This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  tliis  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 
We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  in  forming  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 

at|http: //books  .google  .com/I 


e000B3373V 


^,-2 


7 


1 


EHEA   IITEPOENTA. 


OR,  THE 


DIVERSIONS 


OF 


P  U  R  L  E  Y, 


PART    I. 


•  •♦^■4|>^^«#4 


By    JOHN   HORNE    TOOKE,    A.  M. 

LATE    OF    ST.  JOHN's    COLLEGE,    CAMBRIDGE. 


SECOND    EDITION. 


LONDON: 
PRINTED    FOR    THE    AUTHOR, 

AT  J.  Johnson's,  no.  72,  st.  Paul's  church  yard. 

M  DCC  XCVIII. 


5^r  ,     A  .      ^ 


TO    THE 


UNIVERSITY  OF  CAMBRIDGE, 


/^NE  of  her  grateful  Sons, — who  always  confiders  a<as 
©f  voluntary  juftice  towards  himfelf  as  Favours  *, — 
dedicates  this  humble  offering.  And  particularly  to  her 
diief  ornament  for  virtue  and  talents,  the  Reverend  Dodtor 
Beadon,  Mafter  of  Jefus  College. 


■  km 


♦  Notwithftanding  the  additional  authority  of  Plato's  defpicable  faying— 
Cum  omnibus  folvam  quod  cum  omnibus  debeo  '—the  aflertion  of  Machiavel, 
tliat — Nijfuno  confejfera  mai  haver  oblige  con  uno  cbi  non  foffenda  * — and  the 
repetition  of  it  by  Father  Paul,  that — Mai  alcuno  ft  pretende  obligaio  a  cbi 
Vbabbi  fatlo  giujiitia ;  ftimandolo  tenuto  per  Je  Jiejfo  di  farla  • — ^are  not  true. 
They  are  not  true  either  with  rclpedl  to  nations  or  to  individuals :  for  the 
experience  of  much  injufticc  will  caufe  the  forbearance  of  injury  to  appear 
like  kindnefs. 

•  Scnec,  dc  benefic.  lib,  vi. 
^  Difcor.  lib.  i.  cap.  xvi. 

^  Opinione  del  Padre  Fra  Paolo,  in  qual  modo  dcbba  governarfi  la  Republica^ 
Veneta  per  haver  perpetuo  dominio. 


■'"-* 


CONTENTS 


OF     THIS 


VOLUME. 


PAGE 

Introduftion     •—            —            —            —            —  —  i 

Chap.  L     Of  the  Divifion  or  Diftribution  of  Language  —  17 

Chap.  II.     Some  Confideration  of  Mr.  Locke's  Eflay      —  —  30 

Chap.  III.     Of  the  Parts  of  Speech               —            —  —  44 

Chap.  IV.     Of  the  Noun                —             —             —  —  52 

Chap.  V.     Of  the  Article  and  Interjedion     —             —  —  58 

Advertifement                 —             —            —             —  —  74 

Chap.  VI.     Of  the  Word  THAT     —             —            —  _  81 

Advertifement                  —             —             —             —  —  99 

Chap.  VII.     Of  Conjunftions         —            —             —  —  102 

Chap.  Vin.     Etymology  of  the  Englifli  Conjundions  —  —  150 

Chap.  IX.     Of  Prepofitions  —  —  —  —288 

Chap.  X.     Of  Adverbs                   —             —             —  —  458 


Non 


Non  ut  laudemur,  fed  ut  profimus. 

Equidem  Ac  prope  ab  adoleicencia  animatus  fui,  ut  inania  famae  coa* 
tcmnam,  veraquc  confefter  bona.  In  qua  cogitationc  fepius  defixus,  fiicilius 
ab  animo  mco  potui  impetrare,  ut  (quamvis  fcircm  fordcfcere  magis  &  magis 
ftudia  Literarum,  maximequc  ca  qua?  propric  artem  Grammaticcn  fpedtant) 
nihilominus  paulifper,  non  quidcm  fcponcrcm,  led  remifllus  tamen  traftarcm 
ftudia  graviora  j  iterumque  in  manus  fumerem  vetercs  adolefcentias  laborcs, 
laborequc  novo  inter  tot  Curas  divulgarem. 

G.  J.  Vossius. 

Lc  grand  objet  de  Tart  etymologiquc  n*eft  pas  de  rendrc  raifon  dc  Toriginc 
dc  tous  les  mots  fans  exception,  &  j*ofc  dire  que  ce  fcroit  un  but  aflcz 
frivole.  Cet  art  eft  principalement  rccommandable  en  ce  qu'il  fournit  a  la 
philofophie  des  materiaux  &  des  obfervations  pour  clever  le  grand  edifice,  dc 
la  theorie  generale  des  Langues. 

M.  Lc  Prcfidcnt  de  Brosse?. 


ERRATA. 


i 

i 

4 

I 

« 

I 
I 

/ 


page   59,  Note,  Line  19,  for //&  read ///r. 


Note, 
Note, 
Note, 
Note, 


90, 

i74# 
181, 

200, 

a43» 

281,  Note, 

32if 

322,  Note, 

38i» 
416,  Note, 

422, 

531,  Note, 


1 8,  23,  and  27,  for  Whartm  read  fFartin^ 

19,  fhould  be  effaced. 

16,  for  Prepojitions  read  Propojitionr* 
16,  dele  ^r  Z^. 

9,  for  f^hartm  read  Wartm*- 

4,  for  ^f//  put  BUT. 

6,  for  BUT  read  bot» 

3,  for  £ftm5tis  read  diftmSh^ 
14,  /&^  itzAJheer. 

4,  for  iV  read  ///• 

4,  for  correjondent  read  corrfffondenU 
10,  for  /p0^/  read  /o/sr^. 

6,  for  /ir  put  for, 

7,  for  ^^ij  read  he  is. 

13,  for  MYDDIT  read  MYDLin 
10,  for  fiurdis  read  pout  dey. 


I. 


H 


t 


-  J 


? 


/  • 


EriEA     nTEPOENTA: 


OR,     THE 


DIVERSIONS    OF    PURLEY. 


^ 


INTRODUCTION. 


m^ 


T 


B. 
HE  myftery  is  at  laft  unravelled.  I  (hall  no  more 
wonder  now  that  you  engrofs  his  company  at 
Purley  %  whilft  his  other  friends  can  fcarce  get  a  light  of 
him.  This,  you  fay,  was  Prelident  Bradlhaw's  feat.  That 
is  the  fecret  of  his  attachment  to  the  place.  You  hold  hitn 
by  the  beft  fecurity,  his  political  pirejudices  and  enthufiafm. 
But  do  not  let  his.  veneration  for  the  memory  of  the  antient 
pofleffor  pafs  upon  you  for  affedlion  to  the  prefent.  ' 


-  1 


*  The  feat  of  William  Tooke,  Efq.  near  Croydon,  Surrey. 

B  H.  Should 


INTRODUCTION. 


H. 

Should  you  be  altogether  fo  fevere  upon  my  politics ; 
when  you  refle<St  that,  merely  for  attempting  to  prevent 
the  e£^oa  -of  brother's  blood  and  the  final  difmember- 
ment  of  the  empire,  I  ftand  the  iingle  legal  vidlim  during 
the  conteft,  and  the  Iingle  inftance  of  profcription  after  it  ? 
But  I  am  well  contented  that  my  principles,  which  have 
made  fo  many  of  your  way  of  thinking  angry,  Ihould  only 
make  you  laugh*  Such  however  as  they  are,  they  need 
not  now  to  be  defended  by  me  :  for  they  have  ftood  the 
teft  of  ages;  and  they  'will  keep  their  ground  in  the 
general  commendation  of  the  world,  till  men  forget  to 
love  themfelves ;  though,  till  then  perhaps,  they  are  not 
likely  to  be  feen  (nor  credited  if  feen)  in  the  pra&ice  of 
many  individuals. 

But  are  you  really  forced  to  go  above  a  hundred  years 
back  to  account  for  my  attachment  to  Purley  ?  Without 
confidering  the  many  ftrong  public  and  private  ties  by 
which  I  am  bound  to  its  prefent  poffeflbr,  can  you  find 
nothing  in  the  beautiful  pro{pe<St  from  thefe  windows  ? 
xm^ing  in  the  entertainment  every  one  receives  in  this 
l\oufe  ?  .nothing  in  the  delightful  rides  and  walks  we  have 
taken  round  it  ?  nothing  in  the  cheerful  diipofition  and 

eafy 


\ 


INTROOUCTION.  3 

eafy  kindaefs  of  its  owner,  to  make  a  rational  man  partial 
to  this  habitation  ? 

T. 

Sir,  you  are  making  him  tranigrefs  our  only  ftanding 
rules.  Politics  and  compliments  are  ftrangers  here.  We 
always  put  them  oflF  when  we  put  on  our  boots ;  and  leaVe 
them  behind  us  in  their  proper  atmofphere,  the  fmoke  of 
London. 

B. 

Is  it  pofiible  !  Can  either  of  yoii— Englilhtoen  and  pa- 
triots !— abftain  for  four  and  twenty  hours  together  from 
politics  ?  You  cannot  be  always  <mi  horfeback  or  at  piquet. 
What,  in  the  name  of  wonder,  your  favourite  topic  ex- 
eluded,  can  be  the  fubjedk  of  your  fo  frequent  converfations  ? 

■  ■  T,      . 

You  have  a  ftrange  notion  of  us.  But  Z  afTure  you  we 
find  more  diflficulty  to  finilh  than  to  begin  our  converfations. 
As  for  our  fubje<Sts,  their  variety  cannot  be  remembered ; 
but  I  will  tell  you  on  what  we  were  difcourfing  yefterday 
when  you  came  in ;  and  I  believe  you  are  the  fitted  perfon 
in  tl^e  world  to  decide  between  us.  He  infifts,  contrary  to 
my  opinion,  that  all  forts  of  wifdom  and  ufeful  knowledge 
may  be  obtained  by  a  plain  man  of  fenfe  without  what  is 

B  2  commonly 


4  INTRODUCTION. 

commonly  called  Learning.  And  when  I  took  the  eafieft 
inftance,  as  I  thought,  and  the  foundation  of  all  other 
knowledge,  (becaufe  it  is  the  beginning  of  education,  and 
that  in  which  children  are  firft  employed)  he  declined  the 
proof  of  his  aflertion  in  this  inftance,  and  maintained  that 
I  had  chofen  the  moft  difficult :  for,  he  fays,  that,  though 
Grammar  be  ufually  amongft  the  firft  things  taught,  it  is 
always  one  of  the  laft  underftood. 

B. 

I  muft  confefs  I  differ  from  Mr.  H.  concerning  the  dif- 
ficulty of  grammar :  if  indeed  what  you  have  reported  be 
really  his  opinion.  But  might  he  not  poflibly  give  you  that 
anfwer  to  efcape  the  difcuflion  of  a  difagreeable,  dry  fub- 
jecSt,  remote  from  the  courfe  of  his  ftudies  and  the  objedls 
of  his  inquiry  and  purfuit  ?  By  his  general  expreflSion  of — 
what  is  commonly  called  Learnings— znd  his  declared  opinion 
of  that,  I  can  pretty  well  guefs  what  he  thinks  of  gramma- 
tical learning  in  particular.  I  dare  fwear  (though  he  will  not 
perhaps  pay  me  fo  indifferent  a  compliment)  he  does  not 
in  his  mind  allow  us  even  the  poor  confblation  which  we 
find  in  Athenaeus — u  [iv  ^ccjpoi  tjo-uv ;  but  concludes,  without 
a  fingle  exception,  vSev  rm  rpufifiajiKuv  fiufSlsfov  *•, 


ypafAfAtHiKuy  fAtifolifop^  Dcipnoioph.  Lib.  15* 

4  I  muft 


INTRODUCTION.  s 

I  muft  however  intreat  him  to  recolledt,  (and  at  the  fame 
time  whofe  atithority  it  bears,)  that — Sj^i  Sapientite  ^  lite- 
varum  divortium  faciunU  nunquam  ad  folidam  fapientiam 
pertingent.  .  ^i  verb  alios  etiam  a  literarum  linguarumque 
Jiudio  ahjlerrenu  non  antiqua  fapientia  fed  nova  flultitia 
Dolores  funt  habendi. 

H. 

Indeed  I  fpoke  my  real  fentiments.  I  think  Grammar 
difficult,  but  I  am  very  far  from  looking  upon  it  as  foolifti : 
indeed  fo  far,  that  I  confider  it  as  abfolutely  neceflary  in 
the  fearch  after  philofophical  truth ;  which  if  not  the  moft 
ufeful  perhaps,  is  at  leaft  the  moft  pleafing  employment  of 
the  human  mind.  And  I  think  it  no  lefs  neceflary  in  the 
moft  important  queftions  concerning  religion  and  civil  fo- 
ciety.  But  fince  you  fay  it  is  eafy,  tell  me  where  it  may 
be  learned. 

B. 

If  your  look  and  the  tone  of  your  voice  were  lefs  ferious, 
the  extravagance  of  your  compliment  to  grammar  would 
incline  me  to  fufpedl  that  you  were  taking  your  revenge, 
and  bantering  me  in  your  turn  by  an  ironical  encomium 
on  my  favourite  ftudy.  But,  if  I  am  to  fuppofe  you  in 
eatneft,  I  anfwer,  that  our  Englilh  grammar  may  be  fuf- 

ficiently 


6  INTRODUCTION. 

ficiently  and  eailly  learned  from  the  excellent  Introduction 
of  Doctor  Lowth :  or  from  the  Jirji  (as  well  as  the  bejt) 
£ngli(h  grammar,  given  by  Ben  Johnfon. 

« 

True,  Sir.  And  that  was  my  firft  flight  anfwer  to  our 
friend's  inftance.  But  his  inquiry  is  of  a  much  larger 
compafs  than  you  at  prefent  feem  to  imagine.  He  afks 
after  the  caufes  or  reaibns  of  Grammar  * :  and  for  fatis- 
fadtion  in  them  I  know  not  where  to  fend  him ;  for  I  afTure 
you^  he  has  a  troublefbme>  inquiiitive^  fcrupulous  mind  of 
his  own  that  will  not  take  mere  words  in  current  payment. 

B. 

I  fhould  think  that  difficulty  eafily  removed.  Dr.  Lowth 
in  his  preface  has  done  it  ready  to  your  hands.     ^^  Thofe,'* 


*   'Duplex  Grammatica :  alia  civilis,  alia  philosophica. 

Civil  IS,  peritia  efty  nonjcientia :  conftat  enim  ex  auStoritate  ufuque  clarorum 
fcriptorum. 

Philosophica  vero^  ratione  conftat  \  6?  bac  Jcientiam  olet. 

Grammatica  civilis  hahet  at  at  em  ^  in  qua  viget,  6?  illam  ample Sluntur 
Grammatici,  dicunt  enim  Jub  Cicerone  6f  Cajare  adult  am  linguam,  &c.  At 
philosophica  non  agnojcit  atatem  lingua y  Jed  ^ationalitatem  \  ampleSliturque 

vocahula  bona  omnium  temporum. 

6  Campanella. 

he 


INTRODUCTION,  7 

he  fays,  **  who  would  enter  more  deeply  into  this  fubje(5t, 
«  will  find  it  fully  and  accurately  handled  with  the  greateft 
«  acutenefs  of  inveftigation,  perfpicuity  of  explication,  and 
"  elegance  of  method,  in  a  treatife  intitled  Hermes,  by 
«  James  Harris,  Efq.  the  moft  beautiful  and  perfect  «x- 
«  ample  of  Analyfis  that  has  been  exhibited  fince  the  day% 
«  of  Ariftotle." 

T. 

The  recommendation  no  doubt  is  fuU,  and  the  authority 
great ;  but  I  cannot  fay  that  I  have  found  the  performance 
to  correQx>nd :  nor  can  I  boaff  -of  any  acquilkion  from  its 
perofal,  except  indeed  of  hard  words  and  frivolous  or  un-^ 
intelligible  diftin<5tion8.  And  I  have  learned  from  a  moft 
excellent  authority,  that  <<  Tout  ce  qui  varie,  tout  ce  qui 
«  fe  charge  de  termes  douteux  &  envelopes,,  k  toujours- 
,«  paru  fufpeft ;  8c  non  feulement  frauduleux,  mais  encore. 
«  abfblument  f;aux :  parcequ*il  marque  un  embarras  que 
"  la  verit^  ne  connoit  point  *►** 


B. 


And  you.  Sir  ? 


*  BossusT  des  variations  des  E^iics  Proteftantes. 


H.  I 


3  INTRODUCTION. 

H- 
I  am  really  in  the  fame  lituation. 

B- 

Have  you  tried  any  other  of  our  Englifli  authors  on  the 
tfubjea  ? 

H. 

I  believe  all  of  them,  for  they  are  not  numerous  * ;  but 

none  with  fatisfadtion. 

B.  You 


*  The  authors  who  have  written  profcflcdly  on  this  fubjccl,  in  any  language, 
are  not  numerous.  Caramuel,  in  the  beginning  of  his  Grammatica  Audax, 
fays, — "  Solusy  ut  futo^  Scotus,  £s?  poji  eum  Scaliger  &  Campanella 
"  {alios  etiim  non  vidt)  Grammaticam  Jpeculativam  evulgarunt ;  vias  tamen 
"  omnino  diver Jas  ingreffi.  Malta  mibi  in  S^aligero,  &?  plura  in  Campanella 
"  dijplicuerunt  j  fc?  pauciora  in  ScotOy  qui  vix  alibi  /ubtilius  Jcripfit  quam  cum 
*^  de  Grammaticis  modis  JignificandiJ'* 

The  reader  of  Caramuel  (who,  together  with  Campanella,  may  be  found 
in  the  Bodleian  Library)  will  not  be  difappointed  in  him  j  but  moft  egre- 
gioufly  by  him,  if  the  fmallcft  expeftations  of  information  arc  excited  by 
the  charafter  which  is  here  given  of  Scotus:  whofcJ?^  Modis  Signifcandiy 
fliould  be  intitled,  not  Grammatica  Speculativa,  but — an  Exemplar  of  the 
fubtlc  art  of  faving  appearances,  and  of  difcourfing  deeply  and  learnedly 
on  a  fubjeft  with  which  we  are  totally  unacquainted,  ^id  enim^ubtilius 
vel  magis  tenue,  quam  quod  nihil  eft. 

Wilkins,  Part  3.  Chap.  i.  of  his  Eflay  towards  a  Real  Charafter,  fays, 
after  Caramuel, — ^^  The  firft  of  theje  (i.  e.  philofophical,  rational,  univerfal 
*^  Grammar)  hath  been  treated  of  but  by  few  \   which  makes  our  learned 

"  Verulam 


€< 
€C 
€€ 
€€ 
€C 


INTRODUCTION.  9 

B. 

You  muft  then  give  up  one  at  leaft  of  your  pofitions. 
For  if)  as  you  make  it  out,  Grammar  is  fo  difficult  that  a 

^^  Verulam  put  it  among  bis  Dcfidcrata.  /  do  not  know  any  more  that  have 
purpo/ely  written  of  it,  but  Scotus  in  bis  Grammatica  Speculativa,  and 
Caramuel  in  his  Grammatica  Audax,  and  Campanella  in  bis  Grammatica 
Philoiophica.  (yfs  for  Scioppius  bis  Grammar  of  this  title,  that  doth 
wholly  concern  the  Latin  tongue. )  Bejides  which  fometbing  hath  been  occa^ 
Jitmally  fpoken  of  it  by  Scaliger  in  bis  book  Dc  Cauds  Linguae  Latinae ;  and 
"  by  VoJJius  in  his  Ariftarchus."  So  far  Wilkins :  who,  for  what  rcafon  I 
know  not,  has  omitted  the  Minerva  of  SanHius  j  thoxigh  well  defcrving  his 
notice ;  and  the  declared  foundation  of  Scioppius.  But  he  who  fhould 
confine  himfclt  to  thefe  authors,  and  to  thofe  who,  with  Wilkins,  have 
fince  that  time  written  profeffedly  on  this  fubjeft,  would  fall  very  fliort  of 
the  afliftance  he  might  have,  and  the  leading  hints  and  foundations  of  rca- 
foning  which  he  might  obtain,  by  reading  even  all  the  authors  who  have 
confined  themfclves  to  particular  languages. 

The  great  Bacon  put  this  fubjed  amongft  his  Bejiderata,  not,  as  Wilkins 
fays,  becaufe  "  few  had  treated  of  it ;"  but  becaufe  none  had  given  a  fatis- 
faftory  account  of  it.  At  the  fame  time  Bacon,  though  evidently  wide  of 
the  mark  himfelf,  yet  conjeftured  belt  how  this  knowledge  might  moft 
probably  be  attained ;  and  pointed  out  the  moft  proper  materials  for  rc- 
fleftion  to  work  upon.  "  Ilia  demum  (fays  he)  ut  arbitramur,  foret  nobi- 
liffima  Grammatica  fpecies,  ft  quis  in  Unguis  plurimis,  tam  eruditis  quam 
vulgaribus  eximi}  doiius,  de  variis  linguarum  proprietatibus  traSlaret ;  in 
"  quibus  quaque  exccllat,  in  quibus  deficiat  ojiendens.  Ita  enim  6?  lingU4e 
muttio  commercio  locupletari  pofjint ;  &?  fiet  ex  lis  qua  in  Jingulis  Unguis 
pulchra  funt  (tanquam  Venus  Apellis)  orationis  ipftus  quadam  formofiffima 
"  imago,  &f  exemplar  quoddam  infigne^  ad  fenfus  animi  rite  exprimendos /' 
Dc  augment.  Scicnt.  Lib.  6.  Cap.  i.     . 

knowledge 


it 


/ 


lO 


INTRODUCTION. 


knowledge  of  it  cannot  be  obtained  by  a  man  of  fenfe 
from  any  authors  in  •  his  own  language^  you  muft  fend  him 
to  what  is  commonly .  called  Learning,  to  the  Greek  and 
Latin  authors,  for  the  attainment  of  it.  So  true,  in  this 
fcience  at  leaft,  if  not  in  all  others,  is  that  faying  of  Roger 
Afcham ;  that — "  Even  as  a  hawke  £eeth  not  hie  with 
^^  one  wing,  even  fo  a  man  reacheth  not  to  exfcUency 
^^  with  one  tongue.*^ 


On  the  contrary,  I  am  rather  confirmed  by  this  inftance 
in  my  firft  pofition.  I  acknowledge  philofophical  Grammar 
(to  which  only  my  fufpefted  compliment  was  intended)  to 
be  a  moft  neceflary  ftep  towards  wifdom  and  true  know- 
ledge. From  the  innumerable  and  inveterate  miftakes 
which  have  been  made  concerning  it  by  the  wifeft  philo- 
fophers  and  moft  diligent  inquirers  of  all  ages,  and  from 
the  thick  darknefs  in  which  they  have  hitherto  left  it,  I 
imagine  it  to  be  one  of  the  moft  difficult  fpeculations.  Yet, 
I  fuppofe,  a  man  of  plain  common  fenfe  may  obtain  it,  if 
he  will  dig  for  it ;  but  I  cannot  think  that  what  is  commonly 
called  Learning,  is  the  mine  in  which  it  will  be  found. 
Truth,  in  my  opinion,  has  been  improperly  imagined  at 
the  bottom  of  a  well :  it  lies  much  nearer  to  the  furface ; 
though  buried  indeed  at  prefent  under  mountains  of 
9  learned 


INTRODUCTION,  1 1 

learned  rubbifh ;  in  which  there  is  nothing  to  admire  but 
the  amazing  ftrength  of  thofe  vaft  giants  of  literature  who 
have  been  able  thus  to  heap  Pelion  upon  Offa.  This  at 
prefent  is  only  my  opinion,  which  perhaps  I  have  enter- 
tained too  lightly.  Since  therefore  the  queftion  has  been 
ftarted,  I  am  pleafed  at  this  occafion  of  being  confirmed  or 
corredted  by  you ;  whofe  application^  opportunities,  exten- 
five  reading,  acknowledged  abilities,  and  univerfal  learning 
enable  you  to  inform  us  of  all  that  the  antients  have  left 
or  the  moderns  have  written  on  the  fubjedt* 

B. 

Oh !  Sir,  your  humble  fervant !  compliments,  I  perceive, 
are  banifhed  from  Purley«  But  I  fhall  not  be  at  all  inticed 
by  them  to  take  upon  my  fhoulders  a  burthen  which  you 
feem  defirous  to  ftiift  off  upon  me.  Befides,  Sir,  with  all 
your  caution,  you  have  faid  too  much  now  to  expedt  it 
from  me.  It  is  too  late  to  recall  what  has  pafled  your 
lips :  and  if  Mr.  T.  is  of  my  fentiments  you  ftiall  not  be 
permitted  to  explain  yourfelf  away.  The  fatisfadtion 
which  he  feeks  after,  you  fay  is  to  be  Jbad;  and  you  tell  us 
the  mine  where  you  think  it  is  not  to  be  found.  Now  I 
fliaU  not  eaiily  be  perfuaded  that  you  are  fo  rafh  and  take 
up  your  opinions  fo  lightly,  as  to  advance  or  even  to 
imagine  this ;  unlefs  you  had  firft  fearched  that  mine  your- 

G  a  felf, 


1  a  INTRODUCTION. 

felf,  and  formed  a  conjefture  at  leaft  concerning  the  place 
where  you  fuppofe  this  knowledge  is  to  be  found.  Inftead 
therefore  of  making  me  difplay  to  Mr.  T.  my  reading, 
which  you  have  already  declared  infuflSicient  for  the  pur- 
pofe,  is  it  not  much  more  reafonable  that  you  fhould  com- 
municate to  us  the  refult  of  your  reflection  ? 

H. 

With  all  my  heart,  if  you  chufe  it  fhould  be  fo,  and 
think  you  fhall  have  patience  to  hear  me  through .  I  own 
I  prefer  inftru6tion  to  corre(fiion,  and  had  rather  have  been 
informed  without  the  hazard  of  expofing  my  felf ;  but  if 
you  make  the  one  a  condition  of  the  other,  I  think  it  ftill 
worth  my  acceptance ;  and  will  not  lofe  this  opportunity 
of  your  judgment  for  a  little  fhame.  I  acknowledge  then 
that  the  fubje<fl  is  not  intirely  new  to  my  thoughts :  for, 
though  languages  themfelves  may  be  and  ufually  are  ac- 
quired without  any  regard  to  their  principles ;  I  very  early 
found  it,  or  thought  I  found  it,  impoffible  to  make  many 
fteps  in  the  fearch  after  truth  and  the  nature  of  human 
underjiandirtgy  of  good  and  evily  of  right  and  wrong,  without 
wcH  confidering  the  nature  of  language,  which  appeared 
to  me  to  be  infeparably  conne(Sled  with  them.  I  own 
therefore  I  long  fince  formed  to  myfelf  a  kind  of  fyftem, 
which  feemed  to  me  of  Angular  ufe  in  the  very  fmall  extent 

I  of 


INTRODUCTION.  1 3 

6f  my  younger  ftudies  to  keep  my  mind  from  confulwn 
and  the  impofition  of  words.  After  too  long  an  interval 
of  idlenefs  and  pleafure^  it  was  my  chance  to  have  occafion 
to  apply  to  fome  of  the  modern  languages ;  and,  not  being 
acquainted  with  any  other  more  fatisfaftory,  I  tried  my 
fyftem  with  thefe,  and  tried  it  with  fuccefs.  I  afterwards 
found  it  equally  ufeful  to  me  with  fome  of  the  dead  lan- 
guages,  Whilft  I  was  thus  amufing  myfelf  the  political 
ftruggle  commenced ;  for  my  fhare  in  which  you  fo  far 
juftly  banter  me,  as  I  do  acknowledge  that,  both  in  the 
outfet  and  the  progrefs  of  it,  I  was  guilty  of  two  moft 
egregious  blunders ;  by  attributing  a  much  greater  portion 
of  virtue  to  individuals  and  of  underftanding  to  the  gene- 
rality than  any  experience  of  mankind  can  juftify.  After 
another  interval  therefore  (not  of  idlenefs  aq^  nleafure) 
I  was  again  called  by  the  queftions  of  our  friend  •Mr,  T. 
(for  yefterday  is  not  the  firft  time  by  many  that  he 
has  mentioned  it)  to  the  confideration  of  this  fubjedt.  I 
have  hitherto  declined  attempting  to  give  him  the  fatis- 
fadtion  he  required:  for,  though  the  notion  I  had  of 
language  had  fatisfied  my  own  mind  and  anfwered  my  own 
purpofes,  I  could  not  venture  to  detail  to  him  my  crude 
conceptions  without  having  ever  made  the  leaft  inquiry 
into  the  opinions  of  others.  Befides,  I  did  not  at  all  fufpedt 
that  my  notions,  if  juft,  could  be  peculiar  to  myfelf :  and 

I  hoped 


14  INTRODUCTION. 

I  hoped  to  find  Come  author  who  might  give  him  a  clearer, 
fuller,  and  more  methodical  account  than  I  could,  free 
from  thofe  errors  and  omiffions  to  which  I  mull  be  liable. 
Having  therefore  fome  fmall  intervals  of  Icifure  and  a  great 
defire  to  give  him  the  beft  information ;  I  confefs  I  have 
employed  fome  part  of  that  leifure  in  reading  every  thing 
I  could  eafily  and  readily  procure  that  has  been  fuggefted 
by  others. 

1  am  afraid  I  have  already  fpoken  with  too  much 

prefumption :  But  when  I  tell  you  that  I  differ  from  all 
thofe  who  with  fuch  infinite  labour  and  erudition  have 
gone  before  me  on  this  fubjedt ;  what  apology 

Oh !  ^ake  none.  When  men  think  modeftly  they  may 
be  allowed  to  fpeak  freely.  Come— Where  will  you 
begin  }—ji/pba — Go  on. 

H. 

Not  with  the  organical  part  of  language,  I  afliire  you. 
For,  though  in  many  refpe(9:6  it  has  been  and  is  to  this 
moment  grofsly  miftaken,  (and  the  miftakes  might,  with 
the  hdp  of  fome  of  the  firft  principles  of  natural  philo- 
fophy  and  anatomy,  be  eafily  corrected)  yet  it  is  an  inquiry 
more  of  curiofity  than  immediate  ufefulnefs. 

B.  You 


INTRODUCTION.  15 

You  will  begin  then  either  with  things  or  ideas :  for  it 
is  impoffible  we  Ihould  ever  thoroughly  underftand  the 
nature  bf  the  Jigns,  unlefs  we  firft  properly  confider  and 
arrange  the  things  ftgni fad,  Whofe  fyftem  of  philofophy 
will  you  build  upon  ? 

H. 

What  you  fay  is  true.  And  yet  I  Ihall  not  begin  there* 
Hermes,  you  knc/w,  put  out  the  eyes  of  Argus :  and  I 
fufpe(5t  that  he  has  likewife  blinded  philofophy  :  and  if  I 
had  not  imagined  fb,  I  fhould  never  have  caft  away  a 
thought  upon  this  fubje<St,  If  therefore  Philofophy  her- 
felf  has  been  mifled  by  Language,  how  Ihall  Ihe  teach  us 
to  detedt  his  tricks  I 

« 

Begin  then  as  you  pleafe*     Only  begin  ► 


EnEit 


EHEA   nXEPOENTA,   &c. 


»#• 


PART     I. 


CHAP.    L 

OF  THE  DIVISION,    OR  DISTRIBUTION  OF  LANGUAGE, 


H. 

HTHE    purpofe   of   Language   is   to   communicate  our 
thoughts  — — 

B. 

You  do  not  mention  this,  I  hope,  as  fomething  new,  or 
wherein  you  differ  from  others  ? 

H. 

You  are  too  hafty  with  me.  No.  But  I  mention  it  as 
that  principle,  which,  being  kept  Jingly  in  contemplation, 
has  milled  all  thofe  who  have  reafoned  on  this  fubjedt. 

D  B.  Is 


i8  OF  THE  DIVISION,   OR 

B. 

•  •  * 

Is  it  not  true  then  I 

H. 

I  think  it  is.     And  that  on  which  the  whole  matter 
refts. 

B. 

And  yet  the  confining  themfelves  to  this  true  principle, 
upon  which  the  whole  matter  jreft^  has  milled  them  I 


H. 


Indeed  I  think  fb. 


B. 


This  is  curious ! 


H. 

Yet  I  hope  to  convince  you  of  it.  For  thus  they  rea- 
ft>n«d~Words  are  the  Jtgffs  of  things.  Th«re  muft 
therefore  be  as  many  forts  of  words,  or  parti  &f  fpeecb^  as 
there  are  forts  of  things*.  The  earlieft  inquirers  into 
language  proceeded  then  to  fettle  how  many  forts  there 


*  J^Sth  tmnk  M/4'  t^o.  rAfui»4$fciekm  paxfes  quetgue  Jwu  /ortietur. 

J.  C.  ScALicER  de  CauHs  L.L. 

were 


DISTRIBUTION  OF  LANGUAGE.  19 

were  of  things;    and  from  thence  how  niariy  ibrts  (if 
Words,  or  parts  of  fpeech.     Whilft  this  method  of  fearch 
Jlri&ly  prevailed,  the  parts  of  fpeech  were  very  few  itt 
number :  but  two.     At  moft  tbreey  or  four. 

All  things,  faid  they,  muft  have  names*.  But  there 
are  two  foits  of  things : 

1 .  Res  qua  permanent. 

2.  Res  qua  jiuunt. 

There  muft  tl;iereforc  be  two  forts  of  words  or  parts  pf 
fpeech:  viz. 

1 .  Not  a  return  qua  perindnenL 

2.  Not  a  rerum  qua  fluunt. 

Well;  but  furely  there  are  words  which  are  neither 
nttet  rerum  perhidnintium^  nor  yet  fwia  rerum  jhttntium. 
What  will  you  do  with  them  ? — We  cannot  tell :  we  can 
find  but  thefe  two  forts  in  rerum  natura:  call  therefore 
thofe  other  words,  if  you  will,  for  the  prefent,  particles  +, 

Or 


•.s. 


*  Froftl  this  moment  Grammar  quits  the  day-light ;  and  plunges  into  an 
aby&  c*f  uiter  darkhcfs,  -     . 

f  A  good  convenient  nam^  for  all  the  words  which  we  do  riot  uridcrftaUd :' 
for  as,  the  denomination  means  nothing  in  particular,  and  contains  no  de- 

D   2  ^  fcription. 


i      « 


20  OF  THE  DIVISION,   OR 

or  inferior  parts  of  fpeech,  till  we  can  find  out  what  they 
are.  Or,  as  we  fee  they  are  oonftantly  interfperfed  between 
nouns  and  verbs,  and  feem  therefore  in  a  manner  to  hold 
our  fpeech  together,  fuppofe  you  call  them  conjunSiions  or 
conne&ives  ^^ 


This  feems  to  h^ve  been  the  utmoft  progrefs  that  phi- 
lofophical  Grammar  had  made  till  about  the  time  of 
Ariftotle,  when  a  fourth  part  of  fpeech  was  added, — the 

definitive  J  or  article. 


fcription,  it  will  equally  fuit  any  fhort  word  we  may  plcafe  to  refer  thither. 
There  has  latterly  been  much  di(pute  amongft  Grammarians  concerning  the 
ufe  of  this  word,  particky  in  the  divifion  and  diftribution  of  fpeech :  parti- 
cularly by  Girard,  Dangeau,  the  authors  of  the  Encyclopedie,  &c.  In 
which  it  is  Angular  that  they  fhould  all  be  right  in  their  arguments  againft 
the  ufe  made  of  it  by  others  i  and  all  wrong,  in  the  ufe  which  each  of  them 
would  make  of  it  himfelf.  Dr.  S.  Johnfon  adopts  N.  B^ley's  definition  of 
a  particle — "  A  word  unvaried  by  inflexion."  And  Locke  defines  particles 
to  be — "  The  words  whereby  the  mind  fignifies  what  connexion  it  gives 
"  to  the  feveral  affirmations  and  negations,  that  it  unites  in  one  continued 
"  reafoning  or  narration.'* 

'*  The  Latin  Grammarians  amufe  themfelves  with  debating  whether 
Y,}»ySwii.%i  Ihould  be  tranflatcd  Convinltio  or  Onjunllio.  The  Danes  and  the 
Dutch  feem  to  have  taken  different  fides  of  the  queftion :  for  the  Danifli 
language  terms  it  Bindeord^  and  the  Dutch  Koppelwiord. 

m 

Here 


DISTRIBUTION  OF  LANGUAGE.  21 

Hqre  concluded  the  fearch  after  the  different  forts  of 
words,  or  parts  of  fpeech,  from  the  difference  of  things  : 
for  none  other  apparently  rational,  acknowledged,  or  ac- 
cepted difference  has  been  fiiggefted^ 

According  to  this  fyftem  it  was  neceffary  that  all  forts 
of  words  fliould  belong  to  one  of  thefe  four  claffes.  For 
words  being  xh^Jigns  of  things,  their  forts  muft  neceffarily 
follow  the  forts  of  the  things  Jignified.  And  thei^e  being 
no  more  than  four  differences  of  things,. .  there  could  be 
but  four  parts  of  fpeech.  The  difficulty  and  controverfy 
now.  was^r  to  determine  to  which  of  thefe  four  claffes  each 
wor4  belonged.  In  the  attempting  of  which^  fucceeding 
Grammarians  could  neither  fatisfy  themfelves  nor  others : 
for  they  foon  difcovered  fome  words  fo  ftubborn,  that  no 
fophiftry  nor,  violence  could  by  any  means  reduce  them  to 
any  one  of  thefe  claffes.  However,,  by  this  attempt  and 
difpute  they  became  better  acquainted  with  the  differences 
of  word«,  though  they  could  not  account  for  them ;  and 
they  found  the  dd  fyftem  de^cient,.  though  they  knew 
not  how  to  fupply  its  defe^ts^  ^  They  leem  therefore  to 
have  reverfed  tjtxe  laethod  of  jwoceeding  from  things  to 
i^s,  purfued  by  the  philoib|)her$ ;  and^  ftill:  jmowing  the 
princijde,  {yiz,  that  there  muft  be ,  ^  many  forts  of  words 
as  of  things,)  they  travelled  ba€kwards>  and  fought  for  the 

things; 


2  2  OF  THE  DIVISION,   OR 

things  from  the  figns :  adopting  the  converfe  of  the  prin- 
ciple; naniely,  that  there  muft  be  as  many  differences  of 
things  as  of  figns.  Mifled  therefore  by  the  ufeful  Con- 
trivances  of  language,  they  fuppofed  many  imaginary  dif- 
ferences of  things  :  and  thus  added  greatly  to  the  number 
of  parts  of  fpeech,  and  in  confequence  to  the  errors  of 
philofophy. 

Add  to  this,  that  the  greater  and  more  laborious  part  of 
Grammarians  (to  whofe  genius  it  is  always  more  obvious 
to  remark  a  multitude  of  effects  than  to  trace  out  one 
caufe)  confined  themfelves  merely  to  notice  the  diflfenences 
obfervable  in  words,  without  any  regard  to  the  things 
fignified. 

From  this  time  the  number  of  parts  of  fpeech  has  been 
varioufly  reckoned :  you  will  find  diflFerent  Grammarians 
contending  for  more  than  thirty.  But  moft  of  thofe  who^ 
admitted  the  fewcft,  acknowledged  eight.  This  \f  as  long  a 
favourite  number;  and  has  been  kept  f6  by  many  ynh6 
yet  did  not  include  the  fame  parts  to  ttiake  up  that  number. 
For  thofe  who  reje6ted  the  'ariicky  reckoiied  eight :  attdf 

r  • 

thofe  who  did  not  tdlow  the  interfeSHon  ftiH  reckoned  eight!. 
Bnt  what  fbrt- 01^  difference  in  x^ords  fhoukl  intitle  them  ttei 
hold  a  feparate  r^nk  by  themfelves,  has  not  td  this  fitfoifitnt 
been  fettled.  B.  You 


DISTRIBUTION  OP  LANGUAGE.  23 

B. 

You  feed  to  forget,  that  it  is  fome  time  fince  words 
have  been  no  longer  allowed  to  be  the  llgns  of  things. 
Moderh  Gramm*arians  acknowledge  them  to  be  (as  indeed 
Ariftotle  called  them,  Vu/iffoxa  «r«^ij/«fl(7«v)  the  figris  of  ideas: 

f  ,  J  »  ... 

at  the  fame  time  denying  the  other  alTertion  of  Ariftotle, 
that  ideas  are  the  likeneffis  of  things  ^.  And  this  has  made 
a  great  alteration  in  the  manner  of  accounting  for  the  dif- 
ferences of  words* 

'That  has  hot  much  mended  the  matter.  No  doubt  this 
alteration  approached-  fo  far  nearer  to  the  truth ;  but  the 
nature  of  Language  has  not  been  much  better  underftood 
by  it.  For  Grammarians  have  fin^e  purfued  juft  the  fame 
method  with  mind^  as  had  before  been  done  with  things. 
The  different  operations  of  the  mind,  are  to  account  now 
for  what  the  different  things  were  to  account  before :  and 
when  they  are  not  found  fiiflSciently  numerous  for  the 
purpofe ;  it  is  only  fiippofing  an  imaginary  operation  or 
two,  and  the  difficulties  are  for  the  time  Ihuffled   over. 


'    AaiSTOT.  df  Incepprctat. 
1  So 


2  4-  OF  THE  DIVISION,    OR 

So  that  the  very  fame  game  has  been  played  over  again 
with  ideaSf  which  was  before  played  with  things.  No 
fatisfadlion,  no  agreement  has  been  obtained :  But  all  has 
been  difpute,  diverfity,  and  darknefs.  Infomuch  that  many 
of  the  nioft  learned  and  judicious  Grammarians,  difgufted 
with  abfurdity  and  contradidtions,  have  prudently  contented 
themfelves  with  remarking  the  differences  of  words,  an4 
haveJeft  the  caufes  of  language  to  fhift  for  themfelves* 

B- 

That  the  methods  of  accounting  for  Language  remain 
to  this  day  various,  uncertain  and  unfatisfa6tory,  cannot  be 
denied.  But  you  have  faid  nothing  yet  to  clear  up  the 
paradox  you  fet  out  with ;  nor  a  (ingle  word  to  unfold  to 
us  by  what  means  you  fuppofe  Hermes  has  blinded  phi- 
lofophy. 

H. 

I  imagine  that  it  is,  in  fome  meafure,  with  the  vehicle 
of  our  thoughts,  as  with  .  the  vehicles  for  our  bodies* 
Neceffity  produced  both.  The  firft  carriage  for  men  was 
no  doubt  invented  to  tranfport  the  bodies  of  thofe  who 
from  infirmity,  or  otherwife,  could  not  move  themfelves : 

But  fhould  any  one,  defirous  of  underftanding  the  purpofe 

« 

and   meaning  of    all  the  parts   of    our  modern  elegant 

carriages, 


DISTRIBUTION  OF  LANGUAGE.  25 

carriages,  attempt  to  explain  then!  upon  this  one  principle 

alone,  viz. — That  they  were  neceflary  for  conveyance ; 

he  would  find  himfelf  wofully  puzzled  to  account  for  the 
wheels^  the  feats,  the  fprings,  the  blinds,  the  glafles,  the 
Hning,  8cc.  Not  to  mention  the  mere  ornamental  parts  of 
gilding,  varnifh,  8cc. 

^bbr^iatiom  are  the  wheels  of  language,  the  wings  of 
Mercury.  And  though  we  might  be  dragged  along  with- 
out them,  it  would  be  with  much  difficulty,  very  heavily 
and  tedioufly. 

There  is  nothing  more  admirable  nor  more  ufeful  than 
th«e  invention  pf  figns :  at  the  lame  time  there  is  nothing 
more  productive  of  error  when  we  negled;  to  obferve  their 
compHcation.  Into  what  blunders,  and  confequently  into 
what  difputes  and  difUculties,  might  not  the  excellent  art 
of  Short-hand  writing  (praiftifed  almoft  exclufively  by  the 
Englifh  *)  lead  foreign  philofophers ;  who,  not  knowing 

that 


■»•*■ 


*  "  The  art  of  Short-hand  is,  in  its  kind,  an  ingenious  device,  and  of 
*'  conjdcrable  qftfulncfs,  applicable  to  any  language,  much  wondered  at  by 
"  travellers  that  have  feen  the  experience  of  it  in  England :  and  yet,  though 
it  be  above  threefcore  years  fincc  it  was  firft  invented,  it  is  not  to  thjs 
day  (for  ought  I  can  learn)  brought  into  common  practice  in  any  other 
*'  nation."     Wilkins.     Epift.  Dedicatory.    EJfay  towards  a  Real  Chara£ler. 

E  "  Short- 


cr 

€€ 


26 


OF  THE  DIVISION,    OR 


that  we  had  any  other  alphabet,  (hould  fuppofe  each  mark 
to  be  the  lign  of  a  lingle  found.  If  they  were  very  la- 
borious and  very  learned  indeed,  it  is  likely  they  would 
write  as  many  volumes  on  the  fubjedt,  and  with  as  touch 
bitternefs  againft  each  other,  as  Grammarians  have  done 
from  the  fame  fort  of  miftake  concerning  Language :  until 
perhaps  it  fhould  be  fuggefted  to  them,  that  there  may  be 
not  only  ligns  of  founds ;  but  again,  for  the  fake  of  ab- 
breviation, ligns  of  thofe  iigns,  one  under  another  in  a 
continued  progreffion* 

B. 

I  think  I  begin  X<^  comprehend  you.     You  mean  to  fay 
that  the  errors  of  Grammarians  have  arifen  from  fuppofing 


**  Short-hand,    an  art,  as  I  have  been  told,  known  only  in  Eng^nd/' 

Locke  on  Education. 

In  the  Courier  dc  P Europe,  No.  41,  November  20>  1787,  is  the  following 
article  : 

"  Le  Sieur  Coulon  de  Tbevenot,  a  cu  Thonneur  de  prefenter  au  roi  fa 
*'  mcthode  d*  ecrire  audi  vite  que  Tor  parle,  approuvce  par  T  Academic 
^  Royale  des  fciences,  et  dont  fa  Majeftc  a  deigne  accepter  la  dedicace. 
*'  On  fait  que  les  Anglois  font  dcpuis  tres-long  temps  en  pofleflion  d*une 
pareille  methode  adaptee  a  leur  langage,  et  qu*  elle  leur  eft  devenuc 
extremement  commode  et  utile  pour  recueillir  avec  beaucoup  de  precifion 
les  difcours  publics :  la  methode  du  Sieur  Coulon  doit  done  ctre  tres- 
"  avantageux  a  la  langue  Fransoife." 

all 


4f 


<C 


fC 


DISTRIBUTION  OF  LANGUAGE.  27 

all  words  to  be  immediately  either  the  figns  of  things  or  the 
figns  of  ideas :  whereas  in  fa6t  many  words  are  merely 
abbreviations  employed  for  difpatch,  and  are  the  figns  of 
Other  words.  And  that  theie  are  the  artificial  wings  of 
Mercury,  by  means  of  which  the  Argus  eyes  of  philc^ophy 
have  been  cheated. 


H. 


It  is  my  meaning. 


B. 

Well.  We  can  only  judge  of  your  opinion  after  we 
have  heard  how  you  maintain  it.  Proceed,  and  ftrip  him 
of  his  wings.  They  feem  eafy  enough  to  be  taken  off: 
for  it  flrikes  me  now,  after  what  you  have  faid,  that  they 
are  indeed  put  on  in  a  peculiar  manner,  and  do  not,  like 
thofe  of  other  winged  deities,  make  a  part  of  his  body. 
You  have  only  to  loofe  the  firings  from  his  feet,  and  take 
off  his  cap.  Come — Let  us  fee  what  fort  of  figure  he 
will  make  without  them. 

H. 

The  fixft  aim  of  Language  was  to  communicate  our 
thoughts :  the  fecorid, '  to  do  it  with  difpatch,  (I  mean  in- 
tirely  to  difregard  whatever  additions  or  alterations  have 

E  2  been 


28  OF  THE  DIVISION,  OR 

been  made  fbr  the  fake  of   beauty,  or  ornament,   cafe, 

gracefulnefs,  or  pleafure.)     The  difficulties  and  difputes 

concerning  Language  have  af  ifen  almoft  intirely  from  negleft- 

ing  the  confideration  of  the  latter  purpofe  of  fpeech :  which, 

though  fubordinate  to  the  former,  is  almoft  as  neceffary  in 

the  commerce  of  mankind,  and  has  a  much  greater  (hare 

in  accounting  for  the  different  forts  of  words  *.     Words 

have  been  called  winged :  and  they  well  defei;ve  that  name, 

when  their  abbreviations  are  compared  With  the  progrefs 

which  fpeech  could  make  without  thefe  inventions ;  but 

compared  with  the  rapidity  of  thought,  they  have  not  the 

ihlAll6ft  claim  to  that  title.     Philofophcrs  have  calciliftted 

the  diS^reDce  of  velbcity  between  found  and  light :  But 

'svho  will  kttehipt  to  calculate  the  diflFereHeb  bettreea  fpeech 

&nd  thought !  What  wonder,  then  that  the  kiventibn  of  all 

^^s  fhould  have  been  upon  the  ftretch  to  add  fuch  Wings 

♦  M.  Le  Prefident  de  Brofles,  in  his  excellent  trcatife  De  la  formation 
mecbanique  des  Langues,  torn,  a,  fays — "  On  ne  parle  que  pour  etre  entendu. 
•*  Le  pluis  grand  avahlage  d'une  lartgae  eft  d^etre  cfairc.  Tou5s  les  pfoccdft 
"  de  Grammaire  ne  devroient  allcr  qu*  k  ce  but.'*  And  again*—"  Le  vut- 
"  gaire  &  les  philofophes  n'ont  d'autre  but  en  parlant  que  de  s'expliquer 
"  clairement."  Art.  i6o.  Pour  le  vulgaire,  he  fhould  have  added — & 
fromptement.  And  indeed  he  is  afterwards  well  aware  of  this  :  for  Art.  1 73 
lie  fays,  ^'  L^efpnt  hun^in  veut  aMeir  vtee  xtens  fon  operation  j  plus  citiprcfsc 
"  'dc^'cxprimer  promptementy  que  curieux  de  s'exprimer  avec  unc  juftefle 
"  exafte  &  reflechie.  S'il  n'a  pas  rinttrument  qu'il  faudroit  employer,  il 
"*'  fe  fctt  ^c  celiii  (Jb'il  a  tcrut  "pthr 

2  to 


DISTRIBUTION  OF  LANGUAGE.  29 

to  their  converfation  as  might  enable  it,  if  poffible,  to  keep 
pace  in  fome  meafure  with  their  minds* — Hence  chiefly 
the  variety  of  words. 

Abbreviations  are  employed  in  language  three  ways : 

1.  In  terms. 

2.  In  forts  of  wordsr* 

3.  In  conftrudtion. 

Mr.  Locke's  Eflay  is  the  beft  guide  to  the  Jirjl :  and 
numberlefs  are  the  authors  who  have  given  particular  ex- 
planations of  the  lajl.  TYi^fectmd  only  I  take  for  my  pro- 
vince at  prefent ;  becaufe  I  believe  it  has  hitherto  efcaped 
the  proper  notice  of  all. 


^nEA 


30  SOME  CONSIDERATION  OF 


EHEA   HTEPOENTA,    &c 


CHAP.    II. 


SOME    CONSIDERATION    OF    MR.    LOOKERS    ESSAY. 


B. 

T  CANNOT  recolle<Sl  one  word  of  Mr.  Locke's  that  cor- 
refponds  at  all  with  any  thing  that  you  have  faid. 
The  third  Book  of  his  Effay  is  indeed  exprefsly  written— 
**  On  the  Nature,  Ufe  and  Signification  of  Language,^  But 
there  is  nothing  in  it  concerning  abbreviations, 

H. 

I  confider  the  whole  of  Mr.  Locke's  Effay  as  a  philofo- 
phical  account  of  the  ^/jy?  fort  of  abbreviations  in  Language. 

B. 

Whatever  you  may  think  of  it,  it  is  certain,  not  only 
from  the  title,  but  from  his  own  declaration,  that  Mr. 
Locke  did  not  intend  or  confider  it  as  fuch  :  for  he  fays,— 
**  When  I  firft  began  this  difcourfe  of  the  Underjlanding, 

6  «  and 


MR.  LOCKE'S  ESSAY.  31 

"  and  a  good  while  after,  I  had  not  the  leaft  thought  that 
"  any  confideration  of  words  was  at  all  neceffary  to  it  *.*' 

H, 
True.  And  it  is  very  ftrange  he  fhould  fo  have  imagined  1-. 

But 


*  Perhaps  it  was  for  mankind  a  lucky  miftakc  (for  it  was  a  miftake) 
which  Mr.  Locke  made  when  he  called  his  book.  An  Eflay  on  Human 
Under fianding.  For  fome  part  of  the  ineftimable  benefit  of  that  book  has, 
merely  on  account  of  its  title,  reached  to  many  thoufands  more  than,  I  fear, 
it  would  have  done,  had  he  called  it  (what  it  is  merely)  A  Grammatical 
Effay,  or  a  Treatife  on  JVords^  or  on  Language.  The  human  mind^  or  the 
human  under  ft  andingy  appears  to  be  a  grand  and  noble  theme  \  and  all  men, 
even  the  moft  infufficient,  conceive  that  to  be  a  proper  objeft  for  their 
contemplation :  whilft  inquiries  into  the  nature  of  Language  (through  which 
alone  they  can  obttdn  any  knowledge  beyond  the  beafts)  arc  fallen  into  fuch 
extreme  difrepute  and  contempt,  that  even  thofe  who  "  neither  have  the 
**  accent  of  chriftian,  pagan,  or  man,"  nor  can  (peak  fb  many  wordis  to- 
gether with  as  much  propriety  as  Balaam's  afs  did,  do  yet  imagine  words  to 
be  infinitely  beneath  the  concern  of  their  exalted  underftanding. 

I  "  Ariftotelis  profefto  judicio  Grammatieam  non  folum  efle  Pbilo/opbi^ 
partem,  (id  quod  nemo  fanus  ncgat)  :  fed  ne  ab  ejus  quidem  cognitione 
diflblvi  pofle  intcUigeremus."  J.  C.  Scaliger  de  Caufts.  Praefat. 

"  And  laftly,"  fays  Bacon,  "  let  us  confider  the  falfe  appearances  that 
•*  arc  impofed  upon  us  by  words,  which  are  framed  and  applied  accf)rding, 
''  to  the  conceit  and  capacities  of  the  vulgar  fort :  and  although  wc  think 
'*  we  govern  our  words,  and  prefcribe  it  well — toqucndum  ut  vulgusy  fenti- 
"  endum  ut  Jafientes  ; — yet  certain  it  is,  that  words,  as  a  Tartar's  bow,  do 
'<  ihoot  back  upon  the  underftanding  of  the  wifcft,.  and  mightily  entangle 

"  aad. 


« 


32  SOME  CONSIDER ATON  OF 

But  what  immediately  follows  ? — ^^  But  when,  having 
^^  pafled  over  the  original  and  compofition  of  our  *  ideas, 
"  I  began  to  examine  the  extent  and  certainty  of  our 
"  knowledge ;  I  found  it  had  fo  near  a  connexion  with 
"  words,  that  iinlefs  their  force  and  manner  of  fignification 
*^  were  firft  well  obferved,  there  could  be  very  little  faid 
"  clearly  and  pertinently  concerning  knowledge  :  which 
"  being  converfant  about  truth,  had  conftantly  to  do  with 
^*  propofitions.  And  thovigh  it  terminated  in  things,  yet 
"  it  was  for  the  moft  part  fo  much  by  the  intervention  of 
^^  words,  that  they  feemed  fcarce  feparable  from  our  general 
"  knowledge.'' 

And  again,— ^*  I  am  apt  to  imagine  that,  were  the  />;/- 
<*  perfe&ions  of  Language,  as  the  inftrument  of  knowledge, 


''  and  pervert  the  judgment.     So  as  it  is  almdft  neceflary  in  all  contro- 
''  verlies  and  difputations  to  imitate  the  wifdofn  of  the  mathematicians^  in 
fetting  down  in  the  very  beginning  the  definitions  of  our  words  and  terms, 
that  others  may  know  how  we  accepe  and  underftand  them,  and  whether 
they  concur  with  us  or  no.     For  it  cometh  to  pafs,  for  want  of  this,  that 
•*  we  are  fure  to  end  there  where  we  ought  to  have  begun,  which  is  in 
'•'  qucftions  and  differences  -about  ^vords." 

Of  the  Advancement  of  Learning, 

♦  It  may  appear  prefumptuous,  but  it  ts  neceflary  here  to  declare  my 
opinion  ;  that  Mr.  Locke  in  his  Eflay  never  did  advance  one  i^ep  beyond 
die  origin  of  Ideas  and  the  compofitba  of  Terms. 

*^  more 


MR.  LOCKED  ESSAY.  33 

"  more  thoroughly  weighed,  a  great  many  of  the  contro- 

«  verfies  that  make  fuch  a  noife  in  the  world  would  of 

«  themfdves  ceafe  ;  and  the  way  to  knowledge,  and  per- 

f*  haps  peace  too,  lie  a  great  deal  opener  than  it  does  *.** 

So  that,  from  thefe  and  a  great  many  other  paflages 
throughout  the  Eflay,  you' may  perceive  that  the  more  he 
reflected  and  fearched  into  the  human  underftanding,  the 
more  he  was  convinced  of  the  neceflity  of  an  attention  to 
Language;  and  of  the  infeparable  connexion  between 
words  and  knowledge. 


♦."  This  dcfign  (fays  Wiikins)  will  likewife  contribute  much  to  the 
"  clearing  of  fome  of  our  modem  differences  in  religion  ;*'  (and  he  might 
have  added^  in  all  other  diiputable  fubjefbs ;  efpecially  in  matters  of  law 
and  civil  government  y) — "  by  unmafking  many  wild  errors,  that  Ihelter 
"  themfelves  under  the  difguifc  of  afFefted  phrafesj  which,  being  phi- 
'^  lofophically  unfolded,  and  rendered  according  to  the  genuine  and  natural 
"  importance  of  words,  will  appear  to  be  inconfiftencies  and  contradi6Hons. 
*'  And  fevcral  of  thofc  pretended  myfterious,  profound  notions,  exprefled 
"  in  great  fwelling  words,  whereby  fome  men  fct  up  for  reputation,  being 
**  this  way  examined,  will  appear  to  be  either  nonfcnfe,  or  very  flat  and 
jejune.  And  though  it  fhould  be  of  no  other  ufe  but  this,  yet  were 
it  in  thefe  days  well  worth  a  man's  pains  and  ftudy ;  confidering  the 
<^  common  mifchief  that  is  done,  and  the  many  impoftures  and  cheats  that 
"  are  put  upon  men,  under  the  difguifc  of  afFcftcd,  infignificant  phrafes." 

Epift.  Dedicat. 

> 

F  B.  Yes. 


It 

€€ 


34 


SOME  CONSIDERATION  OF 


Yes.  And  therefore  he  wrote  the  third  Book  of  his  Effayt 
on—"  the  •Nature,  Ufe,  and  SignificaticMi  of  Language.? 
But  you  fay,  the  wboie  of  the  Effay .  concerns  Language  : 
whereas  the  two  firft  Books  concern  the  Origin  and  Com- 
pojition  of  Ideas :  and  he  exprefsly  declares:  that  it  was  not 
till  after  h^  had  paffcd  over  them,  that  he  thought  any 

confideration  of  words  was  at  all  neceffary. 

■  •    '• '  .  ■  \  '  ■  ■ 

'  ,  , ,  •  \  . .  H.         •  - 

■  ■•*"■■  ' 

If  he  had  been  aware  of  this  fooner,  that  is,  ^^/br^.he 
had  treated  of  (what  he  calls)  the  origin  and  contpojition  of 
Ideas  ;  I  think  it  would  have  made  a  great  difference  in  his 
E.ffay.  And  therefore  I  faid,  Mr.  Locke's  Effay  is  the  befl: 
Guide  to  the  firft  fort  of  Abbreviations. 

B. 

PerhJips  you  imagine  that,  if  he  had  been  aware  that 
he  was  only  writing  concerning  Language,  he  might  have 
avoided  treating  of  the  origin  of  Ideas^;  and  fo  have  efcaped 

m 

the  quantity  of  abufe  which  has  been  unjuftly  poured  upon 
him  for  his  opinion  on  that  fubjedl* 

H. 

No%  I  think  he  wouM  have  fet  out  juft  as  he  did,  with 
the  origin  of  Ideas ;,  the  proper  ftarting-poft  of  a  Gram- 

I  '  marian 


MR.  LOCKE'S  ESSAYS 


35. 


marian  who  is  to  treat  of  their  figns.  Nor  is  he  fingular 
in  referring  them  all  to  the  Sea{es;r;  and  ia  beginning  an 
accoi^nt  of  Language  4n  that  manr^er  *. 

•.-t  ,  .  B.  What 


<  1     ^   ^ 


«-^ 


*    ¥    I 


mmfmm^ 


T   I    I   '.M  I 


'J  I  ■  I       til     fc  I  I » 1 1  I  <  rf  1 1  1 1 1  ^ 


1*^1 


*  Nihil  in  intcllcftu  quod  non  ^rias  in.fenfu,  is,  |«  wdj  as  its  conVerfe, 
an  antient  and  well  known  pofition. 

Sicut  in  fpeculo  ea  quae  videntur  non  funt,  fed  eorum  Ipecies  ;  ita  quae 
intcUigimus,  ea  funt  re  ipsa  extra  nos,  corumque  fpecies  in  nobis.  Eft 
6inm  ^ua/l  ferum'/piiklum  iniilUffus  n$fter  i  -cuij  nifiper/enfum  reprefenientur 

re^j  nihil fiit  ifje.  J.  C,  Scalioer,;  dc  caiiifis,  L.  -L.  Caf.  Ixvi. 

.. 

-"  I  fcnfi  (fays  Buonnialtci)  in'^tm  ccrto  tnod^  potrebbon  dirfi  Mimftri, 
^  Nunzj,  Fanfiiglari,  o  Segrctafj  della  'nceWctto.     E  acciochc  lo  Efcmpia 
,ce  ne  faccia  piti  capaci,-^Infiaginianci  di  vederc  aloin  Principe,  ilqual  fc  - 

•  %  m 

ne  ftia  ncUa  fua  corte,  nel  fuo  palazzo.  Non  vedc  egli  con  gli  occhi 
prop],  ne  ode  co*  propj  orecchi  quel  chepcr  lo  ftato  fi  faccia:  ma  col 
"  tenerc  in  divcrfi  luoghi  V^  Miniftri  che  lo  ragguagliono  di  cio  che  fegue, 
vienc  a  fapcre  intender  per  cotal  rclazione.ogni  cofa,  e  bene  fpeflb  molto 
piu  minutamcnte  e  *  piu  perfettamcnte  dcgli  ftefli  miniftri :  Perche  quegli 
"  avendo  fempliceniente  notizia  di  qud  che  avvenuto  fia  nclla  lor  citta  o 
"  provincial  rimangon  A  tutto?  '1  tefto  ignoranti,  c  di  facile  poflfon  fin  delle 
^'  cofe  vcdute  ingannarfi.  Dove  il  principe  pu6  aver  di  tutto  il  fegilito 
rognizione  in  tin  fubito, 'che  fcrvtnddgfi  per  rfprpva  d' oghi  particolar 
rifcritoglr,  non  lo  lafcia  cofi  facilmentc  ingannirc.  Cofi,  dico,  c  T  In-» 
telle tto  umano  \  ilquale  cflcndo  di  tutte  P  altre  potenzc  e  Signore  e  Prin- 
xip^,  fe  ne  fta  rtella  fua  ordinaria  refidefiM  ripofto,.  t  non  vcde  ne  ode 
^  cola  iche  fi  fatcia  di  foori  r  Ma Avendo  cinqUii  miniftri  che  lo  ragguagiian 
^  di  quel  che  fuccede,*'  uiid  hclla  regittW  dclk- vifta, -tin  atero  nella  giurifdizion 
♦*  deir  udito,  quefib  neBipravmciayel  ^^oi>^u^fto  ne? jf)acfi  dcU'  odorato, 
«  e  queft'  altr6  nteWiftr^tCo  del  tiafto,- 'Vl^ne  ^T^re  per  mezzo  del  difcorfd 
"  ogni  cofern  teiiVerfafci  *  tihto  ptirtle''ifcnfl:^effttement^>  -quan^p  i  feafi 
.     ".  /  Fa  '^  ciafcuno 


M 


€C 


tt 


tt 


^i. 


*i 


c< 


Cf 


36  SOME  CONSIDERATION  OF 

B. 

What  difference  then  do  you  imagine  it  would  have  made 
in  Mr.  Locke*s  Eflay,  if  he  had  fooner  been  aware  of  the 
infeparable  connexion  between  words  and  knowledge ;  or, 
in  the  language  of  Sir  Hugh,  in  Shakefpeare,  that  «  the 
"  lips  is  parcel  of  the  mind  *  f^ 

H. 

Much.  And  amongft  many  other  things,  I  think  he 
would  not  have  talked  of  the  compojition  of  ideas  \  but 


imumm 


*^  ciaicuno  intendendo  nella  fua  pura  potenza»  non  poflbn  per  tucte  come  lo 
"  'ntelletto  difcorrere.  E  ficcome  il  Principe,  fenza  lafciarfi  vederc  o  fcn- 
^'  tire,  &  noto  alcrui  la  fua  volonta  per  mezzo  degli  ftefli  miniftn  \  cofi  an 
f*  cora  r  IntcUetto  fe  intenderfi  per  via  dc  medefimi  Senfi/* 

BuoNMATTEi.    Tratt.  2.  Cap.  2» 

*  "  Divers  philofophcrs  hold  that  the  lips  is  parcel  of  the  mind/' 

Merry  fp^hes  of  fVindfoVy  Aft  i.  Scene  4. 

Rowland  Jones  agrees  with  his  countryman,  Sir  Hugh  Evans.  In  his 
•*  Origin  of  Language  and  Nations,'*  Preface,  page  17,  he  fays  (after 
others)—"  I  think  that  Language  ought  not  to  be  confidcrcd  as  mere  arbi- 
^'  trary  founds ;  or  any  thing  lefs  than  a  part,  at  Uafty  of  that  living  foul 
<'  which  God  is  faid  to  have  breathed  into  man/'  This  method  of  re- 
ferring words  immediately  to  God  as  their  framer^  is  a  (hort  cut  to  efcape 
inquiry  and  explanation.  It  faves  the  philofopher  much  trouble  \  but  leaves 
mankind  in  great  ignorance,  and  leads  to  great  error.— iVb/i  dignus  vindice 
ncdus.^-^God  having  furnlflied  man  with  fenles  and  with  organs  of  articu- 
lation i  as  he  has  alfo  with  water,  Ihne  and  fand  1  it  (hould  feem  no  more 
fieccflary  to  form  the  words  for  man,  than  to  temper  the  morui; 

would 


MR.  LOCKE'S  ESSAY,  37 

would  have  fcen  that  it  was  merely  a  dontrivance  of  Lan- 
guage ;  and  that  the  only  compofition  was  in  the  terms ;  and 
confequently  that  it  was  as  improper  to  fpeak  of  a  complex 
ideay  as  it  would  be  to  call  a  conftellation  a  complex  ftar : 
And  that  they  are  not  ideas,  but  merely  terms,  which  are 
general  and  ah/lra£i.  I  think  too  that  he  would  have  ietn 
the  advantage  of  **  thoroughly  weighing"  not  only  (as  he 
lays)  "  the  imperfeBions  of  Language  ;**  but  its  perfeSihns 
alio :  For  the  perfections  of  Language,  not  properly  under- 
flood,  have  been  one  of  the  chief  caufes  of  the  imper- 
fe(Stions  of  our  philofophy.  And  indeed,  from  number- 
lefs  paifages  throughout  his  Eflay,  Mr.  Locke  feems  to  me 
to  have  fufpedted  fomething  of  this  fort :  and  efpecially 
from  what  he  hints  in  his  laft  chapter ;  where,  (peaking 
of  the  doArine  of  iigns,  he  fays—**  The  confideration  then 

*  of  Ideas  and  Words,  as  the  great  inilruments  of  know- 
<  ledge,  makes  no  defpicable  part  of  their  contemplation 

*  who  would  take  a  view  of  ^^human  knowledge  in  the 

*  whole  extent  of  it.     And  perhaps,  if  they  were  diflinBly 

*  weighed  and  duly  confidered,  they  would  afford  us  another 

*  fort  of  Logick  and  Critick  than  what  we  have  hitherto 
•*  been  acquainted  with.** 

B. 
Do  not  you  think  that  what  you  now  advance  will 
bear  a  difpute :    and  that  fome  better  arguments  than 

your 


38  SOME  CONSIDERATION  OF 

your  bare  ailertion  are  necefiary  to  make  us  adopt  your 
opinion? 

Hi 

Yes.  To  many  perfons  much  more  would  be  neceflary ; 
but  not  to  you.  I  only  defire  you-  to  read  the. Effay  over, 
again  with  attention,  arid  fee  whether  all  that  its  immortal 
author  ha3  juflly  concluded  will  not  hold  equally  true  and 
clear,,  if  you  fubftitute  the  corapoiition^  &ci  of  terms 
wherever  he  has  fuppofed  a  compofition,  Scc«  of  ideas. 
And  if  that  fliaU  upon '  i1lri(3:  examination  appear  to  you  to 
be  the  cafe,  you  will  need  no  other  argument  againft  the 
compoiition  of  Ideas :  It  being  exactly  fimilar  to  that  un^ 
anfwerable  one  which  Mr.  L<bcke  himfelf  declares  td  be 

r 

fufficient  againft  their  being  innate.  For  the  fuppofitioii 
is  unneceffary :  Every  purpofe  for  which  the  compofition 
of  Ideas  was  imagined  being  more  ealily  and  naturally 
anfwered  by  the  compofition  of  Terms  :  whilft  at  the  fame 
time  it  does  like  wife  clear  up  miany  difficulties  in  which  the 
fuppofed  compofition  of  Ideas  neceffarily  involves  us.  And,' 
though  this  is  the  only  argument  I  mean  to  ufe  at-prefent, 
(becaufe  I  would  not  willingly  digrefs-  too  far,  and  it  is  not? 
the  neceffary  foundation  for  what  I  have  undertaken)  yet  I 
will  venture  to  fay,  that  it  is  an '  eafy- matter,  tipoii  Mr. 
LockeY  own  principles  and  a  phyfital  ODnfidei^ion  6f '^fttd 

Senfes 


MR.  LOCKE!S  ESSAY.  39 


Senfes.  axKl  the.  Min( 
compofition  of  Ideas  i 


B. 


Well.  Since  you  do  not  intend  to  build  any  thing  upon 
it,  we  may  fafely  for  the  prefent  fuppofe  what  you  have 
advanced ;  and  take  it  for  granted  that  the  gteateft  part  of 
Mr.  Locke's  Eflay,  that  is,  all  which  relates  to  what  he 
calls  the  compofition>  abftra<Stion,  complexity,  generaliza* 
tion,  relation,  8cc.  of  Ideas,  does  indeed  merely  concera 
Language.  But,  pray,  let  me  alk  you ;  If  fo,^  what  has- 
Mr.  Locke  done  in  the  Third  Book  of  his  Eflay  ?  In  which 
he  profeffedfyttt2ii^  of  the  nature,  ufe,  and  fignification  of 
Language  f 

H. 

He  has  really  done  littfe  elfe  but  enlarge  upon  what  he 

« 

had  faid  before,  when  he  thought  he  was  treating  only  of 
Ideas :  that  is,  he  has  continued  to  treat  of  the  compofition 
of  Terms.  For  though,  in  the  paflage  I  have  before 
quoted,  he  fays,  that  <*  unlefs  the  force  and  manner  of 
^  fignification  6f  words  are  firfl  well  obferved,  there  can 
^^  be  very  little  faid  clearly  and  pertinently  concerning 
^*  knowledge  f — and  though  this  is  the  declared  reafon  of 
writing  his  Third  Book  concerning  Language,  as  diJiinSi 

from. 


40  SOME  CONSIDERATION  OF 

from  Ideas;  yet  he  continues  to  treat  fingly,  as  before, 
concerning  the  Force  ^-  of  words ;  and  has  not  advanced 
one  fy liable  concerning  their  Manner  of  fignification* 

The  only  Divifion  Mr.  Locke  has  made  of  words,  is, 
into — Names  of  Ideas  and  Particles.  This  divifion  is  not 
made  regularly  and  formally ;  but  is  referved  to  his  feventh 
Chapter.  And  even  there  it  is  done  in  a  very  cautious^ 
doubting,  loofe,  uncertain  manner,  very  different  from  that 
incomparable  author's  ufual  method  of  proceeding.  For, 
though  the  general  title  of  the  feventb  Chapter  is, — Of 
Particles  \ — yet  he  feems  to  chufe  to  leave  it  uncertain 
whether  he  does  or  does  not  include  Ferbs  in  that  title,  and 
particularly  what  he  calls  <<  the  Marks  of  the  Mind's 
"  affirming  or  denying^  And  indeed  he  himfelf  acknow- 
ledges, in  a  letter  to  Mr.  Molyneux,  that — "  Some  parts 
•^  of  that  l^bird  Book  concerning  Words,  though  the 
•^  thoughts  were  eafy  and  clear  enough,  yet  coft  him  more 
"  pains  to  exprefs  than  all  the  reft  of  his  Effay.  And  that 
<*  therefore  he  ihould  not  much  wonder  if  there  were  in 
^^  fome  parts  of  it  obfcurity  and  doubtfulnefs.''  Now 
whenever  any  man  finds  this  difficulty  to  exprefs  himfelf. 


♦  The  Force  of  ^  word  depends  upon  the  number  of  Ideas  of  which  that 
word  is  the  fign,  6 

in 


MR.  LOCKE'S  ESSAY.  •  41 

in  a  language  with  which  he  is  well  acquainted,  let  him  be 
perfuaded  that  his  thoughts  M*e  not  clear  enough  :  for, .  .as 
Swift  (I  think)  has  fomewhere  obferved,  "  When  the 
*<  wat«r  is  clear  you  will  ealUy  fee  to  the  bottom." 

The   whole   of  this   vague  -  Chapter— O/*  Particles — 
^which  Ihauld  have  contained  an  account  of  every  thing 
but  Nouns)  is  comprized  in  two^  pages  and  a  half :  and  alt  , 
the  reft  of  the  Third'  Book  concerns  only,  as  before,  the 
F^ree  of  the  names  of  Idieas, 


B. 

How  is  this  to  be  accounted  for  ?  Do  you  fuppofe  he 
was  unacquainted  with  the  opinions  of  Grammarians,  or 
that  he  defpifed  the  fubjedt? 

H. 

No.  I  am  very  fuPC'  of  the  contrary.  For  it  is  plain 
he  did  root  defpife  the  fubjedt;  fince  he  repeatedly  and 
flrongly  recommends  it  to  others :  and  at  every  ftep 
throtighout  his  EfFay,  I  find  the  moft  evident  marks  of  the 
journey  he  had  himfelf  taken  through  all  their  works. 
But  it  appears  that  he  was  by  no  means  fatisfied  with  what 
he  found  there  concerning  Particles :  For  he  complains 
tftat  "  this  part  of  Grammar  has  been  as  much  negledled, 

G  "  as 


4^  SOME  CONSIDERATION  OF 

*•  as  fome  others  over-diligently  cultivated.''  And  fays, 
"  that  "  He  who  would  Ihew  the  right  ufe  of  Particles, 
^*  and  what  fignificancy  and  force  they  have,"  (that  is, 
according  to  his  own  divifion,  the  right  ufe,  fignificancyr 
and  force  of  all  words  except  the  names  of  Ideas)  "  muft 
*<  take  a  little  more  pains,  enter  into  his  own  thoughts, 
^  and  obferve  nicely  the  feveral  poftures  of  his  mind  in 
"  difcourfing."  For  thefe  Particles^  he  fays, — "  are  all 
^^  marks  of  fome  aEiion  or  intimation  of  the  Mind;  and 
•*  therefore,  to  underfland  them  rightly,  the  feveral  views^ 
"  ix)ftures,  ftands,  turns,  limitations  and  exceptions,  and 
"  feveral  other  thoughts  of  the  Mind,  for  which  we  have 
^'  either  none  or  very  deficient  namesj  are  diligently  to  be 
^^  ftudied.  Of  thefe  there  are  a  great  variety,  much 
"  exceeding  the  number  of  Particles."  For  himfelf,  he; 
declines  the  tafk,  however  neceffary  and  neglected  by  all 
others;  and  that  for  no  better  reafon  than — ^^  I  intend 
^^  not  here  a  full  explication  of  this  fort  of  ligns."  And 
yet  he  was  (as  he  profefTed  and  thought)  writing  on  the 
human  Underjianding  \  and  therefore  fliould  not  furely 
have  left  mankind  ftill  in  the  fame  darknefs  in  which  he 
found  them,  concerning  thefe  hitherto  unnamed  and  (but 
by  himfelf)  undifcovered  operations  of  the  Mind. 


fia 


MR.  LOCKE'S  ESSAY-  43 

In  fliort,  this  feventh  Chapter  is,  to  mc,  a  full  confeflion 
and  proof  that  he  had  not  fettled  his  own  opinion  concern- 
ing the  manner  of  lignification  of  Words :  that  it  ftill  re- 
mained (though  he  did  not  chufe  to  have  it  fo  underftood) 
a  Dejideratum  with  him,  as  it  did  with  our  great  Bacon 
before  him :  and  therefore  that  he  would  not  decide  any 
thing  about  it;  but  confined  himfelf  to  the  profecution  of 
his  original  inquiry  concerning  the  firft  fort  of  Abbrevia^ 
tionsy  which  is  by  far  the  moft  important  to  knowledge, 
and  which  he  fuppofed  to  belong  to  Ideas. 

But  though  he  declined  the  fubjedi,  he  evidently  leaned 
towards  the  opinion  of  Ariftotle,  Scaliger,  and  Meff.  de  Port 
Royal :  and  therefore,  without  having  fufficiently  examined 
their  pofition,  he  too  haftily  adopted  their  notion  concern- 
ing the  pretended  Copula — ^^  /j,  and  Is  not^  He  fuppofed 
with  them,  that  affirming  and  denying  w^ere  operations  of 
the  Mind\  and  referred  all  the  other  forts  of  Words  to  the 
fame  fource.  Though,  if  the  different  forts  of  Words  had 
been  (as  he  was  willing  to  believe)  to  be  accounted  for  by 
the  different  operations  of  the  Mind,  it  was  almoft  im- 
poflible  they  fliould  have  efcaped  the  penetrating  eyes  of 
Mr.  Locke. 


G  %  EDEA 


EHEA   nXEPOENTA,    &c. 


CHAP.     III. 


OF    THE    PARTS    OF    SPEECH. 


B. 

VOU  faid  fome  time  ago,  very  truly,  that  the  number  of 
Parts  of  Speech  was  varioufly  redkoned :  and  that  it 
has  not  to  this  moment  been  fettled,  what  fort  of  difference 
in  words  ftiould  entitle  them  to  hold  a  feparate  rank  by 
themfelves. 

By  what  you  have  lince  advanced,  this  matter  fcems  to 

be  ten  times  more  unfettled  than  it  was  before :  for  'you 

have  difcarded  the  differences  of  Tdm^s,  and  the  differences 

^  of  Ideas,  and  the  different  operations  of  the  Mind,  as  guides 

to  a  divifion  of  Language.  Now  I  cannot  for  my  life 
imagine  any  other  principle  that  you  have  left  to  condutSl 
us  to  the  Parts  of  Speech. 

H.  I 


OF  THE  PARTS  OF  SPEECH.  45 

H. 

I  thought  I  had  laid  down  in  the  beginning,  the  princi- 
ples upon  which  we  were  to  proceed  in  our  inquiry  into 
the  manner  of  Jignification  of  words. 


6. 


Which  do  you  mean  ? 


H. 


The  fame  which  Mr.  Locke  employs  in  his  inquiry  into 
the  "Force  of  words :  viz.-— The  two  great  purpofes  of 
ipeech. 

B. 
And  to  what  diftribution  do  they  lead  you  ? 

H. 

1.  To  words  necejjary  for  the  communication  of  our 
Thoughts.     And 

2.  To  Abbreviaiionsy  employed  for  the  fake  of  difpatch* 

B., 

How  ma^  of  each  do  you  reckon  ?  And  -which  ^c 
they? 

-  H.  In 


{ 


46  OF  THE  PARTS  OF  SPEECH. 

H. 

In  what  particular  language  do  you  mean  ?  For,  if  you 
do  not  confine  your  queftion,  you  might  as  reafonably 
expedt  me  (according  to  the  fable)  **  to  make  a  coat  to  fit 
^^  the  moon  in  all  her  changes.'' 

Why  ?  Are  they  not  the  fame  in  all  languages  ? 

H. 

Thofe  necejfary  to  the  communication  of  our  thoughts 
are. 

B. 

And  are  not  the  others  alfo  ? 


H. 


No.     Very  different. 


6. 


I  thought  we  were  talking  of  Univcrfal  Grammar. 

H. 

I  mean  fo  too.     But  I  cannot  anfwer  the  whole  of  your 
queftion,  unlefs  you  confine  it  to  fome  particular  language 

1  with 


OF  THE  PARTS  OF  SPEECH.  47 

with  which  I  am  acquainted.     However,  that  need  not 

a 

difturb  you  :  for  you  will  find  afterwards  that  the  princi- 
ples will  apply  univerfally. 

B. 

Well.  For  the  prefent  then  confine  yourfelf  to  the 
necejfary  Parts :  and  exemplify  in  the  Englifh. 

H. 

In  Englifh,  and  in  all  Languages,  there  are  only  iwo 
Ibrts  of  words  which  are  neceffary  for  the  communication 
of  our  thoughts. 


B. 


And  they  are  ? 


H. 


1.  Noun,  and 

2.  Verb. 

B. 

Thefe  are  the  common  names,  and  I  fuppofe  you  ufe 
them  according  to  the  common  acceptation. 

H. 

I  fhould  not  otherwife  have  chofen  them,  but  becaufe 
they  are  commonly  employed ;  and  it  would  not  be  eafy 

tD> 


4il  OF  THE  PARTS  OF  SPEECH. 

to  dirpofleis  them  of  their  prefcriptive  title :  beiidesy  withr 
out  doing  any  mifchief,  it  faves  time  in  our  diicourie. 
And  I  life  them  according  to  their  common  acceptation. 

B. 

But  yoti  have  not  all  this  while  informed  me  how  many 
Paris  of  Speech  you  mean  to  lay  down:. 

H. 

That  fhall  be  as  you  pleafe.  Either  ^w&y  or  Twenty^ 
or  more.  la  the  flri<St  fenfe  of  the  term,  no  doubt  both 
the  neceflary  words  and  the  Abbreviations  aore  ail  of  them 
Parts  of  Speech ;  becaiife  they  are  all  iifcful  in  Language, 
and  each  has  a  dilfferent  manner  of  figmficationT  But  I 
think  it  of  great  cqnfequence  both  to  knowledge  and  to 
Languages,  to  keep  the  words  employed  for  the  dilfferent 
purpofes  of  fpeech,  as  diftin6l  as  poflible.  And  therefore 
I  am  inclined  to  allow  that  rank  only  to  the  necejfary 
words  *  :  and  to  include  all  the  others  (which  are  not 
neceflary  to  fpeech,  but  merely  fubfiitutes  of  tiMr  firft  fort) 
under  the  title  oyi  Abbreviations. 


*  *'  Res  neceflarias  Philofophus  primo  loco  ftatuit :  acccfforias  autem  & 
^^'Vicanns,  nrox.^* 


.  i   •\ 


I,  C  S«s4igeir  de  Gaufift  JU  l"  cap-  ^'^' 

B.  Merely 


OF  THE  PARTS  OF  SPEECH.  49 

B- 

Merely  Subftitutes !  You  do  not  mean  that  yoii  can  dif- 
courfe  as  well  without  as  with  them  ? 

H. 

Not  as  well.  A  fledge  cannot  be  drawn  along  as 
fmoothly,  and  eafily,  and  fwiftly,  as  a  carriage  with  wheels; 
but  it  may  be  dragged. 

B. 

Do  you  mean  then  that,  without  ufing  any  other  fort  of 
word  whatever,  and  merely  by  the  means  of  the  Noun 
and  Verb  alone,  you  can  relate  or  communicate  any  thing 
that  I  can  relate  or  communicate  with  the  help  of  all  the 
others  ? 

H. 

Yes.  It  is  the  great  proof  of  all  I  have  advanced. 
And,  upon  trial,  you  will  find  that  you  may  do  the  fame. 
But,  after  the  long  habit  and  familiar  ufe  of  Abbreviations^ 
your  firfl  attempts  to  do  without  them  will  feem  very 
aukward  to  you ;  and  you  will  flumble  as  often  as  a  horfe, 
long  ufed  to  be  fhod,  that  has  newly  cafl  his  fhoes. 
Though  indeed  (even  with  thofe  who  have  not  the  habit 
to  flruggle  againfl)  without  Abbreviations ^  Language  caa; 

H     :  get 


50  OF  THE  PARTS  OF  SPEECH. 

g6t  on  but  lamely :  and  therefore  they  have  been  intro- 
duced, in  different  plenty,  and  more  or  lefs  happily,  in  all 
Languages.  And  upon  thefe  two  points — Abbreviation  of 
Terms f  and  Abbreviation  in  the  manner  of  Jignijication  of 
words— depends  the  refpe6liv6  excellenceof  every  Language. 
All  their  other  comparative  advantages  are  trifling. 

B. 

I  like  your  method  of  proof  very  well;  and  will  cer- 
tainly put  it  to  the  trial.  But  before  I  can  do  that  pro- 
perly,, you  muft  explain  your  Abbreviations :  that  I  may 
know  what  they  ftand  for,  and  what  words  to  put  in  their 
room. 

H. 

Would  you  have  me  then  pafs  over  the  two  neceJjTary 
Parts  of  Speech ;  and  proceed  immediately  to  their  Abbre- 
viations > 

B. 

If  you  will.  For  I  fuppofe  you  agree  with  the  common 
opinion,  concerning  the  words  which  you  have  diitin- 
guiihed  as  neceflary  to  the  communication  of  our  thoughts. 
Thofe  you  call  neceflary,  I  fuppofe  you  allow  to  be  the 
Jigns  of  different  forts  of  Id*asy  or  of  difiextent  operations 
of  the  mind. 

1  H.  Indeed 


OF  THE  PARTS  OF  SPEECH.  51 


H. 


/      • 


Indeed  1  do  not.  The  tulinefs  of  the  mind,  as  far  as 
it  concerns  Language,  appears  to  me  to  be  very  iimple. 
It  extends  no  farther  than  to  receive  Impreffions,  that  is, 
to  have  Senfations  or  Feelings.  What  are  called  its  opera- 
tions>  are  merely  the  operatioos  of  Language*  A  con- 
fideration  of  Ideas^  or  iof  the  M^nd^  or  of  things  (relative 
to  the  Parts  of  Speech)  will  lead  us  no  farther  than  to 
Nouns :  i.  e.  the  figns  of  thjofe  impreffions,  or  names  of 
ideas.  The  other  Part  of  Sx)eech,  the  Ferby  muft  be  ac- 
counted for  from  the  neceflary  ufe  of  it  in  communication. 
It  is  in  fa(Et  the  communication  itfelf :  and  therefore  well 
denominated  VyifMj  diBum.  For  the  Verb  is  <ijJ0D  loqui^ 
^Hur^;  the  Noun,  de  quo. 

Let  us  proceed  then  regularly ;  and  hear  what  you  have 
to  fay  on  each  of  your  two  neceffary  Parts  of  Speech. 


V     't 


**  Al(erutn  <ft  quod  loquimur ;  alterum  de  quo  loquimur." 

Quin^l.  fib.  1.  cap.- 4, 


'■  ■      ■  .  .  '     . 

H»  EHEA 


EHEA   nTEPOENTA,   &c 


CHAP.    IV. 


OF     THE     NOUN. 


H. 

Q  F  the  firft  Part  of  Speech — ^the  Noun, — ^it  being  the 
beft  underftood,  and  therefore  the  moft  fpoken  of  by 
others,,  I  Ihall  need  af  prefent  to  fay  little  more  than  that 
it  is  the  Jimple  or  complex^  the  particular  or  general  Jign 
or  name  of  ane  or  more  Ideas^ 

I  fliall  only  remind  you,,  that  at  this  ftage  of  our  in- 
quiry concerning  Language,  comes  in  moft  properly  the 
confideration  of  the  Force  of  terms :  which  is  the  whole 
bufinefs  of  Mr.  Locke's  Eflay ;  to  which  I  refer  you.  And 
I  imagine  that  Mfr.  Lockers  intention  of  confining  himfelf 
to  the  confideration  of  the  Mind  only,  was  the  reafon  that 
he  went  no  farther  than  to  the  Force  of  Terms  ;•  and  did 
not  meddle  with  their  Manner  of  fignification,  to  whichi 
the  Mind  alone  could  never  lead  him. 

B*.  Da 


OF  THE  NOUN.  S3 

B. 

Do  you  fay  nothing  of  the  Declenlion,  Number,  Cafe 
and  Gender  of  Nouns  ? 

* 

At  prefent  nothing.  There  is  no  pains-worthy  difli- 
culty  nor  difpute  about  them. 

B. 

Sitrely  there  is  about  the  Gender.  And  Mr.  Harris  par- 
ticularly has  thought  it  worth  his  while  to  treat  at  large  of 
what  ^others  have  flightly  hinted  concerning  it  *  :  and  has 
fupported  his  reafoning  by  a  long  lift  of  poetical  authori- 
ties.    What  think  you  of  that  part  of  his  book  ? 

♦  "  Pythagorici  fexum  in  cunSlis  agnofcunt,  &c.     Agens^  Mas ;  Pattens, 

**  Fc3emina-    Quapropter  Deus-  dicunt  mafculine ;    Terra^  fceminine  j  & 

*'  Ignis,  mafculine;    &  Aquay  feminine:   quoniam  in  his  ASio^  in  iftis 

««  Paffio  rclucebat." 

Campanella. 

^  In  rebus  invcniuntur  duae^  proprietates  gcnerales,  fcilicet  proprictaa 
"  Agentis,  &  proprietas  Patientis.  Genus  eft  modus  fignificandi  nominrs 
fumptus  a  proprietatc  aftiva  vel  paffiva.  Genus  mafculinum  eft  modus 
fignificandi  rem  fub  proprietate  agentis:  Genus  femininum  eft  modus 
fignificandi  rem  fub  proprietate  paticntis/' 

Scotus-Gram.  Spec^  Cap.  xviv 

KL  That, 


ex 

c< 

AC 


54  ^^  THE  NOUN- 

H. 

That,  Tvith  the  reft  of  it,  he  had  mndbi  better  ht\re  let 
it  alone.  And  as  for  his  poetical  authorities ;  the  Miifes 
(as  I  have  heard  Mrs.  Peachum  fay  of  her  own  fex  in  cafes 
of  murder)  are  bitter  bad  judges  in  matters  of  philofophy. 
Beiides  that  Reafon  is  an  arrant  Defpot ;  who,  in  his  own 
dominions,  admits  of  no  authority  but  his  own*  And 
Mr.  Harris  is  particularly  unfortunate  in  the  very  outfet  of 
that — "  fubtle  kind  of  reafoning  (as  he  calls  it)  which 
^^  difcerns  -even  in  things  without  fex,  a  diftant  analogy  to 
^  that  great  natural  diftincSHon.^  For  his  very  firft  in- 
ftances,-^the  sun  and  the  moon,— deftroy  the  whole  fub- 
tiky  of  this  kind  of  reafoning  *.  For  Mr.  Harris  ought 
to  have  known,  that  in  many  Afiatic  Languages,  and  in 
all  the  northern  Languages  of  this  part  of  the  globe  which 
we  inhabit,  and  particularly  in  our  Mother-language  the 
Anglo-faxon  (from  which  suN  and  moon  are  immediately 

*  It  can  only  have  been  Mr.  Harris's  authority,  and  the  ill-founded  praifes 
lavilhcd  on  his  performance,  that  could  miflead  Dr.  Pricftley,  in  his  thirteenth 

Icdure,  haftily  and  without  examination,  to  fay "  Thus,  for  example, 

the  SUN  having  a  ftronger,  and  the  moon  a  weaker  influence  over  the 
world,  and  there  being  but  two  celeftial  bodies  fo  remarkable ;  All  nations^ 
I  believe,  diat  ufe  genders,  have  afcribed  to  the  Sun  the  gender  of  the 
"  Maky  and  to  the  Moon  that  of  the  Female'' 

In  the  Gothic,  Anglo-faxon,  German,  Dutch,  Danifli  and  Swedifh,  sun 
is  feminine :  In  modern  Ruffian  it  is  neuter. 

derived 


€€ 


OF  THE  NOUN.  55 

derived  tons)  sun  is  Feminine j  and  moon  is  Mafculine  *. 
So  feminine  is  the  Sun,  ["  that  fair  hot  wench  in  flame* 
"  coloured  taflfata**]  +  that  our  northern  Mythology  makes 
her  the  Wife  of  Tuifco. 

And  if  our  Englifh  Poets,  Shakefpeare,  Milton,  8cc. 
have,  by  a  familiar  Profopopeia,  made  them  of  different 
genders ;  it  is  only  becaufe,  from  their  claflical  reading, 
they  adopted  the  fouthern  not  the  northern  mythology ; 
and  followed  the  pattern  of  their  Greek  and  Roman  matters. 


*  *'  Apud  Saxoncs,  Luna,  Mona.  Mona  autem  Gcrmanis  fuperioribus 
**  Mofiy  alias  Man ;  a  Mon^  alias  Man  vctcrrimo  ipforum  rege  &  Deo 
*'  patrio,  quern  Tacitus  meminit,.  &  in  Luna  cclebrabant. — Ex  hoc  Lunam 
"  mafculino  {ntHebr^tt)  dicunt  genere,  DerMon:  Dominamque  ejus  & 
*^  Amafiam,  e  cujus  aipeftu  alias  languct,  alias  refipifcit.  Die  Son-,  quafi 
"  tunc  Lunam,  banc  Solem.  Hinc  &  Idolum  Lunae  viri  fingcbant  fpccic  5 
"  non,  ut  Verftcgan  opinatur,  foeminae/*  Spclman's  GlofT.  Mona. 

"  De  generibus  Nominum  (qxMC  per  articulos,  .adjcftiva,  parricipia,  & 
•^  pronomina  indicantur)  hie  nihil  tradimus.  Obiter  tamen  obfervet  Leftor, 
''  ut  ut  minuta  res  eft,  Sokm  (Sunna  vcl  Sunne)  in  Anglo- faxonica  effc 
"  fiminini  generis,  &  Lunam  {Mcna)  effc  ma/culini.**    G.  Hickes. 

"  Quomodo  item  Sol  eft  virile,  Germanicum  Sunn,  fumininum.  Dicunt 
^'  enim  Die  Sunn,  non  Der  Sunn.  Undc  &  Solem  Txiifconis  uxorcm  fuiflc 
«*  fabulantur."  G.  J.  Voffius. 


t  ift.  part  of  Henry  4jth. 


Figure 


56  OF  THE  NOUN. 

Figure  apart,  in  our  Language,  the  names  of  things 
without  fex  are  alfo  without  gender  *•  And  this,  not  be- 
caufe  our  Reafoning  or  Underftanding  differs  from  theirs 
who  gave  them  gender ;   (which  muft  be  the  cafe,  if  the 


€€ 


*  "  Sexus  cnim  non  nifi  in  ABimali,  aut  in  iis  quae  Animalis  naturam 
"  imitantur,  ut  Arbores.     Sed  ab  ufu  hoc  faftum  eft ;  qui  nunc  mafculinum 

"  fcxum,  nunc  foemininum  attribuiffct. Proprium  autem  gcncrum  cfle 

pari  mutationcm,  fatis  patct  ex  generc  incerto ;  ut  etiam  Armentas  dixerit 
Ennius,  quae  nos  Armenia.''  J.  C.  Scaligcr  de  caufis,  cap.  Ixxix. 
Nominum  quoque  genera  mutantur  adeo,  ut  privatim  libros  fupcr  hac 
"  re  veteres  confecerint.  Alterum  argumentum  eft  ex  iis  quae  Dubia  five 
**  Incerta  vocant.  Sic  enim  diftum  eft.  Hie  vel  Hj^e  dies.  Tertium  tefti- 
"  monium  eft  in  quibufdam :  nam  Plautus  collum  mafculino  dixit.  Item 
"  JubaTy  Palumbem,  atque  alia,  diverfis  quam  nos  generibus  efTe  a  prifcis 
"  pronunciata*"     Id.  cap.  ciii. 

*'  Amour  qui  eft  mafculin  au  fingulier,  eft  quelquefois  fcminin  au  pluriel  j 
"  de  folks  amours.  On  dit  au  mafculin  Un  Comtiy  Un  Duehe ;  &  au  feminin 
"  Une  Comte  pairie,  Une  Ducbe  fairie.  On  dit  encore  De  bonnes  genSy  & 
"  Des  gens  •  malbeureux.  Par  ou  vous  voyez  que  Ic  fubftantif  Gens  eft 
*'  fcminin,  lorfqu'  il  eft  precede  d*  un  adjeftif ;  &  qu'il  eft  mafculin,  lorfqu' 
"  il  en  eft  fuivi."  L'  Abbe  de  Condillac,  P.  2.  chap.  iv. 

The  ingenious  author  of— Notes  on  the  Grammarica  Sinica  of  M.  Four- 
mont — fays,  "  According  to  the  Grammaire  Raifonnce,  les  genres  ont  etc 
"  inventes  pour  les  terminaiJo7Js.  But  the  Meff.  du  Port  Royal  have  dif- 
covered  a  different  origin  ;  they  tell  us  that — Arbor  eft  feminine y  parceque 
ccmme  une  bonne  mere  elle  porte  du  fruit. — Miratur  non  fua.  How  could 
"  Frenchmen  forget  that  in  their  own  la  meilleure  des  langues  poJJibleSy  Fruits 
"  trees  arc  mafculine,  and  their  fruits  feminine  ?  Mr.  Harris  has  adopted 
'*  this  idea  ;  he  might  as  well  have  left  it  to  its  legitimate  parents."*    P.  47- 

Mind 


OF  THE  NOUN.  57 

Mind  or  Reafon  was  concerned  in  it  -.)  But  becaufe  with 
lis  the  relation  of  words  to  each  other  is  denoted  by  the 
place  or  by  Prepofitions ;  which  denotation  in  their  language 
ufually  made  a  part  of  the  words  themfelves,  and  was  fhewn 
by  cafes  or  terminations.  This  contrivance  of  theirs,  al- 
lowing them  a  more  varied  conftrudlion,  made  the  termi- 
nating genders  of  Adjedtives  ufeful,  in  order  to  avoid 
miftake  and  mifapplication. 

*  ^^  Sane  in  fcxu  feu  gcnerc  phyfico  omncs  nationcs  convcnire  dcbebunt ; 
quoniam  natura  eft  eadem,  nee  ad  placitum  fcriptorum  inutatun  At 
Poctae  &  Piftorcs  in  coloribus  non  femper  conveniunt.  Ventos  Roman! 
"  non  folum  finxerunt  efle  viros,  fed  &  Deos :  at  Hebraei  contra  cos  ut 
'*  Nymphas  pinxcrunt  Arborcs  Latini  fpecie  foeminea  pinxcrunt  -,  virili 
*^  Hifpani,  &c.  Regioncs  urbefque  Deas  efle  voluit  Gcntilium  Latinorum 
*-  Theologia :  at  Germani  omnia  hasc  ad  neutrum  rejccerunt,  Et  quidera 
"  in  Genere,  feu  fexus  diftinftionc  grammatica,  magna  eft  inter  authorcs 
^'  differentia  5  non  folum  in  diverfis  linguis,  fed  etiam  in  cadem.  In  La- 
"  tina,  ne  ad  alias,  recurram,  aliter  Ora tores,  &  aliter  Poetae :  aliter  vc- 
^  teres,  &  aliter  juniores  fentiunt,  &c.  Iberes  in  Afia  florcre  dicuntur, 
*'  &  linguam  habere  clegantem,  &  umen  nullam  generum  varictatcm 
''  agnofcunt."        Caramuel,  Ixii. 


c< 


I  £n£A 


I' 

t 

f 

r 


EnEA    nXEPOENTA,    &c. 


CHAP.    V. 

OF    THE    ARTICLE    AND    INTERJECTIONr 

B. 

XJOWEVER  .connedled  with  the  Noufij  and  generally 
treated  of  at  the  fame  time,  I  fuppofe  you  forbea;r  to 
mention  the  Articles  at  prefent,  as  not  allowing  them  to 
be  a  feparate  Part  of  Speech ;  at  leaft  not  a  neceflay  Part ; 
becaufe,  as  Wilkins  tells  us,  "  the  Latin  is  without  them  *«^.'» 
Notwithftanding  which,  when  you  conlider  with  him  that 
*^  they  are  fo  convenient  for  the  greater  diftindlnefs  of 
"  fpeech  ;  and  that  upon  this  account,  the  Hebrew,  Greek, 
^^  Sclavonic,  and  moft  other  languages  have  them  ;'•  per- 
haps you  will  not  think  it  improper  to  follow  the  example 
of  many  other  Grammarians  :  who,  though  like  you,  they 
deny  them  to  be  any  part  of  fpeech,  have  yet  treated  of 
them  feparately  from  thofe  parts  which  they  enumerate. 
And  this  you  may  very  confiftently  do,  even  though  you 

♦  Effay,  Part  3.  Chap.  3, 

Ihould 


OF  THE  ARTICLE  AND  INTER JEGTBON--      59 

Ihonld  confider  them,  as  the  Abbe  Girard  calls  them, 
merely  the  avanUconreiws  to  announce  the  approach  or 
entrance  of  a  Noun  *. 

*  "  J'abandonne  Tart  de  copier  des  mots  dits  &  rcpetes  mille  fois  arant 
"  moij  puifqu'ils  n'expliquent  pas  Ics  chofes  cflentielles  que  j'ai  deffcin  dc 
"  fairc  entendre  a  mes  lefteurs.  Une  etude  attentive  .faitc  d'apres  Tufagc. 
"  m'inftruit  bien  mieux.  Elle  m'apprend  que  TArticle  eft  un  mot  ctabli 
"  pour  annoncer  &  particularifer  fimplement  la  chofe  fans  la  nommer :  c*cft 
"  a  dire,  qu'il  eft  une  cxpreflion  indefinie,  quoiquc  pofitive,  dont  la  jufte 
"  valeur  n*eft  que  de  faire  naitre  I'idce  d'une  efpece  fubfiftentc  ,qu'on 
diftingue  de  la  totalite  des  etres,  pour  ctre  enfuice  nommee.  Cctte  de- 
finition en  ^cxpofe  clairement  la  nature  &  le  (ervice  proprc,  au  quel  oit 
le  voit  conftamment  attache  dans  quelque  circonftance  que  ce  foit.  EUc 
m'en  donnc  une  idee  nette  &  determince :  me  le  fait  reconnoitre  par 
*^  tout :  &  m'empeche  de  le  confondre  avec  tout  autre  mot  d'efpece  diffe*- 
rente.  Je  fens  parfaitement  que  lorfquc  je  veux  parler  d'un  objct,  qui 
fe  prefente  a  mes  yeux  ou  a  mon  imagination,  le  genie  de  ma  languc  ne 
*'  m'en  fournit  pas  toujours  li  denomination  precifc  dans  le  premier  inftant 
"  de  Pexecution  de  la  parole :  que  le  plus  fouvent  il  m'offire  d'abord  un 
"  autre  mot,  comme  un  commencement  de  fujet  propose  &  de  diftinClion 
'^  des  autres  objets  j  enforte  que  cc  mot  eft  un  vrai  preparatoirc  a  la  deno- 
"  mination,  par  lequel  elle  eft  annoncee,  avant  que  de  fe  prcfenter  illc 
*^  meme :  Et  voila  V Article  tel  que  je  Tai  defini.  Si  cet  Avant-coureur 
diminue  la  vivacitc  du  langage,  il  y  met  in  recompenfe  une  certaine  po- 
liteflc  &  une  dclicateflc  qui  naiflcnt  de  cette  idee  preparatoire  &  indefinie 
d'un  objet  qu'on  va  nommer :  car  par  ce  moyen  I'elprit  etant  rendu  at- 
tentif  avant  que  d'etre  inftruit,  il  a  le  plaifir.d'aller  au  devant  de  la  deno- 
«*  mination,  dc  la  defirer,  &  de  Tattendre  avant  que  de  la  poflcder.  Plaifir 
*'  qui  a  ici,  comme  ailleurs,  un  mcritc  fiateur,  propre  a  piquer  le  gout. — 
"  Qu'on  me  paflTe  cctte  metaphore ;  puifqu'elle  a  de  la  juftcfle,  &  fait  con- 
**  noitrc  d'une  maniere  fenfible  une  chofe  trtt-metafbyfique.''  Di/c.  iv. 

I  2  H-  Of 


cc 
cc 
<c 


cr 
u 

€€ 


■k 


60       OF  THE  ARTICLE  AND  INTERJECTION. 

H, 

Of  all  the  accounts  which  have  been  given  of  the  Article, 
I  muft  own  I  think  that  of  the  very  ingenious  Abbe  Girard 
to  be  the  moft  fantaftic  and  abfurd*  The  fate  of  this  very 
neceflary  word  has  been  moft  fingularly  hard  and  unfor- 
tunate. For  though  without  it,  or  fome  equivalent  in- 
vention *,  men  could  not  communicate  their  thoughts  at 
all ;  yet  (like  many  of  the  moft  ufeful  things  in  this  world) 
from  its  unajffe6led  limplicity  and  want  of  brilliancy,  it 
has  been  ungratefully  negledted  and  degraded.  It  has  been 
confidered,  after  Scaliger,  as  "  otiofum  loquacijfima  gentis 
'^  Injirumentum  ;^  or,  at  beft,  as  a  mere  vaunt^courier  to 
announce  the  coming  of  his  mafter  :  whilft  the  brutiQi 
inarticulate  Interje&ion^  which  has  nothing  to  do  with 
fpeech,  and  is  only  the  miferable  refuge  of  the  fpeechlefs, 
has  been  permitted,  becaufe  beautiful  and  gaudy,  to  ufurp 
a  place  amongft  words,  and  to  exclude  the  Article  from  its 
well-earned  dignity.  But  though  the  Article  is  denied  by 
niainy  Grammarians  to  be  a  Part  of  Speech ;  it  is  yet,  as 

•    *      * 

you  fay,  treated  of  by  many,  feparately  from  thofe  parts 

*  For  fomc  equivalent  invention,  fee  the  Perfian  and  other  Eaftern 
languages  \  which  fupply  the  place  of  our  Article  by  a  termination  to  thofe 
Nouns  which  they  would  indefinitely  particularize. 

^his  circumftance  of  faft  (if  there  were  not  other  reaibns)  fuflBcicndy 
explodes  Girard's  aotion  of  Avant-coureurs. 

9  which 


OF  THE  ARTICLE  AND  INTERJECTION-       6i 

which  they  allow.  This  inconfiftency  *  and  the  caufe  of 
it  are  pleafantly  ridiculed  by  Buonmattei,  whofe  under- 
ftanding  had  courage  fufficient  to  reftore  the  Article ;  and 
to  launch  out  beyond  quelle  fatali  colonne  che  gli  anticbi 
avevan  fegnate  col — Non  plus  ultra.  "  Dodici''  fays  he, 
"  Tratt.  7.  Cap.  22,  23.)  "  affermiamo  effer  le  Parti  dell* 
"  orazione  nella  noftra  lingua.  N^  ci  iiam  curati  che  gli 
^^  altri  quafi  tutti  non  ne  voglion  conceder  piu  d'  otto ; 
"  moffi,  come  li  vede,  da  una  certa  fopraftiziofa  oftinaziorie 
^^  (fia  detto  con  pace  e  riverenza  loro)  che  gli  autori  piu 
"  antichi  hanno  ftabilito  tal  numero :  Quafi  che  abbiano 
*^  in  tal  modo  proibito  a  noi  il  paflar  quelle  fatali  colonne 
^^  che  gli  antichi  avevan  fegnate  col — Non  plus  ultra.  Onde 
^^  perche  i  Latini  dicevan  tutti  con  una  voce  uniforme — - 
^^  Partes  Orationis  funt  octo  : — quei  che  intorno  a  cent  anni 
"  fono  fcriflbn  !e  regole  di  quefta  lingua,  cominciavan  con 
^^  la  medefima  cantilena,  II  che  fe  fia  da  commendare  o 
"  da  biafimare  non  diro  :  Bafta  che  a  me  par  una  cofa 
"  ridicolofa,  dire — Otto  fon  le  parti  deW  orazione^ — e  fubito 
**  foggiugnere — Ma  innanzi  cbe  to  di  quelle  incominci  a 
"  ragianarey  fa  jnejliero  che  fopra  gli  Articoli  alcuna  cofa 
"  //  dica. 

*  What  Scaliger  fays  of  the  Participle  may  very  julHy  be  applied  to  this 
manner  of  treating  the  Article,  '*  Si  non  eft  Not^y  imo  vcro  fi  nonnullis 
^  ne  pars  quidem  orationis  ulla>  ab  aliis  feparata^  judicata  eft ;  quo  cohfilio 
''  ei  rei^  qu^  nufquam  excat^.  fedem  ftatuunt.**  Lib.  T^Cap.  cxL  { 

"  Quefto 


t» 


6i:      OF  rut  AtlTIGLE  AND  INTER JEG^FION. 

^  -  *  ' 

<*  Quefto  e  il  liiectefimo  che '  fe  diceffimo^ — ^Tre  fon  le 
"  parti  del  mondo :  Ma  prim^  cli'  io  ti  I'agioni  di  quelle^ 
**  fa  meftiero  che  fopra  PEuropa  alcuna  cofa  ti  dica." 

B. 

As  far  as  refpe6ls  the  Article  I  think  you  a^e  right.  But 
M»Tby  fuch  bitternefs  againft  the  Interje<5lion  ?  Why  do  you 
hbt  rather  follow  Buonmattei's  example ;  and,  inflead  of 
iexcluding  both,  admit  them  both  to  be  Parts  of  Speech-  ?  * 

H. 

Becaufe  the  dominion  of  Speech  is  eredted  upon  the 
downfall  of  Interjedlions.  Without  the  artful  contrivances 
of  Language,  mankind  would  have  nothing  but  Inter- 
je6tions  with  which  to  communicate,  orally,  any  of  their 
feeliiigs.     The  neighing  of  a  horfe,  the  lowing  of  a  cow. 


♦  It 


Intcrjcftionem  non  cffe  partem  orationis,  fic  oftends.  Quod  naturale 
eft,  idem  eft  apud  omnes :  fed  gemitus  et  figna  laetitiae  idem  funt  apud  omnes  : 
funt  igitur  naturales.  Si  vero  naturales  non  funt  partes  orationis.  Nam 
cae  partes,  fccundum  Ariftotelem  ^;f  inftituto^  non  nalura,  debent  conftarc. 
Interjcftionem  Graeci  adverbiis  adnumerant,  fed  faifo :  nam  neque  Graecis 
literis  f  jribantur,  fed  figna  triftitiae,  aut  kctitia?,  quaiia  in  avibus,  aut  qua- 
drupcdibus,  quibus  tamen  nee  vocem  nee  orationem  eoncedimus.  Valla 
interjc6tionem  a  partibus  orationis  rejicit.  Itaque  Interjedionem  a  partibus 
orationis  excludimus :  tantum  abeft,  ut  cam  primam  et  preeipuam  cum 
Csefare  Spaligcro  conftituamus/'  Sandlii  Minerva.  Lib.  i.  Cap.  2.  De 
pattibus  ^irationis*'  Page  17.  Edit.  Amft,  17 14. 

'6  the 


OF  THE  ARTICLE  AND  INTERJECTION.       63 

the  barking  of  a  dog,  the  purring  of  a  cat,  fneezing, 
coughing,  groaning,  Ihrieking,  and  every  other  involuntary 
conwlfion  with  oral  found,  have  almoft  as  good  a  title  to 
be  called  Parts  of  Speech,  as  Interjedlions  have.  Voluntary 
Interjections  are  only  employed  when  the  fuddennefs .  or 
vehemence  of  fome  affedtion  or  paflion  returns  men  to 
their  natural  Hate  ;  and  makes  them,  for  a  moment  forget 
the  ufe  of  fpeech  * :   or  when,  from  fome  circumftance^ 

■ 

th© 

*  The  induftrious  and  exaft  Gnonio,  who  does  not  appear  ever  to  have 
had  a  fingle  glimpfe  of  reafon^  fpeaks  thus  of  one  interjeftion  : — 

"  I  varj  afFetti  cui  ferve  quefta  intcriezzione  j4b  et  ^/,  fono  piu  di 
"  vcnti :  ma  v'  abbifogna  d*un  awertimcnto  j  che  ncll'  cfprimcrli  fcmprc 
^*  diverfificano  il  fuono,  c  vagliono  quel  tanto  che,  prcflb  i  Latini,  Ah. 
"  Proh.  Oh.  Vah.  Hci.  Pape,  &c.  Ma  quefta  e  parte  fpettante  a  chi 
^'  pronunzia,  che  fappia  dar  loro  Taccento  di  quell'  afFetto  cui  fervono ; 
***  c  fono 

*^  d'cfclamazione. 

"  di  dolerfi. 

"  di  fvillaveggiare. 

"  di  prcgare. 

«'  di  gridare  minacciando. 

"  di  minacciare. 

*'  di  fofpirare. 

"  di  fgarare. 

*^  di  maravigliarfi. 

**  d'  incitare. 

"I 

**  di  fdegno. 

«  di  defidcrarc.  '    '    ' •     •    •*. 

^*     :*  **  di  It- 


64       OF  THE  ARTICLE  AND  INTERJECTION. 

the  fhortnefs  of  time  will  not  permit  them  to  exercife  it^ 
Aftd  in  books  they  are  only  vifed  for  embellifhment,  and 
to  mark  ftrongly  the  above  fitiiations.  But  where  Speech 
can  be  employed,  they  are  totally  ufelcfs ;  and  are  always 
infujEcient  for  the  pnrpofe  of  communicating  our  thoughts. 
And  indeed  where  will  you  look  for  the  Interjedtion  ? 
Will  you  find  it  amongft  laws,  or  in  books  of  civil  infti* 
tutions,  in  hiftory,  or  in  any  treatife  of  ufeful  arts  or 
Sciences?  No,  You  muft  feek  for  it  in  rhetorick  and 
poetry,  in  novels,  plays  and  romances, 

B. 

If  what  you  fay  is  true,  I  muft  acknowledge  that  the 
Article  has  had  hard  meafure  to  be  difplaced  for  the  Inter- 
jection. For  by  your  declamation,  and  the  zeal  you  have 
Ihewn  in  its  defence,  it  is  evident  that  you  do  not  intend 
we  ftiould,  with  Scaliger,  confider  it  merely  as  otiofum 
Injlrumentum. 


"  di  rcprendcre. 
*^  di  vendicarfi. 
"  di  raccomandazionc, 
'^  di  commovimcnto  per  allegrezza. 
"  di  lamcntarfi. 
•'  di  bcffarc. 
•*  ct  altri  varj." 
Annotazioni  all'  tnutato,  dellc  FarticcUe^  di  Cinonio.     Cs^ifQlo  xi. 

'      H-   Moft 


OF  THE  ARTICLE  AND  INTERJECTION.       6s 

-     H. 

Moft  affuredly  nbt :  though  I  acknowledge  that  it  has 
been  ufed  ofiose  by  many  nations  *.  And  I  do  not  wonder 
that,  keeping  his  eyes  folely  on  the  fuperfluous  ufe  (or 
rather  ab'ufe)  of  it,  he  fhould  too  haftily  conclude  againft 
this  very  ncceflary  inftrument  itfelfJ 

B. 

Say  you  fo !  very  necejfary  inftrument !  Since  then  you 
have,  contrary  to  my  expectation,  allowed  its  necefiity,  I 
fhould  be  glad  to  know  how  the  Article  cdmes  to  be  fo 
neceflary  to  Speech :  and,  if  neceflary,  how  can  the  Latin 
language  be  without  it,  as  moft  authors  s^ee  that  it  is  f  ^ 

And 

*  '^  II  feroit  a  fouhaiter  qu'on  iupprimat:  l'Article>  routes  les  fois  que  les 
'^  iioins  font  fuffifamment  determines  par  la  nature  de  la  chofe  ou  par  les 
'^  circonftances ;  le  difcours  en  feroit  plus  vif.  Mais  la  grande  habitude 
^'  que  nous  nous  en  (bmmes  &ite>  ue  le  permet  pas :  &  ce  n'eft  que  daiis 
'^  des  proverbes^  plus  anciens  que  cette  habitude,  que  nous  nous  faifbns 
*^  ime  loi  de  le  fupprimer.  On  dxt-^Pauvretc  rCeft  fas  vice :  au  lieu  de 
**  diie^-'La  fauvrete  tCeft  pas  un  vice.*^  Condillac.  Gram.  Part  a. 
Chap.  14. 

Without  any  injiiry  to  the  meaning  of  the  pafTage,  the  article  might  have 
been  omitted  here  by  Condillac,  twelve  or  thirteen  times, 

n/ovitj(fTai  TO  irotf^iray.  tlXocrmiHK  ZnrfiiAotra  d*. 

K  ''  /Irticulus 


66       OF  THE  ARTICLE  AND  INTERJECTION. 

And  when  you  have  given  me  fatisfaftion  on  thofe  points^ 
you  will  permit  me  to  aik  you.  a  few  queftions  farther.. 

H. 

You  may  learn  its  nece0ity,  if  you  pleafe,  from  Mh. 
Locke.  And  that  once  proved,  it  follows  of  confequence 
that  I  muft  deny  its  abfence  from  the  Latin  or  from  any 
other  language  *. 

B.  Wr^ 


^*  jir$ieulus  nobis  mtUus.  &  Gxsecis.iuperi^us.!' 

'^  ^ads  conitat  Granroram  Articuloynda  n^^&ot/%jpfM%i  fed  ^  coram': 

'*  iifum  fijpcrflirum." 

J.  C  ScALiGER  de  C  1. 1*.  *Cap. 'fxiU-^tatttii. 

*  • 

It  is  pleafant  after  this  to  have  Scaliger'^s  authority  againft  himfelC  and  to^ 
hear  him  prove  that  the  Latin  not  only  has  Articles-',  but  even  the  very, 
identical  Article  'O  of  the  Greeks:  for  he  fays  (and>  hotwithftandihjg  the 
etymological  diflent  of  Voffius,  fays  truly)  thatiShe  Latin  ^  is  no  other: 
than  the  Greek  ^  o. 

<'  Jrficulumy  Fabio  tefte> '  Latinus  fernK)  mm  dofiderat :  imo^  me  judice». 

"  plane  ignorat." 

G,  J.  Vossius.. 


Dilpleafed  with  the  redundance  of  Particles  in  the  Greek,  the  Romans 
extended  their  di^leafure  to  the  JrHcle,  which  they  totally  bamlhed.'^ 
Notes  on  the  Grammatica  Smica  of  Monf.  FouiiMON*r,  p.  54^ 

'*/  *^  L* Article  indicatif  fe  fqpplce  fur  tout  par  la  terminaifon,  dans  les 
^<  laogues  a  terminaifons^  comme  la  langue  Ladne.    C'eft  ce  qui  avoit  fait 

6  "  croire 


OF  THE  ARTICLE  AND  INTERJECTION.       67 

B. 

Mr.  Locke !  He  has  not  fo  much  as  even  once  mentioned 
the  Article. 

H. 

Notwithihnding  which  he  has  fnfficiently  proved  its 
neceffity';  and  conduiSbed  us  dirc(SUy  to  its  ufc  and  purpofe. 
For  in  the  eleventh  Chapter  of  the  fecond  Book  of  his 
Eflay,  Scft.  9,  he  fays, — **  The  trie  of  words  being  to 
**  fiand  as  outward  marks  of  our  internal  ideas,  and  thofe 
'**  ideas  being  taken  from  particular  things;  if  every  par- 
*<  ticular  idea  fhould  have  a  diilinA  name,  names  would 
**  be  endlefs."  So  again.  Book  3.  Chap.  3.  treating* of 
'Gtneral^erms^  he  fays,' — "  All  things  that  exift  being 
-**  p^iculars,  it  'may^  perhaps  be  thought  reafonable  that 
*<  -words,  which  ought  to  be  eenfoFntied  to  things,  ihoixtd 
^  be  fo  tob;'^  meih'm'thcftr  *fignificatton.  But  yet  we 
«  find  the  quite  contrary;     The  far  g»ateft  part  of  Woi^ 


f        'r        »       f  •       * ■        ' 


•         I 


*^  croire  mal-i-.propos  que  Ics  Larins  n'avoient  aucun  Article ;  &  qui  avoit  * 

*^  fait  conclurc  plus  mal-a-propos  encore  que  TArticle  n*etoit  pas  une  partic 

**  dudifcours/* 

Court  de  .^ekelin.  Gram.  Univerfclle,  p.  ip2. 

The  Latin  quis  is  evidently  i^  «< ;  and  the  Latin  terminations  us.  a*  um, 
lib  Qthcrdwi  die.GrccJcjarjicIC'ff,  n.  py. 

K   2  "  that 


68       OF  THE  ARTICLE  AND  INTERJECTION. 

^^  that  make  all  languages,,  are  General  Therms.     Which 
^^  has  not  beea  the  eflfe6t  of  negledt,  or  chance,  but  of 
"  reafon  and  neceflity.     For,  firft,  it  is  impoffiblc  that 
<<  every  particular  thing  Ihould  have  a  diftincft  peculiar 
"  name.     For  the  lignification  and  uft  of  words  depend- 
"  ing  on  that  connection  which  the  mind  makes  between 
^^  its  ideas  and  the  founds  it  ufes  as  iigns  of  them;  it  is 
"  neceflary,  in  the  application  of  names  to  things,  that 
^<  the  mind  fhould  have  diflindt  ideas  of  the  things,  and 
^^  retain   alfo   the  peculiar  name  that  belongs   to  every 
^<  one,  with  its  peculiar  appropriation  to  that  idea«     We 
^  may  therefore  ealily  find  a  reafon  why  men  have  never 
'^  attempted  to  give  names  to  each  (heep  in  their  flock)  or 
**  crow  that  fiies  over  their  heads ;  much  lefs  to.oall-eveiy 
**  leaf  of  plants  or  grain  of  fand  that  came  in,their.way 
«  by  a  peculiar  name.- — Secondly,  If  it  were  poffible,  it 
<<  would  be  ufelefs:  b^at^e  it  would  not  ferve  to  the 
*<  chief  end  of  Language.     Men  would  ip  .vain- heap  up 
"  names  of  particular  things,  that  would  not  ferve  them 
<*  to  communicate  their  thoughts.     Men  learn  names,  and 
*<  ufe  them  in  talk  with  others,  only  that  they  may  be 
"  underftood ;  which  is  then  only  done,  when  by  ufe  or 
'<  confent,   the  found  I  make  by  the  organs  of  fpeech 
<'  excites  in  another  man's  mind  who  hears  it,  the  idea  I 
*<  apply  to  it  in  mine  when  I  fpeak  it.     Thiis  cannot  be 

**  done 


OF  THE  ARTICLE  AND  INTERJECTION,       69 

^  done  by  names  applied  to  particiilar  things,  whereof  I 
^^  alone  having  the  ideas  in  my  mind,  the  names  of  them 
^^  could  not  be  fignificant  or  intelligible  to  another  who 
^^  was  not  acquainted  with  all  thofe  very  particular  things 
^  which  had  fallen  under  my  notice.^— And  again,  Sedt. 
II. — "General  and  Univerfal  belong  not  to  the  real 
"  exiftence  of  things ;  but  are  the  inventions  and  creatures- 

> 

"  of  the  Underftanding,  made  by  it  for  its  own  ufe,  and: 
"  concern  only  Jigns,  Univerfality  belongs  not  to  things 
"  themfelves  which  are  all  of  them  particular  in  theit 
**  exiftence.  When  therefore  we  quit  Particulars,  the 
<*  Generals  that  reft,  are  only  creatures  of  our  own  making ; 
**  their  general  nature  being  nothing  but  the  capacity  they 
**  are  put  into  of  fignifying  or  reprefenting  many  Parti- 
<*  culars." 

Now  from  this  neceffity  oi  General  terms,  follows  ifib* 
mediately  the  neceffity  of  the  Article:  whofe  bufihefs  it- 
is  to  reduce  their  generality,  and  upon  occafion  to  enable, 
us  to  employ  general  term^fyr  Particulars, . 

SOi  that.  the. Article  alfd,  in  combination  with  a  general: 
ttrmi'}&  merely  ^Jubjlitute^ .   But  then  it  differs  from  thbfe 
fubftitutes  which  we  have  ranked  under  the  general  head 
of  Jlbbreviations :  becaufe  it  is  necejffary  for  the  communi- 
cation 


7©       OF  THE  ARTICLE  AND  INTERJECTION. 

cation  of  our  thoughts,  and  fupplies  the  place  of  words 
which  are  not  in  the  language.  Whereas  Abbreviations 
are  not  neceffary  for  communication ;  and  fupply  the  place 
of  words  which  are  in  the  language. 

B. 

As  far  then  as  regards  the  Article^  Mr.  Harris  feems  at 
prefent  to  be  the  author  moft  likely  to  meet  with  your 
approbation :  for  he  not  only  eftabliihes  its  neceflity,  in 
order  **  to  circumfcribe  the  latitude  of  genera  and  fpecies,* 
and  therefore  treats  of  it  feparately ;  but  has  raifed  it  to  a 
degree  of  importance  much  beyond  all  other  modern 
Grammarians.  And  though  he  admits'  of  only  two  Arti- 
cles, **  properly  and  ftriftly  fb  called,"  viz.  a  and  the  ; 
yet  has  he  alligned  to  thefe  two  little  words  full  one  fourth 
part  in  his  diftribution  of  language :  which,  you  know,  is 
into—"  Subftantives,  Attributives,  Definitives,  and  Con- 
'*  neitives.** 

H. 

If  Mr.  Harris  has  not  intirely  fecured  my  concurrence 
with  his  DoiStrine  of  Definitives j  I  muft  confefs  he  has  at 
leaft  taken  efFe(£tual  care  to  place  it  compleatly  beyond  the 
reach  of  confutation.     He  fays, 

I.  ^^  The 


OF  THE  ARTICLE  AND  INTERJECTION.       7 1 

1,  **  The  Articles  have  no  meaningi  but  when  aflbciated 

<*  to  fome  other  word.* 

2.  **  Nothing  can  be  more  nearly  related  than  the  Greek 

«  article  *0  to  the  Englifti  article  the.** 


3.  <*  But  the  article  A  defines  in  an  iniperfe(Sl  manner.'' 

4.  *<  'Therefore  the  Greeks  have  no  article  correfpondent 

**  to  our  article  A.** 

5.  However  **  they  fupply  its  place.* 
,— And  How,  think  you  \ 

6.  **  By  3  Negatiorf — (obferve  well  their  method  of 

fupply)-^^  by  a  negation  of  their  article  'O;" 
(that  is,  as  he  well  explains  himfelf,)— "  without 
f^  any  thing  prefixed,   but-  only   the  article  *0 
♦<  withdrawn.** 

7.  "  Even  in  Englifh,  we  alfo  exprefr^YiQ  force  of  the 

**  article  A,  in  plurals,  by  the  fame  negation  of  the 

*^  article  the  *  " 

Now 


■r  ■ 1.  ■  f 


♦  "  It  is  perhaps  owing  to  the  impcrfeft  manner  in  which  the  Article  A 
**  defines^  that  the  Greeks  have  no  article  corrdpondent  to  it,  but  fupply 
^  its  place,^  by, a  negation  of  their  Article  'O. — ^"O  ayipuwo;  tv«rn,  the  man: 
•*  fcUi  aifipuvos  iTTiciPy  A  man  fell  J — without  any  thing  prefixed,  but  only> 
**  the  Article  withdrawn,?' 

'*  Everii 


7  »       OF  THE  ARTICLE  AND  INTERJECTION. 

ISfow  here  I  acknowledge  myfelf  to  be  compleatly  thrown 
out ;  and,  like  the  philofopher  of  old,  merely  for  w-ant  of 
a  firm  refting-place  on  which  to  fix  my  machine  z  for  it 
would  have  been  as  eafy  for  him  to  raife  the  earth  with  a 
fulcrum  of  ether,  as  for  me  to  eftablifli  any  reafoning  or 
argument  on  this  fort  of  negation.  For,  **  nothing  being 
**  prefixed^  I  cannot  imagine  in  what  manner  or  in  what 
refpe6t  a  negation  of  *0  or  of  the,  differs  from  a  negation 
of  Harris  or  of  Pudding,  For  lack  however  of  the  light 
of  comprehenfion,  I  muft  do,  as  other  Grammarians  do  in 
iimilar  fituations ;  attempt  to  illuftrate  by  a  parallel. 

i  will  fuppofe  Mr.  Harris  (when  one  of  the  Lords  of 
the  Treafury)  to  have  addrefied  the  Minifter  in  the  fame 

ftyle  of  reafoning. "  Salaries,  Sir,  produce  no  benefit, 

**  unlefs  afibciated  to  fome  receiver :  my  falary  at  prefent 
^^  is  but  an  imperfecSt  provifion  for  myfelf  and  family: 
"  but  your  falary  as  Minifter  is  much  more  compleat. 


^^  Even  in  Engliih^  iMrhere  the  Ardcle  A  cannot  be  ufed,  as  in  plurals^ 

•'  its  force  is  cxprcffcd  by  tiic  fame  negation.— ITO^  arc  thb  men^  means^ 

^'  Tfaofe  are  individuals  of  which  we  polleis  fome  previous  knowledge. — 

''  Thofi  are  mm^  the  Article  apart^  means  no  more  than  they  are  fo  many 

<«  vague  and  uncertain  individuals ;  juft  as  the  phrafe^— ^  man^  in  the 

''  fiflpdtr^  implies  one  of  the  fame  number.*' 

Book  2.  Chap.  i. 

^*  Oblige 


OF  THE  ARTICLE  AND  INTERJECTION.       73 

"  Oblige  me  therefore  by  withdrawing  my  prefent  fcanty 
**  pittance;  atid  fupply  its  place  to  me,  by  a  negation  of 
**  your  falary.** — I  think  this  requeft  could  not  reafbnably 
have  been  denied :  and  what  fatisfadtion  Mr.  Harris  woi^d 
have  felt  by  finding  his  theory  thus  reduced  to  practice, 
no  perfon  can  better,  judge  than  myfelf ;  becauie  I  have 
experienced  a  conduct  not  much  diffimilar  front  the  Riders 
of  the  Inner  Temple :  who  having  firft  inticed  me  to  quit 
one  profeffion»  after  many  years  of  expeiStation,  have  very 
handfomely  fupplied  its  place  to  me  by  a  negation  of  the 
other. 


ADVER- 


ADVERTISEMENT. 

'J^HE  three  following  chapters  (except  fome  fmall  altera- 
tions and  additions)  have  already  been  given  to  the 
public  in  A  Letter  to  Mr.  Dunning  in  the  year  1778s 
which,  though  publifhed,  was  not  written  on  the  fpur  of 
the  occaiion«  The  fubftance  of  that  Letter,  and  of  all 
that  I  have  farther  to  communicate  on  the  fubjedt  of  Lan-^ 
guage,  has  been  amongft  the  loofe  paj)ers  in  my  clofet 
now  upwards  of  thirty  years ;  and  would  probably  have 
remained  there  fome  years  longer,,  and  have  been  finally 
configned  with  myfelf  to  oblivion,  if  I  had  not  been  made 
the  miferable  vLftim  of — *Iwo  Prepqfitions  and  a  Con-- 
junffion. 

The  officiating  Priefts  indeed  *  were  themfelves  of  rank 
and  eminence  fufficient  to  dignify  and  gr^ce  my  fall.     But 


♦  Attorney  General  Tburlow^^finct  Chancellor  and  a.Peer. 
Solicitor  General  JVedderbume — fince  Chancellor  and  a  Peer.  . 
Earl  Mansfield,.  Chief  Juftice. 
Mr.  Buller — fmcc  a  Judge, 
Wr.  Wallace — fince  Attorney  General- 
Mr.  Mansfield — fince  Solicitor  General. 
Mr.  Bearcroft — fince  Chief  Juftice  of  Chefter,. 

6  that 


ADVERTISEMENT.  75 

that  the  Conjunction  that,  and  the  Prepofitions  or  and 
CONCERNING  (words  which  have  hitherto  been  held  ta 
have  NO  meaning)  fhould  be  made  the  abje<^  inftruments 
of  my  chi/  extinSiion,  (for  fuch  was  the  intention^  and  fuch 
has  been  the  confequence  of  my  profecution) ;  appeared  to 
me  to  make  my  exit  from  civil  life  as  degrading  as  if  I  had 
been  brained  by  a  lady's  fan.  For  mankind  in  general  sffc 
not  fufficiently  aware  that  words  without  meaning,  or  of 
equivocal  meaning,  are  the  everlafting  engines  of  fraud 
and  injuftice :  and  that  the  grimgribber  of  Weftminfter- 
Hall  is  a  more  fertile,  and  a  much  more  formidable,  iburce 
of  impofture  than  the  abracadabra  of  magidans. 

Up6n  a  motion  made  by  me  in  arreft  of  judgment  in 
the  court  of  KingVBench  in  the  year  1777,.  the  Chief 
Juflice  adjourned  the  decifion :  and  inftead  of  arguments 
on  the  merits  of  my  obje(Stion,  (which  however  by  a  fide- 
wind  were  falfely  reprefented  by  him  as  mareiy  iiteral 
flaws  *)  deiired  that  Precedents  might  be  brought  by  the 
Attorney  General  on  a  future  day.  None  were  however 
adduced,  but  by  the  Chief  Juftice  himfelf ;  who  i 


♦  «  Lord  Mansfieldy 

*'  If  the  Defendant  has  a  legal  advantage  from  a  Literal  flaw,  Goifrrhii 
"  that  he  Ihould  not  have  the  benefit  of  it." 

Proceedings  in  K.  B.    Tjlte  King  againft  Home. 

^L  i  produced 


76  ADVERTISEMENT. 

produced  two.  (Thereby  depriving  me  of  the  oppoitanity 
of  combating  the  Precedents  and  their  application,  which 
I  ihould  have  had  if  they  had  been  produced  by  the  At- 
torney General  *.  And  on  the  ftrength  of  thefe  two  Pre- 
cedents alone,  (forgetting  his  own  defcription  and  diftin<5tioa 
of  the  crime  to  the  Jury)  he  decided  againft  me  f . 

I  fay, 

♦  ^*  Lord  Mansfield 

'*  I  fancy  the  Attorney  General  'wzsjurprized  with  the  objcdtion/' 

j:  The  Attorney  General,  in  his  reply,  faid  to  the  Jury,  ^^  Let  hs  a  little 
^'  fee  what  is  the  nature  of  the  obfervarions  he  makes.  In  the  firft  placet 
•'  that  I  left  it  exceedingly  (hort :  and  the  objeftion  to  my  having  left  it 
fhort,.  was  fimply  this  i  that  I  had  ftated  no  more  to  you  but  this,  that  of 
imputing  to  the  condudt  of  the  King's  troops  the  crime  of  murder. 
Now  I  Jiated  if,  as  imfuud  to  the  troops,  ordered  as  tbey  were  upon  the 

"   PUBLIC   service/* 

Lord  Mansfield  to  the  Jury 
^  Read  the  paper.  What  is  it  ?  Why  it  is  this ;  that  our  beloved  Ame- 
**  rican  Fellow-fubjcfts — in  rebellion  againft  the  ftate — not  beloved  fo  as 
*'  to  be  abetted  in  their  rebellion."  Again, — "  What  is  the  employment 
'^  they  (the  troops)  are  ordered  upon  ?  Why  then  what  arc  they  who  gave 
"  the  ORDERS  ?  Draw  the  conchifion."  Again, — "  The  unhappy  rcfiftance 
"  to  the  LEGJSLATivE  AUTHORITY  crf"  this  kingdom  by  many  of  our  Fcllow- 
^^  fubjefts  in  America :  the  legislature  of  this  kingdom  have  avowed 
"  that  die  Americans  rebelled  :  Troops  are  employed  upon  this  ground. 
"  The  cafe  is  here  between  2LJuft  Government  and  rebellious  yj^^^fl'j."— 
Again, — **  You  will  read  this  paper;  you  will  judge  whether*  it  is  not 
"  denying  the  Government  and  Legiflafive  authority  of  England "  And  again, 
— •*  If  you  arc  of  opioiki  that  they  were  all  muidcred  (like  the  cafes  of 

^*  undoubted 


tx 


ADVERTISEMENT.  77 

I  fay,  on  the  ftrength  of  thefe  two  precedents  alone.^ 
For  the  grofs  perverfion  and  mifapplication  of  the  technical 
term  de  bene  ejfe,  was  merely  pour  eblouiry  to  introduce  the 
proceedings  on  the  trial,  and  to  divert  the  attention  from 
the  only  point  in  queftion — the  fuflSciency  of  the  charge 
in  the  Record. — And  I  cannot  believe  that  any  man  breathing 
(except  Lord  Mansfield)  either  in  the  profeflion  or  out  of 
it,  will  think  it  an  argument  againft  the  validity  of  my  ob- 
jedlion ;  that  it  was  brought  forward  only  by  myfelf,  and  bad 
not  been  alleged  before  by  the  learned  Counfelfor  the  Printers.^ 
This  however  I  can  truly  tell  his  lordfhip ;  that  the  moft 
learned  of  them  all,  {abjit  invidia)  Mr.  Dunning,  was  npt 

*'  undoubted  murders y  of  Glcnco,  and  twenty  other  maflacres  that  might  be 
•*  named)  why  then  you  may  form  a  different  conclufion." 

And  again — "  If  fome  (bldiers.  Without  authority^  had  got  in  a  drunken 
**  fray,  and  murder  had  cnfued,  and  that  this  paper  could  relate  to  that,  it 
••  would  be  quite  a  different  thing  from  the  charge  in  the  information : 

BECAUSE  it  is  charged — as  a  Jeditious  Lihcl  tending  to  difquiet  the  mihds  of 

the  People:'    See  the  Trial. 

A  man  muft  be  not  only  well  praftifed,  but  even  hackneyed  in  our  Courts ^ 
of  Jufticc  to  difcover  the  above  defcription  of  my  crime  in  the  PrepqfitionSj 
Of  and  CONCERNING.  Be  that  as  it  may :  It  is  evident  that  the  Attorney 
General  and  the  Chief  Jufticc  did  not  expeft  the  Jury  to  be  fo  enlighten^; 
and  therefore  {when  I.  had  no  longer  a  right  to  open  my  lips)  they  defcribed  a 
crime  to  them  in  that  plain  language  which  I  ftill  contend  I  had  a  right 
to  cxpeft  in  the  Information  5  because—**  A  Jeditious  Libel  tending  to  dif 
**  quiet  the  minds  of  the  people  i^ — ^has  been  determined  to  be  mere  paper  and 
packthready  and  no  part  of  the  Charge. 

I  aware 


Cf 


7« 


ADVERTISEMENT. 


raware  of  the  obje<5tion  when  I  firft  mentioned  it  to  him  ; 
•that  he  would  not  believe  the  information  could  be  fo  de- 

* 

fe(Stive  in  all  its  Counts,  till  I  produced  to  him  an  Office 
Copy  :  when  to  his  aftonifhment  he  found  it  fo,  he  felt  no 
jealoufy  that  the  objection  had  been  miffed  by  himfelf ;  but 
declared  it  to  be  injuperable  and  fatal :  and  bad  me  reft 
.aflured,  that  whatever  might  be  Lord  Mansfield's  wilhes, 
.and  his  courage  on  fuch  occaiions,  he  would  not  dare  to 
overrule  the  obje<Stion.  And  when  after  the  clofe  of  the 
firft  day,  I  hinted  to  him  my  fufpicions  of  Lcs'd  Mansfieldls 
intentions  by  the  *<  God  forbid'^  and  by  the  perverted  and 
mlfapplied  «  Be  bene  eje,**  in  order  to  mix  the  proceedings 
«n  the  trial  with  the  queftion  of  record ;  he  fmiled  at  it, 
as  merely  a  method  which  his  lordftiip  took  of  letting  the 
matter  down  gently,  and  breaking  the  abruptnefs  of  his  fall. 

Strange  as  it  may  appear !  One  of  thofe  Precedents  was 
was  merely  imagined  by  the  Chief  Juftice,  but  never  really 
exifted.  And  the  other  (through  ignorance  of  the  meaning 
of  the  Conjunction  that)  had  never  been  truly  under- 
ftood;  neither  by  the  Counfel  who  originally  took  the  ex- 
ception, nor  perhaps  by  the  Judges  who  made  the  decifion^ 
nor  by  the  Reporter  of  it,  nor  by  the  pre&nt  Chief  Juftice 
«rho  Quoted  and  mlfapplied  it. 


Mr. 


ADVERTISEMENT.  7  9 

Mr.  Dunning  undertook  to  prove  (and  did  aftually  prove 
in  the  Houfe  of  Lords)  the  non-exifience  of  the  main  pre- 
cedent. And  I  undertook,  in  that  Letter  to  Mr.  Dunning, 
to  fliew  the  real  merits  and  foundation,  and  confequently 
Lord  Mansfield*&  mifapplication  of  the  others  And  I  under- 
took this,  becauie  it  afforded-  a  very  ftriking  inflance  of 
the  importance  of  the  meaning  of  words ;  not  only  (as  has 
been  too  lightly  fuppofed)'  to-  Metaphyficians  and  School- 
men, but  to  the  rights  and  happinefs  of  mankind  in  their 
dearefi:  concerns— the  dediions  of  Courts  of  Juftice»- 

In  the  Houfe  of  Lords  thefe  two  Precedents  (the  foun- 
dation  of  the  Judgment  in  the  Court  of  King*s  Bench) 
were  abandoned : .  and  the  defeription  of  my  crime  againft 
Government  was  adjudged  to  be  fufficiently  fet  forth  by  the 

« 

Pxiepoiitions  of:  and  coiic£&nin<}j^  < .  \.\ 


»    ..■.■• 


Pbrhaps  it  may  rixake  my  readers  fmile ;  but '  I  mention 
it  as  a  farther  inftance  of  the  importance  of  inquiry  into* 
the  meaning  of  words ;-: — that  in  the  decifion  of  the  Judges  ^ 
in  the  Houfe  of  Lords, ,  the  Chief  Juftiee  De  Grey   (who 
found  OF  and  concerning  fo  comprehenlive,  clear,  and » 
definite)   began  by  declaring  that — ^^  the  viord  Cerfainfy 
^  [which  the  Law  requires  in  the  defcription  of  Crimes^ 
**^  is  as.  indefinite  [that  is,  as  Uncertain]  as  any  word  that 

**  could,  i 


go  ADVERTISEMENT. 

«*  could  be  ufed."  Now  though  certainty  is  fo  uncertain^ 
we  muft  fuppofe  the  word  Lihd  to  be  very  definite  :  and 
yet  if  I  were  called  upon  for  an  equivalent  term,  I  believe 
I  could  not  find  in  our  language  any  word  more  popularly 
appofite  than  Calumny ;  which  is  defined  by  Cicero,  in  his 
Offices,  to  be—"  callida  ^  maiitisfa  Juris  interpretation' 

If  there  was  any  Mijiahe  (which  however  I  ani  very  far 
from  believing)  in  this  decifion,  fandioned  by  the  Judges 
and  the  Houfe  of  Lords ;  I  fhall  be  juftified  in  applying 
(with  the  fubilitution  of  the  fingle  word  Grammatici  for 
Jflorici)  what  Giannone,  who  was  himfelf  an  excellent 
lawyer,  fays  of  his  countrymen  of  the  fame  profeifion  :•— 
**  Tanta  ignoranza  avea  loro  bendati  gli  occhi,  che  fi  pre- 
<<  giavano  d*efiere  ibiamente  LegifU,  e  non  Grammatici ; 
<<  non  accorgendofi,  che  perche  non  erano  Grammatici, 
"  eran  perci6  cattivi  LECflSTi.** 

Ifi;.  civil,  di  Napoli.  Intro. 


EHEA 


EnEA   nXEPOENTA,    &c. 


CHAP.    VI. 


OF    THE    WORD    THAT. 


B. 

"D  U  T  befides  the  Articles  "  properly  and  ftridlly  fp  called," 
I  think  Mr.  Harris  and  other  Grammarians,  fay  that 

•    •  •  ...  I 

there  are  fome  words  which,   according  to  the  different 

;  1 

manner  of  ufing  them,  are  fometimes  Articles  and  fome- 
tlmes  Pronouns :  and  that  it  is  diflScult  to  determine  tp 
which  clafs  they  ought  to  be  referred  ». 

H,  They 

•  '  '  ■  -  /       ■ . 

>  ^  t 

*  *'  It  muft  be  confefled  indeed  that  all  thefe  words  do  not  always  appear 
*^  as  Pronouns. .  When  they  Hand  by  themfclvcs  and  reprcfcnt  fome  Nouhi 
(as  when  we  fay — this  h  virtue y  or  Ji*xl*x«f,  Give  me  that)  then  arc 
they  Pronouns.  But  when  they  are  aflbciated  to  fome  Noun,  (as  when  we 
fay — THIS  habii  is  virtue,  or  Ji*k]»xw^,  thplT  man  defrauded  me)  then  as 
they  fupply  not  the  place  of  a  Noun,  but  only  ferve  to  afcertain  one, 
they  fall  rather  into  the  fpecies  of  Definitives  or  Articles.  That  there  is 
^^  indeed  a  near  relation  between  Pronouns  and  Articles,  the  old  gramma- 
^'  rians  have  all .  acknowledged  5  and  fome  words  it  has  been  doubtful  to 
^  which  clafs  to  refer,     the  bed  rule  tg  diftinguilh  them  is  this.— Tlie 

M  <«  genuine 


82  OF  THE  WORD  THAT. 

H. 

They  do  io.  And  by  fo  doing,  AifBciently  inftrucSt  us 
(if  we  will  but  ufe  our  common  fenfe)  what  value  we 
ought  to  put  upon  fuch  daiibs  and  fuch  definitions. 

Can  you  give  us  any  general  rule  by  which  to  diftinguifh 
when  they  are  of  the  one  fort,  and  when  of  the  other  ? 

H. 

Let  them  give  the  rule  who  thus  confound  together  the 
Manner  of  fignification  of  words,  and  the  Abbreviations 
in  their  ConJiruSfion :  than  which  no  two  things  in  Lan- 
guage are  more  diftindt,  or  ought  to  be  more  carefully 
diftinguiftied.  I  do  not  allow  that  Any  words  change  their 
nature  in  this  manner,  fo  as  to  belong  fometimes  to  one 
Part  of  Speech,  and  fometimes  to  another,  from  the  dif- 
ferent ways  of  ufing  them.  I  never  could  perceive  any 
fuch  fluctuation  in  any  word  whatever  :  though  I  know  it 
is  a  general  charge  brought  erroneoufly  againft  words  of 

"  genuine  Pronoun  always  ftands  by  itfclf,  afiuming  the  power  of  a  noun^ 
"  and  fupplying  its  place. — The  genuine  Article  never  ftands  by  itfelfi  but 
*^  appears  at  all  times  afTociated  to  fbmething  eUe^  requiririg  a  noun  for  its 
'«  fupport,  as  much  as  Attributives  or  Adjectives." 

H£RM£s^  Book  L  Chap.  V. 

almoft 


OF  THE  WORD  THAT,  83 

almoft  every  denomination  ^.  But  it  appears  to  me  to  be 
all|  Error :  arifing  from  the  falfe  nieafure  which  has  been 
taken  of  almoft  every  fort  of  words.  Whilft  the  words 
themfelves  appear  to  me  to  continue  faithfully  and  fteadily 
attached,  each  to  the  ftandard  under  which  it  was  origi- 
nally inlifted.  But  I  defire  to  wave  this  matter  for  the 
prefent ;  becaufe  I  think  it  will  be  cleared  up  by  what  i$ 
to  follow  concerning  the  other  forts  of  words :  at  leaft,  if 
that  (hould  not  convince  you,  I  (hall  be  able  more  eafily 
to  fatisfy  you  on  this  head  hereafter. 

m 

I  would  not  willingly  put  you  out  of  your  own  way, 
and  am  contented  to  wait  for  the  explanation  of  many 
things  till  you  fhall  arrive  at  the  place  which  you  may  think 
proper  for  it.  But  really  what  you  have  now  advanced 
feems  to  me  fo  very  extraordinary  and  contrary  to  fa^^  10 
well  as  to 'the  uniform  declaration  of  all  Grammarians) 
that  you  muil  excufe  me,  if,  before  we  proceed  any  farther, 
I  mention  to  you  one  inftance. 


*  "  Certains  mots  frat  Adverb es^  Prepofitionsy  &  Canjonifions  en  memc 
"  temps :  &  repondent  ainfi  au  memc  temps  i  divcrfes  parties  d'oraifoin 
*^  felon  <}ue  la  grammaire  Ics  emploie  divcrfcmcnt."  * 

BvrFiER>  Art.  *  1 5a  i 

And  fo  fay  all  odicr  Grammarians. 

M  2  Mr. 


84  OF  THE  WORD  THAT. 

Mr.  Harris  and  other  Grammarians  fay  that  the  word 
THAT,  is  fometimes  an  Article  and  fometimes  a  Pronoun^ 
However  I  do  not  defire  an  explanation  of  that  [point]  : 
becaufe  I  fee  how  you  will  eafily  reconcile  that  [difference], 
by  a  fubauditur  or  an  abbreviation  of  Conftru6tion  :  and  I 
agree  with  you  there.  But  what  will  you  do  with  the 
ConjunSion  that  \ 

Is  not  this  a  very  confiderable  and  manifeft  flu6tuation 
and  difference  of  fignification  in  the  fame  word  ?  Has  the 
ConjunBion  that,  any  the  fmalleft  correfpondence  or  fimi- 
larity  of  fignification  with  that,  the  Article^  or  Pronoun  ^ 

H 

In  my  opinion  the  word  that  (call  it  as  you  pJeafe, 
either  Article^  or  Pronoun^  or  ConjunBion)  retains  always 
©ne:  and  the  fame  fignification.  Umioticed  abbreviation  in 
conftru<£lion  and  difference  of  pofition  have  caufed  this 
appearance  of  fluctuation ;  and  mifled  the  Grammarians 
of  all  languages  both  antient  and  modern :  for  in  all  they 
make  the  fame  miftakc     Pray,  anfwer  me  a  queftion.     Ts 

r 

it  not  ftrange  and  improper  that  we  (honld,  without  any, 
•eafon  or  neceflity,  employ  in  Englilh  the  fame  word  for 
two  different  meanings  and  purpofes  ? 


B.  I 


OF  THE  WCWaD  THAT.  85 

B. 
I  think  it  wrong :  and  I  fee  no  reafon  for  it,  but  many 
reasons  againft  it. 

Well !  Then  is  it  not  more  ftrange  that  this  fame  im- 
propriety, in  this  fame  cafe  ihould  run  through  all  Ian* 
guages  ?  And  that  they  ihould  all  ufe  an  Article^  without 
any  reafon,  unneceflarily^L  and  improperly,  for  this  fame 
donjunSiion  ;  with  which  it  has,  as  you  fay,  no  correfpoa- 
dence  nor  fimilarity  of  iignification  ? 

If  they  do  fo  it  is  ftrange.. 

They  eertainly  do ;  as  you  will  eafily  find  by  inquiry. 
Now  does  npt  the  uniformity  and  univerfality  of  this  fupr^ 
pofed  miftake,  and  unnec;eflary  impropriety,,  in  languagj^S) 
which  have  no  connexion  with  each  other,  naturally  .lead 
US  to  fufpe(St  that  this  ufage  of  the  Article  may  perhaps  be 

*     ■ 

neither  miftaken  nor  improper  ?  But  that  the  miftake  may 
Ke  only  with  usj  who  do  iwt  uridferft^nd  it  ? ' 

No  .doubt, what  you  haVe.  faid^  if  true,   would-  afford 

ground  for  fufpicion.  T'  '■  -  • 

:-//:  H.  If 


86  OF  THE  WORD  THAT, 

H. 

If  true !  Examine  any  languages  you  pleaie,  and  fee 
whether  they  alfo,  as  well  as  the  Englifli,  have  not  a 
fuppofed  ConjunSiion  which  they  employ  as  we  do  that  ; 
and  which  is.  alfo  the  fame  word  as  their  fuppofed  Article^ 
or  Pronoun.  Does  not  this  look  as  if  there  was  fome 
reafon  for  employing  the  Article  in  this  manner  ?  And  as 
if  there  was  fome  connexion  and  fimilarity  of  lignification 
between  it  and  this  Conjun&ion  f 

m  m 

B. 

The  appearances^  I  own,  are  ftrongly  in  favour  of  your 
opinion.    But  how  (hall  we  find  out  what  that  connexion  is  ? 

H. 

Snppofe  we  examine  fome  inflances ;  and,  flill  keeping 
the  fame  iignification  of  the  fentences,  try  whether  we 
cannot,  by  a  refolution  of  their  conftnK^ion,  difcover  what 
we  want. 

Example. 
I  wifh  you  to  believe  that  I  would  not  wilfully  hurt  a  fly; 

Resolution. 
I  would  not  wilfully  hurt  a  fly ;  I  wifh  you  to  believe 

THAT  [aflertion]. 

Exam- 


OF  THE  WORD  THAT.  By 

ff 

Example. 

* 

She  knowing  that  Crooke  had  been  indifted  for  forger7> 
fo  and  Co, 


Resolution. 

Crooke  had  been  indidted  for  forgery ;  (he,  knowing 
that,  [fa<5t]  did  fo  and  fb  *. 

Example. 

You  fay  that  the  fame  arm  which,  when  contra£ted> 
can  lift— ;  when  extended  to  its  utmofl  reach^  will  not  be 
able  to  raife — .  You  mean  that  we  fhould  never  forget 
0¥ir  lituation,  and  that  we  fhould  be  prudently  contented 
to  do  good  within  our  own  fphere,  where  it  can  have  ian 
effeiSt :  and  that  we  fhotdd  not  be  mifled  even  by  a  vir^ 
tuous  benevolence  and  public  fpirit,  to  wafte  ourfelves  ia 
fruitlefs  efforts  beyond  our  power  of  influence^ 

Resolution. 

The  fame  arm  which,  when  contraiSted,  can  lift— j  whea 
extended  to  its  iitmoft  reach,  will  not  be  able  to  raife— ^  t 

»      I     I     ■  ■  ■!         II         ■■        II  MM— — — — — *^^— ^»»—        m  iiM      I     I     II  III  >  .  — ii^— ly^T— ► 

*  King  V.  Lawky.    Strange's  Repom.    En&et  T»  4  Geo.  11. 

5  y«>«' 


SB  OF  THE  WORD  THAT. 

you  fay  THAT.  We  fliould  never  forget  our  fituation ; 
you  mean  that  :  and  we  Ihould  be  contented  to  do  good 
?<^ithm  otir  own  fphere  where  it  can  have  an  effe6b;'you 
raean  that  :  and  we  Ihould  not  be  mifled  even  by  a  vir- 
tuous benevolence  and  public  fpirit  to  wafte  ourfelves  in 
fruitlefs  eflforts  beyoftd  our  power  of  influence  ;  you  mean 

THAT..      .*.:    ■ 

.        .  ..  .        . » 

Example. 

They  who  have  well  contidered  that  kingdoms  rife  or 
fall,  and  that  their  inhabitants  are  happy  or  mifer^ble, 
npt  fo  much  from  any  local,  or  accidental  advantages  or 
difadvantages  ;  but  accordingly  as  they  are  wejl  or  ill  go-- 
verned ;  may  beft  determine  how  far  a  virtuous  mind  can 
be  neutral  in  politics. 

Resolution. 

Kingdoms  rife,  or  fall,  not  io  much  frpm  any  local  or 
accidental  advantages  or  difadvantages,  but  accordingly  as 
they  are  well  or  ill  goyerned  ;  they  who  have  well  con* 
fidered  that  (maxim),  may  beft  determine  how  far  a  vir- 
tiious  mind  can  be  neutral  in  politics.  And  the  inhabitants 
"of  kingdoms  are  happy  or  miferable,  not  fo  much  from 
atiy  local  or  accidieiital  advantages  or  difadvantages,  but 
accordingly  i' as^  they'  are  well  or  ill  governed  ;  they  who 

9  have 


OF  THE  WORD  THAT.  87 

* 
r  ' 

Example. 

She  knowing  that  Crooke  had  been  indicted  for  iox^xj^ 
fo  and  fo. 


Resolution. 

•       '  ■ 

Crooke  had  been  inditSted  for  forgery;  fhe,  knowing 
that,  [fa<5t]  did  fo  and  fo  *. 

Example. 

You  fay  that  the  fame  arm  which,  when  contra£ted> 
can  lift— ;  when  extended  to  its  utmoft  reach^  will  not  be 
able  to  raife — •  You  mean  that  we  fhould  never  forget 
0¥ir  lituation,  and  that  we  fhould  be  prudently  contented 
to  do  good  within  our  own  fphere,  where  it  can  have  ian 
effect :  and  that  we  fhotdd  not  be  mifled  even  by  a  vir^ 
tuous  benevolence  and  public  fpirit,  to  wafte  ourfelves  ia 
fruitlefs  efforts  beyond  our  power  of  influence^ 

Resolution. 

The  fame  arm  which,  when  contracted,  can  lift—;  when 
extended  to  its  utmoft  reach,  will  not  be  able  to  raife— ^  t 

»      I     I     ■  ■  ■!         II         ■■        II  — — — — — *^^— ^»»—         m  im      I     I     II  III  %  .  — ii^— ly^T— ► 


*  King  V.  Lawky«    Strange's  Reports.    Eaftcr  T»  4  Geo.  IL 


'■w 


yom 


^o  OF  THE  V70ViTi  THAT. 

Example. 
Thieves  rife  by  night  that  they  may  cut  men*s  throats. 


€C 
€€ 


t©  be  as  well  rewarded)  as  our  late  Poet  Laurcat  j  who,  upon  the  following 

paflage  of  Milton's  Comus, 

"  And  fits  as  Jafe  as  in  a  Senate  houje^^ 

adds  this  flagitious  note  : 

*  Not  many  years  after  this  was  written,  Milton's  Friends  (hewed 
that  the  fafety  of  a  Senate  houfe  was  not  inviolable.  But  when  the  people 
turn  Legiflators,  what  place  is  fafe  againft  the  tumults  of  innovation,  and 

"  the  infults  of  difobedicnce." 
I  believe  our  late  Laureat  meant  not  fo  much  to  cavil  at  Milton's  ex- 

predion,  as  to  feize  an  impertinent  opportunity  of  recommending  himfclf 

to  the  powers  which  bey  by  a  cowardly  irifult  on  the  dead  and  perfecuted 

author's  memory,  and  on  the  aged,  defencelels  conftiturion  of  his  country. 
A'  critic  who  ihould  really  be  difple^ed  at  Milton's  cxpreflion,  would 

r^ier  fliew  its  impropriety  by  an  event  which  had  happened  brfore  it  was 

uled,  than  by  an  event  which  the  poet  could  Ti6t  at  that  time  forefee.     Such 

•  *     * 

a  critic  adverting  to  the  5th  of  November,  1605,  ahd  to  tKc  4th  of  January, 
1641,  might  more  truly  lay——"  N'ot  many  years  both  before  mi" after 
"  this  wias  written,  Whartoh's  friends  Ihiwed  that  the  fafety  ofa  Senate 
"  houfe  was  not  inviblable." 

With  equal  impertinence  and  malignity  (pages  496,  iz^\^  ^^  ^^  rakccf 
up  the  afties  of  Queen  Caroline  ahd  Q6cch  Elizabeth ;  whoife  private  cha- 
racters arid  inbffenlivc  afftufeinthti  wc^c  as  little  connected  wiih  Milton's 
poems,  as  this  animadverfibh  oi£  ^(''hartdH  is '^Mi  die  fbBjeJff  I/am  ftdw 
treating. 

Perhaps,  after  air>  the  concluding  Une  of  Milton's  epitaph^ 
•«  Regc  fub;  aup^o  f^  fit  Utuiare  Catoiiein," 
is  artftilly  made  by  Mr.  Wh^on  tbe  concluding  lihfe  alfo  of  his  kot)»  1  in^ 
older  to  account  for  his  piefcht  viniknce^  aiid  tb  ilflifiS  *the  refentineiit  of 
lSl^itadcrs>  tt'tHd  txpeiicr  of  hU  pkr^^ 

2  RESO^ 


OJF  THE  WOj^D,  2)^^^.  9,:^ 

R.  E  S  p  L  U  T  I  O  N. 

Thieves  may  cut  men's  throats,  (/or)  that  {purpofey 
they  rife  by  night.  > 

After  the  fame  manner,  I  imagine,  may  all  fentences  be 
refolved  (in  all  languages)  where  the  ConJunBion  that  (or 
its  equivalent)  is  employed :  and  by  fuch  refblution  it  will 

^  •         .  ■    '  * 

always  be  difcovered  to  have  merely  the  fame  force  and 
fignification,  and  to  be  in  fa(St  nothing  eUe  but  the  very 
fame  word  which  in  other  places  is  called  an  Article  or  % 
Pronoun,         « 

For  any  thing  that  immediately  occurs  to  me,  this  may 
perhaps  be  the  cafe  in  Englilh,  where  that  is  the  only 
Conjunction  of  the  fame  fignification  which  we  employ  in 
this  manner.  But  your  laft  example  makes  me  believe 
that  this  method  of  refolution  will  not  take  place  in  thofe 
languages  which  have  different  Conjun£lions  for  this  fame 
purpofe.  And  if  fo,  I  fufpedt  that  your  whole  reafoning 
on  this  fubjedt  may  be  without  foundation.     For  how  caa 

you  refolve  the  original  of  your  laft  exam^Jle ;  where  (un- 

•      •  * 

fortunately  for  your  notion)  ut  is  employed,  and  not  the 
neuter  Article  quod  ? 

"  Ut  jugulent  homines  furgunt  dc  nofte  lajrones." 

< 

N  2  I  fuppofe 


$ft  OF  THE  WORD  THAT. 

I  fuppofe  you  will  not  fay  that  ut  is  the  Latin  neuter 
Artide.  For  even  Sanitius,  who  ftruggled  fo  hard  to 
Withdraw  quod  from  amongft  the  Conjun(5Uons,  yet-ftill 
left  UT  amongft  them  without  moleftation  *. 

H.  You 


*  It  is  not  at  all  extraordinary  that  ut  and  oyoo  fhould  be  indifferently 
ufcd  for  the  fame  conjunftive  purpofe  :  for  as  ut  (originally  written  uti) 
is  nothing  but  (>?» :  So  is  qyoo  (anciently  written  qyoDDE)  merely  K«»  •rli. 

**  ^uodde  tuas  iaudes  culpas,  nil  proficis  hilum." 

LuciLius. 

(See  Note  in  Havcrcamp's  and  Creech's  Lucretius  \  where  (iyooDE  is  mif- 
takenly  derived  from  oItiJ'i.)  qjt,  in  Latin^  being  founded  (not  as  the  Englilh 
but  as  the  French  pronounce  oy,  that  is)  as  the  Greek  K  \  Kai  (by  a  change 
of  the  charafter,  not  of  the  found)  became  the  Latui  ^e^  (ufed  only  en- 
clitically  indeed  in  modern  Latin).  Hence  Kai  JtIi  became  in  Latin  ^«' 
otti — ^Bddi — ^ordde — ^od.  Of  which  if  Sanftius  had  been  aware,  he 
would  not  have  attempted  a  diftin&ion  between  ut  and  quod  :  fince  the 
two  words,  though  differently  corrupted,  are  in  fubftance  and  origin  the 
fame. 

The  perpetual  change  of  t  into  d,  and  vice  vtrja^  is  fb  very  familiar  to 
all  who  have  ever  paid  the  fmalleft  attention  to  Language,  that  I  fhould  not 
think  it  worth  while  to  notice  it  in  the  prefent  inftance  \  if  all  the  etymolo- 
gical canonifts,  whom  I  have  fecn,  had  not  been  remarkably  inattentive  to 
the  organical  caufes  of  thofe  literal  changes  of  which  they  treat. 

Skinner  (who  was  a  Phyfician)  in  his  Prolegomena  Etytnologica,  /peak- 
ing of  th«  frequent  tranfmutation  of  s  lAto  Zj  fays  ytvf  truly  ■  ^*  Sunt 
•*  fenc  literae  fono  fcri  esedem." 

But 


OF  THE  WORD  THAT. 


93 


H. 

You  are  not  to  expert  from  me  that  I  fhould>  in  this 
place>  account  etymologically  for  the  different  words  which 

fbme 


But  in  what  docs  that  fer}  confift  ?  For  s  is  not  nearer  in  found  to  z, 
than  p  b  to  B,  or  than  t  is  to  d,  or  than  p  is  to  v,  or  than  k  is  to  c,  or 
than  TH  (0)  in  Tbingy  is  to  th  (D)  in  Tbat^  or  than  sh  is  to  the 
French  j. 

(N.  B.  TH  and  sh  are  fimple  confonants,  and  fhould  be  marked  by 
fingle  letters,  j,  as  the  Englifli  prdnounce  it,  is  a  double  confonant  i  and 
fhould  have  two  characters. ) 


For  thefc  feven  couple  of  fimple  confonants,  viz. 


With  the 
Compreflion 


B 

-      p    -1 

G 

K 

D 

T 

Z 

S 

B      - 

0 

V 

F 

J     - 

-       SH  J 

Without  the 
Compreflion 


differ  each  from  its  partner,  by  no  variation  whatever  of  articulation ;  but 
fingly  by  a  certain  unnoticed  and  almoft  imperceptible  morion  or  comprcf- 
fion  of  or  near  the  Larynx ;  which  caufes  what  WiHcins  calls  "  fome  kind 
"  of  murmur eJ*^  This  compreffion  thc^Wclch  never  ufe.  So  that  when  a 
Welchman,  inftcad  of 

^         "  I  vow,  by  God,  ©at  Jenkin  iz  a  Wizzard,*' 
pronounces  it  thus, 

I  fow,  py  Cot,  eat  ShenHin  i&  a  Wiflart  s" 

he 


(C 


94  OF  THE  WORD  THAT.^ 

) 
fome  languages    (for  there  are  others  befide  the  Latin 

may  fometimes  borrow  and  employ  i  .  this  manner  inftead 
of  their  own  common  Article.  Bui  if  you  ftiould  here- 
after exa6t  it,  I  fhall  not  refufe  the  undertaking :  although 
it  is  not  the  eafieft  part  of  Etymology :  for  Abbreviation 
and  Corruption  are  ahvays  bujieji  with  the  words  which  are 
mbjl  frequently  in  ufe.  Letters,  like  foldiers,  being  very 
apt  to  defert  and  drop  off  in  a  long  march,  and  efpecially 
if  their  pafTage  happens  to  lie  near  the  confines  of  an 
enemy's  country  *.     Yet  I  doubt  not  that,  with  this  clue. 


he  articulates  in  every  other  refpeft  exa6Uy  as  we  do ;  but  omits  the  com- 
preflion  nine  times  in  this  fcntence.  And  for  failing  in  this  one  point  only, 
changes  feven  of  our  confonants:  for  we  owe  feven  additional  letters, 
(i.  c.  feven  additional  founds  in  our  language)  folely  to  the  addition  of  this 
one  compreflion  to  feven  different  articulations. 

♦  "  Nous  avons  deja  dit,  que  Talteration  du  derive  augmentoit  a  mefure 

<'  que  le  temps  Teloignoit  du  primitif ;  &  nous  avons  ajoutc — toutes  chojes 

*'  d'ailleurs  egales^ — parceque  la  quantitc  de  cette  alteration  depend  aufli 

**  du  cours  que  ce  mot  a  dans  le  public.     H  s'ufc,  pour  ainfi  dire,  en 

"  paflant  dans  un  plus  grand  nombre  de  bouches,  fur  tout  dans  la  bouche 

"  du  peuple  :  &  la  rapidit6  de  cette  circulation  equivaut  a  une  plus  longue  ' 

«^  duree.     Les  noms  des  Saints  &  les  noms  de  bapteme  les  plus  communs, 

"  en  font  un  exemple.     Les  mots  qui  reviennent  le  plus  fouvent  dans  les 

^'  langues,  tels  que  les  verbes  Etre,  fairCj  vouloir,  alUr,  &  tous  ceux  qui  ' 

"  fervent  a  lier  les  autres  mots  dans  le  difcours,  font  fujets  a  de  plus  grandes 

**  alterations.     Cc  font  ceux  qui  ont  le  plus  befoin  d'etre  fixes  par  la  langue 

"  ccrite." 

Encyclopedic  {Etymologie)  far  M.  De  Brosses. 

you 


OF  THE  WORD  THAT.  95 

you  will  yourfelf  be  able>  upon  inquiry,  to  account  as 
eafily  (and  in  the  fame  manner)  for  the  ufe  of  all  the  others, 
as  I  know  you  can  for  ut  ;  which  is  merely  the  Greek 
neuter  Article  on  ♦,  adopted  for  this  conjundlive  purpofe 
by  the  Latins,  and  by  them  originally  written  uti  :  the  o 
being  changed  into  u,  froqi  that  propenfity  which  both 
the  ancient  Romans  had  +,  and  the  modern  Italians  ftill 
havej,  upon  many  occafions,   to  pronounce  even  their 


♦  "  Uti  eft  mutata  Jn," 

J.  C.  ScALXGEit^  dc  C.  L.  L,  Cap.  173. 

*t  So  in  the  anticnt  form  of  Iclf-devotion. 

■  •  • .  • 

<«  VTEf.  ECO.  AXIM.  PR  At.  ME.  FORMIDINEM.  METOM,  C^TE.  OMNlOMw 
*'  DIRAS«  SIC.  VTEI.  YERBEIS.  NONCOPASO.  ITA.  PRO.  REPOBLICA.  FOPOLK 
"  ROMANI.  QCIRITIOM.  VITAM.  SALUTEM.  QUE.  MEAM.  LEOIONES.  AUX- 
^*  5ILIA.  QJJE.  HOSTfOM.  MEOM.  DIVEIS.  MANEROUS.  TELLOURI.  QUE.  D£- 
•*   VOVEOfc'* 

•     ■ 

So  HI  the  laws  of  Numa>  and  in  the  twelve  tables^  and  in  all  aatient  in- 
fcriptions,  O  is  perpetually  found  where  the  modern  Latin  ufcs  U.    And 
it  is  but  reafonable  to  fuppofe^  that  the  pronunciation  preceded  the  change: 
of  the  orthography* 


94 


X  "  Quant  i,  la  voyelle  u  pour  ce  qu'ils  (Ics  Italiens)  T^ment  fort,  ainfi 
que  nous  cognoiflbns  par  ces  mots  Ufficio^  ubrigatOy  &c.  je  penfe  bien 
qu'ib  la  refpeftent  plus  que  les  autres." 

Henri  £sTf£N£>  dcla  prccelL  de  la  L.  F. 


owa 


96  OF  THE  WORD  THAT. 

own  o  like  an  u.     Of  which  I  need  not  produce  any 
inftances  *. 

The  Refokition  therefore  of  the  original  will  be  like 
that  of  the  tranflation ; 


cc 


Latroncs  jugulcnt  homines  (A»)  in  furgunt  de  nofte.'* 


♦  "  L'  o  a  ftrctta  amicizia  coll'  v,  ufandofi  in  moke  voci  fcambievol^ 

"  mcnte." 

Menage.  Camblamenti  delle  lettere.  page  i6« 

Menage  quotes  Quinftilian,  Feftus,  Velius  Longus^  Viftorinus,  Caflio- 
dorus^  Senrius,  Prifcian,  Virgil,  Jul.  C.  Scaliger. 

*'  La  V  par  che  prevalcflc  ne'primi  tempi  e  piu  remoti,  quando  i  Latini 

*  memori  della  Eolica  origine,  o  imitando  gli  umbri  e  gli  Etrufchi,  literam 
^  y  fro  o  efferebant :  (i.)  e  pronunziavano  Funtes^  Frundes^  AcheruntCy 
'  HumoneSy  e  fimili.     (2.)  Quindi  Ovidio,  avendo  detto  che  una  volta  il 

*  nome  di  Orione  era  Uriotty  foggiugnc'^perdidif  antiquum  litera  prima 
'  Jonum.     (3.)  Ne'  tempi  pofteriori  fi  ando  all'  altro  eftremo  j  e  all'  antica 

lettera  fu  foftituita  quafi  fempre  la  o,  come  vedefi  in  Novios  Plautios, 

*  e  in  altre  voci  della  tavola  ftconda.     Prifciano  ne  da  per  ragione :  quia 

*  rnuhis  Italiie  populis  v  in  uju  non  erat^fed  e  contrario  utebantur  o :  (4.) 
'  dicendovi  verbigrazia,  Colpa^  Exfoles,  per  Culpa,  Exules,  &c.  (5.)" 

Lanzi  Saggio  di  Lingua  Etrufca,  Tom.  i.  Pag.  1 24. 

(i.)  Feft.  vid.  Orcus. 

(2.)  Quinft.  L.  4. 

(3.)  Faft.  V.  . 

(4.)  Pag.  554. 

(5.)  Cafliod.  2284.  M 

I  B.  You 


OF  THE  WORD  THAT.  97 

B. 

You  have  extricated  yourfelf  pretty  well  oat  of  this 
fcrape  with  ut.  And  perhaps  have  done  prudently,  to 
decline  the  fame  ibrt  of  explanation  in  thofe  other  Ian- 

I 

guages  which,  as  well  as  the  Latin,  have  likewife  a  double 
Conjun6tion  for  this  purpofe,  not  quite  fo  eafily  accounted 
for,  becaufe  not  ready  derived  to  your  hands.  But  I  have 
not  yet  done  with  the  Englifli :  for  though  your  method 
of  refolution  will  anfwer  with  moft  fentences,  yet  I  doubt 
much  whether  it  will  with  all.  I  think  there  is  one  ufage 
of  the  conjunftion  that  which  it  will  not  explain. 

H. 
Produce  an  inftance. 

B. 

The  inftances  are  common  enough.  But  I  chufe  to 
take  one  from  your  favourite  fad  Shepherd :  in  hopes  that 
the  difficulty  it  may  caufe  you,  will  abate  fomething  of 
your  extreme  partiality  for  that  piece.  Which,  though 
it  be 

—  ^^  fuch  wool 

"  As  from  mere  Englilh  flocks  his  Mufc  could  pull," 

you  have  always  contended  obftinately,  with  its  author,  is 

*^  a  Fleece 
"  To  match  or  thofe  of  Sicily  or  Greece." 

O  Example. 


t     '■•}•■ 


98  OF  THE  WORD  THAT.    . 

Example. 

"  I  wonder  he  can  move !  that  he's  not  fix'd ! 
"  If  that  his  feelings  be  the  fame  wid\  mine/' 

So  again  in  Shakelpeare  % 

—— — — "  If  that  the  king 
"  Have  any  way  your  good  deferts  forgot, 
"  He  bids  you  name  your  griefs/'      ■ 

How  will  you  bring  out  the  Article  that,  when  twa 
Conjuadtions  (for  I  mull  ftill  call  that  a  Conjun(Slion,  till 
all  my  fcruples  are  fatisfied)  come  in  this  manner  together  i 


"» -•> 


♦  xft  Part  of  Henry  IV.  Aft  IV.  Scene  5. 


ADVER- 


ADVERTISEMENT, 

T  Presume  my  readers  to  be  acquainted  with  Frencb, 
Latin)  Italian  and  Greek :  which  are  unfortunately  the 
ufual  boundaries  of  an  Englifh  fcholar's  acquifition.  On 
this  fuppofition,  a  friend  of  mine  lamented  that,  in  my 
Letter  to  Mr.  Dunning,  I  had  not  confined  myfelf  to  the 
Common  Englifh  charadter  for  the  Anglo-faxon  and  Gothic 
derivations^ 


In  the  prefent  publication  I  fliould  undoubtedly  have 
conformed  to  his  wiflies,  if  I  had  not  imagined  that,  by 
inferting  the  Anglo-faxon  and  Gothic  characters  in  this 
place,  I  might  poffibly  allure  fome  of  my  readers  to  fami- 
liarize  themfelves  with  thofe  charadters,  by  an  application 
of  them  to  the  few  words  of  thofe  languages  which  are 
here  introduced:  and  thus  lead  the  way  to  their  better 
acquaintance  with  the  parent  language,  which  ought  long 
ago  to  have  made  a  part  of  the  education  of  our  youth. 
And  I  flatter  myfelf  that  one  of  the  confequences  of  my 
prefent  inquiry  will  be,  to  facilitate  and  abridge  the  tedious 
and  miftaken  method  of  inftrudtion  which  has  too  long 
continued  in  our  feminaries :  the  time  which  is  at  prefent 
allotted  to  Latin  and  Greek,  being  amply  fufficient  for  the 

O   2  acquirer 


loo  ADVERTISEMENT. 

acquirement  alfo  of  French,  Italian,  Anglo-faxon,  Dutch, 
German,  Danifh  and  Swedirti*  VVhich  will  not  feem  at  all 
extraordinary,  when  it  is  confidered  that  the  five  laft  men- 
tibned  (together  with  the  Enghfli)  are  little  more  thah 
different  diale(5ls  of  one  and  the  fame  language.  And 
though  this  was  by  no  means  the  leading  motivei  new  1< 
the  prefent  objedl  of  tny  inquiry ;  yet  I  think  it  of  con* 
fiderable  importance :  although  I  do  not  hold  the  acquifi'^ 
iion  of  languages  itl  fo  V^ty  gtiSat  estimation  as  the  Emperor 
Charles  the  Vth  did.  Who,  as  Brantome  tells  uS)  "  difoit 
**  &  repetoit  fouvent,  quand  il  tomboit  fur  la  beaute  des 
"  langties>  (felon  To^iinion  des  Turcs)--^vi'  atilarit  de  lan- 
t<  giie6  que  rhottim^  ir9ait  pader,  a\)ta<it  de  fbi^  tA-il 
»  hotonAfe/ 


Anglo- 


[      lOI      ] 


Anglo-Saxon. 


A 

a 

a 

B 

b 

b 

E 

c 

k 

D 

t) 

d 

6 

e 

c^ 

F 

F 

f 

D 

3 

g 

b 

h 

h 

« 

« 

♦  . 

I 

1 

• 
1 

«' 

♦ 

« 

K 

k 

k 

L 

1 

1 

W 

m 

m 

N 

n 

n 

O 

o  . 

o 

P 

P 

P 

*  ^ 

* 

^ 

R 

P 

r 

s  • 

r 

s 

T 

t: 

t 

D 

« 

th 

U 

n 

u 

r 

> 

w 

X 

X 

X 

Y 

• 

y 

y 

z 

2 

2 

Moefo-Gotfaic. 

A 

a 

B 

b 

« 

« 

a 

d 

6 

e 

IJ 

f 

r 

g 

h 

h 

O 

hw 

I 

• 

1 

1 

9 

jandy 

K 

k 

A 

1 

M 

m 

N 

n 

X 

0 

n 

P 

u 

cw 

K 

r 

s 

8 

T 

t 

* 

th 

n 

U 

V 

w 

X 

ch 

•♦ 

♦ 

EDEA 


•        T». 


[ 


•     •         • 


EHEA   nXEPOENTA,   &c. 


«  T 


CHAP.     VIL 


©F    CONJUNCTIONS. 


H. 

T  WAS  afraid  of  feme  fuch  inftances  as  thefc,  when  I 
wiflied  to  poftponc  the  whole  confideration  of  this  fub- 
je6t  till  after  we  had  difcuffed  the  other  received  Parts  of 
Speech.  Becaufe,  in  order  to  explain  it,  I  mnft  foredall 
fomething  of  what  I  had  to  fay  concerning  Conjun£iions. 
However,  fince  the  quefiion  is  llarted,  perhaps  it  may  be 
as  well  to  give  it  here. 

The  tni^h  of  the  matter  is,  that  if  is  merely  a  Verb. 
It  is  merely  the  Imperative  of  the  Gothic  and  Anglo-faxon 
verb  ri):AN,  nipan.  And  in  thofe  languages,  as  well  as  in 
the  Englifh  formerly,  this  fuppofed  ConjunSiion  was  pro- 
nounced and  written  as  the  common  Imperative,  purely 
m:.  Dip,  Gif.     Thus 

— '*  My 


OF  CONJUNCTIONS.  103 


.<€ 


My  lai^flc 


*»  Hath  lotted  hor  to  be  your  brother's  miftrefie 
*^  OIF  ftiee  can  be  reclaim'd;  gif  not,  his  prey**" 

And  accordingly  our  corrupted  if  has  always  the  figni- 
fication  of  the  Englifh-  Imperative  Givi\.  and  no  other* 
So  that  the  refohition  of  the  conftrudlion  in  the  inftances 
you  have  produced,  will  be  as  before  in  the  others. 

Resolution^. 

^  His  feelings  be  the  fame  with  mine,,  give  that^  I 
^  wonder  he  can  move,  %C£^ 

^^  The  King  may  have  forgotten  your  good  deferts, 
"  GIVE  THAT  in  any  way,  he  bids  you  name  your  griefs.'* 

And  here,  as  an  additional  proof,  we  may  obferve,  that 
whenever  the  Datutn^  upon  which  any  conclufion  depends, 
is  a  fentence,  the  Article  that,  if  not  expreffed,  is  always 
underftood,  and  may  be  inferted  after  if*.  As  in  the.in- 
Jftance  I  have  produced  above,  the  Poet  might  have  faid, 

"  Gif  that  Ihc  can  bfe  reclaimed/*  Src^ 

For  the  refblution  is — "  She  can  be  reclaimed.  Give 
^  that ;  my  largeffe  hath  lotted  her  to  be  your  brother's 

*  Sad  Shepherd,  A6tII.  Scene  1. 

9  *  miftreile. 


*'^i'.  .  -i- 


\. 


V 


J  04  OF  CON  JUNCTIONS. 

"  miftreffe.  She  catinot  be  reclaimed,  Give  that ;  my  largefle 
•,**  hath  lotted  her  to  be  your  brother's  prey.* 

But  the  Article  that  is  not  underftobd,  and  cannot  be 
inferted  after  if,  where  the  Datum  is  not  a  i^tence,  but 
fome  Noun  governed  by  the  Verb  if  or  give.     As,— 


t-*-  :>:  Example. 


\ '  **  How  will  the  weather  difpofe  of  you  to-morrow  ?  if 

"  fair,  it  will  fend  me  abroad ;   if  foul,  it  will  keep  me 
"at  home.** 

Here  we  cannot  fay — *<  if  that  fair  it  will  fend  me 
"  abroad;  ilF  that  foul  it  will  keep  me  at  home.* — Be- 
caufe  in  this  cafe  the  verb  if  governs  the  Noun ;  and  the 
refolved  conftrudlion  is, 

^  GIVE  fair  weather,  it  will  fend  me  abroad;  give  foul 
^  weather,  it  will  keep  me  at  home/* 

But  make  the  Datum  a  fentence^  As — ^^  if  it  is  fair 
^*  weather,  it  will  fend  me  abroad ;  if  it  is  foul  weather, 
^  it  will  keep  me  at  home.'' 

And  then  the  article  that  is  underftood,  and  may  be 
inferted  after  if  ;  As— *^  if  that  it  is  fair  weather,  it  will 

'  a  "  fend 


OP  CONJUNCTIONS.  i©5 

^  fend  me  abroad  $  if  that  it  h  fout  wefttbet)  it  will  keep 
*'  me  at  home.** 

ft 

The  refolution  then  being> 
«  Jt  is  fair  weather,  give  ^hat  ;  it  wifi  fend  me  abroad; 
**  It  is  foul  weather,  give  Ithat  ;  it  will  keep  me  at  home> 

And  this  you  Will  fiifd  to  hold  univeHklly,  not|pilf  with 
IF ;  but  with  many  other  fuppofed  ConjuntiioriSj  ^itdi^s^ 
Bui  tbati  Unkfs  that,  tb$Ugh  $M,  Lefi  nmy  &rc.  (whiA 
are  really  Ferbs)  put  in  this  maimer  before  the  Artiiti'tVLAr, 

One  word  more  to  clear  up  a  difficulty  which  occurs  to 
me  concerning  your  account  of  if,  and  I  have  done. 


We  have  in  Englifli  another  word  Which  (though  now 
rather  obfolete)  ufed  frequently  to  fup^y  the  place  of  ir. 
As — **  AN  you  had  any  eye  behind  you,  you  might  fee  more 
^^  detradtion  at  your  heels^  than  fortunes  before  you  *•'' 

In  this  and  in  all  fimilar  inftances,  what  is  an  ?  For  I  can 

by  no  means  agree  with  the  account  which  Dr.  S.  Johnfon 

■  .1..  I  ■  ■      ■■  ■       I  i^  ■     ■  ■■ ..     I  ,    — 

•  Twelfth  Night,  AA II.  Scene  8. 

P  gives 


io6  OF  CONJUNCTIONS. 

gives  of  it  in  his  Didtionafy  :  aixi  I  do  not  Jcriow  that  anpy 
other  perfon  has  ever  attempted  to  explain  it. 

,  i  How  does,  he  account  for  it  ?  . , 

•  ■■-•••  -'^^  ■.. 

B. 

.H&fa.j^'"**^  AN  is  fometimes  in' old  authors  a  contrai^oii! 
pV And  if^  Of  which  he  gives  a  very  unlucky  inftance 
fs^m  Shakefpeare  *;  whete  both  an  and  if  are  ufed  i& 
the  fanit  line. 


•"  He  cannot  flatter.  He  I 


"  An  honeft  mind  and  plain:  he  muft  Ipeak  Truth : 
"  An  they  will  t^e  it, — So.     if  not  j  He's  plain." 

.  -  « 

Where,  if  an  was  a  contra^iiion  of  and  if  ;  an  and  lf 
fhould  rather  change  places. 


I  can  no  more  agree  with  Dr.  S.  Johnfbn  than  you  do. 
A  part  of  one  word  only,  employed  to  (hew  that  another 
word  is  compounded  with  it,  would  indeed  be  a  curious 
method  of  con-tra&ton.     Though  even  this  account  of  it 

■ 

would  ferve  my  purpofe.     But  the  truth  will  ferve  it  better : 


♦  Lear,  Adt  II.  Scene  6.   ' 

"■'  and 


OF  CONJUNCTIONS*  107 

and  therefore  I  thank  you  for  your  difficulty. '  It  is  a  frefh 
proof,  and  a  very  ftrong  one  in  my  favour.  An  is  alfo  a 
Verb,  and  may  very  well  fupply  the. place  of.  if  ;<  it  being 
nothing  elfe  but  the  Imperative  of  the  Anglorfaxon  verb 
Snan,  which  likewife  means  to  Ghe,  or  to  Grant,     -. 

B. 

It  feems  indeed  to  be  fo.  But,  if  fb,  how  can  it  ever 
be  made  to  fignify  as  if  ?  For  which  alfo,  as  well  as  Jor 
And  if,  Johnfon  fays  an  is  a  con-tra(£tion  *. 

H. 

It  never  (ignifies  As  if :  nor  is  eter  a  contradion  of  them. 

B. 

Johnfon  however  advances  Addifon's  authority  for  it. 
"  My  next  pretty  correfpondent,  like  Shakefpeare*s 


**  Lion  in  Py ramus  and  Thifbe,   roars  an  it  were  any 
"  nightingale," 

H. 

■ 

^     If  Addifon  had  fo  written^  I  fhould  anfwer  roundly,  that 
he  had  written  falfe  Englifh.     But  he  never  did  fo  write^ 


^  Thb  arbitrary  method  of  contraSion  is  very  ufeful  to  an  idle  or  igno- 
rant expofitor,     it  will  fuit  any  thing.     S.  Johnfon  alfo  fays 

"  An't,  a  contradtion  for  :And  it ;  or  rather  Jnd  if  it  j  as— An't  pleafe 
«*  you — that  is,  And  if  it  pleafe  you.''    It  is  nicrcly— an  it  pUafeyou. 

Pa         '  He 


I  o  a  OF  CONJUNCTIONS. 

He  only  quoted  it  in  mirth  and  ridicule,  as  the  author 
Wrote  it.  And  Johnfon,  an  Editor  of  Shakefpeare,  ought 
to  have  known  and  obferved  it.  And  then,  inftead  of 
Addifbn's  or  even  Shakefpeare*s  ai^thority,  from  whom  the 
expreffion  h  borrowed ;  he  (hould  have  quoted  Bottom% 
the  Weavcl" :  whofe  Language  correfponds  with  the  cha- 
racter Shakefpeare  has  given  him, — 

1^  «*  The  Jhattofv'ft  tbickfcutt  of  that  barren  forty  viz. 

"  A  crew  of  Patches,  rude  Mecbtmicals, 
«•  That  work  for  Bread  upon  Athenian  Stalls  *." 

*  "  I  win  aggravate  my  voice  fo  (fays  Bottom)  that  I  wilt 
<*  roar  you  as  gently  as  any  fucking  Dove :  I  will  roar  you 
"  AN  'twere  any  nightingale  +.** 

If  Johnfbn  is  fatisfied  with  ibch  authority  as  this,  for 
the  different  fignification  and  propriety  of  Englifli  words, 
he  will  find  enough  of  it  amongft  the  clowns  in  all  our 
comedies ;  and  Majier  Bottom  in  particular  in  this  very 
fentence  will  furnifh  him  with  many  new  meanings.  But, 
I  believe,  Johnfon  will  not  find  an  ufed  for  uis  iff  either 
ferioufly  or  clownilhly,  in  any  other  part  of  Addifon  or 
Shakefpeare;    except  in  this  fpeech  of  Bottom,    and  in 

*  Midfuramcr  Night*s  Dream,  Aft  HI.  Scene  2. 
-     I  Midfummcr  Night's  Dream,  Aft  I.  Scene  2. 

another 


OF  CONJUNCTIONS.  109 

another  of  Hoftefs  ^tckly — "  He  made  a  finer  end,  and 
"  went  away  an  it  had  been  any  Chriftom  child  *.** 

B. 

In  Englifli  then,  it  feems,  thefe  two  words  which  have 
been  called  conditional  Conjunctions  (and  whofe  force  and 
manner  of  lighification,  as  well  as  of  all  the  others,  we 
are  diredted  by  Mr.  Locke  to  fearch  after  in  "  the  fevferal 
"  views,  poftures,  ftands,  turns,  limitations,  and  exqepr 
^  tions,  and  feveral  other  thoughts  of  the  mind,  for  which 
^^  we  have  either  none  or  very  deficient  namef)  are,  accord- 
ing to  you^  merely  the  original-  Imperatives  of  the  verhsr 
to  Give  or  to  Grants 

Now  Ifet  me  underftand  you,.  I  do  not  mean  to  divert^ 
you  into-  an  etymological  explanation  of  each  particular 
word  of  other  languages,  or  even  of  the  Englifh,  and  fo 
to  change  our  converfation  from  a  philofophical  inquiry 
concerning  the  nature  of  Language  in  genera!,  into  the* 
particular  bufinefs  of  a  polyglot  Lexicon.  But,  as  you 
have  f aid  that  your  principles  will  apply  univerfally,.  I  defire 
to  know  whether  you  mean  that  the  conditional  conjt4nSlions 
of  all  other  languages  are  likewife  to  be  found,  like  if  and 


♦  JJcnry  V.  Aft  XL  Scene  j. 


s 


no  OF  CONJUNCTIONS. 

AN,  in  the  original  Imperatives  of  fome  of  their  own  or 
derived  verbsy  meaning  ^o  Give  f 

H. 

No.  If  that  was  my  opinion  I  know  you  are  ready 
inftantly  to  confute  it  by  the  Conditionals  of  the  Greek  and 
Latin  and  Irifli,  the  French,  Italian,  Spanifli,  Portugueze 
and  many  other  Languages.  But  I  mean,  that  thofe  words 
which  are  called  conditional  conjunSl tons.,  are  to  be  accounted 
for  in  ALL  languages  in  the  fame  manner  as  I  have  ac- 
counted for  IF  and  an,  •  Not  indeed  that  they  muft  all 
mean  precifely  as  thefe  two  do, — Ghe  and  Grant ;  but  fome 
word  equivalent :  Such  as, — Be  it,  Suppofe^  Allow^  Permit^ 
Put  J  Suffer^  &.C,  Which  meaning  is  to  be  fought  for  from 
the  particular  etymology  of  each  refpeftive  language,  not 
from  fome  un-named  and  un-known  "  Turns,  Stands,  Pof- 
*^  ,tures,  &c.  of  the  mind."  In  fhort,  to  put  this  matter 
out  of  doubt,  I  mean  to  difcard  all  fuppofed  myftery^  not 
only  ^boutthQfe  Con(s(itiona/Sy  but  about  all  thofe  words  alfo 
which  Mr.  Harris  and  others  xliftinguifti  from  Prepofitions, 
and  call  Conjun£iions  of  Sentences.  I  deny  them  to  be  a 
feparate  fort  of  words  or  Part  of  Speech  by  themfelves. 
For  they  have  not  a  feparate  manner  of  fignification  V  'dSr 
though  they  are  not  devoid  of  fignification .  And  the  par- 
ticular lignification  of  each  muft  be  fou§^t  for  from  amongfl: 

the 


OF  CONJUNCTIONS*  1 1  r 

the.  other  parts  of  Speech,  by  the  help  of  the  particular 
etymology  of  each  refpedUve  language.  By.fuch  means 
atone  can  we  clear  away  the  obfcurity  and  errors  in  which 
Grammarians  and  Philofophers  have  been  involved  by  the 
corruption  of  fome  common  words,  and  the  ufeful  Abbre- 
viations of  Gonftrudlion.  And  at.  the  fame  time  we  fliall 
get  rid  of  that  farrago  of  ufelefs  diftindtions  into  Gonjunc-^ 
tivBj  AdjunSiivey  DisjunSlivej  SubdisjunStive^  Copulativey 
Negatlv£  copulative  '^,  Continuativey  SubcontinuativBy  Pqfi^ 
tivej  Suppojitivey  Caufal^  <loUe£Hvey  EffeSllvcy,  Approbaiivey 
Difcretivey  Ablativey  Prefumptivey  Abnegativey^  Gompletivey 
Augmentativey  Alternativey  Hypotheticaly  Extenjivey  Feri^ 
odicaly  Motivaly  Conclufivey  Explicativf^  Tranjitivey  Interrof^ 
gativey  Comparativey  Diminutivey.  Pr event ivcy  Adequate 
Preventivey  Adverfativey  Conditionaly  Sufpenfivey  Illativey 
ConduSlivey  Declarative^  8£c.  &c.  &c.  which  explain  no^ 
thing ;  and  (as^moft  other  technical  terms  are  abufed)  ferve 
only  to  throw  a  veil  over  the  ignorance  of  thofe  who  em- 
ploy them  +• 

♦  "  Nofiy  Non^  non  minus  disjungit,  quam  Nec^  Nee.  Qiianqiiam  neu- 
*•  trum  ego  DisjunSlivum  appcUo,  led  ccfulativum  potlus  negativum.'' 

Ariftarchus  Anti-Bcntlcianus.     Pars  fccunda.     Pag.  12.  . 

f  Technical  terms  arc  not  invariably  abufed  to  cover  the  ignoranee  only 
op  thofe  who  employ  them.  In  matters  of  law,  politicks,  and  Government, 
they  are  more  frequently  abufed  in  attempting  to  impofe  upon  the  ignorance 
of  othcn ;  and  to  cover  the  injufticc  and  k^navcry  of  thofe  who  employ  them. 

B.  You 


I  **  ♦  * 


Ill  OF  CONJUNCTIONS. 

r 

B. 
You  mean,  ,then,  by  what  you  have  faid,  flatly  to  con- 
tradiift  Mr.  Harris's  definition  of  a  ConjunSlion ;  which  he 
fays,  is — "  a  Part  of  Speech  devoid  of  fignification  itfelf^. 
**  but  fo  formed  as  to  help  iignification,  by  making  two  or 
^  more  fignificant  featences  to  be  one  iignificant  fentence." 

H. 

1  have  the  lefs  fcniple  to  do  that,  becaufe  Mr.  Harris 
-makes  no  fcruple  to  contradict  himfelf.  For  he  afterwards 
acknowledges  that  Jome  of  them—**  have  a  kind  of  ob- 
^*  fcure  fignification  when  taken  alone;  and  appear  in 
**  Grammar,  like  Zoophytes  *  in  nature,  a  kind  of  middle 
•**  Beings  of  amphibious  character ;  which,  by  Iharing  the 
*^  attributes  of  the  higher  and  the  lower,  conduce  to  link 
**  the  whole  together.'* 

Now  I  fuppofe  tt  is  impoffible  to  convey  a  Nothing  in  a 
more  ingenious  manner.     How  much  fuperior  is  this  to 

# 

*  Thefe  Zoophytes  have  made  a  wonderful  impreflion  on  Lord  Monboddc^ 
I  believe  (for  I  furcly  have  not  counted  them)  that  he  has  ufed  the  allufion 
at  leaft  nventy  times  in  his  progrefs  of  language  4  and  fcems  to  be  always 
hunting  after  extremes  merely  for  die  fake  of  introducing  them.  But  they 
have  been  fo  often  placed  between  two  ftools^  that  it  is  no  wonder  they 
fhould  at  laft  come  t9  the  ground. 

a  the 


OF  OONJUNCnONa.  1 1 J 

the  orac^ulir  Saw  of  another  learcied  aiithor  on  Language 
(typified  by  Shakefpeftre  in  Sir  ^opax  ^)  who,  amongfl 
tnuch  other  intelfigence  of  equal  importance,  tdls  us  \vith 
a  very  ifoletnti  faoe>  and  afcrtlies  it  to  Plato,  tihat—^"  Every 
<<  mall  that  opines,  muft  <^ae  fismethiiig:  tlie  fufcgedt  of 
**  opinion  therefore  is  not  nothing.**  But  the  faireft  way 
to  Lord  Monboddo  is~to  give  yuu  the  whole  paffage. 

^^  It  was  not  therefore  without  reaibn  that  Plato  ftid 
"  that  the  fubje6t  of  apinion  was  neither  the  to  oV,  or  the 
^*  thiog  itfelf,  nor  was  it  the  « fiy^  Sv,  or  nothing ;  but 
^*  fomething  betwixt  thefe  two.  This  may  appear  otjlrjl 
*^  fight  a  little  myfterious,  and  difficult  to  be  underftood ; 
«  but,  like  other  things  of  that  kind  in  Plato,  when 
"  examined  tx)  the  bottom^  it  has  a  "jery  r/^^yr  meaning,  and 


♦  "  As  the  old  Hermit  of  Prague,  that  never  law  pen  and  ink,  very 
"  wittily  (aid  to  a  niece  of  king  Gorboduc, — Thai  that  is y  is:  So  I  being 
"  Mafter  Parjony  urn  Mafter  Par/on.  Fjor  what  is  tbaty  hut  that  ?  And  is, 
«  ha  is  V 

Twelfth  Night,  Aft  ^V^  Scene  3. 


\ 


John  Lily's  Sir  Tophas  monhf^dizes  in  the  fame  manner.  ! 

"  Sir  Tophas.     Doeft  thou  not  know  what  a  poet  is  ?  j 

^'  Epiton.     No.  \ 

'*  Sir  Tophas.     Why  foole,  a  poet  is  as  much  as  one  ftiould  fay — a.poct." 

Endimion,  Aft  I.  Scene  y- 


explains 


114  OF  CONJUNCTIONS. 

**  explains  the  nature  of  opinion  very  well  * ;  for,  as  he 
"  fays,  Every  man  that  opines, .  muft  opine  fomething ; 
"  the  fubjefl  of  opinion  therefore  is  not  nothing.  At  the 
**  fame  time  it  is  not  the  thing  itfelf,  but  fomething  be- 
"  twixt  the  two  +.**     His  Lordihip,  you  fee,  has  explained 

it 


^mmm' 


€€ 
€C 


*  Lucinde.     Qu'eft  ce  que  c^eft  que  ce  galimatias  ? 

Frontin.     Ce  galimatias !  Vous  n'y  comprenez  done  rien  ? 

Ludnde.     Non,  enveritc. 

Frontiiu    Ma  foi,  ni  moi  non  plus :  je  vais  pourtant  vous  Texpliquer  fi 

vous  voulez. 
Lucinde.     Comment  m'  expliquer  ce  que  tu  ne  comprends  pas  ? 
Frontim    Oh  !  Dame^  J'ai  fait  mes  etudes,  moi. 

L'amant  de  lui-meme.     Roufleau,  Scene  xiii; 

t  Origin  and  Progrefs  of  Language,,  VoL  I.  p,  loo.  «♦  U  poffedc 
Tantiquite^  comme  on  le  peut  voir  par  les  belles  remarques  qu'Il  a  faites. 
Sans  lui  nous  ne  f^aurions  pas  que  dans  la  ville  d'Athenes  les  en&is 
pleuroient  quand  on  leur  donn^it  le  fouet.^— Nous  devons  cette  decouvcrte 
"  k  fa  profonde  erudition." 

But  his  lordfhip's  philofophical  wridngs  are  full  of  information,  expla- 
nations  and  obfervations  of  equal  importance.  Vol.  L  p.  1 36,  he  informs 
us,  that — Porphyry,  the  greatefi  pbilofaphtr  as  well  as  left  writer  of  his  age, 
relates  that  crows  and  magpies  and  parrots  were  taught  in  his  time  not 
only  to  imitate  human  fpcech,  but  to  attend  to  what  was  told  them  and 
"  to  remember  it ;  and  many  of  them,  fays  he,  have  learned  to  inform 
"  againft  thofe  whom  they  faw  doing  any  mifchief  in  the  houfc.  And  he 
himfelf  tamed  a  partridge  that  he  found  fomewhere  about  Carthage  to 
fuch  a  degree,  that  it  not  only  played  and  fondled  with  him,  but  anfwered 
him  when  he  fpoke  to  it  in  a  voice  different  from  that  in  which  the 
partridges  call  one  anotlier :  but  was  fo  well  bred,  that  it  never  made 
g  **  this 


it 


CC 


OF  CONJUNCTIONS.  115 

it  very  clearly ;  and  no  doubt  muft  have  fweated  much  to 
get  thus  to  the  bottom. 

But  Mr.  Harris  has  the  advantage  of  a  Simile  over  this 
gentleman  :  and  though  Similies  appear  with  moft  beauty 


i«*> 


4( 
€4 

€€ 


*'  this  noife  but  when  it  was  fpokcn  to.  And  he  maintains,  that  all  animalt 
"  who  have  fenfc  and  memory  arc  capable  of  reafon  :  and  this  is  not  only 
**  his  opinion,  but  that  of  the  Pythagoreans,  fhe  great  eft  philofopbers  in 
"  my  opinion  that  ever  exifted^  next  to  the  mafters  of  their  matter,  I  mean 
the  Egyptian  priefts.  And  befides  the  Pythagoreans,  Plato,  Ariftotle, 
Empedocles,  and  Democritus,  were  of  the  fame  opinion.  One  thing 
cannot  be  denied^  that  their  natures  may  be  very  much  improved  by  ufe 
and  inftruftion,  by  which  they  may  be  made  to  do  things  that  are  really 
*'  wonderful  and  far  exceeding  their  natural  power  of  inftinft." — So  far  we 
"  are  obliged  to  the  greateft  of  all  philofopbers  that  ever  exifted.  And  thus 
far  the  judgment  of  the  extrafk  can  alone  be  called  in  queftion.  Now  for 
the  farther  confirmation  of  this  do6brine  by  their  illuftrious  difciple.— 
There  is  a  man  in  England  at  prefent,  who  has  praftifed  more  upon  them 
and  with  greater  fuccefs  than  any  body  living:'* — (I  fufpeft  his  lordihip 
means  the  owner  of  the  learned  Pig) — '^  and  he  fa^,  as  Tarn  informed^^ — 
(Ay,  Right,  my  lord.  Be  cautious  how  you  take  an  affertion  fo  important 
as  this,  upon  your  own  authority !  Well,  He  fays  ?  What  ?) — "  That,  if 
^^  they  lived  long  enough,  and  pzms  fufficient  were  taken  upon  them,"— 
(Well,  what  then?)—"  it  is  impoffible  to  Jay  to  what  lengths  fome  of  them 
**  might  be  carried.'' 

Now  if  this,  and  fuchiluflp  as  this,  be  Philofophy ;  and  that  too,  of  the 
greatseft  philofophers  that  ever  exifted  s  I  do  moft  humbly  intreat  your 
lordihip,  if  you  ftill  continue  obftinate  to  difcard  Mr.  Locke,  that  I  mii)r 
have  my  Tom  Thumb  again.  For  this  philofophy  gives  to  my  mind  as  much 
diiguft,  though  not  fo  much  indignatiaii,  as  yow  friend  and  admirer  Lord 
Mansfield's  law, 

Q   2  afid 


cc 
cc 


ii6  OF  CONJUNCTIONS. 

and  propriety  in  works  of  imagination,  they  are  frequently 
found  molt  ufeful  to  the  authors  of  philofophical  treatifes  : 
and  have  often  helped  them  out  at  many  a  dead  lift,  by 
giving  them  an  appearance  of  faying  fomething,  when 
indeed  they  had  nothing  to  fay  :  For  Similies  are  in  truth 
the  bladders  upon  which  they  float ;  and  the  Grammarian 
links  at  once  if  he  attempts  to  fwim  without  them. 

As  a  proof  of  which,  let  us  only  examine  the  prefent 
inftance;  and,  difmi fling  the  Zoophytes^  fee  what  intelli- 
gence we  can  draw  from  Mr.  Harris  concerning  the  nature 
of  Conjunctions. 

Firft  he  defines  a  Word  to  be  a  «  found  ftgnificant  *." 
Then  he  defines  Conjunctions  to  be  words  (i.  e.  founds 
ftgnificanf)  "  devoid  of fignificationT — Afterwards  he  allows 
that  they  have — *  a  kind  of  Jignijication,*^ 

But  this  kind  of  fignification  is — "  obfcure^  (i.  e.  a 
fignification  unknown) :  fomething  I  fuppofe  (as  Chilling- 
worth  couples  them)  like  a  fecret  Tradition^  or  a  ftlent 
thunder  :  for  it  amounts  to  the  fame  thing  as  z  Jignification 
lirhich  does  notjignify :  an  obfcure  or  unknown  fignification 

■  I  'ill  .  ■  I    g  ■■■II  11    I  !■  I  .^l— Ml— WW^ 

*  And  (page  329)  he  jdefiaes  a  word  to  be  ^^  a  voice  articulate^  iignU 
"  ficant  by  compaft," 

2        '  ■    '^  being 


\    ' 


OF  CQNJUI^CTIONS.  117 

being  no  fignification  at  all.  But,  not  contented  with 
tl^fe  inconfiftencies,  which  to  a  lefs  learned  man  would 
feem  fufiicient  of  all  confcience,  Mr.  Harris  goes  farthery 
and  adds,  that  they  are  a — "  kind  of  middle  being f* — (he 
mud:  mean  between  fignification  and  no  fignification)— r? 
«  Jbaring  the  Attributes  of  botV^—Q.,  e.  of  fignification  and 
no  fignification)  and — "  conduce  to  link  them  botb"*-^!.  -e. 
fignification  and  no  fignification)  "  together.^ 

It  would  have  helped  us  a  little,  if  Mr.  Harris  had  here 
told  us  what  that  middle  Jiate  is,  between  fignification  and 
no  fignification  * !  What  are  the  attributes  of  nq  fignifica- 
tion !  And  how  fignification  and  no  fignification  can  be 
linked  together ! 


•       -*  •■■«««  •  •••  ^■••■«  *  IS^V    »"^      ~  ^^^^ 


^  If  comqion  reafon  abnc  was  not  fuffident  to  keep  Mr.  Harris  and 
Lord  Motiboddo  from  this  middle  fti^te  between  the  tti  ov  and  the  to  ^%  $9, 
and  between  fignification  and  no  Hgnification ;  they  (hoiild  at  .leaft  have 
iifiened  to  wh^  they  are  hector  acquainted  with^  Authority. 

**  f|li«)a^up»   fkvlifv  dfiflffO¥    wr<|5f Jf^i' jT— Toulwk    |f^(v    ^fiy    fii*i»   /Aio-pv/'      Ariftot. 


/'  Inter  a/)iniiationem  &  neg^t^oQeni  nullum  medium  exiftit/'    J.  C. 
ScALiGEB,^  Lib,  5.  C,  cxiv.     *        ^ 


»  ^^ 


Now 


1 1 8  op:  eONJUNCTIONS. 

;  Now  all  this  itiay,  for  aught  I  know,  be  **  read  and 
<*  admired  as  long  as  there  is  any  tafte  for  fine  writing  in 
^  Britain  *.**    -  But  with  fuch  unlearned  and  vulgar  philo- 

fophers 

*  "  The  truly  philofbphical  language  of  my  worthy  and  learned  friend 
"vMr.  Harris,  the  author  of  Hermes,  a  work  that  will  be  read  and  admired 
^  as  long  as  there;  is  any  tafte  for  philofophy  and  fine  writing  in  Britain.'' 

Orig.  and  Prog,  of  Language,  Vol.  i.  /.  8. 

*'  But  I  can  hardly  have  the  fame  indulgena?fcr  the  philofopher,  efpecially 

'*  one  who  pretended^  like  Mr.  Locke,  to  be  fo  attentive  an  obfcrver .  of 

"  what  pafled  in  his  own  mind,  and  has  written  a  whole  book  upon  die 

•*  fubje6L — If  Mr.  Locke  would  have  taken  the  trouble  to  ftudy  what  had 

"  been  discovered  in  this  matter  by  the  ar)tients,  and  had  not  refolved  to 

have  the  merit  of  inventing  himfelf  a  whole  fyftem  of  philofophy,  he 

would  have  known  that  every  material  objeft  is  compofcd  of  matter  and 

form.'' 

'  OHg:  and  Prog,  of  Lang. 'Vol.  i.  p.  38, 

y  *'  Mn  Locke  wrote  at  a .  time .  when  the  old  philofophy,  I  mean  the 
fcholaftic  philofophy,  was  generally  run  down  and  defpifed,  but  no  othef 
come  in  its  place,  in  that  fituation,  being  naturally  an  acute  man,  and 
^  not  a  bad  writer,  it  was  no  wonder  that  his  Eiiay  met  with  great  applaufe, 
'*  and  was  thought  to  contain  wonderful  difcoveries.  And  I  muft  allow 
"  that  I  think  it  was  difficult  for  any  man,  without  the  affiftance  of  books, 
•'  or  of  the  cohverfation  of  men  more  learned  than  himfdf,  to  go  further 
''  in  the  philofophy  of  mind  than  he  has  done.  But  now  that  Mr.  Harrii 
"  has  opened  to  us  the  treafures  of  Greek  philofophy,  to  confider  Mr. 
"  Locke  ftill  as  a  ftandard  book  of  philofophy,  would  be,  to  ufe  an  ancient 
^<  compariibn,  continuing  to  feed  on  acorns  after  corn  was  difcovered." 


€€ 
€( 
€C 


CC 


«• 


OF  CONJUNCTIONS.  119 

fophers  as  Mr.  Locke  and  his  difciples,  who  feek  not  Tajle 
and  elegance,  but  tmth  and  common  fenfe  in  philofophical 
fubje<£ls,  I  believe  it  will  never  pafs  as  a  **  perfeSl  Example 
**  of  Attains  ;**  nor  bear  away  the  palm  for  "  acutenefs  of 
"  inveftigation  and  perfpicuity  of  explication*^  For,  fepa- 
rated  from  the  Fine  Writingy  (which  however  I  can  no 
where  find  in  the  book)  thus  is  the  ConjunSlion  explained 
by  Mr.  Harris. — A  found  fignificant  devoid  of  fignification^ 

Having  at  the  fame  time  a  kind  of  obfcure  fignification ; 

And  yet  having  neither  fignification  nor  no  fignification ; 

But  a  middle  fometbing  between  iignification  and  no 
fignification, 

Sharing  the  attributes  both  of  iignification  and  no  figni- 
fication  \. 

And  linking  iignification  and  no  fignification  together. 


^*  It  was  the  misfortune  of  us  in  the  weftcrn  parts  of  Europe,  that  after 
<^  we  had  learned  Greeks  and  got  fome  tafte  of  the  Greek  philofophy,  we 
*<  umnediately  fet  up  as  mafters  ourielves^^  and  would  needs  be  inventors  in 
<'  phibfophy>  inftead  of  humble  fcholafs  of  the  ancient  mailers.  In  diis 
"^  way  Deicartes  philofophized  in  France,  Mr.  Hobbes  and  Mr.  Locke  ia 
''  England,  and  many  fince  their  time  of  lefs  note.  I  would  fain  hope,  if 
<^  the  indolence  and  diflipation  th^  prevail  fo  generally  jn  this  age  would 
"  allow  me  to  think  fo  well  of  it,  that  Mr.  Jiw^ns  would  put  a.ftop  to  this 
**  method  of  philiofophifiog  without  thci  affiftancpe  of  the  ancientSj^  aiid  re* 
*'  vivc  the  genuine  Greek  philofophy  among  us.*'    li^  f.  54.. 

If 


I20  6F  eONJUN^GTTONSi 

if  Shed's,  !of  a  mcJrfe  i^e^arit  Tafte  &x  F/tti  Writing f  aife 
able  to  teceive  dther  pleafiire  dr  inftnidtion  from  fudi  trttfy 
pbihfophttittMn^a^i^'i  I  fharH  neither;  <li^(rt«  tvrilh  th'efti 
«dr  etlVy  %Hferiii'  Btitc^  bftly  ^dtejjloifejthe  'flullrtefe  of  my 
■own  apiit^henfit^V**^^*  f«)ttfrithllinidiiig  the  gt^at  authois 
quoted  in  Mr.  H«i'ri6*s  trfea^ife,  artd  the  greaii;  audadrs  whoo 
•fec6imHa*iia  it>  ^anbot 'li^|»:  tdnfrttetibgJ  this  <*  perfeft 
<*<  eKafiiple  of  iiialy^is^^  as^i^^ti  iffiptoiVcd  -emnpaaiidn  cff 
.•akiloft.i^  the  errors  which 'GranftnaatiarK 'Jaiave  been  accu- 
,mulating  from  the  time  of*  Ariftotle  down  ta  our  rprefent 
days,  of  technical  and  learned  aflfedtation  + . 

A^.a-.^i,....*.*  .  .  •■■(.••1  ^  .V.  »%>■  ^.«  !..■  ^. 


^  .    .    • 


^0*„ 


*  "  Clarus  ob  obfcuram  linguam  magis  inter  inarics 
.      .    <*  Qiaamde  gr^vcU  inter  Grajos,  qui  vera  requirunt. 
"  Omnia  enioi  ftolii3i  magis  admirantur  amantque 
"  Inverfis  quas  fub  verbis  latitantia  ccrnunt : 
..     J.  .  *<.Yfraquenconftitu\m;,  ^quas  ^)clle  tangcre  pofTunf  -         •    .  - 
\  "  Aurcs,  &  lepido  qua  funt  fucata  fonore." 

■-■'-■  Lucumus,  Lfi^.  1.  640. 

f  I  muft  however  do  Mr.  Harris  -and  Dri  LbWth  the  ]irfVic€  to  acknow- 
ledge,  that- thfeHefrties  of  the  fortner  "has  been  received  With  univerfal 
ajpprob^rtioh  both  tt  hbnie  ind  ibroii  5  attd  lias  beeft  quoted  as  undeniable 
authority  on  the  fUbjieft  by  the  learnt  bf  all  coiuntties.  For  which  how- 
<tv^  I  ean  eafily  ^Account ;  hot  byfoppofing  that  its  do6h-ine  gave  any  more 
l&tisfadion  to  thHi*  minds  who  quoted  it  than  to  hiine ;  but  becaufe,  as 
•J'wdgcs  ffirclteir  their  ^xtzytryhy  frecedents,  4b  do  fcholars  their  ignorance 
l>y  autburtty :  and  wheh  iihey  cannot  reafon,  it  is  fafer  and  lefs  difgracefui 
to  repeiat  that,  nonienle  at  lecond  hand^  wiuch  they  would  be  afliamed  to 
give  originally  as  their  own. 

B.   I 


OF  <30NJUNCTI0NS.  1 2 1 

B. 

I  am  afraid^  my  good  friend,  you  ftill  carry  with  you 
your  old  humour  in  politics,  though  your  fubjecSt  is  now 
diflferent.  You  fpeak  too  fharply  for  Philofophy.  Come, 
.Confefs  the  truth.  Are  not  you  againft  Autborhyj  becaufe 
Authority  is  againft  you  ?  And  does  not  your  fpleen  to 
Mr.  Harris  arife  principally  from  his  having  taken  care  to 
^  fortify  his  opinions  in  a  manner  in  which,  from  your  fin- 
gularity,  you  cannot  ? 

H. 

I  hope  you  know  my  difpofition  better.  And  I  am 
perfuaded  that  I  owe  your  long  and  fteady  friendlhip  to 
me,  to  the  convidlion  which  an  early  experience  in  private 
life  afforded  you,  that— Neminem  libenter  nominem,  nifi 
ut  laudem ;  fed  nee  peccata  reprehenderem,  nifi  ut  alUs 
prodeffem. — Indeed  you  have  borne  your  teftimony  far  nje 
in  very  trying  lituations,  where  few  befides  yourfelf  would 
have  ventured  fo  much  honefty.  At  the  fame  time,  I 
confefs,  I  fliould  difdain  to  handle  any  ufeful  truth  daintily, 
as  if  I  feared  left  it  Ihould  fting  me;  and  to.  employ  a 
philofophical  inquiry  as  a  vehicle  for  interefted  or  cowardly 
adulation. 


» . 


f  \ 


R  I  proteft 


ff 


122  OF  CONJUNCTIONS. 

I  proteft  to  you,  my  notions  of  Language  were  formed 
before  I  could  account  etymologically  for  any  one  of  the 
words  in  queftion,  and  before  I  was  in  the  leaft  acquainted 
with  the  opinions  of  others.  I  addrefled  myfelf  to  an  in- 
quiry into  their  opinions  with:  all:  the  diffidence  of  confcious 
ignorance ;  and,  Co  far  from  fpurning  authority,  was  dif- 
pofed  to  admit  of  half  an  argument  from  a  great  name. 
So  that  it  is  not  my  fault,  if  I  am  forced  to  carry  Inllead 
of  following  the  lanthorn :  but  at  all  events  it  is  bettef 
than  walking  in  total  darkneis.. 

And  yet,  though  I  believe  I  differ  from  all  the  accounts 
which  have  hitherto  been  given  of  Language,  I  am  not  fo 
much  without  authority  as  you  may  imagine.  Mr.  Harris 
himfelf  and  all  the  Grammarians  whom  he  has,  and  whom 
(though  uiing  their  words)  he  has  not  quoted^  are  my 
authorities.  Their  own  doubts,  their  difficulties,  their 
dil&tisfa£tion,  their  eontradidlions,  their  obfcurity  on  all 
thefe  points  are  my  authorities  again  ft  them  *  :  for  their 

*  "  Profcfto  in  Grammaticorum  propc  omnium  commentis,  quae  aiypoixpi 
**  immcnfium  cxtollunt,  penc  «Ak  uym :  cum  paginse  fingulae  fepe  plurics 
contfheant  crrores^   quam   Sicinius  ille   Dentatus  vulnera  toco  habuit 

••  corpore.'* 

G.  J.  Vossii  Aristarchus,  Lib«.iii.  Cap..  2. 

Lxxiv.  *'  Capienda  etiam  funt  figna  ex  incrementis  et  progref&bus  philo^ 
**  ibphiarum  ct  ftitntiaruin.    Quas  cjiim  in  natura  funcbca  fuDC,  crefcunt 


OF  CONJUNCTIONS.  123 

fyftem  and  their  difficulties  vanifh  together.  Indeed  un- 
lefs,  with  Mr.  Harris,  I  had  been  repeating  what  others 
have  written,  it  is  impoflible  I  ftiould  quote  any  diredt 
authorities  for  my  own  manner  of  explanation.  But  let 
us  hear  Wilkins,  whofe  induftry  deferved  to  have  been 


et  augentur :  quae  autem  in  opinione,  variantur ;  non  augentur.  Icaque 
fi  iftae  doftrinse  plane^  inftar  planta;^  a  ftirpibus  fuis  rcwAfx  non  eflent^ 
^  fed  utero  naturas  adhxrerent,  atque  ab  eadem  alerentuTj  id  miaime 
^'  eventumm  fuiflet^  quod  per  annos  bis  miile  jam  fieri  videmus :  nempe»  ut 
^  fcientiae  fuis  hasreant  veftigiis^  et  in  eodem  fere  ftatu  maneant^  neque 
*'  augmentum  aliijuod  memorabile  iumpferint.^ 

,  Lxxvi  '<  Etiam  aliud  lignum  capiendum  eft  (fi  modo  Jigni  appeilatio 
"  liulc  compctat ;  cum  potius  teJUmonium  fit,  atque  adeo  teftimoniorum 
"  omnium  validiflimum)  hoc  eft,  propria  confeflio  au£tonim,  quos  homines 
nunc  fequuntur.  Nam  et  illi,  qui  tanta  fiducia  de  rebus  pronunciant» 
tamen  per  intervalla  cum  ad  fe  redeunt,  ad  querimonias  de  natura  Jubti- 
litatCy  rerum  obfcuritate^  humani  ingenii  infirmitate  fe  convertunt.  Hoc 
vero  fi  fimpliciter  fieret,  alios  fortaflc  qui  funt  timidiores  ab  ulteriori 
inquifitione  deterrere,  alios  vero  qui  funt  ingenio  aiacriori  et  magis 
fidenti  ad  ultcriorem  progreffum  acuere  et  incitare  poflit,  Verum  non 
"  fatis  illis  eft  de  fe  confiteri,  fed  quicquid  fibi  ipfis  aut  magiftrb  fuis  in- 
cognitum  aut  intaftum  fuerit,  id  extra  terminos  poflibilis  ponunt:  et 
tanquam  ex  arte,  cognitu  aut  fa£hi  impoffibile  pronunciant :  et  tanquam 
ex  arte,  cognita  aut  faftu  impoflibilc  pronunciaret ;  Summa  fuperbia  et 
**  invidia  fuorum  inventorum  infirmitatem,  in  nature  ipfius  calumniam  et 
"  aliorum  omnium  dcfperationem  vertentes.  Hinc  fchola  Academias  novse, 
**  quas  Acatalepfiam  ex  profcffo  tenuit,  et  homines  ad  fempiternas  tenebras 
^'  damnavit." 

NOVUM  ORGAKUM. 

R  2  better 


€€ 
fC 

u 

€€ 


ct 

Cf 

€€ 


r24  OF  eONJUNCTFONS. 

better  employed,  and  his  perfeverance  better  rewarded  with 
difcovery ;  let  us  hear  what  he  feys. 

— "  According  to  the  true  philofbpfty  of  fpeech,  r  can- 
"  not  conceive  this  kind  of  words'*  (he  fpeaks  of  Adverbs 
and  Conj  unflions)  "  to  be  properly  a  diftin6t  part  of 
"  fpeech,  as  they  are  commonly  called.  But  until  they 
^*  can  be  diftributed  into  their  proper  places,  I  have  fo  far 
"  complied  with  the  Grammars  of  inftituted  languages,  as 
"  to  place  them  here  together.'' — And  again, 

"  For  the  accurate  efFedling  of  this  [i.  e.  a  real  cbarac^ 
^^  ter\  it  would  be  neceflary  that  the  theory  itfelf  [i.  e.  of 
^  language]  upon  whicb  foch  a  d«fign  were  to  be  founded, 
"  Ihould  be  exacSlly  fuited  to  the  nature  of  things.  But 
^  upon  fuppofal  that  this  theory  [viz.  of  language']  is  de- 
^  fetSlive,  either  as  to  the  fulnefe  or  the  order  of  it ;  this 
"  muft  needs  add  much  perplexity  to  any  fuch  attempt, 
^^  and  render  it  imperfeiSt.  And  that  this  is  the  cafe  with 
^  that  common  theory  already  received,  need  not  much 
^  be  doubted.'^ 

It  appears  evidently  therefore  that  Wilkins  (to  whom 
Mr.  Locke  was  much  indebted)  was  well  convinced  that 
all  the  accounts  hitherto  given  of  Language  were  erroneous. 

And 


OF  CONJUNCTIONS.  1^25. 

And  in  fa6t>  the  languages  which  are  commonly  ufed 
throi:^;hout  the  world,  are  miich  more  limple  and  eafy,, 
conv .  nient  and  philofophical  than  WilkinsV  fcheme  for  x 
real  cbara£ler\  or  than  any  other  fcheme  that  has  been  at 
any  other  time  imagined  or  propofed  for  the  purpofe. 

Mr.  Locke's  diflatisfadtion  with  all  the  accounts  which 
he  had  feen>  is  too  well  known  to  need  repetition. 

Sandlius  refi^ued  quod  particularly  £rom  the  number  of 
thefe  myfterious  Conjundlions,  though  he  left  ut  amongft 
them. 

And  Serviust  Scioppius,.  G..  J.  VoflGLus^  Perizonius^  and 
others,  have  explained  and  difplaced  many  other  fuppofed 
Adverbs  and  Conjun<Stions» 

Skinner  (though  I  knew  it  not  previoufly)  had  accounted 
for  IF  before  me^  and  in  the  fame  manner ;  which,  though 
fo  palpable,  Lye  confirms  and  compliments..  Even  S.  John- 
fon,  though  miftakenly,  has  attempted  and  ;  and  would 
find  no  difficulty  with  therefore. 

In  fhort,  there  is  not  fuch  a  thing  as  a  ConjunBion  in 
Any  Language^  which  may  not^  by  a  ikilfuL  Herald,  be 

traced 


126  OF  CONJUNCTIONS. 

traced  liome  to  its  own  family  and  origin  ;  without  having 
recourfe  to  contradidtion  and  myftery  with  Mr.  Harris :  or, 
with  Mr.  Locke,  cleaving  open  the  head  of  man,  to  give 
it  fuch  a  birth  as  Minerva's  from  the  brain  of  Jupiter. 

Call  you  this  authority  in  your  favour  ?  When  the  full 
ftream  and  current  fets  the  other  way,  and  only  fome  little 
brook  or  rivulet  runs  with  you  ?  You  know  very  well  that 
all  the  authorities  which  you  have  alleged,  except  Wilkins, 
are  upon  the  whole  againft  yoii.  For  though  they  have 
explained  the  meaning,  and  traced  the  derivation  of  many 
Adverbs  and  Conjundtions ;  yet  (except  Sandlius  in  the 
particular  inftance  of  quod, — whofe  conjundtive  ufe  in 
Latin  he  too  ftrenuoufly  denies)  they  all  acknowledge 
them  ftill  to  be  Adverbs  or  ConjunBions.  It  is  true,  they 
diftinguifh  them  by  the  title  of  reperta  or  ufurpata :  But 
they  at  the  fame  time  acknowledge  (indeed  the  very  dif- 
tinftion  itfelf  is  an  acknowledgment)  that  there  are  others 
which  are  rea/y  primigenia^  nativa^  purcu 

H. 

True^  Becaufe  there  are  fome,  of  whofe  origin  they 
were  totally  ignorant.  But  has  any  Philofopher  or  Gram- 
marian ever  yet  told  us  what  ^  rea/y  <niginaly  native^  pure 

Adverb 


OF  CONJUNCTIONS.  lif 

Adverb  or  ConjunfUon  is  ?  Or  which  of  thefe  Conjun(Stioas 
of  Sentences  are  fo  ?  Whenever  that  is  done,  in  any  lan- 
guage, I  may  venture  to  promife  you  that  I  will  ftiew  thofe 
like  wife  to  be  repertas  and  ufurpatasy  as  well  as  the  reft. 
And  till  then  I  ihall  take  no  more  trouble  about  them.  I 
Ihall  only  add,  that  though  Abbreviation  and  corruption  are 
always  bufiejl  with  the  words  which  are  tuqft  frequently  in 
ufe ;  yet  the  words  mojl  frequently  ufed  are  leajl  liable  to  be 
totally  laid  ajide.  And  therefore  they  are  often  retained,— 
(I  mean  that  branch  of  them  which  is  moft  frequently 
ufed)-^ — when  moft  of  the  other  words^ — (and  even  the 
other  branches  of  thefe  retained  words) — are,  by  various 
changes  and  accidents,  quite  loft  to  a  Language.  Hence 
the  difficulty  of  accounting  for  them.  And  hence  (be- 
caufe  only  one  branch  of  each  of  thefe  declinable  words  is 
retained  in  a  language)  arifes  the  notion  of  their  being 
indeclinable ;  and  a  feparate  fort  of  words,  or  Part  af  Speech 
by  themfelves.  But  that  they  are  not  indeclinable^  is  fuf- 
ficiently  evident  by  what  I  have  already  faid.  For  Dip, 
Sn,  &c.  certainly  could  not  be  called  indeclinable^  when  all 
the  other  branches  of  thofe  Verbs^  of  which  they  are  the 
regular  Imperatives,  were  likewife  in  ufe.  And  that  the 
words  IF>  AN,  &c.  (which  ftill  retain  their  original  fignifi- 
cation,  and  are  ufed  in  the  very  fame  manner  and  for  the 
fame  purpofe  as  formerly)  ihould  now  be  called  indeclinable^ 

proceeds 


laB  OF  CONJUNCTIONS. 

^oceeds  merely  from  the  ignorance  of  thofe  who  could 
not  account  for  them;  and,  who  therefore,  with  Mr. 
Harris,  were  driven  to  fay  that  they  have  neither  msanm^ 
nor  infleSiion  :  whilft  notwithftanding  they  were  fliJl  forced 
to  acknowledge  (either  diredtly,  or  by  giving  them  different 
f-.:  ...  titles  of  conditional^  4i(k)erfative^  &c*)   that  they  have  a 


^^  Jnnd  cf  obfcure  meaning  * 


V 


How  much  more  candid  and  ingenuous  would  it  have 
been,  to  have  owned  fairly  that  they  did  not  underftand 
the  nature  of  thefe  Conjun&ions ;  and,  inftead  of  wrapping 
it  up' in  myftery,  to  have  exhorted  and  encouraged  others 
to  a  farther  fearch. 

B. 

You  are  not  the  firfl:  perfon  who  has  been  mifled  by  a 
fanciful  etymology.  Take  heed  that  your  derivations  be 
not  of  the  fame  ridiculous  caft  with  theirs  whc>  deduced 


*  *^  Et  quelle  idee  eft  excitce  dans  Telprit  en  entendant  prononcer  les 
*^  particules  et,  aussi  i  On  voit  bien  que  ces  mots  fignifient  une  efpece  de 
*'  connexion;  mais  quelque  peine  qu'on  fe  donnat  a  decrire  r.ette  connexion, 
*'  on  fe  fcrviroit  d'autant  d'autres  mots,  dont  la  fignification  feroit  aufli 
*^  difficile  a  cxpliquer :  et  voulant  expliquer  la  fignification  de  la  particule 
*'  ET^  je  me  fervirois  plufieurs  fois  de  cette  meme  particule." 

Lettres  a  une  Princcflc  d'AUcmagne,  by  Euler,  Letter  ti. 

I  Con- 


OF  CONJUNCTIONS.  129 

Conjiantinople  from  Conjiantine  the  noble f-~Breecbes  from 
bear'ricbesy — Donna  from  Dono, — Honour  from  Hon  and 
^urumyzad.  King  Pepin  from  orvtf  *. 

H.  If 


*^ma^ 


♦  *«  Then  this  Conftantyne  removed  the  empcryall  fee  unto  his  cytye  of 

**  Conjiantym  the  noble :  and  there  for  the  more  partye  kepte  his  emperyall 

"  honourcj   and  other  emperours  in  lyke  wyfe  after  hym.     By  feafon 

"  whereof  the  emperours  were  longe  after  called  emperours  of  Conftantyne 

«  nobk:' 

Pabian's  Chronicle,  Chap,  LXDC, 

^'  Hed.  But  why  Breeches  noW  ? 

"  Pha.  Breeches,  quafi  bear-riches ;  when  a  gallant  bears  all  his  riches  in 
**  his  breeches." 

B.  Johnfon.     Cynthia's  Revels,  Aft  4.  See.  3. 

"  Placano  i  Doni  il  ciel ;  placan  Tinfema 

**  E  pur  non  fon  le  Bonne 

*'  Men  avare  the  il  cielo, 

**  Piu  crude  che  Tinfcrno. 

"  II  Don^  credimi,  il  Dono 

•*  Gran  miniftro  d'  amore,  anzi  tiranno. 

"  Egli  d,  che  a  fuo  voler  impetra  e  Ipetra, 

"  Non  fai  tu  cio  ch'  Elpino, 

II  faggio  Elpino  dicea  ? 

Che  fin  coli  nella  primicra  etade, 

Quand*  anco  femplicetti 
"  Non  fapean  favellare 
•'  Che  d*  un  linguaggio  fol  la  lingua  e  *1  core, 
^^  Allor  le  amanti  Donne  altra  canzona 
^^  Non  s'  udivan  cantar  che-— D^m,  Dcna. 

S  «  Quindi 


fC 

cr 

c< 


V 


I30  OP  CONJUNCTIONS. 

H. 

If  I  have  been  mifled/  it  moft  certainly  is  not  by  Ety- 
mology:  of  which  Iconfefs  myfeTf  to  have  been  Shame- 
fully ignorant  at  the  time  when  thefe  my  notions  of  lan- 
guage were  firft  formed.  Though  even  that  previotfS 
ignorance  is  n<yiv  a  circumftance  which  confirms  me  much: 
in  my  opinion  concerning  thefe  ConjuncSlions :  For  I  knew 
not  even  the  cbaraSter  of  the  language  from  which  my 
particular  proofs  of  the  Englijh  conjunctions  were  to  be 

4 

drawn.     And   (notwithftanding  Lord  Monboddo's  difcou- 
raging  Sneer  *,)  it  was  general  reafoning  a  priori^  that  led 

me 

"  Quindi  T  enne  addoppiando 

"  Pcrchc  non  bafta  un  Doriy — Donna  fu  detta.'* 

Guidobaldo*  de'  Bonarcili.. 

'^  On  connoit  le  jeu  de  mots  d'  Owen^  aflcz  mauvais,  mais  qui  renfcrmc- 
"  un  grand  fens. 

"  Divitias  et  opes,  Hon.  lingua  hebrasa  vocavit: 
"  Gallica  gens,  Aurum-or  ;  indeque  venit  Honor." 

.    Mirabeau.  EfTai  fur  le  Dcfpotifme.. 

^  'OtTTTs^ — TiVsf — oVif — Diaper — Napkin — Nipkin— 
"  Pipkin — Pippin-king — King  Pepin." 

I  forget  my  merry  author  of  this  etymology;  but  it  is  altogether  as  plau- 
fible  as  even  Menage's  derivation  of  chez  from  j^puJ. 

*  "  Now  as  I  am  not  able  from  Theory  merely,  and  ^  pHori,  to  forn> 
"  the  idea  of  a  perfeft  language,  I  have  been  obliged  to  feek  for  it  in  the 
"  ftudy  of  the  Greek. — What  men  of  Juperioz.Genius. m^^y  do  in  fuchfpecu- 
"  lations,  I  cannot  tell  s  but  I  know  well  that  ordinary  men,  without  the 

«  ftudy 


/ 
\ 


OF  CONJUNCTIONS.  J31 

me  to  the  particular  inftances ;  not  particular  inftances  to 
the  general  reafoning.  This  Etymologyj  againft  whofe 
fafciaation  you  would  have  me  guard  myfelf,  did  not  occur 
to  me  till  many  years  after  my  fyftem  was  fettled  :  and  it 
occurred  to  me  fuddenly,  in  this  manner ;— "  If  my  rea-- 
^^  foning  concerning  thefe  corrjundlions  is  well  founded; 


€€ 


ftudy  of  fome  model  of  the  kind,  would  be  as  unable  to  conceive  the 
idea  of  a  pcrfeft  language,  as  to  form  a  high  tafte  in  other  arts,  fuch  as 
^'  fculpture  and  painting,  without  having  fccn  the  beft  works  of  thofe  kinds 
^^  that  are  to  be  found."— It  would  be  doing  injuftice  to  thc/e  fuperior  minds 
"  who  havp  in  tbemjelves  the  Jlandard  of  perfeSlion  in  all  the  Aris^  to  judge 
^^  of  them  by  myfelfs  but  I  am  confident  that  my  idea  of  perfeftion  iri 
*f  language  would  have  been  ridiculoufly  imperfcft,  if  I  had  known  no  other 
'^^  language  than  the  modern  languages  of  Europe/* 

Origin  and  Progrefs  of  Language.     Vol.  11.  Page  183. 

Read  this,  Mr.  Burgejsy  and  then  complain  of  illiberality  to  Lord  Mon- 
boddo :  who  places  himfclf  nnjatus  in  Cathedray  and  thus  treats  all  other 
men  in  advance.  Whoever,  after  his  lordfhip,  fball  dare  to  reafon  on  this 
fubjcft  a  priori,  muft  affume  then,  it  feems, — ^to  have  in  his  own  fuperior 
mind  the  ftandard  of  perfection  in  All  the  Arts ! — Do  you,  Mr.  Burgefs, 
acquiefce  to  this  condition  ?  If  it  were  poITible  (which  I  am  very  far  from 
believing)  that  the  fame  fentiments  fhould  pervade  any  confiderable  part  of 
the  very  learned  and  refpeftable  body  to  which  you  belong ;  I  Ihould  be 
forrowfully  compelled  to  join  in  the  exclamation, — O  1  aurita  Arcadias 
pecora !  qui,  Roma,  hujus  cuculi  vocem  vekiti  lufcinioke  melos,  in  aures 
admittere  fuftinetis !  And  perhaps  Mr.  Biirgefs  himfelf  may  have  reafon 
hereafter  to  regret,  that  (with  all  his  real  or  pretended  admiration  of  Lord 
Monboddo's  writings)  he  negledted  to  avail  himfelf  of  the  only  ufeful  leflbn 
to  be  drawn  from  them  :  viz.  To  be  at  Icaft  as  well  bred  as  Porphyry's 
partridge ;  and  to  have  forborne  his  noife,  until  lie  was  himlelf  fpoken  to. 

S   2  «  there 


132  OF  CONJUNCTIONS. 

«  there  muft  then  be  iti  the  original  language  from  which 
**  the  Englifh  (and  fo  of  all  other  languages)  is  derived, 
"  MtGTdllj /ucb  ^nd /ucb  words  bearing  precifely  fucb  and 
"  /ucb  fignificattons.** — I  was  the  more  pleafed  with  this 
fuggeftion,  becaufe  I  was  entirely  ignorant  even  of  the 
Anglo-faxon  and  Gothic  charadters :  and  the  experiment 
prefented  to  me  a  mean,  either  of  difabufing  myfelf  from 
error  (which  I  greatly  feared ;)  or  of  obtaining  a  con- 
firmation fufficiently  ftrong  to  encourage  me  to  believe 
(what  every  man  knowing  any  thing  of  human  nature  will 
always  be  very  backward  in  believing  of  him(elf)  that  I  had 
really  made  a  difcovery.  For,  if  upon  trial  I  fhould  find 
in  an  unknown  langu^e  precifely  thofe  very  words  both 
in  founds  and  fignification,  and  application,  which  in  my 
perfe(£t  ignorance  I  had  foretold ;  what  muft  I  conclude,  but 
either  that  fome  Daemon  had  maKcioufly  infpired  me  with 
the  fpirit  of  true  prophecy  in  order  the  more  deeply  to  de- 
ceive me  ;  or  that  my  reafoning  on  the  nature  of  language 
was  not  fantaftical.  The  event  was  beyond  my  expe<5la- 
tion :  for  I  inftantly  found  upon  trial,  all  my  predications 
verifiefd.  This  has  made  me  prefumptuous  enough  to 
aiTert  it  univerfally.  Befides  that  I  have  fince  traced  thefe 
fuppofed  unmeaning,  indeclinable  conjunctions  with  the 
fame  fuccefs  in  many  other  languages  befides  the  Englifh, 
And  becaufe  I  know  that  the  generality  of  minds  receive 

convi<5tion 


I 


OF  CONJUNCTIONS.  133 

conviftion  more  eafily  from  a  number  of  particular  in- 
ftances,  than  from  the  furer  but  more  abftradted  arguments 
of  general  proof;  if  a  multiplicity  of  uncommon  avoca- 
tions and  engagements  (arifing  from  a  very  peculiar  litu- 
ation)  had  not  prevented  me,  I  ftiould  long  before  this 
have  found  time  enough  from  my  other  purfuits  and  from 
my  enjoyments  (amongft  which  idlenefs  is  not  the  fmalleft) 
to  have  fliewn  clearly  and  fatisfadtorily,  the  origin  and  pre- 
cife  meaning  of  each  of  thefe  pretended  unmeaning,  in- 
declinable Conjunctions,  at  lead  in  all  the  dead  and  living 
languages  of  Europe. 

B. 

Men  talk  very  fafely  of  what  they  may  do^  and  what 
they  might  have  done.  But,  though  prefent  profeffions 
iifually  outweigh  paft  proofs  with  the  people,  they  have 
never  yet  paffed  current  with  philofophers.  If  therefore 
you  would  bring  me  over  to  your  opinion,  and  embolden 
me  to  quit  the  beaten  path  with  you,  you  muft  go  much 
beyond  the  example  of  Henry  Stephens,  which  was  con- 
fidered  by  Mer.  Cafaubon  as  the  ne  plus  ultra  on  this  fub- 
jedt  *,   and  muft  do   what  Wilkins   required,   before  he 

would 

*  "  Henricus  Stcphanus   (author  immortalis  opens,    quod  Thefaurus 
*^  linguas  Graecas  indigitavit)  ita  omncs  orationis  particulas   {quarum  quanto 


sc 


tn 


134  OF  CONJUNCTIONS- 

would  venture  to  differ  from  the  Grammars  of  iiillituted 
languages  :  that  is,  you  muft  diftribute  all  oxxxEiigUjb  Cou- 
junctions  at  leaft  into  their  proper  places.  And  if  it  fliould 
feem  unreafonable  in  me  thus  to  impofe  upon  you  a  tafk 
which — "  no  man,  however  learned  or  fagacio.us  has  yet 
*.^  been  able  to  perform  * ;" — you  muft  thank  yourfelf  foi; 
it,  and  the  peremptory  roundnefs  of  your  alfertiom  Be^ 
lides,  I  do  really  think  that  after  you  have  profeffed  fo 
much  of  all  the  languages  of  Europe,  I  may  fairly  expert 
you  to  perform  a  little  in  your  own. 


*'  in  omni  lingua  difficilior^  tanto  utilior  objervatio)  omnes  idiotifmos  excuflit, 

'*  cruit,  explicavit,  fimilia  cum  fimilibus  comparavit,  ut  exemplum  quidem 

"  in  hoc  gencre  aliis  ad  imitandum   reliquerit  abfolutiffimum  5  fed  quod 

''  pauci  fmt  aflecuturi."     Mcr.  Caf.  de  lingua  Saxonica. 

*  ^^  The  Particles  are,  among  all  nations,  applied  with  fo  great  latitude, 
"  that  they  are  not  eafily  reducible  under  any  regular  fcheme  of  explication : 
"  this  difficulty  is  not  lefs,  nor  perhaps  greater,  in  Englifli  than  in  other 
''  languages.  I  have  laboured  them  with  diligence,  I  hope  with  fuccefs ; 
'*  fuch  at  leaft  as  can  be  expedled  in  a  tafk,  which  no  man,  however  learned 
"  or  fagacious,  has  yet  been  able  to  perform." 

Preface  to  S.  Johnfon's  Didtionary. 


H.  If 


OF  CONJUNCTIONS 


135 


H. 


If  it  muft  be  fo,  thus  then :  I  fay  that 


If 
An 

1 

rcip 

Xipan 
Anan 

To  Give. 

To  Grant. 

Unless 
Eke 

'ir^ 

Onler 
Gac 

CO 

Onlcfan 
Gacan 

To  Difmifs.. 
To  Add. 

Yet 

■Jj 

> 

Eec 

> 

Ceran 

To  Get. 

Still 

s 

Stell 

> 

Srellan 

To  Put. 

Else 
Tho* 
or 

Oh 

Dap 

or 

Alcfan 
Dapian        1 
or         \ 

To  Difmifs.. 
I. 
y  To  Allow. 

Though 
But 

< 

Daps 
Bor 

*3 

Dapi^an      J 
Bo  tan 

To  Boot. 

But 

Be-uran 

Vj 

Beon-uran 

To  Be-out. 

Without 
And 

F'ypS-uran 
^An-at) 

^yji^an-urar 
Anan-ab 

t  To  Be-out. 
Dare  congeriem 

Lest  is  the  paft  participle  Lcf et>  of  Lcfan,  To  Difmifs. 

biSSan 

• 

Since    -< 

• 

Syne 

Seanb-ef 

SiSSc 

>  is  the  J 

participle  of  Seon, 

To  See. 

S 

u 

m-ej 

r 

* ' 

That  is  the  Article  or  Pronoun  Dat. 


Thefe,. 


136  OF  CX)NJUNCTK)NS. 

Thefe,  I  apprehend,  are  the  only  Conjundlions  in  our 
language  which  can  caufe  any  difficulty  ;  and  it  would  be 
impertinent  in  me  to  explain  fuch  as — Be  so  (^),     Be  it. 
Albeit  (Jbi).    Albeit  so  (c).    Set  {d).    Notwithstand- 
ing. 

(a)  "  Set  forth  (quod  flic)  and  tell  mc  how. 
Shew  me  thy  fckc  ncs  cucry  dele. 
Madame,  that  can  I  do  wele : 
Be  so  my  lyfe  thcrto  woU  lafte.'* 

Gower.  Lib.  i.  FoL  8.  Pag.  2.  Col.  i. 

^  For  thcfc  craftes  (as  I  finde) 
A  man  male  do  by  waie  of  kinde  : 
Be  so  it  be  to  .good  cntent." 

Gower.     Lib.  5.  Fol.  1J4.  Pag.  2,  Col.  i, 

^  For  fuche  men  that  ben  vilayns 
The  Jawc  in  fuche  a  wife  ordeinetbj 
That  what  man  to  the  lawe  pleyneth. 
Be  so  the  judge  ftande  upright. 
He  fliall  be  fen  ed  of  his  right.'' 

Gowen    Lib.  7.  Fol.  159.  Pag.  i.  Col.  1. 

^'  The  m^ft  to  brake,  the  fayJc  to  roofe. 
The  fliip  upon  the  wawes  droofc. 
Till  that  thei  fee  the  londes  code. 
The  made  a  vowe  the  lefte  and  mofte 
Be  so  thei  mighten  come  alonde." 

Gower.    Lib.  8.  Fol.  177.  Pag.  i.  Col.  a, 

{i)  "  Satume  anon,  to  ftynten  ftryfe  and  drede 
Al  be  it  that  it  be  agayne  his  kynde 
Of  all  this  ftrife  he  can  remedy  fynde.*' 
Chauc  cr.    Knyghtcs  Talc.    Fd.  8.  Pag,  a.  Col.  i. 
9  **  The 


OF  CONJUNCTIONS.  137 

iNG.      Nevertheless.     Save  that  {e).      Saving   that* 

Except 

-— T ■- 

"  The  quhilk  Juno  nowthir  lang  dayis  lior  geris. 
Nor  nanc  diuyne  fafcrifice  may  appeis ; 
Schc  reft  is  neuir,  nor  may  fche  leif  at  eis. 
Albeit  the  power  and  charge  of  Jupiter 
Rcfiftis  fche  wat,  and  fatis  war  hir  contrare." 

Douglas.     5th  Booke^  Pag.  154. 

^*  Freynd  ferly  not,  na  caufe  is  to  compleyne. 
Albeit  thy  wit  grete  god  may  not  attcyne." 

Douglas.     Proh  to  loth  Booke.  Pag.  309* 

ijc)  "  Another  remedy  is  that  a  man  efchewc  the  companye  of  hem  by 
whiche  he  douteth  to  be  tempted :  for  Albeit  so  that  the  dede  is  wyth^ 
ftonde,  yet  is  there  greatc  tcmptacyon.'* 

Chaucer.    Perfons  Tale.     Fol.  1 15.  Pag.  1.  Col.  2. 

*'  Al  be  it  so  that  of  your  pride  and  high  prcfumpcion  and  fblye,  ye  hauc 
^^  mifborne  you,  yet  for  as  mikell  as  I  fe  and  beholde  ypur  greate  humilytc, 
*'  it  conftrayneth  me  to  do  you  grace  and  mercy." 

Tale  of  Chaucer.    FoU  83.  Pag.  i.  Col.  i. 

{d)  ^'  Bot  fen  I  am  compeliid  the  to  tranflait, 
And  not  onlie  of  my  curage,  God  watc, 
Durft  I  interpnfe  lie  outragious  folic, 
Qujiare  I  offend,  the  lefle  reprefe  ferf  I, 
And  that  ^e  knaw  at  quhais  inftance  I  tuke 
For  to  tranflate  this  maift  excellent  buke, 
I  mene  Virgillis  volum  maift  excellent. 
Set  this  my  werk  full  febill  be  of  rent." 

Douglas.     Preface.     Page  4. 
'*  Sic  plefand  wordes  carpand,  he  has  forth  brocht, 
Sett  his  mynd  troublit  mony  greuous  thocht." 

Douglas.     I  ft  Booke«  Pag.  19. 
T  <«  Betwix 


138  OF  CONJUNCTIONS. 

1£/SJC1E.VT  that*  Excepting /^^^.  Bating /^«/.  If,case(/}. 

In 

"  Betwix  gudc  hope  and  drede  in  doutc  they  ftude, 
Quhithcr  thay  war  Icwand,  or  tholit  extreme  dedc  al, 
Thay  anfuerit  not,  Set  thay  oft  plene  and  cal." 
Douglas,     ift  Booke.  Pag.  19. 

"  And  Set  it  be  not  louable  nor  femcly  thocht 
To  punys  ane  woman,  but  fchamefull  hir  to  fla, 
Na  viftory,  but  lak  following  alfa, 
git  nethcles  I  aucht  louit  to  be, 
Vengeaunce  to  take  on  hir  deferuis  to  de." 

Douglas,     ad*  fiooke.  Pag.  58. 

'^  Virgin  is  full  of  fcntence  ouer  all  quhare. 
His  hie  knawlege  he  fchawis,  that  euery  forte 
Of  his  claufis  comprehend  fic  fentence, 
Thare  bene  thereof.  Set  thou  think  this  but  fporte. 
Made  grete  ragmentis  of  hie  intelligence." 

Douglas.     Prol.  to  6th  Booke.  P^.  158. 

"  To  name  the  god,  that  war  ane  manifeft  lee. 
Is  but  ane  god,  makar  of  euery  thing : 
Set  thou  to  Vulcane  haue  ful  grete  refembling.** 

Douglas.     Prol.  to  6th  Booke.  Pag,  161. 

**  Thare  fuld  na  knicht  rede  but  ane  knichtly  tale. 
Quhat  forcis  him  the  buflart  on  the  brcre  ? 
Set  wele  him  femes  the  falcone  heroner.*' 

Douglas.     Prol.  to  9th  Booke.  Pag.  271. 

*^  Turnus,  bchald  on  cais  reuoluit  the  day. 
And  of  his  fre  wyl  fendis  the  perfay 
Sic  auantagc  and  oportunite. 
And  Set  thou  wald  half  aikit  it,  quod  fche, 

6  There 


OF  CONJUNCTIONS.  139 

In  CASE  C?).     Put  CASE  (-&).     Set  case  (/).     I  pose  X*). 

Because. 

There  was  ncuer  ane  of  al  the  goddis  ding, 
Quhilk  durft  have  the  promittit  fic  ane  thing." 

Douglas.     9th  Booke.     Pag.  273. 

"  Set  our  nature  God  has  to  him  unyte, 
His  godhede  incommyxt  remanis  perfite." 

Douglas.     Prol.  to  10th  Booke.  Pag.  308, 

"  Angellis,  fcheiphardis,  and  kingis  thy  godhede  kend. 
Set  thou  in  crib  bctuix  twa  bciftis  was  laid." 

Douglas.     Prol.  to  loth  Booke.  Pag.  310. 

'^  Drances,  forfoith,  quod  he,  euer  has  thou  bene 
Large  and  to  mekil  of  fpeche,  as  weil  is  fene, 
Bot  not  with  wourdis  fuld  the  court  be  fyllyt. 
Set  thou  be  grete  tharin,  and  ful  cuill  wyllit." 

Douglas,     nth  Booke.  Pag.  376, 

'^  I  put  the  cats  Set  the  Etholianis 

Lift  not  to  cum  in  our  help  nor  fuppile ; 
Jit  than  the  bald  Mcffapus  wele  wylle.*' 

Douglas,     nth  Booke.    Pag.  378. 

^^  With  ftout  curage  agane  him  wend  I  will, 
Thocht  he  in  proues  pas  the  grete.  Achill, 
Or  Set  /;;  cais  fic  armour  he  weris  as  he, 
Wrocht  be  the  handis  of  God  Vulcanus  fle." 

Douglas,  nth  Booke.  Pag.  378. 

"  Bot  Juno  tho  doun  from  the  hicht,  I  wys. 
Of  the  mountane  that  Albane  clepyt  is 
Now  in  our  dayis  (Set  then  this  hillis  down 
Had  nouther  name,  honour,  nor  renowne) 
Scho  did  bchald  amyd  the  feildis  plane."   • 

Douglas.     1 2th  Booke.  Pag.  411. 
T  2  "  For 


140  OF  CONJUNCTIONS. 

Because.     To  wit.     Foreseeing  that  (/.)     Foreseen 

that* 

"  F6r  Set  wc  preis  us  faft  to  fpcikc  out  braid, 
Ne  vocc>  nor  wourdis  foUowis  nocht  b  faid/' 

Douglas.     1 2th  Booke«  Pag,  446. 

"  And  Set  that  empty  be  my  branc  and  dull, 
I  haue  tranflatit  ane  volume  wounderfull." 

Douglas.     13th  Booke.  Pag.  483. 

'*  Fra  tyme  I  thareto  ftt  my  pen  to  wryte,. 
It  was  compilyt  m  auchtene  monethis  fpace  : 
Set  I  fell  fyith  fie  twa  monethis  in  fere 
Wrate  neuir  ane  wourd,  nor  micht  the  volume  ftere/^ 

Douglas.    Fag.  484. 

{e)  ^'  Saufe  onely  that  I  crie  and  biddc, 
I  am  in  trifteffc  all  amidde." 

Gower.     Lib.  4.  Fol.  82.  Pag,  2.  Col.  i. 

"  Almoftc  ryght  \i\  the  fame  wife  the  phificicns  anfwerd, 
Saue  that  dicy  fayden  a  fewe  wordes  more." 

Tale  of  Chaucer.     Fol.  74.  Pag.  i.  Col.  2. 

**  Tyl  flic  gan  aflcen  him  howe  He£kor  ferde 
That  was  the  townes  wal,  and  Grekes  yerde. 
Ful  wel  I  thanke  it  God,  faydc  Pandarus^ 
Saue  in  his  arme  he  hath  a  lytle  wounde." 

Chaucer.     2d  Booke  of  Troylus.  Fol.  164.  Pag.  i..  Col.  lu 

**  Bchynd  thame  for  uptaking  quhare  it  lay 
Mony  bricht  armoure  rychely  dycht  thay  left, 
Sauf  that  Eurialus  with  him  turfit  away 
The  riall  trapouris,  and  mychty  patrellb  gay..** 

Douglas.     9th  Booke.  Pag.  288. 

«*  Bot 


OF  CONJUNCTIONSv  i+r 

ibat.     Provided  that,     Beiing  that,    8cc.     Which  are- 

» 

evident  at  firft  lights 

B.  WeU 


<« 


**  Bot  al  this  time  I  bid  na  mare,  I  wys, 

SAiF  that  this  wenfche,  this  vengeabil  pcft  or  traik> 
Be  bet  doiin  dede  by  my  wound  and  fcharp  ftraik.'* 

Douglas,  nth  booke*  Fag,  393*^ 

«  AH  the  air  a  folemn  ftiUncfi  holds ; 
SAVE  that  from  yonder  ivy-mantled  bower 
The  moping  owl  does  to  the  moon  complain/*^ 

Gray^s  Elegy,^ 

(/)  "  I  do  not  like  theft  papcr-lquibs,  good  mafter,  they  may  unda 
your  ftore — ^I  mean  of  credit,  and  fire  your  arfenalls  if  case  you  do  not  f^ 

**  in  time,  make  good  thofe  outer  works,  your  pockets." 

B.  Johnfon.     Suplc  of  News,  Adt.  i.  So.  3. 
Chaucer  alfo  ufes  if  cace», 

{£)  "The  dignite  of  king  John  wold  have  diftroyed  al  Englande, 
"  therfore  mokel  wifedome  and.goodnes  both,  ncdeth  in  a  peribn,.  the 
^'  malyce  in  dignite  flyly  to  bridell,  and  with  a  gpod  byt  of  areft  to  with^ 
^  draw,  IN  CASE  it  wold  praunce.  otherwife  than  it  fliuld.'* 

Chaucer.     Teftament  of  Louc.  2d  boke.  FoL  3 17,  P.  2.  CoL  i#. 

"  Forfoith,  in  c  a  is  the  auenture  of  battal* 
Had  bene  doutfum :  wald  God  it  war  aflale.*' 


» ' 


Douglas.  4th  booke.  Fag.  121; 

ijj)  "  And ; 


•    A  .  -m' 


I4fi  OF  CONJUNCTIONS 


B. 


Well.     Whether  you  are  right  or  wrong  in  your  con- 
jectures concerning  Conjunctions,  I  acknowledge  that  this 


IS 


(i&)  ^'  And  PUT  THE  CATS  that  I  may  not  optene 

From  Latyne  land  thaim  to  expell  all  clene, 
jit  at  kill  thare  may  fall  ftop  or  delay 
In  fa'grcte  matcris  for  ane  jcre  or  tway.'* 

Douglas.  7thBookc.  Page  217. 

PUT  CASE,  though  now  out  of  fafliion,  was  frequently  ufed  by  Chilling- 
worth  and  "other  good  authors. 

€t  PUT  THE  CASE  the  Pope,  for  t  reward  of  your  ftrvicc  done  him  in 
*'  writing  this  book,  had  given  you  the  honour  and  means  of  a  cardinal, 
*«  would  you  not  have  profeflcd,  that  you  have  not  merited  fuch  a  reward." 

Chillingworth.  Chap.  4.  Pag.  211.  %  36. 

% 

(i)  ^'  He  is  worthy  to  lofe  his  priuylege,  that  mifufeth  the  might  and 
*'  power  that  is  giuen  hym.  And  I  sette  case  ye  might  enioyne  hem 
*'  that  payne  by  right  and  lawe,  whichc  I  trowe  ye  may  not  do :  I  faye  ye 
'*  might  not  put  it  to  execution." 

Tale  of  Chaucer.  Fol.  82.  Pag.  2.  Col.  2. 

*'  Yet  sette  I  CASE  ye  haue  lyccnce  for  to  vcngc  you,  I  faye  that  there 
**  ben  full  many  thinges  that  Ihall  reftrayne  you  of  vengeaunce  takyng." 

Ibid.  Fol.  79.  Pag.  2.  Col.  i. 

{k)  '^  Auauntour 


OF  CONJUNCTIONS.  143 

is  coming  to  the  point :  and  is  fairer  than  fliuffling  them 
over  unnoticed,  as  the  greater  part  of  grammarians  have 

(^k)  "  Aiiauntoiir  and  a  Iyer,  al  is  one 

As  thus.     I  POSE  a  woman  graunt  me 

Her  loue,  and  fayth  that  other  wol  fhe  none 

And  I  am  fworne  to  holden  it  fccre 

And  after  I  tel  it  two  or  thre 

I  wys  I  am  auauntour  at  the  leeft 

And  Iyer  eke,  for  I  breke  my  beheeft." 

Chaucer,  3d  boke  of  Troylus,  Fol.  174,  Pag.  i.  Col.  2* 

«'  Sone  after  this,  fhe  to  liim  gan  rowne 
And  afked  him  if  Troylus  were  there 
H^  fwore  her  nay,  for  he  was  out  of  towne 
And  fayd,  Nece  :  - 1  pose  that  he  were  there 
You  durft  neuer  haue  the  more  feere," 

Chaucer,  3d  booke  of  Troylus,  Fol.  175,  Page  2.  Col.  i» 

(/)  "  It  may  be  ordered  that  i  i  or  i  i  i  of  our  owne  fhippes  do  fee  the 
"  fayde  Frenche  foldiers  wafted  to  the  coaft  of  Frances  forseing  that  our 
"  fayd  fhippes  entre  no  hauen  there/' 

Queen  Elizabeth  to  Sir  W.  Cecil  and  Dr^  Wotton, 
Lodge's  Illuftrations,  Vol.  I.  Pag.  339. 

(m)  "  Whan  he  made  any  ordinary  judges,  advocates  or  proftoures,  he 

"  caufed  them  to  be  openly  n?:ned,  requirynge  the  people  and  gyvynge 

''  them  courage,  if  there  were  caufc  to  accufc  them,  to  prove  the  cryme 

"  by  open  wytncfTe  :  foresene  if  tii-.y  dyd  nca  fufEciently  prove  it,  and 

"  that  it  femed  to  be  malicioufc  de traction,  the  accufour  Ihuide  forthwith^ 

"  be  beheaded." 

Sir  T.  Elliott.    Image  of  Govcrnaunce,  Chap.  17. 

done; 


-144  OF  CONJUNCTIONS. 

done;  or  tlian  repeating  after  others,  that  they  are  not 
themfelves  any  parts  of  language,  but  only  fuch  accejfaries 
as  fait  is  to  meat,  or  water  to  bread ;  or  that  they  are  the 
mere  edging  or  fauce  of  language ;  or  that  they  are  like 
the  bandies  to  cups,  or  plumes  to  helmets,  or  binding  to 
T>ooks,  or  barnejs  for  horfes ;  or  that  they  are  pegs  and 
nails^  and  nerves  and  joints^  and  ligaments  and  glue^  and 
pitch  and  Ume^  and  mortar^    and  fo  forth*.     In  which 

kind 


♦-  '^  Pour  quoy  cft-cc  que  Platon  dit,  que  Toraifon  eft  temperee  dc  nwns 
**  &  de  verbes  ? — ^Mais  advifons  que  nous  nc  prenions  autrement  les  paroles 
*^  dc  Platon  que  commc  il  les  a  dittes :  car  il  a  dit  que  Toraifon  eftoit  tem- 
*'  pcrce  De  ces  deux  parties,  non  Par  ces  deux  parties;  que  nous  ne 
^'  fa^ions  la  faulte  que  fcroit  celuy  qui  calomnieroit  un  autre  pour  avoir  dit, 
que  un  oignemcnt  feroit  compofc  de  circ  &  dc  galbanum,  alleguant 
qu'il  auroit  obmis  a  dire  le  feu  &  le  vafe,  fans  lefquels  on  ne  f(^auroit 
"  mefler  lefdites  drogues  :  aufli  femblablement  fi  nous  le  reprcnions  pour 
autant  qu*il  auroit  obmis  a  dire  les  conjonclions,  les  prepofitions,  & 
autres  tellcs  parties.  Car  le  parler  &  Toraifon  n'eft  compofe  De  ces 
parties  la,  mais  Par  icelles,  &  non  fans  elles.  Car  comme  celuy  qui 
prononceroit  battre^  ou  efire  battu  \  ou  d'ailleurs  Socrates  &  Pythagoras^ 
**  encore  donneroit-il  aucuneraent  a  entendre  &  a  penfer  quelque  chofc : 
^*  mais  celuy  qui  profereroit  Car  ou  De  fimplement  &  feulement,  on  ne 
•'  pourroit  imaginer  qu'il  entendift  aucune  chofc  ny  aucun  corps,  ains  s'il 
**  n'y  a  quelques  autres  paroles  qui  foient  proferces  quant  &  quant,  elles 
"  reflembleront  a  des  fons  &  des  bruits  vains  fans  aucune  fignification ; 
"  d'autant  que  ny  a  par  elles  ny  avec  d'autres  femblables,  elles  ne  pcuvent 
"  rien  fignifier.  Mais  a  fin  que  nous  conjoignons  ou  meflions  &  aflcm- 
'^  blions  tout  en  un^  nous  y  adjouftons  des  prepofitions^  conjonftions,  & 

**  articles^ 


cc 
cc 


cc 
cr 


OF  CONJUNCTIONS.  145 

kind  of  pretty  fimilies  Philofophers  and  Grammarians  feem 
to  have  vied  with  one  another;  and  have  often  endeavoured 

to 

**  articles,  voulans  enfaire  un  corps  dc  tout.— -Comment  done  pourra  dire 
*^  quelqU'un>  ccs  parties-la  ne  fcrvent-elles  de  rien  a  roraifon  ?  Quant  i 
"  moy,  je  ticns  qu'elles  y  fervent  autant  comme  Ic  Sel  a  la  viandc,  &  Xeau 
«'  ^  feire  le  Pain.  Evenus  fouloit  dire  que  le  Feu  eftoit  la  mcillcurc  Saulje 
*«  du  Monde  j  aufli  font  ces  Parries  raffaifonnement  de  noftre  langage,  ne 
«'  plus  ne  moins  que  le  feu  &  le  Sel  des  breuvages  &  viandes,  dont  nous 
*'  ne  nous  fjaurions  pafler  \  exceptc  que  noftre  parler  n'en  a  pas  toujours 
*'  neceffaircment  a  faire  :  comme  Ton  peut  dire  du  langage  des  Romains, 
**  duquel  aujourd'huy  tout  le  monde  prefque  ufe;  car  il  a  ofte  prefquc 
*^  toutes  ks  prepofirions  exccpte  bien  peu ;  &  quant  aux  articles  que  Ton 
"  appelle,  il  n'en  regoit  pas  un  tout  fcul,  ains  ufe  de  noms  fans  bordurc^ 
"  par  maniere  dc  dire ;  &  nc  s'en  fault  pas  efmerveiller,  attendu  qu* 
'^  Homere,  a  peu  de  noms  prcpofe  des  articles,  comme  fi  c'etoient  anjes^ 
"  a  des  vafes  qui  en  cuffent  bcfoign,  ou  des  petmaches  fur  des  morions.— 
"  Or  que  les  Dialefticicns  aient  plus  befoign  dc  conjonftions,  que  mils 
*'  autres  hommes  de  lettres,  pour  la  li^on  &  tiflure  de  leurs  prepofirions, 
**  ou  les  disjonftions  d'icelles,  ne  plus  nc  moins  que  les  cochers  ont  befoign 
**  d'  attelages  pour  atteler  dc  front  Icur  chevaux;  ou  comme  Ulyflcs 
"  avoit  befoign  d'ozier  en  la  caveme  de  Cyclops  pour  lier  fes  moutons ; 
**  ccla  n'argue  ni  ne  preuve  pas  que  la  conjoncHon  foit  autrement 
**  partie  d'oraifon,  mais  bien  un  ouril  proprc  a  conjoindre  felon  qu'elle 
"  en  porte  nom,  &  a  contenir  &  aflembler  non  pas  toutes  chofcs, 
"  ains  feulement  ccUes  qui  nc  font  pas  fimplement  dites:  fi  Ton  nc 
*'  vouloit  dire  que  la  Cborde  ou  courreye  dont  unc  balle  feroit  lice  fiift 
"  partie  dc  la  balle ;  ou  la  cotte  d'un  papier  ou  d'un  livrc  qui  eft  coUc  j 
*'  &  les  donnces  &  diftributions  des  deniers  parrie  du  gouverncment : 
"  comme  Demadcs  difoit  que  les  deniers  que  Ton  diftribuoit  manuellemcnt 
**  par  teftc  a  chafquc  citoycn  d'Athencs,  pour  veoir  les  jcux,  eftoient  la 
"  colic  du  gouverncment  dc  Tcftat  populairc.     Et  quelle  eft  la  conjonftion 

U  qui 


^46  6f  CONJUMCfriONS. 

to  amufe  trieir  readers  and  cover  their  own  fgnoirancey  'tiy 
very  learnedly  difputihg  the  propriety  6f  the  fitoilie, '^r 
ftead  of  explaining  the  nature  of  the  Conjundtion* 


But,  pray,  have  you  any  authority  for  the  derivation  of 
thefe  words  ?  Are  not  all  former  etymologiih  againil  you  ? 

H. 

Except  in  if,  and  but  (in  one  of  its  meanings)  I  be- 
lieve they  are  all  againft  me.  But  I  am  perfuaded  that  all 
future  etymologies,  and  perhaps  fome  philofophers,  will 
acknowledge  their  obligation  to  me.  For  thefe  trouble- 
fonie  conjundtions,  which  have  hitherto  caufed  them  fb 
much  miftaken  and  unfatisfadtcHry  laboiir^  fhall  fave  them 


^^  qui  fa<;e  de  pluiieurs  propofitlons  une,  en  les  coufant  &  liant  enfemble^ 
^'  comme  le  marbre  fait  le  fer  quand  on  le  fond  avec  lui  par  le  feu  -,  mais 
^^  pour  cela  le  marbre  n'eft  pas  pourtant,  ny  ne  I'appelle  Ion  pas  partie  de 
*'  fer  i  combien  que  ces  chofes-U  qui  entrent  en  une  compofidon  &  qui 
'*  font  fondues  avec  les  drogues  que  Ton  mefle^  ont  accouftum6  de  faire 
"  &  de  foulFrir  ne  fjay  quoi  de  commun^  compofe  de  tous  les  ingrediens. — 
^'  Quant  aux  prepofidons  on  les  peult  accomparer  aux  pennacbes  ou  autres 
^^  Ornemens  que  Ion  met  au  deilus  les  habillemens  daTeftes^  ou  bien  aux 
*^  bafes  &  foubajfment  que  Ion  met  au  deflbubs  des  Statues  i  pour  ce 
^^  qu*elles  ne  font  pas  tant  pardes  d'oraifon^  comme  alentour  des  parties/* 

Plutarch,  Platonic  ^ejticns.—^thk  Amyot. 

many 


OF  CONJUNCTIONS.  147 

many  an  error  and  many  a  weary  ftep  in  future.  They 
ihall  no  more  expofe  themfelves  by  unnatural  forced  con- 
ceits  to  derive  the  Englifh  and  all  other  languages  from 
the  Greek,  or  the  Hebrew ;  or  fome  imaginary  primaeval 
tongue.  The  Particles  of  every  language  fliall  teach  them 
jyhither  to  dire6t  and  where  to  Hop  their  inquiries :  for 
wherever  the  evident  meaning  and  origin  of  the  Particles 
of  any  language  can  be  found,  ibere  is  the  certain  fburce 
of  the  whole. 


B. 


H. 


Moft  cert^nly.  And  therefore  when  I  fay  the  wAole,  I 
^inuft  beg  to  be  underftood  with  thofe  exceptions.  And, 
that  I  may  not  faem  to  contradi6t  myfelf  when  we  (hall 
.J)ei:^afifer  cqme  to  treat  of  them,  I  beg  you  like  wife  to  re- 

U  2  member. 


Without  a  moment's  reflexion,  every  one  muft  perceive 
that  this  aflertion  is  too  general  and  comprehenfive.  The 
mixture  which  is  found  in  all  cultivated  languages;  the 
perpetual  acceOion  of  new  words  from  affectation  as  well  I 

as  from  improvement,  and  the  introdu<Slion  of  new  Arts 
and  Habits,  efpedally  in  learned  nations ;  and  from  other 
circuji^ftanCes ;  forbid  the  deduction  of  the  wbo/e  of  a  Ian- 
gu^is  .from  any  one  (ingle  fource. 


I   • 


4 


148  OF  CONJUNCTIONS. 

ft 

member,  that  I  by  no  means  include  in  my  aflertion,  the 
Abbreviations  of  language :  for  they  are  always  improve- 
ments  fuperaddcd  by  language  in  its  progrefs;  and  are 
often  borrowed  from  fome  other  more  cultivated  languages. 
Whereas  the  original  Mother-tongue  is  always  rude  and 
tedious,  without  thofe  advantages  of  Abbre^uiation.  And 
were  he  once  more  in  being,  I  fliould  not  at  all  doubt  of 
being  able  to  convince  even  Junius  himfelf  (who  with 
many  others  could  fo  far  miftake  the  courfe  and  progrefs 
of  fpeech,  as.  to  derive  an  uncultivated  from  a  cultivated 
language)  that,  inftead  of  referring  the  Anglo-faxon  to 
;  his  favourite  Greek  as  its  original,  he  muft  feek  out  (and 

I  fuppofe  he  would  eafily  find)  a  Parent  for  the  latter. 


i 


• 


\ 

\ 

) 


.4 


But,  I  beg  pardon,  this  is  rather  digreffing  from  my 
purpofe.  I  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  learning  of  mere 
curiofity  * :  nor  am  any  farther  concerned  with  Etymo- 
logy, than  as  it  may  ferve  to  get  rid  of  the  falfe  philofophy 
received  concerning  language  and  the  human  underftand- 
ing.     If  you  pleafe,  therefore,  I  will  return  to  the  Con- 

*  *'  n  7  a  un  pointy  pafic  lequel  Ics  recherches  ne  font  pltis  que  pour  k 
'<  curioiite.  Ces  verites  ingenicuies  €t  inutiles  reflemblent  a  des  etoilei 
*'  qui^  placces  trop  loin  de  nous^  ne  nous  donncnt  point  de  clarte/* 

Voltaire^  Sur  la  Socictc  royak  ct  fur  ks  Academies. 

jundtiOQS 


ik 


OF  CONJUNCTIONS.  149 

jun<5tions  I  have  derived ;  and,  if  you  think  it  worth  the 
while,  we  will  examine  the  conje<Stures  of  other  perfons 
concerning  them ;  and  fee  whether  I  have  not  fomething 
better  than  the  authorities  you  afk  after  in  my  favour. 

B. 
I  ihould  be  glad  you  would  do  fo. 


£n£A 


-^t 


.*'■•» 


/ . 


\    • 


f      •    I 


EHEA   nTEPQENTA,   &c 


i  .i. 


»        »         •         ■ 

«         «         «...  I 


.  I 


CHAP.   VIII. 


ETYMOLOGY    OF    THE 


COlrfj^NCtiONJ* 


/F. 


H. 


'  TF  and  an  may  be  ufed  mutually  and  indifferently  to 
fupply  each  other's  place. 

Befides  having  Skinner^s  authority  for  if,  I  fuppofe  that 
the  meaning  and  derivation  of  this  principal  fupporter  of 
the  Tripod  of  Truth  %  are  fo  very  clear,  fimple  and  univtr- 

*  See  Plutarch  ITcfi  rou  EI  ro\)  w  AiX^eifj 

£v  ^f  AiaXfxIfXfi  ifi  vs  /(Afyiniv  fX**  ivvet[Aiv  i  ff\iv»l^l^x^  htoo-i  wyitg-fA^, 
in  in  TO  XoUxtSlell9¥  O'^ffifMili^tav  a£iia|(Aa,— -To  y»g  rtxkixoy  xjki  Xoyixoy^  da^wif 
eifiHaiy  yvcM*!;  axoXsOi^c^  rnk  it  VfOt'Xn^iif  i  aio'Sfiorif  rw  Xofw  itiw&iv.  eOf»  fi  x«ft 
«io';^o»  Mxffy^  vx  axoIp(4/o/;Aai  rsjo  avai  ro»  m;  aXfiSfia;  rpiwo^ft  ro»  XoFoVj  ov  ttiv 
TH  Xiyoirlo;  vpo;  TO  vponyBfAfvoir  axoXHOioir  ^(j^(vo(^  ff7a  vrpotf-XaCwp  rnv  uirap^iv^ 
twayn  ro  ^vfAinfaciAtt  td;  aireJci^fw;.  Tov  «v  nuOiov  fi  ^n  |AHC^Kf^  ti  fiitloti,  xai 
xvxvttv  f tfvaif  xai  xiOapaf  4/e^eK|  ti  ^»viA»r9¥  tn  A<«Xfx7(Xfic  ^iXia  rvjo  ao-Ta^co-Gai 
T8  Xoys  TO /Mff^r  xoei  «yftirayj  cJ  f*»Xir«  xai  vXfifia  vfO-^tiiAtyHg  ifot  rxf  fiXo* 

9  fally 


N 


ErrYMDLORSY .  DK,  Sec  151 

fally   allowed,    as   to  'need   no   farther  difbourle   about 
them. 

Skinner  fays— ^^  IF  (in  agro  line.  (?//)  :ab  AS.'Cfip.  Si. 
^^  Hoc  a  verbo  Dipan,  dare^  q.  d.  Dato!^ 


•^N 


Lye,  in  his  edition  of  Junius,  fays — "  Haud  infcite 
^^  Skinnerus,  qui  deduxit  ab  a.  s  Hiipan,  dare^  q.  d.  Dato.^ 

GiF  is  to  be  found  not  only,  as  Skinner  fays,  in  Lin- 
colnfhire,  but  in  all  our. old  writers.  G*  Douglas  almoft 
always  ufes  Gif:  once  or  twice  only  he  has  ufed  If\  once 
he  ufes  g£W£,  and  once  giffis,  and  fometimes  in  case 
and  IN  CAis  for  gif. 


"  Gif  luf  be  vertcw,  than  is  it  Icful  thing; 
"  Gif  it  be  vice,  it  is  jour  undoing." 

Douglas.  Prol.  to  ^b  boke.  Pag.  95. 
• 

"  Thocht  fum  wald  fwcre,  that  I  the  text  hauc  waryit, 

**  Or  that  I  haue  this  volume  quite  myfcaryit, 

"  Or  threpe  planelie,  I  come  neuer  nere  hand  it, 

"  Or  that  the  werk  is  werft  that  euer  I  fand  it, 

'*  Or  jit  GEWE  Virgil,  ftude  wele  before, 

"  As  now  war  tyme  to  fchift  the  werft  ouer  Ikorc." 

Douglas  Preface^  Pag.  1 1  • 


cc 


Be 


152  ETYMOLOGY  OF  THE 

^'  Be  not  ouer  ftudyous  to  fpy  one  mote  in  myn  s« 
*'  That  in  jour  awin  anc  fcnye  bot  can  not  fc, 

'*  And  do  to  mc,  as  jc  wald  be  done  to ; 

*'  Now  hark  fchirris,  thare  is  na  mare  ado : 

^'  C^ha  lift  attend^  gyffis  audience  and  draw  nere/' 

Douglas  Preface,  Pag.  12. 

Chaucer  commonly  ufes  if  ;  but  fometimes  yeue,  yef 
and  YF. 

"  Lo  here  the  letters  felid  of  thys  thyng 
**  That  I  mote  bcarc  in  all  the  hafte  I  may ; 
"  Yeue  ye  woll  ought  unto  your  fonne  the  kyng, 
'*  I  am  your  ieruaunt  bothe  nyght  and  day," 

Chaucer.  Man  of  Lowes  tale.  Fol.  22.  Pag.  i.  Col.  2. 

*'  And  therfore  he  of  full  auifemcnt 

"  Nolde  neucr  write  in  non  of  his  fermons 

"  Of  fuche  unkynde  abhominacions 

"  Ne  I  ne  wol  non  rcherce,  yef  that  I  may." 

Chaucer.  Man  of  Lawes  prologue.  FoL  18.  Pag.  2.  Col.  i. 

"  She  was  fo  charytable  and  fo  pytous 

"  She  wolde  wepe  yf  that  flie  fawe  a  mous 

"  Caught  in  a  trappe,  if  it  were  deed  or  bledde." 

Prol.  to  Canterbury  tales.     Priorejfe. 

And  it  is  to  be  obferved  that  in  Chaucer  and  in  other 
old  writers,  the  verb  to  give  fufiers  the  fame  variations  in 
the  manner  of  writing  and  prononncing  it,  whether  ufed 

5  con- 


ENGLISH  CONJUNCTIONS.  153 

conjunSihefy  or  otherwife :  as  does  alfo  the  Noun  derived 
from  it. 

"  And  after  on  the  daunce  went 
'*  Largefle,  that  fct  al  her  entent 
*^  For  to  ben  honorable  and  free, 
"  Of  Alexanders  kynne  was  fhe, 
**  Her  mod  joye  was  ywis 
"  Whan  that  Ihe  yafe,  and  fayd :  Haue  this, 
*'  Not  Auaricc  the  foule  caytyfe 
**  Was  halfe  to  grype  fo  ententyfe 
*'  As  Largefle  is  to  yeue  and  fpende, 
*'  And  god  alway  ynowe  hex  fcnde, 
*^  So  that  the  more  fhe  yaue  awayc 
*'  The  more  ywis  fhe  had  alwaye : 
"  Great  loos  hath  Largefle,  and  great  prife^ 
*'  For  both  wyfe  folke  and  unwyfe 
^'  Were  wholy  to  her  bandon  brought 
So  wel  with  yettes  hath  flie  wrought." 

Chaucer.  Romaunt  of  the  Rofe.  FoL  1^5,  P.  2.  C  i. 


xc 


€C 


A  wyfe  is  goddes  yefte  verely 
^*  Al  other  maner  yeftes  hardely 
*'  As  londes,  rentes,  pafture,  or  commune 
**  Or  mouables,  all  ben  yeftes  of  fortune 
*'  That  paflen,  as  a  fliadowe  on  a  wall 
**  But  dred  nat,  yf  playnly  fpeke  I  ftiall 
■^'  A  wyfe  wol  lafl:e  and  in  thyn  houfe  endure 
**  Wel  lenger  than  the  lyft  parauenture." 

Chaucer.  March  aunt  es  tak.  F0L1Z.  Pag.  a.  CoL  2^ 

■ 

^'  Forciff  me,  Virgill,  cif  I  thee  offxjnd." 

Douglas.  Preface.  Pag.  ii* 

X  "  Gif 


154  ETYMOLOGY  OF  THE 

^  GiF  us  thy  anfucir,  quharon  wc  fal  depend." 

Douglas,  3^  iooke,  Pag.  jo. 

"  And  fuffir  Tyrianis,  and  all  Liby  land 
"  Be  GIF  in  dowry  to  thy  fon  in  hand." 

Douglas y  ^b  booke,  Pag.  loj,. 

*'  In  the  mene  tyme^  of  the  nycht  wache  the  cure 
•*  We  GIF  Meflapus.*' 
N  Douglas y  gth  iooke,  Pag.  a  80. 

In  Henry  the  viith^s  will>  dated  1509,  you  will  alfo 
find  YEVE  ufed  where  we  now  employ  give  :  and  in  the 
time  of  Queen  Elizabeth  it  was  written  in  the  fame 
manner. 

"  Yeoven  under  our  fignet." 

Lodge's  Illujiratiojis.     Ihe  ^e£n  to  Sir  IF.  Cecil  and 
Dr.  IVottoHy  Vol.  I.  Pag.  343. 

"  Yeven  under  our  feale  of  our  order,  the  firfl:  day  of  April  1566,  the 
*•  eight  year  of  our  reign." 

Lodge's  Illujirations.     Quene  Elizabeth  to  the  Eric 
of  Sherowjbury^  Vol.  i.  Pag.  362, 

Gin  ^'^  is  often  ufed  in  our  Northern  counties  and  by 
the  Scotch,  as  we  ufe  if  or  an  :  which  they  do  with  equal 


*  Ray  fays — "  Gitiy  Gif^  in  the  old  Saxon  is  Gify  from  whence  the  word 
*  If  \%  made  per  apha^refm  literas  G.     Gif^  from  the  verb  Grfany  dare  s. 
*^  and  is  as  much  as  Dato^ 

propriety 


ENGLISH  CONJUNCTIONS.  X55 

propriety  and  as  little  corruption :  for  gin  is  no  other  than 
the  participle  Givenj  Gt'en,  GPh.  (As  they  alfo  ufe  Gie  fot 
■Give,  and  Gien  for  Given,  when  they  are  not  ufed  conjunC'- 
4ively.)  And  hoc  dato  is  of  equal  conjuncStive  value  in  a 
fen  fence  with  Da  hoc. 

^'  Then  wi'  his  fpear  he  tum'd  hir  owrc-, 

■ 

*'  O  GIN  hir  face  was  wan ! 
**  He  turn'd  her  owre  and  owrc  again, 
"  O  GIN  hir  fkin  was  whytc." 

Percy's  Reliques,  Vol.  i.  Edom  o'Gordon. 

Even  our  Londoners  often  pronounce  Give  and  Given  ia 
the  fame  manner :  As 

"  GV  me  your  hand/' 
*'  I  have  Gin  it  him  well.'* 

So  Wycherly,  Love  in  a  Wood,  A(Sl  V.  ^^  If  my 
*^  daughter  there  fhould  have  done  fo,  I  wouVi  not  have 
gi^n  her  a  groat," 

AN. 

I  do  not  know  that  an  has  been  attempted  by  any  one, 
except  S.  Johnfon :  and,  from  the  judicious  diftindlion  he 
has  made  between  Junius  and  Skinner  *,  I  am  perfuaded 

that 

*  "  Junius  appears  to  have  excelled  in  extent  of  learning,  and  Skinner 
**  in  reditude  of  underftanding.     Junius  was  accurately  (killed  in  all  th« 

X  a  *^  northern 


156  ETYMOLOGY  OF  THE 

that  he  will  be  the  firft  perfon  to  relinquifli  his  own  con- 
je(5ture  ^* :  efpecially  when  he  notices  his  own  felf-contra-« 
didion :  for  after  having  (under  the  article  an)  told  u^ 
that  "  AN  is  a  contraction  of  And  iff  and  given  the  foK 
lowing  inftance, 


''  Well  I  know 


'*  The  clerk  will  ne'er  wear  hair  on's  face  that  had  it. 
<'  He  will  an'if  he  live  to  be  a  man," 

He  very  truly  (under  the  article  and)  fays — "  In  And: 
ify  the  And  is  redundant  \  and  is  omitted  by  all  latep 
writers.     As 


_« 


r  pray  thee,  Launce, 


'•  An*if  thou  fceft  my  boy,:  bid  him  make  hafte/' 


cc 


northern  languages ;  Skinner  probably  examined  the  antient  and  remoter 
dialefts  only  by  occafional  infpe6Vion  into  diftionaries :  Fut  the  learning 
of  Junius  is  often  of  no  other  ufe  than  to  fhew  him  a  track  by  which  he 
may  deviate  from  his  purpofe ;  to  which  Skinner  always  preffes  forward 
"  by  the  fhorteft  way.  Skinner  is  often  ignorant,  but  never  ridiculous: 
"  Junius  is  always  full,  of  knowledge ;  but  his  variety  diftrafts  his  judgment,. 
**  and  his  learning  is  very  frequendy  difgraced  by  his  abfurditics/' 

Preface  to  Di£lidnary. 

*  Immediately  after  the  publication  of  my  letter  to  Mr.  Dunning,  I  was 
informed  by  Mr.  S.  (an  intimate  friend  of  Dr.  Johnfon)  that  I  was  not 
mrftaken  in  this  opinion  ;  Dr.  Johnfon  having  declared,  that  if  he  lived  to- 
give  a  new  edition  of  his  Didionary,  he  Ihould  certainly  adopt  my  dcrivaw 
tions. 

S  The 


ENGLISH  CONJUNCTIONS-  157 

The  author  of  "  Criticijms  on  the  Diver/ions  of  Furky^ 
who  publiflies  under  the  feigned  name  of  Gassander,  (I 
fuppofe,  becaufe  he  was  born  in  the  ifland  of  Cadfatty  iit 
Dutch  Flanders)  and  who  is  a  Teacher  and  Preacher  in: 
the  City  of  Norwich,  thus  elegantly  amufes  his  readers- 
Pages  36,  37,  38- 

^^  I  have  known  a  public  fpeak^r  who*  would  now  and" 
^^  then  take  a  furvey  of  his  audience,  and  call  out  (if  he* 
^^  efpied  any  drooping  noddles  or  falling  jaws) — Bretbrerty 
^^  I  will  tell  pu  a  Jfory. — As  I  think  this  an  excellent 
"  method,  of  roufing  the  attention  of  a  reader  or  hearer^ 
"  for  ever  inclined  to  grow  drowfy  when  the  fiibjedt  is  fo,, 
"  I  Ihall  not  fcruple  to  make  ufe  of  it  ujpon  this  occafion. 

^  It  is  well  known  that  the  Boors  in  Friefland,  one  of 
•*  the  United  Provinces,  have  fo  far  retained  ancient 
^  cuftoms,  as  to  be,  in  dreft,  language,  and  manners,. 
♦^  exa6lly  the  fame  people  which  they  were  five  hundred: 
<^  years  ago ;  a  circumftance  that  induced  Junius  the  fon: 
*^  to  pay  them  a  vifit,  and  to  pafs  a  few  months  among 

» 

"  them.  In  a  tour  I  made  to  that  country  fbme  years. 
"  ago,  I  was  at  a  gentleman's  houfcj  from  which  I  made 
•<  frequent  excurfions  into  the  inner  part  of  the  province.. 
^  In  one  of  thefe  I  was  obliged  to  take  the  firft  fheltering 

"  place- 


158  ETYMOLOGY  OF  THE 

"  place  in  my  way,  being  overtaken  by  a  violent  fliowen 
"  It  was  a  farm  houfe,  where  I  faw  feveral  children :  and 
"  /  Jhall  never  forget  the  fpecch  which  one  of  them,  an 
"  overgrown  babe,  made  to  his  mother.  He  was  ftanding 
<^  at  her  breaft ;  and  after  he  had  done  with  one,  1  heard 
^^  him  fay  to  her, — Trientjen^  yan  my  foor. — i.  e.  Kate, 
*^  give  me  t'other. — /  little  thought  at  the  time^  I  fliould 
"  have  fo  good  an  opportunity  of  making  ufe  of  the  ftory 
"  as  1  have  at  prefent.'' 

This  ftory  of  the  babe,  he  fays,  is  certainly  in  my 
favour.     I  think  it  is  decifively. 

But  the  Critic  proceeds — *<  But  we  fhould  not  fancy 
*^  that  words  exift,  or  muft  have  exifted,  becaufe,  having 
^^  adopted  a  certain  method  of  finding  out  origins,  we  can- 
*^  not  poflibly  do  without  them.  I  have  been  looking  out 
"  with  fome  anxiety  for  the  Anglo-Saxon  verb  Snan,  but 
"  but  can  get  very  little  information  about  it.  I  find,  in- 
"  deed,  in  King  Alfred's  Will  the  following  article  :-— 
**  SEjiift  ic  an  Eat)pajit)e  mmum  ctepa  f  una, — Firft  I  give  to 
<'  Edward  my  eldeft  fon. — And  from  the  expreffion  ic 
"  Sn,  it  Ihould  feem  as  if  there  really  exifted  fuch  verb 
^^  in  the  Anglo-Saxon  as  Snan.  But  as  this  is  the  only 
"  fign  of  life  it  has  given,  as  one  may  fay,   for  thefe 

8  «  thoufand 


ENGLISH  CONJUNCTIONS.  159 

*^  thoufand  years,  I  am  inclined  to  look  upon  that  lign  as 
•^  being  rather  equivocal,  and  fufpedl  that  the  true  reading; 
^^  of  the  Will  is,  not  ic  an,  but  ic  un,  from  unnan 
^*  cedere,  concedere ;  this  laft  verb  being  common  in  the 
^^  Anglo-Saxon,  and  nothing  more  eafy  than  to  miftake 
^  an  u  for  an  a,  in  that  language,  as  well  as  in  Englifh. 
^  Hov^ever,  as  I  have  not  feen  hitherto  any  manu- 
<^  fcript,  on  whofe  authority  I  can  ground  the  juftncfs  of 
^^  my  conjecSlure,  I  do  not  give  it  you  as  any  thing  certain  ;: 
<^  and  if  you  perlift  in  giving  the  preference  to  the  old 
**  reading,  the  ftory  of  the  babe  is  certainly  in  your 
^*  favour ;  for  there  is  as  little  difference  between  Sn  and 
•^  and  yan,  as  between  un  and  IKn.  With  me  it  will  re- 
«  main  a  matter  of  doubt,  whether  there  ever  exifted  fiich 
^  a  verb  as  Snan,  the  fame  in  lignification  and  yet  dif- 
^  ferent  in  origin,  with  Gipan.  It  is  by  no  mean^  pro- 
^  bable,  that  a  people,  who  had  hardly  a  conveyance  for 
•^  one  idea  in  a  thoufand,  Ihould  have  procured  two  fuch 
^  noble  conveyances  for  one  fingle  idea.  This  is  a  piece 
"  of  luxury,  which  even  the  rtioft  civilized  nation  feldom 
"  allow  themfelves  *.'^ 


*  Reprehenfor  autlaculiis  verborum — qui  perpauca  cadeniqiie  a  vulgo 
pnotrita  legerat,  habcbatque  nonnullas  difciplina^  grammaticse  inauditiun- 
culas,  partim  rudes  inchoatafque,  partim  non  probasj  eafqiie  quafi  pulveremi 
©b  oculos,  qiium  adbrais  quemque  fucrar,  adfpergt^bat  i---nequc  ratiorieni 
¥Cibum  hoc,  inquit,  ncqiie  au6toritatem  habet^ 


i6o  ETYMOLOGY  OF  THE    • 

t 

To  this  I  anfwer,  that  Snan^  Siman,  and  Unnan,  are 
all  one  and  the  fame  word  differently  fpelled  (as  almofl:  all 
the  Anglo-Saxon  and  old  Englifh  words  are)  becaufe  diflfe- 
rently  pronounced^ 

But  "  he  has  been  looking  for  Snan,  he  fays,  with 
"  fome  anxiety,  and  can  get  very  little  information  about 
^^  it."  If  he  looks  fo  carelefsly  when  he  is  anxious,  we 
may  pretty  well  guefs  with  how  much  accuracy  he  looks 
upon  other  occafions.  I  will  relieve  his  anxiety.  I  know 
he  has  Lye's  colledlion  of  Anglo-Saxon  words  before  him ; 
(for  he  quotes  it  in  his  66th  page)  let  him  put  on  his 
fpedlacles  and  open  the  book  :  he  will  there  find  Snan,  and 
Snnan,  with  references  to  places  where  they  are  ufed. 
And  if,  after  that,  he  Ihould  ftiU  continue  anxious,  I  will 
furnifh  him  with  more. 

"  Nothing,  he  fays,  is  more  eafy  than  to  miftake  an  u 
^^  for  an  a,  in  that  language,  as  well  as  in  the  Englifh." — 
It  is  not  fo  eafy  to  miftake  the  Anglo-Saxon  charadter  U  for 
S,  or  u  for  a ;  as  it  is  to  miflake  the  written  Englifh  cha- 
radter  u  for  a^ 


It  is  not  true  that  any  people  are  now,  or  ever  were  in 

jthe  condition  he  reprefents  the  Anglo-Saxons;   viz.    of 

having 


ENGLISH  CONJUNCTIONS.  i6i 

having.  "  hardly  a  conveyance  for  one  idea  in  a  thoufand  ;** 
unlefs  he  means  to  include  in  his  exprellion,  of  one  idea^ 
each  man^s  particular  perception.  No.  Cheer  up,  Caf- 
fander :  your  lot  is  not  peculiar  to  yourfelf :  for  the  people 
who  have  the  pooreft  and  fcantieft  language,  have  yet 
always  noany  more  words  than  ideas.  And  I  leave  the 
reader  to  judge  whether  to  have  two  words  for  one  idea, 
be  "  a  piece  of  luxury  which  even  the  moft  civilized  na- 
"  tion  feldom  allows  itfelf.*^ 


UNLESS. 

Skinner  fays — f*  Un/e/s  nifi,  praeter,  preterquam,  q.  d. 
"  One-Ie/sy  uno  dempto  feu  excepto :  vel  potius  ab  Onlefan, 
"dimittere,  liberare,  q.  d.  Hoc  dimiffb^ 

It  is  extraordinary,  after  his  judicious  derivation  of  if, 
that  Skinner  Ihould  have  been  at  a  lofs  about  that  of  un- 
LESS ;  efpecially  as  he  had  it  in  a  manner  before  him :  For 
Onlej-,  dimitte,  was  furely  more  obvious  and  immediate 
than  Onlereb,  dimiffb.—^Ks  for^  One-lefs,  i.  e,  Uno  dempto. 
feu  excepto,  it  is  too  poor  to  deferve  notice. 

So  low  down  as  in  the  reign  of  Queen  Elizabeth,  this 
conjun^on  was  fometimes  written  Onelis  and  (^nelejfe.  And 
ttds  way  of  fpelliog  it,  which  ihould  rather  have  directed 

Y  Skinner 


taL 


j62  etymology  of  the 

Skinnrier  to  its  triie  etymology,  might  perhaps  contribute 
to  miflead  him  to  the  childifli  conjedture  of  One  lefs^  Uno 
dempio. — ^But  in  other  places  it  is  written  purely  dNLXS  : 
and  fometimes  onlesse. 


Thus,  in  the  Trial  of  Sir  John  Oldcaiile,  An.  'r4i3> 
*^  It  was  not  pbffible  for  them  to  malce  whole  Ghrifles  cote 
"  without  feme,  ONLESSE  certeyil  great" theh  v^6tfe ' btought 
**  out  of  the  way.** 

So  Thomas  Lupfet,  i'n'^the  ^atly  part  of  Henry  the  8th*s 
t^ign ; 


"  But  alway,  filter,  rcmetobrc  that  charJtie  la 'net;  per- 
"  fe<St  ONLES  that  it  be  burninge.** 

'Treattfe  of -Cbdritie^  pug,  ST. 

'*  This  peticion  cannot  take  efiefi  onles  man  be  made 
**  like  an  aqngel.**  Ibid.,    pQg,  66.  , 

*♦  Fayth  cannot  be  perfect,  onles  there  be  godd  workes.^ 

A  compendious  Treatife  teachynge  tbiWaye  of 
diynge  well,    pag,  i6o. 

'^«  'tbiiie,  '^e  "gi-feaier  •' jifBfc  ^tt^Sfe  45,^tWit^  ifutii  v«xti*ttfe 

2  "  poyntes 


ENGLISH  CONJUNCTIONS.  163 

«  pQyotejs.  of  feare  ag;ainft  a^U  Ihame  fliuld  not  in  fq  many 
"  dayly  appere,  whan  death  approcheth,  onles  bi  natu^* 
*<  fome  juft  feare  were  of  the  fame.*'      Ibid,    pag,  166. 

In  other  places  Lupfet  fpells  it  ONELf:$  a^d  oifL^$^j^. 

So,  in  "  TUe  IW^e  Qf  G|«iyef^ance''  by  Sir  T.  Elliott, 
1541,  <<  Men  do  fp^  ^o  ^i^rophe  vinto  their  foverayt^e 
<*  Lorde,  oneles  they  be  called." 

«  This  noble  empire  is  lyke  tq  fdle  into  e^treine  ruyqp 
<<  and  perpetuall  infamye,  onelesse  your  mofte  excellent 
«  wyi«k>paes  wyU  ^ilygiently  an4  coi?%iitly  pjrep^e^^ur- 
«  felfes  to  the  certayne  remedy," 

So  in — ^^  A  neceffary  doctrine  and  erudition  for  any 
"  Chriften  m^,  fet  furthe  by  the  Kynges  msycftie  of 
"  Englande."     i543« 

«  Onles  ye  beleve,  ye  fliall  not  underftande.^ 

•*  No  man  (haU  be  crowned,  onles  he  lawfully jfight.* 

*«  t^ey^hejF  is  it  ppffibie  for  any  man,  onelesse  this 
«  holy  fpirite  Ihall  firft  illumine  his  hart." 

Y  i  «  True 


1 64  ETYMOLOGY  OF  THE 

«  True  honour  Ihall  be  gyven  to  none,  oneles  he  be 
"  worthy.'* 

"  Who  can  have  true  penance,  onles  he  beleve  fted- 
«  faftly  that  God  is.** 

«  Who  fo  ever  doth  forfake  his  lawful  wyfe,  oneles  it 
"  be  for  adultery,  commytteth  adulterye  in  fo  doynge.** 

**  They  be  bound  fo  to  do,  onles  they  fe  reafonable 
*<  caufe  to  the  contrary." 

"^Thefoule  waxeth  feble,  onlesse  thefamel)e  cheriftied.* 

•  •         • 

**  In  vayne,  onlesse  there  were  fome  facultie.** 

•••-■• 

'  "  It  cannot  begynne,  onelesse  by  the  grace  of  God.** 

t 

So  in  the  "  Supplication  to  King  Henry  VIII.**  by  Barnes. 

«  I  fhall  come  to  the  couocell  when  foever  I  bee  called, 
**  ONLES  I  be  lawfully  let.** 

So  in  the  "  Declaration  againft  Joye**  by  Gardmer,  Biihop 
of  Wincheftcr. 

<«  No, 


ENGLISH  CONJUNCTIONS.  165 

«  No  man  commeth  to  me,  onlesse  my  father  draweth 
«  hym." 

**  Can  any  man  furt^ier  replye  to  this  carpenter,  onles 
<*  a  man  wolde  faye,  that  the  carpenter  was  alfo  after  the 
"  thefe  hymfelfe." 

**  For  ye  fondely  improve  *  a  conclufion  which  myght 
**  ftande  and  be  true,  with  your  foridfe  paraclbx  of  only 

•       <<'fayth 

m 

*  To  improve  (i.  c.  to  ccnfurc,  to  impeach,  to  blame,  to  reprove)  A 
word  perpetually  ufed  by  the  authors  about  Shake(pcare*s  time,  and 
eipecially  in  religious  controverfy.— "  Whereas  he  hath  ippken  it  by  his 
'^  own  mouth,  that  it  is  not  good  for  man  to  be  alone,  they  have  m- 
"  proved  that  doftrine  and  taughte  the  contrarye." — The  A£les  of  Englijh 
Votaries  by  Ibon  Bale.    Dedicated  to  Edward  the  6tb.     1550. 

^^  A  wondcrfiji  thyng,  that  this  fhoulde  be  cryed  lawful  in  their  cadiedrall 
*'  church  with  ryngyng,  fyngynge,  and  icnfyngc,  and  in  their  yeldc  hallc 
•'  .condemned  for  felony  and  treafon..  Ther  did  they  worfhyp  it  in  their 
**  fcarlet  gownes  with  cappc  in  hande,  and  here  they  improved  it  with  fcornes 
"  and  with  mockcs,  grennyng  upon  her  lyke  termagauntes  in  a  playe/* 

Affes  of  Englijb  Votaries, . 

The  word  is  taken  by  us  from  the  Frqich,  who  ufed  it  and  ftill  continue 
to  ufe  it  in  the  fame  meaning. — "  Elles  croient  que  le  corps  et  Ic  fang  font 
**  vraiment  diftribues  ^  ceux  qui  mangent;  et  improuvent  ceux  qui  enr 
«^  feignent  le  contrairc.*'  Bojfuet  des  variat  des  Eglifes,  Prot. 

*'  Us  foQt  indignes  de  jamais  compnendre  ccs:  fortes  de  beautes^.  et  font 
^  condamnez  au  malhcur  de  les  improuver,  et  d'  etrc  improuvez  audi  des 
*'  gens  d'  cfprit/^  Lettres  de  Bujfy  Rabutin.Tm.  4.  pag.  278. 

5.  "  M^ 


1 66  ETYMOLOGY  OF  THE 

«  fay th  juftifieth,  onlesse  in  teaching  ye  wyl  (6  handel 
<*  the  matter,  as,  &c. 

«  We  cannot  love  god,  onle^  he  prepareth  our  harte 
**  and  geve  us  that  grace ;  no  more  >can  we  beleve  god, 
*<  ONLESSE  he  giveth  us  the  gift  of  belefc." 

**  In  every  kynde  the  female  is  commonly  "barren, 
**  ONLESSE  it  conceyveth  of  the  male ;  fo  is  concupyfcence 
*^  barren  and  voyde  of  fynne,  onlesse  it  conceyve  of 
"  man  the  agreymente  of  his  free  wyll.** 





^'  La  bourgcoifie  lie  Geneve  a  droit  de  fzirt  des  reprefentauons  dans 
^^  toutes  les  occafions  ou  elle  crott  ks  loix  Icsees,  et  ou  elle  improve  la  con* 
^'  duite  de  ies  ma^rats/'  Rouffeati.    Vol.  2.  pag.  440. 

*'  Je  ne  pouvois  en  cfFet  me  difTunuIer  qu*  en  improuvant  ks  travaux 
<^  qu'  on  venoit  de  faire ;  ceux  qui  les  avoient  ordonnes  eA  rejetteroient  le 
^^  blame  fur  \t%  deux  aFclnteftes/' 

Memmm  du  Baron  ^  Toft.    Tom.  2.  pag.  i  a j« 

"  Arrctons-nous  fur  les  incubations  faites  i  Roland  dans  cette  aftc 
^'  d'  accufation,  qui  fcra  la  honte  du  fieclc  et  du  peuple  qui  a  pu,  ou  V  ap- 
*^  prouver^  ou  ne  pas  hautement  V  improuver.''     Obfervations  par  Amar. 

The  cxpreffion  in  Hamlet  (A£t  i.  See.  i.)— *'  Of  unimproved  mettle 
^^  hot  and  full."— ought  not  to  have  given  Shakefpeare's  commentators  any 
trouble:  for  unimproved  mtzxis  unimpeached i  though  Warburton  thinks  it 
means  ^^unr^ned:''  Edwards,  ^*  unproved -,''  and  Johnfon  (with  the  appro- 
bation of  Malone)  "  not  regulated  nor  guided  hy  knowledge  or  experience:^* 
and  in  his  Dictionary  he  explains  it  to  be  ^^  not  taught^  not  meliorated  by  in- 
^'  firuUion:' 

u  We 


t 

1 


ENGLISH  CONJUNCTIONS.  167 

«  We  naay  not  properly  faye  we  apprehend  juftcGcaetion 
<*  by  fayth,  ONLEKE  ^e  wolde  call  the :proraifiejof  God,  ;£{£.* 


«  Such  other  pevifshe  wordes  as  men  be  encombred  to 
«  heard,  onLia  they  MmMe  anake-Goddes  wosde  .t^  matter 
•<  of  the  DcwyUes  ibifc.'* 

«  Who  can  wake  out  of  fynne,  without  godcaU  him;, 
"and  XXIU.ESSE  .god.  hath,  given  eares  to  heare  this  voyce  of 
<*  ^god.  How  is  any  man  beyng  lame  with  fynne,  able  to 
"  take .upi-hiS'Cauche and  walke,  onlesse  ^od  fayeth,  Sec.** 

So  in. the — "  Anfweare  to  Fekenham  touchinge  the  othe 
«<  of  the  fupremacy,**  by. Home,  Biihqp  of  Winchefter. 

*^  Icoulde  not  choofe,  oneles  1  woulde  ftiawc  myfelfe- 
**  overmuch  uhkinde  unto  my 'native  countrey, 'but  take 
«*  pehrte  in  liande  aiid'fhape  him^  ful'.and'phrine'anfweare,, 
**  without  any  curidlitie'.'* 

*<  *Fhe^ete<ftidn'6f  tHie  'pope  'marie  -Hy  the  clergie  -and: 
<•  pedpJc'ih  thofe  dates,  was  but-a  vaine  thing,  ONLBsithe- 
**  emperour  or  his  lieutenant  had  confirmed  the  fame." 

"  The  pope  would  not  confecrate  .the  cle<5t  biOaq^, 
*<  ONLES  he  had  firft  licence  therto  of  the  emperour.** 

«  No> 


1 68  ETYMOLOGY  OF  THE 

"  No  prince,  no  not  the  emperour  himfelfe  ihould  be 
^<  prefent  in  the  councell  with  the  cleargie,  onles  it  were 
^^  >vhen  the  principall  pointes  of  faith  were  treated  of.'' 

^^  He  fwcareth  the  Romaines  that  they  (hall  never  after 
*^  be  prefent  at  the  election  of  any  pope,  onles  they  be 
"  compelled  thereunto  by  the  emperour.'* 

^*  Who  maketh  no  mencion  of  any  prieft  there  prefent, 
^*  as  you  untruely  report,  onles  ye  will  thinke  he  meant 
^^  the  order,  whan  he  named  the  faction  of  the  Pharifees.'* 

^*  So  that  none  fhould  be  confecrate,  onlesse  he  were 
^^  commended  and  inveftured  bifhop  of  the  kinge.** 

*^  And  further  to  commaunde  the  newe  ele6te  pope  to 
^^  forfake  that  dignitie  unlawfully  come  by,  onlesse  they 
^^  woulde  make  a  reafonable  fatisfadtion. 


"  That  the  pope  mighte  fende  into  his  dominions  no 
^  legate,  onlesse  the  kinge  fhoulde  fende  for  him.^ 

^*  What  man,  onlesse  he  be  not  weU  in  his  wittes, 

U    will  lav  tTiQK    Jlrr'^ 


will  fay  that,  &c.'* 


'^  To 


ENGLISH  CONJUNCTIONS.  169 

<'  To  exercife  this  kinde  of  jurifdidion,  neither  kinges 
«  nor  civill  magiftrates  may  take  \ippon  him,  onlesse  he 
«  be  lawfully  called." 

«  That  from  hencefoorth  none  ihoulde  be  pope, 
«  ONELESSE  he  were  created  by  the  confent  of  the  em-» 
<«  perour.** 

-  «  Ye  cannot  finde  ib  muche  as  the  bare  title  of  one  of 
them,  ONELESSE  it  be  of  a  bilhoppe.** 

^  So  in  the — **  Whetftone  of  Witte,"  by  Robert  Recorde, 
1557. 

■     *  —  . 

<*  I  fee  moare  menne  to  acknowledge  the  benefite  of 
^  nomber,  then  I  can  efpie  willyng  to  ftudie  to  attaine  the 
*<  benefites  of  it.  Many  praife  it,  but  fewe  dooe  greatly 
*^  pra<Stife  it ;  onlesse  it  bee  for  the  vulgare  practice  con- 
"  cemyng  Merchaundes  trade.** 

«  Yet  is  it  not  accepted  as  a  like  flatte,  onleb  it  be  re- 
«  ferred  to  fome  other  fquare  nomber,** 

I  believe  that  William  Tyndall,  our  immortal  and  match-. 

lefs  tranflator  of  the  bible,  was  one  of  the  firft  who  wrote 

'  Z  this 


'Jf- 

*   - 

f 


170  ETYMOLOGY  OF  THE 

this  word  with  an  u ;  and,  by  the  importance  and  merit 
of  his  works,  gave  courfe  to  this  corruption  in  the  lan- 
guage *. 

•*  The  fcripture  was  geven,  that  we  may  applye  the 
«  medicine  of  the  fcripture,  every  man  to  his  own  foresy 
**  UNLESSE  then  we  entend  to  be  idle  difputers  and  braulers 
«  about  vaine  wordes,  ever  gnawy ng  upon  the  bitter  barke 
«  without,  and  never  attayning  unto  the  fweete  pith 
*«  within,  &c.'*     Prd.  before  the  5  B»  of  JMofes. 

"  My  thouglits  have  no  veines,  and  yet  uhles  diey  be 
«  let  blood,  I  Ihall  perifli." 
j  Endimion*     By  John  Lilly,     ASi  1 .  See,  i . 

♦  Shaktfpearc,  in  Ochelio,  A61H.  Sec.  13.  writes, 

— — — — "  What's  the  matter, 
'*  That  you  Unlace  your  re{>utation  thus 
*^  And  Ipend  your  rich  opinion  for  the  n^mt 
"  Of  a  night  brawler  ?'* 

In  a  note  on  this  pafiage  S.  Johnfon  fays — "  Slacken  or  loofen.  Put  in 
•'  danger  of  dropping  j  or,  perhaps,  ftrip  of  its  ornaments."  And  in  his 
Diftionary,  he  fays, — "  To  noadkc  iooft  j  to  p^t  in  dangcar  ^f  being  loft.— 
"  Not  in  ufe."  But  he  gives  no  reafon  whatever  for  this  interpretation.  I 
believe  that  Unlace  in  this  paffage  means — ^^  You  unless  or  onles  your 
"  reputation,"  from  the  fame  verb  Onlcfan^ 

«  His 


ENGLISH  CONJUNGTIQNS.  %ji 

**  His  frehdes  thougljt  his  learning  thfcire  fuffident 
"  (uKLEs  he  ihoiild  proceed  D(y£t6r  and  profcffe  fomc  one 
**  ftudie  or  fcience.*') 

Lord  Bur/e/s  Life  in  Peck's  Deftderata  curio/a, 
Foh  I.  pag»  4. 

» 
t 

«<  No  man's  catteH  ftiall  be  queftioned  as  the  companies, 
<*  UNLES  fuch  as  have  been  entrufted  with  them  or  have 
**  difpofed  of  them  without  order.** 

Articles  Jigned  etrid  fettled  by  ibf  Gomin^^Brs  of  ti/e 
Councill  of  State  for  the  CommtmealtV  of  England 
the  twelvetb  day  of  March,     165 1. 

^  ' 

7 
I  do  not  know  that  Onlej*  is  employed  conjunSlively  by  ^ 

the  Anglofaxon  writers,  as  we  ufe  Unlefs ;  (though  I  have 

no  <ioubt  thai  it  was  fo  ufed  in  dtfooarfe) ;  but  inftead  of 

it,  they  frequently  employ  njmSc  or  ncro^;  (which  is 

evidently  the  Imperative  nym  or  nem,  of  nyman  or  neman, 

to  which  is  Subjoined  %t^  i.  e.  ^bat  *.)     And  nym^e — 

Take  away  tbatf—^rMj  very  well  fupply  the  place  of — 

Onley  (Se  exprefled  or  underftood)— Di/^^  that. 


*  It  is  too  fingular  to  be  kft  unnoticed^  that  the  ancient  Romans  ufe(| 
Nemuty  inftcad  of  Nift.  For  ^liich  Fcftus  ekes  Cato  4cf$t0aie  Trib.  but 
ihe  pafifagie  is  k>fl. 

Z    2  LeS^ 


irt  ETYMOLOGY  OF  THE 

Les^  the  Imperative  of  Leran  (which  has  the  fame 
meaning  as  Onlefan)  is  likewife  ufed  fometimes  by  old 
writers  inflead  of  unless.. 

«^  And  thus  I  am  conftrcnit,  als  nerc  as  I  may^ 
"  To  hald  his  vcrfc,  and-  go  nanc  uthir  way ; 
**  Lbs  fum  hiftorie,  fubtell  wordc,  or  rymc, 
^  Caufis  mc  mak  dcgrcffioun  fum  tymc/* 

G.  Douglas.    Preface^ 


^  Gifhc 


**  Commyttis  any  trcflbun,  fiild  he  not  dc ; 

<'  Les  than  his  prince  of  grete  humanite 

"  Perdoun  his  fitult  for  his  long  trcw  fervicc."* 

G.  D.  ProL  to  loth  Book,. 

"  Sterff  the  bchuffis,  les  than  thou  war  unkynd 
^  As  for  to  Icif  thy  brothir  dcfolatc.*' 

G;  D.  jEnead.  loth  book... 

In  the  famie  manner  it  is  ufed  throughout  Ben.  Johnfon^. 

'*  Less  learned  Trebatius  CenAire  difagrec." 

Pottufter^ 

'*  Firfthcar mc— Not  a  fyllablc,  less  you  take." 

Jlcbymifi,,A&UL  Scene  5. 

"  There,  for  ever  to  rcmam 

"  Less  they  could  the  knot  unftrain." 

Mafque. 

"  To  tell  you  true,  'tis  too  good  for  you, 

M  Ljss  you  had  grace  to  follow  it,". 

BartboL  Fdir^   ; 

:  "  But 


ENGLISH  CONJUNCTIONS.  1 7  j- 

•*  But  will  not  bide,  there,  lbss  yourfclf  do  bring^him." 

Sad  Shepherd*. 
«  You 

*  It  is  this  fame  Imperative  les,  placed  at  the  end  of  nouns  and  coalefcing 
with  them,  which  has  given  to  our  language  fuch  adjedbives  as  bopelejs^  reft- 
k/s^  deathUjSy  motlmlefii,  &c.  i.  e.  Dijmjs  hope,,  reft,,  death,  motion,  &c. 

The  two  followmg  lines  of  Chaucer  in  the  Reve's  Tale,  in  Wyllyam 
Thynnc 'sedition,,  . 

And  when  the  horfe  was  loje^  he  gah  to  gon 
"  Towarde  the  fen^ ,  there  wylde  mares  rynne/^* 

are  thus  printed  in  Mr.  Tyrwhit's  cdidon>. 

*'  And  whan  the  hors  was  lausy  he  gan  to  gon- 
«^  Toward  the  fen,  ther  wilde  mares  renne.'* 

I-am  to  fuppofc  that  Mr,  Tyrwhit  is  juftified  for  this  reading  hy  fome 
manufcriptj  and  that  it  was  not  altered  by  himfelf  merely  for  the  lake  of 
introducing  "  Laus^  IJUmd^  and  the  Confuetud.  de  Beverley y*  ii^tb  his 
Gloi&ry.,  .  ^  . 

"*  Laus  (fays  Mr.  Tyrwhit)  adj.  Sax.  Looje.  4o64v^j^iw,  IJland.  Solutus. 
**  This  is  the  true  original  of  that  termination  of  adjcftives  fo  .frequent  in 
**  our  language,. in  /fi  or  lejs.  Confuetud.  Beverley.  MS.  Harl.  560; — 
^  Hujus  facrilegii  emfcnda  non  erat  determinata,  fed  dicebatur  ab  anglis 
^*  Botalaus.  i.  e.  fine  emenda. — So  Chaucer  ufes  Botelesy  and  other  words 
"  of  the  fame  form  5  as  Detteles^  Drinkeles,  Gilteles^  &c." 

I  think,"  however,  there  will  be  very  little  doubt  concerning  this  deriva- 
tion; when  it  is  obferved  that  we.  fay  indifferently  cither./tf^./ij/i,.or 
fvitbout-Jleep)  Sue.  i.  e.  Difmifs  fleep  or  Be-out  fleep^.&c  And  had  not 
thefe  words  les  and  without  been  thus  convertible,  ^hakefpeare  would  have 
toft  a  pun.— "  Thrice .  liave ,  I  fent  him  (fays  Gkndower) ;  weather-^bcaten 
**  home,  and  bootlefs  hz/ck.**    "  Home  without  hots   (replies  Hotfpur)) 

. .  "  and-i 


174 


I  ■» 


<   * 


'>^- 


■:i    •• 


or  THE 


"  You  mv&  no  more  ai<n  at  chofe  eafie  acceOes^, 

"  LESS  you  can  do't  in  ain" 

Beaumont  and  Fletcher.     Beggars  Bujhy  Aft  V.  Sec.  2. 


*^  and  in  foul  weather  tob !  .Ho*r  fca{>e5  he  agu«  te  i5i;e  De^'s  name  ?" 
So,  for  thofc  words  where  we  have  ndt  by  habit  made  the  doalcfcence,  as 
the  £>ani(h  Folkel^  aivd  Haloids,  &<:>  we  Tay  ui  £ngh<k  Wisbma  ptefste, 
tntbout  a  tail,  &c.  But  any  one  may,  if  he  pleafes,  add  the  termination 
lejs  to  any  noun :  and  though  it  fhould  be  unufual,  and  heard  for  the  firft 
time,  it  will  be  perfeftly  underftood.  Between  Wimbom-ihihfter  and 
Cranbourn  in  Dorfctfliire,  there  fa  tf  ip^bod  called  H^lfcy :  and  the  people 
in  that  country  have  a  faying  peifciilly  ifitelli^bfc  to  every  finglifh  ear.— 
"  When  Harley  is  hare-lejs^  Craabourn  «7li0rv-^  arid  Wimbc>m/^0r-%/]r« 
'^  the  world  will  be  at  aa  end/'  And  k  i^obiervablc  that, in  all  the  northern 
languages,  the  tenrnnatioB  of  this  ik^e&ive  in  each  langus^  varies  juil  as 
the  correlpondent  verb,  whofe  Imperative  it  is,  varies  in  that  language. 

Termination*  Infin.  of  die  verb^ 

Goth.  —  AAt^S     ^  —  AAfiSQAN 

A.  S.  —  Leaf  —  Lcofan 

Dutch  —  Loos  or  Lofs  —  Loflen 

Otrman  *-*•  LoS  —  LSfeii 

Dttiifli  *—  Los  —  Lofer 

Swedifli  — i-  L8s  —  L6fa 

I  muft  be  permitted  here  to  fay,  that  I  fincerely  lament  the  principle  on 
which  Mr.  Tyrwhit  proceeded  in  his  edition  of  Chaucer's  talcs.  Had  he 
given  invariably  the  text  of  that  manufcript  which  he  judged  to  be  the 
tddeft,  stand  dirown  to  the  bottdm  the  i^riorum  readings  ivith  their  audrorityj 
Ike  oblivion  of  Ms  KMeirs  (flft  le^  df  fiidh  as  xnyfelf)  would  indeed  have 
t>cen  very  great  tohkn:  todhis  iftduftry,  cai^,  and  fidefity  woidd  thenh«vc 
been  mueh  mait  lifcftil^o  inquireis,  thiiti  ahy  ftiM  which  he  has  Ihewn  in 
Mjrmology  or  the  hoiliifm  latiguages  3*  were  jt  -dVdn  much  greater  than  it 
appean  to  me  tb  haVe  %een. 

0  You 


ENGLISH  CONJUNCTIONS.  17$ 

Y<m  will  pleafe  to  obferve  that  3II  the  languages  which 
have  a  correfponcleDt  conjun<5liou  to  l/n/e/f,  as  well  as  die 
manner  in  which  its  place  is  fupj^ied  in  the  languages 
whidi  havs  not  a  conjuntStian  cprrefpondeBt  to  it ;  ail 
ftrongly  juftify  my  derivation.  The  Greek  E*  /«?.  The 
Latin  Nt^.  The  Italian  Se  non.  The  Spanifh  Sino.  The 
French  Si  non.  All  mean  Re  it  not.  And  in  the  fame 
manner  do  we  fometimes  fupply  its  place  in  Engliih  either 
hy  But,  Witbaut^  Be  it  noty  But  if.  Sec. 


Without  pro&ne  tongues  thou  canft  never  rife. 
Nor  be  upholden.  Be  it  not  with  lies.'* 

M.  Drayton,  Leg.  ofK.TH.of  Normandy. 

"  That  ttpycr  wts  jth^e  garden  of  fucb  p^fc> 
<*  But  yf  it  were  the  yerjr  p^radyfe/' 

"       Fk:anksleyn*«  Tak.- 


€€ 


That  knighte  he  is  a  foul  Paynim^ 
And  large  of  iririb  and  bonfe  -, 
•<•  And  Buttf  heaven  m»y  fee  fhyfipqpdfo 

"  Thy:  life  it  jft  JbHt  jpQO^,"  /  _ 

Sir  Cauline.  I^ercy's  Kellqkes, 


..\  :    '       ■■        •      f   . .        ..-;.•....'.? 


•  t 


ThoHg^h  it  certainly  is' hot  Worth'  the  while,  I  am 
tempted  here  to  obferve  the  grofs  miftake  Mr.  Harris  has 
made  in  the  Force  of  this  word;  which  he  calls  an 
**  Adequate  Preventive*^ 


•\ 


His 


ETYMOLOGY  OF  THE 


■;• 


His  example  is — "  Troy  will  be  taken,    unless  'the 
u  Palladium  be  prcferved.'* — «  That  is  {fays  Mr.  Harris)' 
<*  This  alone  is  fufficient  to  preferve  it,"— -According  to; 
tiie  oracle,  fo  indeed  it  might  be;  but  the  word  unless 
has  no  fuch  force. 

-Let  us  try  another  inftance* 

r 

■**  England  will  be  enflaved  unless  the  Houfe  of  Com- 
*'  mons  continues  a  part  of  the  Legiflature.*' 

Now,  I  alk,  is  this  alone  fufficient  to  preferve  it  ?  We 
who  live  in  thefe  times,  know  but  too  well  that  this  very 
houfe  may  be  made  the  inftrument  of  a  tyranny  as  odious 
and  (J).erbaps)  more  lafting  than  that  of  the  Stuarts.  I  am 
afraid  Mr.  Harris's  adequate  Preventive  will  npt  fave  us. 
For,  though  it  is  moft  cruel  and  unnatural;  yet. we  know 
by  woful  experience  that  the  Kid  may  be  feethed  in  the 
naother*s  milk,  which  providence  appointed  for  its  nouriih- 
ineht ;  and  the  liberties  of  thjys  couotry  be  deftroyed  by 
that  very  part  of  the  Legiflature,  which  was  moft  el^dally 
appointed  for  their  fecurity. 


EKE. 


ENGLISH  CONJUNCTIONS.  177 

EKE, 

Junius  fays,^"  Eak,  etiam.  Goth.  AnK.  a.  s.  Sac, 
"  ALaucb.  D.og.  B.00L  Viderentur  effe  ex  inverfo  ««<{  fed 
**  redtius  petas  ex  proxime  fequenti  AOkAn  (ifl.  oaj^a) 
**  A.  s.  eacan.  6can.  ican.  A/,  auchon.  D.oge.  B.oecken, 
**  Cacan  vero,  vel  auchon,  funt  ab  ««£«»  vel  ett^etv,  addere, 
«  adjicere,  augere.** 

■  •  *  • 

Skinner  fays — *^  Eke.  ab  a.  s.  Gac.  tieac.  Bg/^.  Oock, 
Teut.  Aucb.  Fr.  Tb.  Oucb.  D.oc.  etiam.''. 

Skinner  then  proceeds  to  the  verb> 

"  lb  Eke^  ab  a.  s;  Cacan.  Geican.  lecan.  augere,  adji- 
^*  cere.  Fr.  Jun.  fuo  more,  defleiStit.  a  Gr.  auluv.  Mallem 
^*  ab  Gac,  iteram,  quod  vide :  quod  ehim  augetur,  fecun- 
^^  dum  partes  fuas  quafi  iteratiir  &  de  novo  fit.'* 

In  this  place  Skinner  does  not  feem  to  enjoy  his  ufual 
fuperiority  of  judgment  over  Junius.  And  it  is  very 
ftrange  that  he  ihould  chufe  here  to  derive  the  verb  Cacan 

from  the  conj  undtion  Cac  .  (that  is,  from  its  own  Impera- 

■'       II    I ■  ■  I       II         ■       I.  ■  ■  I        1^1  I  III 

♦  An  inftancc  has  been  already  given  where  if  is  ufcd  as  a  prepofition. 
In  the  following  pafTage  of  Dryden,  Unkjs  is  alfo  ufed  as  a  prepofition  j 

•*  The  commendation  of  Adverfaries  is  the  grcateft  triumph  of  a  writer ; 
"  becaufe  it  never  comes  Unkfs  extorted." 

A  a  tive) ; 


178  ETYMOLOGY  OF  THE 

tive  ;  rather  than  the  conjurxStion  (that  is,  the  Imperative) 
from  the  verb.  His  judgment  was  more  awake  when  he 
derived  if  or  gif  from  Dipan,  and  not  Dipan  from  Ijip; 
which  yet,  according  to  his  prefent  method,  he  fliould 
have  done. 


Perhaps  it  may  be  worth  remarking,  as  an  additional 
proof  of  the  nature  of  this  conjun6tion;  that  in  each 
language,  wh€re  this  imperative  is  ufed  coryui>6lively,  the 
Conjundion  varies  juH  as  the  verb  does. 

In  Danilli  the  Conjun<5Ko<i  i&  cg^  wA  the  verb  dger. 
Id  Swedifla.the  Conjun£tiba  is  oc±i^  and  the  verb  oka. 
In  I>it(Ch  the  Cotkjundtion  is  ook^  £rom  the  verb  oecken. 
I«  •ijermatt  the  Cocrpn£kicm  is  aiich,  from  die  verb  auoiipn. 
In  Gothic  the  GonjunCtion  is^HK,  and  the .  \^erb  AHKAn. 
As  in  Englifh  the  Gonjun6tion  is  Eke  or  Eak,   from  the 
verb  eacan. 

« 

TET^    STILL. 

I-  put  the  conjunctions  tet  and  still  here  together; 
becaufe  (like  If  and  An)  they  may  be  ufcd  mutually  for 
each  other  without  aoy  alteration  ia  the  meaning  of  the 
fentences ;  a  circumftance  which  (though  not  fo  obvioiifly 
as  in  thefe  inflances)  happens  likeivile  tse  fbme  other  of 

the 


ENGLISH  CONJUNCTIONS.  1^9 

the  conj  unions ;  and  which  is  not  unvforthy  of  coniidera- 
tion. 

According  to  my  derivation  of  them  both*  this  mutusd 
interchange  will  not  feem  at  all  extraordinary :  for  yet 
(which  is  nothing  but  the  Imperative  jec  or  jyt,  of  jecan 
or  syt^an,  obtinere)  and  still  (which  is  only  the  Impera- 
tive Stell  or  Steall,  of  Scellan  or  Srealhan  *,  ponere)  may 
very  well  fupply  each  other's  place,  and  be  indifferently 
nfed  for  the  fame  purpofe. 

Algate  and  even  algates,  when  ufed  adverfatively  by 
Chaucer,  I  fuppofe,  though  fo  fpelkd,  to  mean  no  other 

*  ■ 

than  All-^t, 

**  For  ALBErr  tatfeng  be  noyFul,  algate  it  is  not  to  be 
^  reproued  in  yeuynge  of  iugement,  ne  in   vengeaunce 

•<  tikyng.* 

'fa¥\f  Cbauciri  'Pif.  74,  Pa^,  2.  Clo/.  i. 


•      I 


*  Though  this  verbis  no  longer  current  in  Englilb,  except  as  a  Con- 
■)un6|(on,  yet  it  keeps  its  ground  in  the  collateral  Uhg'ito^es. '  " 

In  German  and  Dutch  it  is  —  S/ellen 

Ih'the  Swtdilh'  —  —  'Stalta     '  ■ 

[    And  ii.the  DatiiOi         ^  w.  SHilcr. 


'1        ■  » 


A  a  a  •<*  A  great 


s8o  ETYMOUX5V  OF  THE 

**  A  great  waue  of  the  fee  cometh  icMntyme  with  fo 
^  great  a  vyolence,  that  it  drowneth  the  ihyppe :  and  the 
**  fame  harme  dothe  fometyme  the  fmall  dropes  of  water 
**  that  entrfcth  through  a  lytell  creueys,  in  to  the  tymbre 
**  and  in  to  the  botome  of  the  ihyppe,  jif  men  be  fo  neg- 
**  ligente  that  they  dKcharge  hem  not  by  tymes.  And 
**  therfore  all  though  there  be  a  difference  betwixt  thefe 
«  two  caufes  of  drowning,  algat^s  the  ihyppe  is 
**  drowned." 


The  verb  fo  get  is  ibmetimes  ipelled  by  Chaucer  geate. 

But  I  will  repeat  to  you  the  derivations  which  others 
have  given,  and  leave  you  to  chuie  between  us. 

Men  Cafaubon  fays — '*  Eti,  adhuc.  Yet." 

Junius  fays—**  Yet,  adhuc.  a.  s.  jyr.  Cymroeis  etwa, 
f*"  etto,  iignificat,  adhuc,  etiam,  iterum ;  ex  ixi  vel  ou^if." 

Skinner  fays — **  yet,  ab  a.  s.  Gee,  Cera,  adhuc.  modo. 
<*  Teut.  3Iet5t,  jam,  mox." 

Again  he  fays — **  still,  aiHdue,  indeiinenter,  inccflan- 
**  ter.     Nefcio  an  ab  a.  s.  rill,  addito  tantum  fibilo  ;  vel  a 

**  noftro. 


*  -.     ■■  • 


."•. 


ENGLISH  CONJUNCTIONS.  i8i 

«  noflrO)  8c  credo  etiam,  a.  s.  As,  ut,  ficut^  jQicet  apud 
**  Somnerum  npn  occurrat)  &  eodem  Til,  itfqu».  q.  d. 
*<  ufque,  eodem  modo. 

ELSE. 

This  word  else,  formerly  written  JUeSf  jifySy  yilyfe^ 
Elles<,  Ellusy  EUiSy  Ells,  Els,  and  now  Elfe ;  is,  as  I  have  faid, 
no  other  than  Sler  or  Slyj-,  the  Imperative  of  Xlefan  or 
Kiyj-an,  dimittere. 

Mr.  Wharton,  in  his  Hiftory  of  Englijfh  Poetry,  VoU:  i. 
page  193  (without  any  authority,  and  in  fpite  of  the  con- 
text, which  evidently  demands  BJfe^  and  will  not  admit  of 
Alfo)  has  explained  alles  in  the  following  paflageuby  Alfo. 

"  The  Soudan  ther  he  fatte  in  halle  j 
^         ^  He  fcnt  his  meflfagers  fade  ^th  alle, 

"  To  hire  fader  the  Kyng. 
"  And  fayde,  how  fo  hit  ever  bi  falle, 
**  That  mayde  he  wolde  clothe  in  pallc 

*^  And  fpoufcn  hire  with  his  ryng. 
"  And  ALL£S  I  fwere  withouten  faylc 
•'  I  chull  hire  winnen  in  plcye  battayle 

"  With  mony  an  heih  lordyng." 


The  meaning  of  which  is  evidently,^^^^^  Give  me  your 
daughter,  else  I  will  take  her  by  force.** 

It 


tSa  ETYMOLOGY  OF  THE 

It  would  have  been  nonfenfe  to  fay,—-"  Give  me  your 
<*  daughter,  also  I  will  take  her  by  force.** 

^'  To  haften  loue  is  thynge  in  vcine, 
"  Whan  that  fortune  is  there  ageine. 
*^  To  .take  where  a  man  hath  leue 
**  Good  is :  and  elles  he  mote  leue.'* 

*^  Withouten  noyffe  or  ctertiryng  of  belles 

*^  Te  deum  was  our  Ibnge,  and  nothyng  elles/' 

Chaucer.  Sompners  taU.  Pol.  43.  pag.  i.  coL- 1, 

*'  Efchame  joung  virgins,  and  fair  dartiycellis, 
^y  Furth  of  wedlok  fof  to  difteyne  jour  kellis ; 
^'  Traift  not  dl  talis  that  wantoun  WoWaris  tcDis, 
^  fo%i  to  dcflbure  purpofyhg^  and  not  illis/^ 

Douglas.  Prol.  to  44b  hke.  Pag.  97 » 

w  And,  bycatife  the  derthe  tyt  thing*  be  fbche  as  the 

**  foklyors  be  not  able  to  lyue  of  theyr  accuftomed  wages, 
"  which  is^  by  the  day,  fix  pence  the  foteman,  and  nine 
^*  pence  th^  horfman ;  theffor  we  befeche  your  lordfhips 
<*  to  be  meanes  to  the  Queene^s  majeftie,  that  order  may 
"  be  taken>  eyther  for  th^  encreace  of  theyr  wages  by  the 
"  day,  the  fotemJin  to  cightpence,  and  th^  horfman  to 
**  twelve  pence,  or  ells  to  allow  that  at  the  pay  daife 
**  they  may,  by  their  capteins  or  otherwife,  haue  fome  re- 
**  warde  to  Goum«kuaili  the  like  fomme.*^  , 

The  Council, Hi  the  Ndftb  to  the  Prhy  CouneH.  ^b  wf 

Sept.  1557.     Lodge's  Illujirations. 


ENGLISH  CONJUNCTIONS^  183 

N.  R  ^  Wheat  at  this  time  was  fold  for  four  Marks 
<«  per  Quarter.  Within  one  month  after  the  harveft  the 
^<  price  fell  to^v^  JbillingsJ^ 

"  And  eury  man  for  his  partic 

**  A  kyngdomc  hath  to  iiiftific, 

•*  That  is  to  fcin  his  owne  dome. 

*<  If  he  mifnile  that  kf  ogdome^ 

"  He  lefeth  him  fclfc,  that  is  more, 

•*  Than  if  he  lofte  (hip  and  ore, 

^  And  all  the  woi4des  good  wii^  aHe. 

*<  For  wbsrt  fl»aQ  tha^  ia  4^ciaU 

'<  Hath  not  him  felfe,  he  hath  not  £u^ 

•*  No  more  the  perles  than  the  fhds, 

*«  AB  is  to  ^im  of  cirakie.^ 

Comber.  lH.  i.  Fol.  185-  pag.  2.  cOl.  1L 

"  Nede  has  no  pcre,. 
•*  Him  behoueth  feme  himfclfc  that  has  no  fwayn,. 
*^  Ox  U3  be  i;^  a  hlty  9$  <:krkt3  ikyn. 

Chaucer.  Rents  tale.  Fol.  16.  fag.  i.  ed.  sv 

Junius  fays—"  Eife^  aliter,  alias,  alioqui.     A^  S.  BMeu. 


Skinner  fays — •*  Elfcy  ab  a.  ».  eilef,  alias,  alioquim 
"  Minfliew  &  Dr.  Tho.  Hickes  putant  efle  contra<5tum  a 
"  Lat»  alias^  vel.  Gr.  axxm^,  nee  fine  verifimilitudine." 


S.  Johnlbn* 


1 84  ETYMOLOGY  OF  THE 

S.  Johnfon  fays — "  Elfe^  Pronoun,  (EUep,  Saxon)  oibery 
^<  one  beftdeSi.     It  is  applied  both  to  perfons  and  things.*' 


He  fays  again — ^^  Elfe^  Adverb,    i»  Otherwife*    a. 
^^  fides ;  except  that  mentioned*" 


Be- 


THOUGH. 

Tho'  though,  thah  *  (or,  as  our  country-folks  more 
purely  pronounce  it,  thaf,  thauf  and  thof)  is  the  Im- 
perative Dap  or  Dapij  of  the  verb  Dapian  or  Dap^ao ;  to 
allow,  permit,  grant,  yield,  aflent:  And  Dapj  becomes 
Tbaby  Tbougb^  Tboug  (and  Tbocby  as  G.  Douglas  and  other 
Scotch  authors  write  it)  by  a  tranfition  of  the  fame  fort, 
and  at  leaft  as  eafy,  as  that  of  Hawk  from  Papuc.     And  it 


♦  See  a  ballad  written  about  the  year  1 264,  in  the  reign  of  Henry  the 

third; 

*^  Richard  thah  thou  be  ever  trichard, 

"  Trichten  ihalt  thou  never  more." 

Percy's  Reliques,  VoL  ii.  p.  2. 

* 

See  alfo  another  ballad  written  in  the  year  1307,  on  the  death  of  Edward 
the  firft. 

"  Thah  mi  tongc  were  mad  of  ftel, 
"  Ant  min  herte  yzote  of  bras. 
The  godnefs  myht  y  never  telle 
That  with  kyng  Edward  was." 

5  Percy s  Reliques,  Vol.  ii.  p.  10. 

is 


cc 

C€ 


BNGU5H  CONJUNCTIONS.  185 

is  remarkable,  that  as  there  were  originally  two  ways  of 
writing  the  verb,  either  with  the  guttural  g  (Dapi^an)  or 
without  it  (Dapian)  :  fo  there  ftill  continues  the  fame  dif- 
ference in  writing  and  pronouncing  the  remaining  impe- 
rative of  this  fame  verb,  with  the  guttural  g  {Though)^  or 
without  it  {Tbd").  In  Englifh,  the  difference  is  only  in  the 
charadters ;  but  the  Scotch  retain  in  their  pronunciation,  the 
guttural  termination* 

In  the  earlier  Anglo-Saxon  the  verb  is  written  ^eSapijan. 
In  a  charter  of  William  the  conqueror  it  is  written — ic 
nelle  j^apian.  And  in  a  charter  of  Henry  the  firft  it  is 
alfo  written — ic  nelle  jeSapian*  But  a  charter  of  Henry 
tiie  fecond  has  it — ic  nelle  jeSauian* 

See  the  preface  to  Hickes's  Thefaurus^  pag.  15,  i6. 

So  that  we  thus  have  a  fort  of  proof,  at  what  time  the  p 
was  dropped  from  the  pronunciation  of  ^apian ;  (namely, 
about  the  reign  of  Henry  the  fecond)  and  in  what  manner 
THAFiG  became  thaf,  and  thaf  became  thau  or  tho\ 

I  reckon  it  not  a  fmall  confirmation  of  this  etymology, 
that  our  antient  writers  often  ufed  All  be.  All  he  it.  All 
had.  All  Jbould.  All  were.  All  give.  How  be  it.  Set. 
^uppofe.  &c.  inftead  of  Although. 

B  b  «  Bu: 


1 86  ETYMOLOGY  OF  THE 

^'  But  AL  BE  that  he  was  a  philoibphre 
*'  Yet  had  he  but  lytel  golde  in  cofre." 

Chaucer.  Prol.  to  Canterh.  ialei^ 

"  Ye  wote  your  felfc,  fbc  may  not  wcdde  two 

"  At  ones,  though  yc  fyghtcn  cucr  mo 

"  But  one  of  you,  all  be  him  lothc  or  kfc  * 

**  He  mote  go  pypc  in  an  yuc  kfe.'* 

KfFj^gbtes  tale.  Pol.  5.  fag.  2.  col.  2. 

•^  Albeit  originally  the  King^s  Bench  be  retrained  by 
^^  this  A(5t  to  hold  plea  of  any  real  adlion,  yet  by  a  mean 
"  it  may ;  as  when  removed  thither,  iccJ^     Lord  (Me. 

«  — ^i  i)[i2lyeuen  her  lufEcient  anlwere 

"  And  all  women  after  for  her  fake 

"  That  though  they  ben  in  any  gylte  itake 

"  With  fece  bolde,  they  fhullen  hem  fclue  cxcufc 

"  And  bere  hem  doun,  that  wold  hem  accufe 

'*  For  lacke  of  anlwcre,  non  of  hem  flidl  dytn 

"  All  had  he  fey  a  thyng  with  both  his  cyer> 

"  Yet  fhuld  we  women  fo  vilage  it  hardely 

"  And  wepe  and  fwere  and  chyde  fubtelly 

"  That  ye  fhal  ben  as  leude  as  gees." 

Chaucer.  Mar chauntes  tale.  FoL^^.pag.  i.  coL  2. 

"  But  rede  that  boweth  down  for  euery  blafte 

Ful  lyghtly  ceflc  wynde,  it  wol  aryfe 

But  fo  nyl  not  an  oke,  whan  it  is  cafte 

It  nedeth  me  nought  longe  the  forvyfe 

Men  fhal  reioyfen  of  a  great  emprife 
*^  Atcheued  wel,  and  ftant  withouten  dout 
"  Al  haue  men  ben  the  knger  there  about/' 

qJ  ioke  of  Troylus.  Fol.  170,  pag.  2.  col.  i. 

A  ''  For 


cc 

•€€ 
CC 


ENGUSH  CONJUNCTIONS.  187 

"  For  I  wol  fpcke,  and  tcl  it  the 
Al  shulde  I  dye." 

Romaunt  of  the  Rofc.    Fol.  152.  Pag.  a.  Col.  i. 

^'  And  I  £0  loued  him  for  his  obeyfaunce 
And  for  the  trouthc  that  I  demed  in  his  hcrt 
That  if  fo  were,  that  any  thyng  him  fmert  * 
Al  were  it  neucr  fo  lyec,  and  I  it  wyft 
Methought  I  felt  deth  at  my  hert  twift/* 

Squiers  Tale.     Fol:  27.  Pag.  2.  Col.  t. 

"  Allgyf  England  and  Fraunce  were  thorow  faught" 

\  Skelton. 

"  The  Moor,  Howbeit  that  I  endure  him  not, 
b  of  a  coaftant>  loving,  nobfe  nature/' 

Othello.     Aa  %.  S€€.  I. 

• 

^'  No  wonder  wa$,  suppose  in  mynde  that  he 
Toke  her  fygure  fo  foone^  and  Lo  now  why 
The  ydol  of  a  thyng  in  cafe  may  be 
So  depe  enprymed  in  die  &ntafy 
That  it  deludeth  the  wyttes  outwardly." 

Complaint  of  Crefefde.    Fol.  204.  Pag.  i.  CoL  2. 

"  In  fere  placis  throw  the  cietc  with  thys 
The  murmour  rais  ay  mare  and  mare,  I  wys. 
And  clearar  wax  the  rumour,  and  the  dyn, 
So  that,  suppois  *  Anchifes  my  faderis  In 
With  treis  about  (hide  fecretje  by  the  way. 
So  buftuous  grew  the  noyis  and  furious  fray 
And  ratling  of  thare  armoure  on  the  ftrcte, 
AfFrayit  I  glifnit  of  flepc,  and  fterte  on  fete." 

Douglas.     Soke  2.  Pifg.  49. 


QuANCiyAM  fecreta  parentis 


Anchifae  domus, 

B  b  2  ''  £;urilk 


188  ETYMOLOGY  OF  THE 

"  Eurill  (as  faid  is)  has  this  iouell  hint. 
About  his  fydis  it  brafin,  or  he  ftynt ; 
Bot  all  for  nocht,  suppois  the  gold  dyd  glctc." 

Douglas.     Boke  9.  Pag.  ^289. 

"  That  fche  might  haiie  the  copies  of  the  pretendit 
"  writingis  giuen  in,  quhilkis  they  haue  diuerfe  tymes 
"  requirit  of  the  Quene's  maieftie  and  hir  coiinfel,  suppois 
"  thay  haue  not  as  Sit  obtenit  the  faniin.'' 

Mary  S^ueen  of  Scats. 

N.  B.    In  the  year  1788  I  faw  the  fame  ufe  of  Suppose 

•  * 

for  Though,  in  a  letter  written  by  a  Scotch  officer  at 
Guernfey,  to  my  moft  lamented  and  dear  friend  the  late 
Lieutenant  General  James  Murray.  The  letter  in  other 
refpe(5ls  was  in  very  good  and  common  £ngli(b. 

r 

"  I  feel  exceedingly  for  Lord  W.  M.  suppose  I  have 
<<  not  the  honour  of  being  peribnally  acquainted  with  him.'* 

I  believe  that  the  ufe  of  this  word  Suppose  for  Though 
is  itill  common  in  Scotland. 

The  Gernwu  ufes  Docb ;  the  Dutch  DocJb  and  Dog  ;  the 
Daniih  Dog  and  Endog ;  and  the  Swedifti  Dock  '^  as  we  ufe 
Though:  all  from  the  fame  root.     The  Daniih  employs 

Skiont  and  EndJkiondt\  and  the  Swedifh  Anikont,  for  Though : 
^-  from 


ENGLISH  CONJUNCTIONS.  189 

from  the  Danifli  verb  Skionner ;  and  the  S wedifh  verb 
Skionja,  both  of  which  mean,  to  perceive^  difcern^  imagine^ 
conceive^  fuppofe^  underjiand. 

As  the  Latin  ft  (//)  means  Be  it :  and  Ni/i  and  ^ne 
(unlefs  and  without)  mean  Be  not :  fo  Etji  {although)  means 
And  be  it  '-•.  The  other  Latin  Conjundlions  which  are  \ifcd 
for  Although^  (as,  ^atn-vis^  Licet^  ^antum  vis^  Sttdam-- 
libet)  are  fo  uncorrupted  as  to  need  no  explanation. 

Skinner  barely  fays — ^  though,  ab  as  Deah.  Belg. 
"  £)och*  Belg.  &:  Teut.^och,  etli,  quamvis  +/ 


♦  It  may  not  be  quite  needlcfs  to  obfcrve,  that  our  conjunftions  if  and 
THOUGH  may  very  frequently  fupply  each  other's  place,  as-W*  though  an 
•*  hoft  of  men  ri!e  up  agaihft  me,  yet  fhall  not  my  heart  be  afraid;"  or, 
"  IF  an  hoft  of  men,  &c.'*  So—"  though  all  men  fhould  forfakc  you^ 
"  yet  will  not  1 3''  or,  "  if  all  men  fhould  forfakc  you,,  &c.*/ 

f  Though  this  word  is  called  a.conjunftion  of  fentences,  it  is  conftantly 
lifetl  (cfpecially  by  children  and  in  low  difcourfc)  not  only  at  the  beginning, 
and  between,,  but  at  the  end  of  fentences. 

Fro,  Why  do  you  maintain  your  poet's  quarrel  fb  with  velvet  and  good 
clothes  ?  We  have  fcen  him  in  indifferent  good  clothes  c're  now  himfclf. 

Boy.  And  may  again.  But  his  clothes  fhall  never  be  the  bcft  thing 
•'  about  him,  though.  He  will  have  fomcwhac  befide,  either  of  huinane 
**  letters  orfcvere  honcfty,  fhall  fpeak  him  a  man,  though  he  went  naked." 

BUT. 


4€ 
4t 


1^0  ETYMOLOGY  OF  THE    . 

BUT. 
It  was  this  word,  but,  which  Mr.  Locke  had  chiefly  in 

I 

view,  when  he  fpoke  of  Conjundlions  as  marking  fome 
"  Stands,  Turns,  Limitations,  and  Exceptions  of  the  mind/ 
And  it  was  the  corrupt  ufe  of  this  One  word  (but)  in 
modern  Englifh,  for  Two  words  (bot  and  but)  originally 
(in  the  Anglo-faxon)  very  different  in  fignification,  though 
(by  repeated  abbreviation  and  corruption)  approaching  in 
found,  which  chiefly  mifled  him. 

**  But  (fays  Mr.  Locke)  is  a  Particle,  none  more  familiar 
"  in  our  language ;  and  he  that  fays  it  is  a  difcretive  Con- 
*^  junction,  and  that  it  anfwers  sed  in  Latin,  or  mais  in 
^*-  French  ^',  thinks  he  has  fufficiently  explained  it.  But 
**  it  feems  to  me  to  intimate  feveral  Relations  the  mind 
^*  gives  to  the  feveral  propofitions  or  parts  of  them,  which 
"  it  joins  by  this  monofyllable. 

*^  Firft, But  to  fay  no  more  : 

^^  Here  it  intimates  a  flop  of  the  mind,  in  the  courfe  it 

*•  was  going,  before  it  came  to  the  end  of  it. 

-I ■ ■ ■ — 

*  It  docs  not  anfwcr  to  Sed  in  Latin,  or  Mais  in  French  ;  except  only 
where  it  is  ufcd  for  Bot.  Nor  will  any  one  word  in  any  Language  anfwer  to 
our  Englilh  but  :  becaufe  a  fimilar  corruption  in  the  fame  inftance  has  not 
happened  in  any  other  language. 

*^  Secondly, 


t 
I 


,< 


ENGLISH  CONJUNCTIONS.  191 

<*  Secondly, If  aw  but  two  Plants, 

«  H«:e  it  ftiewsy  that  the  mind  limits  the  fenfe  to  what 
'*  is  exprefled,  with  a  negation  of  all  other. 

«  Thirdly,-^ Tbu  pray  j  but  it  is  not  that  God  would 

•<  bring  ymt  to  the  true  religion  r 


**  Fourthly,— — ^-Bur  ^at  be  would  confirm  you  in  your 


«  The  firft  of  thefe  bUts  intimates  a  fuppofition  in  the 
*<  mind  of  Ibmething  otherwiffe  than  it  fhould  be :  the 
"  latter  Ihews  that  the  mind  makes  a  diredt  opx)ofition  be- 
*<  tweea  that  and  what  goes  before  it. 

Fifthly,!— -rf//  animals  bave  fenfey  but  a  dog  is  an  animaL 

**  Here  it  fignifies  little  more,  but  that  the  latter  pro^ 
•*  poiition  is  joined  to  the  former,  as  the  Minor  of  a- 
"Syllogifm.. 

"  To  thefe,  I  doubt  not,  might  be  added  a  great  many 
•*  other  lignifications  of,  this  particle,  if  itwere  mybufmefs^ 
**  to  examine  it  in  its  full  latitude^  and  coniider  it  in  all  the  * 

*<•  places-> 


19  a  ETYMOLOGY  OF  THE 

"^^  places  it  is  to  be  found ;  which  if  one  (hoidd  do,  I 
"  doubt  whether  in  all  thofe  manners  it  is  made  ufe  of,  it 
^*  would  4eferve  the  title  of  disgretive  which  Gramma- 
"  Tians  give  to  it. 

"  But  /  intend  not  *  here  a  full  explication  of  this  fort 
"  ^f  fS^^*  The  inftances  I  have  given  in  this  one,  may 
^*  give  occafion  to  reflect  upon  their  ufe  and  force  in  lan- 
^^  guage,  and  lead  us  into  the  contemplation  of  feveral 
*^  aSlions  of  our  minds  in  difcourfing,  which  it  has  found  a 
"  way  to  intimate  to  others  by  tbefe  Particles^  fome  whereof 
"  conftantly,  and  others. in  certain  conftrudlions,  have  the 
"  fenfe  of  a  whole  fentence  contained  in  them*** 

•         _  _ 

Now  all  thefe  difficulties  are  very  ^afily  to  be  removed 
without  any  effort  of  the  underftanding :  and  for  that  very 
reafon  J  do  not  much  wonder  that  Mr*  Locke  milled  the 
explanation  :  for  he  dug  too  deep  for  it.  But  that  the 
Etymologifts   (who  only  juft  turn  up  the  furface)  fhould 

«  ■  ■        ■  ■      ■  *m  ■         »  111  ■  I      ■■       ■  ■      I  I  ■ 

♦  "  Eflentiam  finemque  conjundionum  fatis  aptc  cxplicatum  puto  :  nunc 
"  earunoi  origincm  materiamque  videamus,  Ncquc  vero  SigiNniim  ptv- 
"  currcre  omnes  in  Animo  ejl.'*  J.  C.  Scaligbr. 

The  conftant  excufc  of  them  all,  whether  Grammatifts^  Grammarians  or 
Philofophers  ;  though  they  dare  not  hazard  the  affertion,  yet  they  would  all 
have  us  underftand  that  they  can  do  it ;  but  non  in  animo  eft.  And  it  has 
never  been  done. 

2  ixiii^ 


ENGLISH  CONJUNCTIONS.  193 

mifs  it,  does  indeed  aftonifti  me.  It  feems  to  me  impollible, 
that  any  man  who  reads  only  the  mod  common  of  our  old 
Englifli  authors  fliould  fail  to  obferve  it. 

Gawin  Douglas,  notwithftanding  he  frequently  con- 
founds the  two  words,  and  ufes  them  often  improperly, 
does  yet  (without  being  himfelf  aware  of  the  diftindlion, 
and  from  the  mere  force  of  cuftomary  fpeech)  abound  with 
fo  many  inftances,  and  fo  contrafted,  as  to  awaken,  one 
Ihould  think,  the  molt  inattentive  reader. 

*^  BoT  thy  werke  (hall  endure  in  laude  and  ^orie. 
But  fpot  or  fait  condigne  ctcine  mcmorie." 

Preface,  fag.  j. 

*^  Thoch  Wylliamc  Caxtoune  had  no  compatioun 
Of  Virgin  in  that  buk  he  preyt  in  prois, 
Clepand  it  Virgill  in  Eneados, 
Quhilk  that  he  fayis  of  Frenfche  he  did  tranflait. 
It  has  nathing  a  Jo  therwith,  God  wate. 
Nor  na  mare  like  than  the  Deuil  and  fanft  Auftin. 
Haue  he  na  thank  tharfore,  box  lois  his  pyne  \ 
So  fchamefuUy  the  ftorie  did  peruerte, 
I  reid  his  werk  with  harmes  at  my  hert. 
That  fie  ane  buk,  but  fentence  or  ingyne, 
Suld  be  intitulit  cftir  the  pocte  diuine." 

Treface.  pag.  5, 

*'  1  fchrink  not  anys  correkkit  for  to  be, 
With  ony  wycht  groundit  on  charite. 
And  glaidlie  wald  I  baith  inquire  and  lere. 
And  to  ilk  cunnand  wicht  la  to  myne  ere  j 

C  c  BoT 


•t 

I 


194  ETYMOLOGY  OF  THE 

BoT  laith  mc  war,  but  uthcr  offences  or  cryme, 
Anc  rural  body  fuld  intertrik  my  ryme." 

Preface,  fag.  ii. 

**  Box  gif  this  ilk  ftatcw  ftandis  here  Wrocht, 
War  with  jour  handis  into  the  ciete  brocht. 
Than  fchew  he  that  the  peopil  of  Afia 
Rut  ojiy  obftakill  in  fell  battel  fuld  ga." 

Baoke  2.  fag.  45, 

^\  This  chance  is  not  i^ut  goddis  wiUis  went. 
Nor  it  is  not  leful  thyng,  quod  fche, 
Fra  hyne  Creufa  thou  turs  away  wyth  the. 
Nor  die  hie  governoure  of  the  heuin  aboue  is 
Will  fufFer  it  fo  to  be,  box  the  behuffis 
From  hens  to  wend  full  fer  into  exile. 
And  ouer  the  braid  fey  fayl  fiirth  mony  a  mylc. 
Or  thou  cum  to  the  land  Hifperia, 
Qubare  with  foft  courfis  Tybris  of  Lydia 
Rynnis  throw  the  riche  feildis  of  pepill  flout ; 
Thare  is  gret  fubflance  ordanit  the  9ux  dout. 

B9cki  &•  fag.  64. 

**  Vpoun  fie  wife  vncertanlie  we  went 

Thre  dayes  wilfum  throw  the  myfly  ftreme. 
And  als  mony  nychtes  but  flerneys  leme. 
That  quhidder  was  day  or  nycht  vneth  wifl  we* 
Box  at  the  lafl  on  the  ferd  day  we  fe 
On  fer  the  land  appere,  and  hillis  ryfe 
The  fmoky  vapoure  up  cafling  on  thare  gyfe. 
Doun  fallis  falis,  the  aris  foAp  we  fjpan 
Bux  mare  abaid." 

Booke  3.  fag.  74. 


i€ 


Box 


)k. 


ENGLISH  CONJUNCTIONS 


I9S 


*^  BoT  gif  the  faits,  but  pkid. 
At  my  pkfure  fufFer  it  me  life  to  leid. 
At  my  fre  wil  my  workis  to  modify. 


Boch.^.  pdg.  III. 


*'  BoT  fen  Apollo  clepit  Gryneus 
Grete  Italie  to  feik  commandis  us. 
To  Italie  cik  oraclis  of  Licia 
Admonift  us  but  mare  delay  to  ga 
Thare  is  my  lufl:  now  and  delyte  at  hand." 

Bcoke  j^.  pag.  iii. 

*^  Thou  wydi  thyr  harmes  ouerchargit  me  alfo, 
Quhen  I  fell  fyrft  into  this  rage,  quod  fche, 
BoT  fo  to  do  my  teris  conftrenyt  the. 
Was  it  not  lefuU,  allace,  but  cumpany. 
To  me  BUT  crymc  allanc  in  chalmer  to  ly  ?" 

Booke  4.  pag.  119, 

*^  Ane  great  eddir  Jfidand  can  forth  thraw, 
Eneas  of  the  fycht  abafit  fum  deile^ 
BoT  fche  at  the  laft  with  lang  fard  fare  and  wele 
Crepis  amang  the  vefcheli  and  coupis  all. 
The  dritik,  and  cik  the  ofFerandis  grete  and  fmall, 
Snokis  and  likis,  fyne  flil  the  altaris  left. 
And  BUT  mare  harme  in  the  graif  enterit  eft.** 

Booh  5.  pag.  130, 

'^  Thare  hartis  on  flocht,  fmytin  with  Ihame  fum  dele, 
BoT  glaid  and  ioly  in  hope  for  to  do  wele, 
Rafis  in  thare  breiftis  defyre  of  hie  renowne : 
Syne  but  delay  at  the  firft  trumpis  foune 
From  thare  marchis  attanis  forth  thay  iprent.*' 

Booke  5.  pag.  13  2, 


C  c  a 


I 


Anc 


196  ETYMOLOGY  OF  THE 

1 

♦♦  Anc  uthir  mache  to  him  w^s  focht  and  fpcrit ; 
Box  tharc  was  nane  of  all  the  rout  that  ftcrit, 
Na  durft  prcfume  mete  that  man  on  the  land. 
With  mals  or  burdoun,  to  debate  hand  for  hand, 
loly  and  glaid  therof  baith  all  and  fum. 
Into  bargane  wenyng  for  to  ouercum. 
Before  Eneas  feitte  ftude,  but  delay," 

Booke  5.  pag.  140. 

« 

"  The  tothir  anfwerd,  Nowthir  for  drede  nor  boift. 
The  luf  of  wourfchip  nor  honoure  went  away  is 
Box  certanly  the  dafit  blude  now  on  dayis 
Waxis  dolf  and  dull  throw  myne  unweildy  age. 
The  cald  body  has  mynyft  my  curage : 
BoT  war  I  now  as  umquhile  it  has  bene 
jing  as  ^jonc  wantoun  woiftare  fo  ftrang  thay  wene, 
je  had  I  now  fic  joutheid,  traiftis  me. 

But  ony  price  I  fuld  all  reddy  be : 

Na  lufty  bul  me  till  induce  fuld  nede. 

For  nouthir  I  fuld  haue  crauit  wage  nor  mcde. 

Quhen  this  was  faid  he  has  but  mare  abade 

Tua  kempis  burdouns  brocht,  and  before  thayni  laid." 

Booke  5.  pag.  140, 

^^  And  fyrft  to  hym  ran  Aceftcs  the  kyng, 
And  for  compaffioun  has  uphynt  in  fcild 
His  freynd  Entcllus  unto  him  euin  eild. 
BoT  nowthir  aftonift  nor  abafit  hereon. 
Mare  egirly  the  vailjeant  campion 
Agane  to  bargane  went  als  hate  as  fyre  : 
And  ardently  with  ftirie  and  mekle  boift 
Gan  dares  cache,  and  driue  ouer  al  the  coift : 
Now  with  the  richt  hand,  now  with  the  left  hand  he 
Doublis  dyntis,  and  but  abade  lete  fle  j 

The 


ENGLISH  CONJUNCTIONS.  197 

The  prince  Eneas  than  feand  this  dout. 

No  langar  fuffir  wald  fie  wraith  precede. 

Nor  feirs  Entcllus  mude  thu>  rage  and  fpre<Jc^ 

Box  of  the  bargane  maid  end,  but  delay.'* 

Booke  5.  pag.  143* 
**  In  nowmer  war  they  but  ane  few  menje. 

Box  thay  war  quyk,  and  valjeant  in  melle." 

Booke  5.  pag.  153. 

'^  Blyn  not,  blyn  not,  thou  grete  Troian  Enee, 
Of  thy  bedis  nor  prayeris,  quod  fche  : 
For  BOX  thou  do,  thir  grete  durris,  but  dred. 
And  griflie  jcttis  fall  ncucr  warp  on  bred.'* 

Booke  S.pag.  i64» 

'^  On  ficlike  wife  as  thare  thay  did  with  me, 
Grete  go(Mis  mot  the  Grekis  recompens, 
Gif  I  may  thig  ane  uengeance  but  offcns. 
Box  fay  me  this  agane,  freind,  all  togidder, 
Quhat  auenture^has  brocht  the  leuand  hidder  ?'* 

Booke  6.  pag.  182. 

'^  How  grete  apperance  is  in  him,  but  dout, 
Tyll  be  of  proues  and  ane  vailTcant  knycht : 
Box  ane  blak  fop  of  myft  als  dirk  as  nycht 
Wyth  drcry  fchaddow  bylappis  his  hedc." 

Booke  6.  pag.  197. 

**  Nor  mylknaw  not  the  condiciouns  of  us 
Latyne  pcpyll  and  folkis  of  Saturnus, 
Unconftrcnyt,  not  be  law  bound  thertyll. 
Box  be  our  inclinacioun  and  fre  wyll 
lufte  and  equale,  and  bux  ofFcnfis  ay, 
And  rculit  eftir  the  auld  goddis  way/' 

Booke  7.  pag.  aia. 

*•  Box 


^<  BoT  fen  that  Virga  ftandb  *trr  ecwhpare." 

"  Quhidder  gif  the  goddis,  or  fum  (prctis  filly 
Mouis  in  our  myndis  this  ardent  thochtful  fire. 
Or  gif  that  cucry  mannis  fchrcwit  dcfyrc 
Be  as  his  god  and  genius  in  that  place, 
I  wat  ncuer  how  it  ftandis,  box  this  lang  Ipacc 
My  mynd  mouis  to  me,  here  as  I  ftand, 
Batel  tfr  fom  grete  thyng  to  tak  CA  Iwnd: 
I  knaw  not  to  quhat  ptfrpdis  h  is  drdft, 
BoT  be  na  way  m^  I  tak  ris  tidr  reft; 
Behaldis  thou  not  fo  fordfie  fti/T  affray 
^^e  Rtftulianis  haidis  thaym  glaid  and  gay.*' 

^^  His  feris  h&hf  abotit  ontuety  fide. 

To  fe  quhaffra  the  gfotindin  dart  did  ^cfc^ 
Box  lo,  as  tJray  thus  wounderit  in  ctfray. 
This  ilk  Nifirs,  wourthin  proudc  and  gay. 
And  baldare  of  his  chance  fa  with  him  gone, 
Ane  uthir  takiil  aflayrt  he  anonc : 
And  wifch  ane  fcxmd  fmate  Tagus  bvt  remede/' 

Bcoke  ^.  fag.  291. 

^*  Agane  Eneas  ctn  Tarqiritus  drcs. 
And  to  fecounter  Enee  inflamyt  in  tenc, 
Kcft  hym  felf  in  i  eox  the  tothir  bux  fere 
Bure  at  hym  mychceiy  wyth  ane  lang  fpcre." 

Booke  10,  fag.  337. 

**  Sic  wourdis  vane  and  unfemelie  of  found 
Furth  warpis  wyde  this  Liger  fulichelie : 
Box  the  Troiane  baroiin  unabafitlie 
Na  wourdis  preifis  to  render  hun  agane  5 
Box  at  his  &  let  fle  ane  dart  or  flane, 

■  That 


ENGLISH  CONJUNCTIONS.  199 

That  hit  Lucagus  quhilk  fra  he  felt  the  dynt. 
The  ichaft  hinging  in  to  his  fchield,  but  ftynt 
Bad  driue  his  hors  and  chare  al  fordwert  ftreicht." 

Booke  10.  pag.  338, 

<f  BoT  quhat  awalis  bargane  or  ftrang  melle. 
Sync  jeiid  the  to  thy  fa,  but  ony  why.'* 

Prol.  to  Booke  11.  pag.  2S^* 

*^  Than  of  his  Ipeich  fo  wounderit  war  thay 
Kepit  thare  filence,  and  wiil  not  what  to  fay> 
BoT  athir  towart  uthir  turnis  but  mare. 
And  can  bchald  hi$  fallow  in  ane  ftare/* 

Booke  lu  pag.  364, 


<c 


Lat  neuir  demyt  be 


ThjC  buftuoufoes  of  ony  man  dant  the, 
BoT  that  thy  dochter,  O  thou  fader  gude> 
Unto  jone  wourthy  prince  of  gentill  bludc 
Be  gcuin  to  be  thy  fon  iniaw,  I  wys. 
As  he  that  wourthy  fie  ane  wedlok  is ; 
And  knyt  up  pecc  but  mare  difleuerance. 
With  all  eternall  band  of  alliauncc." 

Booke  1 K  f^.  374, 

*^  Tumus  and  thy  cheif  cietc  haue  I  faue, 
Sa  lang  as  that  the  &tis  fufferit  me, 
And  quhil  wefde  fifteris  fa  thclit  tb  be  : 
Bot  now  I  fe  that  joung  man  haift  but  fale 

To  mache  in  fcild  wyth  fatis  inequalc."  ♦ 

Booke  12.  fag.  412. 

*•  On  eucry  fyde  he  has  caffin  his  E  j 
And  at  the  lafl:  behaLiis  the  cietc, 
Saikles  of  batal,  fre  of  all  fie  (IryflTe, 
But  pane  or  traucl,  at  quiet  man  and  wyfit. 

5  Than 


aoo  ETYMOLOGY  OP  THE 

Than  of  ane  gretcr  bargane  in  his  cntcnt 

All  fuddanly  the  fygurc  dyd-  emprcnt.  ': 

And  on  anc  litHl  mote  afcendit  in  hye, 

Qiihare  fone  forgadderit  all  the  Troyane  army, 

And  thyck  about  hym  flokkand  can  but  baid, 

But  nowthir  fcheild  nor  wappinnis  doun  thay  laid.*' 

Baoke  12.  pag.  430. 

—  ^'  Ha !  How, 
Sa  grete  anc  ftorme  or  fpatc  of  felloun  ire. 
Under  thy  breift  thou  rollis  hait  as  fyrc  ? 
BoT  wirk  as  I  tlie  byd,  and  do  away 
That  wraith  confauit  but  ony  caus,  I  pray.'* 

£ooke  12.  pag.  442. 

The  Gloffarift  of  Douglas  contents  himfelf  with  explain- 
ing BOT  by  BUT* 

The  Gloffarift  to  Urry's  Edition  of  Chaucer  fays,--^ 
"  BoT  for  BUT  is  a  form  of  fpeech  frequently  ufed  in 
^*.  Chaucer  to  denote  the  greater  certainty  of  a  thing*^— 
This  is  a  moft  inexcufable  affertion  :  for  I  believe  t^e  place 
cited  in  the  Gloffary  is  the  only  inftance  ^in  this  edition  of 
Chaucer)  where  bot  is  ufed;  and  there  is  not  the  fmalleft 
Ihadow  of  reafon  for  forming  even  a  conjecture  in  favour 
of  this  unfatisfa6tory  affertion  :  unfatisfa(5lory,  even  if  the 
fa6t  had  been  fo;  becaufe  it  contains  no  explanation:  for 
why  Ihould  bot  denote  greater  certainty  ? 


And 


n* 


EN2(3LtSH  CONJUNCTIONS.  201 

I 

•And  hcrt  it  may  be  proper  to  obferve,  that  Gawin 
Dotigtaf^^g  language  (where  bot  is  very  frequently  found) 
though  written  about  a  century  after,  muft  yet  be  efteemed 
ikor'b'  tifncieiiit  than  idhaucer^ :  even  as  at  this  day  the  pre- 
fent  Engli^  Qwecb  in- Scotland  is^'  in  many  refpe(£tsj  more 
ancient  than  that  fpoken  in  England  fo  far  back  as  the 
i^igh  of  Qu^eA  Elizabeth  K  So  Mer.  Cafaubon  (do  tet, 
ling,  Ang.)  fays  of  his  time — "  Scotica  lingua  Anglica 
f<.  hodierna  purior." — Where  by  pur  tor  ^  he  means  nearer 

xty  xfie  '/\ngiO"^axon«  ..i.. .  ^  ^^. 

'         '    ' '  -  .    .         

So  G.Hickes,  in  his  Anglo-Saxon  Grammar,  (Chap.  5.) 
£ays — ^^ '  Scoti  in.  multis  Saxonizantes.^ 

■ 

But,  to  return  to  Mr.  Locke,  whom  (as  B.  Johnfon  fays 
of  Shakefpeare)  ^*  I  xeverence  on  this,  fide  of  idolatry  ;"  in 

tl^p^ve  inftances  which  he  has  given  iovjive  different  mean- 

■  ■  ■     •     ■  J- 

ings  of ;  the  word  b^t,  there  are  indeed  only  two  different 
meanings  + :  nor  could  ^he,  as  he  imagined  he  could,  have 

added 


iv{      I  ■  ■    r      I *■  ■  I 


--•      ■  ■ I     ■       11  ■  ■■1.1 


*  This  will  not'feem  at  all  extraordinary,  -if  ycxu-reafon  direftly  contrary 
to  Lord  Monboddo  on  this  fubjeft  ;  by  doing  which  you  will  •  generally  be 
right,  as  well  in  this  as  in  almoft  every  thing  ciie  which  he  has  advanced. 

f  *^  You  muft  anfwer,  that  Ihe.  was  brought  very  near  the  fire,  and  as 
**  good  as  thrown  in  3  or  elfe  that  (he  was  provoked  to  it  by  a  divine  infpi- 
*^  ration.     But,  but  that  another  divine  infpiration  moved  the  beholders 

D  d  to 


202  ETYMOLOGY  OF  THE 

added  any  other  iignifications  of  this  particle,  but  what  are 
to  be  found  in  bot  and  but  as  I  have  explained  them  *. 

But,  in  the  firjl,  thirds  fourth^  and  fifth  inftances,  is 
corruptly  put  for  bot,  the  imperative  of  Botan; 

In  the  fecond  inftance  only  it  is  put  for  Bute,  or  Bucan, 
.  or  Be-uran  +. 

In 

*'  to  believe  that  (he  did  therein  a  noble  adt,  this  aft  of  her's  might  have 
«*  been  calumniatedj  &c/V 

Donne's  B»«9«m7of,  Tart  H.  'Dtftina.  5,  Se5l.  8. 

In  the  above  paflage,  which  is  exceedingly  aukward,  but  is  ufed  in  both 
it*s  meanings  clofe  to  each  other :  and  the  impropriety  of  the  corruption 
appears  therefore  in  it's  moft  offenfive  point  of  view.  A  careful  author 
would  avoid  this^  by  placing  thefe  two  buts  at  a  diftance  from  each  other 
in  the  fentence,  or  by  changing  one  of  them  for  fome  other  equivalent 
word.  Whereas  had  the  corruption  not  taken  place,  he  might  without  any 
inelegance  (in  this  refpedt)  have  kept  the  conftruftion  of  the  fentence  as  it 
now  ftands :  for  nothing  would  have  offended  us,  had  it  run  thus — ^^  Box, 
"  butan  that  another  divine  inlpiration  moved  the  beholders,  &c.'' 

*  $•  Johnfon,  in  his  Dictionary,  has  numbered  up  eighteen  different  figni-. 
fications  (as  he  imagines)  of  but  :  which  however  are  all  reducible  to  bot 
and  Be-utan. 

f  ^'  I  faw  BUT  two  plants.'* 

Not  or  Ne  is  here  left  out  and  underftood,  which  ufed  formerly  to  be  in- 
fertedj  as  it  frequently  is  ftill* 

So 


ENGLISH  CONJUNCTIONS.  ao^ 

In  the  Jirjl  inftance,— *^  To  fay  no  tnore^   is  a  mere 
parenthefis :    and   Mr.  Locke  has  unwarily  attributed  to 

BUT, 


So  Chaucer, 

**  Tel  forth  your  tale,  fpareth  for  no  man. 
And  teche  us  yong  men  of  your  praftikc. 
Gladly  (quod  (he)  if  it  may  you  lykc. 
But  that  I  pray  to  all  this  company^ 
If  that  I  fpcke  after  my  fantafy. 
As  taketh  not  a  grefe  of  that  I  fay. 
For  myn  entent  is  not  but  to  play." 

Wife  of  Bathes  Prologue. 

"  I  ne  ufurpe  not  to  haue  founden  this  werke  of  my  labour  or  of  myne 
*'  engyn,  I  nam  but  a  leude  compylatour  of  the  laboure  of  olde  aftro- 
**  logiensj  and  haue  it  tranflatcd  in  myn  englyfshe/* 

IntroduSlion  to  Conclujyons  of  the  AfiroJabye, 

*'  Forfake  I  wol  at  home  myn  herytage 
And  as  I  fayd,  ben  of  your  courte  a  page 
If  that  ye  vouchefafe  that  in  this  place 
Ye  graunte  me  to  haue  fuche  a  grace 
That  I  may  haue  nat  but  my  meate  and  drinkc 
And  for  my  fuftynaunce  yet  wol  I  fwynke/* 

*'  Yet  were  it  better  I  were  your  wyfe 
Sithe  ye  ben  as  gentyl  borne  as  I 
And  haue  a  realme  nat  but  fafte  by." 

Ariadne.  Fol.  217.  pag.  1.  coL  1.  and  7.^ 

We  fliould  now  fay — my  intent  is  but  to  play. -^I  am  but  a  compiler y  &c. 

This  omiffion  of  the  negation  before  but,  thoujgh  now  very  common,  is 
one  of  the  mod  blameable  and  corrupt  abbreviations  of  conftruftion  which 
is  ufed  in  our  language ; .  and  could  never  have  obtained^  but  throu^  the 

D  d  2  utter 


€< 


TO4  ETYMOLOGY  OF  THE 

BUT,  the  meaning  contained  in  the  parenthefis  :  for  fup- 
pofe  the  inftance  had  been  this,— ^"  but  A?  proceed," — Or 
this, — "  BUT,  fo  go  fairly  through  this  matter."^ — Or  this, 
.!-«  BUT,  not  tojiop** 

t 

Does 

Utter  ignorance  of  the  meaning  of  the  word  but.  **  There  is  not  (fays 
"  Cliillingworth)  fo  much  ftrength  required  in  the  edifice  «s  in  the  foun- 
•'  dation;  and  if  but  wife  men  have  the  ordering  of  the  building,  they 
will  make  it  much  a  furer  thing,  that  the  foundation  Ihall  not  fail  the 
building,  than  that  the  building  (hall  not  fall  from  the  foundation.  And 
"  though  the  building  be  to  be  of  brick  or  ftone,  and  perhaps  of  wood ; 
**  yet  it  may  be  poffibly  they  will  have  a  rock  for  their  foundation  ;  whofe 
<^  ftability  is  a  much  more  indubitable  thing>  than  die  adherence  pf  the 
*^  ftrufture  to  it," 

It  (hpuld  be  written—"  If  mm  but  wife  men." — But  the  error  in  the 
conftruclion  of  tWs  fentence, .  will  not  excufe  the  .prcfcnt  minifter,  if  he 
neglcfts  the  matter  of  it.  The  blefllngs  or  execrations  of  all  pofterity  for 
ever  upon  the  name  of  Pitt,  {^'pledged  as  he  is)  will  depend  intircly  upon 
his  conduct  in  this  particular. 

The  reader  €f  this  edition  is  requeued  to  cbferve^  that  the  above  note  is  not 
infer  ted  apres  coup ;  bia  was  publijhed  in  the  firft  edition  of  this  volume  in 
1786  :  when  I  was  in  poffefjion  of  the  following  folemny  public  engagement  fron^ 
Mr.  Pitti  made  to  the  IVeflminJler  Delegates  in  1782. 

«  Sir, 

•f  1  am  extremely  lorry  that  I  was  not  at  home,  when  you  and  the  other 
^  ^ntlcmcn  from  the  Weftminftcr  Committee  did  me  the  honor  to  call. 
^  May  I  beg  the  favor  of  jrou  to  exprcls  that  I  am  truly  happy  to  find  that 
"  the  motion  o£  TuefS^y  laft,  has  the  approbation  of  fuch  zealous  friends 
•*  to  thc.public,.  aad;to  afliitc  -tbc  Coniauttec  that  my  exertions  Ihall  never 

"  be 


ENGLISH  CONJUNCTIONS.  9.05 

Does  BUT  in  any  of  thefe  inftances,  intimate  a  flop  of 
the  mind  in  the  courfe  it  was  going  ?  The  truth  is,  that 
BUT  itfelf  is  the  fartheft  of  any  word  in  the  language 
from    «  intimating  a  Jlop^     On  the  contrary  it  always 


•i«« 


**  be  wanting  m  fupport  of  a  mcafurc,  which  I  agree  with  them  in  thinking 
•*  effentialiy  neceflary  to  the  independence  of  Parliament,  and  to  the  liberty 
•*  of  the  people. 

"  I  have  the  honor  to  be,. 

"  with  great  refpeft  and  effieem, 

"  Sir,  your  moft  obedient  and 

ft 

"  moft  humbk  Servant 

<«  Lincoln's- Ihn^  ^^^     ^•.«. 

«  May  10.  «  W.   PITT," 

Although  T  had  long  known  the  old  deteftablt  maxim  of  folitkal  advent urersy 
{for  Philip  tvas  no  oth^r] — <*  To^mufc  boys  with  playthings  and.  men  widi 
*'  oaths" — yety  I  am  not  ajhamed  to  confefsy  T,  at  that  time,  placed  the  firmejf'f 
reliance  on  his  engagement :  and  in  confequence  of  my  full  faith  and  trtijiy 
gave  to  him  and  'to  his  adminifiration^  moji  efpecially .  when  it  tottered  and 
feemed  overthrown  {at  the  time  of  the  Regency  Bill  in  1788)  a  fupport  fo  zealous 
and  effectual  J  as  to  dr/iw  repeatedly  from  himjdf  and  his  friends  the  warmeji 
acknowledgments. 

This  letter  was  produced  by  me  upon  my  trial  at  the  Old  Bailey  in  the  year  • 
1794 :  when  fidelity  to  the  fentiments  it  contains ^  wasfericujly  and  unblaJIAngly 
imputed  to  me  as  High  Treafon.     The  original  of  this  letter  Mr.  Pitt,  uprn  his 
oathy  to  my  aftonijhment  acknowledged  to  be  in  his  own  handwriting  j  although 
every  trace  of  Djelioation  was  totally  effaced  from  bis  memory. 

intimates 


2o6  ETYMOLOGY  OF  THE 

intimates  fomething  more  *,  fomething  to  follow :  (as  in- 
deed it  does  in  this  very  inftance  of  Mr.  Locke's  ;  though 

we 


*  In  the  French,  Italian,  Spanifh,  Portugucfe,  Dutch,  and  fcvcral  other 
dead  and  living  languages,  the  very  word  more  is  ufed  for  this  conjunction 

BUT. 

The  French  anciendy  ufed  mais,  not  only  as  they  now  do  for  the  con- 
junction MAIS  i  but  alfo  as  they  now  ufe  plus  or  d*avaniage. — 

Y  puis  je  Mais  ? 
Je  n'en  puis  Mais^ 

arc  ftill  in  ufe  among  the  vulgar  people ;  in  both  which  expreffions  it  means 
more.     So  Henry  Efticne  ufcs  it  j 

^^  Sont  fi  bien  accouftumez  ^  cefte  fyncope,  ou  plutoft  apocope,  qu'ik 
en  font  quelquesfois  autant  aux  diflyllabes,  qui  n'en  peuvent  mais.'* 

H.  E.  de  la  precellence  du  langage  Francois ^  p.  i8. 


cc 


« 


Mais  vient  de  magis  (j*entens  mais  pour  d'avantage.**)     Id.  p.  131. 


"  Helas !  il  n'en  pouvoit  mais,  le  pauvre  prince,  ni  mort,  ny  vivant." 

Brantome. 

"  Enfin  aprcs  cent  tours  aiant  de  la  maniere 
Sur  ce  qui  n'en  peut  mais  decharge  fa  colere." 

Moliere.     Ecole  des  Femmes.  A.  4.  See.  6. 

In  the  fame  manner  the  Italians ; 

'^  lo  t'  ho  atato,  quanto  ho  potuto :  si  ch'  io  non  fo,  ch'  io  mi  ti  pofla 
piu  atare :  £  pero  qui  non  ha  ma  che  uno  compenfo.  Comincia  a 
piangere,  e  io  piangeroc  con  teco  infieme/' 

Cento  Novelle.  Nov.  35. 


ENGLISH  CONJUNCTIONS^  207 

we  know  not  what  that  fomething  is,  becaufe  the  fentence 
is  not  compleatedO  And  therefore  whenever  any  one  in 
difcoiirfe  finifties  his  words  with  but,  the  queftion  always 
follows — BUT  wbatf 

So  that  Shakefpeare  fpeaks  moft  truly  as  well  as  poeti- 
cally, when  he  gives  an  account  of  but,  very  dijOferent 
from  this  of  Mr.  Locke. 

*'  Meff.  Madam,  he's  well. 

''  Cleo.  Well  faid. 

*^  Mejf.  And  friends  with  Cxfar. 

"  Cleo.  Thou  art  an  honeft  man. 

•*  Meff.  Caefar  and  he  arc  greater  friends  than  ever. 

**  Cleo.  Make  thee  a  fortune  from  me. 

*'  MeJf.  But — yet — Madam,—- 

"  CUo.  I  do  not  like  but — yet.— It  does  allay 
^  The  good  precedent.     Fie  upon  but, — yet.— 
^«  But — YET — ^is  as  a  Jaylour,  to  bring  forth 
"  Some  monftrous  malefadtor." 

Anthony  and  Cleopatra^  Aft  H.  So.  5. 

*^  Fuc  un  fignore,  ch'  avea  uno  giullare  in  fua  corte,  c  quefto  giuUare 
**  r.adorava  ficome  un  fuo  Iddio.  Un  altro  giullare  vedendo  quefto,  fi 
*'  gliene  diffc  male,  e  diffe :  Or  cui  chiami  tu  Iddio  ?  Elli  non  c  ma  che 
^'  uno."  Cento  NovelU.  Nov.  18. 

In  the  fame  maimer  alfo  the  Spanifli  language  employs  mas  both  for  But 
and  More. 

*'  Es  la  verdad  la  que  Ma^  importa  a  los  principes,  y  la  que  menos  fc 
"  halla  en  los  palacios,"  Saavedra.  Corona  Gotbica. 

"  Obra  dc  Mas  novedad,  y  Mas  eftudio.*'    Id. 

3  Where 


ft08  BTTMOLOGY  OF  THE 

Where  yoii  may  obferve  that  yet  (tho'  ufed  elegantly 
here,  to  mark  more  ftroagly  the  hefitation  of  the  fpeaker) 
is  merely  fiiperfluous  to  the  fenfe ;  as  it  is  always  when 
ufed  after  90T :  for  either  bot  or  yet  :done  has  the  very 
fame  e£Fe<5t,  and  will  always  be  found  (efpecially  bot) 
to  ailay  equally  the ''  Good  'or  the  ^ad  ♦  precedent  \  by 
foriiething  MoAe  f  that  fdllbws;     For  Boran  means— ^to 

Boo^r, 

*  "  Sfeed.  Item,  She  hath  more  hairs  than  wit,  and  more  faults  than 
*^  hairs ;  but  more  wealth  than  faults. 

"  Laun.  Stop  there.  She  was  mine,  and  not  mine,  twice  or  thrice  in 
"  that  article.     Rchearfe  that  once  more. 

^'  Speed.  Item,  (he  hath  more  hair  than  wit. 

"  Laun.  What's  next  ? 

**  Speed.  And  more  faults  than  hah^. 

**  Laun.  That's  monftrous !  O  that  that  were  out ! 

*'  Speed.  But  more  wealth  than  faults. 

"  Laun.  Why  that  word  makes  the  faults  gracious.'* 

Here  the  word  but  allays  the  bad  precedent;  for  which,  without  any 
fliifting  of  its  own  intrinfic  fignification,  it  is  as  well  qualified  as  to  allay  the 
Good. 

t  So  Taflb, 

— '^  Am.  Oh,  che  mi  dici  ? 

"  Silvia  m'attende,  ignuda,  e  fola  ?  Ttr.  Sola, 
"  Se  non  quanto  v'e  Dafiie,  ch'  e  per  noi. 
"  Am.  Ignuda  clla  m'afpetta  ?  Ttr.  Ignuda :  ma— 
"  Am.  Oime,  cbe  ma  ?  Tu  taci  tu  m'  uccidi." 

u^/>//^,  Att.  II.  Sc.  3* 

6  Where 


ENGLISH  CONJUNCTIONS.  209 

.BOOT  *,  i.e.  to  fui)eradd  +,  to  fupply,  to  fubftitute,  to  atone 
for,  to  compenfate  with,  to  remedy  with,  to  mal^e  amends 
with,  to  add  fomething  more  in  order  to  make  up  a  de- 
ficiency in  fonaething  elfe, 

...  So  likewife  in  the  tJbird  and  fourth  inftances  (takea  from 
CUiUingworth)  J.     Mr.  Locke   has  attributed    to  but   a 

meaning 


Where  the  difference  of  the  conftrudion  in  the  Englifh  and  the  Italian  is 
worth  obiTcrving  \  and  the  reafon  evident,  why  in  the  queftion  confequent 
to  the  conjiin£tion>  what  is  placed  after  the  one«  but  before  the  other. 

J?^^/what?   7  f  What  more? 


1.  e. 

Che  ma  ? 


♦  S.  Johnfon,  and  others,  have  miftaken  the  expreffion — 75?  Boot— 
(which  ftill  remains  in  our  languagse)  for  a  fubflantive;  which  is  indeed 
the  Infinitive  of  the  fame  verb,  of  which  the  conjunftion  is  the  Imperative. 
As  the  Dutch  .alfo  ftUl  retain  Boetm  in  their  language,  with  the  fame 


meanmg. 


f  *'  Perhaps  it  may  be  thought  improper  for  me  to  addrcfs  you  on  thfs 
*'  fubjcdt.  But  a  moment^  my  Lords,  and  it  will  evidendy  appear^  that 
*^  you  are  equally  blameable  for  an  omiffion  of  duty  here  alfo.'* 

This  may  be  fuppofed  an  abbreviation  of  conftruflion,  for  **  but  indulge 
'^  me  with  a  moment,  my  Lords,  and  k  wiH,  &c."  but  there  is  no  o<xafion 
for  fuch  a  fuppofitiom 

%  Knott  had  faid,— ♦^  How  can  it  be  in  us  a  fundamental  error  to  fay, 
^'  the  Scripture  alone  is  not  judge  of  controver{ies«  seeing  (notwithftahd- 

E  c  «*  ing 


aio  ETYMOLOGY  OF  THE 

meaning  which  can  only  be  collected  from  the  words  whidi 
follow  it. 


But  Mr.  Locke  fays, — «  If  it  were  hu  buflnefs  «o 
«  examine  it  (but)  in  its  full  latitude." — And  that  he 
<*  intends  not  here  a  full  ex^ication  of  this  fort  <if  figrts.**— 
And  yet  he  adds,  that — ^**  the  inftances  he  has  given  in 
«  this  one  (but)  may  lead  us  into  the  contemplation  of 
**  feveral  aSiions  of  our  minds  in  difcourfing,  which  it  has 


ing  this  our  belief)  we  ufe  for  interpreting  of  Scripture  all  tiie  means 
which  they  prefcribcj  as  Tray  art  conferring  of.  Places,  confuldng  the 
originals,  &c." 

* 

To  which  Chillingworth  replies, 

^*  You  pray,  3ut  it  is  not  that  God  would  bring  you  to  the  true  rcli- 
**  gion,  BUT  that  he  would  confirm  you  in  your  own.  You  confer  places, 
**  BUT  it  is,  that  you  may  confirm  or  colour  over  with  pkufibie  difguifcs 
^^  your  erroneous -dodrines  j  not  that  you  may  judge  of  them  and  foifakc 
"  them,  if  there  be  reafon  for  it.  You  confult  the  originals,  but  you  rc- 
*^  gurd  them  not  when  they  make  againft  your  do6lrine  or  tranfladon." 

In  all'diefe  places,  but  j(i.  e.  bot,  or,  as  we  now  pronounce  the  verb, 
IOOt)  only  directs  (bmething  to  be  added  or  fuppTied,  in  order  to  make  up 
feme  deficiency  in  Knott's  expreffiona  of  •*  Pr^yery  conferring  of  places, 
*♦  &c/*  And  fo  far  .indeed  as  an  ^miffion  pf  fomcthing  is  improper,  bvt 
(by  ordering  it's  infertion)  may  be  faid  **  to  intimate  a  fupppfition  in  the 
"  mind  of  the  fpeaker,  of  fomething  otherwifc  than  it  fliould  b^."  But 
^hac  indfliatioii  m  only,  as  you  iec,  by  coi^quencci  and  iH)t  by  the  in- 

«*  found 


ENGLISH  CONJUNCTIONS.  2n 

^  found  a  way  to  intimate  to  otlaers  by  thefe  particles.'' 
And  thefe,  it  muft  be  remembered,  are  A^iions^  or  as  hA 
before  termed  them  thoughts  of  our  minds,  for  whidbt 
he  has  faid,  we  have  ^^  eith#r  mm  or  very  deficient  namesS 

Now  if  it  had  been  fo,  (which  in  truth  it  is  not)  it  was 
furely  for  that  reafon,  mbft  efpecially  the  bufkiefs  of  an 
Effay  on  human  underjlanding^  to  examine  thefe  Signs  in 
their  full  latitude :  and  to  give  a  full  explication  of  them. 
Inftead  of  which, .  neither .  Here^  nor  elfewherey  has  Mr. 
Locke  given  Any  explication  whatever. 

r 

Though  I  have  faid  much,  I  ihall  alfo  omit  much  whiph 
might  be  added  in  fupport  of  this  double  etymology  of 
but:  npr  fliould  I. have  dwelt  fd  long  upon  it,  but  in 

1 

compliment  to  Mr.  Locke ;  whofe  opinions  in  any  matter 
are  not  flightly  to  be  rejefted,  nor  can  they  be  modeftly 
controverted  without  very  ftrong  arguments. 

None  of  the  etymologifts  have  been  aware  of  this  cor- 
rupt ufe  of  one  word  for  /wo  *. 

Minlhew, 

•  Nor  have  etymologifts  been  any  more  aware  of  the  meaning  or  true 
derivation  of  the  words  corrcfpoijding  with  but  in  other  languages.  Voflius 
derives  the  Latin  conjunction  at  from  «T«f  \  and  ast  from  at,  ^*  inferto  s.** 

E  c  a  (But 


412  ETYMOLOGY  OF  THE 

Minlhew,  keeping  only  one  half  of  our  modem  but  in 
contemplation,  has  fought  for  its  derivation  in  the  Latin 
imperative  Puta. 

(But  how  or  why  s  happens  ta  be  infertcd,  he  does  not  iay.)  Now  to 
what  purpofe  is  fuch  fort  of  etymology  ?  Suppofc  it  was  derived  from  this 
doubtful  word  «T«f ,-  what  mtelHgence  does  this  give  us  ?  Why  not  as  well 
ftop  at  the  Latin  word  at,  as  at  the  Greek  word  cltu^  ?  Is  it  not  fuch  fort 
of  trifling  etymology  (for  I  will  not  give  even  that  name  to  what  is  faid  by 
Scaliger  and  Nunnefius  concerning  sed)  which  has  brought  all  etymological 
inquiry  into  difgrace  ? 

Voflius  is  indeed  a  great  authority  j  but,  when  he  has  nothing  to  juftify 
an  ufelefe  conjefture  but  a  fmiilarity  of  found,  we  ought  not  to  be  afraid  of 
oppofing  an  appearance  of  Reafon  to  him. 

It  fe  contrary  to  the  cuftomary  progrefs  of  corruption  in  words  to  derive 
AST  from  AT.  Words  do  not  gain  but  lofe  letters  in  their  progrefs;  nor 
has  unaccountable  accident  any  Ihare  in  their  corruption  j  there  is  always  a 
good  reafon  to  be  given  for  every  change  they  receive :  and,  by  a  good 
rcafonj  I  do  not  mean  thofe  cabaliftical  words  Mctathcfis,  Epenthefis,  &c. 
by  which  Etymologifts  work  fuch  miracles  j  but  at  Icaft  a  probable  or 
anatomical  reafon  for  thofe  not  arbitrary  operations. 

Adfiiy  Adfti  Afi^  At. — ^This  conjefture  is  not  a  little  ftrengthened  both 
by  the  antient  method  of  writing  this  conjunction,  and  by  the  reafon  which 
Scaliger  gives  for  it.—"  At  fuit  ad;  acceffionem  enim  dicit." 

De  C.  L.  L.  cap.  cLXxiri. 

I  am  not  at  all  afraid  of  being  ridiculed  for  the  above  derivation,  by  any 
one  who  will  give  himfelf  the  trouble  to  trace  the  words  (correlponding 
with  but)  of  any  language  to  their  fource :  though  they  Ihould  not  all  be 
quite  fo  obvious  as  the  French  Mais^  the  Italian  Ma^  the  Spanilh  Mas^  or 
liit  Dutch  Maar. 

6  Junius 


ENGLISH  CONJUNCTIONS.  313 

Junius  confines  his  explanation  to  the  other  half ;  which 
he  calls  its  "  primariam  fignificationentj* 

And  Skinner  willing  to  embrace  them  both,  found  no 
better  method  to  reconcile  two  contradiBory  meanings^  than 
to  fay  hardily  that  the  tranfition  from  one  *  to  the  other  + 
\(ras-— <<  LEVI  FLEXU  r 


Junius  fays—**  But,  Chaucero  t.  c.  v.  194.  bis  pofitum 
<*  pro  fine.  Primus  locus  eft  in  fummo  columnae ;-— but 
<<  temper aunce  in  tene^ — ^Alter  eft  in  column©  medio ; 

— "  His  golden  carte  with  fiery  hemes  bright 

"  Four  yoked  {tedes>  full  difFerent  of  hew 

"  But  baite  or  tiring  through  the  fpheres  drew." 


<^  ubi,  tamen  perperam,  primo  bout  pro  but  repofueram : 
^^  quod  itenim  delevi,  cum  (fub  finem  ejufdem  poematis) 
<^  incidiflem  in  hunc  locum ; 

"  But  mete  or  drinke  (he  drefled  her  to  lie 
"  In  a  darke  corner  of  the  hous  alone." 

^^  Atque  adeo  exinde  quoque  obfervare  coepi  frequen- 
*^  tiflimam  effe  banc  particulae  acceptionem.     In  ^Eneide 

*  Id  eft,  a  dircftion  to  leave  out  fomething. 
t  Id  eft,  a  dircftion  to  fupcradd  fomething, 

^^  quoque 


2X4  ETYMOLOGY  OF  THE 

<*  quoque  Scdtica  paflim  occurrunt."— <*  But  Jpof  or  fait ^ 

"  3»  5^' — *'  ^^"^  ^^y  indigence^  4.  20. — "  But  fentence 

"  or  ingyne*  5.  41. — "  Principal  poet  But  per  eP  9.  19. — 

«  Atque  ita  porro.     But  videtur  didum  quali  Be-ut,  pro 

<*  quo  Angli  dicunt  without  :  unde  quoque,  hujus  deri- 

•«  vationis  intuitu,  praefens  hujus  Particulae  acceptio  vide- 

«  bitur  oftendere  hanc  efle  primarium  ejus  Jignificationem^ 

The  extreme  careleflbefs  and  ignorance  of  Jtmiusy  in 
this  article  is  wonderful  and  beneath  a  comment. 

Skinner  fays, — **  But,  ut  ubi  dicimus — "  None  but 
«  be\ — ab  a.  s.  Bute,  Buran,  prater^  nijit  Jine\  Hinc, 
**  LEVI  FLEXU,  poftea  ccepit,  loco  antiqui  Anglo-faxonici 
**  AC,  Sedy  deiignare.  Bure  autem  8c  Buran  tandem  de- 
**  fle<5ti  polTunt  a  Praep*  Be,  circa ;  vel  Beon,  ejfe^  et  utc 
**  vel  utan,  foris,^ 

Mr.  Tyrwhit  in  his  Gloflary  fays — "  But.  prep.  Sax, 
*«  Without,  Gloff.  Ur. — I  cannot  fay  that  I  have  myfelf 
•<  obferved  this  prepofition  in  Chaucer,  but  I  may  have 
♦'  overlooked  it.  The  Saxons  ufed  it  very  frequently; 
•"  and  how  long  the  Scottiih  writers  have  laid  it  afide  I 
**  am  doubtful.     It  occurs  repeatedly  in  Bp.  Douglas.** 

Knowing 


ENGLISH  CONJUNCTIONS.  215 

•  Knowing  that  no  £ngli0iman  had  yet  laid  this  prepofiiion 
afidC)  I  was  curious  to  fee  how  many  fentences  Mr.  Tyrwhit 
himfelf  had  written  without  the  ufe  of  this  prepofition ; 
and  I  confefs  I  was  a  little  difappointed  in  not  meeting 
with  it  till  the  fourth  page  of  his  preface :  where  he  iays 
— ■<<  Paflages  which  have  nothing  to  recommend  them  to 
«  credit,  but  the  iingle  drcumftance  of  having  been  oftea 
<*  repeated.** 

So  in  Chaucer  throughout — "  Hys  ftudy  was  but  lytel 
**  on  the  Byble."  But  Mr.  Tyrwhit  was  not  aware  that, 
in  all  foch  inilances,  but  is  2&in\xc\^.^  prep(j^lionf  as,  any 
in  the  language. 


i     t 


WITHOUT, 

I 

But  (as  diftinguiflied  from  Bof)  and  without  have 
both  exactly  the  fame  meaning,  that  is,  in  modern  £i^lifh, 
neither  more  nor  lefs  than— jB^-o«/.  . 


And  they  were  both  originally  ufed  indifferently  either 
as  ConjunSfions  or  Prepojitions,  But  later  writers  having 
adopted  the  falfe  notions  and  di:Oin<Stions  of  language 
maintained  by  the  Greek  and  Latin  Grammarians,  have 
fucceffively  endeavoured  to  make  the  EngUftx  Language 
conform  more  and  more  to  tite  fame  rules.     Accordingly 

I  WITHr 


a  1 6  ETYMOLOGY  OF  THE 

WITHOUT,  in  approved  modem  fpeech*,  is  now  intirely 
confined  to  the  Office  of  a  Prepofition ;  and  but  is  generally 
though  not  always  ufed  as  a  ConjunSiion.  In  the  fame 
manner  as  Ntji  and  Bine  in  Latin  are  diftributed ;  which 
do  both  likewife  mean  exactly  the  fame,  with  no  other 
difference  than  that,  in  the  former  the  negation  precedes^ 
and  in  the  Other  it ^/^(?wj  the  verb. 

Skinner  only  fays, — "  Without,   ab  a,  s.  wi^utran, 
<<  Extra:!* 


< 


S.'Johnfon  makes  it  a  Prepofition,  an  Adverb,  and  a 
Conjunction ;  and  under  the  head  of  a  Conjunction,  fays, 
<*  Without,  ConjuntSt.  Unlefs ;  if  not ;  Except— JVo/  in 
«  ufe:' 

-  ■  • 

Its  true  derivation  and  meaning  are  the  fame  as  thofe  of 
BUT  (from  Buran.) 


♦  It  is  however  ufed  as  a  ConjunSim  by  Lord  Mansfield  in  Home's  Trial, 
page  56. 

**  It  cannot  be  read,  without  the  Attorney  General  confents  to  it." 

And  yet,  if  this  reverend  EarPs  authority  may  be  fafely  quoted  for  any 
thing,  it  mud  be  for  fFards.  It  is  fo  unibund  in  matter  of  law,  that  it  is 
frequently  rejected  even  by  himielf. 

It 


ENGLISH  CONJUNCTIONS.  217 

It  is  nothing  but  the  Imperative  pyji^utan,  from  the 
Anglo-faxon  and  Gothic  verb  peojiSan,  VAiKOAm  ^  which 
in  the  Anglo^-faxon  and  Engliflx  languages  is  yoked  and 
incorporated  with  the  Verb  Beon  efle.  And  this  will  ac- 
count to  Mr.  Tyrwhit  for  the  remark  which  he  has  made^ 
viz.  that-— *^  By  and  ff^ifJb  are  often  fynonymous  *;•' 

« 

m  .  » 

In  modern  Englilh  we  have  retained  only  a  fmall  portion 
of  it;  but  our  old  Englifli  authors  had  not  loft  the  ufe  of 
any  part  of  this  verb  peoji'San,  and  frequently  employed  it>v 
jnftead  of  be,  in. every  part  of  the  conjugation. 

**  But  I  a  draught  haue  of  thit  wclfc, 

»      *       '  *^;  Jh- whiche  my  dcth  is  and  my  lyfe ; 
"  My  ioyc  is  tourned  in  to  ft  rife, 
"  That  fobrc  fhall  I  neucr  wojithe,"  ' 

Gower.  Lib.  s^  FoL  12S;  Pag:,2.  CoL2^ 

»  •         «  • 

^«-Wo  woRTHE.  the  fayre  gemme  vertukfle      . 
'*  Wo  WORTH  that  hcrbe  alfo  that  doth  no  bote 
'^  Wo  WORTH  the  b'eautc  that  is  routhleflc  '   ' 

**  Wo  WORTH  that  wight  trede  eche  under  fote;!*'' 

Chaucer,   froylus.  Soke  3.  Fol.  165.  Pag.  1.  Col.  i. 


*  "  IVithout  md' Within.     Butan  and  Binnan :  originally,  I  fuppofe,  Bi 
"  uran  and  Bi  innan.    By  and  fVitb  arc  often  fynonyttiojis^*'*       Gloflary» 

F  f  "The* 


9t 


-liS  ETYMOLOGY  OF  THE 

"  The  broche  of  Thebes  was  of  fi«die  kyhdc 

**  So  ful  of  rubies  aod  of  ftones  of  Inde 

"  That  eucry  wight  that  fcttc  on  it  an  eye 

**  He  wendc  anone  to  worthe  out  of  his  mjmdeJ 

Cmplaxnt  of  Mars.  Fcl.  343.  Pag.  2.  CpI.  2. 

«  In  eais  thay  bark  I  compt  it  neuer  ane  mytc, 

*^  C^a  can  not  hald  tharc  pece  ar  fre  to  &te^ 

"  Chide  quhill  thare  hcdis  rifFe,  and  hals  worthe  hace.*' 

Douglas.  ProL  to  Booke  3,  Pag.  66. 

"  Thay  wourth  afFrayit  of  that  fuddane  fycht.'* 

Douglas.  Booke  8.  Pag.  244. 

**  Wo  WORTH  cuer  felfe  enuie.'* 

Gower.  Lib.  8.  Fol.  i8i*  Pag.  i.  Col.  a. 

<c  Wo  WORTH  all  flowc," 

Gowcr.  Lib.  %.  Fol.  i88«  Pag.  2.  Col.  i. 

^^  Sir  Thopas  wold  out  ryde 
*'  He  WORTH  upon  his  ftede  gray 
^  And  in  his  honde  a  launce  gay 
*^  A  long  Iwerdc  by  lus  fyde.'* 

Chaucer.  Ryme  of  Syr  Thopas.  Fol.  17a.  Pag.  2.  Col.  i. 

^^  O  mother  myn,  that  cleaped  were  Argyue 

^*  Wo  WORTH  that  day,  that  thou  me  bare  on  lyuc." 

Troylus.  Boke  2^  Fol.  186.  Pag.  2.  Col.  i. 

"  Than  in  my  mynd  of  mony  thing  is  I  mufit. 
And  to  the  goddes  of  vildemes,  as  is  ufit, 
Quilk  Hamadriades  halt,  I  wourfchip  maid^ 
<^  Beieiking  this  auifioun  worth  happy^ 
^^  And  chc  orakil  profperitc  fuld  fiffify.'* 

Douglas.  Booh  2.  Pag.  6%. 

"  Pallas 


CC 


ENGLISH  CONJUNCTIONS.,  9^%^ 

^  PaJQas  aftonift  of  fo  hie  ane  name 

^^  As  Dardanus,  abafit  worth  for  fchamc/'    - 

Douglas.  Booke  8.  P^g*  244«v 

^  His  hals  wo|lth  dry  of  bkide*'* 

Douglas.  Booke  t.  Pag.  if  Ok  s, 

*«  The  large  ground  worth  grifly  unto  fc/* 

Douglas.  Spoke  ii.  Pag.  ^9$.:; 

<<  In  lefuris  and  on  leyis  Utill  lanimes 

^  Full  tdt  and  trig  focht  bletand  to  thare  dammeij  . 

*^  Tydy  ky  lowis  velis,  by  thaym  rynnb> 

^  And  fhod  and  flekic  worth  thir  beiili&  fluanis." 

Douglas.  Prol.  to  Booke  1 2.  Pag.  402^ 

<«  Quhat  wenys  tfaoui  fteynd,  thy  craw  be  worthin  quhite/' 

Douglas.  Prol.  to  Booke  3.  Pag.  66^  . 

*^  An4  quhen  thay  bene  aflemblit  all  in  fere, 
"  Than  glaid  fcho  wourthis/* 

Douglas.  Booker 3.  Pag.^^t.:, 

•^  Eucr  as  the  batel  worthis  mare  crueL 
"  Be  efFufion  of  bludc  and  dyntis  fel." 

Douglas.  Booke  7.  Pag.  aj/. 

"  Wod  wroith  he  worthis  for  difdene  and  difpitc.*' 

Douglas.  Booke  i  a.  Pag.  423. .: 

jiND. 

M;  Cafaubon  fuppofes  and  to  be  derived  fk»m  the  Greek  . 
HTUy  poftea. 

F  f  A  Skinner  ; 


^^o  .  ETYMOLOGY  OF  THE'  f 

Skinner  fays — "  Nefcio  an  a  Lat.  Addere  <{,A.  Add\ 
**  interjedta  per  Epenthefin  n,  ut  in  Render  a  reddendo* 


•  •  • 


Lye  fuppoCes  it  to  be  derived  from  the  Greek  6t<,  adhuc, 

•  '  -  * 

prieeterea,  etiam,  quinetiam,  infuper. 


1  have  already  given  the  derivation  which,  I  believe, 
will  alone  ftand  examination.. 

% 

I  Ihall  only  remark  here,  how  ealily  men  take  upon 
truft,  how  willingly  they  are  fatisfied  with,  and  how  con- 
fidently they  repeat  after  others,  faHe  explanations  of  what 
they  do  not  nnderftand. — Conjundions,  it  feems,  are  to 
have  their  denomination  and  definition  from  the  ufe  to 
which  they  are  applied  :  per  accidens^  ejfentiam.  Prepofi- 
tions  connedt  words ;  but — "  the  Gonjundlion  connedts  or 
^*  joins  together  fentences ;  fo  as  out  of  ,two  to  make  one 
^^  fentence.  Thus — "  Tou  and  I  and  Peter^  rode  to 
"  London  -,"  is  one  fentence  made  up  of  three^  Sec."* 


♦  "  Petrus  et  Paulus  difputant :  id  eft,  Petrns  difputat  et  T aulas  dijputat:' 

Sanflii  Minerva,  Lib.  i.  cap.  xviir. 

So  again.  Lib.  3.  cap.  xiv.  "  Cicero  £s?  Jiltus  valent.  Figura  Syllepfis 
'Veft:  ut,  vaUtsCicerOy.^  valet  jilius:'  Which  Pei^oriius '  fufficietitly 
confutes,  by  thefe  inftances — "  Emi  librum  x  drachmis  &  iv  obolis." 
*'  Saulus  &  Paulus  funt  iidem." 

Well] 


.    ENGLISH  CONJUNCTION'S.  aat 

Well !    So  far  matters  feem  to  go  on  very  fmoothly. 

It  is, 

«  Tou  rode^  I  rode,  Peter  rodeP 

But  let  us  now  change  the  inftance,  and  try  fome  others, 

-  *         » 

>vhich,  are  full  as  common,  though  not  altogether  fo  cx)n- 
venient. 

Two  AND  two  are  four. 

A  B  and  B  c  and  c  a  form  a  Triangle. 

John  AND  Jane  are  a  handfome  couple. 

Does  A  B  form  a  triangle,  b  c  form  a  triangle  ?  Sec— Is 
John  a  couple  ? '  Is  Jane  a  couple  ? — ^Are  two  four  } 

If  the  definition  of  a  Conjundlion  is  adhered  to,  I  am 
afraid  that  and,  in  fuch  inftances,  will  appear  to  be  no 
more  a  Conjundtion,  (that  is  a  connecter  of  fentences) 
than  Though  in  the  inftance  I  have  given  under  that  word : 
or  than  Buty  in  Mr.  Locke's  fecond  inftance :  or  than  Elfe^ 
when  called  by  S.  Johnfon  a  Pronoun  ;  or  than  Sincey  when 
ufed  for  Si  thence  or  for  Syne.  In  Ihort,  I  am  afraid  that 
the  Grammarians  will  fcarcely  have  an  entire  CoryuncStion 
left.:  for  I  apprehend  that  there  is  not  one  of  thofe  words 
which  they  call  Conjunctions,  which  is  not  fometimes  ufed 
{and  that  very  properly)  without  conne6ling  fentences. 

LEST. 


ai%%  ETYMOLOGY  OF  THE 


LEST, 

Junius  only  fays — "  Lest,  /eq^,  minimus,  v.  little.^ 
Under  Leaji,  he  fays — **  Least,  leji,  minimus.  Con- 
**  tra£tum  eft  ex  tkuxt^o^.  v.  /iu/ef  parvus.*  And  imder 
/////(?)  to  which  he  refers  us>  there  is  nothing  to  the 
purpofe. 

Skinner  fays — "  Lest,  ab  a.  s.  La^*  minus,  q.  d.  quo 
*^  minus  hoc  fiat^ 

/ 

S.  Johnfon  fays, — "  Lest,  Conj.  (fronj  the  Adjedlive 
Leqff)  that  not!* 

This  laft  dedu^ion  is  a  curious  one  indeed ;  and  it 
would  puzzle  as  fagacious  a  reafbner  as  S.  Johnfon  to 
fupply  the  middle  fteps  to  his  conclulion  from  heafi  (which 
always  however  means  yo/«tf)  to  «  That  nof*  (which  means 
none  at  all.)  It  feems  as  if,  when  he  wrote  this,  he  had 
already  in  his  mind  a  preflcntiment  of  fome  future  occa- 
iion  in  which  fuch  reafoiiing .  would  be  convenient.  As 
thus, — **  The  Mother  Country,  the  Seat  of  Government, 
"  muft  neceffarily  enjoy  the  greateft  ihare  of  dignity, 
•*  power, ,  rights,  and  privileges :  an  united  or  aflbciated 
<<  Kingdom  muft  have  in  fome  degree  a  imaller  Ihare ;  and 

«  their 


.ENGLISH  CONJUNCTIONS.  223 

"  their  Colonies  the  leaji  Ihare ;"— That  is,  (according  to 
S.  Johnfon  *)  Hone  of  any  kind. 

It  has  been  propofed  by  no  fmall  authority  (Wallisr  fol" 
lowed  by  Lowth)  to  alter  the  fpelling  of  lest  to  Leqfi ; 
and  vice  ver^.  **  Multi,"  fays  Wallis,  "  pro  Left  fcribunt 
<*  heaft  (ut  diftinguatur  a  Conjun^tione  Lefty  ne^  ut  non :} 


JL^ 


♦  Johnfbn's  merit  ought  not  to  be  denied  to  him  j  but  his  Didionarjr  is 
die  moft  imperfeft  and  ^xoky,  and  the  leaft  valuable  of  any  of  hb  produc- 
tions ;  and  that  fhare  of  merit  which  it  poflefles^  makes  it  bjr  ib  much  the 
more  hurtful.  I  rejoice  however^  that  though  the  leaft  valuable,  he  found 
it  the  moft  profitable :  for  I  could  never  read  his  preface  without  fhedding 
a  tear*  And  yet  it  muft  be  confefTed,  that  his  Grammar  and  IBftory  and 
Dictionary  of  what  be  calls  the  Engliih  language^  are  in  all  refpedb  (except 
the  bulk  of  the  latter)  moft  truly  contemptible  performances ;  and  a  tt* 
proach  to  the  learnmg  and  indufhy  of  a  nation^  which  could  receive  them 
with  the  flighteft"  approbation. 

Nearly  one  third  of  this  Dictionary  is  as  much  the  language  of  the  Hot« 
tentots  as  of  the  Englifh ;  and  it  would  be  no  difficult  matter  fo  to  tranitate 
any  one  of  the  plwieft  and  moft  popular  numbers  of  the  Spe^ator  into  the 
Janguage  of  that  DiAionary,  that  no  mere  Englifhmanj  though  well  read 
in  his  own  language^  would  be  able  to  comprehend  one  fentence  of  it. 

It  appears  to  be  a  work  of  labour,  and  yet  is  in  truth  one  of  the  mol^ 
idle  performances  ever  ofiered  to  the  public :  compiled  by  an  author  ivho 
pofTefTed  not  one  fingle  requifite  for  the  undertakings  and  (being  a  publica^ 
tion  of  a  fet  of  bookieller»)  owing  its  fuccefs  to  that  very  circumftance 
which  alone  muft  make  it  impolBble  that  it  (hould  deferve  fuccefs. 

I  "  Verum 


2'24  ETYMOLOGY  OF  THE 

*^  Venim  omnino  contra  analogiam  Grammaticae.    Mallem 
"  ego  Adjedlivum  leji^  Conjundionem  leaji  fcribere.^ 

^<  The  fuperlative  Leaji^  fays  Lowth,  "  ought  radier 
"  to  be  written  without  the  a;  as  Dr.  Wallis has  long  ago* 
"  obferved.  The  Conjundlion  of  the  fame,  found  might 
^  be  written  with  the  a,  for  diftindtion/* 

S,  Johnfon  judicioufly  diflents  from  this  propofal,  but 
for  no  other  reafon,  but  becaufe  he  thinks  "  the  profit  is. 
^^  not  worth  the  change." 

Now  though  they  all  concur  in  the  fame  Etymology,  E 
will  venture  to  affirm  that  Lest,  for  Lefed  (as  hlefi  ior 
blejpedi  &c.)  is  nothing  elfe  but  the  participle  pall:  of 
Lcf an,  dimittere ;  and,  with  the  article  That  (either  ex-: 
prefled  or  underftood)  means  no  more  than  hoc  dimiffb  or 

quo  dimijfo  *. 

•*■        I.  ■  ■  I     ■■  1 1         ■  ■  ■  1    11    I    ■  — ——     I ,  „— — ,  ,1.  ,   ,    ., 

*  As  LES  the  Imperative  of  Ley^n  is  fometimes  ufed  for  unless,  as  has 
been  already  fhewn  under  the  article  Unlefs :  fo  is  the  fame  imperative  les. 
ibmctimes  ufed  inftead  of  the  participle  lest. 

"  I  knew  it  was  paft  four  houris  of  day> 
*'  And  thocht  I  wald  na  langare  ly  in  May  ; 
*'  Les  Phoebus  fuld  me  lofingerc  attaynt.'* 

G.  Douglas,  ProL  to  the  lath  book  ofEneados. 

'  6  And, 


ENGLISH  CONJUNCTIONS. 


225 


And,  if  this  explanation  and  etymology  of  lest  is 
right,  (of  which  I  have  not  the  fmalleft  doubt)  it  furnilhes 
one  caution  more  to  learned  Critics,  not  to  innovate  ralhly: 
Leji^  whilft  they  attempt  to  amend  a  language,  as  they 
imagine,  in  one  trifling  refpedt,  they  mar  it  io  others  of 
more  importance;  and  by  their  corrupt  alterations  and 
amendnlents,  confirm  error;  and  make  the  truth  more 
difficult  to  be  difcovered  by  thofe  who  come  aften 

Mn  Locke  fays,  and  it  is  agreed  on  all  iides^  that— 
"  it  is  in  the  right  ufe  of  thefe''  {Particles)  "  that  more 
^*  particularly  confifts  the  clearaefs  and  beauty  of  a  good 
^^  flyle  r'^  and  that,  ^*  thefe  words,  which  are  not  truly  by 
"  themfehes  the  names  of  any  ideas j  are  of  conftant  and  in* 
*^  difpenfible  ufe  in  language ;  and  do  much  contribute  to 
"  men's  well  expreffing  themfelves.'* 


Now  this,  I  am  perfuaded,  would  never  have  been  faid, 
had  thefe  Particles  been  underftood ;  for  it  •  proceeds  from 
nothing  but  the  difficulty  of  giving  any  rule  or  dire<5lion 
concerning  their  ufe ;  and  that  difficulty  arifes  from  a  mis- 
taken fuppofition  that  they  are  not  "  by  them/elves  the  names 
**  of  any  ideas  :^  and  in  that  cafe  indeed  I  do  not  fee  how 
any  rational  rules  concerning  their  ufe  could  poffibly  be 
given.     But  I  flatter  myfelf  that  henceforward^  the  true 

G  g         "^  force 


i26  ETYMOLOGY  OP  THE 

force  and  nature  of  thefe  words  being  clearly  underftood, 
the  proper  ufe  of  them  will  be  fo  evident,  that  any  rule 
concerning  their  ufe  will  be  totally  unnecelTary :  as  it  would 
be  thought  abfurd  to  inform  any  one  that  when  he  means 
to  direct  an  addition,  he  fhould  not  ufe  a  word  which 
directs  to  iake  away. 

I  am  induced  to  mention  this  in  this  place,  from  the 
very  improper  manner  in  which  lest  (more  than  any  other 
conjunction)  is  often  ufed  by  our  beft  authors :  thofe  who 
are  moft  converfant  with  the  learned  languages  being  moft 
likely  to  make  the  miftake. — **  Tou  make  ufe  of  fucb  in- 

< 

«*  <^re^  and  crooked  arts  as  tbe/e  to  blajl  my  reputation^  and 
"  to  poffefs  men's  minds  with  difaffeBion  to  my  perfon ;  lest 
••  per  adventure,  tbey  migbt  with  fame  indifference  hear  reafon 
**  from  meJ*  Chillingworth's  Preface  to  the  Author  of 
Charity  maintained,  8cc. 

« 

Here  lest  is  well  ufed — "  Tou  make  itfe  of  tbefe  arts ;" 
»— Why  ?  the  reafon  follows,— Lcfcb  that  i.  e.  Hoc  dimiffo 
— -•«  men  migbt  bear  reafon  from  /w^."— Therefore,— ■ 
"  you  ufe  tbefe  artsT*  . 

Indances  of  the  improper  ufe  of  lest  may  be  found  in 
almoft  every  author  that  ever  wrote  in  our  language; 

2  becaufe 


ENGLISH  CONJUNCTIONS.  2Z7 

becaufe  none  of  them  have  been  aware  of  the  true  mean- 
ing of  the  Word ;  and  have  been  mifled  by  fuppofing  it  to 
be  perfe6tly  correfpondent  to  fome  conjun(5tions  in  other 
languages;  which  it  is  not. 

Thus  King  Henry  the  Eighth,  in  ^  necejpary  DoSfrine,  8cc. 
Jixte  petition^  fays, — "  If  we  fuffer  the  fyrjle  fuggejtion  unto 
**  fynne  to  tarry  any  whyle  in  our  bartes,  it  is  great  peryll 
**  LEST  that  confent  and  dede  wyll  fokme  Jbortiy  after^   \  ' 

Thus  Afchamy  in  his  Scbolemajier,  fays,- — **  If  a  yorig 
•^  jentleman  wiU  venture  bimfelfe  into  the  compameoftuffiaHi^ 
•*  //  is  over  great  a  jeopardie^  list  their  facions^  fJiaHeriy 
**  tbougbtSy  taulke,  and  dedes  will  veriefone  be  ever  likei 


w  ■•* 


Any  tolerable  judge  of  Englifti  will  immediately  perceive 
fomething  aukward  and  improper  in  thefe  fentences ;  though 

•  ■ 

he  cannot  tell  why.  Yet  the  reafon  will  be  very  j^ain  to 
him,  when  he  knows  the  meaning  of  thefe  unmeaning 
particles  (as  they  have  been  called :)  for  he  will  then  fee  at 
once  that  lest  has  no  bufinefs  in  the  fentences;  the^e 
being  nothing  dlmiffo,  in  confequence  of  which  fomething 
elfe  would  follow :  and  that,  if  he  would  employ  lest, 
the  fentences  mufl  be  arranged  otherwife. 

.       .  .     G  g  a  As 


44^  ETYMOLOGY  OF  THE 

X 

As,—"  We  muji  take  beed  that  the  firji  fuggefiion  untojin^ 
*<  tarry  not  any  while  in  our  hearts-,  list  that,  fee.** 

<*  A  young  gentleman  Jhould  be  careful  not  to  venture 
«  bimfelff  &c.     Lest,  &c.** 


**  U  elt  bon  quelquefois  (fays  Leibnitz)  d'avoir  la  cxnn- 
*^  plaifance  d*examiner  certaines  objedtions :  car,  outre 
**  que  cela  peut  fervir  a  tirer  les  gens  de  leur  erreur,  il 
**  peut  irriver  que  nous  en  profitions  nous-m6mes.  Car 
"  les  paralogiftnes  fpecieux  renferment  fouvent  quelque 
«  ouverture  utile,  et  donnent  lieu  i  refoudre  quelques  dif- 
<*  ficultes  coniiderables.  C^e&.  pourquoi  j*ai  toujours  aime 
«  des  objections  ingenieufes  contre  mes  propres  fentiments, 
^<  et  je  ne  les  ai  jamais  examinees  fans  fruit  ^•'* 

I  ihaU,  in  this  inftance,  be  more  complaifant  than 
Leibditz;  and  will  defcend  to  examine  obje<Stions  which 
are  neither  fpecious  nor  ingenious  :  »id  the  rather,  becaufe 
(before  their  publication)  the  fubftance  of  the  Criticifms  on 
the  Hiverjions  of  Purley  was,  with  fingular  induibry  and  a 
chara^riftical  affectation,  goffiped  by  the  prefent  precious 
Secretary  at  War,  in  Payne  the  bookfeller*s  iftiop;    the 


*  tjfaix  it  Jfttdkie,    I^fwrs  it  U  tt^mitf  A  la/ei  out  la  raifon. 

I  c^nibal 


ENGLISH  CONJUNCTIONS.  229 

cannibal  commencing  with  this  modeft  obf»vation>  that — 
«  I  had  found  a  mare's  neft  *.** 


I  fhall  examine  them  in  this  place,  becaufe  one  fourth 
part  of  thefe  criticifms  (ao  pages  out  of  79)  is  employed 
in  obje(Stions  to  the  derivation  of  unless,  else,  and  lest  : 
which  have  all  three  one  meaning  (viz.  of  Separation)  and 
are  all,  as  I  contend,  portions  of  the  fame  verb  Lefan. 
i.  e.  of  On-lej-an,  S-lej-an,  Lefan. 

My  Norwich  critics  (for  I  fhall  couple  them)  "blame  me, 

I.  For  the  obfcurity  of  my  Title-page,  .  Page  2.  + 

2.  For 

I 

*  This  malignant  and  falie  obiervation  was  heard  with  an  appearance  of 
latisfadion  which  prudence  dictated  to  the  hearer ;  and  communicated  with 
diat  dilguft  which  a  liberal  royalifl  always  feels  at  Renegado  illiberality. — 
*•  No,  (faid  my  antipolitical  communicating  friend)  "  I  will  never  dcfccnd 
**  with  him  beneath  even  a  Japanefe :  and  I  remember  what  Voltaire  re- 
*•  marks  of  that  country; — ^Lc  Japon  ctait  partage  en  plufieurs  fcftcs, 
quoique  fous  un  roi  Pontife.  Mais  toutes  les  fe£les  fe  reuniflaient  dans 
Jes  memes  principes  dc  Morales.  Ccux  qui  croiaient  la  metempfycofc, 
*•  ct  ceux  qui  n'y  croiairent  pas,  s*  abftcnaient,  ct  s*  abfticnnent  encore 
^  aujour(Hiui,  de  manger  la  chair  dcs  animaux  qui  rendent  fervice  i  P  bomme" 

f  Vix  plane  a  me  impedrare  po0lim,  quin  cxemplum  fequar  Peiri  Fran^ 
i^ci  GiamiuUar a ^qm  librum  fuum  de  lingua:  Florentime  origine  fcrip- 
turn,  z  Jobams  Bapiifi^t  GtlUiy  viri  fibi  amicitia  ct  ihidiis  conjunfbiflim^, 

cognomine. 


430  ETYMOLOGY  OF  THE 

m 

2.  For  the  matter  of  my  Introduction,     Page  3. 

3.  For  the  place  of  my  Advertifement.     Page  21. 

4.  For  a  very  flrong  propenfion  towards  inaccuracy. 
Page  2. 

5.  For  having  *'  introduced  one  of  the  champions  for 
•*  intolerance,"  by  quoting  a  Roman  catholic  biftiop.     P.  4, 

6.  For  the  imperfe<Stion  of  my  Anglo-faxon  alphabet. 
Page  22. 

7.  And  finally,  For  my  politics.     Page  32.  * 

'  '    ■  III  ■    ■    ■      ^1    ,  ■  III  i^^i^ 

t 

cognoniinei  quern  in  fcribcndo  focium  ct  confiliarium  habuit,  II  Gello  nun- 
cupari  voluit.  Pcrinde  quidcm  et  mihi  Thwaitesii  nomine  librum  noftrum 
infcribendo>  fi  per  modeftiam  ejus  licerct>  nobis  faciendum  cflet, 

C  tSckes% 

*  Mr.  Secret^  and^  his  fccretary  will  not  be  Airprlfed  that  their  difap- 
probation  docs  not  move  me  i  when  they  confider  that,  as  far  as  corrupt 
and  unbridled  power  has  been  able  to  enforce  the  decree,  1  have,  on  account 
•f  theft:  politics, .  been,  for  the  laft  thirty  years,  robbed  of  the  fair  ufe  qf 
life,  inter di£ius  aqua  et  igni:  and,  by  what  I  can  prognofticate,  I  fbppofq  I 
«m  ftill  to  lay  down  my  life  for  them.  I  might  have  quitted  them,  as  Mf. 
Secretary  has  done,  and  have  received  the  reward  of  mV  treachery.  Bjjt 
my  poKtics  will  never  be  changed,  nor  be  kept  back  oh  any  occafion :  and 
whilft  1  have  my  life,  it  will  neither  ht  Embittered  by  any  regret  for  the 
{)afl:>  nor  fear  for  tht  fiiture.  * 

...  All 


ENGLISH  CONJUNCTIONS.  231 

t 

All  thefe  I  willingly  abandon  to  their  mercy  and  dif- 
cretion ;  although  they  have  not  (hewn  any  fym|)toms  of 
either. 

But  I  Ihould  be  forry.if  any  of  my  readers  were  haftily 
mifled  by  them  to  believe, 

I  ft.  That  "  Grammar  was  one  of  the  Firji  arts  which 
**  probably  engaged  the  attention  of  the  curious."    Pag.  4. 

t'or  the  contrary  is  not  a  matter  of  conjedture,  but  of 
hiftorical  fadt:  and  whoever  pleafes  may  know  at  what 
precife  period  Grammar,  as  an  art,  had  its  commencement 
in  every  nation  of  Europe, 

Or  2dly.  That  "  The  defire  which  arifes  in  the  mind, 
*^  next  to  that  of  communicating  thought,  is  certainly  to 
^^  ufe  fuch  ligns  as  will  convey  the  meaning  clearly  and 
^^  precifely.''     Pag.  19. 

For  a  defire  of  communicating  thought^  and  a  defire  of 

conveying  our  meaning  clearly  and  precifcly  (though  ex- 

preffed  by  different  words)  are  not  two  defires,  but  one 

defire  5  for  as  far  as  our  meaning  is  not  conveyed  clearly 

and  precifely,  it  is  not  conveyed  at  all ;  y&  far  there  is  no 

communication  of  thotight. 

Or 


232 


ETYMOLOGY  OF  THE 


Or  3dly.  That  **  This  defire  of  conveying  our  mean- 
<<  ing  clearly  and  precifely  naturally  leads  to  the  ufe  of 
«  abbreviations :  and  that  abbreviations  feem  to  bear  a 
**  much  ftronger  afl&nity  to  the  defire  of  perspicuity  than 
*<  to  that  of  difpatch.**     Pag.  20. 


For*  to  fatisfy  himfelf  that  the  defire  of  cleamefs  and 
perlpicuity  does  not  lead  to  the  ufe  of  abbreviations,  (which 
are  fubftitutes)  any  perfon  needs  only  to  confiilt  the  legal 
inftruments  of  any  civOized  nation  in  the  world :  for,  in 
thefe  inftruments,  perfpicuity  or  clearnefs  is  the  only  ob- 
jedt.  Now  thefe  legal  inftruments  have  always  been,  and 
always  muft  be,  remarkably  more  tedious  and  prolix  than 
any  other  writings,  in  which  the  fame  cleamefs  and  pre- 
cifion  are  not  equally  important.  For  abbreviations  open  a 
door  for  doubt ;  and,  by  the  ufe  of  them,  what  we  gain 
in  time  we  lofe  in  precifion  and  certainty.  In  common 
difcourfe  we  fave  time  by  ufing  the  fhort  fubftitutes  he 
and  ^HE  and  they  and  it  ;  and  (with  a  little  care  on  one 
fide  and  attention  on  the  other)  they  anfwer  our  purpofe 
very  well ;  or,  if  a  miftake  happens,  it  is  eafily  fet  right. 
But  this  fubftitution  will  not  be  rifqued  in  a  legal  inftru- 
ment ;  and  the  drawer  thinks  himfelf  compelled,  for  the 
fake  of  certainty  to  fay — he  (the  faid  John  A.)  to  him 
<the  faid  Thomas  B.)  'for  them  (the  faid  William  C.  an^ 

Anne 


ENGLISH  CONJUNCTIONS.  233 

Anne  D.)  as  often  as  thofe  perfons  are  mentioned  *.  And 
for  the  fame  reafon  he  is  compelled  to  employ  many  other 
prolixities  of  the  fame  kind. 

Or  4thly.  That  "  A  defire  of  variety  gave  birth  to 
"  Pronouns  in  language,  which  otherwife  would  not  have 
«  appeared  in  it.''     Pag.  ao. 

For  Pronouns  prevent  variety. 

Or  5thly.  That  "  Articles  and  Pronouns  are  neither 
^^  Nouns  nor  Verbs.**     Page  26. 

For  I  hope  hereafter  to  fatisfy  the  reader  that  they  arc 
nothing  elfe,  and  can  he  nothing  elfe. 

Or  6thly.  That  Johnfon  confidered  Skinner  as  fo  igno^ 
rant  that  his  authority  ought  not  to  be  regarded,    Pag.  39  f. 

*  Abbreviations  and  fubftitutes  undoubtedly  cannot  fafely  be  tnifted  in 
legal  inilruments.  But  it  is  an  unnecefTary  prolixity  and  great  abfurdity 
which  at  prefent  prevails,  to  retain  the  fubftitute  in  thcfe  writings  at  the 
fame  time  with  the  principal,  for  which  alone  the  fubftitute  is  ever  inferted 
and  for  which  it  is  merely  a  proxy.  He,  she,  they,  it,  who,  which,  &c. 
fhould  have  no  place  in  thefe  inftrumcnts,  but  be  altogether  banifhcd  from 
them.  And  I  know  a  Solicitor  of  eminence  who,  at  my  fuggcftion,  near 
twenty  years  ago,  did  banifli  them. 

f  ''  Skinner,  indeed,  tranflates  Onlejran,  or  rather  Slcj^an,  to  Dtjmijs. 
<^  But  Skinner  is  often  ignorant,  fays  Dr.  JohniXftl/* 

H  h  For 


234  ETYMOLOGY  OF  THE 

For  Johnfon  fpeaks  of  him  as  one  whom  <<  he  ought 
•*  not  to  mention  but  with  the  reverence  due  to  his  in- 
"  ftrudtor  and  benefadtor,"-  and  to  whom  he  was  chiefly 
indebted  for  his  northern  etymologies  *• 

*  « 

Or  ythly.  That  I  have  myfelf  reprefented  Junius  as  a 
**  very  carelefs  and  ignorant"  writer.     Pag.  5 1  +. 


4t 


For  (under  the  article  an)  I  have  noticed  "  the  judicious 
diftindtion  which  Johnfon  has  made  between  Jimius  and 
<^  Skinner/^  And  when  I  had  occafion  (under  the  article 
but)  to  fay  that  he  was  carelefs  and  ignorant  concerning 
that  particular  word,  I  mentioned  it  as  "  wonderfulP  But 
thus  thefe  critics  meanly  attempt  to  miflead  their  readers : 
catching  at  the  word  ignorant  (which  when  applied  to  a 
perfon  in  a  particular  inftange,  means  only  that  he  did  not 

*  "  For  the  Teutonic  etymologies  I  am  commonly  indebted  to  Junius 
•♦  and  Skinner,  the  only  names  which  I  have  forborn  to  quote  when  I  copied 
•*  their  books :  not  that  I  might  appropriate  their  labours  or  ufiirp  their 
••  honours,  but  that  I  might  fpare  a  perpetual  repetition  by  one  general 
•*  acknowledgment.  Thefe  I  ought  not  to  mention  but  with  the  reverence 
•*  due  to  inftruftors  and  benefadtors/'    Johnfon's  Preface* 

f  "  You  have  here,  however,  the  authority  of  Junius,  who  puts  dowa 
••  thefe  verbs  «s  being  the  origin  5  but,  I  have  yours  to  fay,  that  he  was 
^^  ibmctimes  very  carekft  and  ignorant/'    Page  51  of  the  Criticifms. 

invi» 


ENGLISH  CONJUNCTIONS.  435 

htew  that  particular  thing)  in  order  fraudulently  to  fallen 
an  imputation  of  general  ignorance. 

Or  8thly.  That  thofe  who  have  fpelled  less  with  a 
lingle  s,  were  not  "  civilized  people  *."  i.  e.  (I  fuppofe) 
not  capable  of  the  accuftomed  relations' of  peace  and  amity. 

Or  9thly.  That  <^  The  blemiflies  of  Johnfon's  Didli- 
*^  onary  are  not  of  the  kind,  quas  incuria  fudity  but  the 
<<  refult  of  too  much  nicety  and  exacStnefs.**  Pag.  46.— 
But  of  this  in  another  place :  for  it  is  of  more  confequence 
than  any  thing  which  relates  to  thefe  Norwich  Critics. 

Or,  lothly.  That  it  requires  much  practice  in  the 
Anglo-Saxon  or  old  Englifti  writers,  and  mw:h  attention  to 
the  circumftance,  to  obferve  *^  the  various  fpellings  of  one 
^*  and  the  fame  word  in  the  language  \.^ 

For  not  only  are  almoft  all  the  words  fpelled  differently^ 
by  different  authors  ;  but  even  by  the  fame  author,  in  the 


*  "  The  orthography  of  this  word,  I  prefume  to  fay,  is  less.  And  it 
*^  Ihould  feem  as  if  civilized  people  had  no  other  way  of  fpelling  it.*^     P.  40. 

f  "  My  tafte  for  the  Anglo-faxon  has  never  induced  me  to  attend  to  the 
*^  various  fpellings  of  one  and  the  fame  word  in  the  language/*  Page  ^  r 
of  the  Criticifms. 


H  h  2 


fame 


236  ETYMOLOGY  OF  THE 

fame  book,  in  the  fame  page,  and  frequently  in  the  fame 
Hne. 

Or,  iithly.  That  I  "  defire  to  pafs  my  fentiments 
"  upon  others,  as  articles  of  faith.^     Pag.  7  6  ^% 

My  critics  commence  with  a  folemn  proteftation,  that 
they  "  aim  at  nothing  but  a  fair  reprefentation  of  the 
"  truth*''     Pag.  V, 

* 

Yet  twice  in  the  7  th  page,  and  twice  in  the  8th  page> 
and  again  in  the  25  th  page  of  the  Criticifmsj  they  pretend 
to  quote  my  words  ;  and  falfely,  to  ferve  their  own  pur* 
pofe,  infert  a  word  of  their  own.  My  words  are—"  Ab- 
^*  breviations  employed  for  the  fake  of  difpatch.''  They, 
five  times  repeatedly,  affert  that  my  words  are — ^<  words 
**  necejfary  for  difpatch.** 

*  This  groundlefs  apprehcnfion  is  not  unnatural  in  one  of  my  critics* 
He  ftartles  at  his  own  exprefllon— an  article  of  £uth.  But  fear  not  mc^ 
Cafiander.  I  pay  the  fame  regard  to  a  fickly  confcience  that  I  do  to  a 
fickly  appetite  :  and  I  have-  known  thofe  who,  like  fome  honeft  fe£taries> 
have  fainted  at  the  fmcll  of  roaft  beef.  No,  I  fhall  never  wifh  to  hnpofe 
articles  of  feith  on  others,  though  I  am  not  feared  at  their  impofition  upon 
me.  I  ani  a  willing  conformift  to  all  that  is  not  fatal.  I  would  furely  rejeA 
poifon,  i.  e.  power  in  the  priefthood,  and  defpotifm  anywhere;  but  other- 
wife  1  am  not  dainty :  and  can  feed  heartily  upon  any  wholefbme  food,  both 
in  the  church  and  out  of  it;  although  it  might  happen  to  be  coarle and iiot 
ovcrpleafing  to  my  palate. 

la- 


ENGLISH  CONJUNCTIONS-  237 

In  their  8th  page  they  twice  aflert  that  I  "  rank  Articles^. 
<^  Prepojitionsj  and  Conjundiions^  under  the  title  of  Abbre^ 
"  viations :  and  in  their  nth  page  they  aflert,  that  I  have- 
^  made  ^*  Abbreviations  the  principal  object  of  the  work'*' 
I  have  publiftied,  i.  e-  of  the  firft. edition  of  this  volume- 

I  hope  I  have  there  fpoken  with  fufficient  eleamefs  to. 
make  it  imppjG^ble  for  any  attentive  reader  to  fall  into  fuch. 
an  error;  or  to  fuppofe  that  L  have  hitherto  fpoken  ona 
word  about  thofe  Abbreviations  which  compofe  my  fecond 
dafs.  It  is  evident  however  that  my  Critics  made  no  fuch 
miftake,  but  falfified  the  matter  wilfully  :  for,  in  theic 
35  th  page,  they  contradict  their  own  previous  ftatement^:, 
and  acknowledge  thefadt*— ^^  Conjundtions  in  your  fyftem 
^  (fay  they)  are  not  feparate  parts  of  fpeech,  but  words 
•*  belonging  to  the  fpecies  either,  of  Nouns  or  Verbs." 

I  hardly  think  it  neceflSry  to  inform  the  reader,  that  I^ 
have  hitherto  fpoken  little  of  the  Noufti,  nothing  of  the 
Kerb^  and  nothing  of  the  Abbreviations ; :  but  have  chiefly 
employed  myfelf  to  get  rid  of  the  faMe  dodtrme  concerning 
Gonjundtions,  Prepoiltions  and  Advwrbs.  The  method  I 
have  taken  may  perhaps  be  injiidicious :  indeed  I  have  been 
told  fo :  I  may  perhaps  have  begun  at  the  wrong  end :  but 
lidid  it  not  wantonly  or  carelefsly^ ,  but  after.the  moftma* 

3  tucej 


238  ETYMOLOGY  OF  THE 

ture  reflexion,  and  with  the  view  of  leflening  the  diffi- 
Gulties  and  fparing  the  labour  of  thofe  who  may  chufe  to 
proceed  with  me  in  this  enquiry.  Perhaps  when  we  come 
to  the  clofe  of  it,  my  readers  will  feel  with  me  (they  will 
hardly  feel  fo  forcibly  as  I  do)  the  juftnefs  of  the  following 
reflexion  of  Mr.  Necker— •"  Je  reviens  a  mon  trifte  travail. 
^*  On  aura  peine,  je  le  crains^  afe  former  \ine  idee  de.fon 
^^  etendue;  car,  enrefultaty  tout  deviant  Jimple :  etTun  des 
^  premiers  effets  de  la  methode,  c'eft  de  cacher  les  diffi- 
^^  cultes  vaincues :  aufli  dans  les  plus  grandes  chofes  comme 
**  dans  les  plus  petites,  tous  ceux  qui  jouiflent  de  T  ordre, 
*^  n'en  connoiflent  pas  le  merite  ^.'^ 

In  their  1 3th  page,  they  fay,  that  «« It  is  evident  from 
<*  my  words,'  that,  in  my  opinion,  Mr.  Locke  was  no  better 
<f  than  in  a  mift  when  he  wrote  his  famous  Eflay.** 

In  their  1 9th  page,  they  reprefent  me  (who  have  denied 
any  abftra<St  or  complex  ideas)  as  affirming — "  that,  in 
<*  my  opinion,  it  is  the  term  that  gives  birth  to  the  ab-p 
«  ftraa  idea.* 

Becaufe  I  have,  in  the  25  5th  page  of  my  firft  edition, 
*  obferved  that  "  it  is  contrary  to  the  cujlomary  progrefs  of 


*  Nouvcaux  Ecclairciffemcns  fur  le  comte  rendu. 

«  corruption 


ENGLISH  CONJUNCTIONS.  439 

<*  corruption  in  words  to  gain  letters ;"  and  in  the  i3Tft 
page,  that  <*  Letters^  like  fbldiers>  are  very  apt  to  defert 
<*  and  drop  off  in  a  long  march  :** — ^They  twice,  in  their 
41ft  page,  reprefent  me  as  denying  the  poffibUity  that  any 
word  ihould  ever  gain  a  letter  *,  or  be  written  by  any 
fucceeding  author  with  more  letters  than  by  his  ^edeceiTor.. 

Becaufe  I  have,  in  the  218th  page  of  my  firft  edition^ 
given  the  correfponding  Terminations  in  the  other  northern 
languages ;  which  terminations  I  fuppofe  likewife,  as  vi^ell 
as  LESS  (which  is  not  a  modem  Engliih  imperative)  to 
have  .been  originally  the  imperatives  of  their  verbs ;  They^ 
in  their  44th  page,  and  again  in  *their  46th  page,  charge 
me  with  i*  contending"  that  loos  (fo  written)  is  the  pre- 
fent  modern  imperative  in  Dutch. 

In  their  55  th  page,  though  I  call  Douglas  (in  the  very 
place  alluded  to  by*  them)  "  one  of  the  moft  common  of 
**  our  old  Engliih  authors  f  they  would  make  their  readers 
believe  that  I  produce  him  <*  as  an  Anglo-Saxon  writer." 

In  the  conclulion  of  their  Criticifms  they  fay — -"  Pro- 
*<  feffbr  Schultens  was  the  Jirji  philologift  who  fufpecled 

■ 

^-"— ^-      -     ^  -  -  -      -...  —  -      ..        -        .        ..        .-...■i 

*    I  had  given  inftanccs  in   Utiles^   Whiles^  Amiddes^  Amonges^  which 
afterwards  became  Unlejsy  Wbtlfiy  Amidfty  Amongfl. 

9  "  Prepofitions, 


'2^4'° 


ETYMOLOGY  OF 


«  Prepoifitions,  Conjundtions,  Particles  in  general  to  be  no 
^  more  than  Nouns  or  Verbs,  and  refufed  therefore  to 
<*  make  feparate  daflfes  of  them,  among  thofe  that  com- 
"**  prehend  the  Parts  of  Speech.  But  he  confined  himfelf 
**  in  the  application  of  this  truth  Xq  the  learned  languages, 
<*  You  are  the  firft  who  applied  it  to  thofe  which  are  called 
*<  modem.'* 


Thefe  are  the  gentlemen  who  commence  with  a  folemn 
proteftation,  that  they  **  aim  at  nothing  but  a  fair  repre- 
<*  fentation  of  the  truth."  And  yet,  in  the  above  extra^ 
there  is  not  a  fingle  propofition  that  does  not  convey^more 
than  one  wilful  fahhood* 


I  will  here  infert  flie  whole  which  Schultens  has  faid 
upon  the  fubjedl. 

«  S  E  C  T  I  O     V. 

**  Lxv.  Partes  orationis  Hebraeis  eaedem  quae  Graecis, 
^<  Latinis,  omnibus  populis.  Ad  tres  clafies  concinne  fatis 
<*  omnes  illae  partes  revocari  fblent,  Verbum,  Nomen, 
"  Particulam,     Ab  Arabibus  diftindtionem  banc  haufere 

« 

*<  primi  grammatici  Hebraeorum.  In  Gjarumia  habes, 
^*  Partes  orationis  tres  funt,  Nomen,  et  Verbum,  *  et  Par- 
^*  ticula,  quae  venit  in  fignificationem.     Apud  Rabbinos 

*<  iimiliter 


ENGLISH  CONJUNCTIONS.  441 

«  fimilitcr  Nomen,  AiStio,  id  e(t  Verbum,  et  Vox,  five 
**  Particula.  Veteres  Stoici  quatuor  clafles  fecere.  Alii 
**  plures,  alii  pauciores  adhuc,  folo  nomine  et  verbo  con- 
«  tenti.  Optima  divifio  Theode<9is,  et  Ariftotelis,  apud 
'^  Dion*  Halic.  in  cw[uit»,  pvfietrotf  avvStciiv;.  £am  laildat  unice 
**  Quintil.  Nomina,  Verba,  et  Convindtioncs,  reddens :  ut 
'*  nomina  exhibeant  maferiam,  verba  vim  fermonis,  in 
"  convi6tionibus  autem  compJexus  eorum  indicetur.  Con- 
«  fulendus  de  hifce  G.  J.  Vofs.  qui  dubium  cenfet  titmm. 
**  Orientales  hac  in  re  imitati  fint  Graecos,  an  Gi^aeci  potius 
*•  fecuti  fint  exemplum  Orientalium.  Mihi  Arabes  ex  Ari- 
"  ftotele  haufiffe,  planiiTume  liquet.* 

The  above  is  a  mere  tranfcript  from  Voffius,  to  whom 
Schultens  very  fiurly  refers  ns  *.     He  then  proceeds  to 

apply 

•  ''  De  numero  pardum  orationis  diu  eft,  quod  tribus  grammaticas 
controvcrfantuf.  Antiquiffima  eorum  eft  opinio,  qui  tres  faciunt  clafles. 
Eftque  ha^c  Arabum  quoquc  fententia,  quibus  hae  clafles  vocantur  No- 
men,  Verbum  et  Particula.  Hebrsei  quoquc  (qui  cum'Arabes  gram- 
maticam  fcribere  definercnt,  artcm  earn  Demum  fcribere  csepcrunt  %  quod 
"  ante  annos  contigit  circiter  quadringentos)  Hcbrsei,  inquam,  hac  in  re 
**  fecuti  funt  magiftros  fuos  Arabes.  Imo  vero  trium  claflium  numerum 
**  alije  etiam  Oricntis  linguas  retinent.  Dubium,  utrum  ea  in  re  Orientales 
*'  imitati  fint  antiquos  Grajcorum :  an  hi  potius  fecuti  fint  Orientalium 
'*  exemplum.  Utut  eft,  etiam  veteres  Gra^cos  tres  tantum  partes  agnovifle, 
*^  non  folum  autor  eft  Dionyfius :   fed  etiam  Quinftilianu*  teftatur^  ubi 

I  i  *^  hanc 


Cf 

cc 
It 

Cf 


44*  ETYMOLOGY  OF  THE 

apply  this  dodrine  in  the  Hebrew  language  alone.—— 
**  Idem  dixerim  de  methodo  grammaticam  texendi  fecun- 
*^  dum  has  orationis  partes.  Arabes  et  Judaei  a  verbo  in- 
^  cipere  folent,  quod  tanquam  radix  fit,  unde  Nomina  et 
*<  Vzrticulx  propagentur. 

^^  Verba  nempe  tanquam  radices  funt  unde  nomina^re?- 
^  pagantur^  variis  formis,  et  terminationibus  :  itemque 
^^  Particula;  fub  quibus  Pronomina,  Adverbia,  Praepofi- 
^  tione$9  Conjundtiones,  et  Interjedtiones  continentur.  Et 
**  harum  denfa  ilia  fylva  a  Nominibus  itwat  fuccrevit^ 
**  quin  ad  claflem  nominum  maximam  partem  referenda*'' 


<^  hanc  Ariftotelis  ipfius,  ac  Theodcdis  fententiam  fuifle  docet.    Idcmque 
**  dc  vctcribus  Grsecis  teftatur  Rabbmus  iftc  qui,  &c. 

*'  Atquc  ex  Arabibus  grammaticis  candem  fequitur  Giarumide  auflor . 
'^  Muhamed  Sanhagius.  Poflea  aucem  andquiflimi  Stoicorum  quacuor 
^^  dalles  fecerunt.  Imo  nee  defuere,  qui  alias  afferendo  divifiones  ampliorem 
'^  facerent  numerunt  Partium  oradonis.  Quorum  omnium  autor  nobis«» 
**  Dionyfius  Halicarnaffenfis.  Addam  et  infignem  locum  Quindilianiy— « 
"  Vetercs,  quorum  fuerunt  Ariftoteles  quoque,  atque  Theodedcs,  verba 
*'  modo  et  nomina  et  convindliones  tradiderunt.  Videlicet,  quod  in  verbis 
*'  vim  fermonis,  in  nominibus  maUriam^  in  convinAionibus  autem  cfM-- 
•*  plexum  conim  eflc  judicaverunt. — Sed  ut  omnis  haec  difputacio  melius  in- 
telligatur,  non  abs  re  erit,  ii  quas  a  Dionyfio,  et  Prifciano  fcribuntur 
accuradus  expendamus.  Duae  funt  principes  partes,  Nomen  et  Verbum  : 
de  quibus  folis  iccirco  Ariftoteles  agit,  libro  nipi  i^fkuvuoLq.'*    ' 

G.  y.  Voffius  de  arte  gram,  lib.  3.  cap,  i. 

SECTIO 


cc 
cc 


ENGLISH  CONJUNCTIONS.  243 

«  S  E  C  T  I  O     VI. 

^*  xci.  A  nomine  pergimus  ad  Particulas.  Eas  redle 
^*  dividunt  in  feparatas  et  infeparabiles.     Minus  commoda 

w 

"  diftindlis  cl.  Altingii  inter  particulas  declinabiles  et  inde- 

*^  clinabiles.    Ad  priores  refert  pronomina.    Ad  pofteriores 

•*  Adverbia,  Praepolitiones,  conjundtiones,  et  interjedtiones : 

*  Atqui  et  pronomina  quaedam  non  declinantur,  et  bona 

**  pars  adverbiorum,  ac  praepolitionum,   patitur  declina- 

*^  tionem,  quippe  quae  fnaxitnam  partem  funt  Nominaj  vel 

^*  Subjiantivaj  vel  Adjedtiva.     Hoc  fi  perlpexiflent  primi 

«  grammatid,  multo  felicius  naturam,  vim,  mutationem, 

^*  et  conftrudtionem  particularum  expedire  valuiffent.'* 

*^  xcvi.  Particulas  reliquas,  fub  quibus  adverbia,  prae- 
•<  pofitiones,  conjundliones,  et  interjedtiones  comprenfae, 
<*  minus  rite  indeclinabiles  vocari,  quod  re  vera  declinentur5 
^  prafeHim  adverbia  et  praepofitiones ;  utpote  veri  nominis 
<<  fubftantha  vel  adjeSiiva^  maximam  partem.  Redtius  in 
^  feparatas  et  infeparabiles  dirimuntur.  Separatarum  clafleB 
♦*  diftindtius  fubnotabo :  atque  fub  fingulis  fpecimina  quae- 
^*  dam  exhibebo. — Sic  reliqua  funt  originis  vel  fubjianttva 
^  vel  adjeBwa.  Horum  enuclcatio  ampHora  exigit  Jpatia. 
^  Nonnuila  infra  tangentur, 

I  i  2  **  Apud 


a44  JtTYMOLOGY  OF  THE 

**  Apud  Latinos  quoque  Conjundliones  mult  a  a  Nomi^ 
<*  nibus  oriunda,  ut  Ferum,  Vero,  verum  enimvero.  que" 
f<  madmodum.  quamquam,  Additum  et  Verbum  in  quam- 
"  liHt*  quolibft,  quovis.  Mcrvim  verbum  eft  Licet,  &c» 
^<  I>e  adverbiis  et  praepoiltionibus  idem  fubmonitum  velim.** 

•  ■ 

"^Thys  it  appears  that  Schtjltens,  without  reafbmng  at  aU 
Vpon  the  (ul^ei^,  .toplfL;  the  old  divifion  of  language  ex^l)S 
as  he  foun/d  it ;  and>  •  w^h  his  predeceflbrs  on  the  Oriental 
iQQgues,  coofldered  and  ranked  the  Particles,  as  a.  diftin^ 
part  of  fpeech.  But  h^  <pondemns  the  fubdivifion  of  pai> 
ticles  into  declina^  and  iwkflinabie,  and  proposes  to  divide 
them  m!to  fepavatf  ^Sk^  infeparable* 

In  my  opinion  neither  of  thefe  diftributioos  is  blameable' 
in  the  grammar  of  a  particular  language,  vi^hofe  obje(5):  is 
91)17  to  zf&iji  a  learner  of  that  language :  but  the  one  fubn 
4iMf^n  is  juft  as  unphilafopbieal  as  the  other.  If  the  Par» 
lfl<(?le8.  are  all  merely  Nouns  or  Verbs,  they  are  equally  fo 
whether  uTed  ieparately  or  not.  The  term  mjkpajced^let 
inftead  of  mt  feparatedf  is  likewife  }ufti6able  in  Schultena» 
\^'h«)  ccHifined  bioiielf  ta  a  dead  language ;  asd  vi^ho  did 
AQt  uitend  to  coaGder  tbe  nature  of  general  fpeech  :;  for> 

* 

in  a  dead  language,  authority  is  every  thing ;  and  thpfft 
vords  which  cannot  be  found  to  have  been  ufed  feparately 


446  ETYMOLdGY  OF  THE 

But  my  critics, "who  lay  th^  Schultens  fu/peS^^J,  in  five 
lines  farther  impudently  convert  y^is  fufpicion  into  a  Trutbi 
which  they  reprefent  him  as  having  demonftrated  or  at 
leaft  affeited  :  and  with  €quai  eflBxinterjr  they  tell  us^,  he 
applied  it  to  the  dead  languages  "i  ^\\^  khsA  I  applied  hi^ 
Truth  to  thofe  which  are  called  modern.  • 

It  is  however  of  little  confequence  to  the  reader  from 
what  quarter  he  may  receive  a  difcovered  truth ;  or  (if  it 
be  a  difcovery)  whofe  name  it  may  bear ;  noip  do  I  feel  the 
fmalleft  anxiety  on  the  fubjedt  But  bear  with  my  in- 
firmity, reader,  if  it  be  an  infirmity .-— The  enemies  of 
the  ejiqbiyhed  civil  liberties  of  my  country  have  hunted  me 
through  life,  without  a  fingle  perfonal  charge  agaihft  me 
through  the  whole  courfe  of  my  life ;  but  barely  becaufe 
I  early  defcried  their  confpiracy,  and  forefaw  and  foretold 
the  coming  ftorm,  and  have  to  the  utmoft  of  my  power 
UgAlly  refilled  their  corrupt^  tyrannical  and  fatal  innovations 
and  ufurpations :  They  have  deftroyed  my  fortunes :  They 
have  illegally  barred  and  interdicted  my  ufefulnefs  to  my- 
felf,  my  family,  my  fiieiidSf  and  my. country :.  They  have 
tortured  my  body  * :  They  have  aimed  at  my  life  and 
♦i.  ;       .    ..  honotir: 


>  ■!      I  *i  ■  I   ■   ■         ■!  I    rw  <  , 


•  > 


♦  The  anticnt  legal  and  mild  imprifonment  of  this  country  (niildi)oth  in 
manner  and  duration^  compared  to  what  we  now  fee)  was  always  held  to  be 

Torture 


ENGLISH  CON  JUNCTIONS.  247. 

honour  : — Caa  you  wonder  that,  whilft  one  of  thefe  critics 
takes  a  cowardl;^  advantage  (where  I  could  make  no  de- 
fence) to  brand  me  as  an  acquitted  Felon  ;  I  am  unwilling 
(where  I  can  make  a  defence)  that  he  Ihould,  in  con* 
junction  with  his  anonymous  aiTociate^  exhibit  me  as  a 
convidted  plagiary  and  impoftor  ?  But  no  more  of,  thefe 
cowardly  aflaffins.  t  cpnlign  them  to  the  lading  contempt 
they  have  well  earned,  and  which  no  future  Title  will  ever 
be  able  to  obliterate  from  the  name  of  Windham. 


It  may  however  be  ufeful  to  examine  the  objedtions  to 
my  explanation  of  UNLt:ss,  else,  and  lest;  which  are 
to  be  fpund  in  pages  38,  39,  40,  41,  42,  43,  44,  45, 
46,  47,  48,  51,  52,  53,  67,  68,  69,  70,  71,  72,  of 
the^'Criticifms  on  the  Diverfions  of  Purley. 

Four  inilances  are  produced,  and  only  four>  in  which  it 
is  contended  that  my  folution  cannot  be  admitted* 


Torture  and  even  civil  death.  What  would  our  old,  honeft,  uncorrupted 
lawyers  and  judges  (to  whom  and  to  the  law  of  the  land  the  word  close 
was  in  abhorrence)  what  would  they  have  faid  to  /even  mtmtbs  of  close 
cuftody,  fuch  as  I  have  lately  fuffered,  without  a  charge,  without  a  legal 
authority  (for  their  own  monftrous  law,  which  arbitrarily  fufpended  the 
Habeas  Corpus,  did  not  authorize  close  cuftody)  and  without  even  the  moft 
flimiy  pretence  of  any  occafion  for  it  ? 

:  \  *^  I  have 


n^ 


ETITMOLOGY  OF^  THE 


*  **  I  have  already  obferved***  (fay  the  Critics,  pj^e  53.) 

**-  that  it   [Sleran]  is  not  fufceptible  of  "the  fignification 

*«  you  have  all  along  affixed  to  it  as  its  primary  one ;  but 

<*  let  us  fuppofe  it  to  fignify  BiftfiifSf  and  nothing  'bdfides ; 

*«  we  (hall  find  many  phrafes  in  which  else  will  hardly 

«  bear  to  be  refolved  into  Hoc  di/miffb  * ;  witnefs  the  fol- 

*'  lowinv.  Nothing  elfe.    How  elfe,    WTMt  elfe.   Where  elfeP 


To  have  a  proof  of  the  folidity  or  futility  of  this  objec- 
tion, we  muft  have  compleat  fentences. 


Example  i.     Nothing  else. 

You  fliall  have  a  fool's  cap  for  your  pains ;  and  Nothing 

else,  ^         .  • 


.'  ■ 


Resolution. 

You  fhaJl  have  a  foors  cap  for  your  pains ;  and  Nothing 
BUT  a  fooPs  cap. 

i.  c.     But  for  Be-out. 

You  fhall  have  a  fool's  cap  for  your  pains ;  and  Nothing 
EXCEPT  a  fooPs  cap,  ^ 


♦  I  have  faid  that  else  is  the  Imperative  of  Sleran^  and  means  Dimiftfj 
hut  they  give  what  they  pleaie  as  my  words. 

o  Yoo 


ENGLISH  CONJUNCTIONS.  449 

You  fhall  have  a  fool*s  cap  for  your  pains ;  and,  if  not 
a  fool*s  cap,  Nothing* 

You  fhall  have  a  fool's  cap  for  your  pains ;  and,  dismiss 
the  foors  cap,  Nothing, 


Example  2.     How  else. 

If  a  nation's  liberties  cannot  be  fecured  by  a  fair  repre< 
fentation  of  the  people ;  How  else  can  they  be  fecured  ? 


Resolution. 

If  a  nation's  liberties  cannot  be  fecured  by  a  fair  repre- 
fentation  of  the  people ;  without  it.  How  can  they  be 
fecured  ?  i.  e.  Without  for  Be-out, 

If  a  nation's  liberties  cannot  be  fecured  by  a  fair  repre- 
fentation  of  the  people ;  except  by  a  fair  reprefentation 
of  the  people,  How  can  they  be  fecured  ? 

If  a  nation's  liberties  cannot  be  fecured  by  a  fair  repre- 
fehtatioii  of  the  people;  dismiss  it,  (i.  e.  a  fair  repre- 
fentation of  the  people)  How  can  they  be  fecured  ? 


^  k  Example 


as©  ETYMOLOGY  OF  THE 

Example  3.     H^at  sLarE. 

You  have  Ihewn  impotence  and  malice  enough ;  fFbat 
ELSE  have  you  fliewn  ? 

Resolution. 

You  have  fhewn  impotence  and  malice  enough ;  JTbat 
have  you  fliewn  but  impotence  and  malice  ?  Or,  What  but 
them  have  you  ihewn  ? 

You  have  (hewn  impotence  and  malice  enough ;  except 
them  (i.  e.  impotence  and  malice)  What  have  you  fliewn  ? 

You  have  fliewn  impotence  and  malice  enough ;  dismiss 
them,  What  have  you  fliewn  ? 

Example  4.     Where  else. 

« 

Honour  fliould  reflde  in  the  breaft  of  a  king ;  although 
it  might  not  be  found  any  IVbere  else. 

Resolution. 

Honour  fliould  reflde  in  the  breaft  of  a  king ;  although, 
except  in  the  bre»ft  of  a  king,  it  might  not  1^  found 
any  where* 

TC  Honour 


ENGLISH  CONJUNCTIONS.  251 

Honour  Ihoiild  refide  in  the  breaft  of  a  king ;  although) 
DISMISS  (i.  e.  Leave  out.  Take  away,  &c.)  the  breaft  of  a 
king,  it  might  not  be  found  any  where. 

Having  thus,  as  I  truft,  fatisfadtorily  re&lved  the  only 
inftances  they  have  produced  as  irreconcileable  with  my 
etymology ;  I  will  proceed  to  coaHder  their  other  obje<5tions. 

I. 

They  fay — «  The  Latin,  the  Italian,  the  French,  make 
«  ufe  here  [that  is,  where  the  Enghfh  ufe  unless]  of  the 
«  word  Except y     Pag..  38. 

The  Latin  commonly  employs  Nif.  i.  e.  Nejity  the 
negative  preceding  the  verb :  the  ItaUan,  fe  nen,  and  the 
French,  Ji  ne,  L  e.  Stf  notiy  Sit  ne,  the  negative  following 
the  verb :  Inftances  have  been  already  given  of  the  fame 
conjuniStive  i^fe  of  Be  not,  or  Be  it  not  in  Englifli.  The 
Italians  fometimes  ufe  In  fuori,  Senza  cbe ;  and,  if  they 
pleafe,  the  participle  £f^//o  .*  the  French  alfo  fometimes 
uie  Si  non  que.  Si  ce  ttefi  ^e,  A  moins  que,  A  moins  de ; 
and,  if  they  pleafe,  the  imperative  Except fz,  or  the  jiarti- 
ciple  Excepte,  And  any  word  or  words  directing  sepa- 
ration (and  none  other)  in  our  own,  or  in  any  othet 
language,  will  always  be  equivalent  to  unless.     And,  in- 

K  k  a  ftead 


as  a  ETYMOLOGY  OF  THE 

ftead  of  being  an  objection,    I  think  this  circumftance 
ftrongly  enforces  my  etymology. 

11. 

**  If  there  be  fuch  a  verb  [as  Onlcfan]  in  the  Anglo- 
*<  faxon,  it  muft  be  the  fame  as  Onlefon,  a  compound  of 
"  On  and  Lefan."     Pag.  39, 

Why  it  fliould  be  doubted  that  there  is  any  fuch  verb 
as  Onlefan  in  the  Anglo-faxon,  I  cannot  imagine ;  but  if 
any  one,  befide  my  critics,  fhould  jentertain  fuch  a  doubt, 
it  may  eafily  be  removed  by  opening  Lye's  Anglo-faxon 
dictionary  ;  where  both  Onlefan  and  Onlyran  will  be  founds 
with  various  references  to  the  places  'where  they  are  iifed. 
But  that  Onlerpn,  ihould  be  preferred  by  .the  critics  to 
Onleyan,   iS;  truly  extraordinary ;  Sa  h^ing  the  common 

■ 

termination  of  the  Anglo-faxon  Infini;tives«:    =,  ; 

III.  '  -  :*. 


t 


"  Lef^n  in  the.  Anglorfexon  does  not  fignify  to  Difmifs, 
"  Lcfan.  in  its  primary  Hgnification,  means  to  unbind  \  in. 
*<  its;  fecondacy,  torredeenti  to  unload^  to  fet  at  liberty*, 
*<  Solvere,  redimere,  liberare;,, fays  the  dictionary.  In  the 
<*  firft  fenfe.it  anfwers  to  the  Engliib,  to  Loofent  i,  e.  to 
*^  make  loofe,^    Pag..  39.:  >     ;. 

r  .;  "  It 


s. 


JENGLISH  CONJUNCTIONS.  15^ 

^^  It  is  poffible  that  -LES  fliould  be  the  Imperative  of 
*?  Lefan ;  but  less  can-have  no  pretenlions  to  it.^  Pag.  40, 

<^  No  fooner  has  the  imperative  of  the  Anglo- faxon  verb 
«  Leran  (hewn  itfelf  with  you  in  one  form,  than  it  ap- 
^  pears  in  another.  In  the  very  next  article  to  that  we 
^*  are  upon  here,  you  fuppofe  it  to  be,  not  les  but  leas. 
^^  But  it  will  be  faid,  how  can  Leaf  be  the  imperative,  of 
**  Lefan  ? — Certain  it  is,  that  the  verb  Lefan^  is  here  all 
^  of  a  fudden  transformed  into  Leofan,  in  confequence  of 
^  which  its  alliance  with  the  aflSix  Leay  becomes  unqueftion- 
*^  able.  But  Leofan  lignifies  perdere^  and  is  .the  fame  verb 
<«  with  the  EngKfti  to  LoJeP     Pag.  41.. 


.\. 


"  If  tJie  reader  will  call  his  eye  over  the  following  column^ 
he  will  find  that  no  transformation  has  been  fuddenly  made 
by  me ;  and  that  the  alteration  of  a  letter  in  the  ipelling 
of  LES,  LESS  and  leas,  will  be  no  reafonable  objedidoa  to 
the  etymology. 

AAnSQAH*     M*  Goth.     Imperat.  AA>iS« 

Lofijan  ■    -    ^ 

Loj-ian  ■  ■ ' '' 

•  > 

Loejrian 
Leofian.. 

Leofan 


«54  ETYMOLOGY  OF  THE 

Le(^"an  -  -  -  -  luiperat.  Laef . 

Leran    -  -.  -  -  Imperat,  Lq-,  L^*  Lcjjc. 

Lifan 

Lyipan 

S-lej-an     -  •  -  Imperat.  3U«f, 

S~l<raa 

pop-leofan 

pop-lyfan 

Oo-leran  -  -  -  Imperat.  Onl«f . 

Oa-lyran. 

Under  all  thefe  fhapes  diis  vrord  appears  in  the  Anglo* 
faxon  language :  for  I  take  them  all  to  be  one  and  the  fame 
verl)»  differently  pronounced,  and  thereforedifferently  fpelled. 
And  from  thisOothic  and  Anglo-faxon  verb,  I  imagine^  pro* 
oeed  not  only  the  conjundtions,  as  they  are  called,  unless, 
ELSE,  and  LEST,  and  the  privative  termination  less,  to- 
gether with  LESS  the  adjective,  as  it  is  called,  and  the  com- 
parative LESS,  and  the  fuperlative  least  ;  but  alfo 

To  Lo/e Lojf.     A  Lo/s, 

To  Loofe  -  *  -  Loqfe. 
To  Un-loofe 
To  Loo/en 

To 


ENGLISH  CONJUNCTIONS.  355 

To  Lejfem 

To  Leafe  -  -  -  A  Leaje  -- 

To  Re-leafs  —  A  Releafe^  A  Leafe  and  Releafe, 
To  go  a  Leafing  *► 

And  however  this  word  (for  they  are  all  one)  may  be 
now  diflferently  fpelledt  and  differently  ufcd  and  applied  in 

«  ■ 

modem  Engliih ;  the  reader  will  eafily  perceive  that  sep a- 
RATION  is  always  invariably  iignified  ia  every  ufe  and'ap- 
jdyk:ation  of  it  +. 


*  Leafing^  i.  e.  Loofing^  i.  c.  picking  up  that  which  is  Lot^Je  (i.  e.  Loofedy 
fcparatc  (i.  t.Jeparated)  or  detached  {detacbe)  from  the  fhcaf  {a). 

f  —  Clavumque  afHxus  ct  haercns 
Nufquam  A-mitiebat.  jEneis.     Ub.  5. 

Hi  never /(^nt  from  his  hand.  He  never  ^^ir/^rf  with.  Ht  ntvir  miffed 
his  hold;  He  never  let  go  his  hold.  He  never  /^  hi3  hold.  .  He  never 
hfofrd  his  hold.    He  never  lei  go.  ^ 

(a)  Sheaf  (A.  S.  fceap.  Dutch  Schoof)  which  we  call  a  fubftantive;  is  no  other  than 
the  paft  participle  jxeap  (or  fcexpeb)  from  the  verb  fcupian ;  which  paft  participle  in 
modern  Engllfh  we  write  Jbove  (or  Jhwti).  .  Sbiaf  means>  that  which  vkfiom^d  toother.  - 
N.  &  The  pail  participle  in  the  Anglo-faxon  is  nfually  formed  by  adding  ob  (which  we  now 
write  ed)  to  the  pneterperfe£i ;  but  the  praeterperfedl  itfelf  is  often  ufed  (both  in  Anglo- 
iaxon  and  in  Engliih)  for  the  pafl  participle^  without  the  tennin4ti99  tiffed.  Now  the 
praeterperfe£i  of  jxapan  is  f  ceap. 

Shaft  (A.  S.  fcea|;rt)  which  feems  to  us  fo  different  a  word  from  Sheaf,  is  yet  no  other 
thaa  the  fame  paft  participle  fceapob^  r^ca^,  fceap:.    Shaft, mtzxt^  that  which  hjhvi^d, 

I  will  \ 


a56  ETYMOLOGY  OF  THE 

I  win  give. a  few  inftances,  out  of  very  many,  to  ftiew 
how  varioufly  our  old  Eriglifti  writers  fpelled  and  ufed  this 
fame  word. 

^'  Pardoun  and  life  to  thir  tens  gif  we, 
(Quod  Priamus)  and  mercy  grantis  fre. 
And  firfl  of  all  the  mannakillis  and  hard  bandls 
Chargeit  he  Lous  of  this  ilk  mannis  handis. 

Bot  than  the  tothir  wicht. 

Full  weil  inftrukkit  of  Grekis  art  and  flicht, 
Lous  IT  and  laitlye  fred  of  all  his  bandis. 
Unto  the  fternis  heuit  up  his  handis/' 

Douglas.  Booke  i.  Pag.  43. 

^'  Bewalit  thair  feris  losit  on  the  flude." 

Booke  I.  Pag.  19. 


i% 


That  we  thy  blud,  thy  kinrcnt,  and  ofspring 
Has  LOSIT  oure  fchippis." 

Booke  I.  Pag.  20. 

'*  The  grcte  lois  of  Anchifes  rcgreting  fare. 
And  altogidir  gan  to  wepe  and  rare." 

Booke  5.  Pag.  148. 

"  For  neuir  fyne  with  ene  faw  I  her  eft. 
Nor  neuer  abak,  fra  fchc  was  loist  or  reft. 
Blent  I  agane." 

Booke  1.  Pag.  6j. 

« 
■ 

*'  His  nauy  loist  reparellit  I  but  fale. 
And  his  fcris  fred  from  the  deith  alhalc.'* 

Booke  4.  Pag.  112. 

"  Bcwaland 


ENGLISH  CONJUNCTTONSt  257 

^'  Bewaland  gretelye  in  his  mynde  penfife. 
For  that  his  freynd  was  fall,  and  loist  hb  life." 

Booke  5.  Pag.  157. 

^'  Dclift,  Drances,  be  not  abafit,  I  pray. 

For  thou  fall  neuer  leis,  fchortlie  I  the  fay. 

Be  my  wappin  nor  thii  rycht  hand  of  mync 

Sic  any  peinfhe  and  cativt  faule  as  thine." 

JSooke  II.  Pag.  377. 

**  But  yet  LESSE  thou  do  worfc,  take  a  wyfe 
Bet  is  to  wedde,  than  brenne  in  worie  wyfe." 

Driome  of  Chaucer.    Fol.  1259.  Pag.  2.  Col.  2. 

^  And  on  his  way  dian  is  he  fbrthe  yfarc 
In  hope  to  ben  lesseo  of  his  care." 

Chaucer.  Frankeleyns  Tale.  pol.  54,  Pag.  i.  Col.  i* 

"  Now  let  us  ftynt  of  Troylus  a  ftounde 
That  fareth  lyke  a  man,  that  hurt  is  fore 
And  is  fom  dele  of  akyng  of  his  wounde 
Ylessed  well,  but  heled  no  dele  more." 

Troylus.  Soke  i.  Fol.  163.  Pag.  i.  Col.  i. 

«^  And  gladly  lese  his  owne  right. 
To  make  an  other  lbse  his." 

Cower.  Lib.  1.  Fol.  28.  Pag.  2.  Col.  2. 

**  Lo  wherof  forcerie  fcrueth. 

Through  forcerie  his  loue  he  chefe 
Through  forcerie  his  life  he  lese." 

Lib.  5.  Fol.  137.  Pag.  I.  Col.  1. 

**  For  unto  loues  werke  on  night 
Hym  lacketh  both  will  and  might. 
No  wondre  is  in  luftie  place 
Of  loue  though  he  lese  grace." 

Lib,  7.  Fol.  143.  Pag.  i.  Col.  2. 

LI  "It 


258  ETYMOLOGY  OF  THE 

*^  It  fit  a  man  by  wcy  of  kynde 
To  loue,  but  it  is  not  kindc, 
A  man  for  loue  his  wit  to  lese/* 

Lib.  7.  FoL  167.  Pag.  u  Col.  Jw 

«*  Wyne  maketh  a  man  to  lese  wretchedly 
His  mynde,  and  his  lymmes  cucry  chone." 

Chaucer.  Sotnpners  Tale.  FoL  44.  Pag.  i .  Col.  i  ^ 

•'  There  may  nothing,  fo  God  my  foule  faue, 
Lykyng  to  you,  that  may  difplefc  me 
Ne  I  dcfire  nothyng  for  to  haue 
Nc  dred  for  to  lese,  faue  onely  ye." 

Clerke  of  Oxenfordes  Tale.  Fol.  48.  Pag.  i.  CoL  i.. 

^^  Him  neded  none  helpe,  if  he  ne  had.no  money  that 
^*  he  myght  lese.'' 

Boecius.  Boke  3.  Fol.  233.  Pag.  1.  Col.  u. 

**  AI  fhulde  I  dye,  I  wol  her  herte  fechc 
I  fhal  no  more  lesen  but  my  fpeche." 

TYoylus.  Boke  ^.  Fol.  194.  Pag.  2.  Col.  2. 

"  If  it  fo  be  that  thou  art  myghtye  ouer  thy  felfe^  that 
<*  is  to  fayne>  by  tranquyllyte  of  thy  foule,  than  hafte  thou 
^*  thynge  in  thy  power,  that  thou  noldeft  neuer  lesen." 

Boecius.  Boke  2.  Fol.  227.  Pag.  2.  Col.  2. 

"  The  m^fter  leseth  his  tyme  to  ler^ 
Whan  the  difciple  wol  not  here." 

Romaunt  of  the  Rcfe.  Fol.  130.  Page  i.  Col.  2. 

^  Ha,  how  grete  harme,  and  fkaith  for  cucrmarc 
That  child  has  cauchtj  throw  using  of  his  modcr." 

Douglas.  Booke  3..  Pag.  75^ 


ENGLISH  CONJUNCTIONS.  259 

IV. 

^*  Skinner,  Minfhew  and  Johnfon  agree  in  deriving  it 
*^  [else]  from  the  Greek  axxug  or  the  Latin  alias.  There 
"  is  indeed  as  much  reafon  to  fuppofe  that  the  Greeks  and 
**  Latins  borrowed  the  word  from  the  Germans,  as  that 
^^  thefe  borrowed  it  from  them. — Al  and  el  may  be  faid 
*^  to  convey  the  fame  idea  as  the  Greek  axxtaq  and  the  Latin 
*^  alias ;  and,  if  fo,  why  (hould  we  have  recourfe  to  the 
^*  verb  Sleran  to  find  their  origin?'*     Pag.  52. 

This  is  truly  curious :  else  from  «xx«c  or  alias ;  al- 
though there  is  as  much  reafon  to  fuppofe  that  the  Greeks 
and  Latins  borrowed  the  word  from  the  Germans,  as  that 
thefe  borrowed  it  from  them. 

But  al  and  el  convey  the  fame  idea  as  «xx«^  and  alias : 
—What  is  that  idea  ?  This  is  a  queftion  which  my  critics 
never  a£k  themfelves ;  and  yet  it  is  the  only  rational  objedt 
of  etymology.  Thefe  gentlemen  feem  to  think  that  tranf- 
lation  is  explanation.  Nor  have  they  ever  yet  ventured  to 
a£k  themfelves,  what  they  mean  ;  when  they  fay  that  any 
word  comes  from,  is  derived  from,  produced  from,  originates 
from,  or  gives  birth  to,  any  other  word.  Their  ignorance 
and  idlenefs  make  them  contented  with  this  vague  and 
mifapplied  metaphorical  language :  and  if  we  fhould  beg 

L  1  a  them 


a6o  ETYMOLOGY  OF  THE 

them  to  conlider  that  words  have  no  loco^motive  faculty, 
that  they  do  not  jflow  like  rivers,  nor  vegetate  like  plants, 
novfpiculate  like  falts,  nor  VLVt  generated  like  animals ;  they 
would  fay,  we  quibbled  with  them ;  and  might  perhaps 
in  their  fury  be  tempted  to  exert  againft  us  "  a  vigour 
"  beyond  the  law^^  And  yet,  untiU  they  can  get  rid  of 
thefe  metaphors  from  their  minds^  tliey  will  not  themfelves 
be  fit  for  etymology,  nor  furnifti  any  etymology  fit  for 
reafonable  men. 


V. 

«  As  there  is  an  equivalent  in  the  French  of  the  word 
UNLESS,  very  much  refembling  it  in  turn,  it  is  fame- 

<  what  extraordinary  that  it  ihould  never  have  occurred  to 

<  you,  that  poflibly  the  one  is  a  tranflation,  or  at  leaft  an 

*  imitation  of  the  other.     This  equivalent  is  A  moins  que. 

*  What  word  more  likely  to  have  given  birtb  to  unless  ; 

*  if  we  may  fuppofe  the  latter  to  be  a  compound  of  on 

*  and  LESS."     Pag.  39. 


"  You  add  in  a  note**—**  It  is  the  iame  imperative  les, 
"  placed  at  the  end  of  nouns  and  coalefcii^  Mdth  them, 
**  which  has  given  to  our  language  fuch  adjectives  as 
«*  Hopelefs,  Reftlefs,  &c.** — **  Thefe  words  have  been 
**  all  along  confidered  as  conopounds  of  Hspe^  Refi^  &c» 

a  **  and 


ENGLISH  CONJUNCTIONS.  261 

^*  and  the  adjedlive  Lefs,  Anglofaxon  Leaf,  and  Dutch 
**  Loos :  and  this  explanation  is  fo  natural^  fo  dear  and 
^*  fatisfadiory,  that  it  is  inconceivable  how  a  man,  who 
<^  has  any  notion  of  neatnefs  and  confiftency  in  etymo- 
*^  logical  difquilitions,  could  ever  think  of  their  being 
^^  compounds  of  a  noun,  and  the  imperative  of  the  verb 
•^  Leran.  Leas  and  Loos  are  ftiU  extant^  this  in  the 
«^  Dutch,  and  that  in  the  Anglo-iaxon  language :  and  both 
*^  anfwer  to  the  l^2!6x\  folutus  in  this  -phr^fe  foJutus  (ura. 

-^<  Multa  adje(^va  formantur  ex  fubftantivis  addenda 
*<  affixum  negativum  Leajr  vel  Le^e*  Hinc  apud  nos 
*^  careleffe^  &c.  Sciendum  vero  eft  Lea^  Anglo-faxonicuna 
<^  deduci  a  M.  Gothico  LauSj  quod  fignificat  libery  folutus^ 
*^  vacuus^  et  in  compofitione  privationem  vel  defeSum  de- 
"  notat.     Hickes*  A.  S*  Gram.  Pag.  42. 

"  Dr.  Johnfon  gives  us,  in  his  dictionary,  the  following 
^^  deduSlion  of  the  word  lest  ; — ^^  Lest,  conjunction  from 
^^  the  adjective  least.  That  not^  Pag.  70.  ^*  Your  im"^ 
^^  provement  upon  Dr.  Johnfon  is>  Z^is^^  *  tbat^  i.  e.  //b^r 

*  *'  L«:^^."— They  mifreprcfent  my  words  juft  as  it  fuits  their  purpofe. 
I  have  faid  lebed,  not  lezed.  They  have  not  introduced  the  2  here  by 
accident  i  for  the  change  is  important  to  the  etymology.    We  could  never 

arrive 


V 


a62 


ETYMOLOGY  OP  THE 


<*  Dimijffb.  Is  it  not  aftonifhing  that  a  man  Ihovdd  plume 
^<  himfelf  on  having  fubftituted  this  ftrange  and  far-fetched 
<^  manner  of  fpeaking,  for  the  eafy  and  natural  explana- 
"  tion  which  precedes  ?'*     Pag.  7 1 . 

^^  Lest,  in  the  fenfe  of  That  notj  or  the  Ne  emphati- 
^^  cum  of  the  Latin^  is  generally  written  in  the  ancient 
^*  language  thus,  L  J£st*  And  as  Laer  is  ufed  alfo  in  the 
^*  Anglo-faxon  for  the  comparative  of  lytrel,  parvus,  it  is 
^*  evident  that  'p  laef  anfwers  to  the  modern  the,  or  that 
«  LESS.      "P  Laep:,    to   that    least,    fupple>    of  all 

**    THINGS."      Pag.  7  a. 


I  may  anfwer  them  in  the  language  of  Shakefpeare, 


*'  merely  ye  are  death's  fook  j 

For  him  ye  labour  by  your  flight  to  fhun. 
And  yet  run  toward  him  ftilL" 

They  contend  that  the  conjundlion  unless,  and  the  pri- 
vative termination  less,  come  from  the  adjective  less  ; 
and  the  conjundlion  lest,  from  the  fuperlative  least. 
Well :  And  what  is  the  adjedlive  less  ?  What  is  the  com- 

arrivc  at  lest  from  lezed  :  for  (when  the  vowel  between  them  is  removed) 
z  muft  be  followed  by  d  in  pronunciation,  as  s  by  t,— Take  the  word 
Greafed  for  an  inftance :  if  you  remove  the  vowel,  you  muft  cithar  pro- 
nounce it  Gnaz'd,  or  Greas't. 

parative 


ENGLISH  CONJUNCTIONS,  263 

paratfve  LESS  ?  and  what  is  the  fuperlative  least  ?  I  fay, 
What  are  they  ?  for  that  is  the  rational  etymological  quef- 
tion ;  and  not,  whence  do  they  come. — It  is  with  words 
as  with  men  :  Call  this  Squire,  my  Lord  ;  then  he  will  be 
comparative  :  Call  him  by  the  new-fangled  title  of  Marquis, 
or  call  him  Duke ;  then  he  will  be  fuperlative :  And  yet 
whofoever  Ihall  truft  him,  or  have  to  do  with  him,  will 
find  ta  their  coft  that  it  is  the  fame  individual  Squire 
Windham  ftilL  So  neither  is  thefubftance  or  meaning  or 
real  import  or  value  of  any  word  altered  by  its  grammatical* 
clafs  and  denomination*- 

The  adjedlive  Lefs  and  the  comparative  Lefs  *  are  the* 
imperative  of  Lef an ;  and  the  fuperlative  Leqfi  is  the  paft^ 
participle:. 

The  idle  objedlions  of  thefe  critics  have  brought  me  ta 
mention  this  etymology  out  of  its  due  courfe  :  anjd  I  da 
not  intend  to  purfue  its  confequences  in  this  place.  But 
the  reader  will  fee  at  once  the  force  of  this  adje6live,as 
ufed  by  our  anceftors^  when,  inftead  ofnmeUenznd  eigbteerif 


*  Parvum — Comparative  Minus.     Little  or  Small — Comparative  Lefs. 

The  reader  wiD  not  be  furprifed  at  the  irregularity  (as  it  is  called)  of  the 
above  comparifons^  when  he  confiders  the  real  meaning- and  import  of 
Minus  and  L^s. 

^  they/ 


264  ETYMOLOGY  OP  THE 

they  faid,  Sn  l«f  tpentij — Tpa  laef  tpenrij.  i.  e.  Twenty, 
Difmifs  (or  Take  away)  one.  Twenty,  mfmifs  (or  T^>^^ 
/jw^y)  two.  We  alfo  fay, — ^<*  He  demanded  twenty :  I 
gave  him  two  Lefs^  i.  e,  I  gave  him  twenty,  Difmifs  two. 
The  fame  method  of  refohition  takes  place,  when  we  fpeak 
of  any  other  quantity  befides  bare  numbers :  nor  can  any 
inftance  of  the  ule  of  Le/s  or  Leaji  be  found  in  the  lan- 
guage, where  the  (ignification  of  DifmiJJtng,  feparating%  or 
Taking  (vmay^  is  not  conveyed. 

vr. 

"  Lest  for  lesed,  fay  you,  as  blest  for  blessed.— 
«  This  is  the  whole  of  what  you  tender  for  our  deference 
«  to  your  opinion  :  and  fmall  as  the  conflderation  is,  it  is 

* 

"  made  up  of  bad  coin.  Lesan  and  blessian  cannot, 
"  whatever  you  may  think  of  the  matter,  be  coupled  to- 
*^  gether,  as  belonging  to  one  and  the  fame  order  of  verbs ; 
**  the  one  has  a  fingle,  the  other  a  double  confonant  before 
<*  the  termination  of  the  infinitive  mood :  that  forms  a 
*^  long,  this  a  fhort  fyllable  in  the  participle  paffive ;  and 
<*  confequently,  though  the  latter  will  bear  the  contraction, 
<«  it  does  not  follow  that  the  former  will  bear  it  likewife. 
^^  And  thus  much  for  the  bad  coin  with  which  you  at- 
<^  tempt  to  put  us  off.*^     Pag.  68. 

The 


ENGLISH  CONJUNCTIONS.  -265 

, .  The  change  of  the  .  terminating  d  to  t  in  tlie  paft  pat^- 
ticiples  (or  in  any  other  words)  does  not  depend  either  upon 
iingle  or  double  confonants,  or  upon  the  length  or  Ihort- 
nefs  of  the  fyUables ;  but  lingly  upon  the  found  of  the 
^cpnfpnant  which  precedes  it.  There  is  an  anatomical 
reaibn  ajid  neceflity  for  it,  which  I  have  explained  in  pages 
130  and  402  of  the  firft  edition  of  this  volume.  But, 
without  tho^.reafon,  and  without  the  explanation,  the  fa(Sts 
are  fo  notorious  and  fo  conftantly  in  repetition,  that  they 
had  only  to  open  their  eyes  or  their  ears  to  avoid  fo  pal- 
pable an  abfurdity  as  this  rule  about  double  confonants  and 
long  fyUables,  which  they  have,  for  the  firft  time,  conjured 
up.  What  then ;  Should  I  not  fpeak  common  Englifh,  if 
I  fliould  fay  to  Mr.  Windham, 

"  Thou  haft  FacH  many  things ; 
"  Face  not  me.'' 

■ 

*.<  You  have  Fleec^t  the  people,  and  Bplic^t  a  roj^e  for  your 
**  own  neck."  .      . 

f 

I 

Here  are  no  double  confonants;   and  there   are  long 
fyUables.     But,  if  they  will  not  believe  their  eyes  and  their 

■     ...      ^ 

ears,  let  them  try  their  own  organs  of  fpeech ;  and  they 
will  find,  that  without  a  vowel  between  s  and  d  (or  an 
interval  equal  to  the  time  of  a  vowel)  they  cannot  foflow 

Mm  the 


s66  ETYMOLOGY  OF  THE 

die  fbtind  s  with  the  audibk  found  d  ;  and  that,  if  they 
will  termntte  with  z>,  they  mtift  change  the  preceding  s  to 
a  «.  AH  this  woidd  be  equally  true  of  the  found,  even  if 
the  f^e^ling  had  always  continued  with  a  p>  and  that  no 
writer  had  erer  conformed  his  orthography  to  the  pronuo;^ 
elation  *.  But  we  have  rery  numerous  written  authorities 
to  dumbfound  thefe  critics  i,  I  ftiaH  give  them  but  two  j 
believing  they  are  two  more  than  they  wifh  to  fee.. 

**  None  other  wife  negligent 

,  Than  I  you  faie,  haue  I  not  bee. 

In  good  feith  fbnne  wel  me  quenietlt> 

That  thou  thj  feUe  haft  thus  acqiQter 

Toward  this,  in  whiche  no  wighc 

Abide  maie,  for  in  an  houre 

He  -LEST  all  that  he  mak  l^x>ure 

The  longe  ycre." 

GovKT.  de  Cartf.  Amm.  Fd.  &8.  P)ag.-t.  Cat.  2. 

% 

^*  In  the  towne  of  Stafforde  was,  (William  of  Cantorbury 
•*  faitb^^  Ihofi  Capgraue  coafinainge  the  fame)  a  luftye 
^  minion,  a  trtille  for  the  nonce,  a  pece  for  a  prince,  with 

*  Dahaljan  faule  ppam  Sam  benbuai  ^2sj  lichoman  onlyjbe*  Bed,  j.  8. 
Onlyjrbe  inftcad  of  onlyyeb  i  the  e  being  removed  from  between  the  jr  and 
b,  this  word  muff  be  pronounced  onlyjxc.— "  D  literam  ratio  pofcit,  aures 
^  magis  audiunt  s." 

t  Saris  hoc  poM3it  admoncfldf  grada  dkifle>  piastor  agrefte^  qitofilam  et 
itois  ccr6M0feSit  fuiiuii  amftpritaj^bw  adhi^ici(&  non.  comprimuimir. 

**  whome 


•    ^ 


t  •  «)i: 


EN0LISH  CONJUNCTIONS.  %^y 

<^  whodne  by  teport,  the  kinge  at  itimes  was  very  famUiarec 
*^  Betwixte  this  waaton  damfei  or  {tfiQaerofe  pearlefle  aod 
*^  Becket  the  chanoeUoir»  wente  iftpre  of  {^efentes,  and  of 
^  Jknie  tokens  plenty,  and  aKp  the  toilers  met  at  times,  for 
«  when  he  reforted  fhidre,  at  no.  place  would  he  be  hoUed 
**  and  lodged,  but  wher  as  ftie  held  refidence.  In  the 
"  dedde  tyme  of  the  night  (the  ftorye  faithe)  was  it  her 
*<  generall  cuftome,  to  cckme  alone  to  his  bedchan^br-e  with 
*<  a  candle  in  her  hand,  to  toy  and  trifle  with  him.  Men 
**  are  not  fo  folifh,  but  they  can  wel  conceiue,  what 
*  chaftity  was  obfemed  in  thofl  prety,  nice»  and  wanton 
<<  metinges.  But  they  fay,  he  fore  amended  whan  he  was 
**  once  confecrated  archbiftiop  of  Cantorbury,  and  least  * 
**  well  his  accuftomed  ehbracinges  after  the  rules  of  loue, 
«<  and  became  in  lire  relygious,  that  afore  inlbde  was 

ff 

**  lecherous.^  ^ 

Ipbff  Bak.     J^es  of  Bnglifi_  Votaries., 
"Dedicated  to  kyng  Edwarde  the  fyxte.     1^5.0*. 


Since  is  a  very  corrupt  abbreviation ;  cohfpundjing  to?, 
gether  different  words  and  different  combinations  of  words : 

-    *^  V.  M  m  a  and 


26S  ETYMOLOGY  OP 

atid  is  therefore  in  modern  Engliih  improperly  made  (like 
but)  to  ferve  purpofes  which  no  one  word  in  any  other 
language  can  anfwer ;  becaufe  the  fame  accidental  cbrrup- 
tionS)  arifing  from  limilarity  of  found,  have  not  happened 
in  the  correfpondent  words  of  any  other  language. 

Where  we  now  employ  since  was  formerly  (according 
tx)  its  refpedtive  fignification)  ufed, 

*  '  ■ 

Sometimes, 

I.  Seo««an,  Slogan,   SeBSan,  Si^^an,  Si^en,  Sithen, 
Sithepce,  Sithens,  Sithnes,  Sithns :  . 


•  ■  •  «  /    • 

^  ,   ,  Sometimes, 


Sometimes, 

■  ■  ■  •  -     ." . .' 

2.. Syne,. Sine,  Sene,  Sen,  Syn,  Sin.: 


.  ( 


Sometime^) 

3.  Seand,  Seeing,  Seeing  that,  Seeing  as,  Sens,  Senfe, 
Sence. 

Sometimes^ 

4.  SiHSSty  Si%,  Sithe,  Sith,   Seen  that,  Seen  as,   Sens, 
Senfe,  Sence. 


■»  »      • 


•      f 


Accordingly  since  in  modem  Englifh,   is  vfed  four 
ways.     Two,    as  a  prepoiition;    conneding   (or  rather 


1 . 


ENGLISH  CONJUNCTIONS.  26g 

affeSiing")  words:    and  Two,  as  a  Conjundtion;    affeSiing 
fentcnces  *.        •       . 

When  ufed  as  a  prepoiition,  it  has  always  the  fignifica- 
t ion  either  of  the.  paft  participle  Seen  joined  to  tbencey 
(that  h,feen  and  thenceforward  :)—<ir  elfe  it  has  the  figni- 
fication  of  the  paft  Participle  feen  only. 

When  ufed  as  a  Gonjunftion,    it  has   fometimes  the  . 
fignification  of  the  prefent  participle  Seeing,  or  Seeing  that ; 
and  fometimes  the  fignification  of  the  paft  participle  Seen, 
or  Seen  that* 

As  a  Prepofition, 

I .  Since  (for  SiS^an,  Sithence,  or  Seen  and  thence^ 
forward)  as, 

«  Such  a  fyfiem  of  Government y  as  the  prefent,  has  not 

I'm  *  » 

^^' been  ventured  on  by  any  King  since  the  expuljion  of 
<^  James  the  Second.^ 


m^tm 


•  ■  .  A 

*  It  is  likcwife  ufed  adverbially :  as  when  we  fay— It  is  a  year  s'ince  : 
i;  e.  a-ycar  SEEN. 

In  French^-^iM^  annee  pa0e. 

In  Italian-— 1^  anno  fa :  i.  e.  fa/fo, 

2.  Since 

.'n').i;-  ■}   ■■ 


270  FTYMOLOGY  OF  THE    . 

a.  Since  (for  Syne,  Sene,  or  Seen)  as,  .  ' 

*<  Did  George   the  Third  reign   before   or  si\i<;Si  tbai^ 
«  example  P* 

A       As  a  Colijun6fion, 
3.  iSiNCE    (for    Scant),   Seeing,    Seeing   asV    br   Seeing 
that:)  as, 


:  '    M    •    < 


J    *  '       'Ml         \  '  •     • 


**  If  I  Jbould  labour  for  any  tytber  fatisfaSHon^  but  that 
**  of  my  own  fnindf  it  would  he  an  EffeSl  vf  pbhnzy  in  nte, 
"  not  of  hope',  since  it  is  not  Truth,  but  Opinion  that  can 
*<  travel  the  world  without  n  pajport,**'-  - 

4.  Since  (for  Si%%e»  Sith,  Seem  «^  or  Seen  that);  as, 

**  Since  Death  in  the  end  takes  from  all,  wbatfoever 
<*  Fortune  »r  Force  takes  from  ^tny  one ;  //  were  a  fooli/b 
^*  madnefs  in  she.,  Jbipwreck  of  worldly,  things^  where  all 
**  Jinks  hut  the  forrow,  to  fave  that  *.** 


XIIJM7V  ^lwcmmtnti/^^9 


**  eft  ^^  Acgli  ^Vi6  /ii^w^,  q.  d.  ier6  poft:  \\t  JSith  iWud 


MMM«P^M«a^nPWlW«VBi^*M^i^ 


♦  y«,  the  French  pad  participle  of  Feir,  tp  Sa,  k  ufed  .m  |I|€  ^c 
conjundtive  maincr  in  that  language.  ..-•.,,.:: 

V       j^      ^'  Dis  nous  pourquoi  Dieu  V  a  permis^ 
^i?«  qu'il  paroit  dc  fcs  amis  ?*' 

<^  ori^em 


•  i^ 


ENGLISH  CONJUNCTIONS.  ±yi 

<^  origtnem  traxerit  ex  Ulo  S6i(^n>  Sero ;  Quod  habet  Arg. 
«  Cod." 


fays,-*--**  SiNGB,  a  Teut.  %iM  Belg.  %inn. 
*  Poft,  Poftea,  Poftqoani.  Dodi.  Th*  H.  putat  deflexum 
"  h  noftro  Sitbence^  Non  abfurdum  etiam  eflet  declinare 
**  k  Lat.  Exbincy  b  &  n  abje«S\is>  &  x  fadllima  mutatione 
**  in  s  tranfeunte."  Again  he  fays,- — "  Sith  ab  a.  s. 
«  SiSSan,.  Sy««an..  Belg.  ^egD.  ^int.  Poft,.Poft  ilia,  Poftea."' 

9  I 

t 

After  the  explanation  I  have  given,  I  fuppofe  jt  un-!-' 
neceilary  to  point  out  the  particular  errors  of  the  above 
derivations.. 

Sitbetlce  and  Sithy  though  now  obfolete,  continued  in  = 
good  ufe  down  even  to  the  time  of  the  Stuarts. 

Hooker  in  his  writings  ufes  Sitbence^  Sitby  Seesngy  and 
Since.  The  two  fornver  he  always  properly  diftinguilhes ; 
ufing  Sifbince  for  the  true  import  of  the .  Anglo-Saxon 
SiSSan,  and  Sitb  for  the  true  import  of  the  Anglo-Saxon 
SiS^-.  -Which  is  the  more  extraordinary,  becaufe  authors 
of  the  firft  credit  had  very  long  before  Hooker's  time  con- 
fbuhded'them  together ; ,  and.  thereby  led  the  way  for  the 
'.:».  4.  prefent 


47  2  ETYMOLOGY  OF  THE 

■ 

prefent  indifcriminate  and  corrupt  ufc  of  since  in  all  the 
four  cafes  mentioned. 

Seeing  Hooker  ufes  fometimesj  pethaps,  (for  it  will  ad- 
rait  a  doubt*)  improperly.  And  since  (according  to  the 
corrupt  cuftom  which  has  now  uni verfally  prevailed  in  the 
language)  he  ufes  indifferently  either  for  Sdibencey  Seen^ 
Seeing  J  or  Sitb. 

THA  T. 

There  is  fomething  fo  very  fingular  in  the  ufe  of  this 
Conjundtion,  as  it  is  called,  that  one  ftiould  think  it  would 
alone,  if  attended  to,  have  been  fufficient  to  lead  the 
Grammarians  to  a  knowledge  of  moft  of  the  other  con- 
juncStions,  as  well  as  of  itfelf.  The  ufe  I  mean  is,  that 
the  conjundtion  that  generally  makes  apart  of,  and  keeps 


*  Such  IS  the  doubtful  ufc  of  it  by  Sh^kefpear  In  the  following  paflagc : 
"  Of  all  the  wonders  that  I  yet  hare  heard;  " '    •  • 
It  fccms  to  me  moft  ftraiigc  ^thatpfttn  (hould  icarj 
Seeing  that  death,  a  neceflary  end,     .\ 
Will  come  when  it  will  come," 
For  it  may  either  be  refolved  thuss — liftcmsftringd  that  men,  sEEmo 
that  death  will  come  when  it  ynh  come,  (howld  fearr'      - 


i  .    X  ■•  ■>   ' 


Or — Strange  that  men  fhould  fear ;  it  being  seen  that  death  will  come 
When  It  will  come. 

company 


ENGLISH  CONJUNCTIONS.  273 

company  with  moft  of  the  other  conjurnSlions,— 7/"  tbatf 
An  tbaty  Unlefs  tbaty  TboUgb  tbaty  But  tbaty  Without  tbat^ 
Left  tbatf  Since  tbaty  Save  tbat,  Except  tbaty  Sec.  is  the 
conftruiStion  of  moft  of  the  fentences  where  any  of  thofe 
conjunctions  are  ufed. 

Is  it  not  an  obvious  queftiofl  then,  to  aik»  Why  this 
conjun<Stion  alone  fhould  be  fo  peculiarly  diftinguifhed  from 
all  the  reft  of  the  fame  family?  And  why  this  alone 
Ihould  be  able  to  connect  itfelf  with,  and  indeed  be  ufually 
neceftary  to  almoft  all  the  others  ?  So  neoeftary,  that  even 
when  it  is  compounded  with  another  conjunction,  and 
drawn  into  it  fo  as  to  become  one  word,  (as  it  is  with  Jitb 
^vidijince)  we  are  ftill  forced  to  employ  again  this  neceffary 
index,  in  order  to  precede,  and  fo  point  out  the  fentence 
which  is  to  be  afieCted  by  the  other  Conjunction  ? 

B. 

£)e,  in  the  Anglo-Saxon,  meaning  that,  I  can  eafil/ 
perceive  that  sith  (which  is  no  other  than  the  Anglo- 
Saxon  Si^e)  includes  that.  But  when  since  is  (as  you 
here  confider  it)  a  corruption  for  Seeing- as  and  Seenras; 
how  does  it  then  include  that  ? — In  fhort  what  is  as  ? 
For  I  can  gather  no  more  from  the  Etymologifts  concem- 

N  n  ing 


«74  ETYMOLOGY  OF  TH£ 

ing  it,  than  that  it  is  derived  either  from  eSg  or  from  als*: 
But  ftin  this  explains  nothing :  for  what  «V  is,  or  als,  re- 
mains likewife  a  fecret, 

H. 

The  truth  is  that  as  is  alfo  an  article ;  and  (however 
and  whenever  ufed  m  Engliih)  means  the  fame  as  //,  or 
Tbatr  or  Wbicb,  in  the  German,  where  it  ftill  evidently 
itetains  its  original  fignification  and  ufe,  (as  so  f'allb  does)> 
k  is  written— Ej". 

It 


mMh 


*  Junius  faysv — "  As,  «/,  Jicut,  Grsects  eft  mV  Skinner>  wkom  %^ 
Johnfoii  follows^  fays — <'  as  a  Teut»  ^i[f>  ficut;  eliib  firil*  propter  eupho-^ 
^  niam  intermedio  ij^ 

t  The  German,  so  and  the  EnglHh  so  (though  in  one  language  it  i9 
called  an  Adverb  or  Conjunffian ;  and  in  the  other,  an  Article  or  Proncun^ 
are  yet  both  of  them  derived  from  the  Gothic  article  SA»  SR.  And  have 
in  Mb  languages  retained  the  original  meaning,  viz.  //,  or  That. 

Mr.  Tyrwhit  indeed  (not  perccivmg  that  ^/-ei-and  j^-fo  are  different 
compounds),  in  a  note  on  the  Canterbury  Tales,  V.  7327.  lays — "  Out 
'^  AS  is  the  &me  with  Ab.  Teut.  and  Sax.  It  is  only  a  further  corruption 
"  of  A^0.*^  But  the  ^Orffip^tp^iV^/  opinions  of  Mn  Tyrwhit  (who  derives 
Per  the  Ncnes.  from  Pr6  nunc)  merit  not  the  fmalleft  attention. 


Dn  Lowth,  amongft  /dme  falfe  Engliih  which  he  has  recommended,  and 
»wA  good  Englifli  which  he  has  reprobated,  lays — "  So— as,  was  ufed  by 

"  the 


ENGLISH  CONJUNCTIONS. 


^7;S 


It  does  not  come  from  ^ ;  any  jnore  than  T^ougb^  as^ 
Me-it9  and  If  (or  G;/),  8cc.  come  frooa  Although^  and  JJheiti^ 

ap4 


<c 


cc 


cc 


/^  the  wriiters  of  the  laft  centuiy^  to  expcefs  a  <:oaiequence9  inftead  of  scw- 
/*  THAT.  Swift,  I  believe,  is  the  laft  of  our  good  writers  who  .has  fr?- 
^^  quently  ufed  this  manner  of  expreffion.  It  feems  improper ^  and  is  ^« 
**  Jervedly  grown  obfolctc/*  , 

But  Dr..  Lowth,  when  he  undertook  to  write  his  IntroduSiotiy  with  the 
bed  intention  in  the  world,  moft  afluredly  linned  againft  his  better  judg- 
ment. For  he  begins  moft  judicioufly,  thus,—"  Univerfal  Grammar 
explains  the  principles  which  are  common  to  All  languages.  The 
Grammar  of  any  particular  language  applies  thofe  common  principles  to 
that  particular  language."  And  yet,  with  this  clear  truth  before  his  eyes, 
he  boldly  proceeds  to  give  a  particular  grammar  5.  without  being  himfclf 
pofiefled  of  one  (ingle  principle  of  Univerfal  Graftimar.  Again,  he  fays, — 
*^  The  conneftive  parts  of  fentences  are  the  moft  important  of  all,  and  re- 
^^  quire  the  greateft  care  and  attention :  for  it  is  by  thefe  chiefly  that  the 
**  train  of  thought,  the  courfe  of  reafoning,  and  the  whole  progrefs  of  the 
^^  mind,  in  continued  difcourfe  of  all  kinds,  is  laid  open ;  and  on  the  right 
*^  ufc  of  thefe,  the  peripicuity,  that  is  the  firft  and  greateft  beauty  of  ftyle, 
*^  principally  depends.  Relatives  and  Conjunftions  are  the  inftruments  of 
^*  connexion  in  difcourfe :  it  may  be  of  ufe  to  point  out  fome  of  the  moft 
"  common  inaccuracies  that  writers  are  apt  to  fall  into  with  refpeft  to  them; 
*'  and  a  few  examples  of  faults  may  perhaps  be  more  inftrudivc,  than  any 
*'  rules  of  propriety  that  can  be  given." 

And  again, — *^  I  have  been  the  more  particular  in  noting  the  proper  ufes 
**  of  thefe  conjunAions,  becaufe  they  occur  very  frcquendy  j  and,  as  it 
was  obfervcd  before  of  conneiftive  words  in  general,  are  of  great  im- 
portance with  relpeft  to  the  clcarnefs  and  beauty  of  flyle.  I  may  add 
too,  becaufe  miftakes  in  the  ufc  of  them  are  very  common." 

N  n  2  •         After 


<c 


€€ 


M 


vf^  ETYMOLOGY  OF  THE 

and  ^^ft  8cc. — For  J/s,  in  our  old  Englifli  is  a  contrac- 
tion of  j4/,  and  es  or  as :  and  this  yil  (which  in  comparifons 
nfed  to  be  very  properly  employed  before  the  firft  es  or  aSf 
but  was  not  employed  before  the  fecond)  we  now,  in 
modem  Englifhy  fupprefs :  As  we  have  alfo  done  in  num- 
berlefs  other  inftances ;  where  jiH  (though  not  improper) 
is  not  neceifary. 

Thus, 

<*  She  glides  away  under  the  foamy  fcas 


*^  As  Iwift  AS  Darts  or  feathcr'd  arrows  fly. 

That  is, 

*'  She  glides  away   (with)   that  fwiftncfs,   (wi 
<«  arrows  fly." 


99 


^f0 


After  which  Kc  proceeds  to  his  examples  of  the  proper  and  improper  ufc 
of  theft  conneftives : — without  having  the  moft  diftant  notion  of  the  mean^ 
ing  of  the  wordi  whofe  emplt^ment  he  undertakes  to  fettle.  The  confe- 
qucnce  was  unavoidable  :  that^  (having  no  reajonahlt  rule  to  go  by,  and  no 
apparent  fignification  to  dircft  him)  he  was  compelled  to  truft  to  his  own 
fanciful  tafl:c  {as  in  the  hefi  it  is)y  and'  the  uncertain  authority  of  others  :  and 
has  confeqiiendy  approved  and  condemned  without  truth  or  reafbn.  "  Four- 
"  quoi  (fays  Girard)  apres  tant  de  fiecles  &  tant  d'ouvrages,  les  gens  dc 
"  Lettres  ont-ils  encore  des  idces  fi  informes  &  des  exprcflions  fi  confiifcs 
'*  lur  ce  qu'ils  font  profcfllon  d'etudier  &  de  traiter  ?  Ou  s'ils  nc  veulent 
"  pas  prendre  la  peine  d*approfondir  la  matiere,  comment  oftnt-ils  en 
«  donxKcr  des  lemons  au  public  ?  C'eft  ce  que  je  ne  cof^^ob  pas." 

When 


ENGLISH  CONJUNCTIONS.  %ff 

w 

When  in  old  Englifh  it  is  written^ 


<^  Schc 

'*  GUdis  awa7  under  the  fiimy  Scis 

**  Als  fwift  as  Ganze  or  fcddcrit  arrow  flcis/* 

Douglas.    Bdpti. to,  P^^^  jftjir- 

Then  it  means* 

"  With  ALL  THAT  fwifbeis  wUb  WHICH,  &c.'* 

After  what  I  have  faid,  you  will  fee  pl^ly  why  fo-« 
many  of  the  conjunctions  may  be  ufed  almoft' indifferentty - 
(or  with  a  very  little  turn  of  expreffi'on)  for  each  other* . 
And  without  my  enterihg^  into  the  particular  minutiae  ih. 
the  ufe  of  each,  you  will  eafily  account  for  the  flight  dif- 
ferences in  the  turn  of  exprefHon,  arifing  from  difierent: 
cuftomary  abbreviations  of  conftyuSHon. 

r  will  only  give  you  one  inftance,  and  leave  it  with  you  v 
for  your  entertainment;  from  which  you  will  draw  a.* 
variety  of  arguments  and  conclulionsr 

*^  And  foft  he  fighed>  LEST.^ncn  might  ihim  heaiu 
And  foft  he  figh'd^  that  men  might  not  him  hear. 
And  foft  he  iighed^  else  « men  might  him  hear. . 
Unless  he  fighed  foft,  men  might  him  hear.t 
But  that  he  lighed  foft,  men  might  him  hear.. 
Without  he  fighed  foft,  .men  might  him  htar. 
Save  that  he  fighed  foft^  men  might  hini  hear. . 
Except  he  fighed  foft^  men  might  him  hear. .. 

OuTCtrr^ 


OuTCEPT  he  fighedttxEi;,  ittiAi  itiigt£:  iEim  fieirl    . 
Ou.T-TAKE  he  fighed  foft,  men  might  him  hean 
If  that  he  figh*d  not  fbft>  men  might  him  hear. 
And  AN  he-figh'd  not  foft,  men  might  him  hear« 
'  ^£T  that  he  figh'd  not  fo&,  men  niighc  Him  hear. 
Put  cask  he  figh'd  not  loft,  men  might  him  hean 
Bb  it  he  figh'd  not  foft^  men  might  him  hear. 


According  to  your  account  then,  Lord  Monboddo  is 
<extremdy  unfcutunate  in  the  particular  care  he  has  taken 
to  make  an  exception  from  the  general  rule  he  lays  down, 
^  the  Verbs  being  the  Parent  word  of  all  language,  and 
to  caution  the  candid  reader  from  imputing  to  him  ah 
opinion  that  the  coiyunSiohs  were  intended  by  him  to  be 
included  in  his  rule^  or  have  any  connexion  whatever 

•  ■  *  • 

with  Ferbs  *^ 

H.  In 


< 


€ 

4 
4 

4 
4 
4 

4 
4' 


*  "  This  fo  copious  derivation  fix)m  die  verb  in  Greeks  mturaiijr  leads 
one,  to  fu'pea  that  it  is  the  P^r^t  word  of  the  whole  language :  and 
indeed  I  believe  that  to  be  the  fiift:  for  I  do  not  know  that  it  can  be 
certainly  ihewn  that  there  is  any  word  that  is  undoubtedly  a  primitive, 
which  is  not  a  verh  j  I  mean  a  vert  in  the  drifter  fcnfe  and  common 
acceptation  of  the  Word.  By  this  the  candid  reader  will  not  underftand 
that  I  mean  to  fay  that  prepofitimSj  conjun^itms^  and  fuch  like  words, 
which  are  rather -the  Pegs  and  Nails  that  feften  die  feveral  parts  of  die 
language  together  than  the  language  itfelf,  are  derived  from  verbs  or  are 
derivatives  of  any  kind'*    Vol  IL  Part  a.  R  i-  Ch.  15, 

Court 


-I'-  i 


ENGI.ISH  CONJUNCTIONS.  ayft 


^  H; 


In  my  opinion  he  is  not  lefs  unfortunate  in  his  ru/e  than 
in  Ills  exception.  They  are  both  equally  unfounded  :  and 
yet  as  well*  founded,,  as  almoft  every  other  poOdop  which 
lie  has  laid  down  in  his  two  firft  volumes.  The  whole  of 
which  is  perfeiSily  worthy  of  that  profound  politician  and' 
phitoibpher,  who  efteems  that  to  be  the  moft  perfedt  form,, 
aaid  as  he  calls  it — -"  tbe  lafi.  ftage  of  civil  fodety  *,**  where; 
government  leaves  nothing  to  the  free-will  of  individuals ;; 
but  iaterferes  with  the  domeftic  private  lives  of  the  dtizensj^ 


▼       I    T 


'»  »J>"' 


Cpurt  dc  Gebefin  is  as,;po(itive  in  the  contrary  opinion,—^*  Ha  fallu  ne-j 
**  ccflaircment,**  (fays,  he)  "  que  tous  les  autrcs  mots  vinffent  dcs  noms.^ 
"  II  n'cft  aucun  mot,  de  quelgu'  efpccc  que  cc  foit,  &  dans  quelquc  languc^ 
••  que  ce  foit,  qui  ne  dcfccndc  d'un  nom.'*-^Hlft.  de  la  Parole,  page  i8ov- 

*  "'  But  the  private  lives  of  the  Iubje<Sts  under,  thofe  governments  arc 
^  left  as  much  to  the  free  will  of  each  individual,  and  as  litde  fubjc<5ted  to 
<*^  rulie,,a&  in  the  American  Governments  aboye  mentioned :  and  every  msw" 
^  in  fuch  a-  ftate  may  with  impunity  educate  his  children  in  the  woril 
manner  pollible ;.  and  may^  abufe  his  own  perfon  and  fortune  as  much  as 
he  pleafes ;  provided  he  does  no  injury  to  his  neighbours,  nor  attempts 
<'  any  thing  againft  the  ftate*  The  lafi  ftage  of  civil  ibciety,  in  which  d^f^ 
progreffionends,  is  that  moft  perfedt  form  of  polity  which,  to  all  the 
advantages  of  the  Governments  laft  mentioned,  joins  the.  care  of  the. 
education  of  the  youth,  and  of  the  private  lives  of  the  citizens  ;  neither 
"  of  which  is  left  to  the  will  and  pleafure  of  each  individual  j  but  i)0th  are 
*'  regulated  by  pubjjc  wisdom/'— Vol  L  page  1243. . 

andi 


(4 


€4 
€€ 


aSo  ETYMOLOGY  OF  THE 

and  the  education  of  their  children !  Such  would  in  truth 
be  tjie  lajl  ftage  of  civil  fociety,  in  the  fenfe  of  the  lady 
in  the  comedy;  whofe  lover  having-  oflfered — "  to  give 
«  her  the  laji  proof  of  love  and  marry  her.*'— She  aptly 
repUed)  **  The  laji  indeed ;  for  there's  an  end  of  loving." 

B. 

But  what  fay  you  to  the  bitter  irony  with  which  Mr. 
Harris  treats  the  moderns  in  the  concluding  note  to  his 
dodbine  of  Corijun6tions  ?  Where  he  fays, — "  It  is  fome- 
**  what  furpriiing  that  the  poUteft  and  moft  elegant  of  the 
<*  Attic  writersi  and  Plato  above  all  the  reft,  ihould  have 
<*  their  works  filled  wdth  Particles  of  all  kinds  and  with 
**  ConjunEiions  in  particular ;  while  in  the  modern  polite 
**  works,  as  well  of  ourfelves  as  of  our  neighbours,  fcarce 
«  fuch  a  word  as  a  Particle  or  ConjunSiion  is  to  be  found, 
<*  Is  it  that  where  there  is  connexion  in  the  meaning, 
•*  there  muft  be  words  had  to  conneift ;  but  that  where 
**  the  conne<Stion  is  little  or  none,  fuch  conneftives  are  of 
**  little  ufe?  That  houfes  of  cards  without  cement  may 
*•  well  anfwer  their  end ;  but  not  thofe  houfes  where  one 
«  would  chufe  to  dwell  ?  Is  this  the  caufe  ?  Or  have  we 
<*  attained  an  elegance  to  the  antients  unknown  ? 


<*  Venitnus  ad  fummam  fortunay  8cc.'* 


What 


ENGLISH  CONJUNCTIONS.  »8l 

What  will  you  fliy  to  Lord  Monboddo,  who  holds  the 
fame  opinion  with  Mr^  Harris  *  ? 

H. 

I  fay  that  a  little  more  refledlidn  and  a  great  deal  lefs 
reading,  a  little  more  attention  to  common  fenfe  +,  and  left  *^ 

blind  prejudice  for  his  Greek  commentators,  would  havo 
made  Mr.  Harris  a  much  better  Grammarian,  if  not  per- 
haps a  Philofbpher. — What  a  ftrange  language  is  this  to 
come  from  a  man,  who  at  the  fame  time  fuppofes  thefe 
Particles  and  ConjunBions  to  be  words  without  meaning  t 
It  fhould  feem,  by  this  infolent  pleafantry,  that  Mr.  Harris 

reckons  it  the  perfection  of  compofition  and  difcourfe  to 

« 

'•  I  '  ■!  mi     I  I  i  I  ■       I  I      •         I    ■  ■  III  111  ■ 

*  "  This  abundance  of  Conjimftiona  and  Particles,"  (fays  he,  Vol.  11, 
page  179)  "  IS,  in  my  opinion,  one  of  the  greateft  beauties  of  the  Greek 
language,  &c.  For  I  am  fo  far  from  thinking  that  that  disjointed  com- 
pofition and  fhort  cut  of  ftyle,  which  is  fo  much  in  fafhion  at  prefent^ 
"  and  of  which  Tacitus  among  the  ancients  is  the  great  model,  is  a  beauty: 
that  I  am  of  opinion  it  is  the  afftftation  of  a  deformity  5  nor  is  there,  in 
my  apprchenfion,  any  thing  that  more  disfigures  a  ftyle,  or  makes  it 
"  more  ofFenfive  to  a  man  of  true  Tafte  and  Judgement  in  writings  &c." 

"  I  fhall  only  add  at  prefent,  that  one  of  the  greateft  difficulties  of  com- 
"  pofing  in  Englilh  appears  to  me  to  be  the  want  of  fuch  connefting  par-.. 
"  tides  as  the  Greeks  have,  &c.'* 

t  The  author  would  by  no  means  be  underftood  to  allude  to  the  common 
SENSE  of  DoftorsOfwald,  Reid,  and  Beattie  \  which  appears  to  him  to  be 
fti   enonfcnfe. 

O  o  life 


a8a  ETYMOLOGY  OF  THE 

fife  a  great  many  words  without  meaning  /—If  fo,  perhaps 
Mafter  Slender  s  language  would  meet  with  this  learned 
Gentleman's  approbation. 

**  I  keep^/y/  three  men  and  a  boy  yet^  till  my  mother 
«  be  dead ;  hut  what  though  yet  I  live  a  poor  gentleman 
«  born." 


Now  here  is  cement  enough  in  proportion  to  the  build- 
ing. It  is  plain,  however,  that  Shakefpeare  (a  much 
better  philofopher  by  the  bye  than  moft  of  thofe  who 
have  written  philofophical  Treatifes)  was  of  a  different 
opinion  in  this  matter  from  Mr.  Harris.  He  thought  the 
beft  way  to  make  his  Zany  talk  unconnedtedly  and  non- 
fenfically  was  to  give  him  a  quantity  of  thefe  elegant 
words  without  meaning  which  are  fuch  favourites  with  Mr. 
Harris  and  Lord  M(Miboddo. 

B. 

This  may  be  raillery  perhaps,  but  I  am  fure  it  is  neither 
reaibning  nor  authority.  This  inflance  does  not  affe(^  Mr. 
Harris :  for  All  cement  is  no  more  fit  to  make  a  firm  builds 
ing  than  no  cement  at  ail.  Blender's  difcourfe  might  have 
been  made  equally  as  unconnected  without  any  particles, 
a$  with  fo  many  partictes  together.     It  is  the  proper  mix- 

turc 


ENGLISH  CONJUNCTIONS-  283 

ture  of  particles  and  other  words  which  Mr.  Harris  would 
recommend ;  and  he  only  cenfures  the  moderns  for  being 
too  fparing  of  Particles. 

H. 

Reafoning  !  It  difdains  to  be  employed  about  fuch  con- 
ceited nonfenfe,  fuch  afFedted  airs  of  fuperiority  and  pre- 
tended elegance.  Efpecially  when  the  whole  foundation  is 
falfe  :  for  there  are  not  any  ufeful  connedtives  in  the  Greek, 
which  are  not  to  be  found  in  modern  languages*  But  for 
his  opinion  concerning  their  employment,  you  Ihall  have 
authority^  if  you  pleafe ;  Mr.  Harris's  favourite  authority  : 
an  Antient,  a  Greek,  and  one  too  writing  profefledly  on 
Plato's  opinions,  and  in  defence  of  Plato;  and  which  if 
Mr.  Harris  had  not  forgotten,  I  am  perfuaded,  he  would 
not  have  contradidted. 


Plutarch  fays — "  II  n'y  a  ny  Befte,  ny  inftrument,  ny 
"  armeure,  ny  autre  chofe  quelle  qu'elle  foit  au  monde, 
^*  qui  par  ablation  ou  privation  d'une  fiene  propre  partie, 
<^  foit  plus  belie,  plus  adlive,  ne  plus  doulce  que  paravant 
^^  eile  n'eftoit ;  li  ou  I'oraifon  bien  fouvent,  en  eftans  les 
"  conjonSlions  toutes  ojleesj  a  une  force  &  efficace  plus 
"  affedtueufe,  plus  adlive,  &:  plus  efmouvante.  C'eft  pour- 
^^  quoy  ceulx  qui  efcrivent  des  figures  de  Retorique  louent 

O  o   2  ^^  &: 


a84  ETYxMOLOGY  OF  THE     ' 

**  &  prifent  grandement  celle  qu'ik  appdlent  deliee ;  1^ 
V  ou  ceulx  qiii  font  trop  religieux  Sc  qui  s'  alTubjettiflent 
**  trop  aux  regies  de  la  grammaire,  fans  ozer  ofter  une 
"  feule  conjon<£lion  de  la  commune  fa9on  de  parler,  en 
"  font  a  bon  droit  blafmez  Sc  repris ;  comme  faifans  un 
^^  ftile  enerve,  fans  a\icune  pointe  d'afFc(5lion,  8c  qui  laffe 
^<  &  donne  peine  k  ouir,"  &c.  '^ 

I  will  give  you  another  authority,  which  perhaps  Mr. 
Harris  may  value  more,  becaufe  I  value  it  much  lefs* 

*'  U  n'y  a  rien  encore  qui  donne  plus  de  mouvement  au 
**  difcours  que  d'en  oier  les  liaifons.  En  efFet,  un  difcours 
"  qu6  rien  ne  lie  &  n'embaraffe,  marche  &:  coule  de  foy- 
*f  m^mC)  8c  il  s'en  faut  peu  qu'il  n'aille  quelquefois  plus 
<*  vite  que  la  penfee  m^me  de  Torateur."  Longinus  then 
**.  gives  three  examples,  from  Xenophon,  Homer,  and  De- 
**  mofthenes ;  and  concludes — "  En  egalant  &  applaniifant 
«  toutes  chofes  par  le  moyen  de  liaifonsy  vous  verrez  que 
**  tfun  pathetique  fort  &  violent  vous  tomberez  dans  une 
<<  petite  affeteiie  de  langage  qui  n*aura  ni  pointe  ni  eguil- 
«  Ion;  8c  que  toute  la  force  de  votre  difcours  s*eteindra 
<<  aufli-toft  d'elle-mefme.     Et  comme  il  eft  certain,  que  fi 


*  Platonic  Queltions.    Amyot's  Tranflsuion. 

«  on 


ENGLISH  CONJUNCTIONS.  285 

^*  on  lioit  le  corps  d'un  homme  qui  court,  on  lui  feroit 
^^  perdre  toute  fa  force ;  de  m^me  li  vous  allez  embarraffer 
^*  line  paffion  de  ces  liaifons  &:  de  ces  particules  inutilesy 
**  elle  les  fouffre  avec  peine ;  vous  lui  otez  la  liberte  de  fa 
^^  courfe,  &  cette  impetuolite  qui  la  faifoit  marcher  avec 
'^^  la  mefme  violence  qu'  un  trait  lance  par  une  machine  "^^^ 

Take  one  more  authority,  better  than  either  of  the  fore- 
going on  this  fubje(5t. 

**  Partes  orationis  fimiles  nexu  indigent,  ut  inter  fe 

<*  tiniantur ;  &  ifte  vocatur  ConjunSiioy  quae  definitur  vocula 

"  indeclinabilis  qua  partes  orationis  colligit.     Alii  earn  fub- 

"  intelligi  malint,  alii  exprefs^  8c  moleft^  repetunt:  illud, 

**  qui  attentiores  funt  rebus ;  hoc,  qui  rigorofius  loquuntur. 

"  Omittere  fer^   omnes   conjun<£tiones   Hifpanorum   aut 

**  vitium  aut  character  eft.     Plurimae  deliderantur  in  Lu- 

*<  cano,  plurimsB  in  Seneca,  multae  in  aliis  authoribus. 

<*  Multas   omitto;    &,  fi  meum  genium   fequerer,    fer^ 

<*  omnes.     Qui  rem  intelligit  8c  argumentura  pcnetrat, 

**  perdpit  fibi  ipfis  cohaerere  fententias,  nee  egere  parti- 

«  culis  ut  conne(^antur :    quod,    ii   interferantur  voculsg 

*  Boileau's  Tranflation. 

6  **  con*» 


X 


a  86  ETYMOLOGY  OF  THE  . 

^^  cx)nnexiv3e,   fcopae   diflblutae  illae  funt;   nee  additis  8c 

"  multiplicatis  conjundlionibus  cohaerere  poterunt.     Hinc 

^'  patet  quid  debuiffet  refponderi  Caligulae,  Senecae  calamum 

"  vilipendenti.     Suetanius :    Lenius   comptiufque  Jcribendi 

^^  genus  adeo  contempfit^  ut  Senecam^  turn  maxime  placentem^ 

^  commtjftones  nieras  componere^  &^  Arenam  sine  calce, 

^^  dicer et.^ — "  Caligulae  hoc  judicium  eft,  inquit  Lipfius 

^*  in  judicio  de  Seneca;  nempe  illius  qui  cogitavit  etiam 

"  de  Homeri  carminibus  abolendis,  itemque  Virgilii  &:  Titi 

<^  Livii  fcriptis  ex  omnibus  bibliothecis  amovendis.  Refpon- 

^*  deo  igitur  meum  Senecam  non  vulgo  nee  plebi  Jcripjijfe^ 
*^  nee  omni  vivo  do£io^  fed  illi  qui  attente  £um  legeret.     Et 

"  addo^  ubi  LeSlor  mente  Senecam  fequitur^  fenjuni  adfequi : 

"  nee  inter  fententiasy  fuo  fe  prementes  &^    confolidantes 

^^  pondere^  conjunSlionem  majorem  requiriP 

Caramuel,  cxlii. 

And  I  hope  thefe  authorities  (for  I  will  offer  no  argu-^ 
ment  to  a  writer  of  his  caft)  will  fatisfy  the  ^^  true  tajle 
"  ^nd  judgment  in  writing^  of  Lord  Monboddo ;  who  with 
£qual  affedlation  and  vanity  has  followed  Mr.  Harris  in  this 
particular:  and  who,  though  incapable  of  writing  a  fen- 
tence  of  common  Englifh  {defuerunt  enim  iUi  ^  ufus  pro 
duce  ^  ratio  pro  fuafore^  fincerely  deplores  the  decreafe  of 
^  learning 


ENGLISH  CONJUNCTIONS,  287 

learning  in  England"^ ;  whilft  he  really  imagines  that  there 
is  foraething  captivating  in  his  own  ftyle,  and  has  grate- 
fully informed  us  to  whofe  affiftance  we  owe  the  obliga- 
tion. 


*  See  Mr.  Bofwcll's  Tour  to  the  Hebrides^  g.  473,^ 


i«« 


EnEA 


EHEA   HTEPOENTA,    &c. 


^»^*^'^^>^^9*i 


CHAP.    IX. 


OF    PREPOSITIONS. 


B. 

T\^ £ L L9  Sir,  what  you  have  hitherto  faid  of  the  Con- 
jundtions  will  defer ve  to  be  well  confidered.  But 
we  have  not  yet  entirely  done  with  them :  for,  you  know, 
the  Prepofitions  were  originally,  and  for  a  long  time,  clajQTed 
with  the  Conjundtions :  and  when  firft  feparated  from 
them,  were  only  diltinguilhed  by  the  name  of  Prepojitive 
ConjunSiions  *. 

H.  Very 


*  The  philofophers  of  Hungary,  Turkey  and  Georgia  at  leaft  were  in 
no  danger  of  falling  into  this  abfurdity :  for  Dr.  Jault,  in  his  preface  to 
(what  is  very  improperly,  though  commonly,  called)  Menage's  Diftionary, 
tells  us — "  Par  le  frequent  commerce  que  j'ai  eu  avec  eux  \le5  Hongroif\ 
pendant  plufieurs  annces,  ayant  tachc  de  pcnctrer  a  fonds  ce  que  ce 
pouvoit  cti;e  que  cet  idiome  fi  different  dc  tous  les  autres  d'  Europe,  je 
les  ai  .convaincus  qu'ils  etoient  Scythes  d'  origine,  ou  du  moins  que  leiir 
langue  etoit  une  des  branches  de  la  Scythique  s  puifqu'  a  T  egard  de 

"  rinflexion 


fC 

«f 


OF  PREPOSITIONS.  189 

Very  true,  Sir.  And  thefe  Prepojttive  conjun6tions> 
once  feparated  from  the  others,  foon  gave  birth  to  another 
fubdiviiion  * ;  and  Grammarians  were  not  afiiamed  to  have 
a  dafs  of  Pqfipojitive  Prepojitives,"^^'  Dantur  etiam  Poft' 
«  pojitiones  (fay,s  Caramuel) ;  qu«  Prapqfitiones  pojipofitiva 
^<  folent  did,  null4  vocabulorum  repugnanti^ :  vocantur 
**  enim  Prapojitionesy  quia  ienfu  faltem  prseponuntur ;  8c 
**  Pojipojitivoj  quia  vocaliter  poftponi  debent." 

I 

B. 

But  as  Mr.  Harris  ftili  ranks  them  with  Conne5fhes,  this, 
f  think,  will  be  the  proper  place  for  their  inveftigation. 
And  as  the  title  of  Prepojttive  or  Prepojition  "  only  expreffes 
*  their  plate  and  not  their  cbara^er\  their  Definition^  be 
**  faysy  will  dijiinguijb  tbem  from  tbe  former  ConneEtpoes^ 
He  therefore  proceeds  to  g^ve  a  compleat  definition  of 
them,  viz. 


^'  1*  inflexion  elk  avoit  rapport  icelle  desTurcs,<}ui  conftamment  paflbient 
^*  pour  Scythes,  6tant  originaipc  du  Turqueftan,  ct  de  la  Tranfoxiane  j  ct 
qu'  outre  cela  Ics  prepositions  de  ccs  deux  langues,  auffi  bien  que  de  la 
Gcorgienne,  fc  mcttoicnt  toujjpurs  afres  leur  regime,  contre  V  ordre  de  la 
*'  nature  et  la  fignification  de  kur  nom," 

'*  Buonmattei  has  ftill  a  farther  fubdivifion  j  and  has  made  a  fcparate  part 
of  fpeech  of  the  Segnacaji. 

P  p  ^«   ^ 


290  OF  PREPOSITIONS. 

— "  A  Prepojition  is  a  part  of  fpeecby  devoid  it/elf  oj 
"  ftgnification ;  but  fo  formed  as  to  unite  two  words  that  are 
**  ftgi^ificonty  and  that  refufe  to  coalefce  or  unite  of  tbem- 
•*  felves^ — Now  I  am  curious  to  know,  whether  you  will 
agree  with  Mr.  Harris  in  his  definition  of  this  part  of 
Speech ;  or  whether  you  are  determined  to  differ  from  him 
OH  every  point. 

H. 

Till  he  agrees  with  himfelf,  I  think  you  fhould  not  dif- 
approve  of  my  diflfering  from  him;  becaufe  for  this  at 
leaft  I  have  his  own  relpedtable  authority.  Having  defined 
a  word  to  be  a  **  Sound  Jignificant ;"  he  now  defines  a 
Prepofition  to  be  a  word  **  devoid  of  fignification!*  And  a 
few  pages  after,  he  fays,  **  Prepofitions  commonly  transfufe 
«  fcanetbing  of  tbeir  omt  meaning  into  the  word  with  wbicb 
"  tb^  are  compounded^ 

Now,  if  I  agree  with  him  that  words  are  founds  Jigni' 
jicant ;  how  can  I  agree  that  there  arc  forts  of  words  de^ 
i)oid  of  Jignification  f  And  if  1  could  fuppofe  that  Prepofi- 
tions are  devoid  of  Jignif  cation  \  how  could  I  afterwards 
allow  that  they  transfufe  fomething  of  tbeir  own  meaning  f 

%  B.  This 


OF  PREPOSITIONS.  291 

B. 

This  is  the  fame  obje<Stion  repeated,  which  you  made 
before  to  his  definition  of  the  Jirft  fort  of  Gonnedlives. 
But  is  it  not  otherwife  a  compleat  definition  ? 

Mr.  Harris  no  doubt  intended  it  as  fuch :  for,  in  a  notQ 
on  this  paflage,  he  endeavours  to  juftify  his  dodtrine  by  a 
citation  from  ApoUonius  * ;  which  he  calls  ^*  rather  a  de- 
<^  fcriptive  fketch  than  a  complete  definition.'*  But  what 
he  gives  us  in  the  place  of  it,  as  compleat^  is  neither  de- 
finition nor  even  defcription.  It  contains  a  Negation  and 
an  Accident ;  and  nothing  more.  It  tells  us  what  the  Pre- 
pofition  is  not;  and  the  purpofe  for  which  he  fuppofes  it 
to  be  employed.  It  might  ferve  as  well  for  a  definition  of 
the  Eaft  India  Company^  as  of  a  Prepofition :  for  pf  that 
we   may  truly  fay — ^*  It  is  not  itfelf   any  part  of  the 

*  '^  Je  n'  emends  pas  trop  bien  le  Grec,  die  le  Geant. 
*'  Ni  moi  non  plus,  dit  la  Mite  philofophique, 

"  Pourquoi  done,   reprit  le  Sirien,   citez-vous  un  certain  Ariftoto  en 
"  Grec  ? 

C*eft,  repliqua  le  Savant,  qu'il  faut  bien  citer  ce  qu*on  ne  comprcnd 
point  du  tout,  dans  la  langue  qu'on  entend  le  moins." 

Voltaire.  Micromcogas. 

P  p  2  ^^  Govern- 


cc 


992  OF  HIEPOSITIONS* 

**  Government,  but  fo  formed  as  to  unite  thofe  who  would 
*^  not  have  coalefced  of  themfelves  *J^ — Poor  Scaliger  (wha 
well  knew  what  a  definition  fliould  be)  from  his  awa 
melancholy  experience  exclaimed — *^  Nibil  infelicius  grants 
^*  matico  definitore  h  Mr.  Harris's  logical  ignorance  moft 
happily  deprived  him  of  a  feixfe  of  his  misfortunes*  And 
fo  little,  good  man>  did  he  dream  of  the  danger  of  his- 
Situation ;  that  whiLQ:  all  others  were  acknowledging  their 
fuccefslefs  though  indefatigable  labours,  and  lamenting;; 
their  infuperable  difficulties,  he  prefaces  his  do(£h*ine  of 
Conne£tiv£S  with  this  Angularly  confident  introduction ;— ^ 
"  What  remains  of  our  work  is  a  matter  of  lefs  difliculty  j 
<^  it  being  the  fame  here  as  in  fbme  hifloricil  pidluret 


*  Let  the  reader  who  hiEis  any  ienfe  of  juftice>  or  who  frels  any  anxiety 
fbr  the  welfare  of  his  country^  look  back  and  re-conlider  die  corrupt  ufe 
which  one  Coalition  would  have  made  of  this  company  in  the  year  lySj^ 
and  the  corrupt  ufe  which  another  Coalition  has  made  of  it  fmce.  Let  Hxirn 
then  recall  to  his  mind  the  parallel  hiftory  of  the  Company  of  St.  George, 
at  the  clofe  of  the  flourifhing  days  of  the  Republic  of  Genoa ;  and,  in  Ipite 
of  all  outward  appearances,  he  will  cafily  be  able  to  foretell  dbie  Ipeedy  fate 
of  this  pilfered  and  annihilated  body.  Without  any  external  fhock,  the 
fure  caufc  of  its  rapid  dcftruftion  is  in  its  prefent  defpotic  and  corrupt  con- 
ftitution :  to  the  formation  of  which  (and  to  no  fuppofed  delinquency  nor 
pcrfonal  enmity)  that  much  injured  man,  Mr.  Haftings,,  was  made  the 
viftim  by  all  the  corrupt  parties  in  the  kingdom^ 

^  when 


OF  PREPOSITIONS.  293 

*^  whea  the  principal  figures  are  once  formed^  it  is-  an  atfy 
«  labour  to  defign  the  reft  *.** 


However  contradi^ry  and  irregulsu:  all  this  may  appear 
to  you,  Mr.  Harris  has  advanced  nothing  more  than  what 
tiie  moft  approved  Greek  and  Latia  Grammarians  have  de- 


^  Such  is  the  language^^  and  fuch  are  the  definitions  of  him  who^  in  this 
very  chapter  of  the  prepofitiDnSy  has  modeftly  given  us  the  following  note* 
— "  And  here  I  cannot  but  obfcFVC,  that  he  who  pretends  to  difcufs  the 
**  fentiments  of  any  one  of  thcfc  pIi^ofophers>  or  even  to  cite  and  tranflate 
''  hioir  (except  in  trite  and  obvious  fentences)  without  accurately  knowing 
<^  the  Greek  tongue  in  general  ^  the  nice  differences  of  many  wonds  appa- 
rently fynonymous ;  'the  peculiar  flyle  of  the  author  whom  he  prefumes 
to  handle ;  the  new  corned  words,  and  new  fignifications  given  to  old 
words  ufcd  by  fuch  author  and  his  feft ;  the  whole  philofbphy  of  fuch 
feft,  together* with  the  conneftions  and  dependencies  of  its  feveral  parts, 
whether  A^/Vj/,  ethical  or  phyfital ;— He,  I  Jaj^  that  without  this  pre- 
vious preparation,  attempts  nahat  I  have  Jaidy  will  fhoot  in  the  dark ; 
^  will  be  liable  to  perpetual  blunders  5  will  explain  and  praifc,  and  cenfure 
••  merely  by  chance  \  and  though  he  may  poflibly  to  faols  appear  as  a  wife 
^  man,  will  certainly  among  the  wife  ever  pafe  for  a  fool.  Such  a  man's 
^  intcllcft  comprehends  antrcint  philofophy,  as  his  eye  comprehends  a 
•*  diftant  proQjeft.  He  may  fee,  perhaps^  enough  to  know  mountains 
^  fix>m  pl^s,  and  feas  fi-om  woodas  but  for  an  accurate  difcernmcnt  of 
"  particulars  and  their  charadcr,  this,  without  farther  \it\%y  it  is  impoffiblc 
"  to  attain/' 

e 

Q  livered 


u 
tt 
u 


294  OiF  PREPOSITIONS. 

Hvered  down  to  him,  and  what  modem  Grammarians  and 
Philofophers  have  adopted  *.  . 

H.  Yes. 


*  **  Praspofitio  feu  adnomen,  ferje  non  fignificaty  nifi  addatur  nomi- 
"  nibus."— — Campanclla. 

.  ^  Multas  &  varias  hujus  partis  orationia'dcfiriitiones  invenio.  Et  pra 
*'  cseteris  arridet  hsec. — Praepofirio  eft  vocula :  modum  quendam  nominis 
"  adftgnificans. '*  CaramucL 

'  "  Ut  omittam  Particulas  minorcs,  cujufmodi  funt  Praepofitiones,  (  on- 
*^  jun6tiones,  Intcrjcftioncs,  quas  nullam  habent  cum  nominibus  affinitatem.*' 

J.  C.  Scaliger.  dc  L.  L.  Cap.  cxcii. 

■ 

£vcn  Hoogevecn  who  clearly  faw — "  Particulas  in  fua  Infantia  fuijfe  vel 
verba  vel  nomina,  vel  ex  nominibus  formata  adverbiaj'*  yet  gives  the  fol- 
iawing  account  and  Definition  of  them. 

Primam,  ut  reliquarum,  ita  Graecas  quoque  linguae  originem  fuifle 
fimpliciffimam,  ipia  natura  ac  ratio  docent,  primofque  oyo^A^ra^  nomina, 
quibus  res  i  et  verba,  quibus  aStiones  e3^primerent,  non  vero  Partictdas  in- 
ftituijfe^  probabile  eft.  Certe,  cum  ex  nominibus  et  verbis  integra  conftet 
orado,  quorum  haec  adtiones  et  afFeftiones,  ilia  perfonas  agentes  et  patientes 
indicant ;  Jure  quarituti  an  p'imava  lingua  babuerit  particulas.  Non  utiquc, 
neceflariam,  rem  exprimendi,  vim  habere  videntur,  fed  adjcititiam  quan- 
dam^  et  fententias  per  nomina  et  vcrb%  expreflas  variandi^  fiabiliendi,  in^^ 
firmandiy  negandi,  copulandiy  disjungendi,  imminuendi,  affirmandi,  limit andi^ 
multifque  modis  afficicndi :  Ipfa  vero,  quatenus  particuUj  per  Je  Jola  Jpec^^ 
tuu,  nihil  fignificant. — 

Natura,  inquam,  ipfa  docet,  Particulis  antiquiora  ejfe  nomina  et  verba, 
quia,  obfervatQ  rcrum  ordine,  ncceffc  eft,  res  et  adiones  prius  fuifle  natas 

et 


OF  PREPOSITIONS,  295 


Yes.  Yes.  I  know  the  errors  are  ancient  enough,  td 
have  been  long  ago  worn  out  and  difcarded.  But  I  do  not 
think  that  any  excufe  for  repeating  them.  For  a  much 
lefs  degree  of  underftanding  is  neceffary  to  detect  the 
erroneous  principles  of  others,  than  to  guard  againft  thoife 
which  may  be  ftarted  for  the  firft  time  by  our  own 
imagination.  la  thefe  matters  it  fhews  lefs  weaknefa  of 
judgment,  becaufe  it  is  more  eafy,  to  deceive  ourfelves,. 
than  to  be  deceived  by  others^ 

b; 

V 

You  will  do  well,  Sir,  to  be  particularly  mindful  of  what^ 
you  faid  laft ;,  and  to  plaq^  your  ftrongeft  guard  there^ 


ct  exprcflas,  quam  Particulas,  quae  has  vel  conjungunt,  vcl  disjunguntJ 
priora  funt  jungenda  jungentibus^  firmanda  firmantibus^^  limitatida  limitan- 
tifcius^  .ct  fie  deinccps^  Ncquc  itiea  haec,  nequc  nova  eft  de  particularum 
minus  antiqua  origine  opinio:  fuffragantem  habeo  Plutarchum  ad  illam 
qiMBftioncm,  quas  inter  Platonicas  poftrema  eft. — "  Cur  Plato  dixcrit  ora-. 
"  tionem  ex.  nominibus  et  verbis  raifceri".  Ubi  ait—"  Probabile  efle, 
*V  homines  ab  initio,  orationem  diftinguentium  Particularum  eguiflL" — 


"  Dicamus  ergo,  Particulam  efle  voculam,  ex  nomine  vel  verbo  nafam, 
quae  fcntentiae  addita,  .aliquam  ipfi  paffionem  afferfy  et  orationi  adminiculo 
eft,  ct  officiofa  miniftra.  Miniftram  vogo>  quia,  orationi  non  inferta,  fed 
per  fc  pofita  et  folitaria,  nihil  ftgnificat.'* 

where 


%g6  Of  FREPOSmONS. 

where  it  may  be  moft  wanted :  for  you  feem  fufficiently 
determined  not  to  be  deceived  by  oibers^  And  with  this 
caution^  I  &all  be  glad  to  hear  your  account  of  the  Prepo* 
iition.  Perhaps  I  ihall  iave  time,  at  leaft  I  fhall  fooner 
iatisfy  myfelft  by  alking  you  a  few  queflions. — Pray  how 
many  Prepoiitions  are  there  i 

H. 

Taking  the  Philofoj^y  of  language  as  it  now  ftands, 
your  quefti<m  is  a  very  proper  one.  And  yet  you  know, 
that  Authors  have  never  hitherto  been  agreed  concerning 
their  number.  The  ancient  Greek  Grammarians  admitted 
only  eighteen^  (fix  monofyllables  and  twelve  diilyUables). 
Th6  ancient  Latin  Grammarians  ^>ove  fifty  *.  Though 
the  modemsy  SacK^us,  Sdoppius,  Peiizoniusy  Voffius,  and 
others,  have  endeavoured  to  Is&sa  the  numbo:  without 
fixing  it  f  « 

Our  countryman  Wilkins  thinks  that  thirty-fix  are  fuf- 

ficient  J. 

*  Scotus  determines  diem  to  be  foittf -miie. 

t  San£tius  fays^^i^^'  Ex  niimero  Praepofidonumj  qoas  Crammadci  perti* 
**  naciter  afierunt ;  allquas  ililtulimus.'' 

X  ^  There  are  thirty-fix  Prepofidons  which  mayj  with  imich  ]e&  equi- 
*'  vocakiefs  than  is  found  in  inftituttd  languages  ^Jijj^^  to  expreis  thofe 
^'  Tarious  xc^ds  which  am  to  be  fignified  by  this  kind  of  Particle.'^ 

Part  3.  Chap.  3. 

Girard 


OF  PREPOSITIONS^  %g^ 

Giratxl  fays,  that  the  French  language  has  done  the 
budnefs  efib(S):ually  with  thirty-two :  and  that  he  could  not^ 
with  the  utmoil  attention,  difcover  any  more  *. 

T 

t 

But  the  authors  of  the  Encydopedie  [^Prepq^fiort]  though 
they  alfo,  as  well  as  Girard,  admit  OTdy^mple  Psepofitions, 
have  found  in  the  fame  language,  forty-eight. 

And  Buffier  gires  a  lift  of  feventy-five ;  and  dedares 
that  there  is  a  great  number  befides,  which  he  has  not 
mentioned* 

The  greater  part  of  authors  have  not  ventured  even  to 
talk  of  any  particuliar  number :  and  of  thoCe  who  have, 
(except  in  the  Greek)  no  two  authors  have  agreed  in  the 

*  "  Quoiquc  Ics  rapports  determinati&  qtfon  pcut  mcttrc  cntrc  Ics  chofcs 
**  foicnt  varies  &  nombrcHx ;  Ic  langage  Francois  a  trouvc  Tart  d'en  fairc 
<'  cnonccr  la  multitude  8c  la  diverfitc  des  nuances,  par  un  petit  nombre  de 
mots :  car  Texamen  du  detail  fait  avec  toute  V attention  dontjejuis  capable ^ 
ne  m'cn  ofFre  que  trente  deux  de  cctte  elpcce. — II  m'a  paru  que  les  dic- 
tiona4res  confondent  quelquefois  des  Adverbes  &  meme  des  Conjonftions 
avec  des  Prepofitions. — Je  ne  me  fuis  jam^s  permis  de  ne  rien  avancer 
*'  fans  avoir  fait  un  examen  prof  end  6f  rigor  eux ;  me  fervant  toujours  de 
^  Tanalyfe  &  des  regies  de  la  plus  exafte  Logique  pour  .refoudre  mes  doutes, 
4«  &  tacher  de  prendre  la  parti  le  plus  vrai.  Je  ne  diffimulerai  pourtant  fas^ 
**  que  mes  Jcrupules  ont  ete  frequents :  mais  ma  difcuffion  a  etc  attentive,  & 
^  mon  travail  opiniatrc."  Vrais  Principcs,  Difc.  xi, 

Q  q  fame 


<€ 
€€ 
(C 
i€ 


«f  t  OF  KIESOSITEONS. 

&lkke  language.  Noi;  hasi  any  one  author  attriblited  the 
ianie  number  to  any  two  difii^rent  languages. 

T    '  *  •        • 

'   4  .  , 

Now  this  difcordance  has  by  no  means  proceeded  from 
any  careleflhefs  or  want  of  diligence  in  Grammatift$  or 
Lexicogi^aphers;  but  the  truth  is,  that  the  fault  lies  with 
the  Philofophers :  for  thougih  they  have  pretended  to  teach 
others,  they  have  none  of  them  known  themfelvcs  what 
the  nature  of  a  Prepofitiori  is.  And  how  is  it  pofliblethat 
GrammaJriiins  ifliould  agree,  what  words  ought  or  ought 
not  to  be  referred  to  a  clafs  which  was  not  itfelf  afcertainedi 
Yet  had  any  of  the  definitions  or  accounts  yet  given  of  the 
JPrepofltiod  and  oif  language  been  juflv  two  confequences 

I  •  •  •  * 

"WGitd  immediately  have  followed ;  viz.  That  all  men  would 
have  certainly  known  the  firecife  numbw  of  Prepofitions; 
and  (uhlefs  Things,  or  tlie  operations  of  the  human  mind^ 
were  different  in  different  ages  and  climates)  their  number 
in  all  languages  muft  have  been  always  the  fame. 


You  mean  then  now  at  lait,  I  fuppofe,  to  fix  the  number 
of  real  Prepofitions  in  our  own,  and  therefore  in  all  other 
languages. 

H.  Very 


OF  PREPOSITIONS)  tgg 

m 

Very  far  from  it.  I  mean  on  the  contrary  to  account 
for  their  variety.  And  I  will  venture  to  la^r  it  down*  as  a 
rule,  that,  of  different  languages,  the  feaft  corrupt  will 
have  the  feweft  Prepofitions :  and,  in  the  fame  language, 
the  beft  etymologifts  will  acknowledge  the  fewett.  And  (if 
you  are  not  already  aware  of  it)  I  hope  the  reafon  of  the 
rule  will  appear  in  the  fe^^el. 

There  is  not,  for  inftance,  (as  far  as  I  am  aware)  a  pre- 
pofition  in  any  language^  anfweritig  directly  to  the  French 
prepolition  cHez  *.  Yet  does  it  by  no  means  follow,  that 
the  modem  French  do  therefore  employ  any  operation  of 
fhe  mind,  or  put  their  minds  into  any  pofture  different 
from  their  anceftora  or  from  other  nations  ;  but  only  that 

*  In  the  fame  manner  Temoin  and  Moyennant  are  prepofitions  peculiar  alio 
to  the  French,  but  which  require  no  explanation :  becaufe  the  Suhjiantive 
Temoin,  and  the  Participk  Moyennant,  are  not  confined  to  their  prepofitii)e 
employment  alone  (or,  as  in  the  Latin  it  is  termed,  put  ahfolutely)^  but  are 
ufed  upon  all  other  common  occafions  where  thofe  denominations  are  wanted  ^ 
and  their  fignification  is  therefore  evident.  Moiening  was  antiendy  ufcd  in 
EngUfh. — "  At  whofe  inftigacion  and  ftiring  I  (Robert  Copland)  have  me 
•*  applied,  Moiening  the  hclpe  of  God,  to  reduce  and  tranflate  it."  (See 
Ames's  Hi/lory  of  Printing  \  or  fee  Percy's  Reliquesy  Vol.  II.  p.  27J.)  Pad 
the  ufe  of  this  word  contmued  in  our  language,  it  would  certainly  have  been 
ranked  amongft  the  prepofitions  j  and  we  fliould  confcquently  have  been 
confidercd  as  exerting  one  iteration  of  the  mind  more  than  we  do  at  prefcnf, 

Q  q  2  .      there 


300  OF  PREPOSITIONS. 

there  happens  not  to  be  in  any  other  langus^e  a  fimilar 
a)iTuption  of  fome  word  correfponding  precifely  with  chez. 
Which  is  merely  a  corruption  of  the  Italian  fubftantive 
cASA  * :  in  the  fame  manner  as  Cbofe  is  from  Cofa ;  or  as 

•  CbevaU 


*  Though  the  bulk  of  the  French  language  is  manifeftly  a  corrupt  deri- 
vation from  the  Italian^  yet,  as  Scaliger  obferved  of  the  Romans—*^  AEqut 
«*  autem,  inter  quos  Varro,  ctiam  malign^  ^ruerunt  omnia  S  Latinis,  Gra:« 
"  cifque  fuas  origines  invidere :"  So  have  the  French,  in  all  former  times^ 
fliewn  a  narrow  jealoufy  and  envy  towards  Italy,  its  authors,  and  language : 
to  which  however  they  originally  owe  every  thing  valuable  which  they  pof- 
fe&.  From  this  fpirit  Henri  Eftiene,  De  la  frecellence  du  langage  Franfoii, 
(a  book  of  ill-founded  vanity,  blind  prejudice  and  partiality)  aflerts  that 
the  Italians  have  taken — "  la  bande  des  mots  qu'on  appelle  indeclinables  j 
'*  comme  iontAdverbeSy  ConjonSlions,  &  autres particules^*  from  the  French: 
and  amongft  others  he  mentions,  fcj  Je  non^  cbe,  fna,  and  Stnza.  But  I 
ihall  hereafter  have  occafion  to  Ihew  clearly  the  injuftice  of  Henry  Eftiene 
to  the  Italian  language,  when  I  come  to  compare  the  refpeftive  advantages 
and  diladvantages  of  the  modem  languages  of  Europe,  and  whence,  they 
flow.  In  the  mean  time  it  may  not  perhaps  be  improper  to  offer  a  general 
rule,  by  which  (when  applicable)-  all  etymological  di(putants  ought  to  be 
determined^  whether  fiich  determination  be  fevourable  or  adverfe  to  their 
national  vanity  and  prgudice.  Viz.  That  where  difftrent  languages  ufe  the 
fame  or  a  fimilar  particle^  that  language  ought  to  be  confidered  as  its  legi- 
timate parent,  in  which  the  true  meanmg  of  the  word  can  be  found,  and 
where  its  ufe  is  as  common  and  ^miliar  as  thzx  of  any  other  verbs  ^d  fub-* 
ftantives. 

A  more  modem  author  (and  therefore  fcfi  excufable)  Bergier,  Elimens 

pimitifs  des  langueSy  having  firfl  abfurdly  imagined  what  is  contradidlcd  by 

all  experience,  viz.—"  A  mefurc  que  les  langues  fc  font  eloignces  de  leur 

^*  fburce  primitive;^  les  mots  cmt  re^  dc  nouveaux  accroiffements :  plus  elles 

S  **  omt 


OF  PREPOSITIONS.  ^i 

ChevaU  cbhnije^  cbemin,  cbetif)  cbevreuil^  cber,  cbenu,  cbien, 
toucbefi  8cc.  are  corrupted  from  Cavalhy  camifcia,  caminoy 
cattivot  cavriuo/oy  caro,  canuto%  cane^  toccare^  8cc. 

If 


€nt  etc  cultivces  plus  dies  fe  font  allongees.  On  ne  leur  a  donne  de  Tagre-^ 
ment,  dc  h  cadence,  de  T  harmonie  qu*aux  depens  de  leur  bricvetc  :"— 
Proceeds  to  this  confcquence, — ^^  Lcs  Romains  ne  nous  ont  pas  communi- 
*«  que  lcs  tcrmes  fimplcs/  lcs  liailbns  du  difcours :  Ik  plupart  de  ccs  termes 
"  font  plus  courts  en.  Francois  qu'en  Latin,  &  les  Gaulois  s'en  fewoient 
^  avant  que  de  connoitre  I'ltalie  ou  fes  habitants/' — And  then  to  fhew  more 
ftrongly  the  fpirit  which  animates  him  (a  fpirit  unworthy  of  letters  and 
hoflile  to  the  ihveftigation  of  truth)  adds — **  Sommes  nous  fuffifament  in- 
'*  ftrui'ts,  Ibrfque  nous  avons  appris  dfe  nos  Etymologiftes,  que  tel  mot 
"  Francois  eft  empruntc  du  Latir^  tel  autre  du  Grec,  cclui-ci  de  I'Efjpagnol, 
**  celui-la  du  Teuton  ou  de  TAUemand  ?  Mais  les  Latins  ou  les  Allemands 
"  de  qui  Tont  ils  re^u  ?  Ne  femble-/-il  pas  que  nos  ayeux  ne  iubfiftoicnt 
^  que  des  emprunts,  tandifque  les  autres  peuples  eftoient  riches  de  leur 
"  propre  fonds  ?  Je  ne  puis  fouffirir  qu'on  nous  cnvoic  mendicr  ailleurs^  tan-r 
"  difque  nous  Tavons  chez  nous." 

Perhaps  there  was  fomething  of  this  jealoufy  in  Menage,  when  (not  being 
able  to  agree  with  Sylvius,  that  chez  fhould  be  written  Sks  or  Sur)  he 
aflerts  that—"  che»  vient  de  apud  d*ou  les  Italiens  ont  fait  apo^  &  les 
'*  Efpagnols  cabe  en  prepOfant  comme  nous  un  c.'* 

Mr.  de  BrofTes  however,  fuperior  to  all  Kttlc  prejudices,  fays — ^^On  voit 
'<  bien  que  chez. eft  une  traduAion  de  T  Italien  casa,  &  que  quand  on  dit 
"  CHEZ  vous,  c'eft  comme  fi  Ton  difoit  casa  voi  (maison  de  vous.)  Et 
^^  encore  ce  dernier  mot  eft  plutot  dans  notre  langue  une  adverbe  qu'unc, 
"  particule ;  ainfi  que  bcaucoup  d*autres  ddnt  Toriginc  devient  plus  facile  a 
«'  reconnoitre.  Mais  quand  ce  font  de  pures  Partuules,  il  eft  mal  aise  de 
<*  retrouver  la  premiere  caufc  de  leur  formadoas  qui  fans  doute  a  fouvent 


"  etc 


3'o3  of  PROPOSITIONS.' 

If  the  ingenious  Abbe  Girard  had  known  what  chez 
really  was,  he  would  not  have  faid  (vrais  principesyDiic.  1 1 .) 
"  CHEZ  a  pour  fon  partage  particulier  une  id6e  d'hftbitationy 
^S  foit  comme  patrie,  foit  commc  fimple  demenre  doraefti- 

L 

"  que."  But  he  would  have  faid  chez  is  merely  a  cor- 
riiption  of  casa,  and  has  all  the  fame  meaning  in  French, 
which  CAS  A  has  in  Italian  *  :  and  that  is  fomething  more 
than  patrie  or  demeure  domeJiique\  viz.— iJ^c^,  Family^ 
Nation^  SeSf^  &c.  [^*  Ancien  patron  de  la  case,^  fays 
M.  de  Bxifly  Rabutin  in  his  Memoirs.  Tom.  2.  pag.  175.] 
Neither  again  would  he  have  faid— ^^  II  s^agit  ici  de  la  per- 

^'  etc  arbitraire  &  preciplc^e :  comme  je  I'ai  remarquc  en  parlanc  de  petites 
^'  exprefllons  &$njonilives,  qui  ne  fervent  qu'a  former  la  liaiibn  du  difcours/' 
Formation  meckanique  des  langues^  Tom.  H.  Chap.  14.  Art.  254. 

The  French  Law  Term  Chtze,  which  has  caufed  to  that  pcopk  fo  much 
litigation,  and  to  their  lawyers  fo  much  controverfy  (and  which  fomc  of 
their  authors  would  have  written  Cbe/ne,  becaufe  they  fuppofed  the  land  to 
have  been  formerly  mcafured  with  a  Chain  j  and  others  would  have  written 
tboise  parce-que  Tainc  cboiftt)  is  derived  in  like  manner  from  casa,  and 
means  no  more  than  what  we  in  Englilh  call  the  Home-ftead  or  Homcrjiall^ 
whofe  extent  is,  of  courfe,  variable  j  but  ought  in  rcafon  to  go  with  the  houfe. 

If  therefore  the  French  Etymologifts  thus  ftumbled  at  ch£z£,  it  is  no 
wonder  they  knew  not  what  to  make  of  chxZj  whofe  corruption  had  pro* 
cceded  one  ftep  farther. 

*  S.  Johnfon  (who  was  converiknt  with  no  languages,  but  Englifli,  Ladn, 
and  Greek)  under  the  word  at,  fays  hardily,  but  not  truly,  that — *^  chbi 
^^  means  fomedmes  application  to,  or  dependance  on.*' 

c  .**  miilion 


OF  PREPOSITIONS.  303 

^  miffion  que  Tufage  a  accordee  ^  quielques  prepofidons 
«  d*en  regif  d'autres  en  ceitaines  occa£xms :  c*e&,  a  dice* 
<^  de  les  ibuffirir  dans  les  complemens  dont  elles  indlquent 
*<  le  rapport;  comme^ — ye  vims  ds  chez  vo«j."  He 
would  have  ieen  through  this  grammatical  myft«:y  of  oem 
prepofition*s  governing  another ;  and  would  have  faid,  that 
DE  may  be  prefixed  to  the  i$<^tf////v^«  chez  (id  efl:,  casa)  in 
the  fame  manner  as  to  any  other  fubflantive.  For,—**  Js 
<*  viens  De  chez  vous^  is  no  other  than — Je  viens  de  casa 
^  vous :  or  (omitting  the  Segnacafo  *)  de  casa  vous  ;  or, 
dt  CA  vous  f  • 

♦  That  this  omiffion  of  the  Segnaf^o  is  not  a  ftrained  fuppofition  of  my 
own,  we  have  the  authority  of  Henri  Eftiene  {De  la  precett.  du  lang.  Fran. 
p.  178.) 

**  Qui  la  maifonjon  voifin  ardoir  voit, 
"  De  la  iienne  douter  fc  doit. 

'<  Et  faut  noter— /a  mai/on/on  voifin'^'^&tc  dicfc.  a  la  j^on  ancienne^  ati 
•«  lieu  de  dire — la  maifon  d-r/oh  voifin.^^ 

So  the  Diftion.  della  Crufca — '*  casa.  Nome  dopo  di  cui  vien  lafciato 
^*  talvolta  dagli  autofi  per  proprieta  di  linguagio,  VArticolo  tWfegnaeafii 

**  Sen*  andarono  a  caja  i  prejlatori.**    Boccac. 

f  "  Pourquoy  fi  fouvent  de  Dijfylables  font  ils  (les  Icaliens)  des  m<m6^ 
^*  fyllables',  decASA,  ca,  &c.'*  H.  Estieke.  Dela^preeelL 

Di6ton.  dcUa  Crufca.—"  Ca,  accorciato  da  casa.^ 

So 


y? 


304  OF  PREPOSITIONS. 

But  thus  it  is  that  when  Grammar  comes  at  length  (for 
its  application  is  always  late)  to  be  applied  to  a  language ; 
Come  long  preceding  corruption  caufes  a  difficulty :  igno- 
rance of  the  corruption  gives  rife  to  fome  ingenious  fyftem 
to  account  for  thefe  words  which  are  confidered  as  original 
and  not  corrupted.  Succeeding  ingenuity '  and  heaps  of 
mirplaced  learning  increafe  the  difficulty,  and  make  the 
error  more  obfUnate,  if  not  incurable. 


B. 

I 

Do  you  acknowledge  the  prepofition  to  be  an  indeclinable 
? 


H. 


No. 


B. 


Do  you  think  it  has  a  meaning  of  its  own  ? 


So  Menage.—"  Fennato  Tufo  di  quefto  troncamento  di  ca  per  casa, 
**  familiare  a  noftri  aaQchi.~Sarae^miU  air  ucmo/avio,  il  quale  edifica  lac  a. 
** /ua  Jopra  la  pietra.  Vangcl  di  San  matteo  volgare. — Vinegia,  m'  quali 
*  paefiji  dice  ca  in  vece  di  casa."  Silvano  Rozzi.  Many  odicr  inftances 
4i£  alio  given  from  Dante,  Boccacio.    Ciovan  VillanL    Franco  Sachetti,  &c. 

H.  Yes 


OF  PREPOSITIONS.  305 

H. 

Yes  moft  certainly.  And  indeed,  if  prepofitions  had 
no  proper  meaning  of  their  own,  why  feveral  unmeaning 
prepofitions  * ;  when  one  alone  muft  have  anfwered  the 
purpofe  equally  ?  The  cypher,  which  has  no  value  of  itfelf,. 
and  only  ferves  (if  I  may  ufe  the  language  of  Gramma- 
Fians)  to  connote  and  conjignify^  and  to  change  the  value  of 
the  figures,  is  not  feveral  and  various,,  but  uniformly  one. 
and.  the  fame*. 


B; 

r  guefled  as  much  whilft  you  were  talking  of  Con^ 
jundtions ;  and  fuppofed  that  you  intended  to  account  for 
them  both  in  the  fame  manner  +.. 

H.  You 


*  Speaking  of  Prepofitions,  Cour  de  Gebelin  fays.  Gram.  Univcrf.  page 
238.     "  Mais  comment  des  mots  pareik  qui  femblent  ne-  rien  peindre,  ne 

rien  dirty  dont  l!Orlgine  cft.inconnue,  &  qui  ne  tiennent  en  apparcnce  a 
aucune  famille,  peuvent  ils  amener  Tharmonie  &  la  clarte  dans  les  - 
tableaux  dc  la  parole  &  devenir  fi  neceflaires^  que  fans  eux  le  langage 
n'ofFriroit  que  des  pcintures  imparfaites  ?  Comment  ces  mots  peuvent  ils 
produire  de.fi  grands.  efFets  &  repandre  dans  Ic  difcours  tant  de  chaleur, 
tant  de  fineffe  ?'*' 

♦  In  a  Letter  to  Mr.  Dunning,  publifhed  in  the  year  ^778,  I  aflerted  in  • 
a.  note  (page  23)  that-r-"  There  is  jiot,  nor  is  it  poffible  there  fliould  be, 
**'a  word  in  any  language,  which  has  not  a  compleat  meaning  and  fignifi- 

R.r  *'  catioai 


30  6  OF  PREPOSITIONS. 

H. 
You  were  not  miftaken,  Sir.  For  though  Voflius  and 
Others  have  concurred  with  the  cenfure  which  Prifciaii 
paffes  on  the  Stoics  for  clafling  Prepofitions  and  Conjunc- 
tions, &:c.  together  under  one  head ;  yet  in  truth  they  are 
both  to  be  accounted  for  in  tlie  fame  way. 


"  cation  even  when  taken  by  idclf.     AifjeSiiveSy  Prepofitions^  Adverbs,  &c. 
'*  have  all  compleat,  feparate  meanings,  not  difficult  to  be  difcovercd." 

Having  in  that  letter  explained  the  unmeaning  conjunftions,  with  which 
alone  I  had  at  that  time  any  ferjonal  concern  \  and  not  forefccing  that  the 
equally  unmeaning  Prepofitions  were  afterwards  by  a  folemn  decifion  {but 
without  explanation)  to  be  determined  more  certain  tfian  certainty ;  I  was 
contented  by  that  note  to  fet  other  perfons  who  might  be  more  capable  and 
more  at  leifure  than  myfclf,  upon  an  enquiry  into  the  fubjcft  :  being  very 
indifferent  from  whofe  hand  the  explanation  might  come  to  the  public.  I 
muft  acknowledge  myfelf  a  little  difappointed,  that  in  eight  years  time,  no 
perfon  whatever  has  purfued  the  inquiry ;  although  the  fuccefs  I  had  had  with 
the  Conjunftions  might  rcafonably  have  encouraged,  as  it  much  facilitated, 
the  fearch.  But  though  all  men  (as  far  as  I  can  learn)  have  admitted  my 
particular  proofs  concerning  the  Conjunctions,  none  have  been  inclined  (as 
I  wifhed  they  might  be)  to  pulh  the  principle  of  my  reafoning  farther,  and 
apply  it  to  the  other  Particles.  The  ingenious  author  of  EJfays  Hiftorical  avd 
Moraly  publifhed  in  1785,  fays,  (page  125)—"  Poffibly  Prepofitions  ^txt^ 
**  at  firft,  Ihort  interjedional  words,  fuch  as  our  carters  and  (hepherds  make 
*'  ufe  of  to  their  cattle,  to  denote  the  relations  of  place.  Or  perhaps  a 
more  fkilful  IJnguifl:  and  antiquarian  may  be  able  to  trace  them  from 
other  words,  as  the  Conjunctions  have  been  traced  by  the  author  above 
"  mentioned.'* — It  is  tlierefore  manifcft,  that  the  principle  of  my  reafoning 
was  either  not  fufficiently  opened  by  me,  or  has  not  taken  fufficient  hold  of 
the  minds  of  others  \  and  that  it  is  neceflary  ftill  farther  to  apply  it  to  the 
other  Particles. 

The 


OF  PREPOSITIONS.  307 

The  Prepofitions  as  well  as  the  Conjunftions  are  to  be 
found  amongft  the  other  Parts  of  Speech.*  The  fame  fort 
of  corruption)  from  the  fame  cauie,  has  difguifed  both  : 
and  ignorance  of  their  true  origin  has  betrayed  Gramma- 
rians and  Philofophers  into  the  myfterious  and  contra- 
di^bry  language  which  they  have  held  concerning  them. 
And  it  is  really  entertaining,  to  obferve  the  various  fliifts 
Ufed  by  thofe  who  were  too  fharp-witted  and  too  ingenuous 
to  repeat  the  unfatisfa6tory  accounts  of  thefe  Prepofitions, 
handed  down  by  others ;  and  yet  not  ingenuous  enough  to 
acknowledge  their  own  total  ignorance  on  the  fubjedt. 

The  Grammarian  fays,  it  is  none  of  his  bufinefs ;  but 
that  it  belongs  to  the  philofopher:  and  for  that  reafon 
only  he  omits  giving  an  account  of  them.  Whilft  the 
Philofopher  avails  himfelf  of  his  dignity ;  and,  when  he 
meets  with  a  ftubborn  difficulty  which  he  cannot  unravel, 
(^fid  only  theH)^  difdains  to  be  employed  about  JVords : 
although  they  are  the  neceffary  channel  through  which  his 
moft  precious  liquors  muft  flow* 

••  Grammatico  fatis  eft,  fays  Sarr6lius,  fi  tres  has  partes 
*^  pofteriores  (fcil.  Adverbia^  Pr^pofit tones ^  ConjunBitmeSy 
"  vocet  Particulas  indeclinabiles  \  &  fundus  erit  officio 
**  perfedti  gramnwtici. — Significationes  enumerare,.  magis 

R  r  a  «  Philofophi 


3o8  OF  PREPOSITIONS. 

"  Philofophi  eft  quam  Grammatici:  quia  gramrriatid 
*^  munus  non  eft,  tefte  Varrone,  vocum  lignificationes  in- 
'^^  dagare,  fed  earum  ufum.  Propter ea  nos  in  arte  haec 
"  praetermiflimus." 

Mn  Locke  complains  of  the  negledl  of  others  in  this 
particular ;  denies  it  to  be  his  bufinefs  "  to  examine  them 
^^  in  their  full  latitude :"  and  declares  that  he  ^*  intends 
^^  not  here,  a  full  explication  of  them.''  Like  Scaliger— - 
Non  in  animo  eft. — And  this  ferves  him  as  an  apology  for 
not  examining  them  at  aU  in  any  latitude ;  and  for  giving 
no  explication  of  them  whatever  in  any  place. 

.  The  Author  of  the  Port  Royal  philofophical  grammar, 
laves  himfelf  by  an  Almoft,  "  Ce  font  prefque  les  m^mes 
^*  rapports  dans  toutes  les  langues,  qui  font  marques  par 
^*  les  Prepofitions."  And  therefore  he  will  content  him- 
felf to  mention  fome  of  the  principal  French  Prepofitions, 
without  obliging  himfelf  to  fix  their  exaft  number.  And 
as  San<£lius  had  his  reafon  for  turning  the  bufinefs  over  to 
a  philofophical  grammar,  whilft  he  was  treating  of  a  par- 
ticular language :  fo  this  author,  who  was  writing  a  general 
grammar,  had  his  reafon  for  leaving  it  to  thofe  who  wrote 
particular  grammars.—**  C'eft  pourquoi  je  me  contenterai 

«  de 


OF  PREPOSITIONS.  309 

^^  de  rapporter  ici  les  prtncipaux  de  ceux  qui  font  marques 

"  par   les    prepofitions   de   la   Langue    Frangoifc;    fans 

"  m'obliger  ^  en  faire  un  denombrement  exadt,  comme  il 

^<  feroit  neceflaire  pour  une  Grammaire  particuliere.'^ 

M.  L'Abbe  de  Condillac's  method  is  moft  conveniently 
cavalier,  and  perfedtly  adapted  to  a  writer  of  his  defcrip- 
tion. — **  Je  me  bornerai  a  vous  en  donner  quelques 
^^  exemples :  car  vous  Jugez  bien^  Monfeigneur,  que  je  ne 
^  me  propofe  pas  d'analyfcr  les  acceptions  de  toutes  les  pre>- 
^^  pofitions.''  And  again,  concludes — ^^  En  voila  aflez, 
^^  Monfeigneur  *  r 

Even  the  learned  Prefident  de  BrofTes,  in  his  excellent 
treatife  De  la  formation  mechanique  des  Langues,  is  com- 
pelled to  evade  the  inquiry.  "  L'accroiflement  en  tete 
^^  des  mots  y  amene  une  quantite  fort  variee  d'idees  ac- 
^^  ccflbires.     C'eft  un  effet  commun  des  Prepofitions  ;  qui 


*  In  the  fame  manner  he  (kips  over  all  forts  of  difficulty  with  the  Cor- 
junftions. 


€€ 


Mais,  Monfeigneur,  il  eft  inutile  de  faire  Tenumeration  de  toutes  les 
**  conjonftions." — "  Je  ne  crois  pas,  Monfeigneur,  qu'il  y  ait  rien  de  flus 
^  i  remarquer  fur  les  conjonftions.** 

Partie  II.  Chap.  23. 


^4 


pourroit 


31  o  OF  PREPOSITIONS. 

«  pourroit  fournir  la  matiere  d'un  chapitre  tres-^diUofo-^ 

<*  phique  fur  leurs  caufes,  leurs  racines,  leuf  force,  leur 

<*  effet,  leurs  fignifications,  leur  varietes.     Je  ne  ferai  qut 

<*  toucher  cette  matiere  en  fort  peu  de  mots  dans   un 

<*  exemple  que  je  donnerai,  8c  feulement  pour  mettre  fur 

«  les  voies^ 

Tom.  II.  Chap.  ii.  Art.  198. 

The  laborious  and  judicious  R.  Johnibn,  includes  in  one 
page  of  his  National  Grammar  all  that  he  has  to  offer  on 
the  Adverb,  ConjunSion,  and  Prepojition :  and  concludes 
with  faying—"  And  here,  if  I  would  (hew  the  reader  the 
«  defaStivenefs  of  this  Grammar  (Lilly's)  in  the  account 
^  it  gives  of  the  ufe  of  the  Prepofitions,  it  would  make  a 
«  little  volume. 

"  Sed  nos  immenlum  fpatio  confecimus  squor, 
"  £t  jam  tempus  Equum  flimantia  folvere  colla  *." 

Our  countryman  Wilkins,  who  is  fairer  and  more  intel- 
ligent than  any  of  them,  does  not  deny  that  it  falls  pro- 


*  And  in  his  NoHes  Nettingbamica  he  fays — ^^  Pnepofitionum  Con- 
**  ftraftio— . 

"  We  are  come  now  to  die  moft  curious  part  of  all  grammar,  and 
«^  which,  if  it  were  truly  ftated,  would  at  once  mftruft,  and  cntcrt^n  dxc 
"  reader  with  a  furprizing  delight,." 

And  there  he  leaves  ir» 

perly 


OF  PREPOSITIONS.  311 

perly  within  his  province ;  but  faves  himfelf  by  feleBing 
fuch  as  he  conceives  fufficient.  Speaking  of  Particles,  he. 
fays,  (Part  3.  Chap*  2.)—-"  The  words  of  this  kind  are 
*^  exceeding  numerous  and  equivocal  in  all  languages,  and 
*^  add  much  to  the  difficulty  of  learning  them.  It  being 
**  a  very  hard  matter  to  eftablifh  the  juft  number  of  fuch 
"  as  in  all  kinds  are  neceffary  *,  and  to  fix  to  them  their 
*^  proper  fignifications :  which  yet  ought  to  he  done  in  a 
^<  pbilofopbical  grammar.  I  Ihall  in  this  ^ISzy  feleSi  out  of 
<^  inftituted  languages,  fuch  of  the  feveral  forts  as  I  con- 
*^  CQiwt  fufficient  for  this  purpofe.'' 

The  learned  Alexander  Gil  employs  the  denomination 
Conjignijicativa ;  which  is  more  comprehenfive  than  Par- 
ticle^ but  not  more  explanatory. 

*^    DE    CONSIGNIFICATIVIS. 

"  Vox  confignificativa  Articulos  comprehendit,  Adverbia 
"  item,  ConjunBiones^  Prapofitiones^  Inter] edliones.  Et  quia 
"  in  his  invariabilibus  nihil  difficult  at  is  eft,  pneter  ipfam 


*  No  wcnder  that  Wilkins  found  it  fo  hard  to  fix  the  number  which  v/is 
neceflary,  fince  their  number  in  every  language  depends  merely  upon  !iow 
many  of  the  moft  common  words  flial!  become  obfolete  or  cornipre:!  This 
being  mere  matter  of  particular  fadt  and  of  accident,  can  have  no  place  in 
general  or  philofpphical  grammar. 

3  '^  vocum 


3i2r  OF  PREPOSITIONS. 

*^  vocum  cognitionem,  clafles  enitn  eaedem  funt,  ut  ufus 
"  idem  qui  Latinas,  et  aliis  liiiguis,  ad  Lexicograpbos 
^^  hanim  rerum  ftudiofum  leiStorem  ablegabo.'' 

Logonomia  Anglica.   Pag*  67,  69. 

DcxSor  Wallis,  after  Gil's  example)  fays—"  Adverbia 
«  eandem  fbrtmntur  naturam  apud  nos  quam  apod  Latinos, 
^  aliafque  gentes.  ConjuiKStipnes  item  eundem  habent 
"  ufum  quem  apud  Latinos,  aliofque.  Praepofitiones 
<*  etiam  eandem  fbrtiuntur  naturam,  quam  aliis  Unguis. 
•*  Si  quis  tamen  harum  aliquot  voces  potius  adverbia  efle 
«  dicat ;  aut  etiam  ex  adverbiis  aliquot  ad  conjun^onum 
**  claflem  referre  malit :  non  tanti  eft  ut  hac  de  re  quiis 
^  contendat  \.  eum,  8c  apud  Latinos,  eadem  non  raro  vox 
**  nunc  pro  adverbio,  nunc  pro  conjun<Stione  cenfenda  eft. 
**  Neque  aliquod  gfave  detrimentum  pateremur,  fi  tam  ad- 
"  verbia  quam  conJun<ftiones- &  interjedtiones,  ad  eandem: 
«  claflem  redigerentur.  EJi  quidem  nonnibil  difcrimnis,. 
^  fed  leviufculum^     Cap.  xiii,. 


Greenwood  ralhly  ventures  a  little  farther  than  any  other 
perfon ;.  and  upon  Mr.  Locke's  authority,  acknowledging 
it  to  be  his  duty  to  do  what  other  grammarians  had 
negle(5ted, .  fays'— 


OF  PREPOSITIONS*  313 

"  I  am  fenfible  that  what  I  have  here  done"' — (and  he 
has  done  nothing) — ^<  is  flight  and  fuperficial  to  what  may 
^^  and  ought  to  be  done ;  but  if  this  fliall  meet  with  any 
^^  encx)uragement,  I  may  be  excited  to  make  farther  im* 
^^  provements  in  thefe  matters,  by  taking  more  pains  to 
"  obferve  nicely  the  feveral  pojiures  of  the  mind  in  dif- 
"  courfe*.^ 

Now  Greenwood^s  grammar  did  aftually  meet  with  very 
great  and  extraordinary  encouragement ;  and  went  through 
feveral  editions  fpeedily  during  the  author's  life ;  but  he 
never  fulfilled  his  promife :  nor  indeed  is  there  any  thing 
about  him,  to  incline  us  to  believe  that  he  was  a  fit  perfon 
for  fuch  an  undertaking* 

But  not  to  multiply  quotations  without  end  (in  which 
you  are  much  better  verfed  than  I  am)  you  know  that  all 
philoibphers,  philologers  and  grammarians,  Who  have 
owned  a  diflatisfadlion  in  theaccounts  already  given  of  the 
Particles,  have  yet,  for  fome  fliuffling  reafon  or  other,  all 


*  In  the  fame  manner  Greenwood  flips  the  Conjunflions.     "  But  this 

^  fhall  fuffice  for  the  Conjunftions,  fince  it  would  be  too  tedious  to  go 

"  through  all  the  divifions  of  them ;  and  /  may  Jome  ether  time  explain 
"  them  more  largely  and  accurately/' 

S  s  delired 


314  OF  PREPOSITIONS- 

defired  to  be  excufed  from  giving  a  fatisfadlory  account 
thennfelves, 

B. 

But  why  not  concur  with  M.  M.  de  Port  Royal,  and  the 
Prefident  de  Broffes  ?  They  are  free  from  the  contradidtion 
and  inconfiftency  of  Mr.  Harris's  account  of  the  Prepofi- 
tions.  For  they  acknowledge  them  to  have  a  fignification. 
— "  On  a  eu  rccours,  fay  the  former,  dans  toutes  les 
*^  langues  a  une  autre  invention ;  qui  a  ete  ^inv enter  de 
"  pedis  mots  pour  etre  mis  avant  les  noms ;  ce  qui  les  a 
"  fait  appeller  Prepofitions."  ; 

And  M.  de  Brofles,  with  great  ingenuoufnefs  tells  us, 
(Traitc  de  la  formation  mechanique  des  langues,  Tom.  2. 
Chap.  XI.  Art.  198.) — "  Chacune  des  Prepofitions  a  Jon 
"  fens  propre,  mais  qu'on  applique  a  beaucoup  d'autres 
"  fens  par  extenfion  &  par  approximation.  EUes  font  des 
"  formules  abregees,  dont  Tufage  eft  le  plus  frappant  &:  le 
"  plus  commode  dans  toutes  les  langues  pour  circonftancier 
"  les  idees :  elle  font  d'elles-memes  Racines  primitives ; 
"  maisyV  fpai  pas  trouve  quUl  fut  pojjible  d^ajfigner  la  caufe 
*^  de  leur  origine :  tellement  que  j'en  crois  la  formation 
*^  purement  arbitraire.  Je  penfe  de  m^me  des  Particules, 
**  des  Articles,  des  Pronoms,  des  Relatifs,  des  Conjondlion's ; 

"  en 


3i6 


OF  PREPOSITIONS. 


**  fait  connoitre  la  force  8c  Temploi.  Ces  petits  iignes  de 
*^  liafon  font  reftes  en  grand  nombre  dans  chaque  langue, 
"  ou  Ton  i)eut  les  confiderer  comme  fons.  radicaux;  &:  ils 
**  y  ont  en  effet  leurs  derives.'* 

And  again  (Art.  as  4.)  **  J*ai  fait  voir  combien  il  etoit 
"  difficile  de  trouvex  le  premier  germe  radicsd  des  Parti- 
«  cules  conjonitives  du  difcours.  Leur  examen  m*a  fait 
**  pencher  a  croire  qu*elles  etoient  pour  la  plupart  arbi- 
<*  tratres;  8c  que  le  prompt  8c  prodigieux  befoin  qu*on  en 
«  a  pour  s'enoncer,  ay  ant  force  les  hommes  de  chaque 
**  pays  k  prendre  le  premier  monofyllabe  ou  gefte  vocal 
«  indetermine  qui  lui  venoit  k  la  bouche  dans  le  befoia 
"  preflanty  Tufage  reitere  en  avoit  determine  lliabitude 
"  fignificative.  II  n*eft  guere  plus  ai£e  d*affigner  la  pre- 
«<  miere  origine  de  Prepq/itionsy  quoiqu'un  peu  plus  com- 
*<  pofees  que  les  iimples  particules  conjondtives.** 


And  again  (Art.  274.)  <^  On  auroit  a  parler  aufli  de  la 
^^  caufe  des  difierentes  terminaifons  dans  les  langues^  de  la 
*^  fignification  des  prepofitions,  de  leur  variete  a  cet  egard: 
<<  car  les  m^mes  ont  plufieurs  fens  tr^-differents.  G'eft 
*^*  une  matiere  extremenient  vafte  &;  tr^s-philofophique." 


H.  Meffieiirs 


OF  PREPOSITIONS.  317 

H. 

Meflieurs  de  Port-Royal  and  M.  de  BroITes  deferve  for 
ever  to  be  mentioned  with  refpeft  and  gratitude ;  but,  upon 
this  occafion,  I  muft  anfwer  them  in  the  words  of  Mer. 
Cafaubon  (de  lingua  Hebraicd) — "  Perfuadeant  fortafle 
**  illis ;  qui  de  verbis  fingulis,  etiam  vulgatiflimis,  i  phi- 
"  lofophis,  priufquam  imponerentur,  itum  in  coniilium 
"  cedunt.  Nos,  qui  de  verborum  origine  longe  aliter 
**  opinamur,  plan^  pro  fabula  habemus.** 

Language,  it  is  true,  is  an  Art,  and  a  gldrious  one>' 

« 

whofe  influence  extends  over  all  the  others,  and  in  which' 
finally  all  fcience  whatever  muft  centre.  But  an  art 
fpringing  from  neceflity,  and  originally  invented  by  artlefs 
men ;  who  did  not  fit  down  like  philofophers  to  invent 
**  de  pet  its  mots  pour  etre  mis  avant  les  nomsf  nor  yet  did 
they  take  for  this  purpofe  "  des  premiers  Jons  brefs  ^ 
"  vagues  qui  leur  venoient  a  la  boucbe  * ;  but  they  took 

fuch : 

*  It  will  fccm  the  more  extraordinary  that  M.  de  Broffes  fhould  entertain 
this  opinion  of  the  ParticleSy  when  we  remember  what  he  truly  fays  of 
Proper  names. — "  Tous  Ics  mots  formant  les  noms  propres  ou  appcUatifs 
*'  des  perfonnes,  ont  en  quelque  langage  que  ce  foit,  ainfi  que  les  mots  for-  ' 
"  mants  les  noms  des  chofes,  une  origine  certaine,  une  fignification  deter- 
"  min^e,  une  etymologie  veritable,  lis  n'ont  pas,  plus  que  les  autres  mots, 
"  etc  impofes  fins  caufe,  ni  fabriques  au  hafard,  fculement  pour  produire 

**  un. 


3x8  OF  PREPOSITIONS, 

fuch  and  the  fame  (whether  great  or  fmall,  whether  mono- 
fyllable  or  polyfyllablc,  without  diftin6lion)  as  they  em- 
ployed upon  other  occafions  to  mention  the  fame  real  ob^ 
jedls.  For  Prepojitions  alfo  are  the  names  of  real  objects. 
And  thefe  petits  mots^  happen  in  this  cafe  to  be  fo,  merely 
from  their  repeated  corruption,  owing  to  their  frequent, 
long-continued,  and  perpetual  ufe. 

You  affert  then  that  what  w^e  call  PrepoJitionSy  and 
diftinguifli  as  a  feparate  part  of  fpeech,  are  not  a  fpecies 
of  w^ords  eflentially  or  in  any  manner  different  from  the 
other  parts :  that  they  are  not  "  little  words  invented  to 
^^^  put  'before  tiouns^  and  to  which  all  languages  have  had  re- 
*^  courfe :"  but  that  they  are  in  fa£l  either  Nouns  or  Verbs. 
And  that  (like  the  Conjundtions)  Prepofitions  are  only  words 
which  have  been  difguifed  by  corruption ;  and  that  Ety- 
mology will  give  us  in  all  langviages,  what  Philofophy  has 
attempted  in  Vain.  And  yet  I  cannot  but  perceive  that 
fuch  words  as  Prepofitions,  are  abfolutely  neceffary  to  dif- 
courfe. 


"  un  bruit  vague.     Ccpendant  comme  la  plupart  de  ccs  mots  nc  portent  a 

**  Toreille  dc  ceux  qui  les  cntendent  aucune  autre  fignification  que  de  de- 

"  figner  les  perfonnes  nommees ;  c'eft  fur  tout  a  leur  cgard  que  le  vulgairc 

"  eft  porte  a  croire  qu'ik  font  denucs  de  fens  &  d'etymologie." 

2  H.    I 


.      ^ 


OF  PREPOSITIONS. 


H. 


319 


I  acknowledge  them  to  be  undoubtedly  neceflary*  For^ 
as  the  neceffity  of  the  Article  (or  of  fome  equivalent  in- 
vention) follows  from  the  impqlTibility  of  having  in  lan- 
guage a  diftiniSl  name  or  particular  term  for  each  particular 
individual  idea  * ;  fo  does  the  neceffity  of  the  Prepofition 
(or  of  fome  equivalent  invention)  follow  from  the  impof- 
fibility  of  having  in  language  a  diftindt  complex  term  for 
each  different  colleBion  of  ideas  which  we  may  have  occafion 
to  put  together  in  difcourfe.  The  addition  or  fubtradlion 
of  any  one  idea  to  or  from  a  coUedion,  makes  it  a  different 
collection  :  and  (if  there  were  degrees  of  impoffibility)  it 
is  ftill  more  impoffible  to  ufe  in  language  a  different  and 
diftindl  complex  term  for  each  different  and  diftindt  colleBion 
of  ideasy  than  it  is  to  ufe  a  diftindl  particular  term  for  each. 
particufaF  and  individual  idea*  To  fupply^  therefore,  the 
place  of  the  complex  terms  which  are  wanting  in  a  language^ 
is  the  Prepofition  employed.  By  whofe  aid  complex  terms 
are  prevented  from  being  infinite  or  too  numerous,  and  are 
ufed  only  for  thofe  coUedlions  of  ideas  which  we  have  mod 
frequently  occafion  to  mention  in  difcourfe.  And  this  end 
is  obtained  in  the  moft  fimple  manner  in  the  world.  For 
having  occafion  in  communication  to  mention  a  colle6tion 


*  Sec  before.  Chap.  V. 

of 


320  OF  PREPOSITIONS. 

of  ideaS)  for  which  there  is  no  one  fingle  complex  term  in 
the  language,  we  either  take  that  complex  term  which  in- 
dudes  the  greateft  number,  though  not  Ally  of  the  ideas 
wc  would  communicate ;  or  elfe  we  take  that  complex  term 
which  includes  -^/,  and  the  feweft  ideas  more  than  thofe 
we  would  communicate :  and  then  by  the  help  of  the  Pre- 
poiition,  we  either  make  up  the  deficiency  in  the  one  cafe, 
or  retrench  the  fuperfluity  in  the  other. 

For  inftance, 

I .  **  ^  Houfe  wifH  a  Party-waU^ 
a.  "  A  Houfe  without  a  roof^ 

In  the  fifll  inftance,  <  the  complex  term  is  deficient :  The 
Prepofition  diretSts  to  add  what  is  wanting.  In  the  fecond 
inftance,  the  complex  term  is  redundant :  The  Prepofition 
4ire<Sts  to  take  away  what  is  fuperfluous* 

Now  coniidering  it  only  in  this,  the  moft  fimjple  light, 
it  is  abfolutely  neceflary,  in  either  cafe,  that  the  Prepofi- 
tion itfelf  fhould  have  a  meaning  of  its  own :  for  how 
could  we  otherwife  make  known  by  it  our  intention, 
whether  of  adding  to  or  retrenching  from,  the  deficient  or 
redundant  complex  term  we  have  employed  ? 

U 


I; 


6f  prepositions.  34.1 

If  to  one  of  our  modern  grammarians,  I  (liould  fay— ^ 
^*  A  Houfey  Join  f — He  would  afk  me — "  Join  what  .^''— . 
But  he  would  not  contend  that  Join  is  an  indeclinable 
word,  and  has  no  meaning  of  it  own :  becaufe  he  knows 
that  it  is  the  Imperative  of  the  Verb,  the  other  parts  of 
which  are  ftill  in  ufe ;  and  its  own  meaning  is  clear  to 
him,  though  the  fentence  is  not  compleated.  If,  inflead 
of  Join,  I  fhould  fay  to  him, — "  A  Houfe  with  ;" — he 
would  ftill  afk  the  fame  queftion,  "  With  what  ^  But  if 
I  ftiould  difcourfe  with  him  concerning  the  word  with,  he 
would  tell  me  that  it  was  a  Prepofition^  an  indeclinable  word, 
and  that  it  had  no  meaning  of  its  own,  but  only  a  connd^ 
tation  or  confignijication.  And  yet  it  would  be  evident  by 
his  queftion,  that  he  felt  it  had  a  meaning  of  its  own ; 
which  is  indeed  the  fame  as  join  ^.     And  thts  only  dif- 

ference 


*  With  is  alfo  fometimcs  the  Imperative  of  pyji^an.     Tf^  he.    Mr. 
Tyrwhit,  in  his  Gloffary  {Art.  but)  has  obfcrved  truly,  that— ^^  by  and 
WITH  are  often  fynonimous."— They  are  always  fo,  when  with  is  the 
Imperative  of  pyjiSan :  for  by  is  the  Imperative  of  Beon.    To  hi. 

He  has  alfo  in  his  Gloffary  {^Art.  ^yiTn)  faid  truly>  that— '^  With 
'^^  mejchance.  With  mijaventure.  Wnu/orwe.  5316.  7797.  6916.  4410. 
**  5890,  5922.  are  to  be  confidered  as  parenthetical  curies/'— For  the 
literal  meaning  of  thofe  phrafcs,  is  (not  God  yeve,  but)— *bb  mifcbance^  bs 
mijadventurey  -^^Jorrow^  to  him  or  them  concerning  whom  thcfe  wcird»  art 
Ipoken.  But  Mr.  Tyrwhit  is  miftaken,  when  he  fuppofes— "  with  evil 
^^  prefe.  5829.  with  barde  grace.  7810.  with /^ry  grace.   12810." — to 

T  t  have 


34  ft  OF  PREPOSITIONS. 

ference  between  the  two  words  with  and  joiNf  is^  that 
the  other  parts  of  the  verb  yit{i^AN)  pi^an,  to  join  (of  which 
WITH  is  the  imperative)  have  ceafed  to  be  employed  in  the 
language  ^^.     So  that  my  inflances  ftand  thus^ 

I.  A  Houfe 


have  the  fame  meaning  :  for  in  thofe  three  inftances,  with  is  the  Imperative 

of  VltJiAM ;  nor  is  any  parenthetical  curfe  or  wi(h  contained  in  cidier  of 
diofe  inflances. 

As  WITH  means  join,  fo  the  corfefbndent  French  Prepofition^  avec, 
means — And  Hm)e  that^  or  Have  that  alja.    And  it  was  formerly  written 

Avecque^  i.  e.  Avezque.    So  Boileau,  Satire  i. 

•     • 

'*  .Quittons  done  pour  jam^s  line  ville  importune : 
*^  Oii  Phonneur  eft  en  guerre  AVECi^yE  la  fortune,'* 

And  again.  Satire  5. 

*  *  ' 

*f  Mais  qui  m'affurera,  qu'en  cc  longe  cercle  d'ans, 
♦'  A'  leurs  femeux  epoux  vos  aycules  fidelles 
♦*  Aux  douceurs  dcs  galands  furcnt  toujours  rebelles  ? 
«*  Et  comment  f<;avez-vous,  fi  quelqu'  audacieux 
**  N'a  point  interrompu  le  cours  de  vos  ayeux  ? 
*'  Et  fi  leur  fang  tout  pur  AVECCXtrE  kur  noblefle^ 
**  Eft  pafl?  julqu'  i  yous  de  Lucrece  en  Lucrece." 

♦  We  ftill  retain  in  En^fli  Ipecch,  though  not  often  ufed  in  books,  the 
fubftaj(jrives  With  or  Withe,  Withem,  and  Wit^er-band. 

^^  Me  thou  ihalt  ufe  in  what  thou  wilt^  and  doc  diat  with  a  (lender  twift> 
^*  that  aoac^can  doe  with  a  ;ough  With." 

Eufbues  and  bis  England.  '  Pag.  136. 

"  They 


OF  PREPOSITTONS.  323 

I .  A  Houfe  Join  a  Party-waiL 
a.  AHaufe  Be-out  a  roof. 

And  indeed  fo  far  has  always  been  plainly  perceived, 
that  WITH  and  without  are  dire6tly  oppofite  and  contra- 

« 

didtory.  WiUdns,  without  knowing  what  the  words  really 
^ere,  has  yet  well  expreffed  their  meaning,  where  he  fays 
that  With  is  a  prepolition — "  relating  to  the  notion  of 
**  fociafor  circranftance  of  fociety  affirmed  \  and  that  with* 
^  otrr  is  a  prepofition  relating  to  the  fame  notion  oifocial^ 
^*  or  circumftance  of  fociety  denied.^ 


-N^i 


"  -They  had  arms  under  the  ftraw  in  the  boat ;  and  had  cut  the  W|the$ 
*'  that  held  the  oars  of  the  town-boats,  to  prevent  any  purfuit,  if  they 
"  fhould  be  forced  to  fly/'  Ludlow's  Memoirs.     Pag.  435. 

And  again,  pag.  437.  "  One  of  the  four  watermen  was  the  pcrfon  who 
"  cut  the  Withes  of  all  the  town-boats,  to  prevent  them  from  purfuing.'* 

"  This  troublefom  rowing,  though  an  ingenious  invention  of  the  Chinefes, 
•*  hath  railed  this  proverb  amongft  them,  that  their  boMts  are  papery  and 
"  their  watermen  iron  \  becaufe  they  are  made  of  very  thin  boards,  like  our 
"  flit  deal,  which  are  not  n^ed,  but  faflrcned  together  widi  Withs,  in  the 
Chincfe  tongue  called  rotang  j  by  which  means  the  boats,  though  often 
beaten  by  the  ftrong  current  againft  the  rocks,  fplit  not,  but  bend  arid 
"  give  way/'  Hi/iory  of  China.     By  lohn  Ogilby.     Vol.  1.  pag,  609. 


re 


"  The  only  fiihniturc  belonging  to  thft  houfcs,  appears  to  be  an  oblong 
"  veflcl  made  of  bark,  by  tying  up  the  ends  with  a  Withb/* 

Captain  Cook's  dejcription  of  Botany  Bay. 

» 

T  t  a  And 


324  OF  PREPOSITIONS. 

And  it  would  puzzle  the  wifeft  ^hilofopher  to  difcover 
oppofition  and  contradiction  in  two  words,  where  neither 
of  them  had  any  fignification. 

9 

t 

B. 

According  then  to  your  explanation,  the  Prepofition 
WITHOUT,  is  the  very  fame  word,  and  has  the  very  fame 
meaning  as  the  Conjundlion  without.  Does  not  this  in 
fome  meafure  contradidt  what  you  before  aflerted,  con- 
cerning the  faithfulnefs  of  words  to  the  ftandard  undei; 
which  they  were  originally  enlifted  ?  For  there  does  not 
appear  in  this  cafe  to  be  any  melting  down  of  two  words 
into  one,  by  fuch  a  corruption  as  you  before  noticed  in 
fome  of  the  Conjundtions.  And  yet  here  is  one  and  the 
fame  word  ufed  both  as  a  Conjunction  and  as  a  Prepofitipn* 

H. 

There  is  nothing  at  all  extraordinary,  much  lefs  contra?* 
didtory  in  this  ;  that  one  and  the  fame  word  ihould  be  ap- 
plied indifferently  either  to  fingle  ^ords  or  to  fentences : 
(for  you  muft  obferve  that  the  apparently  different  applica^ 
tion  conftitutes  the  only  difference  between  Conjundtions 
and  Prepoiitions)  :  For  I  may  very  well  employ  the  fame 
word  of  diredtion,  whether 'it  be  to  add  a  word  or  to  add 
zfentence  :  And  again,  one  and  the  fame  word  of  diredtion 

will 


ba.M..a^iiM*dhfll» 


OF  PREPOSITIONS-  315 

will  ferve  as  well  to  take  away  a  word  as  to  take  iway  a 
fentence.  No  wonder  therefore  that  our  anceftors  (who 
were  ignorant  of  the  falfe  divifions  and  definitions  of 
Grammar  which  we  have  fince  received)  fhould  have  ufed 
But  indiflferently  to  diredt  the  omiffion  either  of  a  word^ 
pv  of  a  fentence  :  and  Ihould  have  ufed  without  alfo  inr 
j^flferently  for  the  omiffion  of  2,  fentence  or  of  a  word.  But 
after  our  authors  became  more  generally  and  better  ac- 
c[uainted  with  the  divifions  and  definitions  of  the  Greek 
and  Latin  Grammarians,  they  attempted  by  degrees  to 
make  our  language  alfo  conform  to  thofe  definitions  and 
divifions.  And  after  that  it  was,  that  but  ceafed  to  be 
commonly  ufed  as  a  known  Prepofition;  and  without 
ceafed  to  be  correSlly  ufed  as  a  Conjunction. 

As  the  meaning  of  thefe  two  words  but  (I  mean  that 
part  which  is  corrupted  from  Buran)  and  without,  is 
exa^ly  the  fame,  our  authors  would  moft  likely  have  had 
fome  difficulty  to  agree  amongft  themfelves,  which  ihould 
be  the  Prepofition  and  which  the  Conjundtion ;  had  it  npt 
been  for  the  corruption  of  bot,  which  becaming  but, 
muft  neceflarily  decide  the  choice  :  for  though  without 
could  very  well  fupply  the  place  of  the  Prepofition  but,  it 
could  not  fupply  the'  place  of  the  Bot  part  of  the  Con- 
junStion  but  ;  whereas  but  could  entirely  fupply  the  place 

of 


3i6  OF  BEE^^tTtONS. 

6{  the  ConjunBion  without.  And  this,  I  take  it,  is  the 
reafon  why  but  has  been  retained  as  a  Conjiin6tion,  and 
WITHOUT  has  been  retwned  as  a  Prepofition. 

Not  however  that  they  have  been  able  fb  to  bsuiiih  the 
old  habit  of  our  language,  as  that  but  Ihould  always  be 
ufed  as  a  CSonjundtion,  and  without  always  as  a  Prepo- 
fition. (I  mean  that  but  fhould  always  apparently  be  ap- 
plied to  fentencesy  and  without  always  to  words ;  for  that, 
it  muft  be  remembered,  is  the  only  difference  between 
Conjundtions  and  Prepofitions)  :  for  but  is  ftiU  ufed  fre- 
quently  as  a  Prepofition :  though  Grammarians,  forgetful 
or  heedlefs  of  their  own  Definitions,  are  pleafed  to  call  it 
always  a  Gonjunftion ; 

I 

As  thus,  "  yill  BUT  one,^ 

And,  though  it  is  not  now  an  approved  ufage,  it  is  very 
frequent  in  common  fpeech  to  hear  without  ufed  as  a 
conjunAion ;  where,  inftead  of  without,  a  correct  modem 
fpeaker  would  ufe  unless,  or  fome  other  equivalent 
acknowledged  conjunction :  and  that  for  no  other  reafon, 
but  becaufe  it  has  pleafed  our  Grammarians  to  exclude 
without  from  the  number  of  conjun<Slions, 

B.  And 


OF  PREPOSITION&  317 

B. 

AnJ  is  not  that  reaibn  fufiident,  when  the  beft  writers 
have  for  a  long  time  paft  conformed  to  this  arrangement  i 

H. 

Undoubtedly.  Nor  do  I  mean  to  cenfure  thofe  who 
follow  cuftom  for  the  propriety  of  a  particular  language  i 
I  <lo  not  even  mean  to  condemn  the  cuftom  :  for  in  this 
inflance  it  is  perfeilily  harmlefs.  But  I  condemn  the  falfe 
philofbphy  which  caufed  it.  I  condemn  thofe  who  wilfully 
ihut  their  eyes,  and  affibiSt  not  to  perceive  the  indifferent 
application  of  but,  and,  .since,  if,  else,  &c.  both  to  words 
and  to  fentences ;  and  Hill  endeavour  by  their  definitions  to 
uphold  a  diftindtion  which  .they  know  does  not  exifl  even 
in  the  pradtice  of  any  language,  and  which  they  ought  to 
know  cannot  exift  in  theory. 

To  the  pedagogue  indeed,  who  mufl  not  trouble  children 
about  the  corruption  of  words,  the  diftindtion  of  prepo- 
iitions  and  conjun6tions  may  be  ufeful  enough  (on  account 
of  the  cafes  which  they  govern  when  applied  to  words ; 
and  which  they  cannot  govern  when  applied  \.o  fentences)  ; 
and  for  fome  fuch  reafon  perhaps,  both  this  and  many 
tether  diflindions  were  at  firft  introduced.     Nor  would  they 

have  cauied  apy  mifchief  pr  confuiion,  if  the  pbilofopber 

2  had 


•^48  OF  PREPOSITION!^, 

had  not  adopted  thefe  diftin<5lions ;  taken  them  for  real 
differences  in  nature^  or  in  the  operations  of  tbi  btintan 
ntind'y  and  then  attempted  to  account  for  what  he  did  not 
underfland.  And  thus  the  Grammatift  has  mifled  the 
Grammarian,  and  both  of  them  the  Philofopher. 

B. 

**  Sans  eyes,  sans  teeth,  sans  tafte,  sans  every  thing." 

This  prepofition  too,  which  was  formerly  ufed  inftead 
of  WITHOUT,  you  mean,  I  fuppofe,  to  account  for  in  the 
fame  manner :  It  can  be  fliewn,  I  fuppofe,  to  be  the  Im- 
perative of  fome  obfolete  Saxon  verb,  having  a  iimilar 
meaning. 

H. 

Sans,  though  fometimes  ufed  inflead  of  without,  is 
not  an  Englifh  but  a  French  Prepofition,  and  therefore  to 
be  derived  from  another  fburce.  . 

"  Et  je  confervcrai,  malgr6  votre  menace, 

**  Unc  ame  SANS-xourroiu^  Sans  crainte,  ct  Sans  audace." 

Adelaide. 

Nor  is  it  a  verh^  but  zfubjiantive :  and  it  means  fimply 
Abfence,  It  is  one  proof,  amongft  many  others,  that  Plu- 
tarch's half-conjedture  was 'not  ill-founded.  After  all,  h« 
thinks  it  may  be  worth  confidering,  whether  the  Prepd- 

fitions 


OF  PREPOSITIONS.  319 

fitions  may  not  be  perhaps  little  fragments  of  words,  ufed 
m  hafte  and  for  difpatch,  inftead  of  the  >vhole  words  *, 
Sans  is  corrupted  from  the  prepofition  Senza  of  the  Italians 
(by  old  Italian  authors  written  Sanza  \)  who  frequently  ufe 

it 

*  I  M^JL^— ^Mfcl—^  1  l^l^     IWI^M  11     il  ■  ■■  I        I*  l„  .11     >  a   I,  I        Wl     •  I  '1  a     III 

f  '^  Vai  alia  tavemai  ripariti  in  Cafa  femmine,  et  dove  11  gitioca  ipendi 
^^  SANZA  modo/'  MacbiaveUi.  ClUia.    Atto.  3.  See.  4. 

^^  Senza  et  sanza  (lays  Menage)  Da  Abjentiih  per  aferefi/  lo  cava  H 
^^  Cittadinu  Viene  fecondo  me  da/ff^  (come  lo  Spagmiolo  .^fif/^  da  Ante) 
*^  Sine^  Sines.  Senes.  (onde  li  Francefe  Sens^  chc  fi  pronunzia  Sans)  Senfe^ 
**  ^y^ij/Ji.  J^fZJ.     Sanza  cUfferpiu  volentieri  gli  anrichi." 

Again  Menage  fays,  that  Sans  deffks  dejbus^  fhould  be  written  3£ifS 
dejfus  deffbus  "  comme  on  ecrit.  En  tout  Sens,  dece  Sens  li.  Sec.  Sens, 
c'eft  k  dire,  Face,  vifage,  Jituatitm^  pofture,  &c. — Menage  is  iurely  wrong; 
for  it  means,  wUbout  top  or  bottom,  i.  e.  a  lituadon  of  confufion  in  which 
you  cannot  difcern  the  top  from  the  bottom ;  or  fay  which  is  the  top  and 
which  the  bottom.  We  tranflate  it*  by  a  fimikr  expreflion  in  Englifli, 
U^ide  down,  by  our  old  authors  more  properly  written  Upfo  d^wn^ 

^'  But  the  other  parrie  was  fo  ftrongc. 
That  for  the  lawe  of  no  ftatute 
There  maic  no  right  be  execute  z 
And  upon  this  divifion 
The  londc  was  tourned  up  so  downe." 

Gower.     Lib.  2.  FoL  J7,  Pi^.  i.  Col.  a. 

*^^  Do  lawe  awaie,  what  is  a  kynge  ? 
Where  is  the  right  of  any  thyngc 

U  u  IT 


/ 


\ 


330  OF  PREPOSITIONS. 

it  thus ;  Senza  di  te,  i.  e.  Assenza  di  te.  The  French 
(as  we  have  feen  in  Chez)  omit  the  Segnacafo,  and  fay 
Sans  toi.  And  as  from  the  Italian  Aflenza  they  have  their 
Abfence ;  or,  as  they  pronounce  it,  Ahfance  or  Abfans  ;  io 
have  they  their  prepofition  Sans  from  Senza  or  Sanza. 
But  I  perfuade  myfelf  that  you  can  have  no  doubt  of  the 
meaning  of  this  prepofition  Sans,  when  you  find  the  fig- 
nification  of  its  corref^ondent  vrords  equally  clear  in  other 
languages. 

The  Greek  prepofition  X^/m;,  is  the  corrupted  Imperative 
of  Xttpt^atv,  to  fever,  to  disjoin^  to  feparate. 

The  German  prepofition  Sonder,   the   imperative  of 
Sonderfty  which  has  the  fame  meaning  as  Xmpi^tiv, 

The  Dutch  prepofition  Zondek,  the  imperative  of  Zon- 
deren,  with  the  fame  meaning. 

The  Latin  prepofition  Sine,  i.  e.  Sit  ne»   Be  not. 

If  that  there  be  no  lawe  in  londe  ? 
This  ought  a  kynge  well  underftonde^ 
As  lie  whiche  is  to  lawe  (wore> 
That  if  the  lawe  be  fbrelois 
Withouten  execucion. 
It  makcth  a  londe  turne  up  so  tjownb." 

Cower.    Uh.  7.  Foh  159.  Pag.  i,  CoL  i. 

jk  The 


OF  PREPOSITIONS. 


S3I 


The  Spanifh  Sifti  from  the  Latin  Sine. 

The  kalian  Fuori 

The  Sp2imihAfu€ra  (z^Puerta  from  Porta) 
The  French  Hors  *  (by  their  old  authors 
written  Fors  -t) 


.    From  the 

9 

Latin  Foris  J,^ 


♦  Menage,  Camhiamenti  delle  Lettere,  page  ^,  exemplifies  Hors  ufcd  hf 
the  French  for  Foris. 

t  '^  Toute  la  troupe  6toit  lors  endormic, 

Fors  ie  galant  qui  trembloit  pour  ia  vie." 

C$Ht€s  di  la  Fontaine.    Lt  Miktier: 

'^  Elle  ctoit  jeune  et  bcUe  creature, 

Plaifoit  beaucoup,  Fors  un  point  qui  gatoit 

Toute  i'  affaire,  et  qui  feul  rebutoit 

Les  plus  ardens ;  c*eft  qu'cUe  ctoit  avare." 

Cmtes  de  la  Fontaine.    Le  (jolani  Efcrcc. 

Brantome,  Des  Dames  illufires,  cites  an  account  of  the  funeral  of  Queen 
Anne  of  Brctagne — *^  Ne  furent  a  V  ofirande  Fors  Monfieur  d'Angoulefme.** 
And  again— ^^  La  reyne  fut  en  colore  de  ce  que  tout  ce  grand  convoy 

n'  avoit  pafsc  outre,  ainfi  qu'cUe  attendoit,  Fors  Monfieur  fon  fils,  et 

le  roy  de  Navarre.**  f 


€€ 


€€ 


J  The  Greek  0up«  became  the  Doric  *opA  and  the  Latin  Fora,  whertcc 
Fores,  Foris,  whence  the  Italian  Fuora,  Fuore,  Fuori,  and  the  French  Fors  j 
which,  in  the  frepojitive  and  conjunSlive  ufe  6f  it,  the  French  have  latterly 
changed  to  Hors :  but  they  have  not  fo  changed  it  when  in  compofition. 
They  fay  indeed  Fauxbourg  corruptly  for  Forjbourg,  as  it  was  anciently 
written  by  Froiflart  and  others  j  ["La  Bourg  de  Four  n^eftoit  ancicnne- 
*^  ment  qu'un  Fauxbourg  qu'on  appelloit  en  Savoyard  Bourg  de  Feur,  c'eft: 

U  u  a  a  dire, 


J 


332  OF  PREPOSITIONS. 

Whence  Hormts^  i.  e.  {put  out)  by  the  addition  of  the 
participle  of  mettre. 

B. 

If  there  were  no  other  relations  declared  by  the  prepo- 
litions,  befides  thofe  of  adding  or  taking  away^  perhaps 
this  explanation  might  convince  me  ;  but  there  are  afluredly 
Prepofitions  employed  for  very  different  purpofes.  And 
inftead  of  felecSting  fuch  inftances  as  may  happen  to  be 
fuited  particularly  to  your  own  hypothefis,  I:  ihould  have 
more  fatisfadtion  if  you  would  exemplify  in  thofe  which. 
Mr.  Harris  has  employed  to  illuftrate  his  hypothefis. 

^^  From  thefe  principles'*  (he  fays.  Book  11.  Chap.  3.) 
^^  it  follows,  that  when  we  form  a  fentence,  the  fubftan— 
"  tive  without  difficulty  coincides  with  the  verb,  from  the 

■    '  >*'.     ■  ■         ■  ' 

"  a  dire,  Bourg  de  Dehors.^'  Hiftoire  dc  k  ville  de  Geneve  par  Jacob 
Spon;  who  gives  us  likewife  from  their  Archives  the  tranflation  of  it  into 
Burgi  Forts.  For  the  fame  reafon,  I  fuppofc  a  part  of  the  town  of  Reading, 
in  Berkfhire,,  is  calkd  The  Forbery,.]    but  in  their  compounds  the  French 

retain  For : "  Corbleu>,  je  luy  paflerois  mon  cpcc  au  travers  dxj  corpsi, 

"  a  elle  et  au  galant,  fi  ellc  avoit  Forfait  a  fon  honneur." 

George  Dandin.    Ad  i .  See.  4, 

From  Ae  French  we  have  many  EngUfli  words  preceded  by  For  with  this 
meaning,  as,  Forfat^  Forecloje^  &c»  and  wc  had  anciently  many  more, 

Q  ^  natural. 


OF  PREPOSITIONS.  333^ 

^^  natural  coincidence  of  fubftance  and  energy.— TiS^  Sun 
^^  warmetb.'-^^o  like  wife  the  energy  with  the  fubjedt  on 
*^  which  it  operates. — Warmeth  the  earth. — So  likewife 
^  both  fubftance  and  energy  with  their  proper  attributes.. 
^^  — "The  fplendid  fun  genially  warmeth  the  fertile  earth. — 
^  But  fuppofe  we  were  delirous  to  add  other  fubftantives ;, 
^  as  for  inftance,  Airy  or  Beams :.  How  would  thefe  coin- 
^^  cide,  or  under  what  character  could  they  be  introduced  ? 
^^  Not  as  Nominatives  or  Accufatives,  for  both  thofe  places 
^  are  already  filled;  the  Nominative,  by  the  fubftance 
^  Sun;  the  Accufative  by  the  fubftance  JS^r/i&.  Not  as 
"  Attributes  to  thefe  laft,  or  to  any  other  thing :  for  at- 
^^  tributes  by  nature,  they  neither  are  nor  can -be  made. 
"  Here  then  we  perceive  the  rife  and  ufe  of  prepofitions. 
"  By  tnefe  we  conne<5t  thofe  fubftantives  to  fentences, 
"  which  at  the  time  are  unable  to  coalefce  of  themfelves. 
"  Let  us  aflume  for  inftance  a  pair  of  thefe  connedives, 
«  thro'  and  with,  and  mark  their  eflfe(5t  upon  the  fub- 
"  fiances  here  mentioned.  The  fplendid  fun  with  bis 
«  beams  genially  warmeth  thro'  the  air  the  fertile  earth* — 
<♦  The  fentence  as  before  remains  intire  and  one ;  the 

« 

«  fubftantives  required  are  both  introduced;  and  not  a 
«  word  which  was  there  before,  is  detruded  from  its 
«  proper  place.? 


T3ie: 


^34  OP  PREPOSITIONS. 

The  firft  of  this  pair  of  his  conne6tives  (with)  you 
have  already  explained,  and  I  am  willing  to  admit  the 
explanation.  It  is, — The  fplendid  fun  join  bis  beams — 
inftead  of  one  fingle  complex  term  including  Sun  and 
beams. 

But  of  what  real  ohjeSi  is  through  the  name  ? 

H. 

Of  a  very  common  one  indeed  *.  For  as  the  French 
peculiar  prepofition  chez  is  no  other  than  the  Italian 
fubftantive  casa  or  ca,  fo  is  the  Englifti  Prepofition 
THOROUGH +,  Thouroughy  ThoroWyy  Through^  or  Tbro\  no 
other  than  the  Gothic  fubftantive  AAllKX,  or  the  Teutonic 


*  AU  Particles  are  in  truth,  in  all  languages,  the  figns  of.  the  moft  com- 
tnon  and  familiar  ideas,  and  thofe  which  we  have  moft  frequently  occafion 
to  communicate  :  they  had  not  othcrwife  become  Particles.  So  very  much 
miftaken  was  Mn  Locke,  when  he  fuppofed  them  to  be  the  figns  or  marks 
of  certain  operations  of  the  mind  for  which  we  had  either  none  or  very  de- 
ficient names  \  that  the  Particles  are  always  the  words  which  were  the  moft 
common  and  familiar  in  the  language  from  which  they  came. 

-f  S,  Johnfon  calls  '^  Thorough^ — the  word  Through  extended  into  two 
**  fyllablcs." — What  could  poflibly  be  expelled  from  fiich  an  Etymologift 
as  this  ?  lie  might,  with  as  much  verifimilitude,  fay  that  SAlUAAA  was 
the  word  Soul  extended  into  three  fyllables,  or  that  EA£u/AO(ruku  was  the  word 

jilms  extended  kito  fix. 

ft 

fubftantive 


OF  PREPOSITIONS. 


335 


fubftantive   Tburuh :   and,  like  them,  means  Door,  gate, 
pajpage. 

So  that  Mr.  Harris's  inftance  (tranflated  into  modern 
Englifh)  ftands  thus, 

"  The  Splendid  fun — join  bis  beants^— genially  warmetb 
a  —PASSAGE  tbe  air — (or,  the  air  being  tfee  pajfage  or 
medium)  "  the  fertile  earths  And  in  the  fame  manner 
may  you  tranflate  the  prepoljtion  Through  in  every  inftance 
where  Thro^  is  ufed  in  Englifti,  or  its  equivalent  prepofition 
is  ufed  in  any  other  language  *• 


After  having  feen  in  what  manner  the  fubftantive  Houfe 
became  a  prepofition  in  the  French,  you  will  not  wonder 
to  fee  Door  become  a  prepofition  in  the  Englifh :  and 
though  in  the  firft  inftance  it  was  more  eafy  for  you  to 
perceive  the  nature  of  the  French  prepofition  Cbezi  be- 
caufe,  having  no  prepofition  eorrefponding  to  it  in  Englifli,. 
there  was  fo  much  prejudice  out  of  your  way ;  yet  I  am* 
perfuaded  you  will  not. charge  this  to  me  as  a  fantaftical  or 
far-fetched  etymology,  when  I  have  placed  before  you,  at 


*  So,  I  fuppofe,  the  Greek  word  IIopoc  has  given  the  Latin  and  Italian 
prepofition  Per,  the  French  Par,  and  the  Spanifh  Por. 

one 


336  OF  PREPOSITIONS. 

one  view,  the  words  employed  to  fignify  the  iame  idea  In 
thofe  languages  to  which  our  own  has  the  neareft  affinity. 

Snbjiantive,  PrepoJition» 

(doof  rrhourough.  Thorough. 

^"Slilh      ]j^f,,,,^j,,^.         JThurgh  +  Thorow. 

(^  (Through.  Thro.  J 

rDojia.  Dujiu        f  jj       h    D     h 
Anglo-Sax.<  Dujie.  Dujie      -Jr^  ^  *x^  "^  * 


«   cc 


Than  comcth  ydelncflc,  that  is  the  yatc  of  all  harmcs.     This  ydlc- 
*^  ncffe  is  the  Tborruke  of  all  wycked  and  vylayne  thoughtes." 

Chaucer.    Ferjons  Tale.    Fol.  in.  pag,  i.  col.  i. 

f  "  So  in  an  anticnt  roll  in  verfe,  exhibiting  the  ^efcent  of  the  family 
"  of  the  lords  of  Clare  in  Suffolk,  j)rdcrved  in  the  Aiiftin  Friary  at  Oarc^ 
^«  and  written  in  the  year  1356. 

*^  So  conioyned  be 

«^  Ulftris  armes  and  Gloceftris  Thurgb  and  Tburgb^ 
^^  As  flicwith  our  wyndowes  in  houfes  thre." 

War  ton' J  Hift.  of  Engl.  Poetry.  Vol.  1.  pag.  302. 
*^  Releued  by  thynfynyte. grace  and  goodnefs  of  our  faid  lord  Thurgb  the 
'*  mcane  of  the  mediatrice  of  mercy.'* 

The  DiSles  and  Swinges  of  the  Pbilojopbers.  1477. 

J  The  Greeks  abbreviated  in  the  fame  manner  as  the  Englifti :  and  as 

we  ufc  Thro  for  Thorough^   fo  they  ufcd  0pa  for  0u/>a.     Thus  we  find 

Ov/)ii6/)a,  the  Urethra,  or  Urine  paflage,  compounded  of  Oupov  and  eyp«, 

and  by  abbreviation  0pa. 

§  Efip  hipan  heojia  cypicean  majie  ^eajip  hacbben.  hcalb  hine  mon  on 

ci^jium  huf.  anb  Sar  naebbe  Sonne  ma  Sujia  Sonne  po  cyjiice. 

KElpjiebep  a:. 

Sub- 


OF  PREPOSITIONS. 


337 


SuhJIantive, 


Goth. 


Dutch 


(AAiiK 

iDeure.  Deur 
Door,  Dore 


^  CThure. 

German      <  _,,        _, 

(Thur.  Thor. 


Teuton.     < , 


fThurah. 
iThur.  Thor. 

Tura,  Dura. 

Dure. 


Prepofition, 


1 
I 


Deur.  Door. 


Durch 


fThurah.  Thurah. 
JThur.  Durach. 

Durac-  Duruh. 

Durch.  Durh. 


Though  it  is  not  from  Afia  or  its  confines,  that  we  are 
to  feek  for  the  origin  of  this  part  of  our  language ;  yet  vs 
it  worth  noticing  here,  that  the  Greek  (to '  which  the 
Gothic  has  in  many  particulars  a  conliderable  refemblance) 
employs  the  word  Qvf»  for  Door,  And  both  the  Perfian 
(which  in  many  particulars  refembles  the  Teutonic  *)  and 


*  "  On  n'cft  pas  etonne  de  troxivcr  du  rapport  cntre  VAnghis  &  k 
Pcrfan :  car  on  f^jait  que  le  fond  de  la  langue  Angloifc  eft  iSaxon ;  & 
qu'il  y  a  une  quantity  d'exemples  qui  montre  une  affinitc  marquee  cntxc 
•<  I'Allemand  &  le  Perfan." 

Form,  mcchan.  dcs  langucs.  Tom.  II.  Art.  i66. 


cc 


c< 


Xx 


tho 


338  OF  PREPOSITIONS. 

the  Chaldean,  ufe  thro  for  Door.  You  will  obferye,  that 
the  Teutonic  ufes  the  fame  word  Tburah  both  for  the  fub" 
Jianthey  (Door)  and  for  what  is  called  the  Prepojition 
(Thorough).  The  Dutch,  which  has  a  ftrong  antipathy  to 
our  Thy  ufes  the  very  word  Door  for  both.  The  Anglo- 
faxon,  from  which  our  language  immediately  defcends, 
employs  indifferently  for  Door  either  Dure  or  Thure.  The 
modern  German  (direflly  contrary  to  the  modem  EngHfti) 
ufes  the  initial  Tb  (Tbur)  for  our  fubfiantive  (Door)  and 
the  initial  d  (Durch)  for  our  prepojition  {Thorough) :  and 
it  is  remarkable,  that  this  fame  difference  between  the 
German  and  the  Englifli,  prevails  in  almoft  all  cafes,  where 
the  two  languages  employ  a  word  of  the  fame  origin, 
having  either  of  thofe  initials.  Thus  Diftel  und  Don>— 
in  German  are — Tbiftles  and  Thorns  in  Englifti.  So  the 
Englifli  Deary  Dollar^  Dealy  are  in  German  Theur,  Thaler, 
Theil. 

Minfliew  and  Junius  both  concur  that  Door,  &c.  are  de- 
rived from  the  Greek  Thura :  Skinner  fays,  perhaps  they 
are  all  from  the  Gireek  Thura:  and  then  without  any 
reafon  (or  rather  as  it  appears  to  me  againft  all  reafon) 
chufes  rather  ufelefly  to  derive  the  fubfiantive  Door  from 
the  Anglo-faxon  prepofition  Thor,  Thruhy  Thurh,  But  I 
am  perfuaded,  that  Door  and  Thorough  have  one  and  the 

fame 


34©  OF  PREPOSITIONS. 

prefident  de  Brofles,  and  by  all  thofe  writers  whom  yoti 
moft  efteem ;  and  even  by  Wilkins  (*  ^)  and  Locke. 

Now  if  thefe  words  have  a  meaning  as  you  contend, 
and  are  conftantly  ufed  according  to  their  meaning,  which 
you  muft  allow,  (becaufe  you  appeal  to  the  ufe  which  is 
made  of  them  as  proof  of  the  meaning  which  you  attribute 
to  them) :  how  can  they  poffibly  be  the  names  of  real 
-and  unchangeable  objeSiSj  as  common  nouns  and  verbs  are  ? 
I  am  fure  you  muft  fee  the  neceflity  of  reconciling  theic 
contradidtory  appearances. 

H. 

Moft  furely. '  And  I  think  you  will  as  readily  acknow- 
ledge the  neceflity  of  firft  eftablifhing  the  fads,  before  you 
call  uix)n  me  to  reconcile  them.  Where  i^  the  Prepolition 
to  be  found  which  is  at  any  time  ufed  in  contrary  or  even 
in  different  meanings? 


(* ')  '*  Some  of  thcfe  prepofitions  arc  ahjolutely  determined  cithtr  to  mo- 
"  fion  or  to  rejfj  or  the  Terminus  of  Motion.  Others  are  relatively  appli- 
cable to  Ifoib.  Concerning  which  this  rule  is  to  be  obferved  :  that  thofe 
which  belong  to  motion  cannot  fignify  reft  -,  but  thofe  which  belong  to 
reft  may  fignify  motion  in  the  terminus.*' 

Wilkins.  Part  HI.  Chap.  3. 

2  B.  Very 


u 
a 


OF  PREPOSITIONS.  341 

B. 

Very  many  inftances  have  been  given ;  but  none  ftronger 
than  thofe   prcxiuced  by   Mr.  Harris  of  the  Prepofition 

r 

FROM ;  which  he  (hews  to  be  ufed  to  denote  three  very 
different  relations,  and  the  two  laft  in  abfolute  contradiftion 

« 

to  each  other* 


^^  From,  he  fays,  denotes  the  detached  relation  oi  Body ; 
^^  as  when  we  fay — Tbefe  Figs  came  from  Turkey. — So  as 
"  to  Motion  and  Rejlj  only  with  this  difference,  that  here 
^^  the  prepofition  varies  its  cbaraBer  with  the  Verb.  Thus 
^^  if  we  fay — Tbat  lamp  bangs  from  tbe  deling — the  pre- 
^*  pofition  FROM  affumes  a  character  of  quiefcence.  But 
"  if  we  fay — Tbat  lamp  is  falling  from  tbe  deling^ — the 
"  prepofition  in  fuch  cafe  affumes  a  charadter  of  Motion^ 

Now  I  (hould  be  glad  you  would  fhew  me  what  one 
Noun  or  Verb  can  be  found  of  fo  verfatile  a  character  as 
this  prepofition :  what  name  of  any  one  real  object  or  fign 
of  one  idea,  or  of  one  coUedion  of  ideas,  can  have  been 
inflituted  to  convey  thefe  different  and  oppofite  meanings  ? 

H. 

Truly,  none  that  I  Xnow  of.  But  I  take  the  word 
from  {prepojition^  if  you  chufe  to  call  it  fo) — to  have  as 

clear, 


34a  OF  PREPOSITIONS. 

clear,  as  precife,  and  at  all  times  as  uniform  and  un- 
equivocal a  meaning,  as  any  word  in  the  language.  From 
means  merely  beginning,  and  nothing  elfe.  It  is  fimply 
the  Anglo-faxon  and  Gothic  Noun  Fpum,  I^KtlM,  B€^ 
ginningy  Origin^  Source^  fountain^  author  *.  Now  then,  if 
you  pleafe,  we  will  apply  this  meaning  to  Mr.  Harris's 
formidable  inftances,  and  try  whether  we  cannot  make 
FROM  fpeak  clearly  for  itfelf,  without  the  afliftance  of  the 
interpreting  Verbs ;  who  are  fuppofed  by  Mr.  Harris,  to 
vary  its  charaSler  at  will,  and  make  the  prepofition  appear 
as  inconfiftent  and  contradidtory  as  himfelf* 

Figs  came  from  Turkey.  ' 

Lamp  falls  from  Cieling, 
Lamp  bangs  from  Cieling. 

Came  is  a  complex  term  for  one  fpecies  of  motion. 
Falls  is  a  complex  term  for  another  fpecies  of  motion. 
Hangs  is  a  complex  term  for  a  fpecies  of  attachment. 

Have  we  occafion  to  communicate  or  mention  the  com- 
mencement or  beginning  of  thefe  motions  and  of  this 


*  "  Ne  jiaebb  ^e  j-e  Se  on  pjiumman  pojihre.  he  pojihre  paepman  anb 
*'  pipman."  That  is,  Annon  legiftis,  quod  qui  cos  in  frincipio  crcavit, 
'Creavic  cos  marem  &  foeminam.     St«  Matt.  xix.  4. 

attach^ 


OF  PREPOSITIONS.  345 

attachment ;  and  the  place  where  theie,  motions  and  this 
attachment  commence  or  begin  ?  It  is  impoflible  to  have 
complex  terms  for  each  occafion  of  this  fort.  WHat  more, 
natural  then,  or  .more  fimple,  than  to  add  the  figns  of 
thofe  ideas,  viz.  the  word  beginning  (which  will  remain 
always  the  fame)  and  the  name  of  the  place  (which  will 
perpetually  vary)  ? 

Thus, 

"  Figs  came — beginning  Turkey. 
"  Lamp  falls — beginning  Gieling. 
"  Lamp  hangs — beginning  Gieling.** 

That  is 

Turkey  the  Place  of  beginning  to  come. 
Gieling  the  Place  of  beginning  to  fall. 
Gieling  the  Place  of  beginning  to  hang. 

You  have  here  Ihewn  its  meaning  when  it  relates  to 
place  \  but  Wilkins  tells  us,  that  "  from  refers  primarily 
to  place  and  Jituation ;  and  fecondarily  to  time  J*  So  that 
you  ha^  yet  given  but  half  its  meaning. 

— "  From  mom  till  night  th'  eternal  Latum  rang."—* 

There  is  no  place  referred  to  in  this  line. 

H.  From 


S44  OF  PREPOSITIONS, 

H. 
From  relates  to  every  thing  to  which  beginning  re- 
lates  %  and  to  nothing  elfe :  and  therefore  is  referable  to 
T^me  as  well  as  to  motion :  without  which  indeed  there  can 
be  no  Time. 


*  Is  it  unreafonable  to  fuppofe  that,  if  the  meaning  of  this  word  from, 
and  of  its  correfpondent  prepofitions  in  other  languages,  had  been  clearly 
underftood ;  the  Greek  and  Latin  Churches  would  never  have  differed  con- 
cerning the  Eternal  Procejfton  of  the  Holy  Ghoft  from  the  Father,  or 
FROM  the  Father  and  the  Son.  And  that,  if  they  had  been  determined  to 
feparate,  they  would  at  leafl:  have  chofen  fome  fafer  caufe  of  fchifm  ? 

"  Apelles.     I  have  now,  Campafpe,  almoft  made  an  end. 

Campafpe.     You  told  me,  Apelles,  you  would  never  end* 

Ap.     Never  end  my  love  :  for  it  fhall  be  Eternal. 
^  Cam.     That  is,  neither  to  have  Beginning  nor  ending." 

Campafpe  by  John  Lilly.  Aft  4.  See.  4^ 

"  Eternal  fure,  as  without  end 

fFitboUt  Beginning.'* 


ParaJi/e  Regained.     Book  4.  Line  391. 

"  To  fay  that  Immenfity  does  not  fignify  boundlefs  fpace,  and  that  Eternity- 
*'  does  not  fignify  Duration  or  Time  without  Beginning  and  endi  is,  I 
*^  think,  affirming  tliat  words  have  no  meaning.** 

Dr.  Sam.  Clarke* 5  fifth  Reply  to  Leibnitz' s  fifth  Paper.  Seft.  104-106. 

Is  it  prtfumptuous  to  fay,  that  the  c^lanation  of  this  fingle  prepofition, 
\vbuld  have  decided  the  controvcrfy  morfe  cffc&ually,  than  all  the  authorities 
and  all  the  folid  arguments  produced  by  the  wife  and  honcft  bifliop  Proco^ 
powicz  ?  And  thus  have  withheld  one  handle  at  lead  of  reproach,  from 
thofe  who  aflert — "  Que  Ton  pourroit  juftcmcnt  definir  la  theologie — L'art 
"  de  compofcr  des  chimeres  en  combinant  enfemble  des  quaKtcs  impoffibles 
^  i  concilier," — Syftcmc  de  la  Nature,  Tom.  H.  p.  55. 

"  The 


OF  preposition;s. 


MS 


^'  The  Lamm  rang  bboiknino  Morning. 


»i 


i.  e.  Morning  being  the  time  of  its  bsoinnino  to  nn|;. 


B. 

Still  I  have  difficulty  to  tnift  to  this  explanation.  For 
Dr.  S.  Johnfon  has  numbered  up  twenty  di£ferent  meanings 
of  this  Prepofition  from.     He  fays,  it  denotes, 

*<  I.  Privation, 

**  2.  Reception, 

**  3.  Defcent  or  Birtb» 

*<  4.  TranftmUHon, 

<•  5.  Abfira^ion* 

**  6.  SucceJJion. 

**  7,  Emiffion, 

**  8.  Frogrefs  from  premiJJ'es  to  inferences, 

9.  Place  or  Perfon  from  whom  a  mefpage  is  brought, 

10.  Extra^on, 

11.  Reafon  or  Motive, 

1 2.  Ground  or  Cj({/2?. 

13.  Difianee, 

14.  Separation  OT  Recejpon, 

15.  Exemption  OT  Deliverance,  >. 

16.  Jbfence, 

17.  Derivation, 

Yy  «  18. 


(( 
« 

U 


346  OF  PREPOSITION^. 

«  1 8.  Dijiance  from  the  paft, 
«  19.  Contrary  to^ 
«  20.  Removal »^ 

To  thefe  he  adds  twenty-two  other  manners  of  uling  it. 
And  he  has  accompanied  each  with  inftances  fuffidently 
numerous^  as  proofs  *• 

H. 

And  yet  in  all  his  inftances  (which,  I  believe^  are  above 
feventy)  from  continues  to  retain  invariably  pAe  and  the 


€C 
CC 


t€* 


*  Greenwood  fays — "  From  fignifics  Motion  from  a  place  i  and  then  it 
is  put  in  oppofition  to  to. 

2.  It  is  ufcd  to  denote  the  Beginning  of  time.  ^ 

3.  It  denotes  the  Original  of  Things.  < 
4-  It  denotes  the  Order  of  a  thing.  •  ("  And  in  thefe  three  laft  fenfes 

it  is  put  before  Adverbs.'') 
"  5.  It  fignifies  Off:' 

The  caprice  of  language  is  worth  remarking  in  the  words  Fan  (the 
Dutch  From)  and  Rear,  both  of  which  we  have  retained  in  Engiiih  as  Sui- 
Jtantives,  and  therefore  they  are^  allowed  with  us  to  have  a  meaning. .  But 
being  only  employed  as  Prefofitions  by  the  Dutch,  Italian  and  French  j  our 
philofophers  cannot  be  perfuaded  to  allow  then!  aily  tranfmarine  tteaning.— • 
Animam  mutant  qui  trans  man  cutrunt.  And  thus  Van  in  Holland,  Von  in 
Germany,  Avanti  in  It^y,  and  Avant  and  Derriere  in  France,  arc  merely 
des  petit s  mots  inventus  four  etre  mis  avant  les  noms^  or^  in  the  van  of 
Nouns, 

fame 


OF  PREPOSITIONS.  347 

fame  fingle  meaning.  Confult  them :  and  add  to  them  as 
many  more  inftances  as  you  pleafe  ;  and  yet  (if  I  have  ex- 
plained myfelf  as  clearly  as  I  ought^  and.  as  I  think  I  have 
done)  no  farther  afiiftance  of  mine  will  be  neceffary  to 
enable  you  to  extra^  the  fame  meaning  of  the  word  from 
from  all  of  them.  And  you  will  plainly  perceive  that  the 
«  cbaraSiers  of  quiefcence  and  of  motion^  attributed  by  Mr. 
Harris  to  the  word  from,  belong  indeed  to  the  words  Hang 
and  Falli  ufed  in  the  different  fentences.  And  by  the  fame 
manner  of  transferring  to  the  prepofition  the  meaning  of 
fome  other  word  in  the  fentence,  have  all  Johnfon*s  and 
Greenwood's  fuppofed  different  meanings  arifen. 

B. 

You  obferved,  fome  time  fince,  that  the  Prepofitions 
WITH  and  WITHOUT  were  diredlly  oppofite  and  contradic- 
tory to  each  other.  Now  the  fame  oppofition  is  evident  in 
fome  other  of  the  prepofitions :  And  this  circumftance,  I 
fhould  imagine,  muft  much  facilitate  and  fhorten  the  fearch 
of  the  etymologift :  For  having  once  difcovered  the  mean- 
ing of  one  of  the  adverfe  parties,  the  meaning  of  the 
other,  I  fuppofe,  muft  fpllow  of  courfe.  Thus — Going 
TO  a  place ; — is  diredtly  the  contrary  of — Going  from  a 
place. — If  then  you  are  right  in  your  explanation  of  from  ; 
(and  I  will  not  deny  that  appearances  are'hithferto  in  your 

Y  y"  2  favour); 


34S  OF  PREPOSITIONS. 

favour) ;  fince  from  means  Commencement  or  Beginnings 
TO  muft  mean  End  or  Termination.  And  indeed  I  perceive 
that,  if  we  produce  Mr.  Harris's  inftances,  and  fay, 

•*  Tbefejigs  came  from  Turkey  to  England, 
<*  The  lamp  falls  from  the  deling  to  the  ground. 
<*  Tbe  lamp  bangs  from  the  deling  to  tbefioor  ;** 

as  the  word  from  denotes  the  commencement  of  the  motion 
and  hanging ;  fo  does  the  word  to  denote  their  termina- 
tion :  and  the  places  where  they  end  or  terminate,  are 

# 

refpe«Slively  England,  Grounfl,  Floor, 

And  fince  we  have  as  frequently  occaiion  to  mention  the 
termination^  a^  we  have  to  mention  the  commencement  of 
motion  or  time  \  no  doubt  it  was  as  likely  that  the  word 
denoting  End  ihould  become  a  particle  or  prepolition,  as 
the  word  which  fignified  Beginning.     But  in  the  ufe  of 

«  *  • 

thefe  two  words  to  and  from,  I  obferve  a  remarkable 
difference.  From  feems  to  haye  two  oppofites;  which 
ought  therefore  to  mean  the  fame  thing :  and,  if  meaning 
the  fame,  to  be  ufed  indifierently  at  pleafure.  We  always 
ufe  FROM,  (and  From  only)  for  the  beginning  either  of  time 
qr  motion :.  but  for  the  termination^  we  apply  fometimes 
to  ^lid  fometuues,  tii<l,:  to,  indifferently  eith^  tq  plac^e 

%  or 


OF  PREPOSITIONS.  349 

or  time ;  but  till  to  time  only  and  never  to  place.     Thus, 
we  may  fay, 

**  From  morn  to  rrigbt  fb'  eternal  latum  rang.*'  ' 
Or,  From  mom  Titt  night,  &c. 

But  we  cannot  fay, — From  Turkey  till  England, 

■■ .     '  * 

Hi 

The  oppofition  of  Prepofitions,  as  far  as  it  reaches,  does 
undoubtedly  affift  us  much  in  the  diicovery  of  the  meaning 
of  each  oppofite.  And  if,  by  the  total  or  partial  extin<Stion 
of  an  original  language^  there  was  no  root  left  in  the 
ground  for  an  etymologift  to  dig  up,  the  philofopher  ought 
no  doubt  to  be  fatisfied  with  reafoning  from  the  contrariety. 
But  I  fear  much,  that  the  inveterate  prejudices  which  I 
have  to  encounter,  and  which  for  two  thoufahd  years  have 
univerfally  pafled  for  learning  throughout  the  world,  and 
for  deep  learning  too,  would  not  eafily  give  way  to  any 
arguments  of  mine  a  priori.  I  am  .therefore  compelled  to 
refoit  to  etymology,  and  to  bring  forward  the  original 
word  as  well  as  its  meaning.  That  fame  etymology  will 
very  eafily  account  for  the  peculiarity  you  have  noticed : 
and  the  difficulty  folved,  like  other  enemies  fubdued,  will 
become  aft  ufefid  ally  and  additional  flrength  to  the  con^ 
queror. 

The 


350  OF  PREPOSITIONS. 

The  oppofition  to  the  prepofition  from,  refides  (ingly 
in  the  prepofition  to.  Which  has  not  perhaps  (for  I  acn  not 
clear  that  it  has  not)  precifely  the  iignification  of  End  or 
Termination^  but  of  fomething  tantamount  or  equivalent. 
The  prepofition  to  (in  Dutch  written  joe  and  tot,  a  little 
nearer  to  the  original)  is  the  Gothic  fubflantivc  TAni  or 
TAnhTS,  i.  e.  AStj  EffeB^  Refulty  Confummation.  Which 
Gothic  fubflantive  is  indeed  itfelf  no  other  than  the  pafl 
participle  TAnid.  or  TAnidS,  of  the  verb  tAIIQAn  *  agere. 
And  what  is  done^  is  terminated^  endedy  finijbed  +. 

After  this  derivation,  it  will  not  appear  in  the  leafl 
myflerious  or  wonderful  that  we  fhould,  in  a  peculiar 
manner,  in  Englifh,  prefix  this  fame  word  to  to  the  in- 
finitive of  our  verbs.  For  the  verbs,  in  Englifh,  not  being 
diflinguifhed,  as  in  other  languages^  by  a  peculiar  termi- 
nation, and  it  bein^  fometimes  impoflible  to  diilinguifh 
them  by  their  place^  when  the  old  termination  of  the 

.  .  *  In  th^  Teutonic,  thb  verb  is  written  Tuan  or  Tuoriy  whence  the  modern 
German  Thun^  and  its  prepofition  (varying  like  its  verb)  Tu. 
In  the  Anglo*faxon  tht  verb  \%  TeOjan,'  and  prepofition  To. 

f  "  Dativus  cuicunque  oration!  adjimgi  potcft,  in  qua  acquifitio  vel 
**  ademtio, .  commodum .  aut  incpni(i)odii(nt  aut  fini§j  iqu^m  in  fchol)s 
^*  Logici  Fincm  cut  dicunt,  fignificatur/' 

Scioppii  Gram.  Philofbph.  pag.  xiii. 

Anglo- 


OF  PREPOSITIONS.  351 

Anglo-Saxon  verbs  was  dropped,  this  word  to  (i.  e,  A8t) 
became  neceffary  to  be  prefixed,  in  order  to  diftinguifh 
them  from  nouns,  and  to  inveft  them  with  the  verbal 
charadter :  for  there  is  no  difference  between  the  noun, 
Love^  and  the  verb,  to  Love^  but  what  muft  be  com- 
prized in  the  prefix  to. 

The  infinitive  therefore,  appears  plainly  to  be  what  the 
Stoics  called  it,  the  very  verb  itfelf ;  pure  and  uncom- 
pounded  with  the  various  accidents  of  moad^  of  number^ 
of  gender^  of  perforiy  and  (in  Englifh)  of  tenfe ;  which 
accidents  are,  in  fome  languages,  joined  to  the  verb  by 
variety  of  termination ;  and  in  fome,  by  an  additional  word 
fignifying  the  added  circumjlance.  And  if  our  Englijb 
Grammarians  and  Philofophers  had  trufted  fbmething  left 
to  their  reading  and  a  little  more  to  their  own  refledtion,  I 
cannot  help  thinking  that  the  very  awkwardnefs  and  inr- 
perfedtion  of  our  own  language,  in  this  particular  of  the 
infinitive^  would  have  been  a  great  benefit  to  them  in  all 
their  difficulties  about  the  verb  :  and  would  have  led  them 
to  underftand  and  explain  that  which  the  perfedlion  x>f 
more  artificial  and  improved  languages  contributed  to  con- 
ceal from  others.  For  I  reckon  it  a  great  advantage  which  an 
Englijb  philofopher  has  over  thofe  who  are  acquainted  with 
fuch  languages  only  which  do  this  bufinefs  by  termination^ 

For 


35*  OF  PREPOSITJONS, 

Fdt  though  I  think  I  have  good  rea&ns  to  beUew,  that 
all  thefe  Terminations  may  like  wife  be  traced  to  their  ret 
fpe^tive  origin ;  and  that,  however  urtificial  they  may  now 
appear  to  us,  they  were  not  oqginaljy  the  effect  of  pre- 
meditated and  deliberate  arty  but  fep^rate  words  by  lengtl^ 
of  time  corrupted  and  coalefcing  with  the  wwds  of  whictv 
they  are  now  confidered  as  the  Terminations  :  Yet  this  was 
lefs  likely  to  be  fufpec^ed  by  others.  And  if  it  had  been 
fufpedted,  they  would  have  had  much  farther  to  travd  to 
their  journey^s  end,  and  through  a  road  miich  more  em-* 
barrafled ;  as  the  corruption  in  thofe  languages  is  of  much 
longer  fianding  than  in  oursy  and  more  complex^ 

And  yet,  by  what  fatality  I  know  not,  our  Grammarians 
have  not  only  flighted^  but  have  even  been  afraid  to  touch 
this  friendly  due :  for  of  all  the  points  which  they  en^ 
de^vour  to  fhuffle  over,  there  is  none  in  which,  they  do  it 
more  grofsly  than  in  this  of  the  Infinitive. 

Some  are  contented  to  call  to,  a  mark  of  the  infinitive 
mood  '^.     But  bowj  or  wby^  it  is  fo,  they  are  totally  filent. 


*  Lowth  '(P^^  66)  fays— ^«'  The  Prepojition  to  placed  before  the  Verb 
"  makes  the  Infinifivf  Mood.*'  Now  this  is  manifcftly  not  fo:  for  to 
placed  before  the  Veri  lovetb,  will  not  make  the  Infinitive  Mood.  He 
would  have  laid  mpre  truly,  that  to  placed  before  fomc  Nouns  makes  Verbs. 
But  of  this  I  ihall  have  occafion  to  fpcak  hereafter,  when  I  come  to  treat  of 
the  Vtrl.  * 

Others 


OF  PREPOSITIONSl  355 

Others  call  it  a  Prepojition, 

Others,  a  Particle. 

Skinner  calls  it  an  Equivocal  Article  -. 

And  others  t  throw  it  into  that  common  fink  and  repo- 
fitory  of  all  heterogeneous  unknown  corruptions,— the 
Adverb. 


And  when  they  have  thus  given  it  a  name^  they  hope 
you  will  be  fatisfied  :  at  lead  they  truft  that  they  (hall  not 
be  arraigned  for  this  conduct;  becaufe  thofe  who  fhould 
arraign  them,  will  need  the  fame  Ihift  for  themfelves. 

There  is  one  miftake  however,  from  which  this  Prefix 
TO  ought  to  have  refcued  them :  they  fliould  not  have 
repeated  the  error,  of  infilling  that  the  Infinitive  was  a 

*  "  Melius  infinitiva  fua  Anglo-faxones  per  term,  an,  quam  nos  hodie 
"  jEquivoco  illo  ariiculoy  to  prsemiflb,  f«pe  ctiam  omiflb,  diftinxerunt," 

Canones  Etymologici. 

t  S.  Johnfon  fays — "  To,  adverb  [ro,  Saxon;  7>,  Dutch.]"  And 
then,  according  to  his  ufual  method,  (a  very  convenient  one  for  making  a 
bulky  book  without  trouble)  proceeds  to  give  inftances  of  its  various  figni- 
iications,  viz.  "  i .  A  particle  coming  between  two  verbs,  and  noting  the 
-**  fecond  as  the  objeft  of  the  firft.  2.  It  notes  the  intention.  3.  After  an 
'^  adjedtive  it  notes  its  obje£f.  '  4.  Noting  Futurity.'^ 

Z  z  mere 


354 


OF  PREPOSITIONS. 


mere  Noun  * ;  lince  it  was  found  neceflary  in  Engliih  to 
add  another  word  (viz.)  to,  merely  to  diftinguifh  the  In^ 
finitive  from  the  Nouriy  after  the  Infinitive  had  loft  that 
diftinguiftiing  termination  which  it  had  formerly. 

B. 

I  do  not  mean  haftily  and  without  farther  confideration 
abfolutely  to  diflent  from  what  you  have  faid,  becaufe  fome 


it, 


t€ 


•  **  The  words  A£f tones  and  Le£liones  (Wilkins  fays)  arc  but  the  plural  , 
^  number  of  Agere^  Legere.*'  However  it  muft  be  acknowledged^  that 
Wilkins  endeavours  to  fave  himfelf  by  calling  the  Infinitive^  not  a  mere 
noun^  but  a  Participle  Subftantive. — "  That  which  is  called  the  Infinitive 
Mode  fhould,  according  to  the  true  analogy  of  lpeech>  be  flyled  a  Partis 
ciple  Suhftantive.  There  hath  been  formerly  much  difpute  among  fome 
"  learned  men,  whither  the  notion  called  the  Infinitive  Mode  ought  to  be 
"  reduced  according  to  the  philofophy  of  fpeech.  Some  would  have  it  to 
*'  be  the  prime  and  principal  verb ;  as  fignifying  more  direftly  the  notion 
*'  of  aftion  :  and  tiien  the  odicr  varieties  of  the  verb,  fhould  be  but  the 
"  inflexions  of  this.  Others  queftion  whether  the  Infinitive  Mode  be  a 
*'  verb  or  no,  becaufe  in  the  Greek  it  receives  articles  as  a  noun,  Scaliger 
"  concludes  it  to  be  a  verb,  but  will  not  adriiit  it  to  be  a  Mode.  Voflius 
*^  adds,  that  though  it  be  not  Modus  in  Jffu,  yet  it  is  Modus  in  Potentia. 
"  All  which  difficulties  will  be  moft  clearly  ftated  by  aflercing  it  to  be  a 
«  Suhftantive  Participle^  Real  Charafter,  Part  iv.  Chap.  6. 

Mr.  Harris  without  any  palliation,  fays, — '^  Thefe  Infinitives  go  farther* 
They  not  only  lay  afidc  the  charafter  of  Attributives,  but  they  alfo  aflijme 
that  of  Subjtantives.''-  Hermes,  Book  I.  Chap.  8. 


Cf 


€€ 


part 


OF  PREPOSITIONS.  355 

part  of  it  appears  to  me  plaiifible  enough.  And  had  you 
confined  yourfelf  only  to  the  Segnacafo  or  Prepojition,  I 
ihould  not  fiiddenly  have  found  much  to  offer  in  reply. 
But  when  inftead  of  the  Segnacafo  (as  Buonmattei  clafles 
it),  or  the  Prepofiiion  (as  all  others  call  it),  or  the  mar^  of 
the  Infinitive  (as  it  is  peculiarly  ufed  in  Englifli),  you  dire(St 
me  to  confider  it  as  the  neceflary  and  diflinguifhing  Jign 
of  the  VERB,  you  do  yourfelf  throw.difficulties  in  my  way 
which  it  will  be  incumbent  on  you  to  remove.  For  it  is 
impoilible  not  to  obferve,  that  the  Infinitive  is  not  the  only 
part  of  our  Englifh  verbs,  which  does  not  differ  from  the 
noun  :  and  it  refts  upon  you  to  explain  why  this  neceflary 
Jign  of  the  Verb  ihould  be  prefixed  only  to  the  Infinitive, 
and  not  alfo  to  thofe  other  parts  of  the  verb  in  Englifh 
which  have  no  diftinguifhing  Termination, 

H. 

The  fadt  is  undoubtedly  as  you  have  ftated  it.  There 
are  certainly  other  parts  of  the  Englifh  verb,  undiflinguifhed 
from  the  noun  by  termination  ;  but  this  is  to  me  rather  a 
circumflance  of  confirmation  than  an  objection.  For  the 
truth  is,  that  to  them  alfo  (jand  to  thofe  parts  only  which 
have  riot  a  diflinguifhing  termination)  as  well  as  to  the  In- 
finitive, is  this  diflinguifhing  ftgn  equally  neceflary,  and  , 
equally  prefixed.     Do  (the  auxiliary  verb  as  it  has  beea 

Z  z  2  called) 


356  OF  PREPOSITIONS. 

called  ^)  is  derived  from  the  fame  root,  and  is  indeed  the 
fame  word  as  to.     The  difference  betvreen  a  t  and  a  d  is 

fo 


*  *^  The  verb  to  do  (fays  Mr.  Tyrwhit,  Eflky,  Note  37)  is  confidcred 
*'  by  Wallis  and  other  later  grammarians,  as  an  auxiliary  verb.  It  is  fo  iifed, 
**  though  very  rarely y  by  Chaucer.  It  muft  be  confeiTed  that  the  exaft 
^'  power  which  do,  as  an  auxiliary,  now  has^  in  our  language,  is  not  cafy  to 
*'  be  defined,  and  ft  ill  lefs  to  be  accounted  for  from  Analogy.'* 

In  Chaucer's  time  the  diftinguifhing  terminations  of  the  verb  ftill  re- 
mained, although  not  conftantly  employed  5  and  he  availed  himftlf  of  that 
fituation  of  the  language,  either  to  ufe  them  or  drop  them,  as  beft  fuited 
his  purpofe,  and  fometimes  he  ufes  botli  termination  ^xidjign.  Thus,  in  the 
Wife  of  Bathes  Tale,  he  drops  the  Infinitive  termination  j  and  ufes  to. 

*'  My  liege  lady:  generally,'  quod  he, 
**  Women  defyren  to  have  foverayntc 
"As  well  over  her  hufbondes  as  her  love." 

And  again  a  few  lines  after,  he  ufes  the  infinitive  termination^  excluding  to, 

"  In  al  the  court  nas  there  wife  ne  mayde 
"  Ne  widow,  that  contraried  that  he  faide, 
"  But  faid,  he  was  worthy  han  his  lyfc,'* 

So  alfo, 

"  I  trowe  that  if  Envye  iwys 

"  Knewe  the  beft  man  that  is 

"  On  thys  fydc  or  beyonde  the  fee 

**  Yet  fomwhat  lacken  him  wold  flic.'* 

Romaunt  of  the  Kofc; 

The  fame  may  be  ftiewn  by  innumerable  other  inftances  throughout 
Chaucer. 

B.  Johnfon,  in  his  Grammar,  fays — "  The  Perjons  plural  keepe  the 
•*  tcrminatioa  of  the  firft  perfon 'fingulan    In  former  times,  till  about  the 

**  reignc 


OF  PREPOSITIONS.  357 

^  very  fmall,  that  an  Etymologift  knows  by  the  praSHce  of 
languages,  and  an  Anatomift  by  the  reafon  of  that  pradlicet 
that  in  the  derivation  of  words  it  is  fcarce  worth  regard- 
ing *.  And  for  the  fame  reafon  that  to  is  put  before  the 
Infinitive,  do  ufed  formerly  to  be  put  before  fuch  other 
parts  of  the  verb  which  likewife  were  not  diftinguiftied 
from  the  noun  by  termination.  As  we  ftill  lay—/  do  love^ 
— inftead  of — /  love.  And  /  doed  or  did  love — ^inftead 
of  /  loved.  But  it  is  worth  our  while  to  obferve,  that  if  a 
diflinguiftiing  termination  is  iifed,  then  the  diftinguifhing 
DO"  or  1)ID  muji  be  omitted,  the  Termination  fulfilling  its 
office.  And  therefore  we  never  find — "  I  did  loved  "^^  or 
^^  He  "Dorn  lovetb.^    But  "  I  did  love^     ^^  He  doth  love^ 


It  is  not  indeed  an  approved  praftice  at  prefent,  to  ufe 
1^0  before  thofe  parts  of  the  Ferbj  they  being  now  by 
cuftom Sufficiently  diilinguilhed  by  their  Place :  and  there- 
fore the  redundancy  is  noW  avoided,  and  do  is  confidered,' 
in  that  cafe,  as  unneceflary  and  expletive. 


•'  rcigne  of  King  Henry  the  Eighth,  they  were  wont  to  be  formed  by 
"  adding  en.  But  now  (whatfoever  is  the  caufc)  it  hath  quite  grownc  out 
•'  of  ufe,  and  that  other  fo  generally  prevailed  that  I  dare  not  prefumc  to 
"  iet  this  afoot  againe J'  This  is  the  reafon  why  Chaucer  ufed  both  to 
and  DO  more  rarely  than  we  ufe  them  at  prefent. 

*  Sec  the  Note,  page.  93. . 

I-  However 


^5«  OF  PREPOSITIONS. 

However  it  is  ftill  ufed,  and  is  the  common  practice,  and 
ihould  be  ufed,  whenever  the  diftinguiftiing  Plac^  is  dif- 
turbed  by  Interrogation^  or  by  the  in/ertion  of  a  negation^ 
or  of  fome  other  words  between  the  nominative  cafe  and 
the  verb.     As,— 

«  He  DOES  not  love  the  truth. 

**  Does  he  love  the  truth  ? 

**  He  DOES  at  the  fame  time  love  the  truth.^ 

And  if  we  chufe  to  avoid  the  ufe  of  this  verbal  Sign, 
DO,  we  mult  fupply  its  place  by  a  diftinguifhing  termina- 
tion  to  the  verb.     As,— 

He  lovetb  not  the  truth, 

Lovetb  he  the  truth  ? 

He  at  the  fame  time  lovetb  the  truth. 

Or  where  the  verb  has  not .  a  diftinguifhing  termination 
(as  in  phirals)— 

They  po  not  love  the  truth. 
Do  they  love  the  truth  ? 
'  They  do  at  the  fame  time  love  the  truth. 

r 

Here,  if  we  wifti  to  avoid  the  verbal  Jign,  we  muft  re- 
move the  negative^  or  other  intervening  word  or  words 

from 


OF  PREPOSITIONS*  359 

from  between  the  nominative  cafe  and  the  verb ;  and  fo 
reftore  the  diftinguiftiing  Place.     As,— 

«  They  love  not  the  truth, 

*'  Love  they  the  truth  ? 

«<  At  the  fame  time  they  love  the  truth  *.'*" 

And  thus  we  fee  that,  though  we  cannot,  as  Mr.  Tyrwhit 
truly  fays,  account  for  the  ufe  of  this  verbal Jign  from  any 
Analogs  to  other  languages,  yet  there  is  no  caprice  in  thefe 
methods  of  employing  to  and  do,  fo  differently  from  the 
prailice  of  other  languages  :  but  that  they  arife  from  the 
peculiar  method  which  the  Englilh  language  has  taken  to 
arrive  at  the  fame  neceffary  end,  which  other  languages 
attain  by  diftinguiftiing  Termination. 

V 

B. 

I  obferve,  that  Junius  and  Skinner  and  Johnfbn,  .have 
not  chofen  to  give  the  flighteft  hint  concerning  the  deri- 
vation of  TO.  Minftiew  diftinguiflies  between  the  prepo- 
fition  TO,  and  the  ftgn  of  the  Infinitive  to.     Of  the  firft 

*  It  is  not  however  uncommon  to  fay — "  Th^^  at  the  fame  time,  love 
^  the  truth."  Where  the  intervening  words  (at  the  fame  time)  are  con-, 
fidcred  as  merely  parenthetical,  and  the.  mind  of  the  fpeaker  ftill  prefcrves 
die  connexion  oi  'place  between  the  nominative  cafe  and  the  verb. 

6'  li^ 


/ 
> 


'36o  OF  PREPOSITIONS. 

he  is  filent,  and  of  the  latter  he  fays — -^^  to,  as  to  make^ 
^^  to  walk^  to  doj  a  Graeco  articulo  to  ;  idem  eft  tit  to  -stoim. 
a  ro  TsrepiTTocrnv,  to  -srpocTinv.'*  But  Dr.  Gregory  Sharpe  is  per- 
fuaded,  that  our  language  has  taken  it  from  the  Hebrew. 
And  Voflius  derives  the  correfpondent  Latin  Prcpolition  ad 
from  the  fame  fource, 

H. 

Yes.  But  our  Gothic  3nd  Anglo-faxon  anceflors  were  n6t 
altogether  fo  fond  of  the  Hebrew,  nor  quite  fo  well  ac- 
quainted with  it,  as  Dr.  Sharpe  and  Voffius  were.  And 
if  Boerhaave  could  not  confent,  and  Voltaire  *  thought  it 
ridiculous,  to  feek  a  remedy  in  South  America,  for  a  difeafe 
which  was  ppevalent  in  the  North  of  Europe,  how  much 
more  would  they  have  refifted  the  etymology  of  this  pre- 
tended Jewilh  Prepofition  1  for  my  own  part,  I  am  per- 
fuaded  that  the  correfpondent  Latin  Prepofition  ad  has  a 
more  natural  origin,  and  a  meaning  fimilar  to  that  of  to. 


*  "  La  Quinquina,  feul  fpecifique  centre  Ics  ficvrcs  intermittentes,  place 
**  par  la  nature  dans  les  montagncs  du  Pcrou,  tandis  qu'elle  a  mis  la  fievrc 
*'  dans  le  rcfte  du  monde.**  Voltaire^s  Hiji.  generale. 

**  II  mcurit  a  Mocha  dans  le  fable  Arabiquc 
Ce  cafFe  neceiTaire  aux  pays  des  frimats  $ 
II  met  la  ficvre  en  nos  climats, 
Et  le  rcmcde  en  Ameriquc/' 

Voltaire's  Lettre  au  rot  de  Pruffe. 

It 


OF  PREPOSITIONS.  ^$t 


paft 


participle  is  likewife  a  Latin  Subflantive.) 


aGjyum  - 

-  <70D    - 

—   AD 

itum-^gtutn^ 

or 

—    or    - 

—   or 

actum  - 

—   «7CT   — 

-    AT. 

The  moft  fuperficial  reader  of  Latin  verfe  knows,  how 
cafily  the  Romans  dropped  their  final  um :  for  their  poets 
would  never  have  taken  that  licence,  had  it  not  been  pre- 
vioufly  juftified  by  common  pronunciation.  And  a  little 
x:onfideration  of  the  organs  and  practice  of  fpeech,  will  con-^ 
vince  him  how  ealily  ^gd  or  A^,  would  become  ad  or  at  f> 

as 


m^ 


*  My  much  valued  and  valuable  friend  Dr.  Warner,  the  very  ingenious 
author  of  Metronariston,  cr  a  new  pkafure  recommended^  m  a  differtatidn 
upm  Greek  and  Latin  projo^y  i  has  remarked  that—"  C  and  G  were  by  the 
^'  Romans  always  pronounced  hard,  i.  e,  as  the  Greek  K  and  r,  before 
**  ALL  vowels :  which  found  of  them  it  would  have  been  well  if  we  had 
^^  retained  i  for,  had  this  been  done,  the  mcbnvenience  of  many  equivocal 
^^  founds^  and  much  appearance  of  irregularity  in  the  language  would  have 
•*  been  avoided/' — Perhaps  it  may  feem  fuperfiuous  to  cite  any  thing  from 
a  book  which  muft  afTuredly  be  in  every  clalfical  hand ;  but  it  is  neceffary 
for  me  here  to  remind  the  reader  of  this  circumftance ;  left,  inftead  of 
jiggere  and  Aggitumy  he  (hould  pronounce  thefc  words  Adjere  and  Adjitum^ 
and  be  difgufted  with  a  derivation  which  might  then  feem  forced  and  un- 
natural. 

f  If  the  reader  keeps  in  mind  the  note  to  page  i)^y  he  will  eafily  per- 
ceive how  aSlum  became  the  irregular  particij)le  of  agere^  inftead  of  agitum 

A  a  a  or 


3«2  OF  PREPOSITIONS, 

as  indfeed  this  prepofition  was  indifferently  %vritten  by  the 
antients.  By  the  moderns  the  prepofuion  was  written  ai> 
with  the  D  only,  in  order  to  diftinguifh  it  from  the  other 
corrupt  word  called  the  ConjunSlioriy  at;  which  for  the 
fame  reafon  was  written  with  the  t  only,  though  that 
like  wife  had  antiently  been  written,  as  the  prepofition^  either 
AD  or  AT  *. 

B. 

You  have  not  yet  accounted  for  the  drflferent  employ- 
ment of  TILL  and  TO. 

or  agtum.  For  it  depended  entirely  on  the  employment  or  omiffion  of  the 
compreffion  there  noticed.  And  it  is  obfervable,  that  in  all  languages  (for 
the  natural  reafon  is  thfe  fame)  if  two  of  the  letters  (coupled  in  that  notej 
come  together,  in  one  of  which  the  compreffion  fhould  be  employed  and 
in  the  other  omitted,  the  Ipeaker  for  his  own  convenience  will  either  em^ 
ploy  the  compreffion  in  both,  or  omit  it  in  both  j  and  that  without  any 
regard  to  the  written  charafter.  Thus  (amongfl:  innumerable  inftances)  an 
Er^Gfliman  pronounces — o'azerve^ — and  a  Frenchman — of'server.  So  we 
learn  from  Quinftillian  (lib.  i.  cap.  7.)  that  the  Romans  pronounced 
ovftnttiff  though  they  wrote  OBtinuit. — "  Cum  dico  obtinuit^  fecundam  b 
literam  ratio  pofcit  j  aures  magis  audiunt  p." — ^In  the  fame  manner  a  Roman 
woukt  pronounce  the  word  cither — acT>umy  or  acTum,  that  he  might  not  in 
two  letters  coming  clofe  together,  Ihift  fo  inftantly  from  the  employment  to 
the  (nniffton  of  the  compreffion. 

*  "  Ad  &  at,  non  tantum  ob  fignificationem,  fed  &  originem  divcrfam, 
**  divcrfimodc  fcribcrc/^/ia j  eft.'* 

G.  J.  Voflius,  Etymol.  Ling.  Lat. 

H.  That 


I 


364  OF  PREPGSITIOf?S, 

You  acknowledge  then  that  the  oppoiition  of  prepofi- 
ticHis  is  iifefuJ^  as  far  as  it  reaches.     But,  befides  their 

* 

oppojithn  and  abfolute  contradiShn,  I  fhould  ima^ne  that 
the  marked  and  diftinguiflied  manner  alib>  in  which  dif- 
ferent prepofitions  are  ibmetimes  ufed  in  the  fame  fentence> 
muft  very  much  tend  to  facilitate  the  dcfcovery  of  their 
diftinA  iijgnifications.. 

,«  Well  /  *tis  ^en  fot  l  have  got  the  London  dijeafe  tbey 
**  call  Love,  I  am  fick  of  m^  hujband,  and  eor  tn^ 
**  gallant*,"* 

Love  makes  hor  iick  or»,  and  fick  for.  Here  of  and 
FOR  &fim  almoft  i^tced  in  oppofition ;  at  leaft  their  effe^ 
ki  the  fentence  are  moft  evidently  diflferent  t-  for»  by  the 
help  of  thefe  two  Prepofitions  ^one>  and  without  the 
affiftance  of  any  other  words>  Ihe  exprefles  the  two  con-- 
trary  a£fedtions  of  Loathing  and  Dejre,^. 

H. 

9 

No.  SmaH^^  aiBftance  indeed,  if  any*  can  be  derived 
from  ilich  inftances  as  this,     I  rather  think  they  tend  to 


I 


Wycheiley^  Country  Wife. 

miflead 


OF  PREPOSITIONS.  365 

miflead  than  to  direcSt  an  inquirer.  LoVe  was  not  here 
the  only  difeafe.  This  poor  lady  had  a  complication  of 
diftempers ;  ihe  had  two  difbrders ;  a  ficknefs  of  Loathing 
—•and  a  iicknefs  of  Defire.  She  was  lick  for  Difgufl^ 
and  fick  for  Love. 

Sick  OF  difguji  for  ber  bujband* 
Sick,  of  love  FOR  ber  gallant. 
Sick  FOR  difguji  OF  ber  bujband. 
Sick  FOR  love  OF  her  gaUanU 

Her  difgufl:  was  the  offspring  of  her  huiband,  ^0-^ 
ueded  frrmt  her  hufband,  was  begotten  upon  her  ^  her 
huiband.     Her  gallant  was  the  caufe  of  her  love. 

I  think  I  have  clearly  exprefled  the  meaning  of  her 
declarationi  And  I  have  been  purpofely  tautologons,  that 
by  my  indifferent  application  of  the  two  wor4$  of  and 
FOR— »both  to  her  diiguft  ai^d  to  her  lov^,  the  fmalleft 
appearance  of  oppoiition  between  thefe  prepoiitions  might 
be  done  away.  Indeed,  the  difference  between  them  {tbus 
conjfdered)  appears  to  be  fo  fmall,,  that  the  author^  if  it  had : 
pleafed  him>  might  have  ufed  of>  where  he  has  put  for.. 
And  that  he  might  ia  have  done,  the  following  is  a  proof. 

i 

**  Marian^ 


366  OF  PREPOSITIONS. 

**  Marian,     Come.,  Amie^  yot^ll  go  with  us»^ 

"  Amie,     I  am  not  wellC* 

"  Lionel.     Sbe^s  Jick  of  the  yong  Jhefard  that  bekijl 

In  the  fame  manner  we  may,  with  equal  propriety,  fay — 
"  JVe  are  Jick  of  hunger,^ — or,  **  We  are  Jick  for  hunger,^ 
And  in  both  cafes  we  (hall  have  exprefTed  precifely  the 
fame  thing. 

B.  ^ 

Tis  certainly  fo  in  practice.  But  is  that  pradice  jufti- 
fiable  ?  For  the  words  ftill  feem  to  me  to  have  a  very  dif- 
ferent import.  Do  you  mean  to  fay  that  the  words  of 
and  FOR  are  fynonymous  ? 

H. 

Very  ftr  from  it.  I  believe  they  difier  as  widely  as 
CAUSE  and  consequence.  I  imagine  the  word  for 
(whether  denominated  Prepojition^  ConjunSlion,  or  Adverb} 
to  be  a  Nounj  and  to  have  always  one  and  the  fame  fingle 
iignification,  viz.  cause,  and  nothing  elfe.  Though 
Greenwood  attributes  to  it  eight een^  and  S.  Johnfon  forty- 

u 
*^'~— ^->— ^ m— M  ^UT   a      1  m-' i    -     i  _  i  . 

t 

•  Sad  Shepherd,  Aft  I.  Sc  6. 


OF  PREPOSITIONi.  367 

fix  different  mganings :  for  which  Greenwood  cites  above 
forty^  and  Johnfon  above  two  hundred  inftances.  But,  with 
a  little  attention  to  their  inftances,  you  will  eafily  i>erceive, 
that  they  ufually  attribute  to  the  Prepqfition  the  meaning 
of  fomc  other  words  in  the  fentence.. 

Junius  (changing  p  into  F,  and  hy  metathefis  of  the 
letter  r)  derives  for  from  the  Greek  u^fo.  Skinner  from 
the  Latin  Pro.  But  I  believe  it  to  be  no  other  than  the 
Gothic  fubttantive  frJllJClNA,.  cause* 

L imagine  alfo  that  of  (in.  the  Gothic  and  Anglo-faxon 
A]^  and.Sp)  is  a  fragment  of  the  Gothic  and  Anglo-faxon 
AI^AKAj  pofteritas,  &c*  Spojia,  proles,  &c.  *.  That  it  is  a 
noun  fubftantive,  and: means  always  confequence^  offsprings 
fuccejfor J  follower y  &€•. 

And  r  think  it  not  unworthy  of  remark,  that  whilft  the 
old  patronymical  termination  of  our  northern   anceftors 


*  **^  Of*,  a,  ab.  abs^dc  a,*  s.  op.  ix  affl  b*  af.  Goth.  Al^»  Exprimunt 
"  Gr.  «ro,  ab..de-:  pra^fertim  cum  aw9  ante  voeabulum  ab  adipirationc  in- 
*^  cipiens,  fiat  «f."     Junius. 

Minlhcw  and  Skinner  derive  of  from  the  Latin  ab,  and  that  fh>m  the 
Greek  axo. 

was 


568  (9F  PREPOSITIONS. 

was  SON,  the  Sclavonic  and  Ruffian  patronymic  was  of. 
Thus  whom  the  Englifh  and  Swedes  named  Peter/on,  the 
Ruffians  called  Peterbof,  And  as  a  polite  foreign  afie6ta- 
tioti  afterwards  induced  fome  of  our  anceftors  to  affiime 
Fils  or  Fitz  (i.  e.  FiU  or  Filius)  inftead  of  son  ;  fo  the 
Ruffian  affectation  in  more  modern  times  changed  of  to 
Vitcb  (i»  e.  FitZy  Filsy  or  Filius)  and  Peterbof  became 
Petrovitcb  or  Petrowitz* 


So  M.  de  Broffes  (Tom.  a.  p.  295.)  obferves  of  the 
Romans — <*  Remarquons  fur  les  noms  propres  des  families 
**  Romaines  qu*il  n*y  en  a  pas  un  feul  qui  ne  foit  termine 
'<  en  ius ;  deiinenfe  fort  femblable  a  1*  mo;  des  Grecs,  c'eft 
<«  i  dire  filius  *." 

B. 

Stop,  Stop,  Sir.  Not  fo  hafty,  1  befeech  you.  Let  us 
leave  the  Swedes,  and  the  Ruffians,  and  the  Greeks,  and 
the  Romans,  out  of  the  queftion  for  the  prefent ;  and  con- 


(( 


•  **  Et  quamvb  nunc  dierum  habeant  quldem  ad  Anglorum  Imiudoncm, 
&niliarum  nomina  j  fimt  tamen  ea  plenunque  mere  patronymica :  funt 
enim  Price.  Powel.  Bowel.  Bowen.  Pugh.   Parry.   Penry.  Prichard. 

**  Prqbert.  Progcr.  &c.  nihil  aliud  quam  Ap.  Rhys.  Af,  Howcl.  Ap.  Owen. 

**  Ap.  Hugh.   Ap.  Harry.   Ap.  Henry.   Ap.  Rich^.  Ap.  Robert.  Ap. 

**  Roger.  &c.  ap,  hoc  eft  mab,  fiHus."    Walljs>  Pre&ce. 

9  T      fine 


OT  PREPOSITIONS-  ^  369 

fine  yourfelf,  if  you  pleafe,  as  in  the  beginning  you  con- 
fined my  enquiry,  to  the  Englifli  only.  Above  two  bun-^ 
dred  inftances,  do  you  fay,  produced  by  Johnfon  as  proofs 
of  at  leaft  forty-fix  diflferent  meanings  of  this  one  prepofi- 
tion  FOR,  when  Harris  will  not  allow  one  fingle  meaning 
to  all  the  prepofitions  in  the  world  together !  And  is  it 
polllble  that  one  and  the  fame  author,  knowing  this,  fhould 
in  the  fame  fliort  preface,  and  in  the  compafs  of  a  very 
few  fhort  pages,  acknowledge  the  former  to  be  "  the  per-^ 
^5  fan  beji  qualified  to  give  a  perfeSl  Grammar  *,''  and  yet 
compliment  the  grammar  of  the  latter,  as  the  ftandard  of 
accuracy,  acutenefs  and  perfection  +  ! 

Oh,  my  dear  Sir,  the  wife  men  of  this  world  know  full 
well  that  the  family  of  the  BkmdiJheiS  %  are  univexfal 
favourites.  Good  breeding  and  policy  direct  us  to  mention 
the  living  only  with  praife;  and  if  we  do  ^t  any  time 
hazard  a  cenfure,  to  let  it  fall  only  on  the  dead. 


*  See  A  Short  IntroduAion  to  Englifli  Gram.    Preface^  p.  6. 
j-  Sec  id.  p.  14,- 

.    X  ^^  *^  Heirefs.    (One  little  morfcl  of  falfc  moral  excepted)«themoft 
pcrfedt  and  meritorious  comedy,  without  exception,  of  any  on  our  ftage. 

B  b  b  B.  Pray, 


370  '  OF  PREPOSITIONS*. 


B. 


Pray,. which  of  thofe  qualities  didated  that  remark? 

H. 

Neither..  But  a  quality  which  pafies  for  brutality  and' 
ill^nature :  and  which,  in  fpite  of  hard  blows  said  heavy 
burdens,,  would  make  me  rather  chuie  in  the  fcale  of 
beings  to  exift  a  maftifif  or  a  mule,  than  a  monkey  or  St.. 
lapdog.  But  why  have  you  overlooked  my'  civility  to  Mu, 
Harris?  Do  you  not  perc^ve.  that  by  contending  for  only 
one  meting  to  the  word  for,  1  mh  forty-five  times  more_^ 
cjomplaifant.  to  him  than  Johnfon  is  ? 

B. 

He  loves^  every  thiQg  that  is  (jfreek,  and  no  d(toht  tinere--- 
Jfore  will  ow«  you  many  thanks  for  this^n^i  favour.*^-*- 
Danaes  dmu  f^ettfe^ir-*-^S\A  confirm  it,  if  you  ti^i^;^ ;  and  \ 
(if  you  can)  ftrengthen  your  doubtftil  etyr»olDgy  -Cwhich . 
I  think  wants  flrengthening)'  by  e3ttra(5tiftg  your  fingl^ 
meaning  of  for  from  all  Greenwood's  and  Jdhnfian's.nur- 
merous  inftances.. 

H. 

That  would  be  a  tedious  tafk ;  and,  I  truft,  unnec^ffary ;  • 
and  for  that  reafon  only  I  have:  not  purfued  the  method 


OF  PREPOSITIONS.  371 

% 

\ 

ydu  now  propofe,  with  all  the  other  particles  which  I  have 
before  explained.  But  as  this  naanner  of  conlidering  tlie 
prepofitions,  though  many  years  familiar  to  me,  is  ,novel 
to  you,  I  may  perhaps  fuppofe  it  to*  be  eafier  and  clearer 
than  it  may  at  firft  fight  appear  to  others.  I  will  rifque 
therefore  your  impatience,  whilft  I  explain  one  fingle  ia- 
ftance  under  each  feparate  meaning  attributed  to  for. 


tSreenwood  iays— *"  The  Prepofitiou  for  has 'a  gre* 
**  many  iignifications,  and  denotes  chiefly  for  what  purpofe^ 
**  endy  or  ufo^  or  for  whofe  benefit  or  damage  any  t^ing  is 
«  done ;  As — Cbriji  died  for  us^  [i.  e.  Caufe  us ;  or  We 
iieing  the  Caufo  of  lus  dying.] 

<*  I .  For  fcrves  to  denote  the  End  or  Ohje^  which  one 
<*  propofes  in  any  action  5  As — Tofigbt  for  the  public  good* 
[i.e.  CAUSE  the  public  good;  ix^  The  public  good  being 
the  Caufe  of  fighting.] 

"  2.  It  ferves  to  mark  the  Motive,  the  Cau/e,  the  Sub/eS 
<*  of  any  adlion ;  As^—He  does  aU  things  for  tbe  love  of 
<*  virtue^  [i.  e.  The  love  of  virtue  being  the  Caufe,'] 

*'  3.  It  is  ufed  to  mark  the  ufe  for  which  a  thing  is 
**  done;  As — Chelfey  Hofpital  was  built    for    difabled 

B  b  b  2  «  foldiers:' 


372  OF  PREPOSITIONS, 

«  foldiers^  [i»  e.  Difabled  Soldiers  being  the  Caufe  of  its 
l)eing  built.] 

*<  4.  It  is  ufed  likewife  to  denote  Profit,  Advantage, 
Xntereft ;  As — /  write  for  your  JatisfaBion^  [i.  e.  Your 
fatisfadtion  being  the  caufe  of  my  writing.] 

<*  5 .  It  is  ufed  to  denote  for  what  a  thing  is  "Proper,  or 
"  not ;  As — //  is  a  good  remedy  for  the  Fever P  In  which 
laft  example  to  cure  is  to  be  underilood.  [i.  e.  Curing 
the  Fever  being  the  Caufe  that  it  is  called  a  good  remedy,] 

•  * 

<*  6.  This  prepofition  is  ufed  to  denote  Agreement  or 
«  Help ;  As — The  Soldier  fights  for  the  King,"*  [i.  e.  The 
King  being  the  Caufe  of  his  fighting.} 

"  7.  It  is  ufed  to  denote  the  Convenience  or  Inconvem- 
"  ence  of  a  thing ;  As — He  is  big  enough  for  bis  age^ 
[i.  e.  His  age  being  the  Caufe  that  he  is  big  enough  ;  or 
that  his  fize  anfwers  our  expectation.] 

"  8.  It  is  ufed  to  denote  Exchange  or  Trucking,  Recont' 
«  pence.  Retribution  or  Requital  and  Payment  y  As — He 
<*  rewarded  him  for  his  good  ferviees*^  [i.  e.  His  good 
ferviccs  being  the  Caufe  of  reward.} 

«  Hither 


OF  PREPOSITIONS.  373 

"  Hither  we  may  likewife  refer  thefe  phrafes,  Eye  for 
Eye^  &c.  [i.  e.  An  eye  (deftroyed  by  malicious  violence) 
being  the  Caufe  of-  an  eye  taken  from  the  convict  in 
puniihment.} 

**  9,  It  is  ufed  to  denote  Injlead  of,  in  the  Place  of\ 
h.'&'^I  will  grind  for  bim*^  [i.  e.  He  being  the  Caufe  of 
my  grinding-X 

*'  Sometimes  it  ferves  to  denote  a  Miftake\  As— 
**  He  Jpeaks  one  word  yo¥,  another  J*  [i.e.  Another  word 
being  the  Caufe  of  his  fpeaking  that  word  which  he 
ipeaks»]l 

**  10.  It  is  ufed  to  denote  the  Diftribution  of  things^  by 
Proportion  to  feveral  others ;  As — He  fets  down  twelve 
Acres  for  every  man  J*  [i.  e.  Every  or  each  man  being 
the  Caufe  of  his  fetting  down  twelve  acres.] 

"  1 1 .  It  denotes  the  Condition  of  Perfonsy  Things  and 
Times \  Ks- — He. was  a  learned  man  for  thofe  times^ 
[i.  e.  The  darknefs  or  ignorahce  of  thofe  times  being  the. 
Caufe  why  he  may  be  confidered  as  a  learned  man.] . 


<i. 


I2.... 


374  ^^  PREPOSITIONS. 

«  12.  It  is  likewife  ufed  to  denote  in  the  quality  of'.  As 
«  ~ — He  fuborned  bim  for  a  witnefs^  [i.  e.  For  that  he 
might  be  a  witnefs;  or,  for  to  be  a  witnefs.^ — ^That  he 
might  be  a  witnefs ;  or,  to  be  a  witnefs  bping  the  Cauje 
of  his  fuborning  him.] 

«  It  Jignifies  likewife  as  much  as  Becaufe  of.  By  reafon 
•*'  of;  As — 'To  punijb  a  man  for  bis  crimes,^  [i.  c.  His 
icrimes  being  the  Caufe  of  punifliment.] 

•<*  It  iignifies  Asy  Or  To  he;  As — He  was  Jent  for  a 
^  pkdgi.^  [i.  e.  That  h€  might  be  a  pledge,  or  to  bie  a 
pledge  being  the  Caufe  of  his  being  fent.] 

# 

«  During",  to  denote  the  Future  Time',  As — He  was 
«  cbofen  [to  fome  office]  fou  life,**  [i.  e.  To  continue  in 
that  office  for  life;  or^  for  the  continuance  of  his  life-~> 
The  continuance  of  his  hfe  being  the  Caufe  of  the  conti- 
nuance of  his  office.] 

t 

***  Coneemmgj  Admit ;  A^-^As  voit,  me.^  [Thefentencc 
liere  is  not  compleat;  but  it  ftiaU  be  explained  amongft 
Johnfon'^  inftances.1 

«  Not' 


OF  PREPOSITIONS.  375. 

♦  "  Noiwitbjianding :  As,  after  having  fpoke  of  the  faults 
**  of  a  man,  we  add,  for  all  that, .  be  is  an  boneji  man^ 
[i.e.  Though  all  that  has  been,  faid  may  be  the  Cj///^  of : 
thinking  otherwife,  yet  he  is  an  honeft  man.] 

S»  Jphnfon  fays,  "  for,  Prepolition.. 

<•  I'..  Becaufe  of' — Tbat  wbicb  we.  for  our  unwortbinefs 
*•  [i.  e..  our  unworthinefs  the  Caufe'^  are  afraid  to  crave^- 
***  our  prayer  isy.  tbat  God  for  tbe  wortbinefs  of  bis  Son 
«  p.  e.   the.  wprthinefs    of    his  Son   being  the  Caufe"^ 
«*'  would  nQtwitb^anding  voucbfafe  to  grants 

<*  2,  Witb  refpeSi  to,  with  regard  to;  As 

**  Loy  fome  an  vellom^  and  tbe  refi  as  good 

*'  FOR  all.  bis  lordjhip  knows y  but  tbey  are  wood'^ 

p,  e*  As  far  as  all  that  his  lordfliip  knows  is  the  Caufe  of 
their  being  denominated^d?o^  or  bad,  the  reft  are  as  good.] 

."  3-  In.  ;tbjts  fenfe  it  h?^6  oUten  -^j- -before  it;  Asrr-^j 
^  ¥0K. Maramakiuf  tbe  general^  they  bad  no  jtifi  caufe  to 
^  mijlike  biffty   being  an  old  captain  of  great  experience.^ ' 
[i.  e.  As  far  as  Maramaldus  the  genieral  :iXHght  be  a  Caufe 
of  their  difcontent,  they  had  no  jufi  caufe  to  miflike  him.]  . 


i      ■ 


iC 


4-.  la 


I 


376  OF  PREPOSITIONS. 

"  4.  In  the  CharaSler  of;  As — 


«S*^7,  is  it  fitting  in  this  very  fields 
This  fields  where  from  my  youth  Pve  been  a  edrter^ 
'*  I  in  this  field  Jhould  die  for  a  dejerter.^ 

[i.  e.  Being  a  Deferter,  being  the  Caufe  of  my  dying.] 

\ 

t 

^^  5.  With  refemblance  of\  As — 

«<  Forward  he  fleWy  and  pitching  on  his  bead, 
*^  He  quivered  with  his  feet,  and  lay  jor  dead.'' 

[i.  e.  As  if  Death,  or  his  being  dead,  had  been  the  Cau/e 
of  his  laying ;  or.  He  lay  in  that  manner j  in  which  death 
or  being  dead  is  the  Cau/e  that  perfons  fo  lay.] 

<<  6.  Conjidered  as ;  in  the  place  of\  As— 


€€ 


Read  aU  the  Prefaces  of  Dry  den  : 

FOR  thoje  our  critics  much  confide  in: 
"  Though  merely  writ  at  firji  for  filling, 
"  To  rai/e  the  volume's  price  a /hilling.'' 

[i.  e.  Read,  Sec.  the  Cau/e  why  you  Ihould  read  them, 
being,  that  our  critics  confide  in  them.  Though  to  fill 
up  and  to  raife  the  volume*s  price  was  the  Cau/e  that  they 
were  at  firft  written.] 

\ 

**  7.  /« 


37^  <>F  PREPOSITIONS. 

*'  II.  In  proportion  to;  As — jis  be  could  fee  clear ^  for 
«  tbofe  times,  through  fuperjiition,  fo  he  would  be  blinded, 
'<  now  and  then,  by  human  policy^  [i.  e.  The  darknefs, 
or  ignorance,  or  bigotry  of  thofe  times  being  the  Caufe, 
why  even  fuch  iight,  as  he  then  had,  may  be  called  or 
reckoned  clear.] 

^^  12.  JVitb  appropriation  to;  As — Shadow  will ferve 
"  FOR  fummer.  Prick  him:  for  we  have  a  number  of 
"  Shadows  to  Jill  up  the  Mujier-book'^  [i.  e.  Summer  is  the 
Caufe  why  Shadow  will  ferve^  i.  e.  will  do ;  or  will  be 
proper  to  be  taken.  Prick  him*:  the  Caufe  (why  I  will 
have  him  pricked,  or  fet  down)  is,  that  We  have  many 
Ihadows  to  fill  up  the  Mufter-book.] 

^^   1 3.  After  O,  an  expreffion  of  Dejire ;  As — 


C€ 


01  FOK  a  Muje  of  fire ^  that  would  ajcend 
The  bright efi  heaven  of  invention.^* 


[i.  e.  O !  I  wifh  for  a  Mufe  of  fire>  &c.  i.  e.  A  Mufe  of 
fire  being  the  Caufe  of  my  wifhing.] 

**  14.  In  account  of\  In  folution  af\  As — Thus  much 
"  FOR  the  beginning  and progr&fs  of  the  deluged  [i.  e.  The 
**  beginning  and  progrefs  of  the  deluge  is  the  Caufe  of 

thus 


\ 


38o  OF  PREPOSITIONS. 

*^  17.  Noting  Power  or  Pqffibility ;  As— for  a  holyperfon 
"  to  be  bumble ;  for  one^  whom  all  men  ejleem  a  fainty  to 
^^  fear  left  himjelf  become  a  devily  is  as  bard  as  for  a  prince 
"  to  fubmit  him/elf  to  be  guided  by  Tutors  J"  [i.  e.  To  be 
humble  is  hard  or  difficult  Becaufcj  or,  the  Caufe  being,  he 
is  a  holy  perfon  :  To  fear  left  himfelf  become  a  devil  is 
difficult  Becdufcj  or,  the  Cau/e  being,  he  is  one  whom  all 
men  ejieem  a  faint :  To  fubmit  himfelf  to  be  guided  by 
Tutors  is  difficult  Becaufe^  or,  the  Caufe  being,  he  is  a 
Prince.     And  all  thefe  things  are  equally  difficult.] 

<*  18.  Noting  Dependence ;  K%—Tbe  colours  of  outward 
**  objeSsy  brought  into  a  darkened  roonty  depend  for  their 
"  vijibility  upon  the  dimnefs  of  the  light  they  are  beheld  by  J* 
[i.  e.  Depend  upon  the  dimnefs  of  the  light  as  the  Caufe 
of  their  vifibility.J 

"  1 9.  In  Prevention  of,  for  Fear  of;  As 

"  Com  being  bad  dovm,  any  way  ye  allow, 

**  Should  wither  as  needeth  for  hurning  in  Mow." 

[i.  c.   Burning  in  Mow,   the  Caufe  why  it  needeth  to 
wither.] 


An^ 


OF  PREPOSITIONS.  381 

'*  And,  FOR  the  time  jhall  notjeem  tedious , 
"  I'll  tell  thee  what  befell  me  on  a  day*" 

[i.  e.  The  Caufe  of  my  telling  thee,  is,  that  the  time  may 
not  feem  tedious.] 

"  20.  In  Remedy  of  \  As — Sometimes  hot y  fometimes  cold 
"  things  are  good  for  the  tootb-acb^"*  [i.  e.  Their  curing 
the  tooth-ach  the  Gaufe  of  their  being  called  goodJ] 

"  a  I.  In  Exchange  for;  As — He  made  conjiderable 
**  Pfogfefs  in  the  Jiudy  of  the  law^  before  be  quitted  that 
«  profejffion  for  this  of  Poetry.^*  [i.  e.  The  profcflion  of 
Poetry,  the  Caufe  of  his  quitting  the  profeflion  of  the  law.} 

**  2.2.  In  the  Place  of  Injiead  of ;  As — To  make  bint 
«  copious  is  to  alter  bis  charaSler ;  and  to  tranflaie  him 
"  line  FOR  line  is  impoj/ible,**  [i.  e.  Line  Caufe  of  line, 
or,  Each  line  of  the  original  being  the  Caufe  of  each  line 
of  the  tranflation.] 

*  So  Chaucer, 

"  This  dronken  myllcr  hath  ytoldc  us  here 
Howe  that  begylcd  was  a  carpcntcre 
Perauenture  in  ikorne,  for  I  am  one/' 

Reue'sprol.     Fol.  15.  pag.  2.  col.  i. 

"  For  they  feemed  philofophersj  they  weren  purfued  to  the  dethe  and 
flayne/'  Boecm$    Boke  i.  Fol.  221.  pag.  i.  coL  i*. 


€t 


« 


4  3- 


38a  OF  PREPOSITIONS, 

"  23.  /;/  Supply  of^  to  ferve  in  the  Place  of\  As — 
"  Moji  of  our  ingefiious  you7ig  men  take  up  fome  cried^up 
<*  Englifb  poet  for  their  model.''  [i.  e.  To  be  their  model 
the  Caufe  of  taking  him.] 

^^24.  Through  a  certain  Duration ;  As 

*'  Since  bir'd  for  life  tby/ervile  muje  muftfing^ 
**  Succejfive  conquefts  and  a  glorious  king.'* 

[i.  e^  The  continuance  of  your  life  the  Cau/e  of  the  con- 
tinuance of  your  hire.] 

"25.  In  Search  of  in  ^eji  of%  As — Some  of  the 
**  philofophers  have  run  fo  far  back  for  arguments  of 
comfort  againji  pain^  as  to  doubt  whether  there  were 
any  fuch  thing.''  [i.  e.  Arguments  of  comfort  againft 
pain  the  Caufe  of  running  fo  far  back.] 

^^  26.  Accordi7tg  to  ;  As — Chymijis  have  not  been  able^ 
^*  FOR  aught  is  vulgarly  known ^  by  fre  alone  to  feparate 
^^  true  fulphur  from  antimony^'  [i.  e.  Any  thing  which 
is  vulgarly  known,  being  the  Caufe  of  ability,  or  of  their 
being  fuppofed  to  be  able.] 

"  27.  Noting  a  State  of  Fitnefs  or  Readinefs\  As — 
"  Nay  if  you  be  an  Undertaker^  I  am  for^(?//."     [i.  e.  I 

I  am 


OF  PREPOSITIONS.  383 

am  an  Undertaker,  an  Adverfary,  a  Fighter,  &c.  for  you ; 
or,  I  will  undertake  you ;  i,  e.  You  the  Caufe  of  my  being 
an  Undertaker,  &c,] 

"28.  In  Hope  off  for  the  Sake  ofy  noting  the  fnal Caufe; 
«  As — Scholars  are  frugal  of  their  words,  and  not  willing  to 
**  let  any  go  for  ornament^  if  they  will  not  ferve  FOR  ufe,** 
[i.  e.  Ornament  the  Caufe  \  Ufe  the  Caufe.] 

"  29.  Of  Tendency  to,  Towards  \  As — It  were  more  f ok 
<*  his  honour  to  raife  the  Jiege,  than  to  fpendfo  many  good 
*<  men  in  the  winning  of  it  by  forced  [i.  e.  His  honour 
the  Caufe  why  it  were  more  expedient,  ftting,  proper,  8ce. 
to  raife  the  liege.] 

"  30.  In  Favour  of,  on  the  Fart  of,  on  the  Side  of\  As 
<*  — //  becomes  me  not  to  draw  my  pen  in  the  defence  of  a 
"  bad  caufe,  when  Ihavefo  often  drawn  it  for  a  good  one^ 
[i.  e.  A  good  one  being  the  Caufe  of  drawing  it.] 


*•  31.  Noting  Accommodation,  or  Adaptation  :  As— 
«  Per^a  is  commodioujly  Jituated  for  trade  both  by  fea  and 
«  landr  [i.  e.  Trade  the  Caufe  of  its  being  faid  to  be 
commodioujly  lituated.]  . 


« 


3^ 


4 
1 


384  OF  PREPOSITIONS, 

"  32.  fVitb  Intention  of\  As — 

^'  ^»^  ^j^  that  juftice  baft  removed  the  Caufe 
-  '*  Of  thofe  rude  tempeftsj  which,  for  rapine  fent^ 
^  Too  oft  alas  involved  the  innocent.** 

[i.  e.  Rapine  the  Caufe  of  their  being  fent»] 
^*  33»  Becoming  J  Belonging  to ;  As— 

*'  //  w^^  not  FOR  j^^«r  j'W/V/,  »or  your  good^ 
Nor  FOR  i»y  manhood,  honefty  and  wifdom^ 
To  iet  you  know  my  thoughts." 


<€ 


[i.  e.  Your  quiet  is  a  Cau/ey  your  good  is  a  Cau/ey  my 
manhood,  my  honefty,  my  wifdom,  each  is  a  Caufe^  why 
it  is  not  Jit  ov  proper  to  let  you  know  my  thoughts,] 


i  <*  34.  Notwitbftandingi  As — Probability  fuppo/es  that  a 

j  .                                    **  /A/«^  w^^,  or  w^  w/  ^^  foy  FOR  tf//y  /i6w^  /^a/  yet  is 

\  *'  certainly  determined  on  either  Jide^     [i.  e.  Any  thing 

I  yet  determined  being  the  Caufe  of  concluding.] 

I  "35*  For  all.     Notwithjlanding  \  As — For  all  bis 

I  <*  ^:>r^<S?  />^/,    down  was  be  caft  from  all  bis  greatnefs^ 

{i.  e.  His  exawft  plot  being,  all  of  it,  a  Caufe  to  expert 

otherwife ;  yet  he  was  caft  down.] 


«  36. 


OF  PREPOSITIONS.  385 

«  36.  To  the  Ufe  of,  to  be  ufed  in ;  As— 

**  The  Oak  for  nothing  ill  j 
**  The  Ofter  good  for  twigs  j  the  Poplar  for  the  Mill" 

[i.  c.  Not  any  thing  the  Caufe  why  the  oak  Ihould  be 
pronounced  bad ;  Twigs  the  Caiife  why  the  ofier  ftiould  be 
called  good ;  the  Mill  the  Caufe  why  the  poplar  ihould  be 
efteemed  ufeful.] 

^^37.    In  confequence  of;    As — for  love  they  force 
^^  through  thickets  of  the  wood.^^    \i.  e.  Love  the  Caufe^\ 

.    ^^38.  In  recompenfe  of  \  As— 

**  Now  ¥Ok/o  many  glorious  affions  done 
**  For  feace  at  homey  and  for  the  public  wealtbi 
*^  /  mean  to  crown  a  howl  to  Cajar^s  health  : 
"  Bejides  in  gratitude  fok  fuch  high  matters, 
'  **  Know  I  have  vow'd  two  buH^b'dd  Gladiators  J* 

\i.  e.  I  mean  to  crown  a  bowl  to  Caefar^s  health,  the  Cauje 
— fo  many  glorious  adlibns ;  the  Caufe — peace  at  home ; 
the  Catfe — ^the  public  weal.  Befides,  I  have  in  gratitude 
vowed  two  hundred  gladiators,  fuch  high  matters  being 
the  Caufe  of  my  gratitude.] 

"39.  In  proportion  to  ;  K^-^He  is  not  very  tall,  yet  •, 
*'  FOR  bis  years.  he*s  talV   [i.  e.  His  years  the  Caufeyih,'^ 
he  may  be  efteemed  tall.] 

D  d  d  «  4d. ' 


38S  OF  PREPOSITIONS. 

"  40.  By  means  tfs  ly  interpofition  of;  As — Moral 
«  conjideratiom  can  m  maymoije  tbefenjibk  appetite,  were 
«  it  not  FOR  the  ■mill.'  [i.  e.  Were  not  the  wni  the  Caufe."] 

"41.  tn  r'e'gard of }  iri pifefervatim  of  ;  f&^-^I cannot 
'^'' 1&K  my  life.''  [Lei  My  Bfe  being  the  Ca^ ;  or.  To 
&ve  my  life  being  the  Caufe  why  I  Ihould  doit:  i,  e.  thouglk 
my  life  were  at  flake.} 

"  4».  Fo»  W:  As — -I  come  ion  to  fee  you.*  [k  e.  Tl» 
lee  you  being,  the  Caufi  of  my  coming.^ 

"  Atarp  flfiml^ 

"  Of  hUpi^Us  ■^x.  It  iHriafi  tht  amti" 

[L  e.  To  increaie  ffie-  nuodier  beiiig;  AtiCaufi of  &ac 
Btomltiiig.J 


Feit     CtnjUngiin  *t  Asi— ■ 


*  ffi«>'». 


*  So  the  French  corrcljjondcnt  Coi^imBiBn  car  (by  old  French  authon. 
vmtbnj^^f')!  is  liO' other  ttiah'J^»i  6r,'.^(i.  e.K«)Afrf; 

'^  jl^v'^'e'i  {h^tjiatiiAit^my conixiauixm«xa  haboeiic  apudaoti^fuos,. 
-**  u(  jirqutUt  e^tuJuSt  pro  arcus,  oculiis.  PHfc.  Vicifltm  astiurtt'  tabiti; 
M  po  ankH^UHSj  cquullifi  antiqui  libri..  Qim.Ss  Jiutmt  ttri  &  f«i,   Tercnttus 

<<Aiidri>: 


OF  PREPOSITIONS;  .387 

^*  Heaven  doth  with  us  as  we  with  torches  deal, 
«'  Noi  light  them  for  them/elves :  for  if  cur  virtues 
"  Did  not  go  forth  4f  us,  .Uwere  all.  alike 
"  jis  if  xve,had  them  not.'' 

p.  e.  Themfolyes  not  being-  the  Caufe  of  lighting  them» 
If  our  virtues  did  not  go  forth  of  US|  ^twere  all  alike  as  if 
we  had  them  not :  That  is  the  Caufe.  ffhj  heaven  dothdeal 
with  us,  as  we  deal  with  torches.] 


*^  Andria :  ^i  mihi  expurgandus  eft^  pro  cui :  annotat  Donatus. .  S^uerquera 
^^  febrisi  ljaci3^\j^v ^  pfUiusIib.  zo.     Cotidie,  iioti.^tidie,  fcri- 

«'  bunt  Quintil.  &  Viflorinus.  Stercilinium,  pro  ftcrquUinio, .  habcnt  libri 
*«  vetcres  Catonis  de  R.  R*  &'Terentius  Phormione:  In/ece  &  Infeque. 
^  Ennius,  Livius>  Cato:  uc  difputatOellius  lib.  x8.  cap.  19.  Hujufie^.ic 
*'  huju/que,  promifcue  dim  fcribcbant.  Hmc  Fortuna  bi^fce  diei,  apud 
*'  Plinium;  lib.  34.  &,  Fortuna  hujufque  diet,  apud  Ciceronem^  lib.  a.  dc 
*'  Icgibus.  Et  Viftor  dc  regionibus  urbis :  vicus.  HvjusojrB.  dibi.  fort. 
'^  MD.  Lex  vetus  asdificii :  dies  qperis  r,.  kovemb..  primeis  dibs  PEoyvK. 

^V  PARS  DIMJDIA  DABIT.UR  VBI  PR^DIA  J5ATIS  SUBSIONATABItUNT.  A^- 
*^   TERA  PARS  DIMIDIA  SOLVETUR  OPBRE  PERFECTO  PROBATQ  Oy^." 

Of  which  iniiiimerable  other  inftancesjiught  alfo  be  given.  And  the 
latins  in  cutting  off  the  E  at  the  end'  of  ^e,  only  followed  the  example 
jof  the  Greeks^  who  did  the  fame,  hy  K«i  (as  fhould  have  been  mentioned 
before  in  the  note  to  page  92).  .  Thu^.in  Sappho's  ode  to  Venus, 

Hps  otIi  J*  fiv  TO  viwovid,  X*  irli 

Afupo  xocAoijbM* 

Ddd  2  «  a.  Be- 


388  OF  PREPOSITIONS. 

**  2.  Becaufe\  on  this  account  tbat\  K%~—I  doubt  not 
"  but  great  troops  would  be  ready  to  run ;  yet  for  tbat  the 
**  worji  men  are  moft  ready  to  ntove^  I  would  wijh  tbem 
"  chofen  by  difcretion  of  wife  men.**  [i.  e.  The  worft 
men  are  the  moft  r^ady  to  move.  That  is  the  Caufe  why 
I  would  wifti  them  (not  the  worft  men,  but  the  troops) 
chofen  by  difcretion  of  wife  men* 

"  3.  For  as  much.  In  regard  tbat ;  in  confideration  of;. 
**  As — For  as  much  as  the  thirfl  is  intolerable,  the  patient 
**  may  be  indulged  the  free  ufe  of  Spaw  water.**  [i.  e.  As 
much  as  the  thirft  is  intolerable,,  is  the  Cau/e  why  the 
patient  may  be  indulged.  J 

**  4.  For  why.  .  Becaufe ;  For  this  reajon  that ;  As> 
•*  Solyman  had  three  hundred  field  pieces,  that  a  Camel 
•*  might  well  carry  one  of  them,  being  taken  from  the  car^ 
"  riage  t  for  why,  Solyman  purpofing  to  draw  the  emperor 
**  unto  battle,  bad  brought  no  greater  pieces  of  battery  with 
«  him.**  [i.  e.  the  Caufe,  that.] 

For,  is  not  yet  your  own,  however  hard  yoti  have 
ftriiggled  for  it :  for,  belides  Greenwood  and  S.  Johnfon, 
you  have  ftiU  three  others  to  contend  with.^     Wilkins 

5  aiiigjas 


OF  PREPOSITIONS.  389 

ailigns  two  meanings  to  for.     He  fays,  it  denotes—"  tbe 
**  efficient  or  final  caufe^  and  adjuvancy  or  agreement  witb^ 

Lowth  allerts  that — "  for,  in  its  primary  fenfey  is  loco 
«  alterius,  in  tbe  ftead  or  place  of  anotberJ*  And  he 
therefore  cenfures  Swift  for  faying — «  Accufed  tbe  tmnifiers 
<*  FOR  betraying  tbe  Dutcb^  And  Dryden  for  faying— 
**  Tou  accufe  Ovfd  for  luxuriancy  of  verfe^  Where,  in- 
ftead  of  FORa  he  fays  of  fhould  be  written. 

And  Mr.  Tyrwhit,  in  his  Gloflary,  fays—**  For.  Prep, 
**  Sax^  fometimes  fignifies  against."  Of  which  he  gives, 
three  inftances* 

*•  He  didde  next  his  white  Icrc 
**  Of  cloth  of  lake  fin  and  clerc 

**  A  breche  and- eke  a  fherte      •     • 
**  And  next  his  fhert  an  haketoa 
**  And  over  that  an  habergeon 

"  For  percing  of  his  hertc.'* 

Mr.  Tyrwhit  (ays,^ — «  Against,  or  to  prevent  piercihg.*^ 

**  Therfore  for  ftealyng  of  the  rofc 
**  I  rede  her  nat  the  yate  vinclofc." 

Mr.  T.  fays — "  Againjl  ftealing." 

"  Some  fhall  fow  the  facke 
**^  For  ihedihg  of  the  wheate.'" 


Mr.  T.  fays—"  to  prevent  fliedding.' 


H. 


$90 


OF  PREPOSITIONS. 


H. 


As  Willdns  has  prodaced  no  jitfiauses,  ho- has  giY&n.  me 
nothing  to  take  hold  of.  And  let  any  ingenuity  try 
'  i^thether  it  can,  with -any  ocdouF  of  planiiibiU^ty, .  apply  Dr. 
Lowth's  meaning  of  ioca  akeriusy  or  \  any  other  Jingle 
meaning  (except  Caufe)  to  the  jinftancesll.iiave  already 
expljuned.  J&fis  oorredtions  Of  Sufift  and  of  Dryden,  are 
both  mifplaoed*     For  the  meaning  of  thde  paflT^ges,  is>— - 

e  raying  f  Cause  of  the  accufadon. 

**  Luxunancy  of  verfe     i 

So  alfo  in  Mr.  Tyr whit's  inftanoes,  though  their,  con- 
Urudtion  is  aukward  and  faulty,  and  now  out  of  ufe,  yet 
is  the  meaning  of  for  equally  conipicuous.  The  Caufs 
of  putting  on  the  HabergecMi,  of  the  advice  not  to  open 
the  gate,  of  fowing  the  fack— bdng  reipeftively— that 
the  heart  might  not  be  pierced,  that  the  rofe  might  not 
be  ftdlen,  that  the  wheat  might  aot  be  flied. 

B. 

I  will  trouble  you  with  only  one  inftance  of  my  own. 
How  do  you  account  for  this  ientence  ?— **  To  ibe  4if grate 
«  of  common  fenfe  and  common  bonejfy,  after  a  long  debate 
**  concerning  the  RobillaSi  a  new>writ  was  moved  for  for 
^  oJdSarum:  and  eiuery  orator  was  tongue-tied^     jiltbougb 


L 


^  ft  is  as  Mucb  tbe  duty  of  the  HouJlKif  Commmst^<-ex4imme 
*^  tbe  daitn  of  reprefentatioui  as  cf  tbe-.  otber.  b^ufeto  examine 
•<  tbe  claim  of  peerage.'^  Is  the  repetition  of  for  tauto- 
ipgpus>  or  only  aiikward  if 

H. 

Only  ankward.  For  here  are  two  Caufes  mentioned^ 
The  Caufe  of  the  writ»  »id  the  Caufe  of  the  motion.  By 
a  imaU:'  tvan^ikSon  of  the  words-  you>  may  remove  tibe 
aukwaydne&^^and  pMxeive  the  i^ii&atioa  of.  the  phrafe. 
-^^'^  A'tnatiom  waemadb^  for'  a  new  writ  for:  o/c/;  SarumJ* 
fk  e.:  A  new  ymXr^Gati/^  of  the  motion..  OId>  Sfurumr  oc 
a  vacancy  at  Old  Saivaa— -Caufe  of  the  writ.]  And  you 
will  perceive  that  for  may  be  repeated  in  a  fentence  as 
often  as  you  mean  to  indicate  a  Caufe ;  and;  never  elfe. 
As,  *'  A  motion  was  made  for  an  order  for  a  writ  for 
**  tbe  eleSHon  of  a  burgefs  for  to  ferve  in  parliament  for 
«•'  the  borou^bo^  Old  Sarum^ 

1.  An  order— Caufe  of  the  motionw. 

2.  A  writ — Cauie  of  the  order. 

3.  £le(^on.  of  a  burgefs — Caufe  of  the  writ, 

4.  To  ferve  in  Parliament— Caufe  of  the  ele<Stion. 

5.  Boeoog^  of  Old  Sanim:'— ^Camfe  of  the  fervice  in 
Bii4iamai& 

So 


392  OF  PREPOSITIONS, 

So  in  thefe  lines  of  Butler, 

'*  The  Devil's  mafter  of  that  office 
Where  it  muft  pals,  iPt  be  a  drum  j 
He'll  fign  it  with  Cler.  Pari.  Dom.  Com. 

'•'  To  him  apply  yourfelves,  and  he 
Will  foon  dilpatch  you  for  lus  fee." 

i.  e.  his  fee  the  cause. 


B. 

But  if  the  words  for  and  op  differ  fo  widely  as  you 
fay;  if  the  one  means  Caufe  and  the  other  means  Con/e- 
quence ;  by  what  ety ttiological  legerdemain  will  you  be  able 
to  account  for  that  indifferent  ufe  of  them  which  you 
juflified  in  the  inftances  of 


Sicknefi  of  hunger  j  and  Sicknejs  for  hunger.' 
Sicknefs  of  love ;  and  Sicknejs  fojr  love." 


H. 

Qualified  as  it  is  by  you,  it  is  fortunate  for  me  that  I 
ihall  not  need  to  refort  to  Etymology  for  the  explanation. 
Between  the  refpedive  terms 

**  Sicknefs Hunger^ 

**  Sicknefs  Love/* 

it  is  certainly  indifferent  to  the  fignification  which  of  the 
two  prepofitions  you  may  pleafe  to  infert  between  theniy 

whether 


OF  PREPOSITIONS.  353 

whether  of  or  for  :  this  being  the  only  difference,  that 
if  you  infert  of,  it  is  put  in  appojition  to  Stcknefs ;  and 
Sicknefs  is  announced  the  Confequence :  if  you  infert  for, 
it  is  put  in  appoiition  to  Hunger  or  to  Love ;  and  Hunger 
or  Love  is  announced  the  Caufe  <^. 

B. 

I  do  not  well  underftand  how  you  employ  the  term 
Appojition,  Scaliger,  under  the  head  AppoJitiOy  (Cap. 
c^xzvii.  de  cauiis)  fays—"  GauiTa  propter  quam  duo 
"  fubjiantiva  non  ponuntur  fine  copula,  h  philofophia 
«  petenda  eft.  Si  aliqua  fubftantia  ejuimodi  eft,  ut  ex  ea 
«  8c  alia,  unum  intelligi  queat;  earum  duarum  fubftan<» 
«  tiarum  totidem  notae  (id  eft  nomina)  in  oratione  line 
*<  conjundlione  cohserere  poterunt.** 


immmmm^m  i    i.ii  i       , ^i 


w 

♦  The  Dutch  arc  fuppofedto  ufc  Van  in  two  mieanings;  bccaufc  it 
fupplics  indifferently  the  places  both  of  our  of  and  from.  Notwithftanding 
which  Van  has  always  one  and  the  fame  fingle  meaning,  viz.  Beginning. 
And  its  ufe  both  for  of  and  from  is  to  be  explained  by  its  different  appo-^ 
fttion..  When  it  fupplics  the  place  of  from>  Van  is  put  in  appojition  to 
the  fame  term  to  which  from  is  put  in  appojition.  But  when  it  fupplics 
the  place  of  or,  it  is  not  put  in  appojition  to  the  fame  term  to  which  of  is 
put  in  appojition^  but  tp  its  correlative.  And  between  two  correlative  terms, 
it  is  totally  indifferent  to  the  meaning  which  of  the  two  correlations  is 
cxprcfled. 

Eee  M.  What 


3M 


OF  PftEPOSlTIONS. 


H. 

•  • 

What  Scaliger  fays  is  very  true.  And  this  is  the  cafe 
with  all  thofe  prepojthfts  (as  they  are  called)  which  are 
really  fubjiantives.  Each  of  thefe — ejufirtodi  eft,  ut  ex  ea 
8c  alia  (to  which  it  is  prefixed^  pofifixedy  or  by  any  manner 
attached)  unum  intelligi  queat. 

B. 

If  it  be  as  you  fay,  it  may  not  perhaps  be  ^o  impoflible 
as  Lord  Monboddo  imagines,  to  make  a  Grammar  even  for 
the  moft  barbarous  languages :  and  the  Savages  may  pof- 
fibly  have  as  compleat  a  fyntax  as  ourfelves.  Have  you 
€X>n{idered  what  he  fays  upon  that  fubjedt,  VoL  L  Book  3. 
pf  his  Origin  and  Progrefs  of  Language  *  ? 

H.  I 


♦  •'  The  laft  thing  I  propofed  to  confider  was,  the  expreflion  of  the 
*'  relation  or  connexion  of  things,  and  of  the  words  cxprcffing  them :  which 
««  makes  what  we  call  Syntax,  and  is  the  principal  part  of  the  grammatical 


<c 


art. 


>9 


«<  Now  let  ever  fo  many  words  be  thrown  together  of  the  moft  clear  and 

•^  determinate  meaning,  yet  if  they  are  not  fome  way  cbnnefted,  they  will 

•'  ntvtt  make  difcourfc,  nor  form  fo  much  as  a  fifigle  propofition.     This 

*'  connexion  of  the  parts  of  ipeech  in  languages  of  art  is  either  by  feparate 

•^  words,  fuch  as  prcpofitions  and  conjunctions,  or  by  cafes,  genders,  and 

^^  numbers,   in  nouns^   &c.     But  in  lefs  perfc^  languages  the  moft  of 

♦  tbcm  are  denoted  by  feparate  words. 

"  Now 


OF  PREPOSITIONS.  395 

H. 

I  could  fooner  believe  with  Lord  Monboddo,  that  there 
{ire  men  with  tails  like  cats,  as  long  as  his  lorddiip  pleafes  * ; 

and 


,J        -        I  .  -■-•--  .  -  ^^  .   ■  .^_^._4.,^— ....a..^.^,,.....^ — ^.-^_-_^^    ^ 


"  Now  as  every  kind  of  relation  is  a  fure  idea  of  intelleSl^  which  never 
^^  can  be  apprehended  by  fenfe,  and  as  feme  of  thofc  relations,  particularly 
**  fuch  of  them  as  are  cxpreffed  by  cafes,  are  very  abftraft  and  metaphy- 
^  fical,  it  is  not  to  be  expefled  that  favages  fliould  have  any  feparate  and 
^  diftinft  idea  of  thoft  relations.  They  will  therefore  not  cxprc6  them 
^  by  feparate  words,  or  by  the  variation  of  the  fame  word,  but  will  throw 
"  them  into  the  lump  with  the  things  themfelves.  This  will  make  their 
"  fyntax  wretchedly  imperfeft. — ^There  are  only  three  barbarous  languages, 
*^  fo  far  as  I  know,  of  which  we  have  any  particular  account  publiflied  that 
**  can  be  depended  upon.     The  Huron,  the  Galibi,  and  the  Caribbee ;  of 

which  we  have  Diftionaries  and  Grammars  alfo,  fo  far  as  it  is  poffihU  to 

make  a  Grammar  of  them.  With  rclpeft  to  fyntax,  the  Hurons  appear 
"  to  have  none  at  all :  for  they  have  not  prepoftions  or  conjun^ions.  They 
**  have  no  genders,  numbers,  or  cafes,  for  their  nouns ;  nor  moods  for  their 
'*  verbs.  In  fhort  they  have  not,  fo  far  as  I  can  difcover,  any  way  of  con- 
**  nefting  together  the  words  of  their  difcoiu-fc.  Thofe  favages  therefore, 
**  though  they  have  invented  words,  ufe  them  as  our  children  do  when  they 
*^  begin  to  fpeak,  without  connefting  them  together :  from  which  we  may 
"  infer,  that  Syntax,  which  completes  the  work  of  language,  comes  laft  in 

the  order  of  invention,  and  perhaps  is  the  mod  difEailt  part  of  language. 

It  would  feem  however,  that  perfons  may  make  themfelves  und^rftood 
**  without  lyiitax.  And  there  can  be  no  doubt  but  that  the  pojition  of  the 
^*  word  will  Commonly  detcrmiire  what  other  word  in  the  ftntence  it  \i 
*'*  con neftcd  with." 

*  As  his  Lordfliip  (Vol.  I.  pag;e  238)  feems  to  wifh  for  farther  authori- 
ties for  human  tails,  efpeciafly  of  any  tolerable  length,  I  can  help  him  to  k 
fail  of  «  foot  long,  if  that  will  be  of  any  fefvice. 

E  e  e  2  •  *'  Avaqit 


ix 


€€ 


C< 
t€ 

« 
€€ 


396  ,     OF  PREPOSITIONS.^ 

and  conclude  with  him,  from  the  authority  of  his  famijhed 
friend,    that  human  flefli  (even  to  thofe  who  are  not 

fami/hed) 


"  Avant  que  d'avpir  vu  cctte  ile,  j'ayois  fouvept  piiy  dire  qu'il  y  avoit 
**  dcs  hommcs  a  longucs  quciies .  comme  Ics  betes  \  maia  je  n*avois  jamais 
"  pu  ie  croire,  &  je  penfois  la  chofc  fi  eloignee  de  n6tre  nature,  que  j'y 
eus  encore  de  la  peine,  lorfque  mes  fens  m'oterent  tout  lieu  d'en  doutCJ^ 
par  une  avanture  aflez  bizarre.  Les  ha^itans  de  Formosa  etant  accou- 
^  tumez  a  nous  voir,  nous  en  ufions  enfembie  avcc  affcz  de  confiance  pour 
ne  rien  craindre  de  part  ni  d'autre  i  ainfi  quoy  qu'  etrangers  nous  nous, 
croyons  en  feurete,  &  marchions  fouvent  fans  efcorte,  lorfque  Texperi- 
ence  nous  fit  connoitre  que  c'etoit  trop  nous  hazardcr.  Un  jour  quel- 
ques  uns  de  nos  gens  fe  promenant  eniemble,  un  de  nos  miniflres,  qui 
etoit  de  la  compagnie,  s'en  cloigna  d'un  jet  de  pierre  pour  quelques  be- 
'*  foins  naturcls  5  les  autrcs  cependant  marchoient  toiijours  fort  attcntifs  at 
un  recit  qu'on  leur  faifoic ;  quand  il  fut  fini  ils  fe  fouvinrent  que  Ie  mi-r 
niftre  ne  revenoit  point,  ils  Tattendircnt  quelque  temps  j  apres  quoy  las 
«  d'attcndre,  ils  allerent  vers  Ic  lieu  ou  ils  cnirent  qu'il  devoit  etre :  lis  Ic 
"  trouverent  mais  fans  vie,  &  Ie  trifle  ctat  ou  il  etoit  fit  bien  connoitre  qu'il 
"  n'avoit  pas  langui  long-temps.  Pendant  que  les  uns  Ie  gardoient,  les 
"  autres  allerent  de  divers  cotez  pour  decouvrir  Ie  meurtricr :  ils  n*allerent 
"  pas  loin  fans  trouver  un  homme,  qui  fe  voyant  fcrrc  par  les  notres> 
**  ecumoit,  hurloit,  &  faifoit  comprendre.  qu'il  feroit  rcpentir  Ie  premier 
"  qui  Tapprocheroit.  Scs  manieres  defefperces  firent  d*abord  quelqu*  im- 
•*  preffipn  ^  noais  enfin  la  frayeur  ceda,  on  prit  ce  miferable  qui  avoiia  qu'il 
«.  avoit  tue  Ie  miniftre,  mais  on  ne  put  f^avoir  pourquoy*  Comme  Ie 
"  crime  etoit  atioce,  &  que  Timpunite  pouvoit  avoir  de  fecheufes  fuites,^ 
''  on  Ie  condamna  a  etre  brulc,  II  fut  attache  a  un  poteau  ou  il  demeura 
"  quelques  heurcs  avant  I'exccution  j  ce  fot  alors  que  je  vis  ce  que  juiques- 
«.«  E  . je  n*avois  pu  croire  i  fa.  queue  etoit  longue  de  plus  d'un  pied  toute 
V  qouverte  d'un  poil  roux,  &  fort  fcmbkble  i  ccllc  d'un  boeuf.  Quand  il 
A  "  vu 


<c 

cc 


fam^ed)  i»  the  fweeteft  of  all  viaads  to  the  human  taft^^ 
tj^au  admit  that  **  every,  kknl  of  rehtim  is  n  ptri  Ueet 

€jL.     ^t4^ 


^  rit  que  ks  lpe6Ut£t]rs  ctoictit  £irpns  d<  Mr  en  ku  ce  qu'ils  ii*2Voit 
*^  ^point;^  il  kur  die  c|tic  cc  defaut»  fi  e'en  etok  an»  yenoit  du  dUmat,  puifque 
<^  tous  ceux  de  la  parde  meridionale  de  cette  9e  dont  il  ^toit^  en  avoient 
«•  coming  tm^** 

Voyages  de  Jean  Strujrs,  Ar»  1650*  TOM^  L  Cli^.  x* 

The  meek,  modeft>  fincere,  dsdnterefted^  and  amiabk  Dcwftor  Horfley» 
Lord  bifhop  of  Rochefter,  coold  haye  fundlhed  the  oAer  LarJmth  an 
authority  for  Taik  hearer  home,  in  his  own  metropolitan  city  :— •"  Ex 
**  hujus  modi  vocibus,  fiierunt  improbi  nonnuIli>  quibus  vifa  eft  occultti 
•*  voluntas  regis  efle,  ut  Thomiis  e  medio  toUcretur  j  qui  propterea  vclut 
•*  hoftis  re^  habitus>  jam  turn  csepit  fie  vulgo  negligi,.  contemni  ac  in 
^  odio  efle>  ut  cum  venifict  aKquando  Strodom,  qui  vicus  fitus  eft  ad 
^'  Medveiam  flumen,  quod  fiumen  Roceftriam  alluit^  ejus  loci  aecol^ 
*^  cupidi  bonum  patrem  ita  defpefhim  ignominia  aliqua  affidendi,  non  du- 
^  bitarint  amputare  caiidam  equi  quem  ille  equitaret  -,  feipibs  perpetua 
f^  probro  obli^mtes:  nam  fK>ftea>  mitu  dei,  ita  accidit,  ut  omnes  ex  e<f 
^^  hominum  gencre,  qui  id  facinus  feciflcnt,  nati  fint  inftar  brutorum  ani- 
«<  malium.-caudati.'.WAs  tjiis  change  of  Ihape  may  afibrd  a  good  additional 
reaibn  why  Aich  .  fellows.  0K>uJd  have  'f  iiothuiR  to  do  with  the  laws,  but 
"  to  obey  them,"  the  bifhc^  perhaps  wUl  advife  to  fink  what  Poiydore 
kindly,  add^  in  condufion^r— ^  Sed  ea  infamias  nota  jam  pridem  una  cum 
^  gente  ilia  eonmi jhominuni^  qui  peccarint>  dekta  eft."  * 

•   ■  •*But->^  itonfidfcfS  rigHr  will  find  nidccd, 

*f'n  Holy  ^and  parts  us,  not  the  TWecd. 

Nothing  but  Clergy  could  us  two  ieclude  j 
"  •  *  *    ito  'Sc<»teh'iWtt  ever  lik«  a'Bifliop's  feud. 

^J.  Alt 


•  •  ♦ 


^98  OF  PREPOSITIONS. 

*f  of  in feffefff  "which  never  can  be  apprebinded  hy  fenfe\ 
<*  and  that  thofe  particularly  which -are  exprefied  by  cafes^' 
<*  aire  more  abftraft  and  metaphyfical  than  the  othersj^" 


But  his  lordihip  and  his  fautors  will  do  well  to  contend 
ftoutly  and'obftinately  for  their  doi£lrine  of  language^  for 


-«c 
« 


III'"'  ■  "  '  '      "\        "  i  ,        •. 

'  All  Litanys  in  this  have  wanted  faith^       ^ 
There's  no — Deliver  us  from  a  Bijhop's  wrath- 
Never  (hall  Calvin  pardon-d  be  for  faks  j     '    • 
Never,- for  Burnet's  fake,  the  Lauderdales  ;     • 
For  Becket's  fake  Kent  always  (hall  have  tales/' 

The  Loyal  Scot.     By  A.  Marvell. 

'  •*  lohan  Gapgrave  and  Alexander  of  Eflcby  fayth>  that  for  caftyngc  of* 
fyfhe  tayles  at  thys  Augiiftyne>  Doric tt  Shyre  menne  hadde  tayles  ever 
after.  But  Polydorus  applieth  |t  unto  Kcntilh  men  at  Stroud  by 
"  Rochefter,  for  cuttihge  of  Thomas  Becket's  horfes  uil.  Thus  hath 
"  England  in  all  other  land  a  perpetuall  in&my  of  tayks  by  theyr  wrytten 
••  legendes  of  lyes,  yet  can  they  not  well  tell,  where  to  beftowc  them 
♦'  truely."     Pag.  37. 

And  again,  pag.  98.—**  The  fpirftuall  fodomites  in  the  legendes  of  their 
^  fanftified  forccrers  have  diffamed  the  Engltfh  pofterity . with  tails,  as  I 
have  (hewed  afore.  That  an  Englylhman  now  cannot  travayk  in  an 
other  land,  by  way  of  marchandyfc  or  any  other  honeft  dccupyingc,  but 
'*  it  is  moft  contumelioufly  thrown-  in  his  tctht,  that  al  Englifhmen  have 
"  tailes.  That  uncomly  note  and  report  have  the  nation  gotten,  without 
•*  recover,  by  thcfe  laify  and  idle  lubbers  the  Monkcs  and  the  Prieftes, 
"  which  could  find  no  matters  to  advance  their  canofiifcd  gaiti*  by,  or  their 
*«  faintes  as  they  caU  them,  but  manifcft  lies  and  knaveries/V* 

M^n  Bale.    ^esjifEnj^Jh  Votaries. 

^  they 


•     •  -■ 


OF  PREPOSITIONS.  J99 

they  are  menaced  with  a  greater  dangf  r  thaa  tbe)i  will  at 
firft  apprehend:  for  if  they  give  up  their  doctrine  of 
language,  they  will  not  be  able  to  make  even  a  battle  for 
their  Metaphyfics :  the  very  term  Metapbyfic  being  nonfenfe  j 
and  all  the  fyftems  of  it,  and  controverlies  concerning  it, 
that  are  or  have  been  in  the  world,  being  founded  on  the 
groileft  ignorance  of  words  and  of  the  nature  of  fpeech. 

As  far  as  relates  to  Prepofitions  and  Conjun£iionsy  on  which 
(he  fays)  Syntax  depends,  the  principal  and  mq/i  difficult 
tart  (as  he  calls  it)  of  the  Grammatical  aJt,  and  which 
(according  to  him)  is  the  laji  in  order  of  invention^  and 
compleats  the  work  of  language  :  As  far  as  relates  to  thefe 
prepofitions  and  conjunctions,  I  hope  it  is  by  this  time 
pretty  evident  that,  inftead  of  invention,  the  clajes  of  them 
fytmg  from  corruption;  and  that,  in  this  refpeA,  the 
Savage  languages  are  upon  an  equal  footing  with  the  lan- 
guages (as  they  are  called)  of  art,  except  that  the  former 
are  lefs  corrupted :  and  that  favages  have  not  only  z&fepa" 
rate  and  diJiinSf  ideas  of  thofe  relations  as  we  have,  but  that' 
they  have  this  advantage  over  us  (an  advantage  in  point  of 

«  ' 

intelligibility^  though  it  is  a  difadvantage  in  point  of  brevity )> 
that  they  alfo  exprefs  them  feparately  and  diftinftly.  For' 
our  Prepofitions  and  Conjun&ions,  like  the  language  of  the 
Savages,  are  merely — "  fo  many  wonds  of  the  raqft  clear 

"  and 


400 


OF  PREPOSITIONS. 


**  and  determinate  meaning  thrown  together,"  or,  (as  he 
afterwards  ftrangely  expreffes  it)—**  thrown  into  the  lump 
«  with  the  things  themfelves  *." 


"mim 


-H* 


♦  What  Lord  Monboddo  has  delivered  concerning  Syntax,  he  has  taken, 
in  his  own  clumfy  way,  from  the  following,  erroneous  article  of  M.  dc 
Brofies. — 147.  Fabrique  des  Syntaxes  barharts.^-^^^  Dans  fon  originc,  elJe 
^^  ji'a  d'abord  en  qu'un  amas  confiis  de  fignes  epars  appliques  felon  le 
"  befoin  aux  objets  a  mefure  qu*on  les  decouvroit,  Peu  a  peu  la  ncceffitc 
**  de  faire  connoitre  les  circonftances  des  idces  jointes  ^ux  circonftances 
•^  des  objets,  &  de  les  rcndre  dans  Tordre  ou  Tefprit  les  plice,  a,  par  une 
^  *  fogique  naturelle,  commence  de  fixer  la  vericable  fignification  des  mots, 
"  Icur  liaifon,  leur  regime,  leurs  derivations.  Par  Tufage  rejq  &ihvctcre, 
^^  les  tournures  habituelles  font  devenues  les  preceptes  de  Tart  bons  ou 
*^  mauvais,  c'eft  a  dire  blen  ou  mal  faits  felon  le  plus  ou  le  moins  de  logique 

qui  y  i  prcfide  5  &  comme  les  peuj^  barbares  n'en  out  gueres,  aufli 
</  kurs  Ungues  font  elks  ibuvent  pauvres  &  mal  i^piUlipites : ;  mais  a  mefure 

que  le  peuple  fc  police,  on  voit  mieux  Tabps  des  uiag^s,  &  la  fyntaxe 

s'cpure  par  de  meilleurcs  habitudes  qui  deviennent  de  nouveaux  preceptes. 
«  Je  a*en  dis  pas  davantage  fur  retabliflemcnt  des  fyntaxes ;  &  mcme  fi  j'y 
"  rtviens  dans  la  fuite,  ce  ne  fera  qu'en  peu  de  mots..  Ceft  me  matieri 
"  immenfe  dans  fcs  details,  qui  dcmanderoit  iin  livre  en  tier  pour  la  fuivre 
"  dans  toutes  les  operations  mechaniques  du  concept,  qui  en  general  la 
^  rendent  neccffairc '  en  confequence  de  la  &brique  du  ferts  intericur,  m^s 
*i  tres  arbitra'u-e  dans  fcs  petits  deuils,  par  k  nombre  iofioi  de  routes  longues 
^\  ou  courtes,  droites  ou  tortues,  bonnes  ou  mauv^fes,  que  I'oi  peyt 
^  'prendre  pour  parvenir  au  meme  but.  Au  furplus  toutes  ces  routes  bien 
^  ou  mal  faJtes  fervent  egalement  dans  Tufage  lorfqu'elles  font  une  fbis 
•^  fi^yees  &  connucs."  .This  matiere  immenfe^  as  M.  de  BrofTes  imagines 
it,  is  in  truth  a  very  fmall  and  fimpk  bufinefs.  The  whole  of  cultivated 
^g^wgcs,  as  well  as  of  thofe  Ve  caB  barbarous,  is  merely  "  un  amas  de 
'•  ^gtM  epars  npfUquisfelm  le  befrin  aux  objets, y 

B.  Well, 


€< 
CC 

cr 
ft 


OF  PREPOSITIONS.  401 

B. 

Well,  Sir,  after  this  tedious  inveftigation  of  for,  (one 
half  of  which  I  think  might  have  been  fpared)  let  us  now, 
if  you  pleafe,  paufe  for  a  moment,  and  confider  the  ground 
which  we  have  beaten.  The  Prepolitions  if,  unless, 
BUT,  WITHOUT,  SINCE,  you  had  before  explained  amongft 
the  Conjun£iions.  To  thefe  you  have  now  added  the  pre- 
politions WITH,    SANS,    THROUGH,    FROM,  TO,  WHILE,  TILL, 

OF  and  FOR.  Though  we  have  fpent  much  time,  we  have 
made  but  little  progrefs,  compared  with  what  ftill  remains 
to  be  done  :  at  leaft  if  our  language  is  as  fertile  in  prepo- 
litions as  Huffier  fuppofes  the  French  to  be. 

H. 

I  rather  think  we  have  made  great  progrefs.  And,  if 
you  have  nothing  to  objedt  to  my  derivations  and  expla- 
nations, I  muft  confider  the  battle  as  already  won.  For  I 
am  not  here  writing  a  didionary  (which  yet  ought  to  be 
donej  and  of  a  very  different  kind  indeed  from  any  thing 
ever  yet  attempted  any  where)^  but  only  laying  a  foundation 
for  a  new  theory  of  language.  However,  though  the  re- 
maining prepofitions  are  numerous,  the  greater  part  require 
but  little,  and  many  of  them  no  explanation. 


F  f  f  By. 


40ft  OF  PREPOSITIONS. 

By. 

By  (in  the  Anglo-faxon  written  Bi,  Be,  Bij)  is  the  Im- 
perative By^,  of  the  Anglo-faxon  verb  Beon,  to  be.  And  bur 
ancefiprs  wrote  it  indifferently  either  be  or  bt.  <<  Damville 
«  BE  right  ought  to  have  the  leading  of  the  army,  but, 
<<  BTcaufe  thei  be  cofen  germans  to  the  Admirall,  the!  be 
«  miftrufted."  1568.  See  Lodgers  Illujiraihns,  Vol.  2. 
pag.  9.  This  prepoiition  is  frequently,  but  not  always^ 
ufcd  with  an  abbreviation  of  conftru<aion.  Subauditur* 
injirument,  caufe^  agenty  &c.  Whence  the  meaning  of 
the  omitted  word  has  often  been  improperly  attributed  to 
BY.  With  (when  it  is  the  imperative  of  pyji^an)  is  ufed 
indifferently  for  By  *  (wh6n  it  is  the  imperative  of  Beon) 


*  In  compound  prepofitions  dfo. 

the 

Anglo-faxon  ufes  indifFerently  either 

• 

wiB-aptan 
wi^pojian 
vriS^jconban 
wiV-mnan 

Be^septan 
Be-popan 
Bc-jcon^Dan 

Be-mnan 

wi^neo^San 

Be-neotSan 

wi^upan 
witS-mtan 

Be-upn 
Be-utan 

wiH-hinban 

Be-hinb^i 

though  the  modem  £ngli(h  has  ^ven  die  preference  to  Be :  having  retained 
only  two  of  the  above  prepofitions  commencing  with  pi^>  and  dropped 
only  two  conmiencing  with  Be. 

and 


V 


OP  PREPOSITIONS.  4.01 

and  with  the  £ame  fubauditur  and  imputed  meaning  3  As— 
«  Hewasjlain  by  ajwordt  or,  i&^  wasjlain  with  a /word!* 
•^"  Kenwalcus  was  warreyd  with  /-6«  ^/«^  <?/  Britons.^ 
WaHis,  <:onlbimdmg  together'  the  imperative  of  wyjtBan 
with  the  imperative  of  yi^'A^'  %s — «<  With  indicat 
**  injirumentum,  ut  Latinorum  ablativus  inftrumenti ;  atquc 
^  etiam  voncomtantiamy  Ut  Latinorum  ^//f».* 

By  was  alfo  formerly  ufed  (and  not  improperly  nor  with 
a  diSerenrt  meanong)  wberc  we  now  employ  other  prepo- 
iitionsy  fuch  as  Ftv,  f»,  During^  Vjtou^.     As  ;— 

«  Aboute  the  xviii  yere  of  the  reygne  of  Jue  dyed 
«  the  holy  byftiop  Aldelme.  Of  him  it  is  written,  that 
<*  when  he  was  ftyred  by  ,his  gofUy  enymy  to  the  fynne 
<<  of  the  flelh,  he  to  do  the  more  torment  to  himfdfe 

m 

«  and  of  hys  body,  wolde  holde  within  his  bedde  by  hym 
<*  a  fayre  mayden  by  fo  long  a  tyme  as  he  myght  fay  over 
"  the  ihole  iauter***     Fabian  lxxvi. 


**  The  which  bt  a  longe  time  dwelled  in  warre.*     xlv. 


<<  To  whom  t&e  fader  had  bt  hys  lyfe  oomm^tted 
"•*  him.**    ijcxii. 

* 

F  f  f  a  «  He 


0 


404  OF  PREPOSITIONS. 

*<  He  made  Clement  by  his  lyfe  helper  and  fucceffour  * 

LV. 

*<  Whom  Pepyn  by  his  lyfe  hadde  ordeyned  ruler  of 
«  Guian."     lxxxiii. 

*<  Sleynge  the  people  without  mercy  by  all  the  wayes 
«  that  they  paffyd.**     lxxviii. 

So  alfo  OF  was  formerly  ufed,  and  with  propriety,  where 
we  now  employ  by  with  equal  propriety^ 

"  Thefe  quenes  were  as  two  goddefles 
Of  arte  magike  forcercflcs 

Thei  couthc  muche,  he  couthe  more  :  .     x 

Thei  (hape  and  call  ayenft  hym  fore. 
And  wrought  many  a  fubtile  wile. 

But  yet  thei  might  hym  not  begyle.  ' 

Such  crafte  thei  had  aboue  kyndc. 
But  that  arte  couth  thei  not  fyndc. 
Of  whiche  Uliffes  was  deceived." 

Gower.    Lib.  5.  Fol.  135.  Pag.  i.  Col.  2. 

Between^     Betwixt. 

Between  (formerly  written  Twene^  Atwene^  Bytwene)  is 
a  dual  prepofition,  to  which  the  Greek,  Latin,  Italian, 
French,  &c.  have  no  word  correfpondent ;  and  is  almoft 
peculiar  to  ourfelves,  as  fome  languages  have  a  peculiar 

dual 


OF  PREPOSITIONS.  405 

dual  number.     It  is  the  Anglo-faxon  Imperative  Be,  and 
rpcjen  or  twain, 

*  *  •  • 

Betwixt  (by  Chaucer  written  Bytwyt  *)  is  the  impera- 
tive JB^,  and  the  Gothic  tV5?S>  or  two  :  and  was  written 
in  the  Anglo-faxon  Becpeohs,  Becpcox,  Betpux,  Becpyx, 
•and  Betpyxt. 


'.f 


Before^  BEHmo,  Below,  Beside,  Besides, 


Thefe  Prepolitiohs  are  merely  the  imperative  be,  com- 
pounded with  the  nouns  fore,  hind,  low,  side,  which 
remaining  ftfll  in  conftant  and  common  ufe  in  the  language ; 

as — ^The  fore  part,  the  bind  part,  a  /ow  place,  the  Jide, 

require  no  explanation. 

•      «  ... 

Beneath. 

Beneath  means^  the  fame  as  Below.     It  is  the  impera-^- 
tive  Be  compounded  with  the  nourij  Neath.     Which  word 
Neatb  (for  any  pther  ufe  but  this  of  the  prepojition)  having . . 
flipped  away  from  our  language,  would  perhaps  have  given 
fome  trouble,  had  not  the  nouns j  Nether  ^n^  Nethermoji 

♦  '^  Thy  wife  and  thou  mote  hange  fer  atwynnc, 
^*  For  that  By$wyt  you  fliall  be  no  fynnc.'' 

.    MiUer'sTalc. 

(corrupted 


40  6  OF  PREPOSITIONS. 

(corrapted  frona  NeoBemapr,  NiKeraaejr)  Aill  -ooDtinYied  in 
common  ufe  *.  The  word  Nether  is  indeed  at  prefeitt 
fallen  into  great  contempt,  and  is  rarely  ufed  but  in  ridi- 
■cule  and  with  Icdm :  and  this  may  polEbly  have  atifen 
fnimci  its  fotnafer  application  to  the  koufe  of  conunon^ 
ondently  gatted  (by  ifetiry  S)  <*  The  neth>e>r  boufe  if 
«  parliament  +."  That  the  word  fhould  thus  ikvve  faftka 
into  difgrace  is  nothing  wonderful :  for  in  truth  this  Nether 
end  of  our  parliament  has  for  a  long  tia^  paft  beea  a  mere 
fham  and  mockery  of  reprefentation,  but  is  now  become 


*m    <hi 


♦   cc 


y€t  higher  dun  thdr  tops 


The  vcrd'rous  wall  of  paradife  up  fprung ; 
'Whichto  our  gieneral  Sire  gave  pro^dthrge 
Into  his  NETHER  empire  neighboring  Found." 

Par.  Loft.    Book  IV.  Vcr.  445. 


-^^  among  thcfe  the  feat  of  men^ 


Earth  with  her  nether  ocean  circumfiis'd 

Their  pleafant  dwelling  |>lace/' 

P.  L.    Book  Vn.  V.  624. 

**  In  yonder  nether  world  where  fliall  I  feek 
His  bright  appearances,  or  foot-ftep  trace  ?" 

P.  Is.    Book  KI.  V.  3i8, 

t  "  WWch  doftrine  alfo  the  lordes  bothe  fpirituall  and  tcmporaU,  with 
"  the  nether  houfe  of  our  parliament,  have  bothfene,  and  lykc  very  wel.*' 
A  necejfary  doSlrine  and  erudition  f$r  any  chrj^ft^n  man.    Seijurtbe  by 
ibcKynges  maieftic  of  England^.     1543. 

an 


OF  PREPOSITIONS. 


407 


am  impudent  and  barefaced  ufurpation  of  the  rights  of  the 
people. 

Neath,  Neo^an,  Nco&,  (in  the  Dutch  Neden^  in  the 
Danilh  Ned^  in  the  German  Niedere^  and  in  the  Swedilh 
Nedre  and  Neder)  is  undoubtedly  as  much  a  fubilantive» 
and  has  the  fame  meaning  as  the  word  nadir  ;  which 
Skinner  (and  sffter  him  S.  Johnfon)  fays,  we  have  from 
the  Arabians.  This  etymology  (as  the  word  is  now  ap- 
plied only  to  aftronomy)  I  do  not  difpute ;  but  the  word 

■ 

is  mudi  more  ancient  in  the  northern  languages,  than  the 
introduction  of  that  fcience  amongft  them.  And  therefore 
it  was  that  the  whole  Terpentine  clafs  was  denominated 
nA^K  iu  the  Gothic,  and  Nebjie  in  the  Anglo-faxon. 

If  we  fay  in  the  Englifh, — ^«  From  the  top  to  the 
«  BOTTOM,''-^the  nwHi  are  inftantly  acknowledged ;  and 
furdy  they  are  to  the  full  as  evident  in  the  collateral  Dutebi 

**^   Van  BOV£N  M  BIN£D£N^-<-B£NE0KN/<'^>   Us.^ 


Under. 

Under  (in  the  Dutch  Ondef)  which  feems  by  the  lound 
to  have  very  litUe  connexion  with  the  word  Beneatby  is  yet 
in  fa£l  almofl  the  fame,  and  may  very  well  fupj^y  its  place : 
for  it  is  nothing  but  On  neder^  and  is  a  Noun- 


fC 


No 


4o8 


i€ 


OF'  PREPOSITIONS; 

Nor  engine,  nor  device  polemic, 
Difeafc,  nor  Doftor  epidemic. 
Though  ftor'd  with  deletory  med'cincs 
(Which  whofoever  took  is  dead  fince) 
E'er  fent  lb  vaft  a  colony  .   '    ^ 

To  both  the  i^nder  worlds,  as  He." 


(T 


Hudibras.    Can.  2.    V»  320. 


Beyond. 


t^ 


Beyond  (in  the  Anglo-faxon  wi?S5eont)an,  Bigeont:, 
Bejeont))  means  be  pqffed.  It  is  the  imperative  Be^  conj- 
pounded  with  the  paft  participle  jeont),  jeoned,  or  jonet), 
of  the  verb  Han,  Cjansan,  or  HonSany  to  go^  or  to  pafs. 
So  that^ — "  Bey oifD  any  place,^  means-;—"  Be  pqffed  that 
"  place,**— or.  Be  that  place  pcjjfed* 


W  A  R  D« 

Ward,  in  the  Anglo-faxon  wajib  or  weajib,  is  the  im*- 
perative  of  the  verb  wajtt>ian  or  weajibian,- /e>  look  af;6r  to 
direSi  the  view.  It  is  the  fame  word  as  the  French  garder  ^ : 
and  fo  Chaucer  ufes  it,  where  it  is  not  called  a  prepofition. 


"1    V 


i» 


♦  "  Literarum  g  ct  w  frcquentiffima  eft  commutatio,  ifec' 

WaUis's  Preface. 


€€ 


Gain  fcmpcr  o  utuntur  pro  Sax.  p.  id  eft,  pro  w/' 

Spclman  Glofs.  {Garantia). 

4  a  Take 


OF  PREPOSITIONS.  409 

*^  Take  rewarde  of  [i.  e.  Pay  regard  to,  or  Look  again 
*<  at]  thyn  owne  valewe,  that  thou  ne  be  to  foule  to  thy 
<^  felfe.'^ 

Parfons  tale.     Fol.  loi*  pag.  2.  coL  2. 

^'  And  yet  of  Danger  comcth  no  blame 

*^  In  REWARD  [i,  e.  in  regard'\  of  my  doughtcr  fhame." 

Rom.  of  the  Ro/e.  Foh  135.  pag.  2.  coL  i, 

"  This  (huld  a  rijtwife  lord  haue  in  his  thoujt 

**  And  nat  be  like  tirauntcs  of  Lombardy 

"  That  han  no  rewarde  [i,  e.  regard]  but  at  tyranny.'* 

Legende  of  good  JVomefi.   Fol.  206.  pag.  2.  col.  2, 

#  ■  •  • 

**  Wherfore  God  him  felf  toke  reward  to  the  thynges, 
**  and  theron  fuche  puinylhment  let  fal." 

Tefiament  ofLoue.  Boke  a.  Fol.  322.  p.  2.  c.  i. 

Our  common  Englifh  word  To  reward  *,  >;<rhich  ufually, 
by  the  help  of  other  words  in  the  fentence,  conveys  To 

recom^ 


*  Skinner  fays — "  Reward  q.  d.  Re  Auoard  (i.  e.  contra  feu  viciffim 
"  aflignare,  ab  a.  s.  pcajib  verfus,  erga.  v.  award."  And  .under  Awards 
he  fays — "  Award,,  a  part,  initiali  otiofa  a,  et  a.  s.  peajib.  yerfus.  erga. 
"  q.  d.  erga  talem  (i.  e.)  tali  addicere,  aflignare.'* 

S.  Johnfon  fays,  '*  reward  \^Re  and  Aaoard]  to  give  in  return.  Skinner.** 
Which  is  the  more  extraordinary  bccaufe  under  the  aiticle  Award,  Johnfon 
fays,  that  it  is  "  derived  by  Skinner,  fomewhat  improbably^  from  peajib. 
Sax.  towards.'* 

Q  g  g  I  fuppofc 


410  OF  IPREFOSITIONS. 

recofnptiice^  Tobemjit  in  return  .for  fome  good  a£UoD  done ; 
yet  fometimes  means  very  far  irom  benefit:  ^s  thus,—- 
<^  Reward  them  after  their  doings'* — where  it  may  convey 
.the  fignification ;  of  ptmifhroent;  for  which  its  real  import 
is  equally  well  calculated :  for  it  is  no  other  than  Regarder. 
i.  e.  To  look  agairty  i.e.  To  remember,  to  reconfider;  the 
^natural  confequence  of  which  will  be  either  benefit  or  the 
contrary,  according  to  the  action,  or  :con,du6V  which  we 
review. 

In  a  figurative  or  fecondary  fehfeonly,  Garder  means  to 
prjaU^i  to  ke^pt  to  watcbf  to  wardy  .or  to  guard.  It  is  the 
fame  in  Latin :  Tutus ^  .guarded^  looked,  after,  fafe,  is  the 
paft  participle  of  Tueor.  Juitus.  Tutus,  So  T^tor,  he  who 
looks  after.  So  we  fay  either, — Guard  him  well,  or. 
Look  well  after  him,  In  jdifferent  places  in  England,  the 
fame  agent  is  very  properly  called  either  a  Looker y  a  Wjarderty 

*  •  .    # 

a  Warder,  an  Over/eery  a  Keeper,  a  Guard,  or  a  Guardian, 

Accordingly  this  word. ward  may  with  equal  propriety 
be  joined  to  the  name  of -any  perfbn,  place,  or  thing,  to  or 
from  which  our  view  or  fight  may  be  directed. 

I  Tuppofe^  AWARD  to  be  ^  garder i  i.  c.  a  determination  5  qui  c^efi  i 
garder  the  tlung  in  difpute;  i.  e.  to  keep  it— rfiot  cuftodire^  as  Spelman 
imagined ;  but  to  have  or  bold  it  in  pofleflion :  for  garder  in  French  is  ufed 
both  ways,  as  keep  is  in  Englilh,  and  in  both  properly. 

^<  He 


'■■■  -Aa 


41  a  OF  PREPOSITIONS* 

'  "  and  forth  goth  he 
*'  To  Ihyppc,  and  as  a  traytour  dale  away 
€€  Whylc  that  this  Ariadne  a  flcpe  lay 
'^  And  to  his  countreywarde  he  fayleth  blyue." 

Ariadne.    Fol  217.  pag.  a.  col.  U 

^^  Be  this  the  fon  went  to,  and  we  forwrocht 

"  Left  defolate,  the  wyndis  calmit  cik : 

"  We  not  bekend,  quhat  rycht  coift  mycht  we  fcik, 

'^  War  warpit  to  Seywart  by  the  outwart  tyde." 

Douglas.    Booke  3.  pag.  87. 

*^  The  mone  in  till  ane  wauerand  carte  of  licht 
**  Held  rolling  throw  the  hcuynnis  middilwarde/' 

Douglas.    Booke  ib.  pag.  322* 

"  The  Landwart  hynes  than,  bayth  man  and  boy, 
"  For  the  foft  felToiin  ouerflowis  fill  of  ioy/* 

Douglas.    Bopke  13.  pag.  472, 

Lo  Troylus,  right  at  the  ftretes  cnde 
Came  ryding  with  his  tenthe  fomme  yfere 
Al  foftely,  and  tbyderwarde  gan  bende 
There  as  thy  fate,  as  was  his  way  to  wende 
''  To  Paleyswarder 

Chaucer.  Troylus.     Boke  2.  Fol.  169.  p.  2.  c.  2. 

*'  As  fhe  wold  haue  gon  the  way  fortli  right 
"  Towarde  the  garden,  there  as  (he  had  highc 
*^  And  he  was  to  the  Gardenwarde  alfo." 

Frankeleyns  Tale.     Fol.  55.  pag,  2.  col.  i. 

"  And  than  he  fonge  it  wel  and  boldcly 

"  Fro  worde  to  worde  according  to  the  aote 

"  Twife  a  day  it  pafleth  through  his  throte 

**  To  Scolewarde^  and  Homwarde  when  he  went." 

Prioreps  Tale.     Fol.  71.  pag.  2.  col.  i. 
c  "To 


cc 


OF  PREPOSITIONS.  413 


^*  To  Mcwardc  bare  he  right  great  hate." 

Romaunt  of  the  Roje.    Fol.  138.  p.  i.  c.  i. 

*'  He  hath  fuche  hcuynefle,  and  fuch  wrathe  to  uswarde,  bycaufc  of  our 
'»  offence.'* 

Tale  of  Chaucer.    Fol.  82.  pag.  i.  col.  i. 

*'  But  one  thing  I  wolde  wel  ye  wifl: 
*'  That  neucr  for  no  worldes  good 
'^  Myne  hert  unto  birwarde  ftood, 
^^  But  onely  right  for.  pure  loue." 

Gower.    Lib.  5.  Fol.  97.  pag.  1.  col.  2; 

*^  But  be  he  fquicr,  be  he  knight 
**  Whiche  to  my  Ladyewarde  purfuedi^ 
•^  The  more  he  lefeth  of  that  he  feweth, 
**  The  more  me  thinketh  that  I  wynne.'* 

Gower.    Lib.  2.  Fol.  28.  pag.  2.  col.  %, 

•'  Wheras  the  Poo,  out  of  a  wel  fmall 

'*  Taketh  his  firft  fpring  and  his  fours 

•'  That  EJhoarde  euer  increfcth  in  his  cours 

"  To  Emellewardy  to  Fcrare,  and  to  Vcnyfe." 

Chaucer.  Gierke  of  Oxenf  Tale.    Fol.  45.  p.  i.  c,  2. 

■ 

<*  If  we  turned  al  our  care  to  Godward,  we  ihuld  not 

<<  be  deftitute  of  fuch  things  as  necefTarili  this  prefente 

**  lyfe  nedeth.' 

Tbo,  Lupfet*  Of  diyngeweUt  pag;  205. 

"  It  is  hard  for  a  man  in  a  welthy  ftate  to  kepe  his 

**  mind  in  a  due  order  to  Godward.^ 

Ibid.  pag.  205. 

«  The 


» 


4t4  ot  piRElPbsi'i'ioNSi' 

<*  The  which  is  with  nothing  more  hillrted'  and  hyn- 
*<  dered  in  his  way  to  Gracewarde  than  with  the  brekinge 
*'  of  loue  and  charitie.'* 

Lupfet»  Exhortacion  to  yonge  Men, 

So  we  may  bid  the  hearer  look  at  or  regard  either  the 
End  or  Beginning  of  any  aSiion  or  motion  or  time.  Hence 
the  compound  prepofitions  toward  and  fromward,  and 
Adverbs  of  this  termination  without  number:  in  all  of 
which,  WARD  is  always  the  imperative  of  the  verb,  and 
always  retains  one  fingle  meaning ;  viz.  Kegardi  Look  at^ 
See^  Dire^  your  view, 

Minfhew,  Junius,  and  Skinner,  though  they  are  very 
clear  that  ward  and  garder  are,  oh  aU  other  occafions^ 
the  fame  word;  (and  fo  in  Warden  and  Guardian^  &c.)  yet 
concur  that  ward  the  Affix  or  pojipojitive  prepojition^  is  the 
Latin  Verfus :  Skinner,  with  fome  degree  however  of 
doubt,  faying—**  a.  s.  autem  Weajib,  fi  a  Li*.  Vert  ere 
*<  defle<5terem,  quid  fceleris  eflet  ?" — Surely  none.  It 
would  only  be  an  error  to  be  corrected. 

The  French  prepofitiori  Vers^  from  the  Italian  Verfo^ 

from  the  Latin  Verfus  (which  in  thofe  languages  fupply 

the  place  of  the  Englifh  ward,  as  Adverfus  aUb  does  of 

a  To- 


OF  PREPOSITIONS.  4 1 5 

« 

To-waKd^  4o,9U-ipdeed  derive  from  the  Latjn  veib  venerea 
to. turn}  of  Tyhigh  thofe  prepolitions  are.the  paft  participle^ 
and  mean  turned.  And  when  it  is  coniid^fed  that  in 
order  to  direSl ,  our  view  to  any  place  named,  we  muft  turn 
to  it;  it  will  not  feem  extraordinary,  that  the  fame  purpofe 

-  « 

jfhould  in  different  languages  be  indifferently  obtained  by 
yrords  of  fuch  different  meanings,  as  to  look  aty  or,  t9 
tftrn  to, 

A  T  H  iW  A  R  T. 

Athwart  (i.e.  Athweort^ ot Atbweoried)  wreftedytwifiedj 
curved^  is  the  Pad  participle  of  f>peojuan,  to  wrejiy  to 
twift',  flexuofunii  Jinuofum^  curvum  reddere;    from  the 

» 

Gothic  verb  rnXVeKQA^.  Whence  alfo  the  Anglo-faxon 
Dpeoji.  Ppeojih.  the  German  Zwercb.  Zwar.  the  Dutch 
Dwars.  Swerven,  the  Danilh  Tverer,  Tvert,  Tver,  the 
Swedifli  Twert,  and  Swarfma,  and  the  Englifti  Tbwarty 
Swerve  and  Feer  *. 


Among,  amongst,  ymell. 
Minftiew  fays-.— "  ex  Belg.  Getnengt,  i,  t,  mixtus. 


■       Jl       '     I  ■     I    .11  p    n 


*  Junius  derives  Swerve  from  the  Hebrew,    And  all  our  Etymologifts 
Veer  from  the  French.  Virer^ 


Skinner 


41 6  OF  PREPOSITIONS. 

Skinner  fays— ^^  ab  a.  s*  Demanj,  hoc  a  verbo  t/emenjan*.'* 

Junius  fays — ^^  Manifefte  eft  ex  a.  s*  MaenZan,  Menjian, 
^^  mifcere.^ 

Here  all  our  Etymologifts  are  right  in  the  meaning  of 
the  word,  and  therefore  concur  in  their  etymology.  Mr. 
Tyrwhitt  alone  feems  to  have  no  notion  of  the  word. 
For  he  fays — "  I  fufpeEi  the  Saxon  nemang  had  originally 
^«  a  termination  in  anP  But  Mr.  Tyrwhitt  muft  not  be 
reckoned  amongft^  Etymologifts. 

EMONGE+,  amongeJ,  amonges,  amongest§,  amongst 


*  In  the  Dutch  Mtngeriy  Mengen^  Immengen. 
German  Mengen. 
Danifli  Manger. 
Swedifli  Menga. 
t  "  The  kynge  with  all  his  hole  cntent 
"  Then  at  lafle  hem  axeth  this, 
"  What  kynge  men  tellen  that  heis 
*^  Emonge  the  folke  touchinge  his  name, 
*^  Or  it  be  price,  or  it  be  blame." 

Gower.     Lib.  7.  FoL  165.  pag.  i.  col.  2. 
J  "  And  tho  fhe  toke  hir  childe  in  honde 
And  yafe  it  fouke  ;  and  euer  amonge 
She  wepte,  and  othcrvfhilc  fonge 
To  rockc  with  her  childe  aflepe/' 

Gower.     Lib.  2.  Fol.  23*  P^g*  2«  col.  i. 
§  "  I  ftonde  as  one  amongest  all 
^'  Whiche  am  oute  of  hir  grace  fall.** 

Gower.    Lib,  8.  Fol.  187.  pag.  2.  col.  i. 

AMONO^ 


€€ 


OF  PREPOSITIONS;  417 

AMONG)  is  the  paft  participle  Ce-meehcjetJ,  Ee-mencjeb, 
(or,  as  thc^  Ehitch  write  it,  Gemengd,  Gemengt ;  and  -the 
old  Englifh  authors,  Meyht  *>,)  of  the  Angto^faxon  verb 
GemisncSan,  Demencsan,  and  the  Gothic  verb  tAMAimQAm, 
Or  rather,  it  is  the  praeterperfedt  CemanS,  tiemons,  De-  ' 
munS,  or  Amahg,  Among,  Amung,  (of  the  fame  verb 
Maen^aii,  Men^n)  ufed  as  a  participle^  without  the  parti* 
cipial  termination  ob,  ati,  or  eb :  and  it  meatis  purely  and 
fingly  Mixed,  Mingled,  It  is  ufual  with  the  Anglo*faxons 
^and  they  feem  to  be  fond  of  it)  to  prefix  efpedally  to 
their  pafi:  x>artidples  IR,  M>  Be^  fXfji^  tie. 

Chaucer  pfes  this  piuticiple  amonoss  in  a  manner 
which,  I  fuppofe,  muft  exclude  all  doubt  up6n  the  fubjedt ; 
and  where  it  cannot  be  called  a  prepofition^ 

♦  "  Warmc  milkc  fhc  put  alfo  thcrto 
«*  With  hony  meynt,  and  in  fuckc  wife 
*^  She  gan  to  make  hir  faCrifice/* 

Gcwer.    Lib.  5.  Fol.  105.  pag,  2.  col.  i. 
*'  That  men  in  eueryche  myght  fc 
**  Bothe  great  anOye^  and  eke  fwctneflc 
*'  And  ioyc  Meynt  with  bytterncflc 
^\  Nowe  were  they  cafy,  nowe  w^rc  tkcy  wood.** 

Chaucer.  Rom.  of  the  Roje.     FoU  xjO.pag.  i.  col.  \, 
"  For  eucr  of  Ipue  jhe  fickcneffc 
'^  Is  MEYNT  with  fwcte  ^ind  bittcrrteflc.^^ 

Rm.  of  thi  Rofei    tb\.  ijo.  pag.  2.  eol.  2. 

H  h  h  «  Yf 


■*a*HMIMMkl 


i 


4x8  OF  PREPOSITIONS. 

^<  Yf  thou  cafteft  thy  feedes  in  the  feldes,  thou  ftiuldeft 
"  haue  in  mynde  that  the  yeres  bene  amonges,  other- 
^^  whyle  plefttuous,  and  other whyle  bareyn." 

Seconde  Boke  of  Boecius.  Fol.  225.  pag.  2.  col.  2^ 

This  manner  of  ufing  the  prseterperfedt  as  a  participle, 
without  the  participial  termination  ed  or  eriy  is  ftill  very 
common  in  Englifh;  and  was  much  more  ufual  formerly*. 
In  the  iimilar  verbs,  To  fink  Ee-fencan,  To  drink  Lie- 
bperican,  To  flink  Ge-jrencan,  To  hang  jDenjan,  To  fpring 
A-n^jiin^an,  To  fwing  Spenjan^  To  ring  Rmjan,  To  fhrink 
S-fcjimcan,  To  fting  Srinjan,  and  in  very  many  others,  the 
fame  wopd  is  ftill  ufed  by  us,  both  as  proeterperfedt  and 
.participle ;  Sunk^  .  Drunky  Stunk^  Hungj  Sprung ^  Swung, 
Rung,  Shrunk,  StUng.  All  thefe  were  formerly  written 
with  an  o  (as  Among  ftill  continue*  to  be)  Sonk,  Dronk  (or 
A-dronk)  Stonk,  Hong  (or  A-hong)  Sprong  (or  T-fprong) 
Swong,  Rong,  Sbronk,  Stong.     But  the  o  having  been  pro- 


^1^^^^^^ 


*  Doftor  Lovvth  is  of  a  different  opinion^  .He  fays-r— "  This  abulc  has 
**  been  long  growing  upon  us>  aod. is  continually  making  further  incroach- 
'*  nients,"  &o.  But  Doftor  X^wth  was  not;  rnueh  acquainted  with  our 
oid'Engliih  authprs^  and  ftill  Ms  with  the  Anglo-faxon.  It  is  not  an  abufe, 
but  coaeval  with  the  language,^  and  an^logou^  to  the  other  pajrts  of  it:  but 
it  muft  needs  have  been  highly  difgufting  to  Doftor  Lowtb,  who  wa3  excel- 
lently cgnyerfentwith:  th/c  learned  languages,  and  took  them  for  his  model. 


«i  I 


nounced 


OF  PREPOSITK)NS,  45^ 

« 

ijounced  as  an  u,  the  literal  charadter  has  been  changed 
by  the  moderns  in  conformity  with  the  fotind.  And 
though  Amon^  (by  being  ranked  amongft  prepofitions,  and 
being  unfufpe(5ted  of  being  a  participle  like  the  others)  has 
efcaped  the  change,  and  continues  ftill  to  be  written  -with 
an  o,  it  is  always  founded  like  an  ij ;  Amungi  Amunkji. 

T 

/ 

In  the  Reve's  tale,  Chaucer  ufes  the  Prepofition  imell 
inftead  of  among* 

^  Hefdcft  tKoiJ  ever  Ilike  a  fong  cr  now  ? 
**  Lo  whilkc  a  complin  is  ymell  hem  alle/* 


f 


But  this  will  give  us  no  trouble^  but  afibrd  a  frefli  con- 
firmation to  our  doctrine;  for  the  Danes  iife  Mellem^ 
Imellemy  and  Ibiandt^  for  this  prepofition^ yf«;(?/^^,  from 
their  verbs  Megler^  MeJerer,  (in  the  French  Mejler  or 
Meier)  and  Iblatider^  to  miXt  to  hknd\  and  th6  Swedes 
Jblandy  from  their  verb  B/anda,  to  d/end.        .  ; 


;» 


Ymell  mezns y-med/ed,  i.e.  mixed,' fnmgkd.^  *A  medley 
is  ftill  our  common  word  for  a  mixtufi,  Tmeddledj 
ymelledj  and  ymell  by  the  omifliion  of  the  participial  ter- 
mination, than  which  nothing  is  more  ^common  in  all  our 
old  Englifli  writers.     . 

H  h  h  2  "He 


420 


OF  PREPOSITIONS. 


^'  He  drinketh  the  bitter  with  the  fwcte, 
'*  He  M£D^£TH  forowc  with  likyngc 
**  And  liuetb  fo,  as  who  faieth,  diynge^"' 

Gower.    Lib.  i.  FoL  17.  pag.  i.  col.  2. 
'*  O  mighty  ferde^  toward  my  vice 
**  Thy  mercy  msdls^  with  jufticc." 

Lib*  I.  FoL  24.  pag,  2,  col.  2. 
'^  But  for  all  that  a  man  maie  finde 
**  Nowe  in  this  tyme  of  thilke  rage 
<^  Full  great  difeafe  in  mareiage^ 
*'  Whan  venim  medleth  with  the  fugre^ 
*'  And  mariagc  is  made  for  lucre." 

Lib.  5.  Fol.  99.  pag.  I.  coU  i^. 
"  Thus  MEDLETH  flie  with  ioye  wo, 
"  And  with  her  forowc  myrth  alfo." 

Lib.  5.  Fol.  1x6.  pag.  i.  col.  i» 
«  Whan  wordes  mbdlsn  with  the  fongCi 
<^  It  doth  plcfence  well  the  more,^' 

Lib.  7.  Pol.  150.  pag.  I.  col  2. 
*^  A  kinge  wMche  hath  the  chai^ge  on  hondc 
^^  The  common  people  to  gouerne 
<^  If  that  he  wil,  he  m»ie  weU  lerne. 
«*  Is  none  (b  good  to  the  plefance 
**  Of  God,  as  is  good  gouemance. 
**  And  euery  gouemance  is  due 
**  To  pitec,  thus  I  maie  argue^ 
«^  That  pitee  is  the  foundenjente 
**  Of  euery  kynges  regimente. 
^  If  it  be  MEDLED  with  Juftice,  ' 

•^  Thei  two  remeuen  all  vicei 
•^  And  ben  of  vertue  moft  vailabic 
^  To  make  a  kinges  royhnc  liable^" 

Lib.  7«  Fol.  166.  pag.  2«  col.  1. 

«  But 


I 

t 


OP  PRE3P0Srm)NS»  4ftj| 

^  B^^e  whiche  hath  his  luft  afliiec} 
**  With  MJSptiiD  Igue  and  tyrannic." 

Lib.  7.  Fol.  170*  pag.  2*  col  i. 

^  And  MstfLBTH  ibrow<^  with  his  fonge.'* 

Lib.  9.  FoL  18^  pag.  9.  col.  2^ 

'*  Wc  hauntcn  no  tauerncs,  ne  hobelen  abouten> 
^^  Att  oiarkets  aod  miradcs  wc  laoiLiy  us  neuer/^ 

Pi«r<tf  Pkmnans  Creit. 

'<  There  is  nothyng  tfa^t  fauoiureth  fb  Wd  to  a  chyld^ 
**  as  the  mylke  of  his  noiiryce>  ne  nothyng  is  to  him 
<<  more  abhomynable  than  the  mylke,  whan  it  is  medled^ 
•*  with  other  meate.** 

Cbaucer*  PerJJms  Tak.  FoL  loi.  pag.  2.  coL  i. 

**  Has  garment  was  ciiery  dele  " 

'*  Ypurtraycd  and  ywroxight  with  flourcs 

'^  By  dyuers  MEDBiYfib  oif  cdoures/' 

Rtm.  $f  tbi  Rofi.    Foi.  f^.  pag.  i,  col.  2; 

«'  O  God  (quod  flic)  fo  worldly  fdyncife 
'*  Whiche  clerkes  callen  felfe  felicite 
f'  YmedLed  is  with  many  a  byttcmeflc 
"  Ful  anguyfhous."' 

TV^us.    Boke  ^.  Fol.  177;  pag.  i.  coL  u. 

*'  Some  on  her  churches  dwell 
**  ApparaiUed  porely,  proude  of  portc 
''  The  feuen  facram^ntes  they  done  fell 
"  In  cattel  catchyng  is  her  comfort 
"  Of  echc  matter  they  woDen  u%h%.'' 

Plowmans  Tali.    Fol  57,  pag.  2.  col.  i.. 


u. 


Amax^ 


« 


4ftfe  OF  PREPOSITIONS* 

<«  Amang  the  Grckis  mydliT  than  went  we.*'   ^ 

Douglas.    Booke  i.  pag.  52. 

**  And  reky  nycht  within  an  litil  thraw 

*'  Gan  thikkin  oucr  al  the  cauerne  and  oiierblaw,    • 

"  And  with  the  mirkncs  mydlit  Iparkis  of  fire." 

Douglas.    Booke  ^.  pag.  250. 

"  Syne  to  thare  wcrk  in  manere  of  gun  powder, 
*^  Thay  mydlit  and  they  mixt  this  fereful  fouder.'/ 

Douglas.     Book  8.  p.  257. 

^^  •^  And  ftedis  thrawand  on  the  ground  that  weltis, 

'^  Mydlit  with  nien,  quhilk  jeiki  the  goift  and  fweltis." 

Douglas.     Booke  11.  pag.  387. 

^^  With  blyithnes  myddit  hauand  paneful  drede." 

Douglas.     Booke  11.  pag.  394. 

*^  Quhil  blude  and  brane  in  haboundance  furth  fchede 
**  Mydlit  with  fand  under  hors  fete  was  trede." 

Douglas.    Booke  12.  pag.  421. 

"  Above  all  utheris  Dares  in  that  ftcdc 
"  Thame  to  behald  abafit  wox  gretumly 
*'  Tharwith  to  mell  refufing  aluterlie." 

Douglas.     Booke  5.  pag.  141. 

"  Quhen  Turnus  all  the  chiftanis^  trublit  faw, 

"  And  Eneas  fare  woundit  hym  withdraw ; 
Than  for  this  hafty  hope  als  hate  as  fyre 
To  MELL  in  fecht  he  caucht  ardent  defyre." 

Douglas.    Booke  12.  pag.  42e. 

Against* 

Against  (in  the  Anglo-faxon  On^ejen)-  is  derived  by 

Junius  from  ^eon^. 

^^  Dr. 


OF  PREPOSITIONS,  4*3 

<*  Dr.  Mer.  Cafaubou  "  mirabiliter  (fays  Skinner)  de- 

«  fleait  a  Gr.  3c«7«. 

Minfliew  derives  it  from  xajepaiju 

I  can  only  fay  that  I  believe  it  to  be  a  paft  participle^ 
derived  from  the  fame  verb  (whatever  it  be,  for  I  know  it 
not)  from  which  comes  the  collateral  Dutch  verb  Jegenen^ 
to  meet  J  rencontrer^  to  oppofe,  8cc.  And  I  am  the  more 
confirmed  in  this  conjecElure,  becaufe  in  the  room  of  this 
prepofition  the  Dutch  employ  jegens  from  jegenen  :  and 
the  Danes  Mod  and  Imod^  from  their  verb  Modcr  of  the 
fame  meaning :  and  the  Swedes  Emot  from  their  verb 
Mota  of  the  fame  meaning.  The  Danifh  and  Swedilh 
verbs  from  the  Gothic  M5JTQAM ;  whence  alfo  our  verb*, 
to  meef^  and  the  Dutch  Moeteriy  Gemoeten. 

Amid     or     Amidst. 

Thefe  words  (-by  Chaucer  and  others  written  Amiddes) 
fpeak  for  themfelves.  They  are  merely  the  Atiglo-faxon 
On-niibban.  Oh-mit>bef,  in  medio :  and  will  the  more 
eafily  be  aflented  to,  becaufe  the  nouns  Mid^  Middle^  (i.  e* 
CDiiD-bael)  and  Mldft^  are  ftill  commonly  ufed  in  our  lan- 
guage. 

Along. 


414  ^^  PREPOSITIONS. 

'      '  Along* 

On  long,  fecundum  longitudinem,  or  On  length:  "  And 
*<  thefe  wordes  faid,  Ihe  ftreyght  her  On  length  (i.  e.  (he 
<*  ftretched  herfelf  along)  and  refted  awhile,'* 

Chaucer,   Teji.  of  Loue,  FoJ.  325.  pag.  i.  col.  2. 

The  Italians  fupply  its  place  by  Lungo : 

*<  Cosi  Lungo  Tamate  rive  andai,"     Petrarch, 

And  the  French  by  the  obvious  noun  and  article  Le  Long : 

"  Jocondc  la  defliis  fc  remet  en  chemin 

"  Rcvant  k  fon  malheur  tout  Le  Long  du  voyage." 

La  FMtaine. 

So  far  there  is  no  difficulty.  But  there  was  another 
tife  of  this  word  formerly ;  now  to  be  heard  only  from 
children  or  very  illiterate  perfi)ns : 

<*  King  James  had  a  falhion,  that  he  would  never  ad- 
*'  mit  "^ny  to  neamefs  about  himfelf, '  but  fuch  an  one  as 
«  the  queen  fhould  commend  unto  him,  and  make  ibme 
♦*  fuit  on  his  behalf;  that  if  the  queen  afterwards,  being 
«  ill  treated,  fhould  complain  of  this  Dear  one,  he  might 
«  make  his  aniwer — **  It  is  long  of  yourfdf,  for  you 
«  were  the  party  that  Commended  him  to  me." 

Arcbbijbop  Abbofs  narrative.  In  Rufhworth*s 
Collections.  VoL  I.  p.  456. 

5  The 


OF  PREPOSITIONS.  425 

The  Anglo-faxon  ufed  two  words  for  thefe  two  purpofes, 
Siiblanj,  Anblonj,  Onblonj,  for  the  firft;  and  Delanj  for 
the  fecond :  and  our  moll  antient  Englifh  writers  obferved 
the  fame  diftindtion,  uling  endlong  for  the  one,  and 
ALONG  for  the  other. 

*^  She  flough  them  in  a  fodcine  rage 

"  Endelonge  the  borde  as  thei  ben  fct/* 

Gower.     Lib*  2.  Fol.  31.  pag.  i.  col.  1. 

**  Thys  kyngc  the  wether  gan  beholde, 

"  And  will  well,  they  moten  holdc 

"  Her  cours  endlonge  themarche  right.*' 

Lib.  3.  Fol.  53.  pag.  i^  col.  i. 

<^  That  nigh  his  houfe  he  lettc  deuifc 
^'  Endelonge  upon  an  axell  tree 
*'  To  fette  a  tonne  in  fuche  degree 
<^  That  he  it  might  tournc  about/' 

Lib.  3.  Fol.  54.  pag.  i.  coL  i. 

*'  And  euery  thyng  in  his  degree 

"  Endelonge  upon  a  bourde  he  laide.** 

Lib.  5.  FoL  loa  pag.  a.  col.  i*. 

*^  His  prifoners  eke  fhulden  go 

^  Endlonge  the  chare  on  eyther  honde.** 

Lib.  7.  Fol.  155.  pag.  i.  coL  i. 

*^  Than  fee  thei  ftonde  on  euery  fide 
"  Endlonge  the  Ihippes  borde.'* 

Lib.  8.  Fol.  179.  pag.  i.  col.  2. 

"  Loke  what  day  that  endelong  Brytayne 
"  Ye  remeue  all  the  rockes,  ftone  by  ftone^ 

I  i  i  ^'  That 


426  OF  PREPOSITIONS. 

*'  That  they  ne  let  fhyppe  ne  bote  to  gone, 
"  Than  woll  loue  you  beft  of  any  man." 

Chaucer.  Frankekyns  Tale.  Fol.  ^2*  P^«  !•  coll  2;. 

"  This  lady  rometh  by  the  clyffc  to  play 

*^  With  her  meyne,  endlonce  the  ftronde/*' 

Hyfftphile.     Fol.  214;  pag.  i;  col.  3; 

^^  I  fettc  tlie  point  ouer  endelonge  on  the  labeL'* 

Aftrolabie.    Fol.  286.  pag.  2.  col.  i; 

^*-  rfettc  the  poynteof  r,  endelonge  on  my  labell.'* 

AJirolabit.    Fol.  286.  pag.  2;  col.  2:. 

**  We  flydc  in  fluddes  enixlanc  feill  coyftes  fare.*^ 

Douglas.    Booke  j.  pag.  71^ 

^<  Sjme  eftir  endlangis  the  fey  coiftis  bray^- 
*'  Up  fonkia  fet  and'defis  did  array.'* 

Bookc  3.  pag.  75. 

*'  Endlang  the  coiftis  fide  our  nauy  rade.**" 

Booke  3,  pag.  77;. 

•*  Bot  than  the  women  al,  for  drede  and  afiray^ . 
**  Fled  here  and  there,  endlang  the  coift  away." 

Booke  5..  pag.  151;. 

^  In  fchawis  fchenc  endlang  the  wattir  bra**' 

Booke  7;  pag.  23^^ . 

^  Endlang  the  ftyll  fludis  calme  and  bene.**  . 

Bookc  8.  pagi  243,.. 

♦*  For  now  thare  fchippis  full  thik  reddy  ftandis, 
♦•  Brayand  indlanc  the. coiftis  of  thar  landis.'* 

Booke  8.  pag.  2(o# 

♦Thf 


42  8  OF  PREPOSITIONS. 

^*  Yc  wote  your  fclfe,  as  wel  as  any  wight 
'^  Howe  that  your  loue  al  fully  grauntcd  is 
**  To  Troylus,  the  worthyeft  wyght 
''  One  of  the  worlde,  and  therto  trouth  yplight 
"  That  but  it  were  on  him  alonge,  ye  nolde 
^  Him  neuer  falfcn,  whyle  ye  lyuen  fholde/' 

Chaucer.  Troylus^  Booke  3.  Fol.  176.  pag.  2.  coL  2^ 

Once  indeed  (and  only  once,  I  believe)  Gower  has  con^^ 
founded  them,  and  has  iifed  along  for  both  purpofes :: 

^^  I  tary  forth  the  night  alonge,. 
"  For  it  is  nought  on  me  alonge 
"  To  flepe,  that  I  foon  go.'* 

Lib.. 4,  Fol.  78.  pag.  2-  col.  i.. 

?CnblanS  or  endlong  is  manifeftly  On  hng^  But  what  is- 
Celang  or  along? 

S.  Johnfon  fays  it  is — "  a  word  now  out  of  uffe,  but 
"  truly  Englifli/'  He  has  no  difficulty  with  it :  according 
to  him,  it  is — ^^  Eelanj,  a  faulty  Saxon.'' — ^^But  there  is- 
no  fuch  word  in  Saxon  as  nelanj,  a  fault.  Nor  is  that^ 
at  any  time,^  the  meaning  of  this  word  long  (or  along,^ 
as  I  have  always  heard  it  pronounced).  Fault  or  not 
Faulty  always  depends  upon  the  other  words  in  the  fen- 
tence :  for  inftance, 


**  Thanks 


43©  OF  PREPOSITIONS, 

other  word. — "  To  Long,  fays  Skinpec,  valde  defiderare, 
«  ut  nos  dicimus,  to  think  the  time  long  till  a  man  b{Cs  a 
«  thing.'' 

The  word  long  is  here  lugged  in  by  head  and  (houlders, 
to  give  fomething  of  an,  appearance  of  connexion  between 
the  verb  and  the  noun.  But  when  we  xonfider,  that  we 
have,  and  can- have,  no  way  of  expreiljng  the  a<as  or 
operations  of  the  mind,  but  by  the  fame  wcwrds  by  which 
we  exprefs  fome  correfponding  (or  fuppofed  oorrefponding) 
a6t  or  operation  of  the  body :  when  (amongft  a  multitude 
of  fimilar  inftances)  w«  confider  that  we  exprefs  a.  moderate 
defire  for  any  thing,  by  faying  that  we  incline  (i,  e.  Bend 
ourfelves)  to  it ;  will  it  furprize  us,  that  we  Ihould  exprefs 
an  eager  deiire,  by  faying  that  we  long,  i.  t.  Make  long, 
lengthen,  or  ftretch  out  ourfelves  after  it,  or  For  it  ?  efpe- 
dally  when  we  obferve,  that  after  the  verb  To  incline  we 
fay  To  or  Towards  it ;  but  after  the  verb  To  Long  wc  muft 
ufe  either  the  word  for  or  After^  in  order  to  convey  our 
meaning. 

Lensian  in  the  Anglo-faxon  is  To  Long^  i.  e.  To  make 
longy  To  lengthen^  To  Jiretcb  outy  To  produce^  extendere, 
protendere. 


43  a 


OF  PREPOSITIONS. 


During. 


The  French  participle  Durant ;  from  the  Italian  ;  from 
the  Latin.  The  whole  verb  Dure  was  fome  time  ufed 
commonly  in  our  language. 

*'  And  al  his  luftc,  and  al  his  befy  cure 

"  Was  for  to  loue  her  while  his  lyfe  mai  dure." 

Chaucer.     Man  of  Lawes  T.     Fol.  19.  pag.  i.  col.  2. 

**  How  fhuld  a  fyfhe  withoutcn  water  dure," 

Troylus.     Boke  4,  Fol.  186.  pag.  2.  col.  i. 

■ 

— — •"  Elementes  that  bethe  difcordablc 

-**  Holdcn  a  bonde,  perpetually  durync, 

"  That  Phebus  mote  his  rofy  day  forthbring 

''  And  that  the  mone  hath  lorftiip  ouer  the  nightcs." 

Troylus.    Boke  3.  Fol  172.  pag.  i.  col.  i. 

'^  Euer  their  fame  Ihall  dure.'' 

Tejiament  of  Loue.    B.  a.  Fol.  315.  pag.  i,  col.  i. 

^^  This  afPedion,  with  reafon  knytte,  i^ureth  in  cueryche  trew  hertc." 

Ibid.     Boke  3.  Fol.  331.  pag.  i.  col.  i. 

*'  Defyre  hath  longe  dured  fome  fpeking  to  hauc." 

Ibid.  Boke  i.  Fol.  306.  pag.  i.  col..  2. 

Pending. 

The  French  participle  Pendant ;  from  the  Italian ;  from 
the  Latin. 

Opposite. 
The  Latin  participle  Oppojitus, 

MOIENING. 


434  OF  PREPOSITIONS. 

'^  Problcmes  and  demaundcs  eke 

*'  His  wifcdome  was  to  finde  and  fcke : 

"  Whereof  he  woldc  in  fondrie  wife 

"  Oppofcn  them  that  wcren  wife. 

"  But  none  of  them  it  might  bearc 

**  Upon  his  worde  to  yeue  anfwere 

«<  OuTTAKEN  one,  whiche  was  a  knight." 

Gower.     Conf.  Am.    Fol.  i25,  pag.  i.  coL  a. 

"  And  alfo  though  a  man  at  ones 
*'  Of  all  the  worlde  within  his  wones 
'*  The  trcafour  mi^t  haue  eucry  dele : 
"  Yet  had  he  but  one  mans  dele 
"  Towarde  hymfelfe,  fo  as  I  thynke, 
"  Of  clothynge,  and  of  meate  and  drinkc. 
"  For  more  (outtake  vanitee)     - 
There  hath  no  lorde  in  his  degree." 

Gower.    Fol.  84.  pag.  2.  col.  t; 

"  For  in  good  feith  yet  had  I  leuer^ 
*•  Than  to  coucite  in  fliche  aweye, 
"  To  ben  for  euer  till  I  deye 
**  As  peore  as  Jobs  and  louelcs, 
"  OuTTAKEij  one." 

Gotver.    Lib.  5.  fol.  97.  pag.  i.  col.  2,. 

"  There  was  a  clerke  one  Lucius, 
"  A  courtier,  a  famous  man, 
"  Of  euery  witte  fomwhat  he  can^, 
"  Outtake  that  hym  lackcth  rule, 
"  His  owne  cftate  to  guyde  and  rule." 

Gower.     Lib.  5.  fol.  121.  pag.  2.  col.  2». 

^'  For  as  the  fifshe,  if  it.be  drie,.  *  '^ 

"  Mote  in  dcfautc  of  water  die  :, 

'*  Right 


436  OF  PREPOSITIONS. 

^^  And  from  the  perrcl  faif,  and  out  of  dout 

cc  \yas  al  the  navy,  outtake  four  (chippis  loift." 

Douglas.     Booke  5.  pag.  151^ 
*^  And  fchordy  cuery  thyng  that  doith  reparc 
*'  In  firth  or  feild,  flude,  foreft,  erth  or  are, 
*^  Aftablit  lyggis  ftyl  to  fleip  and  rcftis 
*'  Be  the  fmall  buxlis  fyttand  on  thare  neftis, 
**  Ab  wcle  the  wyld  as  the;  tame  bcftiall, 
"  And  cuery  uthir  thingis  grete  and  fmall : 
«  OuTTAK  the  mery  nychtyngale  Philomene, 
"  That  on  the  thome  fat  fyngand  fro  the  Ipknc/^ 

Douglas.    Prol.  to  Booke  ij.  pag.  450/ 

*^  And  alfo  I  refygne  all  my  knyghtly  dygnitie^  magefty 
^^  aad  crownej  with  all  the  lordeihyppes^  powre  and  pryni- 
^<  leges  to  the  forefayd  kingely  dygnitie  and  crown  be* 
^<  longings  and  al  other  lordfhippes  and  pofleflyons  to  me 
<*  In  any  maner  of  wyfe  pertaynynge,  what  name  and 
^^  condicioa  thei  be  of;  outtakje  the  landes  and  poflef- 
<*  iions  for  me  and  mine obyte  pvux^ti^ied and  boughte* 

Fabiarfs  Cbronicle,     Richaid  the  Second. 

Nigh.     Near.     Nest. 

N1GH9  NEAR  is  the  Anglo-faxon  adje^ve  Nih,  Ndi* 
N^»  Neahj,  Vidnus.  And  Next  is  the  Anglo-faxon 
fuperlative  Neahjcjr,  Nchpr. 

"  FoHbth  this  prouerbe  it  b  no  lye 
"  Men  lay  thus  alway,  the  Nye  flye 
"  Mi^etj^.the  ferre  kyue  to  be  locbe/' 

Chaucer.    Mylkrs  Talc.    Fol.  13.  pag.  i.  col.  i. 

"  Lo 


OF  PREPOSITIONS.  437 

^^  Lo  a&  oldc  prouerbc  aleged  by  tnanye  wyie :  Whan  bale  is  greateft^ 
^'  than  is  bote  a  Nye  bore." 

Tijf.  0/  Lone.    Boke  a.  fol.  320.  pag.  a.  col.  2. 

Mr.  Tyrwhit  in  his  gloflary  fays  well — *^  Hext  Sax. 
**  bigbeft,  Hegb.  '  Hegbeft,  Hegft.  Hext,  In  the  fame 
**  manner  Next  is  formed  from  Negh.**— But  he  does  not 
well  fay  that — "  Next  generally  means  th«  nigbeft  foUowingi 
*'  but  fometimes  the  nigbeft  preceding^  For  it  means 
iimply  the  nigbeft,  and  never  implies  either  following  or 
preceding.     As,  «  To  fit  next.**  &c. 

Instead. 

From  the  Anglo-faxon  On  yctht^  In  ftebe,  i.  e.  In  place* 
In  the  Latin  it  is  Vice  and  Loco,  In  the  Italian  In  luogo. 
In  the  Spaniih  En  lugar.  And  in  French  Au  lieu.  In  the 
Dutch  it  is  either  Injlede  or  In  plaats.     In  the  German 

fl 

Onftatt,     In  the  Daniih  Iftaden,     And  in  the  Swedifh  (a& 
we  ufe  either  Home  stead  <x  Home  stall)  it  is  Iftaellet. 

Our  oldeft  Englifli  writers  more  rardy  ufed  the  French 
word  Flacsy  but  moft  commonly  the  Ctothic  and  Anglo- 
fkxon  word  STAA.S9  Scet>,  Scetse,  The  In  fiances  are  fo  abun- 
dantly  numerous  that  it  may  feem  unneceffary  to  give  any. 

<*  But  take  this  lore  into  thy  wit, 

**  That  all  thyng  hath  tjrme  and  stbde  : 

«  The 


ce 

t€ 
€( 


J^SB  OF  PREPOSITIONS. 

^'  The  churche  feructh  for  the  bede, 
'^  The  chambre  is  of  an  other  fpeche/' 

■Cower.     Lib.  5.  fol.  124.  pag.  i,  col.  i* 

GefFray,  thou  wotteft  wel  this 
That  euery  kyndely  thynge  that  is 
Hath  a  kyndely  stede  there  he 
May  beft  in  it  conferued  be." 

Chaucer.  Fame.     Boke  2.  fol.  295.  p.  2.  c.  2. 

"  Furth  of  that  stede  I  went." 

Douglas.     Boke  2.  pag.  59. 

^'  But  je,  unhappy  men,  fle  fra  this  stede." 

Douglas.     Boke  3.  Pag.  89. 

The  fubftantive  stead  is  by  no  means  obfolete,  as 
S.  Johnfon  calls  it ;  nothing  being  more  common  and 
familiar  than — "  Youjballgo  in  their  stead."  It  is  like- 
wife  not  very  uncommon  in  compofition ;  as  Homefteady 
Bedjleady  Roadjlead  -^^,  Girdlejlead  +,  Noonjied  J,   Steadfaft, 

Steady,  Sec. 

One 


*  We  often  meet  with  the  word  Roadftead  in  Voyages,  and  I  fuppofc  it 
is  ftill  a  common  term  with  all  feafaring  men. — "  On  Thurfday  Captain 
"  Fauchey  arrived  at  Plymouth.  The  purport  of  his  dilpatches,  we  con- 
'^  ceivc,  can  only  be  a  reprefentation  of  the  neceffity  of  evacuating  L'Ifle 
"  Pieu  ;  as  it  produces  nothing,  has  no  good  Roadjied,  and  is  not  tenable, 
'*  if  not  protefted  by  a  fleet.'' 

Morning  Chronicle.     Oftober  19,  1795/ 

*'  Extradb  of  a  letter  from  Plymouth.     The  Anfon  man  of  war,  of  44 

'*  guns,  rode  out  the  ftorm  like  a  duck,  without  the  leaft  damage,  in  the 

j6  "  Sound  I 


» 


440  OF  PREPOSITIONS. 

thinks,  that  Step  mother  is,  quafi  Stiff  motber,  from  S/t'ef, 
durus ;  and  fo  called  becaufe  fhe  is  commonly  ^  duraf 
"  fievOi  immitis,  rigida."*  Voffius  on  the  contrary  thinks 
ftie  is  fo  called,  quafi  fulciens  water,  as  a  Jiiff  «id  ftrong 
fupport  of  the  family ;  «  quia  fulcit  domum  cum  nova 
hsereditatc.*  Junius,  obferving  that  there  is  not  only 
Stepmother,,  but  alfo  Stepchild,  Step/on,  Stepdaughter, 
brother,  Jijler,  Sec.  to  all  of  whom  this  imputation  of 
feverity  cannot  furely  belong,  (neither  can  they  be  faid 
fulcire  domum  cum  nova  hareditate)  fays  Stepmother  is  fo 
called,  qua/i  orphanorum  mater  :  "  nam  n*pan  Anglo- 
**  faxonibus,  et  Stiufan  Alamannis  videntur  olim  ufurpata, 
**  pro  orbare."  S.  Johnfon,  neither  contented  with  any 
of  the  foregoing  reafoning,  nor  yet  with  the  videntur  olim 
ufurpata,  determined  alfo  to  try  his  hand  (and  a  dumfy 
one  God  knows  it  is)  at  an  etymology ;  but  inftead  of  it 
produced  a  Pun.  Stepmother,  according  to  him,  is-—**  a 
**  woman  who  has  Jlepped  into  the  place  of  the  true 
«  mother." 


it 


She  by  her  fpclk  could  make  the  moon  to  ftay. 
And  from  the  Eaft  fhe  could  keep  back  the  day, 
**  Raife  mills  and  fogs  that  could  eclipfe  the  light, 
*^  And  with  the  Noonfied  Ihe  could  mix  the  night.  ^* 

Drayton* s  Mooncalf. 

"  With  all  our  fiftcr  nymphs,  that  to  the  Noonfted  look/' 

Pofy'Olikn.     Firjt  Song. 

S  But 


OF  PREPQSITlONSt  4,4,« 

But  ia  the  Danifh  collateral  language,  the  conipof\lnds 
remain  uncorrupted ;  and  there  they  are,  with  a  clear  and 
unforced  meaning  applicable  to  :^^*^^Stedfadery  Stedtnod^y 
Stedbrederj  Stedsqfier^  Stedbarn^  Stedfon^  Steddotter.  i.  e. 
Vice,  Loco^  in  the  place  of,  Instead  of  a  father,  a  mother, 
a  brother,  &c. 

About.- 

Spelman,  "  Abuttare,  occurrere,  vergere,  fcoputn 
**  appetere,  finem  exerere,  terminate.  A  Gallico  abutter^ 
"  feu  abouter;  haec  eadem  fignificant. — La  Bout  enim 
*^  finem^  terminum^  vtlfcopum  defignat :  Inde  Angl.  a  But 

**  pro  meta ;  &  about,  pro  circa  rem  vel  fcopum  verfare* 

,  .  .  - 

**  Vox  feodalis,  Sc  agfi  menforibus  noftris  frequentiffima, 
<*  qui  praediorum  fines  (quos  ipfi  capita  vocant,  Marculfus 
**  front eS)  Galli  Bouts')  abuttare.  dicunt  in  adverfam  terram ; 
**  cum  fe  illuc  adigant  aut  protendant.  Latera  autem 
•*  nunquam  aiunt  abuttare  * .'  fed  terram  proximam  ad- 
*^  jacere.  La  couftume  reformee  de  Normandie,  cap.  556. 
— ^*  Le  Serjeant  eft  tenu  faire  le(3:ure  des  lettres,  &  obli- 
*^  gations,  &:  declaration,  par  Bouts  &:  coftes  des  dites 
<<  terres  faifies.^ 


^^/mmmmmmmim^rm^tmmmmm^tmmmmmmmmtitmmmmmmmm^i^i^m^m^mmmmmm^imm^^m^i^t^m^i^ 


♦  I  hardly  venture  to  fay  that  I  beficvfj  the  correft  and  exadk  Spelman 
is  here  miftaken. 

.  L  1  1  Junius* 


442  OF  PREPOSITIONS. 

Junius.  ^^  But,  Scopus,  g.  But.  Fortafle  defumptum 
<^  eft  nomen  ab  illis  monticellis,  qui  in  limitibus  agrorum 
<«  ab  Agrimenforibus  conftituebantur,  atque  ab  iis  Bodones 
<^  five  Botones  nuncupabantur,  8c  ad  quos,  artem  fagittandi 
'^  exeicentes,  tela  fua  veluti  ad  fcopum  dirigebant.** 

SkJrincr.  "  About  ab  a,  s.  Abu^a,  Ymbutran,  circum 
"  illud,  quantum  ad  priorem  fyllabam  a  pr»p.  Ab.  hoc 
^^  a  prxp.  Ymb,  quod  a  praep.  loquerali  Lat.  Am.  Gr. 
*^  AfA^p  ortum  ducit,  uti,  fecundum  pofteriorem  fyllabana 
"  ab  A.  s.  Ure  vel  utan  foris,  foras,  extremus,  item  extre- 
"  mitas,  unde  &:  defluxit  Belg*  Buyteftj  quod  idem  fonat ; 
**  quod  enim  aliud  ambit,  partes  ejus  exteriores,  i«  e.  ex* 
«^  timam  fuperficiem  attingit  8c  obvolvit/' 

^^  Abutt,  a  Fr*  Aboutir.  Vergere,  confinem  efle,  ubi 
^^  fcilicet  ager  unus  in,  vel  verfus,  alium  protenditur,  8c 
^^  ei  conterminus  eft  :  hoc  a  nom,  Bout^  extremitas,  ter- 
"  minus :  quod  fatis  manifeft^  a  praep.  Lat.  Ab.  8c  a.  s. 
**  utre,  Foras,  Foris,  ortum  trahit,  q.  d.  quod  foras  pro- 
^^  tuberat  vel  extuberat." 

**  But,  a  Fr.  o.  Bout^  Extremitas,  Finis,  Pun<Stum, 
*<  Aboutir^  ad  finem  tendere,  accedere,  acuminari.  But 
**  etiam  in  re  nautica  Extremitatem  alicujus  rei  iignat, 
«  manifefle  Franco  Gallise  originis^" 

Menage^ 


OF  PREPOSITIONS.  443 

Menage.  ^^  Bute — Boito  ^  Botontinus  fe  trouveut.en 
^<  cette  fignification,  Fauftiis  8c  Valerius  dans  le  receuil^ 
^*  des  autheurs  qui  ont  efcrit  de  limitibus  agrorum,  pgge 
«  312. — "  In  limitibus  ubi  rariores  terminos  conftituimus^ 
^^  monticeUos  plantavimus  de  terra^  quos  botontinos  appel- 
^^  lavimus.''  Le  jurifconfulte  Paulus  livre  V  de  ces  fen- 
tences  titre  22. — ^^  Slui  terminos  efodiunt  vel  exarant 
^*  arbor e/ve   terminates  evertunt^    vel  qui  convellunt   bo* 

*^  D0NES9  Sec."     Cujas  fur  ce  lieu  : "  bodones,  lie 

^^  uno  exemplari  fcriptum  legimus,  cujus  nobis  copiam 
^*  fecit  Pithaeus  noften  Bodones  live  Botones  vicem  termi- 
^^  norum  prxftant*  Vox  eft  Menforum,  vel  eomm  qui  de 
^^  agrorum  &:  limitum  conditionibus  fcripferunt  ^K^ 

Spelman,  Junius,  Skinner  and  Menage,  all  refort  to 
Franco*Gall.  for  their  etymology.  As  for  boto  and  its 
diminutive  botontinus  (which  have  been  quoted)  they 
are  evidently  the  tranllation  of  a  Gothic  word  common  to 
all  the  northern  nations :  which  word,  as  it  ftill  remains 
in  the  Anglo-faxon  dialedl,  was  by  our  anceftors  written 
Bot)a  (whence  our  Englifti  To  bode  and  many  other  words) 

*  So,  VUalis  de  Limit.  "  Hi  non  funt  femper  a  ferro  taxati,  &  circa 
"  Botontinos  confcrvantur."  Innocent,  de  caj.  litter.  "  Alius  fontanas  fub 
"  fe  habens,  fupcr  fc  montem,  in  trivio  tres  Botmtinos.^*  AuSior  de  Affrim. 
"  Si  fmt  Botontini  terr^e  ex  fupcris  prohibco  te  jacramcntum  dare."- 

L  1  1  2  and 


444  OF  PREPOSITIONS. 

and  means  the  firft  outward  extremity  or  boundary  of  any 
thing.     Hence  Onbot>a,  Onbu^a,  ^Ibutra,  about. 

After. 

After  (Goth.  AI:tAKx  a.  s.  JEpctp.  Dutch  4gteff 
Jchter,  Danilh,  J5//^r,  Bag,  Swedifti  Efter,  Atrat  Achter^ 
is  ufed  as  a  noun  adjeftive  in  Anglo-faxon,  in  Englifti,  and 
in  mod  of  the  northern  l^uiguages.  I  fuppofe  it  to  be  no 
other  than  the  comparative  of  the  noun  aft  :  (a.  s.  lEJp^ 
for  the  retention  of  which  latter  noun  in  our  language  we 
are  probably  obliged  to  our  feamen. 

Hindi  Aft,  and  Back,  have  all  originally  the  fame 
meaning.  In  which  aflertion  (although  aft  had  not  re- 
mained in  our  language)  I  fhould  think  myfelf  well  jufti- 
fied  by  the  authority,  or  rather  the  found  judgment,  of 
Mr.  de  Brofles ;  who  fays  well — "  Qiielquefois  la  iignifi- 
"  cation  primitive  nous  eft  derobee,  faute  de  monuments 
"  qui  I'indiquent  en  la  langue.  Alors  cependant  on  la 
"  retrouve  parfois  en  la  recherchant  dans  les  langues 
*<  meres  ou  collateralles."  In  the  Daniih  language  they 
exprefs  the  fame  meaning  by.  For  og  Bag^  which  we  ex- 
prefs  by  Fore  and  Afii  or.  Before  and  Behind,  And  in 
the  Anglo-faxon  they  ufe  indifferently  Behmdan,  B^sepran, 

and  Onbsec. 

Down, 


446  OF  PREPOSITIONS. 

**  a  Hill ;  but  is  ufed  now  as  if  derived  from  the  adverb : 
'*  for  it  means,  ift.  A  large  open  plain  or  valley^ 

And  as  an  inftance  of  its  meaning  a  valley^  he  immedi* 
ately  prefents  us  with  Salijbury  Plain. 

"  On  the  "Downs  as  we  fee,  near  Wilton  the  fair, 
"  A  haft'ncd  hare  from  greedy  greyhound  go." 

He  then  gives  four  inftances  more  to  Ihew  that  it  means  a 
valley  \  in  every  one  of  which  it  means  hills  or  rifing 
grounds.  To  compleat  the  abfurdity,  he  then  fays,  it  ^ 
means,  "  2dly.  A  hill,  a  rifing  ground ;  and  that.  This 
Jenfe  is  very  rare^  Although  it  has  this  fenfe  in  every  in- 
flance  he  has  given  for  a  contrary  fenfe :  nor  has  he  given, 
nor  could  he  give,  any  inftance  where  this  fubftantive  has 
any  other  fenfe  than  that  which  he  fays  is  fo  rare, — But 
this  is  like  all  the  reft  from  this  quarter ;  and  I  repeat  it 
again,  the  book  is  a  difgrace  to  the  country. 

Freret,  Falconer,  Wachter  and  De  Broffes,  have  all 
laborioufly  and  learnedly  (but,  I  think,  not  happily)  con* 
fidered  the  word  Bun. 


From  what  Camden  fays  of  the  antient  names  (Dan^ 
monii  or  Dunmonii^  and  Dobuni)    of  the  inhabitants  of 

Cornwal 


% 


OF  PREPOSITIONS.  447 

Coniwal  and  Glovicefterfliire,  and  of  the  two  rivers  (Daven 
or  Dan  or  Dun  or  Don)  in  Chefliire  and  in  Yorkihire ;  it 
feems  as  if  he  fuppofed,  that  our  Englilh  word  down 
came  to  us  from  the  Britons. 

Solinus,  he  obferves,  called  the  Comilh  men  Dunmonii; 
**  which  name  feems  to  come  from  their  dwelling  there 
*<  under  hills.  For  their  habitation  all  over  this  country 
^<  is  low  and  in  vallies;  which  manner  of  dwelling  is 
**  called  in  the  Britifti  tongue  Danmunitb,  In  which  fenfe 
**  alfo  the  province  next  adjoining  is  at  this  day  named  by 

■ 

<*  the  Britons  Duffneint%  that  is  to  fay,  Lmv  vaUies2* 

of  the  Dobuni  he  fays,—"  This  .their  name,  I  believe, 
**  is  formed  from  Duffeny  a  Britiih  word ;  becaufe  the 
**  places  where  they  planted  themfelves,  were  for  the  moft 
"  part  low  and  lying  under  the  hiUs.** 

Speaking  of  the  river  in  Chefliire,  he  fays, — "  Then 
*<  cometh  this  Dan  or  more  truly  Daven,  to  Davenport^ 
"  commonly  called  Danport,^ 

Of  the  river  in  Yorkfliire,  he  fays, — "  The  river  Danusy 
**  commonly  called  Dan  or  Dune,  fo  termed,  as  it  ihould 
*<  feemji  becaufe  it  is  carried  ia  a  channel  low  and  funk 

**  ini 


448  OP  PREPOSITIONS. 

"  in  the  ground :  for  fo  much  lignifieth  Dan  in  the  Brkifli 
**  language  ■"'.** 

Selden,  in  his  notes  on  the  firft  fong  of  Drayton^s  Poly-i^ 
olbion,  gives  full  affent  to  Camden's  etymology.  He  fays, 
— "  Duffneinty  i.  e.  low  valleys  in  Britifti,  as  judidous 
"  Camden  teaches  me."* 

Milton,  I  doubt  not  on  the  fame  authority,  calls  the 
river  *^  the  gulpby  dun.** 

"  Rivers  arife ;  whether  thou  be  the  fon 

"  Of  utmoft  Tweed,  or  Oofe,  or  gulphy  Dun.^* 


♦  "  Regionem  illam  infederunt  antiquitus  Britanni,  qui  Solino  Dunmonii 
"  dicli.  Quod  nomen  ab  habitatione  fub  montibus  faftum  videatur.  In- 
"  ferius  enim,  ct  convallibus  paflim  per  hanc  regionem  habitatur,  quod 
"  Danmunith  Britannice  dicitur :  quo  etiam  fcnfu  proxima  proyincia  Duff'^ 
"  neinty  i.  e.  Depreffe  valles  a  Britannis  hodie  vocatur/' 

Pag.  133.  Folio  Edit.  1607. 

"  Doiunos  videamus,  qui  olim,  ubi  nunc  Glocefterfhire  et  Oxfordfliire, 
"  habitarunt.  Horum  nomen  faftum  a  Buffen  Britannica  didUone  credi- 
"  mus ;  quod  maxima  ex  parte  loca  jacentia  et  deprefla  fub  coUibus  in- 
"  fidebant."     Pag.  249. 

Dan  vcl  Daven  e  montibus  &c.  fcrtur  ad  &c.  Deinde  Davenport, 
vulgo  Danport  accedit."     Pag.  461. 

Danusy  vulgo  Don  et  Dune,  ita,  ut  videtur,  nominatus,  quod  preffiori 
"  et  inferiori  in  folum  labitur  alveo  i  id  cnim  Dan  Britannis  fignificat." 
Pag.  562. 

5  And 


€( 


OF  PREPOSITIONS.  449 

And  Biftiop  Gibfon  concurs  with  the  fame ;  tranflating, 
without  any  diflent,  the  marginal  note,  "  Duffen  Britan- 
**  nic^  profundum  five  depreflum,"  in  thefe  words,  <*  Duffen^ 
«  in  Britiih,  deep  or  low.** 

How  then,  againft  fuch  authorities,  fhall  I,  with  what- 
ever reafon  fortified,  venture  to  declare,  that  I  am  far 
from  thinking  that  the  Anglo-faxons  received  either  the 
name  of  thefe  rivers,  or  their  word  dun,  Sdun  (whidi 
is  evidently  our  word  down,  adown,  (Kfferently  fpelled)  ia 
any  manner  from  the  Britifh  language.  And  as  for  Duffen 
(from  which,  with  Camden,  I  think  the  words  proceeded) 
we  have  it  in  our  own  language  the  Anglo-faxon,  and  with 
the  fame  meaning  of  funky  deprejfunty  deep  or  hm* 

If,  with  Camden,  we  can  fuppofe  the  AngIo*faxon  IHin 
to  have  proceeded  through  the  gradations  of 

-^  r       (Duveriy  Duvn.  Dun.  Don.  DoTvn. 
Dufen    i  ^  ^         ^         ^ 

iDaveny  Davn^  Dan. 

I  fliould  think  it  more  natural  to  derive  both  the  name  of 
the  rivers  ^  and  the  prepofition  from  Dupen  +,  the  paft 

participle 


«.»^ 


*  I  fuppofe  the  river  Dovt  in  StafFordfhire  to  have  its  denomination  from 
the  fame  word,  and  for  the  fame  reafon. 

M  mm  t  The 


450  OF  PREPOSITIONS. 

partieiple  of  the  Anglo-faxon  verb  Dupian,  mergere^  to 
Jinky  to  plunge^  to  dive^  to  dip.  And  the  ufual  prefix  to 
the  Anglo-faxon  participles,  S,  in  Stjun,  ftrongly  favours 
the  fuppofition.  In  mod  of  the  paflages  too  in  which  the 
prepofition  or  adverb  down  is  ufed  in  Englifh,  the  fenfe 
of  this  participle  is  clearly  expreffed ;  and,  without  the 
leaft  {training  or  twitting,  the  acknowledged  participle  may 
be  put  inftead  of  the  fuppofed  prepofition :  although  there 
may  perhaps  be  fome  paflages  in  which  the  prepofition 
DOWN  is  ufed,  where  the  meaning  of  the  participle  may 
not  fo  plainly  appear. 


Upon.  Up.  Over.  Bove.  Above. 

Thefe  prepofitions  have  all  one   common  origin  and 
iignification>  Upon.  Ufan.  Upa. 


t  The  Anglo-faxons  ufe  indifferently  for  the  pad  participle  of  Dupian. 
cither  Dupeb,  or  Dupen  or  Dopen.  I  fuppofe  thiis  fame  verb.to  have  been, 
varioufly  pronounced, 

Dopian      ^  f  Dopen.  Doven.  Dovn.  Doun.  down.  don» 

Dupian      >  Hence     <Dupen.  Duven.  Duvn.  dun.  duni. 
Dapian      y  ^Dapen.  Daven.  Davn.  dan, 

Dypian      f  C 

or  }     }  To  Dive. 

Dypan       [  I 

la 


.  \ 


QF  PREPOSITIONS. 


451 


In  the  Anglo-faxon  Upa.    Upejia.    UFemDefc.    are  the 
nouns,  altuSf  altior^  altijjimus. 

*  • 

Upon,  Upan,  Upa.  Altus  (Fr.  Th.  Upb.)  upon.  up. 
Upepa,  Opejte,  Opep,  Altior. — over  or  upper. 
Upemaeftr.  Altiffimus.  upmost,  uppermost,  upperest, 

OVEREST. 

Be-upan  or  Bupan.  bove. 
On-bupan.  above. 

'  The  ufe  of  thefe  words  in  Englifti  as  adje<5tives  is  very 
common ;  as  it  is  alfo  in  all  the  ndrthern  languages :  for 
the  fame  words  are  ufed  in  all  of  them  *^ 

■ 

*'  Aboue  his  hcde  alfo  there  hongeth 
"A  fruice  whiche  to  that  peine  longeth : 
^^  And  that  fruite  toucheth  cuer  in  one 
^^  His  OVBR  lippe." 

Gower.    Lib.  5.  F0I..85.  pag.  2.  col.  2, 


»-^ 


Germ.        jiuf.  Auher. 

Oben.  Ober.  Oherfie. 
Dutch.       Of.  Opper.  Opperfte. 

Boven.  Over.  Overjie. ' 
Danifli.      Oven.  Over.  'Overfte. 

Ober. 
Swedifli.    Uppe.  bfwir.^bfwtrfie. 

Up.  bfre.  Ypperfi. 

M  m  m  2 


.    /" 


«  Her 


45*  OF  PREPOSITlONSt 

"  Her  OVER  lyp  wjrpcd  fhe  fo  clcne 

"  That  in  her  cup  was  no  ferdiynge  fene/' 

?roL  to  Cant.  Tales.    Priorefc. 

*^  Fill  thredbare  was  his  over  courtpy/' 

Prol.  to  Cant.  Tales.     Gierke  of  Oxenf 


*^  That  of  his  wurfhip  recketh  he  fo  lyte 
"  Hys  ovEREST  Ooppe  is  not  worth  a  myte." 


-^*' 


ProL  to  Chan.  Teman's  Tale. 

*«  By  which  degrees  men  myght  climben  from  the 
^*  neytbereji  letter  to  the  upperest.^ 

Boecius.     Boke  !•  Fol.  12 1.  i)ag»  i.  col.  i. 

**  why  fuffireth  he  iuche  flyding  chaungeS)  that  myf* 
"  tumen  fuche  noble  thynges  as  ben  we  men,  that  arne  a 
<<  fayre  perfell  of  the  ertlh>  and  holden  the  uff£I(.£st  de» 
**  gree  under  God  of  benigne  diinges.'* 


'eji.  of  Loue,     Fol.  312.  pag.  i.  col.  i 


It  is  not  neceffary  for  my  prefent  purpofe,  to  trace  the 
Particles  any  farther  than  to  fome  Noun  or  Verb  of  a  de- 
terminate iignification ;  and  therefore  I  might  here  ftop  at 
the  Anglo-faxon  noun  Upan,  uiUus..  But  I  believe  that 
Upon,  Upa ;  upon,  up,  means  the  fame  as  ^op  or  Heady 
and  is  originally  derived  from  the  iaime  fource»     Thus> 

«  Low- 


OF  PREPOSITIONS.  453 

<*  l^owUne^  is  young  ambition's  ladder, 
**  Whereto  the  climber  Upwards  turns  his  face  j. 
*^  But  when  he  hath  attain'd  the  Topmoft  round, 
<*  He  then  -unto  the  ladder  turns  <his  back." 

Where  you  may  ufe  indifferently  either  Upward^  Topwardy 
or  Headword  \  or  Topmofi,  Upmoft,  or  Headmofi, 

Some  etymologifts  have  chofen  to  derive  the  name  of 
that,p;ut  of  our  body  from  the  Scythian  ha,  a]tusj.  or  the 
Iflandic  haD)  altitudo;  or  the  Qothic  hAHh^  ^tus;  or 
(with  Junius)  from  the  Qreek  u^grawof ;  or  Theot.  hoh  ;  or 
the  Au^lo-iaxon  Heab,  But  our  En^lifh  words  Head  and 
Heaven  are  evidently  the  paft  participles  Heaved  suad  Heavett 
of  the  verb  to  Heave :  as  the  Aqglo-faxon  Heajrot),  Heapty. 
caput}  and  Ueopen,  He^peo^tcoelumy  are  the  paft  participles 
of  the  verb  HesfiViTiy  HeoFan,  to  beave^  to  lift  up.  Whence 
Upon  alfo  may  eafily  be  derived,  and  with  the  fame  i^ni- 
fication.  And  I  believe  that  the  names  of  all  abftradt  re-^ 
lation  (as  it  is  called)  are  taken  either  from  the  adje<ftived 
common  names  of  objects,  or  from  the  participles  of 
common  verbs.  The  relations  of  place  are  more  com~ 
monly  from  the  names  of  fome  parts  of  our  bodyj,  fuch 
as,  Head,  Toe,  Breaji,  Sids,  Back,  Womb,  Skin,  &c.. 

5;  Wilkint 


454 


OF  PREPOSITIONS. 


Wilkins  feems  to  have  felt  fomething  of  this  fort,  when 
he  made  his  ingenious  attempt  to  explain  the  local  prepo- 
litions  by  the  help  of  a  man's  figure  in  the  following 
Diagram.  But  confining  his  attention  to  ideas  (in  which 
he  was  followed  by  Mr.  Locke)  he  overlooked  the  etymo- 
logy of  words,  which  are  their  figns,  and  in  which  the 
fecret  lay. 


"  For  the  clearer  explication  of  thefe  local  prepofitions 
(fays  he)  I  Ihall  refer  to  this  fbUowing  Diagram.  In 
which  by  the  oviil  figures  are  reprefented  the  prepofi- 
tions determined  to  motion,  wherein  the  acuter  part 
doth  point  out  the  tendency  of  that  motion.  The 
Squares  are  intended  to  fignify  reft  or  the  term  of  mo- 
tion. And  by  the  round  figures  are  reprefented  fuch 
relative  prepofitions,  as  may  indifferently  refer  either  to 
motion  or  reft.'* 


In 


>  m'  * 


OF  PREPOSITIONS.  455 

In  all  probability  the  Abbe  de  TEpee  borrowed  his  me- 
thod of  teaching  the  prepofitions  to  his  deaf  and  dumb 
fcholars  from  this  notion  of  Wilkins* 


<^  Tout  ce  que  je  puis  regarder  diredement  en  Face^  eft 
^^  Devant  moi :  tout  ce  que  je  ne  peux  voir  fans  retourner 
^  la  tete  de  Tautre  c6te>  eft  Derriere  moiv 

"  S'agiflbit-il  defaire  entendre  qu'une  action  etoit  paflee  ? 
^^  U  jettoit  au  hafard,  deux  ou  trois  fois  fa  main  du  cote 
*^  de  fbn  epaule.  Enfin  s*il  defiroit  annoncer  une  adtion 
<^  future,  il  faifoit  avancer  fa  main  droite  dire6tement  de- 
*^  vant  lui." 

Des  fourds'  et  muets.     a  Edit,  pag,  54. 

You  will  not  expedt  me  to  wafte  a  word  on  the  prepo«- 
fitions  touching^  concerning^  regarding^  refpe&ingy  relating 
tOj  favingy  except^  excepting j  according  tOy  granting^  allow^ 
ingj  confideringy  notwitbjiandingy  neighbouring^  &c.  nor  yet 
on  the  compound  j^repofitions  In-to^  Un-tOy  Un-till^  Out-ofy 
Through-out y  From-offj  &:c,. 

I  certainly  fliould  not,  if  you  had  explained  all  the 
fimple  terms  of  which  the  latter  are  compounded,     I  ao- 

6  knowledge; 


456  OF  PREPOSITIONS. 

knowledge  that  the  meaning  and  etymology  of  fome  of 
your  prepofitions  are  fufficiently  plain  and  fatisfadtory  : 
and  of  the  others  I  (hall  not  permit  myfelf  to  entertain  a 
decided  opinion  till  after  a  more  mature  confideration. 
Pedetentim  progrediy  was  our  old  favourite  motto  and 
caution,  when  iirft  we  began  together  in  our  early  days  to 
conlider  and  converfe  upon  philofophical  fubjedts;  and, 
having  no  fanciful  fyftem  of  my  own  to  miflead  me,  I  am 
not  yet  prepared  to  relinquifli  it.  But  there  ftill  remain 
five  iimple  prepofitions,  of  which  you  have  not  yet  taken 
the  fmalleft  notice.  How  do  you  account  for  in,  out,  on, 
OFF,  and  AT. 

H. 

Oh !  As  for  thefe,  I  muft  fairly  anfwer  you  with  Martin 
Lutber, — **  Je  les  defendrois  aisement  devant  le  Pape,  mais 
«  je  ne  f9ais  comment  les  juftifier  devant  le  diable.«  With 
the  common  run  of  Etymologifts,  I  Ihould  make  no  bad 
figure  by  repeating  what  others  have  faid  concerning  them ; 
but  I  defpair  of  fatisfying  you  with  any  thing  they  have 
advanced  or  I  can  offer,  becaufe  I  cannot  altogether  fatisfy 
myfelf.  The  explanation  and  etymology  of  thefe  words 
require  a  degree  of  knowledge  in  all  the  antient  northern 
languages,  and  a  fkill  in  the  application  of  that  knowledge, 
which  I  am  very  far  from  aflliming :  and,  though  I  am 

almoft 


^OF  PREPOSITIONS.  457 

almoft  perfuaded  by  fome  of  my  own  conjedlures  con- 
,  cerning  them  -,  I  am  not  willing,  by  an  apparently  forced 
and  far-fetched  derivation^  to  juftify  your  imputation  of 
etymological  legerdemain.  Nor  do  I  think  any  farther 
inquiry  neceffary  to  juftify  my  conclufion  concerning  the 
prepolitions ;  having,  in  my  opinion,  fully  intitled  myfelf 
to  the  application  of  that  axiom  of  M.  de  Broffes  (Art.  215.) 
-^"  La  preuve  connue  d'un  grand  nombre  de  mots  d'une 
^^  efpece,  doit  etablir  un  precepte  generale  fur  les  autres 
**  mote  de  meme  efpece,  a  Torigine  defquels  on  ne  peut 
^*  plus  remonter.  On  doit  en  bonne  logique  juger  des 
^^  chofes  que  Ton  ne  peut  Gonnoitre,  par  celles  de  m^me 
^^  efi^ece  qui  font  bieh  ccxinues ;  en  les  ramenadt  a  vu 
**  principe  dont  Tevidence  fe  fait  appercevoir  par  tout  ^ 
*<  la  vue  peut  s'etendre.* 


•**>■ 


*  In  the  Gothic  and  Anglo-laxon  YnmA^  ^^^^  means  lAnuSf  vffcira^ 
venter,  interim  fars  €^pms.  (Inna^  inne^  1%^  alfo  in  a  fecondaiy  fenfe  ufed 
for  Can)e,  Cell,  Cavern.)  And  there  arc  fome  etymological  rcafons  which 
make  it  not  improbable  that  out  derives  from  a  word  originally  meaning 
Skin.  I  am  inclined  to  believe  that  in  and  out  come  originally  from  two 
Nouns  meaning  thofr  two  parts  of  the  body. 


N  n  n  -EIIEA 


EHEA   nTEPOENTA,    &c. 


CHAP.    X. 


OF  ADVERBS. 


B. 

'T'HE  firft  general  divifion  of  words  (and  that  which  has 
been  and  ftiU  is  almoft  univerfally  held  by  Gramma- 
rians) is  into  Declinable  and  Indeclinable,  All  the  Inde- 
clinables  except  the  Aduerby  we  have  already  confidered. 
And  though  Mr.  Harris  has  taken  away  the  Adverb  from 
its  old  ftation  amongft  the  other  Indeclinables,  and  has,  by 
a  fingular  whim  of  his  own,  made  it  a  fecondary  dafs  pf 
Attributives,  or  (as  he  calls  them)  Attributes  of  Attributes ; 
yet  neither  does  he  nor  any  other  Grammarian  feem  to 
have  any  clear  notion  of  its  nature  and  character. 

B.  Johnfon  *  and  W^is  and  all  others,  I  think,  feem 
to  confound  it  with  the  Prepoiitions,  Conjunctions  and  In* 

teijedtions. 

*  "  Prepofitions  arc  a  peculiar  kind  of  Adverbs ^  and  ought  to  be  re - 
*'  ferrcd  thither/'  Jf.  JohnJorCs  Grammar. 

£  "  Intcrjcario 


460  OF  ADVERBS. 

All  Adverbs  ending  in  ly  (the  moft  prolific  branch  of 
the  family)  are  fufficiently  underftood :  the  termination 
(which  alone  caufes  them  to  be  denominated  Adverbs) 
being  only  the  word  like  corrupted ;  and  the  corruption 
fo  much  the  more  ealily  and  certainly  difcovered,  as  the 
termination  remains  more  pure  and  diftipguiihable  in  the 
other  lifter  languages,  the  GermaQ,  the  Dutch,  the  Danifh 
and  the  Swedilh  ;  in  which  it  is  written  licb,  lyJt,  lig^  Uga. 
And  the  Encyclopaedia  Britannica  informs  us,  that — "  In 
•<  Scotland  the  word  Like  is  at  this  day  frequently  ufed 
*<  inftead  of  the  Englifh  termination  Ly»  As,  for  a  goodfy 
"  figure,  the  common  people  fay,  a  goodlike  figure." 

Adrift 

Is  the  paft  participle  Adrifedy  Adrifd^  Adrift,   of  the 
Anglo-faxon  verb  Djupan,  Abjupan,  to  Drive. 

"  And  qiihat  auenture  has  the  hiddir  driffe  ?" 

Douglas.    Bookc  3.  pag.  79. 

i.  e.  Driffed  or  Driffen, 

Aghast,    Agast. 
May  be  the  paft  participle  Agazed. 

"  The  French  excl^m'd — The  Devil  was  in  arms* 
^^  All  the  whole  army  ftood  AgiO^d  on  him/' 

Firftpart  of  Henry  6.    Afk  i.  Sec.  i. 

I  ,       jigazed 


OF  ADVERBS.  461 

Agazed  may  meui)  made  to  gaze :  a  verb  built  on  the 
verb  To  gaze. 

In  King  Lear  (A6t  a.  See.  i.)  Edmund  fays  pf  Edgar^ 

« 

**  Gasted  by  dje  noife  I  made, 

«  Full  fuddcnly  he  fled." 

GafiecLt  i.  e.  made  aghaft :  which  is  again  a  verb  built 
dri  the  participle  agbaft.  This  progreffive  building  of  verb 
upon  verb  is  not  an  uncommon  prance  in  language. 


In  Beaumont  and  Fletcher's  Wit  at  feveral  Weapons, 
(Aft  2.)  «  Sir  Gregory  Fopp»  a  mtkfs  lordof  land^  fays 
of  his  clown, 

"  If  the  fellow  be  not  out  of  his  wits,  then  will  I  never 
<*  have  any  more  wit  whilft  I  live ;  either  the  fight  of  the 
«  lady  has  gastered  him,  or  elfe  he's  drunk.'' 

I  do  not  bring  this  word  as  an  authority,  nor  do  I  think 
it  calls  for  any  explanatim).  It  is  Tpoken  by  a  fool  of  a 
fool ;  and  may  be  fuppofed  an  ignorantly  coined  or  &n-> 

taftical  cant  \vord ;  or  corruptly  ufed  for  Gajied* 

* 

An  obje^on.may  certainly  be  made  to  this  derivation  : 
because  the  word  aoast  always^  I  believe,  denotes  a  con- 

iiderable 


462  OF  ADVERBS, 

iiderable  degree  of .  terror ;  which  is  not  denoted  by  the 
verb  To  Gaze  :  for  we  may  gaze  with  delight,  with  wonder 
or  admiration,  without  the  leaft  degree  of  fear.  If  I  could 
have  fountl  Written  (as  I  doubt  not  there  was  in  fpeech)  a 
Gothic  verb  formed  upon  the  Gothic  noun  AnS,  which 
means  Fear  and  Trembling  (the  long- fought  etymology  of 
our  Englifti  word  Ague  ^^) ;  I  fliould  have  avoided  this  ob- 
jection, 

♦  Junius  fays—."  Ague,  febris.  G.  Aigu  eft  acutus.  Nihil  ncmpe  ull- 
"  tatius  cftj  quam  acutas  dicerc  febres." 

But  Skinner,  a  medical  man,  was  aware  of  objeftions  to  this  derivadon^ 
which  Junius  never  dreamed  of.  He  therefore  fays—"  Eortajfe  a  Fr. 
"  AigUi  acutus.  Quia  (  Wtem  in  paroxyjmo)  acutus  (^quodammodo)  niorbus 
"  eft,  et  acutis  doloribus  exercet :  licet  a  medicis,  durationem  magis  quam 
"  vehementiam  hujus  morbi  reipicicntibus,  non  inter  acutas,  fed  cbronicas 
"  febres  numeretur.*' 

But  Skinner's  qualifying  paroxyjtnoy  quodammodo,  acutis  doloribus,  by 
which  (for  want  of  any  other  etymology)  he  endeavours  to  give  a  colour, 
to  the  derivation  from  Aigu,  acutus,  will  not  anfwer  his  purpofe :  for  it  is  not 
true  (and  I  Ipeak  from  a  tedious  experience)  that  there  are  any  acute  pain^ 
in  any  period  of  the  ague.  Befides,  S.  Jbhnfon  has  truly  obferved,  that 
— *^  The  cold  fit  is,  in  popular  language;  more  particularly  called  the 
*^  Ague  i  and  the  hot,  the  fever."  And  it  is  commonly  faid---"  He.  has 
*^  an  Ague  and  fever." 

I  believe  our  word  Ague  to  be  no  other  than  the  Gothic  word  ^TlSy 
fear,  trembling,  Ihuddering. 

I .  Bccaufe  the  Anglo-faxons  and  Ehglifh,  in  their  adoption  of  the  Gothic 
fubftaritives,  (moft  of  which  terminate  iri  s)'alwa3rs  drop  tfie'tSrininating  s. 

2»  Becaufe^ 


OF  ADVERBS.  463 

je^ony  and  with  full  aiFuntnce  have  concluded  that  aoast 
was  the  paft  participle  of  AriSA^r*  »•  e.  Ansed,  AriS'A., 
AriST.  i.  e.  made  to  fliudder,  terrified  to  the  degree  of 
trembling.  There  is  indeed  the  verb  AtqAh*  timere; 
and  the  paft  participle  Ari^>  territus ;  and  it  is  not  without 
an  appearance  of  probability,  that,  as  WbileSy  Amongesy  &c. 
have  become  with  us  Whilftx  Amongjiy  8cc.  fo  Ari^  might 
become  Agidst,  Agist,  Agast  ;  or  AridlS  might  become 
Agisd,  Agist,  Agast.  And  the  laft  feems  to  me  the  moft 
probable  etymology.. 

Ago. 

Goy  Ago,  Ygo,  Gon,  Agon,  Gone,  Agene,  are  all  ufed 
Indifcriminately  by  our  old  EngHflx  writers  as  the  paft 
pa^cple  of  the  verh  To  Go, 

Go. 

'*  But  netheks  the  thyngc  is  Da 

**  This  &ls  god  was  foone  go 

«  With  lus-  deceits,  and  held  him  clofe."' 

Gower.   Lib.  6.  Fol.  138.  pag.  2;  coL  2.. 


2.  Becaufe,  though  die  Englifh>  word  is  mitten  Agijb,  the  common 
people  and  the  country  people  always  pronounce  it  Achy,  or  Acuy. 

3.  Biecaufe  the  diltinguifliing  mark  of  this  complaint  is,  the  tremhUng  or 
fimdderingi  and  from  that  diftinguifliing  circumffance  it.  woutd  naturally 
take  its  name. 

•4.  Becaufe:  die  .Fremh/.frofir  whom  the  term  ^/^  is  fuppoied  to  have 
been  boriDwedj  never  called  the  complaint  by  that  name. 

«  The 


99       ' 


464  OF  ADVERBS. 

'^  The  dale  is  go,  the  nightes  chauncc 

^^  Hath  derked  all  the  bright  fonne/' 

•■-.■« 

Gower.    Lib.  8.  Fol.  179.  pag.  i.'  col.  2. 

*'  But  foth  IS  fayed,  go  (ithcn  many  yeres, 
"  That  feld  hath  eyen,  and  wodc  hath  ercs.' 

Chaucer.    Knygbies  Tale.     Fol.  4.  pag.  i .  ^coL  2. 

"  How  ofte  tymc  may  men  rede  and  fcne 
"  The  trcfon,  that  to  women  hath  Be  Do : 
**  To  what  fyiie  is  fuche  loue,  I  cart  not  fenc 
^'  Or  where  bccometh  it,  whan  it  is  oo.'* 

Chaucer.  Troylus.    Bokc  2^  Fol.  167.  pag,  i.  coL  a* 

Ago. 

*^  Of  louers  nowe  a  man  m^e  fee 
^  Ful  many,  that  unkinde  bee 
'^  Whan  that  thei  haue  her  wille  Do^ 
*'  Her  loue  is  after  fbone  ago/* 

Cower.    Lib*  5.  Fol.  iii.  pag.  1.  cd.  a. 

<^  As  god  him  bad,  right  fo  he  dede 
^^  And  thus  there  leftc  in  thziftede 
*^  With  him  thre  hundred,  and  no  mo, 
^*  The  remenant  was  all  ago.'* 

Cower.    Lib.  7.  Fol.  163.  pag.  2.  col.  2. 

^'  Thus  hath  Lycurgus  his  wille : 

**  And  toke  hb  leue,  and  forth  he  went. 

'<  But  lifte  nowe  well  to  what  entent 

"  Of  rightwifneffc  he  did  fo. 

**  For  after  that  he  was  ago, 

"  He  Ihope  him  neuer  to  be  foundc." 

Gower.    Lib.  7.  Fd.  158,  pag,  2.  col.  i. 


<c 


For 


'  ^ 


OP  ADVERBS.  465 

^^  Fo?  eucr  the  latter  cndc  of  ioyc  is  wo, 
"  God  wottc,  worldcly  ioye  is  fbone  ago.** 

CSnuuiT.  Nomusprieft.    FoL  90.  pag.  i.  col.  i. 

^'  For  if  it  erft  was  weH,  tho  was  it  bet 

'*  A  thoiifandc  foldc,  this  nedeth  it  not  enqucrr, 

^^  Ago  was  cuery  Ibrowc  and  euery  fere." 

Trcylus.    Bokc  3.  Fol.  181.  pag,  2.  col.  i. 

'^  That  after  whan  the  ftorme  is  al  ago 
"  Yet  woi  the  water  qiiappc  a  day  or  two." 

Lucnci.    ^o\.  215.  pag.  1.  col.  i. 

"  Ful  fykcrly  ye  wcne  yoiir  othcs  laft 
*^  No  kngcr  than  the  wordes  ben  ago/* 

La  telle  dame.    FoL  267.  pag.  2.  coL  2. 

'^  Trouth  fomtyme  was  woAt  tt>  take  auayle 
<^  In  euery  matere,  but  al  that  b  ago." 

4ffmile  of  La4fes.    F(rf.  277.  pag.  i.  col.  i. 

Y  o  Oi 

*«  A  clerke  tteeretnisrof  Oxenforde  air» 
"  Thac  luifio  Log^  bad  kage  Voo;" 

Prfii.  tt  Cant,  Takt» 

"  To  horfe  is  al  her  lufty  folke  Yco." 

f3>ouefr.  Didtt    Fol.  aia.  pag.  s.  col.  s. 

•^  Thou  woft  thy  felfe,  whom  that  I  loue  ptode 
•*  As  I  beft  can  J  gon  fythcn  longe  whylc." 

Thylue.    Boke  i.  FoL  t6t.  pag.  i.  col.  i. 

O  Q  O  AOON# 


466 


OF  ADVERBS. 


Agon. 

«  And  cuermore,  whan  that  hem  fell  to  Ipcke 
"  Of  any  thingc  of  fuche  a  tyme  agon." 

Troylus.     Boke  3.  Fol.  180.  pag.  i.  col.  i. 

"  Thou  thy  felfe,  that  haddeft  habundaunce  of  rychefl* 
"  nat  longe  agon.** 

Boecius,     Boke  3.  Fol.  232.  pag,  2.  col.  2. 

"  Ful  longe  agon  I  might  haue  taken  hedc." 

Amelyda,    Fol.  V]^.  pag.  i.  col.  i. 

Gone. 

•    ■ 

''  I  was  right  nowc  of  talcs  defolatCj 

"  Ncrc  that  a  marchant,  gone  is  many  a  yerc, 

'*  Me  taught  a  tale,  which  ye  fliuUen  here." 

Man  of  Ldwes  Tale.    Fol.  1 9.  pag«  i .  col.  i  • 

*^  But  fothe  is  faid^  gonb  fithen  many  a  day, 
^*  A  trcwe  wight  and  a  thefe  thynkcth  not  one.** 

Squicrs  Tak.    Fol.  28.  pag.  i.  col.  a. 


A  G  O  N  £• 

"  Of  fuche  enfamples  as  I  finde 
"  Upon  this  point  of  tyme  agone 
"  I  thinke  for  to  tellen  one.*' 

Gower.    Lib.  5.  Fol.  87.  pag.  i.  col.  i. 

"  But  erly  whan  the  fonnc  fhone 
"  Men  figh,  that  thei  were  agone 

^'  And 


€€ 


OE.ADY^^LBS^  467 

^*  And  come  unto  the  kynge,  and  tolde, 
^^  There  was  no  worde^  but  out,  alas, 
'*  She  was  ago,  the  mother  weptc, 
"  The  father  as  a  wood  man  lepte." 

Gower.    Lib.  5.  Fol.  104.  pag.  2.  col.  2. 

Whan  that  the  myfly  vapoure  was  agone 
And  clere  and  fayrc  was  the  mornyng.'' 

Chaucer.  Blacke  knygbt.    Fol.  287.  pag.  i.  col.  i. 

^*  For  I  loued  one^  fill  longc  fythe  agone 
"  With  al  myn  herte,  body  and  ftil  might." 

Blacke  btygbt*    FoL  289.  pag.  i.  col.  2. 

^^  Which  is  no  more  than  has  been  done 
^^  By  knights  for  ladies,  long  agone." 

^^  And  many  a  ferpent  of  fell  kind, 

^^  With  wbgs  before  and  flings  behind^ 

^^  Subdu'd  as  poets  fay,  long  agone, 

"  Bold  Sir  George,  Saint  George  did  the  dragon." 

Hudibras. 

Tillotfon)  in  a  Fafi  fermon  oii  a  thank/giving  occafion, 
31ft  January,  1689,  fays, 

«  Twenty  years  agone." 

Asunder. 

Is  the  paft  participle  Sj-unbpcn  or  3?pint)pcr)i  Separated 
(as  the  particles  oifandzxt)  of  the  verb  Sont>juan,  Sunt>juan, 
Synopian,  Xpinbjuan,  8cc.  Tofeparate* 

O  o  0  2  "In 


CC 


463  OP  KW^mm. 

**  In  vertiie  and  h^ly  almefcdede' 

They  liuen  all^  and  aeucr  ASOND)m  wendc 
Tyll  dcth  departed!  hem/* 

Chaucer.    Squiers  Tde^.    Fol.  §4.  pig.  2.  coL  i. 

And  tyl  a  wicked  deth  him  take 
Hym  had  kuer  asondrb  (hako 
And  let'al  his  lymmes  asokdrb  rjnie 
«  Than  kauc  his  richeflfe  m  his  lyue,^ 

R(mh  of  the  Rofe.    ]?oL  14^.  pag*  2.  coL  2. 

*^  Thefc  ylkc  tiw>  tKat  bcthc  Ui  anocsilafte 

«(  So  Ipthc  ta  Item  AspNbiE.  gon  it  were/'  ^ 

Trojfus.    Boke^.  Fol.  179.  gag,  2;  coL  2^ 

*'  This  yerde  was  large^  and  rayled  4I  t^e  alcyea 
^*  And  fhadowed  wel,  with  hloibmy  bowes  grenc 
^^  And  benched  nciwe^.  and  $ond2D  all  the  wayes 
^*  In  which  flic  walkcth.** 

Tro^luf^    Bqke2.  Fql.  167.  pag.  2,  col.  1. 

'Oiis  word  (in  all  its  varieties)  is  to  be  found  in  all  ther 
northern  languages  ||^  and  is  qrimnaUy  from  A.  $.  Sonxt^ 
i.  e.  Sand^ 

A  8  1?  R.  A  Tt 

Is  the  paft  participle  Sj-tjiaejeb  of  the  Anglo-faxon  ver^ 
St;»aB5anj  fpaigere,  diipeigcare^  Xoj^roj/y  to  fcatter.. 


**  Th^prfifti^dn^^  and  ^th;  astraym J^ 

^ovaer.    lib.  4..  FoL  84..  pag.  2.  coL  b. 

'^  And  ouer  this  1.  figh  alio 
"  The  noble  people  of  Hrael 
^  Dif^s^  as  flicpc  iipon  an  hille. 

4  ^Without 


**'  *  ^ 


OF  ADVERBS^  469 

^^  Without  a  kepe;:  unaraied : 

^  And  as  they  wenten  about  astraied 

^^  I  herde  a  voycc  unto  hem  feyne/* 

Gower.    Lib.  7.  Fol.  156.  pag.  2.  coL  i. 

^^  Adiab  to  the  bataylc  went. 
«  Where  Bcnedad  for  all  his  Ihelde 
*«  FKm  doughy  fo  that  upon  the  feldc 
^^  His  peopk  goth  aboute  astjiaie.^ 

Ciower.    lib.  7.  FoL  156.  pag.  2.  col.  2. 

S^  Johnfbn  fays — To  Stray  is  from  the  It^^n  Sircars 
from  the  Latin  extra  viam.  But  STKAVAm^  Srjieapian^ 
Srjicopian>  Srjicpian>  Sqiejiari^  Scjiae^i^a :  and  Srjiap^  Srjieop^ 
Stpeo,  Stpca,  Stjie>  were  ufed  in'our  own  mother  tongues,  the 
Gothic  and  Anglo-^faxon ;  long  before  the  e:siftence  of  the 
word  Straviarey  and  the  begmning  of  the  corrupted  dialecft 
of  the  Latin  called  Italian^  and  even  of  the  corrupted 
dialedt  of  the  Greek,  called  Latin.  And  as  the  words  To 
Sunder  2ind  Afunder  proceed  from  Sonb^  i*  e.  Sand :  fo  flo 
the  words  To  .Stray^  To  StraWy  To  StroWy  Tb  StreWj  To^ 
Straggle^  Ta  Strolly  and  the  well-named  Strawberry  (i.  e^ 
Stranji^d-berryy  Stray^bsrry)\  all  proceed  from  Strawj  or  as> 
©ur  peasantry  ftill  pronounce  it  Strab  ^.  And  Aftrayy. 
or  j0rafdy  means  Strawedy,  fcattered  and  difperfed  as  the: 
Straw  is  about  the  fields;. 

*  «*  Mte  lyft  not  of  ^dle  chaffe  ne  of  the  Siree 
'<  Make  fo  longe  a  tale,  as  of  the  come.!' 

Chawtr.  Man  of  L«wes.T/ik..   FoK  22.  pag;  i.  col.  i;. 

**  Reaping^ 


470  OF  ADVERBS, 

**  Reaping  where  thou  haft  not  fown,  and  gathering 
*^  where  thou  haft  not  Jir awed  J* 

St.  Matthew,     Chap.  xxv.  Ver.  24. 


A  T  w  I  s  T. 

The  paft  participle  ne-tpifefe,  Scpij-et),  Srpij-b,  of  the  verb 
Tpi;-an,  Tpy]*an,  De-cpyran,  torquere,  Tpij*an  from  Tpa, 
Tpae,  Tpi,  Tpy,  Tpeo,  two. 

Awry. 

The  paft  participle  Sppy^,  Apjiy^o  of  the  verb  pj^an, 
ppi^an,  to  writhe. 

In  the  late  Chief  Juftice  Mansfield's  time,  for  many- 
years  I  rarely  liftened  to  his  doctrines  in  the  Court  of 
King's  Bench,  without  having  ftrong  caufe  to  repeat  the 
words  of  old  Gower ; 

"  Howe  fo  his  mouthe  be  comely 
"  His  worde  fitte  euermore  awrie." 

Lib.  I.  Fol.  29.  pag.  2.  col.  2. 

Askew. 

In  the  Danifh  Skiav^  is  wry,  crooked,  oblique.    Skiavery 
to  twift,  to  wreft.     Skiavt,  twifted,  wrefted. 


€t 


And 


€€ 


OF  ADVERBS.  471 

^'  And  with  that  wordc  all  fodcnly 
She  pafTeth,  as  it  were  askie. 
All  cleanc  out  of  the  ladies  fight." 

Gower.    Lib.  4.  Fol.  7K  pag.  i.  col.  i. 

Askant*     Askance. 

[Probably  the  Participles  Afcbuined^  Afcbuins].  In  Dutch, 
Scbuiftj  wry,  oblique.  Scbuinerij  to  cut  awry.  Scbuins^ 
floping,  wry,  not  ftrait. 

A  s  w  o  o  N. 

The  paft  participle  25pianb,  Syuonb  of  the  verb  Suaman, 
Xfpunan,  deficere  animo* 

"  Whan  flie  this  herd,  aswoune  down  flie  felleth 
"  For  pitous  ioy,  and  after  her  fwounyng 
•«  She  both  her  yong  children  to  her  calleth." 

Gierke  of  Oxenfordes  Tale.     Fol.  51.  pag.  i.  col.  i. 

**  And  ^th  that  word  fhe  fel  aswoune  anon, 
**  And  after,  whan  her  fwounyng  was  gon 
"  She  rifeth  up." 

DoSlour  of  Pbifikes  Tale.     Fol.  65.  pag.  i.  col.  i. 

Astound. 

The  paft  participle  F^onne  [Eftonned]  of  the  French 
verb  Eftonner  (now  written  Etonner)  to  aftonifli. 

"  And  with  this  worde  fhe  fell  to  grounde 
"  Aswoune,  and  there  fhe  laie  astounde." 

Gower.    Lib.  4.  Fol.  83.  pag.  i.goI.  a. 

7  Enough. 


47 «  OF  ADVERBS. 

Enough. 

In  Dutch  Genoeg  from  the  verb  Genoegeriy  to  content,  to 
fatisfy.  S.  Johnfon  catinot  determine  whether  this  word 
is  a  fubflantive,  an  adjective,  or  an  adverb ;  but  he  thinks 
it  is  all  three. 

"  It  is  not  eafy,  he  fays,  to  determine  whether  this 

<*  word  be  an  adje<5tive  or  adverb;  perhaps,  when  it  is 

**  joined  with  a  fubftantive,  it  is  an  adje6tive,  of  which 

«  Encfix)  is  the  Plural''*,     In  other  fituations  it  feems  an 

**  adverb ;  except  that,  after  the  verb  To  have  or  To  be, 

«  either  expreiled  or  underftoodj,  it  may  be  accounted  a 

"  fubftantive.** 

According  i6  him.  It  iheans,-"^**  In  a  fu^ident  meafure* 

<<  fo  as  may  fatisfy,   fo  as  may  fuffice.     2.  Something 

**  fufficient  in  greatnefs  of  exceUencei     ^«  Something  equal 

*'  to  a  fH&ns  power  or  abilities,     4.  In  a  fufficient  degree* 

«  5 «  It  notes  i  Jiigbt  drlgmentafion  of  the  polltive  degree* 

"  6«  Sometimes  it  notes  D/>«/««//o«  /     7 «  An  exclamation 

**  noting  fulnefs  or  fatiety** 


;;S_  -       _     ^.^^t-^'  __  *  <'••'»       ■■v><«^^^  qy  •_^jj^y»»;^^ 


*  In  his  Grammar,  he  faysf — ^'  Adjcftivcs  in  the  Englifh  language  arc 
'^  wholly  indeclinable;  having  neither  cafe,  gender,*  nor  number ^  being 
'^  added  to  Subftantives,  io  all  relations,  without  any  change," 

Irt 


OP  ADVERBS-  473 

Ih  the  Anglo-faxan  it  is  Geno?  or  Cenoh :  and  appears 
to  be  the  paft  participle  Henoset),  multipUcatum>  manifold^ 
of  the  verb  Geaosan,  multiplicare. 


Fain. 

The  paft  participle  pae^eneby  psesen,  pseSn?  loetus^  of  the 
verb  ppsemany  paejaiaDy  gaudere,  betari. 

*'  Of  diat  men  Ipeken  here  and  there, 
"  How  that  my  lady  beareth  the  price, 
**  How  flie  is  &ire,  how  Ihe  is  wife, 
**  How  Ihe  is  womanliche  of  chere : 
<<  Of.  all  this  thing  whan  I  male  here 
«'  What  wonder  is  thovigh  I  be  painb.** 

Gower.    Lib.  i.  Fol.  13.  pag.  i.  coL  2. 

**  For  which  they  were  as  glad  of  his  commyng 
^^  As  foule  is  FAiNEj  whan  the  fonne  upryfeth." 

Chaucer.    Sbyptnans  Talc.    Fol.  69.  pag.  i.  col.  i* 

*'  Na  uthir  wyfc  the  pepyl  Aufoniane 

"  Of  this  glade  time  in  hart  wox  woundcr  fane." 

Douglas.    Boke  13.  pag.  472. 

Lief.  Liever.  Lievest* 

Lcop,  Lcopjie,  laWffffX. 

^M  had  as  lief  not  be^  as  live  to  be  in  awe 
*•  Of  foch  a  thing  as  I  myfelf." 

SbakeJ^iorc^s  Julius  C^ar. 

PPI?  No 


474 


OF  ADVERBS, 


No  modern  author,  I  believe,  would  now  venture  aiy 
of  thefe  words  in  a  ferious  paflage :  and  they  feem  to  be 
cautioufly  ihunned  and  ridiculed  in  commcMi  converiatibn,. 
as  a  vulgarity.  But  they  are  good  Englifh  words,  and 
more  frequently  ufed  by  our  old  Ehglilh  writers,^  than  any 
other  word  of  a  correfponding  fignifiGation. 

» 
Leop  (for  Leopet),  or  Lupab,  of  Lupob  or  Lup)  is  the  paft 

participle  of  Lupian^^^  To  love;  and  always  means  bdoved*^ 


"  And  netheles  by.  daics^olde,, 

**•  Whan  that  the  bokcs  were  L-EtrfiR,. 

'*  Writyng  was  heloued  euer 

**  Of  them,  that  wercn  virtuous/* 

Gnver.    ProL  FoL  i^  p^.  u  col.  r- 

"  It  is  a  unwife  vengeance 

"  Whiche  to  none  other  man  is  lefb 

"  And  is  unto  him  felfe  grcfe.** 

Lib.  2,  Fol.  i«.  pag.  u  col.  2; 

"  And  Ihe  anfwerd>  and  bad  hym  go, 
"  And  faide,  howe  that  a  bed  all  warme 
**  Hir  LiEFE  lay  naked  in  hir  arme/' 

Lib.  2.  Fol.  41.  pag.  I;  col.  t; 


.« 


T" 


♦  *'  The  Fader  Almychty  of  the  heuin  abu^  ^. 

In  the  mcne  tyme,  unto  luno'his  luf. 
Thus  ipak  j  and  fayd,"--- 

Douglas.    Bopke  12.  pag.  441; 


C( 


€€ 


€€ 


Thre 


OF  ADVERBS.  475 

^'  Thre  pointes  whiche  I  fyndc 
*'  Ben  LEUEST  unto  mans  kyndc ; 
««  The  firft  of  hem  it  is  dclite, 
'*  The  two  ben  worfliip  and  profited* 

Lib.  5.  Fol.  184.  pag.  2.  col.  a. 

*^  For  cucry  thyng  is  wcl  the  leuer 

*^  Whan  that  a  man  hath  bought  it  dere.*' 

Lib.  5.  Fol.  109.  pag.  2.  col.  i. 

^^  Whan  Rome  was  the  worldes  chiefe, 
*^  The  footh  fayer  tho  was  leefe, 
'^  Whiche  woldc  not  the  trouth  Iparc, 
'*  But  with  his  worde,  playne  and  bare, 
"  To  thcmperour  his  fothes  tolde." 

lib.  7,  Fol  154.  pag.  2.  col.  2. 

'^  Of  other  mens  paifion 

**  Take  pitee  and  compaflion 

'«  Ai)d  let  no  thyng  to  the  be  leef 

**  Whiche  to  an  other  man  is  grcfc." 

Lib.  8.  Fol.  190.  pag.  2.  coL  i. 

''  They  lyued  m  ioye  and  in  felycitc 

^^  For  cchc  of  hem  had  other  lefb  and  dere." 

Chaucer.    Mtmkcs  Talc.    Fol.  85.  pag.  i.  coh  2. 

^'  In  the  fwete  feafon  that  lbfe  is." 

Rm.  of  the  Rofe.    Fol.  120.  pag.  2.  col.  u 

^'  His  LEEFE  a  rofen  chapelet 

*^  Had  made,  and  on  his  heed  it  fet.'* 

Rom.  of  the  Rofe.    Fol.  124;  pag.  i«  col.  i. 

"  And  hym  her  lefe  and  derc  hert  cal.*' 

TVeylus.    Soke  3.  Fol,  176.  pag,  2.  coL  a. 

P  p  p  a  «  Had 


€€ 
Cf 


476  OF  ADVERBS. 

"  Had  I  hym  neucr  lefe  ?  By  God  I  wcne 
••  Yc  had  neucr  thyng  fo  lefe  (quod  (he)/' 

Troylus.    Bokc  3.  Fol.  177.  pag.  i^  col.  t. 

*'  Ye  that  to  me  (quod  (he)  fol  leuer  were 
*'  Than  al  the  good  the  funne  aboute  gothe.*' 

Troylus.    Bokej.  Fol.  17^.  pag.  a.  coL  i. 

**  For  as  to  me  nys  leuer  none  ne  lother/* 

Leg.  of  good  Women.     Prol.  Fol.  205.  pag.  2.  col.  %. 

**  Remcmbrand  on  the  mortall  anciant  were 
•*  That  for  the  Grckis  to  hir  leif  and  derc, 
"  At  Troye  lang  tyme  fchc  led  before  that  day/' 

Douglas.    Booke  i.  pag.  13. 

Gif  euir  ony  thanke  I  de(en2it  toward  the 

Or  ocht  of  myne  to  the  was  leif^  quod  fche." 

Douglas.    Booke  4.  pag.  i  la 

« 

^  O  thou  nymphe,  vourfchip  of  fludis  clere> 
"  That  to  my  fiiul  is  bald  maiit  leif  and  dere." 

Douglas,    Book  12.  pag.  410. 

Adieu^     Farewell. 

The  former  from  the  French  ^  dieu,  from  the  Italian 
Addio:  the  latter  the  imperative  of  Pajian,  to  go,  or  to 
fare.  So  it  is  equally  faid  in  Englifli — How  fares  it  ?  or, 
How  goes  it  ?— • 

The  Dutch  and  the  Swedes  alio  fay,  Vaarwel^  Farmitl : 
The  Danes  Lev^vel^  and  the  Gennans  Lebet-wobl, 

Halt. 


OP  ADVERBS.  477 

Halt; 

Means— Jr<?A/,  Stop,  (as  when  we  fay — Hold  your  band)^ 
Keep  the  prefent  iltuationy  Hold  fiill. 

In  German  Still  balten  is  To  bolt  or  (lop ;  and  Halten  is 
^0  Hold,  In  Dutch  Still  bouden^  to  halt  or  ftop;  and 
Houderty  to  hold. 

Menage"  fays  well^ — ^**  Far  AltOy  proprio  di  quel  fermarfi 
<<  che  fanno  le  ordinanze  militari :  Dal  Tedefco  Halte^  che 
«  vale,  Ferma  l^ ;  dimora  l^ ;  imperativo  del  verbo  Halten^ 
**  cioe  arreftarfi.* 

The  Italians  ailuredly  took  the  military  tenn  from  the 
Oeimans* 

Our  £ngl;(h  word  halt  is  the  imperative  of  the  AngIo«> 
fax(Mi  verb  Healban,  to  hold ;  and  Hold  itfelf  is  from  Ueal-^ 
taoy  and  was  formerly  written  halt. 

**  He  kyth  downe  his  one  eare  all  plat 
*^  Unto  tfie  grounde^  and  halt  .  it  faft.** 

Gower.    lib.  i.  FoL  la  pag.  i.  coL  2. 

^^  But  fo  well  HALTfi  no  man  the  plough, 
*'  That  he  nc  balkcth  otherwhilc."  . 

Lib;  2.  Fol  50.  pag.  i;^  coL  i». 

.2  ''  The 


47«  OF  ADVERBS. 

^'  The  golde,  whiche  auarlcc  enclofeth, 

"  But  all  to  litell  hym  fuppofeth, 

'^  He  let  it  neuer  out  of  his  honde, 

*'  'Bui  gette  hym  m6re,  and  halt  it  faft,  *  ^    '  - 

"  To  feie  howe  fuche  a  man  hath  good,  .  i    r  i'T 

'*  Who  fo  that  reafone  imderftoode, 

"  It  is  unproperlichc  faydc  :    -'        .  •    , 

*^  That  good  liath  hym,  anrf  halt  him  taidc. 

Lib.  4.  ^6h  83.  p.  2.  Cw  2.  FoL^4,  ^  i.^-ctiiT^i. 

**  Euery  man,  thath  halt  him  worth  a  lefc^;- .         ■  \V.  -  ..  A 
*'  Upon  his  bare  knees  ought  all  hys  lyfe 
*'  Thankcn God,  that  him  hath  fcnt  awjrfe.!* 

Chaucer.    Marckauntes  TaUn.  FoL  29.  pag,  i.  coh  i. 

*^  For  euery  wight,  whiche  that  to  Rome  went, 
'^  Halte  not  o  pathe,  nc  alway  o  manerc.*' 

Troylus.    Boke  i.  I«^6l.  I63.  |>ig.  t.  Col;  !• 

'^  Loue,  that  with  an  holfome  alyauhcc 

'^  H*tT*pe6J)le  ioyncd,  as  hym  lyfte  Hem  gfe.^: 

Troj/lus.    Boke  3.  Fol.  182.  pag.  i^coL  i. 

L  o. 

iriife  itnpef atire  of  Loo^.     So  the  common  people  fay 
corruptly, — "  Lo*  youi  there  now** — "  Lc^  yoii  thfe'te." — 

«   ■ 

Where  we  now  employ  fometimes  jlook  and  ibmetimes 
LOj  Virith  diftritriindtibri ;  btir  old  Englifti  writers  ufed  in- 
differently  lo,  LOKi^XDkETHi'fottiifeihXperativ'e,    Chaucer, 
in  the  Pardoners  Tale,  iays " 


€i 


Al 


OF  ADVERBS.  479 

'^  Al  the  fouerayne  aftes,  dare  I  fay, 

*^  Of  viftories  in  the  Olde  Tcftament 

*'  Were  don  in  abftynencc  and  in  prayene, 

"  LoKETH  the  Byble^  and  there  ye  mowe  it  lere.** 


'^  LoKETH  *  Attyla,  the  great  conqucroiir 

"  Dyed  in  his  flepe,  with  fliame  and  diftionour/* 


f*  LoKB  *  eke  howe  to  kynge  Demetrius 
"  The  king  of  Parthes,  as  the  boke  fayth  us, 
^*^  Sent  him  a  payrc  of  dyce  of  golde  in  fcornc," 


"  Bebolde  and  Je  that  in  the  firft  table 

^  Of  hye  gods  heftes  honourable, 

*'  How  that  the  fcconde  hefte  of  him  is  this, 

•*  Take  not  my  name  in  ydelnefle  amys. 

^*  Lo,  he  Rather  f  foirf)yddcth  fuche  fwering 

"  Than  homicide,  or  any  other  curfed  thing/' 

'  Fol.  66.  pag.  a.  col.  2,  Fbl.  67.  pag.  i.  coL  i. 

m  ■ 

'-*••■' 

ft 

I 

So  B.  Tohnfon,  (Alcbymtfi^  A.  2.  Sc.  3.). 

*'  For  LOOK,  how  oft  I  iterate  the  work, 
'*  So  many  times  I. add  xibta  his  virtue." 

Here,  if  it  had  pleafed  him,  he  might  have  faid— id 
how  oft  8cc. 


I 


a  « 


•     •  • 

*  In  both  thefe  plapes  4  modern  .writer  would  fay  lo* 
j-  Sooner y  Earlier. ^^Ht  forbids  iuch  fwearing.  Before  "he  fbrl)ids  homicide, 
i.  e.  in  a  foregoing  part  of  the  table. 

6  Andi^ 


I 


480  OF  ADVERBS. 

And  again 

«  Subtle,  Why,  Rafcall— 
*<  Face,  Lo  you  here,  Sir." 


Here,  if  it  had  pleafed  him,  he  might  have  faid^— -look 
vou  here. 

m 

The  Dutch  correfpondent  adverb  is  Slet  from  Sietiy  to 
look  or  fee.  The  German  Siebe  or  Sibe  from  Seben^  to  fee. 
The  Danilh  See  from  Seer^  to  look  or  fee.  The  Swedifh 
jS"/,  or  Si  deft  from  Se^  to  look.  . 


Needs. 

Need-is,  ufed  parenthetically.  It  was  antiently  written 
Nedes  and  Nede  is.  Certain  is  was  ufed  in  the  fame  man- 
ner, equivalently  to  certes. 

**  And  certaine  is  (quod  (he)  that  by  ^ettyng  of  good, 
•<  be  men  maked  good." 

* 

"  I  haue  graunted  that  nedes  good  folke  moten  bei:\ 
<<  myghty." 

BQCcius,     BoKe  4.  FoL  241.  pag.  i.  col.  i.  2. 

«  The 


OF  ADVERBS.  4^.4 

«  The  confequence  is  falfe,  nedes  the  antecedeot  inote 
"  ben  of  the  faroC;  condicion.** 

Tefi^.fif  houe,     Boke  2.  Fol.  316.  pag.  i.  ool,  oi* 

« 

<^  None  other  thynge  fignifyeth  this  neceflite  but  onelye 
"  thus;  That  ftial  be,  may  tiat  togider  be  and  hot  be. 
^  Eueolyche  alio  it  is  fothe,  loue  was,  and  is^  arid  ihafl  be, 
^i^atof  hcceflyte;  and  nedeis  to  haue  be  al  that  war, 
**  and  «(?a<?/»/ Af  to  be,  al  that  is.** 

riT/^.  of  Jjtue.  Boke  3.  Fol.  3  28.  pag.  i.  col.  i. 


Prithee. 


I  pray  thee, 


T  o  w  I  T. 


Though  it  is  the  infinitive  of  piran,  does  not  mean  2> 
KnoWf  as  Skinner  and  S.  Johnfbn  have  fuppofed ;  but  To 
Be  known j  Sdendumf.  For  fo  (for  want  of  Gerunds,  as 
they  are  moft  abfurdly  called)  our  anceftors  ufed  the  A(!^ive 
Infinitives,  as  well  of  other  verbs  as  of  piran  *.     Similat 

'  adverbs 


■m    • 


♦  *^  Falfe  fame'is  not  to  drede,  ne  of  wyfe  pcrfons  to  accepte.'* 

Teft.  of  tiyia]^   Boke  f.  Fbl.  308.  pag.  2:  col.  1. 

InfUnccs.of  this  ufp^of  the  A^ive  Infinitives  in  Englifh^  are  very  numc- 
rous ;  but  me  rcalon  of  it  appears  beft  from  old  tranflations. 

,  :\  Q^q  q  -    "  Quod 


482  OF  ADVERBS. 

adverbs  are    thofe  of   the  Latin  and  French,   Videlicet^ 
fcilicet^  a  fqavoir.     And  it  is  worth  noting,  that  the  old 
Latin  authors  nfed  the  abbreviated  Videlicet  for  Videre  licety 
when  not  put  (as  we  call  it)  adverbially  *. 


*'  Quod  fi  nee  Anaxagorae  fugam,  ncc  Socratis  vcncnum,  nee  Zenonis 
tormenta  novifli ;  at  Canios,  at  Scnccas^  at  Soranos  fcire  potuifli.  Quos 
nihil  aliud  in  cladem  detraxit,  nifi  quod  noftris  moribus  inftitutr^  ftudiis  im- 
proborum  diflimillimi  vidcbantur.  Itaque  nihil  eft  quod  admirerc>  fi  in  hoc 
vit£  falo  circumflantibus  agitemur  procellis^  quibu^  hoc  maxime  propofitum 
eft,  p^mis  dijplicere.  Quorum  quidcm  tametfi  eft  numerofus  exeFcitus> 
SPERNENPus  tamcn  eft/' 

Boethius  de  Conjol.    Lib.  1.  Profe  3.. 

Thus  tranflated  by  Chaucer : 

'*  If  thou  haft  not  knowcn  the  exilynge  of  Anaxagoras,  ne  the  enpoy- 
foning  of  Socrates,  ne  the  turmentes  of  Zeno ;  yet  mighteft  thou  haue 
knowen  the  Senecas,  the  Canios,  and  the  Soranos,  The  whichc  men  no- 
thing els  ne  brought  to  the  deth,  but  only  for  they  were  enformed  of  hiy 
maners  land  fcmeden  moft  unlyke  to  the  ftudies  of  wicked  folke.  And  for 
thy  thou  oughteft  not  to  wondren,  though  that  I  in  the  bitter  fee  be  driuen 
with  tempeftcs  blowing  aboute.  In  the  which  thys  is  my  moftc  purpofc, 
that  is  to  Tayne,  to  difplcfen  wicked  men.  Of  whiche  Ihrewes  al  be  the 
hoofte  heuer  fo  great,  it  is  to  dispise." 

Fol.  222,  pag.  I.  col.  r. 

•  "  Pam.  ViDEuciT  parcum  illum  fiiific  fenem,  qui  dixerit: 
"  Quoniam  ilk  iUi  poliicetur,  qia  cum  cibum  popofcerit/' 

«*  jtnt.  Videlicet  fuiffe  illum  nequam  adolcfcentem,  qm  illico, 
••  Ubi  illc  pofck,  denegavit  fc  dare  granum  tritici." 

flauius.  SticbuSy  Adl  4.  See.  i, 

I  PSR- 


OF  ADVERBS.  483 

Perchance. 

Par-efcbeant,  Par-efcbeance,  the  participle  of  Efcbeoirt 
Ecbeoir,  Ecboir,  to  fall, 

Percase. 

« 

Per^afunty  participle  of  cadere,     Antiently  written  Par- 
casy  Parcaas. 

Peradventure. 
Antiently  Perauhtery  Parauntery  Inaunter,  Inaventuu, 

Maybe.     Mathap. 

In  Weftmoreland  they  fay  and  write  Mappen,  i.  e.  may 
happen, 

Habnab. 

Hap  ne  bap — ^happen  or  not  happen. 

<<  Philautus  determined  hab  nab  to  fend  his  letters.* 

Euphues,     By  Jobn  Uify,     Page  109. 

Perhaps.     Uphap. 
By  or  through  Haps,     Upon  a  Hap, 

"  The  HAPPES  oyer  mannes  hede 
**  Ben  honged  with  a  tender  threde." 

Gtwer,    Lib,  6.  Fol.  135.  pj^.  2,  coL  a, 

Qqq  a  «  la 


484  OF  ADVERBS^ 

^^  In  heuen  to  bene  lofcd  with  God  hath  none  ende,  but 
"  endelefle  endureth:  and  thou  canfte  nothynge  done 
"  aryght,  but  thou  defyre  the  rumoure  therof  be  healed 
^^  and  in  euery  wightes  eare ;  and  that  dureth  but  a  pricke, 
*^  in  refped^e  of  the  other.  And  fo  thou  fekeft  rewarde 
"  of  folkes  fmale  wordes,  and  of  vayne  prayfynges* 
^^  Trewely  therein  thou  lefeft  the  guerdon  of  vertue,  and 
<^  lefeft  the  gretteft  valoure  of  confcyence,  and  uphap  thy 
<^  renome  euerlaftyng.*^ 

Chaucer.  Teji.  of  Loue.  Boke  !•  FoL  311.  p.  i.  c.  !♦ 


Belike. 

■   •     ■ 

This  word  is  perpetually  employed  by  Sir  Philip  Sydney^ 
Hooker,  Shakefpear,  B.  Johnfon,  Sir  W.  Raleigh,  Bacon,. 
Milton,  Sec.  But  is  now  only  ufed  in  low  language,  in^ 
ftead  of  perhaps* 

»  ■ 

•  .  ■    '■ 

'  ^  in  the  Dariiih  language  LyHey  and  in  the  S  wedifh  Lyeka, 
mean  Lucky  i.  e.  chance,  hazard.  Hap,  fortune,  adventure.. 

•*  Dionyjius.  He  thought  felike,  if  Damon  were  out 
<*  of  the  citie,  I  would  not  put  him  to  death.** 

Damon  and  Pytbias^     By  R.  Edwards, 

"  Brutus 


OF  ADVERBS.  485 


•**  Brutus  and  Caffius 


<*  Are  rid  like  madmen  through  the  gates  of  Rome." 

**  Anth.     Belike  they  had  fome  notice  of  the  people 
<<  Hdw  I\l»ftd  «iov*d  them." 

■{!.:  -l  ,■■,'  ■■  :.  .  .  .  '     luim  Ca/ar*.    A^  3,  Sep.  2 


■  f  <  ■ 


;  i**  lU^wld  tltet  J  X  Your^iy  if  his  dr^xi  I  Is  jhe  not  my  ibn» 
<^>  except  he !<^.> Ins  own  ibnf  Belikc  this  is  ibme  new 
<f  ilEind : of, iulaloraptiofi  the  gallants  iife;"[.    ' 

\'r'':  ■B'iferyA^n  in  ifis  Humour*  'ASt  3.  See.  7^* 


"  Than  Ihe,  remembering  belike  the  continual  and 
*^  inceilai3rt  and  confident  speeches  and  couHes  that  I  had 
«  held  on  rhf  14tfd^  fide/  beeame  utterly  alie»at6d  fh>ra 

«  me."  ■  .-^  ••-•••''    •'-•-    •■ 


*   .  • 


Sir  F,  Bacon*s  Jpology, 

'^  Will  he,  fo  wife,  let  loofeat  once  his  ire, 

*^  Belike  through  impotence,  or  unaware^ 

**  Togivehi^  ^ncpiesrthqr  wilb  ?"  ^  ,  •., 

'  '  *•    '  "   *^       ParadifeLoft.    Book  i/T.  156; 

*     J.       ;     t    \    '  i..      .    .     '.      -        '     ;..'fil     V*  -la 

'■,ij    »;•  ■    ; -ill    fii'    i'.;;-    :•    ''"^v,  .\    ■..[    I  \a    .j  j    :  jjJ\ 
^'  Many  a  fre^c  knight^ .  ^^rmny.A  Wi?/yl  royte  ._,^ ., . .  .. .  ., 

*'  On  bor/e  and  on  fote,  in  al  the  felde  aboutc/* 

Chaucer.  Annelida.     Fol.  270.  pag,  £•  c&l.  r. 


<c 


Sum 


»  r         11 


^8  OF  ADVERBS. 

'^  I  fall  declare  all,  and  reduce  futb  hate  (*) 
**  From  the  bcginn'uig  of  the  firQ:  debate." 

Ifouglas.    Booke  7.  pag.  205. 

#  ■  »  •  •  •  '  ■  • 

*'  The  felf  ftound  amyd  the  preis  fute  hote  (*) 
^  «^»  Lucagus  cnteris  into  hb  charfotc.**   '    .* 

Douglas.     Booke  10.  pag.  ^8. 

^*  Wyth  fie  woiardis  fcho  a&iiieris  6im  rvrm  hat**""  (*) 

DaugUfs. .  Booke  l2:  pag.  433. 

^^  All  with  ane  voice  and  hale  aflent  at  acconje^. 
^'  Dcfiris  the  as  for  thare  prince  arid  lord> 
"  And  ioyus  ar  that  into  feild  fute  hate  (*) 
**  Under  thy  wappimt  Turmis  lyis  doun;.bct.** 

J9ft;^j:/<v.  .=  Bcjoke  13.  pag.  468. 


■  * 
I    t 


f  * 


ASlD9r 


€C 
€€ 


Now  i&^;i^/  to  band  the.  dynt  lichtb.  with  ane  fwftk^ 
Now  bendis  he  up  bis  burdpun  with:  ane  mynt,  .  ^ 
On  syde  he  bradis  for  to  efchcw  the  dynt.'* 

Douglas.    Booke  5.  pag.  142. 


9 


{*)  EX'fedi-am    ct  primal  revocabojJXOrdia;pilga8&^    •-  Firg. 

(*)  Interca.  -.  .  »  >;^^,  A    ' 

C)  Talibus  occurrit  e^x^k  ^    '  '  Z^^^-'  "  '    "  ' 

(*)  ^TRere  is  no' word  in  tHe  original  of  Maphaeus,  to  explain  or  juftify 

the  rtrrr  hate  of  Douglas  in  tliis  paflage  :  He  barely  fays; —  -  - 

**  Turnumque  fiib  ,armis;Exultant,  ceqjdji^p^'t.ti^j^^  acer 

^etivit,  Expediam^  and  occurrU  diSis^^  of  .yirg(l^  ^  lirfBcici^t.     - 

'  I  fuppofc 


41. 


•      OF  ADVERBS.  489 

I  fuppofc  it  needlefs  to  notice  fach  adverbs  as  Aback, 
Abreaft,  Afront,  Ahead,  At  hand.  Beforehand,  Behind- 
hand, ScCt 

Ablaze. 

*^  That  caftcn  fire  and  flam  aboutc 

*^  Both  at  mouth  and  at  nafe 

^^  So  that  thei  fetten  all  on  blase/*^ 

Gcwer.    lib.  5.  Fol.  I02.  pag.  2.  col.  2,    • 

Aboard. 

**  This  great  fhyp  en  anker  rode ; 

*^  The  lordc  comcth  forth,  and  when  he  figh 

*^  That  other  liggc  on  borde  fo  nighe." 

Gower.    lib.  2.  FoU  33.  pag.  2.  col.  t. 

^'  What  helpeth  a  man  haue  mete, 

**  Where  drinke  lackethe  on  the  borde.** 

Cower.    lib.  4.  Fol.  72.  pag.  2.  col.  i. 

'*  And  howe  he  lofte  hys  fterefman 

*•  Whiche  that  the  fterne,  or  he  toke  kepc, 

•*-^mote  over  the  borde  as  he  flepe." 

Chaucer.    Fame.    Boke  i.  Fol.  194.  pag.  1.  col.  2. 

"  Wc  war  from  thens  aflfrayit,  durft  nocht  abidc^ 
^*  Bot  fled  anon^  and  wtbin  burd  has  brocht 
^'  That  fiuthful  Greik." 

Douglas,    Booke  3.  pag.  90. 

'^  The  burgeomt  treis  on  burd  they  bring  for  aris.*' 

Douglas.    Booke  4.  pag.  x  13. 

R  r  r  "  The 


-•    c 


490  OF  ADVERBS. 

**  The  ftabill  aire  has  calmyt  wcle  the  fe, 

'^  And  fouth  pipand  windis  fare  on  hie 

"  ChaDancis  to  pas  on  bord,  and  tak  the  depe." 

Douglas.     Booke  5.  pag.  15^. 

Abroad. 

^^  The  rofe  Ipred  to  fpanniflihyngc, 

^^  To  iene  it  was  a  goodly  thynge> 

"  But  it  nc  was  fo  fpredc  on  brede 

'*  That  men  within  myght  knowe  the  fede," 

Chaucer.     Rom.  of  tbe.Ro/e.     Fol.  137.  pag.  i..  col.  2; 

^*  Als  fer  as  his  crop  hie  on  Isrede 

*^  Strekis  in  the  are,  as  fer  his  route  dois  fprede." 

Douglas.    Booke  4.  pag.  115. 

■■^^  his  baner  quhite  as  floure 
^^  In  (ing  of  batel  did  on  brede  difplay.'^ 

Douglas. .  Booke  8..  Pag.  240^ 

A  D  A  T  S. 

*  But  tlus  I  fee  on  daies  nowe/' 

Cower.    Lib,  4.  fbl.  7a.  pag.  2.  col  K. 

•*  Thus  here  I  many  a  man  compleine^. 
•*  That  nowe  on  daies  thou  fhalte  finde 
^  At  ncdc,  few  firendcs  kinde." 

Gower.    Lib.  5,  fol,  no.  pag.  i..  col.  i;. 


'^  But  certanly  the  dafit  blude  now  on  dayis 

•*  Waxis  dolf  and  dull  throw  myne  unweildy  age.'* 

Dougtass    Booke  5.  pag.  140^. 

Anights.. 


i 


cc 


OF  ADVERBS-  491 

Anights. 

*^  He  mot  one  of  two  thyngcs  chefc, 

*^  Where  he  woU  haue  hir  fuche  on  nicmt, 

*^  Or  ek  upon  dates  light, 

'^  For  he  fhall  not  haue  both  two." 

Gower.     Lib.  i.  foL  17.  pag.  2.  col.  2. 

For  though  no  man  wold  it  alowe. 

To  flepe  kuef  than  to  wowe 
'^  Is  hismancr,  and  thus  on  nightss 
"  When  he  feeth  the  lufty  knightes 
"  Reuelen,  where  thefe  women  are 
'^  Awey  he  fculketh  as  an  hare." 

Gower.    Lib.  4.  fol.  78.  pag.  i.  coL  i.  * 

^*  For  though  that  wiucs  ben  ful  holy  thioges 
"  They  muft  take  in  patience  a  nyght 
"  Suche  maocr  neccffaryes,  as  ben  plefinges 
*^  To  folke  that  han  wedded  hem  with  ringes, 
*'  And  lay  a  litell  her  holyneflc  afyde." 

Chaucer.    Man  of  Lawes  T.    FoL  22.  pag.  i.  col.  i, 

**  Madame,  die  fentence  of  this  Latyn  is. 

Woman  is  mannes  ioyc  and  his  Wis, 

For  when  I  fele  on  nyght  your  foft  fyde, 
^*  Al  be  it  thit  I  may  not  on  you  rydc,  - 

"  For  that  our  perche  is  made  fo  narowc,  alas, 

I  am  full  of  ioye  and  folas." 

Nonnes  prieft.    Fol.  89.  pag.  2.  col.  2. 

Afire.  ., 

"  Tumus  fegcs  the  Troianis  in grete  yre,     ,  '  \\ 

"  And  al  thare  fchyppis  and  nauy  let  in  fyre." 

Douglas.    Booktf  9.  pag.  274.  ( 

R  r  r  2  Alive.  ' 


€€ 


t€ 


t 


49* 


OF  ADVERBS. 


cc 


€( 


Alive. 
Op  /he.  i.  e.  In  Life  *• " 

"  For  as  the  fisfhe,  if  it  be  drie, 
*'  Mote  in  dcfautc  of  water  die  : 

Right  fo  without  aier,  on  liue 

No  man  ne  beaft  might  thriue." 

Gower.    Lib.  7.  fol.  14a.  pag,  i.  col.  2* 

"  For  prouder  woman  is  there  none  on  lyue.** 

Chaucer.  Troylus.     Boke  ^.  fol.  143.  p.  2.  c.  1. 

**  The  verray  ymagc  of  my  Aftyanax  jing : 

*'  Sic  ene  had  he,  and  fie  fare  handis  tua, 

"  For  al  the  warld  fie  mouth  and  face  perfay  2 

"  And  gif  he  war  on  life  quhil  now  in  fere, 

"  He  had  bene  cuin  eild  with  the,  and  hedy  pere/* 

Douglas.    Booke  3.  pag.  84. 


Aloft. 

t)«  Loft  J  On  Luftj  On  Lyfty  !•  e.  In  the  Luft  or  Lyft ; 
or,  (the  fuperfluous  article  omitted,  as  was  the  antient 
cuftom  in  our  language,  the  Anglo-faxon)  In  Lyfi^  In  Luft^ 
In  Loft. 

"  The  golde  trefTed  Phcbus  hygh  on  lofte.*' 

Chaucer.     Troylus.    Boke  5.  Fol.  196.  pag.  2.  col.  i. 


♦  In  the  firfl  book  of  the  Tcflament  of  Love,  Fol.  305.  pag.  i.  col.  i. 
Chaucer  furnifhes  another  adverb  of  the  fame  kmd,  to  thofe  who  are  ad- 
tiiij«rs  of  this  part  ofjpeech.-^^  Wo  is  hym  that  is  Aloue.'' 

''  But> 


k 


/ 


OP  ADVERBS.  493 

^*  Bot,  lo  anone  (anc  woundcr  thing  to  tcU) 
^^  Ane  huge  bleis  of  flambys  brade  doun  fel, 
*^  Furth  of  the  cluddjrs  at  the  left  hand  ftraucht;^ 
'*  In  manerc  of  an  lychtning  or  fyrc  flaucht : 
"  And  did  alycht  richt  in  the  famyn  Jiede, 
^  Apoun  the  croun  of  fare  Lauinias  hede  i 
^^  And  fra  thine  hie  up  in  fhe  lyft  agane 
^^  Ic  glade  away^  and  tharein  did  remane/* 

Douglas.    Bookc  13.  pag.  476^ 


"  With  that  the  dow 


*^  Heich  IN  /i^  LIFT  full  gl^de  he  gan  behald^ 
'^  And  with  her  wingis  forand  mony  fald," 

Douglas.    Bookc  5.:  pag.  144^ 

In  the  Anglo-faxon  Lypt  is  the  ^/r  or  fhe  Clouds.  In 
St.  Luke — "  in  lypre  cummenbjc — coming  in  the  clouds.'^ 
In  the  Danifh,  Luff  is  -^/r,  and  "  At  fpronge  i  lufterT—^ 
to  blow  up  into  the  air,  or  'jlloft.  In  the  Swedifti  alfo 
Luft  is  Air.  So  in  the  Dutch,  De  toef  bebben^  to  fail  before^ 
the  wind ;  hevettj  to  ply  to  windward  ;  loef^  the  weather 
gage;  &c.  From  the  fame  root  are  our  other  words^ 
Ij>fty  Loftjff  To  Luffj  Lecy  Leewardy  To  Liftj  Sec. 


Anew. 

"  The  battellis  war  adionit  now  of  new, 

"  Not  in  manere  of  hndwart  folkis  barganc,. 

*^  But  with  fcharp  fchcrand  wappinnis  made  melle/* 

Diuglas.    Bookc  7.  pag.  2*25. 


Ci 


Wa» 


494  OF  ADVERBS. 

'<f  Was  it  honcft  ane  godly  diuine  wycht 

*^  With  ony  mortall  ftraik  to  wound  in  ficht  ? 

*'  Or  jit  ganand  the  fwerd  loift  and  adcw 

"  To  rendir  Turniis  to  his  brand  of  new, 

•*^  And  ftrength  incrcfcis  to  thamc  that  vincuft  be  ?" 

Douglas.    Booke  i2.  pag.  441. 

A  R  o  W. 

"  And  in  the  port  cntcrit,  lo,  wc  fee 
"  Flokkis  and  herdis  of  oxin  and  of  fee. 

Fat  and  tydy,  rakand  ouer  all  qubare. 

And  trippis  eik  of  gjut  but  ony  kepare, 
*^  Li  the  rank  gers  pafturing  on  raw." 

Douglas.    Booke  3.  pag.  75. 


"  The  pepil  by  him  vincuft  mycht  thou  knaw, 
"  Before  him  paffand  per  ordour  all  on  raw/* 

Douglas.    Booke  8.  pag.  270. 

"^  A  S  L  £  £  P. 

*^  Whan  that  pyte,  which  longe  on  slepe  doth  tary, 
«  Hath  fet  the  fyne  of  akmy  heuynefle." 

Chaucer.  La  belle  dame.     Fol.  Q,Sg.  pag.  i.  col.  i» 

*^  Apoun  the  earth  the  uthir  beiftis  al, 

"  Thare  befy  thochtis  ceifling  grcte  and  fmal, 

"  Ful  found  ON  SLEPE  did  caucht  thare  reft  be  kind." 

Douglas.    Booke  9.  pag.  aSj* 

"  In  thefe  provynces  the  fayth  of  Chryfte  was  all 
"  quenchyd  and  in  slepe.**       Fabian. 

Awhile. 


o1f  adverbs.  495 

Awhile. 

A  time.     Wbil~es,   i.  e.    Time,  that  or  which.     Wbiljl 
is  a  corruption ;  it  fhould  be  written  as  formerly,  Whiles,. 

**  She  died,  my  lord,  but  whiles  her  flander  Kv'd.'* 

Much  Ado  about  Notbing* 

AuOHTOrOffGHT.. 


The  Anglo-faxon  Hpit:  r  a  wbitj  or  owbit.  N.  B,  O  was 
formerly  written  for  the  Article,  A  ;  or  for  the  numerali 
#0f «     So  Naught  or  Nought  i  Na  wbity  or  No  wbit^ 

For  t  h* 

*<  Againe  die  knight  the  olde  wife  gan  ariie 

•*  And  faid ;  Sir  knight,  here  forth  lyedi  no  way.** 

Cbauftr.  Wife  of  Bathes  Tale.    Fol.  38.  pag.  a.  col.  2^. 

•*  Alas  (quod  he)  alas,  that  euer  I  bchcyght 

**  Of  purcd  gold  a  thoufande  pounde  of  weight 

*'  Unto  thb  phyiofopher,  howe  fhall  I  do  ? 

**  I  fc  no  more,  but  that  I  am  fordo  ^\ 

*•  Myn  hcrytage  mote  I  nedes  fell, 

^  And  ben  a  beggar,  here  may  I  no  lenger  dwell/*' 

Frankekjns  Tale.     Fol.  55;  pag.  2.  col.  i2i. 

*  FoR-DO,   u  e.   Fortlh-dmiei   i.  e.   D«w  to  go  forth^  or  cauied  to  gOi 
>0RTH^  i.  e«  Out  of  douru    In  modern  language,  turned,  out  of  doors^ 

"Lokc- 


496  OF  ADVERBS. 

"  Lokc  out  of  londc  thou  be  not  fore  f, 
**  And  if  fuche  caufe  thou  hauc,  that  the 
"  Behoueth  to  gone  out  of  countre, 
^'  Leaue  hole  thyn  hert  in  hollage." 

Rom.  of  the  Roje.    Fol.  \%i.  pag.  2.  col.  2* 

From  the  Latin  Fores^  Forisj  the  French  had  Fors  (their 
modem  Mors).  And  of  the  French  Fors,  our  anceftors 
(by  their  favourite  pronunciation  of  Tb)  made  poji^,  forth  : 
as  from  the  French  JJes  or  AJfez^  they  made  asseth, 
i.  e.  enougbi  fufficient, 

m 

^^  Rycheffc  ryche  nc  xnakcth  nought 

^'  Hym  that  on  trcafour  fette  his  thought :  . 

*^  For  rycheflc  ftonte  in/ufy/aunce, 

^^  And  nothyng  in  haboundaunce : 

^'  Yorjufyjaunce  al  oncly 

"  Makcth  mcnne  to  Ijrue  rychcly. 

*^  For  he  that  hath  mytchcs  tweyne 

*^  Ne  value  in  hys  demeync, 

*'  Lyueth  more  at  cafe,  and  more  is  riche, 

*^  Than  dothe  he  that  is  chiche 

**  And  in  his  barne  hath,  foth  to  fayne, 

*'  An  hundred  mauis  of  whete  graync. 

Though  he  be  chapman  or  marcbaunt^ 

And  hauc  of  goldc  many  befaunt  i 

For  in  the  gettyng  he  hath  fuche  wo. 

And  in  the  kepyng  drcdc  alio. 

And  fette  euermorc  his  befignefle 
*'  For  to  encrefc,  and  nat  to  leflc. 


€t 


4C 


€t 


f€ 


€€ 


t  FoRB,  i.  €•  Fors  or  forth* 


^  lor 


V 


OF  ADVERBS.  497 

^'  For  to  augment  and  multiplyc;' 

"  And  though  on  heapcs  that  lye  him  by» 

*'  Yet  neucr  Ihal  make  rycheffe 

**  AssBTH  unto  hys  grcdyncfle  */' 

Rom.  of  the  Rofe.    Fol.  146.  pag.  a*  col.  1. 

The  Adverbs  Outfortbj  Infortbj  Witboutfortby  Witbinfortby 
(which  were  formerly  common  in  the  language)  have  ap- 
peared very  ftrange  to  the  modems ;  but  with  this  expla- 
nation of  FORTH,  I  fuppofe,  they  will  not  any  longer  feem 
either  unnatural  or  extraordinary. 

"  Within  the  hertes  of  folke  fhall  be  the  biting  con- 
^^  fcience,  and  witboutfortb  fhal  be  the  worlde  all  brenning.'^ 

Cbaucer.  Perfons  Tak.     Fol.  102.  pag.  i.  coL  i. 

"  Whan  he  was  come  unto  his  neces  place, 
*^  Where  is  my  lady,  to  her  folke  (quod  he) 
"  And  they  him  tolde,  and  Infortb  in  gan  pace, 
"  And  founde  two  other  ladyes  fit  and  (he." 

Troylus.    Soke  2-  Fol.  163.  pag.  2.  col.  \. 


*  I  have  been  compelled  to  make  the  above  long  extraft,  that  my 
reader's  judgment  may  have  fair  play  \  and  that  he  may  not  be  mifled  by 
the  interpretation  given  of  asseth  in  the  gloffary  of  Urry's  edition  of 
Chaucer  j  where  we  are  told,  that  asseth  means — "  AJjfent^  to  Anjwer  \ 
^'  from  the  Anglo-faxon  Aj-eSian,  affirmare.*'  When  the  reader  recolleAs 
xht  Juffyjaunce  which  is  Ipoken  of  in  the  firft  part  of  the  extraft  ^  he  will 
liave  litdc  difficulty,   I  imagine,    to  perceive  clearly  what  asseth  here 

means :  for  the  meaning  of  the  whole  paflage  is -Juffifance  alone  makes 

riches;  yfY^lch Juffi/ance  the  mifer's  grcedincfs  will  never  permit  him  to 
obtain. 

S  «  s  "An 


498  OF  ADVERBS. 

"  And  than  al  the  derkeneffe  of  his  mijQcnowing  fhall 
^^  feme  more  evidently  to  the  fight  of  his  underftandyng, 
<^  than  the  fonne  ne  feemeth  to  the  fight  Without  forthe.^'* 

Boecius.     Boke  3.  fol.  238.  pag.  2.  col.  2. 

^^  Philofophers,  that  hyghten  Stoiciens,  wende  that 
"  ymages  and  fenfibilities  war  emprinted  into  foules  fro 
*^  bodies  Without  for tb  ^ 

Boecius.     Boke  5.  foL  250.  pag.  2.  col.  a* 

"  There  the  vaylance  of  men  is  demed  in  riches  Out^ 
^^  forthy  wenen  men  to  haue  no  proper  good  in  them  felfe, 
**  but  feche  it  in  ftraunge  thinges.'' 

Tejl.  of  Loue.     Boke  2.  fol.  316.  pag.  2.  col.  2. 

"  The  goodnefle  (quod  (he)  of  a  perfon  maye  not  ben 
*<  knowe  Outfortby  but  by  renome  of  the  knowers.** 

Teji.  of  Loue,     Boke  2.  fol.  319.  pag.  i,  co!.  2. 

"  But  he  that  Outfortb  loketh  after  the  wayes  of  this 
"  knot,  connyng  with  which  he  Ihuld  knowe  the  way 
"  Infortby  llepeth  for  the  tyme  j  wherfore  he  that  wol  this 
<*  way  know,  muft  leave  the  lokyng  after  falfe  wayes 
<*  O"tfortb,  and  open  the  eyen  of  his  confcyence  and  un- 
♦*  clofe  his  herte." 

Teji,  of  Loue,     Boke  2.  fol.  322.  pag.  1.  col.  2» 


(C 


Euery 


i 


OF  ADVERBS.  49^ 

**  Euery  herbe  fhewieth  his  vertue  Outforthe  from' 
"  wythin.** 

Teji,  of  Loue,     Boke  2,  fol.  323.  pag.  i.  col,  i. 

^^  Loue  peace  Withoute  forth^  \o\x^  ^^t2s:^  JVithinfortby 
^^  kepe  peace  with  all  men." 

<^  There  is  nothinge  hid  from  god.  Thou  flialte  be 
"  found  gilty  in  the  judgmehtes  of  god,  though  thou  be 
^^  hid  to  mens  judgementes :  for  he  beholdeth  the  lierf^' 

"  that  is  Witbinfortb.'' 

'  Tbo.  Lupfet.  Gathered  Counfails. 

G  A  D  S  O. 

CazzO)  a  common  Italian  oath  (or  rather  obfcenity,  in 
lieu  of  an  oath)  firft  introduced  about  the  time  of  James 
the  firft,  and  made  familiar  in  our  language  afterwards  by 
our  afife6ted  travelleid  gentlemen  in  the  time  of  Charles  the 
fecond.     See  all  bur  comedies  about  that  period. 

Ben  Johnfon  ridiculed  the  aflfeftation  of  this  oath  at  its 
commencement,  but  could  not  ftop  its  progrefs. 

^^  Thefe  be  our  nimble- fpirited  Catso's,  that  ha*  their 
^*  evafions  at  pleafure,  will  run  over  a  bog  like  your  wild 

*  *  . 

**  Irilh ;  no  fooner  ftartcd  but  they'll  leap  from  one  thing 

S  s  s  2  «  to 


500  OF  ADVERBS. 

"  to  another,  like  a  fquirrel.  Heigh  !  dance  and  do  tricks 
**  in  their  difcourfe,  from  fire  to  water,  from  water  to  air, 
**  from  air  to  earth :  as  if  their  tongues  did  but  e*en  lick 
**  the  four  elements  over  and  away.** 

Every  man  out  of  bis  humour,     KOi  a.  See.  i. 

MucH^     More.     Most. 

Thefe  adverbs  have  exceedingly  gravelled  all  our  etymo- 
logifts,  and  they  touch  them  as  tenderly  as  poffible. 

Much. 

Jimius  and  Skinner,  (whom  Johnfon  copies)  for  much, 
irrationally  refer  us  to  the  Spanilh  Mucbo, 

More. 

Under  the  article  more,  (that  he  may  feem  to  fay 
fomething  on  the  fubje^l)  Junius  gives  us  this  fo  little  per- 
tinent or  edifying  piece  of  information; — ".Anglicum. 
«  interim  more  eft  inter  ilia,  quae  faxonicum  a  in  o  con- 
«  vertunt ;  ficuti  videmus  ufu  advenifle  in  ban,  bone,.,  os, 
«  oflis.  Hal^  whole,  integer,  fanus.  Ham,  home^  domus,. 
«  habitatio.     fcan,  ftone,  lapis,  &c.** 

SkuMier  fays — "  More,  Mo.  ab  A.  S.  COa,  CDapa,  ^Dxpt,. 
«  QDape,  8cc     Quid  li  oomia  a  Lat.  Major,  t* 

A.  S.  Johofoxk 


OF  ADVERBS*  sai 

S.  Johnfon  finds  more  to  be  Adje<Stive>  Adverb,  and 
Subftantive.  The  adjedlive,  he  fays,  is — "  The  compa- 
*<^  rative  of  Some  or  Great  J*  The  adverb  is — ^**  The  particle: 
<*  that  forms  the  comparative  degree."—"  Perhaps  fome 
<*  of  the  examples  which  are  adduced^  under  the  adverb, 
"  (hould  be  placed  under  the  fubftantive,** — It  is  doubtful? 
<*  whether  the  word,  in  fome  cafes,  be  noun  or  adverb.** 


M  o  s  t; 

Junius  fays,  untruly, — *^  Most,  Expofitivo  nempe 
^<  msepe,  fuit  comparativus  maejipc,  et  fuperlati^us  maejiej-r  y 
^  et  eontradle  maefr.'^ 

Skinner — "  Teut*  Meifi^  feliciter  alludit  Gr.  f^t^fovy  plu- 
••  rimum,  maximum,  contr,  a  fd^syi^ov.^ 

Si  Johnfon  again  finds  in  most,  an  adjedive,  an  adverb^ 
and  a  fubftantive*  Of  the  adverb  he  fays,  it  is — "  The* 
^^  particle  noting  the  fuperlative  degree."  Of  the  fub* 
ftantive  he  fays — "  This  is  a  kind  of  fubftantive,  being* 
"  according  to  its  fignification,^;;^«Z^r  or  plural.^  And 
he  gives  inftances,  as  he  conceives,,  of  its  plurality  and 

iingularity. 1  have  wafted  more  than  a  page  in  repeating: 

w^at  amounts  to  nothing. 

i 

Though- 


502- 


OF  ADVERBS. 


Though  there  appears  to  be,  there  is  in  reality  no  irre- 
gulatity  in  much>  more,  most:  nor  indeed  is- there  any 
Ibcb  thing  as  capricious  irregularity  in  any. part  o£ language;' 


# 

K 


,  la  the  Anglo^faxon  the  verb  QDapan,  ntetere^  makes  re- 
gularly the  pneterperfedt  QDoP,  or  CDope:,  (as  the.  praeter-- 
perfedt  of  Slajaii  is  SloU)  and  the  paft  participle  jMowen  or^ 
CDeopen,  by  the  addition  of  the  participial  termination 
erij  to  the  prxterperfedjt.  Omit  the  participial  termi- 
nation en  (which  omiflion  was,  and  ftill  is,  a  common 
practice  through  the  whole  language,  with  the  Anglo- 
faxon  writers,  the  old  Englifti  writers,  and  the  moderns) 
and  there  will  remain  CDope  or  Mow ;  which  gives  us  the 
Anglo-faxon  COope  and  our  modern  Englifti  word  Mow : 
which  words  mean  /imply — that  which  is  Mowed  or  Mowttp^ 
And  as  the  Hay,  Sec.  which  was  mowfty  was  put  together 
in  a  heap ;  hence,  Jiguratively^  CD^c  was  ufed  in  Anglo- 
faxon  to  denote  any  heap :  although  in  modern  Englifti  we 
now  confine  the  application  of  it  to  country  produce,  fuch 
as  Hay-mow^  Barley^mowy  8cc.  ^     This  participle  or  fub- 

ftantive 


*  GaWin  Douglas  ufes  the  word  Mowe^  for  a  heap  of  wood,  or  a  funeral 
p.Uc. 

"  Under  the  oppin  iky,  to  this  purpois, 
"  Pas  on,  and  of  treis  thou  mak  an  bing 
"  To  be  ane  fyre,  &c. 


S 


^^  Tharforc 


OF  ADVERBS.  503 

ftantive  (call  it  which  you  pleafe  :  for,  however  claffed,  it 
is  ftill  the  fame  word,  anjl  has  the  fame  fignification)  Mow. 
or  HeaPi  was  pronounced  (and  therefore  written)  with 
fonle  variety,  COa,  QDae,  CDo,  ODope,  Mow;  which,  being 
regularly  compared,  give 

# 

CDa Ma-er     (i.  e.  majie)  -  -  Maejl  (i.  e,  maefr) 

CCae  -  -  -  MiZ-er     (i.  e.  maejie)  -  -  McB-efti^.  e.  maej^) 

Q}ope  -  -  Mow-er  (i.  e.  mojte)  -  -  Moweft  (i.  e.  mO|T) 

Mo  -  *  -  Mo-er      (i*  e*  more)  -  -  Mo-eji  (i.  e*  most) 

I  have  here  printed  in  the  Anglo-faxon  character,  thofe 
words  which  have  come  down  to  us  fo  written  in  the 
Anglo-faxon  writings  :  and  in  Italics,  the  fame  words  in 
found ;  but  fo  written,  as  to  fhew  the  written  regularity  of 
the  comparifon  :  and  in  capitals,  the  words  which  are  ufed 
in  what  we  call  Englifh ;  though  indeed  it  is  only  a  con- 
tinuation of  the  Anglo-faxon,  with  a  little  variation  of  the 
written  charader* 


"  Tharforc  fcho  has  hir  command  done  ilk  dele. 
*'  But  quhen  the  gretc  bing  was  upbeildit  wcle 
•'  Of  aik  trcis,  and  fyrrcn  fchidis  dry 
*'  Wythin  the  fccrete  cloys  under  the  ^y^ 
•^  Abouc  the  Mo  we  the  forcfaid  bed  was  maid.'*" 

Booke  4.  page  rry. 


Ma 


5>o4  ^F  ADVERBS, 

Mo  (mope,  acervus^  heap)  which  was  coitftantly  ufed 
l3y  all  our  old  Englifh  authors,  has  with  the  moderns, 
given  place  to  much  :  which  has  not  (as  Junius,  Wormius, 
jand  Skinner  imagined  of  Mickle)  been  borrowed  from 
fiiyaXog;  but  is  merely  the  diminutive  of  Mo,  pafling 
through  the  gradual  changes  of  Mokel^  Mykelj  Mochily  Mucbd 
(ftiU  retained  in  Scotland)  Mocbey  much. 

^^  Yes  certes  (quod  Ihe)  Who  is  a  frayler  thynge  than 
^  the  flefhly  body  of  a  man,  ouer  whiche  haue  often  tyme 
*^  flyes,  and  yet  lafle  thynge  than  a  flye,  mokel  myght 
-*^  in  greuaunce  and  anoyenge.'' 

Tejl.  of  Loue.     Boke  2.  fol.  319.  pag.  i.  coL  !• 

■ 

<^  Opinion  is  while  a  thinge  is  in  non  certayne,  and 
^^  hydde  frome  mens  very  knowlegyng,  and  by  no  parfyte 
^^  reafon  fully  declared,  as  thus  :  yf  the  fonne  be  fo 
^^  MOKEL  as  men  wenen,  or  els  yf  it  be  more  than  the 
"  erth/' 

Teji.  of  Loue.     Boke  3.  foh  325.  pag.  2.  col.  2. 

"  A  lytel  mifgoyng  in  the  gynning  caufeth  mykel 
^^  errour  in  the  end." 

TeJl.  of  Loue.     Boke  2.  fol.  315.  pag.  2.  col.  i. 

^^  O  badde  and  ftrayte  bene  thilke  (richeffe)  that  at  their 
^  departinge  maketh  men  teneful  and  fory,  and  in  the 

*^  gatheryng 


OF  ADVERBS.  505 

**  gatheryng  of  hem  make  men  nedy.     Moche  folke  at 
^^  ones  mo  wen  not  togider  moche  therof  haue." 

^eji.  of  Loue.     Boke  2.  fol.  316.  pag.  2.  col.  1. 

**  Good  chylde  (quod  fhe)  what  ecbetb  fuche  renome  to 
"  the  confcience  of  a  wyfe  man,  that  loketh  and  meafureth 
*^  hys  goodnefle  not  by  fleueleffe  wofdes  of  the  people,  but 
^*  by  fothfaftneflc  of  confcience  :  by  god,  nothynge.  And 
^*  yf  it  be  fayre  a  mans  name  be  ecbed  by  moche  folkes 
^^  prayling,  and  fouler  thyng  that  Mo  folke  not  prayfen.'' 

Teft.  of  Loue.     Boke  2»  fol.  319^  pag.  2.  col.  r» 

"  Alfo  ryght  as  thou  were  enfample  of  moche  folde 
«  errour,  righte  fo  thou  muft  be  enfample  of  manyfolde 
**  corredlioun.** 

Tefi.  of  Loue.     Boke  i.  fol.  310.  pag.  i.  coL  2^ 

Neverthe  less. 

In  our  old  authors  written  varioufly,  Na-the-lesy  iVfe- 
the-lesy  NocbUtbe-leSy  Not-t belles ^  Never-tbe-later :  its  op- 
pofite  alfo  was  ufed,  WeUtbe-later^ 

*^  Truely  I  fay  for  me,  fythe  I  came  thys  Margarit  to 
**  ierue,  durft  I  neuer  me  difcouer  of  no  maner  difeafe, 
*<  and  WEL  THE  LATtR  hath  myn  herte  hardyed  fuch 
"**  thyiiges  to  done,  iff  the  great  bounties  and  worthy  re- 

Ttt  "frefti- 


so 6  OF  ADVERBS. 

^^  frefhmentes  that  llie  of  her  grace  goodly  without  anye 
<^  defert  on  my  halue  ofte  hath  me  rekened.'* 

Te/I.  of  Lone.     Boke  3.  fol.  332.  pag.  2.  col.  i. 

"  Habyte  maketh  no  monke,  ne  wearynge  of  gylte 
^^  fpiirres  maketh  no  knyghte:  neuerthelater  in  con- 
"  forte  of  thyne  herte,  yet  wol  I  otherwyfe  anfwere.'' 

Tcji.  of  Lone.     B.oke  2.  fol.  322.  pag.  2.  col.  2; 

Rather. 

In  Englifli  we  have  Rath^  Rather^  Ratbeji ;  which  are 
fimply  the  Anglo-faxon  RaS,  Ra^op,  RaSofc.   celer,  velox. 

Some  have  derived  this  Englifh  word  rather  from  the 
Greek  ;  as  Mer.  Cafaubon  from  op^p^^,  ^^  quod  fane  (fays 
"  Skinner)  longius  diftat  quam  mane  a  vefpere :"  and 
others,  with  a  little  more  plaufibility,  from  PaJio^ 

The  Italians  have  received  this  fame  word  from  our 
northern  anceftors,  and  pronounce  it  Ratto^  with  the  fame 
meaning :  which  Menage  derives  either  from  Rapt  us  or 
from  Rapidusy    ^^  Rapdus^  Rapdoy  Raddo^  RattoT 

Skinner  notices  the  exprefSons  Rath  fruit,  and  Rath 
wine,  from  the  Anglo-faxon  RaS ;  of  which,  after  Menage, 


he  fays — ^^  Nefcio  an  contract,  a  Lat.  rapidusT 


Minlhew 


OF  ADVERBS. 


sor 


Minfliew  derives  Rather  from  the  Lat.  Ratus,  Ray  has 
z  proverb — <*  The  Rath  fower  never  borrows  of  the  late.** 

S.  Johnfon  cites  Spenfer  (except  himfelf,  the  worft  pof- 
lible  authority  for  Englifli  words) 

"  Thus  is  my  harvcft  haften'd  all  to  Rathe.*' 

Axid  May — 

"  Rath  ripe  and  purple  grapes  there  be." 

"  Rath  ripe  are  fome,  and  fome  of  later  kind." 

And  Milton — 

"  Bring  the  Rathe  primrofe  that  forfaken  dies." 

And  he  adds  moft  ignorantly — "  To  have  Rather^  This,  I 
"  think  a  barbarous  exprefliori,  of  late  intrufion  into  our 
^*  language ;  for  which  it  is  better  to  fay — will  rather.  ^ 

Dr.  N«wton,  in  a  note  on  Lycidas,  fays  of  the  word 
Rathe — ^**  This  word  is  ufed  by  Spenfer,  B.  3.  Cant.  3. 
St.  28. — 


(C 


Too  Rathe  cut  ofF  by  praftice  criminal.". 


"  And  Shepherd's  Calendar, 

"  The  Rather  lambs  been  ftarvdd  with  cold. 


99 


T.  Warton,  in  his  note  on  the  fame  pafTage  of  Milton, 
fays,—"  The  particular  combination  of,  Ratbe  primrofe^ 

T  1 1  a  is 


5o8 


OF  ADVERBS. 


**  is  perhaps  from  a  paftoral  called  a  Palinode  by  E.  B» 
"  probably  Edmond  Bolton,  in  England's  Helicon^  Edit. 
1 6 14.  fignat.  B.  4. 


c< 


And  made  the  Rathe  and  timely  primrofe  grow/* 


^^  In  the  Weft  of  England,  there  is  an  early  fpecies  of 
^^  apple  called  the  Rafbe^hpc.  We  have — "  Rathe  and 
^*  late*" — in  a  paftoral,  in  Davi/oh^s  poemsy  Edit.  4.  London, 
*^  1 62 1,  p.  177.  In  Baftard's  epigrams,  printed  1598,, 
"  I  find — "  The  i^^^rf  primrofe  and  the  violet,''  Lib.  i. 
^^  Epigr.  34.  p.  12.  i2mo.  Perhaps -R^^^  is  a  provin- 
^^  cial  corruption  from  Rathe.** 

By  the  quotations  of  Johnfon,  Newton  and  WartoD> 
from  Spenfer,  May^  Bolton^  Davifan  and  Baftardy  a  reader 
would  imagine  that  the  word  Ratbe  was  very  little  autho- 
rized in  the  language ;  and  that  it  was  neceflary  to  hunfi: 
diligently  in  obfcure  holes  and  corners  for  an  authority.. 

^*  And  nelheles  there  is  no  man 

**  In  all  this  worlds  fo  wife,  that  can 

*'  Of  loue  temper  the  meafure  l 

*'  But  as  it  falleth  in  auenture. 

"  For  witte  ne  ftrength  maie  not  heipe: 

**  And  whiche  els  wolde  him  yelpe, 

"  h  RATHEST  throwen  under  foote." 

Gmfer.    Lib',  i.  Fol.  7.  pag.  2.  coL.2;. 

•*'SomcL' 


OF  ADVERBS;  509 

^  Some  feync  he  did  well  enough, 

^  And  fomc  feync,  he  did  amis. 

^  Diuers  opinions  there  is. 

^  And  commonliche  in  euery  nede 

^  The  wcrft  Ipcchc  is  rathest  herdc.*' 

Lib.  3.  FoL  59.  pag.  i,  col.  i- 

«*  That  cucry  loue  of  pure  kynde 

•«  Is  fyrft  forth  drawe,  well  I  fynde :: 

**  But  nethelcs  yet  ouer  this 

♦*  Deferte  dothe  fo,  that  it  is 

**  The  RATHER  had  in  many  place/* 

Lib,  4,  Fol.  72.  pag^  i.  col.  r. 

"  Who  that  is  bolde, 

"  And  dar  travaile,  and  undertake 
•^  The  caufe  of  loue,  he  fliall  be  take 
"  The  RATHER  unto  loues  grace." 

Lib.  4.  Fol.  75,  pag.  i.  col.  2. 

"  But  fortune  is-of  fuche  a  fleyght, 
"  That  whan  a  man  is  moft  on  height. 
She  maketh  hym  rathest  for  to  fallc.'' 

Lib.  6.  Fol.  135.  pag.  2,  col.  2. 

Why  ryfe  ye  fa  rathe  ?  Ey,  Benedicite, 
What  eyleth  you  ?" 

Chaucer.     Myllers  Tale.     FoL  15.  pag.  i.  col.  i.. 

•^  O  derc  cofyn,  Dan  Johan,  fhe  fayde, 
"  What  eyleth  you  fo  rathe  to  a  ryfe  ?" 

Shypmans  Tale.     FoL  69.  pag.  i.  col.  2. 

*<  For  hym  my  lyfc  lyeth  al  in  dout. 
"  But  yf  he  come  the  rather  out.'* 

Rom.  of  the  Ro/e,     Fol.  141.  pag.  2.  col.  i; 


€< 


CC 


They/ 


5IO 


v 


iC 
€€ 


OF  ADVERBS. 

*^  They  wolde  eftfones  do  you  fcathc 
**  If  that  they  myght,  late  or  rathe." 

Rom.  cf  the  Rofe.     Fol.  152.  pag.  r.^col.  i. 

<*  And  haue  my  trouth,  but  if  thou  finde  it  fo, 

I  be  thy  bote-,  or  it  be  ful  longc. 

To  peces  do  me  drawc,  and  fythen  honge. 

Ye  fo  fayft  thou  (quod  Troylus)  alas : 
*'  But  God  wot  it  is  naught  the  rather  fo." 

Troylus.     Boke  !•  Fol.  161.  pag,  2.  col.  i. 

*'  Loke  up  I  fay,  and  tel  me  what  fhe  is 

^'  Anon,  that  I  may  gon  about  thy  nedc, 

*'  Knowc  iche  her  aught,  for  my  loue  tel  me  this 

*'  Than  wold  I  hope  rather  for  to  fpede." 

Troylus.     Boke  i.  Fol.  161.  pag.  a.  col.  2. 

*^  And  with  his  fake  teeres  gan  he  bathe 

*^  The  ruby  in  his  fignet,  and  it  fette 

*'  Upon  the  wexc  delyuerlyche  and  rathe." 

Troylus.     Boke  2.  Fol.  16^  pag.  i.  col.  i* 

*^  But  now  to  purpofe  of  my  rather  fpeche." 

Troylus.     Boke  3.  Fol.  179.  pag.  2.  col.  2. 

^*  Thcfe  folke  defiren  nowe  delyueraunce 
Of  Antenor  that  brought  hem  to  mifchaunce. 
For  he  was  after  traytour  to  the  toun 
Of  Troy  alas ;  they  quitte  him  out  to  rathe/' 

Troylus.     Boke  4.  Fol.  183.  pag.  2.  col.  1. 

But  he  was  flayne  alas,  the  more  harme  is, 
Unhappely  at  Thebes  al  to  rathe." 

Troylus.    Boke  5,  Fol.  195.  pag.  2.  col.  i, 

^^  Yf 


4€ 


OF  ADVERBS.     ^  511 

<^  Yf  I  (quod  fhe)  haue  underflonden  and  knowen  ut- 
^^  terly  the  caufes  and  the  habite  of  thy  malady,  thou 
^^  languyflieft  and  art  defedled  for  defyre  and  talent  of  thy 
*^  RATHER  fortune.  She  that  ylke  fortune  onelye  that  is 
*^  chaunged  as  thou  fayneft  to  thewarde,  hath  perverted 
"  the  clerenefle  and  the  eftate  of  thy  corage.'' 

Boecius.     Boke  2.  Fol.  225,  pag.  i.  coL  2. 

•^  Whylom  there  was  a  man  that  had  aflayed  with 
"  ftryuynge  wordes  an  other  man,  the  which  not  for 
^^  ufage  of  very  vertue,  but  for  proude  vayne  glorye,  had 
««  taken  upon  him  falfely  the  name  of  a  phylofophre. 
"  This  RATHER  man  that  I  fpake  of,  thought  he  wold 
"  affay,  wheder  he  thilke  were  a  phylofophre  or  no.** 

Boecius.     Boke  2.  Pol.  230%  ^g.  1.  col.  2* 

*^  Diuyne  grace  is  fo  great  that  it  ne  may  not  ben  ful 
"  pray  fed,  and  this  is  only  the  maner,  that  is  to  fay,  hope 
"  and  prayers.  For  which  it  femcth  that  men  wol  fpeke 
^  with  God,  and  by  refon  of  fupplycacion  bene  conioyned 
^  to  thylke  clerenefle,  that  nys  nat  approched  no  rather 
^*  or  that  men  feken  it  and  impetren  it." 

Boecius.     Boke  5.  Fol.  249,  pag.  2.  coL  i^ 

'*  Graunt  mercy  good  frendc  (quod  he) 
"  I  thankc  the,  that  thou  woldcft  fo 

«  But 


51a  OF  ADVERBS. 

"  But  it  may  neuer  the  rather  be  do, 
'^  No  man  may  my  forowe  glade. '* 

Dreams  of  Chaucer.     Fol.  256.  pag.  i.  col.  i. 

"  The  RATHER  fpede,  the  foner  may  we  go. 
Great  cofte  alway  there  is  in  taryenge 
And  longc  to  fcwe  it  is  a  wery  thynge." 

JJfemble  of  La4yes.     Fol.  275.  pag.  1.  col.  2. 

^^  Thilke  fterres  that  ben  cleped  fterres  of  the  northe> 
x^  aryfen  rather  than  the  degree  of  her  longytude,  and 
*^  all  the  fterres  of  the  fouthe,  aryfen  after  the  degree  of 
^*  her  longytude,'* 

AJlrolabye.     Fol.  280.  pag.  2,  col.  !• 

*'  But  Icfynges  with  her  flatteryc 

**  With  fraude  couercd  under  a  py tous  /ace 

"  Accept  be  nowe  rathest  unto  grace." 

Blacke  Knyght.     Fol.  289.  pag.  2.  col.  2. 

*'  That  (hal  not  nowe  be  tolde  for  me 
"  For  it  no  nede  is  redily 
"  Folke  can  fynge  it  bet  than  I 
"  For  al  mote  out  late  or  rathe.*' 

Fame..  Boke  3.  Fol.  302.  pag.  t.  col.  2. 

^^  Who  was  ycrowned  ?  by  God  nat  the  ftrongeft,  but 
^^  he  that  rathest  come  and  lengeft  abode  and  continued 
**  in  the  iourney  and  fpared  nat  to  trauayle." 

Tejl.  cf  Loue.     Fol.  307.  pagt  1/  col.  2» 

*«  Euerf 


OF  ADVERBS.  513 

"  Euery  glytteryng  thing  is  not  golde,  and  under  colour 
<^  of  fayre  fpeche  many  vices  may  be  hyd  and  confeled. 
"  Therfore  I  rede  no  wight  to  truft  on  you  to  rathe, 
^^  mens  chere  and  her  fpeche  right  guyleful  is  ful  ofte.* 

Teji.  of  Loue.     Boke  2.  Fol.  314.  pag.  2.  col.  2. 

««  Veryly  it  is  proued  that  rycheffe,  dygnyte,  and  power, 
^<  been  not  trewe  waye  to  the  knotte,  but  as  rathe  by 
<<  fuche  thynges  the  knotte  to  be  unbound," 

<^  Than  (quod  Ihe)  wol  I  proue  that  flirewes  as 

^*  RATHE  fhal  ben  in  the  knotte  as  the  good.** 

Tefi.  of  Loue.     Boke  2.  Fol.  319.  pag,  i.  col.  i. 

'  **  Ah,  ^ood  nyghtyngale  (quod  I  then) 
"  A  lytcl  haftc  thou  ben  to  longe  hen, 
**  For  here  hath  ben  the  leude  cuckoWe 
"  And  fongen  fonges  rather  than  haft  thou/' 

Cuckowe  and  Nyghtyngale.     Fol.  351,  pag.  i.  col.  2; 

"  His  feris  has  this  pray  reffauit  raith, 

**  And  to  thare  meat  addrelBs  it  for  to  graitlu" 

Douglas.    Booke  i.  pag.  19. 

"  Quhen  Paris  furth  of  Phryge,  the  Troyane  hird 
"  Socht  to  the  ciete  Laches  in  Sparta, 
"  And  thare  the  douchter  of  Leda  ftal  awa, 
•*  The  fare  Hclene,  and  to  Troy  turfit  raith." 

Douglas.    Booke  7.  pag.  219. 

*  .-•  U  u  u  «^  And 


514  OF  ADVERBS. 

^^  And  fche  hir  lang  round  nek  bane  bowand  raith, 
"  To  gif  thaym  fouck,  can  thaym  culze  bayth." 

Douglas.     Bookc  8.  pag.  266, 

*'  The  princis  tho,  quhilk  fuld  this  peace  making, 
•'  Turnis  towart  the  bricht  fonnys  uprifyng, 
*<  With  the  fait  melder  in  thare  handis  raith." 

Douglas.     Bookc  12.  pag.  413. 

Fie. 

* 

The  Imperative  of  the  Gothic  and  Anglo-faxon  verb 
):IANj  pan,  To  hate. 

0  U  I  C  K  l4  T. 

Siuick-like :  from  epic,  cpicu,  cpicob,  vivus,  (as  we  ftill 
oppofe  the  f^uick  to  the  Dead).  Dpic  is  the  paft  participle 
of  Dpiccian,  vivificare.  Quickly  means,  in  a  life-like  or 
lively  manner ;  in  the  manner  of  a  creature  that  has  life* 

Scarce. 
The  Italians  have  the  adjedive  Scarfo ; 


"  Quelle  parole  affai  paffano  il  core 
*'  Al  trifto  padre,  e  non  fapea  che  fare 
"  Di  racquiftar  la  fua  figlia  e  Tonore, 
*'  Perchc  tutti  i  rimcdj  crano  scarsi." 

H  Morgantc.    Cant,  lo.  St.  128. 

Whkh 


OF  ADVERBS.  515 

Which  Menage  improbably  derives  from  Exparcus.  The 
fame  word  in  Spanifh  is  written  Efcqffb.  Both  the  Italian 
and  the  Spanifli  words  are  probably  of  northern  origin. 
In  Dutch  Skaars  is,  rare,  unfrequent.  It  is  ftill  commonly 
ufed  as  an  adjedlive  in  modem  Englifti ;  but  anciently  was 
more  common. 

<^  Haft  thou  be  scarse  or  large  of  gifte 
"  Unto  thy  loue^  whom  thou  fenieft  ? 
"  And  faith  the  trouth,  if  thou  haft  bee 
*^  Unto  thy  louc  or  scarse  or  free.'* 

Gower.     Lib.  5.  Fol.  109.  pag.  i.  col.  2. 

^^  What  man  that  scarse  is  of  his  good^ 
"  And  wol  not  gyue,  he  (hall  nought  take." 

Gower.    Fol,  109.  pag.  2.  col.  i. 

'*  That  men  Holdc  you  not  to  scarci^  nc  to  Iparyng." 

Tale  of  Chaucer.    FoL  80.  pag.  a.  col,  i. 

^^  Loke  that  no  man  for  scarce  the  holde^ 
*'  For  that  may  greue  the  manyfolde." 

Rom.  of  the  Roje.    Fol.  131.  pag.  i,  col.  i. 


Seldom. 

'*  I  me  reioyccd  of  my  lyberte 

^*  That  SELDEN  tyme  is  founde  in  mariagc." 

CUrke  of  Oxenf  tale.    Fol.  46.  pag.  i«  col.  i. 

U  u  u  a  The 


5i6  OF  ADVERBS. 

The  Dutch  have  alfo  the  adjedlive  Zelden^  Selten :  The 
Germans  Se/ien  :  The  Danes  Seldfom  :  The  Swedes  Sellfynt : 
rare,  unufual,  uncommon. 


Stark. 

According  to  S.  Johnfon  this  word  has  the  following 
lignifications — Stiffs  fi^ong^  rugged^  deep^  full^  mere^  fimpky 
plain^  grofs.  He  fays,  "  it  is  ufed  to  intend  or  augment 
"  the  fignification  of  a  word :  as,  Stark  mady  mad  in  the 
"  higheft  degree.  It  is  now  little  ufed  but  in  low 
"  language." 

'  In  the  Anglo-faxon  Sf  ajic^  Sreajic,  German  Starck^  Dutch 
Sterkj  Danifti  Stark^  Swedifli  .y/^r^,  as  in  the  Englifti,  all 
mean  Strong.  It  is  a  good  Englilh  word;  common  in  all 
our  old  writers,  ftill  retaining  its  place  amongft  the  moderns, 
and  never  had  an  interval  of  difufe. 

"  And  fhe  that  helmed  was  in  starke  ftourcs 
"  And  wan  by  force  townes  ftronge  and  toures." 

Chaucer.     Monkes  Tak.     Fol.  85,  pag,  2.  col.  2. 

"  But  unto  you  I  dare  not  lye, 
"  But  myght  I  felen  or  efpye 
''  That  ye  perceyucd  it  nothyng, 
*'  Ye  fliulde  haue  a  starke  Ical'yng." 

Rgm.  of  the  Rofe.    Fol.  154.  pag.  a.  col.  a* 


u 


This 


OF  ADVERBS.  Si? 

«  This  egle,  of  which  I  haue  you  toUc, 
"  Me  flyeng  at  a  fwappc  he  hente, 
««  And  with  his  fours  agayne  up  wente 
"  Me  caryeng  in  hys  clawes  starke 
"  As  lyghtly  as  I  had  ben  a  larkc." 

Fame*     Bokc  i.  Fol.  294.  pag.  2.  col.  2^ 

"  The  followand  wynd  blew  sterk.  in  our  tail." 

Douglas.     Booke  3.  pag.  71. 

"  So  that,  my  fon,  now  art  thou  fouir  and  sterk, 
"  That  the  not  nedis  to  haue  ony  fere." 

Douglas.     Booke  8.  pag.  265. 

**  Turnus  ane  litil,  thocht  he  was  stark  and  ftout^ 
**.  Begouth  frawart  the  barganc  to  withdraw." 

Douglas.     Booke  9.  pag.  306. 

*/  Sa  thou  me  faif,  thy  piflance  is  fa  stark, 
*'  The  Troianis  glorie,  nor  thare  vidlorye 
^'  Sail  na  thing  change  nor  dymynew  tharby.'* 

Douglas.    Booke  10.  pag.  ;^2^. 

"  And  at  ane  hie  balk  teyt  up  fche  has 

With  ane  loupe  knot  ane  stark  corde  or  lace, 
Quharewith  hir  felf  fche  Ipilt  with  fhameful  dedr." 

Douglas.     Booke  12.  pag.  432. 

"  As  faft  lock'd  up  in  deep,  as  guiltlefs  labour, 
"  When  it  lies  starkly  in  the  traveller's  bones." 

Shakejpeare.     Meajure  for  Meajure.  A.  4.  Sc.  2^ 

"   I .  Boor.  Come,  Englilh  beer,  hoftefs,     Englifli  beer^ 
by  th'  belly* 

«  ^^2.  Boor^ 


CC 


5i8  OF  ADVERBS.  ' 

*^  2.  Boor.  Stark  beer,  boy :  flout  and  ftrong  beer. 
*^  So.  Sit  down,  lads,  and  drink  me  upfey-dutch.  Frolick 
^^  and  fear  not.** 

Beaumont  and  Fletcher.     Beggars  Bujh.  A.  3.  Sc.  i. 


Very. 


Means  True. 


^^  And  it  is  clere  and  open  that  thilke  fentence  of  Plato, 
^^  is  VERY  and  fothe." 

Chaucer.  Boecius.  Boke4.  Fol.  241.  pag.  2,  coL  2. 

It  is  merely  the  French  adjedtive  Frai^  from  the  Italian, 
from  the  Latin.  Vl^hen  this  word  was  firft  adopted  from 
the  French,  (and  long  after)  it  was  written  by  them,  and 
by  us,  VERAY ;  which  they  have  fince  corrupted  to  Fraiy 
and  the  Englifh  to  very. 

**  For  if  a  kynge  fhall  upon  gefle 
**  Without  VERAY  caufe  drede, 
"  He  maie  be  liche  to  that  I  rede.'* 

Gower.     Lib.  7.  Fol.  162.  pag.  2.  col.  2. 

^*  Conftantync  thenfample  and  myrrour 

To  princc5  al,  in  humble  buxumneflc        .'  .     . 

To  holy  churchc  0  veray  fuftaynour.'*  .  -% 

Prologue  to  Cant.  Tales. 


€€ 


But 


V 


ADVERBS.  5 ,  ^ 

«^  But  as  Chrifte  was^  whan  he  was  On  fyue, 
"  So  is  he  there  yERAMzi^T''-^(^vraiment) 

Plowmans  Tale.     Fol.  99,  pag.  2.  col.  1 . 

«  O  thou,  my  chyld,  do  lerne,  I  the  pray, 
"  Vertew  and  veray  labour  to  aflay." 

Douglas.     Booke  12.  pag.  425. 

"  Difce,  puer,  virtutem  ex  me  Ferumque  laborem : 
^^  Fortunam  ex  aliis"^'."  Virgil. 

Once.     At  once.     Twice.     Thrice. 


t    ■! 


Antiently^  written  anes,  anis,  anys,  ones,  onys,  t\vies> 
TWYis,  TWYisE,  THRiES,  THRYis,  &c.  are  merely  the 
Genitives  of  Sne,  Sn,  TVAi,  Tpa,  Tpej,  Tpij,  Dpi,  ©py^ 
&c;  i.  €.  One^  Two,  Three  (The  fubftantive  Timey  Turn^ 
&c.  omitted.) 


*  The  word  Aliis  in  this  paffagc,  fliould  in  a  modern  verfion  be  tranflated 
Lord  Grenvilky  Mr.  Roje^  Mr.  Dundas,  Mr.  JVyndhami  'Mr.  Fifty  Lord 
Liverpool,  &c.  Who  only  aferf  modcffly  (what  our  pilfering  ftewards  and 
bailiffs  will  fliortly  tell  us),  that  they  hold  their- emoluments  of  office  by  as 
good  a  title,  as  any  man  in  England  holds  his  private  eftate  and  fair-earned 
property ;  and  immediately  after  prove  to  us,  that  they  hold  by  a  much 
better  title. — Their  proof  is,  for  the  prefent  only  a  triple  or  quadruple 
(they  may  take  half  or  two  thirds  of  our  income  next  year)  additional 
affeffment  upon  our  ihnocent  property  •  whilft  their  guilty  emoluments  of 
office  (how  earned  we  know)  remain  untouched. 

6  The 


5^0 


OF  ADVERBS. 


The  Italian  and  French  have  no  correfpondent  adverb : 
they  fay  Une  foisj  deux  fois^  una  volta^  due  volte  8cc.  The 
Dutch  have  Eens  for  the  fame  piirpofe ;  but  often  forego 
the  advantage. 

^^  For  ONES  that  he  hath  ben  blithe 
"  He  fhal  ben  after  forie  thries," 

Gower.     Lib.  5.  Fol.  117.  pag.  i.  coL  i. 

*'  For  as  the  wylde  wode  rage 

"  Of  wyndes  maketh  the  fea  fauage, 

"  And  that  was  caulme  bringeth  to  wawe, 

"  So  for  dcfaut  and  grace  of  lawe 

"  The  people  is  ftcred  all  at  ones.** 

Gower.    Lib.  7,  Fol.  i66,  pag.  i.  col.  i. 

>^  Ye  wote  yovr  felfe,  fhe  may  not  wcdde  two 
*'  At  ones,'* 

Knygbtes  Tale.    Fol.  5.  pag.  2.  col.  2. 

Sythen  Chrift  went  neuer  but  onys 
To  weddyng." 

Wyfe  of  Bathe.  Prol.  Fol.  34.  pag.  i  •  col.  i . 

"  And  firft  I  (hrew  myfelf,  both  blode  and  bones, 
'^  If  thou  begyle  me  ofter  than  ones." 

Nonnes  Prieji.     Fol.  91.  pag.  i.  col.  i. 

Sen  Pallas  mycht  on  Grekis  tak  fie  wraik. 

To  birn  thare  fchyppis,  and  all  for  an  is  faik 

"  Droun  in  the  fcye." 

Douglas.    Boke  i.  pag.  14. 

*^  My  faddir  cryis,  How !  feris,  help  away, 
Streik  airis  attanis  with  al  the  force  je  may." 

Douglas.    Booke  3.  pag.  8. 

«  The 


It 


€€ 


€£ 


OF  ADVERBS.  .     521 

^*  The  fcblit  brcith  ful  faft  can  bete  and  blaw, 
^^  Ne  gat  he  lafarc  anys  his  aynd  to  draw," 

Douglas.     Booke  9.  pag.  307. 

"  Thries  flic  turned  hir  aboute 

"  And  THRIES  eke  flie  gan  downe  loutc 

Gower.     Lib.  5.  FoL  105.  pag,  i.  col.  i. 

*^  She  made  a  cercle  about  hym  thries, 
^^  And  cfte  with  fire  of  fulphur  twies." 

Gower.     Lib,  5.  Fol.  105.  pag.  a.  col.  1. 

"  That  hath  been  twyse  hotte  and  twyse  colde." 

Chaucer.  Cokes  ProL    Fol.  17.  pag.  1.  col.  %. 

"  For  as  Senec  fayth :  He  that  ouercomcth  his  hert, 
^<  ouercometh  twise." 

^ale  of  Chaucer.     FoL  82.  pag.  2.  coL  2. 


C€ 


In  gold  to  graif  thy  fall  twyis  etlit  he, 

And  twyise  for  rcuth  feiljeis  the  faderis  handis.** 

Douglas.    Booke  6.  pag.  163. 

*'  He  fychit  profoundlye  owtliir  twyis  or  thryis." 

Douglas.    Booke  10.  pag.  349, 

A  T  W  O.      A  T  H  R  E  E. 

On  tpa.    On  *jiy.    In  two.   In  three.     The  Dutch  have 
Intween ;  the  Danes  Itu. 

X  X  3t  «  And 


S2  2  OF  ADVERBS. 

"  And  Jafon  fworc,  and  faid  thcr, 
"  That  alfo  wis  God  hym  hclpc, 
*'  That  if  Medea  did  hym  helpe, 
"  That  he  his  purpofc  might  wynne, 
"  Thci  fhulde  neuer  part  atwynne." 

Gewer.     Lib.  5.  Fol.  102.  pag.  2.  col.  1. 

"  That  death  us  Ihulde  departe  atwo." 

Gower.    Lib.  4.  Fol.  84.  pag.  i .  col.  i . 

**  And  eke  an  axe  to  ftnytc  the  corde  at  wo.*' 

Myllers  Tale.     Fol.  14.  pag.  1.  col.  i. 

'*  Ne  howc  the  fyrc  was  couched  fyrft  with  Strty 
"  And  than  with  dryc  ftickes  clouen  athrb," 

Knyghtes  Tale.     Fol.  11.  pag.  i.  col.  !• 

Alone.     Only. 

All'One.     One-like.     In  the  Dutch,  Een  is  One :  All-eetty 
ALONE  :  and  All-een-lykj  only. 

"  So  came  fhe  to  him  priuely, 

"  And  that  was,  wher  he  made  his  mone, 

"  Within  a  gardcine  all  him  one." 

Gower.    Lib.  i.  Fdl.  25.  pag.  a.  coL  !• 

The  forowe,  doughter,  which  I  make. 
Is  not  ALL  ONELY  for  my  fake, 
"  But  for  the  bothe,  and  for  you  all.*' 

Gower.    Lib.  i.  Fol.  25.  ps^.  2.  coL  2. 

"•*  All  other  leches  he  forfbke> 
"  And  put  him  out  of  auenture 
•*  Alonly  to  God's  cure.*' 

Ciiwir.    Lib.  a.  FqL  45.  pag.  a.  col.  2. 

•*  And 


w 


OF  ADVERBS.  523 

^'  Ai>4  thus  full  oftc  a  dale  for  nought 
"  (Saufe  ON  Lie  HE  of  myn  owne  thought) 
*^  I  am  fo  with  my  fclucn  wroth." 

Cower.    lib.  3.  Fol.  47,  pag.  %.  col.  i- 

*'  Thrc  yomcn  of  his  chamhre  there 
"  All  only  for  to  fcruc  hym  were/' 

Gower.    Lib,  6.  Fol.  137,  pag.  i.  coL  a* 

**  For  ALL  ONELYCHE  of  gentiU  loue 
^'  My  courte  ftont  all  courtes  aboue." 

Gower.    Lib.  8.  Fol.  187.  pag.  i.  col.  2. 

*<  Thou  woft  well  that  I  am  Venus, 
"  Whiche  all  onely  my  luftes  feche." 

Gower.    Lib.  8.  Fol.  187.  pag.  2.  col.  i. 

Anon. 

Junius  is  right.     Anon  means  In  one  (fubauditur  in- 
fianty  moment^  minute^ 

"  For  I  woU  ben  certayne  a  wedded  man, 
"  And  that  anon  in  all  the-haft  I  can." 

Marcbauntes   Tale.    Fol.  29.  pag.  i.  col.  2. 

<«  Than  Dame  Prudence,  without  delay  or  tarieng,  fent 
**  ANONE  her  meffanger." 

Tale  of  Chaucer,     Fol.  8a,  pag.  i.  col.  2. 

All  our  old  authors  ufe  anon,  for  immediately^  injiantly, 

X  X  X  a  Mr. 


524  OF  ADVERBS. 

Mr.  Tyrwhit,  Vol.  4.  Note  to  Verfe  381,  fays — "  From 
*^  Pro  nuncy  I  fuppofe,  came  For  the  nunc ;  and  fo,  For 
"  the  Nonce.  Juft  as  from  Ad  nunc  came  anon.'' — I 
agree  with  Mr.  Tyrwhit,  that  the  one  is  juji  as  likely  a$ 
the  other.'' 

In  the  Anglo-faxon,  Sn  means  One^  and  On  means  In  :■ 
which  word  On  we  have  in  Enghfh  corrupted  to  Any  before 
a  vowel ;  and  to  a,  before  a  confonant ;  and  in  writing 
and  fpeaking  have  conncdled  it  with  the  fubfequent  word  i 
and  from  this  double  corruption  has  fprung  a  numerous 
race  of  Adverbs ;  which  (only  becaufe  there  has  not  been 
a  limilar  corruption)  have  no  correfpondent  adverbs  in 
other  languages. 

Thus  from  On  t)3e3,  On  niht:,  On  len^e,  On  bpaebe,  On 
bxc,  On  lanbe,  On  lipe,  On  mit)t)an,  On  pihte,  On  rpa. 
On  pes;  we  have  Aday^  Anight^  A/ongj  Abroad^  Abacky 
Alandy  Alivcy  Amidy  Aright y  Atwoy  Away :  and  from  On  Sn, 

ANON. 

Gower  and  Chaucer  write  frequently  In  one :  and 
Douglas,  without  any  corruption,  purely  on  ane. 


€i 


Thus  fayand,  fcho  the  bing  afccndis  on  ane/* 

Douglas.    Bookc  4.  pag.  124. 

4  Ik 


OF  ADVERBS.  525 

InaTrice. 

Skinner,  not  fo  happily  as  ufual,  fays — "  In  a  Trice^ 
«  fort,  a  Dan*  at  reyfe^  furgere,  fe  erigere,  attoUere,  q.  d. 
"  tantillo  temporis  fpatio  qiianto  quis  fe  attollere  poteft.'* 

S.  Johnfon — "  believes  this  word  comes  from  Trait  Fn. 
<^  corrupted  by  pronunciation.  A  Ihort  time,  an  inftant, 
"  2.firoke:\ 

The  etymology  of  this  word  is  of  fmall  confequence; 
but,  I  fuppofe,  we  have  it  from  the  French  Trots :  and 
(in  a  manner  limilar  to  anon)   it  means — In  the  time  in 
which  one  can  count  Three — One^  TwOy  Three  and  away. — 
Gower  writes  it  Treis.. 

"  All  fodenly,  as  who  faith  Treis,. 
"  Where  that  he  ftode  in  his  paleis, 
*^  He  toke  him  from  the  mens  fight, 
"  Was  none  of  them  fo  ware,  that  might 
"  Set  eie  where  he  become," 

Gower.     Lib,  i.  Fol.  24.  pag.  2.  col.  i.. 

The  greater  part  of  the  other  Adverbs  have  always  been 
well  underftood  :  fuch  as,  Gratis,  Alias,  Amen,  Alamode,. 
Indeed,  In  fadt,  Methinks,  Forfooth,  Infooth,  &c.. 


B.  But 


526 


OF  ADVERBS. 


B. 

But  I  fuppofe  there  are  fome  adverbs  which  are  merely 
cant  words ;  belonging  only  to  the  vulgar ;  and  which  have 
therefore  no  certain  origin  nor  precife  meaning ;  fuch  as 
SPICK  and  span,  &c. 

H. 

Spick,  span. 
I  will  not  aflert  that  there  may  not  be  fuch  ;  but  I  know 
of  none  of  that  defcription.  It  is  true  S.  Johnfon  fays  of 
Spick  and  Span^  that  "  he  fhould  not  have  expe6ted  to 
«  find  this  word  authorized  by  a  polite  writer/'  "  Span 
«  newy""  he  fays,  "  is  ufed  by  Chaucer  *,  and  is  fuppofed 

*  Chaucer  ufcs  it,  in  the  third  book  of  Troylus.     Fol.  i8i,   pag,  2. 
col.  I. 

This  is  a  wordc  for  al,  that  Troylus 

Was  ncuer  ful  to  fpekc  of  this  matcre. 

And  for  to  prayfen  unto  Pandarus 

The  bounte  of  his  right  lady  dcre. 

And  Pandarus  to  thanke  and  maken  chere. 

This  tale  was  aye  span  newe  to  bcgynne, 

Tyl  that  the  nyght  departed  hem  atwynne.*' 

But  I  fee  no  reafon  why  Chaucer  fhould  be  blamed  for  its  ufe  j  any  more 
than  Shakefpear  for  ufing  Fire-neWy  on  a  much  more  folemn  occaiSon. 

Maiigre  thy  ftrength,  youth,  place  and  eminence, 
Defpight  thy  viftor  fword,  and  Fire-new  fortune. 
Thy  valour  and  thy  heart, — thou  art  a  tr&itor." 

King  Lear.    Aft  5.  Sec.  j, 

^*  to 


u 


§€ 


€€ 


OF  ADVERBS.  527 

^^  to  come  from  fpannan,  to  ftretch,  Sax.  expandere,  Lat. 
^^  whence /pan.  Span  new  is  therefore  originally  ufed  of 
^  Cloth,  new  extended  or  dreffed  at  the  clothier's:  and 
"  /pick  and  /pan  new,  is,  newly  extended  on  the  fpikes  or 
"  tenters.  It  is,  however,  a  low  word.**  In /pick  znA /pan 
however,  there  is  nothing  ftretched  upon  fpikes  and  tenters 
but  the  etyniologift's  ignorance.  In  Dutch  they  fay  Spick^ 
/pelder-nieuw.  And  /pyker  means  a  warehoufe  or  magazine. 
Spil  or  Spel  means  a  fpindle,  /cbiet^/poely  the  weaver's 
Ihuttle;  and j^(9^/^fr  the  ftiuttle-thrower.  In  Dutch,  there- 
fore, Spik/pelder-nieuw  means,  new  from  the  warehoufe 
and  the  loom. 

In  Germain  they  fay — Span-neu  and  Funckel-  neu.  Spange 
means  any  thing  fhining ;  as  Funckel  means  to  glitter  or 
iparkje. 

In  Danifh  Funckelnye, 

In  Swediih  Spitt  fpangande  ny. 

In  Englifli  we  fay  Spick  and  Span-new,  Fire-new,  Brand- 
nfffX).  The  two  laft  Bran^  an^  Fire  fpeak  for  themfelves. 
^pick  and  Span-new  xosxi^  Jbining  new  from  the  warehoufe. 

I  B.  AVZ) 


^« 


54^8  OF  ADVERBS. 


B. 


Aye,    yea,    yes. 

You  have  omitted  the  moft  important  of  all  the  Ad- 
verbs— AYE  and  NO.  Perhaps  becaufe  you  think  Green- 
wood has  fufficiently  fettled  thefe  points — **  ^,  he  fays, 
"  feems  to  be  a  contraction  of  the  Latin  word  Aioy  as  Nay 
**  is  olNego.  For  our  Nay^  Nay ;  Ay^  ^;  is  a  plain  imitation 
"  of  Terence's  Negat  quis  f  Nego.  Ait  f  Aio^  Though 
I  think  he  might  have  found  a  better  citation  for  his  pur- 
pofe — ^^  An  nata  eft  fponfa  prxgnans  ?  vel  Ah  vel  negu!^ . 

H. 

I  have  avoided  aye  and  no,  becaufe  they  are  two  of 
the  moft  mercenary  and  mifchievous  words  in  the  language, 
the  degraded  inftruments  of  the  meaneft  and  dirtieft  traffic 
in  the  land.  I  cannot  think  they  were  borrowed  from  the 
Romans  even  in  their  moft  degenera:te  ftate.  ^   Indeed  the 

Italian,    Spanifli  and   French  ■''^-  affirmative  adverb,  St^  is 

-  -  -      ■  -  .->      - 

*  The  French  have  another  (and  their  principal)  affirmative  adverb. 
Out:  which,  Menage  fays,  fome  derive  from  the  Greek  «Ioo-i,  but  which  he 
believes  to  be  derived  from  the  Latin  Hoc  efty  inftead  of  which  was  pro- 
nounced Hdccy  then  Oe,  then  0«p,  then  O/,  and  finally  Ouy.  But  (though 
rejefted  by  Menage)  Qui  is  manifeftly  thc.paft  participle  of  Vuir^  taheat*^ 
and  is  well  calculated  for  the  purpofe  of  aflcnt :  for  when  the  proverb  fays 
— "  filence  gives  confenty' — it  is  always  underftood  of  the  filence,  not  of  a 
4caf  or  abfent  perfon,  but  of  one  who  has  both  heard  and  noticed  the  rcquefV. 

derived 


i\ 


OF  ADVERBS.  529 

derived' ^m  the  ^  Latin,  and  means  Be  it  (as  it  does  when 
it  is  called  an  hypothetical  conjunction).  But  our  Ayty  .or 
Teay  is  the  Imperative  of  a  verb  of  northern  extraction ; 
and  means — Have  itypojfefs  tp^  enjoy  it.  And  yes,  is  Af-esy 
Have»  poflefs,  enjoy  that.  More  immediately  perhaps, 
they  are  the  French  fingular  and  plural  Imperative  Aye2xA, 
Afez\.7&.  9ur  corrupted  0-;;^^^  of  the  Cry er,  is  no  other 
tiiian  the  French  Imperative  Oy^ar,  Hear,  Liflen  *. 

.  Danifh,  Ejer,  to  pofTeis,  have,  .enjoy.  Eja^  Aye  or  yea. 
Bje^  pofleffion.     £/^r,  poffeflbur. 

Swediih,.  Egoty  to  poflfefs,  ja,  aye,  yea.  Egare^  pofleflbr. 
.  -GermaQj  J^^,  aye,  yea.  Eigener^  poiTeflor,  owner, 
Efigeth  03¥»f; 

■  •  Dutch^  £/^^^  lo  pofTefs,  ytf,  aye,  yea.  Eigenjcbap^ 
Eigendc^  po^ffi^n,  property.  Eigenaary  owner,  pro*! 
prietor.  ■  '•  ; 


'^m 


•  « > 


*  ^^  And  after  on  the  daunce  went 
*'  Largefle^  that  fct  al  her  entent 
*'  For  to  ben  honorable  and  free, 
**  Of  Alexander's  kynne  was  (he, 
*«  Her  moft  ioye  was  ywis,    '  '  >  -  .    ,  i 

'*^Whan  that  flie  y^fe,  and  fayd :  Haue  this/'  '  ^ 

'-  Rm.  f)f  the  Roje.  *  Fol.  125.  pag.  1:  col.  i. 

Which  might,  with  equal  propriety,  have  been  tranflated,. . 
"  When  flie  gave,  and  faid  yes. 

Y  y  y  .  Anglo- 


559.  OF  ADVERB8* 

Anglo-fax.  Sjen,  Own.  Sjent>e,  ptoptietor.  K^tmyfyei, 
property.  — ' 

Not*    no..         >    _ 

A»  little  do  t  think)  with  Greetiwoody  that  v&T^  or  its 
Abbreviate  NO,  Was  borrowed  from  the  Latih)  or^  witlt 
Minlhew,  from  the  Hebrew;  tk,-  with  Jtinius^  ftom  ttte 
Greek.  The  inhabitants  of  the  Norths  Could  not  Wftit  fdr 
a  word  expreflive  of  diflent,  till  the  eftablifhment  of  thofe 
nations  and  languages  ;  and  it  is  itfelf  a  futly  foit  of  word 
lefs  likely  to  give  way  and  to  be  ehaflged  than  any  iother 
wfed  in  Speech.  Befides,  their  derivatiofis  do  not  leawl  to 
»ny  meaning,  the  otily  objedl  whidi  cati  juftily  aay  ttysdo- 
logical  inquiry.  But  we  need  not  be  any  farther  i&qttiJ^ 
£tive,  nor>  I  thinks  doubtful  CDoceroing  th^:  .origia  tnd 
and  iignification  of  kOT  and  no>  iince  we  ibid  that  in  1^ 
Danifti  Nodi^,  and  in  the  Swedilh  Nodfg,  and  in  the  D^HOch 
Novde*  Node*  and  Not  mean*  ^verjt^  wtwiUine  *. 


And 


*  M.  L'Eveque,  in  his  Eflai  fur  les  reports  de  la  langue  des  Slaves, 
avec  celle  des  ancieos  habitant  dvi  Latium,  (prefixed  tolusHiftory  of  Ruffia) 
has -given  us  a  carious  etymology  of  three  Latin  adverbs  j  which  I  cannot 
6>rbear  tranfcribing  in  this  place,  as  an  additional  confirmation  of  my  opinion 
of  the  Particle*.—**  Le  Chaflgemcnt  de  T  o  en  a  doit  \  peine  ctre  fegardc 
<*  coinme  une  alteration.  En  efl^t  cti  deux  kttres  Ont  en  Slavon  tant  d' 
ft  «  aifinite. 


OF  ADVERBS.  531 

And  I  hope  I  may  now  be  permitted  to  have  done  with 
Etymology :  for  though,  like  a  microfcope,  it  is  fometimes 

ufeful 

*^  aflinitc,  que  Ics  Ruffes  prononcent  en  a  le  tiers  au  moins  des  fyUabes 
"  qu'ils  CGiivcnt  par  un  o." 

"  Let  mot  qui  fignifioit  auparavant  (before  Terra  was  ufed)  la  furfatc  dc 
^*  la  tcrrc.  Cc  mot  en  Slavon  eft  pole  ;  qui  par  I'affinitc  de  To  avep  1'a> 
a  pu  fe  changer  en  !*ale.  Ce  qui  me  6it  prefiimer  que  cc  mot  fc  troU'^ 
voit  auffi  en  Latin,  c*cft  qu'il  refte  un  verbe  qui  paroit  forme  de  ce  fub- 
*'  ftantifi  c'eft  le  verbe  palo  ou  pal  are,  errer  dans  le  campagne :  palans, 
^^  qui  err^  de  cote  &  d'autre^  qui  court  Ics  champs,  L'Advierbc  PAi.Ait 
tire  fon  origine  du  meme  inot,  Jl  fignific  mantfefiementf  a  decmv^rt^ 
Or,  qu'eft  ce  qui  ic  fait  a  dccouvert  pourdcs  hommes  qui  habitent  del 
"  tentes  ou  des  cabannes  ?  C'eft  ce  qui  fe  fait  en  plem  champs.  Ce  mot 
PALAM  femble  meme  dans  fa  formation  avoir  plus  de  rapport  4  la  langut 
Slavonne  qu*  a  la  Latine,  II  femble  qu'on  dife  palam  pour  polami/^t 
les  champs^  h  travers  les  champs.  Ce  qui  me  confirme  dans  cettee  idee, 
•^  c'eft  que  je  ne  me  rappcllc  pas  qu*il  y  ait  en  Latin  d'autre  Adverbe  qui 
<^  ait  une  formation  femblable,  fi  ce  n'eft  ion  oppofe,  clam,  qui  veut  dire 
^'  Jecrettementj  en  cacbeite  i  &  qui  me  paroit  auffi  Slavon.  Clam  fe  dit 
■^  pour  kdlami,  &  par  une  contraction  tres  conforme  au  genie  de  la  langud 
<^  Slavonne,  klami,  au  milieu  des  Pieux ;  cVft  a  dire  dans  des  cabanne^ 
<*  qui  etoicnt  fbrmces  de  Pieux  rcvetus  d'^corces^  de  peaux,  ou  dc 
*'  branchages."  ^ 

m 

« 

•^  J'oubliois  TAdverbe  coram,  qui  veut  drre  Devajit^  enprejence. — *'  II 
«  differe  de  palam  (dit  Ambroife  Calegin)  en  ce  qu'il  fe  rapporte  feule- 
•*  ment  a  quelques  perfonnes,  &  palam  le  rapporte  a  toutes :  il  entralnc 
*^  d'aillcur^  avec  lui  I'idce  dc  proximite.'' — ^11  a  done  pu  marquer  autrefois 
**  que  Taftion  fe  paflbit  en  prefence  de  quelqu'un  dans  un  lieu  circonfcrit 
*^  ou  ferme,  Ainfi  on  aura  dit  coram  pour  korami,  ou,  Mejdeu  Korami-, 
"  parcequc  la  cloture  des  habitations  etoit  fouvcnt  faitc  d'ecorce,  Kora.'* 

Y  y  y  2  I  api 


cc 

€€ 


532  OF  ADVERBS. 

ufeful  to  difcover  the  minuter  parts  of  language  Nvhich 
would  otherwife  efcape  our  fight ;  yet  is  it  notrnecelTary  to 
have  it  ahvays  in  our  hands,  nor  proper  to  apply  it  to 
every  objedl* 

B. 

If  your  dodrine  of  the  Indeclinables  (which  I  think  we 
have  now  pretty  well  exhaufted)  is  true,  and  if  every  word 
in  all  languages  has  a  feparate  meaning  of  its  own,  why 
have  you  left  the  conjun6tion  that  undecyphered  ?  Why 
content  yourfelf  with  nicrely  faying  it  is  an  Article^  whilft 
you  have  left  the  Articles  themfelves  unclafled  and  un- 
explained \ 


I  am  the  better  pleafed  with  Mr.  L'Evequc's  etymology,  becaufe  he  had 
nojyftem  to  defend,,  and  therefore  cannot  be  charged  with  that  partiality  and 
prejudice,  of  which,  after  what  I  have  advanced,  I  may  be  reafonably  fuf- 
pefted.  Nor  is  it  the  worfe,  becaufe  M.  L'Eveque  appears  not  to  have 
known  the  ftrength  of  his  own  eaufc :  for  x:lam  was  antiently  written  in 
Latin  calim :  (though  F^ftus,.  who  telk  us.  this,  abfuixily  derives  ciam  from 
ilavibus^  "  quod  his,  quae  celare  volumus,  claudimus")  and  cala  was  anr 
old  Latin  wor3  for  wood^  or  k)gs>  or  ftakes.  So  Lucilius  (quoted  by  Ser- 
vius)  "  Scindc  puer,  Calamy  ut  caleas."  His  derivation  is  alfo  ftiU  farthei^ 
analogically  fortified  by  the  Danifli  correfpondenr  adverbs  :•  for  in  that  lan- 
guage Gebeinty  gebeimty  I  Hetnmelighedy  (from  H/«»  home),  and  /  enrum 
(i.  e.  in  a  room)  fupply  the  place  of  Clam,  and  Fordagen  (or,  in  the  face 
of  day)  fupplies  the  place  of  Palam. 


OF  ADVERBS,  533 

« 

H. 
I  would  fain  recover  my  credit  with  Mr.  Burgefs,  at  leaft 
upon  the  fcore  of  liberality.  For  the  freedom  (if  he  plcafes, 
^arflinefs)  of  my  ftridlures  on  my  "  predeceffors  on  the 
^*  fubjedt  of  language."  •  I  may  perhaps  obtain  his  pardon^ 
when  he  has  learned  from  Montefquieu  that — "  Rien  ne 
^^  recule  plus  le  progres  des  connoifances^  qtCun  mauvais 
••  ouvrage  cTun  auteur  celebre ;  pareequ  avant  d"  ivftruire^ 
"  //  faut  detromper  :  or  from  Voltaire,  that — La  faveur 
^  prodiguee  aux  mauvais  ouvrages,  eft  aufli  contraire  aux 
^^  progres  de  Tefprit,  que  le  dechainement  contre  les  bons," 
But  Mr.  Burgefs  himfelf  has  undertaken  to  explain  the 
Pronouns:  and  if  I  did  not  leave  the  field  open  to  him 
(after  his  undertaking)  he  might  perhaps  accufe  me  of 
iDiberality  towards  my  followers  alfo.  I  hope  the  title  will 
not  ojffend  him  ;  but  I  will  venture  to  fay  that,  if  he  does 
any  thing  with  the  pronouns,  he  muft  be  contented  to^ 
follow  the  etymological  path  which  I  have  traced  out  for 
him.  Now  the  Articles j  as  they  are  called,,  trench  fo^ 
clofely  on  the  Pronouns^  that  they#ught  to  be  treated  of 
together  :  and  I  rather  chufe  to  leave  one  conjundlion  un- 
explained, and  my  account  of  the  Articles  imperfect,  than 
foreftall  in  the  fmalleft  degree  any  part  of  Mr.  Burgefs's 
future  difcovery.  There  is  room  enough  for  both  of  us* 
The  garden  of  fcicnce  is  overrun  with  weeds ;  and  whilft" 

every 


y- 


OF  ADVERBS. 


every  coxcomb  in  literature  is  anxious  to  be  the  importer 
of  fbme  new  exotic,  the  more  humble,  though  (at  this 
period  of  human  knowledge  efpecially)  more  ufeful  bufinefs 
of  farculation  (to  borrow  an  exotic  from  Dr.  Johnfon)  is 
miferably  negledted. 

B. 

If  you  mean  to  publilh  the  fubftance  of  our  convert 
fation,  you  will  probably  incur  more  cenfure  for  t\iQ/ubJeS 
of  your  inquiry,  than  for  your  manner  of  purfuing  \t. 
It  will  be  faid  to  be  uirtf  ow  a-iuaq. 

H- 

I  know  for  what  building  I  am  laying  the  jFoundation  t 
and  am  myfelf  well  latisfied  of  its  importance.  For  thofe 
who  fhall  think  otherwife,  my  defence  is  ready  made  : 

Sc  quefta  materia  non  e  degna. 

Per  cfler  piu  Icggicri, 

D'un  huom  che  voglia  parcr  faggio  c  gravTj 

4 

ScDfate]o  con  quefto ;  clie  s'ingegna 

Con  quefli  van  pcaperi 

Fare  il  fuo  trifto  tempo  piu  fuave  : 

Perchc  altrove  non  have 

Dove  voltare  il  vifo ; 

Che  gli  ejlato  interctjo 

Moftrar  con  altre  imprefe  altra  virtue. 


ENP    OF    THE    FIRST   PART. 


^4 

k 

1 

J 

4 

m 

w 

4 

■ 

m  j 

'iKlH^'-5^- ' 

1  1 

1  ■' 

W^    -' 

f 

f/