.4% 


55 


i 


LIBRARY  OF  THE  THEOLOGICAL  SEMINARY 


PRINCETON,  N.  J. 

Presented  by 


Section .y  ' 


^ 


SERI 


ON    SEVERAL 

Subjects  and  Occasions^ 

By  the  moil  Reverend 


Dr.  John  tillotsok 


LATE 


Lord  ArchbifLop  of  Canterbu?y. 


VOLUME    the   SECOND. 


^"^  ^^^S^^  ^" 


LONDON: 

Printed  for  R.  Ware,  A.  Ward,  J,  and  P.  Knapton,  T.  Lo}7g?nan^ 

R.  Hat,  C.  Hitch,  J.  Hodges,  S.  Juften,  J.  and  R.  ^r.fon, 

y.  and  H.  P  ember  ton,  and  J .  Ri'vington, 

M  DCC  XLII. 


A 

SERMON 

Preached  at  the 

Firft  General  Meeting 

O  F    T  H  E 

Gentlemen  and  others  born  within 
the  county  of  TorL 


Vol,  IL  A  2 

I. 


To  my  Honoured 
Friends    and     Countrymen, 


'Hugh  Frankland,  " 
Leonard  Robinfon, 


f-Gervas  Wilcocks, 
George  Pickering, 


,^    ,  Abrah.  Fothergil,    .  ;i^  J  Edward  DufHeld, 
'^^•^.  William  Fairfax,    C^''']  John  Topham, 

I  Thomas  Johnfon,    j  I  James  Longbotham, 

LJohn  Hardefly,      J  LNathan.  Holroyd, 

Stewards  of  the  Yorkshire  Feaft. 


Gentlemen, 

^"Y^  H I S  fermon,  w/jk&  was  jirfi 
^  preached^  aitd  is  7tow  puhlijhed 
at  your  defires^  I  dedicate  to  your 
names,  to  whofe  prudence  and  care 
the  dirc8ito?t  and  7na72agement  of  this 
jirji  general  meeting  of  our  country- 
men  was  committed'^  heartily  wifhing 
that  it  may   be  fome   way  ferviceahle 

to 


6  Epistle  Dedicatory. 

to  the  healing  of  our  unhappy  dif- 
ferences^ and  the  refloring  of  mtity 
and  charity  among  chrifiians^  efpeci- 
ally  thofe  of  the  proteflant  reform  d  re- 
ligion.    I  amy 


Gentlemen, 


Your  affcdtionate  Countryman 


and  humble  Servant^ 


Jo.  TiLLOTSON* 


[7] 

S    E    R   M    O    N   XX. 

Preached  at  the  firft  general  meeting 
of  the  gentlemen  and  others,  in  and 
near  London^  born  within  the  county 
of  York. 


JOHN  xiii.  24,  o,S* 

A  new  commandment  I  give  unto  you^  that  ye  love  one 
another  %  as  I  have  loved  you^  that  ye  alfo  love  on: 
another:  By  this Jhall  all  men  know  that  ye  are  my 
difciples^  if  ye  love  one  another, 

AS  the  chriftian  religion  in  general,  is  the  befl:  3  E  R  M. 
philofophy  and  mod  perfedl  inflitution  of,  '^^' 
life,  containing  in  it  the  rnoft  entire  and 
complete  fyftem  of  moral  rules  and  precepts  that  was 
ever  yet  extant  in  the  world :  lb  it  peculiarly  excels 
in  the  dodrine  of  love  and  charity;  earneflly  recom- 
mending, flridly  injoining,  and  vehemendy  and  al- 
moft  perpetually  prefTing  and  inculcating  the  excel- 
lency and  neceflity  of  this  beft  of  graces  and  virtues  \ 
and  propounding  to  us  for  our  imitation  and  encou- 
ragement, the  mod  lively  and  heroical  example  of 
kindnefs  and  charity,  that  ever  was,  in  the  life  and 
death  of  the  great  founder  of  our  religion,  "  the  au- 
«  thor  and  finifher  of  our  faith,"  Jesus  the  Sore 
of  God, 

So 


8  At  the  yorkpire  feajl 

S  E  R  M.  So  that  the  gofpcl,  as  it  hath  in  all  other  parts  of 
our  duty  cleared  the  dimnefs  and  obfcurity  of  natural 
light,  and  fupplied  the  imperfedions  of  former  re- 
velations, fo  doth  it  mod  eminently  reign  and  tri- 
umph in  this  great  and  blefled  virtue  of  charity; 
in  which  all  the  philofophy  and  religions  that  had 
been  before  in  the  world,  whether  jewifh  or  pagan, 
were  fo  remarkably  defcdive. 

With  great  reafon  then  doth  our  blefled  Saviour 
call  this  "  a  new  commandment,'*  and  aflTert  it  to 
himfelf  as  a  thing  peculiar  to  his  do6trine  and  reli- 
gion j  confldering  how  imperfedly  it  had  been  taught 
and  how  little  it  had  been  pradcifed  in  the  world  be- 
fore :  "  A  new  commandment  I  give  unto  you,  that 
*'  ye  love  one  another  •,  as  I  have  loved  you,  that  yc 
"  alfo  love  one  another :  By  this  ihall  all  men  know 
"  that  ye  are  my  difciples,  if  ye  love  one  another." 

I  fhall  reduce  my  difcourfe  upon  thefe  words  under 
thefe  fix  heads. 

Firfl-,  to  inquire  in  what  fenfc  our  Saviour  calls 
this  commandment  of  loving  one  another  "  a  new 
"  commandment." 

Secondly,  to  declare  to  you  the  nature  of  this 
commandment,  by  inftancing  in  the  chief  adts  and 
properrics  of  love. 

Thirdly,  to  confider  the  degrees  and  meafures  of 
our  charity  with  regard  to  the  feveral  objecl^  about 
which  it  is  exercifed. 

Fourthly,  our  obligation  to  this  duty  not  only  from 
our  S  Aviouii's  authority,  but  likewife  from  our  own 
nature,  ar.d  from  the  reafonablenefs  and  excellency  of 
the  thing  commanded. 

Fifthly, 


in  London^  Dec,  3,   1678.  9 

Fifthly,  the  great  example  which  is  here  propound-  S  E  R  M. 
cd  to  our  imitation ,  "  as  I  have  loved  you,  that  ye 
"  alfo  Jove  one  another.'* 

Sixthly  and  laftly,  the  place  and  rank  which  this 
precept  holds  in  the  chriftian  religion.  Our  Sa- 
viour makes  it  the  proper  badge  of  a  difciple,  the 
diflindlive  mark  and  character  of  our  profeiTion  ;  ''  by 
"  this  fhall  all  men  know  that  ye  are  my  difciples,  if 
"  ye  love  one  another." 

I.  In  v/hat  fenfe  our  Saviour  calls  this  command- 
ment of  loving  one  another,  "  a  new  comm.and- 
"  ment;"  not  that  it  is  abfolutely  and  altogether 
new,  but  upon  fome  fpecial  accounts.  For  it  is  a 
branch  of  the  ancient  and  primitive  law  of  nature. 
Ariilotle  truly  obferves  that  upon  grounds  of  natural 
kindred  and  likenefs  all  men  are  friends,  and  kindly 
difpofed  towards  one  another.  And  it  is  a  known 
precept  of  the  jewiih  religion,  to  love  our  neighbour 
as  ourfelves. 

In  fome  fenfe  then,  it  is  no  new  commandment; 
and  fo  St.  John,  who  was  mofl  likely  to  underiland 
our  Saviour's  meaning  in  this  particular,  (all  his 
preaching  and  v/riting  being  almoil  nothing  dit  but 
an  inculcating  of  this  one  precept)  explains  this  mat- 
ter, telling  us  that  in  feveral  relpeds  it  was,  and  it 
was  not  a  new  commandment,  i  John  ii.  7,  8.  "  bre- 
''  thren,  I  write  no  new  commandment  unto  you, 
"  but  that  which  ye  had  from  the  beginning ;  "  that 
is,  from  ancient  times :  but  then  he  correds  himfelf ; 
"  Again,"  -[raXfy,  but  ytt^  "  a  new  commandment 
"  I  write  unto  you."  So  that  though  it  was  not  ab- 
folutely new,  yet  upon  divers  confiderable  accounts 
it  was  fo,  and  in  a  peculiar  manner  proper  to  the 

Vol.  II.  B  evangelical 


10  ^t  the  yorkfJ:ire  ffaji 

S  E  R  M.  evangelical  inftitution  ;  and  is  in  io  exprefs  and  partl- 
^l'J_,  ciilar  a  manner  afcribed  to  the  teaching  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  which  was  conferred  upon  chriflians  by  the 
faith  of  the  gofpel,  as  if  there  hardly  needed  any 
outward  inftruclion  and  exhortation  to  that  purpofe, 
T  ThefT.  iv.  9.  ''  But  as  touching  brotherly  love,  yc 
"  need  not  that  I  write  unto  you,  for  ye  yourfelves 
*'  are  .^^ooWayJlot,  divinely  taught  and  infpired  to 
"  love  one  another." 

This  commandment  then  of  loving  one  another  is 
by  our  Lord  and  Saviour  fo  much  enlarged  as  to 
the  object  of  it,  beyond  what  either  the  Jews  or  hea- 
thens did  underfland  it  to  be,  extending  to  all  man- 
kind, and  even  to  our  grcateft  enemies  •,  fo  greatly 
advanced  and  heightned  as  to  the  degree  of  it,  even 
to  the  laying  down  of  our  lives  for  one  another  \  fo 
effe6lually  taught,  fo  mightily  encouraged,  fo  very 
much  urged  and  infilled  upon,  that  it  may  very  well 
be  called  "a  new  commandment:"  for  though  it 
was  not  altogether  unknown  to  mankind  before,  yet 
it  was  never  fo  taught,  fo  encouraged ;  never  was  fuch 
an  illuftrious  example  given  of  it,  never  fo'much 
Weight  and  ftrefs  laid  upon  it  by  any  philofophy  or 
religion  that  was  before  in  the  world. 

II.  I  fhall  endeavour  to  declare  to  you  the  nature 
of  this  commandment,  or  the  duty  required  by  it. 
And  that  will  beft  be  done,  by  inflancing  in  the 
chief  a6ls  and  properties  of  love  and  chanty.  As, 
humanity  and  kindnefs  in  all  our  carriage  and  beha- 
viour towards  one  another ;  for  love  fmooths  the  dil- 
pofitions  of  men  fo  that  they  are  not  apt  to  grate  up- 
on one  another :  next,  to  rejoice  in  the  good  and 
happincfs  of  one  another,  and  to  grjeye  at  their  evjls 

and 


in  London^  Dec.  3,   1678.  11 

and  fufferings-,  for  love  unites  the  interefts  of  men  fo  S  E  R  M, 
as  to  make  them  affeded  with  what  happens  to  ano- 
ther as  if  it  were  in  fome  fort  their  own  cafe  :  then, 
to  contribute  as  much  as  in  us  lies  to  the  happinefs  of 
one  another,  by  relieving  one  another's  wants  and  re- 
dreffing  their  misfortunes :  again,  tendernefs  of  their 
good  name  and  reputation ;  a  pronenefs  to  interpret 
all  the  words  and  aclions  of  men  to  the  befl  fenfe ; 
patience  and  forbearance  towards  one  another ;  and 
when  differences  happen,  to  manage  them  with  all 
polTible  calmnefs  and  kindnefs,  and  to  be  ready  to 
forgive  and  to  be  reconciled  to  one  another ;  to  pray 
one  for  another;  and  if  occafion  be,  at  lead  if  the 
publick  good  of  chriftianity  require  it,  to  be  ready  to 
lay  down  our  lives  for  our  brethren,  and  to  facrifice 
ourfelves  for  the  furtherance  of  their  falvation. 

III.  We  will  confider  the  degrees  and  meafures  of 
our  charity,  with  regard  to  the  various  objeds  about 
which  it  is  exercifed. 

And  as  to  the  negative  part  of  this  duty,  it  is  to 
be  extended  equally  towards  all.  We  are  not  to  hate 
or  bear  ill-will  to  any  man,  or  to  do  him^  any  harm  or 
mifchief ;  love  worketh  no  evil  to  his  neighbour. 
Thus  much  charity  we  are  to  exercife  towards  all  with- 
out any  exception,  without  any  difference. 

And  as  to  the  pofitive  part  of  this  duty,  we  Hiould 
bear  an  univerfal  good-will  to  all  men,  wifliing  every 
man's  happinefs,  and  praying  for  it  as  heartily  as  for 
our  own :  and  if  we  be  fmcerc  herein,  we  fhall  be 
ready  upon  all  occafions  to  procure  and  promote  the 
welfare  of  all  men.  But  the  outward  adls  and  tefli- 
monies  of  our  charity  neither  can  be  adlually  extend- 
ed to  all,  nor  ought  to  be  to  all  alike.     We  do  not 

B  i  know 


12  At  the  yorkJl:ire  feajl 

S  E  R  M.  know  the  wants  of  all,  and  therefore  our  knowledsfc 
of  perfons,  and  of  their  eonditions,  doth  necefTarily 
Jimit  the  effedls  of  our  charity  within  a  certain  com- 
pafs ;  and  of  thofe  we  do  know,  we  can  but  relieve 
a  fmall  part  for  want  of  ability.  Whence  it  becomes 
necefTary,  that  we  fet  fome  rules  to  ourfelvcs  for  the 
more  difcreet  ordering  of  our  charity ;  fuch  as  thefe : 
cafes  of  extremity  ought  to  take  place  of  all  other. 
Obligations  of  nature,  and  nearnefs  of  relation,  feem 
to  challenge  the  next  place.  Obligations  of  kind- 
nefs,  and  upon  the  account  of  benefits  received, 
may  well  lay  the  next  claim.  And  then  the  houfhold 
of  faith  is  to  be  peculiarly  confidered.  And  after 
thefe,  the  merit  of  the  perfons,  and  all  circumftances 
belonging  to  them,  are  to  be  weighed  and  valued ; 
thofe  who  labour  in  an  honed  calling,  but  are  op- 
prefs'd  with  their  charge ;  thofe  who  are  fallen  from 
a  plentiful  condition,  efpecially  by  misfortune  and 
the  providence  of  God,  without  their  own  fault; 
thofe  who  have  relieved  others,  and  have  been  emi- 
nently charitable  and  beneficial  to  mankind  \  and  laft- 
ly,  thofe  whofe  vifible  necefTities  and  infirmities  of 
body  or  mind,  whether  by  age  or  by  accident,  do 
plead  for  them:  all  thefe  do  challenge  our  more 
cfpecial  regard  and  confideration. 

IV.  We  will  confider  our  obligations  to  this  duty, 
not  only  from  our  Saviour's  authority,  but  likewife 
from  our  own  nature,  and  from  the  reafonablcnels 
and  excellency  of  the  thing  commanded.  This  is  the 
commandment  of  the  Son  of  God,  who  came 
down  from  heaven  with  full  authority  to  declare  the 
will  of  God  to  us.  And  this  is  peculiarly  "  hiscom- 
*'  mandment,"  which  he  urgeth  upon  his^ifciplcs  fo 

earneftly. 


in  Lofidon^  Dec,  3,   1678.  13 

carneflly,     and   fo   as   if  he    almofl  required    no-  S  E  R  Mj 
thing  elfe  in  comparifon  of  this.  John  xv.  12.  "  This  ' 

"  is  my  commandment,  that  ye  love  one  another  ;'* 
and  ver.  17.  "  Thefe  things  I  command  you,  that 
''  ye  love  one  another."  As  if  this  were  the  end  of 
all  his  precepts,  and  of  his  whole  doftrine,  to  bring 
us  to  the  pradlice  of  this  duty.  And  fo  St,  John, 
the  loving  and  beloved  difciple,  fpeaks  of  it  as  the 
great  meflage  which  the  Son  of  God  was  to  deliver 
to  mankind,  i  John  iii.  11.  "  This  is  the  mefiagc 
"  which  ye  have  heard  from  the  beginning,  that  yc 
"  fhould  love  one  another.''  And  ver.  23.  "  This 
*'  is  his  commandment,  that  we  fhould  believe  on  the 
"  name  of  his  Son  Jesus  Christ,  and  love  one 
"  another,  as  he  gave  us  commandment."  And 
chap.  iv.  ver,  21.  "  This  commandment  have  we 
*'  from  him,  that  he  who  loveth  God,  love  his  bro- 
"  theralfo." 

But  befides  the  authority  of  our  Saviour,  wc 
have  a  precedent  obligation  to"  it  from  our  ov/n  na- 
ture, and  from  the  reafonablenefs  and  excellency  of 
the  thing  itfelf.  The  frame  of  our  nature  difpofeth 
us  to  it,  and  our  inclination  to  fociety,  in  which 
there  can  be  no  pleafure,  no  advantage,  without  mu- 
tual love  and  kindnefs.  And  equity  alio  calls  for  it, 
for  that  Vv^e  ourfelves  wilh  and  exped  kindnefs  from 
others  is  conviction  enough  to  us  that  we  owe  it  to 
others.  The  fulfilling  of  this  law  is  the  great  per- 
fedlion  of  our  natures,  the  advancement  and  enlarge- 
ment of  our  fouls,  the  chief  ornament  and  beauty 
of  a  great  mind.  It  makes  us  like  to  God,  the  beft 
and  mofl  perfect  and  happiefl  being,  in  that  which  is 
the  prime  excellency  and  happinefs  and  glory  of  the 
divine  nature.  And 


14  At  the  yorkjlnre  feajl 

S  E  R  M.  And  the  advantages  of  this  temper  are  unfpeakable 
^^  i  and  innumerable.  It  freeth  our  fouls  from  thofe  un- 
ruly and  troublefom  and  difquieting  pafTions  which 
are  the  great  torment  of  our  Ipirits  •,  from  anger  and 
envy,  from  mahcc  and  revenge,  from  jealoufy  and 
difcontent.  It  makes  our  minds  calm  and  chearful, 
and  puts  our  fouls  into  an  eafy  pofture,  and  into  good 
humour,  and  maintains  us  in  the  pofleflion  and  en- 
joyment of  ourfejves :  it  preferves  men  from  many 
mifchiefs  and  inconveniences,  to  which  enmity  and 
ill-will  do  perpetually  cxpofe  them :  it  is  apt  to  make 
friends^  and  to  gain  enemies,  and  to  render  every 
condition  either  pleafant,  or  eafy,  or  tolerable  to  us. 
So  that  to  love  others,  is  the  trued  love  to  ourfelves, 
and  doth  redound  to  our  own  unfpeakable  benefit  and 
advantage  in  all  relpefts. 

It  is  a  very  confiderable  part  of  our  duty,  and  al- 
moft  equalled  by  our  Saviour  with  the  firfl:  and 
great  commandment  of  the  law.  It  is  highly  accept- 
able to  God,  mofl  beneficial  to  others,  and  very 
comfortable  to  ourfelves.  It  is  the  cafieft  of  all  du- 
ties, and  it  makes  all  others  eafy ;  the  pleafure  of  it 
makes  the  pains  to  fignify  nothing,  and  the  delight- 
ful reflexion  upon  it  afterwards  is  a  mofl  ample  re- 
ward of  it.  It  is  a  duty  in  every  man's  power  to 
perform,  how  flrait  and  indigent  foever  his  fortune 
and  condition  be.  The  poorefl  man  may  be  as  cha- 
ritable as  a  prince  \  he  may  have  as  much  kindnefs  in 
his  heart,  though  his  hand  cannot  be  fo  bountiful  and 
munificent.  Our  Saviour  inflanceth  in  the  sivin^ 
of  a  cup  of  cold  water,  as  a  charity  that  will  be 
highly  accepted  and  rewarded  by  God.  And  one  of 
the  mofl  celebrated  charities  that  ever  was,  how 

fmall 


in  Londoriy  Dec,  3,   1678.  ir 

fmall  was  it  for  the  matter  of  it,  and  yet  how  great  S  E  R  M. 
in  regard  of  the  mind  that  gave  it  ?  I  mean  the  wi-  ^^' 
dow's  two  mites,  which  fhc  caft  into  the  treafury : 
one  could  hardly  give  h^s^  and  yet  none  can  give 
piore,  for  ihe  gave  'all  that  ihe  had.  All  thefe  ex- 
cellencies and  advantages  of  love  and  charity,  which 
I  have  briefly  recounted,  are  fo  many  arguments,  fb 
many  obligations  to  the  pradice  of  this  duty. 

V.  We  will  confider  the  great  infl:ance  and  exam- 
ple which  is  here  propounded  to  our  imitation  ;  "  as 
"  I  have  loved  you,  that  ye  alfo  love  one  another.'* 
The  Son  of  God's  becoming  man,  his  whole  life, 
his  bitter  death  and  palTion,  all  that  he  did  and  all 
that  he  fuffered,  was  one  great  and  continued  proof 
and  evidence  of  his  mighty  love  to  mankind.  The 
greateft  inllance  of  love  among  men,  and  that  too 
but  very  rare,  is  for  a  man  to  lay  down  his  life  for 
another,  for  his  friend;  but  the  Son  of  God  died 
for  all  mankind,  and  we  were  all  his  enemies.  And 
fhould  we  not  chearfuUy  imitate  the  example  of  that 
great  love  and  charity,  the  effecfts  whereof  are  fo 
comfortable,  fo  beneficial,  fo  happy  to  every  one  of 
us.  Had  he  not  loved  us,  and  died  for  us,  we  had 
certainly  perifh'd,  we  had  been  miferable  and  undone 
to  all  eternity. 

And  to  perpetuate  this  great  example  of  charity, 
and  that  it  might  be  always  frefh  in  our  memories, 
the  great  facrament  of  our  religion  was  on  purpofe 
inftituted  for  the  commemoration  of  this  great  love 
of  ths  Son  of  God,  in  laying  down  his  life,  and 
fhedding  his  precious  blood  for  the  wicked  and  rebel- 
lious race  of  mankind.  But  I  have  not  time  to  en- 
large upon  this  noble  argument  as  it  deferves. 

VI.  The 


1 6  At  the  yorkjhirc  feajl 

S  E  R  M.  VI.  The  lad  thing  to  be  confidered  is  the  place 
and  rank  which  this  precept  and  duty  holds  in  the 
chriftian  religion.  Our  blefled  Saviour  here  makes 
it  the  proper  badge  and  cognifancc  of  our  profef- 
fion :  "  by  this  fhall  all  men  know  that  ye  are  my 
"  difciples,  if  ye  love  one  another."  The  different 
fedts  among  the  Jews  had  fome  peculiar  charader  to 
diflinguifli  them  from  one  another :  the  fcholars  of 
the  feveral  great  rabbi's  among  them  had  fome  pe- 
culiar fayings  and  opinions,  fome  cuftoms  and  tra- 
ditions whereby  they  were  feverally  known ;  and  fo 
likewife  the  difciples  of  John  the  baptift  were  parti- 
cularly remarkable  for  their  great  aufterities.  In  al- 
lufion  to  thefe  diftindlions  of  feds  and  fchools  among 
the  Jews,  our  Saviour  fixeth  upon  this  mark  and 
charader  whereby  his  difciples  fhould  be  known 
from  the  difciples  of  any  other  Inftitution,  a  mighty 
love  and  affedion  to  one  another. 

Other  feds  were  diflinguifh'd  by  little  opinions, 
or  by  fome  external  rites  and  obfervances  in  reli- 
gion;  but  our  Saviour  pitcheth  upon  that  which 
is  the  mod  real  and  fubftantial,  the  mod  large  and 
extenfive,  the  mod  ufeful  and  beneficial,  the  mod 
humane  and  the  mod  divine  quality  of  which  we  are 
capable. 

This  was  his  great  commandment  to  his  difciples, 
before  he  left  the  world :  this  was  the  legacy  he  left 
them,  and  the  effed  of  his  lad  prayers  for  them  : 
and  for  this  end,  among  others,  he  indituted  the  fa- 
crament  of  his  blefled  body  and  blood,  to  be  a  lively 
remembrance  of  his  great  charity  to  mankind,  and  a 
perpetual  bond  of  love  and  union  amongd  his  fol- 
lowers. 

And 


in  London,  Dec,  3,   1678.  17 

And  the  apoftles  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  do^  E  r  m. 
upon  all  occafions  recommend  this  to  us,  as  a  princi- 
pal duty  and  part  of  our  religion ;  telling  us,  that  in 
Christ  Jesus,  that  is,  in  the  chriftian  religion> 
nothing  will  avail,  no  not  faith  itfelf,  unlefs  it  be  en- 
livened and  infpired  by  charity ;  that  love  is  the  end 
of  the  commandment,  ts>.©^  -f  r^'^^yiKias^  the  end 
of  the  evangelical  declaration,  the  firfl:  fruit  of  the 
Spirit,  the  fpring  and  root  of  all  thofe  graces  and 
virtues  which  concern  our  duty  tov/ards  one  another: 
that  it  is  the  fum  and  abridgement,  the  accomplifh- 
ment  and  fulfilling  of  the  whole  law :  that  without 
this,  whatever  we  pretend  to  in  chriftianity,  we  arc 
nothing,  and  our  religion  is  vain :  that  this  is  the 
greateft  of  all  graces  and  virtues,  greater  than  faith 
and  hope ;  and  of  perpetual  ufe  and  duration,  charity 
never  fails. 

And  therefore  they  exhort  us  above  all  things  to 
endeavour  after  it,  as  the  crown  of  all  other  virtues : 
"  Above  all  things  have  fervent  charity  among  your 
"  felves,"  faith  St.  Peter :  and  St.  Paul,  having  enu- 
merated moll  other  chrittian  virtues,  exhorts  us  above 
all  to  ftrive  after  this,  "  and  above  all  thefe  things 
*'  put  on  charity,  which  is  the  bond  of  perfedlion.** 
This  Si,  John  makes  one  of  the  moft  certain  figns 
of  our  love  to  God,  and  the  want  of  it  an  undenia- 
ble argument  of  the  contrary :  "  If  a  man  fay  I 
*'  love  God,  and  hateth  his  brother,  he  is  a  lyar; 
"  for  he  who  loveth  not  his  brother  whom  he  hath 
**  feen,  how  can  he  love  God  whom  he  hath  not 
**  feen  ? "  This  he  declares  to  be  one  of  the  beft  evi- 
dences that  we  are  in  a  ftate  of  grace  and  falvation. 
Vol.  IL  C  '' Hens- 

I 


i8  At  the  yorkjlnre  feajl 

S  E  R  M. «  Hereby  wc  know  that  we  are  paiTed  from  death  to 
"  life,  becaufe  we  love  the  brethren." 

So  that  v/ell  might  our  bleffed  Saviour  choofe 
this  for  the  badge  of  his  difciples,  and  make  it  the 
great  precept  of  the  beft  and  mod  perfedl  infiitution. 
Other  things  might  have  ferved  better  for  pomp  and 
oftentation,  and  have  more  gratilied  the  curiofity,  • 
or  enthufiafm,  or  fuperflition  of  mankind,  but  there 
is  no  quality  in  the  world  which,  upon  a  fober  and 
impartial  confideration,  is  of  a  more  folid  and  intrin- 
fi ck  value. 

And  in  the  firft  ages  of   chriflianity,    the  chri- 
ftians  were  very  eminent  for  this  virtue,  and  parti- 
cularly noted  for  it ;  Nobis  notam  inurit  apud  quof- 
daiiiy  "  it  is  a  mark  and  brand  fet  upon  us  by  fome,'* 
faith  Tertullian  ;  and  he  tells  us,  that  it  was  proverbi- 
ally faid  among    the  heathen,  "  Behold  how  thefe 
«'  chriilians  love  one  another."     Lucian,  that  great 
fcofter  at  all  religion,  acknowledgeth  in  behalf  of 
chriilians,  that  this  was  the  great  principle  which 
their  matter  had  inflill'd  into  them :  And  Julian,  the 
bittereft  enemy  that  chriflianity  ever  had,  could  not 
forbear  to  propound  to  the  heathen  for  an  example 
the  charity  of  the  Galileans,  for  fo,  by  way  of  re- 
proach, he  calls  the  chriftians,  "  who  (fays  he)  gave 
"  up  themfelves  to  humanity  and  kindnefs-,"  which 
he  acknowledgeth  to  have  been  very  much  to  the 
advantage  and  reputation  of  our   religion:    and   in 
the  fame  letter  to  Arfacius,  the  heathen  high-priefl 
of  Galatia,    he  gives  this  memorable  teftimony  of 
the  chriftians,  that  their  charity  was  not  limited  and 
confin'd  only  to  themfelves,  but  extended  even  to 

their 


in  London,  Dec.  3,   1678.  19 

their  enemies;  which  could  not  be  fald  either  of  the  S  E  R  M, 
jews  or  heathens:    his  words  are  thefe,    "  It  is  a^^ 
"  fhame,  that  when  the  Jews  fufFer  none  of  theirs ' 
«  to  beg,  and  the  impious  Gahleans  relieve  not  on- 
«  Jy  their  own,  hut  thofe  aJfo  of  our  rehgion,  that 
"  we  only  /hould  be  defedlive  in  fo  neceOary  a  duty." 
By  all  which  it  is  evident  that  Jove  and  charity  is 
not  only  the  great  precept  of  our  Saviour,  bun 
was  in  thofe  firf:  and  befl  times  the  general  pra6lice 
of  his  dilbiples,  and  acknowledged  by  the  heathens 
as  a  very  peculiar  and  remarkable  quality  in  them. 

The  application  I  iliall  make  of  this  difcourfe  fhaJl 
be  threefold. 

1.  With  relation  to  the  church  of  Rome. 

2.  With  regard  to  ourfelves  wht)  profefs  the  pro- 
teftant  reform'd  religion. 

3.  With  a  more  particular  refpecfl  to  the  occailon 
of  this  meeting. 

I.  Firll,  with  relation  to  the  church  of  Rome; 
which  we  cannot  choofe  but  think  of,  whenever  we 
fpeak  of  charity  and  loving  one  another;  efpecialiy 
having  had  fo  late  a  difcovery  of  their  affedion  to 
us,  and  fo  confiderable  a  teftimony  of  the  kindnefs 
and  charity  which  they  defign'd  towards  us ;  fjch  as 
mayjudly  make  the  ears  of  all  that  hear  it  to  tingle, 
and  render  popery  execrable  and  infamous,  a  fright- 
ful and  hateful  thing  to  th^  end  of  the  world. 

It  is  now  but  too  vifible  how  groHy  this  great 
commandment  of  our  Saviour  is  contradidled, 
not  only  by  the  practices  of  thofe  in  that  commu- 
raon,  from  the  pope  down  to  the  meaneft  frier ;  but 
by  the  very  docSrines  and  principles,  by  the  genius 
and  fpirit  of  that  religion,  which  is  wholly  calcula- 

C  2  ted 


20  At  the  yorkJlAre  feajl 

S  E  R  M.  ted  for  cruelty  and  perfecution.  Where  now  is  that 
^^^^^^,  mark  of  a  difciplc,  fo  much  infifled  upon  by  our 
Lord  and  Master,  to  be  found  in  that  church? 
And  yet  what  is  the  chriftian  church  but  the  fociety 
and  community  of  Christ's  difciples?  Surely  in  all 
reafon,  that  which  our  Lord  made  the  diftin6live 
mark  and  chara6ter  of  his  difciples,  Ihould  be  die 
principal  mark  of  a  true  church.  Bellarmine  reckons 
up  no  lefs  than  fifteen  marks  of  the  true  church,  all 
which  the  church  of  Rome  arrogates  to  herfclf 
alone :  but  he  wifely  forgot  that  which  is  worth  all 
the  red,  and  which  our  Saviour  infifls  upon  as  the 
chief  of  all  other,  a  fincere  love  and  charity  to  all 
chrlilians :  this  he  knew  would  by  no  means  agree  to 
his  own  church. 

But  for  all  tliat,  it  is  very  reafonable  that  churches 
as  well  as  particular  chriilians  fliould  be  judged  by 
their  charity.  The  church  of  Rome  would  engrofs 
all  faith  to  herfclf:  faith  in  its  utmoft  perfedion,  to 
the  degree  and  pitch  of  infallibility  ;  and  they  allow 
no  body  in  the  world,  befides  themfclves,  no  though 
they  believe  all  the  articles  of  the  apoftles  creed,  to 
have  one  grain  of  true  faith ;  becaufe  they  do 
not  believe  upon  the  authority  of  their  church,  which 
they  pretend  to  be  the  only  foundation  of  true  faith. 
This  is  a  mod  arrogant  and  vain  pretence  ;  but  ad- 
mit it  were  true,  yet  in  the  judgment  of  St.  Paul, 
*'  Though  they  had  all  faith,  if  they  have  not  cha- 
*'  rity,  they  are  nothing." 

The  greateft  wonder  of  all  is  this,  that  they  who 
hate  and  perfecute  chriftians  mod,  do  all  this  while, 
the  mod  confidently  of  all  others,  pretend  to  be  the 
difciples  of  Christ,  and  will  allow  none  to  be  fo 

but 


in  London^  Dec.  3,   1678.  21 

but  themfelves.  That  church  which  cxcommuni-  S  E  R  M. 
cates  all  other  chridian  churches  in  the  world,  and  if  ^^' 
Hie  could,  would  extirpate  them  out  of  the  world, 
will  yet  needs  afTume  to  herfelf  to  be  the  only  chri- 
ftian  church:  as  if  our  Saviour  had  faid,  "  Here- 
"  by  fhall  all  men  know  that  ye  are  my  difciples,  if 
"  ye  hate,  and  excommunicfe,  and  kill  one  ano- 
"  ther.  What  fhall  be  done  unto  thee,  thou  falfe 
"  tongue  ?"  thou  empty  and  impudent  pretence  of 
chriflianity  ! 

II.  Secondly,  with  relation  to  ourfelves,  who  pro- 
fefs  the  proteftant  reformed  religion.  How  is  this 
great  precept  of  our  Saviour  not  only  ihamefully 
negle6led,  but  plainly  violated  by  us?  and  that  not 
only  by  private  hatred  and  ill-will,  quarrels  and  con- 
tentions in  our  civil  converfation  and  intercourfe  with 
one  another ;  but  by  moft  unchridian  divifions  and 
animofities  in  that  common  relation  wherein  we 
fland  to  one  another,  as  brethren,  as  chriilians,  as 
proteflants. 

Have  we  not  all  one  father  ?  hath  not  one  God 
created  us  ?  and  are  we  not  in  a  more  peculiar  and 
eminent  manner  brethren,  being  "  all  the  children 
*'  of  God  by  faith  in  Jesus  Christ  ?  "  are  Vv^e  not 
all  members  of  the  fame  body,  and  partakers  of  the 
fame  fpirit,  and  heirs  of  the  fame  blefied  hopes  of 
eternal  life  ? 

So  that  being  brethren  upon  fo  many  accounts, 
and  by  {o  many  bonds  and  endearments  all  united 
one  to  another,  and  all  travelling  towards  the  fame 
heavenly  country,  why  do  we  fall  out  by  the  way, 
fince  we  be  brethren  ?  why  do  we  not,  as  becomes 
brethren,  dwell  together  in  unity ,?  but  are  fo  apt  to 

quarrel 


XX. 


.22  ^t  the  yorhfklre  feaji 

S  E  R  M.  quarrel  and  break  out  into  heats,  to  crumble  into  feds 
and  parties,  to  divide  and  feparate  from  one  anodier 
upon  every  flight  and  trifling  occafion. 

Give  me  leave  a  little  more  fully  to  expofl:ulate 
this  matter,  but  very  calmly  and  in  the  fpirit  of 
meeknefs,  and  in  the  name  of  our  dear  Lord  who 
loved  us  at  fuch  a  rate  as  to  die  for  us,  to  recom- 
mend to  you  this  new  commandment  of  his,  "  that 
*'  ye  love  one  another : "  v^hich  is  almofl:  a  new  com- 
mandment flill,  and  hardly  the  worfe  for  wearing ; 
fo  feldom  is  it  put  on,  and  fo  litde  hath  it  been  prac- 
tifed  among  chriflians  for  feveral  ages. 

Confider  ferioufly  with  yourfelves ;  ought  not  the 
great  matters  wherein  we  are  agreed,  our  union  in 
the  dodlrines  of  the  chrifliian  religion,  and  in  all  the 
necefl^ary  articles  of  that  faith  which  was  once  deli- 
vered to  the  faints,  in  the  fame  facraments,  and  in 
all  the  fubfl:antial  parts  of  God's  worfliip,  and  in  the 
great  duties  and  virtues  of  the  chrifl:ian  life,  to  be  of 
greater  force  to  unite  us,  than  ditference  in  doubtful 
opinions,  and  in  little  rites  and  circumfl:ances  of  wor- 
fhip  to  divide  and  break  us  ? 

Are  not  the  things  about  which  we  differ,  in  their 
nature  indifl^erent,  that  is,  things  about  which  there 
ought  to  be  no  difi^erence  among  wife  men  ?  Are  they 
not  at  a  great  difl:ance  from  the  life  and  eflfence  of 
religion,  and  rather  good  or  bad  as  they  tend  to  the 
peace  and  unity  of  the  church,  or  are  made  ufe  of  to 
fchifm  and  fadlion,  than  either  necefllliry  or  evil  in 
themfelves?  and  fliafl  little  fcruples  weigh  fo  far  with 
us,  as,  by  breaking  the  peace  of  the  church  about 
them,  to  endanger  our  whole  religion  ?  Shall  we  take 
one   another   by  the  throat  for   a  hundred  pence, 

when 


in  London,  Dec.  3,   1678.  23 

when  our  common  adverfary  {lands  ready  to  clap  S  E  R  M. 
upon  us  an  adlion  of  ten  thoufand  talents  ?  can  we  ^^* 
in  good  earned  be  contented  that  rather  than  the 
furplice  fhould  not  be  thrown  out,  popery  Ihould 
come  in  ?  and  rather  than  receive  the  facrament  in 
the  humble,  but  indifferent,  pofture  of  kneeling,  to 
fwallow  the  camel  of  tranfubllantiation^  and  adore 
the  elements  of  bread  and  wine  for  our  God  and  Sa- 
viour ?  and  rather  than  to  fubmit  to  a  fet  form  of 
prayer,  to  have  the  fervice  of  God  perform'd  in  an 
unknown  tongue  ? 

Are  we  not  yet  made  fenfible,  at  leaft  in  this  our 
day,  by  fo  clear  a  demonftration  as  the  providence  of 
God  hath  lately  given  us:  and  had  net  he  been  in- 
finitely merciful  to  us,  naight  have  proved  the  dear- 
eft  and  moft  dangerous  experiment  that  ever  was :  I 
fay,  are  we  not  yet  convinced,  what  mighty  advan- 
tages our  enemies  have  made  of  our  divifions,  and 
what  a  plentiful  harveft  they  ha^^  had  among  us, 
during  our  differences,  and  upon  occafion  of  them  ; 
and  how  near  their  religion  was  to  have  enter'd  in 
upon  us  at  once,  at  thofe  wide  breaches  which  wc 
had  made-  for  it  ?  And  will  we  ftill  take  counfel  of 
our  enemies,  and  choofe  to  follow  that  courfe  to 
which,  of  all  other,  they  who  hate  us  and  feek  ^our 
ruin  would  moft  certainly  advife  and  diredl  us  ?  Will 
we  freely  offer  them  that  advantage  which  they  would 
be  contented  to  purchale  at  any  rate  ? 

Let  us,  after  all  our  fad  experience,  at  laft  take 
warning  to  keep  a  ftedfaft  eye  upon  our  chief  enemy, 
and  not  fuffer  ourfelves  to  be  diverted  from  the  con- 
fideration  and  regard  of  our  greateft  danger  by  the 
petty  provocations  of  our  friends  j  fo  I  choofe  to  call 

/  thofc 


XX. 


24  ^t  the  yorkJJ:ire  feaji 

S  E  R  M.  thofe  who  dlflent  from  us  in  lefier  matters,  becaufe  I 
would  fain  have  them  fo,  and  they  ought  in  all  rea- 
fon  to  be  fo :  but  however  they  behave  themfelves, 
wc  ought  not  much  to  mind  thofe  who  only  fling  dirt 
at  us,  whilft  we  are  fure  there  are  others  who  fly  at 
our  throats,  and  flrike  at  our  very  hearts. 

Let  us  learn  this  wifdom  of  our  enemies,  who, 
though  they  have  many  great  difirrenccs  among 
themfelves,  yet  they  have  made  a  fhift  at  this  time  to 
unite  together  to  defl:roy  us :  and  fliall  not  we  do  as 
much  to  fave  ourfelves  ? 

■  fas  eft  i^  ah  hofte  doceri. 

It  was  a  principle  among  the  ancient  Romans,  a 
brave  and  wife  people,  donare  mmicitias  Reipubliccd^ 
to  give  up  and  facrifice  their  private  enmities  and  quar- 
rels to  the  publick  good  and  the  fafety  of  the  com- 
monwealth. And  is  it  not  to  every  confiderate  man 
as  clear  as  the  fun  at  noonday,  that  nothing  can  main- 
tain and  fupport  the  protefl:ant  religion  amongfl:  us, 
and  found  our  church  upon  a  rock,  fo  that  ''  when 
*'  the  rain  falls,  and  the  winds  blow,  and  the  floods 
"  beat  upon  it,  it  fliall  fl:and  firm  and  unfliaken :  " 
That  nothing  can  be  a  bulwark  of  fufficient  force  to 
refifl:  all  the  arts  and  attempts  of  popery,  but  an 
cfl:ablifli'd  national  religion,  firmly  united  and  com- 
pared in  all  the  parts  of  it  ?  is  it  not  plain  to  every 
eye,  that  little  fe6ts  and  feparate  congregations  can 
never  do  it?  but  will  be  like  a  foundation  of  find  to 
a  weighty  building,  which  whatever  fliew  it  may 
make,  cannot  fland  long,  becaufe  it  wants  union  at 
the  foundation,  and  for  that  rcafon  muft  neceiTarily 
want  ilrength  and  firmnels. 

It 


in  London^  Dec.  3,   1678.  25 

It  is  not  for  private  perfons  to  undertake  in  mat-  SE  RM. 
ters  of  public  eoncernmcnt-,  but  I  think  we  have  no  v.,..-,^..^ 
caufe  to  doubt  but  the  governors  of  our  church 
(notwithftanding  .ail  the  advantages  of  authority, 
and  we  think  of  reafon  too  on  our  fide)  are  perfons 
of  that  piety  and  prudence,  that  for  peace  fake,  and 
in  order  to  a  firm  union  among  proteflants,  they 
would  be  content,  if  that  would  do  it,  not  to  infift 
upon  litde  things  j  but  to  yield  them  up,  v;hether  to 
the  infirmity  or  importunity,  or,  perhaps  in  fome 
very  few  things,  to  the  plauiible  exceptions  of  thofe 
who  differ  from  us. 

But  then  furely,  on  the  other  fide,  men  ought  to 
bring  along  with  them  a  peaceable  difpofition,  and 
a  mind  ready  to  comply  with  the  church  in  v/hich 
they  were  born  and  baptized,  in  all  reafonable  and 
lawful  things  \  and  defirous  upon  any  terms  that  are 
tolerable  to  return  to  the  communion  of  it :  a  mind 
free  from  pafilon  and  prejudice,  from  peevifh  excep- 
tions, and  groundlefs  and  endlcfs  fcruples ;  not  apt  to 
infift  upon  little  cavils  and  objedlions,  to  which  the 
very  beft  things,  and  the  greatefl  and  cleared  truths 
in  the  world  are  and  always  will  be  liable :  and 
whatever  they  have  been  heretofore,  ro  be  "  hence- 
"  forth  no  more  children,  toiTed  to  and  fro,  and  car- 
"  ried  about  with  every  wind  of  dodrine,  by  the 
"  flight  of  men,  and  cunning  craftinefi  of  thofe  who 
"  lie  in  wait  to  deceive." 

And  if  we  were  thus  affected  on  all  hands,  wc 
might  yet  be  a  happy  church  and  nation  *,  if  we 
would  govern  ourfelves  by  thefe  rules,  and  walk  ac- 
cording to  them,  "  peace  would  be  upon  us,  and 
*'  mercy,  and  on  the  Ifrael  of  God." 

Vol.  II.  D  III.  Thirdly, 

J. 


26  At  the  yorkJl:ire  feajl 

S  E  R  M.  III.  Thirdly,  I  lliall  conclude  all  with  a  few  words 
in  relation  to  the  pccafion  of  this  prefent  meeting.  1 
have  all  this  while  been  recommending  to  you,  from 
the  authority  and  example  of  our  blefied  Saviour, 
and  from  the  nature  and  reafon  of  the  thing  itfelf, 
this  moll  excellent  grace  and  virtue  of  charity,  in  the 
moft  proper  ads  and  indances  of  it :  but  befides  par- 
ticular a6ls  of  charity  to  be  exercifed  upon  emergent 
occafions,  there  are  likewife  charitable  cufjoms  which 
are  highly  commendable,  becaufe  they  are  more  cer- 
tain and  conflant,  of  a  larger  extent,  and  of  a  longer 
continuance :  as  the  meeting  of  the  fons  of  the  cler- 
gy, which  is  now  form'd  and  eftablifh'd  into  a  cha- 
ritable corporation  :  and  the  anniverfary  meetings  of 
thofe  of  the  feveral  counties  of  England,  who  refide, 
or  happen  to  be  in  London ;  for  two  of  the  beft  and 
nobleft  ends  that  can  be,  the  maintaining  of  friend- 
ihip,  and  the  promoting  of  charity.  Thefe,  and 
others  of  the  like  kind,  I  call  charitable  culloms, 
which  of  late  years  have  very  much  obtained  in  this 
great  and  famous  city.  And  it  cannot  but  be  a  great 
pleafure  and  fatisfaclion  to  all  good  men,  to  fee  fo 
generous,  fo  humane,  fo  chrillian  a  dilpofition  to 
prevail  and  reign  fo  much  amongft  us. 

The  ftrange  overflowing  of  vice  and  wickednefs 
in  our  land,  and  the  prodigious  increafe  and  impu- 
dence of  infidelity  and  impiety,  hath  of  late  years 
boded  very  ill  to  us,  and  brought  terrible  judgments 
upon  this  city  and  nation,  and  feems  flill  to  threa- 
ten us  with  more  and  greater :  and  the  greatell  com- 
fort I  have  had  under  thefe  fad  apprehenfions  of 
God's  difpleafure  hath  been  this,  that  though  bad 
men  were  perhaps  never  worfe  in  any  age,  yet  the 

good. 


in  London^  Dec,  3,    1678.  27 

good,  who  I  hope  are  not  a  few,  were  never  more  SERM. 
truly  and  fubilarAially  good  :  I  do  verily  believe  there  ^^* 
never  vvxre,  in  any  time,  greater  and  more  real  ef- 
fedls  of  charity ;  not  from  a  blind  fuperilition,  and 
an  ignorant  zeal,  and  a  mercenary  and  arrogant  and 
prefumptuous  principle  of  merit,  but  from  a  found 
knowledge,  and  a  fmcere  love  and  obedience  to 
God,  or,  as  the  apoflle  exprcfles  it,  "  out  of  a  pure 
"  heart,  and  of  a  good  confcience,  and  of  faith  un- 
"  feigned.'* 

And  who,  that  loves  God  and  religion,  can 
choofe  but  take  great  contentment  to  fee  ^o  general 
and  forward  an  inclination  in  people  this  v/ay  ? 
which  hath  been  very  much  cherilhed  of  late  years 
by  this  ibrt  of  meetings :  and  that  to  very  good 
purpofe  and  effect,  in  many  charitable  contributions 
difpofed  in  the  bed  and  wifeft  ways:  and  which 
likewife  hath  tended  very  much  to  the  reconciling  of 
the  minds  of  men,  and  the  allaying  of  thofe  fierce 
heats  and  animofities  which  have  been  caufed  by  our 
civil  confufions  and  religious  diflradions.  For  there 
is  nothing  many  times  v/anting  to  take  away  preju- 
dice, and  to  exuinguifh  hatred  and  ill-will,  but  an 
opportunity  for  men  to  fee  and  underfland  one  Ano- 
ther ;  by  which  they  will  quickly  perceive,  that  they 
are  not  fuch  monfters  as  thty  have  been  reprefented 
one  to  another  at  a  diflance. 

We  are,  I  think,  one  of  the  lad  counties  of  Eng- 
land that  have  entred  into  this  friendly  and  charita- 
ble kind  of  fociety ;  let  us  make  amends  for  our  late 
fetting  out  by  quickning  our  pace,  fo  that  we  may 
overtake  and  outflrip  thofe  v/ho  are  gone  before  us : 
let  not  our  charity  partake  of  the  coldnefs  of  our 

D  2  climate. 


2i  At  the  yorkjlnrc  feajl^  &c. 

S  E  R  M.  climate,  but  let  us  endeavour  that  it  may  be  equal  to 
the  extent  of  our  country  •,  and  as  we  arc  incompara- 
bly the  greatefl:  county  of  England,  let  it  appear 
that  wc  are  fo  by  the  largcnefs  and  extent  of  our  cha- 
rity. 

''  O  Lord,  who  hail  taught  us  that  all  our  do- 
•*'  ings  without  charity  are  nothing,  fend  thy  Holy 
"  Ghost,  and  pour  into  our  hearts  that  mofl  excel- 
"  lent  gift  of  charity,  the  very  bond  of  peace,  and 
"  of  all  virtues :  without  which  whofoever  liveth,  13 
"  counted  dead  before  thee.  Grant  this  for  thy  only 
"  Son  Jesus  Christ's  fake.'* 

"  Now  the  God  of  peace,  who  brought  again 
"  from  the  dead  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the 
"  great  fhepherd  of  the  fheep,  through  the  blood 
"  of  the  everlafting  covenant,  make  you  perfect  in 
"  every  good  work  to  do  his  will,  working  in  you 
''  that  which  is  well-pleafing  in  his  fight,  through 
"  Jesus  Christ,  to  whom  be  glory  for  ever  and 
*^  even     Amen. 


SERMON 


*9 


SERMON   XXI. 

Preached  at  Whitehall^  April  4,  1679. 


I  JOHN  iv.  I. 

Beloved^  believe  not  every  fpirity  but  try  the  fpirits  whe-       ' 
ther  they  are  of  God  ;  becaufe  many  falfe  prophets 
are  gone  out  into  the  world, 

THIS  caution  and  counfel  was  given  upon  s  E  R  M. 
occafion  of  the  falfe  prophets  and  teachers  ^^\' 
that  were  rifen  up  in  the  beginning  of  the 
chriflian  church,  who  endeavoured  to  feduce  men 
from  the  true  dod:rine  of  the  gofpel  dehvered  by  the 
apoflles  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour.  And  theie 
teaching  contrary  things,  could  not  both  be  from 
God  ;  and  therefore  St.  John  calls  upon  chriftians  to 
examine  the  dodrines  and  pretences  of  thofe  new- 
teachers,  whether  they  were  from  God  or  nor.  "  Bs- 
"  lieve  not  every  fpirit ;"  that  is,  not  every  one  that 
takes  upon  him  to  be  infpired,  and  to  be  a  teacher 
come  from  God:  "  But  try  the  fpirits;"  that  is, 
examine  thofe  that  make  this  pretence,  whether  it  be 
real  or  not  \  and  examine  the  dodrines  which  they 
bring,  becaufe  there  are  many  impoftors  abroad  in  the 
world. 

This  is  the  plain  fenfe  of  the  words:  in  which 
there  are  contained  thefe  four  propofitions. 

jFiru,  that  men  may,  and  often  do,  flilfly  pretend 
to  infpiration.  And  this  is  the  reafon  upon  which 
the  apollle  grounds  this  exhortation  :  "  becaufe  many 

«  falfe 


20  Of  the  trial  of  the  fpirits. 

S  E  R  M.  "  falfc  prophets  are  gone  out  into  the  world,"  thcrc- 
^^^-    fore  we  fhould  try  who  are  true,  and  who  are  falfe. 

Secondly,  we  are  not  to  believe  every  one  that 
pretends  to  be  infpired,  and  to  teach  a  divine  doc- 
trine: this  follows  upon  the  former  5  becaufe  men 
may  falfiy  pretend  to  infpiration,  therefore  we  arc  not 
*'to  believe  every  one  that  makes  this  pretence.  For 
any  man  that  hath  but  confidence  enough,  and  con- 
fcience  little  enough,  may  pretend  to  come  from 
God.  And  if  we  admit  all  pretences  of  this  kind, 
we  lie  at  the  mercy  of  every  crafty  and  confident  m.an, 
to  be  led  by  him  into  what  delufions  he  pleafeth. 

Thirdly,  neither  are  we  to  reje£t  all  that  pretend 
to  come  from  God.  This  is  fufHciently  implied  in 
the  text ;  for  when  the  apoftle  fays,  "  believe  not 
*'  every  ipirit,"  he  fuppofeth  we  are  to  believe  fome; 
and  when  he  faith,  "  try  the  fpirits  whether  they 
*'  be  of  God,"  he  fuppofeth  fome  to  be  of  God, 
and  that  thofe  which  are  fo  are  to  be  believed.  Thefe 
three  obfervations  are  fo  plain,  that  I  need  only  to 
name  them  to  make  way  for  the 

Fourth,  which  I  principally  defigned  to  infifl  upon 
from  thefe  words.  And  that  is  this,  "  that  there  is 
*'  fome  vv/ay  to  difcern  mere  pretenders  to  infpiration, 
•'  from  thofe  who  are  truly  and  divinely  infpired  :  '* 
and  this  is  neceflarily  implied  in  the  apoftle's  bidding 
us  to  "  try  the  fpirits  whether  they  are  of  God." 
For  it  were  in  vain  to  make  any  trial,  if  there  be 
no  way  to  difcern  betv/een  pretended  and  real  in- 
fpiration. 

Now  the  handling  of  this  will  give  occafion  to  two 
very  material  enquiries,  and  ufeful  to  be  refolved. 

I.  How 


Of  the  trial  of  the  fpirits.  3 1 

I.  How  we  may  difcern  between  true  and  coun-  S  E  R  M. 
tcrfeit  dodrines :  thofe  which  really  are  from  God, 
and  thofe  which  only  pretend  to  be  fo  ? 

II.  To  whom  this  judgment  of  difcerning  doth 
appertain  ? 

I.  How  we  may  difcern  between  true  and  coun- 
terfeit doctrines  and  revelations  ?  for  the  clearing  of 
this  I  fhall  lay  down  thefe  following  proportions. 

1.  That  reafon  is  the  faculty  whereby  revelations 
arc  to  be  difcerned  -,  or  to  ufe  the  phrafc  in  the  text, 
it  is  that  v/hereby  v/e  are  to  judge  what  fpirits  are 
of  God,  and  what  not.  For  all  revelation  from 
God  fuppofeth  us  to  be  men,  and  to  be  endued 
with  reafon,  and  therefore  it  does  not  create  new 
faculties  in  us,  but  propounds  new  objects  to  that  fa- 
culty v^^hich  was  in  us  before.  Whatever  dodtrines 
God  reveals  to  men  are  propounded  to  their  under- 
ftandings,  and  by  this  faculty  we  are  to  examine  all 
dodlrines  which  pretend  to  be  from  God,  and  upon 
examination  to  judge  v/hether  there  be  reafon  to  re- 
ceive them  as  divine,  or  to  rejefl  them  as  impoflures. 

2.  All  fupernatural  revelation  fuppofeth  the  truth 
of  the  principles  of  natural  religion.  We  muft  firft 
be  afliired  that  there  is  a  God,  before  we  can  know 
that  he  hath  made  any  revelation  of  himfelf :  and 
we  muft  know  that  his  words  are  true,  otherwife 
there  were  no  fufticient  reafon  to  believe  the  revela- 
tions which  he  makes  to  us :  and  we  muft  believe 
his  authority  over  us,  and  that  he  will  reward  our 
obedience  to  his  laws,  and  punifh  our  breach  of 
them;  otherwife  there  would  neither  be  fufiacient 
obligation  nor  encouragement  to  obedience.  Thefe 
<tnd  many  other  things  are  fuppofed  to   be    true, 

and 


J  2  Of  the  trial  of  the  fpirits. 

SE  R  M.  and  naturally  known  to  us,  antecedently  to  all  fupcr- 
^■^^'  .natural  revelation  ;  otherwife  the  revelations  of  God 
would  fignify  nothing  to  us,  nor  be  of  any  force 
with  us. 

3.  All  reafonings  about  divine  revelations  muft  ne- 
cellirily  be  governed  by  the  principles  of  natural  re- 
ligion :  that  is,  by  thofe   apprehenfions  which  men 
naturally  have  of   the  divine   perfections,    and    the 
clear  notions  of  good  and  evil  which  arc   imprinted 
upon  our  natures.     Bccaufe  we  have   no  other  way 
to  judge  what  is  worthy  of  God,  and  credible  to  be 
revealed  by  him,  and  what  not,  but  by  the  natural 
notions  which  we  have  of  God  and  of  his  efiential   - 
perfections :  which,  becaufe  we  know  him  to  be  im- 
mutable, we  have  realbn  to  believe  he  will  never  con- 
tradict.    And  by   thefe  principles  likewife,  we  are 
to  interpret  what  God  hath  revealed;  and  when  any 
doubt  arifeth  concerning  the  meaning  of  any  divine 
revelation  (as  that  of  the  holy  fcriptures)  we  are  to 
govern  ourfclves  in  the  interpretation  of  it  by  what 
is  mod  agreeable   to    thofe    natural  notions    which 
we  have  of  God,  and  we  have  all  the  reafon  in  V\\t. 
world  to  rejedl  that  fenfe  which  is  contrary  thereto. 
For  inftancc,  when  God  is  reprefented  in  fcripturc 
as  having  a  human  fhape,  eyes,  ears  and  hands,  the 
notions  which  men  naturally  have  of  the  divine  na- 
ture and  perfections  do  fufficiently  direct  us  to  inter- 
pret thefe  expreflions  in  a  fenfe  worthy  of  God,  and 
agreeable  to  his  perfections :  and  therefore  it  is  rea- 
fonable  to  underhand  them  as  rather  fpoken  to  our 
capacity,  and  in  a  figure,  than  to  be  literally  intend- 
ed.  And  this  will  proportionably  hold  in  many  other 

cafes. 

4.  Nothing 


Of  the  trial  of  the  fpirifs.  3  3 

4.  Nothino;  ought  to  be  received  as  a  revelation  S  E  R  M. 
from  God  which  plainly  contradids  ih^  principles  ._^X^X1^ 
of  natural  religion,  or  overrlirows  the  certainty  of 
them.  For  inftance,  it  v/ere  in  vain  to  pretend  a 
revelation  from  God,  *'  that  tiiere  is  no  God,"  be- 
caufe  this  is  a  con  trad  161:  ion  in  terms.  So  likev/ife  to 
pretend  a  command  from  God,  '*  That  we  are  to 
"  hate  and  defpife  him  j"  becauie.it  is  not  credible 
that  God  fhould  require  any  thing  of  reafonalile 
creatures  fo  unfuitable  to  their  natures,  and  to  their 
obligations  to  him ;  befides  that  fjch  a  law  as  this 
does  tacidy  involve  a  contradidicn  j  becaufe  upon 
fuch  a  fuppofidon,  to  deipife  God  would  be  to  obey 
him  J  and  yet  to  obey  him  is  certainly  to  honour 
him.  So  that  in  this  cafe  to  honour  God,  and  to 
defpife  him,  would  be  the  fame  thing,  and  equal 
contempts  of  him.  In  like  manner  it  would  be  vain 
to  pretend  any  revelation  from  God,  "  that  there  is 
"  no  life  after  this,  nor  rev/ards  and  punilliments 
"  in  another  world:"  becaufe  this  is  contrary  to 
thofe  natural  apprehenfions  which  have  generally 
pofTeil  mankind,  and  would  take  away  the  m.ain 
force  and  fandiion  of  the  divine  laws.  The  like  may 
be  faid  concerning  any  pretended  revelation  from 
God,  v/hich  evidently  contradidls  thofe  natural  no- 
tions which  men  have  of  good  and  evil ;  as,  "  that 
"  God  Ihould  command  or  allov/ fedition  and  rebel- 
"  lion,  perfidioufnefs  and  perjury  i"  becaufe  the  prac- 
tice of  thefe  would  be  apparently  defiruflive  of  the 
peace  and  happinefs  of  mankind,  and  would  natu- 
rally bring  confufion  into  the  v/orld  :  but  "  God  is 
"  not  the  God  of  confuHon,  but  of  order,"  which 
St.  Paul  appeals  to  as  a  principle  naturally  known. 
VOL.  II.  E    ^  Upon 


24.  Of  the  trial  of  the  fpirits. 

iRiM.  Upon  the  fame  account  nothing  ought  to  be  enter- 
tained as  a  divine  revelation  which  overthrows  the 
certainty  of  the  principles  of  natural  religion  \  be- 
caufe  that  v/ould  take  away  the  certainty  of  divine  re- 
velation itfelf,  which  fuppofeth  the  truth  of  thofe 
principles.  For  inflance,  whoever  pretends  any  re- 
velation that  brings  the  providence  of  God  into  que- 
flion,  does  by  that  very  thing  make  fuch  a  revelation 
quell lonable.  For  if  God  take  no  care  of  the  world, 
have  no  concernment  for  humane  affairs,  v/hy  fhould 
we  believe  that  he  makes  any  revelation  of  his  will  to 
men?  And  by  this  principle  Mofes  will  have  falfe 
prophets  to  be  tried  :  Deut.  xiii.  i.  "If  there  arife 
**  among  you  a  prophet,  and  giveth  thee  a  fign  or 
''  wonder,  and  the  fign  or  the  wonder  come  to  pafs, 
*'  whereof  he  Ipake  unto  thee,  faying,  \tt  us  go  after 
*'  other  gods,  and  let  us  ferve  them  ;  thou  fhalt  not 
*'  hearken  unto  the  words  of  that  prophet ;  "  and  he 
gives  the  reafon  of  this,  ver.  5.  "  becaufe  he  hath 
*'  fpoken  unto  you  to  turn  you  away  from  the  Lord 
*'  your  God,  Vw-hich  brought  you  out  of  the  land  of 
'*  Egypt."  Here  is  a  cafe  wherein  a  falfe  prophet  is 
fuppofed  to  work  a  true  miracle  to  give  credit  to  his 
dodrine  (which  in  other  cales  the  fcripture  makes  the 
fign  of  a  true  prophet)  but  yet  in  this  cafe  he  is  to  be 
rejefled  as  an  impoftor :  becaufe  the  do6lrine  he 
teacheth  would  draw  men  off  from  the  v/orfhip  of 
the  true  God  who  is  naturally  known,  and  had  ma- 
nifefted  himfejf  to  the  people  of  Ifrael  in  fo  mira- 
culous a  manner,  by  bringing  them  out  of  the 
jatid  of  Egypt.  So  that  a  miracle  is  not  enough 
to  give  credit  to  a  prophet  who  teacheth  any  thing 
contrary  to  that   natural   notion  which   men  have, 

"  That 


Of  the  trial  of  the  fpirlts.  3  5 

*'  That  there  is  but  one  God,  who  only  ought  to  be  S  E  R  M. 
*'  worfhipped." 

5.  Nothing  ought  to  be  received  as  a  divine  doc- 
trine and  revelation,  without  good  evidence  that  it  is 
fo :  that  is,  without  fome  argument  fufEcient  to  fa- 
tisfy  a  prudent  and  confiderate  man.     Now  (fuppo- 
fing  there  be  nothing  in  the  matter  of  the  revelation 
that  is  evidently  contrary  to  the  principles  of  natural 
rehgion,   nor  to  any  former  revelation  which  hath 
already  received  a  greater  and  more  folemn  attefta- 
tion  from  God)  miracles  are  owned  by  all  mankind 
to  be  a  fufEcient  teilimony  to  any  perfon,  or  doflrlne^ 
that   they  are  from  God.     This  was  the  teflimony 
which  God  gave  to  Moles  to  fatisfy  the  people  of 
Ifracl  that  he  had  fent  him  ;  Exod.  iv.  1,2.  "  Mofes 
"  faid,  they  will  not  believe  mc,  nor  hearken  unto 
*'  my  voice;  for  they  will  fay,  the  Lord  hath  not 
*'  appeared  unto  thee."     Upon  this  God  endues  him 
with  a  power  of  miracles,  to  be  an  evidence  to  them, 
"  that  they  may  believe  that  the  God  of  their  fa- 
"  thers,  Abraham,  Ifaac  and  Jacob,  hath  appeared 
*'  unto  thee.'*     And  all  along  in  the  old  teftament, 
v/hen  God  fent  his  prophets  to  make  a  new  revela^ 
tion,  or  upon  any  flrange  and  extraordinary  meilage, 
he  always  gave  credit  to  them  by  fome  fign  or  wonder 
which  they  foretold  or  wrought.     And  when  he  fent 
his  Son  into  the  v/orld,  he  gave  teflimony  to  him  by 
innumerable  great  and  unqueftionabie  miracles,  more 
and  greater  than  Mofes  and  all  the  prophets  had 
wrought.     And  there  was  great  reafon  for  this :  be- 
caufeour  Saviour  came  not  only  to  publifh  a  new 
religion  to  the  v/orld,   but  to  put  an  end  to  that  reli- 
gion which  God  had  infiituted  before.     And  now 

E  2  that 


36  Of  the  trial  of  the  fplrits. 

S  R  R  M.  that  the  gofpel  hath  had  the  confirmation  of  fuch 
^  '^  ^_\_,  miracles  as  never  were  wrought  upon  any  other  oc- 
cafion,  no  evidence  inftrior  to  this  can  in  reafon  con- 
trol this  revelation,  or  give  credit  to  any  thing  con- 
trary to  it.  And  therefore  though  the  falfe  pro- 
phets and  Antichrifts,  foretold  by  our  Saviour, 
did  really  Vv^ork  miracles,  yet  they  were  fo  inconfi- 
derable  in  comparifon  of  our  Saviour's,  that  they 
defer ve  no  credit  in  cppofition  to  that  revelation 
which  had  fo  clear  a  teflimony  given  to  it  from 
heaven  by  miracles,  befides  all  other  concurring  ar- 
guments to  confirm  it. 

6.  And  laltly,  no  argument  is  fufficient  to  prove 
a  dodlrine  or  revelation  to  be  from  God,  which  is 
not  clearer  and  f!:ron2;er  than  the  difficulties  and  ob- 
je6lions  againfl:  it :  becaufe  all  afient  is  grounded  up- 
on evidence,  and  the  ftrongefl:  and  cleared  evidence 
alv/ays  carries  it :  but  where  the  evidence  is  equal  on 
both  fides,  that  can  produce  nothing  but  a  fufpenfe 
and  doubt  in  the  mind  whether  the  thing  be  true  or 
not.  If  Mofes  had  not  confuted  Pharaoh's  Magici- 
ans by  working  miracles  which  they  could  not  work, 
they  might  reafonably  have  difputed  it  with  him 
who  had  been  the  true  prophet:  but  when  he  did 
works  plainly  above  the  power  of  their  magick  and 
the  devil  to  do,  then  they  fubmitted  and  acknow- 
ledged that  there  was  the  finger  of  God.  So  like- 
wife,  though  a  perfon  work  a  miracle  (which  ordi- 
narily is  a  good  evidence  that  he  is  Cent  by  God)  yet 
if  the  dodrine  he  brings  be  plainly  contrary  to  thofc 
natural  notions  which  we  have  of  God,  this  is  a 
better  objection  againft  the  truth  of  this  dodlrine 
than  the  other  is  a  proof  of  it  j   as  is  plain  in  the 

cafe 


XX 


Of  the  trial  of  the  fpirits.  37 

cafe  which  Mofes  puts,  Deut.  xiii.  which  I  mention-  S  E  r  m- 
ed  before. 

Upon  the  fame  account  no  man  can  reafonably 
believe  the  dodrine  of  tranfubftantiation  to  be  re- 
vealed by  God;  becaufe  every  man  hath  as  great 
evidence  that  tranfubfcantiation  is  falfe,  as  any  laan 
can  pretend  to  have  that  God  hath  revealed  any 
fuch  thing.  Suppofe  tranfubftantiation  to  be  pare 
of  the  chriftian  dodrine,  it  mufl:  have  the  fame  con- 
firmation with  the  whole,  and  that  is  miracles :  but 
of  all  dodrines  in  the  world  it  is  peculiarly  incapa- 
ble of  being  proved  by  a  miracle.  For  if  a  miracle 
were  wrought  for  the  proof  of  it,  the  very  fame  af- 
furance  which  a  man  hath  of  the  truth  of  the  mira- 
cle, he  hath  of  the  falfhood  of  the  do6lrine,  that  is, 
the  clear  evidence  of  his  fenfes  for  both.  For  that 
there  is  a  miracle  wrought  to  prove,  that  what  he 
fees  in  the  facrament  is  not  bread  but  the.  body 
of  Christ,  he  hath  only  the  evidence  of  his 
fenfes ;  and  he  hath  the  very  fame  evidence  to  prove, 
that  what  he  fees  in  the  facrament  is  not  the  body 
of  Christ,  but  bread.  So  that  here  arifeth  a  new 
controverfy,  whether  a  man  fhould  believe  his  fenfes 
giving  teftimony  againft  the  dodrine  of  tranfub- 
ftantiation, or  bearing  tellimony  to  the  miracle 
which  is  wrought  to  confirm  that  dodtrine :  for 
there  is  juft  the  fame  evidence  againfl:  the  truth  of 
the  dodlrine,  which  there  is  for  the  truth  of  the  mira- 
cle. So  that  the  argument  for  tranfubftantiation,  and 
the  objection  againf!:  it,  do  jufl  balance  one  another  j 
and  where  the  weights  in  both  fcales  are  equal,  it  is 
impofiiblc  that  the  ona  fliould  weigh  down  the  ci- 
ther j  and  confequently  tranfubftantiation  is  not  to 

be 


38  0/  the  trial  of  the  fpirits, 

S  E  R  M.  be  proved  by  a  miracle ;  for  that  would  be,  to  prove 
to  a  man  by  fomething  that  he  fees,  that  he  docs 
not  fee  what  he  fees. 

And  thus  I  have  endeavoured,  as  briefly  and  clear- 
ly as  I  could,  to  give  fatisfa6lion  to  the  firft  enqui- 
ry I  propounded,  viz.  how  we  may  difcern  between 
true  and  counterfeit  revelations  and  dodlrines :  1  pro- 
ceed now  to  the 

II.  To  whom  this  judgment  of  difcerning  does 
appertain.     V/hethcr  to  chriflians  in  general,  or  to 
feme  particular  perfon  or  perfons,  authorifed  by  God 
to  judge  for  the  refc  of  mankind,  by  v/hofe  judg- 
ment all  men  are  concluded  and  bound  up.     And 
this  is  an  enquiry  of  no  fmall  importance  j  becaufe  it 
is  one  of  the  mod  fundamental  points  in  difference 
between  us  and  the  church  of  Rome.     And  how- 
ever in  many  particular   controverfies,  as  concern- 
ing tranfubftantiation,  the  communion  in  one  kind, 
the  fervice  of  God  in  an  unknov/n  tongue;  the  bu- 
fincfs  of  indulgences,  the  invocation   of  faints,  the 
worihip  of  images,  they  are  not  able  to  offer  any 
thing  that  is  fit  to  move  a  reafonablc  and  confideratc 
man  ;  yet  in  this  controverfy,    concerning  the  judge 
of  controverfies,  they  are  not  deftitute  of  fome  fpe- 
cious  appearance  of  reafon    which   deferves   to  be 
weighed  and  confidered.     Therefore  that  we  may 
examine  this  matter  to  the  bottom,  I  fhall  do  thefc 
three  things. 

I.  Lay  down  fome  cautions  and  limitations 
whereby  we  may  underfland  how  far  the  generality 
of  chriflians  are  allov/ed  to  judge  in  matters  of  re- 


ligion. 


I  fnall  reprefent  the  grounds  of  this  Principle. 

3.  Endea- 


Of  the  trial  of  the  fpirits,  3  9 

2.  Endeavour  to  fatisfy  the  main  objecllons  of  our  3  E  R  M. 
adverfaries  againft  it:   and  likewlfe  to  fnew,  that^^_ 
there  is  no  fuch  reafon  and  neceflity  for  an  univerfal 
infallible  judge  as  they  pretend. 

I.  I  fhall  lay  down  feme  cautions  and  limitations, 
by  which  we  may  underftand  how  far  the  generality 
of  chriilians  are  allowed  to  judge  in  matters  of  reli- 


gion. 


Firll,  private  perfons  are  only  to  judge  for  them- 
felves,  and  not  to  impofe  their  judgment  upon  o- 
thcrs,  as  if  they  had  any  authority  over  them.  And 
this  is  reafonable,  becaufe  if  it  were  otherwife,  a 
man  would  deprive  others  of  that  liberty  which  he 
aflumes  to  himfelf,  and  which  he  can  claim  upon  no 
other  account,  but  becaufe  it  belongs  to  others  e- 
qually  with  himfelf. 

Secondly,  this  liberty  of  judging  is  not  fo  to  be 
underflood  as  to  take  away  the  necefnty  and  ufe  of 
guides  and  teachers  in  religion.  Nor  can  this  be 
denied  to  be  a  reafonable  limitation  -,  becaufe  the 
knowledge  of  revealed  religion  is  not  a  thing  born 
with  us,  nor  ordinarily  fupernaturally  infufed  into 
men  ;  but  is  to  be  learned  as  other  things  are.  And 
if  it  be  to  be  learned,  there  mull  be  fome  to  teach 
and  inflru61:  others :  And  they  that  will  learn  muft 
be  modeil  and  humble ;  and  in  thofe  things,  of 
which  they  are  no  competent  judges,  they  muft  give 
credit  to  their  teachers,  and  truil  their  skill :  for 
inftance,  every  unlearned  man  is  to  take  it  upon 
the  credit  of  thofe  who  are  skilful,  that  the  fcrip- 
tures  are  truly  and  faithfully  tranflated  ;  and  for  the 
underftanding  of  obfcure  texts  of  fcripture,  and  more 
difficult  points  in  religion,  he  is  to  rely  upon  thofe, 

whofe 


xxr. 


40  Of  the  trial  of  the  fptrits, 

SERM.  wliofe  proper  bufinefs  and  employment  it  is  to  ap- 
ply themfelvcs  to  the  underflanding  of  thefe  things. 
For  in  thefe  cafes  every  man  is  not  capable  of  judg- 
ing himfelf,  and  therefore  he  mufl  necelTarily  traft 
others :  and  in  all  other  things  he  ought  to  be  mo- 
deft  i  and  unlefs  it  be  in  plain  matters,  which  every 
man  can  judge  of,  he  ought  rather  to  diftruft  him- 
felf than  his  teacher. 

And  this  refpeift  may  be  given  to  a  teacher  with- 
out either  fuppofing  him  to  be  infallible,  or  making 
an  abfolute  refignation  of  my  judgment  to  him.  A 
man  may  be  a  very  able  teacher  (fuppofe  of  the  ma- 
thematicks)  and  fit  to  have  the  refped;  which  is  due 
to  a  teacher,  tho'  he  be  not  infallible  in  thofe  Sci- 
ences :  and  becaufe  infallibility  is  not  necefifary  to 
fuch  a  teacher,  it  is  neither  necefiary  nor  conveni- 
ent 'that  I  fhould  abfolutely  refign  up  my  judgment 
to  him.  For  though  I  have  reafon  to  credit  him, 
widiin  the  compafs  of  his  art,  in  things  which  I  do 
not  know,  I  am  not  therefore  bound  to  believe  him 
in  things  plainly  contrary  to  what  I  and  all  man- 
kind do  certainly  know.  For  example,  if  upon  pre- 
tence of  his  skill  in  arithmenck,  which  I  am  learn- 
ing of  him,  he  fhould  tell  me,  that  twice  two  do 
not  make  four,  but  five  •,  though  I  believed  him 
to  be  the  beft  mathematician  in  the  world,  yet 
I  cannot  believe  him  in  this  thing :  nor  is  there 
reafon  I  fliould  ;  becaufe  I  did  not  come  to  learn 
this  of  him,  but  knew  as  much  of  that  before  as 
he  or  any  man  t\^c  could  tell  me.  The  cafe  is 
the  fame  in  matters  of  religion  ;  in  which  there 
are  fome  things  h  plain,  and  lie  fo  level  to  all  ca- 
pacities,   that  every  man   is  almoft    equally  judge 

of 


Of  the  trial  of  the  fpirits.  4 1 

of  them:    As  I  fhall  have  cccafion  farther  to  fnew  ^  ^^}^' 
by  and  by. 

Thirdly,  neither  doth  this  liberty  of  judging  ex- 
empt men  from  a  due  fubmiffion  and  obedience  to 
their  teachers  and  governors.  Every  man  is  bound 
to  obey  the  lawful  commands  of  his  governors  -,  and 
what  by  publick  confent  and  authority  is  determi- 
ned and  efiablifhed,  ought  not  to  be  gainfaid  by 
private  perfons,  but  upon  very  clear  evidence  of  the 
the  faUhood  or  unlawfulnefs  of  it.  And  this  is  eve- 
ry man's  duty,  for  the  maintaining  of  order,  and 
out  of  regard  to  the  peace  and  unity  of  the  church  ; 
which  is  not  to  be  violated  upon  every  fcruple  and 
frivolous  pretence :  and  when  men  are  perverfe  and 
difobedient,  authority  is  judge^  and  may  refrrain  and 
punilh  them. 

Fourthly,  nor  do  I  fo  far  extend  this  liberty  of 
judging  in  religion,  as  to  think  every  man  fit  to  dif- 
pute  the  controverfies  of  religion,  A  great  part  of 
people  are  ignorant,  and  of  fo  mean  a  capacity  as 
not  to  be  able  to  judge  of  the  force  of  a  very  good 
argument,  much  lefs  of  the  iiTue  of  a  k)ng  difputc ; 
and  fuch  perfons  ought  not  to  engage  in  difputes  of 
religion  5  but  to  beg  God's  direction,  and  to  rely 
upon  their  teachers  ♦,  and  above  all  to  live  up  to  the 
plain  didates  of  natural  light,  and  the  clear  com- 
mands of  GoD*s  word,  and  this  will  be  their  bed 
fecurity.  And  if  the  providence  of  God  hath  placed 
them  under  fuch  guides  as  do  feduce  them  into  er- 
ror, their  ignorance  is  invincible,  and  God  will  not 
condemn  them  for  it^  fo  long  as  they  fincerely  en- 
deavour to  do  the  will  of  God  fo  far  as  they  know  it. 
And  this  being  the  cafe  of  many,  elpeciaily  in  the 

Vol.  II.  F  -   church 


42  Of  the  trial  of  the  fpirits. 

S  F  R  ?vf.  church  of  Rome,  where  ignorance  is  fo  induflrioufly 
u...^^..^;  cherilhed,  I  have  fo  much  charity  as  to  hope  well 
concerning  many  of  them  :  and  feeing  that  church 
teaches  and   injoins   the  people  to   woribip  images, 
it  is  in  feme  fenfe  charitably  done  of  them,  not  to 
let  them  know  the  fecond  commandment,   that  they 
may  not  be  guilty  of  finning  againft  fo  plain  a  law. 
Having  premifed  thcfe  cautions,  I  proceed  in  the 
II.  Place,  to  repi-efent  to  you  the  grounds  of  this 
principle  of  our  religion,  viz.  that  we  allow  private 
perfons  to  judge  for  themfelves  in  matters  of  reli- 
gion. 

Firfl-,  becaufe  many  things  in  religion,  efpccially 
thofc  which  are  molt  neccffary  to  be  believed  and 
pradlifed,  are  fo  plain,  that  every  man  of  ordinary 
capacity,  after  competent  inftrudlion  in  matters  of 
religion  (which  is  always  to  be  fuppofed)  can  as  well 
judge  of  them  for  himfelf,  as  any  man,  or  compa- 
ny of  men  in  the  world  can  judge  for  him  ;  be- 
caufe in  thefe  he  hath  a  plain  rule  to  go  by,  natural 
light  and  clear  revelation  of  fcripture.  And  this  is 
no  new  principle  of  the  proteftants,  but  moft  ex- 
prefly  owned  by  the  ancient  fathers.  "  Whatever 
**  things  are  neceflluy,  are  plain,"  faith  St.  Chry- 
fbftom.  "  All  things  are  plainly  contained  m  fcrip- 
"  ture  which  concern  fliith  and  a  good  life,  "  faith 
St.  Auftin.  And  nothing  can  be  more  reafonable, 
than  that  thofe  things  which  are  plain  to  every  man 
ihould  be  left  to  every  man*s  judgment.  For  every 
man  can  judge  of  what  is  plain  ;  of  evident  truth 
and  falfhood,  virtue  and  vice,  of  dcdlrines  and  Jaws 
plainly  delivered  in  fcripture,  if  we  belicv^e  any  thing 
to  be  fo^  which  is  next  to  madnefs  to  deiiy.     I  will 

refer 


Of  the  trial  of  the  fpirlU.    *  43 

refer  it  to  no  man's  judgment  upon  earth  to  determine  S  E^R^M- 
for  me    "  Whether  there  be  a  God  or  not  ?   whether 
«  murder  and  perjury  be  fins  ?  "  Whether  it  be  not 
plain  in    fcripture,    that  "   Jesus   Christ    is  the 
''   Son  of  God,  "   that  "  he  became  man,  and  died 
«  for  us,  and  rofe  again  ?  '*  fo  that  there  is  no  need 
of  a  judge  in  thefe  cafes.     Nor  can  1  poflibly  beUeve 
any  man  to  be  fo  abfolutely  infaUible,  as  not  to  call 
his  infalhbihty  into  queftion,  if  he  determines  any 
thing  contrary  to  what  is  plain  and  evident  to  all 
mankind.    For  if  he  ihould  determine  ''  that  there  is 
«  no  God,  "  or  "  that  he  is  not  to  be  wcrPnipped,'* 
or  "  or  that  he  will  not  punifh  and  reward   men," 
or,  which  is  the  cafe  that  Eeiiarmine  puts,  "  that 
«  virtue  is  vice,  and  vice  virtue,  "  he  would  hereby 
take  away   the  very  foundation  of  religion  •,    and 
how  can  I   look  upon  him  any  longer  as  a  judge  in 
matters  of  reUgion,  when  there  can  be  no  fjch  thing 
as  religion  if  he  have  judged  and  determined  right  ? 

Secondly,  the  fcripture  plainly  allows  this  liberty 
to  particular  and  private  perfons  to  judge  for  them- 
felves.     And  for  this  I  need  go  no  farther  than  my 
text,  which  bids  men  "  try  the  fpirirs  whether  they 
«  be  of  God.  "     I  do  not  think  this  is  fpoken  on- 
ly to  the  pope  or  a  general  council,  but  to  chriftians 
in  general :  for  to  thefe  the  apoftlc  writes.     Now  if 
St.  John  had  believed  that  God  had  confdtuted  an 
infallible  judge  in  his  church,  to  whofe  fentence  and 
determination  all  chriftians  are  bound  to  iubmit,  he 
ought  in  all  reafon   to   have  referred  chriftians  to 
him  for  the  trial  of  fpirits,  and  not  to  have  left  it  to 
every  man's  private  judgment  to  examine  and  to  de- 
termine thefe  things.     But  it  feems  St.  Paul  was  Hke- 

F  -  2  wif« 


A-  ,1 


Qf  the  trial  of  the  fplrits, 

wife  of  the  fame  mind ;  and  though  he  was  guldad 
)y  an  infallible  fpirit,  yet  he  did  not  expedl  that  men 
fhould  blindly  Tjbmit  to  his  dodlrine:    nay.  To  far  is 
he  from  that,  that  he  commends  the  Bercans  for  that 
very   thing  for  which,    I  dare  fay,  the  church  of 
Rome  would  have  check'  i  them  molt  feverely,  name- 
ly, f.T  fearchirg  the  fcrip-iures,  to  fee  whether   thofe 
things  v.hich  the  apoUIes  dehvered  were  fo  or  not: 
this  Jibertv  Sr.  Paul  allowed;  and  though  he  was  in- 
fpired  by  God,  yec  he  (.reated  thofe  whom  he  taught 
like  men.     And  indeed,  it  were  a  hard  cafe  that  a 
neceflity  of  believing  d.vii'ie  revelations,  and  rejefting 
impofcures,  ihould  b:-  impofcd  upon  chriflians-,  and 
yet  the  liberty  of  judging,  whether  a  do6lrine  be  from 
God  or  not,  fhould  be  taken  away  from  them. 

Ti.:rdiy,  our  adverfaries  themfelves  are  forced  to 
grant   that  which  in  effefl  is  as  much  as  we  con- 
tend for.     For  though  they  deny  a  liberty  of  judg- 
ing in  particular  points  of  religion,    yet  they  arc 
forced  to  grant  men  a  liberty  of  judging  upon  the 
whole.     When  they  of  the  church  of  Rome  would 
perfuade  a  jew  or  a  heathen,  to  become  a  chriilian; 
or  a  herctick  (as  they  are  pleafed  to  call  us)  to  come 
over   to   the  communion  of  their  church,  and  offer 
arguments  to  induce  them  thereunto ;  they  do  by  this 
very  thing,  whether  they  will  or  no,  make  that  man 
judge  which  is   the   true  church,  and  the  true  reli- 
gion :    becaufe  it  would  be  ridiculous  to  perlliade  a 
man  to  turn  to  their  religion,  and  to  urge  him  with 
feafons  to  do  fo,  and  yet  to  deny  him  the  ufe  of  his 
own  judgment  whether  their  reafons  be  fufficient  to 
move  him  to  make  luch  a   change.     Now,  as  the 
fpoflle  reafons  in  another  cafe,  if  men  be  fit  to  judge 

for 


Of  the  trial  of  the  fpirifs.  4^ 

for  then)felves  in  fo  great  and  important  a  matter  as  S  E  R  M 
the  choice  of   their  religion,    why  fliould  they  be  ^J^ 
thought  unworthy  to  judge  in  lefifer  matters?    They 
tell  us  indeed  that  a  man  may  ufe  his  judgment  in. 
the  choice  of  his  religion ;  but  when  he  hath  once 
chofen,  he  is  then  forever  to  refign  up  his  judgment 
to  their  church :    but  v/hat  tolerable  reafon  can  any 
man  give,  v/hy  a  man  fhould  be  fit  to  judge  upon 
the  Y/hoIe,  and  yet  unfit  to  judge  upon  particular 
points  ?  eipecially  if  it  be  confidered,  that  no  mian 
can  make  a  dil'creet  judgment  of  any  religion,  before 
he  hath  examined  the  pardcular  doctiines  of  it,  and 
made  a  judgment  concerning  them.     Is  it  credible, 
that  God  fhould  give  a  man  judgment  in  the  moil: 
fundamental  and  important  matter  of  all,   viz.    to 
difcern  the  true  religion,  and  the  true  church,  from 
thefalie;  for  no  other  end,  but  to  enaWe  him  to 
choofe  once  for  all  to  whom  he  iliould  refign  and  in- 
flave  his  judgment  for  ever?  which  is  juil  as  reafon- 
able  as  if  one  fhould  fay,  that  God  hath  given  a  man 
,eyes  for  no  other  end,  but  to  look  out  once  for  all, 
and  to  pitch  upon  a  difcrect  perfon  to  lead  him  about 
blindfold  ail    the  days  of   his   life.      I  come  now 
to  the 

III.  Thing  I  propounded,  v/hich  Is,  to  anfv/er  the 
main  objedion  of  our  adverfaries  againft  this  princi- 
ple j  and  likewife  to  fhew  that  there  is  no  fucii  rea- 
fon and^hecefiity  for  an  univerfil  infallible  judge,  as 
they  pretend.  Now  their  great  objedion  is  this.  If 
every  man  may  judge  for  himfelf,  there  will  be  no- 
thing but  confufion  in  religion,  there  will  be  no  encj 
of  controverfies :  fo  that  an  univerfal  infallible  judge 
is  neceOIiry,  and  without  this  God  had  not  made  fuf. 

ficient 


46  Of  the  trial  of  the  fpirits. 

S  E  R  M.  ficient  provifion  for  the  alTurance  of  mens  faith, 
and  for  the  peace  and  unity  of  his  church :  or,  as  it 
is  expreffed  in  the  canon  law,  aliter  Dominiis  non  vi- 
deretur  fuijjc  difcretus^  "  otherwife  our  Lord  had 
"  not  fecm'd  to  be  difcreet."  How  plaufible  foever 
this  objedlion  may  appear,  I  do  not  defpair,  but  if 
men  will  lay  afide  prejudice  and  impartially  confider 
things,  to  make  it  abundantly  evident,  that  this 
gro'jnd  is  not  fufficient  to  found  an  infallible  judge 
upon.  And  therefore  in  anfwer  to  it,  I  defire  thefe 
following  particulars  may  be  confidered. 

Firfb,  that  this  which  they  fay,  rather  proves  what 
God  fhould  have  done  according  to  their  fancy,  than 
what  he  hath  really  and  actually  done.  My  text  ex- 
prefly  bids  chriltians  to  try  the  fpirits,  which  to  any 
man's  fenle  does  imply,  that  they  may  judge  of  thefe 
matters:  but  the  church  of  Rome  fays  they  may 
notj  becaufe  if  this  liberty  were  permitted,  God 
had  not  ordered  things  wifely,  and  for  the  beft,  for 
the  peace  and  unity  of  his  church.  But,  as  the  apo- 
flle  fays  in  another  cafe,  "  What  art  thou,  O  man, 
"  that  objedled  againft  God  ?" 

Secondly,  if  this  reafoning  be  good,  we  may  as    ; 
well  conclude   that   there   is  an  univerfal   infallible  J 
judge  fet  over  the  whole  world  in  all  temporal  mat-  ^ 
ters,  to  whofc  authority  all  mankind  is  bound  to  fub- 
mit.     Becaufe  this  is  as  neceflary  to  the  peace  of  the 
world,  as  the  other   is  to  the  peace  of  the  church. 
And  men  furely  are  every  v/hit  as  apt  to  be  obilinate 
and  perverfe  about   matters  of  temporal  right,    as 
about  matters  of  faith.     But  it  is  evident  in  fad  and 
experience  that  there  is  no  fuch  univerfal  judge  ap- 
pointed by  God  over  the  whole  world,  to  decide  all 

cafes 


Of  the  trial  of  the  fpirits.  47 

cafes  of  temporal  right  -,  and  for  want  of  him  the  S  E  R  M. 
world  is  fain  to  fhift  as  well  as  it  can.  But  now  a 
very  acute  and  fcholaftical  man,  that  would  argue 
that  God  muft  needs  have  done  whatever  he  fancies 
convenient  for  the  world  fhould  be  done,  might  by 
the  very  fame  way  of  reafoning  conclude  the  necei^ 
i\iY  of  an  univerfal  infallible  judge  in  civil  matters, 
as  well  as  in  matters  of  religion  :  and  their  aliter  Do- 
minus  non  videretur  fuijje  difcretus^  "  otherwife  God 
"  had  not  feem'd  to  be  difcreet,"  is  every  whit  as  co- 
gent and  as  civil,  in  the  one  cafe  as  the  other. 

Thirdly,  there  is  no  need  of  fuch  a  judge,  to  aflure 
men  in  matters  of  religion ;  becaufe  men  may  be  fuf- 
ficiently  certain  without  him.  I  hope  it  may  be  cer- 
tain and  clear  enough,  that  there  is  a  God  ;  and 
that  his  providence  governs  the  world  ;  and  that 
there  is  another  life  after  this,  though  neither  pope 
nor  council  had  ever  declared  any  thing  about 
thefe  matters.  And  for  revealed  dodrines,  we  may 
be  certain  enough  of  all  that  is  neceifary,  if  it  be  true 
which  the  fathers  tell  us,  "  that  all  things  neceflary 
*'  are  plainly  revealed  in  the  holy  fcriptures.'* 

Fourthly,  an  infallible  judge,  if  there  were  one, 
is  no  certain  way  to  end  controverfies,  and  to  pre- 
ferve  the  unity  of  the  church  ;  unlefs  it  were  likewile 
infallibly  certain,  that  there  is  fuch  a  judge,  and 
who  he  is.  For  'till  men  were  fure  of  both  thele, 
there  v/ould  ftiil  be  a  controverfy  whether  there  be  an 
infallible  judge,  and  who  he  is.  And  if  it  be  true 
which  they  tell  us,  "  that  without  an  infallible  judge 
''  controverfies  cannot  be  ended ,""  then  a  controverfy 
concerning  an  infallible  judge  can  never  be  ended. 
And  there  ^re  tvvo  controverfies  adually  on  foot  about 

an 


XXI. 


48  Of  the  trial  cf  the  Jpirits. 

^E  RM.  an  infallible  judge;  one,  "  whcthei'  there  be  an  in- 
"  fallible  judge,  or  not?"  which  is  a  controvcrfy  be- 
tween us  and  the  church  of  Rome  :  and  the  other, 
''  who  this  infallible  judge  isr"  which  is  a  contro- 
verfy  among  themfelves,  v/hich  could  never  yet  be 
decided  :  and  yet  'till  it  be  decided,  inlallibility,  if 
they  had  it,  would  be  of  no  ufe  to  them  for  the  end- 
ing of  controverfies. 

Fifthly,  there  is  no  fuch  abfolute  need,  as  is  pre- 
tended, of  determining  all  controverfies  in  religion. 
If  men  would  dived  themfelves  of  prejudice  and  in- 
terefb,  as  they  ought,  in  matters  of  religion,  the  ne- 
celTary  things  of  religion  are  plain  enough,  and  men 
would  generally  agree  well  enough  about  them  :  but 
if  men  will  fufFer  themfelves  to  be  biafied  by  thefe,- 
they  would  not  hearken  to  an  infallible  judge,  if 
there  were  one ;  or  they  would  find  out  fome  way  or 
other  to  call  his  infallibility  into  queftion.  And  as 
for  doubtful  and  lefTer  matters  in  religion,  charity,- 
and  mutual  forbearance  among  chriifians,  would 
make  the  church  as  peaceable  and  happy,  as  perhaps 
it  was  ever  defign'd  to  be  in  this  world,  without  ab- 
folute unity  in  opinion. 

Sixthly  and  lallly,  whatever  may  be  the  inconve- 
niences of  mens  judging  for  themfelves  in  religion, 
yet,  taking  this  principle  with  the  cautions  I  have 
given,  I  doubt  not  to  make  it  appear,  that  the  in- 
conveniences are  fiir  the  lead  on  that  fide.  The  pre- 
fent  condition  of  humane  nature  doth  not  admit  of 
any  conftitution  of  things,  whether  in  religion,  or 
civil  matters,  which  is  free  from  all  kind  of  excep- 
tion and  inconvenience  :  that  is  the  bed  date  of 
things  which   is  liable  to  the  lead  and  fewed.     If 

men 


Of  the  trial  of  the  fpirks,  49 

meri  be  moded,  and  humble,  and  willino;  to  learn,  S  E  R  M. 
God  hath  done  that  which  is  fufficient  for  the  aiTu-  '^'  ' 
ranee  of  our  faith,  and  for  the  peace  of  his  church, 
without  an  infallible  judge :  and  I'i  men  will  not  be 
fo,  I  .cannot  tell  what  would  be  fufRcient.  I  am  furc 
there  were  herefies  and  fchifms  in  the  apoftles  times, 
when  thofe  who  governed  the  church  were  certainly 
guided  by  an  infallible  fpirit.  God  hath  appointed 
guides  and  teachers  for  us  in  matters  of  religion, 
and  if  we  will  be  contented  to  be  intruded  by  them 
in  thofe  necefiary  articles  and  duties  of  religion, 
which  are  plainly  contained  in  fcripture;  and  to  be 
counfelled  and  direded  by  them  in  things  that  are 
mere  doubtful  and  difficult,  I  do  not  fee  why  we 
might  not  do  well  enough  without  any  infallible  judge 

or  guide. 

But  Hill  it  will  be  faid,  "  who  fhall  judge  what 
*'  things  are  plain,  and  what  doubtful?"  The  anfwer 
to  this,  in  my  opinion,  is  not  difficult.  For  if  there 
be  any  thing  plain  in  religion,  every  man  that  hath 
been  duly  intruded  in  the  principles  of  religion  can 
judge  of  it,  or  elfe  it  is  not  plain.  But  there  are 
fome  things  in  religion  fo  very  plain,  that  no  guide 
or  judge  can  in  reafon  claim  that  authority  over  men, 
as  to  oblige  them  to  believe  or  do  the  contrary ;  no, 
though  he  precer.d  to  infallibility;  no,  though  he 
were  an  apodle,  though  he  were  an  angel  from  hea- 
ven. St.  Paul  purs  the  cafe  fo  high,  Gal.  i.  8. 
"  Though  we,  or  an  angel  from  heaven,  preach  any 
"  other  gofpel  unto  you,  than  what  you  have  receiv- 
"  ed,  let  him  be  accurfed:"  vvrhich  plainly  fuppo- 
feth  that  chritlians  may  and  can  judge  when  goc- 
trines  are  contrary  to  the  gofpel.     What  ^    not  be- 

VoL.  II,  G  lieve 

I. 


50  Of  the  trial  of  the  fpirifs. 

SERM.  Jieve  an  apoftic,  nor  an  .angel  from  heaven,  if  he 
Ihould  teach  any  thing  evidently  contrary  to  the  plain 
doftrinc  of  the  gofpel?  If  he  iliould  determine  vir- 
tue to  be  vice,  and  vice  to  be  virtue  ?  no ;  not  an 
apoftle,  nor  an  angcU  bccaufe  fuch  a  dodlrine  as  this 
would  confound  and  overturn  all  things  in  religion. 
And  yet  Bellarmine  puts  this  very  cafe,  and  fays,  if 
the  pope  fhould  fo  determine,  we  were  bound  to  be- 
lieve him,  unlcfs  we  would  fin  againfl  confcience. 

I  will  conclude  this  difcourfe  by  putting  a  very 
plain  and  familiar  C2ik'y  by  which  it  will  appear  what 
credit  and  authority  is  fit  to  be  given  to  i  guide,  and 
what  not.  Suppofc  I  came  a  ftranger  into  England, 
and  landing  at  Dover  took  a  guide  there  to  con- 
duft  me  in  my  way  to  York,  which  I  knew  before 
by  the  map  to  lie  north  of  Dover :  having  commit- 
ted myfelf  to  him,  if  he  lead  me  for  two  or  three 
days  together  out  of  any 'plain  road,  and  many  times 
over  hedge  and  ditch,  I  cannot  but  think  it  llrange, 
that  in  a  civil  and  well-inhabited  country  there 
fhould  be  no  highways  from  one  part  of  it  to  ano- 
ther :  yet  thus  far  I  fubmit  to  him,  though  not  with- 
out fome  regret  and  impatience.  But  then  if  after 
this,  for  two  or  three  days  more  he  lead  me  dired- 
ly  fouth,  and  with  my  face  full  upon  the  fun  at  noon- 
day, and  at  lad  bring  me  back  again  to  Dover  Peer, 
and  ftill  bids  me  follow  him  \  then  certainly  no 
modefty  docs  oblige  a  man  not  to  difpute  with  his 
guide,  and  to  tell  him  furely  that  can  be  no  way,  be- 
caufc  it  is  fca.  Now  though  he  fct  never  fo  bold  a 
face  upon  the  matter,  and  tell  me  with  all  the  gra- 
vity and  authority  in  the  world,  that  it  is  not  the  fea 
but  dry  land  under  the  fpecies  and  appearance  of  wa- 
ter; 


Of  the  trial  of  the  fpirits.  5 1 

tcr;  and  that  whatever  my  eyes  tell  me,  having  SERM. 
once  committed  myfclf  to  his  guidance,  I  m.uft  not 
trufl  my  own  fenfes  in  the  cafe ;  it  being  one  of  the 
mofl  dangerous  forts  of  infidelity  for  a  man  to  be- 
lieve his  own  eyes  rather  than  his  faithful  and  infal- 
lible guide :  all  this  moves  me  not ;  but  I  begin  to 
expoftulate  roundly  with  him,  and  to  let  him  under- 
fland  that  if  1  mufl  not  believe  what  I  fee,  he  is 
like  to  be  of  no  farther  ufe  to  me ;  becaufe  i  fhall 
not  be  able,  at  this  rate,  to  know  whether  I  have  a 
guide,  and  whether  I  follow  him  or  not.  In  fhorr,  I 
tell  him  plainly,  that  when  I  took  him  for  my 
guide,  I  did  not  take  him  to  tell  me  the  difference 
between  north  and  fouth,  betv/een  a  hedge  and  a 
highway,  between  fca  and  dry  land ;  all  this  I  knew 
before,  as  well  as  he  or  any  man  clfe  could  tell  me; 
but  I  took  him  to  conduct  and  dire(5l  me  the  nearcft 
way  to  York.  And  therefore  after  all  his  imperdnent 
talk,  after  all  his  motives  of  credibility  to  perfuade 
me  to  believe  him,  and  all  his  confident  fayings, 
which  he  gravely  calls  demonftrations,  I  ftand  ftifly 
upon  the  fhore,  and  leave  my  learned  and  reverend 
guide  to  take  his  own  courle,  and  to  difpofe  of  him- 
felf  as  he  pleafeth  \  but  firmly  refolve  not  to  follow 
him.  And  is  any  man  to  be  blamed  that  breaks  with 
his  guide  upon  thefe  Terms  ? 

And  this  is  truly  the  cafe,  when  a  man  commits 
himfelf  to  the  guidance  of  any  perfon  or  church  :  if 
by  virtue  of  this  authority  they  will  needs  perfuade 
me  out  of  my  fenfes,  and  not  to  believe  what  I  fee, 
but  what  they  fay ;  that  virtue  is  vice,  and  vice  vir- 
tue, if  they  declare  them  to  be  fo :  and  that,  becaufe 
they  fay  they  are  infallible,   I  am  to  receive  all  their 

G  2  didatct 


Of  the  trial  of  the  fpirits, 
didates  for  oracles,  tho'  never  fo  evidently  falfe  and 
ablurd  in  the  judgment  of  all  mankind  :  in  this  cafe 
there  is  no  way  to  be  rid  of  thefe  unreafonable  peo- 
ple, but  to  defire  of  them,  fince  one  kindnefs  de- 
ferves  another,  and  all  contradictions  are  alike  eafy  to 
be  believed,  that  they  would  be  pleafed  to  believe 
that  infidelity  is  faith,  and  that  when  I  abfolutely 
renounce  their  authority,  I  do  yield  a  mofl  perfed 
fubmiffion  and  obedience  to  it. 

Upon  the  whole  matter,  all  the  revelations  of  God, 
as  well  as  the  laws  of  men,  go  upon  this  prefump- 
tion,  that  men  are  not  ftark  fools;  but  that  they  will 
confider  their  intereft,  and  have  fome  regard  to  the 
great  concernment  of  their  eternal  falvation.  And 
this  is  as  much  to  fecure  men  from  miftake  in  mat- 
ters of  belief,  as  God  hath  afforded  to  keep  men 
from  fin  in  matters  of  pradtice.  He  hath  made  no 
efFe&ual  and  infallible  provifion  that  men  fliall  not 
fni;  and  yet  it  would  puzzle  any  man  to  give  a 
good  reafon,  why  God  fhould  take  more  care  to  fe-- 
cure  men  againft  errors  in  belief,  than  againft  fin  and* 
wickedncfs  in' their  lives. 

I  fhall  now  only  draw  three  or  four  Inferences 
from  this  difcourfe  which  I  have  made,  and  fo  con- 
clude. 

I.  That  it  is  every  m.an's  duty,  who  hath  ability 

and  capacity  for  it,  to  endeavour  to  underlland  the 
grounds  of  his  religion.  For  to  try  dodlrines,  is  to 
inquire  into  the  grounds  and  reafons  of  them;  which 
the  better  any  man  underftands,  the  more  firmly  he 
will  be  cdabliflied  in  lat  truth,  and  be'  the  more 
refolure  in  the  day  of  trial,  and  the  better  able  to 
^vithftand  the  arts  and  afiauits  of  cunning  adverfa- 

ries. 


Xx\. 


Of  the  trial  of  the  fpirifs,  |j 

rks,  and  the  fierce  florms  of  perfecution.  And  on  S  T[  R  M. 
the  contrary,  that  man  will  foon  be  moved  from  his 
fledfaftnefs  who  never  examined  the  grounds  and 
reafons  of  his  belief  When  it  comes  to  the  trial, 
he  that  hath  but  little  to  lay  for  his  religion,  will  pro- 
bu]bly  neither  do  nor  fuffer  much  for  ir. 

2.  That  all  dodrines  are  vehemently  to  be  ^^-;ry6l«» 
ed  which  decline  trial,  and  are  fo  loth  to  be  brou^  ht 
into  the  light  j  whicii  will  not  endure  a  fiir  exami- 
nation, but  magiflerially  require  an  irnplicite  faith: 
whereas  truth  is  bold  and  full  of  courage,  and  loves 
to  appear  openly ;  and  is  fo  fecure  and  confident  of 
her  own  ftrength  as  to  offer  herfelf  to  the  fevereft 
trial  and  examination.  But  to  deny  all  liberty  of 
enquiry  and  judgment  in  matters  of  religion,  is  the 
greateft  injury  and  difparagemcnt  to  truth  that  can 
be,  and  a  tacit  acknowledgment  that  fhe  lies  under 
fome  difad vantage,  and  that  there  is  lefs  to  be  faid 
for  her  than  for  error. 

I  have  often  wonder'd  why  the  people  in  the 
church  of  Rome  do  not  fufpecl  their  teachers  and 
guides  to  have  fome  ill  defign  upon  them,  when  they 
do  fo  induftriouQy  debar  them  of  the  means  of 
knowledge,  and  are  fo  very  loth  to  let  them  under- 
hand what  it  is  that  we  have  to  lay  againft  their  re- 
ligion. For  can  any  thing  in  the  world  be  more 
fufpicious,  than  to  perfuade  men  to  put  out  their 
eyes,  upon  promife  that  they  v/ill  help  them  to  a 
much  better  and  more  faithful  guide  ^  If  any  church, 
any  profelTion  of  men,  be  unwilling  their  doctrines 
fhould  be  expofed  to  trial,  it  is  a  certain  fign  they 
know  fomething  by  them  that  is  fiuky,  and  which 
will  not  endure  the  light.     This  is  the  account  which 

our 


54  Of  the  trial  of  the  fpirits. 

SERM.  our  Saviour  gives  us  in  a  like  cafe,  it  was  "  bc- 

XXI 

"  caufe  mens  deeds  were  evil,  that  they  loved  dark- 

*'  nefs  rather  than  light."  For  "  every  one  that  doth 

**  evil  hateth  the  liglit,  neither  cometh  he  to  the 

**  light,  left  his  deeds  fhoald  be  reproved  :    but  he 

*'  that  doth  the  truth  cometh  to  the  light,  that  his 

**  deeds  may  be  made  manifefl  that  they  are  wrought 

«  in  God." 

3.  Since  reafbn  and  chriflianity  allow  this  liberty 
to  private  pcrfons  to  judge  for  themfclves  in  matters 
of  religion,  we  fhould  ufe  this  privilege  with  much 
modefty  and  humility,  with  great  fubmiflion  and  de- 
ference to  our  fpiritual  rulers  and  guides,  whom 
God  hath  appointed  in  his  church.  And  there  is 
very  great  need  of  this  caution,  fmce  by  experience 
we  find  this  liberty  fo  much  abufed  by  many  to  the 
nourifhing  of  pride  and  felf-conceit,  of  divifion  and 
fadtlon ;  and  thofe  who  arc  leaft  able  to  judge,  to  be 
frequently  the  moft  forward  and  confident,  the  mod 
peremptory  and  perverfe  :  and  inftead  of  demeaning 
themfclves  with  the  fubmiflion  of  learners,  to  aflume 
to  themfclves  the  authority  of  judges,  even  in  the  mofl 
doubtful  and  dilpu table  matters. 

The  tyranny  of  the  Roman  church  over  the  minds 
and  confciences  of  men,  is  not  to  be  juflified  upon  any 
account ;  but  nothing  puts  io  plaufible  a  colour  upon 
it,  as  the  ill  ufe  that  is  too  frequently  made  of  this 
natural  privilege  of  mens  judging  for  themfclves  in  a 
matter  of  fo  infinite  concernment,  as  that  of  their 
eternal  happinefs.  But  then  it  is  to  be  confider'd, 
that  the  proper  remedy  in  this  cafe,  is  not  to  deprive 
men  of  this  privilege,  but  to  ufe  the  beft  means  to 
prevent  the  abufc  of  it.  For  though  the  inconve- 
niences 


Of  the  trial  of  the  fpirits.  55 

niences  arifmg  from  the  ill  ufe  of  it  may  be  very  S  E  R  M. 
great,  yet  the  mifchief  on  the  other  hand  is  into- , 
Jerablc.  Religion  itfelf  is  liable  to  be  abufed  to  very 
bad  purpofes,  and  frequently  is  fo;  but  it  is  not 
therefore  bed  that  there  fhould  be  no  religion  :  and 
yet  this  objed:ion,  if  it  be  of  any  force  and  be  pur- 
fued  home,  is  every  whit  as  ftrong  againft  religion 
itfelf,  as  againft  mens  liberty  of  judging  in  matters 
of  religion.  Nay  I  add  further,  that  no  man  can 
judiciouily  embrace  the  true  religion,  unlels  he  be  per- 
mitted to  judge,  whether  that  which  he  embraces  be 
the  true  religion  or  not. 

4.  When  upon  due  trial  and  examination  we  are 
well  fettled  and  eftablifh'd  in  our  religion,  "  let  us 
"  hold  faft  the  profefTion  of  our  faith  without  wa- 
"  vcring  ;"  and  not  be  "  like  children,  tofled  to  and 
*'  fro,  and  carried  about  with  every  wind  of  doc- 
"  trine,  through  the  Height  of  men,  and  the  cun- 
*'  ning  craftinefs  of  thofe  who  lie  in  wait  to  deceive." 
And  above  all,  let  us  rcfolve  to  live  according  to  the 
excellent  rules  and  precepts  of  our  holy  religion ;  Jet 
us  heartily  obey  that  dodlrine  which  we  profefs  to 
believe.  We,  who  enjoy  the  proteftant  religion, 
have  all  the  means  and  advantages  of  underftanding 
the  will  of  God,  free  liberty  and  full  fcopc  of  in- 
quiring into  it ',  and  informing  ourfelvcs  concerning 
it:  we  have  all  the  opportunities  we  can  wifh  of 
coming  to  the  knowledge  of  our  duty :  the  oracles 
of  God  lie  open  to  us,  and  his  law  is  continually  be- 
fore our  eyes  ^  "  his  word  is  nigh  unto  us  in  our 
"  mouths,  and  in  our  hearts  i'*  (chat  is,  we  may 
read  it  and  meditate  upon  it)  ^'  that  we  may 
*'  do  it:"    the  key  of  knowledge  is  put  into  our 

hands. 


:;;6  Of  the  trial  of  the  fpirits. 

SF  RM.  hands,  fo  that  if  we  do  not  enter  into  the  kingdom 
l^i^^jOf  heaven,  it  is  we  ourfclves  that  Hiut  ourfelves  ou?. 
And  where  there  is  nothing  to  hinder  us  from  the 
knowledge  of  our  duty,  there  certainly  nothing  can 
excufe  us  from  the  pra6lice  of  it.  For  the  end  of 
all  knowledge  is  to  dired:  men  in  their  duty,  and  ef- 
fedlually  to  engage  them  to  the  performance  of  it: 
the  great  bufinefs  of  religion  is,  to  make  men  truly 
good,  and  to  teach  them  to  live  well.  And,  if  re- 
ligion have  not  this  effecl,  it  matters  not  of  what 
church  any  man  lifts  and  enters  himfelf ;  for  moft 
certainly,  a  bad  man  can  be  faved  in  none.  Tho'  a 
man  know  the  right  way  to  heaven  never  fo  well, 
and  be  entred  into  it,  yet  if  he  will  not  walk  there- 
in, he  fliall  never  come  thither :  nay,  it  will  be  an 
aggravation  of  this  man's  unhappinefs,  that  he  was 
loft  in  the  way  to  heaven,  and  perifh'd  in  the  very 
road  to  filvation.  But  if  we  will  in  good  earneft 
apply  ourielves  to  the  pradice  of  religion,  and  the 
obedience  of  God's  holy  laws,  his  grace  will  never 
be  wanting  to  us  to  fo  good  a  purpofe. 

I  have  not  time  to  recommend  Religion  to  you 
at  large,  with  all  its  advantages,  I  will  comprife 
v/hat  I  have  to  fay  in  a  few  words,  and  mind  them 
at  your  peril.  Let  that  which  is  our  great  concern- 
ment be  our  great  care,  "  to  know  the  truth  and  ta 
"  do  it,  to  fear  God  and  keep  his  commandments.'* 
Confidering  the  reafonablenefs  and  the  reward  of 
piety  and  virtue,  nothing  can  be  wifer ;  confidering 
the  mighty  aftiftance  of  God's  grace,  which  he  is 
ready  to  afford  us,  and  the  unfpeakable  fatisfa6lion  and 
delight  which  is  to  be  had  in  the  doing  of  our  duty, 
^  nothing  can  be  eafier :  nothing  will  give  us  that  plea- 

fure, 


Of  the  trial  of  the  fpinfs.  57 

furC)  while  we  live ;  nothing  can  minifter  that  true  S  E  R  M. 
and  folid  comfort  to  us,   when  we  come  to  die :  ^—^ 
there  is  probably  no  fuch  way  for  a  man  to  be  happy 
in  this  world ;  to  be  fure,  there  is  no  way  but  this 
to  efcape  the  intolerable  and  endlefs  miferies  of  ano- 
ther world. 

"  Now  God  grant  that  we  may  all  know  and  do 
"  in  this  our  day,  the  things  that  belong  to  our 
*'  peace,  for  his  mercies  fake  in  Jesus  Christ: 
•'  to  whom  with  the  Father  and  the  HolyGhost, 
"  be  all  honour  and  glory  now  and  for  ever.  Amen. 


Vol.  11.  H  SERMON 

A. 


SERMON 

Preached  at  the 

ASSIZES 

HELD    AT 

KINGSrONnpon  THAMES, 
July  21,     1681. 


H  2 


To  the  right  worlhipful,  and  my  honoured  friend, 

Joseph  reeve,  Efq; 

High-SherlfF  of  the  County  of 

SURREY. 

Sir, 

T  T  7  /?  £  TV  /  had  perform  d  the  fer- 
vice  which  you  were  pleafed  to 
call  me  to  in  the  preaching  of  this  fer- 
mon^  I  had  no  thoughts  of  making  it 
more  publick ;  and  yet  in  this  alfo  I  was 
the  more  eafly  induced  to  comply  with 
your  defere^  becaufe  of  the  fuitahlenefs 
of  the  argument  to  the  age  in  which  we 
live\  wherein  as  men  have  run  into  the 
wildejl  extremities  in  other  thi?7gSy  fo 
particularly    in    the   matter  of  oat^:^  :^ 

fome 


Epistle  Dedicatory. 
fome  making   co7tfcience  of  taking  any 
oaths  at  all^  and  too  many  none  at  all  of 
breaking  them* 

To  convince  the  great  miftake  of  the 
one  extreme^  and  to  check  the  growing 
evil  artd  mifchief  of  the  other ^  is  the 
chief  defign  of  this  difcotirfe.  To  which 
I  fhall  be  very  glad  if  by  GodV  blef 
fing^  it  may  prove  any  ways  ferviceable^ 
I  amy 


S  I  R, 


Your  very  faithful  and 


humble  Servant, 


Jo.  TiLLOTSON, 


[  63  ] 

SERMON    XXII. 

The  lawfulnefs  and  obligation  of  oaths. 

H  E  B.  vi.  i6. 

An  oath  for   confirmation  is  to   them  an  end  of 
all  ftrife. 

THE   necefTity  of  religion  to  the  fupport  of  SERM. 
humane  fociety,  in  nothing  appears  more  evi-  ,  ^3i^' 
dently  than  in  this,  that  the  obligation  of 
an  oath,  which  is  fo  neceflary  for  the  maintenance 
of  peace   and  juflice  among  men,   depends  wholly 
upon  the  fenfe  and  belief  of  a  deity.     For  no  rea- 
fon  can  be  imagined  why  any  man  that  doth  not 
believe  a  God,  fhould  make  the  leaft  confcience  of 
an  oath,  which  is  nothing  t\{t  but  a  Iblemn  appeal 
to  God  as  a   witnefs  of  the  truth  of  what  we  fay. 
So    that  whoever   promotes  atheifm  and  infidelity, 
doth  the  mod  deftruftive  thing  imaginable  to  hu- 
mane fociety,  becaufe  he  takes  away  the  reverence 
and  obligation  of  oaths:  and  whenever  that  is  ge- 
nerally caft  off,  humane  fociety  muft  disband,  and 
all  things  run  into  diforder.     The  jull  fenfe  whereof 
made  Davjd  cry  out  to  God  with  fo  much  earnefl- 
nefs,  as  if  the  world  had  been  cracking,  and  the 
frame  of  it  ready   to  break   in   pieces,    Pfal.  xii. 
*'*  Flelp,  Lord,  for  the  righteous  man  ceafeth,  and 
"  the  faithful  fail  from  among  the  children  of  men :  '* 
intimating,  that  when  faith  fails  from  among  men, 
nothing  but  a  Darticular  and  immediate  interpofition 

of 


The  lawfiilnefs  and 

of  the  divine  providence  can  preferve  the  world  from 
falling  into  confufion.  And  our  bk^fled  Saviour 
gives  this  as  a  fign  of  the  end  of  the  world,  and  the 
approaching  diflblution  of  all  things,  when  faith  and 
trjLii  fhall  hardly  be  found  among  men,  Luke  xviii. 
8.  "  When  the  So\^  of  man  comes,  Ihall  he  find 
*'  faith  on  the  earth  ?  "  This  (late  of  things  doth 
Joudly  call  for  his  coming  to  deftroy  the  world, 
v^hich  is  even  ready  to  difTolve  and  iail  in  pieces  of 
it  {q\^^  when  thefe  hands  and  pillars  of  humane  fo- 
ciety  do  break  and  fail.  And  furely  never  in  any 
age  was  this  fign  of  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  man 
more  glaring  and  terrible  than  in  this  degenerate 
age  wherein  we  live,  when  almoil  all  forts  of  men 
feem  to  have  broke  loofe  from  all  obligations  to 
faith  and  truth. 

And  therefore  I  do  not  know  any  argument 
more  proper  and  ufeful  to  be  treated  of  upon  this 
occafion  than  of  the  nature  and  obligation  of  an  oath, 
which  is  the  utmofl  fecurity  that  one  man  can  give 
to  another  of  the  truth  of  what  he  fays  •,  the  ftrong- 
eft  tie  of  fidelity,  the  fureft  ground  of  judicial  pro- 
ceedings, ^nd  the  moft  firm  and  facred  bond  that 
can  be  laid  upon  all  that  are  concerned  in  the  ad- 
miniftration  of  publick  juflice  j  upon  judge,  and  jury, 
and  witnefles. 

And  for  this  reafon  I  have  pitched  upon  thefe 
words  :  in  which  the  apoftle  declares  to  us  the  great 
ufe  and  nccefTity  of  oaths  among  men  •,  "  an  oath 
*'  for  confirmation  is  to  them  an  end  of  all  ftrife  '\ 
He  had  faid  before,  that  tor  our  greater  alTurance 
and  comfort  God  hath  confirmed  his  promifes  to  us 
by  an  oath  \  condeicending  herein  to  deal  with  us 

after 


Migation  of  oath.  65 

after  the  manner  of  men,  who  when  they  would  eiveS  E  R  M. 
credit  to  a  doubtful  matter,  confirm  what  they  fay  by 
an  oath.  And  generally  when  any  doubt  or  contro- 
verfy  arifeth  between  parties  concerning  a  matter  of 
fadl,  one  fide  affirming  and  the  other  denying,  an 
end  is  put  to  this  contefl  by  an  oath  ;  "  An  oath  for 
*'  confirmation  being  to  them  an  end  of  all  flrife :  " 
An  oath  for  confirmation,  «$•  /BsCa'ojjiy,  for  the 
greater  afiiirance  and  eflabliihment  of  a  thing  :  not 
that  an  oath  is  always  a  certain  and  infallible  deci- 
fion  of  things  according  to  truth  and  right,  but  that 
this  is  the  utmoft  credit  that  we  can  give  to  any 
thing,  and  the  laft  t^ioxx.  of  truth  and  confidence 
among  men  :  after  this  we  can  go  no  farther,  for 
if  the  religion  of  an  oath  will  not  oblige  men  to 
fpeak  truth,  nothing  will.  This  is  the  utmoft  fecu- 
rity  that  men  can  give,  and  muft  therefore  be  the 
final  decifion  of  all  contefts  ;  "  An  oath  for  confir- 
*'  mation  is  to  them  an  end  of  all  ftrife  ". 

Now  from  this  aiTertion  of  the  apoftle  concerning 
the  great  ufe  and  end  of  Oaths  among  men,  I  ihall 
take  occafion, 

1.  To  confider  the  nature  of  an  oath,  and  the 
kinds  of  it. 

2.  To  Ihew  the  great  ufe  and  even  neceffity  of 
oaths,  in  many  cafes. 

3.  To  vindicate  the  lawfulnels  of  them  where  they 
are  necefTary. 

4.  To  fhew  the  facred  obligation  of  an  oath. 
I  fl^all  be  as  brief  in  thefe  as  the  juft  handling  of 

them  will  bear. 

I.  For  the  nature  of  an  oath,  and  the  kinds  of  it. 
An  oath  is  an  invocation  of  God,  or  an  appeal  to 

Vol.  IL  I  him 

2. 


65  ^he  lawfulnefs  and 

\^U.  him  as  a  witnefs  of  the  truth  of  what  we  fay.  So 
that  an  oath  is  a  facred  thing,  as  being  an  a6l  of  re- 
Jigion  and  an  invocation  of  the  name  of  God  :  and 
this,  whether  the  name  of  God  be  exprefly  men- 
tioned in  it  or  not.  If  a  man  only  fay,  I  fwear,  or 
I  take  my  oath,  that  a  thing  is,  or  is  not,  fo  or  fo ; 
or  that  I  will,  or  will  not,  do  fuch  a  thing  :  or  if 
a  man  anfwer  upon  his  oath,  being  adjured  and 
required  fo  to  do  :  or  if  a  man  fwear  by  heaven,  or 
by  earth,  or  by  any  ot'.ier  thing  that  hath  relation 
to  God  ;  in  all  th-fe  Cjc\t>  a  mm  do:h  virtually  call 
God  to  witnefs  •,  xwA  in  lb  doi  g  lie  doth  by  con- 
fequence  invoke  him  as  a  judge  and  an  avenger,  in 
cafe  what  he  fwears  be  not  true  :  and  if  this  be  ex- 
preil,  the  oath  is  a  formal  imprecation  •,  but  whe- 
ther it  be,  or  not,  a  curfe  upon  our  felves  is  always 
implied  in  cafe  of  perjury. 

There  are  two  lorts  of  oaths,  aflertory,  and  pro- 
mifibry.  An  aiTertory  oath  is  when  a  man  affirms 
or  denies  upon  oath  a  matter  of  fail,  pad,  or  pre- 
fent :  when  he  fwears  that  a  thing  was,  or  is  fo,  or 
not  fo.  A  promifiTory  oath  is  a  promife  confirmed 
by  an  oath,  which  always  refpedls  fomething  that  is 
future  :  and  if  the  promife  be  made  diredly  and  im- 
mediately to  God,  then  it  is  called  a  vow;  if  to 
men,  an  oath.     I  proceed  to  the 

II.  Tning,  which  is  to  fhew  the  great  ufe  and 
even  neceffity  of  oaths,  in  many  cafes ;  which  is  fo 
great,  that  humane  fociety  can  very  hardly,  if  ac 
all,  fjbfiri:  long  without  them.  Government  would 
many  times  be  very  infecure,  and  for  the  fiithful  dif- 
charge  of  offices  of  great  truil,  in  which  the  wel- 
fare of  the  publick  is  nearly  concerned,   it  is  not 

poffiblc 


obligation  of  oaths,  67 

poffible  to  find  any  fecurity  equal  to  that  of  ^^iSERM, 
oath  •,  becaufe  the  obHgation  of  that  reacheth  to  the  v. 
moft  fecret  and  hidden  pradices  of  men,  and  takes 
hold  of  them  in  many  cafes  where  the  penalty  of  no 
humane  law  can  have  any  awe  or  force  upon  them : 
and  efpecially,  it  is  (as  the  civil  law  exprelTeth  it) 
maximum  expediendarum  litium  remedium^  the  beft 
means  of  ending  controverfies.  And  where  mens 
eflates  or  lives  are  concerned,  no  evidence  but  what 
is  alTured  by  an  oath  will  be  thought  fufficient  to  de- 
cide the  matter,  fo  as  to  give  full  and  general  fatii^ 
fadion  to  mankind.  For  in  matters  of  fo  great 
concernment,  when  men  have  all  the  afiurance  that 
can  be  had,  and  not  till  then,  they  are  contented  to 
fit  down,  and  reft  fatisfied  with  it.  And  among  all 
nations  an  oath  hath  always  been  thought  the  only- 
peremptory  and  fatisfadory  way  of  deciding  fuch 
controverfies. 

III.  The  third  thing  I  propofed  was,  to  vindicate 
the  lawfulnefs  of  oaths,  whei^e  they  are  neceffary. 
And  it  is  a  very  ftrong  inducement  to  believe  the 
lawfulnefs  of  them,  that  the  unavoidable  condition 
of  humane  affairs  hath  made  them  fo  neceil^ry.  The 
apoftle  takes  it  for  granted,  that  an  oath  is  not  only 
of  great  ufe  in  humane  affairs,  but  in  many  cafes 
of  great  neceffity,  to  confirm  a  doubtful  thing, 
and  to  put  an  end  to  controverfies  which  cannot 
otherwife  be  decided  to  the  flitisfadion  of  the  Parties 
contending  •,  "  An  oath  for  confirmation  is  to  them 
''  an  end  of  all  ftrife. ''  And  indeed  it  is  hardly 
imaginable  that  God  iliould^not  have  left  thut  law- 
fal,^which  is  fo  evidently  necciliry  to  the  peace  and 
fecurity  of  mankind. 


68  The  lawful nefs  and 

^^  M.  But  becanfe  there  is  a  fe£i:,  fprung  up  in  our  me- 
mory, which  hath  called  in  queftion  the  lawfuJnefs 
of  all  oaths,  to  the  great  mifchief  and  difturbancc  of 
humane  fociety,  I  fhall  endeavour  to  fearch  this 
mattter  to  the  bottom,  and  to  manifefl  how  unrea- 
fonablc  and  groundlefs  this  opinion  is.  And  to  this 
end,  I  fhall, 

Firft,  prove  the  lawfulnefs  of  oaths  from  the  au- 
thority of  this  text,  and  from  the  reafons  plainly 
contained,  or  firongly  implied  in  it. 

Secondly,  I  fhall  fhew  the  weaknefs  and  infufEci- 
ency  of  the  grounds  of  the  contrary  opinion  •,  whe- 
ther from  reafon,  or  from  fcripture,  which  lad  they 
principally  rely  upon  ;  and  if  it  could  be  made  out 
from  thence  would  determine  the  cafe. 

I.  I  fhall  prove  the  lawfulnefs  of  oaths  from  the 
authority  of  this  text,  and  the  reafons  plainly  con- 
tained, or  flrongly  implied  in  it.  Becaufe  the  apo- 
flle  doth  not  only  fpeak  of  the  ufe  of  oaths  among 
men  without  any  manner  of  cenfure  and  reproof, 
but  as  a  commendable  cuftom  and  pradlice,  and  in 
many  cafes  ncceflary  for  the  confirmation  of  doubt- 
ful matters,  and  in  order  to  the  final  decifion  of 
controverfies  and  differences  among  men.     For, 

Firfl,  he  fpeaks  of  it  as  the  general  pradice  of 
mankind,  to  confirm  things  by  an  oath  in  order  to 
the  ending  of  differences.  And  indeed  there  is  no- 
thing that  hath  more  univerfally  obtained  in  all  ages 
and  nations  of  the  world  ;  than  which  there  is  not  a 
more  certain  indication  that  a  thing  is  agreeable  to 
the  law  of  nature  and  the  beft  reafon  of  mankind. 
And  that  this  was  no  degenerate  practice  of  man- 
kind, like  that  of  idolatry,  is  from  hence  evident  •, 

that 


obligation  of  oaths,  69 

that  when  God  feparated  a  people  to  himfelf,  it  SERAi. 
was  pradlifed  among  them,  by  the  holy  patriarchs, 
Abraham,  Ifaac,  and  Jacob  •,  and  was  afterwards  not 
only  allowed,  but  in  many  cafes  commanded  by  the 
law  of  Mofes ;  which,  had  it  been  a  thing  evil  in  it 
felf,  and  forbidden  by  the  law  of  nature,  would  not 
have  been  done. 

Secondly,  another  undeniable  argument  from  the 
ttxt  of  the  lawfulnefs  of  oaths  is,  that  God  himfelf, 
in  condefcenfion  to  the  cuftom  of  men  who  ufe  to 
confirm  and  give  credit  to  what  they  fay  by  an 
oath,  is  reprefented  by  the  apoftle  as  confirming  his 
promife  to  us  by  an  oath,  ver.  13.  "  When  God 
"  made  the  promife  to  Abraham,  becaufe  he  could 
"  fwear  by  none  greater,  he  fwears  by  himfelf.  For 
"  men  verily  fwear  by  the  greater ;  and  an  oath  for 
"  confirmation  is  to  them  an  end  of  all  ftrife. 
"  Wherein  God,  willing  more  abundantly  to  fliew 
*'  unto  the  heirs  of  promife  the  immutability  of  his 
*'  counfel,  confirmed  it  by  an  oath  "  :  v/hich  he 
certainly  would  not  have  done,  had  an  oath  been 
unlawful  in  it  i^t\^.  For  that  had  been  to  comply 
with  men  in  an  evil  practice,  and  by  his  own  ex- 
ample to  give  countenance  to  it  in  the  highefl  man- 
ner :  but  though  God  condefcend  to  reprefent  him- 
felf to  us  after  the  manner  of  men,  he  never  does 
it  in  any  thing  that  is  in  its  own  nature  evil  and 
finful. 

Thirdly,  from  the  great  ufefulnefs  of  oaths  in 
humane  affairs,  to  give  credit  and  confirmation  to 
our  word,  and  to  put  an  end  to  conteftations.  Now 
that  which  ferves  to  fuch  excellent  purpofes,  and  is 
fo  convenient  for  humane  fociety,   and  for  mutual 

fecurity 


jyo  ne  lawfulnefs  and 

S  E  R  M.  fecurity  and  confidence  among  men,  ought  not  eafily 
^^^^'  to  be  prefumed  unlawful,  'till  it  be  plainly  proved  to 
be  fo.  And  if  we  confider  the  nature  of  an  oath, 
and  every  thing  belonging  to  it,  there  is  nothing 
that  hath  the  Icalt  appearance  of  evil  in  it.  There 
is  furely  no  evil  in  ir,  as  it  is  an  a6l  of  religion  •,  nor 
as  it  is  an  appeal  to  God  as  a  witncfs  and  avenger 
in  cafe  we  fwear  falfly  j  nor  as  it  is  a  confirmation  of 
a  doubtful  matter ;  nor  as  it  puts  an  end  to  ftrife  and 
controverfy.  And  thefe  are  all  the  effential  ingre- 
dients of  an,  oath,  and  the  ends  of  it ;  and  they 
are  all  fo  good,  that  they  rather  commend  it,  than 
give  the  lead  colour  of  ground  to  condemn  it.  I  pro- 
ceed in  the 

Second  place,  to  fliew  the  weaknefs  and  infuffi^ 
ciency  of  the  grounds  of  the  contrary  opinion ;  whe- 
ther from  reafon  or  from  fcripture. 

Firft,  from  reafon.  They  fay  the  necefllty  of  an 
oath  is  occafioned  by  the  want  of  truth  and  fidelity 
among  men  :  And  that  every  man  ought  to  demean 
himfelf  with  that  faithfulnefs  and  integrity  as  may 
give  credit  and  confirmation  to  his  word ;  and  then 
oaths  will  be  needlefs.  This  pretence  will  be  fully  an^ 
fwered  if  we  confider  thefe  two  things. 

I.  That  in  matters  of  great  importance  no  other 
obligation,  befides  that  of  an  oath,  hath  been  thought 
fufficient  amongft  the  beft  and  wifeft  of  men,  to  afliert 
their  fidelity  to  one  another.  ''  Even  the  beft  of  men 
*'  (to  ufe  the  words  of  a  great  author)  have  not 
"  trufted  the  beft  men  without  it."  As  we  fee  in 
very  remarkable  inftances,  where  oaths  have  pafiTcd 
between  thof^  v,ho  mis:ht  be  thought  to  have  the 
grcatcft  confidence  in  one  another  :  as  between  Abra- 
ham 


obligation  of  oaths,  y  i 

ham  and  his  old  faithful  fervant  Eliczer,  conccrnintr  S  E  R  M". 

XXfT 
the  choice  of  a  wite  for  his  fon  :  between  father  and , 

fon,  Jacob  and  Jofeph,  concerning  the  burial  of  his 
father  in  the  land  of  Canaan  :  between  two  of  the 
deareft  and  mod  intimate  friends,  David  and  Jona- 
than, to  afTure  their  friend  (hip  to  one  another ;  and  it 
had  its  efFed:  long  after  Jonathan's  death,  in  the  fay- 
ing of  Mephibofheth,  when  reafon  of  ftate  and  the 
fecurity  of  his  throne  feem'd  to  move  David  flrong- 
ly  to  the  contrary  •,  for  it  is  expreQy  faid,  2  Sam.  xxi. 
7.  that  *'  David  fpared  Mephibofheth,  Jonathan's 
"  fon,  beciufe  of  the  oath  of  the  Lord  that  was 
^'  between  them ,"  implying,  that  had  it  not  been 
for  his  oath,  other  confiderations  might  probably 
have  prevailed  with  him  to  have  permitted  him  to 
have  been  cut  oft  with  the  reft  of  Saul's  Children, 

2.  This  reafon,  whxh  is  alledged  againft  oaths 
among  men,  is  much  ftronger  againft  God's  con- 
firming his  promifes  to  us  by  an  oath.  For  he,  who 
is  truth  itfelf,  is  furely  of  all  other  moft  to  be  credit- 
ed upon  his  bare  word,  and  his  oath  needlefs  to  give 
confirmation  to  it  •,  and  yet  he  condefcends  to  add 
his  oath  to  his  word  -,  and  therefore  that  reafon  is 
evidently  of  no  force. 

Secondly,  from  fcripture.  Our  Saviour  feems 
altogether  to  forbid  fwearing  in  any  cafe,  Matth.  v. 
33  y  34-  ''Ye  have  heard  that  it  hath  been  faid  to 
*'  them  of  old  time,  thou  Ihalt  not  forfwear  thyfelf: 
^'  but  I  fay  unto  you,  fwear  not  at  all  -,  neither  by 
*'  heaven,  6cc.  but  let  your  communication  be  yea, 
*'  yea,  and  nay,  nay,  for  whatfoever  is  more  tha**! 
"  thefe,  Cometh  of  evil."  And  this  law  St.  James 
recitesj   chap.  v.  ver,  12.    as  that  which  chriftians 

ought 


The  lawfulnefs  and 
ought  to  have  a  particular  and  principal  regard  to ; 
"  above  all  things,  my  brethren,  fwear  not :  "  and 
he  makes  the  breach  of  this  law  a  damning  fin, 
"  left  ye  fall  into  condemnation."  But  the  autho- 
rity of  our  Saviour  alone  is  fufHcient,  and  there- 
fore I  fhall  only  confider  that  text. 

And,  becaufe  here  lies  the  main  ftrength  of  this 
opinion  of  the  unlaw  fulnefs  of  oaths,  it  is  very  fit 
that  this  text  be  fully  confider'd  ',  and  that  it  be  made 
very  evident,  that  it  was  not  our  Saviour's  mean- 
ing by  this  prohibition  wholly  to  forbid  the  ufe  of 
oaths. 

But  before  I  enter  upon  this  matter,  I  will  readi- 
ly grant,  that  there  is  fcarce  any  error  whatfoever 
that  hath  a  more  plaufible  colour  from  fcripture, 
than  this ;  which  makes  the  cafe  of  thofe  who  are 
feduced  into  it  the  more  pitiable  :  but  then  it  ought 
to  be  confider'd,  how  much  this  do6i:rine  of  the  un- 
lawfulnefs  of  oaths  refledls  upon  the  chriftian  reli- 
gion :  fince  it  is  fo  evidently  prejudicial  both  to  hu- 
mane fociety  in  general,  and  particularly  to  thofe  per- 
fons  that  entertain  it :  neither  of  which  ought  rallily 
to  be  fuppofed  and  taken  for  granted,  concerning 
any  law  delivered  by  our  Saviour  :  becaufe  upon 
thefe  terms  it  will  be  very  hard  for  us  to  vindicate 
the  divine  wifdom  of  our  Saviour's  dodlrine,  and 
the  reafonablenefs  of  the  chriftian  religion.  Of  the 
inconvenience  of  this  Doflrine  to  humane  fociety,  I 
have  fpoken  already.  But  befides  this,  it  is  very  pre- 
judicial to  them  that  hold  it.  It  renders  them 
fufpeded  to  government,  and  in  many  cafes  incapa.- 
blc  of  the  common  benefits  of  juftice  and  other  pri- 
vileges of  humane   fociety,   and  expofeth  them   to 

greac 


obligation  of  oaths,  73 

great  penalties  as  the  conllitucion  of  all  laws  and  go-  SE  RAl. 
vernments  at  prefent  is,  and  it  is  not  eafy  to  ima- 
gine how  they  fhould  be  otherwife.  And,  which  is 
very  confiderable  in  this  matter,  it  fets  thofe  who  re- 
fufe  oaths  upon  very  unequal  terms  with  the  reft  of 
mankind,  if  where  the  eftaces  and  lives  of  men  are 
equally  concern'd,  their  bare  teftimonies  fhall  be  ad- 
mitted without  an  oath,  and  others  fhall  be  obliged 
to  fpeak  upon  oath  :  nothing  being  more  certain  in 
experience,  than  that  many  men  will  lye  for  their  in- 
tereft  v/hen  they  will  not  be  perjured,  God  having 
planted  in  the  natural  confciences  of  men  a  fecret 
dread  of  perjury  above  moft  other  fins.  And  this 
inconvenience  is  fo  £^reat,  as  to  render  thofe  who  re- 
fufe  oaths  in  all  cafes  almoft  intolerable  to  humane 
fociety.  I  fpeak  not  this  either  to  bring  them  into 
trouble,  or  to  perfuade  them  to  mcafure  truth  by 
their  interefl :  but  on  the  other  hand  I  maft  needs 
fay,  that  it  is  no  argument  either  of  a  wife  or  good 
man  to  take  up  any  opinion,  efpecially  fuch  a  one  as 
is  greatly  to  his  prejudice,  upon  (light  grounds.  And 
this  very  connderation,  that  it  is  fo  much  to  their  in- 
convenience, may  juftly  move  them  to  be  very  care- 
ful in  the  examination  of  it. 

This  being  premised,  I  come  now  to  explain  this 
prohibition  of  our  Saviour  ;  and  to  this  purpofe,  I 
dcfire  thefe  three  things  may  be  well  confider'd. 

Firft,  that  feveral  circumftances  of  thefe  words  of 
our  Saviour  do  manifeftly  fhew  that  they  ought  to 
be  interpreted  in  a  limited  {^vS^^  as  only  forbidding 
fwearing  in  common  converfation  ;  needlefs  and  heed- 
lefs  oaths  (as  one  expreffeth  it)  and  in  general  all 
voluntary  f //earing,   unlels   upon   fome    great    and 

Vol.  II.  K  weighty 


74  ^!^^  lawfulnefs  ani 

SERAI,  weighty  caufc,  in  which  the  glory  of  God  and  the 
^___^,__^  good  of  the  fouls  of  men  is  concerned.  For  that  in 
fuch  cafes  a  voluntary  oath  may  be  lawful,  I  am  in- 
duced to  believe  from  the  example  of  St.  Paul, 
who  ufeth  it  more  than  once  upon  fuch  occa- 
fions  j  of  which  I  fliall  hereafter  give  particular  In- 
flanccs. 

And  this  was  the  fcnfe  cf  wife  men  among  the 
heathen,  that  men  fhould  not  fwear  but  upon  necef- 
fity  and  great  occafion.  Thus  Eufebius,  the  philo- 
fopher  in  Scobasus,  counfels  men.  *'  Some  (fays  he) 
"  advife  men  to  be  careful  to  fwear  the  truth;  but  I 
"  advife  principally  that  men  do  not  eafily  fwear  at 
*'  all,"  that  is,  not  upon  any  flight  but  only  upon 
v>/eighty  occafions:  to  the  fam.c  purpofe  Epiftetus, 
«'  Shun  oaths  wholly,  if  it  be  pofTible ;  if  not,  hov/- 
*'  ever  as  much  as  thou  canfl: :"  and  fo  likewife  Sim- 
plicius  in  his  comment  upon  him.,  "  We  ought 
"  wholly  to  fhun  fwearing,  except  upon  occafions  of 
"  great  nccefTity."  And  Quintilian  among  the  Ro- 
mans, In  totiim  jurarSy  nift  ubi  necejfe  eft^  gravi  viro 
far  urn  convenit ;  *^  to  fwear  at  all,  except  where  it  is 
*'  necelTary,  does  not  well  fuit  with  a  wife  man." 

And  that  this  prohibition  of  our  Saviour's 
ought  to  be  underflood  of  oaths  in  ordinary  conver- 
fation,  appears  from  the  oppofition  which  our  Sa- 
viour makes,  "  Swear  not  at  all;  but  let  your 
"  communication  be  yea,  yea;"  that  is,  in  your  or- 
dinary commerce  and  affairs  do  not  interpofe  oaths, 
but  fay  and  do.  And  this  is  very  much  confirmed, 
in  that  our  Saviour  does  not  under  this  general 
prohibition  inftance  in  fuch  oaths  as  arc  cxprefly  by 
$hc  name  of  God  :  the  reafon  whereof  is  this;  the 

^ws 


obligation  of  oaths.  75 

jews  thought  it  unlav/ful  in  ordinary  communication  5  E  R  M. 
to  Iwear  exprciiy  by  the  name  of  God,  but  lawful  ^^'^  "' 
to  fwear  by  the  creatures,  as  by  heaven  and  earth, 
&c.  So  that  our  Saviour's  meaning  is  as  if  he 
had  faid,  "  You  think  you  may  fwcar  in  common 
"  converfation,  provided  you  do  not  fwear  by  the 
''  nam.e  of  God  ;  but  I  fay  unto  you,  let  your  com- 
*'  munication  be  without  oaths  of  any  kind :  you 
"  fhall  not  (o  much  as  fwear  by  heaven  or  by  e^rih, 
*'  becaufe  God  is  virtually  invoked  in  every  oath.'* 
And  unlefs  we  fuppofe  this  to  be  our  Saviour's 
meaning,  I  do  not  fee  vrhat  good  reafon  can  be 
given  why  our  Saviour  fhould  only  forbid  them  to 
fwear  by  the  creatures,  and  not  much  rather  by  the 
name  of  God  ;  fuch  oaths  being;  furelv  of  all  others 
moft  to  be  avoided,  as  being  the  moll  dired:  abufe 
and  orofanation  of  the  nam.e  of  God. 

L. 

Secondly,  it  is  very  confiderable  to  the  explaining 
of  this  prohibition,  that  there  are  the  like  general  ex- 
preffions  in  other  jewifh  authors  coja^nung  this  very 
matter,  which  yet  mufh  of  necedity  be  thus  limit- 
ed. Maimonides,  from  the  ancient  rA)bies,  gives 
this  rule,  that  "  it  is  befl  not  to  f,vear  at'all."  And 
Philo  ufeth  almoft  the  fame  words.  And  Rabbi  Jo- 
nathan comes  very  near  our  Saviour's  exprefllon, 
when  he  fays,  "  the  juft  man  will  not  fwear  at  all  j 
"  not  fo  much  as  by  the  common  names  of  God, 
*'  nor  by  his  attributes,  nor  by  his  works,  as  by 
*'  heaven,  or  the  angels,  or  by  the  law."  Now  it  is 
not  imaginable,  that  thefe  learned  jev/s  fhoukl  con- 
demn oaths  in  all  cafes,  when  the  law  of  JVIofes  did 
in  many  cafes  expredy  require  them.  And  therefore 
they  are  to  be  underftood  of  voluntary  oaths  in  or- 

K  2  dinary 


^he  lawfulnefs  and 
dfnary  converfation.  And  that  the  jews  meant  this 
by  not  fwearing  at  all,  feems  to  be  very  plain  from 
a  paflage  in  Jofephus,  who  fays  that  the  feet  of  the 
ElTenes  forbad  their  difciplcs  to  fwear  at  all  j  and  yet 
he  tells  us  at  thfe  lame  time,  that  they  who  were  ad- 
mitted into  that  feet  took  an  oath  to  obf^rve  the  laws 
and  rules  of  it.  So  that  they  who  forbad  to  fwear 
at  all,  allowed  of  oaths  impofed  by  the  authority  of 
fuperiors. 

Thirdly,  which  will  peremptorily  decide  this  mat- 
ter, this  prohibition  of  our  Saviour's  cannot  be 
underflood  to  forbid  all  oaths,  without  a  plain  con- 
tradidlion  to  the  undoubted  pradice  of  the  primi- 
tive chriftians,  and  of  the  apoiUes,  and  even  of  our 
Lord  himfelf.  Origen  and  Tertullian  tell  us,  that 
the  chriilians  refufed  to  fwear  by  the  emperor's  ge- 
nius ;  not  becaufe  it  was  an  oath,  but  becaufe  they 
thought  it  to  be  idolatrous  •,  but  the  fame  Tertullian 
fays,  that  the  chriilians  were  willing  to  fwear  per  fa- 
hitem  imperatoris^  "  by  the  health  and  fafety  of  the 
"  emperor."  Athanafius  being  accufed  to  Conftantius, 
purged  himfelf  by  oath,  and  defired  that  his  accufer 
might  be  put  to  his  oath  fuh  attefiationc  vcriiatis^ 
*'  by  calling  the  truth  to  witncls ;  by  which  form 
«'  (fays  he)  wc  chriilians  are  wont  to  fwear."  Bat 
which  is  more  than  this,  St.  Paul,  upon  weighty  oc- 
cafions,  doesfeveral  times  in  his  epifllcs  call  God  to 
witnefs  for  the  truth  of  what  he  lays  •,  which  is  the 
very  formality  of  an  oath.  "  God  is  my  witnels," 
Rom.  i.  9.  "  As  God  is  true,  our  word  was  not 
^'  yea  and  nay,"  2  Cor.  i.  18.  and  ver.  23.  "  I  call 
•'  God  for  a  record  upon  my  foul.  Before  God  I 
«*  ly(:  not,"    Gal.  i.  20.      "  God  is  rny  record,'* 

Phil. 


ohligation  of  oaths.  yj 

Phil.  i.  8.  "  God  is  my  vvitnefs,"  i  Thef.  il.  5.SER^f. 
Thefe  are  all  unqueftionable  oaths;  which  we  cannot  ^  '" 
imagine  St.  Paul  would  have  ufed,  had  they  been  di- 
rectly contrary  to  our  Saviour's  law.  And 
whereas  fome  defend  this  upon  account  of  his  extra- 
ordinary infpiration,  I  cannot  po.T.bly  fee  hov/  this 
mends  the  matter.  For  certainly  it  is  very  inconve- 
nient to  fay,  that  they  who  were  to  teach  the  precepts 
of  Christ  toothers,  did  themfelves  break  them  by 
infpiration. 

But  I  go  yet  further,  and  fhall  urge  an  example  be- 
yond all  exception. 

Our  Saviour  himfelf  (who  fu rely  would  not  be 
the  lirH  example  of  breaking  his  own  laws)  did  not 
refufe  to  anfvver  upon  oath,  being  called  thereto  at 
his  trial.  So  we  find  Matth,  xxvi.  6 2-  "  The  high 
"  priefl  faid  unto  him,  I  adjure  thee  by  the  living 
"  God,  that  thou  tell  us  whether  thou  be  the 
"  Christ  the  Son  of  God  "  that  is,  he  required 
him  to  anfwer  this  queftion  upon  oath.  For  among 
the  jew^s,  the  form  of  giving  an  oath  to  witnefTes 
and  others  was  not  by  tendring  a  formal  oath  to 
them,  as  the  cuftom  is  among  us,  but  by  adjuring 
them,  that  is,  requiring  them  to  anfwer  upon  oath: 
as  is  plain  from  Levit.  v.  i.  "  If  a  man  hear  the 
*'  voice  of  fvvearing,  and  is  a  wltnefs,  whether  he  hath 
"  feen  or  known  of  fuch  a  thing,  if  he  do  not  utter 
"  it,  then  he  iliall  bear  his  iniquity."  If  he  have 
heard  the  voice  of  fvvearing,  that  is,  if  being  adju- 
red or  demanded  to  anfwer  upon  oath  concerning 
what  he  hath  feen  or  heard,  he  do  not  utter  the  truth, 
he  is  perjured.     Now  to  this  adjuration  of  the  high 

prieft  our  Saviour  anfwered,    "  thou  haft  faid:" 

which 


yS  T/je  lawfulnefs  end 

S  E  R  M.  which  words  arc  not  an  avoiding;  to  anfwcr  (as  fomc 
^^^_^j  have  thought)  but  a  direct  anfvver,  as  if  he  had  faid, 
"  it  is  as  thou  fayeft,  it  is  even  fo,  I  am  the  Son  of 
"  God."  For  upon  this  anfwer  the  high  prieft  faid, 
*'  he  hath  fpoken  blafphcniy."  But  to  put  the  mat- 
ter beyond  all  doubt,  St.  Mark  tells  us,  Mark  xiv.  6i. 
that  he  being  asked  by  the  high  prieft,  "  Art  thou 
"  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  Blessed  ?  he  an- 
*'  fwcred,  I  am.'*  So  that  unlefs  we  will  interpret 
our  Saviour's  doflrinc  contrary  to  his  own  pradicc, 
we  cannot  underftand  him  to  forbid  all  oaths,  and 
confequently  they  are  not  unlav/ful. 

I  have  been  the  longer  upon  this,  that  I  might  give 
clear  fatisfadlion  in  this  matter  to  thofc  that  are  wil- 
ling to  receive  it. 

As  for  the  ceremonies  in  ufe  among  us  in  the  taking 
of  oaths,  it  is  no  juft  exception  againft  them,  that 
they  are  not  found  in  fcripture.  For  this  was  always 
matter  of  liberty  \  and  feveral  nations  have  ufed  fe- 
veral  rites  and  ceremonies  in  their  oaths.  It  was  the 
cuftom  of  the  Grecians,  to  fwear  laying  their  hands 
upon  the  altar,  quod  fan^ijfiraum  jmjurandiim  eft  habi- 
tiim^  (faith  A.  Gellius)  "  which  v;as  looked  upon  as 
"  the  moft  facred  form  of  fwearing."  The  Romans 
were  wont  Jovem  lapidem  jiirare  j  that  is,  he  that 
fworc  by  Jupiter  held  a  flint  ftone  in  his  hand,  and 
flung  it  violently  from  him  with  thefe  words,  Si 
fciens  fallo^  iia  me  Jup'iier  bonis  ofimlbus  ejiciat^  ut  ego 
hunc  lapidem:  "  If  I  knowingly  falfify,  God  fo 
"  throw  me  out  of  all  my  polfelTions  as  I  do  this 
«  ftone." 

In  fcripture  there  are  two  ceremonies  mentioned 
of  fwearing.     One,  of  putting  the  hand  under  the 

thigh 


cbligation  of  oaths,  79 

thigh  of  him  to  whom  the  oath  was  made.  Thus  S  E  iv  M. 
Eliezer  fvvoi-e  to  Abraham,  Gen.  xxiv.  and  Joleph 
to  Jacob,  Gen.  xlvii.  The  other  was  by  hfting  up 
the  hand  to  heaven :  Thus  Abraham  expreficth  the 
manner  of  an  oath.  Gen.  xiv.  22.  "I  have  lift  up 
**  my  hand  to  the  moil  high  God."  And  thus 
God,  condefcending  to  the  manner  of  men,  exprel^ 
feth  himfelf,  Deut.  xxxii.  40.  "  If  I  Hft  up  my  hand 
•'  to  heaven,  and  fwear."  In  alJufion  to  this  cailom 
the  pfalmift  defcribes  the  perjured  perfon,  Pfal  cxliv.  8. 
"  whofe  mouth  fpeaketh  vanity;  and  whofe  right 
*'  hand  is  a  right  hand  of  falfhood."  And  there  is 
not  the  lead  intimation  in  fcripture  that  either  of 
thefe  ceremonies  were  prefcribed  and  appointed  by 
God,  but  voluntarily  inftituted  and  taken  up  by 
men.  And  thus  among  us  the  ceremony  of  fwear- 
ing  is  by  laying  the  hand  on  the  holy  gofpel,  and 
kiffing  the  book;  which  is  both  very  folemn  and 
fignifiCant.  And  this  is  the  reafon  why  this  Iblemn 
kind  of  oath  is  called  a  corporal  oath,  and  was  an- 
ciently fo  called ;  becaufc  the  fign  or  ceremony  of  it 
is  performed  by  fome  part  of  the  body.  And  this 
folemnity  is  an  aggravation  of  the  perjury,  becaule 
it  makes  it  both  more  deliberate,  and  more  fcan- 
dalous. 

I  fliall  fpeak  but  briefly  to  the 

IV.  And  lafl  particular,  viz.  the  facred  obligation 
of  an  oath  :  becaufe  it  is  a  folemn  appeal  to  God  as  a 
witnefs  of  the  truth  of  v/hat  we  fay  :  to  God,  I  fay, 
from  whofe  piercing  and  all-feeing  eye,  from  whole 
perfe(5L  and  infinite  knowledge  nothing  is  or  can  be 
hid ',  fo  that  there  is  not  a  thought  in  our  heart  but 
be  fees  it,  nor  a  word  in  our  tongue  but  he  difcerns 

thg 


8o  Th<^  lazvfuhcfs  and 

S  E  R  M.  the  truth  or  falfhood  of  ir.  Whenever  we  fwear,  we 
appeal  to  his  knowledge,  and  refer  ourfclves  to  his 
jull  judgment  who  is  the  powerful  patron  and  pro- 
te6lor  of  right,  and  the  ahiiighty  judge  and  avenger 
of  all  filfhood  and  unrighteoufnefs.  So  that  it  is  not 
poffible  for  men  to  lay  a  more  ficred  and  folemn  ob- 
ligation upon  their  confciences,  than  by  the  religion 
of  an  oath.  Mofes  very  well  exprefTeth  it,  by 
binding  our  fouls  with  a  bond,  Numb.  xxx.  2.  "  if 
*'  a  man  fwear  an  oath,  to  bind  liis  foul  with  a  bond  \* 
intimating  that  he  that  fwears  lays  the  ftrongeft  ob- 
ligation upon  himfelf,  and  puts  his  foul  in  pawn  for 
the  truth  of  what  he  fays.  And  this  obligation  no 
man  can  violate,  but  at  the  utmod  peril  of  the  judg- 
ment and  vengeance  of  God.  For  every  oath  im- 
plies a  curfe  upon  ourfelves  in  cafe  of  perjury,  as 
Plutarch  obferve:.  And  this  was  always  the  fenfe  of 
mankind  concerning  the  obligation  of  oaths.  Nullum 
vinculujn  ad  aftringendam  fidtm  majores  ncft/'i  jtirejuran- 
do  ar5ihis  ejfe  voluerimt^  faith  Tully;  "  Our  fore- 
"  fathers  had  no  flrifler  bond  whereby  to  oblige  the 
"  faith  of  men  to  one  another,  than  that  of  an 
*'  oath."  To  the  fame  purpofe  is  that  in  the  come- 
dian, Aliudfi  fcirem^  quo  jinnare  meam  apiid  vcs  pjfcm 
Jidem^  fanElius  qiiam  jurjurandum^  id  polliccrer  tihu 
"  If  I  knew  any  thing  more  lacred  than  an  oath, 
*'  whereby  to  confirm  to  you  the  truth  of  what  I 
"  fay,  1  would  make  ufe  of  \\.'* 

I  will  crave  your  patience  a  litdc  longer,  whilft 
by  way  of  inference  from  this  difcourfe,  I  reprefent 
to  you  the  great  fin  of  fwearing  in  common  con- 
verfation,  upon  trivial  and  needleis  occafions,  and  the 
heinoufnefs  of  the  ^in  of  perjury. 

I.  Firft, 


''obtig^fton  of  oathu  8i 

1.  Fird,  the  great  fin  of  fwearino;,  upon  trivial  S  E  R  iM. 
and  ne^dlefs  occafions,  in  common  con ver fa tion.  Be-v--^-— Ij 
caufe  an  oath  is  a  folemn  thing,  and  referved  for 
great  occafions,  to  give  confirmation  to  our  Vv^ord  in 
fome  weighty  matter,  and  to  put  an  end  to  contro- 
verfies  which  cannot  otherwife  be  peremptorily  and 
fatisfadorily  decided.  And  therefore  to  ufe  oaths 
upon  light  occafions  argues  great  profanenefs  and  ir- 
reverence of  almighty  God.  So  Ulpian  the  great 
Roman  lawyer  obferves,  Nonnullos  ejfe  facile s  ad  ju* 
randum  contemptu  religionis  i  "  that  mens  pronenels  to 
"  fwearing  comes  from  a  contempt  of  religion ;" 
than  which  nothing  difpofeth  men  more  to  atheifni 
and  infidelity.  Befidcs  that  it  doth  many  times  flir- 
prife  men  unav/ares  into  perjury :  and  how  can  it  be 
otherwife,  when  men  ufe  to  interlard  all  their  care- 
lefs  talk  with  oaths,  but  that  they  muft  often  be  per- 
jured .?  And  which  is  worfe,  it  prepares  men  for  de- 
liberate perjury ;  for  with  thofe  who  are  accuitomed 
to  fwear  upon  light  occafions,  an  oath  will  go  off 
with  them  more  roundly  about  weightier  matters. 
"  From  a  common  cuftom  of  fwearing  (faith  Pliero- 
"  cles)  men  eafily  Aide  into  perjury :  therefore  (fays 
"  he)  if  thou  wouldft  not  be  perjured,  do  not  ufe  to 
''  fwear."  And  this  perhaps  is  the  meaning  of- 
St.  James,  when  he  cautions  chriftians  fo  vehement-  •■■ 
ly  againft  commoii  fwearing,  hct  /an  eU  xi^x^o-jy, 
Ttrso-y)Tf,  (for  fo  fome  of  the  bell  ancient  copies  read 
it)  "  left  7e  fall  into  hypocrify,"  diat  is,  left  ye  lye 
and  be  penur<:d,  by  ufing  yourfelves  to  rafti  and  in- 
confiderate  fwearing. 

And  men  expofe  themfelves  to  this  danger  to  no 
purpofej  oaths  in  common  difcourfe   being  fo  fir 
Vol.  II.  L  from 

z. 


82  ^he  lawfulnefs  and 

S  E  R  M.  from  confirming  a  man's  word,  that  with  wife  men 
^^^^'  they  much  weaken  it :  for  common  fwearing  (if  it 
have  any  ferious  meaning  at  alJ)  argues  in  a  man  a 
perpetual  diftruft  of  his  own  reputation,  and  is  an 
acknowledgment  that  he  thinks  his  bare  word  not 
to  be  worthy  of  credit.  And  it  is  fo  far  from  adorn- 
ing and  filling  a  man's  difcourfe,  that  it  makes  it 
look  fwoln  and  bloated,  and  more  bold  and  bluftring,. 
than  becomes  perfons  of  gentle  and  good  breeding. 
Befides  that  it  is  a  great  incivility,  becaufe  it  highly 
offends  and  grates  upon  all  fober  and  confiderate  per- 
fons ;  who  cannot  be  prefumed  with  any  manner  of 
eafe  and  patience  to  hear  God  affronted,  and  his  great 
and  glorious  name  fo  irreverently  toil  upon  every 
flight  occafion. 

And  it  is  no  excufc  to  men  that  many  times  they 
do  it  ignorantly,  and  not  obferving  and  knov/ing 
what  they  do.  For  certainly  it  is  no  extenuation  of 
a  fault,  that  a  man  hath  got  the  habit  of  it  fo  per- 
fedl  that  he  commits  it  when  he  does  not  think  of 
it.  Which  confideration  fhould  make  men  oppofe 
the  beginnings  of  this  vice,  left  it  grow  into  a  habit 
very  hard  to  be  left.  Nemo  novit^  niji  qui  expertus  ejl^ 
mam  fit  difficile  confuetudinem  jurandi  extinguere^  faith 
St.  Auftin  j  "  no  man  knows,  but  he  that  hath  tried, 
*«  how  hard  it  is  to  get  rid  of  this  cuftom  of  fwear- 
*'  ing :"  but  yet  it  is  certain  men  may  do  it,  by  re- 
folution  and  great  care  of  themfelves :  for  he  that 
can  choofe  whether  he  will  fpeak  or  not,  can  choofe 
whether  he  will  fwear  or  not  when  he  fpeaks.  Ma^ 
jor  conflict udo  majorem  intentionem  fiagitat  \  "  the  more 
"  inveterate  a  cuftom  is,  the  greater  care  lliould  be 
*'  ufed  to  break  ourfelves  of  it." 

In 


obligation  of  oaths.  83 

In  fhort,  this  pradlice  is  {q  contrary  to  fo  plain  a  S  E  R  M. 
precept  of  our  Saviour,  and  by  the  breach  where- 
of we  incur  fo  great  a  danger  (as  St.  James  aflfures 
usj  that  it  muft  be  a  great  charity  that  can  find  out 
a  way  to  reconcile  a  common  cuftom  of  fwearing 
with  a  ferious  belief  of  the  chriftian  religion :  which 
I  would  to  God  thofe  who  are  concerned  would  fe- 
rioufly  lay  to  heart ;  efpecially,  fince  this  fin,  of  all 
others,  hath  the  leafl  of  temptation  to  it.  Profit  or 
pleafure  there  is  none  in  it,  nor  any  thing  in  mens 
natural  tempers  to  incite  them  to  it.  For  tho'  fbme 
men  pour  out  oaths  fo  freely,  as  if  they  came  natural- 
ly from  them,  yet  furely  no  man  is  born  of  a  fwear- 
ing conflitution. 

All  that  can  be  pretended  for  it,  is  cuftom  and 
fafhion :  but  to  fhew  that  this  is  no  excufe,  it  is  very 
obfervable  that  it  is  particularly  in  the  matter  of  oaths 
and  perjury  that  the  Holy  Ghost  gives  that  caution, 
*'  Thou  flialt  not  follow  a  multitude  to  do  evil." 

And  laflly,  it  deferves  to  be  confidcred,  that  this 
fin  is  fo  much  the  greater  becaufe  of  the  frequent  re- 
turns of  it  in  thofe  that  are  accuflomed  to  ii.  So  that 
altho'  it  were  but  fmall  in  itfelf  (as  it  is  not)  yet  the 
frequent  pradlice  of  this  fin  would  quickly  mount  it 
up  to  a  great  fcore. 

2.  Secondly,  to  rcprefent  the  heinoufnefs  of  the 
fin  of  perjury.  But  before  I  aggravate  this  crime, 
it  is  fit  to  let  men  know  how  many  ways  they  may- 
be guilty  of  it. 

ifl.  When  a  man  afferts  upon  oath  what  lie  knows 
to  be  other  wife :  or  promifeth  what  he  does  not  in- 
tend to  perform.     In  both  thefe  cafes  the  very  ad 
of  fwearing  is  perjury.     And  fo  likewife  when  a  man 
L  2  promiiexh 


84  ^'W 'lawfidnefs  and 

S  E  R  M.  promlfeth  upon  oath  to  do  that  which  is  unlawful 
^^^^'    for  him  to  do,  becaufe  this  oath  is  contrary  to  a  former 
obligation. 

2dly,  When  a  man  is  uncertain  whether  what  he 
fwear  to,  be  true.  This  likewife  is  perjury,  in  the 
a6t  \  though  not  of  the  fame  degree  of  guilt  with 
the  former,  becaufe  it  is  not  fo  fully  and  diredly 
againfl  his  knowledge  and  confcience.  For  men 
oui^-ht  to  be  certain  of  the  truth  of  what  they  aflert 
upon  oath,  and  not  to  Rvear  at  a  venture  And  there- 
fore no  man  ought  pofidvely  to  fwear  to  the  truth  of 
any  thing  but  what  he  himfelf  hath  fcen  or  heard  : 
this  being  the  highed  alTarance  men  are  capable  of 
in  this  world.  In  like  manner,  he  is  guilty  of  per- 
iury  in  the  fame  degree,  who  promifeth  upon  oath 
what  he  is  not  morally  and  reafonably  certain  he  fhall 
be  able  to  perform. 

3dly,  They  are  likewife  guilty  of  perjury,  who 
do  not  ufe  great  plamnefs  and  fimplicity  m  oaths; 
but  anfwer  equivocally  and  doubtfully,  or  with  re- 
fcrvation  of  fomething  in  their  minds,  thinking 
thereby  to  falve  the  truth  of  what  they  fay.  And 
we  all  know  who  they  are  that  make  ufe  of  thefe 
arts,  and  maintain  them  to  be  lawful ;  to  the  infi- 
nite fcandal  of  the  chriilian  religion  and  prejudice  of 
humane  fociety,  by  doing  what  in  them  lies  to  de- 
ftroy  all  faith  and  mutual  confidence  among  men. 
For  what  can  be  a  greater  afiront  to  God,  than  to 
ufe  his  name  to  deceive  men  }  And  what  can  more 
dircclly  overthrow  the  great  end  and  ufe  of  oaths, 
which  are  for  confirmation,  and  to  put  an  end  to 
flrife.f*  whereas  by  thefe  arts  tlie  thing  is  \^{i  in  the 
fame  uncertainty  it  v^as  before,  and  there  is  no  de- 


cifion 


ohligation  of  oaths,  85* 

cifion  of  it.     For  there  is  hardly  any  form  of  words  SERM. 

XXII 
can  be  dcvifed  {o  plain,  as  not  to  be  liable  to  equi- 
vocation :  to  be  fure  a  man  when  he  fwears  may  al- 
ways refcrve  ibmething  in  his  mind  which  will  quite 
alter  the  fenfe  of  whatever  he  can  fay  or  promife  up- 
on oath.  And  this  m^ay  be  laid  down  for  a  certain 
rule,  that  all  departure  from  the  fimpHcity  of  an 
oath  is  a  degree  of  perjury,  and  a  'man  is  never  a 
whit  the  lefs  forfworn  becaufe  his  perjury  is  a  little 
finer  and  more  artificial  than  ordinary.  And  though 
men  think  by  this  device  to  fave  themfelves  harm- 
lefs  from  the  guilt  of  fo  great  a  fin,  they  do  really 
increafe  \t^  by  adding  to  their  iniquity  the  impudent 
folly  of  mocking  God  and  deceiving  themfelves. 

And  v/hereas  it  is  pleaded  in  the  favour  of  mental 
refervation,  that  the  whole  proportion,  as  made  up 
of  what  is  expred  in  v/ords,  and  of  that  v/hich  is  re- 
ferved  in  the  mind,  is  true  ;  for  inllance,  if  a  man 
being  ask'd  upon  oath  whether  he  be  a  priefb,  fhall 
anfwer  he  is  not,  referving  in  his  mind  that  he  is 
not  a  pried  of  Bacchus,  or  fome  fuch  thing,  the 
whole  propofition  is  true,  and  then  they  fay  a  man 
may  fwear  to  that  v^hicli  is  true,  v/ithout  danger  of 
perjury  :  this  is  of  no  force,  becaufe,  though  the 
v/hole  propofition  be  true,  it  is  deceitful,  and  con- 
trary to  that  fmcerity  which  ought  to  be  in  an 
oath :  and  the  end  of  an  oath  is  hereby  likewife  de- 
feated, v/hich  is  to  afcertain  the  truth  of  what  we 
fay  :  but  if  a  m.an  referve  fomething  in  his  mind 
which  alters  the  truth  of  what  he  fays,  the  thing  is 
dill  as  doubtful  and  uncertain  as  it  was  before.  Be- 
fides,  if  this  be  a  good  reafon,  a  man  may  fwear 
with  refervation  in  all  cafes  j  becaufe  the  reafon  e- 

qualljr 


86  '  7he  lawfuhtefs  and' 

S  E  R  M.  qually  txttnds  to  ail  cafes ;  for  if  the  truth  of  the 
propofitlon,  as  made  up  of  what  is  exprefs'd  in 
words  and  referv'd  in  the  mind,  v/ill  «xcufe  a  man 
from  perjury,  then  no  man  can  be  perjur'd  that 
fwears  with  refervation  :  but  this  the  cafuifts  of  the 
Roman  church  do  not  allow,  but  only  in  fomc  par* 
ticular  cafes,  as  before  an  incompetent  judge,  or  the 
like ;  for  they  fee  well  enough  that  if  this  were  al- 
lowed in  all  cafes,  it  would  deftroy  all  faith  among 
men.  And  therefore  fince  the  reafon  extends  alike 
to  all  cafes,  it  is  plain  that  it  is  to  be  allow'd  in 
none. 

4th ly,  He  is  guilty  of  perjury  after  the  afl,  who 
having  a  real  intention  when  he  fwears,  to  perform 
what  he  promifeth,  yet  afterwards  negledls  to  do  it : 
not  for  want  of  power  (for  fo  long  as  that  continues 
the  obligation  ceafethj  but  for  want  of  will,  and  due 
regard  to  his  oath. 

Now  that  perjury  is  a  mod  heinous  fin,'  is  evi- 
dent, becaufe  it  is  contrary  to  fo  plain  and  great  a 
Jaw  of  God  ;  one  of  the  ten  words  or  precepts  of 
the  moral  law,  "  Thou  fhalt  not  take  the  name  of 
*' the   Lord  thy  God   in  vain"j   thou  fhalt   not 
bring  or  apply  the  name  of  God  to  a  falfhood  : 
or,  as  Jofephus  renders  it,  "  Thou  fhalt  not  adjure 
*'  God  to  a  falfe  thing: "  which  our  Saviour  ren- 
ders yet  more  plainly,  Matth.  v.   0,3-  "  Thou  fhalt 
*^'  not  forfwear  thy  felf '*.     For  he  feems  to  refer  to 
the  third  commandment  when  he  fays,  "  Ye  have 
*^  heard  that  it  was  faid  to  them  of  old  time,  thou 
*'  fhalt  not  forfwear  thy  felf,"  as  he  had  done  before 
to  the  6th  and  7th,  when  he  fays,  "  It  was  faid  to 
*'  them  of  old  time,  thou  fhalt  not  kill,  thou  fhalt 

''  not 


obligation  of  oaths,  87 

"  not  commit  adultery  *'.  So  that  the  primary,  if  SERi\f. 
not  the  fole  intention  of  this  Law,  "  Thou  fhalt  not 
"  take  the  name  of  the  Lord  thy  God  in  vain  ", 
is  to  forbid  the  great  fin  of  perjury.  And  I  do  not 
remember  that  in  fcripture  the  phrafe  of  taking 
God's  name  in  vain,  is  ufed  in  any  other  fenfe. 
And  thus  it  is  certainly  ufed,  Prov.  xxx.  9.  "  Left 
"  I  be  poor  and  fteal,  and  take  the  name  of  the 
"  Lord  my  God  in  vain  ",  i.  e.  left  poverty  fhould 
tempt  me  to  fteal,  and  ftealth  ftiould  engage  me 
in  perjury.  For  among  the  jews  an  oath  was 
tendered  to  him  that  was  fufpedled  of  theft,  as  ap- 
pears from  Levit.  vi.  2.  where  it  is  faid,  "  If  any 
"  one  be  guilty  of  theft,  and  lyeth  concerning  it, 
"  or  fweareth  falfly  ;  he  fhall  reftore  all  that  about 
*'  which  he  hath  fworn  falfly.  Left  I  fteal,  and 
*'  take  the  name  of  the  Lord  my  God  in  vain;  ** 
that  is,  be  perjured,  being  examined  upon  oath  con- 
cerning a  thing  ftoln.  And  for  this  reafon  the 
thief  and  the  perjured  perfon  are  put  together, 
Zech.  V.  4.  where  it  is  faid,  that  "  a  curfe  fhall  en- 
•'  ter  into  the  houfe  of  the  thief,  and  of  him  that 
*'  fweareth  falfly  by  the  name  of  God/'  From  all 
which  it  is  very  probable,  that  the  whole  intention 
of  the  third  commandment  is  to  forbid  this  great 
fin  of  perjury.  To  deter  men  from  which,  a  feverc 
threatning  is  there  added ;  "  for  the  Lord  will 
*'  not  hold  him  guildefs  that  taketh  his  name  m 
"  vain  ; "  that  is,  he  will  moft  feverely  punifh  fuch 
a  one.  And  'tis  very  obfervable,  that  there  is  no 
threatning  added  to  any  other  commandment,  but 
to  this  and  the  fecond,  intimating  to  us  that,  next 
to  idolatry  and  the  worlliip  of  a  fulfe  God,  perjury 

is 


88  T^he  la'wfulnefs  and 

S  E  R  M.  is  one  of  the  greatefb  affronts  that  can  be  offered  to 
^?^^'  ;the  divine  majelly.  This  is  one  of  thofe  fins  that 
cries  fo  loud  to  heaven,  and  quickens  tht  pace  of 
God's  judgments,  Mai.  iii.  9.  "  I  will  come  near 
"  to  you  in  judgment,  and  be  a  fwift  witnefs  a- 
"  gainft  the  fwearer  :  "  for  this  God  threatens  ut- 
ter  deftruclion  to  the  man  and  his  houfe,  Zcch.  v.  4. 
fpeaking  of  the  "  curfe  that  goeth  over  the  face  of 
"  the  whole  earth  ;  God  (fays  he)  will  bring  it 
''  forth,  and  it  fhall  enter  into  the  houfe  of  him 
"  that  fweareth  falfly  by  the  name  of  God,  and  fhall 
"  remain  in  the  midft  of  his  houfe,  and  fhall  con- 
"  fume  it  with  the  timber  thereof  and  the  ftones 
"  thereof.  It  fhall  remain  in  the  midft  of  his  houfe, 
"  and  fhall  confume  it."  This  fin  by  the  fecret 
judgment  of  God  undermines  eftates  and  families 
to  the  utter  ruin  of  them.  And  among  the  hea- 
then it  was  always  reckoned  one  of  the  greateft 
crimes,  and  which  they  did  believe  God  did  not 
only  punilh  upon  the  guilty  perfon  himfelf,  but  up- 
on his  family  and  pofterity ;  and  many  times  upon 
whole  nations,  as  the  prophet  alfo  tells  us»  that  "  be- 
"  caufe  of  oaths  the  land  mourns.  " 

I  need  not  ufe  many  words  to  aggravate  this  fin  5 
it  is  certainly  a  crime  of  the  higheft  nature.  Deli- 
berate perjury  being  directly  againft  a  man's  know- 
ledge, fo  that  no  man  can  commit  it  without  fta- 
ring  his  confcience  in  the  face  ;  which  is  one  of  the 
greateft  aggravations  of  any  crime.  And  it  is  equal- 
ly a  fin  againft  both  tables  -,  being  the  higheft  af- 
front to  God,  and  of  moft  injurious  confequence  to 
men.  It  is  an  horrible  abufe  of  the  name  of  God, 
^n  open  contempt  of  his  judgment,  and  an  infolent 

defiance 


obligation  of  caths,  89 

defiance  of  his  vengeance  :  and  in  refped  of  men,  it  ^^^^j^^' 
is  not  only  a  wrong  to  this  or  that  particular  perfon 
who  fufFers  by  it,  but  treafon  againft  humane  focie- 
ty;  fubverting  at  once  the  foundations  of  publick 
peace  and  juftice,  and  the  private  fecurlty  of  every 
man's  life  and  fortune.  It  is  a  defeating  of  the  bell 
and  lad  way  that  the  wifdom  of  men  could  devife 
for  the  decifion  of  doubtful  matters.  Solomon  very 
fully  and  elegantly  expreffeth  the  deftruclive  nature 
of  this  fm,  Prov.  XXV.  18.  "A  talfe  witnefs  againft 
"  his  neighbour  is  a  maul,  and  a  fword,  and  a  fharp 
"  arrow  : "  intimating,  that  amongft  all  the  inftru- 
inents  of  ruine  and  mifchief  that  have  been  devifed 
by  mankind,  none  is  of  more  pernicious  confequence 
to  humane  fociety  than  perjury,  and  breach  of  faith. 
It  is  a  peftilence  that  ufually  walketh  in  darknefs, 
and  a  fecret  ilab  and  blow,  againft  which,  many 
times,  there  is  no  pofTibility  of  defence. 

And  therefore  it  highly  concerns  thofe  who  upoa 
thefe  and  the  like  occafions  are  called  upon  their 
oath,  whether  as  jurors  or  witnefles,  to  fct  God  be- 
fore their  eyes,  and  to  have  his  fear  in  their  hearts 
whenever  they  come  to  take  an  oath.  And  to  go- 
vern and  diicharge  their  coniciences  in  this  matter 
by  known  and  approved  rules,  and  by  the  refolu- 
tions  of  pious  and  wafe  men,  and  not  by  the  loofe 
reafonings  and  refolutions  of  pamphlets,  fent  abroad 
to  ferve  the  turns  of  unpeaceable  and  ill- minded 
men  (whether  atheifts,  or  papifts,  or  others)  on  pur- 
pofe  to  debauch  the  confciences  of  men  by  teach- 
ing them  to  play  faft  and  loofe  with  oaths.  And  it 
is  a  very  fad  iign  of  the  decay  of  chriftian  religion 
_  among  us,  to  fee  fo  many  who  call  themfeives  chri- 

VoL.  IL  M  ftians. 


The  lawfulnefs  and^  &c. 

ftians,  to  make  fo  little  confcience  of  fo  great  a 
fin,  as  even  the  light  of  nature  would  blufli  and 
tremble  at. 

I  will  conclude  all  with  thofe  excellent  fayings  of 
the  fon  of  Sirach  concerning  thefe  two  fins  (1  have 
been  fpeaking  of)  profane  fwearirig  and  perjury, 
Eccl.  xxiii.  9,  10,  &:c.  "  Accuflom  not  thy  mouth 
"  to  fwearing  •,  neither  ule  thy  lelf  to  the  naming  of 
**  the  holy  one.  A  man  that  ufeth  much  fwearing 
*'  fhall  be  filled  with  iniquity,  and  the  plague  fhall 
*'  never  depart  from  his  houfe.  If  he  fhall  offend, 
«'  his  fin  fhall  be  upon  him  ;  and  if  he  acknow- 
i«  ledo-e  not  his  fin,  he  maketh  a  double  offence. 
«  And  if  he  fwear  falfly,  he  Ihall  not  be  innocent, 
"  but  his  houfe  fnall  be  full  of  calamities. "  And 
to  reprefent  to  us  the  dreadful  nature  of  this  fin  of 
perjury,  "  There  is  (faith  he)  a  word  that  is  cloth- 
''  cd  about  with  death,  '*  meaning  a  rafh  and  falie 
oath  •,  "  There  is  a  w^ord  that  is  clothed  about 
"  with  death.  God  grant  it  be  not  found  in  the 
<'  heritage  of  Jacob ;  for  all  fuch  things  fhall  be  far 
*'  from  the  godly  ;  and  they  will  not  wallow  in  thefe 
"  fins."  From  which  God  prelerve  all  good  men, 
and  make  them  caiefai  to  preferve  themlelvesj  as 
they  value  the  prefent  peace  of  their  own  confciences, 
and  the  favour  of  almighty  God  in  this  world  and 
the  other,  for  his  mercies  fake  in  Jesus  Christ, 
To  whom,  ^c. 


A  SER. 


SERMON 

Preached  at  the 

FUNERAL 

Of  the  Reverend 

Ur.THOMAS  GOVGE, 

the  4^^  of  November^   168  x. 

At  St.  Anne's  Black-friers; 

With  a  brief  account  of  his  L  i  f  e. 


M  2 


93 


To  the  right  worfliipful  the 

PRESIDENT, 


THE 


TREASURER, 

AND 

^^he  reft  of  the  worthy  Governors 
of  the  hofpital  of  Chrtji-Church  in 
London. 

^"^^j^ HEN  upon  the  requeft  of  fome 

of  the   relations  a?td  friends  of 

the  revere?id   Mr.   Gouge,   deceajedy 

ajtd  to  fpeak  the  truths  in  cofupliai^ce 

mtb 


04  Epistle  Dedicatory. 

with  7nine  ow?i  inclination  to  do   right 
to  the  7nemory  of  fo  good  a  man^  and 
to  fet  Jo  great  an  example  i?t  the  view 
of  all  men^  I  had  determined  to  make 
this     difcourfe    publicky     I    hiew     not 
where  more  fitly  to  addrefs  it  tha?t  to 
yourfelves  who    are   the   living   pattern 
of   the  fame  virtue^    and  the  faithful 
difpenfers  a7td  managers  of  o?te  of  the 
hefi  and  greatejl  charities  in  the  worlds 
efpecially  fiitce     he    had   a   particular 
relation    to  you^    and  was  pleafed  for 
fome  years  laft  pafiy  without  any  other 
confederation^  hut    that   of  charity y    to 
employ  his  confiant  pains  in  catechifing 
the    poor    children     of  your    hofpital\ 
wifely  confidering  of   how  great  confe- 
que?tce    it   was    to   this    city,    to    have 
the  foundations  of  religion  well  laid  in 
the   tender  years    of  fo  ma?ty  perfons 

as 


Epistle  Dedicatory.  95 

as  were  afterwards  to  be  plai^ted  there, 
in  fever al  profeffwis ;  and  from  a  true 
humility  of  mt7td^  beifig  ready  to  fioop 
to  the  7neanefl  office  and  fervice  to  do 
good. 

I  have  heard  from  an  intimate 
frie?id  of  his^  that  he  would  fometimes 
with  great  pleafure  fay^  that  he  had 
two  livings  which  he  would  not  ex- 
change for  two  of  the  greatefl  in  Eng- 
land, meaning  Wales  a72d  ChriftV  hoA 
pital  :  contrary  to  conwton  account  he 
efleemed  every  advantage  of  being  ufe- 
ful  a?id  fe?^viceable  to  God  and  men 
a  rich  benefice,  and  thofe  his  befl  pa- 
trons and  benefactors,  not  who  did  him 
good^  but  who  gave  him  the  opportu- 
7ttty  and  means   of  doing  it.      To  you 

therefore    as    his   patrons    this  fermon 

doth 


96  Epistle  Dedicatory. 

doth  of  right  belongs  and  to  you  I 
humbly  dedicate  it ;  heartily  befeeching 
almighty  God,  to  raife  up  many  by  his 
example  that  inay  ferve  their  genera- 
tion according  to  the  will  of  God,  as 
he  did.     I  am 


Your  faithful 


and  humble  Servant, 


Jo.  TiLLOTSON. 


[  97  ] 

SERMON  XXIII. 

Preached  at  the  funeral  of  Mr.  Thomas 
Gouge :  With  a  fhort  account  of  his 
life. 


LUKE  XX.  '^j,  3S. 

Now  that  the  dead  are  raifed^  even  Mofes  Jbewedat  the 
hujh^  when  he  calleth  the  Lord  the  Govt  of  Abra^ 
ham^  and  the  God  cf  Ifaac^  and  the  God  of  Jacob, 
For  he  is  not  a  God  of  the  dead^  but  of  the  livings 
for  ail  live  to  him. 


1 


■^H  E  occafion  of  thefe  words  of  our  blefTed  SERM, 
Saviour  was  an  objedion  which  the  lad-  * 


ducees  made  againft  the  refurreftion,  ground- 
ed upon  a  cafe  which  had  fometimes  happened  among 
them,  of  a  woman  that  had  i^w^xi  brethren  iuc- 
ceflively  to  her  husbands.  Upon  which  cafe  they 
put  this  queflion  to  our  Saviour  •,  "  whofe  wife  of 
*'  the  feven  (hall  this  woman  be  at  the  refurredion  ?'* 
that  is,  if  men  live  in  another  world,  how  (hall  the 
controverfy  between  thefe  feven  brethren  be  decided  ? 
for  they  all  feem  to  have  an  equal  claim  to  this  wo- 
man, each  of  them  having  had  her  to  wife. 

This  captious  queftion  was  not  eafy  to  be  anfwer- 
ed  by  the  pharifees,  who  fancied  the  enjoyments  of 
the  next  life  to  be  of  the  fame  kind  with  die  fenfual 
pleafures  of  this  wc.rld,  only  greater  and  more  dura- 
ble.    From  which  tradition  of  the  jews  concerning 

Vo  L.  II,  N  a  fenfual 

a. 


9  8  u4t  the  fimeral  of  the 

S  E  R  Af.  a  fenfual  paradife,  Mahomet  feems  to  have  taken  the 
^_^_^  pattern  of  his:  as  he  did  likewife  many  other  things 
from  the  jewifh  traditions.  Now  upon  this  fuppofi- 
tion,  that  in  the  next  life  there  will  be  marrying  and 
giving  in  marriage,  it  was  a  queflion  not  eafily  Huis- 
fied,  "  whofe  wife  of  the  feven  this  woman  fhould 
«  then  be?" 

But  our  Saviour  clearly  avoids  the  whole  force 
of  it,  by  fhewing  the  different  ftate  of  men  in  this 
world,  and  in  the  other.     "   The  children  of  this 
''  world  (fays  he)  marry,    and  are  given   in   mar- 
*'  riage  j  but  they  who  fhall  be  accounted  worthy  to 
*'  obtam  that  world,  and  the  refurrection  from   the 
«'  dead,  neither  marry,  nor  are  given  in  marriage." 
And  he  does  not  barely  and  magifterialjy  aflert  this 
dodrine,  but  gives  a  plain  and  iubflantial  reafon  for 
it  j  becaufe  they  cannot  die  any  more.     After  men 
have  lived  a  while  in  this  world  they  are  taken  away 
by  dcatti,  and  therefore  marriage  is  neceiTary  to  main- 
tain a  fdCceiTion  of  mankind  \  but  in  the  other  world 
men  fhall  become  immortal  and  live  for  ever,  and 
then  the  reafon  of  marriage  will  wholly  ceafe  :    for 
'wlien  men  can  die  no  more,  there  will  then  be  no  need 
of  any  new  fupplies  of  m.inkind. 

Our  SavjouPv  having  thus  cleared  himfelf  of  this 
objection  by  taking  away  the  ground  and  foundation 
of  it,  he  produceth  an  argument  for  the  proof  of 
the  refurredlion,  in  the  words  of  my  text;  "  Now 
*'  that  the  dead  are  raifed,  Mofes  even  fliewed  at 
*'  the  bufli,  when  he  calleth  the  Lord  the  God  of 
"  Abraham,  the  God  of  Ifaac,  and  the  God  of 
"  Jacob."  That  is,  when  in  one  of  his  books  God 
is  brought  in  fpeaking  to  him  out  of  the  bufh,  and 

calling 


reverend  Mr.  Tho.  Gouge.  99 

callino;  himfelf  by  the  title  of  the  God  of  Abraham,  SE  R  M. 
the   God  of  Ilaac,  and  the  God  of  Jacob.     From    "^  "     ' 
whence  our  Saviour  infers  the  refurreclion,  becaule 
"  God  is  not  the  God  of  the  dead,  but  of  the  hv- 
''  ing  :  for  all  live  to  him." 

My  defign  from  thefe  v/ords  is,  to  fliew  the  force 
and  lirength  of  this  argument  which  our  Saviour 
urgeth  for  the  proof  of  the  refurredlion.  In  order 
whereunto  I  fliall, 

Firil,  confider  it  as  an  argument  ad  hominem^  and 
fhew  the  fitnefs  and  force  of  it  to  convince  thofc  with 
whom  our  Saviour  difputed. 

Secondly,  I  fliall  inquire,  whether  it  be  more  than 
an  argument  ad  bominem.  And  if  it  be,  wherein  the 
real  and  abfolute  force  of  it  doth  confiil  ^ 

And  then,  I  fliall  apply  this  dodlrinc  of  the  refur- 
reclion to  the  prefent  occafion. 

I.  Firil,  we  will  confider  it  as  an  argument  ad  bo- 
minem^ and  fhew  the  fitnefs  and  force  of  it  to  convince 
thofe  with  whom  our  Saviour  difputed.  And  this 
v/ill  appear  if  we  carefully  confider  thefe  four  things. 

1.  What  our  Saviour  intended  diredtly  and  im- 
mediately to  prove  by  this  argument. 

2.  The  extraordinary  veneration  which  the  jews  in 
general  had  for  th^  writings  of  Mofes  above  any 
other  books  of  the  old  teflament. 

3.  The  peculiar  notion  which  tht  jews  had  con- 
cerning the  ufe  of  this  phrafe  or  expreiTion  of  God's 
being  any  one's  God. 

4.  The  great  refpedl  which  the  jev/s  had  for  thefe 
three  fathers  of  their  nation,  Abraham,  Ifaac  and 
Jacob.  For  each  of  thefe  make  our  Saviour's  ar- 
gument more  forcible  againft  thofe  with  whom  he 
difputed,  N  z  Firtf, 


loo  At  the  funeral  of  the 

Eji  M.       Fird,  we  will  confider  what  our  Saviour  intend- 
ed diredlly  and  immediately  to  prove  by  this  argu- 
ment.    And  that  was  this,  that  there  is  another  flate 
after  this  hfe,  wherein  men  fhall  be  happy  or  mifer- 
able  according  as  they  have  liveJ  in  this  world.    And 
this  doth  not  only   fuppofe   the  immortality  of  the 
foul,  but  forafmuch  as  the  body  is  an  efiential  part 
of  man,  doth  by  confequence   infer  the  refurredion 
of  the  body,  becauTe  othervvife  the  man  v.'ould  not 
be  happy  or  miferable  in  the  other  world.     But  I 
cannot  Ice  any  fufficient  ground  to  believe  that  our 
Saviour   intended  by  this  argument  diredlly  and 
immediately   to  prove   the  refurredion  of  the  body, 
but  only  by  confequence,  and  as  it  follows  from  the 
admifTion  of  a  future  tlate  wherein  men  fhall  be  re- 
warded or  punifhed.     For  that  reafon  of   our  Sa- 
viour, that  "  God  is  not  a  God  of  the  dead,  but 
«  of  the  living,"  if  it  did  diredlly  prove  the  refur- 
redion  of  the  body,   it  would  prove  that  the  bodies 
of  Abraham,    Ifaac  and   Jacob   were   raifed  to  life 
ao-ain,  at  or  before  that  time  when  God  fpake  to 
Mofes  and   called   himfelf  the  God  of   Abraham, 
Ifaac  and  Jacob:  but  we  do  not  believe  this;    and 
therefore  ought  not  to  fuppofe  that  it  was  the  inten- 
tion  of   our  Saviour  d^cclly  and  immediately  to 
prove   the  refurredlion  of  the  body,  but  only  (as  I 
iliid  before)  a  future  ftate.     And  that  this  was  all  our 
Saviour   inrended  will  more  plainly  appear,  if  we 
confider  what  that  error  of  the  fidducees  was  which 
our  Saviour    here  confutes.     And  Jofephus,  who 
very  well  underftood  the  difference  of  the  it^^  among 
the  jews,    and  gives  a  particular  account  of  them, 
makes  not  the  leafl:  mention  of  any  controverfy  be- 
tween 


reverend  Mr.  Tho.  Gouge.  loi 

tween  the  pharifees  and  the  fadducees  about  the  refur-  SE  RM. 
redlion  of  the  body.  All  tlut  he  lays,  is  this,  that  ^^ 
the  pharifees  hold  the  immortaUty  of  the  foul,  and 
that  there  are  rewards  and  punifhments  in  another 
world :  but  the  fadducees  denied  all  this,  and  that 
there  was  any  other  flare  after  this  life.  And  this  is 
the  very  fame  account  with  that  which  is  given  of 
them  in  the  new  teftament,  ver.  27.  of  this  chapter, 
^'  The  Sadducees  who  deny  that  there  is  any  refurrec- 
*'  tion."  The  meaning  of  which  is  more  fully  declared. 
Act,  xxiii.  8.  "  The  iadducees  fay  that  there  is  no  refur- 
"  redion,  neither  angel  nor  fpirit ;  but  the  pharifees 
"  confefs  both."  That  is,  the  fadducees  denied  that 
there  was  any, other  (late  of  men  after  this  hfe,  and  that 
there  was  any  fuch  thing  as  an  immortal  fpirit,  either 
angels,  or  the  fouls  of  men  furviving  their  bodies. 
A>)d,  as  Dr.  Hammond  hath  judicioufly  obferved, 
this  is  the  true  importance  of  the  word  dvasacri^^  viz, 
a  future  or  another  ftate  ;  unlefs  in  fuch  texts  where 
tat  coiitext  does  retrain  it  to  the  raifing  again  of  the 
body,  or  where  fome  word  that  denotes  the  body,  as 
c'J^lxar©^  or  cra^xcr,  is  added  to  it. 

Secondly,  the  force  of  this  argument  againft  thofc 
with  whom  our  Saviour  difpuied  will  farther  ap- 
pear, if  we  confider  the  great  veneration  which  the 
jews  in  general  had  for  the  writings  of  Mofes  above 
any  other  books  ot  the  old  teftament ;  which  they 
(efpecially  the  fadducees)  looked  upon  only  as  expli- 
cations and  comments  upon  the  law  of  Mofes :  But 
they  edeemed  nothing  as  a  neceffary  article  of  faith 
which  had  not  fome  foundation  in  the  writings  of 
Mofes.  And  this  feems  to  me  to  be  tiie  true  reafon 
why  our  Saviour   chofe  to  confute  them  out  of 

Mofesj 


102  -^^  the  funeral  of  the 

SERxVI.  Mofes,  rather  than  any  other  part  of  the  old  teda- 
^^^  nienc :  and  not,  as  many  learned  men  have  imagined, 
becaufe  the  iadducees  did  not  receive  any  part  of  the 
old  tedament,  but  only  the  five  books  of  Mofes;  fo 
that  it  was  in  vain  to  argue  againft  them  out  of  ai^iy 
other.  This  I  know  hath  been  a  general  opinion, 
grounded  I  think  upon  the  miftake  of  a  palT.ige  in 
Jofephus,  who  fays  the  fadducees  only  receive  the 
written  law.  But  if  we  carefully  confider  that  paf^ 
fage,  we  fhall  find  that  Jtjfephus  doth  not  there  op. 
pofe  the  law  to  the  other  books  of  the  old  tefla- 
mcnt,  whicn  were  alfo  written  •,  but  to  oral  tradition. 
For  he  fays  exprcfly,  that  "  the  Iadducees  only  receive 
<*  the  written  law,  but  the  pharifees,  over  and 
"  bcfides  what  was  written,  receive  the  oral  which 
"  they  call  tradition. 

I  deny  not  but  that  in  the  later  prophets  there  are 
more  exprefs  texts  for  the  proof  or  a  future  ftate, 
than  any  are  to  be  found  in  the  books  of  Mofes. 
As  Daniel  xii.  2.  "  And  many  of  tiitm  that  fleep 
"  in  the  dud  of  \\\z  earth  fhall  awake,  feme  to  ever- 
*'  lafling  life,  and  fome  to  fliame  and  evcrlafdng 
"  contempt.'*  And  indeed  it  feems  very  plain  that 
holy  men  among  the  jews,  towards  the  expiration  of 
the  legal  difpeniation,  had  ftiil  clearer  and  more  ex- 
prefs apprchenfions  concerning  a  future  flate  than  are 
to  be  met  with  in  the  writings  of  Mofes,  or  of  any 
of  the  prophets. 

The  law  given  by  Mofes  did  fuppofc  the  immor- 
tality of  the  fouls  of  men,  and  the  expedation  of 
another  life  after  this,  as  principles  of  religion  in 
fome  degree  naturally  known  \  but  made  no  new  and 
exprefs   revelation  of  thefe  things.     Nor  was  "there 

any 


reverend  Mr.  Tho.  Gouge.  103 

any  occafion  for  it,  the  law  of  Mofes  being  a  politi-  S  E  R  M. 
cal  law,  not  intended  for  the  government  of  man- 
kind, but  of  one  particular  nation  j  and  therefore 
was  eflablifh'd,  as  polkical  laws  are,  upon  temporal 
promifes  and  threatnings;  promifing  temporal  pro- 
fperity  to  the  obfervation  of  its  precepts,  and  threat- 
ning  the  breach  of  them  with  temporal  judgments 
and  calamities. 

And  this  I  take  to  be  the  true  reafon  why  argu- 
ments fetch'd  from  another  world  are  fo  obfcurely  in- 
fifted  upon  under  that  difpenfation  •,  not  but  that  ano- 
ther life  after  this  was  always  fuppos'd,  and  was  un- 
doubtedly the  hope  and  expedation  of  good  men 
under  the  law,  but  the  clear  difcovery  of  it  ^was  re- 
ferv'd  for  the  tim.es  of  the  Messias.  And  there- 
fore as  thofe  times  drew  on,  and  the  Sun  of  righte- 
oufnefs  was  near  his  rifi'ng,  the  lliadows  of  the 
night  began  to  be  chafed  away,  and  mens  apprehen- 
lions  of  a  future  tlate  to  clear  up ;  fo  that  in  the  time 
of  the  Maccabees  good  men  fpake  with  more  confi- 
dence and  aiTurance  of  thefe  things. 

It  is  likewife  to  be  confider'd,  that  the  temporal 
calamities  and  fafFerings  with  which  the  jews  were 
almoft  continually  harafs'd  from  the  time  of  their 
captivity,  had  very  much  wean'd  good  men  from  the 
confideration  of  temporal  promifes,  and  awaken'd 
their  minds  to  the  more  ferious  thoughts  of  another 
world.  It  being  natural  to  men  when  they  are  de- 
ftitute  of  prefent  comfort,  to  fupport  themfelves  v/ith 
the  expedation  of  better  things  for  the  future,  and 
as  the  apofile  to  the  Hebrews  exprefTeth  it,  chap.  vi. 
ver.  10.  "  to  fly  for  refuge  to  lay  hold  upon  the 
«'  hope  that  is  before  them,"  and  to  employ  their  rea- 

foa 


At  the  funeral  of  the 
fon  to  fortify  themfelves  as  well  as  they  can  in  that 
perfuafion. 

And  this   I    doubt  not  was  the  true  occafion  of 
thofe  clearer  and  riper   apprehcnfions  of  good   men 
concerning  a  future  ftate,  in  thofe  times  of  diftrefs 
and  perfecution :   it  being  very  agreeable  to  the  wif- 
dom  and  goodnefs  of  the  divine  providence  not  to 
leave  his  pev)p'e  deiutute  of  fu.licienc   fupport  under 
great  trials  and  fufferings :  and  nothing  but  the  hopes 
of  a  better  life  could  have  born  up  the  Ipirits  of  men 
under  fuch  cruel  tortures.     And  of  this  we  have  a 
mod  remarkable  infiance  in  the  hiftory  of  the  feven 
brethren  in  the  Maccabees,  who  being  cruelly  tortur- 
ed and  put  to  death  by  Antiochus,  do  moft  exprefly 
declare  their  confident  expeflation  of  a  refurredlion  to 
a  better  life.     To  which  hiftory  the  apoftle  certainly 
refers,  Heb.  xi.    o^^.  when    he    fays,  "  others  were 
*'  tortured,    not  accepting    deliverance,    that    they 
''  might  obtain  a   better   refurreclion  :'*  where  the 
word,  which  we  render  were  tortui'd,    is    £ru,a7ra- 
v/cr^nc-av,  which  is  the  very  word  ufed  in  the  Macca- 
bees to  exprefs  the  particular   kind  of  torture  us'd 
upon  them  ♦,    befides  that  being  otfei  'd   deliverance 
they  mod  refolutely  refus'd  to  accept  of  ir,  with  this 
exprefs  declaration  thit  they  hop'd  for  a  refurreclion 
to  a  better  life. 

But  to  return  to  my  purpofe,  notwithflanding 
there  might  be  more  clcur  and  exprefs  texts  to  this 
purpofe  in  the  ancient  propiiets,  yet  our  Saviour 
knowing  how  great  a  regard  not  or.ly  the  fadducees, 
but  all  the  jews  had  to  the  authority  of  Mofes,  he 
thought  fit  to  bring  his  proof  of  the  refurre6i::o:-:  out  of 
his  writings,  as  that  which  was  the  mofl  likely  to  con- 
vince them.  Thirdly, 


reverend  Mr.  Tho.  Gouge.  105 

Thirdly,  if  we  confider  farther  the  peculiar  no-SERM. 
tion  which  the  jews  had  concerning  the  ufe  of  this 
phrafe  or  expreflion  of  God's  being  any  one's  God. 
And  that  was  this.  That  God  is  no  where  in  fcrip- 
ture  fciid  to  be  any  one's  God  v/hile  he  was  ahve. 
And  therefore  they  tell  us  that  while  Ifaac  lived,  God 
is  not  called  the  God  of  Ifaac,  but  the  fear  of  Ifaac. 
As  Gen.  xxxi.  42.  "  Except  the  God  of  Abraham, 
"  and  the  fear  of  Ifaac  had  been  with  me;"  and 
ver.  53.  when  Laban  made  a  covenant  with  Jacob, 
*tis  faid  that  *'  Laban  did  fwear  by  the  God  of 
"  Abraham,  and  the  God  of  Nahor,  and  the  God 
"  of  their  fathers,  but  Jacob  fwore  by  the  fear  of 
"  his  father  Ifaac."  I  will  not  warrant  this  obferva- 
tion  to  be  good,  becaufe  I  certainly  know  it  is  not 
true.  For  God  doth  expreHy  call  himfelf  the  God 
of  Ifaac,  v/hile  Ifaac  was  yet  alive.  Gen.  xxviii.  13. 
"  I  am  the  Lord  God  of  Abraham  thy  father,  and 
*'  the  God  of  Ifaac."  It  is  fufEcient  to  my  purpofe, 
that  this  was  a  notion  anciently  current  among  the 
jews.  And  therefore  our  Saviour's  argument  from 
this  expreflion  muft  be  fo  much  the  flronger  againd 
them :  for  if  the  fouls  of  men  be  extinguilhed  by 
death  (as  the  fadducees  believed)  what  did  it  fignify 
to  Abraham,  Ifaac  and  Jacob  to  have  God  called 
their  God  after  they  were  dead  ?  but  farely,  for  God 
to  be  any  one's  God,  doth  fignify  fomc  great  benefit 
and  advantage;  which  yet  (according  to  the  notion 
which  the  jews  had  of  this  phrafe)  could  not  refpect 
this  life,  becaufe,  according  to  them,  God  is  not 
faid  to  be  any  one's  God  'till  after  he  is  dead :  but  it 
is  thus  faid  of  Abraham,  Ifaac,  and  Jacob  after  their 
death,  and  therefore  our  Saviour  infers  veryflrong- 
VoL.  IL  O  ly 


io6  ^t  the  funeral  of  the 

SERM.  ly  agalnfi:  them,  that  Abraham,  Ifaac,  and  Jacob 
xxni.  ^gj.g  j^Qj.  extinguifhed  by  deadi,  but  do  Itill  live 
fomewhere:  for  "  God  is  not  the  God  of  the  dead, 
"  but  of  the  living."  And  then  he  adds  by  way  of 
fartlicr  explication,  "  for  all  hve  to  him."  That  is, 
though  thofe  good  men  who  are  departed  this  life, 
do  not  flill  live  to  us,  here  in  this  world,  yet  "  they 
*'  live  to  God,"  and  are  with  him. 

Fourthly,  if  v/e  confidcr  the  great  refpedl  Vv^hich 
the  jews  had  for  thofe  three  fathers  of  their  nation, 
Abraham,  Ifaac,  and  Jacob.  They  had  an  extraor- 
dinary opinion  of  them,  and  elleemed  nothing  too 
great  to  be  thought  or  faid  of  them.  And  therefore 
we  iind  that  they  looked  upon  it  as  a  great  arrogance 
for  any  man  to  aflame  any  thing  to  himfelf  that 
might  feem  to  kt  him  above  Abraham,  Ifaac,  or  Ja- 
cob. With  what  indignation  did  they  fly  upon  our 
Saviour  on  this  account ,?  John  iv.  12.  "  Art  thou 
*'  greater  than  our  father  Jacob?"  and  chap.  viii. 
ver.  ^^.  "  Art  thou  greater  than  our  father  Abra- 
*'  ham?  whom  m.akell  thou  thyfelf ?"  Now  they 
who  had  fo  fuperititious  a. veneration  for  them,  would 
cafily  believe  any  thing  of  privilege  to  belong  to 
them:  fo  that  our  Saviour  doth  with  great  advan- 
tage inftance  in  them,  in  favour  of  whom  they 
would  be  inclined  to  extend  the  meaning  of  any  pro- 
mifc  to  the  utmod,  and  allow  it  to  flgnify  as  much  as 
the  words  could  pofilbly  bear.  So  tiiat  it  is  no  won- 
der that  the  text  tells  us  that  this  argument  put  the 
fadducees  to  filcnce.  They  durfl  not  attempt  a  thing 
fo  odious,  as  to  go  about  to  take  away  any  thing  of 
privilege  from  Abraham,  Ifaac,   and  Jacob. 

And 


reverend  Mr,  Tho.  Gouge.  107 

And  thus  I  have,   as  briefly  as  the  matter  would  S  Erm. 
bear,  endeavoured  to  fhcw  the  fitnels  and  force  of,  ^'^^'^" 
this  argument  to  convince  chofe  with  whom  our  Sa- 
viour difputed.     I  come  now,  in  the 

II.  Second  place,  to  inquire,  whether  this  be  any- 
more than  an  argument  cd  hominem  -,  and  if  it  be, 
wherein  the  real  and  abiblute  force  of  it  doth  con- 
fill? 

I  do  not  think  it  necelTary  to  believe  that  every  ar- 
gument ufed  by  our  Saviour  or  his  apoilles,  is  ab- 
folutely  and  in  itfelf  conclufive  of  the  matter  in  de- 
bate. For  an  argument  which  doth  hot  really  prove 
the  thing  in  queftion,  may  yet  be  a  very  good  argu- 
ment ad  hominem  -,  and  in  fome  cafes  more  convincing 
to  him  with  whom  we  difpute  than  that  v/hkh  is  a 
better  argument  in  itfelf.  Now  it  is  pofTibJe,  that 
our  Saviour's  intention  might  not  be  to  bring  a 
conclufive  proof  of  the  refurredion,  but  only  to  con- 
fute thofe  who  would  needs  be  difputing  with  him. 
And  to  that  purpofe  an  argument  ad  hominem^  which 
proceeded  upon  grounds  which  they  themfelves  could 
not  deny,  might  be  very  proper  and  effedlual.  But 
although  it  be  not  neceflary  to  believe,  that  this  was 
more  than  an  argument  ad  hominem  %  yet  it  is  the  bet- 
ter to  us,  if  it  be  abfolutcly  and  in  it^t\^  conclu- 
five of  the  thing  in  queftion.  And  this  I  hope 
will  fufficiently  appear,  if  we  confider  thefe  four 
things. 

1.  That  for  God  to  be  any  one's  God  doth  fignify 
fome  very  extraordinary  blelTing  and  happinefs  to 
thofe  perfons  of  whom  this  is  faid. 

2.  If  we  confider  the  eminent  faith  and  obedience 
of  the  perfons  to  whom  this  promife  is  made. 

O  2  3.  Their 


io3  At  tie  funeral  of  the 

I  R  M.       2.  Their  condition  in  this  world. 

-  V  f  T  T  '^ 

4.  The  general  importance  of  this  promife,  ab- 
flrading  from  the  perfons  particularly  fpecified  and 
named  in  it,  Abraham,   Ifaac,  and  Jacob. 

Firft,  if  we  confider  that  for  God  to  be  any  one's 
God  doth  fignify  fome  very  extraordinary  blelTing 
and  happincfs  to  thofe  perfons  of  whom  this  is  faid. 
It  is  a  big  word  for  God  to  declare  himfelf  to  be 
any  one's  God  :  and  the  kail  we  can  imagine  to  be 
meant  by  it,  is  that  God  wilJ  in  an  extraordinary 
manner  employ  his  power  and  wifdom  to  do  him 
good  :  that  he  will  concern  himfelf  more  for  the 
happinefs  of  thofc  whofe  God  he  declares  himfelf  to 
be,  than  for  others. 

Secondly,  if  we  confider  the  eminent  faith  and 
obedience  of  Abraham,  Ifaac,  and  Jacob.  Abraham 
left  his  country  in  obedience  to  God,  not  knowing 
whither  he  was  to  go.  And  which  is  one  of  the 
mofl  unparallel'd  and  flrange  inflances  of  faith  and 
obedience  that  can  almoll  be  imagined,  he  was  will- 
ing to  have  facrificed  his  only  fon  at  the  command 
of  God.  Ifaac  and  Jacob  were  alfo  very  good  men, 
and  devout  worfhippers  of  the  true  God,  v/hen  al- 
moft  the  whole  world  was  funk  into  idolatry  and  all 
manner  of  impiety.  Now  what  can  we  imagine, 
but  that  trie  good  God  did  defign  fome  extraordinary 
reward  to  fuch  faithful  fervants  of  his .?  efpecially  if 
we  confider,  that  he  intended  this  gracious  declara- 
tion of  his  concerning  them,  for  a  ftanding  encou- 
ragement to  aiJ  thofe  who  in  after  ages  fhould  fol- 
low the  faith  and  tread  in  the  fleps  of  Abraham, 
Ifaac,  and  Jacob. 

Thirdly, 


reverend  Mr.  Tho.  Gouge.  loo 

Thirdly,  if  we  confidcr  the  condition  of  Abra^  S  E  R  M. 
ham,   Ifaac,  and  Jacob  in  this   world.     The   fcrip-  ■^^^^^• 
ture  tells  us,  that  '^  they  were  pilgrims  and  foan- 
"  gers  upon  the  earth  ;  '*  had  no  fixed  and  fettled  ha- 
bitation, but  were  forced  to  wander  from  one  kino-- 

o 

dom  and  country  to  another ;  that  they  v/ere  expo- 
fed  to  many  hazards  and  difficulties,  to  great  trou- 
bles and  afflidions  in  this  world  ;  {6  that  there  was 
no  fuch  peculiar  happinefs  befel  them  in  this  lift  a- 
bove  the  common  rate  of  men,  as  may  feem  to  fill 
up  the  big  words  of  this  promife,  that  "  God  would 
"  be  their  God  ".  For  fo  far  as  the  fcripturc  hif- 
tory  informs  us,  and  farther  we  cannot  know  of  this 
matter,  Elau  was  as  prolperous  as  Jacob  ;  and  Jacob 
had  a  great  many  more  troubles  and  affiidions  in 
this  life  than  Efau  had.  But  furely  when  God  calls 
himfelf  the  God  of  Abraham,  Ifaac,  and  Jacob,  this 
fignifies  that  God  intended  fome  very  peculiar  blef. 
fing  and  advantage  to  them  above  others :  which 
feeing  they  did  not  enjoy  in  this  world,  it  is  very 
reafonable  to  believe  that  one  time  or  other  this  gra- 
cious declaration  and  promife  of  God  was  made 
good  to  them. 

And  therefore  the  apofllc  to  the  Hebrews,  chap.  xi. 
from  this  very  expreffion  of  God's  being  laid  to  be 
the  God  of  Abraham  and  others,  argues  that  fome 
extraordinary  happinefs  was  referved  for  them  in  a- 
nother  world ;  and  that  upon  this  very  ground  I  am 
now  fpeaking  of,  namely,  becaufe  the  condition  of 
Abraham  and  Ibme  others,  was  not  fuch  in  this 
world  as  might  feem  to  anfwer  the  fulnefs  of  this 
promife.  "  All  thefe  (fays  he)  died  in  the  faith, 
"  not  having  received  the  promifes,  but  having  ^^tn 

"  thenj 


no  ^t  the  funeral  of  the 

S  E  R  M.  "  them  afar  off,  and  were  perfuaded  of  them,  and 
li^!-lij  "  embraced  them ,    and   confefled   that   they  were 
•  ftrangers  and  pilgrims  upon  the  earth."     From 
whence  he   reafons  very  flrongly,  that   thefe  good 
men  might  reafonably  expe6l  fomething  better  than 
any    thing   that   had  befallen   them  in  this  world. 
*'  For  they  (fays  he)  that  fay  fuch  things,  declare 
*'  plainly  that  they  feek  a  country ; "  which  at  the 
1 6M  verfe  he  calls  "  a  better  country,  that  is  a  hea- 
"  venly.     They  that  fay  fuch  things :  "  that  is,  they 
who  acknowledge  themfelves    to  be   ftrangers   and 
pilgrims  in  the  earth,  and  yet  pretend  that  God  had 
promifed  to  be  their  God,  declare  plainly  that  they 
expe6l  Ibme  reward  beyond  this  life.  From  all  which 
he  concludes,  "  Wherefore  God  is  not  afhamed  to 
"  be  called  their  God,    becaufe   he  hath  prepared 
"  for  them  a  city,"  intimating  that  if  no  happi- 
nels  had  remained  for  thefe  good  men   in  another 
world,    this  promife   of  God*s  being   their   God, 
would  fliamefully  have  fallen  (hort  of  v/hat  it  feem- 
cd  to  import,  viz.  fome  extraordinary  reward  and 
blelTing  worthy  of  God  to  befrow  ;  fomething  more 
certain  and  lafting  than  any  of  the  enjoyments  of 
this  world;  which  fince  God  hath  abundandy  per- 
formed to  them  in  the  happinefs  of  another  life,  his 
promife  to  them  was  made  good  to  the  full,  and 
he  needed  not  be  afhamed  to  be  called   their  God. 
But  if  nothing  beyond  this  life  had  been  referved  for 
them,  that  faying  of  old  Jacob  towards  the  conclu- 
fion  of  his  hfe,  "  few  and  evil  have  the  days  of  the 
*'  years  of  my  life  been,  "  would  have  been  an  eter- 
nal refledcion  upon  the  truth  and  faithfulnefs  of  him 
who  had  fo  often  called  himfelf  the  God  of  Jacob. 

Bat 


reverend  Mr,  Tho.  Gouge.  1 1 1 

But  now,  becaufe  to  all  this  it  may  be  faid,  that  S  E  R  M. 
this  promife  feems  to  have  been  made  good  to  Abra-     ''■^^^* 
ham,  Ifaac,  and  Jacob,  in  this  world  :  for  was  not 
God  the  God  of  Abraham,  Ifaac,  and  Jacob,  when 
*  he  took  fuch  a  particular  and   extraordinary  care  of 
them,  and  protected  them  from  the  manifold  dan- 
gers they  were  expofed  to  by  Hich  a  fpecial  and  im- 
mediate providence,  "  fuffering  no  one  to  do  them 
*'  harm,  but  rebuking  even  kings  for  their  fake  ?  " 
Was  not  he  Abraham's  God,  when  he  bled  him  fo 
miraculoufiy  with  a  fon  in  his  old  age,  and  with  fo 
confiderable  an  eflate  to  leave  to  him  ?  was  not  that 
faying  of  Jacob  a  great  acknowledgment  of  the  graci- 
ous providence  o\  God  tov/ards  him,  "  With  my  flaff 
"  palTed  I  over  this  Jordan,  and  now  I  am  become 
"  two  bands  ? "  and  though  it  needs  mufl  be  a  very 
cutting  afflicflion    to   him    to  lofe   his   fon  Jofeph, 
as  he  thought  he  had  done,  yet  that  was  more  than 
recompenfed    to  him  in  Jofeph's  ftrange  advance- 
ment m  Egypt,  whereby  God  put  into  his  hands 
the  opportunity  of  faving  his  father  and  his  whole 
family  alive.     And  was  not  God  the  God  of  Abra- 
ham, Ifaac,  and  Jacob,  in  making  them  fathers  of  fo 
numerous  an  offspring,  as  afterwards  became  a  great: 
nation  :  and  in  giving  them   a  fruitful  land  ;  and 
bringing  them  to  the  quiet  poiTeffion  of  it  by  fuch  a 
feries  of  wonderful  miracles  ?  what  need  then  is  there 
of  extending  this  promife  to  another  world  ?  doth  it 
not  feem  abundantly  made  good  in  thofe  great  blef- 
fings  which  God  beuowed   upon  them  whilfc  they 
lived,   and  afterwards  upon    their  pofterity,  in  this 
world  ?  And  does  not  this  agree  well  enough  with 
the  firfl  and  mod  obvious  knic  of  thefe  words^  "  I 

am 


xkiir. 


112  At  the  funeral  of  the 

SE  RM.  «  am  the  God  of  Abraham,  Ifaac,  and  Jacob,"  that 
h^  I  am  he  that  was  their  God  while  they  were 
alive,  and  am  ilill  the  God  of  their  pofterity  for 
their  fakes ;  I  fay,  becaufc  the  three  former  con  fide- 
rations  are  liable  to  this  objedlion,  which  feems 
wholly  to  take  off  the  force  of  this  argument*, 
therefore  for  the  full  clearing  of  this  matter,  I  will 
add  one  confideration  more. 

Fourthly  then,  we  will  confider  the  general  im- 
portance of  this  promife,  abflrading  from  the  parti- 
cular perfons  fpccified  and  named  in  it,  viz.  Abra- 
ham, Ifaac  and  Jacob;  and  that  is,  that  God  will 
make  a  wide  and  plain  difference  between  good  and 
bad  men  \  he  will  be  fo  the  God  of  good  men  as  he 
is  not  of  the  wicked  :  and  fome  time  or  other  put 
every  good  man  into  a  better  and  happier  condition 
than  any  wicked  man  :  fo  that  the  general  impor- 
tance of  this  promife  is  finally  refolv^ed  into  the  equi- 
ty and  juftice  of  the  divine  providence. 

And  unlefs  we  fuppofe  another  life  after  this,  it 
will  certainly  be  very  hard,  and  I  think  impofTible, 
to  reconcile  the  hiflory  of  the  old  teilament,  and  the 
common  appearances  of  things  in  this  world,  with 
the  juflice  and  goodnefs  of  God's  providence. 

It  cannot  be  denied,  but  that  Abraham,  Ifaac, 
and  Jacob,  and  feveral  good  men  in  the  old  tefta- 
mcnt,  had  many  fignal  teftimonies  of  the  divine  fa- 
vour vouchfifcd  to  them  in  this  world  :  but  we  read 
likcwife  of  fcvcral  v/icked  men  that  had  as  large  a 
fnare  of  temporal  blefnngs.  It  is  very  true  that 
Abraham,  Ifaac,  and  Jacob  had  great  eftates,  and 
were  petty  princes :  but  Pharaoh  was  a  mighty  prince 
in  comparifon  of  them  j  and  the  kingdom  of  Egypt, 

which 


reverend  Mr,  Tho.  Gouge.  113 

■which  probably  was  the  firft  and  chief  feat  of  Ido-  SERM. 
latry,  was  at  the  fame  time  one  of  the  moft  potent 
and  flourifhing  kingdoms  in  the  world:  and  was 
bleft  with  a  prodigious  plenty,  whereby  they  were 
furnifhed  with  ftore  of  corn  when  good  Jacob  and 
his  family  had  like  to  have  periilied  by  famine.  'Tis 
true,  Jofeph  was  advanced  to  great  power  in  Egypt> 
and  thereby  had  the  opportunity  of  faving  his  fa- 
ther's houfe,  by  fettling  and  feeding  them  in  Egypt : 
but  then  it  is  to  be  confidercd  again,  that  this  cofl: 
them  very  dear,  and  their  coming  thither  was  the 
occafion  of  a  long  and  cruel  bondage  to  Jacob's  po- 
llerity,  fo  that  we  fee  that  thefe  good  men  had  no 
fuch  bleflings,  but  what  were  common  with  them 
to  many  others  that  were  wicked  ;  and  the  bleflings 
which  God  beftowed  upon  them,  had  great  abate- 
ments by  the  intermixture  of  many  and  fore  afflidli- 
ons. 

It  fecms  then  upon  the  whole  matter,  to  be  very 
plain,  that  the  Providences  of  God  in  this  world 
towards  good  men  are  fo  contrived,  that  it  may  fuf- 
ficiently  appear,  to  thofe  who  wifely  confidcr  the 
works  of  God,  that  they  are  not  negledled  by  him  ; 
and  yet  that  thefe  outward  bleflings  are  fo  prom.if- 
cuoufly  difpenfed,  that  no  man  can  certainly  be  con- 
ccluded  to  be  a  good  man  from  any  happinefs  he 
enjoys  in  this  life :  and  the  profperity  of  good  men 
is  ufually  on  purpofe  fo  fhadowed  and  mixed  with 
affli61:ions,  as  may  juftly  raife  their  hopes  to  the  ex- 
pectation of  a  more  perfe6l  happinefs  and  better  re- 
ward than  any  they  meet  with  in  this  world. 

And  if  fo,  then  the  general  importance  of  this 
promife,  that  God  v/ill   be  the  God  of  good  men^ 

Vol.  II,  P  mult 

3' 


XXIII. 


11^  At  the  funeral  of  the 

S  E  R  M.  muft  neccflarily  fignify  fomething  beyond  this  world : 
becaufe  in  this  world  there  is  not  that  clear  diffe- 
rence univerfally  made  between  good  and  bad  men 
which  the  juftice  of  the  divine  providence  doth  re- 
quire, and  which  feems  to  be  intended,  in  the  ge- 
neral fenfe  of  this  promife.  For  if  this  promife 
(though  perfonally  made  to  Abraham,  Ifaac,  and  Ja- 
cob) be  intended,  as  the  fcripturc  tells  us  it  was  for 
a  {landing  encouragement  to  good  men  in  all  ages, 
then  it  muft  contain  in  it  this  general  truth,  "  that 
«'  God  will  fome  time  or  other  plentifully  reward 
**  every  good  man  \ "  that  is,  he  will  do  fomething 
far  better  for  him  than  for  any  wicked  man  :  but  if 
there  be  no  life  after  this,  it  is  impofTible  to  recon- 
cile this  fenfe  of  it  with  the  courfe  of  God's  provi- 
dence, and  with  the  hiftory  of  the  bible. 

And  to  make  this  out  fully,  and  at  once,  I  will 
only  produce  that  fingle  inftance  of  Abel  and  Cain. 
''  Abel  offered  to  Goo  a  more  excellent  facriiice  than 
«'  Cain,  and  he  had  this  teftimony,  that  he  pleafed 
<*  God  i "  which  was  in  effe(fl  to  declare,  that 
God  was  the  God  of  Abel,  and  not  of  Cain ;  fo 
that  by  virtue  of  i\\Q  general  importance  of  this  pro- 
mife, it  might  judly  be  expelled  that  Abel's  condi- 
tion fhould  have  been  much  better  than  Cain's :  but 
if  there  be  no  happinefs  after  this  life,  Abel's  v;as 
evidently  much  vv'orfe.  For  upon  this  very  account, 
that  he  pleafed  God  better,  he  was  killed  by  Cain, 
who  had  offered  to  God  a  flight  and  contemptuous 
offering.  And  Cain  lived  a  long  time  after,  and  grew 
great,  and  built  cities.  Now  fuppofing  there  Vv'ere 
no  other  life  after  this,  this  mull  have  been  a  mod 
horrible  example  to  all   ages,    from  tlie  beginning 

of 


reverend  Mr.  Tho.  Gouge.  ii^ 

of  the  world  to  the  end  of  it,  and  have  made  men  S  E  R  M 
for  ever  afraid  to  pleafe  God  upon  fuch  hard  terms  j  '"^ 
when  they  were  fure  of  no  other  reward  for  fo  do- 
ing, but  to  be  opprefs'd  and  flain  by  the  hands  of 
the  wicked.  So  that  if  this  were  really  the  cafe,  it 
would  puzzle  all  tho,  wit  and  reafon  of  mankind  to 
vindicate  the  equity  and  juflice  of  the  divine  provi- 
dence, and  to  refcue  it  out  of  the  hands  of  this  ter- 
rible objedion. 

And  thus  have  I,  as  briefly  as  I  could,  endeavour- 
ed to  clear  to  you  the  force  of  this  argument  ufed 
by  our  Saviour  for  the  proof  of  the  refurredion; 
And  have  the  longer  infifled  upon  it,  becaufe  at  firft 
appearance  it  feems  to  be  but  a  very  obfcurc  and  re- 
mote argument :  and  yet  fo  much  the  more  necefla- 
ry  to  be  cleared,  becaufe  this  in  all  probability  was 
that  very  text  upon  which  the  jews  in  our  Saviour's 
time  grounded  their  belief  of  a  future  ftate,  in  op- 
pofition  to  the  error  of  the  fadducees;  and  which 
they  call'd  by  way  of  eminency  "  the  promife  made 
*'  of  God  unto  the  fathers."  As  will  plainly  ap- 
pear, if  we  confider  what  St.  Paul  fays  to  this 
purpofe  •,  when  he  appeals  fo  often  to  the  pharifees 
for  his  agreement  with  them  in  this  article  of  the  re- 
furreclion,  and  likewife  in  the  ground  of  it  from 
"  the  promife  made  of  God  unto  the  fathers.  " 
Adlsxxiv.  14,  15.  "  But  this  I  confefs  unto  thee, 
*'  that  after  the  way  v/hich  they  call  herely,  fb 
*'  v/orlhip  I  the  God  of  my  fathers,  believing 
*'  all  things  v/hich  are  v/ritten  in  the  Law  and 
*'  the  prophets;  and  have  hope  towards  God,  which 
"  they  themfelves  alfo  allow,  that  there  Ihall  be  a 
*'  refurredion  of  the  dead.*'  From  whence  it  is  clear, 

P  2  that 


ii5  At  the  funeral  of  the 

S  E  R  M.  that  they  both  grounded  their  hope  of  the  rcfur- 
s^^^^^^^^i  redion  upon  fomething  written  in  the  Jaw  and  the 
prophets :  and  what  that  was,  he  exprefTeth  more 
particular,  chap.  xxvi.  ver.  6^  '].  "  And  now  I  ftand, 
*'  and  am  judged  for  the  hope  of  the  promife  made 
**  of  God  unto  our  fathers  \  unto  which  promife  our 
"  twelve  tribes,  inftantly  ferving  God  day  and 
"  night,  hope  to  come."  By  the  promife  made  of 
God  unto  the  fathers,  he  means  fome  promife  made 
by  God  to  Abraham,  Ifaac,  and  Jacob;  for  fo 
St.  Luke  more  than  once,  in  his  hiftory  of  the  Ads, 
explains  this  phrafe  of  the  God  of  their  fathers, 
A6ls  iii.  13.  "  The  God  of  Abraham,  and  of  Ifaac, 
«'  and  of  Jacob,  the  God  of  our  fathers;"  and 
chap.  vii.  ver.  32.  "  I  am  the  God  of  thy  fathers, 
**  the  God  of  Abraham,  and  the  God  of  Ifaac,  and 
*'  the  God  of  Jacob."  Now  what  was  the  great 
and  famous  promife  which  God  made  to  Abraham, 
Ifaac,  and  Jacob?  was  it  not  this  of  being  their  God  ? 
So  that  it  was  this  very  promife  upon  which  St.  Paul 
tells  us  the  jews  grounded  their  hope  of  a  future  Rate, 
becaufc  they  underftood  it  neccflarily  to  fignify  fome 
blelTing  and  happinefs  beyond  this  life. 

And  now  having,  I  hope,  fufficiently  clear'd  this 
matter,  I  flialJ  make  fome  improvement  of  this  doc- 
trine of  a  future  ftate,  and  that  to  thefe  three  pur- 
pofes. 

I.  To  raife  our  minds  above  this  world  and  the 
enjoyments  of  this  prefent  life.  Were  but  men  tho- 
roughly convinced  of  this  plain  and  certain  truth, 
that  there  is  a  vafl  difference  between  time  and  eter- 
nity, between  a  few  years  and  evcrlafting  ages: 
would  we  but  rcprefcnt  to  ourfelves  what  thoughts 

and 


reverend  Mr,  Tho.  Gouge.  117 

and  apprehenfions  dying  perfons  have  of  this  world  ;  S  E  RM. 
how  vain  and  empty  a  thing  it  appears  to  them,  how 
Jike  a  pageant  and  a  fhadow  it  looks  as  it  pafleth 
away  from  them,  mcthinks  none  of  thefe  things 
could  be  a  fufficicnt  temptation  to  any  man  to  forget 
God  and  his  foul-,  but,  notwithftanding  all  the  de- 
lights and  pleafures  of  fenfe,  we  ihould  be  llrangely 
intent  upon  the  concernments  of  another  world,  and 
almofk  wholly  taken  up  with  the  thoughts  of  that 
vaft  eternity  which  we  are  ready  to  lanch  into.  For 
what  is  there  in  this  world,  this  wade  and  howling 
wildernefs,  this  rude  and  barbarous  country  which 
we  arc  but  to  pafs  through,  which  fhould  detain  our 
afPcclions  here,  and  take  off  our  thoughts  from  our 
everlafting  habitation  -,  from  that  better  and  that  hea- 
venly country,  where  we  hope  to  live  and  be  happy 
for  ever  ? 

If  we  fettle  our  affedions  upon  the  enjoyments  of 
this  prefent  lile,  fo  as  to  be  extremely  pleas'd  and 
tranfported  with  them,  and  to  fay  in  our  hearts,  it 
is  good  for  us  to  be  here  •,  if  we  be  excefTively  griev'd 
or  difcontentcd  for  the  want  or  lols  of  them,  and  if 
we  look  upon  our  prefent  (late  in  this  world  any 
otherwife  than  as  a  preparation  and  pafiage  to  a  bet- 
ter life,  it  h  a  fign  that  our  faith  and  hope  of  the 
happinefs  of  another  life  is  but  very  weak  and  faint, 
and  that  we  do  not  heartily  and  in  good  earned  be- 
lieve what  we  pretend  to  do  concerning  thefe  things. 
For  did  we  Itedfaftly  believe  and  were  thoroughly 
perfuaded  of  what  our  religion  fo  plainly  declares  to 
us  concerning  the  unfpeakable  and  endlefs  happinefs 
of  good  men  in  another  world,  our  afFedlions  would 
fit  more  loofe  to  this  world,  and  our  hopes  would 

raift 


1 1 8  At  the  funeral  of  the 

S  E  R  M.  raife  our  hearts  as  much  above  thefe  prelenC  and 
"^'^^  ■  fenfible  things  as  the  heavens  are  high  above  the 
earth  •,  we  fhould  value  nothing  here  below,  but  as 
it  ferves  for  our  prefcnt  fupport  and  palTagc,  or  may 
be  made  a  means  to  fccure  and  increafe  our  future  fe- 
licity. 

2.  The  confideration  of  another  life  fhould  quicken 
our  preparation  for  that  bleffed  flate  which  remains 
for  us  in  the  other  world.  This  life  is  a  flatc  of  pro- 
bation and  trial.  This  world  is  God's  fchool,  where 
immortal  fpirits  clothed  with  flelh  arc  trained  and 
bred  up  for  eternity.  And  then  certainly  it  is  not 
an  indifferent  thing  and  a  matter  of  flight  concern- 
ment to  us,  how  we  live  and  demean  ourfelves  in 
this  world :  whether  we  indulge  ourfelves  in  ungod- 
iinefs  and  worldly  lufls,  or  live  foberly,  and  righte- 
oufly,  and  godly  in  this  prefent  world  :  no,  it  is  % 
matter  of  infinite  moment,  as  much  as  our  fouls  and 
all  eternity  are  worth.  Let  us  not  deceive  ourfelves ; 
*'  for  as  we  fow,  fo  fhall  we  reap :  if  we  fov/  to  the 
"  flefh,  we  fliall  of  the  flefh  reap  corruption  j  but  if 
"  we  fov/  to  the  fpirit,  we  fhall  of  the  fpirit  reap 
"  everlafling  life.  Light  is  fbwn  for  the  righteous, 
*'  and  gladnefs  for  the  upright  in  heart.  The  righ- 
«  teous  hath  hopes  in  his  death.  Mark  the  perfefl 
*'  man,  and  behold  the  upright,  for  the  end  of  that 
"  man  is  peace." 

But  the  ungodly  are  not  lb :  whoever  hath  lived  a 
wicked  and  vicious  life,  feels  flrange  throws  and 
pangs  in  his  confcience  when  he  comes  to  be  caft  up- 
on a  fick  bed.  "  The  wicked  is  like  the  troubled 
*'  fea  (faith  the  prophet)  when  it  cannot  rcftj  "  full 
of  trouble  and  confufjon,  cfpecially  in  a  dyirg  hour. 

It 


reverend  Mr,  Tho.  Gouge.  I19 

It  is  death  to  fuch  a  man  to  look  back  upon  his  life,  S  E  R  Inl- 
and a  hell  to  him  to  think  of  eternity.  When  his  .J^^'j^ 
guilty  and  trembling  foul  is  ready  to  leave  his  body, 
and  juft  flepping  into  the  other  world,  what  horror 
and  amazement  do  then  feize  upon  him  ?  what  a  rage 
doth  fjch  a  man  feel  in  his  breail,  when  he  feriouOy 
confiders,  that  he  hath  been  fo  great  a  fool  as  for  the 
falfe  and  imperfed  pleafure  of  a  few  days  to  make 
himfelf  miferable  for  ever  ? 

3.  Let  the  confideration  of  that  unfpeakable  re- 
ward which  God  hath  promifed  to  good  men  at  the 
refurreftion,  encourage  us  to  obedience  and  a  holy 
life.     We  ferve  a  great  prince  who  is  able  to  pro- 
mote us  to  honour  J  a  moft  gracious  mailer  who  will 
not  let  the  leafl:  fei  vice  we  do  for  him  pals  unreward- 
ed.    This  is  the  inference  which  the  apollle  makes 
from  his  large  difccurfe  of   the  dodrine  of  the  re- 
furredlion,    i   Cor.  xv.  58.    "  Wherefore,  my  be- 
*'  loved  brethren,  be  ye  fledfad  and  unmoveablc, 
"  always  abounding  in  the  work  of  the  Lord,  for- 
*'  afmuch  as  ye  know  that  your  labour  fhall  not  be  m 
"  vain  in  the  Lord.''     Nothing  will  make  death 
more  welcome  to  us,  than  a  conftant  courfe  of  fer- 
vice  and  obedience  to  God.   "  Sleep  (iaith  Solomon) 
"  is  fweet  to  the  labouring  man:"   fo  after  a  great 
diligence  and  induilry  in  "  working  out  cur  own 
*'  falvation,"  and  (as  it  is  faid  of  David)  "  ferving 
"  our  generation  according  to  the  will  of  God," 
how  pleafant  will  it  be  to  fall  aileep  ^  And  as  an  use- 
ful and  well-fpent   life  will  make  our  death  to  be 
fweet,  fo  our  refurreflion  to  be  glorious.     Whatever 
ads  of  piety  we  do  to  God,  or  of  charity  to  men  ; 

whatever  we  lay  out  upon  the  poor  and  affiiclcd  and 

riecefiicous. 


120  At  the  funeral  of  the 

S  ^J^.^-  neceflitous,  will  all  be  confidered  by  God  in  the 
day  of  recompeiices,  and  moft  plentifully  rewarded 
to  us. 

And  furely  no  confideratlon  ought  to  be  more 
prevalent  to  perfuade  us  to  alms-deeds  and  charity  to 
the  poor,  than  that  of  a  refurredion  to  another  life. 
Befides  the  promifes  of  this  life  which  are  made  to 
works  of  charity,  and  there  is  not  any  grace  or  vir- 
tue whatfoever,  which  hath  fo  many  and  fo  great 
promifes  of  temporal  bleflings  made  to  it  in  fcripture 
as  this  grace  of  charity  ;  I  fay,  befides  the  promifes 
of  this  life,  the  great  promife  of  eternal  life  is  in 
fcripture  in  a  more  efpecial  manner  entail'd  upon  it. 
Luke  xii.  ^'^.  "  Give  alms,  (faith  our  Saviour) 
''  provide  your  felves  bags  which  wax  not  old,  a 
"  treafure  in  the  heavens  that  faileth  notj"  and 
chap.  xvi.  ver.  9.  "  Make  to  your  felves  friends  of 
*'  the  mammon  of  unrighteoufncfs,  that  when  ye 
''  fhall  fail,  they  may  receive  you  into  everlafting 
*'  habitations."  And  i  Tim.  vi.  17,  18,  19. 
*'  Charge  them  that  are  rich  in  this  world,  that 
"  they  be  not  high-minded,  ^<r.  that  they  do  good, 
*'  that  they  be  rich  in  good  works,  ready  to  diftri- 
"  bute,  willing  to  communicate,  laying  up  in  flore 
*'  for  themfclves  a  good  foundation  againft  the  time 
*'  to  come,  that  they  may  lay  hold  on  eternal  life;" 
the  word  ^5/jt?>.iov,  which  our  tranilation  renders 
foundation  according  to  the  common  ufe  of  it, 
feems  in  this  place  to  have  a  more  peculiar  notion, 
and  to  fignify  the  fccurity  that  is  given  by  a  pledge, 
or  by  an  inflrument  or  obligation  of  contracfl  for  the 
performance  of  covenants.  For  befides  that  the 
phrafe  of  "  laying  up  in  (lore,  or  treafuring  up  a 

"  foun- 


reverend  Mr,  Tho.  Gouge.  12 1 

*^  foundation  *'  feems  to  be  a  very  odd  jumbling;  of  SE  RM, 

XXIII 
metaphors  j  this  very  word  ^j/^sXt©^  ahnoft  necefTa- 

riJy  requires  this  notion  as  it  is  ufed  by  the  fame  apo- 
flle,    in  his   fecond   epiftle   to  Timothy,    chap.  2. 
ver.  19.  where  it  is  faid,  "  the  foundation  of  God 
"  flands  fure,    having  this  feal,"  ^c,    a   feal  being 
very  improper  to  ftrengthen  a  foundation,  but  very 
fit  to  confirm  a  covenant.     And  then  furely  it  ought 
to  be  render'd,  "  the  covenant  of  God  remains  firmj 
"  having  this  feal."     And  fo  likewife  in  the  fore- 
mention*d   text,  the  fenfe  will  be  much  more  ealy 
and  current  if  we  render  it  thus,  '*  treafuring  up,  or 
"  providing  foe  themfelves  a  good  fecurity  or  pledge 
"  againft  the  time  to  come  "  I  add  pledge,  becaufs 
that  anciently  was  the  common  way  of  fecurity  for 
things  lent:  befides'that  the  apoftle  feems  plainly  to 
allude  to  that  pafTage,  Tobit  iv.  8,  9.  "  If  thou  haft 
*'  abundance,  give  alms  accordingly,  i^c,  for  thou 
*'  lay  eft  up  a  good  treafure  for  thy  felf  againft  the 
"  day  of  neceiTity,  S^s/aa  '^^  dyaVov  3^yicr^.vp/^«r,  for 
*'  thou  treafureft  up  for  thy  felf  a  good  pledge  j"  to 
which  this  of  the  apoftle  exadlly  anfwers,  iumhyouu' 
p'^ovlas-  ItjjtoI^  ^iiAXiov  y.cCKoM^  treafuring  up,  or  pro- 
viding for  themfelves  a  good  pledge  or  fecurity,  (^c. 
the  fenfe  however  is  plain,  that  the  charity  of  alms 
is  one  of  the  beft  ways  of  fecuring  our  future  hap- 
pinefs. 

And  yet  further  to  encourage  us  to  abound  in 
works  of  charity,  the  fcripture  tells  us  that  propor- 
tionably  to  the  degrees  of  our  charity  fhali  be  the  de- 
grees of  our  reward;  upon  this  confideration  the 
apoftle  exhorts  the  Corinthians  to  be  libei-al  in  their 
charity,  2  Cor.  ix.  6.    "  he  that   fowech  fparingly 

Vol.  11.  Q^  "  ihall 

3' 


122  At  the  funeral  of  the 

S  E  R  IM.  "  fhall  reap  fparingly,  but  he  that  foweth  bountifully 
^^^^^'  tc  fj^all  reap  bountifully."  So  that  whatever  we  lay 
out  in  this  kind  is  to  the  greateH  advantage,  and  up- 
on the  beft  fecurity;  two  confiderations  which  ufe 
to  be  very  prevalent  with  rich  men  to  lay  out  their 
money. 

We  certainly  do  it  to  the  greateft  advantage  -,  bc- 
caufe  God  will  confider  the  very  fmalleft  thing  that 
any  of  us  do  in  this  kind.  He  that  fhall  give  fo 
much  as  "  a  cup  of  cold  water  to  a  difciple,  in  the 
"  name  of  a  difciple,  fhall  not  lofe  his  reward  ;" 
thefe  laft  words,  fliall  not  lofc  his  reward,  are  a 
ju?:&ja-i<-9  and  fignify  much  more  than  they  feem  to 
fpeak,  viz.  that  he  fliall  have  a  very  great  reward, 
infinitely  beyond  the  value  of  what  he  hath  done. 

And  wc  do  it  iikev/ife  upon  the  befl  fecurity ;  fo  So- 
lomon afTures  us,  Prov.  xix.  17.  "  He  that  hath  pity 
"  upon  the  poor  lendeth  to  the  lord,  and  that  which 
"  he  hath  given  v/ill  he  pay  him  again :"  and  we 
may  be  confident  of  our  fecurity  where  God  is  fure- 
ty  j  nay,  he  tells  us  that  in  this  cafe  he  looks  upon 
himfelf  as  principal,  and  that  whatever  we  do  in 
ways  of  mercy  and  charity  to  the  poor  he  takes  as 
done  to  himfelf  So  our  Lord  hath  told  us,  Matth. 
XXV.  40.  and  wc  fliall  hear  the  fame  from  him  again 
out  of  his  own  mouth  when  he  fliall  appear  in  his 
majelly  to  judge  the  world,  "  then  the  king  fliall 
*'  anfwer,  and  fay  unto  them,  verily  I  fay  unto  you, 
"  inafmuch  as  ye  have  done  it  unto  one  of  the  leafl 
*'  of  thefe  my  brethren,  ye  have  done  it  unto  me.'* 

And  on  the  other  fide,  the  fcripture  no  where  paf- 
feth  a  more  fevere  doom  upon  any  fort  of  perfons, 
than  upon  thofe  who  have  no  bowels  of  compafTion 

towards 


reverejid  Mr.  Tho.  Gouge.  123 

towards  their  brethren  in  diftrefs.  That  is  a  fearful  5  R  R  M. 
fcntence  indeed,  which  the  apoftle  pronounceth  up-  '  ' 
on  luch  perfons,  Jam.  ii.  13.  "  He  fhall  have  judg- 
*'  ment  without  mercy  that  hath  fhewed  no  mercy." 
And  this  our  Saviour  reprefents  to  us  in  a  mofi: 
foJemn  manner,  in  that  lively  defcription  v/hich  he 
makes  of  the  judgment  of  the  great  day,  Matth.  xxv. 
31.  6cc.  "  When  the  Son  of  man  iliall  come  in  his 
"  glory,  and  all  the  holy  angels  with  him,  then  fliall 
"  he  fit  upon  the  throne  of  his  glory:  and  before 
"  him  fhall  be  gathered  all  nations,  and  he  fliail  fe- 
*'  parate  them  one  from  another,  as  a  fhepherd  di- 
*'  videth  the  fheep  from  the  goats.  And  he  fhall 
"  {tt  the  fheep  on  his  right  hand,  but  the  goats  on 
"  the  left.  Then  fhall  the  king  fay  unto  them  on 
"  his  right  hand.  Come,  ye  bleffed  of  my  father,  in- 
"  herit  t\\t  kingdom  prepared  for  you  before  the 
'^  foundation  of  the  world.  For  I  was  an  hungred, 
*'  and  ye  gave  me  meat ;  I  was  thirfly,  and  ye  gave 
"  me  drink ;  I  was  a  ftranger,  and  ye  took  me  in  ; 
"  naked,  and  ye  clothed  me;  I  was  fick,  and  ye 
"  vifited  me;  I  was  in  prifon,  and  ye  came  unto 
"  me.  Then  fhall  he  fay  alfo  unto  them  on  the  left 
"  hand,  Depart  from  me,  ye  curfed,  into  everlafling 
"  fire,  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels  :  For  I 
*'  was  an  hungred,  and  ye  gave  me  no  meat,  bzc, 
"  And  thefe  fhall  go  away  into  everlafling  punifli- 
«  ment;  but  the  righteous  into  life  eternal."  And 
if  this  be,  as  mofl  certainly  it  is,  a  true  and  pro- 
per reprefentation  of  the  procefs  of  that  day,  then 
the  great  matter  of  enquiry  will  be,  what  works 
of  charity  and  mercy  have  been  dono,  or  negledled 
by  us,  and  accordingly  a  fentence  of  eternal  happi- 

0^2  n^fs 


124  -^^  ik^  funeral  of  the 

S  E  R  M.  nefs  or  mifery  will  be  pafs'd  upon  us :    I  was  hun- 

^  g^y?  ^^^  y^  f*^^^  "^^>  ^^  ^^^  y^  "°^  -^  ^  ^^^  naked, 
did  ye  clothe  me,  or  did  ye  not  ?  I  was  fick  and  in 
prifoDj  did  ye  vifit  me,  or  did  ye  not?  Not  but  that 
all  the  good  or  evil  of  our  lives,  in  what  kind  fo- 
cver,  UmIi  then  be  brought  to  account  j  but  that  our 
Saviour  did  chcofe  to  indance  particularly,  and 
only  in  things  of  this  nature,  fhould  mcthinks  make 
a  mighty  irnprefTion  upon  us,  and  be  a  powerful 
confideration  to  oblige  us  to  have  a  very  peculiar  re- 
gard to  works  of  mercy  and  charity,  and  to  make 
flirc  to  abound  in  this  grace  ;  that  when  we  fhall  ap- 
pear before  the  great  judge  of  the  world,  we  may 
find  that  mercy  from  him,  which  we  have  fliew'd  to 
others,  and  which  we  Ihall  all  undoubtedly  ftand  in 
need  of  in  that  day. 

And  among  all  our  afls  of  charity,  thofe  which 
are  done  upon  lead  probability  and  forefight  of  their 
meeting  with  any  recompenfe  in  this  world,  either 
by  way  of  real  requital  or  of  fame  and  reputation,  as 
they  are  of  all  other  moft  acceptable  to  God,  fo  they 
will  certainly  have  the  moft  ample  reward  in  another 
world.  So  our  Lord  hath  affur'd  us,  and  accord- 
ingly adviieth  us,  Luke  xiv.  12,  13,  14.  "  When 
*'  taou  makeft  a  feail,  invite  not  the  rich,  becaufe 
"  cney  will  recompenfe  thee  again  :  but  call  the  poor, 
"  the  maimed,  the  lame  and  the  blind,  for  they 
^*  cannot  recompenfe  thee,  but  thou  ihait  be  recom- 
*'  penfed  at  the  refurredion  of  the  juft."  If  we  be 
religious  for  worldly  ends,  and  ferve  God,  and  do 
good  to  men,  only  in  contemplation  of  fome  tempo- 
ral advantage,  we  take  up  with  prefent  payment, 
and  cut  ourfelves  iliort  of  our  future  reward :  of  fuch, 

faith 


reverend  Mr.  Tho.  Gouge.  12  r 

faith  our  Lo  rd,  "  verily  I  fay  unto  you,  they  have  S  E  R  M. 
"  their  reward  j"  they  are  their  own  fecurity,  and^^^*^^ 
have  taken  care  to  fatisfy  themfelves,  and  therefore 
are  to  expect  nothing  from  God.  But  let  us  who 
call  ourfelves  chriftians  do  fomcthing  for  God,  for 
which  we  have  no  hopes  to  be  recompenfed  in  this 
world;  that  we  may  lliew  that  we  truft  God,  and  take 
his  v/ord,  and  dare  venture  upon  the  fecurity  of  the 
next  world,  and  that  recompenfe  which  fhall  be  made 
at  the  refurredtion  of  the  juft. 

And  how  great  and  glorious  that  fhall  be,  our  Sa- 
viour tells  us  immediately  before  my  text.  "  They 
*'  that  fhall  be  accounted  worthy  to  obtain  that 
•*  world,  and  the  refurredion  from  the  dead,  they 
*'  can  die  no  rnore,  but  they  are  equal  to  the  angels, 
"  and  are  the  children  of  God,  being  the  children 
''  of  the  refurredlion.** 

If  then  we  be  heirs  of  fiich  glorious  hopes,  and 
beheve  that  he  who  is  the  God  of  Abraham,  Ifaac, 
and  Jacob,  will  alfo  be  our  God  :  let  us  \iyq  as  it 
becomes  the  candidates  of  heaven,  and  the  children 
of  the  refurredion,  and  fuch  as  verily  believe  ano- 
ther life  after  this,  and  hope  one  day  to  fit  down 
with  Abraham^  Ifaac,  and  Jacob,  in  the  kingdom  of 
God. 

And  now  that  I  have  reprefented  to  you  what  en- 
couragement there  is  to  well-doing,  and  particularly 
to  works  of  charity,  from  the  confideration  of  the 
bleiTed  reward  we  fhall  certainly  meet  with  at  the 
refurredlion  of  the  juft ;  I  fhall  crave  your  patience  a 
little  longer,  whilil  I  propofe  to  you  one  of  the 
faireft  examples  of  this  kind  which  either  this,  or 
perhaps  any  other  age,  could  eafily  prefent  us  withal : 

I  mean 


126  At  the  funeral  of  the 

SERM.  I  mean  our  deceafed  brother  to  whom  we  are  nov/ 
^J^  paying  our  lafl:  folcmn  refpccls,  the  reverend 
Mr.  T  H  O  M  A  S  GOUGE;  the  worthy  fon  of 
a  reverend  and  learned  divine  of  this  city,  Dr.  Wil- 
liam Gouge;  who  was  miniller  of  this  parifh  of 
Black-Friers  fix  and  forty  years ;  he  died  in  1 6^1^  and 
flill  lives  in  the  memory  of  many  here  prefent. 

I  mult  confefs  that  I  am  no  friend  to  funeral 
panegy ricks,  where  there  is  nothing  of  extraordinary 
worth  and  merit  in  the  party  commended  to  give  oc- 
cafion  and  foundation  for  them :  in  fuch  cafes,  as 
praifes  are  not  due  to  the  dead,  fo  they  may  be  of  ill 
confequence  to  the  living :  not  only  by  bringing  thofe 
of  our  profelTion  that  make  a  pradlicc  of  it,  under 
the  fufpicion  of  officious  and  mercenary  flattery,  but 
likewiie  by  encouraging  men  to  hope  that  they  alfb 
may  be  well  fpoken  of,  and  even  fainted  when  they 
are  dead,  though  they  (hould  have  done  little  or  no 
good  in  their  life:  but  yet  on  the  other  hand,  to 
commend  thofe  excellent  perfons  the  virtues  of  whofe 
lives  have  been  bright  and  exemplary,  is  net  only  a 
piece  of  juftice  due  to  the  dead,  but  an  a6t  of  great 
charity  to  the  living,  fetting  a  pattern  of  well-doing 
before  our  eyes,  very  apt  and  powerful  to  incite  and 
encourage  us  to  go  and  do  likewife. 

Upon  both  thefe  confiderations,  firft  to  do  right  to 
the  memory  of  fo  good  a  man,  and  then  in  hopes 
that  the  example  may  prove  fruitful  and  have  a  con- 
fiderable  effedt  upon  others  to  beget  the  like  goodnefs 
and  charity  in  them,  I  fliall  endeavour,  in  as  narrow 
a  compafs  as  may  be,  to  give  you  the  juft  charadler 
of  this  truly  pious  and  charitable  man,  and  by  fetting 
liis  life  in  a  true  liffht  to  recommend  with  all  the  adr 


vantage 


reverend  Mr.  Tho.  Gouge.  127 

vantage  I  can  fo  excellent  a  pattern  to  your  imita-  S  E  R  M. 
tion.  ^X"I- 

He  was  born  at  Bow  near  Stratford  in  the  county 
of  Middlefex  the  19th  day  of  September  1605.  He 
was  bred  at  Eaton  fchool,  and  from  thence  chofcn  to 
King's  college  in  Cambridge,  being  about  20  years 
of  age,  in  the  year  1626.  After  he  had  finiih'd  the 
courfe  of  his  fludies,  and  taken  his  degrees,  he  left 
the  univerfity  and  his  fellowfliip,  being  prefented  to 
the  living  of  Colfden  near  Croyden  in  Surrey,  where 
he  continued  about  two  or  three  years ;  and  from 
thence  was  remov'd  to  St.  Sepulchres  in  London,  in 
the  year  1638,  and  the  year  after  thinking  fit  to 
change  his  condition  match'd  into  a  very  worthy  and 
ancient  family,  marrying  one  of  the  daughters  of 
Sir  Robert  Darcy. 

Being  thus  fettled  in  this  large  and  populous  parifh, 
he  did  with  great  folicitude  and  pains  difcharge  all 
the  parts  of  a  vigilant  and  faithful  minifter,  for  about 
the  fpace  of  twenty-four  years.  For  befides  his  con- 
flant  and  weekly  labour  of  preaching,  he  was  very 
diligent  and  charitable  in  vifiting  the  fick,  and  ml- 
niflring  not  only  fpiritual  counfel  and  comfort  to 
them,  but  likewife  liberal  relief  to  the  wants  and 
neceiTities  of  thofe  that  were  poor  and  deftitute  of 
means  to  help  themfelves  in  that  condition.  He  did 
alfo  every  morning  throughout  the  year  catechife  in 
the  church,  efpecially  the  poorer  fort  who  were  gene- 
rally mofb  ignorant  \  and  to  encourage  them  to  come 
thither  to  be  intruded  by  him,  he  did  once  a  week 
diftnbute  money  among  them,  not  upon  a  certain 
day,  but  changing  it  on  purpofe  as  he  thought  good, 
that  he  might  thereby  oblige  them  to  be  conflantly 

prefent^ 


128  At  the  funtral  of  the 

SERM.  prefent;  thefe  were  chiefly  the  more  aged  poor, 
who  being  pafl:  labour  had  leifure  enough  to  attend 
upon  this  exercife.  As  for  the  other  fort  of  poor 
who  were  able  to  work  for  their  living,  he  fet  them 
at  work  upon  his  own  charge,  buying  flax  and 
hemp  for  them  to  fpin,  and  what  they  fpun  he  took 
Oif  their  hands,  paying  them  for  their  work,  and 
then  goc  it  wrought  into  cloth,  and  fold  it  as  he 
could,  chiefly  among  his  friends,  himfelf  bearing  the 
whole  lofs.  And  this  was  a  very  wife  and  well 
chofen  way  of  charity,  and  in  the  good  eff^edl  of  it 
a  much  greater  charity  than  li  he  had  given  thefe 
very  perfons  freely  and  for  nothing  fo  much  as  they 
earned  by  their  work  ;  becaufe  by  this  means  he 
took  many  off  from  begging,  and  thereby  refcued 
them  at  once  from  two  of  the  mod  dangerous  temp- 
tations of  this  world,  idlenefs  and  poverty ;  and  by 
degrees  reclaimed  them  to  a  virtuous  and  induftri- 
ous  courfe  of  life,  which  enabled  them  afterwards 
to  live  without  being  beholden  to  the  charity  of 
others. 

And  this  courle  fo  happily  dcvis'd  and  begun  by 
Mr.  Gouge  in  his  own  parifh  was  I  think  that 
which  gave  the  firft  hint  to  that  worthy  and  ufeful 
citizen  Mr.  Thomas  Firmin  of  a  much  larger  defign, 
which  hath  been  profecuted  by  him  for  fome  years 
with  that  vigour  and  good  fucccfs  in  this  city,  that 
many  hundreds  of  poor  children,  and  others  who 
liv'd  idle  before,  unprofitafeje  both  to  themfelves  and 
the  publick,  are  continually  maintained  at  work,  and 
taught  to  earn  their  own  livelihood  much  in  the 
fame  way :  he  being,  by  the  generous  afliftance  and 
charity  of  many  worthy  and  well-difpofed  Perfons  of 

all 


reverend  Mr.  Tho.  Gouge.  129 

,  all  ranks,  enabled   to  bear  the  unavoidable  lofs  and  S  E  R  M" 
charge  of  fo  vaft  an  undertaking  •,  and  by  his  own 
forward  inclination  to  charity,  and  his  unwearied  di- 
ligence and  adlivity,  extraordinarily  fitted  to  Hiftain 
and  go  through  the  incredible  pains  of  it. 

But  to  return  to  our  dcceafed  friend  ;  concerning 
whom  I  mud  content  my  felf  to  pafs  over  many 
things  worthy  to  be  remembred  of  him,  and  to 
Ipeak  only  of  thofe  virtues  of  his  which  were  more 
eminent  and  remarkable. 

Of  his  piety  towards  God,  which  is  the  neceflary 
foundation  of  all  other  graces  and  virtues,  I  fhall 
only  fay  this,  that  it  was  great  and  exemplary,  but 
yet  very  ftill  and  quiet,  without  ftir  and  noife,  and 
much  more  in  fubftance  and  reality,  than  in  fliew 
and  oftentation  ;  and  did  not  confifl  in  cenfuring  and 
finding  fiult  with  others,  but  in  the  due  care  and  go- 
vernment of  his  own  life  and  adlions,  and  in  "  cxerci- 
"  finghimfelf  continually  to  have  a  confcience  void  of 
*'  ofiTence  toward  God  and  toward  men;"  in  which 
he  was  fuch  a  proficient,  that  even  after  a  long  ac- 
quaintance and  familiar  converfation  with  him,  it 
was  not  eafy  to  obferve  any  thing  that  might  deferve 
blame. 

He  particularly  excell'd  in  the  more  peculiar  vir- 
tues of  converfation,  in  modefcy,  humility,  meek- 
nefs,  cheerfulnefs,  and  m  kindntls  and  charity  to- 
wards all  men. 

So  great  was  his  modedy,  that  it  never  appeared 
either  by  word  or  adion,  that  he  put  any  value  up- 
on  himfelf.  This  I  have  often  ob'erved  in  him, 
that  the  charities  which  were  procured  chiefly  by  his 
application  and  iaduflry,  when  he  had  occafion  to 

Vol.  11.  R  give 

3* 


xxrn. 


130  At  the  funeral  of  the 

SER.\T  give  an  account  of  them,  he  would  rather  impute  to 
any  one  who  had  but  the  leaft  hand  and  part  in  the 
obtaining  of  them,  than  aflume  any  thing  of  it  to 
himfelf.  Another  inftance  of  his  modefty  was,  that 
when  he  had  quitted  his  living  of  St.  Sepulchre's  up- 
on ibme  diflatisfadtion  about  the  terms  of  conformi- 
ty, he  willingly  forbore  preaching,  faying  there  was 
no  need  of  him  here  in  London  where  there  were 
fo  many  worthy  minifters,  and  that  he  thought  he 
might  do  as  much  or  more  good  in  another  way 
which  could  give  no  offence.  Only  in  the  latter 
years  of  his  life,  being  better  fatisfied  in  fome  things 
he  had  doubted  or  before,  he  had  licence  from  fome 
of  the  bifhops  to  preach  in  Wales  in  his  progrefs ; 
which  he  was  the  more  willing  to  do,  becaufe  in 
fome  places  he  faw  great  need  of  it,  and  he  thought 
he  might  do  it  with  greater  advantage  among  the 
poor  people,  who  were  the  more  likely  to  regard  his 
inftrudions,  being  recommended  by  his  great  cha- 
rity fo  well  known  to  them,  and  of  which  they  had 
fo  long  had  the  experience  and  benefit.  But  where 
there  was  no  fuch  need,  he  was  very  well  contented 
to  hear  others  perfuade  men  to  goodnefs,  and  to  prac- 
tife  it  himfelf. 

He  was  clothed  with  humility,  and  had  in  a  mofl: 
eminent  degree  that  "  ornament  of  a  meek  and  quiet 
*'  fpirit,  (which  St.  Peter  fays)  is  in  the  fight  of 
"  God  of  fo  great  price  :  "  fo  that  there  was  not  the 
leaft  appearance  either  of  pride  or  paflion  in  any  of  his 
words  or  a6lions.  He  was  not  only  free  from  anger 
and  bitternefs,  but  from  all  affected  gravity  and  mo- 
rofenefs.  His  converfation  was  affable  and  pleafint; 
he  had  a  v/ondcrful  ferenity  of  mind  and  evennefs 

of 


reverend  Mr.  Tho.  Gouge.  131 

_  of  temper,  vifible  in  his  very  countenance ;  he  was  S  E  K  M. 
hardly  ever  merry,  but  never  melancholy  or  fad  \  i^^l^^ilj 
and  for  any  thing  i  could  difcern,  after  a  long  and 
intimate  acquaintance  with  him,  he  was  upon  all 
occafions  and  accidents  perpetually  the  fame ;  always 
cheerful,  and  always  kmd ;  of  a  difpofition  ready  to 
embrace  and  oblige  all  m.en ;  allowing  others  to  dif- 
fer fr^wn  him,  even  in  opinions  that  were  very  dear  to 
him  i  and  provided  men  did  but  fear  God  and  work 
righteoufnefs,  he  lov'd  them  heartily,  how  diilant 
foever  from  him  in  judgment  about  things  lefs  neceA 
iary  ;  in  all  which  he  is  very  worthy  to  be  a  pattern 
for  men  of  all  perfuafions  whatfoever. 

But  that  virtue  which  of  all  other  flione  bricrhtefl 

o 

in  him,  and  was  his  mod  proper  and  peculiar  cha- 
racter, was  his  cheerful  and  unwearied  diligence  in 
a6ls  of  pious  charity.  In  this  he  left  far  behind  him 
all  that  ever  I  knew,  and,  as  I  faid  before,  had  a 
fingular  fagacity  and  prudence  in  devifing  the  motl 
effectual  ways  of  doing  good,  and  in  managing  and 
difpofmg  his  charity  to  the  bed  purpofes,  and  to  the 
greated  extent ;  always,  if  it  v^  ere  pofTible,  making 
it  to  ferve  fome  end  of  piety  and  religion  ;  as  the  in- 
flru6lions  of  poor  children  m  the  principles  of  re- 
ligion, and  furnifliing  grown  perfons  that  were  ig- 
norant with  the  bible  and  other  good  books ;  flridl- 
ly  obliging  thofe  to  whom  he  gave  them  to  a  dili- 
gent reading  of  them,  and  when  he  had  opportunity 
exacting  of  them  an  account  how  they  had  profited 
by  them. 

In  his  occafional  alms  to  the  poor,  in  which  he 
was  very  free  and  bountiful,  the  relief  he  gave  them 
was  always  mingled  with  good  counfel,  and  as  great 

R  2.  a 


132  At  the  funeral  of  the 

S  E  R  M.  a  tendernefs  and  compafTion  for  their  fouls  as  bodies ; 
XXI  I  . 

which  very  often  attained  the  good  effedl  it  was  Jike- 

Jy  to  have,  the  one  making  way  for  the  other  with 
fo  much  advantage,  and  men  being  very  apt  to  fol* 
low  the  good  advice  of  thofe,  who  gave  them  in 
hand  fo  fenfible  a  pledge  and  teftimony  of  their  good- 
will to  them. 

This  kind  of  charity  muft  needs  be  very  expen- 
five  to  him,  but  he  had  a  plentiful  eftate  fettled  up- 
on him,  and  \t{\.  him  by  his  father,  and  he  laid  it 
out  as  liberally  in  the  moft  prudent  and  effectual  ways 
of  charity  he  could  think  of,  and  upon  fuch  perfons 
as,  all  circumftances  confidered,  he  judged  to  be  the 
fitted  and  mofc  proper  objecls  of  it. 

Fot*  about  nine  or  ten  years  laft  pad  he  did,  as  is 
well  known  to  many  here  prefent,  almofl  wholly 
apply  his  charity  to  Wales,  becaufe  there  he  judged 
was  mod  occcifion  for  it :  And  becaufe  this  was  a 
very  great  u  ork,  he  did  not  only  lay  out  upon  it 
whatever  he  could  fpare  out  of  his  own  edate,  but 
emp-oy'd  his  whole  time  and  pains  to  excite  and 
engag::  the  charity  of  others  tor  his  afTidance  in  it. 

And  in  this  he  had  two  excellent  defigns.  One, 
to  liave  poor  children  brought  up  to  read  and  write, 
and  to  be  carefully  indrucled  in  the  principles  of 
religion  :  the  other,  to  furnifh  perfons  of  grown 
ai^e,  the  poor  efpecially,  with  the  neccffiry  helps 
and  means  of  knowledge,  as  the  bible,  and  other 
books  of  piety  and  devotion,  in  their  own  language  ; 
to  which  end  he  procured  the  church  catechilm,  the 
pradtice  of  piety,  and  that  bed  of  books  the  whole 
duty  of  man,  befides  feveral  other  pious  and  ufeful 
tieatifes,  fome  of  tiicm  to  be   trandated   into   ^i\t 

Welch 


reverend  Mr.  Tho.  Gouge.  133 

Welch  tongue,  and  great  numbers  of  all  of  them  to  be  S  E  R  M- 
printed,  and  fent  down  to  the  chief  towns  in  Wales,    ^^^^^* 
to  be  fold  at  eafy  rates  to  thole  that  were  able  to 
buy  them,  and  to  be  freely  given  to  thofe  that  were 
not. 

And  in  both  thefe  defigns,  through  the  blefling 
of  God  upon  his  unwearied  endeavours,  he  found 
very  great  luccefs.  For  by  the  large  and  bountiful 
contributions  which  chiefly  by  his  induflry  and  pru- 
dent application  were  obtained .  from  charitable  per- 
fons  of  all  ranks  and  conditions,  from  the  nobility 
and  gentry  of  Wales  and  the  neighbouring  coun- 
ties, and  feveral  of  that  quality  in  and  about  Lon- 
don \  from  divers  of  the  right  reverend  billiops,  and 
of  the  clergy  ;  and  from  that  perpetual  fountain  of 
charity-  the  city  of  London,  led  on  and  encouraged 
by  the  mod  bountiful  example  of  the  right  honou- 
rable the  lord  mayor  and  the  court  of  aldermen  -,  to 
all  v/hich  he  conllandy  added  two  thirds  of  his  own 
efrate,  which  as  I  have  been  credibly  informed  was 
two  hundred  pounds  a  year;  I  fay,  by  all  thefe  to- 
gether there  Vv'ere  every  year  eight  hundred,  fbme- 
times  a  thoufand  poor  children  educated  as  I  faid  be- 
fore ;  and  by  this  example  feveral  of  the  mofl  confi- 
derable  towns  ot  Wales  were  excited  to  bring  up  at 
their  own  charge  the  like  number  of  poor  chil- 
dren, in  the  like  manner,  and  under  his  infpedion 
and  care. 

He  likewife  gave  very  great  numbers  of  the  books  a- 
bove-mentioned  both  in  theWelch  and  Englifn  tongues 
to  the  poorer  fort,  fo  many  as  were  unable  to  buy 
them  and  willing  to  read  them.  But  which  w^as  the 
greatefl  work  of  all,   and  amounted  indeed  to  a 

mighty 


134  -^^  the  funeral  of  the 

SERAI,  mighty  charge,  he  procured  a  new  and  very  fair 
imprelTion  of  x\\^  bible  and  liturgy  of  the  church  of 
Er.gland  in  the  Welch  tongue  (the  former  impref- 
fion  being  fpenr,  and  hardly  twenty  of  them  to  be 
had  in  all  London)  to  the  number  of  eight  thou- 
fand  5  one  thoufand  whereof  were  freely  given  to  the 
poor,  and  the  reft  fcnt  to  the  principal  cities  and 
towns  in  Wales  to  be  fold  to  the  rich  at  very  rea- 
fonable  and  low  rates,  viz.  at  four  fhillings  apiece 
well  bound  and  clafped  \  which  was  much  cheaper 
than  any  Englifh  Bible  was  ever  fold  that  was  of  (b 
fair  a  print  and  paper:  a  work  of  that  charge,  that 
it  was  not  likely  to  have  been  done  any  other  way  \ 
and  for  which  this  age,  and  perhaps  the  next,  will 
have  great  caufe  to  thank  God  on  his  behalf. 

In  thcfc  good  works  he  employed  all  his  time  and 
care  and  pains,  and  his  who!e  heart  was  in  them  ;  fo 
that  he  was  very  \\i\\^  aflecied  with  any  thi-g  elfe, 
and  feldom  either  minded  or  knew  any  thin-^g  of  the 
ftrangc  occurrences  of  this  troublefome  and  bufy  age, 
fuch  as  I  think  are  hardly  to  be  parallel'd  in  any  o- 
ther.  Or  if  he  did  mind  them,  he  fcarce  ever  fpoke 
any  thing  about  them.  For  this  was  the  bufinefs  he 
laid  to  heart,  and  knowing  it  to  be  fo  much  and  fo 
certainly  the  will  of  his  heavenly  father,  it  was  his 
meat  and  drink  to  be  doing  of  it :  and  the  good 
fuccefs  he  had  in  it  was  a  continual  feafl  to  him,  and 
gave  him  a  perpetual  ferenity  both  of  mind  and 
countenance.  His  great  love  and  zeal  for  this  work 
made  all  the  pains  and  difficulties  of  it  fecm  no- 
thing to  him  :  he  "would  rife  early  and  fit  up  late, 
and  continued  the  fame  diligence  and  induflry  to  the 
laR-,    though  he  was  in   the  threefcore   and  {tvtn- 

teenth 


reverend  Mr,  Tho.  Gouge.  135 

teenth  year  of  his  age.     And  that  he  might  manage  S  E  R  M. 

.XIII. 


the  diftribution  of  this  great  charity  with  his  own 


hands,  and  fee  the  good  efFe6c  of  it  with  his  own  eyes, 
he  always  once,  but  ufually  twice  a  year,  at  his  own 
charge  travelled  over  a  great  part  of  Wales,  none  of 
the  beft  countries  to  travel  in  :  but  for  the  love  of 
God  and  men  he  endured  all  that,  together  with  the 
extremity  of  heat  and  cold  (which  in  their  feveral 
feafons  are  both  very  great  there)  not  only  with  pa- 
tience, but  with  pleafure.  So  that  all  things  conli- 
dered  there  have  not,  fince  the  primitive  times  of 
Chriilianity,  been  many  among  the  fbns  of  men  to 
whom  that  glorious  charader  of  the  Son  of  God 
might  be  better  applied,  that  he  went  about  doing 
good.  And  Wales  may  as  worthily  boaft  of  this 
truly  apoftolical  man  as  of  their  famous  St.  David ; 
who  was  alfo  very  probably  a  good  man,  as  thofe 
times  of  ignorance  and  fuperflition  went.  Bat  his 
goodnefs  is  fo  difguifed  by  their  fabulous  legends  and 
flories  which  give  us  the  account  of  him,  that  it  is 
not  eafy  to  difcover  it.  Indeed  ridiculous  miracles 
in  abundance  are  reported  of  him  ;  as,  that  upon  oc- 
cafion  of  a  great  number  of  people  reforting  from 
all  parts  to  hear  him  preach,  for  the  greater  advan- 
tage of  his  being  heard,  a  mountain  all  on  a  fad- 
den  rofe  up  miraculouOy  under  his  ^ttt^  and  his 
voice  was  extended  to  that  degree  that  he  might  be  q[- 
flincliy  heard  for  two  or  three  miles  round  about.  Sach 
phantaftical  miracles  as  thefe  make  up  a  great  pare 
of  his  hiliory.  And  admitting  all  thele  to  be  true 
(which  a  wile  man  would  be  loili  to  do)  our  depart- 
ed friend  had  that  which  is  much  greater  and  more 
excellent  than  all   thefe,   a  fervent  charity  to  God 

and 


2:^6  At  the  fimeral  of  the 

S  E  R  M.  and  men  ;  which   is  more  than  to  fpeak   (as  they 
■"^^^-Lj  would  make   us  believe    St.    David    did)    with    the 
tongue  of  men  and  angels,  more  than  to  raile  or  re- 
move mountains.  ...      . . 

And  now  methinks  it'  is  pity  fo  good  a  defign  {o 
happily  profecuted  fhould  fall  and  die  with  this  good 
man.  And  it  is  now  under  deliberation,  if  pofiible, 
fl:ill  to  continue  and  carry  it  on,  and  a  very  worthy  and 
-  charitable  peribn  pitclied  upon  for  that  purpofe,  who 
is  willing  to  undertake  that  part  which  he  that  is 
gone  performed  fo  well :  But  this  will  depend  upon 
the  continuance  of  the  former  charities  and  the  con- 
currence of  thofe  worthy  and  v/ell-difpofed  perfons 
in  Wales  to  contribute  their  part  as  form.erly ; 
which  I  perfuade  miy  felf  they  will  cheerfully  do. 

I  will  add  but  one  thing  more  concernir.g  our  de- 
ceafed  brother,  that  though  he  meddled  not  at  all 
in  our  prefent  heats  and  differences  as  a  party,  hav- 
ing much  better  things  to  mind  •,  yet  as  a  looker- 
on  he  did  very  {2s\\^  lament  them,  and  for  feveral 
of  the  lad  years  of  his  life  he  continued  in  the  com- 
munion of  our  church,  and,  as  he  himlelf  told  me, 
thought  him  felf  obliged  in  confcience  fo  to  do. 

He  died  in  the  77th  year  of  Lis  age,  October  29, 
1681.  It  fo  plcaitd  God  that  hij>  death  was  very 
fuddcn  \  and  lb  fudden  ;  that  in  all  probability  he 
himfeh\ hardly  perceived  it  when  it  happened,  for 
he  died  in  his  fleep  ;  fo  that  we  may  fay  of  him  as 
it  is  faid  of  David,  ''  after  he  had  ferved  his  gene- 
*'  radon  according  to  the  will  of  God,  he  fell  aQcep." 

1  confefs  that  a  fudden  death  is  generally  unde- 
firable,  and  therefore  with  reafon  we  pray  againfb  it^ 
becaufe  fo  very  few  are  fuiiiciently  prepared  for  it : 

bun 


reverend  Mr.  Tho.  Gouge.'  137 

but  to  him,  the  conftant  employment  of  whole  life  S  E  R  M. 
was  the  bed  preparation  for  death  that  was  pofTible,  ^  '  ' 
no  death  could  be  fudden  ;  nay,  it  was  rather  a  fa- 
vour and  blefTing  to  him,  becaufe  by  how  much 
the  more  fudden  fo  much  the  more  eafy  :  as  if  God 
had  defigned  to  begin  the  reward  of  the  great  pains 
of  his  hfe  in  an  eafy  death.  And  indeed  it  was  ra« 
ther  a  tranOation  than  a  death  -,  and,  faving  that  his 
body  was  left  behind,  what  was  faid  of  Enoch  ma/ 
not  unfitly  be  applied  to  this  pious  and  good  man 
with  refpedl  to  the  fuddennefs  of  his  change ;  "  he 
*'  walked  with  God,  and  was  not,  for  God  took 
«  him." 

And  God  grant  that  we  v/ho  furvlve  may  all  of 
us  fincerely  endeavour  to  tread  in  the  fleps  of  his 
exemplary  piety  and  charity ;  of  his  labour  of  love, 
his  unwearied  diligence  and  patient  continuance  in 
doing  good,  that  we  may  meet  with  that  encourag- 
ing commendation  which  he  hath  already  received 
from  the  mouth  of  our  Lord,  "  Well  done,  good 
"  and  faithful  fervant,  enter  thou  into  the  joy  ot  thy 
"  Lord." 

"  Now  the  God  of  peace  that  brought  again  from 
"  the  dead  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that  great 
"  fhepherd  of  the  flieep,  througli  the  blood  or  the 
"  everlafting  covenant,  make  you  perfedt  in  every 
*'  good  work  to  do  his  will,  working  in  you  al- 
"  ways  that  which  is  pleafing  in  his  fight,  through 
"  Jesus  Christ  j   to  whom  be  glory   for  ever. 

Amen. 


Vol.  IL  S  SERMON 

3. 


[   138  ] 

SERMON  XXIV. 

Preached  at  the  funeral  of  the  reverend 
Benjami7i  Whichcoty  D.  D.  May  24, 
1683. 

2  C  O  R.  V.  6. 

Whirefore  we  are  always  confident^  knowing  that 
whilji  we  are  at  home  in  the  body^  we  are  abfent  from 
the  Lord. 


xxi vr  I 


?  •?A^^•  ^"  ■'  "^  H  E  S  E  words  contain  one  of  the  chief 
grounds  of  encouragement  which  the  chri- 
flian  religion  gives  us  againd  the  fear  of 
death.  For  our  clearer  underflanding  of  them  it 
will  be  requifite  to  confider  the  context,  looking 
back  as  far  as  the  beginning  of  the  chapter,  where 
the  apoftle  purfues  the  argument  of  the  foregoing 
chapter  ;  which  was  to  comfort  and  encourage  chri- 
llians  under  their  affli6lions  and  fuffcrings  from  this 
confideration,  that  thefe  did  but  prepare  the  way 
for  a  greater  and  more  glorious  reward  ♦,  "  Ojr 
"  light  affliftion,  which  is  but  for  a  moment,  work- 
*'  eth  for  us  a  far  more  exceeding  and  eternal 
"  weight  of  glory.  "  And  fuppofe  the  worll,  that 
thefe  fuffcrings  fhould  extend  to  death,  there  is  com- 
fort for  us  likewifc  in  this  cafe,  ver.  i.  of  this 
chapter,  *'  For  we  know  that  if  our  earthly  houfe 
"  of  this  tabernacle  were  diflblved,  we  have  a  build- 
"  ing  of  God,  (^c.  If  our  earthly  houfe  of  this  ta- 

^  •    bernacle  j 


\ 


At  the  funeral  of  the^   &cc.  $39 

*'  bernacle-,"   he  calls  our  body  an  earthly  houfe,  SER^^. 
and  that  we  may  not  look  upon  it  as  a  certain  a-  ,^^|^ 
bode  and  fixed  habitation,  he  doth  by  way  of  cor- 
recftion  of  himfelf  add,    that  it  is  but  a  tabernacle 
or  tent  which   muft  fhortly  be  taken  down  :    and 
when  it  is,  "  we  lliall  have  a  building  of  God,  a 
"  houfe  not  made  v/ith  hands,  eternal  in  the  hea- 
"  vens. "     This  is  a  defcription  of  our  heavenly  ha- 
bitation, in  oppofition   to  our  earthly  houfe  or  ta- 
bernacle: it  is  a   building  of  God,  not  like  thofc 
houfes  or  tabernacles  which  men  build,  and  which 
are  liable  to  decay  and  diflblution,  to  be  taken  down, 
or  to  fall  down  of  themfelves,  for  fuch  are  thofe 
houfes  of  clay  which  we  dwell  in,   "  whofe  founda- 
"  tions  are  in  the  duft,"   but  an  habitation  prepa- 
red  by   God    himfelf,    "  a  houfe   not  made  with 
«  hands;"  that  which   is  the  immediate  work  of 
God,  being  in  fcripture  oppofed  to  that  which  is 
made  with  hands,  and  efFecled   by  humane  concur- 
rence, and  by  natural  means :  and  being  the  imme- 
diate work  of  God,  as  it  is  excellent,  fo  it  is  lading 
and  durable,  which  no  earthly  thing  is ;  "  eternal 
''  in  the  heavens,"  that  is  eternal  and  heavenly. 

"  For  in  this  we  groan  earnedly  ; "  that  is,  while 
we  are  in  this  body  we  groan  by  reafon  of  the  pref- 
fures  and  afflidions  of  it.  ''  Defiring  to  be  clothed 
♦'  upon  with  our  houfe  which  is  from  heaven  :  if  fb 
"  be  that  being  clothed  wc  fhall  not  be  found  na- 
«  ked.  Defiring  to  be  clothed  upon, "  that  is,  we 
could  wifh  not  to  put  off  thefe  bodies,  not  to  be 
ftripp'd  of  them  by  death,  but  to  be  of  the  number 
of  thofc  who  at  the  coming  of  our  Lord  without 
the  patting  off  thefe  bodies  fhall  be  changed  and 

S  2  clothed 


XXIV 


140  -^^  t^-^  funeral  of  the 

S  E  R  VI.  clothed  upon  with  their  houfe  which  is  from  hea- 
ven, and  without  dying  be  inveflcd  with  thofe  fpiritual 
and  glorious  and  heavenly  bodies  which  men  (hall 
have  at  the  refurrcdlion. 

This  I  doubt  not  is  the  apoRle's  meaning  in  thefe 
words ;  in  which  he  fpcaks  according  to  a  common 
opinion  among  the  difciples,  grounded  (as  St.  John 
tells  us)  upon  a  miflake  ot  our  Saviour's  words 
concerning  Inm,  "  If  I  will  that  he  tarry  till  I 
*'  come  :  '*  upon  which  St.  John  tells  us  that  "  there 
*'  went  a  faying  among  the  brethren  that  that  dif- 
*'  ciple  Ihould  not  die  \ "  that  is,  that  he  fhould  live 
till  Christ's  coming  to  judgment,  and  then  be 
changed;  and  coiiequently  that  Christ  would 
come  to  judgment  before  the  end  of  that  age.  Suit- 
able to  this  common  opinion  among  chriftians  the 
apodle  here  iays,  '•  in  this  we  groan  earneftly,  de- 
*'  firing  to  be  clothed  upon  with  our  houfe  which  is 
*'  from  heaven,  if  fo  be  that  being  clothed  we  fhall 
*'  not  be  found  naked. "  It  hath  puzzled  interpre- 
ters what  to  make  of  this  pafTage,  and  well  it  might ; 
for  whatever  be  meant  by  being  clothed,  how  can 
they  that  are  clothed  be  found  naked  ?  but  I  think 
it  is  very  clear  that  our  tranflators  have  not  attained 
the  true  fenfe  of  this  paflage,  Et'ys  k^  c/^o'^vc-d^^.vci,  a 
ywijivcl  <i)p£3^63-oa?Ga,  which  is  mofl  naturally  ren- 
dred  thus,  "  if  fo  be  we  fhall  be  found  clothed,  and 
*'  not  naked:"  That  is,  if  the  coming  of  Christ 
fhall  find  us  in  the  body  and  not  divefled  of  it ;  if 
at  Christ's  coming  to  judgment  we  fhall  be  found 
alive  and  not  dead.  And  then  the  fenfe  of  the  whole 
is  very  clear  and  current;  we  are  defirous  to  be 
clothed  upon  with  our  houfe  from  heaven  (that  is, 

^  with 


reverend  Dr.  Whichcot.  i%i 

with  our  fpiritual  and   immortal  bodies)   if  fo  be  it  S  E  R  M. 
Ihali  fo  hapj^en  that  at  tne  coming  of  Christ  we  * 

fhall  be  foand  alive  in  thefe  bodies,  and  not  llrippM 
of  them  before  by  death.  And  then  it  follows, 
"  For  we  that  are  in  this  tabernacle  do  groan  being 
*'  burdened:"  (tnat  is,  with  the  afflidions  and  prel^ 
fures  of  this  hfe)  "  not  that  we  would  be  unclothed," 
(tnat  is,  not  tnat  we  defire  by  death  to  be  divefted  of 
thefe  bodies)  *'  but  clothed  upon"  (that  is,  i^  God 
fee  it  good  we  had  rather  be  found  alive,  and 
changed,  and  without  putting  otf  thefe  bodies  have 
immortality  as  it  v/ere  luperinduced)  "  that  fo  mor- 
"  tality  might  be  fwallowed  up  of  life."  The  plain 
feme  is,  that  he  rather  defires  ^if  it  may  be)  to  be  of 
the  number  of  thofe  who  fhall  be  found  alive  at  the 
coming  of  Christ,  and  have  this  mortal  and  cor- 
ruptible body,  while  they  are  clothed  with  it, 
changed  into  a  fpiritual  a  id  incorruptible  body, 
without  the  pain  and  terror  of  dying:  of  which  im- 
mediate traj illation  into  heaven  without  the  painful 
divorce  of  foul  and  body  by  death,  Enoch  and  Elias 
were  examples  in  the  old  teftament. 

It  follows,  ver.  5.  "  Now  he  that  hath  wrought 
<^  us  tor  the  felf  iame  thing  is  God:"  that  is,  it  is 
he  who  hath  htt^d  and  prepared  us  for  this  glorious 
change :  "  who  alio  hath  given  .us  the  earnefl  of  the 
"  Spirit."  The  Spirit  is  frequently  in  fcripture 
called  the  witnefs,  and  feal,  and  earnefl  of  our  future 
happinefs,  and  bleiled  refurreclion  or  change  of  thefe 
vile  and  earthly  bodies  into  fpiritual  and  heavenly 
bodies.  For  as  the  refurredion  of  Christ  from 
the  dead  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  the 
great  proof  and  evidence  of  immortality  j  fo  the  Spi- 
rit 


J4^  At  the  funeral  of  the 

S  ^^y^'  RiT  of  him  that  raifed  up  Jesus  from  the  dead  dvvel- 
C^ — 1  ling  in  us,  is  the  pledge  and  carnell  of  our  rcfurrec- 
tiO.;  to  an  immortal  life. 

From  all  which  the  apoftld  concludes  in  the  words 
of  tiic  texr,  "  Therefore  we  are  always  confident," 
that  is,  we  are  always  ol  good  courage  again fl:  the 
fear  of  ueath,  "  knowing  that  whilil  we  are  at 
"  hc-me  in  the  body,  we  are  ablent  from  the  Lord," 
o'j(fr,!J,cuvTi^  ov'nE  (jbiixari^  which  m-y  better  be  ren- 
dred  "  whilft  we  converfe  or  lojourn  in  the  body," 
than  '  wnilft  we  are  at  home  \  "  becaufe  the  defign  of 
the  apo'le  is  to  fhew  that  tne  body  is  not  our  houfe 
but  our  tabernacle  ;  and  that  whilft  we  are  in  the 
b  Jy  we  are  not  at  home,  but  pilgrims  and  ftran- 
gc!  s.  And  this  notion  t[\^  neathens  nad  o^  our  pre- 
fent  life  and  condition  in  this  world.  Ex  viia  difcedo 
(faith  Tully)  tanqtiam  ex  kofpiiio  nontanquam  ex  domoy 
commcrandi  enim  natura  divtrforium  nobis  ^  non  habit  an- 
di  locum  dedit,  "  We  go  out  of  this  life  as  it  were 
*'  from  an  inn,  and  not  from  our  home  -,  nature  hav- 
''  ing  dengned  it  to  us  as  a  place  to  fojourn  but  not 
"  to  dwell  in." 

*'  We  are  abfent  from  the  Lord  •,"  that  is,  we  are 
detained  from  the  bleffed  fight  and  enjoyment  of  God, 
and  kept  out  of  the  pofTcHlon  of  that  happinefs 
which  makes  heaven. 

So  that  the  apoftle  makes  an  immediate  oppofition 
between  our  continuance  in  the  body,  and  our  bliis- 
ful  enjoyment  of  God  ;  md  lays  it  down  for  a  cer- 
tain truth,  that  whilft  we  remain  in  the  body  we  are 
detained  from  our  happinefs,  and  that  fo  foon  as 
ever  we  leave  the  body  we  fhall  be  admitted  into  it, 
♦*  knowing  ^hat  while  we  converfe  in  the  body  we 

"  are 


reverend  Dr.  Whichcot.  .  143 

^^  are  abfent  from  the  Lord."    And  ver.  8,    *«  we  s  E  R.Vf. 
"  are  willing  rather  to  be  abfent  from  the  body  and   ^'^^^'• 
"  prefent  with  the  Lo  rd  ;"  intimating  that  io  foon 
as  we  quit  thefe  bodies  we  fhall  be  admitted  to  the 
blefTed  fight  and  enjoyment  of  God. 

My  defign  from  this  text  is  to  draw  fome  ufeful 
corollaries  or  conclufions  from  this  afleriion  of  the 
apoftle.  That  whilft  we  are  in  thefe  bodies  we  are 
detained  from  our  happinefs ;  and  that  fo  loon  as 
ever  we  depart  out  of  them  we  fhall  be  admitted 
to  the  poffefTion  and  enjoyment  of  it.  And  they 
are  thefe, 

I .  The  afTcrtlon  fbews  us  the  vanity  and  falfhood 
of  that  opinion,  or  rather  dream,  concerning  the 
flcep  of  the  foul  from  the  time  of  death  'till  the  ge- 
neral refurrediion.  This  is  chiefly  grounded  upon  that 
frequent  metaphor  in  fcripture  by  which  death  is  re- 
fembled  to  fleep,  and  thofe  that  are  dead  are  faid  to 
be  fallen  aflecp.  But  this  metaphor  is  no  where  in 
fcripture,  that  I  know  of,  applied  to  the  fou^,  but  to 
the  body  refting  in  the  grave  in  order  to  its  being 
awakened  and  raifcd  up  at  the  refurredlion.  And 
thus  it  is  frequendy  ufed  with  exprefs  reference  to 
the  body,  Dan.  xii.  2.  "  Many  of  them  that  deep 
"  in  the  dufl  of  the  earth  fhall  awake.'*  Matth.  xxvii, 
52.  "  And  the  graves  were  opened,  and  many  bo- 
*'  dies  of  faints  which  vflept  arofe,"  Ads  xiii.  36, 
"  David,  after  he  had  ferved  his  ov/n  generation  by 
*'  the  will  of  God,  fell  on  fleep,  and  was  laid  unto 
"  his  fathers,  and  faw  corruption  i"  which  furely  can 
no  othcrwife  be  underflood  than  of  his  body,  i  Cor. 
XV.  20.  "  Now  is  Ch,rist  rifen  from  the  dead,  and 
''become  the  firftrfruits  of  them  th^tflepti"  that 


is^ 


^ 


\/if  the  funeral  cf  the 
is,  the  refurredion  of  his  body  is  the  earnefl:  and  af. 
furance  that  oars  alio  (hall  be  raifed.     And  ver.  51. 
"  We  fhall  not  all  deep,  but  fhall  all  be  changed;'* 
where  the  apoftle  certainly  fpeaks  both  of  the  death 
and  change  of  thele  corrupcible  bodies.     1  Thcfll  iv. 
14.  *"-  If  we  believe  that  Jesus  died  and  n  fe  again, 
*'  even  ]o  them  alio  that  deep  in  Jesus  fhc^li  God 
"  bring  with  himi"  that  is,   the  bodies  of  thole  that 
died  in  the   Lord  fhall  be  raifcd,  and  accompany 
him  at  his  coming.     So  that  it  is  the  body  which  is 
faid  in  fcripture  to  flecp,  and  not  the  foul.     For  that 
is  utterly  inconfiiient  v/ith  the  apoflle's  aflertion  here 
in  the  text,  that  "  while  we  are  in  the  body  we  are 
*'  abfent  from  the   Lord,'*  and  that  fo  foon  as  we 
depart  out  of  the  body  we  fnall  be  prefent  with  the 
Lord.     For  furely  to  be  with  the   Lord  mud  fig- 
nify  a  (late  of  happinefs,  which  fleep  is  not,  but  only 
of  inadlivity:    befides,    that  the  apoflle's  argument 
would  be  very  f5at,  and  it  would  be  but  a  cold  en- 
couragement againd  the  fear  of  death,  that  fo  foon 
as  we  are  dead  we  fhall  fall  afleep  and  become  infen- 
fible.     But  the  apoRle  ufeth  it  as  an  argument  why 
we  fhould  be  willing  to  die  as  foon  as  God  pleafeth, 
and  the  fooner  the  better,  becaufe  fo  foon  as  we  quit 
thefe   bodies  we  fliall  be  prefent  with   the   Lord, 
that  is,  admitted  to  the  blifsful  fight  and  enjoyment 
of  him  •,  and  while  w^e  abide  in  the  body  we  are  de- 
tained  from  our    happinefs  :    but  if  our  fouls  fhall 
fleep  as  well  as  our  bodies  'till  the  general  refurreclion, 
it  is  all  one  whether  we  continue  in  the  body  or  not, 
as  to  any  happinefs  we  fhall  enjoy  in  the  mean  time  ; 
which  is  diredly  contrary  to  the  main  fcope  of  the 
apoflle's  argument. 


reverend  Dr.  Whichcoc.  145 

t.  This  afTertion  of  the  apoflle's  doth  perfcdUy  S  E  R  M. 
conclude  againft  the  feigned  purgatory  of  the  church 
of  Rome  -,  which  fuppofeth  the  far  greater  number  of 
true  and  faithful  chriftians,  of  thofe  who  die  in  the 
Lord,  and  have  obtained  eternal  redemption  by  him 
from  hell  not  to  pafs  immediately  into  a  ftate  of  hap- 
pinefs,  but  to  be  detained  in  the  fuburbs  of  hell  in 
extremity  of  torment  (equal  to  that  of  hell  for  de- 
gree, though  not  for  duration)  'till  their  fouls  be 
purged,  and  the  guilt  of  temporal  punifhments, 
which  they  arc  liable  to,  be  fome  way  or  other  paid 
off  and  difcharged.  They  fuppofe  indeed  fome  very 
few  holy  perfons  (efpccially  thofe  who  fufFer  martyr- 
dom) to  be  fo  perfedl  at  their  departure  out  of  the 
body  as  to  pafs  immediately  into  heaven,  becaufe 
they  need  no  purgation  :  but  mofl  chriftians  they  fup- 
pofe to  die  fo  imperfedl  that  they  fland  in  need  of  be- 
ing purged  ;  and  according  to  the  degree  of  their 
imperfedion  are  to  be  detain'd  a  ihorter  or  a  longer 
time  in  purgatory. 

But  now,  bcfides  that  there  is  no  text  in  fcripture 
from  whence  any  fuch  ftate  can  probably  be  con- 
cluded (as  is  acknowledged  by  many  learned  men  of 
the  church  of  Rome)  and  even  that  text  which  they 
have  moft  infifted  upon  (  "  they  fiiall  be  faved,  yet  ^o 
as  by  fire")  is  given  up  by  them  as  infufncient  to  con- 
clude the  thing.  Eftius  is  very  glad  to  get  off  it, 
by  faying  there  is  nothing  in  it  againft  purgatory  ; 
why  ?  no  body  pretends  that,  but  we  might  reafon- 
ably  expedt  that  there  fhould  be  fomething  for  it 
in  a  text  which  hath  been  fo  often  produced  and 
urged  by  them  for  the  proof  of  it.  1  fay,  befides 
that  there  is  nothing  in  fcripture  for  purgatory,  there 
Vol.  II,  T  are 

5- 


146  At  the  funeral  of  the 

^^^}'}-  are  a  great  many  things  againfl  it,  and  utterly  in- 
confident  with  it.  In  the  parable  of  the  rich  man 
and  Lazarus,  which  was  defigned  to  reprefent  to  us 
the  different  ftates  of  good  and  bad  men  in  another 
world,  there  is  not  the  leall  intimation  of  purgatory, 
but  that  good  men  pafs  immediately  into  a  ftate  of 
happinels,  and  bad  men  into  a  place  of  torment. 
And  '^i.  John,  Rev.  xiv.  13.  pronounceth  all  that 
die  in  the  Lord  happy,  becaufe  "  they  reft  from 
"  their  labours  i"  which  they  cannot  be  faid  to  do 
who  are  in  a  ftate  of  great  anguifh  and  torment,  as 
thofe  arc  fuppofed  to  be  who  are  in  purgatory. 

Bat  above  all,  this  reafoning  of  ^i,  Paul  is  utterly 
inconfiftcnt  with  any  imagination  of  fuch  a  ftate. 
For  he  encourageth  all  chriftians  in  general  againft 
the  fear  of  death  from  the  confideration  of  that 
happy  ftate  they  Ihould  immediately  pafs  into,  by 
being  admitted  into  the  prcfence  of  God  •,  which 
furely  is  not  purgatory. "  "  We  are  of  good  courage 
*'  (fays  he)  and  willing  rather  to  be  abfent  from  the 
"  body :"  and  great  reafon  we  ihould  be  fo,  if  fo 
foon  as  we  leave  the  body  we  are  prefent  with  the 
Lord.  Bat  no  man  fure  would  be  glad  to  leave 
the  body  to  go  into  a  place  of  exquifite  and  extreme 
torment,  which  they  tell  us  is  the  cafe  of  moft  chri- 
ftians when  they  die.  And  what  can  be  more  un- 
reafonable,  than  to  make  the  apoftle  to  ufc  an  argu- 
ment to  comfort  all  chriftians  againft  the  fear  of 
death  which  concerns  but  very  few  in  comparifon  ? 
So  that  if  the  apoftle'a  reafoning  be  good,  that 
while  we  arc  in  this  life  we  arc  detained  from  our 
happinefs,  and  fo  foon  as  we  depart  this  life  we  pals 

immediately  into  it,   and  therefore  death  is  defira- 

blc 


reverend  Dr.  Whlchcot.  147 

bic  to  all  good  men  :  I  fay,  if  this  reafonlng  be  S  E  R  M. 
good,  it  is  very  clear  that  St.  Paul  knew  nothing  of  ^^'^^• 
the  dodlrine  now  taught  in  the  church  of  Rome  con- 
cerning purgatory ;  becaufe  that  is  utterly  incon- 
fill ent  with  what  he  exprefly  afTerts  in  this  chapter, 
and  quite  takes  away  the  force  of  his  whole  argu- 
ment. 

3.  To  encourage  us  againfl  the  fear  of  death.  And 
this  is  the  conclufion  v/hich  the  apoftle  makes  from 
this  confideration.  "  Therefore  (fays  he)  we  are  of 
*'  good  courage,  knowing  that  whilfl  we  converfe 
*'  in  the  body  we  are  abfent  from  the  Lord."  There 
is  in  u%a  natural  love  of  life,  and  a  natural  horrour 
and  dread  of  death ;  fb  that  our  fpirits  are  apt  to 
fhrink  at  the  thoughts  of  the  approach  of  it.  But 
this  fear  may  very  much  be  mitigated  and  even  over- 
ruled by  reafon  and  the  confiderations  of  Religion. 
For  death  is  not  fo  dreadful  in  itfelf,  as  with  regard 
to  the  confequences  of  it :  and  thofe  will  be  as  we 
are,  comfortable  and  happy  to  the  good,  but  difmal 
and  miferabie  to  the  wicked.  So  that  the  only  true 
antidote  againfl  the  fear  of  death  is  the  hopes  of  a 
better  life  j  and  the  only  firm  ground  of  thefe  hopes 
is  the  mercy  of  God  in  Jesus  Christ,  upon  our 
due  preparation  for  another  world  by  repentance  and 
a  holy  life.  For  the  fting  of  death  is  fm  ;  and  when 
that  is  taken  away  the  terrour  and  bitternefs  of  death 
is  pafl :  and  then  death  is  fb  far  from  being  dread- 
ful, that  in  reafon  it  is  extremely  defirable  j  becaufa 
it  lets  us  into  a  better  flate,  fuch  as  only  deferves  the 
name  of  life.  Hi  vivunt  qui  ex  corportm  vinculis  tan- 
^uam  e  car  cere  cvclaverunt :  vejlra  vero  quce  dicitur  vi- 
ta^ mors  eft,  "  They  truly  live  (could  a  heathen  fay) 
T  2  "  who 


14S  At  the  funeral  of  the 

S  E  R  M.  ««  who  have  made  their  efcape  out  of  this  prifon  of 
"  the  body  \  but  that  which  men  commonly  call  life 
"  is  rather  death  than  life."  To  hve  indeed,  is  to 
be  well,  and  to  be  happy ;  and  that  we  ihall  never  be 
*£ill  we  are  got  beyond  the  grave. 

4.  This  confideration  fliould  comfort  us  under  the 
lofs  and  death  of  friends,  which  certainly  is  one  of 
the  greatefl  grievances  and  troubles  of  humane  hfe. 
For  if  they  be  fit  for  God,  and  go  to  him  when  they 
die,  they  are  infinitely  happier  than  it  was  pofTiblc 
for  them  to  have  been  in  this  world  -,  and  the  trouble 
of  their  abfencc  from  us  is  fully  balanced  by  their 
being  prefent  with  the  Lord.  For  why  fliould  wc 
lament  the  end  cf  that  life  which  we  are  affured  is 
the  beginning  of  immortality?  One  rcafon  of  our 
trouble  for  the  lofj  of  friends  is  becaufe  we  loved 
them :  but  it  is  no  fi^n  of  our  love  to  them  to  grudge 
and  repine  at  their  hrppinefs.  But  we  hoped  to  have 
enjoyed  them  longer:  be  it  foj  yet  why  fhould  wc 
be  troubled  that  they  are  happy  fooner  than  we  ex- 
pected? Bjt  they  are  parted  from  us,  and  the 
thouorht  of  this  is  grievous ;  but  yet  the  confideration 
of  their  being  parted  for  a  while  is  not  near  fo  fad, 
as  the  hopes  of  a  happy  meedng  again,  never  to  be 
parted  any  more,  is  comfortable  and  joyful.  So  that 
the  greater  our  love  to  them  was,  the  lefs  fhould  be 
our  grief  for  them,  v/hcn  we  confider  that  they  are 
happy,  and  thac  they  are  fafe  5  paft  all  florms,  all  the 
troubles  and  temptations  of  this  life,  and  out  of  the 
reach  of  all  harm  and  danger  for  ever.  But  though 
the  reafon  of  our  duty  in  this  cafe  be  very  plain,  yet 
the  pradtice  of  it  is  very  difficult;  and  when  all  \% 
iaidj  natural  affedion  will  have  its  courfe ;  and  even 

after 


reverend  Dr.  Whichcot. 


149 


after  our  judgment  is  fatisfied,  it  will  require  fomc  S  P;  R  M. 
time  to  ftill  and  quiet  our  pafTions. 

5.  This  confideration  ifhould  wean  us  from  the  Jove 
of  life  ;  and  make  us  not  only  contented,  but  wil- 
ling and  glad  to  leave  this  world,  whenever  it  fhall 
pleafe  God  to  call  us  out  of  it.  This  inference  the 
apoftle  makes,  vcr.  8.  "  We  are  confident,  I  fay, 
"  and  willing  rather  to  be  abfcnt  from  the  body, 
"  and  prefent  with  the  Lo  rd."  Though  there  were 
no  Hate  of  immortality  after  this  life,  yet  methinks 
we  fliould  not  defire  to  live  always  in  this  world. 
Hahet  natura  (fays  Tully)  tit  altar iim  rerum^  ftc  Vi- 
vendi modum :  '*  As  nature  hath  fet  bounds  and  mea- 
"  fures  to  other  things,  fo  iikewife  to  life;"  of  which 
men  fhould  know  when  tliey  have  enough,  and  not 
covet  fo  much  of  it  'till  they  be  tired  and  cloyed 
with  it.  If  there  w^cre  no  other  inconvenience  in 
long  life,  this  is  a  great  one,  that  in  a  long  courfe  of 
time  we  unavoidably  fee  a  great  many  things  which 
we  would  not;  our  own  misfortunes  and  the  calami- 
ties of  others ;  publick  confuHons  and  diilradtions  ; 
the  lofs  of  friends  and  relations ;  or  which  is  worfe, 
their  mifery  5  or  which  is  worll  of  all,  their  mifcar- 
riage :  efpecially,  a  very  innrm  and  tedious  old  age 
is  very  undefirable :  for  who  would  defire  to  live  long 
uneafy  to  himfelf  and  troublefome  to  others  ?  It  is 
time  for  us  to  be  v/illing  to  die,  when  we  cannot  live 
with  the  good-will  even  of  our  friends ;  when  thole 
who  ought  to  love  us  befl:  think  much  that  we  live 
fo  long,  and  can  hardly  forbear  to  give  us  broad  figns 
that  they  are  weary  of  our  company.  In  fuch  a  cafe 
a  man  would  almoft  be  contented  to  die  out  of  civi- 
lity '3  and  not  choofe  to  make  any  long  ftay  where 

he 


At  the  funeral  of  the 

he  fees  that  his  company  is  not  acceptable.  If  wc 
think  we  can  be  welcome  to  a  better  place,  and  to 
a  more  dehghtful  fociety,  why  Ihould  we  defire  to 
thruft  ourfelves  any  longer  upon  an  ill-natured  world, 
upon  thofe  who  have  much  ado  to  refrain  from  telling 
us  that  our  room  is  better  than  our  company  ? 

Some  indeed  have  a  very  happy  and  vigorous  old 
age,  and  the  taper  of  life  burns  clear  in  them  to  the 
lad:  their  underflandings  are  good,  their  memories 
and  fenfes  tolerable,  their  humour  pleafant,  and  their 
converfation  acceptable,  and  their  relations  kind  and 
refpe(5lful  to  them.  But  this  is  a  rare  felicity,  and 
which  feldom  happens  but  to  thofe  who  have  lived 
wifely  and  virtuouHy,  and  by  a  religious  and  regular 
courfe  of  life  have  preferved  fome  of  their  beft  fpi- 
rits  to  the  lad,  and  have  not  by  vice  and  extravagance 
drawn  off  life  to  the  dregs,  and  left  nothing  to  be 
enjoyed  but  infirmities  and  ill  humours,  guilt  and  re- 
pentance :  but  on  the  contrary  have  prudently  laid 
up  fome  confiderable  comforts  and  fupports  for  them- 
felves  againft  this  gloomy  day;  having  flored  their 
rninds  with  wifdom  and  knowledge,  and  taken  care 
to  fecure  to  themfelves  the  comfortable  reflexions  of 
an  uleful  and  well-fpent  life,  and  the  favour  and 
loving-kindnefs  of  God  which  is  better  than  life  it 
felf  But  generally  the  extremities  of  old  age  are 
very  peevifh  and  querulous,  and  a  declining  and  fal- 
ling back  to  the  weak  and  helplefs  condition  of  in- 
fancy and  childhood.  And  yet  lefs  care  is  common- 
ly taken  to  pleafe  aged  perfons,  and  lefs  kindnefs 
Ihewed  to  them  (unlefs  it  be  in  expedlation  of  re- 
ceiving greater  from  them;  than  to  children :  becaufe 
thefe  are  cherifhed  in  hopes,  the  others  in  defpair  of 

their 


reverend  Dr.  Whichcoc.  i^f 

their  growing  better.     So  that  if  God  fee  it  good  SERM, 
it  is  not  defirable  to  live  to  try  nature,    and  the  ^^^^• 
kindnefs  and  good-will  of  our  relations  to  the  utmoft, 

Nay  there  is  reafon  enough  why  we  ihould  be  con- 
tented to  die  in  any  age  of  our  life.  If  we  are 
young,  we  have  tafted  the  bed  of  it:  if  in  our  mid- 
d\t  age,  we  have  not  only  enjoyed  all  that  is  defirable 
of  life,  but  almofl  all  that  is  tolerable  :  if  we  are  old, 
we  are  come  to  the  dregs  of  it,  and  do  but  fee  the 
fame  things  over  and  over  again,  and  continually  with 
lefs  pleafure. 

Efpecially  if  we  confider  the  happinefs  from  which 
we  are  all  this  while  detained.  This  life  is  but  our 
infancy  and  childhood  in  comparifon  of  the  manly 
pleafures  and  enjoyments  of  the  other  fete.  And 
why  fhould  we  defire  to  be  always  children ;  and  to 
linger  here  below  to  play  the  fools  yet  a  little 
longer .?  In  this  kh{^  that  high  exprelTion  cf  the  poet 
is  true, 

—  Dii  celant  homines^  ut  vivere  durent^  \ 
Sluamjit  duke  mori  ■ 

*'  The  gods  conceal  from  men  the  fweetnefs  of 
dying,  to  make  them  patient  and  contented  to 
««  live." 

This  life  is  wholly  in  order  to  the  other.  Do  but 
make  fure  to  live  well,  and  there  is  no  need  of  living 
long.  To  the  purpofe  of  preparation  for  another 
world,  the  bed  life  is  the  longc  .t.  Some  \\Yt  a  great 
pace,  and  by  continual  diligence  and  indullry  in 
ferving  God  and  doing  good,  do  really  dispatch 
more  of  the  bufmefs  of  hfe  in  a  few  years,  than 
others  do  in  a  whole  age  5  who  go  fuch  a  fanter- 
ing  pace  towards  heaven,  as  if  they  were  in  no  haftc 

to 


XXIV, 


1^2  At  the  funeral  of  the 

S  p:  R  M-  to  get  thither.  Bat  if  we  were  always  prepared  wc 
ihould  rejoice  at  the  profpedl  of  our  end  j  as  thofc 
who  have  been  long  toft  at  fea  are  overjoyed  at  the 
fight  of  land. 

I  have  now  done  with  my  text,  but  have  another 
fubjecSl  to  fpeak  of^  that  excellent  man  in  whofc 
place  I  now  iland  \  whom  we  all  knew,  and  whom 
all  that  knew  him  well  did  highly  efteem  and  reve- 
rence. He  was  born  in  Shropfhire  of  a  worthy  and 
ancient  family,  the  iidi  of  March,  1609,  was  the 
fixth  fon  of  his  father  :  and  being  bred  up  to  learn- 
ing, and  very  capable  of  it,  was  fent  to  the  univcr- 
fity  of  Cambridge,  and  planted  there  in  Emanuel- 
college,  where  he  was  chofen  fellow,  and  was  an  ex- 
cellent tutor  and  inftrudlor  of  youth,  and  bred 
up  many  perfons  of  quality,  and  others,  who  af- 
terwards proved  ufeful  and  eminent;  as  many  per- 
haps as  any  tutor  of  that  time. 

About  the  age  of  four  or  five  and  thirty  he  was 
made  provoft  of  King's-college ;  where  he  was  a 
moft  vigilant  and  prudent  governor,  a  great  encou- 
rager  of  learning  and  good  order,  and  by  his  care- 
ful and  wife  management  of  the  eftate  of  the  col- 
lege, brought  it  into  a  very  fiourifhing  condidon,  and 
left  it  fo. 

It  cannot  be  denied  (nor  am  I  much  concerned  to 
diffemble  it)  that  here  he  pofTefs'd  another  man's 
place,  who  by  x}i\Q,  iniquity  of  the  times  was  wrong- 
fally  eje&di  I  mean  Dr.  Collins  the  famous  and 
learned  divinity-profexTor  of  that  univerfity.  During 
whofc  lile  (and  he  hved  many  years  after)  by  the  free 
conilnt  of  the  college  there  were  two  fhares  out  of 
the  common  dividaid  allotted  to  the  provoft,  one 

whereof 


reverend  Dr.  WhichcCt.  153 

whereof  was  conflantly  paid  to  Dr.  Collins,  as  if  he  SE  RAI. 
had  been  ftill  provoft.  To  tliis  Dr.  Whichcot  didj^^ 
not  only  give  his  confcnt  (without  which  the  thing 
could  not  have  been  done)  but  was  very  forward  for 
the  doing  of  it,  tho'  hereby  he  did  not  only  confide- 
rably  Jeffen  his  own  profit,  but  hkewife  incur  no  fmall 
cenfure  and  hazard,  as  the  times  then  were.  And  left 
this  had  not  been  kindnefs  enough  to  that  worthy 
perfon  whofe  place  he  polTefied,  in  his  laft  will  he  left 
his  Ion,  Sir  John  Collins,  a  legacy  of  one  hundred 
pounds. 

And  as  he  was  not  wanting  either  in  refpeft  or  real 
kindnefs  to  the  rightful  ov/ner,  fo  neither  did  he 
iloop  to  do  any  thing  unworthy  to  obtain  that  place; 
for  he  never  took  the  covenant:  and  not  only  fo,  but 
by  the  particular  friendfhip  and  intereft  v/hich  he 
had  in  fome  of  the  chief  vifitors,  he  prevailed  to 
have  the  greatefl  part  of  the  fellows  of  that  college 
exempted  from  that  impofition  -,  and  preferved  them 
in  their  places  by  that  means.  And  to  the  fellows 
that  were  ejeded  by  the  vifitors,  he  likewife  freely 
confented  that  their  full  dividend  for  that  year  lliould 
be  paid  them,  even  after  they  were  ejected.  Among 
thefe  was  the  reverend  and  ingenious  Dr.  Charles  Ma- 
fon  •,  upon  whom  after  he  was  ejedled,  the  college 
did  confer  a  good  living  which  then  fell  in  their  gift, 
with  the  conient  of  the  provoil,  who,  knowing  him 
to  be  a  worthy  man,  was  content  to  run  the  hazard 
of  the  difpleafure  of  thofe  times. 

So  that  I  hope  none  will  be  hard  upon  him,  that 
he  was  contented  upon  fuch  terms  to  be  in  a  capacity 
to  do  good  in  bad  times, 

Vol.  II.  U  For, 

3- 


At  the^  funeral  of  the 

For,  befides  his  care  of  the  college,  he  had  a  very 
great  and  good  influence  upon  the  univerfity  in  ge- 
neral. Every  Lord's  day  in  the  afternoon,  for  al- 
moft  twenty  years  together,  he  preached  in  Trinity- 
church,  where  he  had  a  great  number  not  only  of 
the  young  fcholars,  but  of  thofe  of  greater  (landing 
and  befl  repute  for  learning  in  the  univerfity,  his  con- 
llant  and  attentive  auditors :  and  in  thofe  wild  and 
unfettled  times  contributed  more  to  the  forming  of 
the  ftudents  of  that  univerfity  to  a  fober  fenfe  of  re- 
ligion than  any  man  in  that  age. 

After  he  left  Cambridge  he  came  to  London,  and 
was  chofen  minlfler  of  Black- Friers,  where  he  con- 
tinued *till  the  dreadful  fire,  and  then  retired  him- 
felf  to  a  donative  he  had  at  Milton  near  Cambridge ; 
where  he  preached  conftantly,  and  relieved  the  poor, 
and  had  their  children  taught  to  read  at  his  own 
charge ;  and  made  up  diiFerences  among  the  neigh- 
bours. Here  he  flayed  'till,  by  the  promotion  of  the 
reverend  Dr.  Wilkins,  his  predecefibr  in  this  place, 
to  the  bifhoprick  of  Chefter,'  he  was  by  his  intereft 
and  recommendation  prefented  to  this  church.  But 
during  the  building  of  it,  upon  the  invitation  of  the 
court  of  aldermen,  in  the  mayoralty  of  Sir  William 
Turner,  he  preached  before  that  honourable  audience 
at  Guildhall  chapel  every  funday  in  the  afternoon 
with  great  acceptance  and  approbation,  for  about  the 
fpacc  of  feven  years. 

When  his  church  was  built,  he  bellowed  his  pains 
here  twice  a  week,  where  he  had  the  general  love  and 
rcfpect  of  his  parifh;  and  a  very  connderable  and  ju- 
dicious auditory,  though  not  very  numerous  by  reafon 
of  the  wcaknefs  of  his  voice  in  his  declining  age. 

It 


reverend  Dr,  Whichcoc.  15^ 

Itplcafed  God  to  blefs  him,  as  with  a  plentiful  S  E  R JVf, 
cftate,  fo  with  a  charitable  mind:  which  yet  wasj^i^ 
not  fo  well  known  to  many,  becaufe  in  the  difpofal 
of  his  charity  he  very  much  afFedied  fecrecy.  ^  He 
frequently  beflowed  his  alms  (as  I  am  informed  by 
thofewho  beft  knew)  on  poor  houfe-keepers  difa- 
bled  by  age  or  ficknefs  to  fupport  themfelves,  think- 
ing thofe  to  be  the  moft  proper  objeds  of  it.  He 
was  rather  frugal  in  expence  upon  himfelf,  that 
fo  he  might  have  v/herev/ithal  to  relieve  the  necef- 
fities  of  others. 

And  he  was  not  only  charitable  in  his  life,  but  in 
a  very  bountiful  manner  at  his  death ;  bequeathing 
in  pious  and  charitable  legacies  to  the  value  of  a 
thoufand  pounds.  To  the  library  of  the  univ.erfity 
of  Cambridge  fifty  pounds :  and  of  King's  College 
one  hundred  pounds:  and  of  Emanuel  Colleo-e 
twenty  pounds :  to  which  college  he  had  been  a  con- 
fiderable  benefador  before;  having  founded  there  fe- 
•veral  fcholarfhips  to  the  value  of  a  thoufand  pounds, 
out  of  a  charity  with  the  difpofal  whereof  he  was 
intruded,  and  which  not  without  great  difficulty 
and  pains  he  at  lad  recovered. 

To  the  poor  of  the  feveral  places  where  his  ellate 
lay,  and  where  he  had  been  minifler,  he  gave  above 
one  hundred  pounds. 

Among  thofe  who  had  been  his  fervants,  or  \yqyq 
fo  at  his  death,  he  difpofed  in  annuities  and  lega- 
cies in  money  to  the  value  of  above  three  hundred 
pounds. 

^  To  other  charitable  ufes  and  among  the  poorer  of 
ills  relations,  above  three  hundi-ed  pounds. 

U  2  To 


156  At  the  funeral  of  the 

S  E  R  M.  To  every  one  of  his  tenants  he  Jeft  a  legacy  ac- 
cording to  the  proportion  of  the  efcate  they  held, 
by  way  of  remembrance  of  him  ^  and  to  one  of  them 
that  was  gone  much  behind  he  remitted  in  his  will 
feventy  pounds.  And  as  became  his  great  goodnels, 
he  was  ever  a  remarkably  kind  landlord,  forgiving 
his  tenants,  and  always  making  abatements  to  them 
for  hard  years  or  any  other  accidental  lofTcs  that 
happened  to  them. 

I  muft  not  omit  the  wife  provifion  he  made  in  his 
will  to  prevent  law-fuits  among  the  legatees,  by  ap- 
pointing two  or  three  perfons  of  greatefl:  prudence 
and  authority  amiOng  his  relations  final  arbitrators  of 
all  differences  that  fliould  arife. 

Having  given  this  account  of  his  lafl:  will,  I 
come  now  to  the  fad  part  of  all :  fad  I  mean  to 
us,  but  happieil  to  him.  A  litde  before  Eafter  laft 
he  went  dov/n  to  Cambridge  :  where,  upon  taking 
a  great  cold,  he  fell  into  a  diftemper  which  in  a 
fev/  days  put  a  period  to  his  life.  He  died  in  the 
houfe  of  his  ancient  and  moil:  learned  friend,  Dr.  Cud- 
worth,  mafier  of  Chrifl's  College.  During  his  fick- 
nefs  he  had  a  conftant  calmnefs  and  ferenity  of  mind  : 
and  under  all  his  bodily  weaknefs  poffeft  his  foul  in 
great  patience.  After  the  prayers  for  the  vifitation 
of  the  fick  (which  he  faid  were  excellent  prayers) 
had  been  ufed,  he  was  put  in  mind  of  receiving  the 
facrament  -,  to  which  he  anfwered,  that  he  moil  rea- 
dily embraced  the  propofal:  and  after  he  had  re- 
ceived it,  fiid  to  Dr.  Cudworth,  I  heartily  thank 
you  for  this  moft  chriftian  office :  1  thank  you  for 
putting  me  in  mind  of  receiving  this  facrament : 
adding  this  pious  ejaculation.  The  Lord  fulfil  all 

hi3 


reverend  Dr.  Whichcot.  i 


57 


his  declarations  and  promifes,  and.  pardon  all  mv  SERM. 
weakneflfes  and  imperfections.  He  difclaimed  all 
merit  in  himfelf;  and  declared  that  whatever  he 
was,  he  was  through  the  grace  and  goodnels  of  God 
in  Jesus  Christ.  He  exprefled  hkev/ife  great  dif- 
like  of  the  principles  of  feparation  ;  and  faid  he  was 
the  more  defirous  to  receive  the  facrament  that  he 
might  declare  his  full  communion  with  the  church 
of  Christ  all  the  world  over.  He  difclaimed  po- 
pery, and,  as  things  of  near  affinity  with  it,  or  ra- 
ther parts  of  it,  all  fjperflition,  and  ufurpation  upon 
the  confciences  of  men. 

He  thanked  God,  that  he  had  no  pain  in  his  body, 
nor  difqiiiet  in  his  mind. 

Towards  his  laft  he  feemed  rather  unwilling  to  be 
detained  any  longer  in  this  Irate ;  not  for  any  pains 
he  Ml  in  himfelf,  but  for  the  trouble  he  gave  his 
friends  :  faying  to  one  of  them  who  had  with  great 
care  attended  him.  all  along  in  his  fickneis,  my 
dear  friend,  thou  haft  taken  a  great  deal  of  pains  to 
uphold  a  crazy  body,  but  it  will  not  do  :  I  pray 
thee  give  me  no  more  cordials ;  for  why  fhouldfc 
thou  keep  me  any  longer  out  of  that  happy  flate  to 
which  1  am  going  ?  I  thank  God  I  hope  in  his  mer- 
cy, that  it  fhall  be  well  with  me. 

And  herein  God  was  pleafed  particularly  to  an- 
fwer  thofe  devout  and  well-weighed  petitions  of  his, 
which  he  frequently  ufed  in  his  prayer  before  fer- 
mon,  which  1  fhall  i^ci  down  in  his  own  words,  and  I 
doubt  not  thofe  that  v/ere  his  conflant  hearers  do 
well  remember  them  j  '^  and  fuperadd  this,  O  Lord, 
*'  to  all  the  grace  and  favour  v/hich  thou  hafl  iliewn 
^'  us  all  along  in  life,  not  to  remove  us  hence  but 

"  with 


XXIV. 


I  j8  At  the  funeral  of  the 

s  E  R  M.  "  with  all  advantage  for  eternity,  when  we  fhall  be  in 
"  a  due  preparation  of  mind,  in  a  holy  conftitution 
"  of  foul,  in  a  perfect  renunciation  of  the  guife  of  this 
"  mad  and  finful  world,  when  we  Ihall  be  intirely  re- 
"  figned  up  to  thee,  when  we  fliall  have  clear  adls  of 
«'  faith  in  God  by  Jesus  Chrit,  high  and  reveren- 
"  tial  thoughts  of  thee  in  our  minds,  enlarged  and  in- 
*'  flamed  afredions  towards  thee,  i£c.  And  whcnfo- 
'*  ever  we  fhall  come  to  leave  this  world,  which  will 
"  be  when  thou  fhalt  appoint  (for  the  ifTues  of  life  and 
*'  death  are  in  thy  hands)  afford  us  fuch  a  mighty 
"  power  and  prefence  of  thy  good  fpirit,  that  we  may 
*'  have  folid  confolatioh  in  believing,  and  avoid  all 
"  confternation  of  mind,  all  doubtfulnefs  and  uncer- 
^'  tainty  concerning  our  everlafting  condition,  and 
"  at  length  depart  in  the  faith  of  God's  eled,  tfr.'* 
^*  Mark  the  perfedl  man,  and  behold  the  upright, 
"  for  the  the  end  of  that  man  is  peace.'' 

Thus  you  have  the  fhort  hiftory  of  the  life  and 
death  of  this  eminent  perfon  ;  whofe  juft  charader 
cannot  be  given  in  few  words,  and  time  will  not  al- 
low me  to  ufe  many.  To  be  able  to  defcribe  him 
aright  it  v/ere  neceflary  one  fhould  be  like  him  ;  for 
which  reafon  I  muft  content  my  felf  with  a  very  im- 
perfedl  draught  of  him. 

I  fhall  not  infifb  upon  his  exemplary  piety  and  de- 
votion towards  God,  of  which  his  whole  Mt  was 
one  continued  teflimony.  Nor  will  1  praife  his  pro- 
found learning,  for  wliich  he  was  juftly  had  in  fo 
great  reputation.  The  moral  improvements  of  his 
mind,  a  god-like  temper  and  dilpofuion  (as  he  was 
wont  to  call  \\.)  he  chiefly  valued  and  afpired  after  ; 
that  univerfal  charity  and  goodnefs,  which  he  did  con- 
tinually preach  and  pradife.  His 


reverend  Dr,  Whichcot.  1^9 

His  converfation  was  exceeding  kind  and  affable,  S  E  R  M, 
grave  and  winning,  prudent  and  profitable.  HeJ^^ 
was  flow  to  declare  his  judgment,  and  modefl  in 
delivering  it.  Never  pafTionate,  never  peremptory : 
fo  far  from  impofing  upon  others,  that  he  was  ra- 
ther apt  to  yield.  And  though  he  had  a  moil  pro- 
found and  well-poifed  judgment,  yet  was  he  of  all 
men  I  ever  knew  the  mofl  patient  to  hear  others 
differ  from  him,  and  the  mofl  eafy  to  be  convinced 
when  good  reafon  was  offered;  and,  which  is  fel- 
dom  feen,  more  apt  to  be  favourable  to  another 
man's  reafon  than  his  own. 

Studious  and  inquifitive  men  commonly  at  fuch 
an  age  (at  forty  or  fifty  at  the  utmofl)  have  fixed 
and  fettled  their  judgments  in  mofl  points,  and  as  it 
were  made  their  lafl  underflanding ;  fuppofing  they 
have  thought,  or  read,  or  heard  what  can  be  faid  on 
all  fides  of  things ;  and  after  that,  they  grow  pofi- 
tive  and  impatient  of  contradidion,  thinking  it  a 
difparagement  to  them  to  alter  their  judgment :  but 
our  deceafed  friend  was  fo  wife,  as  to  be  willino-  to 
learn  to  the  lafl ;  knowing  that  no  man  can  grow 
wifer  without  fome  change  of  his  mind,  without 
gaining  fome  knowledge  which  he  had  not,  or  cor- 
reding  fome  error  which  he  had  before. 

He  had  attained  fo  perfect  a  maflery  of  his  paf- 
fions,  that  for  the  latter  and  greateil  part  of  his  life 
he  was  hardly  ever  feen  to  be  tranfported  with  an- 
ger :  and  as  he  was  extremely  careful  not  to  pro- 
voke any  man,  fo  not  to  be  provoked  by  any; 
ufing  to  fay,  if  I  provoke  a  man  he  is  the  v/orfe  for 
my  company,  and  if  I  fuffer  my  felf  to  be  provoked 
by  him  I  fhall  be  the  worfe  for  his. 

lie 


XXIV 


i6o  ,     At  the  funeral  of  the 

SERM.  He  very  fcldom  reproved  any  perfon  in  company 
otherwife  than  by  fiience,  or  fome  fign  of  uneafi- 
nefs,  or  Ibme  very  foft  and  gentle  word  -,  which  yet 
•From  the  refpedl  men  generally  bore  to  him  did  of- 
ten prove  efte^tual :  for  he  underflood  iiumane  nature 
very  well,  and  how  to  apply  himfelf  to  it  in  the  moft 
eafy  and  efFcdtual  ways. 

He  was  a  great  encourager  and  kind  director  of 
young  divines :  and  one  of  the  mod  candid  hearers 
of  fermons,  I  think,  that  ever  was :  fo  that  though 
all  men  did  mightily  reverence  his  judgment,  yet  no 
man  had  reafon  to  fear  his  cenfure.  He  never  fpake 
well  of  himfelf,  nor  ill  of  others :  making  good  that 
faying  of  Panfa  in  Tully,  Neminem  alterhis^  qui  fiue 
conjideret  virtiitiy  mvidere\  "  that  no  man  is  apt  to 
"  envy  the  worth  and  virtues  of  another,  that  hath 
"  any  of  his  own  to  trufl  to." 

In  a  word,  he  had  all  thofe  virtues,  and  in  a  high 
degree,  which  an  excellent  temper,  great  confidera- 
tion,  long  care  and  watchfulnels  over  himfelf,  toge- 
ther with  the  aflircance  of  God's  grace  (which  he 
continually  implored,  and  mightily  relied  upon)  are 
apt  to  produce.  Particularly  he  excelled  in  the  vir- 
tues of  converfation,  humanity,  and  gentlenefs,  and 
humihty,  a  prudent  and  peaceable  and  reconciling 
temper.  And  God  knows  v/e  could  very  ill  at  this 
time  have  Ipared  fuch  a  man;  and  have  loft  from 
among  us  as  it  v/ere  fo  much  balm  for  the  healing  of 
the  nation,  whiclf  is  now  fo  miferably  rent  and  torn 
by  thofe  wound's  which  we  madly  give  ourfelves.  But 
fince  God  hath  thought  good  to  deprive  us  of  him, 
let  his  virtues  live  in  our  memory,  and  his  example 
in  our  lives.     Let  us  endeavour  to  be  vvhat  he  -was, 

and 


reverend  Dr.  Whichcot.  i6i 

and  we  fliall  one  day  be  what  he  now  is,  of  blefrt:d  S  E  R  M- 
memory  on  earth,  and  happy  for  ever  in  heaven. 

And  now  methinks  the  confideration  of  the  argu- 
ment I  have  been  upon,  and  of  that  great  example 
that  is  before  us,  fhould  raife  our  minds  above  this, 
world,  and  fix  them  upon  the  glory  and  happinefs  of 
the  other.     Let  us  then  then  begin  heaven  here,  in 
the  frame  and  temper  of  our  minds,  in  our  heavenly 
affedlions  and  converfation  ;  in  a  due  preparation  for^ 
and  in  earned  defires  and  breathings  after  that  blel- 
fed  flate  which  we  firmly  believe  and  afllircdiy  hope  to 
be  one  day  poflefTed  of:  when  we  fhall  be  removed 
out  of  this  fink  of  fin  and  forrows  into  the  regions  of 
blifs  and  immortality  :  where  we  fhall  meet  all  thofe 
worthy  and  excellent  perfons  who  are  gone  before  us, 
and  whofe  converfation  was  fo  delightful  to  us  in  this 
world ;  and  will  be  much  more  fo  to  us  in  the  other, 
when  the  fpirits  of  jufl  men  fhall  be  made  perfect, 
and  fhall  be  quit  of  all  thofe  infirmities   which  did 
attend  and  It^Qn  them  in  this  mortal  flate ;  when  we 
Ihall  meet  again  with  our  dear  brother,  and  all  thofe 
good  men  whom  we  knew  in  this  world,  and  with 
the  faints  and  excellent  perfons  of  all  ages,  to  enjoy 
their  bleffed  friendfhip  and  fociety  for  ever,  in   the 
prefence  of  the  blefifed  God,  where  is  "  fulnefs  of 
*'  joy,  at  whofe  right  hand  are  plcafures   for  ever- 
*'  more." 

In  a  firm  perfuafion  of  this  happy  flate  let  us  every 
one  of  us  fay  with  David,  and  with  the  fame  ardency 
of  affedtion  that  he  did,  "  As  the  hart  panteth  after 
.*'  the  water-brooks,  fo  panteth  my  foul  after  thee 
♦'  O  God  ;  my  foul  thirfleth  for  God,  for  the  living 
•'  God  •,    O  when  fliall  I  come  and  appear  before 

Vol.  II.  X  God  J 

3. 


1 62  At  the  funeral^  &oc, 

SERM.  "  God  j"  that  fo  the  Jife  which  we  now  live  in  this 
xxrv 

world  may  be  "  a  patient  continuance  in  well-doing 

"  in  a  joyful  expectation  of  the  blefTed  hope  and  the 

"  glorious  appearance  of  the  greut  God  and  our 

*'  Saviour  Jesus  Christ   "  to  whom   with  the 

Father  and  the  Holy  Ghost  be  all  honour  and 

glory,  now  and  for  ever. 

*'  Now  the  God  of  peace  who  brought  again  from 

"  the  dead  our  Lord   Jesus  Christ,   the  great 

"  fliepherd  of  the  fheep,    through  the  blood  of  the 

*'  everlafting  covenant,   make  us  perfe6t  in   every 

"  good  work  to  do  his  will  •,  working  in  us  always 

*'  that  which  is  well-pleafing  in  his  fight,  through 

"  Jesus  Christ  j   to  whom   be  glory  for   ever. 

"  Amen." 


SERMON^ 


[  i63  ] 

SERMON    XXV. 

A  perfuafive  to  frequent  communion. 


I  COR.  xi.  26,  27,  28. 

For  ^^  often  as  ye  eat  this  hread^  and  drink  this  cup^  ye 

doffjew  the  Lo  rd's  death  ''till  he  come. 
Wherefore  whofoever  fhall  eat  this  breads  and  drink  this 

cup  of  the  Lord  unworthily^  is  guilty  of  the  body 

and  blood  of  the  Lord. 
But  let  a  man  exa?nine  himfelf^  and  fo  let  him  eat  of  that 

breads  and  drink  of  that  cup. 


Y  defign  In  this  argument  is,  from  the  con-s  E  R  M. 
fideration  of  the  nature  of  this  facrament.  ^^^' 
of  the  Lord's  fupper,  and  of  the  perpe- 
tual ufe  of  it  to  the  end  of  the  world,  to  awaken 
men  to  a  {^Ti{<t  of  their  duty,  and  the  great  obliga- 
tion that  lies  upon  them  to  the  more  frequent  re- 
ceiving of  it.  And  there  is  the  greater  need  to 
make  men  fenfible  of  their  duty  in  this  particular, 
becaufe  in  this  lail  age  by  the  unwary  difcourfe  of 
fome  concerning  the  nature  of  this  facrament  and 
the  danger  of  receiving  it  unworthily,  fuch  doubts 
and  fears  have  been  raifed  in  the  minds  of  men,  as 
utterly  to  deter  mahy,  and  in  a  great  meafure  to  dif- 
courage  almofl  the  generality  of  chriflians  from  the 
ufe  of  it  •,  to  the  great  prejudice  and  danger  of  mens 
fouls,  and  the  vifible  abatement  of  piety,  by  the  grols 
negledl  of  fo  excellent  a  means  of  our  growth  and* 


X  2  improve- 


164  -^  perjuafive  to 

SE  R  M.  improvement  in  it;  and  to  the  mighty  fcandal  of  our 
religion,  by  the  general  difufe  and  contempt  of  fo 
plain  and  folemn  an  inftitution  of  our  blefTed  Lord 
and  Saviour. 

Therefore  I  fliall  take  occafion,  as  briefly  and  clear- 
ly as  I  can,  to  treat  of  thcfe  four  points. 

Firft,  of  the  perpetuity  of  this  inflitution  ;  this 
the  apoftle  fignifies  when  he  faith,  that  "  by  eating 
"  this  bread,  and  drinking  this  cup,  we  do  fhevv  the 
*'  Lord's  death  'till  he  come.'* 

Secondly,  of  the  obligation  that  lies  upon  all  chri- 
flians  to  a  frequent  obfervance  of  this  inflitution ; 
this  is  fignified  in  that  exprelTion  of  the  apoRle,  "  as 
*'  often  as  ye  eat  this  bread,  and  drink  this  cup  : " 
which  exprefTion  confidered  and  compared  together 
with  the  pradlicc  of  the  primitive  church,  does  im- 
ply an  obligation  upon  chriliians  to  the  frequent  re- 
ceiving of  this  facrament. 

Thirdly,  I  fhall  endeavour  to  fitisfy  the  obje6lions 
and  fcruples  v/hich  have  been  raifcd  in  the  minds  of 
men,  and  particularly  of  many  devout  and  fincere 
chrifcians,  to  their  great  difcouragcment  from  their 
receiving  this  facrament,  at  lead  fo  frequently  as  they 
ought :  which  obje<5lions  are  chiefly  grounded  upon 
what  the  apoftle  fays,  "  Wherefore  whofoever  fliail 
"  eat  this  bread  and  drink  this  cup  of  the  Lord 
*'  unworthily,  is  guilty  of  the  body  and  blood  of 
*'  the  Lord  :  and  doth  eat  and  drink  damnation  to 
**  himfeir." 

Fourthly,  what  preparation  of  ourfelves  is  necef- 
fary  in  order  to  our  worthy  receiving  of  this  facra- 
ment; which  will  give  me  occafion  to  explain  the 
apoftle's  meaning  in  thofe  words,  "  But  X^tl  a  man  exa- 

*'  mine 


frequent  communion,  165 

If,  and  fo  let  him  eat  of  that  bread, 
Df  that  cup." 
I.  For  the  perpetuity  of  this  inftitution,  implied 


"  mine  himfelf,  and  fo  let  him  eat  of  that  bread,  S  ERM. 
"  and  drink  of  that  cup."  ^^^• 


in  thofe  words,  "  For  as  often  as  ye  eat  this  bread, 
"  and  drink  this  cup,  ye  do  fhew  forth  the  Lord's 
"  death  'till  he  come  j"  or  the  words  may  be  read 
imperatively  and  by  way  of  precept,  "  fhew  ye  forth 
"  the  Lord's  death  'till  he  come.'*  In  the  three 
verfes  immediately  before,  the  apoftle  particularly 
declares  the  inftitution  of  this  facrament,  with  the 
manner  and  circumftances  of  it,  as  he  had  received 
it  not  only  by  the  hands  of  the  apoltles,  but  as  the 
words  feem  rather  to  intimate,  by  immediate  reve- 
lation from  our  Lord  himfelf,  ver.  23.  "  For  I  have 
"  received  of  the  Lord  that  which  I  alfo  delivered 
"  unto  you :  that  the  Lord  Jesus  in  the  fame  night 
*'  that  he  was  betrayed  took  bread  :  and  when  he  had 
''  given  thanks  he  brake  it,  and  faid,  take,  cat,  this 
*'  is  my  body  v/hich  is  broken  for  you  ;  this  do  in  re- 
"  membrance  of  me.  After  the  \z.\v,t  manner  alio 
"  he  took  the  cup  when  he  had  fupped,  faying, 
"  this  cup  is  the  new  teflament  in  my  blood  :  this 
"  do  as  often  as  ye  fhall  drink  it  in  remembrance  of 
"  me."  So  that  the  inftitution  is  in  thefe  v/ords, 
"  this  do  in  remembrance  of  me."  In  which  words 
our  Lord  commands  his  difciples  after  his  death  to 
repeat  thefe  occafions  of  taking,  and  breaking,  and 
eating  the  bread,  and  of  drinking  of  the  cup,  by 
way  of  folemn  commemoration  of  him.  Now  whe- 
ther this  was  to  be  done  by  them  once  only,  or 
ottner;  and  whether  by  the  difciples  only  during 
their  lives,  or  by  all  chriftians  afterwards  in  all  fuccef- 
five  ages  of  the  church,    is  not  fo  certain  merely 

from 


1 66  A  perfuafive  to 

SERM.  from  the  force  of  thefe  words,  "  do  this  in  remem- 
XXV 

"  brancc  of  me:"   but  what  the  apoflJe  adds  puts 

the  matter  out  of  all  doubt,  that  the  inditution  of 
this  facrament  was  intended,  not  only  for  the  apo- 
fl:les,  and  for  that  age,  but  for  all  chriftians,  and  for 
all  ages  of  the  chriftian  church  •,  "  For  as  often  as  ye 
*'  eat  this  bread,  and  drink  this  cup,  ye  do  fhew  the 
"  Lord's  death  'till  he  come:"  that  is,  until  the 
time  of  his  fecond  coming,  which  will  be  at  the  end 
of  the  world.  So  that  this  facrament  was  defigned 
to  be  a  {landing  commemoration  of  the  death  and 
pafTion  of  our  Lord  'till  he  fhould  come  to  judg- 
ment ;  and  confequently  the  obligation  that  lies  upon 
chriflians  to  the  obfervation  of  it  is  perpetual,  and 
Ihall  never  ceafe  to  the  end  of  the  world. 

So  that  it  is  a  vain  conceit  and  mere  dream  of  the 
enthufiafts  concerning  the  feculum  Spritus  fan^ti^ 
''  the  age  and  difpenfation  of  the  Holy  Ghost," 
when,  as  they  fuppofe,  all  humane  teaching  fhall 
ceafe,  and  all  external  ordinances  and  infcitutions  in 
religion  lliall  vanifli,  and  there  fhall  be  no  farther 
ufe  of  them.  Whereas  it  is  very  plain  from  the  new 
tedament,  that  prayer,  and  outward  teaching,  and 
the  ufe  of  the  two  ficraments,  were  intended  to  con- 
tinue among  chriflians  in  all  ages.  As  for  prayer, 
(befides  our  natural  obligation  to  this  duty,  if  there 
were  no  revealed  religion)  we  are  by  our  Saviour 
particularly  exhorted  to  watch  and  pray  with  regard 
to  the  day  of  judgment,  and  in  confideration  of  the 
uncertainty  of  the  time  when  it  fhall  be  :  and  there- 
fore this  will  always  be  a  duty  incumbent  upon  chri- 
flians 'till  the  day  of  judgment,  becaufe  it  is  pre- 
fcribcd  as  one  of  the  befl  ways  of  preparation  for  it. 

That 


frequent  communion.  167 

That  outward  teaching  likewife  and  baptifm  were  in-  S  E  RM. 

x^  X  \/ 
tended  to   be   perpetual   is   no   lefs   plain,    becaufe  ^..^^  ^.^ 

Christ  hath  exprefly  promifed  to  be  with  the 
teachers  of  his  church  in  the  ufe  of  thefe  ordinances 
to  the  end  of  the  world,  Matth.  xxviii.  19,  20. 
"  Go  and  difciple  all  nations,  baptizing  them  in  the 
"  name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of 
"  the  Holy  Ghost  :  and  lo  I  am  with  you  always 
*'  to  n\Q  end  of  the  world."  Not  only  to  the  end 
of  that  particular  age,  but  to  the  end  of  the  gofpel- 
age,  and  the  confummation  of  all  ages,  as  the  phrafe 
clearly  imports.  And  it  is  plain  from  this  text, 
that  the  facrament  of  the  Lord's  fupper  was  in- 
tended for  a  perpetual  inflitution  in  the  chriftian 
church,  *dll  the  fecond  coming  of  Christ,  viz. 
his  coming  to  judgment:  becaufe  St.  Paul  tells  us, 
that  by  thefe  facramental  figns  the  death  of  Christ 
is  to  be  reprefented  and  commemorated  *dll  he  comes. 
"  Do  this  in  remembrance  of  me :  for  as  often  as  ye 
"  eat  this  bread,  and  drink  this  cup,  ye  do  ihew  the 
"  Lord's  death  'dll  he  come.'* 

And  if  this  be  the  end  and  ufe  of  this  facram.ent, 
to  be  a  folemn  remembrance  of  the  death  and  fuf- 
ferings  of  our  Lord  during  his  abfence  from  us, 
that  is,  'dll  his  coming  to  judgment,  then  this  facra- 
ment will  never  be  out  of  date  'nil  the  fecond  com- 
ing of  our  Lord.  The  confideration  whereof 
fhould  mightily  flrengthen  and  encourage  our  faith 
in  the  hope  of  eternal  life  fo  often  as  we  partake  of 
this  facrament :  fmce  our  Lord  hath  Idi  it  to  us  as 
a  memorlil  of  himfelf  'till  he  came  to  tranflate-his 
church  into  leaven,  and  as  a  fure  pledge  that  he  v/ill 
come  again  at  the  end  of  the  world,  and  invefl:  us 

in 


i68  A  perfuajive  to 

S  ER  M-  in  that  glory  which  he  is  now  gone  before  to  pre- 
pare for  us.  So  that  as  often  as  we  approach  the  ta- 
ble of  the  Lord,  we  ihould  comfort  ourfelves  with 
the  thoughts  of  that  bleflcd  time  when  we  fhall  eat 
and  drink  with  him  in  his  kingdom,  and  (hall  be 
admitted  to  the  great  feafc  of  the  lamb,  and  to  eter- 
nal communion  with  God  the  judge  of  all,  and  with 
our  blefled  and  glorified  redeemer,  and  the  holy  an- 
gels, and  the  fpirits  of  jufl  men  made  perfed:. 

And  the  fame  confideration  fliould  likewife  make 
us  afraid  to  receive  this  facrament  unworthily,  with- 
out due  preparation  for  it,  and  without  worthy  effcdls 
of  it  upon  our  hearts  and  lives ;  bccaufe  of  that 
dreadful  fentence  of  condemnation  which  at  the  fe- 
cond  coming  of  our  Lord  fhall  be  pad  upon  thofe, 
who  by  the  profanation  of  this  folemn  inftitution 
trample  under  foot  the  Son  of  God,  and  contemn 
the  blood  of  the  covenant;  that  covenant  of  grace 
and  mercy  which  God  hath  ratified  with  mankind  by 
the  blood  of  his  Son.  The  apoftle  tells  us  that 
*'  he  that  eateth  and  drinketh  unworthily  is  guilty  of 
*'  the  body  and  blood  of  the  Lord,  and  eateth  and 
*'  drinketh  damnation  to  himfelf."  This  indeed  is 
fpoken  of  temporal  judgment  (as  I  fhall  fhew  in  the 
latter  part  of  this  difcourfe,)  but  the  apoftle  likewife 
fuppofeth,  that  if  thefe  temporal  judgments  had  not 
their  etfed  to  bring  men  to  repentance,  but  they  ftill 
perfifted  in  the  profanadon  of  this  holy  facrament, 
they  fhould  at  laft  "  be  condemned  with  the  world." 
For  as  he  that  partaketh  worthily  of  this  facrament 
confirms  his  intereft  in  the  promifes  of  the  Gofpel, 
and  his  title  to  eternal  life  •,  fo  he  that*  receives  this 
facrament  unworthily,  that  is,  without  due  reverence, 

and 


frequent  communion,  169 

and  without  fruits  meet  for  it ;  nay,  on  the  con-  S  E  R  M 

XXV 

trary,  continues  to  live  in  fin  whilft  he  com  memo-, 
rates  the  death  of  Christ,  "  who  gave  himfelf  for 
"  us  that  he  might  redeem  us  from  all  iniquity,"  this 
man  aggravates  and  fcals  his  own  damnation,  becaufc 
he  is  guilty  of  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ,  not 
only  by  the  contempt  of  it,  but  by  renewing  in  fomc 
fort  the  caufc  of  his  fufferings,  and  as  it  were  "  cru- 
"  cifying  to  himfelf  afrelh  the  Lord   of   life  and 
"  glory,  and  putting  him  to  an  open  Ihame."  And 
when  the  great  judge  of  the  world  fhall  appear  and 
pafs  ^nd\  fen tcnce  upon  men,  fuch  obflinate  and  im- 
penitent wretches  as  could  not  be  wrought  upon  by 
the  remembrance  of  the  deareft  love  of  their  dying 
Lord,  nor  be  engaged  to  leave  their  fins  by  all  the 
ties  and  obligations  of  this  holy  facrament,  ihall  have 
their  portion  with  Pilate  and  Judas,  with  the  chief 
priefts  and  foldiers,  who  were  the  betrayers  and  mur- 
derers of  the  Lord  of  life  and  glory-,  and  fhall  be 
dealt  withal  as  thofe  who  are  in  fome  fort  "  guilty  of 
•'  the  body  and  blood  of  the  Lord."    Which  feverc 
threatning  ought   not  to  difcouragc  men  from  the 
facrament,  but  to  deter  all  thofe  from  their  fins  who 
think  of  engaging  thcmfelves  to  God  by  fo  folemn 
and  holy  a  covenant.     It  is  by  no  means  a  fufficient 
reafon   to  make  men  fly  from  the  facrament,   but 
certainly  one  of   the  moll  powerful  arguments  in 
the  world  to  make    men   forfakc  their   fins ;    as  I 
fhall  fliew  more  fully  under  the  third  head  of  this  dif- 
courfe. 

II.  The  obligation  that  lies  upon  all  chriftians  to 

the  frequent  obfervance  and  pradice  of  this  inflitu- 

tion.     For  though  it  be  not  necellarily  implied  in 

Vol.  XL  Y  thefc 

4. 


A  perfuafive  to 
thefe  words,  *'  as  oft  as  ye  eat  this  bread  and  drink 
"  this  cup;'*  yet  if  we  compare  thefe  words  of  the 
apoftle  with  the  ufage  and  practice  of  chriftians  at 
that  time,  which  was  to  communicate  in  this  holy 
facrament  fo  often  as  they  folemnly  met  together  to 
worfhip  God,  they  plainly  fuppofe  and  recommend 
to  us  the  frequent  ufe  of  this  facrament,  or  rather 
imply  an  obligation  upon  chriftians  to  embrace  all 
opportunities  of  receiving  it.  For  the  fenfe  and 
meaning  of  any  law  or  inftitution  is  bed  underftood 
by  the  general  pradlicc  which  follows  immediately 
upon  it. 

And  to  convince  men  of  their  obligation  here- 
unto, and  to  engage  them  to  a  fuitable  pradlice,  I  fhall 
now  endeavour  with  all  the  plainnefs  and  force  of 
perfuafion  I  can :  And  fo  much  the  more,  becaufe 
the  ncgledl  of  it  among  chriftians  is  grown  fo  ge- 
neral, and  a  great  many  perfons  fi-om  a  faperftiti- 
ous  awe  and  reverence  of  this  facrament  are  by  de- 
grees fallen  into  a  profane  negled  and  contempt 
of  it. 

I  Ihall  briefly  mention  a  threefold  obligation  lying 
upon  all  chriftians  to  frequent  communion  in  this 
holy  facrament ;  each  of  them  fufficient  of  it  fclf, 
but  all  of  them  together  of  the  greateft  force  imagi- 
nable to  engage  us  hereunto. 

I .  We  are  obliged  in  point  of  indiipenfable  duty, 
and  in  obedience  to  a  plain  precept  and  m.oft  fo- 
lemn  inftitution  of  our  bleficd  Saviour  that  great 
lawgiver,  "  who  is  able  to  fave  and  to  deftroy,"  as 
Si.  James  calls  him ;  He  hath  bid  us  "  do  this. " 
And  St.  Paul  who  declares  nothing  in  this  matter 
but  what  he  tells  us  he  "  received  from  the  Lord," 

admoniflicth 


frequent  commiiniGn.  171 

admonifhcth  us  to  do  it  often.  Now  for  any  man  ^^3^'^' 
that  profelTcrth  himfelf  a  chriftian  to  live  in  the  open 
and  continued  contempt  or  negled  of  a  plain  lav/ 
and  inftitution  oFChrist  is  utterly  inconfiflent  with 
fuch  a  profeffion.  To  fuch  our  Lord  may  fay  as 
he  did  to  the  jews,  "  Why  call  ye  me  Lord,  Lord, 
*'  and  do  not  the  things  which  I  fay  ?  "  how  far  the 
ignorance  of  this  inftitution,  or  the  midakes  which 
men  have  been  led  into  about  it,  may  extenuate  this 
negle6l,  is  another  confideration..  But  after  we  know 
our  Lord's  will  in  this  particular  and  have  the  law 
plainly  laid  before  us,  there  is  no  clokc  for  our  fin. 
For  nothing  can  excufe  the  wilful  negled  of  a  plain 
inflitution  from  a  downright  contem.pt  of  our  Sa- 
viour's authority. 

2.  We  are  likewife  obliged  hereunto  in  point  of 
intereft.  The  benefits  which  we  expedl  to  be  de- 
rived and  afilired  to  us  by  this  facrament  are  all  the 
blelTings  of  the  new  covenant,  the  forgivenefs  of  our 
fins,  the  grace  and  alTiftancc  of  God's  holy  Spirit 
to  enable  us  to  perform  the  conditions  of  this  cove- 
nant required  on  our  part;  and  the  comforts  of 
God's  holy  Spirit  to  encourage  us  in  well-doing, 
and  to  fupport  us  under  fufierings ;  and  the  glorious 
reward  of  eternal  life.  So  that  in  neo-ledino;  this  fa- 
crament  we  negledl  our  own  intereft  and  happinefs, 
we  forfake  our  own  mercies,  and  judge  our  {dv^^ 
unworthy  of  all  the  bleliings  of  the  gofpel,  and  de- 
prive our  feives  of  one  of  the  befb  means  and  ad- 
vantages of  connrm.ing  and  conveying  thefe  bleillngs 
to  us.  So  that  if  we  had  not  a  due  fenfe  of  our 
duty,  thie  confideration  of  our  own  intereft  fhould 
©blige  us  not  to  neglect  fo  excellent  and  fo  eifeflual 

y  2  a 


172  A  per fu  a  five  to 

S  E  R  M.  a  means  of  promoting;  our  own  comfort  and  hap- 
XXV.       .    ^  ^  ^  ^ 

pinels. 

3.  Wc  are  likewife  particularly  obliged  in  point 
of  gratitude  to  the  careful  obfervance  of  this  in- 
flitution.  This  was  the  particular  thing  our  Lord 
gave  in  charge  when  he  was  going  to  lay  down 
his  life  for  us,  "  do  this  in  remembrance  of  me.  ** 
Men  ufe  religioufly  to  obfcrve  the  charge  of  a 
dying  friend,  and,  unlefs  it  be  very  difficult  and 
unreafonable,  to  do  what  he  defires :  but  this  is 
the  charge  of  our  bcfl:  friend  (nay  of  the  greateft 
friend  and  benefaflor  of  all  mankind)  when  he  was 
preparing  himfelf  to  die  in  our  (lead  and  to  offer  up 
himfelf  a  facritice  for  us  -,  to  undergo  the  mofl  grie- 
vous pains  and  fufFerings  for  our  fakes,  and  to  yield 
up  himfelf  to  the  worfl  of  temporal  deaths  that  he 
might  deliver  us  from  the  bitter  pains  of  eternal 
death.  And  can  we  deny  him  any  thing  he  asks  of 
us  who  was  going  to  do  all  this  for  us  ?  can  we  deny 
him  this  ?  fo  liule  grievous  and  burdenfom  in  it 
{df^  fo  infinitely  beneficial  to  us  ?  had  fuch  a  friend, 
and  in  fuch  circumilances,  bid  us  do  fome  great 
thing,  would  we  not  have  done  it .?  how  much  more 
when  he  hath  only  faid,  "  do  this  in  remembrance 
*'  of  me  •, "  when  he  hath  only  commended  to  us 
one  of  the  moft  natural  aiid  delightful  Actions,  as  a 
fit  reprefentation  and  memorial  of  his  wonderful  love 
to  us,  and  of  his  cruel  fufferings  for  our  fakes ;  when 
he  hath  only  injoined  us,  in  a  thankful  commemo- 
ration of  this  goodnefs,  to  meet  at  his  table  and  to 
remember  what  he  haih  done  for  us,  to  look  upon 
him  whom  we  have  pierced,  and  to  refolve  to  grieve 
and  wound  him  no  miore  ?  can  we  widiout  the  mod 

horrible 


frequent  communion,  17J 

horrible  ingratitude  negledl  this  dying  charge  of  our  S  E  R  ^f. 
Sovereign  and  our  Saviour,  the  great  friend  and    ^^^• 
lover  of  fouls  ?  a  command  fo  reafonablc,  fo   eafy, 
fo  full  of  blefTings  and  benefits  to  the  faithful  ob- 
fervers  of  it ! 

One  would  think  it  were  no  difficult  matter  to 
convince  men  of  their  duty  in  this  particular,  and  of 
the  neceffity  of  obferving  fo  plain  an  inftitution  of 
our  Lord  j  that  it  were  no  hard  thing  to  perfuade 
men  to  their  intereft,  and  to  be  willing  to  partake 
of  thofe  great  and  manifold  blefiings  which  all  chri- 
llians  believe  to  be  promifed  and  made  good  to  the 
frequent  and  v/orthy  receivers  of  this  facrament. 
Where  then  lies  the  difficulty  ?  what  fhould  be  the 
caufe  of  all  this  backwardnefs  which  we  fee  in  men 
to  fo  plain,  fo  necefiary,  and  fo  beneficial  a  duty  ? 
the  truth  is,  men  have  been  greatly  difcouraged  from 
this  facrament  by  the  unwary  preffing  and  inculca- 
ting of  two  great  truths :  the  danger  of  the  unwor- 
thy receiving  of  this  holy  facrament,  and  the  nccef^ 
fity  of  a  due  preparation  for  it.  W  hich  brings  me 
to  the 

III.  Third  particular  I  propofed,  which  was  to 
endeavour  to  fatisfy  the  objedions  and  fcruples  which 
have  been  raifed  in  the  minds  of  men,  and  particu- 
larly of  many  devout  and  fincere  chriftians,  to  their 
great  difcouragement  from  the  receiving  of  this  fa- 
crament, at  leaff  fo  frequently  as  they  ought.  And 
thefe  objedlions,  I  told  you,  are  chiefly  grounded  up- 
on what  the  apoflle  fays  at  the  27th  verfe.  ''  Where- 
"  fore  whofoever  ihall  eat  this  bread  and  drink  this 
"  cup  of  the  Lord  unworthily,  is  guilty  of  the  body 
^'  and  blood  of  the  Lord.  '*    And  again  ver.  29. 

"  He 


174  A  perfuafin^e  to 

SERM.  «  He  that  eateth  and  drinkcth  unwordiily,  catcth 
,„,,^.y^"  and  drinketh  damnadon  to  himfelf.  '*     Upon  the 
miflake  and  mifapplication  of  thefc  x.t\t.%  have  been 
grounded  two  objedlions,  of  great  force    to  difcou- 
rage  men  from  this  facrament,  which  I  ihall  endea- 
vour with  all  the  tendernefs  and  clearnefs  I  can  to 
reniove.     Firft,  that  the  danger  of  unworthy  receiv- 
ing being  fo  very  great,  it  feems  the  fafeft  way  not 
to  receive  at  all.     Secondly,  that  fo  much  prepara- 
tion and  worthinefs  being  required  in  order  to  our 
worthy  receiving,  the  more  timorous  fort  of  devout 
chriflians  can  ^  never  think  themfelves  duly  enough 
quahfied  for  fo  facrcd  an  aclion. 
Ohj.  I.        I.  That  the  danger  of  unv/orthy  receiving  being 
fo  very  great,  it  feems  the  fafeft  way  wholly  to  re- 
frain from  this  facrament  and   not  receive  it  at  all. 
But  this  objedlion  is  evidently  of  no  force  if  there 
be    (as  moft  certainly  there  is)   as  great  or  greater 
danger  on   the  other  hand,  viz.    in  the  negled  of 
this  dutv  :  and  fo  though  the  danger  of  unworthy 
receiving  be  avoided  by  not  receiving,  yet  the  dan- 
ger of  negledling   and  contemning  a  plain  inflitu- 
tion  of  Christ  is  not  thereby  avoided.   Surely  they 
in  the  parable  that  refufed  to  come  to  the  marriage- 
feaft  of  the  king's  fon,  and  made  light  of  that  gra- 
cious  invitation,  were  at  lead  as  faulty  as  he  who 
came  "  without  a  wedding   garment.  *'     And   we 
find  in  the  conclufion  of    the  parable,    that  as  he 
was  feverely  punifhed  for  his  difrefped,  fo  they  were 
deflroyed  for  their  difobedience.     Nay  of  the  two 
it  is  the  griCater  fign  of  contempt  v/holly  to  negled: 
the  facrament,  than   to  partake  of  it  without  fome 
due  qualL^cation.     The  greatefl  indifpofinon  that  can 

be 


frequent  ccmmunion.  175 

be  for  this  holy  facrament  is  one's  being  a  bad  man,  S  E  R  M, 
and  he  may  be  as  bad,  and  is  more  likely  to  con- 
tinue fo,  who  wilfully  negleds  this  facrament,  than 
he  that  comes  to  it  with   any  degree  of  reverence 
and  preparation,  though  much  lefs  than  he  ought : 
and  furely  it  is  very  hard  for  men  to  come  to  fo  fo- 
lemn  an  ordinance  without  fome  kind  of  religious 
awe   upon    their   fpirits,    and   without   fome  good 
thoughts  and   refolutions,  at  leaft  for  the  prefent. 
If  a  man  that  lives  in  any  known  wickednefs  of  life  do 
before  he  receive  the  facrament  fet  himfclf  ferioufly 
to  be  humbled  for  his  fins,  and  to  repent  of  them,  and 
to  beg  God's  grace   and  affiftance  againfl  them; 
and  after  the  receiving  of  it,  does  continue  for  fome 
time  in  thefe  good  refolutions,  though  after  a  while 
he  may  poflibly  rekpfe  into  the  fame  fins  again  ; 
this  is  fome  kind  of  reflraint  to  a  wicked  life;  and 
thefe  good  moods  and  fits  of  repentance  and  refor- 
mation are  much  better  than  a  conftant  and  uninter- 
rupted courfe  of  fin  :  even  this  rightcoufnefs,  which 
is  but  "  as  the  morning  cloud   and  the  early  dew 
*'  which   fo  foon   pafieth  av/ay,"    is   better    than 
none. 

And  indeed  fcarce  any  man  can  think  of  coming 
to  the  facrament,  but  he  will  by  this  confideration  be 
excited  to  fome  good  purpofes,  and  put  upon  fome 
fort  of  endeavour  to  amend  and  reform  his  life :  and 
though  he  be  very  much  under  the  bondage  and 
power  of  evil  habits,  if  he  do  with  any  competent 
degree  of  fincerity  (and  it  is  his  own  fault  if  he  do 
not)  make  ufe  of  this  excellent  means  and  inflrument 
for  the  mortifying  and  fubduing  of  his  lulls  and  for 
the  obtaining  of  God's  grace  and  affiftance,  it  may 

pleafc 


176  A  perfuafive  to 

S  ERM.  pleafe  God  by  the  ufe  of  thefc  means  fo  to  abate  the 

XXV 

*  force  and  power  of  his  lufls,  and  to  imprint  fuch 
confiderations  upon  his  mind  in  the  receiving  of  this 
holy  facrament  and  preparing  himfcif  for  it,  that  he 
may  at  lafl  break  off  his  wicked  courfc  and  become  a 
good  man. 

But,  on  the  other  hand,  as  to  thofe  who  negleft 
this  facrament,  there  is  hardly  any  thing  Jeft  to  re- 
train them  from  the  greatefl  enormities  of  life,  and 
to  give  a  check  to  them  in  their  evil  courfe:  no- 
thing but  the  penalty  of  humane  laws,  which  men 
may  avoid  and  yet  be  wicked  enough.  Heretofore 
men  ufed  to  be  reftrained  from  great  and  fcandalous 
vices  by  fname  and  fear  of  difgrace,  and  would  ab- 
ftain  from  many  fins  out  of  regard  to  their  honour 
and  reputation  among  men  :  but  men  have  hardened 
their  faces  in  this  degenerate  age,  and  thofe  gentle 
reftraints  of  modefly  which  governed  and  kept  men 
in  order  heretofore  lignify  nothing  now-a-days: 
blufhing  is  out  of  faihion,  and  fhame  is  ceafed  from 
among  the  children  of  men. 

But  the  facrament  did  always  ufe  to  lay  fome 
kind  of  reflraint  upon  the  worft  of  men :  and  if  it 
did  not  wholly  reform  them,  it  would  at  lead  have 
fome  good  effed:  upon  them  for  a  time  :  if  it  did  not 
make  men  good,  yet  it  would  make  them  refolve  to 
be  fo,  and  leave  fome  good  thoughts  and  impref- 
fions  upon  their  minds. 

So  that  I  doubt  not  but  it  hath  been  a  thing  of 
very  bad  confequcnce,  to  difcouragc  men  fo  much 
from  the  facrament,  as  the  way  hath  been  of  late 
years :  and  that  many  men  who  were  under  fome 
kind  of  clieck  before,  fince   they  have  been  driven 

away 


frequent  communion.  177 

away  from  the  facrament,   have  quite  let  loofe  the  S  E  R  M, 
reins,  and  proftituted  themfelves  to  all  manner  of 
impiety  and  vice.     And  among  the  many  ill  effedls 
of  our-  paft  confufions,  this   is   none  of  the  leafi:, 
that  in  many  congregations  of  this  kingdom  chrifta- 
ans  v/ere  generally  difufed  and  deterred  from  the  fa- 
crament, upon  a  pretence  that  they  were  unfit  for 
it :  and  being  fo,    they  mull  neceflarily  incur  the 
danger  of  unworthy  receiving  •,  and   therefore  tliey 
had  better   wholly  abftain  from   it.     By  which   it 
came  to  pafs  that  in  very  many  places    this  great 
and  Ibiemn  inftitution  of  the  chriftian  religion  was 
almoft  quite  forgotten,  as  if  it  had  been  no  part  of 
it;  and  the  remembrance  of  Christ's  death  even 
loft  among  chriftians:  fo  that  many  congregations  in 
England  might  juftly  have  taken  up  the  complaint 
of  the  woman  at  our  Saviour's  fepulchre,  "  they 
"  have  taken  away  our  Lord,  and  we  know  not 
*'  where  they  have  laid  him  ?  " 
.    But  furely  men  did  not  well  confider  what  they 
did,  nor  what  the  confequences  of  it  would  be,  when 
they  did   fo  earneftly  diffuade  men  from  the  facra- 
ment.    'Tis  true  indeed  the  danger  of  unworthy  re- 
ceiving is  great ;  but  the  proper  inference  and  con- 
clufion  from  hence  is  not  that  men  fhould  upon  this 
confideration  be  deterred  from  the  facramt^nt,  but 
that  they  (hould  be  affrighted  from  their  fins,  and 
from  that  wicked  courfe  of  life  which  is  an  habitual 
indifpofition  and  unworthinefs.     St.  Paul  indeed  (as  I 
obferved  before)  truly  repreients,  and  very  much  ag- 
gravates the  danger  of  the  unworthy  receiving  of  this 
facrament  •,  but  he  did  not  deter  the  Corinthians  from 
ix^  becaufe  they  had  fometimes  come  to  it  without 
Vol.  IL  Z  due 

4. 


178  A  per fua five  to 

S  E  R  M.  due  reverence,  but  exhorts  them  to  amend  what  had 
•  been  amifs,  and  to  come  better  prepared  and  difpo- 
fed  for  the  future.  And  therefore  after  that  terrible 
declaration  in  the  text,  "  Whofoever  fhall  eat  this 
«'  bread  and  drink  this  cup  of  the  Lord  unwor- 
"  thily,  is  guilty  of  the  body  and  blood  of  the 
*'  Lord,"  he  does  not  add,  therefore  let  chri- 
ftians  take  heed  of  coming  to  the  facrament,  but> 
let  them  come  prepared  and  with  due  reverence,  not 
as  to  a  common  meal,  but  to  a  folemn  participa- 
tion of  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ  ^  *'  but  let 
*'  a  man  examine  himfelf,  and  fo  let  him  eat  of 
"  that  bread  and  drink  of  that  cup  ? " 

For,  if  this  be  a  good  reafon  to  abflain  from  the 
facrament,  for  fear  of  performing  fo  facred  an  a6ti- 
on  in  an  undue  manner,  it  were  beft  for  a  bad  man 
to  lay  afidc  all  religion,  and  to  give  over  the  exer- 
cife  of  all  the  duties  of  piety,  of  prayer,  of  reading 
and  hearing  the  v/ord  of  God  -,  becaufe  there  is  a 
proportionable  danger  in  the  unworthy  and  unpro- 
fitable ufe  of  any  of  thefe.  "  The  prayer  of  the 
*'  wicked  (that  is,  of  one  that  refolves  to  continue 
*'  fo)  is  an  abomination  to  the  Lord."  And  our 
Saviour  gives  us  the  fame  caution  concerning  hear- 
ing the  word  of  God  ;  "  take  heed  how  you  hear.  '* 
And  St.  Paul  tells  us,  that  thofe  who  are  not  reform- 
ed by  the  dodlrine  of  the  gofpel,  it  is  the  favour 
of  death,  that  is,  deadly  and  damnable  to  fuch 
perfons. 

But  now  will  any  man  from  hence  argue,  thaC 
it  is  beil  for  a  wicked  man  not  to  pray,  nor  to 
hear  or  read  the  word  of  God,  left  by  fo  doing  he 
Ibould  endanger  and  aggravate  his  condemnation ,? 

and 


frequent  communion.  179 

and  yet  there  is  as  much  reafon  from  this  confide-  S  E  R  M. 

XXV"  -■ 
ration  to  perfuade  men  to  give  over  praying  and  at- 
tending to  God's  word,  as  to  lay  afide  the  ufe  of  the 
facrament.  And  it  is  every  whit  as  true  that  he  that 
prays  unworthily  and  hears  the  word  of  God  un- 
worthily, that  is,  without  fruit  and  benefit,  is  guil- 
ty of  a  great  contempt  of  God  and  of  our  bleJGTed 
Saviour  ;  and  by  his  indevout  prayers  and  un- 
fruitful hearing  of  God's  word  does  further  and  ag- 
gravate his  own  damnation  :  I  fay,  this  is  every 
whit  as  true,  as  that  he  that  cats  and  drinks  the 
facrament  unworthily  is  guilty  of  a  high  contempt 
of  Christ,  and  "  eats  and  drinks  his  own  judg- 
"  ment ;  "  fo  that  the  danger  of  the  unworthy  per- 
forming this  {o  facred  an  adlion  is  no  otherwife  a 
reafon  to  any  man  to  abflain  from  the  facrament, 
than  it  is  an  argument  to  him  to  caft  off  all  religi- 
on. He  that  unworthily  ufeth  or  performs  any 
part  of  religion  is  in  an  evil  and  dangerous  condi- 
tion ;  but  he  that  calls  off  all  religion  plungeth  him- 
felf  into  a  mofl  deiperate  fbate,  and  does  certain- 
iy  damn  himfelf  to  avoid  the  danger  of  damnation  : 
becaufe  he  that  cafts  off  all  religion  throws  off  all 
the  means  whereby  he  lliould  be  reclaimed  and 
brought  into  a  better  ftate.  I  cannot  more  fitly 
illuftrate  this  matter  than  by  this  plain  fimilitude : 
he  that  eats  and  drinks  intemperately  endangers  his 
health  and  his  life,  but  he  that  to  avoid  this  dan- 
ger will  not  eat  at  all,  I  need  not  tell  you  what 
will  certainly  become  of  him  in  a  very  fhort  fpace. 

There  arc  fome  confcientious  perfons  who  abflain 
from  the  facrament  upon  an  apprehenfion  that  the 
fins  which  they  fhall  commit  afterwards  are  unpar- 

Z  2  donable. 


i8o  A  perfuafive  to 

SERM.  donable.     But  this  is  a  frreat  mi  flake ;  our  Saviour 
s.^^.^.-^i  having  fo  plainly  declared  that  all  manner  of  fm  fhall 
be  forgiven  men  except  the   blafphemy   againft  the 
Holy  Ghost  •,  fuch  as  was  that  of  the  pharifees,  who, 
as   our  Saviour  tells  us,    blafphemed  the  Holy 
Ghost  in  afcribing  thofe  great  miracles  which  they 
faw  him  work,  and  which  he  really  wrought  by  the 
Spirit   of  God,  to  the  pov/er  of  the  devil.     In- 
deed to   fin  deliberately  after  fo  folemn  an  engage- 
ment to  the  contrary  is  a  great  aggravation  of  fin, 
but  not  fuch  as  to  make   it  unpardonable.     But  the 
negled  of  the  facrament  is  not   the  way  to  prevent 
thefe  fins;  but,  on  the  contrary,  the  conftant  receiv- 
ing of  it  with  the  belt  preparation  we  can  is  one  of 
the  moft  efte(fLual  means  to  prevent  fin  for  the  fu- 
ture, and  to  obtain  the  afTiftance  of  God's  grace  to 
that  end  :  and  if  we  fall  into  fm  afterwards,  we  may 
be  renewed  by  repentance  •,  ''  for  we  have  an  advo- 
*'  cate  v/ith  the  fatlier,  Jesus  Christ  the  righteous, 
*'  who  is  the  propitiation  for  our  fins;"  and  as  fuch, 
is  in  a  very  lively  and  affecling  manner  exhibited  to 
us  in  this  blefiTed  facrament  of  his  body  broken,  and 
his  blood  filed  for  the  remlflion  of  our  fins.    Can  we 
think  that  the  primitive  chriftians,  who  fo  frequent- 
ly received  this  holy  facrament,  did  never  afrer  the 
receiving  of  it  fall  into  any  deliberate  fin.?   undoubt- 
edly, many  of  them  did ;  but  far  be  it  from  us  to 
think  that  fuch  fins  were  unpardonable,  and  that  fo 
many  good  men  Ihould,  becaufe  of  their  careful  and 
confcientious  obfervance  of  our   Lord's  inllitution, 
unavoidably  fall  into  condemnation. 

To  draw  to  a  conclufion   of  this  matter  :    fuch 
groundlefs  fears  and  jealoufies  as  thefe  may  be  a  fign 

of 


frequent  communion,  18 1 

of  a  good  meaning,  but  they  are  certainly  a  fign  of  ^^J^^' 
an  injudicious  mind.  For  if  we  fland  upon  thefe 
fcruples,  no  man  perhaps  was  ever  fo  worthily  pre- 
pared to  draw  near  to  God  in  any  duty  of  religion, 
but  there  was  ilill  fome  defect  or  other  in  the  difpofi- 
tion  of  his  mind,  and  x!:it  degree  of  his  preparation. 
But  if  we  prepare  ourfelves  as  well  as  we  can,  this  is 
all  God  expeils.  And  for  our  fears  of  falhng  into 
fin  afterwards,  there  is  this  plain  anfwer  to  be  given 
to  it  \  that  the  danger  of  falling  into  fin  is  not  pre- 
vented by  negleding  the  facrament,  but  increafed  : 
becaufe  a  powerful  and  probable  means  of  preferving 
men  from  fin  is  negledled.  And  why  fhould  not 
every  fincere  chriftian,  by  the  receiving  of  this  fa- 
crament and  renewing  his  covenant  with  God,  ra- 
ther hope  to  be  confirmed  in  goodnefs,  and  to  re- 
ceive farther  aiiidances  of  God's  grace  and  Holy 
Spirit  to  ftrengthen  him  againft  fin  and  to  enable 
him  to  iubdue  it;  than  trouble  himfelf  with  fears 
which  are  either  without  ground,  or  if  they  are  not, 
are  no  fuflicient  rcafon  to  keep  any  man  from  the  fa- 
crament? We  cannot  furely  entertain  fo  unworthy  a 
thought  of  God  and  our  blelTed  Saviour,  as  to 
imap-ine  that  he  did  inftitute  the  facrament  not  for 
the  furtherance  of  our  lalvadon,  but  as  a  Ihare,  and 
an  occafion  of  our  ruin  and  damnation.  Tliis  were 
to  pervert  the  gracious  defign  of  God,  and  to  turn 
the  cup  of  falvation  into  a  cup  of  deadly  poifon  to  the 
fouls  of  men. 

All  then  that  can  reafonably  be  inferred  from  the, 
danger  of  unworthy  receiving  is,  that  upon  this  con- 
fideration  men  fhould  be  quickned  to  come  to  the 
facrament  with  a  due  preparation  of  mind,  and  fo 

much 


jSz  a  perfuafive  to 

S  E  R  M.  much  the  more  to  fortify  their  refolutlons  of  llvinff 
^..^..^^  fuitably  to  that  holy  covenant  which  they  folemnly 
renew  every  time  they  receive  this  holy  facrament. 
This  confideration  ought  to  convince  us  of  the  abfo« 
lute  necelTity  of  a  good  hfe,  but  not  to  deter  us 
from  the  ufe  of  any  means  which  rnay  contribute  to 
make  us  good.  Tiiereforc  (as  a  learned  divine  fays 
very  well)  this  facrament  can  be  negledled  by  none 
but  thofe  that  do  not  underfland  it,  but  thofe  v/ho 
arc  unwilh'ng  to  be  tied  to  their  duty,  and  are  afraid 
of  being  engaged  to  ufe  their  bed  dihgence  to  keep 
the  commandments  of  Christ  :  and  fuch  peribns 
have  no  reafon  to  fear  being  in  a  worfe  condition, 
fince  they  are  already  in  fo  bad  a  ftate.  And  thus 
much  may  fuffice  for  anfwer  to  the  firft  objedlion  con- 
cerning the  great  danger  of  unworthy  receiving  this 
holy  facrament.  I  proceed  to  the 
Oh},  2.  2.  Second  objection,  which  was  this ;  that  fo  much 

preparation  and  worthinefs  being  required  to  our  wor- 
thy receiving,  the  more  timorous  fort  of  chriflians 
can  never  think  themfelves  duly  enough  qualified 
for  fo  facred  an  adlion. 

For  a  full  anfwer  to  this  objedlion,  I  fliall  endea- 
vour briefly  to  clear  thefe  three  things.  Firfl,  that 
every  degree  of  imperfedion  in  our  preparation  for 
this  facrament  is  not  a  fufiicient  reafon  for  men  to  re- 
frain from  it.  Secondly,  that  a  total  want  of  a  due 
preparation,  not  only  in  the  degree  but  in  the  main 
and  fubfl:ance  of  it,  though  it  render  us  unfit  at  pre- 
fcnt  to  receive  this  facrament,  yet  it  does  by  no 
means  excufe  our  negled  of  it.  Thirdly,  that  the 
proper  inference  and  conclufion  from  the  total  w^ant 
of  a  due  preparation  is  not  to  call  otf  all  thoughts  of 


frequent  communion,  183 

receiving  the  facrament,  but  immediately  to  {tt  upon  S  E  R  M. 
the  work  of  preparation  that  fo  we  may  be  fit  to  re-       ^ 
ceive  it.     And  if  I  can  clearly  make  out  thefe  three 
things,  I  hope  this  objection  is  fully  anfwered. 

1.  That  every  degree  of  imperfection  in  our  pre- 
paration for  this  facrament  is  not  a  fufficicnt  rcafon 
for  men  to  abftain  from  it :  for  then  no  man  fhould 
ever  receive  it.  For  who  is  every  way  worthy,  and 
in  all  degrees  and  refpedls  duly  qualified  to  approach 
the  prefcnce  of  God  in  any  of  xh^  duties  of  his  wor- 
Ihip  and  fervice  ?  Who  can  wafh  his  hands  in  inno- 
ccncy,  that  fo  he  may  be  perfedtly  fit  to  approacli 
God's  altar.?  "  There  is  not  a  man  on  earth  that 
*'  lives  and  fins  not."  The  graces  of  the  befl  men 
are  imperfedt  \  and  every  imperfedlion  in  grace  and 
goodnefs  is  an  imperfedlion  in  the  difpofition  and 
preparation  of  our  minds  for  this  holy  facrament : 
but  if  we  do  heartily  repent  of  our  fins,  and  fincere- 
]y  refolve  to  obey  and  perform  the  terms  of  the  gof- 
pel,  and  of  that  covenant  which  we  entred  into  by 
baptifm,  and  are  going  folemnly  to  renew  and  con- 
firm by  our  receiving  of  this  facrament,  we  are  at 
leaft  in  fome  degree  and  in  the  main  qualified  to  par- 
take of  this  holy  facrament ;  and  the  way  for  us  to 
be  more  fit  is  to  receive  this  facrament  frequently, 
that  by  this  fpiritual  food  of  God's  appointing,  by 
*'  this  living  bread  which  comes  down  from  heaven,'* 
our  fouls  may  be  nourifhed  in  goodnels,  and  new 
flrength  and  virtue  may  be  continually  derived  to 
us  for  the  purifying  of  our  hearts,  and  enabling  us  to 
run  the  ways  of  God's  commandments  with  more 
conftancy  and  delight.  For  the  way  to  "  grow  in 
*'  grace"  and  to  be  "  ftrengthened  with  all  might 

"  in 


XXV. 


184  ^  per f LI  afro  e  to 

SERM.  "  in  the  inner  man,"  and  to  "  abound  in  all  the 
"  fruits  of  righteoufnefs  which  by  Christ  Jesus 
''  are  to  the  praife  and  glory  of  God,"  is  with  care 
and  confcience  to  ufe  thofe  means  which  God  hath 
appointed  for  this  end :  and  if  we  will  neglect  the 
ufe  of  thefe  means  it  is  to  no  purpofe  for  us  to  pray 
to  God  for  his  grace  and  afllflance.  We  may  tire 
ourfclves  with  our  devotions,  and  fill  heaven  with  vain 
complaints,  and  yet  by  all  this  importunity  obtain 
nothing  at  God's  hand:  like  lazy  beggars  that  are 
always  complaining  and  always  asking,  but  will  not 
work,  will  do  nothing  to  help  themfelves  and  better 
their  condition,  and  therefore  are  never  like  to  move 
the  pity  and  compafllon  of  others.  If  we  expe6l 
God's  grace  and  affiftance,  we  mufl  work  out  our 
own  falvation  in  the  careful  ufe  of  all  thofe  means 
which  God  hath  appointed  to  that  end.  That  ex- 
cellent degree  of  goodnefs  which  men  would  have  to 
fit  them  for  the  facrament,  is  not  to  be  had  but  by 
the  ufe  of  it.  And  therefore  it  is  a  prepofterous 
thing  for  men  to  infill  upon  having  the  end  before 
they  will  ufe  the  means  that  may  further  them  in  the 
obtaining  of  it. 

2.  The  total  want  of  a  due  preparation,  not  only 
in  the  degree  but  in  the  main  and  fubilance  of  it, 
though  it  render  us  unfit  at  prefent  to  receive  this  fa- 
crament, yet  does  it  by  no  means  excufe  our  negledl 
of  it.  One  fiult  may  draw  on  another,  but  can  ne- 
ver excufe  it.  It  is  our  great  fault  that  we  are  whol- 
ly unprepared,  and  no  man  can  claim  any  benefit  by 
his  fault,  or  plead  it  in  excufe  or  extenuation  of  this 
neglecl.  A  total  want  of  preparation  and  an  abfo- 
lute  unworthinefs  is  impenitency  in  an  evil  courfc,  a 

refolution 


frequent  communion,  185 

rcfolutlon  to  continue  a  bad  man,  not  to  quit  his  lufts  S  E  R  M. 

XXV 
and  to  break  off  that  wicked  courfe  he  hath  Hved  in  : 

but  is  this  any  excufe  for  the  negleft  of  our  duty, 
that  we  will  not  fit  ourfelves  for  the  doing  of  it  with 
benefit  and  advantage  to  ourfelves  ?  A  father  com- 
mands his  fon  to  ask  him  blefTing  every  day,  and  is 
ready  to  give  it  him  j  but  fo  long  as  he  is  undutiful 
to  him  in  his  other  adions,  and  lives  in  open  difobe- 
dience,  forbids  him  to  come  in  his  fight.  He  ex- 
cufeth  himfelf  from  asking  his  father  blefHng,  be- 
caufe  he  is  undutiful  in  other  things,  and  refolves  to 
continue  fo.  This  is  jufl  the  cafe  of  negleding  the 
duty  God  requires,  and  the  blelTings  he  offers  to  us 
in  the  facrament,  becaufe  we  have  made  ourfelves  in- 
capable of  fo  performing  the  one  as  to  receive  the 
other  5  and  are  refolved  to  continue  fo.  We  will  not 
do  our  duty  in  other  things,  and  then  plead  that  v/e 
are  unfit  and  unworthy  to  do  it  in  this  particular  of 
the  facrament. 

3.  Tiie  proper  inference  and  conclufion  from  a 
total  want  of  due  preparanon  for  the  facrament  is  not 
to  call  off  all  thoughts  of  receiving  it,  but  Imme- 
diately to  fet  about  the  work  of  preparation,  that  fo 
we  may  be  fit  to  receive  it.  For  if  this  be  true^  that 
they  who  are  abfokuely  unprepared  ought  not  to  re- 
ceive the  facrament^  nor  can  do  it  with  any  benefit; 
nay  by  doing  it  In  fuch  a  manner  render  their  condi- 
tion much  worfe,  this  is  a  mofl  forcible  argument  to 
repentance  and  amendment  of  life  :  there  is  nothing 
reafonable  in  this  cafe  but  immediately  to  refolve  up- 
on a  better  courfe,  that  fo  v/e  may  be  meet  partakers 
of  thofe  holy  myfleries,  and  may  no  longer  provoke 
God's  wrath  againft  us  by  the  v/ilful  negled:  of  fo 
Vol.  IL  A  a  great 

4. 


XXV. 


1 85  A  perfuajive  to 

SERM,  great  and  necefiary  a  duty  of  the  chriitian  religion. 
And  we  do  wilfully  neglect  it,  fo  long  as  we  do  wil- 
fully refufe  to  fit  and  qualify  ourfelves  for  the  due 
and  worthy  performance  of  it.     Let  us  view  the 
thing  in  a  hke  cafe;  a  pardon  is  gracioufiy  offered  to 
a  rebel,  he  declines  to  accept  it,  and  modeftly  excu- 
feth  himfelf  bccaufe  he  is  not  worthy  of  it.  And  why 
is  he  not  worthy  ?   becaufe  he  refolves  to  be  a  rebel, 
and  then  his  pardon  will  do  him  no  good,  but  be  arj 
ao-gravation  of  his  crime.     Very  true :  and  it  will  be 
EO  lefs  an  aggravation  that  he  refufeth  it  for  fuch  a 
reafon,  and  under  a  pretence  of  modefty  does  the 
moft  imprudent  thing  in  the  world.     This  is  juft  the 
cafe-,  and  in  this  cafe  there  is  but  one  thing  reafona- 
ble  to  be  done,  and  that  is,  for  a  man  to  make  him- 
felf capable  of  the  benefit  as  foon  as  he  can,  and 
thankfully  to  accept  of  it:    but    to  excufe  himfelf 
from  accepting  of  the  benefit  ofi'ered,  becaufe  he  is 
not  worthy  of  it,  nor  fit  for  it,  nor  never  intends  to 
be  fo,  is  as  if  a  man  fhould  defire  to  be  excufed  from 
being  happy  becaufe  he  is  refolved  to  play  the  fool 
and  to  be  miferable.     So  that  whether  our  want  of 
preparation  be  total,  or  only  to  fome  degree,    it  is 
every  way  unreafonable  :    if  it  be  in  the  degree  only, 
it  ought  not  to  hinder  us  from  receiving  the  facra- 
ment;  if  it  be  total,  it  ought  to  put  us  immediately 
upon  removing  the  impediment,  by  making  fuch  pre- 
paration as  is  neceflfary  to  the  due  and  worthy  receiv- 
ing of  it.     And  this  brings  me  to  the 

IV.  Fourth  and  lad  thing  I  propofed,  viz.  what 
preparation  of  ourfelves  is  necefiary  in  order  to  the 
wortiiy  receiving  of  this  ficrament.  Which  I  told 
you  would  give  me  occafion  to  explain  the  apodle's 

meanino: 


frequent  communion,  1S7 

meaning  in  the  laft  part  of  the  text,  "  but  let  a  man  S  E  R  M. 
"  examine  himfelf,  and  {q  let  him  eat  of  that  bread 
"  and  drink  of  that  cup."    I  think  it  very  clear  from 
the  occafion  and  circumftances  of  the  apoftle's  dif. 
courfe  concerning  the  facrament  that  he  does  not  in- 
tend the  examination  of  our  ftate,  whether  we  be 
chriflians  or  not,  and  fincerely  refolded  to  continue 
fo;  and  confequently  that  he  does  not  here  fpeak  of 
our  habitual  preparation  by  the  refolution  of  a  good 
life.     This  he  takes  for  granted,  that  they  were  chri- 
flians and  refolved  to  continue  and  perfevere  in  their 
chriflian  profeiTion  :  but  he  fpeaks  of  their  adlual  fit- 
nefs  and  worthinefs  at  that  time  \yhen  they  came  to 
receive  the  Lord's  fupper.     And  for  the  clearing  of 
this  matter,  we  mud  confider  what  it  was  that  gave 
occafion  to  this  difcourfe.     At  the  20th  verfe  of  this 
chapter  he  fharply  reproves  their  irreverent  and  un- 
fuitable  carriage  at  the  Lord's  fupper.     They  came 
to  it  very  diforderly,  one  before  another.     It  was  the 
cuflom  of  chriilians  to  meet  at  their  feaft  of  charity, 
in  which  they  did  communicate  with  great  fobriety 
and  temperance  \  and  when  that  was  ended  they  ce- 
lebrated the  facrament  of  the  Lord's  fupper.    Now 
among  the  Corinthians  this  order  was  broken  :    the 
rich  met  and  excluded  the  poor  from  this  common 
feaft.     And  after  an  irregular  feaft  (one  before  ano- 
ther eating  his  own  fupper  as  he  came)  they  went  to 
the  facrament  in  great  diforder  \  one  was  hungry, 
having  eaten  nothing  at  all  •,  others  were  drunk,  hav- 
ing eaten  intemperately  •,  and  the  poor  were  defpifed 
and  negleded.     This  the  apoille  condemns  as  a  great 
profanation   of  that  folemn  inflitution  of  the  facra- 
ment j    at  the  participation  whereof  they  behaved 
A  a  2  them- 


XXV. 


8S  A  pej'fuafive  to 

S  E  R  AI.  themfelves  with  as  little  reverence  as  if  they  had  been 
met  at  a  common  fupper  or  feaft.  And  this  he  calls 
"  not  difcerning  the  Lord's  body,"  making  no  dif- 
ference in  their  behaviour  between  the  facramcnt  and 
a  common  meal :  which  irreverent  and  contemptu- 
ous carriage  of  theirs  he  calls  "  eating  and  drinking 
"  unworthily :  "  for  which  he  pronounceth  them 
"  guilty  of  the  body  and  blood  of  the  Lord," 
which  were  reprefented  and  commemorated  in  their 
*'  eating  of  that  bread  and  drinking  of  that  cup.'* 
By  which  irreverent  and  contemptuous  ufage  of  the 
body  and  blood  of  our  Lord,  he  tells  them  that 
they  did  incur  the  judgment  of  God  \  which  he  calls 
*'  eating  and  drinking  their  own  judgment."  For 
that  the  word  k^o-i;^  which  our  tranfiators  render 
damnation,  does  not  here  fignify  eternal  condemna- 
tion, but  a  temporal  judgment  and  chaflifcment  in 
order  to  the  prevention  of  eternal  condemnation,  is 
evident  from  what  follows;  "  he  that  eateth  and 
««  drinketh  unworthily,  eateth  and  drinketh  judg- 
"  ment  to  himfelf :"  and  then  he  fays,  "  for  this  caufe 
"  many  are  weak  and  fickly  among  you,  and  many 
*'  fleep:"  that  is,  for  this  irreverence  of  theirs  God 
had  fent  among  them  feveral  difeafes,  of  which 
many  had  died.  And  then  he  adds,  "  for  if  we 
"  would  judge  ourfelves,  we  fhould  not  be  judged/' 
Jf  we  would  judge  ourfelves;  whether  this  be  meant 
of  the  publick  cenfures  of  the  church,  or  our  private 
cenfuring  of  our  felves  in  order  to  our  future  amend- 
ment and  reformation,  is  not  certain.  If  of  the  lat- 
ter, which  1  think  mofb  probable,  then  judging  here 
is  much  the  fame  with  examining  ourfelves,  ver.  28. 
And  then  the  apoflle's  meaning  is,  that  if  we  would 

cenfure 


frequent  communtGn.  189 

cenfure  and  examine  ourfelves,  fo  as  to  be  more  care-  S  E  R  M. 
ful  for  the  future,  we  fhould  efcape  the  judgment  of^  "^Z^ 
God  in  thefe  temporal  punifhments.  "  But  when 
"  we  are  judged,  we  are  chaftened  of  the  Lord, 
"  that  we  fhould  not  be  condemned  with  the  world." 
But  when  we  are  judged;  that  is,  when  by  negledl- 
ing  thus  to  judge  ourfelves  we  provoke  God  to  judo;e 
us ;  "  we  are  chaftened  of  the  Lord,  that  we  lliould 
"  not  be  condemned  with  the  world ;"  that  is,  he 
inflicts  thefe  temporal  judgments  upon  us  to  prevent 
our  eternal  condemnation.  Which  plainly  fhews, 
that  the  judgment  here  fpoken  of  is  not  eternal  con- 
demnation. And  then  he  concludes,  "  Wnerefore, 
"  my  brethren,  when  ye  come  together  to  eat  tarry 
*'  for  one  another.  And  if  any  man  hunger,  let 
"  him  eat  at  home,  that  ye  come  not  together  unto 
* '  judgment :"  where  the  apollle  plainly  fliews  both 
what  was  the  crime  of  unworthy  receiving,  and  the 
punifhment  of  it.  Their  crime  was,  their  irreverent 
and  difordcrly  participation  of  the  facrament ;  and 
their  punifhment  was,  thofe  temporal  judgments 
which  God  infiided  upon  them  for  this  their  contempt 
of  the  facrament. 

Now  this  being,  I  think,  very  plain  ;  we  are  pro- 
portionably  to  underfland  the  precept  of  examination 
of  ourfelves  "  before  we  eat  of  that  bread,  and  drink 
*'  of  that  cup.  But  let  a  man  examine  hi mfclf-," 
that  is,  confider  well  with  himfelf  what  a  facred  ac- 
tion he  is  going  about,  and  what  behaviour  becomes 
him  when  he  is  celebrating  this  facrament  inflituted 
by  our  Lo  rd  in  memorial  of  his  body  and  blood, 
that  is,  of  his  death  and  pafTion  :  and  if  heretofore 
he  have  been  guilty  of  any  difordcr  and  irreverence 

(fuch 


A  perfuajlve  to 
(fach  as  the  apodle  here  taxeth  them  withal)  \^i  him 
ceniure  and  judge  himfelf  for  it,  be  fenfible  of  and 
fory  for  his  fault,  and  be  careful  to  avoid  it  for 
the  future  i  and  having  thus  "  examined  himfelf,  let 
''  him  eat  of  that  bread  and  drink  of  that  cup." 
This,  I  think,  is  the  plain  fenfe  of  the  apoftle's  dif- 
courfe-,  and  that  if  we  attend  to  the  fcope  and  cir- 
cumftances  of  it,  it  cannot  well  have  any  other 
meaning. 

But  fome  will  fay,  is  this  all  the  preparation  that 
is  required  to  our  worthy  receiving  of  the  facrament, 
that  we  take  care  not  to  come  drunk  to  it,  nor  to  be 
guilty  of  any  irreverence  or  diforder  in  the  celebra- 
tion of  it?  I  anfwer  in  fhort,  this  was  the  particu- 
lar unworthinefs  with  which  the  apoflle  taxeth  the 
Corinthians ;  and  which  he  warns  them  to  amend,  as 
they  defire  to  efcape  the  judgments  of  God,  fuch  as 
they  had  already  felt  for  this  irreverent  carriage  of 
theirs,  fo  unluitable  to  the  holy  facrament :  he  finds 
no  other  fault  with  them  at  prefent  in  this  matter, 
though  any  other  fort  of  irreverence  will  proportion- 
ably  expofe  men  to  the  like  puniihment.  He  fays 
nothing  here  of  their  habitual  preparation,  by  the 
fincere  purpofe  and  refolution  of  a  good  life  anfvvera- 
ble  to  the  rules  of  the  chridian  religion :  this  we 
may  fuppole  he  took  for  granted.  However,  it  con- 
cerns the  facrament  no  more  than  it  does  prayer  or 
any  other  religious  duty.  Not  but  that  it  is  very 
true  that  none  but  thofe  who  do  heartily  embrace 
the  chriftian  religion,  and  are  fincercly  refolved  to 
frame  their  lives  according  to  the  holy  rules  and  pre- 
cepts of  it,  are  fit  to  communicate  in  this  folemn  ac- 
knowledgment and  profefTion  of  it.     So  that  it  is  a 

prafficc 


frequent  communion,  19 r 

practice  verv  much  to  be  countenanced  and  encou-  SERM. 
raged,  becaufe  it  is  of  great  ufe,  for  chriftians  by- 
way of  preparation  for  the  facrament  to  examine 
themfelves  in  a  larger  fenfe  than  in  all  probability  the^ 
apoftle  here  intended  :  I  mean,  to  examine  our  pad 
lives,  and  the  adlions  of  them,  in  order  to  a  fmcere 
repentance  of  all  our  errors  and  mifcarriages,  and  to 
fix  us  in  the  fleady  purpofe  and  refolution  of  a  better 
life :  particularly,  when  we  cxpe6l  to  have  the  for- 
givenefs  of  our  fins  fealed  to  us,  we  fhould  lay  afide 
all  enmity  and  thoughts  of  revenge,  and  heartily  for- 
give thofe  that  have  ofi^ended  us,  and  put  in  pradlice 
that  univerfal  love  and  charity  which  is  reprefented 
to  us  by  this  holy  communion.  And  to  this  purpole 
we  are  earneftly  exhorted  in  the  publick  office  of  the 
communion  by  way  of  due  preparation  and  difpofi- 
tion  for  it,  "  to  repent  us  truly  of  our  fins  paft,  to 
"  amend  our  lives,  and  to  be  in  perfed  charity  with 
"  all  men,  that  fo  we  may  be  meet  partakers  of  thoie 
"  holy  myfteries." 

And  becaufe  this  work  of  examining  ourfelves 
concerning  our  flate  and  condition,  and  of  exer- 
cifing  repentance  towards  God  and  charity  towards 
men  is  incumbent  upon  us  as  we  are  chriftians,  and 
can  never  be  put  in  pradlice  more  feafonably  and  with 
greater  advantage  than  when  we  are  meditating  of 
this  facrament,  therefore  befides  our  habitual  prepa- 
ration by  repentance  and  the  conftant  endeavours  of 
a  holy  life,  it  is  a  very  pious  and  commendable  cu- 
ftom  in  chriftians  before  their  coming  to  the  facra- 
ment to  fet  apart  fome  particular  time  for  this  work 
of  examination.     But  how  much  time  every  perfon 

lliould  allot  to  tliis  purpofe  is  matter  of  prudence ; 

sind 


102  A  perfuafive  to 

S  E  R  M.  and  as  it  need  not,  fo  neither  indeed  can  it  be  prc^ 
XXV 

cifely  determined.  Some  have  greater  reafon  to  fpend 

more  time  upon  this  work  than  others  \  I  mean  thofe 
whofe  accounts  are  heavier,  becaufe  they  have  long 
run  upon  the  fcore  and  negledled  themfelves :  and 
fome  alfo  have  more  leifure  and  freedom  for  it,  by 
reafon  of  their  eafy  condition  and  circumftances  in 
the  world :  and  therefore  are  obliged  to  allow  a  grea- 
ter portion  of  time  for  the  exercifes  of  piety  and  de- 
votion. In  general,  no  man  ought  to  do  a  work  of 
fo  great  moment  and  concernment  (lightly  and  per- 
fundorily.  And  in  this,  as  in  all  other  adions,  the 
end  is  principally  to  be  regarded.  Now  the  end  of 
examining  ourfelves  is  to  underftand  our  (late  and 
condition,  and  to  reform  whatever  we  find  amifs  in 
ourfelves.  And  provided  this  end  be  obtained,  the 
circum (lances  of  the  means  are  lefs  confiderable : 
whether  more  or  lefj  time  be  allowed  to  this  work  it 
matters  not  {o  mach,  as  to  make  fare  that  the  work 
be  thoroughly  done. 

And  I  do  on  purpofe  fpeak  thus  cautioufly  in  this 
matter,  becaufe  fome  pious  perfons  do  perhaps  err 
on  the  ilrider  hand,  and  are  a  little  fuperfiitious  on 
that  ^id^t  \  infomuch  that  unlefs  they  can  gain  fo 
much  time  to  fet  apart  for  a  folemn  preparation,  they 
will  refrain  from  the  facrament  at  that  time  ;  though 
otherwife  they  be  habitually  prepared.  This  I  doubt 
not  proceeds  from  a  pious  mind  •,  but  as  the  apoftle 
fays  in  another  cafe  about  the  facrament,  "  fhall  I 
"  praife  them  in  this  ?  I  praife  them  not,"  For, 
provided  there  be  no  wilful  negled  of  due  prepara- 
tion, it  is  much  better  to  come  fo  prepared  as  wc 
can,  nay  I  think  it  is  our  duty  fo  to  do,  rather  than 


frequent  communion,  193 

to  abftain  upon  this  pundilio.  Foi-  when  all  is  done,  S  E  R  M. 
the  bed  preparation  for  the  facrament  is  the  general  ^  ' 
care  and  endeavour  of  a  good  hfe :  and  he  that  is 
thus  prepared  may  receive  at  any  time  when  oppor- 
tunity is  offered,  though  he  had  no  particular  fore- 
fight  of  that  opportunity.  And  I  think  in  that  cafe 
fuch  a  one  fliall  do  much  better  to  receive  than  to  re- 
frain ;  becaufe  he  is  habitually  prepared  for  the  facra- 
ment, though  he  had  no  time  to  make  fuch  adlual 
preparation  as  he  defircd.  And  if  this  were  not  al- 
lowable how  could  Hilnifters  communicate  with  fick 
perfons  at  all  times,  or  perfuade  others  to  do  it  many 
times  upon  very  fhort  and  fudden  warning  ? 

And  indeed  we  cannot  imagine  that  the  primitive 
thriflians,  who  received  the  facrament  fo  frequently, 
that  for  ought  appears  to  the  contrary  they  judged  it 
as  elTential  and  nccelTary  a  part  of  their  publick  wor- 
lliip  as  any  other  part  of  it  v/hatfoever,  even  as  their 
hymns  and  prayers,  and  reading  and  interpreting  the 
word  of  God  :  1  fay,  we  cannot  v/ell  conceive  how 
they  who  celebrated  it  fo  conftantly,  could  allot  any 
more  time  for  a  Iblem.n  preparation  for  it,  than  they 
did  for  any  other  part  of  divine  v/orfhip :  and  confe- 
qucntly,  that  the  apollle  v/hen  he  bids  the  Corinthians 
examine  themfelvcs,  could  mxcan  no  more  than  that 
confidering  the  nature  and  ends  of  this  infl'itution 
they  fhould  come  to  it  with  great  revei^ence  ;  and  re- 
fleding  upon  their  form.er  mifcarriages  in  this  matter, 
fhould  be  careful  upon  his  admonition  to  avoid  them 
for  the  future,  and,  to  amend  what  had  been  amifs  : 
which  to  do,  requires  rather  refolution  and  care  than 
any  long  time  of  preparation. 

Vol.  II.  Bb  I  fpeak 

4. 


194  -^  perfiiafi've  to 

S  E  R  M.  I  fpcak  this,  that  devout  pcrfbns  may  not  be  in- 
tangled  in  an  apprehenfion  of  a  greater  ncceflity  than 
really  there  is  of  a  long  and  folenin  preparation  every 
time  they  receive  the  facrament.  The  great  necef- 
fity  that  lies  upon  men  is  to  live  as  becomes  chri- 
(lians,  and  then  they  can  never  be  abfolutely  unpre- 
pared. Nay,  I  think  this  to  be  a  very  good  prepa- 
ration :  and  I  fee  not  why  men  fhould  not  be  very 
well  fatisfied  with  it,  unlefs  they  intend  to  make  the 
fame  ufc  of  the  facrament  that  many  of  the  papiils 
do  of  confefTion  and  abfolution,  which  is  to  quit  with 
God  once  or  twice  a  year,  that  fo  they  may  begin  to 
fin  again  upon  a  new  fcore. 

But  bccaufc  the  examination  of  ourfclves  is  a  thing 
fo  very  ufeful,  and  the  time  which  men  are  v/ont  to 
fct  apart  for  their  preparation  for  the  facrament  is  fo 
advantageous  an  opportunity  for  the  praflice  of  it , 
therefore  I  cannot  but  very  much  commend  thofc 
who  take  this  occafion  to  fearch  and  try  their  ways, 
and  to  call  themfelves  to  a  more  folemn  account  of 
their  anions.  Becaufe  this  ought  to  be  done  fomc 
time,  and  I  know  no  fitter  time  for  it  than  this.  And 
perhaps  fome  would  never  find  time  to  recoiled  them- 
felves and  to  take  the  condidon  of  their  fouls  into 
ferious  confideration,  v/ere  it  not  upon  this  folemn 
occafion. 

The  fum  of  what  I  have  faid  is  this,  that  fup- 
pofing  a  perfon  to  be  habitually  prepared  by  a  reli- 
gious difpofition  of  mind  and  the  general  courfe  of 
a  good  \\fc^  this  more  folemn  a6lual  preparation  is 
not  always  necelTary :  and  it  is  better  when  there  is 
an  opportunity  to  receive  without  it,  than  not  to  re- 
ceive at  all.     But  the  greater  our  adual  preparation 

is. 


frequent  communion,  195 

is,  the  better.     For  no  man  can  examine  himfelf  too  S  E  R  M. 

XXV 

often,  and  underfland  the  ilate  of  his  foul  too  well, 
and  exercife  repentance,  and  renew  the  refolutions  of 
a  good  life  too  frequently.  And  there  is  perhaps  no 
fitter  opportunity  for  the  doing  of  all  this,  than 
when  v/c  approach  the  Lord's  tabic,  there  to  com- 
memorate his  death,  and  to  renew  our  covenant  with 
him  to  live  as  becomes  the  gofpel. 

All  the  Reflexion  I  fhall  now  make  upon  this  dil^ 
courfe,  fhall  be  from  the  confideration  of  what  hath 
been  faid  earneflly  to  excite  all  that  profels  and  call 
themfclves  chriftians  to  a  due  preparation  of  them- 
felves  for  this  holy  facrament,  and  a  frequent  partici- 
pation of  it  according  to  the  intention  of  our  Lord 
and  Saviour  in  the  inftitution  of  it,  and  the  un- 
doubted practice  of  chriftians  in  the  primitive  and  befl 
times,  when  men  had  more  devotion  and  fewer  fcru- 
pies  about  their  duty. 

If  we  do  in  good  earned  believe  that  this  facra- 
ment was  inftituted  by  our  Lord  in  rem.embrance 
of  his  dying  love,  we  cannot  but  have  a  very  high 
value  and  efteem  for  it  upon  that  account.  Me- 
thinks  fo  often  as  we  read  in  the  inftitution  of  it 
thofe  words  of  our  dear  Lord,  "  do  this  in  remem- 
*'  branceof  me,"  and  confider  what  he  who  faid 
them  did  for  us,  this  dying  charge  of  our  befl  friend 
lliould  flick  with  us  and  make  a  flrong  imprefTion  up- 
on our  minds :  efpecially  \^  wc  add  to  thefe,  thofe 
other  words  of  his,  not  Jong  before  his  death, 
*'  Greater  love  than  this  hath  no  man,  that  a  man 
*'  lay  down  his  life  for  his  friend ;  ye  are  m^y  friends 
*'  if  ye  do  whatfoever  I  command  you."  It  is  a 
wonderful  love  which  he  hath  exprefled  to  us,  and 
B  b  2  worthy 


19^  =^  -^  perjuafive  to 

S  XX  v^"  "^^^^^y  ^^  ^^  ^^^  ^^'^  perpetual  remembrance.  And 
all  that  he  expeds  from  us,  by  way  of  thankful  ac- 
knowledgment, is  to  celebrate  the  remembrance  of 
it  by  the  frequent  participation  of  this  blefled  facra- 
ment.  And  fhall  this  charge,  laid  upon  us  by  him 
who  laid  down  his  life  for  us,  lay  no  obligation  up- 
on us  to  the  folemn  remembrance  of  that  unparal- 
lel'd  kindnefs  which  is  the  fountain  of  fo  many  blef- 
iings  and  benents  to  us  ?  it  is  a  fign  that  we  have  no 
great  fcnfe  of  the  benefit  when  we  are  fo  unmindful 
of  our  benefadbor  as  to  forget  him  days  without 
number.  The  obligation  he  hath  laid  upon  us  is  fo 
vaftly  great,  not  only  beyond  all  requital  but  beyond 
all  expreflion,  that  if  he  had  commanded  us  fome 
very  grievous  thing  v/e  ought  with  all  readinefs 
and  chearfulnefs  m  xh^  v/orld  to  have  done  it  j  how 
much  more  when  he  hath  impofed  upon  us  fo  eafy 
a  commandment,  a  thing  of  no  burden  but  of  im- 
menfe  beneliL  ?  v/hen  he  hath  only  faid  to  us,  "  eat  O 
*<  friends,  and  drink  O  beloved  ?  **  when  he  only  in- 
vites us  to  his  table,  to  the  beft  and  mod  delicious 
feail  that  we  can  partake  of  on  this  fide  heaven  ? 

If  we  feriouily  believe  the  great  blefTings  which 
arc  there  exhibited  to  us  and  ready  to  be  conferred 
upon  us,  we  fhould  be  fo  far  from  negledlring  them, 
that  we  lliould  heartily  thank  God  for  every  oppor- 
tunity he  offers  to  us  of  being  made  partakers  of 
fuch  benefits.  When  fuch  a  prize  is  put  into  our 
hands,  iliall  we  want  hearts  to  make  ufc  of  it  ?  mc- 
thinks  we  fhould  long  with  David  (who  faw  but 
a  Ihadow  of  thefe  bkfTings)  to  be  fatisfied  with  the 
good  things  of  God's  houlc,  and  to  draw  near  his 
altar  5  and  (hould  cry  out  with  him,  "  O  when  iliall 


frequent  comfnuniGn,  197 

^^  I  come  and  appear  before  thee  !  my  foul  longeth,  S  E  R  M. 
**  -yea  even  fainteth  for  the  courts  of  the  Lop.d,  and  '^ 
*'  my  flefh  crieth  out  for  the  living  God."  And  if 
"we  had  a  juft  cfteem  of  things,  we  fhould  account 
it  the  greateft  infelicity  and  judgment  in  the  world 
to  be  debarred  of  this  privilege,  which  yet  we  do  de- 
liberately and  frequently  deprive  our  felves  of. 

We  exclaim  againfl:  the  church  of  Rome  with 
great  impatience,  and  with  a  very  juft  indignation,  for 
robbing  the  people  of  half  this  bleffed  facrament,  and 
taking  from  them  the  cup  of  blelfing,  the  cup  of 
falvation  ,  and  yet  we  can  patiently  endure  for  fome 
months,  nay  years,  to  exclude  our  felves  wholly  from 
it.  If  no  fuch  great  benefits  and  bleffings  belong 
to  it,  \NhY  do  we  complain  of  them  for  hindring  us 
of  any  part  of  it  ?  but  if  there  do,  why  do  we  by 
our  own  negled  deprive  our  felves  of  the  whole? 

In  vain  do  we  bemoan  the  decay  of  our  graces, 
and  our  flow  progrefs  and  improvement  in  chrifti- 
anity,  whilft  we  wilfully  defpife  the  beft  means  of 
our  growth  in  goodnefs.  Well  do  we  deferve  that 
God  fhould  fend  leannefs  into  our  fouls,  and  make 
them  to  confume  and  pine  away  in  perpetual  doubt- 
ing and  trouble,  if,  when  God  himfelf  doth  fpread 
fo  bountiful  a  table  for  us  and  fet  before  us  the 
bread  of  life,  we  will  not  come  and  feed  upon  it 
withjoyand  thankfulnefs. 


SERMON 


[  .98  ] 

SERMON  XXVL 

A.  Difcourfe  agaiiifi:  Tranfubftantiation. 

6ERM.  ^''^Oncerning  the  facrament  of  the  Lord's  fup- 
^^J_^  R  .  per,  one  of  the  two  great  pofitive  infbituti- 
^■"-^  ons  of  the  chriftian  religion,  there  are  two 
main  points  of  difference  between  us  and  the  church 
of  Rome.  One  about  the  dodlrine  of  Tranfubftan- 
tiation ;  in  which  they  think,  but  arc  not  certain, 
that  they  have  the  fcripture  and  the  words  of  our 
Saviour  on  their  fide  :  the  other,  about  the  ad- 
miniftration  of  this  facrament  to  the  people  in  both 
kinds ;  in  which  we  are  fjre  that  we  have  the  fcrip- 
ture and  our  Saviour's  inflitution  on  our  fide; 
2nd  that  fo  plainly  that  our  adverfaries  themfelves 
do  not  deny  it. 

Of  the  firft  of  thefe  I  fhall  now  treat,  and  endea- 
vour to  fhew  againfl  the  church  of  Rome,  that  in 
this  facrament  there  is  no  fubilantial  change  made 
of  tht  elements  of  bread  and  wine  into  the  natural 
body  and  blood  of  Christ  ;  that  body  which  was 
born  of  the  virgin  Mary,  and  fuffered  upon  the 
crofs  y  for  fo  they  explain  that  hard  word  Tranfub- 
flantiation. 

Before  I  engage  in  this  argument,  I  cannot  but 
obferve  what  an  unreafonable  task  we  are  put  upon, 
by  the  bold  confidence  of  our  adverfaries,  to  difpute 
a  matter  of  fenfe  ;  which  is  one  of  thofe  things  about 
which  Ariflode  Jfeth  long  fince  pronounced  there 
O'jght  to  be  no  difpute. 

Ic 


A  difcourfe  againjl^  5cc.  199 

It  might  well,  feem  llrange  if  any  man  fhould  SERM. 
write  a  book  to  prove  that  an  egg  is  not  an  elephant, 
and  that  a  musket-bullet  is  not  a  pike :  it  is  every 
whit  as  hard  a  cafe,  to  be  put  to  maintain  by  a 
long  difcourfe,  that  what  we  fee  and  handle  and  tafte 
to  be  bread  is  bread,  and  not  the  body  of  a  man  ; 
and  what  we  fee  and  tafle  to  be  wine  is  wine,  and 
not  blood :  and  if  this  evidence  may  not  pafs  for 
fufficient  without  any  farther  proof,  I  do  not  lee 
why  any  man,  that  hath  confidence  enough  to  do 
fo,  may  not  deny  any  thing  to  be  what  all  the  world 
fees  it  is ;  or  affirm  any  thing  to  be  what  all  the 
world  fees  it  is  not ;  and  this  without  all  poflibiiity 
of  being  fardier  confuted.  So  that  the  bufineis  of 
Tranfubflantiation  is  not  a  controverfy  of  fcripturc 
againft  fcripturc,  or  of  reafon  againfl  reaibn,  but  of 
downright  impudence  againft  the  plain  meaning  of 
fcripturc,  and  all  the  fenfe  and  reafon  of  mankind. 

It  is  a  mofl  felf- evident  falfhood  -,  and  there  is  no 
dodrine  or  propofition  in  the  world  that  is  of  it  k\i 
more  evidendy  true,  than  Tranfubftantiation  is  evi- 
dently falfe  :  and  yet  if  it  were  poffible  to  be  true,  it 
would  be  the  moft  ill-natured  and  pernicious  truth 
in  the  world,  becaufe  it  would  fuffer  nothing  elfe  to 
be  true  \  it  is  like  the  Roman-catholick  church, 
which  will  needs  be  the  whole  chriftian  church,  and 
will  allow  no  other  fociety  of  chriftians  to  be  any 
part  of  it :  fo  Tranfabftantiation,  if  it  be  true  at  all, 
it  is  all  truth,  and  nothing  elfe  is  true  ;  for  it  cannot 
be  true  unlefs  our  fenfes,  and  the  fenfes  of  all  man- 
kind be  deceived  about  their  proper  objeds ;  and 
if  this  be  true  and  certain,  then  nothing  d^Q  can  be 
fo  ;  for  if  we  be  not  certain  of  what  we  fee,  we  can 
be  certaitt  of  nothing.  And 


200  -^  dtfcQurfe  againfl 

iERM.  And  yet  notwithftanding  aJl  this,  there  are  a  com- 
^"^^  •  pany  of  men  in  the  world  fo  abandoned  and  given 
up  by  God  to  the  efficacy  of  delufion  as  in  good 
earned  to  believe  this  grofs  and  palpable  error,  and 
to  impofe  t\\^  belief  of  it  upon  the  chriilian  world 
under  no  lefs  penalties  than  of  temporal  death  and 
eternal  damnation.  And  therefore,  to  undeceive,  if 
poffible,  thefe  del'jded  fouls,  it  will  be  necefiary  to 
examine  the  pretended  grounds  of  fo  falfe  a  dodtrinc, 
and  to  ^y  open  the  monftrous  ablurdity  of  it. 

And  in  the  handling  of  this  argument,  1  flmll  pro- 
ceed in  this  plain  method. 

I.  I  fliall  confider  the  pretended  grounds  and  rea- 
fons  of  the  church  of  Rome  for  this  do^lrine. 

II.  I  fhall  produce  our  objedions  againft  it.  And 
if  I  can  fhew  that  there  is  no  tolerable  ground  for 
it,  and  that  there  are  invincible  objections  againft 
it,  then  every  man  is  not  only  in  reafon  excufed 
from  believing  this  dodrine,  but  hath  great  caufe 
to  believe  the  contrary. 

I.  Firft,  I  will  confider  the  pretended  grounds 
and  reafons  of  the  church  of  Rome  for  this  doc- 
trine. Which  muft  be  one  or  more  of  thefe  five; 
Either  ift,  the  authority  of  fcripture.  Or  2dly,  the 
perpetual  -  belief  of  this  docftrinc  in  the  chriftian 
church,  as  an  evidence  that  they  always  underftood 
and  interpreted  our  Saviour's  words,  ^'  this  is  my 
"  body, "  in  this  fenfc.  Or  3dly,  the  authority  of 
the  prefent  church  to  make  and  declare  new  articles 
of  faith.  Or  4thly,  the  abfolute  necelFity  of  fjch 
a  change  as  this  in  the  facrament,  to  the  comfort 
and  benefit  of  thofe  who  receive  this  facrament.  Or 
fthly,  to  magnify  the  power  of  the  prieft  in  being 
able  to  work  fo  great  a  miracle.  ift.  They 


Tranfubjianfiafion.  201 

ift.  They  pretend  for  this  dodrine  the  authority  S  E  R  M. 
of  fcripture  in  thofe  words  of  our  Saviour,  "  this 
"  is  my  body."     Now  to  fhew  the  infufiiciency  of 
this  pretence,  I  fhall  endeavour  to  make  good  thefc 
two  things. 

1.  That  there  is  no  necefTity  of  underllanding 
thofe  words  of  our  Saviour  in  the  fenfe  of  Tran- 
fubftantiation. 

2.  There  is  a  great  deal  of  reafon,  nay  that  it  is 
very  abfurd  and  unreafonable,  not  to  underll^nd  them 
otherwife. 

Firft,  that  there  is  no  necefTity  to  underiland  thofe 
words  of  our  Saviour  in  the  fenfe  of  Tranfubflan- 
tiation.  If  there  be  any,  it  muil  be  from  one  of 
thefe  two  reafons.  Either  becaufe  there  are  no  figu- 
rative expreiTions  in  fcripture,  which  I  think  no  man 
ever  yet  faid :  or  elfe,  becaufe  a  facrament  admits 
of  no  figures ;  which  would  be  very  abfurd  for  any 
man  to  fay,  fince  it  is  of  the  very  nature  of  a  facra- 
ment to  reprefent  and  exhibit  Ibme  invifible  grace 
and  benefit  by  an  outward  fign  and  figure :  and 
cfpecially  fince  it  cannot  be  denied,  but  that  in  the 
inditution  of  this  very  facrament  our  Saviour  ufeth 
fio-urative  expreflions,  and  feveral  words  which  cannot 
be  taken  ftridlly  and  literally.  When  he  gave  the  cup 
he  faid,  "  This  cup  is  the  new  teftament  in  my 
*^  blood,  which  is  fhed  for  you  and  for  many,  for 
''  the  remiflion  of  fins. "  Where  firfi:,  the  cup  is 
put  for  the  wine  contained  in  the  cup  •,  or  elfe,  if  the 
words  be  literally  taken,  fo  as  to  fignify  a  fubftan- 
tial  change,  it  is  not  of  the  wine  but  of  the  cup  j 
and  that,  not  into  the  blood  of  Christ  but  into 
the  new  teftament  or  new  covenant  in  his  blood. 

Vol.  II.  C  c  Befides^ 

4- 


202  A  difcGurfe  agatnjl 

SERM.  Befides,  that  his  blood  is  faid  then  to  be  fhed,  and 
his  body  to  be  broken,  which  was  not  'till  his  paf- 
fion,  which  followed  the  infiitution  and  firfl  cele- 
bration of  this  facrament. 

But  that  there  is  no  neceffity  to  underiland  our 
Saviour's  words  in  the  fenfe  of  Tranfabftr.ntiation, 
I  will  take  the  plain  concefTion  of  a  great  number 
of  the  mod  learned  Writers  of  the  church  of  Rome 
in  this  controverfy.  (a)  Bellarmine,  (b)  Suarez  and 
(c)  Vafquez  do  acknowledge  Scotus  the  great  fchool- 
man  to  have  faid,  that  this  dodlrine  cannot  be  evi- 
dently proved  from  fcripture  :  and  Bellarmine  grants 
this  not  to  be  improbable ;  and  Suarez  and  Vafquez 
acknowledge  (d)  Durandus  to  have   faid  as  much. 

(e)  Ocham,  another  famous  fclioolman,  fays  expref- 
ly,  "  that  the  dodrine  which  holds  the  fubitance  of 
"  the  bread  and  wine  to  remain  after  confecration, 
««  is   neither  repugnant   to  reafon  nor  fcripture. " 

(f )  Petrus  ab  Alliaco,  cardinal  of  Cambray,  fays  plain- 
ly, "  that  the  dodrine  of  the  fubflance  of  bread 
*'  and  wine  remaining  after  confccration  is  more 
*«  eafy  and  free  from  abfurdity;,  more  rational,  and 
«'  no  ways  repugnant  to  the  authority  of  fcripture  i" 
nay  more,  that  for  the  other  dodrine,  viz.  ofTran- 
fubftantiation,  *'  there  is  no  evidence  in  fcripture." 

(g)  Gabriel  Biel,  another  great  fchoolman  and  di- 
vine of  their  church,  freely  declares,  "  that  as  to 
«'  any  thing  expreft  in  the  canon  of  the  fcriptures, 
«'  a  man  may  believe  that  the  fubitance  of  bread 

(a)  deEuch.  1.  3.  c.  23.  (b)  in  3.  dif.  49.  Qu.  75.  Seft.  2. 
(c)  in  3.  part.  difp.  180.  Qu.  75.  art.  2.  c.  15.  (dj  in  Sent.  1, 
4.  dill.  II.  Qu.  1.  n.  15.  (e)  in  4.  Sent.  0^5-  &  Qi:cdl.  4. 
Q.  3.  (f)  in  4.  Sent.  Q^  6.  art  2.  (g)  in  canon  MifT. 
i.ect.  40. 

"  and 


TranfuhJlanfiatio?t,  203 

«  and  wine  doth   remain  after  confecration  :  "  and  ^^^,}^ 
therefore  he   refolves  the  belief  of  Tranfubfiantia-     ^    '■^• 
tion  into  fome   other  revelation,    befides   fcripture, 
which  he  fuppofeth  the  church  had  about  it.     Car- 
dinal (h)  Cajetan  confefleth,  "  that  the  gofpel  doth 
"  no    where   exprefs    that    the    bread   is   changed 
«  into  the  body  of  Christ;  that    we  have  this 
"  from  the  authority  of  the  church  :  "  nay  he  goes 
farther,  "  that  there  is  nothing  in  the  gofpel  which 
<«  enforceth  any  man  to  underjfland  thefe  words  of 
*'  Christ,  this  is  my  body,  in  a  proper  and  not 
"  in  a  metaphorical  fenfe  ;  but  the  church  having 
"  underflood  them  in  a  proper  fenfe,  they  are  to  be 
«'  fo  explained, "  which  words  in  the  Roman  edition 
of  Cajetan  are  expunged  by  order  of  Pope  (i)  Pius  V. 
Cardinal  (k)  Contarenus,  and  (1)  Melchior  Canus  one 
of  the  bed  and  mofl  judicious  writers  that  church  ever 
had,  reckon  this  doctrine  among  thofe  "  which  are 
*'  not  fo  expreOy  found  in  fcripture. "     I  will  add 
but  one  more  of  great  authority  in  the  church,  and 
a  reputed  martyr,   (m)  Fifher  bilhop  of  Rochefler, 
who  ingenuouQy  confefleth  that  in  the  words  of  the 
infxitution  "  there  is  not  one  v/ord  from  whence  the 
^'  true  prefence  of  the  flefh  and  blood  of  Christ 
*'  in  our  mafs  can  be  proved. "     So  that  we  need 
not  much  contend  that  this  do6trine  hath  no  cer- 
tain foundation  in  Scripture,  when  this  is  fo  fully 
and  frankly  acknowledged  by  our  adverfaries  them- 
felves. 

[\i)  In  Aquin.  3.  part,  Qa.  75.  art.  t.  (1)  ^gid.  Conic, 
de  Sacram.  C<.  7$.  art.  i.  n.  13.  (k)  de  Sacram.  1.  2.  c  3. 
(1)  Loc.  Theoiog.  1.  3.  c.  3.  (m)  contra  captiv.  Babylon. 
c.  10.  n.  2. 

C  c  2  Secondly, 


204  ^  difcourfe  againjl 

S  E  R  M.      Secondly,  if  there  be  no  necefTity  of  underflanding 
our  Saviour's  words  in  the  fcnfe  of  Tranfubftantia- 
tion,  I  am  fure  there  is  a  great  deal  of  reafon  to  un- 
derftand  them  otherwifc.     Whether  we  confider  the 
like  exprefllons  in  fcripture;  as  where  our  Saviour 
fays  he  is  the  door  and  the  true  vine  (which  the 
church  of  Rome  would  mightily  have  triumphed  in, 
had  it  been  faid  "  this  is  my  true  body.")     And  fo 
likewifc  where  the  church  is  faid  to  be  Christ's  bo- 
dy ;  and  the  rock  which  followed  the  liraelites  to  be 
Christ,  i  Cor.  x.  4.  "  They  drank  of  that  rock 
*'  which  followed  them,  and  that  rock  was  Ch  rist  :'* 
all  which,  and  innumerable  more  like  exprefnons  in 
fcripture,  every  man  underilands  in  a  figurative,  and 
not  in  a  ftridly  literal  and  abfurd  fenfe.     And  it  is 
very  well  known,  that  in  the  hebrew  language  things 
are  commonly  faid  to  be  that  which  they  do  fignify 
and  reprefent ;  and  there  is  not  in  that  language  a 
inore  proper  and  ufual  way  of  exprefTing  a  thing  to 
fignify  fo  and  fo,  than  to  fay  that  it  is  fb  and  fo. 
Thus  Jofeph  expounded  Pharaoh's  dream  to  him. 
Gen.  xli.  26.  fays,  "  the  feven  good  kine  are  itvtn 
*'  years,  and  the  itvt'Ci  good  ears  of  corn  are  {^vtn 
*'  years,"  that  is,  they  fignified  or  reprefented  feven 
years  of  plenty ;    and  fo  Pharaoh  underftood  him, 
and  fo  would  any  man  of  fenfe  underfland  the  like 
cxprefTions:  nor  do  I  believe  that  any  fenfible  man 
who  had  never  heard   of  Tranfubflantiation  beino- 

o 

grounded  upon  thefe  words  of  our  Saviour,  "  this 
*'  is  my  body,"  would  upon  reading  the  inllitution 
of  the  facrament  in  the  gofpel  ever  have  imagin'd 
any  fuch  thing  to  be  meant  by  our  Saviour  in  thofe 
words  J  but  would  have  underHood  his  meaning  to 

have 


T'ranfuhjiantiation.  2  or 

have  been   "  this  bread  fignifies  my  body,  this  cup  SERM. 
"  fignifies  my  blood;  and   this  which  you  fee  me  '^^^^* 
*'  now  do,  do  ye  hereafter  for  a  memorial  of  me  :'* 
but  furely  it  would  never  have  entred  into  any  man's 
mind  to  have  thought  that  our  Saviour  did  literal- 
ly hold  himfelf  in  his  hand,  and  give  away  himfelf 
from  himfelf  with  his  own  hands.     Or  whether  wc 
compare  thefe  words  of  our  Saviour  with  the  an- 
cient form  of  the  paflbver  ufed  by  the  Jews  from 
Ezra's  time,  as  (n)  Juftin  Martyr  tells  us,  tSto  to 
•wda-^cf.  6  dairyip  Ji/jtojv  k^  yf  Y.cLrcL(^\)yri  riij.m^  ''  this  paf- 
"  fover  is  our  Saviour  and  our  refuge:"  not  that 
they  believed  the  pafchal  lamb  to  be  fubflantially 
changed  either  into  God  their  Saviour  who  deli- 
vered them  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  or  into  the 
Mess  IAS  the  Saviour  whom  they  expeded,  and 
who  was  fignified  by  it :  but  this  lamb  which  they 
did  eat  did  rcprcfent  to  them  and  put  them  in  mind 
of  that  falvation  which  God-  wrought  for  their  fa- 
thers in   Egypt,   when  by   the  flaying  of  a"  lamb 
and  fprinkling  the  blood  of  it  upon  their  doors  their 
firft-born  were  pafTed  over  and  fpared  ;  and  did  like- 
wife  forefhew  the  falvation  of  theMsssiAS,  "  the 
"  lamb  of  God  that  was  to  take  away  the  fins  of  the 
"  world." 

And  nothing  is  more  common  in  all  languages 
than  to  give  the  name  of  the  thing  fignified  to  the 
fign :  as  the  delivery  of  a  deed  or  writing  under 
hand  and  feal  is  call'd  a  conveyance  or  making  over 
of  fuch  an  eftate,  and  it  is  really  fo ;  not  the  delivery 
of  mere  wax  and  parchment,  but  the  conveyance 
of  a  real  eftate ;  as  truly  and  really  to  all  efied:s  and 

(«)  Dialog.  cumTryp.  p.  297,  Edit.  Parif.  1639. 

purpofes 


2o6  ^  difcourfe  againjl 

S  E  R  M.  purpofes  of  law,  as  if  the  very  material  houfes  and 
lands  themfclves  could  be  and  were  a(5tually  delivered 
into  my  hands;  in  like  manner  the  names  of  the 
things  themfelves  made  over  to  us  in  the  new  cove- 
nant of  the  gofpel  between  God  and  man,  are  given 
to  the  figns  or  fcals  of  that  covenant.  By  baptifm 
chriftians  are  faid  to  be  "  made  partakers  of  the 
*'  Holy  Ghost,"  Heb.  vi.  4.  And  by  the  facra- 
ment  of  the  Lord's  fupper  we  are  faid  to  commu- 
nicate, or  to  be  made  partakers  of  the  body  of 
Christ  which  was  broken,  and  of  his  blood  which 
was  fhed  for  us,  that  is,  of  the  real  benefits  of  his 
death  and  paffion.  And  thus  St.  Paul  fpeaks  of  this 
facrament,  i  Cor.  x.  1 6.  "  The  cup  of  blefling  which 
«'  we  blels,  is  it  not  the  communion  of  the  blood  of 
*'  Christ?  the  bread  which  we  break,  is  it  not 
*'  the  communion  of  the  body  of  Christ  ?"  But 
flill  it  is  bread,  and  he  dill  calls  it  fo,  ver.  17.  "  for 
*'  we  being  many,  are  one  bread  and  one  body  ;  for 
'^  we  are  partakers  of  that  one  bread."  The  church 
of  Rome  might,  if  they  plcafed,  as  well  argue  from 
hence,  that  all  chriftians  are  fubftantially  changed  firft 
into  bread,  and  then  into  the  natural  body  of 
Christ  by  their  participation  of  the  facrament,  be- 
caufc  they  are  faid  thereby  to  be  "  one  bread  and  one 
"  body."  And  the  fame  apoftle  in  the  next  chap- 
ter, after  he  had  fpoken  of  the  confecration  of  the 
elements,  ftill  calls  them  the  bread  and  the  cup,  in 
three  verfes  together,  "  As  often  as  ye  eat  this  bread 
*'  and  drink  this  cup,  ver.  26.  Whofoever  iliall  eat 
^  this  bread  and  drink  this  cup  of  the  Lord  un- 
"  worthily,  ver.  27.  But  let  a  man  examine  himfelf, 
*'  and  fo  let  him  eat  of  that  bread  and  drink  of  that 

"  cup, 


Tranfuhjiantiatlon,  2  07 

^*  cup,   ver.    28."      And   our    Saviour    himfelf  SERM, 
when  he  had  faid  "  this  is  my  blood  of  the  new  tefta-  ^_  Vj 
•'  ment,"  immediately  adds,  "  *  but  I  fay  unto  you,  *  Matth. 
"  I  will  not  henceforth  drink  of  this  fruit  of  the^'^^^'  ^9* 
"  vine,  until  I  drink  it  new  with  you  in  my  Fa- 
"  ther's  kingdom,"  that  is,  not 'till  after  his  re- 
furrection,  which  was  the  firjfl  ftep  of  his  exaltation 
into  the  kingdom  given  him  by  his  Father,  when 
the  fcripture  tells  us  he  did  eat  and  drink  with  his 
difciples.     But  that  which  I  obferve  from  our  Sa- 
viour's  words  is,  that  after  the  confecration  of  the 
cup  and  the  delivering  of  it  to  his  difciples  to  drink 
of  it,  he  tells  them  that  he  would  thenceforth  drink 
no  more  of  that  fruit  of  the  vine,  which  he  had  now 
drank  with  them,  'till  after  his  refurredlion.     From 
whence  it  is  plain  that  it  was  the  fruit  of  the  vine,  real 
wine,  which  our  Saviour  drank  of,  and  communi- 
cated to  his  difciples  in  the  facrament. 

Befides,  if  we  confider  that  he  celebrated  this  fa- 
crament before  his  paflion,  it  is  impoflible  thefe  words 
fhould  be  underftood  literally  of  the  natural  body  and 
blood  of  Christ  ;  becaufe  it  was  his  body  broken 
and  his  blood  Ihed  which  he  gave  to  his  difciples, 
which  if  we  underftand  literally  of  his  natural  body 
broken  and  his  blood  fhcd,  then  thefe  words,  "  this 
*'  is  my  body  which  is  broken,  and  this  is  my  blood 
"  which  is  ilied,'*  could  not  be  true,  becaufe  his  body 
was  then  whole  and  unbroken,   and  his  blood  not 
then  fhed  -,  nor  could  it  be  a  propitiatory  lacrifice  (as 
they  affirm  this  facrament  to  be)  unlefs  they  will  fay 
that  propitiation  was  made  before  Christ  fufler'd: 
.  and  it  is  likewife  impoflible  that  the  difciples  fhould 
underftand  thefe  words  literally,  becaufe  they  not  on- 


2o8  A  dlfcoiirfe  againfl 

S  E  R  M.  ]y  plainly  faw  that  what  he  gave  them  was  bread  and 
wine,  but  they  faw  likewife  as  plainly  that  it  was  not 
his  body  which  was  given,  but  his  body  which  gave 
that  which  was  given ;  not  his  body  broken  and  his 
bleod  fhed,  becaufe  they  faw  him  alive  at  that  very 
time,  and  beheld  his  body  whole  and  unpierc'd  ;  and 
therefore  they  could  not  underftand  thefe  words  lite- 
rally :  if  they  did,  can  we  imagine  that  the  difci- 
ples,  who  upon  all  other  occafions  were  fo  full  of 
quefticns  and  objcdions,  fhould  make  no  difficulty 
of  this  matter?  nor  fb  much  as  ask  our  Saviour, 
how  can  thefe  things  be  ?  that  they  fhould  not  tell 
him,  we  fee  this  to  be  bread  and  that  to  be  wine,  and 
we  fee  thy  body  to  be  diflindt  from  both  j  we  fee  thy 
body  not  broken,  and  thy  blood  not  fhed. 

From  all  which  it  muft  needs  be  very  evident  to 
any  man  that  will  impartially  confider  things,  how 
little  reafon  there  is  to  underftand  thofe  words  of  our 
Saviour,  "  this  is  my  body,  and  this  is  my  blood," 
in  the  {tn{z  of  Tranfubftantiation ;  nay,  on  the  con- 
trary, that  there  is  very  great  reafon  and  an  evident 
neceffity  to  underftand  them  otherwife.  I  proceed  to 
fhew, 

2dly,  That  this  do6trine  is  not  grounded  upon  the 
perpetual  belief  of  the  chrifbian  church,  which  the 
church  of  Rome  vainly  pretends  as  an  evidence  that 
the  church  did  always  underftand  and  interpret  our 
Saviour's  words  in  this  {<zYik, 

To  manifeft  the  groundlefnefs  of  this  pretence,  I 
fhall,   I.  fhew  by  plain  tef^mony  of  the  fathers  in 
feveral  ages,  that  this  dodlririe  was  not  the  belief  of 
the  ancient  chriftian  church.   2.  I  fhall  fhew  the  time  . 
and  occafion  of  its  coming  in,  and  by  what  degrees 

it 


Tranfub/ianfiafion. 
it  grew  up  and  was  eftablifh'd  in  the  Roman  church. 
3.  I.Hiall  aniwer  their  great  pretended  demonflrationj 
that  this  always  was  and  mufl  have  been  the  conflanc 
belief  of  the  chriflian  church. 

1 .  I  fhali  fliew  by  plain  tefdmonies  of  the  fithers 
in  feveral  ages,  for  above  five  hundred  years  after 
Christ,  that  this  dodlrine  was  not  the  belief  of  the 
ancient  chriltian  church.  I  deny  not  but  that  the  fa- 
thers do^  and  that  with  great  reafon^  very  much 
magnify  the  wonderful  myftery  and  efficacy  of  this 
facrament,  and  frequently  fpeak  of  a  great  fuperna- 
tural  change  made  by  the  divine  benedidion ;  which 
we  alfo  readily  acknov/ledge.  They  fay  indeed,  that 
the  elements  of  bread  and  wine  do  by  the  divine 
blelTing  become  to  us  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ: 
but  they  likewife  fay  that  the  names  of  the  things 
fignified  are  given  to  the  figns ;  that  the  bread  and 
wine  do  ftill  rem_ain  in  their  proper  nature  and  fub- 
flance,  and  that  they  are  turn'd  into  the  fubdance  of 
our  bodies;  that  the  body  of  Christ  in  the  facra- 
ment  is  not  his  natural  body,  but  the  fign  and  fi- 
gure of  it;  not  that  body  v/hich  was  crucified,  nor 
that  blood  which  was  fhed  upon  the  crofs ;  and  that 
it  is  impious  to  underfland  the  eating  of  the  flefh  of 
the  Son  of  man  and  drinking  his  blood  literally;  all 
which  are  diredlly  oppofite  to  the  doflrine  of  Tran- 
fubftantiation,  and  utterly  inconfiftent  with  it.  I  will 
feled  but  fome  few  teflimonies  of  many  things  which 
I  might  bring  to  this  purpofe. 

I  begin  with  Jufcin  Martyr^   who  fiys  exprefly, 
*'  that  {0)  our  blood  and  flefli  are  nouriihed  by  the 
{0)  Apol.  2.  p.  98.  Edit.  Parif.  1636, 

Vol.  IL  D  d  «« con- 

4i 


XXVI. 


210  A  difconrfe  againjt 

SE  R  M.  «  converfion  of  that  food  which  we  receive  in  the  eu- 
"  charift :"  but  that  cannot  be  the  natural  body  and 
blood  of  Christ,  for  no  man  will  fay  that  that  is 
converted  into  the  nourifhment  of  our  bodies. 

The  fecond  is  [f)  Irenasus,  who  fpcaking  of  this 
facrament  fays,  "  that  the  bread  which  is  from  the 
"  earth,  receiving  the  divine  invocation,  is  now  no- 
*'  longer  common  bread,  but  the  eucharifl  (or  facra- 
*'  ment)  confifiing  of  two  things,  the  one  earthly,. 
*'  the  other  heavenly."  He  fays  it  is  no  longer  com- 
mon bread,  but  after  invocation  or  confecration  it  be- 
comes the  facrament,  that  is,  bread  fandined,  con- 
fiding of  two  things,  an  earthly  and  an  heavenly  ;  the 
earthly  thing  is  bread,  and  the  heavenly  is  the  divine 
bleffing  which  by  the  invocation  or  confecration  is 
added  to  ii.  And  {q)  elfewhere  he  hath  this  paf- 
fage,  "  when  therefore  the  cup  that  is  mix'd  (that  is, 
*'  of  wine  and  v/ater)  and  the  bread  that  is  broken 
"  receives  the  word  of  God,  it  becomes  the  eucha- 
«'  rift  of  the  blood  and  body  of  Christ,  of  which 
"  the  fubftance  of  our  fiefh  is  increafed  and  confifts  ;'* 
but  if  that  which  we  receive  in  the  facrament  do 
nourifh  our  bodies,  it  muft  be  bread  and  wine,  and 
not  the  natural  body  and  blood  of  Christ.  There 
is  another  remarkable  teftimony  of  Irenasus,  which 
though  it  be  not  now  extant  in  thofe  works  of  his 
which  remain,  yet  hath  been  preferv'd  by  if)  Oecu- 
menius,  and  it  is  this  \  "  when  (lays  he)  the  greeks 
"  had  taken  fome  fervants  of  the  chriilian  catechu- 
*'  meni  (that  is,  fuch  as  had  not  been  admitted  lo 
"  the  facrament)  and  afterwards  urged  them  by  vio- 

{/))   Lib.  4,  c.  24.         (y)  Lib.  5,  c  31.         (/)  Co.iiir.ent.  in 
1  i'a,  c.  3. 

"  Icnce 


Tra?7fubJIantiationM  2 1 1 

"  lence  to  tell  them  fome  of  the  fecrets  of  the  chri-  ^.^.?;,^'^' 
"  flians,  thefe  fervants  having  nothing  to  fay  that  ^ 
"  might  gratify  thofe  who  offered  violence  to  them, 
*'  except  only  that  they  had  heard  from  their  mailers, 
*'  that  the  divine  communion  was  the  blood  and  bo- 
*'  dy  of  Christ,  they  thinking  that  it  was  really 
"  blood  and  fieih,  declar'd  as  much  to  thofe  that 
•*'  queilioned  them.  The  greeks  taking  this  as  if  it 
*'  wTre  really  done  by  the  chriftians,  difcovered  it  to 
"  others  of  the  greeks;  who  hereupon  put  Sandlus 
"  and  Blandina  to  the  torture  to  make  them  confels 
"  it."  To  whom  Blandina  boldly  anfwered,  "  How 
*'  could  they  endure  to  do  this,  who  by  way  of  exer- 
"  clfe  (or  abftinence)  do  not  eat  that  ?idh  which 
"  may  lawfully  be  eaten?"  By  which  it  appears 
that  this  which  they  would  have  charg'd  upon  chri- 
llians,  as  if  they  had  literally  eaten  the  fiefh  and 
blood  of  Christ  in  the  facrament,  was  a  falfe  ac- 
cufation  which  thefe  martyrs  denied,  faying  they  were 
fo  far  from  that,  that  they  for  their  part  did  not  eat 
any  fleln  at  all. 

The  next  is  Tertullian,  who  proves  agalnft  Mar- 
cion  the  heretick,  that  the  body  of  our  Saviour 
was  not  a  mere  phantafm  and  appearance,  but  a  real 
body,  becaufe  the  facrament  is  a  figure  and  image  of 
his  body ;  and  if  there  be  an  image  of  his  body  he 
muil  have  a  real  body,  other  wife  the  facrament 
would  be  an  image  of  an  image.  His  words  are 
thefe,  (j)  "  the  bread  which  our  Saviour  took  and 
*'  diflributed  to  his  difciples  he  m.ade  his  own  body, 
"  faying,  this  is  my  body,  that  is,  the  image  or  fi- 
"  gure  of  my  body.     Bat  it  could  not  have  been 

{i)  Adverf.  Marcionem,  I.  4.  p  571.  Edit,  Rigal.  Paiii'.  1634. 
D  d  2  the 


212  A  difcourfe  againfl 

S  E  R  M.  "  the  figure  of  his  body,  if  there  had  not  been  a 
XXVI 

"  true  and  real  body.'*     And  arguing  againft  the 

fcepticks  who  denied  the  certainty  of  fenfe,  he 
ufeth  this  argument :  that  if  we  quedion  our  fenfes, 
we  may  doubt  whether  our  bleffed  Saviour  were 
not  deceived  in  what  he  heard,  and  faw,  and  touch- 
ed. (/)  "  He  might  (fays  he)  be  deceived  in  the 
*'  voice  from  heaven,  in  the  fmelJ  of  the  ointment 
*«  with  which  he  was  anointed  againft  his  burial, 
*'  and  in  the  tafte  of  the  wine  which  he  confecrated 
"  in  remembrance  of  his  blood."  So  that  it  feems 
we  are  to  truft  our  fenfes,  even  in  the  matter  of  the 
facrament :  and  if  that  be  true,  the  dodrine  of  Tran- 
fubftantiation  is  certainly  falfe. 

Origen  in  his  (^)  comment  on  Matth.  xv.  fpeak- 
ing  of  the  facrament  hath  this  pafTage,  "  That  food 
*'  which  is  lan(5l:ified  by  the  word  of  God  and 
*'  prayer,  as  to  that  of  it  which  is  material,  goeth 
*'  into  the  belly  and  is  caft  out  into  the  draught,'* 
which  none  will  furely  fay  of  the  body  of  Christ. 
And  afterwards  he  adds  by  way  of  explication,  "  it 
*'  is  not  the  matter  of  the  bread,  but  the  words 
*«  which  are  fpoken  over  it,  which  profiteth  him  that 
"  worthily  eateth  the  Lord  :  and  this  (he  fays)  he 
"  had  fpoken  concerning  the  typical  and  fymbolical 
"  body."  So  that  the  matter  of  bread  remaineth 
in  the  facrament,  and  this  Origen  calls  the  typical 
and  fymbolical  body  of  Christ;  and  it  is  not  the 
natural  body  of  Christ  which  is  there  eaten,  for 
the  food  eaten  in  the  facrament,  as  to  that  of  it 
which  is  material,  goeth  into  the  belly  and  is  caft  out 
into  the  draughr.     This  teftimony  is  fo  very  plain  in 

(/)  Lib.  de  Aftima.  p.  319.     (a)  Edit.  Huetii. 

the 


Tranfubjlantiation,  212 

the  caufe,  that  Sextus  Senenfis  fufpecls  this  place  of  SER  M, 
Origen  was  depraved  by  the  hereticks.  Cardinal  ^^^^^' 
Perron  is  contented  to  allow  it  to  be  Origen's,  but 
rejects  his  tefrimony  becaufe  he  was  accufed  of  herefy 
by  fome  of  the  fathers,  and  fays  he  talks  like  a  he- 
retick  in  this  place.  So  that  with  much  ado  this 
teflimony  is  yielded  to  us.  The  fame  father  in  his 
(x)  homilies  upon  Leveticus  fpeaks  thus,  "  There  is 
"  alio  in  the  new  teftament  a  letter  which  kills  him 
"  who  doth  not  fpiritually  underiland  thofe  things 
"  which  are  faid ;  for  if  we  take  according  to  the 
''  ktter  that  which  is  faid,  EXCEPT  YE  EAT 
"  MY  FLESH  AND  DRINK  MY  BLOOD,  this 
^^  letter  kills.  "  And  this  is  alfo  a  killing  teflimo- 
ny, and  not  to  be  anfwered  but  in  Cardinal  Perron's 
way,  by  faying  he  talks  like  a  heretick. 

St.  Cyprian  hath  a  whole  epiftle  (y)  to  Cecilius, 
againfl  thofe  who  gave  the  communion  in  water  only 
without  wine  mingled  with  it ;  and  his  main  argu- 
ment againfl  them  is  this,  "  that  the  blood  of 
"  Christ  with  which  we  are  redeemed  and  quick- 
"  ened  cannot  feem  to  be  in  the  cup,  when  there  is 
*'  no  wine  in  the  cup  by  which  the-  blood  of  Christ 
"  is  reprefented  :"  and  afterv/ards  he  fays,  "  that 
"  contrary  to  the  evangelical  and  apoflolical  doc- 
"  trine  v;ater  was  in  fome  places  ofrer'd  (or  given) 
*'  in  the  Lord's  cup,  which  (fays  he)  alone  cannot 
"  exprefs  (or  reprefent)  the  blood  of  Christ.'* 
And  lafrly  he  tells  us,  "  that  by  water  the  people 
f'  is  underilood,  by  wine  the  blood  of  Christ  is 
^'  fhewn  (or  reprefented)  but  when  in  the  cup  wa- 
"  tsr  is  mingled  with  wine  the  people  is  united  to 
(x)  Ca,.  10.  (y)  Ep.  65. 

«  Christ,'* 


214  A  dtfcourfe  agamfl 

SERM.'-  Christ."     So  that  according  to  this  argument 
^^y^^  wine  in  the  facramental  cup  is  no  otherwife  changed 
into  the  blood  of  Christ,   than  the  water  mixed 
with  it  is  changed  into  the  people  which  are  faid  to 
be  united  to  Christ. 

I  omit  many  others,  and  pafs  to  St.  Auflin  in  the 
fourth  age  after  Christ.     And  I  the  rather  infift 
upon  his  teflimony,  becaufe  of  his  eminent  efteem 
and  authority  in  the  Latin  church  •,  and  he  alfo  calls 
*'  the  elements  of  the  facrament  the  figure  and  fign 
*'  of  Christ's  body  and  blood.''     In  his  book  a- 
gainfl  Adamantus  the  Manichee  we  have  this  ex- 
prefTion,  "  (z)  Our  Lord  did  not  doubt  to  fay,  this 
*'  is  my  body,  when  he  gave  the  fign  of  his  bo- 
*'  dy. "     And  in  his  explication  of  the  third  Pfalm, 
fpeaking  of  Judas  whom  our  Lord    admitted  to 
his  laft  fupper,  "  in   which  (fays  he)  (a)  he  com- 
"  mended  and  delivered  to  his  difciples  the  figure 
*'  of  his  body  \ "    language   which  would  nov/  be 
cenfur'd  for  herefy  in  the  church  of  Rome.     Indeed 
he  was  never  accufed  of  herefy,  as  cardinal  Perron 
fays  Origen  was,  but  he  talks  as  hke  one  as  Origen 
himfelf.     And  in  his  comment  on  the  98th  Pfalm, 
fpeaking  of  the  offence  which  the  difciples  took  at 
that  faying  of  our  Saviour,  "  Except  ye  eat  the 
*'  flefh  of  the  Son   of  man  and  drink  his  blood, 
*'  Cs?^."  he  brings  in  our  Saviour  fpeaking  thus 
to  them,   (b)  "  Ye  mufl  underftand  fpiritually,  what 
*'  I  have  faid  unto  you  ;  you  are  not  to  eat  this  body 
"  which  you  fee,    and  to  drink  that  blood  which 
*'  fliall  be  ihed  by  thofe  that  fhall  crucify  me.     I 

(z)  Aug.  Tom.  6.  p.  1S7.  Edit.  Bafi!.  1596.       (.1)  Enarrat. 
in  Pial.  Tcm.  8.  p.  16.      (b)  id.  Tom.  9.  p.  1105. 

have 


ii. 


TrafifuhJlantiatiGn,  2 1  c 

"  have  commended  a  certain  facrament  to  you,SERM. 
which  being  fpirtually  underflood  will  give  you  ^^^^• 
hfe. "  What  more  oppofite  to  the  dodlrine  of  "^ 
Tranfubftantiation,  than  that  the  difciples  were  not 
to  eat  that  body  of  Christ  which  they  iaw,  nor  to 
drink  that  blood  which  was  fhed  upon  the  crofs,  but 
all  this  was  to  be  underflood  fpiritually  and  accord- 
ing to  the  nature  of  a  facrament  p  for  that  body  he 
tells  us  is  net  here  but  in  heaven,  in  his  comment 
upon  thefe  words,  "  Me  ye  have  not  always,  (c)  He 
"  fpeaks  (fays  he)  of  the  prefence  of  his  body :  ye 
*'  fhall  have  me  according  to  my  providence,  ac- 
^'  cording  to  m.ajelly  and  invifible  grace :  but 
"  according  to  the  flefh  which  the  word  aflumed, 
*^'  according  to  that  which  was  born  of  the  viro-in 
*'  Mary,  ye  (liall  not  have  me :  therefore  bccaufe  he 
*'  converfed  with  his  difciples  forty  days,  he  is  af- 
*'  cended  up  into  heaven,  and  is  not  here.'* 

In  his  23d  epiflle;  (d)  "  l^  the  facrament  (fav^s 
"  he)  had  not  fome  refemblance  of  thofe  things 
"  whereof  they  are  facraments,  they  would  not  be 
"  facraments  at  all :  but  from  this  refemblance  they 
*'  take  for  the  mioil  part  the  names  of  the  things 
"  which  they  reprefent.  Therefore  as  the  facra- 
"  ment  of  the  body  of  Christ  is  in  fome  man- 
"  ner  or  fenfe  Christ's  body,  and  the  facrament 
*'  of  his  blood  is  the  blood  of  Christ  ;  fo  the  fa- 
*'  crament  of  faith  (meaning  baptifm)  is  faith.'^  Up- 
on which  words  of  St.  Aaftin,  there  is  this  remark- 
able glofs  in  their  own  canon  lav/,  *'  (e)  The  hea- 
"  venly  facrament  which  truly  r!'r''efents  the  fiefh 
''  of  Christ  is  called  the  body       Christ;  but 

(c)  Id.  Traa.  50.  in  Joan,     (d)  li.  7cm    z.  p.  93.     (e)  De 
Ccnfccrat.  diil:  2.  Hoc  elt.  ''  iilipro- 


2i6  A  dlfcowfe  againji 


SERM.  "  improperly:  whence  it  is  fliid,  that  after  a  rriarii 
"  ner,  but  not  according  to  the  truth  of  the  thing, 
*'  but  the  myftery  of  the  thing  fignified  ;  fo  that 
"  the  meaning  is,  it  is  called  the  body  of  Christ, 
"  that  is,  it  fignifies  the  body  of  Christ."  And 
if  this  be  St.  Auftin's  meaning,  I  am  fure  no  Pro- 
teftant  can  fpeak  more  plainly  againfl  Tranfubflan- 
tiation.  And  in  the  ancient  canon  of  the  mafs,  be- 
fore it  was  changed  in  compliance  v/ith  this  new 
dodlfine,  it  is  exprefly  called  "  a  facrament,  a  fign, 
*'  an  image  and  a  figure  of  Ch^rist's  body.  "  To 
which  I  will  add  that  remarkable  paffage  of  St.  Au- 
liin  cited  by  (Q  Gratian,  ''  That  as  we  receive  the 
"  fimilitude  of  his  death  in  baptifm,  fo  we  may  alfo 
*'  receive  the  likenefs  of  his  fleih  and  blood ;  that 
*'  fo  neither  may  truth  be  wanting  in  the  facrament, 
*'  nor  pagans  have  occafion  to  make  us  ridiculous  for 
"  drinking  the  blood  of  one  that  was  flain.  " 

I  will  mention  but  one  teftimony  more  of  this  fa- 
ther, but  fo  clear  a  one  as  it  is  impoflible  any  m.an 
in  his  wits  that  had  believed  Tranfubftantiation 
could  have  utter'd.  It  is  in  his  treatife  (g)  de  doc- 
irina  chrtftiayia ;  where  laying  down  feveral  rules 
for  the  right  underftanding  of  fcripture,  he  gives 
this  for  one.  "  If  (fays  he)  the  fpeech  be  a  precept 
*'  forbidding  Ibme  heinous  wickednefs  or  crime,  or 
*'  commanding  us  to  do  good,  it  is  not  figurative-, 
*'  but  if  it  feem  to  command  any  heinous  wicked- 
*'  nefs  or  crime,  or  to  forbid  that  which  is  profita- 
*'  ble  or  beneficial  to  others,  it  is  figurative.  For 
*'  example,  except  ye  eat   the  flelh  of  the  Son  of 

(f)  De  Confecrat.  dill.  2.  Scd.  Uuum.  (g)  Lib.  <;.  Tom. 
3.  P-  53- 

«   mari 


^ranfuhpantiatkn  217 

**  man  and  drink  his  blood,  ye  have  no  life  in  you  :  S  E  R  M. 
"  this  feems  to  command  a  heinous  wickednefs  and 
*'  crime,  therefore  it  is  a  figure ;  commanding  us  to 
''  communicate  of  the  paflion  of  our  Lord,  and 
"  with  delight  and  advantage  to  lay  up  in  our  me- 
''  mory  that  his  flefh  was  crucified  and  wounded  for 
*•  us.**  So  that,  according  to  St.  Auflin's  befl  skill 
in  interpreting  fcripture,  the  literal  eating  of  the  flefh 
of  Christ  and  drinking  his  blood  would  have  been 
a  great  impiety  j  and  therefore  the  exprefilon  is  to  be 
underftood  figuratively :  not  as  cardinal  Perrcn  wou'd 
have  it,  only  in  oppofition  to  the  eating  of  his  flefh 
and  blood  in  the  grofs  appearance  of  fleih  and  blood, 
but  to  the  real  eating  of  his  natural  body  and  blood 
under  any  appearance  whatfocver :  for  St.  Auflin 
doth  not  fay,  this  is  a  figurative  fpeech  wherein  we 
are  commanded  really  to  feed  upon  the  natural  body 
and  blood  of  Christ  under  the  fpecies  of  bread  and 
wine,  as  the  cardinal  would  underfcand  himj  for 
then  the  Ipeech  would  be  literal  and  rot  figurative: 
but  he  fays,  this  is  a  figurative  fpeech  wherein  we  are 
commanded  fpiritually  to  feed  upon  the  remembrance 
of  his  pafllon. 

To  thefe  I  will  add  but  tht-ee  or  four  tedimonies 
more  in  the  two  following  ages. 

The  firll  fliall  be  of  Theodoret,  who  fpeaking  of 
that  Qf)  prophecy  of  Jacob  concerning  our  Saviour, 
"  he  v/afhed  his  garments  in  wine,  and  his  clothes 
"  in  the  blood  of  grapes,"  hath  thefe  words,  "  (/')  as 
"  we  call  the  myftical  fruit  of  the  vine  (that  is,  the 
"  wine  in  the  facrament)  after  confecration  the  blood 
•'  of  the  Lord,  fo  he  (viz.  Jacob)  calls  the  blood  of 

(/?>)  Gen   xlix.  ii.  (7)  Dialog,  i. 

Vol.  IL  E«  "  the 

4.     . 


XWl 


2i8  ji  difcourfe  againfi 

SERM.  "  the  true  vine  (viz.  of  Christ)  the  blood  of  the 
''  grape:"  but  the  blood  of  Christ  is  not  hterally 
and  properly  but  only  figuratively  the  blood  of  the 
grape,  in  the  fame  fenfe  as  he  is  faid  to  be  the  true 
vine  j  and  therefore  the  wine  in  the  facrament  after 
confecration  is  in  like  manner  not  literally  and  pro- 
perly but  figuratively  the  blood  of  Christ.  And 
he  explains  this  afcerv^ards,  faying,  "  that  our  Sa- 
"  viouR  changed  the  names,  and  gave  to  his  body 
"  the  name  of  the  fymbol  or  fign,  and  to  that  fym- 
"  bol  or  fign  the  name  of  his  body;  thus  when  he 
"  had  cali'd  himfelf  the  vine,  he  call'd  the  fymbol 
"  or  fign  his  blood  j"  fo  that  in  the  fame  fenfe  that 
he  call'd  himlelf  the  vine,  he  call'd  the  wine,  which 
is  the  fymbol  of  his  blood,  his  blood  :  "For,  fays 
*'  he,  he  would  have  thofc  who  partake  of  the  di- 
*'  vine  myfteries  not  to  atte.id  to  the  nature  of  the 
*'  things  which  are  feen,  but  by  the  change  of  names 
*'  to  believe  the  change  which  is  made  by  grace ;  for 
^'  he  v/ho  caird  that  which  by  nature  is  a  body,  wheat 
"  and  bread,  and  again  likewife  call'd  him^felf  the 
*'  vine,  he  honoured  the  fymbols  with  the  name  of 
"  his  body  and  blood  ;  not  changing  nature,  but  ad- 
*'  ding  grace  to  nature."  Where  you  fee  he  fays 
expreily,  that  when  he  call'd  the  fymbols  or  elements 
of  the  facrament,  viz.  bread  and  wine,  his  body  and 
blood,  he  made  no  change  in  the  nature  of  the  things, 
only  added  grace  to  nature,  that  is,  by  the  divine 
grace  and  blefling  he  raifed  them  to  a  fpiritual  and  fu- 
pernatural  virtue  and  efficacy. 

The  fecond  is  of  the  fame  Theodore t,  in  his  fecond 
dialogue  between  a  catholick  under  the  name  of  Or- 
Uiodoxus,  and  an  heretick  under  the  name  of  Era- 

nifless 


T^ranfuhjlantlation  2 1 9 

niftes;     who    maintaining    that    the    humanity    o^^^.,^-^,^* 
Christ  was  chang'd  into  the  iubftance  of  the  di- 
vinity (which  was  the  herefy  of  Eutyches)  he  illu- 
ftrates  the  matter  by  this  fimihtudc.     "  As,  fays  he, 
"  the  fymbols  of  the  Lord's  body  and  blood  are  one 
"  thing  before  the  invocation  of  the  pried,  but  after 
*'  the  invocation  are  changed  and  become  another 
*'  thing ;  fo  the  body  of  our  Lo  rd  after  his  afcenfion 
*'  is  changed  into  the  divine  fabftance."     Bat  v/hat 
fays  the  cathohck  Oithodoxus  to  this  ?  why,  he  talks 
jufl  like  one  of  cardinal  Perron's  hereticks :   "  Thou 
*«  art,  fays  he,  caught  in  thine  own  net ;  becaufe  the 
"  myftical  fymbols  after  confecration  do  not  pafs  out 
«  of  their  own  nature :  for  they  remain  in  their  for- 
"  mer  fubfiance,  figure  and  appearance,  and  may  be 
«  {^^xi  and  handled  even  as  before.*'     He  does  not 
only  deny  the  outward  figure  and  appearance  of  the 
fymbols  to  be  chang'd,  but  the  nature  and  fubfiance 
of  them,  even  in  the  proper  and  flricteft  fenfe  or  the 
word  fubftance ;  and  it  was  'neceffary  fo  to  do,  other- 
wife  he  had  not  given  a  pertinent  anfwer  to  the  fimi- 
litudc  urg'd  againft  him. 

The  next  is  one  of  their  own  popes,  Gelafius,  who 
brings  the  fame  inftance  againft  the  Eutychians; 
«  {k)  Surely,  fays  he,  the  facraments  which  we  re- 
*^  ceive  of  the  body  and  blood  of  our  Lord  are  a 
"  divine  thing,  fo  that  by  them  we  are  made  paita- 
"  kers  of  a  divine  nature,  and  yet  it  ceafeth  not  to 
«  be  the  fubftance  or  nature  of  bread  and  v/ine ;  and 
«<  certainly  the  image  and  refemblance  of  Christ's 
*'  body  and  blood  are  celebrated  in  the  adlion  of  the 
♦'  myfterics,"  that  is,  in  the  facrament.     To  make 

(yj)  Bibiioth.  Patr.  Tocn  4. 

E  e  2   '  this 


22(3  A  difcourfe  agalnfi 

SERM.  this  indaace  of  any  force  againd  the  Eutychlans, 
'  ,who  held  that  the  body  of  Christ  upon  his  afccn- 
fion  ceased,  and  was  chang'd  into  the  fubftance  of 
his  divini  y,  it  was  necefTary  to  deny  that  there  was 
any  fubtlantial  change  in  the  facrament  of  bread 
and  wine  into  the  body  and  blood  of  Ch  rist.  So 
that  here  is  an  infallible  authority,  one  of  their  own 
popes,  expredy  againft  Tranfubftantiation. 

The  lafl:  tedimony  I  fhall  produce  is  of  Facundus 
an  African  bifliop,  who  lived  in  the  6th  century. 
Upon  occafion  of  judifying  an  expreflion  of  one  who 
had  laid,  ''  that  Christ  alfo  received  the  adoption 
**  of  fons,"  he  reafons  thus.  "  (/)  Christ  vouch- 
**  fafed  to  receive  th,e  facrament  of  adoption  both 
"  when  he  was  circumcifed  and  baptifcd :  and  the 
"  facrament  of  adoption  may  be  called  adoption, 
''  as  the  facrament  of  his  body  and  blood,  which  is 
"in  the  confecrated  bread  and  cup,  is  by  us  called 
"  his  body  and  blood :  not  that  the  bread  (fays  he) 
*'  is  properly  his  body  and  the  cup  his  blood,  but 
*'  becajfe  they  contam  in  them  the  myfteries  of  his 
*'  body  ana  cicod;  hence  alfo  our  Lord  himfelf 
*^  called  the  bleffed  bread  and  cup  which  he  gave  to 
"  his  difciples  hiS  boa^  and  blood."  Can  any  man 
after  this  believe,  that  ic  was  then,  and  had  ever 
been,  the  univerfal  and  received  dodrine  of  the  chri- 
ftian  church,  tiiut  t'le  bread  and  wine  in  the  facra- 
ment are  fubflantially  changed  into  the  proper  and  na- 
tural body  and  blood  of  Christ? 

By  ^Ci\\i'[<i  plain  teftimonies  which  I  have  produced, 
and  I  might  have  brought  a  great  many  more  to  the 
fame  purpofe,  it  is  1  think  evident  beyond  all  denial, 
^)  facund.  p.  144.  edit.  Parif.  1676. 

that 


Tranftibllantlation  221 

that  Tranfiibftantiatlon  hath  not  been  the  perpetual  SERiVf. 
behef  of  the  chriftian  church.  And  this  likewile  is  ,  ^'^  ^  ^' 
acknowledged  by  many  great  and  learned  men  of 
the  Roman  church,  (jii)  Scotus  acknov/ledgcth  that 
this  doctrine  was  not  always  thought  neceffary  to  be 
believed,  but  that  the  necelTity  of  beheving  it  was 
confequent  to  that  declaration  of  the  church  made 
in  the  council  of  Lateran  under  pope  Innocent  III. 
And  {n)  Darandus  freely  difcovers  his  inclination  "  to 
*'  have  believed  the  contrary,  if  the  church  had  not 
"  by  that  determination  obliged  men  to  believe  it.'* 
{q)  Tonftal  biihop  of  Durham  alfo  yields  "  that  bc- 
*'  fgre  the  Lateran  council  men  were  at  liberty  as  to 
"  the  manner  of  Christ's  prefence  in  the  facra- 
"  ment."  And  {f)  Erafmus,  who  lived  and  ^\^6.  \\\ 
the  commiUnion  of  the  Roman  church,  and  thaa 
whom  no  man  was  better  read  in  the  ancient  fathers, 
doth  confefs,  ''  that  it  was  late  before  the  church  de- 
"  fined  Tranfubftantiation,  unknown  to  the  ancients 
"  both  name  and  thing."  And  (^)  Alphonfus  a  Ca- 
flro  fays  plainly,  "  that  concerning  the  Tranfubfban- 
"  tiation  of  the  bread  into  the  body  of  Christ, 
"  there  is  feldom  any  mention  in  the  ancient  wri- 
"  ters."  And  who  can  imagine  that  thefe  learned 
men  would  have  granted  the  ancient  church  and  fa- 
thers to  have  been  fo  much  ftrangers  to  this  doctrine, 
had  they  thought  it  to  have  been  the  perpetual  belief 
of  the  church  ?  I  fhall  now  in  the 

Second  place,  give  an  account  of  the  particular 
time  and  occafion  of  the  coming  in  of  this  do6lrine, 

{m)  In  Send.  4.  dift.  ii.  q.  3.  («)  In  Sent.  1.  4.  diil.  11. 

c.  1.  n.  15.  (o)  De  Eachar.  1.  i.  p.  146.  {p)  In  i  Epill.  ad 
Corinth,  c.  7.  citante  etiam  Salmerone,  Tom.  9.  Tra<5t.  16. 
p.  u)8.     {q)   De  iisref.  i.  8. 

and 


222  A  dijcourje  againji 

SERM.  and  by  what  (Icps  and  degrees  it  grew  up  and  was 

^ 1j  advanced  into  an  article   of  faidi  in  the    Romifh 

church.  The  dodlrine  of  the  corporeal  prefenceof 
Christ  was  firfl  ftartcd  upon  occafion  of  the  diA 
pute  about  the  worflilp  of  images,  in  oppofition 
whereto  the  fynod  of  Conftantinople  about  the  year 
750  did  argae  thus,  That  our  Lord  having  left  us 
no  other  image  of  himfeJf  but  the  facrament,  in 
which  the  fubllance  of  bread  is  th^  image  of  his  bo- 
dy, we  ought  to  make  no  other  image  of  our  Lord. 
In  anfwer  to  this  argument  the  feccnd  Council  of 
Nice,  in  the  year  7S7,  did  declare,  "  that  the  facra-» 
'^  ment  after  confecration  is  not  the  image  and  anti- 
*'  type  of  Christ's  body  and  blood,  but  is  proper- 
"  ly  his  body  and  blood."  So  that  the  corporeal  pre- 
fenceof  the  body  of  Christ  in  the  facrament,  was 
firft  brotight  in  to  fupport  the  fiupid  worfliip  of 
images :  and  indeed  it  could  never  have  come  in  upon 
a  more  proper  occafion,  nor  have  been  applied  to  a 
fitter  purpofe. 

And  here  I  cannot  but  take  notice  how  well  this 
agrees  with  (r)  Bellarmine's  obfervation,  "  that  none 
««  of  the  ancients  who  wrote  of  herefies,  hath  put 
"  this  error  (viz.  of  denying  Tranfubllantiadon)  in  his 
*'  catalogue;  nor  did  any  of  the  ancients  difpute 
*'  againft  this  error  for  tlie  firfl  600  years."  Which 
is  very  true,  becaufc  there  could  be  no  occafion  then 
to  difpute  againft  thofewho  denied  Tranfubflantia- 
tion,  fince,  as  I  have  Hiewn,  this  do6lrine  was  not 
in  being,  unlefs  among  the  Eutychian  Hereticks,  for 
the  firft  600  years  and  more.  But  (i)  Bellarmine 
goes  on  and  tells  us,  "  that  die  firft  who  call'd  in 
(r)  Dc  Eucharill.  1.  1.  c.  \,        [i\  Ibid. 

queftion 


c( 


Tranfuhjianfiation.  223 

•*  queftion  the  truth  of  the  body  of  the  Lord  in  S  E  R  M; 
"  the  eucharift  were  the  ICONOMACHI  (the  op-  ^^^^' 
**  pofers  of  images)  after  the  year  700,  in  the  coun- 
*'  cil  of  Conftantinople ;  for  thefe  faid  there  was 
*'  one  image  of  Christ  inftituted  by  Christ  him- 
"  felf,  viz.  the  bread  and  wine  in  the  eucharift, 
"  which  reprefents  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ  : 
**  wherefore  from  that  time  the  Greek  writers  of- 
"  ten  admoniih  us  that  the  eucharift  is  not  the  fi- 
"  gurc  or  image  of  the  body  of  the  Lord,  but 
•'  his  true  body,  as  appears  from  the  feventh  Syxaod ;" 
which  agrees  moft  exadly  with  the  account  which  1 
have  given  of  the  firft  rife  of  this  dodrine,  which  be- 
gan with  the  corporeal  prefence  of  Christ  in  the 
facrament,  and  afterwards  proceeded  to  Tranfubflan- 
tiation. 

And  as  this  was  the  firft  occafion  of  introducing 
this  doftrine  among  the  Greeks,  fo  in  the  Latin  or 
Roman  church  Pafcafius  Radbertus,  firft  a  monk, 
and  afterwards  abbot  of  Corbey,  was  the  firft 
broacher  of  it,  in  the  year  818. 

And  for  this,  befides  the  evidence  of  hiftory,  wc 
have  the  acknowledgment  of  two  very  eminent  pcr- 
fons  in  the  church  v.f  Rome,  Bellarmine  and  Sir- 
mondus,  who  do  in  effed  confefs  that  this  Pafca- 
fius was  the  firft  who  wrote  to  purpole  upon  this 
argument,  (t)  Bellarmine  in  thefe  words,  "  This 
"  author  was  the  firft  who  hath  ferioully  and  copi- 
"  oufly  written  concerning  the  truth  of  Christ's 
"  body  and  blood  in  the  eucharift : "  and  (u)  Sir- 
mondus  in  thefe,  "  He  fo  firft  explained  the  genu- 
*'  ine  fenfe  of  the  catholick  church,  that  he  opened 
(t)  De  Scriptor.  Ecclef.         (u)  In  vita  Parcalli. 

«  th€ 


2  24  A  difcourfe  againji 

S  E  R  M.  «  the  way  to  the  refl,  who  afterwards  in  great  nuni- 
*;  "  bers  wrote  upon  the  fame  argument :  "  but  though 
Sirmondus  is  pleafed  to  fay  that  he  only  firft  explain* 
ed  the  kx\{t  of  the  cathohck  church  in  this  point, 
yet  it  is  very  plain  from  the  records  of  that  age 
which  arc  left  to  us,  that  this  was  the  firft  time  that 
this  doctrine  was  broached  in  the  Latin  church  ; 
and  it  met  with  great  oppofition  in  that  age,  as  I 
fliall  have  occafion  hereafter  to  Ihevv.  For  Rabanus 
Maurus  archbifhop  of  Mentz,  about  the  year  847, 
reciting  the  very  words  of  Pafcafius  wherein  he 
had  delivered  this  doflrinc,  hath  this  remarkable 
pafTage  concerning  the  novelty  of  itj  "  (x)  Some, 
''  fays  he,  of  late,  not  having  a  right  opinion  con- 
"  cerning  the  facrament  of  the  body  and  blood  of 
*'  our  Lord,  have  faid  that  this  is  the  body  and 
*'  blood  of  our  Lord,  which  v/as  born  of  the  vir- 
*'  gin  Mary,  and  in  which  our  Lord  fuffered  up- 
''  on  ^t  crofs,  and  rofe  from  the  dead  ;  which  er- 
*'  ror,  fays  he,  we  have  oppos'd  with  all  our  might.'* 
From  whence  it  is  plain,  by  the  teftimony  of  one 
of  the  greateft  and  moil  learned  bilhops  of  that  age, 
and  of  eminent  reputation  for  piety,  that  what  is 
now  the  very  dodlrine  of  the  church  of  Rome  con- 
cerning the  facrament,  was  then  efleem'd  an  error 
broach'd  by  fome  particular  perfons,  but  was  far 
from  being  the  generally  receiv'd  dodlrine  of  that 
age.  Can  any  one  think  it  polTible,  that  fo  emi- 
nent a  perfon  in  the  church  both  for  piety  and  learn- 
ing, could  have  condemn'd  this  dodtrine  as  an  error 
and  a  novelty,  had  it  been  the  general  dodlrine  of 
the  chriflian  church,  not  only  in  that  but  in  all 
(x)  Epifl.  ad  Heribaldum,  c.  33. 

former 


Tranfuhjlantlation.  225 

former  ages;  and  no  cenfure   pafs'd  ur^on  him  for  SFRM. 
that  which  is  now  the  great  burning  article  in  the 
church  of  Rome,  and  elleemed  by  them  one  of  the 
greateft  and  mod  pernicious  herefies  ? 

Afterwards  in  the  year  1059,  when  Berengarius 
in  France  and  Germany  had  rais'd  a  frefh  oppofi- 
tion  againft  this  dodtrine,  he  was  ccmpeli'd  to  re- 
cant it  by  pope  Nicholas  and  the  council  at  Rome,  in 
thefe  words,  ''.  (y)  That  the  bread  and  wine  which 
"  are  fet  upon  the  altar,  after  the  confecration  are 
*'  not  only  the  facrament,  but  the  true  body  and 
"  blood  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ;  and  are 
"  fenfibly,  not  only  in  the  facrament,  but  in  truth, 
"  handled  and  broken  by  the  hands  of  the  pricft,  and 
"  ground  or  bruifed  by  the  teeth  of  the  faithful.  '* 
But  it  feeems  the  pope  and  his  council  were  not  then 
skilful  enough  to  exprefs  themfelves  rightly  in  this 
matter ;  for  the  glofs  upon  the  car  on  law  fays  ex- 
prefly'  ^'  (z)  That  unlefs  we  underftand  theie  words 
"  of  BERENGARIUS  ('that  is  in  truth  of  the 
"  pope  and  his  council)  in  a  found  fenfe,  we  fliall 
*'  fall  into  a  greater  herefy  than  that  of  BEREN- 
"  GARIUS  ;  for  we  do  not  make  parts  of  the  body 
*'  of  ChPvIst."  The  meaning  of  which  glofs  I 
cannot  imagine,  unlefs  it  be  this,  that  the  body  of 
Christ,  though  it  be  in  truth  broken,  yet  it  is 
not  broken  into  parts,  (for  we  do  not  miakc  parts  of 
the  body  of  Christ)  but  into  wholes:  now  this 
new  way  of  breaking  a  body,  not  into  parts  but  in- 

(y)  Gratian  de  Confecrat.  dlftln^l.  2.  L.infranc.  de  cwp.  &: 
fang.  Domini,  c.  5.  Guil.  Mund.  de  facram.  Algar.  ue  frcram. 
1.  I.  c  19.  (z)  Glof.  Decree,  de  conrecrat.  dilt.  2,  in  cap. 
Ego  Berengarius. 

Vo  L.  II.  F  f  to 

5- 


226  A  difcourfe  againjl 

SERM.  to  wholes,  (which  in  good  earneil  is  the  doflrine  of 
the  church  of  Rome)  though  to  them  that  are  able 
to  believe  Tranfubftantiation,  it  may  for  any  thing 
1  know  appear  to  be  found  fenfe,  yet  to  us  that  can- 
not believe  fo,  it  appears  to  be  folid  nonfenfe. 

About  twenty  years  after,  in  the  year  1079, 
pope  Gregory  VJI.  began  to  be  fenfible  ol  this  ab- 
furdity ;  and  therefore  in  another  council  at  Rome 
made  Berengarius  to  recant  in  another  form,  viz. 
"  (a)  That  the  bread  and  wine  which  are  placed 
"  upon  the  altar,  are  fubftantially  changed  into  the 
*'  true  and  proper  and  quickning  flefh  and  blood  of 
"  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  after  confecra- 
"  tion  are  the  true  body  of  Christ,  which  was 
«'  born  of  the  virgin,  and  which  being  offered  for  the 
*'  falvation  of  the  world  did  hang  upon  the  crofi, 
*'  and  fits  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Father.'* 

So  that  from  the  firfl  ftarting  of  this  dodrfne  in 
the  fecond  council  of  Nice  in  the  year  787,  'till  the 
council  under  pope  Gregory  VII.  in  the  year  1079, 
it  was  almoil  three  hundred  years  that  this  doctrine 
was  contefted,  and  before  this  miihapen  monfier  of 
Tranfubftantiation  could  be  lick'd  into  that  form  in 
which  it  is  now  fetded  and  eftablifh'd  in  the  church 
of  Rome.  Here  dien  is  a  plain  account  of  the  firft 
rife  of  this  doclrine,  and  of  x}i\z  feveral  fceps  where- 
by it  v/as  advanced  by  the  church  of  Rome  into 
an  article  of  the  faith.     I  come  now  in  tiie 

Third  place,  to  anfvver  the  great  pretended  de- 
monflration  of  the  impoffibihty  that  this  do6lrine, 
if  it  had  been  new,  fhould  ever  have  come  in,  in 
any  age,  and  been  received   in  the    church  ;    and 

(a)  Waldtnf.  Tom.  2.  c.  13. 

confc- 


Tranfubjlantiation,  22  j 

confequently  it  mufl  of  necefTity  have  been  the  per-  S  E  R  Af . 
petual  belief  of  the  church  in  all  ages :  for  if  it  had  ^'^^^* 
not  always  been  the  docflrine  of  the  church,  when- 
ever it  had  attempted  firil  to  come  in,  there  would 
have  been  a  great  fiir  and  buflle  about  it,  and 
the  whole  chriftian  world  would  have  rofe  up  in  op- 
pofition  to  it.  But  v/e  can  fhcw  no  fuch  time  when 
it  firft  came  in,  and  when  any  fuch  oppofition  was 
made  to  it,  and  therefore  it  v/as  always  the  dodlrine 
of  the  church.  This  demonilration  monfieur  Ar- 
nauld,  a  very  learned  man  in  France,  pretends  to  be 
unanfwerable :  whether  it  be  fo  or  not,  I  fliall  brief- 
ly examine.     And, 

Firft,  we  do  alTign  a  pundlual  and  very  likely 
time  of  the  firft  rife  of  this  dodlrine,  about  the  be- 
ginning of  the  ninth  age  ;  though  it  did  not  take 
firm  root,  nor  was  fully  fettled  and  eilablifti'd  till 
towards  the  end  of  the  eleventh.  And  this  was  the 
moft  likely  time  of  all  other,  from  the  beginning 
of  chriftianity,  for  fo  grofs  an  error  to  appear;  it 
being,  by  the  confeftion  and  confent  of  their  own 
hiftorians,  the  moft  dark  and  difmal  time  that  ever 
happened  to  the  chriftian  church,  both  for  igno- 
rance, and  fuperftition,  and  vice.  It  came  in  toge- 
ther with  idolatry,  and  v/as  made  uie  of  to  fupport 
it :  a  fit  prop  and  companion  for  it.  And  indeed 
what  tares'  might  not  the  enemy  have  fown  in  kt 
dark  and  long  a  night ;  when  fo  confiderable  a  pare 
of  the  chriftian  world  was  lull'd  aP.eep  in  profound- 
ignorance  and  fuperftition  ?  and  this  agrees  very  well 
with  the  account  which  our  Saviour  himfelf  gives 
in  the  parable  of  the  tares,  of  the  fpringing  up  of 
'  errors  and  corruptions  in    the  field  of  the  church. 

F  f  2  (b)  While 


XX  VI. 


2zS  j1  Difcourfe  cgainjl 

S  E  R  ^T.  (b)  While  the  men  fiept  the  enemy  did  his  work  in 
the  night,  {o  that  when  they  were  awake  they  won- 
dred  how  and  v  hence  the  tares  came  \  but  being 
fure  they  were  there,  and  that  they  were  not  fov/n 
at  firfl,  they  concluded  the  enemy  had  done  it. 

Secondly,  I  have  fhewn  hkev/ife  that  there  was 
confiderable  oppofition  made  co  this  error  at  its  firft 
coming  in.  The  general  ignorance  and  grofs  fuper- 
fiition  of  that  age  rendred  the  generality  of  people 
more  quiet  and  fecure,  and  difpofed  them  to  re- 
ceive any  thing  that  came  under  a  pretence  of  my- 
fiery  in  religion,  and  of  a  greater  reverence  and  devo- 
tion to  the  iacrament,  and  that  feemed  any  way  to 
countenance  the  worlhip  of  images,  for  which  at 
that  time  they  were  zealouHy  concern'd.  But  not- 
withftanding  the  fecurity  and  pafTive  temper  of  the 
people,  and  men  moft  eminent  for  piety  and  learn- 
ing in  that  time  made  great  refiilance  again fl  it.  I 
have  already  named  Rabanus  archbilhop  ofMentz, 
who  oppos'd  it  as  an  error  lately  fprung  up,  and 
which  had  then  gained  but  upon  fome  few  perfons. 
To  whom  I  may  add  Heribaldus  bifhop  of  Auxer- 
res  in  France,  Jo.  Scotus,  Erigena,  and  Ratramus, 
commonly  known  by  the  name  of  Bertram,  who  at 
the  fame  time  were  employed  by  the  emperor  Charles 
the  bald  to  oppofe  this  growing  error,  and  wrote 
learnedly  againft  it.  And  thefe  were  the  eminent 
men  for  learning  in  that  time.  And  becaufe  mon- 
fieur  Arnauld  will  not  be  fatisfied  unlefs  there  were 
lome  ftir  and  buflle  about  it,  Bertram  in  his  pre- 
face to  his  book  tells  us,  "  that  they  who  accord- 
''  ing  to  their  feveral  opinions  talked  differently  a- 

(b)  Matth.  xiii.  14. 

^  «  bout 


n!ranfnhJlantiation.  229 

"  bout  the  myflery  of  Christ's  body  and  blood  SERM. 
«  were  divided  by  no  rn:iall  fchifm."  ^^^'^• 

Thirdly,  though  for  a  more  clear  and  fatisfac- 
tory  anfwer  to  this  pretended  demonflration  I  have 
been  contented  to  unty  this  knot,  yet  I  could  with- 
out all  thefe  pains  have  cut  it.  For  fuppofe  this 
dodlrinc  had  filently  corns  in  and  without  oppofiti- 
on, 'fothat  we  could  not  aiTign  the  particular  time 
and  occafion  of  its  firft  rife ;  yet  if  it  be  evident 
from  the  records  of  former  ages,  for  above  500  years 
together,  that  this  was  not  the  ancient  belief  of  x!i\^ 
church ;  and  plain  alfo,  that  this  do6lrine  was  af- 
terwards received  in  the  Roman  church,  though  v/c 
could  not  tell  how  and  when  it  came  in,  yet  it 
would  be  the  wildefl  and  moft  extravagant  thing  m. 
the  world  to  {itt  up  a  pretended  demonflration  of 
reafon  againil  plain  experience  and  matter  of  fa6t. 
This  isjuft  Zeno's  demonftraticn  of  the  impofTibihty 
of  motion  againil  Diogenes  walking  before  his  eyes. 
For  this  is  to  undertake  to  prove  that  impofTible  to 
have  been,  which  moft  certainly  was.  Juft  thus  the 
fervants  m  the  parable  might  have  demonftrated  that 
the  tares  were  wheat,  becaufe  they  were  fure  none 
but  good  feed  was  fown  at  firft,  and  no  man  could 
give  any  account  of  the  punflual  time  when  any 
tares  were  fown,  or  by  whom  :  and  if  an  enemy 
had  come  to  do  it,  he  muft  needs  have  met  with 
great  refiftance  and  oppoiition  ;  but  no  fuch  re- 
fiftance  was  made,  and  therefore  there  could  be  no 
tares  in  the  field,  but  that  which  they  called  tares 
was  certainly  good  wheat.  At  the  fame  rate  a  man 
might  dcmonftrate  that  our  king,  his  majefty  of 
Great  Britain,  is  not  return'd  into  England,  nor  re- 

ftor'd 


XXVI. 


230  A  difcourfe  agaiiijl 

SE^RM.  ftor*d  to  his  crown  j    becaufe   there  being  fo  great 
and  powerful  an  army  pofTefs'd  of   his  lands,    and 
therefore   obliged   by  intercft  to  keep   him  out,  it 
was  impofTible  he  Ihould  ever  come   in   without  a 
great  deal  of  fighting  and  bloodfhed  :  but  there  was 
no  fuch  thing,  therefore  he  is  not  returned  and  re- 
itor'd  to  his  crown.     And  by  the  like  kind  of  de- 
monflration  one  might  prove  that  the  turk  did  not 
invade  chriftendom  lail  year,  and  befiege  Vienna ; 
becaufe  if  he  had,  the  mod  chriftian  king,  who  had 
the  greateft  army  in   chriftendom    in   a  readinefs^ 
would  certainly  have  employed  it  againfl  him  ;  but 
monfieur  Arnauld  certainly  knows  no  fuch  thing  was 
done  :  and    therefore  according  to  his  way  of  de- 
monftration,   the  matter   of  fad,  fo  commonly  re- 
ported and  believed,  concerning  the  turk's  invafion 
of  chriftendom  and  befieging  Vienna  laft  year,  was 
a  perfe6t  miftake.     But  a  man  may  demonftrate  till 
his  head  and  heart  ake,  before  he  ihall  ever  be  able 
to  prove  that   which  certainly  is,  or  was,  never  to 
have  been.     For  of  all  forts  of  impofTibles  nothing 
is  more  evidendy  fo,  than  to  make  that  which  hath 
been  not  to  have  been.     All  the  reafon  in  the  world 
is  too  weak  to  cope  with  fo  tough  and  obftinate  a 
difficulty.     And  I  have  often  wonder'd  how  a  man 
of  monfieur  Arnauld's  great  wit  and  iharp  judg- 
ment could  prevail  with  himfelf  to  engage  in  fo  bad 
and  baffled  a  caufe ;  or  could  think  to  defend  it  with 
fo  wooden  a  dagger  as  his  demonftration  of  reafon 
againft   certain  experience  and   matter   of  fad  :    a 
thing,  if  it  be  pofTiblc,  of  equal  abfurdity  with  what 
he  pretends   to   demonftrate,    Tranfubftantiation   it 
felf.     I  proceed  to  the 

Third 


TrafifiihJIantiafton,  23 1 

Third  pretended  ground  of  this  dodrine  of  Tran-  S  E  R  Ai. 
fubftantiationj  and  that  is,  the  infallible  authority  of  ^' 
the  prefcnt  church  to  make  and  declare  new  articles 
of  faith.  And  this  in  truth  is  the  ground  into 
which  the  moil  of  the  learned  men  of  the  church  did 
heretofore,  and  many  do  flill  refolve  their  belief  of 
this  do6lrine:  and,  as  I  have  already  fhewn,  do 
plainly  fay  that  they  fee  no  fufficicnt  realbn,  either 
from  fcripture  or  tradition,  for  the  belief  of  it:  and 
that  they  Ihouid  have  believed  the  contrary,  had  not 
the  determination  of  the  church  obliged  them  other- 
wife.' 

But  if  this  dodlrine  be  obtruded  upon  the  world 
merely  by  virtue  of  the  authority  of  the  Roman 
church,  and  the  declaration  of  the  council  under  pope 
Gregory  VII.  or  of  the  Lateran  council  under  Inno- 
cent III.  then  it  is  a  plain  innovation  in  the  chriftian 
doflrine,  and  a  new  article  of  faith  impos'd  upon  the 
chriftian  world.  And  if  any  church  hath  this  power, 
the  chriftian  faith  may  be  enlarged  and  changed  as 
often  as  men  pleafe  *,  and  that  which  is  no  part  of 
our  Saviour's  dodlrine,  nay,  any  thing,  though 
never  fo  abfurd  and  unreafonable,  may  become  an 
article  of  faith  obliging  all  chriftians  to  the  belief  of 
it,  whenever  the  church  of  Rome  fhall  think  fit  to 
ftamp  her  authority  upon  it :  which  would  make  chri- 
ftianity  a  moft  uncertain  and  endlefs  thing. 

The  fourth  pretended  ground  of  this  dodlrine  is, 
the  necefiity  of  fuch  a  change  as  this  in  the  facra- 
ment,  to  the  comfort  and  benefit  of  thofe  who  receive 
it.  But  there  is  no  colour  for  this,  if  the  thing  be 
rightly  confider'd :  becaufe  the  comfort  and  benefit 
of  the  facrament  depends  upon  the  bleiTing  annexed 

to 


XXVI, 


232  A  difcoiirfe  cgainfl 

SERM.  to  the  inftitutlon.  And  as  water  in  baptifm,  with- 
out any  fubflantial  change  made  in  that  element,  may, 
by  the  divine  bleffing  accompanying  the  inftitution, 
be  effecflual  to  the  wafhing  away  of  fin,  and  fpiritual 
regeneration  ;  fo  there  can  no  reafon  in  the  world  be 
given  why  tlie  elements  of  bread  and  wine  in  the 
Lord's  fupper  may  nor,  by  the  fame  divine  blefTing 
accompanying  this  inflitution,  make  the  worthy  re- 
ceivers partakers  of  ail  the  fpiritual  comfort  and  be- 
nefit defigncd  to  us  thereby,  without  any  fubflantial 
change  made  in  thofe  elements,  fince  our  Lord 
hath  told  us,  that  *'  verily  the  flefh  profiteth  nothing." 
So  that  if  we  could  do  fo  odd  and  ftrange  a  thing 
as  to  eat  the  very  natural  flefli  and  drink  the  blood 
of  our  Lord,  I  do  not  fee  of  what  greater  advan- 
tage it  would  be  to  us,  than  what  we  may  have  by  par- 
taking of  the  fymbols  of  his  body  and  blood  as  he 
hath  appointed  "  in  remembrance  of  him."  For  the 
fpiritual  efficacy  of  the  facrament  doth  not  depend 
upon  the  nature  of  the  thing  received,  fuppofing  we 
receive  what  our  Lord  appointed,  and  receive  it 
with  a  right  preparation  and  difpofition  of  mind,  but 
upon  the  fupernatural  blefling  that  goes  along  with  it, 
and  makes  it  efi^eftual  to  thofe  fpiritual  ends  for  which 
it  was  appointed. 

The  fifth  and  lafl  pretended  ground  of  this  doc- 
trine is,  to  magnify  the  power  of  the  prieft  in  being 
able  to  work  fo  great  a  miracle.  And  this  with 
great  pride  and  pomp  is  often  urg'd  by  them  as  a 
tranfccndent  inftance  of  the  divine  wifdom,  to  find 
out  fo  admirable  a  way  to  raife  x\\q  power  and  reve- 
rence of  the  prieft;  that  he  fhould  be  able  every  day, 
and  as  often  as  he  pleafcs^  by  repeating  a  few  words 

to 


Tranfubjlantiaticn.  233 

to  work  fo  miraculous  a  change,  and  (as  they  love  SERM. 
moft  abfurdly  and  blafphemoufly  to  fpeak)  to  make 
God  himfelf. 

Bdt  this  is  to  pretend  to  a  power  above  that  of 
God  himfelf,  for  he  did  not,  nor  cannot  make  him- 
felf, nor  do  any  thing  that  implies  a  con  tradition,  as 
Tranfubftantiation  evidently  does  in  their  pretending 
to  make  God.  For  to  make  that  which  already  is, 
and  make  that  now  which  always  was,  is  not  only 
vain  and  trifling  if  it  could  be  done,  but  impoffible, 
becaufe  it  implies  a  contradidion. 

And  what  if  after  all,  Tranfubflantiation,  if  it  were 
poiTible,  and  adually  wrought  by  the  pried,  would 
yet  be  no  miracle  ?  For  there  are  t  ,v o  things  necei^ 
lary  to  a  miracle,  that  there  be  a  fjpernatural  eifedi: 
wrought,  and  that  this  efFe^  be  evident  to  fenfe. 
So  that  though  a  fupernatrrJ  elFedl  be  wrought,  yti 
if  it  be  not  evident  to  fenfe,  it  is  to  all  the  ends  and 
purpofes  of  a  miracle  as  if  it  were  not ;  aiid  can  be 
no  teftimony  or  proof  of  any  thing,  becaufe  itfelf 
ftands  in  need  of  another  miracle  to  give  teftimony 
to  it,  and  to  prove  that  it  was  wrought.  And  nei- 
ther in  fcripture,  nor  in  profane  authors,  nor  in 
common  ufe  of  fpeech,  is  any  thing  call'd  a  miracle 
but  what  fails  under  the  notice  of  our  fenfes :  a  mi- 
racle being  nothing  elfe  but  a  fupernatural  efFed:  evi- 
dent to  fenfe,  the  great  end  and  defign  whereof  is  to 
be  a  fenfible  oroof  and  convidlion  to  us  of  fomethine 
that  we  do  not  fee. 

And  for  want  of  this  condition,  Tranfubflantia- 
tion, if  it  were  true,  would  be  no  miracle.  It  would 
be  indeed  very  fupernatural,  but  for  all  that  it  would 
not  be  a  fign  or  miracle :    for  a  fign  or  miracle  is  al- 

VoL.  II.  G  g  ways 

5- 


234  -^  difcoiirfe  again jl 

^^^}^'  ways  a  thing  fcnfiblc,  cthcrwife  it  could  be  no  fign. 
Now  that  fuch  a  change  as  is  pretended  in  Tranlub- 
flantiation  flioiild  really  be  v/roughr,  and  yet  there 
Ihould  be  no  fign  and  appearance  of  it,  is  a  thing  ^ 
very  wonderful,  but  not  to  {t?,{t  \  for  our  fenfes  per- 
ceive no  change,  x!^t  bread  and  wine  in  the  facrament 
to  all  our  fenfes  remaining  jufl  as  they  were  before : 
and  that  a  thing  fhould  remain  to  all  appearance  ju ft 
as  it  \va:,  hath  nothing  at  all  of  wonder  in  it :  we 
wonder  indeed  when  wc  fee  a  flrange  thing  done, 
but  no  man  wonders  when  he  fees  nothing  done.  So 
that  Tranfubftantiation,  if  they  v;ill  needs  have  it  a 
miracle,  is  fjch  a  miracle  as  any  man  may  v/ork  that 
hath  but  the  confidence  to  face  men  down  that  he 
works  it,  and.  the  fortune  to  be  believed  :  and  though 
the  church  of  Rome  may  magaify  their  priells  upon 
accLjunu  of  this  miracle,  which  they  fay  they  can 
work  every  day  and  every  hour,  yet  I  cannot  under- 
fland  th^jreafoncf  it;  for  when  this  great  work  (as 
they  call  it)  is  done,  there  is  nothing  mere  appears 
to  be  done  than  if  there  were  no  miracle :  now  fuch 
a  miracle  as  to  all  appearance  is  no  miracle,  I  fee  no 
reafon  why  a  protetlant  minifter,  as  well  as  a  popifli 
prieft,  may  not  v/ork  as  often  as  he  pleafes;  or  if  he 
can  but  have  the  patience  to  let  it  alone,  it  will  work 
itfelf.  For  furely  nothing  in  the  world  is  eafier  than 
to  let  a  thing  be  as  it  is,  and  by  fpeaking  a  few 
words  over  it  to  make  it  juft  what  it  was  before. 
Every  man,  every  day,  may  work  X.ti\  thoufand  fuch 
miracles. 

And  thus  I  have  difpatch'd  the  firil  part  of  my 
difcourfe,  which  Vv^as  to  confider  the  pretended  grounds 
and  reafons  of  the  church  of  Rome  for  this  dodrine, 

and 


"Tranfiibjiantiation.  2  3  J 

and  to  fhew  the  wcaknefs  arxd  infu-ticiency  of  them.  ^^3,!^* 

T  •       7  XAVl. 

1  come  m  the 

Second  place,  to  produce  cur  obje^lions  againft  it. 
Which  will  be  of  fo  much  the  greater  force,  be- 
caufe  I  have  already  ^f^m  this  doclrine  to  be  defli- 
tutc  of  all  divine  v/arrant  and  authority,  and  of  any 
other  fort  of  ground  fufFicient  in  reafon  to  juftify  it. 
So  that  I  do  not  now  objed  againfl:  a  dodrine  which 
hath  a  fair  probability  of  divine  revelation  on  its  fide, 
for  that  v/ould  v/eigh  down  all  objedions,  which  did 
not  plainly  .overthrow  the  probability  and  credit  of 
its  divine  revelation  •,  but  I  obje(5l  againft  a  do6lrine 
by  the  mere  will  and  tyranny  of  men  impoled  upon 
the  belief  of  chriftians,  without  any  evidence  of 
fcripture,  and  againft  all  the  evidence  of  reafon  and 
fenfe. 

Thcobjeclions  I  fnall  reduce  to  thefe  two  heads. 
Firft,  the  infinite  fcandal  of  this  doclrine  to  the  chri-. 
ftian  religion.     And  fccondly,  the  monftrous  and  in- 
fupportable  abfardity  of  it. 

Firft,  the  infinite  fcandal  of  this  doctrine  to  the 
chriftian  religion.  And  that  upon  thefe  four  accounts: 
I.  Of  the  ftupidity  of  this  do6lrine.  2.  The  real 
barbaroufnefs  of  this  facrament  and  rite  of  our  reli- 
gion, upon  fjppofition  of  the  truth  of  this  dodnne. 
3.  Of  the  cruel  and  bloody  confequences  of  it.  4.  Of 
the  danger  of  idolatry ;  which  they  are  certainly  guil- 
ty of,  if  this  doclrine  be  not  true. 

I.  Upon  account  of  the  ftupidity  of  this  doc- 
trine. I  remember  that'  TuUy,  who  was  a  man 
of  very  good  fenfe,  inftanceth  in  the  conctit  of  eat- 
ing God  as  the  extremity  of  madnefif,  and  fo  ftupid 
an  apprehenfion  as  he  thought  no  man  was  ever  guilty 

G^2  of. 


A  difcoiirfe  againji 
of.  "  {c)  When  we  call  (fays  he)  the  fruits  of  the 
"  earth  Ceres,  and  wine  Bacchus,  we  ufe  but  the 
"  common  language  ;  but  do  you  think  any  man  fo 
"  mad  as  to  believe  that  which  he  eats  to  be  God  ?" 
It  feems  he  could  not  believe  that  fo  extravagant  a 
folly  had  ever  entred  into  the  mind  of  man.  It  is  a 
very  fevere  faying  of  Averroes  the  Arabian  philofo- 
pher  (who  lived  after  this  doflrine  was  entertained 
among  chriftians)  and  ought  to  make  the  church  of 
Rome  blufh,  if  fhe  can ;  "  [d)  I  have  traveli'd  (fays 
"  he)  over  the  world,  and  have  found  divers  fedls ; 
"  but  fo  fottifh  a  fe£t  or  law  I  never  found,  as  is  the 
*'  fedl  of  the  chriftians  j  becaufe  with  their  own  teeth 
*'  they  devour  their  God  whom  they  worfhip.".  It 
was  great  ftupidity  in  the  people  of  Ifrael  to  fay, 
*'  Come,  let  us  make  us  gods;"  but  it  was  civilly 
"  faid  of  them,  "  Let  us  make  us  gods  that  may  go 
"  before  us,"  in  comparifon  of  the  church  of  Rome, 
who  fay,  "  Let  us  make  a  god  that  we  may  eat 
*'  him."  So  that  upon  the  whole  matter  I  cannot 
but  wonder  that  they  fhould  choofe  thus  to  expofe 
faith  to  the  contempt  of  all  that  are  endued  widi 
reafon.  And  to  fpeak  the  plain  truth,  the  chriftian 
religion  was  never  fo  horribly  expofed  to  the  fcorn 
of  atheifts  and  infidels,  as  it  hath  been  by  this 
moft  abfurd  and  fenfelefs  docftrine.  But  thus  it  was 
foretold  "  that  [e)  the  man  of  ^m  fhould  come  with 
^'  power  and  figns  and  lying  miracles,  and  with  all 
"  deceivablenefs  of  unrighteoufneis,"  with  all  the 
legerdemain  and  juggling  tricks  of  falihood  and  im- 
pofture;  amongft  which  this  of  Tranfubftantiation, 

(<r)  De  nat  Deoriim.   1.  3.         [d)  Dionyf.  Cartliuf.  in  4.  dirt. 
10.  art.  I.     {e)  z  ThefT.  ii.  lo. 

which 


Tranfubjfantiation.  237 

which  they  call  a  miracle,  and  we  a  cheat.  Is  one  ^1^^^- 
of  the  chief:  and  in  all  probability  thofe  common 
juggling  words  of  bocus  pocus^  are  nothing  elfe  but 
a  corruption  of  boc  eft  corpus,  by  way  of  ridiculous 
imitation  of  the  priefls  of  the  church  of  Rome  in 
their  trick  of  Tranfubftantlatlon.  Into  fuch  contempt 
by  this  foolilh  dodrine,  and  pretended  miracle  of 
theirs,  have  they  brought  the  mod  facred  and  ve- 
nerable myftery  of  our  religion. 

2.  It  is  very  fcandalous  likewife  upon  account  of 
the  real  barbaroufnefs  of  this  facrament  and  rite  of 
our  religion,  upon  fuppofition  of  the  truth  of  this 
dodrine.  "  Literally  to  eat  the  flefh  of  the  Son  of 
"  Man,  and  to  drink  his  blood,"  St.  Auftin,  as  I 
have  fhewed  before,  declares  to  be  a  great  impiety. 
And  the  impiety  and  barbaroufnefs  of  the  thing  is 
not  in  truth  extenuated,  but  only  the  appearance  of 
it,  by  its  being  done  under  the  fpecies  of  bread  and 
wine :  for  the  thing  they  acknowledge  is  really  done, 
and  they  believe  that  they  verily  eat  and  drink  the 
natural  flelh  and  blood  of  Christ.  And  what  can 
any  man  do  more  unworthily  towards  his  friend  ? 
How  can  he  pofTibly  ufe  him  more  barbarouily,  than 
to  feaft  upon  his  living  flefh  and  blood  ?  It  is  one  of 
the  greateft  wonders  in  the  world,  that  it  ihould  ever 
enter  into  the  minds  of  men  to  put  upon  our  Sa- 
viour's  words,  fo  eafily  capable  of  a  more  conve- 
nient fenfe,  and  fo  necefiarily  requiring  it,  a  mean- 
ing fo  plainly  contrary  to  reafon,  and  fenfe,  and 
even  to  humanity  itfelf.  Had  the  ancient  chriftian^ 
owned  any  fuch  dodrine,  we  fhould  have  heard  it 
from  the  adverfaries  of  our  religion  in  every  page  of 
their  writings  5    and  they  would  have  defired   no 

greater 


23  S  A  difcourfe  agaw/i 

%Iyi'  ^'^^^^^  advantage  agamft  the  chriftianj,  than  to  have 
v^^^.  been  able  to  hit  them  in  the  teeth  v/irh  their  feaflino- 
upon  the  natural  flefh  and  blood  of  their  Lord^ 
and  their  God,  and  their  bed  friend.  What  end- 
Jefs  triumphs  would  they  have  made  upon  this  fub- 
jedl  ?  and  with  what  confidence  would  they  have  fet 
the  cruelty  ufed  by  chriffians  in  their  facrament, 
againfl  their  god  Saturn's  eating  his  own  children, 
and  all  the  cruel  and  bloody  rites  of  their  idolatry  ? 
But  that  no  fuch  thing  was  then  objeacd  by  the  hea- 
thens to  the  chriftians,  is  to  a  wife  man  inftead  of  a 
thoufand  demonftrations  that  no  fuch  dodlrine  was 
then  believed. 

3.  It  is  fcandalous  alfo  upon  account  of  the  cruel 
and  bloody  confequences  of  this  docLrine;  fo  con- 
trary to  the  plain  laws  of  chriflianity,  and  to  one 
great  end  and  dt^ign  of  this  facrament,  which  is  to 
unite  chriftians  in  t:at  moit  perfed  love  and  charity 
to  one  another :  whereas  this  doclrine  hath  been  the 
occafion  of  the  moll  barbarous  and  bloody  tragedies 
that  ever  were  a&d   in  the  world.     For  this^'hath 
been  in  the  church  of  Rome  the  great  burning  arti. 
cle :  and  as  abfurd  and  unreafonable  as  it  h^   more 
chriftians  ha^e  been   murdered  for  the  denial  of  it 
than  perhaps  for  all  tha  other  articles  of  their  reli- 
-gion.     And  I  think  it  may  generally  pafs  for  a  true 
obfcrvation,    that  all  feds  are  commonly   moft  hot 
and  furious  for  thofc  things  for  which  there  is  lead 
rcafon;  for  wnat  men  want  of  reafon  for  their  opi- 
nions, they  ufually  fjpply  and  make  up  in  rage.  And 
it  was  no  more  than  needed  to  ufe  this  fevcrTty  upon 
this  occafion  ;  for  nothing  but  the  cruel  fear  of  death 
could  in  probability  have  driven  fo  great  a  part  of 

mankind 


Tranfukjiantiaticn.  239 

mankind  into  the  acknowledgment  of  fo  unreafona-  S  E  R  M- 
ble  and  fenleiels  a  doarine.  ^^lil 

O  blefTcd  Saviour  !  thoa  befc  friend  and  greatefc 
lover  of  mankind,  who  can  imagine  thou  didft  ever 
intend  that  men  fhould  kill  one  another  for  not  be- 
ing able  to  believe  contrary  to  their  fenfes  ;  for  be- 
ing unwilling  to  think,  that  thou  fhould  ft  make  one 
of  the  moil  horrid  and  barbarous  things  that  can  be 
imagin'd  a  main  duty  and  principal  myftery  of  thy 
religion  5  for  not  flattering  the  pride  and  prefump- 
tion  of  the  prieil  who  fays  he  can  make  God,  and 
for  not  complying  with  the  ^Qlly  and  flupidity  of 
the  people,  who  are  made  to  believe  that  tiiey  can 
eat  him  ? 

4.  Upon   account    of  the    danger    of    idolatry ; 
which  they  are  certainly  guilty  of  if  this  dctfcrine  he 
not  true,  and  fuch  a  change  as  they  pretend  be  not 
made  in  the  facrament  y  for  if  it  be  not,  then  they 
worihip  a  creature  inftead  of  the  creator,  God  blef- 
fed  for  ever.     But  fuch  a  change  I  have  fhewn  to 
be  impofiible  ;  or  if  it  could  be,  yet  they  can  never 
be  certain  that  it  is,  and  confcquently  are  always  in 
danger  of  idolatry  ;'and  that  they  can  never  be  cer- 
tain that  fuch   a  change  is  m.adc,   is  evident ;  be- 
caufe,  according  to  the  exprefs  determination  of  the 
council  of  Trent,  that  depends  upon  the  mind  and 
intention  of  the  prieft,    which   cannot  certainly  be 
known  but  by  revelation,  which  is  not  pretended 
in    this  cafe.     And   if   they  be    miftaken   in    this 
change,    through    the    knavery    or  crofihefs  of  the 
prieft  who  will  not  make  God  but  when  he  thinks 
fit,  they  muft  not  think  to  excufe  themfelves  from 
idolatry  becaufe  they  intended  to  worihip  God  and 
* .  not 


240  A  difcourfe  again jl 

S  E  R  M.  not  a  creature ;  for  fo  the  Perfians  might  be  cxcu- 
^^^  fed  from  idolatry  in  worfhipping  the  Sun,  becaufe 
they  intend  to  vvorfhip  God  and  not  a  creature  \ 
and  fo  indeed  we  may  excufe  ail  the  idolatry  that 
ever  was  in  the  world,  which  is  nothing  clfe  but  a 
miftakc  of  the  deity,  and  upon  that  miftake  a  wor- 
ihipping  of  fomething  as  God  which  is  not  God. 

II.  Befides  the  infinite  fcandal  of  this  dodrine 
upon  the  accounts  1  have  mentioned,  the  monftrous 
abfurdities  of  it  make  it  infupportable  to  any  reli- 
gion. I  am  very  well  aflur'd  of  the  grounds  of 
religion  in  general,  and  of  the  chriftian  religion  in 
particular  \  and  yet  I  cannot  fee  that  the  foundati- 
ons of  any  revealed  religion,  are  ftrong  enough  to 
bear  the  weight  of  fo  many  and  fo  great  abfurdities 
as  this  do6trine  of  Tranfubftantiation  would  load  it 
withal.  And  to  make  this  evident,  I  fhall  not  in- 
fifl  upon  thofe  grofs  contradidions,  of  the  fame  body 
being  in  fo  many  feveral  places  at  once ;  of  our 
Saviour's  giving  away  himfelf  with  his  own  hands 
to  every  one  of  his  difciples,  and  yet  ftill  keeping 
himfelf  to  himfelf ;  and  a  thoufand  more  of  the  like 
nature  :  but  to  fhew  the  abfurdity  of  this  dodtrine,  I 
fhall  only  ask  thefe  few  queflions. 

I.  Whether  any  man  have,  or  ever  had,  greater 
evidence  of  the  truth  of  any  divine  revelation  than 
every  man  hath  of  the  fallhood  of  Tranfubftantiation.? 
infidelity  were  hardly  pofTible  to  men,  if  all  men 
had  the  fame  evidence  for  the  chriftian  religion 
which  they  have  againft  Tranfubftanriation,  that  is, 
the  clear  and  irrefiftible  evidence  of  {(tv\{^.  He  that 
can  once  be  brought  to  contradift  or  deny  his  fenfes, 
is  at  an  end  of  certainty;  for  what  can  a  man  be 

certain 


TLranfiihftantiation.  242 

certain  of*  if  he  be  not  certain  of  what  he  fees  ?  in  S  E  R  M, 

XXVI 
fome  circumftances  our  fenfes  may  deceive  us,  but 

no  faculty  deceives  us  fo  little  and  fo  feldom  :  and 

when  our  fenfes  do  deceive  us,  even  that  error  is  not 

to  be  correded  without  the  help  of  our  fenfes. 

2.  Suppofing  this  dodrine  had  been  delivered  m. 
fcripture  in  the  very  fame  words  that  it  is  decreed 
in  the  council  of  Trent,  by  what  clearer  evidence  or 
llronger  argument  could  any  man  prove  to  me  that 
fuch  words  were  in  the  bible,  than  I  can  prove  to 
him  that  bread  and  wine  after  confecration  are  bread 
and  wine  flill  ?  he  could  but  appeal  to  my  eyes  to 
prove  fuch  words  to  be  in  the  bible^  and  wich  the 
fame  reafon  and  jullice  might  I  appeal  to  feveral 
of  his  fenfes  to  prove  to  him  that  the  bread  and  wine 
after  confecration  are  bread  and  wine  ftill. 

3.  Whether  it  be  reafonable  to  imagine,  that  God 
fhould  make  that  a  part  of  the  chriflian  religion  which 
Jhakes  the  main  external  evidence  and  confirmation 
of  the  whole  ?  I  mean  the  miracles  which  were 
wrought  by  our  Saviour  and  his  apoftles,  the  af- 
furance  whereof  did  at  firft  depend  upon  the  cer- 
tainty of  fenfe.  For  if  the  fenfes  of  thofe  vsi\\o  fay 
they  faw  them  were  deceived,  then  there  might  be  nd 
miracles  wrought  -,  and  confequently  it  may  juflly 
be  doubted  whether  that  kind  of  confirmation  which 
God  hath  given  to  the  chrift.'an  religion  would  be 
ftrong  enough  to  prove  itj  fuppofing  Tranfubllan- 
tiation  to  be  a  part  of  it  :  becaufe  every  man  hath  as 
great  evidence  that  Tranfubftantiation  is  falfe,  as  he 
hath  that  the  chriflian  religion  is  true.  Suppofe  then 
Tranfubftantiation  to  be  part  of  the  chriilian  doc- 
trine, it  mud  have  the  fame  confirmation  with  the 

Vol.  II.  H  h  whole, 

5' 


XXVI. 


242  -^  difcourfe  againjl 

S  E  R  M.  whole,  and  that  is  miracles  :  but  of  all  dodrines  in 
the  world  it  is  peculiarly  incapable  of  being  proved 
by  a  miracle.  For  if  a  miracle  were  wrought  for 
the  proof  of  it,  the  very  fame  aflurance  which  any 
man  hath  of  the  truth  of  the  miracle,  he  hath  of 
the  falihood  of  the  dodtrine,  that  is  the  clear  evi- 
dence of  his  fenfes.  For  that  there  is  a  miracle 
wrought  to  prove,  "  that  what  he  fees  in  the  facra- 
*'  ment  is  not  bread  but  the  body  of  Christ,"' 
there  is  only  the  evidence  of  fenfe  \  and  there  is  the 
very  fame  evidence  to  prove,  "  that  what  he  fees  in 
"  the  facrament  is  not  the  body  of  Christ  but 
*'  bread."  So  that  here  would  arife  a  new  contro- 
verfy,  whether  a  man  fhould  rather  believe  his  fenfes 
giving  teflimony  againfl  the  dodlrine  of  Tranfub- 
ftantiation,  or  bearing  witnels  to  a  miracle  wrought 
to  confirm  that  do6lrine ;  there  being  the  very  fame 
evidence  againfl  the  truth  of  the  dodrine,  which 
there  is  for  the  truth  of  the  miracle :  and  then  the 
argument  for  Tranfubflantiation,  and  the  objedion 
againfl  it,  would  jufl  balance  one  another ;  and  con- 
fequently  Tranfubflantiation  is  not  to  be  proved  by 
a  miracle,  becaufe  that  would  be,  to  prove  to  a  man 
by  fomething  that  he  iz^%^  that  he  doth  not  fee  what 
he  fees.  And  if  there  were  no  other  evidence  that 
Tranfubftantiation  is  no  part  of  the  chriflian  doc- 
trine, this  would  be  fufiicient,  that  what  proves  the 
one  doth  as  much  overthrow  the  other ;  and  that 
miracles  which  are  certainly  the  bell  and  highefl  ex- 
ternal proof  of  chriflianity,  are  the  worft  proof  in 
the  world  of  Tranfubflantiation,  unlefs  a  man  can 
renounce  his  fenfes  at  the  fame  time  that  he  relies 
upon  them.     For  a  man  cannot  believe  a  miracle 

without 


Tranfubflantiation.  243 

without  relying  upon  fenfe,  nor  Tranfubftantiation  SE^RM- 
witliout  renouncing  it.  So  that  never  were  any  two  ,^,^--, 
things  fo  ill  coupled  together  as  the  doftnne  ot 
chriftianity  and  that  of  Tranfubftantiation,  becaufe 
they  .draw  feveral  ways,  and  arc  ready  to  flrangle 
one  another  :  for  the  main  evidence  of  the  chnftian 
dodtrine,  which  is  miracles,  is  refolvcd  into  the  cer- 
tainty of  fenle,  but  this  evidence  is  clear  and  point- 
blank  againft  Tranfubftantiation. 

4.  And  laftly,  I  would  ask  what  we  are  to  think 
of  the  argument  which  our  Saviour  ufed  to  con- 
vince  his    difciples    after   his  refurreftion   that  his 
body  was  really  rifen,  and  that  they  were  not  delu- 
ded by  a  ghoft  or  apparition  ?  Is  it  a  neceflary  and 
conclufive  argument  or  not?    (f)  "  And   he  faidif)  Uke 
*'  unto  them,  why  are  ye  troubled?  and  why  do,'^/^ 
<■'  thoughts  arifein  your  hearts?  behold  my  hands 
^'  and   my  feet,  that  it  is  I  my  felf ;   for   a  fpirit 
«  hath  not  flefti  and  bones,  as  ye  fee  me  have. " 
But  now  if  we  fuppofe  with  the  church  of  Rome  the 
doftrine  of  Tranfubftantiation  to  be  true,  and  that 
he  hsd  inftrufted  his  difciples  in  it  juft  before  his 
death,  ftrange   thoughts  might  juftly  have  nfen  m 
their  hearts,   and  they    might   have  faid  to  him; 
Lord,  it  is  but  a  few  days  ago  fmce  thou  didft 
teach  us  not  to  believe  our  fenfes,  but  direftly  con- 
trary to  what  we  faw,  viz.  that  the  bread  which  thou 
gaveft  us    in  the   facrament,    though  we  faw    and 
handled  it,  and  tafted  it  to  be  bread,  yet  was  not 
bread,  but  thine  own  natural  body  ;  and  now  thou 
apnealeft  to  our  fenfes  to  prove  that  this  is  thy  body 
whkh  we  now  fee.     If  feeing  and  handling  be  an 
unqueftionable  evidence  that  things  are  what  they 
;  H  h   2  appear 


244  -^  difcourfe  againfi 

SERM.  appear  to  our  fenfes,  then  we  were  deceived  before 
in  the  facrament ;  and  if  they  be  not,  then  we  are 
not  fure  now  that  this  is  thy  body  which  we  now 
lee  and  handle,  but  it  may  be  perhaps  bread  under 
the  appearance  of  flefh  and  bones  \  jufb  as  in  the  fa- 
crament, that  which  we  faw  and  handled,  and  tailed 
to  be  bread,  was  thy  flefh  and  bones  under  the  form 
and  appearance  of  bread.  Now  upon  this  fuppofi- 
tion  it  would  have  been  a  hard  matter  to  have  quiet- 
ed the  thoughts  of  his  difcip^es :  For  if  the  argu- 
ment which  our  Saviour  ufed  did  certainly  prove 
to  them,  that  what  they  faw  and  handled  was  his 
body,  his  very  natural  flefh  and  bones,  becaufe  they 
faw  and  handled  them,  (which  it  were  impious  to 
deny)  it  vould  as  flrongly  prove,  that  what  they  faw 
and  received  before  in  the  facrament  was  not  the  na- 
tural body  and  blood  of  Christ,  but  real  bread 
and  wine  :  and  confequcndy,  that  according  to  our 
Saviour's  arguing  after  his  refurredlion  they  had 
no  reafon  to  believe  Tranfubftantiation  before.  For 
that  very  argument  by  which  our  Saviour  proves 
the  reality  of  his  body  after  his  relurredion  doth  as 
Itrongly  prove  the  reality  of  bread  and  wine  after 
confecration.  But  our  Saviour's  argument  was 
mofh  infallibly  good  and  true,  and  therefore  the 
dotlrine  of  TranilibfLantiation  is  undoubtedly  falfe. 

Upon  the  whole  matter  I  fliall  only  fay  this,  that 
fome  other  Points  between  us  and  the  church  of 
Rome  are  managed  by  fome  kind  oi  wit  and  fub- 
tilty,  but  this  of  Tranfubftantiation  is  carried  out 
by  mere  dint  of  impudence  and  facing  down  of  man- 
kind. 

An4 


^ranfubftantlatlon.  245 

And  of  this  the  more  difcerning  perfons  of  thatSERM. 
church  are  of  Jate  grown  fo  fenfible  that  they  would,  * 

now  be  glad  to  be  rid  of  this  odious  and  ridiculous 
do6lrine.  But  the  council  of  Trent  hath  rivetted 
it  fo  faft  into  their  religion,  and  made  it  fo  neceA 
lary  and  efTential  a  point  of  their  belief,  that  they 
cannot  now  part  with  it  if  they  would  ;  it  is  like  a 
milftone  huxng  about  the  neck  of  popery,  which 
will  fink  it  at  the  lafl.  y, 

And  though  fome  of  their  greatefl  wits,  as  cardi- 
nal Perron,  and  of  late  monfieur  Arnauld,  have 
undertaken  the  defence  of  it  in  great  volumes ;  yec 
it  is  an  abfurdity  of  that  monltrous  and  mafly  weight, 
that  no  human  authority  or  wit  is  able  to  fupport 
it.  It  will  make  the  very  pillars  of  St.  Peter's  crack, 
ar  i  -equires  more  volumes  to  make  it  good  than 
woulC  fill  the  Vatican. 

Ar£  now  /  wTJuld  apply  my  felf  to  the  poor  de- 
luded people  of  that  church,  if  they  were  either  per- 
mitted by  their  priefts,  or  durft  venture  without 
their  leave,  to  look  into  their  religion  and  to  exa- 
mine the  dodlrines  of  it,  Confider,  and  fhew  your 
felves  men.  Do  not  fuffcr  your  felves  any  longer  to 
be  led  blindfold,  and  by  an  implicit  faith  in  your 
priefts,  into  the  belief  of  nonfenfe  and  contradidion.^ 
Think  it  enough  and  too  much  to  let  them  rook 
you  out  of  your  money  for  pretended  pardons  and 
counterfeit  relicks,  but  let  not  the  authority  of  any 
prieft  or  church  perfuade  you  out  of  your  fenfes. 
Credulity  is  certainly  a  fault  as  well  as  infidelity : 
and  he  who  faid,  "  Blefied  are  they  that  have  not 
*'  feen,  and  yet  have  believed,"  hath  no  where  faid, 
*'  BlefTed  are  they  that  have  feen,  and  yet  have  not 

"  believed  5" 


246  A  difcourfe  againjl 

S  E  R  M.  «  believed  ; "  much  Jefs,  "  BlefTed  are  they  that  bc-» 
"  lieve  diredlly  contrary  to  what  they  fee.  ** 

To  conclude  this  difcourfe.     By  what  hath  been 
faid  upon  this  argument  it  will  appear,  with  how 
little  truth,  and  reafon,  and  regard  to  the  intereft  of 
our  common  chriftianity,  it  is  fo  often  faid  by  our 
Adverfaries,  that   there  are  as  good  arguments  for 
the  belief  of  Tranfubftantiation  as  of  the  doftrine 
of  the  Trinity :  when  they  themfelves  do  acknow- 
ledge with  us  that  the   dodrine   of  the  Trinity  is 
grounded  upon  the  Scriptures,  and   that  according 
to  the  interpretation  of  them  by  the  confent  of  the 
ancient  fathers :  but  their  dodlrinc  of  Tranfubflan- 
tiation  I  have  plainly  fhewn  to  have  no  fuch  ground, 
and  that  this  is  acknowledged  by  very  learned  men 
of  their  own  church.     And  this  doflrine  of  theirs 
being  firft  plainly  proved  by  us  to  be  deftitute   of 
all   divine   warrant  and    authority,    our    objedlions 
againfl  it   from   the  manifold  contradictions  of  it 
to  reafon  and  fenfe,  are  fo  many  demonftrations  of 
the  falfhood  of  it.     Againfl:  all  which  they  have 
nothing  to  put  in  the  oppofite  fcale  but  the  infal- 
libility of  their  church,  for  which  there  is  even  \t{% 
colour   of  proof  from    fcripture  than   for  Tranfub- 
llantiation  it  felf.     But  fo   fond  are   they  of  their 
own    innovations  and   errors,  that   rather  than  the 
didlates  of  their  church,    how  groundlefs  and   ab- 
furd  foevcr,    fliould   be    called    in  queftion  ;    rather 
than   not  have  their  will    of  us   in  impofing  upon 
us  what  they  pleafe,  they  will  overthrow  any  arti- 
cle of  the  chriftian  faith,  and  fliake  the  very  foun- 
dations of  our  common  religion  :  a  clear  evidence 
that  the  church  of  Rome  is  not  the   true  mother, 

fince 


T^ranfiihjlantiation,  247 

fince  fhe  can  be  fo  well  contented  that  chriftianity 
fhould  be  deftroyed  rather  than  the  point  in  que- 
ftion  fhould  be  decided  againft  her. 


SERMON   XXVII. 

The  proteftant  religion  vindicated  from   • 
the  charge  of  Angularity  and  novelty. 

Preached    before    the    King   at  Whitehall^ 
April  2,   1680. 


JOSHUA  xxiv.  15. 

If  it  feem  evil  unto  you  to  ferve  the  Lord,  choofe you 
this  day  whom  you  will  ferve. 

^  I  A  H  E  S  E  are  the  words  of  Jolhua ;  who,  af-  s  E  R  M; 
I        ter   he  had   brought  the  people  of   Ifrael  .^^^ 

-^  thro'  many  difEculties  and  hazards  into  the 
quiet  poflefTion  of  the  promifed  land,  like  a  good 
prince  and  father  of  his  country,  was  very  folicitous, 
before  his  death,  to  lay  the  firmefl  foundation  he 
could  devife  of  the  future  happinefs  and  prolperi ty  of 
that  people,  in  .whole  prefent  fettlement  he  had,  by 
the  blelTing  of  God,  been  fo  fuccefsful  an  inftru- 
ment. 

And  becaufe  he  knew  no  means  fo  efFedlual  to  this 
end,  as  to  confirm  them  in  the  religion  and  worfhip 
of  the  true  God,  who  had  by  fo  rcmarku!  '^  and  mi- 
raculous 


248  ^he  protejlant  religion 

S  E  R  M.  raculous  a  providence  planted   them   in   that  pood 

XXVII  "~^ 

'  land  J  he  fummons  the  people  together,  and  repre- 
fents  to  them  all  thofc  confiderations  that  might  en- 
gage them  and  their  pofterity  for  ever  to  continue 
in  the  true  religion.  He  tells  them  what  God  had 
already  done  for  them,  and  what  he  had  promifed  to 
do  more,  if  they  would  be  faithful  to  him :  and  on 
the  other  hand,  what  fearful  calamities  he  had  threat- 
ned,  and  would  certainly  bring  upon  them,  in  cafe 
they  fhould  tranfgrefs  his  covenant,  and  go  and  ferve 
other  gods.  And  after  many  arguments  to  this  pur- 
pofc,  he  concludes  with  this  earned  exhortation  at 
the  14th  verfe,  ''  Now  therefore  fear  the  Lord, 
''  and  ferve  him  in  fincerity  and  in  truth,  and  put 
*'  away  the  gods  which  your  fathers  ferved  on  the 
"  other  fide  of  the  flood,  and  in  Egypt  j  and  ferve 
*«  yetheLo  rd.'* 

And  to  give  the  greater  weight  and  force  to  this 
exhortation,  he  does  by  a  very  eloquent  kind  of  in- 
linuation  as  it  were  once  more  itt  them  at  liberty, 
and  leave  them  to  their  own  eledion  :  it  being  the 
nature  of  man  to  (tick  more  fledfaftly  to  that  v/hich 
is  not  violently  impofed,  but  is  our  free  and  deli- 
berate choice:  "  And  if  it  feem  evil  unto  you  to 
*'  ferve  the  Lord,  choofe  you  this  day  whom  you 
«  will  ferve." 

Which  words  ofl^er  to  our  confideration  thefe  fol- 
lowing obfervations. 

1 .  It  is  here  fuppofed  that  a  nation  mufl  be  of  fome 
religion  or  other.  Jofhua  does  not  put  this  to  their 
choice,  but  takes  it  for  granted. 

2.  That  though  religion  be  a  matter  of  choice^ 
yet  it  is  neither  a  thing  indifferent  in  itfelf,  nor  to  a 

good 


vindicated  from  novelty.  249 

good  governor,    what   religion  his  people  are    of.  l^:^,^^' 
Joi]iua  does  not  put  it  to  them  as  if  it  were  an  indif-   "^ 
fcrent  matter  whether  they  ferved  God  or  idols  ^  he 
had  fufliciently  declared  before  which  of  thefe  was 
to  be  preferred. 

3.  The  true  religion  may  have  feveral  prejudices 
and  objedions  againfl  it :  "  If  it  feem  evil  unto  you 
"  to  ferve  the  Lord,"  intimating  that  upon  fome 
accounts,  and  to  fome  perlbns,  it  may  appear  lb. ' 

4.  That  the  true  religion  hath  thofe  real  advan- 
tages on  its  fide,  that  it  may  fafely  be  referred  to  any 
confiderate  man's  choice.  And  this  feems  to  be  the 
true  reafon  why  Jofhua  refers  it  to  them  :  not  that  he 
thought  the  thing  indifferent,  but  becaufe  he  was  ful- 
ly fatisfied  that  the  truth  and  goodnefs  cf  the  one 
above  the  other  was  fo  evident,  that  there  was  no 
dano-er  that  any  prudent  man  fhould  make  a  wrong 
choice,  "  If  it  feem  evil  unto  you  to  ferve  the 
"  Lord,  choofe  you  this  day  whom  you  will 
*'  ferve-,"  intimating,  that  the  plain  difference  of 
the  things  in  competition   would  diredl  them    v;hat 

to  choofe. 

5.  The  examples  of  princes  and  governors  hath  a 
very  great  influence  upon  the  people  in  matters  of  re- 
licrion.  This  I  colled  from  the  context:  and  Joflrua 
was  fenfible  of  it  •,  and  therefore  though  he  firmly 
believed  the  true  religion  to  have  thole  advantages 
that  would  certainly  recommend  it  to  every  impartial 
man's  judgment,  yet  knowing  that  the  multitude  are 
eafily  impofed  upon  and  led  into  error  he  thoLgnt 
fit  to  incline  and  determine  them  by  his  own  exam.- 
ple,  and  by  declaring  his  own  peremptory  relolutioii 
in  the  cafe,  "  Choofe  you  this  day  whom  you  will 

Vol.  11.  li         '  "  iervej 


1^0  The  protejlajit  religion 

S  E  R  M.  «  ferve ;  as  for  me  and  my  houfe  we  will  ferve  the 
V  Lord."     Laws  are  a  good  fccurity  to  religion; 
but  the  example  of  governors  is  a  living  law,  which 
fecretly  overrules  the  minds  of  men,  and  bends  them 
to  a  compliance  with  it. 

Nonfic  infle5lcre  fenfus 

Humanos  edi5fa  valent^  lit  vita  Regentis. 
The  lives  and  adions  of  princes  have  ufually  a  grea- 
ter fvvay  upon   the  minds  of  the  people  than  their 
laws. 

All  thefe  obfervations  are  I  think  very  natural,  and 
very  confiderable.  I  fliall  not  be  able  to  fpeak  to 
them  all ;  but  fhall  proceed  fo  far  as  the  time  and 
your  patience  will  give  me  leave. 

Firft,  it  is  here  fuppofed  that  a  nation  mud  be  of 
fome  religion  or  other.  Joihua  does  not  put  it  to 
their  choice  whether  they  would  worfliip  any  deity 
at  all.  That  had  been  too  wild  and  extravagant  a 
fuppofition,  and  which  it  is  likely  in  thofe  days  had 
never  entered  into  any  man's  mind.  But  he  takes  it 
for  granted  that  all  people  will  be  of  fome  religion ; 
and  then  offers  it  to  their  confideration  which  they 
would  pitch  upon,  "  Ch6ofe  you  this  day  whom 
*'  you  will  ferve,  whether  "the  gods  which  your  fa- 
*'  thersferved,  ^c'* 

Religion  is  a  thing  to  which  men  are  not  only 
formed  by  education  and  cuftom,  but,  as  Tully  fays, 
^w  omnes  duce  naturd  vehimur^  it  is  that  to  which  we 
are  all  carried  by  a  natural  inclination ;  which  is  the 
true  realbn  why  fome  religion  or  other  hath  fo  univer- 
fally  prevailed  in  all  ages  and  places  of  the  world. 

The  temporal  felicity  of  men,  and  the  ends  of 
government  can  very  hardly,  if  at  all,    be  attained 

without 


njifidicated  from  novelty.  151 

without  religion.     Take  away  this,  and  all  obliga-  S  E  R  M. 

XXVI I 

tions  of  confcience  ceafe  :  and  where  there  is  no  oh-. 

ligation  of  confcience,  all  fecurity  of  truth  and  ju- 
flice  and  mutual  confidence  among  men  is  at  an  end. 
For  why  fliould  I  repofe  confidence  in  that  man,  why 
fhould  I  take  his  word,  or  believe  his  promife,  or 
put  any  of  my  interefls  and  concernments  into  his 
power,  who  hath  no  other  redraint  upon  him  but  that 
of  humane  laws,  and  is  at  liberty  in  his  own  mJnd 
and  prmciples  to  do  whatever  he  judgeth  to  be  expe- 
dient for  his  interefl,  provided  he  can  but  do  ic 
without  danger  to  himfelf  ?  So  that  declared  atheifm 
and  infidelity  doth  juftly  bring  men  under  a  jealoufy 
and  fufpicion  with  all  mankind ;  and  every  wife  man 
hath  realbn  to  be  upon  his  guard  againft  thofc,  from 
whom  he  hath  no  caule  to  expert  more  juflice  and 
truth  and  equity  in  their  dealings  than  he  can  com- 
pel them  to  hy  the  mere  dint  and  force  of  laws.  For 
by  declaring  themfelves  free  from  all  other  obliga- 
tions they  give  us  fair  warning  what  we  are  to  ex- 
pe6l  at  their  hands,  and  how  far  we  may  trufl  them. 
Religion  is  the  ftrongefl  band  of  humane  fociety, 
and  fo  neceflliry  to  the  welfare  and  happineis  of 
mankind,  as  it  could  not  have  been  more,  if  we 
could  fuppofe  the  Being  of  God  himfelf  tojiave  been 
purpofely  defigned  and  contrived  for  the  benefit  and 
advantage  of  men  :  fo  that  very  well  may  it  be  ta- 
ken for  granted,  that  a  nation  mufl:  be  of  fome  reli- 
gion or  other. 

Secondly,    Though  religion  be  a  matter  of  our 

choice,  yet  it  is  neither  a  thing  indifierent  in   itfelf, 

nor  to  a  good  governor,  what  religion  his  people  are 

of.     Notwithftanding  the  fuppofitioa  of  the  xtxi^ 

I  i  2  Joiliua 


2^2  ^hc  protejlajit  religion 

S  E  R  M.  Jofhua  doth  not  leave  them  at  liberty  whether  they 
will  ferve  God  or  Idols  ;  but  by  a  very  rhetorical 
fchemc  of  fpcech  endeavours  to  engage  them  more 
firmly  to  the  worfhip  of  the  true  God. 

To  countenance  and  fupport  the  true  religion,  and 
to  take  care  that  the  people  be  inflrudled  in  it,  and 
that  none  be  permitted  to  debauch  and  feduce  men 
from  it,  properly  belongs  to  the  civil  magiftrate. 
This  power  the  kings  of  Ifrael  always  exercifed,  not 
only  wqth  allowance,  but  with  great  approbation 
and  commendation  from  God  himfelf  And  the 
cafe  is  not  altered  fince  chriflianity  :  the  better  the 
religion  is,  the  better  it  deferves  the  countenance 
and  fuppoft  of  the  civil  authority.  And  this  power 
of  the  civil  magiftrate  in  matters  of  religion  was 
never  called  in  queflion,  but  by  the  enthufiafts  of 
thefe  latter  times :  and  yet  among  thefe,  every  fa- 
ther and  mailer  of  a  family  claims  this  power  over 
his  children  and  fervants,  at  the  fame  time  that  tliey 
deny  it  to  the  magiftrate  over  his  fubjeds.  But  1 
would  fain  know  Vvhere  the  diiterence  lies.  Hath  a 
rnafter  of  a  flimily  more  power  over  thofe  under  his 
govern m^ent  than  the  magiftrate  hath  ?  no  man  ever 
pretended  it  :!nay,  fo  far  is  it  from  that,  that  the 
natural  ^thority  of  a  father  may  be,  and  often  is, 
limited  and  reftrained  by  the  laws  of  the  civil  ma- 
giftrate. And  why  then  may  not  a  magiftrate  ex- 
ercife  the  fame  power  ovec  his  fubjedls  in  matters  of 
religion,  which  every  mafter  challengeth  to  himfelf 
in  his  own  family  ?  that  is,  to  eftablifti  the  true  wor- 
fnip  of  God  in  fuch  manner  and  with  fuch  circum- 
ftances  as  he  thinks  beft,  and  to  permit  none  to  af- 
front it,  or  to  feduce  Irom  it  thofe  that  are  under 

hi: 


vindicated  from  novelty,  ^cr 

his  care.  And  to  prevent  all  mifunderftandings  In  SERM, 
this  matter,  I  do  not  hereby  afcribe  any  thing  to  ^^^^^• 
the  magiftrate  that  can  poflibly  give  him  any  pre- 
tence of  right  to  rejeft  God's  true  rehgion,  or  to 
declare  what  he  ple'ics  to  be  fo,  and  what  books  he 
pleafes  to  be  canonical  and  the  word  of  God  ;  and 
confequently  to  make  a  falfe  religion  fo  current  by 
the  .ftamp  of  his  authority,  as  to  oblige  his  fubjed-s 
to  the  profeiTion  of  it :  becaufe  he  who  acknow- 
ledgeth  himfelf  to  derive  all  his  authority  from  God, 
can  pretend  to  none  againft  him.  But  if  a  falfe  re- 
ligion be  eftablilhed  by  law,  the  cafe  here  is  the 
fame  as  in  all  other  laws  that  are  finful  in  the  matter 
of  them,  but  yet  made  by  a  lawful  authority  ;  in 
this  cafe  the  fubjecl  is  not  bound  to  profefs  a  falfe 
religion,  but  patiendy  to  fufFer  for  the  conitant  pro- 
fefilon  of  the  true. 

And  to  fpeak  freely  in  this  matter,  I  cannot 
think  (till  I  be  better  inform'd,  which  I  am  always 
ready  to  be)  that  any  pretence  of  confcience  war- 
rants any  man,  that  is  not  extraordinarily  commif- 
fion'd,  as  the  apoflJes  and  firil  publifhers  of  the 
gofpel  were,  and  cannot  juflify  that  commifilon  by 
miracles  as  they  did,  to  afiront  the  eftablifl:i'd  reli- 
gion of  a  nation  (though  it  be  falfe)  and  openly  to 
draw  men  oft  from  the  profeiTion  of  it  in  contempt 
of  the  magifcrate  and  the  law  :  All  that  perfons 
of  a  different  religion  can  in  fuch  a  cafe  reafonably 
pretend  to,  is  to  enjoy  the  private  liberty  and  exer- 
cife  of  their  own  confcience  and  religion  ;  for  which 
they  ought  to  be  very  thankful,  and  to  forbear  the 
open  making  of  profelytes  to  their  own  religion, 
^though  they  be  never  fo  lure  that  they  are  in  the 

right) 


^54  ^^^  protejiafit  religion 

SERM. right)  till  they   have  either  an  extraordinary  com- 
■  miflion   from  God    to  that  purpofe,  or   the  provi- 
dence of  God  make  way  for  it  by  the  pcrmifllon  or 
connivance  of  the  magiilrate.     Not  but  that  every 
man  hath  a  right  to  pubhih  and  propagate  the  true 
religion,  and  to  declare  it  againft  a  falfc  one  :  but 
there  is  no  obligation  upon  any  man  to  attempt  this 
to  no  purpofe,  and  when  without  a  miracle  it  can 
have  no  other  efted  but  the  lofs  of  his  own   life ; 
unlefs  he  have  an  immediate  command  and  commiffion 
from  God  to  this  purpofe,  and  be  endued  with  a 
power  of  miracles,  as  a  pablick  feal   and  teftimony 
of  that  commifrion,  which   was  the  cafe  of  the  apo- 
llles,    who  after    they    had  received  an   immediate 
commiffion   were   not  to  enter  upon  the  execution 
of  it,  but  to  "  Hay  at  Jerufalem,  till  they  were  en- 
"  dued  with  power  from  on  high.  *'     In  this  cafe 
a  man  is  to  abide  all  hazards,   and  may  reafonably 
cxpedt  both  extraordinary  affiftance  and  fuccefs,  'as 
the  apoftles  had ;  and  even  a  miraculous  protedion 
till  his  v/ork  be  done  \  and  after  that,  if  he  be  call'd 
to  fuffer  martyrdom,  a   fupernatural   fupporc  under 
thofe  fufferings. 

And  that  they  are  guilty  however  of  grofs  hypo- 
crify  -who  pretend  a  further  obligation  of  consci- 
ence in  this  matter,  1  fliail  give  this  plain  demon- 
flration,  which  relies  upon  conceffions  generally 
made  on  all  hands,  and  by  all  parties.  No  prote- 
flant  (that  I  know  of)  holds  himfelf  obliged  to  go 
and  preach  up  his  religion  and  make  converts  in 
Spain  or  Italy  :  nor  do  either  the  proteffant  mini- 
ilers  or  popifli  prieds  think  themfelves  bound  in 
confcience    to    preach    the  gofpel    in    Turkey,     to 

confute 


vindicated  from  novelty,  155 

confute  the  alchoran,  and  to  convert  the  Mahome-  SER?vI. 
tans.  And  what  is  the  rcafon  ?  becaufe  of  the  feve- 
rity  of  the  inquifition  in  popifh  countries,  and  of  the 
laws  in  Turkey.  But  doth  the  danger  then  alter  the 
obhgation  of  confcience  ?  No  certainly ;  but  it  makes 
men  throw  off  the  falfe  pretence  and  difguife  of  it : 
but  where  there  is  a  real  obhgation  of  confcience, 
danger  fhould  not  deter  men  from  their  duty,  as  it 
did  not  the  apoilles:  which  fhews  their  cafe  to  be 
different  from  ours,  and  that  probably  this  matter 
was  ffated  right  at  firff.  So  that  whatever  is  pre- 
tended, this  is  certain,  that  the  priefts  and  jefuits  of 
the  church  of  Rome  have  in  truth  no  more  obhga- 
tion of  confcience  to  make  converts  here  in  England 
than  in  Sweden  or  Turkey  ;  where  it  feems  the  evi- 
dent danger  of  the  attempt  hath  for  thefc  many 
years  given  them  a  perfed  difcharge  from  their  duty 
in  this  particular.     I  fnall  join  the 

Third  and  fourth  obfervations  together.  "  That 
"  though  the  true  religion  may  have  feveral  preju- 
"  dices  and  objedions  againff  it,  yet  upon  exam.ina- 
'^  tion  there  will  be  found  thofe  real  advantages  on 
"  its  fide,  that  it  may  fafely  be  referred  to  any 
"  confiderate  man's  choice  :  If  it  feem  evil  unto  you 
"  that  fervc  the  Lord,  choofe  you  this  day  whom 
"  you  will  ferve.  If  it  feem  evil  unto  you,"  inti- 
mating, that  to  fome  perfons,  and  upon  fome  ac- 
counts, it  may  appear  fo.  But  when  the  matter  is 
truly  rcprefented,  the  choice  is  not  difficult,  nor  re- 
quires any  long  deliberation,  "  Choofe  you  this  day 
"  whom  you  will  ferve.  '*  Let  but  the  caufe  be 
fully  and  impartially  heard,  and  a  wife  man  may  de- 
termine himfelf  upon  the  fpot,  and  give  his  verdi6t 
without  ever  going  from  the  bar.  The 


XXVII. 


256  The  proteftant  religion 

SERM.  The  true  religion  hath  always  lain  under  fomc 
prejudices  with  partial  and  inconfiderate  men-,  which 
commonly  fpring  from  one  of  thefe  two  caufes,  ei- 
ther the  prepofTclFions  of  a  contrary  religion,  or  the 
contrariety  of  the  true  religion  to  the  vicious  incli- 
nations and  practices  of  men,  which  ufually  lies  at 
the  bottom  of  all  prejudice  againfl:  religion.  Religi- 
on is  an  enemy  to  mens  beloved  lufcs,  and  therefore 
they  are  enemies  to  religion.  I  begin  with  the  firft,' 
which  is  as  much  as  I  Hiall  be  able  to  compafs  at 
this  time. 

I.  The  prepofTefnons  of  a  falfe  religion  ;  which 
commonly  pretends  two  advantages  on  its  fide,  an- 
tiquity and  univerfality ;  and  is  wont  to  objefl  to 
the  true  religion  novelty  and  fingularity.  And  both 
thefe  are  intimated  both  before  and  after  the  text: 
*'  Put  av/ay  the  gods  which  your  fathers  ferved  on 
"  the  other  fide  of  the  flood,  and  in  Egypt :  and 
"  choofe  you  this  day  whom  you  will  ferve,  v/he- 
"  ther  the  gods  which  your  fathers  ferved  on  the 
*'  other  fide  of  the  flood,  or  the  gods  of  the  Amo- 
t'  rites  in  whofe  land  ye  dwell.  '*  Idolatry  was  the 
religion  of  their  fathers,  and  had  fpread  it  {di  over 
the  greatefh  and  moft  ancient  nations  of  the  world, 
and  the  mofl:  famous  for  learning  and  arts,  the 
Chaldeans  and  Egyptians  ;  and  was  the  religion  of 
theAmorites,  and  the  nations  roundabout  them.  So 
that  Jolliua  reprefents  the  heathen  religion  with  all 
its  ftrength  and  advantage,  and  does  not  diflfemble 
its  confident  pretence  to  antiquity  and  univerfality, 
whereby  they  would  alfo  infinuate  the  novelty  and 
fingularity  of  the  worfhip  of  the  God  of  Ifrael. 
And  it  is  well  worthy  our  obfervation,  that  one  or 

both 


vindicated  from  ncvelfy,  257 

both  of  thefe  have  ahvays^  been  the  exceptions  of  S  E  k  M, 
falfe  religions  (efpecially  of  idolatry  and  fuperititionj  ^"^^Ml. 
againft  the  true  religion.  The  ancient  idolaters  of 
the  world  pretended  their  religion  to  be  ancient  and 
univerfal,  that  their  fathers  fcrved  tht^Q  gods,  and 
that  the  worfhip  of  the  God  of  Ifrael  was  a  plain 
innovation  upon  the  ancient  and  catholick  religion 
of  tjie  world,  and  that  the  very  firil  rife  and  origi- 
nal of  it  was  within  the  memory  of  their  fathers : 
and  no  doubt  they  were  almoll  perpetually  upon  the 
jews  with  that  pert  queftion,  Where  was  your  reli- 
gion before  Abraham  ?  and  telling  them,  that  it  was 
the  religion  of  a  very  fmall  part  and  corner  of  the 
worldj  confined  within  a  little  territory  :  but  the 
great  nations  of  the  world,  the  Egyptians  and  Chal- 
deans, famous  for  all  kind  of  knowledge  and  wif. 
dom,  and  indeed  all  the  nations  round  about  them, 
worfhipped  other  gods:  and  therefore  it  was  an  in- 
tolerable arrogance  and  fmgularity  in  them,  to  con- 
demn their  fathers  and  all  the  world,  to  be  of  a  re- 
ligion different  from  all  other  nations,  and  thereby 
to  feparate  themfelves  and  make  a  fchifm  from  the 
reft  of  mankind. 

And  vA\^i\  the  gofpel  appeared  in  the  world, 
which  the  apoftle  to  tat  Hebrews  (to  prevent  the 
fcandal  of  that  word)  calls  the  time  of  reformation, 
the  jews  and  heathen  ftill  renewed  the  lame  objcdi- 
ons  againft  chriilianity.  The  jews  urged  againil  it, 
not  the  ancient  fcriptures  and  the  true  v/ord  ot  God, 
but  that  which  they  pretended  to  be  of  much 
greater  authority,  the  unwritten  word,  the  ancient 
and  conftant  traditions  of  their  church  -,  and  brand- 
ed   this   new    religion    v/ith    the    n.vne  of  here fy. 

Vol.  II.  K  k  "  after 

5. 


258  T^he  protejlant  religion 

SERM.  «  after  the  way  (faith  St.  Paul)  that  you  call  he- 
^^^^^-  <c  rely,  fo  worfhip  I  the  God  of  my  fathers  -,  be- 
"  heving  all  things  that  are  written  in  the  lav/, 
"  and  in  the  prophets :  "  By  which  we  fee,  that 
they  of  the  church  of  Rome  were  not  the  firft  who 
called  it  herefy  to  rejed  humane  traditions,  and  to 
make  the  fcriptures  the  rule  of  faith  :  this  was  done 
long  before  by  their  reverend  predeceflbrs,  the 
fcribes  and  pharifees. 

And  the  gentiles,  they  pretended  againfl  it  both 
antiquity  and  univerfality,  the  confiant  belief  and 
practice  of  all  ages,  and  almoft  all  places  of  the 
world  ;  Sequimur  majores  noftros  qui  feliciter  fecuti 
funt  Juosy  fays  Symmachus,  "  We  follow  our  fore- 
*'  fathers,  who  happily  followed  theirs;"  but  you 
bring  a  new  religion,  never  known  nor  heard  of 
in  the  world  before. 

And  when  the  chriftian  religion  was  mofi  mife- 
rably  depraved  and  corrupted,  in  that  difmal  night 
of  ignorance  which  overfpread  thefe  wefbern  parts 
of  the  world  about  the  ninth  and  tenth  centuries  *, 
and  many  pernicious  dodlrines  and  fuperflitious  prac- 
tices were  introduced,  to  the  woful  defacing  of  the 
chriftian  rehgion,  and  making  it  quite  another  thing 
from  what  our  Saviour  had  left  it;  and  thefe 
corruptions  and  abufes  had  continued  for  fcveral 
acres  ;  no  fooner  was  a  reformation  attempted  but 
the  church  of  Rome  made  the  lame  out-cry  of  no- 
velty and  fingularity:  and  though  we  have  fub- 
ftantially  anfwcred  it  a  thoufand  times,  yet  we  can- 
not obtain  of  them  to  forbear  that  thread- bare 
queftion,  "  Where  was  your  religion  before  Lu- 

"  thcr?'* 

I 


vindicated  from  novelty,  259 

I  fhall   therefore  apply  my  felf  to  anfwer  thefe  S  E  R  M. 

.  XXVII. 

two  exceptions  with  all  the  brevity  and  clearnefs  I 

can  :  and  I  doubt  not  to  make  it  appear,  that  as 
to  the  point  of  univerfality  (though  that  be  no-wife 
necefTary  to  juilify  the  truth  of  any  religion)  ours  is 
not  inferior  to  theirs ;  if  we  take  in  the  chriftians 
of  all  ages,  and  of  all  parts  of  the  world :  and  as  to 
the  point  of  antiquity,  that  our  faith  and  the  doc- 
trines of  our  religion  have  clearly  the  advantage  of 
theirs ;  all  our  faith  being  unquefbionably  ancient, 
theirs  not  fo. 

I.  As  to  the  point  of  univerfality.  Which  they 
of  the  church  of  Rome,  I  know  not  for  what  rea- 
ibn,  will  needs  make  an  infeparable  property  and 
mark  of  the  true  church.  And  they  never  flout  at 
the  proteftant  religion  with  fo  good  a  grace  among 
the  ignorant  people,  as  when  they  are  bragging  of 
their  numbers,  and  defpifing  poor  proteftancy  be- 
caufe  embraced  by  fo  few.  This  peflilent  northern 
herefy  (as  of  late  they  fcornfully  call  it)  is  entertained 
it  feems  only  in  this  cold  and  cloudy  corner  of 
the  world,  by  a  company  of  dull  flupid  people, 
that  can  neither  penetrate  into  the  proofs  nor  the 
poHibility  of  Tranfubflantiation  \  whereas  to  the  more 
reBned  fouthern  wits  all  thefe  difficult  and  obfcure 
points  are  as  clear  as  the  fun  at  noon-day. 

But  to  fpeak  to  the  thing  it  felf.  If  number  be 
necefTary  to  prove  the  truth  and  goodnefs  of  any  re- 
ligion, ours  upon  enquiry  v/ill  be  found  not  fo  in- 
confiderable  as  our  adverfaries  would  make  it :  thofe 
of  the  reformed  religion,  according  to  the  moft  ex- 
adl  calculations  that  have  been  made  by  learned 
men,  being  efleemed  not  much  unequal  in  number 

K  k  2  tQ 


26o  7 he  protejlant  religion 

:  R^i.  to  thofe  of  the  romifn  perfuafion  But  then  if  we 
take  in  the  ancient  chriflian  church,  whofe  faith  was 
the  fame  with  ours  ;  and  other  chriftian  churches  at 
this  day,  which  altogether  are  vaftly  greater  and 
more  numerous  than  the  Roman  church,  and  which 
agree  with  us,  feveral  of  them  in  very  confiderablc 
do6lrines  and  practices  in  difpute  between  us  and  the 
church  of  Rome,  and  all  of  them  in  disclaiming  that 
fundamental  point  of  the  Roman  religion,  and  fum 
of  chriftianity  (as  Bellarmine  calls  it)  I  mean  the 
flipremacy  of  the  bifnop  of  Rome  over  all  chriflians 
and  churches  in  the  world,  then  the  number  on  our 
fide  will  be  much  greater  than  on  theirs. 

But  we  will  not  ftand  upon  this  advantage  with 
them.  Suppofe  we  were  by  much  the  fewer.  So 
hath  the  true  church  of  God  often  been,  without 
any  the  lead  prejudice  to  the  truth  of  their  re- 
ligion. What  think  we  of  the  church  in  Abra- 
ham's time,  which  for  ought  we  know  was  confined 
to  one  family;  and  one  fmall  kingdom,  that  of 
Mrlchefidec  king  of  Sulem  ?  What  tmnk  we  of  it 
in  Mofes'j  time,  when  it  was  confined  to  one  peo- 
ple wandring  m  the  wilderncls.?  What  of  it  in 
Elijah's  time,  when  befides  the  two  tribes  that  wor- 
fhipped  at  Jeruialem,  there  were  in  the  other  ten 
but  "  feven  thoufmd  that  had  not  bowed  their 
"  knee  to  Baal.^'"  What  in  our  Saviour's  time, 
when  the  whole  chriflian  church  confided  of  twelve 
apodles,  and  feventy  difciple?,  and  fome  few  fol- 
lowers befide?  How  would  Bellarmine  have  defpifed 
this  little  flock,  becaufe  it  wanted  one  or  two  of 
his  goodliefi:  marks  of  the  true  church,  univeriality 
and  fplendor  ?  And  what  think  we  or"  the  chriftian 

church 


vindicated  from  novelty.  261 

church  in  the  height  of  arianifm  and  pelagianifm,  when  ||^^^^' 
a  great  part  of  chriflendom  was  over-run  with  thefe 
errors,  and  the  number  of  the  orthodox  was  incon- 
fiderable  in  com  pari fon  of  the  hereticks  ? 

Bat  what  need  1  to  urge  thefe  initances  ?  As  if 
the  truth  of  a  religion  were  to  be  eftimated  and  car- 
ried by  the  major  vote  ;  which  as  it  can  be  an  ar- 
gument to  none  but  fools,  fo  I  dare  fay  no  honed 
and  wife  man  ever  made  ufe  of  it  for  a  folid  proof 
of  the  truth  and  goodnefs  of  any  church  or  reli- 
gion. If  multitude  be  an  argument  that  men  are 
in  the  right,  in  vain  then  hath  the  fcripture  faid, 
"  thou  fhak  not  follow  a  multitude  to  do  evil.'* 
For  if  this  argument  be  of  any  force,  the  greater 
number  never  go  wrong. 

2.  As  to  the  point  of  antiquity.  This  Is  not  always 
a  certain  mark  of  the  true  religion.  For  furely 
there  was  a  time  when  chriftianity  began  and  was  a 
new  profeffion,  and  then  both  judaifm  and  paga- 
nifm  had  certainly  the  advantage  of  it  in  point  of 
antiquity.  Bat  the  proper  queftion  in  this  cafe  is. 
Which  is  the  true  ancient  chriftian  faith,  that  of  the 
church  of  Rome,  or  ours  ?  And  to  make  this  mat- 
ter plain,  it  is  to  be  confidered,  that  a  great  part  of 
the  Roman  faith  is  the  fame  with  ours :  as,  name- 
ly, the  articles  of  the  apollles  creed,  as  explained 
by  the  firft  four  general  councils.  And  thefe  make 
up  our  whole  faith,  fo  far  as  concerns  matters  of 
mere  and  fimple  belief,  that  of  abfolute  neceflity  to 
'  falvation.  And  in  this  faith  of  ours,  there  is  no- 
thing wanting  that  can  be  fnewn  in  any  ancient 
creed  of  the  chriftian  church.  And  thus  far  our 
fluth,  and  theirs  of  the  Roman  church,  are  undoubt- 

,  edly 


262  7he  proteflant  religion 

5ERM.  ediy  of  equal  antiquity,  that  is,  as  ancient  as  chri-' 
^^'''"-  ftianity  it  felf. 

All  the  queftion  is,  as  to  the  matters  in  difference 
between  us.  The  principal  whereof  are  the  twelve 
new  articles  of  the  creed  of  pope  Pius  IV.  con* 
cerning  the  facrifice  of  the  mafs,  tranfubftantiation, 
the  communion  in  one  kind  only,  purgatorv,  iSc, 
not  one  of  which  is  to  be  found  in  any  ancient  creed 
or  confefTion  of  faith  generally  allowed  in  the  chri- 
flian  church.  The  antiquity  of  thefe  we  deny,  and 
affirm  them  to  be  innovations ;  and  have  particular- 
ly proved  them  to  be  fo,  not  only  to  the  anfwering, 
but  almoft  to  the  filencing  of  our  adverfaries. 

And  as  for  the  negative  articles  of  the  proteftant 
religion,  in  oppofition  to  the  errors  and  corruptions 
of  the  romifli  faith,  thefe  are  by  accident  become  a 
part  of  our  faith  and  religion,  occafioned  by  their 
errors ;  as  the  renouncing  of  thedodlrines  of  arianifm 
became  part  of  the  catholick  religion^  after  the  rife 
of  that  herefy. 

So  that  the  cafe  is  plainly  this ;  we  believe  and 
teach  all  that  is  contained  in  the  creeds  of  the  anci- 
ent chriftian  church,  and  was  by  them  efteemed  ne- 
ceflary  to  falvation :  and  this  is  our  religion.  But 
now  the  church  of  Rome  hath  innovated  in  the 
chriftian  religion,  and  made  feveral  additions  to  it ; 
and  gready  corrupted  it  both  in  the  dodrincs  and 
practices  of  it  :  and  thefe  additions  and  corruptions 
are  their  religion,  as  it  is  diihnd  from  ours  \  and  both 
becaufe  they  are  corrupdons  and  novelties,  we  have 
rejected  them  :  and  our  rejedion  of  thefe  is  our  re- 
formadon :  and  our  reformation  we  grant  (if  this 
will  do  them  any  good)  not  to  be  fo  ancient  as  their 

corrup- 


vtrifJicated  from  novelty.  263 

corrn-^^'o'^s ;    all  reformation    necefTarily  fuppoUng  SERM. 
co:rj|.M«)i;>  iind  errors  to  have  been  before  it.  e^^lil 

And  now  vve  are  at  a  little  better  Jeifure  to  an- 
fv/er  tiiat  captious  queilion  of  theirs,  "  Where  was 
"  your  religion  before  Luther?  "  Where- ever  chri- 
flianiry  was ;  in  fome  places  more  pure,  in  others 
more  corrupted  :  but  efpecially  in  thefe  weftern  parts 
of  chriftendom  over-grown  for  feveral  ages  with  ma- 
nifold errors  and  corruptions,  which  the  reformati- 
on hath  happily  cut  off,  and  call  caway.  So  that 
though  our  relormation  was  as  late  as  Luther,  our 
religion  is  as  ancient  as  chriftianity  it  felf.  For  when 
the  additions  which  the  church  of  Rome  hath  made 
to  the  ancient  chriftian  faith,  and  their  innovations 
in  pradlice  are  pared  off,  that  which  remains  of 
their  religion  is  ours ;  and  this  they  cannot  deny 
to  be  every  tittle  of  it  the  ancient  chriftianity. 

And  what  other  anfwer  than  this  could  the  jews 
have  given  to  the  like  queftion,  if  it  had  been  put 
to  them  by  the  ancient  idolaters  of  the  worlJ, 
"  Where  was  your  religion  before  Abraham  ?  "  but 
the  very  fame  in  fubftance  which  we  now  give  to 
the  church  of  Rome  ?  That  for  many  ages  the  wor- 
fhip  of  the  one  true  God  had  been  corrupted,  and 
the  worfhip  of  idols  had  prevailed  in  a  great  part 
of  the  world  •,  that  Abraham  was  raifed  up  by  God 
to  reform  religion,  and  to  reduce  the  worfl^ip  of 
God  to  its  firft  inuitution  ;  in  the  doing  Vy'hereof 
he  necefTarily  feparated  himfelf  and  his  family  from 
the  communion  of  thofe  idolaters.  So  that  though 
the  reformation  which  Abraham  beg;an  was  new, 
yet  his  religion  was  truly  ancient ;  as  old  as  that  of 
Noah,  and  Enoch,  and  Adam.     Which  is  the  fame 

ia 


264  ^^<?  protejlant  religion 

S  E  R  M  in  fubftance  that  we  fay,  and  with  the  fame  and  equal 
v^^reafon. 

And  if  they  will  ftill  complain  of  the  newnefs  of 
our  reformation,  fo  do  we  too,  and  are  heartily  forry 
it  began  no  fooner  •,  but  however  better  late  than 
never.  Bcfides  it  ought  to  be  confidered,  that  this 
objedion  of  novelty  lies  againft  all  reformation  what- 
foever,  though  ever  fo  necelfary,  and  though  things 
be  ever  fo  much  amifs :  and  it  is  in  effect  to  fayi 
that  if  things  be  once  bad,  they  muft  never  be  bet* 
ter,  but  mud  always  remain  as  they  arcj  for  they 
cannot  be  better,  without  being  reformed,  and  a  re^ 
formation  mud  begin  fome  time,  and  whenever  it 
begins  it  is  certainly  new.  So  that  if  a  real  reforma- 
tion be  made,  the  thmg  juftihes  itfelf ;  and  no  ob- 
jedlion  of  novelty  ought  to  take  place  againft  that 
which  upon  all  accounts  was  fo  fit  and  necelfary  to  be 
done.  And  if  they  of  the  church  of  Rome  would 
but  fpeak  their  mind  out  in  this  matter,  they  are  not 
fo  much  difpleafed  at  the  reformation  which  we  have 
made  becaufe  it  is  new,  as  becaufe  it  is  a  reforma* 
tion.  It  was  the  humour  of  Babylon  of  old  (as  the 
Jer.  li.  9- prophet  tells  us)  "  that  fhe  wodd  not  be  healed-," 
and  this  is  ftill  the  temper  of  the  church  of  Rome, 
they  "  hate  to  be  reformed-,'*  and  ratner  than  ac- 
knowledge themfelves  to  have  been  once  in  an  error, 
they  will  continue  in  it  for  ever.  And  this  is  that 
which  at  firft  made,  and  ftiU  continues  the  breach 
and  feparation  between  us ;  of  which  we  are  no-wife 
guilty  who  have  only  reformed  what  was  amifs,  but 
they  who  obftinately  perfift  in  their  errors,  and  will 
needs  impofe  them  upon  us  and  will  not  let  us  be  of 
their  communion  unlefs  we  v/ill  fay  they  are  no  errors. 

II.  The 


'Duidicated  from  novelty.  265' 

II.  The  other  prejudice  againft  the  true  religion  is,  ^  F  R  ^'^. 
the  contrariety  of  it  to  the  vicious  inchnations  and 
praftices  of  men. 

Ic  is  too  heavy  a  yoke,  and  lays  too  great  a  reftraint 
upon  humane  nature.  And  this  is  that  which  in  truth 
lies  at  the  bottom  of  all  objedlions  againft  religion, 
*'  Men  love  darknefs  rather  than  light,  becaufe  their 
"  deeds  are  evil." 

But  this  argument  will  require  a  difcourfe  by  it» 
felf,  and  therefore  I  fhall  not  now  enter  upon  it; 
only  crave  your  patience  a  little  longer,  whilft  I 
make  fome  reflexions  upon  what  hath  been  already 
delivered. 

You  fee  what  are  the  exceptions  which  idolatry 
and  fuperftition  have  always  made,  and  do  at  this  day 
ftill  make,  againft  the  true  religion  5  and  how  flight 
and  inflgnificant  they  are. 

Bat  do  we  then  charge  the  church  of  Rome  with 
idolatry?  our  church  moft  certainly  does  fo,  and 
hath  always  done  it  from  the  beginning  of  the  refor- 
mation ;  in  her  homilies,  and  liturgy,  and  canons, 
and  in  the  writings  of  her  beft-  and  ableft  champions. 
And  though  I  have,  as  impartially  as  I  could,  con- 
fidcr'd  what  hath  been  faid  on  both  fides  in  this  con- 
troveriyi  yet  I  muft  confefs  I  could  never  yet  fee 
any  tolerable  defence  made  by  them  againft  this  heavy 
charge.  And  they  themfelves  acknowledge  them- 
felves  to  be  greatly  under  the  fuJpicion  of  u,  by  fay- 
ing (as  cardinal  Perron  and  others  do)  that  the  pri- 
mitive chriftians  for  fome  ages  did  neither  worfhip 
images,  nor  pray  to  faints,  for  fear  of  being  thought 
to  approach  too  near  the  heathen  idolatry  :  and, 
wnich  is  yet  more,  divers  of  their  moft  learned  men 
Vol.  II,  LI  do 

5- 


266  The  protejlant  religion 

^xxvn  ^^  confefs,  that  if  tranfabflantiation  be  not  true, 
they  arc  as  grofs  idolaters  as  any  m  the  world.  And  I 
hope  they  do  not  exped  it  from  us,  that  in  compli- 
ment to  them,  and  to  acquit  them  from  the  charge 
of  idolatry,  we  fhouJd  prefently  deny  our  fenfes,  and 
believe  tranfubdantiation  \  and  if  we  do  not  believe 
this,  they  grant  we  have  reafon  to  charge  them  with 
idolatry. 

But  we  own  them  to  be  a  true  church  ;  which  they 
cannot  be,  if  they  be  guilty  of  idolatry.  This  they 
often  urge  us  withal,  and  there  feems  at  firft  fight 
to  be  fomething  in  it :  and  for  that  reafon  1  fhall 
endeavour  to  give  fo  clear  and  fatisfadory  an  an- 
fwer  to  it,  as  that  we  may  never  more  be  troubled 
with  it. 

The  truth  is,  we  would  fain  hope,  becaufe  they 
ftill  retain  the  efTentials  of  chriilianity,  and  profels 
to  believe  all  the  articles  of  the  chriflian  faith,  that 
notwithftanding  their  corruptions  they  may  ftill  re- 
tain the  true  effence  of  a  church  :  as  a  man  may  be 
truly  and  really  a  man,  though  he  have  the  plague 
upon  him ;  and  for  that  reafon  be  fit  to  be  avoided 
by  all  that  wifh  well  to  themfelves.  But  if  this  will 
not  do,  we  cannot  help  it.  Therefore  to  pufh  the 
matter  home ;  are  they  fure  that  this  is  a  firm  and 
good  confequence,  "  that  if  they  be  idolaters,  they 
*'  cannot  be  a  true  church }  "  Then  let  them  look  to 
it.  It  is  they,  I  take  it,  that  arc  concerned  to  prove 
themfelves  a  true  church,  and  not  we  to  prove  it  for 
them.  And  if  they  will  not  undcrftand  it  of  them- 
felves, it  is  fit  they  Ihould  be  told  that  there  is  a  great 
difference  between  concellions  of  charity  and  of  ne- 
cefTity,  and  that  a  very  different  ufe  ought  to  be 

made 


vindicated  from  novelty,  267 

made  of  them.     We  are  willing  to  think  the  ^^^^^^x^^VlY 
them ;  but  if  they  diflike  our  charity  in  this  point, 
nothing  againft  the  hair:  if  they  will  forgive  us  this 
injury,  we  will  not  offend  them  any  more :    but  ra- 
ther than  have  any  farther  difference  with  them  about 
this  matter,  we  will  for  quietnefs  fake  compound  it 
thus;    that  'till  they  can  clearly  acquit  themfelves 
from  being  idolaters,  they  Ihall  never  more  againfl 
their  wills  be  efteemed  a  true  church. 
And  now  to  draw  to  a  conclufion. 
"  If  it  feem  evil  unto  you  to  ferve  the  Lord," 
and  to  worlhip  him  only  ;  to  pray  to  him  alone,  and 
that  only  in  the  name   and   mediation    of    Jesus 
Christ,  as  he  hath  given  us  commandment  >  "  be- 
"  caufe  there  is  but  one  God,  and  one  Mediator 
"  betv/eenGoD  and  m.an,  the  man  Christ  Jesus. 
"  If  it  feem  evil  unto  you,"  to  have  the  liberty  to 
ferve  God   in  a  language  you  can  underftand ;  and 
to  have  the  free  ufe  of  the  holy  fcriptures,  "  which 
*'  are  able  to  make  men  wife  unto  falvation  •, "  and 
to  have  the  facraments  of  our  religion  entirely  ad- 
miniftred  to  us^  as  our  Lord  did  inflitute  and  ap- 
point. 

And  on  the  other  hand,  if  it  feem  good  to  us,  to 
put  our  necks  once  more  under  that  yoke,  which 
our  fathers  were  not  able  to  bear  :  if  it  be  really  a  pre- 
ferment to  a  prince  to  hold  the  pope's  ftirrup,  and  a 
privilege  to  be  depofed  by  him  at  his  pleafure,  and 
a  courtefy  to  be  killed  at  his  comm.and  :  if  to  pray 
without  underftanding,  and  to  obey  without  reafon, 
and  to  believe  againfl  fenfe;  if  ignorance,  and  im- 
plicit faith,  and  an  inquifition,  be  in  good  earned 
fuch  charming  and  defirable  things :  then  welcome 

L  J  z  popery  i 


268  The  profeflanf  religion 

S  E  R  M.  popery  s  which,  wherever  thou  comefl,  dod  infalli- 
bly bring  all  thefe  wonderful  privileges  and  blefllngs 
along  with  thee. 

Bjc,  the  queftion  is  not  now  about  the  choice  but 
the  change  of  our  religion,  after  we  have  been  fo 
long  killed  m  the  q jiet  pofll^Tion  and  enjoyment  of 
it.  Men  are  very  loth  to  change  even  a  fa'fe  reli- 
gion "  Hath  a  nation  changed  their  gods,  which 
"  yet  are  no  God.^  ?  '*  And  iurely  there  is  much 
more  reafon  why  we  fhould  be  tenacious  of  the  truth, 
and  hold  faft  that  which  is  good. 

We  have  the  bell  religion  in  the  world,  the  very 
fame  which  the  Son  of  God  revealed,  vvhiCli  the 
apoftles  planted  a  .d  confirmed  by  miracles,  and 
which  the  noble  army  of  mariyrs  iealed  with  their 
blood:  and  we  have  retrench'd  from  it  all  falfe 
doctrines  and  fuperftitious  pravTiiCes  which  have  been 
added  fince.  And  I  think  we  may  without  inimo- 
defty  fay,  that  upon  the  plain  Iquare  of  fcripture  and 
reafon,  of  the  tradition  and  practice  of  the  firft  and 
befh  ages  of  the  chriftian  church,  w^e  have  fully  juf- 
tined  our  religion  *,  and  made  it  evident  to  the 
world,  that  our  adverfaries  arc  put  to  very  hard 
.  fhifts,  and  upon  a  perpetual  difadvantage  in  the  de- 
fence of  theirs. 

I  wifh  it  were  as  eafy  for  us  to  juftify  our  lives  as 
our  religion.  I  do  not  mean  in  comparifon  of  our 
adverfaries  (for  that,  as  bad  as  we  are,  I  hope  we 
are  yet  able  to  do)  but  in  comparifon  of  the  rules 
of  our  holy  religion,  from  which  we  are  infinitely 
fwcrv'd  J  which  J  would  to  God  we  all  did  feriouHy 
confider  and  Jay  to  heart  :  I  fay,  in  comparifon  of 
the  rules  of  our  holy  religion,  ''  which  teach  us  to 

*'   deny 


'Vindicated  from  novelty.  269 

^'  deny  ungodlinefs  and  worldly  lufts,  and  to  live  fo- 
"  berly,  and  righceoufly,  and  godly  in  this  prefent 
«'  world,  in  expectation  of  the  blelTed  hope,  and 
"  the  glorious  appearance  of  the  great  God,  and 
*'  cur  Saviour  Je>ud  Christ;"  to  whom  with 
the  Father,  and  the  holy  Ghost,  ^c. 


SERMON   XXVIII. 

Objedions    again  ft    the    true  Religion 
anfv/ered. 


JOSHUA  xxiv.  15. 

If  it  feem  evil  unto  you  to  ferve  the  Lord,  choofe you 
this  day  whom  you  will  ferve, 

THESE  words,  as  I  have  already  declared  s  E  R  M. 
in  the  former  diicourfe,  are  the  lad  coun-^^^^" 
fel  and  advice  which  Jofhua  gave  to  the 
people  of  Lrael,  after  he  had  fafely  condudled  them 
into  the  land  of  Canaan.  And  that  he  might  the 
more  effedually  perfuade  them  to  continue  ftedfaft 
in  the  worfliip  of  the  true  God,  by  an  eloquent 
kind  of  infinuation  he  doth  as  it  were  once  more 
fet  them  at  hberty,  and  leave  them  to  their  own 
choice ;  "  If  it  feem  evil  unto  you  to  ferve  the 
"  Lord,  choofe  you  this  day  whom  you  will  ferve  '* 
The  plain  fenfe  of  which  words  may  be  refolved 
into  this  propofition,    that  notwithftanding  all  the 

prejudices 


27^  OhjeSfiom  etgainjl  the 

XXVin'  P^^^^*^'^^*^^^  ^^^  objeaions  againfl  the  true  religion, 
'  yet  it  hath  thofe  real  advantages  on  its  fide,  that  it 
may  fafely  be  referred  to  any  impartial  and  confi- 
derate  man's  choice;  ''  if  it  feem  evil  unto  you  to 
*'  ferve  the  Lord  ; "  intimating  that  to  fome  per- 
fons,  and  upon  fome  accounts,  it  may  feem  fo;  but 
when  the  matter  is  tliroughly  examined,  the  refolu- 
ticn  and  choice  cannot  be  difficult,  nor  require  any 
long  deliberation,  "  choofe  you  this  day  whom  you 
"  will  ferve.  " 

The  true  religion  hath  always  lain  under  fome 
prejudices  with  partial  and  inconfiderate  men,  arifing 
chiefly  from  thefe  two  caufes  ;  the  prepofTeffions  of 
a  falfe  religion  •,  and  the  contrariety  of  the  true  re- 
ligion to  the  inclinations  of  men,  and  the  uneafinels 
of  it  in  point  of  pradlice. 

Firft,  from  the  prepofleffions  of  a  falfe  religion  -, 
which  hath  always  been  wont  to  lay  claim  to  anti- 
quity and  univerfality,  and  to  charge  the  true  re- 
ligion with  novelty  and  fingularity.  And  both 
thefe  are  intimated  before  the  text  \  "  put  away  the 
"  gods  whom  your  fathers  ferved,  on  the  other  fide 
^^  of  the  flood  and  in  Egypt,  and  choofe  you  this 
*'  day  whom  you  will  ferve."  It  was  pretended 
that  the  worfliip  of  idols  was  the  ancient  religion  of 
the  world,  of  thofe  great  nations  the  Egyptians  and 
Chaldeans,  and  of  all  the  nations  round  about  them. 
But  Lliis  hath  already  been  confidered  at  large. 

Secondly,  there  are  another  fort  of  prejudices 
againd  religion,  more  apt  to  flick  with  men  of  better 
fenie  and  reafon  \  and  thefe  arife  principally  from  the 
contrariety  of  the  true  religion  to  the  inclinations 
of  men,  and  the  uneafmefs  of  it  in  point  of  practice. 

It 


true  religion  anfwered,  271 

It  Is  pretended  that  religion  is  a  heavy  yoke,  and  S  E  R  M, 
lays  too  great  a  reftraint  upon  humane  nature,  and,^ 
that  the  laws  of  it  bear  too  hard  upon  the  general  in- 
clinations of  mankind. 

I  Ihall  not  at  prefent  meddle  with  the  fpeculative 
objedlions  againfl  religion,  upon  account  of  the  pre- 
tended unreafonablenels  of  many  things  in  point  of 
belief:  becaufe  the  contrariety  of  the  true  religion 
to  the  inclinations  of  men,  and  the  uneafinefs  of  it 
in  point  of  pradlice,  is  that  which  in  truth  lies  at 
the  bottom  of  atheifm  and  infidelity,  and  raifes  all 
that  animofity  which  is  in  the  minds  of  bad  men 
againfl  religion,  and  exafperates  them  to  oppofe  it 
with  all  their  wit  and  malice :  "  men  love  darknefs 
"  rather  than  light,  becaufe  their  deeds  are  evil. ''And 
if  this  prejudice  were  but  once  removed,  and  men 
were  in  fome  meafure  reconciled  to  the  praftice  of 
religion,  the  fpeculative  objections  againfl:  it  would 
almoil  vanifh  of  themfelves :  for  there  wants  little 
elfe  to  enable  a  man  to  anfwer  them,  but  a  v/il- 
lingnefs  of  mind  to  have  them  anfwered,  and  that 
wc  have  no  intereft  and  inclination  to  the  contrary. 
And  therefore  I  fhall  at  prefent  wholly  apply  my 
felf  to  remove  this  prejudice  againfl  religion,  from 
the  contrariety  of  it  to  the  inclinations  of  men,  and 
the  uneafinefs  of  it  in  point  of  pradice. 

And  there  are  two  parts  of  this  objedlion. 

ifl.  That  a  great  part  of  the  laws  of  religion  do 
thwart  the  natural  inclinations  of  men,  which  mav 
reafonably  be  fuppofed  to  be  from  God.  And, 

2ly.  That  all  of  them  together  are  a  heavy  yoke, 
and  do  lay  too  great  a  reflraint  upon  humane  nature, 
intrenching  too  much  upon  the  pleafures  and  liberty 
of  it.  I.  That 


272  Ohj^Bions  agalnfl  the 

SERM.  T.  That  a  great  part  of  the  laws  of  relio-ion  do 
\^\^  thwart  the  natural  inclinations  of  men,  which  may 
reafonably  be  fuppofed  to  be  from  God.  So  that 
God  feems  to  have  fet  our  nature  and  our  duty  at 
variance,  to  have  given  us  appetites  and  inclinations 
one  way,  and  laws  another  :  which  if  it  were  true, 
muft  needs  render  the  pradlicc  of  religion  very  grie- 
vous and  uneafy. 

The  force  of  this  objedion  is  very  fmartly  ex- 
prefled  in  thofe  celebrated  verles  of  a  noble  poet  of 
our  own,  which  are  fo  frequently  in  the  mouths  of 
many  who  are  thought  to  bear  no  good- will  to  re- 
ligion. 

O  wearifome  condition  of  humanity^ 
Born  under  one  law^  to  another  hound '^ 

Vainly  begot^  and  yet  forbidden  vanity  j 
Created  fick^  commanded  to  he  found. 

If  nature  did  not  take  delight  in  bloody 

She  would  have  made  more  eafy  ways  to  good. 

So  that  this  objedion  would  fain  charge  the  fins  of 
men  upon  God  •,  firfl  upon  account  of  the  evil  in- 
"f  clinations  of  our  nature  ;  and  then  of  the  contrariety 

of  our  duty  to  thofe  inclinations.  And  from  the 
beginning  man  hath  always  been  apt  to  lay  the  blame 
of  his  faults  where  it  can  lead  lie,  upon  goodnefs 
and  perfe6lion  itfelf.  The  very  firft  fin  that  ever 
man  was  guilty  of  he  endeavoured  to  throw  upon 
God  :  "  The  woman  whom  thou  gaveft  me,  faith 
"  Adam,  fhe  gave  me  of  the  tree,  and  I  did  eat." 
And  his  pofterity  are  dill  apt  to  excufe  themfclves  the 
fame  way.  But  to  return  a  particular  anfwer  to  this 
objedlion. 

I.  Wc 


true  rehgion  arifivered,  273 

I.  We  will  acknowledge  fo  much  of  it  as  Is  true  ;  ^^^''^« 
that  there  is  a  great  degeneracy  and  corruption  of  hu- 
mane nature,  from  what  it  was  originally  framed 
when  it  came  out  of  God's  hands;  of  which  the 
fcripture  gives  us  this  account,  that  it  was  occafioned 
by  the  voluntary  tranfgrefTion  of  a  plain  and  eafy 
command  given  by  God  to  our  firil  parents.  And 
this  weaknefs  contra6ted  by  the  fall  of  our  firft  pa- 
rents naturally  defcends  upon  us  their  poflerity,  and 
vifibly  difcovers  itfelf  in  our  inclinations  to  evil,  and 
impotence  to  that  which  is  good. 

And  of  this  the  heathen  philofophers,  from  the 
light  of  nature,  and  their  own  experience  and  obler- 
vation  of  themfelves  and  others,  were  very  fenfible  ; 
that  humane  nature  was  very  much  declined  from  its 
primitive  reditude,  and  funk  into  a  weak  and  droop- 
ing and  fickly  ftate,  which  they  called  a  'ssrls^opuyjcrir, 
the  moulting  of  the  wings  of  the  foul :  but  yec 
they  were  fo  jud  and  reafbnable  as  not  to  charge 
this  upon  God,  but  upon  fome  corruption  and  im^- 
purity  contra(5led  by  the  foul  in  a  former  frate,  be- 
fore its  union  with  the  body.  For  the  defcent  of  the 
foul  into  thefe  grofs  earthly  bodies  they  looked  upon 
as  partly  the  punilhment  of  faults  committed  in  a  for- 
mer ftate, , and  partly  as  the  opportunity  of  a  new 
trial  in  order  to  its  purgation  and  recovery.  And 
this  was  the  beft  account  they  were  able  to  give 
of  this  matter,  without  the  light  of  divine  revela- 
tion. 

So  that  the  degeneracy  of  humane  nature  is  uni- 
verfilly  acknowledged,  and  God  acquitted  from  be- 
ing the  caufe  of  it:  but  hovvxver,  the  pofterity  of 
Adam  do  all  partake  of  the  weaknefs  contraded  by 

Vol.  li.  Mm  his 

5- 


S74  Obje5iions  againjl  the 

S  E  R  M.  his  fall,  and  do  ftill  labour  under  the  mifcrics  and  in-- 
^J._^^i  convenlencies  of  it.  But  then  this  degeneracy  is  not 
total.  For  though  our  faculties  be  much  weak- 
ned  and  difordered,  yet  they  are  not  deftroyed  nor 
wholly  perverted.  Our  natural  judgment  and  con- 
fcience  doth  ftill  didlate  to  us  what  is  good,  and  what 
wc  ought  to  do  J  and  the  imprefTions  of  the  natural 
law,  as  to  the  great  lines  of  our  duty,  are  flill  legi- 
ble upon  our  hearts.  So  that  the  law  written  in 
God's  word  is  not  contrary  to  the  law  written  upon 
our  hearts.  And  therefore  it- is  not  truly  faid,  "  that 
*'  we  are  born  under  one  law  and  bound  to  another.'* 
But  the  great  diforder  is,  that  our  inferior  faculties, 
our  fenfitive  appetite  and  pafHo.ns,  are  broke  loofe 
and  have  got  head  of  our  reafon,  and  are  upon  all 
occafions  apt  to  rebel  againft  it:  but  our  judgment 
dill  didates  the  very  fame  things  which  the  law  of 
God  doth  injoin. 

It  is  likewife  very  vifiblc,  that  the  fad  effe6ls  of  this 
degeneracy  do  not  appear  equally  and  alike  in  all : 
whether  from  the  better  or  worfe  temper  of  our  bo- 
dies, or  from  fomc  other  more  fecret  caufc,  I  fhall 
not  determine,  becaufe  I  know  not :  but  that  there  is 
a  difTerence  is  evident.  For  though  a  proncnels  to 
evil,  and  fome  feeds  of  it  be  in  all,  yet  w»  may 
plainly  difcover  in  many  very  early  and  forward  in- 
clinations to  fome  kinds  of  virtue  and  goodncfs ; 
which  being  cultivated  by  education,  may  under  the 
ordinary  influence  of  God's  grace  be  carried  on  with 
great  eafe  to  perfev5lion. 

And  there  are  others  who  are  not  fo  ftrongly  bent 
•to  that  which  is  evil,  but  that  by  good  indrudlioii 
and  example  in  their  tender  years  they  may  be  fwayed 

the 


true  religion  anfwered,  27^ 

the  other  way,  and  without  great  difficulty  formed  S  E  r  m. 
togoodnefs.  _  ^^^"f- 

There  are  fome  indeed  (which  is  the  hardcfl  cafe) 
in  whom  there  do  very  early  appear  ftrong  propen- 
fions  and  incHnations  to  evil,  eipecially  to  fome  par- 
ticular kinds  of  vice :  but  the  cafe  of  thefe  is  not  de- 
Iperate;  though  greater  attention  and  care,  and  a 
much  more  prudent  management  is  required  in  the 
education  of  fach  perfons  to  corred  their  evil  tem- 
pers, and  by  degrees  to  bend  their  inclinations  the 
right  way :  and  if  the  feeds  of  piety  and  virtue  be 
but  carefully  fown  at  firfl,  very  much  may  be  done 
by  this  means,  even  in  the  mod  depraved  natures, 
towards  the  altering  and  changing  of  them;  how- 
ever, to  the  checking  and  controlling  of  their  vi- 
cious inclinations.  And  if  thefe  perfons  when  they 
come  to  riper  years,  v/ould  purfue  thefe  advantages 
of  education,  and  take  fome  pains  with  themfelves, 
and  earneftly  feek  the  alliftance  of  God's  grace,  I 
doubt  not  but  even  thefe  perfons  by  degrees  migh: 
at  lafl  get  the  maftery  of  their  unhappy  tempers. 

For  next  to  the  being  and  pcrfeflions  of  God,  and 
the  immortality  of  our  own  fouls,  there  is  no  princi- 
ple of  religion  that  I  do  more  firmly  believe  than 
this,  that  God  hath  that  love  for  men,  that  if  we  do 
heartily  beg  his  affiftance,  and  be  not  wanting  to 
ourfelves,  he  will  afford  it  to  every  one  of  us  in  pro- 
portion to  our  need  of  it;  that  he  is  always  before- 
hand with  us,  and  prevents  every  man  with  the  gra^ 
cious  offers  of  his  help.  And  I  doubt  not  but  many 
very  perverfe  natures  have  thus  been  reclaimed.  For 
God,  who  is  the  lover  of  fouls  (as  the  fon  of  Sirach 
calls  him)  though  he  may  put  fome  men  under  more 

M  m  2  difHcuk 


^7^  ObjeBions  agalnjl  the 

XXVIII*  ^^^^"^^^^'^^""^^ances  of  becoming  better  than  other?, 
;yet  he  leaves  no  man  under  a  fatal  neceffity  of  beinp- 
wicked  and  perifliing  everlaftingly.  He  tenderly 
confiders  every  man's  cafe  and  circumfcances,  and  it 
is  we  that  puli  deflrudion  upon  ourfelves,  with  the 
works  of  our  own  hands :  but  as  fure  as  God  is  good 
and  juft,  no  man  in  the  world  is  ruined  for  want  of 
having  fufficient  help  and  aid  afforded  to  him  by 
God  for  his  recovery. 

2.  It  is  likewife  to  be  confidered  that  God  did 
not  defign  to  create  man  in  the  full  pofTeffion  of  hap- 
pinefs  at  firil,  but  to  train  him  up  to  it  by  tl.e  trial 
of  his  obedience.  But  there  could  be  no  trial  of  our 
obedience  without  fome  difBculty  in  our  duty ;  citlier 
by  reafon  of  powerful  temptations  from  without,  or 
of  crofs  and  perverfe  inclinations  from  within. 

Our  firH  parents,  in  their  flate  of  innocency,  had 
only  the  trial  of  temptation  without;  to  which  they 
yiedded  and  were  overcome;    having  only   natural 
power  to  have  refiflcd  the  temptation,  without  any 
aid  of  fupernatural  grace:  and  that  weaknefs  to  good, 
and  pronenefs  to  evil,  which  they  by  v/ilful  tranfo-ref- 
fion  contradled,  is  naturally  derived  to  us  ;  ancT  we 
neceffarily  partake  of  the  bitternefs  and  impurity  of 
the  fountain  from  whence  we  fpring.    So  that  we  now 
labour  under  a  double  difficulty;  being  affauked  by 
temptations  from  without,  and  incited  by  evil  incli- 
nations from  within  :  but  then,  to  balance  thefe,  wc 
have  a  double  advantage ;  that   a  greater  reward  is 
propofed  to  us,  than  for  ought  we  know  would  have 
been  conferred  on  our  firft  parents  had  they  conti- 
nued  innocent;  and  that  we  are  endued  with  a  fu- 
pernatural power  to  conflid:  with  thefe  difficulties. 

So 


true  religion  anfwered.  I'jj. 

So  that,  accordine;  to  the  merciful  difpenfatloii  of  S  E  R  M. 

.       .  XX  VI II 

God,  all  this  conflid  between  our  inclination  and  our 

duty  does  only  ferve  to  give  a  fairer  opportunity  for  the 
fitting  trial  of  our  obedience,  and  for  the  more  glo- 
rious reward  of  it. 

3.  God  hath  provided  an  univerfal  remedy  for 
this  degeneracy  and  weaknefs  of  humane  Nature  :  fo 
that  what  we  loll  by  the  firfl  Adam,  is  abundantly  re- 
paired to  us  by  the  fecond.  This  St.  Paul  tells  us  at 
large,  Rom.  v.  "  that  as  by  one  man  fin  entered  in- 
"  to  the  world,  and  death  by  fm ;  fo  the  grace  of 
"  God  hath  abounded  to  all  men  by  Jesus  Ch  r  ist  :'* 
and  that  to  fuch  a  degree,  as  effectual  to  counter- 
vail the  ill  effedsof  original  fin,  and  really  to  enable 
men,  if  they  be  not  wanting  to  themfelves,  to  mafler 
and  fubdue  all  the  bad  inclinations  of  nature,  even  in 
thofe  who  feem  to  be  naturally  mofl  corrupt  and  de- 
praved. 

And  if  this  be  true,  we  m^ay  without  any  reflexion 
upon  God  acknowledge,  that  though  he  did  not  at 
firfl:  create  man  fick  and  weak,  yet  he  having  made 
himfelf  fo,  his  pofterity  are  born  fo.  Bat  then  God 
hath  not  Mi  us  helplels  in  this  weak  and  miferable 
flate,  into  which  by  wilful  tranfgrefTion  mankind  is 
fallen :  but  as  he  commafhds  us  to  be  found,  fo  he  af- 
fords us  fufiicient  aids  of  his  grace  by  Jssus  Ch  r  ist 
for  our  recovery. 

And  though  "  there  is  a  law  in  our  members  war- 
"  ring  againfl  the  law  of  our  minds,  and  captivating 
*'  us  to  the  law  of  fin  and  death  *,"  i.  e.  though  our 
fenfitive  appetites  and  pafTions  are  apt  to  rebel  againfl: 
the  reafon  of  our  minds  and  the  did-ates  of  our  na- 
tural confcience,    yet  every  chriilian  may  fay  with 

St.  Paul, 


278  ObjcElions  agatnjl  the 

XXViri"  ^^*  ^^^^'  "  ^\-^^^^^  be  to  God,  who  hath  given  us  the 
■  "  vi(flory  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  ",  i.  e. 
hath  not  left  us  dellitute  of  a  fufficient  aid  and 
llrength  to  enable  us  to  conquer  the  rebellious  mo- 
tions of  fin,  by  the  powerful  affiflance  of  that  grace 
which  is  fo  plentifully  ofrered  to  us  in  the  gofpel. 
And  this  is  the  cafe  of  all  thofe  who  live  under  the 
gofpel :  as  for  others,  as  their  cafe  is  befl  known  to 
God,  fo  we  have  no  reafon  to  doubt  but  that  his 
infinite  goodnefs  and  mercy  takes  that  care  of  them 
which  becomes  a  merciful  creator  :  though  both  the 
meafures  and  the  methods  of  his  mercy  towards  them, 
are  fecret  and  unknown  to  us. 

4.  The  hardeft  contefi  between  man's  inclination 
and  duty,  is  in  thofe  who  have  wilfjlly  contracfbed 
vicious  habits,  and  by  that  means,  rendrcd  their  duty 
much  more  difficult  to  themfelves;  having  greatly 
improved  the  evil  inclinations  of  nature  by  wicked 
practice  and  cufcom.  For  the  fcripture  plainly  fup- 
pofeth,  that  men  may  debauch  even  corrupt  nature, 
and  make  themfelves  ten-fold  more  the  children  of 
wrath  and  of  the  devil,  than  they  were  by  nature. 

This  is  a  cafe  fadly  to  be  deplored,  but  yet  not 
utterly  to  be  dcfpaired  of.  And  therefore  thofe  who 
by  a  long  progrefs  in  an  e^il  courfe,  are  plunged 
into  this  fad  condition,  ought  to  confider  that  they 
are  not  to  be  refcued  out  of  it  by  an  ordinary  refo- 
lution,  and  a  common  grace  of  God.  Their  cafe 
plainly  requires  an  extraordinary  remedy.  For  he 
that  is  deeply  engaged  in  vice  is  like  a  man  laid  fafl 
in  a  bog,  who  by  a  faint  and  lazy  flruggling  to 
get  out,  does  but  fpend  his  ftrcngth  to  no  purpofe, 
and  finks  himfelf  t\\t  deeper  into  it :   the  only  way  is, 

by 


true  religion  anpwereL  279 

by  a  rcfolute  and  vigorous  effort  to  fpring  out,  if||^j^]^- 
poffible,  at  once.  And  therefore  in  this  cafe,  to  a  ' 
vio-orous  refolution  there  mufl  be  joined  an  carneft 
application  to  God  for  his  powerful  grace  and  af- 
fiftance,  to  help  us  out  of  this  miferable  flate.  And  if 
wc  be  truly  fcnfible  of  the  defpcrate  danger  of  our 
condition,  this  prefling  necelTicy  of  our  cafe  will  be 
apt  to  infpire  us  with  a  mighty  refolution.  For 
power  and  necefficy  are  neighbours,  and  never  dwell 
far  afunder.  When  men  are  feverely  urged  and  prel^ 
fed,  they  find  a  power  in  themfelves  which  thcj 
thought  they  had  not.  Like  a  coward  driven  up  to 
a  wall,  who  in  the  extremity  of  diflrels  and  defpair 
will  fight  terribly  and  perform  v/onders :  or  like  3 
man  lame  of  the  gout,  who  being  affauked  by  a  pre* 
fent  and  terrible  danger  forgets  his  difeafe,  and  will 
find  his  legs  rather  than  lofe  his  life. 

And  in  this,  I  do  not  fpcak  above  the  rate  of  h\> 
mane  nature,  and  what  men  throughly  roufed  and 
awakened  to  a  fenfe  of  their  danger,  by  a  mighty 
refolution  may  morally  do,  through  that  divine 
o-race  and  afTillance  which  is  ever  ready  to  be  afford- 
ed to  weil-refolved  minds,  and  fuch  as  are  fin- 
cerely  bent  to  return  to  God  and  their  duty.  More 
than  this  I  cannot  fay  for  the  encouragement  of 
thofe  who  have  proceeded  far  in  an  evil  courfe :  and 
they  who  have  made  their  cafe  fo  very  defperate, 
ought  to  be  very  thankful  to  God  that  there  is  any 
remedy  left  for  them. 

5.  From  all  that  hath  been  faid,  it  evidently  ap- 
pears,  how  malicious   a  fuggcftion  it  is,  that  God 
feeks    the  deftrudion  of  men,   and  hath  made  his 
laws  on  purpofe  fo  difBcult  and  crofs  to  our  incli- 
nations. 


2  So  ObjecitGJis  agahijl  the 

S  ER  A'f.  nations,  that  he  might  have  an  advantage  to  ruin  us 
•_.^^-^  for  our  difobedience  to  them.  Alas,  v/e  are  fo  ab- 
folutely  under  the  power  of  God,  and  fo  unable  to 
withftand  it,  that  he  may  deflroy  us  when  he  plea- 
feth,  without  feeking  pretences  for  it :  "  for  who 
*'  hath  refifted  his  will  ?  '*  if  goodnefs  were  not  his 
nature,  he  hath  power  enough  to  bear  out  whatever 
he  hath  a  mind  to  do  to  us.  Bat  our  deftrudlion 
is  plainly  of  our  fclves,  and  God  is  free  from  the 
blood  of  all  men.  And  he  hath  not  made  the  way 
to  eternal  life  fo  diiiicult  to  any  of  us,  with  a  de- 
fign  to  make  us  miferable,  but  that  we  by  a  vigo- 
rous refolution,  and  an  unwearied  diligence,  and  a 
patient  continuance  in  well  doing,  might  win  and 
wear  a  more  glorious  crown,  and  be  fit  to  receive  a 
more  ample  reward  from  his  bounty  and  goodnefs : 
yea,  in  fome  fenfe,  I  may  fay,  from  his  juftice ,  "  for 
*'  God  is  not  unrighteous,  to  forget  our  work  and 
«'  labour  of  love.  "  He  will  fully  confider  all  the 
pains  that  any  of  us  take  in  his  fervice,  and  all  the 
difficulties  that  we  llruggle  with  out  of  love  to  Goo 
and  goodnefs.  So  that  this  objection,  from  the 
clafhing  of  our  duty  with  our  inclination,  is  I  hope 
fully  anfwered :  Since  God  hath  provided  fo  power- 
ful and  effedlual  a  remedy  againfl  our  natural  im- 
potency  and  infirmity,  by  the  grace  of  the  gofpel. 

And  though  to  thofe  who  have  wilfully  contract- 
ed vicious  habits,  a  religious  and  virtuous  courfe  of 
life  be  very  difficult,  yet  the  main  difficulty  lies  in 
our  firft  entrance  upon  it ;  and  when  that  is  over, 
the  ways  of  goodnefs  are  as  eafy  as  it  is  fit  any  thing 
fhould  be  that  is  fo  excellent,  and  that  hath  the  en- 
couragement of  fo  glorious  a  reward.     Cuftom  will 

reconcile 


triu  religion  anfwered.  281 

reconcile  men  almoft  to  any  thing;  but  there  are  S^E  R  M- 
thofe  charms  in  the  ways  of  wifdom  and  virtue,  that, 
a  Httle  acquaintance  and  converfation  with  them  will 
foon   make  them   more  delightful   than   any   other 
courfe.     And  who  will  grudge  any  pains  and  trou- 
ble to  bring  himfelf  into  fo  fafe  and  happy  a  conditi- 
on ?  After  we  have  tried  both  courfes,   of  religion 
and  profanenefs,    of  virtue  and  vice,    we  Ihall  cer- 
tainly find,  that  nothing  is  fo  wife,  fo  eafy,  and  fo 
comfortable  as  to  be  virtuous  and  good,  and  always 
to  do  that  which  we    are  inwardly    convinced    we 
oucrht  to  do.     Nor  would  I  defire  more  of  any  man 
in  this  matter,  than  to  follow  the  fobered  convictions 
of  his  ovv^n  mind,  and  to  do  that  which  upon  the 
moll  ferious  confideration  at  all  times,  in  profperity 
and  affiidlion,  in  ficknefs  and  health,  in  the  tim.e  of 
life  and  at  the  hour  of  death,  he  judgeth  wifefc  and 
fafefl  for  him  to  do.     I  proceed  to  the 

II.  Branch  of  the  objedion,  "  That  the  laws  of 
«'  religion  (and  particularly  of  the  chriilian  religion) 
*'  are  a  heavy  yoke,  laying  too  great  a  reflraint  up- 
«'  on  humane  nature,  and  entrenching  too  much 
«  upon  the  pleafures  and  liberty  of  it." 

There  was,  I  confefs,  fome  pretence  for  this  ob- 
jedtion  againft  the  jewilh  religion  ;  which  by  the  mul- 
titude of  its  pofitive  inflitutions  and  external  obfer- 
vances,  mud  needs  have  been  very  burdenfome.   And 
the  lame  objedlion  lies  againft  the  church  of  RomiC, 
v/ho  (as  they  have  handled  chriftianity)  by  the  unrea- 
fonable  number  of  their  needlefs  and  fsnfelefs  ceremo- 
nies, have  made  the  yoke  of  Christ   heavier  than 
that  of  Mofes,  and  the  gofpel  a  more  carnal  ccm- 
VoL    11.  Nn  mandmenc 


282  Ohje5iions  againjl  the 

S  E  R  M.  mandmcnt  than  the  law.     So  that  chriftianity  is  loll 
^  '^^'^'^'  among  them  in  the  trappings  and  accoutrements  of 
it;  with  which  inflead  of  adorning  reh'gion  they  have 
llrangely  difguifcd  it,  and  quite  iliRed  it  in  the  crowd 
of  external  rites  and  ceremonies. 

But  the  pure  chriflian  religion,  as  it  was  delivered 
by  our  Saviour,  hath  hardly  any  thing  in  it  that  is 
pofitive-,  except  the  two  facraments,  which  are  not 
very  troublefome  neither,  but  very  much  for  our 
comfort  and  advantage,  becaufe  they  convey  and  con-^ 
firm  to  us  the  great  blefTings  and  privileges  of  our 
religion.  In  other  things  chriftianity  hath  hardly 
impofed  any  other  laws  upon  us  but  what  are  enaded 
in  our  natures,  or  are  agreeable  to  the  prime  and 
fundamental  laws  of  it ;  nothing  but  what  every  man's 
reafon  either  didates  to  him  to  be  neceflary,  or  ap- 
proves as  highly  fit  and  reafbnable. 

But  we  do  mod  groHy  miilake  the  nature  of  plea- 
fure  and  liberty,  if  we  promife  them  10  ourfelves  in 
any  evil  wicked  courfe.  For,  upon  due  fearch 
and  trial  it  will  be  found,  that  true  pleafure,  and  per- 
fe(5l  freedom  are  no-where  to  be  found  but  in  the 
prafticeof  virtue,  and  inthefervice  of  God.  The 
jaws  of  religion  do  not  abridge  us  of  any  pleafure 
that  a  wife  man  can  defire,  and  fafely  enjoy,  I  mean 
without  a  greater  evil  and  trouble  confequent  upon  it. 
The  pleafure  of  commanding  our  appetites,  and  go- 
verning our  paffions,  by  the  rules  of  reafon,  (which 
are  the  laws  of  God)  is  infinitely  to  be  preferred  be- 
fore any  fcnfual  pleafure  whatfocver :  becaufe  it  is  the 
pleafure  of  wifdom  and  difcretion  •,  and  gives  us  tlie 
fatisfa^lion  of  having  done  that  which  is  the  beft  and 
fitted  for  reafonable  creatures  to  do.  Wlio  would  not 

rather 


true  religion  anfwered.  ^"i 

rather  choofe  to  govern  himfdf  asScipio  did,  amidft  SERM. 
ail   tlie  temptations   and   opportunities    of    fenfual  ,__^ — , 
pleafure   vvhicli    liis  power   and  viftories  prefentcd 
to  iiim,    tiian   to   wallow    in   all   the  delights  of 

fenfe  ? 

Nothing  is  more  certain  in  reafon  and  experience, 
than  that  every  inordinate  appetite  and  affeftion  is  a 
punifliment  to  itfelf ;  and  is  perpetually  croffing  us 
own  pleafure,  and  defeating  its  own  fatisfaftion,  by 
over-iliooting  the  mark  it  aims  at.    For  inaance    in- 
temperance in  eating  and  drinking,  inftead  of  de- 
liahting  and  fatisfying  nature,  doth  but  load  and  ooy 
if,  and  inftead  of  quenching  a  natural  thirft,  wnica 
it  is  extremely  pleafant  to  do,  cre7.tes  an  unnatural 
one,  which  is  troublefome  and  endlefs.     The  plea- 
fur^  of  revenge,  as  foon  as  it  is  executed,  turns  into 
Brief  and  pity,  guilt  and  remorfe,  and   a  thouland 
melancholy  willes  that  we  had  retrained  ourk.ves 
from  fo  unreafonable  an  aft.     And  the  fame  is  as 
evident  in  other  fenfual  exceffes,  not  fo  fit  to  be  de- 
fcribed.     Vv^e  may  truft  Epicurus  for  this,  that  there 
can  be  no  true  pleafure  without  temperance  in  theuie 
of  pleafure.  And  God  and  reafon  have  fet  us  no  other 
bounds  concerning  the  ufe  of  fenfual  pleafures,  but 
that  we  take  care  not  to  be  inj'jrious  to  ourfelves,  or 
others,  in  the  kind  or  degree  of  them.     Ana  ir  is 
very  vifible,    that  all  fenfaal  exc:fs  is  naturally  at- 
tended with  a  double  inconvenience :  as  it  goes  be- 
yond the  limits  of  nature,  it  beasts  bodily  pains  and 
difeafes:  as  it  tranfgreaita  the  rules  of  reaion  and  re- 
ligion,   it   breeds   guilt  and  remor.e  in  tne  mind 
And  ihtk  are,  beyond  comparifon,  the  two  grcatcit 
evils  in  this  world  i  a  difeafcd  body,  and  a  diicon- 

N  n  2  tented 


284  Objedlions  againjl  the 

vv-^\^t"  ^^^^^^^  ^^"^-  -^"d  in  this  I  am  fure  I  fpeak  to  the  in- 
ward  ieehng  and  experience  of  men  \  and  lay  no- 
thing but  what  every  vicious  man  finds,  and  hath  a 
more  lively  fenfe  of,  tlian  is  to  be  exprefTed  by  words. 

When  all  is  done,  there  is  no  pleafure  comparable 
to  that  of  innocency,  and  freedom  from  the  flings  of 
a  guilty  confcience  \  this  is  a  pure  and  fpiritual  plea- 
fure, much  above  any  fenfual  delight.  And  yet 
among  all  the  delights  of  fenfe,  that  of  health  (which 
is  the  natural  confequent  of  a  fober,  and  chafle,  and 
regular  life)  is  a  fenfual  pleafure  far  beyond  that  of 
any  vice :  for  it  is  the  life  of  life ;  and  that  which 
gives  a  grateful  relifh  to  all  our  orher  enjoyments.  It 
is  not  indeed  fo  violent  and  tranfporting  a  pleafure, 
but  it  is  pure,  and  even,  and  lading,  and  hath  no 
guilt  and  regret,  no  forrow  and  trouble  in  it,  or  after 
it:  which  is  a  worm  that  infallibly  breeds  in  all  vicious 
and  unlawful  pleafures,  and  makes  tliem  to  be  bitter- 
nefs  in  the  end. 

All  the  ways  of  fin  are  fo  befet  with  thorns  and 
difncukies  on  every  fide,  there  are  fo  many  unanfwer- 
able  objtcflions  againft  vice,  from  the  unreafonable- 
ncfs  and  uglinefs  of  it,  from  the  remorfe  that  attends 
it,  from  the  endlefs  mifcry  that  follows  it,  that  none 
but  the  rafli  and  inconfiderate  can  obtain  leave  of 
themfelves  to  commit  it.  It  is  the  daughter  of  in- 
advertency, and  blindnefs  and  folly  \  and  the  mo- 
ther of  guilt,  and  repentance  and  woe.  Tiiere  is 
no  pleafur;  that  will  hold  out  and  abide  with  us  to 
the  lall,  but  that  of  innocency  and  well-doing.  All 
{\n  is  fol'y,  and  as  Svi^neca  truly  fays,  Omnis  Jlulli- 
tia  lahorat  fafiidio  fui\  "  All  folly  foon  grows  fick 
*'  and  weary  of  itielf.*'     The  pleafure  of  it  is  flight 

and 


true  religion  anfwered,  285 

and  fuperficial,  but  the    trouble  and  remorfe  of  It  S  E  R  M. 
pierceth  our  very  hearts,  XXVIll.^ 

And  then  as  to  the  other  part  of  the  objedion, 
**  that  religion  reilrains  us  of  our  liberty:"  the 
contrary  is  evidently  true,  that  fin  and  vice  are 
the  greateft  flavery.  For  he  is  truly  a  Have,  who  is 
not  at  liberty  to  follow  his  own  judgment,  and  to 
do  thofe  things  which  he  is  inwardly  convinced  it 
is  bed  for  him  to  do  ;  but  is  fubjedl  to  the  unreafon- 
able  commands,  and  the  tyrannical  power  and  vio- 
lence of  his  lulls  and  pafTions :  fo  that  he  is  not 
mafler  of  himfelf,  but  other  lords  have  got  domini- 
on over  him ;  and  he  is  perfeclly  at  their  beck  and 
command.  One  vice  or  pafTion  bids  him  go,  and  he 
goes ;  another,  come,  and  he  comes ;  and  a  third,  do 
this,  and  he  doth  it.  The  man  is  at  perpetual  va- 
riance v/ith  his  own  mind,  and  continually  commit- 
ting the  things  which  he  condemns  in  himfelf.  And 
it  is  all  one,  whether  a  man  be  fubjed  to  the  will  and 
humour  of  another  perfon,  or  to  his  own  lulls  and 
pafTions.  Only  this  of  the  two  is  the  worfe  ;  becaufe 
the  tyrant  is  at  home,  and  always  ready  at  hand  to 
domineer  over  him  ;  he  is  got  v-/ithin  him,  and  fo 
much  the  harder  to  be  vanquifhed  and  overcome. 

But  the  fervice  of  God,  and  obedience  to  his  laws 
is  perfed"  liberty  :  Becaufe  the  law  of  God  requires 
nothing  of  us,  but  what  is  recommended  to  m  by 
our  own  reafon,  and  from  the  benefit  and  advantage 
of  doing  it ;  nothing  but  what  is  much  more  for 
our  own  interefl  to  do  ir,  than  it  can  be  fir  God's 
to  command  it.  And  tho'  in  fome  things  God  exadls 
obedience  of  us  more  indifpenfibly,  and  under  leve- 
rer  penalties,  il  is  becaufe  thofe  things  are  in  their 

nature 


286  Objcdliom  agalnjl  the 

SERM.  nature  more  necefTary  to  our  felicity.  And  how 
'  could  God  poITibly  have  dealt  more  gracioufly  and 
kindly  with  us,  than  to  oblige  us  mod  ftridlly  to 
that  which  is  moH  evidently  for  our  good  \  and 
to  make  fuch  laws  for  us,  as  if  we  live  in  obedience 
to  them  will  infallibly  make  w?  happy  ?  fo  that 
taking  all  things  into  confiderauon,  the  intereft  of 
our  bodies  and  o^x  foub,  of  the  prefent  and  the  fu- 
ture, of  this  ^AX'jid  and  the  other,  religion  is  the 
molt  reafonable  and  wile,  the  moil  comfortable  and 
compendious  courfe  that  any  man  can  take  in  order 
to  his  own  happinefs. 

The  confideration  whereof  ought  to  be  a  mighty 
endearment  of  our  duty  to  us,  and  a  mod  prevalent 
argument  with  us  to  yield  a  ready  and  chearful  obe- 
dience to  the  laws  of  God  s  which  are  in  truth  fo 
many  ads  of  grace  and  favour  to  mankind,  the  real 
privileges  of  our  nature,  and  the  proper  means  and 
caufes  of  our  happineis  :  and  do  retrain  us  from  no- 
thing but  from  doi.ig  mifchief  to  our  felves,  from 
playing  the  fools  and  making  our  felves  miferable. 

And  therefore  indead  of  oppofing  religion,  upon 
pretence  of  the  unreafonable  redraints  of  it,  we  ought 
to  thank  God  heartily,  that  he  hath  laid  fo  drid: 
an  obligation  upon  us  to  regard  and  purfue  our 
true  intered  \  and  hath  been  plcafed  to  take  that 
care  of  us,  as  to  fet  bounds  to  our  loofe  and  wild 
appetites  by  our  duty  ;  and  in  giving  us  rules  to  live 
by,  hath  no  ways  complied  with  our  inconfiderate 
and  foolifh  inclinations,  to  our  real  harm  and  pre- 
judice :  but  hath  made  thofe  things  nccedary  for  us 
to  do,  which  in  all  rcfpeds  are  bed  for  us  •,  and 
which,  if  wc  were  perfcdly  left  to  our  own  liberty, 

ought 


true  religion  anfwered,  287 

ought  in  all  reafon  to  be  our  free  and  firfl  choice  :  S  E  R  M. 
and  hath  made  the  folly  and  inconvenience  of  fin  fo^^^'^^- 
grofly  palpable,  that  every  man  may  fee  it  before- 
hand that  will  but  confider,  and  at  the  beginning 
of  a  bad  courfe  look  to  the  end  of  it  -,  and  they 
that  will  not  confider,  fhall  be  forced  from  woful 
experience  at  lad  to  acknowledge  it,  when  they  find 
the  difmal  effedls  and  mifchievous  confequences  of 
their  vices  ftill  meeting  them  at  one  turn  or  other. 

And  now,  by  all  that  hath  been  faid  upon  this 
argument,  I  hope  we  are  fatisfied  that  Religion  is  no 
liich  intolerable  yoke  ;  and  that  upon  a  due  and  full 
confideration  of  things  it  cannot  feem  evil  unto  any 
of  us  to  ferve  the  Lord  :  nay,  on  the  contrary, 
that  it  is  abfolutely  neceiTary,  both  to  our  prefent 
peace  and  our  future  fehcity  :  and  that  a  religious 
and  virtuous  life  is  not  only  upon  all  accounts  the 
mofi  prudent,  but  after  we  are  entred  upon  it,  and 
accuftomed  to  it,  the  mod  pleafant  courfe  that  any 
man  can  take  *,  and  however  inconfiderate  men  may 
complain  of  the  reftraints  of  religion  that  it  is  not 
one  jot  more  our  duty,  than  it  is  our  privilege  and 
our  happineis. 

And  I  cannot  think,  that  upon  fober  confideration 
any  man  could  fee  reafon  to  thank  God  to  be  re- 
leafed  from  any  of  his  laws,  or  to  have  had  the  con- 
trary to  them  enjoined.  Let  us  fuppofe,  that  the 
laws  of  God  had  been  jufc  the  reverfe  of  what  they 
now  are ;  that  he  had  commanded  us,  under  fevere 
penalties,  to  deal  falfly  and  fraudulendy  with  our 
neighbours ;  to  demean  our  felves  ungratefully  to  our 
beft  friends  and  benefli^ors  •,  to  be  drunk  every 
day,  and  to  purfue  fenfual  pleafures  to  the  endanger- 
ing 


XXVIIl 


g8  Ohjecfions  againjl  the 

SER^f.  in^  of  our  health  and  life:  how  Ihould  we  have 
complained  of  the  unreafonablenefs  of  thefe  laws,  and 
have  murmured  at  the  ilavery  of  fuch  intolerable 
impofitions  ?  and  yet  now  that  God  hath  command- 
ed us  the  contrary,  things  every  way  agreeable 
to  our  reafon  and  interefl:,  we  are  not  pleafed  nei- 
ther. What  will  content  us?  as  our  Saviour  ex- 
pollulates  in  a  like  cafe,  "  whereunto  fliall  I  liken 
"  this  generation  ?  it  is  like  unto  children  playing 
'«  in  the  market-place,  and  calling  unto  their  com- 
"  panions,  we  have  piped  unto  you,  and  ye  have 
*'  not  danced  ♦,  we  have  mourned,  and  ye  have  not 
*'  lamented."  This  is  perfedlly  childifh,  to  be 
pleafed  with  nothing  •,  neither  to  like  this  nor  the 
contrary.  We  are  not  contented  v/ith  the  laws  of 
God  as  they  are,  and  yet  the  contrary  to  them  we 
fhould  have  efteemed  the  greatefb  grievance  in  the 
world. 

And  if  this  be  true,  that  the  laws  of  God,  how 
contrary  foever  to  our  vicious  inclinations,  and  real- 
ly calculated  for  our  benefit  and  advantage,  it  would 
almofl  be  an  affront  to  wife  and  confiderate  men  to 
importune  them  to  their  interefl  j  and  with  great 
earneftnefs  to  perfuade  them  to  that  which  in  all 
refpeds  is  fo  vifibly  for  their  advantage,  "  choofe 
*'  you  therefore  this  day  whom  you  will  fcrve ;  '* 
God,  or  your  lufts.  And  take  up  a  fpcedy  refolu- 
tion  in  a  matter  of  fo  great  and  preffing  a  concern- 
ment ;  clioofc  you  this  day. 

Where  there  is  great  hazard  in  the  doing  of  a 
thing,  it  is  good  to  deliberate  long  before  we  under- 
take it  :  but  where  the  thing  is  not  only  fafe  but  be- 
neficial, and  not  only  hugely  beneficial  but  highly  ne- 

ccfliiry  5 


true  religion  anfwered.  289 

cefiary  %   when  our  life  and  our  happinels  depends  S  E  R  M- 
upon  it,  and  all  die  danger  lies  in  the  delay  of  it  j  ^^^^^^• 
there  we  cannot  be  too  fudden  in  our   refolution, 
nor  too  fpeedy  in  the  execudon  of  it.     That  which 
is  evidently  fafe,    needs   no  deliberation  ;  and  that 
which  is  abfolutely  neceflary,  will  admit  of  none. 

Therefore  refolve  upon  it  out  of  hand  ;  "  to  day, 
<^  whilf!:  it  is  called  to  day,  led  any  of  you  be 
«  hardened  thi"ough  the  deceitfulnefs  of  {m. ''  In 
the  days  of  your  youth  and  health  ;  "  for  that  is  the 
"  acceptable  time,  that  is  the  day  of  falvation  : " 
before  the  evil  day  comes,  and  you  be  driven  to  it 
by  the  terrible  apprehenfion  and  approach  of  death 
when  men  fly  to  God  only  for  fear  of  his  wrath. 
For  the  greatefl  atheifls  and  infidels  (when  they 
come  to  die,  if  they  have  any  of  that  reafon  \tk^ 
which  they  have  ufed  fo  ill)  have  commonly  right 
opinions  about  God  and  religion.  For  then  the  con- 
fidence as  well  as  the  comfort  of  atheifm  leaves  them, 
as  the  devil  ufes  to  do  witches  when  they  are  in 
diftrefs.  Then  with  Nebuchadnezzar,  when  they 
are  recovered  from  being  beads,  they  look  up  to 
heaven,  and  their  underflanding  returns  to  them  ; 
then  they  h€i\tv^  a  God,  and  cannot  help  it;  they 
believe,  and  tremble  at  the  thoughts  of  him.  Thus 
Lucretius,  one  of  their  great  authors,  obferves,  that 
when  men  are  in  diftrefs, 

AcYtiis  advertimt  animos  ad  religionem ; 
the  thoughts  of  religion  are  then  more  quick  and 
pungent  upon  their  minds. 

Nam  vera  voces  turn  demurn  peBore  ah  imo 
Eliciuntur ;  ^  eripitur  perfona^  manet  res. 

Vol.  II.  O  o  Msns 

6. 


290  ObjeEliom^Ggatnll  the 

S  E  R  M.      Mens  words  then  coMb  from  the  bottom  of  their 

•y  Y  v'  T  r  r 

'  hearts ;  the  mask  is  taken  off,  and  things  then  ap- 
pear as  in  truth  they  are. 

But  then  perhaps  it  may  be  too  late  to  make  this 
choice :  nay  then  it  can  hardly  be  choice,  but  ne- 
cefTity.  Men  do  not  then  choofe  to  ferve  the  Lord, 
but  they  are  urged  and  forced  to  it  by  their  fears. 
They  have  ferved  their  lufts  all  their  life  long,  and 
now  they  would  fain  ferve  themfelves  of  God  at  the 
hour  of  death.  They  have  done  what  they  Cin,  by 
their  infolent  contempt  and  defiance  of  the  almigh- 
ty, to  make  themfelves  miferable  ;  and  now  that  they 
can  iland  out  no  longer  againft  him,  they  are  con- 
tented at  lafc  to  be  beholden  to  him  to  make  them 
happy.  The  mercies  of  God  arc  vail  and  bound- 
Icfs,  but  yet  methinks  it  is  too  great  a  prefumption 
in  ail  rcafon,  for  men  to  defign  before-hand  to 
make  the  mercy  of  God  the  fandluary  and  retreat 
of  a  finful  life. 

To  draw  tvitrs.  to  a  conclufion  of  this  difcourfe. 
If  fafety,  or  pleafure,  or  liberty,  or  wifdom,  or  vir- 
tue, or  even  happinefs  it  {<zVi  have  any  temptation 
in  them,  religion  hath  all  thefe  baits  and  allure- 
ments. What  Tully  fays  of  philofophy,  is  much 
more  true  of  the  chriftian  religion,  the  wifdom  and 
philofophy  which  is  from  above  ;  nunquam  fatis  lau- 
dari  pcterit,  ciii  qui  parcat^  omne  tempus  atatis  fine 
moleftia  degers  poJfiL  "  We  can  never  praife  it 
**  enough,  fmce  whoever  lives  according  to  the 
*'  rules  of  it,  may  pafs  the  whole  age  of  his  Yi^t 
*'  CI  may  add,  his  whole  duration,  this  life  and  the 
*'  other)  without  trouble." 

Philo. 


true  religion  anfwered.  291 

Phllofophy  hath  given  us  feveral  plaufible  rules  ^^^^^^^ 
for  the  attaining  of  peace  and  tranquiUity  of  mind, 
but  they  fall  very  much  Ihort  of  bringing  men  to 
it.  The  very  bed  of  them  fiil  us  upon  the  great- 
eft  occafions.  But  the  chriftian  religion  hath  ef- 
fcdtually  done  ali  that  which  philofophy  pretended 
to,  and  aimed  at.  The  precepts  and  promifes  of  the 
holy  fcriptures  are  every  way  fufficient  for  our  com- 
fort, and  for  our  inftru£lion  in  righteoufncfs :  to 
corred  all  the  errors,  and  to  bear  us  up  under  all 
the  evils  and  adverfides  of  humane  life  \  cfpecially 
that  holy  and  heavenly  dodlrine  which  is  contained 
in  the  admirable  fermons  of  our  Saviour,  quern 
cum  legimtis^  quern  philofophum  non  coiitemnimus  ?  whofe 
excellent  difcourfes  when  we  read,  what  philofopher 
do  we  not  defpife  ?  none  of  the  philofophers  could, 
upon  fure  grounds,  give  that  encouragement  to  their 
fcholars  which  our  Saviour  does  to  his  difciples  ; 
"  take  my  yoke  upon  you,  and  learn  of  me,  and 
«  ye  fhall  find  reft  to  your  fouls.  For  my  yoke  is 
*'  eafy,  and  my  burden  is  light.  '* 

This  is  the  advantage  of  the  chriftian  religion 
finccrely  believed  and  pradifed,  that  it  gives  perfe6fc 
reft  and  tranquillity  to  the  mind  of  man  :  it  frees 
us  from  the  guilt  of  an  evil  confcience,  and  from 
the  power  of  our  lufts,  and  from  the  fiavifn  fear 
of  death  and  of  the  vengeance  of  another  v/orld.  ^  It 
builds  our  comfort  upon  a  rock,  which  will  abide 
all  ftorms,  and  remain  unfhaken  in  every  condition, 
and  will  laft  and  hold  out  of  ever  :  "  he  that  hear- 
*'  eth  thcfe  fayings  of  mine,  and  doth  them  (faith 
««  our  Lord)  I  will  liken  him  to  a  wife  man,  who 
<«  built  his  houfe  upon  a  rock. " 

O  o  2  Ia 


292  Objedtions  agahijl  the 

S  E  R  M.  In  fhort,  religion  makes  the  life  of  man  a  wife 
J^^}2^^^%">  regular  and  conftant  to  itfelfj  becaufe  it 
unites  all  our  refolutions  and  adtions  in  one  great 
end :  whereas  without  religion  the  life  of  man  is  a 
wild,  and  fluttering,  and  inconfifbent  thing,  with- 
out any  certain  fcope  and  defign.  The  vicious 
man  lives  at  random,  and  ads  by  chance  :  for  he 
that  walks  by  no  rule  can  carry  on  no  fettled  and 
Iteady  defign.  It  would  pity  a  man's  heart  to  fee, 
how  hard  fuch  men  are  put  to  it  for  diverfion,  and 
what  a  burden  time  is  to  them  ;  and  how  folicitous 
they  are  to  devife  ways,  not  to  fpend  it  but  to  fquan- 
der  it  away.  For  their  great  grievance  is  confidera- 
tion,  and  to  be  obliged  to  be  intent  upon  any  thing 
that  is  ferious.  They  hurry  from  one  vanity  and 
folly  to  another  j  and  plunge  themfelves  into  drink, 
not  to  quench  their  thirft,  but  their  guilt ;  and  are 
beholden  to  every  vain  man,  and  to  every  trifling  oc- 
cafion,  that  can  but  help  to  take  time  oflT  their 
hands.  Wretched  and  inconfiderate  men  !  who  have 
ib  vaft  a  work  before  them,  the  happinefs  of  all  eter- 
nity to  take  care  of  and  provide  for,  and  yet  are  at 
a  lofs  how  to  employ  their  time :  fo  that  irreligioii 
and  vice  makes  life  an  extravagant  and  unnatural 
thing,  becitufe  it  perverts  and  overthrows  the  natural 
courfe  and  order  of  things.  For  inftance  -,  accord- 
ing to  nature  men  labour  to  get  an  eflate,  to  free 
themfelves  from  temptations  to  rapine  and  injury ; 
and  that  they  may  have  wherewithal  to  fupply  their 
own  wants,  and  to  relieve  the  needs  of  others.  But 
now  the  covetous  man  heaps  up  riches,  not  to  enjoy 
them,  but  to  liave  them ;  and  flarves  himfelf  in  the 
midH  of  plenty,    and  moll  unnaturally  cheats  and 

robs 


true  religion  anfwered,  293 

robs  himfelf  of  that  which  is  his  own ;  and  makes  SJ^r^* 
a  hard  fhift  to  be  as  poor  and  miferable  with  a  great 
eflate,  as  any  man  can  be  without  it.  According  to 
the  defign  pf  nature,  men  iliould  eat  and  drink  that 
they  may  Hve ;  but  the  voluptuous  man  only  lives 
that  he  may  eat  and  drink.  Nature  in  all  fenfual 
enjoyments  defigns  pleafure,  which  may  certainly  be 
had  within  the  limits  of  virtue :  but  vice  rafhly  pur- 
fues  pleafure  into  the  enemies  quarters ;  and  never 
Hops  'till  the  fmner  be  furrounded  and  feized  upon  by 
pain  and  torment. 

So  that  take  away  God  and  Religion,  and  men 
live  to  no  purpofe ;  without  propofing  any  worthy 
and  confiderable  end  of  life  to  themfelves.  Whereas 
the  fear  of  God,  and  the  care  of  our  immortal  fouls, 
fixeth  us  upon  one  great  defign,  to  which  our  whole 
life,  and  all  the  adtions  of  it  are  ultimately  refcrr'd, 
Ubi  iinus  Deus  colitur  Cfaith  LadlantiusJ  ibi  vita^  ^ 
omnis  a6lus^  ad  unum  caputs  ^  ad  unam  fiimmam  refer- 
tur-y  when  we  acknowledge  God  as  the  author  of 
our  being,  as  our  fovereign,  and  our  judge,  our 
end  and  our  happinefs  is  then  fixed  ;  and  we  can 
have  but  one  reafonable  defign,  and  that  is,  by  en- 
deavouring to  pleafe  God  to  gain  his  favour  and  pro- 
tedion  in  tliis  world,  and  to  arrive  at  the  blifsful  en- 
joyment of  him  in  the  other :  "  In  whofe  prcfence 
*'  is  fulneis  of  joy;  and  at  whofe  right  hand  arc 
^'  pleafures  for  evermore."  To  him.  Father, 
Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  be  all  honour  and  glory, 
dominion  and  power,  now  and  for  ever.  Amen. 


SERMON 


C  294  ] 
SERMON   XXIX. 


Of  the  difficulty  of  reforming  vicious 
habits. 


J  E  R  E  M.  xiii.  23. 

Can  the  ethiopian  change  his  skiny  or  the  leopard  his 
fpots  ?  then  may  ye  alfo  do  good  that  are  accuftomed  to 
do  evil 


SERM.  ^    ^Onfidering  the  great  difficulty  of  reclaiming 


•   ■  thofe  who  are  far  gone  in  an  evil  courfe,  it 

is  no  more  than  needs  to  ufe  all  forts  of  ar- 
guments to  this  purpofe :  from  the  confideration  of 
the  evil  of  fin,  and  of  the  goodnefs  of  God  and  his 
wonderful  patience  and  long-fuffering  towards  us  in 
the  mid  ft  of  our  infinite  provocations :  from  his  great 
mercy  and  pity  declared  to  us  in  all  thofe  gracious 
means  and  methods  which  he  ufeth  for  our  recovery  : 
and  from  his  readinefs  and  forward nefs  after  all  our 
rebellions  to  receive  us  upon  our  repentance,  and  to 
be  pcrfedly  reconciled  to  us  as  if  we  had  never  of- 
fended him :  and  from  the  final  iifue  and  event  of  a 
wicked  life,  the  difmal  and  endlels  miferies  of  ano- 
ther world,  into  which  we  fhall  inevitably  fall  except 
we  repent  in  time  and  return  to  a  better  mind :  and 
laftly,  from  the  danger  of  being  hardened  in  an  evil 
courfe,  paft  all  remedy  and  hopes  of  repentance. 

And  yet  I  am   very  fenfible   that  to  difcourfe  to 
jmen  of  the  impofllbiiity,  or  at  leaft  the  extreme  dif- 
ficulty 


Of  the  dificulty^  ice,  295 

ficulty  of  refcuins;  themfelves  out  of  this  miferable  S  E  R  M. 
ftate,  fecms  to  be  an  odd  and  crofs  kind  of  argument,, 
and  more  apt  to  drive  people  to  defpair  than  to  gain 
them  to  repentance. 

But  fince  the  Spirit  of  God  is  pleafed  to  make 
ufe  of  it  to  this  purpofe,  we  may  fafely  rely  upon 
infinite  wifdom  for  the  fitnefs  of  it  to  awaken  finners 
to  a  fenfe  of  their  condition,  in  order  to  their  reco- 
very. For  here  in  the  text,  after  terrible  threatnings 
of  captivity  and  defolation  to  the  people  of  the  jews, 
who  were  extremely  wicked  and  degenerate,  through 
an  univerfal  depravation  of  manners  in  all  ranks  of 
men  from  the  higheft  to  the  lowefl,  fo  that  they 
feemed  to  iland  upon  the  brink  of  ruin,  and  to  be 
fatally  devoted  to  it;  to  add  to  the  terror  and  force 
of  thefe  threatnings,  God  by  his  prophet  reprefcnts 
to  them  the  iniinite  danger  and  extreme  difficulty  of 
their  cafe,  to  fee  if  he  could  flartle  them  by  telling 
them  into  what  a  defperatc  condition  they  had 
plunged  diemfelves ;  being  by  a  Jong  cuftom  of  fin- 
ning fo  far  engaged  in  an  evil  courfe,  that  they  had 
almoft  cut  oif  themfelves  from  a  poffibility  of  re- 
treat; fo  that  the  difficulty  of  their  change  feem- 
ed next  to  a  natural  impoffibility.  ''  Can  the  ethio- 
*'  pian  change  his  skin,  or  the  leopard  his  fpots? 
"  then  may  ye  alfo  do  good  that  are  accullom'd  to 
*'  do  evil." 

The  expreffion  is  very  high,  and  it  is  to  be  hoped 
fomewhat  hyperbolical,  and  above  the  jufl  meaning 
of  the  words.  Which  are,  I  think,  only  defigned 
to  fignify  to  us  the  extreme  difficulty  of  making  this 
change ;  which  is  therefore  refembled  to  a  natural  im- 
poffibility, as  coming  very  near  it,  though  not  alto- 
gether up  to  it*  And 


2g6  Of  the  difficulty  of 

SERM.  And  that-  this  expreiTion  is  thus  to  be  mitigated, 
^  '^'  will  appear  more  than  probable,  by  confidering  fome 
other  like  paflagesof  fcripture.  As,  where  our  Sa- 
viour compares  the  difficulty  of  a  rich  man's  fal- 
vation  to  that  which  is  naturally  impoffible,  viz.  to 
*«  a  camel's  palTing  through  the  eye  of  a  needle:  " 
nay,  he  pitcheth  his  expreflion  higher,  and  doth  not 
only  make  it  a  thing  of  equal  but  of  greater  diffi- 
culty 5  "  I  fay  unto  you,  it  is  eafier  for  a  camel  to  go 
"  through  the  eye  of  a  needle,  than  for  a  rich  man 
"  to  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God."  And  yet 
when  he  comes  to  explain  this  to  his  difciples,  he 
tells  them  that  he  only  meant  that  the  thing  was 
very  difficult,  "  how  hard  is  it  for  thofe  that  have 
"  riches  to  be  faved?"  and  that  it  was  not  abfolute- 
ly  impoflible,  but  fpeaking  according  to  humane  pro- 
bability :  "  with  men  this  is  impoffible,  but  not  with 
«  GbD.'* 

And  thus  alfo  it  is  reafonable  to  underftand  that  fe- 
vere  pafifage  of  the  apoflle,  Heb.  vi.  4.  *'  It  is  im- 
''  poffible  for  them  that  were  once  enlightened,  if 
"  they  fall  away,  to  renew  them  again  to  repen- 
*'  tance."  It  is  impoffible,  that  is,  it  is  very  diffi- 
cult. 

In  like  manner  we  are  to  underftand  this  high 
expreffion  in  the  text,  "  Can  the  ethiopian  change 
*'  his  skin  or  the  leopard  his  fpots?  then  may  ye 
**  alfo  do  good  that  are  accuftomed  to  do  evil ;  " 
that  is,  this  moral  change  of  men,  fettled  and  fixed 
in  bad  habits,  is  almoft  as  difficult  as  the  other. 

From  the  words  thus  explained  two  things  will 
properly  fall  under  our  confideration. 

I^irft, 


reforming  vicious  habits.  297 

Firft,  the  great  difficulty  of  reforming  vicious  ha-  S  E  R  M. 

bits,  or  of  changing  a  bad  courfe,  to  thofe  who  have, '„      'j 

been  deeply  engaged  in   it,   and    long  accuftomed 
to  it. 

Secondly,  notwithllanding  the  great  diuiculty  of 
the  thing,  what  ground  of  hope  and  encouragement 
there  is  left  that  it  may  be  done.  So  that  notwith- 
llanding the  appearing  harfhnefs  of  the  text,  the  re- 
fult  of  my  difcourle  will  be,  not  to  difcourage  any, 
how  bad  foever,  from  attempting  this  change,  but 
to  put  them  upon  it,  and  to  perfuade  them  to  it; 
and  to  remove  out  of  the  v/ay  that  which  may 
fv^em  to  be  one  of  the  ftrongefl  objedions  agaiiift  all 
endeavours  of  men  very  bad,  to  become  better. 

I.  Firfl,  the  great  difficulty  of  reforming  vicious 
habits,  or  of  changing  a  bad  couife,  to  thofe  who 
have  been  deeply  engaged  in  it,  and  long  accuftomed 
to  it.  And  this  difficulty  arifcth,  partly  from  the 
general  nature  of  habits  indifferently  confidered  v/he- 
ther  they  be  good,  or  bad,  or  indifferent  j  partly, 
from  the  particular  nature  of  evil  and  vicious  habits  5 
and  partly,  from  the  natural  and  judicial  confe* 
quences  of  a  great  progrefs  and  long  continuance  in 
an  evil  courfe.  By  the  confideration  of  thefe  three 
particulars,  the  extreme  difficulty  of  this  change,  to- 
gether with  the  true  caufes  and  reafons  of  it,  will  fully 
appear. 

I.  If  we  confider  the  nature  of  all  habits,  whe- 
ther good,  or  bad,  or  indifferent.  The  cuftom  and  fre^ 
quent  pradice  of  any  thing  begets  in  us  a  faculty  and 
eafmefs  in  doing  it.  It  bends  the  povv^crs  of  our  foul, 
and  turns  the  ftream  and  current  of  our  animal  fpirits 
fuch  a  way,  and  gives  all  our  faculties  a  tendency  and 

Vo  L.  11.  P  p  pliableneS 

6. 


298  Of  the  difficulty  of 

S  E  R  M.  pliablenefs  to  fuch  a  fort  of  adtions.  And  when  we 
J^^^j^  have  long  flood  bent  one  v/ay,  we  grow  fettled  and 
conrirmed  in  it ;  and  cannot  wiihout  great  force- and 
violence  be  reftored  to  our  former  ftate  and  coiidi- 
tion.  For  the  perfccftion  of  any  habit,  whether 
good  or  bad,  induceth  a  kind  of  necelTity  of  ading 
accordingly.  A  rooted  habit  becomes  a  governing 
principle,  and  bears  almoft  an  equal  fway  in  us 
with  that  which  is  natural.  It  is  a  kind  of  a  new  na- 
ture fuperinduced,  and  even  as  hard  to  be  expelled, 
as  fome  things  which  are  primitively  and  originally 
natural.  When  we  bend  a  thing  at  firft,  it  will  en- 
deavour to  reftore  itfelf  *,  but  it  may  be  h.eld  bent 
fo  long  'till  it  will  contii.ue  fo  of  itfelf,  and  grow 
crooked;  and  then  it  may  require  more  force  and 
violence  to  reduce  it  to  its  former  iiraightnefs,  than 
we  ufed  to  make  it  crooked  at  firih  This  is  the 
nature  of  all  habits;  the  farther  we  proceed,  the  more 
we  are  confirmed  in  them  :  and  that  which  at  firft  we 
did  voluntarily,  by  degrees  becomes  fo  natural  and 
necefTary,  that  it  is  almoft  impolTible  for  us  to  do 
otherwife.  This  is  plainly  feen  in  the  experience  of 
every  day,  in  things  good  and  bad,  both  in  lefTer  and 
greater  matters. 

2.  This  difiiculty  arifcth  more  efpecially  from  the 
particular  nature  of  evil  and  vicious  habits.  Thefe, 
becaufe  they  are  fuitable  to  our  corrupt  nature,  and 
confpire  with  the  inclinations  of  it,  are  likely  to  be 
of  a  much  quicker  growth  and  improvement,  and  in 
a  Iliorter  fpace,  and  with  lefs  care  and  endeavour,  to 
arrive  at  maturity  and  ftrength,  than  the  habits  of 
grace  and  goodnefs.  Confidering  the  propenfion  of 
our    depraved    nature,    the  progrefs  of  virtue  and 

goodnefs 


reforming  vicious  habits,  299 

goodnefs  is  up  the  hill,  in  which  we  not  only  move  S  E  R  M. 
hardly  and  heavily,  but  are  t.\ii\y  roll*d  back:  bu 
by  wickednels  and  vice  we  move  downwards,  which, 
as  it  is  much  quicker  and  eafier,  fo  it  is  harder  for  us 
to  flop  in  that  courie,  and  uuinitely  more  difficult  to 
return  from  it. 

Not  but  that  at  firft  a  Tinner  hath  Ibme  confidera- 
ble  checks  and  reilraints  upon  him,  and  meets  vnth. 
feveral  rubs  and  difficulties  in  his  way ;  the  fliame 
and  unreafonablenefs  of  his  vices,  and  the  troubl^i 
and  difquiet  which  they  create  to  him  :  but  he  breaks 
joofe  from  thefe  redraints,  and  gets  over  thefe  diffi- 
culties by  degrees :  and  the  falter  and  farther  he  ad- 
vanceth  in  an  evil  courfe,  the  lefs  trouble  ftill  they 
give  him,  'till  at  laft  they  almoil  quite  Jofe  their 
force,  and  give  him  little  or  no  dirinrDance. 

Shame  is  a  great  reftraint  upon  fmners  at  firfl, 
but  that  foon  falls  off:  and  when  men  have  once  loft 
their  innocence,  their  modefty  is  not  like  to  be  long 
troublefome  to  them.  For  impudence  comes  on  with 
vice,  and  grows  up  with  it.  Leffer  vices  do  not  ba- 
nifh  all  ffiame  and  modefty,  but  great  and  abomina- 
ble crimes  harden  mens  foreheads,  and  make  them 
Ihamelefs.  "  Were  they  affiamed  (iaith  the  prophet) 
"  when  they  committed  abomination  ?  nay  they  were 
*'  not  ailiamed,  neither  could  they  bluili."  When 
men  have  the  heart  to  do  a  very  bad  thing,  they  fel- 
dom  want  the  face  to  bear  it  out. 

And  as  for  the  unreafonablenefs  of  vice,  though 
nothing  in  the  world  be  more  evident  to  a  free  and 
impartial  judgment,  and  the  finner  himfelf  difcerns 
it  clearly  enough  at  his  firft  fetting  out  in  a  wicked 
eourfe  j 

P  p  2  ^  Video 


300  Of  the  difficuUy  of 

[T  i^  M.  ■■        Video  meliora^  'prohoqiie^ 

Deteriora  feqiior: 
He  ofrends  asainll:  the  light  of  his  own  mind,  and 
does  wickedly  when  he  knows  better :  yet  after  he 
hath  continued  for  fome  time  in  this  courfc,  and  is 
heartily  engaged  in  it,  his  foohlh  heart  is  darkened, 
and  the  notions  of  good  and  evil  are  obfcured  and 
confounded,  and  things  appear  to  him  in  a  falfe  and 
imperfed"  light :  his  lufts  do  at  once  blind  and  bias 
his  underflanding;  and  his  judgment  by  degrees  goes 
over  to  his  inchnations  %  and  he  cannot  think  that 
there  fnould  be  fo  much  reafon  againft  thofe  things 
for  which  he  hath  {q  ftrong  an  afFedion.  He  is  now 
engaged  in  a  party,  and  faclioufly  concerned  to  main- 
tain it,  and  to  make  the  beft  of  it  \  and  to  that  end, 
he  bends  all  his  wits  to  advance  fuch  principles  as 
are  nticfl  to  juftify  his  wicked  pradices;  and  in  all 
debates  plainly  favours  that  fide  of  the  queftion 
which  will  give  the  greateft  countenance  and  encou- 
ragement to  them.  When  men  "  are  corrupt  and 
*'^  do  abominable  works,  they  fay  in  their  hearts, 
"  there  is  no  God,"  that  is,  they  would  fain  think 
{q.  And  every  thing  ferves  for  an  argument  to  a 
v/illing  mind;  and  every  little  objection  appears  flrong 
and  confidcrable,  which  makes  againfl  that  which 
men  are  loth  fliould  be  true. 

Not  that  any  man  ever  fatisfied  himfelf  in  tTie 
principles  of  infidelity,  or  was  able  to  arrive  to  a 
fleady  and  unfhaken  perfuafion  of  the  truth  of  them, 
fo  as  not  vehemently  to  doubt  and  fear  the  contrary. 
However,  by  this  means  many  men,  though  they 
cannot  fully  comfort,  yet  they  make  a  fnift  to  cheat 
themfelves;  to  ftill  their  confciences  and  lay  them 

afleep 


refGrmmg  "ckious  habits.  301 

afleep  for  a  time,  fo  as  not  to  receive  any  great  and  ^E  R  .H. 
frequent  difturbance  in  their  courfe  from  the  checks 
and  rebukes  of  their  own  minds.     And  when  thcfe 
reftraints  are  removed,  the  work  of  iniquity  goes  on 
amain,  being  favoured  both  by  wind  and  tide. 

3.  The  difficulty  of  this  change  arifeth  likewife 
from  the  natural  and  judicial  confequences  of  a  great 
progrefs  and  long  continuance  in  an  evil  courfe.  iVly 
meaning  is,  that  inveterate  evil  habits  do  partly  from 
their  own  nature,  and  partly  from  the  juil  judgment 
and  permiffion  of  God,  put  men  under  feveral  difad- 
vantages  of  moving  effedlually  towards  their  ow^n  re- 
covery. 

By  a  long  cuflom  of  finning  mens  confciences 
grow  brawny,  and  "  feared  as  it  were  with  a  hot 
"  ironi"  and  by  being  often  trampled  upon,  they 
become  hard  as  the  beaten  road.  So  that  unlef.  it  be 
upon  fome  extraordinary  occafion,  they  are  fcldom 
awakened  to  a  fenfe  of  their  guilt.  And  when  mens 
hearts  are  thus  hard,  the  bell  counfels  make  but  lit- 
tle imprefTion  upon  them.  For  they  are  lleeFd 
againfl  reproof,  and  impenetrable  to  good  advice; 
which  is  therefore  feldom  offered  to  them,  even  by 
thofe  that  wifli  them  well,  becaufe  they  know  it  to 
be  both  unacceptable^  and  unlikely  to  prevail.  It 
requires  a  great  deal  of  good-nature  in  a  very  bad 
man, "to  be  able  padently  to  bear  to  be  told  of  his 
faults. 

Befides,  that  habitual  wickednels  is  naturally  apt 
to  banifh  confideration,  to  weaken  our  refoludon, 
and  to  difcourage  our  hopes  both  of  God's  grace  and 
aiTiflance,  and  of  his  mercy  and  forgivenefs;  which 
are  the  befi  means  and  encouragement  to  repentance. 

Sin 


XXIX. 


302  Of  the  difficulty  of 

SE  R  M.  Sin  is  a  great  enemy  to  confideration ;  and  efpeci- 
ally  when  men  are  deeply  plunged  into  it,  their  con- 
dition is  fo  very  bad,  that  they  are  Joth  to  think  of 
it,  and  to  fearch  into  it.  A  vicious  man  is  a  very  de- 
formed fight,  and  to  none  more  than  to  himfelf ; 
and  therefore  he  loves  to  turn  his  eyes  another  way, 
and  to  divert  them  as  much  as  he  can  from  looking 
upon  himielf.  He  is  afraid  to  be  alone,  left  his 
own  mind  fhould  arreft  him,  and  his  confcience 
fhould  take  the  opportunity  to  call  him  to  an  ac- 
count. And  if  at  any  time  his  own  thoughts  meet 
him,  and  he  cannot  avoid  confideration,  he  is 
ready  to  fay  as  Ahab  did  to  Elijah  "  Haft  thou 
"  found  me,  O  my  enemy ! "  and  is  as  glad  to  fhake 
it  pfF  as  a  man  is  to  get  rid  of  a  creditor,  whom,  be- 
caufe  he  knov/s  not  how  to  fatisfy,  he  cares  not  to 
fpeak  with  him.  Confideration  is  the  great  trou- 
bler  and  difturber  of  men,  in  an  evil  courfe,  becaufe 
it  v/ould  reprefent  to  them  the  plain  truth  of  their 
cafe;  and  therefore  they  do  all  they  can  to  keep  it 
off:  as  thofe  who  have  improvidently  managed  their 
affairs,  and  been  ill  husbands  of  their  eftates,  are 
loth  to  make  up  their  accounts,  left  by  that  means 
they  (liould  be  forced  to  underftand  the  worft  of  their 
condition. 

Or  if  confideration  happen  to  take  them  at  an  ad- 
vantage, and  they  are  fj  hard  preft  by  it  that  they 
cannot  efcape  the  fight  of  their  own  condition,  yet 
they  find  themfelves  fo  miferably  entangled  and 
hampcr'd  in  an  evil  courfe,  and  bound  fo  faft  in  the 
chains  of  their  own  wicked nefs,  that  they  know  not 
how  to  get  loofe.     Sin  is  the  fiddeft  flavery  in  the 

world ;  it  breaks  and  finks  mens  fpirits,  and  makes 

them 


reforming  vicious  habits,  303 

them  fo  bafe  and  fervile  that  they  have  not  the  cou-  S  E  R  M. 
rage  to  refcue  themfelves.  No  fort  of  flavcs  are  fo  _  _^ 
poor-fpirited,  as  they  who  are  in  bondage  to  their 
lufts.  Their  power  is  gone,  or  if  they  have  any  left 
they  have  not  the  heart  to  make  ufe  of  it.  And 
though  they  fee  and  feel  their  mifery,  yet  they  * 
choofe  rather  to  fit  down  in  it,  and  tamely  to  fub- 
mit  to  it,  than  to  make  any  refolute  attempt  for  their 
liberty.  What  the  prophet  fays  of  whoredom  and 
wine,  is  proportionably  true  of  other  vices,  "  they 
"  take  away  the  heart."  Every  luft  that  we  enter- 
tain deals  with  us  as  Dalilah  did  with  Sampfon,  not 
only  robs  us  of  our  ftrength  but  leaves  us  fall  bound  : 
fo  that  if  at  any  time  we  be  awakened  to  a  fenfe  of 
our  condition,  and  try  to  refcue  ourfelves  from  it,  we 
find  that  our  ftrength  is  departed  from  us,  and  that 
we  are  not  able  to  break  loofe. 

And  as  long  cuflom  and  continuance  in  fin  de- 
prives us  of  our  fli-ength,  fo  it  difcourageth  our 
hopes,  both  of  God's  grace  and  afiiftance,  and  of 
his  mercy  and  forgivenefs.  For  why  fhould  men 
expedl  the  continuance  of  that  grace  which  they  have 
fo  often  received  in  vain  ?  After  fo  many  provoca- 
tions, how  can  we  look  the  offended  majelty  of  God 
in  the  face  ?  how  can  we  lift  up  our  eyes  to  heaven 
with  any  hopes  of  mercy  and  forgivenefs  there  ?  De- 
fpair  doth  almofl:  naturally  fpring  from  an  evil  con- 
fcience ;  and  when  men  are  thoroughly  awakened  to 
a  fenfe  of  fin,  and  of  the  infinite  evil  of  it,  as  they 
cannot  eafily  forgive  themfelves,  fo  they  can  hardly 
believe  that  there  is  goodnefs  enough  any  where  to 


forgive  them. 


But 


304  ^f  i^^  difficidty  cf 

S  E  R  M.  But  befides  thefe  difadvanta^es,  which  are  natural 
' ,  and  confcquent'  upon  a  vicious  courfe ;  by  the  juft 
judgment  of  God,  his  fpiric  is  withdrawn  from 
them,  and  they  are  given. up  to  their  own  hearts 
lulls,  to  commit  all  iniquity  with  greedinefs.  And 
then  there  is  hardly  any  thing  left,  either  to  redrain 
them  in  their  evil  courie,  or  to  recover  them  out 
of  it. 

And  not  only  fb,  but  by  the  jufl  permifTion  of 
God,  as  men  grow  worfe  and  more  wicked,  the  de- 
vil hath  a  nearer  accefs  to  them  and  more  imme- 
diate power  over  them.  So  the  fcriprure  tells  us, 
that  wicked  men  are  "  led  captive  by  Satan  at  his 
*'  pleafure,"  and  that  "  the  evil  one  works  and  ads 
*'  in  the  children  of  difobedience : "  they  are  as  it 
were  pofTeft  and  infpired  by  him.  And  what  can  be 
expeded  from  this  cruel  and  malicious  enemy  of 
mankind,  but  that  he  will  continually  be  pufhing 
them  on  from  one  wickednefs  to  another,  'till  he- 
drive  them  firll  into  defpair,  and  then,  if  God  per- 
mit him,  into  eternal  perdition  .? 

And  what  a  forlorn  (late  is  this .?  when  men  are 
thus  forfaken  of  God,  and  left  without  check, 
blindly  and  headily  to  follow  the  fway  of  their  own 
tempers,  and  the  bent  of  their  own  corrupt  hearts  ? 
when  they  are  continually  expofed  to  temptations, 
llrongly  inviting  them  to  evil  ;  and  God  lets  the  de- 
vil loofe  upon  them  to  manage  thofe  temptations  with 
his  utmoil  skill,  and  to  praclife  all  his  arts  and  wiles 
upon  them.?  h\  diefe  circumftances  men  almoft  in- 
fallibly run  into  fin,  as  fjre  as  men  wander  in  the 
dark,  and  arc  in  danger  of  falling  in  flippery  place.% 
and  of  being  entangled  when  they  continually  walk 

in 


reforming  vicious  habits,  305 

m  the  mldfl:  of  fnares  cunningly  iaid  for  diem.     It  S  E  R  M. 
is  not  in  men,  thus  difabled  and  entangkd,  to  order  " 

their  own  fteps,  and  to  reflrain  their  inclinations  and 
paflions  in  the  prefence  of  a  powerful  temptation. 
At  the  bed,  we  need  God's  dircdlicn  to  guide  us, 
his  continual  grace  to  uphold  us,  and  to  guard  and 
preferve  us  from  evil -5- and  much  more  do  we  (land 
in  need  of  it,  when  We  have  brought  ourfelves  into 
thefe  wretched  circumdances :  but  then  alas !  how 
little  reafon  have  we  to  hope  for  it„? 

Bhnd  and  miferable  men !  that  in  defpite  of  all 
the  merciful  warnings  of  God's  word  and  providence, 
will  run  themfelves  into  this  defperace  ilate,  and  ne- 
ver think  of  returning  to  a  better  mind,  'dll  their 
retreat  is  difHcuk  almolt  to  an  impoITibility.  I  proceed 
to  the 

II.  Head  of  my  difcourfe,  which  was  to  (liew,  that 
the  cafe  of  thefe  perfons,  though  it  be  extremely  dif- 
ficult, is  not  quite  defperate  \  bat  after  all,  there  is 
fome  ground  of  hope  and  encouragement  left,  that 
they  may  yet  be  reclaimed  and  brought  to  goodnefs. 
Indeed,  humanely  fpeaking,  and  according  to  all  ap- 
pearance and  probability,  the  thing  feems  to  be  very 
hopclefs,  and  next  to  an  impoinbility;  but  yet  what 
our  Saviour  fays  concerning  the  difHculty  of  a 
rich  man*s  falvation  will  reach  alfo  to  this  cafe^ 
though  much  more. difficult;  "  thofe  things  which 
*^  are  impofTible  with  men,  are  poiTible  v^^ith  God/' 

And  this  will  appear,  if  we  confide r  that  even  in 
the  worft  of  men  there  is  fomething  \(t\t  which  tends 
to  reclaim  them,  to  awaken  them  to  confideration, 
and  to  urge  and  encourage  them  to  a  vigorous  reiolu- 
tion  of  a  better  courfe  :  and  this,  accompanied  with  a 
Vol.  II.  Qjq  powerful 

6. 


3c6  Of  the  dlficulfy  of 

S  E  R  vr.  powerful  afliflance  of  God's  grace,  which  when 
fincere'y  fought  is  never  to  be  defpaired  of,  may 
prove  efxedual  to  bring  back  even  the  greatelt  of 
Tinners. 

1.  There  is  left,  even  in  the  word  of  men,  a  natural 
fenfe  of  the  evil  and  unreafonablenefs  of  fin;  which 
can  hardly  be  ever  totally  extinguiihcd  in  humane 
nature.  For  though  the  habits  of  great  vices  are 
very  apt  to  harden  and  ftupify  men,  fo  that  they 
have  feldom  a  juft  ^tn^^z  of  their  evil  ways,  yet  thefe 
perfons  are  Ibmetimes  under  ftrong  convidions,  and 
their  confciences  do  feverely  check  and  rebuke  them 
for  their  fiults.  They  are  ahb,  by  fits,  under  great 
appreheniion  of  the  danger  of  their  condition,  and 
that  the  courfe  which  they  are  in,  if  they  continue 
in  it,  will  prove  fatal  to  them,  and  ruin  them  at  laft: 
efpecially,  when  their  confciences  are  thcroughly 
awakened  by  fomc  great  afflidlion,  or  the  near  ap- 
proach of  death,  and  a  lively  Icnfe  of  another  world. 
And  the  apprehenfion  of  a  mighty  danger  will  make 
men  to  look  about  them,  and  to  ule  the  bell  means  to 
avoid  it. 

2.  Very  bad  men  when  they  have  any  thoughts  of 
becoming  better,  are  apt  to  conceive  fome  good  hopes 
of  God's  grace  and  mercy.  For  though  they  find 
all  the  caufes  and  reafons  of  defpair  in  themfelves, 
yet  the  connderation  of  tlie  boundlefs  goodnels  and 
companions  of  God  (how  undeferved  foever  on  their 
part)  is  apt  to  kindle  fome  fparks  of  hope,  even  in 
the  mod  defponding  mind.  Flis  wonderful  patience, 
in  the  midft  of  oar  manifold  provocations,  cannot 
but  be  a  good  fign  to  us  that  he  hath  no  mind  that 
we  fhould  perifh,  but  rather  that  we  Ihould  come  to 

repentance ; 


reforming  viciGUS  hahits,  3^7 

repentance,  and  if  we  do  repent,  we  are  aiTared  by  ^^^^f' 
hi.  promife,  that  we  Ihall  be  forgiven.     "   He  taat  __. 
"  confcff.ch  and  foriaketh  his  fins  fhall  have  mercy. 
"  If  we  confels  oar  fins,  he  is  faidifal  and  juft  to 
''  forgive  us  our  fins,  and  to  cleanfe  us  from  all  un- 
<'  lighteoufnefs." 

3.  Wno  knows  what  men  thoroughly  roufed  and 
flartled  may  refolve,  and  do?     And  a  mighty  refo- 
Jution  Will  break  through  d.fncultics  which  feem   in- 
fuperable.     Though  we  be  weak  and  pitiful  crea- 
tures-,  yet   nature  when  it  is  mightily  irritated  and 
ftirr'd    will  do  ftrange  things.     The  rcrfolutions  of 
men  upon  the  brink  of  defpair,  have  been  of  an  in- 
credible force:  and  the  foul  of  man  in  nothing  more 
difcovers  its  divine  power  and  original,  than  in  that 
fpring    which    is   in  it,   wher^^by   it    recovers    itielf 
when"  it  is  mightily  urged  and  preft.     There  is  a 
fort  or  refolution  which   is  in  a  manner  invm.  bl  ^ 
and  hardly  any  difficulty  can  refifi  it  or  (land  be- 
fore it.  .   n  •     r        1 
Of  this  there  have  been  great  infcances   in  levcral 
kinds.     Some  by  an  obllinate  refolution,  and  taking 
incredible    pains  with  themfelves,     have    maftered 
areat  natural  vices  and  defecls.     As  Socrates  and  Dl- 
mofthenes,  who  almoft  exceeded  all  mankind  in  thofe 
two  things  for  which  by  nature  they  feemed  to  be 
leaft  made,  and   moft  unfit.     One  in  governing  of 
his  paflions,  and  the  other  in  the  mighty   force  and 
power  of  his  eloquence. 

Some  that  by  intemperance  have  brought  them- 
felves to  a  drorlV,  which  hath  juft  fet  them  upon 
the  brink  of  \he  grave,  by  a  bcM  and  fteaUy 
purpofe  to  ab:^v:;m  wholly  i^'cm  drink  ior  a  long 
^    ^  Q^q2  tn^e 


3o8  Of  the  difculty  of 

S  E  R  M  time  too;ether,  have  rcfcucd  themklves  from  the  laws 

XXIX.        r   J       t 

or  death. 

Some  that  had  almoil  ruined  thciPifch'es  by  a  care- 
lefi  and  diiTolutc  Lfe,  and  havirg  run  thcmielves  out 
of  their  ellates  int;  dthr,  -nd  being  calr  into  prifbn, 
have  there  taken  up  a  mar-ly  reioiucion  to  retrieve 
and  recover  themielves;  and  by  the  ludeiatigablc 
labour  and  lludy  of  fome  years,  in  that  Ui. com- 
fortable retreat,  have  maflered  the  knowledge  and 
skiii  of  one  of  the  moft  di^licult  profcfno'is,  in 
^^■nich  th^y  have  aner  wards  proved  ^r  eat  aid  emi- 
ner.t. 

And  fome  in  the  fuil  career  of  a  wicked  cou^fe, 
have  by  a  fudden  thougijt  and  reiblution,  rai<ed  in 
them  and  affiiled  by  a  mighty  grace  of  God,  taken 
up  prefer tly,  and  made  an  m:i mediate  change  from 
great  wickednefs  and  impiety  of  Jife,  to  a  very  exem- 
plary degree  of  goodnefs  and  virtue. 

The  t.vo  great  encouragements  to  virtue  which 
Pythagoras  gave  to  his  Icholars  were  thefe  ;  and 
they  were  worthy  of  fo  great  a  philofopher ;  Firff, 
"  Choofe  always  the  beli:  courfc  of  life,  and  cuftom 
"  will  foon  m.ake  it  the  moll:  pleafant."  The  other 
was  this,  "  That  power  and  neceirity  are  neigh- 
*'  bours,  and  never  dwell  far  from  one  another." 
When  men  are  prefl  by  a  great  neceffity,  when 
nature  is  fpurr'd  up  and  urged  to  the  utmoft, 
men  difcover  in  themfelvcs  a  power  which  they 
thought  they  had  not,  and  find  at  lad  that  they  can 
do  that  which  at  firfl:  they  defpaired  of  ever  being 
able  to  do. 

4.  The  grace  and  afliflance  of  God  when  fincerely 
fought,  is  never  to  be  defpaired  of.     So  that  if  we 

do 


reforming  vicious  habits,  309 

do  but  heartily,  .and  in  good  earned  refolve  upon  a  S  E  R  M, 
better  courfc,  and  implore  the  help  of  God's  grace  ^^^^^• 
to  this  purpofe,  no  degree  of  it  that  is  necefTary  fhall 
be  wanting  to  us.  And  here  is  our  chief  ground  of 
hope.  For  we  are  weak  and  unftabie  as  water  ; 
and  when  we  have  taken  up  good  refolutions,  do  ea- 
fily  flart  from  them.  So  that  frefh  fupph'es,  and  a 
continued  affiftance  of  God's  grace  is  neceflary  to 
keep  up  the  firfl:  warmth  and  vigour  of  our  refoluti- 
ons,'c:II  they  prove  effectual  and  vidlorious.  And  this 
grace  God  hath  promifed  he  will  not  deny  to  us, 
when  wc  are  thus  difpofcd  for  it  ;  "  that  he  will  give 
"  his  HOLY  Spirit  to  them  that  ask  it;  that  he 
"  will  not  quench  the  fmoking  flax,  nor  break  the 
"  bruifed  reed,  until  he  bring  forth  judgment  unto 
"  vidlory.** 

All  that  now  remains  is  to  apply  this  to  our  felves : 
and  we  are  all  concerned  in  it :  for  we  iLall  all  find 
our  felves  comprehended  under  one  of  thefe  three 
Heads,  either  we  are  of  the  number  of  thofc  few 
happy  perfons,  who  by  the  influence  and  advantage 
of  a  good  education,  were  never  engaged  in  a  bad 
courfe  :  or,  of  thofe  who  have  been  drawn  into  vice, 
but  are  not  yet  far  gone  in  it :  or,  of  thofe  who 
ha^e  been  long  accu Homed  to  an  tw'il  courfe,  and 
are  grov/n  old  and  fliii  in  it. 

The  firfl  of  thefe  have  great  caufe  to  thank 
God  for  this  fmgular  felicity,  that  they  were  never 
enfnared  and  intanglcd  in  vicious  habits,  that  they 
have  not  had  the  trial  of  their  own  v/eaknefs  under 
this  miferable  flavery,  that  they  never  knew  what 
it  was  to  be  out  of  their  o',>'n  power,  to  have  lofl 
their   liberty    and   the   government   of   themfelves. 

When 


Of  the  difficulty  of 

When  we  hear  of  the  mifcrable  fcrvltudc  of  the  poor 
chrillians  in  Turkey,  we  are  apt,  as  there  is  great 
rcafon,  to  pity  them,  and  to  think  what  a  blefTing 
of  God  it  is  to  us  that  we  are  not  in  their  condi- 
tion :  and  yet  that  Havery  is  not  comparable  to 
this,  either  for  the  fad  nature,  or  the  difmal  confe- 
quences  of  it  \  or  for  the  difficulty  of  being  rcleafcd 
from  it.  And^  let  fuch  perfons,  who  have  been 
thus  happy  never  to  have  been  engaged  in  an  evil 
courfe,  preftrve  tlieir  innocency  with  great  tender- 
nefs  and  care,  as  the  greateft  jewel  in  the  world. 
No  man  knows  what  he  does,  and  what  a  foundati- 
on of  trouble  he  lays  to  himfelf,  when  he  forfeits 
his  innocency,  and  breaks  the  peace  of  his  own 
mind ;  when  he  yields  to  a  temptation,  and  makes  the 
firft  ftep  into  a  bad  courfe.  Yli  little  thinks  whither 
his  lufts  may  hurry  him,  and  what  a  monfler  they 
may  make  of  him   before    they    have  done  with 

him. 

2.  Thofe  who  have  been  feduced,  but  are  not  yet 
deeply  engaged  in  an  evil  courfe,  let  them  make  a 
fpeecy  retreat,  left  they  put  it  for  ever  out  of  their 
power  to  return.  Perhaps  their  feet  only  are  yet 
enfnared,  but  their  hands  are  at  liberty,  and  they 
have  fome  power  left,  whereby  with  an  ordinary 
grace  of  God  they  may  loofe  and  refcue  thcmfelves. 
But  after  a  while  their  hands  may  be  manacled,  and 
all  their  power  may  be  gone  -,  and  when  they  are 
thus  "  bound  hand  and  foot,"  they  are  juff  prepa- 
red, and  in  danger  every  moment,  *'  to  be  caft  into 
*'  utter  darknefs." 

3.  As  tor  thofe,  who  are  gone  very  far,  and  arc 
grown  old  in  viccj  who  can  forbear  to  lament  over 

them  ? 


reforming  vicious  habits,  311 

them  ?  for  they  are  a  fad  fpeftacle  indeed,  and  the  S  E  R  M. 
truell  objed  of  pity  in  the  world.     And  yet  their   ^^^^• 
recovery  is  not  utterly  to  be  defpaired  ot\    "  for 
"  with  God  it  is  poflible."     Tlie  Spirit  of  God, 
which  hath  withdrawn  himfelf,  or  rather  hath  been 
driven  away  by  them,  may  yet  be  perfuaded   to  re- 
turn, and  to  undertake  them   once   more,  if  diey 
would  but  feriouily  refolve  upon  a  change,   and  hear- 
tily beg  God's    affifiance  to  that  purpofe.     li  v/e 
would  take  up  a  mighty  refolutioD,  we  might  hope 
that  God  would  afford  a  miraculous  grace  to  iccoiid 
it,  and  make  it  effeftual  to  our  recovery.     Even  in 
this  perverle  and  degenerate  age  in  which  we  live, 
God  hath  not  been  wandng  to  give  lome  miracu- 
lous inftances   of  his   grace  and   mercy    to  finners, 
and   thofe  perhaps  equal  to  any  of  thofe  we   meet 
with  in   fcripture,    of  ManafTes,    or  Mary  Magda- 
lane,  or  the  penitent  thief;  both  for   the  greatiicls 
of  the  offenders,  and  the  miracle  of  their  change : 
to  the  end  that  none  might  defpair,  and  for  want 
of  the  encouragement  of  an  example  equal  to  their 
own  cafe,  be  di (heartened  from   fo  noble  an  enter- 
prife.     I  am  loth  to  put  you  in  mind  how  bad  fome 
have  been,  who  yet  have  been  "  fnatched  as  fire- 
"  brands  out  of  the  fire ; "  and   that  in  fo  ftrapge 
a  manner,   that  it  would  even  amaze  a  man  to  think 
of  the   wonder  of  their  recovery  :  thofe  who  have 
funk  themfelves    into  the   very   depth    of  infidelity 
and   wickedncfs,  have   by  a  mighty  hand  and  out- 
flretched  arm  of  God  been  pluckt  out  of  this  hor- 
rible pit.     And  will  we  ftill  ftand  it  out  with  God, 
when  fuch  great  Leaders  have  given  up'  the  caufe, 
and  have  furrendred  and  yielded  up  themfelves  will- 
ing 


312  Of  the  di^cuhy  of 

SERM.  ing captives  to  the  grace  of  God  ?  that  omnipotent 
grace  of  God,  which  can  eafily  fubdue  the  ftouteH: 
heart  of  man,  by  letting  in  fo  ftrong  a  light  upon 
our  minds,  and  pouring  fjch  terrible  convictions  in- 
to our  coni'ciences,  that  wc  can  find  no  eaic  but  in 
turning  to  God. 

I  hope  there  are  none  here  ^o  bad,  as  to  need  all 
the  encouragement  to  repentance  which  fuch  exam- 
ples might  give  them  :  encouragement,  I  fay,  to  re- 
pentance :  for  furely  thefe  examples  can  encourage 
no  man  to  venture  any  farther  in  a  wicked  courfe  : 
they  are  fo  very  rare,  and  like  the  inftances  of  thofe 
who  have  been  brought  back  to  life  after  the  fen- 
tence  of  death  feemeJ  to  have  been  fully  executed 
upon  them. 

But  perhaps  fome  will  not  believe  that  there  have 
been  fuch  examples  •,  or  if  there  have,  thty  impute 
all  this  either  to  a  diflurbed  imagination,  or  to  the 
faint  and  lo.v  fpirits  of  men  under  great  bodily 
weaknefs,  or  to  their  natural  cowardife  and  fear  y 
or  to  I  know  not  v^'hat  foohfh  and  fantaftical  defign 
of  completing  and  finifhing  a  wicked  life  with  an 
hypocritical  death.  Nothing  furely  is  eafier  than  to 
put  fome  bad  conflrudion  upon  the  bed  things, 
and  fo  flur  even  repentance  it  felf,  and  almoft  dafh 
it  out  of  countenance  by  fome  bold,  and  per- 
haps witty  faying  about  it.  Bat  oh  that  men 
were  wife  !  oh  that  men  were  wife  !  that  they  under- 
ftood,  and  would  but  confidcr  their  latter  end  !  Come, 
let  us  neither  trifle,  nor  diflrmble  in  this  matter  j 
I  dare  fay  every  man's  confcience  is  convinced,  that 
they  who  have  led  very  ill  lives,  have  fo  much  rea- 
fon  for  repentance,    that  we   may  eafily  believe  it 

to 


reformhig  njz clous  hahits.  313 

t©  be  real.     However,  of  all  thino-s  in  the  world,  SERM, 

XXI X. 
let  us  not  make  a  mock  of  repentance  ;  that  which 

muft  be  our  lafl  fan6tuary  and  refuge,  and  which 
we  mud  all  come  to  before  we  die,  "  or  it  had 
*^  been  better  for  us  we  had  never  been  born."  There- 
fore,  "  let  my  counfel  be  acceptable  unto  you,  break 
*'  oft  your  fins  by  repentance,  and  your  iniquities 
«'  by  righteoufnels :  "  and  that  inftantly,  and  with- 
out delay  ;  "  left  any  of  you  be  hardned  through  the 
"  deceitfulnels  of  fin.'*  If  we  have  been  cnflaved 
but  a  little  to  a  vicious  courfe,  we  fhall  find  it  a  task 
difficult  enough  to  affert  our  own  liberty  ;  "to 
*^  break  thefe  bonds  in  funder,  and  cafl  thefe  cords 
"  from  us :  "  but  if  we  have  been  long  under  this 
bondage,  v/e  have  done  fo  much  to  undo  our  felves, 
and  to  make  our  cafe  defperate,  that  it  is  God's  in- 
finite mercy  to  us  that  there  is  yet  hope.  There- 
fore, "  give  glory  to  the  Lord  your  God,  before 
*'  he  caulc  darknefs,  and  your  feet  flumble  upon 
*'  the  dark  mountains,  and  while  you  look  for  light, 
«'  he  turn  it  into  darknefs  and  the  ihadow  of  death." 
I  will  conclude  with  that  encouraging  invitation, 
even  to  the  greateft  of  finners  to  repentance,  from 
the  mouth  of  God  himfelf,  Ha.  Iv.  "  Incline  your 
*'  ear,  and  come  unto  me ;  hear,  and  your  foul  Ihall 
*'  live  :  feek  the  Lord  while  he  may  be  found  \  and 
**  call  upon  him  while  he  is  near.  Let  the  v/icked 
*'  forfake  his  way,  and  the  unrighteous  man  his 
*'  thoughts,  and  let  him  return  unto  the  Lord, 
*'  and  he  will  have  mercy  upon  him,  and  to  our  God^ 
*'  for  he  will  abundantly  pardon." 

To  him  let  us  apply  our  felves,  and  humbly  be- 
feech  him,  "  who  is  mighty  to  fave/'  that  he  ^^'ould 

Vol.  IL  Rt  itrct«!^ 

'     6, 


^14  Of  the  dijiculty  of,  &c. 

llretch  forth  the  right  hand  of  his  power  for  our  deli- 
verance, irom  thismiferable  and  cruel  bondage  of  our 
lufts :  "  and  that  as  the  rain  cometh  down  from 
*'  heaven,  and  returneth  not  thither,  but  watereth 
««  the  earth,  and  maketh  it  to  bring  forth  and  bud  5. 
*'  fo  he  would  grant  that  his  word  may  not  return 
*'  void,  but  accompU(h  his  pleafure,  and  profper  in 
«'  the  thing  to  which  he  fent  it,"  for  his  mercy  fake 
in  Jesus  Christ,  to  whom  with  the  Father  and 
the  HOLY  Ghost,  be  all  honour  and  glory  now  and 
for  ever.     Amen. 


SERMON   XXX. 

The  neceffity  of  the  knowledge  of  the 
holy  fcriptures. 


MATTHEW  xxiii.  13, 

JFo  unto  you  fcribes  and  pharifees^  hypocrites  ;  for  ys 
Jhut  up  the  kingdom  of  heaven  againjl  ?nen  ;  and  ye 
neither  go  in  your  fehes^  neither  fuffer  ye  them  that 
are  entring  to  go  in, 

SER  M.  f  g  "^  H  E  fcribes  fo  often  mentioned  In  the  goA 
^-^^'  i  I  pel,  were  the  great  doclftrs  among  the 
-■-  jews,  the  teachers  and  interpreters  of  the 
law  of  God.  And  becaufe  many  of  them  were  of 
the  fe6t  of  the  pharifees,  which  above  all  others  pre- 
tended to  skill  and  knowledge  in  the  law,  therefore 
it  is  that  our  bleiTed  Saviour  does  fo  often  put  the 
fcribes  and  pharifees  together.     And  thefe  were  the 


Tlje  necejjity  of  the ^    &c.  ^       315 

men  of  chief  authority  in  the  ievvifh  church;  who  SERAf. 
equalled  their  own  unwritten  <f*"jrd  and  traditions ^^^^V^ 
with  the  law  of  God  :  nay  our  Saviour  tells  us, 
"^^  they  made  the  commandments  of  God  of  none 
*'  effefl  by  their  traditions."  They  did  in  efFed  af-» 
fume  to  themfelves  infallibility  ;  and  all  that  oppo- 
fed  and  con  trad  ided  them,  they  branded  with  the 
odious  name  of  heretickso  Againil  thefs  our  Sa- 
viour denounceth  this  wo  here  in  the  tt^t^  "  wo 
**  unto  you  fcribes  and  phafifees,  hypocrites  ;  for  ye 
*'  Ihut  up  the  kingdom  of  heaven  againfr  men,  i^c?^ 
Ail  the  difficulty  in  the  words  is,  what  is  here 
meant  ^'  by  fhutting  up  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
"  againftmen:"  St.  Luke  expreffes  it  more  plain- 
ly, '*  ye  have  taken  away  the  key  of  knowledge^, 
^^'  ye  entred  not  in  your  felves,  and  them  that  were 
-^^  entring  in,  ye  hindered/*  By  putting  thefe  two 
cxpreiTions  together  we  fhali  the  more  eafily  come  at 
the  meaning  of  the  It^t,  * '  Ye  have  taken  away  the 
^  key  of  knowledge,  and  have  fliut  up  the  kingdom 
«'  of  heaven  againft  men."  This  metaphor  of  the  key 
■of  knowledge,  is  undoubtedly  an  allufion  to  that 
known  cuftom  among  the  jev/s  in  the  admiffion  of 
their  dodtors.  For  to  whomfoever  they  gave  au- 
thority to  interpret  the  law  and  the  Prophets,  they 
were  foJemnly  admitted  into  that  office  by  deliver- 
ing to  them  a  key  and  a  table-book.  So  that  by 
the  key  of  knowledge  is  here  meant  the  interpreta- 
tion and  underflanding  of  the  fcriptures  ;  and  by 
taking  away  tl\e  key  of  knowledge,  not  only  that 
they  arrogated  to  themfelves  alone  the  underflanding 
•of  the  fcriptures,  but  likewife  that  they  had  convey- 
ed away  this  key  of  knowledge,  and  as  it  wa-e  hid  it 
1  R  r  z.  <^^^ 


3i6  7i:e  nccej/tfy  of  the 

SERM.  out  of  the  way,  njitiier  ufing  it  themfelves  as  they 
ought,  nor  lliffering  others  to  make  ufe  of  it. 

And  thus  "  they  lliut  the  knigdom  of  heaven 
*'  againft  men ;  "  which  is  very  fitly  fiid  of  thofe 
who  have  locked  the  door  againfl:  them  that  were 
going  in,  and  have  taken  away  the  key.  By  all 
v/hich  it  appears,  that  the  plain  meaning  of  our  Sa- 
viour in  thefe  metaphorical  expreflions  is,  that  the 
fcribes  and  teachers  of  the  law,  under  a  pretence  of 
interpreting  the  fcriptures,  had  perverted  them,  and 
kept  the  true  knowledge  of  them  from  the  people : 
efpecially  thofe  prophecies  of  the  old  tedament  which 
concerned  the  Messias.  And  by  this  means  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  was  fhut  againft  men  :  And 
they  not  only  rejeded  the  truth  themfelves,  but  by 
keeping  men  in  ignorance  of  the  true  meaning  of 
the  fcriptures,  they  hindered  many  from  embracing 
our  Saviour's  dodrines,  and  entring  into  the  king- 
dom of  heaven,  who  were  otherwile  well  enough  dif- 
pofed  for  it. 

Having  thus  explained  the  words,  I  (hall  from  the 
main  fcope  and  defign  of  them  obierve  to  you  thefe 
two  things. 

1.  The  neceflity  of  the  knowledge  of  the  holy 
fcriptures  in  order  to  our  eternal  falvation.  It  is 
called  by  our  Saviour  the  key  of  knowledge,  that 
which  lets  men  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 

2.  The  great  and  inexcufable  fault  of  thofe  who 
deprive  the  people  of  the  knowledge  of  the  fcrip- 
tui-es.  ''  They  fliut  the  kingdom  ot  heaven  againft 
*'  men,"  and  do  v;hat  in  them  lies  to  hinder  their 
eternal  falvation  ;   and  therefore  our  Saviour  de- 

nounceth  fo  heavy  a  wo  againft  them. 

I  ftialj 


knowledge  of  the  holy  fcrtp fur es.  317 

T  fhall  fpeak  briefly   to   thefe  two  obfervations ;  S  E  R  M: 
and   then  apply  them  to  thofe  who  are  principally    "^^^^ 
concerned  in  them. 

I.  Firft,  1  obferve  hence  the  neceflity  of  i\i^ 
knowledge  of  the  holy  fcriptures,  in  order  to  our 
eternal  falvation.  This  is  by  our  Saviour  called 
the  key  of  knowledge,  that  which  lets  men  into  the 
kingdom  of  heaven. 

Knowledge  is  neceflary  to  religion  :  it  is  neceila- 
ry  to  the  being  of  it ;  and  neceflary  to  the  life  and 
pradice  of  it.  "  Without  faith  (fays  the  apoflle)  it 
*'  IS  impoiribie  to  pleafe  God  :  "  becaufe  faith  is  an 
acl  of  the  underltanding,  and  does  neceiTarily  fup- 
poie  fome  knowledge  and  apprehenlion  of  what  wc 
believe.  To  all  ads  of  religion  there  is  neceiTarily 
required  fome  ad  of  the  underilanding ;  fo  that 
without  knowledge  there  can  be  no  devotion  in  the 
fervice  of  God,  no  obedience  to  his  laws.  Reli- 
gion begins  in  the  underilanding,  and  from  thence 
defcends  upon  the  heart  and  life.  "  If  ye  know 
*'  thefe  things  (fays  our  Saviour)  happy  ai-e  ye 
"  if  ye  do  them.'*  We  muff  firfl  know  God,  be- 
fore we  can  worlhip  him ;  and  underftand  what  is 
his  will,  before  we  can  do  it. 

This  is  fo  very  evident,  that  one  would  think 
there  needed  no  difcourfe  about  it.  And  yet  there 
are  fome  in  the  world  that  cry  up  ignorance  as  the 
mother  of  devotion.  And  to  fhew  them  that  wc 
do  not  wrong  them  in  this  matter,  Mr.  Rufhworth 
in  his  dialogues  (a  book  in  great  vogue  among  the 
papifis  here  in  England)  does  exprefly  reckon  up  ig- 
norance among  the  parents  of  religion.  And  can 
^ny  thing  be  faid  more  abfurdly,  and  more  to  the 

difpa- 


•    3iS  ^€  necejjtty  of  the 

SERM.  difparagement  of  religion,  than  to  derive*  the  pe- 
ii^^i_j  digree  of  the  mod  excellent  thing  in  the  world  frorn 
fo  obrcure  and  ignoble  an  original  ?  and  to  make 
that  which  the  fcripture  calls  the  beginning  of  wii^ 
dom,  and  the  excellency  of  knowledge,  to  be  the 
offspring  of  ignoi Uiice  and  a  child  of  darknefs  ?  Ig- 
norance indeed  may  be  the  caufe  of  wonder  and  ad- 
miration, and  the  mother  of  folly  and  fuperdition  : 
but  fure  religion  is  of  a  nobler  extraction,  and  is  the 
iffue  and  refult  of  the  bed  wifdom  and  knowledge^ 
and  defcends  from  above,  from  the  giver  of  every 
good  and  perfed  gift,  even  the  father  of  lights.  | 

And  as  knowledge  in  general  is  neceilciry  to  rell-  ^ 
gion,  fo  more  parcicularly  the  knowledge  of  the 
holy  fcriptures  is  neceflary  to  our  eternal  falvation : 
becaufe  thefe  are  the  great  and  {landing  revelation 
of  God  to  mankind  °,  wherein  the  nature  of  God, 
and  his  will  concerning  our  duty,  and  the  terms  and 
conditions  of  our  eternal  happinefs  in  another  worlds 
are  fijlly  and  plainly  declared  to  us. 

The  fcriptures  are  the  word  of  God  -,  and  from 
whence  can  we  learn  the  will  of  God  fo  well  as  from 
his  own  mouth?  they  are  the  great  inftrument  of 
our  falvation  ;  and  fhould  not  every  man  be  ac- 
quainted with  that  which  alorje  can  perfectly  in- 
ftrucl  him  what  he  muft  believe,  and  what  he  muit 
do  that  he  may  be  faved?  this  is  the  teftimony 
which  the  fcripture  gives  of  it  felf,  that  it  is  "  able 
^'^  to  make  men  wife  unto  falvation  :"  and  is  it  not 
very  fit  that  every  man.fiiould  have  this  wifdom,  and 
in  order  thereunto  the  free  ufe  of  that  book  from 
whence  this  wifdom  is  to  be  learned  ? 

IJ.  Secondly^  , 


knowledge  of  the  holy  fcrlpturet.  ^jn 

II.  Secondly,  I  obferve  the  great  and  inexcufable  SE  R  iVf . 


Fault  of  .thofe  who  keep  men  in  ignorance  of  reli- 
gion, and  take  away  from  them  fo  excellent  and  ne- 
celTiiry  a  means  of  divine  knowledge  as  the  holy 
fcriptures  are.  This  our  Saviour  calls  "  taking 
*'  away  the  key  of  knowledge,  and  fhutting  the 
"  kingdom  of  heaven  againft  men,"  that  is,  doing 
what  in  them  lies  to  render  it  impofTible  for  men  to 
be  faved.  For  this  he  denounceth  a  terrible  wo 
againll  the  teachers  of  the  jewifh  church :  though 
they  did  not  proceed  fo  far  as  to  deprive  men  of  the 
ufe  of  the  holy  fcriptures,  but  only  of  the  right 
knowledge  and  underftanding  of  them.  This  alone  is 
a  horrible  impiety,  to  lead  men  into  a  falfe  fenfe  and 
interpretation  of  fcripture,  but  much  greater  to  for- 
bid them  the  reading  of  it.  This  is  to  flop  know- 
ledge at  the  very  fountain-head  ;  and  not  only  to  lead 
men  into  error,  but  to  take  away  from  them  all  pol^ 
fibility  of  rectifying  their  miftakes.  And  can  there 
be  a  greater  facrilege,  than  to  rob  men  of  the  word 
of  God,  the  bed  means  in  the  world  of  acquainting 
them  with  the  will  of  God  and  their  duty,  and  the 
way  to  eternal  happinefs.?  To  keep  the  people  in  ig- 
norance of  that  which  is  nece/Tary  to  fave  them,  ''  is 
*'  to  judge  them  unworthy  of  eternal  life,"  and  to 
declare  it  does  not  belong  to  them,  and  malicioufiy  to 
contrive  the  eternal  ruin  and  deilrudion  of  their 
fouls. 

To  lock  up  the  fcriptures  and  th^  fervice  of  God 
from  the  people  in  an  unknown  tongae,  what  is  this 
but  in  effedl  to  forbid  men  to  know  God  and  to 
ferve  him  -,  to  render  them  incapable  of  knowing 
*'  what  IS  the  good  and  acccjcable  will  of  God  ,'* 

of 


XXX. 


320  The  nee  (/Jit y  of  th 

SE  R  M.  of  joiaing  in  his  worihip,  or  performing  any  part  of 
■  it,  or  receiving  any  benefit  or  edification  from  it; 
and  what  is,  if  this  be  not,  to  fliut  the  kingdom  of 
heaven  againft  men?  This  is  fo  outrageous  a  cruelty 
to  the  fouls  of  men,  that  it  is  not  to  be  excufed  upon 
any  pretence  whatfoever :  this  is  to  take  the  furefl 
and  mod  effectual  way  in  the  world  to  dcfiroy  thofe 
for  whom  ChxIist  died,  and  directly  to  thwart  the 
great  defign  of  God  our  Saviour,  "  who  would 
"  have  all  men  to  be  faved,  and  to  come  to  the 
"  knowledge  of  the  truth."  Men  may  mifcarry 
with  their  knowledge,  but  they  are  fure  to  perilh  for 
want  of  it. 

The  beft  things  in  the  world  have  their  inconve- 
niences attending  them,  and  arc  liable  to  be  abufed; 
but  furely  men  are  not  to  be  ruined  and  damned  for 
fear  of  abufing  their  knowledge,  or  for  the  preven- 
tion of  any  other  inconvenience  whatfoever.  Be- 
fides,  this  is  to  crois  the  very  end  of  the  fcriptures, 
and  the  defign  of  God  in  infpiring  men  to  write 
them.  Can  any  man  think  that  God  fhould  fend 
this  great  light  of  his  word  into  the  world,  for  the 
priefts  to  hide  it  under  a  bufiiel ;  and  not  rather  that 
it  fhould  be  ki  up  to  the  greatefl:  advantage  for  the 
enlightening  of  the  world  ?  St.  Paul  tells  us,  Rom. 
XV.  4.  "  That  whatfoever  things  were  written,  were 
*'  written  for  our  learning,  that  we  through  pa- 
*'  tience  and  comfort  of  the  fcriptures  might  have 
*'  hope."  And  2  Tim.  iii.  16.  "  That  all  fcripture 
*'  is  given  by  infpiration  of  God  ;  and  is  profitable 
"  for  dcclrine,  for  reproof,  for  corre6lion,  for  in- 
*'  flrudtion  in  righteoufnefs."  And  if  the  fcrip- 
tures were  written  for  thefe  ends,  can  any  man  have 

the 


knowledge  of  the  holy  fcripf tires.  321 

the  face  to   pretend  that  they  do  not  concern  the  SERM, 

XXX 

people  as  well  as  their  teachers?     Nay  St.  Paulex- 

preQy   tells  the  church  of   Rome,    that  they  were 
written  for  their  learning,  howe^/er  it  happens  that 
they  are  not  now  permitted  to  make  ufe  of   them. 
Are  the  fcriptures  fo  ufeful  and  profitable  for  doc- 
trine, for  reproof,  for  inftrudion  in   righteoiifnefs  ? 
and  why  may  they  not  be  ufed  by  the  people  for 
thofe  ends  for  which  they  were  given  ?    'Tis  true  in- 
deed they  are  fit  for  the  mod  knowing  and  learned, 
and  fufficient  to  make  "  the  man  of  God  perfeft, 
"  and  thoroughly  furniflied  to  every  good    work,'* 
as  the  apoftle  there  tells  us.  ,    But  does  this  exclude 
their  being  profitable  alfo  to  the  people ;  who  may 
reafonably  be  prefumed  to  (land  much  more  in  need 
of  all  means  and  helps  of   inftruclion   than    their 
teachers  ?  And  though  there  be  many  difticulties  and 
obfcurities  in  the  fcriptures,  enough  to  exercife  the 
skill  and  wit  of  the  learned,  yet  are  they  not  there- 
fore either  ufelefs  or  dangerous  to  the  people.     The 
ancient  fathers  of  the  church  v/ere  of  another  mind. 
St.  Chryfoftom  tells  us  that,  "  Whatever  things  are 
*'  neceffary,  are  manifefl  in  the  fcriptures.'*     And 
St.  Audin,  "  That  all  things  are  plain  in  the  fcrip« 
"  ture,  which  concern  faith  and  a  good  hfe ;  and 
"  that  thofe  things  which  are  neceiTary  to  the  fal^ 
**  vation  of  men,  are  not  fo  hard  to  be  come  at 5  but 
*'  that  as  to  thofe  things  which  the  fcripture  plainly 
*'  contains,  it  fpeaks  without  difguife  like  a  familiar 
'«  friend  to  the  heart  of  the  learned  and  unlearned.'* 
And  upon  thefe  and  fuch-like  confiderations,  the  fa- 
thers did  every-where  in  their  orations  and  homilies 
charge  and  exhort  the  people  to  be  converfant  in  the 
Vol.  IL  Si  holy 

6. 


222  TX^  neccjfity  of  the 

SERM.  holy  fcripturcs,  to  read  them  daily  and  diiigently 
^^^^and  attentively.  And  I  challenge  our  adverfaries 
to  fhew  me  where  any  of  the  ancient  fathers  do  dif- 
courage  the  people  from  reading  the  fcriptures,  much 
lefs.  forbid  them  fo  to  do.  So  that  they  v/ho  do  it 
now  have  no  cloke  fur  their  fin  :  and  they  who 
prerend  fo  confidently  to  antiquity  in  other  cafes, 
are  by  the  evidence  of  truth  forced  to  acknow- 
ledge that  it  is  againft  them  in  this.  Though  they 
have  ten  thoufand  fchoolmen  on  their  fide,  yet  have 
they -not  one  father,  nor  the  lead  pretence  of  fcrip- 
tures or  rag  of  antiquity  to  cover  their  nakednels  in 
this  point. 

With  great  reafon  then  does  our  Saviour  de- 
nounce fo  heavy  a  wo  againfl  fuch  teachers.  Of 
old  in  the  like  cafe  God  by  his  prophet  feverely 
threatens  the  pricfis  of  the  jewifh  church,  for  not 
inftrucling  the  people  in  the  knowledge  of  God, 
Hofea  iv.  6.  "My  people  are  deftroyed  for  lack 
"  of  knowledge:  becaufc  thou  haft  rejedled  knov/- 
"  ledge,  I  will  alfo  rejedl  thee  •,  thou  fhalt  be  no 
"  more  a  priefl  to  me :  feeing  thou  haft  forgotten 
'^  the  law  of  thy  God,  1  will  aFo  forget  thy  chil- 
**  dren."  God,  you  fee,  lays  the  ruin  of  fo  many 
f  uls  at  their  doors,  and  will  require  their  blood  at 
their  hands.  So  many  as  perifli  for  v/ant  of  know- 
ledge, and  eternally  mifcarry  by  being  deprived  of 
the  neceflary  means  of  falvation,  their  deftrudlion 
fhall  be  charged  upon  thofe  who  "  have  taken  away 
*'  the  key  of  knowledge,  and  lliut  the  kingdom  of 
*'  heaven  againft  men." 

And  it  is  juft  with  God  to  punifli  fuch  perfons, 
not  only  as  the  occafion,  but  as  the  authors  of  their 

ruin. 


knowledge  of  the  holy  fcriptiires.  323 

ruin.  For  v.  ho  can  iuJo-e  other  wife,  but  that  thev  S  E  R  M. 
who  deprive  men  of  che  necelTary  means  to  any  end,  _^J  _^^ 
do  pufpi.lcly  dcfign  to  hinder  them  of  attaining  that 
end  ?  And  whatever  niay  be  pretended  in  this  cafj ; 
to  deprive  men  of  the  holy  fcriptures,  and  to  keep 
them  ignorant  of  the  fervice  of  God,  and  yet  while 
they  ^o  fo,  to  make  a  fhew  of  an  earned  defirc  of 
their  falvation,  is  jint  fnch  a  mockery,  as  if  one  of 
you  that  is  a  mafler  H^ould  tell  his  prentice,  how 
much  you  deiire  lie  fnould  thrive  in  the  world,  and 
be  a  rich  man,  but  all  the  while  keep  him  igno- 
rant of  his  trade  in  order  to  his  being  rich  ;  and 
with  the  f{.n6te(l  care  imag;inable  conceal  from  him 
the  bcfl:  means  o[  learning,  that  whereby  alone  he  is 
likely  to  thrive  and  get  an  eflate.  "  Wo  unto 
*'  you  fcr.bes  and  pharifecs,  hypocrites  " 

By  what  hath  been  dilcourfcd  upon  this  argu- 
ment, you  will  eafily  perceive  where  the  application 
is  like  to  fall.  For  tile  wo  denounced  by  our 
Saviour  here  in  the  text  againft  the  fcribes  and 
pharifees,  falls  every  whit  as  heavy  upon  the  pa- 
llors and  teachers  of  the  Roman  church.  They 
have  taken  away  {^^  key  of  knowledge  with  a  wit- 
nef^;  not  only  depriving  the  people  of  the  right 
underftanding  of  the  fcriptures,  but  of  the  very  ufe 
of  them :  as  if  they  were  fo  afraid  they  fhould  un- 
derltand  them,  that  they  dare  not  fufFer  them  fo  much 
as  to  be  acquainted  with  them. 

I'nis  tyranny  that  church  hath  exercifed  over 
thofe  of  her  communion  for  feveral  hundreds  of 
years.  It  grew  upon  them  indeed  by  degrees :  for 
as  by  \!r\^  inundation  'of  barbarous  nations  upon  the 
Roman  empire  the  Romans  lod  their  language  by 
S  f  2  de2;rees. 


3  24  7 he  necejjity  of  the 

SERM.  degrees,  fo  the  governors  of  that  church  flill  kept 
up  tiVt  fcriptures  and  the  fervice  of  God  in  the 
ktin  tongue;  which  at  laft  was  wholly  unknown  to 
the  common  people.  And  about  the  ninth  and  tenth 
ceni'ines,  when  by  the  general  confcnt  of  all  their 
own  hiftorians  grofs  darknefs  and  ignorance  cover- 
ed  this  part  of  the  world,  the  pope  and  the  priefts 
took  away  the  key  of  knowledge,  and  did  (as  I  may 
fo  fayj  put  it  under  the  door  for  feveral  ages ;  'till  the 
reformation  fetched  it  out  again,  and  rubbed  off  the 
ruft  of  \t. 

And  I  profefs  feriouily  that  hardly  any  thing  in 
the  world  was  ever  to  me  more  aftcnifliing,  than 
this  uncharitable  and  cruel  u%e  of  the  people  in  the 
church  of  Rome.  And  1  cannot  tell  which  to  won* 
der  at  mofb,  the  infolence  of  their  goverp.ors  in  im- 
pofing  upon  men  this  fcnfelefs  way  of  ferving  God, 
or  the  pacience  lliall  I  call  it,  or  rarher  flupidity  of 
the  people-  in  enduring  to  be  fo  in  olerably  abiifed. 
Why  fhoi^ld  reafonable  creatures  be  treated  at  this 
rude  and  oarbarous  rate.?  As  if  tnev  were  unworthy 
to  be  acquainted  w  lii  the  will  ot  G  d  ;  and  as  if 
that  wnici'i  every  man  onghr  to  do,  were  not  fit  for 
every  man  to  know:  as  if  the  common  peo})]e  had 
only  boQics  to  be  pic'ert  at  the  icrvice  of  God,  but 
no  ibuk  \  or  as  if  they  were  all  dif  raffled  ufkI  out  of 
their  wits,  and  it  were  a  dangerous  rhii  g  to  let  \n  the 
light  upon  them. 

But  to  Ipeak  more  diftlndly.  There  arc  two 
things  we  charge  them  withal,  and  v.'hich  they  are 
not  able  to  deny.  Their  performing  i\\^  publick 
fervice  of  God  in  an  unknownr  tongue;  and  depriv- 
ing the  people  of  the  uie  of  the  fcripturcs.     A.  d  I 

fhall 


knowledge  of  the  holy  fcriptures,  325 

fhall  firft  tell  you  what  we  have  to  fay  againft  thefe  S  E  R  M. 
things,    and  then  confider  what  they  pretend  for      '^^' 
them. 

I.  As  for  their  performing  the  fervice  of  God  in 
a  tongue  unknown  to  the  people.  And  I  begin  with 
St,  Paul,  who  in  his  firft  epillle  to  the  Corinthians 
hath  a  vvhole  chapter  on  purpofe  to  ihew  the  unrea- 
fonablenefs  of  this  thing,  and  how  contrary  it  is  to 
the  edification  of  chriftians.  His  difcourle  is  fo  plain 
and  fo  well  known,  that  1  Ihall  not  particularly  infift 
upon  it.  Erafmus  in  his  annotations  upon  this 
chapter,  breaks  out  (as  well  he  might)  into  admira- 
tion at  the  practice  of  the  church  of  Rome  in  his 
time.  Hdc  in  re  mirum^  qiiam  mittata  fit  EccUfiae  con- 
fuetudo  :  "  It  is  wonderful  (fays  he)  how  the  cudom 
"  of  the  church  is  altered  in  this  matter.  St.  Paul 
"  had  rather  fpeak  five  words  with  underOianding, 
"  and  fo  as  to  teach  others,  than  t^n  thoufand  in  an 
*'  unknown  tongue."  Why  does  the  church  doubt 
to  follow  fo  great  an  authority,  or  rather  how  dares 
fhe  difTent  from  it  ? 

As  for  the  pradice  of  the  ancient  church  let  Ori- 
gen  bear  witnefs.  "  The  Grecians  (faith  he)  in  their 
*'  prayers  ufe  the  Greek,  and  the  Romans  the  Latin 
^'  tongue;  and  fo  every  one  according  to  his  lan- 
*'  guage  prayeth  unto  God,  and  praifeth  him  as  he  is 
"  able." 

And  not  only  in  Origen's  time,  but  for  more  than 
the  firft  fix  hundred  years,  the  fervice  of  God  was 
always  performed  in  a  known  tongue.  And  this  the 
learned  men  of  their  own  church  do  not  deny.  And 
cardinal  Cajetan  (as  Cafiander  tells  us)  faid  it  was 
much  better  this  cuftom  were  reftored ;  and  being  re- 
proved 


326  ^he  necejpfy  of  the 

S  E  R  M.  proved  for  %ing  fo,  he  faid  he  learned   it  from 
^^,  Si-.  Paul.     And  Bellarmine  himfelf  confclTeth   that 
the   Armenians,    Egyptians,    Ethiopians,    Ruflians, 
and  others  do  ufe  their  own  language  in  their  litur- 
gies at  this  day. 

Bjt  it  is  otherwife  now  in  the  church  of  Rome, 
and  hath  been  for  feveral  ages.  And  it  feems  they 
lay  great  fcrefs  upon  it,  not  only  as  a  thing  of  great 
ufe,  but  necefTitv.  For  pope  Gregory  VII.  forbids 
the  prince  of  Bohemia  to  permit  to  the  people  the 
celebration  of  divine  offices  in  the  Sclavonian  tongue  -, 
and  commands  him  to  oppofe  them  herein  v\  iih  all 
his  forces.  It  feems  he  thought  it  a  caufe  worthy  the 
fighting  for  -,  and  that  it  were  much  better  tht  peo- 
ple fhould  be  killed,  than  fuffered  to  underhand  their 
prayers. 

But  let  us  reafon  this  matter  a  little  calmly  v/ith 
them.  Is  it  necefTary  for  men  to  under  Hand  any 
thing  they  do  in  religion  ?  and  is  not  p  ayer  one  of 
the  mod  foiemn  parts  of  religion?  and  why  then 
fliould  not  men  underftand  their  prayers  as  v/ell  as 
any  thing  elfe  they  do  in  religion  ?  Is  it  good  diat 
people  Ihould  underlland  their  private  prayers .?  that 
(.ve  thank  them)  they  allow,  and  why  not  pub- 
lick  as  well.?  Is  there  ItiS  of  religion  in  publick 
prayers.?  is  God  lefs  honoured  by  them.?  or  arc  we 
not  as  capable  of  being  edified  and  of  having  our 
hearts  and  affections  moved  and  excited  by  them  ? 
Where  then  lies  the  difference  ?  The  more  1  confider 
it,  the  more  I  am  at  a  lofs,  what  tolerable  reafon  any 
man  can  give  why  people  fhould  .not- underfland 
their  publick  devotions  as  well  as  their  private.  If 
men  cannot  heartily  and  devoudy  pray  alone,  with- 
out • 


knowledge  of  the  holy  fcriptures.  327 

out  underflianding  what  they  ask  of  God,  no  more  ^^  ^^^* 
(fay  l)  can  they  heartily  and  devoutly  join  in  the 
pubhck  prayers  which  are  made  by  the  prieil,  with- 
out underflanding  what  they  are.  If  it  be  enough 
for  the  pried  ro  underftand  them,  why  fhould  not 
the  priefl  only  be  prefent  at  them  ?  unlels  the  people 
do  not  meet  to  worfliipGoD,  but  only  to  wait  up- 
on the  prk\\.  But  by  faying  the  prieit  underftai-ds 
them,  it  feems  it  is  better  fomebody  ^fliould  urderdand 
them  than  not;  and  why  is  not  that  which  is  good 
for  the  pried,  good  for  the  people  ? 

So  that  the  true  date  of  the  controverfy  is,  whe- 
ther it  be  fit  that  the  people  fhould  be  edified  in  the 
fervice  of  God  ;  and  v*'hether  it  be  fit  the  church 
ihould  order  things  contrary  to  edification  ?  For  it 
is  plain  that  the  fervice  of  God  in  an  unknown 
tongue  is  ufclels  and  unprofitable  to  the  people:  nay, 
it  is  evidently  no  publick  fervice  of  God,  when  the 
pried  only  underdands  it.  For  how  can  they  be  laid 
to  be  publick  prayers,  if  the  people  do  not  join  in 
them  ?  and  how  can  they  join  in  that  they  do  not  un- 
derdand  ?  and  to  what  purpofe  are  ledbns  of  fcrip- 
ture-read,  if  people  are  to  learn  nothing  by  them  ? 
and  how  fhould  they  learn  when  they  do  not  under- 
dand  ?  This  is  as  if  one  diould  pretend  to  teach  a 
man  Greek,  by  reading  him  ledures  every  day  out  of 
an  Arabick  and  Perfian  book,  of  which  he  under- 
dands not  one  fy liable. 

II.  As  to  their  depriving  the  people  of  the  ufe  of 
the  holy  fcriptures.  Our  blelled  Saviour  exhorts 
the  jews  to"fearch  the  fcriptures;"  and  St.  Paul 
chargeth  the  chridians  that  ''  the  word  of  God 
«'  fhould  dwell  richly  in  thenn"  and  the  ancient 

fathers 


.  328  ^h^  necfjfity  of  the 

S  E  R  M.  fathers  of  the  church  do  moft  frequently  and  earneft- 
ly  recommend  to  the  people  the  reading  and  (ludy  of 
the  fcriptures :  how  comes  the  cafe  now  to  be  fo  alter- 
ed? fare  the  word  of  God  is  not  changed  ;  that  cer- 
tainly abides  and  continues  the  fame  for  ever. 

I  ihall  by  and  by  examine  what  the  church  of 
Rome  pretends  in  excufe  of  this  facrilege.  In  the 
mean  time  I  do  not  fee  v/hat  confiderable  objedlions 
can  be  made  againfl  the  people's  reading  of  the 
fcriptures,  which  would  not  have  held  as  well  againfl 
the  writing  and  publifhing  of  them  at  firfl  in  a 
language  underftood  by  the  people :  as  the  old  tefta- 
ment  was  by  the  Jews,  and  the  epiftles  of  the  apo- 
Itles  by  the  churches  to  whom  they  were  written, 
and  the  gofpels  both  by  Jews  and  Greeks.  Were  there 
no  difficulties  and  obfcurities  then  in  the  fcriptures, 
capable  of  being  v/refted  by  the  unliable  and  un- 
learned? were  not  people  then  liable  to  error,  and 
was  there  no  danger  of  herefy  in  thofe  times  ?  And 
yet  thefe  are  their  great  objections  againil  putting  the 
fcriptures  into  the  hands  of  the  people.  Which  is 
juft  like  their  arguing  againft  giving  the  cup  to  the 
laity  from  the  inconveniency  of  their  beards,  left 
fome  of  the  confederated  wine  fhould  be  fpilt  upon 
them :  as  if  errors  and  beards  v/ere  inconvenien- 
ces lately  fprung  up  in  the  world,  and  which  man- 
kind were  not  liable  to  in  the  firit  ages  of  <:hriftia- 
nicy. 

But  if  there  were  the  fame  dangers  and  inconve- 
niences in  all  ages,  this  reafon  makes  againft  the  pub- 
liiliing  of  the  fcriptures  to  the  people  at  firft,  as 
much  as  againft  permitting  them  the  ufe  of  them 
now.     And  in  truth  all  thefe  objections  are  againft 

the 


knowledge  of  the  'holy  fcriptures,  329 

the  fcriptufe  itleif:    and  that  which  the  church  ofSER^^- 
Rome  would   find  fault  with  if  they  durd,  is,  that  y^ 
there  fhould  be  any  fuch  book  in  the  world,  and  that 
it  fhould  be  in  any  body's  hands,   learned  or  un- 
learned',  for  if  it  be  dangerous  to  any,  none  are  fb 
capable  of  doing  mifchief  with  it  as  men  of  wit  and 
learning.     So  that  at  the  bottom,    if  they  would 
Ipeak  out,  the  quarrel  is  againfl  the  fcriptures  them- 
felves.     This  is  too  evident  by  the  counfel  given  to 
pope  Julius  III.  by  the  bifhops   met  at  Bononia  to 
confult  about  the  eftablifhment  of  the  Roman   fee  : 
where  among  other  things,  they  gave  this  as  their  laft 
advice,    and  as  the  greatefl  and  weightiefl  of  all, 
"  That  by  all  means  as  litde  of  the  gofpel  as  m.ight 
''  be,    efpecially  in   the  vulgar    tongue,    Ihould  be 
"  read  to  the  people ;   and  that  little  which  was  m 
*'  the  mafs  ought  to  be  fufficient:    neither  flicu.'d  it 
*'  be  permitted  to  any  mortal  to  read  more.     For  k^ 
*'  long  (fay  they)  as  men  were  contented    with  that 
"  little,  all  things  went  well  with  them  ;  but  quite 
*'  otherwife,  fince  more  was  commonly  read."  And 
fpeaking  of  the  fcripture,  they  give  tliis  remarkable 
tcftimony  and  commendation  of  it ;  "  This,  in  fhort, 
"  is  that  book  which,  above  all  others,  hath  raifed 
^'  thofe  tempefls  and  whirlwinds,  which  we  were  al- 
*'  moil  carried    away  v/ith.     And   in  truth,  if  any 
*'  one  diligently  confiders   it,  and  compares  it   with 
''  what  is  done  in  our  church,  he  will  find  them 
"  very  contrary  to  each  other,  and  our  dodrine  not 
"  only  to  be  very  different  from  it,  but  repugnant 
"  to  it."     If  this  be  the  cafe,  they  do  like   the  reft 
of  the  children  of  this  world  prudently  enough  in 
their  generation  :    Can   we  blame  them    for  being 
V  o  L ,  II,  T  t  againft 

6. 


33^  ^^  necejfity  of  the 

^xxx^*  againft  the  fcriptures,  when  the  fcripturos  are  ac-i 
knowledged  to  be  fo  clearly  againft  them  ?  But  flire- 
ly  no  body  that  confidereth  thefe  things  would  be  of 
that  church,  which  is  brought  by  the  undeniable 
evidence  of  the  things  themfelves  to  this  fhameful 
confcfTion,  that  feveral  of  their  dodlrines  and  pradlices 
are  very  contrary  to  the  word  of  God. 

Much  more  might  have  been  fiid  againft  the  prac- 
tice of  the  church  of  Rome  in  thefe  two  particulars^ 
but  this  is  fufHcient. 

I  fhall  in  the  fecond  place  confider,.  what  is  pre- 
tended for  them.  And  indeed  what  can  be  pretend- 
ed in  juftification  of  fo  contumelious  an  affront  to 
mankind,  fo  great  a  tyranny  and  cruelty  to  the  fouls 
of  men?  Hath  God  forbidden  the  people  to  look 
into  the  fcriptures  ?  no;  quite  contrary.  Was  it  the 
practice  oF  the  ancient  church  to  lay  this  reftraint 
upon  men;  or  to  celebrate  the  fervice  of  God  in 
an  unknown  tongue  ?  our  adverfaries  themfelves  have 
not  the  face  to  pretend  this.  I  fliall  truly  re- 
prefent  the  fubftance  of  what  they  fay  in  thefe  two 
points, 

I.  As  to  the  fervice  of  God  in  an  unknown  tongue^ 
they  fiy  thefe  four  things  for  themfelves. 

I .  That  the  people  do  exercife  a  general  devotion, . 
and  come  with  an  intention  to  ferve  God,   and  that 
is  accepted,  though  they  do  not  particularly  under- 
Hand  the  prayers  that  are  made,  a'ld  the  leffons  thaC 
are  read. 

Bjt  is  this  all  that  is  intended  in  the  fervice  of 
God  ?  does  not  St.  Paul  expreQy  require  more?  that 
the  underftanding  of  the  people  fhould  be  edified  by 
the  particular  fervice  that  is  performed  ?  And  if  what 

is 


knowledge  of  the  holy  fcriptures.  331 

is  done  be  not  particularly  underflood,  he  tells  us  the  S  ERM. 
people  are  not  edified,  nor  can  fay  amen  to  the 
prayers  and  thankfgivings  that  are  put  up  to  God  ; 
and  that  any  man  that  fhould  come  in,  and  find 
people  ferving  of  God  in  this  unprofitable  and 
unrcafonable  manner,  would  conclude  tliat  they  were 
mad. 

And  if  there  be  any  general  devotion  in  the  peo- 
ple, it  is  becaufe  in  general  they  undcrftand  what 
they  are  about  j  and  why  may  they  not  as  well  un- 
derftand  the  particular  fervice  that  is  performed,  that 
io  they  might  exercife  a  particular  devotion  ?  So 
that  they  are  devout  no  farther  than  they  underdands 
and  confequently  as  to  what  they  do  not  underftandj 
had  every  whit  as  good  be  abfent. 

2.  They  fay,  the  prayers  are  to  God,  and  he  un- 
derftands  them  5  and  that  is  enough.  But  what  harm 
-were  it,  if  all  they  that  pray  underflood  them  alfo? 
•Or  indeed  how  can  men  pray  to  God  without  un- 
derflancling  what  they  ask  of  him  ?  Is  not  prayer  a 
part  of  thechriftian  worfhip?  and  is  not  that  a  rea- 
fonable  fervice?  and  is  any  fervice  reafonable  that  is 
not  direded  by  our  underflandings^  and  accompanied 
with  our  hearts  and  affed:ions? 

But  then  what  fay  they  to  the  kfTons  and  exhorta- 
tions of  fcripture,  which  are  likewife  read  to  the  peo- 
ple in  an  unknown  tongue?  Are  thefe  diredled  to 
God,  or  to  the  people  only?  And  are  they  not  de- 
■figned  by  God  for  their  inftrudlion^  and  read  ei- 
ther to  that  purpofe  or  none  ?  And  is  it  poiTible 
to  inftruft  men  by  what  they  do  not  underftand  I 
This  is  a  new  and  wonderful  way  of  teaching,  by 
cciicealing  from  the  people  the  things  which  they 

Tt%  ibould 


J32  TX^  necejpty  of  the 

.  S  E  R  M.  fhould  learn.  In  is  not  all  one,  as  to  all  purpofes 
^'^'^'  of  edification,  as  if  tiie  fcriptures  were  not  read,  or  any 
thing  elfe  in  the  place  of  thtrm  ?  as  they  many  times 
do  their  legends,  which  t  e  wifer  fort  among  them  do 
not  believe  when  they  read  them.  For  all  things 
are  alike  to  them  that  underiland  none  \  as  all 
things  are  of  a  colour*  in  the  dark.  Ignorance 
knows  no  difference  of  things ;  it  is  only  knowledge 
that  can  diflinguifh. 

They  fay  that  fome  do,  at  lead  in  fome  mea- 
fure,  underlland  the  particular  prayers.  If  they  do, 
that  is  no  thanks  to  them.  It  is  by  accident  if  they 
are  more  knowing  than  the  reft ;  and  more  than 
the  church  either  defires  or  intends.  For  if  they 
defircd  it,  they  might  order  their  fefvice  fo,  as  every 
man  might  underftand  it. 

4.  They  fay  that  it  is  convenient  that  God  fhould 
be  ferved  and  worfhipped  in  the  fame  language  all 
the  world  over.  Convenient  for  whom  I  for  God  J  or 
for  the  people  }  not  for  God  fyrely.  For  he  under- 
flands  all  other  languages  as  well  as  Latin,  and  for 
any  thing  we  know  to  the  contrary  likes  them  as 
well.  And  certainly  it  cannot  be  fo  coiivenient  for 
the  people,  becaufe  they  generally  underftand  no 
language  but  their  own  •,  and  it  is  very  inconveni- 
ent they  fliould  not  underftand  what  they  do  in  the 
fcrvice  of  God.  Bit  perhaps  they  mean  that  it  is 
convenient  for  the  Roman  church  to  have  it  fo  ;  be- 
g^fe  this  vv^ill  look  like  an  argument  that  they  are 
"^^the  catholick  or  univcrfal  church,  Vv^hen  the  language 
which  was  originally  theirs  ftiall  be  the  univerfal 
lang:uao;e  in  which  all  nations  fhall  ferve  God  ;  and 
by  this  means  alfo  they  may  bring  ail  nations  to  be  of 

their 


kno'wle^ge  of  the  holy  fcriptures. 
their  religion,  and  yet  make  them  never  the  wifer  ; 
and  this  is  a  very  great  convenience,  becaufc  know- 
ledge is  a  troublefome  thing,  and  ignorance  very 
quiet  and  peaceable,  rendring  men  fit  to  be  govern- 
ed, and  unfit  to  difpute. 

1 1.  As  to  their  depriving  the  people  of  the  fcrip- 
tures, the  fum  of  what  they  fay  may  be  reduced  to 
thefe  three  heads. 

1 .  That  the  church  can  give  leave  to  men  to  read 
the  fcriptures.  But  this  not  without  great  trouble 
and  difficulty  :  there  mufl  be  a  licence  for  it  under 
the  hand  of  the  bifhop  or  inquifitor,  by  the  advice 
of  the  prieft  or  confeflLr,  concerning  the  fitneis  of 
the  perlbn  that  defires  this  privilege ;  and  we  may 
be  fure  they  will  think  none  fit,  but  thofe  of  whom 
they  have  the  greatell:  confidence  and  fecurity  :  and 
whoever  prefumes  to  do  it  otherwife,  is  to  be  denied 
abfolution  y  which  is,  as  much  as  in  them  Yi^s^  to 
damn  men  for  prefuming  to  read  the  word  of  God 
without  their  leave. 

And,  whatever  they  may  allow  here  in  England, 
where  they  hold  their  people  upon  more  flippery 
terms,  yet  this  privilege  is  very  rarely  granted  where 
they  are  in  full  poffcirion  of  their  full  power,  and  have 
the  people  perfedlly  under  their  yoke. 

2.  They  tell  us  they  inflrud  tho.  people  other- 
wife.  This  indeed  were  Something  if  they  did  it 
to  purpofe  ;  but  generally  they  do  it  very  fparingly 
and  flightly.  Their  fermons  are  commonly  made 
up  of  feigned  flories  and  miracles  of  faints,  and  ex- 
hortations to  the  woril:iip  of  them,  (and  efpecially 
of  the  blefied  virgin)  and  of  their  images  and  relicks. 
And  for  the  truth  of  this  I  appeal  to  i\\Q.  innumerable 

volumes 


334  '  ^^^  necejfify  of  tht 

^XXX  ^'  "^^^^"^^^  of  their  fermons  and  poftils  in  print ;  which 
'  ^  "  I  fuppofe  are  none  of  their  woril.  I  am  fure  Erafmus 
fays  that  in  his  time  in  feveral  countries,  the  peo- 
ple did  fcarce  once  in  half  a  year  hear  a  profitable 
fermon  to  cxhor:  them  to  true  piety.  Indeed  they 
allow  the  people  ibme  cacechifms  and  manuals  of 
devotion  ;  and  yei:  in  many  of  them  they  have  the 
confcience  and  the  confidence  to  fteal  away  the  fe- 
cond  commandment  in  the  face  of  the  ei^^hrh. 

But  to  bring  the  mctrer  to  a  point,  if^hofe  helps 
of  inflrudlion  are  agreeable  to  the  fcriptures,  why  are 
they  fo  afraid  the  people  fhould  read  the  icriptures  ?  if 
they  are  not,  why  do  they  deceive  and  delude  them  ? 

3.  They  fay  that  people  are  apt  to  wreft  the 
fcriptures  to  their  own  deftruclion,  and  that  the  pro- 
mifcuous  ufe  of  them  hath  been  the  great  occafion 
of  herefies.  It  cannot  be  denied  to  be  the  condition 
of  the  very  befl  things  in  the  world,  that  they  are 
liable  to  be  abufed  :  health,  and  light,  and  liberty,  as 
well  as  knowledge.  Bit  mud  all  thefe  be  therefore 
taken  away  I  This  very  inconvenience  of  peoples 
wfefling  the  fcriptures  to  their  own  ruin  St.  Peter 
takes  notice  of  in  his  days;  but  he  does  not  there- 
fore forbid  men  the  reading  of  them,  as  his  mod 
prudent  fuccefifors  have  done  fince.  Suppofe  the 
reading  of  the  fcriptures  hath  been  the  occafion  of 
herefies  v  were  there  ever  more  than  in  the  firft  acres 
of  chriftianity  .?  and  yet  neither  the  apoftles  nor 
their  fuccelTors  ever  prefcribcd  this  remedy.  But 
are  they  in  earnefl  ?  mull  not  men  know  the  truth 
for  fear  of  falling  into  error?  becaufc  men  may 
pofTibly  mifs  their  way  at  noon-day,  mufl  they  ne- 
ver travel  but  in  the  niglit,  when  they  are  fure  to 
iofe  iti  ^^^ 


Jmowledge  of  the  holy  fcriptures.  335 

And  when  all  is  done,  this  is  not  true,  that  he-  SE  RM. 
defies  have  fprung  from  this  caufe.  They  have  ge-  _  '^ 
nerally  been  broached  by  the  learned,  from  whom 
the  fcriptures  neither  were,  nor  could  be  concealed. 
And  for  this  I  appeal  to  the  hillory  and  experience 
of  all  ao;es.  I  am  well  afTiired  the  ancient  fathers 
were  of  another  mind.  St.  Chryfoftom  fays,  "  If 
"  men  would  be  converfant  in  the  fcriptures,  and  at- 
*'  tend  to  them,  they  would  not  only  not  fall  into 
*'  errors  themfelves,  but  refcuc  thofe  that  are  de- 
"  ceived  :'*  and  "  that  the  fcriptures  would  inftruft 
"  men  both  in  right  opinions  and  a  good  life."  And 
St.  Hieroriie  more  expreily  to  our  purpofe.  "  That 
''  infinite  evils  arife  from  the  ignorance  of  the  fcrip- 
"  turcs  j  and  that  from  that  caufe  the  mofl  part  of 
*'  hcrefics  have  come. " 

But  if  what  they  fay  were  true,  is  not  this  to  lay 
the  blame  of  all  the  ancient  herefies  upon  the  ill- 
management  of  things  by  our  Saviour,  and  his 
apodles,  and  the  holy  fathers  of  the  church  for  {o 
rna.iy  ages,  and  their  imprudent  difpenfing  of  the 
fcriptures  to  the  people  ^  this  indeed  is  to  charge 
the  matter  home ;  and  yet  this  confequence  is  una- 
voidable. For  the  church  of  Rome  cannot  juftify 
the  piety  and  prudence  of  their  prefent  practices, 
without  accufing  all  thefe. 

But  the  thing  which  they  mainly  rely  upon  as 
to  both  thefe  practices  is  this,  that  though  thefe 
things  were  otherwiie  in  the  apofdes  times,  and  in 
the  ancient  church,  yet  the  church  hath  power  to 
alter  them  accordino;  to  the  exigence  and  circum- 
ftances  of  time.  I  have  purpofely  referved  this  for 
the  lafl:  place,  becaufe  it  is  their  lafl:  refuge ;  and  if 
this  fail  them  they  are  gone.  To 


336  77;^  \ecefjity  of  the 

SERM.  To  fhew  the  weaknefs  of  this  pretence,  we  will, 
if  they  pleafe,  take  it  for  granted,  that  the  gover- 
nors of  the  church  have  in  no  age  more  power, 
than  the  apoflles  had  in  theirs.  Now  St.  Paul  tells 
us,  2  Cor.  X.  8.  that  the  authority  which  the  apo- 
llles  had  given  them  from  the  Loi  d,  was  only 
*'  for  edification  but  not  for  deftrud-ion  :  "  and  the 
fame  St.  Paul  makes  it  the  bufinefs  of  a  whole  chap- 
ter to  fhew  that  the  performing  the  publick  fervice 
of  God,  and  particularly  praying  in  an  unknown 
tongue,  are  contrary  to  edification ;  from  which  pre- 
miles  the  conclufion  is  plain,  that  the  apoflles  them- 
felves  had  no  authority  to  appoint  the  fervice  of 
God  to  be  performed  in  an  unknown  tongue;  and 
fjrely  it  is  arrogance  for  the  church  in  any  age  to 
pretend  greater  authority  than  the  apoflles  had. 

This  is  the  fum  of  what  our  adverfaries  iay  m 
juftification  of  themfelves  in  diefe  points.  And  there 
is  no  doubt,  but  that  men  of  wit  and  confidence 
will  always  make  a  fhift  to  fiy  fomething  for  any 
thing ;  and  fome  way  or  other  blanch  over  the 
blacked  and  rnofl  abfurd  things  in  the  world.  But 
1  leave  it  to  the  judgment  of  mankind  whether  any 
thing  be  more  unreafonable  than  to  tell  men  in  ef- 
feft,  that  it  is  fit  they  fnould  underfland  as  litde  of 
religion  as  is  pofTible ;  that  God  hath  publifhcd  a  very 
dangerous  book,  with  which  it  is  not  fafe  for  the 
people  to  be  familiarly  acquainted ;  that  our  bleflcd 
Saviour  and  his  apoflles,  and  the  ancient  chriflian 
church  for  more  than  fix  hundred  years,  were  not 
wife  managers  of  religion,  nor  prudent  difpenfers  of 
the  fcriptures  ;  but  lik«  fond  and  foolifli  fathers  pat 
a  knife  and  a  fword  into  the  hands  of  their  chil- 
dren^ 


knowledge  of  the  holy  fcrip fares .  337 

drcn,  with  which  they  might  eafily  have  forefeen  SERM. 
what  mifchief  they  would  do  to  themfelves  and  others. 
And  who  would  not  choofe  to  be  of  fuch  a  church 
which  is  provided  of  fuch  excellent  and  efTedlual 
means  of  ignorance,  fuch  wife  and  infallible  me- 
thods for  the  prevention  of  knowledge  in  the  peo- 
ple, and  fuch  variety  of  clofe  fhutters  to  keep  out 
the  light  ? 

I  have  chofen  to  infifi  upon  this  argument,  be- 
caufe  it  is  fo  very  plain,  that  the  mofl  ordinary  ca- 
pacity may  judge  of  this  ufage  and  dealing  with  the 
fouls  of  men  \  which  is  fo  very  grofs  that  every  man 
muft  needs  be  fenfible  of  it  j  becaufe  it  toucheth  men 
in  the  common  rights  of  humane  nature,  which  be- 
long to  them  as  much  as  the  light  of  heaven,  and 
the  air  we  breathe  in. 

It  requires  no  fubtilty  of  wit,  no  skill  in  antiquity, 
to  underfland  thefe  controverfies  between  us  and  the 
church  of  Rome.  For  there  are  no  fathers  to  be 
pretended  on  both  fides  in  thefe  queilions:  they  yield 
we  have  antiquity  on  ours :  and  we  refer  it  to  the 
common  fenfe  of  mankind,  which  church,  that  of 
Pcome  or  ours,  hath  all  the  right  and  rcafon  in  the 
world  on  her  fide  in  thefe  debates  ?  And,  who  they 
are  that  tytannize  over  chriftians,  the  governors  of 
their  church,  or  ours.?  who  ufe  the  people  like  fons 
and  freemen,  and  who  like  flaves?  who  feed  the 
flock  of  Christ  committed  to  them,  and  who  take 
t\it  children's  bread  from  them?  Who  they  are  that 
when  their  children  ask  bread,  for  bread  give  them 
a  flone,  and  for  an  egg  a  ferpent  ?  I  mean  the  le- 
gends of  their  faints,   inftead  of  the  holy  fcriptures 

Vol.  IL  Uu  "which 


XXX. 


338  The  necejjity  of  the 

SE  R  Pv2.  «  which  arc  able  to  make  men  wife  unto  falvation:" 
and  who  are  they  that  lie  mofi:  juftly  under  the 
fufpicion  of  errors  and  corruptions,  they  wiio  bring 
their  dodrine  and  pradices  into  the  open  light, 
and  arc  willing  to  have  them  tried  by  the  true 
touchftone,  the  word  of  God  -,  or  they  who  fhun 
the  light,  and  decline  alj  manner  of  trial  and  exa- 
mination ?  and  who  are  mod  likely  to  carry  on  a 
worldly  defign,  they  who  drive  a  trade  of  fuch 
mighty  gain  and  advantage  under  pretence  of  reli- 
gion, and  make  fuch  markets  of  the  ignorance  and 
fins  of  the  people;  or  we  whom  mahce  itfelf  cannot 
charge  with  ferving  any  worldly  defign  by  any  al- 
lowed doflrine  or  pradice  of  our  religion  ?  For  we 
make  no  money  of  the  miflakes  of  the  people,  nor 
do  we  fill  their  heads  with  vain  fears  of  new  places  of 
torment,  to  make  them  wiHing  to  empty  their 
purfes  in  a  vainer  hope  of  being  delivered  out  of 
them.  We  do  not,  like  them,  pretend  a  mighty 
bank  and  treafure  of  merits  in  the  church,  which 
they  fell  to  the  people  for  ready  money,  giving 
them  bills  of  exchange  from  the  pope  to  purga- 
tory ;  when  they  who  grant  them  have  no  reafon  to 
believe  they  will  avail  them,  or  be  accepted  in  the 
other  world. 

For  our  parts,  we  have  no  fear  that  our  people  fhould 
underlland  religion  too  well:  we  could  willi,  with 
Mofes,  "  that  ail  the  Lord's  people  were  prophets:" 
we  fhould  be  heartily  glad  the  people  would  read  the 
holy  fcriptures  mere  diligendy,  being  luiRciendy  af- 
fured  that  it  is  their  own  fault  if  they  learn^any  thing 
but  what  is  good  from  thence : .  we  have  no  doc- 
trines or  practices  contrary  to  fcripture,  and  confe- 

quently 


knowledge  of  the  holy  fcrlptures.  339 

quently  no  occafion  to  keep  it  clofe  from  the  fight  of  S  E  RM. 
the  people,  or  to  hide  any  of  the  commandments  of, 
God  from  them :  we  leave  thefe  mean  arts  to  thofe 
who  Hand  in  need  of  them. 

In  a  word,  there  is  nothing  which  God  hath  faid 
to  men,  which  we  defire  Ihould  be  concealed  from 
them  :  nay,  we  are  wilhng  the  people  fhould  exa- 
mine what  we  teach,  and  bring  all  our  doclrines  "  to 
"  the  law  and  to  the  teftimony  •,"  and  if  they  be  not 
according  to  this  rule,  they  may  neither  believe  them 
nor  us.  'Tis  only  things  falfe  and  adulterate  which 
Jfhun  the  light  and  fear  the  touchftone.  \Ve  have 
that  fecurity  of  the  trurli  of  our  religion,  and  of  the 
agreeablenefs  of  it  to  the  word  of  God  ;  that  honed 
confidence  of  the  goodnefs  of  our  caufe,  that  we  do 
not  forbid  the  people  to  read  the  befl  books  our  adver- 
faries  can  write  againil  it. 

And  now  let  any  impartial  man  judge  whether  this 
be  not  a  better  argument  of  a  good  caufe,  to  leave 
men  at  liberty  to  try  the  grounds  of  their  religion, 
than  the  courfes  which  are  taken  in  the  church  of 
Rome,  to  awe  men  with  an  inquifirion  ;  and,  as 
much  as  is  pofiible,  to  keep  the  common  people  in 
ignorance,  not  only  of  what  their  late  adverfaries,  the 
proteftants,  but  their  chief  and  ancient  adverfary,  the 
fcriptures,  have  to  fay  againfl  them. 

A  man  had  need  of  more  than  common  fecurity 
of  the  skill  and  integrity  of  thofe  to  whom  he  per- 
fectly refigns  his  underflanding ;  this  is  too  great  a 
trufl  to  be  rcpofed  in  humane  trailty,  and  too  flrong 
a  temptation  to  others  to  impofe  upon  us  \  to  abufe 
our  blindnefs,  and  to  make  their  own  ends  of  our 
voluntary  ignorance  and  eafy  credulity.     Tiiis  is  fiich 

U  u  2  a  folly 


71  e  necejjify  of  the 
a  folly  as  if  a  rich  man  lliould  make  his  phyfician  his 
heir-,  which  is  to  tempt  him  either  to  deftroy  him  or 
to  let  him  die,  for  his  own  interefl:.  So  he  that  trulls 
the  care  of  bis  foul  with  other  men,  and  at  the  famiC 
time  by  irrecoverable  deed  fettles  his  underdanding 
upon  them,  lays  too  great  a  temptation  before  them 
to  feduce  and  damn  him  for  their  own  ends. 

And  now  to  reflcd:  a  little  upon  ourfelves.  What 
caufe  have  we  to  blefs  God  who  are  fo  happily  ref- 
cued  from  fliat  more  than  Egyptian  darkncfs  and 
bondage,  wherein  this  nation  was  detained  for  fevcral 
ages!  who  are  delivered  out  of  the  hands  of  thofe 
cruel  task-mafters,  who  required  brick  without  flrav/j 
that  men  fhould  be  religious  without  competent  un- 
derflanding,  and  work  out  their  own  falvation  while 
they  denied  them  the  means  of  all  others  the  mod 
neceflary  to  it  j  who  are  fo  uncharitable  as  to  allow 
us  no  Talvarion  ou:  of  their  church,  and  yet  fo  unrea- 
fonable  as  to  deny  us  the  very  beft  means  of  falvation 
when  we  are  in  it. 

Our  forefathers  tho'jght  It  a  mighty  privilege  to 
have  the  word  of  God  reftored  to  them,  and  the 
publick  prayers  and  (crvice  of  God  celebrated  in  a 
known  tongue.  Let  us  ufc  this  ineftimable  privilege 
with  great  modefty  and  humility  ;  not  to  the  nou- 
rilhing  of  pride  and  felf-concejt,  of  divifion  and 
fadtion  •,  but,  as  the  apoftle  exhorts,  "  Let  the  word 
*'  of  God  dwell  richly  in  you,  in  all  wiidom ; 
*'  and  let  the  peace  of  God  rule  in  your  hearts, 
*'  unto  which  ye  are  called  in  one  body  \  and  be  ye 
«  thankful." 

It  concerns  us  mightily  (with  which  admonition  I 
(hall  conclude)  both  for  the  honour  and  fupport  of 

our 


knowledge  of  the  holy  fcrip tares.  3  4 1 

our  religion,  to  be  at  better  union  among  ourfelves, 
and  not  to  divide  about  lefTer  things  •,  and  fo  to  de- 
mean ourfelves,  as  to  take  from  our  adverfaries  all 
thofe  pretences  whereby  they  would  juftify  themfelves, 
or  at  leaf!  extenuate  the  guilt  of  that  he^^  charge, 
which  falls  every  whit  as  juftly  upon  them  as  ever  it 
did  upon  the  fcribes  and  pharifees,  "  of  taking  away 
"  the  key  of  knowledge,  and  fliutting  the  kingdom 
"  of  heaven  againft  men;  neither  going  in'them- 
"  felves,  nor  fuffering  thole  that  are  entring  to 
"  go  in." 


SERMON   XXXI. 

The  parable  of  tlie  t^n  virgins. 

Preached  before  her  royal  highnefs  the  princefs 
jinne  of  DenmarJz  at  Tunbridge-lVells^  Sep^ 
tember  2,   1688. 

MATTHEW  XXV.  i,  2,  6cc. 
^hen  Jhall  the  kingdom  of  heaven  he  likened  unto  ten 

virgins^  izhich  took  their  lamps ^  and  went  forth  to 

meet  the  bridegroom, 
Jndfhe  of  them  were  wife^  and  five  were  foolijh^  &c. 

MY  defign  at  prefent  is  to  explain  this  pa-  S  E  R  M. 
rable,  and  to  make  fuch  obfervations  upon    ^^^^^• 
it   as  Icem    moil   naturally  and    without 
fqueezing  the  parable  to  fpring  from  it :  and  then  to 
make  fome  application  of  it  to  ourfelves, 

«  Then 


^he  parable  of  the  ten  virgins . 

*'  Then  fhall  the  kingdom  of  heaven  be  likened 
"  unto  ten  virgins : "  by  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is 
meant  the  ftate  and  condition  of  things  under  the 
gofpcl  \  by  the  ten  virgins,  thofe  who  embraced  the 
profcffion  of  it,  which  is  here  reprefented  "  by  their 
''  taking  their  lamps  and  going  forth  to  meet  the 
"  bridegroom  :  "  in  allufion  to  the  ancient  cuflom 
of  marriages,  in  which  the  bridegroom  was  wont  to 
lead  hom.e  liis  bride  in  the  night,  by  the  light  of 
lamps  or  torches. 

But  this  profellion  was  not  in  all  equally  firm  and 
fruitful  \  and  therefore  thofe  who  perfever'd  and 
continued  fledfaft  in  this  profeirion,  notwithilanding 
all  the  temptations  and  allurements  of  the  world, 
and  all  the  fierce  ftorms  and  affaults  of  perfccution 
to  which  this  profcfFion  was  expofed  ;  and  being 
thus  firmly  rooted  in  it,  did  bring  forth  the  fruits  of 
the  Spirit,  and  abound  in  the  graces  and  virtues  of 
a  good  life,  thcfe  are  the  wife  virgins  :  but  thofe 
who  either  deferted  this  profelTion,  or  did  not  bring 
forth  fruits  anfwerable  to  it,  are  the  foolifh  vir- 
gins. 

And  that  this  is  the  true  difi^crence  between  them 
will  appear,  if  we  confidcr  how  the  parable  repre- 
fcnts  them,  ver.  3,4.  "  They  that  were  foolifh  took 
*'  their  lamps,  and  took  no  oil  with  them :  but 
**  the  wife  took  oil  in  their  vefiels  with  their  lamps.'* 
So  that  they  both  took  their  lamps,  and  both  light- 
ed them,  and  therefore  mud  both  be  fuppofed  to 
have  fomc  oil  in  their  lamps  at  fird,  as  appears  from 
ver.  8.  where  "  the  foolifh  virgins  faid  unto  the 
"  wife,  give  us  of  your  oil,  for  our  lamps  are  gone 
"  out."     They  had  it  feems  fome  oil  in  their  lamps 

at 


The  parable  of  the  ten  virgins,  24$ 

at  fird,  which  kept  them  lighted  for  a  little  while,  S  E  R  M. 
but  had  taken  no  care  for  a  future  fupply.  And  Jil^^ 
therefore  the  difference  between  the  wife  and  foolifh 
virgins  did  nor,  as  fome  have  imagined,  condft  in  this, 
that  the  wife  virgins  had  oil,  but  the  foolilli  had 
none ;  but  in  this,  that  the  foolilh  had  taken  no 
care  for  a  farther  fupply,  after  the  oil  which  was 
at  firft  put  into  their  lamps  was  fpent,  as  the  wile 
had  done;  who  befides  the  oil  that  was  in  their 
lamps,  carried  like  wife  a  refer  ve  in  fome  other  veflel ; 
for  a  continual  fupply  of  the  lamp,  as  there  ihould 
be  occafion  ;  "  the  wife  took  oil  in  their  vefTels 
*'  with  their  lamps." 

Now  the  meaning  of  all  this  is,  that  they  who 
are  reprefented  by  the  wife  virgins  had  not  only  em- 
braced the  profefTiOn  of  the  chriftian  religion,  as  the 
foolifli  virgins  alfo  had  done,  for  they  both  had  their 
lamps  lighted  -,  but  they  likewife  perfever'd  in  that 
profeffion,  and  brought  forth  fruits  anfwerable  to  it. 
For  by  oil  in  their  lamps,  and  the  firil  lighting  of 
them,  which  was  common  to  them  both,  is  meant 
that  folemn  profeflion  of  faith  and  repentance  which 
all  chriftians  make  in  baptifm  :  by  that  farther  fup- 
ply of  oil,  which  the  wife  virgins  only  took  care 
to  provide,  is  fignified  our  conftancy  and  perfeve- 
'  ranee  in  this  profeflion,  together  with  the  fruits  of 
the  Spirit,  and  the  improvement  of  the  grace  recei- 
ved in  baptifm  by  the  pradlice  and  exercife  of  all  the 
graces  and  virtues  of  a  good  life,  whereby  men  are 
fitted  and  prepared  for  death  and  judgment,  which 
are  here  reprefented  to  us  by  the  coming  of  the 
bridegroom. 

This 


Tke  far  able  cfthe  ten  virgins. 

This  being  plainly  the  main  fcopc  2nd  intention 
of  the  parable,  I  fhall  explain  the  reft  of  it,  as  there 
fhall  be  occafion,  under  the  federal  obfervations 
v/hich  I  fhall  raife  from  the  feveral  parts  of  it.  And 
they  fliall  be  thefe  : 

Firll,  I  obferve  the  charitable  decorum  which 
our  blefled  Saviour  keeps  in  this,  as  well  as  in  the 
reft  of  his  parables  ;  as  if  he  would  fain  fuppofe 
and  hope,  that  among  thofe  who  enjoy  the  gofpel 
and  make  profefTion  of  it,  the  number  of  them  that 
are  truly  good,  is  equal  to  thofe  that  are  bad.  For 
our  blefled  Saviour  here  reprefents  the  whole 
number  of  the  profeflbrs  of  chriftianity  by  ten  vir- 
gins, the  half  whereof  the  parable  feems  to  fuppofe 
to  be  truly  and  really  good,  and  to  perfevere  in 
goodnels  to  the  end,  ver.  i,  2.  "  Then  fliall  the 
"  kingdom  of  heaven  be  likened  unto  ten  virgins, 
^*'  which  took  their  lamps,  and  went  forth  to  meet 
*''  the  bridegroom  :  and  five  of  them  were  wife,  and 
*'  five  were  foolifti." 

Secondly,  I  obferve  how  very  common  it  is  for 
men  to  negledl  this  great  concernment  of  their 
fouls,  viz.  a  due  preparation  for  another  world  y  and 
how  willing  men  are  to  deceive  themfelves  herein, 
and  to  depend  upon  any  thing  elfe,  how  groundlefs 
and  unreafonable  focver,  rather  than  to  take  pains 
to  be  really  good  and  fit  for  heaven.  And  this  is 
in  a  very  lively  manner  reprefcnted  to  us  in  the  de- 
fcription  of  the  foolifh  virgins,  who  had  provided 
no  fupply  of  oil  in  their  vdiels,  and  when  the  bride- 
groom Vv'as  coming  would  have  furnifli'd  themfelves 
by  borrowii  g  or  buying  of  others,  ver.  8,  9,  10* 

Thirdly, 


The  parable  of  the  ten  virgvts.  345 

Thirdly,  I  obferve,  that  even  the  better  fort  of  ^^^f' 
chriftians  arc  not  careful  and  watchful  as  they  ought 
to  prepare  thcmfelves  for  death  and  judgment : 
"  whilft  the  bridegroom  tarried,  they  ail  flumbered 
"  and  flept;'*  even  the  wife  virgins  as  well  as  the 
foolilh. 

Fourthly,   I  obferve  farther,  how  little  is  to  be 
done  by  us,  to  any  good  purpofe,  in  this  great  work 
of  preparation,  when  it  is  deferred  and  put  off  to 
the  laft.     Thus  the  foolilh  virgins  did,   and  what  a 
fad  confufion  and   hurry  they  were  in  we  may  fee 
ver.  6,  7,  8,  9,  "  And  at  midnight  there  was  a  cry 
*'  made,  behold !    the  bridegroom  cometh  \  go  yc 
"  out  to  meet  him."     At  midnight  \  the  mod  dil- 
mal  and  unfeafonable  time  of  all  other  :  "  then  all 
•<  thofe   virgins   arofe,  and   trimmed  their  lamps : 
«  and  the  foolifh  faid   unto  the  wife,    give   us  of 
«  your  oil  for  our  lamps  arc  gone  out :  but  the  wife 
*'  anfwered,  not  fo  •,  left  there  be  not  enough  for  us 
*'  and  you  s  but  go  ye  rather  to  them  that  fell,  and 
"  buy  for   your  fclves."     And  how   ineffedlual  all 
that  they  could  do  at  that  time  prov'd  to  be,  we 
find,  ver.  10,  11,  12  ^  "  And  whilft  they  went  to 
"  buy,  the  bridegroom   came,   and  they  that  Vv^ere 
*^  ready  went  in  with  him  to  the  marriage,  and  the 
*'  door  was  fhut.     Afterwards  came  alfo  the  other 
««  virgins^  faying,  Lord,  Lord,  open  to  us ;  but 
«'  he  anfwered  and  faid,  verily  I  fay  unto  you,  I 
«'  know  you  not." 

Fifthly,  I  obferve  that  there  is  no  fuch  thing  as 
works  of  fupererogatioHj  that  no  man  can  do  more 
than  needs,  and  is  his  duty  to  do,  by  way  of  prepara- 
tion for  another  world.     For  when  the  foolifti  vir- 
VoL.  11.  X  X  gins 

7. 


XX. 


346  The  pa?' able  of  the  ten  'virgins. 

S  E  R  M.  gins  would  have  begg'd  of  the  wife  fome  oil  for 
their  lamps,  "  the  wife  anfwered,  not  fo  ;  left  there 
"  be  not  enoligh  for  us  and  you."  It  was  only  the 
fooliHi  virgins  that  had  entertained  this  foolilli  con- 
ceit, thut  there  might  be  an  overplus  of  grace  and 
mt^r.t  in  others  fufficient  to  fupply  their  v/ant:  but 
the  wife  knew  not  of  any  that  they  had  to  fpare,  but 
fuppos'd  all  that  they  had  little  enough  to  qualify 
them  for  die  reward  of  eternal  life  ;  ''  not  fo,"  fiy 
they,  /jL/jTrcIf,  "  left  at  any  time,"  left  when  there 
fhould  be  need  and  occafion,  all  that  vve  have  done, 
or  could    do,    fhould  prove  little   enough  for  our 

fclves. 

Sixthly  and  laftly,  I  obfervc,  that  if  v/e  could  fup- 

pofe  any  perfons  to  be  fo  over-good,  as  to  have 
more  grace  and  goodnefs  than  needs  to  qualify  them 
for  the  reward  of  eternal  life,  yet  there  is  no  aftign- 
ing  and  transferring  of  this  overplus  of  grace  and 
virtue  from  one  man  to  another.  For  we  fee,  ver. 
9,  10.  that  all  the  ways  which  they  could  think  of, 
of  borrowing  or  buying  oil  of  others,  did  all  prove 
inefFc£lual  -,  bccaufe  the  thing  is  in  its  own  nature 
impradicable,  that  one  finner  lliould  be  m  a.  condi- 
tion to  merit  for  another. 

All  thefe  obfcrvations  feem  to  have  fome  fair  and 
probable  foundation  in  fome  part  or  other  of  this 
parable ;  and  moft  of  them,  I  am  fure,  are  agreea- 
ble to  the  main  fcope  and  intention  of  the  whole. 
1  fhall  fpeak  to  them  fevcrally,  and  as  briefly  as 
I  can. 

,  Firft,  I  obfervc  the  charitable  decorum,  which  our 
blefTed  Saviour  keeps  in  this,  as  v/ell  as  in  the  reft 
of  his  parables  j  as  if  he  would  fain  fuppofe  and  hope, 

that 


The  parable  of  the  fen  virgins.  347 

that  among  thofe  who  enjoy  the  gofpel,  and  make  SERM: 
profcfTion  of  it,  the  number  of  thofe  who  make  a 
firm  and  fincere  proreHion  of  it,  ;jnd  perfevere  in 
goodnefs  to  tht  end,  is  equal  to  the  number  of  thofe 
who  do  not  make  good  their  proieiiion,  or  who  fall 
off  from  it. 

I  fhall  not  be  Jong  upon  this,  becaufe  I  lay  the 
leaft  ftrels  upon  it,  of  all  the  rcii:.  f  fhall  only  take 
notice  that  cur  bieffai  Saviour  in  this  parable  re- 
prefents  the  whole  number  of  the  profcfTors  of  chri- 
flianity  by  ten  virgins,  the  half  of  which  the  para- 
ble feems  to  fuppole  to  have  fmcerely  embraced  the 
chriftian  profeffion,  and  to  have  perfevered  therein 
to  the  laft^ "  The  kingdom  of  heaven  fliall  be 
*^  likened  unto  ten  virgins,  w^hich  took  their  lamps, 
"  and  went  forth  to  meet  the  bridegroom  :  and  Uve 
*^  of  them  were  wife,  and  five  were  foolifh." 

And  this  decorum  our  blefled  Saviour  feems 
carefully  to  obferve  in  his  other  parables  :  as  in  the 
parable  of  the  prodigal,  Luke  xv.  where  for  one 
fon  that  left  his  father,  and  took  riotous  courfes^ 
there  was  another  that  ftayed  always  with  him,  and 
continued  conflant  to  his  duty.  And  in  the  parable 
of  the  ten  talents,  W'hich  immediately  follows  that 
of  the  ten  virgins,  two  are  fuppofed  to  improve  the 
talents  committed  to  them,  for  one  that  made  no 
improvement  of  his.  He  that  had  five  talents  com- 
mitted to  him  made  them  five  more,  and  he  that 
had  two  gained  other  two  ;  and  only  he  that  but 
one  talent,  hid  it  in  the  earth,  and  made  no  im- 
provement of  it.  And  in  the  parable  which  I  am 
now  upon,  the  number  of  the  profeiTors  of  chriilia- 
nity,  who  took  care  to  fit  and  prepare  themfelves 

X  X  2  for 


34^  The  parable  of  the  ten  virgins, 

8E  RM.  for  the  coming  of  the  bridegroom,  is  fuppofed  equal 
'   "  "  to  the  number  of  thofe  who  did  not. 

And  whether  this  be  particularly  intended  in  the 
parable  or  not,  it  may  however  be  thus  far  inftfuc- 
tive  to  us  j  that  we  fhould  be  fo  far  from  leflening 
the  number  of  true  chriftians,  and  from  confining 
the  church  of  Christ  within  a  narrow  coropafs,  fo 
as  to  exclude  out  of  its  communion  the  far  greatcft 
part  of  the  profefTors  of  chriilianity ;  that  on  the 
contrary,  we  fhould  enlarge  the  kingdom  of  Chr  ist 
as  much  as  we  can,  and  extend  our  charity  to  all 
churches  and  chriftians,  of  what  denomination  fo* 
ever,  as  far  as  regard  to  truth  and  to  the  founda- 
tions of  the  chriflian  religion,  will  permit  us  to  be- 
lieve and  hope  well  of  them  ;  and  rather  be  content- 
ed to  err  a  little  on  the  favourable  and  charitable 
part,  than  to  be  miftaken  on  the  cenforious  and 
damning  fide. 

And  for  this  reafon  perhaps  it  is,  that  our  blefTed 
Saviour  thought  fit  to  frame  his  parables  with  fb 
remarkable  a  bias  to  the  charitable  fide :  partly  to 
inftru(5l  us  to  extend  our  charity  towards  all  chri- 
ftian  churches,  and  profefTors  of  the  chriflian  reli- 
gion, and  our  good  hopes  concerning  them,  as  far 
as  with  reafon  we  can :  and  partly  to  reprove  the  un- 
charitablcncfs  of  the  jews,  who  pofi ti vely  excluded 
all  the  refl  of  mankind,  befides  themfclvcs,  from  all 
hopes  of  falvation.  An  odious  temper,  which  to 
the  infinite  fcandal  of  the  chriflian  name  and  profef- 
fion,  hath  prevailed  upon  fome  chriflians  to  that  no- 
torious degree,  as  not  only  to  fliut  out  all  the  re- 
form'd  part  of  the  wcflern  church,  almofl  equal  in 
number  to  themfelves,  from  all  hopes  of  falvation 

under 


^he  parable  of  the  ten  virgins,  349 

under  the  notion  of  hereticks;  but  likewife  to  un-  SERM. 
church  all  the  other  churches  of  the  chriftian  world, 
which  are  of  much  greater  extent  and  number  than 
themfelvcs,  that  do  not  own  fubjeftion  to  the  bi- 
fhop  of  Rome:  and  this  they  do,  by  declaring  it 
"  to  be  of  necefTity  to  falvation  for  every  creature 
''  to  be  fubjcdl  to  the  Roman  bifhop."  And  this 
fupremacy  of  the  bifhop  of  Rome  over  all  chriftian 
churches,  Bellarmine  calls  the  fum  of  the  chriftian  re- 
ligion. So  that  the  Roman  communion  is  plainly 
founded  in  fchifm,  that  is,  in  the  moft  unchriftian 
and  uncharitable  principle  that  can  be,  namely, 
•*  that  they  are  the  only  true  church  of  Christ,  out 
*'  of  which  none  can  be  laved  : "  which  was  the  very 
fchifm  of  the  Donatifts.  And  in  this  they  are  io 
pofitive,  that  the  learned  men  of  that  church,  in 
their  difputes  and  writings,  are  much  more  inclina- 
ble to  believe  the  falvation  of  heathens  to  be  pofllble, 
than  of  any  of  thole  chriftians,  whom  they  are  pleas'd 
to  call  hereticks.  The  faith  of  the  church  of  Rome 
is  certainly  none  of  the  beft  ;  but  of  one  of  the 
grcateft  and  moft  cfTential  virtues  of  the  chriftian 
religion,  I  mean  charity,  I  doubt  they  have  the 
leaft  fhare  of  any  chriftian  church  this  day  in  the 
world. 

Secondly,  I  obferve,  not  from  any  particular  cir- 
cumftance,  but  from  the  main  fcope  and  defign  of 
this  parable,  how  very  apt  a  great  part  of  chriftians 
are  to  negled  this  great  concernment  of  their  fouls^ 
viz.  a  careful  and  due  preparation  for  another  world-, 
and  how  willing  they  are  to  deceive  themfelves  in 
this  matter,  and  to  depend  upon  any  thing  elfe,  how 
groundlefs  and  unreafonable  foever,  rather  than  to 

take 


350  7he  parable  of  the  tewclrglns,  \ 

S  E  R  M.  take  the  pains  to  be  really  good  and  fit  for  heaven. 
^'  '  And  this  is  in  a  very  lively  manner  reprefented  to  us 
in  the  defcription  of  the  foolifh  virgins,  who  had 
provided  no  fupply  of  oil  in  their  vcfTcls,  and  when 
the  bridegroom  v/as  coming  would  have  furnifh'd 
themfelves  by  borrowing  or  buying  of  others,  ver.  8, 
9,  10.  They  contented  themfelves,  with  having  their 
lamps  lighted  at  their  firfl  feiting  out  to  meet  the 
bridegroom,  that  is,  with  their  being  admitted  into 
the  proieiTion  of  chriilianity  by  baptifm,  but  either 
were  not  fled  fail  in  this  profeifion,  or  were  not  care- 
ful to  adorn  it  with  the  graces  and  virtues  of  a  good 
life. 

And  the  true  reafon  why  men  are  fo  very  apt  to 
deceive  themfelves  in  this  matter,  and  are  fo  hardly 
brought  to  thofe  things  wherein  religion  mainly  con- 
fifls,  I  mean  the  fruits  of  the  fpirit  and  the  pradlice 
of  real  goodnels ;  I  fay,  the  true  reafon  of  this  is, 
becaufe  they  are  extremely  defirous  to  reconcile,  if  it 
were  pofTible,  the  hopes  of  eternal  happinefs  in  ano- 
ther world  with  a  liberty  to  live  as  they  lifl  in  this 
prefent  world :  they  are  loth  to  be  at  the  trouble  and 
drudgery  of  mortifying  their  lulls,  and  governing 
their  palTions,  and  bridling  their  tongues,  and  prafli- 
fing  all  thofe  duties  which  are  comprehended  in 
thofe  two  great  commandments  of  the  love  of  God 
and  of  our  neighbour  :  they  would  fain  gain  the  fa- 
vour of  God,  and  make  their  calling  and  eledion 
fure,  by  fome  eafier  way  than  by  giving  all  diligence 
to  add  to  their  faith  and  knowledge  the  graces  and 
virtues  of  a  good  life. 

For  the  plain  truth  of  the  matter  is,  men  had  rather 
that  religion  fhould  be  any  thing  than  what  indeed  it 

is, 


l^he  parable  of  the  ten  virgins.  351 

is,  viz.  the  thwartinp;  and  croffing  of  their  vicious  S  E  R  M, 

•  •  XXXI 

indinations,    the  curing   of  their   evil  and  corrupt 

affedions,  the  due  care  and  government  of  their  un- 
ruly appetites  and  pafTions,  their  fmcere  endeavour  and 
the  coiillant  practice  of  all  holinefs  and  virtue  in 
their  Hves  :  and  therefore  they  had  much  rather  have 
fomething  that  might  handfomly  palliate  and  excufe 
their  evil  inclinations  and  pradices,  than  to  be  ob- 
liged to  retrench  and  renounce  them;  and  rather 
than  amend  and  reform  their  wicked  lives,  they 
would  be  contented  to  make  an  honourable  amends 
and  compenfation  to  almighty  God  in  fome  other 
way. 

This  hath  been  the  way  and  folly  of  mankind  in 
all  ages,  to  defeat  the  great  end  and  delign  of  reli- 
gion, and  to  thruft  it  by,  by  fubflituting  fomething 
tliQ  in  the  place  of  it^  which,  as  they  think,  may 
ferve  the  turn  as  well,  having  the  appearance  of  as 
much  devotion  and  refped  towards  God,  and  really 
coding  them  more  money  and  pains,  than  that 
which  God  requires  of  them.  Men  have  ever  been 
apt  thus  to  impofe  upon  themfelves,  and  to  pleafe 
themfelves  with  a  conceit  of  pleafing  God  full  as 
well,  or  better,  by  fome  other  way  than  that  which 
he  hath  prefcribed  and  appointed  for  them. 

By  this  means,  and  upon  this  falfe  principle,  reli- 
gion hath  ever  been  apt  to  degenerate  both  among 
jews  and  chriftians,  into  external  and  little  obfer- 
vances,  and  into  a  great  zeal  for  lefier  things,  with 
a  total  negiedi;  of  the  greater  and  weightier  matters 
of  religion ;  and,  in  a  word,  into  infinite  fuperfti- 
tions  of  one  kind  or  other,  and  an  arrogant  conceit 
of  the  extraordinary  righteoufnels  and  merit  of  thefe 

things : 


XXXI. 


352  7 he  parable  of  the  ten  virgins, 

S  E  R  M.  things :  in  which  fome  have  proceeded  to  that  height, 
as  if  they  could  drive  a  flrid:  bargain  with  God  for 
eternal  life  and  happinefs ;  and  have  treated  him  in 
fo  infolent  a  manner,  by  their  do6lrine  of  the  merit 
of  their  devotions  and  good  works,  as  if  God  were 
as  much  beholden  to  them  for  their  fervicc  and  obe- 
dience, as  they  are  to  him  for  the  reward  of  them ; 
which  they  are  not  afraid  to  fay  they  may  challenge 
at  GoD*s  hand  as  of  right  and  juflice  belonging  to 
them. 

Nay,  fo  far  have  they  carried  this  do6lrine  in  the 
church  of  Rome,  as  not  only  to  pretend  to  merit 
eternal  life  for  themfelves,  but  likewife  to  do  a  great 
deal  more  for  the  benefit  and  advantage  of  others  who 
have  not  righteoufnefs  and  gopdnefs  enough  of  their 
own :  which  was  the  filly  conceit  of  the  foolifli  vir- 
gins here  in  the  parable,  as  I  ihall  have  occafion  to 
jQiew  more  fully  by  and  by. 

And  it  is  no  great  wonder  that  fuch  eafy  ways  of 
religion  and  pleafing  God  are  very  grateful  to  the 
corrupt  nature  of  man,  and  that  men  who  are  re- 
folv'd  to  continue  in  an  evil  courfe  are  glad  to  be  of 
a  church  which  will  afifure  falvation  to  men  upon  fuch 
terms:  the  great  difficulty  is,  for  men  to  believe  that 
things  which  are  fo  apparently  abfurd  and  unreafona- 
ble  can  be  true;  and  to  perfuade  themfelves  that  they 
can  impofe  upon  God  by  fuch  pretences  of  fervicc 
and  obedience,  as  no  wife  prince  or  father  upon  earth 
is  to  be  deluded  withal  by  his  fubjeds  or  children. 
"We  ought  to  have  worthier  thoughts  of  God,  and 
to  confider  that  he  is  a  great  King,  and  will  be 
obeyed  and  ferved  by  his  creatures  in  his  own  way, 
and  make  them  happy  upon  his  own  terms:    and 

that 


^be  parable  of  the  ten  virgins,  353 

that  obedience  to  what  he  commands,  is  better  and  ^^|j^' 
more  acceptable  to  him,  than  any  other  facriiice  that,^..^.^ 
we  can  offer,  which  he  hath  not  required  at  our 
hands:  and  hkewife,  that  he  is  infinitely  wife  and 
good;  and  therefore  that  the  laws,  which  he  hath 
given  us  to  live  by,  are  much  more  likely  and  certain 
means  of  our  happinefs,  than  any  inventions  and  de- 
vices of  our  own. 

Thirdly,  I  obferve,  that  even  the  better  and  mors 
confiderats  fort  of  chriftians  are  not  fo  careful  and 
watchful  as  they  ought,   to  prepare  themfelves  for 
death  and  judgment;  "  whilil  the  bridegroom  tar- 
«  ried,   they  all  numbered  and  Hept/*     Even  the 
difciples  of  our  Saviour,  whilft  he  was  yet  perfon- 
ally  prefent  with  them,  and  after  a  particular  charge 
given  them  from  his  own  mouth,    '^  Watch  and 
•«  pray,  left  ye  enter  into  temptation;"  yet  did  not 
keep  that  guard  upon  themfelves  as  to  watch  with 
him  for  one  hour:  "  In  maxny  things,  fays  St.  James, 
«  we  offend  all;"  even  the  bell  of  us:  and  who  is 
there  that  doth  nor,  feme  time  or  other,  remit  of  his 
vigilancy  and  care,  fo  as  to  give  the  devil  an  advan- 
tage and  to  lie  open  to  temptation,  for  want  of  a  con- 
tinual guard  upon  himfelf?     But  then  the  difference 
between  the  wife  and  foolifh  virgins  was  this,    that 
though  they  both  dept,    yet  the  v/ife  did  not  let 
their  lamps  go  out ;  they  neither  quitted  their  pro- 
feffion,  nor  did  they  extinguifh  it  by  a  bad  life :  and 
though  when  the  bridegroom  came  fuddenly  upon 
them,  they  were  not  fo  adually  prepar'd  to  meet  him    .  :^^ 
by  a  continual  vigilancy,    yet  they  were  habitually 
prepar'd  by  the  good  difpofition  of  their  minds,  and 
the  general  courfe  of  a  holy  life.  Their  lamps  might 
Vol.  1 1.  Yy  burn 

7- 


TThe  parable  of  the  ten  'virgins. 

burn  dim  for  want  of  continual  trimming,  but  they 
had  oil  in  their  veiTels  to  fupply  their  lamps,  which 
the  foohfh  virgins  had  taken  no  care  to  provide.  But 
furely  the  greatcll  wifdom  of  all  is  to  maintain  a 
continual  watchfulncfs,  that  fo  we  may  not  be  fur- 
priz'd  by  the  coming  of  the  bridegroom,  and  be  in 
a  confufion  when  death  or  judgment  fhall  overtake 
us.  And  blefled  are  thofe  fervants,  and  wife  indeed, 
whofe  lamps  always  burn  bright,  and  whom  the  bride- 
groom, when  he  comes,  fhall  find  v/atching,  and  in  a 
fit  pofture  and  preparation  to  meet  him. 

Fourthly,  I  obferve  likewifc,  how  little  is  to  be 
done  by  us,  to  any  good  purpofc,  in  this  great  work 
c.i  preparation,  v/hen  it  is  deferr'd  and  put  off  to 
the  lafl.  And  thus  the  foohfh  virgins  did:  but  what 
a  fad  confufion  and  hurry  they  were  in  at  the  fudden 
coming  of  the  bridegroom,  when  they  were  not  on- 
ly aQeep,  but  when  after  they  were  awaken'd,  they 
found  themfelves  altogether  unprovided  of  that 
which  was  neceflary  to  trim  their  lamps,  and  to  put 
them  in  a  pofture  to  meet  the  bridegroom  :  when 
they  wanted  that  which  was  necefliry  at  that  very  in- 
liant,  but  could  not  be  provided  in  an  inftant :  I  fay, 
what  a  tumult  and  confufion  they  were  in,  being 
thus  furpriz'd,  the  parable  reprefents  to  us  at  large, 
ver.  6,  7,  8,  9.  "  and  at  midnight  there  was  a  cry 
*'  made.  Behold!  the  bridegroom  cometh,  go  ye 
♦'  out  to  meet  him.  Then  all  thofe  virgins  arofc 
*'  and  trimmed  their  lamps,"  that  is,  they  went 
about  it  as  well  as  they  could  ;  "  and  the  foolifh  faid 
*'  unto  the  v/ife,  give  us  of  your  oil,  for  our  lamps 


*'  are  gone  out." 


"  At 


The  parable  of  the  ten  virgins.  ^55 

"  At  midnight  there  was  a  cry  made,"  that  is,  at  S  E  R  M. 
the  moit  diihial  and  unfeafonable  time  of  all  other;  '^  '^  ' 
when  they  were  fad  afleep,  and  fuddenly'avvaken'd 
in  great  terror,  when  they  could  not  on  the  fudden 
recoiled  themfelves,  and  confider  what  to  do  ;  when 
the  fiimmons  was  fo  very  fliort,  that  thsy  had  neither 
time  to  confider  what  v/as  fit  to  be  done,  nor  time  to 
do  it  in. 

And  fuch  is  the  cafe  of  thofe  who  put  off  their 
repentance  and  preparation  for  another  v/orld,  'till 
they  arc  furpriz'd  by  death  and  judgment ;  for  it 
comes  all  to  one  in  the  ifiue,  which  of  them  it  be. 
The  parable  indeed  feems  more  particularly  to  point 
at  our  Lord's  coming  to  judgment,  but  the  cafe  is 
much  the  fame  as  to  thofe  who  are  furpriz'd  by 
fudden  death;  fuch  as  gives  them  but  Ikik^  or  not 
fufficient  time  for  fo  great  a  work:  becaufe  luch 
as  death  leaves  them,  judgment  will  certainly  find 
them. 

And  what  a  miferable  confufion  mufl  they  needs 
be  in,  who  are  thus  furpris'd  cither  by  the  one  or 
the  other  ?  How  undt  fhould  we  jbe,  if  the  general 
judgment  of  the  world  fhould  come  upon  us  on  the 
fudden,  to  meet  that  great  judge  at  his  coming,  if 
we  have  made  no  preparation  for  it  before  that  time.^ 
What  fhall  we  then  be  able  to  do,  in  that  great  and 
univerfal  confternation  ?  "  when  the  Son  of  m.an 
"  fhall  appear  in  the  clouds  of  heaven,  with  power 
"  and  great  glory';  when  the  fun  fhall  be  darken'd, 
"  and  the  moon  turned  into  blood,  and  all  the 
*'  powers  of  heaven  fhall  be  fliakcn  :  "  when  all  na- 
ture fl-iall  feel  fuch  violent  pangs  and  convulfions, 
and  the  whole  world  fliall  be  in  a  cumbuflion  fa- 
y  y  2  ming 


356  The  parable  of  the  ten  virgins. 

S  E  R  M.  iTiIng  and  cracking  about  our  cars :  "  when  the 
heavens  fhall  be  Ihrivel'd  up  as  a  fcroli  when  it  is 
roird  together,"  and  the  earth  fliall  be  tofs'd  from 
its  center,  "  and  every  mountain  and  ifland  fhall  be 
"  removed-,"  What  thoughts  can  the  wifelt  men 
then  have  about  them,  in  the  midil  of  fo  much  noifc 
and  terror?  Or  if  they  could  have  any,  what  time 
will  there  then  be  to  put  them  in  execution  ?  "  when 
«*  they  fhall  fee  the  angel,  that  ftandeth  upon  the 
''  fea  and  upon  the  earth,  lifting  up  his  hand  to  hea- 
"  ven,  and  fwearing  by  him  that  liveth  for  ever  and 
"  ever,  that  time  fhall  be  no  longer ;"  as  this  dreadful 
day  is  defcribed  Rev.  x.  5,  6,  and  chap.  vi.  15.  where 
fmners  are  reprefented  at  the  appearance  of  this  great 
judge,  not  as  flying  to  God  in  hopes  of  mercy,  but 
as  flying  from  him  in  utter  dcfpair  of  finding  mercy 
Vv'ith  him :  "  The  kings  of  the  earth,  and  the  great 
"  men,  and  the  mighty  men,  and  the  rich  men, 
"  and  the  great  captains,  hid  themfelves  in  the  dens, 
"  and  in  the  rocks  of  the  earth ;  and  faid  to  the 
"  mountains  and  rocks,  fall  on  us  and  hide  us  from 
"  the  face  of  him  that  fittcth  on  the  throne,  and 
"  from  the  wrath  of  the  lamb :  for  the  great  d^y  of 
"  his  wrath  is  come;  and  who  fliall  be  able  to 
«  ftand  ?  "  The  biggefl  and  the  boldefl  finners  that 
ever  were  upon  earth,  fhall  then  flee  from  the  face 
of  him  whom  they  have  ^o  often  blafphemed  and  de- 
nied ;  and  fliall  fo  far  defpair  of  finding  mercy  with 
him  in  that  day,  who  would  fue  to  him  for  it  no  fooner, 
that  they  fliall  addrefs  themfelves  to  the  mountains 
and  rocks,  as  being  more  pitiful  and  exorable  than 
he-,  "  to  hide  them  from  the  face  of  liim  tl^at  fit- 
«'  tcth  on   the  throne,  and  from  the  v/rath  of  the 

"  lamb : " 


7he  parable  of  the  ten  virgins,  357 

"  lamb:"  from  the  wrath  of  the  lamb,  to  fio;i-)ify  SETrm. 

XXXI 
to  US  that  nothing  is  more  terrible  than  meeknefs  and 

patience  when  they  arc  throughly  provok'd  and  tiirn'd 

into  fury. 

In  fuch  dreadful  confufion  fnall  all  impenitent  Tin- 
ners be,  when  they  fhall  be  furpriz*d  by  that  great 
and  terrible  day  of  the  Lord:  and  the  cafe  of  a 
dying  finner,  who  would  take  no  cars  in  the  time 
of  his  life  and  health  to  make  preparation  for  ano- 
ther world,  is  not  much  more  hopeful  and  com- 
fortable. 

For  alas!  how  little  is  it  that  a  Tick  and  dying 
man  can  do  in  fuch  a  ftrait  of  time?  in  the  midll: 
of  fo  much  pain  and  weakncls  of  body,  and  of  fuch 
confufion  and  amazement  of  mind.  With  what 
heart  can  he  fet  about  fo  great  a  work,  for  which 
there  is  fo  little  time  ?  With  what  face  can  he  ap- 
ply himfelf  to  God  in  this  extremity,  whom  he 
hath  fo  difdainfally  negleded  all  t\\Q  days  of  his 
life  ?  And  how  can  he  have  the  confidence  to  hope, 
that  God  will  hear  his  cries,  and  regard  his  tears,  that 
are  forc'd  from  him  in  this  day  of  his  neceflity? 
when  he  is  confcious  to  himfelf,  that  in  that  long 
day  of  God's  grace  and  patience  he  turned  a  deaf 
ear  to  all  his  merciful  invitations,  "  and  rejedled  the 
"  counfel  of  God  againft  himfelf."  In  a  word, 
how  can  he  "  who  would  not  know,  in  that  his 
''  day,  the  things  which  belonged  to  his  peace,"  ex- 
^  pe6t  any  other  but  that  they  fliould  now  be  for  ever 
hid  from  his  tyQs^  which  are  ready  to  be  clos'd  in  ut- 
ter darknefs  ? 

I  will  not  pronounce  any  thing  concerning  the  im- 
poflibility  of  a  death-bed  repentance :  but  I  am  lure 

that 


358  7lje parable  of  the  ten  virgifis, 

S  K  R  M.  that  It  is  very  difficult,  and  I  believe  very  rare.  Wc 
^^V.^  have  but  one  example,  tliat  I  know  of,  in  the  whole 
bible,  of  the  repentance  of  a  dying  finner;  I  mean 
that  of  the  penitent  thief  upon  the  crofs :  and  the 
clrcumilances  of  his  cafe  arc  fo  peculiar  and  extraor- 
dinary, that  I  cannot  k<z  that  it  affords  any  ground 
of  hope  and  encouragement  to  men  m  ordinary  <:afes. 
AVc  are  not  like  to  fuffer  m  the  company  of  the 
Sor^  of  God,  and  of  the  Saviour  of  the  v/orld  ; 
and  if  we  could  do  io^  it  is  not  certain  that  we  fliould 
behave  ourfelves  towards  him  fo  well  as  the  penitent 
thief  did,  and  mals:e  fo  very  good  an  end  of  lb  very 
bad  a  life. 

And  the  parable  in  the  text  is  fo  far  from  giving 

any   encouragement  to  a  death-bed  repentance  and 

preparation,   that   it   rather  reprefents  their  cafe  as 

defperate  v/ho  put  olT  their  preparation  to  that  time. 

Hov/  ineffectual  all  that  ilit  foolilh  virgins  could  do 

at  that  time  did  in  the  conclufion  prove,  is  kt  forth 

Vcr.  S,  q,  to  us  at  large  in  the   parable  j  they  wanted  oil,  but 

ic,  11,12. ^,Q^^|^  neither  borrow  nor  buy  it:   they  would  then 

fain  have  had  it,  and  ran  about  to  get  it  j  but  it  was 

not  to  be  obtain'd  neither  by  intreaty,    nor  for  miO- 

ney :  fir  ft  they  apply  themfelves  to  the  wife  virgins, 

for  a  fnarc  in  the  overplus  of  their  graces  and  vir- 

Ver.  8.      tues :    *'   the  foolifh  faid  unto  the  wife,  give  us  of 

"  your  oil,   for  our  lamps   are  gone  out  ;  but  the 

*'  wife  anfwered,  not  fo-,  left  there  be   not  enough 

"  for  us  and  you:"     The  wife  virgins,  it  fecms, 

*  knew  of  none  they  had  to  fpare  :  and  then  they  arc 

reprefcnted    ironically,   fending  the  foolifti  virgins  to 

fomc  famous  market  where  this  oil  was  pretended  to 

"^:i-.  0.     be  fold  y  '-  go  yc  rather  to  them  that  fell,  and  buy 

"  for 


ne  parable  of  the  ten  'Oirgins,  3^9 

*'  for  yourfelvcs:"  and  as  dying  and  defperate  per-  SE  R^f. 
fons  are  apt  to  catch  at  every  twig,  and  when  they ,  .^^jj 
can  fee  no  hopes  of  being  faved,  are  apt  to  believe 
every  one  that  will  give  them  any ;  fo  thefe  foolilh 
virgins  follow  the  advice;  "  and  whilft  they  went  to  Ver.  10. 
"  buy,  the  bridegroom  came;  and  they  that  were 
*'  ready  went  in  with  him  to  the  marriage,  and  the 
*'  door  was  fliut ;  and  afterwards  came  alfo  the  other 
'^  virgins,  faying.  Lord,  Lord,  open  to  us;  but 
"  he  anfwered  and  faid,  verily  I  fay   unto  you,  I 
*'  know  you  not." 

You  fee  how  littlej  or  rather  no  encouragement  at 
all  there  is  from  any  the  leait  circumftance  in  this  pa- 
rable, for  thofe  v/ho  have  delay'd  their  preparation 
for  another  world  ^till  they  be  overtaken  by  death 
or  judgment,  to  hope  by  any  thing  that  they 
can  do,  by  any  importunity  which  they  can  then 
ufe,  to  gain  admifllon  into  heaven.  Let  tho.e  con- 
fider  this  with  fear  and  trembling,  who  forget  God 
and  negled  religion  ail  their  life-time,  and  yet  feed 
themfelves  with  vain  hopes  by  fome  device  or  other 
to  be  admitted  into  heaven  at  lail. 

Fifthly,  I  obferve  that  there  is  no  fuch  thing  as 
works  of  fupererogation,  that  is,  that  no  man  can 
do  more  than  needs,  and  than  is  his  duty  to  do,  by 
way  of  preparation  for  another  world.     For  when  Ver.  8. 
the  foolifh  virgins  v/ould  have  begg'd  of  the  wife 
fome  oil  for  their  lamps,  "  the  wife  anfwered,  notVer.  9. 
^^  fo ;  left  there  be  not  enough  for  us  and  you :  "     It 
was  only  the  foolifh  virgins  that  in  the  time  of  their 
extremity,  and  when  they  were  confcious  that  they 
wanted  that  which  was  abfolurely  necefTary  to  qualify 
them  for  admilTion  into  heaven,  v/ho  had  entertain'd 

tiiis 


y     • 

560  Tkc  per  able  of  the  fen  virgins, 

S  E  R  M.  this  Idle  conceit,  that  there  mio-ht  be  an  overplus  of 
'^'  '^"  grace  and  merit  in  others  fufHcient  to  fupply  their 
want :  but  the  wife  knew  not  of  any  they  had  to 
fpare,  but  fuppofed  all  that  they  had  done,  or  could 
poxTibly  do,  to  be  little  enough  to  qualify  them  for 
the  glorious  reward  of  eternal  life:  "  not  fo,  fay 
«  they,  /jtriTrols,  left  at  any  time,"  that  is,  left  when 
there  fhould  be  need  and  occafion,  all  that  we  have 
done,  or  could  do,  ihould  be  little  enough  for  our 
felves:  and  in  this  point  they  had  been  plainly 
inftruded  by  the  bridegroom  himfclf,  *'  But  ye, 
"  when  ye  have  done  all,  fay  wc  are  unprofitable 
"  fervants,  and  have  done  nothing  but  what  was  our 
*'  duty  to  do." 

And  yet  this  conceit  of  the  foolilh  virgins,  as  ab- 
furd  as  it  is,  hath  been  taken  up  in  good  earneft  by 
a  grave  matron,  who  gives  out  her  felf  to  be  the 
mother  and  miftrefs  of  all  cliurches,  and  the  only  in- 
fallible  oracle  of  truth,  I  mean  the  church  of  Rome, 
whofc  avowed  dodrine  it   is,   that  there  are  fomc 
perfons  fo  excellently  good  that  they  may  do  more 
than  needs  for  their  own  falvation:  and   therefore 
when  they  have  done  as  much  for  themfelves  as  in 
ftricl  duty  they  arc  bound  to  do,  and  thereby  have 
paid  down  a  full  and  valuable  confideratlon  for  hea- 
ven, and  as  much  as  in  equal  juftice  between  God 
and  man  it  is  worth  -,   that  then  they  may  go  to 
v;ork  again  for  their  friends,  and  begin  a  new  icorc ; 
and  from  that  time  forv/ards  may  put  the  furplufage 
of  their  good  works  as  a  debt  upon  God,  to  be 
laid  up  in  the  publick  treafury  of  the  church,  as  fo 
many  bills  of  credit,  which  the  pope  by  his  pardons 
and  indulgences  may  difpenfe,  and  place  to  whofc 

account 


The  parable  of  the  ten  virgins.  3  ^  ^ 

account  he   pleafes :  and   out  of  this  bank,   which  S^E  R  ni 
is  kept  at  Rome,  thofe  who  never  took  care  to  have 
any  righteoufnefs  of  their  own,   may  be  fupphed  at 
reafonable  rates. 

to  which  they  have  added  a  further  fuppl>  of 
grace,  if  there  fhould  be  any  need  of  it,  by  the  fa- 
crament  of  extreme  undlion,  never  heard  of  in  the 
chriftian  church  for  many  ages  •,  but  devifed,  as  it 
were  on  purpofe,  to  furniOi  fuch  fooUlh  virgins  with 
oil,  as  are  here  defcribed  in  the  parable. 

And  thus  by  one  device  or  other  they  have  ener- 
vated the  chriftian  religion  to  that  degree,  that  it 
hath  almoft  quite  loft  its  true  virtue  and  efRcacy  up- 
on the  hearts  and  lives  of  men :  and,  inftead  of 
the  real  fruits  of  goodnefs  and  righteoufnefs,  it  pro- 
duceth  little  elfe  but  fuperflition  and  folly  ;  or  if  it 
produce  any  real  virtues,  yet  even  the  virtue  of  thofe  . 
virtues  is  in  st  great  meafure  fpoiled  by  their  arro- 
gant pretences  of  merit  and  fupererogation,  and  is 
render'd  infignificant  to  themfelves  by  their  infolent 
carriage  and  behaviour  towards  God. 

Sixthly  and  laftly,  if  we  could  fuppofe  any  per- 
fons  to  be  fo  overgrown  with  goodnefs,  as  to  have 
more  than  needs  to  qualify  them  for    the    reward 
of  eternal  life;    yet  there  can  be  no  affigning  and 
transferring   of  this    overplus  of  grace    and    virtue 
from  one  man  to  another.     For  we  fee  that  all  the 
ways  that  could  be  thought  on  of  begging,  or  bor- 
rowing, or  buying  oil  of  others,  did  all  prove  in- 
effectual -,  becaufe  the  thing  is  in  its  own  nature  im- 
pradicable,  that   one  finner,  who   owes  all  that  he 
hath,  and  much  more,   to  God,  fhould  have  any 
thing  to  fpare  wherewithal  to  merit  for  another. 
Vol.  II.  Zz  I"^^^^ 


2  62  T/je  parable  of  the  ten  virgins. 

ERM.  Indeed  our  blefTed  Saviour  hath  merited  for  us 
all  the  reward  of  eternal  life,  upon  the  condition 
of  faith  and  repentance  and  obedience  :  but  the 
infinite  merit  of  his  obedience  and  fufferings  will  be 
of  no  benefit  and  advantage  to  us,  if  we  our  felves 
be  not  really  and  inherently  righteous.  So  St.  John 
tells  us,  and  warns  us  to  beware  of  the  contrary  con- 
ceit, "  Little  children,  let  no  man  deceive  you,  he 
*'  that  doth  righteoufnefs  is  righteous,  even  as  he  is 
«'  righteous." 

If  we  do  fincet-ely  endeavour  to  pleafe  God,  and 
to  keep  his  commandments  in  the  general  courfe  of  a 
holy  and  virtuous  life,  the  merit  of  Christ's  perfed 
obedience  and  fufferings  will  be  available  with  God 
for  the  acceptance  of  our  fincerc  though  but  imper- 
fe(5l  obedience.  But  if  we  take  no  care  to  be  righ- 
teous and  good  our  felves,  the  perfe6t  righteoufnefs 
of  Christ  will  do  us  no  good ;  much  lefs  the  im- 
perfed  righteoufnefs  of  any  other  man  who  is  a 
finner  himfclf.  And  the  holieft  man  that  ever  was 
upon  earth,  can  no  more  aiTign  and  make  over 
his  righteoufnefs,  or  repentance,  or  any  part  of  ei- 
ther, to  another  that  wants  it,  than  a  man  can  be- 
queath his  wifdom  or  learning  to  his  heir  or  his 
friend  :  no  more  than  a  fick  man  can  be  rellored  to 
health  by  virtue  of  the  phyfick  which  another  man 
hath  taken. 

Let  no  man  therefore  think  of  being  good  by  a 
deputy,  that  cannot  be  contented  to  be  happy,  and 
to  be  faved  the  fame  way,  that  is,  to  go  to  hell, 
and  to  be  tormented  there  in  pcrfon,  to  or  go  to 
heaven,  and  be  admitted  into  that  place  of  blifs  only 
by  proxy.     So  that  thefe  good  works  with  a  hard 

name. 


*The  parable  of  the  ten  virgins,  363 

name,  and  the  making  over  the  merit  of  them  to  S^ERM, 
others,  have  no  manner  of  foundation  either  m  fcnp-i.^,^— j 
ture  or  reafon,  but  are  all  mere  fkncy  and  fiction  in 

divinity.  . 

The  inference  from  all  this  fiiall  be  the  applicati- 
on  which   our  Saviour   makes   of   this  parable, 
"  Watch  therefore,  for  ye  know  neither  the  day  nor 
«  the  hour  wherein  the  Son  of  man  comethj"  asVer.  13, 
if  he  had  faid,  the  defign  of  this  parable  is  to  m- 
ftrua  us  that  we  ought  to  be  continually  vigilant, 
and  always  upon  our  guard,  and  in  a  conftant  readi- 
nefs  and  preparation  to  meet  the  bridegroom  ;  be- 
caufe  we  know  not  the  time  of  his  coming  to  judg- 
ment, nor  yet,  which  will  be  of  the  fame  confe- 
quence  and  concernment  to  us,  do  any  of  us  know 
the  precife  time  of  our  own  death.     Either  of  theic 
may  happen  at  any  time,  and  come  when  we  leaa 
expea  them.     And  therefore  we  fhould  make  the 
befc  and  fpeedieft  provlfion  that  we  can  for  another 
world,  and  ihould  be  continually  upon  our  watcii, 
'and  trimming  our  lamps,  that  we  may  not  befurpn- 
fed  by  either  of  thefe  ;  neither  by  our  own  particular 
death,  nor  by  the  general  judgment  of  the  world : 
»  Becaufe  the  Son  of  man  will  come  in  a  day  when 
«'  we  look  not  for  him,  and  at  an  hour  when  we  are 

«  not  aware." 

More  particularly,  we  fhould  take  up  a  prefentand 
effeftual  refolution  not  to  delay  car  repentance,  and 
the  reformation  of  our  lives,  that  we  may  not  have 
that  great  work  to  do  when  we  are  not  fit  to  do  any 
thincT ;  no  not  to  difpofe  of  our  temporal  concern, 
men'^s,  much  lefs  to  prepare  for  eternity,  and  to  do 
that  in  a  few  moments,  which  ought  to  have  been 
Z  z  2  ti^e 


:> 


64  The  parable  of  the  ten  virgins] 


A/v 


SF.  tlM-the  care  and  endeavour  of  our  whole  lives :  that  we 
"^  ^  *  may  not  be  forced  to  huddle  up  an  imperfed:,  and  I 
fear  an  infignificant  repentance;  and  to  do  that  in 
great  halle  and  confufion,  which  certainly  does  re- 
quire our  wifefl  and  mofl:  deliberate  thoughts,  and 
all  the  confideration  in  the  world. 

And  we  fiiould  provide  {tore  of  oil  in  our  vefiels, 
v^herewith  to  fupply  our  lamps,  that  they  may  burn 
bright  to  the  lad  ;  I  mean,  we  fhould  improve  the 
grace  which  we  receive  in  baptifm,  by  abounding 
in  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit,  and  in  all  the  fubflan- 
tial  virtues  of  a  good  life  \  "  that  fo  an  entrance 
^'  may  be  minillred  to  us  abundantly  into  the 
?'  everlafling  kingdoni  of  cur  Lord  and  Saviour 
^'  Jesus  Christ." 

By  this  means,  when  wc  are  called  to  meet  the 
bridegroom,  v/e  fhall  not  be  put  to  thofe  milerable 
and  Iharking  fliifts  which  the  foolifh  virgins  were 
driven  to,  of  begging,  or  borrowing,  or  buying  oil ; 
which  will  all  fail  us,  when  we  come  to  depend  upon 
them  :  and  though  the  dying  man  may  miake  a  hard 
fhift  to  fupport  himfelf  with  thefe  falfe  comforts  for  a 
little  while,  yet  when  the  fliort  delufion  is  over,  which 
v/ill  be  as  foon  as  ever  h.e  is  fiep'd  into  the  other 
world,  he  will  to  his  eyerlafung  confufion  and  trou- 
ble find  the  door  of  heaven  fliut  againfl  him  ;  and 
that  notv/iihftanding  all  his  vaft  treafurc  of  pardons 
and  indulgences,  which  have  cod  him  ^o  much,  and 
are  worth  fo  little,  "  he  iliall  never  fee  the  kingdom 
f'  of  God." 

And  ladly,  we  fhould  take  great  care  that  we  do 
liot  extinguilh  our  lamps  by  quitting  the  profefHon 
of  our  h^oly  religion  upon  any  temptation  of  advan- 
tage. 


^he  parable  of  the  ten  virgins.  '365 

tage,  or  for  fear  of  any  lofs  or  fufferlng  whatfoever.  S  E  R  M . 
This  occafion  will  call  for  all  our  faith  and  patience,  v_-^-^ 
all  our  courage  and  conftancy. 

Nunc  animis  opiis^  Mnea^  nunc  p^  ore  fir  mo. 
"When  it  comes  to  this  trial,  we  had  need  "  to  gird 
"  up  the  loins  of  our  minds,'*  to  fummon  all  our 
forces,  and  "  to  put  on  the  whole  armour  of  God, 
"  that  we  may  be  able  to  fland  faft  in  an  evil  day, 
"  and  when  we  have  done  all  to  fland.'* 

And  now,  my  brethren,  to  ufe  the  words  of^  Pet.v; 
St.  Peter,  "  I  teftify  unto  you,  that  this  is  the  true 
"  grace  of  God  wherein  ye  ftand."  The  proteftant 
reformed  religion,  which  we  in  this  nation  pro- 
fefs,  is  the  very  gofpcl  of  Christ,  the  true  ancient 
chriftianity. 

And,  for  God's  fake,  fincc  in  this  hour  of  temp- 
tation, when  our  religion  is  in  fo  apparent  hazard,  we 
pretend  to  love  it  to  that  degree,  as  to  be  contented 
to  part  with  any  thing  for  it,  let  us  refolve  to  prac- 
tife  it ;  and  to  teftify  our  love  to  it,  in  the  fame  way 
that  our  Saviour  would  have  us  fhew  our  love 
to  him,  by  keeping  his  commandments. 

I  will  conclude  all  with  the  apofile's  exhortation, 
{o  very  proper  for  this  purpofe,  and  to  this  prefent 
time,  "  Only  let  your  converfation  be  as  it  be^  Philip,  f, 
''  Cometh  the  gofpel  of  Christ,"  that  is,  chiefly  ^7- 
and  above  all  take  care  to  lead  lives  fuitable  to  the 
chriflian  religion  :  and  then,  as  it  follows,  "  fland 
"  fad:  in  one  fpirit,  with  one  mind,  llriving  toge- 
^'  ther  for  the  faith  of  the  gofpel  ;  and  in  nothing 
'^  terrified  by  your  adverfiries,  which  to  them  is  an 
^"^  evident  token  of  perdition,  but  to  you  of  falvati- 
^'  on,  and  that  of  God,'' 

Now 


366  The  par  ah  k  of  the  fen  ^virgins, 

SERM.  "  Now  unto  him  that  is  able  to  ftabliih  you  in 
XX/.r.  46  fi^e  gofpe],  and  to  keep  you  from  falling  ;  and  to 
"  prefent  you  faultlcfs  before  the  prefcnce  of  his 
"  glory  with  exceeding  joy :  to  the  only  wife  God 
''  our  Saviour,  be  glory  and  majefly,  dominion 
*'  and  Dowcr,  both  now  and  ever."     Amen. 


A 

Thanksgiving  Sermon 

FOR    OUR 

DELIVERANCE 

BY   THE 

VKIN  CE  of  O  RANGE. 

Preached    at   Lincoln  s- Inn   Chapel, 
yamiary  3  r,   1688. 


i 


To  the   worfhipful   the 

Masters  of  the  Bench^ 

And  the  reft  of  the 

GENTLEMEN 

O  F    T  H  E 

Honourable  Society  of  Li7icoln  s  -  Inn. 

THOUGH  I  'was  at  firji  very 
ummlli?ig  to  expofe   to  the  pub- 
lick  a  fermon  made  upon  fo  little  warn- 
ing,   and  fo  great   an    occafion  ;    yet 
upon  fecond  thoughts  I  could  not  thi?2k 
it  fit  to  reftji  the  unanimous  ard  ear- 
nefi    requeji    of  fo    many   worthy  per- 
fons,    as  the  Mailers   of  the  Bench  of 
this    honourable    fociety;    to    whom    I 
fand  fo  much  indebted  for  your  great 
and  continued  refpe&s  to  me^  and  kind 
Vol.  IL  Aaa  ac- 

7- 


Epistle  Dedicatory. 
acceptaitce  of  my  labours  among  you  for 
now  above  the  f pace  of  fve  and  twenty 
years.  In  a  moji  grateful  achtowled<r- 
ment  whereof  this  dfcourfe^  fuch  as  it 
is^  in  mere  obedience  to  your  com7nandsy 
is  7tow  humbly  prefented  to  you^  by 


Your  moft  obliged  and 


^^\^l^'  faithful  Servant, 


m. 


John  Tillotson, 


C  370 

SERMON    XXXII. 


EZRA  ix.  13,  14. 

'And  after  all  that  is  come  upon  us  for  our  evil  deeds, 
and  for  our  great  trefpafs  ;  feeing  that  thou  our  God 
hafl  fAinifhed  us  lefs  than  our  iniquities  deferve^  and 
hafi  given  us  fuch  a  deliverance  as  this  : 

Should  we  again  break  thy  commandments^  and  join  in 
affinity  "with  the  people  of  thefe  abominations  ?  'uooiddfi 
not  thou  be  angry  with  us  ^till  thou  hafi  confmned  us, 
fo  that  there  JJoould  be  no  remnant  nor  efcaping? 

I  A  M  fufliclently  aware  that  the  particular  occa-  s  E  R  M. 
fion  of  thcfe  words  is,  in  feveral  rcfpeds,  very   ^^^^ 
different  from  the  occafion  of  this  day's  folem- 
nity :    for  thefe  words  were  fpoken  by  Ezra  at  a 
time  appointed  for  publick  and  folemn  humiliation. 
But  I  fhall  not  now  confidcr  them  in  that  relation, 
but  rather  as  they  refer  to  the  great  dehverance  which 
God  had  fo  lately  wrought  for  them ;  and  as  they 
are  a  caution  to  take  heed  of  abufing  great  mercies 
received  from  God  \  and  fo  they  are  very  proper  and 
pertinent  to  the  great  occafion  of  this  day.     Nay, 
thefe   words  even  in  their  faddefl:  afpedr,  are  not  fo 
unfuitable  to  it.  For  we  find  in  fcripturc  upon  tlie  moft 
folemn  occafions  of  humiliation,  that  good  men  have 
always  teftified  a  thankful  fenfe  of  the  goodnefs  of 
God   to  IT. em.      And  indeed   the  mercy  of  God 
doth  then  appear  above  meafure  merciful,  when  the 
finner  is  mod  deeply  fenfible  of  his  own  vilenefs  and 
A  a  a  2  unworthinefs. 


372  A  thmikfgiving  fermon. 

SERM.  unworthinels.     And  fo  Ezra  here,  in  the  depth  of 
T_  -^— 1, j  their  forrow  and  humiliation,  hath  fo  great  a  fenfe 
of  the  greatnefb  of  their  dehverance,   that  he  hard- 
ly knew  how  to  exprcis  it  i    "  And  haft    given  us 
"  fuch  a  deliverance  as  this."     And  on  the  other 
hand,  we  find  rhat  good  men,  in  their  mod  fblemn 
praifes  and  thank 'g^vings,   have  made  very  ferious 
reflexions  upon  tiieir  own  unworthinefs.     And  furely 
the  btft  way  to  make  men  truly  thankful,  is  firft  to 
make  them  veiy  humble.     When  David  makes  his 
mofl  folemn  acknowledgments  to  God  for  his  great 
mercies  to  him,    how  doth  he  abafe  himfelf  before 
1  Chron.   him;  "   but  who  am  I,   and  what  is  my  people ? '* 
^^^'  ^'    And  fo  likcwife,    after  he  had  fummoned  all   the 
powers  and  faculties  of  his  foul  to  join  in  the  praifes 
cf  God,  he  interpofeth  this  feafonable  meditation, 
Pfal.  ciii.  "  He  hath  not  dealt  with  us  after  our  fins,  nor  re- 
'^*  "  warded  us  according    to   our    iniquities."     The 

greater  and  more  lively  fenfe  we  have  of  the  good- 
nefs  of  God  to  us,  the  more  we  fhall  abhor  ourfelves 
in  duft  and  afhes  j  nothing  being  more  apt  to  melt 
us  into  tears  of  repentance,  than  the  confideration 
of  great  and  undeferved  mercies  vouchfafed  to 
us.  The  goodnefs  of  God  doth  naturally  lead  to 
repentance. 

Having  thus  reconciled  the  text  to  the  prefent  oc- 
cafion,  I  fhall  for  the  more  diflind  handling  of  the 
words  take  notice  of  thefe  two  parts  in  them. 

Fird,  here  is  a  cafe  fuppofed ;  fhould  we,  *'  after 
•'  all  that  is  come  upon  us  for  our  evil  deeds,  and 
"  fincc  God  hath  punilhed  us  lefs  than  our  iniquities 
•'  defer ve,  and  hath  given  us  fuch  a  deliverance  as 
•'  thisi  fliould  we  again  Ipreak  his  commandments.? 

Secondly, 


A  thankfgiving  fernion,  373 

Secondly,  here  is  a  fentence  and  determination  in  S  E  R  M. 
the  cafe  ;  "  Wouldil  thou  not  be  angry  with  us  'till  ^^lilj 
"  thou  hadft  confum'd  us,  fo  that  there  fhould  be  no 
**^  remnant  nor  efcaping  ?"  This  is  not  fpokea  doubt- 
fully, though  it  be  put  by  way  of  queition ;  but  is 
the  more  vehemently  p-jficive,  the  more  peremptori- 
ly affirmative  ;  as  if  he  had  faid,  it  cannot  other vvi/e 
be  in  reafon  expeded,  but  that  after  fuch  repeated 
provocations  ''God  fhould  be  angry  with  us  *cill  he 
"  had  confumed  us." 

Firft,  here  is  a  cafe  fuppofed  \  fhould  we,  <'  after 
*'  all  that  is  come  upon  us  for  our  evil  deeds,  and  for 
*^  our  great  trefpafs;  and  fince  God  hath  punifned 
*'  us  Icfs  than  our  iniquities  deferve,  and  hath  given 
*'  us  fuch  a  deliverance  as  this:  fhouli  we  a^ain 
"  break  his  commandments,  and  join  affinity  with 
*'  the  people  of  thefe  abominations  ?  "  \n  wnich 
words  thele  following  propofitions  feem  to  be  in- 
volv'd,  which  I  fhall  but  jult  mention,  and  pais  to 
the  fecond  part  of  the  text. 

1.  That  fm  is  the  caufe  of  all  our  fufFerlngs,  "af- 
*'  ter  all  that  is  come  upon  us  for  our  evil  deeds,  and 
"  for  our  great  trefpafs. "  Our  evil  deeds  bring  all 
other  evils  upon  us. 

2.  That  great  fins  have  ufually  a  proportionable  pu^ 
nifhmcnt ;  "  after  all  that  is  come  upon  us,*'  there  is 
the  greatnefs  of  our  punifhment ;  "  for  our  evil  deeds, 
*'  and  for  our  great  trefpals,"  there  is  the  greatnefs 
of  our  fm.  But  when  I  fay  that  great  fins  have  a 
proportionable  punifhment,  I  do  not  mean  that  any 
temporal  punifhments  are  proportionable  to  the  great 
evil  of  fin ;  but  that  God  doth  ufually  obferve  a 
proportion  in  the  temporal  punifhments  of  fin,  io 

that 


-^74  ^  i  hank  (giving  fermon, 

SERM.  that  although  no  temporal  punifliment  be  propor- 
i^il^li/  tionable  to  fin,  yet  the  temporal  punifhment  of  one 
fin  holds  a  proportion  to  the  puniftment  of  another; 
and  confequently,  lefTer  and  greater  fins  have  propor- 
tionably  a  lelTer  and  greater  punilhment. 

3.  That  all  the  punifhments  which  God  inflicls  in 
this  life  do  fall  fhort  of  the  demerit  of  our  fins ;  and 
«*  feeing  that  thou  our  God  hail  punifh'd  us  lefs  than 
<«  our  iniquities  deferve."  In  the  Hebrew  it  is,  "  and 
*'  haft  kept  down  our  iniquities,"  that  is,  that  they 
fhould  not  rife  up  againil  us.     The  LXX.  expreiTeth 
it  very  emphatically,    "  thou  hafi:  eafed  us  of  our 
*'  fins,"  that  is,  thou  haft  not  let  the  whole  weight 
of  them  fall  upon  us.     Were  it  not  for  the  reftraints 
which  God  puts  upon  his  anger,  and  the  merciful 
mitigations  of  it,  the  finner  would  not  be  able  to 
bear  it,  but  muft  fink  under  it.    Indeed  it  is  only  faid 
in  the  Text,  that  the  punifhment  which  God  inflidl- 
ed  upon  the  jews,  though  it  was  a  long  captivity, 
was  beneath  the  defert  of  their  fins :  but  yet  it  is  uni- 
verfally  true,  and  Ezra  perhaps  might  intend  to  infi- 
nuate  fo  much,  that  all  temporal  punifhments,  though 
never  fo  fevere,  are  always  lefs  than  our  inquities  de- 
fervc. 

4.  That  God  many  times  works  very  great  deli- 
verances for  thofe  who  are  very  unworthy  of  them ; 
•'•  and  haft  given  us  f-ich  a  deliverance  as  this,  not- 
"  widiftanding  our  evil  deeds,  and  notwithftanding 
"  our  great  trefpafs.'* 

5.  That  we  are  but  too  apt,  even  after  great  judg- 
ments, and  after  great  mercies,  to  relapfe  into  our 
former  fins;  ''  fhould  we  again  break  thy  command- 
•'  ments."     Ezra  infinuates  that  there  was  m-eat  rea- 

fon 


A  thankfghing  fermoji.  3  75 

fon  to  fear  this,  efpecially  confidcring  the  ftrange  SERM. 
temper  of  that  people,  who  when  God  miiltiply'd/  '^ 
his  blelTings  upon  them,  were  fo  apt  to  "  wax  fat 
*'  and  kick  againfl  him ;"  and  though  he  had  call 
them  feveral  times  into  the  furnace  of  afflidbion, 
though  they  were  melted  for  the  prefent,  yet  they 
were  many  times  but  the  harder  for  it  afterwards. 

6.  Tliat  it  is  good  to  take  notice  of  thofe  parti- 
cular fins  which  have  brought  the  judgments  of  God 
upon  us.  So  Ezra  does  here ;  "  after  all  that  is  come 
"  upon  us  for  our  evil  deeds,  and  for  our  great 
"  trefpafs^  and,  ihould  we  again  join  in  affinity 
"  with  the  people  of  thefe  abominations  ?  " 

Secondly,  here  is  a  fentence  and  determination  in 
the  cafe ;  "  wouldfl  thou  not  be  angry  v/ith  us  'till 
"  thou  hadLl  confumed  us,  fo  that  there  Ihouid  be  no 
"  remnant  nor  efcaping  ? "  Which  queilion,  as  I 
faid  before,  doth  imply  a  ftrong  and  peremptory  af- 
firmative ;  as  if  he  had  faid,.  after  fuch  a  provocation 
there  is  g-reat  reafon  to  conclude  that  God  would  be 
angry  with  us  'till  he  had  confumed  us. 

From  whence  the  obfervation  contained  in  this 
part  of  the  text  will  be  this,  ' '  That  it  is  a  fearful 
"  aggravation  of  fin,  and  a  fad  prefage  of  ruin  to  a 
"  people,  after  great  judgments  and  great  dellve- 
*'  ranees,  to  return  to  fin,  and  efpecially  to  the  lame 
"  fins  again."  Hear  how  paffionately  Ezra  exprelTcs 
himfelf  in  this  cafe,  ver.  6.  "  I  am  alhamed,  O  my 
"  God,  and  blufn  to  lift  up  mine  eyes  to  thee,  my 
"  God."  Why?  v/hat  was  the  caufe  of  this  greac 
fham.e  and  confufion  of  face  .?  He  tells  us,  ver.  9. 
"  for  we  were  bondmen,  yet  our  God  hath  not  for>- 
"  faken  us  in  our  bondage,   but  hath  extended  his 

"  mercy 


376  A  thanhfgin^ing  fei'mon, 

SE  R  M.  «  mercy  to  us,  to  give  us  a  reviving,  to  fct  up  the 
^.^^^^i^^  "  hoaie  of  cjr  God,  and  to  repair  the  defolations 
"  tiicrcof,  and  to  give  us  a  wall  in  Judah  and  in 
*'  Jeruialem;"  that  is,  to  reftore  them  the  free  and 
fafe  exerclie  of  their  religion.  Here  v/as  great  mercy 
and  a  mighty  deliverance  indeed  ;  and  yet  after  this 
they  prefently  relapfcd  into  a  very  great  fin,  ver.  10. 
"  And  now,  O  our  God,  what  fhall  we  fay  after 
"  this  ?   for  we  have  forfaken  thy  commandments." 

In  handling  of  tnis  obfervacion,  I  fhall  do  dicfe 
two  things. 

Firft,  I  fhall  endeavour  to  fhew  that  this  is  a  very 
heavy  agj/,ravation  of  fm,  and 

Secondly,  that  it  is  a  fatal  prefage  of  ruin  to  a 
people. 

Firfl-,  it  is  a  heavy  aggravation  of  fm  after  great 
judgment?,  and  after  fignal  mercies  and  deliverances 
to  return  to  fin,  and  efpecially  to  the  fame  fins  again. 
Here  are  three  things  to  be  dillindlly  fpoken  to. 

1.  That  it  is  a  great  aggravation  of  fin  to  return 
to  it  after  great  judgments. 

2.  To  do  this  after  great  mercies  and  deliverances. 
5.  After  both  to  return  to  the  fame  fins  again. 

I .  It  is  a  great  aggravation  of  fin  after  great  judg- 
ments have  been  upon  us  to  return  to  an  evil  courfe : 
becaufe  this  is  an  argument  of  great  obflinacy  in 
evil.  The  longer  Pharaoh  rcfifted  the  judgments  of 
God,  the  moce  was  his  wicked  heart  hardned,  *till 
at  lafl  he  arrived  at  a  monflrous  degree  of  hardncfs, 
having  been,  as  the  text  tells  us,  hardned  under  ten 
plagues.  And  we  find,  that  after  God  had  threaten 'd 
the  people  of  Ifrael  with  feveral  judgments,  he  tells 
Lev.  xxvi.  them,  that  if  they  "  will  not  be  reformed  by  all 
'3-  «  thcfe 


A  thank fghlng  fermon,  377 

""  thefe   thinp-Sj    he    will   punifn   them  fcven  times  S  E  R  M. 

.        •  xxxir 

"  more  for  their  fins."     And  if  the  jufl  God  will  in  ^^^^     '^ 

fuch  a  cafe  punifh  feven  times  more,  we  may  conclude 

that  xh!t  fm  is  feven  times  greater. 

What  fad  complaints  doth  the  prophet  make  of 
the  people  of  Ifrael  growing  worfe  for  judgments. 
"  Ah!   fmful  nation,  a  people  laden  with  iniquity,  Ifaiah  1.4. 
"  children  that  have  been  corrupters,  a  feed  of  evil 
"  doers."     He  can  hardly  find  words  enough  to  ex- 
prefs  how  great  finners  they  were ;  and  he  adds  the 
reafon  in  the  next  verfe,   "  Why  fhould  they  be  fmit-  Ver.  5; 
"  ten  any  more?  they  will  revolt  more  and  more.'* 
They  were  but  the  worfe  for  judgments.     This  ren- 
ders them  "  a  finful  nation,  a  people  laden  with  ini- 
"  quity."     And  again,  "   The  people  turneth  notlfaiahlx, 
'*  to  him  that  fmiteth  them,  neither  do  they  feek^^* 
"  the  Lord  of  hofts;    therefore  his  anger  is  not 
*^  turned  away,  but  his  hand  is  ftretched  out  fiill.'* 
And  the  fame  prophet  further  complains  to  the  fame 
purpofe,  "  When  thy  hand  is  hfted  up,  they  will'not  ifaiah 
*'  fee."     There  is  a  particular  brand  fet  upon  king^^^^-  ^'• 
Ahaz,  becaufe  afflidion  made   him  worfe  :   "  This  2  Chron. 
"  is  that  king  Ahaz,"  that  is,    that  grievous  and  ^^^^'^*  ^'^*- 
notorious  finner.  And  what  was  it  that  render'd  him 
fo  ?  "  in  the  time  of  his  diftrefs  he  finned  yet  more 
"  againfl:  the  Lord;"  this  is  that  king  Ahaz,  who 
is  faid  to  have  provoked  the  Lord  "  above  all  the 
^"  kings  of  Ifrael  which  were  before  him." 

2.  It  is  likewife  a  lore  aggravation  of  fin,  when  it 
is  committed  after  great  mercies  and  deliverances 
vouchfafed  to  us.  Becaufe  this  is  an  argument  of 
great  ingratitude.  And  this  we  find  recorded  as  a 
heavy  charge  upon  the  people  of  Ifrael,  "  that  they  Judg.  vHi.' 

Vol.  II,  Bbb  "  re- 34>  35* 

7- 


37^  A  thankfgiving  fermoti. 

SERM.  «  remembred  not  the  Lord  their  God,  who  had 
"  delivered  them  out  of  the  hand  of  all  their  cne- 
*'  mies  on  every  fide ;  neither  fhewed  they  kindnels 
**  to  the  houfe  of  Jerubbaal,  namely  Gideon,'*  who 
had  been  their  deliverer,  "  according  to  all  the  good- 
*'  nefs  which  he  had  fliewed  to  Ifrael.  '*  God,  wc 
fee,  takes  it  very  ill  at  our  hands,  when  we  are  un- 
grateful to  the  inftruments  of  our  deliverance;  but 
much  more  when  we  are  unthankful  to  him  the  au- 
thor of  it.  And  how  feverely  doth  Nathan  the  pro- 
phet reproach  David  upon  this  account?  "  Thus 
"  fiid  the  Lord  God  of  Ifrael,  I  anointed  thee 
<^'  king  over  Ifrael,  and  delivered  thee  out  of  the 
«'  hand  of  Saul,  &c.  and  if  this  had  been  too  lit- 
^'^  tie,  I  would  moreover  have  done  fuch  and  fuch 
*'  things.  Wherefore  haft  thou  defpifed  the  com- 
"  mandment  of  the  Lo  rd  to  do  evil  in  his  fight  ?'* 
God  here  reckons  up  his  manifold  mercies  and  de- 
liverances, and  aggravates  David's  fin  upon  this  ac- 
count. And  he  was  very  angry  likevvife  with  Solo- 
mon for  the  fame  reafon,  "  becaufe  he  had  turned 
"  from  the  Lord  God  of  Ifrael,  who  had  appear*d 
"  to  him  twice."  However  we  may  (light  the  mer- 
cies of  God,  he  keeps  a  pundlual  and  flrid  account 
of  them.       It    is    particularly    noted,    as  a'  great 

2  Chron.  i^iot  upon    Hezekiah,  "  that  he  returned  not    ac- 

xxxii.  25.  ^j  cording  to  the  benefits  done  unto  him."  God 
takes  very  fevere  notice  of  all  the  unkind  and 
unworthy  returns  that  are  made  to  him  for  his  good- 
nefs. 

Ingratitude  to  Goo    is   fo  unnatural   and   mon- 
ftrous,   that  we  find  him  appealing  againft  us  for  it 

Ifjiahi.2.to  the  inanimate  creatures.      "  Hear  O  heavens! 

",and 


A  thank/giving  fermon.  379 

*<=  and  give  ear  O  earth!  for  the  Lord  hath  fpoken;  ^|^j^,^* 
^'  I    have  nourifhed  and  brought  up  children,  but  ^.^.^^^.^ 
"  they   have  rebelled  againfl  me."     And  then  he 
goes  on  and  upbraids  them  with  the  brute  creatures, 
as  being  more  grateful  to  men,    than  men  are  to 
God.     "  The  ox  knoweth  his  owner,  and  the  arsiraiahi.3. 
"  his  mailer's  crib,  but  Ifrael  doth  not  know,   my 
"  people  doth  not  confider."     And  in  the  fame  pro- 
phet there  is  the  like   complaint,  "  Let  favour  be  jfaiah 
"  fhewn  to  the  wicked,  yet  will  he  not  learn  righ-^xvi.  lo. 
*'  teoufnefs.     In  the  land  of  uprightnefs  will  he  deal 
*'  unjuflly,  and  will  not  behold  the  majeily  of  the 
«'  Lord.     Lord,  when  thy  hand  is  hfted  up,  they 
^'  will  not  fee;  but  they  Ihall  fee  and  be  afhamed.'* 
They  that  will  not  acknowledge  the  mercies  of  God's 
providence,  ihall  feel  the  ftrokes  of  his  juftice. 

There  is  no  greater  evidence  in  the  world  of  an 
untra6lable  difpofition,  than  not  to  be  wrought  upon 
by  kindnefs,  not  to  be  melted  by  mercies,  not  to  be 
obliged  by  benefits,  not  to  be  tamed  by  gentle  uf\ge. 
Nay,    God   expeds  that  his  mercies  fhould  lay  f3 
great  an  obligation  upon  us,    that  even  a  miracle 
Ihould  not  tempt  us  to  be  unthankful.     "  If  there  Deut  xUl 
"  arife  am.ong  you  a  prophet,    fays  Mofes  to  the^>  2- 
*'  people  of  Ifrael,   or  a  dreamer  of  dreams,  and 
''  giverh  thee  a  fign  or  a  wonder,  and  the  fign  or 
"  the  wonder  cometh  to  pafs,   whereof  he  fpake  to 
'*  thee,  faying,  let  us  go  after  other  gods  and  fervc 
*'  them  •,  thou  ihalt  not  hearken  to  the  words  of  that 
*'  prophet."    And  he  gives  the  reafon,   "  becaufe  he  Ver.  5. 
*'  hath  fpoken  to  turn  you  away  from  the  Lord  God 
*'  of  Ifrael,  which  brought  you  out  of  the  land  of 
"  Egypt,  and  delivered  you  out  of  the  houfe  of  bon- 
•'  dage."  B  b  b  2  %.  It 


3  Bo  A  tbanJzfghing  fermon, 

SE  R  M.  ^.  I:  Is  a  greater  aggravan'on  yet,  after  great  mer- 
^...l-^^^l^cies  and  judgments  to  return  to  the  fame  fms.  Be- 
caufe  this  can  hardly  be  without  our  finning  againft 
knowledge,  and  after  we  are  convinced  how  evil  and 
bitter  the  fin  is  which  we  were  guilty  of,  and  have 
been  {o  forely  punifli'd  for  before.  This  is  an  argu- 
ment of  a  very  perverfe  and  incorrigible  temper, 
and  that  which  made  the  fin  of  the  people  of  Ifrael 
fo  above  meafure  finful,  that  after  fo  many  fignal 
dehverances,  and  fo  many  terrible  judgments,  they 
fell  into  the  fame  fin  of' murmuring  ten  times;  mur- 
muring againft  God  the  author,  and  againft  Mofes 
the  glorious  inftrument  of  their  deliverance  out  of 
Egypt-,  which  was  one  of  the  two  great  types  of  the 
old  teftament,  both  of  temporal  and  fpiritual  op- 
preflion  and  tyranny.  Hear  with  what  refentment 
God  fpeaks  of  the  ill  returns  which  they  made  to 
Numb,  him  for  that  great  mercy  and  deliverance.  "  Becaufe 
XIV.  22,  cc  2\\  thofe  men  which  have  feen  my  glory,  and  my 
"  miracles  which  I  did  in  Egypt,  and  in  the  wilder- 
*'  nefs,  and  have  tempted  me  now  thefe  ten  times, 
*'  and  have  not  hearkened  unto  my  voice  -,  furely 
"  they  ftiall  not  fee  the  land  which  I  fvvare  unto  their 
^'  flithers."  And  after  he  had  brought  them  into  the 
promifed  land,  and  wrought  great  deliverances  for 
them  feveral  times,  how  does  he  upbraid  them  with 
their  pronenefs  to  fall  again  into  the  fame  fin  of  Ido- 
Judges  X.  latry  ?  "  And  the  Lord  faid  unto  the  children  of 
11,12, 13,  cc  jfj-ael,  did  not  I  deliver  you  from  the  Egyptians, 
"  and  from  the  Amorites  •,  from  the  children  of 
*^  Ammon,  and  from  the  Philiftines  ?  The  Zido- 
"  nians  alfo  and  the  Amalekites  and  Maonites  did 
*^  opprefs  youi  and  ye  cried  unto  me,  and  I  de- 

"  liycred 


A  thankfgivtng  fermon,  ^  381 

*^  livered  you  out  of  their  hand  :  yet  you  have  for-  S  E  R  M. 
*'  faken  me,  and  ferved  other   gods  ;  wherefore  I  ^^^^11\ 
*'  will  deliver  you  no  more :  go  and  cry  unto  the 
"  gods  which  ye  have  chofen,  let  them  deliver  you 
"  in  the  time  of  your  tribulation."     This  incenfed 
God  fo  highly  againft  them,  that  they  ftill  relaps'd 
into  the  fame  fin  of  idolatry,  after  fo  many  afflidli- 
ons  and  fo  many  deliverances.     Upon  fuch  an  oc- 
cafion  well  might  the  prophet  fay,    "  Thine  ownl^^-"-J9- 
"  wickednefs  fliall  corredl  thee,    and  thy  fins  fliall 
"  reprove  thee:  know  therefore  that  it  is  an  evil 
"  and  bitter  thing  that  thou  hafl  forfaken  the  Lord 
^'  thy  God."     It  is  hardly  pofiible  but  we  ihould 
know  that  the  wickedneis  for  which  we  have  been 
fo  feverely  corrected,  is  an  evil  and  bitter  thing. 

Thus  much  for  the  firfl  part  of  the  obfervation, 
namely,  that  it  is  a  fearful  aggravation  of  fin,  after 
great  judgments  and  great  deliverances  to  return  to 
fin,  and  efpecially  to  the  fame  fins  again.  I  pro- 
ceed to  the 

Second  part,  namely,  that  this  is  a  fatal  prefagc 
of  ruin  to  a  people  j  "  fhould  we  again  break  thy 
"  commandments,  and  join  in  affinity  with  the  peo- 
*'  pie  ofthefe  abominations.?  wouldll  thou  not  be 
"  angry  with  us  till  thou  hadfi:  confumed  us,  fo  that 
^'  there  fhould  be  no  remnant  nor  efcaping?"  and 
fo  God  threatens  the  people  of  Ifrael  in  the  text 
v/hich  I  cited  before,  "  wherefore  I  will  deliver  you  Judges  x. 
*'  no  more."  Wherefore,  that  is,  becaufe  they  would  ^3- 
neither  be  reformed  by  the  afflidions  wherewith  God 
had  exercifed  them,  nor  by  the  many  wonderful  de- 
liverances which  he  had  wrought  for  them. 

And 


3^2  A  thank/giving  fermon. 

S  E  R  M.      And  there  is  great  reafon  why  God   fhould  deal 
^_  _^^  thus  with  a  people   that  continues  impenitent  both 
under  die  judgnnents  and  mercies  of  God. 

I .  Becaufe  this  doth  ripen  the  fins  of  a  nation ; 
and  it  is  time  for  God  to  put  in  his  fickle  when  a 
people  are  ripe  for  ruin.  When  the  meafure  of 
their  fins  is  full,  it  is  no  wonder  if  the  cup  of  his  in- 
dignation begin  to  overflow.  It  is  faid  of  the  Amo- 
rites,  four  hundred  years  before  God  brought  that 
fearful  ruin  upon  tnem,  that  God  deferr'd  the  ex- 
Gen.  XV.  tirpation  of  tiiem,  "  becaufe  the  iniquity  of  the 
i6.  "  Amorites   was  not;  ya  full.'*     When  neither  the 

mercies  nor  the  judgments  of  God  will  bring  us  to 
repentance,  we  are  then  fit  for  deftrudion  •,  accord- 
Rom,  ix.  ing  to  that  of  the  apofde,  "  Wnat  if  God  willing 
"  to  fhew  his  wrath,  and  make  his  power  known, 
*'  endured  with  much  long-fuffering  the  vefifels  of 
*'  wrath  fitted  for  defirudion  ?  "  they  who  are  not 
wrought  upon  neither  by  the  patience  of  God's 
mercies,  nor  by  the  patience  of  his  judgments,  feem 
to  be  fitted  and  prepared,  to  be  ripe  and  ready 
for  deflrudion. 

2.    Became   this    incorrigible   temper   fhews   the 

cafe  of  fuch  perfbns   to  be  defperate  and  incurable. 

Ifaiahi.  5.C6  Vv^hy  fhould  they   be  fmitten   any  more.^"  fays 

God  of  the  people  of  Ifrael,  "  they  will  revolt  more 

Matth.       ''  and   more.     How  often  would  I  have  gathered 

xxiu.  37,   <c  yoy^  f^ys  our  blefifed  Saviour  to  the  Jews,  even 

^  '  «  as  a  hen  gathereth  her  chickens  under  her  wings  ? 

*'  and  ye  would  not !  Behold,  your  houfe  is  left  to 

*'  you  defolatc,"  that  is,  ye  fiiall  be  utterly  deflroy- 

cd  •,  as  it  happened  forty  years  after  to  Jerufalem,  and 

to  the  whole  jewifh  nation. 

When 


A  tbanJzfgivi72g  fermon.  38 j 

When  God  fees  that  all  the  means  which  he  can  S  E  R  M". 
life  do  prove  inefFedlual  and  to  no  purpofe,  he  will,^^^^^' 
then  give  over  a  people,  as  phyficians  do  their  pa- 
tients when  they  fee  that  nature  is  fpent,  and  their  cafe 
pad  remedy.  When  men  will  not  be  the  better  for 
the  beft  means  that  heaven  can  ufe,  God  will  then 
leave  them  to  reap  the  fruit  of  their  own  doino-s, 
and  abandon  them  to  the  demerit  of  their  fin. 

That  which  now  remains  is  to  apply  this  to  our 
felves,  and  to  the  folemn  occafion  of  this  day. 

And  if  this  be  our  cafe,  let  us  take  heed  diat  this 
be  not  alfo  our  doom  and  fentence. 

Firft,  the  cafe  in  the  ttxt  doth  very  much  reiem- 
blc  ours.  And  that  in  three  refpedls.  God  hath 
fent  great  judgments  upon  us  for  our  evil  deeds  and 
for  our  great  trefpaffes ;  '^  he  hath  punifted  us  lels 
*'  than  our  iniquities  have  deferved:  "  and  hath  gi- 
yen  us  a  very  great  and  wonderful  deliverance. 

I.  God  hath  infiidled  great  judgments  upon  us 
for  our  evil  deeds,  and  for  our  great  trcfpafies.  Great 
judgm.ents,  both  for  the  quality,  and  for  the  conti- 
nuance of  them.  It  fhall  fuffice  only  to  mention 
thofe  which  are  of  a  more  ancient  date.  Scarce  hath 
any  nation  been  more  calamitous  than  this  of  ours, 
both  in  refped  of  the  invafions  and  conquciis  of  fo- 
reigners, and  of  our  own  civil  and  intefline  divin- 
ons.  Four  times  we  have  been  conquer'd ;  by  the 
Romans,  Saxons,  Danes,  and  Normans.  And  our 
inteftine  divifions  have  likewife  been  great  and  of 
long  continuance.  Witnefs  the  barons  wars,  and 
that  long  and  cruel  conteft  between  the  two  houfes  of 
York  and  Lancafter. 

But 


2^4  -^  thank/giving  /etymon, 

S  E  RM.  But  to  come  nearer  to  our  own  times,  what  fear- 
XXX 1 1,  ^^j  JQ^gn-ients  and  calamities  of  war,  and  peltilence^ 
and  fire,  have  many  of  U3  feen  ?  and  how  clofe  did 
they  follow  one  another  ?  what  terrible  havock  did 
the  fword  make  amongfl  us  for  many  years?  and 
this  not  the  fword  of  a  foreign  enemy,  but  of  a  citil 
war ;  the  mifchiefs  whereof  were  all  terminated  up- 
on our  felves,  and  have  given  deep  wounds,  and  left 
broad  fears  upon  the  moil  confiderable  families  in 
the  nation. 

• Alta  manent  civilis  vulnera  dextne. 

This  war  was  drawn  out  to  a  great  length,  and 
had  a  tragical  end,  in  the  murder  of  an  excellent 
king  •,  and  in  the  banifliment  of  his  children  into  a 
Urange  country,  whereby  they  were  expofed  to  the 
arts  and  practices  of  thofe  of  another  religion  ;  the 
mifchievous  confequences  whereof  wc  have  ever 
fince  fadly  labour'd  under,  and  do  feel  them  at 
this  day. 

And  when  God  was  pleas'd  in  great  mercy  at  laffc 
to  put  an  end  to  the  mifcrable  diftra6lions  and  con- 
fufions  of  almofl  twenty  years,  by  the  happy  reflora- 
tion  of  the  royal  family,  and  our  ancient  govern- 
ment ;  which  feem'd  to  promife  to  us  a  lading  fet- 
tlement,  and  all  the  felicities  we  could  wifh  ;  yet 
how  foon  was  this  bright  and  glorious  morning  over- 
call,  by  the  reftlefs  and  black  defigns  of  that  fure 
and  inveterate  enemy  of  ours,  the  church  of  Rome, 
for  the  reftorrng  of  their  religion  amongfl:  us.  And 
there  was  too  much  encouragement  given  to  this 
dcfign,  by  thofe  who  had  power  in  their  hands, 
and  had  brought  home  with  them  a  fecret  good- 
will to  it. 

For 


A  than'kfgiving  fermon,        •  385 

For  this  great  trefpafs,  and  for  our  many  other  S  E  R  M. 
fins,  God  was  angry  with  us,  and  fent  among  us 
the  moll  raging  peftilence  that  ever  was  known  in 
this  nation,  which  in  the  fpace  of  eight  or  nine 
months  fwept  away  near  a  third  part  of  the  inha- 
bitants of  this  vaft  and  populous  city^  and  of  the 
fuburbs  thereof:  befides  a  great  miany  thoufands 
more  in  feveral  parts  of  the  nation.  "  Bat  we  did 
"  not  return  to  the  Lord,  nor  feek  him  for  all  this.'* 

And  therefore,  the  very  next  year  after,  God 
fent  a  terrible  and  devouring  fire,  v/hich  in  lefs  than 
three  days  time  laid  the  greateft  part  of  this  great 
city  in  allies.  And  there  is  too  miuch  reafon  to 
believe  that  the  enemy  did  this,  that  perpetual  and 
implacable  enemy  of  the  peace  and  happinefs  of  this 
nation. 

And  even  fince  the  time  of  that  dreadful  cala- 
mity, which  is  now  above  twenty  years  agone,  we 
have  been  in  a  continual  fear  of  the  cruel  defigns  of 
that  party,  which  had  hitherto  been  incelTantly 
working  under  ground,  but  now  began  to  iliew 
themfelves  more  openly ;  and  efpecially  fmce  a 
prince  of  that  religion  fucceeded  to  the  crov/n,  our 
eyes  have  been  ready  to  fail  us  for  fear,  and  for 
looking  after  thofe  dreadful  things  that  w^ere  com- 
ing upon  us,  and  feem'd  to  be  even  at  the  door. 
A  fear  which  this  nation  could  eafily  have  rid  it  felf 
of,  becaufe  they  that  caufed  it  were  but  a  handful  in 
comparifon  of  us,  and  could  have  done  nothing 
without  a  foreign  force  and  alTiflance ;  had  not  the 
principles  of  humanity,  and  of  our  religion  too,  re- 
ilrain'd  us   from  violence  and  cruelty,    and  from 

Vo  L.  II.  C  c  c  every 

7- 


XXXII 


386  A  thankfgrcing  fermon. 

SKRM.  every  thing  which  had  the  appearance  ofundutiful- 
nefs  to  the  government  which  the  providence  of 
God  had  fet  over  us.  An  inflance  of  the  like  pa- 
tience, under  the  hke  provocations,  fcrfo  long  a  time, 
and  after  fuch  vifible  and  open  attempts  upon  them, 
when  they  had  the  Jaws  fo  plainly  on  their  fide,  I 
challenge  any  nation  or  church  in  the  world,  from 
the  very  foundation  of  it,  to  produce.  Infomuch, 
that  if  God  had  not  put  it  into  the  hearts  of  our 
kind  neighbours,  and  of  that  incomparable  prince, 
who  laid  and  condu6led  that  great  defign  with  fo 
much  skill  and  fecrecy,  to  have  appear'd  fo  feafon- 
ably  for  our  refcue,  our  patience  had  infdlibly, 
without  a  miracle,  been  our  ruin.  And  I  am  fure, 
if  our  enemies  had  ever  had  the  like  opportunity  in 
thsir  hands,  and  had  overbalanced  us  in  numbers  but 
half  fo  much  as  we  did  them,  they  would  never 
have  let  it  flip ;  but  would  long  fince  have  extirpa- 
ted us  utterly,  and  have  "  made  the  remembrance 
*'   of  us  to  have  ceas'd  among  mien." 

And  now  if  you  ask  me,  for  what  fins  more  elpe- 
cially  God  hath  fent  all  thefe  judgments  upon  us  ? 
it  will  not,  I  think,  become  us  to  be  very  particu- 
lar and  pofitive  in  fuch  determinations.  Thus  much 
is  certain,  that  we  have  all  finn'd  and  contributed  to 
thefe  judgments;  every  one  hath  had  fome  hand, 
more  or  lefs,  in  pulling  down  this  vengeance  upon 
the  nation.  But  we  are  all  too  apt  to  remove  the 
meritorious  caufe  of  God's  judgments  as  far  as  we 
can  from  our  felves,  and  our  own  party,  and  up- 
on any  (light  pretence  to  lay  it  upon  others. 

Yet  I  will  venture  to  inflance  in  one  or  two 
things  which  may  probably  enough  have  had  a  more 

particu- 


A  thank/giving  fenmn.  387 

particular  and  immediate  hand  in  drawing  down  the  ^^U^^- 
judgments  of  God  upon  us.  <- 

Our  horrible  contempt  of  religion  on  the  one  hand, 
by  our  infidelity  and  profanenefs ;  and  our  (hame- 
ful  abufe  of  it  on  the  other,  by  our  grois  hypocri- 
fy,  and  fheltering  great  wickednefs  and  immorali- 
ties under  the  cloke  and  profefTion  of  religion. 

And  then,  great  difienfions  and  divifions,  great 
uncharitablenefs  and  bitternefs  of  fpirit  among  thofc 
of  the  Hime  religion  •,  fo  that  almoft  from  the  be- 
o-inning  of  our  happy  reformation  the  enemy  had 
fown  thefe  tares,  and  by  the  unwearied  malice  and 
arts  of  the  church  of  Rome,  the  feeds  of  diircnfioa 
were  fcattered  very  early  amongft  us  •,  and  a  four 
humour  had  been  fermenting  •  in  the  body  of  the  na- 
tion, both  upon  account  of  religion  and  civil  inte- 
refls,  for  a  long  time  before  things  broke  out  into  a 

civil  war. 

And  more  particularly  yet :  that  v/hich  is  cali'd 
the  great  trefpafs  here  in  the  text,  their  joining  in 
affinity  with  the  people  of  thefe  abominations,  by 
whom  they  had  been  detained  in  a  long  captivity  : 
this,  I  lay,  feems  to  have  had,  both  from  the  nature 
of  the  thing,  and  the  juft  judgment  of  God,  no 
fmall  influence  upon  a  great  part  of  the  miferies  and 
calamities  which  have  befallen  us.  For  had  it  not 
been  for  the  countenance  which  popery  had  by  the 
marriages  and  alliances  of  our  princes,  for  two  or 
three  generations  together,  with  thofe  of  that  religi- 
on, it  had  not  probably  had  a  continuance  among 
us  to  this  day.  Which  will,  I  hope,  now  be  a  good 
warning  to  thofe,  who  have  the  authority  to  do  it, 
to  make  effectual  provifion  by  law,  for  the  preven- 

C  c  c  2  ^^^^ 


388  A  thank/giving  fermon, 

S  E  R  M.  tlon  of  the  like  inconvenience  and  mifchief  in  this 
XXXII.       .      r 

nation  for  ever. 

2.  Another  parallel  between  our  cafe  and  that  in 

the  text,   is,  "  that  God  hath  punifn'd  us  lefs  than 

*'  our   iniquities  did  deferve."     And  this  acknow- 

ledsiment  we  liave  as  much  reafon  to  make  for  our 

o 

felves,  as  Ezra  had  to  do  it  in  behalf  of  the  Jews, 
"  Thou  our  God  hafl:  punifh'd  us  lefs  than  our  ini- 
*'  quities  deferve."  Thou,  cur  God,  haft  punifn'd 
us ;  there  is  the  reafon  of  fo  much  mercy  and  miti- 
gation. It  is  God,  and  not  man,  with  whom  we 
have  to  do  ;  and  therefore  it  is,  that  we  "  the  chil- 
*'  dren  of  men  are  not  confumed."  And  it  is  our 
God  like  wife,  to  whom  we  have  a  more  peculiar 
relation,  and  w^ith  whom,  by  virtue  of  our  profef- 
fion  of  chrifcianity,  v/e  are  in  covenant:  thou  our 
God  haft  punifh'd  us  \t{^  than  our  iniquities  de- 
ferve. He  might  juftly  have  "  pour'd  forth  all  his 
*'  wrath,  and  have  made  his  jealoufy  to  have  fmok'd 
*'  againft  us,  and  have  blotted  out  the  remembrance 
*'  of  us  from  under  heaven :  he  might  have  given 
*«  us  up  to  the  will  of  our  enemies,  and  into  the 
*'  hands  of  thofe  whofe  tender  mercies  are  cruelty  :  '* 
he  might  have  brought  us  into  the  net  which  they 
had  fpread  for  us,  and  have  laid  a  terrible  load  of 
afHi6lion  upon  our  loins,  and  fuffer'd  infolent  men 
to  ride  over,  our  heads,  and  them  that  hated  us  with  a 
perfe6l  hatred,  to  have  had  the  rule  over  us :  but  he 
was  graciouily  pleas'd  "  to  remember  mercy  in  the 
««  midft  of  judgment,  and  to  repent  himfelf  for  his 
«'  fervants,  when  he  faw  that  their  power  was  gone," 
^n4  that  things  were  come  to  that  extremity,  that 
we  were  in  all  humane  probability  utterly  unable  to 
have  wrought  out  our  own  deliverance.  3.  The 


A  thanhfghlng  fennon,  3^9 

q.  The  laft  parallel  between  our  cafe,  and  that  in  SE  R.  M. 
the  text,  is  the  great  and  wonderful  deliverance  t^'^'^'^-O 
which  God  hath  wrought  for  us.  And  whilfl  I  am 
ipeaking  of  this,  "  God  is  my  witncf?:,  whom  I 
"  ferve  in  the  gofpel  of  his  Son,"  that  I  do  not  fay- 
one  word  upon  this  occafion  in  flattery  to  men,  but 
in  true  thank fulnefs  to  almighty  God,  and  conflrain'd 
thereto  from  a  jufc  fenfe  of  his  great  mercy  to  us  all, 
in  this  marvellous  deliverance,  in  this  mighty  falva- 
tion  which  he  wrought  for  us.  So  that  we  may  fay 
with  Ezra,  "  Since  thou  our  God  haft  given  us  fuch 
"  a  deliverance  as  this:"  fo  great,  that  we  know 
not  how  to  compare  it  with  any  thing  but  itfdf. 
God  hath  given  us  this  deliverance.  And  therefore, 
"  Not  unto  us,  O  Lord,  not  unto  us,  but  to  thy 
*'  name  te  the  praife."  For  thou  knoweil,  and  we 
are  confcious  to  ourfelves,  that  we  did  in  no  wile 
deferve  it,  but  quite  the  contrary.  God  hath  given 
it,  and  it  ought  to  be  fo  much  the  welcomer  to  us, 
for  coming  from  fuch  a  hand.  It  is  the  Lord's  do- 
ing, and  therefore  ought  to  be  the  more  marvellous 
in  our  eyes.  It  is  a  deliverance  full  of  mercy,  and 
I  had  almoil  fiid,  full  of  miracle.  The  finger  of 
God  was  vifibly  in  it ;  and  there  are  plain  fignatures 
and  charafters  upon  it,  of  a  m.ore  immediate  di- 
vine interpofition.  And  if  we  will  not  wifely  confi- 
der  the  Lord's  doing,  we  have  reafon  to  Ifand  in 
awe  of  that  threatning  of  his,  "  Becaufe  they  rQ-^^^ 
*'  gard  not  the  works  of  the  Lord,  nor  the  opera- xxviii.  5. 
"  tion  of  his  hands,  he  fhall  deflroy  them,  and  not 
^'  build  them  up." 

It  was  a  wonderful  deliverance  indeed,  if  we  confider 
all  the  circumftances  of  it ;  the  greatnefs  of  itj  and 

the 


390  A  thank fghing  fermon, 

S  E  R  M.  the  firanp;eners  of  the  means  whereby  it  was  broudit 
,  _  _L\  about  \  and  the  luadennefs  and  eafinefs  of  it. 

The  greatnefs  of  it;  it  was  a  great  deliverance, 
from  the  greateft  fears,  and  from  the  greateft  dan- 
gers; the  apparent  and  imminent  danger  of  the  fad- 
deft  thraldom  and  bondage,  civil  and  fpiritual ;  both 
of  foul  and  body. 

And  it  was  brought  about  in  a  very  extraordmary 
manner,  and  by  very  ftrange  means:  whether  we 
confider  the  greatnefs  and  difncuky  of  the  enterprlfe; 
or  the  clofenefs  and  fecrecy  of  the  defign,  which  muft 
of  necefTity  be  communicated  at  leaft  to  the  chief  of 
thofe  who  were  to  afTift  and  engage  in  it :  efpecially 
the  ftates  of  the  United  Provinces,  who  were  then  in 
fo  much  danger  themfelves,  and  wanted  more  than 
their  ov/n  forces  for  their  own  defence  ar;d  fecurity : 
a  kindnefs  never  to  be  forgotten  by  the  Engiifh  na- 
tion. And  befides  all  this,  the  difficulties  and  dif- 
appointments  which  happen'd,  after  the  defign  was 
open  and  manifeft,  from  the  uncertainties  of  wind 
and  weather,  and  many  other  accidents  impoffible 
to  be  forefeen  and  prevented.  And  yet  in  conclufion 
a  ftrange  concurrence  of  all  things,  on  all  fides,  to 
bring  the  thing  which  the  providence  of  God  in- 
tended to  a  happy  iftlie  and  efi^d. 

And  we  muft  not  here  forget  the  many  worthies 
of  our  nation,  who  did  fo  generoufly  run  all  hazards 
of  life  and  fortune,  for  the  prefervation  of  our  reli- 
gion, and  the  afierting  of' our  ancient  laws  and  li- 
berties. 

Thefe  are  all  ftrange  and  unufual  means;  but, 
which  is  ftranger  yet,  the  very  counfels  and  me- 
thods of  our  enemies  did  prepare  the  way  for  all 

this. 


A  thankfgtvtng  Jermon.  391 

this,  and  perhaps  more  effeaually,  than  any  coun-"5^E  R  M. 
lei  and  contrivance  of  our  own  could  have  done  J 
it.  For  even  the  jefuits,  thofe  formal  politicians  by 
book  and  rule,  without  any  confideration  or  true 
knowledge  of  the  temper,  and  intcrell,  and  other 
circumftances  of  the  people  they  were  defigning  up- 
on, and  had  to  deal  withal  5  and  indeed  without  any 
care  to  know  them :  i  fay,  the  jefuits,  who  for  fo 
long  a  time,  and  for  fo  little  reafon,  have  affected 
the  reputation  of  the  deeped  and  craftiefl  ftatefmen 
in  the  world,  have  upon  this  great  occafion,  and 
•  when  their  whole  kingdom  of  darknefs  lay  at  flake, 
by  a  more  than  ordinary  infatuation  and  blindnefs,  fo 
outwitted  and  over-reach'd  themfelves  in  their  own 
counfels,  that  they  have  really  contributed  as  much, 
or  more,  to  our  deliverance  from  the  deftrudion 
which  they  had  defigned  to  bring  upon  us,  than  all 
our  wifeft  and  beft  friends  could  have  done. 

And  then  if  we  confider  further,  how  fudden  and 
furprizing  it  was,  fo  that  we  could  hardly  believe  it 
when  it  was  accomplifn'd  -,  and  like  the  children  of 
Ifrael,  "  when  the  Lord  turned  again  the  captivity 
«  of  Zion,  we  were  like  them  that  dream."  When 
ail  things  were  driving  on  furiouOy,  and  in  great 
hade,  then  God  gave  an  unexpeded  check  to  the 
defigns  of  men,  and  ftopp'd  them  in  their  full  ca- 
reer. Who  among  us  could  have  imagin'd,  but  a 
few  months  ago,  fo  happy  and  fo  fpeedy  an  end  of 
our  fears  and  troubles  ?  God  hath  at  once  fcatter'd 
all  our  fears,  and  outdone  all  our  hopes  by  the  great- 
nefs  and  fuddennefs  of  our  deliverance.  "  O  that 
«  men  would  praife  the  Lord  for  his  goodnefs, 
«  and   for  his  wonderful  worbi  to  the  children  of 


392  A  ihanlzfgivmg  fermon, 

S  F  R  M.  And  Jaflly,  if  we  confider  the  cheapnefs  and  eafi- 
^Xa.U-.^  j,^f^  of  this  dehverance.  All  this  was  done  without 
a  battle,  and  almoft  without  blood.  All  the  danger 
is,  led  we  fliould  loath  it,  and  grow  fick  of  it,  be- 
caufe  it  was  fo  very  eafy.  Had  it  come  upon  harder 
terms,  and  had  we  waded  to  it  through  a  red  fea  of 
blood,  we  would  have  valued  it  more.  But  this  furely 
is  great  wantonnefs,  and  whatever  wc  thinl:  of  ir, 
one  of  the  higheft  provocations  imaginable :  for 
there  can  hardly  be  a  fouler  and  blacker  ingratitude 
towards  almighty  God,  than  to  flight  fo  great  a  de- 
liverance, only  becaufe  it  came  to  us  h  eafiiy,  and 
hath  coll  us  fo  very  cheap, 

I  will  miCntion  but  one  circumflance  more,  which 
may  not  be  altogether  unworthy  our  obfervation. 
That  God  feems  in  this  lad  deliverance,  in  fome  fort 
to  have  united  and  brought  together  all  the  great  de- 
liverances which  he  hath  been  pleas'd  to  work  for 
this  nation  againfl  all  the  remarkable  attem.pts  of 
popery,  from  the  beginning  of  our  reformation. 
Our  wonderful  deliverance  from  the  formidable  Spa- 
nifh  invafion  defign'd  againft  us,  happened  in  the 
year  1580..  And  now  juft  a  hundred  years  after, 
God  was  pleafed  to  bring  about  this  laft:  great  and 
mod  happy  deliverance.  That  horrid  gunpowder 
confpiracy,  without  precedent,  and  without  parallel, 
was  defign'd  to  have  been  executed  upon  the  fifth 
day  of  November ;  the  fame  day  upon  which  his 
highnefs  t\\Q  prince  of  Orange  landed  the  forces  here 
in  England  which  he  brought  hither  for  our  refcue. 
So  that  this  is  a  day  every  v/ay  worthy  to  be  (o" 
lemnly  fet  apart  and  joyfully  celebrated  by  this 
church  and  nation,  throughout  all  generations;  as 

the 


A  thanhfgivhig  fermon.  393 

the  fAttefl of  all  other  to  comprehend,  and  to  put  ns  SE  RM. 
in  mind  to  commemorate  ail  the  great  deliverances  ..^^.^^..^ 
which  God  hath  wrought  for  us,  from  popery,  and 
its    infeparable  companion,    arbitrary  power.     And 
we  may  then  fay  with  the  holy  pfalmift,  "  This  is  the  P^al 
"  Lord's  doing,  it  is  marvellous  in  our  eyes.    This  2?/"' 
.*'  is  the  day  which  the  Lord  hath  made,  we  will 
"  rejoice  and  be  glad  in  it." 

Secondly,  as  the  cafe  in  the  text  is  much  like  ours, 
fo  let  us  take  heed  that  the  doom  and  fentcnce  there 
be  not  fo  too.  "  If  after  all  that  is  come  upon  us 
"  for  our  evil  deeds,  and  for  our  great  trefpafs,  and 
*'  fince  God  has  puniili'd  us  lefs  than  our  iniquities 
"  did  deferve;  fhould  we  again  break  his  command- 
"  ments,  and  join  in  afRnity  with  the  people  of 
*'  thefe  abominations,  would  he  not  be  angry  with 
"  us  'till  he  had  confumed  us,  fo  that  there  fliould 
*'  be  no  remnant  nor  efcaping  ? "  What  could  we 
in  reafon  exped  after  all  this,  but  utter  ruin  and  de«^ 
ftrudlion  ?  We  may  here  apply,  as  St.,  Paul  does, 
God's  dealing  with  the  people  of  Ifrael,  to  the 
times  of  the  gofpel ;  for  he  fpeaks  of  it  as  an  exam- 
ple and  admonition  to  all  ages  to  the  end  of  the 
world.  *'  Now  thefe  things,  fays  the  apoflle,  were  i  Cor.  x; 
"  our  examples,  to  the  intent  we  fhould  not  luft   '  7;,^* 

i^       '  I  o,    1 1 , 

*'  after  evil  things,  as  they  alfo  lulled  ;  neither  be  ye 
*'  idolaters,  as  were  fome  of  them,  &c.  neither  \tX. 
*'  us  tempt  Christ,  as  fome  of  them  alfo  tempts 
**  ed,  and  were  deflroyed  of  ferpents."  For  the  ex- 
plication of  this  pafifage  we  mufl  have  recourfe  to  the 
hiftory,  which  gives  this  account  of  it.  "  And  the  peo-  Numb; 
*'  pie  fpake  again  ft  God,  and  againft  Mofes,  where- ^^^'  5'  ^ 
*'  fore  have  ye  brought  us  up  out  of  Egypt,  to  die 
Vol.  IL  D  dd  '^  in 


A  thankfgiving  fermori, 
"  in  the  wildernefs  ?  &c."  ixnpcaching  God  and  his 
fervant  Mofes,  as  if  by  this  dehverance  they  had  put 
them  into  a  much  worfe  condition  than  they  were 
in  when  they  were  in  Egypt.  "  And  the  Lord 
*'  fent  fiery  ferpents  among  the  people,  and  they 
*'  hit  the  people,  and  much  people  of  Ifrael  died.*' 
Bat  how  was  this  a  tempting  of  Christ  ?  "  Nei- 
*'  ther  \ti  us  tempt  Christ,  as  fome  of  them  alfo 
*'  tempted  i'*  that  is,  let  not  us,  now  under  the 
gcfpel,  tempt  our  faviour  and  deliverer,  as  the  If^ 
raehtes  did  theirs,  by  flighting  that  great  deliverance, 
and  by  fpeaking  againft  God,  and  againft  Mofes. 
*'  Neither  murmur  ye,  as  fome  of  them  alfo  mur- 
*'  mured,  and  were  deftroyed  of  the  deftroyer.'* 
And  how  far  this  may  concern  us,  and  all  others,  to 
the  end  of  the  world,  who  Ihall  tempt  Christ, 
the  great  patron  and  deliverer  of  his  church,  and 
murmur  without  caufe,  as  the  Ifraelites  did,  at  the 
deliverance  which  he  works  for  them,  and  againft 
the  inftruments  of  it,  the  apoftle  tells  us  in  the  next 
words :  "  Now  all  thefe  things  happened  unto  them 
*'  for  enfamples,  or  types  ♦,  and  they  are  written  for 
''  our  admonition  upon  whom  the  ends  of  the  world 
''  are  come."  Let  us  not  tempt  Christ  -,  who  is 
now  beginning  the  glorious  deliverance  of  his  church 
from  the  tyranny  of  antichrift. 

To  draw  now  towards  a  conclufion  ;  I  will  compre- 
hend my  advice  to  you  upon  the  whole  matter,  in  as 
few  words  as  I  can. 

Let  us  ufe  this  great  deliverance  which  God  hath 
given  us,  [fuch  a  deliverance  as  this]  from  our  ene- 
mies, and  from  the  hand  of  all  that  hate  us ;  not 
by  ufing  them  as  they  would  have  done  us,  had  we 

fallen 


A  thanlifgivlng  fermon.  39^ 

fallen  under  their  power,  with  great  infolence  and  S  E  R  M. 
rage,  and  cruelty;  but  with  great  moderation  and  ' 
clemency,  making  as  few  examples  of  feverity  as 
will  be  confident  with  our  future  fecurity  from  the 
like  attempts  upon  our  religion  and  laws :  and  even 
in  the  execution  of  juftice  upon  the  greatcfl  offen- 
ders, \t\.  us  not  give  fo  much  countenance  to  the  ill 
examples  which  have  been  fet  of  extravagant  fines  and 
punifhments,  as  to  imitate  thofe  patterns  which  with 
fo  much  reafon  we  abhor  5  no,  not  in  the  puniflimenc 
of  the  authors  of  them. 

And  \t\.  us  endeavour,  for  once,  to  be  fo  wife,  as 
not  to  forfeit  the  fruits  of  this  deliverance,  and  to 
hinder  ourfelves  of  the  benefit  and  advantage  of  it, 
by  breaches  and  divifions  among  ourfelves.  As  we 
have  no  reafon  to  defire  it,  fo  I  think  we  can  hardly 
ever  hope  to  underftand  popery  better,  and  the  cruel 
defigns  of  it,  than  we  do  already,  both  from  the 
long  trial  and  experience  which  we  have  had  of  it 
in  this  nation,  and  likewife  from  that  difmal  and 
horrid  view  which  hath  of  late  been  given  us  of 
the  true  fpirit  and  temper  of  it  in  one  of  our  neigh- 
bour nations,  which  hath  long  pretended  to  the  pro- 
feffion  of  the  moft  refinM  and  moderate  popery  in 
the  worlds  but  hath  now  at  lall  fhewed  itfelf  in  its 
true  colours,  and  in  the  perfection  of  a  perfecuting 
fpirit-,  and  have  therein  given  us  a  mofl  fad  and  de- 
plorable inftance  of  a  religion  corrupted  and  degene- 
rated into  that  which,  if  it  be  pofTible,  is  v/orfe  thaii 
none. 

And  fince,  by  the  undefcrved  mercy  of  God  to 

us,  we  have,  upon  fuch  eafy  terms   in   comparifon, 

efcap'd  their  rage  and  fury  ;  let  us  now  at  length  re- 

D  d  d  2  folve. 


396  A  thankfgrcifig  fermon. 

SERM.  folve,  never  to  join  in  afTinity  with  i\\z  people  of 
■_  1^  \  thefe  abominations;  fince  our  alliances  with  them  by 
marriage  have  had  fo  fatal  an  inPmence,  both  upon 
the  publick  peace  and  tranquillity  of  the  nation,  and 
upon  the  welfare  alio  of  private  families.  I  have 
known  many  inftances  of  this  kind,  but  hardly  ever 
yet  faw  one  that  proved  happy ;  but  a  great  many 
that  have  been  pernicious  and  ruinous  to  thofe  pro- 
teflant  families  in  which  fuch  unequal,  and,  as  I 
think,  unlawful  matches  have  been  made  :  not  that 
fuch  marriages  are  void  in  themfelves,  but  yet  for  all 
that  finful  j  becaufe  of  the  apparent  danger  and 
temptation  to  which  thofe  of  our  church  and  reli- 
gion that  enter  into  them  do  evidently  expofe  them- 
felves, of  being  feduc'd  from  their  religion  \  not  by 
the  good  arguments  which  the  other  can  offer  to  that 
purpofe,  but  by  the  ill  arts  which  they  have  the  con- 
fidence and  the  confcience  to  make  ufe  of  in  the  ma- 
king of  profelytes. 

And  let  us  pay  our  mofl  hearty  and  thankful  ac- 
knowledgments, chiefly  and  in  the  firft  place  to  al- 
mighty God,  theblefled  author  of  this  deliverance; 
and  under  him,  to  that  happy  inftrument,  whom 
God  hath  been  pleafed,  in  great  pity  to  this  finful 
and  unworthy  nation,  to  raife  up  on  purpofe  for  it, 
his  highnefs  the  prince  of  Orange ;  and  to  that  end 
did  in  his  all-wife  providence  lay  the  foundation  of  our 
then  future  deliverance,  in  that  aufpicious  match 
which  was  concluded  here  in  England  about  eleven 
years  ago,  between  this  renowned  prince  and  our  ex- 
cellent princels. 

This  is  that  mod  illuflrious  houfe  of  Nafiau  and 
Orange,  which  God  hath  fo  highly  honoured  above 


A  ihanlfgiving  fermon.  397 

all  the  families  of  the  earth,  to  give  a  check  to  the  S  E  R  M. 
two  great  afpiring  monarchies  of  the  weft,  and  bold  ^^^^^• 
attempters  upon  the  liberties  of  Europe  :  to  the  one, 
in  the  lad  age;  and  to  the  other,  in  the  prefent. 
As  if  the  princes  of  this  valiant  and  vidlorious 
line  had  been  of  the  race  of  Hercules,  born  to 
refcue  mankind  from  opprefllon,  and  to  quell  mon- 
fters. 

And  laftly,  let  us  befeech  almighty  God,  all 
whofe  ways  and  works  are  perfedl,  that  he  would  efla- 
blifh  that  which  he  hath  wrought,  and  Hill  carry  it  on 
to  further  and  greater  perfedion.  V\^hich  after  fuch 
an  carneft  of  his  favour  and  good-will  to  us,  we  have 
no  reafon  to  doubt  but  that  he  is  ready  to  do  for  us; 
if  by  our  own  ficklenefs  and  inconftancy,  difgufting 
the  deliverance  now  it  is  come,  which  we  fo  earneft- 
ly  defired  before  it  came ;  if  by  our  ungrateful  mur- 
murings  and  difcontents,  by  our  own  foolifh  heats 
and  animofities,  kindled  and  carried  on  by  the  ill  de- 
figns  of  fome,  working  upon  the  tendernels  and 
fcruples  of  others,  under  the  fpecious  pretences  of 
confcience  and  loyalty :  I  fay,  if  by  fome  or  all  thele 
ways  we  do  not  refufe  the  blefling  which  God  now 
offers,  and  defeat  and  fruftrate  the  merciful  defign  of 
this  wonderful  revolution;  God  will  ftill  "  rejoice 
''  over  us,  to  do  us  good,  and  think  thoughts  of 
*^  peace  towards  us,  thoughts  of  good,  and  not  of 
*'  evil,  to  give  us  an  expedled  end  "  of  our  long 
troubles  and  confufions.  But  if  we  will  "  not  know, 
"  in  this  our  day,  the  things  which  belong  to  our 
''  peace,"  our  deftruc5lion  will  then  be  of  ourfelves  5 
and  there  will  be  no  need  that  God  fhould  be  angry 
with  usj  for  we  Ihall  be  undone  by  our  own  dif- 
ferences 


2^8  A  thank fgrotng  fermon. 

^  ferences  and  quarrels  about  the  way  and  means  of 
our  being  faved  ;  and  fo  be  angry  with  one  another 
till  we  be  confumed.  Which  God,  of  his  infinite 
o-oodnefs,  give  us  all  the  grace  and  wifdom  to  pre- 
vent:  for  his  mercies  fake,  in  Jesus  Cf^rist,  to 
whom,  with  thee,  O  Father,  and  the  holy 
Ghost,  be  all  honour  and  glory,  thankfgiving  and 
praife,  both  now  and  ever.     Amen. 


SERMON   XXXIII. 

Of  forgivenefs  of  injuries,   and  againft 
revenge. 

Preached  before  the  Qjj  e  e  n  at  Whitehall, 
March  8,  j681. 


MATTHEW  V.  44. 

But  I  fay  unto  you^  love  your  enemies y  hlefs  them  that 
curfe  you,  do  good  to  them  that  hate  you,  pray  for 
them  that  defpitefully  ufe  you,  and  perfe cute  you, 

SERM.  ^T"^HE  gofpel  hath 'promiifed   forgivenefs   of 
ti_„^  -^       ■         fins  to  us  upon  two  conditions:    that  we 
•^       fincerely  repent  of  the  fins  wiiich  we  have 
committed  againft  God  ;  and,  that  we  heartily  for- 
give to  men  the  injuries  and  offences  which  they  have 
been  guilty  of  towards  us 

I  fnall  at  this  time,  by  God's  afTiftance,  treat  of  the 
latter  of  thefe,  from  the  words  which  I  have  recited  to 

yous 


Of  forghenefs  ofhyuries^  &c.  399 

you;  which  are  part  of  our  Saviour's  excellent  SERM. 
lermon  upon  the  mount.  In  which  he  doth  not^^^j,^^; 
only  explain,  but  enlarge  and  perfed  the  moral  and 
natural  law,  by  adding  to  it  precepts  and  prohibiti- 
ons of  greater  perfedion,  than  either  the  law  of 
Mofes  or  the  natural  law,  in  their  largefl  extent,  did 
contain. 

He  forbids  polygamy,  and  divorce  except  only  in 
the  cafe  of  adultery  ;  and  likewife  revenge  •,  none  of 
which  were  either  forbidden  by  the  law  of  nature, 
or  by  the  law  which  was  given  by  Mofes. 

And  to  thefe  prohibitions  our  blelTed  Saviour 
adds  feveral  new  precepts  of  greater  perfedlion  than 
any  laws  that  were  extant  before.  "  But  I  fay  unto 
^'  you,  love  your  enemies."  Thejewifh  law  com- 
manded them  to  love  their  neighbours,  meaning 
their  brethren  and  thofe  of  their  own  nation  :  but 
our  Saviour,  by  commanding  us  to  love  our  ene- 
mies, hath  in  the  moil  emphatical  manner  that  can 
be  commanded  us  to  love  all  men.  For  if  any  were 
to  be  excluded  from  our  charity,  none  fo  hkely 
to  be  fo  as  our  enemies.  So  that  after  a  command 
to  love  our  enemies  it  was  ncedlefs  to  name  any 
others ;  becaufe  men  are  naturally  apt  to  love~  thofc 
that  love  them. 

*'  I  fay  unto  you,  love  your  enemies  -,  "  here  the 
inward  affe6lion  is  required.  ''  Blefs  them  that  curfe 
"  you ;"  here  outward  civility  and  affability  are  re- 
quired, in  oppofition  to  rude  and  uncivil  language  •, 
for  fo  bleiTmg  and  curfing  do  in  fcripturc  frequently 
fignify.  "  Do  good  to  them  that  hate  you,  *'  here 
real  ads  of  kindnefs  are  commanded  to  be  done  by 
us  to  our    bittereft    and   moil   malicious   enemies. 

"  Pray 


V  V  y 


4c o  Of  forghenefs  of  injuries, 

SERM."  Pray  for  them  that  defpitefuny  ufe  you,  and  per- 

"^ \ "  fecute  you.'*  Thefe  are  the  highefl  expreflions  of 

enmity  that  can  be,  calumny  and  cruelty ;  and  yet 
we  are  commanded  to  pray  for  thofe  that  touch  us 
in  thefe  two  tenderefi:  points  of  all  other,  our  repu- 
tation and  our  life.  And  to  fecure  the  fincerity  of 
our  charity  towards  our  enemies,  we  are  requir'd  to 
exprefs  it  by  our  hearty  prayers  to  God  for  them: 
to  God,  I  fay,  before  whom  it  is  both  impious  and 
dangerous  to  difTemble  j  and  from  whom  we  can 
expedt  no  mercy  for  our  {dw^%^  if  with  feigned  lips 
we  beg  it  of  him  for  others. 

You  fee  what  is  the  duty  here  required  ;  that  we 
bear  a  fincere  affcclion  to  our  molt  malicious  and 
implacable  enemies,  and  be  ready  upon  occafion  to 
give  real  teilimony  of  it. 

And  becaufe  this  may  feem  a  hard  duty,  and  not 
fo  eafy  to  be  reconciled  either  to  our  inclination  or 
our  reafon  \  I  fhall  endeavour  to  fhew,  that  this  law 
is  not  only  reafbnable,  but  much  more  perfed  and 
excellent,  and  the  praftice  of  it  more  eafy  and  de- 
lightful, and  upon  all  accounts  much  more  for  our 
benefit  and  advantage,  than  the  contrary.  And  that 
upon  four  confiderations ;  which  I  fliall  endeavour  to 
reprefent  with  their  juft  advantage,  and  fo  as  may,  I 
hope,  not  only  convince  our  judgment  of  the  rea- 
fonablenefs  of  this  precept,  but  likewife  bend  and 
fway  our  wills  to  the  obedience  and  praflice  of  it. 

I.  If  we  confider  the  nature  of  the  a6l  here  requi- 
red, which  is  to  love  ;  which,  when  it  is  not  a  mere 
palTion,  but  under  the  government  of  our  reafon,  is 
the  moft  natural,  and  eafy,  and  delightful  of  all  the  af- 
fcdlions  which  God  hath  planted  in  humane  nature : 

whereas 


and  againji  revenge,  40  r 

v/hereas  ill-will,  and  hatred,  and  revenQ;e,  are  very  SR  RM. 
troublefome  and  vexatious  paffions.  Both  the  devi-  /  '  'X«^ 
fi ng  of  mi fchief,  and  the  accompli fh men t  of  it,  and 
the  refledion  upon  it  afterwards,  are  all  imenfy  ;  and 
the  confequences  of  it  many  times  pernicious  to  our 
felves.  The  very  defign  of  revenge  is  troubleibme, 
and  puts  the  fpirits  into  an  unnatural  fermentation 
and  tumult.  The  man  that  meditates  it  is  ahvays  rel- 
iefs, his  very  foul  is  Itung,  fvvells  and  boils,  is  in  pain 
and  anguiih,  hath  no  eafe,  no  enjoyment  of  it  k\t 
fo  long  as  this  palTion  reigns.  The  execution  of  it 
may  perhaps  be  attended  with  fome  prefent  pleafure, 
but  that  pleafure  is  unreafonable  and  brutiili,  mo- 
mentary and  flicrt,  like  a  flafh  of  lightning,  v/hich 
vanifheth  in  the  tvvinkling  of  an  eye. 

It  is  commonly  faid  that  revenge  is  fweer,  but  to 
a  calm  and  condderate  mind  patience  and  forgive- 
nefs  are  fweeter,  and  do  aiTord  a  much  more  ratio- 
nal and  folid  and  durable  pleafure  than  revenge. 
The  monuments  of  our  mercy  and  goodnels  are  a  far 
more  pleafing  and  delightful  fpedlacle,  than  cur 
rage  and  cruelty.  And  no  fort  of  thought  docs  ufu- 
ally  haunt  men  with  more  terror,  than  the  reflection 
upon  what  they  have  done  in  the  way  of  revenge. 

Befides  that  the  confequences  of  this  palilon  do 
commonly  prove  very  prejudicial  to  cur  felves.  For 
the  revenge  of  one  injury  doth  naturally  draw  on 
more,  and  will  oblige  us  for  the  fame  reafon  to  a 
new  revengeof  them  j  and  this  brings  on  a  perpetual 
and  endlefs  circulation  of  injuries  and  revenges. 
So  that  whoever  fecks  revenge  upon  another,  doth 
commonly  in  the  ilTue  take  it  upon  himfelf;  and 
whilil  he  thinks  to  transfer  the  injury  which  he  hath 

Vol.  II.  E  e  e  rcccrv'd 


402  Offorgivenefs  of  injuries^ 

S  E  R  Al.  recelv'd  upon  him  that  did  it,  he  doubles  it  upon 
^'''-  himfdf. 

Such  and  fo  great  are  the  troubles  and  inconveni- 
ences of  a  malicious  and  revengeful  temper  :  "  but 
"  there  is  no  torment  in  love,"  as  St.  John  excel- 
lendy  lays.  To  be  kindly  affed:ion'd  towards  all,  to 
bear  no  grudge  or  ill-will,  no  thought  of  difpleafure 
or  revenge  towards  any  man,  is  the  eaficft  poflure, 
the  moil  picafant  Hate  of  the  mind.  So  that  if  not 
for  their  Hikes,  yet  for  our  own,  we  fliould  "  love 
"  our  enemies,  and  do  good  to  them  that  hate  us  ;'* 
becaufc  to  be  thus  affeded  towards  all  men,  is  as  great 
a  kindnefs  to  our  felves,  as  it  is  charity  to  others. 

II.  If  we  confidcr  the  qualification  of  the  objedl; 
it  is  our  enemy  v/hom  we  are  requir'd  to  love.  In 
v/hom,  though  there  be  fomcthing  that  is  juftly  dif- 
guRful,  yet  there  is  fomething  alfo  that  is  lovely  \ 
and  if  we  perfifl:  in  our  kindnefs  to  him,  notwith- 
fianding  his  enmity  to  us,  the  enmity  may  wear  off, 
and  perhaps  at  length  be  chang'd  into  a  finccrc  and 
firm  friendlhip. 

'Tis  true  indeed,  that  v/ith  regard  to  our  felves,  per- 
fonal  enmity  tov/ards  us  is  one  of  the  moft  inconve- 
nient qualities  that  a  man  can  have,  but  not  there- 
fore the  worft  in  it  felf.  If  we  could  be  impartial  and 
lay  afide  prejudice,  we  might  perhaps  difccrn  feve- 
ral  very  lovely  qualides  in  him  who  hates  us :  and 
virtue  is  to  be  ov/n'd,  and  prais'd,  and  lov'd,  even  in 
an  enemy.  And  perhaps  his  enmity  towards  us  is 
not  fo  great  and  inexcufable  a  fault,  as  we  apprehend ; 
lie  is  not  perhaps  our  enemy  to  that  degree,  nor  fo 
altogether  without  caufe,  as  we  imagine  j  pofTibly  we 
haveprovok'd  him,  or  by  his  own  mifcake,  or  through 

the 


roni\ 


and  againji  revenge,  /03 

the  malicious  reprefentation  of  others  he  may  be  In-  S  E  R  M. 
duc'd  to  think  fo  :  and  are  not  we  our  felves  liable  C-..^^— ^* 
to  the  like  mifapprehenfions  concerning  others,  of 
which  we  are  many  times  afterwards  convinc'd  and 
afham'd  ?  and  fo  may  he,  and  then  his  enmity  will 
ceafe,  if  we  will  but  have  a  litde  patience  v/ith  him, 
as  we  always  wifh  in  the  like  cafe  that  others  would 
have  with  us. 

At  the  worfc,  though  never  fo  fore  and  caufelefs  an  Dr.  Bar- 
enemy,  though  never  fo  bad  a  man,  yet  he  is  a  man, 
and  as  fuch,  hath  fomething  in  him  which  the  blinded 
paffion  cannot  deny  to  be  good  and  amiable.  He 
hath  the  fame  nature  with  our  felves,  which  we  can- 
not hate,  or  defpife,  without  hatred  and  contempt  of 
our  felves.  Let  a  man's  faults  be  what  they  will, 
they  do  not  deHroy  his  nature  and  make  him  ceafe  to 
be  a  man. 

The  two  great  foundations  of  love  are  relation  and 
likenefs.  "  No  one  thing,  fays  Tully,  is  fo  like,  fo 
*'  equal  to  another,  as  one  man  is  to  another."  What 
difference  focver  there  may  be  between  us  and  ano- 
ther man,  yea,  though  he  be  our  enemy,  yet  he  is 
Hill  like  us  in  the  main ;  and  perhaps  but  too  like 
us  in  that  for  which  we  find  fo  much  fault  with  him, 
a  pronenefs  to  offer  affronts  and  injuries. 

And  there  is  an  effential  relation,  as  well  as  likenefs, 
between  one  man  and  another,  which  nothing  can  ever 
diflblve,  becaufe  it  is  founded  in  that  v/hich  no  man 
can  divefl  himfelf  of,  in  humane  nature.  So  far  is  it 
from  being  true,  which  Mr.  Hobbes  afferts  as  the  fun- 
damental principle  of  his  politicks,  "  That  men  are 
**  naturally  in  a  Hate  of  war  and  enmity  with  one 
*'  another,"  that  the  contrary  principle,  laid  down  by 

E  e  e  ^  a 


404.  Gfforghenefs  of  injuries ^ 

SRRM.  a  much  deeper  and  wifer  man,  I  mean  ArKlotlej  is 
"mod  certainly  true,  "  that  men  are  naturally  akin 
"  and  friends  to  each  other."  Some  unhappy  acci- 
dents and  occafions  may  make  men  enemies,  but  na- 
turally every  man  is  a  friend  to  another  :  and  that  is 
the  fureil  and  mod  unalterable  reafon  of  things  which 
is  founded  in  nature,  not  that  which  fprings  from 
mutable  accidents  and  occafions.  So  that  whoever 
is  recommended  to  us  under  the  notion  of  a  man, 
cu'^ht  not  to  be  look'd  upon  by  us,  and  treated  as  an 
enemy. 

Confider  farther,  that  an  enemy,  even  whilft  he  is 
cxercifing  his  enmity  towards  us,  may  do  us  many 
a6ls  of  real  advantage  -,  which,  though  they  do  not 
proceed  from  kindneis,  yet  in  truth  arc  benefits.  The 
malicious  cenfures  of  our  enemies,  if  we  make  a  right 
ufe  of  them,  may  prove  of  greater  advantage  to  us, 
than  the  civilities  of  our  bcft  friends.  We  can  eafily  af- 
ford, nay  the  wifefhof  men  can  hardly  forbear,  to  love 
a  flatterer,  to  embrace  him,  and  to  take  him  into  our 
bofom  ;  and  yet  an  open  enemy  is  a  thoufand  times 
better  and  Ms  dangerous  than  he.  It  is  good  for 
many  men  that  they  have  had  enemies,  v.'ho  have 
many  times  been  to  them  the  happy  occafion  of  re- 
forming thofc  faults,  which  none  but  an  enemy 
would  have  taken  the  freedom,  I  had  almofl  faid, 
would  have  had  the  friendfliip  to  have  told  them  of. 

But  what  if  after  all,  this  enemy  of  ours,  this  ha- 
ted man,  prove  to  be  one  of  our  beft  friends  ^  For 
fo  reconciled  enemies  ufually  are.  And  if  any  thing 
will  reconcile  an  enemy,  love  and  kindnefs  will. 
An  obftinate  goodnefs  is  apt  to  conquer  even  the 
worfi  of  men.     It  is  hardly  in  the  nature  of  man  to 

withftand 


and  againfl  revenge.  40  ij 

withftand  the  kindnefs  of  one  whom,  by  all  that  wc  S  E  R  M. 
could  do,  we  have  not  been  able  to  make  our  enemy,  .^^j"^; 
After  a  man  hath  done  the  greatefl  injury  to  another, 
not  only  to  find  no  revenge  following  upon  it,  but  the 
firfl:  opportunity  taken  to  oblige  him,  is  fo  very  fur- 
prizing,  that  it  can  hardly  fliil  to  gain  upon  the  worft 
difpofition,  and  to  melt  down  the  hardefi:  temper.  So 
that  we  fhould  love  our  enemies,  if  not  for  v/hat  they 
are  at  prefent,  yet  for  what  they  may  be,  and  in  hope 
that  by  thefe  m.eans  they  may  in  time  become  our 
friends. 

III.  If  we  confider  the  excellency  and  generofity  of 
the  thing  itfelf.  "  To  love  our  enemies,  and  to  do 
"  good  to  them  that  hate  us,'*  is  the  perfedion  of 
goodnefs,  and  the  advancement  of  it  to  its  higheft 
pitch.  It  is  the  moll  excellent  and  perfe6l  ad:  of  the 
greatelt  and  moll  perfecl  of  all  graces  and  virtues,  I 
mean  charity  ;  which  by  St.  Paul  is  calPd  "  the  bond 
"  of  perfec1:ion;"  and  by  St,  James,  "  the  perfeft 
"  and  the  royal  law  :  "  becaufe  it  infpires  men  with 
a  greatnefs  of  mind  fit  for  kings  and  princes,  in 
whom  nothing  is  more  admirable  than  a  generous 
goodnefs  and  clemency,  even  towards  great  enemies 
and  offenders,  fo  far  as  is  confiflent  with  the  publick 
good.  Love  for  love  is  but  juflice  and  gratitude ;  love 
for  no  love  is  favour  and  kindnefs ;  but  love  for  hatred 
and  enmity  is  a  moll  divine  temper,  a  lleddy  and  im- 
mutable goodnefs  that  is  not  to  be  flirr'd  by  provoca- 
tion, and  fo  far  from  being  conquer'd  that  it  is  ra- 
ther confirm'd  by  its  contrary  :  for  if  hatred  and  en- 
mity do  not  extinguifh  love,  what  can .?  This  is  good- 
nefs indeed;  not  only  without  merit  and  obligation, 
without  invitation  or  motive  >  but  againfl  all  reafon- 

able 


40 6  Of  forghejiefs  of  injuries^ 

SE  R  M.  able  expedlation,  and  in  defpite  of  all  temptation  and 
^J,^^^^^  provocation  to  the  contrary. 

So  that  to  return  good  for  evil,  and  love  for  hatred, 

is  one  of  the  greatefl  arguments  of  a  great  mind,  and 

of  deep  wifdom  and  confideration:  for  naturally  our 

Tirfl  inclinations  and  thoughts  towards  our  enemies, arc 

full  of  anger  and  revenge;  but  our  fecond  and  wilef 

thoughts  will  tell  us,  that  forgivenefs  is  much  more 

generous  than  revenge.   And  a  more  glorious  vidory 

cannot  be  gain'd  over  another  man  than  this,  that 

when  the  injury  began  on  his  part,  the  kindnefs  fhould 

begin  on  ours.  If  both  the  ways  were  equally  in  our 

power,  yet  it  is  a  much  more  defirable  conqueft  to 

overcome  evil  with  good,  than  with  evil.     By  this, 

we  can  only  conquer  our  enemy,  and  miay  perhaps 

fail  in  that ;  but  by  the  other,  we  certainly  conquer 

ourfclves,  and  perhaps  our  enemy  too  \   overcoming 

him  in  the  nobleil  manner,  and  walking  him  gently 

'till  he  be  cool,  and  v/ithout  force  effe6lually  fubdu- 

Dr.  Bar-  i^g  him  to  be  our  friend.     This,  as  one  fitly  com- 

rffw.        pares  it,  is  like  a  great  and  wife  general,  by  art  and 

flratagem,  by  meer  dint  of  skill  and  condud,  by 

patience  and  wife  delay ;    without  ever  ftriking  a 

llroke,  or  fhedding  one  drop  of  blood,  to  vanquifh 

an  enemy,  and  to  make  an  end  of  the  war  without 

ever  putting  it  to  the  hazard  of  a  battle. 

Revenge  is  blind  and  rafli,  and  does  always  pro- 
ceed from  impotency  and  weaknefs  of  mind.  'Tis 
anger  that  fpurs  men  on  to  it ;  and  anger  is  certain- 
ly one  of  the  fooliflieft  pafTions  of  humane  nature, 
and  v/hich  commonly  betrays  men  to  the  moll  im- 
prudent and  unreafonable  things.  So  Solomon  ob- 
Prov.xlv.  ferves,  "  He  that  is  hafty  of  Ipirit  exalteth  ioWyi  " 
29-  and 


:ov.  XVI » 


a72d  agaiiifi  revenge.  407 

and  again,  "  Anger  refteth  in  the  bofom  of  fools:"  SE  RM, 
but  to  be  able  to  bear  provocation,  is  an  argument  v^^jl^^^ 
of  great  wifdom;   and  to   forgive  it,   of  a  great  Eel.  vii. 
mind:  fo  the  fame  wife  man  teJls  us,  "  He  that  is^^.^ 
"  flow  to  anger  is  better  than  the  mighty,  and  he  32. 
"  that  ruleth  his  fpirit,  than  he  that  taketh  a  city." 
It  is  a  greater  thing,  in  cafe  of  great  provocation, 
to  calm,  a  man's  own  ipirit,  than  to  ftorm  and  take 
a  flrong  city. 

V/hereas  the  angry  man  lofeth  and  lets  fall  the 
government  of  himfclf,  and  lays  the  reins  upon  the 
neck  of  the  wild  beaft,  his  own  brutifh  appetite  and 
paflion ;  which  hurries  him  on  firfc  to  revenge,  and 
then  to  repentance  for  the  folly  which  he  hath  been 
guilty  of  in  gratifying  fo  unreafonable  a  pafTion.  For 
it  very  feldom  happens  that  any  man  executes  an  a6t 
of  revenge,  but  the  very  next  moment  afcer  he  hath 
done  it,  he  is  forry  for  it,  and  wiiheth  he  had  not 
done  it :  v/hereas  patience  and  forgivenefs  do  v/ifely 
prevent  both  the  mifchief  to  others,  and  the  trouble 
to  ourfelves,    which  is  ufually  confequent  upon  re- 


venge. 


IV.  If  we  confider  the  perfe6lion  and  prevalency 
of  the  examples  which  the  gofpel  propofeth  to  us,  to 
allure  and  engage  us  to  the  pra6tice  of  this  duty. 
And  they  are  the  examples  of  God  himfelf,  and  of 
the  Son  of  God  in  the  nature  of  man. 

I.  The  example  of  God  himfelf.  The  fcripturs 
doth  frequently  fet  before  us  the  goodnefs  of  God's 
common  providence  to  fmners,  for  our  pattern.  And 
this  is  the  argument  whereby  our  blefled  Saviour 
prefleth  the  duty  in  the  text  upon  us,  in  the  verfe 
immediately  afcer:    "  That  ye   may  be  the  chil- y^gj,  , - 

"  drea 


4o8  Of  forgivenefs  of  injuries^ 

S  E  R  M.  «  clren  of  your  Iieavenly  Father,  who  maketh  his 
^^,_^_.^  "  fun  to  rife  on  the  evil  and  the  good,  and  his  ram 
"  to  fall  on  the  juft  and  the  unjuft."  The  lame  ar- 
gument Seneca  alfo  urgcth  to  the  fame  purpofe. 
"  How  many  (fays  he)  are  unworthy  of  the  light, 
"  and  yet  the  day  vifits  them  ?"  And  fpeakingof  the 
gods,  "  They  beflow,  (fays  he)  their  benefits  upon 
*'  the  unthankful,  and  arc  ready  to  help  thofe  who 
*'  make  a  bad  conurudion  and  ufe  of  their  kindnefs." 
And  almoft  in  the  very  words  of  our  Saviour, 
Etiam  ingratis  fol  oritur^  &c.  '^  The  fun  rifeth  even 
"  upon  the  mod  vile  and  profligate  perfons,  and  the 
*'  feas  arc  open  to  pirates," 

Thus  is  God  afteded  towards  thofe  who  are  guilty 
of  the  greatefl  provocations  towards  him.  He  be- 
ftows  upon  them  the  gifts  cf  his  common  providence; 
and  not  only  fo,  but  is  ready  to  forgive  innumerable 
offences  to  them  for  Christ's  fake.  This  pattern  the 
Eph.  iv.  apoftle  propofeth  to  our  imitation,  "  Be  ye  kind, 
32.  "  tender-hearted,  forbearing  one  another,  forgiving 

"  one  another,  even  as  God  for  Christ's  fake  hath 
Clap. V.I."  forgiven  you:  be  ye  therefore  imitators  of  God 
"  as  dear  children."  This  temper  and  difpofuion  of 
mind,  is  the  prime  excellency  and  perfeflion  of  the 
divine  nature;  and  who  v/ould  not  be  ambitious  to 
be  like  the  moll  perfe£l-  and  beft  of  beings?  And  fo 
our  bleffed  Saviour  concludes  this  argument,  in  the 
lad  vcrfe  of  this  chapter,  "  Be  ye  therefore  perfedt, 
•'  as  your  father  which  is  in  heaven  is  pcrfed;** 
which  St.  Luke  renders,  "  Be  ye  therefore  merciful, 
"  as  your  father  which  is  in  heaven  is  merciful."  So 
that  in  that  very  thing,  which  we  think  to  be  fo  hard 
and  difficult,  you  fee  that  wc  have  perfection  itfelf 

for 


and  dgainfl  revenge,  -  409 

fjr  our  pattern.  And  this  example  ought  to  be  of  S  ER  M. 
fo  much  greater  force  with  us,  by  how  much  greater  ^^}}^\ 
reafon  there  is,  why  we  fnould  do  thus  to  one  another, 
than  why  God  Ihould  do  thus  to  us.  Oar  offences 
agaiiiil  God  are  more  and  greater,  than  any  man  ever 
was  or  could  be  guilry  of  towards  us:  befides,  that 
there  are  many  confiderations  which  ought  to  tie  up 
our  hands,  and  may  reafonably  reflrain  us  from  faljing 
furioufly  upon  one  ar>other,  which  can  have  no  place 
at  all  in  God.  We  may  juRIy  fear,  that  the  confe- 
quencc  of  our  revenge  may  return  upon  ourfelves, 
and  that  it  may  come  to  be  our  own  eafe  to  ftand  in 
need  of  mercy  and  forgivenefs  from  others;  and 
therefore  out  of  neccflary  caution  and  prudence,  we 
fiiould  take  heed  not  to  [tt  any  bad  example  in  this 
kind,  lell  it  ihould  recoil  upon  ourfelves.  We  v/ho 
ftand  lo  much  in  need  of  forgivenefs  ourfelves,  ought 
in  all  reafon  to  be  very  eafy  to  forgive  others.  But 
now  \}'?t(^  divine  nature  is  infinitely  above  any  real  in- 
jury or  luiTering.  God  can  never  (land  in  need  of 
piiy  or  forgivenefs;  and  yet  of  his  own  meer  good- 
nefs,  without  any  intereft  or  defign,  how  flow  is  he  to 
anger,  and  how  ready  to  forgive  ? 

And,  which  comes  yet  nearer  to  us,  there  is  alio 
the  example  of  the  Son  of  God,  our  blelfed  S  a  viou  R5 
who  in  our  nature,  and  in  cafe  of  the  greatefl:  inju- 
ries and  provocations  imaginable,  did  practife  this  vir- 
tue to  the  height :  and  all  this  for  our  lakes,  as  well 
as  for  our  example.  ^^  that  he  requires  nothing  of 
us,  but  vvhat  he  himfelf  fubmitted  to-  with  the  greateft 
patience  and  confiancy  of  mind,  ia  our  ftead,  and 
v/holly  for  our  advantage. 

Vol.  IL  fff  IM 


410  Of  forgiven^fs  of  wjurles, 

E  R  M.       «•  He  rcndcr'd  good  for  evil "  to  all  mankind, 

VVTTr  ^ 

and  Ihew'd  greater  love  to  us,  whilfl  we  were  enemies 
to  him,  than  ever  any  man  did  to  his  friend. 

"  He  pray'd  for  thofe  that  defpitefuUy  ufed  him  and 
**  perfecuted  him.'*  And  this,  not  upon  cool  confidera- 
tion,  after  the  injury  was  done,  and  the  pains  of  his  fuf- 
ferings  were  over;  but  whilft  the  fenfe  and  fmart  of 
them  was  upon  him,  and  in  the  very  agony  and  bit- 
terncfs  of  death:  in  the- height  of  all  his  anguifh,  he 
pour'd  out  his  foul  an  offering  for  the  fins  of  men,  and 
his  blood  a  facriuce  to  God,  for  the  expiation  of  the 
guilt  of  that  very  fm  whereby  they  fhed  it ;  pleading 
with  God,  in  the  behalf  of  his  murderers,  the  only  ex- 
cufe  that  v/as  poffible  to  be  made  for  their  malice, 
that  is,  their  ignorance ;  and  fpending  his  laft  breath 
in  that  mofl  charitable  prayer  for  them,  "  Father, 
«'  forgive  them,  for  they  know  not  what  they  do.'* 

The  laft  declaration  which  he  made  of  his  mind, 
was  love  to  his  enemies ;  and  the  laft  legacy  he  be- 
queath'd  was  an  earned  requeft  to  God  for  the  for- 
givenefs  of  his  perfecutors  and  murderers. 

So  that  if  any  example  ought  to  be  dear  to  us,  and 
effedually  to  engage  us  to  the  imitation  of  ii^  this  of 
our  bleffed  Saviour  fhould  ;  fince  the  injuries  which 
he  fjffer'd  have  fav'd  us  from  fuffering,  and  the 
greateft  blefling  and  happinefs  that  ever  befel  man- 
kind is  due  to  this  excellent  example.  And  then  with 
what  confidence,  nay  with  what  confcience,  can  we 
pretend  to  fhare  in  the  benefits  of  this  example, 
without  imitating  the  virtues  of  it? 

Can  we  ferioufly  contemplate  the  excefTive  kind- 
nefs  and  charity  of  the  Son  of  God  to  the  fintui  fons 
of  men,  after  all  our  bittcrcil  enmity  towards  him,  and 

moft 


and  againjl  revenge*  411 

mofl:  cruel  and  injurious  ufage  of  him;  and  all  this  SERM* 
charity  exercis'd  towards  us,  whilft  he  was  under  the  ^_^^^ 
aftual  fenfe  and  fufFering  of  thefe  things :  and  yet  not  be 
provok'd  by  an  example  fo  admirable  in  itfclf,  and  of 
fuch  mighty  advantage  to  us,  "  to  go  and  do  hkewife  ?** 

But  notwithftanding  the  power  of  thefe  arguments  to 
perfuade  to  this  duty,  I  muft  not  difTemble  fome  ob- 
jedlions  which  are,  1  believe,  in  many  of  your  minds 
againft  it ;  and  to  which  for  the  full  clearing  of  this 
matter,  it  will  be  fit  to  give  Ibmc  fatisfadion.  And 
they  are  thefe : 

I.  That  this  precept  in  the  text  does  not  feem  fo 
well  to  agree  with  another  of  our  blcfTed  Saviour's, 
in  another  evangelifl,  "  If  thy  brother  trefpafs  againft  Lukexvii. 
"  thee,  rebuke  him ;  and  if  he  repent,  forgive  him.  ^'  ^' 
"  And  if  he  trefpafs  againft  thee  {tv^n  times  in  a  day, 
*'  and  feven  times  in  a  day  turn  again  to  thee,  faying, 
*'  I  repent,  thou  flialt  forgive  him."  Here  our  blefted 
Saviour  feems  not  to  require  forgivenefs,  unlefs  he 
that  hath  done  the  injury  declare  his  repentance  for 
it ;  but  the  text  plainly  requires  us  to  forgive  thofa 
v/ho  are  fo  far  from  repenting  of  their  enmity,  that 
they  ft  ill  purfue  it,  and  exercife  it  upon  us.  Thus  our 
Lord  teacheth  us,  and  thus  he  himfelf  pradlifed  to- 
wards his  per fecu tors. 

But  this  appearance  of  contradidion  will  quickly  va- 
nifli,  if  we  con  fid  er  that  forgivenefs  is  fometimes  ta- 
ken chiefly  for  abftaining  from  revenge  •,  and  fo  far  wc 
are  to  forgive  our  enemies,  even  whilft  they  continue 
fo,  and  though  they  do  not  repent ;  and  not  only  fo, 
but  we  are  alfo  to  pray  for  them,  and  to  do  good  offi- 
ces to  them,  efpecially  of  common  humanity :  and  this 
is  the  meaning  of  the  precept  in  the  text.    But  fome- 

F  f  f  2  times 


4T2  Of  forglvenefs  of  injuries^ 

SE  R  \T    times  forgivenefs  does  fignify  a  perfect  reconciliation 
■  to  thofe  chat  have  offended  U5,  fo  as  to  take  them  again 
into  our  friendfliip;  v/hich   they  are  by  no  means  fit 
for,  'till  they  have  repented  of  their  enmity,  and  laid  ic 
afide.  And  this  is  plainly  the  meaning  of  the  ocher  text. 
2.   Jt  is  farther  objected.    That  this  feems  to  be  a 
very  imprudent  thing,  and  of  dangerous  confequence 
to  ourfelves;  becaufe  by  bearing  one  irjury  fo  patient- 
ly, and  forgiving  it  To  eafily,  we  ii.vite  more ;  a'  d  not 
only  tempt  our  enemy  to  go  on,  but  others  aJfo  by  his 
example  to  do  the  like:  which  will  make  iil-natur'd 
men  to  provoke  us  on  purpofe,  with  a  crafty  defign  to 
wreft  benefits  from  us :  for  what  better  trade  can  a  man 
drive,  than  to  gain  benefits  in  exchange  for  injuries? 
To  this  I  aniwer  three  things : 
Fird,  it  is  to  be  feared    that  there  are  but  few  fo 
very  good,  as  to  make  this  kind  return  for  injuries: 
perhaps,  of  thofe  that  call  themfelves  chriftians,  not 
one  in  a  hundred.    And  he  is  f  ot  a  cjnning  man  that 
Will  venture  to   make  an   enemv,  when  there  is  the 
odds  of  a  hundred  to  one  agair.fl:  him,  that  this  ene- 
my of  his  will  tuke  i\\t  lirit  opportuniEy,  to  take  his 
revenge  upon  him. 

Secondly,  it  u  alfo  on  the  other  hand  to  be  hoped, 
that  but  very  ^cw  are  (o  prodigioufly  bad,  as  to  make 
fo  barbarous  a  recurn  for  the  unexpedted  kmdnefs  of  a 
generous  enemy.  And  this  is  encouragement  enough 
to  the  prac^lice  of  this  duty,  if  there  be  a  probable 
hope  that  it  v/ill  have  a  good  efFed;  and  liowever,  if 
it  fnould  fall  out  otherwife,  yet  this  would  notberea- 
fon  enough  todifcourage  our  goodnefs,  efpecially  fince 
the  kmdnefs  which  we  do  to  our  friends  is  liable  al- 
moll  to  an  equal  objeffion,  that  they  may  prove  un- 


grateful^ 


tind  againjl  revenge,  >  j^ 

grateful,  and  become  our  enemies  •,  it  having  been  S  E  R  M. 
oken  Teen  diat  great  beiiefirs,  and  luch  as  are  beyond  ''^^^^^^• 
requital,  inftead  of  making  a  man  more  a  friend,  Inwe 
made  him  an  enemy. 

Thirdly,  our  S.iViouR  never  intended  by  this  pre- 
cept, that  our  goodneiij  fliould  be  bhnd  and  void  of  all 
prudence  and  difcretion,  but  that  it  fhould  be  fo  ma- 
naged as  to  make  our  enemy  fenHble  both  of  his  own 
fault,  and  of  our  favour  ;  and  fo,  as  to  give  him  as  lit- 
tle encouragement,  as  there  is  reafon  for  it,  to  hope  to 
find  the  Lke  favour  again  upon  the  like  provocation. 
Our  S  Aviou  11  commands  us  to  do  the  thing,  but  hath 
Jeft  it  to  our  prudence  lo  do  it  in  fuch  a  manner  as 
may  be  moil  effedlual,  both  to  r.x'aim  the  ofiender, 
and  likewife  to  fecure  ourfelves  againft  future  and  fur- 
ther injuries. 

3.  Laftly,  it  is  objedled.  What  can  we  do  more  to 
eur  bcft  friends,  than  to  love  them  and  blefs  them, 
than  to  do  good  to  them  and  to  pray  for  them?  And 
are  we  then  to  m.ake  no  difilrence  betwixt  our  ene- 
niies  and  our  friends  ? 

Yesfurely;  and  fo  Vv-e  may,  notwithllanding  this 
precept :  for  there  are  degrees  of  love,  and  there  are 
benefits  of  feveral  rates  and  fizes.  Thofe  of  the  firft 
rate  we  may  with  reaibn  bellow  upon  our  friends,  and 
with  thofe  of  a  fecond  or  third  rate  there  is  all  the  rea- 
fon in  the  world  why  our  enemies  flf  mid  be  very  well 
contented.  Befides  that,  we  may  abflain  from  revenge, 
yea,  and  love  our  enemy,  and  wifli  him  and  do  him 
goodj  and  yet  it  wall  not  prefently  be  necelTary  that 
we  fhould  take  him  into  our  bofom,  and  treat  and  trufl 
him  as  our  intimate  and  familiar  friend  :  for  every  one 
that  is  not  our  enemy,  is  not  fit  to  be  our  friend  -,  much 

lefe 


.^2k. 


Of  forglvenefs  of  injuries^ 
lefs  cne  that  hath  been  our  enemy,  and  perhaps  is  {o 
fill  J.  There  mud  be  a  great  change  in  him  that  hath 
bcc:i  our  enemy,  and  we  muft  have  had  long  expe- 
rience of  him  before  it  be  fit,  if  ever  it  be  io^  to 
take  him  into  our  friendihip. 

Ail  that  now  remains,  is  to  make  fome  inferences 
from  tne  difcourfe  which  I  have  made  upon  this  ar- 
gument, by  way  of  application.  And  they  fhall  be 
thefe  four  : 

I.  If  we  think  it  fo  very  difficult  to  demean  our 
felves  towards  our  enemies,  as  tiiC  chriftian  religion 
doth  plainly  require  us  to  do  \  to  forgive  thtm,  and 
love  them,  and  pray  for  them,  and  to  do  good  of- 
fices to  them,  then  certainly  it  concerns  us  in  pru- 
dence to  be  very  careful  how  we  m^ke  enemies  to 
our  felves.  One  of  the  firfl  principles  of  humane  wil^ 
dom,  in  the  condud;  of  our  lives,  I  have  ever  thought 
to  be  this,  to  have  a  few  intimate  friends,  and  to 
make  no  enemies,  if  it  be  pcfTible,  to  our  felves. 
St.  Paul  lays  a  great  flrefs  upon  this,  and  prefTeth  it 
very  carneflly.  For  after  he  had  forbidden  revenge, 
'*  Recompenfe  to  no  man  evil  for  evil."  As  if  he 
were  very  lenfible  how  hard  a  matter  it  is  to  bring 
men  to  this,  he  advifeth  in  the  next  words,  to  pre- 
vent, if  it  be  pofTible,  the  occafions  of  revenge,  "  If 
**  it  be  pofTible,  and  as  much  as  lieth  in  you,  live 
*'  peacably  with  all  men:"'  that  is,  if  we  can  avoid 
it,  have  no  enmity  with  any  man.  And  that  for 
two  weighty  reafons  : 

The  firfl  I  have  already  intimated  ;  bccaufe  it  is 
fo  very  hard  to  behave  our  felves  towards  enemies  aa 
T/e  ought.  This  v/e  fliall  find  to  be  a  difficult  duty 
to  fleih  and  blood  j  and  it  will  require  great  wifdom 

and 


and  againjl  revenge.  4.1^ 

and  confidcratlon,  and  humility  of  mind,  for  a  man  SERM. 
to  bring  down  his   fpirit  to  the  obedience  of  this    ^'^^^^^• 
command:  for  the  fewer  enemies  we  have,  the  lefs 
occafion  will  there  be  of  conteHing  this  hard  point 
with  our  felvcs. 

And  the  other  reafon  is,  I  think,  yet  plainer  and 
more  convincing,  becaufe  enemies  will  come  of  them- 
felves,  and  let  a  man  do  what  he  can,  he  flmll  have 
fome.  Friendihip  is  a  thing  that  needs  to  be  cultiva- 
ted, if  we  would  have  it  come  to  any  thing ;  but 
enemies,  like  ill  weeds,  will  fpring  up  of  themfelves 
without  our  care  and  toil.  The  enemy,  as  our  Sa- 
viour calls  the  devil,  will  fow  thefe  tares  in  the 
night,  and  when  we  leaft  difcern  it  will  fcatter  the 
feeds  of  difcord  and  enmity  among  men  5  and  will 
take  an  advantage  either  from  the  envy,  or  ma- 
lice, or  the  miftakes  of  men,  to  make  them  enemies 
to  one  another.  Which  would  make  one  wonder  to 
fee  what  care  and  pains  fome  men  will  take,  to  pro- 
voke mankind  againfl  them  ;  how  they  will  lay  a- 
bout  them,  and  fnatch  at  opportunities  to  make 
themfelves  enemies,  as  if  they  were  afraid  to  let  the 
happy  occafion  flip  by  them  :  But  all  this  care  and 
fear  furely  is  needlefs ;  w^e  may  fafely  truft  an  ill-na- 
tur'd  world,  that  we  fhall  have  enemies  enough, 
without  our  doing  things  on  our  part  to  provoke 
and  procure  them. 

But  above  all,  it  concerns  every  man  in  prudence 

to  take  great  care  not  to  make  perfonal  enemies  to 

hlmfelf ;  for  thefe  are  the  forefl  and  the  furefl:  of  all 

other,  and  when  there  is  an  opportunity  for  it,  will  fic 

hardeft  upon  us.     Injuries  done  to  the  publick  are 

certainly  the  greateft,  and  yet  they  are  many  times 

more  eafily  forgiven,  than  thofe  which  are  done  to 

parti- 


^t6  Cf  firglvenefs  cf  injuries y 

S  E  R  AT.  particular  perfons.  Por  when  revenge  is  every  boJy'f 
'^^^^^^-  ^ork,  it  may  prove  to  be  no  body's.  Tiie  general 
v.Tongs  which  are  done  to  humane  Ibciety,  do  not  ib 
fenfibly  toach  and  (ling  men,  as  perlbnal  injuries  and 
provocations.  The  Javv  is  never  angry  or  in  pafTion, 
and  it  is  not  only  a  great  indecency,  but  a  fault,  wliea 
the  judcves  of  it  are  fo.  Heat  of  profecution  belongs 
to  particular  p-rfons ;  and  it  is  their  memory  cf  in- 
juries, and  defire  to  revenge  them,  and  diligence  to 
fet  on  and  fharpen  the  law,  that  is  chiefly  to  bs 
dreaded  :  and  if  ti^e  truth  were  knov/n,  it  is  much  to 
be  fear'd  that  there  are  almoft  as  few  private  as  pub- 
lick  acls  of  obhvion  pals'd  in  xht  world  ;  and  they 
commonly  pals  as  fiovvlv,  and  with  as  much  difficul- 
ty, and  ncit  till  the  grace  and  good  efiec^  of  them  i* 
almoll  quite  loft. 

IL  Ir  we  ought  to  be  thus  affeded  towards  our 
enemies,  how  great  ought  our  kir.dnefs,  and  the 
exprefiions  of  it,  to  be  to  others  ?  to  thofe  who  ne- 
ver diibbliged  us,  nor  did  us  any  injury  by  word 
or  di<ctA  ;  to  thofe  more  efpecially,  who  fland  in 
a  nearer  rek\tion  to  us  ;  to  our  natural  kindred, 
and  to  our  fpiritual  brethren  to  whom  we  are  fb 
firongly  Imk'd  ai:d  united  by  the  common  bond  of 
chriltianity,  and  lailJy,  to  our  benefaftor.-,  and  thofe 
who  have  been  before-hand  with  us  in  obligation  : 
for  all  thefe  are  fo  many  fpecial  ties  and  endearments 
cf  men  to  one  another,  founded  either  in  nature  or 
religion,  or  in  common  juftice  and  aratitude.  And 
therefore  between  all  thefe  and  our  enemies  we  oucht 
to  make'a  very  wide  and  fenfible  ditferer.ce,  in  our 
carriao;e  and  kindnefs  towards  them.  And  if  we  do 
not   fo,    we  reprefent   our  Saviour,  as    an    unrea- 

fonable  lawgiver,  and  do  perverily  interpret  this  pre- 
^  cepc 


and  againji  revenge,  417 

cent  of  his  contrary  to  the  reafonable  and  equitable  SERM. 

•  XXXIIf 

meaning  of  it.  For  whatever  degree  of  kindnefs  is 
Jiere  required  towards  our  enemies,  it  is  certain  that 
fo  much  more  is  due  to  others,  as  according  to  the 
true  proportion  of  our  tie  and  obligation  to  them  they 
have  deferved  at  our  hands  •,  nothing  being  more  cer- 
tain than  that  our  blelTed  Saviour,  the  founder  of 
our  religion,  did  never  intend  by  any  precept  of  it 
to  cancel  any  real  obligation  of  nature,  or  jufdce,  or 
gratitude  ;  or  to  offer  violence  in  the  leaft  to  the 
common  reafon  (ff  mankind, 

III.  Hence  we  learn  the  excellency  and  the  rea- 
fonablenefs  of  the  chriftian  religion,  which  hath 
carried  our  duty  fo  high,  in  things  Vv^hich  do  fo  di- 
redly  tend  to  the  perfeflion  of  humiane  nature, 
and  to  the  peace  of  humane  fociety ;  and  which,  if 
all  things  be  rightly  confider'd,  are  mod  agreeable  to 
t^ciz  cleared  and  hvk  reafon  of  mankind :  fo  that 
thofe  things  which  v/ere  heretofore  look'd  upon,  and 
that  only  by  fome  few  of  the  wifer  fort,  as  heroical 
inflances  of  gocdneis,  and  above  ^At  common  rate  of 
humanity,  are  now  by  the  chriftian  religion  made 
the  indifpenfible  duties  of  all  mankind.  And  the 
precepts  of  no  other  religion,  that  ever  yet  appeared 
in  the  world,  have  advanced  humane  nature  fo  much 
above  it  {d^^  and  are  fo  v/eil  calculated  for  the  peace 
and  happinefs  of  the  world,  as  the  precepts  of  the 
chriftian  religion  are  :  for  they  ftridly  forbid  the  do- 
ing of  injuries,  by  way  of  prevention  ;  and  in  cafe 
they  happen,  they  endeavour  to  put  a  prefent  dop  to 
the  progrefs  of  them,  by  fo  feverely  forbidding  the 
revenging  of  them. 

And  yet  after  all  this,  it  mufl  be  acknowledged  to 
Vol.  IL  G  g  g  ^e 

8, 


41 3  Of  forghenefs  of  injuries^ 

S  E  R  Af .  be  a  very  untoward  objedlion  againfl  the  excellency 
^'^^}^  and  efficacy  of  the  chridian  religion,  that  the  prac- 
tice of  fo  many  chriftians  is  fo  unequal  to  the  per- 
fedlion  of  thcfe  precepts.  For  who  is  there  in  the 
changes  aiid  revolutions  of  humane  affairs,  and  when 
the  wheel  of  providence  turns  them  uppermoft,  and 
lays  their  enemies  at  their  ft^U  that  will  give  them 
any  quarter  ?  Nay,  that  does  not  greedily  feize  upon 
the  firfi  opportunities  of  revenge,  and  like  an  eagle, 
hungry  for  his  prey,  make  a  fudden  fboop  upon  them 
with  all  his  force  and  violence  j  and  when  he  hath 
them  in  his  pounces,  and  at  his  mercy,  is  not  ready 
to  tear  them  in  pieces  ? 

So  that  after  all  our  boafts  of  the  excellency  of  our 
religion,  v^^here  is  the  pradlice  of  it  ?  this,  I  confels, 
is  a  terrible  objedion  indeed  ;  and  I  muft  intreat  of 
you,  my  brethren,  to  help  me  to  the  bed  anfwer  ta 
it ;  not  by  M\y  nice  diftmftions  and  fpeculations  a- 
bout  it,  buc  by  the  careful  and  honeH  pradlice  of  this 
precept  of  our  religion. 

This  was  the  old  objedion  againfl  philofophy, 
that  many  that  were  philofbphers  in  their  opinions 
were  faulty  in  their  lives :  but  yet  this  was  never 
thought  by  wife  men  to  be  a  good  objedion  a^ 
gainfc  philofophy.  And  unlefs  we  will  lay  more 
weight  upon  the  objedlions  againfl  religion,  and 
prefs  them  harder  than  we  think  it  reafonable  to  do 
in  any  other  cafe,  we  muft  acknowledge  likewife, 
that  this  obje£Hon  againfl-  religion  is  of  no  force. 
Men  do  not  caft  off  the  art  of  pliyfick,  becauie  many 
phyficians  do  not  live  up  to  their  own  rules,  and  do 
not  themfelves  follow  thofe  prefcriptions  which  they 
think  fit  to  give  to  others :  and  there  is  a  plain  rea- 
iovi  for  it,  becaufe  their  fwerving  frora  their  own 

rules 


dnd  again fi  revenge.  419 

rules  doth  not  necefifarily  fignify  that  their  rules  are  S  E^M. 
not  good,  bat  only  that  their  appetites  are  unruly,^ 
and  too  hard  and  headflrong  for  their  reafon  :  no- 
thino-  being  more  certain  than  this,  that  rules  may 
be  very  reaibnable,  and  yet  they  that  give  them  may 
not  follow  them. 

IV.  The  fourth  and  lafl  Inference  from  this  whole 
difcourfe  fliall  be  this,  that  being  convinced  by  what 
hath  been  faid  upon  this  argument,  of  the  rcafonable- 
nefs  of  this  duty,  we  would  refolve  upon  the  pradlice 
of  it,  whenever  there  is  occafion  ofter'd  for  it  in 
the  courfe  of  our  lives.  I  need  not  to  put  you  in 
mind,  that  there  is  now  like  to  be  great  occafion  for 
it :  I  fhall  only  fay,  that  whenever  there  is  fo,  nothing 
can  be  tied  more  ilridly  upon  us  than  this  duty  is. 

It  hath  often  been  a  great  comfort  and  confirma- 
tion  to  me,  to  fee  the  humanity  of  the  proteflant  re- 
ligion, fo  plainly  difcovering  it  felf,  upon  fo  many 
occafions,  in  the  practice  of  the  profefibrs  of  it.   And 
fetting  afide  all  other  advantages  which  our  religion 
hath  been  evidently  Ihewn  to  have  above  popery  in 
point  of  reafon  and  argument,  I  cannot  for  my  life 
but  think  that  to  be  the  bell  religion  which  makes 
the  bed  men,  and  from  the  nature  of  its  principles  is 
apt  to  make  them  fo ;  mofl  kind,  and  merciful,  and 
charitable  -,  and  moft  free  from  malice,  and  revenge, 
and  cruelty. 

And  therefore  our  blefied  Saviour,  who  knew 
what  was  in  man  better  than  any  man  that  ever  was, 
knowing  our  great  reluctance  and  backwardnefs  to 
the  praftice  of  this  duty,  hath  urged  it  upon  us  by 
fuch  forcible  and  almofl  violent  arguments,  that  if 
we  have  any  tendernefs  for  our  felves,  we  cannot  re=. 
fufe  obedience  to  it.    For  he  plainly  tells  us,  that  no 

G  2  s  i  acrificc 


&  & 


Of  forghmefs  of  injures, 
fiicrifice  that  we  can  offer  will  appeafe  God  towards U5, 
fo  long  as  we  ourl'elves  are  imp'acab'e  to  men  j  ver.23d 
of  this  chapter,  "  If  thou  bring  thy  gift  to  the  altar, 
*'  and  there  remembrefl:  that  tny  brother  hath  ought 
*^  agtinit  thee,  leave  thy  gift  before  the  altar,  and  go 
*'  thy  way :  iirft  go  and  be  reconciled  to  thy  brother, 
^'  and  then  com::  and  offer  tiiy  gifc."  To  recommend 
this  duty  effedually  to  us,  he  gives  it  a  preference  to 
all  the  pofidve  dutjes  of  religion  :  '*  firit  go  and  be 
*'  reconciled  to  thy  brother,  and  then  come  and  offer 
"  thy  gift."  'Till  this  duty  be  difcharged,  God  will 
accept  of  no  fervice,  no  facrifice  at  our  hands.  And 
therefore  our  liturgy  doth  witn  great  reafon  declare  it 
to  be  a  neccffary  qualification  for  our  worthy  receiving 
of  the  facramenr,  that  u  e  be  in  love  and  charity  with 
our  neighbours  j  becaufe  this  is  a  moral  duty,  and  of 
eternal  obligation,  without  which  no  pofitive  part  of 
religion,  fuch  as  the  lacraments  are,  can  be  acceptable 
to  God  ;  efpecially  fince  in  this  bleffed  facrament  of 
Christ's  body  and  blood  we  expe^l  to  have  the  for- 
givenefs  of  our  fins  ratified  and  confirmed  to  us: 
which  how  can  we  hope  for  from  God,  if  we  our 
fclves  be  not  ready  to  forgive  one  another  ? 

^'  He  fhall  have  judgment  without  mercy,  fays  St. 
"  James,  who  hath  fhcwed  no  mercy."  And  in  that 
excellent  form  of  prayer  which  our  Lord  himfelf  hath 
given  us,  he  hath  taught  us  fo  to  ask  forgivenefsof  God, 
as  not  to  expe(5l  it  from  him,  if  we  do  not  forgive  one 
another.  So  that  if  we  do  not  pradife  this  duty,  as 
hard  as  we  think  it  is,  every  time  that  we  put  up  this 
petition  to  God,  "  Forgive  us  our  trefpaffes,  as  we  for- 
^'  give  them  that  trefpafs  again (1  us-, "  we  fend  up  a 
terrible  imprecation  againff  ourfelves,  and  do  in  effect 
t^g  of  Go  D  not  to  forgive  us.  And  therefore,  to  im- 


pnnc 


G7id  againjl  revenge,  42? 

jprint  this  matter  the  deeper  upon  our  minds,  our  bleA  SE  R  Ai. 
fe<i  Saviour  immediately  after  the  recital  of  this .^/lfi,[^ 
Prayer,  hath  thought  fit  to  add  a  very  remarkable  en- 
forcement of  this  petition,  above  all  the  reft  ;   "  for  ^"^^"t-^-  ^i. 

1 '      I  c 

"  it,  fays  he,  ye  forgive  men  their  trefpalTes,  your  hea-  ^^ 
*'  venly  father  will  alfo  forgive  you  :  but  if  ye  forgive 
*'  not  men  their  trefpalTes,  neither  will  your  father  for- 
*'  give  year  trefpalles." 

And  our  Saviour  hath  likewife  in  his  gofpel  re- 
pre  cnred  to  us,  both  the  reafonablenefs  of  this  duty, 
a  id  tiie  da  iger  of  doing  contrary  to  it,  in  a  very  lively 
aiiu  aifecting  parable,  deliver'd  by  him  to  this  purpofc: 
conceniinsj  a  wicked  fervant,  who,  when  his  lord  had  ^^'^'^^^ 
but  juit  betore  forgiven  him  a  vait  debt  01  ten  thou- 
LijO  talents,  took  his  poor  fellow-fervant  by  the  throat, 
and,  notwithitaiiding  his  humble  fubmiffion  and  ear- 
neit  intreuties  to  be  favourable  to  him,  haled  him  to 
priion  for  a  triflii  g  debt  of  an  hundred  pence.  And  the 
application  which  he  makes  of  this  parable,  at  the  end 
or  it,  is  very  terrible,  and  fuch  as  ought  never  to  go 
out  of  our  mi'ids;  "  fo  likewife,  fays  he,  Ihall  my  Ver.^5» 
"  heavenly  father  do  ah^o  unto  you,  if  ye  do  not  from 
"  your  hearts  forgive  every  one  his  brother  his  tref^ 
"  paiTes."  Ore  might  be  apt  to  think  at  firfl  view, 
that  this  parable  was  over-done,  and  wanted  fomething 
of  a  due  decorum ;  it  being  hardly  credible,  that  a 
man  after  he  had  been  fo  mercifully  and  generoufly 
dealt  withal,  as  upon  his  humble  requeft  to  have  fb 
huge  a  debt  fo  freely  forgiven,  fhould  whilft  the  me- 
mory of  fo  much  mercy  was  frefh  upon  him,  even  the 
very  next  moment,  handle  his  fellow-fervant,  who 
had  made  the  fime  humble  fubmifTion  and  requeft  to 
him  which  he  had  done  to  his  Lord,  with  fo  much 
roughneii  and  cruelty,  for  fo  inconfidcrabk  a  fum. 


^22  Of  forgtvenefs  of  itijuneSj 

S  E  R  M  This  I  ^iy»  would  hardly  feeni  credible ;  did  v/c  not 
fee  in  experience  how  very  unreafonable  and  unmer- 
ciful feme  men  are,  and  widi  what  confidence  they 
can  ask  and  expedt  great  mercy  from  God,  when 
they  will  fhew  none  to  men. 

The  greatnefs  of  the  injuries  which  are  done  to  us, 
is  the  realbn  commonly  pleaded  by  us  why  we  cannot 
forgive  them.  Bat  whoever  thou  art,  that  makefl:  this 
an  argument  why  thou  canft  not  forgive  thy  brother, 
lay  thine  hand  upon  thine  heart,  and  bethink  thyfelf 
liovv  many  more  and  much  greater  offences  thou  haft 
been  guilty  of  againft  God  :  look  up  to  that  juft  and 
powerrul  being  that  is  above,  and  confider  well,  whe- 
ther thou  doft  not  both  expecl  and  (land  in  need  of 
more  mercy  and  favour  from  him,  than  thou  canft  find 
in  thy  heart  to  fhew  to  thine  offending  brother? 

We  have  all  certainly  great  reafon  to  expert  that  as 
v,'t  ufe  one  another,  God  will  Jikewife  deal  with  us. 
And  yet  after  all  this,  how  litde  is  this  duty  pradlis'd 
among  chriftians?  and  how  hardly  are  the  befl:  of  us 
brought  to  love  our  enemies,  and  to  forgive  them  ? 
and  this,  notwithilanding  that  all  our  hopes  of  mercy 
and  forgivenefs  from  God  do  depend  upon  it.  How 
ftrangely  inconfiftent  is  our  practice  and  our  hope? 
and  what  a  wide  diftance  is  there  between  our  expe6la- 
tions  from  God,  and  our  dealings  with  men?  How 
very  partial  and  unequal  are  we,  to  hope  fo  tdi^ily  to 
be  forgiven,  and  yet  to  be  fo  hard  to  forgive  ? 

Would  we  have  God,  for  Christ's  fake,  t& for- 
give us  thofe  numberlefs  and  monftrous  provocations 
which  we  have  been  guilty  of  againft  his  divine  ma- 
jefty  ?  And  fhall  we  not  for  his  fake,  for  whofe  fake 
we  ourfelves  are  forgiven,  be  willing  to  forgive  one 
another? 


'end  againfi  revenge.  42J 

We  think  it  hard  to  be  oblig'd  to  forgive  great  in-  S  E  R  M, 

juries,  and  often  repeated  i  and  yet  wo  be  to  us  all,  and  . ~^ 

mod  miferable  fliali  we  be  to  all  eternity,  if  God  do 
not  all  this  to  us,  which  we  think  to  be  fo  very  hard 
and  unreafonable  for  us  to  do  to  one  another. 

I  have  fometimes  wonder'd  how  it  Ihould  come  to 
pais,  that  fo  many  perfons  ihould  be  fo  apt  to  defpair 
of  the  mercy  and  forgivenefs  of  God  to  them-,  efpe- 
daily  confidering  what  clear  and  exprefs  declarations 
God  hath  made  of  his  readinefs  to  forgive  our  greateft 
fins  and  provocations  upon  our  fincere  repentance : 
but  the  wonder  will  be  very  much  abated,  when  we 
fhall  confider  with    how  much  difficulty   men   are 
brought  to  remit  great  injuries,  and  how  haxoly  we 
are  perfuaded  to  refrain  fi'om  flying  upon  thofe  who 
have  oiven  us  any  confideiable  provocation.     So  that 
when  men  look  into  themfelves,  and  Ihall  carefully  ob- 
ferve  the  motions  of  their  own  minds  towards  thofe 
againftwhom  they  have  been  jutUy  exafperated,  they 
will  fee  but  too  much  reafon  to  think  that  forgivenefs 
is  no  fuch  eafy  matter. 

But  our  comfort  in  this  cafe  is,  that  God  is  not  as 

man;,  "  that  his  ways  are  not  as  our  ways,  nor  his 

.  «  thoughts  as  our  thoughts  •,  but  as  the  heavens  are 

«  high  above  the  earth,  fo  are  his  ways  above  our 

«  ways,  and  his  thoughts  above  our  thoughts." 

And  the  beft  way  to  keepourfelves  from  delpairing 
of  God's  mercy  and  forgivenefs  to  us,  is  to  be  eafy  to 
grant  forgivenefs  to  others:  and  without  this  as  God 
hath  reafon  to  deny  forgivenefs  to  us,  fo  we  our 
felveshave  all  the  reafon  in  the  world  utterly  to  de- 

fpair  of  it.  1  1       j 

It  would  almoft  tranfport  a  chrlftian  to  read  that  ad- 
mirable paffage  of  the  great  heathen  ^"iperor  a^nd^^^^^^^ 


'^24  Of  forghenefs  of  injuries,  &c. 

S  E  R  M.  lofopher  M.  Aurdius"  Antoninus,   "  Can  the  gods, 

X\XiU.  jc  ^^yg  l^p^  ^l^^j.  j^j.g  immortal,  for  the  continuance  of 

M.  Aur.    "  fo  many  ages,  bear  without  impatience  with  fuch 

Anrcn.     ^^  ^^^  ^^  many  finners  as  have  ever  been  -,  and  not  on- 

'  '*       "  ly  fo,  but  hkewife  take  care  of  them,  and  provide 

*'  for  them  that  they  want  nothing:  and  doit  thou  To 

*'  grievoufly  take  on,  as  one  that  can  bear  with  them 

"  no  longer  ?     Thou,  that  art  but  for  a  momejit  of 

*'  time-,  yea,  thou  that  art  one  of  thofe  finners  thyfcif.'* 

I  will   conclude  this  whole  dilcourfe  with    thofe 

weighty  and  pungent  fayings  of  the  wife  fon  of  Sirach, 

Iccl.xxili. "  He  that  revergeth  fhull  find  vengeance  from  the 

»,  2,  3»4-"  Lord,  and  he  will  certainly  retain  his  fins.    For- 

*'  give  thy  neighbour  that  hath  hurt  thee,  fo  (hall 

*'  thy  fins  alfo  be  forgiven  when  thou  prayed.    One 

«'  man  beareth  hatred  againfl:  another,  and  doih  he 

**'  feek  pardon  of  the  Lord  ?  He  flieweth  no  mercy 

*='  to  a  man  like  himfelf,  and  doth  he  ask  forgive- 

**  nefs  of  his  own  fins  ? 

*'  Enable  us,  O  Lord,  by  thy  grace,  to  pra6life 
«'  this  excellent  and  difficult  duty  of  our  religion  :  and 
"  then,  forgive  us  our  trefpafifes,  as  we  forgive  them 
**  that  trefpafs  againfl  us:  for  thy  mercies  fake,  in  Jc- 
*'  sus  Christ;  to  whom  with  thee,  O  Father,  and 
*'  the  FIoLY  Ghost,  be  all  honour  and  glory,  adora- 
^[  tion  and  obedience,  bodi  now  and  ever.  Amen, 


SERMON 


[425  ] 

SERMON  XXXIV. 

The  care  of  our  fouls,    the  one  thing 
needful 

Preached  before   the  King  and  Queen  at 
Hampton-Court,   /Ipril  14,    1689. 


LUKE  X.  42. 
But   one   thing   is   needful, 

JN  the  accounts  of  wife  men,  one  of  the  Hrd  rules  S  E  R  ^^ 
and  mcafurcs  of  humane  actions  is  this,  "  To  re-  ^""^'^ 
"  gard  every  thing  more  or  lefs,  according  to  the 
"  degree  of  its  confequence  and  importance  to  our 
"  happinefs.''  That  which  is  moft  ncceiTary  to  that 
end,  ought  in  all  reafon  to  be  minded  by  us  in  the  nrft 
place,  and  other  things  only  fo  far  as  i\\f']  are  con- 
fident with  that  great  end,  and  fubfervient  to  it. 

Our  blefled  Saviour  here  tells  us  "  that  there  is 
«  one  thing  needful,"  that  is,  one  thing  which  ought 
firft  and  principally  to  be  regarded  by  us:  and  what 
that  is,  it  is  of  great  concernment  to  us  all  to  know, 
that  we  may  mind  and  purfue  it  as  it  deferves. 

And  we  may  eafily  underftand  what  it  is  by  confi- 
dering  the  context,  and  the  occafion  of  thefe  words, 
which  was  briefly  this :  our  Saviour,  as  he  went  a- 
bout  preaching  the  kingdom  of  God,  came  into  a 
certain  village,  where  he  was  entertain'J  at  the  houfe 
of  two  devout  fillers.  The  elder,  who  had  the  care 
and  management  of  the  family  and  the  affairs  of  it. 

Vol.  II.  H  hh  waf 

8. 


426  ^he  care  of  our  fouls  ^ 

S  E  R  M.  was  employed  in  makLng  entertainment  for  fuch  a 
XXXIV.  g^^g|-u.  j-i^^  other  fat  at  our  Saviour's  feet,  attend- 
in  o-  to  the  do6lrIne  of  falvation  which  he  preach'd. 

The  elder  finding  herfelf  not  able  to  do  all  the  bu- 
finefs  alone,  defirt:)  of  our  Saviour  that  he  would 
command  her  filler  to  come  and  help  her.  Upon  this 
our  Saviour  gives  her  this  gentle  reprehenfion, 
"  Martha,  Martha,  thou  art  careful  and  troubled  a- 
"  bout  many  things,  but  one  thing  is  needful."  And 
v/hat  that  is  he  declares  in  the  next  words,  "  and 
"  Mary  hath  chofen  that  good  part,  which  fhall  not 
''  be  taken  away  from  her^"  that  is,  fhe  hath  chofen 
to  take  care  of  her  falvation,  which  is  infinitely  more 
confiderable  than  any  thing  elfe. 

Oar  Saviour  doth  not  altogether  blame  Martha 
for  her  refpedful  car/s  of  him,  but  commends  her  filler 
for  her  greater  care  of  her  foul  j  which  made  her  ei- 
ther wholly  to  forget,  or  unwilling  to  mind  other 
things  at  that  time.  Sj  that,  upon  the  whole  matter, 
he  h-ghly  approves  her  wife  choice,  in  preferring  an 
attentive  regard  to  his  dodrine,  even  before  that 
which  might  be  thought  a  necelTary  civility  to  his 
perfon. 

From  the  words  thus  explained,  the  obfervation 
which  I  fliall  make  is  this : 

That  the  care  of  religion  and  of  our  fouls  is  the 
cne  thing  necefiliry,  and  that  which  every  man  is 
concern'd  in  the  firft  place  and  above  all  other  things 
to  mind  and  regard. 

This  obfervation  feems  to  be  plainly  contained  in 
the  text.  I  fhall  handle  it  as  briefly  as  I  can ;  and 
then  by  way  of  application  fliall  endeavour  to  per- 
fuade  you  and  myfelf  to  mind  this  one  thing  necellary. 

And  in  fpeaking  to  this  ferious  and  weighty  argu- 
ment^ I  fiiall  do  thefe  two  things.  Firfl^ 


the  one  thing  needfiih  427 

Firft,  I  fliall  endeavour  to  fhew  wherein  this  care  S  E  R  M . 

XXX IV 

of  religion  and  of  our  fouls  does  confiil.  , ,^_J 

Secondly,  to  convince  men  of  the  necefTity  of  ta, 
king  this  care. 

I.  I  fhall  fhew  wherein  this  care  of  reh'gion  and  of 
our  fouls  doth  confift.  And  this  I  fhall  endeavour  to 
do  with  all  the  plainnefs  I  can,  and  fo  as  every  one 
that  hears  me  may  underfland  and  be  fufficiently  di- 
redted  what  is  necefTary  for  him  to  do  in  order  to  his 
eternal  falvaticn. 

And  of  this  I  fnall  give  an  account  in  the  five  fol- 
lowing particulars,  in  which  I  think  the  main  bufinefs 
of  religion  and  the  due  care  of  our  fouls  does  confid. 
Firft,  in  the  diftindt  knowledge,  and  in  the  firm  be- 
lief and  periuafion  of  thofe  things  which  are  necef- 
fary  to  be  known  and  believed  by  us  in  order  to  our 
eternal  falvation. 

Secondly,  in  the  frequent  examination  of  our  lives 
and  adions,  and  in  a  fincere  repentance  for  all  the  er- 
rors and  mifcarriages  of  them. 

Thirdly,  in  the  conftant  and  daily  exercife  of  piety 
and  devotion. 

Fourthly,  in  avoiding  thofe  things  which  are  per- 
nicious to  cur  falvation,  and  whereby  men  do  often 
hazard  their  feuls. 

Fifthly,  in  the  even  and  conftant  pradlice  of  the 
feveral  graces  and  virtues  of  a  good  life. 

1.  The  due  care  of  religion  and  our  fouls  does  con- 
fift in  the  diftind  knowledge,  and  in  the  firm  belief 
and  perfuafion  of  thofe  things  v/hich  are  necefTary  to 
be  known  and  believ'd  by  us  in  order  to  our  eternal 
falvation. 

For  this  knowledge  of  the  necefTary  principles  and 

duties  of  religion  is  the  foundation  of  all  good  prac- 

H  h  h  2  tice^ 


42§  ^he  care  of  our  fouls y 

SER;\T.  tice,  wherein  the  life  of  re]io;ion  doth  confiH:.  And 
v__,^-.^^  winhoiit  this  no  man  can  be  truly  rehgious.  "  With- 
Hcb.  xi.6.  "  out  faith,  faith  the  apoftle  to  the  hebrews,  it  is  im- 
"  poilible  to  pleafe  God:  for  he  that  cometh  to  God 
"  muil  beheve  that  he  is,  and  that  he  is  a  rewarder  of 
"  them  that  dihgeiuly  feek  hnn."  Now  t'.^efj  two  ex- 
prelTions  of  pleafing  Go  D  and  feeking  hmi,  .re  plain- 
ly of  the  fame  importance,  and  do  both  of  them  fig- 
nify  religion,  or  the  worll^iip  and  fervice  of  God  ; 
which  duth  antecedently  fuppole  our  firm  belief  and 
perfuafionof  thele  two  fundamental  principles  of  all 
religion,  That  there  is  a  Goo,  and.  That  he  will  re- 
ward thole  that  ferve  him  :  becaufe  unlefs  a  man  do 
firfl:  believe  thcfe,  there  would  neither  be  ground  nor 
encouragement  for  any  fuch  thing  as  religion. 

And  this  knowledge  of  the  neceflary  principles  of 
religion  our  bleiTed  Saviour  calls  eternal  \\\c^  be- 
caufe it  is  fo  fundamentally  necefiliry  in  order  to  our 
Jch.  xv;i.  atcainipg  of  it:    "  This  is  life  eternal,  fays  he,  to 
3-  "  know  thee  the  only  true  God  ;  and  him  whom 

*'  thou  haft  fent,  Jesus  Christ,"  that  is,  to  be 
rightly  inftrudled  in  the  knowledge  of  the  only  true 
God,  and  of  his  Son  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord: 
under  which  two  general  heads  are  comprehended  all 
the  neceiTary  principles  both  of  tiie  natural  and  of 
the  chriftian  religion. 

And  to  the  attaining  of  this  knowledge  which  is 
abfolutcly  neceflary  to  falvation,  no  fuch  extraordi- 
nary pains  and  (tudy  is  required  \  but  only  a  teachable 
dilpofition,  and  a  due  application  of  mind.  For  what- 
ever in  religion  is  necellary  to  be  known  by  all,  muft 
in  all  reafon  be  plain  and  eafy,  and  lie  level  to  all  ca- 
pacities; otherwife  we  muft  fay,  that  God  who  would 
have  all  men  to  be  i-^w^^^  hadi  not  provided  for  the  fal- 

vation 


the  me  thing  needful.  ^2q 

vatbn  of  all  men.  And  therefore,  now  that  the  know-  S  E  r  y. 
ledge  of  the  true  God  and  the  light  of  chriflianity  are  ^^^^^• 
fpread  abroad  in  the  world,  all  that  enjoy  the  gofpel 
are,  or  may  be,  fufficiently  inftru6led  in  all  things 
necefTary  to  their  happinefs:  unlefs  fuch  care  be  u(ed, 
as  is  in  the  church  of  Rome,  to  take  away  the  key  of 
knowledge,  and  to  lock  up  the  fcriptures  from  tiic 
people  in  an  unknown  tongue ;  and  this,  as  they  pre- 
tend, upon  a  very  charitable  confideration  -,  only  ic  is 
to  be  hop'd  that  it  is  not  true,  that  the  generahty  of 
mankind  are  mad  and  have  need  to  be  kept  in  the  dark. 
But  fuppofing  men  to  be  allowed  thofe  means  of 
knowledge  which  God  affords,  and  hath  appointed 
for  us,  the  great  difficulty  doth  not  commonly  lie  in 
mens  underilandings,  but  in  their  wills:  only  whea 
men  know  thefe  things,  they  muft  attend  to  them 
and  confider  them;  that  the  light  which  is  in  their 
underilandings  may  warm  their  hearts,  and  have  its 
due  influence  upon  their  liv^es. 

II.  The  due  care  of  our  fouls  confiRs  in  the  fre- 
quent examination  of  our  lives  and  adions,  and  in  a 
fmcere  repentance  for  all  the  errors  and  mifcarriages 
of  them :  in  a  more  particular  and  deep  humiliation 
and  repentance  for  deliberate  and  wilful  fins,  fo  far  as 
we  can  call  them  to  our  remembrance ;  and  in  a  ge- 
neral repentance  for  fins  of  ignorance,  and  infirmity, 
and  furprize.  In  theexercife  whereof  we  are  always 
to  remember,  that  the  nature  of  true  repentance  doth 
not  confift  only  in  an  humble  confeflion  of  our  fins  to 
God,  and  a  hearty  trouble  and  contrition  for  them ; 
but  chiefly  in  the  ftedfaft  purpofe  and  refolucion  of  a 
better  life,  and  in  profecution  of  this  refolution,  in 
adlual  reformation  and  amendment. 

By  the  conftant  exercife  hereof,  we  are  put  into  a 

fafe 


^^D  ^^^  ^^^^  ^f  our  fouls y 

SE  R  M.  fafe  condition ;  provided  that  we  perfevere  in  this  hoiy 
^^Lll refolution  and  courfe :  but  if  we  dill  retain  the  love  and 
praftice  of  any  known  fin,  or  if  after  we  have  taken 
up  thefe  good  refolutions  we  return  a^aln  to  an  evil 
courfe ;  this  is  a  clear  evidence,  either  that  our  repen- 
tance was  not  fincere  at  firft,  or  that  we  are  relap^'d 
into  our  former  ftate :  and  then  our  fouls  are  ftill  in  ap- 
parent danger  of  being  loil,  and  will  continue  in  that 
dangerous  ftate,  'till  we  have  renew 'd  our  repentance, 
and  made  it  good  in  the  following  courfe  of  our  lives. 
III.  The  due  care  of  our  fouls  confifts  in  theconftant 
and  daily  exercife  of  piety  and  devotion,  both  in  pri- 
vate, and  in  publick   if  there  be  opportunity  for  it, 
efpecially  at  proper  times  and  upon  more  folemn  occa- 
fions :  by  fervent  prayer  to  God,  and  by  hearing  and 
reading  the  word  of  God  with  reverence  and  godly 
fear  :  by  frequenting  his  publick  worfhip,  and  demean- 
in^  ourfelves  in  it  with  that  folemnity  and  fenoulhefs 
v/hich  becomes  the  prefence  and  fervice  of  the  great 
and  p-jorious  majelly  of  God,  who  obferves  our  beha- 
viour and  fees  into  our  hearts :  and  by  receiving  the 
blefied  facrament,  as  often  as  we  have  opportunity, 
with  due  preparation  and  devotion  of  mind. 

For  thefe  are  not  only  outward  teftimonies  of  our 
inward  piety,  but  they  are  means  likewile  appointed 
by  God  to  improve  and  confirm  us  in  hohneis  and 
goodnefs.  And  whoever  negleds  thefe  duties  of  reli- 
gion, or  performs  them  in  a  flight  and  fuperficial  man- 
ner, doth  plainly  fliew  that  he  hath  neither  a  due  fcnfe 
of  God,  nor  care  of  himfelf:  for  in  vain  does  any 
man  pretend  that  he  does  in  good  earneft  defign  the 
end,  when  he  negledls  the  bell  and  moll  proper 
means  for  the  attainment  of  it. 

IV,  The  due  cure  of  our  fouls  confifts  alfo  in  avoid- 


ing 


the  cm  thing  needful.  A31 

ing  thofe  things  which  are  pernicious  to  our  falvation,  S  E  R  M. 
and  whereby  men  do  often  hazard  their  fouls.  Such  in  ^^^^^^• 
general  is  the  practice  of  any  known  fin.  By  this  we 
do,  as  it  were,  run  upon  the  f^'ord's  point,  and  do  en- 
danger our  falvation  as  much  as  a  deep  wound  in  our 
body  would  do  our  life  :  and  tho'  fuch  a  wound  may 
perhaps  becur'd  afterwards  by  repentance,  yet  no  maa 
that  commits  any  wilful  fm  knows  the  difmal  confe- 
quenceof  it,  and  whither  by  degrees  it  may  carry  rum 
at  la^:  for  upon  fuch  a  provocation  God  may  leave 
the  fmner  to  himfelf,  and  withdraw  his  grace  from  him, 
and  give  him  up  to  a  hard  an  1  impenitent  heart,  to 
proceed  from  evil  to  worfe,  and  from  one  wickednels 
to  another,  'till  he  be  finally  ruiii^'d.  So  dangerous 
a  thirig  is  it  knowingly  to  offend  God,  and  to  com-, 
mit  any  deliberate  ad  of  fin. 

More  particularly,  an  inordinate  love  of  the  world 
is  very  pernicious  to  the  fouls  of  men ;  becaufe  it 
quencheth  the  heavenly  lire,  and  fills  our  minds  with 
earthly  cares  and  (iefigns ;  it  tempts  men  to  forfake 
God  and  religion  v/hen  their  worldly  intereilscome  in 
competition  v/ith  them;  and  betrays  them  to  fraud, 
and  falihood,  and  all  kind  of  injuftice,  and  "  many 
^'  other  hurtful  'uds  which  drown  the  foul  in  perdition.'* 

But  bcfides  thefe  dangers  which  are  more  vifible 
and  apparent,  there  is  another  which  is  lefs  difcernible 
becaufe  it  hath  the  face  of  piety ;  and  that  is  fadtion 
in  religion :  by  which  I  mean  an  unpeaceable  and  un- 
charitable zeal  about  things  wherein  religion  either 
doth  not  at  all,  or  but  very  little  confift.  For  bcHdes 
that  this  temper  is  utterly  inconfiflent  with  feveral  of 
the  moil  eminent  chriftian  graces  and  virtues,  as  hu- 
mility, love,  peace,  meeknefs,  and  forbearance  to- 
wards thole  that  differ  from  usj  it  hath  likewife  twQ 

very 


4]  2  ^he  care  of  cur  fouls, 

SKRM.  very  great  mifchiefs  commonly  attending  upon  it, 
^^ •  and  both  of  them  pernicious  to  religion  and  the  fouls 
of  men. 

Fird,  that  it  takes  fuch  men  off  from  minding  the 
more  necelLry  and  eflfential  parts  of  religion.  They 
are  lb  zealous  about  fmall  things,  the  tithing  of  mint, 
and  anife,  and  cummin,  that  they  negledt  the  weigh- 
tier things  of  the  law,  faith,  and  mercy,  and  judg- 
ment, and  the  love  of  God  :  they  fpend  fo  much  of 
their  time  and  heat  about  things  doubtful,  that  they 
hive  no  leilure  to  mind  the  things  that  are  necefTary : 
and  are  fo  concerii'd  about  little  fpeculative  opinions 
in  religion,  which  they  always  call  fundamental  arti- 
cles of  faith,  that  the  pradtice  of  religion  is  almoft 
wholly  negle£i:ed  by  them :  and  they  are  fo  taken  up  in 
fpying  out  and  cenfuring  error  and  herefy  in  others, 
that  they  never  think  of  curing  thofe  Jufls  and  vices 
and  paiTions  which  do  fo  vifibly  reign  in  thcmfclves. 
Deluded  people!  that  do  not  confider  that  the  greateft 
herefy  in  the  worM  is  a  wicked  life,  becaufe  it  is  fo  di- 
rediy  and  fundamentally  oppofite  to  the  whole  defign 
of  the  chriflian  faith  and  religion :  and  that  do  not  con- 
fider, that  God  will  fooner  forgive  a  man  a  hundred  de- 
fects of  his  underftanding  than  one  fault  of  his  will. 

Secondly,  another  great  mifchief  which  attends  this 
temper  is,  that  men  are  very  apt  to  interpret  this  zeal 
of  theirs  againft  others  to  be  great  piety  in  themfelves, 
and  as  much  as  is  neceflary  to  bring  them  to  heaven ; 
and  to  think  that  they  arc  very  religious,  becaufe  they 
keep  a  great  llir  about  maintaining  the  out-works  of 
religion,  when  it  is  ready  to  be  ilarv'd  within  \  and 
that  there  needs  no  more  to  denominate  them  good 
chriflians,  but  to  be  of  fuch  a  party,  aiid  to  be  lifted 
of  fuch  a  church,  which  they  always  take  for  granted 

to 


the  one  thing  needful,  433 

to  be  the  only  true  one  ;  and  then  zealoufly  to  hate,  ^  E  R  at. 
and  uncharitably  to  cenfure  all  the  reft  of  mankind.   ,    '^'"'^    * 

How  many  arc  there  in  the  world,  that  think 
they  have  made  very  fure  of  heaven,  not  by  the  old 
plain  way  of  leaving  their  fins  and  reforming  their 
\\vt<,^  but  by  a  more  clofe  and  cunning  way  of  carry- 
ing their  vices  along  with  them  into  another  church, 
and  calling  themfelves  good  catholicks,  and  all 
others  hcreticks  ?  and  that  having  done  this,  they  are 
m  a  fafc  condition  ;  as  if  a  mere  name  would  admit 
a  man  into  heaven,  or  as  if  there  v/ere  any  church 
in  the  world  that  had  this  fantaflical  privilege  be- 
longing to  it,  that  a  wicked  man  might  be  faved  for 
no  other  reafon  but  becaufe  he  is  of  it. 

Therefore,  as  thou  valued  thy  foul,  take  heed  of 
engaging  in  any  faflion  in  religion  ;  becaufe  it  is  an 
hundred  to  one  but  thy  zeal  will  be  fo  employed  a- 
bout  lefTer  things,  that  the  main  and  fubftantial  parts 
of  religion  will  be  negledled :  befides  that,  a  man 
deeply  engag'd  in  heats  and  controvernes  of  this  na- 
ture, (hall  very  hardly  efcape  being  poiTcfs'd  with  that 
fpirit  of  uncharitablenefs  and  contention,  of  peevifh- 
nefs  and  fiercenefs,  which  reigns  in  all  factions,  but 
more  efpecially  in  thofe  of  religion. 

V.  The  due  care  of  our  fouls  confifls  in  the  even 
and  conftant  practice  of  the  feveral  graces  and  virraes 
of  a  good  life  \  or,  as  the  apoftle  exprefTeth  it,  "  in 
««  exercifing  our  felves  always  to  have  a  confcicncc 
<'  void  of  offence  towards  God  and  men."  For  here- 
in is  religion  bed  feen,  in  an  equal  and  uniform 
pradice  of  every  part  of  our  duty :  not  only  in  fer- 
ving  God  devoutly,  but  in  demeaning  our  felves 
peaceably  and  jufdy,  kindly  and  charitably  towards 

Vol.  II.  I  i  i  ^J 


434  ^^^^  ^^'"^  of  our  fouls 

SERM.  all  men:  not  only  in  reilraininef  our  fclves  from  the 
'  '  '  'J^  oiuward  adt  of  fin,  but  in  mortifying  the  inward  in- 
clination to  it,  in  fubduing  our  luils,  and  governing 
our  paiTions,  and  bridling  our  tongues.  As  he  that 
would  have  a  prudent  care  of  his  health  and  life,  mud 
not  only  guard  himfelf  againft  the  chief  and  com- 
mon difeaies  v»'hich  are  incident  to  men,  and  take 
care  to  prevent  them  ;  but  mull  likewife  be  careful  to 
preferve  himfelf  Irom  thofe  which  are  eilcemed  lels 
dangerous,  but  yet  fometimes  do  prove  mortal ;  he 
mult  not  only  endeavour  to  fecure  his  head  and  heart 
from  being  wounded,  but  muft  have  a  teiider  care 
of  every  part ;  there  being  hardly  any  dileafe  or 
wound  fo  fiight  but  tliat  feme  have  died  of  it :  in  like 
manner,  die  care  of  cur  fouls  confilts  in  an  univerfal 
regard  to  our  ^':.t)\  and  that  we  be  defedive  in  no 
part  of  it:  though  v/e  ought  to  have  a  more  efpccial 
regard  to  thofe  dudes  which  are  more  confiderable, 
aiid  wherein  religion  doth  mainly  confiH:;  as  piety 
towards  God,  temperance  and  chadity  in  regard  of 
our  felves,  charity  towards  d-\t:  poor,  truth  and  jufticc, 
goodnefs  and  kindnefs  towards  all  men  :  but  then  no 
oriier  grace  and  virtue,  though  of  an  inferior  rank, 
Ought  to  be  negleded  by  us. 

And  tiius  I  have  endeavour'd,  as  plainly  and  brief- 
ly as  I  could,  to  declare  to  you  in  wh^t  inftances  the 
due  care  of  religion  and  our  fouls  doth  chiefly  confifl. 
Arid  I  would  not  have  any  man  think  that  all  this 
is  an  ealy  bufuiefs,  and  requires  but  little  time  to  do 
it  in,  and  that  a  fmall  degree  of  diligence  and  induitry 
will  fcrve  for  this  purpoie  :  to  maiier  and  root  out  the 
inveterate  habits  ot  fin,  to  bring  our  paffions  under 
the  command  and  government  of  our  reafon,  and  to 
attain  to  a  good  degree  of  e\  ery  chriflian  grace  and 

virtue: 


the  one  thing  needful,  4  ^  ^ 

virtue:  that  faith  sad  hope  and  charhy,  humih'ty  SER\T. 
and  meeknefs  and  p-itience  may  all  have  their  per-  vH-^l.^ 
feet  v/ork  \  and  that,  as  St.  James  Hiys,  "  v/c  may 
*'  be  periecl  and  entire,  wanting  nothing  ; "  nothing- 
that  belongs  to  the  perfedion  of  a  good  man,  and  cf 
a  good  chriftian.  And  this,  whenever  we  come  to 
make  the  trial,  w-e  ^~iA\  find  to  be  a  great  and  a  long 
work. 

Some  indeed  would  make  religion  to  be  a  vasy 
fliort  and  eafy  bufincfs,  and  to  confiil  only  in  believ- 
ing v/hat  Christ  hath  done   for  us,  and  relyino- 
conndendy  upon  it :  which  is  fo  far  from  being  the 
true  nodon  cf  chriftian  faith,  that,   if  I  be  not  much 
miitakcn,  it  is   the  very  definition  cf  prefumption. 
For  the  bible  plainly  tcacheth  u|>,  that  unlefs  our 
.  faith  work  by  charity,  and  purify  bur  hearts  and  re- 
form our  lives  j   unlefs  like  Abraham's  futh  it  be 
perK&d  by  works,  it  is  but  a  dead  faith,  and  will 
in   no  wife  avail  to  our  juftiiication   and  falvation. 
And  our  blefTed  Saviour,    the  great  author  and 
finifner  of  our  uiith,  hatli  no  where,  that  I  know  of, 
faid  one  word  to  this  purpofe,  that  foith  feparated 
from  obedience  and  a  good  life  will  lave  any  man  : 
But  he  hath  faid  very  much  to  x}?,t  coxitrary,  and  thaC 
very  plainly.     For  he  promifeth  blelTcdnefs  to  none, 
but  thofe  vv'ho  live  in  the  praclice  of  thole  chrifliaii 
graces  and  virtues  which  are  particularly  mention'd 
by  him  in  the  beginning  of  his  excellent  fermon  up- 
on the  mount;    of  humility,  and  repentance,  and  Matth.v. 
meeknefs,  and  righteoufnefs,   and  mercifulnefs,  and  ^'  ^*      * 
purity,  and  peaccablenefs,  and  padence  under  perfccu- 
tion  and  fuiferings  for  righteoufnefs  fake.     And  af- 
terv/ards  in  the  fame  fermon,  "  Not  every  one,  fiith  Matth.vii 
.*'  he,  that  faith  unto  me.  Lord,  Lord,  fhall  en-  ^^- 

1  i  I  2  "  tei; 


43  6  ^hs  c^yre  of  our  fouls 

SER  M.  ce  |_^..  ]^jfQ  (|jg  kinp;dom  of  heaven,  but  he  that  doth 

X  X  X 1  v 
v.,,.^^^,..^" "  the  will  of  my  Father  which  is  in  heaven." 

Ver.  24.  And  again,  "  wholbever  heareth  thefc  fayings  of 
"  mine,  and  doth  them,  I  v/ill  liken  him  unto  a 
"  wife  man  which  built  his  houfe  upon  a  rock." 

Ver.  26,    And  afterwards  he  tells  us,    that  whofocver  builds 

^'^'  his  hopes  of  eternal  happinefs  upon  any  other  foun- 

dation, than  the  faith  of  the  gofpel  and  the  pradice 
of  its  precepts,  doth  build  his  houfe  upon  tlie  fand ; 
v/hich  when  it  comes  to  be  tried  by  the  rain  and  the 
winds,  "  will  fall  \  and  the  fall  of  it  will  be  great." 

Jo;in  xiii.  And  elfewhere ;  "  if  ye  know  thefe  things,  happy 

*'^*  "  are  ye  if  ye  do  them."     And  he  does  very  fevere- 

ly  check  the  vain   confidence   and  prefumption  of 

thofe,  who  will  needs  rely  upon  him  for  falvation 

without  keeping  his  commandments,  "  Why  call  ye 

A;kevi.    (t  ^^^^  ^^yg  j^^.^  Lord,  Lord,  and  do  not  the  things 

""  '  «  which  I  fay  ?'» 

Does  any  man  think  that  he  can  be  favcd  without 

T  John  V.  loving  God  and  Christ  }  "  And  this,  faith  St.  John, 


3-  "is  the  love  of  God,  that  we  keep  his  command- 

1  Johnii.  «  ments:"  and  again,  "he  that  faith  I  know  him," 
^^  and   by  the  fame  reafon,   he  that  faith  I  love  him, 

"  and  kcepeth  not  his  commandments,  he  is  a  liar, 
John  xiv.  *'  and  the  truth  is  not  in  him.  If  ye  love  me,  faith 
^^*  "  our    blefled    Lord,  keep   my  commandments:'* 

Ver,  21.   And  again,  "  he  that  hath  my  commftidments  and 

"  keepeth  them,  he  it  is  that  loveth  me." 

Does  any  man  think,  that  any  but  the  children  of 

'God  fhall  be  heirs  of  eternal  life.?  Hear  then  what 

I  John  iii.  St.  John  faith,  "  Little  children,  let  no  man  deceive 

7*  "  you,  he  that  doth  righteoufneis  is  righteous,  even  as 

Ver.  10.    "  he  is  righteous:"  and  again,  "  in  this  the  chil- 

"  dren  of  Gup  are  manifefl,  and  the  children  of  the 

'^  devil. 


the  one  thing  needful,  437 

•^  devil,  he  that  doth   not  righteoufnefs  is  not  of  S  E  R  \i: 
,,  ^  XXXIV. 

God.  u-v—^ 

In  a  word,  this  is  the  perpetual  tenour  of  the  bible, 
from  the  beginning  of  it  to  the  end,  "  If  thou  doft  well, 
*'  faith  God  to  Cain,  fhalt  thou  not  be  accceptcd  ?  "  Gen.  ill.7* 
and  again,  "  fay  ye  to  the  righteous,  it  fhall  be  well  jfa.  in. 
"  with  him,  for  they  fliall  eat  the  fruit  of  their  do- *°>  *'• 
*'  ings :  wo  unto  the  wicked,  it  fhall  be  ill  with  him, 
**  for  the  reward  of  his  hands  fhall  be  given  him.  •* 
And  in  the  gofpel,  when  the  young  man  came  to 
our  Saviour  to  be  inftrudlcd  by  him,  what  good 
thing  he  fhould  do  that  he  might  inherit  eternal  life, 
our  Lord  gives  him  this  fhort  and  plain  advice,  "  jf  ^^^tt.  xi^ 
*'  thou  wilt  enter  into  life,  keep  the  commandments.'* 
And  in  the  very  lafl  chapter  of  the  bible  we  find  this 
folemn  declaration,  "  BlefTed  are  they  that  do  his 
*'  commandments,  that  they  may  have  right  to  the 
*'  tree  of  life,  and  enter  in  through  the  gates  into  the  '^ 

*^  city,"  that  is,  into  heaven,  which  the  apoftle  to 
the  Hebrews  calls  "  the  city  which  hath  foundations, 
*'  whofe  builder  and  maker  is  God."  So  vain  and 
groundlefs  is  the  imagination  of  thofe,  who  truft  to 
be  favcd  by  an  idle  and  ineffedual  faith,  without  ho- 
linefs  and  obedience  of  life. 

II.  I  proceed  now  in  the  fecond  place  to  convince 
us  all,  if  it  may  be,  of  the  necefTity  of  minding  reli- 
gion and  our  Touls.  When  we  call  any  thing  neceffa- 
ry,  we  mean  that  it  is  fo  in  order  to  fome  end,  which 
cannot  be  attained  without  it.  We  call  thofe  things 
the  neceffaries  of  life,  without  which  men  cannot 
fubfift  and  live  in  a  tolerable  condition  in  this  world  : 
and  that  is  neceffary  to  our  eternal  happinefs,  with- 
out which  it  cannot  be  attaint.  Now  happinefs  be- 
ing our  chief  end,  whatever  is  necelTary  to  that  is  more 

necefTary 


43 S  ^^-^  ^^'^^  ofoiirfcuh 

SE  R  M.  neceflary  than  any  tiling  eJfe  ;  and  in  compariTon  of 

4^'J ;  that,  all  other  things  not  only  may,  but  ou5^hc  to  be 

neg]e6i;ed  by  us. 

Now  to  convince  men  of  the  ncccfiity  of  religion, 
I  fliall  brieiiy  fhew,  that  it  is  a  certain  way  to  happi- 
nefs :  that  it  is  certain  that  there  is  no  other  v/ay  but 
this :  and  that  if  we  neglecl  religion,  we  lliall  cer- 
tainly be  extremely  and  for  ever  miilrable. 

Firll,  that  religion  is  a  certain  way  to  happinefs. 
And  for  this  we  have  God's  exprefs  declaration  and 
promife.  The  bed  aiTurance  that  can  be."  Pie  that  can- 
"  not  lye  hath  promifed  eternal  life,  to  them  v/hoby 
"  patient  continuance  in  vvell-doing  feek  for  glory 
**  and  honour  and  immorrality."  All  the  happinefs 
that  v/e  can  def:re,  and  of  which  the  nature  of  man  is 
capable,  is  promifed  to  us  upon  the  terms  of  religion, 
*'  upon  our  denying  ungodlinefs,  and  v/orldly  lufls, 
"  and  living  foberly,  and  righteoufiy  and  godly  in 
*'  this  prefent  world  :"  A  mighty  reward  for  a  little 
fervice ;  an  eternity  of  happinefs,  of  joys  unfpeakable 
and  full  of  glory,  for  the  diligence  and  induilry  of  a" 
few  days :  a  happinefs  large  as  our  wilhcs,  and  lad- 
ing as  our  fouls. 

Secondly,  'tis  certain  alfo  that  there  is  no  other  way 
to  happinels  but  this.  He,  who  alone  can  make  us 
happy,  hath  promifed  it  to  us  upon  thefe  and  no 
other  terms.  He  hath  faid,  "  that  if  we  live  after  the 
*'  flefn,  v/e  fl^all  die;  but  if  by  the  Spirit  v/c  mor- 
*'  t'fy  the  deeds  of  the  Refli,  we  fliall  live:  that 
"  wiihout  holinefs  no  man  fhill  fee  the  Lord:  " 
zx\^^  that  he  that  lives  in  the  habitual  practice  of  any 
vice,  "  of  covetoufncfs,  or  adultery,  or  malice,  or 
"^  revenge,  fliall  not  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God :  ** 
and  wc  have  reafon  to  believe  him   concerning  the 

term* 


the  one  thing  needful.  a^q 

terms  of  this  happinefs,  and  the  means  of  attaining  it,  S  E  Rx\f.^ 
by  v/hofe  favour  and  bounty  alone  wc  hope  to  be;^'^'^'^^" 
n^ake  partakers  of  it. 

■  And  if  God  had  not  faid  it  in  his  v/crd,  yet  the  lia- 
ture  a.'d  reafon  of  the  thing  doth  plainly  declare  it. 
For  religion  is  not  only  a  condition  of  our  iiappinefs, 
but  a  neceffary  qualihcation  and  difpofition  for  it.  We 
mufl  beiike  to  God  in  the  temper  of  our  minds,  be- 
fore we  can  find  any  felicity  in  th^  enjoyment  of  him. 
Men  mufl:  be  purged  from  their  lufts,  and  from  thofe 
ili-natur'd  and  deviliili  paiTions  of  malice,  and  envy, 
and  revenge,  before  tliey  can  be  fit  company  for  their 
heavenly  Father,  and  meet  to  dwell  with  him, 
*'  who  is  love,  and  dwells  in  love." 

Thirdly,  if  we  negled  religion,  we  fhall  certainly 
be  extremely  and  for  ever  miferable.  The  word  of 
truth  hath  laid  it,  "  that  indignation  and  wrath,  tri- 
"  bulation  and  anguiHi  fhall  be  upon  every  foul  of 
*'  man  that  doth  evil."  Nay,  if  God  iliould  hold  his 
hand,  and  fliould  infiid  no  poficive  torment  upon  fn- 
ners,  yet  they  could  not  fpare  themfelves,  but  would 
be  their  own  executioners  and  tormentors.  The  guilt 
of  that  wicked  life  v/liich  they  had  led  in  this  world, 
and  the  flings  of  their  own  confcienccs  muft  neceflliri- 
ly  make  them  mifrable, v^'henever  their  cv/n  thoup-hts 
are  let  loofe  upon  them  ;  as  they  will  certainly  be  in 
the  other  world,  when  they  Hiall  have  nothing  either 
of  pleafure  or  bufinefs  to  divert  them. 

So  that  if  we  be  concern'd,  either  to  be  happy  here- 
after, or  to  avoid  thofe  mileries  which  are  great  and 
dreadful  beyond  all  imagination,  it  will  be  neceffary 
for  us  to  mind  religion  •,  without  which  we  can  nei- 
ther attain  that  happinefs,  nor  efcape  thofe  miferies. 

AH  that  nov\^  remains,  is  to  perfuade  you  and  my 

felf 


440  ^he  care  ofonrfouh 

S  E  R  M.  felf  ferioufly  to  mind  this  one  thing  ncceflary.    And 
^^^2Zji  to  ^"^^  ^""^^  ^  ^^'^^^  ^PP^y  "^y  <^i^courfe  to  two  forts  of 
perfons ;  thofc  who  are  remifs  in  a  matter  of  fo  great 
concernment,  and  thofe  who  are  grofiy  carclcfs,  and 
mind  it  not  all. 

Firfi:,  to  thofe  who  arc  remifs  in  a  matter  of  fuch 
vaft  concernment :  who  mind  the  bufinefs  of  religion, 
in  fome  degree,  but  not  fo  heartily  and  vigoroufly  as 
a  matter  of  fuch  infinite  confcquence  doth  require 
and  dcfervc. 

And  here  I  fear  the  very  bcft  are  gready  defedive  ; 
and  fo  much  the  more  to  be  blamed,  by  how  much 
they  are  more  convinc'd  than  others,  of  the  neceffity 
of  a  religious  and  holy  life  \  and  that  without  this 
no  man  iLall  ever  be  admitted  into  the  manfions  of 
the  bleffed:  they  believe  likewife,  that  according  to 
the  degrees  of  every  man's  holinefs  and  virtue  in  this 
life,  will  be  the  degrees  of  his  happinefs  in  the  other; 
*'  that  he  that  fows  fparingly  fhali  reap  fparingly,  and 
"  he  that  fows  plenufully  Ihall  reap  plentifully ; " 
and  that  the  meafure  of  every  man's  reward  fhall  be 
according  to  his  improvement  of  the  talents  that 
were  committed  to  him. 

But  how  litdc  do  men  live  under  the  power  of  theic 
convi(5lions  ?  and  notv/ithftanding  we  are  allur'd  by 
the  mod  glorious  promifes  and  hopes,  and  aw'd  by 
the  greateft  fears,  and  urg'd  by  the  mofc  forcible  ar- 
gument in  the  world,  the  evident  neceffity  of  the 
thing  ;  yet  how  faintly  do  we  run  the  race  that  is  fet 
before  us?  how  frequently  and  how  eafily  arc  we 
ftop'd  or  diverted  in  our  chriftian  courfe  by  very 
little  temptations  ?  how  cold,  and  how  carelels,  and 
how  inconftant  are  we  in  the  excrcifes  of  piety,  and 
how  dcfedlive  in  every  part  of  our  duty  ?  did  wc  a6l 

reafcn* 


the  om  thing  needfiih  44  r 

reafbnably,  and  as  men  ufe  to  do  in  matters  of  much  ^  E  R  M, 
Ids  moment,   we  could  not  be  io  indifferent  about  a  ^.J..,^..^ 
thing  fo  necefiliry,  fo  (light  and  carelefs  in   a  matter 
of  hfe  and  death,  and  upon  which  all  eternity  doth 
depend. 

Let  us  then  fhake  off  this  floth  and  fecurity,  and 
refolve  to  make  that  the  great  bufinefs  of  time,  which 
is  our  great  concernment  to  all  eternity:  and  when  we 
are  immers'd  m  the  cares  and  bufinefs  of  this  life,  and 
troubled  about  many  thing?,  let  this  thought  often 
come  into  our  minds,  that  there  is  one  thing  needful, 
and  which  therefore  deferves  above  all  ether  thino-s 
to  be  regarded  by  us. 

Secondly,  There  are  another  fort  of  perfons,  who 
are  groOy  carelefs  of  this  one  thing  neceffary,  and  do 
not  feem  to  mind  it  at  all :  Who  go  on  fecurely  in  an 
evil  courfe,  as  if  either  they  had  no  fouls,  or  no  con- 
cernment for  them.  .  I  may  fay  to  thefe  as  the  mafter 
of  the  fhip  did  to  Jonah^  when  he  was  faft  aflecp  in 
the  ftorm,  "  What  meanefl  thou,  O  deeper  ?  arife 
*'  and  call  upon  thy  God."  When  our  fouls  are  every 
moment  in  danger  of  finking,  it  is  high  time  for 
us  to  awake  out  of  deep,  to  ply  every  oar,  and  i<:i 
ule  all  pofTible  care  and  induftry  to  fave  a  thing  {(^ 
precious  from  a  danger  fo  threatning  and  fo  terrible. 

We  are  apt  enough  to  be  fenfible  of  the  force  of  this 
argument  of  neceflity  in  other  cafes,  and  very  careful- 
ly to  provide  againft  the  prelTing  nccelTities  of  this  life, 
and  how  to  avoid  thofe  great  temporal  evils  of  poverty 
and  difgrace,  of  pain  and  fuffering:  but  the  great  ne- 
celTity  or  all,  and  that  which  is  mainly  incumbent  up- 
on us,  is  to  provide  for  eternity,  to  fecure  the  ever- 
jafting  happinefsj  and  to  prevent  the  endlefs  and  in- 

Vol.  II.  '"  Kkk  fuo. 


442  7he  care  of  our  fouls, 

S  E  R  M.  fupportable  miferies  of  another  world.    This,  this,  is 
XXXIV  .  33 

v,,^, 'j  the  one  thing  neceflliry ;  and  to  this  we  ought  to  bend 

and  apply  all  our  care  and  endeavours. 

If  we  would  fairly  compare  the  neceffity  of  things, 
and  wifely  weigh  the  concernments  of  this  life  and  the 
other  in  a  juft  and  equal  balance,  we  fhould  be  afhamed 
to  mifplace  our  diligence  and  induftry  as  we  do ;  to 
bellow  our  bed:  thoughts  and  time  about  thefe  vain 
and  pcrifhing  things,  and  to  take  no  care  about  that 
better  part  which  cannot  be  taken  from  us.  Fond 
and  vain  men  that  we  are !  who  are  fo  folicitous  how 
we  fhall  pafs  a  few  days  in  this  world,  but  matter 
not  v/hat  fhall  become  of  us  for  ever. 

But  as  carelefs  as  we  are  now  about  thefe  things, 
time  will  come  when  we  fnall  ladly  lay  them  to  heart, 
and  when  they  will  touch  us  to  the  quick :  when  we 
come  to  lie  upon  a  death-bed,  if  God  lliall  be  pleas'd 
to  grant  us  then  fo  much  time  and  ufe  of  our  reafon 
as  to  be  able  to  recoiled  ourfelves,  we  fhall  then  be 
convinc'd  how  great  a  neceiTity  there  was  of  mind- 
ing our  fouls,  and  of  the  prodigious  folly  of  neglect- 
ing them,  and  of  our  not  being  fenfible  of  the  value 
of  them,  'till  we  are  ready  to  defpair  of  faving  them. 
But,  blelfed  be  God,  this  is  not  yet  our  cafe,  though 
we  know  not  how  foon  it  may  be.  Let  us  then  be 
"wife,  and  confider  thefe  things  in  time,  left  death 
and  defpair  fhould  overtake  and  opprefs  us  at  once. 

You  that  are  young,  be  pleas'd  to  confider  that 
this  is  the  belt  opportunity  of  your  lives,  for  the 
minding  and  doing  of  this  work.  You  are  now  moft 
capable  of  the  befl  imprefTions,  before  the  habits  of 
Vice  have  taken  deep  root,  and  your  hearts  "  be 
*'  harden'd  through  the  deceitfulnefi  of  fin:  this  is 
"  tlie  acceptable  time,  this  is  the  day  of  flUvation.'* 

And 


the  one  thing  netdfiiL  443 

And  there  is  likewife  a  very  weighty  confidcration  S  E  R  M- 
to  be  urg'd  upon  thofe  that  are  old,  if  there  be  any 
that  are  wilhng  to  own  themfelves  fo  ;  that  this  is 
the  lafl  opportunity  of  their  hves,  and  therefore  they 
fliould  lay  hold  of  it,  and  improve  it  with  all  their 
might  :  for  it  will  foon  be  pad,  and  when  it  is,  no- 
thing can  call  it  back. 

\i  is  but  a  very  litde  while  before  v/e  fhall  all  cer- 
tainly be  of  this  mind,  that  the  bed  thing  we  could 
have  done  in  this  world,  was  to  prepare  for  the  other. 
Could  I  reprefent  to  you  that  invifible  world  v/hich  I 
am  fpeaking  of,  you  would  all  readily  afTent  to  this 
counfel,  and  would  be  glad  to  follow  it  and  put  it 
fpeedily  in  pradlice.  Do  but  then  open  your  eyes,  and 
look  a  little  before  you  to  the  things  which  are  not  far 
off  from  any  of  us,  and  to  many  of  us  may  perhaps 
be  much  nearer  than  we  are  aware  :  let  us  but  judge  of 
things  now,  as  we  fhall  all  fhortly  judge  of  them:  and 
\tt  us  live  now,  as  after  a  few  days  we  fhall  every  one 
of  us  wifh  with  all  our  fouls  that  we  had  liv'd ;  and 
be  as  ferious,  as  if  we  were  ready  to  flep  into  the  other 
world,  and  to  enter  upon  that  change  which  death 
v/ill  quickly  make  in  every  one  of  us.  Strange  flu- 
pidity  of  men !  that  a  change  fo  near,  fo  great,  fo 
certain,  fhould  afted  us  fo  coldly,  and  be  fo  little 
confider'd  and  provided  for  by  us:  that  the  things  of 
time  fhould  move  us  fo  much,  and  the  things  of  eter- 
nity fo  \\xx\t.  What  will  we  do  when  this  change 
comes,  if  we  have  made  no  preparation  for  it  ? 

If  we  be  chriftians,  and  do  verily  believe  the  things 
which  I  am  fpeaking  of,  and  that  after  a  few  days 
more  are  pafs'd,  death  will  come,  and  draw  afide  that 
thick  veil  of  fenfe  and  fccurity  which  now  hides  thefe 
things  from  us  \  and  ihew  us  that  fearful  aad  amazing 
K  k  k  2  fighc 


XX 


444  ^^^  ^^^^  of  our  fouh'y 

E  R  ^'f  fisht  which  we  are  now  fo  loth  to  think  upon  :  I  fay, 
if  we  beheve  this,  it  is  time  for  us  to  be  wife  and  ferious. 

And  happy  that  man,  who  in  the  days  of  his  health 
hath  retir-d  himfelf  from  the  noife  and  tumult  of  this 
v/orld,  and  made  that  careful  preparation  fc)r  death 
and  a  better  life,  as  may  give  him  that  conftancy  and 
firmnefs  of  fpirit,  as  to  be  able  to  bear  the  thoughts 
and  approaches  of  his  great  charge  without  amaze- 
ment •,  and  to  have  a  mind  almr-it  cq-.ialJy  pc!;*d  be- 
tween that  flrong  inclii  :^nnn  pf  nature  whicl*  makes 
us  defirous  to  live,  and  that  wifer  .'.ifi-.ite  oKreafon 
and  religion  which  fhould  make  u-  ^vjlh  ^  and  con- 
tented to  die  whenever  God  think.s  i.. 

Many  of  us  do  not  fiow  fo  clearly  difcern  thefe 
things,  becaufe  our  e^es  are  dazzled  with  the  falle 
light  and  fplendor  of  Cafdily  felicity  :  but  this  afiu- 
redly  is  more  worth  than  ail  the  kii  gdoms  of  the 
world  and  the  glory  of  them,  to  be  able  to  poiTefs  our 
fouls  at  fuch  a  time,  .md  to  be  at  perlect-  pt-ace  with  our 
own  minds,  having  our  hearts  fixed  trufting  in  God  : 
to  have  our  accounts  made  up,  and  ef!:ate  of  our  im- 
mortal fouls  as  v;ell  let  tied  and  fecur'd,  as,  by  the  al- 
fifUnce  of  God's  gracc^  humane  care  and  endeavour, 
tho'  mix'd  with  much  humane  frailty,  is  able  to  do. 

And  if  we  be  convinc'd  ot  tnefe  things,  we  are  ut- 
terly inexcufable  if  we  do  not  make  thks  our  firft  and 
great  care,  and.  prefer  it  to  all  other  interefls  whatfo- 
ever.  And  to  this  end,  we  fhould  refolutcly  difen- 
tangle  our  felves  from  worldly  cares  and  incum- 
brances ;  at  leait  fo  far,  that  we  may  have  competent 
liberty  and  leifure  to  attend  this  great  concernment, 
and  to  put  our  fouls  into  a  fit  poflure  and  preparation 
for  another  world  :  that  when  ficknefs  and  death  fliall 
come,  we  may  not  ad:  o^^  lall  part  indecently  and 

confufcdJy, 


the  one  thing  needful  44  ^ 

eoiifufedly,  and  have  a  great  deal  of  work  to  do  y^}^,- 
when  we  Hiall  want  both  time  and  all  other  advan-  y,,^.^ 
tages  to  do  it  in  :  whereby  our  fouls,  when  they  will 
fland  mod  in  need  of  comfort  and  f-ipporr,  will  un- 
avoidably be  left  in  a  trembling  and  difconfolate  con- 
dition, and  in  an  anxious  doubtfulnefs  of  mind  what 
will  become  of  them  ibr  zvqv. 

To  conclude,  this  care  of  religion  and  our  fouls  is 
a  thing  fo  neceftiry,  that  in  comparifon  of  it  we  are 
to  neglect  the  very  necefiaries  of  life.  So  our  Lord 
teacheth  us,  "  Take  no  thought,  faying,  what  fliallM^tth.  tj; 
"  we  eat?  or  what  (hall  we  drink?  or  wherewithal^^' ^^'^ 
"  fliall  we  be  clothed  ?  but  feek  ye  firft  the  king- 
^^  dom  of  God  and  his  righteoufnefs."  The  calls  of 
God  and  religion  are  fo  very  prefling  and  importu- 
nate, that  they  admit  of  no  delay  or  excufe  whatfo- 
cver:  this  our  Saviour  fignifies  to  us  by  denying 
the  difciple,  whom  he  had  call'd  to  follow  him, 
leave  to  go  and  bury  his  father,  "  Let  the  dead, 
*'  fays  he,  bury  their  dead,  but  do  thou  follov/  me." 

There  is  one  thing  needful,  and  that  is  the  bull- 
nefs  of  religion,  and  the  care  of  our  immortal  fouls, 
which  whatever  we  negledl  fhould  be  carefully 
minded  and  regarded  by  every  one  of  us.  "  O  that 
*'  there  were  fuch  a  heart  in  us !  O  that  we  were 
"  wife,  that  we  underftand  this,  that  we  would 
"  confider  our  latter  end  !  "  Which  God  grant  wc 
may  all  do,  in  this  our  day,  for  his  mercies  fake  in 
Jesus  Christ,  to  whom  with  the  Father  and 
the  HOLY  Ghost,  be  all  honour  and  glory,  now 
^nd  ever.     Amen. 


A  Tabic 


A  Table  of  the  Texts  of  each 
Sermon. 


J 


SERMON    XX. 

OHN  xiii.  34?  35.  ^  new  commandment  I  give 
unto  you^  that  ye  love  one  another  •,  as  I  have  Icved 
you^  that  ye  alfo  love  one  another :  By  this  Jhall  all 
men  know  that  ye  are  my  difciples^  if  ye  love  one  ano- 
ther, page  7 

SERMON    XXI. 

I  JOHN  iv.  I.  Beloved^  believe  not  every  fpirit^  hut 
try  the  jpirits  whether  they  are  ofGoTy  ;  becaufe  many 
falfe  prophets  are  gone  out  into  the  world.  P-  29 

SERMON    XXII. 

HEB.  vi.  16.  An  oath  for  confirmation  is  to  thern  an 
end  of  all  ft  rife.  P-  ^3 

SERMON    XXIII. 

LUKE  XX.  o,"/^  38.  Now  that  the  dead  are  raifed^ 
even  Mofes  fhcwsd  at  the  hufh^  when  he  calleth  the 
Lord  the  God  of  Abraham^  and  the  God  of  IfaaCy 
and  the  God  of  Jacob,  For  he  is  not  ^  God  of  the 
deady  but  of  the  living  :  for  all  live  to  him,       P-  97 

SERMON    XXIV. 

i  C  O  R.  V.  6.  Wherefore  we  are  always  confident ^ 
knowing  that  whilft  we  are  at  home  in  the  body^  we 
are  abfent  from  the  hoKD.  p.   1 3 8 

SERMON    XXV. 

I  COR.  xi.  2(5,  27,  28.  For  as  often  as  ye  cat  this 
breads  and  drink  this  cup^  ye  do  jljsw  the  Lord's 
death  'till  he  come. 

Where* 


A  Table  of  the  Texts. 

Wherefore  whofoever  Jhall  eat  this  breads  and  drink  this 
cup  of  the  Lord  unworthily^  is  guilty  of  the  body 
and  blood  of  thel^OKTt. 

But  let  a  man  examine  himfelf^  and  fo  let  him  eat  of  that 
breads  and  drink  of  that  cup,  p.   1 52 

SERMON    XXVI. 

A  Difcourfe  againfi 'Tranfuhfiantiation.  p.  log 

SERMON    XXVIL 

JOSHUA  xxiv.  15.  If  it  feem  evil  unto  you  ta 
ferve  the  Lord,  chocfe you  this  day  whom  you  will 
ferve,  p.  247 

SERMON    XXVIII. 

JOSH  U A  xxiv.  15.  If  it  feem  evil  unto  you  to 
ferve  the  Lord,  choofe you  this  day  whom  you  will 
ferve.  p.  269 

SERMON    XXIX. 
JEREM.  xiii.   23.    Can   the   ethiopian  change  his 
skin^  or  the  leopard  his  fpots  P  then  may  ye  alfo  do 
good  that  are  accuflomed  to  do  evil,  p.  294 

SERMON    XXX. 

MATTHEW  xxiii.  1 3 .  iVo  unto  you  fcribes  and 
pharifees^  hypocrites  j  for  ye  fhut  up  the  kingdom  of 
heaven  againfi  men  \  and  ye  neither  go  in  your  f elves ^ 
neither  fuffer  ye  them  thai  are  entring  to  go  in, 

P-  314 

SERMON    XXXL 

MATTHEW  XXV.  i,  2,  &c.  "Then  fhall  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  be  likened  unto  ten  virgins^  which 
took  their  lamps^  and  went  forth  to  meet  the  bride^ 
groom^ 

'And  five  of  them  were  wife^  and  five  were  foolifh^  Sec. 

P-  341 

SERMON 


A  Table  of  the  Texts. 

SERMON     XXXII. 

EZRA  IX.  13,  14.  And  after  all  that  is  come,  upcn 
us  for  OUT  LVil  deeds ^  and  for  our  great  trefpafs  ; 
feeing  that  thou  our  God  hofi  punifhed  us  lefs  than 
cur  miquities  defcrve^  and  haft  given  us  fiich  a  deli- 
verance  as  this : 

Shoidd  "-'^e  again  break  thy  commandments^  'a}id  join 
in  affinity  with  tbe  people  of  thefe  abominations  ? 
,  wouldcft  not  thou  be  angry  with  us  'till  thou  hadfi  con- 
fumed  us^  fo  that  there  fhculd  be  no  remnant  nor 
efcaping  ?  p.   zj  i 

SERMON    XXXIII. 

MATTHEW  V.  44.  But  I  fay  unto  you^  lovs 
your  enemies^  blefs  them  that  curfe  you^  do  *good  to 
them  that  ha'e  you,  pray  for  them  that  defpitefully  ufe 
yoUy  and  per fe  cute  you,  p.   "^(^"^ 

SERMON    XXXIV. 
LUKE  X.  4^.  But  one  thing  is  needfuL      p.  425 


The  End  of  the  Second  Volume^ 


m»f^ 


f- 


:-rr  -v'r 


