i 


LIBRARY  OF  THE  THEOLOGICAL  SEMINARY 


PRINCETON,  N.  J. 

Presented  by 


J  ^  ' 


Division...t. 
Section. 


r 


SERMONS 

ON    SEVERAL 

Subjects  and  Occasions, 

By  the  mofl:  Reverend 

T>v.yoHN  riLLorsoN, 

LATE 

Lord  Archbifliop  of  Canterbury. 


VOLUME    the    NINTH. 


LONDON: 

^Printed  for  R.  Ware,  A.  Ward,  J .  and  P.  Knapton,  7*.  Longman, 
R,  Hetty  C.  Hitch  J.  Hodges,  S.  Auften,  J,  and  R.  Tonjon, 
y,  and  H.  Pemherton^  and  y .  Rivington* 

MDCCXLIIlT 


'net: 
SERMON     CLVir. 

God  the  firft  caufe,  and  laft  end. 


ROM.  xi.  36. 

For  of  him^  and  through  hirn^  and  to  him  are  all 
things^  to  whom  he  glory  for  ever.     Amen, 


H 


AVING  confidered  the  more  eminent  and  S  E  R  M; 
abfolute  perfedlions  of  the  divine  nature,  as    ^^  ^^' 


alfo  that  which  refults  from  the  infinite  excellency  and 
perfedlion  of  God  compared  with  the  imperfection  of 
our  underftandings,  I  come  in  the  laft  place  to  treat 
of  fuch  as  are  merely  and  purely  relative  •,  as  that  he 
is  "  the  firft  caufe,  and  the  laft  end"  of  all  things; 
to  wiiich  purpofe  I  have  chofen  thefe  words  of  the 
^poftle,  for  the  fubjed:  of  my  prefent  difcourfe  j  *'  For 
**  of  him,  and  through  him,  &c.'* 

The  dependance  of  thefe  words  upon  the  former 
is  briefly  this.  The  apoftle  had  been  fpeaking  be- 
fore in  this  chapter,  feveral  things  that  might  tend 
to  raife  us  to  an  admiration  of  the  wifdom,  and 
goodnefs,  and  mercy  of  God,  in  the  difpenfation 
of  his  grace,  for  the  falvation  of  men,  both  Jews 
and  Gentiles,  and  therefore  would  have  us  afcribe 
this  work  wholly  to  God  ;  the  contrivance  of  it  to  his 
wifdom,  and  not  to  our  own  counfels,  v.  34.  "  For 
"  who  hath  known  the  mind  of  the  Lord  ?  and 
"  who  hath  been  his  counfellor  ?"  and  the  beft ow- 
ing this  grace,  to  his  free  goodnefs  and  mercy,  and 
not  to  any  defert  of  ours,  v.  '^s-  "Or  who  hath 
"  firft  given  to  him,  and  it  ftiall  be  recompenfed  to 

Vol.  IX,  j8  N  a  V  ^^ 


3.76^  ^^^  /^^/r/?  caufe,  and  lajl  end. 

S  E  R  M.  «  him  again  ?"  Yea  and  not  only  in  the  difpenfation 
^^^^^'  of  o-face,  bul  of  all  good  things  •,  not  onlyln  this  work 
of  redemption,  but  alfo  of  creation,  God  is  the 
fountain,  and  original,  and  firftcaufe,  from  wh'fence 
every  thing  proceeds  ;  and  the  laft  end,  to  which 
every  thing  is  to  be  referred.  "  For  of  him,"  &c. 
g|  aurS,  "  from  him,"  the  efficient  caufe  producing 
all  things  -,  ^i  uvrS,  "  by  or  through  him,''  as  the 
efficient  conferving  caufe  of  all  things  ;  j^  elg  ocvtou\ 
"  and  to  him,"  as  the  final  caufe  of  all  things,  and 
the  end  for  which  they  were  made. 

The  propofition  I  fhall  fpeak  to  isj  that  God  is 
the  firft  caufe,  and  laft  end. 

Firft,  I  fhall  a  httle  explain  the  terms. 

Secondly,  confirm  the  propofition. 

Thirdly,  apply  it. 

Firft,  for  the  explication  of  the  terms. 

I.  That  God  is  the  firft  caufe,  fignifies, 
;    I.  Negatively,  that  he  liad  no  caufe,  did  not  de-. 
rive  his  being  from  any  other,  or  does  depend  upon 
any  other  being  •,  but  that  he  was  always,  and  eter- 
nally of  himfelf. 

V  2.  Pofitively,  that  he  is  the  caufe  of  all  things 
befides  himfelf,  the  fountain  and  original  of  all  creat- 
ed beings,  from  whom  all  things  proceed,  and  upon 
whom  all  things  depend  •,  or,  that  I  may  ufe  the 
exprcffionof  St.  John,  John  i.  3.  which  I  know  is 
appropriated  to  the  fecond  perfon  in  the  Trinity, 
*'  By  him  all  things  were  made,  and  without  him 
"  was  nothing  made  that  was  made."  So  that  when 
we  attribute  to  God,  that  he  is  the  firft,  we  mean, 
that  there  was  nothing  before  him,  and  that  he  was 
before  all  things,  and  that  all  things  are  by  him. 

II.  The  laft  end,  that  is,  that  all  things  refer  to 
him  i  that  is,  the  dcfign  and  aim  of  all  things  that 

I  /  arc 


GeD  thefirfi  caufe^  and  lafi  end.  3763 

4femade,  is  the  illuflration  of  God's  glory  ^onieSF^RM. 
way  or  other,  and  the  manifeilation  of  his  perfe6lions, 
'   Secondly,  for  the  confirmation,   I   fhall   briefly, 
according  to  my  ufual  method,  attempt  it  thefe  two 
ways. 

I.  By  natural  light.  The  notion  of  a  God  con- 
tains in  it  all  poflible  perfection.  Now  the  utmoft 
perfection  we  can  imagine,  is,  for  a  being  to  be  al- 
ways of  itfelf,  before  all  other  beings,  and  not  only 
fo,  but  to  be  thecaufe  of  all  other  beings  •,  that  is,, 
that  there  fhould  be  nothing,  but  what  derives  it's 
being  from  him,  and  continually  depends  upon  him  ; 
from  whence  follows,  that  all  things  muft  refer  to 
him,  as  their  laft  end.  For  every  wife  agent  adls 
with  defign,  and  in  order  to  an  end.  Now  the  end 
is  that  which  is  beft,  which  is  moil  worthy  the  at- 
taining, and  that  is  God  himfelf.  Now  his  being 
and  perfections  are  already,  and  the  beft  next  to  the 
exiftence  of  his  being  and  perfections,  is  the  mani- 
feftation  of  them,  which  is  called  God's  glory  ;  and 
'  this  is  the  higheft  end  that  we  can  imagine,  to  which 
all  the  effects  of  the  divine  power,  and  goodnefs,  and 
wifdom,   do  refer. 

And  that  thefe  titles  are  to  be  attributed  to  God, 
is  not  only  reafonable,  when  it  is  revealed  and  dif- 
covered,  but  was  difcovercd  by  the  natural  light  of 
the  heathens.  Hence  it  was  that  Ariftotle  gave  to 
God  thofe  titles  of  the  firft  being,  the  firft  caufe, 
and  the  firft  mover  \  and  his  mafter  Plato  calls  God 
the  author,  and  parent  of  all  things,  the  maker 
and  architect  of  the  world,  and  of  all  creatures  •, 
the  fountain  and  original  of  all  things."  Porphyry 
calls  him  to  sr^caTov,  the  firft,  from  whence  he 
reafons  to  this  fenfe,  that  "  he  is  the  ultimate  end, 
[^  and  that  all  things  move  towards  God,    thd.  all 

"  motions 


cc 


cc 


3764  God  thefirjl  caufe^  and  lajl  end. 

S  E  R  M  "  motions  center  in  him ;  becaufe,  faith  he,  it  is  mod 
^^^   *    "  proper  and  natural  for  things  to  refer  to  their  ori- 
ginal, and  to  refer  all  to  him,   from  whom  they 
receive  all."     Antoninus,  the  emperor  and  phi- 
lofophcr,  fpeaking  of  nature  (which  with  the  Stoicks 
ilgnifies  God)  hath  thefe  words,  which  are  fo  very 
like  thefe  of  the  apoftle,  that  they  may  feem  to  be 
taken  from  him  •,  £x  0*5  TxrocvlcCy  ev  <TOi  Tarocvjocy  Big  trs 
'srccvloiy   "  Of  thee  are  all   things,  in  thee  are  all 
"  things,  to  thee  are  all  things." 

II.  From  fcripture.  Hither  belong  all  thole  places 

where  he  declares  himfelf  to  be  "  the  firft,  and  the 

"  laft,'*  Ifa.  xh.  4.  "  Who  hath  wrought  and  done 

"  it,  calling  the  generations  from  the  beginning  f  I 

*'  the  Lord,  the  firft,  and  with  the  laft,  I  am  he.'* 

lia.  xliii.  ID.  "  Before  me  there  was  no  God  formed,'* 

(or  as  it  is  in  the  margin)  "  there  was  nothing  form- 

"  ed  of  God,  neither  fhall  there  be  after  me."  Ifa. 

xliv.  6.  "  I  am  the  firil,  and  I  am  the  laft,  and  bc- 

"  fides  me  there  is  no  God."  Ifa.  xlviii.  12,   13. 

I  am  the  firft,  I  am  alfo  the  laft,  my  hand  hath 

laid  the  foundation  of  the  earth,  my  right  hand 

hath  fpread  the  heavens  ;"   which  is  as  much  as 

to  fay,   he  hath  made  the  world,  and  was  the  firft 

caufe  of  all  things.    Rev.  i.  8.    "  I  am  alpha  and 

omega,    the  beginning  and  the   end,   faith  the 

Lord,  which  is,  and  which  was,   and  which  is 


<c 


**  to  come." 


(C 


But  more  exprefly,  i  Cor.  viii.  6.  "  But  to  us 
there  is  but  one  God,  the  father,  of  whom  are 
all  things,  and  we  by  him,  ^  17/^6^^  £ig  uvtov^ 
and  we  to  him,  and  for  him."  Ad:s  xvii.  24. 
*'  God  that  made  the  world,  and  all  things  therein." 
V.  25.  "  He  giveth  to  all  life,  and  breath,  and  all 
II  rfiings."  y.  2b*.  ^  In  him  we  live,  and  move, 

"  and 


GoDtheJlrJicaufey  ajid  laji  end.  376  c 

*'  and  have  our  being."  V.  29.  "  For  as  much  then  SE  R  M, 
"  as  we  are  the  ofF-fpring  of  God." 

Hither  we  may  refer  thofe  texts  which  attribute 
the  fame  to  the  fecond  perfon  in  the  Trinity,  as  the 
eternal  wifdom  and  word  of  God,  whereby  all  things 
were  made,  John.  i.  3.  "  All  things  were  made  by 
**  him,  and  without  him  was  nothing  made,  that 
*^  was  made."  V.  10.  "  And  the  world  was  made 
^^  by  him."  i  Cor.  viii.  6.  "  And  one  Lord  Jesus 
*^  Christ,  by  whom  are  all  things,  and  we  by 
**  him."  Eph.  iii.  9.  "  God,  who  created  all 
"  things  by  Jesus  Christ."  Col.  i.  16.  "  By  him 
*^  were  all  things  created  that  are  in  heaven,  and 
*^  that  are  in  earth,  vifible  and  invifible,  whether 
*^  they  be  thrones,  or  dominions,  or  principalities, 
**  or  powers,  all  things  were  created  by  him,  and 
*^  for  him,  and  he  is  before  all  things,  and  by  him 
**  all  things  confift."  Heb.  i.  2.  "  By  whom  alio 
**  he  made  the  worlds."  And,  v.  3.  "  Uphold- 
"  ing  all  things  by  the  word  of  his  power." 

Thirdly  and  laflly,  to  apply  this  dodlrine. 

Ufe.  Firft,  if  God  be  the  firft:  caufe  of  all  things, 
who  did  at  firft  produce  all  creatures,  and  does  fincc 
preferve  them  and  govern  them,  and  difpofeth  of 
all  their  concernments,  and  orders  all  things  that  be- 
fal  them,  from  hence  let  us  learn, 

I.  With  humility  and  thankfulnefs  to  own,  and 
acknowledge,  and  admire  and  blefs  God  as  the  au- 
thor and  original  of  our  being,  as  the  fpring  and 
fountain  of  all  the  blcffings  and  good  things  that  we 
enjoy.  If  we  do  but  confider  what  thefe  words  fig- 
nify,  that  God  is  the  firft  caufe  of  all  things,  wc 
Ihall  fee  great  reafon  to  own  and  acknowledge,  to 
adore  and  praife  him,  and  that  with  the  greateft  hu- 
mility 5  becaufc  we  have  not  ^ren  him  any  things 
'1  \Mi 


CLVII. 


-2766  God  thejirjl  caufe^  and  lajl  end, 

SERM.  but  have  received  all  from  him  ;  he  is  the  caufe  or 
all  things,  who  did  freely  and  of  his  own  good  will 
and  pleafure  communicate  being  to  us,  without  any 
conftraint  or  neceflity,  but  what  his  own  goodnefs- 
laid  upon  him.  Rev.  iv.  11.  "  Thou  art  worthy,  O 
"  Lord,  to  receive  glory,  and  honour,  and  power; 
*'  for  thou  haft  created  all  things,  and  for  thy  plea- 
"  fure  they  are  and  were  created."  We  could  not, 
before  we  were,  deferve  any  thing  from  him,  or 
move  him  by  any  argument,  or  importune  him  by 
intreaties  to  make  us  \  but  he  freely  gave  us  being  V 
and  ever  fince  we  depend  upon  him,  and  have  been 
prefei-ved  by  him,  and  cannot  fubfift  one  moment 
without  the  continued  influence  of  the  power  and' 
goodnefs  which  lirft  called  us  out  of  nothing.  He 
is  the  author  of  all  the  good,  and  the  fountain  of 
all  thofe  blefllngs,  which  for  the  prefent  we  enjoy, 
and  for  the  future  hope  for. 

When  he  made  us  at  firft,  he  defigned  us  for 
happinefs  ;  and  when  w^e  by  our  fin  and  wilful  mifcaf- 
riage  fell  fhort  of  the  happinefs  which  he  defigned 
us  for,  he  fent  his  fon  into  the  world  for  our  reco- 
very, and  gave  his  life  for  the  ranfom  of  our  fouls. 
He  hath  not  only  admitted  us  into  a  new  covenant, 
wherein  he  hath  promifed  pardon,  and  eternal  life 
to  us  ;  but  he  hath  alfo  purchafed  thefe  blefllngs  for 
us,  by  the  moft  endearing  price,  the  blood  of  his 
own  fon,  and  hath  faved  us  in  fuch  a  manner  as  may 
juftly  aftonifh  us.  Upon  thef(i  confiderations  we 
fhould  awaken  ourfclves  to  the  praife  of  God,  and 
with  the  holy  Pfalmift,  call  up  our  fpirits,  and  fum- 
mon  all  the  powers  and  faculties  of  our  fouls  to  afTift 
us  in  this  work,  Pfal.  ciii.  i,  2,  3,  4,  &c.  "  Blefs 
**  the  LcJliD,  O  my  foul,  and  all  that  is  within  me, 
**  blefs  his  holy  name  \  blefs  the  Lord,  0-/ny  fouW 

.  and 


God  the  firji  caufe^  and  lafl  end.  'i7(>7 

"  and  forp;et  not  all  his  benefits  ;  who  foro-iveth  all  ^  ^  R  M. 

t>  '  o  CLVII. 

*'  thy  iniquities,  who  healeth  all  thy  difcafes,  who 
"  redeemcth  thy  life  from  de(tru6lion  ;  who  crown- 
"  eth  thee  with  loving  kindnefs  and  tender  mcr- 
*'  cies  ;''  it  is  he  that  "  fatisfies  our  fouls  with  good 
*'  things,'*  that  hath  promifed  eternal  life  and  hap- 
pinefs  to  us,  and  muft  confer  and  beftow  this  upon 
us  •,  ''  Therefore  our  fouls,  and  all  that  is  within 
"  us,"  fhould  "  blefs  his  holy  name." 

2.  If  God  be  the  firll:  caufe,  that  is,  orders  all 
things  that  bcfal  us,  and  by  his  providence  difpofeth 
of  all  our  concernments,  this  fhould  teach  us  with 
patience  and  quietnefs  to  fubmit  to  all  events,  to 
all  evils  and  affiidlions,  that  come  upon  us,  as  being 
difpofed  by  his  wife  providence,  and  coming  from 
him  ;  wc  are  apt  to  attribute  all  things  to  the  next 
and  immediate  agent,  and  to  look  no  higher  than 
fecond  caufes  ;  not  confidering  that  all  the  motions 
of  natural  caufes  are  diredtly  fubordinate  to  the  firfb 
caufe,  and  all  the  adions  of  free  creatures  are  under 
the  government  of  God's  wife  providence-,  fo  that 
nothing  happens  to  us  befides  the  defigns  and  inten- 
tion of  God. 

And  methinks  this  is  one  particular  excellency  of 
the  ftile  of  the  fcripture  above  all  other  books,  that 
the  conftarvt  phrafe  of  the  facred  dialed  is  to  attri- 
bute all  events  (excepting  fins  only)  to  God  j  fo  that 
every  one  that  reads  it  cannot  but  take  notice,  that 
it  is  wrote  with  a  more  attentive  confideration  of 
God  th^n  any  other  book,  as  appears  by  thofe  fre- 
quent and  exprcfs  acknowledgments  of  God  as  the 
caufe  of  all  events  -,  fo  that  what  in  other  writers 
woukl  be  faid  to  be  done  by  this  or  that  pcrfon,  is 
afcribed  to  God,     Therefore  it  is  fo  ofccn  f.iid,  that 

Vol.  IX,  xS  O  the 

I. 


3768  Gqd  the  Jirjl  caiife^  and  lafl  end, 

S  E  R  M.  the  Lord  did  this  and  that,  ftirred  up  fuch  aw  ene- 

CLVII.  . 

my,  brought  fuch  a  judgment.  And  we  fliall  find 
that  holy  men  in  fcripture  make  excellent  ufe  of  this 
confideration,  to  argue  themfclves  into  patience  and 
contentednefs  in  every  condition.  So  Eli,  i  Sam. 
iii.  18.  "  It  is  the  Lord,  let  him  do  what  feemeth 
*'  him  good."  So  Job,  he  did  not  fo  confider  the 
Sabeans  and  Chaldeans,  who  had  carried  away  his 
oxen  and  his  camels,  and  (lain  his  fervants  ;  nor  the 
wind  which  had  thrown  down  his  houfe,  and  killed 
his  fons  and  his  daughters  •,  but  he  looks  up  to 
God,  the  great  governor  and  difpofer  of  all  thefe 
events ;  "  The  Lord  giveth,  and  the  Lord  hath 
"  taken  away,  blefTed  be  the  name  of  the  Lord.'* 
So  David,  Pfal,  xxxvi.  9.  "  I  was  dumb,  and  fpake 
*'  not  a  word,  becaufe  thou  Lord  didil  it."  So 
ourblefled  Saviour,  when  he  was  ready  to  fuffcr, 
he  did  not  confider  the  malice  of  the  Jews,  which 
was  the  caufe  of  his  death,  but  looks  to  a  higher 
hand  ;  "  the  cup  which  my  father  gives  mc  to 
"  drink,  fhall  not  I  drink  it  ?" 

He  that  looks  upon  all  things  as  coming  from 
fecond  caufes,  and  does  not  eye  the  firfk  caufe,  ^az 
good  and  wife  governor,  will  be  apt  to  take  offence 
at  every  crofs  and  unwelcome  accident.  Men  are 
apt  to  be  angry,  when  one  flings  water  upon  them 
as  they  pafs  in  the  fl:rccts  ;  but  no  man  is  oilended 
if  he  is  wet  by  rain  from  heaven.  When  we  look 
upon  evils  as  coming  only  from  men,  we  are  apt  to 
be  impatient,  and  know  not  how  to  bear  them  ; 
but  we  fliould  look  upon  all  things  as  under  the  go- 
vernment and  difpofal  of  the  firil  caufe,  and  the 
circum (lances  of  every  condition  as  allotted  to  us  by 
the  wife  providence   of  God  \   this  confideration, 

that 


God  the Jirft  caufe^  and  lajl  end,  Z7^9 

that  it  is  the  hand  of  God,  and  that  he  hath  done  S  E  R  M. 
it,  would  ftill  all  the  murmurings  of  our  fpirits.  As 
v/hen  a  feditious  multitude  is  in  an  uproar,  the  pre- 
fence  of  a  grave  and  venerable  perfon  will  hufh  the 
noife,  and  quell  the  tumult-,  fo  if  we  would  but 
reprefent  God  as  prefent  to  all  adlions,  and  govern- 
ing and  difpofing  all  events,  this  would  ftill  and  ap- 
peafe  our  fpirits,  when  they  are  ready  to  riot  and 
mutiny  againft  any  of  his  difpenfations. 

Ufe  the  fecond.  If  God  be  the  laft  end  of  all, 
let  us  make  him  our  laft  end,  and  refer  all  our  ac- 
tions to  his  glory.  This  is  that  which  is  due  to 
him,  as  he  is  the  firft  caufe,  and  therefore  he  does 
moft  reafonably  require  it  of  us. 

And  herein  likewife  the  fcripture  doth  excel  all 
other  books,  that  is,  doth  more  frequently  and  ex- 
prefly  mind  us  of  this  end,  and  calls  upon  us  to 
propofe  it  to  ourfelves  as  our  ultimate  aim  and  de- 
fign.  We  ftiould  love  him  as  our  chief  end,  Matth. 
xxii.  37.  "  Thou  ftialt  love  the  Lord  thy  God 
"  with  all  thy  heart,  and  with  all  thy  foul,  and  with 
*'  all  thy  mind."  Thus  to  love  God  is  that  which, 
in  the  language  of  the  fchools,  is  loving  God  as 
our  chief  end.  So  likewife  the  apoftle  requires, 
that  we  fliould  refer  all  the  actions  of  our  lives  to 
this  end,  i  Cor.  x.  31.  "  Whether  ye  eat  or  drink, 
"  do  -all  to  the  glory  of  God  v"  that  we  ftiould 
"  glorify  him  in  our  fouls,  and  in  our  bodies,  which 
*'  are  his."  He  is  the  author  of  all  the  powers  that 
we  have,  and  therefore  we  fnould  ufe  them  for  him  ; 
we  do  all  by  him,  and  therefore  we  ftiould  do  all  to 
him. 

And  that  we  may  the  better  underftand  ourfelves 
as  to  this  duty,  I  fliall  endeavour  to  give  fatisfaclion 
to  a  queftion  or  two  which  may  arifc  about  it. 

18  O  2  Firft, 


CLVJI. 


3770  God  the  firji  caufe^  and  lajl  end. 

S  E  R  M.  Firfl,  whether  an  adnal  intention  of  God's  clory 
be  neceflary  to  make  every  adion  that  we  do  good 
and  acceptable  to  God  ? 

Anfvv.  I.  It  is  necefTary  that  the  glory  of  God, 
either  formally  or  virtually,  (hould  be  the  ultimate 
end  and  fcope  of  our  lives,  and  all  our  adions  ; 
otherwife  they  will  be  defective  in  that  which  in  mo- 
ral adlions  is  mofl  confiderable,  and  that  is  the  end. 
If  a  n:an  ihould  keep  A\  the  commandments  of  the 
gofpel,  this  excepted,  of  making  God's  glory  his 
fupreme  end,  only  v/ith  a  dcfign  to  gain  reputation, 
or  fome  ether  advantage  in  the  world,  this  very 
thing  would  vitiate  all,  and  render  him  unacceptable 
to  God. 

2.  It  is  very  requifite  and  convenient,  as  a  good 
fign,  that  v/e  fhould  very  frequently,  adlually  think 
upon,  a'nd  intend  this  end  \  for  if  it  be  very  much 
out  of  our  thoughts,  we  have  reafon  to  be  jealous 
of  ourfelves,  that  we  do  not  intend  it  at  all. 

3.  It  is  fo  far  from,  being  neceflary,  that  we  fliould 
in  every  adtion  have  this  intention  of  God's  glory, 
chat  it  is  not  morally  poflible  that  we  fhould,  no 
more  than  it  is  poflible,  that  a  man  that  goes  a  jour- 
ney of  a  thouflmd  miles,  fliould  every  fl:ep  he  takes 
havT  adlual  thoughts  of  his  journey's  end,  nor  is  it 
more  neceflary  j  for  conflderation  of  the  end  is  only 
fo  far  neceilary,  as  it  is  neceflary  to  guide  and  quick- 
en us  in  the  ufe  of  means  •,  as  it  is  not  neceflliry  for 
a  man  to  think. of  his  journey's  end,  farther  than  to 
direct  and  excite  him  to  go  thither.  And  this  ap^ 
pears  farther  by  the  contrary  ;  it  is  not  neceflary  to 
make  a  flntul  adlion,  tliat  a  man  fliould  formally, 
much  lefs  actually  intend  God's  diflionour  ^  it  is 
enough  to  confticute  a  man  a  wicked  man,  if  he 
wiihngly  tranfgrefs  God's  law,  the   doing  whereof 

2  dots 


God  the  jirjl  caufe^  and  lafl  end.  377^ 

does  by  confcquence  refled  a  diilionour  upon  him  :  ^  ^^vif ' 
fo,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  fufficient  to  make  an  ac- 
tion good  and   acceptable,  if  it  be  conformable  to 
God's  law,  and  fuch  as  by  confcquence  redounds  to 
God's  glory. 

Second  queftion.  Whether  the  glory  of  God 
may,  or  ought  to  be  confidered,  as  an  end  feparate 
and  diflin(fl  from  our  own  happinefs  ? 

Anfw.  I  fhall  fpeak  but  briefly  to  this,  becaufe  I 
have  elfewhere  fpoken  to  it  •,  but  in  that  little  which 
I  have  to  fay  for  fatisfadlion  to  this  queftion,  I  will 
proceed  by  thefe  fteps. 

I.  By  the  glory  of  God,  we  mean  the  demon- 
flration,  or  illuftration,  or  manifeftation  of  fome  or 
of  all  his  perfedions,  more  efpecially  his  goodnefs, 
and  mercy,  and  juftice,  and  wifdom,  and  power, 
and  holinefs. 

II.  It  is  plain,  that  the  manifeftation  of  fome  of 
thefe  perfections  is  a  thing  that  may  be  feparated 
from  the  happinefs  of  a  creature  ;  for  his  holinefs, 
and  juftice,  and  power,  may  and  fhall  be  manifefted 
in  the  final  and  eternal  ruin  of  impenitent  finners. 

III.  The  manifeftation  of  any  of  God's  perfec- 
tions, ought  many  times  to  be  propounded  by  us  as 
an  end  diftind  and  feparate  from  our  refpedive  hap- 
pinefs ;  fuch  a  happinefs,  as  refpeds  only  fome  par- 
ticulars, and  fome  particular  duration,  in  oppofition 
to  abfolute  and  eternal  happinefs.  In  this  fenfe  our 
Saviour  fays,  that  he  "  fought  not  his  own  glory, 
"  but  the  glory  of  him  that  fent  him  :"  by  which 
he  does  not  mean,  that  he  quitted  everlafting  glory 
and  happinefs  j  but  that,  in  order  to  the  glory  of 
God,  he  did  for  a  time  lay  afide  his  own  glory,  and 
diveft  himfelf  of  it  while  he  was  in  this  world  j  for 
the  apoftle  tells  us^  that  he  was  encouraged  to  do 

this 


3772  God  thejirj}  caufe,  and  lajl  end. 


SERM. 

CLVII. 


this  out  of  a  refpcdl  to  a  greater  glory,  Heb.  xil.  2, 
"  Who  for  the  joy  that  was  fet  before  him,  endur- 
*'  ed  the  crofs,  defpifing  the  fhame,  and  is  fet  down 
*'  at  the  right  hand  of  the  throne  of  God."  And 
in  this  fenfe  we  are  to  underftand  the  command  of 
felf-denial  in  the  gofpeJ,  with  reference  to  our  parti- 
cular or  temporal,  not  our  eternal  intereft  -,  and  that 
it  is  no  more,  is  plain  from  the  argument  our  Sa- 
viour ufes  to  encourage  this  felf-denial,  the  pro- 
mife  of  a  far  greater  happincfs  than  that  we  deny  ; 
no  man  that  "  forfakes  father  or  mother  for  my 
"  fake,''  but  fhall  *'  have  eternal  life  :"  And  pro- 
portionably  we  are  to  underftand  thofe  commands  of 
loving  Christ  more  than  ourfelves,  that  is,  more 
than  any  temporal  intereft. 

IV.  The  manifeftation  of  any  of  God's  perfec- 
tions, neither  ought,  nor  can  reafonably  be  propound- 
ed by  us,  as  an  end  feparated  from,  or  oppofite  to 
our  eternal  bleflednefs  ;  that  is,  we  cannot  naturally 
or  reafonably  defire  the  glory  of  God  fhould  be  ad- 
vanced, though  it  were  to  our  final  ruin,  either  by 
annihilation,  or  eternal  mifery. 

I.  We  cannot  either  naturally  or  reafonably  de- 
fire  God  fhould  be  glorified  by  our  annihilation. 

(i.)  Not  naturally.  Becaufe  fuch  a  defire  would 
be  direftly  contrary  to  the  natural  defire  of  felf-pre- 
fervation,  which  God  himfclf  hath  planted  in  us, 
and  is  moft  intimate  and  effential  to  our  nature. 

(2.)  Not  reafonably.  Becaufe  it  is  utterly  unima- 
ginable how  God  can  be  glorified  by  the  annihila- 
tion of  a  creature.  All  the  attributes  that  we  can 
imagine  can  be  manifcftcd  herein,  are  power  and  fo- 
vercfgnty  ;  his  power  hath  already  been  as  much 
manifcftcd  in  creating  and  making  the  creature  out 
of  nothing,  as  it  can  be  by  reducing  it  into  nothing  •, 

tor 


God  the  Jirjl  caiife^  and  lajl  end,  3773 

for  to  create  is  the  very  fame  demonflration  of  pow-  S  E  R  M. 

,  CLVII. 

cr  as  to  annihilate.  And  as  for  his  fovereignty, 
God  will  never  manifefl  that  in  contradiction  to  his 
goodnefs,  or  wifdom,  or  any  other  perfedion  of  the 
divine  nature.  To  unmake  a  creature,  and  to  take 
away  the  being  which  he  had  given,  would  argue 
either  a  failure  of  his  goodnefs  toward  the  creature, 
or  that  he  did  repent  he  had  made  it,  which  would 
refledl  upon  his  wifdom  and  conflancy.  I  do  not 
fay,  that  in  juftice  God  cannot  annihilate  a  creature  ; 
far  be  it  from  me :  for  what  he  gave  was  his  own, 
and  he  may  without  any  wrong  to  the  creature  take 
it  again. 

2.  Much  lefs  can  wc  naturally  defire  that  God 
fliould  be  glorified  in  our  eternal  mifery.  The 
reafons  which  I  gave  about  annihilation  are  ftrongcr 
here  ;  therefore  we  cannot  naturally  defire  it,  nor 
reafonably,  for  the  demonflration  of  his  power,  or 
fovereignty,  or  juftice,  or  holinefs,  which  I  think 
are  all  the  attributes  which  we  -can  imagine  to  be 
glorified  hereby  :  not  a:  the  manifeftation  of  his 
power  •,  for  that  would  be  as  much  manifefted  in  the 
happinefs,  as  mifery  of  the  creature  :  not  of  his  fo- 
vereignty •,  for  God  will  not  manifefl  that  in  con- 
tradidlion  to  his  goodnefs,  upon  which  nothing  can 
reflect  more,  than  merely,  fro  arhitrio^  for  his  plea- 
fure,  to  make  an  innocent  creature  for  ever  mifera- 
ble  :  Not  his  judice,  and  holinefs  ;  for  thefe  pre- 
fuppofe  fin  and  demerit  in  the  creature,  out  of  ha- 
tred to  which  he  makes  it  miferable  •  but  God  hath 
declared  that  he  cfleems  himfelf  more  glorified  by 
the  obedience  and  happinefs  of  his  creatures,  than 
by  their  fin  and  deflrudion  •,  and  if  it  were  reafon- 
able  to  defire  the  juflice  and  holinefs  of  God  might 
be  glorified  in  my  eternal  ruin,  which  I  have  deferv- 

cd 


CLVII. 


3774  God  the  fir Jl  caiife^  and  loft  erid, 

S  E  R  M.  cd  by  fin  •,  this  would  plainly  follow  from  it,  that  it 
were  reafonable  "  to  fin,  that  juflice  might  abound,'* 
which  of  the  two  is  a  greater  abfurdity  than  that 
which  the  apoftle  condemns,  of  "  finning,  that 
*'  grace  may  abound." 

V.  There  is  a  flrid  and  inviolable  connexion  be- 
tween thegreatefl  glory  of  God,  and  our  obedience 
and  happinefs  :  I  fay,  between  his   greateft  glory  > 
becaufe  he   efleems   himfelf  more  glorified  by  the 
obedience  and  happinefs  of  his  creatures,  than  by 
their  ruin  and  mifery  ;  and  that  we  may  believe  it, 
we  have  his  oath  for  it ;  ''  As  I  live,  faith  the  Lord, 
"  I  delight  not  in  the  death  of  a  finner,  but  rather 
"  that  he  fhould  turn,  and  live."     And  it  is  ob- 
fervable,  that  the  apoftle,  in  i  Cor.  x.  31,   32,  33. 
"  Whether  ye  eat  or  drink,  or  whatfoever  ye  do, 
"  do  all  to  the  glory  of  God;  giving  none  offence, 
neither  to  the  Jews,  nor  to  the  Gentiles,  nor  to 
the  church  of  God  ;  even  as  I  pleafe  all  inen 
in  all  things,  not  fecking  mine  own   profit,  but 
the  profit  of  many,   that  they  may  be  faved," 
explains  the  glorifying  of  God,  by  edifying  and  pro- 
moting the  falvation  of  others. 

VI.  We  may  confider  the  glory  of  God  as  fomc 
ways  diftind  from  our  happinefs  •,  that  is,  we  may 
confider  the  manifcftation  of  his  goodncfs,  and 
mercy,  and  wifdom,  in  our  happinefs,  as  that  which 
refults  from  it  ;  but  this  is  not  enough  to  make  it  a 
diftind  end,  but  the  fame  diverfly  confidered  ;  as 
the  publick  good  is  that  which  refults  from  the  ge- 
neral good  of  particular  perfons,  but  cannot  reafo- 
nably  be  propounded  by  any  man,  as  an  end  diftind 
from  the  general  happinefs  of  particular  perfons, 
without  ruining  and  dcftroying  the  notion  of  pub- 
lick  good. 

VII.  Though 


cc 
cc 
cc 
<c 
cc 


God  thejirji  caufe^  and  lafl  eiid.  3775 

VII.  Thoucrh  confidered  as  we  are  particular  be-  SER  M, 

♦  ?  11  1  CLVII. 

ingsi  we  can  have  no  greater  encithan  our  own  hap- 
piriefs,  in  which  God  is  eminently  gloriried  ;  yet  as 
we  are  part  of  the  whole  creation  and  workmanfhip 
of  God,  which  is  the  nobleft  confideration  of  our- 
felves,  the  glory  of  God,  which  refults  from  the  rria- 
nifellation  of  all  his  perfcdions  in  and  about  his 
creatures,  is  precifely  our  ultimate  end,  and  yet  not 
an  end  really  diflindl  from  our  own  happinefs ;  and 
therefore  it  is  mod  proper,  and  becoming,  and  a- 
greeable  to  the  wife  ftile  of  fcripture,  to  give  our 
end  it's  denomination,  not  from  the  more  particular 
and  narrow,  but  the  more  noble  confideration  of  our- 
felvcs,  as  we  are  parts  of  the  whole  creation  and  work- 
manfhip  of  God  ;  as  it  is  more  generous  and  be- 
coming for  the  members  of  a  civil  fociety  to  men- 
tion the  publick  good  as  their  end,  than  their  private 
happinefs  and  advantage,  though  that  be  fo  really 
and  effedlually  promoted  by  the  publick  good. 

Thus  I  have  finifhed  what  \  propofed  on  this  ar- 
gument, and  concerning  the  attributes  of  God  in 
general  j  *^'  Of  whom,  and  through  whom,  and  tc^ 
^  whom  are  all  things.  To  him  be  glory  for  ever/^ 
Amen* 


Vol.  IX.  t%  P  SER- 


377^ 

SERMON   CLVIir. 

Of  doing  good. 

I      I         ■!    *     I  ■  ■ill,  I    I       II  ■■  -      . 

G  ALAT.  vi.  9,  j6. 

Let  us  not  he  weary  in  well-doings  for  in  due  feafon 
we  Jhall  reaps  if  we  faint  not :   as  we  have  there- 
^  fore  opportunity s   let  us  do  good  unto  ailment  efpe- 

daily  unto  them  who  are  of  the  houfhold  of  faith, 

S  E  R  M.  rr^  H  E  apoflle  in  thefe  words  recommends  un- 

CLVIII  I 

y__-^-^'_)     j|^      to  US  a  great  and comprehenfive  duty,  "  the 
A  Spit.1    <«  doincr  of  sood  -,"  concernino;  which  the  text  offers 
preached   ^^^^^  ^^^  particulars  to  our  confideration. 
at  Chrlft.       I.  The  nature  of  the  duty  itfelf,  which  is  calJed 

Church-    <c  well-doins:,"  v.  o.  and  "  doing  prood,"   v.   lo. 
on  Earter-  .  . 

Tuefdav        !!•  The  extent  of  this  duty,  in  refpefl  of  it's  ob- 
April  14.  je6l,  which  is  all  mankind,  ''  Let  us  do  good  unto 
1691.       cc  ^ij  j^^j^^    efpecially  unto  them  who  are  of  the 
"  hou(hold  of  faith." 

III.Themeafure  of  it,  "as  we  have  opportunity." 

IV.  Our  unwearied  perfeverance  in  it ;  "  let  us 
*'  not  be  weary  in  well-doing." 

V.  The  argument  and  encouragement  to  it ;  be- 
caufe  "  in  due  feafon  we  fhall  reap,  if  we  faint  not: 

Therefore  as   we  have  opportunity,    let  us  do 

good,  &c." 

I.  I  will  confider  the  nature  of  the  duty  itfelf;  of 
"  well-doing,"  and  "  doing  good."  And  this  I 
fliall  explain  to  you  as  briefly  as  I  can,  by  confidering 
the  extent  of  the  afl  of  doing  good,  and  the  excel- 
lency of  it.     And, 

I .  The  extent  gf  the  a6t.  It  comprehends  in  it 
2  aU 


Of  doing  good,  3777 

all  thofe  ways  wherein  we  may  be  beneficial  and  ufe-  ^pLvij^"^* 
fill  to  one  another.  It  reaches  not  only  to  the  bodies 
of  men,  but  to  their  fouls,  that  better  and  more  ex- 
cellent part  of  ourfelves ;  and  is  converfant  in  all 
thofe  ways  and  kinds,  whereby  we  may  ferve  the 
temporal,  or  fpiritual  good  of  our  neighbour,  and 
promote  cither  his  prefent,  or  his  future  and  eternal 
happinefs. 

To  inftrud  the  ignorant,  or  reduce  thofe  that  are 
in  error  ;  "  to  turn  the  difobedient  to  the  wifdom  of 
*'  thejuft,"  and  reclaim  thofe  that  are  engaged  in  any 
evil  courfe,  by  good  counfel,  and  feafonable  admo- 
nition, and  by  prudent  and  kind  reproof ;  to  refol ve 
and  fatisfy  the  doubting  mind  •,  to  confirm  the  weak ; 
to  heal  the  broken-hearted,  and  to  comfort  the  me- 
lancholy and  troubled  fpirits  :  Thefe  are  the  nobleft 
ways  of  charity,  becaufe  they  are  converfant  about 
the  fouls  of  men,  and  tend  to  procure  and  promote 
their  eternal  felicity. 

And  then  ''  to  feed  the  hungry,  to  clothe  the 
*'  naked,  releafe  the  imprifoned  •,"  to  redeem  the 
captives,  and  to  vindicate  thofe  who  are  injured  and 
opprefi^ed  in  their  perfons,  or  eilates,  or  reputation  *, 
to  repair  thofe  who  are  ruined  in  their  fortunes ;  and, 
in  a  word,  to  relieve  and  comfort  thofe  who  are  in 
any  kind  of  calamity  or  diftrefs. 

All  thefe  are  but  the  feveral  branches  and  inftances 
of  this  great  duty  here  in  the  text,  of  "  doing  good  •,*' 
though  it  hath,  in  this  place,  a  more  particular  re- 
fpedl  to  the  charitable  fupply  of  thofe,  who  are  in 
want  and  neceflity  •,  and  therefore  with  a  more  par- 
ticular regard  to  that,  I  fhall  difcourfe  of  it  at  this 
time.  You  fee  the  extent  of  the  duty.  We  will, 
in  the 

ad  place,  bpefly  fay  fomething  of  the  excellency 
i8  P  2  o£ 


S  £  R  M.  Qf  if^  which  will  appear,  if  we  confider,  that  it  is 
the  imitation  of  the  higheft  excellency  and  perfedi- 
on.  To  do  good,  is  to  be  like  God,  who  "  is  good, 
"  and  doth  good-,"  and  it  is  to  be  like  him,  in  that 
which  he  efteems  his  greateft  glory.  It  is  to  be  like 
the  Son  of  God,  who,  when  he  was  pleafed  to  take 
our  nature  upon  him,  and  live  here  below,  and  to 
dwell  amongft  us,  "  went  about  doing  good."  And 
it  is  to  be  like  the  bleffed  angels,  the  higheft  rank 
and  order  of  God's  creatures  -,  whofe  great  employ- 
ment it  is  to  be  miniftring  fprits,  for  the  good  of 
men.  So  that  for  a  man  to  be  kind,  and  helpful, 
and  beneficial  to  others,  is  to  be  a  good  angel,  and 
a  faviour,  and  a  kind  of  god  too. 

It  is  an  argument  of  a  great,  and  noble,  and  ge- 
nerous mind,  to  excite  our  thoughts  and  cares  to  the 
concernments  of  others,  and  to  employ  our  intereft, 
and  power,  and  endeavours  for  their  benefit  and  ad^ 
vantage  :  whereas  a  low,  and  mean,  and  narrow 
fpirit,  is  contra6led  and  fhriveled  up  within  itfelf, 
and  cares  only  for  it's  own  things,  without  any  re- 
gard to  the  good  and  happinefs  of  others. 

It  is  the  raoft  noble  work  in  the  world,  becaufe 
that  inclination  of  mind,  v/hich  prompts  us  to  do 
good,  is  the  very  temper  and  difpofition  of  happi- 
nefs. Solomon,  after  all  his  experience  of  v/orkily 
grcatnefs  and  plcafure,  at  lad  pitched  upon  this,  as 
the  great  felicity  of  hum.an  life,  and  the  only  good 
ufe  that  is  to  be  made  of  a  profperous  and  plentiful 
fortune.  Ecclcf.  iii.  12.  "I  know  (fays  he,  fpeaking 
of  riches)  '•  that  there  is  no  good  in  them.,  but  for 
*'  a  m»an  to  rejoice  and  do  good  in  his  life."  And 
certainly  the  bcft  v/ay  to  take  joy  in  an  eftatc,  is  to 
do  good  Vv'ith  it :  and  a  greater  and  wifer  than  Solo- 
|non  has  fuid  it;  even  he  **  who  is  the  power  and 
V  "  wifdpn^ 


Of  dot  Jig  good.  7,7  7  <) 

*^  wlfdom  of  God"  has  faid  it,  that  "  it  Is  a  more  S  E  R  M. 
"  blefled  thins;  to  o-ive  than  to  receive." 

Confider  tardier,  that  this  is  one  of  the  great 
and  fubftantial  parts  of  rehgion,  and  next  to  the 
love  and  honour,  which  v^^e  pay  to  Almighty  God, 
the  m.oft  acceptable  fervice  that  we  can  do  to  him  ; 
it  is  one  table  of  the  law,  and  next  to  the  nrfl  and  great 
commandment,  of  "  loving  the  Lord  our  God,** 
and  very  like  to  it.  "  And  the  fecond  is  like  unto 
**  it,"  (fays  our  Saviour)  "  Thou  fhalt  love  thy 
"  neighbour  asthyfelf^"  like  to  it,  in  the  excellen- 
cy of  it ;  and  equal  to  it,  in  the  necelTary  obligation 
of  it.  "  And  this  commandment  (fays  St.  John,  i  epift. 
chap.  4.  V.  21.)  "  have  we  from  him,  that  he  who 
"  loveth  God,  love  his  brother  alfo."  The  firft 
commandment  indeed  excels  in  the  dignity  of  the 
object,  becaufe  it  enjoins  the  love  of  God  ;  but  the 
fecond  feems  to  have  the  advantage  in  the  reality  of  it's 
effe6ls  :  for  the  love  of  God  confiils  in  our  acknow- 
ledgment, and  honour  of  him  -,  but  our  "  righte- 
*'  oufhefs  and  goodnefs  extend  not  to  him  •,"  we 
can  do  him  no  real  benefit  and  advantage :  but  our 
love  to  men  is-really  ufeful  and  beneficial  to  them ; 
for  which  reafon,  God  is  contented  in  many  cafes, 
that  the  external  honour  and  worIhip,which  he  requires 
of  us  by  his  pofitive  commands,  fhould  give  way  to 
that  natural  duty  of  love  and  mercy  which  we  owe 
to  one  another.  "  I  will  have  mercy"  (fays  God  in 
the  prophet  Amos)  "  and  notfacrifice." 

And  to  fhev/  how  great  a  value  God  puts  upon 
this  duty,  he  hath  made  it  the  very  teftimony  of 
our  love  to  himfelf-,  and  for  want  of  it,  hath  de- 
clared that  he  will  reject  all  our  other  profefTions  and 
teftimonies  of  love  to  him,  as  falfe  and  infincere. 
[^  Whofo  hath  this  vrorlds  good,"  (faith  ^t.  John, 

I  epift. 


37^0  Of  doing  good, 

^CLviii^'  1  epift.  iii.  t;.)  "  and  feeth  his  brother  have  need, 
*^'  and  fhuttcth  up  his  bowels  of  compaflion  from 
"  him,  how  dwellcth  the  love  of  God  in  him  ?" 
And  again,  chap.  iv.  ver.  20.  "  If  a  man  fay, 
"  I  love  God,  and  hateth  his  brother,  he  is  a  liar  ; 
*'  for  he  that  loveth  not  his  brother,  whom  he  hath 
*'  feen,  how  can  he  love  God,  whom  he  hath  not 
5'  feen  ?" 

You  fee  the  duty  here  recommended,  both  in  the 
extent  and  in  the  excellency  of  it ;  "  let  us  do  good.  '* 
I  proceed  to  confider,   in  the 

lid  place,  the  extent  of  this  duty,  in  refpeft  of 
it's  objedb,  which  is  all  mankind,  but  more  efpecial- 
ly  Chriftians,  thofe  that  are  of  the  fame  faith  and 
teljgion,  "  Let  us  do  good  unto  all  men,  efpecially 
**  unto  thofe  that  are  of  the  houfhold  of  faith." 
So  that  the  objeft,  about  which  this  duty  is  conver- 
fant,  is  very  large,  and  takes  in  all  mankind  •,  "  let 
**  us  do  good  unto  all  men."  The  Jev/s  confined 
their  love  and  kindnefs  to  their  own  kindred  and  na- 
lipn  ;  and  becaufe  they  were  prohibited  familiarity 
with  idolatrous  nations,  and  were  enjoined  to  main- 
tain a  perpetual  enmity  with  Amalek,  and  the  fcven 
nations  of  Canaan,  whom  God  had  caft  out  before 
them,  and  devoted  to  ruin  -,  they  looked  upon  them- 
fclves  as  perfedly  difcharged  from  all  obligation  of 
kindnefs  to  the  reft  of  mankind :  and  yet  it  is  cer- 
tain, that  they  were  cxpreily  enjoined  by  their  law, 
to  be  kind  to  ftrangers,  becaufe  they  themfelves  had 
been  ftrangers  in  the  land  of  Egypt.  But  our  Sa- 
viour hath  reftored  this  law  of  love  and  charity  to 
it's  natural  and  original  extent ;  and  hath  declared 
every  one  that  is  of  the  fame  nature  with  ourfelves  to 
be  our  neighbour,  and  our  brother  -,  and  that  he  is  to 
be  treated  by  us  accordingly,  whenever  he  ftands 

in 


Of  doing  good.  375  J 

in  need  of  our  kindnefs  and  help  \  and  to  fhew  that  S  E  R  M. 
none  are  out  of  the  compafs  of  our  charity,  he  hath 
exprefly  commanded  us  to  extend  it  to  thofe  who  of 
all  others  can  leaft  pretend  to  it,  even  our  enemies 
and  perfecutors. 

So  that  if  the  queftion  be  about  the  extent  of  our 
charity  in  general,  thefe  two  things  are  plainly  en^ 
joined  by  the  chriftian  religion. 

1 .  Negatively,  That  we  fhould  not  hate  nor  bear 
ill-will  to  any  man,  or  do  him  any  harm  or  mifchief. 
*'  Love  worketh  no  evil  to  his  neighbour,"  (faith 
the  apoflle)  Rom.  xiii.  10.  And  this  negative 
charity  every  hian  may  exercife  towards  all  men,  with- 
out exception,  and  that  equally,  becaufe  it  does  not 
lignify  any  pofitive  a6t,  but  only  that  we  abflain  from 
enmity  and  hatred,  from  injury  and  revenge,  which 
it  is  in  every  man's  powder,  by  the  grace  of  God, 
and  the  due  care  and  government  of  himfelf,  to  do, 

2.  Pofitively,  the  law  of  charity  requires,  that 
we  fhould  bear  an  univerfal  good-will  to  all  men, 
and  wifli  every  man's  happinefs,  and  pray  for  it,  as 
lincerely  as  we  wifh  and  pray  for  our  own  \  and  if 
we  be  fincere  in  our  wiflies,  and  prayers  for  the  good 
of  others,  we  fhall  be  fo  in  our  endeavours  to  pro- 
cure and  promote  it. 

But  the  great  difficulty  is,  as  to  the  exercife  of 
our  charity,  and  the  real  expreffions  and  effedts  of  it, 
in  doing  good  to  others  •,  which  is  the  duty  here 
meant  in  the  text,  and  (as  I  told  you  before)  does 
more  particularly  relate  to  the  relief  of  thofe  whp 
are  in  want  and  neceflity.  And  the  reafon  of  the 
difficulty  is,  becaufe  no  man  can  do  good  to  all  in 
this  kind,  if  he  would  i  it  not  being  poffible  for  any 
man  to  come  to  the  knowledge  of  every  man's  necef- 
fity  and  diftrefs  \  and  if  he  could,  no  man'^s  ability 

caa 


2782  Of  doing  good. 

SER  M.  can  pofTibly  reach  to  the  fupply  and  the  relief  of  all 
mens  wants.     And  indeed  this  limitation  the  text 
gives  to  this  duty  ;  "As  we  have  opportunity  (fays 
the  apoille)  "  let  us  do  good  unto  all  men  i"  which 
either  fignifies,  as  occafion  is  offered,  or  as  we  have 
ability  of  doing,  or  both ;  as  I  fhall  fhew  afterwards. 
So  that  it  being  impoflible  to  exercife  this  charity 
to  all  men  that  Hand  in  need  of  it,  it  is  neceffary  to 
make  a  difference,  and  to  ufe  prudence  and  difcre- 
tion  in  the  choice  of  the  mod  fit  and  proper  objeds. 
We  do  not  know  the  wants  of  all  men,  and  there- 
fore the  bounds  of  our  knowledge  do  of  neceffity  li- 
mit our  charity  within  a  certain  compafs  >  and  of 
thofe  whom  we  do  know,  we  can  relieve  but  a  fmall 
part  for  want  of  ability  j  from  whence  it  fallows,, 
that  though  a  man  were  never  fo  charitably  difpofed,. 
yet  he  mull  of  neceffity  fet  fome  rules  to  himfelf,  for 
the  management  of  his  charity  to  the  beft  advantage. 
"What  thofe  rules  are,  cannot  minutely  and  nicely  be 
determined  -,  when  all  is  done,  much  muff  be  left  ta 
every  man's  prudence  and  difcretion,  upon  a  full 
view  and  confideration  of  the  cafe  before  him,  and 
all  the  circumftances  of  it ;  but  yet  fuch  general  rules 
may  be  given,  as  may  ferve  for  the  diredion  of  our 
pradice  in  moft  cafes  ;  and  for  the  reft,  every  man's 
prudence,  as  well  as  it  can,  muft  determine  the  mat- 
ter.    And  the  rules  which  I  lliall  give,  fhall  be  thefe^ 
Firft,  Cafes  of  extremity  ought  to  take  the  firft 
place,  and  do  for  that  time  challenge  precedence  of 
all  other  confiderations.     If  a  perlbn  be  in  great  and 
prefent  diftrefs,  and  his  neceffity  fo  urgent,  that  if 
he  be  not  immediately  relieved,  he  muft  perifti  ;. 
this  is  fo  violent  a  cafe,  and  caJls  fo  loud  for  prefent 
help,  that  there  is  no  refifting  of  it,  whatever  the 
perfon  be  j   though  a  perfect  ftranger  to.  us,  though 

molt 


Of  doing  good.  *       37S3 

mofl:  unworthy,  though  the  greateft  enemy  we  have  ^^.^^jjf  * 
in  the  world,  yet  the  greatnefs  of  his  diftrefs  does 
fo  flrongly  plead  for  him,  as  to  filence  all  confide- 
rations  to  the  contrary  -,  for  after  all,  he  is  a  man, 
and  is  of  the  fame  nature  with  ourfelves  j  and  the 
confideration  of  humanity  ought,  for  that  time,  to 
prevail  over  all  objedlions  againft  the  man,  and  to 
prefer  him  to  our  charity,  before  the  neareil  relation 
and  friend,  who  is  not  in  the  like  extremity.  In 
other  cafes  we  not  only  may,  but  ought  to  relieve 
our  friends,  and  thofe  that  have  deferved  well  of  us 
in  tlie  firft  place :  but  if  our  enemy  be  in  extremity, 
then  that  divine  precept  takes  place,  "  if  thine 
"  enemy  hunger,  feed  him  ;  if  he  thirft,  give  him 
"  drink." 

Secondly,  In  the  next  place,  I  think,  that  the  ob- 
ligation of  nature,  and  the  nearnefs  of  relation,  does 
challenge  a  preference  -,  for  there  is  all  the  reafon  in 
the  world,  if  other  things  be  equal,  that  we  Ihould 
confider  and  fupply  the  necelTity  of  thofe,  who  are 
of  our  blood  and  kindred,  and  members  of  ogr  fa- 
mily, before  the  necefTities  of  llrangers,  and  thofe 
who  have  no  relation  to  us.  There  is  a  fpecial  duty 
incumbent  upon  us,  and  another  obligation  befid^ 
that  of  charity,  to  have  a  particular  care  and  regard 
for  them.  In  this  cafe  not  only  chrillianity,  but 
nature  tie3  this  duty  upon  us,  i  Tim.  v.  8.  *'  If  any 
"  man  provide  not  for  his  own,  efpecially  for  thofe 
"  of  his  own  houfe,"  for  them  that  are  of  his  family, 
"  he  hath  denied  the  faith,  and  is  worfe  than  an 
^'  infidel ;"  that  is,  he  doth  not  only  offend  againft 
the  law  of  chriftianity,  but  againft  the  very  didlates 
of  nature,  which  prevail  even  amongft  infidels. 
And  our  Saviour  hath  told  us,  that  when  our  pa- 
rents ftand  in  need  of  relief,  it  is  more  acceptable  to 

Vol.  IX,  18  (^  GOD^ 


37^4  Q/"  doing  good. 

^^lYUi'  ^^^'  ^^  employ  our  eftatcs  that  way,  than  to  dc- 
^  vote  them  to  hmi,  and  his  immediate  fervice  ;  and 
that  it  is  a  kind  of  facrilege   to  confecrate  that  to 
God,  whereby  our  parents  may  be  profited,  and 
provided  for  in  their  neceflity. 

Thirdly,  the  obligation  of  kindnefs,  and  benefits, 
lays  the  next  claim  to  our  charity.  If  they  fall  into 
want,  who  have  obliged  us  by  their  former  kind- 
nefs and  charity,  both  juftice  and  charity  do  chal- 
lenge from  us  a  particular  confideration  of  their 
cafe  ;  and  proportionably,  if  we  ourfelves  have  been 
obliged  to  their  family,  or  to  any  other  that  are 
nearly  related  to  them. 

Fourthly,  thofe  "  who  are  of  the  houfhold  of  faith,'* 
^nd  of  the  fame  religion,  and  members  of  the  fame 
myflical  body,  and  do  partake  of  the  fame  holy 
myfleries,  the  body  and  blood  of  our  bleffed  Sa- 
viour, the  ftridleft  bond  of  love  and  charity  ;  thefe 
fall  under  a  very  particular  confideration  in  the  cxer- 
cife  of  our  charity  :  and  of  this  the  apoflle  puts 
\\s  in  mind,  in  the  laft  words  of  my  text ;  '^  Let 
*'  us  do  good  unto  all  men,  efpecially  unto  thofe 
*'  that  are  of  the  houfhold  of  faith."  God  hath  a 
fpecial  love  and  regard  for  fuch  ;  and  thofe  whom 
God  loves  ought  to  be  very  dear  to  us. 

And  this,  perhaps,  was  a  confideration  of  the  firfl 
rank,  in  thofe  times  when  Chriftians  lived  among 
heathens,  and  were  expofed  to  continual  wants  and 
fuiferings  ;  but  it  fignities  much  lefs  now,  that  Chrif- 
tianity  is  the  general  profcflion  of  a  nation,  and  is 
too  often  made  ufe  of  to  very  uncharitable  purpofes  ; 
to  confine  mens  bounty  and  benefits  to  their  own  fedt 
^nd  party,  as  if  they,  and  none  but  they,  were 
^'  Xht  houfhold  of  faith  •/'  a  principle,  which  I 
know  not:  whether  ij:  hath  more  of  judaifm  or  of 
j)0|)ery  in  it.  Fifthly^ 


Of  doing  good.  378^ 

Fifthly,  after  thefe,  the  merit  of  the  perfons  who  S  E  R  M. 
are  the  objeds  of  our  charity,  and  all  the  circum-  ^^^^^^^ 
(lances  belonging  to  them,  are  to  be  valued  and 
confidered,  and  we  accordingly  to  proportion  our 
charity,  and  the  degrees  of  it.  I  Ihall  inflance  in 
fome  particulars^  by  which  a  prudent  man  may  judge 
of  the  reft. 

Thofe  who  labour  in  an  honeft  calling,  but  yet  are 
opprefTed  with  their  charge,  or  difabled  for  a  time 
by  ficknefs,  or  fome  other  cafualty  ^  thefe  many  ^ 
time  need  as  much,  and  certainly  defervc  much  bet- 
ter than  common  beggars  \  for  thefe  are  ufeful  mem- 
bers of  the  commonwealth  \  and  we  cannot  place 
our  charity  better,  than  upon  thefe,  who  do  what 
they  can  to  fupport  themfelves. 

Thofe  likewife  who  are  fallen  from  a  rich  and 
plentiful  condition^  without  any  fault  or  prodigality 
of  their  own,  merely  by  the  providence  of  God,  of 
fome  general  calamity  \  thefe  are  more  efpecially  ob- 
jedls  of  our  charity,  and  hberal  relief. 

And  thofe  alfo,  who  have  been  charitable^  and 
have  liberally  relieved  others,  when  they  were  in 
condition  to  do  it  ;  or  the  children,  or  near  rela- 
tions of  thofe  who  were  eminently  charitable  and 
beneficial  to  mankind^  do  deferve  a  particular  re- 
gard in  our  charity.  Mankind  being  (as  I  may  fay) 
bound  in  juftice,  and  for  the  honour  of  God's  pro- 
vidence^  to  make  good  his  promife,  to  preferve  fuch 
from  extreme  neceflityi 

And  laftly,  thofe,  whofe  vifible  wants,  and  great 
age  and  infirmities,  do  plead  for  more  than  ordinary 
pity,  and  do,  at  firft  fight,  convince  every  one  that 
fees  them,  that  they  do  not  beg  out  of  lazinefs,  but 
of  necefTity,  and  becaufe  they  are  not  able  to  do  any 
thing  towards  their  own  fupport  and  fubfiftence.    . 

18  0^2  There 


Of  doing  good. 

There  are  Innumerable  circumftances  more,  which 
in  would  be  endlefs  to  reckon  up  \  but  thefe  which  I 
have  mentioned  are  fome  of  the  chief*,  and,  by 
proportion  to  thefe,  we  may  dire6t  ourfelves  in 
other  cafes. 

Sixthly,  thofc  whom  we  certainly  know  to  be  true 
objeds  of  charity,  are  to  be  confidered  by  us,  be- 
fore thofe  who  are  fbrangers  to  us,  and  whofe  con- 
dition we  do  not  know,  yea  though,  in  common 
charity,  v/e  do  not  difbeUeve  them  ;  becaufe  in  rea- 
fon  and  prudence  we  are  obliged  to  prefer  thofe, 
who  are  certainly  known  to  us  ;  fince  v/e  find  by  ex- 
perience, that  there  are  many  cheats  and  counterfeit 
beggars,  who  can  tell  their  (lory,  and  carry  about 
teftimonials  of  their  own  making  -,  and  likewife  be- 
caufe we  run  the  hazard  of  mifplacing  our  charity, 
when  there  are  objedls  enough  befides,  where  we 
are  fure  we  fliall  place  it  right  ;  and  charity  mif- 
placed,  as  it  is  in  truth  and  reality  no  charity  in  it- 
felf,  fo  it  is  hardly  any  in  us,  when  we  Iquander  it 
fo  imprudently,  as  to  pafs  by  a  certain  and  real  ob- 
jeft,  and  give  it  to  thofe  of  whom  we  are  not  certain 
that  they  are  true  objects  of  charity.  In  this  blind 
way  a  man  "  may  give  all  his  goods  to  the  poor,"  as 
he  thinks,  and  yet  do  no  real  charity.  And  therefore, 
unMs  we  be  able  to  reheve  "  every  one  that  afks," 
we  muft  of  necefTity  make  a  difference,  and  ufe  our 
bed  prudence  in  the  choice  of  the  moft  proper  ob- 
jedls  of  our  charity. 

And  yet  we  ought  not  to  obferve  this  rule  fo 
ftridlly,  as  to  fhut  out  all  whom  we  do  not  know, 
without  exception ;  becaufe  their  cafe,  if  it  be  true, 
may  fometimcs  be  much  more  pitiable,  and  of  great- 
tcr  extremity,  than  the  cafe  of  many  whom  we  do 
know  J  and  then  it  would  be  uncharitable  to  rejedl 

fuch^ 


Of  dohig  good,  37^7 

fuch^  and  to  harden  our  hearts  fo  far  againft  ^l^em,  S  E^R  M. 
as  utterly  to  dilbelieve  them  ;  becaufe  it  is  no  fault  v — ^^-^ 
of  theirs,  that  we  do  not  know  them  i  no,  their 
wants  may  be  real,  notwithflanding  that ;  efpecially 
when  their  extremity  feems  great,  we  ought  not  to 
Hand  upon  too  rigorous  a  proof  and  evidence  of  it, 
but  fhould  accept  of  a  fair  probability. 

Seventhly,  thofe  who  fuffer  for  the  caufe  of  reli- 
gion, and  are  flripped  of  all  for  th^  fake  of  it,  ought 
to  have  a  great  precedence  in  our  charity  to  nloft 
other  cafes.     And  this  of  late  hath  been,  and  ftiU  jiu.-t!X. 
is  the  cafe  of  many  among  us,  who  have  fled  hi**  7v»fe>-^^ 
ther  for  refuge,  from  the  tyranny  and  cruelty  of 
their  perfecutors,  and  have  been,  by  a  moft  extraor- 
dinary charity  of  the  whole  nation,   ntore  than  once 
extended  to  them,  moft  feafonably  relieved  :  but 
efpecially  by  the  bounty  of  this   great  city,  whofe 
liberality,  upon  thefe  occafions,  hath  been  beyond 
all  example,  and  even  all  belief.     And  I  have  often 
thought,  that  this  very  thing,  next  to  the  mercy  and 
goodnefsof  Almighty  God,  hath  had  a  particular 
influence  upon  our  prefervation  and  deliverance  from 
thofe  terrible  calamities,  which  were  juft  ready  to 
break  in  upon  us ;  and,  were  we  not  fo  ftupidly  in- 
fenfible  of  this   great  deliverance   which  God  hath 
wrought  for  us,  and  fo  horribly  unthankful  to  him, 
and  to  the  happy  inftruments  of  it,  might  ftill  be  a 
means  to  continue  the  favour  of  God  to  us.     And 
what  caufe  have  we  to  thank  God,  who  hath  allot- 
ted to  us  this  more  bleffed,  and  more  merciful  part, 
to  give,  and  not  to  receive  •,  to  be  free  from  perfe- 
cution  ourfelves,  that  we  might  give  refuge  and  re- 
lief to  thofe  that  are  perfecuted ! 

III.  We  muft  confider  the  meafure  of  our  cha- 
rity, wV  iCiXifov  'ix°i^i^>  "^^"^^  ^^^  tranflation  renders. 


3  7  8  S  Of  doing  good, 

SE  R  M.  <c  as  we  have  opportunity ;"  others,  as  we  have  abi- 
lity :  So  that  this  expreflion  may  refer,  either  to  the 
occafions  of  our  charity,  or  to  the  feafon  of  it,  or 
to  the  proportion  and  degree  of  it. 

1 .  It  may  refer  to  the  occafions  of  our  charity, 
**  as  we  have  opportunity,  let  us  do  good,"  that  is, 
according  as  the  occafions  of  doing  good  Ihall  pre- 
fent  themfelves  to  us,  fo  often  as  an  opportunity  is 
offered.  And  this  is  an  argument  of  a  very  good 
and  charitable  difpofition,  gladly  to  lay  hold  of  the 
occafions  of  doing  good  ;  as  it  were  to  meet  oppor- 
tunities when  they  are  coming  towards  us.  This 
forwardnefs  of  mind  in  the  work  of  charity,  the 
apoflle  commends  in  the  Corinthians,  2  Cor.  ix.  2. 

I  know  the  forwardnefs  of  your  minds,  for  which 
I  boafl  of  you  to  them  of  Macedonia:"  And 
this  he  requires  of  all  Chriftians,  Tit.  iii.  8.  that 
they  Hiould  "  be  ready  to  every  good  work  •,"  and 
I  Tim.  vi.  18.  that  we  be  "  ready  to  diftribute, 
*'  willing  to  communicate."  Some  are  very  ready 
to  decline  thefe  opportunities,  and  to  get  out  of  the 
way  of  them ;  and  when  they  thruft  themfelves  up- 
on them,  and  they  cannot  avoid  them,  they  do  what 
they  do  grudgingly,  and  not  with  a  willing  mind. 

2.  It  may  refer  to  the  feafon  of  this  duty,  J^ 
%a/poi/  6%c?^£y,  whilft  we  have  time,  t^q  for  ew^-,  whilfb 
this  life  lafts  ;  fo  Grotius  does  underfland  and  inter- 
pret this  phrafe  ;  and  then  the  apoftle  does  hereby 
intimate  to  them  the  uncertainty  of  their  lives,  efpe- 
daily  in  thofe  times  of  perfecution.  And  this  con- 
fideration  holds  in  all  times,  in  fome  degree,  that  our 
lives  are  fhort  and  uncertain  •,  that  it  is  but  a  little  while 
that  we  can  ferve  God  in  this  kind,  namely,  while 
we  are  in  this  world,  in  this  vale  of  mifery  and 
wants.    In  the  next  world  there  will  be  no  occafion, 

no 


Of  doing  good.  37^9 

no  opportunity  for  it  j  we  fhall  then  have  nothing  to  ^  E  R  M, 
do,  but  to  reap  the  reward  of  the  good  we  have  ^^'^"^* 
done  in  this  Hfe,  and  to  receive  that  bleffed  fentence 
from  the  mouth  of  the  great  judge  of  the  world. 
Come,  ye  bleffed  of  my  father,  inherit  the  king- 
dom prepared  for  you,  before  the  foundation  of 
the  world  :  for  I  was  hungry,  and  ye  gave  me 
meat,  &c."  And,  Eugehone  ferve !  "  Well  done, 
good  and  faithful  fervant !  thou  haft  been  faithful 
in  a  little,  and  I  will  make  thee  ruler  over  much.'* 
God  will  then  declare  his  bounty  and  goodnefs  to 
us,  and  open  thofe  inexhauftible  treafures  of  glor/ 
and  happinefs,  which  all  good  men  fhall  partake  of, 
in  proportion  to  the  good  which  they  have  done  in 
this  world.     Or  elfe, 

3.  (Which  I  take  to  be  the  moft  probable  mean- 
ing of  this  phrafe,)  It  may  refer  to   the  degree  of 
this  duty,  in  proportion  to  our  abihty  and  eftate  ;  as 
we  have  abiHty,  "  let  us  do  good  unto  all  men.'* 
And  this  the  phrafe  will  bear,  as  learned  men  have 
cbfcrved  -,  and  it  is  very  reafonable  to  take  it  in  this 
fenfe,  at  leaft  as  part  of  the  meaning  of  it,  either 
exprefied,  or  implied.     For,  without  this,  we  cannot 
exercife  charity,  though  there  w^ere  never  fo  many 
occafions  for  it  •,  and  then  this  precept  will  be  of 
the  fame  importance  with  that  of  the  fon  of  Sirach, 
Eccluf.  XXXV.  10.  "  Give  unto  the  moil  high  ac- 
*'  cording  as  he  hath  enriched  thee ;"  and  with  that 
counfel,  Tob.  iv.  7.    "  Give   alms,   gjc  rciv  VTTufh 
"  Xov\m^  according  to  thy  fubftance,"  and  v.  %^ 
"  If  thou  haft  abundance,  give  ahns  accordingly." 
And  this  may  be  reafonably  expeded  from  us  •,  for 
where-ever  his  providence  gives  a  man  an  eftate,  ic 
is  but  in  truft  for  certain  ufes  and  purpofes,  among 
which  charity  and  alms  is  the  chief :  and  we  muft 

1  tc 


SERM.  be  accountable  to  him,  whether  we  have  difpofed  it 

CLVIII.  . 

faithfully  to  the  ends  for  which  it  was  committed  to 
us.     It  is  an  eafy  thing,  with  him,  to  level  mens 
eftates,  and  to  give  every  man  a  competency  ;  but 
he  does  on  purpofe  fuffer  things  to  be  diftributed  fo 
unequally,  to  try  and  exercife  the  virtues  of  men  in 
feveral  ways  ;  the  faith  and   patience  of  the  poor, 
the  contentednefs   of  thofe  in  a  middle  condition, 
the  charity  and  bounty  of  the  rich.     And,  in  truth, 
wealth  and  riches,  that  is,  an  eftate  above  what  fuf- 
ficeth  our  real  occafions  and  neceffities,  is  in  no  other 
fenfe  a  blefTing,  than  as  it  is  an  opportunity  put  into 
our  hands,  by  the  providence  of  God,  of  doing 
more  good  -,  and  if  we  do  not  faithfully  employ  it 
to  this  end,  it  is  but  a  temptation  and  a  fnare ;  "  and 
the  ruft  of  our  filver  and  our  gold  will  be  a  wit- 
nefs  againft  us  i"  and  we  do  but  "  heap  up  trea- 
fures  together  againft  the  laft  day." 
But  what  proportion  our  charity  ought  to  bear 
to  Qur  eftates,  I  fhall  not  undertake  to  determine. 
The  circumftances  of  men  have  too  much  variety  in 
them  to  admit  of  any  certain  rule  ;   fome  may  dq 
weD,  and  others   may   do  better  -,    every   man  as 
God  hath  put  into  his  heart,  and  according  to  his 
belief  of  "  the  recompence  which  Ihall  be  made  at 
"  the  refurredtion  of  the  juft."     I  fhall  only  fay  in 
general,  that  if  there  be  firft  a  free  and  willing  mind, 
that  will  make  a  man  charitable  to  his  power  •,   for 
'^  jthe  liberal  man  will  devife  liberal  things."     And 
we  cannot  propofe  a  better  pattern  to  ourfelves  in 
this  kind,  than  the  king   and  queen,  who  are,  as 
they  ought  to  be  (but  as  it  very  feldom  happens)  the 
moft  bright  and  ftiining  examples  of  this  greateft  of 
all  graces  and  virtues,  charity  and  compafTion  to  the 
poor  and  pgrfecuted,    I  proceed  to  the 

IV.  Thin^ 


Of  doing  good.  3791 

IVth  thing  confiderable  in  the  text^  viZ.     Cur^^RM- 
unwearied  peiTeverance  in  this  work  of  doing  good  ;  ^  ' 

*'  let  us  not  be  weary  in  well-doing.*'  After  we  have 
done  fome  few  a6ls  of  charity,  yea,  though  they 
lliould  be  very  confiderable,  we  mufl  not  fit  down 
and  fiy  we  have  done  enough  :  There  will  ftill  be 
new  objeds,  new  occafions,  new  opportunities  for 
the  exercife  of  our  charity,  fpringing  up  and  pre- 
fenting  themfelves  to  us.  Let  us  never  think  that 
we  can  do  enough  in  the  way  of  doing  good.  The 
befl  and  the  happiefl  beings  are  ipoft  conftant  and 
unwearied  in  this  work  of  doing  good.  The  holy 
angels  of  God  are  continually  employed  in  miniftring 
for  the  good  of  "  thofe,  who  fhall  be  heirs  of  falva- 
"  tion  :"  and  the  Son  of  God,  when  he  appeared  ia 
.pur  nature,  and  "  dwelt  among  us,"  that  he  might 
be  a  perfc(5l  and  familiar  example  to  us  of  all  holi- 
nefs  and  virtue,  "  he  went  about  doing  good"  to  the 
bodies,  and  to  the  fouls  of  men.  How  diligent  and 
unwearied  was  he  in  this  work  !  It  was  his  employ- 
ment and  his  pleafure,  his  meat  and  drink,  the  joy 
and  the  life  of  his  life.  And  God  himfelf,  though, 
he  is  infinitely  and  perfc6lly  good  in  himfelf,  yet  he 
fiill  continues  "  to  do  good,"  and  is  never  weary 
of  this  bleffed  work.  It  is  the  nature,  and  the  per- 
fe(5lion,  and  the  felicity  of  God  himfelf;  and  how 
can  we  be  weary  of  that  work;,  which  is  an  imita- 
tion of  the  highefl  excellency  and  perfection,  and 
the  very  eifence  of  happinefs ! 
-  V.  And  laftly,  here  is  the  argum.ent  and  encou- 
ragement to  the  chearful  difcharge  of  this  duty, 
bscaufe  in  due  feafon  we  fliall  reap,  if  we  faint 
not  ;  therefore,  as  we  have  opportunity,  let  us  do 
good  unto  all  men.  In  due  feafon  we  fliall  reap  ;" 
that  is,  fooner  or  later,  in  this  world,  or  in  the 
Vol.  IX.  iS  R  other, 


3792  Of  doing  good. 

S  E  R  M.   other,  we  fhall  receive  the  full  reward  of  our  well- 

CLVIII.       ,    . 

doing. 

And  now  I  have  explained  this  duty  to  you,  as 
plainly  and  briefly  as  1  could,  thehardeft  part  of  my 
tafk  is  yet  behind,  to  perfuade  men  to  the  praftice 
of  it  •,  and  to  this  purpofe  I  Ihall  only  infill  upon  the 
promifein  the  text,  "  be  not  weary  in  well-doing^; 
*'  for  in  due  feafon  ye  fhall  reap,  if  ye  faint  not :" 
We  Ihall  reap  the  pleafure  and  fatisfadion  of  it  in 
our  own  minds,  and  all  the  other  mighty  advantages 
of  it  in  this  world,  and  the  vafl  and  unfpeakable  re- 
ward of  it  in  the  other. 

Firft,  We  fhall  reap  the  pleafure  and  >fatisfa6lion 
of  it  in  our  own  minds  •,  and  there  is  no  fenfual  plea- 
fure that  is  comparable  to  the  deUght  of  doing  good. 
This  Cato  makes  his  boaft  of,  as  the  great  comfort 
and  ioy  of  his  old  age,  confcientia  bene  a^^e  vitd^^ 
mtiltonmque  henefaUorum  recordatiojuciindiffima.  The 
remembrance  of  a  well-fpent  life,  and  of  many  bene- 
fits and  kindnelTes  done  by  us  to  others,  is  one  of  the 
moft  pleafant  things  in  the  world.     Senfual  pleafures 
foon  die  and  vanifh  •,  but  that  is  not  the  worft  of  them, 
they  leave  a  fting  behind  them ;  and  when  the  pleafure 
is  gone,  nothing  remains  but  guilt,  and  trouble,  and 
repentance  :  whereas  the  reflexion  upon  any  good  we 
have  done,  is  a  perpetual  fpring  of  peace  and  pleafure, 
to  us,  and  no  trouble  and  bitternefs  enfues  upon  it  •, 
the  thoughts  of  it  lie  even  and  eafy  in  our  minds  *, 
and  fo  often  as  it  comes  to  our  remembrance,  it  mi- 
nifters  frefh  comfort  to  us. 

Secondly,  We  fliall   likcwife   reap  other  mighty 
advantages  by  it  in  this  world.     It  is  the  way  to  de- 
rive a  lading  blefTing  upon  our  eftates.     What  we 
give  in  alms  and  charity  is  confecrated  to  Goo,  and 
is  one  of  the  chiefeft  and  moft  acceptable  facrifices  in 

the 


Of  doing  good.  3793 

the  chriilian  religion  :  fo  the  apoftle  tells  us,  Ileb.  ^  ^  '^  ''^' 
xiii.  1 6.  "  To  do  good,  and  to  communicate,  for- 
*'  get  not  ;  for  with  fuch  facrifices  God  is  well 
*'  pleafed."  It  is  Uke  the  firft-fruits  under  the  law, 
which  being  dedicated  and  offered  up  to  God,  did 
derive  a  blefiing  upon  their  whole  harveft. 

And  it  procures  for  us  alfo  the  bleiTing  and  pray- 
ers of  thofe  to  whom  we  extend  our  charity  -,  their 
bleffing,  I  fay,  upon  us  and  ours,  and  all  that  we 
have  :  and  "  is  it  a  fmall  thing  in  our  eye,  to  have" 
(as  Job  fpeaks)  "  the  bleffing  of  them,  who  are 
"  ready  to  perilli,to  come  upon  us  ?"  "  The  fervent 
*'  prayer"  of  the  poor  for  us  "  availeth  much  ;"  for 
God  hath  a  fpecial  "  regard  to  the  prayers  of  the  de- 
*'  flitutc,  and  his  ear  is  open  to  their  cry." 

Few  men  have  faith  to  believe  it,  but  certainly 
charity  is  a  great  fecurity  to  us  in  the  times  of  evil, 
and  that  not  only  from  the  fpecial  promife  and  pro- 
vidence of  God,  which  is  engaged  to  preferve  thofe 
from  want,  who  are  ready  to  relieve  the  necefTity  of 
others.  Pro  v.  xi.  25.  "  The  liberal  foul  fhall  be 
"  made  fat  ;  and  he  that  watereth,  fhall  be  watered 
alfo  himfelf,"  and  Pro  v.  xxviii.  27.  "  He  that 
giveth  unto  the  poor  fhall  not  lack.  He  ihall  not 
be  afraid  in  the  evil  time,  and  in  the  days  of  dearth 
he  fhall  be  fatisfied,"  fays  the  Pfahnift.  But  be- 
befides  the  promife  and  providence  of  God,  our  cha- 
rity  and  alms  are  likewife  a  great  fecurity  to  us,  from 
the  nature  and  reafon  of  the  thing  itfclf.  Whofo- 
ever  is  charitable  to  others,  docs  wifely  befpeak  the 
charity  and  kindnefs  of  others  for  himftlf,  againfl 
the  day  of  necefTity  •,  for  there  is  nothing  that  makes 
a  man  more  and  furer  friends,  than  our  bounty  -,  this 
will  plead  for  us,  and  fband  our  friend  in  our  great- 
eft  troubles  and  dangers  •,  *'  for  a  good  man,"  faith 

I S  R  2  the 


3794  ^f  ^olnggood. 

S  E  R  M.  the  apoftle,  that  is,  for  one  that  is  ready  to  oblige 
others  by  great  kindnefTes  and  benefits,  *'  one  would 
"  even  dare  to  die."  It  has  fometimes  happened, 
that  the  obHgation  which  a  man  hath  laid  upon  others 
by  achearful  and  feafonable  charity,  hath,  in  time  of 
danger  and  extremity,  done  him  more  kindncfs  than 
all  hiseftate  could  do  for  him.  "  Alms,"  faith  the 
wife  man,  "  hath  delivered  from  death." 

And  in  times  of  publick  diftrefs,  and  when  we 
are  befet  with  cruel  and  powerful  enemies,  who,  "  if 
*'  God  were  not  on  our  fide,  v/ould  fwallow  us  up 
'-^  quick,''  the  publick  charity  of  a  nation  does  many 
times  prove  it's  bell  fafeguard  and  fhield.     There  is 
a  moft  remarkable  paffage  to  this  purpofe,  Eccluf. 
xxix.   II,   12,   13.     "  Lay  up  thy  treafure  accord- 
ing to  the  commandments  of  the  moft  High,  and 
it  fhall  bring  thee  mere  profit,  than  gold.    Shut 
up  alms  in  thy  ftore-houfts,  and  it  fhall  deliver 
"  thee  from  all  affli(5tion.    It  fliall  fight  for  thee  a- 
*'  gainft  thine  enemies,  better  than  a  i^nighty  fliield 
"  and  a  ftrongfpear." 

And  of  this  I  doubt  not  but  we  of  this  nation, 
by  the  g^*eat  mercy  and  gcodnefs  of  Almighty  God, 
have  had  happy  experience  in  our  late  wonderful  de- 
liverance, under  the  condud  and  valour  of  one  of 
the  beft  and  braveft  of  princes,  and  to  whom,  by  too 
many  am^ng  us,  the  moft  unworthy  and  unthank- 
ful returns  have  been  made,  for  the  unweariea  pains 
he  hath  undergone,  and  for  the  defptrate  hazards  he 
hathexpofed  himfelf  to  for  our  fakes,  that  ever  were 
made  to  fo  great  and  generous  a  benefactor  •,  fo 
great  a  benefidor,  I  fay,  not  only  to  thefe  nations, 
but  to  all  Europe,  in  aiferting  and  vindicating  their 
liberties  againft  the  infolcnt  tyranny  and  pride  ot  one 
of  the  greateft  opprelfors  of  mankind  •,  of  whom  I 
2  may 


Of  doing  good,  3795 

may  fay,  as  Job  does  of  the  Leviathan,  Job  xl'i.  33.  S  E  R  M. 
34.    "  Upon  earth  there  is  not  his  hke.    He  behold- 
"  eth  all  high  things  ^  he  is  king  over  all  the  chil- 
dren of  pride." 

And  beyond  all  this,  the  blefllng  of  God  does 
defcend  upon  the  poflerity  of  thofe  who  are  emi- 
nently charitable,  and  great  benefactors  to  mankind. 
This  David  obferves  in  his  time  -,  ''  I  have  been 
"  young"  (fays  he)  "  and  now  am  old  ;  yet  have 
''  I  not  feen  the  righteous  forfaken,  nor  his  (ttd 
"  begging  bread  \'  and  what  he  means  by  the  righ- 
teous man,  he  explains  in  the  next  words,  "  he  is 
*'  ever  merciful,  and  lendeth." 

I  lliall  only  add  upon  this  head,  that  the  pradlice 
of  this  virtue  will  be  one  of  our  bed  comforts  at  the 
hour  of  death,  and  that  we  ihall  then  look  back  up- 
on all  the  good  we  have  done  in  our  life  with  the 
greateil  contentment  and  joy  imaginable.  Xenophon, 
in  his  Cyrus,  which  he  defigned  for  the  perfed  idea 
of  a  good  prince,  reprefents  him  in  the  laft  minutes 
of  his  life,  addreffing  himfelf  to  God  to  this  pur- 
pofe,  ''  Thou  knoweft  that  I  have  been  a  lover  of 
"  mankind  ;  and  now  that  I  am  leaving  this  world, 
"  I  hope  to  find  that  mercy  from  thee,  which  I  have 
"  Ihewed  to  others."  Thefe  words  that  excellent 
heathen  hiftorian  thought  fit  to  come  from  the  mouth 
of  fo  excellent  a  prince,  as  he  had  defcribed  him,- 
juft  as  he  was  leaving  the  world  •,  by  which  we  may 
fee,  what  the  light  of  nature  thought  to  be  the  belt 
comfort  of  a  dying  man.     This  brings  me  to  the 

Third  and  lafl  particular  which  I  mentioned,  the 
vaft:  and  unfpeakable  reward,  which  this  grace  and 
virtue  of  charity  will  meet  with  in  the  other  world. 
It  will  plead  for  us  at  the  day  of  judgment,  and 
procure  for  us  a  mofb  glorious  *'  recompence  at  the 

"  refurredlion 


379^  ^f  ^^^^S  S^^^' 

SERM.  refurreclion  of  thejufl,'*  and  that  proportionable  to 
■l^^-!l^  fhe  degrees  of  our  chanty  ;  2  Cor.  ix.  6.  "  He 
"  which  foweth  fparingly,  fhall  reap  alfo  fparingly  :*' 
*'-and  he  which  foweth  bountifully,  fhall  reap  boun- 
*'  tifully  ;"  and  from  this  confideration,  the  apoftle 
encourageth  our  perfeverance  in  well-  doing  -,  "let  us 
*'  not  be  weary  in  well-doing,  for  in  due  feafon  we  fhall 
'*  reap,  if  we  faint  not  ;'*  that  is,  we  fhall  certainly 
meet  with  the  reward  of  it,  if  not  in  this  world,  yet 
in  the  other. 

And  now  that  I  have  declared  this  duty  to  you, 
together  with  the  mighty  plcafure,  and  advantages, 
and  rewards  of  it,  I  crave  leave  to  prefent  you  with 
fome  of  the  beft  occafions,  and  opportunities  of  the 
exercife  and  praftice  of  it.  And  for  your  encourage- 
ment hereto,  I  fhall  read  to  you  the  prefent  flate  of 
the  chief  hofpitals  belonging  to  this  great  city,  and 
of  the  difpofal  of  their  charity  for  the  lafl  year. 

And  now  I  have  laid  before  you  thefe  great  obje^ls 
t)f  your  charity,  and  the  beft  arguments  I  could  think 
of  to  incline  and  ftir  up  your  minds  to  the  exercife 
of  this  excellent .  grace  and  virtue ;  as  there  is  no 
time  left  for  it,  I  having,  I  am  afraid,  already  tired 
your  patience,  fo,  I  hope,  there  is  no  need  to  prefs  this 
duty  any  farther  upon  you,  fince  you  are  willing  and 
forward  of  yourfelves,  and  fo  very  ready  to  every 
good  work.  This  great  city  hath  a  double  honour 
due  to  !T,  of  being  both  the  greateft  benefadors  in 
this  kind,  and  the  moft  faithful  managers,  and  dif- 
pofers  of  it  i  and  I  am  now  in  a  place  moft  proper 
for  the  mention  of  Christ's  Hofpital,  a  proteftant 
foundation  of  that  moft  pious  and  excellent  prince 
Edward  VI.  which,  I  believe,  is  one  of  the  beft  in- 
ftances  of  fo  large  and  fo  well- managed  a  charity, 
this  day  in  the  world. 

And 


Of  doing  good,  3797 

^nd  now  to  conclude  all :  if  any  of  you  know 
any  better  employment  than  "  to  do  good  •/'  any 
work  that  will  give  truer  pleafure  to  our  minds  ; 
that  hath  greater  and  better  promifcs  made  to  it, 
"  the  promifes  of  the  life  that  now  is,  and  that 
"  which  is  to  come  j"  that  we  fhall  refle6l  upon 
with  more  cornfort,  when  v/e  come  to  die  ;  and 
that  through  the  mercies  and  merits  of  our  blefled 
Saviour,  will  Hand  us  in  more  {lead  at  the  day  of 
judgment  -,  let  us  mind  that  work  :  but  if  we  do  not, 
let  us  apply  ourfelves  to  this  bufinefs  of  charity  with 
all  our  might,  and  "  let  us  not  be  weary  in  well- 
"  doing,  becaufe  in  due  feafon  we  fhall  reap,  if  wc 
"  faint  not." 

"  Now  the  God  of  peace,  who  brought  again 
from  the  dead  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the 
great  fhepherd  of  the  fheep,  through  the  blood 
of  the  everlafting  covenant,  make  you  perfed:  in 
every  good  work,  to  do  his  will,  through  Jesus 
Christ,  to  whom  with  thee,  O  father,  and  the 
Holy  Ghofl,  be  all  honour  and  glory,  thankfgiv- 
ing  and  praife,  both  now  and  for  ever,"  Amen. 


cc 

cc 


SERMON     CLIX. 

The  necellity  of  repentance  and  faith, 

ACTS  XX.  21. 
^efiifying  both  to  the  Jews^  and  alfo  to  the  Greeks^  re^ 
pentance  toward  God,  and  faith  toward  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ. 

TO  have  feen  St.  Paul  in  the  pulpit,  was  one  of  S  E  R  M. 
thofe  three  things  which  St.  Auguftine  thought    ^^^^' 
worth  the  wifhing  for.     And  fure  it  were  very  defi- 

rablc 


«  y  g  8  7he  necejity  of  repentance  and  J  ait  U. 

SERM.  rable  to  have  feen  this  glorious  inftrument  of  God, 
^^f_,  who  did  fuch  >^^nders  in  the  world,  to  have  heard 
that  plain  and  powerful  eloquence  of  his,  which  was 
fo  "  mighty  through  God,  for  the  calling  down  of 
*'  flrong  holds,  and   the  fubduing  of  men   to  the 
"  obedience  of  the   gofpel  •,"  to   have  beheld  the 
jteal  of  this  holy  man,  who  was  all  on  fire  for  God, 
with  what  ardency  of  affection,   and  earneftnefs  of 
cxpreffion,  heperfuaded  men  to  come  in  to  Christ, 
and  entertain  the  goipel.     This  were  very  defirable  -, 
but  feeing  it  is  a  thing  we  cannot  hope  for,  it  fnould 
be  fome  fatisfadion  to  our  curiofity,  to  know  what 
St.  Paul  preached,  what  was  the  main  fubjed  of  his 
fermons,  whither  he  referred  all  his  difcourfes,  and 
w^hat  they  tended  to.     This  he  tells  us  in  the  words 
that  I  have  read  to  you,  that  the  main  fubftance  of 
all  his  fermons  was  *' repentance  toward  God,  and 
*'  faith  toward  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ." 

The  occafion  of  the  words  was  briefly  this  •,  ^U 
Paul  being  in  his  journey  to  Jerufalem,  and  intend- 
ing to  be  there  JDy  the  day  of  Pentecoft,  that  he 
might  not  be  hindred  in  his  journey,  he  refolves  to 
pa^  by  Ephefus,  and  only  to  call  to  him  the  elders  of 
the  church  to  charge  them  with  their  duty,  and  the 
care  of  the  church  •,  and  to  engage  them  hereto,  he 
tells  them  how  he  had  carried  and  demeaned  himfelf 
among  them,  v.  iS.  with  what  diligence  and  vigi- 
lance he  had  watched  over  them,  with  what  affedli- 
on  and  earneftnefs  he  had  preached  to  them,  v.  19, 
20.  And  here  in  the  text  he  tells  them,  what  had 
been  the  fum  of  his  dodrine,  and  the  fubftance  of 
thofe  many  fermons  he  had  preached  among  them, 
and  what  was  the  end  and  defignof  all  his  difcourfes, 
viz.  To  perfuadc  men  to  "  repentance  toward  God, 
*'  and  faith  toward  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  •,  tef- 
''  tifying  both  to  the  Jews  and  Greeks,  &c.        I  Ihall 


"The  neceffity  of  repentance  and  faith.  ^yg^ 

I  fhali  explain  the  words  a  little,  and  then  fix  up-  S  E  R  M. 
on  the  obfervations  which  I  intend  to  fpeak  to,  be-    ^^^^' 
caufe  I  defign  this  only  as  a  preface  to  fomc  larger 
difcourfes  of  faith  and  repentance. 

For  explication,     l^flifying,  the  word  is  Aa/^ap. 
rvfof/,ii^,  which  fignifies  to  tellify,  to  prove  a  thing 
by  teftimony  ;  fo  it  is  ufed,  Heb.  ii.  6.     ''  But  one 
"  in  a  certain  place  teflifieth,  faying."     In  heathen 
writers  the  word  is  often  ufed  in  a  law  fenfe,  for  con- 
tefting  by  law,  and  pleading  in  a  caufe  ^  and  from 
hence  it  fignifies,  earneflly  to  contend  or  perfuade 
by  arguments  and  threatenings.     In  the  ufe  of  the 
LXX.  it  fignifies  to  protefl,  to  convince,  to  prefs 
carnefljy,  to  perfuade.    It  is  ufed  mofl  frequently 
by  St.^  Luke  in  a  very  intenfe  fignification,  and  is 
fometimes  joined  with  exhorting,  which  is  an  earnefl 
perfuading  to  a  thing,  Ads  ii.  40.     "  And  with 
•'  many  other  words  did  he  teftify  and  exhorf,  fay- 
*^  ing,  fave  yourfelves  from  this  untoward  genera- 
"  tion  j"  and  with  preaching,  Adsviij.  25.  *' And 
"  when  they  had  teflified  and  preached  the  word  of 
"  the  Lord  ;"  andfo  Ads  xviii.  5.  "  Being  prefTed 
"  in  fpirit,  he  teflified  to  the  Jews,  that  Jeeus  was 
"  the  Christ."  Being  preffed  in  fpirit,  fignifies  in- 
tention  .and  vehemency  in  teflifying  to  thern,  that  he 
did  vehemently  endeavour  to  convince  them  ;  it  feems 
to  be  equivalent  to  the  exprefTion,  v.  2S.  where  it  is 
faid,  ^'  ApoUos  did  mightily  convince  the  Jews  that 
^'  Jesus  was  the  Christ  ;"  that  is,  did  ufe  fuchper- 
fuafionsand  arguments  as  were  fuffident  to  convince ; 
and  to  mention  no  more.  Ads  xxviii.  23.     "  He 
^'  expounded  and  teflified  the  kingdom  of  God, 
"  perfuading  them  concerning  Jesus.** 

S.Paul  in  his  epiftle  to  Timothy  ufeth  thefe  words 

in  a  mofl  vehement  fenfe,  for  giving  a  folemn  charge, 

Vql.  IX.  ,8  s  I  Tim. 


CLIX. 


3800  ^he  necejjity  of  repentance  and  faith.* 

S  F.  R  M.    I  Tim.  V.  21.     "I  charge  thee  before  God  and  the 
"  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  the  word  is  J^/ajt^aprupo- 
^oLi  •,  and  fo  2  Tim.  ii.  14.  "  charging  them  before 
*'  the  Lord,  that  they  ftrive  not  about  words  ;" 
arid  fo  2  Tim.  iv.  i.     "I  charge  thee  before  God 
^^  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  •,"  and  here  in  the 
text  the  word  feems  to  be  of  a  very  high  and  intenfe 
fignification,  becaufe  of  the  circumftances  mentioned 
before  and  after  •,  he  tells  us  before,  that  he  taught 
them  "atallfeafons,"  v.  18.  "  publickly  and  from 
*'  houfe  to  houfe,"  v.  20.  And  afterwards  at  the 
"  31ft.  V.  that   "he  warned   them   day  and  night 
*'  with  tears."     So  that  "teftifying  to  the  Jews  re- 
"  pentance  and  faith/'  muft  fignify  hisprelTing  and 
pcrfuading  of  them  with  the  greateft  vehemency,  to 
turn  from  their  fms,  and  believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  ;  his  charging  on  themthefe  things  as  their 
duty,  his  pleading  with  them  the  necefTity  of  faith 
and  repentance,  and  earneftly  endeavouring  to  con- 
vince them  thereof. 

''  Repentance  toward  God,  and  faith  toward  our 
*'  Lord  Jesus  Christ  :"•  what  is  the  reafon  of 
this  appropriation  of  repentance  and  faith,  the  one 
as  properly  refpedingGoD,  and  the  other  our  Lord 
Tesus  Christ  ?  lanfwer.  Repentance  doth  pro- 
perly rcfped  God,  becaufe  he  is  the  party  offended, 
and  to  wliom  we  are  to  be  reconciled  ;  the  faith  of 
the  Gofpel  doth  properly  refer  to  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  as  the  chief  and  principal  objed  of  it;  fo 
that  by  "  teflifying  to  them  repentance  toward 
*'  God,  &c.  we  are  to  underftand  that  the  apoftle 
did  earneftly  prefs  and  perfuade  them  to  repent  of 
their  fins,  whereby  they  had  ofFenaed  God,  and  to 
believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  as  the  Meflias, 
the  perfon  that  was  ordained  of  God,  and  fcnt  to  be 
fhe  Saviour  of  (he  world,  From 


^he  7ieceJ]ity  of  repentance  and  jaith,  3801 

From  the  words  thus  explained,  this  is  the  obfer-  S  R  R  M. 

1  1      ,  11  •  -  CLIX. 

vation  that  doth  naturally  anie. 

That  repentance  and  faith  are  the  fum  and  fub- 
fiance  of  the  gofpel ;  and  that  minifters  ought  with 
all  earneilnefs  and  vehemency  to  prefs  people  to  re- 
pent and  believe,  to  charge  them  with  thefe  as  their 
duty,  and  by  all  means  to  endeavour  to  convince 
them  of  the  neceflity  of  them. 

In  the  handling  of  this  J  fhall  do  thefe  two  things. 

Firil,  fhew  you  what  is  included  in  repentance  and 
faith,  that  you  may  fee  that  they  are  the  fum  of  the 
gofpel.     And, 

Secondly,  fliew  you  the  neceffity  of  them. 

Firfl,  What  is  included  in  thefe. 

I.  Repentance  \  this  properly  fignifies  a  change  of 
mindj  a  convidion  that  we  have  done  amifSj  fo  as 
to  be  truly  forty  for  what  we  have  done,  and  hearti- 
ly to  wifh  that  we  had  not  done  it.  To  repent,  is  to  al- 
ter  our  mind,  to  have  other  apprehenfions  of  things 
than  we  had,  to  look  upon  that  now  as  evil,  which 
we  did  not  before  ;  from  whence  follows  forrow  for 
what  we  have  done,  and  a  refolution  of  mind  for  the 
future  not  to  do  again  that  which  appears  now  to  us 
to  be  fo  evil,  that  we  are  afhamed  of  it,  and  trou- 
bled for  it,  and  wifh  we  had  never  done  it.  So  that 
repentance  implies  a  convidlion  that  we  have  done 
fomething  that  is  evil  and  finful,  contrary  to  the  law 
we  are  under,  and  thofe  obligations  of  duty  and  gra- 
titude that  lie  upon  us,  whereby  God  is  highly  pro- 
voked and  incenfed  againfl  us,  and  we  in  danger  of 
his  wrath,  and  the  fad  effeds  of  his  difpleafure ;  up- 
on which  we  are  troubled,  and  grieved,  and  afham- 
ed for  what  we  have  done,  and  wifh  we  had  been 
wifer,  and  had  done  otherNyife  •,  hereupon  we  re*- 
folve  never  to  do  any  thing  that  is  finful,  that  is  con- 

^8  S  2  trary 


3802  ^^  necejftty  of  repentance  and  faith. 

S  E  R  M.  trary  to  our  duty  and  obligations  to  God,  and  by 
^^^^'  which  we  may  provoke  him  againft  us.  Thefe  twa 
things  are  contained  in  a  true  repentance,  a  deep 
fenfe  of,  and  forrow  for  the  evils  that  are  pad,  and 
the  fins  that  we  have  committed  •,  and  a  firm  pur- 
pofe  and  refolution  of  obedience  for  the  future,  of 
abftaining  from  all  fin,  and  doing  whatever  is  our 
duty  ;  the  true  effcdt  of  which  refolution,  is  the 
breaking  oflf  the  pradiice  of  fm,  and  the  courfe  of  a 
wicked  life,  and  a  conflant  courfe  of  obedience. 

II.  Faith  in  Christ  is  an  effedual  believing  the 
revelation  of  the  gofpel,  the  hiftory  and  the  dodrinc 
of  it  ;  the  hiftory  of  it,  that  there  was  fuch  a  per- 
fon  as  Jesus  Christ,  that  he  was  the  true  MeiTias, 
prophefied  of  and  promifed  in  the  Old  Teftament, 
that  he  was  born  and  lived  and  preached,  and  wrought 
the  miracles  that  are  recorded,  that  he  was  crucified 
and  rofe  again,  and  afcended  into  heaven,  that  he  was 
*'  the  Son  of  God,'*  and  fent  by  him  into  the  world, 
by  his  dod:rin€  to  inftru<5t,  and  by  the  example  of  his 
life  to  go  before  us  in  the  way  to  happinefs,  and  by 
the  merit  and  fatisfadion  of  his  death  and  fufferings, 
to  appeafe  and  reconcile  God  to  us,  and  to  purchafe 
for  us  the  pardon  of  our  fins  and  eternal  hfe,  upon 
the  conditions  of  faith  and  repentance  and  fincere 
obedience  i  and  that  to  enable  us  to  the  performance 
of  thefe  conditions,  he  promifed,  and  afterward  fent 
his  holy  Spirit,  to  accompany  the  preaching  of  his 
gofpel,  and  to  aflift  all  Chriftians  to  the  doing  of 
that  which  God  requires  of  them  j  this  is  the  hifto- 
ry of  the  gofpel. 

Now  the  do6lrine  of  it  contains  the  precepts  and 
promifes  and  threatenings  of  it,  and  faith  in  Christ 
includes  a  firm  belief  of  all  thefe  •,  of  the  precepts 
of  the  gofpel  as  the  matter  of  our  duty,  and  the 

rule 


The  neceffity  of  repentance  and  faith.  3803 

rule  of  our  life  •,  and  of  the  promifes  and  threaten-  ^  ^^J"^' 
ings  of  the  gofpel,  as  arguments  to  our  duty,   to 
encourage  our  obedience,  and  deter  us  from  fin.    So 
that  he  that  believes  the  Lord  Jesus,  believes  him 
to  be  the  great  guide  and  teacher  fent  from  God,   to 
bring  and  condud  men  to  eternal  happinefs,  and  that 
therefore  we  ought  to  hearken  to  him  and  follow 
him  ;  this  is  to  believe  his  prophetical  office.  He  be- 
lieves that  he  is  "  the  author  of  falvatioii,"  and  hath 
purchafed  for  us  forgivenefs  of  fins,  ranfom  from 
hell,  and  eternal  life  and  bleflednefs  upon  the  condi- 
tions before  mentioned,  and  therefore  that  we  ought 
to  rely  upon  him  only  for  falvation,  to  own  him  for 
our  Saviour,  and  to  beg  of  him  his  holy  Spirit, 
which  he  hath  promifed  to  us,   to  enable  us  to  per- 
form the  conditions  required  on  our  part ;  this  is  ta 
believe  his  prieftly  office.     And  laftly,  he  believes 
that  the  precepts  of  the  gofpel,  being  delivered  to 
us  by  the  Son  of  God,  ought  to  have  the  authority 
of  laws  upon  us,  and  that  we  are  bound  to  be  obe- 
dient to  them ;  and  for  our  encouragement  if  wc 
be  fo,  that  there  is  a  glorious  and  eternal  reward  pro- 
mifed to  us  ;  and  for  our  terror  if  we  be  not,  there 
are  terrible  and  eternal  puniffiments  threatened  to  us  ; 
to  which  rewards,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  at  the 
day   of  judgment  will  fentence  men,  as  the  great 
judge  of  the  world  ;  and  this  is  to  believe  the  kingly 
office  of  Christ.      And  this  is  the  fum  of  that 
which  is  meant  by  "  faith  toward  the  Lord  Jesus 
"  Christ,'*  which  the  apoftle  faith  was  one  fubjedt 
of  his  preaching. 

And  the  proper  and  genuine  efi^sft  of  this  faith  Is 
to  live  as  we  believe,  to  conform  our  lives  to  the 
dodlrine,  to  the  truth  whereof  we  afient.  Hence  it  is 
that  true  Chriltians,  that  is,  thofe  who  f alliioncd  their 
I  lives. 


3804  ^^^  necejjity  of  repejitaiice  and  faith, 

S  E  R  M.  lives  according  to  the  gofpel,  are  called  believers  % 
and  the  whole  of  chriflianity  is  many  times  contain- 
ed in  this  word  believing,  which  is  the  great  principle 
of  a  chriflian  life.  As  in  the  old  teilament  all  reli- 
gion is  exprelTed  by  "  the  fear  of  God  ;"  fo  in  the 
new,  by  "  faith  in  Christ." 

And  now  you  fee  what  is  included  in  repentance 
and  faith,  you  may  eafily  judge  whether  thefe  be  not 
the  fum  of  the  gofpel,  that  men  fhould  forfake  their 
fins  and  turn  to  God,  and  believe  in  the  revelation  of 
the  gofpel  concerning  Jesus  Christ,  that  is,  hear- 
tily entertain  and  fubmit  to  it.  What  did  Christ 
preach  to  the  Jew^s,  but  that  they  fhould  repent  of 
their  fins,  and  believe  on  him  as  the  MefTias  .^  And 
what  did  the  apoftles  preach,  but  to  the  fame  pur- 
pofe?  When  St.  Peter  preached  to  the  Jews,  A6tsii. 
the  effe6l  of  his  fermon  and  the  fcope  of  it  was  to 
perfuade  them  "  to  repent  and  be  baptized  in  the 
*'  name  of  Jesus,"  that  is,  to  profefs  their  belief  in 
him,  V.  38.  And  fo  A6ls  iii.  19.  This  is  the  con- 
clufion  of  his  difcourfe,  "  repent  therefore  and  be 
*'  converted,"  and  then  he  propounded  Christ  to 
them  as  the  obje6l  of  their  faith,  being  the  great 
prophet  that  was  prophefied  of  by  Moles,  who  fhould 
*'  be. railed  up  among  them,"  v.  22.  So  likewife 
^t.  Paul  when  he  preached  to  the  Jews  and  Gentiles, 
thefe  were  his  great  fubje6ls,  Adts  xvii.  30.  This 
is  the  conclufion  of  his  fermon  to  the  Athenians,  to 
perfuade  them  to  repent  by  the  confideration  of  a 
future  judgment ;  and  to  perfuade  them  to  believe 
on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  was  to  be  the 
judge  of  the  world,  from  the  miracle  of  his  refur- 
redlion  •,  "  But  now  he  commands  all  men  every 
**  where  to  repent,  becaufe  he  hath  appointed  a  day, 
"  &c.  whereof  he  hath  given  affurance  unto  all  men. 


"  in 


^he  necejjity  of  repentance  and  faith.  3805 

"  in  that  he  hath  raifed  him  from  the  dead."     So  SER  M. 
that  you  fee  that  thefe  are  the  great  dodrines  of  the 
gofpel,  and  were  the  fum  of  the  apoftles  preaching ; 
all  their  fermons  were  perfuafives  to  thefe  two  duties 
of  repentance  and  faith. 

Secondly,  for  the  necefTity  of  thefe  dotlrines.They 
are  neceffary  for  the  efcaping  of  eternal  mifery,  and 
attaining  of  everlafting  happincfs.  And  this  will  ap- 
pear, by  confidering  the  nature  of  them,  and  the 
relation  they  have  to  both  thefe. 

For  the  avoiding  of  eternal  punifliment,  it  is  ne- 
ceffary the  guilt  fhould  be  removed,  which  is  an  ob- 
ligation to  punifhment,  and  that  cannot  be  but  by 
pardon  ;  and  fure  we  cannot  imagine  that  God  will 
ever  pardon  us  without  iripcntance  ;  he  will  never 
remit  to  us  the  punifhment  of  fin,  fo  long  as  we  tell 
him  we  are  not  at  all  troubled  for  what  we  have  done, 
and  we  are  of  the  fame  mind  flill,  and  will  do  the 
fame  again  ;  and  till  we  repent,  we  tell  God  this, 
and  we  may  be  fure  God  will  not  cafl  away  his  par- 
dons upon  thofe  that  defpife  them  ;  fo  that  repentance 
is  necefiary  to  the  efcaping  of  hell. 

And  faith  in  CnpasT  is  neceffary  to  it  j  for  if  this 
be  the  method  of  God's  grace,  not  to  pardon  fin 
without  fatisfa6lion,  and  Jesus  Christ  hath  made 
fatisfad:ion  for  fin  by  the  merit  of  his  fufferings,  and 
if  it  be  neceffary  that  we  fhould  believe  this,  that  the 
benefit  hereof  may  redound  to  us  \  then  faith  in 
Christ  is  neceffary  to  the  obtaining  of  the  pardon 
of  fin,  by  which  the  guilt  of  fin  is  removed,  that 
is,  ofir  obligation  to  eternal  punifhment. 

And  then  for  attaining  falvation.  Christ  having 
in  the  gofpel  revealed  to  us  the  way  and  means  to 
eternal  happinefs,  it  is  necefTary  that  we  fhould  be- 
lieve this  revelation  pf  the  gofpel  by  Jesus  Christ, 

in 


3806  ^he  neceJIity  of  repentance  and  faith. 

6E  R  M.  in  order  to  this  end.  So  that  you  fee  the  neceflity 
of  faith  and  repentance,  becaufe  without  thefe  wc 
can  neither  efcape  mifery,  nor  attain  to  happinefs. 

I  ihould  now  come  to  draw  fome  inferences  from 
this  difcourfe,  but  I  will  firft  give  fatisfa6lion  to  a 
query  or  two,  to  which  this  difcourfe  feems  to  have 
given  occafion. 

I.  Query.  You  will  fay,  why  do  I  call  repentance 
a  do&ine  of  the  gofpel  ?  It  is  a  do6trine  of  nature. 
Natural  religion  tells  us,  that  when  we  have  offend- 
ed God,  we  ought  to  be  forry  for  it,  and  refolve  to 
amend  and  reform. 

Anf.  I  do  not  make  the  dodrine  of  repentance 
proper  to  the  gofpel,  as  if  it  had  not  been  revealed 
to  the  world  before  ;  h)^  becaufe  it  is  a  dodlrine 
which  the  gofpel  very  much  preiTeth  and  perfuadeth 
men  to,  and  becaufe  the  great  motives  and  enforce- 
tiients  of  it  are  peculiar  to  the  gofpel,  So  that  the 
dodrine  of  repentance,  confidered  with  thofe  power- 
ful rcafons  and  arguments  to  it  which  the  gofpel  fur- 
nifheth  us  withal,  is  in  this  fenfe  proper  to  the  gof- 
pel, and  not  known  to  the  world  before. 

There  are  two  motives  and  enforcements  to  re- 
pentance which  the  gofpel  furnifheth  us  with. 

1.  AfTurance  of  pardon  and  remifTion  of  fins  in 
cafe  of  repentance,  which  is  a  great  encouragement 
to  repentance,  and  which,  before  the  gofpel,  the 
world  had  never  any  firm  and  clear  aflurance  of. 

2.  Aflurance  of  eternal  rewards  and  punifliments 
after  this  life,  w^hich  is  a  ftrong  argument  to  per- 
fuade  men  to  change  their  lives,  that  they  may  a- 
void  the  mifery  that  is  threatened  to  impenitent  fin- 
ncrs,  and  be  qualified  for  the  happinefs  which  it  pro- 
mifeth  to  repentance  and  obedience.  And  this  the 
apoftle  tells  us  in  the  formentioned  place,  Afts  xvii, 

30>  3'' 


7he  necejjity  of  repentance  mid  faith,  3807 

30,  31.  is  that  which  doth,  as  it  were,  make  repen-  S  E  RM. 
tance  to  be  a  new  do6lrine  that  did  come  with  the 
golpel  into  the  world,  becaufe  it  was  never  before 
enforced  with  this  powerful  argument  \  "  the  times 
•'  of  that  ignorance  God  winked  at;  but  now  he 
•'  calls  upon  all  men  every  where  to  repent  \  be- 
*'  caufe,  &c/'  When  the  world  was  in  ignorance, 
and  had  not  fuch  aflurance  of  a  future  flate,  of  eter- 
nal rewards  and  punilliments  after  this  life,  the  argu- 
ments to  repentance  were  weak  and  feeble  in  compa- 
rifon  of  what  they  now  are,  the  neccflity  of  this 
duty  was  not  fo  evident.  But  now  God  hath  afTur- 
ed  us  of  a  future  judgment,  now  exhortations  to 
repentance  have  a  commanding  power  and  influence 
upon  men  ;  fo  that  repentance,  both  as  it  is  that 
which  is  very  much  prefTcd  and  inculcated  in  the  go- 
fpel,  and  as  it  hath  it's  chief  motives  and  enforce- 
ments from  the  gofpel,  may  be  faid  to  be  one  of  the 
great  dodlrines  of  the  gofpel. 

Query  2.  Whether  the  preaching  of  faith  in 
Christ,  among  thofe  who  are  already  Chriflians, 
be  at  all  neceffary  ?  Becaufe  it  feems  very  improper, 
toprefs  thofe  to  believe  in  Christ,  who  are  already 
perfuaded  that  he  is  the  MefTias,  and  do  entertain 
the  hiftory  and  dodrine  of  the  gofpel. 

Anf.  The  faith  which  the  apofcle  here  means,  and 
which  he  would  perfuade  men  to,  is  an  effedual 
belief  of  the  gofpel  \  fuch  a  faith  as  hath  real  effedls 
upon  men,  and  makes  them  to  live  as  they  believe ; 
fuch  a  faith  as  perfuades  them  of  the  need  of  thefe 
blelTings  that  the  gofpel  offers,  and  makes  them  to 
defire  to  be  partakers  of  them,  and  in  order  thereto 
to  be  wiUing  to  fubmit  to  thofe  terms  and  conditions 
of  holinefs  and  obedience,  v/hich  the  gofpel  requires. 
This  is  the  faith  we  would  perfuade  men  to,  and 

Vol.  IX.  18  T  there 


I 


3  8  o  S  T'he  necejfity  of  repentance  and  faith. 

S  li  R  M.  ti^ere  is  nothing  more  necefTary  to  be  prefTed  upon  the 
greatefl  part  of  Chriftians  than  this  •,  for  how  few- 
are  there,  among  thofe  who  profefs  to  believe  the 
gofpel,  who  bcUeve  it  in  this  effedual  manner,  fo 
as  to  conform  themfelves  to  it  ?  The  faith  which 
mofl  Chriitians  pretend  to  is  merely  negative  •,  they 
do  not  difbelieve  the  gofpel,  they  do  not  confider  it, 
nor  trouble  themfelves  about  it,  they  do  not  care, 
nor  are  concerned  whether  it  be  true  or  not  •,  but  they 
have  not  a  pofitive  belief  of  it,  they  are  not  poflefled 
with  a  firm  perfuafion  of  the  truth  of  thofe  matters 
which  are  contained  in  it  ;  if  they  were,  fuch  a  per- 
fuafion   would  produce   real    and   pofitive   efFeds. 
Every  man  naturally  defires  happinefs,  and  it  is  im- 
pofiible  that  any  man  that  is  poflefled  with  this  belief, 
that  in  order  to  happinefs  it  is  neceflary  for  him  to 
do  fuch  and  fuch  things  •,  and  that  if  he  omit  or  neg- 
ledt  them    he  is    unavoidably    miferable,    that   he 
fhould  not  do  them.     Men  fay  they  believe  this  or 
that,  but  you  may  fee  in  their  lives,  what  it  is  they 
believe.     So    that  the   preaching  of  this   faith   in 
Christ,  which  is  the  only  truefaith,is  fliill  neceflfary. 
I.  Infer.  '' If  repentance  towards  God,  and  faith  in 
*'  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  be  the  fum  and  fubfl:ance 
of  the  gofpel,  then  from  hence  we  may  infer  the  ex- 
cellency of  the  chriftian  religion,  which  infifts  only 
upon  thofe  things  that  do  tend  to  our  perfedion  and 
our  happinefs.     Repentance  tends  to  our  recovery, 
and  the  bringing  of  us  back  as  near  as  may  be  to 
innocence.  Primus  i7inocenti^ gradus  eft  non  peccajfe-y 
fecundus,  pmitentia  :  and  then  *'  faith  in  the  Lord 
"Jesus  Christ,"  though  it  bevery comprehenfive, 
and  contains  many  things  in  it,    yet  nothing  but 
what  is  eminently  for  our  advantage,  and  doth  very 
much  conduce  to  our  happinefs.    The  hiilorical  part 

of 


The  necejjity  of  repejitance  and  faith.  3809 

oF  the  gofpel  acquaints  us  with  the  perfon  and  adions  S  E  R  M. 
of  our  Saviour,  which  conduceth  very  much  to  our 
underftanding  of  the  author  and  means  of  our  falva- 
tion.  The  do6lrinal  part  of  the  gofpel  contains  what 
God  requires  on  our  part,  and  the  encouragements 
and  arguments  to  our  duty,  from  the  confideration 
of  the  recompence  and  rewards  of  the  next  life.  The 
precepts  of  Christ's  dodrine  are  fuch  as  tend  ex- 
ceedingly to  the  perfection  of  our  nature,  being  all 
founded  in  reafon,  in  the  nature  of  God,  and  of  a 
reafonable  creature  ;  I  except  only  thofe  pofitive  in- 
ilitutions  of  the  chriftian  religion,  the  two  facra- 
ments,  which  are  not  burthenfom,  and  are  of  ex- 
cellent ufe.     This  is  the  firft. 

II.  We  may  learn  from  hence  what  is  to  be  the 
fum  and  end  of  our  preaching,  to  bring  men  to  re- 
pentance and  a  firm  belief  of  the  gofpel ;  but  then  it 
is  to  be  confidered,  that  we  preach  repentance,  fo 
often  as  we  preach  either  againft  fin  in  general,  or 
any  particular  fin  or  vice  ;  and  fo  often  as  we  per- 
fuade  to  holinefs  in  general,  or  to  the  performance 
of  any  particular  duty  of  religion,  or  to  the  exercife 
of  any  particular  grace  ;  for  repentance  includes  th« 
forfaking  of  fin,  and  a  fincere  refolution  and  endea- 
vour of  reformation  and  obedience.  And  we  preach 
repentance  fo  often  as  we  infill  upon  fuch  confidera- 
tions  and  arguments,  as  may  be  powerful  to  deter 
men  from  fin,  and  to  engage  them  to  holinefs.  And 
wepreach  "faith  towards  our  Lord  JesusChrist," 
fo  often  as  we  declare  the  grounds  of  the  chrifbian 
religion,  and  infill  upon  fuch  arguments  as  tend  to 
make  it  credible,  and  are  proper  to  convince  men  of 
the  truth  and  reafonablenefs  of  it ;  fo  often  as  we  ex^ 
plain  the  myilery  of  Christ's  incarnation,  the  hi- 
llory  of  his  hfe,  death,  refurredion,  afcenfion,  and 
1^  T  2  intercefiiong 


CLIX. 


3810  Tthe  mcejjit'j  of  repentance  and  faith. 

S£R  M.  intercefTion,  and  the  proper  ends  and  ufe  of  thefe  % 
fo  often  as  we  open  the  method  of  God's  grace  for 
the  falvation  of  finners,  the  nature  of  the  covenant 
between  God  and  us,  and  the  conditions  of  it,  and 
the  way  how  a  finner  is  juftified  and  hath  his  fins 
pardoned,  the  nature   and  neceffity  of  regeneration 
and  fandtification  ;  fo  often  as  we  explain  the  precepts 
of  the  gofpel,  and  the  promifes  and  threatenings  of 
it,  and  endeavour  to  convince  men  of  the  equity  of 
Chrit's  commands,  and  to  aflure  them  of  the  cer- 
tainty of  the  eternal  happinefs  which  the  gofpel  pro- 
mifes to  them  that  obey  it,  and  of  the  eternal  mi- 
fery  which  the  gofpel  threatens  to  thofe  that  are  dif- 
obedient-,  all  this  is  preaching  "faith  in  our  Lord 
*'  Jesus  Christ.'* 

III.  This  may  corre6l  the  irregular  humours  and 
itch  in  many  people,  who  are  not  contented  with  this 
plain  and  wholefom  food,  but  mud  be  gratified  with 
fublime   notions   and  unintelligible  myfleries,  with 
pleafant  palTages  of  wit,  and  artificial  ftrams  of  rhe- 
torick,  with  nice  and  unprofitable  difputes,  with  bold 
interpretations  of  dark  prophecies,  and  peremptory 
determinations  of  what  will  happen  next  year,  and 
a  pundual  ftating  of  the  time  when  Anti-chrift  fhall 
be  thrown  down,  and  Babylon  fliall  fall,  and  who 
fhall  be  employed  in  this  work.     Or  if  their  humour 
lies  another  v/ay,  you  muft  apply  yourielf  to  it,  by 
making  fnarp  refiedions  upon  matters  in  prefent  con- 
troverfy  and  debate,  you  muft  dip  your  ftile  in  gall 
and  vinegar,  and  be  all  fatyr  and  inve6live  againlt 
thofe  that  differ  from  you,  and  teach  people  to  hate 
one  another,  and  to  fall  together  by  the  ears  •,  and 
this  men  call  gofpel  preaching,  and  fpeaking  of  fea- 
fonable  truths. 

Surely  St.  Paul  was  a  gofpel  preacher,  and  fuch 

an 


^he  neceffity  of  repentance  and  faith.  38 1 1 

an  one  as  may  be  a  pattern  to  all  others ;  and  yet  he  S  E  R  M. 
did  none  of  thefe  -,  he  preached  what  men  might 
underfland,  and  what  they  ought  to  believe  and 
pra^life,  in  a  plain  and  unaffe6ted  and  convincing 
manner  ;  he  taught  "  fuch  things  as  made  for  peace,'* 
*'  and  whereby  he  might  edify  and  build  up  men  in 
"  their  holy  faith."  The  dodrines  that  he  preach- 
ed will  never  be  unfeafonable,  that  men  fliould  leave 
their  fins,  and  believe  the  gofpel,  and  live  accordingly. 

And  if  men  mud  needs  be  gratified  with  difputes    '^ 
and  controverfies,  there  are  thefe  great  controverfies 
between  God  and  the  finnerto  be  ftated  and  determi- 
ned ;  whether  this  be  religion,  to  follow  our  own 
lufts  and  inclinations,  or  to  endeavour  to  be  like  God, 
and  to  be  conformed  to  him,  in  goodnefs,  and  mer- 
cy, and  righteoufnefs,  and  truth,  and  faithfulnefs  ? 
Whether  Jesus  Christ  be  not  the  MefTias  and  Savi- 
our of  the  world  ?  Whether  faith  and  repentance  and 
fincere  obedience  be  not  the  terms  of  falvation,  and  the 
ncceflary  conditions  of  happinefs  ?    Whether  there 
fhall  be  a  future  judgment,  when  all  men  fhall  be 
fentenced  according  to  their  works  ?  Whether  there 
be  heaven  and  hell  ?    Whether  good  men  fhall  be 
eternally  and  unfpeakably  happy,  and  wicked  men 
extremely  and  everlaftingly  miferable  ?  Thefe  are  the 
great  controverfies  of  religion,  upon  which  we  are 
to  difpute  on  God's  behalf  againll  finners.     God 
aflerts,  and  finners  deny  thefe  things,  not  in  words, 
but  which  IS  more  emphatical  andfignificant,  in  their 
lives  and  a6lions.     Thefe  are  practical  controverfies 
of  faith,  and  it  concerns  every  man  to  be  refolved 
and  determined  about  them,  that  he  may  frame  his   ')(^ 
life  accordingly. 

And  fo  for  repentance  ;  God  fays,  repentance  is  a 
forfaking  of  fin,  and  a  thorough  change  and  amend- 
ment 


CLIX. 


-3812  ^^  necejjity  ofrepe^itance  and  faiths 

S  E  R  M.  mcnt  of  life  ;  the  finner  fays,  that  it  is  only  a  for- 
mal confefTion,  and  a  flight  afking  of  God  forgive- 
nefs  :  God  calls  upon  us  fpeedily  and  forthwith  to 
repent  •,  the  finner  faith  it  is  time  enough,  and  it 
may  fafely  be  deferred  to  ficknefs  or  death  \  thefe  arc 
important  controverfies,  and  matters  of  moment. 
But  men  do  not  afFedl  common  truths ;  whereas  thefe 
are  moft  neceflfary  :  And  indeed  whatever  is  general- 
ly ufeful  and  beneficial,  ought  to  be  common,  and 
not  to  be  the  lefs  valued,  but  the  more  efleemed  for 
being  fo. 

And  as  thefe  dodrines  of  faith  and  repentance  arc 
never  unfeafonable,  fo  are  they  more  peculiarly  pro- 
per when  we  celebrate  the  holy  facrament,  which 
was  inflituted  for  a  folemn  and  ftanding  memorial 
of  the  chriftian  religion,  and  is  one  of  the  moft 
powerful  arguments  and  perfuafives  to  repentance 
and  a  good  hfe. 

The  faith  of  the  gofpel  doth  more  particularly 
refpe(5t  the  death  of  Christ  \  and  therefore  it  is  call- 
ed "  faith  in  his  blood,"  becaufe  that  is  more  efpe- 
cially  the  obje^lof  our  faith  •,  the  blood  of  Christ, 
as  it  was  a  feal  of  the  truth  of  his  dodrine,  fo  it  is 
alfo  a  confirmation  of  all  the  bleflings  and  benefits 
of  the  new  covenant. 

And  it  is  one  of  the  greateft  arguments  in  the  world 
to  repentance.  In  the  blood  of  Christ  we  may 
fee  our  own  guilt,  and  in  the  dreadful  fufferings  of 
the  Son  of  God,  thejuft  dcfert  of  our  fins;  "  he 
*'  hath  born  our  griefs,  and  carried  our  forrows,  he 
*'  was  wounded  for  our  tranfgreiTions,  and  bruifed 
*'  for  our  iniquities  ;  therefore  the  commemoration 
of  his  fufferings  fliould  call  our  fins  to  remembrance, 
the  reprefentation  of  his  body  broken,  ^fhould  melt 
tpyr  hearts.  •,  and  fo  often  as  wp  remember  that  "  his 

"  blood 


uhe  necejjity  of  repentance  and  faith.  3  S 1 3 

blood  was  Ihod  for  us,  our  eyes"   iliould  "  run  S  ER  M 
down  widi  rivers  of  tears  i"  fo  often  as  we  "look 


''  upon  him  whom  we  have  pierced,"  we  fhould 
*'  mourn  over  him."  When  the  fon  of  God  fuf- 
fered,  ''  the  rocks  were  rent  in  funder  ;"  and  fhall 
not  the  confideration  of  thofe  fuiferings  be  effedtual 
to  break  the  mofl  ftony  and  obdurate  heart  ? 

What  can  be  more  proper  when  we  come  to  this 
facrament,  than  the  renewing  of  our  repentance  ? 
When  we  partake  of  this  pafTover,  we  fliould  "  eat 
"  it  with  bitter  herbs."  The  mofl  folemn  expref- 
fions  of  our  repentance  fall  fhort  of  thofe  fufferings, 
which  our  blelTed  Saviour  underwent  for  our  fins. 
If  "  our  head  were  waters,  and  our  eyes  fountains 
"  of  tears,"  we  could  never  fufficiently  lament  the 
curfed  effedls  and  confequences  of  thofe  provocations 
which  were  fo  fatal  to  the  Son  of  God. 

And  that  our  repentance  may  be  real,  it  muft  be 
accompanied  with  the  refolution  of  a  better  life  ;  for 
if  we  return  to  our  fins  again,  "  we  trample  under 
*'  foot  the  Son  of  God,  and  profane  the  blood  of 
"  the  covenant,"  and  out  of  "  the  cup  of  falvation 
"  wc  drink  our  own  damnation,"  and  turn  that 
which  fliould  fave  us  into  an  inftrument  and  feal  of 
«ur  own  ruin. 


SER- 


■3814 


SERMON     CLX. 

Of  confeffing  and  forfaking  fin,  in  or- 
der to  pardon. 


$ERM. 

CLX. 


on  A(h 
wednef- 
day. 


P  R  O  V.    xxvhi.    13. 

He  that  cover eth  his  fins  pall  not  profper :  hut  who- 
fo  confejfetb  and  forfaketh  them,  Jhall  have  mercy, 

SI  N  C  E  we  are  all  Tinners,  and  liable  to  the  jus- 
tice of  God,  it  is  a  matter  of  great  moment 
Preached  to  our  Comfort  and  happinefs,  to  be  rightly  inform- 
ed by  what  means,  and  upon  what  terms,  we  may 
be  reconciled  to  God,  and  find  mercy  with  him. 
And  to  this  piirpofe  the  text  gives  us  this  advice  and 
direction,  "  whofo  confefleth  and  forfaketh  his  fins 
*'  fhall  have  mercy." 

In  which  words  there  is  a  great  blefling  and  bene- 
fit  declared  and  promifed  to  finners,  upon  certain 
conditions.  The  blefling  and  benefit  promifed,  is 
*' the  mercy  and  favour  of  God,"  which  compre- 
hends all  the  happy  efi^eds  of  God's  mercy  and  good- 
nefs  to  finners.  And  the  conditions  upon  which  this 
blefling  is  promifed  are  two,  "  confeflion  of  our  fins, 
*'  and  forfaking  of  them  j"  and  thcfe  two  contain  in 
them  the  whole  nature  of  that  great  and  ncceflTary 
duty  of  repentance,  without  which  a  finner  can  have 
no  reafonable  hopes  of  the  mercy  of  God. 

I.  Here  is  a  blefling  or  benefit  promifed,  which  is 
*'  the  mercy  and  favour  of  God."  And  this  in  the 
full  extent  of  it,  comprehends  all  the  efix:6ls  of  the 
mercy  and  goodnefs  of  God  to  finners,  and  doth  pri- 
marily import  the  pardon  and  forgivenefsofour  fins. 

And 


Of  conjejfing  and forfukingfm^  Sec,  3815 

And  this  probably  Solomon  did  chiefly  intend  in  this  ^  ^'  ^'  '^• 
expreffion  ;  for  fo  the  mercy  of  God  doth  mod  fre- 
quently fignify  in  the  old  teflament,  viz.  the  forgivc- 
nefs  of  our  fins.  And  thus  the  prophet  explains  it, 
Ifa.  lv»  7.  "  Let  the  wicked  forfake  his  ways,  and 
"  the  unrighteous  man  his  thoughts,  and  let  him 
"  return  unto  the  Lord,  and  he  will  have  mercy, 
"  and  to  our  God,  for  he  vrill  abundandy  pardon.'* 
But  now  fince  the  clear  revelation  of  the  gofpel, 
the  mercy  of  God  doth  not  only  extend  to  the  par- 
don of  fin,  but  to  power  againft  it ;  becaufe  this  al- 
fo  is  an  effecfl  of  God's  free  grace  and  mercy  to 
finners,  to  enable  them,  by  the  grace  of  his  holy- 
Spirit,  to  mailer  and  mortify  their  lulls,  and  to  per- 
fevere  in  goodnefs  to  the  end* 

And  it  comprehends  alfo  our  final  pardon  and  ab- 
folution  at  the  great  day,  together  with  the  glorious 
reward  of  eternal  life,  which  the  apoflle  exprefTeth, 
by  "  finding  mercy  with  the  Lord  in  that  day." 
And  this  likewife  is  promifed  to  repentance,  Ad:s 
iii.  19,  "  Repent  ye  therefore,  and  be  converted, 
that  your  fins  may  be  blotted  out,  when  tli£  times 
of  refrcfhing  fhall  come  from  the  prefence  of  the 
Lord,  and  he  fhall  fend  Jesus  Christ,  who 
before  was  preached  unto  you  j"  that  is,  that  when 
Jesus  Christ  who  is  now  preached  unto  you  fhall 
come,  you  may  receive  the  final  fcntence  of  abfolp- 
tion  and  forgivenefs. 

And  thus  much  fhall  fuffice  to  have  fpoken  of 
the  blefTing  and  benefit  here  promifed,  the  mercy  of 
God  ;  which  comprehends  all  the  blefied  effe6ls  of 
the  divine  grace  and  goodnefs  to  finners,  the  prefenc 
pardon  of  fin,  and  power  to  mortify  fin,  and  to  per- 
fevere  in  a  good  courfc,  and  our   final  abfyliicion  by 

Vol.  IX.  iS  U  the 


€C 


3816  Of  confejfing  and  for  faking  fn , 

S  E  R  M.  the  fentence  of  the  great  day,  together  with  the  mcr* 
ciful  and  glorious  reward  of  eternal  Ufe. 

II.  We  will  confider  in  the  next  place,  the  condi- 
tions upon  which  this  bleflTing  is  promifed,  and  they 
are  two,  the  confefling  and  forfaking  of  our  fins, 
"  Whofo  confefleth  and  forfaketh  his  fm,  Ihall  have 
*'  mercy  •,"  and  thefe  two  do  contain  and  confiitute 
the  whole  nature  of  repentance,  without  which  a 
finner  can  have  no  reafonable  hopes  to  find  mercy 
with  God.     I  begin  with  the 

Firil,  theconfeffion  of  our  fins ;  by  which  is  meant 
a  penitent  acknowledgment  of  our  faults  to  God  ; 
to  God  I  fay,  becaufe  the  confeffion  of  our  fins  to 
men  is  not,  generally  fpeaking,  a  condition  of  the 
forgivenefs  of  them,  but  only  in  fome  paiticular  ca- 
fes, when  our  fins  againfi;  God  are  accompanied  and 
complicated  with  fcandal  and  injury  to  men.  In  o- 
ther  cafes  the  confeffion  of  our  fins  to  men  is  not  ne- 
cefi^ary  to  the  pardon  of  them  •,  as  I  fhall  more  fully 
ihew  in  the  progrefs  of  this  difcourfe. 

All  the  difficulty  in  this  matter  is,  that  the  con- 
feffion of  our  fins  is  oppcfed  to  the  covering  and 
concealing  of  them  :  "  he  that  covereth  his  fin  ffiall 
**  not  profper :  but  whofo  confeifeth  them  fhall  have 
"  mercy."  But  no  man  can  hope  to  hide  his  fin 
from  God,  and  therefore  confeffion  of  them  to  God 
cannot  be  here  meant.  But  this  ob)e6i;ion,  if  it  be  of 
any  force,  quite  excludeth  confeffiion  to  God,  as 
no  part  of  Solomon's  meaning  •,  when  yet  confeffiion 
of  owr  fins  to  God  is  granted,  on  all  hands,  to  be  a 
neceffaiy  condition  of  the  forgivenefs  of  them.  And 
to  take  away  the  whole  ground  of  this  objedion ; 
men  are  faid  in  fcripture,  when  they  do  not  confefs 
their  fins  and  repent  of  thca?,  to  hide  and  conceal 
them  from  God:  not  to  acknowledge  them  is  as  it 


a  man 


tn  order  to  pardon,  ?  8 1 7 

a  man  went  about  to  cover  them.  And  thus  David  S  E  R  M. 
oppofeth  confefTion  of  fins  to  God,  to  the  hiding  of  ^^^' 
them,  Pfal.  xxxii.  5.  "  I  acknowledged  my  fin  unto 
**  thee,  and  mine  iniquity  have  I  not  hid  :  I  faid  I 
"  will  confefs  my  tranfgrcfiions  unto  the  Lord." 
So  that  this  is  no  reafon,  why  the  text  fliould  not  be 
underflood  of  the  confefllng  of  our  fins  to  God. 

But  becaufe  the  neceflity  of  confeffing  our  fins  to 
men  (that  is,  to  the  prieil)  in  order  to  the  forgive- 
nefs  of  them,  is  a  great  point  of  difference  between 
us  and  the  church  of  Rome,  it  being  by  them  efleem- 
ed  a  neceffary  article  of  faith,  but  by  us,  fo  far  from 
being  neceffary  to  be  believed,  that  we  do  not  be- 
lieve it  to  be  true  ;  therefore  for  the  clear  flating 
of  this  matter,  I  fiiall  briefly  enquire  into  thefe  two 
things. 

I.  Whether  confefficn  of  our  fins  to  the  prieft,  as 
taught  and  pradifed  in  the  church  of  Rome,  be  ne- 
ceffary to  the  forgivenefs  of  them. 

II.  How  far  the  difclofing  and  revealing  of  our 
fins  to  the  minifters  of  God  is  convenient  upon  o- 
ther  accounts,  and  for  other  purpofes  of  relio-ion. 

I.  Whether  confeffion  of  our  fins  to  the  prieft, 
and  the  manner  in  which  it  is  taught  and  pradifed  in 
the  church  of  Rome,  be  neceffary  to  the  forgivenefs 
of  them.  What  manner  of  confeffion  this  is,  the 
council  of  Trent  hath  miOft  precifely  determined, 
viz.  "  Secret  confeffion  to  the  pried  alone,  of  all 
and  every  mortal  fin,  which  upon  the  moil  dili- 
gent fearch  and  examination  of  our  confciences 
we  can  remember  ourfelves  to  be  guilty  of,  fince 
our  baptifm ;  together  with  all  the  circumfiances 
of  thofe  fins,  which  may  change  the  nature  of 
them  ;  becaufe  without  the  perfc6l  knowledge  of 
*^  thefe,  the  prieft  cannot  make  a  judgment  of  the 

10  U  2  "  nature 


CLX. 


3818  Of  confejjing  and  f or  faking  fin  ^ 

SER^M.  "  nature  and  quality  of  men's  fins,  nor  impofe  fit- 
*  ting  penance  for  them."  This  is  the  confefTion 
of  fins  required  in  the  church  of  Rome,  which  the 
fame  council  of  Trent,  without  any  real  ground  from 
fcripture  or  ecclefiaftical  antiquity,  doth  mofl  confi- 
dently affirm,  ^'  to  have  been  inftituted  by  our  Lord, 
"  and  by  the  law  of  God  to  be  necefiary  to  falvati- 
*^  on,  and  to  have  been  always  pra6lifed  in  the  ca- 
**  tholick  church." 

I  fhall  as  briefly  as  I  can  examine  both  thefe  pre- 
tences, of  the  divine  inftitution,  and  conftant  prac- 
tice of  this  kind  of  confeflion. 

Firft,  for  the  divine  inftitution  of  it,  they  mainly 
rely  upon  three  texts  *,  in  the  firft  of  which  there  is 
no  mention  at  all  of  confefiion,  much  lefs  of  a  parti- 
cular confeffion  of  ail  our  fins  with  the  circumftances 
of  them ;  in  the  other  two  there  is  no  mention  of 
confeffion  to  the  priefts :  and  yet  all  this  ought  clear- 
ly to  appear  in  thefe  texts,  before  they  can  ground  a 
divine  inftitution  upon  them  ;  for  a  divine  inftitution 
is  not  to  be  founded  upon  obfcure  confequences,  but 
upon  plain  words. 

The  firft  text,  and  the  only  one  upon  which  the 
council  of  Trent  grounds  the  neceffity  of  confeffion, 
is,  John  XX.  23.  "  Whofefoever  fins  ye  remit,  they 
*'  are  remitted  \  and  whofefoever  fins  ye  retain,  they 
*'  are  retained :"  It  is  a  fign  they  were  at  a  great 
lofs  for  a  text  to  prove  it,  when  they  are  glad  to 
bring  one  that  hath  not  one  word  in  it  concerning 
confeffion, nor  the  leaft  intimation  of  the  neceffiity  of  it. 

But  let  us  fee  how  they  manage  it  to  their  pur- 
pofe.  The  apoftles  and  their  fuccefibrs  (faith  Bellar- 
mine)  by  this  power  of  remitting  and  retaining  fins, 
are  conftituted  judges  of  the  cafe  of  penitents  •,  but 
they  cannot  judge  without  hearing  the  caufe,    and 

this 


in  order  to  pardon.  3  S  i  o 

this  infers  particular  confefTion  of  fins  to  the  priefl,  S  E  R  M. 
from  whence  he  conckides  it  neceflary  to  the  forgive- 
nefs  of  fins. 

But  do  not  the  minifters  of  the  gofpel  exercife  this 
power  of  remitting  fins  in  baptifm  ?  And  yet  parti- 
cular confefTion  of  all  fins  to  the  prieil;  is  not  requir- 
ed, no  not  in  the  church  of  Rome,  in  the  baptifm 
of  adult  perfons.  And  therefore  according  to  them, 
particular  confefTion  of  fin  to  the  prieft  is  not  necef- 
fary  to  his  exercifing  the  power  of  remitting  fins,  and 
confequently  the  necefTity  of  confefilon  cannot  be 
concluded  from  this  text. 

And  to  fhew  how  they  are  puzzled  in  this  matter, 
Vafquez  by  a  flrange  device  concludes  the  necefTity 
of  confefTion  from  the  power  of  retaining  fins ;  for 
(fays  he)  if  the  prieft  have  a  power  of  retaining  fins, 
that  is  of  denying  pardon  and  abfolution  to  the  pe- 
nitent, then  he  may  impofe  confefTion  as  a  condition 
of  forgivenefs,  and  not  abfolve  the  penitent  upon  o- 
ther  terms.  But  fuppofing  the  prieil  to  have  this 
unreafonable  power,  this  makes  confefTion  no  other- 
wife  neceffary  by  divine  inflitution,  than  going  to 
Jerufalem  or  China  is,  in  order  to  the  forgivenefs  of 
our  fins,  or  fubmitting  to  any  other  foolifh  conditir 
on,  that  the  prieft  thinks  fit  to  require ;  for  accord- 
ing to  this  way  of  reafoning,  this  power  of  retain- 
ing fins  makes  every  foolifh  thing,  that  the  prieft 
fhall  impofe  upon  the  penitent,  to  be  necelTary  by 
divine  command  and  inflitution. 

But  the  truth  is,  this  power  of  remitting  and  re- 
taining fins  is  exercifed  by  the  minifters  of  the  go- 
fpel, in  the  adminiftration  of  the  facraments,  and  the 
preaching  of  the  gofpel,  which  is  called  "  the  word 
"  of  reconciliation,  the  miniftry  whereof  is  commit- 
[[  ted  to  them.*',     And  thus  the  ancient  fathers  un- 

derftood 


3820  O/*  confejjtng  and  forfakmg  Jtriy 

S  E  R  M.  derflood  it ;  and  as  a  great  divine  told  them  in  the 
council  of  Trent,  it  was  perhaps  never  expounded 
by  any  one  father  concerning  the  bufinefs  of  con^ 
feffion. 

The  fecond  tf^t  they  alledge  to  this  purpofe  is 
I  John  1.9.  "  If  we  confefs  our  fins,  he  is  faithful 
*'  and  jufl  to  forgive  us  our  fins."  Here  indeed  is 
confeflion;  but  general,  not  particular,  as  appears 
by  the  oppofition,  "  If  we  fay  that  we  have  no  fin, 
*'  we  deceive  ourfelves,  and  the  truth  is  not  in  us : 
*^  but  if  we  confefs  our  fins,"  that  is,  if  we  acknow- 
ledge our  felves  to  have  been  fmners.  And  then 
there  is  not  a  word  of  confefTing  to  the  priefl  \  the 
confeflion  here  meant  is  plainly  to  God,  becaufe  it 
follows,  **  he  is  faithful  and  jufl  to  forgive  us  our 
*'  fins,"  that  is  God,  who  is  neceflTarily  underftood 
in  the  former  part  of  the  fentence  ;  as  if  it  had  run 
thus,  ''  if  we  confefs  our  fins  to  God,  he  is  faithful 
^'  and  juft  to  forgive  us  our  fins." 

The  third  text  is.  Jam  v.  16.  "Confefs  your 
•'  faults  one  to  another,  and  pray  one  for  another." 
And  here  again  there  is  only  mention  of  confeflion, 
but  not  a  word  of  the  priefl: :  and  for  another  reafon, 
if  I  had  been  to  advife  them,  they  fliould  not  have 
prefl:  this  text  for  their  fcrvice  in  this  caufe,  becaufe 
it  does  them  as  much  hurt  as  good ;  for  it  is  certain, 
the  duty  of  confeflion  here  enjoined  is  reciprocal 
and  mutual,  "  confefs  your  fins  one  to  another :" 
fo  that  if  by  virtue  of  this  text  the  people  are  bound 
to  confefs  their  fins  to  the  priefl:,  the  priefl:  is  hereby  as 
much  obliged  to  confefs  his  fins  to  the  people  •,  which  I 
dare  fay  is  more  than  they  have  a  mind  to  prove 
from  this  text.  The  plain  meaning  whereof  is  this, 
that  as  Chriftians  fhould  be  ready  to  perform  all  mu- 
tual oflices  of  charity,  fo  to  aflifl  and  comfort  one 

another. 


in  order  to  pardon^  3  S  2 1 

another  by  their  counfel  and  prayers.     And  there-  S  E  R  M. 
fore  the  apoftle  advifeth  Chriftians  when  they  are 
fick,    if  at    the  fame  time  they  be  under  any  fpi- 
ritual  trouble,  by  reafon  of  the  guilt  of  any  fin  lying 
upon  their  confciences,  to  lay  open  their  cafe  to  one 
another,  that  fo  they  may  have  the  help  of  one  ano- 
thcrs  advice  and  prayers  ^  "  confefs  your  faults  one 
to  another,    and  pray  one  for  aiiother,  that  ye 
may  be  healed,"  both  of  your  bodily  and  fpiritual 
dillemper.     Not  that  the  priefl  or  minifter  is  hexc 
excluded ;  St.  James  had  Ipokcn  of  that  particular 
before,  thac  when  "  any  y/as  fick,*'  he  fhould  "fend 
*'  for  the  elders  of  the  church,"  that  he   might  in 
the  firfb  place  have  the  benefit  of  their  counfel  and 
prayers  ;  and  then  becaufe  private  Chriftians  may 
alfo  be  ufeful  to  one  another  in  this  kind,  he  adds, 
that  they  fhould  alfo  lay  open  their  condition  and 
troubles  "  to  one  another,"  that  fo  they  might  have 
the  help  of  one  anothers  advice  and  prayers ;  and  vq-^ 
ly  probably  all  the  confeflion  here  meant  of  private 
Chriftians  to  one  another,  is  of  the  offences  and 
injuries  they  may  have  been  guilty  of,  one  towards 
another ;  that  they  fhould  be  reconciled  upon  this 
occafion,  and  as  a  teftimony  of  their  charity,  fhould 
"  pray  one  for  another  i"  whereas  they  are  bound 
*'  to  fend  for  the  elders  of  the  church,"  and  they  are 
**  to  pray  over  them,"  as  an  a6t  not  only  of  chari- 
ty, but  of  fuperiority,  and  by  virtue  of  their  oiiice 
in  the  church,  a  more  efpecial  blefTing  being  to  be  ex- 
pelled from  their  prayers. 

Thefe  three  texts  are  the  main  arguments  from 
fcripture,  which  they  of  the  church  of  Rome  bring  to 
prove  their  auricular  or  fecret  confeflion  to  be  of  di^ 
vine  inftitution  ;  and  woful  proofs  they  are  :  which 
Ihews  what  miferable  Hiifcs  they  are  reduced  to,  who 
refolve  to  maintain  a  bad  caufe.  I  pro- 


Of  confejjing  and  forfaklng  JiTty 

I  proceed  in  the  fecond  place,  to  difcover  the  falf^ 
hood  of  their  other  pretences,  that  this  kind  of  con- 
fefTion  hath  always  been  pra6lifed  in  the  xathoUck 
church ;  and  not  only  fo,  but  believed  abfolutely  ne- 
celTary  to  the  remiflion  of  mens  fins,  and  their  eter- 
nal falvation. 

The  truth  of  the  whole  matter  is  this :  publick 
confefTion  and  penance  for  open  and  fcandalous  crimes 
was  in  ufe,  and  with  great  ftridlnefs  obferved  in  the: 
firfl  ages  of  Chriftianity ;  and  there  was  then  no  ge- 
neral law  or  cuflom,  that  exadled  fecret  confeflion  of 
fins  to  the  pried,  as  a  neceffary  part  of  repentance,  and 
condition  of  forgivenefs  :  afterward  publick  penance 
was  by  degrees  difufed,  which  plainly  fhews,  that,  in 
the  opinion  of  the  church,  this  difcipline,  how  ufe- 
ful  foever,  was  not  of  abfolute  necefTity  to  reflore 
men  to  the  favour  of  God. 

In  place  of  this  came  in  private  confeflion  to  the 
prieft,  particularly  appointed  to  this  office,  and  call- 
ed the  penitentiary  •,  but  upon  occafion  of  a  fcandal 
that  happened,  this  alfo  was  abrogated  by  Nedlarius 
bifliop  of  Conftantinople  ;  which  iliews  that  neither 
"was  this  neceffary.  And  this  a6b  of  Nedlarius  was 
juftified  by  his  fuccefTor  St.  Chryfoftom,  who  does 
over  and  over  mod  expredy  teach,  that  confeflion  of 
our  fins  to  men  is  not  neceffary  to  the  forgivenefs 
of  them,  but  that  it  is  fufBcient  to  confefs  them  ta 
God  alone  ;  fo  that  St.  Chryfoflom  does  plainly  fland 
condemned  by  the  decrees  of  the  council  of  Trent. 

And  thus  for  feveral  ages  the  matter  refled,  till 
the  degeneracy  of  the  church  of  Rome  growing  to- 
wards it's  height,  about  the  IX.  and  X.  centuries,- 
fome  began  to  contend  for  the  neccfiity  of  fecret  con- 
1  fcfFion  J  and  this  in  the  year  1215.  in  the  IV.  coun- 
cil of  Latcran  under  Pope  Innocent  111.  was  decreed 
and  eilabliflied.  And 


in  order  to  pardon.  -  g  2  ? 

;  And  this  is  the  firft  publick  law  that  was  made  SR  R  M, 
m  the  chnftian  church  concerning  this  matter,  not-  Jil^ 
wthftanding  all  the  boafts  of  the  council  of  Trent  ^^ 
about  the  antiquity  of  this  inftitucion  and  praftice- 
tor  Gratian,  who  lived  about  fifty  years  before  this 
council,  tells  us,  that  in  his  time  fcveral  wife  and 
religious  men  ^vcre  of  the  contrary  opinion,  and  did 
not  hold  confeffion  neceflary  by  virtue  of  any  &.1 
law.     Afterwards  in  the  council  of  Florence,  and 
efpeca  ly  ,n  that  of  Trent,  this  decree  of  the  Coun- 
cil of  Lateran  was  confirmed  and  enlarged  in  manv 
particulars,  of  which  I  have  already  given  fome  ac- 


And  whereas  they  pretend  for  themfelves  the  uni- 

verfalpraa,cenotonlyofthepaft,butprefentchurch 
we  are  able  to  fhew  from  clear  teftimony  of  their  own 

TT  ^Vp"'^''°"'  -  taught  and  prSdi; 
the  church  of  Rome,  is  no  where  die  in  ufe  at  this 
day,  neither  among  the  Abyffines,  nor  Indians  of 

for  tlt'T'-r'"'  ?'^.°™"^'  "^"'^^^  Armenians. 
nor  the  Jacobites,  churches  of  great  antiquity  and 

vaft  extent.  And  as  for  the  Greek  ehuich,  if  we 
may  believe  Gratian,  and  the  author  of  the  glofs  up- 
on the  canon  law,  the  Greeks  had  ancientl^no  tra- 
dition concerning  the  nccefllty  of  confeffion  nor  da 
they  at  this  day  agree  with  the  Roman  church  in  all 
points  concerning  it. 

So  that,  in  fhort,  there  is  no  nation  nor  church 
throughout  the  whole  world,  that  bears  the  name  of 

X  Imb    '  ^'"T"  ^'"^^'  °"'>^  -cepted.,that  dod 

council  of  1  rent,concernmg  confefflon  ;  and  yet,  ac- 
cording to  their  principles,  the  whole  is  of  equa  ne- 
ceffity  to  be  believed,  as  any  part  of  it.  With  that 
face  then  do  tliey  declare,  that  this  manner  of  c;"- 
VoL.  IX.  ,8X 


Z 


fellion 


X' 


3824  Of  confejjing  and  for  faking  Jln^ 

S  E  R  M.  feflion  always  was,  and  ftill  is  obferved  in  the  catho- 
lick,  that  is,  in  the  whole  chriftian  church  ? 
y       I  have  not  time  to  fhew  the  great  and  manifold  in- 
j  conveniencies  and  mifchiefs  of  this  practice  :    how 
infinite  a  torture  it  is  to  the  confciences  of  men,  by 
entangling  them  in  endlefs  doubts  and  fcruples ;  and 
how  great  a  fcandal  it  is  to  the  chriftian  profeflion,  in 
the  lewd  management  of  it  by  the  priefts,  is  evident 
from  the  two  bulls  of  pope  Pius  IV.  and  Gregory  XV. 
which  mention  things  too  fhameful  to  be  declared  •, 
not  to  infift  upon  other  horrible  abufes  of  it  to  the 
vileft  and  wickedeft  purpofes  ;  not  fo  much  to  dired: 
the  confciences  of  men,  as  to  dive  into  their  fecrcts, 
of  which  there  are  fo  many  plain  and  notorious  in- 
^ftances,  that  they  are  paft  denial. 

The  other  thing  pretended  for  it  is,  that  it  is  a 
great  reftraint  upon  men  from  fin.     And  very  pro- 
bably it  is  fo,  to  modeft  and  well  difpofed  perfons : 
but  experience  fhews  how  quite  contrary  an  effed  it 
hath  upon  others,  who  are  the  far  greateft  part  of 
mankind.     Does  not  all  the  world  fee  in  the  popifli 
countries,  in  the  time  of  their  carnival,  juft  before 
Lent,  the  annivcrfary  feafon  of  confefTion,  how  fcan- 
tklous  a  liberty  men  take  of  doing  lewd  and  wicked 
things  ;  and  that  for  this  very  reafon,  becaufe  their 
confciences  are  prefently  to  be  eafed  and  fcoured  (as 
they  call  it)  by  confeffion  and  abfolution  ?  And  they 
therefore  take  the  opportunity  to  gratify  their  lufts, 
and  fill  up  the  meafure  of  their  iniquity  at  that  time  ; 
'  becaufe  with  one  labour  they  canfet  their  confciences 
right,  and  clear  them  of  all  guilt.     And  they  look 
upon  this  as  a  fpecial  piece  of  fpiritual  good  husban- 
dry, to  quit  their  fcorcs  with  Gop  at  once,  that  fo 
they  may  have  no  occafion  to  trouble  him,  nor  the 
prieft,  nor  thcmfelves  again  for  a  good  while  after. 

So 


m  order  to  pardon,  3  82  c 

So  that  confefTion,  inflead  of  being  a  rcflraint  from  ^  ^  -  ^• 
fin,  gives  great  encouragement  to  it,  by  deluding     ''''^' 
men  into  a  vain  hope  of  obtaining  the  pardon  of 
their  fins  from  time  to  time,  though  they  ftil]  con- 
tinue  in  xht  pradice  of  them  ;  by  which  device 
mens  fins  are  at  once  remitted  and  retained  ;  the 
pried  remits  them  by  abfolution,  and  the  penitent  re- 
tains them,  by  going  on  fliil  in  the  commifTion  of 
them,  in  hope  of  obtaining  a  new  abfolution  as  of- 
ten  as  occafion  ihall  require.     I  proceed  to  the 

lid  Enquiry,  namely,  how  far  the  difclofino-  and 
revealing  our  fins  to  the  miniflers  of  God,  mlv  be 
convenient  upon  other  accounts,  and  to  other  pur- 
pofes  of  religion  ?  To  which  the  anfwer  is  very  plain 
and  fliort;  fo  far  as  is  neceflary  either  to  the  direai- 
on,  or  the  eafe  of  mens  confciences. 

There  are  many  cafes  wherein  men,  under  the 
guilt  and  trouble  of  their  fms,  can  neither  Popeafe 
their  own  minds,  nor  fufficiently  dired  themfeives 
without  recourfe  to  fome  pious  and  prudent  guide  ' 
in  thefe  cafes,  men  certainly  do  very  well,  and  many 
times  prevent  a  great  deal  of  trouble  and  perplexity 
to  themfeives,  by  a  timely  difcovery  of  their  condi- 
tion to  fome  faithful  minifter,  in  order  to  their  di- 
redion  and  fatisfadion,    without  which  they  fhall 
never  perhaps  be  able  to  clear  themfeives  of  the  ob. 
fcurity  and  entanglement  of  their  own  minds,  but' 
by  fmothering  their  trouble  in   their  own  breads 
Ihall  proceed  from  one  degree  of  melancholy  to  an- 
other, till  at  laft  they  be  plunged  either  into  diftrac- 
tion  or  defpair  ;  whereas  the  difcovery  of  their  con- 
dition in  time,  would  prove  a  prefent  and  efFedual 
remedy.     And  to  this  purpofe,  a  general  ZQ,,{t^,on 
is  tor  the  moil  part  fuffident  ;  and  where  there  is  oc- 
<:afion  for  a  more  particular  difcovery,  there  is  no 

18  X  2  need 


3826  Of  conf effing  and  forfaking  fm^ 

^^0^^'  "^^^  ^^  raking  into  the  particular  and  foul  circum- 
flances  of  niens  fins,  to  give  that  advice  which  is  ne- 
cefTary  for  the  cure  and  cafe  of  the  penitent  •,  a  thing 
fo  fartrom  being  defirable,  that  it  muil  needs  be  very 
grievous  to  every  mode  ft  and  good  man. 
V  And  thus  far  confefTion  is  not  only  allowed,  but 
encouraged  among  proteftants.  In  the  Lutheran 
churches,  Chemnitius  tells  us,  that  private  general 
confcfiion  is  in  ufe  and  pradice.  And  Calvin  freely 
dechrcs,  that  he  is  fo  flir  from  being  againft  peoples 
repairing  to  their  paftors  to  this  purpofe,  that  he 
earneftly  wiflieth  it  were  every  where  obferved  be- 
fore the  receiving  of  the  facrament.  And  the  fame 
is  the  fenfe  of  our  own  church,  laying  no  necelTity 
upon  men  in  this  matter,  but  advifmg,  cfpecially 
before  the  facrament,  thole  who  have  any  trouble 
upon  their  confciences,  to  repair  to  fome  difcreet 
and  faithful  minifter  of  God's  word,  for  advice  and 
ilitisfadion.  And  thus  all  the  good  ufe,  which  can 
be  made  of  confeflion,  may  be  had  in  our  church, 
without  the  ill  effeds  and  confequences  of  the  Romifli 
confefiion,  and  without  laying  a  yoke  upon  the  con- 
fciences  of  men,  which  our  Saviour  never  laid. 

And  now  I  have,  as  briefly  and  as  plainly  as  I 
xould,  flated  this  controverfy  between  us  and  the 
church  of  Rome,  concerning  the  necefl'ity  and  ufe  of 
fecret  confeffion  to  the  minillers  of  God,  as  the  pro- 
per guides  and  direclors  of  our  confciences.  But  it 
is  granted  on  all  hands,  that  confeflion  of  our  fins  to 
God  is  neceGary  ;  and  there  is  no  doubt  but  it  is 
here  intended  in  the  text,  viz.  a  penitent  acknov/- 
ledgment  of  our  fins  •,  the  nature  whereof  I  lliall 
briefly  explain  to  you. 

And  it  muft  not  only  be  a  general  confeflion  that 
we  are  finpers  \  but  there  mufl:  be  a  particular  acknov/-. 

ledgmcnt 


A 


in  order  to  pardon,  3^2/ 

ledgment  of  our  fins  to  God,  fo  far  as  upon  a  par-  ^  ^^^' 
ticular  difculTion  and  examination  of  our  confciences, 
we  can  call  them  to  remembrance  ♦,  efpecially  our 
moll  heinous  fins,which  our  confciences  will  not  fuffer 
us  to  forget,  muft  be  particularly  acknowledged, with 
the  feveral  aggravations  of  them. 

And  this  confeffion  muft  be  accompanied  with 
fuch  a  fhame  and  forrow  for  our  fins,  as  produccth  in 
us  a  fincere  refolution  to  leave  them,  and  to  betake 
ourfclves  to  a  better  courfe.  Thefe  are  the  principal 
ingredients  of  a  penitent  confeffion. 

1.  There  muft  be  a  fliame, without  which  there  Is 
no  hope  of  amendment.  Confeffion  always  fuppofeth 
conviction  of  a  fault ;  and  he  that  is  truly  convinced 
that  he  hath  done  amifs,  cannot  but  be  afhamed  of 
what  he  hath  done.  And  thus  the  penitents  in  fcrip- 
ture  were  wont  to  make  confeffion  of  their  fins  to 
God  ;  Ezra  ix.  6.  ''  O  my  God,  fays  he,  I  am 
*'  afliamed,  and  blufh  to  lift  up  my  face  to  thee  my 
"  God."  So  Jeremiah,  ch,  iii.  25.  "  We  lie  down 
'*  in  our  fhame,  and  our  confufion  covereth  us ; 
"  for  we  have  finned  againft  the  Lord."  And  fo 
likewife  Daniel,  chap.  ix.  5.  "  We  have  finned, 
"  and  have  committed  iniquity,  and  done  wicked- 
*'  ly  ;  unto  us  belongeth  confufion  of  face."  And 
thus  our  Saviour  ddcribes  the  penitent  behaviour 
of  the  publican,  as  aihamed  to  look  up  to  that  God 
whom  he  had  offended,  Luke  xviii.  13.  "  He 
*'  would  not  lift  up  fo  much  as  his  eyes  to  heaven ; 
'^'  but  fmote  upon  his  brcaft,  faying,  God  be  mer- 
*'  ciful  to  me  a  finner." 

2.  Confeffion  muft  be  always  accompanied  with 
great  forrovv  for  our  fins,  confidering  the  great  dif- 
honour  we  have  brought  to  God,  and  the  danger 
into  which  we  h^ive  brgughc  ouifelves  \    "I  will 

"  declare 


3828  Of  confejjtng  and  forfaking  fm^ 

S  E  R  M.  <«  declare  mine  iniquity,  fays  David,  and  I  will  be 
"  forry  for  my  fin." 

And  this  forrow  miift  be  proportionable  to  the 
degree  of  our  fin.  If  we  have  been  very  wicked, 
and  have  finned  greatly  againfl  the  Lord,  and 
*'  have  multiplied  our  tranfgreflions"  and  continued 
long  in  an  evil  courfe,  have  negleded  God,  and 
'^  forgotten  him  days  without  number,"  the  mea- 
fure  of  our  forrow  muft  bear  fome  proportion  to  the 
degree  of  our  fins :  if  they  have  been  **  as  fcarlet 
*'  and  crimfon,"  (as  the  prophet  exprefleth  it)  that 
is,  of  a  deeper  dye  than  ordinary,  our  forrow  muft 
be  as  deep  as  our  guilt  ;  for  it  is  not  a  flight  trouble 
and  a  few  tears  that  will  wafli  out  fuch  llains. 

Not  that  tears  are  abfolutely  neceflary,  though 
they  do  very  well  become,  and  moft  commonly  ac- 
company a  fincere  repentance.  All  tempers  are  not 
in  this  alike  \  fome  cannot  exprefs  their  forrow  by 
tears,  even  then  when  they  are  moft  inwardly  and 
fenfibly  grieved.  But  if  we  can  eafily  ftied  tears  upon 
other  occafions ;  certainly  "  rivers  of  tears"  ought 
to  "  run  down  our  eyes,"  becaufe  we  have  broken 
God's  laws,  the  reafonable,  and  righteous,  and  good 
laws  of  fo  good  a  God,  of  fo  gracious  a  fovcreign, 
of  fo  mighty  a  benefadlor,  of  the  founder  of  our 
being,  and  the  perpetual  patron  and  protector  of  our 
lives  :  but  if  we  cannot  command  our  tears,  there 
muft  however  be  great  trouble  and  contrition  of  fpi- 
rit,  efpecially  for  great  fins  ;  to  be  fure  to  that  de- 
gree as  to  produce  the 

3.  Property  I  mentioned  of  a  penitent  confefTion, 
namely,  a  fincere  refolution  to  leave  our  fins,  and 
betake  ourfclves  to  a  better  courfe.  He  does  not 
confefs  his  fault,  but  ftand  in  it,  who  is  not  refolved 
to  amend.     True  fhame  and  forrow  for  our  fins  is 

utterly 


in  order  to  pardon.  3^29 

utterly  inconfiftent  with  any  thought  of  returning  to  ^  E  R  M- 
them.  It  argues  great  obftinacy  and  impudence  to 
confefs  a  fault  and  continue  in  it.  Whenever  we 
make  confeflion  of  our  fins  to  God,  *'  furely  it  is 
**  meet  to  fay  unto  him,  I  will  not  offend  any  more  ; 
"  that  which  I  know  not,  teach  thou  me  ;  and  if  I 
*'  have  done  iniquity,  I  will  do  no  more.'* 

This  is  the  firft  part  of  repentance  mentioned  in 
the  text,  the  firft  condition  of  our  finding  mercy 
with  God,  the  penitent  acknowledgment  of  our  fins 
to  him.     I  proceed  to  the 

Second  condition  required  to  make  us  capable  of 
the  mercy  of  God,  which  is  the  a(5lual  forfaking  of 
our  fins  ;  "  whofo  confefleth  and  forfaketh  them 
*'  fhall  have  mercy."  I  fhall  not  go  about  to  ex- 
plain what  is  meant  by  "  forfaking  fin,"  it  is  that 
which  every  body  can  underftand,  but  few  will  do  ; 
there  lies  all  the  difficulty.  I  Ihall  only  put  you  in 
mind,  that  forfaking  of  fin  comprehends  our  return 
to  our  duty,  that  necefTarily  follows  from  it.  In  fins 
of  commiffion,  he  that  hath  left  any  vice,  does  there- 
by become  mafter  of  the  contrary  virtue.  Virtus  efi 
vitium  fugere^  not  to  be  drunk,  is  to  befober  ;  not 
to  opprcfs,  or  defraud,  or  deal  falfly,  is  to  be  juft 
and  honcft  :  and  for  fins  of  omifilon,  the  forfaking 
of  them  is  nothing  elfe,  but  the  doing  of  thofe  du- 
ties which  we  omitted  and  neglected  before.  And 
therefore  what  Solomon  here  calls  "  forfaking  of 
*'  fin,"  is  elfewhere  in  fcripture  more  fully  expref- 
fed,  by  "  ceafing  to  do  evil,  and  learning  to  do 
*'  well,"  Ifa.  i.  16.  By  forfaking  our  fins,  and  turn- 
ing to  God  ;  Ifa.  Iv.  7.  "  Let  the  whickcd  man 
forfake  his  ways,  and  the  unrighteous  man  his 
thoughts,  and  let  him  return  unto  the  Lord." 
By  turning  from  all  our  {■\i\^y  and  keeping  all  God's 
3  laws 


3830  ^f  (^H^P^g  andfoffakingfin, 

SERM.  laws  and  llatutes;  Ezek.  xviii.  21.  "If  the  wicked 
CLX.    ^  jc  ^jji  |.yj.j^  fj.Qj^  all  his  fins  whick  he  hath  com  mi  t- 

*'  ted,  and  keep  all  my  flatutcs,  and  do  that  which 
*^  is  lawful  and  right." 

And  this  is  a  moft  eflentlal  part  of  repentance, 
and  a  neceflary  condition  of  our  finding  mercy  with 
God.  That  part  of  repentance  which  I  have  men- 
tioned and  infilled  upon  before,  the  penitent  acknow- 
ledgment of  our  fins  to  God,  with  fliame  and  for- 
row  for  them,  and  a  firm  purpofe  and  refolution  to 
leave  them  ;  all  this  is  but  preparatory  to  the  a6lual 
forfaking  of  them  :  that  which  perfeds  and  com- 
pletes repentance,  is  "to  turn  from  our  evil  ways,'* 
and  *'  to  break  off  our  fins  by  righteoufnefs/' 

And  thefe  terms  of  confefling  and  forfaking 
our  fins,  are  reafonable  in  themfelves,  and  honou- 
rable to  God,  and  profitable  to  us  *,  and  upon  low- 
er terms  we  have  no  reafon  to  expe6l  the  mercy 
of  God,  nor  in  truth  are  we  capable  of  it,  either  by 
the  prefcnt  forgivenefs  of  our  fins,  or  the  final  ab- 
folution  of  the  grealt  day,  and  the  blefied  reward  of 
eternal  life.  God  peremptorily  requires  this  change 
as  a  condition  of  our  forgivenefs  and  happinefs  \  "  re- 
*'  pent  and  be  converted,  that  your  fins  may  be 

blotted  out,"  Adls  iii.  19.     "  If  thou  wilt  enter 

into  life,  keep  the  commandments,"  Matth.  xix. 
17.  "  Without  holinefs  no  man  fliall  fee  the  Lord," 
Heb.  xii.  14.  And  why  fhould  any  man  hope  for 
the  mercy  of  God  upon  other  terms  than  thofe 
which  he  hath  fo  plainly  and  peremptorily  declared  ? 

It  is  a  mean  and  unworthy  thought  of  God,  to 
imagine  that  he  will  accept  men  to  his  favour  and 
eternal  life  upon  other  terms  than  of  better  obedi- 
ence. Will  any  wife  father  or  prince  accept  lefs  from 
his  children  and  fiabjeds  ?  W^ill  they  be  fatisfied  with 

fighs 


cc 


in  order  to  pardon.  38^1 

fighs  and  tears,  as  well  as  with  obedience  ?  And  well  s  E  R  M. 
pleafed  if  they  be  but  melancholy  for  their  faults,  ^^^' 
though  they  never  mend  them  ?  We  muft  not  im- 
put?e  that  to  God,  which  would  be  a  defed  of  wif- 
dom  and  good  government  in  any  father  or  prince 
Upon  earth.  God  values  no  part  of  repentance  up- 
on any  other  account,  but  as  it  tends  to  reclaim  us 
to  our  duty,  and  ends  in  our  reformation  and  a- 
mendment. 

This  is  that  which  qualifies  us  for  the  happinefs  of 
another  life,  and  "  makes  us  meet  to  be  made  par- 
"  takers  of  the  inheritance  of  the  flints  in  light." 
And  without  this,  though  God  fhould  be  pleafed  to 
forgive  us,  yet  we  could  not  forgive  ourfelves ;  and 
notwithflanding  the  legal  difcharge  from  guilt,  the 
fting  of  it  would  remain,  and  we  fhould,  like  our 
firft  parents  after  they  had  finned,  run  away  and 
hide  ourfelves  from  God,  though  he  fpake  never  fo 
kindly  to  us.  God  hath  placed  in  every  man's  mind 
an  inexorable  judge,  that  will  grant  no  pardon  and 
forgivenefs  but  to  a  reformed  penitent,  to  him  that 
hath  fuch  a  fenfe  of  the  evil  of  his  pafl  life,  as  to  be- 
come a  better  man  for  the  future. 

And  whoever  entertains  any  other  notion  of  the 
grace  and  mercy  of  God  to  finners,  confounds  the 
nature  of  things,  and  does  plainly  overthrow  the 
reafon  of  all  laws,  which  is  to  reitrain  men  from 
fin  :  but  when  it  is  committed,  to  pardon  it  without 
amendment,  is  to  encourage  the  pra6lice  of  it,  and 
to  take  away  the  reverence  and  veneration  of  thofe 
laws,  which  feem  fo  feverely  to  forbid  it.  So  that 
next  to  impunity,  the  forgivenefs  of  mens  fins  upon 
fuch  eafy  and  unfit  terms  gives  boldnefs  and  en- 
couragement to  fin,  and  muft  neccfiarily  in  the  opinion 
of  men  lefien  the  honour  and  efteem  of  God's  laws. 

Vol.  IX.  i8  Y  And 

2. 


f^ 

:> 


CLX. 


832  Of  confejjtng  and  forfallng  Ji?t^ 

S  F  R  M.  And  thus  I  have  conridcrt:d  and  explained  both 
the  blefiing  and  benefit  which  is  here  pron^ifed  and 
declared,  viz,  "  the  mercy  and  favour  of  God,'* 
which  comprehends  both  the  prefent  forgivenefs  of 
our  fins,  and  power  againil  them,  and  grace  to  per- 
fevere  in  goodnefs  to  the  end,  and  our  final  abfolu- 
tion  at  the  great  day,  and  the  glorious  and  merciful 
reward  of  eternal  hfe  :  and  likewife  the  conditions 
upon  v/hich  this  bleffing  is  promifed,  viz.  the  peni- 
tent acknowledsment  of  our  fins  to  God,  with  fuch 
fham.e  and  forrow  for  them,  as  produceth  a  finccre 
refolution  of  leaving  them,  and  returning  to  a  bet- 
ter crurfe,  and  the  aftual  forfaking  of  them,  v/hich 
involves  in  it  our  a6lual  return  to  our  duty,  and  a 
conftant  and  fincer^  obedience  to  the  laws  of  God  in 
the  future  courfe  of  our  lives. 

I  fhali  now  make  fome  application  of  this  dif- 
courfe  to  ourfelves.  I  am  fure  we  are  all  nearly  con- 
cerned in  it.  The  bed  of  us  have  many  fins  to 
confefs  and  forfake  ^  fome  of  us  very  probably  have 
need  to  change  the  whole  courfe  of  our  lives,  to  put 
us  into  a  capacity  of  the  mercy  of  God.  This 
work  can  never  be  unfeafonable ;  but  there  cannot  be 
a  more  proper  time  for  it,  than  when  we  are  folemn- 
ly  preparing  ourfelves  to  receive  the  holy  facrament ; 
in  wliich  as  we  do  commemorate  the  great  mercy  of 
God  to  mankind,  fo  we  do  likewife  renew  and  con- 
firm our  covenant  with  him,  that  holy  covenant 
Nvherein  we  enQ;ap;e  ourfelves  to  forfake  our  fins,  as 
ever  we  expedt  the  forgivenefs  of  them  at  God's 
hand. 

To  perfuadc  us  hereto,  be  pleafed  to  con  fid  er  the 
reafonabkncfs  of  the  thing,  the  infinite  benefit  and 
advantage  of  it  ^  and  which  is  beyond  all  other  ar- 
guments, the  abfolute  neceflity  of  it,  to  make  us 

capable 


cc 


in  order  to  pardon,  %^7  7 

capable  of  the  mercy  and  forgivenefs  of  God,  in  S  E  r  u. 
this  world  and  the  other,  and  "  to  deHver  us  from  ^^^' 
"  the  wrath  which  is  to  come,"  and  from  thofe  ter- 
rible ftorms  of  vengeance,  which  will  infallibly  fall 
upon  impenitent  finners  :  fo  that  we  have  all  the  rea- 
fon  and  all  the  encouragement  in  the  world,  to  re- 
folve  upon  a  better  courfe.  Upon  this  condition,  the 
mercy  of  God  is  ready  to  meet  and  embrace  us,  God 
will  pardon  our  greateft  provocations,  and  be  per- 
fectly reconciled  to  us.  So  he  hath  declared  by  the 
prophet,  Ifaiah  i.  i6.  "  Wafli  ye,  make  you  chan, 
put  away  the  evil  of  your  doings  from  before 
mine  eyes,  ceafe  to  do  evil,  learn  to  do  well. 
Come  now  and  let  us  reafon  together,  faith  the 
Lord  ;  though  your  fins  be  as  fcarlet,  they  fhall  be 
as  white  as  fnow  ;  though  they  be  red  as  crim/on, 
they  fhall  be  as  wool."  And  what  greater  en- 
couragement can  we  defire,  than  that  upon  fo  eafy 
and  advantageous  terms,  God  fhould  be  fo  ready  to 
have  an  end  put  to  all  controverfies  and  quarrels  be- 
tween him  and  us  ? 

"  I  befeech  you  therefore,  brethren,  by  the  mer- 
*'  cies  of  God,"  to  take  up  a  ferious  refolution  "  to 
*'  break  off  your  fins  by  repentance,"  and  to  reform 
whatever,  upon  due  fearch  and  trial  of  your  ways, 
you  fhall  find  to  be  amifs  in  your  lives. 

"  I  befeech  you  by  the  mercies  of  God,"  that  mer- 
cy which  naturally  "  leads  to  repentance,"  and  which 
is  "  long-fufFering  to  us-ward,"  on  purpofe  "  that 
"  we  may  not  perifh,  but  come  to  .epentance  •," 
which  hath  fpared  us  io  often,  and  is  not  yet  exhaufled 
and  tired  out  by  our  intolerable  obftinacy,  and  in- 
numerable provocations  ,  that  mercy  which  moved 
the  Son  of  God  to  become  man,  to  live  among  us, 
and  to  die  for  us  j  who  now  as  it  were  fpeaks  to  us 

i8  Y  2  from 


Of  confejjing  andforfakingjln, 

from  the  crofs,  extending  his  pierced  hands,  and 
painful  arms  to  embrace  us,  and  through  the  gafping 
wounds  of  his  fide  let  us  fee  the  tender  and  bleeding 
compafTion  of  his  heart  •,  that  mercy  which  if  we 
now  defpife  it,  we  fliall  in  vain  one  day  implore,  and 
catch  hold  of,  and  hang  upon,  to  fave  us  from  fink- 
ing into  eternal  perdition  ;  that  mercy,  which  how 
much  foever  we  now  prefume  upon,  will  then  be  fo 
far  from  interpofing  between  us  and  the  wrath  of 
QoD,  that  it  will  highly  inflame  and  exafperate  it  : 
for  whatever  impenitent  finners  may  now  think,  they 
will  then  certainly  find  that  the  divine  juftice,  when 
it  is  throughly  provoked,  and  whetted  by  his  abufed 
mercy  and  goodnefs,  will  be  moft  terribly  fevere, 
and  like  a  razor  fet  with  oil,  will  cut  the  keener  for 
it*s  fmoothnefs. 

*'  Confider  this  all  ye  that  forget  God,  left  he 
**  tear  you  in  pieces,  and  there  be  none  to  deliver  : 
^'  confider  and  fhew  yourfelves  men,  O  ye  tranf- 
['  greflfors  !" 

We  do  confider  all  this  (may  fbme  perhaps  fay) 
but  we  have  been  great  finners,  fo  great,  that  we 
doubt  whether  our  cafe  be  not  already  defperate. 

This,  if  it  be  fenfibly  faid,  with  deep  forrow  and 
contrition,  with  that  fham.e  and  confufion  of  face, 
which  becomes  great  offenders,  is  a  good  confefTion, 
and  the  befl  reafon  in  the  world,  why  ye  fhould  now 
*'  break  off  your  fins  :'*  for  if  what  you  have  al* 
ready  done,  do  really  make  your  cafe  fo  doubtful 
and  difhcult  ;  do  not  by  finning  yet  more  and  miorc 
againft  the  Lord,  make  it  quite  defperate  and  paft 
remedy  ;  do  but  you  repent,  and  God  will  yet  "  re- 
*'  turn  and  have  mercy  upon  you."  And  do  not 
fay  you  cannon  do  it,  when  it  muft  be  done,  or  you 
are  undone.  Power  and  neceflky  go  together  ;  when 
^  men 


in  order  to  pardon,  3^35 

men  arc  hard  prefTed  they  find  a  power  which  they  ^  ^  ^J^* 
thought  they  had  not  ;  and  when  it  comes  to  the 
pufh,  men  can  do  that  which  they  plainly  fee  diey 
either  muft  do,  or  be  ruined  for  ever. 

But  after  all  this,  I  am  very  fenfibk  how  great  a 
need  there  is  of  God's  powerful  alTiftance  in  this 
cafe,  and  that  it  is  not  an  ordinary  refolution,  and 
common  meafure  of  God's  grace,  that  will  reclaim 
thofe  who  have  been  long  habituated  to  an  evil 
courfe. 

Let  us  therefore  earneftly  beg  of  him,  that  he 
would  make  thefe  counfels  effedual,  that  he  would 
**  grant  us  repentance  unto  life,"  that  he  would 
make  us  all  fenfible  of  our  faults,  forry  for  them, 
and  refolved  to  amend  them  ;  and  let  us  every  one 
put  up  David's  prayer  to  God  for  ourfelves,  "  deal 
with  thy  fervant  according  to  thy  mercy,  and 
teach  me  thy  ftatutes  ;  order  my  fteps  in  thy 
word,  and  let  not  any  iniquity  have  dominion  over 
me  i  teach  me,  O  Lord,  the  way  of  thy  flatutes, 
that  I  may  keep  them  unto  the  end." 
I  have  now  done  ;  I  am  only  to  mind  you  of 
another  duty,  which  is  to  accompany  our  repent- 
ance, and  fafting,  and  prayer,  as  a  teftimony  of  the 
fincerity  of  our  repentance,  and  one  of  thebeft  means 
to  make  our  fafting  and  prayer  acceptable  to  God, 
and  to  turn  away  his  judgments  from  us,  and  that  is 
charity  and  alms  to  the  poor,  whofe  number  is  very 
great  among  us,  and  their  neceflities  very  prefTing 
and  clamorous,  and  therefore  do  call  for^  a  bountiful 
fupply. 

And  to  convince  men  of  the  neccffity  of  this  duty, 
and  the  efficacy  of  it  in  conjun6lion  with  our  repent- 
ance and  fafting,  and  prayers^  I  ftiall  only  offer  to 
jTOur  cvnfideration  a  few  plain  tcxcs  of  fcripture, 

which 


fC 


3836  Of  confejjing  and  forfahlng  Jin^  Sec, 

S  E  R  M.  which  need   no   comment  upon  them.     Dan.   iv, 
27.  It  is  the  prophet's  advice  to  Nebuchadnezzar  ; 
Break  off  thy  fins  by  righteoufnefs,  and  thine  ini- 
quity by  fhewing  mercy  to  the  poor  ;  if  fo  be  it 
may  be  a  lengthening  of  thy  tranquilUty.  Ads  x. 
4.  the  angel  there  tells  Cornelius,  "  Thy  prayers  and 
*'  thine  alms  are  come  up  for  a  memorial  before  God.'* 
Ifa.  Iviii.  5.     "  Is  not  this  the  faft  which  I  have 
*'  chofen,  to  loofe  the  bands  of  wickednefs,  to  un- 
do the  heavy  burthens,  and  to  let  the  opprelTed 
go  free,  and  that  ye  break  every  yoke  ?  Is  it  not 
to  deal  thy  bread  to  the  hungry,  and  that  thou 
*^  bring  the  poor  that  are  caft  out,  to  thy  houfe  ; 
*^  when  thou  feeft  the  naked,  that  thou  cover  him, 
**  and  that  thou  hide  not  thy felf  from  thy  own  flefh  ? 
**  Then  fhall  thy  light  break  forth  as  the  morning, 
**  and  thine  health  fhall  fpring  forth  fpeedily,  and 
**  thy  righteoufnefs  fhall  go  before  thee,   and  the 
**  glory  of  the  Lord  fhall  be  thy  reward  :  then  fhalt 
*'  thou  call,  and  the  Lord  fhall  anfwer  thee;  thou 
*'  fhalt  ciy,   and  he  fhall  fay,  here  I  am.'*     To 
which  I  will  only  add  that  gracious  promife  of  our 
Saviour  -,  "  bleffedare  the  merciful,  for  they  fhall 
"  find  mercy  •,"  and  that  terrible  fentence  in  St, 
James,  "  He  fhall  have  judgment  without  mercy, 
^  that  hath  fhewed  no  mercy, '^ 


SER- 


3^37 

SERMON     CLXr. 

Of  confeffion,  and  forrovv  for  fin. 

PSAL.  xxxviii.   i8. 
I  will  declare  mine  iniq^uity^  and  he  for  ry  for  my  Jin, 

IN  this  pfalm  David  does  earneftly  beg  mercy  and  S  E  R  Mk 
forgivenefs  of  God,  and  in  order  to  the  obtain-  ^  ^^* 
ing  of  it,  he  declares  both  his  fins,  and  his  repentance 
for  them  in  thefe  words,  which  contain  in  them  two 
of  the  neceflary  ingredients,  or  at  leaft  concomitants 
of  a  true  repentance,  viz.  confefTion  of  fin,  and  for- 
row  for  it. 

I  lliall  fpcak  fomething  of  the  ifirfl:  of  thcfe,  viz. 
confefTion  of  fin  :  but  the  fecond,  viz.  forrow  for 
fin^  fhall  be  the  main  fubjedi:  of  my  difcourfe. 

I.  ConfefTion  of  fin ;  "  I  will  declare  mine  iniqui- 
"  ty,"  or  as  it  is  in  the  old  tranflation,  "  I  will  con- 
"  fefs  my  wickednefs."  Of  which  I  fhall  fpeak  un- 
der thefe  three  heads. 

I.  What  confeflion  of  fin  is. 

II.  How  far  it  is  nccefTary. 

III.  What  are  the  rcafons  and  grounds  of  this 
necefTty. 

I.  What  confefTion  of  fin  is.  It  is  a  declaration 
or  acknowledgment  of  fome  moral  evil  or  fault  to 
another,  which  we  are  confcious  to  ourfelves  wc 
have  been  guilty  of.  And  this  acknowledgment 
may  be  made  by  us,  either  to  God  or  man.  The 
fcripture  mentions  both.  ConfefTion  of  our  fins  to 
God  is  very  frequently  mentioned  in  fcripture,  as 
the  firft  and  neceflary  part  of  repentance  •,  and  fome- 

times. 


CLXI. 


3838  0/  confejjion^   andforrow  forfm, 

S  EJ^  ^^.  times,  and  in  fome  cafes,  confeflion  to  men  is  not 
only  recommended,  but  enjoined. 

II.  How  far  confeflion  of  our  fins  is  neccflary. 
That  it  is  neceflary  to  confefs  our  fins  to  God,  the 
fcripture  plainly  declares,  and  is  I  think  a  matter  out 
of  all  difpute.  For  it  is  a  necefTary  part  of  repent- 
ance, that  we  fhould  confefs  our  fins  to  God.^  with 
a  due  fenfe  of  the  evil  of  them  j  and  therefore  the 
fcripture  maketh  this  a  necefTary  qualification,  and 
condition  of  pardon  and  forgivenefs.  Prov.  xxviii. 
13.  "  Whofo  confefleth  and  forfaketh  his  fins,  fhall 
*'  have  mercy."  i  John  i.  9.  *'  If  we  confefs  our 
*'  fins,  he  is  faithful  and  juflto  forgive  us  our  fins, 
*'  and  tocleanfe  us  from  all  unrighteoufnefs  ^"  im- 
plying that  if  we  do  not  confefs  our  fins  to  God,  the 
guilt  of  them  will  flill  remain  •,  to  God  I  fay,  for 
of  confeflion  to  him  St.  John  plainly  fpeaks,  when 
he  fays,  "  He  is  faithful  and  jufl:  •/'  Who  ?  God 
furely  ;  who  though  he  be  not  named  before,  yet  is 
neceflfarily  underflood  in  the  words  before -,  "If  we 
"  confefs  our  fins,"  i.  e.  to  God,  "  he  is  faithful 
*'  and  jufl:." 

A  general  confeflion  of  our  fins  is  abfolutely  ne- 
cefTary ;  and  in  fome  cafes  a  particular  acknowledg- 
ment of  them,  and  repentance  for  them,  efpeciaUy 
if  the  fins  have  been  great  and  deliberate  and  pre- 
fumptuous  J  in  this  cafe  a  particular  confeflion  of 
them,  and  repentance  for  them,  is  necefTary  fo  far 
as  we  can  particularly  recolledt  them,  and  call  them 
to  remembrance  :  whereas  for  fins  of  ignorance  and 
infirmity,  of  furprize  and  daily  incurfion,  for  lefTer 
omifllons,  and  the  defers  and  imperfections  of  our 
bcffc  anions  and  fervices,  we  have  all  the  reafon  that 
can  be  to  believe,  that  God  will  accept  of  a  general 
confeflion  of  them^  and  repentance  for  tliem.    And 

If 


Ofconfe/Jion,  mjdforrowforjtn,  3  8 -^9 

if  any  man  afk  mc^  where  I  find  this  diftindion  in  S  K  R  M. 
Icnpture,  between  a  general  and  particular  repent- 
ance ;  I  anfwer,  that  it  is  not  neceflary  it  (hould  be 
any  where  exprefled  in  fcripture,  being  fo  clearly 
founded  in  the  nature  and  reafon  of  the  thing  ;  be- 
caufe  in  many  cafes  it  is  not  polTible  that  we  ihould 
have  a  particular  knowledge  and  remembrance  of  all 
our  particular  fins  ;  as  is  plain  in  fins  of  ignorance, 
fince  our  very  calling  them  by  that  name  does  ne- 
ceffarily  fuppofe  that  we  do  not  know  them.  It  is 
impoffible  we  fhould  remember  thofe  fins  afterwards, 
which  we  did  not  know  v/hen  they  were  commit- 
ted :  and  therefore  either  a  general  repentance  for 
thefe,  and  the  other  fins  I  mentioned  of  the  like  na- 
ture, mufl  be  fufficient,  in  order  to  the  pardon  of 
them  ;  or  we  miift  fay,  that  they  are  unpardonable, 
which  would  be  very  unreafonablc,  becaufe  this  v/oiild 
be  to  make  leffer  fins  more  unpardonable  than  thofe 
which  are  far  greater. 

^And  yet  though  this  difference  between  a  general  and 
particular  repentance  be  no  v/here  expreQy  mention- 
ed in  fcripture,  there  does  not  want  foundation  for  it 
there.  Pfal.  xix.  12.  "  Who  can  underftand  his 
"  errors  .?  Cleanfe  thou  me  from  fecret  fins,"  (i.  e.) 
fuch  as  we  do  not  difcern  and  take  notice  of,  when 
they  are  committed  :  and  yet  David  fuppofeth,  that 
upon  a  general  acknowledgment  of  them,  and  re- 
pentance for  them,  we  may  be  cleanfed  from  them  ; 
though  we  cannot  make  a  particular  acknowledgment 
of  them,  and  exercife  a  particular  repentance  for 
them,  becaufe  they  are  fecret,  and  we  do  not  particular- 
ly underftand  what  they  are. 

As  for  our  confeffing  our  fins  to  men,  both  fcrip- 
ture  and  reafon  do  in  fome  cafes  recommend  and  en- 
join it.     As, 

Vol.  IX.  18  Z  i.  In 


of  conjejjton^  and  forrow for  Jin. 

I.  In  order  to  the  obtaining  of  the  prayers  of 
good  men  for  us.  James  v.  16.  "  Confefs  your  fins 
"  one  to  another  ;'*  he  faid  before,  "  the  prayer  of 
*'  faith  fhall  fave  the  fick,  and  the  Lord  Ihall  raife 
**  him  up.'*  This  in  all  probabihty  is  meant  of  the 
miraculous  power  of  prayer,  which  St.  Chryfoflom 
reckons  among  the  miraculous  gifts  of  the  Spirit,  be- 
flowed  upon  Chriilians  in  the  firfl  ages  of  the  church  : 
and  this  is  very  much  countenanced  and  confirmed 
by  what  prefently  follows  after  this  command  of 
*'  confefTing  our  fins  one  to  another,  and  praying 
**  one  for  another,"  and  given  as  the  reafon  of  it-, 
*'  for  the  cffedlual  fervent  prayer  of  a  righteous 
*'  man  availeth  much,"  the  original  is  ytyitriq  ei/ep- 
ynf/evT],  the  infpired  prayer,  which,  in  the  verfe  be- 
fore, is  called  "  the  prayer  of  faith,"  meaning  that 
miraculous  faith,  in  the  power  whereof  Chriilians 
did  obtain  of  God  whatever  they  were  infpired  to 
afk  of  him  ;  according  to  our  Saviour's  promifs 
in  the  gofpel,  concerning  the  efficacy  of  the  prayers 
of  Chriftians,  which  we  find  mentioned  among  the 
other  miraculous  powers,  \vhich  were  to  be  conferred 
upon  them  by  the  coming  of  the  Holy  Ghoft. 

2.  Confeflion  of  our  fins  to  men  is  likewife  reafon- 
able,  in  order  to  the  eafe  and  fatisfadlion  of  our  minds, 
and  our  being  direded  in  our  duty  for  the  future.  In 
this  cafe  common  reafon  and  prudence,  without  any 
precept  of  fcripture,  will  dired:  men  to  have  recourfe 
to  this  remedy,  viz.  to  difcover  and  lay  open  our  dif- 
eafe  to  fome  fkilful  fpiritual  phyfician,  to  fome  faith- 
ful friend  or  prudent  guide,  in  order  to  fpiritual  ad- 
vice and  direction,  for  the  peace  and  fatisfadion  of 
our  minds.     And  then, 

3.  In  cafe  our  fins  have  been  publick  and  fcanda- 

lous,  both  reafon  and  the  pradlce  of  the  chriftian 

2  :  church 


Of  conjeJ/toHy  andjorrow jorjin.  3041 

church  do  require,  that  when  men  have  publickly  ^  clxl'* 
offended,  they  fhould  give  publick  fatisfa6lion,  and 
open  teilimony  of  their  repentance. 

But  as  for  private  and  auricular  confefTion  of  our 
fins  to  a  prieft  in  all  cafes,  and  as  of  abfolute  necef- 
fity  to  our  obtaining  pardon  and  forgivenefs  from 
God,  as  the  church  ofRometeacheth,  this  is  neither 
necelfary  by  divine  precept,  nor  by  any  conilitution 
and  practice  of  the  ancient  chriflian  church,  as  I  have 
fhewn  in  my  former  difcourfe. 

Not  to  mention  the  bad  confequence  of  this  prac- 
tice, and  the  impious  and  dangerous  ufe  which  hath 
been  made  of  this  feal  of  confeflion,  for  the  conceal- 
ing and  carrying  on  of  the  moft  wicked  and  barba- 
rous defigns  •,  and  the  debauching  of  the  penitents, 
by  drawing  them  into  the  commifTion  of  the  fame 
and  greater  fins,  than  thofe  which  they  confefTed, 
which  the  more  devout  perfons  of  that  church  have 
frequently  complained  of.  I  proceed  now  to  Ihcw 
briefly  in  the 

Hid  Place,  the  grounds  and  reafons  of  the  necef- 
fity  of  confelTing  our  fms  to  God  j  and  I  fhall  but 
juft  mention  them. 

1.  From  the  precept  and  command  of  God  •,  for 
which  I  have  already  produced  clear  proof  of  fcripturc. 

2.  From  the  nature  of  the  thing,  becaufe  with- 
out this  there  can  be  no  repentance  towards  God. 
He  that  will  not  fo  much  as  own  the  faults  which  he 
hath  been  guilty  of,  can  never  repent  of  them.  If 
we  will  not  confefs  our  fins  to  God,  we  are  never 
like  to  be  forry  for  them.  Thus  much  for  the  firfl 
thing  in  the  text,  the  confefTion  of  our  fms.  I  pro- 
ceed now  to  the 

Second  ingredient  of  repentance  mentioned  in  the 
textj  which  is  forrow  for  fin  j  "  I  will  declare  mine 


18  Z  2  "iniquity 


» 


v"»; 


3^4  2  Of  confeffiony  and  forrow  for  fin. 

^  cLxi^'  "  iniquity,  and  be  forry  for  my  fm."     In  the  hand- 
ling of  this  argunient,  I  Ihall 

I.  Confider  the  nature  of  this  pafTion  of  forrow. 

II.  The  reafon  and  grounds  of  our  forrow  for  fin. 

III.  The  meafure  and  degrees  of  it. 

IV.  How  far  the  outward  exprefilon  of  our  in- 
ward grief  by  tears  is  neceffary  to  a  true  repentance. 

I.  For  the  nature  of  this  pafTion.  Sorrow  is  a 
trouble  or  diilurbance  of  mind,  occafioned  by  fome- 
thing  that  is  evil,  done  or  fuffcred  by  us,  or  which 
we  are  in  danger  of  fuffering,  that  tends  greatly  to 
our  damage  or  mifchief :  fo  that  to  be  forry  for  a 
thing,  is  nothing  elfe  but  to  be  fenfibly  affe6ted  with 
the  confideration  of  the  evil  of  it,  and  of  the  mif- 
chief and  inconvenience  which  is  like  to  redound  to 
us  from  it :  which  if  it  be  a  moral  evil,  fuch  as  fin 
is,  to  be  forry  for  it,  is  to  be  troubled  that  we  have 
done  it,  and  to  wilh  with  all  our  hearts  that  we  had 
been  wifer,  and  had  done  otherwife  ;  and  if  this  for- 
row be  true  and  real,  if  it  abide  and  flay  upon  us, 
it  will  produce  a  firm  purpofe  and  refolution  in  us, 
not  to  do  the  like  for  the  future. 

It  is  true  indeed,  that  we  are  faid  to  be  forry  for 
the  death  and  lofs  of  friends  \  but  this  is  rather  the 
efFe6l  of  natural  afFe6lion  than  of  our  reafon,  which 
always  endeavours  to  check  and  moderate  our  grief 
for  that  which  we  cannot  help,  and  labours  by  all 
means  to  turn  our  forrow  into  patience  :  and  we  are 
faid  likewife  to  grieve  for  the  miferies  and  fuffcrings 
of  others  •,  but  this  is  not  fo  properly  forrow  as  pity 
and  companion.  Sorrov/  rather  refpedls  ourfelves, 
and  our  own  doings  and  fufierings.  I  proceed  in  the 

lid  Place  to  enquire  into  the  reafons  and  grounds 
of  our  forrow  for  fin  ;  and  they,  as  I  have  already 
hinted,  are  thefe  two  \  the  intrinfical,  or  the  confe- 

qucnt 


Of  confejjion^  andforroioforjln.  3843 

qucnt  evil  of  fin  •,  cither  the  evil  of  fin  in  itfelf,  or  S  E  R  M. 

•  CLXI 

the  mifchicfs  and  inconveniencies  which  it  will  bring 
upon  us.  For  every  one  that  is  forry  for  any  fault 
he  is  guilty  of,  is  fo  upon  one  of  thefe  two  ac- 
counts ;  either  upon  the  fcore  of  ingenuity,  or  of 
intcreft  j  either  becaufe  he  hath  done  a  thing  which 
is  unworthy  in  itfelf,  or  becaufe  he  hath  done  fome- 
thing  which  may  prove  prejudicial  to  himfelf ;  either 
out  of  a  principle  of  love  and  gratitude  to  God,  or 
from  a  principle  of  felf-love.  And  though  the  form- 
er of  thefe  be  the  better,  the  more  generous  principle 
of  forrow  ;  yet  the  latter  is  ufually  the  firft ;  be- 
caufe it  is  the  more  fenfible,  and  toucheth  us  more 
nearly  :  for  fin  is  a  bafe  and  ill-natured  thing,  and 
renders  a  man  not  fo  apt  to  b«  affed:ed  with  the  in- 
juries he  hath  offered  to  God,  as  with  the  mifchief 
which  is  likely  to  fall  upon  himfelf.  And  therefore 
I  will  begin  with  the  latter,  becaufe  it  is  ufually  the 
more  fenfible  caufe  of  our  trouble  and  forrow  for  fui. 
I .  The  great  mifchief  and  inconvenience  that  fin 
is  like  to  bring  upon  us.  When  a  man  is  thorough- 
ly convinced  of  the  danger  into  which  his  fins  have 
brought  him,  that  they  have  "  made  him  a  child  of 
"  wrath,"  and  **  a  fon  of  perdition,"  that  he  is 
thereby  fallen  under  the  heavy  difpleafure  of  Almigh- 
ty God,  and  liable  to  all  thofe  dreadful  curfes  which 
are  written  in  his  book,  that  ruin  and  deitrudlion 
hang  over  him,  and  that  nothing  keeps  him  from  eter- 
nal and  intolerable  torments,  but  the  patience  and 
long-fufFering  of  God,  which  he  does  not  know  how 
foon  it  may  ceafe  to  interpofe  between  him  and  the 
wrath  of  God,  and  \tt  him  fall  into  that  endlcfs  and 
infupportable  mifery,  which  is  the  jufl  portion  and 
defert  of  his  fins  ;  he  that  lays  to  heart  the  fad  eflatc 
^nd  condition  into  which  he  hath  brought  himfelf  by 

fin. 


3844  Of  confe/Jion^  oid forrow for  fin% 

S  E  R  M.  fm,  and  the  mifchiefs  which  attend  him  every  mo- 

CLXI  ... 

ment  of  his  continuance  in  that  flate,  and  how  near 
they  arc  to  him,  and  that  there  is  but  a  ftep  between 
him  and  death,  and  hardly  another  between  that  and 
hell,  he  cannot  furely  but  be  very  forry  for  what  he 
hath  done,  and  be  highly  difpleafed  and  offended 
with  himfelf,  that  he  ihould  be  the  author  of  his 
own  ruin,  and  have  contributed  as  much  as  in  him 
lies  to  his  everlafting  undoing. 

2.  Another  and  better  principle  of  forrow  for  fin, 
is  ingenuity  ;  becaufe  we  are  fenfible,  that  we  have 
carried  ourfelves  very  unworthily  towards  God,  and 
have  been  injurious  to  him,  who  hath  laid  all  pofTi- 
ble  obligations  upon  us  :  for  he  hath  made  us,  and 
hath  given  us  our  beings,  and  hath  charged  his 
watchful  providence  with  the  continual  care  of  us  ; 
his  bounty  hath  miniilred  to  the  necefTities  and  com- 
forts of  our  life  ;  all  the  bleflings  that  we  enjoy,  are 
the  effedls  of  his  mere  love  and  goodnefs,  without 
any  hope  of  requital,  or  expeftation  of  any  other 
return  from  us,  than  of  love,  of  gratitude,  and  o- 
bedience ;  which  yet  are  of  no  advantage  to  him, 
but  very  beneficial  and  comfortable  to  ourfelves  : 
for  he  docs  not  expedl  duty  and  obedience  from  us, 
with  any  regard  of  benefit  to  himfelf,  but  for  our 
fakes,  and  in  order  to  our  own  happinefs. 

Nay,  his  kindnefs  did  not  flop  here,  but  after  wc 
had  abufed  him  by  our  repeated  provocations,  yet  he 
Hill  continued  his  care  of  us ;  and  when  we  had 
farther  provoked  him  to  withdraw  his  love,  and  to 
call  in  his  abufed  goodnefs,  and  had  done  what  lay 
in  us  to  make  ourfelves  miferable,  he  would  not  fuf- 
fer  us  to  be  undone,  but  found  out  a  ranfom  for  us, 
and  hath  contrived  a  way  for  the  pardon  of  all  our 
ofiences,  and  to  reconcile  us  to  himfelf,  and  to  reflore 


us      \ 


Of  cojifejjion^  and  for  row  for  Jin.  3^4? 

us  to  happinefs,  by  the  moll  flupendous  and  amaz-  S  E  R  M. 
ing  condefcenfion  of  love  and  goodnefs  that  ever  v— 
was,  even  by  giving  his  only  Son  to  die  for  us. 

And  can  we  refkdl  upon  all  this,  and  not  be  forry 
and  grieved  at  our  very  hearts,  that  we  fhould  be  fo 
evil  to  him,  who  hath  been  fo  good  to  us  ;  that  wc 
ihould  be  fo  undutiful  to  fo  loving  a  father,  fo  un- 
kind tofo  faithful  and  conftant  a  friend,  fo  ungrateful 
and  unworthy  to  fo  mighty  a  benefador  ?  If  any 
thing  will  melt  us  into  tears,  furely  this  will  do  it, 
to  confider  that  we  have  finned  againft  him,  who 
made  us,  and  continually  preferves  us,  and  after  all 
our  unkindnefs  to  him,  did  ftill  retain  fo  great  a  love 
for  us,  as  to  redeem  us  from  hell  and  deftrudion, 
by  the  death  and  fuffering  of  his  Son,  and  notwith- 
flanding  all  our  offences  does  flill  offer  us  pardon 
and  peace,  life  and  happinefs.  Such  confiderations 
as  thcfe,  ferioufly  laid  to  heart,  fhould,  one  would 
think,  break  the  hardeft  heart,  and  make  tears  to 
gufh  even  out  of  a  rock.     I  proceed  in  the 

Hid  Place  to  confider  the  meafure  and  degree  of 
our  forrow  for  fin.  That  it  admits  of  degrees, 
which  ought  to  bearfome  proportion  to  the  heinouf- 
nefs  of  our  fins,  and  the  feveral  aggravations  of  them, 
and  the  time  of  our  continuance  in  them,  is  out  of 
all  difpute :  for  though  the  leall  fin  be  a  jufl  caufe  of 
the  deepefl  forrow  •,  yet  becaufe  our  greatefl  grief 
can  never  bear  a  due  proportion  to  the  vail  and  in- 
finite evil  of  fin,  God  is  pleafed  to  require  and  ac- 
cept fuch  meafures  of  forrow,  as  do  not  bear  an 
exad  correfpondence  to  the  malignity  of  fin,  provid- 
ed they  be  according  to  the  capacity  of  our  nature, 
and  in  feme  fort  proportioned  to  the  degree  and  ag- 
gravations of  our  fins  •,  i.e.  Though  the  higheil  de- 
gree of  our  forrow  doth  necelfarily  fall  below  the  evil 

of 


3846  Of  confejjiofty   and forrow for  fn. 

^  CLxi^'  ^f  ^^^  ^^^^  ^^^  '  y^^  ^^^  requires  that  we  fhould  be 
more  deeply  affe6led  with  fome  fins  than  others. 

But  what  is  the  lowed  degree  which  God  requires 
in  a  true  penitent,  and  will  accept,  as  it  is  impofliblc 
for  me  to  tell,  fo  it  is  unprofitable  for  any  body  to 
know :  for  no  man  can  reafonably  make  this  enquiry 
witli  any  other  defign,  than  that  he  may  learn  how 
he  may  come  off  with  God  upon  the  cheapefl  and 
eafieft  terms.  Now  there  cannot  be  a  worfe  fign, 
that  a  man  is  not  truly  fenfible  of  the  great  evil  of 
fin,  than  this,  that  he  defires  to  be  troubled  for  it  as 
little  as  may  be,  and  no  longer  than  needs  mufl : 
and  none  furely  are  more  unlikely  to  find  acceptance 
with  God,  than  thofe  who  deal  fo  nearly,  and  en- 
deavour to  drive  fo  hard  a  bargain  with  him. 

And  therefore  I  fhall  only  fay  this  in  general, 
concerning  the  degrees  of  our  forrow  for  fin  ;  that 
fin  being  fo  great  an  evil  in  itfelf,  and  of  fo  pernici- 
ous a  confequence  to  us,  it  cannot  be  too  much  la- 
mented and  grieved  for  by  us  :  and  the  more  and 
greater  our  fins  have  been,  and  the  longer  we  have 
continued  and  lived  in  them,  they  call  for  fo  much 
the  greater  forrow,  and  deeper  humiliation  from  us  : 
for  the  reafoning  of  our  Saviour  concerning  Mary 
Magdalene,  "  She  loved  much,  becaufe  much  was 
"  forgiven  her,"  is  proportionably  true  in  this  cafe, 
thofe  who  have  finned  much,  fhould  forrow  the  more. 

And  then  we  muft  take  this  caution  along  with  us, 
that  if  we  would  judge  aright  of  the  truth  of  our 
forrow  for  fm,  we  mull  not  meafure  it  fo  much  by 
the  degrees  of  fenfible  trouble  and  afflidlion,  as  by  the 
rational  effects  of  it,  which  are  hatred  of  fin,  and  a 
fixed  purpofe  and  refolution  againft  it  for  the  future : 
for  he  is  moft  truly  forry  for  his  mifcarriage,  who 
looks  upon  what  he  hath  done  amifs  with  abhor- 
rence 


Ofconfeffion,    arid  f or  row  for  fin.  3847 

rcfi^eand.deteflationofthe  thing,  and  wifheth  he  had  SE  R  m. 
not  done  it,  and  cenfures  himfelf  feverely  for  it,  and     ^^^^^• 
thereupon  refolves  not  to  do  the  like  again.     And  '^^""'^ 
this  is  the  charadler  which  ^t.  Paul  gives  of  a  godly 
forrow,^2  Cor.  vii.  10.  that  "  it  worketh  repent- 
I'  ance,"  f^s]c6mccv,    it  produceth  ''  a  real  change 
*'  in  our  minds,"  and  makes  us  to  alter  our  purpofe 
and  refoludon:  and  though  fuch  a  perfon  may  not 
be  fo  paffionately  and  fenfibly  afflided  for  fin,  yet  it 
appears  by  the  cffed,  that  he  hath  a  deeper  and 
more  rational  refentment  of  the  evil  of  it,  than  that 
man  who  is  fad  and  melancholy  and  drooping  for 
never  fo  long  a  time,  and  after  all  returns  to  his'^for- 
mer  finfulcourfe  ;  the  degree  of  his  forrow  may  ap- 
pear greater,  but  the  efFed  of  it  is  really  lefs. 

IV.  As  for  the  outward  expreffions  of  our  grief 
and  forrow.     The  ufual  fign  and  outward  expreffion 
of  forrow  is  tears  ;  but  thefe  being  not  the  fubilance 
of  our  duty,  but  an  external  tellimony  of  it,  which 
iome  tempers  are  more  unapt  to  than  others  ;  we 
are  much  lefs  to  judge  of  the  truth  of  our  forrow 
tor  fin  by  thefe,  than  by  our  inward  fenfiblc  trouble 
and  affliction  of  fpirit.     Some  perfon^  are  of  a  more 
tender  and  melting  difpofition,  and  can  command 
their  tears  upon  a  little  occafion,  and  upon  very  lliort 
warning  ;  and  fuch  perfons  that  can  weep  for  every 
thing  elfe  that  troubles  them,  have  much  more  rea- 
Ion  to  fufped  the  truth  of  their  forrow  for  fin,  if  this 
outward  expreffion  of  it  be  wanting.  And  we  find  in 
icripture,  that  the  forrow  of  true  penitents  does  very 
frequently  difcover  itfelf  by  this  outward  fign  of  it. 
Thus  when  Ezra  and  the  people  made  confeffion  of 
their  fins  to  God,  it  is  faid,  that  ^'  they  wept  very 
**  fore,"  Ezrax.  Peter  when  he  refleded  upon  that 
great  fin  of  denying  his  mafter,  it  is  faid,  "  He 
>    Vol.  IX.  ,^  A  c(  ^gjj^ 


CLXI. 


Of  confejjion,  ajid  for  row  for  Jin, 

^^  went  forth  and  wept  bitterly.''  Davjd  alfo  was 
abundant  in  this  expreflion  oli"  his  grief.  In  the  book 
of  Pfahns  he  fpeaks  frequently  of  his  fighs  and  groans, 
and  of  "  watering  liis  couch  with  his  tears  :"  yea  fo 
fenfibly  was  he  aftedted  with  the  evil  of  fin,  that  he 
could  fhed  tears  plentifully  for  the  fins  of  others, 
Pfal.  cxix.  136.  ''  Rivers  of  waters  run  down  .mine 
"  eyes,  becaufe  men  keep  not  thy  law."  In  fike 
manner  Jeremiah  tells  us,  that  "  his  foul  did  weep 
"  in  fecret  places,  for  the  pride  and  obftinacy  of  the 
"  Jews-,'*  that  "  his  eye  did  weep  fore,  and  run 
^'  down  with  tears  j"  Jer.  xiii.  17.  And  fo  like- 
wife  St.  Paul,  Philip  iii.  18,  19.  **  There  are  many 
"  that  walk,  cf  whom  I  have  told  you  often,  and 
*'  now  tell  you  even  weeping,  that  they  are  enemies 
*^  to  the  crofs  of  Christ."  And  there  feems  to  be 
this  natural  reafon  for  it,  that  all  great  and  perma- 
nent imprefTions  upon  the  mind,  all  deep  inward  re- 
ientments  have  ufually  a  proportionable  efFed  upon 
^hebody,  and  the  inferior  faculties. 

But  though  this  happen  very  frequently,  yet  it  is 
not  fo  conftant  and  certain ;  for  all  men  have  not  the 
fame  tendernefs  of  fpirit,  nor  are  equally  prone  to 
tears  ^  nay  though  a  man  can  weep  upon  natural  ac- 
counts, as  upon  the  lofs  of  a  child,  or  near  relation, 
or  an  intimate  friend,  or  when  he  lies  under  a  fharp 
JDodily  pain,  yet  a  man  may  truly  repent,  though  he 
cannot  exprefs  his  forrow  for  fin  the  fame  way,  pro- 
vided he  give  teflimony  of  it  by  more  real  efifedls  : 
and  therefore  the  rule,  which  is  commonly  given  by 
cafuifts  in  this  cafe,  feems  to  be  more  enfnaring  than 
true  and  ufeful :  namely,  ^'  That  that  man  that  can 
*'  fhed  tears  upon  account  of  any  evil  lefs  than  that 
^*  of  fin,  (as  certainly  all  natural  evils  arc)  ought 
^*  to  queftion  the  truth  of  his  repentance  for  any  fin 

<^  tha? 


OfcoJifeJJion^  tind  forrow  for  Jin,  3^49 

**  that  he  hath  com  mitt  ^d,  if  he  cannot  fhed  tears  S  F  R  M. 

CLXI. 

*'  for  it/*  This  I  thinly .  is  not  true,  becaufe  there  is 
fcarce  any  man  of  fo  h  ard  and  unrelenting  a  fpirit, 
but  the  lofs  of  a  kind  father,  or  a  dear  child,  or 
other  near  relation5will  f  brce  tears  from  him :  and  yet 
fuch  a  man,  if  it  were  t  o  fave  his  foul,  may  not  be 
able  at  fome  times  to  fl  led  a  tear  for  his  fins.  And 
the  reafon  is  obvious  \  1 3ecaufe  tears  do  pfbceed  froirf 
a  fenfitive  trouble,  and ;are  commonly  the  product  of 
a  natural  affedion  ;  and  therefore  it  is  no  wonder, 
if  they  flow  more  readi  ly  and  eafily  upon  a  natural 
account  \  becaufe  they  are  the  effect  of  a  caufe  fuita- 
ble  to  their  nature.  But  forrow  for  fm,  which  hath 
more  of  the  judgment  and  underftanding  in  it,  hath 
not  it's  foundation  in  natural  affedion^  but  in  rea- 
fon 5  and  therefore  may  not  many  times  exprefs  it- 
it\i  in  tears,  though  it  may  produce  gr:sater  and 
more  proper  effedls. 

So  that  upon  the  whdl'e  matter,  I  fee  no  reafon  to 
Call  in  queftion  the  truth  and  fincerity  of  that  man's 
forrow  and  repentance,  who  hates  fin  and  forfakes  it, 
and  returns  to  God  and  hh  duty,  though  he  cannot 
fhed  tears,  and  exprefs  the  bitternefs  of  his  foul  for  - 
his  fin,  by  the  fame  fignifications  that  a  mother  doth 
in  the  lofs  of  her  only  fon.  He  that  cannot  weep  x 
like  a  child  may  refolve  like  a  m.an,  and  that  un- 
doubtedly will  find  acceptance  with  God.  A  learn- 
ed divine  hath  well  illuftrated  this  matter  by  this  fi- 
militude.  Two  perfons  walking  together  efpy  a 
ferpent,  the  one  Ihrieks  and  cries  out  at  the  fight  of 
it,  the  other  kills  it :  fo  is  it  in  forrov/  for  fin  ;  fome 
exprefs  it  by  great  lamentation  and  tears,  and  vehe- 
ment tranfports  of  pafiion  ;  others  by  greater  and 
more  real  cffeds  of  hatred  and  deteflration,  by  for- 
faking  their  fins,  and  by  mortifying  and  fubduing 

J9  A  2  their 


Of  confejjion^  and  for  row  for  fin. 

their  lufls  :  but  he  that  kills  it  does  certainly  bed 
exprefs  his  inward  difpleafun^  and  enmity  againfl  it. 

The  application  I  fhall  make  of  what  hath  been 
faid  upon  this  argument,   fhall  be  in  two  particulars. 

I.  By  way  of  caution,  and  that  againfl  a  double 
miftake  about  forrow  for  fin. 

1.  Some  look  upon  trouble  and  forrow  for  fin,  as 
the  whole  of  repentance. 

2.  Others  exa6l  from  themfelves  fuch  a  degree  of 
forrow,  as  ends  in  melancholy,  and  renders  them  un- 
fit both  for  the  duties  of  religion,,  and  of  their  par- 
ticular calling.  The  firil  ccmcerns  almofl  the  gene- 
rality of  men  \  the  latter  but  a  very  few  in  comparifon. 

I .  There  are  a  great  many,  who  look  upon  trou- 
ble and  forrow  for  their  fins,  as  the  whole  of  re- 
pentance, whereas  it  is  but  2.n  introdu6lion  to  it.  It 
is  that  which  works  repentance  •,  but  is  not  repent- 
ance itfelf.  Repentance  is  always  accompanied  with 
forrow  for  fm  •,  but  forrow  for  fin  does,  not  always 
end  in  true  repentance  :  forrow  only  refpeds  fins 
paft  ;  but  repentance  is  cfiiefly  preventive  of  fin  for 
the  future.  And  God  doth  therefore  require  our 
forrow  for  fm,  in  order  to  our  forfaking  of  it.  Heb. 
vi.  I.  Repentance  is  there  called  "  repentance  from 
"  dead  works."  It  is  not  only  a  forrow  for  them, 
but  a  turning  from  them. 

There  is  no  reafon  why  men  fliould  be  fo  willing 
to  deceive  themfelves,  for  they  are  like  to  be  the 
iofers  by  it  :  but  fo  we  fee  it  is,  that  many  men  are 
contented  to  be  deceived  to  their  own  ruin  -,  and 
among  many  other  ways,  which  men  have  to  cheat 
themfelves,  this  is  none  of  the  leaft  frequent,  to 
think  that  if  they  can  but  fhed  a  few  tears  for  fin 
upon  a  death-bed,  which  no  doubt  they  may  eafily 
do,  when  they  lee  their  friends  weeping  about  them, 

and 


Of  confejjton^  and  forrow  forjin.  S^^"! 

and  apprehend  themfelves  to  be  in  imminent  danger,  S  E  R  M, 
not  only  of  death,  but  of  that  which  is  more  terri- 
ble, the  heavy  difpleafure,  and  the  fiery  indignation 
of  Almighty  God,  "  into  whofe  hands  it  is  a  fear- 
"  ful  thing  to  fall  •,"  I  fay,  they  think  that  if  they 
can  but  do  thus  much,  God  will  accept  this  for  a 
true  repentance,  and  hereupon  grant  them  pardon 
and  eternal  life.  And  upon  thefe  fond  hopes,  they 
adjourn  their  repentance,  and  the  reformation  of 
their  lives  to  a  dying  hour. 

Indeed  if  I  v/eretofpeak  to  a  man  upon  his  death- 
bed, I  would  encourage  him  to  a  great  contrition 
and  forrow  for  his  fins,  as  his  lafl  and  only  remedy, 
and  the  befl  thing  he  can  do  at  that  time  -,  but  on  the 
other  hand,  when  I  am  fpeaking  to  thofe  that  arc 
well  and  in  health,  I  dare  not  give  them  the  leafl  en- 
couragement to  venture  their  fouls  upon  this,  becaufc 
it  is  an  hazardous,  and  almoil  defperate  remedy  j 
efpecially  when  men  have  cunningly  and  defignedly 
contrived  to  rob  God  of  the  fervice  of  their  lives,  and 
to  put  him  off  with  a  few  unprofitable  fighs  and  tears  afe 
their  departure  out  of  the  world.  Our  Saviour 
tells  us,  that  it  is  "  not  every  one,  that  (hall  fay  un- 
*^  to  him  Lord  !  Lord  !  that  fhall  enter  into  the 
"  kingdom  of  heaven  ;"  and  that  there  is  a  time, 
when  "  many  fhall  feek  to  enter  in,  but  fhall  not 
*^  be  able." 

The  fum  of  this  caution  is,  that  men  fliould  take 
heed  of  miflaking  forrow  for  fin,  for  true  repentance, 
unlefs  it  be  followed  with  the  forfaking  of  fin  and 
the  real  reformation  of  our  lives.  •  Ahab  humbled 
himfclf,  but  we  do  not  find  that  he  was  a  true  peni- 
tent. Judas  was  forry  for  his  fin,  and  yet  for  all 
that  was  "  the  fon  of  perdition."  Efau  is  a  fad  type 
of  an  ineffectual  forrow  for  fin,.  Heb.  xii.  where  the 
Jt  apoflle 


3852  Of  cojifejjion^  and fon-owfor Jiit. 

S  E  R  M.  apoflle  tells  us,  that  '*  he  found  no  place  for  repcrt*. 
*'  tance,"  that  is,  no  way  to  change  the  mind  of 
his  father  Ifaac,  "  though  he  fought  it  carefully  with 
*'  tears."  If  forrow  for  fin  were  repentance,  there 
would  be  ftore  of  penitents  in  hell  \  for  there  is  the 
deepefl:  and  moft  intenfe  forrow,  *'  weeping  and 
*'  wailing  and  gnafliing  of  teeth." 

2.  Another  miftake  which  men  ought  to  be  cau- 
tioned againft  in  this  matter,  is  of  thofe  who  exa6ft 
from  themfelves  fuch  a  degree  of  forrow  for  fin,  as 
ends  in  deep  melancholy,  as  renders  them  unfit  both 
for  the  duties  of  religion,  and  of  their  particular  call- 
ings. But  becaufe  there  are  but  very  few  who  fall 
into  this  miftake,  I  Ihall  need  to  fay  the  lefs  to  it. 
This  only  I  fhall  fay,  that  thofe  who  indulge  their 
forrow  to  fuch  a  degree,  as  to  drown  their  fpirits, 
and  to  fink  them  into  melancholy  and  mopifhnefs, 
and  thereby  render  themfelves  unferviceable  to  God, 
and  unfit  for  the  neceflities  of  this  life,  they  com* 
mit  one  fin  more  to  mourn  for,  and  overthrow  the 
end  of  repentance  by  the  indifcreet  ufe  of  the  means 
of  it.  For  the  end  of  forrow  for  fin,  is  the  forfak- 
ing  of  it,  and  returning  to  our  duty  :  but  he  that 
forrows  for  fin,  fo  as  to  unfit  him  for  his  duty,  de- 
feats his  own  defign,  and  deftroys  the  end  he  aims  at. 
II.  The  other  part  of  the  application  of  this  dif- 
courfe  fhould  be,  to  ftir  up  this  affedion  of  forrow 
In  us.  And  here,  if  I  had  time,  I  might  reprefent 
to  you  the  great  evil  of  fin,  and  the  infinite  danger 
and  inconvenience  of  it.  If  the  holy  men  in  fcrip^ 
ture,  David,  and  Jeremiah^  and  St.  Paul,  were  fo 
deeply  affeded  with  the  fins  of  others,  as  to  fhed 
rivers  of  tears  at  the  remembrance  of  them  ;  how 
ought  we  to  be  touched  with  the  fcnfe  of  our  own 
finsj  who  are  equally  concerned  in  the  difhonour 

brought 


Of  confejjion^  andforrowforfm.  3^53 

brought  to  God  by  them,  and  infinitely  more  in  the  S  E  R  M". 
danger  they  expofe  us  to  !  can  we  weep  for  our  dead 
friends  ?  And  have  we  no  fenfe  of  that  heavy  load 
of  guik,  of  that  body  of  death,  which  we  carry  a- 
bout  with  us  ?  Can  we  be  fad  and  melancholy  for 
temporal  lofTes  and  fuiferings,  and  refufe  to  be  com- 
forted ?  And  is  i;  no  trouble  to  us  to  have  loft  heavea 
and  happinefs,  and  to  be  in  continual  danger  of  the 
intolerable  fufferings  and  endlefs  torments  of  an- 
other world  ? 

I  fhall  only  offer  to  your  confideration,  the  great 
benefit  and  advantage  which  will  redound  to  us  from 
this  "  godly  forrow  J  it  worketh  repentance  to  fal- 
"  vation,  not  to  be  repented  of,"  faith  St.  Paul.  If 
we  would  thus  "  fow  in  tears,"  we  fhould  "  reap 
*'  in  joy."  This  forrow  would  but  "  continue  for 
"  a  time,"  and  "  in  the  morning"  of  the  refurrec- 
tion  there  would  be  joy  to  all  eternity,  *'joy  un- 
*'  fpeakable  and  full  of  glory."  It  is  bur  a  very- 
little  while,  and  thefe  "  days  of  mourning  will  be 
*'  accomplifhed  ;"  and  then  "  all  tears  fhall  be  wip- 
*'  ed  from  our  eyes ;  and  the  ranfomed  of  the  Lord 
*'  ihall  come  to  Sion  with  fongs,  and  everlafting 
*'  joy  fliall  be  upon  their  heads.  They  (hall  obtain 
*^  joy  and  gladnefs,  and  forrow  and  fighing  fhall 
*^  flee  away.  BlefTed  are  they  that  mourn,  for  they 
"  fhall  be  comforted :  but  wo  unto  you  that  laugh, 
*♦  for  ye  fhall  mourn  and  weep."  If  men  will  re« 
joice  in  thepleafures  of  fin,  and  "  walk  in  the  ways 
*'  of  their  hearts,  and  in  the  fight  of  their  eyes  ;'* 
if  they  will  "  remove  forrow  from  their  heart,"  and 
put  away  all  fad  and  melancholy  thoughts  from 
thern,  and  are  refolved  to  harden  their  fpirits  againfl 
the  fenfe  of  fin,  againfl  the  checks  and  convidions 
pf  th<eir  own  confciences,   and  the  fuggeftions   of 

God'3 


3854         ^^^  unprofitablenefs  of  Jin  in  this  Ufi^ 

God's  holy  Spirit,  againfl  all  the  arguments  that  Goa 
can  offer,  and  all  the  methods  that  God  can  ufe  to 
bring  them  to  repentance ;  let  them  "  know,  that  for 
"  all  thefe  things  God  will  bring  them  intojudg- 
*'  ment  •,"  and  becaufe  they  would  not  give  way  to 
a  timely  and  feafonable  forrow  for  fin,  they  Ihall  lie 
down  in  eternal  forrow,  "  weeping  and  wailing  and 
"  gnalhing  of  teeth  jQiall  be  their  portion  for  ever." 
From  which  fad  and  miferable  eftate,  beyond  all 
imagination,  and  pafl  all  remedy,  God  of  his  infi- 
nite goodnefs  deliver  us  all,  for  Jesus  Christ's 
fake. 

"  To  whom,  &c. 


SERMON    CLXir. 

The  unprofitablenefs  of  fin  in  this  life, 
an  argument  for  repentance. 

JOB  xxxiii.  27,  28. 

Helooketh  upon  men^  and  if  any  fay ^  I  have  finnei^ 
and  perverted  that  which  was  rights  and  it  -profit- 
ed  me  not  *,  he  will  deliver  his  foul  from  going  in- 
to the  pity  and  his  life  fh  all  fee  the  light, 

S  E  R  M.  '   I  "^HE  great  folly  and  perverfenefs  of  human  na- 

cLxii.       J[      ture  is  in  nothing  more  apparent  than  in  this, 

P^^^^jJI^  that  when  in  all  other  things  men  are  generally  led 

on  Afti-     and  governed  by  their  interefts,  and  can  hardly  be 

d^^"^6s    if^^pofed  upon  by  any  art,  or  perfuaded  by  any  folici- 

tation,  to  a6b  plainly  contrary  to  it  ;  yet  in  matter 

of  their  fin  and  duty,  that  is,  in  that  which  of  all 

Other  is  of  greateft  concernment  to  them,  they  have 

little 


en  argumenf  for  repent ancel  3  S  5  ^ 

little  or  ho  regard  to  it  ;  but  are  fo  blinded  and  be-  ^  E  R  M. 
witched  with  "  the  deceitfulnefs  of  fin,"  as  not  to    ^^^"* 
confider  the  infinite  danger  and  difad vantage  of  It ; 
and  at  the  fame  time  to  cafb  the  commandments  of 
God,  and  the  confideration  of  their  own  happinefa 
behind  their  backs. 

And  of  this  every  fihner,  when  he  comes  to  him- 
felf,  and  confiders  what  he  hath  done,  is  abundantly- 
convinced  j  as  appears  by  the  confeflion  and  acknow- 
ledgment, which  is  here  in  the  text  put  into  the 
mouth  of  a  true  penitent  j  "  I  have  finned,  and 
*'  perverted  that  which  was  right,  and  it  profited  me 
"  not,  &c." 

In  which  words  here  is  a  great  blefling  and  benefit 
promifed  on  God's  part,  and  condition  required  oa 
cur  part. 

Firft,  The  blefTing  or  benefit  promifed  on  God's 
part,  which  is  deliverance  from  the  ill  confequences 
and  punifhment  of  fin  ;  ''he  will  deliver  his  foul 
*'  from  going  into  the  pit,  and  his  life  fhall  fee  the 
"  light,"  that  is,  he  will  deliver  him  from  death 
and  damnation.  And  though  perhaps  temporal 
death  be  here  immediately  intended,  yet  that  is  a 
type  of  our  deliverance  from  eternal  death  ^  which  is 
exprefly  promifed  in  the  gofpeh 

Secondly,  Here  is  a  condition  required  on  out- 
part  ;  "  If  any  fay,  I  have  finned,  and  perverted 
"  that  which  was  right,  and  it  profited  me  not.". 
In  which  words  there  are  contained, 

I.  A  penitent  confefllon  of  our  fins  to  God  ;  for 
*'  helooketh  upon  men,  and  if  any  fay,  I  have  fin- 
ned,'' that  is,  make  a  penitent  confefl;ion  of  his 

fin  to  God. 

II.  A  true  contrition  for  our  fin,  not  only  for 
Fear  of  the  pernicious  confequences  of  fin,  and  the 

Vol.  IX,  19  B  punilli- 


3856        The  unprofitablenefs  of  Jin  in  this  life^ 

S  E  R  M.  punifhment  that  will  follow  it,  implied  in  thefe  words, 
"  and  it  profited  me  not,'*  this  is  but  a  very  imper- 
fe6t  contrition  :  but  from  a  juft  fenfe  of  the  evil  na- 
ture of  fin,  and  the  fault  and  offence  of  it  againfl 
God,  that  we  have  done  contrary  to  right  and  our 
duty.  "  If  any  fay,  I  have  finned,  and  perverted 
"  that  which  was  right."  Here  you  fee  that  true 
and  perfect  contrition  for  our  fins,  is  made  a  neceffary 
condition  of  the  blefiing  and  benefit  here  promifed, 
viz.  deliverance  from  the  punifhment  due  to  them. 

III.  Here  is  a  defcription  of  the  evil  nature  of  fin, 
it  is  "a  perverting  of  that  which  is  right."  Sin  is  a  per- 
verting of  the  conftitution  and  appointment  of  God, 
and  of  the  nature  and  order  of  things.     God  hatli 
given  man  a  law  and  rule  to  walk  by,  but  "  the 
*'  foohfhncfs  of  man  perverteth  his  way."  The  great 
lines  of  our  duty  are  plain  and  vifible  to  all  men ; 
and  if  we  would  attend  to  the  diredion  of  our  own 
minds,  concerning  good  and  evil,  every  man  would 
be  "  a  law  to  himfelf."  "  He  hath  fhewed  thee,  O 
"  man,  what  is  good."     That  which  is  right  and 
juil  and  good  is  plain  and  obvious,  and   offers  it- 
felf  firft  to  us  ;  and  whenever  we  fin,  we  go  out  of 
the  right  way  that  lies  plain  before  us,  and  "  turn 
*'  afide  into  crookecJ»paths."    But  when  we  do  that 
which  is  rig^.t,  we  zd:  agreeably  to  the  defign  and 
frame  of  our  beings,  and  comply  with  the  true  na- 
ture and  order  of  things ;  we  do  what  becomes  us, 
and  are  what  we  ought  to  be  :  but  fin  perverts  the 
nature  of  things,  and  puts   them   out  of  courfe  ; 
*'  I  have  finned  and  perverted  that  which  was  right." 
IV.  You  have  here  an  acknowledgment  of  the 
mifchievous  and  pernicious  confequences  of  fin  -,  "  I 
have  finned  and  perverted  that  which  was  right, 
and  it  profited  me  not."     Which  lafl  words  are  a 


an  argument  for  repentaiice.  3^57 

[tiitacriq^  in  which  much  Icfs  is  faid  than  is  meant  and  S 1^^^^* 
intended  ;  "  It  profited  me  not,"  that  is,  it  was  fo 
far  from  being  of  advantage,  that  the  effeds  and  con- 
fequences  of  it  were  very  pernicious  and  deftrudlive. 

And  this  is  not  only  true  as  to  the  final  ifTue,  and 
event  of  an  evil  courfe  in  the  other  world  ;  but  I 
fhall  endeavour  to  ihew,  that  even  in  refpe6l  of  this 
world,  and  the  prefent  life,  the  practice  of  fome  fins 
is  plainly  mifchievous  to  the  temporal  interefls  of 
men  ;  that  others  are  wholly  unprofitable  •,  and  that 
thofe  which  pretend  to  bring  fome  benefit  and  ad- 
vantage, will,  when  all  accounts  are  cafl  up,  and  all 
circumflances  duly  weighed  and  confidered,  be  found 
to  do  far  otherwife. 

Firfl,  I  fhall  fhew,  that  the  pra6lice  of  fome  vices 
is  evidently  mifchievous  and  prejudicial  to  us,  as  to 
this  worid  ♦,  as  all  thofe  vices  which  fall  under  the 
cognizance  of  human  laws,  and  are  punifhed  by 
them :  murder,  theft,  perjury,  fedition,  rebelhon, 
and  the  like  ;  thefe  cannot  be  denied  to  be  of  per- 
nicious confequence  to  men,  and  therefore  the  great 
patrons  of  vice  feldom  plead  for  thefe,  the  incon- 
venience of  them  is  fo  palpable,  that  fome  feel  it, 
and  all  may  fee  it  every  day. 

But  befides  thefe,  there  are  many  other  forts  of 
fin,  which  human  laws  either  take  no  notice  of,  or 
do  not  fo  feverely  punifh,  which  yet  in  their  natural 
confcquences  are  very  pernicious  to  our  prefent  in- 
terefl  -,  either  they  are  a  diflurbance  to  our  minds, 
or  dangerous  to  our  health,  or  ruinous  to  our  eftate, 
or  hurtful  to  our  reputation,  or  it  may  be  at  once 
prejudicial  to  us,  in  all,  or  moft  of  thefe  refpecfls ; 
and  thefe  are  the  greateft  temporal  inconveniencies 
that  men  are  liable  to. 

All  irregular  paflions,    as  wrath,  malice,  envy, 
19  B  2  impa- 


3858         7he  iinprojitahlenefs  of  fin  In  this  life^ 

impatience  and  revenge,  are  not  only  a  difturbancc 
to  oiirfelves,  but  they  naturally  draw  upon  us  hatred 
and  contempt  from  others.  Any  one  of  thefe  paf- 
fions  is  enough  to  render  a  man  uneafy  to  himfelf,  and 
to  make  his  converfation  difeuflful  and  troublefom 
to  all  that  are  about  him  ;  for  all  men  naturally  hate 
all  thofe,  who  are  of  an  envious,  or  malicious,  or 
revengeful  temper,  and  are  apt  to  rife  up  and  ftand 
upon  their  guard  againfl  them.  Anger  and  impa-* 
tience  are  great  deformities  of  the  mind,  and  make 
a  man  look  as  ugly,  as  if  he  had  a  wry  and  diftorted 
countenance  -,  and  thefe  paiTions  are  apt  to  breed  in 
others  a  fecret  contempt  of  us,  and  to  bring  our 
prudence  into  queflion,  becaufe  they  are  figns  of  a 
weak  and  impotent  mind,  that  either  hath  loil,  or 
never  had  the  government  of  itfelf. 

There  are  other  vices,  which  are  plainly  pernici- 
ous to  our  health,  and  do  naturally  bring  pains  and 
difeafes  upon  men  ;  fuch  are  intemperance  and  lull : 
and  though  fome  may  pretend  to  govern  themfelves, 
in  the  pradice  of  thefe,  with  fo  much  moderation 
and  difcretion,  as  to  prevent  the  notorious  bad  con- 
fequences  of  them,  yet  there  are  very  few  or  none 
i  that  do  fo  ;  this  is  feldom  more  than  a  fpeculation, 
and  men  that  allow  themfelves  in  any  lew^d  or  in- 
temperate courfe,  will  find  it  very  hard  to  govern 
themfelves  in  it  •,  for  after  men  have  forfeited  their 
innocence,  and  broke  in  upon  their  natural  modelly, 
they  are  apt  by  degrees  to  grow  profligate  and  de- 
fperate.  If  a  man  gives  way  but  little  to  his  own 
vicious  inclinations,  they  will  foon  get  head  of  him, 
and  no  man  knows  how  far  they  will  hurry  him  at  laft. 
Befides,  that  the  vices  I  am  fpeaking  of,  intem- 
perance and  luft,  have  other  great  inconveniencies  at- 
tcjiding  them,  they  expofe   men  more  frequently, 

tha,^ 


an  argument  for  repentance,  3^59 

than  mofl  other  vices,  to  occafions  of  quarrel,  m^^,^.^^ 
which  men  often  lofe  their  own  hves,  or  take  away  <— 
other  mens,  by  which  they  fall  under  the  danger  of 
the  law,  and  the  flroke  of  publick  juftice  -,  or  if 
they  cfcape  that,  (as  too  often  they  do)  they  can- 
not fly  from  their  own  confciences,  which  do  com- 
monly fill  them  with  the  horror  and  torment  of  fuch 
an  adtion  all  their  days  ;  fo  pernicious  are  the  ufual 
confequences  of  thefe  vices,  of  which  we  fee  fad  in- 
flances  every  day. 

Nor  are  thefe  vices  lefs  hurtful  to  mens  eflates  ; 
for  they  are  extremely  expenfive  and  wafteful,  and 
nfually  make  men  carelefs  of  all  their  bufinefs  and 
concernments,  liable  to  be  cheated  by  thofc,  whom 
they  are  forced  to  truft  with  their  affairs,  becaufe  they 
will  not  mind  them  themfelves,  and  to  be  abufed  by 
crafty  men,  who  watch  the  opportunities  of  their 
folly  and  weaknefs,  to  draw  them  into  foolifh  bar- 
gains. It  is  an  old  obfervation,  that  more  men  perifli 
by  intemperance,  than  by  the  fword  ;  and  I  believe 
it  is  as  true,  that  more  cftates  are  diflipated  and  waft- 
ed by  thefe  two  riotous  vices,  than  by  all  other  acci- 
dents whatfoever. 

And  there  is  fcarce  any  notorious  vice,  by  which 
men  do  not  greatly  fufFer  in  their  reputation  and  good 
iiame,  even  when  the  times  are  worft  and  moft  dege- 
nerate ;  any  wicked  courfe,  whether  of  debauchery 
or  injuftice,  is  a  blemifh  to  a  man's  credit,  not  only 
in  the  efteem  of  the  fober  and  virtuous,  but  even  of 
thofe  who  are  loofe  and  extravagant  -,  for  men  arc 
fooner  brought  to  pradife  what  is  bad,  than  to  ap- 
prove of  it,  and  do  generally  think  all  fin  and  wick- 
ednefs  to  be  a  ftain  upon  them,  whatever  in  a  fwag- 
gering  humour  they  may  fay  to  the  contrary.  A  clear 
evidence  of  this  is,  that  men  do  fo  fludioufly  en- 
deavour 


3^6o         T^he  unprofifablenefs  of  Jin  in  this  life, 
S  E  R  M.  deavour  to  conceal  their  vices,   and  are  fo  careful 

CLXII 

that  as  few  as  may  be  fliould  be  confcious  to  them, 
and  are  fo  confounded  if  they  be  difcovered,  and  fo 
out  of  all  patience  when  they  are  upbraided  with  them  i 
a  plain  acknowledgment,  thatthefe  things  are  fhame- 
ful  in  themfelves,  and  whatever  face  men  may  put  up- 
on things,  that  they  do  inwardly  and  at  the  bottom  of 
their  hearts  believe,  that  thefe  practices  are  deferved- 
ly  of  bad  reputation,  and  do,  in  the  general  opinion 
of  mankind,  leave  a  blot  upon  them. 

Secondly,  There  are  other  fins,  which  though  they 
are  not  ufually  attended  with  confequences  fo  pal- 
pably mifchievous,  yet  are  plainly  unprofitable,  and 
bring  no  manner  of  advantage  to  men. 

Of  this  fort  is  all  kind  of  profanenefs,  and  cufto- 
mary  fwearing  in  common  converfation,  there  is 
neither  profit  nor  pleafure  in  them.  What  doth  the 
profane  man  get  by  his  contempt  of  religion  ?'  He 
is  neither  more  refpeded  nor  better  trufted  for  this 
quahty  \  but  on  the  contrary,  it  is  many  times  really 
to  his  prejudice,  and  brings  a  great  odium  upon  him, 
not  only  from  thofe  who  fincerely  love  religion,  but 
from  others  alfo  \  though  they  are  confcious  to  them- 
felves, that  they  do  not  love  religion  as  they  ought, 
yet  they  have  a  veneration  for  it,  and  cannot  endure 
that  any  one  fliould  fpeak  fiightly  of  it. 

And  it  is  as  hard  to  imagine,  where  the  pleafure 
of  profanenefs  lies.  Men  cannot  but  at  firil  have  a 
great  relu6lancy  in  their  minds  againfi;  it,  and  muft 
offer  confiderable  violence  to  themfelves,  to  bring 
themfelves  to  it  •,  and  when  it  is  grown  more  fami- 
liar, and  their  confciences  are  become  more  feared 
and  infcnfible,  yet  whenever  they  are  alone  and  fe- 
rious,  or  when  any  af^iclion  or  calamity  is  upon 
them,  they  are  full  of  fears  and  anguilh,  their  guilt 

ftares 


an  argiimenffor  repejitance,  3  S  6 1 

(lares  them  in  the  face,  and  their  confciences  are  ra-  S  E  R  M. 
ging  and  furious. 

And  as  all  kind  of  profanenefs  is  unprofitable,  fo 
more  efpecially  cuflomary  fwearing  in  ordinary  con- 
verfation,  upon  every  occafion  of  pafTion,  or  any 
other  trivial  caufe,  nay  it  may  be  without  caufe,  out 
of  mere  habit  and  cuftom.  Now  what  can  poflibly 
be  imagined  to  be  the  profit  or  pleafure  of  this  vice  ? 
fenfual  pleafure  in  it  there  can  be  none,  becaufe  it  is 
not  founded  in  the  temper  of  the  body  :  a  man  may 
be  naturally  prone  to  anger  or  luft  •,  but  no  man  I 
think  is  born  with  a  fwearing  conflitution. 

And  there  is  as  little  profit  as  pleafure  in  it ;  for 
the  common  and  trivial  ufe  of  oaths  makes  them  per- 
fedlly  infignificant  to  their  end,  and  is  fo  far  from 
giving  credit  to  a  man's  word,  that  it  rather  weak- 
ens the  reputation  of  it. 

Thirdly,  Thofe  vices  which  pretend  to  be  of  ad- 
vantage to  us,  when  all  accounts  are  caft  up,  and  all 
circumftances  duly  confidered,  will  be  found  to  be 
quite  otherwife.  Some  vices  pretend  to  bring  in 
profit,  others  to  yield  pleafure  \  but  upon  ^  thorough 
examination  of  the  matter,  thefe  pretences  will  va- 
nifli  and  come  to  nothing. 

The  vices  v/hich  pretend  to  be  mofl  profitable  are 
covetoufnefs  and  oppreffion,  fraud  and  falfhood,  and 
perfidioufnefs  :  but  if  we  look  well  into  them,  we 
fhall  find  that  either  they  do  not  bring  the  advan- 
tages they  pretend  to  bring  ;  or  that  the  inconveni- 
encies  which  attend  them  are  as  great  or  greater,  than 
the  advantages  they  bring  ;  or  elfe  that  the  pradice 
of  the  oppofite  virtues  would  be  of  much  gitater 
advantage  to  us. 

I .  Some  of  thefe  vices  do  not  bring  the  advantages 
^  ihey  pretend  to  do.     Covetoufnefs  may  increafe  a 

man's 


T'he  unprojitabknefs  of  fm  in  this  life, 

man's  cllate,  but  it  adds  nothing  to  his  happinels 
and  contentment  -,  for  though  his  eftate  grow  never 
ib  much,  his  want  is  ftill  as  great  as  it  was  before, 
and  his  care  and  trouble  continually  greater  •,  fo  that 
fo  long  as  he  continues  covetous,  the  more  rich,  the 
lefs  happy. 

And  then  for  fraud  and  falfhood  ;  they  are  not  of 
that  real  and  lading  advantage,  that  cunning  but 
fhort-fighted  men  are  apt  to  imagine.  Nothing  is 
truer  than  that  of  Solomon,  "  the  lying  tongue  is 
*'  but  for  a  moment."  A  man  can  pra(51:ife  the  arts  of 
fallKood  and  deceit  but  for  a  little  while,  before  they 
will  be  difcovered  *,  and  when  they  are  difcovered, 
they  are  fo  far  from  being  any  advantage  to  him, 
that  they  turn  to  his  prejudice,  and  the  cunning  man 
begins  to  be  in  a  bad  cafe,  and  he  that  was  wont  to 
over-reach  others,  is  at  laft  caught  himfelf. 

2.  Several  of  thefe  vices  are  attended  with  incon- 
veniencies,  as  great  or  greater  than  the  advantages 
they  bring.  If  a  man  increafe  his  eftate  by  injuftice 
and  oppreflion,  yet  he  lofeth  his  reputation.  Befidea 
that  all  fraudulent  arid  unjuft  courfes  are  apt  to  en- 
tangle a  man  in  a  great  many  inconveniencies,  and  to 
expofe  him  to  troublefom  fuits,  for  the  keeping  of 
what  he  hath  unjuftly  gotten  ;  it  is  very  often  feen, 
that  what  is  gotten  by  injuftice  is  fpent  in  law  ,  and 
though  it  may  be  thofe  whom  he  hath  Wronged  never 
recover  their  right,  yet  firft  or  laft  the  unjuft  man 
is  put  to  more  trouble  and  vexation  about  it,  than 
the  thing  is  worth.  This  Solomon  obferves,  Prov. 
XV.  1 6.  *'  In  the  revenue  of  the  wicked  there  is^ 
"  trouble." 

The  perfidious  man  by  betraying  a  friend  or  a 
trull:,  may  perhaps  make  fome  prcfent  advantage  : 
but  then  by  fuch  a  vilUiny  he  makes  himfelf  odious 

to 


an  argiime?it  for  repentance.  3  8  6  -? 

to  all  mankind,  and  by  this  means,  at  one  time  or  S  E  R  M. 
other,  prevents  himfclf  of  greater  advantages  which 
he  might  have  had  another  way  ;  and  perhaps  at 
laft  is  miferably  crufhed  by  thofe  whom  he  betrayed, 
who,  in  the  change  and  revolution  of  human  affairs, 
may  fome  time  or  other  have  the  opportunity  of  be- 
ing revenged.     Or  t\^e^ 

3.  The  pradlice  of  the  oppofite  virtues  would 
be  of  far  greater  advantage  to  us. 

Truth  and  fidelity  are  in  common  experience  found 
to  be  a  better  and  furer  way  of  thriving,  and  more 
like  to  laft  and  hold  out,  than  fraud  and  falfhood  ; 
and  as  honefty  is  a  furer  way  of  raifing  an  eflate,  {o 
it  brings  along  with  it  greater  fecurity  of  the  quiet 
enjoyment  of  it.  There  is  never  any  real  occafion, 
and  feldom  any  colour  and  pretence  of  bringing  fuch 
a  man  into  trouble  ;  for  which  reafon  Solomon  fays, 
^'  Better  is  the  little  which  the  righteous  man  hath, 
*'  than  great  pofTefTions  without  right  :"  becaufe, 
though  it  be  but  little,  yet  it  will  wear  like  fleel,  and 
he  is  like  to  enjoy  it  quietly,  'and  may  increafe  it  ; 
whereas  the  unjuft  man  is  continually  in  danger  of 
lofing  what  he  hath  gotten. 

And  if  this  be  the  cafe,  it  is  very  plain,  that  thofe 
vices  which  pretend  to  bring  tlie  greatefl  advantage, 
are  really  unprofitable  ;  and  to  thefe  kind  of  vices 
the  text  feems  to  point  more  particularly  -,  *'  if  any 
*'  fay,  I  have  finned,  and  perverted  that  which  was 
"  right,  and  it  profited  me  not,  &c.*' 

But  perhaps  though  there  be  no  profit  in  any  fln- 
ful  courfe,  yet  there  may  be  fome  pleafure.  That 
comes  next  to  be  examined  ^  and  I  doubt  not  to  make 
it  evident,  that  there  is  no  fuch  pleafure  in  fin,  as 
can  make  it  a  reafonable  temptation  to  any  man  to 
venture  upon  it.     The  vices  which  pretend  to  bring 

Vol.  IX.  19  C  the 


3  S64    •       77j^  iinpr  0 fit  able  nefs  offm  in  this  life^ 

S  E  P  M.  the  greatefl  pleafure,    are  lewdnefs,  and  intempe- 
rance, and  revenge. 

The  two  firil  of  thefe  are  the  higheft  pretenders 
to  pleafure  :  but  God  knows,  and  the  fmner  himfelf 
knows,  how  thin  and  tranfitory  this  pleafure  is,  how 
much  trouble  attends  it,  and  how  many  fighs  and 
groans  follow  it,  and  whatever  pleafure  they  may 
minifter  to  the  fenfe,  they  bring  a  great  deal  of  an- 
guifh  and  perplexity  to  the  mind  \  fo  that  the  trou- 
ble which  they  caufe,  does  more  than  countervail 
the  pleafure  which  they  bring  :  and  they  do  not  on- 
ly difturb  the  mind,  but  they  difeafe  the  body.  How 
many  are  there,  who  for  the  gratifying  of  an  inor- 
dinate lull,  and  for  the  incomprehenfible  pleafure  of 
a  drunken  fit,  have  endured  the  violent  burnings  of 
a  fever,  or  elfc  have  confumed  the  remainder   of 
their  days  in  languifhing  ficknefs  and  pain  ? 

And  the  reafon  of  all  this  is  plain,  becaufe  all  the 
pleafures  of  fin  are  violent,  and  forced,  and  unna- 
tural, and  therefore  not  like  to  continue  -,  they  are 
founded  in  fome  difeafe  and  diilemper  of  our  minds, 
and  therefore  always  end  in  pain  and  fmart. 

And  as  for  revenge  ♦,  it  is  indeed  a  very  eager  and 
impatient  dcfire  :  but  fo  far  furely  from  being  a 
pleafure,  that  the  very  thoughts  of  it  are  extremely 
troublefom,  and  raife  as  great  ftorms  in  the  mind  of 
a  man,  as  any  paflion  whatfoever :  and  I  never  heard 
of  the  pleafure  of  being  in  a  ftorm  \  it  is  pleafant 
indeed  to  be  out  of  it,  when  others  are  in  it.  And 
when  revenge  hath  fatisfied  itfelf,  and  laid  it's  ene- 
my bleeding  at  it's  foot,  the  man  that  executed  it 
commonly  repents  himfelf  the  next  moment,  and 
woukl  give  all  the  world  to  undo  what  he  hath 
done  •,  fo  that  if  tlierc  be  any  pleafure  in  revenge, 
it  is  fo  flitting  and  of  io  fhort  a  continuance,  that 
3.  we 


an  argument  for  repentance,  386^ 

we  know  not  where  to  fix  it :  for  there  is  nothing  but  ^  '^-  ^  M. 
tumult  and  rage  before  the  execution  of  it,  and  after 
it  nothing  but  remorfe  and  horror  •,  fo  that  if  it  be  a 
pleafure,  it  is  but  of  one  moment's  continuance,  and 
lafls  no  longer  than  the  acl  is  a  doing  -,  and  what 
man  in  his  wits  would  purchafe  fo  fhort  a  pleafare  at 
fo  dear  a  price  ?  This  is  moft  certainly  true,  and  if 
it  were  well  confidered,  fuilicient  to  convince  any 
reafonable  man  of  the  unrcafonablenefs  of  this  paiTion. 
Cain  is  a  fearful  inftance  of  this  kind,  who  after 
he  had  drawn  his  brother  into  the  field,  and  flain 
him  there,  how  was  he  tormented  with  the  guilt  of 
what  he  had  done,  and  forced  to  cry  out,  "  my  pu- 
*'  nifhment  is  greater  than  I  can  bear,"  (or  as  fome 
tranllations  render  the  words)    "  mine  iniquity  is 
''  greater  than  that  it  can  be  forgiven !"  Gen.  iv.  13. 
*'  From  thy  face,  (fays  he  to  God,  in  the  anguifh 
of  his  foul)  "  from  thy  face  fhall  I  be   hid,  and  I 
*'  fhall  be  a  fugitive  and  a  vagabond  in  the  earth  ; 
"  and  it  fhall  come  to  pafs  that  every  one  that  find- 
''  cth  me  fliall  flay  me,  v.  14.  Every  one  that  find- 
"  eth  me,"  how  fearful  did  his  guilt  make  him !  when 
probably  there  was  then  but  one  man  in  the  world  be- 
fides  himfelf.     And  I  may  fay  of  this  fort  of  men,  as 
St.  Jude  does  of  thofe  in  his  time,  Jude  v.  11.  *'  Wo 
''  unto  them,  for  they  have  gone  in  the  way  of  Cain," 
they  are  guilty  of  his  crime,and  his  doom  fliall  be  theirs. 
And  here  I  cannot  but  take  notice  of  a  great  evil 
that  grows  daily  upon  us,  and  therefore  deferves  with 
the  greatefl  feverity  to  be  difcountenanced  and  pu- 
nifhed,  I  mean  that  of  duels,  than  which  what  can 
be  more  unchriftian  }  And  what  can  be  more  unrea- 
fonable,  than  for  men  upon  deliberation,  and  after 
the  heat  of  paffion  is  over,  to  refoive  to  fhcath  their 
fwords  in  one  another's  bowelsjOnly  for  ahafly  word  ? 

19  C  2  And 


3866  ^he  nnprojitablenef\  of  fm  in  this  life^ 

S  E  R  M.   And  which  is  yet  more  unreafonable,  that  becaufe 

CLX II. 

two  men  are  angry,  and  have  quarrelled  with  one 
another,  and  vvill  fight  it  out,  that  therefore  two 
more,  who  have  no  quarrel,  no  kind  of  difpleafurc 
againfl:  one  another,  mufl  light  too,  and  kill  one 
another  if  they  can  for  no  rcafon,  and  upon  no  pro- 
vocation. Thcfe  falfe  rules  of  honour  v/ill  not  pafs 
in  another  world  in  the  higbeft  and  greateft  court  of 
honour,  from  whence  there  is  no  appeal. 

I  fhall  conclude  this  whole  argument  with  that  ex- 
cellent faying  of  Cato,  reported  in  A.  Gellius,  "  co- 
gitate cum  animis  veftris,    &c."   '^  confider  (fays 
he)  with  yourfelves,  if  ye  be  at  any  trouble  and 
pain  to  do  a  good  adion,  the  trouble  will  be  foon 
over  ;  but  the  pleafure  and  comfort  of  what  ye 
have  done  well,  abides  with  you  all  your  days  : 
but  if  to  gratify  yourfelves,    you  do  any  thing 
that  is  wicked,  the  pleafure  will  quickly  vanifh  \ 
but  the  guilt  of  it  will  ftick  by  you  for  ever.'* 
And  is  it  not  then  much  better  to  prevent  all  this 
trouble,  by  denying  ourfelves  thefe  finful  pleafures, 
which  will  follow^  us  with  guilt  whilft  we  live,  and 
fill  us  with  horror  and  dcfpair  when  we  come  to  die  } 
I  fhall  now  make  fome  reflexions  upon  what  has 
been  delivered,  and  fo  conclude. 

Firff,  What  hath  been  faid  upon  this  argument, 
ought  particularly  to  move  thofe  who  have  fo  great  a 
confideration  of  this  prefent  life,  and  the  temporal 
happinefs  of  it,  that  the  pradice  of  all  virtues  is  a 
friend  to  their  temporal,  as  well  as  eternal  welfare, 
and  all  vice  is  an  enemy  to  both. 

Secondly,  This  likewife  takes  off  all  manner  of 
excufe  from  fin  and  vice.  It  pretends  not  to  ferve 
the  foul,  and  to  profit  our  future  happinefs  in  another 
wo;-ld  i  and  if  it  be  an  enemy  alio  to  our  prefent 

wel- 


an  arguynent  for  repejitance,  3S67 

welfare  in  this  world,  what  is  there  to  be  faid  for  it  ?  S  E  R  M. 

CLXII 

Thirdly,  (which  I  defirc  to  infift  a  little  longer 
upon)  all  the  arguments  which  I  have  ufed,  to  con- 
vince men  of  the  folly  of  a  wicked  courfe,  are  fo 
many  flrong  and  unanfwerable  reafons  for  repentance  -, 
for  when  a  man  is  convinced, that "  he  hath  done  fool- 
ifhly,  and  to  his  own  prejudice,  that  he  hath  finned, 
*'  and  that  it  profited  him  not,"  what  can  he  do 
lefs,  than  to  be  heartily  forry  for  it,  and  afhamed  of 
it,  and  refolved  to  do  better  for  the  future  ?  Nothing 
furely  is  more  reafonable  than  repentance  \  and  yet 
how  hard  is  it  to  bring  men  to  it  ?  Either  men  will 
miftake  the  nature  of  it,  and  not  do  it  effedlually ; 
or  they  will  delay  it,  and  not  do  it  in  time. 

I.   Men  miftake  the  nature  of  repentance  ;  and 
there  are  two  great  miflakes  about  it. 

I.  Of  thofe  who  make  the  great  force  and  virtue 
of  it  to  confift,  not  fo  much  in  the  refolution  of  the 
penitent,  as  in  the  abfolution  of  the  prieft.  And 
this  the  church  of  Rome,  in  their  do6lrine  concern- 
ing repentance,  does.  For  their  facrament  of  pe- 
nance (as  they  call  it)  they  make  to  conflft  of  two 
parts  ;  the  matter  of  it,  which  con  fills  in  thefe  three 
adls  of  the  penitent,  confefTion,  contrition,  and  fa- 
tisfa(5tion  ;  and  the  form  of  it,  which  is  the  abfolu- 
tion of  the  priefl,  in  which  they  make  the  main  vir- 
tue and  force  of  repentance  to  confift  ;  in  qua  pra- 
cipue  ipfiiis  vis  fit  a  eft^  are  the  very  words  of  the 
council  of  Trent.  And  here  is  a  wide  difference 
betwixt  us  ♦,  for  though  the  comfort  of  the  penitent 
may  in  fome  cafe  confift  in  the  abfolution  of  the 
prieft,  yet  the  virtue  and  efficacy  of  repentance  does 
not  at  all  confift  in  it,  but  wholly  in  the  contrition 
and  fincere  refolution  of  the  penitent,  as  the  fcripture 
every  where  declares  :  and  to  think  otherwife,  is  of 

dancTcrous 


T'he  unprqfiiableJiefs  of  fin  in  this  lifcy 

dangerous  confcquence ;  bccaiife  it  encouragcth  men 
to  hope  for  the  benefit  of  repentance,  that  is,  the  par- 
don and  forgivcnefs  of  their  fins,  without  having 
truly  repented.  And  indeed  the  council  of  Trent  have 
fo  framed  their  do6lrines  in  this  point,  that  any  one 
may  fee,  that  they  did  not  matter  how  much  they 
abated  on  the  part  of  the  penitent,  provided  the 
power  of  the  prieft  be  but  advanced,  and  kept  up  in 
it's  full  height. 

2.  I'he  other  miftake  is  of  thofe,  who  make  re- 
pentance to  confift  in  the  bare  refolution  of  amend- 
ment, though  it  never  has  it's  effedl ;  that  is,  though 
the  finner  either  do  not  what  he  refolved,  or  do  it 
only  for  a  fit,  and  during  his  prefent  trouble  and 
convi6lion. 

There  is  one  cafe  indeed,  and  but  one,  wherein 
a  refolution  not  brought  to  effecfl  is  available,  and 
that  is,  when  nothing  hinders  the  performance  and 
execution  of  it,  but  only  want  of  time  and  opportuni- 
ty for  it  •,  when  the  repentance  is  fincere,  and  the  re- 
folution real,  but  the  man  is  cut  off  between  the 
aftual  reformation  which  he  intended,  and  which 
God,  who  fees  things  certainly  in  their  caufes,  knows 
would  have  followed,  if  the  man  had  hved  to  give 
dcmonflration  of  it.  But  this  is  nothins;  to  thofe 
who  have  the  opportunity  to  make  good  their  refo- 
lution, and  do  not  :  for,  becaufe  the  refolution 
which  would  have  been  performed,  had  there  been 
time  and  opportunity,  is  reckoned  for  a  true  repent- 
ance, and  accepted  of  God  as  if  it  had  been  done  ; 
tliereiore  the  refolution  which  was  not  brought  to 
cffedl  when  there  was  time  and  opportunity  for  it, 
hath  not  the  nature  of  true  reoentance,  nor  will  it  be 
accepted  of  God. 

I  will  add  but  one  thing  more  upon  this  head,  be- 
caufe 


an  argument  for  repentance,  3  S  6  9 

caufe  I  doubt  it  is  not  always  fufficiently  confidered  ;  S  E  R  M, 
and  that  is  this,  that   a  fincere  refolution  of  a  better 
courfe  does  imply  a  refolution  of  the  means,  as  well 
as  of  the  end  ;  he  that  is  truly  refolved  againfl  any 
fin,  is  likewife   refolved   againfl   the  occafions  and 
temptations  that  would  lead  and  draw  him  to  it  ; 
other  wife  he  hath  taken  up  a  rafli  and  foolifli  re  folia- 
tion, which  he  is  not  like  to  keep,  becaufe  he  did  not 
refolve  upon  that  which  was  necelfary  to  the  keeping 
of  it.  So  he  that  refolves  upon  any  part  of  his  duty, 
mufl  likewife  refolve  upon  the  means  which  are  ne- 
celfary to  the  difcharge  and  performance  of  it ;  he 
that  is  refolved  to  be  jufl  in  his  dealing,  and  to  pay 
his  debts,  muil  be  diligent  in  his  calling,  and  mind 
his  bufinefs,   becaufe  without  this  he  cannot  do  the 
other  \  for  nothing  can  be  more  vain  and  fond,  thaa 
for  a  man  to  pretend  that  he  is  refolved  upon  doing 
his  duty,  when  he  negledls  any  thing  that  is  neceffa- 
ry  to  put  him  into  a  capacity,  and  to  further  him  in 
the  difcharge  of  it.     This  is,  as  if  a  man  Ihould  re- 
folve to  be  well,  and  yet  never  take  phyfick,  or  be 
carelefs  in  obferving  the  rules  which  are  prefcribed 
in  order  to  his  health.     So  for  a  man  to  refolve  a-^ 
gainft  drunkennefs,  and  yet  to  run  himfelf  upon  the 
temptations  which  naturally  lead  to  it,  by  frequent- 
ing the  company  of  lewd  and  intemperate  perfons, 
this  is,  as  if  a  man  fhould  refolve  againfl  the  plague, 
and  run  into  the  pefl-houfe.    Whatever  can  reafona- 
bly  move  a  man  to  be  refolved  upon  any  end,  will, 
if  this  refolution  be  wife  and  honefl,  determine  him 
as  flrongly  to  ufe  the  means  which  arc  proper  and 
necelfary  to  that  end. 

Thefc  arc  the  common  miftakes  about  this  mat- 
ter, which  men  are  the  more  willing   to  run  into, 
becaufe  they  are  loth  to  be  brought  to  a  true  repent- 
ance j 


ogyo         The  unprojitablefiefs  of  Jin  in  this  life, 

E  R  M.  ance  ;  the  nature  whereof  is  not  difficult  to  be  un- 
^^^"'    derftood,  (for  nothing  in  the  world  is  plainer  -,)  on- 
ly men  are  always  flow  to  underftand  what  they  have 
no  mind  to  put  in  pra6lice.     But, 

II.  Befidcs  thefe  miilakes  about  repentance,  there 
is  another  great  mifcarriage  in  this  matter,  and  that 
is  the  delay  of  repentance  ♦,  men  are  loth  to  fet  about 
it,  and  therefore  they  put  it  upon  their  laft  hazard, 
and  refolve  then  to  huddle  it  up  as  well  as  they  can  : 
but  this  certainly  is  great  folly,  to  be  ftill  making 
more  work  for  repentance,  becaufe  it  is  to  create  fo 
much  needlels  trouble  and  vexation  to  ourfelves  ;  it 
is  to  go  on  ftill  in  playing  a  foolifli  part,  in  hopes  to 
retrieve  all  by  an  after-game  ;  this  is  extremely  dan- 
gerous, becaufe  we  may  certainly  fin,  but  it  is  not 
certain  we  fliall  repent,  our  repentance  may  be  pre- 
vented, and  we  may  be  cut  off  in  our  fins  ;  but  if 
we  fhould  have  fpace  for  it,  repentance  may  in  pro- 
cefs  of  time  grow  an  hundred  times  more  difficult 
than  it  is  at  prefent. 

But  if  it  were  much  more  certain,  and  more  eafy 
than  it  is,  if  it  were  nothing  but  a  hearty  forrow  and 
fhame  for  our  fins,  and  an  aflcing  God  forgivenefs 
for  them,  without  being  put  to  the  trouble  of  re- 
forming our  wicked  lives,  yet  this  were  great  folly, 
to  do  thofe  things  which  will  certainly  grieve  us  af- 
ter we  have  done  them,  and  put  us  to  lliame,  and 
to  afk  forgivenefs  for  them.  It  was  well  fiid  of  old 
Cato,  «^  tu  ftultus  es  hcmuncio,  qui  malts  vemam 
'pncariy  quam  nonpeccare  %  ^^  thou  art  a  foolifli  maa 
"  indeed,  who  chufeft  rather  to  afk  forgivenefs, 
*'  than  not  to  offend." 

At  the  beft,  repentance  implies  a  fault  •,  it  is  an 
after- wifyiom,  which  fuppofcth  a  man  at  firft  to  have 
plaid  the  fool  \  it  is  but  the  beft  end  of  a  bad  bufi- 

ncfs  5 


an  argument  for  repentance,  3871 

bufinefs  ;  a  hard  fhift,  and  a  defperate  hazard,  which  S  E  R  M 
a  man  that  had  aded  prudently  would  never  have 
been  put  to  ;  it  is  a  plaifter  after  we  have  dangeroufly 
wounded  ourfelves  :  but  certainly  it  had  been  much 
wifer,  to  have  prevented  the  danger  of  the  wound, 
and  the  pain  of  curing  it.  A  wife  man  would  not 
make  himfelf  fickif  he  could,  or  if  he  were  already 
fo,  would  not  make  himfelf  ficker,  though  he  had 
the  mod  efFedlual  and  infallible  remedy  in  the  world 
in  his  power  :  but  this  is  not  the  cafe  of  a  Tinner,  for 
repentance  as  well  as  faith  is  the  gift  of  God.  ^ 

Above  all,  let  me  caution  you,  not  to  put  off  ^ 
this  great  and  ncceflary  work,  to  the  molt  unfeafon- 
able  time  of  all  other,  the  time  of  iicknefs  and  death, 
upon  a  fond  prefumption,  that  you  can  be  reconciled 
to  God  when  you  pleafe,  and  exercife  fuch  a  repent- 
ance as  will  make  your  peace  with  him  at  any  time. 

I  am  heartily  afraid,  that  a  very  great  part  of 
mankind  do  mifcarry  upon  this  confidence,  and  arc 
fwallowed  up  in  the  gulf  of  eternal  perdition,  with 
this  plank  in  their  arms.  The  common  cultom  is 
(and  I  fear  it  is  too  common)  when  the  phyfician 
hath  given  over  his  patient,  then,  and  not  till  then, 
to  fend  for  the  minifler  \  not  fo  much  to  enquire  in- 
to the  man's  condition,  and  to  give  him  fuitable  ad- 
vice, as  to  minifler  comfort,  and  to  fpeak  peace  to 
him  at  a  venture. 

But  let  me  tell  you,  that  herein  you  put  an  ex- 
treme difficult  tafk  upon  us,  in  expecting  that  we 
fhould  pour  wine  and  oil  into  the  wound  before  it  be 
fearched,  and  fpeak  fmooth  and  comfortable  things 
to  a  man,  that  is  but  juft  brought  to  a  fcnfe  of  the 
long  courfe  of  a  lewd  and  wicked  life,  impenitently 
continued  in.  Alas  !  what  comfort  can  we  give  to 
men  in  fuch  a  cafe  ?  Wc  are  loth  to  drive  them  to  dc- 

VoL.  IX,  19  D  fpairj^ 

3 


The  unprofitablenefs  of  fm  in  this  life, 

fpair  •,  and  yet  we  mtift  not  deftroy  them  by  prcfump- 
tion  ;  pity  and  good  nature  do  ftrongly  tempt  us  to 
make  the  beft  of  their  cafe,  and  to  givT  them  all  the 
little  hopes,  which  with  any  kind  of  reafon  wc  can, 
and  God  knows  it  is  but  very  little  that  we  can  give 
to  fuch  perfons  upon  good  ground  \  for  it  all  de- 
pends upon  the  degree  and  fincerky  of  their  repent- 
ance, which  God  only  knows,  and  we  can  but  guefs 
at.  We  can  eafily  tell  them  what  they  ought  to  have 
done,  and  what  they  fhould  do  if  they  were  to  live 
longer,  and  what  is  the  beft  that  they  can  do  in  thofe 
ftraights  into  which  they  have  brought  themfelves, 
viz.  to  exercife  as  deep  a  forrow  and  repentance  fon 
their  fins  as  is  pofTible,  and  to  cry  mightily  to  God 
for  mercy,  in  and  through  the  merit  of  our  blefied 
Saviour.  But  how  far  this  will  be  available  inthefe 
circumftances  we  cannot  tell  \  becaufe  we  do  not 
know,  whether  if  the  man  had  hved  longer,  this 
repentance  and  thefe  refolutions  which  he  now  de- 
clares of  a  better  courfe,  would  have  been  good. 

And  after  all  is  done  that  can  be  done  in  fo  fhort  a 
time,  and  in  fuch  circumftances  of  confufion  and  dif- 
order,  as  commonly  attend  dying  perfons,  I  doubt 
the  refult  of  all  will  be  this  •,  that  there  is  much 
more  ground  of  fear  than  hope  concerning  them  ; 
nay  perhaps,  while  we  are  prefiing  the  dying  finner 
to  repentance,  and  he  is  bungling  about  it,  he  ex- 
pires in  great  doubt  and  perplexity  of  mind  what 
will  become  of  him  •,  or  if  his  eyes  be  clofed  with 
more  comfortable  hopes  of  his  condition,  the  next 
time  he  opens  them  again,  he  may  find  his  fearful 
miftake,  like  the  rich  man  in  the  parable,  who 
when  he  was  *'  in  hell,  lift  up  his  eyes  being  in 
"  torment." 

This  is  a  very  difmd  and  melancholy  confideration^ 
^  and 


an  argument  for  repentance.  3^73 

and  commands  all  men  prefentiy  to  repent,  and  not  S  E  R  ^ 
to  put  off  the  main  work  of  their  Uves  to  the  end  of  u— y*— 
them,  and  the  time  of  ficknefs  and  old  age.  Let 
us  not  offer  up  a  carcafs  to  God  inftead  of  a  Uving 
and  acceptable  facrifice :  but  let  us  turn  to  God,  in 
the  days  of  our  health  and  ftrength,  *•  before  the 
"  evil  days  come,  and  the  years  draw  nigh,  of  which 
*'  we  fhall  lay  we  have  no  pleafure  in  them  ;  before 
"  the  fun  and  the  moon  and  the  ffars  be  darkned  ;'* 
as  Solomon  elegantly  expreffeth  it,  Ecclef.  xii.  i,  2. 
before  all  the  comforts  of  life  be  gone,  before  our 
faculties  be  all  ceafed  and  fpent,  before  our  under- 
ftandings  be  too  weak,  and  our  wills  too  flrong  ; 
our  underftandings  be  too  weak  for  confidcration,and 
the  deliberate  exercife  of  repentance,  and  our  wills 
too  ftrong  and  fciff  to  be  bent  and  bowed  to  it. 

Let  us  not  deceive  ourfelvcs,  heaven  is  not  an  % 
hofpital  made  to  receive  all  fick  and  aged  perfons, 
that  can  but  put  up  a  faint  requeft  to  be  admitted 
there  ;  no,  no,  they  are  never  like  to  fee  the  king- 
dom of  God,  who  inftead  of  feeking  it  in  the  firft 
place,  make  ic  their  laft  refuge  and  retreat ;  and 
when  they  find  the  fentence  of  death  upon  them, 
only  to  avoid  prefcnt  execution,  do  bethink  them- 
felves  of  getting  to  heaven,  and  fince  there  is  no 
other  remedy,  are  contented  to  petition  the  great 
king  and  judge  of  the  world,  that  they  may  be 
tranfported  thither. 

Upon  all  thefe  confiderations,  let  us  ufe  no  delay 
in  a  matter  of  fuch  mighty  confcquence  to  our  eter- 
nal happinefs,  but  let  the  counfel  which  was  given  to 
Nebuchadnezzar  be  acceptable  to  us  •,  let  us  "  break 
*'  off  our  fins  by  righteoufnefs,  and  our  iniquities 
"  by  fliewing  mercy  to  the  poor  ;  if  fo  be  it  may 
**  be  a  lengthening  of  our  tranquillity."  Repentance 

19  D  ^^  and 


\ 


3^874      ^^^  unprofitablenefs  of  Jin  in  this  life^  Sec, 
5  E  R  M.  and  alms  do  well  too;ether  :  "  let  us  break  off  oiir 

CLXII  . 

**  fins  by  right eoufnefs,  and  our  iniquities  by  fhew- 
**  ing  mercy  to  the  poor;'*  efpecially  upon  this 
great  occafion,  which  his  majefty's  great  goodnefs 
to  thofe  diftrefTed  ftrangers,  that  have  taken  fandua- 
ry  among  us,  hath  lately  prefented  us  withal,  "  re- 
**  membring  that  we  alfo  are  in  the  body,"  and 
liable  to  the  like  fufferings  •,  and  confidering  on  the 
one  hand,  that  gracious  promife  of  our  Lord, 
"  Bleffed  are  the  merciful,  for  they  fhall  receive 
*'  mercy  ;"  and  on  the  other  hand,  that  terrible 
threatening  in  St.  James,  "  He  fhall  have  judg* 
"  ment  without  mercy,  that  hathfliewed  no  mercy.'* 
To  conclude,  from  all  that  hath  been  faid,  let  us 
take  up  a  preicnt  refolution  of  a  better  courfe,  and 
enter  immediately  upon  it,  "  to  day  whilft  it  is  call- 
*'  en  to  day,  left  any  of  you  be  hardened  through 
"  the  deceitfulnefs  of  fin.  O  that  men  were  wife, 
"  that  they  underftood  this,  that  they  would  confi- 
"  der  their  latter  end  !  And  grant  we  befeech  thee 
Almighty  God,  that  we  may  all  know  and  do, 
in  this  our  day,  the  things  which  belong  to  our 
peace,  for  thy  mercy's  fake  in  Jesus  Christ, 
to  whom  with  thee,  O  Father,  and  the  Holy 
*'  Ghoft,  be  ajl  honour  and  glory  now  and  for  ever.'* 
Amen. 


<e 


SER. 


3875 
SERMON    CLXIII. 

The  fliamefulnefs  of  fin,  an  argument 
for  repentance. 


ROM.  vi.  21,  22. 

JVhat  fruit  had  ye  then  in  thofe  things^  whereof  ye 
are  now  afhamed  ?  For  the  end  of  thofe  things  is 
death.  But  now  being  made  free  from  fin^  and 
become  fervants  to  God,  ye  have  your  fruit  unto 
holinefs^  and  the  end  everlafiing  life, 

THERE  are  two  pafTions  which  do  always 
in  fome  degree  or  other  accompany  a  true  S  E  R  M; 
repentance,  viz.     Sorrow  and  fiiame  for  our  fins  ;  ._-^-l/ 
becaufe  thefe  are  neceflary  to  engage  men  to  a  refo-  TJ^e  firftj 
lution  of  making  that  change  wherein   repentance  l\^^^y^ 
does  confift  :  for  till  we  are  heartily  forry  for  what 
we  have  done,  and  afhamed  of  the  evil  of  it,  it  is 
not  likely  that  we  ihould  ever  come  to  a  firm  and 
fteady  purpofe  of  forfaking  our  evil  ways,  and  be- 
taking ourfelves  to  a  better  courfe. 

And  thefe  two  pafTions  of  forrow  and  fliame  for 
our  fins,  were  wont  anciently  to  be  fignified  by  thofe 
outward  expreflions  of  humiliation  and  repentance, 
wliich  we  find  fo  frequently  mentioned  in  fcripture, 
of  "  being  clothed  in  fackcloth"  as  a  teflimony  of 
our  forrow  and  mourning  for  our  fins,  and  of  '*  be- 
**  ing  fprinkled  upon  the  head,  and  covered  over 
*'  with  filth  and  dirt,  with  dufl  and  afhes,"  in  token 
of  our  fhame  and  confufion  of  face  for  all  our  iniqui- 
ties and  tranfgrelTions.  Hence  are  thofe  exprelTiona 
in  fcripture  of  "  repenting  in  fackcloth  and  aflies,  of 
"  lying  down  in  our  fliame,  and  being  covered  with 

*'  confufion,'* 


n^y6  ^he  Jloamefuhiefs  of  Jin  ^ 

SERM.  *'  confufion,"  in  token  of  their  great  forrow  and 
^LXHL^  fhame  for  the  manifold  and  heinous  fins,  which  they 
had  been  guilty  of. 

Of  the  former  of  thefe,  viz.  trouble  and  forrow 
*  SERM.  for  ouD  fins,  I  have  very  lately  *  treated  ;  and  of  the 
^^^^-  latter,  I  intend  now  by  God's  alTiftance  to  fpeak,  viz. 
fhame  for  our  fins,  and  that  from  thefe  words  which 
I  have  recited  to  you  \  "  what  fruit  had  ye  then  in 
*'  thofe  things  V^  &c.  In  which  words  the  apoftle 
makes  a  comparifon  between  an  holy  and  virtuous, 
and  a  finful  and  vicious  courfe  of  life,  and  fets  before 
us  a  perfedl  enumeration  of  the  manifefl  inconveni- 
encics  of  the  one,  and  the  manifold  advantages  of  the 
other. 

Firft,  The  manifefl  inconveniencies  of  a  vicious 
and  finful  courfe  i  and  the  apoftle  mentions  thefe 
three. 

I.  It  is  unprofitable.  It  brings  no  manner  of  prc- 
fent  benefit  and  advantage  to  us,  if  all  things  be  right- 
ly calculated  and  confidered.  "  What  fruit  had  ye 
"  then  in  thofe  things  ?"  Then  (i.e.)  at  the  time 
when  you  committed  thofe  fins,  had  you  any  prcfent 
advantage  by  them  ?  No,  certainly  ;  but  quite  con- 
trary. 

II.  The  rcfle(5lion  upon  our  fins  afterwards  is 
caufe  of  Ihame  and  confufion  to  us  -,  "  What  fruit 
"  had  ye  then  in  thofe  things,  whereof  ye  are  now 
"  afiiamed?" 

III.  The  final  ifiue  and  confequence  of  thefe  things 
is  very  difmal  and  miferable  \  "  the  end  of  thofe 
"  things  is  death."  Let  us  put  thefe  things  toge- 
ther, and  fee  what  they  amount  to :  No  fruit  then 
when  ye  did  thefe  things,  and  fhame  now  when  ye 
come  afterwards  to  refied  upon  them,  and  death  and 
mifery  at  the  lafl. 

Secondly, 


an  argument  for  repent ajice,  -3^77 

Secondly,  Here  is  likewife  on  the  other  hand  re-  S  E  R  M. 

CLXIII 

prefented  to  us  the  manifold  benefits  of  an  holy  and 
virtuous  hfe.     And  that  upon  thefe  two  accounts. 

I.  Of  the  prefent  benefit  of  it,  which  the  apoftle 
calls  here,  fruit  •,  "ye  have  your  fruit  unto  hohnefs." 

II.  In  refpe6l  of  the  future  reward  of  it;  "  and 
"  the  end  evejrlafting  life."  Here  is  a  confiderable 
earneft  in  hand,  and  a  mighty  recompence  afterwards, 
infinitely  beyond  the  proportion  of  our  beft  anions 
and  fervices,  both  in  refped:  of  the  greatnefs  and  the 
duration  of  it,  "  evcrlafting  life  ;*'  for  a  few  tranfient 
and  very  imperfe6l  a6lions  of  obedience,  a  perfet^ 
and  immutable  and  endlefs  ftateof  happinefs.  I  fhall 
begin  with  the 

Firft  of  the  two  general  heads,  viz.  the  manifefl 
inconveniencies  of  a  finful  and  vicious  courfe  \  and 
the  apollle  I  told  you  in  the  text  takes  notice  of  three. 

I.  It  is  unprofitable,  and  if  all  things  be  rightly 
calculated  and  confidered,  it  brings  no  manner  of  pre- 
fent advantage  and  benefit  to  us.  "  What  fruit  had 
"  ye  then  in  thofe  things  ?"  Then  (i.  e.)  when  yc 
committed  thofe  fins,  had  you  any  prefent  advantage 
by  them  .^  No,  certainly,  quite  contrary  ;  as  if  the 
apoflle  had  faid,  if  you  ferioufiy  refle6l  upon  your 
former  courfe  of  impiety  and  fin,  wherein  you  have 
continued  fo  long,  you  cannot  but  acknowledge  that 
it  brought  no  manner  of  advantage  to  you  ^  and 
when  all  accounts  are  truly  caft  up,  you  mull,  if  you 
will  confefs  the  truth,  own  that  you  were  in  no  fort 
gainers  by  it :  For  the  words  are  a  jw,s:wcr^^j  and  the 
apoflle  plainly  intends  more  than  he  exprefiTeth, 
>*'  What  fruit  had  ye  then  in  thofe  things  ?"  (i.  e.)'" 
the  wicked  courfe  which  ye  formerly  lived  in,  was  fo 
far  from  being  any  ways  beneficial  to  you,  that  it 
was  on  the  contrary  upon  all  accounts  extKmely  ta 
your  prejudice  and  difadvantage.  And 


«  8  7  8  ^be  fiamefiilnefs  of  Jin^ 

^  E  R  M.  And  this  is  not  only  true  in  refped  of  the  final 
^Lxn^  j^^^  ^^^  confequence  of  a  finful  and  vicious  courfe 
of  life,  that  no  man  is  a  gainer  by  it  at  the  long  run  ; 
and  if  we  take  into  our  confideration  another  world, 
and  the  dreadful  and  endkfs  mifery  which  a  wicked 
and  impenitent  life  will  then  plunge  men  into  (which 
in  the  farther  handling  of  this  text  will  at  large  be 
ipoken  to,  being  the  laft  of  the  three  particulars  un- 
der this  firfl  general  head  :)  But  it  is  true  likewife, 
even  in  refpedt  of  this  world,  and  with  regard  only 
to  this  prefent  and  temporal  life,  without  looking  fo 
far  as  the  future  recompence  and  punifhment  of  fin 
in  another  world. 

And  this  would  plainly  appear,  by  an  indudion  of 
thefc  three  particulars. 

1.  It  is  evident  that  fome  fins  arc  plainly  mif- 
chievous  to  the  temporal  intereft  of  men,  as  tending 
cither  to  the  difturbance  of  their  minds,  or  the  en- 
dangering of  their  healths  and  lives,  or  to  the  pre* 
judice  of  their  eflates,  or  the  blafting  of  them  in 
their  reputation  and  good  name. 

2.  That  there  are  other  fins,  which  though  they 
are  not  fo  vifibly  burdened  and  attended  with  mif- 
chievous  confequences,  yet  they  are  plainly  unprofi- 
table, and  bring  no  manner  of  real  advantage  to  men, 
cither  in  refpedl  of  gain  or  pleafure  -,  fuch  are  the 
fins  of  profanenefs,  and  cuilomary  fwearing  in  com* 
mon  converfation. 

3.  That  even  thofe  fins  and  vices,  which  make 
the  faireft  pretence  to  be  of  advantage  to  us,  when 
all  accounts  are  call  up,  and  all  circumftances  duly 
weighed  and  confidered,  will  be  found  to  be  but  pre- 
tenders, and  in  no  degree  able  to  perform  and  make 
good  what  they  fo  largely  promife  before  hand,  when 
ihey  tempt  us  to  the  commifilon  of  them.     There 

arc 


an  argument  for  repentance,  3^79 

lire  feme  vices,  which  pretend  to  bring  in  great  pro-  S  E  R  M. 
lit,  and  tempt  worldly-minded  men,  whofe  minds  v— v*^-* 
are  difpofed  to  catch  at  that  bait  -,  fuch  are  the  fins 
of  covetoufnefs  and  opprefTion,  of  fraud  and  falOiood 
and  perfidioufnefs.  And  there  are  others  which  pre- 
tend to  bring  pleafure  along  with  them,  which  is  al- 
moft  an  irrefiftiblc  temptation  to  voluptuous  and 
fenfual  men  \  fuch  are  the  fins  of  revenge,  and  in- 
temperance, and  luft.  But  upon  a  particular  exami- 
nation of  each  of  thefe,  it  will  evidently  appear,  that 
there  is  no  fuch  profit  or  pleafure  in  any  of  thefe 
vices,  as  can  be  a  reafonable  temptation  to  any  man 
to  fall  in  love  with  them,  and  to  engage  in  the  com- 
mifllon  and  pradlice  of  them.  But  I  fliall  not  now 
inlarge  upon  any  of  thefe,  having  lately  difcourfed 
upon  them  from  another  text.  I  fliall  therefore 
proceed  to  the 

II.  Inconvenience  which  I  mentioned  of  a  finful 
and  vicious  courfe,  viz.  that  the  reflexion  upon  our 
fins  afterwards,  is  caufe  of  great  fliame  and  confufion 
to  us.  "  What  fruit  had  you  then  in  thofe  things, 
*'  whereof  you  are  now  afliamed  ?"  And  this  is  a 
very  proper  argument  for  this  feafon ;  becaufe  the  Preached 
pafTion  of  fliame,  as  it  is  a  natural  and  ufual  con-  ^"  Lent, 
fequent  of  fin,  fo  it  is  a  difpofition  neceflfarily  required 
to  a  true  repentance. 

Mofl:  men  when  they  commit  a  known  fault  are  apt 
to  be  afliamed,  and  ready  to  blufli  whenever  they  are 
put  in  mind  of  it,  and  charged  with  it.  Some  perfons 
indeed  have  gone  fo  far  in  fin,  and  have  waded  fo 
deep  in  a  vicious  courfe,  as  to  be  confirmed  and  har- 
dened in  their  wickednefs  to  that  degree  as  to  bepafl: 
all  fliame,  and  almofl:  all  fenfe  of  their  faults  \  efpeci- 
ally  in  regard  of  the  more  common  and  ordinary  vices, 
which  are  in  vogue  and  fafliion,  and  in  the  com.mifiion 

Vql.  IX.  19  E  whereof 

3 


3880  1'he  fiamefulnefs  of  fm, 

E  R  M.  whereof  they  are  countenanced  and  encouraged  by 
^^^"  '    company  and  example,  fuch  were  thofe  of  whom  the 
prophet  fpeaks,  Jcr.  vi.  15.  ''  Vv^erethey  afhamed, 
*'  when   they  had  committed  abomination  ?    nay, 
"  they  were  not  afhamed,  neither  could  they  blufh.'* 
But  yet  even  thefe  perfons,  when  they  come  to  be 
fenfible  of  their  guilt,  (o  as  to  be  brought  to  repen- 
tance, they  cannot  then  but  be  afliamed  of  what  they 
have  done.     For  what  face  foever  men  may  fet  up- 
on their  vices,  fin  is  fliameful  in  itfelf,  and  fo  apt  to 
fill  men  with  "  confufion  of  face,"  when  they  feri- 
pufly  refled  upon  it,  that  they  cannot  harden  their 
foreheads  againft  all  fenfe  of  fiiame.     And  whatever 
men  may  declare  to  the  contrary,  this  is  tacitly  ac- 
knowledged by  the  generality  of  men,  in  that  they 
are  fo  folicitous  and  careful  to  conceal  their  faults 
from  the  eyes  of  others,  and  to  keep  them  as  fecret 
as  they  can  -,  and  whenever  they  are  difcovered  and 
laid  open,  'tis  matter  of  great  trouble  and  confufion 
to  them  •,  and  if  any  one  happen  to  upbraid  and  twit 
them  with  their  mifcarriages  of  any  kind,  they  can- 
not bear  with  patience  to  hear  of  them. 

There  are  indeed  fome  few  fuch  prodigies  and 
inonfliers  of  men,  as  are  able  after  great  ftruglings 
with  their  confciences,  to  force  themfelves  to  boaft 
impudently  of  their  wickednefs,  and  "  to  glory  in 
''  their  fhame;"  not  becaufe  they  do  really  and  in- 
wardly believe  their  vices  to  be  an  honour  and  glory 
10  them,  but  becaufe  conTcious  to  themfelves  that 
they  have  done  fnameful  things,  and  believing  that 
others  know  it,  they  put  on  "  a  whore's  forehead," 
and  tliink  to  prevent  the  upbraiding  of  others,  by 
owning  what  they  have  done,  and  feeming  to  glory 
in  it  :  but  yet  for  all  that,  thefe  perfons,  if  they 
would  confefs  the  truth,  do  feel  fome  confufion  in 

them- 


an  arguineiit  for  repe?ita?ice,  3  ^  8 1 

thcmfelves,  and  they  are  inwardly  fenfible  of  the  in-  S  R  R  M 

CLXIII. 

famy  and  reproach  of  fuch  actions,  for  all  they  would 
feem  to  the  world  to  bear  it  out  fo  well :  For  when 
all  is  done,  there  is  a  wide  difference  between  the 
impudence  of  a  criminal,  and  the  confidence  and  af- 
furance  of  a  clear  confcience,  that  is  fully  fatisfied  of 
it's  own  innocence  and  integrity.  The  confcientious 
man  is  not  afhamed  of  any  thing  that  he  hath  done  : 
but  the  impudent  finner  only  feems  not  to  be  fo,  but 
all  the  while  feels  a  great  deal  of  confufion  in  his  own 
mind.  The  one  is  fenfible  and  fatisfied  that  there  is 
no  caufe  for  ihamc  :  the  other  is  confcious  to  him- 
felf  that  there  is  caufe,  but  he  offers  violence  to  him- 
felf,  and  fupprelTes  all  he  can  the  fenfe  and  fhew  of 
it,  and  will  needs  face  down  the  world,  that  he  hath 
no  guilt  and  regret  in  his  own  mind  for  any  thing 
that  he  hath  done. 

Now  that  fin  is  truly  matter  of  fhame,  will  be  very 
evident,  if  we  confider  thcfe  two  things. 

Firft,  If  we  confider  the  nature  of  this  pafTion  of 
fliame. 

Secondly,  If  we  confider  what  there  is  in  fin, 
which  gives  real  ground  and  occafion  for  it. 

Firft,  For  the  nature  of  this  palTion.  Shame  is 
the  trouble  or  confufion  of  mind,  occafioned  by 
fomething  that  tends  to  our  difgrace  and  difhonour^ 
to  our  infamy  and  reproach.  Now  there  is  nothing 
truly  and  really  matter  of  fliame  and  reproach  to  us^ 
but  what  we  ourfelves  have  done,  or  have  been  fome 
way  or  other  acceffary  to  the  doing  of,  by  our  own 
fault  or  negledl,  and  by  confjquence  what  it  was  in 
our  power  and  choice  not  to  have  done :  For  no 
man  is  afhamed  of  what  he  is  fure  he  could  not 
help.  Necefiity,  unlefs  it  be  v/ilful  and  contrafted, 
and  happens  through  fome  precedent  occafion  and 

19  E  2  fault 


2  8  8  2  7he  Jhamefulnefs  oj  fm^ 

E  R  M.  fault  of  our  own,  does  take  away  all  juft  caufe  of 

CLXIII.  (y 

(hame. 

And  nothing  likewife  is  matter  of  fTiannte,  but 
fomething  which  we  ought  not  to  do,  which  mifbe- 
comes  us,  and  is  below  the  dignity  and  perfedlion  of 
our  nature,  and  is  againft  fome  duty  and  obligation 
that  is  upon  us  to  the  contrary  ;  and  confequently  is 
a  reproach  to  our  reafon  and  underftanding,  a  reflec- 
tion upon  our  prudence  and  difcretion,  and  at  firft 
fight  hath  an  appearance  of  ruggednels  and  defor- 
mity. 

And  all  a6tions  of  this  nature  do  receive  feveral 
aggravations,  with  refpe6l  to  the  perfons  againft 
whom,  and  in  whofe  prefence,  and  under  whole  eye 
and  knowledge  thefe  fliameful  things  are  done.  Now 
\  ilia  11  ihew  in  the 

Second  place.  That  fin  contains  in  it  whatfoever  is 
juilly  accounted  infamous,  together  with  all  the  ag- 
gravations of  fhame  and  reproach  that  can  be  ima- 
gined. And  this  will  appear  by  confidering  fin  and 
vice  in  thefe  two  rcfpe^ls  ; 

I.  In  relation  to  ourfelves. 

II.  In  rcfpecl  to  God,  againft  whom,  and  in 
wliofe  figjit  it  is  committed. 

I.  In  relation  to  ourfelves,  there  are  thefe  four 
things  which  make  fin  and  vice  to  be  very  fiiameful. 

1.  I'he  natural  ruggednefs  and  deformity  of  it. 

2.  That  it  is  fo  great  a  difiionour  to  our  nature, 
;ind  to  the  dignity  and  excellency  of  our  being. 

3.  That  it  is  fo  great  a  reproach  to  our  reafon  and 
undcrfianding,  and  fo  foul  a  refledlion  upon  our 
['rudci>ce  and  difcretion. 

4.  That  it  is  our  own  voluntary  a(5b  and  choice. 
I'lvcry  one  of  thefe  confiderations  render  it  vei^y 

fliamcful,  and  all  gf  them  together  ought  to  fill  the 

finner 


c?i  argument  for  repentance.  3  8  S  3 

firmer  with  "  confufion  efface."     I  fhall  fpeak  tQ^^^^- 
them  feveialJy. 

I.  The  natural  ruggednefs  and  deformity  of  fin 
and  vice  render  it  very  fliameful.  Men  are  apt  to 
be  afhamed  of  any  thing  in  them,  or  belonging  to 
them,  that  looks  ugly  and  monftrous,  and  therefore 
they  endeavour  with  great  care  and  art  to  conceal 
and  dilfemble  their  deformity  in  any  kind.  How 
(Irangely  do  we  fee  men  concerned,  with  all  their  di- 
ligence and  flcill,  to  cover  and  palliate  any  defect  or 
deformity  in  their  bodies  •,  an  ill  face,  if  they  could, 
however  a  foul  and  bad  complexion,  or  blind  or 
fquinting  eye,  a  crooked  body  or  limb,  or  what- 
ever is  ill-favoured  or  monftrous.  Now  in  regard 
of  our  fouls  and  better  part,  fin  hath  all  the  mon- 
ftroufnefs  and  deformity  in  it,  which  we  can  ima- 
gine in  the  body,  and  much  more ;  and  it  is  as  hard 
to  be  covered  from  the  eye  of  difcerning  men,  as  the 
deformity  of  the  body  is  ;  but  impofTible  to  be  con- 
cealed from  the  eye  of  God,  to  whom  "  darknels 
*'  and  light,"  fecret  and  open  are  all  one.  But  then 
the  moral  defedls  and  deformities  of  the  mind  have 
this  advantage  above  the  natural  defedls  and  defor- 
mities of  the  body,  that  the  former  are  pofTible  to 
be  cured  by  the  grace  of  God,  in  conjun6lion  with 
our  own  care  and  endeavour  :  Whereas  no  diligence 
or  ficill  can  ever  help  or  remove  many  of  the  natural 
defeds  and  deformities  of  the  body. 

Sin  is  the  blindnefs  of  our  minds,  the  perverfenefi 
and  crookednefs  of  our  wills,  and  the  monftrous  ir- 
regularity and  diforder  of  our  affe6lions  and  appe- 
tites \  it  is  the  mif-placing  of  our  powers  and  facul- 
ties, the  fetting  of  our  wilh  and  pafTions  above  our 
reafon  ;  all  which  is  ugly  and  unnatural,  and,  if  wc 
were  truly  fenfible  gf  it,  matter  of  great  fliame  and 
reproach  to  us^  There 


3  8  84  The  Jf:amefidnefe  of  fin. 

There  is  hardly  any  vice,  but  at  firfl  fight  hath  an 
odious  and  ugly  appearance  to  a  well  difciplined  and 
innocent  mind,  that  hath  never  had  any  acquaint- 
ance with  it.  And  however  familiarity  and  cuilom 
may  abate  the  fenfe  of  it's  deformity,  yet  it  is  as  it 
was  before,  and  the  change  that  is  made  in  us  does 
not  alter  the  nature  of  the  thing.  Drunkennefs  and 
furious  paflion,  pride  and  falfliood,  covetoufnefs  and 
cruelty,  are  odious,  and  matter  of  lliame,  in  the 
fincere  and  uncorrupted  opinion  of  all  mankind. 
And  though  a  man,  by  the  frequent  practice  of  any 
of  thefe  vices,  and  a  long  familiarity  v\^ith  them,  may 
not  be  fo  fenfible  of  the  deformity  of  them  in  him- 
felf,  yet  he  quickly  difcerns  the  uglinefs  of  them  in 
others,  whenever  they  come  in  his  way,  and  could 
with  fait  and  fliarpnefs  enough  upbraid  thofe  whom 
he  fees  guilty  of  them,  but  that  he  is  inwardly  con- 
fcious,  that  the  reproach  may  be  fo  eafily  returned, 
and  thrown  back  upon  himfelf.  However  this  is  a 
natural  acknowledgment  of  the  deformity  and  fhame- 
fulnefs  of  fin  and  vice. 

2.  They  are  likewifc  fliameful,  becaufe  they  are 
fo  great  a  diflionour  to  our  nature,  and  to  the  dig- 
nity and  excellency  of  our  being.  We  go  belov/  our- 
felves,  and  a6t  beneath  the  dignity  of  our  nature, 
when  we  do  any  thing  contrary  to  the  rules  and  laws 
of  it,  or  to  the  revealed  will  of  God  ^  becaufe  thefe 
are  the  bounds  and  limits  which  God  and  nature  hath 
fet  to  human  adions  ;  and  are  the  meafures  of  our 
duty,  i.  e.  what  is  fit  and  becoming  for  us  to  do^ 
and  what  not.  So  that  all  fin  and  vice  is  bafe  and 
unworthy,  and  beneath  the  dignity  of  our  nature  j 
it  argues  a  corrupt  and  difeafed  conftitution  and  ha- 
bit of  mind,  a  crooked  and  perverfe  difpofition  of 
will,  and  a  fordid  and  mean  temper  of  fpirit. 

I  And 


an  argument  for  repentance,  3885 

And  therefore  the  fcripture  doth  frequently  repre-  S  E  R  M. 
fent  a  ftate  of  fin  and  wickednefs,  by  that  which  is 
accoupted  the  bafeft  and  meanell  condition  among 
men,  by  a  flate  of  fervitude  and  flavery,  efpccially 
if  it  had  been  our  choice,  or  the  evident  and  necef- 
fary  confequence  of  our  wilful  fault  :  for  we  do  as 
bad  as  chufe  it,  when  we  wilfully  bring  it  upon  our- 
felves.  So  that  to  be  a  finner,  is  to  be  a  (lave  to 
fome  vile  lull,  appetite,  or  paiTion,  to  fome  unna- 
tural or  irregular  defire  j  it  is  to  fell  ourfelves  into 
bondage,  and  to  part  with  one  of  the  moft  valuable 
things  in  the  world,  our  liberty,  upon  low  and  un- 
worthy terms.  Such  a  (late  and  condition  does  un- 
avoidably debafe  and  debauch  our  minds,  and  break 
the  force  and  firmnefs  of  our  fpirits,  and  robs  us,  as 
Dalilah  did  Sampfon,  of  our  ftrength  and  courage, 
of  our  refolution  and  conftancy  \  fo  that  men  have 
not  the  heart  left  to  defign  and  endeavour  in  good 
earneft  their  own  refcue  out  of  this  mean  and  mife- 
rable  eflate,  into  which  by  their  own  folly  and  fault 
they  have  brought  themfelves. 

When  men  are  engaged  into  a  cuflom  of  finning, 
and  have  habituated  themfelves  to  any  vicious  courfe, 
how  do  they  betray  their  weaknefs  and  want  of  re- 
folution, by  being  at  the  beck  of  every  foolifh  luft, 
and  by  fufFering  themfelves  to  be  commanded  and 
hurried  away  by  every  unruly  appetite  and  palTion, 
to  do  things  which  they  know  to  be  greatly  to  their 
harm  and  prejudice,  and  which  they  are  convinced 
are  mean  and  fordid  things,  and  fuch  as  they  are  a- 
fhamed  that  any  wife  mu.ii  "liould  fee  them  doing  I 
and  there  is  no  greater  argument  of  a  pitiful  and  de- 
generate fpirit,  than  to  commit  fuch  things  as  a  man 
would  biuih  to  be  furprized  in,  and  v/ould  be  migh* 
tily  troubled  to  hear  of  afterwards.     And  which  is 

more* 


3886  5"^^  Jhamefiihiefs  of  fin, 

more,  after  he  hath  been  convinced  by  manifold  ex- 
perience, that  they  are  a  lliame  and  difgrace  to  him, 
and  make  him  to  hang  down  his  head,  and  let  fall 
his  countenance,  whenever  he  is  in  better  company 
than  himfelf  -,  yet  after  this  to  go  and  do  the  fame 
things  again,  which  he  is  fenfible  are  fo  fhameful, 
and  to  be  fo  impotent,  and  to  have  fo  little  com- 
mand of  himfelf,  as  not  to  be  able  to  free  himfelf 
from  this  bondage,  nor  the  heart  to  pray  to  God 
that  by  his  grace  he  would  enable  him  thereto. 

And  that  fin  is  of  this  fliameful  nature,  is  evident, 
in  that  the  greateft  part  of  finners  take  fo  much  care 
and  pains  to  hide  their  vices  from  the  fight  and  notice 
of  men,  and  to  this  purpofe  chufe  darknefs  and  fe- 
cret  places  of  retirement  to  commit  their  fins  in. 
The  apollle  takes  notice,  that  thus  much  modefty 
was  left  even  in  a  very  wicked  and  degenerate  age, 
I  Thef.  V.  7.  "  They  that  be  drunk  (fays  he) 
"  are  drunk  in  the  night."  Now  all  this  is  a  plain  ac- 
knowledgment, that  fin  is  a  fpurious  and  degenerate 
thing,  that  it  mifbecomes  human  nature,  and  is  be- 
low the  dignity  of  a  reafonable  creature  :  otherwife 
why  fhould  men  be  fo  folicitous  and  concerned  to 
cover  their  faults  from,  the  fight  of  others  ?  If  they 
are  not  afhamed  of  them,  why  do  they  not  bring 
them  into  the  broad  light,  and  fhew  them  openly,  if 
they  think  they  will  endure  it  ? 

So  true  is  that  obfervation  which  Plato  makes, 
that  though  a  man  were  fure  that  God  would  for- 
give his  fins,  and  that  men  fhould  never  know  them, 
yet  there  is  that  bafenefs  in  fin,  that  a  wife  man, 
that  confidcrs  what  it  is,  would  blufli  to  himfelf  a- 
lone  to  be  guilty  of  it ;  and  though  he  were  not  a- 
fraid  of  the  punidiment,  would  be  afliamed  of  the 
turpitude  and  deformity  of  it. 

Pici 


an  argitment  for  repentance,  3SS7 

Did  but  a  man   coxafider  ferioufly  with  himfelf.  S  F.  R  M; 

CLXIII. 

how  mean  and  unmanly  it  is  for  a  man  to  be  drunk  ; 
and  what  an  apixQi  and  ridiculous  thing  he  renders 
himlclf  to  all  fober  men  that  behold  him,  and  with 
what  contempt  and  fcorn  they  entertain  fuch  a  fight ; 
and  how  brutifli  it  is  to  wallow  in  any  unlawful  iuft, 
and  how  much  a  man  defcends  and  floops  beneath 
himfelf ;  what  fhameful  fear  and  cowardice  he  be- 
trays when  he  is  frighted  to  tell  a  lie  out  of  fear,  or 
tempted  thereto  for  fome  little  advantage  ;  and  yet 
is  fo  inconfiftent  with  himfelf,  as  to  have,  or  to  pre- 
tend to  have  the  courage  to  fight  any  man,  that  fhall 
tell  him  fo  fawcy  a  truth,  as  that  he  told  a  lie. 

Would  but  a  man  think  before-hand, how  unworthy^^ 
and  how  unequal  a  thing  it  is  to  defraud  or  cheat  his 
brother,  or  to  do  any  thing  to  another  man,  which  he 
would  be  loth  in  the  like  cafe  that  he  fliould  do  to  him  ; 
how  bafe  a  thing  it  is,  for  a  man  to  be  perfidious  and 
falfe  to  his  promife  or  trull ;  how  monflrous  to  be  un- 
thankful to  one  that  hath  highly  obliged  him,  and  e- 
very  way  and  upon  all  occafions  deferved  well  at  his 
hands  ;  and  fo  I  might  inftance  in  all  other  forts  of 
fins  ;  I  fay,  he  that  confiders  this  well  and  wifely, 
though  there  were  no  law  againft  fin,  and  (if  it  were 
apoifiblc  cafe,  and  fit  to  be  fuppofed)  though  there 
were  no  fuch  being  as  God  in  the  world,  to  call  him 
to  account  and  punifii  him  for  it,  yet  out  of  mere 
generofity  and  greatnefs  of  mind,  out  of  pure  re- 
fpedl  to  himfelf,  and  the  dignity  and  rank  of  his 
being,  and  of  his  order  in  the  world,  out  of  very 
reverence  to  human  nature,  and  the  inward  perfuafi- 
on  of  his  own  mind,  (however  he  came  by  that  per- 
fuafion)  concerning  the  indecency  and  deformity  and 
fhamefulnefs  of  the  thing  ;  I  fay,  for  thcfc  realbns, 
if  there  were  no  other,  a  man  would  iiiivc  with 
Vol.  IX.  19  F  him- 


cLXin. 


533  q'he  Jhamefidnefs  offm, 

S  E  R  M.  himfelf,  with  all  his  might,  to  refrain  from  fin  and 
vice,  and  not  only  blufh,  but  abhor  to  think  of  do- 
ing a  wicked  action. 

3.  Sin  will  yet  farther  appear  fhameful,  in  that  it 
is  fo  great  a  reproach  to  our  underftandings  and  rea- 
fons,  and  fo  foul  a  blot  upon  our  prudence  and  dif- 
cretion.  Omnis peccans  aut  igjwrans  efi^autincogitanSj 
is  a  fiying,  I  think,  of  one  of  the  fchool-men  •,  (as 
one  would  guefs  by  the  Latin  of  it)  "  Every  finner 
''  is  either  an  ignorant,  or  an  inconfiderate  perfon.'* 
Either  men  do  not  underftand  what  they  do,  when 
they  commit  fin  •,  or  if  they  do  know,  they  do  not 
adlually  attend  ♦lo,  and  confider  what  they  know. 
Either  they*arc  hubitually  or  adually  ignorant  of 
what  they  dc  ;  for  fin  and  confideration  cannot 
dv/ell  together  •,  it  is  fo  very  unreafonable  and  ab- 
furd  a  thing,  that  it  requires  either  grofs  ignorance, 
or  flupid  inadvertency,  to  make  a  man  capable  of 
committing  it.  Whenever  a  man  fins,  he  muft 
cither  be  deftitutc  of  rcafon,  or  muft  lay  it  afide  or 
afleep  for  die  time,  and  fo  fufFer  himfelf  to  be  hur- 
ried away,  and  to  act  brudflily,  as  if  he  had  no  un- 
derftand ing. 

Did  but  men  attentively  confider  what  it  is  to  of- 
fend God,  and  to  break  the  laws  of  that  great  law- 
giver, who  "  is  able  to  fave  or  to  deftroy,"  they 
would  difcern  fo  many  invincible  objections  againft 
the  thing,  and  would  be  filled  with  fjch  ftrong  fears 
and  jealoufies  of  the  fatal  iflue  and  event  of  it,  that 
they  would  not  dare  to  venture  upon  it.  And  there- 
fore we  find  the  fcripture  fo  frequently  refolving  the 
wickednefs  of  men  into  their  ignorance  and  inconfi- 
deratenefs,  Pfal.  xiv.  4.  "  Have  all  the  v/orkers  of 
*'  iniquity  no  knowledge  ?"  intimating  that  by  their 
actions  one  would  judge  fo.     And  the  fame  account 

God 


an  argument  for  repe7itance.  3889 

God  himfelf  alfo  gives  elfewhere  of  the  frequent  dif-  S  ii  R  M- 

CLXIII. 

obedience  and  rebellion  of  the  people  of  Ifrael,  Deut. 
xxxii.  28,  29.  "  They  are  a  nation  void  of  coun- 
"  id^  neither  is  there  any  underilanding  in  them. 
*^  Oh  !  that  they  were  wife,  that  they  underftood 
"  this,  that  they  would  confider  their  latter  end  !" 
Knowledge  and  condderation  would  cure  a  great  part 
of  the  wickednefs  that  is  in  the  world  ;  men  would 
not  commit  fin  with  fo  much  greedinefs,  would  they 
but  take  time  to  confider  and  bethink  themfelves 
what  they  do. 

Have  we  not  reafon  then  to  be  afhamed  of  fin, 
which  cafts  fuch  a  reproach  of  ignorance  and  rafli- 
nefs  upon  us  ?  And  of  imprudence  likewife  and  in- 
difcretion  ?  Since  nothing  can  be  more  diredly  and 
plainly  againfl  our  greateft  and  beft  intereft  both  of 
body  and  foul,  both  here  and  hereafter,  both  now 
and  to  all  eternity.  And  there  is  nothing  that  men 
are  more  afhamed  of,  than  to  be  guilty  of  fo  great 
an  imprudence,  as  to  a6l  clearly  againft  their  ov/n 
interell,  to  which  fin  is  the  moft  plainly  crofs  and 
contrary,  that  it  is  pofTible  for  any  thing  to  be.  No 
man  can  engage  and  continue  in  a  finful  courfe,  with- 
out being  fo  far  abufed  and  infatuated,  as  to  be  con- 
tented to  part  with  everlafting  happinefs,  and  to  be 
undone  and  miferable  for  ever  ;  none  but  he  that 
can  perfuade  himfelf  againft  all  the  reafon  and  fenfe 
of  mankind,  that  there  is  pleafure  enough  in  the 
tranfient  a6ls  of  fin,  to  make  amends  for  eternal 
forrow,  and  fiiame,  and  fuffering.  And  can  fuch  a 
thought  as  this  enter  into  the  heart  of  a  confiderate 
man  ?  Epicurus  was  fo  wife,  as  to  conclude  againft 
all  pleafures  that  would  give  a  man  more  trouble  and 
difcurbance  afterwards  ;  againft  all  pleafures  that  had 
pain  and  grief  confcquent  upon  them  :  and  he  for- 

19  F  2  bids 


CI.XIII. 


2890  l^he  fiamcftihtefs  of  Jin  ^ 

S  E  R  M.  bids  his  wife  man  to  tafte  of  them,  or  to  meddle 
with  them  •,  and  had  he  believed  any  thing  of  a  fu- 
ture ftate,  he  muft,  according  to  his  principle,  have 
pronounced  it  the  greatefl  folly  that  could  be,  for 
any  man  to  purchafe  the  pleafures  and  happinefs  of  a 
few  years,  at  the  dear  rate  of  eternal  mifery  and  tor- 
ment. So  that  if  it  be  a  difgrace  to  a  man  to  a6l 
imprudently,  and  to  do  things  plainly  againil  his  in- 
tereft,  then  vice  is  the  greatefl  reproach  that  is  poffible. 
The  fourth  and  laft  confidcration,  which  renders 
fin  fo  fhameful  to  us,  is,  that  it  is  our  own  volun- 
tary act  and  choice.  We  chufe  this  difgrace,  and 
willingly  bring  this  reproach  upon  ourfelves.  We 
pity  an  ideot,  and  one  that  is  naturally  deftitute  of 
underftanding,  or  one  that  lofeth  the  ufe  of  his  reafon 
by  a  difeafe  or  other  inevitable  accident :  but  every 
one  defpileth  him  who  befots  himfelf,  and  plays  the 
foal  out  of  carelefncfs  and  a  grofs  negle6t  of  himfelf. 
And  this  is  the  cafe  of  the  finner  •,  there  is  no  man 
that  finneth,  but  becaufe  he  is  wanting  to  himfelf  ; 
he  might  be  wifer  and  do  better,  and  will  not  ;  but 
he  chufcs  his  own  devices,  and  voluntarily  runs  him- 
felf upon  thofe  inconveniencies,  which  it  was  in  his 
power  to  have  avoided. 

Not  but  that  I  do  heartily  own  and  lament  the 
great  corruption  and  degeneracy  of  our  nature,  and 
the  flrong  prcpenfions  which  appear  fo  early  in  us  to 
that  which  is  evil :  but  God  hath  provided  a  remedy 
and  cure  for  all  this :  For  fince  "  the  grace  of  God 
"  which  brings  filvation  unto  all  men  hath  appear- 
**  ed,"  under  the  influence  and  through  the  afTifl- 
ancc  of  that  grace,  which  is  offered  to  them  by  the 
gofpel,  men  may  "  deny  ungodlinefs  and  worldly 
*'  lulls,  and  live  foberly,  righteoufly,  and  godly 
''  in  this  prcfcat  world."     For  I  make  no  doubt, 

but 


an  argument  for  repentance.  3^9^ 

but  fince.  God  has  entered  into  a  new  covenant  of  SERM, 
grace  with  mankind,  and  offered  new  terms  of  life 
and  falvation  to  us  •,  I  fay,  I  doubt  not,  but  his  grace 
is  ready  at  hand,  to  enable  us  to  perform  all  thofe 
conditions  which  he  requires  of  us,  if  we  be  not 
wanting  to  ourfclves. 

There  was  a  way  of  falvation  eftablifhed,  before 
the  gofpel  was  clearly  revealed  to  the  world  ;  and 
they  who  under  that  difpenfation,  whether  Jews  or 
Gentiles,  fincerely  endeavoured  to  do  the  will  of 
God,  fo  far  as  they  knew  it,  were  not  utterly  defti- 
tute  of  divine  grace  and  affifbance  :  but  now  there  is 
a  more  plentiful  effufion  of  God's  grace  and  holy 
ipirit  i  fo  that  whoever  under  the  gofpel  fins  delibe- 
rately, fins  wilfully,  and  is  wicked,  not  for  want  of 
power  but  of  will  to  do  otherwife.  And  this  is  that 
which  makes  fin  fo  ihameful  a  thing,  and  fo  very 
reproachful  to  us,  that  we  deflroy  ourfelves  by  our 
own  folly  and  negledl  of  ourfelves,  and  become  mi- 
ferable  by  our  own  choice,  and  when  the  grace  of 
God  hath  put  it  into  our  power  to  be  wife  and  to  be 
happy. 

I  fhould  now  have  proceeded  to  the  fecond  thing 
I  propofed,  which  was  to  confider  fin  in  relatfon  to 
God,  and  to  fhew  that  it  is  no  lefs  fhameful  in  that 
refped,  than  I  have  fhewn  it  to  be  with  regard  to 
ourfelves :  but  this  I  Hiall  refer  to  another  oppor- 
tunity* 


S  E  R^ 


3S92  ^he  Jhameftdnefs  ofjtn^ 

SERMON     CLXIV. 

The  fhamefulnefs  of  fin,  an  argument 
for  repentance. 


ROM.  vi.  21,  22. 

lyh at  fruit  had  ye  then  in  thofe  things^  whereof  ye 
are  now  afhamed  ?  For  the  end  of  thofe  things  is 
death.  But  nozv  being  made  free  from  Jin^  and 
become  fervants  to  God^  ye  have  your  fruit  tint  9 
holinefs^  and  the  end  everlajiing  life. 


ERM, 

CLXIV. 


IN  thefe  words  the  apoflle  makes  a  comparifon, 
_  ^  _  between  an  holy  and  virtuous,  and  a  finful  and 
hefecond  VICIOUS  courfe  of  life,  and  fets  before  us  a  perfect 
'"'^^^^  enumeration  of  the  manifold  inconveniencies  of  the 

us  text.  *»»^-*' 

one,  and  the  manifold  advantages  of  the  other. 

I  began  v/ith  the  firfl  of  thefe,  viz.  to  fhew  the 
manifell  inconveniencies  of  a  finful  and  vicious  courfe. 
I  am  upon  the  fecond  inconvenience  of  a  finful 
courfe,  viz.  that  the  reflexion  upon  it  afterwards  is 
cade  of  great  iliame  and  "  confufion  of  face"  to  us  j 
and  that 

Firft,  In  relation  to  ourfelves.  Which  I  have 
difpatched,  and  proceed  now  in  the 

Second  place,  To  confider  fin  in  refpedl  of  God, 
againft  whom,  and  in  whofe  fight  and  prefence  it  is 
committed  -,  and  upon  examination  it  will  appear  to 
be  no  Icfs  fliameful  in  this  refped  than  the  other. 

There  are  fome  perfons  before  whom  we  are  more 
apt  to  be  adiamed  and  blufh,  than  before  others  ;  as 
thofe  whom  we  reverence,  thofe  to  whom  we  are 
greatly  obliged,  and  thofe  who  are  clear  of  thofe 

faults 


an  argument  for  repentance,  3893. 

faults  which  we  are  guilty  of ;  and  thofe  who  hate  S  E  R  M. 
or  greatly  diflike  what  we  do  \  efpecially  if  they  be 
prefent  with  us,  and  in  our  company  ;  if  they  Hand 
by  us,  and  obferve,  and  take  notice  of  what  we  do, 
and  are  likely  to  publifli  our  folly  and  make  it  known, 
and  have  authority  and  power  to  punifli  us  for  our 
faults  i  we  are  alhamed  to  have  done  any  thing  that 
is  vile  and  unworthy  before  fuch  perfons.  Now  to 
render  fin  the  more  fhameful,  God  may  be  confider- 
ed  by  us  under  all  thefe  notions,  and  in  all  thefe 
refpe6ls. 

I .  Whenever  we  commit  any  fin,  we  do  it  before 
him,  in  his  prefence,  and  under  his  eye  and  know- 
ledge, to  whom  of  all  perfons  in  the  world  we  ought 
to  pay  the  moil  profound  reverence.  I  remember 
Seneca  fomewhere  fays ;  that  "  there  are  fome  per- 
fons, quorum  interventu  ferditi  quoqiie  homines  vi^ 
tia  fupprimerent^  that  they  are  fo  awful  and  (o 
generally  reverenced  for  the  eminency  of  their 
virtues,  that  even  the  moft  profligate  and  impu- 
dent finners  will  endeavour  to  fupprefs  their  vices, 
and  refrain  from  any  thing  that  is  notorioufly 
bad,  and  uncomely,  whilft  fuch  perfons  ftand  by 
them,  and  are  in  prefence."  Such  an  one  was 
Cato  among  the  Romans.  The  people  of  Rome 
had  fuch  a  regard  and  reverence  for  him,  that  if  he 
appeared,  they  would  not  begin  or  continue  their 
ufual  fports,  till  he  was  withdrawn  from  the  theatre^ 
thinking  them  too  light  to  be  acled  before  a  perfon 
of  his  gravity  and  virtue :  and  if  they  were  fo  much 
awed  by  the  prefence  of  a  wife  and  virtuous  man, 
that  they  were  afhamcd  to  do  t^wy  thing  that  was 
unfeemly  before  him ;  how  much  more  Ihould  the 
prefence  of  the  holy  God,  who  is  "  of  purer  eyes 
"  than  to  behold  iniquity,"  make  us  blufh  to  do 

3  ^y 


6( 
(C 


3894  ^^  Jljameftdnefi  of  fin, 

E  R  M.  any  thing  that  is  lewd  and  vile  in  his  fight,  and  fill 
^^[^  us  with  fhame  and  "  confufion  of  face"  at  the 
thoughts  of  it  ?  Now  whenever  we  commit  any  fin, 
God  looks  upon  us  ;  and  he  alone  is  an  ample  the- 
atre indeed.  That  he  obferves  what  we  do,  ought 
to  be  more  to  us,  than  if  the  eyes  of  all  the  world 
befides  were  gazing  upon  us. 

2.  He  likewife  is  incomparably  our  greateft  bene- 
fadlor,  and  there  is  no  perfon  in  the  world,  to  whom 
in  any  degree  we  ftand  fo  much  obliged,  as  to  him ; 
and  from  whom  we  can  expe6t  and  hope  for  fo 
much  good,  as  from  him  •,  the  confideration  whereof 
mull  make  us  afliamed,  fo  often  as  we  confider,  and 
are  confcious  to  ourfelves,  that  we  have  done  any 
thing  that  is  grievous  and  difpleafing  to  him. 

We  are  wont  to  have  a  peculiar  reverence  for 
thofe  to  whom  we  are  exceedingly  beholden,  and 
to  be  much  afhamed  to  do  any  thing  before  them, 
which  may  fignify  difrefped,  and  much  more  enmi- 
ty againft  them  \  becaufe  this  would  be  horrible  in- 
gratitude, one  of  the  moft  odious  and  fliameful  of 
all  vices.  And  is  there  any  one  to  whom  we  can 
Hand  more  obliged,  than  to  him  that  made  us,  than 
to  the  author  and  founder  of  our  beings,  and  the 
great  patron  and  preferver  of  our  lives  ;  and  can 
there  then  be  any  before  whom,  and  againft  whom 
we  fliould  be  more  afhamed  to  offend  ?  When  the 
prodigal  in  the  parable  would  fet  forth  the  fhameful- 
ncfs  of  his  mifcarriage,  he  aggravates  it  from  hence, 
that  he  had  offended  againft  and  before  one  to  whom 
he  had  been  lb  infinitely  obliged  :  *'  Father,  fays  he, 
*'  I  have  finned  againft  heaven,  and  in  thy  fight." 

3.  We  are  afhamed  likewife  to  be  guilty  of  any 
fault  or  crime  before  thofe  perfons  who  are  clear  of 
it,  or  of  any  thing  of  the  Uke  nature  thcmfelves. 

Men 


an  argument  J  or  repentance,  3^95 

Men  are  not  apt  to  be  alhamed  before  thofe  who  are  ^  ^  J^  ^^• 

.      .  .  CLXIV. 

their  fellow-criminals,  and  involved  with  them  in 
the  fame  guilt,  becaufe  they  do  not  fland  in  awe  of 
them,  nor  can  have  any  reverence  for  them.  Thofe, 
who  arc  equally  guilty,  mud  bear  with  one  another. 
We  are  not  apt  to  fear  the  cenfures  and  reproofs  of 
thofe,  who  arc  as  bad  as  ourfelves  •,  but  we  are 
afhamed  to  do  a  foul  and  unworthy  adlion,  before 
thofe  who  are  innocent  and  free  from  the  lame,  or 
the  like  fins  and  vices  which  we  are  guilty  of. 

Now  whenever  we  commit  any  fin,  it  is  in  the 
prefencc  of  the  holy  God,  who  hath  no  part  with  us 
in  our  crimes,  whofe  nature  is  removed  at  the  far- 
theft  diftance  from  fin,  and  is  as  contrary  to  it  as  can 
be.  "  There  is  no  iniquity  with  the  Lord  our 
*'  God."  And  therefore  of  all  perlbns  in  the  world 
we  fhould  blufh  to  be  guilty  of  it  before  him. 

4.  We  are  apt  alfo  to  be  afhamed  to  do  any  thing 
before  thofe  who  diQike  and  deteft  what  we  do.  To 
do  a  wicked  adlion  before  thofe  who  are  not  offended 
at  it,  or  perhaps  take  pleafure  in  it,  is  no  fuch  mat- 
ter of  fhame  to  us.  Now  of  all  others,  God  is  the 
greateft  hater  of  fin,  and  the  moft  perfed  enemy  to 
it  in  the  whole  world.     Hab.  i.  13.  *'  Thou  art  of 

purer  eyes,  than  to  behold  evil,  and  canft  not  look 

on  iniquity,"  i.  c.  with  patience,  and  without  an 
infinite  hatred  and  abhorrence  of  it.  Such  is  the 
unfpotted  purity  and  perfedlion  of  the  divine  na- 
ture, that  it  is  not  pofilble  that  God  fiiould  give  the 
leaft  countenance  to  any  thing  that  is  evil.  Pfal. 
V.  4,  5.  "  Thou  art  not  a  God,"  fays  David  there 
to  him,  "  that  haft  pleafure  in  iniquity,  neither 
*'  fliall  evil  dwell  with  thee :  The  wicked  fhall  not 
*'  ft  and  in  thy  fight  ^  thou  hateft  all  workers  of 
•'  iniquity." 

Vol.  IX,  ig  G  r:.  Wc 

.3  ^ 


^he  pamefulnefs  of  fn^ 

5.   We  are  alhamed  likcwife  to  do  any  thing  that 
is  evil  and  unfeemly  before  thofe,  who  we  are  afraid 
will   publifh    our  faults  to  others,  and  will  make 
known  and  expofe  the  folly  of  them.     Now  when- 
ever we  fin,  it  is  before  him  who  will  moft  certainly 
one  day  bring  all  our  works  of  darknefs  into  the 
open  light,  and  expofe  all  our  fecret  deeds  of  dilho- 
nefty  upon  the  publick  ftage  of  the  world,  and  make 
all  the  vilcfl  of  our  adions  known,  and  lay  them* 
open,  with  all  the  fhameful  circumftances  of  them, 
before  men  and  angels,  to  our  everlafting  fliame  and 
confufion.     This  is  the  meaning  of  that  proverbial 
fpeech,  fo  often  ufed  by  our  Saviour,  "  There  is 
*'  nothing  covered   that  fhall  not  be  revealed,  nei- 
"  ther  hid  that  fliall  not  be  made  manifcft."     All 
the  fins  which  we  now  commit  with  fo  much  caution, 
in  fecret  and  dark  retirements,  fhall  in  that  great  day 
of  revelation,  when  the  fecrets  of  all  hearts  (hall  be 
difclofed,  be  itt  in  open  view,  and  in  fo  full  and 
flronp-  a  lio;ht,  that  all  the  world  fhall  fee  them  -,  and 
that  which  was  plotted  and  contrived  in  fo  much  fe- 
crecy,  and  hardly  whifpered  in  this  world,  Ihall  then 
*'  be  proclaimed  aloud,"  and  as  it  were  "  upon  the 
*'  houfe  tops." 

6.  And  laftly.  We  are  aflaamed  and  afraid  to  com^ 
mit  a  fault  before  thofe,  who  we  believe  will  call  us 
Xo  an  account  for  it,  and  punifli  us  feverely.  A  man 
may  fuffer  innocently  and  for  a  good  caufe  j  but  all 
fuffcring  in  that  cafe  is  by  wife  and  good  men 
efleemcd  honourable  and  glorious,  and  though  we 
are  condemned  by  men,  we  are  acquitted  in  our  own 
confcicnces  :  Rut  that  which  is  properly  called  pu- 
riiflimcnt  is  always  attcncitd  with  infamy  and  re- 
proach •,  becaufe  it  always  fuppofeth  fome  fault  an4 
crime,  as  the  groufid  and  rcafon  of  it.  H^nce  it  is 
2  (hax 


lan  argument  for  repentance*  3^97 

that  In  this  world  men  are  not  only  afraid,  but  a-  S  R  R  M. 

-  I  CLXIV.j 

fhamed  to  commit  any  fault  before  thofe,  who  they 
think  have  authority  and  power  to  punifh  it.  He  is 
an  impudent  villain  indeed,  that  will  venture  to  cut 
a  purle  in  the  prefence  of  the  judge. 

Now  Whenever  we  commit  any  wickednefs,  we 
do  it  under  the  eye  of  the  great  Judge  of  the  world, 
who  ftedfaftly  beholds  us,  and  whofe  omnipotent 
juflice  Itands  by  us  ready  armed  and  charged  for  our 
deftru6lion,  and  can  in  a  moment  cut  us  off.  Every 
fin  that  we  are  guiky  of,  in  thought,  word  or  deed,  is 
all  in  the  prefence  of  the  holy,  and  juft,  and  powerful 
God  ;  whofe  power  enables  himj  and  whofe  holincfs 
and  juflice  will  effe6lually  engage  him,  one  time  or 
other,  if  a  timely  repentance  doth  not  prevent  it,  to 
inflid  a  terrible  punifhment  upon  all  the  workers  of 
iniquity. 

You  fee  then  by  all  that  hath  been  faid  iipbn  this 
argument,  how  fhameful  a  thing  fin  is,  and  whaE 
*'  confufion  of  face"  the  reflexion  upon  our  wicked 
lives  ought  to  caufe  in  all  of  us.  "  What  fruit  had 
**  ye  then  in  thofe  things,  whereof  ye  are  now  afliam- 
*'  ed  ?'*  If  ever  we  be  brought  to  true  repentance 
for  our  fms,  it  cannot  but  be  matter  of  great  fhame 
to  us. 

We  find  In  fcripture  that  fhame  doth  continually 
accompany  repentance,  and  \%  infeparable  from  it.- 
This  is  one  mark  and  charadler  of  a  true  penitent,^ 
that  he  is  afhamed  of  what  he  hath  done.  Thus 
Ezra,  when  he  makes  confciTion  of  \\\(t  fins  of  the 
people,  he  teflifies  and  declares  his  fliame  for  what 
they  had  done  ^  "  I  faid,  O  my  God  f  I  am  afliam- 

ed,  and  blufh  to  lift  up  mine  eyes  to  thee  my 

God  i  for  our  iniquities  are  increafed  over  our 
**  heads,  and  our  trefpaffes  are  grown  up  to  the 

ip  G  2  f'  heavens/'^ 


7he  Jha?nefulnefs  oj  ftn^ 

"  heavens,"  Ezra  ix.  6.  And  may  not  we  of  this 
nation  at  this  day  take  thefe  words  unto  ourfelves, 
confidcring  to  what  a  (Vrange  height  our  fins  are 
grown,  and  how  iniquity  abounds  among  us  ?  So 
likewife  the  prophet  Jeremiah,  when  he  wQpld  ex- 
prefs  the  repentance  of  the  people  of  Ifrael,  Jer.  iii. 
25.  "  We  lye  down  (fays  he)  in  our  fhame,  and 
*'  our  confufion  covercth  us,  becaufe  we  have  finned 
*'  againft  the  Lord  our  God."  In  like  manner 
the  propj^^Daniel,  after  he  had  in  the  name  of  the 
people  rnl^lfl  humble  acknowledgment  of  their 
manifold  and  great  fins,  he  takes  fhame  to  himfelf 
and  them,  for  them.  Dan.  ix.  5.  "  We  have  fin- 
*'  ned,  fays  he,  and  have  committed  iniquity,  and 
*'  have  done  wickedly,  and  have  rebelled  in  depart- 
ing from  thy  precepts,  and  from  thy  judgments^ 
O  Lord,  righteoufnefs  belongeth  to  thee  ;  but 
unto  us  confufion  of  face,  as  at  this  day  -,  to  the 
men  of  Judah,  and  to  the  inhabitants  of  Jerufa- 
lem,  and  unto  all  Ifrael,  that  are  near,  and  that  are 
*'  far  ofl:",  through  all  the  countries  whither  thou  hail 
♦'  driven  them,  becaufe  of  their  trefpafs,  which  they 
*'  have  trefpalTed  againfl  thee  :  O  Lord  !  to  us  be- 
•'  longeth  confufion  of  face,  to  our  kings,  to  our 
•'  princes,  and  to  our  fathers,  becaufe  we  have  fm- 
*'  ned  againfl:  thee."  By  which  we  may  judge,  how 
confiderable  and  eflential  a  part  of  repentance,'  this 
holy  man  efteemed  fliame,  for  the  fins  they  had 
been  guilty  of,  to  be.  And  indeed  upon  all  occa- 
fions  of  folemn  repentance  and  humiliation  for  fin, 
this  taking  fliamc  for  their  fins  is  liardly  ever  omit- 
ted, as  if  there  could  be  no  fincere  confefTion  cf  fin 
and  repentance  for  it,  without  tellifying  their  fhame, 
and  "  confufion  of  tace"  upon  the  remembrance  of 
their  fins. 

Now 


cc 

«c 


an  argument  for  repentance.  3899 

Now  to  ilir  up  this  affe^lion  of  fhamc  in  us,  let  ^  E  R  ^• 
me  offer  to  you  thefe  three  confiderations'. 

I.  Confider  what  great  reafon  we  have  to  be  hear- 
tily afhamed  of  all  the  fins  and  offences  which  wc 
have  been  guilty  of  againft  God.  It  was  a  good  old 
precept  of  philofophy.  That  we  fliould  reverence 
ourfclves,  i.  e.  that  we  fliould  never  do  any  thing 
that  fliould  be  matter  of  fliame  and  reproach  to  ug 
afterwards,  nothing  that  mifljecomcs  us,  and  is  un^ 
worthy  of  us. 

I  have  fliewn  at  large,  that  all  fin  and  vice  is  ^ 
diflionour  to  our  nature,  and  beneath  the  dignity  of 
it  -,  that  it  is  a  great  reproach  to  our  reafon,  and  di- 
redlly  contrary  to  our  true  and  beft  intereil ;  that  it 
hath  all  the  aggravating  circumftances  of  infamy  and 
fhame  ;  that  every  fin  that  was  at  any  time  commit* 
ted  by  us,  was  done  in  the  prefence  of  one,  whom  of 
all  perfons  in  the  world  we  have  moft  reafon  to  re- 
verence, and  againft  him,  to  whom  of  all  others  wc 
ftand  moft  obliged  for  the  greateft  favours,  for  innu- 
merable benefits,  for  infinite  mercy  and  patience  and 
forbearance  towards  us,  in  the  prefence  of  the  holy  and 
juft  God,  who  is  at  the  fartheft  diftance  from  fin, 
and  the  greateft  and  moft  implacable  enemy  to  it  in 
the  whole  world  \  and  who  will  one  day  punifti  all 
our  faults,  and  expofe  us  to  open  fliame  for  them  ^ 
who  will  '^  bring  every  work  into  judgment,  and 
"  every  fecret  fin"  that  ever  we  committed,  and  take 
vengeance  upon  us  for  all  our  iniquities.  So  that 
v/hencver  we  fin,  v/c  fliamcfully  intreat  ourfelvcs, 
and  give  the  deepeft  wounds  to  our  reputation  in  the 
eftcem  of  him,  who  is  the  moft  competent  judge  of 
what  is  truly  honourable  and  praife-worthy,  and 
cloulie  ourfelves  with  fliame  and  diflionour. 

We  are  afliamed  of  poverty,  becaufe  the  poor  man 

i5 


2  goo  ^he  Jl^arnefulnefs  of  fin  ^ 

S  E  R  M.  is  defpifed,  and  almoft  ridiculous  in  the  eye  of  the 
^^^^  '  proud  and  covetous  rich  man,  "  whofe  riches  are  his 
**  hightower,"and  make  him  apt  to  look  down  upon 
the  poor  man  that  is  below  him,  with  contempt  and 
fcorn  •,  we  are  afhamed  of  a  dangerous  and  contagi- 
ous difcafe,  becaufe  all  men  fly  infectious  company  : 
but  a  man  may  be  poor  or  fick  by  misfortune  •,  but 
no  man  is  wicked,  but  by  his  own  fault  and  wilful 
choice.  Ill-natured  and  inconfiderate  men  will  be  apC 
to  contemn  us  for  our  poverty  and  affli6tion  in  any 
kind :  but  by  our  vices  we  render  ourfelves  odious  to 
God,  and  to  all  good  and  confiderate  men. 

II.  Confider  that  fliame  for  fin  now,  is  the  way  to 
prevent  eternal  fhame  and  confufion  hereafter.  For 
this  is  one  great  part  of  the  mifery  of  another  world, 
that  the  finner  Ihall  then  "  be  filled  with  everlafling 
*'  fhame  and  confufion"  at  the  remembrance  of  his 
faults  and  folly.  The  eternal  mifery  of  wicked  men 
is  fometimes  in  fcripture  reprefented,  as  if  it  confifted 
only  or  chiefly  in  the  infamy  and  reproach  which  will 
then  overwhelm  them,  when  all  their  crimes  and 
faults  fhall  be  expofed  and  laid  open  to  the  view  of 
the  whole  world,  Dan.  xii.  2.  where  the  general 
refurredlion  of  the  jufl:  and  unjuft:  is  thus  dcfcribed  ; 
Many  of  them  that  fleep  in  the  dult  of  the  earth 
fhall  awake,  fome  to  everlalling  life,  and  fome  to 
everlalling  fhame  and  contempt  :*'  where everlail:- 
ing  life  and  everlafling  fliame  are  oppofed,  as  if  eter- 
nal fhame  were  a  kind  of  perpetual  death. 

In  this  world  finners  make  a  hard  fhift,  by  con- 
cealing or  extenuating  their  faults,  as  well  as  they 
can,  to  fupprefs  or  Icfll^n  their  fliame  •,  they  have  not 
now  fo  clear  and  full  a  convidion  of  the  evil  and  folly 
of  their  fin  ;  God  is  pleafed  to  bear  with  them,  and 
to  fpara  them  at  prefent,  and  they  do  not  yet  feel  the 

difmxl 


4C 


an  argument  for  repentance.  39^^^ 

difmal  effefts  and  confequences  of  a  wicked  life  :  but  ^^^xiv^* 
in  the  next  world,  when  "  the  righteous  judgment 
"  of  God  is  revealed,"  and  the  full  vials  of  his 
wrath  fhall  be  poured  forth  upon  Tinners,  they  fhall 
then  "  be  clothed  with  fhanie  as  with  a  garment, 
and  "  be  covered  with  confufion:"  then  they  will 
feel  the  folly  of  their  fins,  and  have  a  fenfible  demon- 
ftration  within  themfelves  of  the  infinite  evil  of  them ; 
their  own  confciences  will  then  furioufly  fly  in  their 
Faces,  and  with  the  grcateft  bitternefs  and  rage  up- 
braid and  reproach  them  with  the  folly  of  their  own 
doings  J  and  fo  long  as  we  are  fenfible,  that  we  fufFer 
for  our  own  folly,  fo  long  we  muft  unavoidably  be 
afhamed  of  what  we  have  done.  So  that  if  finners 
fhall  be  everlaftingly  tormented  in  another  world,  it 
necefiarily  follows,  that  they  fliall  be  eternally  con- 
founded. 

Is  it  not  then  better  to  remember  our  ways  now, 
and  to  be  afhamed  and  repent  of  them,  than  to  bring 
everlafting  fhame  and  confufion  upon  ourfelves,  be- 
fore God,  and  angels,  and  men.^  This  is  the  argu-^ 
ment  which  St.  John  ufetli,  to  take  men  off  from  fin, 
and  to  engage  them  to  holinefs  and  righteoufnefs  of 
life  ;  I  Joh.  ii.  28.  "  That  when  he  fhall  appear,'* 
that  is,  when  he  fhall  come  to  judge  the  world,  "  we 
^'  may  have  confidence,  and  not  be  ailiamed  before 
■'  him  at  his  coming." 

III.  And  laftly,  Confider  that  nothing  fets  men  at 
a  farther  diflance  from  repentance,  and  all  hopes  of 
their  becoming  better,  and  brings  them  nearer  to 
ruin,  than  impudence  in  a  finful  courfe.  There  are 
too  many  in  the  world,  who  are  fo  far  from  being 
^fhamcd  of  their  wickednefs,  and  blufhing  at  the 
mention  of  their  faults,  that  they  boafl  of  them,  and 
jglory  in  them.     God  often  complains  of  this  in  the 

people 


3002  ^he  Jhaincfulnefs  of  Jin^ 

8  E  R  M.  people  of  Ifrael,  as  a  fad  prefage  of  their  ruin,  and 
an  ill  fign  Of  their  defperate  and  irrecoverable  condi- 
tion :  Jer.  iii.  3.  "  Thou  hadft  a  whore's  forehead, 
**  and  refufedft  to  be  afhamed  -,"  and  Jcrem.  vi.  15. 
**  Were  they  afhamed,  when  they  committed  abo- 
*'  minations  ?  Nay,  ihcy  were  not  afhamed,  neither 
*'  could  they  blufh :  therefore  they  fhall  fall  among 
*'  them  that  fall,  and  in  the  time  that  I  vifit  them 
*'  they  fliall  be  caft  down."  Hear  likewife  how 
the  apoflle  doth  lament  the  cafe  of  fuch  perfons,  as  are 
incurable  and  pafl  all  remedy:  Philip  iii.  18,  19,. 
*'  There  are  many  of  whom  I  have  told  you  often, 
*'  and  now  tell  you,  even  weeping,  that  they  arc 
*'  enemies  to  the  crofs  of  Christ;  whofe  end  is 
*'  defl:ru6lion,  whofe  God  is  their  belly,  whofe  glory 
•'  is  in  their  fhame."  Such  perfons  who  glory  in 
that  which  ought  to  be  their  Ihame,  what  can  their 
end  be  but  deflruclion  ? 

There  is  certainly  no  greater  argument  of  a  dege- 
nerate perfon,  and  of  one  that  is  utterly  loft  to  all 
fcnfe  of  o;oodnefs,  than  to  be  void  of  fhame  :  and  as 
on  the  one  hand,  they  muft  be  very  towardly,  and 
well  difpofed  to  virtue,  who  are  drawn  by  ingenuity, 
tind  meer  fenfe  of  obligation  and  kindnefs  •,  fo  on  the 
other  hand,  they  mull  be  very  ftupid  and  infenfible, 
who  are  not  wrought  upon  by  arguments  of  fear,  and 
fcnfe  of  fhame.  There  is  hardly  any  hopes  of  that 
man,  who  is  not  to  be  reclaimed  from  an  evil  courfe, 
neither  by  the  apprehenfion  of  danger,  nor  of  dif- 
grace,  and  who  c^x\  at  once  fecurely  ncgle(5l  both  his 
fafety  and  reputation. 

Hear  how  the  prophet  reprefents  the  deplorable- 
cafe  of  fuch  perfons,  Ifa.  iii.  9.  "  The  fhew  of  their 
*'  countenance  bears  witnefs  againft  them-,'*  in  the 
Hebrew  it  is,  "  The  hardnefs  of  their  countenance 

•'  dotA 


en  argument  for  repentance.  3903 

**  doth  teftify  againft  them,  and  they  declare  their  S  E  R  M, 
''  fin  as  Sodom,  they  hide  it  not.  Wo  unto  their 
*'  fouls,  for  they  have  rewarded  evil  to  themfelves." 
When  men  are  once  arrived  to  that  pitch  of  impiety, 
as  to  harden  their  foreheads  againft  all  fenfe  and  fliew 
of  fhame,  and  fo  as  to  be  able  to  fet  a  good  face  up- 
on the  fouleft  matter  in  the  world  ;  "  wo  unto 
"  them,"  becaufe  their  cafe  feems  then  to  be  defpe- 
rate,  and  paft  all  hopes  of  recovery.  For  who  can 
hope,  that  a  man  will  forfake  his  fins,  when  he  is 
not  fo  much  as  afhamed  of  them  ?  But  yet  one  would 
think,  that  thofe  that  are  not  afhamed  of  their  im- 
piety, fhould  be  afhamed  of  their  impudence,  and 
fliould  at  leaft  blufh  at  this,  that  they  can  do  the 
vileft  and  the  moft  fiiameful  things  in  the  world  with- 
out blufhing. 

To  conclude  this  whole  difcourfe,  let  the  confide- 
ration  of  the  evil  and  fhamefulncfs  of  fin  have  this 
double  effedt  upon  us,  to  make  us  heartily  afhamed 
of  the  paft  errors  and  mifcarriages  of  our  lives,  and 
firmly  refolved  to  do  better  for  the  future. 

I.  To  be  heartily  afhamed  of  the  paft  errors  of 
our  lives.  So  often  as  we  refle6l  upon  the  manifold 
and  heinous  provocations  of  the  divine  majefty,  which 
many  of  us  have  been  guilty  of  in  the  long  courfe  of 
a  wicked  hfe,  together  with  the  heavy  aggravations 
of  our  fins,  by  all  the  circumftances  that  can  render 
them  abominable  and  fhameful,  not  only  in  the  eye 
of  God  and  men,  but  of  our  own  confciences  like- 
wife  \  we  have  great  reafon  to  humble  ourfclves  be- 
fore God,  in  a  penitent  acknowledgment  of  them,  and 
every  one  of  us  to  fay  with  Job,  "  Behold  I  am  vile, 
*^  what  fhall  I  anfwer  thee  ?  I  will  lay  mine  hand 
"  upon  my  mouth,  I  abhor  myfclf,  and  repent  in 
*'  duft  and  afhes  •,"  and  with  Ezra,  "  O  my  God  1 

Vol.  IX.  19  H  *'Iam 

5 


iC 

cc 
cc 


^hejhamefulnefsofjin^ 

"  I  am  afliamed,  and  blufh  to  lift  up  my  face  to 
thee,  my  God  •,  for  our  iniquities  are  increafed  over 
our  heads,  and  our  trefpafs  is  grown  up  unto  the 
heavens  :  And  now,  O  my  God,  what  Ihall  we 
hy  after  this  ?  for  we  have  forfaken  thy  command- 
ments •,"  and  with  holy  Daniel,  "  we  have  finned, 
and  have  committed  iniquity,  and  have  done 
•'  wickedly  ;  O  Lord  !  righteoufnefs  belongeth  un- 
**  to  thee,  but  unto  us  confulion  of  face."  Thus 
we  fhould  reproach  and  upbrciid  ourfelves  in  the  pre- 
fence  of  that  holy  God,  whom  we  have  fo  often  and 
fo  highly  offended,  and  againft  whom  we  have  done 
as  evil  things  as  we  could,  and  fay  with  the  prodigal 
fon  in  the  parable  •,  *'  Father,  I  have  finned  againft 
*'  heaven  and  before  thee,  and  am  no  more  worthy 
*'  to  be  called  thy  fon." 

If  we  would  thus  take  fliame  to  ourfelves,  and 
humble  ourfelves  before  God,  he  would  "  be  merci- 
•'  ful  to  us  miferable  finners ;"  he  would  "  take  away 
*'  all  iniquity,  and  receive  us  gracioufly ;"  and  fo 
foon  as  ever  he  fiw  us  coming  towards  him,  would 
meet  us  with  joy,  and  embrace  us  in  the  arms  of  his 
mercy.     And  then, 

IT.  As  we  fhould  be  heartily  afhamed  of  the  paft 
errors  and  mifcarriages  of  our  lives,  fo  we  fliould 
firmly  refolvc,  by  God's  grace,  to  do  better  for  the 
Hiture ',  never  to  confent  to  iniquity,  or  to  do  any 
thing  which  we  are  convinced  is  contrary  to  our  du-* 
ty,  and  which  will  be  matter  of  fhame  to  us,  when 
we  come  to  look  back  upon  it,  and  make  our  blood 
to  rife  in  our  faces  at  the  mention  or  intimation  of  it ; 
which  will  make  us  to  fneak,  and  "  hang  down  our 
*'  heads,"  when  we  are  twitted  and  upbraided  with 
it,  and  which,  if  it  be  not  prevented  by  a  timely 
humiliation  and  repentance,  will  fill  us  with  horror 
^  and 


an  argiime'nt for  ?'€pfnfance,  39^ S 

and  amazement,  with  fhame  and  confufion  of  face, 
both  at  the  hour  of  death,  and  in  the  day  of  judgment. 

So  that  when  we  look  into-  our  hves,  and  examine 
the  adlions  of  them,  when  we  confider  what  we 
have  done,  and  what  our  doings  have  deferved,  we 
ihould,  in  a  due  fenfe  of  the  great  and  manifold  mif- 
carriages  of  our  lives,  and  from  a  deep  forrow  and 
fhame  and  deteflation  of  ourfelves  for  them  ;  I  fay, 
we  fhould,  with  that  true  penitent  defcribcd  in  Job, 
take  words  to  ourfelves,  and  fay,  *'  furely  it  is  meet 

to  be  faid  unto  God,  I  will  not  offend  any  more  ; 

that  which  I  know  not,  teach  thou  me  j  and  if  I 

have  done  iniquity,  I  will  do  no  more."  And 
thus  I  have  done  with  the  fecond  inconvenience  of  a 
finful  and  vicious  courfe  of  -life,  viz.  that  the  reflcdi- 
on  upon  it  afterwards  caufeth  fhaliie  -,  "  What  fruit 
**  had  you  then  in  thofe  things,  whereof  ye  are  now 
«  afhamed  ?" 


SERMON    CLXV. 

The  final  iffue  of  fin,  an  argument 
for  repentance, 

ROM.  vi.  21,  22. 

What  fruit  had  ye  then  in  thqfe  things^  whereof  ye  are 
now  afhamed  ?  For  the  end  of  thofe  things  is  death. 
But  now  being  made  free  from  ftn^  and  become  fer- 
vants  /^  God,  ye  have  your  fruit  unto  holinefs^  ayid 
the  end  everlafling  life, 

THESE  words  are  a  comparifon  between  an  ^^lxv^" 
holy  and  virtuous  and  a  finful  and   vicious  "^-^"-^r^ 
courfe  of  life,  and  fct  before  us  the  maaifeil  incon-  ^-g^'^^Voi 

i^  H   a  ;       venienpies  this  text. 


T'be  final  ijjue  of  Jin^ 

vcnlcncies  of  the  one,  and  the  manifold  advantages 
of  the  other.  I  have  entered  into  a  difcourfe  upon 
the  firft  of  thefe  heads,  viz.  The  manifeft  incon- 
veniencies  of  a  finful  and  vicious  courfe  :  and  the 
XxXi  mentions  thefe  three. 

I.  That  it  is  unprofitable. 

II.  That  the  reflexion  upon  it  afterwards  is  mat- 
ter of  fhame.  Thefe  two  I  have  fpoken  largely  to. 
I  fhall  now  proceed  to  the 

III.  And  lad  inconvenience,  which  the  text  men- 
tions, of  a  finful  and  vicious  courfe  of  life,  viz.  that 
the  final  iffue  and  confequence  of  thefe  things  is  very 
difmal  and  miferable  ;  "  the  end  of  thofe  things  is 
"  death."  No  fruit  then  when  ye  did  thefe  things  ; 
fhame  now  that  you  come  to  refled:  upon  them  \  and 
mifery  and  death  at  the  laft. 

There  are  indeed  almoft  innumerable  confiderati- 
ons  and  arguments  to  difcourage  and  deter  men  from 
fin  ;  the  unrcafonablenefs  of  it  in  itfelf ;  the  injuflice 
and  difloyalty,  and  ingratitude  of  it  in  refpeft  to 
God  ;  the  ill  example  of  it  to  others  ;  the  cruelty 
of  it  to  ourfclvcs  \  the  fhame  and  diflionour  that  at- 
tends it ;  the'  grief  and  forrow  which  it  will  coft  us, 
if  ever  we  be  brought  to  a  due  fenfe  of  it ;  the  trou- 
ble and  horror  of  a  guilty  confcience,  that  will  per- 
petually haunt  us  ;  but  above  all  the  miferable  event 
and  fad  ifllie  of  a  wicked  courfe  of  life  continued  in, 
and  finally  unrepentcd  of.  The  temptations  to  fin 
may  be  alluring  enough,  and  look  upon  us  with  a 
fmiling  countenance,  and  the  commiflion  may  af- 
ford us  a  fliort  and  imperfedl  pleafure  :  but  the  re- 
m.embrancc  of  it  will  certainly  be  bitter,  and  the  end 
of  it  milerable. 

And  this  confideration  is  of  all  others  the  moft 
>w      apt  to  work  upon  the  generality  of  men,  efpecially 

upon 


an  argument  for  repentance.  39^7 

upon  the  more  obftinate  and  obdurate  fort  of  Tinners,  SE  R  M, 
and  thofe  whom  no  other  arguments  will  penetrate  •, 
that  whatever  the  prefcnt  pleafure  and  advantage  of 
iin  may  be,  it  will  be  bitternefs  and  mifery  in  the  end. 

The  two  former  inconveniencies  of  a  finful  courfe, 
^hich  I  have  lately  difcourfed  of,  viz.  That  fin  is 
unprofitable,  and  that  it  is  fhameful,  are  very  confi- 
derable,  and  ought  to  be  great  arguments  ^gainfl;  it 
to  every  finner,  and  confiderate  man  :  and  yet  how 
light  are  they,  and  but  as  the  very  fmall  dull:  upon 
the  balance,  in  comparifon  of  that  infupportable 
weight  of  mifery  which  will  opprefs  the  finner  at 
lafl  !  "  Indignation  and  wrath,  tribulation  and  an- 
"  guifh  upon  every  foul  of  man  that  doth  evil.'* 
This,  this  is  the  fling  of  all,  that  "  the  end  of  thefe 
*'  things  is  death." 

It  is  very  ufual  in  fcripture  to  exprefs  the  greateft 
happinefs,  and  the  greatefb  mifery,  by  life  and  death  ; 
life  being  the  firft  and  mofl  defirable  of  all  other  blef- 
fings,  becaufe  it  is  the  foundation  of  them,  and  that 
which  makes  us  capable  of  all  the  reft.  Hence  we 
find  in  fcripture,  that  all  the  bleflings  of  the  gofpel 
are  fummed  up  in  this  one  word,  "John  xx.  31. 
*'  Thefe  things  are  written,  that  you  might  believe 
*'  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  and 
*'  that  believing  ye  might  have  life  through  his 
^'  name."  i  John  iv.  9.  "  In  this  was  manifeft  the 
*'  love  of  God  towards  us,  becaufe  that  God  fent  his 
**  only  begotten  Son  into  the  world,  that  we  might 
"  live  throuo;h  him."  So  that  under  this  term  or 
notion  of  life,  the  fcripture  is  wont  to  exprefs  all 
happinefs  to  us,  and  more  efpecially  that  eternal  life 
which  is  the  great  promife  of  the  gofpel.  And  this 
is  life  by  way  of  eminency  ;  as  if  this  frail  and  mor- 
tal and  miferable  life,  which  we  live  here  in  this 
wojjld,  did  not  defervc  tl*at  name.  And 


-^oo8  ^he  Ji?ial  ijfue  of  fin ^ 

And  on  the  other  hand,  all  the  evils  which  are 
conlequent  upon  fin,  efpecially  the  dreadful  and  laft- 
iiig  mifcry  of  another  world,  are  called  by  the  name 
of  death,  "  the  end  of  thefe  things  is  death."  So 
the  apoflle,  here  in  the  text,  and  v.  23.  "  The 
*'  wages  of  fin  is  death,"  not  only  a  temporal  death, 
but  fuch  a  death  as  is  oppofed  to  eternal  life  •,  "  The 
*'  wages  of  fin  is  death :  but  the  gift  of  God  is  eter- 
*'  nallife  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord."  So 
that  death  here  in  the  text  is  plainly  intended  to  com- 
prehend in  it  all  thofe  fearful  and  aftonifhing  miferies, 
wherewith  the  wrath  of  God  w^ill  purfue  and  afflict 
finners  in  another  world.  f^ 

But  ^vhat  and  how  great  this  mifery  is,  I  am  not 
able  to  declare  to  you  -,  "  it  hath"  no  more  "en- 
*'  tered  into  the  heart  of  man,"  than  thofe  great  and 
glorious  things  which  "  God  hath  laid  up  for  them 
"  that  love  him:*'  and  as  I  would  fain  hope,  that 
none  of  us  here  Ihall  ever  have  the  fad  experience  of 
k  5  fo  none  but  thofe  who  have  felt  it,  are  able  to 
give  a  tolerable  defcription  of  the  intolerablenefs  of  it. 

But  by  what  the  fcripture  hath  faid  of  it  in  gene- 
ral, and  in  fuch  metaphors  as  are  moft  level  to  our 
prefent  capacity,  it  appears  fo  full  of  terror,  that  I 
am  loth  to  attempt  the  rcprefentation  of  it.  There 
arc  fo  many  other  arguments,  that  are  more  human 
and  natural,  and  more  proper  to  work  upon  the  rea- 
fon  and  ingenuity  of  men  ;  as  the  great  love  and 
kindncfs  of  God  to  us  •,  the  grievous  fufferings  of 
his  Son  for  us ;  the  unreafonablencfs  and  fliameful* 
ncfs  of  fin  J  the  prefent  benefit  and  advantage,  the 
peace  and  plcafure  of  an  holy  and  virtuous  life  •,  and 
the  mighty  rewards  prcnufed  to  it  in  another  world, 
that  one  would  think  thcK  fliould  be  abundantly  fuf» 
ficient  to  prevail  with  men  to  gain  them  to  good- 

ncfs. 


an  argument  for  repentance^  3c>99 

ncfs,  and  that  they  need  not  to  be  frighted  Into  k,  S E  RM. 
and  to  have  the  law  laid  to  them,  as  it  was  once 
given  to  the  people  of  "  Ifrael,  in  thunder  and  light- 
^'  ning,  in  blacknefs,  in  darknefs  and  tempeft,"  fb 
as  to  make  them  ''  exceedingly  to  fear  and  tremble." 
And  it  feems  a  very  hard  cafe,  that  when  we  have  to 
deal  with  men,  fenfible  enough  of  their  interefl  in 
other  cafes,  and  diligent  enough  to  mind  it,  we  caa- 
not  pcrfuade  them  to  accept  of  happinefs,  without 
fetting  before  them  the  terrors  of  eternal  darknefs, 
and  thofe  amazing  and  endlefs  miferies,  which  will 
certainly  be  the  portion  of  thofe  who  refufe  fo  great 
an  happinefs ;  this  I  fay  feems  very  hard,  that  men 
muft  be  carried  to  the  gate  of  hell,  before  they  can 
be  brought  to  fet  their  faces  towards  heaven,  and  to 
think  in  good  earneil  of  getting  thither. 

And  yet  it  cannot  be  dilTembled,  that  the  nature 
of  men  is  fo  degenerate,  as  to  Hand  in  need  of  this 
argument  ;  and  that  men  are  fo  far  engaged  in  an 
evil  courfe,  that  they  are  not  to  be  reclaimed  from 
it  by  any  other  confideration,  but  of  the  endlefs  and 
unfpeakable  mifery  of  impenitent  finners  in  another 
world.  And  therefore  God,  knowing  how  nccef- 
fary  this  is,  doth  frequently  make  ufe  of  it  ;  and  our 
bleffed  Saviour,  than  whom  none  was  ever  more 
mild  and  gentle,  doth  often  fet  this  confideration  be- 
fore men  to  take  them  off  from  fin,  and  to  bring 
them  to  do  better.  And  this  St.  Paul  tells  us,  Rom. 
i.  1 8.  is  one  principal  thing  which  renders  the  go- 
fpel  fo  powerful  an  inilrumentfor  the  reforming  and 
faving  of  mankind,  becaufe  *'  therein  die  wrath  of 
*'  God  is  revealed  from  heaven,  againft  all  ungod- 
**  linefs  and  unrighteoufnefs  of  men." 

So  that  how  harfh  and  unoleafant  foever  this  nrQ:u- 
ment  may  be,  the  great  ilupidity  and  foJly  of  Tome 

men. 


o  Q I  o  I'he  final  ijfue  of  fin ^ 

men,  and  their  inveterate  obftinacy  in  an  evil  courfc 
makes  it  neceflary  for  us  to  prefs  it  home,  that  thofe 
who  will  not  be  moved,  and  made  fenfible  of  the 
danger  and  inconvenience  of  fin  by  gentler  arguments, 
may  be  roufed  and  awakened  by  the  terrors  of  eter- 
nal mifery.  ' 

That  the  lafl  ifTue  and  confequencc  of  a  wicked 
life  will  be  very  miferable,  the  general  apprehenfion 
of  mankind  concerning  the  fate  of  bad  men  in  an- 
other world,  and  the  fecret  mifgivings  of  mens  con- 
fciences^  gives  men  too  much  ground  to  fear.  Be- 
iides  that  the  juflice  of  divine  providence,  which  is 
not  many  times  in  this  world  fo  clear  and  manifeft, 
does  feem  to  require  that  there  fhould  be  a  time  of 
recompence,  when  the  virtue  and  patience  of  good 
men  fhould  be  rewarded,  and  the  infolencc  and  ob- 
ftinacy of  bad  men  fhould  be  punifhed.  This  can- 
not but  appear  very  reafonable  to  any  man,  that 
confiders  the  nature  of  God,  and  is  perfuaded  that 
he  governs  the  world,  and  hath  given  laws  to  man- 
kind, by  the  obfervance  whereof  they  may  be  happy, 
and  by  the  ncgle<5l  and  contempt  whereof  they  muft 
be  miferable. 

But  that  there  might  remain  no  doubts  upon  the 
tuinds  of  men,  concerning  thefe  matters,  God  hath 
been  pleafed  to  reveal  this  from  heaven,  by  a  pcrfon 
fent  by  him  on  purpofe  to  declare  it  to  the  world  ^ 
and  to  the  truth  of  thefe  do6lrines  concerning  a  fu- 
ture ftate  and  a  day  of  judgment,  and  recompences, 
God  hath  given  teflimony  by  unqueftionable  mira- 
cles wrouglit  for  the  confirmation  of  them,  and  par- 
ticularly by  "  the  refurredlion  of  Jesus  Christ 
*'  from  the  dead,  whereby  he  hath  given  an  alTu- 
*'  ranee  unto  all  men,  that  he  is"  the  perfon  "  or- 
^  dained  by  God  to  judge  the  world  in  righteoufnefs, 

*'and 


an  argument  for  repentance.  39^7 

**  and  to  render  to  every  man  according  to  his  deeds  5  S  R  M. 
to  them  who  by  patient  continuance  in  well-do- 
ing feek  for  glory,  and  honour  and  immortality, 
eternal  life ;  but  to  them  who  obey  not  the  truth, 
but  obey  unrighteoufnefs,  indignation  and  wrath, 
tribulation  and  anguiih  upon  every  foul  of  man 
"  that  doeth  evil." 

So  that  how  quietly  focver  wicked  men  may  pais 
through  this  world,  or  out  of  it,  (which  they  fcldom 
do)  mifery  will  certainly  overtake  their  fins  at  lad  3 
unfpeakable  and  intolerable  mifery,  arifing  from  the 
anguifh  of  a  guilty  confcience,  from  a  lively  appre- 
henfion  of  their  fad  lofs,  and  from  a  quick  fenfe  of 
the  fharp  pain  which  they  labour  under  -,  and  all  this 
aggravated  and  fet  off  with  the  confideration  of  paft 
pleafure,  and  the  defpair  of  future  cafe.  Each  of 
thefe  is  mifery  enough,  and  all  of  them  together  do 
conftitute  and  make  up  that  difmal  and  forlorn  ftate, 
which  thefcripture  calls  hell  and  damnation. 

I  fhall  therefore  briefly  reprefent  (for  it  is  by  no 
means  defirable  to  dwell  long  upon  fo  melancholy 
and  frightful  an  argument) 

Firft,  The  principal  ingredients  which  conftitute 
this  miferable  ftate.     And, 

Secondly,  The  aggravations  of  it. 
Firft,  The  principal  ingredients  which  conflitute 
this  miferable  ftate  \  and  they  are  thefe  three  which 
I  have  mentioned. 

I.  The  anguifh  of  a  guilty  mind. 

II.  The  lively  apprehenfions  of  the  invaluable  hap-< 
pinefs  which  they  have  loft. 

III.  A  quick  fenfe  of  the  intolerable  pains  which 
they  lie  under. 

I.  The  anguifh  of  a  guilty  confcience.  And  this 
is  natural ;  for  there  is  a  worm  that  abides  in  a  guilty 

Vol.  IX,  19  I  €QV)r 

,5 


^be  final  ijfue  of  fin ^ 

confcience,  and  is  continually  gnawing  it.  This  is 
that  our  Saviour  calls  "  the  worm  that  dies  not/* 
And  though  God  fhould  infli6l  no  pofitive  punifli- 
ment  upon  Tinners,  yet  this  is  a  revenge  which  every 
man's  mind  would  take  upon  him  •,  for  things  are 
fo  ordered  by  God,  in  the  original  frame  and  confli- 
tution  of  our  minds,  that  on  the  one  hand  peace  and 
pleafure,  contentment  and  fatisfaftion  do  naturally 
arife  in  our  minds  from  the  confcience  of  well-doing, 
and  fpring  up  in  the  foul  of  every  good  man  :  and 
on  the  other  hand,  no  man  knowingly  does  an  evil 
a6tion,  but  his  guilty  confcience  galls  him  for  it,  and 
the  remembrance  of  it  is  full  of  bitternefs  to  him. 

And  this  the  finner  feels  in  this  world  ;  he  difguif- 
eth  and  diflembleth  his  trouble  as  much  as  he  can, 
and  fhifts  off  thefe  uneafy  thoughts  by  all  the  diver- 
fions  he  can  dcvife,  and  by  this  means  palliates  his 
difeafe,  and  renders  his  condition  in  fome  fort  tolera- 
ble unto  himfelf  :  but  when  he  is  alone,  or  caft  up- 
on the  bed  of  ficknefs,  and  his  thoughts  are  let  loofe 
upon  him,  and  he  hath  nothing  to  give  them  a  di- 
verfion,  how  does  his  guilt  ferment  and  work  !  and 
the  fever,  which  lurked  before,  does  now  Ihew  it- 
fclf,  and  is  ready  to  burn  him  up  •,  fo  that  nothing 
can  appear  more  difiiial  and  ghaftly,  than  fuch  a  man 
does  to  himfelf. 

And  much  more,  when  finners  come  into  the  other 
world,  and  are  entered  into  the  regions  of  darknefs, 
and  the  melancholy  Ihades,  where  evil  fpirits  are 
continually  wandring  up  and  down  •,  where  they 
can  meet  with  nothing  either  ot  employment  or  plea- 
fure, to  give  the  lead  diverfion  to  their  penfive  minds  i 
where  they  fliall  find  nothing  to  do,  but  to  refledt 
upon,  and  bemoan  themfelves  ;  where  all  the  wick- 
ed adions  that  ever  they  committed  fhall  come  frelh 
2  into 


an  argument  for  repentance,     "  39^3 

into  their  minds,  and  flare  their  confciences  in  the  ^^^^'^* 
face.     It  is  not  to  be  imagined,  what  fad  fcenes  will 
then  be  prefent  to  their  imaginations,  and  what  fharp 
refle6lions  their  own  guilty  minds  will  make  upon 
them,  and  what  fwarms  of  furies  will  poffefs  them. 
So  foon  as  ever  they  are  entered  upon  that  ftate, 
they  will  then  find  themfelves  forfaken  of  all  thofe  com- 
forts which  they  once  placed  fo  much  happinefs  in  ; 
and  they  will  have  nothing  to  converfe  with,  but 
their  own  uneafy  felves,  and  thofe  that  are  as  mifera- 
ble  as  themfelves,  and  therefore  uncapable  of  admi- 
niflring  any  comfort  to  one  another.    They  will  thert 
have  nothing  to  think  on,but  what  will  trouble  them  ; 
and  every  new  thought  will  be  a  new  increafe  of  their 
trouble.     Their  guilt  will  make  them  rcftlefs,  and 
the  more  rcftlefs  they  are,  the  more  will  their  minds 
be  enraged  ;  and  there  will  be  no  end  of  their  vexa- 
tion, becaufe  the  caufe  and  ground  of  it  is  perpetual. 
For  there  is  no  poiTible  way  to  get  rid  of  guilt,  but 
by  repentance  ;  and  there  is  no  encouragement,  no 
argument  to  repentance,  where  there  is  no  hope  of 
pardon.     So  that  if  God  Ihould  hold  his  hand,  and 
leave  finners  to  themfelves,  and  to  the  laflies  of  their 
own  confcience,  a  more  fevere  and  terrible  torment 
can  hardly  be  imagined,  than  that  which  a  guilty 
mind  would  execute  upon  itfelf. 

II.  Another  ingredient  into  the  miferies  of  finners 
in  another  world,  is  the  lively  apprehenfion  of  the 
invaluable  happinefs  which  they  have  loft  by  their 
own  obftinacy  and  foolifh  choice.  In  the  next  world 
wicked  men  fliall  be  for  ever  feparated  from  God, 
who  is  the  fountain  of  happinefs,  and  from  all  the 
comforts  of  his  prefenceand  favour.  This,  our  Sa- 
viouR  tells  us,  is  the  firft  part  of  that  dreadful  fcn- 
tence  that  fhall  be  pafled  upon  the  wicked  at  the  great 

19  I  2  day  J 


^he  final  ijfue  of  fi^i^ 

day-,  *^  depart  from  me  ;"  which  words,  though 
they  do  not  fignify  any  pofitive  inflidion  and  tor- 
ment, yet  they  import  the  greateft  lofs  that  can  be 
imagined.  And  it  is  not  fo  eafy  to  determine  which 
is  the  greateft  of  evils,  lofs  or  pain.  Indeed  to  a 
creature  that  is  only  endowed  with  fenfc,  there  can 
be  no  mifery  but  that  of  pain  and  fuffering  :  but  to 
thofe  who  have  reafon  and  underftanding,  and  are 
capable  of  knowing  the  value  of  things,  and  of  re- 
fleding  upon  themfelves  in  the  want  of  them,  the 
greateft  lofs  may  be  as  grievous  and  hard  to  be  born 
as  the  greateft  pain. 

It  is  true,  that  finners  are  now  fo  immers'd  in  the  grofs 
and  fenfual  delignts  of  this  world,  that  they  have  no 
apprehenfion  of  the  joys  of  heaven,  and  the  pleafures 
of  God's  prefence,  and  of  the  happinefs  that  is  to  be 
enjoyed  in  communion  with  him,  and  therefore  they 
are  not  now  capable  of  eftimating  the  greatnefs  of  thi? 
Jofs.  But  this  infenfiblenefs  of  wicked  men  continues  no 
longer  than  this  prefentftate,  which  affords  them  va- 
riety of  objeds  of  pleafure  and  of  bufinefs  to  divert 
them  and  entertain  them  :  but  when  they  come  into 
the  other  world,  they  Ihall  then  have  nothing  elfe  to 
think  upon,  but  the  fad  condition  into  which  they 
have  brought  them.felves,  nothing  to  do  but  to  pore 
and  meditate  upon  their  own  misfortune,  when  they 
ihall  lift  up  their  eyes,  and  with  the  rich  man  m  the 
parable,  in  the  midft  of  their  torments,  look  up  to 
thofe  who  are  "  in  Abraham's  bofom-,"  and  their 
mifery  will  be  mightily  increafed  by  the  contempla- 
tion of  that  happinefs  which  others  enjoy,  and  them- 
felves have  fofooliflily  forfeited  and  fallen  Ihort  of  ^ 
infomuch  that  it  would  be  happy  for  them,  if  that 
God,  from  whofe  prefence  they  are  banifhed,  that 
heayen  froy[i  which  they  have  excluded  themfelves, 

and 


nn  argument  for  repentance.  39^5 

and  that  everlaftihg  glory,  which  they  have  delpifed  S  E  R  M. 
and  negledled,   might  be  for  ever  hid   from  their 
eyes,  and  never  come  into  their  minds. 

III.  This  is  not  all,  bur  befides  the  fad  apprehen- 
fion  of  their  lofs,  they  fhall  endure  the  fharpeft 
pains.  Thefe  God  hath  threatened  fmners  withal, 
and  they  are  in  fcriptiire  reprefcnted  to  us,  by  the 
moft  grievous  and  intolerable  pains  that  in  this  world 
we  are  acquainted  withal,  as  by  the  pain  of  burning. 
Hence  the  wicked  are  faid  "  to  be  cafl  into  the  lake, 
*'  which  burns  with  fire  and  brimflone,  and  into 
*'  the  fire  which  is  not  quenched;"  which,  whether 
it  be  literally  to  be  underftood  or  not,  is  certainly 
intended  to  fignify  the  moft  fevere  kind  of  torment; 
but  what  that  is,  and  in  what  manner  it  Ihall  be  in- 
flicted, none  know  but  they  that  feel  it,  and  he  under 
it.  The  fcripture  tells  fo  much  in  general  of  it,  as  is 
enough  to  warn  men  to  avoid  it ;  that  it  is  the  efi'edt 
of  a  mighty  difpleafure,  and  of  anger  armed  with 
omnipotence,  and  confequently  muft  needs  be  very 
terrible,  more  dreadful  than  we  can  now  conceive, 
and  probably  greater  than  can  be  defcribed  by  any  of 
thofe  pains  and  fufferings  which  now  v/e  are  acquaint- 
ed withal  •,  for  "  who  knows  the  power  of  God's 
^'  anger,"  and  the  utmoft  of  what  almighty  juilice 
can  do  to  finners  ?  Who  can  comprehend  the  vaft  fig- 
nificancy  of  thofe  exprcfTions,  "  fear  him,  who  af- 
"  ter  he  hath  killed  can  defcroy  both  body  and  foul 
*'  in  hell  V  and  again,  '^  it  is  a  fearful  thing  to  fall 
^'  into  the  hands  of  the  living  God  ?''  One  would 
think  this  were  mifery  enough,  and  needed  no  farther 
aggravation  ;  and  yet  it  hath  two  terrible  ones,  from 
the  confideration  of  paft  pleafures  which  finners  have 
enjoyed  in  this  world,  and  from  an  ucter  defpair  of 
future  eafe  and  remedy, 

J.  From 


-?  Q 1 6  5^^  ^fe^/  {([lie  of  fiUy 

1.  From  the  confideration  of  the  pafl  pleafufes 
which  finners  have  enjoyed  in  this  life.     This  will 
make  their  fufFerings  much  more  fharp  and  fenfible  ; 
for  as  nothing  commends  pleafure  more,  and  gives 
happinefs  a  quicker  tafte  and  rehfh,  than  precedent 
fufferings  and  pain,  there  is  not  perhaps  a  greater 
pleafure  in  the  world,  than  th^  flrange  and  fudden 
cafe  which  a  man  finds  after  a  fharp  fit  of  the  flonc 
or  coiick,  or  after  a  man  is  taken  off  the  rack,  and 
nature  which  was  in  an  agony  before  is  all  at  once  fet 
at  perfecft  eafe  :  fo  on  the  other  hand,  nothing  exaf- 
perates  fuffering  more,  and  fets  a  keener  edge  upon 
mifery,  than  to  ftep  into  afilidlions  and  pain  imme- 
diately out  of  a  ftate   of  great  eafe  and  pleafure. 
This  we  find  in  the  parable  was  the  great  aggravati- 
on of  the  rich  man's  torment,  that  he  had  firil  *'  re- 
*'  ceived  his  good  things/'  and  was  afterwards  tor- 
mented. We  may  do  well  to  confider  this,  that  thofc 
pleafures  of  fin  which  have  now  fo  much  of  tempta- 
tion in  them,  will  in  the  next  world  be  one  of  the 
chief  aggravations  of  our  torment. 

2 .  The  greatcft  aggravation  of  this  mifery  will  be, 
that  it  is  attended  with  the  defpair  of  any  future  eafe  \ 
and  when  mifery '  and  defpair  meet  together,  they 
make  a  man  completely  miferablc.  The  duration 
of  this  mifery  is  exprcffed  to  us  in  fcripture,  by  fuch 
words  as  are  ufed  to  lignify  the  longed  and  moft  in- 
terminable duration.  "  Depart  ye  curfed  into  ever- 
*'  lading  fire.  Matt.  xxv.  41.  Where  the  worm  dieth 
"  not,  and  the  fire  is  not  quenched,"  Mark  ix.  43. 
And  2  Theff.  i.  7.  it  is  there  faid,  that  thofe  "  who 
"  know  not  God,  and  obey  not  the  gofpel  of  his 

Son,  fliall  be  punifli'd  with  everlafting  dcflruc- 
tion,  from  the  prefence  of  the  Lx)rd,  and  from 
the  glory  of  his  power."     And  in  Rev.  xx.  10. 

That 


<c 


an  argument  for  repentance.  39^7 

That  ''  the  wicked  Ihall  be  tormented  day  and  night  S  r  R  M. 

.  CLXV 

"  tor  ever  and  ever.'*  And  what  can  be  imagined 
beyond  this  ?  This  is  the  perfe6lion  of  mifcry,  to  lyc 
under  the  greateft  torment,  and  yet  be  in  defpair  of 
ever  finding  the  leafl  eafe. 

And  thus  I  have  done  with  the  firft  thing  I  pro- 
pounded to  fpeak  to  from  this  text,  viz.  the  mani- 
feft  inconveniencies  of  a  finful  and  vicious  courfe  of 
life  j  that  it  brings  no  prefent  benefit  or  advantage 
to  us  ;  that  the  refledtion  upon  it  caufeth  fhame  -,  and 
that  it  is  fearful  and  mifcrable  in  the  laft  iiTue  and  con- 
fequence  of  it.     "  What  fruit  had  you,"  ^c. 

I  fhould  now  have  proceeded  to  the  fecond  part 
of  the  text,  which  reprefents  to  us  the  manifold  ad- 
vantages of  an  holy  and  virtuous  courfe  of  life  ; 
ver.  22.  "  But  now  being  made  free  from  fin,  and 
*^  become  the  fervants  of  righteoufnefs,  ye  have  your 
*'  fruit  unto  hoiinefs,"  there's  the  prefent  advantage 
of  it  i  "  and  the  end  everlafting  life,"  there's  the  fu- 
ture reward  of  it.  But  this  is  a  large  argument, 
which  will  require  a  difcourfe  by  itfelf,  and  therefore 
I  ihall  not  now  enter  upon  it  •,  but  Hiall  only  make 
fome  reue^tions  upon  what  hath  been  faid,  concerning 
the  miferable  ifiue  and  confequencc  of  a  wicked  life 
impenitenrly  perfifled  in. 

And  funly  if  we  firmly  believe  and  ferioufiy  con- 
fidcr  thefe  things,  we  have  no  reafon  to  be  fond  of 
any  vice  \  we  can  take  no  greater  comfort  or  con- 
tentment in  a  finful  courfe.  If  we  could  for  the 
feeming  advantage  and  Ihort  pleafure  of  fome  fins, 
difpenfe  with  the  temporal  mifchiefs  and  inconveni- 
encies of  them,  which  yet  I  cannot  fee  how  any  pru- 
dent and  confiderate  man  could  do  :  if  we  could 
conquer  fhame,  and  bear  the  infamy  and  reproach 
which  attends  mod  fins,  and  could  digeft  the  up- 

braidings 


CLXV. 


3  9 1 5  72;^  fi^^^  #'^  of  fin^ 

S  E  R  M.  braidings  of  our  own  confciences,  fo  often  as  we  call 
them  to  remembrance,  and  reflect  ferioufly  upon 
them  ;  though  for  the  gratifying  an  importunate  in- 
clination, and  an  impetuous  appetite,  all  the  incon- 
veniencies  of  them  might  be  born  withal  •,  yet  me- 
thinks  the  very  thought  of  the  end  and  ilTue  of  a 
wicked  life,  that  "  the  end  of  thefe  things  is  death," 
that  "  indignation  and  wrath,  tribulation  and  an- 
*'  guifli,"  far  greater  than  we  can  now  defcribe,  or 
imagine,  "  fliall  be  to  every  foul  of  man  that  doth 
*'  evil,"  fhould  over- rule  us.  Though  the  violence 
of  an  irregular  lull  and  defire  are  able  to  bear  down 
all  other  arguments,  yet  methinks  the  eternal  intereil 
of  our  precious  and  immortal  fouls  Ihould  ftill  lye 
near  our  hearts,  and  affedl  us  very  fenfibly.  Me- 
thinks the  confideration  of  another  world,  and  of  all 
eternity,  and  of  that  difmal  fate  which  attends  im- 
penitent finners  after  this  life,  and  the  dreadful  ha- 
zard of  beins:  miferable  for  ever,  ihould  be  more 
than  enough  to  difliearten  any  man  from  a  wicked 
life,  and  to  bring  him  to  a  better  mind  and  courfe. 

And  if  the  plain  reprefentations  of  thefe  things  do 
not  prevail  with  men  to  this  purpofe,  it  is  a  fign  that 
cither  they  do  not  believe  thefe  things,  or  elfe  that 
they  do  not  confider  them.  •,  one  of  thefe  two  mufi 
be  the  reafon  why  any  man,  notwithftanding  thefe 
terrible  threatnings  of  God's  word,  does  venture  to 
continue  in  an  evil  courfe. 

It  is  vehemently  to  be  fufpedled,  that  men  do  not 
.really  believe  thefe  things,  that  they  are  not  fully 
perfuaded  that  there  is  another  Hate  after  this  life, 
in  which  the  righteous  God  "  will  render  to  every 
"  man  according  to  his  deeds :"  and  therefore  fo 
much  wicked  nefs  as  we  fee  in  the  lives  of  men,  fo 
much  infidehty  may  reafonably  be  fufpedled  to  lye 

lurking 


an  argument  for  repentance^  j  o  i  g 

lurking  in  their  hearts.  They  may  indeed  fecming-  S  E  R  M. 
ly  profefs  to  believe  thefe  things  \  but  he  that  would 
know  what  a  man  inwardly  and  firmly  believes, 
lliould  attend  rather  to  his  adlions,  than  to  his  verbal 
profelTions  :  For  if  any  man  lives  fo,  as  no  man  that 
believes  the  principles  of  the  chriflian  religion  in  rea- 
fon  can  live,  there  is  too  much  reafon  to  queftion 
whether  that  man  doth  believe  his  religion  •,  he  may 
fay  he  does,  but  there  is  a  far  greater  evidence  in  the 
cafe  than  words  j  the  aftions  of  the  man  are  by  far 
the  moil  credible  declarations  of  the  inward  fenfe  and 
perfuafion  of  his  mind. 

Did  men  firmly  and  heartily  believe  that  there  is 
a  God  that  governs  the  world,  and  regards  the  ac- 
tions of  men,  and  that  "  he  hath  appointed  a  day 
"  in  which  he  will  judge  the  world  in  righteoufnefs,'* 
and  that  all  mankind  fliall  appear  before  hini'  in 
that  day,  and  every  adlion  that  they  have  done  in 
their  whole  lives  fliall  be  brought  upon  the  flage,  and 
pafs  a  flrid  examination  and  cenfure,  and  that  thofe 
who  have  made  confcience  of  their  duty  to  God  and 
men,  and  have  "  lived  foberly,  righteoufly,  and 
"  godly  in  this  prefent  world,"  fliall  be  unfpeakably 
and  eternally  happy  in  the  next ;  but  thofe  who  haves 
lived  leud  and  licentious  lives,  and  perfifled  in  an 
impenitent  courfe,  fhall  be  extremely  and  everlafl- 
ingly  miferable,  without  pity,  and  without  comfort, 
and  without  remedy,  and  without  hope  of  ever  be- 
ing othcrwife  •,  I  fiy,  if  men  were  fully  and  firmly 
perfuaded  of  tliefe  things,  it  is  not  credible,  it  \% 
hardly  pofTible  that  they  fhould  live  fuch  profane 
and  impious,  fuch  carelefs  and  difTolute  hves,  as  wc 
daily  fee  a  great  part  of  mankind  do. 

That  man  that  can  be  awed  from  his  duty,  or 
tempted  to  fin  by  any  of  the  pleafures  or  te;-rors  of 

Vol.  IX,  19  K  this 


2  Q  2  o  7/6^  fi^^^  i/f^^  of  fi^:t 

S  F  R  M.  this  world,  that  for  the  prefent  enjoyment  of  his  lufls 
cLxv.  ^^^  y^^  contented  to  venture  his  foul,  what  greater 
evidence  than  this  can  there  be,  that  this  man  does 
not  believe  the  threatnings  of  the  gofpel,  and  how 
"  fearful  a  thing  it  is  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the 
*'  living  God?'*  That  man  that  can  be  willing  to 
undergo  an  hard  fervice  for  feveral  years,  that  he 
may  be  in  a  way  to  get  an  eftate,  and  be  rich  in  this 
world  ;  and  yet  will  not  be  perfuaded  to  reflrain  him- 
{di  of  his  liberty,  or  to  deny  his  pleafure,  or  to 
check  his  appetite  or  lull,  for  the  greateft  reward 
that  God  can  promife,  or  the  fevereft  punifhment 
that  he  can  threaten  ;  can  any  man  reafonably  think, 
that  this  man  is  perfuaded  of  any  fuch  happinefs  or 
mifery  after  this  life,  as  is  plainly  revealed  in  the  gofpel, 
that  "  verily  there  is  a  reward  for  the  righteous,  and 
"  verily  there  is  a  God  that  judgeth  the  earth  ?'* 
For  what  can  he  that  believes  not  one  fyllable  of  the 
bible,  do  worfe  than  this  comes  to  ? 

A  flrong  and  vigorous  faith  even  in  temporal 
cafes,  is  a  powerful  principle  of  adion,  efpecially  if 
it  be  backed  and  enforced  with  arguments  of  fear. 
He  that  believes  the  reality  of  a  thing,  and  that  it  is 
good  for  him,  and  that  it  may  be  attained,  and  that 
if  he  do  attain  it,  it  will  make  him  very  happy,  and 
that  without  it  he  fliall  be  extremely  miferable  •,  fuch 
a  belief  and  perfuafion  will  put  a  man  upon  difficult 
things,  and  make  him  to  put  forth  a  vigorous  en- 
deavour, and  to  ufe  a  mighty  induftry  for  the  ob- 
taining of  that,  concerning  which  he  is  thus  per- 
fuaded. 

And  the  faith  of  the  gofpel  ought  to  be  fo  much 

the  more  powerful,  by  how  much  theobjeds  of  hope 

and  fear,  which  it  prefents  to  us,  are  greater  and 

more  confiderable.     Did  men  fully  believe  \\\t  hap- 

?'  pinefs' 


an  argument  for  repenfarice,  "^  0  2  r 

pinefs  of  heaven,  and  the  torments  of  heJJ,  and  were  S  E  R  M. 
they  as  verily  perfuaded  of  the  truth  of  them,  as  if  .^^''•^^' 
they  were  before  their  eyes,  how  infignificant  would 
all  the  terrors  and  temptations  of  {t'^iit  be  to  draw 
them  into  fin,  and  feduce  them  from  their  duty  ? 

But  although  it  fcems  very  ilrange,  and  aimoft 
incredible,  that  men  fhould  believe  thefe  things,  and 
yet  live  wicked  and  impious  lives  ;  yet  becaufe  I  have 
no  mind,  and  God  knows  there's  no  need  to  in- 
creafe  the  number  of  infidels  in  this  age,  I  fliall  chufe 
rather  to  impute  a  great  deal  of  the  wickednefs  that 
is  in  the  world,  to  the  inconfideratenefs  of  men,  than 
to  their  unbelief  I  will  grant  that  they  do  in  fome 
fort  believe  thefe  things,  or  at  lead  that  they  do  not 
difbelieve  them  ;  and  then  the  great  caufe  of  m.ens 
ruin  muft  be,  that  they  do  not  attend  to  the  confe- 
quence  of  this  belief,  and  how  men  ought  to  live 
that  are  thus  perfuaded.  Men  flifle  their  reafon,  and 
fuffer  themfelves  to  be  hurried  away  by  fenfe,  into 
the  embraces  of  fenfual  objects  and  things  prefent,  but 
do  not  confider  what  the  end  of  thefe  things  will  be, 
and  what  is  like  to  become  of  them  hereafter  ;  for  it 
is  not  to  be  imagined,  but  that  man  v/ho  fliall  calm- 
ly confider  with  himfelf  what  fin  is,  the  fhortnefs  of 
its  pleafure,  and  the  eternity  of  its  punifliment,  fliould 
fcrioudy  refolve  upon  a  better  courfe  of  hfe. 

And  why  do  we  not  confider  thefe  things,  which 
are  of  fo  infinite  concernment  to  us  ?  What  have  we 
our  reafon  for,  but  to  refle6t  upon  ourfelves,  and  to 
mind  what  we  do,  and  wifely  to  compare  things  to- 
gether, and  upon  the  whole  matter  to  judge  what 
makes  moft  for  our  true  and  lafting  intcreil  ?  to  con- 
fider our  whole  felves,  our  fouls  as  well  as  our  bo- 
dies i  and  our  whole  duration  not  only  in  this  world, 
but  in  the  other,  not  only  with  regard  to  time,  but 

19  K  ^  to 


2  o  2 1  ^f^^  J&W  ijjtie  of  JiTty 

S  E  R  M.  to  eternity?  to  look  before  us  to  the  laft  ilTue  and 
*  ;  event  of  our  aflions,  and  to  the  fartheft  confequencc 
of  them,  and  to  reckon  upon  what  will  be  hereafter, 
as  well  as  what  is  prcfent  •,  and  if  we  fufped  or  hope 
or  fear,  efpecially  if  we  have  good  reafon  to  believe 
a  future  flate  after  death,  in  which  we  fhall  be  happy 
or  miferable  to  all  eternity,  according  as  we  manage 
and  behave  ourfelves  in  this  world,  to  refolve  to 
make  it  our  greatefb  defign  and  concerument  wliile 
we  are  in  tilis  world,  fo  to  hve  and  demean  ourfelves, 
that  we  miy.be  of  the  number  of  thofe  that  Ihall  be 
accounted  worthy  to  efcape  that  mifery,  and  to  ob- 
tain that  happinefs,  which  will  laft  and  continue  for 
ever. 

And  if  men  would  but  apply  their  minds  lerioufly 
to  the  confideration  of  thefe  things^  they  could  not 
act  fo  imprudently  as  they  do  -,  they  would  not  live 
fo  by  chance  and  without  defign,  taking  the  pleafure 
that  comes  next,  and  avoiding  the  prefent  evils  which 
prefs  uDon  them,  without  any  regard  to  thofe  that 
are  future,  and  at  a  diftance,  though  they  be  infinite- 
ly "greater  and  more  confiderable  :  If  men  could  have 
the  patience  to  debate  and  argue  thefe  matters  with 
thcmfelves,  they  could  not  live  fo  prepofteroufly  as 
they  do,  preferring  their  bodies  before  their  fouls,  and 
the  world  before  God,  and  the  things  which  arc 
temporal  before  the  things  that  are  eternal. 

Did  men  verily  and  in  good  earneft  believe  but 
half  of  that  to  be  true,  which  hath  now  been  declared 
to  you,  concerning  the  miferable  ftate  of  impenitent 
fmners  in  another  world,  (and  I  am  very  fure,  that 
the  one  half  of  that  which  is  true  concerning  that 
liate  hath  not  been  told  you)  I  fay,  did  we  in  any 
meafure  believe  what  hath  been  fo  imperfe6lly  repre- 
sented, "  what  manner  of  pcrfons  fhould  we  all  be. 


''  m 


en  argument  for  repentance],       -         3923 

**  in  all  holy  converfation  and  godlinefs,  waiting  for 
*'  and  haftening  unto"  (that  is,  making  hafte  to  make 
the  befl  preparation  we  could  for)  "  the  coming  of 
*'  the  day  of  God'/'  | 

I  will  conclude  all  with  our  Saviour's  exhorta- 
tion to  his  difciples,  and  to  all  others  ;  "  watch  ye 
"  therefore  and  pray  always,  that  ye  may  be  ac- 
*'  counted  worthy  to  efcape  all  thefe  things,  and  to 
"  fland  before  the  Son  of  man :  To  whom,  with 
"  the  Father  and  the  Holy  Ghoft,  be  all  honour  and 
*^  glory,  world  without  end.     Amen." 


SERMON     CLXVI. 

The  prefent  and  future  advantage  of  an 
holy  and  virtuous  Hfe. 

ROM.  vi.  21,  22.  » 

W'hat  fruit  had  ye  then  in  thofe  things^  whereof  ye 
are  now  afhamed  ?  For  the  end  of  thofe  things  is 
death.  But  now  being  made  free  from  ftn^  and 
become  fervants  to  God,  ye  have  your  fruit  unto 
holinefs^  and  the  end  everlafling  life* 

I  HAVE  feveral  times  told  you,  that  the  apoftle  S  E  R  M 
in  thefe  words  makes  a  comparilon  between  an  ^^^J^ J 

holy  and  virtuous,  and  a  finful  and  vicious  courfe  of  The  fourth 
life,  and  fets  before  us  the  manifeft  inconveniencies  ^^';'"o"  ^"^ 
of  the  one,  and  the  manifold  advantages  of  the  other. 
I  have  finifhed  my  difcourfe  upon  the  firft  part  of 
the  comparifon  -,  the  manifeft  inconveniencies  of  a 
finful  and  vicious  courfe.  I  proceed  now  to  the  other 
part  of  the  comparifon,  which  was  the  Second 


CLXVI. 


3924  ^b^  prefent  and  future  advantage 

S  E  R  M.  Second  thing  I  propounded  to  ipeak  to  from  thefe 
words,  viz.  the  manifold  benefits  and  advantages  of 
an  holy  and  virtuous  courfe  ;  and  that  upon  thefc 
two  accounts. 

Firfl,  Of  the  prefent  benefit  and  advantage  of  it, 
which  the  apoftle  here  calls  fruit,  "  ye  have  your  fruit 
"  unto  hoHnefs." 

Secondly,  In  refpe6t  of  the  future  reward  of  it, 
"  and  the  end  everlafting  life.'*  So  that  here  is  a 
confiderable  earned  in  hand,  befides  a  mighty  recom- 
pence  afterwards,  infinitely  beyond  the  proportion  of 
our  beft  adions  and  fervices,  both  in  regard  of  the 
greatnefs  and  duration  of  it,  "  everlafting  hfe  j"  that 
is,  for  a  few  tranfient  a6ls  of  obedience,  a  perfecl  and 
immutable  and  endlefs  ftate  of  happinefs.  And  thefe 
two  the  apoftle  mentions  in  oppofition  to  the  incon- 
veniencies  and  evil  confequences  of  a  wicked  and  vi- 
cious courfe  ;  "  what  fruit  had  you  then  in  thofe 
"  things  ?  &c." 

But  before  I  come  to  fpeak  to  thefe  two  parti- 
culars, I  fhall  take  notice  of  the  defcription  which 
the  apoftle  here  makes,  of  the  change  from  a  ftate 
of  fin  and  vice  to  a  ftate  of  holinefs  and  vir- 
tue. "  But  now  being  made  free  from  fin,  and  be- 
"  come  the  fervants  of  God  i"  intimating  that  the 
ftate  of  fin  is  a  ftate  of  fervitude  and  flavery,  from 
which  repentance  and  the  change  which  is  there- 
by made  does  fet  us  free  ;  "  but  now  being  made 
*'  free  from  fin."  And  fo  our  Saviour  tells  us, 
that  "  whofoever  committeth  fin  is  the  fervant  of 
"  fin  •,"  and  this  is  the  vileft  and  hardeft  flavery 
in  the  world,  becaufe  it  is  the  fervitude  of  the  foul, 
the  beft  and  nobleft  part  of  ourfclves  -,  it  is  the 
fubjedlion  of  our  reafon,  which  ought  to  rule  and 
bear  fway  over  the  inferior  faculties,  to  our  fen- 

fual 


of  a7i  holy  and  virtuous  life,  ,        3925 

fual  appetites  and  brutifh  paflions  ;  which  is  as  un-  S  E  R  M. 
comely  a  fight,  as  to  fee  beggars  ride  on  horfe-back, 
and  princes  walk  on  foot.  And  as  inferior  perfons, 
when  they  arc  advanced  to  power,  are  ilrangely  in- 
folent  and  tyrannical  towards  thofe  that  are  fubjedl 
to  them  ;  fo  the  lufts  and  paflions  of  men,  when  they 
once  get  the  command  of  them,  are  the  moil  domi- 
neering tyrants  in  the  world  j  and  there  is  no  fuch 
flave  as  a  man  that  is  fubjedl  to  his  appetite  and  luft, 
that  is  under  the  power  of  irregular  paflions  and  vi- 
cious inclinations,  which  tranfport  and  hurry  him  to 
the  vileft  and  mofl:  unreafonable  things.  For  a  wick- 
ed man  is  a  flave  to  as  many  mafliers  as  he  hath  paf- 
fions  and  vices  ;  and  they  are  very  imperious  and  ex- 
ading,  and  the  m6re  he  yields  to  them,  the  more  they 
grow  upon  him,  and  exercife  the  greater  tyranny- 
over  him  :  and  being  fubje6l  to  fo  many  mafl:ers,  the 
poor  flave  is  continually  divided  and  difl:ra6led  be- 
tween their  contrary  commands  and  impofitions  ;  one 
pafllon  hurries  him  one  way,  and  another  as  violent- 
ly drives  him  another  -,  one  lufl:  commands  him  up- 
on fuch  a  fervice,  and  another  it  may  be  at  the  fame 
time  calls  him  to  another  work.  His  pride  and  am- 
bition bids  him  fpend  and  lay  it  out,  whilfl:  his  covc- 
toufnefs  holds  his  hand  fafl:  clofed  ;  fo  that  he  knov/s 
not  many  times  how  to  difpofe  of  himfelf  or  what  to 
do,  he  mufl:  difpleafe  fome  of  his  mafters,  and  what 
inclination  foever  he  contradicts,  he  certainly  dif- 
plcafeth  himfelf. 

And  that  which  aggravates  the  mifery  of  his  con- 
dition is,  that  he  voluntarily  fubmits  to  this  fervi' 
tude.  In  other  cafes  men  are  made  flaves  againfl:  their 
wills,  and  are  brought  under  the  force  and  power  of 
others,  whom  they  are  not  able  to  refifl: :  but  the 
fmner  chufeth  this  fervitude,  and  willingly  puts  his 

neck 


-5026  ^^^  prejent  and  juture  advantage 

S  b  R  M.  neck  under  this  yoke.     There  are  few  men  in  the 

CLXVI 

world  fo  Tick  of  their  liberty,  and  fo  weary  of  their 
own  happinefs,  as  to  chufe  this  condition  :  but  the 
finner  fells  himfelf,  and  voluntarily  parts  with  that 
liberty,  which  he  might  keep,  and  which  none  could 
take  from  him. 

An^  which  makes  this  condition  yet  more  into- 
lerable, he  makes  himfelf  a  Have  to  his  own  fervants, 
to  thofe  who  are  born  to  be  fubje6l  to  him,  to  his 
own  appetites  and  paiTions  ;  and  this  certainly  is  the 
worft  kind  of  (lavery,  fo  much  worfe  than  that  of 
mines  and  gallies,  as  the  foul  ifi  more  noble  and  ex- 
cellent than  the  body. 

Men  are  not  ufually  fo  fenfible  of  the  mifery  of 
this  kind  of  fervitude,  becaufe  they  are  govern' d  by 
fenfe  more  than  reafon :  But  according  to  a  true  judg- 
ment and  eftimation  of  things,  a  vicious  courfe  of 
life  is  the  faddeft,  (lavery  of  all  others.  And  there- 
fore the  gofpel  rcprefents  it  as  a  defign  every  way 
worthy  of  the  Son  of  God,  to  come  down  from 
heaven,  and  to  debafe  himfelf  fo  far,  as  to  aiTume  our 
nature,  and  to  fubmit  to  the  death  of  the  crofs,  on 
purpofe  to  refcue  us  from  this  flavery,  and  to  affert 
us  into  "  the  liberty  of  the  fons  of  God."  And  this 
IS  the  great  defign  of  the  dodlrine  of  the  gofpel,  to 
free  men  from  the  bondage  of  their  lulls,  and  to 
bring  them  to  the  fervice  of  God,  "  whofe  ferviceis 
*'  perfect  freedom."  And  therefore  our  Saviour 
tells  us,  John  viii.  31,  32.  That  "  if  we  continue  in 
"  his  word,"  i.  e.  if  we  obey  his  dodlrine,  and  frame 
our  lives  according  to  it,  it  will  make  us  free  \  "  ye 
•'  fhall  know  (fays  he)  the  truth,  and  the  truth  (hall 
*'  make  you  free."  And  if  we  obferve  it,  the  fcrip- 
ture  delights  very  much  to  fet  forth  to  us  the  benefits 
and  advantages^of  the  chriflian  religion  by  the  meta- 
phor 


ef  nn  holy  and  virtuous  life.  39^7 

phor  of  li'berty  and  redemption  from  captivity  and  S  F,  R  M, 
flavery.  Hence  our  Saviour  is  often  called  the  re- 
deemer and  deliverer,  and  is  faid  to  have  "  obtained 
"  eternal  redemption  for  us."  And  the  publifhing 
of  the  gofpcl  is  compared  to  the  proclaiming  of  the 
year  of  jubilee  among  the  Jews,  when  all  perfons  that 
would  were  fet  at  Hberty.  Ifa.  Ixi.  i,  2.  "  TheSpi- 
*^  rit  of  the  Lord  is  upon  me,"  faith  the  prophet 
fpeaking  in  the  perfon  of  the  MelTiah,  "  becaufe  he 
"  hath  anointed  me  to  proclaim  liberty  to  the  cap- 
"  tives,  and  the  opening  of  the  prifon  to  them  that 
"  are  bound,  to  proclaim  the  acceptable  year  of  the 
*^  Lord."  And  it  is  probable  that  upon  this  ac- 
count iikewife  the  chriftian  dodlrine  or  law  is  by  St. 
James  called  "  the  royal  law  of  liberty." 

This  is  the  great  defign  of  chriftianity,  to  fet  men 
free  from  the  flavery  of  their  lufts ;  and  to  this  end 
the  apoftle  tells  us.  Tit.  ii.  13.  that  *'  Christ  gave 
"  himfelf  for  us,  that  he  might  redeem  us  from  all 
*'  iniquity,  and  purify  to  himfelf  a  peculiar  people, 
"  zealous  of  good  works."  And  herein  the  great 
mercy  and  compafTion  of  God  towards  mankind  ap- 
peared, in  that  he  fent  his  Son  to  refcue  us  from  that 
fervitude,  which  we  had  fo  long  groaned  under,  that 
*'  being  made  free  from  fin,  we  might  become  the 
*'  fervants  of  God,  and  the  fervants  of  righteoufnefs." 

And  this  he  hath  done  not  only  by  the  price  of 
his  blood,  but  by  the  power  and  purity  of  his  doc- 
trine, and  the  holy  example  of  his  life,  and  by  all 
thofe  confideratioHS  which  reprefent  to  us  the  mifery 
of  our  finful  ftate,  and  the  infinite  danger  of  conti- 
nuing in  it :  and  on  the  other  hand,  by  fetting  before 
us  the  advantages  of  a  religious  and  holy  life,  and 
what  a  bleffed  change  we  make,  when  we  quit  the 
fervice  of  fin,  and  becouie  the  fervants  of  God.     It 

Vol.  IX.  19  L  will 

4 


S  E  R  M.  ^ii]  not  only  be  a  mighty  prefent  benefit  to  us,  but 
will  make  us  happy  to  all  eternity  ;  and  thefe  are  the 
two  confiderations  which  at  firfl  I  propounded  to 
fj3cak  to  at  this  time. 

Firfl,  The  prefent  benefit  of  an  holy  and  virtuous 
life,  which  the  apoftle  here  calls  fruit  •,  "-  But  now 
"  being  made  free  from  fin,  and  become  the  fer- 
"  vants  of  God,  ye  have  your  fruit  unto  holinefs.'* 
Secondly,  The  future  reward  and  recompence  of 
it  •,  "  and  the  end  everlafting  life." 

Firfl:,  Let  us  confider  the  prefent  benefit  and  ad- 
vantage of  an  holy  and  virtuous  life,  which  the  apo- 
flle  here  calls  fruit.  If  all  things  be  truly  confidered, 
there  is  no  advantage  comes  to  any  man  by  a  wicked 
and  vicious  courfe  of  life,  A  wicked  life  is  no  pre- 
fent advantage  \  the  reflection  upon  it  afterwards  is 
fliameful  and  troublefom  •,  and  the  end  of  it  mife- 
rable.  But  on  the  contrary,  the  advantages  of  an 
holy  and  good  life  are  many  and  great  even  in  this 
world,  and  upon  temporal  accounts,  abllra6ling  from 
the  confideration  of  a  future  reward  in  the  world  to 
come. 

I  fhall  inflance  in  five  or  fix  eminent  advantages, 
which  it  ufually  brings  to  men  in  this  world. 

I.  It  brings  great  peace  and  contentment  of  mind, 

II.  It  is  a  very  fit  and  proper  means  to  promote 
our  outward  temporal  interefl. 

III.  It  tends  to  the  lengthening  our  days,  and  hath 
frequently  the  blefTing  of  long  life  attending  upon  it, 

IV.  It  gives  a  man  great  peace  and  comfort  when 
Jie  comes  to  die. 

V.  After  death  it  tranfmits  a  good  name  and  re- 
putation to  poflierity. 

VI.  It  derives  a  blefTing  upon  our  poflerity  after 
ys,     ApcJ  (hefe  are  certainly  the  greateft  bleffings 

that 


()f  an  holy  and  'virtuous  life,  39^9 

that  a  wife  man  can  aim  at,  and  defign  to  himfclf  in  ^1;  ^y¥' 
this  world.     Every  one  of  thcfe  taken  feverally  is 
very  confiderable  \  but  all  of  tJiem  together  com- 
plete a  man's  temporal   felicity,  and  raife  it  to  as 
high  a  pitch  as  is  to  be  expe6led  in  this  world. 

I.  A  religious  and  virtuous  courfe  of  life  is  the 
bed  way  to  peace  and  contentment  of  mind,  and 
does  commonly  bring  it.  And  to  a  wife  man,  that 
knows  how  to-  value  the  eafe  and  fatisfadion  of  his 
own  mind,  there  cannot  be  a  greater  temptation  to 
religion  and  virtue,  than  to  confider  that  it  is  the  bed 
and  only  way  to  give  reft  to  his  mind.  And  this  is 
prefent  fruit  and  ready  payment  -,  becaufe  it  imme- 
diately follows,  or  rather  accompanies  the  difcharge 
of  our  duty.  "  The  fruit  of  righteoufncfs  is  peace,'* 
faith  the  prophet  *,  and  the  apoftle  to  the  Hebrews 
fpeaks  of  "  the  peaceable  fruits  of  righteoufncfs,'* 
meaning  that  inward  peace  which  a  righteous  man 
hath  in  his  own  mind. 

A  man  needs  not  to  take  pains,  or  to  ufe  many 
arguments,  to  fatisfy  and  content  his  own  mind,  af- 
ter he  hath  done  a  good  adion,  and  to  convince 
himfelf,  that  he  hath  no  caufe  to  be  troubled  for  it  •,  for 
peace  and  pleafure  do  naturally  fpring  from  it  :  nay^ 
not  only  fo,  but  there  is  an  unexpreiTible  kind  ot 
pleafure  and  delight,  that  flows  from  the  teftimony 
of  a  good  confcience.  Let  but  a  man  take  care  to 
fatisfy  himfelf  in  the  doing  of  his  duty,  and  what- 
ever troubles  and  ftorms  may  be  raifed  from  with- 
out, all  will  be  clear  and  calm  within  :  for  nothing 
but  guilt  can  trouble  a  man's  mind,  and  fright  his 
confcience,  and  make  him  uneafy  to  himfelf ;  that 
indeed  will  wound  his  fpirit,  andftinghis  very  foul, 
and  make  him  full  of  fearful  and  tormenting  thoughts* 
This  Cain  found  after  he  had  committed  that  crying 

jp  L  2  fin 


3  9  3  o  ^be  prefe7it  and  future  advantage 

S  E  R  M.   fin  of  murderino;  his  brother.     Gen.  iv.  6.  '^  The 
CLXvr.  . 

*'  Lord  faid  unto  Cain,  why  art  thou  wrath  ?  And 

"  why  is  thy  countenance  fallen  ?  His  guilt  made 
him  full  of  wrath,  and  difcontent  filled  hi^  mind  with 
vexation,  and  his  countenance  with  fhame  and  con- 
fufian.  When  a  man's  confcience  is  awakened  to  a 
fenfe  of  his  guilt,  it  is  angry  and  froward,  and  hard- 
er to  be  ftilled  than  a  peevifli  child  :  but  the  pra6lice 
of  holinefs  and  virtue  does  produce  juft  the  contrary 
effedls  ;  it  fills  a  man's  mind  with  pleafure,  and 
makes  his  countenance  chearful. 

And  this  certainly,  if  it  be  well  confidered,  is  no 
fmall  and  contemptible  advantage.  The  peace  and 
tranquillity  of  our  minds  is  the  great  things  which  all 
the  philofophy  and  wifdom  of  the  world  did  always 
defign  to  bring  men  to,  as  the  very  utmoft  happinefs 
that  a  wife  man  is  capable  of  in  this  life  •,  and  it  rs 
that  which  no  confiderate  man  would  part  with,  for 
all  that  this  world  can  give  him.  The  greatefl  for- 
tune in  this  world  ought  to  be  no  temptation  to  any 
man  in  his  wits,  to  fubmit  to  perpetual  ficknefs  and 
pain  for  the  gaining  of  it ;  and  yet  there  is  no  difeafc 
in  the  world,  that  for  the  fharpnefs  of  it  is  compara- 
ble to  the  fling  of  a  guilty  mind,  and  no  pleafure 
equal  to  that  of  innocence  and  a  good  confcience. 
And  this  naturally  fprings  up  in  the  mind  of  a  good 
man,  where  it  is  not  hindred  either  by  a  melancholy 
temper,  or  by  falfe  principles  in  religion,  which  fill 
a  man  with  groundlefs  fears  and  jealoufies  of  the  love 
and  favour  of  God  towards  him  j  and  excepting  thefe 
two  cafes,  this  is  the  ordinary  fruit  of  an  holy  and 
good  courfe,  which  is  not  interrupted  by  frequent 
hilling  into  fin,  and  great  omifTions  and  violations  of 
our  duty  :  for  in  this  cafe  the  interruptions  of  our 
peace  and  comfort  will  naturally  be  anfwerable  to  the 
inequality  of  our  obedience,  II.  Be* 


of  an  holy  and  virtuous  life,  3  9  3  ^ 

IL  Befides  the  prefent  and  ineftimable  fruit  of  ho-  S  E  R  Nf ;■ 
linefs,  the  quiet  and  fati3fa6lion  of  our  own  minds  j 
it  is  likewife  a  proper  means  to  promote  our  intereft 
and  happinefs  in  this  world.  For  as  every  vice  is 
naturally  attended  with  fome  temporal  inconvenience 
of  pain  or  lofs  ;  fo  there  is  no  grace  or  virtue,  but 
does  apparently  conduce  to  a  man's  temporal  felicity. 
There  are  fome  virtues  which  tend  to  the  health  of 
his  body,  and  the  prolonging  of  his  life,  as  tempe- 
rance and  chaility  •,  others  tend  to  riches  and  plenty, 
as  diligence  and  induftry  in  our  callings  ;  others  to 
the  fecureand  peaceable  enjoyment  of  what  we  have, 
as  truth  and  fidelity,  juftice  and  honefty  in  all  our 
dealings  and  intercourfe  with  men.  There  are  other 
virtues  that  are  apt  to  oblige  mankind  to  us,  and  to 
gain  their  friendfhip  and  good  will,  their  aid  and 
afllflance,  as  kindnefs,  and  meeknefs,  and  charity, 
and  a  generous  difpofition  to  do  good  to  all,  as  far  as 
we  have  power  and  opportunity.  In  a  word,  there 
is  no  real  intereft  of  this  world,  but  may  ordinarily 
be  as  effedlually  promoted  and  purfued  to  as  great 
advantage,  by  a  man  that  exercifes  himfelf  in  the 
pradtice  of  all  virtue  and  goodnefs,  and  ufually  to 
far  greater  advantage,  than  by  one  that  is  intempe- 
rate and  debauched,  deceitful  and  difhoneft,  apt  to 
difoblige  and  provoke,  four  and  ill-natured  to  all 
mankind  :  for  there  is  none  of  thefe  vices,  but  is  to 
a  man's  real  hinderance  and  difadvantage,  in  regard 
of  one  kind  of  happinefs  or  another,  which  men 
aim  at  and  propofe  tothemfelves  in  this  world. 

III.  A  religrious  and  virtuous  courfe  of  life  doth  na- 
turally  tend  to  the  prolonging  of  our  days,  and  hath 
very  frequently  theblefiing  of  health  and  long  hfe  at- 
tending upon  it.  The  pradice  of  a  great  many  virtues 
is  a  great  prefervative  of  life  and  health,  as  the  due  go- 
j  vernmenc 


Uhe prejent  afidjiiture  advantage 

vernment  of  our  appetites  and  pafiions,  by  tempe- 
rance and  chaflity  and  meeknefs,  which  prevent  the 
chief  caufes  from  within  of  bodily  difeafes  and  diftem- 
pers  •,  the  due  government  of  our  tongues  and  con- 
verfation  in  refpedl  of  others,  by  juilice  and  kind- 
nefs,  and  abilaining  from  wrath  and  provocation, 
which  are  a  great  fecurity  againft  the  dangers  of  out- 
ward violence,  according  to  that  of  St.  Peter,  i  Epilt. 
iii.  lo.  ''  He  that  will  love  hfe  and  fee  good  days, 
let  him  refrain  his  tongue  from  evil,  and  his  lips 
that  they  fpeak  no  guile  \  let  him  efchew  evil, 
and  do  good,  let  him  feek  peace  and  enfue  it." 
And  bende  the  natural  tendency  of  things,  there 
is  a  fpecial  blefiing  of  God,  which  attends  good 
men,  and  makes  "  their  days  long  in  the  land  which 
^*'  the  Lord  their  God  hath  given  them." 

IV.  There  is  nothing  gives  a  man  fo  much  com- 
fort when  he  comes  to  die,  as  the  ref[e6lion  upon  an 
holy  and  good  life  :  and  then  furely  above  ail  other 
times  comfort  is  moft  valuable,  becaufe  our  frail  and 
infirm  nature  doth  then  Hand  mofl  in  need  of  it. 
Then  ufually  mens  hearts  are  faint  and  their  fpirits 
low,  and  every  thing  is  apt  to  dejedl  and  trouble 
them  \  fo  that  we  had  need  to  provide  ourfelves  of 
fome  excellent  cordial  againfl  that  time  \  and  there 
is  no  comfort  like  to  that  of  a  clear  confcience,  and 
of  an  innocent  and  ufeful  Hfe.  This  will  revive  and 
raife  a  man's  fpirits  under  all  the  infirmities  of  his 
body,  becaufe  it  gives  a  man  good  hopes  concerning 
his  eternal  ftate,  and  the  hopes  of  that  are  apt  to 
fill  a  man  with  "  joy  unfpeakable  and  full  of  glory." 
The  difference  between  good  and  bad  men  is  never 
fo  remarkahle  in  this  world,  as  when  they  are  upon 
their  death-bed.  This  the  fcripture  obferves  to  us, 
Pfal.  xxxvii.  37.  ''  Mark  the  pcrfed;  m^n,  and  be- 

"  hold 


of  an  holy  and  -virtuQUs  life.  3933 

"  hold  the  upright,  for  the  end  of  that  man  is  peace."  S  E  R  M. 
With  what  triumph  and  exultation  doth  the  blef-  i^^-y^ 
fed  apoftle  St.  Paul,  upon  the  review  of  his  life,  dif- 
courfe  concerning  his  death  and  diflblution  ?  2  Tim. 
iv.  6,  7,  8,  "I  am  now  ready,  fays  he,  to  be  offered 
"  up,  and  the  time  of  my  departure  is  at  hand  : 
"  I  have  fought  a  good  fight,  I  have  finiihed  my 
"  courfc,  I  have  kept  the  faith  •,  henceforth  there  is 
*'  laid  up  for  me  a  crown  of  righteoufnefs,  which  the 
*'  Lord,  the  righteous  judge,  will  give  me  at  that 
"  day."     What  would  not  any  of  us  do  to  be  thus 
affeded  when  we  come  to  leave  the  world,  and  to 
be  able   to  bear  the  thoughts  of  death  and  eternity 
with  fo  quiet  and  v/ell  fatisfied  a  mind  !  Why,  let 
us  but  endeavour  to  live  holy  lives,  and  to  be  ufeful 
and  ferviceable  to  God  in  our  generation,  as  this  holy 
apoftle  was,  and  we  fhall  have  the  fame  ground  of  joy 
and  triumph  which  he  had.     For  this  is  the  proper 
and  genuine  effed:  of  virtue  and  goodnefs  ;  "  the 
*'  work  of  righteoufnefs  is  peace,  and  the  effe<5l  of 
*'  righteoufnefs  quictnefs  and  aiTurance  for  ever." 
All  the  good  adions  that  we  do  in  this  life  are  fo 
many  feeds  of  comfort  fov/n  in  our  own  confciences, 
which  will  fpring  up  one  time  or  other,  but  efpecial- 
ly  in  the  approaches  of  death,  when  we  come  to  take 
a  ferious  review  of  our  lives  -,  for  then  mens  con- 
fciences ufe  to  deal  plainly  and  impartially  with  them, 
and  to  tell  them  the  truth  -,  and  if  at  that  time  more 
efpecially  "our  hearts  condemn  us  not,  then  may  we 
*'  have  comfort  and  confidence  towards  God." 

V.  An  holy  and  virtuous  life  doth  tranfmit  a  good 
name  and  reputation  to  pofterity.  And  this  Solomon 
hath  determined  to  be  a  much  greater  happinefs, 
than  for  a  man  to  leave  a  great  eftate  behind  him  : 
a  good  name,  fays  he,  "  is  rather  to  be  chofen  than 

"  great 


CLXVI. 


'iQ'id.  ^^^  prefent  and  future  advantage 

SE  R  M.  "  great  riches."  Pious  and  virtuous  men  do  com- 
moniy  gain  to  themfelves  a  good  efteem  and  repu- 
tation in  this  world,  while  they  are  in  it  -,  but  the  vir- 
tues of  good  men  are  not  always  fo  bright  and  fhin- 
ing,  as  to  meet  with  that  refpedl  and  acknowledg- 
ment which  is  due  to  them  in  this  world.  Many  times 
they  are  much  clouded  by  the  infirmities  and  paflions 
which  attend  them,  and  are  fhadowed  by  fome  af- 
fc(5bed  fmgularities  and  morofities,  which  thofe  which 
have  lived  more  retired  from  the  world  are  more 
liable  to.  Befides  that  the  envy  of  others,  who  arc 
not  fo  good  as  they,  lies  heavy  upon  them,  and 
does  deprefs  them.  For  bad  men  are  very  apt  to 
mifinterpret  the  beil  a6lions  of  the  good,  and  put 
falfe  colours  upon  them,  and  when  they  have  no- 
thing ^ic  to  obje6l  againfl  them,  to  charge  them 
with  hypocrify  and  infmcerity ;  an  objection  as  hard 
to  be  anfwered,  as  it  is  to  be  made  good,  unlefs  we 
could  fee  into  the  hearts  of  men. 

But  when  good  men  are  dead  and  gone,  and  the 
bright  and  fhining  example  of  their  virtues  is  at  a 
convenient  diflance,  and  does  not  gall  and  upbraid 
others,  then  envy  ceafeth,  and  every  man  is  then 
content  to  give  a  good  man  his  due  praife,  and  his 
friends  and  poflerity  may  then  quietly  enjoy  the 
comfort  of  his  reputation,  which  is  fome  fort  of 
blefTing  to  him  that  is  gone.  This  difference  So- 
lomon obferves  to  us  between  good  and  bad  men  ; 
*'  the  memory  of  the  juft  is  blelTed,  or  well  fpoken 
*'  of:  but  the  name  of  the  wicked  fhall  rot.'* 

VI.  And  laftly,  religion  and  virtue  do  derive  a 
blefling  upon  our  pofterity  after  us.  "  Oh,  that 
*'  there  were  fuch  an  heart  in  them,"  faith  Mofes 
concerning  the  people  of  Ifrael,  "  that  they  would 
^*  fear  me,  and  keep  all  my  commandments  always, 

"  that 


of  an  holy  and  virtuous  Hfe,  3935 

*'  that  it  might  be  well  with  them  and  with  their  ^pj^^f* 
*'  children  for  ever  !"  And  to  this  purpofe  there  are 
many  promifes  in  fcripture  of  God's  "  blefTing  the 
"  poflerity  of  the  righteous,"  and  "  his  fhewing 
"  mercy  to  thoufands  of  the  children  of  them  that 
"  love  him,  and  keep  his  commandments.'^ 

And  this  is  a  great  motive  to  obedience,  and 
touches  upon  that  natural  affedlion  which  men  bear 
to  their  children  ;  fo  that  if  we  have  any  regard  to 
them,  or  concernment  for  their  happinefs,  we  ought 
to  be  very  careful  of  our  duty,  and  afraid  to  offend 
God  j  becaufe  according  as  we  demean  ourfclves  to- 
wards him,  we  entail  a  lading  blefTing  or  a  great 
curfe  upon  our  children  ;  by  fo  many  and  fo  fhrong 
bonds  hath  God  tied  our  duty  upon  us,  that  if  we' 
either  defire  our  own  happinefs,  or  the  happinefs  of 
thofe  that  are  dearefl  to  us,  and  part  of  ourfelves,  we 
mufl  "  fear  God  and  keep  his  commandments." 

And  thus  I  have  briefly  reprefented  to  you  fome 
of  the  chief  benefits  and  advantages  which  an  holy 
and  virtuous  life  does  commonly  bring  to  men  in  this 
world,  which  is  the  firfb  encouragement  mentioned 
in  the  text ;  "  Ye  have  your  fruit  unto  hoHnefs." 

Before  I  proceed  to  the  fccond,  I  fhall  only  juft 
take  notice,  by  way  of  application,  of  what  has 
been  faid  on  this  argument. 

I.  That  it  is  a  great  encouragement  to  well-doing, 
to  confider  that  ordinarily  piety  and  goodnefs  are  no 
hindrance  to  a  man's  temporal  felicity,  but  very 
frequently  great  promoters  of  it  ;  fo  that  excepting 
only  the  cafe  of  perfccution  for  religion,  I  think  I 
may  fafely  challenge  any  man,  to  ilicv/  me  how  the 
practice  df  any  part  or  duty  of  religion,  how  the 
cxercife  of  any  grace  or  virtue  is  to  the  prejudice  of  a 
man's  temporal  interefl:,  or  does  debar  him  of  any 

Vol.  IX,  ^9  M  tru« 

4 


*?  9  3  ^  T'/'^  prefenf  and  future  advantage 

S  E  R  M.  ixwt  pleafure,  or  hinder  him  of  any  real  advantage, 
which  a  prudent  and  confiderate  man  would  think  fit 
to  chufe.  And  as  for  perfecution  and  fufferings  for 
religion,  God  can  reward  us  for  them,  if  he  pleafe, 
in  this  world  ;  and  we  have  all  the  afllirance  that  we 
can  defire,  that  he  will  do  it  abundantly  in  the  next. 

2.  The  hope  of  long  hfe,  and  efpecially  of  a 
quiet  and  comfortable  death,  fhould  be  a  great  en- 
couragement to  an  holy  and  virtuous  Mq.  He  that 
lives  well,  takes  the  beft  courfe  to  live  long,  and  lays 
in  for  an  happy  old  age,  free  from  the  difeafes  and 
infirmities  which  are  naturally  procured  by  a  vicious 
youth,  and  likewife  free  from  the  guilt  and  galling 
remembrance  of  a  wicked  life.  And  there  is  no  con- 
dition, which  we  can  fall  into  in  this  world,  that 
does  fo  clearly  difcover  the  difference  between  a  good 
and  bad  man,  as  a  death- bed :  for  then  the  good 
man  begins  mofl  fenfibly  to  enjoy  the  comforts  of 
well-doing,  and  the  finner  to  taftethe  bitter  fruits  of 
fin.  What  a  wide  difference  is  then  to  be  feen,  be- 
tween the  hopes  and  fears  of  thefe  two  forts  of  per- 
fons !  and  furely  next  to  the  a(5lual  poffeffion  of  blef- 
fednefs,  the  good  hopes  and  comfortable  profpe6l  of  it 
are  the  greatefl  happinefs  •,  and  next  to  the  a(5lual  ftnfe 
of  pain,  the  fear  of  fuffering  is  the  greatefl  torment. 

Though  there  were  nothing  beyond  this  life  to  be 
cxpedlcd,  yet  if  men  were  fure  to  be  poffeffed  with 
thefe  delightful  or  troublefom  pafllons  when  they 
come  to  die,  no  man  that  wifely  confiders  things 
would,  for  all  the  pleafures  of  fin,  forfeit  the  com- 
fort of  a  righteous  foul,  leaving  this  world  full  of 
tile  hope  of  immortality  ;  and  endure  the  vexation 
and  anguifh  of  a  guilty  confcience,  and  that  infinite 
terror  and  amazement  which  fo  frequently  poffeffeth 
the  foul  of  a  dying  finner. 

2  3-  If 


of  an  holy  and  virtuous  life.  3.9  3  7 

3.  If  there  be  any  fpark  of  a  generous  mind  in  us,  S  E^R  M. 
It  fhould  animate  us  to  do  well,  that  we  may  be  well  ^ 
fpoken  of  when -.^^c  are  gone  off  the  ilage,  and  may 
tranfmit  a  grateful  memory  of  our  lives  to  thofe  that 
(hall  be  after  us.      I  proceed  now  to  the 

Second  thing  I  propofed,  as  the  great  advantage 
indeed,  viz.  the  glorious  reward  of  a  holy  and  vir- 
tuous life  in  another  world,  which  is  here  called  ever- 
lafting  nfe  •,  "  and  the  end  everlafting  life :"  by 
which  the  apoftle  intends  to  exprefs  to  us,  both  the 
happinefs  of  our  future  (late,  and  the  way  and  means 
whereby  we  are  prepared  and  made  meet  to  be  made 
partakers  of  it ;  and  that  is  by  the  conftant  and  fin- 
cere  endeavours  of  an  holy  and  good  life.     For  it  is 
they  only  that ''  have  their  fruit  unto  hoUnefs,"  whofe 
end  fhall  be  ''  everlafting  life."     I  fhall  fpeak  briefly 
to  thefe  two,  and  fo  conclude  my  difcourfe  upon 

this  text. 

I.  The  happinefs  of  our  future  ftate,  which  is  here 
exprefs'd  by  the  name  of  "  everlafting  Hfe  i"  in  very 
few  words,  but  fuch  as  are  of  wonderful  weight  and 
fignificancy  :  For  they  import  the  excellency  of  this 
fttte,  and  the  eternity  of  it.      And  who  is  fuffici- 
ent  to  fpeak  to  either  of  thefe  arguments  ?    Both  of 
them  are  too  big  to  enter  now  into  the  heart  of  man, 
too  vaft  and  boundlefs  to  be  comprehended  by  hu- 
man underftanding,and  too  unwieldy  to  be  managed 
by  the  tongue  of  men  and  angels,  anfwerable  to  the 
unfpeakable  greatnefs  and  glory  of  them.     And  if  I 
were  able  to  declare  them  unto  you,  as  they  deferv- 
ed,  you  would  not  be  able  to  hear  me.     And  there- 
fore I  ftiall  chufe  to  fay  but  httle  upon  an  argument, 
of  which  I  can  nevtr  fay  enough,  and  fhall  very 
briefly  confider  thofe  two  things  which  are  compre- 
hended in  that  ftiort  defcription,  which  the  text  gives 

19  M  2         ,  ^s 


3  9  3  S  ^^^  p^^fin^  dnd  future  advantage 

us  of  future  happinefs,  by  the  name  of  "  everlaft- 
*^  ing  life,"  viz.  the  excellency  of  this  (late,  and  the 
eternity  of  it. 

I .  The  excellency  of  it,  which  is  here  reprefented 
to  us  under  the  notion  of  life,  the  moil  defirable  of 
all  other  things,  becaufe  it  is  the  foundation  of  all 
other  enjoyments  whatfoever.  Barely  to  be  in  being, 
and  to  be  fenfible  that  we  are  fo,  is  but  a  dry  notion 
of  life.     The  true  notion  of  Hfe  b  to  be  well  and  to 
be  happy,  vivere  efi  hem  valere.     They  who  are  in 
the  mofl  miferable  condition  that  can  be  imagined, 
are  in  being,  and  fenfible  alfo  that  they  are  mifera- 
ble.    But  this  kind  of  life  is  fo  far  from  coming  un* 
der  the  true  notion  of  life,  that  the  fcripture  calls  it 
*'  the  fecond  death."     Rev.  xxi.  8.  It  is  there  faid, 
that  "  the  wicked  fhall  have  their  part  in  the  lake 
^*  that  burneth  with  fire  and  brimftone,  which  is  the 
^'  fecond  death."     And  chap.  xx.  ver.  6.  "  Bleffed 
^^  and  holy  is  he,  that  hath  part  in  the  firft  refur- 
^^  redlion,  on  fuch  the  fecond  death  fhall  have  no 
^^  power."     So  that  a  ftate  of  mere  mifery  and  tor- 
ment is  not  life  but  death  ;  nay,  the  fcripture  will 
not  allow  the  life  of  a  wicked  man  in  this  world  to 
be  true  life,  but  fpeaks  of  him  as  dead.     Eph.  ii.  i. 
fpeaking  of  the  fmners  among  the  Gentiles,  '*  You, 
*'  faith  the  apoflle,  hath  he  quickened,  who  were 
*'  dead  in  trefpafles  and  fins."     And  which  is  more 
yet,  the  fcripture  calls  a  life  of  finful  pleafures  (which 
pien  cflecm  the  only  happinefs  of  this  world)  the 
fcripture,  I  fay,  calls  this  a  death,  i  Tim.  v.  6.  '^  She 
**  that  liveth  in  pleafures,  is  dead  whilil  fhe  liveth." 
A  lewd  and  unprofitable  life,  which  ferves  to  no  good 
end  and  purpofe,  is  a  death  rather  than  a  life.    Nay, 
|:hat  decaying  and  dying  life  which  we  now  hve  in 
this  world,  and  which  is  allayed  by  the  mixture  of 

fo 


of  an  holy  and  'virtuous  life,  3939 

fo  many  infirmities  and  pains,  of  fo  much  trouble  S  E  R  M. 

.  CLXVI 

and  forrow ;   I  fay,  that  even  this  fort  of  hfe,  for  all 
that  we  are  fo  fondly  in  love  with  it,  does  hardly  de- 
ferve  the  nam.e  of  life.     But  the  life  of  the  world  to 
come,  of  which  we  now  fpeak,  this   is  life  indeed ; 
to  do  thofe  things  which  we  were  made  for,  to  ferve 
the  true  ends  of  our  being,  and  to  enjoy  the  comfort 
and  reward  of  fo  doing,  this  is  the  true  notion  of 
life  ;  and  whatever  is  lefs  than  this,  is  death,  or  a 
degree  of  it,  and  approach  towards  it.      And  there- 
fore very  well  may  heaven  and  happinefs  be  defcribed 
by  the  notion  of  life,  becaufe  "  truly  to  live"  and  "  to 
*'  be  happy"  are  words  that  fignify  the  fame  thing. 
But  what  kind  of  hfe  this  is,  I  can  no  more  de- 
fcribe  to  you  in  the  particularities  of  it,  than  Colum- 
bus could  have  defcribed  the  particular  manners  and 
cuiloms  of  the  people  of  America,  before  he  or  any 
other  perfon  in  thefe  parts  of  the  world  had  (z^n  it 
or  been  there.     But  this  I  can  fay  of  it  in  general, 
and  that  from  the  infallible  teflimony  of  the  great 
Creator  and  glorious  inhabitants  of  that  bleffed  place, 
that  it  is  a  Hate  of  pure  pleafjre  and  unmingled  joys, 
of  pleafures  more  manly,  more  fpiritual,  and  more 
refined,  tlian  any  of  the  delights  of  fenfe,  confiding 
in  the  enlargement  of  our  minds  and  knowledge  to 
a  greater  degree,  and  in  the  perfe6t  exercife  of  love 
and  friendship,  in  the  converfation  of  the  bed  and 
wifell  company,  free  from  fclf-intereft,  and  all  thofe 
nnfociable  pafilons  of  envy  and  jcaloufy,  of  malice 
and  ill-will,  which  fpoil  the  comfort  of  all  converfa- 
tion in  this  world;  and,  in  a  v/ord,  free  from  all 
other  pafTion  or  defign,  but  an  ardent  and  almoft 
equal  defire  to  contribute  all,  that  by  all  means  pofli- 
ble  they  can,  to  the  mutual  happinefs  of  one  another : 
For  charity  reigns  in  heaven,  and  is  ;he  brightcll 

grace 


394^  ^^  /r^///  and  future  advantage 

S  E  R  M.  prrace  and  virtue  in  the  firmament  of  glory,  far  out- 
Ihining  all  other  \  as  St.  Paul,  who  had  him{elf  been 
taken  up  into  the  third  heaven,  does  exprefly  declare 
to  us. 

Farther  yet,  this  blelTed  ft  ate  confifts  more  parti- 
cularly in  thefe  two  things :  In  having  our  bodies 
raifed  and  refined  to  a  far  greater  purity  and  perfec- 
tion, than  ever  they  had  in  this  world  ;  and  in  the 
confequent  happinefs  of  the  whole  man,  foul  and  bo- 
dy, fo  ftridly  and  firmly  united  as  never  to  be  parted 
again,  and  fo  equally  match'd  as  to  be  no  trouble  or 
impediment  to  one  another. 

(i.)  In  having  our  bodies  raifed  and  refined  to  a 
far  greater  purity  and  perfedbion,  than  ever  they  had 
in  this  world.  Our  bodies,  as  they  are  now,  are  une- 
qually tempered,  and  in  a  perpetual  flux  and  change, 
continually  tending  to  corruption,  becaufe  made  up  of 
fuch  contrary  principles  and  qualities,  as  by  their  per- 
petual confii6l  are  always  at  work,  confpiring  the  ruin 
and  diflblution  of  them  •,  but  when  they  are  raifed 
again,  they  fliall  be  fo  tempered  a^d  fo  refined,  as 
to  be  free  from  all  thofe  deftrudtive  qualities,  which 
do  now  threaten  their  change  and  diiTolution  :  and 
though  they  fhali  ft  ill  confift  of  matter,  yet  they  ftiall 
be  purified  to  that  degree,  as  to  partake  of  the  im- 
mortality of  our  fouls,  to  which  they  ftiall  be  united, 
and  to  be  of  equal  duration  v/ith  them.  So  thefcrip- 
ture  tells  us,  i  Cor.  xv.  52,  ^-2^.  "  That  our  dead 
bodies  ftiall  be  raifed  incorruptible :  for  this  cor- 
ruptible muft  put  on  incorruption,  and  this  mor- 
tal muft-  put  on  immortality." 
Our  bodies  when  they  are  laid  down  in  the  grave 
are  vile  carcafes,  but  they  ftiall  be  raifed  again  beau- 
tiful and  glorious,  and  as  different  from  what  they 
were  before,  as  the  heavenly  nianfions  in  which  they 

are 


cc 


of  an  holy  and  virtuous  life,  394^ 

are  to  refide  for  ever  are  from  that  dark  cell  of  the  S  E  R  M. 

CLXVI. 

grave  out  of  which  they  are  raifed  ;  and  fhall  then  be 
endowed  with  fuch  a  life,  and  flrength,  and  vigour, 
as  to  be  able  without  any  change  or  decay  to  abide 
and  continue  for  ever  in  the  fame  flate. 

Our  bodies  in  this  world  are  grofs  flefh  and  blood, 
liable  to  be  affedled  with  natural  and  fenfual  pleafures, 
and  to  be  afflided  with  natural  pains  and  difeafes,  to 
be  prefs'd  with  the  natural  necefTities  of  hunger  and 
thirft,  and  obnoxious  to  all  thofe  changes  and  acci- 
dents to  which  all  natural  things  are  fubjedl :  But 
"  they  fhall  be  raifed  fpiritual  bodies,"  pure  and  re- 
fined from  all  the  dregs  of  matter  \  they  fhall  not 
hunger,  nor  third,  nor  be  difeafed,  or  in  pain  any  more. 
"  Thefe  houfes  of  clay,  whofe  foundation  is  in 
*'  the  dufl,'*  are  continually  decaying,  and  therefore 
ftand  in  need  of  continual  reparation  by  food  and 
phyfick:  but  *'  our  houfe  which  is  from  heaven'* 
(as  the  apoflle  calls  it)  fliall  be  of  fuch  lading  and 
durable  materials,  as  not  only  time,  but  even  eter- 
nity itfelf,  fhall  make  no  impreOion  upon  it,  or  caufe 
the  lead  decay  in  it.  "  They  (fays  our  bleded  Sa- 
*'  VI our)  who  fliall  be  accounted  worthy  to  obtain 
that  world,  and  the  refurreclion  from  the  dead, 
cannot  die  any  more  :  but  fhall  be  Hke  the  angels, 
and  are  the  children  of  God,"  i.  e.  fhall  in  fomc 
degree  partake  of  the  felicity  and  immortality  of 
God  himfelf,  "  who  is  always  the  fame,  and  whofe 
*'  years  fail  not."  Nay,  the  apodle  exprefly  tells 
us,  that  our  bodies  after  the  refurredtion  fhall  be  fpi- 
ritual bodies,  fo  that  we  fhall  then  be  as  it  were  all 
fpirit,  and  our  bodies  fhall  be  fo  raifed  and  refined, 
tliat  they  fhall  be  no  clog  or  impediment  to  the  ope- 
ration of  our  fuuls.  And  it  mud  needs  be  a  great 
comfort  to  us  whild  we  are  in  this  world,  to  live  in 

the 


'3  042  ^^^  prefent  and  future  advantage 

S  E  R  M.  the  hopes  of  fo  happy  and  glorious  a  change  ;  when 
^^^^^*  we  confider  how  our  bodies  do  now  opprefs  our  fpi- 
rits,  and  what  a  melancholy  and  dead  weight  they 
are  upon  them,  how  grievous  an  incumbrance  and 
trouble  and  temptation  they  are  for  the  moll  part  to 
us  in  this  mortal  (late. 

(2.)  The  bleflednefs  of  this  ilate  confifls  likewife 
in  the  confequent  happinefs  of  the  whole  man,  foul 
and  body,  fo  flridlly  and  firmly  united  as  never  to  be 
parted  again,  and  fo  equally  matched  as  to  be  no 
trouble  and  impediment  to  one  another. 

In  this  world  the  foul  and  body  are  for  the  mofl 
part  very  unequally  yoked,  fo  that  the  foul  is  not 
only  darkened  by  the  grofs  fumes  and  clouds  which 
rife  from  the  body,  but  loaded  and  opprefs'd  by  the 
dull  weight  of  it,  which  it  very  heavily  lugs  on  and 
draws  after  it  •,  and  the  foul  likewife,  and  the  vicious 
inclinations  and  the  irregular  pafTions  of  it,  have  many 
times  an  ill  influence  upon  the  body  and  the  humours 
of  it.  But  in  the  next  world  they  fhall  both  be  puri- 
fied, the  one  from  fin,  and  the  other  from  frailty 
and  corruption,  and  both  be  admitted  to  the  blelTed 
fight  and  enjoyment  of  the  ever-blcffed  God. 

But  the  confideration  of  this  (as  I  faid  before)  is 
too  big  for  our  narrow  apprehenfions  in  this  mortal 
ftate,  and  an  argument  not  fit  to  be  treated  of  by 
fuch  children,  as  the  wifeft  of  men  are  in  this  world  ; 
and  whenever  we  attempt  to  fpeak  of  it,  we  do  but 
lifp  like  children,  and  underiland  like  children,  and 
reafon  like  children  about  it.  "  That  which  is  im- 
*'  perfect  mud  be  done  away,"  and  our  fouls  mull 
be  raifed  to  a  greater  perfedion,  and  our  under- 
ftandings  filled  with  a  flronger  and  Headier  light,  be- 
fore we  can  be  fit  to  engage  in  fo  profound  a  con- 
templation.    We  muft  firfi:  have  been  in  heaven^ 

and 


ef  an  holy  and  virtuous  life,  3943 

and  pofTefs'd  of  that  felicity  and  glory  which  is  there  S  E  R  M. 
to  be  enjoyed,  before  we  can  either  fpeak  or  think 
of  it  in  any  meafure  as  it  defer ves.  In  the  mean 
time,  whenever  w&  fet  about  it,  we  ihall  find  our  fa- 
culties opprefs'd  and  dazzled  with  the  weight  and 
Iplendor  of  fo  great  and  glorious  an  argument  \  like 
St.  Paul,  who,  when  "  he  was  caught  up  into  pa- 
*'  radife,"  faw  and  heard  thofe  things,  which,  when 
he  came  down  again  into  this  world,  he  was  not  able 
to  exprefs,  and  which  it  was  not  polTible  for  the 
tongue  of  man  to  utter. 

So  that  in  difcourfing  of  the  (late  of  the  blefled, 
we  mull  content  ourfelves  with  what  the  fcripture 
hath  revealed  in  general  concerning  it  \  that  it  is  a 
Hate  of  perfedt  freedom  from  all  thofe  infirmities  and 
imperfe6lions,  thofe  evils  and  miferies,  thofe  fins  and 
temptations  which  we  are  liable  to  in  this  world.  So 
St.  John  defcribes  the  glory  and  felicity  of  that  flate, 
as  they  were  in  vifions  reprefented  to  him.  Rev.  xxi. 
2,  3,  4.  "  And  I,  John,  faw  the  holy  city,  the  new 
"  Jerufalem,  prepared  as  a  bride  adorned  for  her 
*'  hufband.  And  I  heard  a  great  voice  out  of  hea- 
*'  ven,  faying.  Behold !  the  tabernacle  of  God  is 
with  men,  and  he  will  dwell  with  them,  and  they 
fhall  be  his  people,  and  God  himfelf  fhall  be  with 
them,  and  be  their  God.  And  God  fhall  wipe 
away  all  tears  from  their  eyes  ♦,  and  there  fhall  be 
no  more  death,  neither  forrow,  nor  crying,  nei- 
ther fhall  there  be  any  more  pain  :  for  the  former 
things  are  pafTed  away  \^  that  is,  all  thofe  evils 
which  we  faw  or  fuffered  in  this  world,  fhall  for  ever 
vanifh  and  difappear,  and,  which  is  the  great  privi- 
lege and  felicity  of  all,  that  there  fhall  no  fin  be 
there,  ver.  27.  "  There  fhall  in  no  wife  enter  into  it 
any  thing  that  defileth,"  and  confequently  there 
yoL.  IX.  19  N  Ihall 

4 


cc 

Cc 
(C 


«( 


^he  prefent  and  future  advantage 

fliall  be  no  mifery  and  curfe  there.     So  we  read, 
chap.  xxii.  3,  4.  "  And  there  fhall  be  no  more  curfe; 
"  but  the  throne  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb  fhall  be 
"  in  it,  and  his  fervant  fhall  ferve  him,  and  they 
*'  fhall  fee  his  face."     In  which  laft  words  our  em- 
ployment and  our  happinefs  arc  exprefs'd  ;  but  what 
in  particular  our  employment  Ihall  be,  and  wherein 
it  fliall  confiil,  is  impoflible  now  to  defcribe  5  it  is 
fufficient  to  know  in  the  general,  that  our  employ- 
ment fhall  be  our  unfpeakablc  pleafurc,  and  every 
way  fuitable  to  the  glory  and  happinefs  of  that  ftate, 
and  as  much  above  the  noblefl  and  moil  delightful 
employments  of  this  world,  as  the  perfection  of  our 
bodies,   and  the  power  of  our  fouls,  fhall  then  be 
above  what  they  are  now  in  this  world. 

For  there  is  no  doubt,  but  that  he  who  made  us, 
and  endued  cur  fouls  with  a  defire  of  immortali- 
ty, and  fo  large  a  capacity  of  happinefs,  does  under- 
fland  very  well  by  what  way  and  means  to  make  us 
happy,  and  hath  in  readinefs  proper  exercifes  and  em- 
ployments for  that  flate,  and  every  way  more  fitted 
to  make  us  happy,  than  any  condition  or  employ* 
ment  in  this  world  is  fliitable  to  a  temporal  happi- 
nefs :  employments  that  are  fuitable  to  "  the  fpirits 
"  of  jufl  men  made  perfed,"  united  to  bodies  pu* 
rifled  and  refined  almofl  to  the  condition  of  fpirits  ; 
employments  v/hich  we  fhall  be  fo  far  from  being 
weary  of,  that  they  fhall  minifler  to  us  a  new  ^nd 
frefli  delight  to  all  eternity  ;  and  this  perhaps,  not  fo 
much  from  the  variety,  as  from  the  perpetual  and 
growing  pleafure  of  them. 

It  is  fufhcicnt  for  us  to  know  this  in  the  general, 
and  to  trufl  the  infinite  power  and  wifdom  and  good- 
pefs  of  God,  for  the  particular  manner  and  circum- 
ft^pces  of  our  happinefs  \  not  doubting  but  that  he, 

I  who 


cf  an  holy  and  virtuous  life.  3945 

Xvho  is  the  eternal  and  inexhaufbible  fpring  and  foiin-  ^J:  xvi^ 
tain  of  all  happinefs,  can  and  will  derive  and  convey 
fuch  a  (hare  of  it  to  every  one  of  us  as  he  thinks  fit, 
and  in  fuch  ways  as  he,  who  bell  underilands  it,  is 
bell  able  to  find  out. 

In  a  word,  the  happinefs  of  the  next  life  fliall  be 
fuch  as  is  worthy  of  the  great  King  of  the  world  to 
bellow  upon  his  faithful  fervants,  and  fuch  as  is  infi- 
nitely beyond  the  jull  reward  of  their  bell  fervices  ; 
it  is  "  to  fee  God,"  i.  c.  to  contemplate  and  love 
the  bell  and  moll  perfe6l  of  beings,  and  "  to  be  for 
*'  ever  with  the  Lord,  in  whofe  prefence  is  fulnefs 
*'  of  joy,  and  at  whofe  right  hand  there  are  plea- 
*'  fures  for  evermore." 

I  will  fay  no  more  upon  this  argument,  left  I 
fhould  fay  lefs,  and  bccaufe  whoever  ventures  to 
wade  far  into  it,  will  foon  find  himfelf  out  of  his 
depth,  and  in  danger  to  be  fwallowed  up  and  loft 
in  that  great  abyfs,  which  is  not  to  be  fathomed  by 
the  Ihallow  faculties  of  mortal  men. 

I  Ihall  therefore  only  mention  the 

2.  Thing  I  propofed  to  fpcak  to,  vi^.  the  eter- 
nity of  this  happinefs ;  "  and  the  end  everlafting 
*'  life :"  by  which  the  apollle  intends  to  exprefs  the 
utmoft  perfection,  but  not  the  final  period  of  the 
happinefs  of  good  men  in  another  world.  For  to  a 
perfe6l  ftate  of  happinefs  thefe  two  conditions  are  re* 
quifite,  that  it  be  immutable,  and  that  it  be  intermi- 
nable, that  it  can  neither  admit  of  a  change  nor  of  an 
end.  And  this  is  all  that  I  Ihall  fay  of  it,  it  being 
impolTible  to  fay  any  thing  that  is  more  intelligible 
and  plain,  concerning  that  which  is  infinite,  than  that 
it  is  fo.     I  fhould  now  have  proceeded  to  the 

II.  Thing  I  propofed,    viz.   by  what  way  and 
means  we  may  be  prepared,  and  made  meet  to  be 

13  N  2,  made 


594^  ^^-'^  /'r^y?;?/  and  future  advantage 

;  E  R  M.  made  partakers  of  this  happinefs  ;  and  that  is  (as  I 
have  told  you  all  along)  by  the  conftant  and  fincere 
endeavour  of  an  holy  and  good  life  -,  for  the  text 
fuppofeth  that  they  only  who  are  "  made  free  from 
"  fin,"  and  "  become  the  fervants  of  God,"  and 
who  "  have  their  fruit  unto  holinefs,"  are  they  whofc 
end  fhall  be  everlailing  life.  But  this  is  an  argu- 
ment which  I  have  had  fo  frequent  occafion  to  fpeak 
to,  that  I  (liall  not  now  meddle  with  it.  All  that  I 
fliall  do  more  at  prefent  fhall  be  to  make  an  infe- 
rence or  two  from  what  hath  been  faid  upon  this  ar- 
gument. 

I.  The  confideration  of  the  happy  flate  of  good 
men  in  another  w^orld,  cannot  but  be  a  great  comfort 
and  fupport  to  good  men  under  all  the  evils  and  fuf- 
ferings  of  this  prefent  life.  Hope  is  a  great  cordial 
to  the  minds  of  men,  efpecially  when  the  thing  hoped 
for  does  fo  vaftly  outweigh  the  prefent  grievance  and 
trouble.  The  holy  fcriptures,  which  reveal  to  us 
the  happinefs  of  our  future  (late,  do  likewife  alTure 
us  that  there  is  no  comparifon  between  the  afflidions 
and  fufferings  of  good  men  in  this  world,  and  the  re- 
war  d  of  them  in  the  other.  "  I  reckon  (faith  St, 
Paul)  Rom.  viii.  8.  that  the  fufferings  of  this  pre- 
fent time,  are  not  worthy  to  be  compared  with  the 
glory  that  fhall  be  revealed  in  us." 
Particularly  the  confideration  of  that  glorious 
change  which  fliall  be  made  in  our  bodies  at  the  re- 
furreclion,  ought  to  be  a  great  comfort  to  us  under 
all  the  pains  and  difeafes  which  they  are  now  liable 
to,  and  even  againfl  death  itfelf.  One  of  the  great- 
efl  burdens  of  human  nature,  is  the  frailty  and  infir- 
mity of  our  bodies,  the  necefllties  which  they  are 
frequently  prcfs'd  withal,  the  difeafes  and  pains  to 
which  they  are  liable,  and  "  the  fear  of  death,"  by 

reafon. 


of  an  holy  and  virtuous  life.  3947 

reafon  whereof  a  great  part  of  mankind  are  "  fubje6l  S  E  R  M." 
"  to  bondage  ;"  againft  all  which  this  is  an  everlaft- 
ing  fpring  of  confolation  to  us,  that  the  time  is  com- 
ing when  we  Hiall  have  other  fort  of  bodies,  freed 
from  that  burden  of  corruption  which  we  now  groaa 
under,  and  from  all  thofe  miferies  and  inconvenisn- 
cies  which  flelh  and  blood  are  now  fubjedl  to.  P'or 
the  time  will  come,  when  "  thefe  vile  bodies,''  which 
we  now  wear,  "  fnall  be  changed,  and  fafhioned  like 
*'  to  the  glorious  body  of  the  Son  of  God  i*'  and 
when  they  fhall  be  raifed  at  the  laft  day,  they  fhall 
not  be  raifed  fuch  as  we  laid  them  down,  vile  and 
corruptible,  but  immortal  and  incorruptible  :  for  the 
fame  power  which  hath  raifed  them  up  to  life,  fliall 
iikewife  change  them,  and  put  a  glory  upon  them 
like  to  that  of  the  glorified  body  of  our  Lord  •,  and 
when  this  glorious  change  is  made,  "  when  this  cor- 
ruptible hath  put  on  incorruption,  and  this  mortal 
hath  put  on  immortality,  then  fhall  come  to  pafs 
the  faying  that  is  written,  death  is  fwallowed  up 
in  vidlory  j"  and  when  this  laft  enemy  is  perfe6lly 
fubdued,  we  fhall  be  fet  above  all  the  frailties  and 
dangers,  all  the  temptations  and  fufferings  of  this 
mortal  Hate  ;  there  will  then  be  no  "  flefhly  lufts'* 
and  brutifh  palTions  "  to  war  againft  the  foul ;"  no 
*'  law  in  our  members"  to  rife  up  in  rebeUion  againft 
*'  the  law  of  our  minds  ;'*  no  difcafes  to  torment  us, 
no  danger  of  death  to  terrify  us  •,  all  the  motions 
and  pafTions  of  our  outward  man  fliall  then  be  per- 
fedlly  fubjedt  to  the  reafon  of  our  minds,  and  our 
bodies  fhall  partake  of  the  immortality  of  our  fouls. 
How  fhould  this  confideration  bear  us  up  under  all 
the  evils  of  life  and  the  fears  df  death,  that  the  refur- 
redlion  will  be  a  perfedt  cure  of  all  our  infirmities 
and  difcafes,  and  an  sfFeflual  remedy  of  all  the  evils 

that 


394^        ^heprefent  and  future  advantage^  &c. 

^^xv?*  ^^^^  ^^  "^^  labour  under  •,  and  that  it  is  but  a  very 
little  while  that  we  fhall  be  troubled  with  thefe  frail, 
and  mortal,  and  vile  bodies,  which  fhall  fhortly  be 
laid  in  the  duft,  and  when  they  are  raifed  again, 
fliall  become  fpiritual,   incorruptible,  and  glorious. 

And  if  our  bodies  fhall  undergo  fo  happy  a  change, 
what  happinefs  may  we  imagine  Ihall  then  be  confer- 
red upon  our  fouls,  that  fo  much  better  and  nobler 
part  of  ourfelves  !  as  the  apoftle  reafons  in  another 
cafe,  "  Doth  God  take  care  of  oxen  ?"  Hath  he 
this  confidcration  of  our  bodies,  which  are  but  the 
brutifh  part  of  the  man  ?  What  regard  will  he  then 
have  to  his  own  image,  that  fpark  of  divinity  which 
is  for  ever  to  refide  in  thefe  bodies  ?  If  upon  the  ac- 
count of  our  fouls,  and  for  their  fakes,  our  bodies 
Ihall  become  incorruptible,  fpiritual  and  glorious  ; 
then  certainly  our  fouls  lliall  be  endued  with  far  more 
excellent  and  divine  qualities  :  if  our  bodies  fhall  in 
fome  degree  partake  of  the  pcrfedlion  of  our  fouls 
in  their  fpiritual  and  immortal  nature  ;  to  what  a 
pitch  of  perfedion  fnall  our  fouls  be  raifed  and  ad- 
vanced !  even  to  an  equality  with  angels,  and  to 
fome  kind  of  participation  of  the  divine  nature  and 
perfection,  fo  far  as  a  creature  is  capable  of  them. 

II.  The  comparifon  which  is  here  in  the  text,  and 
which  I  have  largely  explained,  between  the  manifell 
inconveniencies  of  a  finful  and  vicious  courfe,  and 
the  manifold  advantages  of  an  holy  and  virtuous 
life,  is  a  plain  diredion  to  us  which  of  thefe  two  to 
chufe.  So  that  I  may  make  the  fame  appeal  that 
Mofes  does,  after  that  he  had  at  large  declared  the 
bleffings  promifed  to  the  obedience  of  God's  laws, 
and  the  curfe  denounced  againft  the  violation  and 
tranfgreflion  of  them,  Deut.  xxx.  19.  "Icallhea- 
."  ven  and  earth  to  record  againft  you  this  day,  that 
^  *'  I  hay« 


c< 


^he  nature  arid  necejjify  of  holy  refolution.       3949 

I  have  fet  before  you  life  and  death,  blefTing  and 
**  curfing  ;  therefore  chufe  life,"  that  you  may  be 
happy  in  life  and  death,  and  after  death  to  all  eterni- 
ty. I  know  every  one  is  ready  to  chufe  happinefs, 
and  to  fay  with  Balaam,  "  Let  me  die  the  death  of 
"  the  righteous,  and  \tx.  my  latter  end  be  like  his  :" 
but  if  we  do  in  good  earneft  defire  the  end,  we  muft 
take  the  way  that  leads  to  it ;  we  muft:  "  become 
"  the  fervants  of  God,  and  have  our  fruit  unto  ho- 
*'  linefs,"  if  ever  we  expedl,  that  "  the  end  fhall 
*'  be  everlafling  life.'* 


SERMON    CLXVII. 

The  nature  and  neceffity  of  holy 
refolutlon, 

JOB  xxxiv.  31,  32. 

Purely  it  is  meet  to  be  f aid  unto  God,  /  have  horn 
cbaftifementy  I  will  not  offend  any  more  :  'That  which 
I  fee  not^  teach  thou  me-,  if  I  have  done  iniquity, 
I  will  do  no  more, 

THESE  words  are  the  words  of  Elihu,  one  S  E  R  M. 
of  Job's  friends,  and  the  only  one;  who  is  vfif^Iii^ 
not  reproved  for  his  difcourfe  with  Job,  and  who  The  firil 
was  probably  the  author  of  this  ancient  and  moft  ^f^"^°".°^ 
eloquent  hift:ory  of  the  fufferings  and  patience  of 
Job,  and  of  the  end  which  the  Lord  inade  with 
him  ;  and  they  contain  in  them  a  defcription  of  the 
temper  and  behaviour  of  a  true  penitent.     "  Surely 
5'  it  is  meet,  &c." 

In  which  words  we  have  the  two  eflfential  parts  of 
%  true  repentance*  Eirft, 


CLXVII. 


''^  g  r  o      7b^  nature  and  JieceJJity  of  holy  refolution^ 

S  E  R  M.  Firfl,  An  humble  acknowledgment  and  confefTion 
of  our  fins  to  God,  "  Surely  it  is  meet  to  be  faid 
'^  unto  God,  I  have  born  chaftifement." 

Secondly,  A  firm  purpofe  and  refolution  of  a- 
mendment  and  forfaking  of  fin  for  the  future,  '•'"  I. 
*'  will  not  offend  any  more  \  if  I  have  done  iniqui- 
*'  ty,  I  will  do  no  more." 

Firfb,  An  humble  acknowledgment  and  confefTion 
of  our  fins  to  God  ^  "  Surely  it  is  meet  to  be  faid 
"  unto  God,  I  have  born  chaftifement,"  that  is, 
have  finned  and  been  juflly  punilhed  for  it,  and 
am  now  convinced  of  the  evil  of  fin,  and  refolved  to 
leave  it  •,  ''I  have  bom  chaftifement,  I  will  offend 


*'  no  more." 


Of  this  firfl  part  of  repentance,  viz.  an  humble 
confefTion  of  our  fins  to  God,  with  great  fhame  and 
forrow  for  them,  and  a  thorough  conviction  of  the 
evil  and  danger  of  a  finful  courfe,  I  have  already 
treated  at  large.  In  thefe  repentance  mufl  begin, 
but  it  mufl  not  end  in  them  :  for  a  penitent  con- 
fefTion of  our  fins  to  God,  and  a  convidlion  of  the 
evil  of  them,  fignifies  nothings  unlefs  it  brings  us 
to  a  refolution  of  amendment,  that  is,  of  leaving 
our  fins,  and  betaking  ourfelves  to  a  better  courfe. 
And  this  I  intend,  by  God's  afTiilance,  to  fpeak  to 
now,  as  being  the 

Second  part  of  a  true  repentance  here  defcribed  in 
the  text,  viz.  A  firm  purpofe  and  refolution  of  a-r 
mendment  and  forfaking  of  fin  for  the  future  ;  and 
to  exprefs  it  the  more  ftronglyand  emphatically,  and 
to  fli^^w  the  firmnefs  of  the  refolution,  it  is  repeat- 
ed again,  "  I  will  not  offend  any  more*,"  and  then 
in  the  next  verfe,  "  I  have  done  iniquity,  I  will 
*'  do  no  more."  And  this  is  fo  necefTary  a  part  of 
repentance,  that  hereii)  the  very  eiTence  and  formal 


^he  nafufe  and  neceffify  of  holy  refoliition,        3  95 1 

dature  of  repentance  does  confifl,  viz.  in  the  firm  ^  ^-  ^  ^ 
and  fincere  purpofe  and  refolution  ot  a  better  courfe. 
In  the  handling  of  this  argument,  I  fliall  do  theic 
•fix  things. 

I.  I  fliall  fhew  what  refolution  is  in  general. 

II.  What  is  the  fpecial  objedl  of  this  kind  of  re- 
folution. 

III.  What  is  implied  in  a  (incere  refolution  of  lea- 
ving our  fins  and  returning  to  God. 

IV.  I  fhall  fliew  that  in  this  refolution  of  amend- 
ment, the  very  effence  and  formal  nature  of  repent- 
ance does  confiil. 

v.  I  fhall  offer  fome  confiderations  to  convince 
men,  both  of  the  necelTity  and  fitnefs  of  this  refolu- 
tion, and  of  keeping  fledfaftly  to  it,  "  Surely  it  Is 
*'  meet  to  be  faid  unto  God,  I  will  not  offend 
**  any  more.'* 

VI.  I  fhall  add  fome  brief  dire6lions  concerning 
the  managing  and  maintaining  of  this  holy  and  ne- 
cefTary  refolution. 

I.  What  refolution  in  general  is.  It  is  a  fix'd  deter- 
mination of  the  will  about  any  thing,  either  to  do 
it,  or  not  to  do  it,  as  upon  due  dehberation  we  have 
judged  and  concluded  it  to  be  necelTary  or  convenient 
to  be  done,  or  not  to  be  done  by  us :  and  this  fup- 
pofeth  three  things. 

I.  Refolution  fuppofeth  a  precedent  deliberation  of 
the  mind  about  the  thing  to  be  refolved  up.  For  no 
prudent  man  does  determine  or  refolve  upon  any 
thing,  till  he  have  confidered  the  thing,  and  weigh- 
ed it  well  with  himfclf,  and  have  fully  debated  the 
necelfity  and  expedience  of  it  •,  what  advantage  he 
Ihall  have  by  the  doing  of  it,  and  what  danger  and 
inconvenience  will  certainly  or  very  probably  redound 
to  him  by  the  negledl  and  omifTion  of  it.  For  pe- 
,    Vol.  IX,  19  O  remptorily 

4 


395^      ^^^  ;^^/wri?  and  necejfity  of  holy  refolutiort. 

remptorily  to  determine  and  refolve  upon  any  thing, 
before  a  man  have  done  this,  is  not  properly  refolu* 
tion,  but  precipitancy  and  rafhnefs. 

2 .  Refolution  fuppofeth  fome  judgment  pafs'd  up- 
on the  thing,  after  a  man  hath  thus  deliberated  about 
it  5  that  he  IS  fatisfied  in  his  mind  one  way  or  other 
concerning  it,  that  his  underftanding  is  convinced 
either  that  it  is  neceflary  and  convenient  for  him  to 
do  it,  or  that  it  is  not  v  and  this  is  lometimes  called 
refolution,  but  is  not  that  refolution  which  immediate- 
ly determines  a  man  to  adion.  This  judgment  of 
the  necefTity  and  fitnefs  of  the  thing  is  not  the  re- 
folution of  the  will,  but  of  the  underftanding ;  for 
It  Jols  not  fignify  that  a  man  hath  fully  determined 
to  do  the  thing,  but  that  he  hath  determined  with 
himfelf  that  it  is  reafonable  to  be  done,  and  that  he 
is  no  longer  in  doubt  and  fufpence  whether  it  be  befl: 
for  mm  to  do  it  or  not,  but  is  in  his  mind  refolved 
and  fatisned  one  way  or  other.  And  thefe  arc  two 
very  difterent  things  ;  to  be  refolved  in  one's  judg- 
ment, that  IS,  to  be  convinced  that  a  thing  is  fit  and 
neceffary  to  be  done,  and  to  be  refolved  to  fet  upon 
the  doing  of  it  i  for  many  men  are  thus  convinced 
of  the  fitnefs  and  necefTity  of  the  thing,  who  yet 
have  not  the  heart,  cannot  bring  themfelves  to  a 
firm  and  fixed  refolution  to  fet  upon  the  doing  of  it. 
So  that  an  aft  of  the  judgment,  muft  go  before  the 
refolution  of  the  will  :  for  as  he  is  rafh  that  refolves 
to  do  a  thing  before  he  hath  deliberated  about  it ;  fo 
he  is  blind  and  wilful  that  refolves  to  do  a  thing  be- 
fore his  j'l pigment  be  fatisfied,  whether  it  be  beft 
for  him  to  do  it  or  not. 

^.  If  the  matter  be  of  confiderable  moment  and 
conffqu':nce,  refolution  fuppofeth  fome  motion  oi 
the  aficcUons  j  which  is  a  kind  of  biafs  upon  the 

will. 


^e  nature  and  necejjity  of  holy  refolution.        3  0  C  f 

will,  a  certain  propenfion  and  inclination  that  a  man  S  r  "vf. 
feels  in  himfelf,  either  urging  him  to  do  a  thing,  or  ^^^^"* 
withdrawing  him  from  it.  Deliberation  and  judg- 
ment, they  direft  a  man  what  to  do,  or  leave  undone  ; 
the  afFedions  excite  and  quicken  a  man  to  take  fome 
refolution  in  the  matter,  that  is,  to  do  fuitably  to  the 
judgment  his  mind  hath  pafs'd  upon  the  thing.f  or  in- 
fiance  ;  a  great  finncr  refleds  upon  his  life,  and  conii-  - 
ders  what  he  hath  done,  what  the  courfc  is  that  he  lives 
in,  and  what  the  illue  and  conlequence  of  it  will 
probably  or  certainly  be,  whether  it  will  make  him 
happy  or  miferable  in  the  conclufion  ;  and  debating 
the  matter  calmly  and  foberly  with  himfelf,  he  is  fa- 
tislicd  and  convinced  of  the  evil  and  danger  of  a 
wicked  life,  and  confequently  that  it  is  beft  for  him 
to  refoive  upon  a  better  courfe,  that  is,  to  repent. 
Now  thcfc  thoughts  muft  needs  awaken  in  him  fear- 
ful apprrhenfions  of  the  wrath  of  Almighty  God, 
which  is  due  to  him  for  his  fins  and  hangs  over  him, 
and  which  he  is  every  moment  in  danger  of,  if  he 
goes  on  in  his  evil  courfe.  Thefe  thoughts  are  apt 
like  wife  to  fill  him  with  fhame  and  confufion,  at  the 
remembrance  of  his  horrible  ingratitude  to  God  his 
maker,  his  beft  friend  and  grcateft  benefadtor,  and  of 
his  defperate  folly  in  provoking  omnipotent  juftice 
againft  himfelf  %  whereupon  he  is  heartily  grieved 
and  troubled  for  what  he  hath  done  ;  and  thefe  af- 
fedions  of  fear  and  Ihame  and  forrow  being  once  up, 
they  come  with  great  violence  upon  the  will,  and 
urge  the  man  to  a  fpeedy  refolutioi>  of  changing  his 
coMrf?,  anJ  leaving  the  way  he  is  in,  which  he  is 
fully  convinced  is  fo  evil  and  dangerous  •,  and  of 
Becakinq;  himfelf  to  another  courfe,  which  he  is  ful- 
ly  fdcisned  will  be  much  more  for  his  fafety  and  ad- 


vantage. 


ip   O    2  So 


3954      ^^^  nature  and  necejjity  of  holy  refoluflon, 

E  R  M.       So  that  refolution  in  eencral,  is  a  fix'd  determina- 

CLXVII.       .  .... 

tion  of  the  will  •,  that  is,  fuch  a  determination  as  is  not 
only  for  the  prefent  free  from  all  wavering  and  doubt- 
ing, but  fuch  as  cannot  prudently  be  altered,  fo  long 
as  reafon  remains.  For  the  man  who  upon  full  delibe- 
ration and  convi6lion  of  his  mind  refolves  upon  any 
thing,  cannot  without  the  imputation  of  ficklenefs  and 
inconftancy  quit  that  refolution,  fo  long  as  he  hath  the 
fame  reafon  which  he  had  when  he  took  it  up,  and  is 
flill  fatisfied  that  the  reafon  is  good.  For  inflance  •,  The 
man  who  hath  taken  up  a  refolution  to  be  fober,  becaule 
of  the  uglinefs  and  unreafonablenefs  of  drunkennefs, 
and  the  temporal  inconveniencies  and  eternal  damnati- 
on which  that  fin  expofeth  a  man  to ;  if  thefe  reafons 
be  true  and  good,  can  never  prudently  alter  the  refo- 
lution which  he  hath  taken,and  return  to  that  fin  again. 
-    II.  Let  us  confider  what  is  the  fpecial  obje6t  or 
matter  of  this  refolution,  wherein  the  formal  nature 
of  repentance  does   confift,  what  it  is  that  a  man 
when  he  repents  refolves  upon  ;  and  that  I  told  you 
is  to  leave  his  fin,  and  to  return  to  God  and  his 
duty  •,  and  this  is  the  refolution  which  the  penitent 
here  defcribed  in  the  text  takes  up,  "  I  will  not  of- 
fend any  more.     That  which  I  fee  not,  teach  thou 
me ;  and  if  I  have  done  iniquity,  I  wall  do  no 
more.'*     He  refolves  againll  all  known  fin,  "  I 
will  not  offend  any  more  i"  and  if  through  ig* 
norance  he  had  finned  and  done  contrary  to  his  duty> 
he  defires  to   be  better  inflrudled,  that  he  may  not 
offend  again  in  the  Hke  kind,  "  That  which  I  fee 
"  fee  not,  teach  thou  me  ;  and  if  I  have  done  ini- 
*'  quity,  I  will  do  no  more." 

So  that  the  true  penitent  refolves  upon  thefe  two 
things. 

1.  To  forfake  his  fin.     And 
.^  ^2.  To  return  to  God  and  his  duty.  i»  To 


Tfo  nature  and  necejfity  of  holy  refolution.      S955 

,  •  I.  To  forfake  his  fin  :  and  this  impUes  the  quit-  ^cl^o^i^*' 
ting  of  his  finful  courfc  whatever  it  had  been  -,  and 
that  not  only  by  abilaining  from  the  outward  adb 
and  pradice  of  every  fm,  but  by  endeavouring  to 
crucify  and  fubdue  t^e  inward  afFedion  and  inclina- 
tion to  it.  > 

And  it  implies  farther,  the  utter  forfaking  of  fin  ; 
for  repentance  is  not  only  a  refolution  to  abftain  from 
fin  for  the  prefent,  but  never  to  return  to  it  again. 
Thus  Ephraim,  when  he  repented  of  his  idolatry,  he 
utterly  renounced  it,  faying,  "  What  have  I  to  do 
"  anymore  with  idols?"  Hof  xiv.  8.  He  that 
truly  repents,  is  refolved  to  break  off  his  finful  courfe, 
and  to  abandon  thofe  lufts  and  vices  which  he  was 
formerly  addided  to,  and  hved  in.  »: 

2.  The  true  penitent  refolves  likewife  to  return  to 
God  and  his  duty  :  he  does  not  ftay  in  the  negative 
part  of  religion,  he  does  not  only  refolve  not  to 
commit  any  fin,  but  not  to  neg'led  or  omit  any  thing 
that  he  knows  to  be  his  duty  ;  and  if  he  has  been 
Ignorant  of  any  part  of  his  duty,  he  is  willing  to 
know  it,  that  he  may  do  it  ;  he  is  not  only  deter- 
mined to  forfake  his  fin,  which  will  make  him  mife- 
rable,  but  to  return  to  God,  who  alone  can  make 
him  happy  :  he  is  now  refolved  to  love  God,  and 
to  ferve  him  as  much  as  he  hated  and  difhonourcd 
him  before  -,  and  will  now  be  as  diligent  to  perform 
and  pradife  all  the  duties  and  parts  of  religion,  as 
he  was  negligent  of  them  before,  and  as  ready  to  do 
all  the  good  he  can  to  all  men  in  any  kind,  as  he  was 
carekfs  of  thefe  things  before  :  thefe  in  general  are 
^he  things  which  a  true  penitent  refolves  upon.  I 
proceed  to  the 

III.  Thing  I  propofed  to  confider,  namely  what 
IS  implied  in  a  fincere  refolutionof  leaving  our  fns, 

and 


395^      -^^  « j/«r<f  and  necejjity  of  holy  refolution. 
$  E  R  M.  and  returning  to  God  and  our  duty.     And  this  lioly 
CLXV  I.  j.^fQjyt;ion,  if  it  be  thorough  and  fincere,  does  imply 
in  it  thefe  three  things. 

1.  That  it  be  univerfal. 

2.  That  it  be  a  refolution  of  the  means  as  well  a* 
of  the  end. 

3 .  That  it  prefently  comes  to  effed,  and  be  ipcc- 
dily  and  without  delay  put  in  execution. 

I.  A  fincere  refolution  of  amendment  muft  beuni* 
verfal :  a  refolution  to  forfake  all  fin,  and  to  return  to 
cur  whole  duty,  and  every  part  of  it ;  fuch  a  rcfolu* 
tion  as  that  of  holy  David,  "to  hate  every  falfe  way, 
**  and  to  have  refpedt  to  all  God's  comrtianditients.'* 

This  refolution  muft  be  univerfal  in  refpedl  of  the 
whole  man,  and  with  regard  to  all  our  adtions.  In 
refpedl  of  the  whole  man ;  for  we  muft  refolve  not  only 
to  abftain  from  the  outward  adtion  of  fin,  but  this  refo- 
lution muft  have  it's  efFed  upon  our  inward  man,  and 
reach  our  very  hearts  and  thoughts  \  it  muft  reftrain 
our  inclinations,  and  *'  mortify  our  lufts  and  cor- 
**  rupt  afFedtions,  and  renew  us  in  the  very  fpirit  of 
*'  our  minds,*'  as  the  apoftle  exprefles  it. 

And  it  muft  be  univerfal,  in  refpedt  of  all  our 
aftions.  For  this  is  not  the  refolution  of  a  fincere 
penitent,  to  abftain  only  from  grofs  and  notorious, 
from  fcandalous  and  open  fins ;  but  likewife  to  re- 
frain from  the  commiflion  of  thofe  fins  which  are 
fmall  in  the  efteem  of  men,  and  not  branded  with  a 
itiark  of  publick  infamy  and  reproach  •,  to  forbear 
fin  in  fccret,  and  when  no  eye  of  man  fees  us  and 
takes  notice  of  us.  This  is  not  a  fincere  refolution, 
to  refolve  to  pradlife  the  duties  and  virtues  of  religion 
in  publick,  and  to  negledl  them  in  private ;  to  re- 
folve to  perform  the  duties  of  the  firft  table,  and  to 
pafs  by  thofe  of  the  fecond  \  to  refolve  to  ferve  God, 

and 


ffbe  nature  and  necejjity  of  holy  refolution.        3  957 
and  to  take  a  liberty  to  defraud  and  cozen  men  ;  to  S  E  R  M. 

.         .  .    .  CLXVII 

honour  our  father  which  is  heaven,  and  to  injure  and 
hate  our  brethren  upon  earth  -,  "  to  love  our  neigh- 
*'  hour,  and  to  hate  our  enemy,"  as  the  Jews  did 
of  old  time  \  to  refolve  againft  fwearing,  and  to  al- 
low ourfelves  the  liberty  to  fpeak  falfely,  and  to 
break  our  word  ;  to  flee  from  fuperftition,  and  to 
run  into  fa6lion  -,  to  abhor  idols,  and  to  commit  la- 
crilcge ;  to  refolve  to  be  devout  at  church,  and  de- 
ceitful in  our  Ihops  ;  to  be  very  fcrupulous  about 
Icfler  matters,  and  to  be  very  zealous  about  indiffe- 
rent things ;  "  to  tithe  mint  and  anife  and  cummin, 
*'  and  to  omit  the  weightier  matters  of  the  law, 
*'  mercy  and  fidelity  and  juftice  j"  to  be  very  rigid 
in  matters  of  faith  and  opinion,  but  loofe  in  life 
and  pradlice. 

No  i  the  refolution  of  a  fincere  penitent  muft  be 
univerfal  and  uniform  :  it  muft  extend  alike  to  the 
forbearing  of  all  fin,  and  the  exercife  of  every  grace 
and  virtue,  and  to  the  due  pradtice  and  performance 
of  every  part  of  our  duty.  The  true  penitent  muft 
refolve  for  the  future  to  abftain  from  all  fin,  "  to  be 
**  holy  in  all  manner  of  converfation,  and  to  abound 
**  in  all  the  fruits  of  righteoufnefs,  which  by  Jesus 
•*  Christ  are  to  the  praife  and  glory  of  God.** 
For  if  a  man  do  truly  repent  of  his  wicked  hfe,  there 
is  the  very  fame  rcafon  why  he  Ihould  refolve  againft 
All  fin,  as  why  he  Ihould  refolve  againft  any  ;  why 
he  fliould  obferve  all  the  commandments  of  God,  as 
why  he  fliould  keep  any  one  of  them.  For  as  St. 
James  reafons  concerning  him  that  wilfully  breaks 
any  one  commandment  of  God,  that  "  he  is  guilty 
*•  of  all,  and  breaks  the  whole  law ;"  becaufe  the 
authority  of  God  is  equally  ftampt  upon  all  his  laws, 
and  is  violated  and  contemned  by  the  wilful  tranfgref- 
I  fion 


395^      T'^f  nature  and  necejjity  of  holy  refolutton. 
S  E  R  M.  fjon  of  any  one  of  them  •,  "  For  he  that  hath  faid^ 

CLXVII.  ^  . 

"  thou  fhalt  not  kill,  hath  likewife  faid,  thou  ihalt 
"  not  commit  adultery,  and  thou  fhalt  not  fteal  :'* 
fo  he  that  refolves  againft  any  one  fin,  or  upon  per- 
formance of  any  one  part  of  his  duty,  ought  for  the 
very  fame  reafon  to  make  hjs  refolution  univerfal ; 
becaufe  one  fin  is  evil  and  provoking  to  God,  as 
\fd\  as  another ;  and  the  performance  of  one  part  of 
our  duty  good  and  pleafing  to  him,  as  well  as  ano- 
ther, and  theie  is  no  difference.  So  that  he  that 
refolves  againft  any  fin,  upon  wife  and  reafonable 
grounds,  becaufe  of  the  evil  of  it,  and  the  danger 
of  the  wrath  of  God  to  which  it  expofeth  us,  ought 
for  the  fame  reafon  to  refolve  againft  all  fin ;  becaufe 
it  is  damnable  to  commit  adultery,  and  to  fteal,  as 
well  as  to  kill  ♦,  and  that  refolution  againft  fin,  which 
is  not  univerfal,  it  is  a  plain  cafe  that  it  is  not  true 
and  fincere,  and  that  it  was  not  taken  up  out  of  the 
fenfe  of  the  intrinfical  evil  of  ftn,  and  the  danger  of 
it  in  refpe6l  of  God  and  the  judgment  of  another 
world  ;  (for  this  reafon  holds  againft  every  fin,  and 
remains  always  the  fame)  but  that  it  was  taken  up 
upon  fome  inferior  confideration,  either  becaufe  of 
the  fhame  and  infamy  of  it  among  men,  or  becaufe 
of  fome  other  temporal  inconvenience,  which  if  the 
man  could  be  fecured  againft,  he  would  prefently 
break  his  refolution,  and  return  to  the  commifTion  of 
that  fin,  with  as  much  freedom  as  any  other. 

2.  A  fincere  refolution  implies  a  refolution  of  the 
means  as  well  as  of  the  end.  He  that  is  truly  and 
honeftly  refolved  againft  any  fin,  is  likewife  refolved 
to  avoid  as  much  as  is  poffible  the  occafions  and 
temptations  which  may  lead  or  draw  him  to  that  fin  •, 
or  if  they  happen  to  prefent  themfelves  to  him,  he  is 
r^fojved  to  ftand  upon  his  guard,  and  to  refift  them. 

4  In 


T'he  nature  and  neceffity  of  holy  refolution.       3959 
In  like  manner  he  that  fincerely  refolves  upon  doino;  S  E  R  M. 

CI  XVII 

his  duty  in  any  kind,  muil  refolve  upon  the  means 
that  are  requifite  and  neceflary  to  the  due  difcharge 
and  performance  of  that  duty.  As  he  that  refolves 
againft  that  needlefs  and  ufelefs  fin  of  fwearing  in 
common  converfatioi>,  muft  refolve  alfo  "  to  fct  a 
"  guard  before  the  door  of  his  lips,"  feeing  it  is 
certain  that  it  requires  great  care  and  attention,  at 
leaft  for  fome  competent  time,  to  get  rid  of  a  habit. 

When  David  refolved  "  not  to  offend  with  his 
*'  tongue,"  he  refolved  at  the  fame  time  to  be  very 
watchful  over  himfelf,  Pfal.  xxxix.  i.  "  I  faid  I  will 
*'  take  heed  to  my  ways,  that  I  offend  not  with  my 
''  tongue  :  I  will  keep  my  mouth  as  with  a  bridle, 
*'  while  the  wicked  is  before  me."  For  a  man  to 
refolve  againft  any  fin  or  vice,  and  yet  to  inv^olve 
himfelf  continually  in  the  occafions,  and  to  run  him- 
felf into  the  company  and  temptations,  which  do  na- 
turally, and  will  almoft  neceffarily  lead  and  betray 
him  into  thofe  fins,  is  a  plain  evidence  of  infincerity. 
This  I  take  for  a  certain  rule,  that  whatever  can  rea- 
fonably  move  a  m^an  to  refolve  upon  any  end,  will, 
if  his  refolution  be  fincere  and  honeft,  determine  him 
every  whit  as  ftrongly  to  ufe  all  thofe  means  which 
are  neceffary  in  order  to  that  end.  ^  But  of  this  I 
have  fpoken  eliewhere. 

3.  A  fincere  refolution  of  leaving  our  fins,  and  re- 
turning to  God  and  our  duty,  does  imply  the  pre- 
fent  time,  and  that  we  are  to  refolve  fpeedily  and 
without  delay  to  put  this  refolution  in  pradice ;  that 
we  are  preremptorily  determined  not  to  go  one  ftep 
farther  in  the  ways  of  fin,  not  to  negled:  any  duty 
that  God  requires  of  us,  not  for  one  moment  \  but 
immediately  and  forthwith  to  fet  upon  the  pradice 
of  it,  fo  foon  as  occafion  and  opportunity  is  offer'd 

Vol.  IX.  19  P  to 


-5  of'O       ^he  nature  and  itecejfity  of  holy  refoluttoH. 

SKRM.  tons.  And  the  reafon  of  this  is  evident  •,  becaufc 
CLXVii.  ^^^  ^^^y  {B,mc  confiderations  that  prevail. upon  any 
man  to  take  up  this  rcfolution  of  amendment,  and 
changing  the  courfe  of  his  hfe,  are  every  whit  as 
prevalent  to  engage  him  to  put  this  refolution  pre- 
fcntly  in  pradlice  and  execution. 

I  deny  not,  but  a  man  m.-  7  refolve  upon  a  thing 
for  the  future,  and  when  the  time  comes  may  exe- 
cute his  refolution,  and  this  refolution  may  for  all 
that  be  very  fincere  and  real,  though  it  was  delayed 
to  a  certain  time  ^  becaufe  he  did  not  fee  reafon  to  re* 
folve  to  do  the  thing  fooner  :  but  it  cannot  be  fo  in 
this  cafe  of  repentance  ^  becaufe  there  can  no  good 
reafon  be  imagined,  why  a  man  fliould  refolve  feven 
years  hence  to  change  his  courfe,  and  break  off  his 
iinful  life,  but  the  very  fame .  reafon  will  hold  as 
llrongly,  why  he  fliould  do  it  prefently  and  with- 
out delay  ;  and  over  and  befides  this,  there  are  a 
great  m.any  and  powerful  reafons  and  confiderations, 
why  he  fnould  rather  put  this  good  refolution  in  pre- 
fent  execution,  than  put  it  off  and  defer  it  to  any 
farther  time  whatfoever. 

What  is  it  that  puts  thee  upon  this  refolution  of 
Icvaving  thy  fins,  and  urgeth  thee  to  do  it  at  all  ? 
Art  thou  refolved  to  leave  fin,  becaufe  it  is  fo  great 
^n  evil  ?  Why  it  is  fo  for  the  prefent ;  the  evil  of  it 
is  intrinfical  to  it,  and  cleave?  to  the  very  nature  of 
it,  and  is  never  to  be  ftparatei  from  it :  fo  that  this 
is  a  prefent  reafon,  and  as  flrong  againfl  it  now,  as 
ever  it  will  be  hereafter  :  nay  it  is  flronger  at  prefent ; 
becaufe  if  it  be  fo  great  an  evil,  the  fooner  we  leave 
it,  the  better. 

Or  doff  thou  refolve  to  forfake  fm,  becaufe  thou 
^rt  apprehenfive  of  the  danger  and  mifchief  of  it^ 
%l\3,t  it  will  expofe  thee  to  the  wrath  of  God,  and  tp 


7b e  nature  and  necejjity  of  holy  refolution.       3961 

the  endlefs  and  intolerable  mifery  of  another  world  ?  S  F  R-M. 
Why  this  reafon  likewife  makes  much  more  for  the 
prefcnt  leaving  of  it :  becau fc  the  longer  thou  con- 
tinued in  a  finful  and  impenitent  ftate,  the  greater 
is  thy  danger,  and  the  greater  penalty  thou  wilt  moft 
certainly  incur  •,  by  delaying  to  put  this  good  refo- 
lution in  pra6lice,  thou  doft  increafe  and  multiply 
the  caufes  of  thy  fear*  For  hereby  thou  provokeft 
God  more,  and  every  day  doft  incenfe  his  wrath 
more  and  more  againft  thee  ;  thou  prepared  more 
and    more  fuel  for   "  cverlafting  burnings,"    and 

treafureft  up  for  thy  felf  more  wrath,  againft  the 

day  of  wrath,  and  the  revelation  of  the  rigi.reous 
*'  judgment  of  God."  Nay  thou  doft  not  only  in- 
creafe and  aggravate,  but  thou  doft  hereby  haften 
thine  own  mifery,  and  ruin,  and  takeil  the  mod  ef- 
fecSlual  courfe  that  is  poiTible,  to  bring  thine  own 
fears,  and  the  vengeance  of  Almighty  God,  fo  much 
the  fooner  upon  thee.  For  nothing  provokes  God 
to  take  a  fpeedier  courfe  with  finneis,  and  does  more 
quicken  the  pace  of  his  judgments,  than  wilful  con- 
tinuance in  fin. 

And  yet  farther  ;  if  thy  refolution  be  valuable  and 
confiderable  to  thee,  thou  takeft  the  mod  efte6lual 
courfe  in  the  world  to  frudrate  and  defeat  it.  Thou 
art  fully  refolved  to  leave  thy  fins  hereafter,  and  thou 
thinked  thou  had  reafon  for  it :  but  by  continuing  in 
them  for  the  prefcnt,  thou  provoked  thejudiceof 
Almighty  God  to  cut  thee  off,  before  thy  refolution 
hath  taken  effect. 

Again  •,  dod  thou  refolve  to  leave  thy  fins  one 
time  or  other,  becaufe  thereby  thou  hoped  to  put 
thy  {^Mi  into  a  capacity  of  pardon  and  mercy,  and  of 
eternal  life  and  happinefs  ?  Why  this  reafon  diould 
move  thee  to  do  the  thing  as  foon  as  is  poffible  ;  be- 

19  P  a  caufe 


3962       T'he  nature  and  necejjity  of  holy  refolution. 
S  E  ?.  M.  caufc  the  fooner  thou  forfakeft  thy  fins,  thou  haft ' 

CLXVII. 

the  greater  hope  of  finding  mercy  and  forgivenefs 
with  God  ;  and  the  fooner  thou  beginneft  a  holy 
courfc,  and  the  longer  thou  continueft  therein,  thou 
halt  reafon  to  expedl  a  greater  and  more  ample 
reward.  Thou  canft  not  by  holding  off  hope  to 
bring  down  pardon  and  mercy  to  lower  rates,  and  to 
obtain  thefe  hereafter  upon  eafier  terms  :  No ;  the 
terms  and  conditions  of  God's  mercy  are  already  fix- 
ed and  eftablifhed,  fo  as  never  to  be  altered. 

So  that  whatever  reafon  thou  canft  poffibly  ailed  ge 
for  taking  up  this  refolution,  it  is  every  whit  as  for- 
cible and  powerful  to  perfuade  thee  to  put  it  fpeedily 
in  execution. 

And  then  there  is  this  reafon  befides,  and  that  a 
very  confiderable  one,  why  thou  fliouldeft  immedi- 
ately put  this  refolution  in  practice,  and  not  delay  it 
for  a  moment.  Thou  mayeft  at  prefcnt  do  it  much 
more  certainly,  and  much  more  eafily.  Much  more 
certainly  ;  becaufe  thou  art  furer  of  the  prefent  time, 
than  thou  canft  be  of  the  future.  The  prefent  is  in 
thy  power,  but  not  one  moment  more.  And  thou 
mayeft  at  prefent  do  it  more  eafily ;  for  the  longer 
thou  continueft  in  fin,  thy  refolution  againft  it  will 
ftill  grow  weaker,  and  the  habit  of  fin  continually 
ftronger.  Thou  wilt  every  day  be  more  enflaved 
by  the  power  of  thy  lufts,  and  thy  heart  will  every 
day  be  more  "  hardened  through  the  deceitfulnefs 
"  of  fin."  All  the  change  that  time  makes  will 
ftill  be  for  the  worfe,  and  more  to  thy  difadvantage. 
Sin  will  be  as  pleafant  to  thee  hereafter,  and  thou 
more  loth  to  leave  it,  than  at  prefent.  Sin  was  never 
mortified  by  age.  It  will  every  day  have  more 
ftrength  to  bind  thee  and  hold  thee  faft,  and  thou 
wilt  have  every  day  kfs  to  break  loofe  from  it.     For 


^he  nature  and  necefftty  of  holy  refolution.  3  963^ 
by  every  fin  thou  doft  commit,  thou  added  a  new  S  E  R  M. 
degree  to  the  flrength  and  force  of  it  •,  and  fo  much 
flrength  as  thou  added  to  it,  fo  much  thou  takeft 
from  thy  (d^^  and  fo  much  thou  lofell  of  thine  own 
power  and  Uberty.  For  a  man  and  his  lufts  are  hke 
nature  and  difeafe  :  fo  much  flrength  as  the  difeafc 
gains,  nature  lofeth,  and  the  man  is  hereby  doubly 
weakened  :  for  he  does  not  only  lofe  fo  much  of  his 
own  flrength,  but  the  enemy  gets  it. 

Nay  thou  doll  hereby  likewife  forfeit  that  auxi- 
liary ilrcngth  and  afTillance  which  the  grace  of  God 
is  ready  to  afford  to  men,  his  reflraining  and  his 
preventing  grace.  For  as  a  man  goes  on  in  fin,  and 
advanceth  in  an  evil  courfe,  the  grace  of  God  draws 
off  by  degrees,  and  his  Holy  Spirit  doth  infenfibly 
leave  him  :  and  when  a  finner  is  come  to  this,  his 
befl  refolutions  will  ''  vanifh  like  the  morning  cloud 
"  and  the  early  dew  which  paffeth  away.'* 

So  that  it  cannot  be  a  true  and  fincere  refolution 
of  leaving  our  fins,  if  it  do  not  take  place  and  have 
-not  it's  effedl  prefently.  For  there  is  no  man  that 
takes  up  a  refolution,  upon  weighty  and  conlidera- 
ble  reafons,  of  doing  any  thing  ;  but  if  the  reafons 
upon  which  he  takes  it  up  urge  him  to  do  the 
thing  at  prefent,  he  will  prefently  fet  about  it :  and 
that  man  is  not  refolved  to  do  a  thing,  whatever  he 
may  pretend,  who  hath  mofl  rcafon  to  do  it  at  pre- 
fent, and  may  befl  do  it  now,  and  yet  delays  it. 

And  thus  I  have  opened  to  you  the  nature  of  this 
holy  refolution  of  leaving  our  fins,  and  returning  to 
<jOd  and  our  duty  •,  and  have  fhewn  what  is  necef- 
farily  implied  in  fuch  a  refolution,  if  it  be  iincerc 
and  in  gooJ  earnefl ;  that  it  be  univerfal  ;  and  that 
it  be  a  refolution  of  the  means^  as  well  as  of  the  end ; 
and  that  it  prefently  take  place  and  be  put  in  execu- 
tion. 


'JO $4      ^^  nature  and  necejjity  ef  holy  refolutton. 

tion.  And  thefe  are  three  the  beil  figns  and  marks 
that  I  know  of,  whereby  a  man  may  try  and  examino 
the  truth  and  fincerity  of  that  refokition  of  amend* 
'  ment,  which  we  call  repentance.  If  it  be  againft  all 
fin,  and  have  an  equal  regard  to  every  part  of  our 
duty  ;  if  when  we  refolve  upon  the  end,  that  is,  to 
avoid  fin,  and  to  perform  our  duty,  we  are  equally 
refolved  upon  the  means  that  are  neceflary  to  thofe 
ends  ;  if  the  refokition  we  have  taken  up  commence 
prefently,  and  from  that  day  forward  be  duly  exe- 
cuted and  put  in  pra6lice,  then  is  our  repentance  and 
refokition  of  amendment  fincere :  but  if  there  be  a 
defedl  in  any  of  thefe,  our  refolution  is  not  as  it 
ought  to  be. 


SERMON    CLXVIII. 

The  nature  and  neceffity  of  holy 
refolution. 


Job  xxxiv.  31,  32. 

Surely  it  is  meet  to  he  [aid  unto  God,  /  have  horit 
chaftifement,  I  will  not  offend  any  fnore  :  'That  which 
J  fee  not^  teach  thou  me ;  //  /  have  done  iniquity  ^ 
I  will  do  no  more, 

S  E  R  M.  '   I  ^  H  E  S  E  words  are  the  defcription  .of  the 

CLXVIII.  I  . 

i><V>J     A      temper  and  behaviour  of  a  true  penitent,  and 
Thefeconddo  contain  in  them  the  two  eflfential  parts  of  a  true 
fermon  on  repentance, 
iiiis  text. 

Firft,  An  humble  acloiowlegment  and  confeflion 

cf  fin. 

Secondly, 


T^e  nature  and  necejjity  of  holy  refolutien.      3  96 ^ 

Secondly,  A  firm  purpofe  and  refolution  of  amend-  S  E  R  M. 
ment  and  forfaking  our  fins  for  the  future. 

And  this  latter  is  fo  necelTary  a  part  of  repentance, 
that  herein  the  very  efience  and  formal  nature  of  re- 
pentance does  confiil.  In  handling  of  this  argument, 
I  propofed  to  confider, 

I.  What  refolution  in  general  is. 

II.  What  is  the  fpecial  objed  or  matter  of  this 
kind  of  refolution. 

III.  What  is  implied  in  a  fincere  refolution  of  leav- 
ing our  fins,  and  returning  to  God  and  our  duty. 

IV.  To  fhew  that  in  this  refolution  of  amendment, 
the  very  effence  and  formal  nature  of  repentance 
doth  confift. 

V.  To  offer  fome  confiderations  to  convince  men 
of  the  neceffity  and  fitnefs  of  this  refolution,  and  of 
keeping  ftedfaft  to  it. 

VI.  To  add  fome  dire6lions  concerning  the  ma- 
naging and  maintaining  this  holy  refolution.  The 
three  firfl  I  have  fpoken  to,  I  now  proceed  to  the 

IV.  To  fhew  that  in  this  refolution  the  very  ef- 
fence and  formal  nature  of  repentance  doth  confifV. 
A  man  may  do  many  reafonable  adlions,  without  an 
explicit  refolution.     In  things  that  are  more  eafy  and 
natural  to  us,  judgment  and  refolution  are  all  one ; 
it  is  all  one  to  judge  a  thing  fit  to  be  done,  and  to 
refolve  to  do  it.     But  in  matters  of  difficulty,  when 
a  man  is  to  ftrive  againfl  the  ftream,  and  to  oppofe 
ftrong  habits  that  have  taken  deep  root,  there  is  no- 
thing to  be  done  without  an  explicit  refolution.     No 
man  makes  any  remarkable  change  in  his  life,  fo  as 
to  crofs  his  inchnations  and  cuftom,  without  an  ex- 
prefs  refolution.     For  though  a  man's  judgment  be 
never  fo  much  convinced  of  the  reafonablenefs  and 
n^cciTity  of  fuch  a  change  \  yet  unkfs  a  man's  fpirit 

b« 


'5966     T^ke  nature  and  7ieceJ]ity  of  holy  refolution, 

S  E  R  M.  be  fortified  and  fix'd  by  refolution,  the  power  of 
cuftom,  and  the  violence  of  his  own  inclinations  will 
carry  him  againft  his  judgment.  Now  there  is  no 
change  of  a  man's  life  can  be  imagined,  wherein  a 
man  offers  greater  violence  to  inveterate  habits,  and 
to  the  ftrong  propenfions  of  his  prefent  temper,  thaa 
in  this  of  repentance.  So  that  among  all  the  adlions 
of  a  man's  life,  there  is  none  that  doth  more  neceifa- 
rily  require  an  exprefs  purpofe,  than  repentance  does. 

And  that  herein  repentance  doth  chiefiy  confifl,  I 
fhall  endeavour  to  make  evident  from  fcripture,  and 
from  the  common  apprehenfions  of  mankind  con- 
cerning repentance. 

The  fcripture,  befides  the  feveral  defcriptlons  of 
repentance,  ufeth  two  words  to  exprefs  it  to  us,  jite- 
TccfiiXeix  and  fjcercc]'oic6.  The  former  properly  figni- 
iies  the  inward  trouole  and  difpleafure  which  men. 
conceive  againft  themfelves,  for  having  done  amifs ; 
which  if  it  be  jcara  G^ou  Xutttj,  *'  a  godly  forrow,'* 
it  worketh  in  us  fzsrdvoic^v  u^sJctf^LsXifiOv^  as  St.  Paul 
calls  it,  ''  a  repentance  not  to  be  repented  of,"  that 
is,  fuch  a  change  of  our  minds,  which  as  we  fhall 
have  no  caufe  to  be  troubled  at,  fo  no  reafon  to  alter 
afterwards.  And  what  is  this,  but  a  firm,  ftedfaft, 
and  unalterable  refolution  ?    . 

The  fcripture  likewife  ufeth  feveral  phrafes  of  the 
like  importance  to  defcribe  repentance  by  ;  as  for- 
faking  and  turning  from  fin,  and  converfion  and  turn- 
ing to  God.  Forfaking  and  turning  from  fin.  Hence 
it  is  called  "  repentance  from  dead  works,"  Heb. 
vi.  I.  and  turning  to  God,  A6lsxxvi.  20.  "  I  have 
"  fhewed  to  the  Gentiles,  that  they  fhould  repent  and 
**  turn  to  God,"  that  is,  from  the  worfhip  of  idols 
to  the  true  God.  And  we  have  both  thefe  together 
in  the  defcription  which  the  prophet  gives  of  repent- 

'ancej 


ne  nature  and  necejiiy  of  holy  refilutlon.        3967 
ance,  Ifa.  Iv.  7.  "  Let  the  v/icked  forfake  his  ways^  S  E  R  \C 
"  and  the  unrighteous  man  his  thoughts,  and  let  ^^^^"^* 
"  him  return  unto  the  Lord."     Now  this  chano-e 
begins  in  the  Tinner's  refokition  of  doing  this ;  and 
xkt  "  unrighteous  man's  forfaking  his  thoughts,'*  is 
nothing  tMc  but  changing  the  purpofe  of  his  mind, 
and  refolving  upon  a  better  courfe.     And  thus  Lac- 
tantius  defcribes  it :  Agere  autem  pcenitentiam  nihil 
aliud  eft^  quam  affirinare  ^  profiteri  fe  nan  amplius 
peccaturum.     "  To  repent  is  nothing  ^i'it^  but  for  a 
"  man  to  declare  and  profefs  that  he  will  fin  no 
more."     This  is  repentance  before  men.     And 
repentance  before  God  is  a  refolution  anfwerable  to 
this  profeffion.  And  clfewhere  faith  the  fame  author, 
*'  The  Greeks  do  moil  fully  exprefs  repentance  by 
the  word  f/^sjccvoioc,  becaufe  he  that  repents  reco- 
"  vers  his  mind  from  his  former  folly,  and  is  trou- 
bled at  it ;"  ^  confirmat  animam  fuam  ad  re5lius 
"vivendum,  "  and  confirms  his  mind    for  a   better 
*'  courfe,"  And  how  is  this  done  but  by  refolution.^ 
And  that  this  is  the  natural  and  true  notion  of  re- 
pentance appears,  in  that  the  heathens  did  confenc 
and  agree  in  it.     Gellius  gives  this  defcription  of  it* 
Pcenitere  turn  dicere  f olenitis^  cim  qua  ipjifecimus,  ea 
nobis  poft  incipiiint  difplicere,  fententiamque  in   Us 
noftram  demutamus.    "  We  are  faid  then  to  repent, 
when  thofe  things  which  we  have  done  begin  af- 
*'  terwards  to  difpleafe  us,  and  we  change  our  refo- 
*'  lution  about  them."     And  fo  Hkewifc  one  of  the 
philofophers  defcribes  it  -,  "  repentance  is  the  begin- 
*'  ning  of  philofophy,  a  flying  from  fooliih  words 
•'  and  adions,  y^   t'?^  d^^ocixeXr^ra  ^cjr,g  ij   w^c^rrj 
"  ^u^oio-nEV'!},  and  the  firlt  preparation  of  a  life  not 
*'  to  be  repented  of." 

It  is  true  indeed,  repentance  fuppofcih  the  entire 
Vol.  IX.  1^  (^  change 

4  I 


3968      "the  nature  andnecejfity  of  holy  refolution. 

S  E  R  M.  change  of  our  lives  and  anions,  and  a  continued  ftate, 
as  the  proper  confequence  of  it :  but  repentance  is 
but  the  beginning  of  this  change,  which  takes  its  rife 
from  the  purpofe  and  refolution  of  our  minds  -,  and 
if  it  be  fincere  and  firm,  it  will  certainly  have  this 
efFe6t,  to  change  our  lives ;  and  if  it  be  not  fo,  it  is 
not  repentance.  For  though  in  the  nature  of  the 
thing  it  be  pofiible,  that  a  man  may  fincerely  refolve 
upon  a  thing,  and  yet  let  fall  his  refolution  after- 
wards, before  it  come  into  ad  :  yet  in  the  phrafe  of 
fcripture,  nothing  is  called  repentance,  but  fuch  a 
refolution  as  takes  effc6i:,  fo  foon  as  there  is  oppor- 
tunity for  it.  If  we  change  our  refolution,  and  re- 
pent of  our  repentance,  this  is  not  that  which  St. 
Paul  calls  "  repentance  unto  falvation."  So  that 
no  man  that  reads  and  confiders  the  bible,  can  impofe 
upon  himfelf  fo  groOy,  as  to  conceit  himfelf  a  true 
penitent,  and  confequently  to  be  in  a  ftate  of  falva- 
tion,  who  hath  been  troubled  for  his  fins,  and  hath 
taken  ud  a  refolution  to  leave  them,  if  he  do  not 
purfue  this  refolution,  and  a6l  according  to  it. 

V.  I  fhall  in  the  next  place  propound  fome  argu- 
ments and  confiderations  to  perfuade  men  to  this  holy 
refolution,  and  then  to  keep  them  firm  and  ftedfaft  to 
it,  fo  as  never  to  change  it  after  they  have  once  taken 
it  up. 

Firft,  I  ffiall  propound  fome  arguments  to  per- 
fuade men  to  take  up  this  refolution  ^  and  they  are 
thefe. 

I.  Con fider  that  this  refolution  of  repentance,  is 
nothing  but  what,  under  the  influence  of  God's  grace 
and  holy  Spirit,  which  are  never  wanting  to  the  fin- 
cere  endeavours  of  men,  is  in  your  power.  And  it 
is  necelTary  to  premife  this  ;  for  unlefs  this  be  cleared, 
all  the  other  arguments  that  I  can  ufe  will  fignify  no- 
3  tiling. 


T'he  nature  arid  necejjity  of  holy  refolution,        3969 
thino;.     For  nothinp;  in  the  world  could  be  more  ^  P-  ^^  ^'• 

o  O  CLXVIII. 

vain,  than  to  take  a  great  deal  of  pains  to  perfuade 
men  to  do  a  thing  which  they  cannot  do,  to  entreat 
them  to  attempt  an  impofilbility,  and  to  urge  and 
folicit  them  with  all  earneftnefs  and  importunity  to 
do  that  which  is  abfolutely  and  altogether  out  of  their 
power.  All  the  commands  of  God,  and  the  exhor- 
tations of  his  word,  and  all  the  promifes  and  threat- 
nings,  whereby  thefe  commands  and  exhortations  are 
enforced,  do  plainly  fuppofe,  either  that  it  is  in  our 
power  to  do  the  thing  which  God  commands  or  ex- 
horts us  to :  or  eife,  if  it  be  not  (which  I  grant  it  is 
not)  that  God  is  ready  by  his  grace  and  ftrength,  if 
we  be  not  wanting  to  ourfelves,  to  affift  and  enable 
us  to  thofe  ends  and  purpofes.  For  the  gofpel  fup- 
pofeth  a  power  going  along  'with  it,  and  that  the 
holy  Spirit  of  God  works  upon  the  minds  of  men, 
to  quicken  and  excite  and  afliil  them  to  their  duty. 
And  if  it  were  not  lb,  the  exhortations  of  preachers 
would  be  nothing  elfe,  but  a  cruel  and  bitter  mock- 
ing of  finners,  and  an  ironical  infuiting  over  the  mi- 
fery  and  weaknefs  of  poor  creatures  ;  and  for  mini- 
fters  to  preach,  or  people  to  hear  fermons,  upon  other 
terms,  would  be  the  vaineft  expence  of  time,  and 
the  idled  thing  we  do  all  the  week  •,  and  all  our  dif- 
fuafives  from  fin,  and  exhortations  to  holinefs  and  a 
good  life,  and  vehement  perfuafions  of  men  to  ftrive 
to  get  to  heaven  and  to  efcape  hell,  would  be  jult  as 
if  one  fliould  urge  a  blind  man,  by  many  reafons  and 
arguments  taken  from  the  advantages  of  fight,  and 
the  comfort  of  that  fenfe,  and  the  beauty  of  external 
objeds,'  by  all  means  to  open  his  eyes,  and  to  behold 
the  delights  of  nature,  to  fee  his  way,  and  to  look 
to  his  fleps  •,  and  fliould  upbraid  him,  and  be  very 
angry  with  him  for  not  doing  fo.     Why,  if  reiolu- 

19(^2  tion 


397^      ^^^^  ;?^/2i^r^  and  necejjit'^  of  holy  refolutlon] 

CLXvm  ^*^^"  ^^  abfolutcly  impofTible  to  us,  and  a  thing  whol- 
ly out  of  our  power,  it  is  juft  the  fame  cafe.  But 
then  we  ought  to  deal  plainly  and  opc^nly  with  men, 
and  to  tell  them,  that  what  we  fo  earneftly  perfuade 
them  to,  is  that  which  wc  certainly  know  they  cannot 
do.  So  that  it  is  neceflary,  if  I  intend  that  the  fol- 
lowing confiderations  fhould  do  any  good,  to  aiTure 
men,  that  it  is  not  impolTible  for  them  to  make  a  re- 
folution  of  leaving  their  fins,  and  returning  to  God. 

It  is  a  power  which  every  man  is  naturally  inveft- 
cd  withal,  to  confider,  and  judge,  and  chufe.  To 
confider,  that  is,  to  weigh  and  compare  things  to- 
gether. To  judge,  that  is,  to  determine  which  is 
bed.  And  to  chufe,  that  is,  to  refolve  to  do  it  or 
not.  And  there  is  nothing  more  evident  and  more 
univerfally  acknowledged  in  temporal  cafes,  and  in 
the  affairs  and  concernments  of  this  Ufe.  In  thefe 
matters  refolution  is  a  thing  ordinary  and  of  frequent 
pradice  ;  it  is  the  principle  of  all  great  and  confide- 
rable  adlions.  Men  refolve  to  be  great  in  this  world, 
and  by  virtue  of  this  refolution,  when  they  have 
once  taken  it  up,  what  induflry  will  they  not  ufe  ! 
what  hazards  will  they  not  run  in  the  purfuit  of  their 
ambitious  defigns  !  difficulties  and  dangers  do  rather 
whet  their  courage,  and  fet  an  edge  upon  their  fpi- 
rits.  Men  refolve  to  be  rich  ;  the  apoftle  fpeaks  of 
feme  that  will  be  rich,  i  Tim.  vi.  "  they  that  will 
^'  be  rich  :  and  though  this  be  but  a  low  and  mean 
defign,  .yet  thefe  perfons,  by  virtue  of  this  refoluti- 
on, will  toil  and  take  prodigious  pains  in  it. 

And  as  to  fpiritual  things,  every  man  hath  the 
fame  power  radically,  that  is,  he  hath  the  facul- 
ties of  underftanding  and  will ;  but  thefe  are  ob- 
ftruded  and  hindered  in  their  exercife,  and  ftrongly 
biaffed  a  contrary  way  by  the  power  of  evil  inclina- 
tions 


The  nature  and  necejfity  of  holy  refolution.      397^' 
tions  and  habits  ;  fo  that  as  to  the  exercife  of  this  If^^j^^ 
power  and  the  effecSl  of  it  in  fpiritual  things,  men 
are  in  a  fort  as  much  difabled,  as  if  they  were  defti- 
tute  of  it.     For  it  is  in  effed  all  one,  to  have  no  un- 
derftandingat  all  to  confider  things  that  are  fpiritual, 
as  to  have  the  underftanding  blinded  by  an  invincible 
prejudice  •,  to  have  no  liberty  as  to  fpiritual  things, 
as  to  have  the  will  flrongly  biaffed  againft  them. 
For  a  man  that  hath  this  prejudice  upon  his  under- 
Handing,  and  this  biafs  upon  his  will,  is  to  all  in- 
tents and  purpofes  as  if  he  were  dcftitute  of  thefc 
faculties.   But  then  we  are  not  to  underftand  this  im- 
potency  to  be  abfolutely  natural,  but  accidental  •,  not 
to  be  in  the  firft  frame  and  conftitution  of  our  fouls, 
but  to  have  happened  upon  the  depravation  of  nature. 
It  is  not  a  want  of  natural  faculties,  but  the  binding 
of  them  up  and  hindering  their  operations  to  certain 
purpofes.     This  impotency  proceeds  from  the  powr 
er  of  evil  habits.     And  thus  the  fcripture  expreffeth 
it,  and  compares  an  impotency  arifing  from  bad  ha- 
bits and  cuftoms  to  a  natural  impolTibihty  •,  nothing 
coming  nearer  to  nature,  than  a  powerful  cuftom. 
*'  Can  the  Ethiopian  change  his  Ikin,  or  the  leo- 
"  pard  his  fpots  ?  Then  may  ye  alfo,  that  are  ac- 
"  cuftomed  to  do  evil,  learn  to  do  well." 

But  now  God  by  the  gofpel  hath  defigned  the  re- 
covery of  mankind  from  the  flavery  of  fin,  and  the 
power  of  their  lufts  ;  and  therefore,  as  by  the  death 
of  Christ  he  hath  provided  a  way  to  remove  the 
guilt  of  fin,  fo  by  the  fpirit  of  Christ  he  furnifheth 
us  with  fufficient  power  to  deftroy  the  dominion  of 
fin.  I  fay  fufficient,  if  we  be  not  wanting  to  our- 
felves,  but  be  "  workers  together  with  God,"  and 
be  as  dilio-ent  "  to  work  out  our  own  falvation,"  as 
he  is  ready  ''  to  work  in  us  both  to  will  and  to  do.'* 
^  So 


CLXVIII. 


-5972      ^he  nature  andnecejfity  of  holy  refolution. 

S  R  R  M.  So  that  when  we  perfuade  men  to  repent  and  change 
their  lives,  and  to  refolve  upon  a  better  coiirfc,  we 
do  not  exhort  them  to  any  thing  that  is  abfolutely 
cut  of  their  power ;  but  to  what  they  may  do,  though 
not  of  themfelves,  yet  by  the  grace  of  God,  which 
is  always  ready  to  afTift  them,  unlefs  by  their  former 
grofs  ncgleds  and  long  obftinacy  in  an  evil  courfe, 
they  have  provoked  God  to  withdraw  his  grace 
from  them.  So  that  though,  confidering  our  own 
flrength  ab{lra6tedly,  and  feparately  from  the  grace 
of  God,  tliefe  things  be  not  in  our  power  •,  yet  the 
grace  of  God  puts  them  into  our  power. 

And  this  is  fo  far  from  derogating  from  the  grace 
of  God,  that  it  is  highly  to  thepraife  of  it.  Forif 
the  grace  of  God  makes  us  able  to  repent  and  refolve 
upon  a  new  life,  he  that  afTerts  this  does  not  attri- 
bute his  repentance  to  himfelf,  but  to  the  grace  of 
God  :  nay  he  that  fays  that  God's  grace  excites,  and 
is  ready  toafiifl  men  to  do  what  God  commands,  re- 
prefents  God  immenfely  more  good  and  gracious, than 
he  that  fays  that  God  commands  men  to  do  that  which 
by  their  natural  power  they  cannot  do,  and  will  con- 
demn them  for  not  doing  it,  and  yet  denies  them 
that  grace  which  is  neceflary  to  the  doing  of  it. 

Let  this  then  be  eflablifhed  as  a  neceflary  confide- 
rationto  prevent  difcouragement,  that  to  refolve  up- 
on the  change  of  our  lives,  is  that  which  by  the 
grace  of  God  we  are  enabled  to  do,  if  we  will.  Re- 
folution is  no  ftrange  and  extraordinary  thing  ;  it  is 
one  of  the  mod  common  a6ts  that  belongs  to  us  as 
we  are  men  \  but  we  do  not  ordinarily  apply  it  to 
the  bed  purpofes.  It  is  not  fo  ordinary  for  men 
to  refolve  to  be  good,  as  to  be  ric':  and  great  ; 
not  fo  common  for  men  to  refolvr  againft  fin,  as 
to  refolve  againfl  poverty  and  fuiiering.     It  is  not 

fo 


T^he  nature  and  necejjity  of  holy  refohition,        3973 

fo  ufual  for  men  to  refolve  to  keep  a  good  con-  ^  ^^  R  M. 
fcience,  as  to  keep  a  good  place.  Indeed  our  cor- 
rupt nature  is  much  more  oppofite  to  this  holy  kind 
of  refolution.  But  then  to  balance  and  anfwer  this, 
God  hath  promifed  greater  and  more  immediate  af- 
fiftance  to  us  in  this  cafe,  than  in  any  other.  There 
is  a  general  blelTing  and  common  afTiflance  promifed 
to  refolution  and  diligence  about  temporal  things  y 
and  God's  providence  doth  often  advance  fuch  per- 
fons  to  riches  and  honour.  The  diligent  hand,  with 
God's  blefnng,  makes  rich,  as  Solomon  tells  us, 
Prov.  X.  4.  and  xxii.  29.  Seeil  thou"  (fays  he)  "  a 
"  man  diligent  in  his  bufmefs  ?  He  fliall  ftand  beforie 
*'  kings,  he  fhall  not  ftand  before  mean  men.'* 
Now  diligence  is  the  effed:  of  a  great  and  vigorous 
refolution.  But  there  is  a  fpecial  and  extraordinary 
blefling  and  aiTiftance,  that  attends  the  refolution 
and  endeavour  of  a  holy  life.  God  hath  not  pro- 
mifed to  ftrengthen  men  with  all  might  in  the  way  to 
riches  and  honours,  and  to  aflift  the  ambitious  and 
covetous  defigners  of  this  world,  with    "  a  mighty 

and  glorious  power,  fuch  as  raifed  up  Jesus  from 
*'  the  dead  :"  but  this  he  hath  promifed  to  thofe, 
who  with  a  firm  purpofe  and  refolution  do  engage  in 
the  ways  of  religion.  Let  us  then  fliake  off  our 
floth  and  liftlefnefs,  and  in  that  ftrength  and  aiTiftance 
which  God  offers,  let  us  refolve  to  leave  our  fins, 
and  to  amend  our  lives. 

2.  Confider  what  it  is  that  you  are  to  refolve  up- 
on ;  to  leave  your  fins,  and  to  return  to  God  and 
goodnefs.  So  that  the  things  I  am  pcrfuading  you 
to  refolve  upon  are  the  ftrongeft  reafons  that  can  be 
for  fuch  a  refolution.  Sin  is  fuch  a  thing,  that  there 
can  be  no  better  argument  to  make  men  refolve  a- 
gainft  it,  than  to  confider  what  it  is,  and  to  think 

feriouily 


3  974  ^^^  nature  and  7ieceJJity  of  holy  refolution. 
S  E  R  M.  ferioufly  of  the  nature  and  confequence  of  it.  And 
God  and  goodnefs  are  fo  amiable  and  defirable,  that 
the  very  propofal  of  thefe  objects  hath  invitations 
and  allurements  enough  to  inflame  our  defires  after 
them,  and  to  make  us  rufh  into  the  embraces  of 
them.  If  we  would  but  enter  into  the  ferious  con- 
fideration  of  them,  we  fhould  foon  be  refolvcd  in 
our  minds  about  them. 

Do  but  confider  a  little  what  fin  is.  It  is  the 
ihame  and  blemifh  of  thy  nature,  the  reproach  and 
difgrace  of  thy  underflanding  and  reafon,  the  great 
deformity  and  difeafe  of  thy  foul,  and  the  eternal 
enemy  of  thy  reft  and  peace.  It  is  thy  Ihackles  and 
thy  fetters,  the  tyrant  that  opprefTcs  thee  and  re- 
llrains  thee  of  thy  liberty,  and  condemns  thee  to  the 
bafeft  flavery  and  the  vileft  drudgery.  It  is  the  un- 
natural and  violent  ftate  of  thy  foul,  the  worm  that 
perpetually  gnaws  thy  confcience,  the  caufe  of  all 
fears  and  troubles,  and  of  all  the  evils  and  miferies, 
all  the  mifchiefs  and  diforders  that  are  in  the  world  ; 
it  is  the  foundation  and  fuel  of  hell  •,  it  is  that 
which  puts  thee  out  of  the  polTefTion  and  enjoyment  of 
thyfelf,  which  doth  alienate  and  feparate  thee  from 
God  the  fountain  of  bliis  and  happinefs,  which  pro- 
vokes him  to  be  thine  enemy,  and  lays  thee  open 
every  moment  to  the  fierce  revenge  of  his  juftioe, 
and  if  thou  doft  perfift  and  continue  in  it,  will  final- 
ly fink  and  opprefs  thee  under  the  infupportable 
weight  of  his  wrath,  and  make  thee  fo  weary  of 
thyfclf,  that  thou  Ihalt  wiHi  a  thoufand  times  that 
thou  hadft  never  been  ;  and  will  render  thee  fo  per- 
fectly miferable,  that  thou  woukieft  efteem  it  a  great 
happinefs  to  exchange  thy  condition  with  the  moft 
wretched  and  forlorn  perfon  that  ever  lived  upon 
earth,  to   be  perpetualiy  upon  a  rack,  and  to  lie 

down 


^h^  fiature  a?id  nec^Jjity  of  holy  I'efolution,       Z97  S 
down  for  ever  under  the  rage  of  all  the  moft  violent  S  K  R  M. 

.  .  CLXVIIL 

difeafes  and  pains  that  ever  afflicted  mankind.  Sin 
is  all  this  which  I  have  defcribed,  and  will  certainly 
bring  upon  thee  all  thofe  evils  and  mifchicfs  which  I 
have  mentioned,  and  make  thee  far  more  miferable 
than  I  am  able  to  exprefs,  or  thou  to  conceive.  And 
art  thou  not  yet  refolved  to  leave  it  }  Shall  I  need  to 
ufe  any  other  arguments  to  fet  thee  againft  it,  and 
to  take  thee  off  from  the  love  and  pradlice  of  it, 
than  this  reprefentation  which  I  have  now  made  of 
the  horrible  nature  and  confequences  of  it  } 

And  then  confider  on  the  other  hand,  what  it  is 
that  I  am  perfuading  thee  to  turn  to  •,  to  thy  Goo 
and  duty.  And  would  not  this  be  a  bleffed  change 
indeed  !  To  leave  the  greateft  evil,  and  to  return  to 
the  chief  good !  For  this  refolution  of  returning  to 
God,  is  nothing  elfe  but  a  refolution  to  be  wife  and 
happy,  and  to  put  thyfelf  into  the  poffelTion  of  than 
which  is  a  greater  good,  if  it  is  pofTible,  than  fin  is 
an  evil,  and  will  render  thee  more  happy,  than  fin 
can  make  thee  miferable.  Didll  thou  but  think  what 
God  is,  and  what  he  will  be  to  thee  if  thou  wilt  re- 
turn to  him,  how  kindly  he  will  receive  thee  after  all 
thy  wandrings  from  him  days  v/ichout  number,  thou 
wouldft  foon  take  up  the  refolution  of  the  prodigal, 
and  fay,  "  I  will  arife  and  go  to  my  father." 

And  confider  likewife  what  it  is  to  return  to  thy 
duty.  It  is  nothing  elfe  but  to  do  what  becomes 
thee,  and  what  is  fuitable  to  the  original  frame  of 
thy  nature,  and  to  the  trueft  didlates  of  thy  reafon 
and  confcience,  and  what  is  not  more  thy  duty,  than 
it  is  thy  intereft  and  thy  h.ippinefs.  For  that  which 
God  requires  of  us,  is  to  be  righteous  and  holy  and 
good,  that  is,  to  be  Hke  God  himfjlf,  who  is  th- 
pattern  of  all  perfedlion  and  happinefs.  It  \%  to  have 

Vol.  IX,  19  R  our 


7  01 6       ^he  jiature  and  necejjify  of  holy  refolution. 

our  lives  conformed  to  his  will,  which  is  always  per- 
fect holinefs  and  goodnefs,  a  ftate  of  peace  and  tran- 
quillity, and  the  very  temper  and  difpofition  of  hap- 
pinefs.  It  is  that  which  is  a  principal  and  mofl  efTen- 
tial  ingredient  into  the  felicity  of  the  divine  nature, 
and  without  which  God  would  not  be  what  he  is, 
but  a  deformed  and  imperfe6t  and  miferable  being. 

And  if  this  be  a  true  reprefentation  which  I  have 
made  to  you,  of  fin  and  vice  on  the  one  hand,  and 
of  God  and  goodnefs  on  the  other,  what  can  be 
more  powerful  than  the  ferious  confideration  of  it, 
to  engage  us  to  a  fpeedy  refolution  of  leaving  our 
fins,  and  of  *'  turning  and  cleaving  to  the  Lord 
"  with  full  purpofe  of  heart  ?"  After  this  wc 
cannot  but  conclude  with  the  penitent  in  the  text ; 
**  Surely  it  is  meet  to  be  faid  unto  God,  I  will  not 
"  offend  any  more  :  that  which  I  fee  not,  teach 
"  thou  me  ;  and  if  I  have  done  iniquity,  I  will  do 


"  no  more." 


3.  Confider  how  unreafonable  it  is  to  be  unrefolv- 
cd  in  a  cafe  of  fo  great  moment  and  concernment. 
There  is  no  greater  argument  of  a  man's  weaknefs, 
than  irrefolution'  in  matters  of  mighty  confequence, 
when  both  the  importance  of  the  thing,  and  exi- 
gency of  prefent  circumftances  require  a  fpeedy  re- 
folution. We  fhould  account  it  a  ftrange  folly,  for 
a  man  to  be  unrefolved  in  the  cleared  and  plained 
matters  that  concern  his  temporal  welfare  and  fafety. 
If  a  man  could  not  determine  himfelf  whether  he 
fhould  eat  or  darve  •,  if  he  were  dangeroufly  Tick, 
and  could  not  determine  whether  he  fliould  take  phy- 
Tick  or  die  -,  or  if  one  that  were  in  prifon,  could  not 
rcfolve  himfelf  whether  he  fhould  accept  of  liberty, 
and  be  content  to  be  rclcafed  -,  or  if  a  fair  edatc 
were  offered  to  him,  he  (liould  defire  feven  years  time 


3  to 


,     T*he  nature  and  7ieceJ]ity  of  holy  refoliition.       3977 

to  confider  whether  he  fhould  take  it  or  not  :  this  ^,^-^,}:!]' 
would  be  {o  abfurd  in  the  common  affairs  of  lire, 
that  a  man  would  be  thought  infatuated,  that  fhould 
be  doubtful  and  unrefolved  in  cafes  fo  plain,  and  of 
fuch  prefling  concernment.  If  a  man  were  under  the 
fentence  and  condemnation  of  the  law,  and  liable  to 
be  executed  upon  the  Icafb  intimation  of  the  prince's 
pleafure,  and  a  pardon  were  gracioufly  offered  to 
him,  with  this  intimation,  that  this  would  probably 
be  the  lail  offer  of  mercy  that  ever  would  be  made 
to  him  •,  one  would  think  that  in  this  cafe  a  man 
fhould  foon  be  determined  what  to  do,  or  rather  that 
he  fliould  not  need  to  deliberate  at  all  about  it  j  bC' 
caufe  there  is  no  danger  of  rafhnefs  in  making  hade 
to  fave  his  life. 

And  yet  the  cafe  of  a  finner  is  of  far  greater  im- 
portance, and  much  more  depends  upon  it,  infinite- 
ly more  than  any  temporal  concernment  whatfoever 
can  amount  to,  even  our  happinefs  or  mifery  to  all 
eternity.  And  can  there  be  any  difficulty,  for  a  man 
to  be  refolved  what  is  to  be  done  in  flich  a  cafe  ?  No 
cafe  furely  in  the  world  can  be  plainer  than  this ; 
whether  a  man  fhould  leave  his  fins,  and  return  to 
God  and  his  duty,  or  not ;  that  is,  whether  a  man 
fhould  chufe  to  be  happy  or  miferable,  unfpeakably 
and  everlaftingly  happy,  or  extremely  and  eternally 
miferable. 

And  the  clrcumflances  and  exigencies  of  our  cafe 
do  call  for  a  fpeedy  and  peremptory  relblution  in  this 
matter.  The  fentence  of  the  law  is  already  pad:,  and 
God  may  execute  it  upon  thee  every  moment,  and 
it  is  great  mercy  and  forbearance  not  to  do  it.  Thy 
life  is  uncertain,  and  thou  art  liable  every  minute  to 
be  fnatched  away  and  hurried  out  of  this  world. 
However  at  the  beft,  thou  haft  but  a  li:  Ic  time  t  j 

19  R  2  refolve 


8       ^he  nature  and  necejjlty  of  holy  refolution, 

refolve  in  •,  death  and  judgment  and  eternity  cannot 
be  far  off,  and  for  ought  thou  knoweft  they  may  bq 
even  at  the  door.  Thou  art  upon  the  matter  jufl 
ready  to  be  feized  upon  by  death,  to  be  fummoned 
to  judgment,  and  to  be  J  wallowed  up  of  eternity  ; 
and  is  it  not  yet  time,  thinkefl  thou,  to  refolve  ? 
Wouldft  thou  have  yet  a  little  longer  time  to  delibe- 
rate, whether  thou  Ihouldft  repent  and  forfake  thy 
fins,  or  not  ?  If  there  were  difficulty  in  the  cafe,  or 
if  there  were  no  danger  in  the  delay  •,  if  thou  couldft 
gain  time,  or  any  thing  elfe,  by  fufpending  thy  re- 
solution •,  there  were  then  fome  reafon  why  thoq 
fhouldft  not  make  a  fudden  determination.  But 
thou  canft  pretend  none  of  thefe.  It  is  evident  at 
firfb  fight,  what  is  beft  to  be  done,  and  nothing  caa 
make  it  plainer.  It  is  not  a  matter  fo  clear  and  out 
of  the  confroverfy,  that  riches  are  better  than  poverty, 
and  cafe  better  than  pain,  and  life  more  defirable 
than  death  •,  as  it  is,  that  it  is  better  to  break  off  our 
fins,  than  to  continue  in  the  pra6tice  of  them  -,  to 
be  reconciled  to  God,  than  to  gq  on  to  provoke 
him  •,  to  be  holy  and  virtuous,  thafT  to  be  wicked 
and  vicious  ;  to  be  ''  heirs  of  eternal  glory,'*  than 
to  be   ^'  veffels  of  wrath  fitted  for  deflrucftion." 

And  there  is  infinite  danger  in  thefe  delays.  For 
if  thy  foul  be  any  thing  to  thee,  thou  ventureft 
that ;  if  thou  hafb  any  tendernefs  and  regard  for  thy 
eternal  interefl,  thou  runncft  the  hazard  of  that  ;  if 
heaven  and  hell  be  any  thing  to  thee,  thou  incurreit 
the  danger  of  lofinoj  the  one,  and  fallino;  into  the  other. 

And  thou  gaineft  nothing  by  continuing  unrefolv- 
ed.  If  death  and  judgment  would  tarry  thy  leifure, 
and  wait  till  thou  had  ft  brought'  thy  thoughts  to 
fome  iffue,  and  were  refolved  what  to  do,  it  were 
fomething  :  but  thy  irrefolution  in  this  matter  will 

bQ 


Tthe  nature  and  necefjity  of  holy  resolution.      3970 

be  fo  far  from  keeping  back  death  and  judgnnent,  ^J-  ^^  M- 
that  it  will  both  halten  and  aggravate  them,  both 
make  them  to  come  the  fooner,  and  to  be  the  hea- 
vier  when  they  come  :  becaufe  thou  abufeft  the 
goodnefs  of  God,  and  "  defpifeft  his  patience  and 
''  long-fufFering,  which  fhould  lead  thee"  and  draw 
thee  on  *'  to  repentance,"  and  not  keep  thee  back. 
Hereby  thou  encouraged  thyfelf  in  thy  lewd  and  rio- 
tous courfes,  and,  becaufe  thy  "  Lord  delayeth  his 
"  coming,"  art  the  more  negligent  and  extravagant. 
Hear  what  doom  our  Lord  pronounceth  upon  fuch 
flothful  and  wicked  fervants,  Luke  xii.46.  "the  Lord 
of  that  fervant  will  come  in  a  day  when  he  looketh 
not  for  him,  and  at  an  hour  when  he  is  not  aware, 
and  will  cut  him  in  funder,  and  will  appoint  him 
his  portion  with  the  unbelievers."  None  fo  like 
to  be  furprized,  and  to  be  feverely  handled  by  the 
juilice  of  God,  as  thofe  that  trifle  with  his  patience. 
4.  Confider  how  much  refolution  would  tend  to 
the  fettling  of  our  minds,  and  making  our  lives  com- 
fortable. There  is  nothing  that  perplexeth  and  dif- 
quieteth  a  man  more,  than  to  be  unrefolved  in  the 
great  and  important  concernments  of  his  life.  What 
anxiety  and  confufion  is  there  in  ourfpirits,  whilfl  we 
are  doubtful  and  undetermined  about  fuch  matters  ? 
How  are  we  divided  and  diftradled,  when  our  rea- 
fon  and  judgment  diredl  us  one  way  ;  and  our  lulls 
arwi  afi:ed;ions  biafs  us  to  the  contrary  ?  When  we 
are  convinced  and  fatisfied  what  is  bed  for  us ;  and 
yet  are  difaffedled  to  our  own  intereft.  Such  a  man 
is  all  the  while  felf-condemned,  and  acls  with  the 
perpetual  regret  of  his  reafon  and  confcience  ;  and 
whenever  he  reflc6ls  upon  himfelf,  he  is  ofi'endcd 
and  angry  with  himfelf,  his  life  and  all  his  adions 
are  uneafy  and  difpleafing  to  him  *,  and  there  is  no 

way 


-jqSo       ^he  nature  d72d  necejtty  of  hcly  refolufion. 

way  for  this  man  to  be  at  peace,  but  to  put  an  end 
to  this  conPii6l  one  way  or  other,  either  by  conquer- 
ing his  reafon  or  his  will.  The  former  is  very  dif- 
ficult, nothing  being  harder  than  for  a  finner  to  lay 
his  confcience  afleep,  after  it  is  once  thoroughly  a- 
wakened  -,  he  may  charm  it  for  a  while,  but  every 
little  occafion  will  rouze  it  again,  and  renew  his  trou- 
ble ;  fo  that  though  a  man  may  have  fome  truce 
with  his  confcience,  yet  he  can  never  come  to  a  firm 
and  fettled  peace  this  way  :  but  if  by  a  vigorous  re- 
folution  a  man  would  but  conquer  his  will,  his  mind 
would  be  at  reft,  and  there  would  be  a  prefent  calm 
in  his  fpirit.  And  why  ftiould  we  be  fuch  enemies 
to  our  own  peace,  and  to  the  comfort  and  content- 
ment of  our  lives,  as  not  to  take  this  courfe,  aind 
thereby  rid  ourfelves  at  once  of  that,  which  really 
and  at  the  bottom  is  the  ground  of  all  the  trouble  and 
difquiet  of  our  lives  ? 

9 

•*' ' . — < I 

SERMON    CLXIX. 

The  nature  and  neceflity  of  holy 

refolution. 

* ■  -  -  — ^ 

JOB  xxxiv.  31,  32. 

Surely  it  is  meet  to  be  f aid  unto  God,  /  have  born 
chafiifement^  I  will  not  offend  any  more  :  That  which 
I  fee  not^  teach  thou  me-y  if  I  have  done  iniquity  ^ 
I  will  do  no  more, 

THESE  words  are  a  defcription  of  the  tem- 
per and  behaviour  of  a  true  penitent,  his  con- 
fermon  on  ^^^^^^  ^^  ^i^'^s,  and  rcfolucion  of  amendment.  Con- 
this  text.  cerning 


The  nature  and  necejjify  of  holy  refolution,       3981 
cernino;  refolution  I  have  fnewn  what  it  is  in  general :  S  E  R  M. 

.  CLXiX. 

What  is  the  fpecial  obje6l  or  matter  of  this  kind  of 
refolution  :  What  is  implied  in  a  fincere  refolution  of 
leaving  our  fins,  and  returning  to  God  and  our  du- 
ty :  That  in  this  refolution  the  very  eflence  and  for- 
mal nature  of  repentance  doth  confift  :  and  have  of- 
fered fomc  confiderations,  to  convince  men  of  the 
neceflity  and  fitnefs  of  this  refolution,  and  to  keep 
them  fledfail  to  it.     As, 

1 .  That  this  refolution  is  nothing  but  what  under 
the  influence  of  God's  grace  is  in  our  power. 

2.  The  things  themfelves,  which  we  are  to  refolve 
upon,  are  the  ftrongeft  arguments  that  can  be  for  fuch 
a  refolution. 

3.  How  unreafonable  it  is  for  men  to  be  unre- 
folved  in  a  cafe  of  fo  great  moment. 

4.  How  much  this  refolution  will  tend  to  the  fet- 
tling of  our  minds,  and  m.aking  our  lives  comforta- 
ble.    I  proceed  to  the  confiderations  which  remain. 

5.  Then  be  pleafed  to  confider,  that  a  (trong  and 
vigorous  refolution  would  make  the  whole  work  of 
religion  eafy  to  us,  it  would  conquer  all   difficul- 
ties which  attend  a  holy  and  religious  courfe  of  life, 
efpecially  at  our  firfb  entrance  into  it :  Becaufe  refo- 
lution brings  our  minds  to  a  point,  and  unites  all 
the  ftrength  and  force  of  our  fouls  in  one  great  de- 
fign,  and  makes  us  vigorous  and  firm,  couragious 
and  conftant  in  the  profecution  of  it ;  and  without 
this  it  is  impolTible  to  hold  out  long,  and  to  refill 
the  ftrong  propenfions  and  inclinations  of  our  cor- 
rupt nature,  which,  if  v/e  be  not  firmly  rcfolved,  will 
return  and  by  degrees  gain  upon  us ;  it  will  be  im- 
poffible  to  break  through  temptations,  and  to  gain- 
fay  the  importunity  of  them  •,  when  the  devil  and 
the  world  folicit  us,  wc  fhall  not  be  able  to  fay  them 
nay,  but  fhall  be  apt  to  yield  to  them.  There 


•10  S  2      ^he  nature  andnecejjity  of  holy  refohtion. 

There  are  many,  who  have  had  faint  wifhes  and 
cold  defires,  and  half  purpofes  of  leading  a  new  and 
better  life :  but  having  not  taken  up  a  firm  refolu- 
tiori  in  the  cafe,  having  not  determined  themfelves 
by  a  fevere  purpofe,  a  little  thing  fways  them,  and 
brings  them  back  to  their  former  courfe  ;  it  is  no  hard 
matter  to  divert  them  and  engage  them  another  way ; 
they  are  "  fhaken  with  every  wind'*  of  temptation, 
every  little  blaft  of  oppofition  and  perfecution  turns 
them  back,  and  carries  them  to  the  ways  of  fin : 
whereas  refoiution  fixeth  a  man's  fpirit,  and  makes  k 
moil  ftedfaft  and  unmoveable,  and  fets  him  upon  a 
rock,  which,  "  when  the  winds  blow,-  and  the  rain 
*'  falls,  and  the  floods  come,"  abides  firm  againft 
all  impreflions. 

If  I  would  give  the  moft  probable  and  ufeful  ad- 
vice to  engage  and  continue  a  man  in  a  good  courfe, 
I  would  commend  to  him  a  deliberate  and  firm  refo- 
Jution.  David  proved  this  way  with  very  happy 
fuccefs,  Pfal.  cxix.  io6.  "  I  have  fworn  (fays  he) 
*'  and  will  perform  it,  that  I  will  keep  thy  righteous 
*'  judgments."  This  was  a  fecurity  to  him  againft 
all  affaults,  and  nothing  could  turn  him  from  his 
courfe  afterwards  ;  not  the  dangers  he  was  expofed 
to,  ver.  109.  "  My  foul  is  continually  in  my  hand, 
*^  yet  do  I  not  forget  thy  law ;"  not  the  fnares  of 
wicked  men  that  were  laid  for  him,  ver.  no.  "  The 
**  wicked  have  laid  a  fnare  for  me,  yet  I  erred  not 
*'  from  thy  precepts."  By  virtue  of  this  refolution 
he  could  rife  up  in  defiance  of  all  thofe  that  would 
have  tempted  him  to  any  finful  adlion,  ver.  115. 
*'  Depart  from  me  ye  evil  doers :  for  I  will  keep  the 
*'  commandments  of  my  God." 

"When  a  man  is  thus  refolved  upon  a  holy  courfe, 
he  is  not  eafily  diverted  from  it,  and  is  able  to  refift 

;he 


CLXIX. 


The  nature  and  necejiiy  of  holy  refolution.  392? 
the  importunity  and  flattery  of  temptations,  and  to  ^  E  R  M. 
ay  to  them,  as  men  are  wont  to  do,  when  they 
are  fully  and  firmly  refolved  upon  any  thing  •,  "  Let 
''  me  alone,  I  am  not  to  be  moved,  it  is  in  vain  to 
"  urge  me,  I  am  refolved  to  the  contrary."  Thus  ft  iff 
and  refolute  men  can  be  in  other  cafes,  where  there 
is  not  near  that  caufe  and  reafon  for  it :  and  if  we 
would  but  take  up  a  generous  refolution  to  break  ofF 
our  fins,  and  to  live  better  lives,  this  would  be  the 
way  to  conquer  that  liftlefnefs  and  unwillingnefs, 
which  hinders  us  from  engaging  in  a  good  courfe* 
and  is  the  caufe  of  fo  many  lame  excufes  and  unrea- 
fonable  delays.  It  is  the  want  of  refolution,  and  the 
weaknefs  of  our  refolutions,  which  is  the  true  reafon 
why  we  are  not  more  equal  and  conftant  and  uniform 
in  the  ways  of  religion ;  but  are  religious  only  by 
fits  and  darts,  in  a  heat,  and  during  fome  prefent 
trouble  and  convidion  of  mind.  "  The  double 
"  minded  is  unftable,  fays  St.  James,  in  all  his  ways." 
When  a  man  is  of  feveral  minds,  he  is  eafily  moved 
one  way  or  other. 

6.  And  laftly,  Confider  the  infinite  danger  of  re-' 
maining  unrefolved.  "  The  evil  day  may  overtake 
*'  you,"  while  you  are  deliberating  whether  you 
fhould  avoid  it  or  not.  A  ftate  of  fin  is  liable  to  fo 
many  hazards,  hath  fo  many  dangers  continually 
threatening  it,  and  hanging  over  it,  that  it  is  the 
moft  imprudent  thing  in  the  world  to  hnger  in  it* 
It  is  like  Lot's  ftaying  in  Sodom,  when  the  Lord 
was  goirg  to  deftroy  it,  v/hen  fire  and  brimftone  were 
juit  reaay  to  be  rained  down  from  heaven  upon  it. 
Whilft  men  are  hngering  in  a  finful  ftate,  if  "  the 
*'  Lord  be  not  merciful  to  them,"  they  will  be  con- 
fumed.  Therefore  it  concerns  thee  finner,  to  deter- 
mine thy  fclf  fpeedily,  and  to  make  hafte  out  of 

Vol.  IX.  19  S  this 

5 


3984     "The  nature  and  necejfity  of  holy  resolution, 

this  dangerous  condition,  *'  to  efcape  for  thy  life, 
"  left  fome  evil  overtake  thee,"  and  left  death,  find- 
ing thee  unrefolved,  determine  thy  cafe  for  thee,  and 
put  it  out  of  all  doubt,  and  paft  all  remedy. 

Hov^r  many  have  been  cut  oft'  in  their  irrefolution  ? 
And  becaufe  they  would  not  determine  v^^hat  to  do, 
God  hath  concluded  their  cafe  for  them,  and  "  fworn 

in  his  wrath,  that  they  ftiould  not  enter  into  his 

reft."  It  may  be  thou  promifeft  thyfelf  the  fpace 
of  many  years  to  refolve  in  :  "  Thou  fool,  this 
*'  night  thy  foul  may  be  required  of  thee,"  and 
whilft  thou  art  unrefolved  what  to  do,  God  is  refolv- 
ing  what  to  do  with  thee,  and  putting  a  period  to 
his  patience  and  long  expedtation  of  thy  repentance : 
and  thou  knov/cft  not  how  foon  God  may  do  this, 
and  make  an  iramutable  deierm/iriation  concerhing 
thee.  And  wo  unto  thee  when  God  hath  refolved 
thus. 

Suppofe  thou  ftiouldft  be  fnatched  out  of  the  world, 
and  hurried  before  the  dreadful  tribunal  of  God,  in 
this  doubtful  and  unrefolved  ftate.  And  this  is  pof- 
lible  enough  -,  becaufe  thou  haft  no  certain  tenure  of 
thy  life,  thou  art  at  no  time  fecured  from  the  ftroke 
of  death  :  nay  it  is  probable  enough  ;  becaufe  thou 
art  every  moment  liable  to  ten  thoufand  accidents, 
any  one  of  which  may  fnap  in  funder  the  thread  of 
thy  life.  And  fuppofe  this  fhould  happen  to  thee, 
what  doft  thou  imagine  would  become  of  thee  ? 
Wouldft  not  thou  then  wifti  a  thoufand  times,  that 
thou  hadft  refolved  in  time  ?  How  glad  wouldft  thou 
then  be,  that  it  were  pofTible  for  thee  to  retrieve  and 
call  back  but  one  of  thofe  days  without  number, 
which  thou  haft  fo  vainly  trifled  away,  that  thou 
mighteft  refolve  upon  "  the  things  of  thy  peace!" 
but  ''  thou  wouldeft  not"  do  it  "  in  that  thy  day," 

which 


Hoe  nature  and  neceJIity  of  holy  refolution,        308c 

which  God  afforded  thee  to  this  purpofe  ;  thou  haft  S  E  R  M. 
let  the  opportunity  flip  outof  chy  hands,  and  it  will        '  '^' 
nvever  be  in  thy  power  again,  but  "  the  things  of 
"  thy  peace  will  be"  for  ever  "  hid  from  thine  eyes.'* 

Why  wilt  thou  then  be  fo  foolifli,  as  to  run  thy 
felf  upon  the  evident  hazard  of  loftng  heaven,  and 
being  miferable  for  ever  ?  Why  wilt  thou  make  work 
for  a  fadder  and  longer  repentance,  than  that  which 
thou  doft  nov/  fo  carefully  decline  ?  This  was  the 
cafe  of  the  foolifh  virgins  in  the  parable.  Matt. 
XXV.  who  made  account  to  be  ready  "  to  meet  the 
*'  bridegroom"  at  his  coming,  but  took  no  care  in 
time  to  get  oil  into  their  lamps.  They  thought  the 
bridegroom  would  tarry  yet  a  while  longer,  and 
therefore  "  they  flumbered  and  flept"  in  great  fecu- 
rity  :  but  at  midnight,  when  the  cry  was  made, 
**  behold  the  bridegroom  cometh  •,"  then  they  arofe, 
and  in  agreat  hurry  and  confufion  wentabout  "  trim- 
*'  ming  their  lamps  ;"  they  were  refolved  then,  they 
would  have  begged  or  bought  oil,  and  would  have 
been  at  any  pains  or  coil  for  it :  but  then  it  was  too 
late  •,  for  the  door  was  fuddenly  fhut  againft  them, 
and  no  importunity  could  prevail  to  have  it  opened 
to  them. 

Canfl  thou  be  contented  to  have  the  door  fliut 
againft  thee,  and  when  thou  ftialt  cry,  *'  Lord  open 
"  unto  me,"  to  have  him  return  this  anfwer,  "  de^ 
*'  part  from  rne,  I  know  thee  not  V^  If  thou  canft 
not,  refolve  to  prevent  this  in  time. 

Didft  thou  but  fee,  and  know,  and  feel,  what  the 
miferable  do  in  hell,  thou  couldft  not  linger  thus, 
thou  couldft  not  continue  fo  long  unrefolved.  Why 
the  time  will  come,  when  thou  wilt  refled  feverely 
upon  thyfelf,  and  fay,  that  I  Ihould  ever  be  fo  ftupid 
and  fottifti,  to  be  unrefolved  in  a  matter  of  fuch  in- 

19  S  2  finite 


39^6      T^he  nature  and  necejjify  of  holy  refolution], 

finite  concernment  to  me!  How  often  was  I  ad- 
monifhed  and  convinced  of  the  neceOlty  of  chang- 
ing my  courfe  ?  How  many  inward  motions  had  I 
to  that  purpofe  ?  How  often  did  my  own  reafon  and 
confcience,  and  the  holy  Spirit  of  God,  by  his  fre- 
quent and  friendly  fiiggeftions,  put  me  upon  this  ? 
How  often  was  I  jufl  upon  the  brink  of  refolving  ? 
I  refolved  to  refolve  ;  but  flill  I  delayed  it  till  death 
feized  upon  me  unrefolved  :  and  now  the  opportunity 
is  lofl,  and  never  to  be  recovered  again.  I  would  not 
in  time  refolve  to  be  wife  and  happy :  and  now  by 
the  fentence  of  the  juft  and  unchangeable  God,  it  is 
refolved  that  I  muil  be  miferable  to  all  eternity. 

How  fhould  thefe  confiderations  quicken  us,  who 
have  yet  thefe  opportunities  in  our  hands :  which  thofc 
who  neglected  and  trifled  them  away,  would  now 
purchafe  at  any  rate  I  I  fay,  how  fhould  thefe  confi- 
derations which  I  have  propofed,  move  us  to  take 
up  a  prefent  refolution  in  the  matter  !  Confider  thefe 
things,  fmner,  and  lay  them  ferioufly  to  heart,  and 
fay  to  thy  (elf,  fool  that  I  have  been,  to  be  unrefolv- 
ed fo  long  j  not  to  determine  myfelf  in  a  matter  of 
fuch  mighty  confequcnce  *,  to  continue  fo  long  in  fuf- 
pence,  whether  I  had  beft  go  to  heaven  or  hell,  and 
which  was  mod  advifable,  to  be  happy  or  miferable 
for  ever!  Bleffed  be  God  that  hath  been  pleafed  to 
exercife  fo  much  patience  and  long-fufFering  towards 
me,  that  hath  fpared  me  fo  long,  when  he  might 
have  taken  me  away,  and  cut  me  off  unrefolved. 
My  foul  lies  at  flake,  and  for  ought  I  know  all  eter- 
nity depends  upon  my  prefent  and  fpcedy  refolution. 
And  now  by  God's  grace  I  will  not  delay  one  mo- 
ment more,  I  will  hang  no  longer  between  heaven  and 
hcil.     1  fhall  now  in  the 

Second  place,  offer  fome  confiderations  to  perr 

fuadip 


T^he  nature  and  nccejfify  of  holy  refolution,      3987 
fuade  thofe  that  have  taken  up  this  p;ood  refolution,  S  E  RM. 

CLXIX 

to  purfue  it,  and  to  promote  it  to  pra6lice  and  exe- 
cution, and  to  keep  firm  and  Itedtail  to  it.  And  to 
this  end,  be  pkafed  to  confider  thefe  three  things. 

I.  What  an  argument  it  is  ot  vanity  and  incon- 
llancy,  to  change  this  refohition,  whilft  the  reafon 
of  it  Hands  good  and  is  not  changed.  I  fuppofe  that 
thou  wert  once  refolved  to  leave  thy  fins,  and  to  re- 
turn to  God  and  thy  duty.  Why  dofl  thou  not  pur- 
fue this  refolution  }  Why  doft  thou  not  perfift  in  it  ? 
Surely  there  appeared  to  thee  fome  reafon  why  thou 
didft  take  it  up  •,  and  if  the  reafon  remain,  and  ap- 
pear ftill  the  fame  to  thee  that  it  did,  how  comes  it 
to  pafs  that  thou  haft  altered  thy  mind,  and  chang- 
ed thy  purpofe  ?  Either  the  cafe  is  the  fame  it  was, 
when  thou  tookeft  up  this  refolution  ;  or  it  is  not. 
If  it  be  altered,  then  thou  haft  reafon  to  change  thy 
refolution  :  if  it  be  not,  thou  haft  the  fame  reafon  to 
continue  in  it,  that  thou  hadft  to  take  it  up.  Shew 
then,  if  thou  canft,  wherein  it  is  changed.  Wert  thou 
miftaken  before  about  the  nature  of  fin,  and  the  per- 
nicious confequences  of  it ;  or  about  the  nature  of 
God  and  goodnefs  ?  Haft  thou  any  thing  now  to 
plead  for  fin,  which  thou  didft  not  know  or  confider 
before?  Art  thou  now  fatisfied  that  fin  is  not  foevil 
and  unreafonable  a  thing,  as  thou  didft  once  appre- 
hend, or  that  it  does  not  threaten  thee  with  fo  much 
danger  as  thou  didft  fear  ?  Hath  God  altered  his 
opinion  of  it,  or  is  he  become  more  favourable  to  it 
than  he  was .?  Haft  thou  received  any  news  lately 
from  heaven  by  any  good  hands,  that  God  hath  re- 
verfed  his  threatnings  againft  fin,  or  that  he  hath  ad- 
journed the  judgment  of  the  world,  7?«^  die^  without 
^ny  fet  time  ?  I'hat  he  hath  fet  the  devils  at  liberty, 
»nd  releas'd  them  from  their  chains  of  darknefs,  and 

hath 


•?  9  S  8      ^he  nature  and  necejjity  of  holy  refolufion. 

hath  quenched  and  put  out  the  fire  of  hell  ?  Or  art  thou 
fatisficd  that  there  is  no  fuch  being  as  God  in  the 
world,  or  that  he  is  not  fo  good  as  thou  didft  appre- 
hend him  to  be,  or  that  he  will  not  reward  thofe  that 
diligently  ferve  him  ?  Haft  thou  found  upon  trial, 
that  holincfs  and  virtue  are  but  empty  names,  and 
that  there  is  nothing  in  them  ?  That  there  is  not 
that  pleafurc  and  peace  in  keeping  the  commandments 
of  Gon,  v/hich  thou  wert  told  of?  I  am  fure  thou 
canil  not  with  reafon  pretend  any  thing  of  all  this. 
Thy  reafon  and  confcience  and  experience  cannot 
fpealc  one  word  on  the  behalf  of  fin,  or  give  any  tef- 
timony  againft  God  and  his  holy  ways.  And  if  the 
cafe  be  the  fame  it  was,  nothing  but  thine  own  vanity 
and  ficklenefe,  or  fome  worfc  reafon,  could  move 
thee  to  alter  thy  purpofe. 

2.  Let  it  be  farther  confidered,  that  if  we  be  not 

conflant  to  our  refjlution,  all  we  have  done  is  loft.  If 

thou  repenteft  of  thy  repentance,  it  will  not  prove 

*'  a  repentance  to  falvation."     As  good  to  have 

flayed  in  Sodom,  as  to  look  back  after  thou  art  come 

out  of  it.  Thus  God  tells  us  by  the  prophet.  Ezek. 

xxxiii.  12,  13.  ''  Therefore  thou  Son  of  man,  fay 

"  unto  the  children  of  thy  people,  the  righteouf- 

*'  nefs  of  the  righteous  fhall  not  deliver  him  in  the 

day  of  his  tranfgrelTion  ;  neither  fhall  the  righteous 

be  able  to  live  in  the  day  that  he  finneth.     When 

I  f^y  to  the  lighteous,  he  fhall  furely  live:  if  he 

"  truft  to  his  own  righteoufnefs,  and  commit  ini- 

**  quity,  all  his  righteoufnefs  fhall  not  be  remembred : 

*'  but  tor  his  iniquity  that  he  hath  committed,  he 

''  fhall  die  for  it."     So  that  whatever  we  have  done 

in  the  work  of  repentance,  what  refolutions  foever 

we  have  taken  up  :  if  afterwards  we  give  over  and  let 

them  fall,  all  that  we  have  done  is  loft,  and  will  come 

to  noihiiig,  3.  Let 


ic 


^he  nature  and  nccejjitj  of  holy  7'efoliitlon,       3989 

3.  Let  us  confider  in  the  laft  place,  that  if  wc  be  "^  ^^  R  IVT. 
not  conltant  to  our  refolution,  we  fliall  not  only  lofe 
all  that  we  have  done,  but  we  fhall  thereby  render 
our  condition  much  worfe.  "  Remember  Lot's 
*^  wife,"  who,  after  fhe  was  efcaped  out  of  Sodom, 
looked  back,  and  was  made  a  particular  and  lading 
monument  of  God's  wrath  and  difpleafure  ;  which 
fecms  to  be  meant  by  that  exprefTion  of  her  being 
'^  turned  into  a  pillar  of  fait,"  that  is,  a  lafting  mo- 
nument. Prov.  xiv.  14.  "  The  backflider  in  heart 
*'  fhall  be  filled  with  his  own  ways."  "Shall  be  filled 
*'  with  his  own  ways ;"  this  exprefTion  doth  fignify 
a  moft  heavy  and  dreadful  curfe  upon  thofe,  who 
fall  off  from  their  good  purpofe  and  refolution,  that 
they  fhall  have  forrow  and  trouble  enough  upon  it. 
For  fo  likewife  Prov.  i.  26,  27.  where  God  threat- 
ens wilful  and  obilinate  finners  with  the  heavieft  judg- 
ments, that  he  would  "  laugh  at  their  calamity,  and 
*'  mock  when  their  fear  comes,  when  their  fear  comes 
*'  as  defolation,  and  their  deflrudtion  as  a  whirlwind, 
*'  and  fear  and  anguifh  cometh  upon  them  ;"  he 
adds,  as  the  fum  of  all  other  judgments,  that  "  they 
*'  fhall  eat  the  fruit  of  their  own  ways,  and  be  filled 
*'  with  their  own  devices."  Heb.  x.  38.  "  But  if 
*'  any  man  draw  back,  my  foul  fhall  have  no  plea- 
*'  fure  in  him  •,"  which  words  are  a  fjcBiuo-ig,  and 
fignify  a  great  deal  more  than  feems  to  be  exprefs'd. 
*'  My  foul  fhall  have  no  plcafure  in  him^"  that  is, 
let  fuch  an  one  exped:  the  effeifts  of  God's  fierceft 
wrath  and  difpleafure.  For  fo^the  Hebrews  are  wont 
to  cxprefs  things  that  are  great  and  unfpcakable  ; 
when  they  cannot  fufBciently  fet  them  forth  -,  by  fay- 
ing lefs,  they  fay  more.  So  Ffal.  v.  4.  where  it  is 
faid,  "  thou  art  not  a  God  that  haft  pleafure  in  wick- 
"  ednefs,"  (.he  Pfalmifh  means,  and  would  have  us 
I  to 


^OQO      The  ytaiure  and  necejjity  of  holy  refolution, 

S  E  R  M.  to  underftand  it  fo,  that  God  is  fo  far  from  taking 
cLXix.   ^^^  pleafure  in  the  fins  of  men,  that  he  bears  the  moft 
violent  hatred  and  difpleafure  againil  them.  So  when 
the  apoftle  here  fays,  "  If  any  man  draw  back,  my 
*'  foul  fhall  have  no  pleafure  in  him,"  he  means, 
that  it  is  not  to  be  exprefs'd  how  God  will  deal  with 
fuch  perfons,  and  how  feverely  his  juftice  will  handle 
them.      To  the  fame  purpofe  is  that  declaration, 
2  Pet.  ii.  20,  2r.  "  For  if  after  they  have  efcaped 
*'  the  pollutions  of  the  world,  through  the  know- 
**  ledge  of  the  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ, 
*'  they  are  again  entangled  therein  and  overcome, 
^*  the  latter  end  is  worfe  with  them  than  the  begin - 
*'  ning.     For  it  had  been  better  for  them,  not  to 
*'  have  known  the  way  of  righteoufnefs,  than  after 
**  they  have  known  it,  to  turn  from  the  holy  com- 
"  mandment  delivered  unto  them."     The  condition 
of  all  impenitent  fmners  is  very  fad  -,  but  of  apoftates 
much  worfe  :    not  only  becaufe  the  fins  which  they 
commit  afterwards  are  much  greater,  receiving  a  new 
aggravation,  which  the  fins  of  thofe  who  are  fimply 
impenitent   are  not  capable  of  j    but   likewife    be- 
caufe fuch  perfons  are  ufually  more  wicked  after- 
wards.    For  they  that  break  loofe  from  fevere  pur- 
pofes  and  refolutions  of  a  better  courfe,  do  by  this 
very  thing  in  a  great  meafure  fear  and  conquer  their 
confciences  \  and  then  no  wonder  if  afterwards  "  they 
*'  give  up  themfelves  to  commit  all  iniquity  with 
*'  greedincfs."      When  after  long  abflinence  men 
return  to  fin  again,  their  lulls  are  more  fierce  and 
violent  •,  like  a  man  who,  after  long  failing,  returns^ 
to  his  meac  with  a  more  raging  appetite.     This  our 
Saviour  fets  forth  to  us  in  the  parable  of  the  unclean 
fpirit's  returning  again  and  taking  pofleflion  of  the 
man,  after  he  had  left  him.  Matt,  xii,  43,  44,  45. 

"  When 


l^he  Jiatiire  and  necejfity  of  holy  refolution.       3991 

"  When  the  unclean  fpirit  is  gone  out  of  a  man,  he  S  E  R  M. 
"  walketh  through  dry  places,  feeking  reft,  and  find- 
"  eth  none.  Then  he  faith,  I  will  return  into  my 
*'  houfe  from  whence  I  came  out :  And  when  he  is 
*'  come,  he  findeth  it  empty,  fwept,  and  garnifh'd. 
"  Then  goeth  he,  and  taketh  with  himfelf  {twtn 
"  other  fpirits  more  wicked  than  himfelf;  and  the 
"  end  of  that  man  is  worfe  than  his  beginning.'* 
The  moral  of  which  is,  that  when  a  man  hath  once 
left  his  fins,  if  afterward  he  entertain  thoughts  of  re- 
turning to  them  again,  fin  will  return  upon  him  with 
redoubled  force  and  ftrength,  and  his  heart  will  be 
fo  much  the  more  prepared  and  difpofed  for  the 
entertaining  of  more  and  greater  vices  •,  and  his  leav- 
ing his  fins  for  a  time  will  be  but  like  a  running  back, 
that  he  may  leap  with  greater  violence  into  hell  and 
deftrudion. 

Bcfides  that  fuch  perfons  do  the  greateft  injury  to 
God  and  the  holy  ways  of  religion,  that  can  be,  by 
forfaking  them  after  they  have  owned  and  approved 
them.  For  it  will  not  be  fo  much  regarded,  what 
wicked  men,  who  have  always  been  fo,  talk  againft 
God  and  religion  •,  becaufe  they  do  not  talk  from 
experience,  but  "  fpeak  evil  of  the  things  which  they 
"  know  not :"  whereas  thofe  who  forfakethe  ways 
of  religion  after  they  have  once  engaged  in  them,  do 
difparage  religion  more  effedually,  and  reproach  it 
with  greater  advantage  •,  becaufe  they  pretend  to 
fpeak  from  the  experience  they  have  had  of  it  •,  they 
have  tried  both  the  ways  of  fin,  and  the  ways  of 
religion,  and  after  experience  of  both,  they  return 
to  fin  again  :  which,  what  is  it  but  to  proclaim  to  the 
world,  that  the  ways  of  fin  and  vice  are  rather  to 
be  chofen  than  the  ways  of  holinefs  and  virtue  ;  that 
the  devil  is  a  better  maftcr  than  God,  and  that  a 

Vol.  IX.  19  T  ^ii^^"^l 

5 


3  9  9  2       '^^^  ;?<^///r^  and  necejjity  of  holy  rejolution, 

S  R  R  M.  finful  and  wicked  life  yields  more  pleafure  and  great- 
cLxix.  ^j.  advantages,  than  are  to  be  had  in  keeping  the 
commandments  of  God  ?  And  this  muft  needs  be  a 
high  provocation,  and  a  heavy  aggravation  of  our 
ruin.  Let  thefe  confiderations  prevail  with  us,  to 
purfue  this  holy  refolution^  after  we  have  taken  it  up, 
and  to  perlift  in  it.     There  remains  only  the 

VI.  And  laft  particular  which  I  propofed  to  be' 
fpoken  to,  viz.  to  add  fome  dire6lions  for  the  main- 
taining and  making  good  of  this  refolution  of  re- 
pentance and  amendment  j  and  they  fliall  be  thefe 
three. 

I.  Let  us  do  all  in  the  flrength  of  God,  confi- 
dering  our  necefiary  and  eflfential  dependance  upon 
him,  and  that  "  without  him,"  and  the  alTiftance  of 
his  grace,  '*  we  can  do  nothing."  "  We  are  not  (as 
*'  the  apoftle  tells  us)  fufficient  ofourfelves,  as  of 
'^  ourfelves,"  that  is,  without  the  afliftance  of  God's 
lioly  Spirit,  "  to  think  any  thing' '  that  is  good  ; 
much  lefs  to  refolve  upon  it.  "  It  is  God  that 
*'  worketh  in  us  both  to  will  and  to  do  of  his  good 
"  pleafure,"  that  is,  of  his  own  goodnefs,  as  the 
fame  apoflle  fpeaks,  Phil.  ii.  13.  It  is  God  that  up- 
holds us  in  being,  and  from  whom  we  have  all  our 
power  as  to  natural  aflions  •,  but  as  to  fpiritual  things, 
confidering  the  great  corruption  and  depravation  of 
human  nature,  we  Hand  in  need  of  a  more  efpecial 
and  immediate  afliftance. 

If  we  know  any  thing  of  ourfelves,  we  cannot  but 
know  what  foohfh  and  ignorant  creatures  we  are, 
how  weak  and  impotent,  how  averfe  and  oppofite  to 
any  thing  that  is  good.  And  therefore  it  is  wife 
counfel  in  all  cafes,  but  chiefly  in  fpiritual  matters, 
which  Solomon  gives,  Prov.  iii.  5,  6.  "  Truft  in 
"  the  Lop.D  with  all  thine  heart,  and  lean  not  to 

"  thine 


I'he  nature  and  necejjity  of  holy  refolutlon,       3993 

"  thine  own  underflanding.     Acknowledge  him  in  S  E  R  M. 

"  all  thy  ways:  and  hefhall  diredl  thy  fteps.''  Let    ^^^^^• 

us  then  addrefs  ourfelves  to  God,  in  the  words  of 

the  holy  prophet,  Jer.  x.  23.     "  O  Lord,  I  know 

*^  that  the  way  of  man  is  not  in  himfelf,  and  that  it 

"  is  not  in  man  that  walketh,  to  direct  his  fleps." 

And  let  us  beg  of  him,  that  he  would  confider  our 

cafe,  commiferate  our  weaknefs,  and  pity  our  im- 

potency,  and  that  he  would  join  his  flrength  to  us, 

and  grant  us  the  afliftance  of  his  grace  and  holy  fpi- 

rit,  to  put  us  upon  fincere  refolutions  of  a  new  life, 

and  to  keep  us  conftant  and  ftedfaft  to  them  *,  "to 

**  open  the  eyes  of  our  minds,  and  to  turn  us  from 

*^  darknefs  to  light,  and  from  the  power  of  Satan 

*^  and  our  lufts,  unto  God  ;  that  we  may  repent  and 

*'  turn  to  God,  and  do  works  meet  for  repentance, 

**  that  fo  we  may  receive  forgivenefs  of  fins,  and  an 

*^  inheritance  among  them  that  are  fandlified  through 

**  faith  that  is  in  Christ/* 

And  for  our  encouragement  in  this  matter,  God 
hath  bid  us  to  apply  ourfelves  to  him  •,  and  he  hath 
promifed  not  to  be  wanting  to  us,  in  words  as  exprefs 
and  univerfal  as  can  well  be  devifed.  Jam.  i.  6. 
If  any  man  lack  wifdom,  let  him  afk  it  of  God, 
who  giveth  to  all  liberally,  and  upbraideth  no 
*'  man ;  but  let  him  afk  in  faith,  nothing  waver- 
"  ing,"  that  is,  not  doubting  but  that  God  is  both 
able  and  willing  to  give  what  he  afl<s.  And  Luke 
xi.  9,  10,  II,  12,  13.  "  I  fay  unto  you,  afk, 
"  and  it  fhall  be  given  you  •,  feek,  and  ye  fliall 
*'  find ;  knock,  and  it  fhall  be  opened  unto  you. 
*'  For  every  one  that  aflceth,  receivcth  -,  and  he  that 
"  feeketb,  findeth  \  and  to  him  that  knocketh,  it 
"  fhall  be  opened.  If  a  fon  fliall  afk  bread  of  any 
"  of  you  that  is  a  father,  will  he  give  him  a  flone  ? 

19  T  2  "  Or 


cc 
cc 
cc 

(C 


3994      T'he  nature  and  necejjify  of  holy  refolution. 

"  Or  if  he  afk  a  fifli,  will  he  for  a  fifli  give  him  a 
ferpent  ?  Or  if  he  Ihall  afk  an  egg,   will  he  offer 
him  a  fcorpion  ?  If  ye  then  being  evil,  know  how 
to  give  good  gifts  unto  your  children  *,  how  much 
more  fhall  your  heavenly  Father  give  the  holy  Spi- 
"  rit  to  them   that  afk  him  ?''     To  encourage  our 
faith,  cur  Saviour  ufeth  fuch  an  argument  as  may 
give  us  the  greateft  affu ranee.     We  are  commonly 
confident,  that  our  earthly  parents  will  not  deny  us 
thofe    things    that  are  good  and  necefiary  for  us, 
though  they  may  be  otherwife  evil  :  ''  how  much 
*'  more  then  fhall  our  heavenly  Father,*'  who  is  ef- 
fentially  and  infinitely  good,  *'  give  his  holy  Spirit 
"  to  us  ?"  And  if  this  be  not  enough,  St.  Matthew 
ufeth  a  larger  exprefiion,  "  How  much  more  fhall 
*'  your  heavenly  Father  give  good  things  to  them 
*'  that  afk  him  ?"     If  there  be  any  thing  that  is 
good,   and  we  fland  in  need  of  it,  and  earnellly 
pray  to  God  for  it,  we  may  be  confident  that  h* 
will  give  it  us. 

2.  We  ought  to  be  very  watchful  over  ourfelves, 
confidering  our  weaknefs  and  wavering,  and  infla- 
bility  and  ficklenefs,  the  treachery  and  deceitfulnefs 
of  our  own  hearts,  and  the  malice  of  Satan.  It  will 
be  a  great  while  before  the  habits  of  fin  be  fo  weak- 
ened and  fubdued,  as  that  we  fhall  have  no  propenfi- 
on  to  return  to  them  again  ;  fo  that  our  hearts  will 
be  often  endeavouring  to  return  to  their  former  pof- 
ture,  and  like  a  deceitful  bow,  which  is  not  firmly 
ftrong,  to  ftart  back.  And  bcfides  the  deceitfulnefs  of 
fin  and  our  own  hearts,  the  devil  is  very  malicious,and 
his  malice  will  make  him  vigilant  to  watch  all  ad- 
vantages againfl  us  ;  and  his  great  defign  will  be  to 
fliake  our  refolution  ;  for  if  that  fland,  he  knows 
his  kingdom  will  fall,  and  therefore  he  raifeth  all  his 

batteries 


l*he  nature  and  nece[fity  of  holy  refohition.      3995 

batteries  againft  this  fort,  and  labours  by  all  means  ^^^^xi^* 
to  undermine  it ;  and  nothing  will  be  matter  of  great-  ^ 
er  triumph  to  him,  than  to  gain  a  perfon  that  was 
revolted  from  him,  and  refolved  to  leave  his  fervice. 
If  therefore  thou  expe6teft  God's  grace  and  afllftancc 
to  keep  thee  ftedfaft  to  thy  refolution,  do  not  neg- 
led  thyfelf,  but  "  keep  thy  heart  with  all  diligence,'* 
and  watch  carefully  over  thyfelf:  for  becaufe  "  God 
«'  worketh  in  us  both  to  will  and  to  do,"  therefore 
he  expedts  that  "  we  fhould  work  out  our  falvation 
"  with  fear  and  trembling,"  left  by  our  own  care- 
lefnefs  and  ncgled  we  fhould  mifcarry. 

3.  Let  us  frequently  renew  and  reinforce  our  re- 
folutions,  more  efpecially  when  we  think  of  coming 
to  the  facrament,  and  approaching  the  holy  table  of 
the  Lord.  Nothing  is  more  apt  to  beget  in  us  good 
refolutions,  and  to  ftrengthen  them,  than  to  confi- 
der  the  dreadful  fufferings  of  the  Son  of  God  for 
our  fms,  which  are  fo  lively  fet  forth  and  reprefent- 
ed  to  us  in  his  holy  facrament,  which  as  it  is  on 
God's  part  a  feal  and  confirmation  of  his  grace  and 
love  to  us,  fo  on  our  part  it  ought  to  be  a  folemn  ra- 
tification of  our  covenant  with  God,  "  to  depart 
^^  from  iniquity,  and  to  walk  before  him  in  holinefs 
*^  and  righteoufnefs  all  the  days  of  our  lives/* 


SER- 


399^ 

SERMON    CLXX. 

The  nature  and  neceffity  of  reftitution* 

»  ■  I  P  I  »— -a— ^— ^— ^»— ^i^^— »«» 

LUKE  xix.  8,  9. 

And  if  I  have  taken  any  thing  from  any  man  hy  falfe 
accufationy   I  reft  ore  him  fourfold.     And  Jesus 
faid  unto  him^  Wis  day .  is  falvation  come  to  this 
hcufe. 


S  E  R  M. 


N  E  particular  and  eminent  fruit  of  true  re- 
CLXX.  *  V_>/  pentance,  is  the  making  of  reftitution  and 
^ — -' — '  fatisfadion  to  thofe  whom  we  have  injured.     As  for 
fermon  on  ^^^'>  we  can  make  no  fatisfa6lion  and  compenfation 
du5  text,    to  him,  for  the  injuries  we  have  done  him  by  our 
fms  ;  all  that  we  can  do  in  refpedt  of  God,  is  to 
confefs  our  fms  to  him,  to  make  acknowledgment  of 
our  mifcarriages,  to  be  heartily  troubled  for  what  we 
have  done,  and  not  to  do  the  like  for  the  future. 
But  for  injuries  done  to  men,  we  may  in  many  cafes 
make  reparation  and  fatisfadlion.     And  this,  as  it  is 
one  of  the  beft  figns  and  evidences  of  a  true  repen- 
tance *,  fo  it  is  one  of  the  moft  proper  and  genuine 
effedls  of  it :  for  this  is  as  much  as  in  us  lies,  to  un- 
do what  we  have  done,  and  to  unfin  our  fins. 

But,  becaufe  the  pradlice  of  this  duty  doth  fo  in- 
terfere with  the  interell  of  men,  and  confequently  it 
will  be  very  difficult  to  convince  men  of  their  duty 
in  this  particular,  and  to  perfuade  them  to  it  •,  there- 
fore I  defign  to  handle  this  particular  fruit  and  effed: 
of  a  true  repentance  by  itfelf,  from  thefe  words, 
which  contain  in  them, 
I.  The  fruit  and  efFed  of  Zaccheus  his  converfion 

and 


T'he  nature  and  necejjity  of  refit  tut  Ion.         3  997 

and  repentance ;  "  If  I  have  taken  any  thing  from  S  E  R  M. 
•*  any  man,  I  reflore  him  fourfold." 

II.  The  declaration,  which  our  Saviour  makes 
hereupon,  of  the  truth  of  his  repc:ntance  and  con- 
verfion,  and  the  happy  flate  he  was  thereby  put  in- 
to. "  And  Jesus  faid  unto  him,  This  day  is  fal- 
"  vatlon  come  to  this  houfe,  for  as  much  as  he  aifo 
"  is  the  fon  of  Abraham  •,"  as  if  he  had  faid,  by 
thefe  fruits  and  effedts  it  appears,  that  this  is  a  re- 
pentance to  falvation  ;  and  this  man  whom  you  look 
upon  as  a  finner  and  a  heathen,  may  by  better  right 
call  Abraham  father,  than  any  of  you  formal  phari- 
fees  and  Jews,  who  glory  fo  much  in  being  the  chil- 
dren of  Abraham. 

I.  The  fruit  and  effedl  of  Zaccheus's  converfion 
and  repentance  -,  "  If,  &c. 

This  Zaccheus,  as  you  find  at  the  fecond  verfe, 
was  chief  of  the  publicans,  which  was  an  office  of  great 
odium  and  infamy  among  the  Jews,  they  being  the 
colledlors  of  the  tribute  which  the  Roman  empe- 
ror, under  whofe  power  the  Jews  then  were,  did 
exadt  from  them.  And  becaufe  thefe  publicans 
farmed  this  tribute  of  the  emperor  at  a  certain  rent, 
they  made  again  out  of  it  to  themfelves,  by  exact- 
ing and  requiring  more  of  the  people  than  was  due 
upon  that  account  -,  fo  that  their  calling  was  very  in- 
famous, upon  three  accounts. 

1.  Becaufe  they  were  the  infiruments  of  oppreffing 
their  countrymen  •,  for  fo  they  looked  upon  the  tax 
they  paid  to  the  Romans,   as  a  great  oppreffion. 

2.  Becaufe  they  were  forced  by  the  neceflity  of 
their  calling  to  have  familiar  converfation  with  hea- 
thens, whom  they  looked  upon  as  finners.  Hence 
the  phrafe  ufed  by  the  apoftlc,  of  "  finners  of  the 
"  Gentiles/*  And  hence  likewife  probubly  it  is,  that 
o  "  publicans 


399^         -^^  /?^///^^  and  necejjity  of  rejlifiition. 
S  E  R  M.  "  publicans  and  finners,  publicans  and  heathens,'* 
cLxx.     aj-e  joined  feveral  times  together,  becaufe  of  the  oc- 
cafions  of  frequent  converfe  whith  the  publicans  had 
with  heathens. 

3.  But  principally  they  were  odious,  becaufe  of 
the  common  injuilice  and  oppreflion,  which  they 
iifed  in  the  management  of  their  calling,  by  fraud 
and  violence  extorting  more  than  was  due,  to  in- 
hance  the  profit  of  their  places.  Hence  it  is,  that 
this  fort  of  officers  have  been  generally  branded,  and 
reckoned  among  the  worft  fort  of  men.  So  he  in 
the  comedy,  iro(,v\zq  TTjXuuoHy  'Trocvjeg  slo'iv  a^TToty^g^ 
*'  all  publicans  are  rapacious  or  robbers.'*  And  this  is 
moll  probably  the  fin  which  Zaccheus  here  repents  of, 
and  in  regard  to  which  he  promifes  reflitution,  3^  il 
Tivog  6(rv}co<pcicfl7j(roiy  *'  and  if  I  have  taken  any 
*'  thing  from  any  man  by  falfe  accufation  •,"  fo  we 
render  the  words  in  our  tranflation :  but  the  word 
£(rvico(pccv]7j(rcc  fignifies  more  generally,  ''  if  I  have 
*'  been  injurious  to  any  one,  if  I  have  wronged  any 
**  man,"  as  appears  by  the  conftant  ufe  of  this  word 
by  the  LXX,  who  by  this  word  do  tranflate  the  moft 
general  Hebrew  words,  which  fignify  any  kind  of 
injury  or  oppreflion,  either  by  fraud  or  violence  or 
calumny.  So  that  there  is  no  reafon  here  to  reftrain 
it,"  wronging  men  by  falfe  accufation :"  for  Zaccheus 
his  fin  being  in  all  probability  extorting  more  than 
was  due,  this  might  as  eafily  be  done  many  other 
v/ays,.  as  by  falfe  accufation.  And  that  this  was  the 
comiuon  fin  of  the  pubhcans,  appears  by  the  coun- 
fel  which  John  the  Baptifb  gives  them,  Luke  iii.  12, 
15.  "  Then  camealfo  the  publicans  to  be  baptized, 
"  and  faid  unto  him,  mafler,  what  fhall  we  do  ? 
"  And  he  faid  unto  them,  exa6t  no  more  than  that 
"  which  is  appointed  you  •,"  that  is,  do  not  by  fraud 

or 


The  nature  and  JieceJJity  of  reftitution.         3999 
or  violence  extort  from  any  man,  any  more  than  the  ^  E  R  M. 
tribute  which  is  laid  upon  him.  ^^^^* 

So  that  Zaccheus  here  promifeth,  that  if  he  had 
been  injurious  to  any  man  in  his  office,  by  extorting- 
more  than  was  due,  he  would  reftore  to  him  four- 
fold. And  if  Zaccheus  calculated  his  eflate  right, 
and  intended  to  referve  any  part  of  it  to  himfelf, 
which  is  but  reafonable  to  fuppofe  -,  it  could  be  no 
very  great  part  bf  his  eflate  which  was  injurioufly  got ; 
and  I  am  afraid  a  far  fmaller  proportion  than  many 
are  guilty  of,  who  yet  pafs  for  very  honeft  men  in 
comparifon  of  the  publicans.  The  text  laith,  he 
was  a  rich  man.  Suppofe  he  was  worth  ten  or  twelve 
thoufand  pounds  ;  half  he  gives  to  the  poor  ;  thac 
was  well  got,  or  elfe  his  whole  eftate  could  not  have 
raade  fourfold  reftitution  for  it.  Suppofe  he  referved  a 
thoufand  or  two  to  himfelf,  then  at  the  rate  of  re- 
floring  fourfold,  not  above  a  thoufand  can  be  inju- 
rioufly got,  that  is  about  a  penny  in  the  fhilling.  I 
am  afraid  that  now  a-days  there  are  few  fuch  moderate 
oppreflbrs  :  nay,  it  is  poflible  that  the  proportion  of 
his  eftate  injurioufly  got  might  be  much  lefs  ;  more 
it  could  not  eafily  be.  But  whatever  it  was,  he  does 
not  plead  that  by  way  of  excufe  for  himfelf,  he 
freely  confeflieth  he  had  finned  in  this  kind,  and  of- 
fers reftitution  to  the  utmoft,  much  more  than  the 
law  did  require  in  fuch  cafes. 

II.  You  have  the  declaration  our  Saviour  makes 
hereupon,  of  the  truth  of  his  repentance  and  con- 
verfion,  and  the  happy  ftate  he  was  thereby  put  in- 
to, *'  this  day  is  falvation  come  to  this  houfe." 

The  obfervation  I  fliall  make  from  hence  is  this, 
that  reftitution  and  fatisfadtion  for  the  injuries  we 
have  done  to  others,  is  a  proper  and  genuine  cflcd: 
of  true  repentance.     I  know  the  text  only  fpcaks  of 

Vol.  IX.  19  U  refti- 

5 


400  0        ^h^  nature  and"  necejfit'j  of  rejlitutlon, 

E  R  M.  reftitution  in  cafe  of  opprefTion  and  'cxadion  :  but 
becaufe  there  is  the  fame  reafon  why  reftitution  fhould 
be  made  for  all  other  injuries,  I  think  I  may,  without 
any  force  or  violence  to  my  text,  very  well  make  it 
the  foundation  of  a  more  general  difcourfe  concern- 
ing reftitution. 

In  the  handling  of  this,  I  fhall, 

Firft,  open  to  you  the  nature  of  this  duty. 

Secondly,  confirm  the  truth  of  the  propofition, 
by  fhewing  the  neceftity  of  it. 

Thirdly,  endeavour  to  perfuade  men  to  the  dif- 
charge  of  this  ncceflary  duty. 

"  Firft,  for  the  opening  the  nature  of  this  duty,  I 
Will  confider, 

I.  The  ad. 

II.  The  latitude  or  extent  of  the  objed,  as  I  may 
Call  it,  or  the  matter  about  which  it  is  converfant. 

III.  The  manner  how  it  is  to  be  done. 

IV.  The  meafure  of  it. 

V.  The  perfons  who  are  bound  to  make  reftitu- 
tion ;  and  to  whom  it  is  to  be  made. 

VI.  The  time  in  which  it  is  to  be  done. 

VII.  The  order  of  doing  it,  where  more  are  in- 
jured,  and  reftitution  cannot  be  made  at  once  to  all. 

I.  For  the  a6t.  Reftitution  is  nothing  elfe  but  the 
making  reparation  or  fatisfaclion  to  another  for  the 
injuries  we  have  done  him.  It  is  to  reftore  a  man  to 
the  good  condition,  from  which,  contrary  to  right  and 
to  our  duty,  we  have  removed  him.  Reftitution  is 
only  done  in  cafe  of  injury.  Another  man  may  be 
damaged  and  prejudiced  by  us  many  ways,  and  we 
not  be  bound  to  make  reftitution  i  becaufe  there  are 
many  cafes,  wherein  a  man  deferves  the  prejudice  we 
do  to  him.  As  when  we  are  inftruments  of  infiid:- 
ing  upon  a  man  the  puniftiment  which  the  law  doth 

fen- 


The  nature  and  neccjjity  of  rejtltiition,         4.001' 

fentence  him  to.     And  there  are  many  cafes  wherein  S  E  R  M. 
we  may  be  prejudicial  to  others,  and  cannot  help  it.  As 
a  man  that  is  Tick  of  a  contagious  difcafe,  may  infecl 
others  that  are  about  him  :  but  he  is  not  injurious  to 
them  -,  becaufe  it  is  not  his  fault,  but  his  infelicity. 

II.  For  the  latitude  and  extent  of  the  obje6l,  as  I 
may  call  it,  or  the  matter  about  which  it  is  conver- 
fant.  It  extends  to  all  kind  of  injuries,  which  may 
be  reduced  to  thefe  two  heads  ;  either  we  injure  a 
perfon  with  or  without  his  confent. 

1.  Some  injuries  are  done  to  perfons  with  their 
confent.  Such  are  moft  of  thofe  injuries  which  are 
done  to  the  fouls  of  men,  "when  we  command,  or 
counfel,  or  incourage  them  to  fin,  or  draw  them  in 
by  our  example.     For  the  maxim  volenti  nonfit  in^ 

juria,  "  there's  no  injury  done  to  a  man  that  is 
*'  willing,"  is  not  fo  to  be  underflood,  as  that  a 
man  may  not  in  fome  fort  confent  to  his  own  wrong  : 
for  abfolute  freedom  and  willingnefs  fuppofeth  that  a 
man  is  wholly  left  to  himfclf,  and  that  he  under- 
flands  fully  what  he  does.  And  in  this  fenfe  no 
man  fins  willingly,  that  is,  perfedly  knowing  and 
adually  confidering  v/hat  he  does  •,  and  commands, 
and  perfuafion,  and  example  are  a  kind  of  violence  : 
yet  none  of  thefe  hinder,  but  that  a  man  in  thefe 
cafes  may  fufficiently  confent  to  what  he  does.  But 
yet  he  is  not  fo  perfeclly  free,  as  to  cxcufe  him  thac 
draws  him  into  fin  by  thefe  ways.  So  hkewife  when 
a  man  refufeth  to  do  that  which  is  his  duty  without 
a  reward  •,  forindance,  to  do  juftice  to  another  •,  he 
is  injurious  in  fo  doing  :  but  yet  not  altogether  with- 
out the  confent  of  him  whom  he  injuries. 

2.  Injuries  are  done  to  perfons  without  thtlr  con- 
fent. And  thefe,  though  they  are  not  always  the  gi  eac- 
cft  mifchiefs,  yet  they  are  the  grcatcft  injuries.   And 

19  U  2  thefe 


400  2         ^he  nature  and  neceffify  of  reflitution] 

E  R  M.  thefe  injuries  are  done  either  by  fraud  and  cunning, 
or  by  violence  and  opprefTion  -,  either  by  over-reach- 
ing another  man  in  wit,  or  over-bearing  him  by 
power.  And  thefe  ufually  either  refpeft  the  bodies 
of  men,  or  their  eftates,  or  their  good  name.  The 
bodies  of  men.  He  that  maims  another,  or  does 
him  any  other  injury  in  his  limbs  or  health,  either 
by  fraud  or  force,  is  bound,  {o  far  as  he  is  able,  to 
make  reparation  for  the  injury.  Or  they  refped  the  ' 
eftates  of  men.  If  by  cunning,  or  by  violence,  or 
by  falfe  teftimony  or  accufation,  thou  haft  hindered 
a  man  of  any  benefit,  which  otherwife  would  have 
come  to  him,  thou  art  bound  to  reftitution.  If  by 
thy  power  or  intereft,  by  thy  knowledge  in  the  law, 
or  fkill  in  bufinefs,  thou  haft  diredly  and  avowedly 
helped  and  afTifted  another  to  do  injuftice  to  his 
neighbour,  thou  art  bound  to  reftitution  ;  though 
not  as  the  principal,  yet  as  the  acceflary.  If  thou  haft 
over-reached  thy  brother  in  any  contradl,  making  ad- 
vantage of  his  ignorance  or  unlkilfulnefs  ;  if  thou 
haft  made  a  gain  of  his  necefTity ;  if  thou  haft  by  thy 
power  and  intereft,  or  by  any  more  violent  and  for- 
cible way  detained  his  right,  or  taken  away  that 
which  was  his ;  thou  art  bound  to  make  reparation 
for  thefe  injuries,  to  reftore  that  which  thou  haft  bor- 
rowed, to  return  the  pledge  which  thou  haft  wrong- 
fully kept,  to  releafe  unconfcionable  forfeitures,  to 
pay  debts,  to  make  fatisfa6lion  for  frauds  and  cheats, 
to  take  off  all  unjuft  invafions  and  furprizals  of  eftates : 
yea  though  the  fraud  be  fuch  that  thou  art  not  liable 
to  make  fatisfadlion  by  any  human  law,  yet  thou  art 
as  much  bound  to  it  in  confcience  to  God  and  thy 
duty,  as  if  thou  hadft  ftoln,  or  taken  it  by  violence 
from  thy  neighbour.  For  in  truth  and  reality,  fraud 
is  as  great  an  injury  as  violence,  although  human 
3  laws 


*The  nature  and  necefity  of  rejlltuthn.         4003 
Jaws  cannot  take  cognizance  of  it,  fo  as  to  relieve  S  E  R  M. 

.  .  CLXX, 

every  man  that  is  over-reached  in  a  bargain  :  nay  of 
the  two  it  is  worfe ;  for  whenever  thou  decciveft  a 
man  in  this  kind,  thou  doft  not  only  wrong  him  in 
point  of  eftate,  but  thou  abufeft  his  underftanding. 

And  fo  likewife  in  refpe6l  of  a  man's  fam.e  and 
reputation.  If  thou  haft  hurt  any  man's  good  name 
by  flander  or  calumny,  by  falfe  witnefs,  by  rendring 
him  ridiculous,  or  any  other  way,  thou  art  bound 
to  give  fuch  fatisfadlion  as  the  thing  is  capable  of; 
or  if  there  be  any  other  injury  which  I  have  not  men- 
tioned, thou  art  obliged  to  make  reparation  for  it. 

III.  As  to  the  manner  how  reftitution  is  to  be 
made. 

I.  Thou  art  bound  to  do  it  voluntarily,  and  of 
thy  own  accord,  though  the  perfon  injured  do  nOt 
know  who  it  was  that  did  him  the  injury,  though 
he  do  not  feek  reparation  by  law.  When  a  man  is 
forced  by  law  to  make  reftitution,  it  is  not  a  virtue. 
But  neceflity  ;  this  is  not  a  fruit  of  repentance  and  a 
good  mind,  but  of  good  law.  And  that  thou  doft 
not  do  it,  unlefs  the  law  compel  thee  to  it,  is  an  ar- 
gument thou  wouldft  not  have  done  it,  if  thou  couldft 
have  avoided  it.  And  though  the  thing  be  done, 
yet  thou  haft  not  done  it,  but  the  law  -,  and  unlefs 
thou  heartily  repent  of  thy  crime,  the  injury  ftill  lies 
at  thy  door,  and  in  God's  account  thou  art  as  guilty 
as  if  no  reftitution  had  been  made.  Not  that  thou 
art  bound  in  this  cafe  to  make  new  reftitution  over 
again  ;  but  thou  art  bound  to  bewail  thy  neglect,  that 
thou  didft  not  do  it  voluntarily  and  without  the  com- 
pullion  of  the  law. 

2.  Thou  muft  do  it  in  kind,  if  the  thing  be  ca- 
pable of  it,  and  the  injured  party  demand  it.    Thou 
muft  reftore  thQ  very  thing  which  thou  hadft  depriv- 
ed 


4004  ^^  nature  and  necejjity  of  rejlitution. 

S  E  R  M.  ed  thy  neighbour  of,  if  it  be  fuch  a  thine  as  can  be 

CLXX.  JO  '  ^  o 

reflored,  and  be  flill  in  thy  power  ;  unlefs  he  volun- 
tarily accept  of  fome  other  thing  in  exchange. 

3.  If  thou  canft  not  reftore  it  in  kind,  thou  art 
bound  to  reflore  it  in  value,  in  fomething  that  is  as 
good.  As  for  fpiritual  injuries  done  to  the  fouls  of 
men,  we  are  bound  to  make  fuch  reparation  and  com- 
penfation  as  we  can.  Thofe  whom  we  have  drawn 
into  fin,  and  engaged  in  wicked  courfes,  by  our  in- 
fluence and  example,  or  by  neglect  of  our  duty  to- 
wards them,  we  are  fo  far  as  becomes  the  relation 
we  fland  into  them,  to  make  acknowledgment  of 
our  fault,  to  endeavour  by  our  inllrudion  and  coun- 
fel  to  reclaim  them  from  thofe  fins  we  led  them 
into,  and  "  to  recover  them  out  of  the  fnare  of  the 
*'  devil*,"  and  fhould  never  be  at  reft  till  we  have 
done  as  much  or  more  for  the  furtherance  of  their 
falvation,  and  helping  them  forwards  towards  hea- 
ven, as  we  did  contribute  before  to  their  ruin  and 
deftrudion.  If  we  have  violated  any  one's  chaftity, 
we  are  bound  to  marry  them,  if  it  was  done  upon 
that  condition,  and  if  they  require  it :  thou  art  bound 
to  keep  and  maintain  thofe  children  which  are  the 
fruit  of  thy  luft,  and  to  make  reparation  to  the  per- 
fon  whom  thou  haft  injured,  by  dowry  or  other  wife. 

If  thou  haft  defrauded  and  injured  any  man  in  his 
good  name,  thou  art  obliged  to  make  him  a  com- 
penfation  by  acknowledgment  of  thy  fault,  by  a  ftu- 
dious  vindication  of  him,  and  by  doing  him  honour 
and  repairing  his  credit  in  all  fitting  ways.  And  if 
the  injury  be  irreparable  (as  it  frequently  happens, 
that  we  can  hardly  fo  effedlually  vindicate  a  man,  as 
we  can  defame  him  -,  and  it  is  feldom  feen  that  thofe 
wounds  which  are  given  to  mens  reputation  are  per- 
fedlly  healed)  I  fay,  if  the  injury  be  irreparable,  efpe- 

cially 


*Ibe  nature  and  necejfity  of  rejiitution.  4005 

dally  if  it  prove  really  prejudicial  to  a  man  in  his  ^  ^  R  M. 
calling  and  civil  intereft  •,  if  no  other  fatisfadion  will 
be  accepted,  it  is  to  be  made  in  money,  "  which, 
"  Solomon  fays,  anfwcrs  all  things  ;"  and  the  rather, 
becaufe  the  reafon  and  equity  of  human  laws  hath 
thought  fit  to  afTign  this  way  of  fatisfa6lion  in  many 
cafes  upon  actions  of  fcandal  and  defamation.  And 
whatever  the  law  would  give  in  any  cafe,  if  it  could 
be  proved,  that  is  the  lead  we  are  bound  in  con- 
fcience  to  do,  when  we  are  guilty  to  ourfelves,  though 
the  law  cannot  take  hold  of  us. 

So  likewife,  if  thou  haft  wounded  a  man,  thou  art 
bound  to  pay  the  cure,  to  repair  to  him  and  his  rela- 
tions the  difability  for  his  calling,  and  his  way  of 
livelihood  and  fubfiftence,  which  he  hath  contraded 
by  thy  injury.  And  fo  for  falfe  imprifonment,  the 
real  detriment  which  comes  to  him  by  it  is  to  be 
made  amends  for :  and  fo  in  all  other  cafes,  the  in- 
jured perfon  is  fo  far  as  is  pofTible  to  be  reftored  to 
the  good  condition  in  which  he  was  before  the  injury. 

IV.  As  to  the  meafure  and  proportion  of  the  re- 
ftitution  we  are  to  make.  Zaccheus  here  offers  four- 
fold, which  was  much  beyond  what  any  law  required 
in  like  cafes.  The  meafure  of  reftitution  by  the  ju-' 
dicial  law  of  the  Jews,  did  very  much  vary  accord- 
ing to  the  kind  and  degree  of  the  injury.  In  fome 
cafes  a  man  was  only  bound  to  fimple  reftitution ; 
but  then  he  was  to  do  it  to  the  full,  Exod.  xxii.  5,  6. 
And  fo  if  that  which  is  another  man's  be  "  delivered 
**  unto  his  neighbour  to  keep,  and  be  ftoln  from . 
*'  him,  he  is  to  make  reftitution  thereof,"  ver.  12. 
**  And  fo  if  a  man  borrow  ought  of  his  neighbour, 
"  and  if  it  be  hurt  or  die,  the  owner  thereof  not  being 
"  with  it,  he  fliall  furely  make  it  good,'*  ver.  14. 
*^  But  for  all  manner  of  trefpaffes  by  way  of  theft, 

'*  whether 


n^  nature  andnecejjify  of  rejlitution. 

>  cLxxf  *  "  whether  it  be  for  ox,  for  afs,  for  flieep,  for  rai- 
ment, or  for  any  manner  of  loft  thing,  which  ano* 
thcr  challengeth  to  be  his,  he  whom  the  judge 
Ihall  condemn,  fhall  pay  double  to  his  neighbour," 
ver.  9.  that  is,  if  it  be  of  "  a  living  creature,"  if  the 
theft  be  "  found  in  his  hands  alive,  whether  it  be  ox, 
"  or  afs,  or  iheep,  he  Ihall  reftore  double,' '  ver.  4.But 
if  a  man  did  "  fteal  an  ox  or  a  fheep,  and  did  kill  it 
**  or  fell  it,"  he  was  to  reftore  "  five  oxen  for  an  ox, 
*'  and  four  flieep  for  a  fheep."     And  thus  we  find 
David  judged  upon  Nathan's  parable  of  the  rich  man, 
who  had  taken  the  poor  man's  only  lamb,  and  kill'd 
and  dreft  it  for  a  traveller  that  came  to  him,  2  Sam. 
xii.  6.  ''  He  fhall  reftore  the  lamb  fourfold."    Now 
the  reafon  of  this  feems  to  be  partly  becaufe  of  the 
advantage  and  ufefulnefs  of  thofe  creatures  above  any 
other  -,  and  partly  becaufe  when  they  were  once  kill- 
ed or  ahenated,  a  man  could  not  without  great  trou- 
ble and  difficulty  make  difcovery,  which  hazard  of 
not  difcovering  feems  to  be  accounted  for  in  the  re- 
ftitution:  but  if  a  man  did  voluntarily  offer  reftitu- 
tion,  before  he  was  profecuted,  for  any  thing  that 
was  taken  by  violence,  or  unjuftly  detained  from  his 
neighbour,  then  he  was  only  **  to  reftore  the  prin- 
cipal, and  to  add  a  fifth  part  thereto,  and  to  offer 
up  an  offering  to  the  Lord,  and  fohis  atonement 
was  made,"  Lev.  vi.  i,  &c. 
So  that  the  highcft  proportion  was  a  fourth  or 
fifth  parr,  and  that  only  in  the  particular  cafe  of 
flieep  or  oxen  ftoln  away,  and  killed  or  alienated 
afterwards.     Indeed  Solomon  fpeaks  of  a  fevenfold 
reftitution,  Prov.  vi.  31.  where  he  faith,  "  If  a  thief 
"  be  found,  he  fhall  reftore  fevenfold,  even  all  the 
"  fubftance  of  his  houfe ;"  where  feven  is  only  a 
pumber  of  perfedlion,  and  the  meaning  is,  he  fhall 

make 


H^e  nature  and  necejjity  of  rejlitution.         4007 
make  perfe(5l  and  full  reftitution  accordino-  to  the  S  E  R  M. 

.  CLXX. 

law,  fo  far  as  his  fubftance  or  eftatewill  reach. 

So  that  it  ieems  Zaccheus  in  reftoring  fourfold  did 
out-do  the  utmoft  feverity  of  the  law  •,  which  in  cafe 
of  fraud  and  opprefTion  was  but  double,  if  demand- 
ed ;  if  voluntarily  offered,  was  the  principal  and  a 
fifth  part  added  :  but  to  teftify  the  truth  of  his  re- 
pentance, and  his  hearty  ibrrow  for  the  injuries  he 
had  done,  he  punillieth  himfelf  beyond  what  the  law 
would  have  done. 

I  do  not  fay  that  this  example  binds  as  to  this 
meafure  and  proportion :  nay,  I  do  not  fay  we  are 
bound  to  the  proportions  of  the  law  ;  for  that  only 
concerned  the  nation  of  the  Jews  :  but  although  we 
be  free  from  the  letter  of  xh^  law,  yet  we  arc  tied  to 
the  equity  of  it.  As  to  the  fubftance  of  the  duty  of 
reftitution,  we  are  bound  to  that  by  the  law  of  na- 
ture. As  to  the  meafure  and  proportion^  the  equity 
of  the  judicial  law  in  it's  proportions,  and  of  Zaccheus 
his  example,  ought  to  be  confiderable  to  us. 

But  to  fpeak  more  particularly  concerning  the  mea- 
fures  and  proportions  of  reftitution,  I  ftiall  lay  down 
thefe  propofitions. 

1.  Where  reftitution  can  be  made  in  kind,  or  the 
injury  can  be  certainly  valued,  we  are  to  reftore  the 
thing,  or  the  value. 

2.  We  are  bound  to  reftore  the  thing,  with  the 
natural  increafe  of  it,  that  is,  to  fatisfy  for  the  lofs 
fuftained  in  the  mean  time,  and  the  gain  hindered. 

g.  Where  the  thing  cannot  be  reftored,  and  the 
value  of  it  is  not  certain,  we  are  to  give  reafonable 
fatisfadlion,  that  is,  according  to  a  middle  cftima- 
tion  •,  not  the  higheft,  nor  the  loweft  of  things  of 
the  kind.  The  injured  perfon  can  demand  no  more, 
^nd  ftrift  juftice  requires  no  more.     But  it  is  fafe  for 

Vol.  IX.  19  X  him 

5 


40 o 8  l^he  nature  andnecejjity  of  rejlitutwt, 

\  E  R  M.  hirn  that  hath  done  the  injury,  rather  to  exceed  than 
to  fall  fliort. 

4.  We  are  at  leaft  to  give  by  way  of  reffcitution 
what  the  lav/  would  give  •,  for  that  is  generally  equal, 
and  in  moft  cafes  rather  favourable  than  rigorous. 

5.  A  man  is  not  only  bound  to  reftkution  for  the 
injury  which  he  did,  but  for  all  that  diredlly  follows 
upon  his  injurious  ad,  though  it  were  beyond  his 
intention.     For  the  firft  injury  being  wilful,  thou  art 
prefumed  to  will  all  that  which  dire^lly  followed  up- 
on it  ;  according  to  that  rule,   Involuntarium  ortum 
ex  volnntario  cenfetur  pro  voluntarto,    *'  We  are  pre- 
"  fumed  to  will  that  which  follows  upon  a  voluntary 
*'  action,  though  we  did  not  intend  it."     For  in- 
fhance,  if  a  man  malicioufly  and  knowingly  fet  fire 
upon  another  man's  houfe,   though  he  intended  only 
an  injury  to  that  particular  perfon,  yet  if  a  wind 
come  and  drive  the  fire  to  his  neighbours  at  fome  di- 
fiance,  though  he  did  not  intend  this,  yet  becaufe 
the  firft  ad  was  unlawful,  he  is  liable  to  fatisfy  for 
all  the  dired  confequences  of  it.     If  a  man  wound 
another  without  any  intention  of  killing  him,  and 
the  wound  prove  mortal,  though  there  was  no  pro- 
bability that  death  would  enfue  upon  it,  the  man  is 
boun'^,  becaufe  the  firft  ad  was  injurious,  to  make 
reparation  to  his  relations  for  the  damage  they  fuftain 
by  his  death  \  and  if  they  did  depend  folely  upoa 
him,  who  died  by  fuch  injury,  thou  art  bound  l^ 
maintain  them. 

6.  Becaufe  thofe  who  have  lived  in  a  trade  and 
courfe  of  injuftice,  can  hardly  remerpber  all  the  par- 
ticular injuries  they  have  done,  fo  as  to  make  exad 
fatisfadion  for  them,  it  will  not  be  amifs  over  and 
befides  to  give  fomething  to  the  poor.  So  Zaccheus 
does  here,  "  half  of  my  eftate  I  give  to  the  poor, 
y  gnd  if  I  have  taken  any  thing,"  §f(?,  V.  The 


^je  nature  and  necejjity  of  reftitiition.  4009 

\  V.  The  perfons  who  are  concerned  in  reftitiition.  S  p  R  M. 

ci^x. 
And  here  I  fliall  confider, 

Firft,  The  perfons  who  are  bound  to  make  refti- 
tiition. 

Secondly,  The  perfons  to  whom  it  is  to  be  made. 

Firft,  The  perfons  who  are  bound  to  make  refti- 
tution.  In  general,  they  who  have  done  the  injury, 
or  they  who  come  into  their  ft.ead,  fo  as  in  law  or 
equity  the  injury  devolves  and  defcends  upon  them. 
But  for  the  clearer  ftating  of  this,  I  ihall  lay  down 
fevcral  proportions,  which  may  fcrve  to  refolve  a 
great  many  cafes,  that  may  be  put  concerning  per- 
fons obliged  to  make  reftitution. 

1.  If  the  injury  be  done  folely  by  one,  w^ithouc 
accomplices  and  partakers  in  the  crime,  he  alone  is 
rcfponfble,  and  wholly  bound  to  make  fatisfadtion  ; 
I  mean,  he  only  is  bound  fo  long  as  he  lives  •,  but  if 
the  injury  defcends  as  a  burden  upon  the  eftate,  then 
he  who  enjoys  the  eftate  becomes  bound  to  make 
fatisfa(ftion  \  as  I  lliall  ftiew  afterwards. 

2.  If  the  injury  was  done  by  more,  who  did  all 
equally  concur  to  the  doing  of  it,  they  are  all  equally 
bound  to  make  fatisfidtion  ;  and  they  are  bound  to 
concur  together  to  that  purpofe  ;  and  in  cafe  of  fuch 
concurrence,  every  one  is  not  bound  to  fatisty  for 
the  whole,  but  pro  rata  parte^  for  his  ftiare  •,  pro- 
vided they  do  among  them  make  full  fatisfadlion. 

3.  If  all  will  not  concur,  thofe  that  are  willing  are 
bound  among  them  to  make  reparation  for  the  inju- 
ry :  nay,  if  all  the  reft  rcfufe  to  join  with  thee  in  it, 
thou  art  bound  in  folidum  to  make  full  reparation  fo 
far  as  thou  art  able  -,  becaufe  every  one  was  guilty 
of  itit  whole  injury.  For  inftance,  if  four  men  con- 
fpirc  together  to  cheat  a  man,  or  to  rob  him,  any 
one  of  thefe,  if  the  reft  refufe,  is  bouad  to  mal^e  en- 

19  X  2  t^re 


The  nature  and  necejjity  of  rejikufton, 

tire  fatisfadion ;  yea,  though  he  was  only  ;:qrtaker 
in  the  benefit ;  becaufe,  as  I  faid  before,  he  is  guilty 
of  the  whole  injury. 

4.  If  the  injury  be  done  by  more,  who  do  une- 
qually concur  to  the  doing  of  it,  he  that  is  principal 
is  chiefly  and  principally  bound  to  make  fatisfadlion  : 
and  here  I  do  not  take  principal,  flriftly  in  the  fenfe 
of  the  law,  but  in  the  fenfe  of  equity  ;  not  for  him 
always  who  is  the  more  immediate  caufe  of  the  in- 
jury, but  for  him  who  was  the  greateft  caufe,  and  by 
whofe  influence  chiefly  it  was  procured  and  done : 
but  if  the  principal  will  not,  the  acceflfories  and  in- 
ftruments  are  bound,  at  leaft  for  their  fliare,  and  ac- 
cording to  the  proportion  of  the  hand  they  had  in  it. 
But  if  the  principal  do  fatisfy  in  the  name,  and  upon 
the  account  of  the  reft,  then  the  acceflx>5ies  are  free 
from  an  obligation  to  reftitution,  and  are  only  bound 
to  repentance. 

5.  If  the  injury  devolve  upon  another,  by  defend- 
ing as  a  burden  upon  the  eflate,  he  who  enjoys  the 
eftate  is  bound  to  make  fatisfa6lion.  And  when  in- 
juries do  thus  defcend  as  burdens  and  incumbrances 
opon  eftates,  and  when;  not,  the  civil  laws  of  the 
place  where  we  live  muft  determine :  but  then  where 
my  cafe  falls  within  the  compafs  of  the  law,  I  am 
bound  voluntarily  to  fatisfy  without  the  compulfion 
of  the  law.  For  inftance,  if  an  eftate  fall  to  me 
charged  with  a  debt,  which  hath  been  unjuftly  de- 
tained, I  am  bound  voluntarily  to  difcharge  the  debt, 
fo  foon  as  it  appears  to  me,  before  I  am  compell'd 
thereto  by  the  law. 

6.  As  for  perfonal  injuries  which  do  not  lye  as 
burdens  upon  the  eftate,  nor  do  by  the  law  ^dctVidL 
upon  the  fon  or  heir,  though  in  ftrid  juftice  a  man 
be  not  bound  to  make  compenfation  for  them,  for 

th§t 


Tthe  nature  ajtd  necejfity  of  reflitiition,^        -40 1 1 

that  would  be  endlefs,  ^  infinitum  in  lege  repudia-  S  E  R  M. 
/«r,  "  no  law  can  take  notice  of  that  which  is  infi- 
*'  nite  and  endlels  -,"  for  qu^  exitum  non  hahent  ha- 
hentur  pro  impoffthilibuSy  "  thofe  things  which  have 
**  no  end,  to  which  no  bounds  can  be  fet,  are  efleem- 
"  ed  among  things  impofTible,"  to  which  no  man 
can  be  obliged  :  but  though  in  flridt  juflice  the  heir 
be  not  bound  to  make  reparation,  for  the  perfonal 
injuries  of  him  whom  he  fucceeds  in  the  eftate,  yet 
in  many  cafes  it  is  equitable,  and  generous,  and  chrif- 
tian,  for  fuch  perfons  to  make  fome  kind  of  repara- 
tion for  palpable  and  notorious  injuries.  For  in- 
ftance,  if  I  be  heir  to  aii  eflate,  part  of  which  I  know 
certainly  was  injurioufly  gotten,  it  is  not  only  chrif- 
tian,  but  prudent,  to  make  fatisfa(5lion  in  the  cafe  to 
the  party  injured,  if  certainly  known ;  if  not,  to  give 
it  to  the  poor ;  for  by  this  means  I  may  take  out  the 
moth,  which  was  bred  by  injuftice  in  the  eftate,  and 
rub  off  the  ruft,  that  fticks  to  the  gold  and  filver, 
which  was  got  by  oppreflion  or  fraud,  and  fo  free 
the  remaining  part  of  the  eftate  from  that  fecret  and 
divine  Nemejis  which  attends  it  and  follows  it.  And 
for  the  fame  reafon,  it  is  very  noble  and  chriftian,  for 
the  fonand  heir  of  an  unjuft  father,  to  make  fome 
reparation  for  his  father's  injuries  by  reftitutron,  if 
the  thing  be  capable  of  it :  if  not,  by  doing  all  good 
offices  to  the  injured  perfons,  which  is  fome  kind  of 
compenfation.  And  in  this  cafe  the  obligation  is 
greater,  becaufe  by  this  means  a  man  does  not  only 
do  what  in  him  lies,  to  cut  off  the  curfe,  which  by 
his  father's  oppreftion  and  injuftice  is  intail'd  upon 
the  family  and  eftate  :  but  likewifc,  becaufe  a  fon 
ought  much  more  tobeconcern'd  for  his  father,  than 
any  other  perfon,  and  to  confult  tlie  honour  and  re- 
putation both  of  him  and  his  own  family  ;  and  the 

reparation 


4012         ^he  nature  and  necejfity  of  rejlitution. 

)  E  R  M.  reparation  which  the  Ton  makes,  is  in  {ov:\^  fort  the 
father's  a6l,  becaufe  he  fucceeds  him  and  comes  into 
his  {lead. 

Secondly,  As  to  the  perfons  to  whom  fatisfadtioa 
\%  to  be  made.  For  the  refolution  of  thofe  cafes 
which  may  fall  under  this  head,  I  ihall  lay  down 
thefe  propofitions. 

1 .  If  the  injured  perfon  can  be  certainly  known,  and 
be  alive  and  extant,the  fatisfadlion  is  to  be  made  to  him. 

2.  If  he  be  not  alive,  or  which  is  all  one,  not 
to  be  found  or  come  at,  fatisfa6lion  is  to  be  made 
to  his  nearefl  relations,  his  wife,  or  children,  or  bro- 
thers, or  other  neareft  kindred.  The  reafon  is,  be- 
caufe fatisfadlion  being  due,  and  I  having  no  right  to 
keep  that  which  I  have  injurioufly  gotten,  if  I  cannot 
reftore  it  to  the  party  himfelf,  I  ought  in  all  reafon 
to  place  it  there  where  I  may  moft  reafonably  pre- 
fume  the  party  injured  would  have  bellowed  his 
eftate,  and  this  part  of  it  amongft  the  reft,  had  he 
been  pofTeffed  of  it.  And  by  the  fame  reafon  that 
I  am  bound  thus  to  reftore  the  part  of  his  eftate 
which  I  have  injurioufly  taken  or  detained  from  him, 
I  am  likewife  obliged  to  give  fatisfadlion  to  the  fame 
perfon  for  any  other  injury  :  for  to  whomfoever  I 
would  pay  a  debt  due  to  one  that  is  deceafed,  to  the 
fame  perfon  I  ought  to  give  fatisfadlion  for  the  in- 
juries, by  which  a  debt  is,  though  not  form'ally,  yet 
virtually  contra6led. 

3.  If  the  party  injured  be  not  certainly  known,  or 
have-no  near  relations  known  to  me,  in  that  cafe  I 
think  it  very  advif ible  to  give  fo  much  to  the  poor, 
or  to  fome  charitable  ufe  \  or  if  the  party  injured  be 
npt  capable  of  proper  fatisfa<5lion,  as  fometimes  it  is 
a  community  and  body  of  men  that  you  have  injured, 
in  this  cafe  it  is  proper  to  repair  the  injuries  to  com- 

I  munities 


77;<?  nature  and  necejjity  trf  rejiitution,  4013 

Itiunities  or  bodies  of  men,  by  equivalent  good  offi- 
ces, or  by  fome  publick  good  work,  which  may  be 
of  common  benefit  and  advantage.  This  is  the  fifth 
thing  I  propofed  to  fpeak  to,  the  perfons  concern'd  in 
reftitution  ;  both  the  perfons  who  are  bound  to  make 
reftitution,  and  the  perfons  to  whom  it  is  to  be  made. 
Of  the  reft  hereafter. 


SERMON     CLXXr. 

The  nature  and  necejflity  of  reftitution. 

LUKE  xix.  8,  9. 

Ani  if  I  have  taken  any  thing  from  any  man  hy  falfe 
accufation^    I  reft  ore  him  fourfold.     And  Jesus 
faid  unto  him^  ^his  day  is  falvation  come  to  this 
houfe. 


I 


N  fpeaking  to  thefe  words,  I  propofed  to  confidcr,  S  E  R  M. 
Firft,  The  nature  of  this  duty  of  reftitution.     »^^^^f 
Secondly,  To  ftiew  the  neceffity  of  it.  The 

Thirdly,  To  perfuade  men  to  the  difcharee  of  it.  ^^^^"^ 

T  •  r     1  r       rL-       •  T   1  fcrmon  QTl 

In  treating  or  the  nature  of  reftitution,  I  have  jhis  text. 


confider'd, 
L  The  ad. 

II.  The  extent  of  it. 

III.  The  manner  how  it  is  to  be  perform'd, 

IV.  The  meafure  of  it. 

V.  The  perfons  who  arc  to  make  reftitution ;  and 
the  perfons  to  whom  reftitution  is  to  be  made.  I 
now  proceed  to  confider. 

VI.  The  time  when  reftitution  is  to  be  made.  In 
thefe  cafes  a  man  is  not  tied  up  to  an  inftant,  not 

juft 


4014  ^'^^  nature  and  necejjity  of  rejlitution, 

S  F  R  M.  juft  to  the.  prefent  time,  unlefs  the  cafe  be  fuch,  that 
^^ilL»  he  can  never  do  it,  if  he  do  not  do  it  then.  As  if  a 
man  lie  upon  his  death-bed  ^  that  is  a  cafe  that  ad- 
mits of  no  delay,  a  man  fhould  haften  reflitution,  as 
he  would  do  the  making  of  his  will,  and  the  difpofal 
of  his  eflate  •,  left  if  he  do  not  do  it  prefently,  he 
lofe  his  opportunity  of  doing  it  for  ever  :  but  ordi- 
narily, a  man  is  not  fo  ftridly  tied  up  to  moments, 
and  to  the  prefent  time.  It  is  fufEcient  that  a  man 
be  for  the  prefent  refolved  to  do  it,  fo  foon  as  m.oral- 
ly  he  can,  fo  foon  as  he  would  do  other  actions  of 
great  moment  and  concernment.  And  to  this  pur- 
pofe  the  text  gives  us  an  excellent  pattern  \  Zaccheus, 
the  fame  day  he  repented,  took  up  this  refoiution, 
and  to  oblige  himfelf  effedlually  to  put  it  in  execu- 
tion, he  publickly  declares  it,  and  before  all  the 
people  offers  to  make  reftitution  to  all  whom  he  had 
injured. 

Therefore  take  heed  of  all  unneceflary  delays  in 
thefe  matters  :  for  though  God  would  accept  of  a 
firm  and  fincere  refolution  in  this  cafe,  if  a  perfoit 
thus  refolved  fhould,  before  he  could  bring  his  refo- 
lution to  effe6b,  happen  to  be  cut  off  by  death,  or 
be  otherwife  rendered  incapable  of  doing  it  •,  I  fay, 
though  Gqd  would  accept  fuch  a  refolution  as  this, 
yet  he  will  not  interpret  that  to  be  a  fincere  refolution, 
which  a  man  is  negligent  to  put  in  pra6tice  :  for 
every  negled  of  putting  our  refolution  in  pradice, 
is  a  degree  of  quitting  and  altering  it  •,  and  he  who 
did  not  do  what  he  was  refolved  to  do,  when  he  had 
an  opportunity  and  abihty  of  doing  it,  is  juftly  prc- 
fumed  to  have  let  fall  his  refolution. 

Therefore  let  no  man  prefume  upon  his  good  in^^ 
tention  and  refolution  in  this  kind  ^  for  they  are  only 
i^ceptable  to  God,  fo  far  as  they  are  fincere  and  real  j 

and 


n'e  nature  and  hecejjity  of  reftiftitioif.         4^)  i  ^ 

land  they  are  only  fo  far  fmcere  and  real,  as  the  man  S  K  R  M. 
that  makes  them,  is  ready  to  put  them  in  execution, 
fo  foon  as  morally  he  can.  And  if  thou  carelefly 
and  fupinely  trifle  away  thy  opportunities  in  this 
kind,  God  may  likewife  deprive  thee  of  an  oppor- 
tunity for  ever.  For  all  the  while  thou  wilfully  ne- 
gledeft  to  make  reftitution,  thou  art  guilty  of  the 
injury  ;  and  there  are  hardly  two  fins  that  cry  loud- 
er to  God  for  a  quick  and  fpeedy  revenge,  than  in- 
juftice  and  opprefTion,  deceit  and  fraud.  God  many 
times  takes  fuch  caufes  into  his  more  immediate  cog- 
nizancc^  i  ThefT.  iv.  6.  "  Let  no  man  deceive  or 
**  go  beyond  his  brother  in  any  thing  :  for  God  is 
"  the  avenger  of  fuch."  And  David  tells  us,  that 
God  in  a  pecuhar  manner  "  abhors  the  blood-thirfty 
"  and  deceitful  man  •,"  and  threatens  that  "  he 
**  fhall  not  live  out  half  his  days."  And  God  by 
the  prophet,  Mai.  iii.  5.  tells  us,  that  "  He  will 
*'  be  a  fwift  witnefs  againft  the  opprefTors."  And 
if  God  be  fo  fwift  to  take  vengeance  upon  fuch  per- 
fens,  furely  then  they  are  concerned  to  be  very  quick 
and  fpeedy  in  making  fatisfadlion  for  their  injuries 
and  opprefTions,  left  divine  vengeance  prevent  them, 
and  inftead  of  making  reparation  to  men,  they  ht 
called  upon  to  make  fatisfaclion  to  the  jufl:ice  of  God  % 
and  you  know  who  hath  faid  it,  that  "  it  is  a  kar- 
**  ful  thing  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living  God.'* 

You  therefore  that  have  hitherto  negle^fkd  this 
duty,  delay  it  no  longer  ;  by  all  means  difcharge 
your  confciences  of  this  burden,beforc  you  come  to  lye 
upon  a  death-bed.  Then  the  confciences  of  the 
■worft  of  men  begin  to  work,  like  a  ftomachoppref- 
fed  and  furcharged  with  meat  -,  and  then  they  arc 
"willing  for  their  cafe  to  vomit  upthofc  eftates,  which 
they  have  devoured  by  fraud  and  injuilicc  i  then 

Vol.  IX.  19  Y  they 

5 


40 1 6  TX^  nature  and  necejjity  of  rejlitution, 

?Tv^*  ^^^y  begin  toconfider  the  difficulty  of  being  faved, 
and  to  fear  that  it  will  be  impolTible  for  them  ever 
*'  to  enter  in  at  the  ftrait  gate,"  thus  laden  with  the 
fpoils  of  violence  and  deceit  ;  even  thofe  that  have 
the  hardeft  and  moft  feared  confciences,  will  be 
touched  with  the  fenfe  of  fuch  great  fins  at  fuch  a 
time  :  but  do  not  thou  defer  this  work  to  that  time, 
for  thefe  two  reafons. 

1.  Becaufe  it  cannot  be  fo  acceptable  to  God,  to 
make  reftitution  at  fuch  a  time,  as  when  thou  art  in 
health  and  in  hopes  of  longer  life.  To  give  a  man 
his  own,  when  thou  canfl  enjoy  it  and  ufe  it  no  long- 
er, this  is  next  to  detaining  of  it. 

2.  Becaufe  in  all  probability  the  reftitution  which 
is  then  made  will  not  prove  fo  efFedlual.  What  thou 
doft  thyfelf,  that  thou  art  fure  is  done  :  but  what 
thou  leaveft  to  be  done  by  thy  executors,  and  charg- 
cft  upon  them,  thou  art  not  fure  will  be  done  ;  ten 
to  one  but  if  they  can  find  out  any  trick  and  evafion 
in  law,  either  to  delay  or  avoid  the  doing  of  it,  it 
fhall  either  never  be  done,  or  very  flowly.  This  is 
che  fixth  thing,  the  time  when  reftitution  is  to  be  made. 

But  before  I  leave  this  head,  there  is  one  cafe  very 
proper  to  be  confidered,  v/hich  relates  to  this  circum- 
ftance  of  tim,e,  and  that  is  concerning  injuries  of  a 
very  ancient  date  \  that  is,  how  far  this  duty  of  re- 
ftitution is  to  look  backward,  and  whether  it  doth 
not  expire  by  tra6l  of  time  ?  For  anfwer  to  this,  I 
Ihall  lay  down  thefe  propofitions. 

I.  At  what  diftance  of  timefoever  the  law  would 
in  the  cafe. make  reparation  and  give  fatisfadion,  wc 
are  undoubtedly  bound  in  confcience  voluntarily  to 
give  it.  I  deliver  this  generally  *,  becaufe,  though 
it  be  pofTible  fome  civil  laws  may  be  in  fome  cafes 
iinrealbnable  in  this  matter,  yet  they  arc  our  beft  rule 
^  and 


i:he  nature  and  nccejjity  of  r  eft  i  tut  ion.  4017 

and  guide  ;  and  fpeaking  generally  and  for  the  mod  S  E  R  M. 
part,  they  are  as  equitable  as  the  rcafon  of  man  could  ^^^''^^• 
dcvife.  Not  that  we  are  to  tie  ourfclves  ftriclly  to 
the  law,  fo  as  not  to  go  farther,  if  reafon  and  equity 
require  ;  for,  as  Seneca  fays,  Farum  eft  ad  legem 
bonum  ejfcy  "  it  is  no  great  argument  of  goodnefs, 
*'  to  be  ju ft  as  good  as  the  law  requires.*'  There- 
fore I  think  it  will  very  well  become  a  good  man, 
in  many  cafes,  rather  to  be  better  than  the  law,  than 
to  keep  ftridlly  to  it. 

2.  In  cafes  where  the  law  hath  not  determined  the 
time,  we  may  do  well  to  obfcrve  a  proportion  to 
what  the  law  hath  determined  in  other  cafes,  whiclt 
come  neareft  our  own  cafe. 

3,  When  the  injury  is  fo  old,  that  the  right  which 
the  injured  perfon  had  to  reparation  is  reafonably  pre- 
fumed  to  be  quitted  and  forfaken,  then  the  obliga- 
tion to  fatisfa6lion  ceafeth  and  expires.  The  reafon 
is  plain,  becaufe  every  man  may  recede  from  his 
own  right,  and  give  it  up  to  another  •,  and  where  a 
man  may  reafonably  be  prefumed  to  have  parted  with 
his  right  to  another,  the  obligation  to  reftirution 
ceafeth,  and  the  right  of  claiming  it.  Now  when  a 
thing  begins,  haheri  pro  dereli5io^  that  is,  when  a 
right  may  reafonably  be  prefumed  to  be  quitted  and 
forfaken,  cannot  in  general  be  determined  :  but  this 
muft  be  eftimated  according  to  the  importance  of  the 
right  and  thing  in  controverfy,  as  whether  it  be  more 
or  lefs  confiderable  -,  and  according  to  the  reafon 
and  determination  of  laws  about  things  of  this  na- 
ture. To  illuftratc  this  rule  by  inllances.  The 
Saxons,  Danes,  and  Normans,  did  at  feveral  times 
invade  and  conquer  this  nation,  and  conquered  it  we 
will  fuppofe  unjuftly,  and  confcquently  did  hold  and 
poUtfs  that  which  truly  belonged  to  others,  contrary 

19  Y  2  to 


40 1  8  ^he  nature  and  necejjity  of  rejlitution, 

S  R  R  M.  to  right ;  and  feveral  of  the  pofterity  of  each  of 
thefe  do  probably  to  this  day  hold  what  was  then 
injuriouily  gotten  •,  I  iay,  in  this  cafe,  the  obliga- 
tion to  fatisfadtion   and  reftitution  is  long  fince  ex- 
pired, and  the  original  title,  which  thofe  who  were  dif- 
poircfifed  had,  is  reafonably  prefumed  tobelong  fincc 
quitted  and  forfaken  ;  and  that  for  very  wife  reafons 
\n  law  and  government  j  becaufe  it  would  confound 
and  unfettle  all  eftaces,  if  every  thing,  the  original 
title  whereof  is  naught,  were  to  be  reftored  ;  and  it 
is  but  equal  to  prefume,  that  all  mankind  are  fo  rea- 
fonable,  as  to  quit  their  right  in  fuch  cafes,  rather 
than  to  caufe  endlefs  difturbances,  and  to  have  the 
guilt   of  injuftice  everlaflingly  perpetuated.     And 
though  it  be  a  rule  in  civil  law,  that  vitiofmt  intio^ 
tra^tu  temporis  non  convalefcit^  "  a  title  originally 
"  bad  can  never  by  time  be  made  juft  *,'*  it  is  only 
true  thus  far,  that  time  in  itfelf  doth  not  alter  the 
nature  of  things  :  but  confidermg  the  neceflities  of 
the  world,  and  the  infinite  difficulties  of  retrieving 
an  ancient  right,  and  the  inconvenlencies  and  diftur- 
bances that  would  thereby  redound  to  human  fociety, 
it  is  better  that  an  injury  (hould  be  perpetuated,  than 
that  a  great  inconvenrency  fhould  come  by  endea- 
vouring to  redrefs  it  \  fo  that  although  confidering  a 
thing  fimply  in  itfelf,  an  injury  is  fo  far  from  being 
lefTened  or  nulled  by  tra6t  of  time,  thai  it  is  increaf- 
ed,  and  the  longer  it  continues,  the  greater  it  is ; 
yet  by  accident,  and  in  compliance  with  the  necefli- 
ty  of  things,  length  of  time  may  give  a  right  to  that 
which  was  at  firft  injuriouily  polTefs'd.     Judg.  xi. 
26.  Thus  Jephthah  reafons  with  the  king  of  Am- 
mon,  who  had  made  war  for  recovery  of  an  ancient 
fight,  as  he  fuppofed.  And  though  the  inftances  I  have 
given  of  the  unjuft  conqueft  of  a  nation  be  great  and 

publick  i 


^he  nature  and  necejfity  of  reftltutton,         40 1 9 

publick  ;  yet  the  fame  is  to  be  determined  proper-  S  E  R  M. 
tionably  in  lefs  and  particular  cafes.  And  tlius  I  have  ^^^^^' 
done  with  the  fixth  thing. 

VII.  And  laftly,  as  to  the  order  of  reftitution. 
When  we  have  injured  a  great  many,  and  are  not 
able  to  make  reftitution  to  all  at  once,  our  beft  pru- 
dence and  difcretion  muft  govern  us  herein.  Becaufc 
no  certain  rule  can  be  given,  which  will  reach  all 
cafes,  I  will  only  fay  this  in  general,  that  it  is  rea- 
fonable  firft  to  make  reparation  for  the  oldeft  and 
greateft  injuries;  and  ceteris  paribus^  if  all  other 
confidcrations  be  equal,  to  confider  thofe  firft  who 
are  moft  neccftitous,  and  if  there  be  any  other  fpe- 
cial  reafon  and  obligation  arifing  from  the  nature 
of  the  injury,  or  the  circumftances  of  the  perfon 
injured,  to  have  regard  to  them.     I  come  now  in  the 

Second  place,  to  confirm  the  truth  of  the  propo- 
fition,  that  to  make  reftitution  and  fatisfadion  to 
thofe  whom  we  have  injured,  is  a  proper  and  ne- 
cefTary  fruit  of  a  true  repentance.  And  this  will  ap- 
pear, if  we  confider  thefe  two  things. 

I.  Our  obligation  to  this  duty. 

II.  The  nature  of  repentance. 
I.  Our  obligation  to  this  duty.     Upon  the  fame 

account  that  we  are  obliged  to  repentance,  we  are 
obliged  to  reftitution ;  and  both  thefe  obligations 
arife  from  natural  equity  and  juftice.  All  fin  is  an 
injury  done  ;  and  though  repentance  be  not  ftricflly 
fatisfadion,  yet  it  is  the  beft  we  can  make  ;  and  he 
is  unjuft,  whq  having  done  an  injury,  does  not 
make  the  beft  reparation  he  can.  But  now  there  arc 
fome  fins,  in  which,  befides  the  injury  that  is  done 
to  God  by  them,  upon  the  general  account,  as  tliey 
are  fins  and  violations  of  his  laws,  there  is  likewife  a 
particular  injury  done  to  men  \  and  fuch  .ire  all  thofe, 

the 


402  0         ^he  nature  and  necejjity  of  rejlitution^ 

*CLxxL^*  ^^^  ^^^^  whereof  redounds  to  the  prejudice  of  other 
men  :  fuch  are  fraud  and  opprciTion,  and  all  other 
fins  whereby  others  are  injured.     So  that  in  thefc 
kinds  of  fins,  there  are  two  things  confiderable,  the 
irregularity  and  vitioufnefs  of  the  aft,  and  the  evil 
effeds  of  it  upon  other  men  :  the  former  refpeds 
the  law,  and  calls  for  forrow  and  repentance  for  our 
violation  of  it ;  the  latter  refpedls  thepcrfon  thatisin- 
jufiid,  and  calls  for  fatisfadion  and  reflitution.  So  that 
our  obligation  to  reflitution  is  founded  in  the  immu» 
table  and  indifpenfable  law  of  nature,  which  is  "to 
"  do  that  to  another,  which  we  would  have  another 
*'  do  to  us."     We  would  have  no  man  be  injuri- 
ous to  us,  or  if  he  hath  been  fo,  we  would  have 
him  make  fatisfadbion  and  reparation  to  us  of  the  in- 
jury he  hath  done  ;  and  we  take  it  grievoufly  from 
him,  if  he  do  not.     Now  nothing  is  more  jufl  and 
equitable,  than  that  we  fhould  do  that  to  others, 
which  we  in  like  cafe  would  expedl  from  them  :  for 
the  very  fame  obHgation  that  lyes  upon  others  towards 
us,  does  lye  upon  us  in  regard  to  others. 

II.  This  will  yet  further  appear,  if  we  confider 
the  nature  of  repentance,  which  is  to  be  forry  for 
what  we  have  done,  and  not  to  do  the  hke  for  the 
future.  Now  if  thou  be  forry  for  what  thou  haft 
done,  thou  wifheft  with  all  thy  heart  thou  hadft  not 
done  it ;  and  if  thou  doft  fo,  thou  wilt  undo,  as 
much  as  in  thee  lyeth,  what  thou  haft  done.  Now 
the  beft  way  to  undo  an  injury,  is  to  make  reparation 
for  it ;  and  till  we  do  this,  we  continue  in  the  fin. 
For  if  it  was  a  fin,  to  do  the  injury  at  firft,  it  is  the 
fame  continued,  not  to  make  fatisfadlion  \  and  we 
do  not  ceafe  to  commit  the  fin,  fo  long  as  we  detain 
that  which  is  another's  right.  Nothing  but  reftitu- 
tisn  can  ftop  the  progrefs  of  fin :  for  if  it  be  a  fin  to 

take 


l!he  7iature  and  necejjity  of  rejlitutioft.         4021 

tabe  that  which  is  another  man's  from  him  by  fraud  S  K  R  M^ 
Qf  violence,  it  is  the  fame  continued  and  virtually 
repeated,  to  detain  and  keep  it  from  him  ;  and  no- 
thing more  contrary  to  repentance,  than  to  continue 
in  the  fin  thou  pretended  to  repent  of.  For  how 
art  thou  forry  for  doing  of  it,  if  thou  continued  tci 
do  it,  if  thou  wilt  go  on  to  do  it  and  do  it  again  ? 
How  doft  thou  hate  thy  fin,  if  thou  enjoy  the  be- 
nefit and  reap  the  advantage  of  it  ?  If  thou  doed  this, 
it  is  an  argument  thou  loved  thy  fin  dill  :  for  thou 
didd  never  love  it  for  itfelf,  but  for  the  profit  of  it  9 
and  fo  long  as  thou  retained  that,  thou  cand  not  bd 
quit  of  the  fin.  Thou  holded  fad  thy  fin  fo  long  as 
thou  refufed  to  make  fatisfa6lion  for  it  •,  and  repen- 
tance without  ^editution  differs  as  much  from  true 
repentance,  as  continuance  in  fin  does  from  the  for- 
saking of  it.  Si  res  aliena  non  redditiir^  non  agitur 
fcenitentia^  Jed  fingitur  ;  fo  "Sit,  Augudine  "  If  we 
*'  do  not  redore  that  which  we  have  injurioufiy  dc- 
*'  tained  from  another,  our  repentance  is  not  real, 
*'  but  feigned  and  hypocritical,"  and  will  not  be 
cffcdlual  to  the  obtaining  of  our  pardon.  It  is  a 
very  common,  but  a  true  and  terrible  faying,  Non. 
dimittitur peccatim^niji  rejtituatur  ahlatum,  "  no  re- 
*' miffion  without  reditution.*'  If  we  will  inherit  the 
profit  and  advantage  of  fin,  we  cannot  think  it  un- 
reafonable  or  unjud  that  we  fliould  inherit  the  pu-' 
nifliment  of  it. 

"When  the  fcripture  fpeaks  of  repentance,  it  fre- 
quently mentions  reditu tion  as  a  proper  fruit  and  ef- 
fe<5l  of  it,  and  as  a  necefiTary  and  indifpenfable  condi- 
tion of  pardon  and  life.  Ezek.  xxxiii.  14,  15,  16. 
•*  Again,  when  I  fay  unto  the  wicked,  thou  flK^It 
•*  furely  die  :  if  he  turn  from  his  fin,  and  do  that 
][^  which  is  lawful  and  right  j  if  the  wicked  rcdorc 

"  the 


4022  T^be  nature  and  necejjity  of  reJlitutioHi 

S  E  R  M.  •  the  pledge,  give  again  that  he  hath  robbed,"  &c^ 
Lxxi.    ^^  .£.  ^^  j^^^  ^^.^^  when  I  denounce  death  and  de- 

ftru6lion  to  the  wicked,  there  is  but  this  one  way  to 
efcape  it,  and  that  is  by  repentance  ;  but  then  take 
notice,  what  a  repentance  it  is,  that  will  avail  to  this 
end  \  it  is  not  a  bewailing  ourfelves,  and  lamenting 
over  our  fins,  but  a  forfaking  of  them  and  returning 
to  our  duty  ;  "  If  we  turn  from  our  fin,  and  do  that 
*'  which  is  lawful  and  right."  For  inftance,  if  he 
have  been  guilty  of  injuftice  and  oppreflion ;  if  he 
leave  his  courfe^  and  deal  juftly  and  righteoufly 
with  his  neighbour,  and  not  only  fo,  but  he  alfo 
make  reftitution  for  the  injury  he  hath  done,  and  re- 
(lore  what  he  hath  unjuftly  detained  and  taken  away  j 
if  he  reftore  the  pledge,  and  give  again  that  he  hath 
robbed,'*  and  do  no  injuftice  for  the  futiire,  but 
walk  in  the  ftatutes  of  life  without  committing 
iniquity;'*  upon  thefe  terms  and  no  other  "  he 
*'  Ihall  live,  he  Ihall  not  die.'*  Yea  the  very  light 
of  nature  could  fuggeft  thus  much  to  the  people  of 
Nineveh,  that  there  was  no  hope,  without  this  fruit 
of  repentance,  of  appcafing  God's  wrath.  There- 
fore the  king  and  the  princes,  after  all  the  external 
folemnity  of  fafting,  and  fackcloth,  and  crying 
mightily,  they  decree  that  "  every  one  fhould  turn 
*'  from  the  evil  of  his  ways,  and  from  the  violence 
'^  that  was  in  their  hands,"  ut  rap'ina  mauus  vacue- 
faciat^  6?  rapta  reftituat^  fine  quo  non  eft  vera  pcsni^ 
tentia  \  fo  Grot,  upon  the  place,  "  that  he  empty 
"  his  hands  of  thefpoils  of  rapine  and  opprefTion," 
that  is,  "  that  he  make  reftitution,  without  which 
*' there  can  be  no  repentance :"  and  upon  their  doing 
this,  it  is  faid,  that  "  God  fpared  them,  v.  lo. 
*'  and  God  faw  their  works,  that  they  turned  from 
"  their  evil  ways.'*     It  is  not  faid,  that  he  faw  their 

fafrmg 


cc 


^he  nature  wid  neccj]ity  of  refiitution,         402  ? 
feftino;  and  fackcloth,  but  he  faw  their  works,  the  real  S  E  R  M. 

.  CLXXI. 

fruits  and  effedls  of  their  repentance  ;  and  upon  this 
it  was  that  "  God  repented  of  the  evil  he  laid  he 
"  would  do  to  them,  and  he  did  it  not."  And  elfe- 
where  we  find,  that  God  fpeaks  with  great  indignati- 
on of  the  moft  folemn  repentance,  which  is  not  ac- 
companied with  this  fruit,  Ifa.  Iviii.  3,  4,  5,  6.  The 
people  tell  God  how  "  they  had  faded  and  affliAed  their 
*'  foul,  and  made  their  voice  to  be  heard  on  high :" 
but  God  defpifeth  all  this,  becaufe  it  was  not  ac- 
companied with  the  fruit  of  repentance,  "  it  is  fuch 
"  a  fafl:  as  I  have  chofen,' '  &c.  There  is  fo  much  of  na- 
tural juftice  and  equity  in  reflitution,  and  it  is  fo  pro- 
per a  fruit  of  repentance,  that  as  Grotius  obferves,  it 
is  not  only  the  dodrine  of  the  Jews  and  Chriflians, 
but  of  Heathens  and  Mahometans,  that  the  repent- 
ance which  doth  not  produce  this  fruit  is  feigned,  and 
will  never  avail  with  God  for  pardon  and  mercy. 
Thus  much  for  confirmation  of  this  dodlrine. 

The  third  and  lad  thing  I  propofed  was  to  per- 
fuade  to  the  pradice  of  this  duty  -,  and  this  may  ferve 
by  way  of  application  of  the  dodlrine  of  reflitution. 
The  ufe  we  fhall  make  of  it  is, 

Firft,  To  perfuade  men  to  the  pradice  of  this 
difficult  duty.  I  doubt  not  but  the  arguments  I  have 
ufed  are  fufficient  to  convince  us  of  the  equity  and 
necefTity  of  reflitution  •,  but  whj^t  arguments  fliall  I 
ufe  to  perfuade  to  the  pradice  and  exercife  of  it  ? 
When  we  prefs  men  to  their  duty,  though  we"  have 
fome  advantages  on  our  fide,  yet  we  have  alfo  great 
difadvantages.  We  have  this  advantage,  that  we 
have  the  reafon  and  confciences  of  men  on  our  fide  : 
but  then  we  have  this  difadvantage,  that  we  have  to 
contend  either  with  the  lufls  or  intcrefls  of"  men,  or 
both  :  now  that  thefe  are  ufually  more  powerful,  is 

Vol.  IX.  19  Z  evident, 

5 


4024        ^^^  nature  and  necejjtfy  of  refiitution, 

S  R  R  M.  evident,  in  that  the  lufts  and  interefls  of  men  do  fq 
cLxxi.  fj-^,q^£j^^.|y  \31gfs  2iT^^  draw  thena  t©do  things  contrary 

to  reafon  and  confcience.  When  we  perfuade  men 
to  be  juft,  and  to  make  reftitution  to  thoie  whom 
they  have  injured,  it  is  true  we  have  not  to  contend 
with  the  lufts  of  men,  with  any  corrupt  and  vicious 
incUnation  of  nature.  There  are  fomc  fins  that  have 
their  rife  from  mens  natural  tempers,  as  palTion  and 
lufl,  and  thofe  fenfual  vices  that  abound  in  the  world  : 
but  there's  nothing  in  any  man's  natural  temper  and 
difpofition  that  inclines  him  to  be  unjuft,  no  man's 
complexion  doth  particularly  difpofe  him  to  lie  or 
i  fteal,  to  defraud  his  neighbour,  or  detain  his  right 
I  from  him  -,  it  is  only  the  interefts  of  men  that  prompt 
them  to  thefe  things  ^  and  they  are  upon  this  account 
the  more  inexcufable,  becaufe  no  man  is  inclined  to 
thefe  fins  from  particular  temper  and  conftitution ; 
fo  that  an  unjuft  man  is  in  ordinary  cafes  and  circum- 
ftances  a  greater  fmner,  than  a  drunkard  or  a  luftful 
man,  becaufe  no  man  can  pretend  to  be  hurried  a- 
way  by  the  ftrong  propenfion  and  inclination  of  his 
nature,  to  cheat  his  brother  -,  but  although  when  we 
perfuade  men  to  be  juft,  we  have  not  the  lufts  of  men 
to  contend  withal,  yet  we  have  another  powerful  ad- 
verfary,  and  that  is  the  interefts  of  men,which  is  one  of 
the  chief  rulers  and  governors  of  this  world  •,  fo  that 
when  we  prefs  men  to  reftitution,  we  touch  them  in 
their  intereft,  which  is  a  very  touchy  and  tender 
thing  \  when  we  tell  them  that  without  reftitution  np 
man  can  repent  and  be  faved,  they  think  this  to  be  a 
very  hard  faying,  and  they  know  not  how  to  bear  it. 
But  certainly  it  hath  all  the  reafon  and  equity  in  the 
world  on  it's  fide.  If  it  be  fo  hard  for  them  to  re- 
ftorc  that  which  is  another  man's,  is  it  not  much 
harder  for  hini  whom  thou  haft  injured,  to  lofe  that 

which 


^*he  natw^e  and  fiecejjity  of  rejlitution,         402  r 

•  ti^hich  is  his  own  ?  Make  it  thine  own  cafe  -,  wouldft  S  F.  R  \t. 
thou  not  think  it  much  harder  to  have  thy  right  de- 
tained from  thee  by  another,  than  for  another  to  part 
with  that  which  is  not  his  own  ? 

But  I  am  fenfible  how  httle  it  is,  that  reafon  will 
fway  with  men  againft  their  intereft  ;  therefore  the 
beft  argument  that  I  can  ufe  will  be  to  fatisfy  men, 
that  upon  a  true  and  jUft  account,  it  is  not  fo  much 
their  interefl,  to  retain  what  they  have  unjuftly  got, 
as  to  make  reftitution.  And  this  I  fliall  do  by  fhew- 
ing  men,  that  to  make  reftitution  is  their  true  intereft, 
both  in  refped  of  themfelves,  and  of  their  pofterity. 

I.  In  refped  to  themfelves.  It  is  better  both  in 
refpedl  of  our  prefent  condition  in  this  world,  and  of 
our  future  ft  ate. 

I.  In  refped  of  our  prefent  condition  in  this  worlds 
and  that  both  in  refpeA  of  our  outward  eftate,  and 
our  inward  peace  and  tranquillity. 

( I . )  In  refped  of  our  outward  eftate.  If  we  have 
any  belief  of  the  providence  of  God^  that  his  blef- 
fing  can  profper  an  eftate,  and  his  curfe  confume  it 
and  make  it  moulder  away,  we  cannot  but  judge  it 
highly  our  intereft  to  clear  our  cftates  of  injuftice  by 
reftitution  ♦,  and  by  this  means  to  free  them  from 
God's  curfe.  For  if  any  of  our  eftate  be  unjuftly 
gotten,  it  is  enough  to  draw  down  God's  curfe  upon 
all  that  we  have  -,  it  is  like  a  moth  in  our  eftate^ 
which  will  infenfibly  confume  it  •,  it  is  like  a  fccret 
poifon,  which  will  oiffufeitfelf  through  the  whole; 
like  a  little  land  in  capite^  which  brings  the  whole 
eftate  into  wardftiip. 

Hear  fiow  God  threatens  to  blaft  eftates  unjuftly 
gotten,  Job  XX.  12,  &c.  concluding  with  thefe  ^ovd%y 
"  this  is  the  portion  of  a  wicked  m:\n,"  that  is,  of  an 
uniuft  man.     Jer.  xvii.  11.  ''  As  a  partridge  fitteth 

19  Z  2  ''  ^ 


CLXXI. 


T'he  nature  and  necejjity  of  rejlitutton, 

on  eggs,  and  hatcheth  them  not,  fo  he  that  getteth 
riches,  and  not  by  right,  Ihall  leave  them  in  the 
midft  of  his  days,  and  at  his  end  fhall  be  a  fool." 
Men  many  times  Hve  to  fee  the  folly  of  their  inju  ft  ice 
and  oppreflion,  and  their  eftates  wither  away  before 
their  eyes  ;  and  by  the  juft  revenge  of  God  they  are 
deprived  of  them  in  the  midft  of  their  days.  So 
that  the  beft  way  to  fix  an  eftate,  and  to  fecure  it  to 
oiirfclves,  is  by  reftitiition  to  free  it  from  God's 
curfe  •>  and  when  we  have  done  that,  how  much  fo- 
ever  we  may  diminilli  onr  eftate  by  it,  v/e  may  look 
upon  purfelves  as  having  a  better  eftate  than  we  had  •, 
better,  becaufe  v/e  have  God's  blefTing  with  that 
which  remains.  If  we  believe  the  bible,  we  cannot 
doubt  of  this.  The  Spirit  of  God  tells  us  this  from^ 
the  obfervation  of  the  wifeft  men,  Pfal.  xxxvii.  i6. 
*'  A  little  that  a  righteous  man  hath,  is  better  than  the 
*'  riches  of  many  wicked."  Prov.  xvi.  8.  "Better 
"  is  a  little  with  righteoufnefs,  than  great  revenues 
"  without  right." 

(2.)  In  refpe(5l  of  inward  peace  and  tranquillity,  it 
is  highly  our  intereft  to  make  reftitution.  No  man 
can  enjoy  an  eftate,  that  does  not  enjoy  himfelf ; 
and  nothing  puts  a  man  more  out  of  the  pofleflion  of 
liimfclf,  than  an  unquiet  confcience  ;  and  there  are 
no  kind  of  fins  lye  heavier  upon  a  man's  confcience, 
than  thofe  of  injuftice  \  becaufe  they  are  committed 
againft  the  cleareft  natural  light,  and  there  is  the 
leaft  natural  temptation  to  them.  They  have  thefe 
two  great  aggravations,  that  they  are  fins  moft 
againft  knowledge,  and  have  moft  of  will  m  them. 
There  needs  no  revelation  to  convince  men  of  fins  of 
injuftice  and  opprefiion  \  every  man  hath  thofe  prin- 
ciples born  with  him,  which  will  fufhciently  acquaint 
him,  that  he  ought  not  to  be  injurious  to  another. 

There 


^he  nature  and  necejjify  af  rejlitidlon,         4027 
There  is  nothino;  that  relates  to  our  duty,  that  a  man  ^  E  R  M. 

CLXXl 

can  know  with  greater  certainty  than  this,  that  in- 
juftice  is  a  fin.  And  as  it  is  a  fin  mod  againft  know- 
ledge, fo  it  hath  mod  of  will  in  it.  Men  are  hurried 
away  to  other  fins  by  the  ftrong  and  violent  propen- 
fions  of  their  nature  :  but  no  man  is  inclined  by  his 
temper  and  conflitution,  to  fraud  and  oppreflion  ; 
and  the  lefs  there  is  of  nature  in  any  fin,  there  is  the 
lefs  of  neceflity,  and  confcquently  it  is  the  more  vo- 
luntary. Now  the  greater  the  aggravations  of  any 
fin  are,  the  greater  is  the  guilt ;  and  the  greater  the 
guilt  is,  the  more  unquiet  our  confciences  will  be  ; 
fo  that  if  thou  have  any  regard  to  the  interefl  of  thine 
own  peace,  if  that  be  confiderable  to  thee,  which  to 
wife  men  is  the  mofl  valuable  thing  in  the  world,  do 
not  for  a  little  wealth  continue  in  thofe  fins,  which 
will  create  perpetual  diflurbance  to  thee,  and  imbit- 
ter  all  the  pleafures  of  thy  life.  Hear  how  Job  dc- 
fcribes  the  condition  of  the  wicked  oppreflbrs  in  the 
place  before  cited,  Job  xx.  12,  &c.  "  He  fliall  not 
*'  rejoice  in  them,  becaufe  he  hath  opprefled,  becaufe 
he  hath  violently  taken  away  a  houfe  which  he 
builded  not,  furely  he  fhall  not  feel  quietnefs  in  his 
belly  :"  that  is,  he  fhali  have  no  inward  peace  and 
contentment  in  the  midil  of  all  his  outward  enjoy- 
ments i  but  his  ill-gotten  eftate  will  work  in  his  con- 
fcience,  and  gripe  him,  as  if  a  man  had  taken  dowri 
poifon  into  his  belly. 

2.  But  chiefly,  in  refpedl  of  our  future  eftate  in 
another  world,  it  is  every  man's  intereft  to  make  re- 
ftitution.  Without  repentance  we  are  ruined  for 
ever,  and  without  reflitution  no  repentance.  "  No 
"  unrighteous  man  hath  any  inheritance  in  theking- 
*'  dom  of  Christ."  If  thou  continue  in  thy  fraud 
and  oppreflion,  and  carry  thcfe  fins  with  thee  mto 

another 


4028  "The  nature  and  7ieceffity  of  reflitutton, 

S  E  R  M.  another  world,  they  will  hang  as  a  milftonc  about 
thy  neck,  and  fink  thee  into  eternal  ruin.     He  that 
wrongs  his  brother  hates  him,  and  "  he  that  hatcth  his 
*'  brother  is  a  murderer,  and  ye  know  that  no-mur- 
*'  derer  hath  eternal  hfe  abiding  in  him,"  i  John  iii. 
15.     Rom.  i.  18.  "  The  wrath  of  God  is  revealed 
*'  from  heaven,  againll  all  ungodlinefs  and  unrigh- 
*^  teoufnefs  of  men."     So  that  if  it  be  mens  intereft 
to  efcape  the  wrath  of  God,  it  concerns  us  to  make 
reparation  for  thofe  injuries  which  will  expofe  us  to 
it.     That  is  a  dreadful  tf^x^  Jam.  v.  i,  2,  3,  4.  "  Go 
to  now  ye  rich  men,  weep  and  howl  for  your  mi- 
feries  that  fhall  come  upon  you.     Your  riches  arc 
corrupted,  and  your  gauments  moth-eaten :  your 
gold  and  filver  is  cankered,  and  the  ruft  of  them 
fhall  be  a  witnefs  againil  you,  and  ihall  eat  your 
flefh  as  it  were  fire :  ye  have  heaped  treafure  to- 
gether for  the  laft  days.     Behold!  the  hire  of  the 
labourers  which  have  reaped  down  your  fields, 
which  is  of  you  kept  back  by  fraud,  crieth  ;  and 
the  cries  of  them  which  have  reaped,  are  entered 
into  the  ears  of  the  Lord  of  Sabaoth."     Do  not 
by  "  detaining  the  treafures  of  wickednefs,  treafure 
**  up  to  yourfelves  Vv^rath  againfl  the  day  of  wrath  :'• 
do  not  make  yourfelves  "  miferable  for  ever,"  that 
you  may  be  "  rich  for  a  httle  while  :"  do  not  for  a 
little"  filver  and  gold,"  forfeit"  the  eternal  inhe- 
*'  ritance,"  which  "  was  not  purchafed  with  corrup- 
*'  tible  things,  but  with  the  precious  blood  of  the 
*'  Son  of  God  :"  And  if  this  confideration,  which 
is  the  weightieft  in  the  world,  will  not  prevail  with 
men,  I  can  only  fay  with  the  angel.  Rev.  xxii.  11. 
*'  He  that  is  unjufl,  let  him  be  unjuft  ftill,"  let  him 
continue  in  his  injuftice  at  his  peril,  and  remember 
•what  is  added  at  the  12th  verfe,  '^  Behold  !  I  come 
i  "  quickly 


<C 

<c 
cc 
cc 

(C 

<c 


/ 


7he  nature  and  neceffity  of  rejlitution.  4029 

"  quickly,  and  my  reward  is  with  me,  to  give  to  S  F,  R  M. 
"'  every  man  according  as  his  work  fhall  be."  clxxi. 

II.  In  reiped:  of  our  chikiren  and  pofterity,  it  is 
greatly  our  intereft  to  make  rcftitution.  God  many 
times  fuifers  an  eftate  got  by  oppreflion  to  profper 
for  a  little  while :  but  there  is  a  curfc  attends  it,  which 
defcends  upon  the  eftate  like  an  incumbrance  •,  and 
parents  many  times  when  they  think  they  entail  an 
eftate,  they  entail  poverty  upon  their  children.  Job 
XX.  10.  fpeaking  of  the  children  of  the  oppreflbr,  he 
faith,  "  his  children  ftiall  feek  to  pleafe  the  poor, 
"  and  his  hands  fhall  reftore  their  goods."  And 
Job  xxi.  19.  *'  God  layeth  up  his  iniquity  for  his 
*'  children."  Thou  lay  eft  up  riches  for  thy  chil- 
dren ;  and  "  God  lays  up  thine  iniquity"  and  injuf- 
tice  '^  for  them,"  the  curfe  that  belongs  to  them. 
Hab.  ii.  9,  to,  11.  "  Wo  unto  him  that  coveteth 
*'  an  evil  covetoufnefs,  or  gaineth  an  evil  gain  to 'his 
**  houfe,"  &c.  Thou  thoughteft  to  raife  thy  fami- 
ly by  thofe  ways  ;  but  "  thou  haft  confulted  ftiamc 
"  to  thy  houfe."  No  fuch  eiFedlual  way  to  ruin  thy 
family,  as  injuftice  and  oppreflion.  As  then  you 
would  not  tranfmit  a  curfe  to  your  children,  and  de- 
volve mifery  upon  your  family,  free  your  eftates  from 
the  burden  and  weight  of  what  is  other  mens,  left  by 
God's  juft  judgment  and  fecret  providence,  that  lit- 
tle which  you  injurioufly  detain  from  others,  carry 
away  your  whole  eftate  to  them  and  their  family, 
God's  providence  many  times  makes  abundant  refti- 
tution,  when  we  will  not. 

Having  now  endeavoured  to  fatisfy  men,  that  it 
is  their  trueft  intereft,  to  make  reftitution  for  the 
injuries  they  have  done  to  others,  it  remains  only 
that  I  ftiould  anfwer  an  objedion  or  two,  which  men 
are  apt  to  make  againft  this  duty. 

Fiiil, 


4030  2l5<f  nature  andnecejjity  of  rejlitution. 

S  E  R  M.  pirfl.  Men  fay  they  are  afhamed  to  do  it.  Anf. 
It  is  not  matter  of  fhame,  but  of  praife  and  com- 
mendation. But  it  may  be  thou  wilt  fay,  it  is  mat- 
ter of  fhame  to  have  injured  another,  and  this  is  the 
way  to  lay  open  thy  fhame.  Indeed  if  the  injury 
were  publick,  the  reftitution  ought  to  be  fo  too,  as 
the  only  way  to  take  off  the  Hiame  of  the  injury. 
For  thy  reftitution  doth  not  in  this  cafe  publifh  thy 
fhame,  but  thy  honefty  :  but  if  the  injury  was  pri- 
vate, thou  mayft  preferve  thy  own  credit  by  conceal- 
ing thyfelf ;  and  provided  thou  do  the  thing  effec- 
tually, thou  may  ft  be  as  prudent,  as  to  the  manner 
of  doing  it  as  thou  pleafeft. 

Secondly,  Another  objedion  is  the  prejudice  it 
will  be  to  mens  eftates.  But  this  I  have  anfwered 
already,  by  fliewing  that  it  is  more  their  intereft  to 
make  reftitution,  than  to  continue  in  the  fin.  I  fhall 
only  add,  that,  as  our  Saviour  reafons  in  another 
cafe,  "  it  is  profitable  for  thee,  that  one  of  thy  mem- 
"  bers  fhould  perifh,  rather  than  that  thy  whole 
*'  body  fhould  be  caft  into  hell  :"  it  is  true  likewifc 
here,  it  is  profitable  for  thee,  that  thou  fhouldft  go 
a  beggar  to  heaven,  rather  than  that  thou  fhouldft  go 
to  hell,  laden  with  the  fpoils  and  guilt  of  rapine  and 
injuftice. 

Thirdly,  The  laft  objedlion  that  I  fliall  mention, 
is  difability  to  make  reftitution.  This  indeed  is 
fomething  ;  where  nothing  is  to  be  had,  every  man 
muft  lofe  his  right :  but  then  remember,  that  there 
muft  be  a  hearty  repentance  for  the  fin ;  and  thy  for- 
row  muft  be  fo  much  greater,  by  how  much  thy 
ability  to  make  reftitution  is  lefs  ;  and  there  muft  be 
a  willing  mind,  a  firm  purpofe  and  rcfolution  of  do- 
ing it,  when  God  fliall  enable  thee,  and  diligent  en- 
deavours to  that  purpofe.     Under  the  law  thofe  who 

were 


The  nafuj^e  and  7iece[fity  of  rejlitutton.         40  ^  i" 

were  not  able  to  make  reftitution,  were  fold  for  fix  SE  R  M. 
years,  if  their  fervice  did  not  make  reparation  in  lefs  ^^^^^• 
time.  It  is  true  indeed,  the  moderation  of  the 
gofpel  does  not  fufFer  Chriftians  to  deal  fo  hardly  with 
another  :  but  if  the  gofpel  remit  of  this  rigour,  and 
do  not  allow  Chriftians  to  challenge  it,  we  fhould 
voluntarily  do  in  efFe6t  that  which  they  were  forced 
to,  that  is,  we  fliould  ufe  our  beft  endeavours  and 
diligence  to  put  ourfelves  into  a  condition  of  makino- 
fatisfadtion  ;  and  we  fhould  not  look  upon  any  thinf>- 
beyond  the  necefifary  conveniencies  of  life  as  our  own, 
till  we  have  done  it  •,  unlefs  the  party  injured  will 
recede  from  his  right,  in  whole  or  in  part.  For 
though  the  impoflibility  of  the  thing  do  difcharge  us 
for  the  prefent,  yet  the  obligation  ftill  lyes  upon  us 
to  do  it,  fo  foon  as  we  are  able. 

And  here  it  will  be  proper  to  confider  the  cafe  of 
thofe,  who  have  compounded  with  their  creditors 
for  a  fmall  part,  whether  they  be  in  confcience  and 
equity  releafed  from  the  whole  debt.  I  am  loth  to 
lay  unnecelTary  burdens  upon  mens  confciences,  there- 
fore I  am  very  tender  in  refolving  fuch  cafes  :  but  I 
ought  to  have  a  more  tender  care  of  the  fouls  of 
men,  than  of  their  eftates  :  therefore  to  deal  plainly, 
and  to  difcharge  my  confcience  in  this  matter,  I  tkink 
fuch  perfons  do,  notwithftanding  the  compofirion, 
fland  oblig'd  in  equity  and  confcience  for  the  whole 
debt,  and  are  bound  to  difcharge  it,  fi  foon  as  they 
can  with  tolerable  convenience.  My  reafon  is,  bc- 
caufe,  though  they  be  difchargcd  in  law,  yet  the  law 
does  not  intend  to  take  off  the  obligation  of  con- 
fcience or  equity,  which  they  are  under  ;  but  leaves 
that  as  it  found  it.  Thus  the  cafe  ftands  ;  men  who 
are  in  a  way  of  trade  are  engaged  by  the  necefTities 
of  their  calling,  to  venture  a  great  part  of   their 

Vol.  IX,  20  A  eftatc 

S 


^he  nature  and  necejjity  of  rejiltiitton. 

eftate  in  other  mens  hands,  and  by  this  means  be- 
come liable  many  times  to  be  undone  without  their 
own  fault  •,   therefore  it  is  ufual,  when  any  man  in  a 
way  of  trade  becomes  difabled,  for  the  creditors  to 
make  fuch  a  compofition  with  him,  as  his  eftate  will 
bear,  and  upon  this  compofition  to  give  him  a  full  dif- 
charge,  fo  as  that  they  cannot  afterwards  by  law  re- 
quireof  him  the  remainder  of  their  debt.  Now  though 
this  be  a  favour  to  the  debtor,  yet  it  is  principally 
intended  for  the  benefit  of  the  creditor  \  becaufe  it 
being  his  a6l,  it  is  to  be  prefumed,  that  he  intended 
it  as  much  as  may  be,  for  his  own  advantage  -,  and 
fo  it  is,  for  the  creditor  has  as  much  fatisfadion  at 
prefent  as  can  be  had,  and  the  debtor  is  hereby  left 
in  a  capacity  of  recovering  himfelf  again  by  his  induf- 
try  and  diligence,  which  could  not  be,  if  he  were  not 
fully  difcharged  ;  for  if  he  were  ftill  liable  for  the 
reft,  he  would  continually  be  obnoxious  to  imprifon- 
ment,  which  would  render  him  incapable  of  follow- 
ing his  calling  •,  or  if  he  were  at  liberty,  he  could 
have  no  credit  to  enable  him  to  do  any  thing  in  his 
calling  •,  for  who  would  truft  a  man  with  any  thing, 
who  is  liable  every  moment  to  have  it  taken  from 
him  ?  So  that  the  reafon  of  this  plenary  difcharge  is 
this,  that  men,  who  are  otherwife  hopeful,  and  in  a 
fair  probability  of  recovering  themfelves,  may  not  be 
rendered  incapable  of  getting  an  eftate  afterwards, 
whereby  they  may  fupport  themfelves,  and  difcharge 
their  debts.     Now  this  difcharge  being  given  in  or- 
der to  thefe  ends,  it  cannot  be  imagined  that  it  ftiould 
be  intended  to  defeat  them  \  but  it  is  in  all  reafon  to 
be  fuppofed,  that  the  creditors  did  not  intend  to  take 
off  the  obligation  of  equity  and  confcience,  only  to 
put  the  man  into  a  condition  of  doing  fomething  to- 
wards the  enabling  him  to  difcharge  his  debt.     So 

that 


^he  nature  and  necejjity  of  reflitution.         4033 
that  unlefs  it  were  exprefs'd  at  the  compofition,  that  S  E  R  M. 

CLXXI 

the  creditor  wouIJ  never  exped:  more  from  him,  upon 
any  account  of  equity  and  confcience,  but  did  free- 
ly forgive  him  the  reft,  the  contrary  whereof  is  ufu- 
ally  done  \  I  fay,  unlefs  it  were  thus  exprefs'd,  there 
is  no  reafon  why  the  creditor's  favour  in  making  a 
compofition  fhould  be  abufed  to  his  prejudice  ;  and 
why  a  legal  difcharge,  given  him  on  purpofe  for  this 
reafon  among  others,  to  put  him  into  a  capacity  of 
recovering  himfelf  and  giving  full  fatisfa(5bion,  fhould 
be  fo  interpreted,  as  to  extinguifh  the  equitable  right 
of  the  creditor  to  the  remainder  of  his  debt. 

The  fecond  ufe  of  this  dodrine  of  reftitution  fhould 
be  by  way  of  prevention,  that  men  would  take  heed 
of  being  injurious,  and  fo  take  away  the  occafion  of 
reftitution,  and  free  themfelves  from  the  temptation 
of  not  performing  fo  difficult  and  fo  unwelcome  a 
duty.  It  is  much  eafier  of  the  two,  not  to  cozen 
or  opprefs  thy  neighbour,  than  after  thou  haft  done 
it,  it  will  be  to  bring  thyfelf  to  make  reftitution : 
therefore  we  ftiould  be  very  careful,  not  to  be  inju- 
rious to  any  one  in  any  kind  -,  neither  immediately 
by  ourfelves,  nor  by  aiding  and  alTifting  others,  by 
our  power  and  intereft,  or  Ikill  in  the  law,  or  by  any 
Other  way,  to  do  injuftice. 


ao  A  2  ,S  E  R- 


The  ufefidnefs  of  confideration^ 

SERMON    CLXXII. 

The  ufefulnefs  of  confideration,  in  order 
to  repentance. 


D  E  U  T.  xxxii.  29. 

O  that  they  were  wife^  that  they  underjlood  this^  that 
they  would  confider  their  latter  end! 

^   I  ^HIS  chapter  is  called   Mofes  his  fong,  in 
J^      which  he  briefly  recounts  the  various  provi- 
dences of  God  toward  tj[ie  people  of  Ifrael,  and  the 
fro  ward  carriage  of  tha£  peoJ>le  towards  him. 

Firft,  He  puts  them  fin  mind  how  God  had  cho- 
fen  them  for  his  peculiar  people,  and  had  by  a  fignal 
care  and  providence  conduded  them  all  that  tedious 
journey,  for  the  fpace  of  forty  years  in  the  wilder- 
nefs,  till  he  had  brought  them  to  the  promifed  land, 
which  they  had  now  begun  to  take  pofTeflron  of. 

And  then  he  foretels,  how  they  would  behave 
themfelves  after  all  this  mercy  and  kindnefs  God  had 
fhewn  to  them,  ver.  15.  "  Jefurun  waxed  fat,  and 
*'  kicked,  and  forfook  God  which  made  him,  and 
•'  lightly  efleemed  the  rock  of  his  falvation."  Up- 
on this  Ife  tells  them,  God  would  be  extremely  dif- 
pleafed  with  them,  and  would  multiply  his  judg- 
ments upon  them,  ver.  19,20.  "  When  the  Lord 
faw  it,  he  abhorred  them,  becaufe  of  the  provok- 
ing of  his  fons  and  of  his  daughters  -,  and  he  faid, 
I  will  hide  my  face  from  themt,  I  will  fee  v/hat 
their  end  lliall  be  :  \ov  they  are  a  very  froward 
generation,  ciiiluren  in  whom  is  no  faith.'*  And 
ver,  23.  "  1  wiU  kap  mifchi-f  upon  them,  I  wii 

>:-  •'  fpend 


in  order  to  repenianct.  4c>35 

**  fpend  mine  arrows  upon  them."  And  then  he  S  E  R  m. 
enumerates  the  particular  judgments  which  he  would 
lend  upon  them :  nay,  he  declares  he  would  have 
utterly  confumed  them,  but  that  he  was  loth  to  give 
occafion  of  fo  much  triumph  to  his  and  their  ene*- 
mies,  V.  26,  27.  "I  faid,  I  would  fcatter  them 
*'  into  corners,  I  would  make  the  remembrance  of 
*'  them  to  ceafe  from  among  men :  were  it  not,  that 
*'  I  feared  the  wrath  of  the  enemy,  left  their  adver- 
**  faries  fhould  behave  themfelves  ftrangely,  and  left 
*'  they  fhould  fay,  our  hand  is  high,  and  the  Lord 
*'  hath  not  done  all  this."  And  he  adds  the  reafoa 
of  all  this  feverity  \  becaufe  they  were  fo  very  ftupid 
and  inconfiderate,  v.  28.  "  For  they  are  a  nation 
*'  void  of  counfel,  neither  is  there  any  underftand- 
*'  ing  in  them."  ,  ' ;' 

And  in  the  conclufion  of  all,  he  reprefents  Goo 
as  it  were  breaking  out  into  this  vehement  and  affec- 
tionate wifh,  "  O  that  they  were  wife,  that  they 
"  underftood  this,  that  they  would  confider  therr 
**  latter  end  !" 

"  O  that  they  were  wife,  that  they  underftood 
"  this  !"  What  is  that  ?  This  may  refer  to  all  that 
ivent  Before.  O  that  they  were  wife  to  confider 
what  God  had  done  for  them,  and  what  they  had 
done  againft  him,  and  what  he  will  do  againft  them, 
if  they  continue  or  renew  their  former  provocations ! 
O  that  they  were  but  duly  apprehenfive  of  this,  and 
would  lay  it  ferioufly  to  heart ! 

But  from  what  follows,  it  feems  more  particular- 
ly to  refer  to  thofe  particular  judgments,  which  God 
haa  threatened  them  withal,  and  which  would  cef- 
tiinly  bcfal  them,  if  they  ftill  continued  in  their  d;f- 
obcdlv^  ce.  "  O  that  they  were  wife,  that  they  un- 
"  dcrftood  this,  that  they  v/ould  confider  their  la?- 
^'  -  ^  "  ter 


4036  ^he  ufefulnefs  of  conjideration^ 

SERM.  <c  ter  end  !"  that  is,  the  fad  confequences  of  thele 

CLXXII.  ^ 

their  provocations,  that  by  the  confideration  thereof, 
they  might  prevent  all  thofe  evils  and  calamities,  by 
turning  from  thofe  fins  which  would  unavoidably 
bring  them  upon  them. 

From  the  words  thus  explained,  I  Ihall  obferve 
thefe  four  things. 

I.  That  God  doth  really  and  heartily  defire  the 
happinefs  of  men,  and  to  prevent  their  mifery  and 
ruin.  For  the  very  defign  of  thefe  words  is  to  ex- 
prefs  this  to  us,  and  it  is  done  in  a  very  vehement, 
and,  as  I  may  fay,  paffionate  manner. 

U.  That  it  is  a  great  point  of  wifdom  to  confider 
ferioufly  the  laft  iffue  and  confequence  of  our  adions, 
whither  they  tend,  and  what  will  follow  upon  them. 
And  therefore  wifdom  is  here  defcribed  by  "  the  con- 
;*'  fideration  of  our  latter  end." 

III.  That  this  is  an  excellent  means  to  prevent  that 
mifery,  which  will  other  wife  befal  us.  And  this 
is  neceflarily  implied  in  this  wifti,  that  if  they  would 
but  confider  thefe  things,  they  might  be  prevented. 

IV.  That  the  want  of  this  confideration  is  the 
great  caufe  of  mens  ruin.  And  this  is  like  wife  im- 
plied in  the  words,  that  one  great  reafon  of  mens 
ruin  is,  becaufe  they  are  not  fo  wife,  as  to  confider 
the  fatal  iffue  and  confequence  of  a  finful  courfe.  I 
fhall  fpeak  briefly  to  each  of  thefe. 

I.  That  God  doth  really  and  heartily  defire  the 
happinefs  of  men,  and  to  prevent  their  mifery  and 
ruin.  To  exprefs  this  to  us,  God  doth  put  on  the 
vehemency  of  a  human  paffion,  *'  O  that  they  were 
*'  wife,"  &c.  The  laws  of  God  are  a  clear  evi- 
dence of  this  •,  becaufe  the  obfervancc  of  them  tends 
to  our  happinefs.  There  is  no  good  prince  makes 
laws  with  any  other  defign,  than  to  promote  the 

"  pubhcic 


in  order  to  repentance.  4^37 

publick  welfare  and  happinefs  of  his  people  :  and  ^^^^^l 
with  much  more  reafon  may  we  imagine,  that  the  v-- 
infinite  good  God  does  by  all  his  laws  defign  the 
happinefs  of  his  creatures.     And  rhe  exhortations  of 
fcripture,  by  which  he  enforceth  his  laws,  are  yen 
a  greater  evidence  how  earneftly  he  dcfires  the  hap- 
pinefs of  his  creatures.     For  it  Ihews  that  he  is  con- 
cerned for  us,  when  he  ufeth  fo  many  arguments  to 
perfuade  us  to  our  duty,   and  when  he  cxpoduiates 
fo  vehemently  with  us  for  our  negleft  of  it,  faying 
to  finners,  "  Turn  ye,  turn  ye,  why  will  ye  die,  O 
''  houfe  of  Ifrael  ?"  "  Ye  will  not  come  unto  me,  that 
*'  ye  might  have  life,"  fays  our  bleffed  Saviour, 
with  great  trouble  to  fee  men  fo  obftinately  fet  a- 
gainft  their  own  happinefs  •,  and  again,  "  How  of- 
"  ten  would  I  have  gathered  you,  as  a  hen  gathereth 
"  her  chickens  under  her  wings,  and  ye  would  not  T* 
And  to  fatisfy  us  yet  farther,  that  it  is  his  real  de- 
fire,  by  our  obedience  to  his  laws,  to  prevent  our 
ruin,  God  does  frequently  in  fcripture  put  on  the 
palTions  of  men,   and  ufe  all  forts  of  vehement  ex- 
preflions  to  this  purpofe,  Deut.  v.  29.     "  O  that 
"  there  were  fuch  a  heart  in  them,  that  they  would 
"  fear  me,  and  keep  all  my  commandments  always, 
**  that  it  might  be  well  with  them,  and  with  their 
*'  children  for  ever  I"  And  Pfal.  Ixxxi.  13.     ''  O 
"  that  my  people  had  hearkned  unto  me,  and  Ifrael 
"  had  walked  in  my  ways  !  I  lliould  foon  have  fub- 
*'  dued  their  enemies,  and  turned  my  hand  againd 
«  their  adverfaries."   Jer.xiii.27.  "  O  Ifrael  1  wilt 
"  thou  not  be  made  clean  ?   When  Hiall  it  once  be  V 
And  to  name  but  one  text  more,  when  our  blclTed 
Saviour  wept  over  Jcrufalem,    how  pamonatcly 
does  he  wifh  that  "  flie  had  known  in  that  her  day, 
' "  the  things  that  belonged  to  her  peace  1". 

3  ^"^ 


S  The  ufefulnefs  of  conjideratton. 

And  if  after  all  this  we  can  doubt  whether  the 
faithful  God  means  as  he  fays,  he  hath  for  our 
farther  afllirance,  and  to  put  the  matter  out  of  all 
doubt,  confirmed  his  word  by  an  oath,  Ezek.  xxxiii. 
II.  "  As  I  Hve,  faith  the  Lord  God,  I  have  no 
"  pleafure  in  the  death  of  the  wicked,  but  that  the 
**  wicked  turn  from  his  ways  and  Uve.  Turn  ye, 
*'  turn  ye  from  your  evil  ways  ;  for  why  will  ye  die, 
^'  O  houfe  of  Ifrael  ?"  So  that  if  words  can  be  any 
declaration  of  a  hearty  and  fincere  defire,  we  have 
no  reafon  to  doubt,  but  that  God  does  really  defire 
the  happinefs  of  men,  and  would  gladly  prevent  their 
ruin  and  deilrudion. 

If  any  now  aflc,  Why  then  are  not  all  men  hap- 
py ?  Why  do  they  not  efcape  ruin  and  deflrudlion  I 
And  particularly  why  the  people  of  Ifrael,  for  whom 
God  here  makes  this  wifh,  did  not  efcape  thofe 
judgments  which  v/ere  threatened  i  the  prophet  Ihall 
anfvver  for  me,  Hof.  xiii.  9.     "  O  Ifrael!  thou  haft 
deftroyed  thyfelf."  *  And  David,  Pfal.  Ixxxi.  ii. 
My  people  would  not  hearken  to  my  voice,  Ifrael 
*'  would  none  of  me."    And  our  blefled  Saviour, 
Matt,  xxiii.  37.     "  How  often  would  I  have  ga- 
thered thee,  as  a  hen  gathereth  her  chickens  un- 
der her  wings,  and  ye  would  not  [*'    And  John 
V.  40.  "  Ye  will  not  come  unto  me,  that  ye  might 
*'  have  life."     You  fee  what  account  the  fcripturc 
plainly  gives  of  this  matter  ;  it  refts  upon  the  wills  of 
men,  and  God  hath  not  thought  fit  to  force  happi- 
nefs upon  men,  and  to  make  them  wife  and  good 
whether  they  will  or  no.    He  prefents  men  with  fuch 
motives,  and  offers  fuch  arguments  to  their  con lidera- 
tion,  as  are  fit  to  prevail  with  reafonable  men,  and 
is  ready  to  afford  them  all  necefTary  afTiftarcc.  if  they 
be  not  wanting  to  themfelves  3  but  if  tl^cy  will  not 

be 


in  order  to  repentance,  4^39 

be  wife  and  confider,  if  they  will  Hand  out  agalnft  ^^^^^^J* 
all  the  arguments  that  God  can  offer,  if  they  will 
receive  the  grace  of  God  in  vain,  and  refill  his  blef- 
fed  Spirit,  and  rejed  the  counfel  of  God  againfl 
themfelves,  God  hath  not  in  this  cafe  engaged 
himfelf  to  provide  any  remedy  againfl  the  obfti- 
nacy  and  perverfenefs  of  men,  but  "  their  dcflruc- 
*'  tion  is  of  themfelves,  and  their  blood  fhall  be 
*'  upon  their  own  heads."  And  there  is  no  nicety 
and  intricacy  in  this  matter  -,  but  if  men  will  confider 
fcripture  and  reafon  impartially,  they  will  hnd  this 
to  be  the  plain  refolution  of  the  cafe. 

So  that  no  man  hath  reafon  either  to  charge  his 
fault,  or  his  punilhment  upon  God  \  he  is  "  free 
"  from  the  blood  of  all  men  i"  he  fincerely  defires  • 
our  happinefs ;  but  we  wilfully  ruin  ourfelves  :  and 
when  he  tells,  that  "  he  defires  not  the  death  of 
*^  a  finner,  but  rather  that  he  fhould  turn  from  his 
'«  wickednefs  and  live ;  that  he  would  have  all  men 
"  to  be  faved,  and  to  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the 
*«  truth  -,  that  he  is  not  wilUng  that  any  fhould  pe- 
"  rifh,  but  that  all  fhould  come  to  repentance  •,  he 
plainly  means  as  he  fays,  and  doth  not  fpeak  to  us 
with  any  referve,  or  dark  diftindion  between  his 
fecret  and  revealed  will,  he  does  not  decree  one  thing, 
and  declare  another. 

And  if  this  be  fo,  no  man  hath  reafon  to  be  dif- 
couraged  from  attempting  and  endeavouring  his  own 
happinefs,  upon  ajealoufy  and  furmife  that  God 
hath  by  any  fatal  decree  put  a  bar  to  it  from  all  eter- 
nity :  for  if  he  had  fo  abfolutely  rcfolved  to  make  the 
greatefl  part  of  mankind  miferable,  without  any 
refpeft  to  their  adlions  in  this  world,  he  would  never 
have  faid,  that  "  he  defires  that  all  fhould  be  faved  -,'• 
he  would  not  have  exhorted  all  men  '*  to  work  out 
Vol.  IX.  20  B  T  '^^^^ 

5 


^he  ufefidnefs  of  conjideration^ 

"  their  own  falvation  :"  had  he  taken  up  any  fuch 
refolution,  he  would  have  declared  it  to  all  the 
world :  for  he  hath  power  enough  in  his  hand,  "  to 
"  do  what  he  pleafeth,  and  none  can  reiift  his  will  i" 
fo  that  he  did  not  need  to  have  diffembled  the  mat- 
ter, and  to  have  pretended  a  defire  to  fave  men, 
when  he  was  refolved  to  ruin  them. 

This  is  the  firft,  that  God  doth  really  and  heartily 
defire  the  happinefs  of  men,  and  to  prevent  their 
mifery  and  ruin.     I  proceed  to  the 

II.  That  it  is  a  great  part  of  wifdom  to  confider 
ferioufly  the  laft  ifiue  and  confequence  of  our  adlions, 
and  whither  the  courfe  of  life  which  we  lead  does 
tend,  and  what  will  follow  upon  it.  And  therefore 
wifdo.m  is  here  explained  by  confideration,  "  O  that 
*'  they  v/ere  wife,  that  they  would  confider  their 
^'  latter  end  !"  that  is,  what  will  befal  them  here-' 
after,  what  will  be  the  iiTue  and  confequence  of  all 
the  fins  and  provocations  which  they  are  guilty  of. 

And  this  is  a  principal  point  and  property  of  wif- 
dom, to  look  forward,  and  not  only  to  confider  the 
prefent  pleafure  and  advantage  of  any  acftion,  but 
the  future  confequence  of  it :  and  there  is  no  greater 
argument'  of  an  imprudent  mian,  than  to  gratify  him- 
felf  for  the  prefent  in  the  doing  of  a  thing,  which 
will  turn  to  his  greater  prejudice  afterwards  ;  efpe- 
cially  if  the  future  inconvenience  be  great  and  into-? 
lerable,  as  it  is  in  the  cafe  we  are  fpeaking  of.  For  eter- 
nal happinefs  or  mifery  depends  upon  the  aftions  of 
t:his  prefent  life,  and  accoruix:g  as  we  behave  our- 
felves  in  this  world.,  it  will  go  well  or  ill  with  us  for 
ever  •,  fo  that  this  is  a  matter  of  vafl  importance j, 
;ind  deferves  cur  mofl  ferious  thoughts  ;  and  in  mat- 
ters of  mighty  confequence,  a  wife  man  will  take  all 
things  into  confiderationa  and  look  before  him  as  far 

as 


in  order  to  repentance,  4041 

as  fie  can.  And  indeed  this  is  the  reafon  why  things  S  E  R  \r. 

•*  ^  *-'      CLXXIf. 

of  great  moment  are  faid  to  be  things  of  confcqucnce, 
becaufe  great  things  depend  and  are  likely  to  follow 
upon  them  :  and  then  flirely  that  is  the  greatcft  con- 
cernment, upon  wliich  not  only  the  happinefs  of  this 
prefent  life,  but  our  happinefs  to  all  eternity  does 
depend  -,  and  if  the  good  and  bad  aflions  of  this  life 
be  of  that  confequence  to  us,  it  is  fit  every  man 
fhould  confider  what  he  does,  and  whither  the  courfe 
of  life  he  is  engaged  or  about  to  engage  in,  will 
lead  him  at  lad.  For  this  is  true  wiidom,  to  look 
to  the  end  of  things,  and  to  think  feriouOy  before- 
hand, what  is  likely  to  be  the  event  of  fuch  an  acl:i- 
on,  of  fuch  a  courfe  of  life  :  if  we  ferve  God  faith- 
fully and  do  his  will,  what  will  be  the  confequence 
of  that  to  us  in  this  world,  and  the  other  :  and  on 
the  other  hand,  if  we  live  wickedly,  and  allow  our- 
felves  in  any  unlawful  and  vicious  practice,  what  will 
be  the  end  of  that  courfe. 

And  to  any  man  that  confults  the  law  of  his  own 
nature,  or  the  will  of  God  revealed  in  fcripture,  no- 
thing can  be  plainer  than  what  will  be  the  end  of 
thefe  feveral  ways.  God  hath  plainly  told  us,  and 
our  own  confciences  will  tell  us  the  fame,  that ''  if  we 
"  do  well,weniall  be  accepted"  of  God,  and  reward- 
ed by  him :  but  if  we  do  ill, ''  the  end  of  thcfe  things 
•'  is  death  i"  that  "  indignation  and  wrath,  tribulati- 
"  on  and  anguifh  will  be  upon  every  foul  of  man 
^'  that  doth  evil  ;  but  honour  and  glory  and  peace 
''  to  every  man  that  doth  good,  in  the  day  when 
«  God  fhall  judge  the  fecrets  of  men  by  Jesus 
"  Christ,  according  to  the  goipcl." 

So  that  God  hath  given  us  a  plain  profpedl  of  the 
different  ilTucs  of  a  virtuous  and  a  wicked  hte,  and 
there  wants  nothing  but  confideration  to  make  us  to 

20  B  2  a^^-"^ 


4042  T'he  iifefiilnefs  of  conjiderattony 

E  R  M.  attend  to  thefc  things,  and  to  lay  them  ferioufly  to 
heart.  For  while  men  are  inconfiderate,  they  go  on 
llupidly  in  an  evil  way,  and  are  not  fenfible  of  the 
danger  of  their  prefent  courfe,  becaufe  they  do  not 
attend  to  the  confequence  of  it :  but  when  their  eyes 
are  once  opened  by  confideilation,  they  cannot  but 
be  fadly  apprehenfive  of  the  mifchief  they  are  run- 
ning themfeives  upon.  If  men  would  take  but  a 
ferious  and  impartial  view  of  their  lives  and  a6lions, 
if  they  would  confider  the  tendency  of  afinful  courfe, 
and  whither  it  will  bring  them  at  laft  \  if  the  vicious 
and  difiblute  man  would  but  look  about  him 3  and 
confider  how  many  have  been  ruined  in  that  very 
way  that  he  is  in,  how  many  lye  "  flain  and  wounded 
*'  in  it ;  that  it  is  the  way  to  hell,  and  leads  down 
*'  to  the  chambers  of  death  •,"  the  ferious  thought  of 
this  could  not  but  check  him  in  his  courfe,  and  make 
him  refolve  upon  a  better  life.  If  men  were  wife, 
they  would  confider  the  confequence  of  their  a6lions, 
and  upon  confideration  would  refolve  upon  that 
which  they  are  convinced  is  beft.     I  proceed  to  the 

III.  Thing  I  propounded,  which  was,  that  con- 
fideration of  the  confequence  of  our  adlions  is  an 
excellent  means  to  prevent  the  mifchiefs,  which  other- 
wife  we  fliould  run  into.  And  this  is  neceflarily  im- 
plied in  the  wifh  here  in  the  text,  that  if  we  would 
but  confider  thefe  things,  they  might  be  prevented. 
For  how  can  any  man,  who  hath  any  love  or  regard  for 
himfclf,  any  tendernefs  for  his  own  intereft  and  hap- 
pinefs,  fee  hell  and  defl:ru(5tion  before  him,  which, 
if  he  hold  on  in  his  evil  courfe,  will  certainly  fw.J- 
iow  him  up,  and  yet  venture  to  go  on  in  his  fins  ? 
Can  any  man  that  plainly  beholds  mifery  haftening 
towards  him  ''  like  an  armed  man,  and  dcftrudion 
*'  coming  upon  him  as  a  whirlwind,'*  think  himfelf 

unconcerned 


m  order  to  repentance,  4043 

linconcerned  to  prevent  it  and  fliefrom  it  ?  The  moft:  S  E  R  M. 
dull  and  flupid  creatures  will  flart  back  upon  the 
fight  of  prefent  danger.     Balaam's  als,   when  fhe 
law  the  angel  of  the  Lord  (landing  in  the  way,  with 
his  fword  drawn  ready  to  fmiteher,  flarts  afide,  and 
could  not  be  urged  on.     Now  God  hath  given  us, 
not  only  fenfe  to  apprehend  a  prefent  evil,  but  reafon 
and  confideration  to  look  before  us,  and  to  difcover 
dangers  at  a  diftance,  to  apprehend  them  as  certain- 
ly, and  with  as  clear  a  convidlion  of  the  reality  of 
them,  as  if  they  threatened  us  the  next  moment : 
and  will  any  confiuerate  man,  who  hath  calculated 
the  dangerous  events  of  fin,  and  the  dreadful  efFefls 
of  God's  wrath  upon  finners,  go  on  to  "  provoke 
*'  the  Lord  tojealoufy,  as  if  he  were  ftronger  than 
"  he  V  It  is  not  to  be  imagined,  but  that  if  men 
would  ferioufly  confider  what  fin  is,  and  what  fliall 
be  the  fad  portion  of  finners  hereafter,  they   would 
refolve  upon  a  better  courfe.     Would  any  man  live 
in  the  lufts  of  the  flefli,  and  of  intemperance,  or 
out  of  covetoufnefs  defraud  or  opprefs  his  neigh- 
bour, did  he  ferioufly  confider,  that  "  God  is  the 
"  avenger  of  fuch  i"  and  that  "  becaufe  of  thefc 
<'  things  the  wrath  of  God  comes  upon  the  chil- 
"  dren  of  difobedience." 

I  fhould  have  great  hopes  of  mens  repentance  and 
reformation,  if  they  could  but  once  be  brought  to 
confideration  :  for  in  moft  men  it  is  not  fo  much  a 
pofitive  difiDelief  of  the  truth,  as  inadvertency  and 
want  of  confideration,  that  makes  them  to  go  on  fo 
fecurely  in  a  finful  courfe.  Would  but  men  confider 
what  fin  is,  and  what  will  be  the  fearful  confcquence 
of  it,  probably  in  this  world,  but  moft  certainly  in 
the  other,  they  could  not  chuk  but  ily  from  it  as  tiic 
greateft  evil  in  the  world. 


4044^  The  ufefuhtefs  of  confideration^ 

^cLxxir  *       ^^^  ^^  ^^^  ^^^^^^  power  and  influence  confidera-r 
tion  will  probably  have  to  bring  men  to  repentance, 
and  a  change  of  their  lives,    I  remember  to  have 
fomewhere  met  with  a  very  remarkable  (lory,  of  one 
that  had  a  fon  that  took  bad  courfes,  and  would  not 
be  reclaimed  by  all  the  good  counfel  his  father  could 
give  him  5  at  laft  coming  to  his  father,  who  lay  up- 
on his  death-bed,  to  beg  his  blefllng,  his  father  in- 
Head  of  upbraiding  him  with  his  bad  life,  and  undu- 
tiful  carriage  toward  him,  fpake  kindly  to  him,  and 
told  him  he  had  but  one  thing  to  defire  of  him,  that 
every  day  he  would  retire  and  fpend  one  quarter  of 
an  hour  alone  by  himfelf ;  which  he  promifed  his 
father  faithfully  to  do,  and  made  it  good.     After 
a  while  it  grew  tedious  to  him,  to  fpend  even  fo  lit- 
tle time  in  fuch  bad  and  uneafy  company,  and  he 
began  to  bethink  him.felf,  for  what  reafon  his  fa- 
ther fhould  fo  earneftly  defire  of  him  to  do  fo  odd 
a  thing  for  his  fake,  and  his  mind  prefently  fuggeft- 
ed  to  him,  that  it  was  to  enforce  him  to  confidera- 
tion;  wifely  judging  that  if  by  any  means  he  could 
but  bring  him  to  that,  he  would  foon  reform  his  life 
and  become  a  new  man. '  And  the  thing  had  its  de- 
fired  effed; ;  for  after  a  very  little  confideration,  he 
took  up  a  firm  refolution  to  change  the  courfe  of  his 
life,  and  was  true  to  it  all  his  days.     I  cannot  anfwer 
for  the  truth  of  the  ftory,  but  for  the  moral  of  it  I 
will ;  namely,  that  confideration  is  one  of  the  beft 
and  mofl  likely  means  in  the  world,  to  bring  a  bad 
man  to  a  better  mind.     I  now  come  to  the 

IV.  and  laft  particular,  namely,  that  the  want  of 
this  confideration  is  one  of  the  greateft  caufes  of  mens 
ruin.  And  this  likewife  is  implied  in  the  text ;  and 
the  reafon  why  God  does  fo  vehemently  defire  that 
men  would  be  wife  and  confider,  is,  becaufe  fo  many 

arc 


in  order  to  repentance,      '  4^4  C 

xire  ruined  and  undone  for  want  of  it.  This  is  the  S  E  R  M. 
defperate  folly  of  mankind,  that  they  fcldom  think 
feriouQy  of  the  confequence  of  their  adions,  and  leaft 
of  all  of  fuch  as  are  of  greatcit  concernment  to  them, 
and  have  t!ie  chief  influence  upon  their  eternal  condi- 
tion. They  do  not  confider  what  mifchief  and  in- 
convenience a  wicked  life  may  plunge  them  into  ia 
thic  world,  what  trouble  and  difturbance  it  may  give 
them  when  they  come  to  die  \  what  horror  and  con- 
fufion  it  may  fill  them  withal  when  they  are  leaving 
this  world,  and  pafTing  into  eternity  •,  and  what  in- 
tolerable mifery  and  torment  it  may  bring  upon  them 
to  all  eternity.  Did  men  ponder  and  lay  to  heart 
death  and  judgment,  heaven  and  hell  •,  and  would 
they  but  let  their  thoughts  dw^ell  upon  thefe  things, 
it  is  not  credible  that  the  generality  of  men  could 
leaa  fuch  profane  and  impious,  fuch  leud  and  difTo- 
lute,  fuch  fecure  and  carelefs  lives  as  they  do. 

Would  but  a  man  frequently  entertain  his  mind 
with  fuch  thoughts  as  thefe  \  I  mud  fhortly  die  and 
leave  this  world,  and  then  all  the  pleafures  and  en- 
joyments of  it  will  be  to  me  as  if  they  had  never 
been,  only  that  the  remembrance  of  them,  and  the 
iM  nfe  I  have  made  of  them,  will  be  very  bitter  and 
gi  jevous  to  me  *,  after  all,  death  will  tranfmit  me  out 
of  this  world,  into  a  quite  different  flate  and  fcene 
of  things,  into  the  prefence  cf  that  great  and  terrible, 
that  inriexible  and  impartial  judge,  who  will  "  ren- 
"  der  to  every  man  according  to  his  works  j"  and 
then  all  the  evils  which  I  have  done  in  this  life,  will 
rife  up  in  judgment  againft  me,  and  fill  me  with  ever- 
lafling  confufion,  in  that  great  alfembly  of  men  and 
angels,  will  banifh  me  from  the  prefence  of  God, 
and  all  the  happinefs  which  fiows  from  it,  and  pro- 
pure  a  dreadful  fentence  of  unfpcakable  mifery  and 

torment 


4046  ^^^  ufefulnefs  of  conjtderafion^ 

torment  to  be  paft  upon  me,  which  I  can  never  get 
reverfed,  nor  yet  ever  be  able  to  ftand  under  the  weight " 
of  it.  If  men  would  but  enter  into  the  ferious  con- 
fid  eration  of  thefe  things,  and  purfue  thefe  thoughts 
to  fome  ifTue  and  conclufion,  they  would  take  up 
other  refolutions ;  and  I  verily  believe,  that  the  want 
of  this  hath  ruined  more  than  even  infideUty  itfelf. 
And  this  I  take  to  be  the  meaning  of  that  queftion 
in  the  Pfalmifb,  "  Have  all  the  workers  of  iniquity 
•*  no  knowledge  ?''  that  is,  no  confideration  ;  inti' 
mating  that  if  they  had,  they  would  do  better. 

All  that  now  remains,  is  to  perfuade  men  to  ap- 
ply  their  hearts  to  this  piece  of  wifdom,  to  look  be- 
fore them,  and  to  think  ferioufly  of  the  confequence 
of  their  adlions,  what  will  be  the  final  ilTue  of  that 
courfe  of  life  they  are  engaged  in  *,  and  if  they  conti- 
nue in  it,  what  will  become  of  them  hereafter,  what 
will  become  of  them  for  ever. 

And  here  I  might  apply  this  text,  as  God  here 
does  to  the  people  of  Ifrael,  to  the  publick  condition 
of  this  nation,  which  is  not  fo  very  unlike  to  that  of 
the  people  of  Ifrael :  for  God  feems  to  have  chofen 
this  nation  for  his  more  peculiar  people,  and  hath 
exercifed  a  very  particular  providence  towards  us,  in 
conducting  us  through  that  wildernefs  of  confufion, 
in  which  we  have  been  wandring  for  the  fpace  of 
above  forty  years  -,  and  when  things  were  come  to 
the  laft  extremity,  and  we  feemed  to  fland  upon  the 
very  brink  of  ruin,  "  Then  (as  it  is  faid  of  the 
people  of  Ifrael,  ver.  36.  of  this  chapter)  "  God 
**  repented  himfelf  for  his  fervants,  when  he  faw 
*'  their  power  was  gone:"  that  is,  that  they  were 
utterly  unable  to  help  themfelves,  and  to  work 
their  own  deliverance.  And  it  may  be  faid  of  us, 
as  Mofes  does  of  that  people,  chap,  xxxiii.  29. 

^  !!  Happy 


hi  order  to  repentance,  4047 

''  Happy  art  thou,  O  IfraeJ,  O  people  hwcd  by  the  S  R  R  ivf. 
*^  Lord,  the  iliield  of  thy  help,  and  who  is  the  .^^^^ 
"  fword  of  thy  excellency !"    Never  did  any  nation  ^^""""^ 
•Itruggle  with,  and  get  through  fo  many  and  fo  great 
difficulties,  as  we  have  feveral  times  done. 

And  I  fear  we  have  behaved  ourfelves  towards  God, 
not  much  better  than  the  people  of  Ifrael  did,  but 
Jike  Jefurun,  after  many  deliverances  and  great  mer- 
cies, "  have  waxed  fat  and  kicked,  have  forfakea 
"  the  God  that  made  us,  and  little  efteemed  the 
rock  of  our  falvarion ;"  by  which  we  have  "  pro- 
voked the  Lord   to  jealoufy,"  and  have  as  it 
were  forced  him  to  multiply  his  judgments,  and  to 
fpend  his  arrows  upon  us,  and  "  to  hide  his  face  from 
"  us,  to  fee  what  our  end  will  be  -,"  fo  that  we  have 
reafon  to  fear,  that  God  would  have  brought  utter 
ruin  and  deftru6lion  upon  us,  and  "  fcattered  us  in- 
"  to  corners,  and  made  the  remembrance  of  us  to 
*'  have  ceafed  from  among  men,  had  he  not  feared 
the  wrath  of  the  enemy,  and  left  the  adverfaries 
fhould  have  behaved  themfelves  ftrangely,  and  left 
they  Ihould  fay,  our  hand  is  high,  and  the  Lord 
hath  not  done  all  this  ;"  that  is,  left  they  fliould 
afcribe  this  juft  vengeance  of  God  upon  a  finfui  and 
unthankful  nation  to  the  goodnefs  and  righteoufnefs 
of  their  own  caufe,  and  to  the  favour  and  aftiftance 
of  the  idols  and  falfe  gods  whom  they  worfhipped, 
tc  the  patronage  and  aid  of  the  virgin  Mary  and 
the  faints  ;   to  whom,  contrary  to  the  will  and  com- 
mand of  the  true  God,  they  had  offer'd  up  fo  many 
prayers  and  vows,  and  paid  the  greateft  part  of  their 
religious  worftiip.      But  "  the  Lord   hath  flicwii 
himfelf  greater  than  all  gods,  and  in  the  things 
wherein  they  dealt  proudly,  that  he  is  above  them  : 
Vol.  IX.  20  C  "  for 

6 


<c 
cc 


ii. 


The  ufefulnefs  of  confideratlony 

"  for  our  rock  is  not  as  their  rock,  even  our  enemies 
"  themfclves  being  judges." 

And  we  have  been  too  like  the  people  of  Ifrael  ia 
other  refpeds  alfo,  fo  fickle  and  inconflant,  that  after 
great  deliverances  we  are  apt  prefently  to  murmur 
and  be  difcontented,  to  grow  fick  of  our  own  hap- 
pinefs,  and  "  to  turn  back  in  our  hearts  into  Egypt  •,'* 
fo  that  God  may  complain  of  us,  as  he  does  of  his 
people  Ifrael,  that  nothing  that  he  could  do  would 
bring  them  to  confideration,  and  make  them  better, 
neither  his  mercies  nor  his  judgments.  Ifa.  i.  2,  3. 
"  Hear,  O  heavens !  and  give  ear,  O  earth !  For  the 
"  Lord  hath  fpoken  •,  I  have  nourifhed  and  brought 

up  children,    but  they  have  rebelled  againft  me. 

The  ox  knoweth  his  owner,  and  the  afs  his  mailer's 

crib :  but  Ifrael  doth  not  know,  my  people  doth 
*^  not  confider."  And  fo  likewife  he  complains, 
that  his  judgments  had  no  efFe'fl  upon  them,  ver.  5. 
"  Why  fhould  ye  be  fmitten  any  more  ?  Ye  will 
"  revolt  more  and  more."  Well  therefore  may  it 
be  faid  of  us,  as  it  was  of  them  in  the  verfe  before 
the  text,  "  they  are  a  nation  void  of  knowledge, 
"  neither  is  there  any  underltanding  in  them."  And 
the  wifh  that  follows  in  the  text  is  as  feafonable  for 
us  as  it  was  for  them,  ^^  O  that  they  were  wife,  that 
*'  they  underflood  this,  that  they  would  confider 
*'  their  latter  end!" 

And  by  parity  of  reafon,  this  may  likewife  be  ap- 
plied to  particular  perfons,  and  to  perfuade  every  one 
of  us  to  a  ferious  confideration  of  the  final  ilTue  and 
ccnfequence  of  our  a(^ions,  I  will  only  offer  thefe  two 
arguments. 

I.  That  confideration  is  the  proper  a6t  of  reafon- 
able  creatures,  and  that  whereby  we  fhew  ourfelves 
men.     So  the  prophet  intimates,  Ifa.  xlvi.  8.  "Re- 

^'  member 


in  order  to  repentance.  4049 

*^  member  this,  and  fhew  yourfelves  men  ;  bring  it  S  f^  R  ^'f. 
"  again  to  mind,  O  ye  tranfgreflbrs  !"  that  is,  con-  ^^^ 
fider  it  well,  think  of  it  again  and  again,  ye  that  run 
on  fo  furioufly  in  a  finful  courfe,  what  the  end  and 
ifTue  of  thefe  things  will  be.  If  ye  do  not  do  this, 
you  do  not  "  lliew  yourfelves  men,"  you  do  not 
a(5t  like  reafonable  creatures,  to  whom  it  is  pecu- 
liar to  propofe  to  themfelves  fome  end  and  dcfign 
of  their  adions  ;  but  rather  like  "  brute  creatures, 
*'  which  have  no  underftanding,"  and  a6l  only  by 
a  natural  inftinfl,  without  any  confideration  of  the 
end  of  their  actions,  or  of  the  means  conducing;  to  it. 

II.  Whether  we  confider  it  or  not,  our  latter  end 
will  come  ;  and  all  thofe  difmal  confequences  of  a 
finful  courfe,  which  God  hath  fo  plainly  threatened, 
and  our  own  confciences  do  fo  much  dread,  will  cer- 
tainly overtake  us  at  laft  ;  and  we  cannot,  by  not 
thinking  of  thefe  things,  ever  prevent  or  avoid  them. 
Death  will  come,  and  after  that  the  judgment,  and 
an  irreverfible  doom  will  pafs  upon  us,  according  to 
all  the  evil  that  we  have  done,  and  all  the  good  that 
We  have  neglected  to  do  in  this  life,  under  the  heavy 
weight  and  prefTure  whereof  we  muft  lye  groaning, 
and  bewailing  ouifelves  to  everlafling  ages. 

God  >  now  excrcifcth  his  mercy  and  patience  and 
long-fuffering  towards  us,  in  expectation  of  our 
amendment  •,  he  reprieves  us  on  purpofe  that  we  may 
repent,  and  in  hopes  that  we  wiil  at  laft  confider  and 
grow  wifer  -,  for  "  he  is  not  willing  that  any  fhould 
''  perifh,  but  that  all  fhould  come  to  repentance  :*' 
but  if  we  will  trifle  away  this  day  of  Goo's  grace 
and  patience,  if  wc  vvill  not  confider  and  bethink 
ourfelves,  there  is  another  day  that  v/ill  certainly 
come,  "  that  great  and  terrible  day  of  the  Lord, 
**  in  which  the  heavens  fhall  pafs  away  with  a  ^reat 

20  C  2  "  noifc, 


4050  T'he  danger  of  impenitence^ 

"  noife,  and  the  elements  Ihall  melt  with  fervent 
*'  heat  •,  the  earth  alfo,  and  the  works  that  are  there- 
*'  in  fhall  be  burnt  up." 

"  Seeing  then  all  thefe  things  fhall  be,"  let  us  con- 
fider  ferioufly  "-  what  manner  of  perfons  we  ouo-ht  to 
"  be  in  all  holy  converfation  and  godlincfs,  waiting 
''  for  and  haftening  junto  the  coming  of  the  day  of 
*'  God  ;  to  whom  be  glory  now  and  for  ever.'* 


SERMON    CLXXIII. 

The  danger  of  impenitence,  where  the 
gofpel  is  preached. 


MATT.  xi.  21,  22, 

Woe  unto  thee  Chorazin^  woe  unto  thee  Bethfaida  ! 
for  if  the  mighty  works  which  were  done  in  you^ 
had  been  done  in  'Tyre  and  Sidon^  they  would  have 
repented  long  ago  in  fackcloth  and  afhes.  But  I 
fay  unto  you.  It  fhall  he  more  tolerable  fcr  'Tyre  and 
Sidon  at  the  day  of  judgment^  than  for  you, 

E  R  M.  A  F  T  E  R  our  blefied  Saviottti  had  inflruded, 
Lxxiii.  ^/\  and  fent  forth  hie  diLiples,  he  hunfclf  went 
abroad  to  preach  unto  the  cities  of  Ifrael ;  particu- 
larly he  fpent  much  time  in  the  cities  of  Galilee,  Cho- 
razin,  and  Bethfaida,  and  Capernaum,  preaching  the 
gofpel  to  them,  and  working  many  and  great  mira- 
cles among  them  ;  but  with  little  or  no  fucccfs  : 
which  was  the  caufe  of  his  denouncing  this  terrible 
woe  againd:  them,  ver.  20.  ''  Then  began  he  to 
"  upbraid  the  cities,  wherein  moil  of  his  mighty 


"  works 


where  the  gofpel  is  preached,  4051 

^^  works  were  done,  becaufc  they  repented  not.  Woe  S  i-^  R  M. 
*'  unto  thee  Chorazin,*' &c. 

In  which  words  our  Saviour  declares  the  fad  and 
miferable  condition  of  thofe  two  cities,  Chorazin  and 
Bethfaida,  which  had  negledlcd  fuch  an  opportunity, 
and  refifted  and  withftood  fuch  means  of  repentance, 
as  would  have  effedtually  recluimed  the  moft  wicked 
cities  and  people  that  can  be  inflanced  in  any  age. 
Tyre  and  Sidon  and  Sodom  ;  and  therefore  he  tells 
them,  that  their  condition  was  much  worfe,  and  that 
they  fhould  fall  under  a  heavier  fentence  at  the  day 
of  judgment,  than  the  people  of  thofe  cities,  whom 
they  had  always  looked  upon  as  the  greatcft  fmners 
that  ever  were  in  the  world.  This  is  the  plain  mean- 
ing of  the  words  in  general ;  but  yet  there  are  fome 
di^"^culties  in  them,  which  1  fnall  endeavour  to  clear, 
and  then  proceed  to  raife  fuch  obfervations  from 
them,  as  may  be  inftru(5live  and  ufeful  to  us. 

The  difficulties  are  thefe  : 

I.  What  repentance  is  here  fpoken  of;  whether 
an  external  repentance,  in  fhew  and  appearance  only, 
or  an  inward  and  real  and  fincere  repentance. 

II.  In  w!iat  fenfe  it  is  faid,  that  "  Tyre  and  Sidon 
*'  would  have  repented." 

III.  What  is  meant  by  their  "  would  have  repent- 
*'  ed  long  ago." 

IV.  How  this  afTertion  of  our  Saviour,  that 
miracles  would  have  converted  Tyre  and  Sidon,  is 
reconcilable  with  that  other  faying  of  his,  Luk.  xvi. 
31.  in  tiie  parable  ot  the  rich  man  and  Lazarus,  that 
"  thofe  who  believed  not  Moles  and  the  prophets, 
*'  neither  would  they  be  perfuadcd,  though  one  rofc 
*'  from  the  dead." 

I.  What  repciitance  is  here  fpoken  of ;  wliethcr  a 
mere  external  and  hypocritical  repentance  in  Ihcw 

agi 


">  o  r  2  ^he  danger  of  impenitence^ 

s  E  R  M.  and  appearance  only,  or  an  inward  and  real  and  fin- 

CLXXIII.  ^      ^ 

cere  repentance. 

The  reafon  of  this  doubt  depends  upon  the  dif- 
ferent theories  of  divines,  about  the  fufficiency  of 
grace  accompanying  the  outward  means  of  repen- 
tance, and  whether  an  irrefifbible  degree  of  God's 
grace  be  nccefTary  to  repentance  :  for  they  who  deny 
fufficient  grace  to  accompany  the  outward  means  of 
repentance,  and  afTert  an  irrefiilible  degree  of  God's 
grace  neceflary  to  repentance,  are  forced  to  fay,  that 
our  Saviour  here  fpeaks  of  a  mere  external  repen- 
tance :  becaufe  if  he  fpake  of  an  inward  and  fincere 
repentance,  then  it  muft  be  granted,  that  fufficient 
inward  grace  did  accompany  the  miracles  that  were 
wrought  in  Chorazin  and  Bethfaida,  to  bring  men  to 
repentance  ;    becaufe  what  was  afforded  to  them, 
would  have  brought  Tyre  and  Sidon  to  repentance. 
And  that  which  would  have  effedled  a  thing,  cajanoc 
be  denied  to  be  fufficient ;  fo  that  unlefs  our  Savi- 
our here  fpeaks  of  a  mere  external  repentance,  either 
the  outward  means  of  repentance,  as  preaching  and 
miracles,  muft  be  granted  to  be  fufficient  to  bring 
men  to  repentance,  without  the  inward  operation  of 
God's  grace  upon  the  minds  of  men  \  or  elfe  a  fuf- 
ficient degree  of  God's  grace  muft  be  acknowledged 
to  accompany  the  outward  means  of  repentance. 
Again,  if  an  irrefiftible  degree  of  grace  be  necefiary 
to  true  repentance,  it  is  plain,  Chorazin  and  Beth- 
faida had  it  not,  becaufe  they  did  not  repent ;  and 
yet  without  this  Tyre  and  Sidon  could  not  fmcerely 
have  repented  \  therefore  our  Saviour  here  muft 
Ipeak  of  a  mere  external  repentance.     Thus  fome  ar- 
gue, as  they  do  likewife  concerning  the  repentance  of 
Nineveh,  making  thatalfoto  be  merely  external,  be- 
caufe they  are  loth  to  allow  true  repentance  to  hea- 
thens. But 


wbere  ttje  gojpel  is  preacUea,  4^53 

But  it  feems  very  plain,  that  our  Saviour  does  S  R  R  M. 
fpeak  of  an  inward  and  true  and  fincere  repentance  •, 
and  therefore  the  do6lrines  that  will  not  admit  this,  are 
not  true.  For  our  Saviour  fpeaks  of  the  fame  kind 
of  repentance,  that  he  upbraided  them  with  the  want 
of,  in  the  verfe  before  the  text.  "  Then  began  he 
"  to  upbraid  the  cities  wherein  moll  of  his  mighty 
"  works  were  done,  becaufe  they  repented  not  •,'* 
that  is,  becaufe  they  were  not  brougltt  to  a  fincere 
repentance  by  his  preaching,  which  was  confirmed 
by  fuch  great  miracles.  It  is  true  indeed,  he  men- 
tions the  outward  figns  and  expreiTions  of  repentance, 
when  he  fays,  "  they  would  have  repented  in  fack- 
"  cloth  and  afhes  i"  but  not  as  excluding  inward 
and  real  repentance,  but  fuppoling  it,  as  is  evident 
from  what  is  faid  in  the  next  verfe,  "  It  fhallbe  more 
"  tolerable  for  Tyre  and  Sidon  at  the  day  of  judg- 
*'  ment,  than  for  you  :"  for  though  an  external  and 
hypocritical  repentance  may  prevail  with  God  to  put 
off  temporal  judgments,  yet  furely  it  will  be  but  a  very 
fmall,  if  any  mitigation  of  our  condemnadon  at  the 
day  of  judgment :  fo  that  the  repentance  here  fpokeri 
of  cannot,  without  great  violence  to  the  fcope  and 
defign  of  our  Saviour's  argument,  be  underftood 
only  of  an  external  fhew  and  appearance  of  repentance. 

II.  The  next  diflicuky  to  be  cleared,  is,  in  what 
fenfe  it  is  here  faid,  that  "  if  the  mighty  works 
"  which  were  done"  by  our  Saviour  among  the 
Jews,  "  had  been  done  in  Tyre  and  Sidon,  they 
*'  would  have  repented." 

Some  to  avoid  the  inconvenience  which  they  ap- 
prehend to  be  in  the  more  ftridl  and  literal  fcnfc  of 
the  words,  look  upon  them  as  hyperbolical,  as  we 
fay  fuch  a  thing  would  move  a  (tone,  or  the  like, 
when  we  would  exprcfs  fomething  to  be  very  fad  and 

grievous  > 


CXXLIII. 


"/  Q  J-  A  Ti'he  danger  of  impenitence, 

SE  R  M.  grievous  ;  fo  here  to  aggravate  the  impenitence  of 
the  Jews,  our  Saviour  fays,  that  they  refifled 
thofe  means  of  repentance,  which  one  would  think 
fhould  almofl  have  prevailed  upon  the  greateft  and 
moil  obdurate  Tinners  that  ever  were  \  but  not  in- 
tending to  affirm  any  fuch  thing. 

But  there  is  no  colour  for  this,  if  we  confider  that 
our  Saviour  reafonsfrom  the  fuppofition  of  fuch  a 
thing,  that  therefore  the  cafe  of  Tyre  and  Sidon 
would  really  be  "  more  tolerable  at  the  day  of  judg- 
^'  ment  than  theirs  •,"  becaufe  they  would  have  re- 
pented, but  the  Jews  did  not. 

Others  perhaps  underfland  the  words  too  ftrldlly, 
as  if  our  Saviour  had  fpoken  according  to  v/h;t  he 
certainly  foreknew  would  have  happened  to  the  peo- 
ple of  Tyre  and  Sidon,  if  fuch  miracles  had  been 
wrought  among  them.  And  no  doubt  but  in  that 
cafe  God  did  certainly  know  what  they  would  have 
done  :  but  yet  I  lliould  rather chufe  to  underfband  the 
words  as  fpoken  popularly,  according  to  what  in  all 
human  appearance  and  probability  would  have  hap- 
pened, if  fuch  external  means  of  repentance,  ac- 
companied with  an  ordinary  grace  of  God,  had  been 
afforded  to  them  of  Tyre  and  Sidon.  And  thus  the  old 
Latin  interpreter  feems  to  have  underftood  the  next 
words,  *'  if  the  mighty  works  which  have  been 
*'  done  in  thee,  had  been  done  in  Sodom,  Bfjcsivocv  civ,^' 
forte  manfiffent,  "  it  would  perhaps  have  remained 

to  this  day,  in  all  likelihood  it  had  continued  till 

now."  Much  the  fame  with  that  paffage  of  the 
prophet,  Ezek.  iii.  5,  6.  "  Thou  art  not  fent  to  a 
"  people  of  a  ftrange  fpeech,  and  of  a  hard  lan- 
*'  guage,  but  to  the  houfe  of  Ifracl  :  Surely  had  I 
*'  fent  thee  to  them,  they  wouki  have  hearkened  un- 
*'  to  thee  i"  that  is,  in  all  probability  they  would, 
I  therq 


6C 


^ber-e  the  gpfpel  is  preached.  4  ^  5  C 

there  is  little  doubt  to  be  made  of  the  contrary.  And  S  f  R  \f . 

this  is  fufficient  foundation  for  our  Saviour's  reafon-  y^^^ \ 

ing  afterwards,  that  "  it  fhall  be  more  tolerable  for 
**  Tyre  and  Sidon  in  the  day  of  judgment  than  for 
*^  them/*  And  if  we  may  judge  what  they  would 
have  done  before,  by  what  they  did  afterward,  there  is 
more  than  probability  for  it :  for  we  read  in  the  2  ill 
chapter  of  the  A(5ls,  ver.  3.  and  ver.  27.  that  the  in- 
habitants of  Tyre  and  Sidon  received  the  gofpel,  and 
kindly  entertained  St.  Paul,  when  the  Jews  rejeded 
them  both.     The 

III.  Thing  to  be  cleared,  is,  what  is  meant  by 
long  ago  ;  "  they  would  have  repented  long  ago." 

Some  underftand  this,  as  if  our  Saviour  had 
faid,  they  would  not  have  flood  our  fo  long  againfl 
fo  much  preaching,  and  fg  many  miracles  •,  but  would 
at  firft  have  repented^  long  before  our  Saviour 
gave  over  Chorazin  and  Bethfaida  for  obflinate  and 
incorrigible  finners  ;  they  would  not  only  have  re- 
pented at  laft,  but  much  fooner  and  without  fo 
much  ado. 

But  this  does  not  feem  to  be  the  meaning  of  the 
words  ;  but  our  Saviour  feems  to  refer  to  thofc 
ancient  times  long  ago,  when  the  prophets  denoun- 
ced judgments  againft  Tyre  and  Sidon,  particularly 
the  prophet  Ezekiel ;  and  to  fay,  that  if  in  thofc  days 
the  preaching  of  that  prophet  had  been  accompanied 
with  fuch  miracles  as  our  Saviour  wrought  in  the 
cities  of  Galilee,  Tyre  and  Sidon  would  in  thofc 
days  have  repented. 

The  laft  and  greateft  difficulty  of  all  is,  how  this 
afiertion  of  our  Saviour,  that  miracles  would  have 
converted  Tyre  and  Sidon,  is  reconcilable  with  that 
difcourfe  of  our  Saviour's,  Luke  xvi.  in  the  pa- 
rable of  the  rich  man  and  Lazarus,  that  "  thole 

Vol.  IX.  xo  D  *'  who 

6 


7he  danger  of  impenitence ^ 

^^  who  would  not  believe  Mofes  and  the  prophets, 
"  would  not  have  been  perfuaded,  though  one  had 
^'  rofe  from  the  dead." 

The  true  anfwer  to  which  difficulty  in  fhort  is 
this  ;  that  when  our  Saviour  fays,  "  if  they  be- 
''  lieve  not  Mofes  and  the  prophets,  neither  will 
'^  tney  be  prrfuaded  though  one  rofe  from  the  dead," 
he  does  not  hereby  weaken  the  force  of  miracles,  or 
their  aptnefs  to  convince  men  and  bring  them  to  re- 
pentance, but  rather  confirm  it  ;  becaufe  Mofes  and 
x\:vt  prophets  had  the  atteftation  of  many  and  great 
iTsiracIes,  and  therefore  there  was  no  reafon  to  tiiink, 
that  thsy  who  would  not  believe  the  writings  and 
dodrine  of  Mofes  and  the  prophets,  which  had  the 
confirmation  of  fo  many  miracles,  and  was  owned  by 
thcmfeives  to  have  fo,  ihould  be  wrought  upon  by 
one  particular  miracle,  ^'  the  coming  of  one  from 
"  the  dead,  and  fpeaking  unto  them:"  or  however 
this  might  move  and  afloniili  them  for  the  prefent, 
yet  it  was  not  likely  that  the  grace  of  God  fhould 
concur  with  fuch  an  extraordinary  means,  to  ren^ 
der  it  efFediual  to  their  convcriion  and  repentance, 
who  had  wilfully  defpifed  and  obfiinately  rejedled 
that  which  had  a  much  greater  confirmation,  than  the 
difcourfc  of  a  man  rifen  from  the  dead,  and  was  ap- 
pointed by  God  for  the  ordinary  and  (landing  means 
of  bringing  men  to  repentance.  So  that  our  Savi- 
our might  with  reafon  enough  pronounce  that  Tyre 
and  Sidon,  who  never  had  a  (landing  revelation  of 
God  to  bring  them  to  repentar^ce,  nor  had  rejcdled 
it,  would  upon  niiracles  extraordinarily  wrought  a- 
mong  them,  have  repented  ;  and  yet  deny  it  tM^- 
where  to  be  hkely,  that  they  who  rejected  a.fband^ 
ing  revelation  of  Goo,  confirmed  by  miracles,  which 
e^lie^  ^hem  to  repentance,  would  probably  be  brought 


where  the  gofpel  is  preached,  4^5/ 

to  repentance  by  a  pariticular  miracle  •,  or  that  God  ^  j^"-  '^  ''^• 
fhould  afford  his  grace  to  make  it  cffcc1:ual  for  their 
repentance  and  falvation. 

The  words  being  thus  cleared,  I  come  now  to 
raife  fuch  obfervations  from  them,  as  may  be  in- 
flrudtive  and  ufefiil  to  us. 

I.  I  obferve  from  this  difcoiirfe  of  onr  Saviour, 
that  miracles  are  of  great  force  and  efTicacy  to  bring 
men  to  repentance. 

This  our  Saviour's  difcourfe  here  fuppofeth  \ 
otherwife  their  impenitence  had  not  been  fo  criminal 
and  inexcufable  upon  that  account,  "  that  fuch 
"  mighty  works  had  been  done  among  them,'*  as 
would  probably  have  prevailed  upon  fome  of  the 
worft  people  that  had  been  in  the  world  •,  for  fuch 
were  the  inhabitants  of  Tyre  and  Sidon,  guilty  of 
great  covetoufnefs  and  fraud,  pride  and  luxury, 
the  ufual  fins  of  places  of  great  traffick  and  com- 
merce :  and  fuch  to  be  fure  was  Sodom  -,  and  yet  our 
Saviour  tells  us,  that  the  miracles  which  he  had 
wrought  in  the  cities  of  Ifrael,  would  in  all  proba- 
bility have  brought  thofe  great  finners  to  repentance  j 
namely,  by  bringing  them  to  faith,  and  convincing 
them  of  the  truth  and  divinity  of  that  doctrine  which 
he  preached  unto  them,  and  which  contains  fuch 
powerful  arguments  to  repentance .  and  am-endmcnt 
of  life. 

II.  I  obferve  likewife  from  our  Saviour's  dif- 
courfe,  that  God  is  not  always  obliged  to  work  mi- 
racles for  the  converfion  of  finners.  It  is  great  good- 
nefs  in  him  to  aiFord  fufficient  means  of  repentance 
to  men,  as  he  did  to  Tyre  and  Sidon,  in  calHng 
them  to  repentance  by  his  prophet  •,  tliough  fuch 
miracles  were  not  wrought  among  them,  as  God 
thought  fit  to  accompany  our  Saviour's  preaching 
WithaL  20  D  i  This 


The  danger  of  impenitence^ 

This  I  obferve^  to  prevent  a  kind  of  bold  and  faucy 
objedlion^  which  fome  would  perhaps  be  apt  to  make  \ 
if  Tyre  and  Sidon  would  have  repented,  had  fuch 
miracles  been  wrought  among  them^  as  our  Saviour 
wrought  in  Chorazin  and  Bethfaida,  why  were  they 
not  wrought,  that  they  might  have  repented  ?    To 
which  it  is  fufficient  anfwer  to  fay,  that  God  is  not 
obliged  to  do  all  that  is  poflible  to  be  done,  to  re- 
claim men  from  their  fins  ;  he  is  not  obliged  to  over- 
power their  wills,  and  to  work  irrefiftibly  upon  their 
minds,  which  he  can  eafily  do  \  he  is  not  obliged  to 
work  miracles  for  every  particular  man's  convidlion  ; 
nor  where  he  vouchfefeth  to  do  tins,  is  he  obliged 
always  to  wo^k  the  greateft  and  moft  convincing 
miracles  i  his  goodnefs  will  not  fuffer  him  to  omit 
what  is  neceflary  and  fufficient  to  bring  men  to  re- 
pentance and  happinefs,  nay  beyond  this  he  many 
times  does  more  ;  but  it  is  fufficieht  to  vindicate  tkc 
juflice  and  goodnefs  of  God,  that  he  is  not  wanting 
to  us,  in  affording  the  means  neceflary  to  Feclaim  us 
from  our  finSy  and  to  bring  us  to  goodnefs.     That 
which  is  properly  our  part,  is  to  make  ufe  of  thofe 
means  which  God  affords  us  to  become  better,  and 
not  to  prefcribe  to  him.  how  much  he  fhould  do  for 
us ;  to  be  thankful  that  he  hath  done  fo  much,  and 
not  to  find  fault  with  him  for  having  done  no  more. 
III.  I  obferve  farther  from  our  Saviour's  diir 
courfe,  that  the  external  means  of  repentance  which 
God  affords  to  men,  do  fuppofe  an  inward  grace  of 
God  accompanying  them,  fufficiently  enabling  men 
to  repent,  if  it  be  not  their  own  fault  ^  I  lay  a  fuf- 
ficient grace  of  God   accompanying   the    outward 
means  of  repentance,  till  by  our  wiltul  and  obftinate 
ncgledl  and  rcfiftance  and  oppofition  of  ths  grace, 
we  provoke  God  to  withdraw  it  from  the  means,  or 
i  eliib 


ivhere  the  gofpel  is  freached.  4^59 

clfe  to  withdraw  both  the  grace  and  the  means  from  S  E  R  M". 
us  ;  otherwife  impenitence  after  fuch  external  means  ^^^^"^• 
afforded,  would  be  no  new  and  fpecial  fault.  For 
if  the  concurrence  of  God's  grace  with  the  outward 
means  be  neccflary  to  work  repentance,  then  the  impe- 
nitence of  thofe  to  whom  this  grace  is  not  afforded, 
which  yet  is  neceffary  to  repentance,  is  neither  any  new 
fin,  nor  any  new  aggravation  of  their  former  impe- 
nitence. For  no  man  can  imagine  that  the  juft  God 
will  charge  men  with  new  guilt,  and  increafe  their  con- 
demnation, for  remaining  impenitent  in  fuch  circum- 
ftances  in  which  it  is  impoffible  for  them  to  repent. 
IV.  I  obferve  from  this  difcourfe  of  our  Savi- 
our's, that  an  irrefiftible  degree  of  grace  is  not  ne- 
ceffary to  repentance,  nor  commonly  afforded  to 
thofe  who  do  repent.  God  nwy  where  he  pieafeth, 
without  injury  to  any  man,  over-power  his  will,  and 
ftop  him  in  his  courfe,  and  hinder  him  from  making 
himfelf  miferable,and  by  an  irrefiftible  right  convince 
him  of  his  error  and  the  evil  of  his  ways,  and  bring 
him  to  a  better  mind  :  But  this  God  feldom  does  ; 
and  when  he  doe^  it,  it  is  very  probable  it  is  not  fo 
much  for  their  own  fakes>  as  to  make  them  inftru- 
ments  of  good  to  others.  Thus  by  a  fecret  but  over- 
powering influence  he  over-ruled  the  difciples  to  fol- 
low our  Saviour,  and  to  leave  their  calling  and 
relations,  and  all  their  temporal  concernments  to  do 
it.  But  one  of  the  moft  remarkable  examples  of  thii 
extraordinary  grace  of  God,  is  St.  Paul,  who  was 
violently  ftopt  in  his  courfc  of  perfecuting  the  Chrif- 
tians,  and  convinced  of  his  fin,  and  brought  over 
to  chriftianity,  in  a  very  extraordinary  and  forcibk 
manner.  And  of  this  miraculous  and  extraordinary 
converfion,GoD  himfelf  gives  this  account,  "  that  he 
"  was  a  chokn  vcffd  unto  him,  to  bear  his  nara^c 

**"  before 


jI 


4060  "The  danger  of  impenitence^ 

"  before  the  Gentiles  and  kings,  and  the  children  of 
''  Ifrael,"  Ads.  ix.  15.  And  St.  Paul  tells  us,  Gal. 
i.  15,  16.  "  That  for  this  end  God  had  feparated 
him  from  his  mother's  womb,  and  called  him  by 
his  grace,  and  revealed  his  Son  to  him"  in  that 
extraordinary  manner,  "  that  he  might  preach  hira 
*'  among  the  heathen." 

But  generally  God  does  not  bring  men  thus  to  re- 
pentance ;  nor  is  it  neceffary  he  fhould.  For  if  an 
irrefiftible  degree  of  grace  were  always  neceffary  to 
bring  men  to  repentance,  there  could  be  no  difference 
between  the  impenitence  of  Chorazin  and  Bethfaida, 
and  of  Tyre  and  Sidon.  For  according  to  this  doc- 
trine of  the  neceffity  of  irrefiftible  grace  to  the  con- 
verfion  of  every  man,  it  is  evident,  that  Tyre  and 
Sidon  neither  could,  nor  would  have  repented,  with- 
out an  irrefiftible  degree  of  God's  grace, accompany- 
ing the  outward  means  of  repentance  which  he  af- 
forded to  them  ;  becaufe  fuch  a  degree  of  grace  is 
neceffary  to  repentance,  and  without  it,  it  is  impof- 
fible  for  any  man  to  repent.  But  then  it  is  as  plain 
on  the  contrary,  that  if  Chorazin  and  Bethfaida  had 
had  the  fame  irrefiftible  degree  of  God's  grace,  to- 
gether with  the  outward  means  of  repentance  afford- 
ed to  them,  that  they  would  have  repented  as  cer- 
tainly as  Tyre  and  Sidon.  Where  then  is  the  reafon 
of  upbraiding  the  impenitence  of  the  one,  more  than 
of  the  other  ?  Where  the  aggravation  of  the  one's 
guilt  above  the  other  ?  Where  the  juftice  of  punifh- 
ing  the  impenitence  of  Chorazin  and  Bethfaida, 
more  than  theirs  of  Tyre  and  Sidon  ?  For  upon  this 
fuppofition,  they  muft  either  have  repented  both  alike, 
or  have  been  both  equally  impenitent.  The  fum  of 
what  I  have  faid,  is  this,  that  if  no  man  does,  nor 
can  repent,  without  fuch  a  degree  of  God's  grace  as 

cannoc 


where  the  go/pel  is  preached,  4061 

cannot  be  refifled,  no  man's  repentance  is  commen-  s  r,  R  M. 
dable,  nor  is  one  man's  impenitence  more  blameable  ^^''^^"^• 
than  another's  ;  Chorazin  and  Bethfaidacan  be  in  no 
more  fault  for  continuing  impenitent,  than  Tyre  and 
Sidon  were.  For  either  this  irrefirtible  grace  is  af- 
forded to  men  or  not :  if  it  be,  their  repentance  is 
neceifary,  and  they  cannot  help  it  -,  if  it  be  not,  their 
repentance  is  impoffible,  and  confequently  their  im- 
penitence is  neceiiary,  and  they  cannot  help  it  neither. 

V.  I  obferve  from  the  main  fcope  of  our  Savi- 
our's difcourfe,  that  the  fins  and  impenitence  of  men 
receive  their  aggravation,  and  confequently  fhall  have 
their  puniinment  proportionable  to  the  opportunities 
and  means  of  repentance,  which  thofe  perfons  have 
enjoyed  and  negledled. 

For  what  is  here  faid  of  miracles,  is  by  equality 
of  reafon  likewife  true  of  all  other  advantages  and 
means  of  repentance  and  falvation.  The  reafon  why 
miracles  will  be  fuch  an  aggravation  of  the  condem- 
nation of  men  is,  becaufe  they  are  fo  proper  and 
powerful  a  means  to  convince  them  of  the  truth  and 
divinity  of  that  do(5lrine  which  calls  them  to  repen- 
tance. So  that  all  thofe  means  which  God  affords 
to  us  of  the  knowledge  of  our  duty,  of  convicStion 
of  the  evil  and  danger  of  a  finful  courfe,  are  fo  many 
helps  and  motives  to  repentance,  and  confequently 
will  prove  fo  many  aggravations  of  our  fin  and  pu- 
nifhment,  if  we  continue  impenitent.     The 

VI.  and  lafc  obfervation,  and  which  naturally  fol- 
lows from  the  former,  is  this,  that  the  cafe  of  thofe 
who  are  impenitent  under  the  gofpel,  is  of  all  others 
the  moft  dangerous,  and  their  damnation  Ihall  be 
heavieft  and  moft  feverc. 

And  this  brings  the  cafe  of  thefe  cities  here  in  the 
text  home  to  ourfdves.    For  in  truth  there  is  no  ma- 
terial 


4062  ^ke  danger  of  impenitence^ 

SERM.  terial  difference  between  the  cafe  of  Chorazin  and 
*  Bethfaida  and  Capernaum,  and  of  ourfelves  in  this 
city  and  nation,  who  enjoy  the  clear  hght  of  the 
gofpel,  with  all  the  freedom,  and  all  the  advantages 
that  any  people  ever  did.  The  mercies  of  God  to 
this  nation  have  been  very  great,  efpecially  in  bring- 
ing us  out  of  that  darknefs  and  fuperftition,  which 
covered  this  weftern  part  of  the  world  ;  in  refcuing 
us  from  that  great  corruption  and  degeneracy  of  the 
chriilian  religion  which  prevailed  among  us,  by  fo 
early  and  fo  regular  a  reformation  \  and  in  continu- 
ing fo  long  this  great  blefling  to  us.  The  judg- 
ments of  God  have  been  likewife  very  great  upon 
us  for  our  fins:  "  God  hath  manifefted  himfelf  by 
**  terrible  things  in  righteoufnefs ;"  our  eyes  have 
feen  many  and  difmal  calamities  in  the  fpace  of  a  few 
years,  which  call  loudly  upon  us  to  repent  and  turn 
to  God.  God  hath  afforded  us  the  moft  effedlual 
means  of  repentance,  and  hath  taken  the  moft  effec- 
tual courfe  of  bringing  us  to  it.  And  though  our 
blefied  Saviour  do  not  fpeak  to  us  in  perfon,  nor 
do  we  at  this  day  fee  miracles  wrought  among  us,  as 
the  Jews  did  ;  yet  we  have  the  dodlrine  which  our 
bleffed  Saviour  preached,  faithfully  tranfmittcd  to 
us,  and  a  credible  relation  of  the  miracles  wrought 
for  the  confirmation  of  that  dodrine,  and  many  other 
argu/nents  to  perfuade  us  of  the  truth  of  it,  which 
thoTe  to  whom  our  Saviour  fpake  had  not,  nor 
could  not  then  have,  taken  from  the  accompliihing 
of  our  Saviour's  predidions,  after  his  death;  the 
fpeedy  propagation  and  wonderful  fuccefs  of  this  doc- 
trine in  the  world,  by  weak  and  inconfiderable  means, 
againft  all  the  power  and  oppofition  of  the  world  j 
the  deftrudlion  of  Jerufalem,  and  the  difperfion  of 
the  Jewilh  nation,  according  to  our  Saviour's  pro* 

phecy  ^ 


^here  the  go/pel  is  preached,  4063 

phecy ;  befides  many  more  that  mio-ht  be  mention-  ^^  ^^  R  ^'^- 
ed.  And  which  is  a  mighty  advantage  to  us,  we  are  ^  '  ' 
free  from  thofe  prejudices  againft  the  perfon  of  our 
Saviour  and  his  do6lrine,  which  the  Jews,  by  the 
reverence  which  they  bare  to  their  rulers  and  teach- 
ers, were  generally  polTcfs'd  withal ;  we  are  brought 
up  in  the  belief  of  it,  and  have  drunk  it  in  by  edu- 
cation ;  and  if  we  believe  it,  as  we  all  profefs  to  do, 
we  have  all  the  obligation  and  all  the  arguments  to 
repentance,  which  the  Jews  could  poiTibly  have  from 
the  miracles  which  they  faw  ;  for  they  were  means  of 
repentance  to  them  no  otherwife  than  as  they  brought 
them  to  the  belief  of  our  Saviour's  dodrine,  which 
called  them  to  repentance. 

So  that  if  we  continue  impenitent,  the  fame  woe 
is  denounced  againft  us  that  is  againft  Chorazin  and 
Bethfaida ;  and  we  may  be  faid  with  Capernaum, 
*'  to  be  lifted  up  to  heaven,"  by  the  enjoyment  of 
the  moft  excellent  means  and  advantages  of  falvation, 
that  any  people  ever  did,  which  if  we  negled,  and 
Hill  continue  wicked  and  impenitent  under  them,  we 
may  juftly  fear,  that  with  them  "  we  Iliall  be  throwa 
"  down  to  hell,"  and  liave  our  place  in  the  lowcft 
part  of  that  difmal  dungeon,  and  in  the  very  center 
of  that  fiery  furnace. 

Never  was"  there  greater  caufc  to  upbraid  the  im- 
penitence of  any  people,  than  of  us,  confidering  the 
means  and  opportunities  which  we  enjoy  -,  and  never 
had  any  greater  reafon  to  fear  a  feverer  doom,  tlian 
we  have.  Impenitence  in  a  heathen  is  a  great  fin  ; 
dfe  how  fhould  God  judge  the  world  ?  But  Goi> 
takes  no  notice  of  that,  in  comparifon  ol  the  impeni- 
tence of  Chriftians,  who  enjoy  the  gofpcl,  and  are 
convinced  of  the  truth,  and  upon  the  greateft  rcaibii 
in  the  world  profefs  to  believe  it.      \Vc  Chrillians 

Vol.  IX.  20  E  have 

6 


1*he  danger  of  impenitence^ 

E.RM.  have  all  the  obligations  to  repentance,  that  realbn 
and  revelation,  nature  and  grace  can  lay  upon  us. 
Art  thou  convinced  that  thou  haft  finned,  and  done 
that  which  is  contrary  to  thy  duty,  and  thereby  pro- 
voked the  wrath  of  God,  and  incenfed  his  juftice 
againft  thee  ?  As  thou  art  a  man,  and  upon  the 
ftock  of  natural  principles,  thou  art  obliged  to  re- 
pentance. The  fame  light  of  reafon  which  difcovers 
to  thee  the  errors  of  thy  life,  and  challengeth  thee 
for  thy  impiety  and  intemperance,  for  thy  injuftice 
and  opprefiion,  for  thy  pride  and  pafTion  ;  the  fame 
natural  confcience  which  accufeth  thee  of  any  mif— 
carriages,  does  oblige  thee  to  be  forry  for  them,  "  to 
*'  turn  from  thy  evil  ways,  and  to  break  off  thy 
*'  fins  by  repentance."  For  nothing  can  be  more 
unreafonable,  than  for  a  man  to  know  a  fault,  and 
yet  not  think  himfelf  bound  to  be  forry  for  it  \  to  be 
convinced  of  the  evil  of  his  ways,  and  not  to  think 
himfelf  obliged  by  that  very  convidlion,  to  turn  from 
it  and  forfake  it.  If  there  be  any  fuch  thing  as  a 
natural  "  Jaw  written  in  mens  hearts,"  which  the  a- 
poftle  tells  us  the  heathens  had,  it  is  impoflible  to 
imagine,  but  that  the  law,  which  obligeth  men  not 
to  tranfgrefs,  fhould  oblige  them  to  repentance  in 
cafe  of  tranfgrelTion.  And  this  every  man  in  the 
world  is  bound  to,  though  he  had  never  feen  the  bi- 
ble, nor  heard  of  the  name  of  Christ.  And  the 
revelation  of  the  gofpel  doth  not  fuperfede  this  ob- 
ligation, but  adds  new  ftrength  and  force  to  it  :  and 
by  how  much  this  duty  of  repentance  is  more  clear- 
ly revealed  by  our  bleffed  Saviour  in  the  gofpel ; 
by  how  much  the  arguments  which  the  gofpel  ufeth 
to  pcrfuade  men,  and  encourage  them  to  repent- 
ance, are  greater  and  more  powerful.;  by  fo  much  is 
the  impenitence  of  thofe  who  live  under  the  gofpel 
the  more  inexciiflible.  Had 


where  the  ^ofpel  is  preached,  406^ 

Had  we  only  fome  faint  hopes  of  God's  mercy,  S  E  R  M. 
a  doubtful  opinion  and  weak  pcrfuafion  of  the  re- 
wards and  punifhmcnts  of  another  world  *,  yet  we 
have  a  law  within  us,  which  upon  the  probability  of 
thefe  confiderations  would  oblige  us  to  repentance. 
Indeed  if  men  were  aflured  upon  good  grounds,  that 
there  would  be  no  future  rewards  and  punilliments ; 
then  the  fan<5lion  of  the  law  were  gone,  and  it  would 
lofe  it's  force  and  obhgation  :  or  if  we  did  defpair 
of  the  mercy  of  God,  and  had  good  reafon  to  think 
repentance  impoflible,  or  that  it  would  do  us  no 
sood  ;  in  that  cafe  there  would  be  no  fuEcient  mo- 
tive  and  argument  to  repentance  :  for  no  man  can 
return  to  his  duty,  without  returning  to  the  love  of 
God  and  goodnefs  ;  and  no  man  can  return  to  the 
love  of  God,  who  beheves  that  he  bears  an  impla- 
cable hatred  againft  him,  and  is  refolved  to  make 
him  miferable  for  ever.  During  this  perfuafion  no 
man  can  repent.  And  this  feems  to  be  the  reafon, 
why  the  devils  continue  impenitent. 

But  the  heathens  were  not  without  hopes  of  God's 
mercy,  and  upon  thofe  fmall  hopes  which  they  had, 
they  encouraged  themfelves  into  repentance  \  as  you 
may  fee  in  the  inftance  of  the  Ninevitcs,  "  Let 
*'  them  turn  every  one  from  his  evil  ways,  and  from 
"  the  violence  that  is  in  his  hands.  Who  can  tell, 
*'  if  God  will  turn  and  repent,  and  turn  away  from 
*'  his  fierce  anger,  that  we  perifh  not  ?*'  Jonah  iii. 
S,  9.  But  if  we,  who  have  the  clearell  difcoverics, 
and  the  higheft  affuranc^i  of  this,  who  profcfs  to  be- 
lieve that  God  hath  declared  himfclf  placable  to  all 
mankind,  that  "  he  is  in  Christ  reconciling  the 
"  world  to  himfelf,"  and  that  upon  our  repentance  "  he 
"  will  not  impute  our  fins  to  us  •,"  if  we,  to  wlioni 
*'  the  wrath  of  God  is  revealed  from  heaven,  againft 

20  E  2  •  \'  all 


57v  danger  of  impenitence^  Sec, 

"  all  ungodlinefs  and  unrighteoufnefs  of  men>"  and 
to  whom  "  life  and  immortality  are  brought  to  light 
"  by  the  gofpel ;"  if  after  all  this,  we  ftill  go  on  in 
an  impenitent  courfe,  what  fliall  v/e  be  able  to  plead 
in  excufe  of  ourfelves  at  that  great  day  ?  "  The  men 
*'  of  Nineveh  fhall  rife  up  in  judgment"  againft 
fuch  an  impenitent  generation,  and  condemn  it  -,  be- 
caufe  they  repented  upon  the  terror  of  lighter  threaten- 
ings,  and  upon  the  encouragement  of  weaker  hopes. 
And  therefore  it  concerns  us,  who  call  ourfelves 
Chriflians,  and  enjoy  the  clear  revelation  of  the  gof- 
pel, to  look  about  us,  and  take  heed  how  we  con- 
tinue in  an  evil  courfe.  For  if  we  remain  impenitent, 
after  all  the  arguments  which  the  gofpel,  fuper-added 
to  the  light  of  nature,  affords  to  us  to  bring  us  to 
repentance,  it  (hall  not  only  "  be  more  tolerable  for 
"  the  men  of  Nineveh,  but  for  Tyre  and  Sidon,  for 
"  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,'*  the  moft  wicked  and 
impenitent  heathens,  "  at  the  day  of  judgment, 
*'  than  for  us."  For  becaufe  we  have  ftrongcr  ar- 
guments, and  more  powerful  encouragements  to 
repentance,  than  they  had,  if  we  do  not  repent,  we 
fhall  meet  with  a  heavier  doom,  and  a  fiercer  dam- 
nation. The  heathen  world  had  many  excufes  to 
plead  for  themfelves,  which  we  have  not,  "  The 
^'  times  of  that  ignorance  God  winked  at :  but  now 
^'  commands  all  men  every  where  to  repent  •,  becaufe 
he  hath  appointed  a  day,  in  the  which  he  will 
judge  the  v/orld  in  righteoufnefs,  by  that  man 
*'  whom  he  hath  ordained,  whereof  he  hath  given 
"  all u ranee  unto  all  men,  in  that  he  hath  raifed  him 
**  from  the  dead." 


SER. 


4067 
SERMON  CLXXI V. 

Of  the  immortality  of  the  foul,  as  difco- 
vered  by  nature,  and  by  revelation. 

2  TIM.  i.  10. 

But  is  now  made  mamfeft  hy  the  appear'mg  of  our 
SaviourJesus  Christ,  who  hath  aholified 
deaths  and  hath  brought  life  and  mmortality  t$ 
lights  through  the  gofpel. 

TH  E  defign  of  the  apoftle  in  thefe  two  cpi-  S  E  R  M. 
files  to  Timothy,  is  to  diredl  him  how  he  ^Jfl^^l^ 
ought  to   demean  himfelf,  in  the  office  which  he  The  firit 
bore  in  the  church  ;  which  he  does  in  the  firft  epi-  Sermon  on 
ftle  :  and  to  encourage  him  in  his  work  ;  which  he 
does  here  in  the  fecond  :  in  which,  after  his  ufual 
falutation,  he  endeavours  to  arm  him  againit  the  fear 
of  thofe  perfecutions,    and  the  Hiame  of  thofe  re- 
proaches, which  would  probably  attend  him  in  the 
work  of  the  Gofpel,  ver.  8.  "Be  not  thou  there- 
*'  fore  afhamed  of  the  teftimony  of  our  Lord,  nor 
*'  of  me  his  prifoner  •,  but  be  thou  partaker  of  the 
*'  affliftions  of  the  gofpel,  according  to  the  power 
*'  of  God,  who  hath  favcd  us,  and  called  us  with  an 
*'  holy  calling  •,"  as  if  he  had  faid,  the  God  whom 
thou  fervefl  in  this  employment,  and  by  whole  pow- 
er thou  art  flrengthcneJ,  is  he   that    "  hath  faved 
*'  and  called  us  with  an  holy  calling,"  that  is,  it  is 
he  who  by  Jesus  Christ  hath  brouglit  falvation  to 
us,  and  called  us  to  this  holy  profcflion  •,   "  not  ac- 
*'  cording  to  our  works,"  that  is,  not  that  we  by 
any  thing  that  we  have  done,  have  dckived  this  at 

his 


4o6S  Of  the  immortality  of  the  foul ^ 

;SRivL   }iis  hand,  but  "  accord  ins;  to  his  own  purpofe  and 

CLXXIV  .  . 

',  "  grace/'  that  is,  according  to  his  own  gracious  pur- 
pofe, "  which  was  given  us  in  Christ  before  the 
*'  world  began,"  that  is,  which  from  all  eternity 
he  decreed  and  determined  to  accomphfh  by  Jesus 
Christ  *,  "  but  is  now  mademanifeft  by  the  appear- 
*'  ing  of  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ  ;"  that  is, 
which  gracious  purpofe  of  his  is  now  clearly  difcover- 
ed  by  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ's  coming  into  the 
world,  "who  hath  aboliflied  death,  and  hath  brought 
"  life  and  immortality  to  light,  through  the  gofpel.'* 

Which  words  exprefs  to  us  two  happy  effects  of 
Christ's  appearance:  firfl,  "  the  aboHfhing  of 
*'  death  ;"  and,  fecondly,  "  the  bringing  of  life  and 
*'  immortality  to  light."  In  the  handling  of  thefe 
words,  I  Ihall, 

Firfl,  Open  to  you  the  meaning  of  the  feveral  ex- 
preffions  in  the  text. 

Secondly,  Shew  what  our  Saviour  Jesus 
Christ  did  towards  "  the  aboliihing  of  death,  and 
*'  bringing  to  light  Hfe  and  immortality." 

For  the  firft,  I  fhall  Ihew^ 

I.  Y/hat  is  here  meant  by  '^  the  appearing  of 
*'  Jesus  Christ." 

II.  What  by  the  "  abohlhing  of  death.'* 

III.  What  by  "  bringing  to  light  hfe  and  im- 
*'  mortahtv." 

I.  What  is  here  meant  by  "  the  appearing  of  our 
*'  Saviour  Jesus  Christ."  The  fcripture  ufeth 
feveral  phrafes  to  exprefs  this  thing  to  us.  As  it  was 
the  gracious  defign  of  God  the  Father,  fo  it  is  call- 
ed the  giving  ot  his  Son,  or  fending  him  into  the 
world.  John  iii.  i6.  "  God  fo  loved  the  world, 
"  thrt  he  gave  his  only  begotten  Son."  Gal.  iv.  4. 
"  In  the  fulnefs  of  time  God  fent  his  Son,"  As  it 
3  was 


a  difcovered  hy  nature^  and  by  revclatioji.     4069 

was  the  voluntary  undertaking  of  God  tlie  Son,  fo  S  '•.  R  M. 
it  is  called  his  coming  into  the  world.  In  relation  i^l!Z^ 
to  his  incarnation,  whereby  he  was  made  vifible  to 
us  in  his  body,  and  likewife  in  reference  to  the  ob- 
fcure  promifes,  and  prophecies,  and  types  of  the 
old  teftament,  it  is  called  his  manifeflation  or  ap- 
pearance. So  the  apoftle  exprelTeth  it,  i  John  iii. 
5.  "  Ye  know  that  he  was  manifefted  to  take  away 
*'  our  fins  ;"  by  which  we  are  to  underfland  prima- 
rily his  incarnation,  his  appearing  in  our  nature, 
whereby  he  became  vifible  to  us.  As  he  was  God, 
he  could  not  appear  to  us,  dwelling  in  light  and 
glory,  not  to  be  approached  by  us  in  this  fbate  of 
mortality,  and  therefore  he  clothed  himfclf  in  flcfli, 
that  he  might  appear  and  become  manifefl  to  us. 

I  fay,  by  his  appearing  we  are  primarily  to  under- 
ftand  his  incarnation  :  yet  not  only  that,  but  like- 
wife  all  that  was  confequcnt  upon  this,  the  adions 
of  his  life,  and  his  death  and  refurredlion  ;  becaiife 
all  thefe  concur  to  the  producing  of  thefe  happy  ef- 
fedts  mentioned  in  the  text. 

II.  What  is  meant  by  the  abolifliing  of  death." 
By  this  we  are  not  to  underfland,  that  Christ  by 
his  appearance  hath  rooted  death  out  of  the  world, 
fo  that  men  are  no  longer  fubjed:  to  it.  For  we  fee 
that  even  good  men,  and  thofe  who  are  partakers  of 
the  benefits  of  Christ's  death,  are  llilifubjcd;  to  the 
common  law  of  mortality  :  but  this  exprcfiion  of 
Christ's  having  abohlhed  death,  fignifies  the  con- 
queft  and  victory  which  Christ  hath  gained  over 
death  in  his  own  perfon,  in  that  after  he  was  dead, 
and  laid  in  his  grave,  he  rofe  again  from  the  dead, 
he  freed  himfclf  from  the  bands  of  deatii,  and  broke 
loofe  from  the  fetters  of  it,  they  not  being  able  to  liol  J 
him,  as  the  exprcfTion  is,  Acfls  ii.  24.  and  confe- 
qucnt ly 


4070  Of  the  immortality  of  the  foul^ 

S  E  R  M.  qucntly  hath,  by  this  vidory  over  it,  given  us  an  aflli* 
ranee  of  a  refurredion  to  a  better  life.     Ror  fincc 
Christ  hath  abolifhed  death,  and  triumphed  over 
it,  and  thereby  over  the  powers  of  darknefs  :  (for 
fo  the  apoftle  tells  us,  that  by  his  death,  and  that 
which  followed  it,  his  refurredion  from  the  dead, 
"  he  hath  deftroyed   him  that  had  the  power  of 
*'  death,  that  is,  the  devil."    The  devil,  he  contri- 
buted all  he  could  to  the  death  of  Christ,  by  tempt- 
ing Judas  to  betray  him,  and  engaging  all  his  in- 
llruments  in  the  procuring  of  it ;  as  he  had  before 
brought  in  death  into  the  world,  by  tempting  the 
'firft  man  to  fin,  upon  which  death  infued  \  thus  far 
he  prevailed,  and  thought  his  kingdom  was  fafe, 
having  procured  the  death  of  him  who  was  fo  great 
an  enemy  to  it  :  but  Christ,    by  rifing  from 
the  dead,  defeats  the  devil  of  his  defign,  and  plain- 
ly conquers  him,  who  had  arrogated  to  himfelf  the 
power  of  death  j)    I  fay,  fince  Christ  hath  thus 
vanquifhed  death,  and  triumphed  over  it,  and  him 
that  had  the  power  of  it,  death  hath  loft  it's  domi- 
nion, and  Christ  hath  taken  the  whole  power  and 
difpofal  of  it',  as  you  find.  Rev.  i,    18.     "  lam 
*'  he  that  liveth  and  was  dead,  and  behold  I  am 
*'  alive  for  evermore,  and  have  the  keys  of  hell  and 
*^  of  death."     Now  Christ  hath  not  only  thus 
conquered  death  for  himfelf,  but  likewife  for  all  thofc 
who  believe  on  him  ;  fo  that  death  Ihall  not  be  able 
to  keep  them  for  ever  under  it's  power :  but  Christ, 
by  the  fame  power  v/hereby  he  raifed  up  himfelf  from 
the  dead,  will  alfo  "  quicken  our  mortal  bodies,'* 
and  raife  them  up  to  a  new  life  ;  for  he  keeps  "  the 
*' keys  of  hell  and  deaths"  and  as  a  reward  of  his 
fulferings  and  fubmilTion  to  death,  he  hath  power  con-. 
ferred  upon  him,  "  to  give  eternal  life  to  as  many  as 

*'  he 


as  difcovered  by  nature,  aiid  by  revclatmt,  4071' 
;(  "  he  pleafes.'*  In  this  fenfe,  death,  though  it  be  not  S  r  u  \f . 
quite  chafed  out  of  the  world,  yet  it  is  virtually  and  v. 
in  effedb  "  aboliflied  by  the  appearance  of  Jesus 
"  Christ,"  having  in  a  great  meafure  loll  it's  power 
and  dominion  •,  and  fince  Christ  hath  alTured  us 
of  a  final  refcue  from  it,  the  power  of  it  is  rendered 
infignilicant  and  inconfiderable,  and  the  fling  and 
terror  of  it  is  taken  away.  So  the  apoflle  tells  us  in 
the  forementioned  place,  Heb.  ii.  14, 15.  that  Christ 
having  "  by  death  deflroyed  him  who  had  the 
"  power  of  death,  that  is,  the  devil,  he  hath  deli- 
"  vered  thofe  who  through  fear  of  death,  were  all 
"  their  life-time  fubied  to  bondage.'*  And  not  only 
the  power  and  terror  of  death  is  for  the  prefent  in  a 
great  meafure  taken  away  •,  but  it  fliall  at  lall  be  ut- 
terly deflroyed.  So  the  apoflle  tells  us,  i  Cor.  xv. 
26.  "  The  lafl  enemy  that  fliall  be  deftroyed  is 
"  death  ;"  which  makes  the  apoflle,  in  the  latter 
end  of  this  chapter,  to  break  forth  into  that  triumph, 
ver.  54,  S5*  "  ^^  ^^^^^  ^^^^^  corruptible  fliall  have 
"  put  on  incorruption,  and  this  mortal  fliall  have 
*'  put  on  immortality,  then  Hiall  be  brouglu  to  pafs 
*'  the  faying  that  is  written,  death  is  fwallowed  up  in 
"  vi6lory.  O  death,  where  is  thy  fling  ?  O  grave, 
'*  where  is  thy  victory  ?" 

III.  What  is  here  meant  by  ''  bringing  life  and 
"  immortality  to  light."  Life  and  immortality,  is 
here  by  a  frequent  Hcbraifn  put  for  immortal  life  ; 
as  alfo  immediately  before  the  text,  you  find  purpofc 
and  grace,  put  for  God's  gracious  purpole.  The 
phrafe  of  bringing  to  light,  is  fpoken  of  things  which 
were  before  either  wholly  or  in  a  great  meafure  iiid, 
either  were  not  at  all  difcovered  bcfc^rc,  or  not  fo 
clearly.  Now  becaufe  the  headiens  by  the  light  ot 
nature,  had  fome  probable  conjcdiurcs  and  hopes  con- 
VOL.  IX.  20^F  cernm- 

6 


^072  Of  the  mmortality  of  the  fouly 

S  E  R  M.   cernlno;  another  life  after  this,  they  were  in  fome 

CLXXIV 

meafare  perfuaded,  that  when  men  died,  they  were 
not  wholly  extinguilhed,  but  did  pafs  into  another 
world,  and  did  there  receive  rewards  fuited  to  their 
carriage  and  demeanour  in  this  life  ;  and  becaufe  the 
Jews  alfo,  before  Christ,  had  thefe  natural  fug- 
geftions  and  hopes  ftrcngthened  and  confirmed  by 
revelations,  which  God  made  unto  them  under  the 
old  teftament,  therefore  we  cannot  underftand  this 
phrafe  of  Christ's,"  bringing  immortal  life  to  light'* 
abfolutejy,  as  if  it  were  wholly  a  new  difcovery, 
which  the  world  had  no  apprehenfion  of  before  •,  but 
only  comparatively,  as  a  thing  which  was  now  ren- 
dered, by  the  coming  of  Christ  into  the  world,  in- 
comparably more  evident  and  manifeft.  ^icquid 
enim  philofophi^  quicquid  rabhini  ed  de  re  dicunt^  te- 
nelra  funt ^fi  ad  evangelii  lucem  comparentur ;  "  what- 
*'  ever  the  philofophers,  whatever  the  rabbins  fay  of 
"  this  matter,  is  but  darknefs,  compared  to  the 
"  clear  light  and  revelation  of  the  gofpel."  I  pro- 
ceed to  the 

Second  thing  I  propofed,  viz.  to  fhew  what 
Christ's  coming  into  the  world  hath  done  towards 
''  the  abolilhing  of  death,"  and  "  bringing  of  life 
"  and  immortality  to  light."  I  lliall  fpeak  diftindly 
to  thefe  two. 

I.  What  Christie  appearance  and  coming  into 
the  world  hath  done  towards  "  the  abolifhing  of 
"  death,''  or  how  "  death  is  abolifhed  by  the  ap- 
*'  pcarance  of  Christ,"  I  have  already  fliewn  in 
the  explication,  that  this  phrafe,  "  the  abolifhing  of 
*'  death,"  fignifies  the  conqueft  which  he  made  over 
death  in  his  own  perfon  for  himfelf ;  the  fruit  of 
which  vidory  redounds  to  us.  For  in  that  Christ 
by  his  divine  power  did  conquer  it,  and  fet  himfelf 

z  free 


as  dif covered  by  nature^  and  by  revelation.  4<^73 
free  from  the  bands  of  it,  this  Hiews  that  the  power  S  E  R  M. 
of  it  is  now  brought  into  other  hands,  that  "  Chri  st 
*'  hath  the  keys  of  hell  and  death  •/*  fo  that  though 
the  devil,  by  tempting  to  fin,  brought  death  into 
the  world,  yet  it  fliall  not  be  in  his  power  to  keep 
men  always  under  the  power  of  it ;  and  hereby  the 
terror  of  this  great  enemy  is  in  a  good  meafurc  taken 
away,  and  he  fhall  at  lall  be  totally  dcftroyed,  by  the 
fame  hand  tliat  hath  already  given  him  his  mortal 
wound. 

Now  this  is  fiid  to  be  done  by  "  the  appearing  of 
"  Jesus  Christ,"  for  as  much  as  by  his  coming 
into  the  world,  and  taking  our  nature  upon  him,  he 
became  capable  of  encountering  this  enemy  and  over- 
coming him,  in  fuch  a  manner  as  might  give  us  af- 
furance  of  a  final  vidtory  over  it,  and  for  the  prefent 
comfort  and  encourage  us  againft  the  fears  of  it.  For, 

I .  By  taking  our  nature  upon  him,  he  became  fub- 
jedl  to  the  frailties  and  miferics  of  mortaUty,  and  lia- 
ble to  the  fuiTering  of  death,  by  which  expiation  of 
fin  was  made.  Sin  was  the  cauf?  or  death.  So  the 
apoflle  tells  us,  "  by  man  fiii  entered  into  the  world, 
*'  and  death  by  fin,  fo  that  death  came  upon  all.'* 
Now  the  way  to  cure  this  malady  which  was  come 
upon  our  nature,  and  to  remove  this  great  mifchief 
which  was  come  into  the  world,  is  by  taking  away 
the  meritorious  caufe  of  it,  which  is  the  guilt  of  fin. 
Now  this  Christ  hath  taken  away  by  his  death. 
Christ,  that  he  might  abolifli  death,  hath  appeared 
for  "  the  abolition  of  fin.'*  So  the  apofi:le  tells  us, 
Hcb.  ix.  26,  27,  28.  "  But  now  once  in  the  end  of 

the  world  hath  he  appeared,  to  put  away  fin  by 

the  facrifice  of  himfell,  eiV  oL^^TY^tnv  dfxcc^ioc^,  tor 
*'  the  abolifhing  of  fin  :''  and  to  fiiew  that  this  was 
intended  as  a  remedy  of  the  great  mifchief  and  In- 

20  F  2  conve- 


CLXXn^ 


4074  Of  the  immortality  of  the  foul^ 

^7'Jt^^'  convenience  of  mortality,  which  fin  had  brought 
upon  mankind,  the  apoftle  immediately  adds  in  the 
next  verfe,  that  "  as  it  is  appointed  unto  all  men 
*'  once  to  die,  fo  Christ  was  once  offered  to  bear 
*'  the  fins  of  many  :'*  and  by  this  means  the  fling 
of  death  is  taken  away,  and  death  in  effe6t  conquer- 
ed 5  the  confideration  of  which  makes  the  apoftle 
break  out  into  that  thankful  triumph,  i  Cor.  xv. 
55-:  5^9  57'  "  O  death,  where  is  thy  fting  ?  O  grave, 
*'  where  is  thy  vidtory  ?  The  fting  of  death  is  fin  : 
*'  But  thanks  be  to  God^  which  giveth  us  the  vie- 
*'  tory  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ." 

2.  As  Christ  by  taking  our  nature  upon  him  be- 
came capable  of  fuffering  death,  and  thereby  making 
expiation  for  fin  ;  fo  by  dying  he  became  capable  of 
rifing  again  from  the  dead,  whereby  he  hath  gained 
a  perfed  vidlory  and  conqueft  over  death  and  the 
powers  of  darknefs.  And  this  account  the  apoftle 
gives  us  of  Christ's  taking  our  nature  upon  him, 
as  being  one  of  the  principal  ends  and  dcfigns  of  it, 
Heb.  ii.  14,  15, 16.  ''  For  as  much  then  as  the  chil- 
dren are  partakers  of  fiefh  and  blood,  he  alfo  himfelf 
*'  likewife  took  part  of  the  fame,  that  through  death 
*'  he  might  deftroy  him  that  had  the  power  of  death, 
"  that  is,  the  devil ;"  that  is,  that  by  taking  our 
nature  upon  him,  he  might  be  capable  of  encounter- 
ing this  enemy,  that  is,  of  encountering  death  in  his 
own  territories,  and  beating  him  in  his  own  quarters  ; 
gnd  by  rifing  out  of  his  grave,  he  might  give  us  full 
and  comfortable  aflurance  of  the  poffibility  of  being 
fefcued  from  the  power  of  the  grave,  and  recovered 
out  of  the  jaws  of  death.  And  therefore  the  wifdom 
of  God  pitched  upon  this  way,  as  that  which  was 
moft  fit  and  proper  to  encourage  and  bear  us  up 
^gainft  the  terrors  of  the  enemy  s  and  by  giving  us 

^  lively 


as  dtf covered  by  nature^  and  by  revelation,      4075 

a  lively  inftance  and  example  of  a  vidory  over  death,  S  E  R  M. 

atchievcd  by  one  clothed  with  mortality  like  our-  ^^^^'^■ 

felves,  *'  we  might  have  itrong  confolation  and  good 

**  hope  through  grace/'  and  might  be  fully  affured 

that  he  who  had  conquered  this  enemy  for  himfelf, 

was  able  alfo  to  conquer  him  for  us,  and  to  deliver 

us  from  the  grave.     Therefore  the  apoftle  rcafons 

from  the  fitnefs  and  fuitablenefs  of  this  difpenfation, 

as  if  no  other  argument  could  have  been  fo  proper  to 

arm  us  againft  the  fears  of  death,  and  to  latisfy  us 

that  we  fhould  not  always  be  held  under  the  power 

of  it ;  "  for  as  much  as  tlie  children  are  partakers 

"  of  flefli  and  blood,  he  alfo  himfelf  likewife  took 

*'  part  of  the  fame,  that  through  death  he  might 

"  deftroy  him  that  had  the  power  of  death,  and  de- 

**  liver  them  who  through  fear  of  death,"  &c.  The 

force  of  which  argument  is  this,  that  feeing  men  arc 

of  a  mortal  nature  (for  that  he  means  by  "  being 

**  partakers  of  flefh  and  blood")  nothing  can  be  a 

greater  comfort  to  us  againft  the  fears  of  death,  than 

to  fee  death  conquered  by  flefli  and  blood,  by  one 

of  the  fame  nature  with  ourfelves.     Therefore  the 

apoftle  adds,  ver.  16.  "  For  verily  he  took  not  on 

*'  him  the  nature  of  angels  •,  but  the  feed  of  Abra- 

•'  ham,"     If  he  had  afllimed  the  angeUcal  nature, 

which  is  immortal,  this  would  not  have  been  fo  fcn- 

fible  a  convi6lion  to  us  of  the  pofl^ibility  of  it,  as  to 

have  a  lively  inftance  and  example  prcfcnted  us,  of 

one  in  our  nature  conquering  death,  and  triumphing 

over  the  grave,     I  proceed  to  the 

II.  thing,  What  Christ  hath  done  towards  "  the 
*'  bringing  of  life  and  immortality  to  light."  And 
becaufe  I  told  you  that  this  is  comparatively  fpokcn, 
and  fignifies  to  us  a  greater  degree  of  evidence,  and 
a  firmer  aflTurance  given  us  by  the  chriftian  religion, 

than 


4076  Oj  the  immortality  of  the  foul y 

8  E  R  M.  than  the  world  had  before,  therefore  it  will  be  requl- 
cLxxiv.   ^         •       •     •  <.    .u  r  ^       ^L- 

fite  to  inquire  into  thele  two  things. 

Firft,  What  afTurance  men  had  or  might  have  had 
of  the  immortality  of  the  foul,  and  a  future  ftate, 
before  the  coming  of  Christ  into  the  world,  and 
the  revelation  of  the  gofpel. 

Secondly,  What  greater  evidence,  and  what  high- 
er degree  of  afTurance  the  gofpel  now  gives  us  of 
immortal  life  ;  what  greater  arguments  this  new  re- 
velation and  difcovery  of  God  to  the  world  doth  fur- 
nifh  us  withal,  to  perfuade  us  of  this  matter,  than  the 
world  was  acquainted  withal  before. 

Firft,  What  afTurance  men  had  or  might  have  had 
of  the  immortality  of  the  foul,  and  confequently  of 
a  future  ftate,  before  the  revelation  of  the  gofpel  by 
Christ's  coming  into  the  world.  And  here  are  two 
things  diftinfbly  to  be  confidered. 

Firft,  What  arguments  natural  reafon  doth  furnilh 
us  withal,  to  perfuade  us  of  this  principle,  that  our 
fouls  are  immortal,  and  that  there  is  another  ftate 
remains  for  men  after  this  life. 

Secondly,  What  afTurance  de  fa5lo  the  world  had 
of  this,  principle,  before  Christ's  coming  into  the 
world  5  what  the  heathens,  and  what  the  Jews  had. 
The  reafon  why  I  fhall  fpeak  to  thefe  diftindlly,  is, 
becaufe  they  are  two  very  difTerent  inquiries ;  what 
afTurance  men  might  have  had  from  the  principles  of 
natural  reafon  concerning  this  matter,  and  what  af- 
Turance they  had  de  fa£la,     I  begin  with  the 

Firft,  What  arguments  natural  reafon  doth  fur- 
nifh  us  withal  to  perfuade  us  to  this  principle,  that 
our  fouls  are  immortal,  and  confequently  that  ano- 
ther ftate  remains  for  men  after  this  life.  And  here 
I  iliall  fhew, 

L  How  much  may  be  faid  for  it. 

IL  How 


as  difcovered  by  nature^  and  by  revelation,  4077 
11.  How  little  can  be  faid  againft  it.  But  before  S  E  R  M. 
1  come  to  fpeak  particularly  to  the  arguments,  which 
natural  reafon  affords  us  for  the  proof  of  this  prin- 
ciple, I  fhall  premife  certain  general  confiderations, 
which  may  give  light  and  force  to  the  following  ar- 
guments.    As, 

Firfl,  By  the  foul  we  mean  a  part  of  man  diftindt 
from  his  body,  or  a  principle  in  him  which  is  not 
matter.     I  chufe  rather  to  defcribe  it  this  way,  than 
by  the  eflential  properties  of  it,  which  are  hard  to 
?ix  upon,  and  are  more  remote  from  common  apprc- 
henfion.     Our  Saviour,  when  he  would  convince 
his  difciplcs    after  his  refurredlion,  that  the  body 
wherein  he  appeared  to  them  was  a  real  body,  and 
that  he  was  not  a  fpirit  or  apparition,  he  bids  them 
*'  touch  and  handle  him;  for,  fays  he,  a  fpirit  hath 
**  not  flefh  and  bones,  as  ye  fee  me  to  have."     So 
that  by  the  foul  or  fpirit  of  a  man,  we  mean  foipc 
principle  in  man,  which  is  really  diftindt  from  his 
vifible  and  fenfible  part,  from  all  that  in  man  which 
affe6ls  our  outward  fenfes,  and  which  is  not  to  be 
defcribed  by  any  fenfible  and  external  qualities,  fuch 
as  we  ufe  to  defcribe  a  body  by :  becaufe  it  iS"  fup* 
pofed  to  be  of  fuch  a  nature,  as  does  not  fall  under 
the  cognizance  and  notice  of  any  of  our  fenfes.  And 
therefore  I  defcribe  it,  by  removing  from  it  all  thofe 
qualities  and  properties  which  belong  to  that  which 
falls  under  our  fenfes,  viz.  that  it  is  fomcthing  in 
man  diiVind  from  his  body,  a  principle  in  him  which 
is  not  matter  •,  that  principle  which  is  the  caufe  of 
thofe  feveral  operations,  which  by  inward  fenfc  and 
experience  we  are  confcious  to  ourfelves  of-,  fuch  are 
perception,  underftanding,  memory,  will.     So  that 
the  mod  plain  and  popular  notion  that  we  can  have 
gf  the  foul,  is,  that  it  is  fomething  in  U5  which  we 

never 


407^  Q/'  ^^^  immortality  of  the  foiil^ 

SERM.  never  law,  and  which  is  the  caufe  ofthofe  effects 
*  which  we  find  in  ourfelves  ;  it  is  the  principle  where* 
by  we  are  confcious  to  ourfelves,  that  we  perceive 
flich  and  fuch  objedls,  that  we  fee,  or  hear,  or  per- 
ceive any  thing  by  any  other  fenfe  •,  it  is  that  where- 
by we  think  and  remember,  whereby  we  reafon  about 
any  thing,  and  do  freely  chufe  and  refufe  fuch  things 
as  are  prefented  to  us.  Thefe  operations  every  one 
is  confcious  to  himfelf  of,  and  that  which  is  the  prin- 
ciple of  thefe,  or  the  caufe  from  whence  thefe  pro- 
ceed, is  that  which  we  mean  by  the  foul. 

Secondly,  By  the  immortality  of  the  foul,  I  mean 
nothing  elfe,  but  that  it  furvives  the  body,  that  when 
the  body  dies  and  falls  to  the  ground,  yet  this  prin- 
ciple which  we  call  the  foul,  ftill  remains  and  lives 
fcparate  from  it  •,  that  is,  there  is  ftill  a  part  of  us 
which  is  free  from  the  fate  of  the  body,  and  conti- 
nues to  perform  all  thofe  operations,  to  the  perfor- 
mance of  which  the  organs  of  the  body  are  not  necef- 
fary ;  that  is,  when  our  bodies  are  deftitute  of  hfe, 
and  become  a  dead  carcafe,  there  is  ftill  fomething 
that  did  belong  to  us,  which  retains  the  power  of  un- 
derfbanding,  which  thinks,  and  reafons,  and  remem- 
bers, and  does  all  thefe  freely. 

Thirdly,  That  he  that  goes  about  to  prove  the 
foul's  immortality,  fuppofeth  the  exiftence  of  a  Deity, 
that  there  is  a  God.  For  although  there  be  a  very 
intimate  and  ftridt  connexion  between  thefe  two  prin- 
ciples as  to  us,  as  being  the  two  great  pillars  of  all 
religion  ;  yet  that  which  is  firft  and  moft  fundamen- 
tal to  all  religion,  is  the  exiftence  of  a  God  •,  which 
if  it  be  not  firft  proved,  the  beft  arguments  for  the 
foul's  immortahty  lofe  their  force.  Therefore  as  to 
the  prefent  argument,  I  fuppofe  the  being  of  God  ai 
a  thing  acknowledged,  and  not  now  to  be  proved ; 

which 


its  difcovered  hy  nature^  and  by  revelation.        4070 
which  I  may  the  better  do,    havino;  formerly  endea-  S  E  R  M. 

*  ^  CLXXIV^ 

voured  to  make  good  this  grand  principle  of  rehgi- 
on,  againfl  the  pretenfions  of  the  Atheiits. 

Fourthly,  The  exiilence  of  a  God  being  fuppo- 
fed,  this  doth  very  much  facilitate  the  other,  of  the 
foul's  immortality.  For  this  being  an  eflential  pro- 
perty of  the  divine  nature,  that  he  is  a  fpirit,  that  is, 
fomething  that  is  not  inattLT  ;  it  being  once  granted 
that  God  is,  thus  much  is  gained,  that  there  is  fuch 
a  thing  as  a  fpirit,  as  an  immaterial  fubllance,  that 
is  not  liable  to  die  or  perifli  :  fo  th.it  he  that  goes 
about  to  prove  the  immortality  of  the  foul,  fhall  not 
need  to  prove  that  there  may  be  fuch  a  thing  as  a 
Ipirit,  that  the  notion  of  an  immaterial  fubftance  does 
not  imply  a  contradidlion,  becaufe5fuppofing  that  there 
is  a  God,  who  is  eflentially  a  fpirit,  there  can  be  no 
doubt  of  the  pofTibility  of  fuch  a  thing  as  a  fpirit ; 
and  though  there  be  this  difference  between  Goo  and 
all  other  fpirits,  that  he  is  an  infinite  fpirit,  whereas 
others  are  but  finite  ;  yet  no  man,  that  grants  the 
exiilence  of  an  infinite  fpirit,  can  with  any  pretence 
or  colour  of  reafon  deny  the  poflibility  of  a  finite  fpirit. 

Fifthly,  and  laftly,  it  is  highly  reafonable  that  men 
fhould  acquiefce  and  reft  fatisfied  in  fuch  reafons  and 
arguments  for  the  proof  of  any  thing,  as  the  nature  of 
the  thing  to  be  proved  will  bear ;  bccaufe  there  are 
feveral  kinds  and  degrees  of  evidence,  which  all  things 
are  not  equally  capable  of.  It  is  fufficient  that  the  evi- 
dence be  fuch  as  the  nature  of  the  thing  to  be  proved 
will  admit  of,  and  fuch  as  prudent  men  make  no 
fcruple  to  admit  for  fufficient  evidence  for  tilings  ot 
the  like  nature,  and  fuch  as,  fuppofing  the  thing  to 
be,  we  cannot  ordinarily  exped  better  or  greater  evi- 
dence for  it. 

There  are  two  kinds  of  evidences,  wluch  are  the 

Vol.  IX.  20  G  highcft- 


4  o  8  o  Of  the  immortality  of  the  fouly 

;  E  R  M.  hio;hefl  and  mod  liuisfadory  that  this  world  affords 
to  US,  and  thofe  are  the  evidence  of  fenfe,  and  ma- 
thematical demonftration.  Now  there  are  many- 
things,  concerning  which  the  generality  of  men  pro- 
fefs  them.feives  to  be  well  fatisfied,  which  do  not 
afford  either  of  thefe  kinds  of  evidence.  There's 
none  of  us  but  doth  firmly  believe  that  we  were  born, 
though  we  do  not  remember  any  fuch  thing  -,  no 
man's  niemory  does  furnifh  him  with  the  teftimony 
of  his  fenfes  from  this  matter,  nor  can  any  man 
prove  this  by  a  mathematical  demonftration,  nor  by 
any  neceffary  argument,  fo  as  to  Ihew  it  impoffible 
that  the  thing  fhould  be  otherwife.  For  it  is  poffiblc 
that  a  man  may  come  into  the  world  otherwife,  than 
by  the  ordinary  courfe  of  generation,  as  the  firft 
man  did,  who  was  created  immediately  by  God  ; 
and  yet  I  know  no  man  in  the  world  who  doubts  in 
the  leaft  concerning  this  matter,  though  he  hath  no 
other  argument  for  it,  but  the  teftimony  of  others, 
and  his  own  obfervation,  how  other  perfons  like 
himfelf  came  into  the  world.  And  it  is  reafonable  to 
acquiefce  in  this  evidence,  becaufe  the  nature  of  the 
thing  affords  no  greater.  We  who  never  were  at 
Jerufalem,  do  firmly  beheve  that  there  is  fuch  a 
place,  upon  the  teftimony  and  relation  of  others : 
and  no  man  is  blamed  for  this,  as  being  over-credu- 
lous 5  becaufe  no  man,  that  will  not  take  the  pains 
to  go  thither,  can  have  any  other  greater  evidence  of 
it,  than  the  general  teftimony  of  thofe  who  fay  they 
have  feen  it.  And  indeed  almoft  all  human  affairs, 
I  am  fure  the  moft  important,  are  governed  and 
conduced  by  fuch  evidence,  as  falls  very  much  fhort 
both  of  the  evidence  of  fenfe,  and  of  mathematical 
demonftration. 

To  apply  this  then  to  my  prefent  purpgfe.    Tha 
2  the 


as  difcovered  by  nature^  a7id  by  y^ev elation^  4081 
the  foul  of  man  is  of  an  immortal  nature,  is  not  ca-  S  F.  R IVT. 
pablc  of  all  kinds  and  degrees  of  evidence.  It  can- 
not be  proved  by  our  fenfes,  nor  is  it  reafonable  to 
expecft  it  fhould  be  fo  proved  ;  becaufe  the  foul  is 
fuppofcd,  by  every  one  that  difcourfeth  of  it,  to  be 
a  thing  of  fuch  a  nature,  as  cannot  be  feen  or  hand- 
led, or  fall  under  any  other  of  our  fenfes  :  nor  can 
it  be  proved  to  us  by  our  own  experience,  while  we 
are  in  this  world  ;  becaufe  whoever  dies,  which  is 
the  only  trial  that  can  be  made  whether  our  fouls  re- 
main after  our  bodies,  goes  out  of  this  world.  As  for 
mathematical  demonftration,  the  nature  of  the  thing 
renders  it  incap.ible  of  it.  It  remains  then  that  we 
reft  contented  with  fuch  arguments  as  the  nature  of 
the  thing  will  bear,  and  with  fuch  evidence  as  men 
arc  contented  to  accept  of,  and  do  account  fufficient, 
in  other  matters  •,  fuch  evidence  as  a  prudent  confi- 
dering  man,  who  is  not  credulous  on  the  one  hand, 
and  on  the  other  is  not  prejudiced  by  any  intereft 
againft  it,  would  reft  fatisficd  in. 

Having  premifed  thefe  general  confiderations,  to 
clear  my  way,  I  now  come  to  fpeak  to  the  particular 
arguments,  whereby  the  immortality  of  the  foul 
may  be  made  out  to  our  reafon.  And  the  beft  way 
to  eftimate  the  force  of  the  arguments  which  I  fhall 
bring  for  it,  will  be  to  confider  before-hand  with 
ourfelves,  what  evidence  we  can  in  reafon  expecl  for 
a  thing  of  this  nature.  Suppofe  our  fouls  be  im- 
mortal -,  by  what  kind  of  arguments  could  we  defirc 
to  be  afiured  of  it  ?  Setting  afide  miracles  and  divine 
revelation,   could  wc  defire  more  than  this  ? 

I.  That  the  thins;  be  a  natural  notion  and  dictate 
of  our  minds. 

II.  That  it  doth  not  contradid  any  other  prin- 
ciple that  nature  hath  planted  in  us,  but  docs  very 

20  G  2  well 


|.o  8  2  Of  the  immortality  of  the  foul, 

1  R  M,  well  accord  and  asrree  with  all  other  the  mofl:  natural 

-XXIV, 

\-^--.L'  notions  of  our  minds. 

III.  That  it  be  fuitable  to  our  natural  fears  and  hopes. 

IV.  That  it  tends  to  the  happinefs  of  nnan,  and 
the  good  order  and  government  of  the  world. 

V.  That  it  gives  the  moft  rational  account  of  all 
thofe  inward  adions,  which  we  are  confcious  to  our- 
felves  of,  as  perception,  underftanding,  memory, 
will,  which  we  cannot  without  great  unreafonable- 
nefs  afcribe  to  matter,  as  the  caufe  of  them.  If  all 
thefe  be  thus,  as  I  fhall  endeavour  to  make  it  appear 
they  are,  what  greater  fatisfadlion  could  we  defire  to 
have  of  the  immortality  of  our  fouls,  than  thefe  ar- 
guments give  us  ?  I  do  not  fay  that  any  one  of  theie 
arguments  doth  fufficlently  conclude  this  thing  •,  nor 
is  it  neceflary,  that  taken  fingly  and  by  themfelves 
they  fliould  do  it  •,  it  is  fufficient  that  they  concur  to 
make  up  one  entire  argument,  which  may  be  a  fuf- 
ficient evidence  of  the  foul's  immortality.  To  il- 
luftrate  this  by  an  inftance.  Suppofe  a  man  fhould 
ufe  thefe  two  arguments,  to  prove  that  fuch  a  man 
deferves  to  be  credited  in  fuch  a  relation.  Firft,  be- 
caufe  he  had  fufRcient  knowledge  of  the  thing  he 
relates  ♦,  and,  fecondJy,  becaufe  he  is  a  man  of  in- 
tegrity and  fidelity.  Neither  of  thefe  alone  would 
prove  the  man  to  be  worthy  of  credit ;  though  both 
together  make  up  a  good  argument.  So  it  is  in  thefe 
arguments  which  I  have  produced  •,  it  may  be,  no 
one  of  them  is  a  fufficient  inducement,  taken  fingly 
and  by  itfclf,  to  fatisfy  a  man  fully  that  the  foul  is 
immortal  ;  and  yet  they  may  concur  together  to 
make  a  very  powerful  argument.  I  begin  with  the 

I.  I'hat  our  fouls  are  of  an  immortal  nature,  that 
they  do  not  die  and  perifh  with  our  bodies,  but  pafs 
Jnto  another  flate  upon  the  difTolution  of  our  bodies, 

is 


as  difcovered  by  nature^  and  by  revelation.       4083 

is  a  natural  notion  and  didlate  of  our  minds.  That  I  ^F-  R  M. 
call  a  natural  notion,  which  the  minds  of  all  men  do 
naturally  hit  upon  and  agree  in,  notwithftanding  the 
diftance  and  remotenefs  of  the  feveral  parts  of  the 
world  from  one  another,  notwithdanding  the  diffe- 
rent tempers,  and  manner  and  ways  of  education. 
The  only  way  to  meafure  whether  any  thing  be  na- 
tural or  not,  is  by  inquiring  whether  it  agree  to  the 
whole  kind  or  not :  if  it  do,  then  we  call  it  natural. 
Omnium  confenfus  nature  vox  efi,  "  The  confent  of 
"  all  is  the  voice  of  nature,"  fays  Tully,  fpcaking 
of  the  univerfal  agreement  of  all  nations  in  this  ap- 
prehenfion,  that  "  the  fouls  of  men  remain  after 
*'  their  bodies."  And  this  he  tells  us  he  looks  upon 
as  a  very  great  argument.  Maximum  vere  argumen- 
turn  eft^  naturam  ipfam  de  immortalitate  animarum 
tacitam  judicare^  quod  omnibus  cura  ftnt  i^  maxime 
quidem  qu^  pojl  mortem  futura  funt :  '*  this  is  a  very 
great  argument  that  nature  doth  fecretly,  and  in 
mens  filent  thoughts  determine  the  immortality  of 
the  foul,  that  all  men  are  folicitous  of  what  fhall 
*'  become  of  them  after  death."  Nefcio  quomodQ 
inharet  in  mentihus  quaft  feculorum  quoddam  augur ium 
futurorum^  idque  in  maximis  ingeniis  altiffimifque  ani- 
mis  (^  exijiit  maxime  ^  apparet  facillime  .*  "  I  know 
not  how  (faith  he)  there  (licks  in  the  mind  a  cer- 
tain kind  of  prefage  of  a  future  ftate,  and  this  is 
mofl  deeply  fixed  and  difcovers  itfelf  fooneft  in 
the  choiceft  fpirits."  Again  the  fame  author,  Ut 
Deos  ejfe  naturd  opinamur  fic  pcrmanere  animos  arhi- 
tramur  confenfu  nationum  omnium :  "  As  this  opinion 
is  planted  in  us  by  nature,  that  there  is  a  God,  io 
by  the  confent  of  all  nations  we  believe  that  fouls 
remain  after  the  body."  I  might  multiply  tefli- 
monies  to  this  purpofe  out  of  the  ancient  heathen 

writers : 


4084  Of  th  immortality  of  the  foul ^ 

Ilxxiv.-  Y'^'''  '  ^"^  ^^'^^  ^^^^^  ^  ^^^^  produced  out  of 
this  great  author,  are  fo  plain  and  exprefs,  that  I 
need  bring  no  other. 

As  for  thofe  barbarous  nations  which  have  been 
difcovered  in  thefe  latter  ages  of  the  world,  and 
which  before   the  firfl  planting  of  America,  were 
never  known  to  have  held  correfpondence  with  thefe 
parts  of  the  world,  yet  all  thofe  nations  agree  in  this 
principle,  of  the  immortality  of  the  foul  ;  nay  even 
the  moft  barbarous  of  thofe  nations,  thofe  who  are 
mod  inhuman  and  eat  one  another,  thofe  of  Joupi- 
namboult  in  Brafile,  who  are  faid  by  fome  authors, 
but  I  think  not  upon  fufficient  grounds,  not  to  ac- 
knowledge the  being  of  a  God  ;  yet  even  thefe  (as 
Lerius  tells  us,    who  lived  among  them)    had  a 
very  fixed  and  firm  perfuafion  of  this  principle  of 
rehgion,  the  immortality  of  the  foul.     "  There  is 
*'  not,  fays  he,  any  nation  in  the  world  more  remote 
from  all  religion  than  thefe  were  ;  yet  to  Ihew  that 
^^  there  is  fome  light  in  the  midll  of  this  darknefs, 
^^  I  can,   fays  he,   truly  affirm,   that  they  have  nor 
''  only  fome  apprehenfions   of  the  immortality  of 
the  foul,  but  a  moft  confident  perfuafion  of  it. 
Their  opinion,   fays  he,  is  that  the  fouls  of  ftout 
and  valiant  men  after  death  fly  beyond  the  higheft 
mountains,  and  there  arc  gathered  to  their  fathers 
and  grand-fathers,   and  hve  in  pleafant  gardens, 
with   all  manner   of  delights  ;  but  the  fouls  of 
flothful  and  unadive  men,  and  thofe  who  do  no- 
thing for  their  country,  are  carried  to  Aygman 
(fo  they  call  the  devil)  and  live  with  him  in  perpe- 
tual torments."     The  hke  Xaverius  and  others, 
who  laboured  in  the  converfion  of  the  remote  parts 
of  the  Eaft-Indies,  tell  us  concerning  thofe  nations, 
that  they  found  them  generally  poffelfed  with  this 
principle,  of  the  foul's  immortahty.  Now 


, 


as  difcovered  by  nature^  and  by  revelation,      408  c 
Now  what  will  we  call  a  natural  notion,    if  not^ERM. 

pi    Y  Y  I  \T 

that  which  mankind  in  all  places  of  the  world,  in 
all  ages,  fo  far  as  hiftory  informs,  did  univerfally 
agree  in  ?  What  evidence  greater  than  this  can  any 
man  give,  to  fhew  that  any  thing  is  natural  ?  And , 
if  we  believe  a  God,  (which  I  told  you  I  do  all  a- 
long  in  this  argument  fuppofe  to  be  already  proved) 
can  we  imagine  that  this  wife  and  good  God  would 
plant  fuch  a  notion  and  apprehenfion  in  the  under- 
ftandings  of  men,  as  would  put  an  univerfal  cheat 
and  deiufion  upon  human  nature  ? 

And  that  the  univerfal  confent  of  all  nations  in  this 
principle,  cannot  be  refolved  either  into  the  fears  and 
groundlefs  jealoufy  and  fuperflition  of  human  nature, 
nor  into  univerfal  tradition,  which  had  it*s  original 
from  fome  impoflor,  nor  into  reafon  and  policy  of 
ftate,  I  might  fhew  particularly  :  but  having  former- 
ly done  that,  concerning  the  univerfal  confent  of  all 
nations  in  the  belief  of  a  God,  and  the  reafon  being 
the  very  fame,  as  to  this  principle  of  the  immorta- 
lity of  the  foul,  I  fhall  not  need  to  do  this  over  again 
upon  this  argument. 

And  that  fome  perfons,  and  particular  feds  in  the 
world,  have  difowned  this  principle,  is  no  fufficient 
objedtion  againft  it.  It  cannot  be  denied,  but  the 
Epicureans  among  the  philofophers,  did  renounce 
this  principle  ;  and  fome  alfo  among  the  Stoicks  do 
fpeak  doubtfully  of  it.  Hie  Sadducecs  likewife  a- 
mong  the  Jews  fell  into  this  error,  upon  a  mi  (lake 
and  mifapprehenfion  of  the  dodrine  of  their  mafter 
Sadoc,  who,  as  Jofephus  tells  us,  did  ufe  to  incul- 
cate this  principle  to  his  fcholars,  that  though  there 
were  no  rewards  nOr  puniflimcnts  after  this  life,  yet 
men  ought  to  be  good  and  live  virtuoufly  ;  from 
whence  in  procefs  of  time,  by  heat  of  oppofition 

againft 


40  8  6  Of  the  immortality  of  the  foul ^ 

S  E  R  M.  againft  the  Pharifees,  who  brought  in  oral  tradltlon,^ 

CLXXIV.  -*  o  7 

and  made  it  equal  with  the  written  word  of  God, 
they  fell  into  that  error,  and  denied  the  foul's  im- 
mortality, not  finding  fuch  clear  texts  for  it  in  the 
Old  Teftament,  as  to  them  did  feem  fully  convincing 
of  this  truth.  Xaverius  likewife  tells  us,  that  among 
the  feveral  fedls  of  religion  which  he  found  in  Japan, 
there  was  one  which  denied  the  immortality  of  the 
foul,  and  that  there  were  any  fpirits  :  but  he  fays 
they  were  a  fort  of  notoriouily  wicked  and  vicious 
perfons. 

To  thefe  inftances,  which  are  fo  few,  and  bear  no 
proportion  to  the  generality  of  mankind,  I  have 
thefe  two  things  to  fay. 

1 .  That  no  argument  can  be  drawn,  a  monftro  ad, 
7mturam,  A  thing  may  be  natural,  and  yet  fome  in- 
ftances may  be  brought  to  the  contrary :  but  thefe  are 
but  few  in  comparifon,  and  like  monfters,  which  are 
no  argument  againft  nature.  No  man  will  deny 
that  it  is  natural  for  men  to  have  two  eyes,  and  five 
fingers  upon  a  hand  ;  though  there  are  feveral  in- 
ftances of  men  born  but  with  one  eye,  and  with 
four  or  fix  fingers. 

2.  But  efpecially  in  matters  of  religion  and  d^jT- 
courfe,  which  are  fubjedl  to  liberty,  men  may  offer 
violence  to  nature,  and  to  gratify  their  lufts  and  in- 
terefts,  may  by  falfe  reafonings  debauch  their  un- 
derftanding,  and  by  long  ftriving  againft  the  natural 
bent  and  biafs  of  it,  may  alter  their  apprehenfions  of 
things,  and  perfuade  others  to  the  fame :  but  no- 
thing that  is  againft  nature  can  prevail  very  far,  but 
nature  will  ftill  be  endeavouring  to  recover  itfelf,  and 
to  free  itfelf  from  the  violence  which  is  offered  to  it. 
So  that  mens  underftandings  left  to  themfelves,  and 
not  having  fome  falfe  biafs  put  upon  them,  out  of  a 

defign 


as  d/jcovered  by  7iature^  and  by  revelation.       4087 

defign  of  pride  and  fingularity  in  opinion,  which 
was  the  cafe  of  Epicurus  •,  or  out  of  the  intcreil  of 
fome  luft,  and  a  defign  to  fet  men  at  hberty  to  fin, 
which  is  the  cafe  of  moil  who  have  renounced  this 
principle  ;  I  fay,  nothing  but  one  of  thcfe  two  can 
ordinarily  make  men  deny  the  immortality  of  the  foul. 
Thus  I  have  done  with  the  firft  argument,  namely, 
that  the  immortality  of  the  foul  is  a  natural  notion  and 
didlate  of  our  minds. 


SERMON    CLXXV. 

Of  the  immortality  of  the  foul,  as  difco- 
vered  by  nature,  and  by  revelation. 

2  TIM.  i.  10. 

But  is  now  made  mayi'ifeft  by   the  appearing  of  our 
Saviour    Jesus   Christ,    who    hath   aboliJJjed 
^death^  and  hath  brought  life  and  mmortality  ta 
lights  through  the  gofpeL 


I 


Proceed  to  the  fecond  argument,  that  this  notion  S  F-  R  M. 

or  principle  of  the  immortality  of  the  foul  doth 

not  contradi6l  any  other  principle  that  nature  hath  TJie 
planted  in  us,  but  doth  veiy  well  accord  and  agree  ^^.'^JJ"^^^  ^^ 
with  all  thofe  other  notions  which  are  moll  natural,  ihii  text. 
I  fliall  mention  two,  which  fcem  to  be  the  moil  na- 
tural notions  that  we  have,  and  the  moll  deeply  root- 
ed in  our  natures  •,  the  one  is  the  cxillence  and  the 
perfedions  of  God  -,  and  the  other,  the  dilfercnce  of 
good  and  evil.  Mankind  do  univerfiUy  agree  in 
thefe  two  principles,  that  there  is  a  God  who  is  ef- 
VoL.  IX.  20  H  fenti.illy 

6 


40  8  8  Of  the  immortality  of  the  foul ^ 

F  R  M.  fentially  good  and  juil  \  and  that  there  is  a  real  dif- 
CLXxv.  fgj.gj^^,g  between -good  and  evil,  which  is  not  found- 
ed in  the  opinion  and  imagination  of  perfons,  or  in 
the  cuftom  and  ufage  of  the  world,  but  in  the  nature 
of  things.  Now  this  principle  of  the  immortality  of 
the  foul,  and  future  rewards  after  this  life,  is  fo  far 
from  clalhing  with  either  of  thefe  principles,  that  the 
contrary  affertion,  viz.  that  our  fouls  are  mortal,  and 
that  there  is  nothing  to  be  hoped  for,  or  feared  be- 
yond this  life,  would  very  much  contradid  thofc 
other  principles.     To  fbew  this  then  particularly, 

I .  The  immortality  of  the  foul  is  very  agreeable 
to  the  natural  notion  which  we  have  of  God,  one 
part  whereof  is,  that  he  is  elTentially  good  and  juft. 

(i,)  For  his  goodnefs.  It  is  very  agreeable  to 
that,  to  think  that  God  would  make  fome  creatures 
for  as  long  a  duration  as  they  are  capable  of.  The 
wifdom  of  Gon  hath  chofen  to  difplay  itfelf,  in  creat- 
ing variety  of  things  of  different  degrees  and  perfec- 
tions ;  things  devoid  of  life  and  fenfe  j  and  feveral 
degrees  and  orders  of  fenfitive  creatures,  of  different 
fhapes  and  figures,  of  different  magnitude,  fome 
vaflly  great,  others  extremely  little,  others  of  a  mid- 
dle fort  between  thefe.  And  himfelf  being  a  pure 
ipirit,  we  have  no  reafon  to  doubt,  but  he  could  make 
creatures  of  a  fpiritual  nature,  and  fuch  as  Ihould  have 
no  principle  of  felf-corruption  in  them.  And  feeing 
he  could  make  creatures  of  fuch  perfedlion,  if  we  be- 
lieve him  to  be  effentially  good,  we  have  no  reafpn 
to  doubt,  but  that  he  hath  done  fo.  For  it  is  the 
very  nature  of  goodnefs,  to  communicate  and  diffufe 
itfelf,  and  to  delight  in  doing  fo  -,  and  we  cannot 
imagine,  but  that  the  fame  goodnefs  which  prompt- 
ed and  inclined  him  to  give  being  to  thofe  creatures 
which  are  of  an  inferior  degree  of  perfcdion,  would 
J  move 


as  dif covered  by  nature,  mid  by  revelation.       4089 

move  him  likewlfe  to  make  creatures  more  pcrfcdl,  S  R  '  \r. 
andcapableof  greater  degrees  of  happincfs,  and  of  a 
longer  enjoyment  of  it,  if  it  were  in  his  power  to 
make  fuch  •,  and  no  man  that  believes  the  omnipo- 
tency  of  God  can  doubt  of  this.  Fpr  he  who  by  a 
pure  a6l  of  his  will  can  command  thiiigs  to  be,  and 
in  an  inftant  to  ftart  out  of  notning,  can  as  eafily 
make  one  fort  of  creatures  as  anot'ier.  Now  the 
power  of  God  being  fuppofed,  his  goodnefs  fccures 
us  of  his  will :  for  we  cannot  imagine  any  fuch  thing 
as  envy,  in  a  being  which  we  fuppofe  to  be  perfe(ftly 
good  ;  nothing  being  more  inconfiflent  with  perfect 
goodnefs,  than  to  be  unwilling  to  communicate  hap- 
pinefs  to  others,  and  to  grudge  that  others  fliould  par- 
take of  it. 

Now  this  being  fuppofed,  that  God  could  and 
would  make  creatures  of  a  fpiritual  and  immortal  na- 
ture, and  the  utmoft  imaginable  perfeclions  of  fuch 
creatures  being  knowledge  and  liberty,  wherever  thefe 
perfedlions  are  found,  we  have  rtafon  to  conclude 
that  creature  to  be  endowed  with  a  principle  that  is 
of  a  fpiritual  and  immortal  nature.  Now  thefe  per- 
fedlions  of  underflanding  and  will  being  found  in  man, 
this  argues  him  to  be  endowed  with  fuch  a  principle, 
as  is  in  it's  own  nature  capable  of  an  immortal  du- 
ration. 

It  is  true  indeed,  this  fpiritual  part  of  man,  v/hich 
we  call  his  foul,  is  united  to  a  vifiblc  and  material 
part,  viz.  his  body  •,  the  union  of  which  parts  con- 
flitutes  a  peculiar  fort  of  creature,  which  13  utriufqtis 
mundi  nexus^  "  unites  the  material  and  immaterial 
*'  world,  the  world  of  matter  and  of  fpirius.'*  .And 
as  ic  is  very  fuitablc  to  the  wifdom  of  God,  which 
delights  in  variety,  that  there  fliould  be  a  fort  of 
creatures,  compounded  of  both  thefe  principles,  mat- 

ao  H  2  tcr 


4090  Of  the  mmorfaltfy  of  the  foul ^ 

S  E  R  M.  ter  and  fpirit  -,  fo  it  is  very  agreeable  to  his  goodnels 
cLxxv.  ^  ^^  think  that  he  would  defign  fuch  creatures  for  as 
long  a  duration  and  continuance  as  they  were  capable 
of.  For  as  it  is  the  effe6l  of  goodnefs  to  bring  crea- 
tures forth  into  the  polTeflion  of  that  hfe  and  happi- 
nefs  which  they  are  capable  of;  fo  to  continue  them 
in  the  enjoyment  of  it  for  fo  long  as  they  are  capable. 

The  funi  of  all  this  is,  that  as  it  is  agreeable  to  the 
wifdom  of  God,  which  made  the  world,  to  difplay 
itfelf  in  all  variety  of  creatures  •,  fo  it  is  agreeable  to 
his  goodnefs,  to  m.ake  fome  of  as  perfe6l  a  kind  as 
creatures  are  capable  of  being.  Now  it  being  no  re- 
pugnancy nor  contradiction,  that  a  creature  fhould  be 
of  a  fpiritual  and  immortal  nature,  we  have  no  rea- 
fon  to  think,  but  that  the  fruitfulnefs  of  the  divine 
goodnefs  hath  brought  forth  fuch  creatures-,  and  if 
there  be  reafon  to  conclude  any  thing  to  be  of  a  fpiri- 
tual and  immortal  nature,  certainly  the  principle  of 
underilanding  and  liberty,  which  we  are  confcious  of 
in  ourfelvcs,  deferves  to  be  reputed  fuch. 

(2.)  It  is  very  agreeable  to  the  juilice  of  God,  to 
think  the  fouls  of  men  remain  after  this  life,  that 
there  may  be  a  flate  of  reward  and  recompence  irf 
another  world.  If  we  believe  God  to  be  holy  and 
jufl,  we  cannot  but  believe  that  he  loves  righteouf- 
nefs  and  goodnefs,  and  hates  iniquity  ;  and  that  as 
he  is  governor  and  publick  magiflirate  of  the  world, 
he  is  concerned  to  countenance  and  encourage  the  one, 
and  to  difcountenance  and  difcourage  the  other.  Now 
the  providences  of  God  being  in  a  great  meafure  pro- 
niifcuoufly  adminiftered  in  this  world,  fo  that  no  man 
can  make  any  certain  judgmient  of  God's  love  and 
hatred  towards  perfons,  by  what  befals  them  in  this 
world,  it  being  the  lot  of  good  men  many  times  to 
iliiTcr  and  be  aniidtedjand  of  wicked  men  to  live  in  a 

flourifhinfr 


its  dif covered  by  nature^  a?id  by  revelatiou,      4001 

fiourifhing  and  profperous  condition  ;  I  lay,  things  S  R  R  \f. 
being  thus,  it  is  very  agreeable  to  thcle  notions  which  '^^^^^' 
we  have  of  the  divine  holinefs  and  juflice,  to  believe 
that  there  will  a  time  come,  when  this  wile  and  juffc 
governor  of  the  world  will  make  a  wide  and  vifible 
difference  between  the  righteous  and  the  wicked  -,  fo 
that  though  for  a  while  the  juftice  of  God  may  be 
clouded,  yet  there  will  a  time  come  when  it  fhall  be 
clearly  manifefled,  and  every  eye  fee  it  and  bear 
witnefs  to  it,  when  "  judgment  fliall  break  forth  as 
"  the  light,  and  righteouinefs  as  the  noon-day." 
It  is  pofTible  that  fin  for  a  while  may  go  unpuniihcd, 
nay,  triumph  and  profper ;  and  that  virtue  and  inno- 
cence may  not  only  be  unrewarded,  but  opprelfed  and 
dcfpifed,  and  perfccuted.  And  this  may  be  recon- 
cilable enough  to  the  wifdom  of  God's  providence, 
and  the  juilice  of  it,  fuppofmg  the  immortaHty  of 
the  foul,  and  another  (late  after  this  life,  wherein  all 
things  fhall  be  fet  llrait,  and  every  man  fliall  receive 
according  to  his  works :  but  unlefs  this  be  fuppofed, 
it  is  impoflible  to  folvc  the  juftice  of  God's  provi- 
dence. Who  will  believe  that  the  aftairs  of  the 
world  are  adminiftered  by  him  who  loves  righteouf- 
nefs,  and  hates  all  the  workers  of  iniquity,  who  will 
not  let  the  leaft  fervice  that  is  done  to  him  p.ifs  unre- 
warded, nor  on  the  other  hand  acquit  the  guilty,  and 
Jet  fin  go  unpuniflied,  which  arc  the  properties  of 
juftice  ;  I  fay,  wHo  will  believe  this,  that  looks  into 
the  courfe  of  the  world,  and  fees  with  how  little  dif- 
ference and  diftindtion  of  good  and  bad,  the  affairs 
of  it  are  managed?  That  fees  virtue  difcountenanccd 
and  defpifcd,  poor  and  deftitute,  afflic^tcd  and  tor- 
mented i  when  wickednefs  is  many  times  exalted  to 
high  places,  and  makes  a  great  noife  and  ru^Tic  ia 
the  world  ?  He  that  confidcrs  what  a  hazard  mmy 

timcg 


4092  Of  the  immortality  of  the  fouly 

S  E  R  M,  times  good  men  run,  how  for  goodnefs  fake  they  ven* 
ture,  and  many  times  quit  all  the  contentments  and 
enjoyments  of  this  life,  and  fubmit  to  the  greatelt 
fufferings  and  calamities  that  human  nature  is  capable 
of ;  while  in  the  mean  time  profperity  is  poured  into 
the  lap  of  the  wicked,  and  heaven  feems  to  lookplea- 
fantly  upon  thofe  that  deal  treacherbufly,  and  to  be 
filent  whilft  the  wicked  devours  the  man  that  is  more 
righteous  than  himfelf-,  he  that  confiders  this,  and 
can  without  fuppofing  another  life  after  this,  pretend 
to  vindicate  the  juflice  of  thefe  things,  muft  be  as 
blind  as  the  fortune  that  governs  them.  Would  not 
this  be  a  perpetual  (lain  and  blemifh  upon  the  divine 
providence,  that  Abel,  who  offered  up  "  a  better 
facrifice  than  Cain,  and  had  this  tefbimony,  that 
he  pleafed  God,"  yet  after  all  this,  fhould  have  no 
other  reward  for  it,  but  to  be  (lain  by  his  brother, 
who  had  offended  God  by  a  flight  and  contemptuous 
offering  ?  If  there  were  no  reward  to  be  expedted  af- 
ter this  life,  would  not  this  have  been  a  fad  example 
to  the  world,  to  fee  one  of  the  firfl:  men  that  ferved 
God  acceptably,  thus  rewarded  ?  What  a  pitiful  en- 
couragement would  it  be  to  men  to  be  good,  to  fee 
profane  Efau  bieft  "  with  the  dew  of  heaven,  and 
"  the  fatnefs  of  the  earth;"  and  to  hear  good  old 
Jacob  in  the  end  and  conclufion  of  his  days,  to  com- 
plain, ''  few  and  evil  have  the  days  of  my  pilgrimage 
*'  been  ?"  If  this  had  been  the  end  of  Efau  and  Ja- 
cob, it  would  puzzle  all  the  wit  and  reafon  of  man- 
kind, to  wipe  off  this  reproach  from  the  providence 
of  God,  and  vindicate  the  juflice  of  it.  And  there- 
fore I  do  not  wonder,  that  the  grcateft  wits  among 
the  heathen  philofophers,  were  fo  much  puzzled  with 
this  objection  againft  the  providence  of  God  ;  if  the 
wife,  and  jufl,  and  good  God  do  adminilter  the  af- 
fairs 


as  aijcv'uifrea  oy  namre^  ana  oy  r  eve  la  f  ion,       A0Q7 
fairs  of  the  world,  and  be  concerned  in  the  good  orS  R  R  M. 
bad  actions  of  men,  ciir  bonis  male  ii^  malis  bene  ?  ^^^Zl. 

How  comes  it  to  pafs,  that  good  men  many  times 

are  miferable,  and  bad  men  fo  happy  in  the 
**  world  ?'*  And  they  had  no  other  way  to  wipe  oiF 
this  objedion,  but  by  referring  thefc  things  to  ano- 
ther world,  wherein  the  temporal  futferings  of  good 
men  fliould  be  eternally  rewarded  ;  and  the  fhort  and 
tranfient  happinefs  of  wicked  menHiould  be  rendered 
infignificant,  and  drowned  in  an  eternity  of  mifery. 

So  that  if  we  believe  the  being  of  God,  and  the 
providence  of  God  j  (which  I  do  all  along  take  for 
granted  in  this  argument)  there  is  no  other  way  ima- 
ginable to  folve  the  equity  and  juflice  of  God's  pro- 
vidence, but  upon  this  fuppofition,  that  there  is  ano- 
ther hfe  after  this.     P'or  to  fay,  that  virtue  is  a  fuf- 
ficient  and  abundant  reward  for  itfelf,  though  it  have 
fome  truth  in  it,  if  we  fet  afide  thofe  fufferings  and 
miferies  and  calamities,  which  virtue  is  frequently  at- 
tended with  in  this  Hfe  ;  yet  if  thefe  be  taken  in,  it 
4s  but  a  very  jejune  and  dry  fpeculation.     For  confi- 
dering  the  flrong  propenfion  and  inclination  of  hu- 
man nature  to  avoid  thefe  evils  and  inconveniencies, 
a  ftate  of  virtue  attended  with  great  fufferings,  would 
be  fo  far  from  being  a  happinefs,  that  it  would  be  a 
real  mifery  \  fo  that  the  determination  of  the  apoftle, 
I  Cor.  XV.  19.  is  according  to  nature,  and  the  truth 
and  reafon  of  things,  that,  "  if  in  this  life  only  wc 
*'  had  hope,  we  were  of  all  men  mod  miferable.'* 
For  although  it  be  true,  that  as  things  now  Hand, 
and  as  the  nature  of  man  is  framed,  good  men  do 
find  a  ftrange  kind  of  inward  pleafure  and  fccret  fatif- 
fadlion  of  mind  in  the  difcharge  of  their  duty,  and  in 
doing  what  is  virtuous  •,  yet  every  man  that  looks  in- 
to himfelf,  and  consults  liis  own  breaft,  will  tind  that 

tliis 


4094  ^f  ^^-^^  immof^fality  of  the  foul ^ 

S  E  R  M.  this  delight  and  contentment  fprings  chiefly  from  the 
hopes  which  men  conceive,  that  a  holy  and  virtuous 
life  Ihall  not  be  unrewarded  ;  and  without  thefe 
hopes  virtue  is  but  a  dead  and  empty  name :  and 
notwithftanding  the  reafonablenefs  of  virtuous  adions 
compared  with  the  contrary  of  them,  yet  when  vir- 
tue came  to  be  encumbered  with  difficulties,  and  to 
be  attended  with  fuch  fufferings  and  inconveniencies, 
as  were  grievous  and  intolerable  to  human  nature, 
then  it  would  appear  unreafonable  to  chufe  that  for  a 
happinefs,  which  would  rob  a  man  of  all  the  felicity 
of  his  life.  For  though  a  man  were  never  fo  much 
in  love  with  virtue,  for  the  native  beauty  and  comeli- 
nefs  of  it ;  yet  it  would  ftrangely  cool  his  affection 
to  it,  to  confider  that  he  fhould  be  undone  by  the 
match,  that  when  he  had  it  he  mud  go  a  begging 
with  it,  and  be  in  danger  of  death,  for  the  fake  of 
that  which  he  had  chofen  for  the  felicity  of  his  life. 
So  that  how  devout  foever  the  woman  might  be,  yet 
I  dare  fay  fhe  was  not  over-wife  and  confiderate, 
who  going  about  with  a  pitcher  of  water  in  one  hand, 
and  a  pan  of  coals  in  the  other,  and  being  afked  what 
fhe  intended  to  do  with  them,  anfwered :  "  that  fhe 
intended  with  the  one  to  burn  up  heaven,  and 
with  the  other  to  quench  hell,  that  men  might  love 
God  and  virtue  for  their  own  fikes,  without  hope 
*'  of  reward,  or  fear  of  punifhment.'* 

And  the  confcquence  of  this  dry  doctrine  does 
fufficiently  appear  in  the  fed  of  theSadducecs,  which 
had  its  rife  from,  this  principle  of  Sadoc,  the  mufler 
of  the  fed,  who  out  of  an  indifcreet  zeal  to  tei^ch 
fomething  above  others,  and  indeed  above  the  pitch 
of  human  nature,  inculcated  this  doclrine  upon  hi? 
fcholars,  that  religion  and  virtue  ought  to  be  loved 
for  thf  mfdvcs,  though  there  were  no  reward  of  virtue 

to 


cc 


as  difcovered  by  ymture^  and  by  revelation,        409-' 

to  be  hoped,  nor  punifhment  of  vice  to  be  feared  '^P-R  M. 
in  another  world  -,  from  which  his  difciples  interred, 
that  it  was  not  ncceflary  to  religion  to  believe  a  fu- 
ture (late,  and  in  procefs  of  time,  peremptorily 
maintained  that  there  was  no  life  after  this.  For  they 
did  not  only  deny  the  rcfurredlion  of  the  body,  but 
as  St.  Paul  tells  us,  they  faid,  tltat  "  there  was  nei- 
*'  ther  angel  nor  fpirit  •,'*  that  is,  they  denied  that 
there  was  any  thing  of  an  immortal  nature,  that  did 
i;emain  after  this  life.  And  what  the  confcquence  of 
this  was,  we  may  fee  in  the  charadler  which  Jofephus 
gives  of  that  fed  •,  for  he  tells  us,  that  the  com- 
monalty of  the  Jews  were  of  the  fcdl  of  the  Phari-> 
itts,  but  moft  of  the  great  and  rich  men  were  Sad- 
ducees  ♦,  which  plainly  fliews,  that  this  dry  fpeculation 
of  loving  rehgion  and  virtue  for  themfelves,  without 
any  expectation  of  future  rewards,  did  end  in  their 
giving  over  all  ferious  purfuit  of  religion  :  and  be- 
caufe  they  hoped  for  nothing  after  this  life,  therefore 
laying  afide  all  other  confiderations,  they  applied 
themfelves  to  the  prefcnt  bufincfs  of  this  lite,  and 
grafpcd  as  much  of  the  prelent  enjoyment  of  its  pow- 
er and  riches,  as  they  could  by  any  means  attain  to. 
And  for  a  farther  evidence  of  this,  that  it  is  only  or 
principally  the  hopes  of  a  future  happinels  that  bear 
men  up  in  the  purfuit  of  virtue,  that  give  them  fo 
much  comfort  and  fatisfadfion  in  the  profccution  o: 
it,  and  make  men  encounter  the  difficulties,  and  op- 
pofitions,  and  perfccutions  they  meet  withal  in  the 
ways  of  religion,  with  ^o  much  undauntednefs  and 
courage,  I  fay,  for. the  farther  evidence  of  this,  I 
Ihall  only  offer  this  confidtration,  that  according  to* 
the  degree  of  this  hope  and  alTurance  of  another  life, 
mens  conflancy  and  courage  in  the  ways  of  viftuc 
and  reli2;ion  have  been.     Before  Cj-irist's  cominu 

-    Vol.  IX,  >©  I  inro 

6 


4096  Of  the  immortality  of  the  fouly 

3  E  R  M.  into  the  world,  and  "  the  bringing  of  life  and  in> 

CL.XXV. 

"  mortality  to  light  by  the  gofpel,*'  we  do  not  find 
in  all  ages  of  the  world,  fo  many  inftances  of  pati- 
ence and  conftant  fuffering  for  religion,  as  happened 
in  the  fir  ft:  age  after  Christ.  God  did  not  think 
fit  to  try  the  wofld  fo  much  in  this  kind,  till  they 
were  furnifhed  with  a  principle  which  would  bear 
them  up  under  the  greateft  fufferings,  which  was  no- 
thing elfe  but  the  full  afTu ranee  which  the  gofpel  gave 
th^  world  of  a  blelTed  immortality  after  this  life  -,  the 
firm  belief  and  perfuafion  of  which,  made  Chriftians 
dead  to  the  world,  and  all  the  contentments  and  en- 
joyments of  it,  and  by  raifing  them  above  all  the 
pleafures  and  terrors  of  fenfe,  made  them  to  defpife 
prefent  things,  '*  in  hopes  of  eternal  hfe,  which 
*'  God  that  could  not  lye  had  promifed."  This 
was  that  which  fet  them  above  the  fears  of  death,  fo 
that  they  were  not  to  be  frighted  out  of  their  reli- 
gion by  the  moil  exquifite  torments,  and  all  the  moft 
horrid  and  fearful  Ihapes  that  the  malice  of  men  and 
devils  could  drefs  up  mifery  and  afiiidion  in.  Where- 
as under  the  old  difpenfation  of  the  law,  before  the 
revelation  of  the  gofpel,  when  the  promifes  of  eter- 
nal life  were  not  fo  clear,  and  mens  hopes  of  it  more 
weak  and  faint,  the  exprefs  encouragement  to  obe- 
dience was  founded  in  the  promifes  of  temporal  blef- 
fings  j  God  herein  complying  with  the  necefTity  of 
human  nature,  which  is  not  to  be  wrought  upon  to 
any  great  purpofe,  but  by  arguments  of  advantage. 

The  fum  of  this  argument,  which  I  have  thus 
largely  dilated  upon,  becaufe  I  look  upon  it  as  one  of 
the  moil  flrong  and  convincing  of  the  foul's  immor- 
tality, is  this ;  that  the  juflice  of  God's  providence 
cannot  llil^ciently  be  vindicated,  but  upon  the  fup- 
polal  of  this  principle  of  the  fouFs  immortality  : 
2  whereas 


as  dtf covered  by  nature^  and  by  revelatio?!^       4097 

whereas  if  this  principle  be  admitted,  that  men  pafs  S  E  r  m. 
out  of  this  hfe  into  an  eternal  ftate  of-  happincfs  or      '  ^.^^ 
mifery,  according  as  they  have  behaved  themfelvcs 
in  this   world  \  then  the  account  of  the  unequal  pro- 
vidences of  God  in  this  world  is  eafy.     For  if  we 
look  upon  this  life  as  a  (late  of  probation,  of  trial 
to  wicked  men,  and  of  exercife  to  good  men  in  or- 
der to  a  future  and  eternal  Hate  •,  and  if  we  confidcr 
withal,  how  vaft  the  difference  is  between  time  and 
eternity,  it  will  be  eafy  then  to  apprehend  how  all 
.things  may  be  fet  ftrait  in  another  world,  and  how 
the  righteoufncfs  of  God  may  appear,  in  giving  an 
abundant  recompence  to  good  men  for  all  their  tem- 
poral fervice  and  fufferings,  which  do  but  prepare 
them  the  more  for  a  quicker  relifh  of  the  glory  and 
happinefs  which  is  referved  for  them  -,  and  on  the 
other  hand,  in  punifhing  wicked  men,  whofe  fhort 
eafe  and  profperity  in  this  world  will,  by  the  juft 
judgment  of  God  for  their  abufe  of  the  blelTings  of 
this  hfe,  fet  out  their  mifery  and  torment  to  the 
greateft  difadvantage.     For  as  nothing  commends 
happinefs  more  than  precedent  forrow  •,  fo  nothing 
makes  pain  and  fuffering  more  bitter  and  intolerable, 
than  to  ftep  into  them  out  of  a  ftate  of  cafe  and  plea- 
fure ;  fo  that  the  pleafures  and  profperity  of  wicked 
men  in  this  life,  confidered  with  the  puniflimcnr  of 
the  next,  which  will  follow  upon  them,  is  an  addi- 
tion to  their  mifery.     This  is  the  very  fting  of  the 
fecond  death  ;  and  in  this  fenfe  alfo  that  of  the  wife 
man  is  true,  "  the  eafe  of  the  fimple  will  Hay  them, 
"  and  the  profperity  of"   thefe  "  fools''   Ihall  be 
the  o-reat  a^"-ravation  of  their  deilruclion. 

2.  Another  notion  which  is  deeply  rooted  in  the 
nature  of  man,  is,  that  there  is  a  ditfcrcnce  between 
£;ood  and  evil,  which  is  not  founded  in  the  imagi- 

20  I  2  ^^^^^^^ 


40  9  5  Of  the  immortality  of  the  fouly 

E  R  M.  nation  of  perfons,  or  in  the  cuftom  and  ufage  of  the 

CLXXV  1 

world,  but  in  the  nature  of  things ;  that  there  are 
fome  things  which  have  a  natural  evil,  and  turpitude, 
and  deformity  in  them  •,  /or  example,  impiety  and 
profanenefs  towards  God,  injuftice  and  unrighteouf- 
nefs  towards  men,  perfidioufnefs,  injury,  ingratitude, 
thefe  are  things  that  are  not  only  condemned  by  the 
pofitive  laws  and  conflitutions  of  particular  nations 
iand  governments,  but  by  the  general  verdi6t  and 
fentiments  of  humanity.  Piety  and  religion  towards 
God,  juftice,  and  righteoufnefs,  and  fidelity,  and' 
reverence  of  oaths,  regard  to  a  man's  word  and  pro- 
mife,  and  gratitude  towards  thofe  who  have  obliged 
us,  thefe  and  the  like  qualities,  which  we  call  vir- 
tues, are  riot  only  well  fpoken  of,  where  they  are 
countenanced  by  the  authority  of  law,  but  have  the 
tacit  approbation  and  veneration  of  mankind  :  And 
any  man  that  thinks  thefe  things  are  not  natu- 
rally  and  in  themfelves  good,  but  are  meerly  arbi- 
trary, and  depend  upon  the  pleafurc  of  authority, 
and  the  will  of  thofe  who  have  the  power  of  impo- 
fing  laws  upon  others  ;  I  fay,  any  fuch  perfon  may 
cafily  be  convinced  of  his  error,  by  putting  this  fup- 

f)o(ition  \  fuppofe  wicked nefs  were  eftablifhed  by  a 
aw,  and  the  pradice  of  fraud,  and  rapine,  and  per- 
jury, falfenefs  in  a  man's  word  and  promifes,  were 
comrnended  and  rewarded,  and  it  were  made  a  crime 
for  any  man  to  be  honeft,  to  have  any  regard  to  his 
path  or  proruife,  and  the  man  that  fhould  dare  to 
be  honed  or  make  good  his  word  fliould  be  feverely 
puniflied  and  made  a  publick  example  •,  I  fay,  fup- 
pofe the  reverfe  of  all  that  which  we  now  call  virtue, 
were  folemnly  enabled  by  a  law,  and  publick  autho- 
rity fliould  enjoin  the  pradice  of  that  which  we  call 
vice  ;  Vv"hat  would  the  cgnfcquence  of  this  be,  when 

the 


as  difcovered  by  nature^  and  by  re^c elation,       4099 
the  tables  were  thus  turned  ?  Would  that  which  we  s  E  R  M. 

CLXXV 

now  call  vice,  gain  the  efteem  and  reputation  of 
•virtue  ;  and  thofe  things  which  we  now  call  virtue, 
grow  contemptible  and  become  odious  to  human  na- 
ture ?  If  not,  then  there  is  a  natural  and  intrinfical 
difference  between  good  and  evil,  between  virtue 
and  vice  -,  there  is  fomething  in  the  nature  of  tliefe 
things  which  does  not  depend  upon  arbitrary  confti- 
tution.  And  I  think  nothing  can  be  more  evident, 
than  that  the  authority  which  fhould  attempt  fuch  an 
eftabliHiment,  would  thereby  be  rendered  ridiculous, 
and  all  laws  of  fuch  a  tendency  as  this,  would  be 
hift  out  of  the  world.  And  the  reafon  of  this  is 
plain,  becaufe  no  government  could  fubfifl  upon 
thefe  terms  :  for  the  very  forbidding  men  to  be  jull 
and  honeft,  the  enjoining  of  fraud,  and  violence, 
and  perjury,  and  breach  of  trufl,  would  apparently 
deftroy  the  end  of  government,  which  is  to  prefervc 
men  and  their  rights  againft  the  encroachments  and 
inconveniencies  of  thefe  *,  and  this  end  being  dc- 
ilroyed,  human  fociety  would  prefently  difband,  and 
men  would  naturally  fall  into  a  ftate  of  war  •,  which 
plainly  fhews  that  there  is  a  natural,  and  immutable, 
and  eternal  reafon  for  that  which  we  call  goodnefs 
and  virtue,  and  againft  that  which  we  call  vice  and 
wicked  nefs. 

To  come  then  to  my  purpofe,  it  is  very  agreeable 
to  this  natural  notion  of  tlie  difference  Ix^twccn  good 
and  evil,  to  believe  the  foul's  immortahty.  For  no- 
thing is  more  reafonable  to  imagine,  than  that  good 
and  evil,  as  they  are  differenced  in  their  nature,  fq 
they  fhall  be  in  their  rewards  ;  that  it  fliall  one  time 
or  other  be  well  to  them  that  do  well,  and  evil  to 
the  wicked  man.  Now  feeing  this  difference  is  not 
made  in  this  world,  but  all  things  happen  alike  to 

aU, 


4 1  CO  Of  the  immortality  of  the  foul ^ 

S  E  R  M.  all,  the  belief  of  this  difference  between  e;ood  and 

CLXXV.  . 

evil,  and  the  different  rewards  belonging  to  them, 
infers  another  ftate  after  this  life,  which  is  the  very 
thing  we  mean  by  the  foul's  immortality,  namely, 
that  it  does  not  die  with  the  body,  but  remains  after 
it,  and  pafTeth  into  a  flate  wherein  it  fhall  receive  a 
reward  fuitable  to  the  adlions  of  this  life. 

And  thus  I  have  done  with  the  fecond  argument 
for  the  foul's  immortality,  namely,  that  this  prin- 
ciple doth  not  contradid:  thofe  other  principles  which 
nature  hath  planted  in  us,  but  doth  very  well  accord 
and  agree  with  thofe  natural  notions  which  we  have 
of  the  goodnefs  of  God,  and  of  the  juflice  of  his 
providence,  and  of  the  real  and  intrinfical  difference 
between  good  and  evil. 

III.  This  principle  of  the  foul's  immortality,  is 
fuitable  to  the  natural  hopes  and  fears  of  men. 

To  the  natural  hopes  of  men.  Whence  is  it  that 
men  are  fo  delirous  to  purchafe  a  lading  fame,  and 
to  perpetuate  their  memory  to  pofterity,  but  that 
they  hope  that  there's  fomething  belonging  to  them, 
which  Ihall  furvive  the  fate  of  the  body,  and  when 
that  lies  in  the  filent  grave,  Ihall  be  fenfible  of  the 
honour  which  is  done  to  their  memory,  and  fhail 
enjoy  the  pleafure  of  thejufl  and  impartial  fame, 
which  fhall  fpeak  of  them  to  poflerity  without  envy 
or  flattery  ?  And  this  is  a  thing  incident  to  the  great- 
efl  and  mofl  generous  fpirits  ;  none  fo  apt  as  they  to 
feed  themfelves  with  thefe  hopes  of  immortaliivy. 
What  was  it  made  thofe  great  fpirits  among  the  Ro- 
mans, fo  freely  to  facrifice  their  lives  for  the  fafety 
of  their  country,  but  an  ambition  that  their  names 
might  live  after  them,  and  be  mentioned  with  honour 
when  they  were  dead  and  gone  ?  Which  ambition 
of  theirs,   had  it  not  been  grounded  in  the  hopes  of 

immor- 


as  dif covered  by  nature^  and  by  revelaUon.      4101 

immortality,  and  a  natural  opinion  of  another  life  5>  E  R  M. 
after  this,  in  which  they  might  enjoy  the  delight  and 
fatisfadtion  of  the  fame  which  they  had  purchafed, 
nothing  could  have  been  more  vain  and  unrcafonable. 
If  there  were  no  hopes  of  a  life  beyond  this,  what  is 
there  in  fame  that  fhould  tempt  any  man  to  forego 
this  prefent  life,  with  all  the  contentments  and  en- 
joyments of  it  ?  What  is  the  pleafure  of  being  well 
fpoken  of,  when  a  man  is  not  ?  What  is  the  happi- 
nefs  which  men  can  promife  to  themfelves,  when 
they  are  out  of  being,  when  they  can  enjoy  nothing, 
nor  be  fenfible  of  any  thing,  becaufe  they  are  not  ? 
So  that  the  fpring  of  all  thofe  brave  and  gallant  a6i:i- 
ons,  which  the  heathens  did  with  the  hazard  of  their 
lives,  out  of  a  defire  of  after-fame  and  glory  •,  I  fay, 
the  fpring  of  all  thofe  a6lions,  could  be  no  other 
than  the  hopes  of  another  life  after  this,  in  which 
they  made  account  to  enjoy  the  pleafure  of  the  fame, 
which  they  purchafed  with  the  expence  and  lofs  of 
this  prefent  life. 

But  this  ardent  defire  and  impatient  third  after 
fame,  concerns  but  a  few  of  mankind  in  comparifon. 
I  Ihall  therefore  inftance  in  fomething  which  is  more 
common  and  general  to  mankind,  which  plainly  ar- 
gues this  hope  of  immortality.  What  is  the  ground'' 
of  that  peace,  and  quiet,  and  Utisfadion,  wliich 
good  men  find  in  good  and  virtuous  a6lions,  but 
that  they  have  a  fecret  perfuafion  and  comfortable 
hopes  that  they  Hiail  fome  time  or  other  be  reward- 
ed ?  And  we  find  that  they  maintain  thefe  even  when 
they  defpair  of  any  reward  in  this  world.  Now  what 
do  thcfe  hopes  argue,  but  a  fecret  belief  of  a  future 
ftate,  and  another  life  after  this,  wherein  men  fhall 
receive  the  reward  of  their  adlions,  and  inherit  the 
fruit  of  their  doings  ?     Whence  is  it  cife,  that  good 

men. 


4102  Of  the  immortality  of  the  foiil^ 

S  E  R  M.  men,  thoudi  they  find  that  goodnefs  fuffers.  and  Is 
perfecuted  in  this  world,  and  that  the  beft  defign'S 
are  many  times  unfuccefsful  •,  what  is  it  that  bears 
:*i.  <,them  up  under  thefe  difappointments,  and  makes 
them  conftant  in  a  virtuous  courfe,  but  this  hope  of 
another  life,  in  a  better  ftate  of  things  hereafter  ? 
They  have  fome  fecret  prefage  in  their  own  minds  of 
a  life  after  death,  which  will  be  a  time  of  recompence^ 
as  this  is  of  trial. 

2.  The  fame  may  be  argued  from  the  natural  fears 
of  men.  Whence  is  the  fecret  fhame,  and  fear, 
and  horror,  which  feizeth  upon  the  minds  of  men, 
when  they  are  about  a  wicked  adion  ;  yea,  though 
no  eye  fee  them,  and  though  what  they  are  doing 
do  not  fall  under  the  cognizance  of  any  human  court 
or  tribunal  ?  Whence  is  it  that  they  meet  with  fuch 
checks  and  rebukes  in  their  own  fpirits,  and  feel  fuch 
a  diflurbance  and  confufion  in  their  minds,  when 
they  do  a  vile  and  unworthy  thing  •,  yea,  although 
it  be  fo  fecretly  contrived  and  fo  privately  managed, 
that  no  man  can  charge  them  with  it,  or  call  them 
to  account  for  it  ?  What  art  thou  afraid  of,  man,  if 
there  be  no  life  after  this  ?  Why  do  thy  joints  trem- 
ble, and  thy  knees  k*nock  together,  if  thou  be'fl  in 
no  danger  from  any  thing  in  this  world,  and  haft  no 
fears  of  the  other  ?  If  men  had  not  a  natural  dread 
of  another  world y  and  fad  and  dreadful  prefages  of 
future  vengeance,  why  do  not  men  fin  with  aflu- 
ranee,  when  no  eye  fees  them  ?  Why  are  not  men 
fecure,  when  they  have  only  imagined  a  mifchief  pri- 
vately in  their  own  hearts,  and  no  creature  is  privy 
and  confcious  to  it  ?  Why  do  mens  own  confcience* 
lafh  and  fting  them  for  thefe  things,  which  they 
might  do  with  as  great  impunity  from  men  in  this 
world,  as  the  moft  virtuous  actions  ?  Whence  is  it 
^-tj.rtw  that 


as  difcovered  by  72ature^  a?2d  by  revelation,       410? 

that  cogttare^  peccare  eft^  as  Min.  Felix  cxprcfTcth  it,  S  E  R  M, 
6x  non  fclum  confcios  timet ^  fed  ^  confcientium  ?  ^^^^^ ' 
*'  Whence  is  it  that  a  wicked  man  is  guilty  upon 
*'  account  merely  of  his  thoughts,  and  is  not  only 
*'  fearful  becaufe  of  thofe  things  which  others  arc 
*'  confcious  of,  but  becaufe  of  thofe  things  which 
''  no  body  knows  but  his  own  confcience  ?'*  Whence 
is  it,  that, 

Scelus  i7ttra  fe  taciturn  qui  cogitat  ullum^ 
Fa5li  crimen  hahet^ 

That  "  he  that  does  but  imagine  and  devife  fecret 
*'  mifchief  in  his  heart  is  guilty  to  himfdf,  as  if  the 
*'  fa6t  had  been  committed-,"  aiid  when  no  man 
can  charge  and  accufe  him  for  it,  yet, 

No^e  dieque  fuum  geftat  in  -peElore  tejlem^ 

*'  he  carries  his  accufer  in  his  breafl,  who  does  night 
*'  and  day  inceflantly  witnefs  ngainft  him?" 

And  that  thefe  fears  are  natural,  the  Hidden  rife  of 
them  is  a  good  evidence.  They  do  not  proceed  from 
deliberation,  men  do  not  reafonthemfclvcs  into  thcfe 
fears,  but  they  fpring  up  in  mens  minds  they  know 
not  how  ;  which  fliews  that  they  are  natural.  Now  a 
man's  natural  adions,  I  mean  fuch  as  furprize  us, 
and  do  not  proceed  from  deliberation,  are  better 
arguments  of  the  intimate  fenfe  of  our  minds,  and 
do  more  truly  difcover  the  bottom  of  our  hearts, 
and  thofe  notions  that  are  implanted  in  our  natures, 
than  thofe  adions  which  are  governed  by  reafon  and 
difcourfe,  and  proceed  from  deliberation.  To  dc- 
monflrate  this  by  aninftance  \  If  a  man  upon  a  fud- 
den  fight  of  a  fnake,  do  recoil  and  Hart  back,  trem- 
ble and  grow  pale ;  this  is  a  better  argument  of  a 
natural  antipathy  and  fear,  than  it  is  of  a  natural  cou- 

VoL.  IX.  20  K  :ugc^ 

6 


A  J  01,  Of  the  immortality  of  the  foiil^ 

;  K  R  M.  race,  if  afterward,  when  he  hath  commanded  down 
CLXxv.    j^.^  ^^^^^  j^^  fhould  by  his  reafon  perfuade  himfelf  to 
take  up  the  fnake  into  his  hand.     If  you  would 
know  what  a  man's  natural  apprehenfions  are,  take 
him  on  the  fudden,  and  give  him  no  time  to  deli- 
berate.     Therefore  fome  cunning  politicians  have 
ufed  this  way  of  furprize  and  fudden  queftions,  to 
dive  into  the  hearts  of  men,  and  difcover  their  fecrets. 
In  like  manner,  if  we  would  know  what  mens 
natural  apprehenfions  are  concerning  the  immortality 
of  the  foul,   and  a  future  flate,  obferve  what  mens 
firft  thoughts  are,  whether  a  man's  confcience  does 
not  fuseefl:  to  him  fuch  fears  upon  the  coinmiffion 
of  fin.  There's  no  doubt  but  men  may  offer  violence 
to  their  natures,  and  reafon  themfelves  into  great 
doubts  about  the  foul's  immortality  -,  nay,  men  may 
be  bribed  into  the  contrary  opinion  :  but  this  man 
who  in  his  deliberate  difcourfes  denies  any  rewards  af- 
ter this  life,  Iball  by  his  natural  adions  acknowledge 
them,  by  thofe  fears  and  terrors,  which  his  guilty 
confcience  is  ever  and  anon  furprized  withal. 

The  fum  of  this  argum.ent  is,  that  it  is  natural  for 
men  that  live  pioufly  and  virtuoufly,  that  dojuftand 
honeft  and  worthy  adions,  to  conceive  good  hopes 
that  it  fiiall  fome  time  or  other  be  well  with  them  ; 
that  however  they  may  meet  with  no  reward  and 
recompence  in  this  world,  yet  verily  there  will  be 
a  reward  for  the  righteous :  and  on  the  other  hand, 
wicked  men,  though  they  flourifh  and  profper  in 
their  wickedntfs,  yet  they  are  not  free  from  guilt, 
they  are  fearful  and  timorous,  even  when  their  con- 
dition fets  them  above  the  fear  of  any  man  upon 
earth.  Now  what  doth  this  fignify,  but  that  they 
have  fome  fccret  prefages  of  an  after-punifnment  ^ 
Nature  fuggeHs  this  thought  to  them,  that  there  will 

be 


as  dif covered  by  nature^  a?id  by  revelation,       4105 
be  a  time  when  all  the  fins  which  thev  have  commit-  S  E  R  M. 

CLXXV. 

ted,  and  the  wickednefs  which  they  have  done,  ihall 
be  accounted  for. 

And  it  is  no  prejudice  to  this  truth,  that  fome 
men  fin  agairul  their  confciences,  and  by  frequent 
a6ts  of  fin,  and  oficnng  notorious  violence  to  their 
own  light,  bring  themf:lves  into  a  brawny  and  in- 
fenfible  condition,  fo  that  they  have  not  thofc  flings 
and  laflies,  are  not  haunted  wicn  thofe  fears  and  ter- 
rors which  purfue  common  finners.  This  is  but 
reafonable  to  be  expedled,  that  men  by  f;  equcnt  acfls 
of  fin,  fhould  lofe  the  tender  fenfe  which  mens  con- 
fciences naturally  have  of  good  and  evil ;  that  men 
that  lay  wade  their  confciences  by  grofs  and  notori- 
ous fins,  fhould  lofe  the  fenfe  of  good  and  evil,  and 
that  their  confciences  fhould  grow  hard  like  the  beaten 
JToad  ;  nay,  it  is  fuitable  to  the  jufliice  of  God,  to  give 
up  fuch  perfons  to  a  reprobate  fenfe,  to  an  injudicious 
mind,  that  they  who  would  not  be  awakened  and 
reclaimed  by  the  natural  fear  of  divine  juftice,  which 
God  hath  hid  in  every  man's  confcicnce,  fliould  a: 
lafl  lofe  all  fenfe  and  apprehenfion  of  thefe  things, 
and  be  permitted  fecurely  and  without  remorfe  to 
perfed:  their  own  ruin^ 

IV.  This  dodlrine  of-  the  immortality  of  the  foul, 
does  evidently  tend  to  the  happinefs  and  perlcdion  of 
man,  and  to  the  good  order  and  government  of  the 
world  i  to  the  happinefs  and  perfedion  of  man, 
both  confidered  fingly,  and  in  fociety. 

I.  To  the  happinefs  and  perledion  of  man  con- 
fidered in  his  fingle  capacity.  If  it  be  a  thing  defi- 
rablc  to  be  at  all,  then  it  is  a  thing  delirable  to  be 
continued  in  being  as  long  as  may  be,  and  tor  ever 
if  it  be  poflible.  If  life  be  a  perfedion,  then  eter- 
nal life  is  much  more  fo;  efpecially  if  the  circum- 

20  K  2  fiances 


41^6  0/  the  immortality  of  the  foul^ 

;  E  R  M.  ftances  of  this  prefent  life  be  confidered,  tosjether 
with  the  ftate  which  we  hope  for  hereafter.     The 
condition  of  men  in  this  prefent  life,  is  attended  with 
fo  many  frailties,  liable  to  fo  great  miferies  and  fuf- 
ferings,  to  fo  many  pains  and  difeafes,  to  fuch  vari- 
ous caufes  of  forrow  and  trouble,  of  fear  and  vexa- 
tion, by  reafon  of  the  many  hazards  and  uncertain- 
ties, which  not  only  the  comforts  and  contentments 
of  our  lives,  but  even  life  itfelf  is  liable  to,  that  the 
pleafure  and  happinefs  of  it  is  by  thefe  very  much  re- 
bated ;  fo  that  were  not  men  trained  on  with  the 
hopes  of  fomething  better  hereafter,  life  itfelf  would  to 
many  men  be  an  infupportable  burden  ;  if  men  were 
not  fupported  and  born  up  under  the  anxieties  of  this 
prefent  life,  with  the  hopes  and  expectations  of  a 
happier  flate  in  another  world,  mankind  would  be 
the  moil  imperfedl  and  unhappy  part  of  God's  crea- 
tion.    For  although  other  creatures  be  fubjeded  to 
a  great  deal  of  vanity  and  mifery,  yet  they  have  this 
happinefs,  that  as  they  are  made  for  a  fhort  dura- 
tion and  continuance,  fo  they  are  only  afFedled  with 
the  prefent,  they  do  not  fret  and  difcontent  them- 
felves  about  the  future,  they  are  not  liable  to  be 
cheated  with  hopes,  nor  tormented  with  fears,  nor 
vexed  at  difappointments,  as  the  fons  of  men  are. 

Bwt  if  our  fouls  be  immortal,  this  makes  abun- 
dant amends  and  compenfation  for  the  frailties  of 
this  life,  and  all  the  tranfitory  fulFerings  and  incon- 
veniencies  of  this  prefent  ftate  ;  human  nature,  con- 
fidered  with  this  advantage,  is  infinitely  above  the 
brute  beafts  that  perifii. 

As  for  thofe  torments  and  miferies  which  we  are 
liable  to  in  another  world,  far  greater  than  any  thing 
that  men  fuft"er  in  this  life,  this  ought  not  in  reafon 
to  beobjeded  againfl  the  immortality  of  the  foul,  as 

if 


its  Jif covered  hy  nature^  a?id  by  revelation,      4107 

if  this  dodrine  did  not  tend  to  the  happinefs  and  ^  P-^  ^f. 
perfedlion  of  man  :  for  if  this  be  truly  the  cafe  of 
mankind,  that  God  hath  made  mens  fouls  of  an  im- 
mortal nature,  and  defigned  them  for  a  perpetual  du- 
ration and  continuance  in  another  flate  after  this  iife, 
i  n  order  to  which  (late,  he  hath  placed  every  man  in  this 
world,  to  be  as  it  were  a  candidate  for  eternity,  he 
hath  furniflied  every  man  with  fuch  helps  and  ad- 
vantages, fuch  opportunities  and  means  for  the  at- 
taining of  everlafting  happinefs,  that  if  he  be  not 
grofly  wanting  to  himfclf,  he  fliall  not  mifcarry  ;  if 
this  be  the  cafe,  then  an  immortal  nature  is  a  real 
and  mighty  privilege.  If  God  puts  every  man  into 
a  capacity  of  happinefs,  and  if  no  man  becomes  mi- 
ferable  but  by  his  own  choice,  if  no  man  falls  fliorc 
of  eternal  happinefs  but  by  his  own  fault,  then  im- 
mortality is  a  privilege  in  itfelf,  and  a  curfe  to  none 
but  thofe  who  make  it  fo  to  themfelves. 

2.  This  dodlrine  tends  to  the  happinefs  of  maa 
confidered  in  fociety,  to  the  good  order  and  govern- 
ment of  the  world,     I  do  not  deny,  but  if  this  prin- 
ciple of  the  immortality  of  the  foul  were  not  be- 
lieved in  the  world,  if  the  generality  of  mankind 
had  no  regard  to  any  thing  beyond  this  prefcnt  life  ; 
I  fay,  I  do  not  deny  notwithftanding  this,  but  there 
would  be  fome  kind  of  government  kept  up  in  the 
world  ;    the  neceflities  of  human   nature,  and  the 
mifchiefs  of  contention  would  compel  men  to  fome 
kind  of  order  :  but  I  fay  withal,  that  if  this  prin- 
ciple were  banifhed  out  of  the  world,  government 
would  want  it's  moft  firm  bafis  and  foundation  ; 
there  would  be  infinitely  more  diforders  in  the  v/orld, 
were  men  not  refbraincJ  from  injuflice  and  violence 
by  principles  of  confcience,  and  the  awe  of  another 
world.     And  that  this  is  fo,  is  evident  from  hence, 
2  that 


4 1  o  8  Of  the  immortality  of  the  foul y 

S  E  R  M.  that  all  magiftrates  think  themfelves  coneerncd  to 
cherilh  religion,  and  to  maintain  in  the  minds  of 
men  the  beUef  of  a  God,  and  of  a  fijture  ftatc. 

This  is  the  fourth  argument,  that  this  do6lrine 
does  evidently  tend  to  the  happinefs  of  man,  and 
the  good  order  and  government  of  the  world.  I 
grant,  that  this  argument  alone,  and  taken  fingly 
by  itfelf,  is  far  from  enforcing  and  neceifarily  con- 
cluding the  foul's  immortality  :  but  if  the  other  ar- 
guments be  of  force  to  conclude,  this  added  to  them 
is  a  very  proper  inducement  to  perfuade  and  incline 
men  to  the  belief  of  this  principle ;  it  does  very 
well  ferve  the  purpofe  for  which  I  bring  it,  namely, 
to  fliew  that  if  there  be  good  arguments  for  it,  no 
man  hath  reafon  to  be  averfe  or  backward  to  the  be- 
lief of  it  *,  if  by  other  arguments  we  be  convinced 
of  the  fuitablenefs  of  this  principle  to  reafon,  this 
confideration  will  fatisfy  us,  that  it  is  not  againft 
our  intereft  to  entertain  it.  And  no  man  that  is  not 
refolved  to  live  wickedly,  hath  reafon  to  defire  that 
the  contrary  Ihould  be  true.  For  what  would  a  man 
gain  by  it,  if  the  foul  were  not  immortal,  but  to 
level  himfelf  with  the  beafts  that  perilh,  and  to  put 
himfelf  into  a  worfe  and  more  miferable  condition 
than  any  of  the  creatures  below  him  ? 


S  ERA 


as  difcovered  by  nature^  and  by  revelation.      4109 

SERMON    CLXXVI. 

Of  the  immortality  of  the  foul,  as  dif- 
covered by  nature,  and  by  revelation. 
-  ■        .   -         ■  ■ 

2  TIM.  i.   10. 

But  is  now  made  mam f eft  hy  the  appearing  of  our  Sa- 
viour Jesus  Christ,  who  hath  ah olijloed  deaths 
and  hath  brought  life  and  immortality  to  lights 
through  the  go fp eh 

TH  E  fifth  and  laft  aro-ument  is,  that  this  fup-  ^^  ^  ^.  ^* 
_         "  ^     CLXXVI. 

poiition  or  the  foul-s  immortality  gives  the  v-^,^— ^ 

faireft  account  and  eafieft  folution  of  the  phaenomcna  '^^^  ^^•''^ 
of  human  nature,  of  thofe  feveral  adtions  and  ope-  th'is^exu 
rations  which  we  are  confcious  to  ourfclves  of,  and 
which,  without  great  violence  to  our  reafon,  cannot 
be  refoJved  into  a  bodily  principle,  and  afcribed  to 
meer  matter ;  fuch  are  perception,  memory,  liberty, 
and  the  feveral  a6ls  of  underftanding  and  reafon. 
Thefe  operations  we  find  in  ourfclves,  and  we  can- 
not imagine  how  they  fhould  be  performed  by  mere 
matter  ;  therefore  we  ought  in  all  reafon  to  refolvc 
them  into  fome  principle  of  another  nature  from  mat- 
ter, that  is,  into  fomething  that  is  immaterial,  and 
confequently  immortal,  that  is,  incapable  in  it's 
own  nature  of  corruption  and  diflblution. 

And  that  the  force  of  this  argument  may  the  bet- 
ter appear,  I  fliall  fpeak  fomething  of  thcfediRinfl- 
ly,  and  fhew  that  none  of  thcfc  operations  can  be 
performed  from  mere  matter.   I  begin  with  the 

I.  And  lowed,  which  is  fcnfitive  perception, 
which  is  nothing  clfc  but  a  confciouiiK'fi)  to  ourfclves 

of 


4 1 1  o  Of  the  immortality  of  the  foul ^ 

5  E  R  M.  of  our  own  fenfations,  an  apprehenfion  of  the  im- 
prelTions  which  are  made  upon  us ;  and  this  faculty  is 
that  which  conflitutes  the  difference  between  fenfi- 
tive  and  infenfitive  creatures.  A  flone  may  have  fe- 
vcral  impreflions  made  upon  it,  as  well  as  the  living 
creature  endowed  with  fenfe :  but  with  this  diffe- 
rence, that  whatever  imprefTions  are  made  upon  a 
ftone,  by  knocking,  cutting,  or  any  other  kind  of 
motion  or  adion,  the  ftone  is  flupid,  and  is  not  in 
the  leaft  confcious  of  any  of  thofe  imprefTions,  does 
not  perceive  what  is  done  to  it ;  whereas  thofe  crea- 
tures which  arc  endowed  with  fenfe,  do  plainly  per- 
ceive their  own  and  other  motions,  they  are  affedted 
with  the  imprefTions  which  are  made  upon  them. 

Now  we  can  give  no  account  of  this  operation 
from  mere  matter.  It  is  plain,  that  matter  is  not  in 
its  own  nature  fenfible  :  for  we  find  the  greatefl  part 
of  the  world  to  confifl  of  infenfible  parts,  and  fuch 
as  have  no  perception.  Now  if  matter  be  granted  in 
itfelf  to  be  infenfible,  it  is  utterly  unimaginable,  how 
any  motion  or  configuration  of  the  parts  of  it,  fhould 
raife  that  which  hath  no  fenfe  to  a  faculty  of  percep- 
tion. Epicurus  fancied  thofe  particles  of  matter,  of 
which  fouls  were  framed,  to  be  the  finefl  and  fmall- 
eft  \  and  for  their  fmoother  and  eafier  motion,  that 
they  were  all  of  a  round  figure.  But  fuppofing  mat- 
ter not  to  be  naturally  and  of  itfelf  fenfible,  who  can 
conceive  what  that  is  which  fhould  awaken  the  drow- 
fy  parts  of  it,  to  a  lively  fenfe  of  the  imprefTions 
made  upon  it  ?  It  is  every  whit  as  eafy  to  imagine 
how  an  inflrument  might  be  framed  and  tuned  fo 
artificially,  as  to  hear  its  own  founds,  and  to  be 
marveloufly  delighted  with  them  \  or  that  a  glafs 
might  be  polifhed  to  that  finenefs,  as  to  fee  all  thofe 
objedts  which  are  refieded  upon  it. 

But 


m  difcovered  hy  iiature^  aiidhy  revelation,        4 1 1 1 

But  there  is  one  difficulty  in  this :  for  it  may  be  ^  E  R  M. 
faid,  if  fenfitive  perception  be  an  argument  of  the  foul's 
immateriality,  and  confequently  immortality,  then  the 
fouls  of  beafts  will  be  immortal,  as  well  as  the  fouls 
of  men..     For  anfwer  to  this,  I  fhall  fay  thcfe  tluRgs. 

(i.)  That  the  moil  general  and  common  philofo- 
phy  of  the  world  hath  always  acknowledged  fome- 
thing  in  beafts  befides  their  bodies,  and  that  the  fa- 
culty of  fenfe  and  perception,  which  is  in  them,  is 
founded  in  a  principle  of  a  higher  nature  than  mat- 
ter. And  as  this  was  always  the  common  philofo- 
phy  of  the  world,  fo  we  find  it  to  be  a  fuppofition  of 
fcripture,  which  frequently  attributes  fouls  to  beafts 
as  well  as  to  men,  though  of  a  much  inferior  namre. 
And  therefore  thofe  particular  philofophers,  who  have 
denied  any  immaterial  principle,  or  a  foul  to  beafts, 
have  alfo  denied  them  to  have  fenfe,  any  more  thian 
a  clock  or  watch,  or  any  ether  engine ;  and  have 
imagined  them  to  be  nothing  elfe  but  a  finer  and 
more  complicated  kind  of  engines,  which,  by  reafon 
of  the  curiofity  and  tendernefs  of  their  frame,  are 
more  eafily  fufceptible  of  all  kind  of  motions  and  im- 
preffions  from  without,  which  impreffions  are  the 
caufe  of  all  thofe  adlions,  that  refemble  thofc  fcnfa- 
tions  which  we  men  find  in  ourfelves  -,  which  is  to 
fay,  that  birds,  and  beafts,  and  fillies,  are  nothing 
elfe  but  a  more  curious  fort  of  puppets,  which  by 
certain  fecret  and  liidden  weights  and  fprings  do 
move  up  and  down,  and  counterfeit  the  adlions  of 
life  and  fenfe.  This  I  confefs  feems  to  me  to  be  an 
odd  kind  of  philofophy  ;  and  it  hath  this  vehement 
prejudice  againft  it,  that  if  this  were  true,  every  man 
would  have  great  caufe  to  queftion  the  reality  ot  his 
own  perceptions :  for  to  all  appearance  the  fenlations 
of  beafts  are  as  real  as  ours,  and  in  many  tilings  their 

Vol..  IX.  20  L  fuifcs 

7 


Of  the  immortality  of  the  foul ^ 

fenfes  much  more  exquifite  than  ours  •,  and  if  nothing 
can  be  a  fufficient  argument  to  a  man,  that  he  is  really 
endowed  with  fenfe,  befides  his  own  confcioufnefs  of 
it,  then  every  mian  hath  rcafon  to  doubt  whether  al^ 
men  in  the  world  befides  himfelf  be  not  mere  en- 
gines ;  for  no  man  hath  any  other  evidence,  that 
another  man  is  really  endowed  with  fenfe,  than  he 
hath  that  brute  creatures  are  fo  •,  for  they  appear  to  us 
to  fee,  and  hear,  and  feel,  and  fmell,  and  taile  things 
as  truly  and  as  exadly  as  any  man  in  the  world  does, 
(2.)  Suppofing  beafts  to  have  an  immaterial  prin- 
ciple diftind  from  their  body^  it  will  not  from  hence 
follow,  that  they  are  immortal,  in  the  fenfe  that  we 
attribute  immortality  to  men.  For  immor<;ahty, 
when  we  afcribe  it  to  men,  fignifies  two  things. 

1 .  That  the  foul  remains  after  the  body,  and  is 
pot  corrupted  and  diflfolved  together  with  it. 

2.  That  it  lives  in  thisfeparate  ftate,  and  is  fenfir 
ble  of  happinefs  or  mifery. 

I .  Immortality  imports  that  the  foul  remains  af- 
ter the  body,  and  is  not  corrupted  or  diflfolved  tOr 
gcther  with  it.  And  there  is  no  inconvenience  in  at- 
tributing this  fort  of  immortality  to  the  brute  crea- 
tures. And  here  it  is  not  necelTary  for  us,  who  know 
fo  little  of  the  ways  and  works  of  God,  and  of  the 
fecrets  of  nature,  to  be  able  to  give  a  particular  ac- 
count what  becomes  of  the  fouls  of  brute  creatures 
after  death  •,  whether  they  return  into  the  foul  and 
,  fpiric  of  the  world,  if  there  be  any  fuch  thing,  as  fome 
I  fancy  ;  or  whether  they  pafs  into  the  bodies  of  other 
i  animals  which  fucceed  in  their  rooms  •,  I  fay,  this  is 
not  neceffary  to  be  particularly  determined  •,  it  is  fuf- 
ficient to  lay  down  this  in  general  as  h:^ '.ly  proba- 
ble, that  they  are  fiich  a  fort  of  l]:>irits,  which,  as  to 
their  operation  and  life,  do  necefiarily  depend  upon 

matter,^ 


as  difcove7'ed  hy  natur^^  and  by  revelatim,  4  1 1  -j 
inatter,  and  require  union  with  it,  which  union  be-  ^^  K  R  \\. 
ing  difTolved,  they  lapfe  into  an  infenfible  conditioni  ^''^^^'^• 
and  a  flate  of  inaftivity.  Fcr  being  endowed  only 
with  a  fenfitive  principle^  the  operations  of  which  do 
plainly  depend  upon  an  organical  difpolition  of  the 
body,  when  the  body  is  diflblved,  all  their  activity 
ceafeth  ;  and  when  this  vifible  frame  of  the  world 
ihall  be  diflblved,  and  this  Icene  of  fenfible  things 
Ihall  pafs  away,  then  it  is  not  improbable  that  they 
fhall  be  difcharged  out  of  being,  and  return  to  their 
firft  nothing :  for  though  in  their  own  nature  they 
would  continue  longer,  yet  having  ferved  the  end  of 
their  being,  and  done  their  workj  it  is  not  unfuitablc  to 
the  fame  wifdom  that  made  them,  and  commanded 
them  into  being,  to  let  them  fink  into  their  firft  ftate. 

adly.  Immortality,    as  applied  to  the  fpirits  gf 
men,  imports  that  their  fouls  arc  not  only  capable  of 
continuing,  but  living  in  this  fcparate  ftate,  fo  as  to 
be  fenfible  of  happinefs  and  mifery.     For  the  foul  of 
man  being  of  an  higher  nature,  and  not  only  en- 
dowed with  a  faculty  of  fenfe,  but  hkewife  other  fa- 
culties which  have  no  neceflary  dependance  upon,  or 
connexion  with  matter  •,  having  a  fenfe  of  God,  and 
of  divine  and  fpiritual  things,  and  being  capable  of 
happinefs  in  the  enjoyment  of  God,  or  of  mifery  in 
a  feparation  from  him  ;   it  is  but  reafonablc  to  ima- 
gine, that  the  fouls  of  men  ftiall  be  admitted  to  the 
exercife  of  thefe  faculties,  and  the  enjoyment  of  that 
life  which  they  are  capable  of  in  a  leparate  ftate. 
And  this  is  that  which  conftitutes  that  Vift  and  wide 
difference  between  the  fouls  of  men  and  beafts :  and 
this  degree  of  immortality  is  as  much  above  the 
other,   as  reafon  and  religion  are  above  {^.Viic. 

2.   Another  faculty  in  us,  which  argues  an  im* 
material,  and  confequently  an  immortal  principle  in 

20  L  2  n^an. 


Of  the  immortality  of  the  foul y 

man,  is  memory  ,  and  this  likewife  is  common  in 
fomc  degree  to  feveral  of  the  brute  creatures,  and  is 
fcems  to  be  nothing  elfe  but  a  kind  of  continued  fen- 
iation  of  things.  And  of  this  we  can  give  no  account 
from  mere  matter.  For  if  that  which  wc  call  the 
foul,  were  nothing  elfe  buty  as  Epicurus  imagined, 
a  little  wild-fire,  a  company  of  fmall  round  particles 
of  matter  in  perpetual  motion,  it  being  a  fluid  thing, 
it  would  be  liable  so  a  continual  diiTipation  of  its 
parts,  and  the  new  parts  that  come  would  be  alto- 
gether ftrangers  to  the  impreflions  made  upon  the 
old  ;  fo  that  fuppofmg  the  foul  liable  but  to  thofe 
changes  which  the  grofler  parts  of  our  bodies,  our 
flefli  and  blood,  continually  are  liable  to,  by  the  eva- 
poration and  fpending  of  the  old,  and  an  acceflion  of 
new  matter  *,  (and  if  we  fuppofe  the  foul  to  be  fluid 
matter,  that  is,  confifl:ing  of  particles,  which  are  by 
no  kind  of  connexion  hnked  to  one  another,  it  will 
in  all  probability  be  more  eaflly  difllpablc,  than  the 
grofiTer  parts  of  the  body,,  and)  if  fo,  how  is  it  ima- 
ginable that  thefe  new  and  foreign  particles  fhould 
retain  any  fenfe  of  the  imprefllons  made  upon  thofc 
which  are  gone  many  years  ago  ? 

3.  Another  faculty  which  I  ihall  infl:ance  in,  is  tlie 
will  of  man,  which  is  endowed  with  liberty  and  free- 
dom, and  gives  a  man  dominion  over  his  own  adlions. 
Matter  moves  by  neceflfary  and  certain  laws,  and  cannot 
move  if  it  be  at  refl:,  unlefs  it  be  moved  by  another ; 
and  cannot  reft,  that  is,  cannot  but  move,  if  it  be  im- 
pelled by  another.  Whence  then  are  voluntary  mo- 
tions ?  Whence  is  the  a,vle^4(nov,  the  arbitrary  prin- 
ciple which  we  find  in  ourfelves,  the  freedom  of  ac- 
tion to  do  or  not  to  do,  to  do  this  or  that,  which  we 
are  intimately  confcious  to  ourfelves  of  ?  Of  all  the 
operations  of  our  minds,  it  is  the  hardell  to  give  an 

account 


cc 

cc 
cc 


as  difcovered  by  nature^  and  by  revelation,       4 1 1 5 

account  of  liberty  from  mere  matter.  This  Epicu-  S  F,  R  u. 
rus  was  fenfible  of,  and  infinitely  puzzled  with  it,  as  ._- -^ 
we  may  fee  by  the  queftion  which  Lucretius  puts, 

Unde  ejl  h^c  inquam  fat  is  avulfa  voluntas  ? 

*'  How  comes  the  foul  of  man  to  have  this  pccu- 
**  liar  privilege  of  freedom  and  liberty,  above  all 
*'  other  forts  of  matter  that  are  in  the  world  ?  whence 

is  it,  that  when  all  things  cife  move  by  a  fatal  ne- 

ceflity,  the  foul  of  man  fhould  be  exempted  from 

that  flavery?"  He  does  indeed  attempt  to  give 
an  account  of  it  from  a  motion  of  declination  which 
is  proper  and  peculiar  to  the  particles  of  the  foul : 
but  that  is  a  more  unintelligible  riddle  than  liberty 
itfelf.     The 

4.  And  laft  operation  I  fliail  inflance  in,  is  that 
of  reafon  and  underflanding.  Not  to  mention  the 
adlivity  and  nimblenefs  of  our  thoughts,  in  the  ab- 
flradted  notions  of  our  minds,  the  multitude  of  dif- 
tind:  ideas  and  notions  which  dwell  together  in  our 
fouls,  none  of  which  are  accountable  from  matter,  I 
fhall  only  inflance  in  two  particulars. 

(i.)  Thofe  a6ts  of  reafon  and  judgment  whereby 
we  over-rule  the  reports  of  our  fcnfes,  and  corred: 
tht  errors  and  deceptions  of  them. 

(2.)  The  contemplation  of  fpiritual  and  divine 
things. 

(i.)  Thofe  a6ls  of  reafon  and  judgment  whereby 
we  over-rule  the  reports  and  determination^;  of  fenje. 
Our  fenfe  tells  us,  that  things  at  a  dillancc  are  lefs, 
than  our  reafon  tells  us  they  are  really  in  themfelves; 
as  that  the  body  of  the  fun  is  but  about  a  foot  dia- 
meter :  but  our  reafon  informs  us  othcrwifc.  Now 
what  is  the  principle  that  controls  our  lenfcs,  and  cor- 
rcd:s  the  deception  of  thvm  ?  If  the  foul  of  man,  be 

mere 


4 1 1 6  Of  the  Immorfaltfy  of  the  fouJy 

S  ^.  R  M.  mere  matter,  it  can  only  judge  of  things  according 
,^J_^  to  the  imprefiions  which  are  made  upon  our  fenfes  : 
but  we  do  judge  otherwife,  and  fee  reafon  to  do  fo 
many  times.  Therefore  it  mufb  be  fome  higher 
principle  which  judges  of  things,  not  by  the  material 
impreflions  which  they  make  upon  our  fenfes,  but  by 
other  meafures.  And  therefore  to  avoid  this  incon- 
venience, Epicurus  was  glad,  to  fly  the  abfurdity, 
,  to  affirm  that  all  things  really  are  what  they  appear 
to  us,  and  that  in  truth  the  fun  is  no  bigger  than  it 
feems  to  be. 

(2.)  The  contemplation  of  things  fpiritual  and  di- 
vine, is  an  argument  that  the  foul  is  of  a  higher  ori- 
ginal than  any  thing  that  is  material.  To  contem- 
plate the  nature  of  God,  and  the  divine  excellencies 
and  perfedions ;  the  meditation  of  a  future  ftate,  and 
of  the  happinefs  of  another  world  ;  thofe  breathings 
which  good  men  feel  in  their  fouls  after  God,  and 
the  enjoyment  of  him,  argue  the  fpiritual  nature  of 
the  foul.  Hoc  hahet  argumentum  dhinitatis  fu^  (faith 
Seneca)  quod  earn  divina  dek^ianty  nee  ut  alienis  inte- 
reft  fed  ut  fuis.  "  The  foul  of  roan  hath  this  argu- 
ment of  it's  divine  original,that  it  is  (o  ftrangely  de- 
lighted, fo  infinitely  pleafed  and  fatisfieJ  with  the 
contemplation  of  divine  things,  and  is  taken  up 
with  thefe  thoughts,  as  if  they  were  it*s  proper 
*'  bufinefs  and  concernment."  Thofe  ftrong  incli- 
nations and  defires  after  immortality,  and  the  plea- 
fure  which  good  men  find  in  the  fore-thoughts  of  the 
happinefs  which  they  hope  to  enter  into,  when  their 
fouls  fhall  quit  thefe  manfions  ;  the  reftlefs  afpirings 
of  our  fouls  toward  God,  and  thofe  bleffed  manfions 
where  he  dwells,  and  where  the  fpirits  of  good  men 
converfe  with  him  and  one  another,  thefe  fignify 
our  fouls  to  be  of  a  nobler  extraction  than  the  earth, 

that 


as  dif covered  by  ftafure,  and  by  revelation,      4 1 1 7 

that  they  are  defcended  from  abovo,  and  that  hca-  ^"^  K  R  JVT. 
yen  is  their  countiy,  their  thoughts  are  lb  much  up- 
on it,  and  they  are  fo  dcfirous  to  return  to  it. 

J  ?Az}i\  conclude  this, argument  from  the  noble  and 
excelknt  operations  of  our  fouls,  of  which  we  arc 
corfcious  to  ourfelvcs,  with  a  paflige  of  Tully  to 
this  purpofe.  Animaruvi  mdla  in  terris  origo  tnue* 
niri  pcteji :  nihil  ernm  eft  in  animis  'mixtuin  atque  con- 
(return^  aut  quod  ex  terra  natum  atque  fief  urn  ejfe  vi- 
deatur,  *'  The  fouls  of  men  have  not  their  original 
"  from  the  earth,  it  is  in  vain  to  feek  for  it  there  : 
**  for  there  is  nothing  in  the  mind  of  man  of  a  ma- 
**  terial  mixture  and  compofition,  which  we  can  ima- 
^'  gine  to  be  born  or  formed  out  of  the  eartl).  For, 
^*  fays  he,  among  material  and  earthly  thin  ;^s  there 
**  is  nothing,"  quod  vim  memori^^  mentis^  cogita- 
tionis  habeaty  quod  i^  preterit  a  teneat^  ^  futurapro- 
videaty  i^  compkcli  pojjit  pr^cfcntia.  *'  There  is  no 
"  earth]  ^ '".hmg  which  hath  the  power  of  memory, 
**  ot  underllanding,  of  thought,  which  retains  things 
"•*  pafl,  forcfees  and  provides  for  things  future,  com- 
*'  prehends  and  confiders  things  prefent."  Singula- 
ris  eft  igitur  quc^dam  natura  atque  vis  animiy  fejun^la, 
ah  his  ufitatis  notifque  naturis\  "  fo  that  the  nature 
'*  and  power  of  t!ie  foul  are  of  a  peculiar  and  lingu- 
*'  lar  kind,  cilterent  from  all  thofe  natures  which 
*^  we  are  acquainted  with  in  this  world."  He  con- 
cludes, Jtaque  quicquid  eft  quod  Je;::ity  quod  fapit, 
quod  vult,  qiLcd  viget^  ccclcftc  (jf  divinuf/i  efty  ob  earn- 
que  rem  ieternum  fit  necejfc  eft.  "  Thcre^^re  what- 
*'  ever  that  is  which  is  endowed  with  a  p(^wer  of 
*'  perception,  with  wifdom,  with  liberty,  with  fo 
*'  much  vigour  and  adlivity  as  the  foul  of  man,  is  of 
**  heavenly  and  divine  original,  and  for  that  reafon 
^*  is  peccllarily  immortal,  and  to  continue  for  ever." 

1  Thus 


CLXXVI. 


41 1 8  Of  the  immortality  of  the  foul ^ 

SEJR  M.  Thus  I  have  reprefented  to  you,  as  briefly  and 
plainly  as  I  could,  chofe  which  I  account  the  chief 
and  ftrongefl  arguments  of  this  great  principle  of  re- 
ligion, the  foul's  immortality.  Some  of  them  are 
plain  and  obvious  to  every  capacity ;  the  reft,  though 
they  be  abpve  common  capacities,  yet  were  not  to 
be  negledfed,  becaufe  they  may  be  ufeful  to  fome, 
though  not  to  all ;  and  as  thofe  who  are  more  wife 
and  knowing  Ihould  have  patience,  whilft  tlie  molt 
common  and  plaineft  things  are  Ipoken  for  the  in- 
firuftion  of  ordinary  capacities,  fo  thofe  of  lower  ca- 
pacities fhould  be  content  that  many  things  fhould 
be  fpoken  which  may  be  ufeful  to  others,  though 
they  be  above  their  reach. 

To  fum  up  then  what  has  been  faid  from  reafon,  for 
the  proof  of  the  foul's  immortality.  It  is  a  natural 
di61;ate  and  notion  of  our  minds,  univerfally  enter- 
tained in  all  ages  and  places  of  the  world,  excepting 
Ibme  very  few  perfons  and  fe(5ls  •,  it  doth  not  contra- 
di6l  any  other  principle  that  nature  hath  planted  in 
us,  but  doth  very  well  agree  with  thofe  other  no* 
tions  which  are  moft  natural  j  it  is  moft  fuitable  to 
tht  natural  hopes  and  fears  of  men ;  it  evident- 
ly tends  to  the  happinefs  and  perfecfkion  of  man, 
and  to  the  good  order  and  government  of  the  world ; 
laftly,  it  gives  the  faireft  account  of  the  phaenomena 
of  human  nature,  of  thofe  feveral  adions  and  opera- 
tions which  we  are  ponfcious  to  ourfelves  of. 

Now  fuppof  ng  the  foul  were  immortal,  what 
greater  rational  evidence  than  this  can  we  expedb  for 
it  ^  How  can  we  without  a  revelation  have  more  af- 
furance  of  the  things  of  this  nature,  than  thefe  argu- 
ments give  us,  not  taken  fingly,  but  as  they  concur 
together  to  make  up  an  entire  argument,  and  to  give 
us  fufficient  evidence  of  this  ? 

I  do 


as  J/fcovered  by  nature^  and  by  revelation,       4 1 1 9 

I  do  not  fay  that  thcfc  argunients  do  fo  ncc^fiarily  ^  ^"  ^  M- 
conclude  it,  that  there  is  an  abfolutc  impoifibilicy  ^^^^^'^• 
the  thing  fhould  be  otherwifc  :  but  fo  as  to  render  it 
fafficientJy  certain  to  a  prudent  and  confiderate  man, 
and  one  that  is  willing  to  accept  of  reafop.able  evi- 
dence. For  the  generality  of  the  papids  do  pcrti- 
naciouily  maintain  this  iinreafonable  principle,  that 
there  can  be  no  certainty  of  any  thing  without  infal- 
libility :  yet  fome  of  the  wifcr  of  them  have  thought 
better  of  it,  and  are  pleafed  to  ftate  the  bufinels  of 
certainty  otherwife  \  particularly  Melchior  Canus,  one 
of  the  mofl  learned  of  their  writers  determines  thofe 
things  to  be  fufficiently  certain,  which  no  man  can 
without  imprudence  and  obftinacy  difbelieve.  Certa 
apud  homines  ea  funt  qiia  negari  fine  pervicacia  i^ 
ftultitid  non  poffunt,  ''  Men  efteem  thofe  things 
*'  certain,  which  no  man  that  is  not  unrcafonably 
*'  obftinate  and  imprudent  can  deny."  And  I  think 
the  arguments  I  have  brought  for  the  fouPs  immorta- 
lity, ace  fuch  as  no  man  that  is  unprejudiced  and 
hath  a  prudent  regard  to  his  own  intercR  can  rcfiil. 

Thus  I  have  done  with  the  Hrfl  thing  I  propound- 
ed to  do  for  the  proof  of  the  foul's  immortality,  which 
was  to  fhew  what  evidence  of  rcafon  there  is  for  it. 
I  fhall  fpeak  briefly  to  the 

Second  thing  I  propounded,  which  was  to  fhew 
how  little  can  be  fai.i  as^ainft  it,  bccaufe  this  will  in- 
dire(5L!y  give  a  ftrength  and  force  to  t!ie  arguments  I 
have  brought  for  it.  For  it  is  very  confiderable  in 
any  queftion  or  controvcrfy,  what  ilrength  there  is 
in  the  arguments  on  both  fides :  for  though  very  pl.iu- 
iible  arguments  may  be  brought  for  a  thing,  yet  if 
others  as  plaufible  and  fpccious  may  be  urged  a-nnnft 
it,  this  leaves  the  thing  in  cequiiibrio,  it  fcts  the  ba- 
lance even,  and  inclines  the  judgment  neither  way; 

Vol.  IX.  20  M  nay, 

7 


4 1 2  o  Of  the  immortaUty  of  the  fouly 

nay,  if  the  objefljons  againft  a  thing  be  confidera- 
bJe,  though  not  fo  flrong  as  the  arguments  for  it, 
the  confiderablenefs  of  the  objections  does  fo  far 
weaken  the  contrary  arguments :  but  where  the  ar- 
guments on  one  hand  are  llrong,  and  the  objedlions 
on  the  contrary  very  flight,  and  fuch  as  may  eafily  be 
anfwered,  the  weaknefs  of  the  objections  contributes 
to  the  flrength  of  the  argument  for  the  other  fide  of 
the  queftion. 

To  come  then  to  the  bufinefs,  I  know  but  three 
objections,  which  have  any  colour  againft  this  principle. 

1.  That  the  notion  of  a  fpirit,  or  an  immaterial 
fubftance,  does  imply  a  contradiction. 

Anfw.  I.  This  is  only  boldly  faid,  and  not  the 
leaft  colour  of  proof  offered  for  it  by  the  author  that 
aflerts  it.  This  objection  had  indeed  been  confider- 
able,  if  it  had  been  made  out  as  clearly,  as  it  is  con- 
fidently affirmed.  In  the  mean  time  I  think  we  may 
take  leave  to  deny,  that  the  notion  of  a  fpirit  hath 
any  repugnancy  in  it,  till  fome  body  think  fit  to 
prove  it. 

2.  I  told  you  that  this  queftion  about  the  fouFs 
immortality,  fuppofeth  the  exiftence  of  God  to  be 
already  proved  •,  and  if  there  be  a  God,  and  it  be  an 
efiential  property  of  the  divine  nature,  that  he  is  a 
fpirit,  then  there  is  fuch  a  thing  as  a  fpirit  and  im- 
material fubftance,  and  confequently  the  notion  of  a 
fpirit  hath  no  contradiction  in  it  •,  for  if  it  had,  there 
could  be  no  fuch  thing. 

II.  It  is  f  lid,  there  is  no  exprefs  text  for  the  foul's 
immortality  in  the  old  teftament. 

Anfw.  This  doth  not  properly  belong  to  the  in- 
trinfical  arguments  and  reafon  of  the  thing,  but  h 
m-itter  of  revelation.  And  this  I  Ihall  fully  fpeak  to, 
when  I  come  to  fhew  what  evidence  the  Jews  had 

for 


as  difcovered  by  nature,  and  by  revelation,       4121 
for  the  fours  immortality.     In  the  mean  time  this  S  K  R  M. 

.  CI. XXVI. 

may  be  a  lufficient  anfwer  Co  this  objedlion,  that  there 
is  no  abfolute  neceffity  why  it  fhould  be  exprefly  re- 
vealed in  the  old  teftament,  if  it  be,  as  I  have  fhewn, 
a  natural  notion  of  our  minds  :  for  the  fcripture  fup- 
pofeth  us  to  be  men,  and  to  have  an  antecedent  noti- 
on of  thofe  truths  which  are  implanted  in  our  nature, 
and  therefore  chiefly  dcfigns  to  teach  us  the  way  to 
that  eternal  happinefs  which  we  have  a  natural  notion 
and  hope  of     The 

III.  Objedion  is  from  the  near  and  intimate  fym- 
pathy  which  is  between  the  foul  and  the  body,  which 
appears  in  the  vigour  and  ftrcngth  of  our  faculties  •, 
as  underflanding  and  memory  do  very  much  depend 
upon  the  temper  and  difpofition  of  the  body,  and  do 
ufually  decay  and  decline  with  it. 

Anfw.  The  utmoft  that  thts  objedion  fignifies, 
is,  that  there  is  an  intimate  union  and  conjunction 
between  the  foul  and  the  body,  which  is  the  caufe  of 
the  fympathy  which  we  find  to  be  between  them :  but 
it  does  by  no  means  prove,  that  they  are  one  and  tiie 
fame  effence.  Now  thr.t  there  is  fuch  an  intimate 
union  and  connexion  between  the  loul  and  matt^T  in 
all  creatures  endowed  with  life  and  fenfe,  is  acknow- 
ledged by  all  who  affirm  the  immateriality  ot  fouls ; 
though  the  manner  of  this  union  be  altogether  un- 
known to  us  i  and  fuppofing  fuch  an  union,  it  is  but 
reafonable  to  imagine  that  there  flioul  I  be  fuch  a 
fympathy,  thiit  the  body  fhouU  be  aftcclcd  witli  the 
delights  and  diilurbances  of  the  mind,  and  that  the 
foul  fliould  alfo  take  part  in  the  pleafures  and  pnins 
of  the  body,  that  by  this  means  it  may  be  efTcctually 
excited  and  flirred  up  to  provide  for  the  fupply  of 
our  bodily  wants  and  necefiities  :  and  from  this  fym- 
pathy, it  is  eafy  to  give  account  how  it  comes  to 

20  M  2  pafs, 


^12  2  Of  the  immortality  of  the  foul^ 

pafs,  that  our  faculties  of  underllanding,  and  me- 
mory, and  imagination,  are  more  or  lefs  vigorous, 
according  to  the  good  or  bad  temper  and  difpofition 
of  our  bodies.  For  by  the  fame  reafon  that  the 
mind  may  be  grieved  and  afflidled  at  the  pains  and 
flifFerings  of  the  body,  it  may  likewife  be  difordered 
and  v/eakened  in  it's  operations  by  the  diftempers  of 
the  body.  So  that  this  objedion  only  proves  the 
foul  to  be  united  to  the  body  \  but  not  to  be  the  fame 
thing  with  it. 


SERMON    CLXXVII. 

Of  the  immortality  of  the  foul,  as  difco- 
vered  by  nature,  and  by  revelation. 

2  TIM.  i,  10. 

But  is  now  made  manifefi  hy  the  appearing  of  cur 
Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  who  hath  aholijhed 
deaths  ar.i  hath  hr ought  life  and  immortality  to 
lights  through  the  gcfpeL 


S  E  R  M.  "¥"  "FAV  I  N  G  in  my  three  former  difcourfes  fhew- 


CLXXVII         m  cj 

ed,  what  arguments  natural  reafon  doth  fur- 
Thefourch  nifh  US  with,  for  the  immortality  of  our  fouls,  I 
thirp^r"  come  now  to  the  fecond  thing  I  propounded,  which 
is  to  fhew  what  affurance  the  world  had  de  fa£fo^  of 
this  great  principle  of  religion,  the  foul's  immorta- 
lity, before  the  revelation  of  the  gofpel. 

Before  our  Saviour's  coming  into  the  world, 
there  were  but  two  different  religions ;  that  of  the 
heathens,  aiid  that  of  tiie  Jews,     The  religion  of  the 

heathens 


as  dlfcovered  hy  nature^  and  by  revelation.       4123 
heathens  was  natural  relie;ion,  corrupted  and  de^ie-  S  E  R  M. 

CLvXVII 

Derated  into  idolatry  :  the  rehgion  of  the  Jews  was 
revealed  and  inftituted  by  God-,  but  did  fuppofe 
natural  religion,  and  was  luperadded  to  it.  There- 
fore I  fhall  confider  the  heathens  and  the  Jews  dif- 
tindly.     And, 

Fird,  Shew  what  affurance  the  heatheiis  had  of 
this  principle  of  the  foul's  immortality. 

Secondly,  What  the  Jews  had  of  it. 

Firft,  What  affurance  the  heathens  hatl  of  the 
foul's  immortahty. 

1.  It  is  evident,  that  there  was  a  general  inclina- 
tion in  mankind,  even  after  it's  greated  corruption 
and  degeneracy,  to  the  belief  of  this  principle  \ 
which  appears  in  that  all  people  and  nations  of  the 
world,  after  they  were  funk  into  the  grcateil  dege- 
neracy, and  all  (except  only  the  Jcv/s)  became  idola- 
ters, did  univerfilly  agree  in  this  apprehenfion,  that 
their  fouls  did  remain  after  their  bodies,  and  pafs  in- 
to a  (tare  of  happintfs  or  mifcry,  according  as  they 
had  demeaned  themfelves  in  this  life.  Not  that  they 
did  generally  reafon  themfelves  into  this  apprehen- 
fion, by  any  convincing  arguments,  but  did  herein 
follow  the  bent  and  tendency  of  their  natures,  which 
did  incline  them  thus  to  think.  For  no  other  reafon 
can  be  given  of  the  univerfil  confcnt,  even  of  the 
mod  rude  and  barbarous  nations  in  this  principle, 
befides  the  inclination  of  human  nature  to  this  opi- 
nion ;  that  is,  either  men  come  into  the  world  with 
this  notion  imprinted  upon  their  minds,  or  clfe  (which 
comes 'all  to  one)  the  underftanding  of  man  is  na- 
turally of  fuch  a  frame  and  make,  that  \'Ax.  to  itfelf, 
and  the  free  exercife  of  it':  own  thoughts,  it  will 
fall  into  this  apprehenfion. 

2.  The  ur^learned  and   common  pcojJc   amon^; 

the 


4124  Q/*  ^^^  tmmortaUfy  of  the  foul ^ 

SERM.  the  heathen,  feem  to  have  had  the  trueft  and  leaft 
wavering  apprehen lions  in  this  matter ;  the  realon 
of  which  feems  to  be  plain,  becaufe  their  behef  fol- 
lowed the  biafs  and  inclination  of  their  nature,  and 
they  had  not  their  natural  notions  embroiled  and 
difordered  by  obfcure  and  uncertain  reafonings  about 
it,  as  the  philofophers  had,  whofe  underftandings 
were  perplexed  with  infinite  niceties  and  obje6tions, 
which  never  troubled  the  heads  of  the  common  peo- 
ple. By  which  means  the  vulgar  had  this  advantage, 
that  the  natural  dictates  of  their  minds  had  their  free 
courfe  ;  and  as  they  did  not  argue  themfelves  inta 
this  principle,  fo  neither  were  their  natural  hopes 
and  fears  check' d  and  controlled  by  any  objedcions 
to  the  contrary.  » 

But  then,  this  principle  being  only  a  kind  of  na- 
tural infl:in6]:  in  them,  which  did  not  awaken  their 
minds  by  any  deep  confideration  and  reafoning  about 
k,  it  had  no  great  influence  on  their  lives.  For  as 
they  were  not  much  troubled  with  doubts  concerning 
it,  fo  neither  did  they  deeply  attend  to  the  confe- 
quences  of  it :  but  as  they  followed  the  inclination 
of  nature  in  the  entertaining  of  this  notion,  fo  be- 
caufe it  was  not  entertained  upon  deep  confideration, 
it  had  no  great  efrecl  upon  them. 

g.  The  learned  among  the  heathen  did  not  fo  ge- 
nerally agree  in  this  principle,  and  thofe  who  did 
confent  in  it,  were  many  of  them  more  wavering 
and  unfettled  than  the  common  people.  Epicurus 
and  his  followers  were  peremptory  in  the  deni^  of  it : 
but  by  their  own  acknowledgment,  they  did  herein 
orFer  great  violence  to  their  natures,  and  had  much 
ado  to  diveil  themfelves  of  the  contrary  apprehcn- 
fions  and  fears.  Therefore  the  poet,  in  the  perfon 
of  the  epicurean,  reprefents  it  as  a  rare  piece  of  hap- 

3  pinefs. 


US  dif covered  by  nature^  and  by  revelation,      4125 
pinefs,  and  that  which  few  attained  to,  to  quit  them-  S  E  R  M. 

CLXXVII* 

lelves  of  the  notions  of  another  (late  after  this  life. 

Felix  qui-potuit  rerum  cognofcere  can  fas  j 
At  que  metus  omnes  ^  ir.excrabile  fatum 
Stihjecit  pedibuSy  Jlrepitiimque  acherontis  avari. 

The  Stoicks  were  very  incfinable  to  the  belief  of 
a  future  ftate  ;  but  yet  they  almoil  every  where  fpeak 
very  doubtfully  of  it.  Seneca  and  Antoninus  often 
fpeak  to  this  purpofe,  that  if  the  foul  remain  after 
this  life,  there's  no  doubt  but  that  good  men  fliall 
be  happy,  and  bad  men  miferable  -,  but  whether  the 
foul  oift-live  the  body  or  not,  that  they  could  not  po- 
fitively  determine.  Ariftotle  hath  feme  exprefs  paf- 
fages  for  the  foul's  immortality  ;  but  it  feemshe  was 
not  conftant  to  himfelf  in  this  matter,  or  elfe  they 
have  done  him  a  great  deal  of  wrong,  who  have 
wrote  fo  many  books  on  both  fides,  concerning 
his  opinion  in  this  point.  Pythagoras,  Socrates, 
and  Plato,  and  many  others  of  the  moft  eminent 
philofophers,  as  TuUy  tells  us,  were  full,  not  of  af- 
furance,  but  of  very  good  hopes  of  the  foul's  im- 
mortaUty  and  a  future  ilate.  Socrates,  who  was 
one  of  the  bed  and  wifefl  of  all  the  heathens,  docs 
in  his  difcourfes  before  his  death,  (as  Plato  relates- 
them)  fupport  and  bear  up  himfelf  againft  the  ter- 
rors of  death,  only  with  this  confideration,  that  he 
was  full  of  hopes  that  when  he  left  this  world,  he 
ihould  pafs  into  a  far  happier  and  more  perfec^l  ilate  ; 
that  he  fnould  go  to  G  o  d  and  live  with  him,  and 
keep  company  with  the  fpirits  of  good  men  :  and 
that  he  is  not  pofitive  and  perem>ptory  in  it,  is  no 
argument  t\\dCi  he  doubted  of  this  more  than  any 
thing  d^tt  ;  for  ;hat  was  his  fafliion  in  all  his  dif- 
courfes, to  fpeak  modeilly,  and  v/ith  fome  Hiew  of 

doubt- 


4126  Of  the  immortality  of  the  foul^ 

S  E  R  M.  doubting,  even  concerning  thofe  things  whereof  he 
had  the  greateft  aflurance  :  but  this  is  plain,  that  he 
was  fo  well  afllired  of  it  as  to  die  chearfully,  and  to 
leave  the  world  without  any  kind  of  difturbance, 
upon  the  hopes  that  he  had  conceived  of  another 
life ;  and  furely  they  muft  be  pretty  confident  hopes, 
that  will  bear  up  a  man's  fpiritto  fuch  a  height  when 
he  comes  to  die.  In  fhort,  he  told  his  friends  the 
morning  before  he  died,  that  he  had  as  good  af- 
furance  of  the  foul's  immortality  as  human  reafon 
could  give,  and  that  nothing  but  a  divine  revela- 
tion could  give  him  greater  fatisfad:ion.  And  to 
mention  no  more,  Tully,  the  chief  philofooher  a- 
mong  the  Romans,  expreffeth  himfelf  vvich  a  good 
degree  of  confidence  in  this  matter.  He  ar  gues  ex- 
cellently for  it  in  feveral  parts  of  his  v/orks  •,  but 
particularly  in  his  book  de  Seyie5fute,  he  declares  his 
own  opinion  of  it,  where,  fpeaking  to  Scipio  and 
Lselius,  he  fays,  "  I  do  not  fee  why  I  may  not  ad- 
*'  venture  to  declare  freely  to  you,  what  my  thoughts 
*'  are  concerning  death  •,  and  perhaps  I  may  difcern 
*'  better  than  others  what  it  is,  becaufe  I  am  now 
*'  by  reafon  of  my  age  not  far  from  it.  I  believe^ 
fays  he,  that  the  fathers,  thofe  eminent  perfons 
and  my  particular  friends,  are  flill  alive,  and  chat 
they  live  the  life  which  only  dcfcfrves  tht  name  of 
life."  And  afterward,  Nee  me  folum  ratio  ac  dif- 
putatio  impulit  ut  it  a  credercjn,  fed  nol/ilitas  ctiain 
fummerum  philGfcpbcrpjn  ^  aiitboritas  j  '"  nor  has 
**  reafon  only  and  difputation  brought  me  to  this 
"  behcf,  but  the  famous  judgment  and  authority  of 
'•  t\\t  chief  philofophers."  And  having  mention- 
ed Pythagoras,  Socrates,  and  r'laro,  he  breaks  out 
into  this  rapture,  Oh  prceclarum  diem  qtium  in  ilhtd 
animorum  CGncilium  ccctumqite  prcjicifcar^  i^  cum  ^ 


as  difcovered  by  nature^  and  by  revelation,        41 27 
hdc  turhd  &  colluvione  difcedam !  ''  Oh  o-lorious  day,  ^  ^'-  ^  '^• 

CLXXVII, 

"  when  I  fhall  go  unto  the  great  council  and  aflcm- 
*'  bly  of  fpirits,  when  I  fhall  go  out  of  this  tumult 
*'  and  confufion,  and  quit  the  fink  of  this  world, 
"  when  I  iliall  be  gathered  to  all  thofc  brave  fpirits 
"  who  have  left  this  world,  and  meet  with  Cato,  the 
"  greatefh  and  befl  of  mankind  !"  What  could  a 
Chriftian  aimed  fiy  with  more  extafy  ?  And  he  con- 
cludes, ^{dd  ft  in  hoc  erro^  quod  animos  hcmimim 
immor  tales  ejfe  credam,  lib  enter  erro,  nee  mihi  hunc 
error  em  quo  deleSior^  dum  vivo^  extorqueri  volo  :  fin 
mortuus^  ut  quidam  minuti  philofophi  cenfent^  nihil  j'en- 
tiam^  non  vereor  ne  hunc  errorem  meiim  mortui  philo- 
fophi  irrideant.'^  "  But  if  after  all  I  am  miilaken 
"  herein,  I  am  pleafed  with  my  error,  which  I 
would  not  willingly  part  with  whilft  I  live  :  and 
if  after  my  death  (as  fome  little  phil'ofophers  fup- 
pofe)  I  fhall  be  deprived  of  all  fenfe,  I  have  no 
fear  of  being  expofed  and  laughed  at  by  them, 
for  this  my  miilake  in  the  other  world." 
Thus  you  fee  what  aiTurance  the  heathens  had  of 
this  principle,  and  that  there  was  a  general  inclina- 
tion and  propenfion  in  them  to  the  belief  of  it ;  and 
as  it  was  not  firmly  and  upon  good  grounds  believed 
among  the  common  people  •,  fo  neither  was  it  doubt- 
ed of  or  called  in  quedion  among  them.  Among 
the  philofophers  it  was  a  matter  of  great  uncertainty, 
being  ftiffly  denied  by  fome,  doubted  of  by  others  ; 
and  thofe  who  were  mod  inclinable  to  the  entertain^ 
ment  of  it,  do  rather  exprefs  their  defires  and  hopes  of 
it,  than  their  full  adurance  concerning  it.  I  come 
therefore, 

Secondly,    To  the  enquiry,    what   adurance  the 

Jews  had   of  the   foul's   immortaUty  and  a  future 

Vol.  IX.  20  N  date? 

7 


cc 
cc 

cc 


4128  Of  the  immortality  of  the  foiil^ 

S  R  '^  M    fliate  ?  And  of  this,  I  fhall  eive  you  an  account  in 
\^^^,^  thefe  following  particulars. 

1 .  They  had  all  the  aifurance  which  natural  light, 
and  the  common  reafon  of  mankind  does  ordinarily 
afford  men  concerning  this  matter  -,  they  had  com- 
mon to  them  with  the  heathens,  all  the  advantage 
that  nature  gives  men  to  come  to  the  knowledge  of 
this  truth.  But  that  which  I  chiefly  defign  to  en- 
quire into,  is,  what  fingular  advantage  they  had 
above  the  heathens,  by  means  of  thofe  fpecial  re^ 
velations  which  were  made  to  them  from  God, 

'Therefore, 

2.  They  had  by  divine  revelation  a  fuller  afiurance 
of  thofe  truths  which  have  a  nearer  connexion  with 
^his  principle,  and  which  do  very  much  tend  to  fa- 
cilitate the  belief  of  it  ♦,  as  namely,  concerning  the 
providence  of  God,  and  his  interefting  himfelf  par- 
ticularly in  the  affairs  of  the  world.  In  the  hillory 
pf  Mofes  they  had  a  fatisfa6lory  account  of  the  ori- 
ginal of  the  world,  that  God  made  it,  and  that  he 
had  eminently  interpofed  in  the  government  of  it  ; 
and  had  given  feveral  eminent  teftimonies  of  hisi 
providence,  in  the  general  deluge  which  was  brought 
upon  the  world,  and  in  the  dreadful  particular  judg- 
rnent  from  heaven  upon  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  and 
the  neighbouring  cities  *,  in  his  fpecial  providence  to- 
wards Abraham,  and  Ifaac,  and  Jacob  j  in  that  feries 
pf  miracles  whereby  their  deliverance  was  wrouglit 
out  of  Egypt,  and  they  were  carried  through  the 
wilderncfs  to  the  promifed  land  ♦,  and  in  thofe  two. 
ftanding  miracles  of  the  fruitfulnefs  of  every  fixth 
year,  becaufe  the  land  was  to  reft  the  feventh  ;  and 
preferving  the  land  from  the  invafion  of  enemies, 
when  they  came  up  to  Jerufalem  three  times  a  year ; 
by  which  God  did  teftify  a  very  particular  and  im- 

'  mediate 


as  difcovered  by  nature^  and  by  revelation,        4129 

mediate  providence  toward  them.  Now  whatever  ^^^^^^.j'^j^' 
gives  alTurance  of  God's  providence,  does  very  much  ^ 
facilitate  the  behef  of  a  future  (late.  Epicurus  was 
well  aware  of  the  connexion  of  thefe  principles  ;  and 
therefore  in  order  to  the  freeing  of  the  minds  of  mea 
from  the  fears  of  a  future  flate,  he  makes  way  for  it, 
by  removing  the  providence  of  God,  and  denying 
that  he  either  made  the  world,  or  concerned  himfelf 
in  the  government  of  it. 

And  then  befides  this,  the  Jews  had  afTurance  of 
the  exiftence  of  fpirits,  by  the  more  immediate  mi- 
nillry  of  angels  among  them.  And  this  does  di- 
redly  make  way  for  the  belief  of  an  immaterial  prin- 
ciple, and  consequently  of  the  foul's  immortality. 
And  this  the  Sadducees,  who  were  a  kind  of  Epicu- 
reans among  the  Jews,  were  fenfible  of  -,  and  there- 
fore as  they  faid  that  there  was  no  refurredtion  and  nd 
future  {late  after  this  life,  fo  they  denied  that  there 
was  either  angel  or  fpirit,  as  the  apoftle  tells  us,  Ads 
xxiii.  7.  From  whence  by  the  way  we  may  take 
notice  of  the  great  miftake  of  thofe,  who,  from  the 
opinion  of  the  Sadducees,  argue  that  eternal  life  was 
not  at  all  believed  under  the  old  teftament  ;  becaufe: 
if  it  had  been  fo,  it  is  not  credible  that  it  would  have 
been  difowned  by  thofe  who  acknowledged  the  au- 
thority of  thofe  books  ^  whereas  we  fee  that  they  de- 
nied, to  ferve  their  hypothefis,  other  things  which 
were  mod  expreQy  revealed  in  the  old  teftament,  as 
the  do6lrine  of  angels  and  fpirits. 

3.  There  were  fome  remarkable  inllances  in  the 
old  teftament,  which  did  tend  very  much  to  perfjadc 
men  to  this  truth  \  I  mean  the  inftanccs  of  Enoch 
and  Elias,  who  did  not  die  like  other  men,  but  were 
tranflatcd,  and  taken  up  into  heaven  in  an  extraor- 
dinary manner.     From  which  inilances  it  was  obvi- 

20  N  2  0U9 


4130  Of  the  immortality  of  the  fouly 

ous  to  confiderate  men,  to  reafon,  that  God  did  In- 
tend by  thefe  examples  to  encourage  good  men  with 
the  hopes  of  another  flate  after  this  hfe.     And  ac- 
cordingly the  apodle  to  the  Hebrews  makes  the  be- 
lief ot  future  rewards  a  necefTary  confequence  from 
this  inflance  of  Enoch's  trandation,  Heb.  xi.   5,  6. 
*'  By  faith  Enoch  was  tranllated,  that  he  fhould  not 
"  fee  death,  and  was  not  found,  becaufe  God  had 
"  tranflated  him  :  for  before  his  trandation   he  had 
"  this  teftimony,  that  he  pleafed  God.     But  with- 
out faith  it  is  impoiTible  to  pleafe  him  :  for  he  that 
Cometh  to  God,  muft  believe  that  he  is,  and  that 
he  is  a  rewarder  of  them  that  diligently  feek  him.'* 

4.  This  was  typified  and  fliadowed  forth  to  them 
by  the  legal  adminiftrations.  The  whole  oeconomy 
of  their  worlliip  and  temple,  of  their  rites  and  ce- 
remonies, and  fabbaths,  did  iliadow  out  fome  farther 
thing  to  them,  though  in  a  very  obfcure  manner  : 
The  land  of  Canaan,  and  their  coming  to  the  pof- 
felFion  of  It,  after  fo  many  years  travel  in  the  wil- 
dernefs,  did  reprefent  that  heavenly  inheritance  which 
good  men  fhould  be  pofTeiTed  of  after  the  troubles  of 
this  life.  And  thefe  were  intended  by  God  to  fignify 
thofe  greater  and  better  things  to  them,  and  fo  un- 
derftood  by  thofe  who  were  more  devout  and  know- 
ing among  them  •,  elfe  the  apoflle,  in  his  epiftle  to 
the  Hebrews,  had  gone  upon  a  very  ill  ground,  when 
he  all  along  takes  it  for  granted,  that  the  difpenla- 
tion  of  the  law,  and  all  the  ceremonies  of  it,  were 
of  a  farther  fignification,  Heb.  x.  11.  ''  The  law 
"  having  a  fhadow  of  good  things  to  come." 

5.  Ihis  was  in  general,  and  by  good  confequence, 
though  not  obvious  to  all,  yet  fufnciently  to  prudent 
and  difcerning  men,  revealed  in  the  book  of  the  law 
taken  precifciy  j  I  mean  tlie  five  books  of  Moks.  It 

I  is 


as  difcovered  by  nature^  and  by  revelation.       4^31 
is  faid  of  Abel,  that  God  was  pleafed  with  his  fa-  ^  E  R  M. 

CLXXVII 

crifice,  though  with  Cain's  he  was  not  well  pleafed,  .    --  Lk 

Gen.  iv.     Upon  this  Cain  was  angry  at  his  brother, 

and  flew  him.     Now  if  the  immortality  of  the  foul 

and  a  future  fbate,  be  not  fuppofed  and  taken  for 

granted  in  this  flory,  this  very  paflage  is  enough  to 

cut  the  finews,  and  pluck  up  the  roots  of  all  religion. 

For  if  there  were  no  rewards  after  this  life,  it  were 

obvious  for  every  man  to  argue  from  this  ftory,  that 

it  was  a  dangerous  thing  to  pleafe  God  •,  if  this  were 

all  that  Abel  got  by  it,  to  be  knocked  on  the  head 

by  his  brother,  who  offended  God. 

But  I  fliall  chiefly  inflfl:  on  the  general  promifes, 
which  we  find  in  thefe  books  of  Mofes,  of  God's  blef- 
fing  good  men,  and  declaring  that  he  was  their  God, 
even  after  their  death.  Now  I  fliall  fliew  that  thefe 
promifes  did  involve  the  happinefs  of  another  life, 
and  were  intended  by  God  to  fignify  thus  much, 
and  were  fo  underfl:ood  by  good  men  under  that  dif- 
penfation.  That  thefe  general  promifes  did  contain 
this  fenfe  under  them,  and  were  intended  by  God  to 
fignify  thus  much,  is  evident  from  our  Saviour's 
citation  of  that  text,  to  confute  the  Sadducees,  "  I 
"  am  the  God  of  Abraham,  the  God  of  Ifaac,  and 
"  the  God  of  Jacob  •,"  from  whence  he  reafons 
thus,  "  now  God  is  not  the  God  of  the  dead,  but 
*'  of  the  hving  \  for  all  live  to  him:'*  the  force  of 
which  argument  was  diredlly  and  immediately  level- 
led againfl:  the  main  error  of  the  Sadducees,  which 
was  the  denial  of  a  future  fl:ate.  This  our  Saviour 
immediately  proves  from  this  text,  and  by  confer 
quence  the  refurredlion,  which  the  Sadducees  did  not 
deny  upon  any  other  account,  but  becaufe  they  did 
not  *  believe  a  future  fliate.  * ^'\  '""* 

mon  XXXV 1. 

6.  Toward  the  expiration  of  the  legal  difpenfir  ^'o^-  ^^^• 

,j^  tipn,  - 


:4MM^ 


CLXXVII. 


4132  Of  the  immortality  of  the  foul ^ 

SKRM.  tion,  there  was  yet  a  clearer  revelation  of  a  futufe 
Hate.     The  text  in  Daniel  feems  to  be  much  plainer 
than  any  in  the  old  teftament,  Dan.  xii.  2.  "  And 
*'  many  of  them  that  fleep  in  the  duft  of  the  earth 
"  fhall  awake  •,  fome  to  everlafting  life,  and  fome 
*'  to  fhame  and  everlafting  contempt."  And  to  this 
text  the  feven  brethren,  who  v/ere  cruelly  put  to  death 
under  the  perfecution  of  Antiochus,  feem  to  refer, 
when  they  comfort  themfelves  with  the  hopes  of  ano- 
ther life,  2  Mac.  vii.  9.  where  one  of  them,  ready 
to  die,  fays  thus  to  Antiochus,  ''  thou  like  a  fury 
takeft  us  out  of  this  prefenc  life  •,  but  the  king  of 
the  world  Ihall  raife  us  up,  who  have  died  for  his 
laws,  unto  everlafting  life."     To  the  fame  pur- 
pofe  another  of  them,  ver.  14.  when   he  was  tor- 
mented, exprefleth  his  confidence  thus, ''  it  is  good, 
being  put  to  death  by  men,  to  look  for  hope  from 
God,  to  be  raifed  up  again  by  him  :  but  as  for 
thee  (fpeaking  of  Antiochus)  thou  fhalt  have  no 
*'  refurredion  to  life."     Where  he  feems  to  allude 
to  the  twofold  refurre6lion  mentioned  by  Daniel. 
And  though  this  hiftory  of  the  Maccabees  be  not  ca- 
nonical, yet  the  apoftle  hath  warranted  the  truth  of 
it  to  us,  at  leaft  in  this  particular,  for  he  plainly  re- 
fers to  this  ftory,  Heb.  xi.  35.  "  Others  were  tor- 
*'  tured,  not  accepting  deliverance,  that  they  might 
obtain  a  better  refurre6lion. 

7.  Notwithftanding  this,  I  fay,  that  the  immor- 
tality of  the  foul,  and  a  future  ftate,  was  not  ex- 
prefly  and  clearly  revealed  in  the  old  teftament,  at 
leaft  not  in  Mofes  his  law.  The  fpecial  and  particu- 
lar promifes  of  that  difpenfation,  were  of  temporal 
good  things  ;  and  the  great  blefTing  of  eternal  hfe, 
was  but  fomewhat  obfcurely  involved  and  fignified  in 
the  types  and  general  promifes  :  for  confidering  that 

the 


^ 


as  difcovertd  by  nature^  and  by  7'evelation.      4133 
the  particular   promifes  were    plainly   of  temporal  S  R  R  M. 

.  .  CLXXVlI. 

things,  it  was  very  obvious  to  thofe  who  were  not 
fo  prudent  and  difcerning  to  interpret  the  general 
promifes,  fo  as  to  comprehend  only  that  kind  of 
)  blefllngs,  which  were  exprefs'd  in  the  fpecial  and 
particular  promifes,  and  fo  likewife  to  underftand  the 
general  threatnings.  And  upon  this  account,  the  a- 
poftle  to  the  Hebrews  principally  advanceth  the  new 
covenant  of  the  gofpel,  above  the  old  difpenfation  ; 
becaufe  the  gofpel  had  clear,  and  exprefs,  and  fpecial 
promifes  of  eternal  life,  which  the  law  had  not,  Heb. 
viii.  6.  "  But  now  hath  he  obtained  a  more  excel* 
*^  lent  miniftry,  by  htw  much  alfo  he  is  the  Medi- 
*'  ator  of  a  better  covenant,  which  was  eftablifhed 
*'  upon  better  promifes."  For  the  fame  reafon 
Christ  is  faid  here  in  the  text,  *'  by  his  appearance 
*'  to  have  abolilhed  death,  and  brought  life  and 
*'  immortality  to  light  through  the  gofpel.'^  And 
fo  I  proceed  to  the 

Second  thing  I  propounded,  which  is  to  fhew  what 
farther  evidence  and  affurance  the  gofpel  gives  us  of  it, 
than  the  world  had  before  •,  what  clearer  difcoveries 
we  have  by  Christ's  coming,  than  the  heathens  or 
Jews  had  before. 

That  the  gofpel  hath  brought  to  us  a  clearer  dif- 
covery  of  this  than  they  had,  is  here  exprefly  faid  ; 
that  God's  gracious  purpofe  concerning  our  falva- 
tion,  which  was,  before  the  world  began,  decreed  to 
be  accompUihed  in  Christ,  is  now  made  manifeft 
by  his  coming  into  the  world  ;  ver.  9.  "  Who  hath 
faved  and  called  us  with  an  holy  calling,  not  ac- 
cording to  our  works,  but  according  to  his  own 
purpofe  and  grace,  which  was  given  us  in  Christ 
Jesus  before  the  world  began,  but  is  nov/  made 
manifeft,  &c."     "Which  is  emphatically  ipoken, 

now. 


4134  ^f  ^'^^  immortality  of  the  foul, 

S  E  R  M.    now,  and  not  till  now,  importing  that  before  the  ap- 

CLXXVII.  -re  -^  •  r        1  •  1 

pearing  or  our  Saviour,  it  was  in  great  meafure  hid 
from  the  world,  and  that  men  had  very  dark  and 
obfcure  apprehenflons  of  it,  till  it  was  "  brought  to 
*'  light  by  the  gofpel."  And  this  is  not  only  af- 
firmed in  this  place,  but  very  frequently  all  over  the 
new  teftament.  I  will  mention  fome  of  the  moft 
exprefs  places  to  this  purpofe,  John  vi.  8.  When 
many  of  Christ's  followers  left  him,  he  afks  the 
twelve,  "  will  ye  alfo  go  away?"  To  whom  Peter 
anfwers,  "Lord,  to  whom  fhall  we  go  ?  thou  haft 
**  the  words  of  eternal  life."  As  if  he  had  faid, 
what  mafter  fhould  we  chufe  to  follow  rather  than 
thee,  who  bringeft  to  the  world  the  glad  tidings 
cf  eternal  hfe  ?  What  difcipline  or  infhitution  is  there 
in  the  world,  that  gives  fuch  encouragement  to  its 
followers  ?  Others  may  promife  great  things  in  this 
world  •,  but  in  the  declarations  and  promifes  of  ano- 
ther life,  we  cannot  rely  upon  any  one  but  him  that 
comes  from  God,  as  we  are  fully  perfuaded  thou 
doft ;  for  it  follows  in  the  next  verfe,  "  and  we  be- 
*'  heve,  and  are  fure  that  thou  art  the  Christ,  the 
"  Son  of  the  living  God." 

Tit.  ii.  10,  &c.  "  The  grace  of  God  which  brings 
*'■  falvation  hath  appeared  to  all  men,  &c."  Where 
the  revelation  of  the  gofpel  is  called  "  the  grace  of 
"  God  which  brings  falvation,"  that  is,  which  dif- 
covers  to  the  world  that  eternal  happinefs,  which  was 
in  a  great  meafure  hid  from  it  before,  and  encou- 
rageth  men  by  the  hopes  of  that  blefling  to  live  a 
holy  life.  The  apoftle  to  the  Hebrews  doth  all  along 
in  his  epiftle,  ufe  this  as  an  argument  to  the  Jews, 
to  take  them  off  from  the  Mofaical  inftitution,  and  to 
perfuade  them  to  entertain  the  dodlrine  of  the  gofpel, 
as  making  clearer  difcoveries,  and  giving  greater  af- 

furance 


iC 


as  dif covered  by  nature^  and  by  revelation.       41;?? 
furance  of  eternal  Jife  and  falvation,  than  the  law  did,  S  E  R  M, 
Heb.  ii.  2,  3,  4,  5.  "  For  if  the  word  fpoken  by  ^^^^^": 
angels  was  ftedfafl,  and  every  tranfgreflion  and 
difobedience  received  a  juft  recompence  of  reward  : 
how  fhall  we  efcape,  if  we  negled  fo  great  falva- 
tion, which  at  the  firft  began  to  be  fpoken  by  the 
Lord,  and  was  confirmed  unto  us  by  them  that 
heard  him  ;  God  alfo  bearing  them  witnefs,  both 
with  figns  and  wonders,  and  with  divers  miracles 
and  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghoft,  according  to  his  own 
will  ?  For  unto  the  angels  hath  he  not  put  in  fub- 
jedion  the  world   to  come,  whereof  we  fpeak.'* 
That  is,  if  the  promifcs  and  threatnings  of  the  law, 
which  was  delivered  but "  by  theminiftry  of  angels,*' 
were  made  good,  and  the  offenders  under  that  dif- 
penfation  were  feverely  punifhed,  what  fhall  become 
of  us,  if  we  negled  the  difpenfation  of  the  gofpel, 
which  reveals  to  us  greater  things,  even  eternal  life 
and  falvation,  and  which  recciveth  fo  great  a  confir- 
mation both  from  Christ  himfelf,  by  whom  it  was 
firil  delivered,  and  alfo  from  his  apoflles,  who  pub- 
lilhed  it  to  the  world,  and  gave  teltimony  to  it  by 
fo  many  miracles?  And  it  follows,  at  ver.  5.  "  For 
"  unto  the  angels  hath  he  not  put  in  fubjedion  the 
*'  world  to  come,  whereof  we  now  fpeak."     The 
meaning  of  which  is  this,  the  promifcs  and  threat- 
nings of  the  law  which  was  delivered  by  angels  were 
temporal,  and  fuch  as  refpecfled  this  world  \  but  now 
God  hath  fent  his  fon,  he  hath  in  him  made  pro- 
miles  of  a  greater  falvation,  he  hath  put  into  his 
hands   the  great  things  of  another  world,  and  hath 
given  him  power  to  promiie  eternal  life,  and  to  give 
it  to  as  many  as  he  pleafes.     So  the  danger  of  con- 
temning the    gofpel    mufl  needs  be  much  greater 
ihan  that  of  the  law,  becaufe  the  happineli  which  the 
Vol.  IX.  20   O  gofpd 

7 


4136  Of  the  immortality  of  the  foul^ 

S  E  R  M.  gofpel  promifes,  is  fo  much  greater :  For  unto  the 
angels,  who  delivered  the  law,  God  gave  no  powder 
and  commilTion  to  make  clear  and  exprefs  promifes 
of  the  rewards  of  another  world.  "  Unto  the  angels 
"  did  he  not  put  in  fubje6bionthe  world  to  come  ;'* 
but  fo  hath  he  done  to  his  Son,  "  he  hath  commit- 
"  ted  all  judgment  to  him,  and  hath  given  him 
''  power  to  raife  up  thofe  who  have  done  good,  un- 
*'  to  the  refurreftion  of  Hfe,  and  thofe  that  have  done 
*'  evil,  unto  the  refurredion  of  damnation  :"  As 
our  Saviour  himfelf  fpeaks,  John  v.  22.  and  thus, 
"  he  hath  put  the  world  to  come  in  fubjedion  unto 
*'  his  Son,"   having  impowered  him  to  encourage 
and  argue  men  to  the  obedience  of  his  laws,  by  the 
rewards  and  punilhments  of  another  world  :  whereas 
the  law  delivered  by  angels  had  only  the  fandion  of 
temporal  threatnings  and  promifes.     Heb.  vii.  j6. 
The  gofpel  is  called  ''  the  power  of  an  eternal  life,'* 
in  oppofition  to  the  'aw,  which  is  called  "  a  carnal 
*'  commandment  i"  not  only  becaufe  the  precepts 
of  it  refpeded  the  body,  but  becaufe  the  promifes  of 
it  were  of  temporal  good  things  which  belong  to  this 
life  ;  and  at  the  19th  verfe,  the  gofpel,  in  oppofition 
to  the  Mofaical  difpenfation,  is  called  "  the  bringing 
in  of  a  better  hope.     The  law  made  nothing  per- 
fedl :  but  the  bringing  in  of  a  better  hope  did  ; 
e7r£i<rccy^jyri,  the  fuperindudion  of  abetter  hope  •," 
by  which  the  apoflle  plainly  figniiies,  that  this  was 
the  imperfection  of  the  Moiliical  difpenfation,  that  it 
did  not  give  men  firm  hopes  and  alTurance  of  eter- 
nal life  ;  but  the  gofpel  hath  fuperinduced  this  hope, 
and  thereby  fupplied  the  great  defe6t  of  the  former 
adminiftration.     To  the  fame  purpofe  he  tells  us, 
chap.  viii.  6.  that  Christ  "  hath  now  obtained  a 
"  more  excellent  miniilry,  for  as  much  as  he  is  the 
2  *'  mediator 


cc 


as  difcovered  by  nature,  and  by  revelation.       4^37 
*'  Mediator  of  a  better  covenant,  efbablifhed  upon  '^  E  R  M, 

CLXXVII 

*'  better  promifes."  How  better  promifes  ?  why, 
inflead  of  the  promifes  of  a  temporal  Canaan,  and 
earthly  blellings,  Christ  hath  given  us  promifes  of 
eternal  life  and  happinefs.  Therefore  in  the  next 
chapter  he  is  called  "  an  high  pried  of  the  good  things 
"  to  come  :"  and  ver.  15.  '' For  this  caufe"  he  is 
faid  to  be  "  the  mediator  of  the  new  teilament,  that 
"  they  which  are  called  might  receive  the  promife 
"  of  the  eternal  inheritance."  Once  more  the  apof- 
tle,  chap.  X.  i.  makes  this  the  great  imperfection  of 
the  law,  in  oppofition  to  the  gofpel,  that  it  "  had 
"  only  a  fhadow  of  good  things  to  come,  but  not 
*'  the  very  image  of  the  things  i"  that  is,  it  did  but 
darkly  typify  and  fhadow  forth  the  things  of  another 
life,  not  give  us  fo  exprefs  an  im.age,  and  lively  re- 
prefentation  of  the  rewards  of  another  world,  as  the 
gofpel  does.  Therefore  St.  John  makes  eternal  life 
to  be  the  great  promife  of  the  gofpel,  the  great  blel^ 
fing  which  Christ  hath  revealed  to  the  world, 
I  John  ii.  25.  "  this  is  the  promife  which  he  hath 
"  promifed,  even  eternal  life."  So  that  you  fee,  that 
the  full  and  clear  difcovery  of  eternal  life  is  every 
where  in  the  new  teftament  attributed  to  Christ, 
and  to  the  revelation  which  by  him  was  made  to  the 
world. 

It  remains  now,  that  I  Ihew  more  particularly, 
wherein  the  gofpel  hath  given  the  world  greater  evi- 
dence and  alTurance  of  a  future  ftate,  than  they  had 
before. 

I .  The  rewards  of  another  life  are  mod  clearly 
revealed  in  the  gofpel.  That  God  hath  made  a  re- 
velation of  this  by  Christ  is  an  advantage  which 
the  heathen  wanted,  who  were  deflitute  of  divine 
revelation.     There  are  many  truths  which  men  may 

20  O  2  be 


4 1 3  S  Of  the  immortality  of  the  foul^ 

>  E  R  M.  be  vvell  inclined  to  believe,  and  for  the  proof  of 
which,  the  wifer  and  more  knowing  fort  of  men  may 
be  able  to  offer  very  fair  and  plaufible  arguments  ;  and 
yet  for  all  this,  they  may  have  no  confident  afTiirance 
of  them,  or  at  lead  may  be  very  far  from  a  well- 
grounded  certainty,  fuch  as  will  give  reft  and  fatif- 
fadlion  to  the  mind  of  a  confiderate  and  inquifitive 
man.  All  men  are  not  capable  of  the  force  of  a  rea- 
fon ;  nay,  there  are  very  few  who  can  truly  judge  of 
the  weaknefs  or  ftrength  of  an  argument.  There  are 
many  things  which  admit  of  very  plaufible  arguments 
on  both  fides  \  and  the  generality  of  men  are  very  apt 
to  be  impofed  upon  by  very  flight  arguments,  to  be 
moved  any  way  with  fome  little  fhew  an/i  appearance 
of  reafon.  So  that  when  this  principle  of  the  foul's 
immortality  came  to  be  difputed  in  the  world,  and  the 
fe6ls  of  the  philofophers,  the  learned  men  of  thofc 
times,  came  to  be  divided  in  opinion  about  it,  fome 
difputing  diredlly  againil:  it,  others  doubting  very 
much  of  it,  and  fcarce  any  pretending  to  any  great 
afllirance  of  it,  it  was  no  wonder,  if  by  this  means 
many  came  to  be  in  fufpence  about  it  •,  but  now  di- 
vine revelation,  when  that  comes,  it  takes  away  all 
doubting,  and  gives  men  aflfuranceof  that,  concerning 
which  they  were  uncertain  before.  For  every  man 
that  believes  a  God,  does  firmly  believe  this  principle, 
that  whatever  is  revealed  by  him  is  true :  But  efpeci- 
ally  if  the  revelation  be  clear  and  exprefs,  then  it  gives 
full  fatisfaftion  to  the  mind  of  man,  and  removes  all 
jealoufy  and  fufpicions  of  the  contrary.  And  this  is 
a  great  advantage  which  the  gofpel  gives  us  in  this 
matter,  above  what  the  Jews  had.  They  had  fome 
kind  of  revelation  and  difcovery  of  this  under  the  dif- 
penfation  of  the  law  ;  but  very  darkly,  in  types  and 
ihadows ;  but  the  gofpel  gives  us  a  mofl  exprefs  re- 
velation 


as  difcovered  by  nature^  and  by  revelation,       4139 

vektion  of  it,  is  full  of  fpecial  promifes  to  this  pur-  ^^  R  R  M. 
pofe,  made  in  clear  words,  free  from  all  ambiguity,  ^ 
or  liablenefs  to  be  interpreted  to  another  fenfe.  So 
that  if  we  compare  the  law  and  the  gofpel  together, 
we  fliall  fee  a  vaft  difference  as  to  this  matter.  Under 
the  law,  the  promife  of  eternal  life  was  only  compre- 
hended in  fome  general  words,  from  which  a  man 
that  had  true  notions  of  God  and  religion  might  be 
able  to  infer,  that  God  intended  fome  reward  for 
■  good  men,  and  punifhment  for  wicked  men,  beyond 
this  life  :  but  the  promifes  of  temporal  good  things 
were  fpecial  and  exprefs,  and  their  law  was  fui!  of 
them.  Contrariwife  in  the  new  tefbament,  the  moft 
fpecial  and  exprefs  promife  is  that  of  eternal  life,  and 
this  the  books  of  the  new  teflament  are  full  of:  as 
for,  temporal  blefTings,  they  are  but  fparingly  and  ob- 
fcurely  promifed  in  comparifon  of  the  other. 

2 .  The  rewards  of  another  life,  as  they  are  clearly 
and  exprefly  revealed  by  the  gofpel,  fo  that  they  may 
have  the  greater  power  and  influence  upon  us,  and 
we  may  have  the  greater  affurance  of  them,  they  are 
revealed  with  very  particular  circumflances.  And 
herein  the  gofpel  gives  us  a  great  advantage,  both 
above  the  heathens  and  Jews.  For  though  a  man 
was  fatisfied  in  general  of  a  ftate  after  this  life,  that 
mens  fouls  fhould  furvive  their  bodies,  and  pals  into 
another  world,  where  it  fliall  be  well  with  them  that 
have  done  well  in  this  world,  and  ill  to  thofe  that 
have  done  ill ;  yet  no  man,  without  a  revelation, 
could  conjedure  the  particular  circumftances  of  that 
ftate.  What  wild  defcriptions  do  the  heathen  poets, 
who  were  their  moft  ancient  divines,  make  of  heaven 
and  hell,  of  the  Elyfian  fields,  and  the  infernal  re- 
gions! But  now  the  gofpel,  for  our  greater  affurance 
and  fatisfadlion,  hath  revealed  many  particular  cir- 
cumftances 


Of  the  immortality  of  the  foul ^  '  ] 


4140 

S  K  R  M.  cumflances  of  the  future  ftate  to  us  -,  as  that  all  ii-fcni 
at  the  end  of  the  world  fhall  be  fummoned  to  make 
a  folemn  appearance  before  the  Lord  Jesus  Chp.i  st, 
whom  God  hath  made  judge  of  the  world,  as  a  re- 
ward of  his  patience  and  fufferings  y  that  Lhe  bodies 
of  men  fhall,  in  order  to  that  appearance,  be  raifed  up 
by  the  mighty  power  of  God,  and  united  to  their 
fouls,  that  as  they  have  been  inflruments  of  the  foul 
in  adls  of  holinefs  and  fin,  fo  they  may  take  part  like- 
wife  in  the  happinefs  and  torments  of  it.  There  arc 
feveral  other  circumftances  the  gofpel  hath  revealed 
to  us  concerning  our  future  ftate,  which  had  they  not 
been  revealed,  we  could  never  have  known,  hardly 
have  conje6lured ;  in  all  which,  befides  the  afTurance 
that  they  are  revealed,  it  is  a  great  fatisfadion  to  us, 
that  there  is  nothing  in  them  that  is  unworthy  of 
God,  or  that  favours  of  the  weaknefs  and  vanity  of 
human  imagination. 

3.  The  gofpel  gives  us  yet  farther  alTurance  of 
thefe  things,  by  fuch  an  argument  as  is  like  to  be  the 
moil  convincing  and  fatisfaclory  to  common  capaci- 
ties ;  and  that  is  by  a  lively  inftance  of  the  thing  to 
be  proved,  in  "  raifing  Christ  from  the  dead," 
Adls  xvii.  30,  31. 

It  is  true  indeed,  under  the  old  teftament  there 
were  two  inflances  fomewhat  of  this  nature  -,  Enoch 
and  Elias  were  immediately  tranQated,  and  taken  up 
alive  into  heaven  -,  but  thefe  two  inftances  do  in  many 
refpeds  fiill  fliort  of  the  other.  For  after  Christ 
was  raifed  from  the  dead,  he  converfed  forty  days 
with  his  difciples,  and  iatisfied  them  that  he  was 
rifen  ;  after  which  he  was  in  their  fight  vifibly  taken 
up  into  heaven  :  and  as  an  evidence  that  he  was  pof- 
felTed  of  his  glorious  kine;dom,  he  fent  down,  ac-^ 
cording  to  his  promife,  his  holy  Spirit  in  miraculous 

gifts. 


as  dif covered  by  7iature^  and  by  revelation,       4141 

gifts,  to  aflure  them  by  thofe  teftimonies  of  his  roy-  ^  F"-  ^  ^• 
;ilty,  that  he  was  in  heaven,  and  to  qualify  them  by 
thofe  miraculous  powers  to  convince  the  world  of  the 
truth  of  their  do6lrinc. 

Now  what  argument  more  proper  to  convince 
them  of  another  life  after  this,  than  to  fee  a  man  raifed 
from  the  dead,  and  reftored  to  a  new  life  ?  What 
fitter  to  fatisfy  a  man  concerning  heaven,  and  the 
happy  eftate  of  thofe  there,  than  to  fee  one  vifibly 
taken  up  into  heaven  ?  And  what  more  fit  to  afTure 
us,  that  the  promifes  of  the  gofpel  are  real,  and  fhall 
be  made  good  to  us,  than  to  fee  him  who  made  thefc 
promifes  to  us,  raife  himfelf  from  the  dead,  and  go 
up  into  heaven,  and  from  thence  to  difpenfe  miracu- 
lous gifts  and  powers  abroad  in  the  world,  as  evi- 
dences of  the  power  and  authority  which  he  was  in- 
verted withal  ?  All  the  philofophical  arguments  that 
a  man  can  bring  for  the  foul's  immortality,  and  an- 
other life,  will  have  no  force  upon  vulgar  apprehen- 
fions,  in  comparifon  of  thefe  fenfible  demonflrations, 
which  give  an  experiment  of  the  thing,  and  furnifh 
us  with  an  inflance  of  fomeching  of  the  fame  kind, 
and  of  equal  difficulty  with  that  which  is  propounded 
to  our  belief. 

4.  And  laftly,  the  effedls  which  the  clear  difcovery 
of  this  truth  had  upon  the  world,  are  iiich,  as  the 
world  never  faw  before,  and  are  a  farther  inducement 
to  perfuade  us  of  the  truth  ard  thtr  reality  of  it.  Af- 
ter the  gofpel  was  entertairec:  in  the  world,  tolliew, 
that  thofe  who  embrace  \  it  did  fully  believe  this  prin- 
ciple, and  were  abundantly  fatisiied  concerning  the 
rewards  and  happincfs  of  another  hfe,  they  did  for 
the  fake  of  their  religion  dcfpife  this  life  and  all  the 
enjoyments  of  it,  from  a  thorough  perfuafion  of  a 
far  greater  happincfs  than  any  this  world  could  af- 
ford, 


4142  ^f  ^^^  /^//-^^r/^///y  of  the  foul ^ 

SE  R  M.  ford,  remaining  in  the  next  life.  With  what  chear- 
'  fulnefs  did  they  fuffer  perfecutions,  with  what  joy 
and  triumph  did  they  welcome  torments,  and  em-  1 
brace  death,  "  knowing  in  themfelves  that  they  had 
*'  in  heaven  a  better  and  more  enduring  fiibftance  !** 
Thus  when  "  hfc  and  immortality  was  brought  to 
"  hght  by  the  gofpel,"  death  was  as  it  were  quite 
abolifhed  ;  thofe  of  the  weakeft  age  and  fex,  wo- 
men and  children,  did  famiUarly  encounter  it  with 
as  great  a  bravery,  and  bore  up  againft  the  terrors 
of  it  with  as  much  courage,  as  any  of  the  greateft 
fpirits  among  the  Romans  ever  did  :  and  this  not  in 
a  few  inilances,  but  in  vaft  numbers.  No  emperor 
in  the  world  ever  had  fo  numerous  an  army  of  per- 
fons  refolved  to  fight  for  him,  as  this  "  captain  of 
"  our  falvation,  this  prince  of  life  and  glory"  had 
of  perfons  couragioufly  refolved,  and  chearfully  con- 
tented to  die  for  him. 

Now  this  wonderful  effe6l,  the  like  of  which  the 
world  never  faw  before,  was  very  fuitable  to  the  na- 
ture of  this  dodlrine.  Suppofe  that  God  from  hea- 
ven fhould  have  given  men  aiTurance  of  another  Ufe 
after  this,  in  which  good  men  Ihould  be  unfpeak- 
ably  happy  :  what  more  reafonable  to  imagine,  than 
that  perfons  fo  aflured  fhould  defpife  this  life,  and 
all  the  enjoyments  of  it,  in  comparifon  of  the  eternal 
and  unconceivable  happinefs,  which  they  were  per- 
fuaded  they  fliould  be  made  partakers  of  in  another 
world  ?  So  that  whatever  aflurance  an  exprefs  and 
^lear  revelation  from  God  of  the  foul's  immortality 
and  another  life,  together  with  the  particular  circum- 
ftances  of  that  ftate  •,  whatever  afTurance  a  hvely  in- 
llance  and  example  of  the  thing,  in  the  perfon  of 
him  who  brings  this  dodlrine  to  the  world  •,  what- 
ever confequent  miracles,  and  fuitable  effects  upon 

the 


its  difcovered  by  7iature^  arid  by  revelation,        414-2 

.the  minds  of  men  to  fuch  a  principle  :  I  fay,  what-  ^  R  R  iVT. 
ever  afllirance  and  Hitisfa^lion  thefe  can  give  of  this 
principle,  all  this  the  gofpel  hath  given  us,  beyond 
whatever  the  heathens  or  Jews  had  before. 

The  inference  I  fhall  make  from  this  diicourfe 
fhall  be  only  this  •,  that  if  there  be  fuch  a  itate  after 
this  life,  then  how  does  it  concern  every  man  to 
provide  for  it  ?  TEvery  a6lion  that  we  do  in  this  life 
will  have  a  good  or  bad  influence  upon  our  everlafh- 
ing  condition,  and  the  confequences  of  it  will  extend 
themfelves  to  eternity.  Did  men  ferioufly  confider 
this,  that  they  carry  about  them  immortal  fouls  that 
fhall  live  for  ever,  they  would  not  trifle  away  the  op- 
portunities of  this  life,  bend  all  their  thoughts,  and 
imploy  their  defigns  in  the  prefent  gratification  of 
their  fenfes,  and  the  fatisfaclion  of  their  flefhly  part, 
which  fliall  fliortly  die  and  moulder  into  duft :  but  they 
would  make  provifion  for  the  fl.ate  which  is  beyond 
the  grave,  and  lay  defigns  for  eternity,  which  is  in- 
finitely the  mod  confiderable  duration  \  they  would 
not,  like  children,  take  care  for  the  prefent,  with- 
out any  profpe6t  to  the  future,  and  lay  out  all  they 
have  to  pleafe  themfelves  for  a  day,  without  any  re- 
gard to  the  remaining  part  of  their  lives.  Nothing 
can  be  more  unbecoming  Chriftians,  whofe  whole  re- 
ligion pretends  to  be  built  upon  the  firm  belief  of 
another  world,  than  to  be  intent  lipon  the  things  of 
this  prefent  life,  to  the  negled  of  their  fouls  and  all 
eternity. 

Seeing  then  we  pretend  to  be  afifured  of  immortal 
life,  and  to  have  clear  difcoveries  of  everlafting  hap- 
pinefs  and  glory,  as  we  hope  to  be  made  partakers 
of  this  portion,  let  us  live  as  it  becomes  the  candi- 
dates of  heaven,  thofe  that  arc  heirs  of  another  w6rld, 
and    "  the  children  of  the   refurrc^^lion,    that   this 


Vol.  IX.  20  P 


!.( 


(TI 


7 


4144       Of  ^^^  certainty  of  a  future  judgment. 

"  grace  of  God,  which  hath  brought  falvation,  may 
*'  teach  us  to  deny  ungodlinefs  and  worldly  lufls^ 
*'  and  to  live  foberly,  righteoufly,  and  godly  in  this 
**  prefent  life,  looking  for  that  bleffed  hope,  and  the 
*'  glorious  appearing  of  the  great  God,  and  our 
"  Saviour  Jesus  Christ."" 


SERMON  CLXXVIIL 

Of  the  certainty  of  a  future  judgment* 

-COR.  V.   10. 

For  we  muft  all  appear  before  the  judgment- feat  of 
Christ,  that  every  one  may  receive  the  things 
done  in  his  hody^  according  to  that  he  hath  done^ 
whether  it  he  good  or  had. 

S  E  R  M.  ^  I  ^  H  E  apoftle,  in  the  beginning  of  this  chapter^ 
cLxxvui.  J  'expreffeth  his  earned  defire,  if  God  faw  it 
The  firft  fit,  to  quit  "  this  earthly  tabernacle,  for  ahoufe  not 
fermon  on  «  made  with  hands,  eternal  in  the  heavens,  to  be 
"  abfcnt  from  the  body,  and  prefent  with  the  Lord.'* 
But  however  God  fliould  difpofe  of  him,  he  tells  us 
that  he  mads  it  his  conftant  endeavour,  fo  to  behave* 
himfelf,  that  both  in  this  prefent  ftate,  whilll  he 
continued  in  the  body,  and  when  he  fhould  quit  it^ 
and  appear  before  God,  he  might  be  approved  and 
accepted  of  him.  And  that  which  made  him  fo 
careful  was,  becaufe  there  was  a  day  certainly  com- 
ing, wherein  every  man  muft  give  an  account  of 
himfelf  to  the  great  judge  of  the  world,  and  receive 
the  juft  recompence  of  his  actions  done  in  this  life^ 
V.  9,  10.     "  Wherefore  we  labour,  that   whether 

"  prefent 


II 


Of  the  certainty  of  c  future  judgme??f,         4 1 4  C 
^^  prefent  or  abfent,  wc  may  be  accepted  of  him.^ERM. 
"  For  we  mufl  all  appear  before  the  judgment- feat  ^^^^^^^'' 
*'  of  Christ,  that  every  one  may  receive  the  things 
*'  done  in  the  body,  according  to  that  he  hath  done, 
*'  whether  it  be  good  or  bad." 

Which  words  are  fo  plain  and  powerful,  fo  eafy 
to  be  underflood,  and  of  fuch  a  mighty  force  and 
influence,  if  thoroughly  believed,  that  the  very  re- 
peating of  them  is  fufficient  to  awaken  men  to  a 
ferious  care  of  their  hves  and  adlions,  and  a  power- 
ful confideration  to  perfuade  them  to  do  every  thing, 
with  refpe(5b  to  that  folemn  account  they  mufl  one 
day  make  to  God  of  all  theadlions  done  in  this  life. 

But  that  the  truth  contained  in  them,  may  make 
the  greater  imprefTion  upon  us,  I  fhall  diftinclly  con- 
fider  the  words,  and  handle,  as  briefly  as  I  can,  the 
feveral  propofitions  contained  in  them. 

The  general  and  principal  propofition  contained 
in  thcfe  words  is,  the  certainty  of  a  future  judg- 
ment. 

But  befides  this  principal  propofition,  which  com- 
prehends the  general  meaning  and  intention  of  thcfe 
words,  there  are  four  other  more  particular  propoH- 
tions  contained  in  them. 

Firfl,  That  the  adminiftradon  of  this  judgment 
will  be  committed  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  •,  for 
which  reafon  the  tribunal  before  which  we  mud  ap- 
pear, is  called,  "  the  judgment- feat  of  Christ. 
**  We  muft  all  appear  before  the  judgment- feat  of 
*'  Christ." 

Secondly,  That  all  men  are  liable  to  this  judg- 
ment ;  no  perfon  of  what  condition  foever  fhall  be 
exempted  from  it.     "  We  muft  all  appear." 

Thirdly,  That  all  the  adions  which  men  have 
dqne  in  this  life  fhall  then  come  to  account,  and  they 

20  P  2  ihali 


4146       Of  tke  certaiitfy  of  a  future  judgment, 
S  E  R  M.  f}^all  be  judged  for  them.     "  That  every  one  may 

CXXLVI  II  • 

■  ''  receive  the  things  done  in  the  body." 

f'ourthly,  That  fentence  v/ill  then  be  paft  accord- 
ing to  the  quality  of  mens  adlions,  v/hether  good  or 
bad  :  "  every  one  fliall  receive  according  to  that  he 
'*  hath  done,  whether  it  be  good  or  evil." 

But  I  fhall  at  prefent  only  fpeak  to  the  principal 
proportion  contained  in  the  words,  concerning  the 
certainty  of  a  future  and  general  judgment,  viz. 
That  at  the  end  of  the  world,  there  fhall  be  a  gene- 
ral  and  publick  aiTize,  when  all  perfons  that  have 
lived  in  this  world  (except  only  the  judge  himfelf, 
our  blefied  Saviour,  who  is  "  the  man  ordained 
*'  by  God  to  judge  the  world)"  fliall  come  upon 
their  trial,  and  all  the  adions  which  they  have  done 
fhall  come  under  a  ilri6l  examination  ♦,  and  accord- 
ing as  men  have  demeaned  thcmXelves  in  this  world 
tov/ards  God  and  man,  they  fnall  receive  fentence, 
and  rev/ards  Ihall  be  diflributed  to  them.,  according 
to  the  nature  and  quality  of  their  actions.  And 
though  all  thefe  particulars  be  not  exprefled  in  the 
text,  yet  they  are  virtually  contained  in  the  general 
expreflions  of  it,  and  fully  and  clearly  delivered  in 
other  texts  of  fcripture. 

The  truth  and  certainty  of  a  future  and  genera) 
judgment,  I  fliall  endeavour  to  confirm  from  thefe 
three  heads  of  arguments. 

I.  From  the  acknowledgments  of  natural  light. 

II.  From  the  notions  which  men  generally  have  oF 
God  and  his  providence. 

III.  From  exprefs  and  clear  revelation  of  holy 
fcripture. 

I.  From  the  acknowledgments  of  natural  light. 
And  I  might  fnew  the  general  confent  of  mankind  in 
this  matter,  by  all  forts  of  human  teftimonies,  and 

from 


Of  the  certainty  of  a  future  judgment.         4147 
from  all  kinds  of  writers  in  all  a^es :  but  this  would  S  E  R  M. 
be  almoil  endlefs,  and  not  lo  proper  tor  a  plain  and  i 
pra6lical  difcourfe  upon  this  fubjed.     And  therefore 
palling  by  teftimonies,  I  Ihall  mainly  infill  upon  this, 
that  the  confciences  of  men  do  fecretly  acknowledge 
a  difference  between  good  and  evil.    Hence  it  is  that 
men  find  great  peace  and  quiet  and  fatisfadion  of 
mind,  in  the  doing  of  good  and  virtuous  actions, 
and  have  fecret  and  comfortable  hopes,    that  this 
kind  of  a6lions  will  fome  time  or  other  be  confidered 
•and  rewarded  ;  and  they  are  apt  to  maintain  thcfe 
hopes,  and  to  fupport  themfelves  with  them,  even 
when  they  defpair  to  meet  with  any  reward  of  their 
good  and  honelt  a6lions  in  this  world. 

And  on  the  other  hand,  men  find  a  fecret  fear  and 
horror,  and  are  inv/ardly  afhamed  and  confounded 
in  their  own  minds,  when  they  are  about  a  wicked 
enterprize,  and  engaged  in  an  ill  defign  ♦,  their  con- 
fciences check  them  and  terrify  them,  and  their  own 
minds  bode  ill  to  them,  as  if  mifchief  and  vengeance 
would  overtake  them  one  time  or  other  ;  and  this, 
when  no  eye  fees  them,  and  what  they  are  a  doing 
does  not  fall  under  the  cognizance  of  any  human 
court  or  tribunal,  nor  is  liable  to  any  cenfure  or  pu- 
nifhment  from  any  human  authority  \  yet  for  all 
that,  they  have  many  filings  and  laflies  from  their 
own  minds,  feel  many  checks  and  rebukes  from  their 
own  confciences,  when  they  do  any  thing  which  they 
ought  not  to  do,  though  no  man  can  charge  them 
with  it,  or  call  them  to  an  account  for  it. 

Now  thefe  hopes  and  fears  do  argue,  if  not  the 

firm  bcHef  and  perfuafion  of  a  future  judgment,  yet 

great  fufpicions  and  mifgivings  of  it  in  bad  men  ; 

and  in  good  men,  fecret  and  comfortable  apprehen- 

.  lions  concerning  it.     From  whence  elfc  can  it  be, 

that 


414^       ^f  ^^^  certainty  of  a  futu.:^  judgment. 
5  E  R  M.  that  good  men,  though  they  find  that  virtue  is  dif- 
cLxxviii.  countenanced,  and  goodnefs  many  times  fuffers,  and 
is  perfecuted  in  this  world,  and  that  the  beft  adions 
and  defigns  are  often  unfuccefsful  \  whence  I  fay,  is 
it  that  good  men,   notwithftanding  this,  bear  up  and 
perfiil  in  their  courfe,  but  becaufe  they  have  this  in- 
ward apprehenfion  and  perfuafion,  that  there  will  be 
a  time,  when  virtue  and  goodnefs  will  be  confidered 
and   rewarded,    though  not  in  this  world  ?    And 
whence  is  it,  that  bad  men,  though  they  profper  in 
their  impiety,  arc  yet  guilty  and  fearful  and  timo- 
rous ;    but  becaufe  they   (land  in  awe  of  a  being, 
greater  and  more  righteous  and  more  powerful  than 
themfelves  •,  but  becaufe  they  have  fome  fecret  ap- 
prehenfions  of  an  invifible  judge,  and  inward  prefagc 
of  a  future   vengeance,  which  fooner  or  later  will 
overtake  them  \  and  becaufe  they  believe  there  v/ill 
be  a  time  when  all  the  wickednefs  they  have  done 
Ihall  be  accounted  for  ?  Infomuch  that  when  they 
have  done  what  they  can,  they  cannot  fliake  off  thefe 
fears,  nor  quit  themfelves  of  thefe  apprehenfions  of 
divine  juftice,   threatening   and  purfuing  them  for 
their  evil  deeds.     All  which  are  plain  acknowledg- 
ments of  a  natural  apprehenfion  and  perfuafion  born 
with  us,  and  riveted  in  our  minds,  concerning  a  fu- 
ture judgment. 

II.  This  will  farther  appear  from  the  natural  no- 
tions which  men  have  of  a  God,  and  his  providence. 
This  is  effential  to  the  notion  of  a  God,  that  he  is 
good,  and  holy,  and  juil  •,  and  confequently,  that 
he  loves  goodnefs,  and  hates  iniquity  •,  and  there- 
fore it  muft  be  agreeable  to  his  nature,  to  counte- 
nance the  one,  and  to  difcountenance  the  other,  in 
fuch  a  manner  as  becomes  the  wife  fovereign  and 
governor  of  the  world.  Now  this  cannot  be  folemn- 


Of  the  certainty  of  a  future  judgment.        4140 
\^  and  openly  done,   but  by  a  publick  diftribution  of  ^  E  R  M. 
rewards  and  punifhments  ;  and  this  we  fee  is  not^^^^^'^^* 
done  in  this  world.     The  difpenfations  of  God's 
providence  in  this  world,  toward  good  and  bad  men, 
are  many   times  very  promifcuous,  and  very  crofs, 
and  contrary  to  what  might  be  expected  from  the 
wife  and  juft  fovereign  of  the  world,  from  one  whom 
we  believe  to  love  righteoufnefs,  and  to  hate  iniquity. 
For  virtuous  and  holy  men  are  often  ill  treated  in 
this  world,  grievoufly  harafifed  and  afflidted,  and  that 
*'  for  righteoufnefs  fake  ;"  and  bad  men  many  times 
flourifh,  and  are  profperous,  "they  are  not  in  trouble 
*'  like  other  men,  neither  arc  they  plagued  like  other 
*'  men."  And  this  is  a  very  great  objection  againft  the 
providence  of  God  ;  if  there  were  no  other  confi- 
deration  had  of  virtue  and  vice,  no  other  kind  of 
retribution  made  to  good  and  bad  men,  but  what 
we  fee  in  this  world.     And  therefore  the  jullice  of 
the  divine  providence  feems  to  require,  that  there 
fhould  be  a  day  of  recompence,  and  a  folemn  and 
publick  diftribution  of  rev/ards  and  puniflimenrs  to 
the  righteous  and  to  the  wicked.     For  this  is  plainly 
a  ftate  of  trial  and  probation,  of  patience,  and  for- 
bearance to  finners,  and  of  exercife  to  good  men  ; 
and  being  a  ftate  of  trial,  it  is  not  fo  proper  a  feafon 
for  the  diftribution  of  publick  juftice.     But  fincethe 
juftice  of  God  doth  not  appear  in  fhis  world,  it 
ferns  very  reafonable  to  believe,  that  there  vs^ill  be  a 
time  when  it  will  be  made  manifeft',  and  every  eye 
fhall  fee  it  •,  that  God  will  one  day  fully  vindicate  his 
righteoufnefs,  and  acquit  the  honour  of  his  juftice, 
and  that  there  fliali  be  a  general  aflize  held,  when  all 
men  ftiall  have  a  fair  and  open  trial,  and  "God  will 
*'  render  to  every  man  according  to  his  works." 
Now  the  juftice  of  God's  providence  is  in  a 


great 


415^      Of  the  certainty  of  a  future  judgment: 

5  E  R  M.  great  meafure  hid  and  covered,  but  there  will  come 
^^^^^^^^'  vj^s^oc  uTTOKOLXi-^ecag  (as  the  apoflle  calls  the  day  of 
judgment,  Rom.  ii.  5.)  "  a  day  of  the  revelation 
"  of  the  righteous  judgment  of  God,  when  he  will 
*'  bring  forth  his  righteoufnefs  as  the  hght,  and  his 
*'  judgment  as  the  noon-day,  and  every  mouth 
^'  Ihallbe  flopped,"  and  every  confcience  and  heart 
of  man  acknowledge  "  the  righteous  judgment  of 

"  God." 

And  in  the  mean  tune  God  contents  himfelf  to 
give  fome  particular  and  remarkable  inilances  of  his 
rewarding  and  punifhing  juflice,  in  this  world,  which 
may  be  to  us  an  earned  of  a  future  and  general  judg- 
ment ;  he  is  pleafed  fometimes  in  the  difpenfations  of 
his  providence,  clearly  to  feparate  and  diftinguilh 
'^  the  precious  from  the  vile,'*  remarkably  to  de- 
liver good  men,  and  "  to  fnare  the  wicked  in  the 
*'  works  of  their  own  hands."  Sometimes  he  gives 
good  men  fome  foretaftes  of  heaven,  fome  earnefl 
of  their  future  happinefs  in  this  life  :  and  on  the 
other  hand,  he  many  times  gives  finners  fome  pra^ 
judicia  divini  judicii^  fome  intimations  of  a  future 
judgment,  and  fhadows  of  that  "  utter  darknefs,'* 
jvhere  they  are  to  dwell  for  ever  ;  he  drops  down 
now  and  then  a  httle  of  hell  into  the  confcience  of 
^  finner.  That  fire  which  is  kindled  in  fome  mens 
confciences  in  this  life,  that  unfpeakable  anguifh, 
and  thofe  inexplicable  horrors,  which  fome  finners 
have  felt  in  this  world,  may  ferve  to  give  us  no- 
tice of  the  extreme  fe verity  of  the  divine  juflice  to- 
wards impenitent  finners  ;  that  miraculous  deluge 
that  fvvept  away  the  old  world  ;  thofe  (lupendous 
and  terrible  fhowers  of  are  and  brimflone,  which 
confumed  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  and  the  cities 
jibout  j  that  dreadful  cardiquake,   which  fwallo\?v'cd 

3  ^P 


Of  the  certainty  of  a  future  judgment ,         4151 

lip  Corah  and  his  company,  and  let  them  down  as  ^  ^^^' 
it  were  quick  into  hell,   may  ferve  for  pledges  and 
earnefts  to  us  of  the  difmal  punifhments  and  torments 
of  the  next  world. 

But  notwithftanding  all  thefe  particular  and  re- 
markable inftances  of  the  divine  jullice,  yet  confi- 
dering  how  unequal  and  promifcuous  the  greated 
part  of  God's  providences  are  in  this  world,  it  is  high^ 
ly  requifite,  that  there  fhould  be  a  general  judgment, 
for  a  more  clear  and  full  manifeftation  of  the  juftice 
and  equity  of  the  divine  providence. 

11.  But  this  will  moft  evidently  appear  from  the 
clear  and  exprefs  revelation  of  the  holy  fcripture.  I 
will  not  cite  texts  out  of  the  old  teftament  to  this 
purpofe,  becaufe  thefe  things  were  but  obfcurely  re^ 
vealed  to  the  Jews  in  comparifon,  "  life  and  immor- 
"  tality  being  brought  to  light  by  thegofpel."  YeC 
St.  Jude  tells  us,  that  there  was  an  early  revelation 
of  this  to  the  old  world,  ver.  14,  15.  "  And  Enoch 
alfo  the  feventh  from  Adam  prophefied  of  thefe, 
faying,  behold  the  Lord  cometh  with  ten  thou- 
fands  of  his  faints,  to  execute  judgment  upon  all, 
*'  and  to  convince  all  that  are  ungodly."  But  whe- 
ther this  refer  to  the  flood,  or  the  final  judgment  of 
the  world,  is  not  fo  clear  and  certain  -,  however  this 
is  moft  plainly  revealed  by  our  blefledLoRD  and  Sa- 
viour, in  the  new  teftament.  The  procefs  of  this 
great  day,  with  feveral  of  the  particular  circumftances 
of  it,  are  fully  defcribed  by  our  Saviour,  Matt.  xxv. 
and  in  the  vifion  of  St.  John,  Rev.  xx.  11,  12,  13. 
And  the  apoftles  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  do 
moft  frequently  declare  and  inculcate  it.  Adls  xvii. 
30,  31.*'  But  now  commandeth  all  men  every  where 
^'  to  repent :  becaufe  he  hath  appointed  a  day,  in  the 
*•'  which  he  will  judge  the  world  in  righteoufnefs,  by 
Vol.  IX.  20  Q^  "  that 

7 


4 1  C2         Of  the  certainty  of  a  future  judgments 

S  E  R  M.  "  that  man  whom  he  hath  ordained,  whereof  he  hath 
cLxxviii.  cc  given  afTurance  unto  all  men,  in  that  he  hath  raifed 
^'  him  from  the  dead."  Rom.  ii.  5,  6,  7,  8,  9. 
where  fpeaking  of  the  day  of  judgment,  he  calls  it, 
*'  the  day  of  wrath,  and  revelation  of  the  righteous 
''  judgment  of  God  \  who  will  render  to  every  man 
*^  according  to  his  deeds :  to  them,  who  by  patient 
**  continuance  in  well-doing  feek  for  glory,  and  ho- 
"  nour,  and  immortality,  eternal  life :  but  unto  them 
**  that  are  contentious,  and  do  not  obey  the  truth, 
**  but  obey  unrighteoufnefs  •,  indignation  and  wrath, 
**  tribulation  and  anguifh  upon  every  foul  of  man 
*'  that  doth  evil."  i  Pet.  i.  17.  "  And  if  ye  call  on 
*^  the  father,  who  without  refpefl  of  pcrfons  judgeth 
*'  according  to  every  man's  work."  2  Pet.  iii.  10. 
*^  But  the  day  of  the  Lord  will  come,  in  which  the 
^^  heavens  fhall  pafs  away  with  a  great  noife,  &c." 

Thus  you  fee  the  truth  and  certainty  of  a  future 
judgment  confirmed,  from  the  acknowledgments  of 
mens  natural  hopes  and  fears,  from  the  natural  no- 
tions w^hich  men  have  concerning  God  and  his  pro- 
vidence, and  from  plain  revelation  of  fcripture. 

All  that  I  Ihall  do  farther  at  prelent  fhall  be  to 
make  fome  refle6lions  upon  what  hath  been  deliver- 
ed, concerning  the  certainty  of  a  future  general  judg- 
ment.    And, 

I.  If  there  be  fuch  a  day  certainly  a  coming,  it 
may  jtiftly  be  matter  of  wonder  and  afloniihment  to 
us,  to  fee  the  general  impiety  and  fbupidity  of  men, 
how  wicked  they  are,  and  how  carelefs  of  their  lives 
^nd  adlions,  and  how  infenfible  of  that  "  great  and 
**  terrible  day  of  the  Lord,''  which  is  coming  upon 
all  flefh,  and  for  any  thing  we  know  to  the  contrary, 
may  be  very  near  us,  and  ^'  even  at  the  door."  How 
fecurely  do  the  great  part  of  men  pafs  away  their  time, 

fome 


Of  the  certainty  of  a  future  judgments  4^53 
fome  in  worldly  bufinefs,  others  in  worldly  pleafures  S  E  R  ivf. 
and  vanity,  and  a  great  many  in  wickednefs  and  vice  ? 
Surely  fuch  men  have  no  apprehenfions  of  a  future 
judgment ;  furely  they  do  not  believe  that  there  will 
be  any  memorial  of  their  actions  in  another  world, 
and  that  they  (hall  be  called  to  a  flrid;  and  fevere  ac- 
count for  all  the  adlions  of  this  life ;  they  do  not  think 
that  there  is  a  juft  and  powerful  being  above  them, 
who  now  obferves  every  thing  that  they  do,  and  will 
one  day  judge  them  for  \  that  there  is  a  pen  always 
writing,  and  making  a  faithful  record  of  all  the  paf- 
fages  of  their  lives  •,  and  that  thefe  volumes  fliall  one 
day  be  produced  and  '*  opened,  and  men  fhall  be 
"  judged  out  of  the  things  that  are  written  in  them  ;'* 
and  all  our  thoughts,  words,  and  a6tions  iliall  pafa 
under  a  mofl  fevere  trial  and  examination. 

Or  if  men  do  believe  thefe  things,  they  flifle  and 
fupprefs  this  belief,  and  "  detain  this  great  truth  of 
*'  God  in  unrighteoufnefs  ^'^  they  do  not  attend  to 
it,  and  confider  it,  that  it  may  have  it's  due  awe  and 
influence  upon  their  lives.  For  it  is  not  imaginable, 
that  if  men  were  polTefs'd  with  a  firm  belief  and  per- 
fuafion  of  this  "great  and  terrible  day  of  the  Lord," 
they  fhould  be  fo  carelefs  and  fecure,  as  we  fee  they 
are,  and  have  fo  Httle  regard  to  what  they  do  •,  thac 
they  fliould  pafs  whole  days,  and  weeks,  and  years, 
in  the  grofs  negle6l  of  God  and  religion,  and  of  their 
immortal  fouls  \  that  they  fhould  "  fpend  their  days 
*'  in  vanity,  and  their  years  in  pleafure  •,*'  that  they 
fhould  live  in  a  continued  courfe  of  impiety  and  pro- 
fanenefs,  of  leudnefs  and  intemperance,  in  the  curfed 
habits  of  fwearing  and  curfing ;  which  are  now 
grown  fo  common  among  us,  that  a  man  cannot 
walk  in  the  ftreet,  without  having  his  cars  grated 
.  with  this  hellifli  noife  \  and  that  they  fhould  go  on  ia 

20  0^2  thefe 


4154         ^f  ^^^^  certainty  of  a  future  judgment. 
S  E  R  M.  thefe  courfes,  without  any  great  regret  or  difturbance," 
*  as  if  no  danger  attended  them,  as  if  juftice  were 
afleep,  and  ail  their  adlions  would  be  buried  with 
them,  and  never  rife  up  againft  them. 

What  can  we  refolve  this  into,  but  either  into 
habitual  or  a6lual  atheifm  and  infidelity  ?  Either  men 
do  not  at  all  believe  a  judgment  to  come  •,  or  elfe 
they  do  not  actually  confider  it,  and  attend  to  the  na- 
tural and  proper  confequences  of  fuch  a  belief.  One 
of  thefe  two  is  neceffary.  It  feems  very  hard  to 
charge  the  generality  of  wicked  men  with  habitual 
atheifm  and  unbehef,  but  that  the  Spirit  of  God  in 
fcripture  fo  often  does  it.  Pfal.  xiv.  i.  "  The  fool 
**  hath  faid  in  his  heart,  there  is  no  God."  How 
doth  that  appear  ?  It  follows,  "  they  are  corrupt, 
they  have  done  abominable  works,  there  is  none 
that  doth  good.''  And  Pfal.  xxxvi.  i.  "  The 
tranfgreffion  of  the  wicked  faith  within  my  heart, 
*'  there  is  no  fear  of  God  before  his  eyes.'*  David 
fpeaks  as  if  the  wicked  practices  of  men  did  convince 
iiim,  that  they  had  no  belief  and  apprehenfion  of  a 
God. 

Nay,  even  after  thofe  clear  difcoveries  which  the. 
gofpel  hath  made  of  a  future  judgment,  our  Savi- 
our feems  to  fore tel  a  general  infidehty  among  men, 
;it  lead  as  to  this  particular  article  of  a  future  judg- 
ment, Luke  xviii.  8.  "  Neverthelefs  when  the  Son  of 
*'  man  fhall  come,  fhall  he  find  faith  upon  the  earth  V* . 
And  St.  Peter  tells  us,  2  Pet.  iii.  3,  4.  that  "  there 
fhall  come  in  the  lafl  days  fcoffers,  walking  after 
their  own  lufts,  and  faying,  where  is  the  promife 
of  his  coming  V^  that  is,  deriding  the  belief  and  ex- 
pedlation  which  theChriilians  had  of  a  future  judgment. 
But  to  be  fure,  if  the  generality  of  rrten  be  not  al-. 
ready  funk  thus  low,  as  to  difbelieve  thefe  things, 
J  yet 


<c 
cc 
cc 


cc 

(C 


Of  the  certainty  of  a  future  judgment.         4^55 

yet  this  at  leaft  is  evident  from  the  lives  of  men,  that  ^  E  R  M. 
they  are  ilrangely  inconfiderate,  and  guilty  of  the 
moil  grofs  and  ilupid  inadvertency  that  can  befal  rea- 
fonable  creatures.     For  I  dare  appeal  to  any  man  of 
underllanding  and  ferious  confideration,  whether  a 
greater  folly  and  madncfs  can  be  imagined,  than  for 
men  to  profefs  in  good  earned  to  believe,  that  there 
is  a  day  fhortly  coming,  wherein  they  fhall  appear 
before  the  impartial  tribunal  of  the  great  ju'ge  of  the 
world,  and  all  the  adlions  of  their  lives  fhail  be  ran- 
facked  and  laid  open,  and  that  there  is  not  any  thing 
that  ever  they  did,  that  fhall  efcape  a  fevere  cefl- 
fure  •,  yea,  and  farther  to  be  perfuaded,  that  as  it  fhall 
upon   that  trial  appear,  that  they  have  clemeaned 
themfelves  in  this  world,  they  fliall  be  fenttnced  to 
an  eternal  and  unchangeable  flate,  of  happinefs  or 
mifery,  in  the  other  world;  and  yet  after  all  this 
convidion,  to  live  at  fuch  a  mad  and  carelefs  rate, 
as  no  man  in  reafon  can  live,  but  he  that  is  undoubt- 
edly certam  of  the  contrary,  of  all  this,  and  veuly 
perfuaded  in  his  heart,  that  not  one  fyllable  of  what 
the  gofpel  fays  concerning  thefe  matters,  is  true ;  this 
is  fo  incredible  a  ftupidity  and  folly,  that  did  not  fre- 
quent and  undeniable  experience  make  us  fure  of  the 
truth  of  it,  out  of  mere  charity  and  refpedl  to  human 
nature,  it  were  not  to  be  believed.     "  Confider  this 
**  all  ye  that  forget  God,  and  put  far  from  you  the 
*'  evil  day  •,  confider  and  Diew  yourfelves  men,  O  ye 
"  tranfgrcfTors  !"  who  profefs   to  believe  a  future 
judgment,  and  yet  run  the  hazard  of  it,  as  if  ye  had 
no  fear  and  fufpicion  of  any  fuch  thing. 

II.  Having  confidered,  not  without  wonder  and 
aftonifhment,  what  manner  of  perfons  the  generality 
of  men  are,  notwithllanding  all  the  alTurance  we  have 
©fa  future  judgment,  let  us  in  the  next  place  confi- 
der. 


i 


4 1  C  6         Of  the  certainty  of  a  future  judgment^ 

SERM.  der,  "  feeing  thcfe  things  fhall  be,  'what  manner  of 
cLxxviii.  <c  pej-fQQs  we  ought  to  be  in  all  holy  converfation 
and  godlinefs,  waiting  for,  and  haftening  unto  the 
*'  coming  of  the  day  of  God,"  as  the  apoille  argues, 
2  Pet.  iii.  II,  12.     How  fhould  theferious  belief  of 
this  great  principle  of  religion  work  upon  us,  that 
*'  we  muil  all  appear  before  the  judgment  feat  of 
•^  Christ,  that  every  one  may  receive  the  things 
*'  done  in  the  body,  according  to  that  he  hath  done, 
*'  whether  it  be  good  or  evil?"  St.  Paul  tells  us, 
that  the  confideration  of  it  had  a  mighty  awe  and 
influence  upon  him,  to  be  careful  of  himfelf,  and  to 
be  concerned  for  others  :  to  be  careful  of  himfelf,  in 
the  verfe  before  the  text,  "  wherefore  we  labour  that 
*^  whether  prefent  or  abfent,  we  may  be  accepted  of 
*'  him.     For  we  muft  all  appear  before  the  judg- 
*'  ment  feat  of  Christ."    And  to  be  concerned  for 
others,  that  they  may  prevent  the  terrors  of  that  day, 
in  the  verfe  immediately  after  the  text,  "  knowing    j 
*'  therefore  iae  terror  of  the  Lord,  we  perfuade 
*^  men.  Knowing  the  terror  of  the  Lord  ;"  it  were 
no  difficult  matter  to  make  fuch  a  dreadful  reprefen- 
tation  of  this  "great  and  terrible  day  of  the  Lord," 
as  would  affright  the  flouted  finner,  and  make  every 
joint  of  him  to  tremble :  but  it  is  much  more  defira- 
ble,  that  men  Ihould  be  wrought  upon  by  reafon, 
and  convinced  and  perfuaded  by  a  calm  and  fober 
confideration  of  things  •,  becaufe  that  is  likely  to  have 
a  better  and  more  lading  effedl,  than  prefent  terror 
and  amazement  -,  and  therefore  I  diall  content  my- 
felf  with  the  naked  reprefer.tation  of  the  thing,  in  the 
plain  and  powerful  expreflions  of  the  holy  fcriptures. 
Imagine  then  thou  fawed  "  the  Son  of  man  coming 
**  in  great  power  and  great  glory,  and  all  his  holy   \ 
*^  angels  with  him  j"  that  thou  bearded  the  great 

trumpet 


Of  the  certainty  of  a  future  judgment.  4157 
trumpet  found,  and  a  mighty  voice  piercing  the  hea-  S  E  R  M. 
vens  and  the  earth,  faying,  "  Arife,  ye  dead,  and  ^''^^^"'* 
*'  come  to  judgment.*'  Suppofe  thou  lawefl  "  the 
•'  thrones  fet,  and  the  great  judge  fitting  upon  the 
*'  throne  of  his  glory,  and  all  nations  gathered  be* 
*'  fore  him,  and  all  the  dead,  both  fmall  and  great, 
*'  (landing  before  God,  the  books  opened,  and  the 
*^  dead  judged  out  of  the  things  written  in  thofe 
**  books  :*'  and  the  feveral  fentences  pronounced 
from  the  mouth  of  Christ  himfelf, "  Come  ye  blef- 
fed  of  my  Father,  inherit  the  kingdom  prepared 
for  you,  from  the  foundation  of  the  world  ;"  and. 
Depart  ye  curfed  into  everlafting  fire,  prepared  for 
*'  the  devil  and  his  angels.'*  Would  not  this  be  a 
dreadful  and  amazing  fight !  Why  the  gofpel  plain- 
ly declares  that  all  this  fhall  be,  and  thou  pro- 
feffeft  to  believe  it.  Why  then  doil  thou  not  live  as 
if  thou  didft  believe  thefe  things  ;  Why  fliould  not 
that  which  will  certainly  be,  have  to  all  reafonablc 
purpofes  the  fame  effed:  upon  thee,  as  if  it  were  al- 
ready and  adually  prefent  ?  Why  do  men  fuffer 
themfelves  to  be  diverted  from  the  attentive  confide- 
ration  of  fo  important  a  matter,  by  the  impertinent 
trifles  of  this  world }  Why  do  we  not  make  wife  and 
fpeedy  preparation  for  *'  that  day,"  which  "  will  cer- 
**  tainly  come  V  but  we  41  e  uncertain  when  it  will 
come,  for  "  it  will  come  as  a  thief  in  the  night,  and 
*'  as  a  fnare  upon  all  them  that  dwell  on  the  face  of 
**  the  whole  earth."  Why  doft  thou  (tifle  thy  con- 
fcience,  and  drown  the  loud  cries  of  it,  with  the  din 
and  noife  of  worldly  bufinefs  ?  Why  doft  thou  at  any 
time  check  and  fupprcfs  the  thoughts  of  a  future 
judgment,  and  **  put  far  from  thee  the  evil  day  ?'* 
and  not  rather  fuflx!r  the  terrors  of  it  to  haunt  and 
purfue  thee,  till  they  have  m^de  thee  weary  of  thy 

wicked 


4158         Of  the  certainty  of  a  future  judgment, 
S  E  R  M.  wicked  life,  till  they  have  reclaimed  thee  to  thy  dutyJ 

OLXX VIII  J  J  ' 

and  efFeftually  perfuaded  thee,  "  to  break  off  thy 
^^  fins  by  repentance ;"  and  to  refolve  upon  fuch  2t 
holy  and  virtuous  courfe  of  life,  that  thou  mayll  be 
able,  not  only  with  peace  and  comfort,  but  with  joy 
and  triumph,  to  entertain  the  thoughts  of  that  day  ? 

Reafon  thus  with  thyfelf,  if  this  day  be  fo  dreadful 
atadidance,  that  I  can  hardly  now  bear  the  thoughts 
of  it,  how  infupportable  will  the  thing  itfelf  be,  when 
it  comes  to  be  prefent  -,  and  if  it  will  come  neverthe- 
lefs,  nor  the  later  for  my  not  thinking  of  it,  is  it  not 
reafonable,  inftead  of  putting  away  the  thoughts  of 
it,  to  endeavour  by  all  polTible  means  to  prevent  the 
terrors  of  it? 

We  efpecially,  who  profefs  ourfelves  Chriftians, 
and  live  in  the  clear  light  of  the  gofpel,  ought  to 
confider,  that  we  cannot  plead  ignorance  for  our  ex- 
cufe,  as  the  heathen  world  might.  We  read  and 
hear  the  gofpel  every  day,  "  wherein  the  wrath  of 
*^  God  is  clearly  revealed  againlt  all  ungodlinefs  and 
*^  unrighteoufnefs  of  men:"  So  that  if  we  continue 
impenitent,  we  have  no  cloak,  no  excufe  for  our- 
felves 'y  wo  unto  as  above  ail  others !  "  It  fliall  be 

more  tolerable  for  Tyre  and  Sidon,  for  Sodom  and 

Gomorrah,  in  the  day  of  judgment,  than  for  us. 

The  times  of  ignorance,*'  faith  St.  Paul,  fpeaking 
of  the  heathen  world,  '*  the  times  of  this  ignorance 
*'  God  winked  at  •,  but  now  he  commands  all  men 

every  where  to  repent,  becaufe  he  hath  appointed 

a  day,  in  which  he  will  judge  the  world  in  righ- 
**  teoufnefs,  by  that  man  whom  he  hath  ordained, 
■**  whereof  he  hath  given  affurance  unto  all  men,  in 
*'  that  he  hath  raifed  him  from  the  dead."  Thus 
much  concerning  the  general  propofition,  the  certain- 
ty of  a  future  judgment. 

S  E  R- 


cc 
cc 


SERMON    CLXXIX. 

*Of  the  perfon  by  whom  the  world  fhall 

be  judged. 

*    -     '  .......       .  ■  - 

2  CO  R.    V.    20. 

For  we  mufl  all  appear  before  the  judgment -feat  of 
Christ,  that  every  one  fnay  receive  the  things  done 
in  his  hody^  according  to  that  he  hath  done^  whether 
it  he  good  or  bad. 


I 


N  thefe  words,  befides  the  o;eneraI  point  mainly  SE  R  M: 

.  CLXXIX 

intended,  concerning  the  certainty  of  a  future  and  .    -^-Q 
general  judgment,  there  are  likewife  feveral  particu-  The 
lar  propofidons.  {5^°"^    ^ 

T^   n  1  1     •    •  n       •  r       •     •  lermon  on 

Firft,  That  the  adminiflration  of  this  judgment  tiiis  text. 

is  committed  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

Secondly,  That  all  men  are  liable  to  this  judgment. 

Thirdly,  That  all  the  adions  which  men  have  done 
in  this  life  fhall  then  come  to  account,  and  they  Ihall 
be  judged  for  them. 

Fourthly,  That  this  fentence  fhall  be  pafh  upon 
men  according  to  the  nature  and  quality  of  their 
adtions,  whether  good  or  evil.  I  have  handled  the 
general  point,  the  certainty  of  a  future  judgment :  I 
fhall  now  proceed  to  the  particular  propofiiions  con- 
tained in  the  text,  and  lliall  handle  them  in  the  order 
in  which  I  have  propofcd  them. 

Firfb,  That  the  adminiilration  of  this  judgment  is 
committed  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  that  ho 
is  the  perfon  conftitutcd  and  ordained  ol  God,  to  be 
thejudgeof  the  world.     The  tribunal  before  which 

Vol.  IX,  20  R  we 

2 


>!  I  6o  Of  she  per/on  by  whom 

S  E  R  M.  we  muft  (land,  is  here  in  the  text  called  "  the  judg- 
'  ''  "  ment  feat  of  Christ."  "  We  mufb  all  appear 
*'  before  the  judgment-feat  of  Christ."  In  the 
profecution  of  this  I  fhall, 

Firil,  Endeavour  to  confirm  and  illuftrate  the  truth 
of  this  propofition. 

Secondly,  Draw  fome  inferences  from  it,  by  way 
of  application. 

Firll,  For  the  confirmation  of  it,  I  ihall  do  thefe 
two  things. 

I.  Prove  it  from  clear  teflimbny  of  fcripture, 

II.  Endeavour  to  give  fome  account  of  this  oeco- 
nomy  and  difpenfation ;  why  God  hath  committed 
the  adminillration  of  this  great  work  to  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  ;  in  all  which  I  fhall  rely  only  uport 
fcripture,  the  thing  being  capable  of  no  other  proof 
or  evidence.  And  indeed  the  whole  mediatory  un- 
dertaking of  our  bleffed  Saviour,  and  all  the  cir- 
cumftances  of  it,  are  matter  of  pure  revelation  ;  this 
is  "  the  hidden  and  manifold  wifdom  of  God,  which 

none  of  the  princes  and  philofophers  of  this  world 
knew,"  and  which  we  could  not  pofTibly  have 
found  out  and  difcovcred,  had  not  God  been  pleafed 
to  reveal  it  to  us. 

I.  I  lliall  prove  this  from  exprefs  teflimony  of 

fcripture,  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the  per- 

fon  conflituted  and  ordained  by  God,  to  adminifler 

the  judgment  of  the  great  day.     Matt.  xiii.  40,  41^ 

42,  43.  "  So  fliall  it  be  in  the  end  of  this  world. 

The  Son  of  man  fhall  fend  forth  his  angels,  and 

they  fhall  gather  out  of  his  kingdom  all  things 

that  offend,  and  them  which  do  iniquity ;  and 

fhall  caft  them  into  a  furnace  of  fire  :  there  fliall  be 


C( 
(C 

(C 


wailing  and  gnafliing  of  teeth.     Then  fhall  the 
righteous  fliine  forth  as  the  fun  in  the  kingdom  of 

"  their 


the  'world  Jljall  be  judged,  4 1 6 1 

•*  their  father.'*     Here  our  Saviour  is  reprcfented  S  E  R  IVI. 
as  the  chief  minifber  of  God's  juflice,  in  the  diftri-  ^'^'^^^^• 
bution  of  rewards  to  the  righteous  and  the  wicked  ; 
and  though  the  effe(ft  and  execution  of  the  fentence 
only  be  exprefs'd,  yet  it  fuppofeth  a  juaicial  procefs 
preceding.      So  likewife  Matt.  xvi.  27.  ''  For  the 
Son  of  man  fhall  come  in  the  glofy  of  his  Father, 
with  his  holy  angels,  and  then  he  fliall  reward  every 
*'  man  according  to  his  work."  "  Shall  come  in  the 
*'  glory  of  his  Father,"  that  is,  with  his  authority 
committed  to  him.     Matt.  xxiv.  30.  where  our  Sa- 
viour fpeaking  of  his  coming  to  judge  the  world, 
it  is  faid,  "  then  fliall  appear  the  fign  of  the  Son  of 
man  in  heaven,  and  then  fliall  all  the  tribes  of  the 
earth  mourn  ;  and  they  fliall  fee  the  Son  of  man 
coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven  with  power  and 
great  glory  ;"  that  is,  in  order  to  the  judgment  of 
the  world.     But  moft  fully  and  expreQy,  Matt.  xxv. 
31.  where  you  have  the  manner  ot  his  coming  par- 
ticularly defcribed,   together  with  the  folemn  repre- 
fentation  of  the  procefs  of  that  day.     "  When  the 
"  Son  of  man  fhall  come  in  his  glory,  and  all  the 
*'  holy  angels  with  him,  then  fliall  he  fit  upon  the 
"  throne  of  his  glory  :  And  before  him  fhall  be  ga- 
*'  thered  all  nations,  and  he  fhall  feparate  the  one  from 
*'  another,  as  the  Iliepherd  dividcth  his  flieep  from 
*'  the  goats :  And  he  fliall  fettlie  fliecp  on  his  right 
"  hand,  but  the  goats  on  the  left.     Then  fliall  the 
*'  king  fciy  to  them  on  his  right  hand,  &:c."  You  fee 
the  whole  adminiftration  of  this  judgment,  and  the 
management  of  every  part  of  it,  is  committed  to 
Christ.     John  v.  22.  OurSAviouR  there  produ- 
ceth  his  commifiion,  and  tells  us  from  whence  this 
authority  was  derived  to  him.     "  The  Father  judg- 
*'  cth  no  man,  but  hath  committed  all  judgment  to 
'       .  20  R  2  "  the 


Of  the  perfon  by  whom 

"  the  Son."  And  ver.  27.  "  He  hath  given  hini 
"  authority  alfo  to  execute  judgment,  becaufe  he  is 
"  the  Son  of  man."  Acls  x.  42.  "  And  he  com- 
manded us  to  preach  unto  the  people,  and  to  tef- 
tify  that  it  is  he  that  is  ordained  of  God,  to  be  the 
judge  of  quick  and  dead."  A6ls  xvii.  31.  "  He 
hath  appointed  a  day  in  the  which  he  will  judge  the 
world  in  righteoufnefs,  by  that  man  whom  he  hath 
ordained,"  that  is,  by  Jesus  Christ  ;  for  it  fol- 
lows, "  whereof  he  hath  given  afTurance  unto  all  men, 
"  in  that  he  hath  raifed  him  from  tl\e  dead."  Rom. 
ii.  16.  "  In  the  day  when  God  fhall  judge  the  fecrets 
of  men  by  Jesus  Christ."  Rom.  xiv.  10. 
We  fhall  all  ftand  before  the  judgment  feat  of 
Christ."  2  ThefT.  i.  7,  8,  9.  The  apollle  there 
fpeaking  of  the  day  of  judgment,  defcribes  it  thus  ; 
*'  When  the  Lord  Jesus  fhall  be  revealed  from 
*'  heaven  with  his  mighty  angels,  in  flaming  fire, 
''  taking  vengeance  on  all  them  that  know  not  God, 
and  obey  not  the  gofpel  of  his  Son  i  who  fliall  be 
punifned  with  everlafling  deftruftion  from  the  pre- 
fence  of  the  Lord,  and  from  the  glory  of  his 
power."  2  Tim.  iv.  i.  "  I  charge  thee,  faith  St. 
Paul  there  to  Timothy,  before  God,  and  the  Lord 
"  Jesus  Christ,  who  fhall  judge  the  quick  and  the 
"  dead  at  his  appearing,  and  his  kingdom."  Rev. 
xxii.  12.  ''  Behold  I  come  quickly,  faith  our  Lord, 
*'  and  my  reward  is  with  me,  to  give  to  every  man 
"  according  as  his  work  fhall  be."  I  proceed  to  the 
II.  Thing  I  propofed,  namely,  to  give  fome  ac- 
count, why  God  hath  committed  the adminiflration 
of  this  work,  into  the  hands  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  And  of  this  I  fliall  give  an  account  in 
thefe  two  particulars. 

I.  God  thought  fit  to  confer  this  honour  upon 

Christ, 


(C 


cc 
cc 
cc 
<c 
cc 


the  world  Jhall  be  judged.  4163 

Christ,  as  a  fuitablc  reward  of  his  patience  and^^E^^'^- 

/•   cc     '  CLXXIX. 

iLilrerings. 

2.  He  thought  fit  likewife  hereby  to  declare  the 
righteoulhefs  and  equity  of  his  judgment,  in  that 
mankind  is  judged  by  one  in  their  own  nature,  a 
man  hke  themfelves. 

J.  God  hath  thought  fit  to  confer  this  honour 
upon  Christ,  as  a  fuitable  reward  of  his  obedience 
and  fufferings,  of  his  coming  into  the  world  by  liis 
appointment,  to  undertake  the  work  of  our  redemp- 
tion, and  to  mec]iate  a  reconciliation  between  God 
and  us,  of  his  vokintary  fubmiflion  to  a  condition  fa 
mean  and  low,  to  that  poverty  and  contempt,  and 
to  thofe  extreme  fufTerings  which  he  did  fo  patiently 
undergo,  in  the  profecution  of  this  great  defign. 

That  God  hath  committed  all  power  to  Christ, 
with  defign  to  put  an  honour  upon  him,  our  Savi- 
our himfelf  tells  us,  John  v.  22,  23.  "  The  Fa- 
*'  ther  judgeth  no  man,  but  hath  committed  all 
*'  judgment  to  the  Son  ;  that  all  men  (liould  honour 
*'  the  Son,  even  as  they  honour  the  Father."  The 
fcripture  fpeaks  of  this  matter,  as  if  when  Christ 
undertook  the  great  work  of  our  redemption,  it  were 
expreily  covenanted  between  God  the  Father  and 
him,  that  he  fhould  undertake  this  work,  and  fub- 
mit  to  all  thofe  grievous  things,  which  were  necefTary 
to  be  done  and  fuffered,  in  order  to  the  cfFecling  of 
it  ;  and  that  when  he  had  accompliihed  ir,  God 
would  confer  this  glory  upon  him,  that  in  his  hu- 
man nature  he  fiiouldbe  "  exalted  to  the  right-hand 
*'  of  God,  and  have  power  given  him  over  all  fiefli, 
*'  to  judge  the  world,  and  to  give  eternal  life  to  as 
"  many  as  he  pleafjcl  •,"  and  when  he  had  received 
this  reward,  that  then  his  mediatory  oificc  ilioukl 
ceafe,  and  he  fliould  *'  rcfign  up  the  kingdom  to 

God 


'ii[.i  64  Of  the  perfon  by  whom 

"  God  the  Father,  that  God  might  be  all  in  all." 
This  is  the  fcope  and  dellgn  of  the  feveral  texts  of 
fcripture  concerning  this  matter. 

With  relation  to  this  covenant  and  agreement  be- 
tween him  and  his  Father,  he  prays,  John  xvii.    i, 
2.  that  he  would  not  be  unmindful  of  the  glory 
which  he  had  promifed  to  inveft  him  withal.    "  Fa- 
ther, the  hour  is  come,  glorify  thy  Son  ;  as  thou 
haft  given  him  power  over  all  fle(h,  that  he  fhould 
give  eternal  life  to  as   many  as  thou  haft  given 
him."  And  ver.  4,  5.     ''  I  have  glorified  thee 
*'  on  the  earth  :  I  have   finiflied  the  work  which 
*'  thou  Sfaveft  me  to  do."     And  then  he  claims  the 
reward  of  it.    "  And  now,  O  Father,  glorify  thou 
'^  me  with  thine  own  felf."    And  the  apoftle  to  the 
Hebrews,  chap.  xii.  2.  tells  us,  that  the  hopes  of 
this  did  encourage,  and  bear  up  our  Lord  under  his 
fufferings,  ''  who  for  the  joy  that  was  fet  before 
*'  him,  endured  the  crofs,  defpifing  the  fhame,  and 
*^  is  fet  down  at  the  rig;ht-hand  of  the  throne  of 
"  God."     And  ^i,  Peter  tells  us,    i  Pet.  i.    n. 
that  *^'  the  prophets  of  old  teftified  before-hand  the 
**^  fuffcrings  of  Christ,  and  the  glory  that  fhould 
•'  follow."     And  St.  Paul  tells  us  what  this  glory 
is,    "  Eph.  i.    20,  21.  viz.  that  "  God   hath  fet 
him  at  his  own  right-hand  in  heavenly  places,  far 
above  all  principality,  and  power,  and  might,  and 
dominion,  i^nd  every  name  that  is  named,  not 
only  in  this  world,  but  in  that  which  is  to  come" 
But  moft  exprefly,  Phil.  ii.  7,  8,  9,  10,  11. -the  fame 
apoftle  tells  us,  that   in  confideration  of  the  great 
humiliation   and  fufterings  of  Christ,    "God 
hath  highly  exalted  him.     He  made  himfelf  of 
no  reputation,  (he  emptied   himfelf)  and  took 
upon  him  the  form  of  a  fervant,  and  was  made 

3  "  i« 


the  'woj'Id  fijall  be  judged,  4^6  5 

^*  in  the  likenefs  of  men.     And  beino;  found  in  fa-  S  K  R  ^f. 
*'  fhionasaman,  he  humbled  himfelf,  and  became 
*'  obedient  unto  death,  even  the  death  of  the  crofs. 
*'  Wherefore  God  ahb  hath  highly   exalted  him, 
and  given   him  a   name,    which  is  above  every 
name  :  that  at  the  name  of  Jesus   every  knee 
*'  Ihould  bow,  of  things  in  heaven,  and  things  in 
*'  earth,  and  things  under  the  earth :  and  that  every 
*'  tongue  fliould  confefs  that  Jesus  Christ  is 
*'  Lord,  to  the  glory  of  God  the  Father"     And 
that  the  giving  of  this  name  and  authority  to  Christ, 
upon  account  whereof  all  creatures  fhould  be  fubjed: 
to  him,  doth  principally  import  that  power  of  judg- 
ing the  world  which  was  committed  to  him,   is  evi- 
dent from  the  explication  of  thcfe  phrafes,  of  "bow- 
"  ing  the  knee  to   Christ,  and   of  confefling  to 
*'  him  with  the  tongue,"  which  the  fame  apoftle 
tells  us   elfewhere  do   fignify  our  being  judged  by 
him.     Rom.  xiv.    lo,   ii.  "  We  Ihall  all  ftand  be- 
fore the  judgment-feat  of  Christ  :  for  it  is  writ- 
ten. As  I  hve,  faith  the  Lord,  every   knee  fliall 
bow  to  me,  and  every  tongue  fhall  confefs  to  God. 
So  then  every  one  of  us  Ihail  give  an  account  of 
''  himfelf  to  God." 

So  that  you  fee  that  the  glorious  reward  of 
Christ's  felf-denial  and  fuffcring,  doth  principally 
confift  in  having  the  judgment  ot  the  world  com- 
mitted to  him,  which  thcrciore  is  called  "  his  king- 
*'  dom.  Matth.  xvi.  2S.  where  our  Saviour  ex- 
prefieth  it  by  '*  the  Son  of  man's  coming  in  his 
*'  kingdom.  2  Tim.  iv.  i.  *'  I  charge  thee  there- 
"  fore,"  faith  St.  Paul  to  Timothy,  ''  before  God 
and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  iliall  judge 
the  quick  and  the  dead  at  his  appearing,  and  his 
^  kingdom."  And  it  is  with  relation  to  tliui  pow- 
er 


'4166  Of  the  perfon  by  whom 

8  E  R  M.  er  and  authority,  that  the  title  of  kine  is  eiven  t<5 

CLXXIX  «^  o 

him,  Matth.  xxv.  34.  "  Then  Ihall  the  king  fay 
"  unto  them  on  his  right-hand,  &c."  And  the 
fcripture  almofl  every  where,  when  it  fpeaks  of 
Christ's  coming,  calls  it  his  '^glorious  appearance.'* 
Matth.  xvi.  27.  "  They  fhall  fee  the  Son  of  man 
*'  coming  in  the  glory  of  his  Father.  Mat.  xxiv.  30. 
*'  They  Ihall  fee  the  Son  of  man  coming  with  power 
"  and  great  glory."  Mat.  xxv.  31.  "When  the 
*'  Son  of  man  fhall  come  in  his  glory."  And  Tit. 
*'  ii.  13.  it  is  called,  "  the  glorious  appearance  of  the 
*^  great  God,  and  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.'* 
And  this  is  a  very  fuitable  reward  of  his  great 
fubmiffion  and  fufferings,  that  he  who  lived  in  fo 
mean  and  obfcure  a  condition,  fliould  come  in  great 
glory  ;  that  he  who  was  rejeded  and  defpifed  of 
men,  fliould  be  attended  onby  mighty  angels ;  that  he 
who  was  arraigned  and  condemned  by  the  powers  of 
the  world,  fhould  have  authority  given  him  to  fum- 
mon  all,  both  fmall  and  great,  the  kings  and  great 
men,  and  judges  of  the  earth,  to  appear  at  his  bar^ 
and  to  receive  fentence  at  his  mouth. 

And  this  fhall  be  the  laft  ad  of  his  mediatorfhip,' 
to  fit  in  judgment  upon  the  world,  to  diilribute  re- 
wards to  his  faithful  fervants,  and  to  punifh  his.  ob- 
llinate  and  implacable  enemies.  And  when  this  work 
is  finifhed,  then  this  authority  fliall  expire,  and  the 
office  and  kingdom  of  the  mediator  fhall  ceafe  ;  for 
"  when  he  Ihall  have  fubdued  all  things  to  himfelf,'^, 
as  the  apoflle  exprefly  tells  us,   i  Cor.  xv.  24,  25, 
&c.  "  then  cometh  the  end,  when  he  fhall  have  de- 
*'  livered  up  the  kingdom  to  God,  even  the  Father, 
when  he  fhall  have  put  down  all  rule,   and  all  au- 
thority, and  power.  For  he  mud  reign,  till  he  hath 
put  all  enemies  under  his  feet.  And  when  all  things 

"  fhall 


cc 


the  world  JJoall  be  judged,  A  "^^7 

*'  fliall  be  fubdued  unto  him,  then  fiiall  the  Son  alfo  S  K  R  \l. 
"  himfelf  be  fubjc6t  unto  him  that  hath  put  all  things  _^'^~ij 
"  under  him,  that  God  may  be  all  in  all." 

2.  God  hath  committed  the  adminill ration  of  this 
judgment  to  Christ,  that  he  might  hereby  declare 
the  righteoufnefs  and  equity  of  it,  in  that  mankind 
is  judged  by  one  in  their  own  nature,  a  man  lika 
thcmfclvcs.     And  therefore  we  find  that  the  fcrip- 
ture,    when  it  fpeaks  of  Christ  as  judge  of  the 
world,    doth  alinoi.1  conftandy  call  him  man,  and 
'^  the  Son  of  man."  In  the  places  I  have  mention- 
ed before,  Matth.  xiii.  41.     "  The  Son  of  nian  fliall 
"  fend  forth  his  angels."     And  Matth.   xvi.   27. 
*'  The  Son  of  man  fhall  come  in  the  glory  of  his 
*'  Father."  Matth.  xxiv.   30.    *'  Then  ihall  appear 
*'  the  flgn  of  the  Son  of  man  in  heaven,  and  they 
"  fhall  fee  the  Son  of  man  coming  in  the  clouds  of 
*'  heaven,with  power  and  great  glory."  Matth. xx v. 
31.   "  When  the  Son  of  man  fliall  come  in  his  glory." 
Adls  xvii.  31.  "  He  hath  appointed  a  day,  in  which 
*'  he  will  judge  the  world  in  righteoufnefs,  by  that 
*'  man  whom  he  hath  ordained."  By  the  conftant  ufe 
of  which  expreflion,  the  fcripture  doth  give  us  plain- 
ly to  underftand,  that  this  great  honour  of  being 
judge  of  the  world  was  conferred  upon  the  human 
nature  of  Christ.     For  as  he  is  God,  he  is  over 
all,  and  judge   of  the  world,  and  could  not  derive 
this  power  from  any,  it  being  originally  inherent  in 
the  Deity.     Which  likewife  appears  in  thof •  cxprcf- 
fions  of  his  being  ordained  a  judge,  and  having  "all 
authority  and  judgment  committed  and  given  to 
him."     A6ls   xvii.    31.    "  lie  will  ju(.ge   the 
world  in  righteoufnefs  by  that  man,    v/hom  he 
hath  ordained."     And  John  v.  22.  '' I'he  Fa- 
ther hath  committed  all  judgment  to  the  Son." 
Vol.  IX.  20  S  And 


4 1 6  8  Of  the  perfon  by  njohom 

And  ven  27.  "  He  hath  given  him  authority  to 
"  execute  judgment."  Now  this  cannot  be  faki  of 
Christ  as  God,  but  in  refpedt  of  his  human  na- 
ture. And  this  is  clear  beyond  all  exception,  by 
what  our  Saviour  adds,  as  a  reafon  why  this  au- 
thority is  committed  to  him  ;  "  he  hath  given  him 
*'  authority  to  execute  judgment,  becaufe  he  is  the 
^'  Son  of  man  ;"  that  is,  becaufe  in  that  refped,  and 
no  other,  he  is  capable  of  having  this  authority  de- 
rived to  him  ;  for  as  he  is  the  Son  of  God,  he  hath 
it  in  himfelf.  And  perhaps  for  this  reafon  likewife, 
becaufe  in  refped  of  his  human  nature,  he  is  vifible  •, 
and  man  being  part  of  the  vifible  creation  of  God, 
and  the  judgment  of  the  great  day  being  to  be  admi- 
niftered  in  a  vifible  manner,  and  to  that  end  the  bodies 
of  men  to  be  raifed  and  united  to  their  fouls,  in  order 
to  thtiir  vifible  appearance  at  this  judgment  y  it  feems 
very  congruous,  that  the  Son  of  man,  clothed  in  our 
nature  and  invefted  with  a  human  body,  fhould  fit 
in  judgment  upon  mankind. 

But  principally  becaufe  nothing  can  more  effeflu- 
ally  declare  the  equity  of  this  judgment,  and  that 
it  fliall  be  adminiftered  in  righteoufnefs,  than  that 
God  hath  ordained  a  man  like  ourfelves  to  fit  in 
judgment  upon  us.  In  human  judgments,  it  is 
reckoned  a  great  piece  of  equity,  for  men  to  be  tried 
by  their  peers,  to  be  acquitted  or  condemned  by 
thofe,  who  are  as  near  as  may  be  to  them,  and  in 
the  fame  circumilances  of  rank  and  condition  with 
themfelves  •,  becaufe  fuch  are  like  to  underftand  their 
cafe  bell,  and  to  have  a  fair  and  equitable  confide- 
ration  of  all  the  circumftances  belon2;ino;  to  it.  Now 
Christ,  as  he  is  "  the  Son  of  man,"  is  near  to  us, 
*'  bone  of  our  bone,  and  flefli  of  our  flefh,  made 
^^  in  all  things  like  unto  us,  only  without  fin  ^^ 

which 


^i  ii 


the  world  Jljall  be  judged,  4169 

which  was  neceflary  to  qualify  him  to  be  our  judge  ;  S  E  R  M. 
he  dwelt  among  us,  and  underftands  all  our  circum- 
flances,  and  whatever  may  have  influence  upon  our 
cafe,  to  extenuate  or  aggravate  our  guilt.  What  the 
apoftle  to  the  Hebrews  fays  of  Christ  as  an  high- 
pricfl,  may  be  applied  to  him  as  a  judge,  Heb.  iv. 
15.  "  We  have  not  a  judge,  which  cannot  be 
*'  touched  with  the  feehng  of  our  infirmities  •,  but 
*'  Avas  in  all  points  tempted  like  as  we  are,  yet  with- 
*'  out  fin." 

That  which  now  remains,  is  to  draw  fome  infe- 
rences from  what  I  have  difcourfed  to  you  upon  this 
argument. 

I.  If  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  fh all  judge  the 
world,  and  we  muft  "  all  appear  before  his  judg- 
*'  ment-feat,"  then  it  greatly  concerns  every  one  of 
us   fo  to  demean  ourfclves  in  this  world,  that  we 
may  be  accepted  of  him  in  the  next.     If  a  man  be 
to  be  tried  for  his  hfe,  how  will  he  court  the  favour 
of  the  judge,  that  when  he  comes  to  ftand  at  his 
bar,    he  may  receive  a  gracious  fentence  from  his 
mouth  ^.   WHiy  there  is  a  day  certainly  coming,  when 
every  one  of  us  mull  appear  before  the  tribunal  of  the 
great)  udge  of  the  world  -,  and  therefore  we  fliould  with 
all  pofTible  care  and  diligence  endeavour  to  approve 
our  ccnfciences,  and  all  the  atSlions  of  our  lives  to 
him.     "  Wherefore  we  labour,"    faith  the  apoftle 
immediately  before  my  text,   "  that  whether  prefent 
"  or  abfent,  we  may  be  accepted  ot  him.     For  we 
*'  muft    all    appear    before    the  judgment-feat    of 
"  Christ.'*     This  is  that  whic!i  makes  his  accept- 
ance and  approbation  fo  valuable  and  confiderable, 
that  he  is  to  be  our  judge,   to  him  we  muft  ftand 
or  fall,  by  his  fentence  we  fliall  be  caft  or  cleared 
for  ever. 

20  S  21  We 


Of  the  perfoti  by  whom 

We  are  very  apt  to  court  the  favour  of  great  men, 
of  the  princes  and  judges  of  this  world,  that  when 
we  come  to  ftand  in  need  of  it,  we  may  have  the 
benefit  and  comfort  of  it.     But  this  is  not  our  great 
intereft  ;  for  the  fentence  that  men  can  pafs  upon  us, 
doth  but  operate  for  a  Httle  while,  the  effect  and  con- 
fequences  of  it  do  not  reach  beyond  this  world,  it 
is  not  final  and  conclufive  as  to  our  eternal  (late.  To 
allude  to  that  faying  of  Solomon's,  ''  many  feek  the 
*'  prince's  favour  :   but  every  man's  judgment  is  of 
''  the  Lord."    We  feek  the  favour  of  the  great 
men  of  this  world  :  but  there  is  a  greater  man  than 
any  of  thefe,  whom  we  are  apt  to  defpife  and  neg- 
ledl,  "  the  prince  of  the  kings  of  the  earth,    the 
"  man  who  is  ordained  of  God,  to  be  judge  both 
*'  of  quick  and  dead."  Every  man's  judgment  fliall 
be  from  him.,  it  is  his  fentence  Vv^hich  above  all  other 
we  have  mofl  reafon  to  defire  or  dread.     Therefore 
we  fhould  have  regard  to  him,  and  by  fubmitting 
to  his  fcepter,  and  yielding  a  willing  obedience  to 
the  laws  of  his  holy  gofpel,  feek  his  favour,  left  "  he 
break  us  with  a  rod  of  iron,  and  dafh  us  in  pieces 
like  a  potter's  vefTel."  This  advice  v/e  find  given 
to  the  kings  and  rulers  of  the  earth,"  Pfal.  ii. 
10,  1 1,  12.     "Be  wife  now  therefore,  O  ye  kings  ; 
"  and  be  inftruded,  ye  judges  of  the  earth.     Serve 
"  the  Lord  with  fear,  and  rejoice  with  trembling. 
"  Kifs  the  Son  left  he  be  angry,  and  ye  perifh  fi'om- 
"  the  way,  when  his  wrath  is  kindled  but  a  little: 
*'  bleffed  are  all  they  that  put  their  truft  in  him." 

2.  This  is  matter  of  great  comfort  to  all  fincere 
Chriftians,  that  Christ  Ihalljuc'ge  the  world  ;  as 
it  likewife  is  of  great  terror  to  all  that  difobey  the 
gofpel,  and  by  their  wicked  lives  confute  their  pro- 
fcilion,  and  pretended  belief  of  it.  Christ  is 
2  "  the 


the  world  pall  be  judged.  4 1 7 1 

**  the  author  of  eternal  falvation  to  them  that  obey  S  E  R  M. 
"  him,"  and  to  none  elfe.     Fie  hath  not  only  pur-" 
chafed  this  falvation  for  us,  but  by  a  publick,  and 
folemn,  and  authoritative  fentence,  will  confer  it  up- 
on us. 

Indeed  it  is  juftly  matter  of  great  terror  to  the 
wicked  of  the  world,  who  live  in  ungodlinefs  and 
worldly  lufts,  and  under  the  name  and  title  of  Chri- 
ftians,  have  "  trampled  under  foot  the  Son  of  God'* 
and  by  their  lives  have  openly  declared,  that  *'  they 
"  would  not  have  this  man  rule  over  them.**     Sure 
it  cannot  but  be  matter  of  great  horror  and  amaze- 
ment to  fuch  perfons,  to  think  of  this  judge,  and  to 
confider,  that  he,  whom  by  their  lewd  lives  and  prac- 
tices they  have  fo  contemned  in  this  world,  will  fit. 
as  judge  upon  them,  and  condemn  them  in  the  next. 
And  therefore  our  Saviour  tells  us,  Luke  xxi.  25, 
&c.  that  when  the  day  of  judgment  fhall  furprizc 
the   world,  and   "  they  fhall  fee  the  Son  of  man 
*'  coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven,  with  power  and 
*'  great  glory  •,'*  then  the  v/ickcd  of  the  earth  fhall 
be  in  great  diRrefs  and  perplexity,  and  "  their  hearts 
"  fliall  fail  them  for  fear,  and  for  looking  after  thofc 
*'  things  which  are  coming  upon  the  earth:"  but 
that  to  good  men  it  ihall  be  a  day  of  great  joy,  and 
that  the  approach  of  it  fhall  revive  their  fpirits,  and 
raife  their  heads,  ver.  28.     "  But  when  thefe  things 
"  lliall  begin  to  come  to  pafs,  then  lift  up  your  heads 
*'  with  joy,  becaufe  your  redemption  draws  nigh.** 

And  this  confidcration  is  matter  of  great  comfort 
to  all  good  men,  both  upon  account  of  their  fuiTer- 
ings  and  ferviccs  for  Christ.  In  refped:  of  their 
fuffcrings  for  him.  In  this  world  they  are  expofcd 
to  great  trials  and  pcrfecutions  for  him  :  but  he,  for 
whofc  name  we  fuiTcr,  is  to  give  us  our  reward  y  he, 

\vh« 


Aiy2  Of  the  per/on  by  whom 

SERM.  who  IS  of  the  fame  nature  with  us,  and  '^  took  pare 
CLxxix.^  «  of  flefh  and  blood,"  andfuffered  himfelf  "  in  the 
"  flefh,"  more  grievoufly  than  any  of  us  can  fuf- 
fer  ;  he  it  is,  to  whom  God  hath  referred  it,  to  con- 
fider  our  fufferings,  and  give  what  rewards  to  them 
he  thinks  fit.  And  then  in  refpedl  of  our  fervices. 
Though  the  beft  of  them  be  imperfedl,  and  nothing 
that  we  do  is  able  to  abide  the  feverity  of  his  juftice, 
yet  by  virtue  of  his  meritorious  facrifice  and  fatis- 
fadlion,  the  imperfedion  of  them  is  pardoned,  and 
thefincerity  of  them  is  accepted.  For  he  being  our 
judge,  who  was  our"" facrifice,  and  is  our  "  advocate. 
*'  w^ith  the  Father,"  we  m.ay  reft  affured,  that  he  will 
plead  our  caufe  for  us,  and  the  merit  of  his  own  fuffer- 
ings, in  bar  of  that  fentence  which  ftri6l  juftice  would 
pafs  upon  us. 

3.  And  laftly,  this  lliews  what  reafon  the  mini- 
fters  of  Christ  have,  to  be  earneft  and  importunate 
with  finners,  to  repent  and  turn  to  God,  to  believe 
and  obey  the  gofpel  of  Christ,  that  they  may  have 
him  their  friend,  who  will  certainly  be  their  judge. 
This  inference  the  apoftle  makes  from  this  dodrine, 
in  the  words  immediately  after  the  text.     "  Know- 
*'  ing  therefore  the  terror  of  the  Lord,  we  per- 
*'  fuade  men  ;"  we  who  are  employed  by  Christ, 
to  warn  finners  of  the  danger  and  terror  of  a  future 
judgment,  who  are  ambafladors  fent  from  this  great 
king  and  judge  of  the  world,  to  treat  with  finners, 
and  to  offer  peace  to  them,    and    "  in  Christ's 
•'  ftead  to  befeech  them  to  be  reconciled  to  God," 
as  the  apoftle  fpeaks  in  the  latter  part  of  this  chap- 
ter.    So  that  if  we  ourfelves  beheve  what  we  preach 
to  others,  to  be  the  word  and  law  of  him  who  fliall 
fhortly  judge  us,  and  them  that  hear  us,  can  we  for- 
bear with  all  pofTible  importunity  to  folicit  their  re- 
pentance^ 


the  wo7'ld pall  be  judged,  4^73 

pentance,  and  to  warn  them  "  to  Pice  from  the  wrath  S  K  R  M. 

.  CLXXIX 

"  which  is  to  come  ?"  Can  we  let  them  deep  in  their 
fins,  when  we  fee  them  negled  fo  great  a  happinefs, 
and  run  themfelves  upon  fo  intolerable  a  mifcry  ?  If 
we  believe  that  holy  book  out  of  which  we  preach, 
and  the  difcoveries  and  revelation  there  made, we  may 
take  an  eafy  profpedl  of  another  world,  and  fee  "  the 
*'  wrath  of  God  revealed  from  heaven,  againft  all 
*'  ungodlincfs  and  unrighteoufnefs  of  men."  For 
the  gofpel  hath  made  a  more  particular  and  clear  dif- 
covery  to  us  of  the  Hate  of  the  next  world,  and  the 
proceedings  of  the  great  day,  than  ever  the  world 
was  acquainted  with  before.  It  tells  us  who  is  the 
perfon  that  fhall  fit  in  judgment  upon  us,  even  "  Je- 
*'  sus  Christ,  whereof  God  hath  given  affurance 
"  unto  all  men,  in  that  he  hath  raifedhim  from  the 
"  dead."  Now  if  we  know  this,  and  be  alTured  of 
it,  we  cannot  but  deal  plainly  with  finners,  and  out 
of  tender  pity  and  compaflion  to  them,  endeavour 
to  make  them  fenfible  of  the  fad  iffue  and  event  of  a 
wicked  life,  and  that  without  repentance  and  amend- 
ment they  will  not  be  able  to  (land  in  the  judgment 
of  the  great  day.  When  wc  fee  men  in  the  high- 
v^ay  to  ruin  and  deflru6tion,  and  the  evil  day  mak- 
ing halle  towards  them,  we  cannot  but  warn  thein 
of  that  fad  fate  which  hangs  over  them,  and  endea- 
vour by  all  means  to  refcue  them  from  that  extreme 
and  endlefs  mifcry,  which  is  ready  to  overtake  them. 
Confider  then,  finner,  whom  it  is  thou  now  reject- 
eft  and  defpifcfb,  and  whofe  laws  thou  cafteft  behind 
thy  back.  It  is  he,  who  for  all  his  mean  appearance  in 
the  world,  is  "  the  Lord  of  glory,"  into  whofe 
hand  *'  the  Father  hath  committed  all  judgment." 
And  can  there  be  a  greater  madnefs,  than  to  provoke 
and  make  him  thine  enemy,  who  fliall  be  thy  judge  .^ 


S  E  R  M.  than  to  defpife  him,  who  can  deflroy  thee  ?  He  ap- 
peared  once  as  "  a  lamb  to  take  away  the  fins  of  the 
*'  world  :"  but  if  through  our  obflinacy  and  im- 
penitency  we  render  this  appearance  of  his  ineffectu- 
al for  our  recovery,  he  will  appear  a  fecond  time  in 
a  more  terrible  manner,  as  "  a  lion  to  tear  us  in 
•'pieces."  He  came  once  as  "a  light  into  the  world," 
in  a  flill  and  gentle  way,  to  convince  and  convert 
finners  :  but  if  we  refill  this  light,  he. will  come 
**  in  flaming  fire  to  take  vengeance  on  all  them  that 
*'  know  not  God,  and  obey  not  the  gofpel  of .  his  J 
*'  Son."  ^ 

And  this  is  that  which  will  make  us  fpeechlefs,  and 
fill  our  faces  with  everlaftingconfufion,  at  the  fecond 
coming  of  Christ,  that  we  have  fruflrated  and  made 
void  the  end  of  his  firft  coming.  What  fhall  we  be  able 
to  fay  to  him,  when  he  comes  to  judge  us,  who  re- 
jedled  him,  when  he  came  to  fave  us  ?  With  v/hat 
reafon  can  we  hope  that  he  will  deliver  us  from  hell, 
when  we  would  not  be  faved  by  him  "  from  our  fins, 
**  and  redeemed  from  our  vain  converfation  ?" 

I  will  conclude  all  with  that  merciful  warnino- 

o 

which  the  judge  himfelf  hath  given  us,  and  left  up- 
on record,  Luke  xxi.   34,  35,   '^6.     "  Take  heed 
**  to  yourfelves,  left  at  any  time  your  hearts  be  over- 
*'  charged  with  furfeiting,  and   drunkennefs,    and 
*'  cares  of  this  life,  and  fo  that  day  come  upon  you 
*'  unawares.    For  as  a  fnare  fhall  it  come  on  all  them 
**  that  dwell  on  the  face  of  the  whole  earth.    Watch 
ye  therefore  and  pray  always,  that  ye  may  be  ac- 
counted worthy  to  efcape  all  thefe  things  that  fhall 
come  to  pafs,  and  to  ftand  before  the  Son  of  man." 


cc 

6( 


~JL  <\  1 


-^'  -^  ax^wTTTiu!.  SER- 


r 


The  necejjlty  of  repentance  and  faith,  3807 

30,  31.  is  that  which  doth,  as  it  were,  make  repen-  S  E  RM. 
tance  to  be  a  new  do6lrine  that  did  come  with  the 
gofpel  into  the  world,  becatife  it  was  never  before 
enforced  with  this  powerful  argument  •,  "  the  times 
•'  of  that  ignorance  God  winked  at  i  but  now  he 
*'  calls  upon  all  men  every  where  to  repent ;  be- 
''  caufe,  &c."  When  the  world  was  in  ignorance, 
and  had  not  fuch  afTurance  of  a  future  flare,  of  eter- 
nal rewards  and  punilliments  after  this  life,  the  argu- 
ments to  repentance  were  weak  and  feeble  in  compa- 
rifon  of  what  they  now  are,  the  ncctirity  of  this 
■duty  was  not  lb  evident.  But  now  God  hath  allur- 
ed us  of  a  future  judgment,  now  exhortations  to 
repentance  have  a  commanding  power  and  influence 
upon  men  ;  fo  that  repentance,  both  as  it  is  that 
■which  is  very  much  prefled  and  inculcated  in  the  go- 
fpel, and  as  it  hath  it's  chief  motives  and  enforce- 
ments from  the  gofpelj  may  be  faid  to  be  one  of  the 
great  do6lrines  of  the  gofpel. 

Query  2.  Whether  the  preaching  of  faith  in 
Christ,  among  thofe  who  arc  already  Chriilians, 
be  at  all  neceflary  .^  Becaufe  it  feems  very  improper^ 
to  prefs  thofe  to  believe  in  Christ,  who  are  already 
perfuaded  that  he  is  the  MefTus,  and  do  entertain 
the  hiftory  and  dodlrine  of  the  gofpel. 

Anf.  The  faith  which  the  apoiclc  here  means,  and 
which  he  would  pcrfuade  merr  to,  is  aii  cffecfbual 
belief  of  the  gofpel  •,  fuch  a  faith  as  hath  real  effeds 
upon  men,  and  makes  dicm  to  live  as  they  believe-, 
fuch  a  faith  as  pcrfuades  them  ot  the  need  ot  thefc 
bleflings  that  the  goipcl  ofurs,  and  makes  them  to 
defire  to  be  partakers  of  them,  and  in  order  thereto 
to  be  willing  to  fubmit  to  thofe  terms  and  conditions 
of  holinefs  and  obedience,  which  the  gofpel  requires. 
This  is  the  faith  we  wuuld  prrkiade  men  to,  and 

Vol.  IX,  li  T  there 


3  a  o  5  ^ibe  necel/ity  oj  I'cpentance  and  faith. 

^  cux  ^^^^'^  '^^  nothing  more  neceflary  to  be  prefTed  upon  the 
greateft  part  of  Chriilians  than  this  \  for  how  few 
are  there,  among  thofe  who  profefs  to  beheve  the 
gofpel,  who  believe  it  in  this  effedlual  manner,  fo 
as  to  conform  themfelves  to  it  ?  The  faith  which 
mofl  Chriftians  pretend  to  is  merely  negative  •,  they 
do  not  difbelieve  the  gofpel,  they  do  not  confider  it, 
nor  trouble  themfelves  about  it,  they  do  not  care, 
nor  are  concerned  whether  it  be  true  or  not  •,  but  they 
have  not  a  pofitive  belief  of  it,  they  are  not  poflefTed 
with  a  firm  perfuafion  of  the  truth  of  thofe  matters 
which  are  contained  in  it  •,  if  they  were,  fuch  a  per- 
fuafion would  produce  real  and  pofitive  effeds. 
Every  man  naturally  defires  happinefs,  and  it  is  im- 
pofiible  that  any  man  that  is  poflefied  with  this  belief, 
that  in  order  to  happinefs  it  is  necelTary  for  him  to 
do  fuch  and  fuch  things  •,  and  that  if  he  omit  or  neg- 
led:  them  he  is  unavoidably  miferable,  that  he 
ihould  not  do  them.  Men  fay  they  believe  this  or 
that,  but  you  may  fee  in  their  lives,  what  it  is  they 
believe.  So  that  the  preaching  of  this  faith  in 
Christ,  v/hich  is  the  only  true  fluth,is  ftill  necefTary. 
I.  Infer.  *'  If  repentance  towards  God,  and  faith  in 
*'  the  Lord  Jesus  Chri  st,"  be  the  fum  and  fubftance 
of  the  gofpel,  then  from  hence  we  may  infer  the  ex- 
cellency of  the  chrillian  religion,  which  infills  only 
upon  thofe  things  that  do  tend  to  our  perfedion  and 
our  happinefs.  Repentance  tends  to  our  recovery, 
and  the  bringing  of  us  back  as  near  as  may  be  to 
innocence.  Primus  innocent'iagradiis  eft  non  feccajfe\ 
fectwdus^  pcajiitcntia  :  and  then  *'  faith  in  the  Lord 
*' Jesus  Christ,"  though  it  be  very  comprehenfive, 
and  contains  many  things  in  it,  yet  nothing  but 
wliat  is  eminently  for  our  advantage,  and  doth  very 
n:i.;ch  conduce  to  our  happinefs.    The  Juftorical  part 

of 


tl.lX. 


7he  necejfity  ofrepenimtce  aJid faiths  3^09 

of  the  gofpel  acquaints  us  with  the  pcrfon  and  acftlons  ^  ^'  ^^  ^^• 
of  our  Saviour,  which  conduceth  very  much  to  our 
underftanding  of  the  author  and  means  of  our  falva- 
tion.  The  do6lrinal  part  of  the  gofpel  contains  wha: 
God  requires  on  our.  part,  and  the  encouragements 
and  arguments  to  our  duty,  from  the  confidcration 
of  the  recompence  and  rewards  of  the  next  hfe.  The 
precepts  of  Christ's  dodlrine  are  fuch  as  tend  ex- 
ceedingly to  the  perfection  of  our  nature,  being  all 
founded  in  reafon,  in  the  nature  of  God,  and  of  a 
reafonable  creature  •,  I  except  only  thofe  pofitive  in- 
ftitutions  of  t-\c  chriftian  religion,  the  two  facra- 
ments,  which  are  not  burthenfom,  and  are  of  ex- 
cellent ufe.     This  is  the  firil. 

II.  We  may  learn  from  hence  what  is  to  be  the 
fum  and  end  of  our  preaching,  to  bring  men  to  re- 
pentance and  a  firm  belief  of  the  gofpel  •,  but  then  ic 
is  to  be  confidered,  that  we  preach  repentance,  fo 
often  as  we  preach  cither  againft  fin  in  general,  or 
any  particular  fin  or  vice  ;  and  fo  often  as  we  per- 
fuade  to  holinefs  in  general,  or  to  the  performance 
of  any  particular  duty  of  religion,  or  to  the  exercife 
of  any  particular  grace  ;  for  repentance  includes  the 
forfaking  of  fin,  and  a  fincere  refolution  and  endea- 
vour of  reformation  and  obedience.  And  we  preach 
repentance  fo  often  as  we  infill  upon  fuch  confidera- 
tions  and  arguments,  as  may  be  powerful  to  deter 
men  from  fin,  and  to  engage  them  to  holinefs.  And 
we  preach  "faith  towards  cjur  Lord  Ji^sus  Christ," 
^o  often  as  we  declare  the  grounds  of  the  chriftian 
religion,   and  infifh  upon  fuch  arguments  as  tend  to 
make  it  credible,  and  are  proper  to  convince  men  of 
the  truth  and  reafonablenefs  of  it  •,  fo  often  as  we  ex- 
plain the  myllery  of  Christ's  incarnation,  the  hi- 
ttory  of  his  life,  death,  refurrcclion,  afcenfion,  and 
1^   T  a  interccffion , 


3810  T^he  necejjlty  of  repentance  and  faith, 

S  F,  R  M.  intercefTion,  and  the  proper  ends  and  ufe  of  thefe  ; 
fo  often  as  we  open  the  method  of  God's  grace  for 
the  falvation  of  finners,  the  nature  of  the  covenant 
between  God  and  us,  and  the  conditions  of  it,  and 
the  way  how  a  Tinner  is  juftified  and  hath  his  fins 
pardoned,  the  nature   and  neceffity  of  regeneration 
and  fandlification  ;  fo  often  as  we  explain  the  precepts 
of  the  gofpel,  and  the  promifes  and  threatenings  of 
it,  and  endeavour  to  convince  men  of  the  equity  of 
Chrit's  commands,  and  to  afTure  them  of  the  cer- 
tainty of  the  eternal  happinefs  which  the  gofpel  pro- 
mifes to  them  that  obey  it,  and  of  the  eternal  mi-  , 
fery  which  the  gofpel  threatens  to  thofe  that  are  dif- 
obedient-,  all  this  is  preaching  ''faith  in  our  Lord 
^'  Jesus  Christ." 

III.  This  may  corre6l  the  irregular  humours  and 

Itch  in  many  people,  who  are  not  contented  with  this 

plain  and  wholefom  food,  bpt  mud  be  gratified  with 

ifubhme   notions   and  uninirelligible  myfteries,  with 

pleafint  parages  of  wit,  and  artificial  drains  of  rhe- 

porick,  with  nice  and  unprofitable  difputes,  v/ith  bold 

interpretations  of  dark  prophecies,  and  peremptory 

determinations  of  what  will  happen  next  year,  and 

a  punftual  dating  of  the  time  when  Anti-chrid  fhall 

be  thrown  down,  and  Babylqn  fhall  fall,  and  who 

diall  be  employed  in  this  work.     Or  if  their  humour 

lies  another  way,  you  mud  apply  yourfelf  to  it,  by 

making  fharp  refiedlions  upon  matters  in  prefent  con- 

trovcrfy  and  debate,  you  mud  dip  your  dile  in  gall 

and  vinegar,  and  be  all  fatyr  and  inventive  againd 

thofe  that  differ  from  you,  and  teach  people  to  hate 

pne  another,  and  to  fall  together  by  the  ears  ;  and 

this  men  call  gofpel  preaching,  and  fpeaking  of  fca- 

fonable  truths. 

Surely  St.  Paul  was  a  gofpel  preacher,  and  fuch 

an 


T['he  necejjlty  of  repentance  and  faith,  3811 

an  one  as  may  be  a  pattern  to  all  others ;  and  yet  he  S  E  R  M. 
did  none  of  thcfe ;  he  preached  what  men  might 
underiland,   and  what  they  ought  to   believe  and 
pradife,  in  a  plain  and  unaffefted  and  convincing 
manner  •,  he  taught ''  fuch  things  as  made  for  peace," 
"  and  whereby  he  might  edify  and  build  up  men  in 
"  their  holy  faith."     The  do6lrines  that  he  preach- 
ed will  never  be  unfeafonable,  that  men  fhould  leave 
their  fins,  and  believe  the  gofpel,  and  live  accordingly. 
And  if  men  mufl  needs  be  gratified  with  difputes 
and  controverfies,  there  are  thefe  great  controverfies 
between  God  and  the  finner  to  be  ftated  and  determi- 
ned ;  whether  this  be  religion,  to  follow  our  own 
lufts  and  inclinations,  or  to  endeavour  to  be  hkeGoD, 
and  to  be  conformed  to  him,  in  goodnefs,  and  mer- 
cy, and  righteoufnefs,  and  truth,  and  faithfulnefs  ? 
Whether  Jesus  Christ  be  not  the  Mefiiasand  Savi- 
our of  the  world  ?  Whether  faith  and  repentance  and 
fincere  obedience  be  not  the  terms  of  falvation,  and  the 
nccefiary  conditions  of  happincfs  ?    Whether  there 
fhall  be  a  future  judgment,  when  all  men  fliall  be 
fentenced  accordino;  to  their  works  ?  Whether  there 
be  heaven  and  hell  ?    Whether  good  men  fhall  be 
eternally  and  unfpeakably  happy,  and  wicked  men 
extremely  and  everlaftingly  miferable  ?  Thcfe  are  the 
great  controverfies  of  religion,  upon  which  we  are 
to  difpute  on  God's  behalf  againft  finners.     God 
afierts,  and  finners  deny  thefe  things,  not  in  words, 
but  which  is  more  emphacical  and  fignificant,  in  their 
lives  and  adlions.     Thefe  are  practical  controverfies 
of  faith,  and  it  concerns  every  man  to  be  refolved 
and  determined  about  them,  that  he  may  frame  his 
life  accordingly. 

And  fo  for  repentance  j  God  fays,  repentance  is  a 
forfaking  of  fin,  and  a  thorough  change  and  amend- 
ment 


755<?  necejjtfy  of  repentance  and  faith. 

ment  of  life  ;  the  firmer  fays,  that  it  is  only  a  for- 
mal confefilon,  and  a  flight  afking  of  God  forgive- 
nefs  :  God  calls  upon  us  fpeedily  and  forthwith  to 
repent  *,  the  finner  faith  it  is  time  enough,  and  it 
may  fafely  be  deferred  to  ficknefs  or  death  ;  thefe  are 
important  controverfies,  and  matters  of  moment. 
But  men  do  not  affedi:  common  truths  •,  whereas  thefe 
are  molt  neceffary  :  And  indeed  whatever  is  general- 
ly ufeful  and  beneficial,  ought  to  be  common,  and 
not  to  be  the  lefs  valued,  but  the  more  eileemed  for 
being  fo. 

'  And  as  thefe  dodrines  of  faith  and  repentance  arc 
never  unfeafonable,  fo  are  they  more  peculiarly  pro- 
per when  we  celebrate  the  holy  facrament,  which 
was  inflitutcd  for  a  folemn  and  ftanding  memorial 
of  the  chriftian  religion,  and  is  one  of  the  mod 
powerful  arguments  and  perfuafives  to  repentance 
and  a  good  hfc. 

The  faith  of  the  gofpel  doth  more  particularljr 
refpedl  the  death  of  Christ  ;  and  therefore  it  is  call- 
ed "  faith  in  his  blood,"  becaufe  that  is  more  efpe- 
daily  the  objedlof  our  faith  •,  the  blood  of  Christ, 
as  it  was  a  feal  of  the  truth  of  his  do6lrine,  fo  it  is 
alfo  a  confirmation  of  all  the  bleflings  and  benefits 
of  the  new  covenant. 

And  it  is  one  of  the  greatefl  arguments  in  the  world 
to  repentance.  In  the  blood  of  Christ  we  may 
fee  our  own  guilt,  and  in  the  dreadful  fufl^erings  of 
the  Son  of  God,  the  jufl  defert  of  our  fins ;  "  he 
*'  hath  born  our  griefs,  and  carried  our  forrows,  he 
*'  was  wounded  for  our  tranfgrenions,  and  bruifed 
*'  for  our  iniquities  -,  therefore  the  commemoration 
of  his  fufierings  fhould  call  our  fins  to  rem.ernbrance, 
the  reparefentation  of  his  body  broken,  lliould  melt 
our  hearts  j  and  fo  often  as  \vc  remember  that  "  his 

'^  blood 


^he  necefity  of  repentance  and  faith.  3  8 1  j 

*'  blood  was  ihed  for  us,  our  eyes"   fhould  "  run  S  ER  M. 

CLIX 

**  down  with  rivers  of  tears  •/'  fo  often  as  we  ''  look 
*'  upon  him  whom  we  have  pierced,"  we  fhould 
*'  mourn  over  him."  When  the  fon  of  God  fuf- 
fered,  "  the  rocks  were  rent  in  funder  •,"  and  fhall 
not  the  confideration  of  thofe  fufferings  be  effedual 
to  break  the  moft  (tony  and  obdurate  heart  ? 

What  can  be  more  proper  when  we  come  to  this 
facrament,  than  the  renewing  of  our  repentance  ? 
When  we  partake  of  this  paflbver,  we  fhould  "  eat 
"  it  with  bitter  herbs."  The  mofl  folemn  expref- 
fions  of  our  repentance  fall  fhort  of  thofe  fufferings, 
which  our  bleffed  Saviour  underwent  for  our  fins. 
If  "  our  head  were  waters,  and  our  eyes  fountains 
"  of  tears,"  we  could  never  fufficiently  lament  the 
curfed  effedis  and  confequences  of  thofe  provocations 
which  were  fo  fatal  to  the  Son  of  God. 

And  that  our  repentance  may  be  real,  it  mufl  be 
accompanied  with  the  refolution  of  a  better  life  ;  for 
if  we  return  to  our  fins  again,  *'  we  trample  under 
"  foot  the  Son  of  God,  and  profane  the  blood  of 
"  the  covenant,"  and  out  of  ''  the  cup  of  falvation 
"  we  drink  our  own  damnation,"  and  turn  that 
which  fhould  fave  us  into  an  inftrument  and  feal  of 
our  own  ruin. 


SER- 


3814 

SERMON     CLX. 

Of  confeffing  and  forfaking  fin,  in  or- 
der to  pardon. 

P  R  O  V.    xxviii.   13. 

He  that  cover eth  his  Jlns  Jhall  not  prcfper :  but  who- 
fo  confejfeth  and  forfaketh  them^  Jhall  have  mercy, 

;  E  R  M.  ^<  I N  C  E  we  are  all  finners,  and  liable  to  the  juf- 

_^^l^j  \^  tice   of  God,  it  m  a  matter  of  great  moment 

•reached    to  our  comfort  and  happinefs,  to  be  rightly  inform- 

rdnef"     ^^  ^y  what  means,  and  upon  what  terms,  we  may 

ay.  be  reconciled  to  God,  and  find  mercy  with   him. 

And  to  this  purpofe  the  text  gives  us  this  advice  and 

diredion,  "  whofo  confefleth  and  forfaketh  his  fins 

**  Ihall  have  mercy." 

In  which  words  there  is  a  great  blelTing  and  bene- 
fit declared  and  promifed  to  finners,  upon  certain 
conditions.  The  blefling  and  benefit  promifed,  is 
*' the  mercy  and  favour  of  God,''  which  compre- 
hends all  the  happy  efi-ed:s  of  God's  mercy  and  good- 
nefs  to  finners.  And  the  conditions  upon  which  this 
blefling  is  promifed  are  two,  "  confefiion  of  our  fins, 
*'  and  forfaking  of  them  ;"  and  thefe  two  contain  in 
them  the  whole  nature  of  that  great  and  necefiary 
duty  of  repentance,  without  which  a  finner  can  have 
no  reafonablc  hopes  of  the  mercy  of  God. 

I.  Here  is  a  blelTing  or  benefit  promifed,  which  is 
*'  the  mercy  and  favour  of  God."  And  this  in  the 
full  extent  of  it,  comprehends  all  the  effects  of  the 
mercy  and  goodnefs  of  God  to  finners,  and  doth  pri- 
marily import  the  pardon  and  forgivenefsof  our  fins. 

And 


Of  the  perfons  who  are  to  be  judged,  4183' 

men,  thou  fhall  not  efcape  the  judo-ment  of  God.  SER  M. 
It  may  be  thou  art  a  prince,  and  beared  rule  over 
others  :  but  thou  alio  art  liable  to  the  judgment  of 
God,  and  therefore  oughteft  to  remember,  that 
"  they  that  rule  over  men,  mufl  be  jufl,  ruling  in  the 
**  fear  of  God,"  and  of  that  great  account  which 
they  muft  one  day  give  of  that  high  charge  com- 
mitted to  them.  It  may  be  now  thou  judgeft  others,Y 
and  canft  call  them  before  thy  bar,  and  make  them 
tremble,  having  power  and  authority  to  abfolve  or 
condemn  them  :  but  remember,  that  for  all  this  thou 
muft  come  into  judgment  thyfelf,and  give  an  account 
how  thou  haft  judged  others,  and  whether  thou  haft 
fat  and  proceeded  in  thefe  inferior  courts,  as  one 
mindful  of  the  high  tribunal  of  God,  and  with  a 
juft  ienfe  of  the  judgment  of  the  great  day,  when 
all  the  caufes  which  thou  haft  tried  here  upon  earth, 
will  be  reviewed  and  feverely  fcanned  in  tliat  higher  ^ 
court,  from  which  there  can  be  no  appeal. 

It  may  be  thou  art  rich  and  powerful,  and  one  of ' 
thofe  great  flies  that  can  break  through  the  cobwebs 
of  hum^n  laws,  and  efcape  the  judgment  of  them  : 
but  the  judgment  of  God  will  take  faft  hold  of  thee, 
and  in  defpite  of  all  thy  intereft,  and  might,  will 
take  a  fevcre  revenge  mpon  thee.  As  powerful  as 
thou  art,  thoij  art  but  a  man,  and  God  is  infinitely 
too  ftrong  for  thee,  thou  canft  not  efcape  out  of  his 
hands.  "  Thinkeft  thou,  O  man  !  that  thou  flialt 
*'  efcape  the  judgment  of  God  ?'*  fays  the  apoftle; 
looking  upon  it  as  a  foolifti  and  abfurd  imagination, 
for  any  man  to  think,  that  he  can  by  any  means  avoid 
thejudgment  of  God. 

So  that  fo  long  as  we  are  men,  whatever  elfe  we 
are,  we  ought  to  ftand  in  awe  of  the  judgment  di 
the  great  day  \  bccaufc,  let  our  rank  and  condition 

Vol.  IX.  20  U  be 

% 


Of  the  perfons  ivho  are  to  be  Judged, 

be  what  it  will,  we  are  all  equally  obnoxious  to  thar, 
and  can  upon  no  account  whatfoever  plead  any  pri- 
vilege and  exemption  from  it. 

II.  The  confideration  of  this  confounds  all  thofc 
differences  and  diftin6lions  of  men,  which  make 
fuch  a  noife  in  this  world,  and  whatever  they  may 
lignify  in  this  world,  makes  them  very  inconfidera- 
ble  as  to  the  other.  Why  then  fhould  men  be  puft 
up,  and  look  fo  big  upon  account  of  any  of  thefe 
things,  when  there  is  a  day  not  far  off,  and  which 
will  certainly,  and  for  ought  we  know,  fhortly  over- 
take us,  which  will  level  men  in  all  thefe  refpedls, 
and  fet  them  upon  even  ground,  before  an  impartial 
bar  ;  where  none  of  thefe  things  will  be  had  in  any 
confideration,  and  where  the  fooUfh  pride  and  arro- 
gance of  men  fhall  be  confounded,  and  thofe  who 
were  wont  to  look  down  with  fo  much  fcorn  upon 
others,  as  fo  infinitely  below  them,  fhall  find  them- 
felves  upon  an  equal  level  with  the  poorefl  and  mofb 
abjed  part  of  mankind,  and  fhall  be  ready  to  fay 
with  the  v/ife  man,  in  the  wifdom  of  Solomon,  chap, 
v.  8.  "  What  hath  pride  profited  us,  or  what  hath 
"  riches  with  our  vaunting  brought  us  ?  All  thefe 
*'  things  are  palTed  away  as  a  fhadow,  and  as  a  pofl 
"  that  hafteth  by."  So  that  we  ought  to  ufe  well 
all  thofe  advantages  which  we  have  above  others  in 
this  world  :  if  we  do  not,  they  will  be  of  no  ufe 
and  benefit  to  us  in  the  other.  "  Riches  profit  not 
"  in  the  day  of  wrath." 

All  thef-^^  petty  civil  differences  and  difcriminations 
of  high  and  low,  rich  and  poor,  honourable  and 
bafe,  they  only  hold  m  this  world,  and  are  in  vogu5i 
on  this  fide  the  grave  :  but  when  we  come  into  the 
other  world,  they  will  all  ceafe  and  fignify  nothing. 
There  the  powerful  oppreifor  can  do  nothing  to  the 

injury 


Of  the  pcrfons  roho  are  to  he  judged,  4 1  S  5 

injury  of  the  poorefl  man  that  ever  Jived  in  this  S  K  R  M. 

CLXXX. 

world,  and  as  little  to  his  own  fafety  and  fccurity. 
All  that  power  and  intereft  which  is  now  fo  confide- 
rable,  and  make^  it's  way  every  where,  and  docs 
what  it  pleafcth,  will  be  of  no  ufe  and  fignificancy  in 
the  other  world.     The  great  and  the  mighty,  when 
death  hath  once  arrefbed  them,  and  bound  them  over 
to  the  judgment  of  the  great  day,  their  glory  and 
ftrength  departs  from  them,  and  they  are  then  but 
like  other  men.     Job  elegantly  defcribes  the  ftate  of 
men  after  death,  Job  iii.    17,  18,   19.    "  There  the 
**  wicked  ceafe  from  troubling;  and  there  the  weary 
*'  be  at  reft.     There  tlie  prifoners  reft  together,  they 
*'  hear  not  the  voice  of  the  oppreifor.     The  fmall 
*'  and  the  great  are  there,  and  the  ftrvar.t  is  free 
*'  from  his  mafter."  While  we  are  upon  the  ftage 
of  this  world,  we  fuftain  feveral  perfons  j  one  is  a 
prince  and  a  great  man,  another  is  a  captain  and  a 
mighty  man  ;  and  whilft  this  life  lafts,  thefe  dilfe- 
rences  are  confiderable  :  but  when  we  retire  and  go 
off  the  ftage,  we  Ihall  then  be  undreft,  we  ftiall  be 
ftrip'd  of  all  our  titles,  and  of  all  our  glory,  and 
go  otit  of  the  world  as  naked  as  we  came  into  it. 
Death  and  judgment  level  all  mankind,  and  when 
we  come    to   appear  before  the  judgment-feat  of 
Christ,  we  lliall  all  ftand  upon  equal  terms.     For 
God  refpeds  not  the  pcrfons  of  the  mighty  in  judg- 
ment, he  will  ftiew  no  reverence  to  the  great  ones  of 
this  world,  but  will  deal  impartially  and  alike  with 
all.     Matth.  XXV.  32.     You  may  there  fee  how  the 
judge  himfelf  reprefents  the  univerfdity  and  iiiipar- 
tiahty  of  his  dealings  with  men  in  that  day.     "  Be- 
*^  fore  him  fliall  be  gathered  all  nations,  and  he  fliall 
**  feparate  them  one  from  another,  as  a  ilicpherd 
*-'  divideth  his  flieep  from  tiie  goats."     All  man- 

20  \}>  ?.  kind 


4 1 8  6  Of  the  ferfom  who  are  to  be 

E  R  M.  kind  Hiall  then  be  o-athered  into  one  common  flock, 
among  which  there  fhall  no  other  diflindlion  be  made, 
but  of  fheep  and  goats  ;  the  reparation  which  fhall 
then  be  made,  fhall  not  be  of  the  high  from  the 
low,  of  the  rich  from  the  poor,  of  the  honourable 
from  the  bafe,  of  the  learned  from  the  ignorant ; 
there  fhall  be  but  one  diflindtion  then  made,  of  the 
good  from  the  bad,  and  the  righteous  from  the 
wicked  ;  there  fhall  no  confideration  be  then  had, 
but  only  of  the  moral  differences  of  men  ;  all  civil 
difference  will  then  vanifh  and  be  of  no  account  in 
that  day,  either  to  exempt  any  man  from  that  judg- 
ment, or  to  gain  any  favour  and  refped  to  him  in  the 
hearing  or  decifion  of  his  caufe.  This  fhould  make 
all  men  very  modefl  and  humble  in  this  world,  to 
confider  how  they  fhali  be  levelled  in  the  next. 

III.  How  fhould  the  confideration  of  this  dafh  all 
our  fenfual  mirth  and  joUity,  and  put  a  damp  upon 
our  fpirits,  when  they  are  too  light  and  vainly  tranf- 
ported  with  the  pleafures  and  delights  of  this  world  ! 
If  a  man  be  to  prepare  himfelf  to  be  tried  for  his  life 
after  a  few  days,  how  will  he  look  aoout  him,  with 
what  care  and  ferioufnefs  will  he  provide  for  fo  fo- 
lemn  an  occafion,  and  negle6l  nothing  that  may 
ftandhim  in  Head,  and  help  to  bring  him  off  when  he 
fhall  receive  his  trial  !  The  thoughts  of  this  will 
Ipoil  all  his  mirth,  and  turn  the  lightnefs  of  his 
Ipirit  into  fober  fadnefs.  Much  more  ought  the  c.  n- 
fideration  of  a  judgment  infinitely  more  terrible,  and 
in  the  confequence  of  it  of  far  greater  concernment 
to  us,  to  compofe  our  minds  into  a  ferious  frame. 
For  if  we  believe  a  future  and  general  judgment, 
and  that  none  of  us  can  by  any  means  pofTibly  efca.je 
it,  then  certainly  it  highly  concerns  every  one  of  us 
to  be  ferious,  and  to  pafs  the  time  of  his  life  in  a 

perpetual 


Of  the  perfons  who  are  to  be  judged.  4-1^7 

perpetual  awe  of  it.  So  that  St.  Peter  argues  from  S  ^  R  ivr. 
this  confideration,  i  Pet.  i.  17.  *'  And  if  ye  call  ^^^^** 
*^  on  the  Father,  who  without  refped  of  perfons 
*'  judgeth  every  man,  pafs  the  time  of  your  fojourn- 
"  ingherein  fear."  This  thought  fhould  interpofe 
itfelf  in  all  our  mirth,"  that  "we  muft  appear  be- 
*'  fore  the  judgment-feat  of  Christ."  And  there- 
fore Solomon  admonifheth  young  men,  in  the  midft 
of  their  fports  and  pleafures,  to  think  of  a  future 
account,  Ecclef.  xi.  9.  "  Rejoice,  O  young  man, 
**  in  thy  youth,  and  let  thy  heart  chear  thee  in  the 
*'  days  of  thy  youth,  and  walk  in  the  ways  of  thy 
**  heart,  and  in  the  fight  of  thine  eyes  :  but  know 
*'  that  for  all  thefe  things  God  will  bring  thee  into 
**  judgment." 

IV.  And  laftly,  from  hence  we  learn,  that  the 
bufinefs  of  religion  does  equally  concern  every  man. 
For  if  we  muft  all  be  judged,  we  arc  all  concerned 
to  prepare  and  provide  for  it ;  and  a  religious  and 
virtuous  iiiC  is  the  only  preparation  for  it.  How 
ilioula  we  order  our  lives  witha  refped:  to  this  greac 
and  genera]  affize,  when  every  one  of  us  rr.idl  be 
brought  upon  hij  trial,  and  ftand  at  the  bar  of  God 
tohi  jadgcd  by  him  ?  Many  live  as  if  they  thought 
th'  bufinefs  of  religion  barlow  them,  and  not  at  all 
appertaining  to  them  :  bui  if  the  judgment  of  God 
will  equally  re?ch  ail  perfons,  then  I  am  furc  it  e- 
quahy  concerns  all  to  mind  religion,  and  a  holy  and 
\  Tuous  life  ;  for  that  alone  will  make  us  vv-'.rthy, 
as  our  Savio'jr  himfelf  expreifcih  ir,  "  to  efc.ipe 
''  all  thef"  •  hing.^  tha-  ^h^Vi  coinc  to  pafs,  and  to  ftand 
*'  Lcfrirc  rh  :  Son  y)(  1  n.i." 

Apu  tl  IS  is  the  rc^i  li  ul  Solomon's  '-nquii-v,  nn  1 
of  iils  long  difcourf*  Ui)  .n  that  rrgunv  r.r,  wn«t  is 
the  great  work  and  buiinefs,  the  great  intcrefl:  ar.  1 

con- 


4 1 8  8   Of  the  aBionsfor  which  7nen  will  be  accountable. 

S  K  ^  M.  concernment  of  men  in  this  life  ;  which  we  find  in 
the  conclufion  of  his  fermon,  called  the  book  of  the 
preacher,  Ecclef.  xii.  13,  14.  "  Let  us,  fays  he,  hear 
"  the  conclufion  of  the  whole  matter.  Fear  God, 
*'  and  keep  his  commandments  ;  for  this  is  the 
**  whole  of  man."  Religion  is  the  great  bufinefs 
and  concernment  of  men  in  this  world,  becaufe 
*'  God  will  bring  every  m.an,  and  every  work  into 
^'  judgment,  v/hether  it  be  good  or  evil/' 


SERMON    CLXXXI. 

Of  the  adions  for  which  men  will  be 
accountable. 


2  COR.  V.  10. 

For  we  mufi  all  appear  before  the  judgment-feat  of 
Christ,  that  every  one  may  receive  the  things  done 
in  his  hody^  according  to  that  he  hath  done^  whether 
it  be  good  or  bad. 

SE  R  M.  T  Proceed  to  thethira  propofition  contained  in  thefe 
^^.•^^•[•j  Jl^  words,  viz.  That  all  the  adions  which  men  have 
Thefcurth  done  in  this  life  iliall  then  come  to  account,  and 
icrmon  tn  ^^^  ^^^j|  ^^  judged  for  them.     "  That  every  man 
•*    *'  may  receive  the  things  done  in  the  body,  roi  'iSio^ 
*'  tS  (rcoiJLai<^^  the  things  proper  and  due  to  the 
*'  body  j"  fo  fome  very  good  copies  have  it :  and 
then  the  meaning  will  be,  that  every  one  may  re- 
ceive the  reward  due  to  him  ♦,  the  word  body,   by  a 
frequent  Hebraifm  -,  being  put  for  the  perfon  ^  as  if 

he 


Vj  the  actions  jor  lotJicb  men  ivtll  be  ac  count  aolc,  4189 

he  had  faid,  "  the  revvard  due  to  himfclf,"  accord-  -^  '^  R  ^'^- 
ing  to  the  actions  he  hath  done  in  this  Jifc,  good  or  ^' 
bad  :  but  in  moft  copies  it  is,  roi  Sicc  rS  (tco^ccI^^^ 
*'  the  things  done  in,  or  by  the  body/*  as  our  tran- 
flation  renders  it,  that  every  one  may  receive  the  re- 
ward of  the  adlions  which  he  hath  done  in  this  life  ; 
and  then  this  phrafe  doth  import  what  it  is  that  fliall 
be  the  matter  of  our  account  at  the  day  of  judgment, 
viz.  "  The  things  done  in  the  body,'*  that  is,  all 
the  a6lions  of  this  life,  while  we  are  in  this  world, 
in  this  ilate  of  union  of  the  foul  and  body. 

Whether  there  be  any  pecuHar  cmphafis  in  this 
phrafe,  rol  Sia,  t5  (rcofJLcc]^^  "  the  things  done  by, 
*'  or  in  the  body,"  as  if  it  did  exclude  thofe  things 
which  fhall  be  done  after  death,  in  the  ftate  of  fepa- 
ration  of  our  fouls  from  our  bodies,  from  being  ac- 
counted for  at  the  refurredlion  in  the  day  of  judg- 
ment -,  I  fay,  whether  there  be  any  fuch  emphafis  in 
thofe  words,  "  the  things  done  in  the  body,"  I  can- 
not certainly  affirm,  though  according  to  the  nature 
and  reafon  of  the  thing  it  fcems  very  probable,  as  the 
fchoolmen  have  generally  determined  in  this  cafe, 
that  meritmn  efi  viatoris^  "  merit  and  demerit  are  pro- 
**  per  to  this  ilate  of  trial-,"  and  thatwicl<.ed  men 
when  they  are  in  termino^  and  their  ftate  is  finally 
concluded,  and  the  trial  of  their  obedience  is  at  an 
end,  do  not  demerit  by  their  fins,  nor  increafe  their 
Punifliment.  For  although  that  hatred  and  enmity  of 
God  which  is  in  the  damned  fpirits,  be  a  monilrous 
irregularity  in  a  creature,  yet  it  cannot  well  in  reafon 
be  otherwife,  but  that  a  creature  which  is  cxtrcamly 
miferable,  and  withal  defpcrate,  and  paft  all  hopes 
of  remedy  and  recovery  out  of  that  difmal  ilate  -,  I 
fay,  it  cannot  well  in  reafon  be  otherwife  expeded, 
"but  that  a  creature  in  fuch  a  condition  fliould  rage 
2  agiiinit 


4 1 0 O   VJ  *^^  actions jor  wmcn  men  win  oc  accoumaoLe. 

S  E  R  M.  againft   the  author  of  its  torment  and  punifliment, 
CLxxxi.  ^^^  ^^  ^jj  ^1^^  defpite  to  him  that  he  can,  and  wilh 

that  he  were  not,  though  it  be  in  vain  to  wifh  fo  •,  and 
it  feems  probable  that  God  will  not  bring  this  to  a 
new  account,  becaufe  it  feems  fo  natural  and  necef- 
fary  a  confequent  of  a  miferable  and  defperate  ftate :  ^| 
but  though  all  this  be  probable,  I  am  far  from  being  ^ 
peremptory  in  it,  much  lefs  am  I  confident  that  it    i 
is  the  meaning  of  this  phrafe  here  in  the  text,  and 
I  do  not  love  to  build  an  opinion  upon  a  fingle  and 
doubtful  phrafe«  of  fcripture.     I  only  mention  it  by 
the  by,  not  intending  to  infifl  upon  it,  being  much 
of  his  mind,  who  faid,  Non  amo  nimis  argutam  theo^ 
logiam^  "  I  am  no  lover  of  great  fubtilty  and  nicety 
•*  in  divinity.'* 

It  is  fufficient  to  my  purpofe,  that  this  phrafe  of 
*'  every  man's  receiving  the  things  done  in  the  body,'*, 
docs  at  leaft  import  thus  much,  that  we  fhall  be  ac- 
countable at  the  day  of  judgment,  for  all  the  adions 
that  we  have  done  in  this  life,  and  receive  the  due 
recompence  and  reward  of  them  -,  which  is  the  pro- 
pofition  I  intend  as  briefly  as  I  can  to  illuftrate  and 
confirm. 

And,  firft,  for  the  illuftration  of  this  point,  I 
fliall  inftance  in  the  feveral  heads  of  a6lion,  as  they 
take  their  difference  and  variety  from  the  principle,or 
matter,  or  objedl,  or  other  circumftances  of  them. 
Wc  muft  render  an  account  to  this  great  judge  for 
our  inward  as  well  as  outward  adlions  ;  for  the  ads 
of  our  minds,  and  every  thought  fpringing  up  there, 
efpecially  if  it  be  chcrilhed  and  entertained  by  us  ; 
for  all  our  fecret  defigns,  purpofes  and  intentions, 
as  well  as  for  the  words  which  we  fpeak,  and  the. 
outward  adions  which  we  do  :  whatever  we  have 
thought  and  dcfigned,  fpoken  and  declared,  accom- 

pliHied 


Of  the  aB  ions  for  which  men  will  be  accountable,  4 1 9 1 
plifhed  and  done,  will  then  be  confidered  and  exa-  S  E  R  M. 

.  CLXXXI. 

inined,  and  we  fliall  be  judged  for  it.  We  muft 
likewife  give  an  account  of  all  our  civil  as  well  as 
religious  actions,  of  our  behaviour  toward  men  in 
all  our  dealing  and  intercourfc  with  them,  as  well  as 
of  our  demeanour  toward  God  in  the  duties  of 
his  more  immediate  worfhip  and  fervice.  The  ne- 
glecSts  and  omilTionsof  our  duty  in  any  kind  willalfo 
come  under  confideration,  as  well  as  our  commif- 
fions  of  evil.  A  flri(St  account  likewife  will  be  ex- 
adled  of  all  the  talents  which  God  luth  entrufted 
us  with,  of  all  the  abilities,  opportunities  and  ad- 
vantages we  ever  had  of  doing  fervice  to  God,  and 
good  to  men,  and  whether  we  have  made  anfwer- 
able  improvements  of  them,  for  the  glory  of  God 
and  the  benefit  and  advantage  of  men. 

We  muft  be  accountable  likewife  for  words  and 
adlions  of  lefs  moment  and  confequcnce,  as  well  as 
for  thofe  of  greater  weight  and  concernment  ;  for 
thofe  which  were  done  in  fecret,  and  in  the  greateft 
darknefs  and  privacy,  as  well  as  for  thofe  which 
were  done  in  publick,  and  in  the  open  view  and  lighc 
of  the  world  •,  for  the  good  and  evil  which  hath  been 
done  by  ourfelves,  and  in  our  own  perfons,  and  for 
what  hath  been  done  by  others  by  our  command  and 
countenance,  and  from  the  influence  of  our  counfel 
and  perfuafion,  or  example,  or  whicJi  we  have  been 
any  ways  acceffary  to  hinder  or  promote  j  and  laftly, 
for  the  manner  and  circumftances  of  our  actions,  as 
well  as  for  the  matter  and  fubilance  of  them  j  all  thefc 
will  be  furveycd  and  ftridly  fcarched  into,  and  weigh- 
ed in  an  exad  balance,  that  we  may  receive  a  reward 
or  punifhmcnt  proportionable  to  them. 

Secondly,  for  the  conlirmation  of  this,  I  fhali 
make  it  evident  both  from  fcripture  and  reafon. 

Vol.  IX.  20  X  1.  From 

g 


4192    Of  the  aEiiomfor  which  men  mil  be  accountable. 

I.  From  fcripturt  \  which  in  general  tells  us,  that 

"  God  will  bring  every  work  into  judgment ,"  and 

that  in  order  thereto,  God  ilridly  obferves  and  takes 

notice  of  what  we  do  •,  that  "  his  eyes  are  upon  the 

ways  of  man,  and  that  he  feeth  all  his  goings  ; 

that   there  is  no  darknefs   or  fhadow  ot  death, 

where  the  workers  of  iniquity  may  hide  thcm- 

felves,''  Job  xxxiv.  21,  22.     That  "the  ways 

of  man  are  before  the  eyes  of  the  Lord,  and  he 

pondereth  all  his  goings,  Prov.  v.  21.      That 

he  knoweth  our  paths,  and  our  lying  down,  and 

is  acquainted  w4th  all  our  ways."     That  "  there 

"  is  not  a  word  in  our  tongue,  but  he  knoweth  i( 

*'  altogether,    and  that  he   underflands   even  our 

*'  thoughts  afar  off,"  Pfal.  cxxxix.  2,  3,  4.  That 

all  the  adtions  of  men  are  recorded  in  books,  which 

fhall  be  "  produced  and  opened  at  the  great  day, 

*'  and  the  dead,  both  fmall  and  great,  fhall  be  judged 

•'  from  thofe  things,  which  lliall  be  written  in  thofe 

"  books.  Rev.  xx.   12." 

And  more  particularly  the  fcripture  tells  us,  that 
thofe  words  and  adlions  of  men  which  feem  moft  in- 
confiderable,  and  are  moft  likely  to  be  exempted, 
fhall  be  accounted  for,and  feverely  fcanned  and  weigh- 
ed.    Matt.  xii.  '^^^2>1'  ^^y^  ^^^  Lord  there,  "  I  fay 
*'  unto  you,  that  every  idle  word,"  by  which  if  our 
Saviour  do  not  mean  every  unprofitable,  to  be  fure 
every  "  wicked  word  that  men  fhall  fpeak,  they  fhall 
give  an  account  thereof  in  the  day  of  judgment. 
For  by  thy  words  thou  Ihalt  be  juftified,  and  by 
thy  words  thou  fhalt  be  condemned."     By  which 
faying,  our  Saviour  defignedly  confutes  an  opinion 
too  current  among  many,  that  mens  words  fignify 
little,  and  that  no  account  will  be  taken  of  them  at 
t\\^  day  of  judgment ;  that  God  will  not  be  fo  fevere 
2  as 


<c 

(C 

cc 
<( 

<c 

€( 
« 


<C 


Of  the  actions  for  which  men  will  be  account  able,  4 1  o  t 
as  to  make  them  matter  of  charo;e  and  accufation,  S  F  R  M. 

CLXXXI 

and  to  punifli  us  for  them  in  the  other  world  \  and 
therefore  to  obviate  this  miftake,  he  purpofely  adds, 
"  for  by  thy  words  thou  fhalt  be  jullified,  and  by 
"  thy  words  thou  fhalt  be  condemned.'*  And  there- 
fore men  mud  not  think,  that  all  their  lewd  and  fil- 
thy talk,  all  their  rafh  oaths  and  imprecations,  all  their 
atheiftical  difcourfe,  and  profane  jefts  upon  religion 
and  the  holy  fcriptures,  all  their  calumnies  and  flan- 
ders  of  good  men,  all  the?r  ofHcious  lies  to  ferve  a 
prefent  turn  and  occafr^n,  will  pafs  for  nothing  at  the 
judgment  of  the  great  day.  No,  the  judge  himfelf 
hath  exprefly  told  us,  that  of  all  fuch  "  words  men 
"  fliall  give  an  account  in  the  day  of  judgment.'* 
And  St.  Jude  tells  us,  out  of  an  ancient  prophecy  of 
Enoch,  that  ''  the  Lord  fhall  come  with  ten  thou- 
fands  of  his  faints,  to  execute  judgment  upon  all, 
and  to  convince  all  that  are  ungodly,  not  only  of 
all  their  ungodly  deeds  which  they  have  ungodly 
committed,  but  likewife  of  all  their  hard  fpeeches 
which  ungodly  Tinners  have  fpoken  againfl  him.'* 
Our  mod  fecret  thoughts  and  actions  alio,  as  well 
as  our  open  and  publick  deeds,  lliall  then  be  brought 
upon  the  ftage,  Ecclef.  xii.  14.  "  For  God  will 
*'  bring  every  work  into  judgment,  with  every  fecret 
"  thing,  whether  it  be  good,  or  whether  it  be  evil." 
Rom.  ii.  16.  "  In  the  day,  when  God  fliall  judge 
"  the  fccrets  of  men  by  Jesus  Christ,  according  to 
"  my  gofpel."  And  this  likewife  is  the  meaning 
of  that  proverbial  fpeech  fo  often  ufcd  by  our  Savi- 
our, "  there  is  nothing  covered,  that  fhall  not  bere- 
*'  vealed  ;  neither  hid,  that  fliall  not  be  known." 
There  is  nothing  fo  fccret  which  lliall  not  be  difclofcd 
and  made  manifcil  in  that  great  day  of  revelation, 
^nd  be  laid  open  in  the  face  of  the  whole  world  -,  efpc- 

20  X  2  dally 


(C 

cc 

(C 

<c 
<c 


4194  Of  ^^^  (i^ions  for  which  men  will  be  accountable, 

dally  the  cunning,  difTimulation  and  hypocrify  of 
men  with  God  and  men.  Men  are  apt  to  think 
themfelvcs  fafe  enough,  if  they  can  but  efcape  the 
eye  of  men,  and  commit  their  fins  fecretly,  and  in 
the  dark.  But  this  is  either  dire6b  atheifm,  or  down- 
right folly  i  becaufe  the  eye  of  God  is  continually 
upon  us,  and  "  the  darknefs  hideth  not  from  him, 
*^  but  the  night  fhineth  as  the  day,  the  darknefs  and 
*^  the  light  are  both  alike  to  him."  And  if  we  ba 
always  under  the  infpe^lion  of  our  judge,  if  all  that 
we  think,  and  fay,  and  do,  be  "  open  and  naked  to 
*'  the  eye  of  him,  nr^og  ov  rif^Tv  0  Xoyog^  to  whom  we 
*'  muft  give  an  account,"  what  will  it  profit  us  to 
dilTemble  before  men,  and  to  conceal  any  of  our  ac- 
tions from  them  ?  Nay,  if  we  could  hide  them  from 
ourfelves  (as  we  cannot  our  wilful  and  deliberate  fins) 
yet  that  would  be  of  no  advantage  to  us,  becaufe  God 
*'  is  greater  than  our  hearts,  and  knows  all  things." 

And  then  likewife,  we  muft  be  accountable  to  God 
for  all  the  negleds  and  omifiions  of  our  duty,  as  well 
as  for  the  pofitive  commiffion  of  fin,  and  that  in  pro- 
portion to  the  advantages  and  opportunities  we  have 
had  of  doing  more  and  greater  good.  So  our  Sa- 
viour tells  us,  that  "  unto  whomfoever  much  is 
^'  given,  of  him  much  fhall  be  required,"  Luke 
xii.  48.  Many  are  apt  to  think,  that  if  they  do  but 
abflrain  from  notorious  and  fcandalous  vices,  if  they 
do  no  body  harm,  though  they  do  not  ferve  God  fo 
fervently  and  conftantly  as  others  do,  though  they 
feldom  think  of  him  and  pray  to  him,  though  they 
have  no  manner  of  adivity  or  concernment  to  do 
good,  either  to  the  bodies  or  fouls  of  men,  yet  that 
this  negative  virtue  v^iJl  ferve  their  turn  at  the  day  of 
judgment.  But  the  matter  is  quite  othcrwife,  as  our 
Saviour  hath  moil  cxprefly  declared.     "  A  good 

tree 


<.( 


Of  the  acliomfor  which  men  imll  be  accountable,  4195 
*^  tree,  faith  he,  will  brinp;  forth  e;ood  fruit."    And  ^  ^-  ^  ^*- 

-  ...  CLXXXI 

by  the  parable  of  the  foolifh  virgins,  who  for  want  of  ^ 
*^  oil  in  their  lamps"  were  fliut  out  of  the  kingdom 
of  God,  he  declares  to  us  the  dangerous  ftate  of 
thofe  who  flumber  away  their  lives  in  a  drowfy  inac- 
tivity, and  are  not  careful  either  to  keep  alive  grace 
in  their  hearts,  or  to  fhew  forth  the  light  of  good 
works  in  their  converfation.  And  in  the  parable  of 
the  talents,  Matt.  xxv.  he  paffeth  a  moil  fevere  fen- 
tence  upon  that  "  ilothful  fervant,  who  hid  his  lord's 
*^  talent  in  a  napkin,  and  buried  it  in  the  earth," 
without  making  any  manner  of  improvement  of  it ; 
ver.  30.  "  Call  ye  the  unprofitable  fervai  c  into  outer 
*'  darknefs,  there  fhall  b.-  weeping  and  giiafning  of 
*'  teeth."  And  in  the  fame  chapter,  where  our  Sa- 
viour reprefents  to  us  the  proceedings  of  the  great 
day,  the  charge  there  drawn  up  againft  them,  confifts 
of  fins  of  omifllon,  and  grofs  negle(5ls  to  do  the 
good  which  they  had  the  ability  and  opportunity  to 
c3o,yer.4i,42,  4:?,  &c.  "  Depart  from  me,  ye  curfed, 
*'  into  everlafting  fire,  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his 
*'  angels.  For  I  was  hungry,  and  ye  gave  me  no 
*'  meat ;  thirfty,  and  ye  gave  me  no  drink  •,  a  ftran- 
"  ger,  and  ye  took  me  not  in  •,  naked,  and  ye  cloth- 
^'  ed  me  not  \  fick  and  in  prifon,  and  ye  vifited  me 
*'  not."  Not  that  fins  of  commifiion  fhall  then  be 
pad  by  and  left  out  of  the  account ;  it  is  taken  for 
granted,  that  they  fhall  be  reckoned  for  in  the  firfl 
place:  but  the  wifdom  of  our  Saviour  chufcth  to 
inftance  in  thofe  fins,  which  many  hope  they  fliall  not 
be  called  to  account  for,  the  omiQlons  and  negledls 
of  their  duty,  that  he  might  hereby  root  out  of  the 
minds  of  men  effedually  that  falfc  opinion,  which  they 
are  fo  apt  to  entertain  concerning  fuch  fins,  as  if  the  y 
were  of  a  very  light  and  venial  nature. 

II.  This 


4196  Of  the  aBiomJor  which  men  will  be  accountable, 

S  E  R  M.  II.  This  is  evident  likewife  from  reafon ;  becaufc 
*  all  the  adlions  of  reafonable  creatures,  as  fuch,  are 
under  the  regulation  and  government  of  law,  by 
which,  as  by  a  rule,  every  thing  that  we  do  is  to  be 
meafured.  And  we  have  all  the  reafon  that  can  be  to 
exped,  that  he  who  gave  us  this  law,  v/ill  look  to 
the  obfervance  of  it,  and  take  an  account  of  all  breaches 
and  tranfgrefllons  of  it,  fo  as  to  reward  thofe  that 
keep  it,  and  to  punifh  the  bold  tranfgreffors  of  it  •, 
and  if  this  were  not  fo,  the  law  would  want  it's  proper 
fanclion  and  enforcement,  and  had  been  given  to  no 
purpofe. 

And  this  law  of  God  reacheth  all  our  a6l;ions,  in- 
ward and  outward,  religious  and  civil,  fecret  and 
open,  pofitive  and  negative,  with  all  the  circumftances 
of  commendation  or  aggravation  that  belong  to  them. 
And  as  this  law  is  the  rule  of  all  human  actions  now, 
and  by  which  we  ought  to  live  in  this  world  •,  fo  it 
will  be  the  rule  by  which  we  and  all  our  adlions  Ihall 
be  examined  and  judged  in  the  next.  The  judgment 
<^of  God  will  be  of  the  fame  extent  with  his  law. 

And  thus  I  have,  as  briefly  as  I  could,  illuflrated 
and  confirmed  the  truth  of  this  propofition,  that  all 
the  aftions  which  men  have  done  in  this  life,  fhall 
come  to  account  in  the  next,  and  they  fhall  be  judged 
for  them. 

And  if  fo,  then  certainly  no  confideration  that  can 
be  prefented  to  the  mind  of  man,  ought  in  reafon  to  be 
more  powerful  to  beget  in  us  a  flridl  care  and  confciencc 
of  all  our  thoughts,  words,  and  a6lions,  than  this,  that 
after  a  little  while,  when  a  few  days  or  years  are  over, 
all  that  we  ever  did  in  this  world,  fhall  be  ftri6lly  exa- 
mined and  looked  into,  and  be  approved  or  condemn- 
ed by  the  impartial  judgment  of  God.  And  there- 
fore, if  we  have  any  grain  of  true  wifdom  in  us,  any 

love 


Of  the  a5t  ions  for  which  men  will  be  accountable.  4197 

love  to  ourfelves,  any  fenfc  of  our  great  and  everlaft-  S  E  R  IVf . 
ing  intcrell,  that  great  day  of  account  fliould  always 
be  before  us,  and  prefent  to  our  minds,  and  we  fhould 
govern  every  adlion  of  our  lives  with  a  ferious  and 
awful  regard  to  it.  And  if  we  be  confcious  to  our- 
felves that "  there  is  any  way  of  wickednefs  in  us,'* 
that  we  have  been  grofly  culpable  in  the  violation  of 
any  known  law  of  God,  or  in  the  negledl  of  any 
part  of  our  duty,  how  can  we  witiiout  dread  think  of 
coming  to  fo  fcvere  an  account,  and  falling  under  fo 
heavy  a  fentence,  as  will  then  be  pronounced  upon 
the  workers  of  iniquity  ? 

Indeed,  if  we  could  do  any  thing  now,  of  which 
we  were  to  give  no  account  hereafter,  and  which 
would  not  be  taken  into  confideration  at  the  great 
day,  we  then  might  be  fecure  and  carelefs  as  to  fuch 
actions :  But  when  nothing  we  do  is  exempted  from 
the  judgment  of  God,  when  we  are  affured  beyond 
all  doubt,  that  he  will  one  day  take  cognizance  of 
every  thought,  word,  and  adlion  ;  how  circumfpe6t 
fhould  we  be,  *'  what  manner  of  perfons  we  are  in 
*'  all  holy  converfation  and  godlinefs  !*'  how  nearly 
does  it  concern  us,  "  to  take  heed  to  our  ways,  left 
"  at  any  time  we  offend  :  to  keepour  hearts  with  all 
**  diligence,  and  to  fet  a  watch  to  the  door  of  our 
**  lips  !**  that  we  may  not  think  or  fpeak  any  thing 
in  the  fight  or  hearing  of  our  juJge,  by  which  we 
may  incur  his  cenfure  and  condemnation.  This  is 
the  confideration  which  the  wife  man  propofeth  to 
us,  as  of  all  other  the  moft  likely  to  awe  men  to  the 
careful  obedience  and  oblervance  of  God's  laws. 
*'  Fear  God,  and  keep  his  commandments  :  for  God 
**  will  bring  every  work  into  judgment,  and  every 
*'  fecret  thing,  whether  it  be  good,  or  whether  it  be 
''  evil/* 

Can 


4198  Of  the  a^io?2sfor  which  men  will  be  account  ablei 
S  E  R  M.  Can  we  be  negligent  of  our  lives  and  anions,  when 
we  confider  that  all  the  pafiages  of  our  lives  are  upon 
record,  and  that  there  is  a  moft  exadt  regifter  kept 
of  them,  written  in  indelible  charaders  with  "  a  pen 
*^  of  iron,  and  the  point  of  a  diamond  ?"  as  the  ex- 
prefTion  is,  Jer  xvii.  i.  "  I  remember  all  their  wick- 
*'  ednefs,  and  their  doings  are  before  me,"  fays 
God,  Hof.  vii.  2.     And  chap.  viii.  7.  "  The  Lord 

hath  fworn  by  the  excellency  of  Jacob,  furely  I 

will  not  forget  any  of  their  works."  We  fin,  and 
forget  that  we  have  finned  :  but  God  chargeth-him- 
felf  with  the  remembrance  of  all  our  evil  doings,  and 
they  can  never  flip  out  of  his  mind. 

Did  men  ferioully  believe  thefe  things,  and  were 
they  affedted  with  them  as  they  ought,  they  could 
not  but  have  a  wonderful  efFe6l  upon  their  lives,  to 
make  us  more  watchful  over  our  ways,  and  to  tread 
every  ftep  of  our  lives  more  warily.  We  could  not 
"  commit  iniquity  with  fo  much  greedinefs  and 
*^  pleafure,  and  rufh  into  fin,  as  the  horfe  ruflieth 
^'  into  battel,"  without  any  fear  or  confideration, 
were  we  verily  perfuaded,  that  every  evil  adlion  that 
we  do  in  this  life,  will  be  matter  of  charge  and  accu- 
fation  in  the  day  of  judgment. 

Therefore  when  we  are  doing  any  thing,  we  fliould 
afk  ourfelves,  will  not  this  alfo  come  into  judgment  ? 
When  we  are  engaged  in  any  wicked  defign,  or  vi- 
cious courfe,  we  fiiould  confider,  with  what  face  will 
this  adl  of  violence  and  oppreflion,  of  fraud  and 
cozenage,  of  filthy  leudnefs  and  brutifh  intemperance, 
appear  at  the  great  day  ?  how  will  it  look,  when 
*'  God  Ihall  arife  to  judgment?"  When  we  are  care- 
lefs  and  remifs,  flight  and  fup^rficial  in  the  fervice  of 
God,  and  the  duties  of  his  worfliip,  we  ftiould  re- 
member that  God  takes  notice  of  all  this,  and  we 

mull 


Of  the  adlionsfor  which  men  ivtllbe  accountable^  4 1 Q  Q 

muil  give  an  account  to  him  for  the  manner,  as  well  S  n:  R  M. 
as  the  matter  of  our  actions.  clxxxi. 

If  the  adlions  of  our  lives  were  tranfientjand  the  con- 
fequence  of  them  were  over  fo  foon  as  they  are  done, 
and  no  memorial  of  them  would  remain  hereafter  ; 
if  they  would  die  with  us,  and  never  rife  up  in  judg- 
ment againft  us  ;  we  needed  not  to  take  fuch  liecd  to 
them  :  But  we  do  all  things  for  eternity,  and  every 
adlion  of  this  life  will  have  a  good  or  bad  influence 
upon  our  everlafting  flate. 

More  particularly,  the  confideration  of  this  fliould 
have  an  influence  upon  us,  more  efpecially  to  thcfe 
purpofes. 

1.  To  make  us  afraid  of  leflTer  fins,  as  well  as 
greater,  becaufe  thofe  alfo,  as  well  as  thefe,  will  come 
into  judgment ;  and  we  fhould  not  efl:eem  any  thing 
little,  which  God  fliall  think  fit  to  take  into  confide- 
ration, and  to  bring  upon  the  fliage  at  the  great  day. 

2.  The  confideration  of  this  fhould  likewife  deter 
us  from  fecret  fins.  We  are  apt  to  think,  that  if  we 
can  but  fin  in  fecret,  and  hide  what  we  do  from  the 
eyes  of  men,  we  are  fecure  and  fafe  enough  :  but  alas ! 
our  great  danger  is  not  from  m.en,  but  God  ;  not 
now,  but  hereafter.  We  are  now  very  folicitous  to 
conceal  our  wickednefs,  that  we  may  avoid  fliame, 
and  efcape  punifhment  from  men  :  but  God  will  one 
day  produce  all  our  fecret  fins,  and  bring  them  forth 
into  the  light,  for  all  our  fl:udious  concealment  of 
them  now.  Now  we  are  afraid  of  the  eye  of  men, 
and  therefore  chufe  fecrecy,  that  we  may  commit  our 
fins  privately  and  unfeen.  Vain  man  !  The  day  is  at 
hand,  when  all  thy  fecret  leudnefs  and  fraud  will  be 
brought  upon  the  publick  fi:age  of  the  work],  and  be 
matter  of  publick  infamy  to  thee,  and  an  everlafting 
reproach  that  can  never  be  wiped  ofl's  and  though 

Vol.  IX.  20  Y  thou 


4-200   Of  the  aBiomfor  "which  men  will  he  accountable. 
S^:r.Vi.    tj-^ou  now   ^'  covered  thy  tranfcrefiion  as  Adam, 

CLXX'-CI  . 

''  and  hidell  thine  iniquity  in  thy  bofoin,"  yet  the 
time  is  coming,  when  ail  thy  fecret  wickednefs  fhall 
be  expofed  to  the  view  of  angels  and  men  ♦,  and  then, 
finner,  what  wilt  thou  do,  when  thou  fhalt  appear 
before  this  all-feeing  Judge  ?  None  of  thine  arts  of 
concealment  will  then  iland  thee  in  ftead.  Canft  thou 
hide  thy  fins  from  his  eye,  fo  that  he  cannot  fearch 
them  out  ?  or  thy  felf  from  his  wrath  ?  If  thou  canil 
not,  what  matters  it  to  have  any  fecret  from  others 
when  all  is  known  to  thy  Judge  ? 

3.  This  fliould  likewife  difpofe  us  to  great  fince- 
rity  in  all  our  words  and  adions,  and  make  us  always 
to  fpeak  as  we  think,  to  perform  what  we  promife 
and  proftfs,  and  in  all  things  to  be  what  we  would 
feem  to  be,  fince  there  is  a  day  coming  when  "  the 
*'  fecrets  of  all  hearts  ihall  be  difclofcd,"  and  every 
niaPA  of  hypocrify  and  diflimulation  (liall  be  pluck' d 
off,  and  our  mod  clofe  and  cunning  defigns  fhall  be 
brought  into  the  open  light.  In  th  it  great  day  of 
revelation,  nothing  will  be  matter  of  comfort  and  re- 
joicing to  us,  but  "  the  teftimony  of  our  confciences, 
^'  that  in  all  fimplicity  and  godly  fmcerity,  w^e  have 
*'  had  our  converfation  in  the  world." 

4.  This  fhould  make  us  faithfully  to  improve  all 
the  talents  and  opportunities  which  God  affords  to 
ys,  becaufe  we  are  but  ftewards,  and  muft  give  an 
account  of  them.  We  are  apt  to  covet  great  wealth, 
and  to  afpire  after  great  places  and  power :  but  do 
we  confider  what  it  is  that  we  fo  eagerly  defireand  pur- 
fue  ?  All  this  will  but  bring  upon  us  the  burden  of  a 
greater  and  heavier  account,  if  we  do  not  improve 
rhefe  talents  and  advantages  to  the  end  for  which 
•jrhey  were  given,  to  reUcve  the  wants  of  the  poor  and 
miferuble,  ^nd  to  ferve  the  great  ends  of  religion  and 

virtue  % 


M 


Of  the  adiiomfor  ivhich  men  will  be  accoimtahk.  4201 

virtue  ;  and  if  we  fail  herein,  a  dreadful  account  will  ^  E  R  \i. 
be  txadted  of  us,  and  we  fhall  wifli  that  we  had  been  _1  _^ 
the  pooreft  and  meaneil,  the  moft  ignorant  and  un- 
learned perfons  in  the  world. 

5.  This  fhould  reitrain  us  from  uncharitable  cen- 
fures  of  others.  "  Thou  art  therefore  incxcufable,  O 
*'  man,  whofoever  thou  art,  that  judged  another : 
*'  for  thinkeil  thou,  that  thou  fhalt  efcape  the  judg- 
*'  ment  of  God  ?'*  as  the  apoftle  reafons,  Rom.  ii.  r. 

6.  This  may  help  to  fupport  us  under  the  unjud 
cenfures  and  reproaches  of  men.  If  we  be  innbcentj 
God  will  one  day  "  bring  forth  our  righteoufncfs  as 

the  light,  and  our  judgment  as  the  noon  day.'* 
With  me,  faith  St.  Paul,  i  Cor.  iv.  3.  it  is  a  very 
fmall  thing  that  I  Ibould  be  judged  of  you,  or  of 
man's  judgment.  He  that  judgeth  me  is  the 
Lord."  It  is  defirable  to  approve  ourfclves  and 
our  adions  to  men :  but  if  we  cannot,  it  is  a  great 
fatisfa6lion  to  approve  them  to  our  own  confciences, 
and  to  God  who  is  "  greater  than  our  hearts,  and 
*'  knows  all  things." 

Laftly,  This  will  teach  us  not  to  meafure  our  con- 
dition by  the  good  opinion  which  others  have  of  us ; 
but  by  the  law  of  God,  which  v/ill  be  the  flandard 
and  meafure  of  our  judgment.  He  will  confider 
every  thing  exa(ftly,  and  weigh  all  the  circumllances 
of  our  cafe,  and  make  all  the  allowances  that  equity 
requires.  Men  can  but  judge  according  to  appear- 
ance •,  but  the  judgment  of  God  will  be  according  to 
truth  :  therefore  we  fhould  above  all  "  labour  to  be 
*'  accepted  of  him  in  that  day." 

1 

20  Y  2  S  E  R- 


cc 


^  2  o  2  Of  the  fentence  to  be  pajfed 

SERMON    CLXXXir. 

Of  the  fentence  to  be  pafTed  at  the  day 
of  judgment* 

2  COR.  V.  10. 

For  we  miifi  all  appear  before  the  judgment-feat  of 
Christ,  that  every  one  may  receive  the  things 
done  in  his  body^  according  to  that  he  hath  done^ 
whether  it  be  good  or  bad, 

S  E  R  M.  X  Proceed  to  the  fourth  and  laft  propofition  con- 

cLxxxiL  j^    tained  in  the  text,  viz.  that  at  the  day  of  judg- 

The  fifth  ment,  fentence  fhall  be  pafTed  upon  men  according  to 

fermon  on  the  nature  and  quality  of  their  actions  done  in  this 

world,  whether  good  or  evil.     The  reward  of  hap- 

pinefs  or  mifery  which  men  fhall  be  fentenced  to  at 

that  day,  fhall  bear  a  proportion  to  the  good  or  evil 

vi^hich  they  have  done  in  this  life. 

In  the  profecution  of  this  argument,  I  fhall  enquire 
into  thefe  two  things. 

Firfl,  What  proportion  the  rewards  of  the  next 
world  fhall  bear  to  the  adlions  of  men  in  this  life. 

Secondly,  The  grounds  and  reafons  of  it.  And 
then  make  fome  application  of  this  truth  to  the  con- 
fciences  of  men. 

Firfl,  What  proportion  the  rewards  of  the  next 
world  fhall  bear  to  the  actions  of  men  in  this  life.  I 
mean,  whether  the  rewards  of  the  next  life  fhall  only 
be  proportioned  to  the  kind  and  quality  of  our  ac- 
tions confidered  in  general,  as  good  or  evil,  that  is, 
that  good  men  fliall  be  rewarded  with  everlafling 

glory 


at  the  day  of  judgment.  4203 

elorv  and  happinefs,  and  wicked  men  with  eternal  S  E  R  M. 

^  CLXXXII 

punifliment  and  torment :  or  whether  the  degrees  of 
thefe  rewards  fhall  hkewile  bear  a  proportion  to  the 
degrees  of  the  good  or  evil  of  our  actions,  fo  that  a 
more  eminent  degree  of  piety  and  hoHnefs,  fhall  have 
a  proportionable  Ihare  of  glory  and  happinefs  ;  and 
greater  and  more  hainous  fins,  fliall  be  loaded  with 
greater  and  heavier  punifliments. 

I.  It  is  clear,  and  out  of  all  controverfy,  that  men 
fhall  be  rewarded  according  to  the  quality  and  kind 
of  their  actions  ;  good  fhall  be  rewarded  to  the  good, 
and  evil  to  the  evil.  And  this  is  the  conflant  tenor 
of  the  bible.  Pfal.  i.  6.  "  The  Lord  knoweth  the 
"  way  of  the  righteous,"  that  is,  doth  approve  it, 
and  will  reward  it :  "  but  the  way  of  the  ungod- 
*'  Jy  fhall  perifh  j'*  which  is  of  the  fame  importance 
with  the  exprefTion  in  the  verfe  before,  ''  the  wicked 
fliall  not  ftand  in  the  judgment."  Ifa.  iii.io,  11. 
Say  ye  to  the  righteous,  it  fhall  be  well  with  them, 
for  they  fhall  eat  of  the  fruit  of  their  doings.  Wo 
unto  the  wicked,  for  it  (liall  be  ill  with  him,  for 
the  reward  of  his  hands  fhall  be  given  him-," 
which  if  it  be  meant  of  the  rewards  and  punifhments 
of  this  Hfe,  is  much  more  conftantly  and  univerfally 
true  of  the  other.  Matt.  xvi.  27.  "  The  Son  of  man 
fhall  come  in  the  glory  of  his  Father,  with  his  an- 
gels with  him,  and  fhall  reward  every  man  ac- 
*'  cording  to  his  works."  Rev.  xxii.  12.  "  Behold 
I  come  quickly,  and  my  reward  is  with  me,  to 
render  to  every  man  according  as  his  work  fliall 
be,"  that  is,  whether  good  or  evil.  Rom.  vi.  23. 
The  wages  of  fin  is  death  :  but  the  gift  ot  God  is 
eternal  life,  that  is,  to  thofe  who  have  their  fruit 
unto  holinefs,"  as  he  had  faid  immediately  before. 
Hither  likcwifc  belong  thofc  innumerable  texts,  in 

which 


Of  the  fe?ifence  to  be  pajfed 

which  glory  and  happinefs  and  eternal  life  are  pro- 
^^^™'i  mifed  to  thofe  who  live  "  foberly,  righteouily,  and 
"  godly  in  this  prefent  world  •/'  and  wickednefs  and 
difobedience  are  threatened  with  dreadful  and  eternal 
punifhment.  But  I  fliall  only  take  notice  of  two  or 
three  of  the  mod  remarkable  of  them.  Matt.  xiii.  40, 
41,  42.  "  The  Son  of  man  Ihall  fend  forth  his  angels 
*'  and  they  ihall  gather  out  of  his  kingdom  all  things 
*^  that  offend,  and  them  which  do  iniquity,  and  fhall 
*'  call:  them  into  a  furnace  of  fire,  there  fhall  be 
*'  wailing  and  gnafhing  of  teeth.  Then  fhall  the 
''  righteous  fhine  forth  as  the  fun  in  the  kingdom  of 
*'  their  Father."  But  this  is  moft  fully  reprefented 
in  that  particular  defcription,  which  our  Lord  him- 
felf  makes  of  the  procefs  of  that  day.  Matt.  xxv.  34. 
where  the  fentence  that  fhall  be  paft  on  the  righteous 
is  this,  "  Come  ye  bleffed  of  my  Father,  inherit  the 
*'  kingdom  prepared  for  you  before  the  foundation 
*'  of  the  world."  And  on  the  wicked,  ver.  41. 
*'  Depart  from  me,  ye  curfed,  into  everlafling  fire, 
*'  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels."  And 
ver.  46.  ''  And  thefe,  fpeaking  of  the  wicked,  fhall 
^^  go  away  into  everlafling  punifhment :  but  the 
*'  righteous  into  Hfe  eternal."  John  v.  28,  29, 
*'  The  hour  is  coming  in  which  all  that  are  in  their 
*'  graves  fhall  hear  his  voice,  and  fhall  come  forth. 


they  that  have  done  good  unto  the  refurre6lion  of 
life,  and  they  that  have  done  evil  unto  the  refur- 

*'  redion  of  damnation."      Rom.  ii.   6,  7,  8,  9. 

fpeaking  of  "  the  revelation  of  the  righteous  judg- 
ment of  God,  who,  fays  the  apoflle,  fhall  render 
to  every  man  according  to  his  works  \  to  them 
who  by  patient  continuance  in  well-doing  feek  for 
glory  and  honour  and  immortality,  eternal  life  : 

"  but  to  them  that  are  contentious  and  obey  not  the 

"  truth. 


(C 


at  the  day  of  judgment.  420  c 

**  truth,  but  obey  unrighteouinefs,  indignation  and  S  E  R  M. 
*'  wrath,  tribulation  and  anguifli,  upon  every  foul 
^'  of  man  that  doth  evil." 

II.  That  the  rewards  and  recompences  of  the  next 
world  Ihall  likewife  bear  a  proportion  to  the  degrees 
ofgc.oa  or  evil  which  we  have  done  in  this  life, 
though  it  have  been  controverted,  feems  alfo  to  be 
fuHiciently  clear  from  fcripture.  And  to  this  pur- 
pofe  I  fhall, 

1.  Pro.'iuce  fuch  texts  as  will  fully  prove  it.  And, 

2.  Anfwer  the  grounds  of  the  contrary  opinion. 
.  I.  The  fcripture  doth  plainly  aflfert,  that  there- 
wards  of  the  next  life  will  bear  a  proportion,  not  on- 
ly to  the  kind  and  quality  of  our  adlions,  but  to  the 
degree  of  them  -,  that  good  men  lliall  receive  a  re- 
ward proportionable  to  the  degree  of  their  holinefs 
and  obedience,  of  their  fervice  and  fufferings  for 
God  :  and  that  the  torments  of  the  wicked  fhall  be 
greater  or  lefs,  according  to  the  degree  and  aggrava- 
tion of  their  fins. 

(i.)  As  for  good  men-,  that  the  reward,  that 
fhall  be  bellowed  upon  them,  fhall  bear  a  proportion 
to  the  degree  of  their  fervice  and  fufferings  for  God. 
This  feems  to  be  intimated  in  thofe  metaphorical 
expreflions  ufed  by  the  prophet  Daniel,  chap.  xii.  3. 
*'  They  that  be  wife  Ihall  ihine  as  the  brightnefs  of  the 
*'  firmament  j  and  they  that  turn  many  to  righteouf- 
"  nefs,  as  the  (tars  for  ever  and  ever."  Which  is  much 
the  fame  with  what  St.  Paul  exprefly  affirms,  concern- 
ing the  different  glory  of  the  faints  at  the  refurredlion, 
I  Cor.  XV.  41.  "  There  is  one  glory  of  the  fun,  ano- 
*'  ther  glory  of  die  moon,  and  another  glory  of  the 
^'  flars :  for  one  ftar  diifercth  from  another  itar  in 
*'  glory.  So  alfo  is  the  refurrc(ftion  of  the  dead." 
Matt.  V.  10,  n.  *'  Bleffed  are  ye,  when  men  Ihail 

"  reviJc 


cc 


Of  the  fentence  to  bepajfei  f 

revile  you,  and  perfecute  you,  and  fpeak  all  man^ 
ner  of  evil  againft  you  for  my  name's  fake.     Rc^ 
joice,  and  be  exceeding  glad :  for  great  is  your 
reward  in  heaven."  Which  words,  if  they  do  not 
fignify  a  more  glorious  reward  to  thofe  who  fuffer 
perfecution  for  Christ,  have  no  emphafis  or  encou- 
ragement in  them.     For  what  caufe  of  ''  exceeding 
*'  joy  and  gladnefs"  is  it,  to  be  perfecuted  and  fuf- 
fer for  Christ,  if  a  peculiar  reward  did  not  belong 
to  thofe  who  fuffer  for  him  ?  If  there  do  not,  then 
thofe  who  fuffer  for  Christ,  are  plainly  in  a  worfc 
condition  in  this  world,  than  other  good  men  who 
cfcape  thefe  fufferings ;  and  yet  are  in  no  better  con- 
dition, than  others  in  the  next  world  :  and  then  why 
fhould  any  man  be  glad  to  fuffer?  Matt.  x.  41,  42. 
He  that  receiveth  a  prophet,  in  the  name  of  a  pro- 
phet, fhall  receive  a  prophet's  reward:  and  he 
that  receiveth  a  righteous  man,  in  the  name  of  a 
righteous  man,  fhall  receive  a  righteous  man's  re- 
ward."    Where  you  fee  a  difference  intimated  be- 
tween "  the  reward  of  a  prophet,  and  a  righteous 
**  man,"  namely,  that  a  prophet  lliall  have  a  greater 
reward  than  an  ordinary  good  man.     Matt.  xix.  28, 
29.  where  our  bleffed  Saviour  tells  us,  that  all  that 
denied  themfelves  for  Christ,"  fhall  inherit  everlaft- 
*'  ing  life  i"  but  for  his  difciples,  who  were  continu- 
ally attendants  upon  him,  and  fufferers  for  him,  that 
a  more  eminent  degree  of  glory  fhould  be  conferred 
on  them  •,  which  is  exprefs'd  by  their  "  fitting  upon 
"  twelve  thrones,  to  judge  the  twelve  tribes  of  If- 
*'  rael."     But  mofl  plainly  in  the  parable  of  the  ta- 
lents, where  every  man's  reward  is  according  to  the 
improvement  of  his  talents.     "  He  that  had  gained 
*'  five  talents,  is  made  ruler  over  five  cities  ;  and  he 
•'  that  had  gained  ten  talents,  ruler  over  ten  cities," 
I  Luke 


<c 

CC 
CC 
CC 


at  the  day  of  judgment.  4207 

Luke  xix.  15.  I  Cor.  xv.  58.  "  Be  yc  (ledfafl,  un-  S  E  R  M. 
"  moveable,  always  abounding  in  the  work  of  the 
^'  Lord  ;  forafmuch  as  you  know  th.it  your  labour 
*'  is  not  in  vain  in  the  Lord."  But  if  our  reward 
fliould  not  hold  a  proportion  to  the  degree  of  our 
fervice,  it  would  be  in  vain  to  be  "  abundant  in  the 
*'  work  of  the  Lord."  2  Cor.  iv.  17.  "  Our  light 
*^  afllidion  which  is  but  for  a  moment>  worketh  for 
"  us  a  far  more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glo- 
*'  ry ;"  that  is,  our  afflidion  contributes  to  our  glo- 
ry^  and  adds  to  the  degree  of  it.  2  Cor.  ix.  6.  The 
apoflle  ufeth  this  as  an  argument  to  perfuade  tlie  Co- 
rinthians to  be  very  liberal  and  bountiful  to  their  dif- 
trefled  brethren,  bccaufe  according  to  the  degree  of 
their  charity,  would  be  the  degree  of  their  reward. 
-*'  This  I  fay,  he  that  foweth  fparingly,  Hiall  reap 
"  Iparingly,  and  he  that  foweth  plentifully,  Hiall  reap 
*'  plentifully:"  than  which  I  cannot  imagine  any 
thing  can  be  fpoken  more  plainly  to  this  purpofe* 
And  the  fame  argument  he  ufeth  to  the  PhiHppians, 
to  itir  them  up  to  charity,  Phil.  iv.  17.  "  Not  be- 
*'  caufc  I  defire  a  gift :  but  I  defire  fruit  that  may 
*'  abound  to  your  account  -,"  clearly  implying,  that 
the  more  good  we  do  in  this  world,  the  more  abun- 
dant fhall  be  our  reward  in  the  next. 

(2.)  It  is  likewife  as  plain  from  fcrlpturc,  that  the 
punifliment  and  torment  of  wicked  men  will  be  abat- 
ed or  increafcd  proportionably  to  the  degree  and  ag- 
gravation of  their  fins.  Upon  this  account  our  Sa- 
viour threatens  thufc  who  continue  impenitent  un- 
der the  gofpcl,  with  more  heavy  and  dreadlul  puniili- 
ments,  and  tells  us,  that  "  in  the  day  ofju.lgment" 
their  condition  (lull  be  far  worfe  than  tlitirs  of  "  I'yre 
**  and  Sidon,  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,"  Matt.  xi. 
2c,  21.     And  Matt.  xxiv.  51.  he  threatens  that  kr- 

Vol.  IX.  20  Z  vant 


4  2  o  S  Of  the  Jentence  to  be  pajjed 

R  M.  vant,  who,  becaufe  "  his  Lord  delayed  his  coming/* 
prefumed  fo  much  upon  the  patience  of  God,  with  a 
more  fevere  punifliment :  "  The  Lord  of  that  fer- 
vant  fhall  cut  him  in  fundcr,  and  appoint  him  his 
portion  with  the  hypocrites  /'  intimating  that  the 
punifhment  of  hypocrites  will  be  very  fevere,  and  as 
it  were  the  llandard  of  the  hightfl  punifhment.  And 
fo  likewife,  Luke  xii.  47,  48.  our  Savio'jr  tells  us, 
that  according  to  the  degree  of  light  and  knowledge 
which  men  lin  againfb,  fliall  be  the  degree  of  theii^ 
torment.     **  The  fervant  tliat  knew  his  Lord's  will, 
and  prepared  not  himfelf  to  do  according  to  it^ 
fhall  be  beaten  with  many  flripes :  but  he  that 
•'  knew  it  not,  and  did  commit  things  worthy  of 
**  llripes,  fhall  be  beaten  with  few  flripes."    And  in 
general  he  tells  us,  that  the  punifhment  of  Tinners 
takes  it*s  aggravation  from  the  advantages  and  oppor- 
tunities which  men  have  negledled.     ^'  For  unto 
"  whomfoever  much  is  given,  of  him  much  fhall  be 
•'  required,  and  to  whom  men  have  committed  much, 
**  of  him  they  will  afk  the  more."     So  hkewife  the 
apoflle  to  the  Hebrews  tells  us,  that  God  will  vindi- 
cate the  contempt  of  the  gofpel  more  feverely  than 
of  the  law  of  Mofes,  Heb.  ii.  2,  3,  4.  "  If  the  word 
♦'  fpoken  by  angels  was  fledfafl,  and  every  tranf- 
*^  grefTion  and  difobedience  received  a  jufl  recom- 
*'  pence  of  reward  ;  how  fliall  we  eicape,  if  we  ne- 
**  gle6l  fo  great  falvation  ?"  And  chap.  x.  28,  29, 
^  He  that  defpifed  Mofes's  law  died  without  mercy, 
*'  under  two  or  three  witneffcs  •,  of  how  much  forcr 
*'  punifh.menj,  think  ye,  fhall  he  be  thought  worthy^ 
•'  who  hath  trodden  under  foot  the  Son  of  God  .''" 
So  that  it  feems  very  evident  from  fcripture,  that 
the  degree  of  happinefs  or  mifery  which  men  fhall 
be  fentenced  to  in  the  next  world,  fhall  be  correfpon- 

dcnt 


at  the  day  of  judgment ,  4209 

dent  to  the  degree  of  p;ood  or  evil,  which  thcv  have  ^  ^'  ^  ^'^^ 

CLXXXII 

done  in  this  world ;  and  I  can  hardly  imagine  any 
thing  more  clear.  But  it  fcems  the  fciioolmen,  and 
other  divines  who  have  been  at  Icifure  to  tie  knots, 
and  to  make  objedions  againfl  the  plaincfb  truths^ 
have  called  this  alfo  into  qucflion.  And  therefore  I 
fhall,  in  the 

^  lid.  Place,  briefly  examine  the  grounds  of  the 
contrary  opinion  •,  which  though  they  do  but  imme- 
diately flrike  at  the  degrees  of  glory  and  happinefs^ 
yet  by  a  parity  of  rcafon  and  confcquencc,  they  like- 
wife  overthrow  the  degrees  of  punillimcnt ;  and  they 
are  thefe  two. 

I.  They  fay,  that  the  merits  of  Christ,  by  which 
eternal  life  and  happinefs  is  purchafed  for  us,  are  e- 
qual  to  all  thofe  who  have  any  intereft  in  them,  and 
are  of  value  fufficient  to  purchafe  tlie  higheft  degree 
of  glory  for  them  •,  and  the  meritorious  caufe  being 
the  fame,  there  is  no  reafon  to  imagine  any  diffe- 
rence of  degrees  in  the  effecft. 

Anfw.  Thewcaknefs  of  this  objection,  how  fpe- 
cious  foever  it  may  appear,  will  be  evident  to  any 
one  that  confiders,  that  eternal  life  and  happinefs 
doth  not  accrue  to  us  by  way  of  neccfTary  and  natural 
refult  from  the  merit  of  Christ's  obedience  and  fuf- 
ferings,  but  of  voluntary  compacft  and  agreement, 
and  therefore  is  only  available  fo  far  as  it  pleafed  God 
the  Father  and  him  that  it  fliould  be.  Now  the 
fcripture  hath  declared  that  "  Christ  is  the  author 
**  of  eternal  falvation  to  them  that  believ^e  and  obey 
*'  him  :'*  but  it  hath  declared  like  wife,  that  accord- 
in"-  to  the  degrees  of  our  holinefs  and  obedience 
ihall  be  the  degrees  of  our  happinefs  \  bccaufe  the 
happinefs  which  Christ  hath  purchafed  for  us,  is 
pot  bcftowcd  upon  us  but  upon  certain  terms  and 

20  Z  2  con- 


T)f  the  fcntence  to  be  pa  [fed 

conditions  to  be  performed  on  our  part,  upon  the 
performance  whereof,  and  the  degrees  of  that  per- 
formance, the  degrees  of  our  happinefs  do  depend. 

II.  The  other  objedlion  is  from  the  parable  of  the 
labourers  in  the  vineyard,  Matth.  xx.  where  it  is 
faid,  that  "  they  that  came  in  at  the  lafl  hour  re- 
*'  ceived  as  much,  as  they  that  came  in  at  the  fird, 
*'  and  had  borne  the  heat  and  burden  of  the  day, 
*'  every  one  his  peny."  For  anfwer  to  this,  It  is 
a  known  rule  among  divines,  that  theologia  paraho^ 
lica  non  eft  argumentativa  •,  by  which  they  mean, 
that  we  cannot  argue  in  divinity  from  every  circum- 
ftance  of  a  parable,  but  only  from  the  main  fcope  of 
it.  Now  this  parable  feems  plainly  dire6led  againft 
the  envious  Jews,  who  murmured  becaufe  the  Gen- 
tiles were  to  partake  of  the  blefling  of  the  MefTias, 
and  that  they  who  were  called  in  the  laft  age  of  the 
world  fhould  fhare  in  this  benefit,  as  well  as  the 
ancient  people  of  God  ;  fo  that  by  the  murmurers, 
the  Jews  are  defigned,  who  were  offended  that  fal- 
vation  fhould  come  to  the  Gentiles.  And  then  the 
fcope  of  the  parable  is  not,  that  all  good  men  fhall 
have  equal  degrees  of  glory  ;  but  that  the  Gentiles, 
which  were  Ccilled  long  after  the  Jews,  fhould  bQ 
faved  as  well  as  they.     I  proceed  to  the 

Second  thing  I  propofed  to  enquire  into,  viz.  the 
grounds  and  reafons  of  this,  why  the  rewards  which 
fhall  be  diflributed  at  the  day  of  judgment,  fhall 
bear  a  proportion  to  the  good  or  evil  which  men  have 
done  in  this  life  ?  And, 

I .  That  they  fhall  be  correfpondent  to  the  nature 
and  quality  of  our  a6lions,  the  jufticc  and  equity  of 
the  divine  providence  doth  plainly  require.  For  ju- 
flice  is  to  give  to  every  one  that  which  of  due  be- 
longs to  him  :  now  of  equity  it  belongs  to  them  that 

do 


at  the  day  of  judgment.  42 1 1 

do  well,  that  it  fhould  go  well  with  them ;  and  to  ^"^  ^-  R  M'- 
the  evil,  that  it  fhould  be  ill  with  them,  that  every  ^^^^^"• 
one  fhould  "  receive  the  fruit  of  his  doings."  Not 
that  we  can  flridlly  merit  any  thing  at  the  hand  of 
God.  It  is  goodnefs  to  reward  an  innocent  creature, 
and  it  is  goodnefs  to  reward  the  good  adlions  of 
thofe  who  have  been  finncrs ;  but  juflice  requires  that 
good  and  bad  men  fhould  not  fare  alike.  Thus 
Abraham  reafons  from  the  juflice  of  God,  "  that 
*'  the  righteous  fhould  be  as  the  wicked,  that  be  far 
*'  from  thee  :  fliall  not  the  judge  of  all  the  world 
*'  do  right  ?'*  And  confidcring  the  promifes  which 
the  goodnefs  of  God  hath  made  freely  to  good 
men,  for  their  encouragement  in  goodnefs,  and  the 
performance  of  thefe  promifes  is  founded  in  the  righ* 
teoufnefs  and  faithfulnefs  of  God. 

1,  That  the  rewards  of  the  next  life  fhould  beaf 

a  proportion  to  the  degree  of  the  good  or  evil  done 

by  us  in  this  life,  is  clearly  founded  in  the  equity  and 

reafonablenefs  of  the  thing ;  it  being  very  much  for 

the  encouragement  of  holinefs  and  goodnefs,  to  be 

afifured  that  whatever  we  do  for  God  now,  will  be 

fully  confidered  and  rewarded  hereafter  ;  that  he  will 

take  notice  of  the  leafh  fcrvice  that  we  do  for  him, 

and  that  every  degree  of  grace  and  holinefs  fliall  be 

crowned  with  an   anfwerable  degree  of  glory  and 

happinefs.     And  fo  on  the  other  hand,  it  tends  very 

much  to  difcountenance  fin,  and  to  keep  men  from 

running  to  the  height  of  impiety  ^  to  confider  that 

every  fin  will  aggravate  their  mifcry,  and  that  every 

degree  of  wickednefs  will  add  to  the  weight  of  their 

torment,    and  that  though  they  be  "  children  of 

•'  wrath*'  already,  yet  by  "adding  iniquity  to  tranf- 

*^  grefTion,"  they  may  caufe  the  "  wrath  of  God 

*^  and  his  jealoufy  to  fipoke  againll  tlicm^**  and  bring 

more 


JL2  1Z  Of  the fifiience  to  be  pajjed 

E  R  M.  more  curfes  upon  themfeJves,  and  make  themfelves 
''  ten  times  more  the  children  of  wrath." 

And  indeed  in  the  nature  of  the  thing  it  cannot 
be  otherwife,  but  that  the  better  and  more  holy  any 
man  is,  the  more  capable  he  fhould  be  of  happinefs, 
and  the  more  difpofed  for  the  enjoyment  of  God  ; 
and  the  more  wicked  any  man  is,  the  more  he  fliould 
exafperate  his  ov/n  confcience,  and  awaken  thofc 
furies  which  rage  in  his  breafr.  ''  He  treafures  up 
*'  more  wrath  againd  the  day  of  wrath,"  and  piles 
up  more  fuel  for  everl ailing  burnings.  The  tor- 
ments of  hell  are  in  fcripture  compared  to  fire  ;  now 
the  more  fuei  and  greater  ftore  of  combuftible  mat- 
ter is  cafl  into  it,  the  more  fierce  and  raging  it  muit 
be. 

I  have  done  with  the  explication,  and  fhall  now 
apply  what  hath  been  delivered. 

1.  If  fentence  fhall  be  pail  at  the  great  day  accord- 
ing to  the  good  or  bad  actions  of  men,  this  fhews 
us  what  fhould  be  the  great  care  of  every  man  in 
this  life  ;  to  attend  to  the  nature  and  quahty  of  our 
nclions,  and  to  obferve  that  difference  between  them 
in  our  pradice  now,  which  our  judge  will  certainly 
make  in  the  fentence  which  he  v/ill  pafs  upon  them 
at  the  great  day.  And  yet  fo  blind  and  miilaken 
is  the  greateft  part  of  the  world,  that  they  make  this 
the  leail  part  of  their  care  and  bufinefs.  Men  are 
generally  very  folicitous  to  be  rich  and  great,  and  to 
be  in  a  healthful  and  profperous  condition,  and  da 
with  ail  pofTible  care  feck  to  avoid  ficknefs  and  po- 
verty and  meannefs :  but  how  few  are  concerned  to 
be  virtuous  and  sood,  and  to  avoid  wickednefs  and 
vice  !  And  yet  thcfe  moral  differences  of  men  at  the 
day  of  judgment  will  only  be  taken  injto  confiderati- 
on  :  other  things  will  not  "  profit  us  in  the  day  of 

*'wratL** 


at  the  day  oj  judgment,  4213 

*•  wrath."  God  in  that  day  will  not  proceed  with  SF.  R  M. 
men  according  to  their  outward  quality  and  condi- 
tion in  this  life,  their  eternal  flate  fliall  not  then  be 
decided  according  to  their  wealth  or  poverty,  their 
height  and  meannefs  in  this  world  :  it  will  not  then 
be  enquired  what  office  a  man  bore,  v/hat  titles  of 
honour,  what  manors  or  lordfliips  he  was  owner  of  > 
but  how  he  hath  behaved  himfelf  in  thofc  circum- 
llances,  what  ufe  he  haih  made  of  his  wealth  and 
power,  what  good  or  evil  he  hath  done  ;  whether 
he  hath  glorified  God,  and  ferved  the  great  ends  of 
his  creation  -,  whether  he  hath  obeyed  or  difobeyed 
the  truth  ^  whether  .he  hath  Jived  in  "  ungodlinefs 
**  and  worldly  lufts,  or  fobcrly  and  righteoully  and 
*'  godly  in  this  prefent  world  ;'*  in  a  word,  whether 
we  have'  been  righteous  or  wicked.  This  will  be  the 
great  enquiry  at  that  day,  and  thefe  qualities,  accord- 
ing as  they  are  found  with  us,  will  determine  our 
condition  for  ever. 

II.  The  confideration  of  this  may  comfort  good 
men  under  the  promifcuous  difpenfations  of  God's 
providence  in  this  world.  Now  *'  all  things  gene- 
*'  rally  happen  alike,  and  there  is  the  fame  event  to 
*'  the  righteous  and  to  the  wicked  :"  but  things  v;ill 
not  be  always  thus.  Plave  but  a  little  patience,  and 
the  juitice  of  God's  providence,  which  is  now  un- 
der a  cloud,  will  clear  up  ;  the  day  is  coming  which 
will  make  a  wide  and  vail  difference  between  good 
and  bad  men,  "  between  thofc  that  ferve  God,  and 
•'  thofe  that  ferve  him  not  ;  thofe  that  fwear,  and 
**  thofe  that  fear  an  oath  i"  between  the  lewd  and 
the  chaftc,  the  fober  and  debauched,  the  meek  of 
the  earth  and  the  murderers  •,  between  the  proud 
and  the  humble,  the  jud  and  the  opprefibrs  •,  be- 
tween thofe  that  perfecutc,  and  thofc  who  are  perfc- 
cuted  for  righceoufucfs,  ^^^w 


S  E  R  M.  Now  the  difference  is  frequently  on  the  wrong 
CLxxxii.  ^^^^  .  gQQj^  j^gj^  fuffer  and  are  afflicted,  the  wicked 
flourifh  and  are  profperous  :  but  "  go  into  the  fan- 
**  duary  of  God,  and  there  thou  fhalt  fee  their 
**  end."  Let  us  but  look  a  little  before  us,  beyond 
''  the  things  which  are  feen  and  are  but  temporal, 
*'  Unto  the  things  which  are  not  feen  and  are  eter- 
*'  nal,"  and  we  Ihall  fee  all  things  flraight ;  that 
the  end  of  the  wicked/*  who  flourifhed  in  this 
world,  "is  to  be  deflroyed  for  ever  ;  and  that  the 
*^  righteous,"  who  were  fo  diftrefled  and  afflifted 
in  this  world,  *'  fhall  enter  into  reft  and  joy :  when 
*'  the  days  of  refrefhing  fhall  come  from  the  prefencc 
*'  of  the  Lord,  thefe  ihall  be  comforted  and  the 
*^  other  tormented.'* 

III.  If  the  reward  of  the  next  life  fliall  bear  a  pro- 
portion to  the  degrees  of  good  or  evil  which  wc 
have  done  in  this  world,  then  on  the  one  hand  here 
is  matter  of  great  comfort  and  encouragement  to  us 
in  the  ways  of  holinefs  and  obedience.  This  is  3 
mighty  argument  to  good  men  to  grow  in  grace^ 
and  to  prefs  forward  toward  perfe6bion,  ''  to  be  fted-* 
*'  faft  and  unmoveable  and  abundant  in  the  work  of 
*^  the  LoRD>  becaufe  they  know  that  their  labour 
**  fhall  not  be  in  vain  in  the  Lord  j"  but  that  ac- 
cording to  the  degrees  of  our  fervice  and  obedience, 
of  our  virtue  and  goodnefs,  fhall  be  the  degree  of 
our  glory  and  happinefs.  We  ferve  a  good  mafter, 
who  will  confider  every  thing  that  we  do  for  him  5 
*'  who  is  not  unrighteous,  to  forget  our  work  and 
*'  labour  of  love,"  and  will  not  let  the  leafl  fervice 
pafs  unrewarded.  Let  us  not  then  content  ourfelves 
with  any  low  degree  of  goodnefs  ;  but  be  continual- 
ly afpiring  after  the  higkeft  perfedtion  we  are  capa- 
ble of.     Since  wc  have  fuch  a  prize  in  our  view, 

5  VM 


at  the  day  of  judgment,  4  2 1  c 

*'  let  us  run  with  patience,"  and  with  all  our  might,  ^,  ^  R  M. 
*'  the  race  which  is  fet  before  us."  For  by  the  fame 
reafon  that  any  man  defires  happinefs,  he  cannot  but 
defire  the  higheft  degrees  of  k  that  are  attainable  ; 
and  will  confequently  endeavour  to  make  himfelf  ca- 
pable of  the  greateft  degree  of  glory :  and  though 
no  degree  of  holinefs  can  merit  everlalling  life  and 
happinefs,yet  greater  degrees  of  holinefs  will  certainly 
be  rewarded  with  a  larger  portion  of  happinefs.  God 
is  not  bound  antecedently  to  his  promife,  to  give  fo 
great  a  reward  to  any  man  for  his  works  •,  yet  he 
hath  promifed  to  reward  every  man  according  to 
them. 

So  that  there  is  no  reafon  why  a  good  man,  when 
he  is  once  come  to  this,  that  by  the  grace  and  afTift- 
ance  of  God,  he  can  refrain  from  grofs  fins,  and 
refift  the  temptations  to  them,  and  perform  the  great 
duties  of  religion,  why  he  Ihould  with  Efau,  fit 
down  and  fay,  "  I  have  enough,"  I  have  fo  much  as 
will  carry  me  to  heaven,  and  I  defirc  no  more.  It  is 
a  fad  prefage  of  apoilafy,  to  fland  ftill  in  religion. 
He  that  once  ilops,  the  next  thing  is  to  look  back. 
This  is  the  remedy  which  St.  Peter  prefcribes  againfl: 
apoftafy,  2  Pet.  iii.  18.  "  Take  heed  left  ye  m 
"  from  your  own  fledfaflnefs  •,"  and  then  it  fol- 
lows, **  but  grow  in  grace,  and  in  the  knowledge  of 
*'  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ."  The 
bell  remedy  againfl  apoflafy,  is  growth  in  goodnefs. 
It  is  a  rule  in  policy,  that  an  ambitious  man  fliould 
never  flay  at  any  flcp  of  preferment,  till  he  come  at 
the  top,  becaufe  it  is  fome  fccuricy  to  be  in  motion. 
Our  afcent  to  heaven  is  flcep  and  narrow,  and  wc  are 
fafefl  when  we  do  not  fland  Hill :  temptation  cannot 
fo  well  take  it's  aim  at  us. 
Let  us  therefore  prefs  after  the  hlghefl  degree  of 
Vol.  IX,  21  A  >'^^t^c 

8 


42  1 6  Of  the  fentence  to  be  pajfed 

S  E  R  M.  virtue  and  holinefs,  and  labour  to  be  as  good  as  we 

CLXXXII  ... 

*  can  in  this  world,  that  in  the  next  our  happinels 
may  be  the  greater  ;  that  v/hen  the  day  of  recom- 
pence  fliall  come,  we  may  receive  an  ample  reward, 
and  God  the  righteous  judge  may  fet  a  bright  and 
glorious  crown  upon  our  heads. 

We  ought  like  wife  to  confider,  that  if  any  man 
can  be  content  only  to  be  faved,  and  delire  no  more 
but  jufl  to  get  heaven,  that  fuch  a  degree  of  hoUnefs 
and  virtue  as  will  fave  a  man  that  can  attain  no  more, 
will  perhaps  not  fave  that  man  v/ho  lazily  refls  in  the 
lowell  degree,  and  defires  no  more.  To  be  "  leafl 
*'  in  the  kingdom  of  God,'*  is  next  to  being  fhuc 
out  of  it.  It  is  not  to  be  expe6led  that  God  fliouJd 
beftow  heaven  and  happinefs  upon  thofe  who  are  fo 
indifferent  about  it,  as  to  defire  heaven  for  no  other 
reafon,  but  becaufe  they  would  not  go  to  hell.  Men 
mud  not  think  to  drive  fo  near  and  hard  a  bargain, 
in  fo  defirable  and  advantageous  a  purchafe. 

And  then  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  matter  of  great 
terror  to  great  finners.  "  The  wages  of  every  fin 
"  is  death,"  eternal  death  ;  and  every  degree  of 
hell  and  damnation  is  dreadful  :  but  there  are  fins 
more  heinous  in  themfelves,  and  fome  that  are  at- 
tended with  heavier  aggravations  in  fome  perfons  ; 
thefe  do  inflame  hell,  and  heat  that  furnace  feven 
times  hotter.  There  are  fome  moderate  finners  in 
comparifon  -,  thefe  fhall  have  a  moderate  doom,  and  a 
cooler  hell :  but  there  are  others,  who  are  extravagant 
and  enormous  finners,  that  "  drink  up  iniquity,  as 
*'  the  ox  drinks  up  water  •,  that  let  themfelves  loofe 
*'  to  commit  all  wickednefs  with  greedinefs  ;"  fuch 
as  fin  above  the  common  rate  of  men,  with  full  con- 
fent,  and  upon  deliberation,  v/ith  great  deflgn  and 
contrivance,  in  defpite  of  the  cleared  convictions, 

of 


at  the  day  ofjiidg?nent,  42  17 

of  the  bed  counfels  and  reproofs  i  thefe  make  hade  "^T-  R  M 
to  ruin,  and  take  hell  by  violence.  Nowfuch  "migh- 
**  ty  tranfgreffors  fliall  be  mightily  tormented  ;" 
they  fliall  not  be  punidied  at  the  common  rate  of 
finners,  their  confciences  will  breed  more  and  fliarp- 
er  flings,  and  wilder  furies  to  torment  them,  and 
they  fhall  fink  into  a  deeper  mifery. 

More  particularly  this  concerns  us  Chriflians,  who 
continue  impenitent,  and  live  in  our  fins,  notwith- 
flanding  the  clear  revelation  of  the  gofpcl,  anci 
*'  the  wrath  of  God  revealed  from  heaven,  againfl 
*'  all  ungo  hinefs  and  uiirighteoufnc-fs  of  men;  not- 
*'  withil\t!idi/ig  life  and  immortality  fo  clearly  brought 
*'  to  light  by  the  gofpel.  How  fliall  we  efcape,  if 
*'  we  nc2:le6l  fo  great  falvation  ?"  Whatcondemna- 
tionwillbe  heavy  enough  for  thofe,  who  wilfully  refufe 
to  be  faved  ?  This  is  the  condemnation,  fays  our 
Saviour,  "  that  light  is  come  into  the  world,  and 
"  men  love  darknels  rather  than  light."  All  the 
fins  which  we  now  commit,  are  infinitely  aggravated 
above  the  fins  of  thoufands  in  the  world,  who  never 
enjoyed  that  light,  and  thofe  advantages  and  oppor- 
tunities which  we  have  done.  "  The  ignorance  of 
*'  thcfe  God  winked  at,  but  now  he  expeds,  he 
"  commands  all  men  every  where  to  repent  ;  bc- 
"  caufe  he  hath  appointed  a  day,  in  which  he  will 
*'  judge  the  world  in  righteoufnefs."  What  flripes 
do  we  deferve,  who  have  "  known  our  mailer's 
"  will,  but  have  iiot  prepared  ourfelves  to  do  accord- 
"  ing  to  it  V  All  that  hght  and  knowledge  which 
we  have,  all  thofe  counfels  and  inftructions  which 
we  have  read  and  heard  out  of  God's  word,  will 
inflame  our  account,  and  heighten  our  condemna- 
tion, and  the  very  means  of  our  f-ilvation  will  be  the 
faddell  aggravation  of  our  ruin.     What  our  Savi- 

21   A  ^  OUR, 


42 1 8  Of  the  fentence^io  be  faffed^  &c. 

OUR  faid  of  the  impenitent  and  unbelieving  Jews, 

holds  as  well  concerning  impenitent  Chriftians  \  that 

it  fliall  be  more  tolerable  for  Tyre  and  Sidon,  for 

Sodom  and  Gomorrah  in  the  day  of  judgment, 

than  for  them.  But,  beloved,  I  hope  better  things 

of  you,  and  things  that  accompany  falvation." 

Let  us  but  remember  and  ferioufly  confider,  that 

we  muft  all  appear  before  the  judgment- feat  of 

Christ,  to  receive  the  things  done  in  the  body, 

**  according  to  what  we  have  done,  whether  good 

"  or  evil;"  and  this  will  certainly  have  a  mighty 

awe  and  influence  upon  our  lives,  and  all  the  ac« 

tions  of  them. 

f^  Now  die  God  of  peace,  &c," 


The  ENt)  of  the  ninth  Volume, 


4219 
THE 

CONTENTS. 

S  E  R  M.    CLVIL 

God  the  firft  caufe,  and  laft  end. 

ROM.  xi.  36. 

JpO  R  of  bim,  and  through  him^  and  to  him  are 
•'-    all  things^  to  whom  be  glory  for  ever^     Amen. 

Page  ^-jGi, 

S  E  R  M.     CLVIII. 

Of  doing  good. 

Being  a  fpital  fermon  preachM  at  Cbrijl-Church  on  Eafler-Tuefday, 
April  14.  169!. 

Let  us  not  he  weary  in  well-doings  for  in  due  feafon 
we  Jhall  reaps  if  we  faint  not :  as  we  have  there- 
fore  opportunity s  let  us  do  good  unto  all  men,  efpe- 
daily  unto  them  who  are  of  the  houfhold  of  faith^ 

P-  377^- 
S  E  R  M.    CLIX. 

The  neccHity  of  repentance  and  faith. 

ACTS  XX.  21. 

^eflifying  both  to  the  Jews,  and  alfo  to  the  Greeks,  re- 
pentance  toward  God,  and  faith  toward  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.  p.  3797. 

S  E  R  M.     CLX. 

Of  confefTing  and  forfaking  fin,  in  order  to  pardon. 
Preached  on  Afli-Wcdncfday. 

P  R  O  V, 


4220  The  CONTENTS. 

PROV.  xxviii.   13. 

He  that  cover eth  his  fins  Jhall  not  profper :  hut  whop 
confejfeth  and  forfaketh  themy  jhall  have  mercy ^ 

p.  38 14* 
S  E  R  M.     CLXI. 
Of  confefllon  and  forrow  for  fin. 

P  S  A  L.  xxxvili.   18. 

/  will  declare  mine  iniquity ^  and  he  forry  for  my  JtUy 

P-3837- 

S  E  R  M.     CLXII 

The  unprofitablenefs  of  fin  in  this  life,  an  argument 

for  repentance. 

Preached  on  AQi-Wednefday,   1689. 

JOB  xxxiii.  27,  28. 

He  looketh  upon  men,  and  if  any  fay,  I  have  finned, 
and  perverted  that  which  was  right,  and  it  profit- 
ed me  not  -,  he  will  deliver  his  foul  from  going  in^ 
to  the  pit,  and  his  life  jhall  fee  the  light,     p.  3854. 

S  E  R  M.    CLXIII,  CLXIV,  CLXV,  CXLVI. 

The  fhamefulnefs  of  fin,  an  argument  for  repentance. 
The  final  ifilie  of  fin,  an  argument  for  repentance. 
The  prefent  and  future  advantage  of  an  holy  and 
virtuous  life. 

ROM.  vi.  21,  22. 

What  jruit  had  ye  then  in  thofe  things,  whereoj  ye 
are  now  ajloamed  ?  For  the  end  oj  thofe  things  is 
death.  But  now  being  made  jree  from  fin,  and 
become  fervants  to  God,  ye  have  your  jruit  unto 
holinejs,  and  the  end  everlajling  lije,         p- 3875, 

3^9^'  Z')^S^  3r-9' 
S  E  R  M. 


The  CONTENTS.  4221 

S  E  R  M.  CXLVII,  CXLVIII,  CXLIX. 

The  nature  and  neceflity  of  holy  refolution. 

JOB  xxxiv.   31,  32. 

Surely  it  is  meet  to  be  [aid  unto  God,  /  have  horn 

chaftifement^  I  will  not  offend  any  more  :  That  which 

I  fee  not,  teach  thou  me-,  if  I  have  done  iniquity^ 

I  will  do  no  more.  294-9^  39^4>  39^^- 

S  E  R  M.  CLXX,  CLXXI. 

The  nature  and  neceflity  of  reflitution. 

LUKE  xix.  8,  9. 

j^nd  if  I  have  taken  any  thing  from  any  man  hy  falfi 
accufation^  I  reft  ore  him  fourfold.  And  Jesus 
faid  unto  him^  This  day  is  falvation  come  to  this 
houfe,  39 9^ >  401 3* 

S  E  R  M.  CLXXII. 

The  ufefulnefs  of  confideration,  in  order  to  repentance. 

D  EU  T.  xxxii.  29. 

O  that  they  were  wife^  that  they  underftood  this^  that 
they  would  confider  their  latter  end!  4034* 

S  E  R  M.  CLXXIII. 

The  danger  of  impenitence,  where  the  gofpcl  is 

preached. 

MATT.  xi.  2T,  22. 

Woe  unto  thee  Chorazin,  wee  unto  thee  Bcthfaida  f 
for  if  the  mighty  wo7'ks  which  were  done  in  yoUy 
had  been  done  in  Tyre  and  Sidon^  they  would  have 
repented  long  ago  in  fackcloth  and  ajhes.  But  I 
fay  unto  you.,  It  foall  be  more  tolerable  for  Tyre  and 
Sidon  at  the  day  of  judgment^  than  for  you. 
^  '    S  E  R. 


The  CONTENTS. 

6  E  R  M.  CLXXIV,  CLXXV,  CLXXVI, 
CLXXVII. 

Of  the  immortality  of  the  foul,  as  difcovered  by  na- 
ture, and  by  revelation. 

2TIM.  i.   10. 

tul  is  now  made  manifeft  by  the  appearing  of  our  Sa- 
VI OUR  Jesus  Christ,  who  hath  abolijhed  deaths 
und  hath  brought  life  and  immortality  to  light^ 
through  the gofpeL       4067,  4087,  4109,  4122. 

SERM.  CLXXVIII,  CLXXIX,  CLXXX, 
CLXXXI,  CLXXXII. 

Of  the  certainty  of  a  future  judgment.  Of  the  per- 
fonbywhom  the  world  fhall  be  judged.  Of  the 
perfons  whd^afestor^e  judged; '^H)?  the  a<3:ions  for 
which  men  will  be  accountable.  Of  the  fentence 
to  be  paffed  at  the  day  of  judgment, 

2  COR.  V.  10. 

For  we  mufi  all  appear  before  the  judgment-feat  of 
Christ,  that  every  one  may  receive  the  things  done 
in  his  body^  according  to  that  he  hath  done^  whether 
it  he  good  or  bad,         4i44»  41591  4i75>  4i88> 

4202.' 


$• 


•  t 


t% 


•^' 


V,'" 


<^Ov 


xfM- 


