fi^ 


^ 


/.2.Z/.2.2.. 

LIBRARY  OF  THE  THEOLOGICAL  SEMINARY 


PRINCETON,  N.  J. 

Presented  by 


rr\rs .  \}\^\\\\c\rr\  S^^cAn 

Dtviston .,.. 

Section .....J 


1 


# 


SERMONS 

ON    SEVERAL 

Subjects  and  Occasions, 

By  the  mofl  Reverend 

Dr.  yoHN^riLLorsoN, 

LATE 

Lord  Archbifliop  of  Canterbury* 
VOLUME    the    THIRD. 


I   L  ■    Jl  I  'I 


LONDON: 

Printed  for  R.  Ware,  A.  Ward,  J.  and  ?.  Knapton,  7.  Longman, 
R,  Hett,  C.  Hitch,  7.  Hodges,  S.  Aufien,  J.  and  R.  fonjon, 
■     7.  and  H-  Pemberton,  and  J.  Rivingtsn^ 

MDCCXLII. 


[3] 

SERMON   XXXV. 

Of  the  eternity  of  hell  torments. 

Preached   before  the   Queen  at   Whitehall, 
March  7.   i6l|. 


M  A  T  T  H.  XXV.  46. 

And  thefe  Jhall  go  away  into  everlajling  puni/hmeni^  hut 
the  righteous  into  life  eternal. 

AM  O  N  G  all  the  arguments  to  repentance  and  s  ERM. 
a  good  life,  thofe  have'  the  greateft  force  and*  ^XXV. 
power  upon  the  minds  of  men,  which  are  fetch'd- 
from  another  world,  and  from  the  final  ftate  of 
good  and  bad  men  after  this  life.  And  this  our  Sa- 
viour reprefents  to  us  in  a  moft  lively  manner,  in 
that  profpefl  which,  in  the  latter  part  of  this  chap- 
ter, he  gives  us  of  the  judgment  of  the  great  day, 
namely,  that  at  the  end  of  the  world  the  "  Son  of 
"  man  Ihall  come  in  his  glory,  with  his  holy  angels, 
"  and  fhall  fit  upon  the  throne  of  his  glory ;  and  all 
"  nations  fhall  be  gathered  before  him,"  and  (hall 
be  feparated  into  two  great  companies,  the  righteous 
and  the  wicked ;  who  fhall  ftand  the  one  on  the  right 
hand,  and  the  other  on  the  left  of  this  great  judge; 
who  fhall  pronounce  fentence  feverally  upon  them  ac- 
cording to  the  anions  which  they  have  done  in  this 
life :  the  righteous  fhall  be  rewarded  with  eternal  hap- 
Vol.  III.  L]l2.  pinefs. 


XXXV. 


Of  the  eternity  of  hell  torments. 
pincfs,  and  the  wicked  fhall  be  fentenced  to  everlafl- 
ing  punifhment.  "  And  thefe,"  that  is  the  wicked, 
"  fhall  go  away  into  everlafting  punilhment,  but  the 
*'  righteous  into  life  eternal." 

The  words  are  plain  and  need  no  explication.   For 
I  take  it  for  granted,  that  every  one,  at  firft  hearing 
of  them,  does  clearly  apprehend  the  difference  be- 
tween the  righteous  and   the  wicked,  and  between 
endlefs  happinefs   and  mifery:  but  although  thefe 
words  be  fo  very  eafy  to  be  underflood,  they  can  ne- 
ver be  too  much  confidered  by  us.     The  fcope  and 
defign  of  them  is,  to  reprefent  to  us  the  different 
fates  of  good  and  bad  men  in  another  world,  and  that 
their  ends  there  will  be  as  different   as  their  ways 
and  doings  have  been  here  in  this  world  :  the  ferious 
confideration  whereof  is  the  greatefl  difcouragement 
to  fin,  and  the  moft  powerful  argument  in  the  world 
to  a  holy  and  virtuous  life:  becaufe  it  is  an  argument 
taken  from  our  greateft  and  mofl   lafling  intereft, 
our  happinefs  or  our  mifery  to  all  eternity :  a  con- 
cermnent  of  that  vaft  confequence,  that  it  mufl  be 
the  greatefl  flupidity  and  folly  in  the  world  for  any 
jnan  to  negleft  it. 

This  eternal  ftate  of  rev.ards  and  punifhments  ia 
another  world,  our  blefTed  Saviour  hath  clearly  re- 
vealed to  us.  And  as  to  one  part  of  it,  viz.  that 
good  men  fhall  be  eternally  happy  in  another  world, 
every  one  gladly  admits  it:  but  many  are  loth  that 
the  other  part  fhould  be  true,  concerning  the  eternal 
punifhment  of  wicked  men.  And  therefore  they  pre- 
tend that  it  is  contrary  to  the  juftice  of  God  to  punifli 
temporary  crimes  with  eternal  torments:  becaufe 
*juftiGe  always  obferves  a  proportion  between  offences 

and 


Of  the  eternity  of  hell  torments.  e 

arid  punifhments :  but  between  temporary  fins  and  S  E  R  M. 
eternal  punifhments  there  is  no  proportion.     And  as 
this  feems  hard  to  be  reconciled  with  juftice,  fo  much 
more  with  that  excefs  of  goodnefs  which  we  fuppofe 
to  be  in  God. 

And  therefore  they  fay,  that  though  God  feem 
to  have  declared  that  impenitent  finners  fhall  be  ever- 
laftingly  punilhed,  yet  thefe  declarations  of  fcripturc 
are  fo  to  be  mollified  and  underftood,  as  that  we  may 
be  able  to  reconcile  them  with  the  effential  perfedi- 
ons  of  the  divine  nature. 

This  is  the  full  force  and  ftrength  of  the  objedtioo. 
And  my  work  at  this  time  fliall  be  to  clear,  if  I  can, 
this  difficult  point.  And  that  for  thefe  two  reafons. 
Firft,  for  the  vindication  of  the  divine  juftice  and 
goodnefs :  "  that  God  may  be  juftified  in  his  fayings, 
*'  and  appear  righteous  when  he  judgeth.'*  And  fe- 
condly,  becaufe  the  belief  of  the  threatnings  of  God 
in  their  utmoft  extent  is  of  fo  great  moment  to  a  good 
life,  and  fo  great  a  difcouragement  to  fin :  for  the 
fting  of  fm  is  the  terror  of  eternal  punilhment ;  and 
if  men  were  once  fet  free  from  the  fear  and  belief  of 
this,  the  moft  powerful  reftraint  from  fm  would  be 
taken  away. 

So  that  in  anfwer  to  this  objeflion,  I  fhall  endea- 
vour to  prove  thefe  two  things. 

Firft,  that  the  eternal  punifhment  of  wicked  men 
in  another  world  is  plainly  threatned  in  fcripturc. 

Secondly,  that  this  is  not  inconfiftent  either  with 
the  juftice  or  the  goodnefs  of  God. 

Firft,  that  the  eternal  punifliment  of  wicked  men 
in  another  world  is  plainly  threatned  in  fcripture, 
-namely,  in  thefe  following  texts,  Matth.  xviii.  .8. 

«  It 


Of  the  eternity  of  hell  torments, 

"  It  is  better  for  thee  to  enter  into  life  halt  and  maim- 
"  ed,  than  having  two  hands  or  two  feet  to  be  caft 
<'  into  everlafting  fire."  And  Matth.  xxv.  41. 
"  Depart,  ye  curfed,  into  everlafting  fire,  prepared  for 
«  the  devil  and  his  angels."  And  here  in  the  text^ 
"  thefe,"  that  is  the  wicked,  "  lliall  go  away  into  ever- 
"  lafting  punifhment."  And  Mark  ix.  It  is  there 
three  feveral  times  with  great  vehemency  repeated  by 
our  Saviour,  "  where  their  worm  dieth  not,  and 
"  the  fire  is  not  quenched."  And  2  Thef.  i.  9.  fpeak- 
ing  of  "  them  that  know  not  God,  and  obey  not  the 
"  gofpel  of  his  Son,"  itisfaidof  them,  "  who  fhall 
"  be  punillied  with  everlafting  deftru6tion." 

I  know  very  well  that  great  endeavour  hath  been 
ufed  to  avoid  the  force  of  thefe  texts,  by  fhewing 
that  the  words,  for  ever  and  everlafting,  are  frequent- 
ly ufed  in  fcripture  in  a  more  limited  fenfe,  only  for 
a  lono"  duration  and  continuance.  Thus,  for  ever, 
doth  very  often  in  the  old  teftament  only  fignify  for 
a  long  time  and  till  the  end  of  the  jewifh  difpenfati- 
on.  And  in  the  epiftle  of  St.  Jude,  verfe  7th,  the 
cities  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  are  faid  to  be  "  fet 
«  forth  for  an  example,  fufferlng  the  vengeance  of 
«  eternal  fire  •,"  that  is,  of  a  fire  that  was  not  extin- 
guifhed  till  thofe  cities  were  utterly  confumed. 

And  therefore  to  clear  the  meaning  of  the  fore- 
mentioned  texts,  firft,  I  ftiall  readily  grant,  that 
the  words,  for  ever  and  everlafting,  do  not  always 
in  fcripture  fignify  an  endlefs  duration  ;  and  that  this 
is  fufticiently  proved  by  the  inftances  alledged  to  this 
purpofe.  But  then,  fecondly,  it  cannot  be  denied 
on  the  other  hand,  that  thefe  words  are  often  in 
fcripture  ufed  in  a  larger  fenfe,  and  fo  as  neceffarily 

to 


Of  the  eternity  of  hell  tormettts.  y 

to  fignify  an  interminable  and  endlefs  duration.  As  SERM. 
where  eternity  is  attributed  to  God,  and  he  is  fai^  to  ^^^^• 
"  live  forever  and  ever  :"  and  where  eternal  happinefs 
in  another  world  is  promifed  to  good  men,  and  that 
"  they  fliall  be  for  ever  with  the  Lord."  Now  the 
very  fame  words  and  expreflions  are  ufed  concerning 
the  punifhment  of  wicked  men  in  another  life,  and 
there  is  great  reafon  why  we  fhouJd  underfland  them 
in  the  fame  extent:  both  becaufe  if  God  had  intend- 
ed to  have  told  us  that  the  punifhment  of  wicked 
men  fhall  have  no  end,  the  languages  wherein  the 
fcriptures  are  written  do  hardlyafford  fuller  and  more 
certain  words,  than  thofe  that  are  ufcd  in  this  cafe, 
whereby  to  exprefs  to  us  a  duration  without  end: 
and  Jikewife,  which  is  almoft  a  peremptoiy  decifion 
of  the  thing,  becaufe  the  duration  of  the  punifhment 
of  wicked  men  is  in  x.]^t  very  fame  fentence  expreffed 
by  the  very  fame  word  which  is  ufcd  for  the  duration 
of  the  happinefs  of  the  righteous :  as  is  evident  from 
the  text,  "  thefe,'*  fpeaking  of  the  wicked,  "  fhall 
"  go  away,  iU  xcAao'/v  oiluvtov,  into  eternal  punifh- 
"  ment,  but  the  righteous,  slf  ^wjjV  alanov,  into 
"  life  eternal.'*     I  proceed  to  the 

Second  thing  I  propofed ;  namely,  to  fhew  that 
this  is  not  inconfiftent  either  with  the  juftice  or  the 
goodnefs  of  God.  For  in  this  the  force  of  the  ob- 
jeftion  lies.  And  it  hath  been  attempted  to  be  an- 
fwered  feveral  ways,  none  of  which  feems  to  me  to 
give  clear  and  full  fatisfadlion  to  it. 

Firft,  it  is  faid  by  fome,  that  becaufe  fin  is  infinite 
in  refped  of  the  objed  againft  whom  it  is  committed, 
which  is  God,  therefore  it  deferves  an  infinite  pu- 
piihment. 

But 


'S  Of  the  eternity  of  hell  torments. 

^xxicv'       ^"^  ^^^^  ^  *^°"^^  ^^^^  "P^"  examination  be  found 
to  have  more  of  fubtlety  than  of  fohdity  in  it.     'Tis 
true  indeed,  that  the  dignity  of  the  perfon  againfl 
whom  any  offence  is  committed  is  a  great  aggravati- 
on of  the  fault.     For  which  reafon  all  offences  againfl 
God  are  certainly  the  greatefl  of  all  other.     But  that 
crimes  fhould  hereby  be  heightened  to  an  infinite  de- 
gree can  by  no  means  be  admitted ;  and  that  for  this 
plain  reafon;  becaufe  then  the  evil  and  demerit  of  all 
fins  mull  neceffarily  be  equal ;  for  the  demerit  of  no 
fin  can  be  more  than  infinite :  and  if  the  demerit  of 
all  fins  be  equal,  there  can  then  be  no  reafon  for  the 
degrees  of  punifhment  in  another  world :  but  to  deny 
that  there  are  degrees  of  punifhment  there,  is  not  on- 
ly contrary  to  reafon,  but  to  our  Saviour's  exprefs 
allertion,  that   fome  fhall   be  "  beaten  with  many 
"  flripes"  and  fome  with  "  fewer,"  and  that  it  fhall 
be  "  more  tolerable  for  fome  in  the  day  of  judgment" 
than  for  others.    Befides,  that  by  the  fame  reafon 
thatthe  leaftfinthatis  committed  againfl  God  may  be 
faid  to  be  infinite  becaufe  of  it's  obje(5l,  the  leafl  pu- 
nifhment that  is  inflidled  by  God  may  be  faid  to  be 
infinite  becaufe  of  it's  author;  and  then  all  punifh- 
ments  from  God  as  well  as  all  fins  againfl  him  would 
be  equal ;  which  is  palpably  abfurd.     So  that  this  an- 
fwer  is  by  no  means  fufRcient  to  break  the  force  of 
this  obje(5lion. 

Secondly,  it  is  faid  by  others,  that  if  wicked  men 
lived  for  ever  in  this  world  they  would  fin  for  ever, 
and  therefore  they  deferve  to  be  punifhed  for  ever. 
But  this  hath  neither  truth  nor  reafon  enough  in  it 
to  give  fatisfadion.  For  who  gan  certainly  tell  diat 
if  a  man  lived  never  fo  long  he  would  never  repent 
and  grow  better  ?  Befides, 


Of  the  eternity  of  hell  torments. 

Befides,  that  the  juftice  of  God  doth  only  punifh 
the  fins  which  men  have  committed  in  this  hfe,  and 
not  thofe  which  they  might  poflibly  have  committed 
if  they  had  lived  longer. 

Thirdly,  it  is  faid  in  the  laft  place,  that  God  hath 
fet  before  men  everlafting  happinefs  and  mifery,  and 
the  finner  hath  his  choice.  Here  are  two  things  faid 
which  fecm  to  bid  fairly  towards  an  anfwer. 

Firfl,  that  the  reward  which  GoDpromifeth  to  our 
obedience  is  equal  to  the  punifhment  which  he  threat- 
ens to  our  difobedience.  But  yet  this  I  doubt  will 
not  reach  the  bufinefs :  becaufe  though  it  be  not  con- 
trary to  juftice  to  exceed  in  rewards,  that  being  mat- 
ter of  meer  favour  -,  yet  it  may  be  fo,  to  exceed  in 
punilhments. 

Secondly,  it  is  further  faid,  that  the  finner  in  this 
cafe  has  nothing  to  complain  of,  fince  he  hath  his 
own  choice.  This  I  confefs  is  enough  to  filence  the 
finner,  and  to  make  him  to  acknowledge  that  his  de- 
ftru6lion  is  of  himfelf ;  but  yet  for  ail  that,  It  does 
not  feem  fo  clearly  to  fatisfy  the  obje<5tion  from  the 
difproportion  between  the  fault  and  the  punifhment. 

And  therefore  I  fhall  endeavour  to  clear,  if  it  may 
be,  this  matter  yet  a  little  further  by  thefe  following 
confiderations. 

Firft,  let  it  be  confidered,  that  the  meafure  of  pe- 
nalties with  refpeft  to  crimes  is  not  only,  nor  always, 
to  be  taken  from  the  quality  and  degree  of  the  of- 
fence, much  lefs  from  the  duration  and  continuance 
of  it,  but  from  the  ends  and  reafons  of  government  i 
which  require  fuch  penalties  as  may,  if  it  bepollible, 
fecure  the  obfervation  of  the  law,  and  deter  men  from 
the  breach  of  it.     And  the  reafon  of  this  is  evident. 

Vol.  III.  M  m  m  becaufe 

I. 


Of  the  eternity  of  hell  torments, 
becaufe  if  it  were  once  declared  that  no  man  fliould 
fufFer  longer  for  any  crime  than  according  to  the  pro- 
portion of  the  time  in  which  it  was  committed,  the 
confequence  of  this  would  be,  that  Tinners  would  be 
better  hufbands  of  their  time,  and  fin  fo  much  the  fat- 
ter, that  they  might  have  the  greater  bargain  of  it, 
and  might  fatisfy  for  their  fins  by  a  Ihorter  punifli- 
ment. 

And  it  would  be  unreafonable  likewife  upon  ano- 
ther account ;  becaufe  fome  of  the  greatell  fins  may 
perhaps  be  committed  in  the  fhorteft  time  ;  for  in- 
ftance,  murther  \  the  adt  whereof  may  be  over  in  a 
moment,  but  the  effefts  of  it  are  perpetual.  For  he 
that  kills  a  man  once  kills  him  for  ever.  The  ad  of 
murther  may  be  committed  in  a  trice,  but  the  injury 
isendlefsand  irreparable.  So  that  this  objection  of 
temporary  crimes  being  punifhed  with  fo  much  longer 
yfufferings  is  plainly  of  no  force. 

Befides  that,  whoever  confiders  how  ineffcdual 
the  threatning  even  of  eternal  torments  is  to  the 
greateft  part  of  finners,  will  foon  be  fatisfied  that  a 
lefs  penalty  than  that  of  eternal  fufferings  would,  to 
the  far  greatefl:  part  of  mankind,  have  been  in  all  pro- 
bability of  little  or  no  force.  And  therefore  if  any 
thing  more  terrible  than  eternal  vengeance  could 
have  been  threatned  to  the  workei-s  of  iniquity,  it  had 
not  been  unreafonable,  becaufe  it  would  all  have 
been  little  enough  to  deter  men  effeftually  from  fin. 

So  that  what  proportion  crimes  and  penalties  ought 
to  bear  to  each  other,  is  not  fo  properly  a  confiderati- 
on  of  juflice,  as  of  wifdom  and  prudence  in  the  law- 


And 


Of  the  eternity  of  hell  tormeiits.  i  r 

And  the  reafon  of  this  feems  very  plain,  becaufe  SERM. 
the  meafure  of  penalties  is  not  taken  from  any  ftrift  ^^^^  • 
proportion  betwixt  crimes  and  punifhments  j  but 
from  one  great  end  and  defign  of  government,  which 
is  to  fecLire  the  obfervation  of  wholefom  and  necefla- 
ry  Jaws  •,  and  confeqnently  whatever  penalties  are  pro- 
per and  neceflary  to  this  end  are  not  unjuft:. 

And  this  confideration  I  defire  may  be  more  efpe- 
cialiy  obferved,  becaufe  it  flrikes  at  the  very  foun- 
dation of  the  objeftion.  For  if  the  appointing  and 
apportioning  of  penalties  to  crimes  be  not  fo  proper- 
ly a  confideration  of  juftice,  but  rather  of  prudence 
in  the  lawgiver  -,  then  whatever  the  difproportion 
may  be  between  temporary  fins  and  eternal  fufferings 
juftice  cannot  be  faid  to  be  concerned  in  it. 

Juftice  indeed  is  concerned,  that  the  righteous  and 
the  wicked  Ihould  not  be  treated  alike  \  and  farther 
yet,  that  greater  fins  fhould  have  a  heavier  punifhment, 
and  that  mighty  finners  fhould  be  mightily  torment- 
ed •,  but  all  this  may  be  confidered  and  adjufted  in 
the  degree  and  the  intenfenefs  of  the  fuffering,  with- 
out making  any  difference  in  the  duration  of  it. 

The  cafe  then  in  fhort  ftands  thus.  Whenever 
we  break  the  laws  of  God  we  fall  into  his  hands  and 
lie  at  his  mercy,  and  he  may  without  injuftice  inflidl 
what  punifhment  upon  us  he  pleafeth  :  and  confe- 
quently,  to  fecure  his  law  from  violation,  he  may  be- 
forehand threaten  what  penalties  he  thinks  fit  and  ne- 
cefTary  to  deter  men  from  the  tranfgrefTion  of  it. 
And  this  is  not  efteemed  unjuft  among  men,  to  pu- 
nifh  crimes  that  are  committed  in  an  inftant  with  the 

perpetual  lofs  of  eftate,  or  liberty,  or  life. 

, ,.,/v...-.'-t-A,>H&^  w. "  .■■ 
M  m  m  2  Second^ 


12  Of  the  eternity  of  hell  torments, 

SERM.  Secondly,  this  will  yet  appear  more  reafonablc 
^^  ■  when  we  confider,that  after  all,  he  that  threatens  hath 
ftill  the  power  of  execution  in  his  own  hands.  For 
there  is  this  remarkable  difference  between  promifes 
and  threatnings,  that  he  who  promifeth  pafTeth  over 
a  right  to  another,  and  thereby  (lands  obliged  to  him 
in  juftice  and  faithfulnefs  to  make  good  his  promife ; 
and  if  he  do  not,  the  party  to  whom  the  promife  is 
'**^'^^  made  is  not  only  difappointed  but  injurioufly  dealt 
withal  :  but  in  threatning  it  is  quite  otherwife.  He 
that  threatens  keeps  the  right  of  punifhing  in  his  own 
hand,  and  is  not  obliged  to  execute  what  he  hath 
threatned  any  further  than  the  reafons  and  ends  of 
government  do  require :  and  he  may  without  any 
injury  to  the  party  threatned  remit  and  abate  as  much 
as  he  pleafeth  of  the  punifliment  that  he  hath  threat- 
ned: and  becaufe  in  fo  doing  he  is  not  worfe  but 
better  than  his  word,  no  body  can  find  fault,  or 
complain  of  any  wrong  or  injuftice  thereby  done  to 
him. 

Nor  is  this  any  impeachment  of  God's  truth  and 
faithfulnefs,  any  more  than  it  is  efteemed  among 
men  a  piece  of  falfhood  not  to  do  what  they  have 
threatned.  God  did  abfolutely  threaten  the  deftrudlion 
of  the  city  of  Niniveh,  and  his  peevifb  prophet  did  un- 
dcrltand  the  threatning  to  be  abfolute,  and  was  very 
angry  with  God  for  employing  him  in  a  mefTage  that 
was  not  made  good.  But  God  underftood  his  own 
right,  and  did  what  he  pleafed  notwithftanding  the 
threatning  he  had  denounced,  and  for  all  Jonah  was 
fo  touched  in  honour  that  he  had  rather  have  died 
himfelf  than  that  Niniveh  fhould  not  have  been  de- 
ftroyed,  only  to  have  verified  his  melTage. 
..  I  know 


Of  the  eternity  of  hell  torments.  13 

I  know  it  is  faid  in  this  cafe,  tliat  God  hath  con-  S  E  R  M. 

XXXV 
firmed  thefe  threatnings  by  an  oath,  which  is  a  cer- 
tain fign  of  the  immutability  of  his  counfel ;  and 
therefore  his  truth  is  concerned  in  the  flridl  and  ri- 
gorous execution  of  them.  The  land  of  Canaan  was 
a  type  of  heaven,  and  the  Ifraelites  who  rebelled  in 
the  wildernefs  were  alfo  a  type  of  impenitent  finners 
under  the  gofpel ;  confequently  the  oath  of  God 
concerning  the  rebellious  Ifraelites,  when  "  he  fware 
*'  in  his  wrath  that  they  fhoiad  not  enter  into  his 
*'  reft,"  that  is,  into  the  land  of  Canaan,  doth  equal- 
ly oblige  him  to  execute  his  threatning  upon  ail  im- 
penitent fmners  under  the  gofpel,  that  "  they  {hall 
"  never  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God."  And  this 
is  very  truly  rcafoned,  fo  far  as  the  threatning  ex- 
tends ;  which  if  we  attend  to  the  plain  words  of  it, 
beyond  which  threatnings  are  never  to  be  ftretched, 
doth  not  feem  to  reach  any  further  than  to  the  ex- 
clufion  of  impenitent  finncrs  out  of  heaven,  and  their 
falling  finally  fhort  of  the  reft  and  happinefs  of  the 
righteous  :  which,  however,  directly  overthrows  the 
opinion  afcribed  to  Origen,  that  the  devils  and  wicked 
men  fliall  all  be  faved  at  laft ;  God  having  "  fworn  in 
•'  his  wrath  that  they  fliall  never  enter  into  his  reft." 

But  then,  as  to  the  eternal  mifery  and  punifhment 
threatned  to  wicked  men  in  the  other  world,  though 
it  be  not  neceflarily  comprehended  in  this  oath  that 
they  "  fliall  not  enter  into  his  reft  j"  yet  we  are  to 
confider,  that  both  the  tenor  of  the  fentence  which 
our  blcfled  Savioujx  hath  afliiredus  willbepafted  up- 
on them  at  the  judgment  of  the  great  day,  "  depart 
*'  ye  curfed  into  everlafting  fire  i"  and  likewife  this 
declaration  in  the  text,    that  ^   the  wicked   fliall 


r  g'^ 


I A  Of  the  eternity  of  hell  torments. 

SE  R  M.  "  go  away  into  everlafting  punifhment,"  though  they 
.^_^^'j  <^o  not  reftrain  God  from  doing  what  he  pleafes,  yet 
they  cut  off  from  the  fmner  all  reafonable  hopes  of 
the  relaxation  or  mitigation  of  them.  For  fince  the 
great  judge  of  the  world  hath  made  fo  plain  and  ex- 
prefs  a  declaration,  and  will  certainly  pafs  fuch  a  fen- 
tence,  it  would  be  the  greateft  folly  and  madnefs  in 
the  world  for  the  finner  to  entertain  any  hope  of 
efcaping  it,  and  to  venture  his  foul  upon  that  hope. 

I  know  but  one  thing  more,  commonly  faid  up- 
on this  argument,  that  feems  material,  and  that  is 
this ;  that  the  words  death  and  deftruflion  and  perifli- 
ing,  whereby  the  punifhmentjof  wicked  men  in  the 
other  world  is  moft  frequently  cxprefTed  in  fcripture, 
do  moft  properly  import  annihilation  and  an  utter 
end  of  being ;  and  therefore  may  reafonably  be  fo 
underftood  in  the  matter  of  which  we  are  now  fpcak- 
ing. 

To  this  I  anfwer,  that  thefe  words,  and  thofe 
which  anfwer  them  in  other  languages,  are  often, 
both  in  fcripture  and  other  authors,  ufed  to  fignify 
a  ftate  of  great  mlfery  and  fuffering,  without  the  ut- 
ter €xtin6lion  of  the  miferable.  Thus  God  is  often 
in  fcripture  faid  to  bring  deftrucftion  upon  a  nation 
when  he  fends  great  judgments  upon  them,  though 
they  do  not  exterminate  and  make  an  utter  end  of 
them. 

And  nothing  is  more  common  in  moft  languages, 
than  by  periftiing  to  exprefs  a  pcrfon's  being  undone 
and  made  very  miferable.  As  in  that  known  paflage 
in  Tiberius  his  letter  to  the  Roman  fenate,  *  "  let  all 

*  Ita  me  dii  dexquc  omnes  pejus  perdant  quam  hodie  p erire  me 
fentio,  &c. 

I  «  the 


of  the  eternity  of  hell  torments,  {^ 

«  the  gods  and  goddeffes,  faith  he,  deftroy  me  worfe  S  ERM. 
"  than  at  this  very  time  I  feel  my  lelf  to  perifh,  &c."  ^^^V- 
in  which  faying,  the  words,  deftroy  and  perifh,  arc 
both  of  them  ufed  to  exprefs  the  miferable  anguilli 
and  torment  which  at  that  time  he  felt  in  his  mind, 
as  Tacitus  tells  us  at  large. 

And  as  for  the  word  death  •,  a  ftate  of  mifery,  which 
is  as  bad  or  worfe  than  death,  may  properly  enough 
be  called  by  that  name :  and  for  this  reafon  the  punifh- 
ment  of  wicked  men  after  the. day  of  judgment  is  in 
the  book  of  the  revelation  fo  frequently  and  fitly  call- 
ed "  the  fecond  death."  And  "  the  lake  of  fire,'*  into  Rev.  xx.- 
which  the  wicked  fhall-be  caft  to  be  tormented  in  it,  '+* 
is  exprefly  called  "  the  fecond  death." 

But  befides  this,  they  that  argue  from  the  force 
of  thefe  words,  that  the  punifhment  of  wicked  men 
in  the  other  world  fhall  be  nothing  elfe  but  an  utter 
end  of  their  being,  do  neceflarily  fall  into  two  great 
inconveniences. 

Firll,  that  hereby  they  exclude  all  pofitive  punifh- 
ment and  torment  of  finners.  For  if  the  fecond  death, 
and  to  be  deftroyed,  and  to  perifh,  fignify  nothing 
clfe  but  the  annihilation  of  fmners,  and  an  utter  ex- 
tinction of  their  being-,  and  if  this  be  all  theefFedof 
that  dreadful  fentcnce  which  fhall  be  paffed  upon 
them  at  the  day  of  judgment,  then  the  fire  of  hell 
is  quenched  all  at  once,  and  is  only  a  frightful  meta- 
phor without  any  meaning.  But  this  is  diredlly  con- 
trary to  the  tenor  of  fcripture,  which  doth  fo  often 
defcribe  the  punifliment  of  wicked  men  in  hell  by 
pofitive  torments  :  and  particularly  our  bleffed  Sa- 
VI  OUR,  defcribing  the  lamentable  ftate  of  the  damned 
in  hell,   exprefly'  fays,  that  "there  fhall  be  weeping 

«  and 


1$  Of  the  eternity  of  hell  torments. 

SE  R  M.  <«  and  wailing  and  gnafhing  of  teeth  i'*  which  cannot 
^XXXV.  ^  j^g^  •£  annihilation  be  all  the  meaning  and  effed  of 
the  fentence  of  the  great  day. 

Secondly,  another  inconvenience  of  this  opinion  is, 
that  if  annihilation  be  all  the  punifhment  of  finners 
in  the  other  world,  then  the  punifhment  of  all  fin- 
ners m.uft  of  neceflity  be  equal,  becaufe  there  are  no 
degrees  of  annihilation  or  not-being.  But  this  alfo 
is  moft  diredly  contrary  to  fcripture,  as  I  have  al- 
ready (hewn. 

I  know  very  well  that  fome  who  are  of  this  opinion 
do  allow  a  very  long  and  tedious  time  of  the  moft 
terrible  and  intolerable  torment  of  finners,  and  after 
that  they  believe  that  there  fhall  be  an  utter  end  of 
their  being. 

But  then  they  muft  not  argue  this  from  the  force 
of  the  words  before  mentioned,  becaufe  the  plain  in- 
ference from  thence  is,    that  annihilation  is  all  the 
punifhment  that  wicked  men  fhall  undergo  in  the 
next  life ;  and  if  that  be  not  true,  as  I  have  plainly 
ihewn  that  it  is  not,  I  do  not  fee  from  what  other 
words  or  exprefTions  in  fcripture  they  can  find  the 
leaft  ground  for  this  opinion,  that  the  torment  of 
wicked  men  fhall  at  laft  end  in  their  annihilation. 
And  yet  admitting  all  this,  for  which  I  think  there 
is  no  ground  at  all  in  fcripture,   I  cannot  fee  what 
great  comfort  finners  can  take  in  the  thought  of  a 
tedious  time  of  terrible  torment,  ending  at  lafl  in 
annihilation,  and  the  utter  extindlion  of  their  beings. 
Thirdly,  we  may  confider  further,  that  the  pri- 
mary end  of  all  threatnings  is  not  punifhment,   but 
the  prevention  of  it.    For  God  does  not  threaten 
that  men  may  fin  and  be  punifhed,  but  that  they  may 

jiot 


of  the  etefjiity  ofheUtormenti.  \j 

not  fin,  and  fo  may  efcape    the   pimifhment  threat- SEP.  M. 
ned.     And  therefore  tlie  higher  the  threatning  runs, 
io  much  the  more  mercy  and  gcodnefs  there  is  in  it ; 
becaufc  it  is  fo  much  the  more  hkely  to  hinder  men 
from  incurring  the  penalty  that  is  threatned. 

Fourthly,  Jet  it  be  confidered  likewife,  that  when 
it  is  fo  very  plain  that  God  hath  threatned  eternal 
mifery  to  impenitent  Tinners,  all  the  prudence  in  the 
world  obliges  men  to  believe  that  he  is  in  good  car- 
neft,  and  will  execute  thefe  threatnings  upon  them, 
if  they  will  obftinately  Hand  it  out  with  him,  and 
will  not  be  brought  to  repentance.  And  therefore 
in  all  reafon  we  ought  fo  to  demean  our  felves,  and 
fo  to  perfuade  others,  as  knowing  the  terror  of  the 
Lord,  and  that  they  v/ho  wilfully  break  his  laws  are 
in  danger  of  eternal  death.  To  which  I  will  add  in 
the 

Fifth  and  laft  place-,  that  if  Vv-e  fuppofe  that  God 
did  intend  that  his  threatnings  ftould  have  t'heir  ef-^ 
fed:  to  deter  men  from  the  breach  of  his  laws,  it  can- 
not be  imagined  that  in  the  lame  revelation,  which 
declares  thefe  threatnings,  any  intimation  fhould  be 
given  of  the  abatement  or  non-execution  oi  them- 
For  by  this  God  would  liave  v/eakened  his  own  laws, 
and  have  taken  off  the  edge  and  terror  of  his  threat- 
nings :  bccaufe  a  threatning  hath  quite  loft  ii's  force, 
if  we  once  come  to  believe  that  it  will  not  be  execu- 
ted :  and  confequently,  it  would  be  a  very  impious 
defign  to  go  about  to  teach  or  perfuade  any  thing  to 
the  contrary,  and  a  betraying  men  iiuo  that  mifery, 
which  had  it  been  firmly  believed  might  have  been 
avoided. 

Vol.  III.  N  n  n  Wfc 

I. 


iS  Of  the  eternity  of  hell  torments. 

ERM.  We  are  all  bound  to  preach,  and  you  and  I  are  all 
bound  to  believe  the  terrors  of  the  Lord.  Not  fo, 
as  faucily  to  determine  and  pronounce  what  God  muft 
do  in  this  cafe;  for  after  all,  he  may  do  what  he  will, 
as  I  have  clearly  fhewn :  but  what  is  fit  lor  us  to  do, 
and  what  we  have  reafon  to  expe6l,  if  notwithftand- 
ing  a  plain  and  exprefs  threatning  of  "  the  vengeance 
"  of  eternal  fire,"  we  frill  go  on  to  "  treaflire  up  to 
*'  our  felves  wrath  againft  the  day  of  wrath,  and  the 
"  revelation  of  the  righteous  judgmentof  God  ;"  and 
will  defperately  put  it  to  the  hazard,  whether,  and 
how  far  God  will  execute  his  threatnings  upon  fin- 
ners  in  another  world. 

And  therefore  there  is  no  need  why  we  fhould  be 

very  folicitoufly  concerned  for  the  honour  of  God*s 

juitice  or  goodnefs  in  this  matter.     Let  us  but  take 

care  to  believe  and  avoid  the  threatnings  of  God  ;  and 

then,  how  terrible  foever  they  are,  no  harm  can  come 

to  us.     And  as  for  God,  let  us  not  doubt  but  that 

he  will   take  care  of  his  own  honour  \  and  that  he, 

•'  who  is  holy  in  all  his  ways,  and  righteous  in  all  his 

"  works,"  will  do  nothing  that  is   repugnant  to  his 

eternal  goodnefs  and  righteoufnefs ;  and  that  he  will 

certainly  fo  manage  things  at  the  judgment  of  the 

o-reat  day,  as  "  to  be  juftified  in  his  layings,  and  to 

'"'  be  righteous  when  we  are  judged."     For,  notwith- 

ftanding  his  threatnings,   he  hath   referved  power  e- 

nough  in  his  own  hands  to  do  right  to  all  his  perfec- 

tians:  fo   that  we  may   reft   afiured,    that   he  will 

*'  judge  the  world  in  righteoufnefs ;"  and  if  it  be  any 

wife  inconfiftent  either  with  righteoufnefs  or  goodnefs, 

which  he  knows  much   better  than  we  do,  to  make 

iinners  miferable  for  ever,  that  he  will  not  do  it  >  nor 

is 


Of  the  eternity  of  hell  torments,  ig 

is  it  credible,  that  he  would  threaten  finners  with  a  pu-S  E  R  M. 

Y  V  Y  v 

nilliment  which  he  could   not  juftly  execute  upon,  '  ' 
them. 

Therefore  finners  ought  always  to  be  afraid  of  it, 
and  reckon  upon  it :  and  always  to  remember,  that 
there  is  great  goodnefs  and  mercy  in  the  feverity  of 
God's  threatnings ;  and  that  nothing  will  morejufti- 
fy  the  infiiflion  of  eternal  torments,  than  the  foolifh 
prefuniption  of  finners  in  venturing  upon  them 
notwithftanding  fuch  plain  and  terrible  threatnings.  ■ 

This,  I  am  fure,  is  a  good  argument  to  all  of  us 
to  *'  work  out  our  falvation  with  fear  and  trem- 
"  bling  i"  and  with  all  pofllble  care  to  endeavour 
the  prevention  of  that  mifery  which  is  fo  terribly  fe- 
vere,  that  at  prefentwe  can  hardly  tell  how  to  recon- 
cile it  with  the  juftice  and  goodnefs  of  God. 

This  God  heartily  defires  we  would  do,  and  hath 
Iblemnly  fworn,  that  "  he  hath  no  pleafure  in  the 
"  death  of  the  wicked,  but  rather  that  he  fhould 
"  turn  from  his  wickednefs  and  live."  So  that  here 
is  all  imaginable  care  taken  to  prevent  our  mifcarri- 
age,  and  all  the  afliirance  that  the  God  of  truth  can 
give  us  of  his  unwilhngnefs  to  bring  this  mifery  upon 
us.  And  both  thefe,  I  am  fure,  are  arguments  of 
great  goodnefs.  For  what  can  goodnefs  do  more, 
than  to  warn  us  of  this  mifery,  and  earneftly  per- 
fuade  us  to  prevent  it ;  and  to  threaten  us  fo  very 
terribly,  on  purpofe  to  deter  us  from  fo  great  a 
danger.? 

And  if  this  will  not  prevail  with  us,  but  we  will 

ftill  go  on  to  "  defpife  the  riches  of  God's  goodnefs, 

"  and  long fuffering,  and  forbearance;"  what  in  rea- 

fpn  remains  for  us,  "  but  a  fearful  looking  for  oi 

N  n  n  2  *'  judgment 


20  Of  the  eternity  of  hell  torments. 

I  R  M.  «c  judgment  and  fiery  indignation  to  confume  us  ?'* 
And  whatalmofl  can  juftice,  or  even  goodnefs  i-t  felf 
do  lefs,  than  to  inflift  that  punifhment  upon  u?^, 
which  with  eyes  open  we  would  wilfully  run  upon  ^ 
and  which  no  warning,  no  perfuafion,  no  importuni- 
ty could  prevail  with  us  to  avoid  ?  And  when,  as  the 
apoftle  fays,  "  knowing  the  judgment  of  God,  that 
"  they  which  commit  fuch  things  are  v/orthy  of 
^'  death  ;"  yet  for  all  that,  v/e  would  venture  to  com- 
mit them. 

And  therefore,  whatever  we  fuffcr,  we  do  but  in- 
herit our  own  choice,  and  have  no  reafon  to  com- 
plain of  God,  who  hath  fct  before  us  life  and  death, 
eternal  happlnefs  and  mifery,  and  hath  left  us  to  be 
the  carvers  of  our  own  fortune:  and  if,  after  all  this, 
we  will  obifinately  refufe  this  happinefs,  and  v/ilfulJy 
run  upon  this  mifery,  "  wo  unto  us !  for  we  have 
"  rewarded  evil  to  our  felves." 

You  fee  then,  by  all  that  hath  been  faid  upon  this 
argument,  what  we  have  all  reafon  to  cxped:,  if  we 
will  ftill  go  on  in  our  fins,  and  will  not  be  brought 
to  repentance.  You  have  heard,  v»'hat  a  terrible  pu- 
niibment  the  juft  God  hath  thrcatned  to  the  v/orkcrs 
pf  iniquity  :  and  that  in  as  plain  v/ords  as  can  be  ufed 
feto  exprefs  any  thing.  "  Thefc,"  that  is  the  wicked, 
*'  fhall  go  away  into  everlafting  punifhment,  but  the 
«'.  righteous  into  life  eternal  " 

Here  are  \\\g  and  death,  happinefs  and  mifery  fet 
before  us.  Not  this  frail  and  mortal  life,  which  is 
hardly  worth  the  having,  were  it  not  in  order  to  a 
better  and  happier  life  %  nor  a  temporal  death,  to  get 
above  the  dread  whereof  fuould  not  methinks  be  diMi- 
pult  to  us,  were  it  not  for  tlic  bitter  and  terrible  con- 

feq  -lenccs 


Of  the  eternity  of  hell  torments,  2 1 

feqiiences  of  it:  but  an   eternal  life,  and  an  eternal  S  E  R  M. 

XXXV 

enjoyment  of  all  things  which  can  render  life  plea- 
fan  t  and  happy;  and  a  perpetual  death,  which  will 
for  ever  torment  us,  but  never  make  an  end  of  us. 

Thefe  God  propounds  to  our  choice :  and  if  the 
confideration  of  them  will  not  prevail  with  us  to  leave 
our  fins,  and  to  reform  our  lives,  v/hat  will?  Weigh- 
tier motives  cannot  be  propofed  to  the  underllanding 
of  man,  than  everlafting  punifnment,  and  life  eter- 
nal ;  than  the  greateft  and  moft  durable  happinefs> 
and  the  moft  intolerable  and  lafting  mifery  that  hu- 
man nature  is  capable  of. 

Now,  confidering  in  what  terms  the  threatnings 
of  the  gofpel  are  exprelTed,  wfe  have  all  the  reafon  in 
the  world  to  believe  that  thepunirnment  of  finners  in 
another  world  will  be  everlafting.  However,  we 
cannot  be  certain  of  the  contrary,  time  enough  to 
prevent  it;  not  till  we  come  there,  and  find  by  expe- 
rience how  it  is :  and  if  it  prove  fo,  it  will  then  be 
too  late  either  to  prevent  that  terrible  doom,  or  to 
get  it  revers'd. 

Some  comfort  themfelves  with  the  uncomfortable 
and  uncertain  hope  of  being  difcharged  out  of  being, 
and  r  duced  to  their  firft  nothine:  at  leaft  after  the 
tedious  and  terrible  fuffcring  of  the  moft  grievous 
and  exquifite  torments  for  innumerable  ages.  And 
if  this  fliould  happen  to  be  true,  good  God  !  how  fee- 
ble, how  cold  a  comfort  is  this  .^  Where  is  the  rea- 
fon and  underftanding  of  men,  to  make  this  their  Jaft 
refuge  and  hope  -,  and  to  lean  upon  it  as  a  matter  of 
mighty  confolation,  that  they  fliall  be  miferabie  be- 
yond all  imagination,  and  beyond  all  patience,  for 
God  knows  how  many  ages.''  "  Have  all  the  workers 

"of 


22 


Of  the  eternity  of  hell  torments. 


S  E  R  M.  <«  of  iniquity  no  knowledge  ?"  No   right   fenfe  and 
judgment   of  things?  No  confideration  and  care  of 
themfelves,  no  concernment  for  their  own  lading  in- 
terefl  and  happinefs  ? 

Origen,  I  know  not  for  what  good  reafon,  is  faid 
to  have  been  of  opinion,  that  the  punifhment  of  de- 
vils and  wicked  men,  after  the  day  of  judgment, 
will  continue  but  for  a  thoufand  years  •,  and  that  after 
that  time,  they  fhall  all  be  finally  faved.  I  can  very 
hardly  perfuade  my  felf,  that  fo  wife  and  learned  a 
man  as  Origcn  was  fhould  be  pofitive  in  an  opinion 
for  which,  there  can  be  no  certain  ground  in  reafon, 
cfpecially  for  the  punctual  andprecife  term  of  a  thou- 
fand years  5  and  for  which  there  is  no  ground  at  all, 
that  I  know  of,  from  divine  revelation. 

But  upon  the  whole  matter,  however  it  be  ;  be  it 
for  a  thoufand  years,  or  be  it  for  a  longer  and  un- 
known term,  or  be  it  for  ever,  which  is  plainly 
threatned  in  the  golpel :  I  fay,  however  it  be,  this  is 
certain,  that  it  is  infinitely  wifer  to  take  care  to  avoid 
it,  than  to  difpute  11^  and  to  run  the  final  hazard  of 
it.  Put  it  which  v/ay  vvc  will,  efpccially  if  we  put  it 
at  the  worll,  as  in  all  prudence  we  ought  to  do,  it  is 
by  all  poffible  means  to  be  provided  againft :  So  ter- 
rible, fo  intolerable  is  the  thought,  yea,  the  very  leaft 
fufpicion  of  being  miferable  for  ever. 

And  now  give  me  leave  to  afik  you,  as  St.  Paul  did 
king  Agrippa,  "  Do  you  believe  the  fcriptures  ?'* 
And  I  hope  I  may  anfwer  for  you  my  felf,  as  he  did 
for  Agrippa,  "  I  know  you  do  believe  them."  And 
in  them  thefe  things  are  clearly  revealed,  and  are 
part  of  that  creed  of  which  we  make  a  folemn  pro- 
feffion  every  day, 

2  And 


Gf  the  eternity  of  hell  tor?nents,  2j 

And  yet  when  we  confider  how  moft  men  hve,  is  S  E  R  M. 
it  credible  that  they  do  firmly  believe  this  plain  decla- 
ration of  our   Saviour  and    our  judge,  that  ''  the 
"  wicked  Ihall  go  away  into  everlafting  punifliment, 
t'  but  the  righteous  into  life  eternal  ?" 

Or  if  they  do  in  fome  fort  believe  it,  is  it  credible 
that. they  do  at  all  confider  it  ferioufly,  and  lay  it  to 
heart  ?  So  that  if  we  have  a  mind  to  reconcile  our  be- 
hef  with  our  actions,  we  mud  either  alter  our  bible 
and  our  creed,  or  we  muft  change  our  lives. 

Let  us  then  "  confider,  and  fhewour  felves  men." 
And  if  we  do  fo,  can  any  man  to  pleafe  himfelf  for 
a  little  while  be  contented  to  be  punilhed  for  ever  ; 
and  for  the  fhadow  of  a  fhort  and  imperfect  happi- 
nefs  in  this  life,  be  willing  to  run  the  hazard  of  be- 
ing really  and  eternally  miferable  in  the  next  world  ^ 

Surely  this  confideration  alone,  of  the  extreme  and 
endlefs  mifery  of  impenitent  finners  in  another  world, 
if  it  were  but  well  wrought  into  our  minds,  would  be 
fufficient  to  kill  all  the  temptations  of  this  world 
and  to  lay  them  dead  at  our  feet  \  and  to  make  us 
deaf  to  all  the  enchantments  of  fin  and  vice :  becaufe 
they  bid  us  fo  infinitely  to  our  iofs,  when  they  offer 
us  the  enjoyment  of  a  fhort  pleafure,  upon  fo  very 
hard  and  unequal  a  condition  as  that  of  being  mifera- 
ble forever. 

The  eternal  rewards  and  punifriments  of  another  life, 
which  are  the  great  fanelion  and  fecurity  of  Qod's 
laws,  one  would  think  iliould  be  a  fufficient  weight 
to  caft  the  fcales  againft  any  pleafare,  or  any  pain, 
that  this  world  can  tempt,  or  threaten  us  withal. 

And  yet,  after  all  this,  will  we  flill  go  on  to  do 
wickedly ;  when "^^  we  knov,^  the  terrors  of  the  Lord,'* 


Of  the  eternity  of  hell  formejits. 
and  that  we  mud  one  day  anfwer  all  our  bold  violati* 
ons  of  his  law,  and  contempts  of  his  authority,  with 
the  lofs  of  our  immortal  fouls,  and  by  "  fufFering  the 
"  vengeance  of  eternal  fire  ? 

What  is  it  then  that  can  give  men  the  heart  and 
courage;  but  I  recal  that  v/ord,  becaufe  it  is  not 
true  courage  but  fool-hardinefs,  thus  to  out-brave 
the  judgment  of  God,  and  to  fet  at  nought  the  hor- 
rible and  amazing  confideration  of  a  miferable  eterni- 
ty ?  How  is  it  pofTible  that  men  that  are  awake,  and 
in  their  wits,  fiiould  have  any  eafe  in  their  minds, 
or  enjoy  fo  much  as  one  quiet  hour,  whilft  fo  great 
a  danger  hangs  over  their  heads,  and  they  have  taken 
no  tolerable  care  to  prevent  it?  If  we  have  any  true 
and  juft  fenfe  of  this  danger,  we  cannot  fail  to  fhew 
that  we  have  it,  by  making  hade  to  efcapeit,  and  by 
taking  that  care  of  our  fouls,  which  is  due  to  immor- 
tal fpirits  that  are  made  to  be  happy  or  miferable  to 
all  eternity. 

Let  us  not  therefore  eftimate  and  meafure  thinss, 
as  they  appear  now  to  our  fenfual  and  deluded  and 
depraved  judgments  -,  but  let  us  open  our  eyes,  and 
look  to  the  laft  iffue  and  confequence  of  them :  let 
•us  often  think  of  thcfe  thing?,  andconfider  well  with 
our  felves,  what  apprehenfions  will  then  probably  fill 
and  pofiefs  our  minds,  when  we  iliall  ftand  trembling 
before  our  judge,  in  a  fearful  expectation  of  that  ter- 
rible fentence  which  is  jull  ready  to  be  pronounced, 
and  as  foon  as  ever  it  is  pronounced,  to  be  executed 
upon  us:  when  we  fhall  have  a  full  and  clear  fight  of 
the  unfpeakable  happinefs,  and  of  the  horrible  and 
aftonifhing  miferies  of  another  workl :  when  there 
fhall  be  no  longer  any  veil  of  fiefa  and  fenfe  to  inter- 

pofe 


Of  the  efemify  of  hell  torments,  2f 

pofe  between  them  and  us,  and  to  hide  thcfe  things  S  E  R  M« 

•  XXXV 

from  our  eyes  :  and,  in  a  word,  when  heaven,  with  ,_       ^j 
all  the  glories  of  it,  Ihall  be  open  to  our  view;  and, 
as  the  expreflion  is  in  Job,  *'  hell  fhall  be  naked  be- 
"  fore  us,  and  deftruflion  fhall  have  no  covering.'* 

How  fhall  we  then  be  confounded,  to  find  the 
truth  and  reality  of  thofe  things  which  we  will  not 
now  be  perfuaded  to  believe  ?  And  how  fliall  we  then 
wilh,  that  we  had  believed  "  the  terrors  of  the  Lor  d  i" 
and  inftead  of  quarrelling  with  the  principles  of  reli- 
gion, and  calling  them  into  queftion,  we  had  lived 
under  the  conftant  fenfe  and  awe  of  them  ? 

BleiTcd  be  God,  that  there  is  yet  hope  concerning 
us,  and  that  we  may  yet  "  flee  from  the  wrath  to 
"  come  -,"  and  that  the  miferies  of  eternity  may 
yet  be  prevented  in  time  :  and  that  for  this  very 
end  and  purpofe,  our  moft  gracious  and  merciful 
God  hath  fo  clearly  revealed  thefe  things  to  us,  not 
with  a  defire  to  bring  them  upon  us,  but  that  we, 
being  warned  by  his  threatnings,  might  not  bring 
them  upon  our  felves. 

I  will  conclude  all  with  the  counfel  of  the  wife  vvifd.  of 
man;  "  feek  not  death  in  the  error  of  your  life,  and  Solomon» 

-^  ch.  J.  ver. 

"  pull  not  upon  your  felves  deftruftion  with  the  ,2,13,16. 
"  works  of  your  own  hands.  For  God  made  not 
"  death,  neither  hath  he  pleafure  in  the  deftruftion 
"  of  the  living:  but  ungodly  men  with  their  works 
"  and  words  have  called  it  down  upon  themfelves." 
"Which  that  none  of  us  may  do,  God  of  his  infinite 
goodnefs  grant,  for  his  mercies  fake  in  Jesus  Christ  : 
to  whom,  with  thee,  O  Father,  and  the  holy  Ghoft, 
be  all  honour  and  glory,  dominion  and  pov/er,  thankf- 
giving  and  praife,  both  now  and  for  ever.  Amen. 
Vol,  IIL  Ooo  SER. 

t. 


26  Succefs  not  always  anfujerahle  to 

SERMON    XXXVI. 

Succefs  not  always  anfwerable  to  the  pro-^ 
babiliiy  of  fecond  caufes. 

Being  a  faft-fermon  preached  before  the  Houfe  of 
Commpns^ on  Wednefday,  April  i6,  1690. 


ECCLESIASTES  ix.   11. 

I  returned,  and  f aw  under  the  fun,  that  the  race  is  not 

to  thefwift,  nor  the  battle  to  theftrong^  nor  yet  bread 

Jo  the  wife,  nor  yet  riches  to  men  of  underfianding, 

nor  yet  favour  to  men  of  Jktll,   but  time  and  chance 

happeneth  to  them  all. 

NEXT  to  the  acknowledgment  of  God's  being. 
^^_ nothing  is  more  eflentia]  to  religion,  than  the 

belief  of  his  providencCjand  a  conflant  dependance  up- 
on him,  as  the  great  governor  of  the  world,  and  the 
wife  difpofer  of  all  the  affairs  and  concernments  of  the 
children  of  men :  and  nothing  can  be  a  greater  argu- 
gument  of  providence,  than  that  there  is  fuch  an  or- 
der of  caufes  laid  in  nature,  that  in  ordinary  courfe 
every  thing  does  ufually  attain  it's  end  ;  and  yet  that 
there  is  fuch  a  mixture  of  corrtingency,  as  that  now 
and  then  we  cannot  tell  how  nor  why,  the  moft  likely 
caufes  do  deceive  iis,  and  fail  of  producing  their  ufu- 
al  effects. 


For 


the  probability  of  fecond  caufes,  2f. 

For  if  there  be  a  God  and  a  providence,  it  is  rea«  S  E  R  M- 
fonable  that  things  fhould  be  thus :  becaufe  a  provi- 
dence does  fuppofe  all  things  to  have  been  at  firft 
wifely  framedj  and  with  a  fitnefs  to  attain  their  end  •, 
but  yet  it  does  alfo  fuppofe  that  God  hath  referved 
to  himfelf  a  power  and  liberty  to  interpofe,  and  to 
crofs  as  he  pleafes,  the  ufual  courfe  of  things  j  to 
awaken  men  to  the  confideration  of  him,  and  a  con- 
tinual dependance  upon  him  ;  and  to  teach  us  to  a- 
fcribe  thofe  things  to  his  wife  difpofal,  which,  if  we 
never  faw  any  change,  we  fliould  be  apt  to  impute  to 
blind  neceffity.  And  therefore  the  wife-man,  to 
bring  us  to  an  acknowledgment  of  the  divine  provi- 
dence, tells  us,  that  thus  he  had  obferved  things  to  be 
in  this  world  •,  that  though  they  generally  happen 
according  to  the  probability  of  fecond  caufes,  yet 
fomctimes  they  fall  out  quite  otherwife,  "  I  returned, 
*'  and  faw  under  the  fun,  that  the  race  is  not  to  the 
"  fv/ifr,  nor  the  battle  to  the  ftrong,  &c." 

The  connexion  of  v/hich  words  with  the  foregoing 
difcourfe,  is  briefly  this.  Among  many  other  obfer- 
vations,  which  the  wife  preacher  makes  in  thisfermon, 
of  the  vanity  and  uncertainty  of  all  things  in  this 
world,  and  of  the  miftakes  of  men  about  them,  he 
takes  notice  here  in  the  text,  and  in  the  verfe  before 
it,  of  two  extremes  of  human  life:  fome,  becaufe  of 
the  uncertainty  of  all  worldly  things,  cad  off  all  care 
and  diHgence,  and  negledl  the  ufe  of  proper  and  pro- 
bable means,  having  found  by  experience^  that  when 
men  have  done  all  they  can,  they  many  times  fail 
of  their  end,  and  are  difappointed  they  know  not 
how  :  others,  on  the  contrary,  rely  fo  much  upon 
their  own  (kill  and  induftry,  as  to  promife  fuccefs  to 

O  0  0  2  them- 


ii^  Succefs  not  always  anfwerable  to 

SERM.    themfelves  in  all  their  undcrtakinsrs  ;  and  prefiime  ib 
XXXVI  •        ^   '  i 

much  upon  fecond  caufes,  as  if  no  confideration  at  all 

were  to  be  had  of  the  firft. 

The  wife  preacher  reproves  both  thefe  extremes, 
and  Ihews  the  folly  and  vanity  of  them.  On  the  one 
hand,  of  thofe  who  fit  ftill,  and  will  ufe  no  care  and 
endeavour,  becaufe  it  may  all  happen  to  be  difap- 
pointed,  and  to  fail  of  fuccefs :  not  confidering,  that 
though  prudent  care  and  diligence  will  not  always 
do  the  bufinefs,  yet  there  is  nothing  to  be  done  with- 
out them,  in  the  ordinary  courfe  of  things ;  and  that, 
in  the  order  of  fecond  caufes,  thefe  are  the  moft  like- 
ly and  effeftual  means  to  any  end  :  and  therefore,  re- 
jefting  this  lazy  principle,  he  counfels  men,  what- 
ever they  propofe  to  themfelves,  to  be  very  diligent 
and  vigorous  in  the  ufe  of  proper  means  for  the  at- 
tainment of  it,  in  the  verfe  immediately  before  the 
text,  "  whatever  thy  hand  findeth  to  do,  do  it  with 
*'  thy  might." 

But  then  he  obferves  alfo,  as  great  a  folly  and  va- 
nity on  the  other  hand  j  that  they,  who  manage  their 
affairs  v/ith  great  wifdom  and  induftry,  are  apt  to 
pn^Rime  and  reckon  upon  the  certain  fuccefs  of  them, 
without  taking  into  confideration  that  which  in  all 
human  affairs  is  moft  confiderable,  the  favour  and 
bleffing  of  that  almighty  and  wife  providence  which 
rules  the  world ;  "  I  returned,  fays  he,  and  faw  un- 
"  der  the  fun,  that  the  race  is  not  to  the  fwift,  nor 
"  the  battle  to  the  ftrong,  &c." 

"  I  returned  and  faw ;"  that  is,  having  confidered 
on  the  one  hand  the  folly  of  (loth  and  carelelsnefs,  I 
turned  mine  eyes  the  other  way,  and  faw  as  great  an 
error  on  the  other  hand  ;    in  mens  prefuming  too 

much 


the  probahility  offecondcaufes.  v.g 

much  upon  their  own  dihgence  and  condud,  without  S  E  R  M. 
taking  notice  of  the  providence  of  God.  For  I  have  J^^ 
found,  fays  Solomon,  by  manifold  obfervations,  that 
the  fuccefs  of  things  does  not  always  anfwer  the  pro- 
bability of  fecond  caufes  and  means.  So  that  the  fum 
of  the  preacher's  advice  is  this :  when  thou  propound- 
eft  any  end  to  thy  felf,  be  diligent  and  vigorous  in 
the  ufe  of  means  j  and  when  thou  haft  done  all,  look 
above  and  beyond  thefe  to  a  fuperior  caufe  which 
over-rules,  and  ftecrs,  and  ftops,  as  he  pleafes,  all  the 
motions  and  adivity  of  fecond  caufes  :  and  be  not 
confident  that  all  things  are  ever  fo  wifely  and  firm- 
ly laid,  that  they  cannot  fail  of  fuccefs.  For  thQ 
providence  of  God  doth  many  times  ftep  in  to  divert 
the  moft  probable  event  of  things,  and  to  turn  it 
quite  another  v/ay :  and  whenever  he  pleafeth  to  do 
fo,  the  moft  ftrong  and  likely  means  do  fall  lame, 
or  ftumble,  or  by  fome  accident  or  other  come  Ihort 
of  their  end. 

"  I  returned,  and  faw  under  the  fun,"  that  is,  here 
below,  in  this  inferior  world. 

"  That  the  race  is  not  to  the  fwift:"  this  the  Chal- 
dee  paraphraft  docs  underftand  with  relation  to  war- 
like affairs,  "  I  beheld,  fays  he,  and  faw,  that  they 
*'  who  are  fwift  as  eagles  do  not  always  efcape  in  the 
"  day  of  battle."  But  I  chufe  rather  to  underftand 
the  words  in  their  more  obvious  fenfe,  that  in  a  race 
many  things  may  happen  to  hinder  him  that  is  fwift- 
eft  from  winning  it. 

"  Nor  the  battle  to  the  ftrong  i"  that  is,  vicflory 
and  fuccefs  in  war  do  not  always  attend  the  greateft 
force  and  preparations,  nor  doth  that  fide,  v/hich  in 
human  eftimation  is  ftrongeft,  always  prevail  and  get 
the  better.  *'  Nor 


30  Succefs  not  always  dfifwirable  to 

S  E  R  M.  «  Nor  yet  bread  to  the  wife  j"  neque  do5loruni  pa- 
nem  ejp,  fo  fome  render  the  words,  that  learned  men 
are  not  always  fecured  againft  poverty  and  want. 

"  Nor  yet  riches  to  men  of  underflanding  •,"  for 
fo  fome  interpreters  tranHate  the  words,  neque  induf- 
triis  divitias  efe,  that  thofe  who  take  moil  pains  do 
not  always  get  the  greateft  eftates. 

"  Nor  yet  favour  to  men  of  fl<:ill ;"  that  is,  to 
thofe  who  underftand  men  and  bufinefs,  and  how  to 
apply  themfelves  dextrouily  to  the  incHnations  and 
interefts  of  princes  and  great  men.  Others  interpret 
thele  words  more  generally,  ncque  peritoriim  artificum 
ejfegrdiiam,  that  thofe  who  excel  moft  in  their  feve- 
ral  arts  and  profeiTions  do  not  always  meet  with  fuita- 
ble  encouragement :  but  becaufe  the  word,,  which  is 
here  rendered  favour,  is  fo  frequently  ufed  by  Solo- 
mon for  the  favour  of  princes,  the  former  fenfe  feems 
to  be  more  eafy  and  natural. 

"  But  time  and  chance  happeneth  to  t'hem  all  " 
that  is,  faith  Aben  Ezra,  there  is  a  fecret  providence 
of  God  which  fometimes  prefents  men  with  unex- 
pedled  opportunities,  and  interpofeth  accidents  which 
no  human  wifdom  could  forefee :  which  gives  fuccefs 
to  very  unlikely  means ;  and  defeats  the  fwitt,  and 
the  ftrong,  and  the  learned,  and  the  induftrious,  and 
them  that  are  beft  verfed  in  men  and  bufmefs,  of  their 
feveral  ends  and  defigns. 

It  fometimes  happens,  that  he  that  is  Avifteft,  by 
a  fall,  or  by  fainting,  or  by  fom.e  other  unlucky  ac- 
cident, may  lofe  the  race. 

It  fometimes  falls  out,  that  a  much  fmaller  and 
weaker  number,  by  the  advantage  of  ground,  or  of 
a  pafs  J  by  a  ftratagem,   or  by  a  fudden  furprife,  or 

by 


the  probability  of  fecond  caiifeu  3  r 

l3y  fome  other    accident  and  opportunity,    may  be  S  E  r  M. 
vi6lorious  over  a  much  greater  force.  XXXVI. 

And  that  an  unlearned  man,  in  comparifon,  by 
favour,  or  friends,  or  by  fome  happy  chance  of  fet- 
ing out  to  the  bed  advantage  the  httle  learning  he 
has  before  one  that  hath  lefs,  may  arrive  at  great 
things ;  when  perhaps  at  the  fame  time,  the  man 
that  is  a  hundred  times  more  learned  than  he,  may 
be  ready  to  ftarve. 

And  that  men  of  no  great  parts  and  induflry  may 
flumble  into  an  eftate,  and  by  fome  cafual  hit  in 
trade  may  attain  fuch  a  fortune,  as  the  man  that  hath 
toiled  and  drudged  all  his  life  fhall  never  be  able  to 
reach. 

And  laftly,  that  a  man  of  no  great  ambition  or  de- 
fign  may  fall  into  an  opportunity,  and  by  happening 
upon  the  mollia  tempora  fandi,  fome  foft  and  lucky 
feafon  of  addrefs,  may  Hide  into  his  prince's  favour, 
and  all  on  the  fudden  be  hoifted  up  to  that  degree  of 
dignity  and  efteem,  as  the  defigning  man,  who  hath 
been  laying  trains  to  blow  up  his  rivals,  and  waiting 
opportunities  all  his  days  to  worm  others  out,  and  to 
fkrew  himfelf  in,  Ihall  never  be  able  to  attain. 

The  words  thus  explained  contain  this  general^pro- 
pofition,  which  fhall  be  the  fubjed  of  my  following 
difcourfe. 

That  in  human  affairs  the  moft  likely  means  do 
not  always  attain  their  end,  nor  does  the  event  con- 
ftantly  anfwer  the  probability  of  fecond  caufes ;  but 
there  is  a  fecret  providence  which  governs  and  over- 
rules all  things,  and  does,  when  it  pleafes,  interpofe 
to  defeat  the  moft  hopeful  and  probable  defigns. 
2 

In 


2  2  Succe/s  not  always  anfiverable  to 

SERM.       In  the  handling  of  this  propofition  I  jQiall  do  thefc 
?^I]lr  three  things. 

Firfl,  I  Ihall  confirm  and  illuftrate  the  truth  of  it, 
by  an  induftion  of  the  particulars  which  are  inftanced 
in,  here  in  text. 

Secondly,  I  (hall  give  feme  reafon  and  account  of- 
this,  why  the  providence  of  God  doth  fometimes 
interpofe  to  hinder  and  defeat  the  moll  probable  de- 
figns. 

Thirdly,  I  Ihall  draw  fome  inferences  from  the 
whole,  fuitable  to  the  occafion  of  this  day.  In  all 
which  I  ihall  endeavour  to  be  as  brief  as  convenient- 
ly I  can. 

Firft,  for  the  confirmation  and  illufiration  of  this 
propofition,  that  the  mod  likely  means  do  not  aL 
ways  attain  their  end  ;  but  there  is  a  fecret  provi_ 
dence  which  over-rules  and  governs  all  events,  and 
does,  when  it  pleafes,  interpofe  to  defeat  the  mod 
probable  and  hopeful  defigns.  This  is  the  general 
conclufion  v/hich  Solomon  proves  by  this  induftion 
of  particulars  in  the  text.  And  he  inftanceth  in  the 
moft  probable  means  for  the  compafiing  of  the  feve- 
ral  ends  which  mod  men  in  this  world  propofe  to 
themfelves.  And  the  great  darlings  of  mankind  are 
viftory,  riches,  and  honour ;  I  do  not  mention  plea- 
lure,  becaufe  that  feems  rather  to  refult  from  the  ufe 
and  enjoyment  of  the  other.  Now  if  a  man  defign 
vidlory,  what  niore  probable  means  to  overcome  in  a 
race  than  fwiftnefs  .?  What  more  likely  to  prevail  in 
war  than  flrength .''  If  a  man  aim  at  riches,  what 
more  proper  to  raife  an  eilate  than  underftanding  and 
induftry .?  If  a  man  afpire  to  honour,  what  more  like- 
ly to  prefer  him  to  x!^t  king's  favour  and  fervice 

than 


the  prohahilify  of  fccond  caufes,  -^  ^ 

than  dexterity  and  fkill  in  bufinefs  ?  And  yet  experi-  S  F.p  ivr. 
ence  (hews  that  thefe  means,  as  probable  as  they  fcem   ^^^^^^"^^I- 
to  be,  are  not  always  fuccefsful  for  the  accomplifnment 
of  their  feveral  ends. 

Or  elfe  we  may  fuppofe  that  Solomon  by  thefe  in- 
ftances  did  intend  to  reprefent  the  chief  engines  and 
inflruments  of  human  defigns  and  a6lions.  Now 
there  are  five  things  more  efpecialJy,  which  do  emi- 
nently qualify  a.man  for  any  undertaking ;  expediti- 
on and  quicknefs  of  difpatch  •, -ftrength  and  force; 
providence  andforecaft  •,  diligence  and  induftry  •,  know- 
ledge, and  infight  into  men  and  bufinefs:  and  fo:ne 
think  that  Solomon  did  intend  to  reprefent  tlicfe  fe- 
veral qualities  by  the  feveral  inftances  in  the  rcxr, 
"  The  race  is  not  to  the  fwift,"  that  is,  men  of 
the  greateft  expedition  and  difpatch  do  not  always  fuc- 
ceed:  for  we  fee  that  men  dofometimes  out-run  bufi- 
nefs, and  make  haile  to  be  undone.  "  Nor  the  bat- 
"  tie  to  the  iViong,"  that  is,  neither  does  force  and 
ftrength  always  carry  it.  "  Nor  yet  bread  to  the 
"  wife-,"  which  fome  underftand  of  the  providenj; 
care  and  pains  of  the  hufbandman,  whole  harveft  is 
not  always  anfwerable  to  his  labour  and  hopes.  "  Nor 
"  yet  riches  to  men  of  underftanding,"  or  indufi:ry  ; 
that  is,  neither  is  diligence  in  bufinefs  always  crown-  • 
ed  with  fuccefs.  "  Nor  yet  favour  to  men  of  fl^ill," 
that  is,  neither  have  they  that  have  the  greateft  dex- 
terity in  the  management  of  affairs  always  the  fortune 
to  rife.  And  if  we  take  the  words  in  this  fenfe,  the 
thing  will  come  much  to  one :  but  I  rather  approve  • 
the  firft  interpretation,  as  being  lefs  forced  and  near- 
er to  the  letter. 

Vol.  III.  P  p  p  So 

I. 


34  Succefs  not  always  anfwerahle  to  . 

SERM.        So  that  the  force  of  Solomon's   reafonins;  is  this. 
XXXVI 

If  the  fwifteft  do  not  always  win  the  race  *,  nor  the 

ftrongefl:  always  overcome  in  war:  If  knowledge  and 
learning  do  not  always  fecure  men  from  want;  nor 
indiiltry  always  make  men  rich  •,  nor  political  fkill 
always  raife  men  to  high  place-,  nor  any  other  means 
that  can  be  inftanced  in  as  mofc  probable,  do  con- 
ftantly  and  infalhbly  fucceed :  then  it  muil  be  ac- 
knowledged that  there  is  fome  other  caufe  which 
mingles  it  felf  with  human  affairs  and  governs  all  e- 
vents  ',  and  which  can,  and  does  when  itplcafes,  de- 
feat the  moil  likely,  and  bring  to  pafs  the  mofi:  im- 
probable defigns :  and  what  elfe  can  that  be  imagin- 
ed to  be,  but  the  fecret  and  over-ruling  providence  of 
almighty  God?  When  we  can  find  no  other,  we  are 
very  unreafonable  if  we  will  not  admit  this  to  be  the 
caufe  of  fuch  extraordinary  events,  but  v/ill  obliinate- 
ly  impute  that  to  blind  neceffity  or  chance,  which 
hath  fuch  plain  charaders  upon  it  of  a  divine  power 
and  wifdom. 

I  might  be  large  upon  every  one  of  thefe  inftances 
in  the  text,  and  illuftrate  them  by  pat  and  lively  ex- 
amples both  out  of  fcripture  and  other  hiffcories.  But 
I  iliall  briefly  pafs  over  all  of  them,  but  the  fecond, 
*'  the  battle  is  not  to  the  flrong.'* 

"-  The  race  is  not  to  the  fwift."  If  we  underftand 
this  literally,  it  is  obvious  to  every  man  to  imagine 
a  great  many  accidents  in  a  race,  wliich  may  fnatch 
victory  from  the  fwifteft  runner.  If  v/e  underftand 
it,  as  the  Chaldee  paraphrafe  does,  with  relation  to 
war,  that  the  fwifteft  does  not  always  overcome  or 
efcape  in  the  day  of  battle;  of  this  Afahcl  is  an  emi- 
nent inftance,  who  though  he  was,  as  the  fcripture 

tells 


the  probability  of  fecond  caufes:  3  r 

teJIsus,  "  light  of  foot  as  a  wild  roe,"  yet  did  heSERM. 
not  efcape  the  fpear  of  Abner.  It  feems  that  among  ^^^^'I- 
the  ancients,  fwiftnefs  was  looked  upon  as  a  great 
qualification  in  a  warrior,  both  becaufe  it  ferves  for 
a  fudden  affault  and  onfet,  and  likewife  for  that 
which  in  civihty  we  call  a  nimble  retreat.  And 
therefore  David  in  his  poetical  lamentation  over 
thofe  two  great  captains,  Saul  and  Jonathan,  takes 
particular  notice  of  this  warlike  quality  of  theirs; 
'*  they  were,"  fays  he,  "  fwifter  than  eagles,  ftronger 
than  lions :"  and  the  conftant  charafter  which  Homer 
gives  of  Achilles,  one  of  his  principal  heroes,  is,  that 
*'  he  was  fwift  of  foot :"  the  poet  feigns  of  him,  that 
by  fome  charm  or  gift  of  the  gods  he  was  invulnera- 
ble in  all  parts  of  his  body  except  his  heel  ;  and  that 
was  the  part  to  which  he  truftei  ;  and  in  that  he  re- 
ceived his  mortal  wound :  the  wife  poet  hereby 
inflrucling  us,  that  many  times  our  greateft  danger 
lies  there,  where  we  place  our  chief  confidence  and 
fafety. 

"  Nor  yet  bread  to  the  wife,"  or  to  the  learned. 
The  poverty  of  poets  is  proverbial-,  and  there  are 
frequent  inftances  in  hiftory  of  eminently  learned  per- 
fons  that  have  been  reduced  to  great  itraits  and  ne- 
celTities. 

"  Nor  yet  riches  to  men  of  underilanding  :"  by 
which,  whether  we  underftand  men  of  great  parts, 
cr  of  great  diligence  and  induftry,  it  is  obvious  to 
every  man's  obfervation,  that  an  ordinary  capacity 
and  underilanding  does  ufually  lie  more  level  to  the 
bufinefs  of  a  common  trade  and  profelTion,  than 
more  refined  and  elevated  parts  j  which  lie  rather  for 
fpeculation  than  prad:ice,  and  are  better  fitted  for  the 
P  p  p  2  pleafure 


36  Slice efs  not  ahvays  anfiverable  to 

SLRM,  pleafurc  and  ornament  of  converfation,  than  for  the 
XXXVI        . 

itoil  and  drudgf  ry  of  bufinefs:  as  a  fine  razor  is  ad- 
mirable for  cutting  hairs,  but  the  duli  hatchet  much 
more  proper  for  hewing  a  hard  and  knotty  piece  of 
timber.  And  even  when  parts  and  induftry  meet  to- 
gether, they  are  many  times  lefs  fuccefsful  in  the  rai- 
fing  of  a  great  eftate,  than  men  of  much  lower  and 
flower  underftandings :  becaufe  thefe  are  apt  to  ad- 
mire riches,  which  is  a  great  fpur  to  induftry  \  and  be- 
caufe they  are  perpetually  intent  upon  one  thing,  and 
mind  but  one  bufinels,  from  which  their  thoughts  ne- 
ver ftraggle  into  vain  and  ufelefs  enquiries  after  know- 
ledge, or  news,  or  publick  affairs  ;  all  which  being 
foreign  to  their  bufinefs  they  leave  to  thof^  who  are, 
as  th.  y  are  Vv'ont  to  fay  of  them  in  fcorn,  more  curi- 
ous, and  too  wife  to  be  rich. 

*'  Nor  yet  favour  to  men  of  fKill."  All  hidory  is 
full  of  inftances  of  the  cafual  advancement  of  men  to 
great  favour  and  honour,  when  others,  who  have 
made  it  their  ferious  iludy  and  bufniefs,  have  tallen 
Ihort  of  it.  I  could  give  a  famous  example  in  this 
kind,  of  the  manifold  and  manifeft  difappointment 
of  a  whole  order  of  men  :  the  flyeft  and  moil  fubtle, 
••'  in  their  generation,  of  all  the  chikircn  ot  this 
"  Vv'Orld  i"  the  moil  politically  inftituted,  and  the 
beft  lludied  and  fkillcd  in  the  tempers  and  interefls  of 
men;  the  moil  pragmatical,  and  cunning,  to  infini> 
ate  themfelves  into  the  intrig:-:cs  of  courts  and  great 
families:  and  who,  by  long  experience,  and  an  uni, 
vcrfai  intelligence,  and  communicated  obfervations, 
have  reduced  human  affairs,  at  leaft  as  they  think, 
to  a  certain  art  or  method,  and  to  the  mofl  ftcady 

rules  thatfuch  contingent  things  arecapable  of:  Ibe-^ 

lieve 


the  probability  of  fecond  caufes.  37 

lieve  you  all  guefs  before-hand  whom  I  mean,  even  SER  M. 
the  honeft  Jefuits :  and  yet thefe  men, of  fo  much  art  ._\_1\ 
and  fkill,  have  met  with  as  many  checks  and  difappoint- 
ments,  as  any  fort  of  men  ever  did :  they  have  been 
difcountenanced  by  almoft  all  princes  and  ftates,  and, 
one  time  or  other,  baniflied  out  of  moft  of  the  courts 
and  countries  of  Europe.  And  it  is  no  fmall  argu- 
ment of  the  divine  providence,  that  fo  much  cun- 
ning hath  met  with  fo  little  countenance  and  fuccefs ; 
and  hath  been  fo  often,  fo  grofly  infatuated,  and 
their  "-  counfels  turned  into  foolidmefs.'* 

But  I  promifed  only  to  mention  thefe,  ahd  to  in- 
fill upon  the  fecond  inftance  in  the  text,  "  I  return- 
"  ed,  and  faw  under  the  fun,  that  the  battle  is  not 
"  to  the  ilrong,'*  to  the  gibborim,  the  giants,  for 
fo  the  Hebrew  word  fignifies ;  in  which  Solomon 
might  pofTibly  have  refpedt  to  the  hiftory  of  the  Ifrae- 
^ites  fubduing  the  Canaanites,  apeople  of  great  ftrength 
and  ftature,  among  whom  were  the  giants,  the  fons 
of  Anak :  or  more  probably,  to  the  famous  encoun- 
ter of  his  father  David  with  the  great  Goliah:  but 
however  that  be,  the  fcripture  is  full  of  examples  to 
this  purpofe ;  that  when  the  providence  of  God  is 
pleafed  to  interpofe  in  favour  of  any  fide,  it  becomes 
vidorious-,  according  to  the  faying  of  king  Afa  in  his 
prayer  to  God  ''  it  is  nothing  with  thee  to  help?  ^  p, 
"  whether  with  many,  or  with  thofe  that  have.no  xiv,  Tu 
"  power." 

Sometimes  God  hath  defeated  great  armies  by  plain 
and  apparent  miracles  :  fuch  was  the  drowning  of 
Pharaoh  and  his  hoft  in  the  Red-fea  -,  and  the  ftars 
fighting  in  their  courfes  againft  Sifera ;  by  which  po- 
etical expreflion  Ifuppofe  is  meant  Sifera's  being  re- 
markably 


^S  Succefs  not  always  anfwe7'ahle  to 

S  E  R  M.  markably  defeated  by  a  vifible  hand  from   heaven : 
XXXVI 
t,„„.^,^^^  and  fuch  was  the  deftruftion  of  the  proud  king  of 

AfTyria's  army  by  an  angel,  who  flew  an  hundred 
and  fourfcore  and  five  thoufand  of  them  in  one 
night. 

Sometimes  God  does  this  by  more  human  ways ; 
by  ftriking  mighty  armies  with  a  panick  and  unac- 
countable fear  ;  and  fometimies  by  putting  extraordi- 
nary fpirits  and  courage  into  the  weaker  fide,  fo  that 
"  an  hundred  fliall  chafe  a  thoufand,  and  a  thoufand 
"  fliall  put  ten  thoufand  to  flight.'* 

This  made   David  fo    frequently  to   acknowledge 
the  providence  of  God,  efpccially  in  the  affairs    of 
Y'.  xxxiii.  war.     "  There  is  no  king  faved  by  the  multitude  o^ 
^^-  "  an  hoft,  neither  is  a  mighty  man  delivered  by  much 

Pial.  xliv. «'  ftrength."     And  again,  "  I  will   not  truft  in  my 
^'  "  bow,  neither  fliall  m^y  fword  fave  me."     And  So- 

Prov  XX'  lomon  confirms  the  fame  obfcrvation,  "  There  is  no 
30,  31.  "  wifJom,  fays  he,  nor  underflanding,  nor  coun- 
"  fel  againft  the  liORD.  The  horfe  is  prepared  a- 
*'  gainu  the  day  of  battle,  but  fafety,"  or,  as  fome 
tramlations  render  it,  "  viftory  is  of  the  Lord."  Gi- 
deon, by  a  very  odd  ftratagem  of  lamps  and  pitchers, 
defeated  a  very  numerous  army,  only  with  three  hun- 
dred men.  Jonathan  and  his  armour-bearer,  by 
climbing  up  a  rock,  and  coming  fuddcnly  on  the 
back  of  the  Philiflines  camp,  firuck  them  with  fuch 
a  terror  as  put  their  whole  army  to  fiiglit.  King  Afa, 
v/ith  a  much  inferior  number,  defeated  that  huge  E- 
thiopian  army  which  confifted  of  a  million.  And 
how  was  Xerxes  his  mighty  armiy  overthrown,  al- 
moil  by  a  handful  of  Grecians  ?  And,  to  come  near- 
er our  felyes,  how  was   that   formidable  fleet  of  the 

Spaniards, 


the  probability  of  fecond  caufes.  39 

Spaniards,  which  they  prefumptuoufly  called invinci-  SERM. 
bJe,  fhattered  and  broken  in  pieces,  chiefly  by  the 
winds  and  the  fea  ?  So  many  accidents  are  there,  e- 
fpecially  in  war,  whereby  the  divine  providence  doth 
fometimes  interpole  and  give  vidtory  to  the  weaker 
fide. 

And  this  hath  been  fo  apparent  in  all  ages,  that 
even  the  heathen  did  always  acknowledge,  in  the  af- 
fairs of  war,  a  fpecial  interpofition  of  fortune ;  by 
which  the  wifer  among  them  did  underftand  the  di- 
vine providence.  Plutarch,  fpeaking  of  the  Romans, 
fays,  that "  time  and  fortune,"  the  very  fame  with  Solo- 
mon's time  and  chance  here  in  the  text,  "  did  lay 
"  the  foundation  of  their  greatnefs,'*  by  which  he  a- 
fcribes  their  fuccefs  to  a  remarkable  providence  of 
God  concurring  with  feveral  happy  opportunities. 

And  Livy,  their  great  hiftorian,  hath  this  remark- 
able obfervation,  that  "  in  all  human  affairs,  efpe- 
"  cially  in  matters  of  war,  fortune  hath  a  mighty 
"  flroke."  And  again,  "  no  where,"  fays  he,  "  is  the 
"  event  lefs  anfwerable  to  expedation  than  in  war; 
"  and  therefore  nothing  is  fo  flight  and  inconfidera- 
t'  ble,  which  may  not  turn  the  fcales  in  a  great  mat- 
"  ter."  And  C£:far  himfelf,  who  was  perhaps  the 
moft  fkilful  and  profperous  warrior  that  ever  ,was, 
makes  the  fame  acknowledgment;  "  as  in  all  other 
"  things,"-  fays  he,  "  fo  particularly  in  war,  fortune 
"  hath  a  huge  fway."  And  Plutarch  obfcrves,  that 
there  was  no  temple  at  Rome  dedicated  to  wifdom 
or  valor,  but  a  mod  magnificent  and  {lately  one  to 
fortune  •,  fignifying  thereby,  that  they  did  .afcribe 
their  fuccefs  infinitely  more  to  the  providence  of  God, 
than  to  their  own  courage  and  condu<5t.  I  proceed 
now,  in  the  Second 


Succefs  not  always  anfwerahk  to 

Second  place,  to  give  fome  reafon  and  account  of 
this,  why  the  providence  of  God  doth  fometimes 
thus  interpofe  to  hinder  and  defeat  the  mod  proba- 
ble defigns  of  men.  To  bring  men  to  an  acknow- 
ledgment of  his  providence,  and  of  their  dependance 
upon  him,  and  fubordination  to  him  ;  and  that  he 
is  the  great  governor  of  the  world,  and  "  rules  in  the 
"  kingdoms  of  men  •,'*  and  that  "  all  the  inhabitants 
"  of  the  earth  are  as  nothing  to  him,"  and  the  pow- 
er of  fecond  caufes  inconfiderable  :  that  "  he  doth  ac- 
"  cording  to  his  will,  in  the  armies  of  heaven,  and 
"  among  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth,  and  none  may 
"  flay  his  hand,  or  fay  unto  him  what  doft  thou." 

God  hath  fo  ordered  things,  in  the  adminiftration 
of  the  affairs  of  the  world,  as  to  encourage  the  ufe  of 
means  5  and  yet  fo,  as  to  keep  men  in  a  continual  de- 
pendance upon  him  for  the  efficacy  and  fuccefs  of 
them  :  to  encourage  induftry  and  prudence,  God 
generally  permits  things  to  their  natural  courfe,  and 
to  fall  out  according  to  the  power  and  probability  of 
fecond  caufes. 

But  then,  left  men  fhould  cafi:  off  religion,  and 
*'  deny  that  God  is  above  j"  left  they  ftiould  *'  trull 
"  in  their  fword  and  their  bow,  and  fay,  the  Lord 
*'  hath  not  done  this  •,"  left  men  fhould  look  upon 
themfelves  as  the  creators  and  framers  of  their  own 
fortune,  and  when  they  do  but  a  little  outftrip  others 
irv  wifdom  or  power,  in  the  fkill  and  condu(fb  of  hu- 
man affairs,  they  fliould  grow  proud  and  prefumptu- 
ous,  God  is  pleafed  fometimes  more  remarkably  to 
interpofe,  to  hide  pride  from  man,  as  the  exprefTion 
is  in  Job  ;  to  check  the  haughtinefs  and  infolence 
of  men's  fpirits,  and  to  keep  them  within  the  bounds 

of 


the  probability  offecond  caufei,  4I 

of  modefty  and  humility  ;  to  make  us  to  know/'  that  S  E  R  M. 
"  we  are  butmen/'and  that  the  reins  of  the  world  are 
not  in  our  hands,  but  that  there  is  one  above  who 
fways  and  governs  all  things  here  below. 

And  indeed  if  we  fhould  fuppofe,  in  the  firft  frame 
of  things,  which  we  call  nature,  an  immutable  order 
to  be  fixed,  and  all  things  to  go  on  in  a  conftant 
courfe,  according  to  the  power  and  force  of  fecond 
caufes,  without  any  interpofition  of  providence  to 
flop,  or  alter  that  courfe,  upon  any  occafion  :  In  this 
cafe,  the  foundation  of  a  great  part  of  religionj  but 
efpecially  of  prayer  to  God,  would  be  quite  taken 
away  :  upon  this  fuppofition,  it  would  be  the  vaineft: 
thing  in  the  world  to  pray  to  God  for  the  good  fuc- 
cefs  of  our  undertakings,  or  to  acknowledge  him  as 
the  author  of  it :  for  if  God  do  only  look  on,  and 
permit  all  things  to  proceed  in  a  fettled  and  eftablifh- 
cd  courfe  j  then  inftead  of  praying  to  God,  we  ought 
to  ply  the  means,  and  to  make  the  beft  provifion  and 
preparation  we  can  for  the  effedling  of  what  we  de- 
fire  i  and  to  rely  upon  that,  without  taking  God  at 
all  into  our  counfel  and  confideration.  For  all  ap^ 
plication  to  God  by  prayer  doth  evidently  fuppofe^ 
that  the  providence  of  God  does  frequently  interpofe, 
to  over-rule  events  befides  and  beyond  the  natural 
and  ordinary  courfe  of  things,  and  to  fleer  them  to  a, 
quite  different  point,  from  that  to  which  in  human 
probability  they  feemed  to  tend. 

So  that  it  is  every  whit  as  neceflary  to  religion  to 

believe  the  providence  of  God,  and  that  he  governs 

the  world,  and  does  when  he  pleafes  interpofe  in  the 

affairs  of  it,  as  that  he  made  it  at  firft.     1  come  now" 

in  the 

Vol.  IIL  Q^  q  q  Third 

1. 


42  Succefs  77ot  alavays  ajifwerahle  to 

SERM.       Third  and   laft  place,    to  make  fome  inferences 

»1^^,..^  fuitable  to  the  occafion  of  this  day,  from  what  hath 

been  faid  upon  this  argument :  and  they  fhall  be  thefe. 

Firfi",  from  hence  we  may  learn,  not  to  account 

religion,  and  time  fpent  in  the  fervice  of  God,  and 

in  prayer  to  him  for  his  bleffing  upon  our  endeavours, 

to  be  any  hindrance  to  our  affairs,     for  after  we 

have  done  all  we  can,  the  event  is  ftill  in  God's  hand, 

and  refts  upon  the  difpofal  of  his  providence. 

And  did  men  firmly  believe  this,  they  would  not 
neglect  the  duty  of  prayer,  and  behave  themfelves 
fo  careleOy,  and  unconcernedly,  and  irreverently  in 
it,  as  we  fee  too  many  do  ;  they  would  not  look  up- 
on every  hour  that  is  fpent  in  devotion  as  loft  from 
their  bufinefs. 

If  men  would  but  take  a  view  of  what  hath  hap- 
pened to  them  in  the  courfe  of  a  long  life,  I  believe 
mod  of  us  would  fee  reafon  to  acknowledge,  that  our 
profperity  and  fucccfs  in  any  kind  hath  depended 
more  upon  happy  opportunities,  upon  undefigned 
and  unexpeded  occurrences,  than  upon  our  own  pru- 
dent forecafl  and  condu6l. 

And  if  this  were  well  confidered  by  us,  we  fhould 
not  methinks  be  fo  apt  to  leave  God  out  of  our  coun- 
fels  and  undertakings,  as  if  he  were  a  mere  name  and 
cypher  in  the  world.  It  is,  I  am  fure,  the  advice  of 
one  that  was  much  wifer  and  more  experienced,  than 
any  of  us  will  pretend  to  be,  I  mean  Solomon* 
Prov.  iii,  "  truft  in  the  Lor p  with  all  thine  heart,  and  lean 
5.  6.  «  j^j.  {.Q  f-i-jii^e  ^^i^  underftanding  :  in  all  thy  ways 
"  acknowledge  him,  and  he  fliali  dired  thy  paths : 
''  be  not  wife  in  thine  own  eyes,  fear  the  Lord  and 
''  depart  from  evil."     There  is  no  principle  that 

ought 


the  probability  of  fee  ond  catifes.  43 

ouffht  more  firmly  to  be  believed  by  us  than  this,  that  SER  M. 

-  ,  .  XXX\  I 

to  live  under  a  conllant  fenfe  and  awe  of  almighty  ,^„^.^^ 

God,  to  depend  upon  his  providence,  and  to  feek  his 

favour  and  blefiing  upon  all  our  defigns,  being  fearful 

to  offend  him  and  careful  to  pleafe  him,  is  a  much 

nearer  and  furer  way  to  fuccefs,  than  our  own  beft 

prudence  and  preparations. 

And  therefore  at  fuch  a  time,  more  efpecially, 
■when  we  are  going  to  war,  or  engaged  in  it,  we 
fhould  break  off  our  fins  by  repentance  and  the  fin- 
cere  refolution  of  a  better  courfe :  we  fhould  earneft- 
ly  implore  the  bleffing  of  God  upon  our  undertak- 
ings i  and  not  only  take  great  care  that  our  caufe  be 
juft,  but  likewife  that  there  be  no  wicked  thing 
amongft  us,  to  drive  God  out  of  our  camp  ;  no  ac- 
curfed  thing,  that  may  provoke  him  to  deliver  us  in- 
to the  hands  of  our  enemies.  It  was  a  particular  law 
given  by  God  to  the  Jews,  "  when  the  hofl:  goeth  Deut. 
"  forth  againft  thine  enemy,  then  keep  thy  felf  from  ^'""'  9- 
"  every  wicked  thing  i"  then,  that  is,  more  efpeci- 
ally at  fuch  a  time. 

And  this  is  a  necefTary  caution,  not  only  to  thofe 
who  are  perfonally  engaged  in  the  war,  that  by  t\iQ, 
favour  of  God  they  may  have  their  heads  covered  in 
the  day  of  battle,  or  if  God  fhali  fuffer  them  to  fall  by 
the  hand  of  the  enemy,  that  having  made  their  peace 
beforehand  with  him,  they  may  not  only  have  the 
comfort  of  a  good  caufe,  but  of  a  good  confcience, 
void  of  offence  towards  God  and  men. 

But  this  caution  likewife  concerns  thofe,  who  are 
interefted  in  the  fuccefs  and  event  of  the  war ;  as  we 
all  are,  not  only  in  regard  of  our  lives  and  eflates, 
but  of  that  which  ought  to  be  much  dearer  to  us, 

CL  q  q  2  our 


Succefs  not  always  anfwerahk  to 

our  religion  and  the  freedom  of  our  confciences  ; 
which  are  now  every  whit  as  much  at  ftake,  as  our 
civil  interefts  and  liberties.  And  therefore  as  we 
tender  any,  or  all  of  thefe,  we  fhould  be  very  careful 
"  to  keep  our  felves  from  every  wicked  thing  •/'  that 
thf^y  who  fight  for  us,  may  not  for  our  fins,  and  for 
our  {likes,  turn  their  backs  in  the  day  of  battle,  and 
fall  by  the  fword  of  the  enemy. 

Secondly,  from  hence  we  may  likewife  learn,  fo 
to  ufe  the  means  as  ftill  to  depend  upon  God  ;  who 
can,  as  he  pleafes,  blefs  the  counfels  and  endeavours 
of  men,  or  blafl:  tliem  and  miake  them  of  none  effeft. 
For  as  God  hath  promifed  nothing  but  to  a  wife  and 
diligent  ufe  of  means,  fo  all  our  prudence,  and  in- 
duftry,  and  moil  careful  preparations  may  mifcarry, 
if  he  do  not  favour  our  defign  :  for  without  him  no- 
thing is  wife,  nothing  is  ftrong,  nothing  is  able  to 
reach  and  attain  it*s  end. 

We  fhould  indeed  ufe  the  means  as  vigoroufly 
as  if  God  did  nothing  ;  and  when  we  have  done  fo, 
we  fhould  depend  upon  God  for  the  fuccefs  of  thofe 
means,  as  if  we  our  felves  had  done  nothing,  but  did 
expeft  all  from  his  favour  and  blefling  :  for  when  all 
is  done,  we  are  only  fafe  under  his  proteftion,  and 
fure  of  fuccefs  from  his  blefling. 

For  whatever  vain  and  foolifh  men  may  fay  in 
their  hearts,  there  is,  there  is  a  God,  that  made  the 
world,  and  adminiflers  the  affairs  of  it  with  great 
"wifdom  and  goodnefs  -,  tMt  how  came  any  of  us  in- 
to being,  or  what  do  we  here  ?  Did  we  not  moil 
sfTuredly  believe  that  there  is  a  God,  that  governs 
the  world  and  fuper-intends  human  affairs,  the  firft 
wifTi  of  a  wife  man  would  be,  to  fleal  out  of  being,  if 


the  probability  of  fecond  caufes,  '  j^^ 

he  could  ;  and  that  the  fame  chance  or  neceflity  that  S  E  R  M. 
brought  him  into  the  world,  would  take  the  firft  op-  •^^■^^*- 
portunity  to  carry  him  out.  For  to  be  every  moment 
liable  to  prefent,  and  great,  and  certain  evils ;  and 
to  have  no  fecurity  againft  the  continuance  of  them, 
or  the  return  of  the  fame  or  worfe  evils  -,  nor  to  have 
any  aiTurance  of  a  better  and  more  durable  ftate  of  reft 
and  happinefs  hereafter,  is  in  truth  fo  very  melancho- 
ly a  meditation,  that  I  do  not  know  any  confiderati- 
on  in  the  world  that  is  of  force  and  power  enough 
to  fupport  the  mind  of  man  under  it:  and  were  there 
not  in  the  world  a  being,  that  is  wifer,  and  better, 
and  more  powerful  than  our  felves,  and  that  keeps 
things  from  running  into  endlefs  confufion  and  dif- 
order ;  a  being  that  loves  us,  and  takes  care  of  us, 
and  that  will  certainly  confider  and  reward  all  the 
good  that  we  do,  and  all  the  evil  that  we  fuffer  upon 
his  account,  I  do  not  fee  what  reafon  any  man  could 
have  to  take  any  comfort  and  joy  in  being,  or  to  wifli 
the  continuance  of  it  for  one  moment. 

Thirdly  and  laftly,  the  confideration  of  what  hath 
been  faid  upon  this  argument,  Ihould  keep  us  from 
being  too  fanguine  and  confident  of  the  moft  likely 
defigns  and  undertakings  -■>  becaufe  thefe  do  not  al- 
ways anfwer  the  probability  of  fecond  caufes  and 
means  i  and  never  lefs,  than  when  we  do  with  the 
greateft  confidence  rely  upon  them  j  when  we  pro- 
mife  moft  to  our  felves  from  them,  then  are  they 
moft  likely  to  deceive  us :  they  are,  as  the  prophet 
compares  them,  like  a  broken  reed,  which  a  man 
may  walk  with  in  his  hand,  whilft  he  lays  no  great 
ftrefs  upon  it ;  but  if  he  truft  to  it,  and  lean  his 
whole  weight  on  it,  it  will  not  only  fail  him,  but 
even  pierce  him  through.  And 


46  Succefs  not  always  anfwerabk  to 

E  R  M.  And  we  cannot  do  a  Greater  preiudice  to  our  affairs, 
when  they  are  in  the  moft  hopeful  and  likely  condi- 
tion to  fucceed  and  do  well,  than  to  fhutGoDandhis 
providence  outofourcounfelsand  con fideration.  When 
wc  pafs  God  by,  and  take  no  notice  of  him,  but  will 
rely  upon  our  own  wifdom  and  ftrength,  we  provoke 
him  to  leave  us  in  the  hands  of  our  own  counfel,  and 
to  let  us  fee  what  weak  and  foolifh  creatures  we  are  : 
and  a  man  is  never  in  greater  danger  of  drowning, 
than  when  he  clafps  his  arms  clofeft  about  himfelf: 
befides,  that  God  loves  to  refift  the  felf-confident  and 
prefumptuous,  and  to  "  fcatter  the  proud  in  the  ima- 
"  gination  of  their  hearts.'* 

And  as  in  all  our  concernments  we  ought  to  have 
a  great  regard  to  God,  the  fupreme  difpofer  of  all 
things,  and  earneftly  to  feek  his  favour  and  blefling 
upon  all  our  undertakings,  fo  more  efpecially  in  the 
affairs  of  war ;  in  which  the  providence  of  God  is 
pleafed  many  times  in  a  very  peculiar  manner  to  in- 
terpofe  and  intereft  itfelf:  and  there  is  great  reafon 
to  think  he  does  fo  ;  becaufc  all  war  is,  as  it  were, 
an  appeal  to  God,  and  a  reference  of  thofe  caufes  to 
the  decifion  of  his  providence,  which  through  the 
pride,  and  injuftice,  and  perverfe  paffions  of  men, 
can  receive  no  other  determination. 

And  here  God  loves  to  fhew  himfelf,  and  in  an 
eminent  manner  to  take  part  with  right  and  juftice 
againfl  thofe  mighty  oppreffors  of  the  earth,who  like 
an  overflowing  flood  would  bear  down  all  before  them : 
in  this  cafe,  the  providence  of  God  is  fometimes 
pleafed  to  give  a  remarkable  check  to  great  power 
and  violence,  and  to  one  that  vainly  gives  out  him- 
felf not  unequal  to  the  whole  world  j  by  very  weak 

I  and 


the  probability  offecond  caufes.  47 

and  contemptible  means  i  and, as  the  apoftle  elegantly  ^y^^^' 

exprefieth  it,  "  by  the  things  which  are  not/ to  bring  <„,.,-.^^^ 

"  to  nought  the  things  that  are :"  and  to  fay  to  him, 

as   God  once  did  to  the   proud   king   of  AfTyria: 

"  Whom  haft  thou  reproached  and  blafphemed,  and        .. 

"  againft   whom  haft  thou  exalted  thy  voice,    and  23,  26, 

"  lifted  up  thine  eyes  on  high  ?  even  againft  the  Ho-  ^'^'  ^^' 

"  ly  One  of  Ifrael.     Haft  thou  not  heard  long  ago, 

"  that  I  have  done  it ;  and  of  ancient  times  that  I 

"  have  formed  it  ?    Now  have  I  brought  it  to  pafs 

*'  that  thou  ftiouldeft  be  to  lay  wafte  defenced  cities 

"  into  ruinous  heaps :    therefore  their   inhabitants 

"  were  of  fmail  power,  they  were  difmayed  and  con- 

"  founded,  &c.'*   "  But  I  know  thy  abode,  and  thj 

"  going  out,  and  thy  coming  in,  and  thy  rage  againft 

*'  me.  Becaufe  thy  rage  againft  me,  and  thy  tumult 

"  is  come  up  into  mine  ears,  therefore  will  I  put  my 

"  hook  into  thy  nofe,  and  my  bridle  into  thy  lips, 

"  and  I  will  turn  thee  back  by  the  way  by  which  thou 

"  cameft. The  zeal  of  the  Lord  of  hofts  Ihall 

«  do  this.'* 

But  more  efpecially,  in  vindication  of  his  oppreflcd 
truth  and  religion,  and  in  the  great  and  fignal  delive- 
rances of  his  church  and  people,  God  is  wont  to  take 
the  conduct  of  affairs  into  his  own  hands,  and  not 
to  proceed  by  human  rules  and  meafures :  he  then 
bids  fecond  caufes  to  ftand  by,  that  "  his  own  arm 
'*  may  be  feen,  and  his  falvation  may  appear:"  he 
raifeth  the  fpirits  of  men  above  their  natural  pitch,  ■ 
"  and  giveth  power  to  the  faint,  and  to  them  that 
"  have  no  might  he  increafeth  ftrength,"  as  the  pro- 
phet exprefieth  it. 

Thus 


4  5  Succefs  not  always  anfwerahle  to 

;ERM.  Thus  hath  the  providence  of  God  very  vifibly  ap- 
peared in  our  late  dehverance  ;  in  fuch  a  manner,  as 
I  know  not  whether  he  ever  did  for  any  other  nation, 
except  the  people  of  Ifrael,  when  he  delivered  them 
"  from  the  houfe  of  bondage  by  fo  mighty  a  hand 
"  and  fo  out-ft retched  an  arm :"  and  yet  too  many 
among  us,  I  fpeak  it  this  day  to  our  fhame,  do  not 
feem  to  have  the  leaft  fenfe  of  this  great  deliverance, 
or  of  the  hand  of  God  which  was  fo  vifible  in  it; 
but  like  the  children  of  Ifrael  when  they  were  brought 
out  of  Egypt,  we  are  all  fullof  murmurings  anddifcon- 
tent  againft  God  the  author,  and  his  fervant  the  hap- 
py inftrument  under  God  of  this  our  deliverance. 
What  the  prophet  fays  of  that  people,  may,  I  fear,  be 
too  juftly  applied  to  us,  "  let  favour  be  fhewn  to  the 
"  wicked,  yet  will  he  not  learn  righteoufnefs ;  in 
"  the  land  of  uprightnefs  he  will  deal  unjullly,  and 
"  will  not  behold  the  majefty  of  the  Lord:  Lord, 
*'  when  thy  hand  is  lifted  up,  they  will  not  fee ;  but 
*'  they  fhall  fee,  and  be  afhamed :"  and  I  hope  I  may 
add  that  which  follows  in  the  next  verfe,  "  Lord, 
"  thou  wilt  ordain  peace  for  us  •,  for  thou  alfo  haft 
"  wrought  all  our  works  for  us."  What  God  hath 
already  done  for  our  deliverance  is,  I  hope,  an  car- 
ncft  that  he  will  carry  it  on  to  a  perfedt  peace  and  fet- 
tlement ;  and  this,  notwithftanding  our  high  provo- 
cations and  horrible  ingratitude  to  "  the  God  of  our 
"  life,   and  of  our  falvation." 

And  whenever  the  providence  of  God  thinks  fit 
thus  to  interpofe  in  human  affairs,  *'  the  race  is  not 
"  to  the  fwift,  nor  the  battle  to  the  ftrong :"  for 
which  reafon  there  majefties,  in  their  great  piety  and 
wifdom,  and  from  a  juft  fenfe  of  the  providence  of 

almighty 


the  prohahiltfy  offecond  caufes.  49 

almighty  God,  which  "  rules  in  the  kingdoms  of  ^^vi* 
*«  men,"  have  thought  fit  to  fet  apart  this  day  for 
folemn  repentance  and  humiliation :  that  the  many 
and  heinous  fins,  which  we  in  this  nation  have  been, 
and  ftill  are  guilty  of,  and  which  are  of  all  other  our 
greateft  and  moft  dangerous  enemies,  may  not  "  fe- 
"  parate  between  God  and  us,  and  hinder  good  things 
•'  from  us,"  and  cover  us  with  confufion  in  the  day 
of  our  danger  and  diftrefs :  and  likewife,  earneftly  to 
implore  the  favour  and  blefling  of  almighty  God  up- 
on their  majefties  forces  and  preparations  by  fca  and 
land  :  and  more  particularly,  for  the  prefervation  of 
his  majefty*s  facred  perfon,  upon  whom  fo  much  de- 
pends, and  who  is  contented  again  to  hazard  him- 
felf  to  fave  us. 

To  conclude  •,  there  is  no  fuch  way  to  engage  the 
providence  of  God  for  us,  as  by  real  repentance  and 
reformation ;  and  by  doing  all  we  can,  in  our  feveral 
places,  from  the  higheft  to  the  loweft,  by  the  provifi- 
on  of  wife  and  effeftual  laws  for  the  difcountenancing 
and  fuppreflingofprophanenefs  and  vice,  and  by  the 
careful  and  due  execution  of  them,  and  by  the  more 
kindly  and  powerful  influence  of  a  good  example, 
to  retrieve  the  ancient  piety  and  virtue  of  the  nation ; 
for  without  this,  whatever  we  may  think  of  the  firm- 
nefs  of  our  prefent  fettlement,  we  cannot  long  be  up- 
on good  terms  with  almighty  God,  upon  whofe  fa- 
vour depends  the  profperity  and  {lability  of  the  pre- 
fent and  future  times. 

I  have  but  one  thing  more  to  mind  you  of;  and 
that  is,  to  ftir  up  your  charity  towards  the  poor  ; 
which  is  likewife  a  great  part  of  the  duty  of  this  day, 
and  which  ought  always  to  accompany  our  prayers 

Vol.  III.  Rrr        "  afid 


^o  Suecefs  not  always  anfioerahle  to 

SERM.  and  faftings :  *'  thy  prayers  and   thine  alms/*  faith 

y^^,.^.^^,...^  the  angel  to  Cornelius,  are  "  come  up  before  God:** 

and  therefore  if  we  defire   that  our  prayers  fhould 

reach  heaven,  and  receive  a  gracious  anfwer  from 

God,  we  mufl  fend  up  our  alms  along  with  them. 

And  inftead  of  all  other  arguments  to  this  pur- 
pofe.  I  Ihall  only  recite  to  you  the  plain  and  perfua- 
five  words  of  God  himfelf,  in  which  he  declares  what 
Ifa.  Iviii.  kJ'^^  of  fall  is  acceptable  to  him:  "  Is  it  fuch  a  faft 
5,  6,  kc.  "  as  I  have  chofen  ?  a  day  for  a  man  to  afflid:  his 
*'  foul  ?  Is  it  to  bow  down  his  head  as  a  bulrufh,  to 
"  fpread  fackcloth  and  allies  under  him  ?  Wilt  thou 
"  call  thisa  faft,  and  an  acceptable  day  to  the  Lord  ? 
"  Is  not  this  the  faft  that  I  have  chofen  ?  To  loofe 
"  the  bands  of  wickednefs,  and  to  undo  the  heavy 
"  burthens,  and  to  let  the  opprefTed  go  free,  and 
"  that  ye  break  every  yoke  :  is  it  not  to  deal  thy 
*'  bread  to  the  hungry,  and  that  thou  bring  the 
"•  poor  that  arecaft  out  to  thine  houfe;  when  thou 
"  feeft  the  naked  that  thou  cover  him,  and  that  thou 
^'  hide  not  thy  felf  from  thine  ov/n  fiefh  ?  Then 
"  ftiall  thy  light  break  forth  as  the  morning,  and 
"  thy  falvation  fliall  fpring  forth  fpeedily ;  thy  righ- 
"  teoufnefs,  or  thine  alms,  fliall  go  before  thee,  and 
"  the  glory  of  the  Lord  fhall  be  thy  rereward  :  then 
''  flialt  thou  call,  and  I  will  anlwer  thee  ;  thou  Ihalt 
*'  cry,  and  he  fliall  fay,  here  I  am." 

Now  to  "  him  that  fitteth  upon  the  throne,  and 
to  the  Lamb  that  was  flain  :  To  God,  even  our 
Father,  and  to  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  firft 
begotten  from  the  dead,  and  the  prince  of  the 
*'  kings  of  the  earth:  unto  him  who  hath  loved  us, 

I  "  and 


«( 


(« 


the  prohahilitj  offecond  canfes.  5 1 

*'  and  wafhed  us  from    our  fins  in  his  own  blood ;  S  E  R  M. 

xxxvr 
*'  and  hath  made  us  kings  andpriefls  unto  God  and 

"  his  Father :  to  him  be  glory  and  dominion,  for  c- 

•*  ver  and  ever.  Amen. 

"  And  the  God  of  peace,  that  brought  again 
"  from  the  dead  our  Lord  Jesus,  that  great  fhep- 
**  herd  of  the  fheep,  through  the  blood  of  the  ever- 
"  lading  covenant,  make  you  perfeft  in  every  good 
"  work  to  do  his  wiJl,  working  in  you  that  which 
"  is  well-pleafing  in  his  fight  ;  through  Jesus 
"  Christ,  to  whom  be  glory,  for  ever  and  ever, 
"  Amen. 


R  rr  2  The 


The  way  to  prevent  the  ruiii  of  a  fin- 
ful  people. 

A 

FAST-SERMON 

Preached  before  the 

Lord-Mayor,  Sec. 

O  N 

Wednefday,   June  the    i8th,     1690. 


To  the  right  honourable 

Sir  Th  OM  AS  Pi  LKINGTON, 

Lord-Mayor  of  the  City  of  London : 

A  N  D    T  H  E 

Court  of  Aldermen. 

Mv  Lord, 

IN  obedience  to  your  commands^  1 
have  publijhed  this  fermon  lately 
preached  before  you^  and  do  now  humbly 
prefent  you  with  it ;  heartily  wijhing  it 
may  have  that  good  effeSi  for  the  refor- 
mation of  our  livesy  and  reconciliation 
of  our  unhappy  differences^  which  was 
fincerely  intended  by^ 

MYLORD, 

Your  moft  faithful 

and  humble  fervant, 
John  Tillotson. 

S  E  R- 


55 


SERMON    XXXVII. 

The  way  to  prevent  the  ruin  of  a  fin- 
ful  people. 


JEREMIAH  vi.  8. 

Be  thou  injlru^ed,  0  Jerufakm,  lefi  my  foul  depart  from 
theey  lefl  I  make  thee  deflate^  a  land  not  inhabited, 

T 


H  E  S  E  words  are  a  merciful  warning  from  S  E  R  M. 
God  to  the  people  of  Ifrael   by  the  prophet  ^^^ '^  ^^• 


Jeremiah,  the  laft  prophet  that  God  fent  to  them 
before  their  captivity  in  Babylon. 

The  time  of  his  prophecy  was  of  a  long  continu- 
ance, above  the  fpace  of  forty  years,  viz.  from  the 
thirteenth  year  of  king  Jofiah,  to  the  eleventh  year 
of  king  Zedekiah,  the  year  in  which  Jerufalem  was 
taken  by  Nebuchadnezzar  king  of  Babylon. 

This  I  obferve,  to  fhew  the  great  patience  of  God 
to  a  finful  nation.  And  this  is  much  the  fame  fpace 
of  time  that  God  gave  warning  by  our  blefied  Savi- 
our and  his  apoftles  to  the  fame  people  of  the  Jews 
concerning  their  final  deftrudtion.  For  it  was  about 
forty  years  after  the  predidion  of  our  Saviour  con- 
cerning it,  juft  before  his  death,  that  the  terrible  de- 
ftrudion  of  Jerufalem  and  the  Jewifh  nation  was  exe- 
cuted upon  them  by  the  Romans,  or  rather  chiefly 
by  themfelves  -,  as  I  Ihall  prefently  fhew.  Of  which 
dreadful  defolation,  the  firll  raking  of  Jerufalem  by 
Nebuchadnezzar,    and  their  captivity  into  Babylon 

was 


'5$  ^e  way  to  prevent  the 

S  E  R  M.  was  a  kind  of  type  and  forerunner.     For,  as  Tofe- 
XXXV  ^ 

phus  obferves,  the  taking  of  Jerufalem  by  Titus  Vef- 

pafian  did  happen  in  the  very  fame  month,  and  on 

the  very  fame  day  of  the  month  in  which  Jerufalem 

was  taken  by  Nebuchadnezzar,  viz.  upon  our  tenth 

ofAuguft. 

And  it  is  not  unworthy  of  our  obfervation,  that  the 
time  of  GoD*s  warning  is  wont  to  hold  fome  fort  of 
proportion  with  the  extent  of  his  judgments.  Be- 
fore the  univerfal  deluge  which  deftroyed  the  whole 
world,  Noah  and  his  family  only  excepted,  God 
gave  a  much  longer  warning  by  the  preaching  of 
Noah,  for  the  fpace  of  an  hundred  and  twenty  years. 
Before  the  dcflrufllon  of  a  particular  nation,  if  we 
may  judge  by  God's  dealing  with  the  Jews,  his 
time  of  warning  is  forty  years.  And  before  the  de- 
ftruflion  of  a  particular  city,  if  we  may  conclude  a- 
ny  thing  from  the  fingle  example  of  Niniveh,  the 
time  of  God's  warning  is  yet  much  fhorter,  the  fpace 
of  forty  days. 

And  now  to  what  end  doth  God  exerclfe  fo  much 
patience  and  threaten  fo  long  beforehand,  but  that 
by  the  terror  of  histhreatnings  men  may  be  brought 
to  repentance,  and  by  repentance  may  prevent  the 
execution  of  them  ?  For  all  the  while  that  God  by 
his  prophet  threatens  ruin  and  deftrudion  to  the 
people  of  Ifrael,  he  earneftly  invites  and  urges  them 
to  repentance,  that  by  this  means  they  might  efcape 
the  ruin  that  Was  denounced  againft  them  :  this  be- 
ing a  condition  pei-petually  implied  in  the  denunci- 
ation of  publick  judgments,  that  if  a  people  repent 
of  the  evil  of  their  doings,  God  alfo  will  repent. of 
the  evil  which  he  faid  he  v,'ouId  do  unto  them,  as  he 

exprefly 


ruin  of  ajinful  people.  57 

cxprefly  declares  chap,  xviii.  verf.  7,  8.  "  At  whatS  ERM. 
"  inftant  I  fpeak  concerning  a  nation  and  concerning 
"  a  kingdom,  to  pluck  up,  and  to  pull  down,  and  to 
"  deftroy  it ;  if  that  nation,  againft  whom  I  have  pro- 
"  nounced,  turn  from  their  evil,  I  will  repent  of  the 
"  evil  which  I  thought  to  do  unto  therii."  And 
here  in  the  text,  after  God  had  threatened  deflru<51:i- 
on  to  Jerufalem,  becaufe  of  the  overflowing  of  all 
manner  of  wickednefs  and  oppreffion  in  the  midft  of 
her,  he  gives  her  a  merciful  warning  to  prevent  this 
ruin  and  defolation  by  repentance,  verf.  6,  7.  *'  Thus 
**■  hath  the  Lord  of  hofts  faid,  hew  ye  down  trees, 
"  and  caft  a  mount  againft  Jerufalem  ;  this  is  a  city 
"  to  be  vifited,  fhe  is  wholly  oppreffion  in  the  midft 
"  of  her.  Asa  fountain  cafteth  cutwaters,  fo  fhe 
"  cafteth  out  her  wickednefs.  Before  me  continual- 
"  ly  is  grief  and  wounds."  And  yet  when  he  had 
pronounced  this  fearful  fentence  upon  her,  he  tells 
her  that  all  this  mifery  and  defolation  might  yet  be 
prevented,  if  they  would  but  hearken  to  the  counfel 
of  God,  and  be  inftrudted  by  him  concerning  the 
things  of  their  peace:  for  fo  it  follows  in  the  next 
words,  "  Be  thou  inftru6led,  O  Jerufalem,  left  my 
'*  foul  depart  from  thee,  left  I  make  thee  defolate 
"  a  land  not  inhabited.  Be  thou  inftrufted,  O  Jeru- 
"  falem,'*  that  is,  do  but  now  at  laft  take  that  coun- 
fel and  warning,  which  hath  fo  often  and  fo  long 
been  tendered  to  thee  by  my  fervant  the  prophet,  who 
hath  now  for  the  fpace  of  forty  years  continually, 
and  that  with  great  earneftnefs  and  importunity, 
been  warning  thee  of  this  danger,  and  calling  thee  t© 
repentance  and  a  better  mind. 

"  Left  my  foul  depart  from  thee."     In  the  He- 
VoL.  III.  ^ii  brew 

2. 


58  ^he  'Way  to  prevent  the 

SERM.  brew  it  is,  "  left  my  foul  be  loofened  and  disiointed 
^,^„..,^,^  "  from  thee,"  as  it  is  in  the  margin  of  your  bibles ; 
hereby  fignifying,  in  the  moft  emphatical  manner, 
the  wonderful  affection  and  kindnefs  which  God  had 
,  ^  for  his  people,  and  how  ftrongly  his  foul  was  linked 
to  them,  and  how  loth  he  was  to  withdraw  his  love 
from  them ;  it  was  like  the  tearing  off  of  a  limb, 
or  the  plucking  of  a  joint  in  funder  ;  fo  unwilling 
is  God  to  come  to  extremity  ;  fo  hardly  is  he  brought 
to  refolve  upon  the  ruin  even  of  a  finful  nation  : 
how  much  rather  would  he,  that  they  would  be 
infl:ru(5led  and  receive  corre6lion,  and  hearken  to 
the  things  of  their  peace  ?  But  if  they  will  not  be 
perfuaded,  if  no  warning  will  work  upon  them, 
"  his  fpirit  will  not  always  ftrive  with  them ;"  but 
*'  his  foul"  will  at  laft,  though  with  great  unwilHng- 
nefs  and  relu6lancy,    "  depart  from  them." 

And  then,  no  interceflion  will  prevail  for  them  ; 
as  he  threatens  by  the  fame  prophet,  chap.  xv.  ver.  i. 
"  Then  faid  the  Lord  unto  me,  though  Mofes  and 
**  Samuel  flood  before  me,  yet  my  mind  could  not 
*'  be  towards  this  people  ;  caft  them  out  of  my  fight, 
*'  and  let  them  go  forth ;"  away  with  them  into 
captivity,  for  they  have  loft  my  heart,  and  no  in- 
terceflion of  others  for  them,  nothing  but  their  own 
repentance  can  recover  it. 

And  when  his  foul  is  once  departed  from  a  peo- 
ple, and  his  heart  turned  againft  them,  then  all  forts 
of  evils  and  calamities  will  be  let  loofe  upon  them  ; 
as  we  may  read  in  the  next  verfe  of  tha:  chapter  ; 
"  And  it  fhall  come  to  pafs  if  they  Cay  unto  thee, 
*"  whither  fliall  we  go  forth  .^  then  fhalt  thou  tell  them, 
"  thus  faith  the  Lord,    fuch  as  are  for  death  to 

"  death, 


xxxvir. 


rtiin  of  ajinfidpeople.  ^() 

''  death,  and  fuch  as  are  for  the  fword  to  the  fwort!,  ?,E  R  M. 
"  and  fuch  as  are  for  the  famine  to  the  famine,  and 
*'  fuch  as  are  for  the  captivity  to  the  captivity.'*  For 
then  God  will  be  weary  of  repenting,  as  he  tells 
them  Ytr^e.  6.  "  Thou  haft  forfaken  me,  faith  the 
*'  Lord,  thou  art  gone  backward  ;  therefore  will 
"  I  ftretch  out  my  hand  againfl:  thee,and  deliver  thee; 
"  I  am  weary  of  repenting.'*  By  our  obftinate  im- 
penitency  we  harden  the  heart  of  God  againft  us, 
and  make  "  him  weary  of  repenting."  And  when 
his  foul  is  thus  departed  from  a  people,  nothing  re- 
mains but  a  fearful  expedlation  of  ruin.  "  Wo  un-  Hof.  ix;. 
"  to  them,"  faith  God  by  the  prophet,  "  when  I  ^^• 
"  depart  from  them.'*  Therefore  "  be  thou  inftrudl- 
"  ed,  O  Jerufalem,  lefl:  my  foul  depart  from  thee, 
"  left  I  make  thee  defolate,  a  land  not  inhabited. 

Having  given  this  account  of  the  words,  I  Ihall 
obferve  from  them  three  things  well  worth  our  con- 
fideration. 

Firft,  the  infinite  goodnefs  and  patience  of  God 
towards  a  finful  people,  and  his  great  unwillingnefs 
to  bring  ruin  and  deftrudflion  upon  them,  "  left  my 
"  foul  depart  from  thee,  left  I  make  thee  defolate, 
"  a  land  not  inhabited."  How  loth  is  he  that  things 
fliould  come  to  this  extremity  ?  He  is  not  without 
great  difficulty,  and  fome  kind  of  violence,  as  it 
were,  oflfered  to  himfelf,  brought  to  this  fevere  re- 
iblution ;  his  foul  is,  as  it  were,  rent  and  disjointed 
horn  them. 

Secondly,  you  fee  here  what  is  the  only  proper 

and  effectual  means  to  prevent  the  mifery  and  ruin 

of  a  finful  people.     If  they  will  be  inftru(^ed  afid 

S  f f 2  take 


6o  ^e  way  to  prevent  the 

SERM.  tJtJfe  warning  by  the  threatnings  of  God,  and  will 
^5^^^'  become  wifer  and  better,  then  "  his  foul"  will  not 
"  depart  from  them,"  he  will  not  htfing  upon  them 
the  defolation  which  he  hath  threatned. 

Thirdly,  you  have  here  intimated  the  miferable 
cafe  and  condition  of  a  people,  when  God  takes  off 
his  affedion  from  them,  and  gives  over  all  further 
care  and  concernrnent  for  them.  Wo  unto  them, 
when"  his  foul  departs  from  iv.'  .1,"  For  when 
God  once  leaves  them,  thja  all  forts  of  evils  and 
calamities  will  break  m  upon  them. 

I  fhall  fpeak  as  briefly  as  I  can  to  thefe  three  ob- 
fervations  from  the  text. 

Firft,  I  obferve  the  infinite  patience  and  goodneHj 
of  God  towards  a  finful  people,  and  hi§  great  un- 
willingnefs  to  bring  ruin  and  deftru(5lion  upon  them ; 
"  left  my  foql  depart  from  thee,  left  I  make  thee 
"  defolate,  a  land  not  inhabited."  How  loth  is 
God  that  things  fhould  come  to  this?  He  is  very 
patient  to  particular  perfons,  notwithftanding  their 
great  and  innumerable  provocations.  "God  is  ft r on g 
^'and  patient,"  though  men  "  provoke  him  every 
**  day."  And  much  greater  is  his  patience  to  whole 
nations  and  great  communities  of  men. 

How  great  was  it  to  the  old  world,  "  when  the 
*'  long  fuffering  of  God  waited  in  the  days  ot  Noah," 
for  the  fpace  of  an  hundred  and  twenty  years  ^  And 
(did  not  expire,  till  "  he  faw  that  the  wickednefs  of 
*'  man  was  grown  great  upon  the  earth,  and  that  all 
^'  ftelh  had  corrupted  it's  way  j"  not  till  it  v/as  ne- 
cefiary  to  drown  the  world  to  cleanfe  it,  and  to  de- 
ftroy  mankind  to  reform  it,  by  beginning  a  new 

v/orld 


ruin  of  a  ftnf id  people,  6 1 

world  upon  the  only  righteous  family  that  was  left  S  E  R  M. 
of  all  the  laft  generation  of  the  old.     For  fo  God  C^T^l^* 
teftifies  concerning  Noah,  when  he  commanded  him 
to  enter  into  the  ark,  faying,  "  Come  thou  and  all  Gen,  viL 
"  thy  houfe  into  the  ark;    for  thee,"  that  is,  thee  ** 
only,   "  have  I  feen  righteous  before  me  in  this  ge- 
"  neration.'* 

The  patience  of  God  was  great  likewife  to  Sodom 
and  Gomorrah,  and  the  cities  about  them.  For 
when  "  the  cry  of  their  fins  had  reached  heaven,'* 
and  called  loud  for  vengeance  to  be  poured  down 
upon  them,  to  exprefs  the  wonderful  patience  of 
God  towards  fuch  grievous  finners,  though  nothing 
is  hid  from  his  fight  and  knowledge,  yet  he  is  re- 
prefented  as  coming  down  from  heaven  to  earth  on 
purpofe  to  enquire  into  the  truth  of  things,  and 
"  whether  they  were  altogether  according  to  the 
"  cry  that  was  come  up  to  him."  And  when  he 
found  things  as  bad  as  was  pofiible,  yet  then  was  he 
willing  to  have  come  almoft  to  the  ioweft  terms 
imaginable,  that  if  there  had  been  but  "  ten  righteous 
♦'  perfons"  in  thofe  wicked  cities,  "  he  would  not 
^*  have  deftroyed  them  for  the  ten's  fake. 

Nay,  he  feems  to  come  to  lower  terms  yet,  v/ith 
the  city  of  Jerufalem,  Jer.  v.  i .  "  Run  ye  to  and  fro 
*'  through  the  ftreets  of  Jerufalem,  and  fee  now 
*'  and  know,  and  feek  in  the  broad  places  thereof, 
^'  if  ye  can  find  a  man,  if  there  be  any  that  execut- 
^'  eth  judgment,  and  fceketh  the  truth,  and  I  will 
"  pardon  it." 

What  can  be  imagined  ipore  llov/,  and  mild,  and 
merciful,  than  the  proceedings  of  the  divine  juftice 
againft  a  finful  people  ?  God  is  reprefcnted  in  fcrip- 

turs 


62  The  way  to  prevent  the 

S  E  R  M.   ture  as  taking  a  long  time  to  "  make  ready  his  bow," 

XXXVII  o  o  /  » 

■  and  to  "  whet  his  ghttering  fword,"  before  "  his 
"  hand  takes  hold  of"  vengeance  j  as  if  the  inftru- 
ments  of  his  wrath  lay  by  him  blunt  and  rufty,  and 
unready  for  iife.  Many  a  time  he  threatens,  and 
many  a  time  lifts  up  his  hand,  before  he  gives  the 
fatal  blow.  And  hov/  glad  is  he  when  any  good 
man  will  ftep  in  and  interpofe  to  flay  his  hand  ? 
As  we  read  Pfal.cvi.23.  "  Therefore  he  faid,"  fpeak- 
ing  of  the  people  of  Ifrael,  "  that  he  would  deftroy 
"  them,  had  not  Mofes  his  fervant  flood  in  the 
"  breach  to  turn  away  his  wrath,  left  he  fhould  de- 
"  flroy  them."  And  how  kindly  doth  God  take 
it  of  Phineas,  as  a  mod  acceptable  piece  of  fervice 
done  to  him,  and  which  he  hardly  knew  how  fufH- 
ciently  to  reward,  that  he  was  a  means  of  putting  a 
-^op  to  his  anger  againfl  the  people  of  Ifrael:  info- 
much  that  the  Pialmift  tells  us,  that  "  it  was  account- 
"  ed  to  him  for  righteoufnefs  to  all  generations  for 
"  evermore."  I  will  recite  the  whole  paflage  at 
large,  becaufe  it  is  remarkable.  When  the  people 
of  Ifrael  were  feduced  into  idolatry  and  whoredoni 
by  the  daughters  of  Moab,  Phinehas  in  great  zeal 
flood  up  and  executed  judgment  upon  Zimri  and 
Cozbi  in  the  very  a6l :  by  which  means  the  plague 
which  was  broken  out  upon  the  congregation  of 
Ifrael  was  prefcntly  flayed.  Hear  what  God  fays  to 
Mofes  concerning  this  aft  of  Phinehas.  "  The 
"  Lord  fpakc  unto  Mofes,  faying,  Phinehas  the  fon 
"  of  Eleazar,  the  fon  of  Aaron  the  priefl,  hath  turn- 
"  ed  away  my  wrath  from  the  children  of  Ifrael, 
"  whilft  he  was  zealous  for  my  fake,  that  I  confum- 
"  cd  them  not.  Wherefore  fay,  behold  I  give  un- 
*    .  to 


ruin  of  a  Jinful  people.  63 

"  to  him  my  covenant  of  peace,  and  he  Ihall  have  SE  R  M. 
"  it,  and  his  feed  after  him,  even  the  covenant  of  ^_^^^-^  j 
*'  an  everlafting  priefthood,  becaufe  he  was  zealous 
"  for  his  God,  and  made  an  atonement  for  the 
"  children  of  Ifrael."  That  which  God  takes  fo  kind- 
ly at  his  hands,  next  to  his  zeal  for  liim,  is,  that  he 
pacified  God's  wrath  towards  the  children  of  Ifrael. 

And  thus  did  God  from  time  to  time  deal  with 
the  people  of  Ifrael,  that  great  example  of  the  old 
teftament  of  the  merciful  methods  of  the  divine  pro- 
vidence towards  a  finful  nation.  And  an  example, 
as  St.  Paul  tells  us,  purpofely  "  recorded  for  our  ad-  "  Cor.  x. 
"  monition,  upon  whom  the  ends  of  the  world  are 
"  come.'* 

Let  us  therefore  confider  a  little  the  aftonifhing 
patience  of  God  towards  that  perverfe  people.  Af- 
ter all  the  figns  and  wonders  which  he  had  wrought 
in  their  deliverance  out  of  Egypt,  and  for  their  fup- 
port  in  the  wildernefs ;  and  notwithuanding  their 
grofs  and  (tupid  infidelity,  and  horrible  ingratitude 
to  God  their  faviour,  and  all  their  rebellious  mur- 
murings  and  difcontents,  yet  he  fuffered  their  man- 
ners for  the  fpace  of  forty  years. 

And  when  they  were  at  lad  peaceably  fettled  in 
the  promifed  land ;  notwithftanding  their  frequent 
relapfes  into  idolatry,  with  what  patience  did  God 
expe6l  their  repentance,  and  the  refult  of  all  the 
merciful  meffages  and  warnings  given  them  from 
time  to  time  by  his  prophets,  as  one  that  earneftly 
defired  it,  and  even  longed  for  it  .?  "  O  Jerufalem,  Jer.  iv. 
"  wafh  thine  heart  from  wickednefs,  that  thou  may-  ''^' 
"  eft  be  faved  ;  how  long  fliall  vain  thoughts  lodge 
*^  within  thee  V*  that  is,  how  long  wilt  thou  delude 
2  thy 


64  The  way  to  prevent  the 

xxwu"  ^^^  ^^^^  ^^^^  ^^^"  hopes  of  efcaping  the  judgments 
■  6f  God  by  any  other  way  than  by  repentance?  And 
again,  "  O  Jerufalem,  wilt  thou  not  be  made  clean  ? 
"  when  fhall  it  once  be?"  And  chap.  viii.  ver.  6. 
fays  God  there,  *'  I  hearkened  and  I  heard,  but  they 
"  fpake  not  aright  -,  no  man  repented  him  of  his 
*'  wickednefs,  faying,  what  have  I  done  r"  Whers 
God  is  reprefented,  after  the  manner  of  men,  wait- 
ing with  great  patience,  as  one  that  would  have  been 
glad  to  have  heard  any  penitent  word  drop  from  them, 
to  have  feen  any  fign  of  their  repentance  and  return 
to  a  better  mind. 

And  when  they  made  fome  fhews  of  repentance, 
and  had  fome  fits  of  good  refolution  that  did  pre- 
fently  vanifli  and  come  to  nothing,  how  pafTionate- 
]y  does  God  complain  of  their  ficklenefs  and  incon- 
ftancy  ?  "  O  Ephraim,  what  (hall  I  do  unto  thee  ?  O 
*'  Judah,  wliat  fliall  I  do  unto  thee  ?  for  your  good- 
*'  nefs  is  as  a  morning  cloud,  and  as  the  early  dew  it 
"  goeth  away." 

And  at  laft,  when  nothing  would  do,  with  what 
difficulty  and  reluctance  does  God  deliver  them  up 
into  the  hands  of  their  enemies  ?  "  FIov/  fliall  I  give 

Hofeas;!.   thee  up  Ephraim  ?  rlow  fiiall  I  deliver  thee  Judah  ? 

t,  9.  (.(.  How  fhall  I  make  thee  as  Admah  ?  How  fhall  I 
"  fet  thee  as  Zeboim  ?  Mine  heart  is  turned  within 
*'  me,  and  my  repentings  are  kindled  together ;  I 
"  will  not  execute  the  fiercenefs  of  mine  anger,  I 
"  will  not  deftroy  Ephraim."  What  a  conflidl  is 
here  ?  What  tendernefs  and  yearning  of  his  bowels 
towards  them  ?  He  cannot  find  in  his  lieart  to  give 
them  up,   till  he  is  forced  to  it  by  the  lad  neceOity. 

And 


rum  of  a  fitful  people,  65 

And  when  the  nation  of  the  Jews,  after  their  re-  S  E  R  M. 
turn  from  the  captivity  of  Babylon,  had  in  the  courfe  '  '  ' 
of  feveral  ages  greatly  corrupted  themfelves,  and 
filled  up  the  meaHire  of  their  fins  by  "  crucifying  the 
"  Lord  of  life  and  glory,"  yet  how  flow  was  the  pa-- 
tienceof  God  in  bringing  that  fatal  and  final  deftruc- 
tion  upon  them  ?  not  till  after  themoft  mercifiil  warn- 
ings given  to  them,  by  the  apoftles  of  our  Lord  and 
Saviour  ;  not  till  after  the  moft  obftinate  impeni- 
tency  of  forty  years,  under  the  moft  powerful  means 
of  repentance  that  any  people  in  the  world  ever  en- 
joyed.    I  proceed  to  the 

Second  obfervation  from  the  text,  namely,  what  II 
is  the  only  proper  and  effedual  means  to  prevent 
the  ruin  of  a  finful  people?  and  that  is,  if  they  will 
be  inftrufled,  and  take  warning  by  the  threatnings  of 
God  to  become  wifer  and  better,  then  "  his  foul  will 
*'  not  depart  from  them,'*  and  he  will  not  bring  up- 
on them  the  defolation  threatned.  "  Be  thou  in- 
''  ftrudted,  O  Jerufalem,  left  my  foul  depart  from 
•*  thee,  and  I  make  thee  defolate,  a  land  not  in- 
*'  habited  j"  intimating,  or  rather  plainly  declar- 
ing to  us,  that  if  we  will  receive  inftruftion  ahd 
take  warning,  the  evil  threatned  Ihall  not  come.  For 
what  other  reafon  can  there  be,  why  God  fhould 
threaten  fo  long  before  he  ftrikes,  and  fo  earneftly 
prefs  men  to  repentance,  but  that  he  might  have 
the  opportunity  to  fpare  them,  and  to  fhew  mercy  to 
them } 

And  indeed,  as  I  obferved  before,  all  the  de- 
nunciations and  threatnings  of  God  to  a  finful  na- 
tion do  carry  this  tacit  condition  in  them,  that  if 
that  nation  turn  from  their  evil  ways,  God  will  re- 

VoL.  III.  T  1 1  penc 


66  l%e  way  to  prevent  the 

yyvvrr  P^"^  ^^  ^^^  ^^^'  which  he  thought  to  do  unto  them. 
'  For  God  never  pafleth  To  irrevocable  a  fentence  up- 
on a  nation,  as  to  exclude  the  cafe  of  repentance : 
nay  on  the  contrary,  he  gives  all  imaginable  encou- 
ragement to  it,  and  is  always  ready  to  meet  it,  with 
a  pardon  in  his  hand.  "  Plow  often  would  I  have 
"  gathered  thee,"  fays  our  merciful  Lord  when  he 
wept  over  Jerufalem,  "  as  a  hen  gathereth  herchick- 
"  ens  under  her  wings,  and  ye  would  not ;  there- 
*'  fore  your  houfe  is  left  unto  you  defolate." 

God  is  very  merciful  to  particular  perfons  upon 
their  repentance.  When  the  prodigal  fon  in  the  pa- 
rable, after  all  his  riot  and  lewdnefs  came  to  him- 
self and  refolved  to  return  home,  "  his  father  feeing 
*'  him  yet  afar  off"  coming  towards  him,  "  came 
'^'  out  to  meet  him,  and  had  comDaffion  on  him  and 
*'  killed  him."  And  can  any  of  us  be  fo  obftinate 
and  hard-hearted,  as  not  prefently  to  refolve  to  re- 
pent and  return,  and  to  meet  the  companions  of 
fuch  a  father  ?  v/ho,  after  we  have  offended  him  to 
the  uttermoft,  is  upon  the  firft  difcovery  of  our  re- 
pentance ready  to  be  as  kind  to  us,  as  he  could  pop- 
iibly  have  been  if  we  had  never  offended  him. 

And  miich  more  is  God  ready  to  receive  a  nation 
upon  their  fincere  repentance  ;  when  his  judgments 
mull  needs  make  great  havock,  and  fo  many  are 
like  to  fuffer  under  them.  This  confideration  God 
urgeth  and  pleads  with  his  froward  prophet,  in  be- 

Jonah  iv.  half  of  the  great  city  of  Niniveh.  "  And  fhall  not  I 
*'  fpare  that  great  city  of  Niniveh,  wherein  are  more 
<'  than  fixfcore  thoufand  perfons,  who  cannot  dif- 
"  cern  their  right  hand  from  their  left.?"  that  is, 
{o  many  innocent  children,  by  which  we  may  judge 


11. 


fiiin  ofafinfuipeoplei  67 

of  the  vail  number  of  the  reft  of  the  inhabitants,  SERM. 
For  this  is  a  great  confideration  with  God,  in  his  f-nd-  {   -[—a 
ing  of  publick  calamities,  the  multitude  of  the  fuffcr- 
ers  j  and    that  not  only  tiie  guilty  but  the  innocent 
alio,  without  a  fpecial  and   miraculous  providence, 
muft  be  involved  in  a  common  calamity. 
.    Sometimes  God  rcfpites  his  judgments  upon  ths 
mere  external  humiliation  of  a  people,  and  ibme  for- 
mal teftimonies  and  exprefTions  of  their  repentance. 
When  the  people  of"  Ifrael  fought  God  and  enqui- 
"  red  early  after  him,  though  they  did  but  flatter  pfal 
"  him  with  their  mouth,  and  their  heart  was  net  'xxviil, 
"  right  with  him,'*  yet  the  pfalmift  tells  us,  "  that 
"  being  full  of  compafnon  he  forgave  their  iniquity 
"  and  deftroyed  them  not  -,"  that  is,  he  forgave  them 
fo  far  as  to  refpite  their  ruin. 

And  much  more  will  a  fmcere  and  effe6lual  repen* 
tance  flay  God*s  hand,  and  infallibly  turn  him  from 
the  fiercenefs  of  his  anger:  infomuch  that  after  he 
had  fixed  and  determined  the  very  day  for  the  de- 
Urudion  of  Niniveth,  and  had  engaged  the  credit  of 
his  prophet  in  it,  yet  as  foon  as  "  he  law  their  works,  ' 

"  and  that  they  turned  from  their  evil  ways,"  and 
how  glad  was  he  to  fee  it?  he  prefently  "  repented  of 
"  the  evil  which  he  had  fald  he  would  do  unto  them, 
"  and  he  did  it  not.*'  In  this  cafe  God  does  not 
fland  upon  the  reputation  of  his  prophet,  by  whom 
he  had  fent  fo  perem.ptory  a  meffage  to  them ;  but 
his  mercy  breaks  through  all  confidcrations,  and  re- 
joiceth  againft  judgment :  for  he  cannot  find  in  his 
heart  to  ruin  thofe  who  by  the  terror  of  liis  judg- 
ments will  be  brought  to  repentance. 

T  1 1  2  And 


6S  ^he  way  to  prevent  the 

S  K  R  M.  And  this  furely  is  a  mighty  motive  and  encoU- 
^^^^^  rage  men  t  to  repentance,  to  be  affured  that  we  fliall 
find  mercy  •,  and  that  when  our  ruin  is  even  decreed, 
and  all  the  inftruments  of  God*s  wrath  are  fixed  and 
ready  for  execution,  and  his  hand  is  juft  taking  hold 
of  vengeance,  yet  even  then  a  fincere  repentance  will 
mitigate  his  hotted  difpleafure,  and  turn  away  his 
wrath.  And  if  we  will  not  come  in  upon  thefe  terms, 
we  extort  the  judgments  of  God  from  him,  and  force 
him  to  depart  from  us,  and  with  violent  hands  we 
pull  down  vengeance  upon  our  own  heads. 
Ill  Thirdly  and  laftly,  the  text  intimates  to  us  the 

miferable  cafe  and  condition  of  a  people  when  God 
takes  off  his  heart  and  affedlion  from  them,  when  he 
gives  over  all  further  care  and  concernment  for  them, 
and  abandons  them  to  their  own  wickednefs  and  fol- 
ly, and  to  the  miferable  efFeds  and  confequences 
thereof:  "  Wo  unto  them,  when  his  foul  departs 
"  from  them  :"  for  then  all  forts  of  evils  and  cala- 
mities will  rufh  in,  and  "  wrath  will  come  upon 
"  them  to  the  uttermoft ;"  as  was  threatned  to  the 
Jews  a  little  before  their  final  deftruftion,  and  exe- 
cuted upon  them  in  the  moil  terrible  and  amazing 
manner  that  ever  was  from  the  foundation  of  the 
World.  "  Thefe,"  asourbleffed  Saviour  expref- 
-  fes  it,  were  "  days  of  vengeance"  indeed,  that  "  all 
*'  things  which  were  written,"  that  is,  foretold  by 
Mofcs  and  the  prophets  concerning  the  fearful  end 
of  this  perverfe  and  iliff-necked  people,  "  might  be 
«  fulfilled." 

And  becaufe  my  text  fpeaks  to  Jerufalem,  "  be 

*'  thou  infirufted,  O  Jerufalem,  left  my  foul  depart 

«  from  thee,  lefl:  I  make  thee  defolate,  a  land  not  in- 

I  "  habited  i'* 


rum  of  a  faf id  people,  6^ 

'*  habited;"  thouo;h  this  was  fpoken  to  Teruralem  SERM. 

XXXVII 
before  her  captivity  into  Babylon,  yet  becaufe  this 

firft  captivity  was  but  a  faint  type  of  her  laft  and  fi- 
nal defolation  by  the  Romans,  when  God's  foul  was 
indeed "  departed  from  her,"  and  Judea  was  "  left 
"  defolate,  a  land  not  inhabited :"  I  Ihall  therefore 
briefly  reprefent  to  you  the  full  effe6t  of  this  threat- 
ning  in  her  laft  final  deftruftion,  when  God*s  foul 
was,  as  it  were,  perfedly  loofened  and  disjointed 
from  her :  that  you  may  fee  what  the  fiercenefs  and 
power  of  God's  anger  is,  when  "  he  departs  from 
"  them,  and  wrath  comes  upon  them  to  the  utter- 
"  moft,"  becaufe  they  would  not  be  "  inftruded 
*'  and  know  the  time  of  their  vifitatlon." 

Thus  it  was  with  the  Jews,  about  forty  years  af- 
ter the  pafllon  of  our  Lord,  whom  "  with  wicked 
*'  hands  they  had  crucified  and  flain  :'*  then  was 
"  God's  foul  departed  from  them :"  then  darknefs 
and  defolation  came  upon  them ;  and  they  were  in 
a  far  worfe  condition  than  a  country  would  be  that 
is  forfaken  of  the  fun,  and  left  condemned  to  a  per- 
petual night,  in  which  darknefs  and  diforder,  facti- 
on and  fury  do  reign  and  rage ;  together  with  all 
the  fatal  confequences  of  zeal  and  ftrife,  which,  St. 
James  tells  us,  are  "  confufion  and  every  evil  work." 
For  when  God  is  once  gone,  all  the  good  and  happi- 
nefs  of  mankind  departs  together  with  him  :  then 
men  fail  foul  upon  one  another,  divide  into  parties 
and  fadtions,  and  execute  the  vengeance  of  God  up- 
on themfelves  with  their  own  hands. 

Thus  it  happened  to  the  Jewilh  nation,  when  the 
meafure  of  their  iniquity  was  full,  and  their  final 
ruin  was  approaching.     And  that  we  might  knov/ 

their 


70  /    l^he  way  to  prevent  the 

SERM.  their   fate,  and  be  inftrLnfted   by  it,  God    provided 

XXXVII  -  •  •        • 

i^^-     _iand  preierved  a  faithfuJ   hiftorian  on  purpofe,  who 

was  an  eye-witnefs  of  all  that  befel  them ;  I  mean 
Jofephus,  who  was  perfonally  engaged,  and  was  a 
confiderable  commander  in  the  wars  of  the  Jews  with 
the  Romans,  before  the  fiege  of  Jerufalem  :  and  du- 
•  ring  the  fiege  was  prefent  in  the  Roman  camp,  and 

being  a  Jew  himfelf  hath  tranfmitted  thefe  things  to 
pofterity  in  a  moft  exad:  and  admirable  hiftory  : 
fuch  a  hiftory,  as  no  man  that  hath  the  heart  and 
bowels  of  a  man  can  read  without  the  greateft  pity 
and  aftoniihment. 

In  tiie  preface  of  that  lamentable  hiftory  he  telb 
us,  "  that  all  the  misfortunes  and  calamities  which' 
"  the  world  from  the  beginning  of  it  had  feen,  com. 
«  pared  with  this  laft  calamity  of  the  Jewifti  nationj. 
"  were  but  flight  and  inconfiderable."  He  tells  us» 
likewife,  that  their  civil  diftentions  were  the  nexs 
and  immediate  caufe  of  their  confufion  and  ruin. 

And  this  more  than  oticc :  for  when  Pompey,  a- 
bout   fixty  years  before   our  Saviour's  birth,  fat 
»  Lib.  i.   down  before  Jerufalem,  he  tells  us,  *  that  the  fadli- 
^'  3-        ons  and  divifions  which  they  had  among  themfelves 
were  the  caufe  of  the  taking  the  city  and  temple  at 
that  time.     And  when  they  rebelled  afterwards,  that 
the  heads   of  their  fadions  provoked  the  Romans, 
and  brought   them  unwillingly  upon  them,  and  at 
laft  forced  the  beft  natured  prince  in  the  world,  Ti- 
tus Vefpafian,  to  that  feverity  which  hemoft  earneft- 
ly  dcfirei  by  all  means  to  have  prevented.     And  he 
farther  tells  us,  that  even  before  the  fiege  of  Jerufa- 
Lib.  IV.  c.  jgj^^  ^^  cities  of  Judea  had  all  of  them  civil  difcords 
among  themfelves,  and  that  in   every  city  one  part 
of  the  Jews  fought  againft  another.  And 


ruin  of  ajinful  people.  yt 

And  when  Jerufalem  began  to  be  befieged,  what  S  E  R  M. 
a  miferable  condition  was  it  in,  by  the  cruelty  of  .  'I       !| 
the  zealots  under  the  command  of  John  the  fon  of 
Giorah  ?  And  prefently  after  another  faftion   arofe 
under  Simon,  who  entered  into  the  city  with  a  frefn 
force,  and  afiaulted  the  zealots  in  the  temple  ;  fo  that 
moft   miferable  havock   was  made  between   them. 
And  then  a  third  faftion  darted  up  under  Eleazar,  j.jb.  vii. 
as  bad  as  either  of  the  other:  fo  that  infinite  almolt  ^-  '• 
were  the  numbers  of  the  people  within  the  city,  that 
were  barbaroully  (lain  by  thefe  feditions. 

And  what  an  infatuation  was  this?  when  the  ene- 
my was  at  the  gates  and  ready  to  break  in  upon 
them,  to  empk)y  their  whole  ftrength  and  force  a- 
gainft  one  another:  when  the  fame  courage  and  fury, 
which  they  fpent  fo  freely  upon  themfelves,  had 
it  been  turned  with  the  like  defperatenefs  and  oblli- 
nacy  upon  the  Romans,  might  have  endangered  the 
whole  force  of  the  Roman  empire.  Once  or  twice 
indeed  they  feemed  to  lay  afide  their  enmity  for  a 
little  while,  and  to  unite  in  the  common  defence ; 
but  as  fcon  as  the  danger  of  a  prefent  affault  was  o- 
ver,  they  relapfed  into  their  former  ftate  of  intefline 
enmity  and  diiTention,  as  if  that  had  been  their  main  >% 
bufinefs,  and  the  prefervation  of  their  city  againft 
the  Romans  only  a  work  by  the  by,  and  not  much 
to  be  regarded. 

And  to  add  to  all  their  other  miferies,  they  were 
fo  blinded  by  their  own  rage  and  madncfs,  that  they 
v/ilfully  brought  upon  themfelves  an  extreme  famine. 
For,  as  the  hiftorian  tells  us,  they  themfelves  fet  on 
fire  vaft  flores  of  corn  and  other  necefTaries,  fufficient 
to  have  feryed  them  for  many  years  3  and  by  this 

means 


72  ^he  way  topreijenf  the 

S  E  R  M.   means  the  city  was  much  fooncr  reduced,  even  by  a  fa- 

XXXVII  .  . 

^  -^-^  mine  of  their  own  making,  and  which  could  not 

have  been  brought  upon  them  but  by  themfelves. 

This  famine,  befides  all  the  other  miferies  and 
cruelties  which  it  occafioned  within  the  city,  did 
force  great  numbers  of  them  to  (leal  out  by  night  in- 
to the  Roman  camp  •,  where  they  met  with  as  cruel 
but  a  fpeedier  death.  For  Titus,  in  hope  to  reduce 
them  the  fooner  by  terrbr,  ordered  all  thofe  that 
came  out  of  the  city  to  be  crucified  before  the  walls. 
"Which  order  was  fo  feverely  executed,  that  for  feve- 
ral  days  five  hundred  a  day  were  crucified,  till  there 
was  neither  room  left  to  place  croffes  in,  nor  wood 
whereof  to  make  them :  fo  that  they  who  once  cried 
out  fo  vehemently  againfl:  our  Saviour,  "  crucify 
"  him,  crucify  him,"  had  enough  of  it  at  laft,  and 
by  the  juft  and  moft  remarkable  judgments  of  God 
^ere  paid  home  in  their  own  kind. 

Behold  the  fad  fate  of  a  finful  people,  when  God 

is  departed  from  them!  Then  all  evils  overtake  them 

at  once.     For  as  their  mifery  increafed,  fo  did  their 

impiety  to  that  degree,  that  the  hiftorian  tells  us. 

Lib.  V.  c.  "  they  fcorned  and  mocked  at   all  divine  and  holy 

^-  "  things,  and  derided  the  oracles  of  the  prophets,  e- 

"  fteeming  them  no  better  than  fables  -,"  and,  in  a 

word,  were  carried  to  that  extremity  of  wickednefs, 

as  not  only  to  prophane  their  temple  in  the  higheft 

manner,  and  to  break  the  laws  of  their  own  religion, 

but  even  to  violate  the  laws  of  nature  and  humanity 

in  the  grofieft  inftances :  which  made  their  hiftorian 

Lib.  vi.  c.  to  give  that  difmal  character  of  them,  "  that  as  he 

»i-  "  thought  no  city  ever  fuffered  fuch  things,  fo  no 

"  nation,  from  the  beginning  of  the  world,  did  e- 

^  ver 


ruin  ofajiJifulpeople,  ^3 

"  ever  fo  abound  in  all  manner  of  wickednefs  and  S  E  R  M. 

XXXVII. 
"  impiety  :"  a  certain  fign  that  God's  foul  was  de-  ^  ^  — J 

parted  from  them. 

And  the  fame  hiflorian  afterwards,  upon  con  fide- 
ration  of  the  lamentable  ftate  into  which  their  fedi- 
tions  had  brought  them,  breaks  out  into  this  dole- 
ful lamentation  over  them,  "  O  miferable  city!  Lib.vii.c, 
"  what  didfl  thou  fuffer  from  the  Romans,  though  ^' 
"  at  laft  they  fet  thee  on  fire  to  purge  thee  from 
"  thy  fins,  that  is  to  be  compared  with  thofe  mi- 
"  feries  which  thou  haft  brought  upon  thy  felf? 

To  fuch  a  difmal  ftate  did  things  come  at  laft, 
that,  as  the  fame  hiftorian  relates,  "  many  of  the 
"  Jews  prayed  for  the  good  fuccefs  of  their  enemies* 
"  to  deliver  them  from  their  civil  diflentions,  the 
*'  calamity  whereof  was  fo  great,  that  their  final  de- 
"  ftruflion  by  the  Romans  did  rather  put  an  end  to 
"  their  mifery  than  increafe  it, 

En  !   quo  difcordia  elves 

Perduxit  miferos 

To  conclude  this  fad  ftory.  It  was  the  Jews 
themfelves  that  by  their  own  folly  and  diflentions 
forced  the  Romans  to  this  forrowful  vidory  over 
them  ;  for  in  truth  all  the  remorfe  and  pity  was  on 
the  enemies  fide.  The  Romans  were  little  more  than 
fpedators  in  this  cruel  tragedy,  the  Jev;s  aifted  it  up- 
on themfelves :  and  they  only,  who  were  arrived  at 
that  prodigious  height  of  impiety  and  wickednefs, 
were  fit  to  be  the  executioners  of  this  vengeance  of 
God  upon  one  another :  as  if  the  prophet  had  fore- 
told this,  when  he  fays,  "  thine  own  wickednefs  jer.ii.  ig^, 
'^  ftiall  cored  thee." 

Vol.  III.  Uuu  When 


The  way  to  prevent  the 

When  impiety  and  wickednefs  are  at  their  highcft 
pitch  in  a  nation,  then  they  themfelves  are  the  on- 
ly proper  inflruments  to  punifh  one  another.  The 
Romans  were  by  far  too  good  and  gentle  to  inflift  a 
fuffering  upon  the  Jews,  that  vv'as  equal  to  the  evil 
of  their  doings:  none  but  their  own  barbarous  felves, 
•who  were  funk  dov/n  into  the  very  loweft  degenera- 
cy of  human  nature,  were  capable  of  fo  much  cruel- 
ty and  inhumanity  as  was  requifite  to  execute  the 
judgment  of  God  upon  them  to  that  degree  which 
their  fins  had  deferved. 

You  fee,  my  brethren,  by  what  hath  been  faid 
upon  this  argument,  what  were  the  faults,  and  what 
the  fate  of  the  Jewifh  nation.  Now  thefe  things, 
as  the  apoftle  exprefly  tells  us,  "  were  written  for  our 
"  admonition,"  and  to  the  intent  that  "  we  upon 
"  whom  the  ends  of  the  world  are  come"  might  be 
inftrufted  by  them :  we,  I  fay,  who  next  to  the 
Jewifli  nation  feem  to  be  a  people  highly  favoured 
by  God  above  all  the  nations  of  the  earth.  We  re- 
femble  them  very  much  in  their  many  and  wonder- 
ful deliverances,  and  a  great  deal  too  much  in  their 
faults  and  follies. 

But  as  I  intend  it  not,  fo  God  forbid  that  there 
fliould  be  any  juft  ground  for  a  full  and  exadl  pa- 
rallel between  us ;  yet  tliis  I  mull  fay,  that  nothing 
ever  came  nearer  to  them  than  we  do  in  feveral  re- 
fpe6ts.  In  our  ficklenefs  and  inconftancy,  in  our 
murmurings  a^d  difcontcnts  ;  for  we  are  never  pleaf- 
ed  with  what  God  does,  neither  when  he  brings  us 
into  danger,  nor  when  he  delivers  us  out  of  it :  we 
refemble  them  likewife,  in  our  horrible  profaneneis 
andin fidelity,  and  in  our  impiety  and  wickednefs 
2  of 


ruin  of  a  Jinful people,  75 

of  feveral  kinds :  in  our  monftrous  ingratitude  and  SERM. 
moft  unworthy  returns  to  the  God  of  our  falvation : 
and  laftly,  in  our  factions  and  divifions,  which  were 
the  fatal  fign  of  God's  being  departed  from  the 
Jews,  and  the  immediate  caufe  and  means  of  thofc 
difmal  calamities  which  wrought  their  final  ruin. 
And  howcan  we  chufe  but  dread  left  theirfate  fhould 
overtake  us,  the  example  of  whofe  faults  and  follies 
we  do  in  fo  many  things  fo  nearly  refemble  ? 

That  this  may  not,  nor  any  thing  like  it,  be  our 
fate,  let  us  apply  our  felves  to  the  great  duties  of 
this  day  •,  a  ferious  and  deep  repentance,  and  humili- 
ation of  our  felves  before  almighty  God  for  the  ma- 
ny and  heinous  fins  which  we  in  this  nation  have  been, 
and  ftill  are  guilty  of,  againfl  his  divine  majefty  ; 
by  our  profanenefs  and  impiety,  by  our  lewdnefs 
and  luxury,  by  our  oppreflion  and  injuftice,  by  our 
implacable  malice  and  hatred  one  towards  another, 
and  by  our  fenfelefs  divifions  and  animofities  one 
againft  another,  without  caufe  and  without  end : 
by  our  neglect  of  God's  worfliip,  and  profanati- 
on of  his  holy  day,  and  by  our  dreadful  abufe  of 
God's  great  and  glorious  name  in  thofe  horrid  oaths 
and  curfes  and  imprecations  which  are  heard  almoft 
day  and  night  in  the  ftreets  of  this  great  city. 

For  thefe  and  all  other  our  innumerable  provoca- 
tions of  the  patience  and  goodnefs  and  long-fuffer- 
ing  of  God  towards  us,  let  us  fadly  repent  our  felves 
this  day,  and  "  turn  unto  the  Lord  with  all  our 
"  hearts,  with  falling,  and  with  weeping,  and  with 
"  mourning :  and  rent  our  hearts  and  not  our  gar- 
"  ments,  and  turn  unto  the  Lord  our  God  •,  for  he 
*'  is  gracious  and  merciful,  flow  to  anger  and  of 
U  u  ij  2  "  great 


xxxvir. 


76  l!he  way  to  prevent  the 

SERM.  «  great  kind nefs,  and  repenteth  him  of  the  evil  i 
"  and  who  knoweth  if  he  will  return  and  repent  and 
^'  leave  a  blefTing  behind  him  ?  Turn  thou  us  unto 
"  thee,  O  Lord,  and  we  (hall  be  turned  :  take 
"  away  all  iniquity,  and  receive  us  gracioufly." 

And  let  us  earneftly  beg  of  him,  that  he  would 
be  pleafed  to  prevent  thofe  terrible  judgments  and 
calamities  which  hang  over  us,  and  which  our  fins 
have  fo  juilly  deferved  fliould  fall  upon  us :  and  that 
he  would  perfed  that  wonderful  deliverance  which 
he  hath  begun  for  us,  and  "  eftabliih  the  thing 
"  which  he  hath  wrought  :"  that  he  would  blefs 
them  whom  he  hath  fet  in  authority  over  us  -,  and 
particularly,  that  he  would  preferve  the  perfon  of 
the  king  in  his  prefent  expedition,  and  crown  him 
•with  vi6tory  and  good  fuccels. 

And  to  our  repentance  and  prayers  let  us  add  our 
liberal  alms,  and  according  to  the  counfel  given  by 
the  prophet  to  Nebuchadnezzar,  let  us  "  break  off 
"  our  fins  by  righteoufnefs,  and  our  iniquities  by 
"  fliewing  mercy  to  the  poor,  if  fo  be  it  may  be  a 
*'  lengthening  of  our  tranquillity." 

We  are  yet,  blefied  be  God,  in  the  full  enjoy- 
ment of  peace  and  quiet  at  home,  and  of  our  religi- 
on and  civil  liberties.  God  hath  given  us  two  ex- 
cellent princes  fitting  on  the  throne  together,  and 
both  of  the  fame  religion  with  the  main  body  of  the 
nation  ;  and  as  bright  examples  of  piety  and  good- 
nefs  as  England  ever  faw :  and  who  do  by  all  ways 
and  means  fludy  and  feek  the  good  of  the  people 
committed  to  their  charge. 

So  that  if  we  did  but  know   our  own  happinefs, 
and  how  to  value  it,  we  might  be  the  happiefl  peo- 
ple 


ruin  of  afmful  people.  J7 

T)le  this  day  under  heaven  :  and  yet  for  all  this,   we  S  E  R  M. 
i^  ^  •'  .  XXXVI r. 

are  very  far  from  being  happy  ;  becaufe  we  are  nei- 
ther contented,  nor  united  ;  and  though  we  have  all 
the  materials  of  happinefs  about  us  within  our  reach, 
yet  have  we  not  the  fkill  and  wifdom  to  put  them 
together. 

Miferable  people !  that  may  be  happy  and  will 
not ;  whom  neither  fo  frefh  a  deliverance  from  fo 
great  a  danger  as  was  juft  ready  to  have  fwaliowed 
us  up,  nor  the  fear  and  apprehenfion  of  falling  again 
into  the  like  confufion,  can  be  a  warning  to  us  from 
returning  again  unto  the  fame  folly  :for  thofe  odious 
and  unhappy  names  of  difference  which  fome  years 
ago  fprang  up  among  us,  the  devil  knows  how,  did 
feem  whilil  a  common  danger  threatned  us,  to  be 
quite  dead  and  buried  :  but  no  fooner  was  the  dan- 
ger over,  but  by  a  kind  of  miraculous  infatuation, 
behold  a  fudden  refurreiflion  of  them,  with  greater 
heats  and  animofities,  if  poffible,  than  before :  jufi: 
as  it  was  with  the  Jev/s  in  the  fiege  of  Jerufalem, 
when  the  Romans  had  made  a  v/ide  breach,  and  the 
city  was  furioufly  affaulted,  the  faflions  then  gave 
truce  to  one  another,  and  ran  in  to  the  common 
defence  ;  but  as  foon  as  ever  the  danger  was  a  little 
over,  they  fell  on  afreih  and  profecuted  their  main 
defign  of  deftroying  one  another. 

And  now  that  the  danger  is  a  little  over  with  us 
alfo,  how  like  a  fate  upon  us  does  it  look,  that  we 
are  fo  foon  altered  from  our  wifer  and  better  temper  ? 
Did  we  well  and  wifely  before  our  late  happy  revo- 
lution, when  we  united  for  our  common  defence 
againft  a  common  danger,  and  did  let  thofe  unlucky 
names  of  diftindion  fall,  fo  that  theyfeemed  to  be 

quite 


y8  ^e  way  to  prevent  the 

S  E  R  M.  quite  extinguifhed  ?  And  can  it  be  now  wife  to  revive 
J^^^^  them,  and  to  take  them  up  again  j  when  the  fame 
danger  in  feme  degree,  and  from  the  fame  implaca- 
ble enemi'es,  ftill  hovers  over  us?  No  furely,  it 
would  not  be  wife,  if  the  danger  were  quite  paft  and 
over;  but  when  it  fl:i!l  remains  and  threatens  us, 
what  greater  folly  and  infatuation  can  there  be  than 
ftill  to  divide  and  quarrel  among  our  felves?  Will 
nothing  but  fad  and  bitter  experience  bean  admoni- 
tion to  us  ?  Will  nothing  but  the  laft  necefTity  and 
extremity  of  things  bring  us  to  our  felves  and  teach 
us  wifdom? 

Methinks  we  fhould  all  now  be  glad  to  be  at  reft, 
after  the  tedious  troubles  and  diftraftions,  the  fruit- 
Jefs  quarrels  and  diviiions  of  fifty  years.  So  long  I 
remember ;  and  in  all  that  fpace  how  very  few  years 
paffed  over  us  without  fome  great  calamity  and  dif- 
mal  event.  So  that  by  this  time  one  would  think 
we  fliould  all  be  fick  of  our  own  follies,  and  fo  tired 
with  our  unprofitable  feuds  and  diffentions,  as  to 
make  both  fides  look  about  them,  to  fee  if  any  body 
will  take  pity  on  us,  and  ilep  in  to  part  our  quarrels. 
And  now  I  begin  to  be  fenfible,  that  1  have  en- 
gaged in  a  tender  point  indeed  ;  and  do  feel  my  felf 
ftanding  upon  a  very  flippery  place.  For  who  is  fit 
to  interpofe  in  fuch  hot  and  fierce  differences  .^  who 
can  do  it  without  danger,  and  with  any  hopes  of  fuc- 
cefs  ?  And  yet  for  Zion's  fake  "  I  will  not  hold  my 
"  peace,"  for  Jerufalem's  fake  "  I  will  not  keep  fi- 
"  lence  :"  Of  fo  great  confequence  is  it  to  the  peace 
and  happinefs  of  this  church  and  nation,  that  thefe 
names  and  diftincHiions  of  parties  fhould  be  laid  down 
and  aboliflied  for  ever. 

In 


ruin  of  a  fm fid  people.  yg 

In  order  whereunto  I  take  it  for  granted,  and  lav  S  ERM. 

xxxvir. 

it  for  a  principle,  that  he  who  hopes  to  perfuade  both 
fides  muft  provoke  neither :  and  therefore  I  will 
not  fo  much  as  enquire  where  the  fault  lies.  It  is  i^ 
thefe  civil  differences  as  in  family  quarrels  between 
man  and  wife,  if  any  man  afk  on  which  fide  lies  the 
fault  j  one  may  almoft  fafely  anfwer  at  a  venture, 
on  both  fides.  It  muft  indeed  begin  on  one,  but  if 
it  be  not  prefently  healed  and  made  up,  the  other 
party  is  always  fo  civil  as  to  run  in  and  take  a  fliare 
of  the  fault,  that  all  the  blame  may  not  lie  wholly 
on  one  fide. 

And  now,  my  brethren,  let  me  for  once  perfuade 
and  prevail  with  you  for  your  good :  \tt  me  be  fo 
happy  as  to  fay  fomething  that  may  fink  into  your 
hearts,  and  incline  your  minds  to  peace  and  good 
agreement  with  one  another,  "  have  fait  in  your 
"  felves,"  fays  our  blelfed  Saviour  the  great  peace 
maker,  "  and  peace  one  with' another."  By  fait  is 
meant  grace  and  fpiritual  wifdom,  and  if  that  do 
but  rule  and  fway  in  our  hearts,  we  fliall  then  en- 
deavour, "  if  it  be  pofTible,  and  as  much  as  in  us 
"  lies,  to  live  peaceably  with  all  men."  If  we 
*'  have  fait  in  our  felves,"  that  is,  if  we  be  wife,  we 
will  then  certainly  "  have  peace  one  with  another." 

And  if  we  were  but  once  come  to  this  healing 
temper,  in  this  divided  and  diflrafted  nation,  we 
fliould  not  then  need  to  fear  "  all  the  power  of  the 
"  enemy."  And  this  our  enemies  know  full  well : 
and  therefore  their  chief  policy  and  wifdom  is,  and 
ever  hath  been,  to  divide  us  •,  and  it  will  be  our  own 
great  folly  and  weaknefs  if  we  fuffcr  our  felves  to  be 
divided  :  for  who  that  is  wife  will  take  counfcl  and 

advice 


to  The  way  to  prevent  the 

SERM.    advice  from  an  enemy  ?  But  if  we  could  a^ree  and 

XXXVTI 

^_     _^  hold  together,  then  our  Jerufalem  would  be  "  as  a 

"  city  that  is  compa6t  together,"  ftrong  and  im- 
pregnable. 

Let  us  then  be  inftrudted,  and  know,  "  in  this 
"  our  day,  the  things  which  belong  to  peace,  before 
"  they  be  hid  from  our  eyes.'*  And  let  us  all  earneft- 
Pfal.cxxii.  Jy  endeavour  "  and  pray  for  the  peace  of  Jerufalem  : 
"  they  {hall  profper  that  love  her,"  fays  the  Pfalm- 
ift,  and  they  do  not  love  her,  that  do  not  feek  her 
peace,  and  endeavour  by  all  means  to  procure  it : 
"  that  peace  may  be  within  her  walls,  and  profperi- 
"  ty  within  her  palaces  :'*  The  one  cannot  be  with- 
out the  other  :  without  peace  there  can  be  no  pro- 
fperity.  And  to  go  on  with  the  words  of  the  Pfalm- 
ill,  let  every  one  of  us  fay,  yea  let  us  ail  with  one 
heart  and  voice  fay,  "  for  our  brethren  and  compani- 
"  ons  fake,"  for  the  fake  of  our  proteftant  brethren  all 
the  world  over,  let  us  fay,  "  peace  be  within  thee : 
*'  for  the  houfe  of  the  Lord  our  God,"  for  the  fake 
of  our  holy  religion,  and  of  that  excellent  church 
whereof  we  all  are,  or  ought  to  be  members,  let 
every  one  of  us  fay,  "  I  will  feek  thy  good." 

And  what  greater  good  can  we  do  to  the  beft  re- 
lio-ion,  how  can  v/e  better  ferve  the  intereft  of  it  in 
all  parts  of  the  world,  than  by  being  at  peace  and 
unity  amongft  cur  felves,  here  in  England .?  upon 
whom  the  eyes  of  all  the  Proteftants  abroad  are  fix- 
ed, as  the  glory  of  the  reformation,  and  the  great 
bulwark  and  fupport  of  it. 

That  fo  under  the  providence  of  almighty  God, 
and  the  conduft  of  two  fuch  excellent  princes  as  he 
hath   now  blelTed  us  withal :  the  one  fo  brave  and 

valiant. 


''  ruin  of  a  pnful  people*  8  r 

valiant,  and  both  of  them  fo  wife,  fo  good,  fo  re- 
ligious, we  may  at  laft  arrive  at  a  firm  eftablilhment, 
and  become  "  like  mount  Zion  that  cannot"  be  mov- 
ed ;  the  perfedion  of  beauty  and  ftrength,  and  the 
admiration  and  "  joy  of  the  whole  earth  i"  which 
God  of  his  infinite  goodnefs  grant,  for  his  mercies 
fake  in  Jesus  Christ  :  to  whom  with  thee,  O  Fa- 
ther, and  the  Holy  Ghoft,  be  all  honour  and  glory, 
dominion  and  power,  thankfgiving  and  praife  both 
now  and  ever.     Amen. 


SERMON  XXXVIII. 

A  confcience  void  of  offence  towards 
God  and  men. 

Preached  before  the  Queen  at  White-hall,    Fe- 
bruary 27,  1690-1. 

ACTS    xxiv.  16. 

And  herein  do  I  exercife  my  felf,  to  have  always  a  con-' 
fcience  void  of  offence  towards  God,  and  towards  men, 

THESE  words  are  part  of  the  defence  which  S  E  R  M. 
St.  Paul  made  for  himfelf,  before  Fselix  the  ^-''-'^^  =  ^^- 
Roman  governor. 

In  which  he  firft  of  all  vindicates  himfelf  from  the 
charge  of  fedition,  ver.  12.  "  they  neither  found  me 
"  in  the  temple,  difputing  with  any  man  ;  neither 
f  railing  up  the  people,  neither  in  the  fynagogue. 

Vol.  Ill,  X  X  X  *«  nor 

a. 


g  2  A  confcience  void  of  offence 

SERM.  «  nor  in  the  city  ;"vhat  is,  they  coijld  not  charge  him 
with  making  any  difturbance  either  in  church  or  ftate. 

After  this,  he  makes  a  free  and  open  profefTion 
of  his  reHgion,  ver.  14.  "  But  this  I  confefs,  that 
"  after  the  way  which  they  call  herefy,  fo  worfhip 
"  I  the  God  of  my  fathers,  beheving  all  things 
*'  which  are  written  in  the  law  and  the  prophets :" 
here  he  declares  the  fcriptures  to  be  the  rule  of  his 
faith,  in  oppofition  to  the  oral  tradition  of  the  Pha- 
rifees. 

More  particularly  he  aflerts  the  dodlrine  of  the  re- 
furredion,  which  was  a  principal  article  both  of  the 
Jewifh  and  the  Chriftian  religion,  ver.  1 5.  "  and  I 
"  have  hope  alfo  towards  God,  that  there  lliall  be 
"  a  refurredion,  both  of  the  jufl:  and  the  unjuft." 

And  having  made  this  declaration  of  his  faith, 
he  gives  an  account  of  his  life,  in  the  words  of  the 
text,  ver.  16.  "  and  herein  do  I  exercife  my  felf,  to 
"  have  always  a  confcience  void  of  offence  towards 
"  God,  and  towards  men.'* 

Herein,  h  t«t«,  that  is,  "  in  this  work,"  do  I 
employ  my  felf ;  or  as  others  render  it,  "  in  the 
"  mean  time,"  whilft  I  am  in  this  world  ;  pr  as  others, 
I  think  mofl  probably,  "  for  this  caufe  and  reafon," 
Iv  TSJTft),  for  &i»  -Sto,  "  for  this  reafon,"  becaufe  I  be- 
lieve a  refurredion,  therefore  have  I  a  confcientious 
care  of  my  life,  and  all  the  anions  of  it. 

The  difcourfe  I  intend  to  make  upon  thefe  words, 
fliall  be  comprifed  in  thefe  following  paiticulars. 

I.  Here  is  the  extent  of  a  good  man's  pious  prac- 
tice, "  to  have  a  confcience  void  of  offence  to- 
"  wards  God,  and  towards  men."     . 

11.  Here 


towards  God  and  men.  83 

II.  Here  is  his  conftancy  and  perfeverance  in  this  S  E  R  M. 
courfe:  to  have  "  always"  a  confcience  void  of  offence,  f -^^^^  "* 

III.  Here  is  his  earned  care  and  endeavour  to  this 
purpofe,  "  I  exercife  my  fclf.'* 

ly.  Here  is  the  principle  and  immediate  guide  of 
his  actions,  which  St.  Paul  here  tells  us  was  his 
'*  confcience." 

V.  I  lliall  lay  down  fome  rules  and  directions  for 
the  keeping  of  a  good  confcience. 

VI.  Here  is  the  great  motive  and  encouragement 
to  this,  which  St.  Paul  tells  us  was  the  belief  of  a 
refurredlion,  and  of  a  future  ftate  of  rewards  and 
punifhments  confequent  upon  it  -,  "  for  this  caufe  j'* 
becaufe  "  I  hope  for  a  refurredion  both  of  the  jufl 
*'  and  unjuft,  I  exercife  my  felf  to  have  always  a  con- 
*'  fcience  void  of  offence  towards  God,  and  towards 
"  men."  I  fhall  fpeak  but  briefly  to  the  three  firft 
of  thefe  particulars,  that  I  may  be  larger  in  the  reft. 

I.  Here  is  the  extent  of  a  good  man's  pious  prac-      j^ 
tice.     It  hath  regard  to  the  whole  compafs  of  his  du- 
ty, as  it  refpefts  God  and  man.     "  I  exercife  my 
**  felf,"  fays  St.  Paul,  "  to  have  a  confcience  void 
"  of    offence    towards   God,    and  towards   men." 
And  this  diftribution  of  our  duty,  under  thefe  two 
general  heads,  is  very  frequent  in  fcripture.     The 
decalogue  refers  our  duty  to  thefe  two  heads :  and 
accordingly  our  Saviour    comprehends  the  whole 
duty  of  man  in  thefe  two  great  commandments,  the 
love  of  God  and  of  our  neighbour,    Matth.  xxii. 
38.  "  Upon  thefe  two  commandments  hang  all  the 
"  law  and  the  prophets,"  that  is,  all  the  moral  pre- 
cepts which  are  difperfed  up  and  down  in  the  law 
and  the  prophets,  may  be  referred  to  thefe  two  ge- 
neral heads.  X  x  x  2  II.  Here 


^4  A  confcience  void  of  offence 

S  E  R  M.      II,  Here  is  his  conftancy  and  perfeverance  in  this 

X  XX  VIII  •       f 

i,,,,.^^,^  courfe.  St.  Paul  fays,  that  he  exercifed  himfclf  to 

II.  have  always  a  confcience  void  of  offence ;  ^<«7r«v7oV, 
continually,  at  all  times,  in  the  whole  courfe  of  his 
life.  We  muft  not  only  make  confcience  of  our 
ways  by  fits  and  ftarts,  but  in  the  general  courfe  and 
tenour  of  our  lives  and  adtions,  without  any  balks 
and  intermiffions. 

There  are  fome  that  will  refrain  from  grolTer  fms, 
and  be  very  flrift  at  fome  feafons ;  as  during  the  time 
of  a  folemn  repentance,  and  for  fome  days  before 
they  receive  the  facrament;  and  perhaps  for  a  little 
while  after  it:  and  when  thefe  devout  feafons  are  o- 
ver  they  let  themfelves  loofe  again  to  their  former 
lewd  and  vicious  courfe :  but  religion  Ihould  be  a 
conflant  frame  and  temper  of  mind,  difcovering  it 
felf  in  the  habitual  courfe  of  our  lives  and  aftions. 

III.  III.  Here  is  like  wife  a  very  earn  eft  care  and  endea- 
vour to  this  purpofe.  Herein  do  I  exercife  my- 
felf,  fays  St.  Paul.  The  word  aVxw,  which  is  here 
rendered  exercife,  is  a  word  of  a  very  intenfe  fignifi- 
cation,  and  does  denote  that  St.  Paul  applied  himfelf 
to  this  bufinefs  with  all  his  care  and  might,  and  that 
he  made  it  his  earneft  fludy  and  endeavour :  and  fo 
we  muft  i  we  muft  take  great  care  to  underftand  our 
duty,  and  to  be  rightly  informed  concerning  good 
and  evil,  that  we  may  not  miftake  the  nature  of 
things,  and  "  call  good  evil,  and  evil  good :"  we 
muft  apply  our  minds  in  good  earneft  to  be  tho- 
roughly inftrutfled  in  all  the  parts  of  our  duty,  that 
fo  we  may  not  be  at  a  lofs  what  to  do  when  we  are 
called  to  the  prafticc  of  it:  and  when  we  know  our 
fluty,  we  muft  be  true  and  honeft  to  our  felves,  and 

very 


\ 


XXXVIII. 


towards  God  and  men  1 5 

Very  careful  and  confcientious  in  the  difchargeand  SERM. 
performance  of  it.     I  proceed  in  the 

IVth  place,  to  confider  the  principle  and  immedi- 
ate guide  of  our  adiions,  which  St.  Paul  here  tells  us, 
was  his  confcience ;  "  I  exercife  my  felf  to  have  al- 
*'  ways  a  confcience  void  of  offence :"  by  which  he 
does  not  only  mean  a  refolution  to  follow  the  didlate 
and  diredion  of  his  confcience,  but  likewife  a  due  care 
to  inform  his  confcience  aright,  that  he  might  not 
in  any  thing  trangrefs  the  law  of  God,  and  his  duty. 

Confcience  is  the  great  principle  of  moral  adions, 
and  our  guide  in  matter  of  fin  and  duty.  It  is  not 
the  law  and  rule  of  our  fusions,  that  the  law  of  God 
only  is ;  but  it  is  our  immediate  guide  and  diredor, 
telling  us  what  is  the  law  of  God  and  our  duty. 

But  becaufe  confcience  is  a  word  of  a  very  large 
and  various  fignification,  I  fliall  endeavour  very  brief- 
ly to  give  you  the  true  notion  of  it.  Now  in  com- 
mon fpeech  concerning  confcience,  every  man  is  re- 
prefented  as  having  a  kind  of  court  and  tribunal  in 
his  own  breaft,  where  he  tries  himfelf  and  all  his  ac- 
tions :  and  confcience,  under  one  notion  or  other, 
fuftains  all  parts  in  this  trial :  the  court  is  called  the 
court  of  a  man's  confcience,  and  the  bar  at  which 
the  finncr  ftands  impleaded,  is  called  the  bar  of  con- 
fcience :  confcience  alfo  is  the  accufer  j  and  it  is  the 
record  and  regifter  of  our  crimes,  in  which  the  me- 
mory of  them  is  preferved :  and  it  is  the  witnefs 
which  gives  teftimony  for  or  againft  us ;  hence  are 
thofe  exprelTions  of"  the  teftimony  of  our  confciences," 
and  that  "  a  man's  own  confcience  is  to  him  inftead 
**  of  a  thoufand  witnelTes :"  and  it  is  likewife  the 
judge  which  declares  the  Jaw,  and  what  we  ought, 

or 


S6  'A  confcience  i3oid  of  offence 

S  E  R  M.  or  ought  not  to  have  done,  in  fuch  or  fuch  a  cafe, 
n_,-  'i  and  accordingly  pafleth  fentence  upon  us  by  acquit- 
ting or  condemning  us.  Thus,  according  to  com- 
mon ufe  of  fpeech,  confcience  fuftainsall  imaginable 
parts  in  this  fpiritual  court :  it  is  the  court,  and  the 
bench,  and  the  bar ;  the  accufer,  and  witnefs,  and 
regifter,  and  all. 

But  I  fhall  only  at  prefent  confider  confcience  in 
the  moft  common  and  famous  notion  of  it,  as  it  is 
a  principle  or  faculty  whereby  we  judge  of  moral 
good  and  evil,  and  do  accordingly  dire6t  and  govern 
our  a6lions :  fo  that  in  fhort,  confcience  is  nothing 
elfe  but "  the  judgment  of  a  man's  own  mind  con- 
"  cerning  the  morality  of  his  acflions ;"  that  is,  the 
good,  or  evil,  or  indifference  of  them  j  telling  us 
what  things  are  commanded  by  God,  and  confe- 
quently  are  our  duty  i  what  things  are  forbidden  by 
him,  and  confequently  are  finfulj  what  things  are 
neither  commanded  nor  forbidden,  and  confequently 
are  indifferent.  I  proceed  in  the 
V.  Vth  place,  to  give  fome  rules  and  diredions  for 

the  keeping  of  a  confcience  void  of  offence.     And 
they  fhall  be  thefe  following  : 

Firft,  never  in  any  cafe  to  a6l  contrary  to  the  per- 
fuafion  and  convidion  of  our  confcience.  For  that 
certainly  is  a  great  fin,  and  that  which  properly  of- 
fends the  confcience  and  renders  us  guilty ;  guilt  be- 
ing nothing  t\{^  but  trouble  arifing  in  our  minds 
from  a  confcioufnefs  of  having  done  contrary  to  what 
we  are  verily  perfuaded  was  our  duty :  and  though 
perhaps  this  perfuafion  is  not  always  well  grounded, 
yet  the  guilt  is  the  fame  fo  long  as  this  perfuafion 

continues  \  becaufe  every  man*s  confcience  is  a  kind 

of 


towards  God  and  men,  S7 

of  god  to  him,  and  accufeth  or  abfolves  him  accor-  S  E  R  M. 
ding  to  the  prefent  perfuafion  of  it.     And  therefore  ^^fll/^ 
we  ought  to  take  great  care  not  to  offend  againft  the 
light  and  convidlion  of  our  own  mind. 

Secondly,  we  fliould  be  very  careful  to  inform 
our  confciences  aright,  that  we  may  not  miftake  con- 
cerning our  duty  ;  or  if  we  do,  that  our  error  and 
miftake  may  not  be  grofly  wilful  and  faulty. 

And  this  rule  is  the  more  necclTary  to  be  confider- 
cd  and  regarded  by  us,  becaufe  generally  men  are 
apt  to  think  it  a  fufficient  excufe  for  any  thing,  that 
they  did  it  according  to  their  confcience.  But  this 
will  appear  to  be  a  dangerous  miftake,  and  of  very 
pernicious  confequence  to  the  fouls  of  men,  if  we  con- 
iider  thefe  two  things. 

I  ft.  That  men  may  be  guilty  of  the  moft  heinous 
fins  in  following  an  erroneous  confcience. 

2]y,  And  thefe  fins  may  prove  damnable  without 
a  particular  repentance  for  them. 

I  ft.  That  men  may  be  guilty  of  the  moft  heinous 

fins  in  following  an  erroneous  confcience.    Men  may 

negleft  and  abufe   themfelves  fo  far,  as  to  do  fome 

of  the  worft  and  wickedeft  things  in  the  world  with 

a  perfuafion  that  they  do  well.     Our  Saviour  tells 

his  difciples  that  *'  the  time  ftiould  come"  when  the  t  i, 

■^  John  XVI. 

Jews  ftiould  "  put  them  to  death,  thinking  they  did  2. 
"  God  good  fervice  :"  nay  the  Jews   murthered  the 
Son  of  God  himfelf  through  ignorance  and   a  falfe 
perfuafion  of  mind  :  "  Father,  forgive  them,"  fays  Luk.xxiii, 
our  blefled  Lord,  when   he  was  breathing   out  his  34- 
foul  upon  the  crofs,  "  for  they  know  not  what  they 
"  do."     And  St.  Peter,  after  he  had  charged  the 
Jews"  with  killing  theprinceoflife,"heprefentIy  adds.  Ads.  iii. 

y  "  I  woe  ^7- 


S5  A  confcience  void  of  offence 

SERM.    "I  wot  that  through  ignorance  ye  did  it,  as  did  al- 

^^^"^  "  fo  your  rulers."     And  St.  Paul,  in  mitigation  of 

that  great  crime,  fays,  "  had   they   known,  they 

"  would  not   have   crucified    the  Lord  of  life  and 

Aasxxvi.  "  glory  :"  and  concerning  himfelf  he  tells  us,  "  that 

9-  «'  he  verily  thought  with  himfelf,  that  he  ought  to 

"  do  many  things  againfl:  the  name  of  Jesus  of  Na- 

"  zareth  :'*  and  yet  notwithftanding  that  he  a<5ted 

herein  according  to  the  perfuafion  of  his  confcience, 

he  tells  us  that  he  had  been  a  blafphemer,  and  a  per- 

fecutor,  and  injurious,  and  a  murtherer,  and   in   a 

•word,  the  greateft  of  finners.     So  that  men  may  be 

guilty  of  the  greateft  fins  in  following  an  erroneous 

confcience.    And, 

2ly,  Thefe  fins  may  prove  damnable,  without  a 
particular  repentance  for  them.  Where  the  igno- 
rance and  miftake  is  not  grofiy  wilful,  there  God 
will  accept  of  a  general  repentance ;  but  v/here  it  is 
grofly  wilful,  great  fins  committed  upon  it  are  not 
pardoned  without  a  particular  repentance  for  them : 
and  an  error  which  proceeds  from  want  of  ordinary 
human  care  and  due  government  of  a  man*s  felf,  is 
in  a  great  degree  wilful :  as  when  it  proceeds  from 
an  unreafonable  and  obftinate  prejudice,  from  great 
pride  and  felf  conceit,  and  contempt  of  council  and 
inftruftion ;  or  from  a  vifible  biafs  of  felf  intereft, 
or  when  it  is  accompanied  with  a  furious  pafTion  and 
zeal,  prompting  men  to  cruel  and  horrible  things, 
contrary  to  the  light  of  nature  and  the  common  fenfe 
of  humanity :  an  error  proceeding  from  fuch  caufes, 
and  producing  fuch  effefts,  is  wilful  in  fo  high  a 
degree,  that  whatever  evil  is  done  in  virtue  of  it  is 
almoft  equally  faulty  with  a  dire(^  and  wilful  violati- 
on of  the  law  of  God.  T^? 


towards  God  and  men.  8^ 

The  ignorance  and  miftake  doth  indeed  make  the  S  E  R  M,- 
perfon  fo   miftaken  more  capable   of  forgivenefs,  ^  _^_  _J 
which  is  the  ground  of  our  Saviour's  prayer  for  his 
murthererSj  "  Father,  forgive  them,  for  they  knoW 
•'  not  what  they  do  :'*    St.   Paul  likewife  tells  us,- 
that  he  found  mercy  upon  this  account,  "  neverthe-  »  Tim,  h 
"  lefs,  fays  he,  I  obtained  mercy,  becaufe  I  did  it 
"  ignorantly,  and   in  unbelief,"  that  is,  through  a 
falfe  perfuafion  of  mind,  not  believing  it  to  be  a  fin : 
and  yet  he  did  not  obtain  this  mercy,  without  a  par- 
ticular conviftion  of  his  fault  and  repentance  for  it. 
And  St.  Peter  after  he  had  convinced  the  Jews  of 
their  great  fm  in  crucifying  Christ,  though  they 
did  it  ignorantly,  yet  he  exhorts  them  to  a  particu- 
lar and  deep  repentance  for  it,  as  neceflary  to  the 
pardon  and  forgivenefs  of  it:    and  therefore  after 
he  had  faid,  "  I  wot  that  through  ignorance  ye  did  A(h  mi 
"  it,  as  did  alfo  your  rulers,"  he  immediately  adds   ^9- 
"  repent  ye  therefore,  and  be  converted,  that  your 
*'  fins  may  be  blotted  out." 

So  that  it  highly  concerns  men  to  confider  what 
opinions  they  embrace  in  order  to  praftife,  and  not 
to  fuffer  themfelves  to  be  hurried  away  by  an  unreafe- 
nable  prejudice  and  a  heady  paffion,  without  a  due 
and  calm  examination  of  things,  nor  to  be  over-born 
by  pride,  or  humour,  or  partiality,  or  intereflr,  or 
by  a  furious  and  extravagant  zeal :  becaufe  proporti- 
onably  to  the  voluntarinefs  of  our  error  will  be  the 
guilt  of  our  praflice  purfuant  to  that  error.  In- 
deed where  our  error  is  involuntary,  and  morally 
invincible,  God  will  confider  it,  and  make  allow- 
ance for  it;  but  where  it  is  voluntary,  and  occafion-=" 
ed  by  our  own  grofs  faults  and  negle<^,  we  are  boun*^ 
Vol.  m.  y  y  y  ^ 

9- 


90  A  confcience  wid  of  offence 

S  E  R  M.  to  confider,  and  reftify  our  miftake :  for  what- 
jcxxMia.  ^^^^  ^^  j^  contrary  to  the  law  of  God  and  our  du- 
ty, in  virtue  of  that  falfe  perfuafion,  we  do  it  at  our 
Utmoft  peril,  and  mud  be  anfwerable  to  God  for  it, 
notwithftandiijg  we  did  it  according  to  the  didate  of 
our  confcience. 

A  third  rule  is  this,  that  in  all  doubts  of  confcience 
we  endeavour  to  be  equal  and  impartial,  and  do  not 
lay  all  the  weight  of  our  doubts  on  one  fide,  when . 
there  is  perhaps  as  much  or  greater  reafon  of  doubt- 
ing on  the  other :  and  confequently,  that  we  be  as 
traftable  and  eafy  to  receive  fatisfaftion  of  our  doubts 
in  one  kind  as  in  another,  and  be  equally  contented 
to  have  them  over-ruled  in  cafes  that  are  equal :  I 
mean,  where  our  paflions  and  interefts  are  not  con^ 
cerned,  as  well  as  where  they  arc.  And  if  we  do 
not  do  this,  it  is  a  fign  that  we  are  partial  in  our 
pretences  of  confcience,  and  that  we  do  not  aim 
merely  at  the  peace  and  fatisfa6tion  of  our  own 
minds,  but  have  fome  other  intereft  and  defign. 

For  it  is  a  very  fufpicious  thing,  when  men's 
doubts  and  fcruples  bear  all  on  one  fide,  efpecially 
if  it  be  on  that  fide  which  is  againft  charity,  and 
peace,  and  obedience  to  government,  whether  ec- 
clefiaftical  or  civil :  in  this  cafe  I  think  that  a  mere 
doubt,  and  much  more  a  fcruple,  may,  nay,  ought  int 
jeafon  to  be  over-ruled  by  the  command  of  authori- 
ty, by  the  opinion  and  judgment  of  wife  and  good 
men,  and  in  confideration  of  thepublick  peace,  and 
of  the  unity  and  edification  of  the  church. 

Not  that  a  man  is  in  any  cafe  to  go  againft  the 

clear  perfuafion  and  convidion  of  his   own  rriind^ 

but  when  there  is  only  a  meer  doubt  concerning  the 

J  lawful- 


towards  God  and  men,  9 1 

lawfulnefs  op  unlawfulnels  of  a  thing,  it  feems  to  S  E  R  M. 
me  in  that  cafe  very  reafonable  that  a  man  fhould  f^^^^"^ 
fuffer  a  mere  doubt  or  fcruple  to  be  over-ruled  by 
any  ©f  thofe  weighty  confiderations  which  I  menti- 
oned before. 

The  fourth  rule  is,  that  all  pretences  of  confcience 
are  vehemently  to  be  fiifpedted,  which  arc  accom- 
panied with  turbulent  paffion  and  a  furious  zeal.  It 
is  a  hundred  to  one  but  fuch  a  man's  confcience  is 
in  the  wrong.  It  is  an  excellent  faying  of  St.  James 
*'  the  wrath  of  man  worketh  not  the  righteoufnefs  Jam.i.zo. 
"  of  God  i"  that  is,  the  fierce  paflions  of  men  are 
no  proper  inftruments  to  promote  religion,  and  to 
accomplifli  any  thing  that  is  good.  And  therefore 
if  any  man  be  tranfported  with  a  wild  zeal,  and 
pretend  confcience  for  his  fury,  it  is  great  odds  but 
he  is  in  an  error:  none  are  fo  likely  to  judge  amifs, 
as  they  whofe  minds  are  clouded  and  blinded  by  their 
paflions, 

Nuhila  mens  ejfy  Boeth. 

H^c  uhi  regnant. 

And  if  men  would  carefully  obferve  themfelves, 
they  might  almoft  certainly  know  when  they  a(5i; 
upon  reafon  and  a  true  principle  of  confcience.  A 
good  confcience  is  eafy  to  it  felf,  and  pleafed  with 
it*s  own  doings ;  but  when  a  man's  paffion  and  dif- 
content  are  a  weight  upon  his  judgment,  and  do,  as 
it  were,  bear  down  his  confcience  to  a  compliance, 
no  wonder  if  this  puts  a  man's  mind  into  a  very  un- 
natural and  uneafy  ftate. 

There  can  hardly  be  a  broader  fign  that  a  man  is 
in  the  wrong,  than  to  rage  and  be  confident:  becaufe 

Y  y  y  2  thi*^ 


^^  A  confcience  'uoid  of  offence 

S  E  R  M.  this  plainly  fliews  that  the  man's  confcience  is  not 
^^^],^.„,^..^  fettled  upon  clear  reafon,  but  that  he  hath  brought 
over  his  confcience  to  his  iriteneft,  or  to  his  humour 
^       gnd  difcontent. 

And  though  fuch  a  man  may  be  fo  far  blinded 
by  his  paffion  as  not  to  fee  what  is  right,  yet  me- 
thinks  he  fliould  feel  himfelf  to  be  in  the  wrong  by 
his  being  fo  very  hot  and  impatient. 

Art  thou  fure  thou  art  in  the  right  ?  thou  art  a 
happy  man,  and  haft  reafon  to  be  pleafed  :  What 
caufe  then,  what  need  is  thereof  being  angry  ?  Hath 
^  man  reafon  on  his  fide  ?  what  would  he  have  more  ? 
"Why  then  does  he  fly  out  into  paffion  ?  which  as 
jt  gives  no  ftrength  to  a  bad  argument,  fo  I  could 
never  yet  fee  that  it  was  any  grace  and  advantage 
to  a  good  one. 

Of  the  great  evil,  and  the  perpetual  miftake  of 
this  furious  kind  of  zeal,  the  Jews  are  a  lively  and 
a  lamentable  example,  in  their  carriage  towards  our 
blefled  Saviour  and  his  apoftles  :  and  more  parti- 
cularly St.  Paul,  when  he  perfecuted  the  Chriftians 
from  a  falfe  and  erroneous  perfuafion  of  his  con- 
fcience. Hear  how  St.  Paul  defcribes  himfelf  aqd 
his  own  doings  whilft  he  was  afted  by  an  erroneous 
^as  xxii.  confcience  :  "  I  perfecuted,"  fays  he,  "  this  way  un- 
^*  "  to  the  death,  binding  and  dehvering  into  prifoa 

*'  both  men  and  women  :"  and  in  another  chapter, 
^as  Kxvi.  "  I  verily  thought  with  my  k%  that  I  ought  to  do 
^'  "  many  things  againft  the  name  of  Jesus  of  Naza- 

-  **  reth  :'*  here  was  his  erroneous  confcience.  Let  us 
next  fee  what  were  the  unhappy  concomitants  and 
effefls  of  it ;  ver.  lo,  ii.  "  which  things,"  fays  he, 
«5-  J  alfo  did  in  Jerufalem,  and  many  of  the  faints  1 

**  ihut 


towards  God  and  men,  93 

*'  fhiit  up  in  prifon,  and  when  they  were  put  toSERM. 
*'  death,  I  gave  my  "voice  againft  them,  and  punifh- ^^^^"^' 
'*  ed  them  oft  in  every  fynagogue,  and  compelled 
"  them  to  blafpheme;  and  being  exceedingly  mad 
"  againft  them,  I  perfecuted  them  even  to  ftrangc 
•*  cities."     When  confcience  tranfports  men  with 
fuch  a  furious  zeal  and  pafTion,  it  is  hardly  ever  in 
the  right ;  or  if  it  fhould  happen  to  be  fo,  they  who 
are  thus  tranfported,  by  their   ungracious  way  of 
maintaining  the  truth,  and  their  ill  management  of 
a  good  caufe,  have  found  out  a  cunning  way  to  be 
in  the  wrong,  even  when  they  are  in  the  right. 

Fifthly,  All  pretences  of  confcience  are  likewife 
to  be  fufpedled,  which  are  not  accompanied  with 
modefty  and  humility,  and  a  teachable  temper  and 
difpofition,  willing  to  learn  and  to  be  better  inform- 
ed. A  proud  and  conceited  temper  of  mind  is  ve- 
ry likely  to  run  into  miftakes ;  becaufe  pride  and 
fulnefs  of  a  man's  felf  does  keep  out  knowledge,  and 
obftruds  all  the  palTages  by  which  wifdom  and  in- 
ftru6lion  Ihould  enter  into  men :  befides  that  it  pro- 
vokes God  to  abandon  men  to  their  own  follies  and 
miftakes  -,  for  "  God  refifceth  the  proud,"  but  "  the 
"  meek  will  he  guide  in  judgment,"  and  "  will  give 
"  more  grace"  and  wifdom  "to  the  humble."  When 
men  are  once  come  to  this,  to  think  themfelves  wi- 
fer  than  their  teachers,  and  to  defpife  and  caft  off 
their  guides,  no  wonder  if  then  they  go  aftray. 

Laftly,  let  us  be  fure  to  mind  that  which  is  our 
plain  and  unqueftionable  duty :  the  great  things  of 
rehgion,  wherein  the  life  and  fubftance  of  it  doth 
confift  i  and  "  the  things"  likewife  "  which  make 
^^  for  peace,  and  whereby  we  may  edify  one  ano- 

«  ther  :" 


94  -^  confcience  wid  of  offence 

SERM.  «  ther  :"  and  let  us  not  fuffer  our  difputes  about 
^-^" ^  lefler  matters  to  prejudice  and  hinder  our  main  du- 
ty :  but  let  it  be  our  great  care  not  to  fail  in  thofe 
greater  things  which  are  comprehended  under  the 
two  great  commandments  of  the  law,  the  love  of 
God  and  of  our  neighbour  :  let  us  be  ftrid  and  con- 
llant  in  our  piety  and  devotion  towards  God  ;  chaft 
and  temperate  in  reference  to  our  felves ;  jufl  and 
honeft,  kind  and  charitable,  humble  and  meek,  pa- 
tient and  peaceable  towards  all  men ;  fubmiflive  and 
obedient  to  our  fuperiors,  natural,  civil,  and  fpi ri- 
tual. A  due  regard  to  thefe  great  virtues  of  the 
chriftian  life  is  the  way  to  "  keep  a  confcience  void 
*'  of  offence  towards  God,  and  towards  men:"* 
and  furely  the  beft  means  to  have  our  doubts  cleared 
about  m.atters  of  leffer  moment  in  religion,  is  hearti- 
ly to  fet  about  the  praftice  of  the  great  and  un- 
queflionable  duties  of  it:  fo  our  bleffed  Saviour 
John  rli.  hath  aflured  us,  that  "  if  any  man  will  do  the  will 
"  of  God,  he  Ihall  know  of  his  doflrine  whether  it 
"  be  of  God.**    I  come  now  in  the 

"V"!.  Vlth  and  laft  place,  to  confider  the  great  motive 
and  encouragement  to  this  confcientious  care  of  our 
lives  and  aflions  j  which  St.  Paul  here  tells  us  was 
his  belief  of  a  refurredtion,  and  of  the  rewards  and 
punifliments  confequent  upon  it ;  "  I  have  hope,'* 
fays  he,  "  towards  God,  that  there  fhall  be  a  refur- 
"  reftion  both  of  the  juft  and  unjuft  :"  for  this 
caufe  therefore  "  I  exercife  my  felf  to  have  always  a 
"  confcience  void  of  offence  toward  God,  and  to- 
"  ward  men.'* 


If 


XXXVIII. 


towards  God  and  men*  95 

If  we  believe  the  refurre(flion  of  the  dead,  and  a  S  E  |IM. 
future  judgment,  we  ought  to  be  very  careful  to 
difcharge  a  good  confcience  now,  in  order  to  the 
rendring  of  a  good  account  hereafter ;  that  "  we 
"  may  be  fincere  and  without  offence,  with  refpeft 
*'  to  the  day  of  Christ,"  as  the  apoftle  expreffeth 
it.  For  when  that  great  day  of  recom'pences  fhall 
come,  we  {hall  moft  aflfuredly  find  that  nothing  will 
then  raife  our  hearts,  and  make  us  to  lift  up  our 
heads  with  joy,  like  the  witnels  of  a  good  confcience: 
and  therefore  we  fhould  make  that  our  conftant  care 
and  companion  now,  which  will  then  be  our  great 
comfort  and  rejoicing,  a  good  Confcience  and  the 
teftimony  of  it,  "  that  in  all  fimplicity  and  godly 
"  fincerity  we  have  had  our  converfation  in  the 
"  world." 

And  on  the  contrary,  when  we  come  to  appear 
before  the  great  judge  of  the  world,  nothing  will 
fill  our  minds  with  fo  much  terror,  and  our  faces  with 
fo  much  confufion,  as  the  clamorous  accufations  of  a 
guilty  confcience ;  which  will  be  "  more  than  a 
"  thoufand  witneffes"  againft  us,  and  will  anticipate 
our  condemnation,  and  pafs  almoft  as  fevere  a  fen- 
tence  upon  us  as  the  judge  himfelf  can. 

This  is  that  which  will  make  the  finner  to  droop, 
and  to  hang  down  his  head  for  ever :  and  one  of 
the  principal  ingredients  of  his  mifery  and  torment 
will  be  the  perpetual  regret  and  remorfe  of  his  own 
mind  for  his  wilful  wickednefs  and  folly  j  which 
will  kindle  a  fire  within  him  as  hot  as  that  without 
him,  and  as  hard  to  be  quenched. 

This  confideration  ought  to  have  a  mighty  ope- 
ration upon  us  to  make  us  very  careful  to  have  con- 

fciences 


9^  A  confcience  void  of  offence 

S  E  R  M.  fcicnces  void  of  offence  now,  that  they  may  be  free 
from  torment  and  anguifh  hereafter  :  that  when  we 
fhall  come  into  the  other  world,  v/e  may  not  be 
eternally  difpleafed  with  our  felves,  and  enraged  at 
our  own  doings  •,  but  may  carry  with  us  thither  con- 
fciences  clear  of  all  guilt,  either  by  innocency,  or 
by  repentance. 

The  firm  belief  of  a  future  ftate  of  eternal  hap- 
pinefs  or  mifery  in  another  world  is  the  great  weight 
or  fpring  that  fets  a  going  thofe  two  powerful  prin- 
ciples of  human  activity,  the  hopes  and  the  fears  of 
men  ;  and  is  in  it's  nature  fo  fitted  to  raife  thefe 
paffions  to  that  degree,  that  did  not  experience  fhew 
us  the  contrary,  one  would  think  it  morally  impof- 
fible  for  human  nature  to  refift  the  mighty  force  of  it. 

All  men  are  fenfible,  more  or  lefs,  at  one  time  or 
other,  of  the  true  force  of  thefe  arguments  •,  but  the 
mifchief  is,  that  in  fome  perfons  they  work  quite  the 
wrong  way,  and  inftead  of  leading  men  to  repen- 
tance, they  drive  them  to  infidelity  :  they  cannot 
deny  the  force  of  thefe  arguments,  if  they  were  true ; 
but  that  they  may  avoid  the  force  of  them,  they 
will  not  believe  them  to  be  true :  and  fo  far  they  are 
in  the  right,  that  granting  thefe  things  to  be  true, 
they  cannot  but  acknowledge  that  they  ought  to 
live  otherwife  than  they  do :  but  here  is  their  fatal 
mifcarriage,  that  being  refolved  upon  an  evil  courfe, 
fincc  they  cannot  reconcile  their  praftice  with  fuch 
principles  as  thefe,  they  will  fit  their  principles  to 
their  pradice  •,  and  fo  they  will  believe  nothing  ac 
all  of  the  rewards  and  punifhments  of  another  world, 
left  this  fhould  difturb  them  in  their  courfe  :  vaii¥ 
men !  as  if  heaven  and  hell  mufl  needs  vanilh  and 


towards  God  and  mm.  97 

difappear,  becaufe  fome  witty  but  wicked  men  have  S  E  R  M, 

.     ,         ,     ,4  ,  x5cxviii. 

no  mind  to  believe  them. 

Thefe  men  are  infidels  in  their  own  defence,  and 
merely  for  the  quiet  of  their  own  minds  ;  that  their 
confciences  may  not  perpetually  rate  them,  and  fly 
in  their  faces.  For  a  right  belief  and  an  evil  con- 
fcience  are  but  unfuitable  companions ;  they  are 
quarrelfom  neighbours,  and  muft  needs  live  very  un- 
eafily  by  one  another.  He  that  believes  the  princi- 
ples of  religion,  and  yet  is  confcious  to  himfelf  that 
he  hath  lived  contrary  to  them,  and  (till  continues 
to  do  fo,  how  can  he  poflibly  have  any  peace  and 
quiet  in  his  mind?  unlefs  like  Jonah  he  can  fleep  in 
a  ftorm,  and  his  confcience  be,  as  it  were,  "  feared 
*'  with  a  hot  iron  :'*  for  if  his  confcience  be  awake, 
and  in  any  degree  fenfible,  the  evident  danger  of  c 
ternal  ruin,  continually  hanging  over  him,  muft  in 
reafon  either  drive  him  to  repentance  or  to  defpair: 
if  fo  forcible  and  violent  an  argument  can  make  no 
imprefTion  upon  us,  we  are  ftupid  and  betwiched, 
we  are  loft  and  undone,  we  are  wretched  and  mifera- 
ble  for  ever. 

But  befides  the  future  reward  of  a  holy  and  confci- 

cntiouscourfe,  which  is  "unfpeakable  and  full  of  glo- 

*'  ry  i"  it  hath  alfo  this  prefent  fruit,  this  earneft, 

as  I  may  fay,  and  ready  money  in  hand,  the  peace 

and  fatisfaftion  of  our  own  minds,   which  is  much 

more  valuable  "  than  thoufands   of  gold  and  fil- 

"  ver  *,"    the  unfpeakable  comfort  whereof  every 

man  will  then  find,  when  he  hath  moft  need  of  it : 

for  it  will  be  matter  of  great  joy  to  him,  not  only 

under  the  foreft  affliftions  and  calamities  of  life,  but 

even  at  the  hour  of  death;  when  the  miferies  of  life 

Vol.  Ill,  Z  z  z  opprefiii 

2. 


X  X  X  V  I  f  I , 


4 


/ 

98  A  confcience  'void  of  offence 

SERM.  opprefs  him,  and  the  forrows  of  death  compafs  him 
about,  and  the  pangs  of  it  are  ready  to  take  hold 
of  him. 

.  There  is  certainly  no  fuch  comfort  under  the  evils 
and  afRiftions  of  this  life,  as  a  faithful  witnefs  in 
our  breafls  of  our  own  innocency  and  integrity  : 
when  we  are  afflicted  by  God,  or  perfecuted  and  re- 
viled by  men,  it  cannot  but  be  a  mighty  confolati- 
on  to  us,  to  be  confcious  to  our  felves  of  our  own  fin- 
cerity.  For  though  no  man  can  acquit  and  juflify  him- 
felf  before  God,  as  to  the  perfe6linnocency  of  hislife, 
1  Cor.  iv.  jj^  which  fenfe  St.  Paul  fays,  that  "  though  he  knew 
"  nothing  by  himfelf,  yet  was  he  not  thereby  jufti- 
''  fied  i"  1  fay,  though  no  man  can  plead  perfedt  in- 
nocency, yet  as  to  the  general  courfe  and  tenor  of 
an  unblameable  life,  a  good  man  mjay  appeal  to  God 
and  even  when  he  afflids  him,  may  look  upon  him 
as  a  tender  and  compaffionate  father,  and  not  as  an 
angry  and  revengeful  judge. 

With  this,  holy  and  patient  Job,  under  all  thofe 
terrible  difailers  and  calamities  which  befel  him,  was 
able  in  fome  meafure  to  comfort  himfelf:  after  he 
had  loft  all,  and  he  had  a  great  deal  to  lofe ;  when 
he  was  forfaken  of  all  other  comfort,  even  the  cha- 
ritable opinion  of  his  beft  friends  concerning  his  fin- 
cerity.  In  theie  fad  and  difconfolate  circumftances, 
what  was  it  that  bore  up  his  fpirit?  nothing  but  the 
confcience  of  his  own  integrity.  See  with  what  re- 
folution  and  conftancy  of  mind  he  afferts  and  main- 
Job  x.w.  tains  it:  "  1  will  not,  fays  he,  remove  mine  inte- 
"  grity  from  me :  my  righteoufnefs  will  I  hold  faft, 
"  and  will  not  let  it  go  :  mine  heart  fhall  not  reproach 
*>  me,  fo  long  as  I  live.'*    You  fee,  that  when  eve- 


5,6. 


towards  God  and  men.  99 

ry  thing  elfe  was  gone,  his  integrity  fluck  by  himjSERM. 
and  fupported  him  to  the  laft.  i!ijllllj 

And  as  to  perfecutions  and  fufferings  from  men, 
our  own  innocency,  and  the  goodnefs  of  our  caufe, 
will  be  our  bell  comfort  under  them :  when  we  are  not 
guilty  to  our  {tlwts  that  we  have  deferved  them  from 
men,  and  are  inwardly  affured  that  whatever  we  pa- 
tiently fufFer  for  God  and  a  good  confcience,  will  all 
turn  to  our  account  another  day,  and  "  work  for  us 
"  a  far  moreexceeding and  eternal  weightof  glory." 

This  was  that  which  fupported  the  firfcChriftians, 
that  noble  army  of  martyrs,  under  all  thole  bitter 
and  cruel  perfecutions,  which  had  otherwife  been 
beyond  all  human  patience  to  have  endured :  this 
comforted  them  in  all  their  tribulations;  "'  our  re- 
"  joicing,"  fays  St.  Paul,  "  is  this,  the  teftimony 
"  of  our  confciences,  that  in  fimplicity  and  godly 
''  fincerity,  we  have  had  our  converlation  in  the 
"  world." 

So  likewife  under  that  inferior  but  equally  malici- 
ous fort  of  perfecution,  of  which  this  age  is  fo  very 
profufe  and  prodigal,  I  mean  the  caufelefs  calumnies 
and  reproaches  of  men  ;  if  under  thefe  we  can  but 
approve  our  confciences  to  God,  the  uncharitable 
cenfures  of  men  are  not  fo  much  to  be  regarded  by 
us :  fome  impreflion  they  will  make  upon  a  ten.ier 
mind,  but  we  muft  not,  if  we  can  help  it,  let  them 
fink  too  deep  into  our  fpirits :  "  if  our  hearts  con-  i  joh.  lii. 
"  demn  us  not,  we  may  have  confidence  towards^'* 
"  God  •,"  and  then  furely  much  more  towards  men  : 
if  God  and  our  own  confciences  do  but  acquit  us, 
methinks  it  fhould  be  no  fuch  difficult  matter  to  bear 
the  flanders  and  hard  cenfures  of  men. 

Z  z  z  2  But 


100  A  confcience  'void  of  offence 

E  E  R  M.        But  above  all  other  times,  the  comfort  of  a  good 

XXX  V  III 

.  ^  confcience  is  moft  fenfible,    and  moft  confiderable 

at  the  hour  of  death  :  for  as  nothing  dejeds  a  man's 
fpirits  more,  and  fends  him  down  with  fo  much  for- 
row  to  the  grave,  as  the  guilt  of  an  evi]  confcience ; 
what  terror  and  anguifli,  what  rage  and  defpair  do 
feij^e  upon  a  finner  at  that  time,  when  he  reflefls 
upon  what  he  hath  done,  and  confiders  what  he  is 
like  to  fuffer  ?  So  on  the  other  hand,  there  is  no- 
thing that  revives  and  raifes  the  fainting  fpirits  of 
a  dying  man,  like  the  confcience  of  a  holy  and  ufe- 
ful  life,  which  hath  brought  gloiy  to  God,  and 
Prov.  xiv.  good  to  men.  "  The  wicked,'*  fays  Solomon,  "  is 
32-  «  driven  away   in  his  wickednefs,*'    that  is,  he  is 

carried  out  of  the   world,  as   it  were,  in  a  ftorm 
and  tempeft  :  "  but  the  righteous  hath  hope  in  his 
"  death  i"    he  ufually  dies  calmly  and  comfortably: 
Pf.xxxvli.  "  Mark  the  perfed;  man,"  fays  David,  "  and  behold 
37*  *'  the  upright  •,  for  the  end  of  that  man  is  peace.** 

If  a  n-^an  be  confcious  to  himfelf  that  he  hath  fm- 
cerely  endeavoured  to  keep  the  commandments  of 
God,  and  to  do  the  things  which  pleafe  him  :  if  he 
hath  lived  inoffenfively,  and,  as  St.  Paul  faith  of 
AQ:sxxiii.  himfelf,  "  in  all  good  confcience  before  God  and 
*'  men  ;'*  what  an  unfpeakable  confolation  muft  it 
be  to  him,  in  that  dark  and  gloomy  time,  and  when 
he  is  "  walking  through  the  valley  of  the  fhadow  of 
"  death,'*  then  "  to  fear  no  evil  ?"  and  to  be  able 
with  our  blefled  Saviour  to  fay,  though  in  a  much 

f  u       ••  inferior  meafure  and  deeree,  "  Father,  I  have  glo- 
John  xvii.  '  o      '  '  D    . 

\,  ^'  rified  thee  on  the  earth,  I  have  finifhed  the  worl^ 

^'  which  thou  haft  given  me  to  do  :'*  and  to  be  able 
to  look  death  \x\  the  face  with  the  like  courage  and 

conftcincy 


towards  God  and  men,  loi 

conftancy  of  mind  as  St.  Paul  did  when  he  faw  it  ap-  S  ER  M. 

XXXVIII* 

preaching  towards  him  :    "  I  am  now,**    fays   he,  v--.v— J 

*'  ready  to  be  offered,  and  the  time  of  my  depar-  ^  Tim.  iv. 

678 
*'  ture  is  at  hand-,  I  have  fought  a  good  fight,  I 

*'  have  finilhed  my  race,  I  have  kept  the  faith; 
*'  henceforth  there  is  laid  up  for  me  a  crown  of 
*'  righteoufnefs,  which  the  Lord  the  righteous 
"  judge  fhall  give  me  at  that  day."  A  comfortable 
death,  that  is  free  from  the  flings  and  upbraidings, 
the  terrors  and  tortures,  the  confufion  and  amaze- 
ment of  a  guilty  confcience,  is  a  happinefs  fo  de- 
firable,  as  to  be  well  worth  the  befl  care  and  en- 
<leavour  of  a  man's  whole  life. 

Let  us  then  have  a  confcientious  regard  to  the 
whole  compafs  of  our  duty,  and,  with  St.  Paul, 
*'  let  us  exercife  our  felves  to  have  always  a  con- 
**  fcience  void  of  offence  towards  God,  and  towards 
"  men:'*  and  let  us  never  do  any  thing  whereby  we 
fhall  offer  violence  to  the  light  of  our  minds.  God 
hath  given  us  this  principle  to  be  ourconflant  guide 
and  companion ;  and  whoever,  after  due  care  to 
inform  himfelf  aright,  does  fincerely  follow  the  dic- 
tate and  direftion  of  this  guide,  fhall  never  fatally 
mifcarry  :  but  whoever  goes  againfl  the  clear  diftatc 
and  convidion  of  his  confcience,  in  fo  doing  he  un- 
dermines the  foundation  of  his  own  comfort  and 
peace,  and  fins  againfl  God  and  his  own  foul. 

And  to  the  end  we  may  keep  our  confciences  clear 
of  guilt,  we  fhould  frequently  examine  our  felves, 
and  look  back  upon  the  aftions  of  our  lives,  and 
call  our  felves  to  a  flrift  account  for  them ;  that 
whereinfoever  we  have  failed  of  innocency,  we 
fnay  rpake  it  up  by  repentance  j  and  may  get  our 

€0JI« 


lot  A  confdence  void  of  offence 

SERM.  confclences  cleared  of  guilt  by  pardon  and  forgive- 
nefs :  and  if  we  do  not  do  this,  we  cannot  with  confi- 
dence rely  upon  the  teflimony  of  our  confciences ; 
becaufe  many  great  fins  may  flip  out  of  our  memories 
without  a  particular  repentance  for  them,  which  yet 
do  require  and  ftand  in  need  of  a  particular  repen- 
tance. 

Efpecially,  we  fhould  fearch  our  confciences  more 
narrowly  at  thefe  more  folemn  times  of  repentance, 
and  when  we  are  preparing  bur  felves  to  receive  the 
holy  Sacrament :  and  if  at  thefe  times  our  hearts  do 
accufe  and  condemn  us  for  any  thing,  we  fiiould  not 
only  heartily  lament  and  bewail  it  before  God,  but 
fincerely  refolve  by  God's  grace  to  reform  in  that 
particular,  and  from  that  time  to  break  oft' that  fin 
which  we  have  then  repented  of,  and  have  afked  for- 
givenefs  of  God  for:  for  if  after  we  have  repented 
of  it,  we  return  to  it  again,  we  wound  our  confci- 
ences afrefh,  and  involve  them  in  a  new  guilt. 

In  the  laft  place,  we  fhould  reverence  our  confci- 
ences, and  {land  in  awe  of  them,  and  have  a  great 
regard  to  their  teftimony  and  verdid:  for  confci- 
ence  is  a  domeflick  judge,  and  a  kind  of  familiar 
God  :  and  therefore,  next  to  the  fupreme  majefl:y 
of  heaven  and  earth,  every  man  fhould  be  afraid  to 
offend  his  own  reafon  and  confcience,  which,  when- 
ever we  knowingly  do  amifs,  will  beat  us  with  ma- 
ny ftripes,and  handle  us  more  feverely  than  the  great- 
eft  enemy  we  have  in  the  world  :  fo  that  next  to  the 
dreadful  fentence  of  the  great  day,  every  man  hath 
reafon  to  dread  the  fentence  of  his  own  confcience. 
"  God  indeed  is  greater  than  our  hearts,  and  knoweth 
«  all  things  j"  but  under  him  we  have  the  greateft 

reafon 


towards  God  and  men,  103 

reafon  to  fear  the  judgment  of  our  own  confciences :  S  E  R  M. 
for  nothing  but  that  can  give  us  comfort,  and  no-  ^^'^^"^^ 
thing  can  create  fo  much  trouble  and  difquiet  to  us. 

And  though  the  judgment  of  our  confciences  be 
not  always  the  judgment  of  God,  yet  we  have  great 
reafon  to  have  great  regard  to  it  •,  and  that  upon  fe- 
veral  accounts,  which  I  ihall  but  briefly  mention, 
and  fo  conclude. 

Firft,  becaufe  the  judgment  of  our  conference 
is  free  from  any  compulfion.  No  body  can  force  it 
from  us,  whether  we  will  or  no ;  and  make  us  to 
pafs  fentence  againft  our  fclves,  whether  we  fee  rea- 
fon  for  it  or  not. 

Secondly,  the  fentence  of  our  own  confciences 
is  very  likely  to  be  impartial,  at  lead  not  too  hard  on 
the  fevere  fide ;  becaufe  men  naturally  love  them- 
felves,  and  are  too  apt  to  be  favourable  in  their  own 
cafe.  All  the  world  cannot  bribe  a  man  againft  him- 
felf :  there  is  no  man  whofe  mind  is  not  cither  dis- 
tempered by  melancholy,  or  deluded  by  faife  prin- 
ciples, that  is  apt  to  be  credulous  againft  himfelf, 
and  his  own  intereft  and  peace. 

Thirdly,  the  judgment  which  our  confclence  paf- 
feth  upon  our  own  actions,  is  upon  the  moft  inti- 
mate and  certain  knowledge  of  them,  and  of  their 
true  motives  and  ends.  We  may  eafily  be  deceiv- 
ed in  our  judgment  of  the  adions  of  other  men, 
and  may  think  them  to  be  much  better  or  worfe 
than  in  truth  they  are  :  becaufe  we  cannot  certain- 
ly tell  with  what  mind  they  were  done,  and  what 
circumftances  there  may  be  to  excufe  or  aggravate 
them  i  how  ftrong  the  temptation  was,  or  how  weak 
the  judgment  of  him  that  was  feduced  by  it  into  er- 
ror and  folly.  i  But 


A  confcience  moid  of  offence 

But  we  are  confcious  to  all  the  fecret  fprlngs,  and 
motives,  and  circumftances  of  our  own  a6tions  : 
we  can  defcend  into  our  own  hearts,  and  dive  to  the 
bottom  of  them,  and  fearch  into  the  mod  retired 
corners  of  our  intentions  and  ends  ;  which  none,  be- 
fides  our  felves,  but  only  God  can  do ;  for  except- 
ing him  only,  "  none  knows  the  things  of  a  man 
*'  but  the  fpirit  of  a  man  which  is  in  him." 

Fourthly,  the  fentence  of  our  confcience  is  peremp- 
tory and  inexorable,  and  there  is  no  way  to  avoid  it. 
Thou  mayeft  poflibly  fly  from  the  wrath  of  other 
men  to  the  uttermoft  parts  of  the  earth,  but  thou 
canft  not  fl:ir  one  ftep  from  thy  felf :  in  vain  flialt 
thou  call  upon  the  mountains  and  rocks  to  fall  on 
thee,  and  hide  thee  from  the  fight  of  thine  own  con- 
fcience. 

Wretched  and  miferable  man !  when  thou  haft 
offended  and  wounded  thy  confcience  :  for  whither 
canft  thou  go,  to  efcape  the  eye  of  this  witnefs, 
the  terror  of  this  judge,  the  torment  of  this  execu- 
tioner? A  man  may  as  foon  get  rid  of  himfelf,  and 
quit  his  own  being,  as  fly  from  the  fliarp  accufations 
and  flinging  guilt  of  his  own  confcience  ;  which 
will  perpetually  haunt  him,  till  it  be  done  away  by 
repentance  and  forgivenefs. 

We  account  it  a  fearful  thing  to  be  haunted  by 
evil  fpirits,  and  yet  the  fpirit  of  a  man  which  is  in 
him,  throughly  affrighted  with  it*s  own  guilt,  may 
be  a  more  ghaftly  and  amazing  fpedtacle  than  all  the 
devils  in  hell :  there  is  no  fuch  frightful  apparition 
in  the  world,  as  a  man's  own  guilty  and  terrified 
confcience  ftaring  him  in  the  face  :  a  "fpirit"  that  is 
thus  "  wounded,  who  can  bear  ?" 

To 


towards  God  and  me?2.  lo  r 

To  conclude ;  let  thefe  confiderations  prevail  with  S  E  R  M. 
us  always  to  live,  not  with  regard  to  the  opinion  of 
others,  which  may  be  grounded  upon  miftakc,  or 
may  not  indeed  be  their  opinion,  but  their  flattery ; 
but  with  regard  to  the  judgment  of  cur  ov/n  con- 
fcience,  which  though  it  may  fometimes  be  miita- 
ken,  can  never  be  bribed  and  corrupted  :  we  may  be 
hypocrites  to  others  and  bafe  flatterers,  but  our  own 
confciences  whenever  they  are  thoroughly  awakened 
are  always  fincere,  and  deal  truly  with  us,  and  fpeak 
to  us  as  they  think. 

Therefore  whatever  we  fay  or  do,  let  it  be  fincere: 
for  though  hypocrify  may  for  a  while  preferve  our 
efteem  and  reputation  with  others,  yet  it  can  fignify 
nothing  to  the  peace  of  our  own  minds :  and  then 
what  will  it  avail  us  to  conceal  any  thing  from  other 
men,  when  we  can  hide  nothing  that  we  fay  or  do 
from  our  own  confciences  ? 

The  fum  of  all  is  this :  if  we  would  keep  a  Gon- 
fcience  void  of  offence,  let  us  always  be  calm  and 
confiderate,  and  have  the  patience  to  examine  things 
thoroughly  and  impartially :  let  us  be  humble  and 
willing  to  learn,  and  never  too  proud  and  fliff  to  be 
better  informed  :  let  us  do  what  we  can  to  free  our 
felves  from  prejudice  and  palTion,  from  felf-conceic 
and  felf-interefl,  which  are  often  too  flrong  a  biafs 
upon  the  judgments  of  the  beft  men,  as  we  may  fee 
every  day  in  very  fad  and  melancholy  inftances:  and 
having  taken  all  due  care  to  inform  our  confciences 
aright,  let  us  follow  the  judgment  of  our  minds  in 
what  we  do ;  and  then  we  have  done  what  we  can 
to  pleafe  God. 

Vol.  Ill,  4  A  And 

2. 


XXXVIII. 


1 06  A  confcience  void  of  offence  &c. 

S  ERM.  p^^^  if  ^g  would  always  take  this  care  to  keep  3 
good  confcience,  we  iKould  always  be  eafy,  and 
good  company  to  our  felves  :  but  if  we  offend  our 
confciences,  by  doing  contrary  to  the  clear  diftate 
and  conviftion  of  them,  we  make  the  unhappiefl 
breach  in  the  world  ;  we  flir  up  a  quarrel  in  our 
own  breads,  and  arm  our  own  minds  againfl  our 
felves;  we  create  an  enemy  to  our  felves  in  our 
own  bofoms,  and  fall  out  with  the  beft  and  moft  in- 
feparable  companion  of  our  lives. 

And  on  the  contrary,  a  good  confcience  will  be  a 
continual  feaft,  and  will  give  us  that  comfort  and 
courage  in  an  evil  day  which  nothing  elfe  can  : 
and  then  whatever  happens  to  us,  we  may  "  commit 
f'  our  felves  to  God  in  well  doing,  as  into  the  hands 
"  of  a  faithful  creator  :"  to  whom  with  our  bleffed 
Saviour  and  Redeemer,  and  the  Holy  Ghoft  the 
Comforter,  be  all  honour  and  glory,  now  and  ever. 
Amen. 


SER: 


107 

SERMON    XXXIX. 

How  to  keep  a  truly  religious  faft. 

Preached  before  the  Queen  at  Whitehall,  Sep* 
tember  the  i6th,  1690. 


Z  E  C  H.  vii.  5. 

S;peak  unto  all  the  people  of  the  land,  and  to  the  priejis^ 
faying.  When  ye  f aft ed  and  mourned  in  the  fifth  and 
feventh  month,   even  thofe  feventy  years,  did    ye 

AT  ALL  FAST  UNTO  ME,    EVEN  UNTO  ME  ? 

IN  the  beginning  of  this  chapter  the  people  of  the  SERM. 
Jews,  who  were  then  rebuilding  the  temple  at  ^^^^^* 
Jerufalem,  and  had  already  far  advanced  the  work, 
though  it  was  not  perfectly  finifhed  till  about  two 
years  after,  fend  to  the  prielis  and  the  prophets,  to 
enquire  of  them,  whether  they  fhould  ftill  continue 
the  fail  of  the  fifth  month,  which  they  had  begun 
in  Babylon  and  continued  to  obferve  during  the  le- 
venty  years  of  their  captivity,  in  a  fad  remembrance 
of  the  deftrudion  of  the  city  and  temple  of  Jerufa- 
lem ;  or  lliould  not  now  rather  turn  it  into  a  day  of 
feafling  and  gladnefs? 

To  this  enquiry  God  by  his  prophet  returns  an 
anfwer  in  this,  and  the  following  chapter.  And  firft 
he  expoftulates  with  them  concerning  thofe  their 
monthly  fafts,  whether  they  did  indeed  deferve  that 
name,  and  were  not  rather  a  mere  fhew  and  pretence 

4  A  2  of 


XXXIX. 


io8  How  to  keep  a  truly  religious  fafi. 

S  ER^M.  of  a  religious  faft,  verfes  4,  5.  "  Then  came  the 
"  word  of  the  Lord  of  hofts  unto  me,  faying; 
"  Speak  unto  all  the  people  of  the  land,  and  to  the 
"  priefts,  faying.  When  ye  fafted  and  mourned  in 
"  the  fifth  and  feventh  month,  even  thofe  feventy 
"  years,  did  ye  at  all  faft  unto  me,  even  unto  me?" 
The  enquiry  was  particularly  concerning  the  faft  of 
the  fifth  month,  becaufe  the  occafion  of  that  was 
more  confiderable  than  of  all  the  other  ;  but  the  an- 
fwer  of  God  mentions  the  fafts  of  the  fifth  and  fe- 
venth months,  thefe  two  being  probably  obferved 
with  greater  folemnity  than  the  other. 

But  for  our  clearer  underftanding  of  this,  it  will 
be  requifite  to  confider  the  original  and  occafion  of 
all  their  monthly  fafts :  which,  as  appears  from  other 
places  of  fcripture,  in  fhort,  was  this :  when  the  Jews 
were  carried  away  captive  into  Babylon,  in  a  deep 
fenfe  of  this  great  judgment  of  God  upon  them  for 
their  fins,  and  of  the  heavy  affliftion  which  they 
lay  under,  they  appointed  four  annual  fafts,  which 
they  obferved  during  their  feventy  years  captivity, 
viz.  the  faft  of  the  fourth  month,  in  remembrance 
of  the  enemies  breaking  through  the  wall  of  Jerufa- 
lem,  which  we  find  mentioned,  Jer.  hi.  6,  7.  The 
faft  of  the  fifth  month,  in  memory  of  the  deftruclion 
of  the  city  and  temple  of  Jerufalem,  verfes  12,  13. 
The  faft  of  the  feventh  month,  in  remembrance  of 
the  ftaying  of  Gedaliah,  upon  which  followed  tlie 
difperfion  of  the  Jews,  of  which  we  have  an  account, 
Jer.  xlii.  1,2.  And  the  faft  of  the  tenth  month,  in 
memory  of  the  beginning  of  the  fiege  of  Jerufalem, 
of  which  we  find  mention,  2  Kings  xxv.  i. 

In  this  crder  we  fijid  thefe  four  annual  fafts  men- 

tionedj 


How  to  keep  a  truly  religious  Jafl.  109 

tioned-Zechar.  viii.  lo.not  accordino;  to  the  order  of  SE  R  M. 

XXXIX 
the  events,  but   of  the  months   of  the  feveral  years  ,    ..       j 

in  which  thefe  events  happened :  and  there  likewife 

God  gives  a  full  anfwer  to   this  enquiry  concerning 

the  continuance  of  thefe  annual  fads,  namely,  that 

they  fhould  for  the  future  be  turned  into  folemn  days 

of  joy  and  gladnefs.     "  And  the  word  of  the  Lord  Zech.viii. 

"  of  hofts  came  unto  me,   faying.  Thus  faith  the  18,  19. 

"  Lord  of  hofts,  the  faft  of  the  fourth  month,  and 

"  the  faft  of  the  fifth,  and  the  faft  of  the  feventh, 

"  and  the  faft  of  the  tenth,  fhall  be  to  the  houfe  of 

"  Judah  joy  and  gladnefs,  and  cheerful  feafts. 

I  return  now  to  the  text,  "  Did  ye  at  all  faft  unto 
"  me,  even  unto  me  ?  that  is,  did  thefe  tafts  truly 
ferve  to  any  religious  end  and  purpofe  ?  Did  not  the 
people  content  themfelves  with  a  mere  external  fliew 
and  performance,  without  any  inward  affliftion  and 
humiliation  of  their  fouls,  in  order  to  a  real  repent- 
ance ?  Did  they  not  ftill  go  on  in  their  fins  ;  nay, 
and  add  to  them  upon  thefe  occafions,  fafting  for 
ftrife,  and  debate,  and  oppreffion  ?  In  a  word,  were 
they  not  worfe  rather  than  better  for  them  ?  And 
therefore  God  had  no  regard  to  them,  as  it  follows 
in  this  chapter  ;  "  thus  fpeaketh  the  Lord  of  hofts,  Verfe.  9, 
"  faying  i  Execute  judgment,  and  fhew  mercy  and  J°'  "» 
"  compafTion  every  man  to  his  brother  j  and  opprefs 
"  not  the  widows  nor  the  fatherlefs,  the  ftranger  nor 
"  the  poor  -,  and  let  none  of  you  imagine  mifchief 
"  againft  his  brother  in  your  heart:  but  they  refufed 
"  to  hearken,  and  pulled  away  the  ftioulder,  and 
'*  ftopped  their  ears  that  they  fhould  not  hear  ;  yea, 
"  they  made  their  heart  as  an  adamant-ftone,  left 
"  they  fhould  hear  the  law  and  the  words  which  the 

"  Lord 


12,  13. 


1 10  How  to  keep  a  truly  religious  fafi, 

XXXIX '   "  ^^^  ^^  ^^^^  ^^^^  ^^"^  ^^  ^^^  ^P^"*^  ^"  ^^^  former 
'^  prophets  :    therefore  came  great  wrath  from  the 

"  Lord  of  hofts :  therefore  it  is  come  to  pafs,  that 

"  as  he  cried  and  they  would  not  hear ;  io  they  cried, 

"  and  I  would  not  hear,  faith  the  Lord  of  hofls." 

So  that  notwithflanding  thefe  outward  folemnities 

of  fafting  and  prayer,  here  was  nothing  of  a  religious 

fafl,  "  Did  ye  at  all  fall  unto  me,  even  unto  me  ?" 

They  were  fenfible  of  the  judgments  of  God  which 

were  broken  in  upon  them,    but  they  did  not  turn 

from  their  fins,  but  perfifted  Hill  in  their  obftinacy 

and  difobedience. 

And  what  God  here  by  the  prophet  Zechary  calls 

<«  fafting  unto  him,   even  unto  him,"   the  prophet 

Ifaiah  calls  "  the  faft  which  God  hath  chofen,   and 

*'  an  acceptable  day  to  the  Lord.     Wherefore  have 

«  we  fafted,  fay  they,  and  thou  feeft  not  ?    Where- 

*'  fore  have  we  afflicSted  our  fouls,   and  thou  takefl 

*'  no  knowledge  ?  Behold,  ye  faft  for  ftrife  and  debate, 

*'  and  to  fmite  with  the  fift  of  wickednefs  :  ye  fball 

"  not  faft  as  ye  do  this  day,  to  make  your  voice  to 

<'  be  heard  on  high.     Is  it  fuch  a  faft  as  I  have  cho- 

«'  fen,  a  day  for  a  man  to  afflidt  his  foul  ?   Is  it  to 

«  bow  down  his  head  as  a  bulrufh,  and  to  fpread  fack- 

**  cloth  and  afties  under  him  ?  Wilt  thou  call  this  a 

*'  faft,  and  an  acceptable  day  to  the  Lord  ?  Is  it  not 

"  to  deal  thy  bread  to  the  hungry ,and  that  thou  bring 

«'  the  poor  that  are  caft  out  to  thy  houfe ;  when  thou 

*'  feeft  the  naked  that  thou  cover  him,  and  that  thou 

<'  hide  not  thy  felf  from  thine  own  flefh  ?  Then  fhall 

«  thy  light  break  forth  as  the  morning,  and  thy  fal- 

*«  vation  fhall  fpring  forth  fpeedily  :  then  fhalt  thou 

*<  call  and  the  Lord  fhall  anfwer,  &c. 

2  From 


How  to  keep  a  truly  religious fafl,  1 1 1 

From  all  which  paflages  we  may  eafily  underftand  SE  R  M, 
wherein  thefe  monthly  fads  of  the  Jews  were  defec- 
tive, and  what  was  the  fault  that  God  finds  with 
them  when  he  expoftulates  fo  feverely  in  the  text : 
"  When  ye  faded  and  mourned  in  the  fifth  and  fe- 
"  venth  month,  even  thefe  feventy  years,  did  ye  at 
*'  all  fall  unto  me,  even  unto  me  ?  In  the  general, 
the  fault  which  God  finds  with  them  was  this,  that 
thefe  folemnities  did  not  ferve  any  real  end  and  pur- 
pofe  of  religion,  but  failed  in  their  main  defign, 
which  was,  a  fincere  repentance  and  reformation  of 
their  lives :  for  which  reafon  he  tells  them  that  they 
were  not  at  all  acceptable  to  him,  nor  efteemed  by 
him  as  performed  unto  him,  becaufe  they  did  not 
anfwer  the  true  intention  and  defign  of  them. 

My  work  at  this  time  (hall  be,  firft,  to  confider 
in  general  what  it  is  to  fad  unto  God,  that  is,  to 
keep  a  truly  religious  fad.  Secondly,  to  bring  the 
matter  nearer  to  our  felves,  I  Ihall  confider  more 
particularly,  what  the  duty  of  this  day,  appointed 
by  their  majedies  for  a  folemn  humiliation  and  re- 
pentance throughout  the  nation,  does  require  at  our 
hands. 

I.  I  fhall  confider  In  general  what  it  is  to  fad  un-  j 
to  God,  that  is,  to  keep  a  truly  religious  fad. 
And  of  this  I  Ihall  give  an  account  in  the  following 
particulars.  Fird,  a  truly  religious  fad  confids  in 
the  afflicting  of  our  bodies  by  a  drid  abdinence,  that 
fo  they  may  be  fit  and  proper  indruments  to  promote 
and  help  forward  the  grief  and  trouble  of  our  minds. 
Secondly,  in  the  humble  confeflTion  of  our  fins  to 
God  with  diame  and  confufion  of  face,  and  with  a 

hearty 


112  How  to  keep  a  truly  religious  f aft. 

SERM.   hearty  contrition  and  forrow  for  them.     Thirdly, 
XXXIX  • 

,_  -  -, J.  in  an  earned  deprecation  of  God's  difpleafure,   and 

humble  fupplications  to  him  that  he  would  avert  his 
judgments  and  turn  away  his  anger  from  us.  Fourth- 
ly, in  intercelTion  with  God  for  fuch  fpiritual  and 
temporal  bleflings  upon  our  felves  and  others  as  are 
needful  and  convenient.  Fifthly,  in  alms  and  cha- 
rity to  the  poor,  that  our  humiliation  and  prayers 
may  find  acceptance  with  God.  I  do  but  mention 
thefe  particulars,  that  I  may  more  largely  infift  up- 
on that  which  I  mainly  intended,  and  propofed  to 
confider  in  the  next  place,  namely, 

^^'  II.  What  the  duty  of  this  day,  appointed  by  their 

majefties  for  a  folemn  humiliation  and  repentance 
throughout  the  nation,  doth  require  at  our  hands. 
And  this  I  fhall  endeavour  to  comprize  in  the  fol- 
lowing particulars.     Firfl:,  that  we  fhould  humble 
our  felves  before  God  every  one  for  his  own  perfo- 
nal  fms,  whereby  he  hath  provoked  Goo,  and  in- 
creafed  the  public  guilt,  and  done  his  part  to  bring 
down  the  judgments  and  vengeance  of  God  upon 
the  nation.    Secondly,  that  we  fhould  hkewife  hear- 
tily lament  and  bewail  the  fins  of  others ;  cfpecial- 
■]y  the  great  and  crying  fins  of  the  nation,  com- 
mitted by  all  ranks  and  orders  of  men  amongft  us, 
and  whereby  the  wrath  and  indignation  of  Almigh- 
ty God  hath  been  fo  juftly   incenfed   againft  us. 
Thirdly,    we  fhould  moft  importunately  deprecate 
thofe  terrible  judgments  of  God  to  which  thefe  our 
great  and  crying  fins  have  fo  juftly  expofed  us. 
''         Fourthly,  we  fhould  pour  out  our  earneft  prayers 
and  fupplications  to  Almighty  God  for  the  preferva- 

tion 


How  to  keep  a  truly  religious  fafl.  113 

tion  of  their  majefties  facred  perfons,  and  for  the  SERM. 
eftabUrhment  and  profperity  of  their  government,  ^,....»-y-«J 
and  for  the  good  fuccefs  of  their  arms  and  forces  by 
fea  and  land.  Fifthly,  our  fading  and  prayers  fhould 
be  accompanied  with  our  charity  and  alms  to  the 
poor  and  needy.  Laftly,  we  ihould  profecute  our 
repentance  and  good  refolutions  to  the  adtual  refor- 
mation and  amendment  of  our  Jives.  Of  thefe  I  IhalJ, 
by  God's  afliftance,  fpeak  as  briefly  and  as  plainly 
as  I  can,  and  fo  as  every  one  of  us  may  underftand 
what  God  requires  of  him  upon  fo  folemn  an  occa- 
fion  as  this. 

Firft,  we  fliould  humble  our  felves  before  God 
every  one  for  his  own  perfonal  fins  and  mifcarriages, 
whereby  he  hath  provoked  God,  and  increafed  the 
publick  guilt,  and  done  his  part  to  bring  down  the 
judgments  and  vengeance  of  God  upon  the  nation. 
Our  humiliation  and  repentance  Ihould  begin  with- 
out felves  and  our  own  fins,  becaufe  repentance  is  al- 
ways defigned  to  end  in  reformation  ;  but  there  can- 
not be  a  general  reformation  without  the  reformati- 
on of  particular  perfons  which  do  .conilitute  and 
make  up  the  generaHty. 

And  this  Solomon  prefcribes  as  the  true  method 
of  a  national  reformation,  and  the  proper  effcc?:  of  a 
publick  humiliation  and  repentance  ;  in  that   admi- 
rable prayer  of  his  "at  the  dedication  of  the  temple  : 
''  If  there  be,  fays  he,  in  the  land  famine;  if  tiiere  '.^i".?^ 
"  bepeftilence,  blading,   mildew,  locufl ;  or  if  there  38,39*, 
"  be  caterpillar  -,  or  if  their  enemy  beiiege  them  in  4o- 
"  the  land  of  their  cities  :  whatever  plague,  whatever 
"  ficknefs  there  be ;  what  prayer  and  fupplication  fo- 
"  ever  be  made  by  any  man,  or  by  all  thy  people 

Vol.  III.  4  B  "  Ifrael, 

3- 


1 14  How  to  keep  a  truly  religious  f aft, 

SERM.  t<  Ifrael,    v/ho  shall    know    every    man    the 
XXXIX 

PLAGUE  OF   HIS  OWN  HEART,  and  fprcad   forth 

his  hands  towards  this  hoiife  :  then  hear  thou  in 
"  heaven  thy  dwelHng  place,  and  forgive,  and  do, 
*'  and  give  to  every  man  according  to  his  way,  whofe 
*'  heart  thou  kncweft  ;  for  thou,  even  thou  only, 
«'  knoweft  the  hearts  of  all  the  children  of  men ; 
"  that  they  may  fear  thee,  all  the  days  which  they 
''  live  in  the  land  which  thou  gaveftto  their  fathers.'* 

You  fee  here  that  in  cafe  of  any  publick  judgment 
or  calamity  the  humiliation  and  repentance  of  a  na- 
tion muft  begin  with  particular  perfons :  "  what 
"  prayer  orfupplication  foever  be  made  by  any  man, 
"  or  by  all  thy  people  Ifrael,  who  shall  know  e- 

"    VERY  MAN  THE    PLAGUE    OF     HIS  OWN   HEART  : 

"  then  hear  thou  in  heaven  thy  dwelling  place,  and 
"  forgive.  Particular  perfons  mufi:  be  convinced  of 
their  perfonal  fins  and  tranfgrelTions,  before  God 
will  hear  theprayers,  and  forgive  the  fins  of  a  nation. 
And  becaufe  we  cannot  perform  this  part  of  con- 
feffing  and  bewailing  our  own  perfonal  fins,  and  of 
teftifying  our  particular  repentance  for  them,  in  the 
publick  congregation,  any  otherwife  than  by  joining 
with  them  in  a  general  humiliation  and  repentance  ; 
therefore  we  (liould  do  well,  on  the  day  before  the 
publick  fall,  or  at  lead  the  morning  before  we  go 
to  the  publick  afiembly,  to  humble  our  felves  before 
God  in  our  families,  and  efpecially  in  our  clofets ; 
confeffing  to  him,  vvith  great  fhame  and  forrow,  all 
the  particular  fins  and  offences,  together  with  the  fe- 
veral  aggravations  of  them,  which  we  have  been 
guilty  of  againfl  the  Divine  Majelly,  fo  far  as  we  are 
able  to  call  them  particulaiiy  to  our  remembrance  ; 

and 


How  to  keep  a  truly  religious  fafl.  1 1  ^ 

and  earneftly  to  beg  of  God  the  pardon  find  forgive-  ?.,^y^ l^^- 
nefs  of  them,  ror  his  mercies  lake  in  Jesus  Christ. 

And  fo  likewife,  after  we  return  from  the  church, 
we  fhould  retire  again  into  our  clofets,  and  there  re- 
new our  repentance,  with  moft  ferious  and  fincere 
refolutions  of  reforming  in  all  thofe  particulars  which 
we  have  confeffed  and  repented  of  And  if  we  would 
have  our  refolutions  to  come  to  any  good,  we  mufl 
make  them  as  diftindand  particular  as  we  can  ;  and 
charge  it  upon  our  felves,  as  to  fuch  and  fuch  fins, 
for  which  we  have  declared  our  forrow  and  repen- 
tance, that  we  will  amend  and  do  better  for  the 
future. 

And  we  fhould  endeavour  alfo,  to  fortify  thefs 
good  refolutions,  in  the  befl:  manner  we  can,  by  fe- 
rious confideration,  and  by  folemn  promifes  of  better 
obedience,  and  of  a  more  confcientious  care  of  our 
lives  and  all  our  aftions,  for  the  future :  and  then, 
with  the  greateft  earneRnefs  and  importunity,  we 
Ihould  implore  the  affiftance  of  God's  grace  and  holy 
fpirit  to  this  purpofe. 

By  this  means  the  great  end  of  a  folemn  fail  and 
humiliation  will  be  in  fome  good  meafure  attained, 
and  not  wholly  defeated,  as  far  the  moft  part  it  is, 
by  being  huddled  up  and  loft  in  a  confufed  and  gene-* 
ral  repentance,  which  commonly  ends  together  with 
the  publick  aflembly,  without  any  real  and  perma- 
nent effedl  upon  particular  perfons :  perhaps  a  great 
part  of  the  congregation  may  have  been  in  fome  de-- 
gree  forry  for  their  fins  -,  but  nfter  all  no  man  for- 
fakes  them,  nor  is  the  better  for  his  forrow,  buc 
leaves  that  behind  him  m  the  church,  and  carries 
home  v/ith  him  the  fame  aftedion  for  his  fins  whicln 

4  B  2  he 


1 1 6  How  to  keep  a  truly  religious  faji. 

S  E  R  M.   l^e  had  before,    and  a  fecret  refolution  not  to  leave 
XXXIX.     , 

them. 


Thus  it  was  with  the  people  of  the  Jews.  They 
had  their  folemn  monthly  fail,  in  v/hich  they  made 
a  great  ihew  of  humiliation,  "  hanging  down  their 
"  heads  like  a  bulrufh  for  a  day,  and  fpreading  fack- 
"  cloth  and  aflies  under  them  :"  but  there  was  no 
inward  change  of  their  minds,  no  real  reformation 
of  their  lives ;  and  as  foon  as  ever  the  pubhck  folem- 
nity  was  over,  they  turned  every  one  to  his  former 
Jer.  viii.  ^vil  courfe.  So  God  complains  of  them  ;  "  I  heark- 
^-  "  en'd,"  fays  he,  "  and  I  heard,  but  they  fpake  not 

"  aright ;  no  man  repented  him  of  his  wickednefs, 
"  faying,  what  have  1  done  ?  but  they  turned  every 
*'  one  to  his  courfe,  as  the  horfe  rufheth  into  the 
"  battle.  They  fpake  not  aright,"  that  is,  they  did 
not  take  the  right  method  for  an  effedlual  repen- 
tance: they  humbled  themfelves  indeed  before  God, 
and  repented  at  random  for  the  fins  of  the  nation  in 
general,  which  they  were  all  of  them  ready  enough 
to  acknowledge,  and  to  lay  a  heavy  load  of  guilt  up- 
on the  community  :  but  all  this  while,  they  never 
reflefted  upon  themfelves  in  particular  ;  they  had  no 
fenfe,  no  conviftion  of  their  own  perfonal  faults  and 
mifcarriages,  without  which  there  can  be  no  true  ge- 
neral repentance:  "  no  man  repented  him  of  his  wic- 
"  kednefs,  faying,  what  have  I  done  ?'* 

And  as  they  had  no  fenfe  of  their  own  particular 
fins  which  they  had  been  guilty  of,  fo  they  had  no 
thought  of  leaving  them ;  but  as  foon  as  ever  the 
public  fading  and  humiliation  was  over,  they  return- 
ed to  them  again  with  the  fame  eager  and  furious 
appetite;  **  they  turned  every  one  to  his  courfe, 

«  as 


How  to  keep  a  truly  religious  faft.  iij 

"  as  the   horfe  rulhcth  into  the  battle,"    that  is,  SERM. 

XXXIX 
without  any  confideration,  or  fenfe  of  danger.  ._  _      '^ 

Secondly,  we  fhoiild  likewife  upon  this  day, 
heartily  lament  and  bewail  the  fins  of  others ;  efpecial- 
ly  the  great  and  crying  fins  of  the  nation  commited. 
by  all  ranks  and  orders  of  men  amongft  us,  and 
whereby  the  wrath  and  indignation  of  Almighty 
God  hath  been  fo  juftly  incenfed  againft  us. 

This  hath  been  the  temper  and  praftice  of  good 
men  in  all  ages,  to  be  greatly  troubled  and  afflifted 
for  the  fins  of  others,  as  well  as  for  their  own ;  to 
mourn  for  them  in  fecret,  as  the  prophet  Jeremy 
does  for  the  obftinacy  and  impenitency  of  the  Jews, 
and  for  the  terrible  judgments  and  calamities  which 
their  fins  were  ready  to  bring  down  upon  them  : 
"  but  if  ye  will  not  return,"  fays  he  to  that  obdu-  jer.  xiS. 
rate  people,  "  my  foul  fhall  weep  in  fecret  places  ^7- 
"  for  your  pride,'*  or  obftinacy ;  "  and  mine 
"  eyes  fhall  weep  fore,  and  run  down  with  tears, 
"  becaufe  the  Lord's  flock  is  carried  away  captive." 
And  indeed  almoft  the  whole  prophecy  of  Jeremy, 
and  his  book  of  Lamentations,  are  little  elfe  but  a 
perpetual  humiliation  and  mourning  for  the  fins  of 
that  people,  and  for  the  judgments  of  God  which 
he  faw  already  inflicted,  or  forefaw  to  be  coming 
upon  them. 

We  read  likewife  of  Lot,  when  he  dwelt  in  So. 
dom,  how  "  he  was  vexed  with  the  filthy  convcr- 
*'  fation  of  the  wicked  :  "  for  that  righteous  man," 
faith  St.  Peter,  "  dwelling  among  them,  in  feeing 
*'  and  hearing,  vexed  his  righteous  foul  from  day  to 
*'  day,  with  their  unlawful  deeds." 

Holy 


1 18  How  to  keep  a  truly  religious  fafi. 

SERM.       Holy  David  alio,  upon  all  occafions,  tcftifies  his 

XXXIX 

^^^^,^^^  great  trouble  and  grief"  for  the  fins  which  he  fav^ 

committed  by  others,  and  was  foaffeded  with  them, 

that  he  trembled  at  the  very   thought  of  them  : 

Pfal.  cxix.  "  rivers  of  tears,'*  fays  he,   "  run  down  mine  eyeSj 

^  '  "  becaufe  men  keep  not  thy  law:'*  and  in  the  fame 

V.  S3-    pfalm,  "  horror  hath  taken  hold  of  me,  becaufe  of" 

"  the  wicked  which  forfake  thy  law:"   and  again, 
V.  158.  <t  J  bojieid  the  tranfgrelTors  and  was  grieved,  becaufe 
"  they  kept  not  thy  word.'* 

And  how  does  Daniel  humble  hi mfelf  before  God 
and  mourn,  and  in  the  name  of  all  the  people,  and 
of  all  degrees  and  orders  of  men  among  them,  take 
fhame  to  himfelf  and  them,  for  the  great  fins  which 
Dan.  IX.  j.|^gy.  ^^^  htcn  guilty  of?  "  We  have  finned,  and 
'  "  have  committed  iniquity,  and  have  done  wickcd- 
"  ly:  O  Lord,  righteoufnefs  belongeth  unto  thee, 
"  but  unto  us  confufion  of  face,  as  at  this  day:  to 
'*  our  kings,  to  our  princes,  and  to  our  fathers,  be- 
"  caufe  we  have  finned  againft  thee." 

With  what  trouble  and  confufion  does  Ezra,  up- 
on a  folemn  day  of  falling  and  humiliation,  acknow- 
ledge and  bewail  the  fins  of  the  people  ?  "  O  my 
Ezr.  IX.  ^^  God,"  fays  he,'*  "  I  am  alhamed,  and  bluOi  to 
"  lift  up  my  face  to  thee  my  God  :  for  our  iniqui- 
"  ties  are  increafed  over  our  heads,  and  our  trefpaf- 
"  fes  grown  up  unto  the  heavens  :  fince  the  days  of 
"  our  fathers,  we  have  been  in  a  great  trefpafs  unto 
"  this  day,  and  for  our  iniquities  have  we,  our  kings 
"  and  our  priefls,  been  delivered  into  the  hands  of 
«  the  kings  of  tlie  lands,  &c." 

And  thus  alfo  ought  we,  the  people  of  this  fin- 
ful  land,  upon  this  folemn  day  of  failing  and  hu- 

^  miliation. 


How  to  keep  a  truly  religiotis  faji,  119 

mlliation,  to  itt  our  fins  in  order  before  us,  with  all  S  E  R  M. 
their  heinous  aggravations ;  and  in  the  bitternefs  of 
our  fouls  to  lament  and  bewail  that  general  preva- 
lence of  impiety  and  vice,which  hath  over-fpread  the 
nation,  and  diffufe'd  it  felf  through  all  ranks  and 
degrees  of  men,  magiftrates,  minifters,  and  people. 
I  Ihall  fpeak  fomething  more  particularly  concern- 
ing each  of  thefe. 

I.  The  fins  of  the  magillrates  and  thofe  that  are 
in  authority.  They  that  make  laws  for  others, 
and  are  to  fee  to  the  execution  of  them,  ought  to 
be  ftri6l  obfervers  of  them  themfelves.  For  it  mufl 
needs  put  a  man  not  a  little  out  of  countenance,  to 
be  fevere  upon  thofe  faults  in  others  of  which  he 
knows  himfelf  to  be  notorioufly  guilty.  And  yet 
how  many  are  there,  whofe  place  and  duty  it  is  to 
corred  the  vices  and  immoralities  of  others,  who 
are  far  from  being  examples  of  virtue  themfelves  ? 
And  therefore  it  is  no  wonder  that  there  is  fo  lame 
and  unequal  a  diftribution  of  juftice  in  the  nation, 
and  that  magiftrates  are  fo  cold  and  flack  in  the  dif- 
countenancing  of  vice  and  impiety-,  and  in  putting 
the  good  and  wholefom  laws  made  againft  them  in 
execution  :  as  againft  the  profanation  of  the  Lord's 
day  by  fecular  bufinefs,  by  vain  fports  and  paftimes, 
which  by  the  very  nature  of  them  are  apt  to  diflblve 
the  minds  of  men  into  mirth  and  pleafure,  and  to 
carry  them  off  from  all  ferious  thoughts  of  God  and 
religion,  and  from  the  meditations  of  another  world  ; 
and  to  give  the  devil  an  advantage,  and  an  oppor- 
tunity, which  he  never  fails  to  take,  to  fteal  the 
good  feed,  the  word  of  God,  which  they  have  heard 
that  day,  out  of  their  hearts,   and   to  make  it  of 

none 


I20  How  to  keep  a  truly  religious  f aft. 

S  E  R  M.  none  efFecfl :  and  which  is  ^yet  worfe,  by  lewd  and 
XXXIX  •  •  . 

finful  pradtices,  which   are  unlawful  at  any  time, 

but  upon  that  day,  are  a  double  breach  and  violati- 
on of  God's  law. 

And  likewife  by  negleding  to  put  in  execution 
the  laws  againft  profane  fwearing  and  curfing,  for 
which  the  land  mourns ;  and  againft  drunkennefs, 
and  adultery,  and  fornication,  which  are  fo  com- 
mon, and  fo  impudently  committed  amongft  us : 
whether  they  be  civil,  or  ecclefiaftical  laws  ;  and  it 
is  hard  to  fay  which  of  them  are  moft  remifly  ex- 
ecuted. 

And  to  mention  no  more,  by  neglefling  to  pro- 
fecute  that  horrible  fin  of  murther,  fo  frequently 
now  committed  in  our  ftreets  beyond  the  example 
of  former  ages,  with  that  feverity  and  impartiality 
which  is  neceflary  to  free  the  nation  from  the  guilt 
of  that  crying  fm,  which  calls  fo  loud  to  heaven  for 
vengeance. 

And  all  this,  notwithftanding  the  magiftrates  are 
under  the  oath  of  God  to  put  the  laws  in  due  execu- 
tion againft  all  thefe  crimes,  fo  far  as  they  come  to 
their  knowledge,  and  fall  under  their  cognifance. 

2.  The  fins  of  the  minifters,  who  ferve  at  God's 
altar,  and  watch  over  the  fouls  of  men,  whofe  blood 
will  be  required  at  their  hands,  if  any  of  them  pe- 
rifh  through  their  fault  and  negled.  There  is  no 
reafon  to  doubt,  but  that  there  is  a  good  number 
of  faithful  fhepherds  in  the  land,  who  watch  over 
their  flocks  with  great  care  and  confcience,  remem- 
bring  the  dreadful  account  which  they  muft  one 
day  make,  to  "  him  who  ftiall  judge  the  quick  and 
"  dead,"  of  the  fouls  committed  to  their  charge. 

But 


How  to  keep  a  truly  reUgiousfaJi,  12 1 

But  yet  how  grofly  do  many  of  us  fail  of  the  faith-  |.^.5J.\!' 
ful  difcharge  of  the  fiibftantial  parts  of  this  high  of- 
fice ?  Wanting  a  juft  fenfe  of  the  ineftimable  worth 
and  value  of  the  fouls  of  men  for  whom  Christ 
died  ;  taking  little  or  no  care  to  inftruft  them  in 
the  good  knowledge  of  the  Lord,  and  to  lead  them 
in  the  way  to  eternal  happinefs  by  an  exemplary 
converfation. 

Nay  too  many  among  us  demean  themfelves  fo 
fcandaloufly,  as  perfecftly  to  undermine  the  credit 
and  effed;  of  their  doftrine  by  leading  lives  fo  diredl"- 
ly  contrary  to  it ;  and  to  alienate  their  people  from 
the  church,  and  to  make  them  to  abhor  the  facrifice 
and  fervice  of  the  Lord  by  their  wicked  and  unhal- 
lowed converfations :  hereby  cxpofmg  them  to  the 
craft  of  feducers,  and  rendring  them  an  eafy  prey  to 
the  emiffaries  of  the  church  of  Rome,  or  to  any 
other  fedl  and  faction  that  pretends  a  greater  zeal 
for  religion,  or  makes  a  better  fhew  of  a  ftrid  and 
unblameable  life. 

For  who  will  regard  or  believe  thofe  teachers, 
who  give  all  the  evidence  that  can  be  by  their  lives 
and  anions,  that  they  do  not  believe  themfelves  and 
their  own  dodrines  ?  When  all  is  faid,  the  life  and 
manners  of  the  preacher  are  the  beft  eloquence,  and 
have  that  dint  and  power  of  perfuafion  in  them, 
which  no  words,  no  art  can  equal.  Who  fo  lives 
as  he  fpeaks,  does,  as  it  is  faid  of  our  blefled  Sa- 
viour, "  fpeaks  as  one  that  hath  authority,  and  not 
"  as  the  fcribes :"  not  as  the  fcribes  •,  whofe  words, 
notwithftanding  all  the  formality  and  gravity  with 
which  they  were  delivered,  did  therefore  want 
weight  and  force,  becaufe,   as  our  Saviour  tells  us 

Vol.  in.  4  C  of 


XXXIX. 


122  How  to  hep  a  truly  religious  faji. 

S^JJ^M.  of  them,  "  they  faid,  but  did  not  "  their  lives  were 
not  anfwerable  to  their  do6trines :  whereas  our  blef- 
fed  Saviour  therefore  "fpokeas  never  man  fpake," 
becaufe  he  lived  as  never  man  lived  -,  fo  innocent, 
fo  ufeful,  fo  exemplary  a  life  :  he  "  was  holy,  harm- 
"  lefs,  and  undefiled:"  he  "  did  no  fin,  neither  was 
«'  guile  found  in  his  lips :  he  fulfilled  all  righteouf- 
^*  nefs,  and  went  about  doing  good."  This  was 
that  which  made  him  fo  powerful  '^'  a  preacher  of 
"  righteoufnefs  i"  and  we  muft  neceflTarily  fall  fo 
much  fhort  of  him  in  the  authority  and  efficacy  of 
our  fermons,  as  we  do  in  the  holinefs  and  goodnefs 
of  our  lives.  Such  a  preacher,  and  fuch  a  pradice 
as  that  of  our  blefiTed  Saviour  was,  is  every  way  fit- 
ted to  reprove,  and  perfuade,  and  reform  mankind. 
We  now  live  in  an  age  and  church,  wherein  they 
who  are  called  to  be  the  teachers  and  guides  of  fouls 
ought  to  take  great  heed  both  to  their  dodtrine  and 
their  lives;  that  the  name  of  God  may  not  be  blaf- 
phemed,  and  his  holy  religion  brought  into  con- 
tempt by  thofe,  who,  above  all  others,  are  moft 
nearly  concerned  to  prefejrve  and  fupport  the  credit 
and  honour  of  it. 

And  we  cannot  but  fee,  how  our  religion  and 
church  are  befet  and  endangered  on  every  fide  ;  by 
the  rude  aflaults  of  infidelity,  and  by  the  cunning 
arts  of  feducing  fpirits,  and  by  our  own  intefline 
heats  and  divifions  :  and  it  can  never  be  fufficiently 
lamented,  no  though  it  were  with  tears  of  blood, 
that  we  whofe  particular  charge  and  employment  it 
is  to  build  up  the  fouls  of  men  in  a  holy  faith,  and 
in  the  refolution  of  a  good  life,  fhould,  for  want  of 
due  iriflrudlionj  and  by  the  difTolute  and  profligate 

lives 


Hotv  to  keep  a  truly  religious  fafl.  123 

lives  of  too  many  among  us,  and  by  inflaminp;  our  S  E  R  M. 

•  XXXIX 

needlefs  differences  about  lefler  things,  have  fo  great  vl„_^^ 

a  hand  in  pulling  down  religion,  and  in  betraying 
the  fouls  of  men  either  to  downright  infidelity,  or 
to  a  carelefs  negled  and  profane  contempt  of  all  re- 
ligion. 

May  not  God  juftly  cxpoftulate  this  matter  with 
us,  as  he  did  of  old  with  the  people  of  the  Jews  •, 
"  a  wonderful  and  horrible  thing  is  committed  in  jer.  v.  36^ 
"  the  land  J  the  prophets  prophefy  falfly,  and  the  3i- 
"  priefls  bear  rule  by  their  means,  and  my  people 
"  love  to  have  it  fo  ;  and  what  will  ye  do  in  the 
"  end  thereof?"  When  they  who  are  the  pallors 
and  guides  of  fouls,  have  by  their  ill  coiidud:  and 
management  brought  matters  to  that  pafs,  that  the 
generality  of  the  people  fit  down  contented  with  the 
worft  ftate  of  things,  and  are  become  almoU  indif- 
ferent whether  they  have  any  religion  or  not,  what 
can  the  end  of  thefe  things  be,  but  that  "  the  king- 
*'  domofGoD  will  be  taken  from  us,  and  given  to 
"  a  nation  that  will  bring  forth  the  fruits  of  it  ?" 

If  ever  there  be  a  public  reformation  among  us,  it 
mud  begin  at  the  houfe  of  God  ;  and  they  who  are 
the  minifters  of  religion  muft  lead  on  this  work,  and 
be  more  careful  and  confcientious  in  the  difchargs 
of  that  high  and  holy  office  which  is  committed  to 
them  by  "  the  great  fhepherd  and  bifhop  of  fouls. '^ 
Elfe,  what  fliali  we  fay  when  God  fhall  challenge  us, 
as  he  once  did  the  paftors  of  the  Jewifh  church,  by    • 
his  prophet,  faying,  «  where  is  the  flock  that  was  jer.  xlll, 
"  given  thee,  thy  beautiful  flock.?  What  wilt  thou  2^'  ^i. 
"  fay  when  he  fhall  punifh  thee  ? 

4  C  2  ^  ^,  The 


124^'  How  to  keep  a  truly  religious  fajl. 

S  E  R  M.        5.  The  fins  of  the  people  ;  amonsft  whom  there 

XXXIX  .  . 

'^_  1    '.  ^1  IS  almoft  an  univerfal   corruption  and  depravation 

of  manners ;  infomuch  that  impiety  and  vice  feem 
to  have  overfpread  the  face  of  the  nation  •,  fo  that 
we  may  take  up  that  fad  complaint  of  the  prophet 
concerning  the  people  of  Ifrael,  and  apply  it  to  our 
Tfai.  i.  4,  felves ;  that  we  *'  are  a  finful  nation,  a  people  laden 
5*  "  withiniquity,  a  feed  of  evildoers-,"  that  "the  whole 

"  head  is  fick,  and  the  whole  heart  faint  •,  and  that 
"  from  the  fole  of  the  foot  even  to  the  head,  there 
"  is  no  foundnefs  in  us,  but  wounds,  and  bruifes, 
"  and  putrifying  fores." 

We  may  juftly  ftand  amazed  to  confider,  how 
''the  God  of  all  patience"  is  provoked  by  us  every  day  -, 
to  think,  how  long  he  hath  born  with  us  and  "fuffer- 
'•  ed  our  manners  i"  ouropen  profanencfs,  and  infide- 
lity \  our  great  immoralities,  and  grofs  hypocrify ; 
our  infolent  contempt  of  religion,  and  our  ill-favour- 
ed counterfeiting  of  it  for  low  and  fordid  ends :  and, 
which  is  the  moft  melancholy  confideration  of  all  the 
reft,  we  feem  to  be  degenerated  to  that  degree,  that 
it  is  very  much  to  be  feared,  there  is  hardly  integri- 
ty enough  left  amongft  us  to  fave  us. 

And  then  if  we  confider  further  our  moft  unchari- 
table and  uncliriftian  divifions,  to  the  endangering 
both  of  our  reformed  rehgion,  and  of  the  civil  rights 
and  liberties  of  the  nation:  our  incorrigiblenefs  under 
the  judgments  of  God  which  we  have  feen  abroad 
in  the  earth,  and  which  hav^  in  a  very  fevere  and 
terrible  manner  been  infliifled  upon  thefe  kingdoms, 
that  the  "  inhabitants  thereof  might  learn  righteouf- 
"  nefs:"  our  infenfiblenefs  of  the  hand  of  God,  fo 
vifible  in  his  late  providences  towards  us,  and  in  the 

many 


How  to  keep  a  truly  religious  f aft.  125 

many  merciful  and  wonderful  deliverances  which  ^^^^^• 
from  time  to  time  he  hath  wrought  for  us..  »,^«-^,-Jj 

And  laftly,  if  we  refleft  upon  our  horrible  ingra- 
titude to  God  our  Saviour  and  mighty  deliverer; 
and  to  them  likewife  whom  he  hath  fo  flgnally  ho- 
noured in  making  them  the  happy  means  and  inftru- 
ments  of  our  deliverance :  and  this,  not  only  expreiT- 
ed  by  a  bold  contempt  of  their  authority,  but  by  a 
moll  unnatural  confpiracy  againft  them  with  the 
greateft  enemies  not  only  to  the  peace  of  the  nation, 
but  likewife  to  the  reformed  religion  therein  profeff- 
ed  and  by  law  eftabliflied  ;  and  to  the  intereft  of  it 
all  the  world  over. 

So  that  we  may  fay  with  Ezra,  "  and  now,  O  our  Ezra  Ix* 
"  God,  what  lliall  we  fay  unto  thee  after  this?'* 
And  may  not  God  likewife  fay  to  us,  as  he  did 
more  than  once  to  the  Jews  ?  "  Shall  I  not  vifit  for 
"  thefe  things,  faith  the  Lord?  and  ihall  not  my 
"  foul  be  avenged  on  fuch  a  nation  as  this  ?" 

Thirdly,  we  fhould  likewife,  upon  this  day,  ear- 
neftly  deprecate  God's  difpleafure,  and  make  our  hum- 
ble fupplications  to  him,  that  he  would  be  graciouf- 
ly  pleafed  to  avert  thofe  terrible  judgments  which 
hang  over  us,  and  which  we  havejull  caufe  to  fear  may 
fall  upon  us ;  and  that  he  would  be  intreated  by  us 
at  laft  to  be  appeafed  towards  us,  and  to  turn  from 
the  fiercenefs  of  his  anger. 

This  we  find  the  people  of  God  were  wont  to  do 
Upon  their  folemn  days  of  fading  and  prayer  ;  and 
this  God  exprelly  enjoins :  "  Blow  the  trumpet  in  ,  .  .. 
"  Zion,  fandify  a  faft,  call  a  folemn  afiembly  ;  ga-  16,  17. 
"  ther  the  people,  fandify  the  congregation,  alTem- 
**  ble  the  elders,  &c.  Let  the  priefts,  the  minifters 
I  «  of 


XXXIX. 


126  Jiow  to  keep  a  truly  religions  fajl. 

S  ERM.  ««  of  the  Lord,  weep  between  the  porch  and  the  al- 
ter, and  let  them  fay.  Spare  thy  people,  OLord, 
and  give  not  thy  heritage  to  reproach,  that  the 
"  heathen  iliould  rule  over  them :  wherefore  fhould 
*'  they  fay  among  the  people,  where  is  their  God?'* 
And  to  this  earnefl  deprecation  of  his  judgments, 
God  promifeth  a  gracious  anfwer;  for  fo  it  immedi- 

Ver.  1 8.  ately  follows  :  "  then  v/ill  the  Lord  be  jealous  for 
"  his  land,  and  pity  his  people.'* 

And  thus  likewife  Daniel,  when  he  itl  his  face 

Dan.ix.  3.  «  to  feek  the  Lord  God,  by  prayer  and  fupphca- 
"  tions,  with  failing  and  fackcloth  and  afhes,"  does 
in  a  mofl  humble  and  earnefl:  manner  deprecate  the 
difpleafure  of  God  towards  his  people,  and  beg  of 
him  to  remove  his  judgments,  and  to  turn  away  his 

y       .     anger  from  them.     "  O  Lord,  according  to  all  thy 

17,18,19.  "  righteoufnefs,  I  befeech  thee,  let  thine  anger  and 

«  thy  fury  be  turned  away  from  thy  city  Jerufalem, 

*'  thy  holy  mountain :  becaufe  for  our  fins,  and  for  the 

"  iniquity  of  our  fathers,  Jerufalem  and  thy  people 

'«  are  become  a  reproach  to  all  that  are  about  us. 

''  Now  therefore,  O  God,  hear  the  prayer  of  thy 

*'  fervant  and  his  fupplication  ;  and  caufe  thy  face 

"  to  fhine  upon  thy  fandluary  which  is  defolate,  for 

"  the  Lord's  fake.     O  my  God,  incline  thine  ear 

"  and  hear,  open  thine  eyes  and  behold  our  defola- 

"  tions,  and  the  city  which  is  called  by  thy  name  : 

*••  for  we  do  not  prefent  our  fupplications  before  thee^ 

"  for  our  righteoufnefs,  but  for  thy  great  mercy  :  O 

*'  Lord  hear,  OLord  forgive,  O  Lord  hearken 

- "  and   do  \  defer  not  for  thine  own  fake,    O   my 

"  God  j  for  thy  city  and  thy  people   are  called  by 

"  thy  name." 

And 


How  to  keep  a  truly  religious  faft,  1 27 

And  thus  alfo  fhould  we,  upon  this  folemn  oc-  SERM. 

XXXIX 
cafion,  cry  mightily  unto  God,  and  with  the  great- 
eft  importunity  deprecate  thofe  terrible  judgments 
which  we  fo  righteoufly  have  deferved,  and  to  which 
the  great  and  crying  fins  of  the  whole  nation  have 
fo  juilly  expcfed  us :  humbly  befeeching  him,  not 
for  our  righteoufnefs,  but  for  his  great  mercy  ;  for 
his  own  name's  fake,  and  becaufe  we  are  his  people 
and  are  called  by  his  name,  and  becaufe  his  holy 
truth  and  religion  are  profeffed  amongft  us  ;  that  he 
would  be  pleafed  to  hear  the  prayers  of  his  fervants 
and  their  fupplicatiohs  which  they  have  made  before 
him  this  day,  "  for  the  Lord's  fake." 

Fourthly,  we  fliould  likewife,  upon  this  day, 
pour  out  our  moft  earneft  fupplications  to  Almighty 
God,  for  the  prefervation  of  their  majefties  facred 
perfons,  and  for  the  profperity  and  eftablifhment  of 
their  government,  and  for  the  good  fuccefs  of  their 
arms  and  forces  by  fea  and  land. 

And  more  efpecially,  fmce  his  majefty,  with  fo 
many  confederate  princes  and  ftates  of  Europe,  is 
engaged  in  fo  neceifary  an  undertaking  for  the  com- 
mon good  of  Chriftendom,  and  for  the  mutual  pre- 
fervation and  recovery  of  their  refpedive  rights : 
we  (hould  earneftly  implore  the  favour  and  affiftance 
ot  Almighty  God  in  fo  juft  and  glorious  a  caufe,  a- 
gainft  the  common  invader  and  oppreflbr  of  the  rights 
and  liberties  of  mankind. 

And  that  of  his  infinite  goodnefs  he  would  be  gra- 
cioufly  pleafed  to  take  the  perfon  of  our  fovereign 
lord  the  king  into  the  particular  care  and  protection 
of  his  providence  :  that  he  would  fecure  his  precious 
life  from  all  fecrct  attempts,  and  from  open  violence  : 

that 


128  How  to  keep  a  truly  religious  fafl, 

S  E  R  M.  that  he  would  eive  his  ano;els  charge  over  him,  and 
^__  ^^  cover  his  head  in  the  day  of  battle,  and  crown  it  with 
viftory  over  his  enemieSj  and  reftore  him  to  us  again 
in  fafety. 

And  that  he  would  likewife  preferve  and  dire6l  the 
queen's  majefty,  in  whofe  hands  the  adminiftration 
of  the  government  is  at  prefent  fo  happily  placed  : 
that  he  would  give  her  wifdom  and  refolution  for 
fuch  a  time  as  this,  and  fupport  and  carry  her  through 
all  the  difficulties  of  it. 

And,  laftly,  that  he  would  blefs  them  both  with 
a  long  life,  and  a  peaceful  and  happy  reign  over  us ; 
that  "  under  them  we  may  live  quiet  and  peaceable 
"  Jives  in  all  godlinefs  and  honefly." 

Fifthly,  our  fading  and  humiliation  fhould  be  ac- 
companied with  our  alms  and  charity  to  the  poor  and 
needy  :  and  we  fhould  every  one  of  us,  according  to 
the  counfel  given  by  the  prophet  to  king  Nebuchad- 
Dan.  iv.    nezzar,  "  break  off  our  fins  by  righteoufnefs,  and 
^'  "  our  iniquities  by  fhewing  mercy  to  the  poor,  if  it 

"  may  be  a  lengthning  of  our  tranquillity :"  hereby 
intimating,  that  if  there  be  any  way  to  prevent  or 
remove  the  judgments  of  God,  and  to  prolong  the 
tranquillity  and  happinefs  of  prince  and  people,  a 
fincere  repentance,  and  a  great  charity  to  them  that 
are  in  neceffity  and  diftrefs,  are  moft  likely  to  prevail 
with  God,  not  only  to  refpite  the  ruin  of  afinfuJ 
people,  but  to  incline  him  to  thoughts  of  peace  to- 
wards them.  For  fo  he  promifeth  to  the  Jews  up- 
on their  fincere  repentance,  and  earneft  fupplication 
to  him,  which  are  always  accompanied  with  charity 
Jer.xxJx.  to  the  poor  :  "  for  I  know  the  thoughts  which  I 
11,12,13.  tf  think  towards  you,  faith  the  Lord,  thoughts  of 

peace. 


Mow  to  keep  a  truly  religious fdfl.  1 2  9 

"  peace,  and  not  of  evil,    to  give  you    an  expeft-  S  E  R  M. 
*'  ed  end  :  then  fhall  ye  call  upon  me,  and  ye  fhall 
"  go  and  pray  unto   me,  and  I  will   hearken  unto 
*'  you ;  and   ye  fhall  leek  me,  and  find  me,  when 
**  ye  fhall  fearch  for  me  with  all. your  heart." 

And  I  have  often  thought  that  the  extraordinary 
charity  of  this  whole  nation,  and  of  our  pious  princes, 
who  are  fo  ready  to  every  good  work,  and  fuch 
bright  and  fhining  examples  in  this  kind,  more  than 
once  fo  feafonably  extended  to  the  relief  of  our  dif- 
treffed  brethren,  who  fled  hither  for  refuge  from  the 
rage  and  cruelty  of  their  perfecutors  :  I  fay,  I  have 
often  thought,  that  this  very,  thing,  next  to  the  in-* 
finite  mercy  and  goodnefs  of  Almighty  God,  hath 
had  a  very  particular  influence  upon  our  prefervation 
and  deliverance  from  thofe  terrible  calamities  which 
were  juft  ready  to  rufli  in  upon  us.  And  what 
caufe  have  we  to  thank  God,  who  hath  allotted  to 
us  this  more  bleffed  and  merciful  part,  to  give  and 
not  to  receive  ;  to  be  free  from  perfecution  our  felves, 
that  fo  we  might  be  in  a  capacity  to  give  refuge  and 
relief  to  them  that  were  perfecuted  ? 

There  are  but  few  that  have  the  faith  to  believe 
..it,  but  certainly  charity  to  the  poor  is  a  great  fe- 
curity  to  us  in  times  of  evil :  fo  David  aiTures  us, 
fpeaking  of  the  righteous  or  charitable  man  •,  "  he 
*'  fhall  not,"  fays  he,  "  be  afraid  in  the  evil  time, 
"  and  in  the  days  of  dearth  he  fhall  be  fatisfied." 

And  fo  likewife  in  times  of  public  diftrefs,  when 
we  are  befet  with  cruel  and  powerful  enemies,  who 
\\  God  were  not  on  our  fide  would  fwallow  us  up, 
the  public  charity  of  a  nation  hath  many  times  prr>^' 
^d  it's  befl  fafeguard  and  fhieid  ;  *'  it  fhall  fight  t  r 

Vol.  III.  4  D  "  thee, 

3- 


130  How  to  keep  a  truly  religious  fajl. 

SERM.  «  thee,'*  faith  the  fon  of  Sirach,  fpeaking  of  the 
XXXIX.  '    r  o 

\_-^-  _■  charity  of  alms,  "  againft  thine  enemy,  more  than 

"  a  mighty  fhield  and  ftrong  fpear." 

And  of  this,  as  I  faid  before,  I  doubt  not  but  we 
of  this  nation,  by  the  great  mercy  and  goodnefs  of 
God  to  us,  have  had  happy  experience  in  our  late 
wonderful  deliverance  under  the  condu<5t  and  valour 
of  one  of  the  beft  and  braved  of  princes  ;  to  whom, 
by  too  many  among  us,  the  moft  unworthy  and 
unthankful  returns  have  been  made  for  all  the  un- 
wearied pains  he  hath  undergone,  and  for  the  many 
and  defperate  hazards  to  which  he  hath  expofed  him- 
felf  for  our  fakes,  that  ever  were  made  to  fo  great 
and  generous  a  benefaftor  :  to  fo  great  a  benefadtor,  L 
fay,  not  only  to  thefe  nations,  but  even  to  all  Europe, 
in  averting  and  maintaining  their  liberties  againfl 
the  infolent  pride  and  unjuft  encroachments  of  one 
of  the  greateft  opprefTors  the  world  hath  known  for 
'  many  ages  :  of  whom  it  may  be  faid  as  Job  doth  of 
Job  xli.  the  Leviathan,  "  upon  the  earth  there  is  not  his 
33'  34-  «  iil<.e  :'*  I  am  glad  I  cannot  apply  what  immediate- 
ly follows,  that  "  he  is  made  without  fear  i"  but 
furely  the  next  words  are  appofite  enough,  "  he  be- 
"  holdeth  all  high  things,  and  is  king  of  all  the 
«  children  of  pride:"  and  yet  "  he  that  is  higher 
"  than  the  higheft,"  even  "  he  that  fitteth  in  the 
^'  heavens  doth  laugh  at  him,  for  he  feeth  that  his 
"  day  is  coming." 

To  conclude  this  particular  •,  if  we  would  have 

our  prayers  afcend  up  to  heaven,  and  find  acceptance 

there,  our  alms  muft  go  along  with  them  :    fo  the 

Adsx  4.    ^"S^l  intimates  when  he  fays  to  Cornelius,  "  thy 

"  prayers  and  thine  alms  are  gone  up  for  a  memorial 

'«  before 


How  to  keep  a  truly  religious  f aft.  131 

"  before  God  :'*  thy  prayers  and  thine  alms;  they  SER  M. 
muft  go  together  if  we  defire  that  our  prayers  fhould  v_L,^ 
be  effeftual.     And  the  prophet  Ifaiah,  fpeaking  of 
the  "  faft  which  God  hath  chofen,"  and  which  is  ac- 
ceptable to  him,  makes  charity  and  alms  a  moft  ef- 
fentiai  part  of  it :  "  is  it  not,"  fays  he,  "  to  deal  I^a*  Iviii. 
"  thy  bread  to  the  hungry,  and  that  thou  bring '''  ^' 
"  the  poor  that  are  caft  out  of  thy  houfe ;  when 
"  thou  feed  the  naked  that  thou   cover  him,  and 
*'  that  thou  hide  not  thy  felf  from  thine  own  fiefh  ? 
"  Then  fhalt  thou  call,  and  the  Lord  fhall  anfwer ; 
"  thou  fhalt  cry,  and  he  fhall  fay,  here  I  am/* 

Sixthly  and  laftly,  we  fhould  profecute  our  repen- 
tance and  good  refolutions  to  the  adbual  reformation 
and  amendment  of  our  lives.  For  in  this  repentance 
doth  mainly  confift :  this  is  the  proper  fruit  and  ef- 
fe6t  of  all  our  humiliation  and  good  refolutions,  to 
forfake  our  fins,  and  to  become  better  for  the  future ; 
more  pious  and  devout  towards  God,  more  fober 
and  chafte  with  regard  to  our  felves,  more  juft  and 
charitable,  more  humble  and  meek  towards  all  men : 
in  a  word,  more  innocent,  more  ufeful,  and  more 
*'  holy  in  all  manner  of  converfation." 

And  without  this,  all  our  fafting  and  humiliation, 
our  moft  earneft  prayers  and  fupplications,  will  figni- 
fy  nothing:  all  our  forrow  and  tears  will  be  but  as 
water  fpilt  upon  the  ground,  and  will  not  turn  to 
any  account  either  to  fave  our  own  fouls,  or  to  pre- 
ferve  "  this  untoward  generation,  this  crooked  and 
"  perverfe  nation,'*  from  ruin  and  deftruftion.  So 
God  tells  Solomon,  that  this  is  the  only  way  to 
appeafe  and  reconcile  him  to  a  finful  people :  "  if  2  Chron. 
^'  my  people  which  is  called  by  my  name  Ihall  hum-  ^^'*  ''^' 
4  D  2  "  ble 


1^2  How  to  keep  a  truly  religious  fajl, 

SERM^  "  ble  themfelves,  and  pray,  and  feek  my  face,  and 

1^'-,^— ,^  "  turn  from  their  wicked  ways :  then  will  I  hear  in 

*'  heaven,  and  forgive  their  fin,  and  heal  their  land." 

And  if  this  were  the  happy  effedb  of  our  prayers 

and  humiliation   this  day,  to   "  turn  us  from  our 

"  wicked  ways  -,"  God   would  then  turn  away  his 

anger  from  us  •,  and,  as  he  promifed  to  the  Jews  by 

the  prophet  Zachary,  he  would  turn  thefe  our  month- 

Zech.viii.  jy  f^fts  ''  into  joy,  and  gladnefs,  and  cheerful  feaftsi'* 

as  he  hath  in  a  great  meafure  already  done,  "  blef- 

"  fed  be  his  great  and  glorious  name." 

But  if  we  will  not  hearken  and  obey,  can  we  ex- 
peft  that  God  fhould  deliver  us  from  the  hands  of 
our  enemies,  that  we  may  fin  againft  him  without 
fear  all  the  days  of  our  lives  ?  To  what  purpofe 
fhould  the  providence  of  God  take  fo  much  care  to 
preferve  our  religion  to  us,  when  we  make  no  better 
ufe  of  it  for  the  direftion  and  government  of  our 
lives?  When  it  ferves  moft  of  us,  only  to  talk  of 
it ;  and  too  many  amongft  us,  to  talk  againft  it ; 
to  deride  it,  and  defpitefully  to  ufe  it.  If  this  be 
the  truth  of  our  cafe,  what  can  we  fay,  why  the 
kingdom  of  God  fhould  not  be  taken  from  us  and 
given  to  a  nation  that  v/ill  bring  forth  the  fruits  of 
it  ?  What  can  we  fay,  why  our  candleftick  fhould 
not  be  removed,  and  the  light  of  the  glorious  gof- 
pel  of  Christ  which  we  have  fo  long  enjoyed,  and 
fo  long  rebelled  againft,  fhould  not  be  utterly  ex- 
tinguifiied  amongft  us  ? 

And  if  I  cannot  prevail  with  you  to  come  to  thefe 
good  rcfolutions,  and  to  make  them  good:  if  you 
will  not  be  perfuaded  to  pra6lifc,  yet  be  pleal"ed  to 
attend  to  what  \it  fay :  hear  our  words  at  leaft,  if 

ye 


How  to  keep  a  truly  religious  fafi,  133 

ye  will  not  do  them.     This  the  people  of  the  Jews  S  E  R  M. 
would  do,  when  they  were  at  the  worft :  So  God  ^_J -^ 
tells  the  prophet  concerning  them  :  "  they  come  Ezek. 
"  unto  thee,  as   the  people  cometh  ;   and  they  fit 
•'  before  thee,  as   my  people  ;  and  they  hear  thy 
*'  words,  but  they  will  not  do  them." 

I  had  much  rather  at  any  time  have  occafion  to 
praife  than  to  reprove,  efpecially  in  this  great  af- 
fembly  :  and  yet  it  is  not  to  be  diflembled,  that  the 
behaviour  of  too  many  in  this  place  is  frequently  fo 
carelefs  and  irreverent,  as  is  very  mif-becoming 
thofe  who  are  in  the  more  peculiar  prefence  of  the 
great  and  glorious  "  majefty  of  heaven  and  earth," 
and  profefs  at  that  very  time  to  worfhip  him. 

I  am  fure,  we  have  a  better  pattern  perpetually 
before  us ;  of  a  decent  and  unaffed:ed  devotion,  of 
a  mod  ferious  and  fteady  attention,  without  wan- 
dring,  without  diverfion,  and  without  drowfinefs: 
fuch  an  example  as  I  cannot  but  hope  will  in  a  fhort 
time  gain  upon  us  all,  and  by  a  more  gentle  and 
filent  reproof  win  us  to  the  imitation  of  it. 

And  if  we  could  but  be  prevailed  upon  to  demean 
our  felves  with  that  reverence,  and  to  hear  with 
that  attention,  which  becomes  the  worfhip  and  the 
word  of  God,  it  might  then  be  hoped  that  we 
would  confider  what  is  faid  •,  and  confideration  would 
probably  work  conviction,  and  conviflion  bring  us 
to  a  better  mind,  and  to  a  firm  purpofe  of  doing 
what  we  are  inwardly  convinced  is  both  our  duty 
and  our  intereft  to  do. 

Let  us  then  go  away  from  this  folemnity,  with  a 
refolution  to  do  every  one  what  we  ought  j  truly 
and  earneftly  to  repent  us  of  our  fins  paft»  and  to 

lead 


134  How  to  keep  a  truly  religious  fafl, 

ST  R  M.  lej^j  a  new  life  for  the  future  ;  to  fear  that  ereat  and 
terrible  God,  in  whofe  prefence  we  have  humbled 
our  felves  this  day ;  and  to  "  turn  to  him  that  hath 
*'  fmitten  us,"  left  we  provoke  him  "  to  punifii  us 
«  yet  feven  times  more,"  and  after  that "  feven  times 
«  more  For  our  fins,"  and  for  our  impenitency  in 
them,  till  at  laft  "  he  make  our  plagues  wonderful.'* 
To  conclude ;  let  us  every  one,  with  that  true 
penitent  in  Job,  take  words  to  our  felves,  and  fay, 
"  furely  it  is  meet  to  be  faid  unto  God,  I  have  born 
''  chaftifemenr,  I  will  not  offend  any  more;  that 
"  which  I  fee  not,  teach  thou  me;  and  if  I  have 
"  done  iniquity,  I  will  do  no  more.  Oh  !  that 
*'  there  were  fuch  a  heart  in  us,  that  it  might  be 
*'  well  with  us,  and  with  our  children  for  ever." 

Which  God  of  his  infinite  goodnefs  grant,  for  his 
mercies  fake  in  Jesus  Christ  :  to  whom  with 
thee,  O  Father  and  the  Holy  Ghoft,  be  all  honour 
and  glory,  both  now  and  ever,  Amen> 


S  E  R- 


'35 


SERMON     XL. 

That  God  is  the  only  happinefs  of  man. 

Preached  before  the  Queen  at  Whitehall, 
March  20,    169 1-2. 

PSALM    Ixxiii.    25. 

Whom  have  lin  heaven  but  thee  ?  and  there  is  none  up- 
on earth  that  I  defire  hefides  thee. 

TH  E  defign  of  this  pfalm  is  to  vindicate  the  SERM. 
goodnefs  and  juftice  of  the  divine  providence,     ^L. 
notwithftanding  the  prolperous  ftate  of  the. wicked        ^~ 
and  the  afflided  condition  of  good  men  many  times 
in  this  world.     And  in  the  firft  place,  the  pfalmift, 
whoever  he  was,    whether  David  or  Afaph,    lays 
down  this  for  a  mofl  certain  truth,  that  God  is  good 
to  good  men:  "  of  a  truth  God  is  good  to  Ifraei,  Ver.  i, 
"to  fuch  as  are  of  a  clean  heart." 

And  yet  for  all  this  he  tells  us,  that  at  fome  times 
he  was  under  no  fmall  temptation  to  queftion  the 
truth  of  this  principle,  when  he  beheld  the  promif- 
cuous  difpenfation  of  things  here  below  ;  that  the 
wicked  are  often  profperous,  and  good  men  cxpof- 
cd  to  great  calamities  in  this  life  ;  as  if  God  either 
negle6led  human  affairs,  or  had  a  greater  kindnefs 
for  the  workers  of  iniquity  than  for  pious  and  good 
men  :  ^'  as  for  me,  my  foot  had  well-nigh  (lipped,  y^j.^  ^^ 
3  "  fbr 


1^6  *That  God  is  the  only  happhiefsof  maftc 

^  ^xi  ^    *'  ^*^^  ^  ^^^  envious  at  the  foolidi,  when  I  faw  the 

\_^^^_j  "  profperity  of  the  wicked.'* 

This,  he  fays,  was  a  very  great  ftumbling-block 
to  good  men,  and  tempted  them  to  doubt  of  the  pro- 

Ver,  10.  vidence  of  God:  "  therefore  his  people  return  hi- 
*'  ther,  and  waters  of  a  full  cup  are  wrung  out  to 
"  them;  and  they  fay,  doth  God  know,  and  is  there 
"  knowledge  in  the  mod  High  V*  This  fcntence  is 
fomewhat  obfcurely  rendered  in  our  tranflation,  fo 
as  to  make  the  fenfe  of  it  difficult;  which  is  plainly 
this:  "  therefore  his  people  return  hither  -,"  that  is, 
therefore  good  men  come  to  this,  in  the  greatnefs  of 
their  affliftion,  and  in  the  bitternefs  of  their  foul,  to 
queftion  God's  knov/ledge  and  care  of  human  affairs. 

Vcr.  12.  "  Behold,"  fay  they,  "  thefe  are  the  ungodly, 
*'  and  yet  they  are  the  profperous  in  the  world,  they 
"  increafe  in  riches:"  to  what  purpofe  then  is  it  for 

Ver.  13.  any  man  to  be  religious  and  virtuous?  "  Verily,  I 
"  have  cleanfed  my  heart  in  vain,  and  wafTied  my 
"  hands  in  innocency :"  in  vain  have  I  endeavoured 
after  purity  of  heart  and  innocency  of  life,  fmce  (o 
little  good  comes  of  it ;  nay,  fo  far  from  that,  that 

Ver.  14.  I  ^^ve  been  in  continual  trouble  and  affliftion  :  "  all 
"  the  day  long  have  I  been  plagued,  and  chaftned 
"  every  morning." 

Such  thoughts  as  thefe  often  came  into  his  mind, 
and  gave  him  great  trouble  and  difquiet :  but  he  pre- 

V«r.  ic.  fently  correds  himfelf:  if  I  fay  I  will  fpeak  thus,  I 
"  fliould  offend  againft  the  generation  of  thy  chil- 
"  dren;"  that  is,  I  (hould  go  againft  the  fenfe  of  all 
pious  and  good  men,  who  have  always  believed  the. 
providence  of  God  notwithflanding  this  objeftion: 
which  at  lall  he  tells  us  he  had  raifed  On  purpofe  to 


^haf  God  is  the  only  happinefs  of  mam  137 

try  if  he  could  find  the  folution  of  it  i  "  I  thought  SERM. 
*'  to  know  this,  which  was  grievous  in  mine  eyes :"  ._^  _L,^ 
and  then  he   refolves  all  into  the  unfearchable  wif-  ^'^r-  ^^ 
dom  of  the  divine  providence,  which  if  we  fully  un- 
derftood  from  firft  to  lafl,  we  fhould  fee  good  reafon 
to  be  fatlsfied  with  the   equity  of  it:  *'  when  I  go  Ver.  17, 
"  into  the  fand:uary  of  God,  then  fhall  I  underftand 
"  the  end  of  thefe  men  ?  How  thou  didft  fet  them 
"  in  flippery  places,  &c/'     This  fatisfied  him,  that 
whenever    the    fecret  defign  of  God's   providence 
fhould  be  unfolded,  whether  in  this  world  or  the  o- 
ther,  how  ftrange  and  crofs  foever  things  might  feemf 
to  be  at  prefent,  yet  in  the  ilTue  and  conclufion  it 
would  appear,  that  neither  are  bad  men  fo  happy, 
nor  good  men  fo  miferable,  as  at  prefent  they  may 
feem  to  be. 

So  that  upon  a  full  debate  of  this  matter,  the  pfalm- 
ift  concludes,  ^that  thefe  objeflions  againft  provi- 
dence do  fpring  from  our  ignorance,  and  ihort  and 
imperfedl  view  of  things  ;  whereas  if  we  faw  the 
whole  defign  from  beginning  to  end,  it  would  ap- 
pear to  be  very  reafonablc  and  regular.  "  Thus  my  ^^^"  ^^' 
**  heart  was  grieved  ;  fo  foolifh  was  I  and  ignorant, 
*'  and  as  a  beaft  before  thee."  And  in  regard  to 
himfelf,  he  tells  us,  that  he  faw  great  reafon  to  ac- 
knowledge God's  tender  care  over  him  in  particular, 
and  that  he  could  find  nofecurity  or  comfort  for  him- 
felf, but  in  God  alone  :  "  Neverthelefs  I  am  conti-  Ver.  23. 
"  nually  with  thee ;  thou  haft  holden  me  up  by  thy 
"  right  hand:  thou  fhalt  guide  me  with  thy  counfel, 
"  and  afterwards  receive  me  to  glory  •,"  as  if  he  had 
faid,  I  am  fenfible  of  thy  conftant  prefence  with  me, 
and  care  of  me  j  and  do  intirely  depend  upon  thy 

Vol.  III.  4  E  guidance 

3- 


138  Tto  God  /V  the  only  happinefe  of  man. 

SE^RM.  guidance  and  direflion,  not  doubting  but  that  my 
prefent  troubles  and  affliftions  will  have  a  happy  and 
glorious  ilTue. 

And  at  laft  he  breaks  out  into  a  kind  of  exultati- 
on and  triumph  for  the  mighty  confolation  which  he 
found  in  the  firm  behef  of  the  being  and  providence 
of  God,  as  the  great  flay  and  fupport  of  his  foul  in 
the  worlT:  condition  that  could  befal  him  ;  in  the 
words  of  the  text,  "  whom  have  I  in  heaven  but 
*'  thee  ?  and  there  is  none  upon  earth  that  I  defire 
"  befides  thee.'*  If  a  man  were  to  chufe  a  happi- 
nefs  for  himfelf,  and  were  to  ranfack  heaven  and 
earth  for  it,  after  all  his  fearch  and  enquiry  he  would 
at  laft  fix  upon  God  as  the  chief  happinefs  of  man 
and  the  true  and  only  reft  and  center  of  our  fouls. 
This  then  is  the  plain  meaning  of  the  text,  "  that 
^'  nothing  in  the  world  but  God  can  make  man 
*'  happy:  whom  have  I  in  heaven  but  thee  ?  and 
*'  there  is  none  upon  earth  that  I  defire  befides 
*'  thee.'* 

That  man  of  himfelf  is  not  fufficient  for  his  own 
happinefs,  is  evident  upon  many  accounts :  becaufe 
he  is  liable  to  fo  many  evils  and  calamities,  which  he 
can  neither  prevent,  nor  remedy:  he  is  full  of  wants 
which  he  cannot  fupply  •,  compafled  about  with  in- 
firmities which  he  can  only  complain  of,  but  is  not 
able  to  redrefs :  he  is  obnoxious  to  dangers  which 
he  muft  always  fear,  becaufe  he  can  never  fufficient-  \ 
ly  provide  againft  them, 

Confider  man  by  himfelf,  and  from  under  thecon- 
duifl  and  protedion  of  a  fuperior  and  more  powerfuj 
being,  and  he  is  in  a  moft  difconfolate  and  forlorn 
condition  :  fccure  of  nothing  that  he  enjoys,  and  li- 
able 


7hat  God  is  the  only  happmefs  of  man.  13  a 

able  to  be  difappointed  of  every  thing  that  he  hopes  SERM. 
for :  he  is  apt  to  grieve  for  what  he  cannot  help,  and  y^^ 
perhaps  the  jufteft  caufe  of  his  grief  is  that  he  can- 
not help  it;  for  if  he  could,  inftead  of  grieving  for 
it,  he  would  help  it :  he  cannot  refrain  from  defir- 
ing  a  great  many  things  which  he  would  fain  have, 
but  is  never  likely  to  obtain,  becaufe  they  are  out  of 
his  power;  and  it  troubles  him  both  that  they  are  fo, 
and  that  he  cannot  help  his  being  troubled  at  it. 

"  Thus  man  walketh  in  a  vain  fhew,  and  difquiet- 
''  eth  himfelf  in  vain  ;"  courting  happinefs  in  a 
thoufand  fliapes,  and  the  fader  he  follows  it,  the 
fwifter  it  flies  from  him.  Almoft  every  thing  pro- 
mifeth  happinefs  to  us  at  a  diftance,  fuch  a  ftcp  of 
honour,  fuch  a  pitch  of  eftate,  fuch  a  fortune  or 
match  for  a  child:  but  when  we  come  nearer  to  it, 
either  we  fall  fliort  of  it,  or  it  falls  fliort  of  our  expec- 
tation ;  and  it  is  hard  to  fay  which  of  thefe  is  the 
greateftdifappointment.  Our  hopes  are  ufually  big- 
ger than  enjoyment  can  fatisfy,  and  an  evil  long  fear- 
ed, befides  that  it  may  never  come,  is  many  times 
more  painful  and  troublefom  than  the  evil  it  felf 
when  it  comes. 

"  In  a  word,  man  is  born  to  trouble  as  the  fparks 
^  fly  upwards."  He  comes  into  the  world  naked 
and  unarmed,  and  from  himfelf  more  deflitute  of 
the  natural  means  of  his  fecurity  and  fupport  than  a- 
ny  other  creature  whatfoever,  as  it  were  on  purpofe 
to  fliew  that  he  is  more  peculiarly  the  care  of  a  fupe- 
rior  providence :  and  as  man,  of  all  the  creatures 
of  this  lower  world,  is  only  made  to  ov/n  and  ac- 
knowledge a  deity  -,  fo  God  in  great  wifdom  hath  (o 
ordered  things,    that   none  of  the  other   creatures 

4  E  2  fhould 


^hat  God  is  the  only  happhiefi  ofmati. 
fhould  have  fo  much  need  of  him,  and  fo  much  rea- 
fon  to  acknowledge  their  neceflary  dependance  up- 
on him.  So  that  the  words  of  David  are  the  ve- 
ry fenfe  and  voice  of  nature,  declaring  to  us  that 
mankind  is  born  into  the  world  upon  terms  of  great- 
er dependance  upon  the  providence  of  God  than  o- 
Pfal.  xxn.  t}^ej.  creatures :  "  thou  art  he,'*  fays  David  there  to 
"  God,  "  that  tookeft  me  out  of  the  womb,  thou 
"  madefl  me  to  hope,'*  or  thou  didfl  keep  me  in 
fafety,  "  when  I  was  upon  my  mother's  breafts :  I 
"  was  caft  upon  thee  from  the  womb,  thou  art  my 
"  God  from  my  mother's  belly  :  be  not  far  from  me, 
"  for  trouble  is  near  :"  trouble  is  always  near  to  us, 
and  therefore  it  is  happy  for  us  that  God  is  never  far 
from  any  of  us :  "  for  in  him  we  live,  and  move, 
*'  and  have  our  being." 

And  when  we  are  grown  up,  we  are  liable  to  a 
great  many  mifchiefs  and  dangers,  every  moment  of 
our  lives  -,  and,  without  the  providence  of  God,  con- 
tinually infecure  not  only  of  the  good  things  of  this 
life,  but  even  of  life  it  felf :  fo  that  when  we  come 
to  be  men,  we  cannot  but  wonder  however  we  ar- 
rived at  that  ftate,  and  how  we  have  continued  in  it 
fo  long,  confidering  the  infinite  difficulties  and  dan- 
gers which  have  continually  attended  us :  that  in 
running  the  gantlope  of  a  long  life,  when  fo  many 
hands  have  been  lifted  up  againft  us,  and  fo  many 
flrokes  levelled  at  us,  we  have  efcaped  fo  free,  and 
with  fo  few  marks  and  fears  upon  us :  that  when  we 
are  befieged  with  fo  many  dangers,  and  (o  many  ar- 
rows of  death  are  perpetually  flying  about  us,  to 
which  we  do  fo  many  \vays  lie  open,  we  fhould  yet 
hold  out  twenty,  forty,  fixty  years,  and  fome  of  us 

perhaps 


7hat  God  is  the  only  happinefs  of  man.  141 

perhaps  longer,  and  do  Hill  (land  at  the  mark  iin-  SE  R  M. 
touched,  at  leaft  not  dangeroufly  wounded  by  any  of 
them :  and  confidering  likewife  this  fearful  and  won- 
derful frame  of  a  human  body,  this  infinitely  com- 
plicated engine ;  in  which,  to  the  due  performance  of 
the  feveral  funftions  and  offices  of  life,  fo  many 
firings  and  fprings,  fo  many  receptacles  and  channels 
are  neceflary,  and  all  in  their  right  frame  and  order  ; 
and  in  which,  befides  the  infinite  imperceptible  and 
fecret  ways  of  mortality,  there  are  fo  many  fluices  and 
flood-gates  to  let  death  in  and  life  out,  that  it  is 
next  to  a  miracle,  though  we  take  but  little  notice 
of  it,  that  every  one  of  us  did  not  die  every  day  fince 
we  were  born:  I  fay  confidering  the  nice  and  curi- 
ous frame  of  our  bodies,  and  the  innumerable  con- 
tingencies and  hazards  of  human  life,  which  is  kt  in 
fo  llippery  a  place,  that  we  ftill  continue  in  the  land 
of  the  living,  we  cannot  afcribe  to  any  thing  but  the 
watchful  providence  of  Almighty  God,  "  who  holds 
"  our  foul  in  life,  and  fufFers  not  our  foot  to  be 
*'  moved." 

To  the  fame  merciful  providence  of  God  we  owe, 
that  whilft  we  continue  in  life  we  have  any  comfort- 
able poffeffion  and  enjoyment  of  our  felves  and  of 
that  which  makes  us  men,  I  mean  our  reafon  and 
underftanding  :  that  our  imagination  is  not  let 
loofe  upon  us,  to  haunt  and  torment  us  with  melan- 
cholick  freaks  and  fears :  that  we  are  not  delivered 
up  to  the  horrors  of  a  gloomy  and  guilty  mind  :  that 
every  day  we  do  not  fall  into  frenzy  and  diftradion, 
which  next  to  wickednefs  and  vice  is  the  foreft  cala- 
mity, and  •  idJefl  difguife  of  human  nature  :  I  fay, 
next  to  wickednefs  and  vice,  which  is  a  wilful  fren- 


142  ^bat  God  is  the  only  happmefs  of  man. 

S  E  R  M.  2y,  a  madnefs  not  from  misfortune  but  from  choice  ; 
whereas  the  other  proceeds  from  natural  and  necef- 
fary  caufes,  fuch  as  are  in  a  great  meafure  out  of  our 
power  ;  fo  that  we  are  perpetually  liable  to  it,  from 
any  fecret  and  fudden  diforder  of  the  brain,  from 
the  violence  of  a  difeafe,  or  the  vehement  tranfport 
of  any  pafTion. 

Now  it  things  were  under  no  government,  what 
could  hinder  fo  many  probable  evils  from  break- 
ing in  upon  us,  and  from  treading  upon  the  heels  of 
one  another  ?  Like  the  calamities  of  Job,  when  "  the 
"  hedge,  which  God  had  fet  about  him  and  all  that 
"  he  had,  was  broken  down  and  removed." 

So  that  if  there  were  no  God  to  take  care  of  us, 
we  could  be  fecure  of  no  fort,  no  degree  of  happinefs 
in  this  world  ;  no  not  for  one  moment :  and  there 
would  be  no  other  v/orld  for  us  to  be  happy  in,  and 
to  make  amends  to  us  for  all  the  fears  and  dangers, 
all  the  troubles  and  calamities  of  this  prefent  life : 
for  God  and  another  world  Hand  and  fall  together: 
without  him  there  can  be  no  life  after  this  •,  and  if 
our  hopes  of  happinefs  were  only  in  this  life,  man 
of  all  other  beings  in  this  lower  world  wouj^  certain- 
ly be  the  moft  miferable. 

I  cannot  fay  that  all  the  evils  which  I  have  men- 
tioned would  happen  to  all,  if  the  providence  of 
God  did  not  rule  the  world ;  but  that  every  man 
would  be  in  danger  of  them  all,  and  have  nothing 
to  fupport  and  comfort  him  againft  the  fear  of  that 
danger.  For  the  nature  of  man,  confidered  by  it 
felf,  is  plainly  infufficient  for  it*s  own  happinefs  ; 
fo  that  we  m  I'c  neceffarily  look  abroad,  and  feek 
for  it  f'^i.-iiwhc. ,'  ell>  :  and  who  can  fhew  us  that 

good 


XL. 


^bat  God  is  the  only  happinefs  of  man.  \ax 

good  thatis  equal  toall  the  wantstendnecefrities,al]theSERM. 
capacities  and  dcfires,  all  the  fears  and  hopes  of  iiu- 
man  nature  ?  Whatfover  can  anfwer  all  thefe,  mufl 
have  thefe  following  properties  : 

Firfl,  it  muft  be  an  all-fufficient  good. 

Secondly,  it  mufl  be  perfed:  goodnefs. 

Thirdly,  it  mufl  be  firm  and  unchangeable  in  it 
felf. 

Fourthly,  it  mufl  be  fuch  a  good  as  none  can  de- 
prive us  of,  and  take  away  from  us. 

Fifthly,  it  mufl  be  eternal. 

Sixthly,  it  mufl  be  able  to  fupport  and  comfort 
us  in  every  condition,  and  under  all  the  acci- 
dents and  adverfities  of  human  life. 

Lallly,  it  mufl  be  fuch  a  good  as  can  give  perfect 
reft  and  tranquillity  to  our  minds. 

Nothing  that  is  fhort  of  all  this  can  make  us  hap- 
py :  and  no  creature,  no  not  the  whole  creation, 
can  pretend  to  be  all  this  to  us.  All  thefe  proper- 
ties meet  only  in  God,  who  is  the  perfeft  and  fu- 
preme  good  ;  as  I  fhall  endeavour,  in  the  following 
difcourfe,  more  particularly  to  Ihew  ;  and  confe- 
quently,  "  that  God  is  the  only  happinefs  of  man/*'* 

Firft,  God  is  an  all-fufHcient  good.  And  this 
does  import  two  things  •,  wifdom  to  contrive  our 
happinefs,  and  power  to  effeft  it  \  for  neither  of  thefe 
without  the  other  is  fufRcient,  and  both  thefe  in  the 
higheft  and  moft  eminent  degree  are  in  God. 

He  is  infinitely  wife  to  defign  and  contrive  our 
happinefs ;  becaufe  he  knows  what  happinefs  is,  and 

how 


XL. 


144  That  God  is  the  only  happinefs  ofmmu 

S  E  RM.  ht)w  to  frame  us  fo  as  to  be  capable  of  the  happinefs 
he  defigns  for  us ;  and  how  to  order  and  difpofe  all 
other  things  fo,  as  that  they  fhall  be  no  hindrance 
and  impediment  to  it. 

He  perfedlly  underflands  all  the  poflibilitiei;  of 
things,  and  how  to  fit  means  to  any  end.  He  knows 
all  our  wants,  and  how  to  fupply  them ;  all  our 
hopes  and  defires,  and  how  to  fatisfy  them  :  he 
forefees  all  the  dangers  and  evils  which  threaten  us, 
and  knows  how  to  prevent  or  divert  them,  if  he 
thinks  fit ;  or  if  he  permit  them  to  come,  how  to 
fupport  us  under  them,  or  to  deliver  us  out  of  them^ 
or  to  turn  them  to  our  greater  benefit  and  advantage 
in  the  laft  ilTue  and  refult  of  things. 

His  wifdom  cannot  be  furprifed  by  any  accident 
which  he  did  not  forefee,  and  which  he  is  not  fuf- 
ficiently  provided  againft.  The  wifdom  of  men  is 
but  fhort  and  imperfect,  and  liable  to  infinite  errors 
and  miftakes :  in  many  cafes  men  know  not  what  is 
fafeft  and  bcft  for  them,  nor  whether  this  or  that 
will  conduce  mofl  to  their  happinefs  :  nay  it  often 
happens  that  thofe  very  means  which  the  wifeft  men 
chufe  for  their  fecurity  do  prove  the  occafions  of 
their  ruin,  and  they  are  thrown  down  by  thofe  very 
ways  whereby  they  thought  raife  and  eftablifh 
themfelves. 

Efpecially  if  God  breathe  upon  the  counfels  of 
men,  how  are  their  defigns  blafted  }  How  are  they 
infatuated  and  foiled  in  their  deeped  contrivances, 
and  "  fnared  in  the  work  of  their  own  hands  ?'* 
when  "  it  is  of  the  Lord;"  the  wifdom  of  the  great- 
eft  politicians  is  turned  into  foolilhnefs :  "  for  there 
*'  is  no  wifdom,  nor  underftanding,  nor  counfel 
^'  ao;ainfl:  the  Lord.'*  But 


^D" 


72-^/  God  is  the  only  happinefi  of  man.  145 

But  the  divine  wifdom,  being  founded  upon  in-  SE_RM. 
finite  knowledge,  is  thereby  fecured  againft  all 
poiTibility  of  error  and  miftake.  God  perfedlly 
knows  the  natures  and  the  powers  of  all  his  creatures, 
and  therefore  can  never  be  miftaken  in  the  ufe  and 
application  of  them  to  any  of  his  purpofes :  fo  that 
none  of  his  defigns  of  love  and  mercy  to  the  fons  of 
men  can  mifcarry  for  want  of  good  contrivance, 
or  wife  conduct. 

And  as  he  is  perfeftly  wife  to  contrive  our  hap- 
pinefs,  fo  is  he  infinitely  powerful  to  effe6l  it,  and 
to  remove  out  of  the  way  all  the  obftacles  and  im- 
pediments of  it.  We  may  underftand  many  times 
what  would  conduce  to  our  happinefs,  but  may  not 
be  able  to  compafs  it  \  but  nothing  is  out  of  the 
reach  ofomnipotency :  many  things  are  difficult  to 
us,  but  nothing  is  too  hard  for  God  :  many  things 
are  impoffible  with  us,  but  "  with  God  all  things 
"  are  poITible.'*  For  he  is  the  fountain  and  origi- 
nal of  all  power,  from  whom  it  is  derived,  and  up- 
on whom  it  depends,  and  to  whom  it  is  perfedtly 
fubjecl  and  fubordinate  :  he  can  do  all  things  at 
once,  and  in  an  inftant,  and  with  the  greateft  eafe  ; 
and  no  created  power  can  put  any  difficulty  in  his 
way,  much  lefs  make  any  effisdual  refinance  ;  be- 
caufe  omnipotency  can  check,  and  countermand, 
and  bear  down  before  it  all  other  powers. 

So  that  if  God  be  on  our  fide,  who  can  be  againft 
us }  We  may  fafely  "  commit  our  fouls  into  his 
"  hands,  for  he  is  able  to  keep  that  which  is  com- 
*'  mitted  to  him."  He  can  give  us  all  good  things, 
and  deliver  us  from  all  evil,  for  "  his  is  the  king- 
'^  dom  and  the  glorious  power."  Though  all  creatures 
Vol.  III.  4  F  fhould 

3- 


146  I'hat  God  is  the  only  happinefs  of  man. 

S  E  R  M.  fhould  fail  us,  we  may  rely  upon  God,  and  live  up- 
^  -  -  ^  on  his  all-fufficiency  for  our  fupply,  and  may  fay 
with  the  prophet,  "  though  the  fig-tree  fhould  not 
"  bloflbm,  neither  fruit  be  in  the  vine  ;  though  the 
"  labour  of  the  olive  fhould  fail,  and  the  fields 
"  fhould  yield  no  meat ;  though  the  flock  fhould 
*'  be  cut  off  from  the  fold,  and  there  fhould  be  no 
"  herd  in  the  flails  ;  yet  would  I  rejoice  in  the 
"  Lord,  and  joy  in  the  God  of  my  falvation.'* 

II.  Secondly,  as  God  is  an  all-fufficient  good,  fo  he 

is  perfedb  goodnefs.  He  is  willing  to  communicate 
happinefs  to  us,  and  to  employ  his  power  and  wifdom 
for  our  good.  He  made  us  that  he  might  make  us 
happy,  and  nothing  can  hinder  us  from  being  fo  but 
our  felves.  Such  is  his  goodnefs,  that  "  he  would  have 
'*  all  men  to  be  favcd,  and  to  come  to  the  know- 
«  ledge  of  the  truth  :"  and  when  we  have  provok- 
ed him  by  our  fins,  "  he  is  long-fuffering  to  us-ward, 
"  not  willing  that  any  fhould  perifh,  but  that  all 
*'  fhould  come  to  repentance :"  for  "  he  delight- 
"  eth  not  in  the  death  of  a  finner,  but  rather  that 
"  he  fliould  turn  from  his  wickednefs  and  live."  So 
that  if  any  of  us  be  miferable,  it  is  our  own  choice  ; 
if  we  perifh,  our  deftruftion  is  of  our  felves  :  for  as 
the  wifeman,  in  one  of  the  Apocryphal  books,  fays 
excellently,  "  God  made  not  death,  neither  hath  he 
"  pleafure  in  the  deflrudtion  of  the  living  :  but  men 
"  feek  death  in  the  error  of  their  life,  and  pull  de- 
*'  flru61:ion  upon  themfelves,  with  the  works  of  their 
*'  own  hands." 

So  great  is  the  goodnefs  of  God  to  mankind,  that 
he  hath  omitted  nothing  that  is  necelTary  to  our  hap- 
pinefs. 


^haf  God  is  the  only  happ'tnefs  of  man.  147 

pinefs.     He  defi^ned  it  for  us  at  firft,  and  to  that  S  E  R  M. 

.  XL 

end  he  hath  endowed  us  with  powers  and  faculties  ^_^  1  _f 

whereby  we  are  capable  of  knowing,  and  loving, 
and  obeying,  and  enjoying  him  the  chief  good.  And 
when  we  had  forfeited  all  this  by  the  wilful  tranf- 
greflion  and  difobedience  of  the  firft  parents  of  man- 
kind, and  were  miferably  bruifed  and  maimed  by 
their  fall,  God  of  his  infinite  mercy  was  pleafed  to 
reftore  us  to  a  new  capacity  of  happinefs,  by  fend- 
ing his  only  fon  to  fuffer  in  our  nature,  and  in  our 
ftead  •,  and  thereby  to  become  "  a  propitiation  for 
"  the  fins  of  the  whole  world,'*  and  "  the  author 
"  of  eternal  falvation  to  them  that  believe  and  oboy 
"  him."  And  he  hath  likewife  promifed  to  give 
us  his  holy  Spirit,  to  enable  us  to  that  faith  and  obe- 
dience which  the  gofpel  requires  of  us,  as  the  ne- 
cefiiary  conditions  of  our  eternal  falvation. 

Thirdly,  God  is  alfo  a  firm'  and  unchangeable  ^^^* 
good.  Notwithftanding  his  infinite  wifdom,  and 
power,  and  goodnefs,  we  might  bemiferable  if  God 
were  mutable.  For  that  cannot  be  a  happinefs  which 
depends  upon  uncertainties,  and  perhaps  one  of  the 
greatefl  aggravations  of  mifery  is  to  fall  from  hap- 
pinefs, to  have  been  once  happy,  and  afterwards  to 
ceafe  to  be  fo :  and  that  would  unavoidably  happen 
to  us,  if  the  caufe  of  our  happinefs  could  change, 
and  the  foundation  of  it  be  removed.  If  God  could 
be  otherwife  than  powerful,  and  wife,  and  good, 
all  our  hopes  of  happinefs  would  be  fhaken,  and 
would  fall  to  the  ground.  But  the  divine  nature  is 
not  fubjeft  to  any  change :  as  he  is  "  the  father  of 
"  lights,"  and  "  the  author  of  every  good  and  per- 

4F3  ''kdc 


14S  That  God  is  the  ojtly  happinefs  of  man, 

SERM.  "  feci  mtt,"  fo  "  with  him  is  no  variablenefs,  nei- 

,_^,^J.^^  "  ther  fhadow  of  turning."     All  the  things  of  this 

world  are  mutable,  and  for  that  reafon,    had  they 

no  other  imperfe6lion  belonging  to  them,  cannot 

make  us  happy. 

IV.  Fourthly  God  is  fuch  a  good  as  none  can  deprive 

us  of  and  take  away  from  us.  If  the  things  of  this 
world  were  unchangeable  in  their  nature,  and  not 
liable  to  any  decay,  yet  they  cannot  make  us  happy ; 
becaufe  we  may  be  cheated  of  them  by  fraud,  or 
robbed  of  them  by  violence ;  but  God  cannot  be 
taken  from  us.  Nothing  but  our  fms  can  part  God 
Rom.viii.  and  US  :  "  who  fhall  feparate  us,"  faith  the  apoftle, 
35-  «  from  the  love  of  God  ?  fhall  tribulation,  or  dif- 

"  ftrefs,  or  perfecution,  or  famine,  or  nakednefs, 
.  "  or  peril,  or  fword  ?"  We  may  be  ftripped  of  all 
our  worldly  comforts  and  enjoyments,  by  the  vio- 
lence of  men  ;  but  none  of  all  thefe  can  feparate  us 
V.  30, 39.  from  God  •,  "  I  am  perfuaded,"  as  the  apoflle  goes 
on  with  great  triumph,  "  that  neither  death,  nor 
"  life,  nor  angels,  nor  principalities,  nor  powers  ; 
"  nor  height,  nor  depth,  nor  things  prefent,  nor 
"  things  to  come,  nor  any  other  creature,  fhall  be 
"  able  to  feparate  us  from  the  love  of  God  which  is 
'*  in  Christ  Jesus,  our  Lord.  Nor  any  other 
"  creature  :"  here  is  a  fufficient  induftion  of  parti- 
culars, and  nothing  left  out  of  this  catalogue  t  ut  one, 
and  that  is  fm,  which  is  none  cf  God's  creatures, 
but  our  own  :  this  indeed  deliberate  ly  confented  to, 
and  wilfully  continued  in,  will  f  nally  part  God  and 
us,  and  for  ever  hinder  us  from  being  happy. 

But 


T^af  God  is  the  only  happinefs  of  man.  149 

But  if  we  be  careful  to  avoid  this,  which  only  can  ^  E  R  jvf. 
feparate  between  God  and  us,  nothing  can  deprive 
us  of  him  ;  the  aids  and  influences  of  his  grace  none 
can  intercept  or  hinder:  the  joys  and  comforts  of 
his  holy  Spirit  none  can  take  from  us :  all  other 
things  may  leave  us  and  forfake  us :  we  may  be  de- 
barred of  our  beft  friends,  and  banifhed  from  all  our  ac- 
quaintance ;  but  men  can  fend  us  no  whither  from 
the  prefence  of  God  :  our  communication  with  hea- 
ven cannot  be  prevented  or  interrupted.  Our  pray- 
ers and  our  fouls  will  always  find  the  way  thither  from 
the  uttermoft  parts  of  the  earth. 

Fifthly,  God  is  an  eternal  good  :  and  nothing  but  V- 
what  is  fo  can  make  us  happy.  Man  having  an 
immortal  fpirit,  and  being  defigned  for  an  endlefs 
duration,  muft  have  a  happinefs  proportionable :  for 
which  reafon  nothing  in  this  world  can  make  us  hap- 
py, becaufe  we  (hall  abide  and  remain  after  it :  when 
a  very  few  years  are  paft  and  gone,  and  much  foon- 
er  for  any  thing  we  know,  all  the  things  of  this 
world  will  leave  us,  or  elfe  we  (hall  be  taken  away 
from  them,  "  but  God  is  from  everlafting  to  ever- 
"  lalling  :  he  is  the  fame,  and  his  years  fail  not  :'* 
therefore  well  might  David  fix  his  happinefs  upon 
God  alone,  and  fay,  "  Whom  have  I  in  heaven  but 
"  thee  ?  and  there  is  none  upon  earth  that  I  defire 
"  befides  thee:  when  my  heart  faileth,  and  my 
"  ftrength  faileth,  God  is  tiie  ftrength  of  my  heart, 
"  and  my  portion  for  ever.'* 

Sixthly,  God  is  able  to  fupport   and  comfort  us,      vi. 
in  every  condition,  and  under  all  the  accidents  and 

adverfities 


That  God  is  the  only  happlnefs  of  man. 
adverfities  of  human  life.  Outward  affliftions  may- 
hurt  our  body,  but  they  cannot  reach  our  foul ;  and 
fo  long  as  that  remains  unwounded,  "  the  fpirit  of 
"  a  man  can  bear  his  infirmities."  God  is  intimate 
to  our  fouls,  and  hath  fecret  ways  whereby  to  convey 
the  joys  and  comforts  of  his  holy  Spirit  into  our 
hearts,  under  the  bittereft  affliftions  and  fharpeft  fuf- 
ferings  :  he  can  enable  us  by  his  grace  "  to  pofTefs 
*'  our  fouls  in  patience,"  when  all  other  things  are  ta- 
ken from  us :  when  there  is  nothing  but  trouble  a- 
bout  us,  he  can  "  give  us  peace  and  joy  in  believ- 
"  ing:"  when  we  are  perfecuted,  afflided,  and 
tormented,  he  can  give  us  that  ravilhing  fight  of 
the  glories  of  another  world,  that  ftedfaft  afiurance 
of  a  future  bleflednefs,  as  fhall  quite  extinguifh  all 
fenfe  of  prefent  fufferings :  how  did  many  of  the  pri- 
mitive Chriftian  martyrs,  in  the  midft  of  their  tor- 
ments, and  under  the  very  pangs  of  death  "  rejoice 
"  in  the  hope  of  the  glory  of  God  P 

There  are  none  of  us  but  may  happen  to  fall  into 
thofe  circumftances  of  danger,  and  of  bodily  pains 
and  fufferings,  as  to  have  no  hopes  of  relief  and  com- 
fort but  from  God  ;  none  in  all  the  world  to  truft  to 
but  him  only  :  and  in  the  greateft  evils  that  can  be- 
fal  us  in  this  life,  he  is  a  fure  refuge  and  fanduary  ; 
and  to  repeat  the  words  of  the  pfalmift  after  the 
text,  "  when  our  heart  fails,  and  our  ftrength  fails, 
"  God  is  the  ftrength  of  our  hearts,  and  our  porti- 
"  on  for  ever.'* 

Now  what  would  any  of  us  do  in  fuch  a  cafe,  if 

it  were  not  for  God  ?  Human  nature  is  liable  to  de- 

fperate  ftraits  and  exigencies  :  and  he  is  not  happy 

■who  is  not  provided  againft  the  worft  that  may  hap- 

I  pen. 


^at  God  is  the  only  happ'inefs  of  man.  151 

pen.  It  is  fad  to  be  reduced  to  fuch  a  condition,  as  SER M. 
to  be  deftituce  of  all  comfort  and  hope  :  and  yet  men  ._  1  ^i 
may  be  brought  to  that  extremity,  that  if  it  were 
not  for  God  they  would  not  know  which  way  to 
turn  themfelves,  or  how  to  entertain  their  thoughts 
with  any  comfortable  confideration  under  their  pre- 
fent  anguilh. 

All  men  naturally  refort  to  God  in  extremity, 
and  cry  out  to  him  for  help:  even  the  moil  profane 
and  atheiftical,  when  they  are  deftitute  of  all  other 
comfort,  will  run  to  God,  and  take  hold  of  him,  and 
cling  about  him.  But  "  God  hath  no  pleafure  in 
"  fools ',"  in  thofe  who  negle6l  and  defpife  him  in 
their  profperity,  though  they  owe  that  alfo  entirely 
to  him  ;  but  when  the  evil  day  comes,  then  they  lay 
hold  of  him  as  their  only  refuge :  when  all  things  go 
well  with  them,  "  God  is  not  in  all  their  thoughts ; 
"  but  in  their  afflidtion  they  will  feek  him  early  : 
"  then  they  will  cry.  Lord,  Lord  ;  but  he  will  fay 
"  to  them  in  that  day,  depart  from  me,  ye  workers 
*'  of  iniquity,  for  I  know  you  not.'* 

Here  will  be  the  great  unhappinefs  of  fuch  per- 
fons,  that  God  will  then  appear  terrible  to  them,  fo 
as  they  fhall  not  be  able,  when  they  look  up  to  him, 
to  abide  his  frowns :  and  at  the  fame  time  that  they 
are  forced  to  acknowledge  him, and  to  fupplicate  to  him 
for  mercy  and  forgivenefs,  they  fhall  be  ready  to  de- 
fpair  of  it :  then,  thofe  terrible  threatnings  of  God's 
word  will  come  to  their  minds ;  "  becaufe  I  called,  and  p^^^  j 
"  ye  refufed  •,  I  ftretched  out  my  hand,  and  no  man  25,  &c. 
"  regarded :  but  ye  fet  at  nought  all  my  counfel, 
"  and  would  have  none  of  my  reproof;  I  alfo  will 
"  laugh  at  your  calamity,  and  mock  when  your  fear 

Cometh  j 


1^2  ^hat  God  is  the  only  happinefs  of  man. 

SERM.  «  cometh;  when  your  fear  cometh  as  defolation, 

XL  •  •       • 

,^     '  J  "  and  your  deftru6lion  cometh  as  a  whirlwind  ;  when. 

"  diftrefs  and  anguifh  cometh  upon  you  :  then  fhall 
"  theycalluponme,  buti  will  notanfwer;  theyfhall 
"  feek  me  early,  but  they  Ihall  not  find  me :  for 
"  that  they  hated  knowledge,  and  did  not  chufe  the 
"  fear  of  the  Lord  :  they  would  none  of  my  coun- 
"  fel,  they  defpifed  all  my  reproof :  therefore  fhall 
"  they  eat  the  fruit  of  their  own  ways,  and  be  filled 
*'  with  their  own  devices :  the  eafe  of  the  fimple 
"  fhall  flay  them,  and  the  profperity  of  fools  fhall 
"  deftroy  them."  To  which  I  will  add  that  ter- 
rible paiTage  in  the  prophet,  concerning  the  per- 
Ifa.xxvii.  verfe  and  obftinate  Jews,  "  they  are  a  people  of  no 
^'*  "  underftanding,  therefore  he  that  made  them  will 

"  not  have  mercy  on  them,  and  he  that  formed 
*'  them  will  Ihew  them  no  favour."  And  men  are 
miferablc  creatures  indeed,  when  God  their  maker 
doth  abandon  them,  and  hath  fo  far  hardened  his 
heart  againft  them,  that  he  can  have  no  pity  and 
compafnon  for  them. 

VII.  Seventhly  and  lafl:Iy,  which  is  confequent  upon 

all  the  reft,  God  is  fuch  a  good  as  can  give  perfedt 
reft  and  tranquillity  to  our  minds.  And  that  which 
cannot  do  this,  though  it  had  all  the  properties  be- 
fore mentioned,  cannot  make  us  happy.  For  he 
is  not  happy  who  does  not  think  himfelf  fo,  what- 
ever caufe  he  may  have  to  think  fo.  Now  what  in 
reafon  can  give  us  difquiet,  if  we  do  firmly  believe 
that  there  is  a  God,  and  that  his  providence  rules  and 
governs  all  things  for  the  beftj  and  that  God  is  all 
that  to  good  men  which  hath  now  been  faid  of  him  ? 

Why 


That  God  is  the  072ly  happinefs  of  man,  155 

Why  fliould  not  our  minds  be  in  perfeft  repofe,wheti  S  E  R  M* 
we  arc  fecure  ofthe  chief  good,  and  have  found  out  .^,1  '  ^ 
that  which  can  make  us  happy,  and  is  willing  to 
make  us  fo,  if  we  be  not  wanting  to  our  felves,  and 
by  our  wilful  obftinacy  and  rebellion  againil  him  do 
not  oppofe  and  fruftrate  this  defign  ? 

If  a  confiderate  man  were  permitted  to  his  own 
choice,  to  wilh  the  greatefl:  good  to  himfelf  that  he 
could  pofiibly  devife  ;  after  he  had  fearched  heaven 
and  earth,  the  refult  of  all  his  wiflies  would  be  that 
there  were  juft  fuch  a  being  as  we  muft  necelTarily 
conceive  God  to  be :  nor  would  he  chufe  any  other 
friend  or  benefadlor  -,  any  other  protedor  for  him* 
felf  or  governor  for  the  whole  world,  than  infinite 
power  conduced  and  managed  by  infinite  wifdom  and 
goodnefs  \  which  is  the  true  notion  of  a  God  :  after 
all  his  enquiry  he  would  come  to  the  pfalmift's  con- 
clufion  here  in  the  text,  "  whom  have  I  in  heaven 
"  but  thee?  and  there  is  none  upon  earth  that  I  de- 
**  fire  befides  thee." 

Vain  man  is  apt  to  feek  for  happinefs  elfewherej 
but  this  proceeds  from  want  of  due  confideration : 
for  when  all  things  are  well  weighed^  and  all  accounts 
rightly  caft  up  and  adjufted,  we  fhall  at  laft  fettle 
in  David's  refolution  of  that  great  queftion,  "  what  PfaI.Iv.6. 
"  is  the  chief  good  of  man  ?  There  may  be  many,'*  7*  ^\ 
fays  he,  "  that  fay,  who  will  fliew  us  any  good  ?'* 
that  is,  men  are  generally  inquifitive  after  happinefs, 
but  greatly  divided  in  their  opinions  about  it :  mod 
men  place  it  in  the  prefent  enjoyments  of  this  world, 
but  David  for  his  part  pitches  upon  God,  in  whorri 
he  was  fully  convinced  that  the  happinefs  of  man 
does  confift :  "  there  be  many  that  fay,  who  will 
Vol.  III.  4  G  «  fhevr 


^hat  God  is  the  only  happinefs  of  man. 

"  fhew  us  any  good  ?  Lord  lift  thou  up  the  light 
"  of  thy  countenance  upon  us :  thou  haft  put  glad- 
"  nefs  in  my  heart,  more  than  in  the  time  that  their 
"  corn  and  wine  increafed."  The  great  joy  of  tlie 
men  of  this  world  is  in  a  plentiful  harvefr,  and  the 
abundance  of  the  good  things  of  this  life:  but  David 
had  found  that  which  gave  more  joy  and  gladnefs 
to  his  heart,  the  favour  of  God  and  the  "  light  of 
"  his  countenance  :"  this  gave  perfect  reft  and  tran- 
quillity to  his  mind,  fo  that  he  needed  not  to  en- 
quire any  further :  for  fo  it  follows  in  the  next  words, 
*'  I  will  both  lay  me  down  in  peace,  and  reft  -,  for 
"  thou,  Lord,  only  makeft  me  to  dwell  in  fafety :" 
the  Hebrew  word  fignifies  confidence  or  fecurity  : 
here,  and  no-where  elfe,  his  mind  found  reft,  and 
was  in  perfedl  eafe  and  fecurity. 

I  fhallnow  only  make  two  or  three  inferences  from 
this  difcourfe,  and  fo  conclude. 

Firft,  this  plainly  fhews  us  the  great  iinreafonable- 
nefs  and  folly  of  atheifm,  which  would  banifh  the 
belief  of  God  and  his  providence  out  of  the  world: 
which,  as  it  is  moft  impious  in  refpeft  of  God,  fo  is 
it  moft  malicious  to  men  -,  becaufe  it  ftrikes  at  the 
very  foundation  of  our  happinefs,  and  perfectly  un- 
dermines it.  For  if  there  were  no  God,  man  would 
evidently  be  the  moft  unhappy  of  all  other  beings 
here  below  -,  'becaufe  his  unhappinefs  would  be  laid 
in  the  very  frame  of  his  nature,  in  that  which  dif- 
tinguifties  him  from  all  other  beings  below  him,  I 
mean  in  his  reafon  and  underftanding  :  and  he  would 
be  fo  much  more  miferable  than  the  beafts,  by  how 
much  he  hath  a  farther  reach,  and  a  larger  profped; 
of  future  evils  -,  a  quicker  apprehenfion«  and  a  deep- 
er and  more  laftins  refentment  of  them.  So 


I'hat  God  is  the  only  happmefs  of  man.  155 

So  that  if  any  man  could  fee  reafon  to  ftagger  his  S  E  R  M . 
behef  of  a  God,  or  of  his  providence,  as  I  am  fure 
there  is  infinite  reafon  to  the  contrary  -,  yet  the  be- 
lief of  thefe  things  is  fo  much  for  the  interell,  and 
comfort,  and  happinefs  of  mankind,  that  a  wife 
man  would  be  heartily  troubled  to  part  with  a  prin- 
ciple fo  favourable  to  his  quiet,  and  that  does  fo  ex- 
aftly  anfwer  all  the  natural  deiires  and  hopes  and 
fears  of  men,  and  isfo  equally  calculated  both  forour 
comfort  in  this  world,  and  for  our  happinefs  in  the 
other.  For  when  a  man's  thoughts  have  ranged 
and  wandered  as  far  as  they  can,  his  mind  can  find 
no  ref!:,  no  probable  foundation  of  happinefs  but 
God  only  ;  no  other  reafonable,  no  nor  tolerable 
hypothefis  and  fcheme  of  things  for  a  wife  man  to 
rely  upon,  and  to  live  and  die  by.  For  no  other 
principle  but  this,  firmly  believed,  and  truly  lived 
up  to  by  an  anfwerable  pradlice,  was  ever  able  to 
fupport  the  generality  of  mankind,  and  to  minifher 
true  confolation  to  them  under  the  calamities  of  life, 
and  the  pangs  of  death. 

And  if  there  were  not  fomething  real  in  the  prin- 
ciples of  religion,  it  is  impofllble  that  they  fhould 
have  fo  remarkable  and  fo  regular  an  efTe6l  to  fup- 
port our  minds  in  every  condition,  upon  fo  great  a 
number  of  perfons  of  different  degrees  of  underlland- 
ing,  of  all  ranks  and  conditions,  young  and  old, 
learned  and  unlearned,  in  fo  many  diftant  places, 
and  in  all  ages  of  the  world,  the  records  whereof  are 
come  down  to  us :  I  fay  fo  real,  and  fo  frequent, 
and  fo  regular  an  efFed  as  this  is,  cannot  with  any 
colour  of  reafon  be  afcribed  either  to  blind  chance, 
or  mere  imagination,  but  mull  have  a  real,  and  re- 
4  G  2  gular, 


J  56  That  God  is  the  only  happiitefs  of  man. 

E  R  M.   gular,  and  uniform  caufe,  proportionable  to  fo  great 
and  general  an  effeft. 

I  remember  that  Grotius,  in  his  excellent  book  of 
the  truth  of  the  chriftian  religion,  hath  this  obferva- 
tion,  that  God  did  not  intend  that  the  principles  of 
religion  fliould  have  the  utmoft  evidence  that  any 
thing  is  capable  of,  and  fuch  as  is  fufficient  to  an- 
fwer  and  bear  down  all  forts  of  captious  cavils  and 
objedions  againft  it ;  but  fo  much  as  is  abundantly 
fufficient  to  fatisfy  a  fober  and  impartial  enquirer  af- 
ter truth,  one  that  hath  no  other  intereft  but  to  find 
out  truth;  and  when  he  hath  found  it,  to  yield  to  it: 
if  it  were  otherwife,  and  the  principles  of  religion 
were  as  glaring  and  evident  as  the  fun  fhining  at 
noon-day,  as  there  could  hardly  be  any  virtue  in 
fuch  a  faith,  fo  infidelity  would  be  next  to  an  im- 
pofTibility. 

All  that  I  would  expe6l  from  any  man,  that  fliall 
fay  that  he  cannot  fee  fufficient  reafon  to  believe  the 
being  and  the  providence  of  God,  is  this  ;  that  he 
would  offer  feme  other  principles ;  that  he  would 
advance  any  other  hypothecs  and  fcheme  of  things, 
that  is  more  agreeable  to  the  common  and  natural 
notions  of  men,  and  to  all  appearances  of  things  in 
tat  world  ;  and  that  does  bid  more  fairly  for  the 
comfort  and  happinefs  of  mankind,  than  thefe  prin- 
ciples of  the  being  of  a  God,  and  of  his  watchful 
providence  over  the  children  of  men,  do  plainly  do: 
and  till  this  be  clearly  done,  the  principles  of  re- 
ligion which  have  generally  been  received  by  man- 
kind, and  have  obtained  in  the  world  in  all  ages, 
cannot  fairly  be  difcarded,  and  ought  not  to  be 
<diih)rbed  Jind  put  out  of  poiTefTion.    And  this,  I 

think, 


That  God  is  the  only  happinefs  of  man.  157 

think,  puts  this  whole  matter  upon  a  very  fair  and  S  E  R  M. 
reafonable  ifllie,  and  that  nothing  more  needs  to  be 
faid  concerning  it. 

Secondly,  from  what  hath  been  faid  in  the  fore- 
going difcourfe,  it  naturally  follows,  that  God  is 
the  only  objedt  of  our  truft  and  confidence,  and 
therefore  to  him  alone,  and  to  no  other,  we  ought 
to  addrefs  all  our  prayers  and  fupplications  "  for 
"  mercy  and  grace  to  help  in  time  of  need.*'  But 
now,  according  to  the  dodrine  and  practice  of  the 
church  of  Rome,  the  pfalmift  here  puts  a  very  odd 
and  ftrange  queftion,  "  whom  have  I  in  heaven  but 
•'  thee  ?"  To  which  they  muft  give  a  quite  different 
anfwer  from  what  the  pfalmift  plainly  intended  j 
namely,  that  God  was  the  fole  objeftof  his  hope 
and  truft,  and  that  upon  him  alone  he  relied  as  his 
only  comfort  and  happinefs :  but  to  this  affertion  of 
the  pfalmift  the  church  of  Rome  can  by  no  means 
agree :  they  underftand  this  matter  much  better  than 
the  pfalmift  did ;  namely,  that  befides  God,  there  are 
in  heaven  innumerable  angels  and  faints,  in  whom 
we  are  to  repofe  great  truft  and  confidence,  and  to 
whom  alfo  we  are  to  addrefs  folemn  prayers  and 
fupplications,  not  only  for  temporal  good  things, 
but  for  the  pardon  of  our  fins,  for  the  increafe  of 
our  graces,  and  for  eternal  life.  That  there  are  in 
heaven  particular  advocates  and  patrons  for  all  exi- 
gencies and  occafions,  againft  all  forts  of  dangers 
and  difeafes,  for  all  graces  and  virtues  •,  and,  in  a 
word,  for  all  temporal,  fpiritual,  and  eternal  blef- 
fmgs  ;  to  whom  we  may  apply  our  felves,  without 
troubling  God  and  our  blefled  Saviour,  who  alfo 
is  "God  blelTed  for  evermore,"  by  prefuming  upon 

every 


15S  l^hat  God  IS  the  only  happinefs  cf  man. 

SER  M.  every  occafion  to  make  our  immediate  addrefTes  to 
hirn  :  for  as  they  would  make  us  believe,  though 
Abraham  was  ignorant  of  it,  and  David  knew  it  not, 
the  blefied  fpirits  above,  both  angels  and  faints,  do 
not  only  intercede  with  God  for  us  for  ail  forts  of 
bleffrngs,  but  we  may  make  direft  and  immediate 
addrefles  to  them  to  bedow  thefe  blelTings  upon  us  • 
for  fo  they  do  in  the  church  of  Rome,  as  is  evident, 
beyond  all  denial,  from  feveral  of  their  prayers  in 
their  mofl:  pubhck  and  authentick  liturgies. 

They  would  indeed  fain  palliate  this  matter,  by 
telling  us,  that  by  thefe  direct  and  immediate  ad- 
drefTes to  angels  and  faints  to  beflow  grace  and  eter- 
nal life  upon  them,  they  mean  no  more  but  only  to 
pray  to  them  that  they  would  be  pleafed  to  intercede 
with  God  for  thefe  blefTings  to  be  bellowed  upon 
them  by  their  mediation  :  but  if  they  mean  no  more, 
why  do  they  fay  more  than  they  mean  ?  Why  do 
they  ufe  fuch  expreffions  as  to  the  common  fenfe 
and  underftanding  of  mankind  do  fignify  a  great 
deal  more  than  they  fay  they  mean  \  fuch  expreffi- 
ons, as  they  themfelves  do  acknowledge,  if  they  be 
underftood  according  to  the  moft  obvious  fenfe  ot  the 
words,  would  render  them  guilty  of  fiat  idolatry  ? 
Efpecially  when  they  know,  that  they  are  charged 
with  idolatry  upon  this  account ;  and  fince  to  clear 
themfelves  of  it  they  will  not  alter  their  prayers, 
they  juftly  lie  under  the  fufpicion  of  it. 

And  yet  admitting  what  they  fay  in  this  matter  to 
be  true,  and  that  by  thefe  expreffions  in  their  pray- 
ers they  intend  no  more  but  their  folemn  invocation 
of  angels  and  faints,  that  they  would  intercede  with 
God  to  beftow  thefe  bleffings  upon  them  for  the  fake 
t  3  ^^ 


T^hat  God  is  the  only  happinefs  of  man.  159 

of  their  merits,  and  upon  their  mediation:  yet  this  SERM. 
furely  is  a  great  deal  too  much,  and  cannot  be  done 
without  a  high  entrenchment  upon  the  office  of  the 
only  "  mediator  between  God  and  man,  the  man 
"  Christ  Jesus:"  but  let  them  not  deceive  them- 
felves,  "  God  is  not  mocked  :  the  Lord  our  God  is 
St  jealous  God,"  and  "  he  will  notgive  his  glory 
*'  to  another." 

I  have  not  yet  inilanced  in  the  grofleil  part  of 
their  fuperftition,  not  to  fay  downright  idolatry,  in 
this  kind  ;  I  mean,  in  their  extravagant  worfhip  of 
the  blelTed  virgin  and  mother  of  our  Lord  ;  whom 
they  blafphemoufly  call  the  queen  of  heaven ;  and 
whom,  by  a  new  ftile,  unknown  to  the  fcriptures 
and  primitive  antiquity,  they  think  to  dignify  with 
the  modifh  title  of  our  lady  ;  as  if  that  could  be  any 
addition  of  honour  to  her,  whom  the  angel  declared 
to  be  "  bleffed  among  women :"  who,  if  flie  know 
any  thing  of  the  follies  of  her  worfhippers  here  below, 
with  what  difdain  and  indignation  do  we  think  fhe 
hears  thofe  infinite  prayers  that  are  made  to  her,  and 
that  facrilegious  worfnip  which  is  given  her  in  that 
church,  and  which  makes  both  pages  of  their  reli- 
gion \  and  which  for  the  frequency  of  it,  both  in 
their  publick  and  private  devotions,  is  very  much 
beyond  what  they  give  to  God  and  Christ  ?  As  if 
there  were  "  none  in  heaven  but  fhe,"  nor  "  any 
"  thing  upon  earth"  to  be  worfhipped  in  compari- 
fon  of  "  her  image." 

Nay,  fo  far  have  they  carried  this  extravagant  fol- 
ly, and  how  much  farther  they  v/ould  have  carried 
it,  had  not  the  reformation  given  a  check  to  it,  God 
only  knows :  fo  far,  I  fay,  have  they  proceeded  in 

this 


i6o  l^hat  God  is  the  only  happinefs  of  man. 

SERM.  this  folly,  as,  in  that  famous  book  of  their  devotions, 
'_  _j  called  "  Our  lady*s  pfalter,**  not  only  to  apply  to  her 
fbme  part  of  this  pfalm,  out  of  which  I  have  taken 
my  text,  beginning  it  thus :  "  How  good  is  God  to 
"  Ifrael,  to  them  that  worfhip  his  blefled  mother  ?'* 
But  they  have  likewife  profanely  burlefqued,  I  can- 
not afford  it  a  better  term,  this  whole  book  of  pfalms, 
applying  to  her  almoft  the  higheft  things  that  are 
there  faid  concerning  God  and  our  blefled  Saviour. 
"  Hear,  O  heavens,  and  give  ear,  O  earth,  and  be 
"  ye  horribly  aftonilhed,"  to  fee  the  beft  and  wifeft 
religion  in  the  world  transformed  into  fuperftition 
and  folly ;  and  to  fee  the  mod  learned  perfons  in 
that  communion  fet  themfelves  in  good  earned  to 
juftify  all  thefe  follies  and  abfurdities,  by  a  grave  and 
groundlefs  pretence  to  infallibility. 

Thirdly  and  laftly,  this  fhews  us  how  neceflary  the 
favour  of  God  is  to  every  man's  happinefs :  and  there 
is  but  one  way  to  gain  his  friendfhip  and  favour,  by 
becoming  holy  and  good  as  he  is :  then  may  we  re- 
joice and  glory  in  God,  as  the  pfalmift  here  does, 
and  fay,  "  Whom  have  I  in  heaven  but  thee  ?  and 
"  there  is  none  upon  earth  that  I  defire  befides  thee.'* 
A  wicked  man  dreads  God  above  all  things  in  the 
world,  and  he  has  great  reafon  to  do  fo :  "  for  he 
"  is  not  a  God  that  hath  pleafure  in  wickednefs, 
*'  neither  (hall  evil  dwell  with  him  :  the  foolilh  fhall 
**  not  ftand  in  his  fight,  he  hatcth  all  the  workers  of 
"  iniquity."     When  by  fin  we  depart   from  God, 

pfal.  ocix.  we  forfake  our  own  happinefs :  "  falvation  is  far 
*'  from  the  wicked,"  fays  St.  David.  And  again, 
a  little  after  the  text,  "  they  that  are  far  from  thee 
*'  fhall  periih,  but  it  is  good  for  me  to  d^aw  near  to 

«  God.'* 


7haf  God  h  the  only  happinefs  of  man.  1 59 

"  God.'*    Now  by  holincfs  and  goodnefs  we  draw  S  E  RM. 
near  to  him,  who  alone  can  make  us  happy.  , -v--*. 

It  is  certainly  the  common  intereft  of  mankind 
there  fhould  be  a  God,  becaufe  we  cannot  poffibly 
be  happy  without  him  :  but  then  it  is  no  man's  in- 
tereft to  be  wicked,  becaufe  thereby  we  make  him 
our  enemy  "  in  whofe  favour  is  life,"  and  upon 
whom  all  our  hopes  of  happinefs  do  depend. 

To  conclude,  if  we  would  have  God  for  our  hap- 
pinefs, we  muft  be  fure  to  make  him  our  friend ;  and 
then  we  may  promife  to  our  felves  all  thofe  advanta- 
ges which  the  friendlhip  of  fo  great  and  powerful  a 
patron  can  give  us :  and  there  is  but  one  way  to  efta- 
blifti  a  firm  friendfliip  between  God  and  us,  and  that 
is,  by  doing  his  will,  and  living  in  obedience  to  his 
laws :  "  Ye  are  my  friends,"  faith  ourbleffed  Lord, 
"  if  ye  do  whatfoever  I  command  you  :  This  is  the 
"  love  of  God,"  faith  St.  John,  "  that  we  keep  his 
"  commandments:"  and  to  love  God  is  the  way  to 
be  made  partakers  of  thofe  glorious  "  things  which 
"  God  hath  prepared  for  them  that  love  him :  fuch 
"  as  eye  hath  not  feen,  nor  ear  heard,  neither  have 
"  entered  into  tlie  heart  of  man :"  which  God  of 
his  infinite  goodnefs  grant  we  may  all  at  laft  be  par- 
takers of,  for  his  mercies  fake  in  Jesus  Christ  ;  to 
whom  with  thee,  O  Father,  and  the  Holy  Ghoft, 
be  all  honour  and  glory,  dominion  and  power,  both 
now  and  for  ever.     Amen. 


Vol.  hi.  4  H  S  E  R- 

3- 


i62  A  thankfghing-fermonfor 

SERMON     XLI. 

A  thankfgiving  -  fermon  for  the  late  vie-' 
tory  at  fea. 

Preached  before  the  Queen  at  Whitehall,  M^rch 
the  20th  1692. 


J  E  R,  ix.  23,  24. 

7 bus  faith  /^^  Lord,  let  not  the  wife  man  glory  in  his 
wifdom,  neither  let  the  mighty  man  glory  in  his  might ; 
let  not  the  rich  man  glory  in  his  riches :  hut  let  him 
that  glorieth  glcry  in  this,  that  he  underjlandeth  and 
knoweth  me,  that  I  am  the  Lord,  which  exercije 
hving-kindnefs,  and  judgment,  and  right eoufnefs  in 
the  earth :  for  in  thefe  things  I  delight,  faith  the 
Lord. 

S  E  R  M.  '  I  ^  Hefe  words  are  a  meflage  from  God,  fent  by 
XLI-  X  his  prophet  to  the  people  of  the  Jews,  who 
traded  in  their  own  wifdom,  and  might,  and  riches, 
for  their  fafety  and  prefervation  from  that  deftrufti- 
on  which,  in  the  former  part  of  this  chapter,  God 
had  threatned  to  bring  upon  them  by  the  king  of 
Babylon.  To  take  them  off  from  this  vain  confi- 
dence is  this  melTage  fent  to  them,  "  Thus  faith  the 
"  Lord,  let  not  the  wife  man  glory  in  his  wifdom, 
"  neither  let  the  mighty  man  glory  in  his  might ; 
*'  let  not  the  rich  man  glory  in  his  riches :  but  let 
'*  him  that  glorieth  glory  in  this,  that  he  underftand- 

"  eth 


the  late  "viBory  at  fea,  1 63 

"  eth  and  knoweth  me,  that  I  am  the  Lord,  which  ^  ^^i^' 
*'  exercife  loving-kindnefs,  and  judgment,  and  righ- 
'*  teoufnefs  in    the  earth  :  for  in   thefe  things  I  de- 
"  light,  faith  the  Lord.'* 

In  the  handling  of  thefe  Words,  I  fhall  abftraft 
from  the  particular  occafion  of  them,  and  only  con- 
fider  the  general  truth  contained  in  them :  which  I 
fhall  do  under  thefe  two  heads. 

Firftjwhat  we  are  not  to  glory  in :  "  \tt  not  the  wife 
"  man  glory  in  his  wifdom,  neither  let  the  mighty 
*'  man  glory  in  his  might ;  let  not  the  rich  man  glo- 
'*  ry  in  his  riches.** 

Secondly,what  it  Is  that  is  the  matter  of  true  glory  : 
"  but  let  him  that  glorieth  glory  in  this,  that  he  un- 
*'  derftandeth  and  knoweth  me,  that  I  am  the  Lord^ 
<*  which  exercife  loving-kindnefs,  and  judgment, 
"  and  righteoufnefs  in  the  earth.** 

I.  "  What  we  are  not  to  glory  in."  The  text  in" 
ftanceth  in  three  things  which  are  the  great  idols  of 
mankind,  and  in  which  they  are  very  apt  to  pride 
themfelves,  and  to  place  their  confidence  ;  namely, 
wifdom,  and  might,  and  riches.  I  fhall  confider 
thefe  feverally,  and  fhew  how  little  reafon  there  is 
to  glory  in  any  of  them. 

I.  *'  Let  not  the  wife  man  glory  in  his  wifdom." 
This  may  comprehend  both  human  knowledge, 
and  likewife  prudence  in  the  management  of  affairs. 
We  will  fuppofe  both  thefe  to  be  intended  here  by 
the  name  of  wifdom,  "  let  not  the  wife  man  glory 
*'  in  his  wifdom;  *'  that  is,  neither  in  the  largenefs 
and  compafs  of  his  knowledge  and  underftanding, 
nor  in  his  fkill  and  dexterity  in  the  contrivance  and 
condud  of  human  affairs ;  and  that  for  thefe  two 
reafons.  4  H  2  Firfl, 


164  A  thankfghlng'fermon  for 

ERM.       Firfl,  becaufe  the  higheft  pitch  of  human  know- 
ledge and  wifdom  is  very  imperfeft. 

Secondly,  becaufe  when  knowledge  and  wifdom 
are  with  much  difficulty  in  any  competent  meafure 
attained,  how  eafily  are  they  loft  ? 

Firft,  the  higheft  pitch  of  human  knowledge  and 
wifdom  is  very  imperfecl.  Our  ignorance  doth  vaft- 
ly  exceed  our  knowledge  at  the  heft.  Wifdom  in  any 
tolerable  degree  is  difficult  to  be  attained,  but  per- 
feiftion  in  it  utterly  to  be  defpaired  of.  Where  is 
there  to  be  found  {o  ftrong  and  found  a  head,  as 
hath  no  foft  place :  fo  perfed,  fo  clear  an  under- 
ftanding  as  hath  no  flaw,  no  dark  water  in  it  ?  How 
hard  a  matter  is  it  to  be  truly  wife  ?  And  yet  there 
are  fo  many  pretenders  to  wifdom  as  would  almoft 
tempt  a  man  to  think  that  nothing  is  eafier.  Men 
do  frequently  murmur  and  repine  at  the  unequal  dif- 
tribution  of  other  things,  as  of  health  and  ftrength, 
of  power  and  riches:  but  if  we  will  truft  the  judg- 
ment of  moft  men  concerning  themfelves,  nothing 
is  more  equally  Ihared  among  mankind  than  a  good 
degree  of  wifdom  and  underftanding.  Many  will 
grant  others  to  be  fuperior  to  -them  in  other  gifts  of 
nature,  as  in  bodily  ftrength  and  ftature  i  and  in  the 
gifts  of  fortune,  as  in  riches  and  honour -,  becaufe  the 
difference  between  one  man  and  another  in  thefe  qua- 
lities is  many  times  fo  grofsand  palpable,  that  no  body 
hath  the  face  to  deny  it:  but  very  few  in  compari- 
fon,  unlefs  it  be  in  mere  compliment  and  civility, 
will  yield  others  to  be  wifer  than  themfelves ;  and 
yet  the  difference  in  this  alfo  is  for  the  moft  part 
very  vifible  to  every  body  but  themfelves. 

So  that  true  wifdom  is  a  thing  very  extraordinary. 

Happy 


the  late  viBory  atfea.  165 

Happy  are  they  that  have  it- :  and,  next  to  them,  S  E  R  M. 
not  thofe  many  that  think  they  have  it,  but  thofe 
few  that  are  fenfible  of  their  own  defefts  and  imper- 
fedlions,  and  know  that  they  have  it  not. 

And  among  all  the  kinds  of  wifdom  none  is  more 
nice  and  difficult,  and  meets  with  more  frequent  dif- 
appointments,  than  that  which  men  are  moft  apt  to 
pride  themfelves  in,  I  mean  political  wifdom  and  pru- 
dence ;  becaufe  it  depends  upon  fo  many  contingent 
caufes,  any  one  of  which  failing  the  bed  laid  defign 
breaks  and  falls  in  pieces  :  it  depends  upon  the  un- 
certain wills  and  fickle  humours,  the  miftaken  and 
mutable  interefts  of  men,  which  are  perpetually 
Ihifting  from  one  point  to  another,  fo  that  no  body 
knows  where  to  find  them  :  befides  an  unaccounta- 
ble mixture  of  that  which  the  heathen  called  fortune, 
but  we  Chriftians  by  it's  true  name,  the  providence 
of  God  ;  which  does  frequently  interpofe  in  human 
affairs,  and  loves  to  "  confound  the  wifdom  of 
**  the  wife,"  and  *'  to  turn  their  counfels  into  fool- 
«  ifhnefs." 

Of  this  we  have  a  moft  remarkable  example  in 
Achitophel,  of  whofe  wifdom  the  fcripture  gives 
this  extraordinary  teftimony,  that  "  the  counfel 
"  which  he  counfelled  in  thofe  days  was  as  if  one 
"  had  enquired  at  the  oracle  of  God  :  fuch  was  all 
*'  the  counfel  of  Achitophel  both  with  David  and 
"  with  Abfalom."  It  feems  he  gave  very  good 
counfel  alfo  to  Abfalom,and  becaufe  he  would  notfol- 
low  it,  was  difcontented  to  that  degree  as  to  lay  vio- 
lent hands  upon  himfelf :  and  now  who  would  pride 
himfelf  in  being  fo  very  wife  as  to  be  able  to  give 
the  bed  counjCel  in  the  world,  an4  y,et  fq  very  weak 

as 


1 66  A  thankfgi'mng  -  fermonfor 

S  ER  M.  as  to  make  away  himfelf,  becaufe  he  to  whom  it  was 
^      ^  given  was  not  wife  enough  to  take  it  ? 

The  hke  mifcarriages  often  happen  in  point  of 
military  fkill  and  prudence.  A  great  prince  or  ge- 
neral is  fometimes  fo  very  cautious  and  wary,  that 
nothing  can  provoke  him  to  a  battle  ;  and  then  at 
another  time,  and  perhaps  in  another  element,  fo 
ra(h  and  wilful  that  nothing  can  hinder  him  from 
fighting  and  being  beaten  :  as  if  the  two  elements 
made  the  difference  ;  and  caution  were  great  wifdom 
at  land,  and  confidence  and  prefumption  great  pru- 
dence at  fea.  But  the  true  reafon  of  thefe  things 
lies  much  deeper,  in  the  fecret  providence  of  Al- 
mighty God,  who  when  he  pleafescan  fo  govern  and 
over-rule  both  theunderftandings  and  the  wills  of  men, 
as  fhall  bell  ferve  his  .own  wife  purpofe  and  defign. 

And  as  the  higheft  pitch  of  human  wifdom  is 
very  imperfeft  in  it  felf,  fo  is  it  much  more  fo  in 
comparifon  with  the  divine  knowledge  and  wifdom : 
compared  with  this  it  is  mere  folly,  and  lefs  than  the 
underftanding  and  wifdom  of  a  child  to  that  of  thewif- 
'  ^°''-  '•  eft  man.  "  The  fooliflinefs  of  God,"  fays  St.  Paul,  "is 
^*  "  wifer  than  men-,"  that  is,  the  leaft  grain  of  divine 

wifdom  is  infinitely  beyond  all  the  wifdom  of  men: 
but  in  oppofition  to  the  wifdom  of  God,  the  wifdom 
of  men  is  lefs  than  nothing  and  vanity.  Let  men 
defign  things  never  fo  prudently,  and  make  them 
never  fo  fure,  even  to  the  Popifh  and  French  de- 
gree of  infallibility  i  let  them  reckon  upon  it  as  a 
blow  that  cannot  fail :  yet  after  all,  the  counfel  of 
the  Lord  that  (hall  ftand,  and  he  will  do  all  his 
pleafure  -,  "  for  there  is  no  wifdom,  nor  underftand- 
«  ing,  nor  counfel  agalnft  the  Lord.'* 
,  And 


the  late  *vi£iory  atfea,  i6^ 

And  now  we  may  afk  the  queftion  which  Job  does,  S  E  R  M. 
"  where  fliall  wifdom  be  found,  and  where  is  the     ^^^' 
*'  place  of  underftanding  ?"  And  we  muft  anfwer     Job 
it  as  he  does,  "  it  is  not  to  be  found  in  the  land  of  ^''^"'•*2- 
"  the  living:"  unlefs  it  be  that  one  infallible  point 
of  wifdom  to  which  God  dire<5ls  every  man,  and  of 
which  every  man  is  capable,  viz.  religion  and  the 
fear  of  God,  "  unto  man  he  faid,  behold  !    the  fear  job 
"  of  the  Lord,  that  is  wifdom  ;  and  to  depart  from  ^xviii.28. 
*'  evil  is  underftanding.'* 

Secondly,  when  knowledge  and  wifdom  are  with 
great  difficulty  in  any  competent  meafure  attained, 
how  eafily  are  they  loft  .?  By  a  difeafe,  by  a  blow  up- 
on the  head ;  by  a  fudden  and  violent  paflion,  which 
may  diforder  the  ftrongeft  brain,  and  confound  the 
cleareft  underftanding  in  a  moment :  nay  even  the 
cxcefs  of  knowledge  and  wifdom,  efpecially  if  attend- 
ed with  pride,  as  too  often  it  is,  is  very  dangerous, 
and  does  many  times  border  upon  diftradion  and 
run  into  madnefs :  like  an  athletick  conftitution  and 
perfed  ftate  of  health,  which  is  obferved  by  phyfi- 
cians  to  verge  upon  fome  dangerous  difeafe,  and  to 
be  a  forerunner  of  it. 

And  when  a  man's  underftanding  is  once  craz'd 
and  fhattered,  how  are  the  fineft  notions  and  thoughts 
of  the  wifeft  man  blunder'd  and  broken,  perplexed 
and  entangled.^  Like  a  puzzled  lump  of  filk,  fo  that 
the  man  cannot  draw  out  a  thought  to  any  length, 
but  is  forced  to  break  it  off  and  to  begin  at  another 
end.  Upon  all  which  and  many  more  accounts, 
^'  let  not  the  wife  man  glory  in  his  wifdom,"  which 
is  fo  very  imperfefl ;  fo  hard  to  be  attained,  and 
yet  fo  eafy  to  be  loft. 

2.  **  Neither 


XLI. 


1 68  A  fhankfgiving  -fermon  for 

^  \^}^'  2.  "  Neither  \tx.  the  mighty  man  glory  in  his 
"  might,"  which  whether  it  be  meant  of  natural 
ftrength  of  body,  or  of  military  force  and  power, 
how  weak  and  imperfeft  is  it,  and  how  frequently 
foiled  by  an  unequal  ftrength  ? 

If  we  underftand  it  of  the  natural  ftrength  of  men's 
bodies,  how  little  reafon  is  there  to  glory  in  that, 
in  which  fo  many  of  the  creatures  below  us  do  by  fo 
many  degrees  excel  us?  In  that,  which  may  fo  ma- 
ny ways  be  loft;  by  ficknefs,  by  a  maim,  and  by 
many  other  external  accidents ;  and  which  however 
will  decay  of  it  felf,  and  by  age  fink  into  infirmity 
and  weaknefs. 

And  how  little  reafon  is  there  to  glory  in  that, 
which  is  fo  frequently  foiled  by  an  unequal  ftrength  ? 
Of  which  Goliah  is  a  famous  inftance.  When  he 
defied  the  hoft  of  Ifrael,  and  would  needs  have  the 
matter  decided  by  fingle  combat,  God  infpired  Da- 
vid to  accept  the  challenge ;  who  though  he  was  no 
wife  comparable  to  him  in  ftrength,  and  would  have 
been  nothing  in  his  hands  in  clofe  fight,  yet  God 
idirefted  him  to  aflail  him  at  a  diftance  by  a  weapon 
that  was  too  hard  ibr  him,  a  ftone  out  of  a  fling, 
which  ftruck  the  giant  in  the  forehead,  and  brought 
his  unwieldy  bulk  down  to  the  earth. 

Or  if  by  might  we  underftand  military  force  and 
power,  how  little  like  wife  is  that  to  be  gloried  in  ? 
Confidering  the  uncertain  events  of  war,  and  how 
very  often  and  remarkably  the  providence  of  God 
doth  interpofe  to  caft  the  vidlory  on  the  unlikely 
fide.  It  is  Solomon's  obfervation,  that  fuch  are  the 
interpofitions  of  divine  providence  in  human  affairs, 
that  the  event  of  things  is  many  times  not  at  all  an- 

fwerable 


the  late  viBory  at  feai  1 6^ 

fwerable   to  the  power  and  probability  of  fccond  S  E  R  M, 
caufes :  "  I  returned,"  fays  he,  "  and  faw  under  the  (,J„,_^ 
*'  fun,   that  the  race  is  not  to  the  fwift,    nor  the  Eccl.  ix. 
"  battle  to  the  firong." 

And  one  way,  among  many  others,  whereby  th^ 
providence  of  God  doth  often  interpofe  to  decide 
the  events  of  war^  is  by  a  remarkable  change  of  the 
feafons  and  weather  in  favour  of  one  fide :  as  by 
fending  great  fnows,  or  violent  rains,  to  hinder  the 
early  motion  and  march  of  a  powerful  army,  to  the 
difappointment  or  prejudice  of  fome  great  defign  : 
by  remarkable  winds  and  ftorms  at  fea,  to  prevent 
the  coiijundiion  of  a  powerful  fleet  :  and  by  go- 
verning all  thefe  for  a  long  time  together  fo  vifibly 
to  the  advantage  of  one  fide  as  utterly  to  defeat  the 
well  laid  defign  of  the  other.  Of  all  which^  by  the 
great  mercy  and  goodnefs  of  God  to  us,  we  have  had 
the  happy  experience  in  all  our  late  fignal  deliver-* 
ances  and  vi6lories. 

And  here  I  cannot  but  take  notice  of  a  paffage  tc^ 
this  purpofe  in  the  book  of  Job  :  which  may  de- 
ferve  our  more  attentive  regard  and  confideration, 
becaufe  I  take  this  book  to  be  incomparably  the 
mofb  ancient  of  all  other,  and  much  elder  than  Mo- 
fes  :  and  yet  it  is  written  with  as  lively  a  fenfe  of 
the  providence  of  God,  and  as  noble  figures  and 
flights  of  eloquence  as  perhaps  any  book  extant  in 
the  world.  The  paflage  1  mean  is,  v;here  God,  x.a 
convince  Job  of  his  ignorance  in  the  fecrets  of  na- 
ture and  providence,  pofeth  him  with  many  hard 
queftions,  and  with  this  amongfl:  the  refl,  '''•  Ilaft  Job, 
"  thou  cntred  into  the  treafures  of  the  fnow  ?  Hail  ''-''•''^'''' 
*'  thou  feen  the  treafures  of  the  hail  ?  which  I  have 

Vol.  III.  4 1  "  refer vcd 

4- 


A  than'kfgtving'  fermon  for 
referved  againft  the  time  of  trouble,  againft  the 
"  day  of  battle  and  war.'*  The  meaning  of  which 
is,  that  the  providence  of  God  doth  fometimes  in- 
terpofe  to  determine  the  events  of  war,  by  govern- 
ing the  feafons  and  the  weather,  and  by  making 
the  fnows  and  rains,  "  the  winds  and  ftorms  to  ful- 
»*  fil  his  word,'*  and  to  execute  his  pleafure. 

Of  this  we  have  a  remarkable  inftance  in  the  de- 
feat of  Sifera's  mighty  army  -,  againft  whom,  in  the 
fong  of  Deborah,  the  ttars  are  faid  to  "  have  fought 
*'  in  their  courfes  :'*  the  expreflion  is  poetical,  but 
the  plain  meaning  of  it  is,  that  by  mighty  and  fud- 
den  rains,  which  the  common  opinion  did  afcribe  to 
a  fpecial  influence  of  the  planets,  the  river  of  Ki- 
Ihon,  near  which  Sifera's  army  lay,  was  fo  raifed  and 
fwoln  as  to  drown  the  greateft  part  of  that  huge  hoft. 
For  fo  Deborah  explains  the  "  fighting  of  the  ftars 
"  in  their  courfes  againft  Sifera:"  "  they  fought,** 
fay  Ihe,  "  from  heaven,  the  ftars  in  their  courfes 
*'  fought  againft  Sifera,  the  river  of  Kifhon  fwept 
"  them  away  :"  as  if  the  ftars,  which  were  fuppofed 
by  their  influence  to  have  caufed  thofe  fudden  and 
extraordinary  rains,  had  fet  themfelves  in  battle-ar- 
ray againft  Sifera  and  his  army. 

Therefore,  "  let  not  the  mighty  man  glory  in 
"  his  might,"  which  isfofmall  in  it  felf,  but  inop- 
pofition  to  God  is  weaknefs  and  nothing.  "  The 
"  weaknefs  of  God,**  fays  St.  Paul,  "  is  ftronger 
«'  than  men."  All  power  to  do  mifchief  is  but  im- 
.  potence,  and  therefore  no  matter  ofboafting:  "  why 
*'  boafteft  thou  thy  felf,  thou  tyrant,  that  thou  art 
"  able  to  do  mifchief }  The  goodnefs  of  God  endu- 
"  reth  continually  :'*  the  goodnefs  of  God  is  too 

hard 


the  late  'viSforyatfea,  jyj 

hard  for  the  pride  and  malice  of  man,  and  will  lad  S  E  R  M. 
and  hold  out  when  that  has  tired  and  fpent  it  felf.     .  -__'  . 

Thirdly, "  let  not  the  rich  man  glory  in  his  riches." 
In  thefe,  men  are  apt  to  pride  themfelves :  even  the 
meaneft  and  pooreft  fpirits,  who  have  nothing  to 
be  proud  of  but  their  money,  when  they  have  got 
good  (lore  of  that  together,  how  will  they  fwell  and 
ftrut  ?  as  if  becaufe  they  are  rich  and  increafed  in 
goods  they  wanted  nothing. 

But  we  may  do  well  to  confider,  that  riches  arc 
things  without  us  •,  not  the  real  excellencies  of  our 
nature,  but  the  accidental  ornaments  of  our  fortune. 
If  they  defcend  upon  us,  they  are  the  privilege  of 
our  birth,  not  the  effe6t  of  our  wifdom  and  induf- 
try ;  and  thofe  things  in  the  procurement  whereof 
we  had  no  hand,  we  can  hardly  call  our  own  :  and 
if  they  be  the  fruit  of  our  own  prudent  induftry, 
that  is  no  fuch  matter  of  glorying  ;  becaufe  men  of 
much  flower  underftan dings  do  commonly  out-do 
others  in  diligence  and  drudging,  their  minds  lying 
more  level  to  the  low  defign  of  being  rich. 

At  the  beft,  riches  are  uncertain.  "  Charge  them,'* 
fays  St.  Paul,  "  that  are  rich  in  this  world,  that  they 
"  be  not  high-minded,  nor  truft  in  uncertain  riches:'* 
men  have  little  reafon  to  pride  themfelves,  or  to 
place  their  confidence  in  that  which  is  uncertain, 
and  even  next  to  that  which  is  not :  So  the  wife 
man  fpeaks  of  riches,.  "  wilt  thou  kt  thine  heart  prov. 
*'  upon  that  which  is  not  ?  for  riches  certainly  make  ^x"'-  S- 
*'  themfelves  wings,  and  fly  as  an  eagle  towards 
^'  heaven :"  he  cxprefles  it  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  if 
a  rich  man  fat  brooding  over  an  eftate  till  it  was 
fledg*d  and  had  gotten  it  felt  wings  to  fly  away. 

4  I  2  But 


A  thanlfgiving-fermon  for 

But  that  which  is  the  moft  ftinging  confideration 

of  all  is,  that  many  men  have  an  evil  eye  upon  a 

good  eftate  •,  fo  that  inftead  of  being  the  means  of 

our  happinefs,  it  may   prove    the   occafion   of  our 

EccL\M3.  ruin  :  fo  the  fame  wife  man  obferves,  "  there  is  a  fore 
*'  evil  which  I  have  feen  under  the  fuii,  namely, 
*■'  riches  kept  for  the  owners  thereof  to  their  hurt.'* 
And  it  is  not  without  example,  that  a  very  rich  man 
hath  been  excepted  out  of  a  general  pardon,  both  as 
to  life  and  eflate,  for  no  other  vifible  reafon  but  his 
vaft  and  over-grown  fortune  :  fo  Solomon   obferves 

froy.i.iS.  to  us  again,  "  fuch  are  the  ways  of  every  one  that 
"  is  greedy  of  gain,  which  taketh  away  the  life  of 
"  the  owners  thereof.'*  And  why  fhould  any  man 
be  proud  of  his  danger,  of  that  which  one  time  or 
other  may  be  the  certain  and  only  caufe  of  his  ruin  ? 
A  man  may  be  too  rich  to  be  forgiven  a  fault  which 
would  never  have  been  profecuted  againft  a  man  of  a 
middle  fortune.  For  thefe  reafons,  and  a  great  ma- 
py  morCj  "  kt  not  the  rich  rnan  glory  in  his  riches." 

Jf.  II.  I  proceed  to  confider,  what  it  is  that  is  mat- 

ter of  true  glory.  "  But  let  him  that  glorieth  glory 
'^  in  this,  that  he  underftandeth  and  knoweth  me, 
t'  that  I  am  the  Lord,  which  exercife  loving-kind- 
"  nefs,  and  judgment,  and  righteoufnefs  in  the 
?*  earth  :  for  in  thefe  things  I  delight,  faith  the 
«^*  Lord." 

"  That  he  underftandeth  and  knoweth  me  :"  here 
are  two  words  ufed  to  exprefs  the  thing  more  fully, 
underftanding  and  knowledge  -,  which  feem  not  on- 
ly to  import  right  apprehenfions  of  the  being,  and 
prQyidence,  and  perfections  of  Gqd  j  but  likewife 

a  lively 


the  late  viSlory  at  fea.  17^ 

a  lively  fenfe  of  thefe  things,  and  affe6l:ions  fuitableSERM. 

to  thefe  apprehenfions.  ^^- 

"  That  he  underftandeth  and  knoweth  me,  that 

"  I  am  the  Lor  d,"  that  is  the  creator,  and  the  fove- 

reign  governor  of  the  world. 

"  Which  exercife  loving-kindnefs,  and  judgment, 

^'  and  righteoufnefs  in  the  earth.'* 

The  beft  knowledge  of  religion,  and  that  which 

is  the  foundation  of  ail  the  reft,  is  the  knowledge  of 

the  divine  nature  and  perfeftions  :  efpecialiy  of  thofe 

which  are  moft  proper  for  our  imitation  ;  and  fuch 
are  thofe  mentioned  in  the  text,  loving-kindnefs, 
and  judgment,  and  righteoufnefs :  which  we  may 
diftinguifli  thus :  loving-kindnefs  comprehends  God's 
milder  attributes,  his  goodnefs,  and  mercy,  and  pa- 
tience :  judgment  fignifies  his  feverer  dealings  with 
men,  whether  in  the  chaftifement  of  his  people,  or 
in  the  remarkable  punifliment  of  great  offenders  for 
example  and  warning  to  others  :  righteoufnefs  feems 
to  be  a  word  pf  a  larger  fignification,  and  to  denote 
that  univerfal  rectitude  of  the  divine  nature  which 
appears  in  all  the  adminiftrations  of  the  providence 
here  below  -,  for  the  text  fpeaks  of  the  exercife  of 
thefe  perfections  in  this  world :  "  which  exercife  lov- 
^'  ing-kindnefs,  and  judgment,  and  righteoufnefs 
"  in  the  earth." 

Several  of  the  perfections  of  the  divine  nature  are 
incommunicable  to  a  creature,  and  therefore  cannot 
be  thought  to  be  propofed  to  us  for  a  pattern ;  as 
felf-exiftence,  independence,  and  all-fufficiency ;  the 
eternity,  and  the  immenfity  of  the  divine'being  ;  to 
be  the  original  caufe  of  all  other  things,  and  the  fo- 
vereign  governor  of  the  whole  world:  for  God  only 

is 


174  A  thankfghing-fermon  for 

S  E  R  M.  is  fufficient  for  that ;  and  to   be  a  match  for  all  the 

XLI. 
v_.-^-^^  world,  a  »^c  pluribus  impar,  is  not  a  motto  fit  for  a 

mortal  man.  A  creature  may  fwell  with  pride  till  it 
burft,  before  it  can  flretch  it  felf  to  this  pitch  of 
power  and  greatnefs :  it  is  an  infufferable  prefump- 
tion,  and  a  fottifh  ignorance  of  the  neceffary  bounds 
and  limits  of  our  being,  to  think  to  refemble  God 
in  thefe  perfedlions  :  this  was  the  ambition  of  Luci- 
fer, to  afcend  into  heaven,  and  to  be  Uke  the  moft 
high. 

In  our  imitation  of  God  we  mufb  ftill  keep  with- 
in the  ftation  of  creatures  ;  not  affefting  an  indepen- 
dency and  fovereignty  like  God,  and  to  be  omnipo- 
Job.  xl.  9.  tent  as  he  is :  "  haft  thou  an  arm  like  God,  and 
"  canft  thou  thunder  with  a  voice  like  him  ?"  as 
God  himfelf  argues  with  Job. 

"  For  in  thefe  things  I  delight,  faith  the  Lord." 
God  takes  pleafure  to  exercife  thefe  perfections  him- 
felf, and  to  fee  them  imitated  by  us ;  and  the  imita- 
tion of  thefe  divine  perfections  is  our  perfection  and 
glory  -,  in  comparifon  of  which  all  human  wifdom, 
and  power,  afld  riches,  are  fo  far  from  being  matter 
of  glory,  that  they  are  very  defpicable  and  pitiful 
things  :  knowledge  and  fkill  to  devife  mifchief,  and 
power  to  effeCt  it,  arc  the  true  nature  and  character 
of  the  devil  and  his  angels  j  thofe  apoftate  and  ac- 
curfed  fpirits,  who  in  temper  and  difpofition  are  moft 
contrary  to  God,  who  is  the  rule  and  pattern  of  all 
perfection. 

I  ihall  only  make  two  obfervations  or  inferences 

from  what  hath  been  faid,  and  then  apply  the  whole 

difcourfe  to  the  great  occafion  of  this  day  :  and  they 

jire  thefe. 

Firft, 


the  late  viBory  at  fea,  lyg 

Firft,  that  the  wifeft  and  fureft  reafonings  in  reli-  SE  R  M. 
gion  are  grounded  upon  the  unqueftionable  perfecti- 
ons of  the  divine  nature. 

Secondly,  that  the  nature  of  God  is  the  true  idea 
and  pattern  of  perfection  and  happinefs. 

Firft,  that  the  wifeft  and  fureft  reafonings  in  reli- 
gion are  grounded  upon  the  unqueftionable  perfecti- 
ons of  the  divine  nature  :  upon  thofe  more  efpecially 
which  to  us  are  moft  eafy  and  intelligible  :  fuch  as 
are  thofe  nnentioned  in  the  text.  And  this  makes  the 
knowledge  of  God,  and  of  thefe  perfections,  to  be 
fo  ufeful  and  fo  valuable:  becaufe  all  religion  is 
founded  in  right  notions  of  God,  and  of  his  perfecti- 
ons :  infomuch  that  divine  revelation  it  felf  does  fup- 
pofe  thefe  for  it's  foundation,  and  can  fjgnify  nothing 
to  us  unlefs  thefe  be  firft  known  and  believed :  for 
unlefs  we  be  firft  firmly  perfuaded  of  the  providence 
of  God,  and  of  his  particular  care  of  mankind,  why 
fhould  we  fuppofe  that  he  makes  any  revelation  of 
his  will  to  us  ?  Unlefs  it  be  firft  naturally  known  that 
God  is  a  God  of  truth,  what  ground  is  there  for  the 
belief  of  his  word  ?  So  that  the  principles  of  natural 
religion  are  the  foundation  of  that  which  is  revealed: 
and  therefore  nothing  can  in  reafon  be  admitted  to 
be  a  revelation  from  God,  which  does  plainly  con- 
tradict hts  efiential  perfections. 

Upon  this  principle,  a  great  many  doCtrines  are 
without  more  a-do  to  be  rejeCted,  becaufe  they  do 
plainly  and  at  firft  fight  contradict  the  divine  nature 
and  perfections.  I  will  give  a  few  inftances,  inftead 
of  many  that  might  be  given. 

In  virtue  of  this  principle  I  cannot  believe,  upon 

the  pretended  authority  or  infaUibility  of  any  perfon 

3  or 


XLI. 


176  A  thank fgiving-fermon  for 

SERM.  or  churrh,  that  force  is  a  fit  argument  to  produce 
faith :  no  man  fhall  ever  perfuade  me,  no  not  the 
bifhop  of  Meaux  with  all  his  eloquence,  that  prifons 
and  tortures,  dragoons  and  the  galleys,  are  proper 
means  to  convince  the  underftanding,  and  either 
Chriftian  or  human  methods  of  converting  men  to 
the  true  religion. 

For  the  fame  reafon  I  cannot  believe,  that  God 
would  not  have  men  to  underfland  their  publick  pray- 
ers, nor  the  leiTons  of  fcripture  which  are  read  to 
them:  becaufe  a  lelTon  is  fomething  that  is  to  be  learnt, 
and  therefore  a  lefTon  that  is  not  to  be  underftood  is 
nonfenfe  •,  for  if  it  be  not  underftood  how  can  it  be 
learnt  ? 

As  little  can  I  believe,  that  God,  who  caufed  the 
holy  fcriptures  to  be  written  for  the  inftruftion  of 
mankind,  did  ever  intend  that  they  fhould  be  lock- 
ed up  and  concealed  from  the  people  in  an  unknown 
tongue. 

Leaft  of  all  can  I  believe  that  dOclrine  of  the  coun- 
cil of  Trent,  that  the  faving  efficacy  of  the  facra- 
ments  doth  depend  upon  the  intention  of  the  prieft 
that  adminifters  them  :  which  is  to  fay,  that  though 
the  people  believe  and  live  never  fo  well,  yet  they 
may  be  damned  by  fhoals,  and  whole  parilhes  toge: 
ther,  at  the  pleafure  of  the  prieft  :  and  this  for  no 
other  reafon,  but  becaufe  the  prieft  is  fo  crofs  and  fo 
cruel  that  he  will  not  intend  to  fave  them. 

Now  can  any  man  believe  this  that  has  any  to- 
lerable notion  either  of  the  goodnefs  or  juftke  of  God  .? 
May  we  not  appeal  to  God  in  this,  as  Abraham  did 
in  another  cafe  .^  "  Wilt  thou  deftroy  the  righteou^ 
"  with  the  wicked  ?  That  be  far  from  thee^  to  do 

*'  after 


the  late  viSfory  at fea.  '  ijj 

*«  after  this  manner :  Ihall  not  the  iudge  of  all  the  S  E  ];  M. 

XT  T 

«'  earth  do  right  ?"  Much  more,  to  deftroy  the  righ- 
teous for  the  wicked,  and  that  righteous  and  inno- 
cent people  fhould  lie  at  the  mercy  and  will  of  a 
wicked  and  perverfe  prieft,  to  be  faved  or  damned 
by  him  as  he  thinks  fit,  "  that  be  far  from  thee  : 
"  Ihall  not  the  judge  of  all  the  earth  do  right  ?"  For, 
to  drive  the  argument  to  the  head,  if  this  be  to  do 
right  there  is  no  poflibility  of  doing  wrong. 

Thus  in  things  which  are  more  obfcure  we  ITiould 
govern  all  our  reafonings  concerning  God  and  religi- 
on by  that  which  is  clear  and  unqueftionable,  and 
fhould  with  Mofes  lay  down  this  for  a  certain  prin- 
ciple, "  all  his  ways  are  judgment,  a  God  of  truth, 
"  and  without  iniquity,   juft  and  right  is  he  :"  and 
fay  with  St.   Paul,  "  is   there  then  unrighteoufnefs 
"  with  God  ?  God  forbid !"  And  again,  "  we  know 
•'  that  the  judgment  of  God  is  according  to  truth.'* 
2dly,  The  other  inference  is  this,  that  the  nature 
of  God  is  the  true  idea  and  pattern  of  perfection  and 
happinefs :  and  therefore  nothing  but  our  own  confor- 
mity to  it  can  make  us  happy :  and  for  this  reafon, 
to  underftand  and  know  God  is  our  great  excellency 
and  glory,  becaufe  it  is  neceflary  to  our  imitation  of 
him  who  is  the  bell  and  happiefl  being.     And  fo  far 
as  we  are  from  refembling  God,  fo  far  are  we  diftant 
from  happinefs  and  the  true  temper  of  the  bleffed. 
For  goodnefs  is  an  effential  ingredient  of  happinefs ; 
and  as  without  goodnefs  there  can  be  no  true  maief- 
ty  and  greatnefs,  fo  neither  any  true  felicity  and  blef- 
fednefs. 

Now  goodnefs  is  a  generous  difpofition  of  mind  to 
diffufe  and  communicate  it  felf  by  making  others  to 
Vol.  III.  4  K  partake 

4- 


17^  A  thank/giving- fermoji  for 

^\?"r^'  P^'"^^^^  of  our  happinefs,  in  fuch  degrees  as  they  are 
capable  :  for  no  being  is  fo  happy  as  it  might  be, 
that  hath  not  the  power  and  the  pleafure  to  make  o- 
thers  happy :  this  fureJy  is  the  higheft  pleafure,  I  had 
almoft  faid  pride,  of  a  great  mind. 

In  vain  therefore  do  we  dream  of  happinefs  in  any 
thing  without  us.  Happinefs  muft  be  within  us ; 
the  foundation  of  it  muft  be  laid  in  the  inward  frame 
and  difpofition  of  our  fpirits  :  and  the  very  fame  cau- 
fes  and  ingredients  which  make  up  the  happinefs  of 
God  muft  be  found  in  us,  though  in  a  much  inferior 
degree,  or  we  cannot  be  happy.  They  underftand 
not  the  nature  of  happinefs,  who  hope  for  it  upon 
any  other  terms  :  he  who  is  the  author  and  fountain 
of  happinefs  cannot  convey  it  to  us  by  any  other  way, 
than  by  planting  in  us  fuch  difpofitions  of  mind  as 
are  in  truth  a  kind  of  participation  of  the  divine 
nature,  and  by  enduing  us  with  fuch  qualities  as  are 
the  neceflary  materials  of  happinefs:  and  a  man  may 
as  foon  be  well  without  health  as  happy  without 
goodnefs. 

If  a  wicked  man  were  taken  up  into  heaven,  yet 
if  he  ftill  continue  the  fame  bad  man  that  he  was  be- 
fore, cesium^  non  animum  mutavit^  he  may  have  chang- 
ed  the  climate,  and  be  gone  into  a  far  country  ;  but 
becaufe  he  carries  himfelf  flill  along  with  him,  he 
will  ftill  be  miferable  from  himfelf:  becaufe  the 
man's  mind  is  not  changed  all  the  while,  which 
Would  fignify  a  thoufand  times  more  to  his  happinefs 
than  change  of  place,  or  of  any  outward  circumftan- 
ces  whatfoever :  for  a  bad  man  hath  a  fiend  in  his 
own  breaft,  and  the  fuel  of  hell  in  his  guilty  con- 

fcience. 

There 


the  late  njiBory  at  fea.  tyg 

.  There  is  a  certain  kind  of  temper  and  difpofition  SER  M. 
which  is  neceflary  and  effential  to  happinefs,  and 
that  is  hohnefs  and  goodnefs,  which  is  the  very  na- 
ture of  God  ;  and  fo  far  as  any  man  departs  from 
this  temper,  fo  far  he  removes  himfelf  and  runs  away 
from  happinefs.  And  here  the  foundation  of  hell  is 
laid,  in  the  evil  difpofition  of  a  man's  own  mind, 
which  is  naturally  a  torment  to  it  felf :  and  till  this 
be  cured,  it  is  as  impofTible  for  him  to  be  happy, 
as  for  a  limb  that  is  out  of  joint  to  be  at  eafe  ;  be- 
caufe  the  man's  fpirit  is  out  of  order,  and  off  the 
hinges,  and  as  it  were  tolled  from  it's  center  •,  and 
till  that  be  fet  right,  and  reftored  to  it's  proper  and 
natural  ftate,  the  man  will  be  perpetually  unquiet, 
and  can  have  no  reft  and  peace  within  himfelf. 
"  The  wicked,"  faith  the  prophet,  "  is  like  the 
"  troubled  fea,  when  it  cannot  reft:  there  is  no 
"  peace,  faith  my  God,  to  the  wicked  :"  no  peace 
with  God,  no  peace  with  his  own  mind  ;  for  a  bad 
man  is  at  perpetual  difcord  and  wars  within  himfelf: ' 
and  hence,  as  St.  James  tells  us,  "  come  wars  and 
"  fightings  without  us,  even  from  our  lufts  which 
*'  war  in  our  members." 

And  now  that  I  have  mentioned  wars  and  fight- 
ings without  us,  this  cannot  but  bring  to  mind  the 
great  and  glorious  occafion  of  this  day  :  which  gives 
us  manifold  caufe  of  praife  and  thankfgiving  to  Al- 
mighty God  :  for  feveral  wonderful  mercies  and  de- 
liverances ;  and  more  particularly,  for  a  moft  glo- 
rious victory  at  fea,  vouchfafed  to  their  majefties 
fleet  in  this  laft  fummer's  expedition. 

For  feveral  great  mercies  and  deliverances :  for  a 
wonderful  deliverance  indeed,  from  a  fudden  inva- 

4  K  2  fion 


1 8  o  A  thankfgiving  -fennon  for 

S  £  R  M.  fion  defigned  upon  us  by  the  inveterate  and  impla- 
cable enemies  of  our  pcape  and  religion  •,  which  by 
the  merciful  providence  of  God  was  happily  and 
llrangely  prevented,  when  it  was  juft  upon  the  point 
of  execution. 

Next,  for  the  prefervation  of  our  gracious  fove- 
reign,  from  that  horrid  and  moft  barbarous  attempt 
defigned  upon  his  facred  perfon :  and  from  thofe 
great  and  manifold  dangers  to  which  he  was  expofed 
in  his  late  tedious  expedition  :  and  for  his  fafe  and 
moft  welcome  return  to  us. 

And  laftly,  for  a  moft  glorious  viftory  at  fea : 
the  greateft  and  the  cheapeft  that  ever  the  fun  faw, 
from  his  firft  fetting  out  to  run  his  courfe.  The 
opportunity  indeed  of  this  vidory  was  through  the 
raftmefs  and  confidence  of  our  enemies,  by  the  wife 
providence  of  God,  put  into  our  hands  :  but  the 
improvement  of  this  opportunity  into  fo  great  and 
happy  a  vidory  we  owe,  under  God,  to  the  match- 
lefs  condu6t  and  courage  of  the  brave  admiral,  and 
to  the  invincible  refolution  and  valour  of  the  captains 
and  feamen. 

This  great  deliverance  from  the  defigned  invafi- 
on,  and  this  glorious  vidlory,  God  vouchfafed  to 
us  at  home,  whilft  his  facred  maj^fty  was  fo  freely 
hazarding  his  royal  perfon  abroad,  in  the  publick 
caufe  of  the  rights  and  liberties  of  almoft  all  Europe. 

And  now  what  may  God  juftly  expe6t  from  us, 
as  a  meet  return  for  his  goodnefs  to  us  '^  What  ? 
but  that  we  fliould  glorify  him,  firft  by  off'ering 
praife  and  thankfgiving  ;  and  then,  by  ordering  our 
'  converfation  aright,  that  he  may  ftill  delight  to  ftiew 
us  his  faivation. 

God 


the  late  vidfory  at  fea,  1 8 1 

God  mi&ht  have  flood  aloof  from  us  in  the  day  SERM. 

•  XLl 

of  our  diftrefs,  and  have  faid  to  us,  as  he  once  did  ._  -  -^ 

to  the  people  of  Ifrael,  fo  often  have  I  delivered  you 

from  the  hands  of  your  enemies,  but  ye  have  ftill 

provoked  me  more  and  more,  "  wherefore  I  will  de-  Judg.  x. 

"  liver  you  no  more:'*   he  might  have  faid  of  us,  '3- 

as  he  did  of  the  fame  people,  "  I  will  hide  my  face  Deut. 

"  from  them,  I  will  fee  what  their  end  fhall  be :  ^^^"-  2°' 

"  for  they  are  a  very  froward  generation,  children 

"  in  whom   is  no  faith  :**  our  refolutions  and  pro- 

mifes  of  better  obedience  are  not  to  be  trufted  ;   all 

our  repentance  and  righteoufnefs  are  but  "  as  the 

"  morning  cloud,  and  like  the  early  dew  that  paf- 

"  feth  away:"  nay  methinks  God  feems  now  to  fay 

to  us,  as  he  did  of  old  to  Jerufalem,  "  be  inftrud:-  Jer.  vi.  8. 

*'  ed,  O  Jerufalem,  left  my  foul  depart  from  thee, 

"  and  I  make  thee  defolate,  a  land  not  inhabited/* 

We  are  here  met  together  this  day,  to  pay  our 
folemn  acknowledgments  to  "  the  God  of  our  falva- 
"  tion ;  who  hath  (hewed  ftrength  with  his  arm, 
"  and  hath  fcattered  the  proud  in  the  imagination 
"  of  their  heart:"  even  to  "  him  that  exercifeth lov- 
"  ing-kindnefs,  and  judgment,  and  righteoufnefs  in 
"  the  earth :"  in  him  will  we  glory  as  our  fure  re- 
fuge and  defence,  as  our  mighty  deliverer,  and  the 
rock  of  ourfalvation. 

And  now  I  have  only  to  entreat  your  patience  a 
little  longer,  whilft  I  apply  what  hath  been  difcourf- 
ed  upon  this  text  a  little  more  clofely  to  the  occafi- 
on  of  this  day.  I  may  be  tedious,  but  I  will  not 
be  long. 

And  blefled  be  God  for  this  happy  occafion  :  the 
greateft  England  ever  had,  and,  in  the  true  confe- 

quences 


1 8  2  A  thankfgiving'fermon  for 

S  E  R  M.  quences  of  it,  perhaps  the  greateft  that  Europe  ever 
•^^^;  ^  had  of  praife  and  thankl'giving. 

You  have  heard  two  forts  of  perfons  defcribed  In 
the  text,  by  very  different  chara6lers:  the  one,  that 
^lory  in  their  wifdom  and  might,  and  riches :  the 
pdier,  that  glory  in  this,  that  they  "  underftand 
•*'  and  know  God  to  be  the  Lord,  which  exercifcth 
*'  loving-kindnefs,  and  judgment,  and  righteoufnefs 
*'  in  the  earth." 

And  we  have  feen  thefe  two  characfters  exempHfi- 
cd,  or  rather  drawn  to  the  hfe,  in  this  prefent  age. 
We  who  live  in  this  weltern  part  of  Chriftendom 
have  feen  a  mighty  prince,  by  the  juft  permilTion 
of  God,  raifed  up  to  be  a  terror  and  fcourge  to  all 
his  neighbours :  a  prince,  who  had  in  perfedion  all 
the  advantages  mentioned  in  the  former  part  of  the 
text:  and  who,  in  the  opinion  of  many  who  had 
been  long  dazzled  with  his  fplendor  and  greatnefs, 
hath  pafTed  for  many  years,  for  the  moft  politick, 
and  powerful,  and  richefl  monarch  that  hath  appear- 
ed in  thefe  parts  of  the  v/orld,  for  many  ages. 

Who  hath  governed  his  affairs  by  the  deeped 
and  fteadieft  counfels,  and  the  moft  refined  wifdom 
of  this  world:  a  prince  mighty  and  powerful  in  his 
preparations  for  war  ;  formidable  for  his  vafl  and 
well  difciplined  armies,  and  for  his  great  naval  force  : 
and  who  had  brought  the  art  of  war  almoft  to  that 
perfedion,  ^s  to  be  able  to  conquer  and  do  his  bufi- 
nefs  without  fighting :  a  myftcry  hardly  known  to 
former  ages  and  generations  :  and  all  this  ll<:ill  and 
ftrength  united  under  one  abfolute  will,  not  ham- 
pered or  bound  up  by  any  reftraints  of  law  or  con- 

icience. 

A  prince 


'V.' 


the  late  viSfory  affea,  i8^ 

A  prince  that  commands  the  eftates  of  all  his  fub-  S  ERM. 
je6ls,  and  of  all  his  conquefts ;  which  hath  furnifhed  ._  '.^^ 
him  with  an  alraoft  inexhauflible  treafure  and  re- 
venue :  and  one,  who  if  the  world  doth  not  greatly 
miftake  him,  hath  fuificiently  gloried  in  all  thefe  ad- 
vantages, and  even  beyond  the  rate  of  a  mortal  man. 
But  not  "  knowing  God  to  be  the  Lord,  which 
*'  exercifes  loving-kindnefs,  and  judgment,  and 
"  righteoufnefs  in  the  earth  ;"  how  hath  the  pride 
of  all  his  glory  been  flained  by  tyranny  and  oppref- 
fion,  by  injuftice  and  cruelty  •,  by  enlarging  his  do- 
minions without  right,  and  by  making  war  upon 
his  neighbours  without  reafon,  or  even  colour  of  pro- 
vocation ?  And  this  in  a  more  barbarous  manner 
than  the  moft  barbarous  nations  ever  did ;  carrying 
fire  and  defolation  wherefoever  he  went,  and  laying 
wafte  many  and  great  cities  without  neceflity,  and 
without  pity. 

And  now  behold  what  a  terrible  rebuke  the  pro- 
vidence of  God  hath  given  to  this  mighty  monarch, 
in  the  full  career  of  his  fortune  and  fury.  The  con- 
fideration  whereof  brings  to  my  thoughts  thofe  paf- 
fages  in  the  prophet  concerning  old  Babylon,  that 
(landing  and  perpetual  type  of  the  great  oppreflbrs 
and  perfecutors  of  God's  true  church  and  religion  : 
"  How  is  the  oppreflbr  ceafed  ?  the  exadlor  of  gold 
"  ceafed  ?  He  who  fmote  the  people  in  wrath  with  ifa.  xiv, 
"  a  continual  ftroke,  he  who  ruled  the  nations  in 
«'  anger  is  himfelf  perfecuted,  and  none  hindreth, 
"  The  whole  earth  is  at  reft  and  is  quiet,  and  breaks 
"  forth  into  finging :  the  grave  beneath  is  moved 
"  for  thee,  to  meet  thee  at  thy  coming  ;  it  ftirreth 
"  up  the  dead  for  thee,  even  all  the  captains  of 
I  "  the 


i8''4  A  thank/giving  -Jermonfor 

SERM.   «'  the  earth.-,  it  hath  raifed  up  from  their  thrones 

XLI.  .  . 

\_^^-^  "  all  the  kings  of  the  nations ;  alJ  they  fhall  fpeak 

"  and  fay  unto  thee,  art  thou  alfo  become  weak 

"  as  we  are  ?  art  thou   alfo  become   like  unto  us? 

"  How  art  thou  fallen  from  heaven,  O  Lucifer, 

"  fon  of  the  morning  ?    How  art  thou  cut  down 

"  to   the  ground  that   didll    weaken  the    nations  ? 

"  For    thou    haft   faid   in    thy    heart,    I   will   a- 

*'  fcend  into  heaven,  I  will  exalt  my  throne  above 

"  the  ftars  of  God  :  I  will  fit  alfo  upon  the  mount 

**  of  the  congregation   in  the  fides  of  the  north," 

that  Is,  upon  mount  Zion,  for  juft  fo   the  pfalmift. 

^^*.V.         defcribes  it,  "  beautiful  for  fituation,  the  joy  of  the 
xlviii*  2t 

"  whole  earth  is  mount  Zion,  on   the  fides  of  the 

"  north."  Here  the  king  of  Babylon  threatens  to 
take  Jerufalem,  and  to  demolifh  the  temple  where 
the  congregation  of  Ifrael  met  for  the  worfhip  of 
the  true  God  ;  "  I  will  alfo  fit  upon  the  mount  of 
'*  the  congregation  in  the  fides  of  the  north." 
Much  in  the  fame  ftile  with  the  threatnings  of  mo- 
dern Babylon,  "  I  will  deftroy  the  reformation,  I 
*'  will  extirpate  the  northern  herefy." 

And  then  he  goes  on,  "  I  will  afcend  above  the 
"  height  of  the  clouds,  I  will  be  like  the  moft  high : 
*'  yet  thou  (halt  be  brought  down  to  the  grave,  to 
"  the  fides  of  the  pit  :  tliey  that  fee  thee  fhall  nar- 
*'  rowly  look  upon  thee,  and  confider  thee,  faying, 
*'  is  this  the  man  that  made  the  earth  to  tremble, 
•*  that  did  fhake  kingdoms  ;  that  made  the  world  as 
"  a  wildernefs,  and  deftroycd  the  cities  thereof,  and 
"  opened  not  the  houfe  of  his  prifoners?" 

God  fccms  already  to  have  begun  this  work,  in 
the  late  glorious  vidory  at  fea  ;  and  I  hope  he  will 

"  cut 


the  late  viSfory  at  fia.  185 

"  cut  it  fhort  in  righteoufnefs."     I  have  fometimes  SERM- 
heretofore  wondred,  why  at  the  deftrudtion  of  mo-  ^_J^ll^ 
dern  and  myftical  Babylon  the  fcripture  Ihould  make 
fo  exprefs  mention  of  great  wailing  and  lamentati- 
on for  the  lofs  of  her  "  fliips"  and  "  feamen  :"  little  Rev.xviii. 
imagining  thirty  years  ago,  that  any  of  the  king-  '7- 
doms  who  had  "  given   their  power  to  the  bead''* 
v/ould  ever  have  arrived  to  that  mighty  naval  force: 
but  the  "  fcripture  faith  nothing  in  vain." 

Whether,  and  how  far,  fuccefs  is  an  argument 
of  a  good  caufe,  I  (hall  not  now  debate ;  but  thus 
much,  1  think,  may  fafely  be  affirmed,  that  the 
providence  of  God  doth  fometimes,  without  plain 
and  downright  miracles,  fo  vifibly  fliew  it  felf,  that 
we  cannot  without  great  ftupidity  and  obftinacy  re- 
fufe  to  acknowledge  it. 

I  grant,  the  caufe  muft  firft  be  manifeflly  jufb, 
before  fuccefs  can  be  made  an  argument  of  God's 
favour  to  it  and  approbation  of  it :  and  if  the  caufe 
of  true  religion,  and  the  neceffary  defence  of  it 
againft  a  falfe  and  idolatrous  worfhip,  be  a  good 
caufe,  ours  is  fo :  and  I  do  not  here  beg  the  quef- 
tion  ;  we  have  abundantly  proved  it  to  the  confufion 
of  our  adverfaries  :  if  the  vindication  of  the  common 
liberties  of  mankind  againft  tyranny  and  oppreilion, 
be  a  good  caufe,  than  ours  is  fo  :  and  this  needs  not 
to  be  proved,  it  is  fo  glaringly  evident  to  all  the 
world.     And  as  our  caufe  is  not  like  theirs,  fo  nei-  ^ 

ther  hath  their  rock  been  like  our  rock,  our  enemies 
themfelves  being  judges. 

And  yet  as  bad  an  argument  as  fuccefs  is  of  a 
good  caufe,  I  am  forry  to  fay  it,  but  I  am  afraid  it  is 
too  true,  it  is  like  in  the  conclufion  to  prove  the  beft 

Vol.  III.  4  L  argu- 

4- 


II. 


1 86  A  thank  [giving -fermon  for 

S  ER  M.   arsiument  of  all  other  to  convince  thofe  who  have  fo 

XLI 
^^      '   I  long  pretended  confcience  againit  fubmiflion  to  the 

prefcnt  government. 

Mere  fuccefs  is  certainly  one  of  the  worft  argu- 
ments in  the  world  of  a  good  caufe,  and  the  moft 
improper  to  fatisfy  confcience  :  and  yet  we  find  by 
experience,  that  in  the  iffue  it  is  the  moft  fuccefsful 
of  all  other  arguments  -,  and  does  in  a  very  odd,  but 
effectual  way,  fatisfy  the  confciences  of  a  great  many 
men  by  Hiewing  i;:"m  their  intereft. 

God  has  of  late  vifibly  made  bare  his  arm  in  our 
behalf,  though  fome  are  ftill  fo  blind  and  obftinate 
that  they  will  not  fee  it :  like  thofe  of  whom  the 
Ha.  xxvi.  prophet  complains,  "  Lord,  when  thy  hand  is  lift- 
"  ed  up  they  will  not  fee,  but  they  fhall  fee,  and 
"  be  afhamed  for  their  envy  at  thy  people." 

Thus  have  I  reprefented  unto  you  a  mighty  mo- 
narch, who  like  a  fiery  comet  hath  hung  over  Eu- 
rope for  many  years  ;  and  by  his  malignant  influence 
hath  made-  fuch  terrible  havock  and  devaftations  in 
this  part  of  the  world. 

Let  us  now  turn  our  view  to  the  other  part  of  the 
text :  and  behold  a  greater  than  he  is  here  :  a  prince 
of  a  quite  different  character,  who  does  "  underftand 
"  and  know  God  to  be  the  Lord,  which  doth  ex- 
^'  ercife  loving  kindnefs,  and  judgment,  and  righte- 
"  oufnefs  in  the  earth  :'*  and  who  hath  made  it  the 
great  ftudy  and  endeavour  of  his  life  to  imitate  thefe 
divine  perfections,  as  far  as  the  imperfedlion  of  hu- 
man nature  in  this  mortal  ftate  will  admit :  I  fay,  a 
greater  than  he  is  here ;  who  never  faid  or  did  an 
infolent  thing,  but  inftead  of  defpifing  his  enemies 
has  upon  all  occafions  encountered  them  with  an  un- 
daunted fpirit  and  refolution.  This 


the  late  vtdtory  at  fea.  187 

This  Is  the  man  whom  God  hath  honoured  to  give  S  E  R  M, 

XLI 
a  check  to  this  mighty  man  of  the  earth,  and  to 

put  a  hook  into  the  noftrils  of  this  great  leviathan, 

who  has  fo  long  had  his  paftime  in  the  feas. 

But  we  will  not  infult,  as  he  once  did  in  a  moft  un- 
princely  manner  over  a  man  much  better  than  him- 
felf,  when  he  believed  him  to  have  been  flain  at  the 
Boyne  :  and  indeed  death  came  then  as  near  to  him 
as  was  pofTible  without  killing  him :  but  the  merci- 
flil  providence  of  God  was  pleafed  to  ftep  in  for  his 
prefervation,  almoft  by  a  miracle  :  for  1  do  not  be- 
lieve that  from  the  firft  ufe  of  great  guns  to  that  day, 
any  mortal  man  ever  had  his  fhoulder  fo  kindly  kifs'd 
by  a  cannon-bullet. 

But  I  will  not  trefpafs  any  further  upon  that  which 
is  the  great  ornament  of  all  his  other  virtues  ; 
though  I  have  faid  nothing  of  him  but  what  all  the 
world  does  fee  and  muft  acknowledge:  he  is  as  much 
above  being  flattered,  as  it  is  beneath  an  honefl  and 
generous  mind  to  flatter. 

Let  us  then  glory  in  the  Lord,  and  rejoice  in  the 
God  of  our  falvation  :  let  us  now  in  theprefence  of 
all  his  people  pay  our  mofl:  thankful  acknowledg- 
ments to  him  "  who  is  worthy  to  be  praifed  i"  even 
to  "  the  Lord  God  of  Ifrael,  who  alone  doth  won- 
"  drous  things :"  who  "  giveth  viflory  unto  kings," 
and  hath  "  preferved  our  David  his  fervant  from  the 
*'  hurtful  Iword." 

And  let  us  humbly  befeech  Almighty  God,  that 
he  would  long  preferve  to  us  the  invaluable  blefling 
of  our  two  excellent  princes  i  whom  the  providence 
of  God  hath  fent  amongft  us,  like  two  good  angels; 
not  to  refcue  two  or  three  perfons,  but  almofl  a 
4  L  2  whole 


XLI. 


1 8  8  A  thank/giving  -  fermon  for  &c. 

S  ER  M.  whole  nation  out  of  Sodom  :  by  faving  us  I  hope  at 
lafl  from  our  vices,  as  well  as  at  firft  from  that  ven- 
geance which  was  juft  ready  to  have  been  poured 
down  upon  us. 

Two  fovereign  princes  reigning  together,  and  in 
the  fame  throne ;  and  yet  fo  intirely  one,  as  perhaps 
no  nation,  no  age  can  furnifh  us  with  a  parallel ; 
two  princes  perfeiSlly  united  in  the  fame  defign  of 
promoting  the  true  religion,  and  the  public  welfare> 
by  reforming  our  manners,  and  as  far  is  polTible, 
by  repairing  the  breaches,  and  healing  the  divifions 
of  a  miferably  diftrafted  church  and  nation  :  in  a 
word,  two  princes  who  are  contented  to  facrifice 
themfelves  and  their  whole  time  to  the  care  of  the 
publick  :  and  for  the  fake  of  that  to  deny  themfelves 
almoft  all  fort  of  eafe  and  pleafure  :  To  deny  them- 
felves, did  I  fay  ?  No,  they  have  wifely  and  judici- 
ouily  chofen  the  truefl  and  higheft  pleafure  that  this 
world  knows,  the  pleafure  of  doing  good,  and  be- 
ing benefadois  to  mankind.  May  they  have  a  long 
and  happy  reign  over  us,  to  make  us  happy,  and 
to  lay  up  in  ftore  for  themfelves  a  happinefs,  without 
meafure,  and  without  end,  in  God's  glorious  and 
everlafting  kingdom:  for  his  mercies  fake  in  Jesus' 
Christ,  to  whom  with  thee,  O  Father,  and  the 
Holy  Ghoft,  be  all  honour  and  glory,  thankfgiving 
^nd  praife,  both  now  and  for  ever.     Amen. 


S  E  R- 


i89 


SERMON     XLII. 

Againft  evil-fpeaking. 

Preached  before,  the  King  and  Queen  at  White- 
hail,    February  25,    169!. 


T  I  T.    iii.  2. 
To  [peak  evil  of  no  man. 

GENERAL  perfuafives  to  repentance  and  a  S  E  R  M. 
good  life,  and  inveftives  againft  fm  and  wick-  ,  _  1_ 
ednefs  at  large,  are  certainly  of  good  life  to  recom- 
mend religion  and  virtue,  and  to  expofe  the  defor- 
mity and  danger  of  a  vicious  courfe.     But  it  muft  be 
acknowledged  on  the  other  hand,    that  thefe  general 
difcourfes  do  not  fo  immediately  tend  to  reform  the 
lives  of  men  :  becaufe  they  fall  among  the  crowd, 
but  do  not  touch   the  confciences  of  particular  per- 
fons,  in  fo  fenfible  and  awakening  a  manner  as  when 
we  treat  of  particular  duties  and  fins,  and  endeavour 
to  put  men  upon  the  practice  of  the  one,  and  to  re- 
claim them  from   the  other,  by  proper  Arguments 
taken  from  the   word  of  God,  and  from  the  nature^ 
of  particular  virtues  and  vices. 

The  general  way  is,  as  if  a  phyfician,  inftead  of 
applying  particular  remedies  to  the  diftemper  of  his 
patient,  fhould  entertain  him  with  a  long  difcourfe 
of  difeafes  in  general,  and  of  the  pleafure  and  ad- 
vantages of  health  j  and  earneftly  perfuade  him  to 

be 


'9^  '^gainjl  evilfpeaking. 

^  XLir^'  ^  ^^^^'  ^^^^^"'^  taking  his   particular  difeafe  into 
^_x^^-0  confideration,  and  prefcribing  remedies  for  it. 

But  if  we  would  effedlualJy  reform  men,  we  muft 
take  to  tafk  the  great  and  common  diforders  of  their 
lives,  and  reprefent  their  faults  to  them  in  fuch  a 
manner  as  may  convince  them  of  the  evil  and  dan- 
ger of  them,  and  put  them  upon  the  endeavour  of 
a  cure. 

And  to  this  end  I  have  pitched  upon  one  of  the 

common  and  *  reigning  vices  of  the  age,  calumny 

and  evil  fpeaking  ;  by  which  men  contrad:  fo  much 

guilt  to  themfelves,  and  create  fo  much  trouble  to 

others  :  And  from  which,  it  is  to  be  feared,  few  or 

Eccl.  xix.  none  are  wholly  free.     For  "  who  is  he,"  faith  the 

*^*  fon   of  Sirach,   "  that  hath  not  offended  with  his 

James  iii.  "  tongue  ?  In  many  things,"  faith  St.  James,  "  we 

*•  t'  offend  all  :  and  if  any  man  offend  not  in  word, 

«'  the  fame  is  a  perfe6b  man." 

But   how  few  have  attained  to  this  perfedlion  ? 
And  yet  unlefs  we  do  endeavour   after  it,  and  in 
fome  good  meafure  attain  it,  all  our  pretence  to  re- 
James  I.     ligion  is  vain  :  fo  the  fame  Apoftle  tells  us,  "  If 
»6.  c<  2Py  man  among  you  feemeth  to  be  religious,  and 

"  bridleth  not  his  tongue,  but  deceiveth  his  own 
"  heart,  that  man's  religion  is  vain." 

For  the  more  diftind  handling  of  this  argument, 
I  fhall  reduce  my  difcourfe  to  thefe  five  heads. 

Firfl,  I  Ihall  confider  the  nature  of  this  vice,  and 
wherein  it  confifts. 

Secondly,  I  fhall  confider  the  due  extent  of  this 
prohibition,  "  to  fpcakevilof  no  man." 

Thirdly, 


Againfi  evil-fpeaking,  191 

Thirdly,  I  lliall  Ihew  the  evil  of  this  pradice,  SERM 

both  in  the  caiifes  and  efFefts  of  it. 

Fourthly,  I  fhall  add  fome  further  confiderations 

to  diflliade  men  from  it. 

Fifthly,  I  fhall  give  fome  rules  and  direftions  for 

the  prevention  and  cure  of  it. 

I.  I  fliall  confider  what  this  fin  or  vice  of  evil-  I. 
fpeaking,  here  forbidden  by  the  apoftle,  is  :  fAyi^ivet 
ftKa(T(pyifM7v,  not  to  defame  and  flander  any  man, 
not  to  hurt  his  reputation,  as  the  etymology  of  the 
word  doth  import.  So  that  this  vice  confilts  in  fay- 
ing things  of  others  which  tend  to  their  difparage- 
ment  and  reproach,  to  the  taking  away  or  leflening 
of  their  reputation  and  good  name.  And  this,  whe- 
ther the  things  faid  be  true  or  not.  If  they  be 
falfe,  and  we  know  it,  then  it  is  downright  calum- 
ny ;  and  if  we  do  not  know  it,  but  take  it  upon 
the  report  of  others,  it  is  however  a  flander  j  and 
fo  much  the  more  injurious,  becaufe  really  ground- 
lefs  and  undeferved. 

If  the  thing  be  true,  and  we  know  it  to  be  fo, 
yet  it  is  a  defamation,  and  tends  to  the  prejudice  of 
our  neighbour's  reputation  :  and  it  is  a  fault  to  fay 
the  evil  of  others  which  is  true,  unlefs  there  be  fome 
good  reafon  for  it :  befides  it  is  contrary  to  that 
charity  and  goodnefs  which  Chriftianity  requires, 
to  divulge  the  faults  of  others,  though  they  be  re- 
ally guilty  of  them,  without  necefllty  or  fome  other 
very  good  reafon  for  it. 

Again,  it  is  evil-fpeaking,  and  the  vice  condemn- 
ed in  the  text,  whether  we  be  the  firll  authors  of  an 
ill  report,  or  relate  it  from  others  j  becaufe  the  man 

that 


Againjl  evil'fpeakmg.     . 

that  is  evil  fpoken  of  is  equally  defamed  either 
way. 

Again,  whether  we  fpeak  evil  of  a  man  to  his 
face,  or  behind  his  back  :  the  former  way  indeed 
feems  to  be  the  more  generous,  but  yet  is  a  great  fault, 
and  that  which  we  call  reviling  :  the  htter  is  more 
mean  and  bafe,  and  that  which  v/e  properly  call 
ilander  or  backbiting. 

And  laftly,  whether  it  be  done  direflly  and  in  ex- 
pr^fs  terms,  or  more  obfcurely  and  by  way  of  ob- 
lique infinuation  •,  whether  by  way  of  downright 
reproach,  or  with  fome  crafty  preface  of  condemna- 
tion :  for  fo  it  have  the  effedt  to  defame,  the  man- 
ner of  addrefs  does  not  much  alter  the  cafe  :  the  one 
may  be  more  dextrous,  but  is  not  one  jot  lefs  faulty  r 
for  many  times  the  deepefl  wounds  are  given  by 
thefe  fmoother  and  more  artificial  ways  of  flander  ; 
as  by  afking  queftions,  have  not  you  heard  fo  and 
fo  of  fuch  a  man  ?  I  fay  no  more  ;  I  only  afk  the 
queftion  :  or  by  general  intimations,  that  they  are 
loth  to  fay- what  they  have  heard  of  fuch  a  one,  are 
very  forry  for  it,  and  do  not  at  all  believe  it,  if  you 
will  believe  them  :  and  this  many  times  without  tel- 
ling the  thing,  but  leaving  you  in  the  dark  to  fufpedt 
the  worft. 

Thefe  and  fuch  like  arts,  though  they  may  fecm 
to  be  tenderer  and  gentler  ways  of  ufing  men's  re- 
putation, yet  in  truth  they  are  the  moft  malicious 
and  effeftual  methods  of  Ilander ;  becaufe  they  in- 
finuate  fomething  that  is  much  worfe  than  is  faid, 
and  yet  are  very  apt  to  create  in  unwary  men,  a 
flrong  belief  of  fomething  that  is  very  bad,  though 
they  know  not  what  it  is.  So  that  it  matters  not  in 
I  what 


Againjl  evil-Jpeaking,  ip^ 

what  fafhion  a  flander  is  drefied up,  if  it  tend  to  de- SE  R  M. 
fame  a  man,  and  to  diminifli  his  reputation,  it  is  the  J^^^' 
fin  forbidden  in  the  text. 

II.  We  will  confider  the  extent  of  this  prohibit!-  II. 
on,  "  to  fpeak  evil  of  no  man  ;'*  and  the  due  bounds 
and  limitations  of  it.  For  it  is  not  to  be  underftood 
abfolutely,  to  forbid  us  to  fay  any  thing  concerning 
others  that  is  bad.  This  in  fome  cafes  may  be  ne- 
ceflary  and  our  duty,  and  in  feveral  cafes  very  fit 
and  reafonable.  The  queftion  is,  in  what  cafes  by 
the  general  rules  of  fcripture  and  right  reafon  we  are 
warranted  to  fay  the  evil  of  others  that  is  true  ? 

In  general,  we  are  not  to  do  this  without  great 
reafon  and  neceffity  ;  as,  for  the  prevention  of  fome 
great  evil,  or  the  procuring  of  fome  confiderable 
good  to  ourfelves,  or  others.  And  this  I  take  to  be 
the  meaning  of  that  advice  of  the  fon  of  Sirach, 
"  whether  it  be  to  a  friend  or  a  foe,  talk  not  of  p  ,  . 
"  other  men's  lives ;  and  if  thou  canft  without  of-  8. 
"  fence  reveal  them  not ;"  that  is,  if  without  hurt 
to  any  body  thou  canft  conceal  them,  divulge  them 
not. 

But  becaqfe  this  may  not  be  diredlion  fufficient,  I 
fhall  inftance  in  fome  of  the  principal  cafes,  wherein 
men  are  warranted  to  fpeak  evil  of  others,  and  yet 
in  fo,  doing  do  not  offend  againft  this  prohibition  in 
the  text. 

Firft,  it  is  not  only  lawful,  but  very  commend- 
able, and  many  times  our  duty,  to  do  this  in  order 
to  the  probable  amendment  of  the  perfon  of  whom 
evil  is  fpoken.  In  fuch  a  cafe  we  may  tell  a  man  of 
his  faults  privately  ;  or  \yhere  it  may  not  be  fo  fit 

Vol.  III.  4M  fer 

4' 


Agalnfl  evil-fpeaking, 
for  us  to  ufe  that  boldnefs  and  freedom,  we  may  re- 
veal his  faults  to  one  who  is  more  fit  and  proper  to 
reprove  him,  and  will  probably  make  no  other  ufe 
of  this  difcovery  but  in  order  to  his  amendment. 
And  this  is  fo  far  from  being  a  breach  of  charity, 
that  it  is  one  of  the  beft  tefti monies  of  it.  For  per- 
haps the  party  may  not  be  guilty  of  what  hath  been 
reported  of  him,  and  then  it  is  a  kindnefs  to  give 
him  the  opportunity  of  vindicating  himfelf :  or  if 
*  he  be  guilty,  perhaps  being  privately  and  prudently 
told  of  it  he  may  reform.  In  this  cafe  the  fon  of 
Eccl.  xix.  Sirach  advifeth  to  reveal  men's  faults  •,  "  admonifh 
fit^h^S'  (c  ^  friend,"  fays  he,  "  it  may  be  he  hath  not  done 
*'  it ;  and  if  he  have  done  it,  that  he  do  it  no  more : 
*'  admonifh  a  friend,  it  may  be  he  hath  not  faid  it ; 
««  and  if  he  have,  that  he  fpeak  it  not  again :  ad- 
<*  monilh  a  friend,  for  many  times  it  is  a  flander  ; 
5*  and  believe  not  every  tale." 

But  then  we  muft  take  care  that  this  be  done  out 
of  kindnefs,  and  that  nothing  of  our  own  pafllon  be 
mingled  with  it  -,  and  that  under  pretence  of  reprov- 
ing and  reforming  men,  we  do  not  reproach  and  re- 
vile them,  and  tell  them  of  their  faults  in  fuch  a 
manner  as  if  we  did  it  to  fhew  our  authority  rather 
than  our  charity.  It  requires  a  great  deal  of  addrefs 
and  gentle  application  fo  to  manage  the  bufinefs  of 
reproof,  as  not  to  irritate  and  exafperate  the  perfon 
whom  we  reprove,  inftead  of  curing  him. 

Secondly,  this  likewife  is  not  only  lawful,  but  our 
duty,  when  we  are  legally  called  to  bear  witnefs 
concerning  the  fault  and  crime.of  another,  A  good 
man  would  not  be  an  accufer,  unlefs  the  publick 
good,  qr  ^he  prevention  of  forne  great  evil  fhould 

require 


Againfi  evil-fpeaking,  I9  j 

require  it.     And  then  the  plain  reafon  of  the  thine  SE  RM. 

•  Xr  TT 

will  fufficiently  juftify  a  voluntary  accufation :  other- 
wife  it  hath  always  among  well-manner'd  people 
been  efteemed  very  odious  for  a  man  to  be  officious 
in  this  kind,  and  a  forward  informer  concerning  the 
mifdemeanor  of  others.  Magiftrates  may  fome- 
times  think  it  fit  to  give  encouragement  to  fuch  per* 
fons,  and  to  fet  one  bad  man  to  catch  another,  be- 
caufe  fuch  men  are  fitteft  for  fuch  dirty  work  :  but 
they  can  never  inwardly  approve  them,  nor  will 
they  ever  make  them  their  friends  and  confidents. 

But  when  a  man  is  called  to  give  teftimony  in 
this  kind  in  obedience  to  the  laws,  and  out  of  re- 
verence to  the  oath  taken  in  fuch  cafes,  he  is  fo  far 
from  deferving  blame  for  fo  doing,  that  it  would  be 
an  unpardonable  fault  in  him  to  conceal  the  truth, 
or  any  part  of  it. 

Thirdly,  it  is  lawful  to  publifh  the  faults  of  others, 
in  our  own  neceflary  defence  and  vindication.  When 
a  man  cannot  conceal  another's  faults  without  betray- 
ing his  own  innocency,  no  charity  requires  a  man 
to  fufi^er  himfelf  to  be  defamed  to  fave  the  reputa- 
tion of  another  man.  "  Charity  begins  at  homej'* 
and  though  a  man  had  never  fo  much  goodnels,  he 
would  firft  fecure  his  own  good  name,  and  then  be 
concerned  for  other  men's.  We  are  "  to  love  our 
"  neighbour  as  ourfelvesj"  fo  that  the  loveof  ourfelvcs 
is  the  rule  and  meafure  of  our  love  to  our  neigh- 
bour :  and  therefore  firft,  otherwife  it  could  not  b9 
the  rule.  And  it  would  be  very  well  for  the  world, 
if  our  charity  would  rife  thus  high  j  and  no  man 
would  hurt  another  man's  reputation,  but  where  his 
9wn  is  in  real  danger. 

4  M  2  Fourthly, 


196  'Againfi  evil-fpeaking. 

IE  R  M.  Fourthly,  this  alfo  is  lawful  for  caution  and  warn- 
ing to  a  third  perfon,  that  is  in  danger  to  be  infeded 
by  the  company,  or  ill  example  of  another  ;  or 
may  be  greatly  prejudiced  by  repofing  too  much 
confidence  in  him,  having  no  knowledge  or  fufpicion 
of  his  bad  qualities  :  but  even  in  this  cafe  we  ought 
to  take  great  care,  that  the  ill  charader  we  give  of 
any  man  be  fpread  no  farther  than  is  neceffary  to 
the  good  end  we  defigned  in  it. 

Bcfides  thefe  more  obvious  and  remarkable  cafesr 
this  prohibition  doth  not  I  think  hinder,  but  that 
in  ordinary  converfation  men  may  mention  that  ill  of 
others,  which  is  already  made  as  publick  as  it  well  can 
be :  or  that  one  friend  may  not  in  freedom  fpeak  to 
another  of  the  mifcarriage  of  a  third  perfon,  where 
,  he  is  fecure  no  ill  ufe  will  be  made  of  it,  and  that 
it  will  go  no  farther  to  his  prejudice  :  provided  al- 
ways, that  we  take  no  delight  in  hearing  or  fpcaking 
ill  of  others  :  and  the  lefs  we  do  it,  though  without 
any  malice  or  defign  of  harm,  dill  the  better  -,  be- 
caufe  this  fliews  that  we  do  not  feed  upon  ill  reports, 
.    and  take  pleafure  in  them. 

Theie  are  alt  the  ufual  cafes  in  which  it  may  be 
neceffary  for  us  to  fpcak  evil  of  other  men.  And 
thefe  are  fo  evidently  reafonable,  that  the  prohibi- 
tion in  the  text  cannot  with  rcafon  be  extended  to 
them.  And  if  no  man  would  allow  himfelf  to  fay 
any  thing  to  the  prejudice  of  another  man's  good 
name,  but  in  thefe  and  the  like  cafes,  the  tongues 
of  men  would  be  very  innocent,  and  the  world  would 
be  very  quiet.     I  proceed  in  the 

in.       Hid  place,  to  confider  the  evil  of  this  pradicc, 
toth  in  the  caufes  and  the  confequences  of  it. 

Firfl, 


Agdinfl  evil'fpeaking.  igj 

Firfl:,  we  will  confider  the  caufes  of  it.     And  it  S  E  R  M. 

XLIf 
commonly  fprings  from  one  or  more  of  thefc  evil 

roots. 

Firft,  one  of  the  deeped  and  mod  common  caufes 
of  evil-fpeaking  is  ill-nature  and  cruelty  of  difpofiti- 
on  :  and  by  a  general  miflake  ill-nature  pafleth  for 
wit,  as  cunning  doth  for  wifdom ;  though  in  truth 
they  are  nothing  a-kin  to  one  another,  but  as  far 
diftant  as  vice  and  virtue. 

And  there  is  no  greater  evidence  of  the  bad  tem- 
per of  mankind,  than  the  general  pronenefs  of  men 
to  this  vice.  For  (as  our  Saviour  fays)  **  out  of 
"  the  abundance  of  the  heart  the  mouth  fpeaketh.'* 
And  therefore  men  do  commonly  incline  to  the  cen- 
forious  and  uncharitable  fide :  which  fhews  human  na- 
ture to  be  ftrangely  diftorted  from  it's  original  redi- 
tudeand  innocency.  The  wit  of  man  doth  more  natural- 
ly vent  it  felf  in  fatire  and  cenfure,  than  in  praife  and 
panegyrick.  When  men  fet  themfclves  to  commend, 
it  comes  hardly  from  them,  and  not  without  great 
force  and  draining  ;  and  if  any  thing  be  fitly  faid  in 
that  kind,  it  doth  hardly  relifliwith  mod  men:  but  in 
the  way  of  invedive,  the  invention  of  men  is  a  plen- 
tiful and  never-failing  fpring :  and  this  kind  of  wit 
is  not  more  eafy  than  it  is  acceptable  :  it  is  greedily 
entertained  and  greatly  applauded,  and  every  man  is 
glad  to  hear  others  abufed,  not  confidering  iiow  foon 
it  may  come  to  his  own  turn  to  lie  down  and  make 
fport  for  others, 

To  fpeak  evil  of  others,  Is  almod  become  the  ge- 
neral entertainment  of  all  companies :  and  the  great 
and  ferious  bufmefs  of  mod  meetings  and  vifits,  af- 
ter the  neceffary  ceremonies  and  compliments  are  o- 

ver, 
I 


19^  Agalnjl  evil-fpeaking. 

S  ERM.  vcr,  is  to  fit  down  and  back-bite  all  the  world.  *Tis 
the  fauce  of  converfation,  and  all  difcourfc  is  counted 
but  flat  and  dull  which  hath  not  fomething  of  pi- 
quancy and  fharpnefs  in  it  againft  fomebody.  For 
men  generally  love  rather  to  hear  evil  of  others  than 
good,  and  are  fecretly  pleafed  with  ill  reports,  and 
drink  them  in  with  greedinefs  and  delight :  though 
at  the  fame  time  they  have  fo  much  juftice,  as  to  hate 
thofe  that  propagate  them  ;  and  fo  much  wit,  as  to 
conclude  that  thefe  very  perfons  will  do  the  fame  for 
them  in  another  place  and  company. 

But  efpecially,  if  it  concerns  one  of  another  party, 
and  that  differs  from  us  in  matters  of  religion  ;  in 
this  cafe,  all  parties  feem  to  be  agreed  that  they  do 
God  great  fervice  in  blading  the  reputation  of  their 
adverfaries :  and  though  they  all  pretend  to  be  Chri- 
flians,  and  the  difciples  of  him  who  taught  nothing 
but  kindnefs  and  meeknefs  and  charity  •,  yet  it  is 
ftrange  to  fee  with  what  a  falvage  and  murderous 
difpofition  they  will  fly  at  one  another's  reputation 
and  tear  it  in  pieces :  and  whatever  other  fcruples 
they  may  have,  they  make  none  to  befpatter  one 
another  in  the  moft  bitter  and  flanderous  manner. 
/  But  if  they  hear  any  good  of  their  adverfaries 
j  with  what  nicety  and  caution  do  they  receive  it  ?  How 
many  objeftions  do  they  raife  againfl:  it  ?  and  with 
what  coldnefs  do  they  at  lafl:  admit  it  ?  It  is  very 
well,  fay  they,  if  it  be  true.  I  fhall  be  glad  to  hear 
it  confirmed.  I  never  heard  fo  much  good  of  him 
before.  You  are  a  good  man  yourfelf,  but  have  a 
,  care  you  be  not  deceived. 

I     Nay  it  is  well,  if  to  balance  the  matter,  and  itt 
I  things  even,  they  do  not  clap  fome  infirmity  and  fault 

into 


Agalnft  evil'fpeaking.  199 

into  the  other  fcale,  that  fo  the  enemy  may  not  goSERM. 
off  with  flying  colours. 

But  on  the  other  fide,  every  man  is  a  good  and 
fubftantial  author  of  an  ill  report.  I  do  not  apply 
this  to  any  one  fort  of  men,  though  all  are  to  blame 
in  this  way  *,  Jliacos  intra  muros  peccatur^  ^  extra^ 
To  fpeak  impartially,  the  zealots  of  all  parties  have 
got  a  fcurvy  trick  of  lying  for  the  truth. 

But  of  all  forts  of  people,  I  have  obferved  the 
priefts  and  bigots  of  the  church  of  Rome  to  be 
the  ableft  in  this  way,  and  to  have  the  ftrongeft  faith 
for  a  lufly  falfliood  and  calumny.  Others  will  ban- 
dy a  falfe  report,  and  tofs  it  from  one  hand  to  ano- 
ther ;  but  I  never  knew  any  that  would  fo  hug  a  lie 
and  be  fo  very  fond  of  it.  They  feem  to  be  defcrib- 
ed  by  St.  John  in  that  exprefllon  in  the  revelation, 
**  whofoever  loveth  and  maketh  a  lie." 

Another  Ihrewd  fign  that  ill-nature  lies  at  the  root 
of  this  vice  is,  that  we  eafily  forget  the  good  that  is 
faid  of  others,  andfeldom  make  mention  of  itj  but 
the  contrary  fticks  with  us,  and  lies  uppermofl  in 
our  memories,  and  is  ready  to  come  out  upon  all  oc- 
cafions  :  and  which  is  yet  more  ill-natured  and  unjuft, 
many  times  when  we  do  not  believe  it  our  felves  we 
tell  it  to  others,  with  this  charitable  caution,  that 
we  hope  it  is  not  true :  but  in  the  mean  time  we  give 
it  our  pafs,  and  venture  it  to  take  it*s  fortune  to  be 
believed  or  not,  according  to  the  charity  of  thofe  in-* 
to  whofe  hands  it  comes. 

Secondly,  another  caufc  of  the  commonnefs  of 
this  vice  is,  that  many  are  fo  bad  themfelves,  in  one 
kind  or  other.  For  to  think  and  fpeak  ill  of  others 
is  not  only  a  bad  thing,  but  a  fign  of  a  bad  man. 

Our 


200  Againjl  evil-fpcaking, 

SERM.  OurbleflTed  Saviour,  fpeaking  of  the  evil  of  the 
^J^^^^;[^  laft  days,  gives  this  as  the  reafon  of  the  great  decay 
Mat.xxiv.  of  charity  among  men ;  "  becaufe  iniquity  lliall  a- 
'^*  «  bound,  the  love  of  many  fhall  wax  cold."     When 

men  are  bad  themfelves,  they  are  glad  of  any  oppor- 
tunity to  cenfure  others,  and  are  always  apt  to  fuf- 
pedl  that  evil  of  other  men  which  they  know  by 
themfelves.  They  cannot  have  a  good  opinion  of 
themfelves,  and  therefore  are  very  unwilling  to  have 
fo  of  any  body  clfe ;  and  for  this  reafon  they  endea- 
vour to  bring  men  to  a  level,  hoping  it  will  be  fomc 
juftification  of  them  if  they  can  but  render  others  as 
bad  as  themfelves. 

Thirdly,  another  fource  of  this  vice  is  malice  and 
revenge.     When  men  are  in  heat  and  paflion  they 
do  not  confider  what  is  true,  but  what  is  fpightful 
!  and  mifchievous  ;  and  fpeak  evil  of  others  in  revenge 
of  fome  injury  which  they  have  received  from  them : 
and  when   they  are  blinded  by  their  palTions,  they 
lay  about  them   madly  and  at  a  venture,  not  much 
caring  whether  the  evil  they  fpeak   be  true  or  not. 
Nay  many  are  fo  devilifh,  as  to  invent  and  raife  falfe 
reports  on  purpofe  to  blaft  men's  reputation.     This 
is  a  diabolical   temper,  and  therefore  St.  James  tells 
us  that  the  flanderous  "  tongue  is  fet  on  fire  of  hell:" 
and  the  devil  hath  his  very  name  from  calumny  and 
falfe  accufation  -,  and  it  is  his  nature  too,  for  he  is  al- 
ways ready  to  ftir  up  and  foment  this   evil  fpirit  a- 
mong  men  :  nay,  the  fcripture  tells  us   that  he  hath 
the  malice  and  impwdence  to  accufe  good  men  before 
God  •,  as  he  did  Job,  charging  him  with  hypocrify 
to  God  himfelf;  "who,"  he  knows,  "  does  know 

*'  the  hearts  of  all  the  children  of  men." 

Firft, 


Agaiiifi  evil-f peaking,  201 

Fourthly,  another  caufe  of  evil-fpeaking  is  envy.  S  E  RM. 
Men  look  with  an  evil  eye  upon  the  good  that  is  in    ^^^^" 
others,  and  think  that  their  reputation  obfcures  them, 
and  that  their   commendabk  quahties  do   ftand  in 
their  light ;  and  therefore  they  do  what  they  can  to 
caft  a  cjoud  over  them,  that  the  bright  fliining  of 
their  virtues  may  not  fcorch  them.     This  makes 
them  greedily  to  entertain,  and  tnduftrioufly  to  pub- 
Jifh  any  thing  that  may  ferve  to  that  purpofe,  there- 
by  to   raife  themfelves  upon   the   ruins    of   other 
men's  reputation  :  and  therefore  as  foon  as  they  have 
got  an  ill  report  of  any  good    man  by  the  end,  to 
work  they  prefently  go  to  fend  it  abroad  by  the  firft 
poft :  for  the  firing  is  always  ready  upon  their  bow 
to  let  fly  this   arrow  with  an   incredible  fwiftnefs, 
through  city  and  country  ;    for  fear   the   innocent  \ 
man's  juftification  fhould  overtake  it. 

Fifthly,  another  caufe  of  evil-fpeaking  is  imperti- 
nence and  curiofity  ;  an  itch  of  talking  and  medling 
in  the  affairs  of  other  men,  which  do  no  wife  con- 
cern them.     Some  perfons  love  to  mingle  themfelves 
in  all  bufinefs,  and  are  loth  to  feem    ignorant  of  fo 
important  a  piece  of  news  as  the  faults  and  follies  of 
men,  or  any  bad  thing  that  is  talked  of  in  good  com- 
pany.    And  therefore  they  do  with  great  care  pick 
up  ill  ftories,  as  good  matter  of  difcourfe  in  the  next 
company  that  is  worthy  of  them  :  and  this  perhaps 
not  out  of  any  great  malice,  but  for  want  of  fome- 
thing  better  to  talk  of,  and  becaufe  their  parts  lie 
chiefly  that  way. 

Laftly,  men  do  this  many  times  out  of  wantonnefs 

and  for  diverfion.     So  little  do  light  and  vain  men 

confider,  that  a  man's  reputation  is  too  great  and 

Vol,,  III.  4N  tender 

4- 


202  Againjl  evil- [peaking, 

S  E  R  M.  tender  a  concernment  to  be  iefted  withal ;  and  that 
a  flanderous  tongue  "  bites  like  a  ferpent,  and  wounds 
*'  like  a  fword."  For  what  can  be  more  barbarous, 
next  to  fporting  with  a  man's  life,  than  to  play  with 
his  honour  and  reputation,  which  to  fome  men  is 
dearer  to  them  than  their  lives  ? 

It  is  a  cruel  pleafure  which  fome  men  take  in  wor- 
rying the  reputation  of  others  much  better  than 
themfelves ;  and  this  only  to  divert  themfelves  and 
the  company.  Solomon  compares  this  fort  of  mea 
to  diftraded  perfons  j  "  as  a  madman,"  faith  he, 
"  who  cafteth  fire-brands,  arrows,  and  death,  fo  is 
"  the  man  that  deceiveth  his  neighbour ;"  the  LXX^ 
render  it,  "  fo  is  the  man  that  defameth  his  neigh- 
*'  bour,  and  faith,  am  I  not  in  fport  ?"  Such,  and 
fo  bad  are  the  caufcs  of  this  vice.  I  proceed  to  con- 
fide r,  in  the 

Second  pkce,  the  ordinary,  but  very  pernicious 
confequences  and  cffedls  of  it ;  both  to  others,  and 
to  our  felvcs. 

Firft,  to  others ;  the  parties  I  mean  that  are  flan- 
dered.  To  them  it  is  certainly  a  great  injury,  and 
commonly  a  high  provocation,  but  always  matter  of 
no  fmall  grief  and  trouble  to  them. 

It  is  certainly  a  great  injury,  and  if  the  evil  which 
■we  fay  of  them  be  not  true,  it  is  an  injury  beyond 
imagination,  and  beyond  all  pofTible  reparation. 
And  though  we  fhould  do  our  utmoft  endeavour  af- 
terwards towards  their  vindication,  yet  that  makes 
but  very  little  amends ;  becaufe  the  vindication  fel- 
dom  reacheth  fo  far  as  the  reproach,  and  becaufe 
commonly  men  are  neither  fo  forward  to  fpread  the 
vindicatio/H,  nor  is  it  fo  eafily  received  after  ill  im- 

prefTions 


Againji  evil  [peaking,  203 

preflions  are  once  made.     The  folicitous  vindication  S  E  R  M. 

XLII 
of  a  man's  felf  is,  at  the  befl,  but  an  after-game  •,  and 

for  the  mod  part  a  man  had  better  fit  flill,  than  to 
run  the  hazard  of  making  the  matter  worfe  by  play- 
ing it. 

I  will  add  one  thing  more,  that  it  is  an  injury  that' 
defcends  to  a  man's  children  and  pofterity  j  becaufe 
the  good  or  ill  name  of  the  father  is  derived  down 
to  them ;  and  many  times  the  befl  thing  he  hath  to 
leave  them  is  the  reputation  of  his  unblemifhed  vir- 
tue and  worth  :  and  do  we  make  no  confcience 
to  rob  his  innocent  children  of  the  belt  part  of  this 
fmall  patrimony,  and  of  all  the  kindnefs  that  would 
have  been  done  them  for  their  father's  fake,  if  his 
reputation  had  not  been  fo  undefervedly  ftained  ? 
Is  it  no  crime  by  the  breath  of  our  mouth  at  once  to 
blafl:  a  man's  reputation,  and  to  ruin  his  children, 
perhaps  to  all  pofterity?  Can  we  make  a  jeft  of  fo 
ferious  a  matter  ?  Of  an  injury  fo  very  hard  to  be  re- 
pented of  as  it  ought,  becaufe  in  fuch  a  cafe  no  re- 
pentance will  be  acceptable  without  reftitution,  if  it 
be  in  our  power.  And  perhaps  it  will  undo  us  In 
this  world  to  make  it ;  and  if  we  do  it  not,  will  be 
our  ruin  in  the  other. 

I  will  put  the  cafe  at  the  beft,  that  the  matter  of 
the  flander  is  true  \  yet  no  man's  reputation  is  conH- 
derably  ftained,  though  never  fo  defervedly,  with- 
out great  harm  and  damage  to  him.  And  it  is  great 
odds  but  the  matter  by  paffing  through  feveral  hands 
is  aggravated  beyond  truth,  every  one  out  of  his 
bounty  being  apt  to  add  fomething  to  it. 

But  befides  the  injury,    it  is  commonly  a  very 

high  provocation.     And  the  confequence  of  that 

4  N  2  may 


204  Again ji  ei^tl'fpeaUng. 

S  E  R  M.  may  be  as  bad  as  we  can  imagine,  and  may  end  in 
^.^  _'_^  dangerous  and  defperate  quarrels.  This  reafon  the 
wife  fon  of  Sirach  gives  why  we  fliould  defame  no 
man  :  "  whether  it  be,'*  fays  he,  "  to  a  friend  or 
"  a  foe,  talk  not  of  other  men's  lives.  For  he  hath 
"  heard  and  obferved  thee  j'*  that  is,  one  way  or 
other  it  will  probably  come  to  his  knowledge,  "  and 
**  when  the  time  cometh  he  will  fliew  his  hatred  *,'* 
that  is,  he  will  take  the  firft  opportunity  to  revenge  it. 
At  the  belt,  it  is  always  matter  of  grief  to  the  pcr- 
fon  that  is  defamed  :  and  Chriftianity,  which  is  the 
beft-natured  inftitution  in  the  world,  forbids  us  the 
doing  of  thole  things  whereby  we  may  grieve  one 
another.  A  man's  good  name  is  a  tender  thing, 
and  a  wound  there  finks  deep* into  the  fpirit  even  of 
a  wife  and  goodjman  :  and  ^}{iQ.  more  innocent  any 
man  is  in  this  kind,  the  more  fsnfible  is  he  of  this 
hard  ufage;  becaufe  he  never  treats  others  fo,  nor 
is  he'confcious  to  himfelf  that  he  hath  deferved  it. 

Secondly,  the  confequenccs  of  this  vice  are  as  bad 
or  worfe  to  our  fclves.  Whoever  is  wont  to  fpeak 
evil  of  others,  gives  a  bad  character  of  himfelf,  even 
to  tliofe  whom  he  defires  to  pleafe  ;  who,  if  they 
be  wife  enough,  will  conclude  that  he  fpeaks  of  them 
to  others,  as  he  does  of  others  to  them  :  and  were  it 
not'  tor  that  fond  partiality  which  men  have  for 
themfelves,  no  man  could  be  fo  blind  as  not  to  fee 

this. 

And  it  is  very  well  worthy  of  our  confideration, 
which  our  Saviour  fays  in  this  very  cafe,  that 
"  with  what  meafare  we  mete  to  others,  it  lliall  be 
*'  mealured  to  us  again  ;'*  and  that  many  times 
"  heaped  up,  and  running  over."      For  there  is 

hardly 


Mat.  vii. 


Agmnfl  evil-fpeaking».  205^ 

hardly  any   thing  wherein   mankind  do  ufe  more  SERM. 
llri<ft  juftice  and  equality;  than  "  in  rendering  evil  ^J,,.,^^ 
"  for  evil,  and  railing  for  railing.'* 

Nay,  revenge  often  goes  further  than  words.  A 
reproachful  and  flanderous  fpeech  hath  cod  many  a 
man  a  duel,  and  in  that  the  lofsof  his  own  life,  or  the 
murther  of  another,  perhaps  with  the  lofs  of  his 
own  foul :  and  I  have  otten  wondered  that  among 
Chriilians  this  matter  is  no  more  laid  to  heart. 

And  though  neither  of  thefe  great  mifchiefs  Ihould 
happen  to  us,  yet  this  may  be  inconvenient  enough 
many  other  ways.    For  no  man  knows  in  the  chance 
of  things,  and  the  mutability  of  human  affairs,  whole 
kindnefs  and  good-will  he  may  come  toftandin  need 
of  before  he  dies.  So  that  did  a  man  only  confult  his 
own  fafety  and  quiet,  he  ought  to  Kfrain  from  evil- 
fpeaking,     "  What  man  is  he,"  faith  the  pfalmift,  pf.^jn^ 
t'  that  defireth  life,  and  lovcth  many  days,  that  he  xxxiv.  12, 
"  may  fee  good  :  keep  thy  tongue  from  evil,    and  '^' 
"  thy  lips  from  fpeaking  falfhood." 

But  there  is  an  infinitely  greater  danger  hanging 
over  us   from  God.     If  we  allow  our  felves  in  this 
evil  practice,  all  our  religion  is  good  for  nothing. 
So  St.  James  exprefly  tells  us,  "  if  any  man  among  jam.  i.  26. 
"  you  feemeth  to  be  religious,    and  bridleth  not  his 
"  tongue,  but  deceiveth  his  own  heart,  that  man's 
"  religion  is  vain."     And  St.  Paul  puts  flanderers 
and  revilers  amongft  thofethat  "  Ihall  not  inherit  the  1  cdr.  vij 
'*  kingdom  of  God."     And  our  blelTed  Saviour  ^^' 
hath  told  us,  that  "  by  our  words  we  fhall  be  jufti- 
"  fied,  and  by  our  words  we  fhall  be  condemned." 
To  which  I  will  add  the  counfel  given  us  by  the  wife- 
njan,  *'  refrain  your  tongue  from  back-biting,  for 


2o6  Againfi  evil-fpeaking. 

SE  R  M.  «  there  is  no  word  fo  fecret  that  Ihall  eo  for  nought, 

XLII  o     ' 

^_    _;^  **  and  the  mouth  that  flandereth  flayeth  the  foul." 

Wifdom    I  proceed  in  the 
of  Solo-         •^ 


men,  c.  1. 

V.  II. 


IVth  place,  to  add  fome  further  arguments  and 
confiderations  to  take  men  off  from  this  vice :  as, 

Firft,  thattheufeoffpecch  is  a  peculiar  prerogative 
of  man  above  other  creatures,  and  bellowed  upon 
him  for  fome  excellent  end  and  purpofe  :  that  by  this 
faculty  we  might  communicate  our  thoughts  more 
eafily  to  one  another,  and  confult  together  for  our 
mutual  comfort  and  benefit :  not  to  enable  us  to  be 
hurtful  and  injurious,  but  helpful  and  beneficial  to 
one  another.  The  pfalmift,  as  by  interpreters  is 
generally  thought,  calls  our  "tongue" our  "glory  j" 
therewith  we  "  praife  God"  and  "  blefs  men."  Now 
to  blefs  is  to  fpeak  well  of  any,  and  to  wilh  them 
well.  So  that  we  pervert  the  ufe  of  fpeech,  and 
turn  our  glory  into  fliame,  when  we  abufe  this  fa- 
culty to  the  injury  and  reproach  of  any. 

Secondly,  confider  how  cheap  a  kindnefs  it  is  to 
fpeak  well,  at  leafl  not  to  fpeak  ill  of  any.  A  good 
word  is  an  eafy  obligation,  but  not  to  fpeak  ill  re- 
quires only  our  filence,  which  cofts  us  nothing. 
Some  inftances  of  charity  are  chargeable,  as  to  re- 
lieve the  wants  and  neceffities  of  others:  the  expence 
deters  many  from  this  kind  of  charity.  But  were  a 
man  never  fo  covetous,  he  might  afford  another 
man  his  good  word  -,  at  lead  he  might  refrain  from 
fpeaking  ill  of  him:  efpecially  if  it  be  confidered 
how  dear  many  have  paid  for  a  (landerous  and  re- 
proachful word. 

2  Thirdly, 


Againfl  evil'fpcaking,  207 

Thirdly,  confider  that  no  quality  doth  ordinarily  S  E  R  M. 
recommend  one  more  to  the  favour  and  good-will  of 
men,  than  to  be  free  from  this  vice.  Every  one 
defires  fuch  a  man's  friend  (hip,  and  is  apt  to  repofe 
a  great  truft  and  confidence  in  him :  and  when  he 
is  dead,  men  will  praife  him  ;  and  next  to  piety  to- 
wards God,  and  righteoufnefs  to  men,  nothing  is 
thought  a  more  fignificant  commendation,  than  that 
he  was  never,  or  very  rarely  heard  to  fpeak  ill  of  any. 
It  was  a  fingular  character  of  a  Roman  gentleman, 
nefcivit  quid  ejfet  nmledicere,  "  he  knew  not  what  it 
"  was  to  give  any  man  an  ill  word.'* 

Fourthly,  let  every  man  lay  his  hand  upon  his 
heart,  and  confider  how  himfelf  is  apt  to  be  afFed- 
ed  with  this  ufage.  Speak  thy  confcience  man,  and 
fay  whether,  as  bad  as  thou  art,  thou  wouldft  not 
be  glad  to  have  every  man's,  efpecially  every  good 
man's  good  word  ?  And  to  have  thy  faults  conceal- 
ed, and  not  to  be  hardly  fpoken  of,  though  it  may 
be  not  altogether  without  truth,  by  thole  whom 
thou  didft  never  offend  by  word  or  deed .?  But  with 
what  face  or  reafon  doft  thou  exped:  this  from  o- 
thers,  to  whom  thy  carriage  hath  been  fo  contrary  ? 
Nothing  llirely  is  more  equal  and  reafonable  than 
that  known  rule,  "  what  thou  wouldft  have  no  man 
"  do  to  thee,  that  do  thou, to  no  man." 

Fifthly,  when  you  are  going  to  fpeak  reproach- 
fully of  others,  confider  whether  you  do  not  lie  open 
to  juft  reproach  in  the  fame,  or  fome  other  kind. 
Therefore  give  no  occafion,  no  example  of  this  bar- 
barous ufage  of  one  another. ' 

There  are  very  few  fo  innocent  and  free  either 
from  infirmities  or  greater  faults,  as  not  to  be  obnoxi- 
ous 


2o8  Againfi  evil-  fpealdng. 

SERM.  ous  to  reproach  upon  one  account  or  other  ;  even 
^  '  i  the  wifeft,  and  mod  virtuous,  and  moft  perfeft  a- 
mong  men  have  fome  Jittle  vanity,  or  affectation, 
which  lays  them  open  to  the  raillery  of  a  mimical 
and  malicious  wit :  therefore  we  fhould  often  turn 
our  thoughts  upon  our  felves,  and  look  into  that 
part  of  the  wallet  which  men  commonly  fling  over 
their  Ihoulders  and  keep  behind  them,  that  they 
may  not  fee  their  own  faults :  and  v/hen  we  have 
fearched  that  well,  let  us  remember  our  Saviour's 
rule,  *'  he  that  is  without  fm,  let  him  caft  the  firft 
"  ftone." 

Laftly  confider,  that  it  is  in  many  cafes  as  great 

,  a  charity  to  conceal  the  evil  you  hear  and  know  of 

others,  as  if  you  relieved  them  in  a  great  necefiity. 

And  we  think  him  a  hard-hearted  man  that  will  not 

beftow  a  fmall  alms  w^Ctoxi  one  in  great  want.     It  is 

an  excellent  advice  which  the  fon  of  Sirach  gives  to 

Ecclus.      this  purpofe  ;  "  talk  not  of  other  men's  lives  ;  if 

xix.  lo.     tt  thou  haft  heard  a  word,  let  it  die  with  thee  ;   and 

"  be  bold  it  will  not  burft  thee."    I  fhall  in  the 

y  Vth  and  lad  place,  give  fome  rules  and  dire<5ti- 

ons  for  the  prevention  and  cure  of  this  great  evil 
among  men. 

Firft,  never  fay  any  evii  of  any  man,  but  what 
you  certainly  know.  Whenever  you  pofitiveiy  ac- 
cufe  and  indite  any  man  of  any  crime,  though  it  be 
in  private  and  among  friends,  fpeak  as  if  you  were 
upon  your  oath,  becaufe  God  fees  and  hears  you. 
This  not  only  charity,  but  juftice  and  regard  to 
truth  do  demand  of  us.  He  that  eafily  credits  an 
ill  report  is  almoft  as  faulty  as  the  firft  inventor  ot  it. 

For 


Againji  evil-Jpeakmg.  209 

For  though  you  do  not  make,  yet  you  commonly  SERM. 
propagate  a  lie.      Therefore  never  fpeak  evil  of  any 
upon  common  fame,  which   for  the  moft  part  is 
falfe,  but  almoft  always  uncertain  whether  it  be  true 
or  not. 

Not  but  that  it  is  a  fault,  in  moll  cafes,  to  report 
the  evil  of  men  which  is  true,  and  which  we  certain- 
ly know  to  be  fo  :  but  if  I  cannot  prevail  to  make 
men  wholly  to  abftain  from  this  fault,  I  would  be 
glad  to  compound  with  fome  perfons,  and  to  gain 
this  point  of  them  however ;  becaufe  it  will  re- 
trench nine  parts  in  ten  of  the  evil-fpeaking  that  is. 
in  the  world. 

Secondly,  before  you  fpeak  evil  of  any  man,  con- 
fidcr  whether  he  hath  not  obliged  you  by  fome  real 
kindnefs,  and  then  it  is  a  bad  return  to  fpeak  ill  of 
him  who  hath  done  us  good.  Confider  alfo,  whether 
you  may  not  come  hereafter  to  be  acquainted  with 
him,  related  to  him,  or  obliged  by  him  whom  you 
have  thus  injured  ?  And  how  will  you  then  be  afham- 
cd  when  you  refledt  upon  it,  and  perhaps  have  rea- 
fon  alfo  to  believe  that  he  to  whom  you  have  done 
this  injury  is  not  ignorant  of  it  } 

Confider  iikewife,  whether  in  the  chance  of  hu- 
man affairs,  you  may  not  fome  time  or  other  come 
to  ftand  in  need  of  his  favour;  and  how  incapable 
this  carriage  of  yours  towards  him  will  render  you 
of  it.?  And  whether  it  may  not  be  in  his  power  to 
revenge  a  fpiteful  and  needlefs  word  by  a  fhrev/d 
turn  ^.  So  that  if  a  man  made  no  confcience  of  hurt- 
ing others,  yet  he  ihould  in  prudence  have  fome 
confideration  of  himfelf. 

Vol.  Ill,  4O  Thirdly, 

4. 


Againfi  evil'fpeaking. 

Thirdly,  let  us  accuflom  our  felves  to  pity  the 
faults  of  men,  and  to  be  truly  forry  for  them,  and 
then  we  Ihall  take  no  pleafure  in  publifhing  them. 
And  this  common  humanity  requires  of  us,  confider- 
ing  the  great  infirmities  of  human  nature,  and  that 
we  our  felves  alfo  are  liable  to  be  tempted  :  confider- 
ing  likewife,  how  fevere  a  punifhment  every  fault 
and  mifcarriage  is  to  itfelf;  and  how  terribly  it 
cxpofeth  a  man  to  the  wrath  of  God,  both  in  this 
world  and  the  other.  He  is  not  a  good  Chriftian, 
that  is  not  heartily  forry  for  the  faults  even  of  his 
greateft  enemies  \  and  if  he  be  fo,  he  will  difcover 
them  no  farther  than  is  neceffary  to  fome  good  end. 

Fourthly,  whenever  we  hear  any  man  evil-fpok- 
en  of,  if  we  know  any  good  of  him  let  us  fay  that. 
It  is  always  the  more  iicimane  and  the  more  honour- 
able part  to  ftand  up  in  the  defence  and  vindication 
of  others,  than  to  accufe  and  befpatter  them.  Pof- 
fibly  the  good  you  have  heard  of  them  may  not  be 
true,  but  it  is  mucli  more  probable  that  the  evil 
which  you  have  heard  of  them  is  not  true  neither : 
however,  it  is  better  to  preferve  the  credit  of  a  bad 
man,  than  to  ftain  the  reputation  of  the  innocent. 
And  if  there  were  any  need  that  a  man  fliould  be 
evil-fpoken  of,  it  is  but  fair  and  equal  that  his  good 
and  bad  qualities  fliould  be  mentioned  together ; 
otherwife  he  may  be  flrangely  mifreprefented,  and 
an  indifferent  man  may  be  made  a  monfter. 

They  that  will  obferve  nothing  in  a  wife  man, 
but  his  over  fights  and  follies ;  nothing  in  a  good 
man,  but  his  failings  and  infirmities,  may  make  a 
fhift  to  render  a  very  wife  and  good  man  very  de- 
fpicable.     If  one  fhculd  heap  together  all  the  paf- 

fionatc 


j^galnji  evil-ffeaking,  211 

fionate  fpeeches,  all  the  froward  and  imprudent  ac-  S  E  R  M. 
tions  of  the  beft  man  ;  all  that  he  had  faid  or  done  '  ' 
amifs  in  his  whole  life,  and  prefent  it  all  at  one  view, 
concealing  his  wifdom  and  virtues  ;  the  man  in  this 
difguiie  would  look  like  a  mad-man  or  a  fury :  and 
yet  it  his  life  were  fairly  reprefented,  and  juft  in  the 
fame  manner  it  v/as  led ;  and  his  many  and  great 
virtur^s  fet  over  againft  his  failings  and  infirmities, 
he  would  appear  to  all  the  world  to  be  an  admirable 
and  exrelknt  perfon.  But  how  many  and  great  fo- 
ever  a:iy  mar/s  ill  qualities  are,  it  is  but  juft  that 
with  all  this  heavy  load  of  faults  he  fliould  have 
the  due  praife  of  the  few  real  virtues  that  are  in 
him. 

Fifthly,  that  you  may  not  fpeak  ill  of  any,  do 
not  delight  to  hear  ill  of  them.  Give  no  counte- 
nance to  bufy-bodies,  and  thofe  that  love  to  talk  of 
other  men's  fliults :  or  if  you  cannot  decently  re- 
prove them  becaufeof  their  quality,  then  divert  the 
difcourfe  fome  other  way  ;  or  if  you  cannot  do 
that,  by  feeming  not  to  mind  it,  you  may  fuffici- 
cntly  fignify  that  you  do  not  like  it. 

Sixthly,  let  every  m.an  mind  himfelf,  and  his  own 
duty  and  concei-nment.  Do  but  endeavour  in  good 
earneft  to  mend  thy  felf,  and  it  will  be  work  enough 
for  one  man,  and  leave  thee  but  little  time  to  talk 
of  others.  When  Plato  withdrevv-  from  the  court  of 
Dionyfius,  who  would  fain  have  had  a  famous  phi- 
lofopher  for  his  flatterer,  they  parted  in  fome  un- 
kindnefs,  and  Dionyfius  bade  him  not  to  fpeak  ill  of 
him  when  he  was  returned  into  Greece  ;  Plato  told 
him,  "  he  had  no  leifure  for  it  ;"  meaning,  that  he 
had  better  things  to  mind,  than  to  take  up  his 
4  O  2  thoughts 


2  T  2  Againft  evll-fpeaUng. 

S  E  R  M.  thoughts  and  talk  with  the  faults  of  fo  bad  a  man, 
fo  notorloufiy  known  to  all  the  world. 

Laftly,  let  us  fet  a  watch  before  the  door  of  our  lips, 
and  not  fpeak  but  upon  confideration  :  I  do  not  mean 
to  fpeak  finely,  but  fitly.  Efpecially  when  thou 
fpeakeft  of  others,  confider  of  whom,  and  what  thou 
art  going  to  fpeak :  ufe  great  caution  and  circum- 
fpeftion  in  this  matter:  look  well  about  thee;  on 
every  fide  cf  the  thing,  and  on  every  perfon  in  the 
company,  before  thy  words  flip  from  thee ;  which 
when  they  are  once  out  of  thy  lips,  are  for  ever  out 
of  thy  power. 

Not  that  men  fhould  be  fuHen  In  company,  and 
fay  nothing;  or  fo  ftiff  in  converfation,  as  to  drop 
nothing  but  aphorifms  and  oracles  :  efpecially,  a- 
mong  equals  and  friends,  we  fliould  not  be  fo  referv- 
ed  as  if  we  would  have  it  taken  for  a  mighty  favour 
that  we  vouchfafe  to  fay  any  thing.  If  a  man  had 
the  underftanding  of  an  angel,  he  mufl:  be  content- 
ed to  abate  fomething  of  this  excefs  of  wifdom,  for 
fear  of  being  thought  cunning.  The  true  art  of 
converfation,  if  any  body  can  hit  upon  it,  feems  to 
be  this  i  an  appearing  freedom  and  opennefs,  with 
a  refolute  refervednefs  as  little  appearing  as  is  pof- 
fible. 

All  that  I  mean  by  this  caution  is,  that  we  Ihould 
confider  well  what  we  fay,  efpecially  of  others.  And 
to  this  end  we  Ihould  endeavour  to  get  our  minds 
furnilTied  with  matter  of  difcourfe  concerning  things 
ufeful  in  themfelves,  and  not  hurtful  to  others  :  and, 
if  vv-e  have  but  a  mind  wife  enough,  and  good  e- 
nough,  we  may  eafily  find  a  field  large  enough  for 
innocent  converfciticn  ;  fuch  as  will  harm  no  body, 

and 


Agalnjl  evil-fpeaking.  s.i^ 

and  yet  be  acceptable  enough  to  the  better  and  \vi-  S  E  R  M.' 
fcr  part  of  mankind  :  and  v^hy  fhould  any  one  be 
at  the  coft  of  playing  the  fool  to  gratify  any  body 
whatfoever  ? 

I  have  done  with  the  five  things  I  propounded  to 
fpeak  to  upon  this  argument.  But  becaufe  hardly 
any  thing  can  be  fo  clear,  but  fomething  may  be 
faid  againftit ;  nor  any  thing  fo  bad,  but  fomething 
may  be  pleaded  in  excufe  for  it :  I  fhall  therefore 
take  notice  of  two  or  three  pleas  that  may  be  made 
for  it. 

Firft,  fome  pretend  mighty  injury  and  provocati- 
on. If  in  the  fame  kind,  it  feems  thou  art  fenfible 
of  it ;  and  therefore  thou  of  ail  men  oughteft  to  ab- 
ftain  from  it  :  but  in  what  kind  foever  it  be,  the 
Chriftian  religion  forbids  revenge.  Therefore  do 
not  plead  one  fin  in  excufe  of  another,  and  make  re- 
venge an  apology  for  reviling. 

Secondly,  it  is  alledged  by  others,  with  a  little 
better  grace,  that  if  this  doctrine  were  praftifed, 
converfation  would  be  fpoiled,  and  there  would  not 
be  matter  enough  for  pleafant  difcourfe  and  enter- 
tainment. 

I  anfwer,  the  defign  of  this  difcourfe  Is  to  redrels 
a  great  evil  in  converfation,  and  that  I  hope  which 
ipends  it  will  not  fpoil  it.  And  however,  if  men's 
tongues  lay  a  little  more  ftill,  and  mod  of  us  fpake 
a  good  deal  lefs  than  we  do,  both  of  our  felves  and 
others,  I  fee  no  great  harm  in  it :  I  hope  we  might 
for  all  that  live  comfortably  and  in  good  health,  and 
fee  many  good  days.  David,  I  am  fure,  prefcribes 
it  as  an  excellent  receipt,  in  his  opinion,  for  a  quiet, 
and  cheerful,  and  long  life,  to  refrain  from  evil- 

fpeak- 


13 


2  14  Againjl  evil-fpeaking, 

^  XLlT '    ^P^^klng ;  "  what  man  is  he  that  defireth  life,  and 
u^-^, — ;  "  loveth  many  days  that  he  may  fee  good  ?  Keep 
Pfal.      «  thy  tongue  from  evil,  and  thy  lips  from  fpeaking 
""r^' '"'  «  falfhood/' 

But  granting  that  there  is  fome  pleafure  in  invec- 
tive, I  hope  there  is  a  great  deal  more  in  innocence  : 
and  the  more  any  man  confiders  this,  the  truer  he 
will  find  it;  and  whenever  we  are  ferious,  we  our 
felves  cannot  but  acknowledge  it.  When  a  man 
examines  himfelf  impartially  before  the  facrament, 
or  is  put  in  mind  upon  a  death-bed  to  make  repara- 
tion for  injuries  done  in  this  kind,  he  will  then  cer- 
tainly be  of  this  mind,  and  wifli  he  had  not  done 
them.  For  this  certainly  is  one  neceffary  qualifica- 
tion for  the  bleffed  facram.ent,  that  we  "  be  in  love 
"  and  charity  with  our  neighbours;'*  with  which 
temper  of  mind  this  quality  is  utterly  inconfiflent. 

Thirdly,  there  is  yet  a  more  fpecious  plea  than 
either  of  the  former,  that  men  will  be  encouraged  to 
do  ill  if  they  can  efcape  the  tongues  of  men  ;  as  they 
would  do,  if  this  doftrine  did  effeftually  take  place : 
becaufe  by  this  means  one  great  reftraint  from  doing 
evil  would  be  taken  away,which  thefe  good  men,  who 
are  fo  bent  upon  reforming  the  world,  think  v/ould 
be  great  pity.  For  many  who  will  venture  upon 
the  difpleafure  of  God,  will  yet  abllain  from  doing 
l^d  things  for  fear  of  reproach  from  men  :  befidcs, 
'  that  this  feems  the  moib  proper  punifnmtnt  of 
many  faults  which  the  laws  of  men  can  take  no  no- 
tice of. 

Admitting  all  this  to  be  true,  yet  it  does  not  feem 
fo  good  and  laudable  a  way  to  puniili  one  fault  by 
another :  but  \^t  no  man  encourage  himfelf  in  an 

evil 


Againfi  eml-fpeaking.  21^ 

evil  way  with  this  hope,  that  he  Ihall  efcape  the  SE  R  M. 
cenfure  of  men :  when  I  have  faid  all  I  can,  there 
will,  I  fear,  be  evil-fpeaking  enough  in  the  world 
to  chaftife  them  that  do  ill  :  and  though  we  fliould 
hold  our  peace,  there  will  be  bad  tongues  enow  to 
reproach  men  with  their  evil  doings.  I  wifh  we 
could  but  be  perfuaded  to  make  the  experiment  for 
a  little  while,  whether  men  would  not  be  fufHcient- 
ly  lafhed  for  their  faults,  though  we  fat  by  and  faid 
nothing. 

So  that  there  is  no  need  at  all  that  good  men 
fhould  be  concerned  in  this  odious  work.  There 
will  always  be  offenders  and  malefa6tors  enow  to  be 
the  executioners  to  inflift  this  punifhment  upon  one 
another.  Therefore  let  no  man  prefume  upon  im- 
punity on  the  oee  hand  j  and  on  the  other,  let  no 
man  defpair  but  that  this  bufinefs  will  be  fufiiciently 
done  one  way  or  other.  I  am  very  much  miftaken, 
if  we  may  not  fafsly  trufl  an  ill-natured  world  that 
there  will  be  no  failure  of  juftice  in  this  kind. 

And  here,  if  I  durft,  I  would  fain  have  faid  a  word 
or  two  concerning  that  more  publick  fort  of  obloquy 
by  lampoons  and  libels,  fo  much  in  falhion  in  this 
witty  age.  But  1  have  no  mind  to  provoke  a  very 
terrible  fort  of  men.  Yet  thus  much  I  hope  may 
be  faid  without  offence,  that  how  much  foever  men 
are  pleafed  to  fee  others  abufed  in  this  kind,  yet  it 
is  always  grievous  when  it  comes  to  their  own  turn : 
however  I  cannot  but  hope  that  every  man  that  im- 
partially confiders,  muft  own  it  to  be  a  fault  of  a 
very  high  nature,  to  revile  thofe  whom  God  hath 
placed  in  authority  over  us,  and  "  to  fiander  the 
"  footfteps  of  the  Lord's  anointed;"  efpecially 
2  fmce 


2 1 6  Agalnji  evil-Jpeaking. 

SER  M.    fince  it  Is  fo  exprefly  written,  "  thoulhalt  not  fpeak 
''  evil  of  the  rulers  of  thy  people." 

Having  reprefented  the  great  evil  of  this  vice.  It 
might  not  now  be  improper  to  fay  fomething  to  thofe 
who  fuffer  by  it.  Are  we  guilty  of  the  evil  faid  of 
us  ?  Let  us  reform,  and  cut  off  all  occafions  for  the 
future ;  and  fo  turn  the  malice  of  our  enemies  to 
our  own  advantage,  and  defeat  their  ill  intentions  by 
,  making  fo  good  an  ufe  of  it :  and  then  it  will  be  well 
''  for  us  to  have  been  evil-fpoken  of. 

Are  we  innocent  ?  We  may  fo  much  the  better 
bear  it  patiently ;  imitating  herein  the  pattern  of 
our  blefled  Saviour,  "  who  when  he  was  reviled, 
<«  reviled  not  again,  but  committed  himfelftahim 
"  that  judgeth  righteoufly.'* 

"We  may  confider  likewife,  that  though  it  be  a 
misfortune  to  be  evil-fpoken  of,  it  is  their  fault  that 
do  it,  and  not  ours  ;  and  therefore  fliould  not  put 
us  into  palTion  :  becaufe  another  man's  being  injuri- 
ous to  me  is  no  good  reafon  why  I  fhould  be  uneafy 
to  my  felf.  We  fliould  not  revenge  the  injuries 
done  to  us,  no  not  upon  them  that  do  them,  much 
lefs  upon  our  felves.  Let  no  man's  provocation  make 
thee  lofe  thy  patience.  Be  not  fuch  a  fool,  as  to 
part  with  any  one  virtue,  becaufe  fome  men  are  fo 
malicious  as  to  endeavour  to  rob  thee  of  the  reputa- 
tion of  all  the  reil.  When  men  fpeak  ill  of  thee, 
do  as  Plato  faid  he  would. do  in  that  cafe  ;  "  live  fo> 
♦♦  as  that  no  body  may  believe  them." 

All  that  now  remains  is  to  refled  upon  what  hath 
been  faid,  and  to  urge  you  and  niy  felf  to  do  accord- 
ingly. For  all  is  nothing,  if  we  do  not  prailife  what 
we  fo  plainly  fee  to  be  our  duty.  Many  are  fo  taken 

up 


Againji  evil-fpeaking,  217 

up  with  the  deep  points  and  my  fteries  of  religion,  that  S  E  R  M. 
they  never  think  of  the  com  mon  duties  and  offices  of  hu- 
man Hfe.  Butjfaith  and  a  good  life  are  fo  far  from  clalh- 
ing  with  one  another,  that  the  Chriftian  religion  hath 
made  them  infeparable.  True  faith  is  neceffary  in 
order  to  a  good  life,  and  a  good  life  is  the  genuine 
product  of  a  right  belief;  and  therefore  the  one 
never  ought  to  be  preflfed  to  the  prejudice  of  the 
other. 

I  forefee  what  will  be  faid ,  becaufe  I  have 
heard  it  fo  often  faid  in  the  like  cafe  ;  that  there  is 
not  one  word  of  Jesus  Christ  in  all  tliis.  No  more 
is  there  in  the  text.  And  yet  I  hope  that  Jesus 
Christ  is  truly  preached,  whenever  his  will  and 
laws,  and  the  duties  injoined  by  the  Chriftian  religi- 
on, are  inculcated  upon  us. 

But  fome  men  are  pleafed  to  fay,  that  this  is  mere 
morality :  I  anfwer,  that  this  is  fcripture  morality, 
and  Chriftian  morality,  and  who  hath  any  thing  to 
fay  ^gainft  that  ?  Nay,  I  will  go  yet  farther,  that 
no  man  ought  to  pretend  to  believe  the  Chriftian  re- 
ligion, who  lives  in  the  negledt  of  fo  plain  a  duty  ; 
and  in  the  praftice  of  a  fin  fo  clearly  condemned  by 
it,  as  this  of  evil-fpeaking  is. 

But  becaufe  "  the  word  of  God  is  quick  and  pow- 
*'  erful,  and  ftiarper  than  a  two  edged  fword,"  yea 
fharper  than  calumny  it  felf;  and  pierceth  the  very 
hearts  and  confciences  of  men,  laying  us  open  to  our 
felves,  and  convincing  us  of  our  more  fecret  as  well 
as  our  more  vifible  faults;  I  ftiall  therefore  at  one  view 
reprefent  to  you  what  is  difperfedly  faid  concerning 
this  fin  in  the  holy  word  of  God. 

Vol.  III.  4  P  And 

4- 


2i8  Againll  evil-Jpeaking. 

S  E  R  M.       And  I  have  purpofely  referved  this  to  the  lafl:,  be- 
^      -  _t  canfe  it  is  more  perfuafive  and  penetrating  than  any 
human  difcourfe.     And  to  this  end  be   pleafed  to 
confider  in  what  company  the  Holy  Ghoft  doth  ufu- 
ally  mention  this  fin.     There  is  fcarce  any  black  ca- 
talogue of  fins  in  the  bible  but  we  find  this  among 
them  •,  in  the  company  of  the  very  worft  adions  and 
Matt  XV  "^o^  irregular  pafTions  of  men.    "  Out  of  the  heart," 
19.  fays  our  Saviour,  "  proceed  evil   thoughts,  mur- 

"  ders,  adulteries,  fornications,  falfe-witnefs,  evil- 
Rom,  i.  "  fpsakings.'*  And  the  apollle  ranks  "  back-biters" 
29-  with  "  fornicators,"  and  "  murderers,"  and  "  haters 

"""ofGoD;"  and  with  thofe  of  whom  it  is  expredy 
1  Cor.  vi.  fald,  that  "  they  fhall  not  inherit  the  kingdom  of 
*°-  «  God." 

And  when  he  enumerates  the  fins  of  the  laft 
zTira.  iii.  times,  "  men,"  fays  he,  "  fhall  be  lovers  of  them- 
*'  ^"  "  felves,  covetous,  boafters,  evil-fpeakers,  without 
*«  natural  affection,  perfidious,  falfe  accufers,"  &c. 
And  which  is  the  ftrangeft  of  all,  they  who  are  faid 
to  be  guilty  of  thefe  great  vices  and  enormities  are 
noted  by  the  apoftle  to  be  great  pretenders  to  religi- 
on ',  for  fo  it  follows  in  the  next  words,  "  having  a 
"  form  of  godlinefs,  but  denying  the  power  there- 
"  of"  So  that  it  is  no  new  thing  for  men  to  make 
a  more  than  ordinary  profefiion  of  Chriftianity,  and 
yet  at  the  fame  time  to  live  in  a  mod  palpable  con- 
tradiftion  to  the  precepts  of  that  holy  religion :  as  if 
any  pretence  to  myftery,  and  I  know  not  what  extra- 
ordinary attainments  in  the  knowledge  of  Christ, 
could  exempt  men  from  obedience  to  his  laws,  and 
fet  them  above  the  virtues  of  a  good  life. 

And 


Againfi  evth^eaking.  ^ig 

And  now  after  all  this,  do  we  hardly  think  thatSERM. 
to  be  a  fin,  which  is  in  fcripture  fo  frequently  rank- .  -  -'j 
ed  with  miirther  and  adultery  and  the  blackeft  crimes ; 
fuch  as  are  inconfiftent  with  the  life  and  power  of 
religion,  and  will  certainly  fhut  men  out  of  the  king- 
dom of  God  ?  Do  we  believe  the  bible  to  be  the 
word  of  God  ?  And  can  we  allow  our  felves  in  the 
common  practice  of  a  fin,  than  which  there  is  hardly 
any  fault  of" men's  lives  more  frequently  mentioned, 
more  feverely  reproved,  and  more  odioufly  branded 
in   that  holy  book? 

Confider  ferioufly  thefe  texts.  "  Who  fhall  abide  Pfal.xv.i. 
"  in  thy  tabernacle,  who  fhall  dwell  in  thy  holy 
"  hill  ?  He  that  back-biteth  not  with  his  tongue, 
*'  nor  taketh  up  a  reproach  againft  his  neighbour." 
Have  you  never  heard  what  our  Saviour  fays,  that 
"  of  every  idle  word  We  mull:  give  an  account  in  the 
*'  day  of  judgment  i"  that  "  by  thy  words  thou 
•'  fhalt  be  juftified,  and  by  thy  words  thoii  fhalt  be 
"  condemned  .''*'  What  can  be  more  fevere  than 
that  of  St.  James  ?  "  If  ^ny  man  among  you  feem- 
"  cth  to  be  religious,  and  bridlcth  not  his  tongue, 
"  that  man's  religion  is  vain. 

To  conclude :  the  fin,  which  I  have  now  warned 
men  againft,  is  plainly  condemned  by  the  word  of 
God  i  and  the  duty  which  I  have  now  been  perfuad- 
ing  you  to,  is  eafy  for  every  man  to  underftand, 
not  hard  for  any  man,  that  can  but  refolve  to  keep 
a  good  guard  upon  himfelffor  fome  time,  by  the 
grace  of  God  to  pradtife  ;  and  moft  reafonable  for 
all  men,  but  efpecially  for  all  Chriftians,  to  obferve. 
It  is  as  eafy  as  a  refolute  filence  upon  juft:  occafion 
as  reafonable  as  prudence  and  jullice  and  charity, 

4  P  2  and 


2  2  o  Againji  evil-fpeaktng. 

SE  RM.  and  the  prefervation  of  peace  and  good-will  among 
^     _^'_;  men,  can  make  it  -,  and  of  as  neceflary  and  indifpenfa- 
ble  an  obligation,  as  the  authority  of  God  can  render 
any  thing. 

Upon  all  which  confiderations  let  every  one  of 
us  be  perfuaded  to  take  up  David's  deliberate  refoluti- 
Pfal.  Q^^  u  I  ^^j  j^  J  ^r[\i  take  heed  to  my  ways,  that  I  offend 
"  not  with  my  tongue,'*  And  I  do  verily  believe,  that 
would  we  but  heartily  endeavour  to  amend  this  one 
fault,  we  fhould  foon  be  better  men  in  our  whole 
lives :  I  mean,  that  the  correding  of  this  vice,  toge- 
ther with  thofe  that  are  nearly  allied  to  it,  and  may 
at  the  fame  time,  and  almoft  with  the  fame  refolution 
and  care  be  correfted,  would  make  us  owners  of  a 
great  many  confiderable  virtues,  and  carry  us  on  a 
good  way  towards  perfection  j  it  being  hardly  to 
be  imagined  that  a  man  that  makes  confcience  of  his 
words  fhould  not  take  an  equal  or  a  greater  care  of 
his  adlions.  And  this  I  take  to  be  both  the  true 
meaning,  and  the  true  reafon  of  that  faying  of  St. 
'James,  and  with  v/hich  1  fhall  conclude :  "  if  any 
"  man  offend  not  in  word,  the  fame  is  a  perfed: 
"  man." 

"  Now  the  God  of  peace,  who  brought  again 
"  from  the  dead  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the 
"  great  fliepherd  of  the  flieep,  through  the 
'*  blood  of  the  everlafting  covenant,  make  you 
"  perfed  in  every  good  word  and  work,  to  do 
"  his  will ;  working  in  you  always  that  which 
"  is  well-pleafing  in  his  fight,  through  Jesus 
"  Christ  ;"  to  whom  be  glory  for  ever, Amen. 

I  THE 


THE 

DIVINITY 

AND 

INCARNATION 


O  F    O  U  R 


Blefled  Saviour. 


222 

A  N 


Advertifement 

T  O    T  H  E 

READER. 

THE  following  fermo?is  were 
preached  fever al  years  ago^  in 
the  church  of  St,  Lawrence -yewry  in 
London ;  and  being  now  revifed  and  en^ 
larged  by  the  author  are  here  made  pub- 
lick :  the  true  reafon  whereof ^  was  not 
that  which  is  commonly  alledged  for 
printing  books ^  the  importunity  offrie7ids\ 
but  the  importunate  clamours  and  mali- 
cious calumnies  of  others^  whom  the  au- 
thor heartily  prays  Qovi  to  forgive^  and 
to  give  them  be$ter  minds  :  and  to  grant 
that  the  enfuing  difcourfesy  the  publi- 
cation whereof  was  info  great  a  degree 
necejfary^  7nay  by  his  blefftng  prove  i7i 
fome  meafure  ufefuU 

S  E  R- 


223 

SERMON     XLIII. 

Concerning  the  divinity  of  our  bleffed 
Saviour. 

Preached  in  the  church  of  St.  Lawrence-Jury, 
December  30,   1679. 


JOHN    i.    14. 

Ilbe  Word  was  made  flejh,  and  dwelt  amongfl  us ;  and 
we  beheld  his  glory ^  the  glory  as  of  the  only  begotten 
of  the  Father^  full  of  grace  and  truth. 

THESE  words  contain  in  them  three  great  SERM. 
points  concerning  our  bleffed  Saviour,  the    XLIH. 
author  and  founder  of  our  faith  and  religion. 

Firft,  his  incarnation, "  the  Word  was  made,"  or 
became,  «  flelh." 

Secondly,  his  life  and  converfation  here  among 
us,  "and  dwelt  among  us," so-xfoywo-gy  b>  ^jaTv,  he  pitch- 
ed his  tabernacle  among  us  •,  he  lived  here  below  in 
this  world,  and  for  a  time  made  his  refidence  and  a- 
bode  with  us. 

Thirdly,  that  in  this  ftate  of  his  humiliation  he 
gave  great  and  clear  evidence  of  his  divinity  ;  whilfl: 
he  appeared  as  a  man  and  lived  amongft  us,  there 
were  great  and  glorious  teftimonies  given  of  him 
that  he  was  the  Son  of  God  :  and  that  in  fo  peculiar 
a  manner  as  no  creature  can  be  faid  to  be  :  "  and  we 
*'  beheld  his  glory,  the  glory  as  of  the  only  begot- 
«  ten  of  the  Fathec,  &c."  I  Ihall 


224  Concerning  the  divinity  of 

S  E  R  M,       I  Hiall  begin  with  the  firfl  of  thefe,  his  incarnati- 

XLIII 
^  --'  J  on ;  as  moft  proper  for  this  folemn  time,  which  hath 

for  many  ages  been  {tx.  apart  for  the  commemorati- 
on of  the  nativity  and  incarnation  of  our  blefled  Sa- 
viour :  "  the  Word  was  made  flefh,"  that  is,  he 
who  is  perfonally  called  the  Word,  and  whom  the 
cvangelift  St.  John  had  fo  fully  defcribed  in  the  be- 
ginning of  this  gofpel,  he  became  flefh,  that  is,  af- 
fumed  our  nature  and  became  man ;  for  fo  the  word 
flefh  is  frequently  ufed  in  fcripture  for  man  or  hu- 
Pfal.  Ixv.  man  nature :  "  O  thou  that  heareft  prayer,  unto 
*•  «  thee  fhall  all  flefh  come,"  that  is,  to  thee  fhall  all 

Ifa.  xl.5.  men  addrefs  their  fupplications :  again,  "  the  glory 
*^'  "  of  the  Lord  fhall  be  revealed,  and  all  flefh  fhall 

*'  fee  it  together",  that  is,  all  men  fhall  behold  and 
acknowledge  it ;  and  then  it  follows,  "  all  flefh 
*'  is  grafs,"  fpeaking  of  the  frailty  and  mortality  of 
man :  and  fo  likewife  in  the  new  teftament,  our 
bleffed  Saviour  foretelling  the  mifery  that  was 
Mat.xxlv.  coming  upon  the  Jewifh  nation,  fays,  "  except 
^^*  "  thofe  days  fhould  be  Ihortned  no  flefh  fhould  be 

*'  faved,"  that  is,  no  man  fhould  efcape  and  furvive 
that  great  calamity  and  deflrudtion  which  was  com- 
Cal.ii.i6.  ing  upon  them  :  "  by  the  works  of  the  law,"  fays 
the  apoflle,  "  fhall  no  flefh,"  that  is,  no  man  "  be 
<'jufl:ified." 

So  that  by  the  Word's  being  made  or  becoming 
flefh,  the  evangelifl  did  not  intend  that  he  aflfumed 
only  a  human  body  without  a  foul,  and  was  united 
only  to  a  human  body,  which  was  the  herefy  of 
Apollinaris,  and  his  followers,  but  that  he  became 
man,  that  is,  afTumed  the  whole  human  nature, 
Ipody  and  foul.    And  it  is  likewife  very  probable 

that 


our  blcjJed^Awio-uv^.  225 

that  the  evangelift  did  purpofely  chufethe  word'flefli,  S  E  R  M. 
which  fignifies  the  frail  and  n:ortal  part  of  man,  to  /  _  .  'j 
denote   to  us   that  the  Son  of  God  did  alTume  our 
nature  with  all  it's  infirmities,  and  became  fubjedl 
to  the  common  frailty  and  mortality  of  human  na- 
ture. 

The  words  thus  explained  contain  that "  great  my- 
"  (lery  of  godlinefs,"  as  the  apoftle  calls  it,  or  of  the 
Chriftian  religion,  viz.  the  incarnation  of  the  Son  of 
God,  which  St.  Paul  expreifcth  by  the  appearance 
or  manifeftation  of  God  in  the  flefh,  "  and  without  i  Timiii, 
"  controverfy  great  is  the  mydery  of  godlinefs,  '^' 
"  God  was  manifefted  in  the  fledi,"  that  is,  he  ap- 
peared in  human  nature,  he  became  man  ;  or,  as 
St.  John  exprefleth  it  in  the  text,  "  the  Word  was 
«  made  fleni." 

But  for  the  more  clear  and  full  explication  of  thefe- 
words,  we  will  confider  thefe  two  things. 

Firfl,  the  perfon  that  is  here  fpoken  of,  and  who 
is  faid  to  be  incarnate  or  to  be  "  made  fiefh,"  name- 
ly **  the  Word." 

Secondly,  the  myftery  it  fclf;  or  the  nature  of 
this  incarnation,  fo  far  as  the  fcripture  hath  revealed 
and  declared  it  to  us. 

I.  We  will  confider  the  perfon  that  is  here  fpoken  I. 
of,  and  who  is  fiid  to  be  incarnate  or  to  be  "  made 
"  flefh,"  and  who  is  fo  frequently  in  this  chapter 
called  by  the  name  or  title  of  the  Word  ;  namely  the 
eternal  and  only  begotten  Son  of  God  -,  for  fb  we  find 
him  defcribed  in  the  text.  "  The  W^ord  was  made 
"  flefli,  and  dwelt  amongfl  us ;  and  we  beheld  his 
*'  glory,  the  glory  as  of  the  only  begotten  of  the 

Vol.  III.  4  Q_  *'  Father, 

5- 


226  Concerning  the  divinity  of 

S  E  R  M.  «  pather,  &c.'*  that  is,  fuch  as  became  fo  great  and 
XLIII.  .  . 

glorious  a  perfon  as  deferves  the  title  of  "  the  only 

"  b<egotten  Son  of  God." 

For  the  explaining  of  this  name  or  title  of  the 
Word,  given  by  St.  John  to  our  blefied  Saviour, 
we  will  confider  thefe  two  things. 

Firfl,  the  reafon  of  this  name  or  title  of  the  Word, 
and  what  probably  might  be  the  occafion  why  this 
evangelifl  infills  fo  much  upon  it,  and  makes  fo  fre- 
quent mention  of  it. 

Secondly,  the  defcription  it  felf,  which  is  given 
of  him  under  this  name  or  title  of  the  Word  by  this 
cvangeliil,  in  his  entrance  into  his  hiftory  of  the 
gofpel. 

I.  We  will  enquire  into  the  reafon  of  this  name 
or  title  of  the  Word,  which  is  here  given  to  our  blef- 
fed  Saviour  by  this  evangelift  :  and  what  might 
probably  be  the  occafion  why  he  infills  fo  much 
upon  it  and  makes  fo  frequent  mention  of  it.  I 
fhall  confider  thefe  two  things  diftindly  and  feve- 
rally. 

Firfl,  the  reafon  of  this  name  or  title  of  the  Word, 
here  given  by  the  evangelift  to  our  blefied  Saviour. 
And  he  feems  to  have  done  it  in  compliance  with 
the  common  way  of  fpeaking  among  the  Jews,  who 
frequently  call  the  Mefllas  by  the  name  of  "  the 
"  Word  of  the  Loud  ;"  of  which  I  might  give  many 
inftances :  but  there  is  one  very  remarkable,  in  the 
Targum  of  Jonathan,  which  renders  thofe  words  of 
the  pfalmift,  which  the  Jews  acknowledge  to  be 
fpoken  of  theMefiias,  viz.  "  the  Lord  faid  unto 
**  my  Lord,  fit  thou  on  my  right  hand,  &;c."  I  fay 
it  renders  them  thus,    "  the  JLord'  faid  unto  his 

Word 


our  hlejjed  Saviour.  227 

«  Word,  fit  thou  on  my  right  hand  &c."     And  fo  SERM. 

•  XLIII 

likewife  Philo  the  Jew  calls  him  "  by  whom  God 

"  made  the  world,  the  Word  of  God,"  and  "  the 
"  Son  of  God."  And  Plato  probably  had  the  fame 
notion  from  the  Jews,  which  made  Amelius  thePla- 
tonift,  when  he  read  the  beginning  of  St.  John's 
gofpel,  to  fay,  "  this  Barbarian  agrees  with  Plato, 
*'  ranking  the  Word  in  the  order  of  principles.^" 
meaning  that  he  made  the  Word  the  principle  or 
efficient  caufe  of  the  world,  as  Plato  alfo  hath  done. 
And  this  title  of  the  Word  was  fo  famoufly  known 
to  be  given  to  the  Meflias,  that  even  the  enemies  of 
Chriftianity  took  notice  of  it.  Julian  the  apoflatc 
calls  Christ  by  this  name:  and  Mahomet  in  his 
alchoran  gives  this  name  of  the  Word  to  Jesus  the 
fon  of  Mary.  But  St.  John  had  probably  no  refe- 
rence to  Plato,  any  otherwife  than  as  the  Gnofticks, 
againft  whom  he  wrote,  made  ufe  of  feveral  of  Pla- 
to's words  and  notions.  So  that  in  all  probabihty 
St.  John  gives  our  blelfed  Saviour  this  title  with 
regard  to  the  Jews  more  efpecially,  who  anciently 
called  the  Meffias  by  this  name. 

2dly,  we  will  in  the  next  place  confider,  what 
might  probably  be  the  occafion  why  this  evangelift 
makes  fo  frequent  mention  of  this  title  of  the  Word, 
and  infifts  fo  much  upon  it.  And  it  feems  to  be 
this :  nay,  ^I  think  that  hardly  any  doubt  can  be 
made  of  it,  fince  the  mod  ancient  of  the  fathers, 
who  lived  nearefl  the  time  of  St.  John,  do  confirm 
it  to  us. 

St.  John,  who  furvived  all  the  apoflles,  lived  to 
fee  thofe  herefies  which  fprang  up  in  the  beginnings 
of  Chriftianity,    during   the  lives  of  the  apoflles, 
4  0^2  grov/ii. 


£2S  Concerning  the  divinity  of 

>E  RM.  grown  up  to  a  great  height,  to  the  great  prejudice 
and  difturbance  of  the  Chriflian  rehgion :  I  mean 
the  herefies  of  Ebion  and  Cerinthus,  and  the  feveral 
fecfls  of  the  Gnofticks  which  began  from  Simon  Ma- 
gus, and  were  continued  and  carried  on  by  Valenti- 
niis  and  Bafihdcs,  Carpocrates  and  Menander  •  feme 
of  which  exprefly  denied  the  divinity  of  our  Sa- 
viour, aflerting  him  to  have  been  a  mere  man, 
and  to  have  had  no  manner  of  cxiftence  before  he 
was  born  of  the  bleffed  virgin,  as  Eufebius  and  E- 
piphanius  tell  us  particularly  concerning  Ebion  : 
which  thofe  who  hold  the  fame  opinion  now  in  our 
days,  may  do  well  to  confider  from  whence  it  had  it's 
original. 

Others  of  them,  I  flili  mean  the  GnoHicks,  had 
corrupted  the  fnnplicity  of  the  Chriflian  doftrine 
by  mingling  with  it  the  fancies  and  conceits  of  the 
Jewifh  cabbalifts,  and  of  the  fchools  of  Pythagoras 
and  Plato,  and  of  the  Chaldean  philofophy,  more 
ancient  than  either  •,  as  may  be  feen  in  Eufebius  de 
^r^parat  evang.  and  by  jumbling  all  thele  together 
they  had  framed  a  confufed  genealogy  of  deities, 
v/hich  they  called  by  feveral  glorious  names,  and  all 
of  them  by  the  general  name  of  /Eons  or  Ages : 
among  which  they  reckoned  Zm>?,  and  Aoj^o?,  and  mo- 
>fl>gv>jV,  and  UMfwixot,^  that  is,  the  Life,  and  the  Word 
and  the  Only  begotten,  and  the  Fulnefs,  and  many 
other  divine  powers  and  emanations  which  they  fan- 
cied to  be  fucccHively  derived  from  one  another. 

And  they  alfo   diftinguifhed  between  the  maker 

of  the  world  whom  they  called  the  God  of  the  old 

teftament,  and   the  God   of  the  new :  and  between 

Jesus  and  Christ  :  Jesus  according  to  the  dodrine 

2  of 


our  blejfed  Saviour.  229 

of  Cerinthus,  as  Irena^us  tells  us,  beins;  the  man  thatS  K  R  M. 
.     .  ■■  CT  XLIII 

was  bom  of  the  virgin,  and  Christ  or  the  Meffias  ^_^^^^^ 

being  that  divine  power  or  Spirit  which  afterwards  de- 
fcended  into  Jesus  and  dwelt  in  him. 

If  it  were  poffible,  yet  it  would  be  to  no  purpofe* 
to  go  about  to  reconcile  thefe  wild  conceits  with  one 
another  -,  and  to  find  out  for  what  reafcn  they  were 
invented,  unlefs  it  were  to  amufe  the  people  with 
thefe  "  high  fwelling  words  of  vanity"  and  a  pre- 
tence of '^  knowledge  falOy  fo  called,"  as  the  apo- 
ftle  fpeaks  in  allafion  to  the  name  of  Gnofticks,  that 
is  to  fay,  the  men  of  knowledge,  which  they  proud- 
ly afiumed  to  themfelves,  as  if  the  knowledge  of 
myfteries  of  a  more  fublime  nature  did  peculiarly  be- 
long tn  tiiem. 

In  oppofition  to  all  thefe  vain  and  groundlefs  con- 
ceits, St.  John  in  the  beginning  of  his  gofpel  chufes 
to  fpeak  of  our  blefied  Saviour,  the  hiftory  of 
whofe  life  and  death  he  was  going  to  write,  by  the 
name  or  title  of  the  Word,  a  term  very  famous  a- 
mong  thofe  feels :  and  Ihews  that  this  Word  of  God, 
which  was  alfo  the  title  the  Jews  anciently  gave  to  the 
Mefllas,  did  exiil  before  he  afllimed  a  human  nature* 
and  even  from  all  eternity:  and  that  to  this  eternal 
Word  did  truly  belong  all  thofe  titles  which  they  kept 
fuch  a  canting  ftir  about,  and  which  they  did  with  ib 
iTQUch  fcndefs  nicety  and  fubtilty  diftinguifh  from  one 
another,  as  if  they  had  been  fo  many  feveral  emana- 
tions from  the  deity  :  and  he  fliews  that  this  Word 
of  God  was  really  and  truly  the  life,  and  the  light, 
and  the  fulnefs,  and  the  ^*  only  begotten  of  the  Fa- 
''  ther  i"  V,  5.  "  In  him  was  the  life,  and  the  life 
''  was  the  light  Ci"  men  i"  and  v.  6*  "  and  the  light 

"  ihincth 


Concernifjg  the  divinity  of 
"  fhineth  in  darknefs,  and  the  darkenefs  compre- 
"  hended  it  not:"  and  v.  7,  8,  9.  where  the  evan- 
gelift  fpeaking  of  John  the  Baptift,  fays  of  him,  that 
«'  he  came  for  a  witnefs,  to  bear  witnefs  of  the  light ; 
and  that  "  he  was  not  that  light,  but  was  fent  to 
««  bear  witnefs  of  that  light :  and  that  light  was  the 
"  true  light  which  coming  into  the  world  enlight- 
<'  ens  every  man  :"  and  v.  14.  "  and  we  beheld  his 
"  glory,  the  glory  as  of  the  only  begotten  of  the  Fa- 
"  ther,  full  of  grace  and  truth:"  and  v.  16.  "  And 
**  of  his  fulnefs  we  all  receive,  &c."  You  fee  here 
is  a  perpetual  allufion  to  the  glorious  titles  which 
they  gave  to  their  JEons,  as  if  they  had  been  fo  ma- 
ny feveral  deities. 

In  fhort,  the  evangelift  fhews  that  all  this  fanciful 
genealogy  of  divine  emanations,  with  which  the 
Gnofticks  made  fo  great  a  noife,  was  mere  conceit 
and  imagination  •,  and  that  all  thefe  glorious  titles 
did  really  meet  in  the  Meflias  who  is  the  Word,  and 
who  before  his  incarnation  was  from  all  eternity  with 
God,  partaker  of  his  divine  nature  and  glory. 

I  have  declared  this  the  more  fully  and  particular- 
ly, becaufe  the  knowledge  of  it  feems  to  me  to  be 
the  only  true  key  to  the  interpretation  of  this  dif- 
courfeofSt.  John  concerning  our  Saviour  under 
the  name  and  title  of  the  Word.  And  furely  it  is  a 
quite  wrong  way  for  any  man  to  go  about  by  the 
mere  ftrength  and  fubtilty  of  his  reafon  and  wit, 
though  never  fo  great,  to  interpret  an  ancient  book, 
without  underftanding  and  confidering  the  hiftorical 
occafion  of  it,  which  is  the  only  thing  that  can  give 
true  light  to  it. 

And 


our  bleJfedSAYlQVBi,  23 1 

And  this  was  the  great  and  fatal  millakc  of  Soci-  S  E  R  M. 
nus,  to  go  to  interpret  fcripture  merely  by  criticifing  >_  -^Lt 
upon  words,  and  fearching  into  all  the  fenfes  that 
they  are  poflibly  capable  of,  till  he  can  find  one, 
though  never  fo  forced  and  foreign,  that  will  fave  harm- 
lefs  the  opinion,  which  he  was  before-hand  refolved  to 
maintain,  even  againft  the  moft  natural  and  obvious 
fenfeof  the  text  which  he  undertakes  to  interpret :  juft 
as  if  a  man  Ihould  interpret  ancient  ftatutes  and  records 
by  mere  critical  fkill  in  words,  without  regard  to  the 
true  occafion  upon  which  thy  were  made,  and  with- 
out any  manner  of  knowledge  and  infight  into  the 
hiflory  of  the  age  in  which  they  were  written. 

I  fhall  now  proceed  to  the  fecond  thing  which  I 
propofed  to  confider,  namely, 

II.  The  defcription  here  given  of  the  Word  by  this  jj, 
evangelift  in  his  entrance  into  his  hiflory  of  the  gof- 
pel.  "  In  the  beginning,'*  fays  he,  "was  the  Word> 
*'  and  the  Word  was  with  God,  and  the  Word  was 
"  God  :  the  fame  was  in  the  beginning  with  God  :  all 
*'  things  were  made  by  him,  and  without  him  was 
"  not  any  thing  made  that  was  made." 

In  which  paf^age  of  the  evangelift  four  things  are 
faid  of  the  Word  which  will  require  a  more  particular 
explication. 

Firft,  that  "  he  was  in  the  beginning.** 

Secondly,  that  "  he  was  in  the  beginnijig  with 
«  God.** 

Thirdly,  that"  he  was  God.'* 

Fourthly,  that  "  all  were  made  by  him.'* 

I  ft.  That  "  he  was  in  the  beginning,"  h  oi^X'^^  ijohn.i.i. 
which  is  the  fame  with  utf'  df^^yji,  "  from  tlie  begin- 

"ning.**. 


13^  Concerning  the  dhinity  of 

^XLin'  "  "^"S'"  where  fpeaking  of  Christ  by  the  name  of 
w.,^  "  eternal  life,"  and  of  the  "  Word  of  life,"  "  that,'* 
fays  he, "  which  was  from  the  beginning."  Nonnus, 
the  ancient  paraphraft  of  St.  John's  gofpel,  by  way 
of  explication  of  what  is  meant  by  his  being  "  in  the 
"beginning,"adds,  that  he  was  <j4';^$ovof,  without  time, 
that  is,  before  all  time  ;  and  if  fo,  then  he  was  from 
all  eternity :  "  in  the  beginning  was  the  Word," 
that  is,  when  things  began  to  be  made  he  was  •,  not 
then  began  to  be,  but  then  already  was,  and  did  ex- 
ill  before  any  thing  was  made  -,  and  confequently  is 
without  beginning,  for  that  which  was  never  made 
could  have  no  beginning  of  it*s  being  :  and  io  the 
Jews  ufed  to  defcribe  eternity,"  before  the  world  was," 
and  "before  the  foundation  of  the  world,"  as  alfoin 
feveral  places  of  the  new  teftament.  And  fo  like- 
wife  Solomon  defcribes  the  eternity  of  wifdom, 
Prov.  viii.  ''  theLoRD,"  fays  he,  "  poffefied  me  in  the  beginning 
22,  23,  «t  Qf  ]^is  ^ay^  before  his  works  of  old  :  I  was  fet  up 
"  from  everlafting,  from  the  beginning,  or  ever  the 
*'  earth  was :  when  he  prepared  the  heavens  I  was 
*'  there ;  then  I  was  with  him  as  one  brought  up 
*'  with  him,  rejoicing  always  before  him :"  and  fo 
Juflin  Martyr  explains  this  very  exprelTion  of  St. 
John,  that  he  vv^as,  or  had  a  being  before  all  ages  : 
fo  likewife  Athenagoras,  a  mofr  ancient  Chriflian 
writer,  "  God,"  fays  he,  *'  who  is  an  invlfible  mind, 
"  had  from  the  beginning  the  Word  in  himfelf." 

2dly,  That  "  in  the  beginning  the  Word  was  with 
*'  God  :"  and  fo  Solomon,  when  he  would  exprefs 
the  eternity  of  wifdcm,  fays,  "  it  was  with  God  :" 
And  fo  likewife  the  fon  of  Sirach  fpeaking  of  wifdom, 

fays,  it  wasju£7i^  ii  bi2^  with  God  :  and  fo  the  ancient 

Jews 


otir  l?lej/e^  Saviovr.  2?^ 

Tews  often  called  the  "  Word  of  God,"  the  "  Word  S  E  R  M. 

.       .  ...  XLliJ. 

"  which  is  before  the  Lord,"  that  is,  with  him,  or  .   -^-  '^ 

in  his  prefence :  in  like  manner  the  evangelift  fays 
here,  that  the  "  Word  was  with  God,"  that  is,  it 
was  always  together  with  him,  partaking  of  his 
happinefs  and  glory:  to  which  our  Saviour  refers 
in  his  prayer,  ''  glorify  me  with  thine  own  felf  with  joi^n 
"  the  glory  which  I  had  with  thee  before  the  world  xvii.  5. 
"  was."  And  this  ''  being  with  God"  the  evan- 
gelift oppofeth  to  his  appearing  and  "  being  mani- 
"  fefted"  to  the  world,  v.  lo."  he  was  in  the  world, 
"  and  the  world  was  made  by  him,  and  the  world 
"  knew  him  not ;"  that  is,  he,  who  from  all  eternity 
was  "  with  God,"  appeared  in  the  world,  and  when 
he  did  fo,  though  he  had  made  the  world,  yet  the 
world  would  not  own  him.  And  this  oppofition  be- 
tv/een  his  "  being  with  God"  and  his  "  being  mani- 
"  fefted"  in  the  world,  the  fame  St.  John  mentions 
elfewhere,  "  I  fhew  unto  you  that  eternal  life  which  ,  TqI^^ 
"  was  with  the  Father,  and  wasmanifefteduntous."  i-  2. 

3dly,  That  "  he  was  God:"  and  fo  Juftin  Martyr 
fays  of  him,  that  "  he  was  God  before  the  world," 
that  is,  from  all  eternity:  but  then  the  evangelift 
adds  by  way  of  explication,  "  the  fame  was  in  the 
"  beginning  with  God,"  that  is,  though  the  Word 
was  truly  and  really  God,  yet  he  was  not  "  God  the 
"  Father,"  who  is  the  fountain  of  the  deity,  but  an 
emanation  from  him,  the  only  begotten  Son  of  God, 
from  all  eternity  with  him  ;  to  denote  to  us,  that* 
which  is  commonly  called  by  divines,  and  for  any 
thing  I  could  ever  fee  properly  enough,  the  diftinc- 
tion  of  perfons  in  the  deity  •,  at  leaft  we  know  not 
a  fitter  word  whereby  to  exprefs  that  great  myftery. 

Vol.  III.  4  R  4thly, 

5- 


Concerning  the  divinity  of 

4thly,  That  "  all  things  were  made  by  him.** 
This  feems  to  refer  to  the  defcription  which  Mofes 
makes  of  the  creation,  where  God  is  reprefented 
^^^  .      creating  things  by  his  Word,  "  God  faid,  let  there 
"  be  light,  and  there  was  light :"   and  fo  likewife 
Pfal.       the  pfalmifb,   •'  by  the  Word  of  the  Lord  were  the 
3CXXU1.    .  „  heavens  made,  and  all  the  hoft  of  them  by  the 
"  breath  of  his  mouth:"  and  fo  St.  Peter  alfo  eX' 
t  Pet.  lii.  prefleth  the  creation  of  the  world,  "  by  the  Word  of 
^*  *'  the  Lord  the  heavens  were  of  old,  and  the  earth 

"  made  out  of  water  :"  and  in  the  ancient  books  of 
the  Chaldeans  and  the  verfes  afcribed  to  Orpheus, 
the  "  maker  of  the  world'*  is  called  the  Word,  and 
the  divine  Word :  and  fo  Tertullian  tells  the  pagans, 
that  by  their  philofophers  the  "  maker  of  the  world 
*'  was  called  Aa'j^of,  the  Word,  or  Reafon:"and  Phi- 
lo  the  Jew,  following  Plato,  who  himfclf  moft  pro- 
bably had  it  from  the  Jews,  fays,  that  the  world 
was  created  by  the  Word  ;  whom  he  calls  the  "  name 
"  of  God,"  and  the  "  image  of  God,"  and  the 
*'  Son  of  God  i"  two  of  which  glorious  titles 
are  afcribed  to  him,  together  with  that  of  "  maker 
"  of  the  world,"  by  the  author  of  the  epiftle  to 
the  Hebrews  ;  "  in  thefe  laft  days,"  fays  he,  "  God 
"  hath  fpoken  to  us  by  his  Son,  by  whom  al- 
"  fo  he  made  the  worlds:  who  is  the  bright- 
"  nefs  of  his  glory,  and  the  exprefs  image  of  his- 
*'  perfon  :"  and  to  the  fame  purpofe  St.  Paul, 
Colof.  i.  fpeaking  of  Christ,  calls  him  "  the  image  of  the 
15. 16,  cc  invifible  God,  the  firft-born  of  every  creature  j** 
that  is,  born  before  any  thing  was  created,  as  does 
evidently  follow  from  the  reafon  given  in  the  next 
words  why  he  called  him  the  "  firft-born  of  every 

^'  creature. 


»7 


mr  hieffed  SaviourJ  ^3^ 

"  creature,  for  by  him  were  all  things  created  SERM. 
*'  that  are  in  heaven  and  in  earth,  vifible  and  in- 
"  vifible  ;  all  things  were  created  by  him  and  for 
"  him,  and  he  is  before  all  things,  and  by  him  all 
"  things  fubfift  :"  From  whence  it  is  plain,  that  by 
his  being"  the  firft-born  of  every  creature"  thus  much 
at  lead  is  to  be  underftood,  that  he  was  before  all 
creatures,  and  therefore  he  himfelf  cannot  be  a  crea- 
ture, unlefs  he  could  be  before  himfelf:  nay  the  a- 
poftle  fays  it  exprefly  in  this  very  text  in  which  he 
is  called  the  "  firft-born  of  every  creature,"  or  "  of 
"  the  whole  creation,"  that "  he  is  before  all  things  j" 
that  is,  he  had  a  being  before  there  was  any  created 
being,  he  was  before  all  creatures  both  in  duration 
and  in  dignity  ;  for  fo  muft  he  of  neceflity  be,  if 
"  all  things  were  made  by  him  ;"  for  as  the  maker 
is  always  before  the  thing  which  is  made,  fo  is  he 
alfo  bett^^r  and  of  greater  dignity. 

And  yet  I  muft  acknowledge  that  there  feems  to 
be  no  fmall  difficulty  in  the  interpretation  I  have  giv- 
en of  this  expreffion,in  which  Christ  is  faid  by  the 
apoftle  to  be  "  the  firft-born  of  every  creature,"  or  of 
the  whole  creation  ;  becaufe  in  ftridnefs  of  fpeech 
the  firft-born  is  of  the  fame  nature  with  thofe  in  re- 
fpeft  of  whom  he  is  faid  to  be  the  firft-born  :  and  if 
fo,  then  he  muft  be  a  creature  as  well  as  thofe  in  re- 
fped  of  whom  he  is  l^iid  to  be  the  firft-born.  This  is 
the  objedtion  in  it's  full"  ftrength,  and  I  do  own  it  to 
have  a  very  plaufible  appearance  :  and  yet  I  hope  be- 
fore I  have  done,  to  fatisfy  any  one  that  will  confider 
things  impartially  and  without  prejudice,  and  will 
duly  attend  to  the  fcope  of  the  apoftle's  reafoning 
in  this  text,and  compare  it  with  other  parallel  places 

4  R  2  of 


^3^  Cojicerning  the  divinity  of 

S  E  R  M.   of  the  new  teftamenr,  that  It  neither  is,  nor  can  be 
t.   "  ^.,^  the apoftle's  meaning  in  affirming  Christ  to  be  the 
"  firft-born  of  every  creature",  to  infinuate  that  the 
Son  of  God  is  a  creature. 

For  how  can  this  poffibly  agree  with  that  which 
follows  and  is  given  as  the  reafon  why  Chp«.ist  is 
faid  to  be  the  "  firft-born  of  every  creature  ?"  name- 
ly, becaufe  "  all  things  were  made  by  him  :"  the 
apoftle's  words  are  thefe,  "  the  firft-born  of  every 
"  creature,"  or,  of  the  whole  creation,  "  for  by  him 
"  all  things  were  created :"  but  now,  according  to 
the  Socinian  interpretation,  this  would  be  a  reafon 
juft  the  contrary  way:  for  if  "  all  things  were  creat- 
"  ed  by  him,"  then  he  himfelf  is  not  a  creature. 

So  that  the  apoftle's  meaning  in  this  exprefTion 
muft  either  be  that  the  Son  of  God,  our  bleffed  Sa- 
viour, was  before  all  creatures,  as  it  is  faid  prefent- 
ly  after  that  "  he  is  before  all  things ;"  and  then  the 
reafon  which  is  added  will  be  very  proper  and  per- 
tinent, "  he  is  before  all  things"  becaufe  "  all  things 
"  were  created  by  him  :"  in  which  fenfe  it  is  very 
probable  that  the  Son  of  God  elfewhere  calls  him- 
Rev.  iii.  ^^^^  "  the  beginning  of  the  creation  of  God,"  mean- 
*4-  ing  by  it,  as   the  philofophers  moft    frequently  ufe 

the  word  oifx^i,  the  principle  or  efficient  caufe  of  the 
creation  :  and  fo  we  find  the  fame  word,  which  our 
tranflation  renders  the  beginning,  ufed  together  with 
the  word  firft-born,  as  if  they  were  of  the  fame  im- 
Col  1  18  portance  ;  "  the  beginning  and  firft-born  from  the 
"  dead,"  that  is,  the  principle  and  efficient  caufe 
of  the  refurre(5lion  of  the  dead. 

Or  t\k^  which  feems  to  me  to  be  the  moft  pro- 
bable, and  indeed  the  true  meaning  of  the  expreffion, 

by 


our  Me  fed  Saviour.  237 

by  this  title  of"  the  firfl-born  of  every  creature,"  the  ^yrnr^' 
apoflle  means,    that  he  was  lord  and  heir  of  the  ere-  v^-v-^-ii 
ation :  for  the  firfl-born  is  natural  heir,  and  Juftini- 
an  tells  us,    that  heir  did  anciently  fignify   lord  : 
and  therefore  the  fcripture  ufes  thefe  terms  promif- 
cuoufly,  and  as  if  they  were  equivalent  •,  for  where- 
as St.  Peter  fays  of  Jesus  Christ,  that  "  he  is  Aftsx.36. 
"  lord  of  all,"    St.  Paul  calls  him   "  heir  of  all  ^o""-  i^. 
"  things:"    and  then  the  reafon  given  by  theapof- 
tle  why  he  calls  him  "  the  firft-born  of  every  crea- 
"  ture"  will  be  very  fit  and  proper,  becaufe  "  all 
"  things  were  created  .by  him :"  for  well   may  he 
be  faid  to  be  lord  and  heir  of  the   creation   who 
"  made  all  things  that  were  made,   and  without 
"  whom  was  not  any  thing  made  that  was  made," 

And  this  will  yet  appear  much  more  evident,  if 
we  confider,  that  the  apoflle  to  the  Hebrews,  (who, 
by  feveral  of  the  ancients,  was  thought  to  be  St.  Paul, 
where  he  gives  to  Chri  st  fome  of  the  very  fame 
titles  which  St.  Paul  in  his  epiflle  to  the  Coloffians 
had  done,  calling  him,  the  "  image  of  God,"  and 
the  "  maker  of  the  v/orld,)'*  does,  inftead  of  the  title 
of  the  "  firfl-born  of  every  creature",  call  him  "  the 
*'  heir  of  all  things  •"  and  then  adds,  as  the  reafon  of 
this  title,  that  by  him  God  made  the  worlds,  "God," 
fays  he,  "  hath  in  thefe  laft  days  fpoken  unto  us 
"  by  his  Son,  whom  he  hath  conflituted  heir  of 
"  all  things  :  who  being  the  brightnefs  of  his  glo- 
"  ry,  and  the  exprefs  image  of  his  perfon,  and  up- 
*'  holding  all  things  by  the  Word  of  his  power,&c." 
Which  is  exaflly  parallel  with  that  pafTage  of  St. 
J*aul  to  the  Coloffians,  where  Christ  is  called  "  the 
*'  image  of  the  invifibleGoD,"  and  where  it  ishke- 

wife 


238  Concerning  the  divinity  df 

E^R^M.  vvrife  iaid  of  him,  that  "  he  made  all  things,"and  that 
"  by  him  all  things  do  fubfift,"  which  the  apoftle  to 
the  Hebrews,  in  different  words,  but  to  the  very  fame 
ienfe,  expreffeth  by  his  "  upholding  all  things  by  the 
"  Word  of  his  power,  that  is,  by  the  fame  pow- 
exful  Word  by  which  all  things  at  firft  were  made: 
but  then  inftead  of  calling  him  "  the  firft-born  of 
*'  every  creature,"  becaufe  "  all  things  were  made 
"  by  him,'*  he  calls  him  the  "  heir  of  all  things, 
"  by  whom  God  alfo  made  the  worlds." 

And  indeed  that  exprelTion  of  "  the  firft-born  of 
"  every  creature'*  cannot  admit  of  any  other. fenfe 
which  will  agree  fo  well  with  the  reafon  that  follows 
as  the  fenfe  which  I  have  mentioned  ;  namely,  that 
he  is  therefore  "  heir  and  lord  of  the  whole  crea- 
•'  tion,"  becaufe  "  all  creatures  were  made"  by  him ; 
which  exadlly  anfwers  thofe  words  of  the  apoftle  to 
the  Hebrews,  "  whom  he  hath  conftituted  heir  of 
*'  all  things,  by  whom  alfo  he  made  the  worlds." 

And  now  I  appeal  to  any  fober  and  confiderate 
man,  whether  the  interpretation  which  I  have  given 
of  that  expreffion  of  the  "  firft-born  of  every  crea- 
*'  ture"  be  not  much  more  agreeable  both  to  the  te- 
nour  of  the  fcripture,  and  to  the  plain  fcope  and  de- 
fign  of  the  apoftle's  argument  and  reafoning  in  that 
text. 

I  have  infifted  the  longer  upon  this,  becaufe  it  is 
the  great  text  upon  which  the  Arians  lay  the  main 
ftrength  and  ftrefs  of  their  opinion  that  the  Son  of 
■God  is  a  creature,  becaufe  he  is  faid  by  the  apoftle 
to  be  "  the  firft-born  of  every  creature ;"  by  which 
expreffion,  if  no  more  be  meant  than  that  he  is  heir 
and  lord  of  the  >yhole  creation,  which  I  have  fliew- 


our  blejjed  Saviour.  239 

cd  to  be  very  agreeable  both  to  the  ufe  of  the  word  SERM* 
firft-born  among  the  Hebrews,  and  likewife  to  the 
defcription  given  of  Christ  in  that  parallel  text 
which  I  cited  out  of  the  epiftle  to  the  Hebrews,  then 
this  exprellion  of  "  the  firft-born  of  every  creature'* 
is  nothing  at  all  to  the  purpofe  either  of  the  Arians 
or  the  Socinians,  to  prove  the  Son  of  God  to  be  a 
creature:  befides,  that  the  interpretation  which  I 
have  given  of  it  makes  the  apoftle's  fenfe  much  more 
current  and  cafy  ;  for  then  the  text  will  run  thus, 
*'  who  is  the  image  of  the  invifible  God,  heir  and 
*'  lord  of  the  whole  creation,  for  by  him  all  things 
"  were  made.'* 

So  that  in  thefe  four  expreflions  of  the  evangellft 
which  I  have  explained,  there  are  thefe  four  things 
diftin6tly  affirmed  of  the  Word. 

Firft,  that  "  he  was  in  the  beginning,"  that  is, 
that  he  already  was  and  did  exift  when  things  began 
to  be  created  :  he  was  before  any  thing  was  made 
and  confequently  is  without  any  beginning  of  time ; 
for  that  which  was  never  made  could  have  no  begin- 
ning of  it's  being. 

Secondly,  that  in  that  ftate  of  his  exiftence  before 
the  creation  of  the  world  he  was  partaker  of  the  di- 
vine glory  and  happinefs.  And  this  I  have  fhewed  to 
be  the  meaning  of  that  expreffion,  "  and  the  Word 
*'  was  with  God  :"  for  thus  our  bleffed  Saviour 
does  explain  his  being  with  God  before  the  world 
was,  "  and  now,  O  Father,  glorify  me  with  thy  own 
"  felf,  with  the  glory  which  I  had  with  thee  before 
*'  the  world  was. 

Thirdly,  that  "  he  was  God  ;  and  the  Word  was 
•'  God."   Not  "  God  the  Father,"  who  is  the  prin- 

I  ciple 


240  Concerning  the  divinity  of 

ERM.  ciple  and  fountain  of  the  deity :  to  prevent  that  mi- 
ftake,  after  he  had  faid  that  "  the  Word  was  God," 
he  immediately  adds  in  the  next  verfe,  "  the  fame 
"  was  in  the  beginning  with  God  :"  he  was  God  by 
participation  of  the  divine  nature  and  happinefs  to- 
gether with  the  Father,  and  by  way  of  derivation 
from  him,  as  the  light  is  from  the  fun  :  which  is  the 
common  illuftration  which  the  ancient  fathers  of  the 
Chriftian  church  give  us  of  this  myftery,  and  is  per- 
haps the  beft  and  fitted  that  can  be  given  of  it.  For 
among  finite  beings  it  is  not  to  be  expefled,  becaufe 
not  poflible,  to  find  any  cxa£t  refemblance  of  that 
which  is  infinite,  and  confequently  incomprehenfible ; 
becaufe  whatever  is  infinite  is  for  that  reafon  incom- 
prehenfible by  a  finite  underftaading,  which  is  too 
lliort  and  fliallow  to  meafure  that  which  is  infinite  ; 
and  whoever  attempts  it  will  foon  find  himfelf  out  of 
depth. 

Fourthly,  that  "  all  things  were  made  by  him  :" 
which  could  not  have  been  more  emphatically  exprelf- 
cd  than  it  is  here  by  the  evangehft,  after  the  manner 
of  the  Hebrews,  who  when  they  would  fay  a  thing 
with  the  greatefl  force  and  certainty,  are  wont  to  ex- 
prefs  it  both  affirmatively  and  negatively  ;  as,  "  he 
«  fhall  live  and  not  die,"  that  is,  he  fhall  moft  afiTur- 
edly  live  :  fo  here,  "  all  things  were  made  by  him, 
*'  and  without  him  was  not  any  thing  made  that 
"  was  made,"  that  is,  he  made  all  creatures  without 
exception,  and  confequently  he  himfelf  is  not  a  crea- 
ture, becaufe  it  is  evidently  impoifible  that  any  thing 
fhould  ever  make  it  felf:  but  then  if  he  be,  and  yet 
was  never  made,  it  is  certainly  true  that  he  always 
was,  even  from  all  eternity. 

AU 


our  Mejfed  SaviouRo  54  j 

All  thefe  affertlons  are  plainly  and  exprefly  con-  S  E  R  M. 
tained  in  this  defcription  which  the  evangelift  St. 
John  here  makes  of  the  Word  ;  and  this  according 
to  the  interpretation  of  thefe  expreflions  by  the  una- 
nimous confent  of  the  mod  ancient  writers  of  the 
Chriftian  church  ;  who,  fome  of  them,  had  the  advan- 
tage of  receiving  it  from  the  immediate  difciplcs  of 
St.  John  :  which  furely  is  no  fmall  prejudice  againft 
any  newly  invented  and  contrary  interpretation  ;  as 
I  Ihall  hereafter  more  fully  fhew,  when  I  come  to 
confider  the  ftrange  and  extravagant  interpretation 
which  the  Socinians  make  of  this  paflage  of  St.  John  5 
which  is  plain  enough  of  it  felf,  if  they,  under  a  pre- 
tence of  explaining  and  making  it  more  clear,  had 
not  difturbed  and  darkened  it. 

Now  from  this  defcription,  which  the  evangelift 
here  gives  of  the  Word,  and  which  I  have  fo  largely 
explained  in  the  foregoing  difcourfe,  thefe  three  corol- 
laries or  conclufions  do  necelTarily  follow. 

Firft,  that  the  Word  here  defcribed  by  St.  John  is 
not  a  creature.  This  conclufion  is  diredly  againft 
the  Arians,  who  affirmed  that  the  Son  of  God  was  a 
creature.  They  grant  indeed  that  he  is  the  firft  of 
all  the  creatures  both  in  dignity  and  duration  ;  for 
fo  they  underftand  that  cxprellion  of  the  apoftle  where- 
in he  is  called  "  the  firft-born  of  every  creature  :'* 
but  this  I  have  endeavoured  already  to  fhew  not  to 
be  the  meaning  of  that  expreflicn. 

They  grant  him  indeed  to  have  been  God*s  agent 
or  inftrument  in  the  creation  of  the  world,  and  that 
all  other  creatures  befides  himfelf  were  made  by  him: 
but  ftill  they  contend  that  he  is  a  creature  and  was 
made :  Now  this  cannot  pollibly  confift  wit-h  what 

Vol.  III.  4  S  St, 

5- 


242  Concerning  the  divinity  of 

SERM.  St.  John  fays  of  him,  that  "  he  was  in  the  begin- 
"  ning,"  that  is,  as  hath  been  already  fhewn,  before 
any  thing  was  made :  and  likewife,  becaufe  he  is 
faid  to  have  "  made  all  things,  and  that  without  him 
"  was  not  any  thing  made  that  was  made  "  and 
therefore  he  himfelf  who  made  all  things  is  neceffa- 
rily  excepted  out  of  the  condition  or  rank  of  a  crea- 
ture ;  as  the  apoftle  reafons  in  another  cafe,  "  he 
*'  hath  put  all  things  under  his  feet :  but  when  he 
"  faith  all  things  are  put  under  him,  it  is  mani- 
"  fell:  that  he  is  excepted  who  did  put  all  things  un- 
*'  der  him  :"  in  like  manner,  "  if  by  him  all  things 
'*  "were  made,  and  without  him  was  not  any  thing 
"  made  that  was  made,'*  then  either  he  was  not 
made,  or  he  muft  make  himfelf,  which  involves  in 
it  a  plain  contradiction. 

Secondly,  that  this  Word  was  from  all  eternity : 
for  if"  he  was  in  the  beginning,"  that  is,  before  a- 
ny  thing  was  made,  he  muft  of  neceftity  always  have 
been ;  becaufe  whatever  is,  muft  either  have  been 
fome  time  made,  or  muft  always  have  been  ;  for  that 
which  was  not,  and  afterwards  is,  muft  be  made. 
And  this  will  likewife  follow  from  his  being  faid  to 
be  God,  and  that  in  the  moft  ftri6l  and  proper  fenfe, 
which  doth  neceflarily  imply  his  eternity,  becaufe 
God  cannot  begin  to  be,  but  muft  of  necefllty  al- 
ways have  been. 

Thirdly,  from  both  thefe  it  will  undeniably  fol- 
low, that  he  had  an  exiftence  before  his  incarnation, 
and  his  being  born  of  the  blefted  virgin.  For  "  if 
«'  he  was  in  the  beginning,'*  that  is,  from  all  eternity, 
which  I  have  ftiewn  to  be  the  meaning  of  that  expref- 
iion,  then  certainly  he  was  before  his  being  born  of 
.?.  the 


our  blejfed  Saviour."  243 

the  blefTed  virgin.     And  this  likewife  is  implied  in  S  E  R  M* 

XT  TTT 

the  propofition  in  the  text,  "  and  the  Word  was 
''  made  flefh."  viz.  that  Word  which  the  evangehfl 
had  before  fo  glorioufly  defcribed,  that  Word  which 
"  was  in  the  begirming,  and  was  with  God,  and 
"  was  God,  and  by  whom  all  things  were  made  j'* 
I  fay,  that  Word  was  incarnate  and  alTumed  a  hu- 
man nature,  and  therefore  miift  neceffarily  exift  and 
have  a  being  before  he  could  affume  humanity  into 
an  union  with  his  divinity. 

And  this  propofition  is  direflly  levelled  againfl 
the  Socinians,  who  affirm  our  bleflfed  Saviour   to 
be  a  mere  man,  and  that  he  had  no  exiflence  before  he 
was  born  of  the  virgin  Mary  his  mother  :  which  afler- 
tion  of  theirs  doth  perfedlly  contradid  all  the  former 
conclulions  which  have  been  drawn  from  the  defcrip- 
tion  here  given  by  St.  John  of  the  Word  :  and  their 
interpretation  of  this  palTage  of  St.  John,  applying 
it  to  the  beginning  of  the  publication  of  the  gofpej, 
and  to  the  new  creation  or  reformation  of  the  world 
by  Jesus  Christ,  doth  likewife  contradid  the  in- 
terpretation of  this  paflage  conftantly  received,  not 
only  by  the  ancient  fathers,  but  even  by  the  general 
confent  of  all  Chriftians  for  fifteen  hundred  years  to- 
gether, as  I  fhall  hereafter  plainly  fhew :  for  to  efta- 
blilh  this  their  opinion,  that  our  blelTed  Saviour 
was  a  mere  man,  and  had  no  exiflence  before  his  birth, 
they  are  forced  to  interpret  this  whole  pafTage  in  the 
beginning  of  St.  John's  gofpel  quite  to  another  fenfe, 
never  mentioned,  nor  I  believe  thought  of  by  any 
Chriflian  writer  whatfoever  before  Socinus :  and  it 
is  not  eafy  to  imagine  how  any  opinion  can  be  load- 
ed with  a  greater  and  heavier  prejudice  than  this  is.. 

4  S  2  And 


Concerning  the  dhlnity  of 

And  this  I  fhould  now  take  into  confideration, 
and  fhe'vV,  befides  the  novelty  of  this  interpretation, 
and  the  great  violence  and  unreafonablenefs  of  it,  the 
utter  inconfiftency  of  it  with  other  plain  texts  of 
the  ne\W  teftament. 

But  this  is  wholly  matter  of  controverfy,  and  will 
irequire  a  large  difcourfe  by  it  felf :  I  Ihall  therefore 
wave  the  further  profecution  of  it  at  prefent,  and  ap- 
ply my  felf  to  that  which  is  more  practical  and  pro- 
per for  the  occafion  of  this  feafon :  fo  that  at  prefent 
I  have  done  with  the  firft  thing  contained  in  the  firil 
part  of  the  text,  viz.  The  perfon  here  fpoken  of, 
who  is  faid  to  be  incarnate,  namely  the  Word,  it 
was  "  he  that  was  m^ade  fiefh.'* 

I  fhould  then  have  proceeded  to  the  fecond  thing 
which  I  propofed  to  confider,  viz.  The  myflery  it 
felf,  or  the  nature  of  this  incarnation  fo  far  as  the 
fcripture  hath  revealed  and  declared  it  to  us,  name- 
ly, by  aflfuming  our  nature  in  fuch  a  manner  as  that 
the  divinity  became  united  to  a  human  foul  and  bo- 
dy. But  this  I  have  already  endeavoured  in  fome 
meafure  to  explain,  and  fhall  do  it  more  fully  in  fome 
of  the  following  difcourfes  upon  this  text.  I  fhall 
now  only  make  a  fhort  and  ufeful  reflcdion  upon  it 
with  relation  to  the  folemnity  of  this  time. 

And  it  fhall  be  to  ftir  us  up  to  a  thankful  acknow- 
ledgment of  the  great  love  of  God  to  mankind  in 
the  myftery  of  our  redemption  by  the  incarnation  of 
the  Word,  "  the  only  begotten  Son  of  God  :"  that 
he  fhould  deign  to  have  fuch  a  regard  to  us  in  our 
low  condition,  and  to  take  our  cafe  fo  much  to  heart 
as  to  think  of  redeeming  and  faving  mankind  from 
that  depth  of  mifery  into  which  we  had  plunged  our 

felves  3 


our  ^kffed  Saviour,  245 

felves  ;  and  to  do  this  In  Co  wonderful  and  aftonifli-  SERM. 

XLIII 
ing  a  manner  :  that  God  fhould  employ  his  eternal 

and  only  begotten  Son,  who  had  been  with  him 
from  all  eternity,  partaker  of  his  happinefs  and  glo- 
ry, and  was  "  God  of  God,"  to  fave  the  fons  of 
men  by  fo  infinite  and  amazing  a  condefcenfion : 
that  GoD  fliould  vouchfafe  to  become  man,  to  re- 
concile man  to  God  :  that  he  Ihould  come  down 
from  heaven  to  earth,  to  raife  us  from  earth  to  hea- 
ven: that  he  ihould  aflume  our  vile  and  frail  and 
mortal  nature,  that  he  might  clothe  us  with  glory 
and  honour  and  immortality  :  that  he  fhould  fuffer 
death  to  fave  us  from  hell,  and  fhed  his  blood  to 
purchafe  eternal  redemption  for  us. 

For  certainly  the  greater  the  perfon  is  that  was 
employed  >^n  this  merciful  defign,  fo  much  the  great- 
er is  the  condefcenfion,  and  the  love  and  goodnefs 
expreffed  in  it  fo  much  the  more  admirable :  that 
the  Son  of  God  fhould  floop  from  the  height  of  glo- 
ry and  happinefs  to  the  loweft  degree  of  abafement, 
and  to  the  very  depth  of  mifery  for  our  fakes,  v/ho 
were  fo  mean  and  inconfiderable,  fo  guilty  and  ob- 
noxious to  the  feverity  of  his  juftice,  fo  altogether 
unworthy  of  his  grace  and  favour,  and  fo  very  un- 
willing to  receive  it  when  it  was  fo  freely  offered  to 
us ;  for,  as  the  evangelifl  here  tells  us,  "  he  came 
"  to  his  own,  and  his  own  received  him  not :"  to 
his  own  creatures,  and  they  did  not  own  and  ac- 
knowledge their  maker;  to  his  own  nation  and 
kindred,  and  they  defpifed  him  and  efteemed  him 
not.  Lord !  what  is  man,  that  God  fhould  be  fo 
mindful  of  him  ;  or  the  fon  of  man,  that  the  Son 
of  God  lliould  come  down  from  heaven  to  vifit  him, 

in 


246'  Concerning  the  divinity  of 

SERM.    in  fo  much  humility  and  condefcenfion,  and  with  fo 
much  kindnefs  and  compafTion  ? 

Bleifed  God  and  Saviour  of  mankind!  what 
fhall  we  render  to  thee  for  fuch  mighty  love,  for 
fuch  ineftimable  benefits  as  thou  haft  purchafed  for 
us,  and  art  ready  to  confer  upon  us  t  What  fhall  we 
fay  to  thee,  O  thou  preferver  and  lover  of  fouls,  fo 
cften  as  we  approach  thy  holy  table,  there  to  com- 
memorate this  mighty  love  of  thine  to  us,  and  to 
partake  of  thofe  invaluable  blefTings  which  by  thy 
precious  bloodfhedding  thou  haft  obtained  for  us  ? 
fo  often  as  we  there  remember,  that  thou  waft  pleaf- 
ed  to  affume  our  mortal  nature,  on  purpofe  to  live 
amongft  us  for  our  inftrudion,  and  for  our  exam- 
ple, and  to  lay  down  thy  life  for  the  redemption  of 
our  fouls,  and  for  the  expiation  of  our  fins  j  and  to 
"  take  part  of  flefh  and  blood"  that  thou  mighteft 
fhed  it  for  our  fakes :  what  affections  fhould  thefe 
thoughts  raife  in  us  ?  What  vows  and  refolutions 
ftiould  they  engage  us  in,  of  perpetual  love,  and  gra- 
titude, and  obedience  to  thee  the  moft  gracious  and 
moft  glorious  redeemer  of  mankind  ? 

And  with  what  religious  folemnity  ftiould  we, 
more  efpecially  at  this  time,  celebrate  the  incarnati- 
on and  birth  of  the  Son  of  God,  by  giving  praife  and 
"  glory  to  God  in  the  higheft,"  and  by  all  pofTible 
demonftration  of  charity  and  "  good-will  to  men?'* 
And  as  he  was  pleafed  to  affume  our  nature,  fo  fhould 
we,  efpecially  at  this  feafon,  "  put  on  the  Lord 
*'  Jesus  Christ,'*  that  is,  fmcerely  embrace  and 
pradice  his  religion,  "  making  no  provifion  for  the 
"  flefnto  fulfil  the  lufts  thereof:"  and  now  that  the 
*'  fun  of  righteoufnefs"  is  rifen  upon  the  world,  we 

fliould 


cur  hlejfed  Saviour,"  247 

ihould  "  walk  as  children  of  the  light,"  and  "  de- 
"  mean  our  felves  decently  as  in  the  day,  not  in  ri- 
"  oting  and  drunkennefs,  not  in  chambering  and 
"  wantonnefs,  not  in  ftrife  and  envy  :"  and  fhould 
be  very  careful  not  to  abufe  our  felves  by  fm  and 
fenfuality,  upon  this  very  confideration,  that  the  Son 
hath  put  fuch  an  honour  and  dignity  upon  us :  we 
Ihould  reverence  that  nature  which  God  did  not  dif- 
dain  to  afllime  and  to  inhabit  here  on  earth,  and  in 
which  he  now  glorioufly  reigns  in  heaven  at  the 
right  hand  of  his  Father ;  "  to  him  be  glory  for 
"  ever  and  ever."    Amen. 


SERMON    XLIV. 

Concerning  the  divinity  of  our  bleffed 

Saviour. 

Preached  in  the  church  of  St.  Lawrence-Jewry, 
January  6,   1679. 


JOHN    i.   14. 

I^he  Word  was  made  flejh. 

1  Proceed  now  to  profecute  the  third  corollary  or  s  E  R  M. 
conclufion  which  does  neceflarily  follow  from  the    XLIV. 
defcription   which  St.  John  in  the  beginning  of  his 
gofpel  gives  of  the  Word,   and  which  I  have  fo 
largely  explained  in  the  foregoing  difcourfe  :    and 
it  was  this,  That 


XLIV. 


248  Concerning  the  divinity  of 

S  E^R  M.  That  the  Word,  here  defcribed  by  the  evange- 
lift,  had  an  exiftence  before  his  incarnation,  and  his 
being  born  of  the  blefled  virgin. 

This  aflertion,  I  told  you,  is  levelled  direftly  a- 
gainft  the  Socinians,  who  affirm  our  blefled  Sa- 
viour to  be  a  mere  man,  and  deny  that  he  had 
any  exiftence  before  he  was  born  of  the  virgin  Ma- 
ry his  mother :  which  pofition  of  theirs  does  perfed- 
ly  contradi6t  all  the  former  conclufions  which  have 
been  fo  evidently  drawn  from  the  defcription  here 
o-iven  of  the  Word :  and  not  only  fo,  but  hath 
forced  them  to  interpret  this  whole  paflage  in  the 
beginning  of  St.  John's  gofpel  in  a  very  different 
fenfe  from  that  which  was  conftantly  received,  not 
only  by  the  ancient  fathers,  but  by  the  general  con- 
fent  of  all  Chriftians  1500  years  together:  for  to 
eftablifti  this  their  opinion  of  our  Saviour's  being 
a  mere  man,  and  having  no  exiftence  before  his  birth, 
they  have  found  it  necefiary  to  expound  this  whole 
pafiage  quite  to  another  fenfe,  and  fuch  as  by  their 
own  confefllon  was  never  mentioned,  nor,  I  believe, 
thought  of  by  any  Chriftian  writer  whatfoever  be- 
fore Socinus. 

For  this  reafon  I  ihall  very  particularly  confider 
the  interpretation  which  Socinus  gives  of  this  paf- 
fage  of  St.  John  ;  and  befides  the  novelty  of  it, 
which  they  themfelves  acknowledge,  I  make  no 
doubt  very  plainly  to  manifeft  the  great  violence  an^ 
unreafonablenefs,  and  likewife  the  inconfiftency  of 
it  with  other  plain  texts  of  the  new  teftament. 

It  is  very  evident  what  it  was  that  forced  Socinus 
to  fo  ftrained  and  violent  an  interpretation  of  this 
paflage  of  the  evangelift,  namely,   that  he  plainly 

faw 


XLIV. 


€ur  blejfed  Saviour.  249 

faw  how  much  the  obvious,  and  natural,  and  gene-  SF;RM. 
rally  received  interpretation  of  this  pafiage;  in  all  ages 
of  the  Chriftian  church  down  to  his  time,  flood  in 
the  way  of  his  opinion,  of  Christ's  being  a  mere 
man,  which  he  was  fo  fond  of,  and  mufl  of  necefTi- 
ty  have  quitted,  unlefs  he  would  either  have  denied 
the  divine  authority  of  St.  John's  gofpel,  or  elfe 
could  fupplant  the  common  interpretation  of  this 
paflfage  by  putting  a  quite  different  fenfe  upon  it: 
which  fenfe  he  could  find  no  way  to  fupport  with- 
out fuch  pitiful  and  wretched  fhifts,  fudh  precarious 
and  arbitrary  fuppofitions,  as  a  man  of  fo  fharp  a 
reafon  and  judgment  as  Socinus,  could  not,  I  though  t-v 
have  ever  been  driven  to.  But  neceflity  hath  no 
laws  either  of  reafon  or  modefty  ;  and  he  who  is 
refolved  to  maintain  an  opinion  which  he  hath  once 
taken  up,  muft  flick  at  nothing,  but  mull  break 
through  all  difficulties  that  fland  in  his  way  :  and 
fo  the  Socinians  have  here  done,  as  will,  I  hope, 
manifeflly  appear  in  the  following  difcourfe. 

They  grant,  that  by  the  Word  is  here  meant 
Christ,  by  whom  God  fpake  and  declared  his 
mind  and  will  to  the  world  ;  v/hich  they  maks  to  be 
the  whole  reafon  of  that  name  or  title  of  the  Word 
which  is  here  given  him,  and  not  becaufe  by  him 
God  made  the  world  :  for  the  Word  by  which  God 
made  the  world,  they  tell  us,  was  nothing  but  the 
powerful  command  of  God,  and  not  a  perfon  who 
was  defigned  to  be  the  Meffias.  And  becaufe,  as  I 
have  fliewed  before,  the  ancient  Jews  do  make  fre- 
quent mention  of  this  title  of  the  *'  Word  of  God" 
by  whom  they  fay  "  God  made  the  world,"  and 
do  likewife  apply  this  title  to  tlie  Meffias  \  therefore 

Vol.  III.  4  T  to 


25Q  Concerning  the  divinity  of 

SERM.  to  avoid  this,  Schlidinglus  fays,  that  the  Chaldec 
paraphrafts,  Jonathan  and  Onkelos,  do  fometimes 
put  the  "  Word  of  God"  for  God,  by  a  meto- 
nymy of  the  effeft  for  the  caufe ;  but  then  he  con- 
fidently denies  that  they  do  any  where  diftinguiQi 
the  Word  of  God  from  the  perfon  of  God,  as  they 
acknowledge  that  St.  John  here  does  ;  nor  do  they, 
fays  he,  underftand  by  the  "  Word  of  God"  the 
MefTias,  but  on  the  contrary  do  oppofe  the  **  Word 
"  of  God'*  to  the  Meflias :  all  which  is  moll  cvi- 
dently  confute(^  by  that  paflage  which  1  cited  before 
cut  of  the  targum  of  Jonathan,  who  renders  thofe 
words  concerning  the  Meflias,  *'  the  Lord  faid  un- 
"  to  my  Lord,  &c."  thus,  "  the  Lord  faid  unto 
"  his  Word,  fit  thou  on  my  right  hand,  &c." 
where  you  fee  both  that  the  "  Word  of  God"  is  plain- 
ly diflinguifhed  from  God,  and  that  it  is  the  Title 
given  to  the  Meflias;  which  arc  the  two  things 
which  Schlidtingius  doth  fo  confidently  deny. 

This  then  being  agreed  on  all  hands,  that  by  the 
Word  St.  John  means  the  Meflias,  I  fhall  in  the 
next  place  fhew  by  what  fl:rained  and  forced  arts  of 
intei'pretation  the  Socinians  endeavour  to  avoid  the 
plain  and  neceflary  confequence  from  tiiis  pafl^age  of 
St.  John,  namely,  that  the  Word  had  an  exiftence 
before  he  was  made  flefli,  and  born  of  the  blefl^ed 
virgin  his  mother. 

This  then,  in  fliort,  is  the  interpretation  which 
they  give  of  this  paflage,  than  which  I  think  no- 
thing can  be  more  unnatural  and  violent. 

"  In  the  beginning:"  this  they  will  by  no  means 
have  to  refer  to  the  creation  of  the  world,  but  to 
the  beginning  of  the  gofpel ;  that  is,  when  the  gof- 

pel 


our  bleffed  ^aviovr',  2^1 

pel  firfl  began  to  be  publifhed ;  then  was  Christ,  SERM. 
and  not  before  :  "  and  he  was  with  God,"  that  is, 
fays  Socinus,  Christ  as  he  was  the  "  Word  of 
"  God,"  that  is,  the  gofpel  of  Christ  which  was 
afterwards  by  him  revealed  to  the  world,  was  firft 
only  known  to  God  :  but  all  this  being  fomewhat 
hard,  firft  to  underftand  by  "  the  beginning"  not 
the  beginning  of  the  world  but  of  the  gofpel ;  and 
then  by  the  Word  which  "  was  with  God,"  to  un- 
derftand the  gofpel  which  before  it  was  revealed  was 
only  known  to  God  •,  they  have  upon  fecond 
thoughts  found  out  another  meaning  of  thofe  words, 
"  and  the  Word  was  with  God  •,"  that  is,  faith 
Schli(5lingius,  Christ  was  taken  up  by  God  into 
heaven,  and  there  inftrufled  in  the  mind  and  will  of 
God,  and  from  thence  fent  down  into  the  world 
again  to  declare  it  to  mankind. 

"  And  the  Word  was  God,"  that  is,  fay  they, 
Christ  had  the  honour  and  title  of  God  conferred 
upon  him,  as  magiftrates  alfo  have,  who  in  the 
-  fcripture  are  called  gods :  "  he  was  God,"  not  by 
nature  but  by  office,  and  by  divine  conftitution  and 
appointment. 

"  All  things  were  made  by  him :"  this  they  will 
needs  have  to  be  meant  of  the  renovation  and  refor- 
mation of  the  world  by  Jesus  Christ,  which  isfe- 
veral  times  in  fcripture  called  a  new  creation. 

This  in  (hort  is  the  fum  of  their  interpretation  of 
this  paffage,  which  I  fhall  now  examine,  and  to 
which  I  ftiall  oppofe  three  things  as  fo  many  invin- 
cible prejudices  againft  it. 

Firft,  That  not  only  all  the  ancient  fathers  of  the 

Chriftian  church,  but  fo  far  as  I  can  find,  all  intcr- 

4  T  2  prefers 


252  Concerning  the  divinity  of 

S  E  R  M.  praters  whatfoever  for  fifteen  hundred  years  toge- 
ther, did  underlland  this  paflage  of  Si.  John  in  a 
quite  different  fenfe,  namely,  of  the  creation  of  the 
materia],  and  not  of  the  renovation  of  the  moral 
world  :  and  I  add  farther,  that  the  generality  of 
Chriftians  did  fo  underftand  this  p'''^ge,  as  to  col- 
led: from  it,  as  an  undoubted  poi.-it:  of  Chrifcianity, 
that  the  Word  had  a  real  exiftence  before  he  was 
born  of  the  bleffed  virgin. 

Ar^d  thus  not  only  the  orthodox  Chriflians,  but 
even  the  Arians,  and  Amelius  the  Platcni[\  who 
was  a  more  indifferent  judge  than  either  of  them, 
did  underftand  this  paffage  of  St.  John,  without 
any  thought  of  this  invention  that  he  fpake  not  of 
the  old,  but  of  the  new  creation  of  the  world  by 
Jesus  Christ,  and  the  reformation  of  mankind  by 
the  preaching  of  the  gofpel :  which  I  dare  fay  no 
indifferent  reader  of  Si.  John,  that  had  not  been 
prepoffeffed  and  biaffed  by  fome  violent  prejudice, 
would  ever  have  thought  of. 

And  furely  it  ought  to  be  very  confiderable  in  this 
cafe,  that  the  moft  ancient  Chriftian  writers,  Igna- 
tius,  Juftin  Martyr,  Athenagoras,  Irenseus,  Tertul- 
lian,  and  even  Origen  himfelf,  who  is  called  the  father 
of  interpreters,  are  moft  exprefs  and  pofttive  in  this 
matter.  For  Ignatius  was  the  fcholar  of  Polycarp, 
who  was  a  difciple  of  St.  John  ;  and  Juftin  Martyr 
lived  in  the  next  age  to  that  of  the  apoftles  ;  and 
Origen  was  a  man  of  infinite  learning  and  reading, 
and  in  his  comments  upon  fcripture  feems  to  havecon- 
fidered  all  the  interpretations  of  thofe  that  were  before 
him.  So  that  if  this,  which  Socinus  is  fo  confident 
Is  the  true  fenff  of  St.  John,  had  been  any  where  ex- 
tant. 


our  blefed  S A v i our  .  2  r^ 

tant,  he   would  not  probably  have  omitted  it  ;  nay  SERM. 
rather  would  certainly  have  mentioned  it,  if  for  no    ^^^^• 
other  reafon,   yet   for  the  furprifing  novelty   and 
ftrangenefs  of  it,  with  which  he  was  apt  to  be  over- 
much delighted. 

So  that  if  this  interpretation  of  Socinus  be  true, 
here  are  two  things  very  wonderful,  and  almoft  in- 
creaible  :  firil,  that  thofe  who  lived  fo  very  near 
St.  John's  tmie,  and  were  moft  likely  to  know  his 
meaning,  as  Ignatius,  Juftin  Martyr,  &c.  {hould 
fo  widely  miitake  it  :  and  then,  that  the  whole 
Chriilian  world  (hould  for  fo  many  ages  together  be 
deceived  in  the  ground  and  foundation  of  fo  im- 
portant an  article  of  faith,  if  it  were  true  ;  or  if  it 
were  not,  Ihould  be  led  into  fo  grofs  and  dangerous 
an  error  as  this  muft  needs  be,  if  Christ  had  no 
real  exiftence  before  he  was  born  into  the  world  : 
aad  which  would  be  necelTarily  confequent  upon 
this,  that  no  man  did  underftand  this  paflage  of 
St.  John  aright  before  Socinus,  This  very  confide- 
ration  alone,  if  there  were  no  other,  were  fufficient 
to  (tagger  any  prudent  man's  belief  of  this  inter- 
pretation. 

As  to  the  novelty  of  it,  Socinus  himfelf  makes 
no  difficulty  to  own  it ;  nay,  he  feems  rather  to  re- 
joice and  to  applaud  himfelf  in  it.  Unhappy  man  \ 
that  was  fo  Vv^edded  to  his  own  opinion,  that  no  ob- 
jeiStion,  no  difficulty  could  divorce  him  from  it. 

And  for  this  I  refer  my  felf  to  his  preface  to  his 
explication  of  this  firft  chapter  of  St.  John's  gof- 
pel  i  where  you  (hall  find  thefe  words  concerning 
the  pafTage  now  in  controverfy,  quorum  verus  fenfus 
cmnes  prorfus,    qui  quidem  extarent.y  explanatores  la- 

tuijfe 


2^4  '  Concerning  the  divinity  of 

S  E  R  M.  tuilTe  videtur,   "  the  true   fenfe  of  which  words/' 
XLIV.  jj  ^  » 

fays  he,  "  feems  to  have  been  hid  from  all  the  eX' 

*'  pofitors  that  ever  were  extant."  And  upon  thefe 
words,  V.  10.  "  He  was  in  the  world,  and  the 
*'  world  was  made  by  him,"  he  hath  this  expref- 
fion,  quid  autem  hoc  locofthl  velii  Johannes,  a  neniine 
-^uodfciam  adhuc  re5fe  expcjittim  fuii,  "  but  what  St. 
"  John  means  in  this  place  was  never  yet,  that  I  know 
"  of,  by  any  man  rightly  explained  :'*  andSchlidlingius 
after  him,  with  more  confidence  but  much  lefs  de- 
cency, tells  us,  that  concerning  the  meaning  of  thofe 
expreliions,  "  in  the  beginning,"  and  of  thofe 
which  follow  concerning  the  Word,  the  ancient 
interpreters  did  ab  afojioli  mente  delirare,  went  "  fo 
*'  far  from  the  apoftle's  meaning  as  if  they  had  rav'd 
**•  and  been  out  of  their  wits  :'*  which  is  fo  extra- 
vagantly faid,  and  with  fo  much  contempt  of  thofe 
great  and  venerable  names,  who  were  the  chief  pro- 
pagators of  Chridianity  in  the  world,  and  to  whom 
all  ages  do  fo  juflly  pay  a  reverence,  that  nothing 
can  be  faid  in  excufe  of  him,  but  only  that  it  is  not 
ufual  with  him  to  fall  into  fuch  rafh  and  rude  ex- 
preffions.  But  the  man  was  really  pinched  by  fo 
plain  and  prefling  a  text,  and  where  reafon  is  weak 
and  biunt,  paflion  mull  be  whetted,  the  only  wea- 
pon that  is  left  when  reafon  fails  :  and  I  always  take 
it  for  granted,  that  no  man  is  ever  angry  with  his 
adverfary,  but  for  want  of  a  better  argument  to  fup- 
port  his  caufe. 

And  yet  to  do  right  to  the  writers  on  that  fide, 

I  mult  own,  that  generally  they  are  a  pattern  of  the 

fair  way  of  difputing,  and  of  debating   matters  of 

religion  without  heat  and  unfeemly  reflections  upon 

2  their 


our  MeJJeJ  Saviour,  255 

their  adverfarles,  in  the  number  of  whom  I  did  not  S  ER  M. 
cxpedl  that  the  primitive  fathers  of  the  Chriftian 
church  would  have  been  reckoned  by  them.  They 
generally  argue  matters  with  that  temper  and  gravi- 
ty, and  with  that  freedom  from  paflion  and  tranf- 
port,  which  becomes  a  ferious  and  weighty  argu- 
ment :  and  for  the  mod  part  they  reafon  clofely  and 
clearly,  with  extraordinary  guard  and  caution,  with 
great  dexterity  and  decency,  and  yet  with  fmartnefs 
and  fubtilty  enough;  with  a  very  gentle  heat,  and 
few  hard  words  :  virtues  to  be  praifed  where-ever 
they  are  found,  yea  even  in  an  enemy,  and  very 
worthy  our  imitation :  in  a  word,  they  are  the 
ftrongeft  managers  of  a  weak  caufe  and  which  is  ill 
founded  at  the  bottom,  that  perhaps  ever  yet  med- 
led  with  controverfy  :  infomuch  that  fome  of  the 
proteftants  and  the  generality  of  the  popifli  writers, 
and  even  of  the  Jefuits  themfelves,  who  pretend  to 
all  the  reafon  and  fubtilty  in  the  world,  are  in  com- 
parifon  of  them  but  mere  fcolds  and  bunglers.  Up- 
on the  whole  matter,  they  have  but  this  one  great 
defeft,  that  they  want  a  good  ca-ife  and  truth  on 
their  fide  ;  which  if  they  had,  they  have  reafon, 
and  wit,  and  temper  enough  to  defend  it. 

But  to  return  to  the  bufinefs.  That  which  I  urge 
them  withal,  and  that  from  their  own  confeffion,  is 
this,  that  this  interpretation  of  theirs  isperfeflly  new, 
and  unknown  to  the  whole  Chriftian  world  before 
Socinus  ;  and  for  that  reafon,  in  my  opinion,  not 
to  be  bragged  of:  becaufe  it  is  in  effed:  to  fay  that 
the  Chriftian  religion,  in  a  point  pretended  on  both 
fides  to  be  of  the  greateft  moment,  v/as  never  right- 
ly underftood  by  any  fince  the  apofties  days,  for 

fifteen 


256  Concerning  the  divmity  of 

S  E  R  M.  fifteen  hundred  years  together  :   and  which  makes 
XLIV 

the  matter  yet  worfe,  that  the    religion  which  was 

particularly  defigned  to  overthrow  polytheifm  and 
the  belief  of  more  gods,  hath,  according  to  them, 
been  fo  ill  taught  and  underftood  by  Chriftians  for  fo 
many  ages  together,  and  almoft  from  the  very  be- 
ginning of  Chriftianity,  as  does  necelTarily  infer  a 
plurality  of  gods  :  an  inconvenience  fo  great,  as  no 
caufe,  how  plaufiblc  foever  it  may  otherwife  appear, 
is  able  to  Hand  under  and  to  fuftain  the  weight  of  it. 

For  this  the  Socinians  objedt  to  us  at  every  turn, 
as  the  unavoidable  confequence  of  our  interpreta- 
tion of  this  paflage  of  St.  John,  and  of  all  other 
texts  of  fcripture  produced  by  us  to  the  fame  pur- 
pofe,  notwithftanding  that  this  interpretation  hath 
obtained  in  the  Chriftian  church  for  fo  many  ages. 
Now  whofoever  can  believe  that  the  Chriftian  reli- 
gion hath  done  the  work  for  which  it  was  princi- 
pally defigned  fo  inefFe6lually,  muft  have  very  little 
reverence  for  it  -,  nay,  it  muft  be  a  marvel!ous  civility 
in  him  if  he  believe  it  at  all.  All  that  can  be  faid  in 
this  cafe  is,  that  itpleafes  God  many  times  toperm^it 
men  to  hold  very  inconfiftent  things,  and  which  do 
in  truth,  though  they  themfeives  difcern  it  not, 
moft  effeftually  overthrow  one  another. 

Secondly,  another  mighty  prejudice  againft  this 
interpretation  is  this,  that  according  to  this  rate  of 
liberty  in  interpreting  fcripture,  it  will  fignify  very 
little  or  nothing,  when  any  perfon  or  party  Is  con- 
cerned to  oppofe  any  doctrine  contained  in  it  \  and 
the  plaineft  texts  for  any  article  of  faith,  how  fun- 
damental and  neceffary  foever,  may  by  the  fame 
arts  and  vv^ays  of  interpretation  be  eluded  and  ren- 
dered 


our  bleffed  S AY lOUVx.  ±^j 

dered  utterly  inefFeflual   for  the  eftablidiino;  of  it,  SF,  RM. 

•  .  "7  XLIV 

For  example  :  if  any  man  had  a  mind  to  call  in  quef- 

tion  that  article  of  tht  creed  concerning  the  crea- 
tion of  the  world,  why  might  he  not,  according  to 
Socinus  his  way  of  interpreting  St.  John,  imder- 
ftand  the  firft  chapter  of  Genefis  concerning  the  be- 
ginning of  the  mofaical  difpenfation,  and  interpret 
the  creation  of  the  heaven  and  the  earth  to  be  the 
inftitution  of  the  Jewifli  polity  and  religion,  as  by 
the  new  heavens  and  the  new  earth  they  pretend  is 
to  be  underflood  the  new  ftate  of  things  under  the 
gofpel  ?  And  why  may  not  the  chaos  fignify  that 
ftate  of  darknefs  and  ignorance,  in  which  the  world  " 
was  before  the  giving  of  the  law  by  Mofes  ?  And 
fo  on  i  as  a  very  learned  divine  *  of  our  own  Jiath 
ingenioufly  fhevv'n  more  at  large. 

There  is  no  end  of  wit  and  fancy,  which  can 
turn  any  thing  any  way,  and  can  make  whatever 
they  pleafe  to  be  the  meaning  of  any  book,  though 
never  fo  contrary  to  the  plain  defign  of  it,  and  to 
that  fenfe  which  at  the  firft  hearing  and  reading  of 
it  is  obvious  to  every  man  of  common  fenfe. 

And  this,  in  my  opinion,  Socinus  hath  done  in 
the  cafe  now  before  us,  by  impofing  a  new  and  odd 
and  violent  fenfe  upon  this  paffage  of  St.  John,  di- 
reflly  contrary  to  what  any  man  would  imagine  to 
be  the  plain  and  obvious  meaning  of  it,  and  con- 
trary likewife  to  the  fenfe  of  the  Chriftian  church  in 
all  ages  down  to  his  time  -,  who  yet  had  as  great  or 
grea,ter  advantages  of  underftanding  St.  John  aright, 
and  as  much  integrity  as  any  man  can  now  modeftly 
pretend  to  :  and  all  this  only  to  ferve  and  fupport  an 

*  Dr.  Stiliingfleet,  late  bifhop  of  Worcefler. 
Vol.  III.  4  U  opinion 

5' 


258  Concerning  the  divinity  of 

^  XLIV*  °P'"^°"  which  he  had  entertained  before,  and  there- 
fore was  refolved  one  way  or  other  to  bring  the 
fcripture  to  comply  with  it :  and  if  he  could  not 
have  done  it,  it  is  greatly  to  be  feared  that  he  would 
at  laft  have  called  in  queftion  the  divine  authority 
of  St.  John's  gofpel,  rather  than  have  quitted  his 
opinion. 

And  to  fpeak  freely,  I  mud  needs  fay  that  it 
feems  to  me  a  much  fairer  way  to  reje6b  the  divine 
authority  of  a  book,  than  to  ufe  it  fo  difingenuouf- 
ly,  and  to  wreft  the  plain  exprefllons  of  it  with  fo 
much  (training  and  violence  from  their  moft  natu- 
ral and  obvious  fenfe :  for  no  dodrine  whatfoevcr 
can  have  any  certain  foundation  in  any  book,  if  this 
liberty  be  once  admitted,  without  regard  to  the 
plain  fcope  and  occafion  of  it,  to  play  upon  the 
words  and  phrafes  with  all  the  arts  of  criticifm,  and 
with  all  the  variety  of  allegory,  which  a  briflc  and 
lively  imagination  can  devife :  which  I  am  fo  far 
from  admiring  in  the  expounding  of  the  holy  fcrip- 
Cures,  that  I  am  always  jealous  of  an  over-laboured 
and  far-fetched  interpretation  of  any  author  what- 
foevcr. 

I  do  readily  grant,  that  the  Socinian  writers  have 
managed  the  caufe  of  the  reformation  againft  the  in- 
novations and  corruptions  of  the  church  of  Rome 
both  in  dodrine  and  pradice,  with  great  acutenefs 
and  advantage  in  many  refpefls :  but  I  am  forry  to 
have  caufe  to  fay,  that  they  have  likewife  put  into 
their  hands  better  and  Iharper  weapons  than  ever 
they  had  before  for  the  weakning  and  undermining 
of  the  authority  of  the  holy  fcriptures ;  which  So-? 
<;inus  indeed  hath  in  the  general  itron^ly  alTerted,  had 


our  blejfed  Saviour*  259 

lie  not  by  a  dangerous  liberty  of  impofing  a  foreign  SER  M. 
and  forced  fenfe  upon  particular  texts  brought  the 
whole  into  uncertainty. 

Thirdly,  which  is  as  confiderable  a  prejudice  a* 
gainft  this  new  interpretation  of  this  pafTage  of  St. 
John  as  either  of  the  former,  I  Ihall  endeavour  to 
fhew,  that  this  point,  of  the  exiftence  of  the  Word 
before  his  incarnation,  does  not  rely  only  upon  this 
fingle  pafTage  of  St.  John,  but  is  likewife  confirmed 
by  many  other  texts  of  the  new  teftament  confpiring 
in  the  fame  fenfe,  and  utterly  incapable  of  the  inter- 
pretation which  Socinus  gives  of  it. 

I  find  he  would  be  glad  to  have  it  taken  for 
granted,  that  this  is  the  only  text  in  the  new  tefta- 
ment to  this  purpofe  :  and  therefore  he  fays  very 
cunningly,  that  this  do6lrine  of  the  exiftence  of  the 
Son  of  God  before  his  incarnation  is  too  great  a 
dodrine  to  be  eftabliftied  upon  one  fingle  text.  And 
this  is  fomething,  if  it  were  true,  that  there  is  no 
other  text  in  the  new  teftament  that  does  plainly 
deliver  the  fame  fenfe :  and  yet  this  were  not  fuf- 
ficient  to  bring  in  queftion  the  dodlrine  delivered  in 
this  paflTage  of  St.  John. 

That  "  God  is  a  fpirit,'*  will  I  hope  be  acknow- 
ledged to  be  a  very  weighty  and  fundamental  point 
of  religion  ;  and  yet  I  am  very  much  miftaken,  if 
there  be  any  more  than  one  text  in  the  whole  bible 
that  fays  fo,  and  that  text  is  only  in  St.  John's  gof- 
pel.  I  know  it  may  be  faid,  that  from  the  light  of 
natural  reafon  it  may  be  fufficiently  proved  that  God 
is  a  fpirit :  but  furely  Socinus,  of  all  men,  cannot 
fay  this  with  a  good  grace  i  becaufe  he  denies  that 
the  exiftence  of  a  God   can  be  known  by  natural 

4  U  2  lighc 


26o  Concerning  the  divinity  of 

SE  R  M.  lirrht  without  divine  revelation  :  and  if  it  cannot  be 
known  by  natural  light  that  there  is  a  God,  much 
kfs  can  it  be  known  by  natural  light  what  God  is, 
whether  a  fpirit  or  a  body. 

And  yet  after  all  it  is  very  far  from  being  true, 
that  there  is  but  one  text  to  this  purpofe ;  which 
yet  he  thought  fit  to  infinuate,  by  way  of  excufe, 
for  the  novelty  and  boldnefs  of  his  interpretation  ; 
of  which  any  one  that  reads  him  may  fee  that  he 
was  fuiliciently  confcious  to  himfelf,  and  therefore 
was  fo  wife  as  to  endeavour,  by  this  fly  infinuation, 
to  provide  and  lay  in  againft  it.  I  have  likewife  an- 
other reafon  which  very  much  inclines  me  to  be- 
lieve that  Socinus  was  the  firft  author  of  this  inter- 
pretation, becaufe  it  feems  to  me  next  to  impoffible, 
that  a  man,  of  fo  good  an  underftanding  as  he  was, 
could  ever  have  been  fo  fond  of  fo  ill-favoured  a 
child  if  it  had  not  been  his  own.  And  yet  I  do 
not  at  all  wonder  that  his  followers  came  into  it  fo 
readily,  fmce  they  had  him  in  fo  great  a  veneration, 
it  being  natural  to  all  fedls  to  admire  their  mafter; 
befides  that,  I  doubt  not  but  they  were  very  glad 
to  have  fo  great  an  authority  as  they  thought  him 
to  be,  to  vouch  for  an  interpretation  which  was  fo 
feafonably  devifed  for  the  relief  of  their  caufe,  in 
fo  much  danger  to  be  overthrown  by  a  text  that  was 
fo  plain  and  full  againft  them. 

And  how  little  ground  there  is  for  this  infinuati- 
on, that  this  is  the  only  text  in  the  New  Teftament 
to  this  purpofe,  I  fliall  now  fiiew  from  a  multitude 
of  other  texts,  to  the  fame  fenfe  and  purpofe  with 
this  pafiage  of  St.  John.  And  I  ihall  rank  them 
under  two  heads. 

Firft, 


our  hlejfed  Saviour.^  26 1 

Firfl:,  Thofe  which  exprefly  afiert  the  Son  of  God  S  E  R  M. 

•  XLIV 

to  have  been,  and  to  have  been  in  heaven  with  God,  k,^.,.^Jj 

and  partaker  with  him  in  his  glory,  before  his  in- 
carnation and  appearance  in  the  world. 

Secondly,  Thofe  which  afErm  that  the  world  and 
all  creatures  whatfoever  were  made  by  him. 

I.  Thofe  texts  which  exprefly  aflert  the  Son  of 
God  to  have  been,  and  to  have  been  in  heaven  with 
God,  and  partaker  with  him  in  his  glory,  before  his 
incarnation  and  appearance  in  the  world. 

"  No  man  hath  afcended   into  heaven,  but  he  johniii. 
"  that  came  down   from  heaven,  the  Son  of  man  '3« 
*'  who  is  in  heaven  :"  where  the  Son  is  faid  to  have 
"  come  down  from  heaven,"  in  refpe6l  of  the  u- 
nion  of  his  divinity  with  human  nature,  and   his 
fpecial  refidence  in  it  here  below  :  and  yet  he  is  faid 
fo  to  have  "  come  down  from  heaven"  as  ftill  "  to 
»'  be  in  heaven  :  he  that  came  down  from  heaven, 
"  the  Son  of  man  who  is  in  heaven,"  that  is,  in 
refpedt  of    his    divinity    by  which    he    is  every 
where  prefent :  "  And  he  that  came  down  from  hea- 
"  ven"  is  here  called  "  the  Son  of  man,"  by  the 
fame    figure   that    his  blood    is  elfewhere    called 
"  the  blood  of  God,"  the  apoftle  afcribing  that  to  Ads  xx. 
one  nature  which   is  proper  to  the  other :  this  we  ^^* 
take  to  be  the  moft  natural  and  eafy  fenfe  of  this 
text,  and  moft  agreeable  to  the  tenour  of  the  new 
teftamiCnt. 

Again  ;  "  What  and  if  ye  fhall  fee  the  Son  of  John  vi. 
*'  man  afcend  up  where  he  was  before  .?"  So  that  if  ^^* 
he  really  "  afcended  up  into  heaven"  after  his  re- 
furreftion,  he  was  really  there  before  his  incarnation. 

I  "  Before 


262  Concerning  the  dhinify  of 

SERM.       "  Before   Abraham  was/*  fays  our  blefled  Sa- 
XLIV.    yjQuj^^  tc  J  ^j^  j'»  the  obvious  fenfe  of  which  words 
johnviii.  is,  that  he  had  a  real  exiftence  before  Abraham  was 
5^'  adually  in  being. 

John  xiii.      Again  it  is  faid,  that  "  Jesus  knowing  that  the 

3*  "  Pather  had  given  all  things  into  his  hands,  and 

"  that  he  was  come  from  God  , and  went  to  God,&c." 

John  xvl.       ^^  ao-^ln  .    u  Pqj.    the  Father  himfelf  loveth 
27,  28. 

"  you,  becaufe  ye  loved  me,  and  have  believed  that 

Ver.  28.  «  I  came  out  from  God.  I  came  forth  from  the 
"  Father,  and  am  come  into  the  world  i'*  again, 
"  I  leave  the  world,  and  go  to  the  Father  :'*  This  was 
fo  very  plain,  that  his  difciples,  who  were  flow  enough 
of  apprehenfion  in  other  things,  did  underftand 
this  fo  well,  that  upon  this  declaration  of  his  they 
were  convinced  of  his  omnifcience,  which  is  an  in- 
communicable property  of  the  divinity  :  for  fo  it  im- 

Ver.  29,    mediately  follows,  "  His  difciples   faid  unto  him, 

^°*'  "  Lord,  now  fpeakefl:  thou  plainly,  and  fpeakeft 

"  no  parable  :  Now  are  we  fure  that  thou  knoweft 
"  all  things,  and  needeft  not  that  any  man  fhould 
»«  alk  thee  :  By  this  we  believe  that  thou  cameft 
*«  forth  from  God."  So  that  either  this  which  I 
have  all  along  declared  mufh  be  the  meaning  of  our 
Saviour *s  words,  or  elfe  his  difciples  were  grofly 
miftaken  and  did  not  underftand  him  at  all  :  and  if 
fo,  then  furely  our  Saviour  before  he  had  proceed- 
ed any  further  would  have  corrcfted  their  miftake, 
and  have  fet  them  right  in  this  matter :  but  fo  far  is 
he  from  doing  that,  that  he  allows  them  to  have 

Ver.  31.  underftood  him  aright :  for  thus  it  follows,  "  Jesus 
"  anfwered  them,  Do  ye  now  believe  ?"  As  if  he 
had  faid,  I  am  glad  that  you  are  at  laft  convinced 

and 


cur  bkJfedSAv lovR,  263 

and  do  believe  that  "  I  came  from  God,"  and  mull  SER  M. 

XLIV 
"  return  to  him  j"  and  that  "  I  know  all  things,"  ^  -  - '.f 

which  none  but  God  can  do.  Is  it  now  pofllble  for 
any  man  to  read  this  paiTage,  and  yet  not  to  be  con- 
vinced that  the  difciples  underftood  our  Saviour 
to  fpeak  literally  ?  But  if  his  meaning  was  as  the 
Socinians  would  make  us  believe,  then  the  difciples 
did  perfedly  miftake  his  words  -,  the  contrary  where- 
of is,  I  think,  very  plain  and  evident  beyond  all  con- 
tradidion. 

Again,  "And  now,  O  Father,  glorify  me  with  j.ohnxvii. 
"  thine  own  felf,  with  the  glory  which  I  had  wiph  5* 
"  thee,  before  the  world  was  :"  this  furely  is  jiot 
fpoken  of  his  "  being  with  God"  after  his  incarna- 
tion, and  before  his  entrance  upon  his  publick  mi- 
niftry :  they  have  not,  I  think,  the  face  to  underftand 
this  exprefTion,  "  before  the  world  was,"  of  the  new 
creation,  but  do  endeavour  to  avoid  it  another  way, 
which  I  Ihall  confider  by  and  by. 

And  a  little  after,  **  I  have  given  them  the  words  Ver.  8. 
"  which  thou  gaveft  me,  and  they  have  received 
"  them,  and   known   affuredly  that  I  came  from 
*'  thee,  and  that  thou  didft  fend  me." 

Again,  "  That  which  was  from  the  beginning,  '  J^'^'^  i» 
*'  which  we  have  heard,  which  we  have  feen  with  * 
*'  our  eyes,  which  we  have  looked  upon,  and  our 
*'  hands  have  handled  of  the  Word  of  life  :  for  the 
♦'  life  was  manifefted,  and  we  have  feen  it,  and 
•*  bear  witnefs,  and  Ihew  unto  you  that  eternal  life," 
for  fo  he  calls  "  the  Son  of  God,  which  was  with  the 
•'  Father,  and  was  manifefted  unto  us." 

And  that  he  was  not  only  "with  God"  before 
he  ^ifumed  hum^n  nature,  but  alfo  was  really  God, 

St, 


264  Concerning  the  divinity  of 

SE  R  M.  St.  Paul  tells  us :  "  Let  this  mind  be  in  you,  which" 
y^\l^''^  was  a!fo  in  Christ  Jesus,  who  being  in  the 
Phii.ii.  5,  "  form  of  >ix  <*p7r«^oi'  ^yK'^ot-yo^  did  not  arrogate  to 
'  7>  8.    tt  himfelf  to  be  equal  with  God,"  that  is,  he  made 
no  often tation  of  his  divinity  :  for  this  I  take  to  be 
the  true  meaning  of  that  phrafe,  both  becaufe  it  is 
fo  ufed  by  Plutarch,  and  becaufe  it  makes  the  fenfe 
much  more  eafy  and  current,  thus,  "  who  being  in 
"  the  form  of  God,  did  not  affumean  equality  with 
"  God,"  that  is,  he  did  not  appear  in  the  glory  of 
his  divinity,  which  was  hid  under  a  veil  of  human 
fiefh  and  infirmity  •,  "  but  he  emptied  himfelf,  and 
"  took  upon  him  the  form  of  a  fervant,  and  was 
"  made  in  the  likenefs  of  men,  and  being  found  in 
"  falhion  as  a  man,"  or  in  the  habit  of  a  man,  "  he 
**  became  obedient  to  the  death,  &c."     So  that  if 
*'  his  being  made  in  the  likenefs  and  falhion  of  a 
"  man"  does  fignify,  that  he  was  really  man  by  his 
incarnation,  then  furely  his  "  being  in  the  form  of 
God"  when  he  took  upon  him  "  the  fafhion  and 
*'  likenefs  of  man",  and  "  the  form  of  a  fervant"  or 
flave,  muft  in  all  reafon  fignify  that  he  was  really 
God   before    he  became   man :    for   which  reafon 
iTim.iii.  the  fame  apoftle  did  not  doubt  to  fay,  that  "   God 
'  *  "  was  manifefted  in  the  flefh." 

And  now  I  hope  that  I  have  made  it  fully  appear, 
that  the  beginning  of  St.  John's  gofpel  is  not  the 
fingle  and  only  text  upon  which  we  ground  this 
great  dodrine,  as  Socinus  calls  it,  and  as  we  really 
cfteem  it  to  be  :  for  you  fee  that  I  have  produced  a 
great  many  more  ;  to  avoid  the  dint  and  force  where- 
of the  Socinians  do^chlefly  make  ufe  of  thefe  two 
anfwers, 

Firft, 


our  bleffed  ^AviovVi,  265 

Firft,  to  thofe  texts  which  fay  "  he  was  in  hea-  S  E  R  M. 
"  ven,"  and  *'  came  down  from  heaven,"  they 
give  this  anfwer  ;  that  our  Saviour,  fome  time  be- 
fore his  entrance  upon  his  publick  miniilry,  they 
cannot  agree  precifely  when,  was  taken  up  into 
heaven,  and  then  and  there  had  the  will  of  God  re- 
vealed to  him,  and  was  fentdown  from  heaven  again 
to  make  it  known  to  the  world. 

This  is  fo  very  arbitrary  and  precarious  a  fuppo- 
fition,  that  I  muft  confefs  myfelf  not  a  little  out  of 
countenance  for  them,  that  men  of  fo  much  wit 
and  reafon  fliould  ever  be  put  to  fo  forry  and  pitiful 
a  iliift.  For  can  any  man  imagine,  that  info  exadl 
a  hiftory  of  our  Saviour's  life,  written  by  feveral 
perfons,  the  relation  of  fo  important  a  matter  as  this, 
and  of  the  circumftances  of  it,  fliould  be  wholly 
omitted  ?  That  we  fhould  have  a  particular  account 
of  his  being  carried  into  Egypt  in  his  infancy,  and 
of  the  time  when  he  was  brought  back  from  thence: 
of  his  difputing  in  the  temple  Vv^ith  the  jewiili  doc- 
tors, and  putting  them  to  iilence  when  he  was  but 
twelve  years  of  age  :  a  punftual  relation  of  his  be- 
^  ing  baptized  by  John  •,  and  how  after  that  "  he  was 
"  led  by  the  fpirit  into  the  wildernefs  to  be  tempted 
"  of  the  devil,  and  Vv'as  carried  by  that  evil  fpirit 
from  one  place  to  another  :  but  not  one  word  of  his 
being  taken  up  by  God  into  heaven,  and  of  his 
coming  down  again  from  thence  •,  not  the  lead  inti- 
mation given  either  of  the  time  or  any  other  cir- 
cumftance  of  fo  memorable  a  thing,  upon  which, 
according  to  the  Socinians,  the  auth(;rity  of  his  mif- 
fion,  and  the  divinity  of  his  doftrihe  did  fo  n)ucJi 
depend  :  when  fo  many  things  of  fo  much  lefs  mo- 
VoL.  III.  4  X  ment 

S- 


266  Concerning  the  divinity  of 

SERM.  jnent  are  fo  minutely  and  exadly  reported,  v/l,at 
can  be  the  reafon  of  this  deep  filence  in  all  the  evan- 
geiifts  concerning  this  matter  ?  But  above  all,  it  is 
to  be  wondered  that  St.  John,  who  wrote  his  gofpel 
laft,  and,  as  Eufebius  teJls  us,  on  purpofe  to  fupply  the 
omiifions  of  the  other  evangeU''s,  fhould  give  no 
account  of  this  thing,  and  yet,  as  the  Socinians  f-  ip- 
pofe,  fliould  fo  often  take  it  for  granted,  ar  ;  refer 
to  it ;  as  when  it  is  faid  that  "  he  came  rorth  from 
^'  God,"  and  was  "  fent  from  God,'*  and  "  came 
"  down"  from  heaven,  befides  feveral  other  ex-  / 
preffions  to  this  purpofe. 

Who  can  beheve  this  ?  And  can  it  then  be  rcafon- 
able  to  fuppofe  luch  a  thing  ?  and  this  VN/ithout  any 
ground  from  the  hiftory  of  the  gofpel,  only  to  ferve 
an  hypothefis  which  they  had  taken  up,  and  which 
they  cannot  maintain,  unlefs  they  may  have  Jeave  to 
make  a  fuppofition,  for  which  they  have  nothing  in 
truth  to  fay,  but  only  that  it  is  neceffary  to  defend 
an  opinion,  which  they  are  rcfolved  not  to  part  with 
upon  any  terms  ? 

This  is  fo  inartificial,  not  to  fay  abfurd  a  way  of 
avoiding  a  difficuky,  to  take  for  granted  whatever 
is  necelTary  to  that  purpofe,  that  no  man  of  common 
ingenuity  v/ould  make  tifepf  it  :  and  there  is  no 
furer  fign  that  a  caufe  is  greatly  diilreiled,  than  to 
be  driven  to  fuch  a  fhift.  For  do  but  give  a  m.an 
leave  to  fuppofe  what  he  pleafes,  and  he  may  prove 
what  he  will,  and  avoid  any  difficulty  whatever  that 
can  be  objefted  to  him. 

Befides,  that  according  to  this  device  the  Son  of 
God  did  not  firft  come  from  heaven  into  the  world, 
as  the  fcripture  feems  every  where  to  fay,  but  firfl: 

was 


our  blejfed  Saviour-  267 

was  in  the  world,  and  then  went  to  heaven,  and  SE  R  M. 
from  thence  came  back  into  the  world  again  :  and 
he  was  not  "  in  the  beginning  with  God,"  but  was 
firft  in  the  world,  and  afterwards  with  God  ;  where- 
as St.  John  fays,  that  the  "  Word  was  in  the  be- 
ginning," and  then  "  was  made  flefhj  and  dwelt 
"  among  us  :"  but  they  fay,  that  he  firft  "  was 
"  made  fleOi,"  and  then  a  great  while  after  was 
"  in  the  beginning  with  God  :"  A  fuppofition 
which  is  quite  contrary  to  all  the  texts  which  I  have 
mentioned. 

Nor  do  the  feveral  parts  of  this  interpretation  of 
theirs  agree  very  well  together.  "  In  the  begin- 
"  ning,"  that  is,  fay  they,  when-  the  gofpel  firft 
began  to  be  publiflied,  '"■  was  the  Word  J*  and 
then,  that  is,  "in  the  beginning,  he  was  with  God," 
that  is,  in  heaven,  to  receive  from  God  that  dodlrine 
which  he  was  to  deliver  to  the  world  :  but  if  by 
*'  the  beginning"  be  meant  the  firft  pubhcation  of 
the  gofpel,  he  was  not  then  with  God,  but  had  been 
with  him,  and  was  come  back  from  him  before  he 
cntred  upon  his  publick  miniilry,  which  they  make 
to  be  the  meaning  of  "  the  beginning  :"  and  "  in 
"  the  beginning  he  was  God,"  that  is,  fay  they,  not 
God  by  nature,  but  by  ofncc  and  divine  conftitu- 
tion  :  and  yet  in  this  again  they  fall  foul  upon  them- 
felves,  for  they  fay  he  V'/as  not  declared  to  be  God 
till  after  his  refurrc6lion,  and  his  being  advanced  to 
the  right-hand  of  God  :  fo  that  he  was  net  God  in 
their  fenfe  of  "  the  beginning,"  that  is,  when  he 
entredupon  his  publick  miniilry,  and  began  to  preach 
the  gofpel. 

2X4  Secondlyj 


268  Conc&r?ii?ig  the  divinity  of 

E  R  M.  Secondly,  as  to  fome  other  texts  which  fpeak  of 
his  exifbence  before  his  incarnation,  as  that  he  was 
"  glorified  with  his  Father  before  the  world  was  •," 
and  "  before  Abraham  was,  I  am  :"  thefe  they  in- 
terpret thus,  that  "  he  was  glorified  with  his  Fa- 
"  ther  before  the  world  was,"  and  that  he  was  be- 
fore "  Abraham  was,"  viz.  in  the  divine  foreknow- 
ledge and  decree  :  but  then  furely  they  do  not  con- 
fider  that  this  is  nothing  but  what  might  have  been 
faid  of  any  other  man,  and  even  of  Abraham  him- 
felf,  that  "  before  he  was,"  that  is,  before  he  had 
a  real  and  aclual  exigence,  he  was  in  the  purpofe  and 
decree  of  God,  that  is,  before  he  was,  God  did  in- 
tend he  fliould  be :  which  is  a  fenfe  fo  very  flat, 
that  I  can  hardly  abilain  from  faying  it  is  ridiculous. 
For  certainly  our  Saviour  did  intend,  by  faying 
this  of  himfelf,  to  give  himfcif  fome  preference 
and  advantage  above  Abraham,  which  this  fenfe 
and  interpretation  does  not  in  the  leaft  do  :  becaufe 
of  any  other  man,  as  well  as  of  our  blefled  Saviour, 
it  may  as  truly  be  faid,  that  he  was  in  the  foreknow- 
ledge and  decree  of  God  before  Abraham  v/as  born. 
And  I  cannot  but  obferve  further,  that  our  Sa- 
viour does  not  fay  before  Abraham  was,  I  was  ; 
but  "  before  Abraham  was,  I  am  :"  which  is  the 
proper  name  of  God,  whereby  is  (ignified  the  eternal 
ciuration  and  permanency  of  his  being  ;  in  which 
fenfe  he  is  faid  by  the  apoftle  to  the  Hebrews  to  be 
xlli.  "  the  fame  yefterday,  to  day,  and  for  ever :" 
and  fo  likewife  he  defcribes  himfelf  in  St.  John's 
j  g  vifions,  "  I  am  ot.  and  w,  the  beginning  and  the  end- 
"  ing,  faith  the  Lord,  which  is,  and  which  was, 
"  and  which  is  to  come,  the  Aimiii,hty  :"  and  that 

this 


our  hleffcd  Saviour.  269 

this  is  fpoken  of  the  Son  you  may  ice  in   the  fame  S  E  R  M. 
chapter,  where  he  fays  of  himfelf,  "  I  am  the  firfl:  v_,^^ 
"  and  the  laft  :"  and  fo  likewife  he  defcribes  him-  Ver.  17. 
felf  again,  "  I  am  o£  and  w,    the  beginning  and  the  Rev.  xxii, 
"  end,  the  firft  and  the  laft  :"  and  that  we  may  not  '^* 
doubt  who  it  is  that  thus  defcribes  his  own  eternitv, 
he  continuing  ftill  to  fpeakin  the  fame  perlbn,  fays, 
"  I  Jesus  have  fent  mine  angeJ,  &c."  After  this  I  Ver.  16, 
fliall  onlyobferve,  that  all  thefe  exprelTions  are  the 
common  defcription  which  the  fcripture  gives  of  the 
eternity   of  God,  whofe  being  is  ccmmenfurate  to 
all  the  feveral  refpefts  of  "  duration,  paft,  prefent," 
and  "  to  come  :"  befides,  that  the  attribute  of  Al- 
mighty   is  alfo  a  part  of  this  defcription,  which  is 
fo  peculiar  a  property  of  God,  I  mean  of  him  who 
is  God  by  nature,  that  the  fcripture  never  gives  it 
to  any  other. 

TI."  I  Hiall  in  the  next  place  produce  thofe  texts 
which  do  cxpredy  affirm  "  that  the  world  and  all 
"  creatures  whatfoevcr  were  made  by  him  :"  and  this 
will  not  only  infer  his  exiftence  before  his  incarna- 
tion, but  from  all  eternity. 

And  for   this,  befides    this  pafiage  of  St.  John, 
we  have  the  apoftle   to  the  Hebrews  moft  exprefs, 
who  fays,    that  "  by  him  God  made  the  worlds  :"  Heb.i,  2. 
and  St.  Paul  likewife  fays  the  fame  more  fully  and 
particularly,  calling  Jesus  Christ,   who   was  the 
"  Son   of  God,  the  firft-born   of  every   creature,"  CoIoiT.  £. 
that  is,  as  I  have  fhewn  in  my  former  difcourfe,  the  '^'  ^^* 
*'   heir"  and  "  lord    of  the    whole   creation  :    for 
"  by  him,"  fays  he,  "  were  all  things  created  that 
"  are  In  heaven,  and  that  are  in  earth,  vifible  and 

"  jnvifible  j 


Concerning  the  dhinify  of 
invlfible  j  whether  they  be  thrones  or  dominions, 
principalities  or  powers  •,"  for  fo  lie  calls  the  fe- 
veral  orders  of  angels  :  "  all  things  were  created  by 
"  him,  and  for  him,  and  he  is  before  all  things :" 
or,  as  he  is  defcribed  in  St.  John's  viiion,  he  "  is 
"  the  beginning  of  the  creation  of  God,'*  that  is, 
the  principal  and  efRcient  caufe  of  the  creation  ;  or 
elfe,  he  was  when  all  things  began  to  be  made,  and 
therefore  miift  be  before  any  thing  was  created,  and 
for  that  reafon  could  not  be  a  creature  himfelf ;  and 
confequently,  mufl  of  necelTity  have  been  from  ail 
eternity. 

Now  thefe  texts  mufl  necefiarily  be  underftood  of 
the  old  creation,  and  of  the  natural  world,  and  not 
of  the  moral  world,  and  the  renovation  and  refor- 
mation of  the  minds  and  manners  of  men  by  the 
gofpel :  for  that  was  only  the  world  here  below 
which  was  reformed  by  him,  and  not  things  in 
heaven  ;  not  the  invifible  world,  not  the  feveral  or- 
ders of  "  good  angels,  v/hich  kept  their  firit  fiation," 
and  have  no  need  to  be  reformed  and  made  anew  : 
nor  the  devil  and  his  evil  angels ;  for  though  fmce 
the  preaching  of  the  gofpel  they  have  been  under 
greater  reftraint,  and  kept  more  v/ithin  bounds,  yet 
we  have  no  reafon  to  think  that  they  are  at  all  re- 
formed, hut  are  devils  ftill,  and  have  the  fame  ma- 
lice and  mind  to  do  all  the  mifchief  to  mankind 
that  God  will  fuffer  them  to  do. 

So  that  thefe  texts  feem,  at  firft  view,  to  be  very 
plain  and  preffing  of  themfelves,  but  they  appear 
to  be  much  more  convincing,  when  we  confider  the 
groundlefs  interpretations  whereby  they  endeavour 
to  evade  the  dint  and  force  of  them.     For  can  any 

2  man 


our  bkff'ed  Saviour.  271 

man  that  ferioufiy  attends  to  the  perpetual  ftlle  andSERM. 
phrafe  of  the  new  teftament,  and  to  the  plain  fcope  ^ 


and  drift  of  the  apoftle's  reafoning  in  thefe  trxts, 
be  induced  to  believe  that  when  St.  Paul  tells  us, 
that  "  all  things  were  created  by  him,  that  are  in 
*'  heaven  and  that  are  in  earth,  vifible  and  invifible  ; 
*'  whether  they  be  thrones,  or  dominions,  or  prin- 
*'  cipalities,  or  powers  :"  I  fay,  can  any  man  of 
good  fjnfe  perfuade  himfelf,  that  by  all  this  the  • 
apoPde  means  no  more  than  the  moral  renovation  of 
the  world  here  below,  and  the  reformation  of  man- 
kind by  Jesus  Christ,  and  his  gofpel  which  was 
preached  unto  them  ? 

But  there  is  yet  one  text  more  to  this  purpofe, 
which  I  have  referved  to  the  lafi:  place  ;  becaufe  I 
find  Schli6tingius  and  Crellius,  in  their  joint  com- 
ment upon  it,  to  be  put  to  their  laft  ihifts  to  avoid 
the  force  of  it.  It  is  in  the  epiftie  to  the  Hebrews, 
at  the  beginning  of  it ;  where  the  apoftle  thus  de- 
fcribes  the  Son  of  God  ;  "  God,"  fays  he,  "  hath  Heb.  1. 2. 
"  in  thefe  laft  days  fpoken  to  us  by  his  Son,  whom 
"  he  hath  confticuted  heir  of  all  things,,  by  whom 
"  alio  he  made  the  worlds :"  from  whence  he  ar- 
gues the  excellency  of  the  gofpel  above  the  Jaw : 
for  the  law  was  given  by  angels,  but  the  gofpel  by 
the  Son  of  God  ;  whofe  preheminence  above  the 
angels  he  fliews  at  large  in  the  two  iirft  chapters  of 
this  epiftie. 

And  to  this  end  he  proves  the  two  parts  of  the 
defcription  which  had  been  given  of  him,  namely, 
that  God  had  "  conftituted  him  heir  of  all  things,"  Ver.  2, 
and  that  "  by  him  he  made  the  worlds." 

Firft, 


272  Concerning  the  divinity  of 

SERM.        Firft,  That  God  had  "  conftituted  him  heir  of 
^^"^^^,  "  all  things,"  which  is  no  where  faid  of  the  angels : 
Ver^  -.      but  of  him  it  is  faid  that  he  was  "  mad:  fo  much 
"  better  than  the  angels,  as  he  hath  by  inheritance 
"  obtained  a  more  excellent  name  than  they."  The 
angels  are  only   called  God's  minifters,  for  which 
the  apoftle  cites  the  words  of  the  pfalmift  •,  but  to 
Pf,civ.4.  Christ  he  gives  the  title  of  "  his  Son,"  and  "  his 
"  firft   begotten,"  by  virtue  whereof  he  is  "  heir 
Ver.  6.      "  of  all  things  :  for  to  which  of  the  angels  faid  he 
''  at  any  time,  thou    art   my  fon,  this  day   have  I 
"  begotten  thee  :"  And  this  I  will  agree  with  them 
to  be  fpoken  of  Christ,  with  refpecl  to  his  refur- 
reftion,    by  which,    as  St.    Paul   tells  us,    he  was 
B.om.i.  4.  "  powerfully  declared    to    be    the  Son  of  God." 
This  is  the   firft  prerogative  of  Christ   above 
the  angels  :  but  there  is  a  far  greater  yet  behind ; 
for  he  proves, 

Secondly,  That  he  had  not  only  the  title  of  God 

given    him  ;  but  that  he    was  "  truly   and   really 

Keb.  i.  8.  "  God,"  becaufe  "  he  made  the  world."     That  the 

title  of  God  was  given  him,  he  proves  by  a  citation 

Pf.  xlv.     out  of  the  pfalmift,  "  but  unto  the  Son  he  faith, 

6,  7.         <t  iihy  throne,  O  God,  is  for  ever  and  ever,  &c." 

And  that  he  was  truly  and  really  God,  becaufe  "he 

"  made  the  world,"  he  proves  by  a  citation  out  of 

jT  ^^  '       another   pfalm,  where  ic  is  faid  of  hixm,  "  Thou, 

10,11,12."  Lord,  in  the  beginning  haft  laid   the  foundati- 

"  ons  of  the  earth,  and  the  heavens  are  the  works 

"  of  thy  hands  :   they  fliall  perifli,  &c." 

Let  us  now  fee  how  Schli6tingius  and  Crellius  in- 
terpret this  text  cited  out  of  the  Pfalmift  by  the 

apoftk? 


otir  ilefe J  S  Ay  10  vn.  2;^3 

apoflle  as  fpoken  of  Christ.  They  fay,  *  that  S  E  R  M«^ 
the  author  of  this  epiftle  could  not  have  referred  to 
Christ  the  former  words  of  this  citation,  which 
fpeak  of  the  creation  of  heaven  and  earth,  unlefa 
he  had  taken  it  for  granted  that  Christ  is  themoft 
high  God  ;  efpecially  if  they  be  underftood,  as  they 
muft  neceflarily  be  by  thofe  Who  take  this  for 
granted,  to  be  fpokeniin  the  firft  place  and  direftly 
to,  or  concerning  Christ.  For  fmce  all  the  words 
of  the  pfalm  are  rrianifeflly  fpoken  of  the  moft  high 
God,  but  that  Christ  is  that  God  is  not  fignified, 
no  not  fo  much  as  by  one  word  in  that  pfalm,  it  is 
necefiary  that  if  you  will  have  thefe  words  to  be 
direfted  to  Christ,  you  muft  take  it  for  granted 
that  Christ  is  that  moft  high  God  of  whom  the 
pfalmift  there  fpeaks. 

Now  we  will  join  iftlie  with  thefe  int'erpretei-s  iip- 
on  this  concefTion,  viz.  that  the  author  of  this  epif- 
tle could  not  have  referred  thefe  words,  which  fpeak, 
of  the  creation  of  heaven  dnd  earth,  to  Christ, 
without  taking  it  for  granted  that  Christ  is  truly 
that  God  who  made  the  world.  And  if  the  author 
of  this  epiftle  does  affirm  thefe  words  of  the  pfal- 
mift to  be  fpoken  of  Christ,  thert  they  muft  ac- 
knowledge Christ  to  be  the  true  God  who  made 

*  Ne  referre  quidem  hasc  priora  verba,  de  cccli  terrseque  crea- 
tlone  loquentia,  ad  Chriftum  potuifTct  autor,  nift  pro  concelTo 
fumfiffet  Chrillum  efle;  fummum  ilium  Deum,  cceII  &  terrsecre- 
atorem  j  prsfertim  fi  ea,  uc  necefle  foret,  primo  &  diredle  ad 
Chriftum  didta  effe  cenfeas.  Nam  cum  omnia  pfalmi  verba  ma- 
nifefte  de  Deo  loquuntur,  Chriftum  autetti  Deum  ilium  elTe  ne  uni- 
co  quidem  verbo  in  toto  hoc  pialmo  indicetur  ;  necefie  eft  ut  li 
verba  ilk  ad  Chriftum  direfta  effe  vtlis,  pro  conceffo  fumas, 
Chriftum  effe  Deum  ilium  fummum  de  quo  in  f  falmo  fcrmo  eft.- 

Vol.  III.  4  Y  heaven 


274  Coftcentmg  the  dhinlfy  of 

S  E  R  M.  heaven  and  earth :  but  the  author  of  this  epiftic 
XLIV.  . 

.    -  -  _!»  does  as  evidently  affirm  thefe  words  to  be  fpokcn  to 

or  of  Christ,  as  he  does  the  words  of  any  other 
ttxt  cited  in  this  chapter :  and  for  this  I  appeal  to 
the  common  fenfe  of  every  man  that  reads  them. 

Thefe  interpreters  indeed  are  contented  that  the 
latter  part  of  this  citation  fhould  be  fpoken  of 
Christ,  but  not  the  former  :  but  why  not  the  for- 
mer as  well  as  the  latter  ?  when  they  have  fo  ex- 
prelly  told  us  that  all  the  words  of  this  pfalm  are 
manifeflly  fpoken  of  God.  What  is  the  my  fiery  of 
this  ?  Could  they  not  as  eafily  have  interpreted  the 
former  part  which  fpeaks  of  the  creation  of  heaven 
and  earth,  concerning  the  moral  world,  and  the 
new  creation  or  reformation  of  mankind  by  Jesus 
Christ  and  his  gofpel,  as  well  as  fo  many  other 
plain  texts  to  the  fame  purpofe  ?  No  doubt  they 
couki  as  well  have  done  it,  and  have  fet  as  good  a 
face  upon  it  when  they  had  done  it.  But  why  then 
did  they  not  do  it  ?  It  was  for  a  reafon  which  they 
■  had  no  mind  to  tell,  but  yet  it  is  not  hard  to  be 
guefled  at,  namely,  that  if  they  had  admitted  the 
former  words  to  have  been  fpoken  of  Christ,  they 
knew  not  what  to  do  with  the  latter  part  of  this  ci- 

Vcr.  n,    tation,   "  They  Ihall  periih,   but  thou  remained  ; 

iz.  "  they  (hall  wax  old  as  a  garment,  and  as  a  vefture 

"  Ihalt  thou  fold  them  up,  and  they  fhall  be 
"  changed."  What  fhall  periih,  and  wax  old, 
and  be  changed  ?  Why,  the  earth  and  the  hea- 
vens which  the  Son  had  made,  that  is,  the  moral 
world,  the  reformation  of  mankind,  and  the  new 
creation  of  things  by  the  gofpel.  All  thefe  mull 
have  undergone    the  fame  fate  with  the  natural 

world. 


our  blejfed  Saviour.  27^ 

world,  and  muft   not  only   have  been  defaced,  but  SERM. 

.  XLIV. 

utterly   deflroyed   and  brought  to  nothing.     This 

they  would  not  fay,  but  they  did  fee  it,  though  they 
would  not  feem  to  fee  it :  and  we  may  plainly  fee 
by  this,  that  they  can  interpret  a  text  right  when 
neceffity  forceth  them  to  it,  and  they  cannot  with- 
out great  inconvenience  to  their  caufe  avoid  it :  but 
when  men  have  once  refolved  to  hold  fall  an  opinion 
they  have  taken  up,  it  then  becomes  not  only  con- 
venient but  neceffary  to  underfland  nothing  that 
makes  againft  it :  and  this  is  truly  the  prefent  cafe  : 
but  in  the  mean  time  where  is  ingenuity  and  love  of 
truth? 

And  thus  I  have,  with  all  the  clearnefs  and  bre- 
vity I  could,  fearched  to  the  very  foundations  of 
this  new  interpretation  of  this  palTage  of  the  evan- 
gelift,  upon  which  the  divinity  of  the  Son  of  God 
is  fo  firmly  eftablifhed  •,  and  likewife  of  the  grofs 
mifinterpretations  of  feveral  other  texts  to  the  fame 
purpofe  in  this  evangelift,  and  in  other  books  of 
the  new  teftament :  all  which  interpretations  I  have 
endeavoured  to  fhew  to  be  not  only  contrary  to  the 
fenfe  of  all  antiquity,  of  which  as  Socinus  had  but 
little  knowledge,  fo  he  feems  to  have  made  but  lit- 
tle account  -,  but  to  be  alfo  evidently  contrary  to  the 
perpetual  tenour  and  ftile  of  the  holy  fcripture. 

Before  I  go  off  from  this  argument,  I  cannot  but 
take  notice  of  one  thing,  wherein  our  adverfaries 
in  this  caufe  do  perpetually  glory,  as  a  mighty  ad- 
vantage which  they  think  they  have  over  us  in  this 
point  of  the  divinity  of  the  Son  of  God,  and  con- 
fequently  in  that  other  point  of  the  bleiTed  Trinity : 
namely,  that  they  have  reafon  clearly  on  their  fide 
4  Y  2  in 


276  Concerning  the  dhinity  of 

SE  R  M.   jn  this  controverfy,  and  that  the  difficulties  and  ab- 
XLIV.  .  . 

furdities  are  much  greater  apd  plainer  on  our  part 

than  on  theirs. 

Here  they  are  pleafed  to  triumph  without  mo- 
(defty,  and  without  meafure  :  and  yet  notwithftand- 
ing  this,  I  am  not  afraid  here  hkewife  to  join  iffue 
with  them,  and  am  contented  to  have  this  matter 
brought  to  a  fair  trial  at  the  bar  of  reafon,  as  well  as 
of  fcripture,  expounded  by  the  general  tradition  of 
the  Chriftian  church:  I  fay  by  general  tradition, 
which  next  to  fcripture  is  the  belt  and  fureft  con- 
firmation of  this  great  point  now  in  queftion  be- 
tween us,  and  that  which  gives  us  the  greateft  and 
trueft  light  for  the  right  underilanding  of  the  true 
fenfe  and  meaning  of  fcripture  not  only  in  this,  bqt 
in  moft  other  important  dodrines  of  the  Chriftian 
religion, 

I  am  not  without  fonie  good  hopes,  I  will  not 
fay  confidence,  for  I  never  thought  that  to  be  fo 
great  an  advantage  to  any  caufe  as  fome  men  would 
be  glad  to  make  others  believe  it  is,  hoping  to  help 
and  fupport  a  weak  argument  by  a  ftrong  and 
mighty  confidence :  but  furely  modefty  never  hurt 
any  caufe,  and  the  confidence  of  man  feems  to  me 
to  be  niuch  like  the  wrath  of  man,  which  St.  James 
tells  us,  "  worketh  not  the  righteoufnefs  of  God  ;'* 
that  is,  it  never  does  any  good,  it  never  ferves  any 
wife  and  real  purpofe  of  religion. 

I  fay,  I  am  not  without  fome  good  hopes,  that  I 
have  in  the  foregoing  difcourfes  clearly  fhewn,  that 
the  tenour  of  fcripture  and  general  tradition  are  on 
our  fide  in  this  argument,  and  therefore  I  fhall  not 
need  to  give  myfelf  the  trouble  to  examine  this 
matter  over  ao;ain.  Now 


our  blefjed  Saviour.  2 77 

Now  as  to  the  point  of  reafon,  the  great  difficul-  S ERM. 
Vj  and  abfurdity,  which  they  objedl  to  our  do6lrine 
concerning  this  myftery,  amounts  to  thus  much,  that 
it  is  not  only  above  reafon,  but  plainly  contrary  to  it. 
As  to  its  being  above  reafon,  which  they  are  loth 
to  admit  any  thing  to  be  •,  this  I  think  will  bear  no 
great  difpute  :  becaufe  if  they  would  be  pleafed  to 
fpeak  out,  they  can  mean  no  more  by  this,  but  that 
our  reafon  is  not  able  fully  to  comprehend  it :  but 
what  then  ?  Are  there  no  myfteries  in  religion  ?  That 
I  am  fure  they  will  not  fay,  becaufe  God,  whofe  in- 
finite nature  and  perfedions  are  the  very  foundation 
of  religion,  is  certainly  the  greateft  myftery  ofallother, 
and  the  moft  incomprehenfible :  but  we  mufi:  not,  nay 
they  will  not  for  this  reafon  deny,  that  there  is  fuch  a 
being  as  God.  And  therefore  if  there  be  myfteries  in 
religion,  it  is  no  reafonable  objection  againft  them 
that  we  cannot  fully  comprehend  them  :  becaufe  all 
myfteries  in  what  kind  foever,  whether  in  religion 
or  in  nature,  fo  long,  and  fo  far  as  they  are  myfte- 
ries, are  for  that  very  reafon  incomprehenfible. 

But  they  urge  the  matter  much  farther,  that  this 
particular  myftery  now  under  debate  is  plainly  con- 
trary to  reafon  :  and  if  they  can  make  this  good,  I 
will  confefs  that  they  have  gained  a  great  point  up- 
on us.  But  then  they  are  to  be  put  in  mind,  that 
to  make  this  good  againft  us,  they  muft  clearly 
ftiew  fome  plain  contradidlion  in  this  doflrine,  which 
I  could  never  yet  fee  done  by  any.  Great  difficulty 
I  acknowledge  there  is  in  the  explication  of  it,  in 
which  the  farther  we  go,  beyond  what  God  has 
thought  fit  to  reveal  to  us  in  fcripture  concerning  it, 
the  more  we  are  entangled  ;  and  that  which  men  are 

pleafed 


7 


27S  Concerning  the  dhinity  of 

S  E  R  M.  pleafed  to  call  an  explaining  of  it,  does,  in  my  ap- 
prehenfion,  often  make  it  more  obfcure,  that  is,  lels 
plain  than  it  was  before  ;  which  does  not  fo  very 
well  agree  with  a  pretence  of  explication. 

Here  then  I  fix  my  foot :  that  there  are  three  dif- 
ferences in  the  deity,  which  the  fcripture  fpeaks  of 
by  the  names  of  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghoft,  and 
every  where  fpeaks  of  them  as  we  ufe  to  do  of  three 
diftrndl  perfons  :  and  therefore  I  fee  no  reafon  why 
in  this  argument  we  Ihoiild  nicely  abdain  from 
ufing  the  word  perfon  \  though  I  remember  that  St. 
Jerom  does  fomewhere  defire  to  be  excufed  from  it. 
Now  concerning  thefe  three,  I  might  in  the  firft 
I  John  V,  place  urge  that  plain  and  exprefs  text,  "  there  are 
"  three  that  bear  record  in  heaven,  the  Father,  the 
*'  Word,  and  the  Holy  Ghoft  •,  and  thefe  three  are 
*'  one  :"  but  upon  this  I  will  not  now  infift,  becaufe 
it  is  pretended  that  in  fome  copies  of  greateft  anti- 
quity this  verfe  is  omitted  ;  the  contrary  whereof 
is  I  think  capable  of  being  made  out  very  clearly : 
but  this  matter  would  be  too  long  to  be  debated  at 
prefent. 

However  that  be,  thus  much  is  certain  and  can- 
not be  denied,  that  our  Saviour  commanded  his 
apoftles  to  "  baptize  all  nations  in  the  name  of  the 
"  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghoft  :"  and  that  the 
apoftles  in  their  epiftles  do  in  their  moft  ufual  form 
of  benediction  join  thefe  three  together  :  and  it  is 
yet  farther  certain,  that  not  only  the  name  and  title 
of  God,  but  the  moft  incommunicable  properties 
and  perfections  of  the  deity,  are  in  fcripture  fre- 
quently afcribed  to  the  Son  and  the  Holy  Ghoft  ; 
one  property  only  excepted,  which  is  peculiar  to  the 

Father, 


our  bkjjed  Saviour.  279 

Father,  as  he  is  the  principle  and  fountain  of  the  SERM, 
deity,  that  he  is  of  himfelf  and  of  no  other.;  which  ,_  - -,.1 
is  not,  nor  can  be  faid  of  the  Son  and  Holy  Ghoft. 

Now  let  any  man  lliew  any  plain  and  downright 
Gontradidion  in  all  this  -,  or  any  other  difficulty  be- 
lides  this,  that  the  particular  manner  of  the  exiftence 
of  thefe  three  differences  or  perfons  in  the  divine 
nature,  exprefs'd  in  fcripture  by  the  names  of  Fa- 
ther, Son,  and  Holy  Ghoit,  is  incomprehenfible  by 
our  finite  underftandings,  and  inexplicable  by  us :  in 
which  I  do  not  fee  what  abfurdity  there  is,  fince  our 
adverfaries  cannot  deny  that  many  things  certainly 
are,  the  particular  manner  of  whofe  exiftence  we 
can  neither  comprehend,  nor  explain. 

Let  us  now  fee,  whether  the  opinion  of  our  ad- 
verfaries hath  not  greater  difficulties  in  it,  and  more 
palpable  abfurdities  following  from  it.  They  fay, 
that  the  Son  of  God  is  a  mere  creature  -,  not  God 
by  nature,  and  yet  truly  and  really  God  by  office 
and  by  divine  appointment  and  conftitution  ;  to 
whom  the  very  fame  honour  and  worffiip  is  to  be 
given  which  we  give  to  him  who  is  God  by  nature. 

And  can  they  difcern  no  difficulty,  no  abfurdity. 
in  this  ?  What  ?  no  abfurdity  in  bringing  idolatry 
by  a  back-door  into  the  Chriftian  religion,  one 
main  defign  whereof  was  to  baniffi  idolatry  out  of 
the  world  ?  And  will  they  in  good  earneft  conteft  this 
matter  with  us,  that  the  giving  divine  worffiip  to  a 
mere  creature  is  not  idolatry  ?  And  can  they  vindicate 
themfelves  in  this  point  any  other  way,  than  what 
will  in  a  great  meafure  acquit  both  the  pagans  and 
the  papifts  from  the  charge  of  idolatry  ? 

9  What  ? 


280  Concerning  the  divinity  of 

S  E  R  M.       What  ?  no  abfurdity  in  a  eod  as  it  were  but   of 

y_     -^  yefterday  •,  in  a  creature   god,  in  a  god  merely  by 

pofitive  inftitution  i  and  this  in  oppofition  to  a  plain 

moral  precept  of  eternal  obligation,  and  to  the  fixed 

and  immutable  nature  and  reafon  of  things  ? 

So  that  to  avoid  the  fhadow  and  appearance  of  a 
plurality  of  deities  they  run  really    into  it,  and  for 
any  thing  I  can  fee  into   downright  idolatry,    by 
Rom.  i.     "  worfliipping  a  creature  befides  the  Creator,  who 
25.  "  is  bleffed  for  ever."     They  can  by  no  means  al- 

low two  gods  by  nature  j  no  more  can  we :  but  they 
can  willingly  admit  of  two  gods ;  the  one  by  nature, 
and  the  other  by  office,  to  whom  they  are  content 
to  pay  the  fame  honour  which  is  due  to  him  who  is 
God  by  nature.  Provided  Christ  will  be  content- 
ed to  be  but  a  creature,  they  will  deal  more  liberal- 
ly with  him  in  another  way  than  in  reafon  is  fit. 

And  do  they  fee  no  abfurdity  in  all  this  ?  Nothing 
that  is  contrary  to  reafon  and  good  fenfe  ^  Nothing 
that  feels  like  inconfiflency  and  contradi6lion  ^  Da 
they  confider  how  often  God  hath  declared  that  "  he 
"  will  not  give  his  glory  to  another  ?'*  And  that  the 
apoftle  defcribes  idolatry  to  be,  the  giving  fervice, 
Gal.iv.8.  or  worlhip,  to  things  *' which  by  nature  are  no  gods?'* 
Surely,  if  reafon  guided  by  divine  revelation  were 
to  chufe  a  god,  it  would  make  choice  of  one  who  is 
declared  in  fcripture  to  be  "  the  only  begotten  of 
"  the  Father,  the  firfl  and  the  laft,  the  beginning 
"  and  the  end,  the  fame  yefterday,  to  day,  and  for 
"  ever  :*'  much  rather  than  a  mere  creature,  who 
did  not  begin  to  be  till  about  feventeen  hundred  years 
ago. 

i  only 


XLIV. 


tur  hlejfed  S A  v  l  OUR.  2  S I 

1  only  propofe  thefe  things,  without  any  artificial  S  ERM. 
aggravation,  to  their  molt  ferious  and  impartial  con- 
fideration  •,  after  which  I  cannot  think  that  thefe 
great  mailers  of  reafon  can  think  it  fo  eafy  a  matter 
to  extricate  themfdves  out  of  thefe  difficulties.  The 
*'  God  of  truth"  lead  us  into  all  truth,  and  enlight- 
en the  minds  of  thofe  who  are  in  error,  and  give 
them  "  repentance  to  the  acknowledgment  of  the 
"  truth  :"  for  his  fake  who  is  "  the  way,  the  truth, 
«  and  the  life.'* 

And  thus  much  may  fuffice  to  have  faid  upon  this 
argument,  which  I  am  fenfible  is  mere  controverfy : 
a  thing  which  I  feldom  meddle  with,  and  do  not 
delight  to  dwell  upon.  But  my  text,  which  is  fo 
very  proper  for  this  feafon,  hath  almoft  necelTarily 
engaged  me  in  it  :  befides,  that  I  think  it  a  point 
of  that  concernment,  that  all  Chriftians  ought  to 
be  well  inftruded  in  it.  And  I  have  chofen  rather 
once  for  all  to  handle  it  fully,  and  to  go  to  the  bot- 
tom of  it,  than  in  every  fermon  to  be  flirting  at  it, 
without  faying  any  thing  to  the  purpofe  againfl  it : 
a  way  which  in  my  opinion  is  neither  proper  to  e- 
llablifh  men  in  the  truth,  nor  to  convince  them  of 
their  error. 

I  Ihall  only  at  frefent  make  this  Ihort  refleflion 
upon  the  whole  :  that  we  ought  to  treat  the  holy 
fcriptures  as  the  oracles  of  G  o  d,  with  all  reve- 
rence and  fubmilTion  of  mind  to  the  dodtrine  there- 
in revealed :  and  to  interpret  them  with  that  can- 
dor and  fimplicity  which  is  due  to  the  fincere  de- 
clarations of  God  intended  for  the  inftruftion,  and 
not  for  the  deception  and  delufion  of  men  :  I  fay, 
we  fliould  treat  them  as  the  oracles  of  God,  and 

Vol.  III.  4  Z  not 

6. 


XLV 


282  Concerning  the  dhmity  of 

S  E  R  M.  not  like  the  doubtful  oracles  of  the  heathen  deities, 
that  is,  in  truth  of  the  devil  -,  which  were  contrived 
and  calculated  on  purpofe  to  deceive,  containing 
and  for  the  moft  part  intending  a  fenfe  diredtly  con- 
trary to  the  appearing  and  mofl  obvious  meaning 
of  the  words  :  for  the  devil  was  the  firft  author  of 
equivocation  ;  though  the  Jefuits  have  fince  made  it 
a  lawful  way  of  lying,  which  their  father,  of  whom 
they  learned  it,  had  not  credit  and  authority  enough 
to  do. 

And  it  deferves  likewife  to  be  very  well  confider- 
ed  by  us,  that  nothing  hath  given  a  greater  force  to 
the  exceptions  of  the  church  of  Rome  againft  the 
holy  fcriptures  being  a  fufficient  and  certain  rule  of 
faith,  than  the  uncertainty  into  which  they  have 
brought  the  plained  texts  imaginable  for  the  efta- 
blifhing  of  doftrines  of  greateft  «ioment  in  the 
Chriilian  religion,  by  their  remote  and  wrefted  in- 
terpretation of  them  :  which  way  of  dealing  with 
them  feems  to  be  really  more  contumelious  to  thofe 
holy  oracles,  than  the  downright  rejedling  of  their 
authority :  becaufe  this  is  a  fair  and  open  way  of  at- 
tacking them,  whereas  the  other  is  an  infidious  and 
therefore  more  dangerous  way  of  undermining  them. 
But  as  for  us,  who  do  in  good^arneft  believe  the 
divine  authority  of  the  holy  fcriptures,  let  us  take 
all  our  do6lrines  and  opinions  from  thofe  clear  foun- 
tains of  truth,  not  difturbed  and  darkned  by  fearch- 
ing  anxioufly  into  all  the  pofllble  fenfes  that  the 
feveral  words  and  expreflions  of  fcripture  can  bear, 
and  by  forcing  that  fenfe  upon  them  v.'hich  is  moft 
remote  and  unnatural,  and  in  the  mean  time  wilfully 
overlooking  and  paffing  by  that  fenfe  which  is  moft 

obvious 


cur  blefjed  Saviour.  283 

obvious  and  eafy  to  the  common  apprehenfion  ^f    Jfy^' 
any  unbiaffed  and  impartial  reader.     This  is  to  ufe 
the  holy   fcriptures  as  the  church  of  Rome  hath 
done  many  holy   and  good   men,  whom  they  are 
pleafed  to  brand  with  the  odious  name  of  hereticks, 
to  torture  them  till  they  fpeak  the   mind  of  their 
tormentors,  though  never  fo  contrary  to  their  own. 
I  will  now  conclude  this  whole  difcourfe  with  a 
faying  which  I  heard  from   a  great  and  judicious 
man,  Non  amo  nimis  argutam  theologiam^   "  I  love 
"  no  do6trines    in   divinity,   which   ftand  fo  very 
«'  much  upon  quirk  and  fubtilty.'*     And  I  cannot 
upon  this  occafion  forbear  to  fay,  that  thofe  doc- 
trines of  religion  and  thofe  interpretations  of  fcrip- 
ture  have  ever  been  to  me  the  moft  fufpe6led,  which 
need  abundance  of  wit  and  a  great  many  criticifms 
to  make  them  out :  and  confidering  the  wifdom  and 
goodnefs  of  Almighty  God,  I  cannot  poflibly  be- 
lieve but  that  all  things  neceffary  to  be  believed  and 
praftifed  by  Chriftians,  in  order  to  their  eternal  fal- 
vation,  are  plainly  contained  in  the  holy  fcriptures : 
God  furely  hath  not  dealt  fo  hardly  with  mankind, 
as  to  make  any  thing  neceflary  to  be  believed  or 
praflifed  by  us,  i^^hich  he  hath  not  made  fufficiently 
plain  to  the  capacity  of  the  unlearned  as  well  as  of 
the  learned.     God  forbid  that  it  fhould  be  impofli- 
ble  for  any  pian  to  be  faved  and  to  get  to  heaven 
without  a  great  deal  of  learning  to  diredl  and  carry 
him  thither,  when  the  far  greateft  part  of  mankind 
have  no  learning  at  all.  It  was  well  faidby  Erafmus, 
"  That  it  was  never  well  with  the  Chriftian  world 
"  fmce  it  began  to  be  a  matter  of  fo  much  fubtilty 
"  and  wit  for  a  man  to  be  a  true  Chriftian." 

4  Z  2  S  E  R- 


284  Concerning  the  incarnation  of 

SERMON    XLV. 

Concerning  the  Incarnation  of  Ckrist; 

Preached  in  the  church  of  St.  Lawrence-Jewry, 
December   21,  1680. 


J  O  H  N    i.   14. 

^he  Word  was  madeflejh. 

SERM.  ^  I  ^  H  E  kft  year  about  this  time,  and  upon  the 
XLV.  JL  fame  occafion  of  the  annual  commemoration 
of  the  incarnation  and  nativity  of  our  bleffed  Lord 
and  Saviour,  I  began  to  difcourfe  to  you  upon 
thefe  words  :  in  which  I-  told  you  were  contained 
three  great  points  concerning  our  Saviour,  the 
author  and  founder  of  our  religion. 

Firft,  his  incarnation,  "  the  Word  was  made," 
or  became  "  flefh." 

Secondly,  his  life  and  converfation  here  amongft 
us ;  and  dwelt  among  us,  Ictx^m/Wsv  Iv  t^fXtv,  "  he 
♦«  pitched  his  tabernacle  among  us,"  he  lived  here 
below  in  this  world,  and  for  fome  time  made  his  re- 
fidence  and  abode  with  us.  ^ 

-  Thirdly,  that  In  this  ftate  of  his  humiliation  he 
gave  great  and  clear  evidence  of  his  divinity:  whilft 
he  appeared  as  a  man  and  lived  amongft  us,  there 
were  great  and  glorious  teftimonies  given  of  him 
that  he  was  the  Son  of  God  •,  and  that  in  fo  peculiar 
a  manner  as  no  creature  can  be  faid  to  be  j  *'  and 
I  "  we 


our  blejjed  Saviour.  28  c 

^  wc  beheld  his  glory,  the  glory  as  of  the  only  be-  S  E  R  M. 
«  gotten  of  the  Father,  full  of  grace  and  truth.         .  ^^' 

I  began  with  the  firfl  of  thefe,  namely,  his  incar- 
nation, "  the  Word  was  made  flefli  :"  for  the  full 
and  clear  explication  of  which  words  I  propofed  to 
confider  thefe  two  things. 

I.  The  perfon  here  fpoken  of,  and  who  it  is  that        t 
is  here  faid   to   be  incarnate,    "  or  made   flelh," 
namely,  the  Word.  And  this  I  have  handled  at  large 

in  my  two  former  difcourfes  upon  this  text.  I  (hall 
now  proceed  in  the 

II.  Second  place  to  give  feme  account  of  the  na-       II, 
ture  and  manner  of  this  incarnation,  fo  far  as  the 
fcripture  hath  thought  fit  to  reveal  and  declare  this 
myftery  to  us.     "  The  Word  was  made  flefh,"  that 

is,  he  who  is  perfonally  called  the  Word,  and  whom 
the  evan gelid  hath  fo  fully  and  clearly  defcribed  in 
the  beginning  of  his  gofpel,  he  "  became  flefh," 
that  is,  aflumcd  our  nature  and  became  man  ;  for  fo 
the  Word  flefh  is  frequently  ufed  in  fcripture  for 
man  or  human  nature. 

So  that  by  the  Word's  becoming  flefh,  that  is, 
man,  the  evangclifl:  did  not  only  intend  to  exprefs 
to  us  that  he  affumed  a  human  body  without  a  foul, 
but  that  he  becarfte  a  perfed  man,  conflfl:ing  of 
foul  and  body  united.  It  is  very  probable  indeed 
that  the  evangelift  did  purpofely  chufe  the  word 
flefh,  which  fi|flifies  the  frail  and  mortal  part  of 
humanity,  to  denote  to  us  the  great  condefcenfion 
of  the  Son  of  God,  in  afTuming  our  nature  with  all 
it's  infirmities,  and  becoming  fubjedt  to  frailty  and 
jportality  for  our  fake. 

Having 


XLV. 


286  Concerning  the  incarnation  of 

SERM.  Having  thus  explained  the  meaning  of  this  pro- 
pofition,  the  "  Word  was  made  flefh,"  I  lliall  in  a 
further  profecution  of  this  argument  take  into  con- 
fideration  thefe  three  things. 

Firft,  I  fhall  confider  more  diftinftJy  what  may 
reafonably  be  fuppofed  to  be  implied  in  this  expref- 
fion,  of  the  "  Word's  being  made  flefh." 

Secondly,  I  fhall  confider  the  objeftions  which 
are  commonly  brought  againft  this  incarnation  of 
the  Son  of  God,  from  the  feeming  impoflibility  or 
incongruity  of  the  thing. 

Thirdly,  and  becaufe,  after  all  that  can  be  faid 
in  anfwer  to  thefe  obje6lions,  it  may  ftill  appear  to 
us  very  ftrange  that  God,  who  could  without  all  this 
circumllance  and  condefcenfion,    even   almofl   be- 
neath the  majefty  of  the  great  God,  at  leaft  as  we 
are  apt  to  think,  have  given  laws  to  mankind,  and 
have  offered  forgivenefs  of  fins  and  eternal  life  up- 
on their  repentance  for  fins  paft,  and  fincere  though 
imperfedt  obedience  for  the  future  ;  I  fay,  it  may 
feem  flrange,  that  notwithftanding  this  God  Ihould 
yet  make  choice  of  this  way  and   method  of  our 
falvation  :  I  fhall  therefore  in  the  laft  place  endea- 
vour to  give  feme  probable  account  of  this  flrange 
and  wonderful  difpenfation  anS  fhew  that  it  was 
done  in  great  condefcenfion   to  the  weaknefs  and 
common  prejudices  of  mankind  ;  and  that  when  it 
is  thoroughly  confideied  it  will  appear  to  be  much 
more  for  our  comfort  and  advantage  than  any  other 
way  which  the  wifdom  of  this  world  would   have 
been  apt  to  devife  and  pitch  upon.     And  in  all  this 
I  fhall  all  along  take  either  the  plain  declarations  of 
fcripture,  or  the  pregnant  intimations  of  it  for  my 
ground  and  guide.  I.  I  fhall 


■     our  MeJ/edSAyiojjK,  287 

I.  I  fhall  confider  more  diftindly  what  may  rea-  ^xLV  * 
fonably  be  fuppofed  to  be  implied  in  this  expreflion 
of  the  "  Word's  being  made  flelh,"  namely,  thefe 
five  things. 

Firft,  the  truth  and  reality  of  the  thing  :  that 
the  Son  of  God  did  not  only  appear  in  the  form  of 
human  fiefh,  but  did  really  afllime  it ;  "  the  Word 
"  was  made  fleili,"  as  the  evangelifi  exprefly  de- 
clares :  for  if  this  had  been  only  a  phantafm  and 
apparition,  as  fome  hereticks  of  old  did  fancy,  it 
would  in  all  probability  have  been  like  the  appear- 
ance of  angels  mentioned  in  the  old  teftament,  fud- 
den  and  of  fliort  continuance,  and  would  after  a  little 
while  have  vanilhed  and  difappeared.  But  "  he 
"  dwelt  among  us,"  and  converfed  familiarly  with 
us  a  long  time,  and  for  many  years  together ;  and  the 
fcripture  ufeth  all  the  expreffions  which  are  proper 
to  fignify  a  real  man,  and  a  real  human  body,  and 
there  were  all  the  figns  and  evidences  of  reality  that 
could  be.  For  the  Word  is  faid  to  be  made  flefh,  and 
Christ  is  faid  to  be  "  of  the  feed  of  David  accord- 
"  ing  to  the  flefh,"  and  to  be  "  made  of  a  woman;'* 
and  all  this  to  fliew  that  he  was  a  real  man,  and  had 
a  real  and  fubftantial  body  :  for  he  was  born,  and 
by  degrees  grew  up  to  be  a  man,  and  did  perform 
all  fuch  actions  as  are  natural  and  proper  to  men : 
he  continued  a  ^reat  while  in  the  world,  and  at  laft 
fuffered  and  died,  and  was  laid  in  the  grave.  He  did 
not  vanifh  and  difappear  like  a  phantafm  or  fpi- 
rit,  but  he  died  like  other  men :  and  his  body  was' 
raifed  again  out  of  the  grave  -,  and  after  he  was 
rifen,  he  converfed  forty  days  upon  earth,  and  per- 
mitted his  body  to  be  handled,  and  laft  of  all  was 
vifibly  taken  up  into  heaven.  So 


288  Concernhig  the  incarnation  of 

S  E  R  M.       So  that  either  we  muft  grant  him  to  have  had  a 
XLV 

real  body,  or  we  have  caufe   to  doubt  whether   all 

mankind  be  not  mere  phantafms  and  apparitions. 
For  greater  evidence  no  man  can  give  that  he  is 
really  clothed  with  and  carries  about  him  a  true  and 
fubftantial  body,  than  the  Son  of  God  did  in  the 
days  of  his  flefh.  It  is  to  me  very  wonderful  upon 
what  ground,  or  indeed  to  what  end,  the  hereticks 
of  old,  Marcion  and  others,  did  deny  the  reality  of 
Chri  st's  flefh.  Surely  they  had  a  great  mind  to 
be  hereticks,  who  took  up  fo  fenfelefs  an  opinion  for 
no  reafon,  and  to  no  purpofe. 

Secondly,  another  thing  implied  in  the  "  Word's 
"  being  made  flefh,"  is,  that  this  was  done  pecu- 
liarly for  the  benefit  and  advantage  of  men.  "  The 
*' , Word  was  made  flefh,'*  that  is,  became  man  ; 
For  fo  I  have  fliewn  the  word  flefh  to  be  often  ufed 
in  fcripture.  "And  this  the  author  of  the  epiftle  to 
the  Hebrews  takes  very  fpecial  notice  of,  as  a  great 
grace  and  favour  of  God  to  mankind,  that  his  Son 
appeared  in  our  nature,  and  confequently  for  our  fal- 
vation ;  as  it  is  faid  in  the  Nicene  creed,  "  who  for 
"  us  men  and  for  our  falvation  came  down  from 
Heb.il.  "  heaven,  and  was  incarnate, "  &c.  "  For  verily,'* 
fays  the  apoftle,  "  he  took  not  on  him  the  nature 
*'  of  angels,  but  of  the  feed  of  Abraham,"  »  y»^ 
^YiTfi  dfyihcav  £7nAtfju€avs7of/,  "  he  did  not  affume  the 
"  angelical  nature,"  fo  our  tranflators  underftood  the 
phrafe  ♦,  but  the  word  alfo  fignifies  to  take  hold  of 
a  thing  which  is  falling,  as  well  as  to  alTume  or  take 
on  him.  He  did  not  take  hold  of  the  angels  when 
they  were  falling,  but  fuffered  them  to  lapfe  irre- 
coverably into  mifery  and  ruin ;  but  he  took  hold, 

of 


«6. 


dUr  ^iejfed  Saviour.  289 

of  human  nature  when  it  was  falling,  and  particu-  SElRM. 
larly  of  the  feed  of  Abraham,  and  by  the  feed  of  ^^^' 
Abraham,  that  is,  by  "  himfelf,  in  whom  all  the 
"  nations  of  the  earth  were  bleifed,"  he  brought 
falvation  firft  to  the  Jews,  and  then  to  the  reft  of 
mankind.  The  apoftle  chufes  to  derive  this  blef- 
fing  from  Abraham,  that  fo  he  might  bring  it  near- 
er to  the  Jews  to  whom  he  wrote  this  cpiftle,  and 
might  thereby  more  efFeftually  recommend  the 
gofpel  to  them,  and  the  glad  tidings  of  that  great 
falvation,  in  which  they  had  fo  peculiar  an  intereft. 

And  it  is  fome  confirmation  of  the  interpretation 
I  have  given  of  that  expreffion,  "  he  took  not  on 
"  him,"  &c.  That  the  evangelift  ufes  the  very 
fame  word  for  taking  hold  of  one  that  was  ready  to 
fink :  for  fo  it  is  faid  of  St.  Peter  when  he  was  ready 
to  fink,  that  "  Christ  put  forth  his  hand  >^  im-  Matt. xk; 
"  hcc^ito^  and  caught  hold  of  him,"  and  faved  him  3'' 
from  drowning :  and  thus  the  Son  of  God  caught 
hold  of  mankind,  which  was  ready  to  fink  into  e- 
ternal  perdition :  he  laid  hold  of  our  nature,  or  as 
it  is  exprefled  in  the  fame  chapter,  "  he  took  part 
"  of  flefh  and  blood,"  that  in  our  nature  he  might  be 
capable  of  effefting  our  redemption  and  deliverance. 

But  it  is  no  where  faid  in  fcripture,  not  the  ieaft 
intimation  given  there,  that  the  Son  of  God  ever 
fhewed  fuch  grace  and  favour  to  the  angels :  buG 
"  the  Word  became  flefh,"  that  is,  became  man  : 
he  did  not  afllime  the  angelical  nature,  but  was 
contented  to  be  clothed  with  the  rags  of  huma- 
nity, and  to  be  made  in  the  likenefs  of  finful  flelh, 
that  is,  of  finful  man. 

Vol.  III.  5  A  Thirdly, 

6. 


290  Concerning  the  incarnation  of 

E^R  M.  Thirdly,  this  expreffion  of  *'  the  Y/ord's  being 
"  made  flcih,"  may  farther  impJy  his  airuming  the 
infirmities,  and  fubmitting  to  the  miferies  of  human 
nature.  This  I  colled  from  the  word  flefh,  by 
which  the  fcripture  often  ufes  to  exprefs  our  frail 
and  mortal  nature.  The  Son  of  God  did  not  only 
condefcend  to  be  made  man,  but  alfo  to  become 
mortal  and  miferable  for  our  fakes :  he  fubmitted 
to  all  thofe  things  which  are  accounted  moft  grie- 
vous and  calamitous  to  human  nature  :  to  hunger 
and  want,  to  fhame  and  contempt,  to  bitter  pains 
afld  agonies,  and  to  a  moft  cruel  and  difgraceful 
death  :  fo  that  in  this  fenfe  alfo  he  became  flefh, 
not  only  by  being  clothed  with  human  nature,  but 
by  becoming  liable  to  all  the  frailties  and  fufferings 
of  it  •,  of  which  he  had  a  greater  fhare  than  any  of 
the  fons  of  men  ever  had  :  for  never  was  forrow  like 
to  his  forrow,  nor  fufferings  hke  to  his  fufferings, 
the  weight  and  bitternefs  whereof  was  fuch  as  to 
wring  from  him,  the  meekefb  and  moft  patient  en- 
durer  of  fufferings  that  ever  was,  that  doleful  com- 
plaint, "  My  God,  miy  God,  why  haft  thou  for- 
"  faken  me?" 

Fourthly,  in  this  expreffion,  "  the  Word  is  made 
"  flefli,"  is  likewife  implied  the  union  of  the  divi- 
nity with  human  nature  in  one  perfon.  And  this 
the  text  expreffeth  in  fuch  words  as  feem  to  fignify 
a  moft  perfed,  and  intimate,  and  vital  union  of  the 
divine  and  human  natures  of  Christ  in  one  per- 
fon :  "  the  Word  was  made,"  or  became,  "  flefh  :" 
which  what  elfe  can  it  fignify  but  one  of  thefe  two 
Things  ?  Either  that  the  eternal  word  and  only  be- 
gotten Son  of  God  was  changed  into  a  man>  which 

is 


XLV. 


our  bleffed  Saviour,  291 

is  not  only  impoffible  to  be,  but  impious  to  ima-  SERM. 
gine  :  or  elfe,  that  the  Son  of  God  did  afifume 
our  nature,  and  became  man,  by  his  divinity  being 
united  to  human  nature  as  the  foul  is  vitally  united 
to  the  body  -,  without  either  being  changed  into  it, 
or  confounded  with  it,  or  fwallowed  up  by  it,  as 
the  Eutychian  hereticks  fancied  the  human  nature  of 
Christ  to  be  fwallowed  up  of  his  divinity:  which 
had  it  been  fo,  St.  John  had  expreffed  himfelf  very 
untowardly  when  he  fays,  "  the  Word  became 
'*  fieflii"  for  it  had  been  quite  contrary,  and  flelh 
had  become  the  Word,  being  changed  into  it,  and 
fwallowed  up  by  it,  and  loft  in  it. 

The  only  thing  then  that  we  can  reafonably  ima- 
gine to  be  the  meaning  of  this  exprelTion  is  this,  that 
the  Son  of  God  afTumed  our  nature,  and  united 
himfelf  with  it,  as  our  fouls  are  united  with  our 
bodies:  and  as  the  foul  and  body  united  make  one 
perfon,  and  yet  retain  their  diftind:  natures  and  pro- 
perties •,  fo  may  we  conceive  the  divine  and  human 
natures  in  Christ  to  be  united  into  one  perfon: 
anti  this  without  any  change  or  confufion  of  the 
two  natures. 

I  fay,  the  divinity  united  itfelf  with  human  na- 
ture :  for  though  flefh  be  only  mentioned  in  the 
text,  yet  he  did  not  only  ailume  a  human  body, 
which  was  the  herefy  of  Apollinaris  and  his  follow- 
ers, upon  a  miftake  of  this  and  fome  other  texts  of 
fcripture :  but  he  affumed  the  whole  human  nature, 
that  is,  a  human  foul  united  to  a  real  and  natural  bo- 
dy :  for  fo  1  have  fhewn  the  word  flefh  to  be  fre- 
quently ufed  in  fcripture,  not  only  for  the  body  but 
for  the  whole  man,  by  an  ufual  figure  of  fpeech  :  as 

5  A  2  on 


Concerning  the  incarnation  of 

on  the  other  hand,  foul  is  frequently  ufed  for  the 
whole  ruan  or  perfon  :  fo  many  fouls  are  faid  to 
have  gone  down  with  Jacob  into  Egypt,  that  is,  fo 
many  perfons. 

But  this  I  need  not  infift  longer  upon,  our  Savi- 
our being  fo  frequently  in  fcripture,  and  fo  cxprefly 
faid  to  be  a  man  ;  which  could  with  no  propriety  of 
fpeech  have  been  faid,  had  he  only  affumed  a  human 
body  :norcould  he  have  been  faid  to  have  been  "  made 
*'  in  all  things  like  unto  us,  fin  only  excepted,"  had 
he  only  had  a  human  body  but  not  a  foul  ?  For  then 
the  meaning  muft  have  been,  that  he  had  been 
"  made  in  all  things  like  unto  us,"  that  is,  like  to 
a  man,  that  only  excepted  which  chiefly  makes  the 
man,  that  is,  the  foul :  and  the  addition  ef  thofe 
words,  "  fm  only  excepted,"  had  been  no  lefs 
flrange  -,  becaufe  a  human  body,  without  a  foul,  is 
neither  capable  of  being  faid  to  have  fin,  or  to  be 
without  it. 

And  this  may  fuffice  to  have  been  fpoken  in  ge- 
neral, concerning  that  great  myftery  of  the  hypo- 
ftatical,  as  they  that  love  hard  v/ords  love  to  call  it, 
or  perfonal  union  of  the  divine  and  human  natures 
in  the  perfon  of  our  blelTed  Saviour  :  in  the  more 
particular  explication  whereof,  it  is  not  fafe  for  our 
fhallow  underflandings  to  wade  farther  than  the 
fcripture  goes  before  us,  for  fear  we  go  out  of  our 
depth  and  lofe  ourfelves  in  the  profound  inquiry  in- 
to the  deep  things  of  God,  which  he  has  not  thought 
fit  in  this  prefent  ftate  of  darknefs  and  imperfeftion, 
to  reveal  more  plainly  and  fully  to  us.  It  ought  to 
be  thought  fuflicient,  that  the  fcripture  fpeaking  of 
tliz  fame  perfon,  Jesus  Chri  st  our  blelTed  Savi- 
our, 


our  bleffed  S A v  i  our .  293 

OUR,  doth   frequently   and  exprefly  call  him  both  SERM. 
God  and  man :  which  how  it  can  be  fo  eafijy  con-  <_  -^-Lf 
ceived  upon  any  other  fuppofition,  than  that  of  the 
union  of  the  divine  and  human  natures  in  one  per- 
fon,  I  muft  confefs  that  1  am  not  able  to  compre- 
hend. 

Fifthly  and  laftly,  all  this  which  I  have  ffiewn 
to  be  implied  in  this  propofition,  "  the  Word  was 
"  made  flefh,"  does  fignify  to  us  the  wonderful  and 
amazing  condefcenfion  and  love  of  God  to  man- 
kind in  fending  his  Son  into  the  world,  and  fub- 
mitting  him  to  this  way  and  method  for  our  falva- 
tion  and  recovery.  "  The  Word  was  made  flefh  :" 
what  a  ftep  is  here  made  in  order  to  the  reconciling 
of  men  to  God  ?  From  heaven  to  earth ;  from  the 
top  of  glory  and  majefty  to  the  loweft  gulf  of  mean- 
nefs  and  mifery:  the  evangelift  feems  here  to  ufe  the 
word  flefh,  which  fignifies  the  meanefl:  and  vilefl: 
part  of  humanity,  to  exprefs  to  us  how  low  the 
Son  of  God  was  contented  to  ftoop  for  the  redemp- 
tion of  man,  "  The  Word  was  made  flefli  :'*  two 
terms,  at  the  greateft  diftance  from  one  another,  are 
here  brought  together :  the  Son  of  God  is  here  ex- 
preffed  to  us  by  one  of  his  higheft  and  moft  glori- 
ous titles,  the  Word,  which  imports  both  power 
and  wifdom -,  "Christ  the  power  of  Goo,  and  iCor.  i. 
"  the  wifdom  of  God,"  as  the  apoftlc  calls  him  :  ^^' 
and  human  nature  is  here  defcribed  by  it's  vileft 
part,  flefh;  which  imports  frailty  and  infirmity: 
"  the  Word  became  flefh,"  that  is,  fubmitted  to 
that  from  which  it  was  at  the  greateft  diftance  : 
"  He"  who  was  the  "  power  of  God,  and  the 
*'  wifcfom  of  Cod,"  fubmitted  not  only  to  be  call- 
ed. 


"94  Concerning  the  incarnation  of 

:  ''»  'f  ed,  but  really  to  become  a  frail  and  miferable  man  ; 
not  only  to  ailume  our  nature,  but  to  put  on  all  the 
infirmities,  and  which  is  the  greateli  of  all,  the 
mortality  of  it. 

And  this  is  the  great  myftery  of  godlinefs,  that 
is,  of  the  Chrifiian  religion,  that  God  fliould  be 
"  manifcfted  in  the  nefli,  and  become  man,"  with 
a  moil  gracious  and  merciful  defign  to  bring  man 
back  again  to  God  :  that  he  lliould  become  a  mi- 
ferable, and  a  mortal  man  to  fave  us  from  eternal 
death,  and  to  make  us  partakers  of  everlafting  life  : 
that  the  Son  of  God  fhould  condefcend  to  inhabit 
our  vile  nature,  to  wear  rags  and  to  become  a  beg- 
gar for  our  fakes  ;  and  all  this,  not  only  to  repair 
thofe  difmal  ruins  which  fm  had  made  in  it,  and  to 
reftore  us  to  our  former  eftate  %  but  to  better  and  ad- 
vance our  condition,  and  by  degrees  to  bring  us  to  a 
Hate  of  much  greater  perfection  and  happinefs  than 
that  from  which  we  fell. 

And  that  he  fhould  become  man  on  purpofe  that 
he  mJght  dwell  among  us,  and  converfe  with  us, 
and  thoroughly  inftrudt  us  in  our  duty,  and  (hew  us 
the  way  to  eternal  life  by  his  heavenly  doftrine,  and 
as  it  were  take  us  by  the  hand,  and  lead  us  in  that 
way  by  the  perfeft  and  familiar  example  of  a  moft 
blamelefs  and  holy  life  ;  fhewing  us  how  God  him- 
felf  thought  fit  to  live  in  this  world,  when  he  was 
pleafed  to  become  man. 

That  by  converfing  with  us  in  the  likenefs  and 
nature  of  man,  he  might  become  a  human,  and  in 
fome  fort  an  equal  and  familiar,  an  imitable  and  en- 
couraging example  of  innocency  and  goodnefs,  of 
meeknefs  and  humility,  of  patience  and  fubmiflion 

to 


our  Meffed  Saviour,  295 

to  the  will   of  God  under  the  foreft  affliftlons  and  SER  M. 
fufferings,  and  in  a  word,  a  moft  perfedl  pattern  of 
a  divine  and  heavenly  converfation  upon  earth. 

And  that  by  this  means  we  might,  for  our  greater 
encouragement  in  hoHnefs  and  virtue,  fee  all  that 
which  the  kw  of  God  requires  of  us  exemplified  in 
our  nature,  and  really  performed  and  pradifed  by  a 
man  like  our  felves. 

And  that  hkewife  in  our  nature  he  might  conquer 
and  triumph  over  the  two  great  enemies  of  our  fal- 
vation,  the  world  and  the  devil :  and  by  firft  fuffer- 
ing  death,  and  then  overcoming  it,  and  by  refcuing 
our  nature  from  the  power  of  it  by  his  refurrec5Hon 
from  the  dead,  he  might  deliver  us  from  the  fear 
of  death,  and  give  us  the  glorious  hopes  of  a  blefTed 
immortality  :  for  by  aiTuming  our  frail  and  mortal 
nature  he  became  capable  of  fufFering  and  of  fhed- 
ing  his  precious  blood  for  us,  and  by  ?hat  means  of 
purchafing  "  forgivenefs  of  fins"  and  "  eternal  re- 
"  demption  for  us." 

And  farther  yet,  that  by  being  fubjedl  to  the  mi- 
feries  and  infirmities  of  humanity,  he  might  from 
his  own  experience,  the  fureft  and  moft  fenfibie  fort 
of  knowledge  and  inftruftion,  learn  to  have  a  more 
companionate  fenfe  of  our  infirmities,  and  be  more 
apt  to  commiferate  us  in  all  our  fufferings  and  temp- 
tations, and  more  ready  to  fuccour  us  labouring  un- 
der them. 

And  finally,  that  as  a  reward  of  his  obedience  and 
fufferings  in  our  nature,  he  might  in  the  fame  na- 
ture be  ''  exalted  to  the  right-hand  of  the  majeffy 
*'  on  high,**  there  to  continue  "  for  ever  to  make 
"  interceflion  for  us**. 

2  II.  I 


XLV. 


296  Concerning  the  incarnation  of 

SERM.  II.  I  fliall  in  the  next  place confider  the  objeflions 
againft  the  incarnation  of  the  Son  of  God,  from 
the  fuppofed  impofiibility  and  incongruity  of  the 
thing.  I  fhall  mention  three,  and  endeavour  in  as 
few  words  as  I  can  to  give  a  clear  and  fatisfadory 
anfwer  to  them. 

Firfl,  it  is  objefled,  that  the  incarnation  of  the 
Son  of  God,  as  I  have  explained  it,  neceffarily  Hip- 
pofing  an  union  of  the  divinity  with  human  nature 
is,  if  not  altogether  impoffible,  yet  a  very  unintel- 
ligible thing. 

Now  that  there  is  no  impofiibility  in  the  thing 
feems  to  be  very  evident  from  the  inftance  whereby 
I  have  endeavoured  to  illuftrate  it,  of  the  union  be- 
tween the  foul  and  the  body  of  man,  which  we 
muft  acknowledge  to  be  a  thing  poflible,  becaufe 
we  are  fure  that  it  is  ;  and  yet  no  man  can  explain, 
either  to  himfelf  or  to  any  one  elfe,  the  manner  how 
it  is,  or  can  be  conceived  to  be  ;  but  for  all  that 
we  are  certain,  as  we  can  be  of  any  thing,  that  it 
isfo. 

And  is  it  not  evc-ry  whit  as  pofiible  for  God,  if 
he  fo  pleafe,  to  unite  himfelf  to  human  nature,  as 
it  is  for  the  foul  to  be  united  to  the  body  ?  And  that 
we  are  not  able  to  conceive  the  manner  how  this  is 
or  can  be  done,  ought  not  ki  reafon  to  be  any  pre- 
judice againft  the  truth  and  certainty  of  the  thing  : 
This  indeed  may  make  it  feem  ftrange  to  us,  but  by 
no  means  incredible  :  becaufe  we  do  moft  firmly  be- 
lieve a  great  many  things  to  be,  the  manner  of 
whofe  being  we  do  not  at  all  comprehend.  And 
therefore  I  take  it  for  an  undoubted  principle  which 
no  man  can  gainfay,  that  to  affure  us  that  a  thing 

really 


our  bleffed  ^AviQXJR.  2gy 

really  is,  It  is  not  necefiary  for  us  to  know  the  man-  SER  M. 
ner  how  it  is,  or  can  be  :  It   is  fufficient  for  us  to      -^^  '''• 
know,    that  the  thing   is    not  impofilble  •,  and   of 
that  we  have  the  very  beft  demonitration  that  can  be, 
if  we  be  fare  that  it  is. 

Secondly,  fuppofing  this  thing  to  be  poffible, 
and  capable  in  any  meafure  to  be  underftood,  which 
yet  I  have  fhewn  not  to  be  neceffary  to  our  firm  be- 
lief of  it  •,  it  is  farther  objedled,  that  it  feems  to  be 
a  thing  very  incongruous,  and  much  beneath  the 
dignity  of  the  Son  of  God,  to  be  united  to  human 
nature,  and  to  fubmit  to  fo  near  an  alliance  with 
that  which  is  fo  very  mean  and  defpicable  :  yea  to 
be  infinitely  more  below  him,  than  for  the  greateft 
prince  in  this  world  to  match  with  the  pooreft  and 
mod  contemptible  beggar. 

But  herein  furely  we  meafure  God  too  much  by 
ourfelves,  and  becaufe  we  who  are  evil  have  feldoni 
fo  much  goodnefs  as  to  floop  beneath  ourfelves  for 
the  benefit  and  good  of  others,  we  are  apt  to  think 
that  God  hath  not  fo  much  goodnefs  neither :  and 
becaufe  our  ill  nature,  and  pride,  and  folly,  as  in- 
deed all  pride  is  folly,  will  not  fuffer  us  to  do  it,  we 
prefently  conclude  that  it  does  not  become  God. 
But  what  Pliny  faid  to  the  emperor  Trajan  con- 
cerning earthly  kings  and  potentates,  is  much  more 
true  of  the  Lord  of  glory,  the  great  king  of  hea- 
ven and  earth  ;  Cui  nihil  ad  attgenditm  fajligium  fuper- 
eji,  hoc  WW  modo  crefcere  potcjl^  fi  fdpfian  fuhmittaty 
fecurus  magnitudinis  fua^  "  He  that  is  at  the  top,  and 
"  can  rife  no  higher,  hath  yet  this  one  way  left  to 
"  become  greater,  by  ftooping  beneath  himfelf  j" 
which  he  may  very  fafeJy  do,  "  being  fecure  of  his 

Vol.  III.  5  B  "  own 


29S  Concerning  the  incarnation  of 

SERM    «  own  sjreatnefs."     The  lower  any  being,  be  he 

XLV  •  J  <~> 

._  -     '_}  never  fo  high,  condefcends  to  do  good,  the  glory 

of  his  goodnels  fhines  fo  much  the  brighter.  Men 
are  many  times  too  proud  and  ftiff  to  bend,  too  per- 
verfe  and  ill-natured  to  ftoop  beneath  their  own 
little  greatncfs  for  the  good  of  others  :  but  God, 
whofe  "  ways  are  not  as  our  ways,"  and  whofe 
thoughts  are  as  much  above  our  low  and  nar- 
row thoughts,  "  as  the  heavens  are  high  above  the 
"  earth,"  did  not  difdain  nor  think  it  below  him  to 
become  man  for  the  good  of  mankind  -,  and,  as 
much  as  the  divinity  is  capable  of  being  fo,  to  be- 
come miferable  to  make  us  happy.  We  may  be 
afraid  that  if  we  humble  our  felves  we  fhall  be  de- 
fpifed,  that  if  we  ftoop  others  will  get  above  us  and 
trample  upon  us  :  but  God,  though  he  condefcend 
never  fo  low,  is  ftill  fecure  of  his  own  greatnefs, 
and  that  none  can  take  it  from  him. 

So  that  in  truth,  and  according  to  right  reafon, 
it  was  no  real  diminution  or  difparagement  to  the 
Son  of  God  to  become  man  for  the  falvation  of 
mankind  :  but  on  the  contrary,  it  was  a  moft  glo- 
rious humility,  and  the  greateft  inftance  of  the  trueil 
goodnefs  that  ever  was.  And  therefore  the  apoftle 
Heb.  V.  ".  ^^  ^^^  Hebrews,  when  he  fays,  that  "  Christ  glo- 
"  rified  not  himfelf  to  be  made  an  high-prieft,  but'' 
was  "  appointed  of  God"  to  this  "  office,  as  was 
"  Aaron  •,"  does  hereby  feem  to  intimate,  that  it  was 
a  glory  to  the  "  Son  of  God  to  be  an  high-prieit  for 
"  the  fons  of  men  :"  for  though  it  was  a  ftrange  con- 
defcenfion,  yet  was  it  likewife  a  moft  wonderful  ar- 
gument of  his  goodnefs,  which  is  the  higheft  glory 
of  the  divine  nature. 

In 


our  hlefjed  Saviour.  299 

In  fnort,  if  God  for  our  fakes  did  fubmit  himfelf  ^^jj^^* 

to  a  condition  which  we  may  think  did  lefs  become  *.. ^^-— 1 

him,  here  is  great  caufe  of  thankfulnefs,  but  none 

furely  of  cavil  and  exception  :  we  have  infinite  rea- 

fon  to  acknowledge  and  admire  his   goodnefs,  but 

none  at  all  to  upbraid  him  with  his  kindnefs,  and 

to  quarrel  with  him  for  having  defcended  fo  much 

beneath   himfelf  to  teftify  his  love  to  us,  and  his 

tender  concernment  for  our  happinefs  :  befides,  that 

when   we  have  faid  all  we  can  about  this  matter,  I 

hope  we  will  allow  God  himfelf  to  be  the  bed  and 

moft  competent  judge  what  is  fit  for  God  to  do  ; 

and  that  he  needs  not  to  take  counfel  of  any  of  his 

creatures,  what  will  bcft  become  him  in  this  or  any 

other  cafe  :  "  behold  in  this  thou   art  not  iuft  -,  I  Jobxxxui, 

1213. 
"  will  anfwer  thee,  that  God  is  greater  than  man  : 

"  Why  doft  thou  difputeagainft  him?  Forhegiveth 
"  not  account  of  any  of  his  matters.'* 

Thirdly,  if  our  reafon  could  get  over  this  diffi- 
culty, and  admit  that  God  might  become  man  ; 
yet  it  feems  very  unfui table  to  the  Son  of  God,  and 
to  his  great   defign    of  inftrufting  and   reforming 
mankind,  to  appear  in  fo  low  and  fufFering  a  condi- 
tion.    This,  to  the  heathen  philofophers,  who,   as 
the  apoftle  tells  us,  "  by  wifdom  knew  not  God,"  did 
not  only  fecm  unreafonable,  but  even  ridiculous :  fo 
St.  Paul  tells  us,  "  we,"  fays  he,  "  preach  Chris  t  i  Cor.  i. 
"  crucified,  to  the  Jews  a  ftumbling-block,  and  to  ^^* 
"  the  Greeks  foolifhnefs  :"  to  think  that  fo  poor 
and  mean  a  man  was  fit  to  give  laws  to  mankind, 
and  to  awe  the  minds  of  men  by  the  authority  of 
his  dodlrine  :  that  one  who  was  put  to  death  himfelf 
ihovild  be  believed  by  others  when  he  promiled  to 
S  ^-  %  thera 


300  Concenimg  the  incarnation  of 

SERM.  them  life  and   immortality   in  another  world,  could 
1  XV 

not  but  appear  very  llrange  and  unreafonable. 

For  anfwer  to  this ;  befides  other  excellent  reafons 
and  ends  which  the  fcripture  exprePiy  affigns  of  our 
bleiTed  Saviour's  humiliation,  in  his  aflfuming  our 
nature  v/ith  the  frailties  and  miferies  of  it :  as  that 
he  might  be  a  teacher,  and  an  example  to  us :  that 
by  his  bitter  pafilon  he  might  make  expiation  for 
fin,  and  fct  us  a  pattern  of  the  greateft  meeknefs 
and  patience  under  the  greateft  provocations  and 
fufferings  :  that  having  fufTered  fo  grievoufly  him- 
felf,  he  might  know  how  to  comm.iferate  and  pity 
lis  in  all  our  temptations  and  fufferings  :  that  "  by 
"  death  he  might  deflroy  him  that  had  the  pow- 
"  er  of  death,  that  is,  the  devil  -,  and  might  de- 
"  liver  thofe  who  through  fear  of  death  were  all 
"  their  life-time  fubjed:  to  bondage  :"  I  fay,  be- 
fides all  this,  it  was  of  great  ufe  that  the  great  teach- 
er and  reformer  of  mankind  fliould  live  in  fo  mean 
and  afflifted  a  condition,  to  confront  the  pride  and 
vanity  of  the  world  by  this  confideration,  that  the 
Son  of  God,  and  the  very  bcft  man  that  ever  was, 
was  a  beggar,  and  "  had  not  where  to  lay  his  head  :" 
and  likewife  to  convince  men  of  thefe  two  great, 
truths,  that  God  may  grievoufly  afflid  thofe  whom 
he  dearly  loves  ;  and  that  it  is  pofTible  for  men  to 
be  innocent  and  contented  in  the  midil  of  poverty, 
and  reproach,  and  fufferings. 

Had  our  bleffed  Saviour  appeared  in  the  perfon 
and  pomp  of  a  great  temporal  prince,  the  inftuence 
of  his  authority  and  example  would  probably  have 
made  more  hypocrites  and  fervile  converts,  but  not 
have  perfuaded  men  one  jot  more  to  be  inwardly 

holy 


our  blejj'ed  Saviour.  ^or 

holy  and  good.     The  great  arguments  that  muft  do  S  E  R  M. 
that,  muft  not  be  fetched  from  the  pomp  and  pro-  .    _  _' 
fperity  of  this  world,  but  from  the  great  and  eternal 
recompences  of  the  other. 

And  it  is  very  well  worth  our  obfervation,  that 
nothing  puzzled  Ca^far  Vaninus,  who  was  perhaps 
the  iiril:,  and  the  only  martyr  for  atheifm  that  ever 
was  •,  I  fay,  nothing  puzzled  him  more,  than  that 
he  could  not  from  the  hiftory  of  our  Saviour's  hfe 
and  aftions,  written  by  the  evangelifts  with  fo  na- 
tive a  fimpticity,  faflen  upon  him  any  probable  im- 
putation of  a  fecular  intereft  and  deiign  in  any  thing 
that  he  faid  or  did.  No  doubt  but  Vaninus,  before 
he  made  this  acknowledgment,  had  fearched  very 
narrowly  into  this  matter-,  and  could  he  have  found 
any  colour  for  fuch  an  imputation,  he  would  have 
thought  it  fufficient  to  have  blafted  both  him  and  his 
religion. 

You  may  be  pleafed  to  confider  farther,  that  it 
was  the  opinion  of  the   wifefl:  Jews,  that   the  beft 
men,  the  children  of  God  who  called  God  their  fa- 
ther, were  many  times  expofed  to  the  greateft  fuf- 
ferings  and  reproaches  for  the  trial  of  their  faith, 
and  meeknefs,  and  patience,  as  we  may  fee  at  large 
in  the  Wifdom  of  Solomon,  v/hcre  fpeaking  of  the 
malice  and  enmity  of  the  wicked   to  one  that  was 
eminently  righteous,  he  brings  them  in  faying  after 
this  manner,  "  Let  us  lie  in  wait  for  the  righteous,  chap.  ij. 
"  becaufe  he   is  not  for  our  turn;  he  is  clean  con-  12,  13,  ^ 
"  trary  to  our  doings :  he   upbraideth  us  with  our  i-^jgjig', 
"  oftendipig  the  law,  and  objedeth  to  our  infamy  20. 
"  the  tranfgrcffions  of  our  youth  :  he  profefieth  to 
*'  have  the  knowledge  of  God,  and  hecalleth  him- 

«  felf 


Concerning  the  incarnation  of 

"  felf  the  child  of  the  Lop.d  .:  he  is  grievous  unto 
"  us  even  to  behold  ;  for  his  life  is  not  like  other 
"  mens,  his  ways  are  of  another  fafhion :  we  are 
"  eileemed  of  him  as  counterfeits,  he  abftaineth 
"  from  our  ways  as  from  filthinefs  :  he  pronounceth 
"  the  end  of  the  juft  to  be  bkiled,  and  maketh  his 
"  boaft  that  God  is  his  father:  let  us  fee  if  his 
"  words  be  true,  and  what  fliaJl  happen  in  the  end 
"  of  him:  for  if  the  juft  man  be  the  Son  of  God, 
"  he  will  help  him,  and  deliver  him  from  the  hands 
"  of  his  enemies  :  let  us  examine  him  with  defpite- 
*'  fulnefs  and  torture,  that  we  may  know  his  m.eek- 
*'  nefs  and  prove  his  patience:  let  us  condemn  him 
"  to  a  Oiameful  death,  &:c." 

This  is  fo  exact  a  chara^Sler  of  our  blefied  Savi- 
our, both  in  refpeft  of  the  hohnefs  and  innocency 
of  his  life,  and  of  the  reproaches  and  fufferings 
which  he  met  with  from  the  wicked  and  malicious 
Jews,  who  perfccuted  him  all  his  life,  and  at  lafh 
confpired  his  death,  that  whoever  reads  this  pafifage, 
can  hardly  forbear  to  think  it  a  prophetical  defcrip- 
tion  of  the  innocency  and  fufferings  of  the  bleffed 
Jesus  :  for  he  certainly  in  the  moft  eminent  man- 
ner was  the  Son  of  God,  being  called  by  the  evan*- 
gelift,  "  the  only  begotten  of  the  Father." 

Or  if  this  was  not  ar  predidlion  concerning  our 
bleffed  Saviour,  yet  thus  much  at  leaft  may  be 
concluded  from  it,  that  in  the  judgment  of  the 
wifeft  among  the  Jev.'s,  it  was  not  unworthy  of  the 
goodnefs  and  wifdom  of  the  divine  providence  to 
permit  the  beft  man  to  be  fo  ill  treated  by  wicked 
men  :  and  farther,  that  in  their  judgment  t[ie  inno- 
cency and  virtues  of  an  eminently  righteous  man  are 
2  thea 


our  bleJfedSAvioxsK.  ^^oi 

then  fet  off  to   the  beft  advantao;e,  and  do  fliine  S  E  R  !Vf. 
forth  with  the  greateft  Jiiftre,  when  he  is  under  the 
hardeft  circumftances  of  fuffering  and  perfecution 
from  an  evil  world. 

Add  to  this  iikewife,  that  the  bed  and  wifeft  of 
the  heathen  philofophers  do  frequently  inculcate 
fuch  dodrines  as  thefe :  that  worldly  greatnefs  and 
power  are  not  to  be  admired,  but  rather  to  be  de- 
ipifed  by  a  wife  man :  that  men  may  be  very  good 
and  dear  to  the  gods,  and  yet  liable  to  the  greateft 
miferiesand  fufferings  in  this  world.  That  whoever 
fufFers  unjuftly,  and  bears  it  patiently,  gives  the 
greateft  teftimony  to  goodnefs,  and  does  moft  ef- 
fedually  recommend  piety  and  virtue,  as  things  of 
greater  value  than  the  eafe  and  pleafure  of  this  pre- 
fent  life  :  nay  farther,  that  a  good  man  caft  into  the 
hartleft  circumftances  of  poverty  and  mifery,  of  re- 
proach and  fuffering,  is  the  fitteft  perfon  of  all  other 
to  be  the  minifter,  and  apoftle  and  preacher  of  God 
to  mankind  -,  which  are  the  very  words  of  Arian  a 
heathen  philofopher,  in  his  difcourfes  of  Epidletus. 
Now  furely  they  who  fiy  fuch  things,  have  no  rea- 
fon  to  obje6l  to  our  bleiTed  Saviour  his  low  and 
fuffering  condition,  as  miftiecoming  one  that  was  to 
be  the  great  teacher  and  reformer  of  the  world. 

And  as  to  that  part  of  the  objeclion,  that  he  who 

fo  freely  promifed  immortality  to  others  could  not, 

orhov/ever  did  not  favc  himfelf  from  death.     This 

vaniftieth   into  nothing  when  v/e  confider,  that  he 

refcued  himfelf  from  the  power  of  the  grave:  and 

it  is  fo  far  from  being  ridiculous  to  rely  upon   his 

promife   of  raifing  us  up  from  the  dead,  that  the 

objecftion   itfelf  is  really  fo.     For  can   any   thing 

be 


304  Concernmg  the  incarnatioJi  of 

be  more  reafonable,  than  to  rely  upon  him  for  our 
hopes  of  immortality,  who  by  rifing  from  the  grave 
himfelf,  and  by  conquering  the  powers  of  death  and 
darknefs,  and  triumphing  openJy  over  them  by  his 
I'ifible  afcenfion  into  heaven,  hath  given  fo  plain 
and  fenfible  a  demonftration  to  all  mankind  that  he 
is  able  to  make  good  to  the  uttermoft  all  the  glori- 
ous promifes  which  he  hath  made  to  us  of  a  blefled 
refurreftion  to  eternal  life  and  happinefs  in  another 
world  ?  To  him  be  glory  and  dominion  for  ever 
and  ever.     Amen. 


SERMON    XLVI. 

Concerning  the  Incarnation  of  Christ. 

Preached  in  the  church  of  St.  Lawrence -Jewry, 
December   28,   1680. 

J  O  H  N    i.   14. 

^e  JVcrd  ivas  made  flejh. 

SERM.  ry^HE  third  and  lad  thing  which  I  propofed 
^^\]'f  A.  upon  this  argument  of  the  incarnation  of  the 
Son  of  God  was,  to  give  fom.e  account  of  this  dif- 
penfation,  and  to  fiiew  that  the  v/ifdom  of  God 
thought  fit  thus  to  order  things,  in  great  condefcen- 
fion  to  the  weaknefs  and  common  prejudices  of 
mankind :  and  that  when  all  things  are  duly  weighed 

and 


XLVI. 


mr  Mejfed  Saviour,  305 

and  confidered,  it  will   appear  much  more    forourSERM. 
comfort  and  advantage,  than  any  other  way  which 
the  wifdom  of  men  would  have  been  moft  apt  to 
devife  and  pitch  upon. 

And  it  is  the  more  neceflary  to  give  fome  account 
of  this  matter,  becaufe  after  all  that  hath  hitherto 
been  faid  in  anfwer  to  the  objedlions  againfl  it,  it 
may  ftill  feem  very  ftrange  to  a  confidering  man 
that  God,  who  could  without  all  this  circumftance 
and  condefcenfion,  have  done  the  bufinefs  for  which 
his  Son  came  into  the  world  and  appeared  in  our  na- 
ture, that  is,  could  have  given  the  fame  laws  to 
mankind,  and  have  offered  to  us  the  forgivenefs  of 
our  fins  and  eternal  life  upon  our  repentance  for  fins 
paft,  and  a  fincere  endeavour  of  obedience  for  the 
future  :  I  fay,  that  notwithfi:anding  this,  he  fiiould 
yet  make  choice  of  this  way  for  the  redemption  and 
recovery  of  fain  man,  by  fending  his  Son  in  our 
nature  to  accomplilh  this  defign. 

And  in  the  handhngof  this  argument  I  fliall,  as  I 
faid  before,  all  along  take  the  exprefs  declarations, 
or  at  lead  the  pregnant  intimations  of  fcripture  for 
my  ground  and  guide  :  it  being  always  fafeft  to  take 
the  reafons  of  the  divine  counfels  and  adions  from 
God  himfelf;  and  in  the 

Firft  place,  I  make  no  manner  of  doubt  to  fay, 
that  it  would  be  a  great  prefumption  and  boldnefs 
in  any  man  to  affirm,  that  the  infinite  wifdom  of 
God  could  not  have  brought  about  the  falvation  of 
men  by  any  other  way,  than  by  this  very  way  in 
which  he  hath  done  it.  For  why  fliould  we  cake 
upon  us  to  fet  limits  to  infinite  wifdom,  and  pretend 
to  know  the  utmoft  extent  of  it?  But  fmce  Goo 

Vol..  III.                       5  C  hath 

6.  


XLVI. 


306  Concerning  the  incarnation  of 

S^ERM.  hath  been  pleafed  to  pitch  upon  this  way  rather  than 
any  other,  this  furely  ought  to  be  reafon  enough  to 
fatisfy  us  of  the  peculiar  wifdom  and  fitnefs  of  it, 
■whether  the  particular  reafons  of  it  appear  to  us  or 
not. 

And  yet  it  cannot  be  denied  to  be  a  very  noble  ar- 
gument, and  well  worthy  our  confideration,  to  en- 
quire into  the  reafons  of  this  difpenfation,  and  to  af- 
lign  them  particularly,  if  we  can.  For  I  look  upon 
myfteries  and  miracles  in  religion  to  be  much  of  the 
fame  nature,  and  that  a  great  reverence  is  due  to 
both  where  they  are  certain,  and  necelTary  in  the 
nature  and  reafon  of  the  thing :  but  neither  of  them 
are  e^fily  to  be  admitted  without  neceffity,  and  very 
good  evidence. 

Secondly,  I  confider  in  the  next  place,  that  in  the 
feveral  revelations  which  God  hath  made  of  him- 
felf  to  mankind,  he  hath  with  great  condefcenfion 
accommodated  himfelf,  both  as  to  the  manner  and 
degree  of  them,  to  the  condition  and  capacity,  and 
other  circumltances  of  the  perfons  and  people  to 
whom  they  v/ere  made. 

Particularly  we  find,  that  the  difpenfation  of  God 
towards  the  JewiOi  nation  was  full  of  condefcenfion 
^o  the  temper,  and  prejudices,  and  other  circum- 
flances  of  that  people.  For  the  religion  and  laws 
which  God  gave  them  were  far  from  being  the  beft 
and  mod  perfedt  in  themfelves ;  in  which  fenfe 
fome  underftand  that  paflage  in  the  prophet  Ezekiel, 
where  it  is  faid  that  God  "  gave  them  ftatutes 
f«  which  were  not  good,"  that  is,  very  imperfedl  in 
^omparifon  of  what  he  could  and  would  have  given 
fhemj  had  they  been  capable  of  them  5  and   yet 

(uch 


bur  Mefed  S AVI ovRi  ^of 

fuch  as  were  very  well  fuited  and  fitted  to  their  pre-  S  E  R  M. 

•  XLVI 

fent  capacity  and  circumftances. 

Thirdly,  I  obferve  yet  farther  ;  that  though  the 
Chriftian  religion,  as  to  the  main  and  fubftance  of 
it,  be  a  moft  perfeft  inftitution,  being  the  law  of 
nature  revived  and  perfed:ed  ;  yet  upon  a  due  con- 
fideration  of  things  it  cannot  be  denied,  that  the 
lilanner  and  circumftances  of  this  difpenfation  are  full 
of  condefcenfion  to  the  weaknefs  of  mankind,  and 
very  much  accommodated  to  the  moft  common  and 
deeply  radicated  prejudices  of  men  concerning  God 
and  religion  ;  and  peculiarly  fitted  to  remove  and 
root  them  out  of  the  minds  of  men,  by  fubftitut- 
ing  fomething  in  the  place  of  them^  of  as  near  a 
compliance  with  them  as  was  confiftent  with  the  ho- 
nour of  Almighty  God,  and  the  great  defign  of  the 
Chriftian  religion, 

it  is  not  eafy  to  give  a  certain  account  of  the  tru^ 
Original  of  fome  notions  and  prejudices  concerning 
God  and  religion,  which  have  generally  obtained  in 
the  world,  in  that  variety  of  religions,  and  the  dif* 
ferent  ways  of  worfhip  and  fuperftition,  which  havd 
been  in  feveral  nations  of  the  earth  :  but  in  hiftor/ 
and  fa6t  this  is  certain,  that  fome  notions,  and  thofd 
Very  grofs  and  erroneous,  did  almoft  univerfall/ 
prevail  even  among  thofe  who  did  extremely  differ 
in  the  particular  forms  and  modes  of  their  fuperftition* 

And  though  fome  of  thefe  were  much  more  to- 
lerable than  others,  yet  God  feems  to  have  had 
great  confideration  of  fome  very  weak  and  grofa 
apprehenfions  of  mankind  concerning  religion.  And^ 
as  in  fome  of  the  laws  given  by  Mofes,  God  was 
pleafed  particularly  to  confider  the  hardnefs  of  the 

5  C  a  hearts 


308  Concerning  the  incarnation  of 

S  E  R  M.   hearts  of  that  people  j  fo  he  feems  likewife  to  have 
XLVI  • 

very  much  fuited  the  difpenfation  of  the  gofpel  and 

the  method  of  our  falvation,  by  the  incarnation 
and  fufferings  of  his  Son,  to  the  common  preju- 
dices of  mankind  ;  efpecially  of  the  heathen  world, 
whofe  minds  were  lefs  prepared  for  this  difpenfation 
than  the  Jews,  if  we  confider  the  light  and  advan- 
tages which  the  Jewifh  nation  had  above  the  Gentile 
world  :  that  fo  by  this  means  and  method  he  might 
wean  them  by  degrees  from  their  grofs  conceptions 
of  things,  and  redlify  more  eafily  their  wrong  ap- 
prehenfions,  by  gratifying  them  in  fome  meafure, 
and  in  a  gracious  compliance  with  our  weaknefs,  by 
bending  and  accommodating  the  way  and  method 
of  our  falvation,  to  our  weak  capacity  and  imper- 
fedt  conceptions  of  things. 

Fourthly,  and  that  God  hath  done  this  in  the 
difpenfation  of  the  gofpel,  will  I  think  very  plain- 
ly appear  in  the  following  inftances  -,  in  moft  of 
which  I  Ihall  be  very  brief,  and  only  infifl  fome- 
what  more  largely  upon  the  laft  of  them. 

I  ft,  The  world  was  much  given  to  adrfiire  myf- 
teries  in  religion.  The  Jews  had  theirs  ;  feveral  of 
which  by  God's  own  appointment  were  referved 
and  kept  fecret  in  a  great  meafure  from  the  people ; 
others  were  added  by  the  fuperftition  of  after  ages, 
and  held  in  equal  or  rather  greater  veneration  than 
the  former :  and  the  heathen  likewife  had  theirs  ; 
the  devil  always  affefting  to  imitate  God,  fo  far  as 
ferved  his  wicked  and  mahcious  defign  of  feducing 
mankind  into  idolatry  and  the  worihip  of  himfelf : 
and  therefore  the  fcripture  always  fpeaks  of  the  hea- 
then idolatry  as  the  worfhip  of  devils,  and  not  of 

God  : 


our  blejfed  S A  v lo  ir  R .  309 

God  :  fo  that  almoft  every  nation  had  their  peculiar  S  ER  M. 

•  XLVi 

and  celebrated  myfteries  -,  moft  of  which  were  either  ^__     "j 

very  odd  and  phantaftical,  or  very  lewd  and  impure, 

or  very  inhuman  and  cruel,  and  every  way  unworthy 

of  the  deity. 

But  the  great  myftery  of  the  Chriftian  religion, 
the  "  incarnation  of  the  Son  of  God  ;"  or,  as  the 
apoftle  calls  it,  "  God  manifefted  in  the  fiefli  •,'* 
was  fuch  a  myftery,  as  for  the  greatnefs  and  won- 
derfulnefs,  for  the  infinite  mercy  and  condefcenfion 
of  it,  did  obfcure  and  fwallow  up  all  other  myfteries. 
For  which  reafon  the  apoftle,  in  allufion  to  the 
heathen  myfteries  and  in  contempt  of  them,  fpeak- 
ing  of  the  great  myftery  of  the  Chriftian  religion 
fays,  "  without  controverfy  great  is  the  myftery  of  '  "Tim.iii, 
"  godlinefs,  God  was  manifefted  in  the  flefti,  &c." 
Since  the  world  had  fuch  an  admiration  for  myfte- 
ries, he  inftanceth  in  that  which  was  a  myftery  in- 
deed ;  a  myftery  beyond  all  difpute,  and  beyond  all 
comparifon. 

2dly,  There  was  likewife  a  great  inclination  in 
mankind  to  the  worlhip  of  a  vifible  and  fenfible 
deity :  and  this  was  a  main  root  and  fource  of  the 
various  idolatries  in  the  heathen  world.  Now  to 
take  men  off  from  this,  God  was  pleafed  to  appear 
in  our  nature  -,  that  they  who  were  fo  fond  of  a  vi- 
fible deity  might  have  one  to  whom  they  might  pay 
divine  worftiip  without  danger  of  idolatry,  and  with- 
out injury  to  the  divine  nature  :  even  a  true  and  na- 
tural image  of  Goo  the  Father,  the  fountain  of  the 
deity  •,  or,  as  the  apoftle  to  the  Hebrews  defcribes 
the  Son  of  God,  the  refplendency  or  "  bright- 
"  nefs  of  his  Father's  glory,  and  the  exprefs'*  cha- 
racter or  "  image  of  his  perfon.'*  3dly, 


Coftcerntng  the  incarnation  of 
3dly,  Another  notion,  which  had  generally  ob- 
tained among  mankind,  was  concerning  the  expia- 
tion of  the  fins  of  men,  and  appeafing  the  offended 
deity  by  facrifice,  upon  which  they  fuppofed  the 
punifhment  due  to  the  finner  was  transfer'd,  to  ex- 
empt him  from  it  :  efpecially  by  the  facrifices  of 
men,  which  had  almoft  univerfally  prevailed  in  the 
Gentile  world. 

And  this  notion,  of  the  expiation  of  fin  by  facrifices 
of  one  kind  or  other,  feems  to  have  obtained  very 
early  in  the  world,  and  among  all  other  ways  of  di- 
vine worfhip  to  have  found  the  moft  univerfal  re- 
ception in  all  times  and  places.  And  indeed  a  great 
part  of  the  Jewifii  religion  and  worlhip  was  a  plain 
condefcenfion  to  the  general  apprehenfions  of  men 
concerning  this  way  of  appeafing  the  deity  by  fa- 
crifice :  and  the  greateft  part  of  the  Pagan  religion 
and  worfiiip  was  likewife  founded  upon  the  fame 
notion  and  opinion,  which  becaufe  it  was  fo  univer- 
fal, feems  to  have  had  it's  original  from  the  firft 
parents  of  mankind  •,  either  immediately  after  the 
creation,  or  after  the  flood  ;  and  from  thence,  I 
mean  as  to  the  fubftance  of  this  notion,  to  have  been 
derived  and  propagated  to  all  their  pofterity. 

And  with  this  general  notion  of  mankind,  what- 
ever the  ground  and  foundation  of  it  might  be* 
God  was  pleafed  fo  far  to  comply  as  once  for  all  to 
have  a  general  atonement  made  for  the  fins  of  all 
mankind  by  the  facrifice  of  his  only  Son,  whom  his 
wife  providence  did  permit  by  wicked  hands  to  be 
crucified  and  flain.  But  I  fliall  not  at  prefent  infill 
any  farther  upon  this ;  which  requires  a  particular 
difcourfe  by  it  felf,  and  may  by  God's  afliftance  in 
due  time  have  it.  i  4thly, 


mr  blejjed  Saviour,  311 

4thly,  Another  very  common  notion  and  very  S  E  R  M. 
rife  m  the  heathen  world,  and  a  great  fource  of  their  ' 
idolatry,  was  their  apotheofes  or  canonizing  of  fa- 
mous and  eminent  perfons,  who  in  their  hfe-time 
had  done  great  things,  and  fome  way  or  other  been 
great  benefadors  to  mankind,  by  advancing  them 
after  their  death  to  the  dignity  of  an  inferior  kind 
of  gods  fit  to  be  worfliipped  by  men  here  on  earth, 
and  to  have  their  prayers  and  fupplications  addreffed 
to  them  as  proper  and  powerful  mediators  and  in- 
tercefTors  for  them  with  the  fuperior  gods  :  to  thefe 
they  gave  the  titles  of  heroes  and  femidei,  that  is, 
half-gods  i  though  the  notion  of  a  being  that  is  juft 
half-infinite  feems  to  me  very  hard  to  be  conceived 
and  defined. 

Now  to  take  men  oflr  from  this  kind  of  idolatry, 
and  to  put  an  end  to  it,  behold  one  in  our  "  nature 
«'  exalted  to  the  right-hand  of  the  majefty  on  high,'* 
to  be  worfhipped  by  men  and  angels  :  one  that  was 
the  truly  great  benefaftor  of  mankind :  one  that 
**  was  dead,  and  is  alive  again,  and  fives  for  ever- 
"  more,  to  make  intercefllon  for  us.*' 

5thly,  To  give  but  one  inftance  more,  which  I 
have  already  intimated  -,  the  world  was  mightily 
bent  upon  addrefiing  their  requefts  and  fupplications, 
not  to  the  deity  immediately,  becaufe  their  fuper- 
llition  thought  that  too  great  a  prefumption,  but 
by  fome  mediators  between  the  gods  and  them  ,vho 
might  with  advantage  in  this  humble  manner  pre- 
fent  their  requefts  fo  as  to  find  acceptance.  To  this 
end  they  made  ufe  of  the  dsemons  or  angels,  and  of 
their  heroes,  or  deified  men  whom  I  mentioned  be- 
fore, by  whom  they  put  up  their  prayers  to  the  fu- 

preme 


3 12  Concerning  the  incarnation  of 

S  E  R  M.  preme  gods,  hoping  by  their  interceflloriy  and  pa- 
^  -    .^  tronage  of  their  caufe,  to  obtain  a  gracious  anfwer 
of  them. 

In  a  gracious  compliance  with  this  common  ap- 
prehenfion,  and  thereby  more  eafily  and  effedlually 
to  extirpate  this  fort  of  idolatry,  which  had  been  fo 
long,  and  fo  generally  praftifed  in  the  world,  God 
was  pleafed  to  conftitute  and  appoint  one  in  our  na- 
ture to  be  a  perpetual  advocate  and  interceflbr  in 
heaven  for  us,  to  offer  up  our  prayers  to  God  his 
Father,  and  to  obtain  "  mercy  for  us,  and  grace  to 
*'  help  in  time  of  need." 

And  for  ever  to  take  us  off  fi'om  all  other  media- 
tors, we  are  exprefly  told  in  fcripture,  that  as  there  is 
but  one  God  to  whom  we  are  to  pray,  fo  there  is 
1  Tim.  ii.  but  "one  mediator  between  God  and  men,    the 
^'  "  man  Ch  r  i  s  t  Jesus,"  by  whom  we  are  to  offer  up 

our  prayers  to  God  :  and  that  we  need  not  look  out 
for  any  other,  fince   the  apoftle  to   the  Hebrews 
Heb.  vii.    tells  US,  that  he  "  is  able  to  fave  to  the  uttermoftall 
^^"  "  thofe  that  come  to  God  by  him,  feeing  he  lives 

"  for  ever  to  make  interceffion  for  us.'* 

And  for  this  reafon  the  church  of  Rome  is  alto- 
gether inexcufable  in  this  point,  for  introducing 
more  mediators  and  interceffors,  more  patrons  and 
advocates  in  heaven  for  us  :  and  this  not  only  with- 
out any  neccffity,  for  who  can  add  any  virtue  and 
efficacy  to  the  powerful  and  prevalent  interceffion  of 
the  Son  of  God  ?  But  likewife  in  direft  contra- 
didlion  to  the  exprefs  conftitution  and  appointment 
of  God  himfelf,  who  fays  there  is  "  but  one  me- 
•'  diator  between  God  and  man,"  and  they  fay 
«;here  ou^ht  to  be  many  more,  not  only  the  bleffed 

virgin. 


tur  blejfed  Saviour.  3  Ij 

virgin,  but  all  the  faints  and  angels  in  heaven.  Be-  SE  R  M. 
fides,  that  by  this  very  thing  they  revive  one  noto-    "^^^  ^' 
rioLis  piece  of  the  old  pagan  idolatry,  which  God 
fo  plainly  defigned  to  extinguiOi  by  appointing  "  one 
only  *'  mediator  between  God  and  men." 

By  this  condefcenfion  likewife  God  hath  given  us 
the  comfortable  afiurance  of  a  moft  powerful  and  a 
perpetual  interceffor  at  "  the  right  hand  of  God" 
in  our  behalf.  For  if  we  confider  Christ  as  man 
and  of  the  fame  nature  with  us,  "  bone  of  our  bone, 
"  and  flefh  of  our  flefli,"  fo  very  nearly  allied  and 
related  to  us,  we  may  eafily  believe  that  he  hath  a 
mod  tender  care  and  concernment  for  us  :  that  he 
fincerely  wifheth  our  happinefs,  and  will  by  all  means 
feek  to  procure  it,  if  we  our  felves  by  our  own  will- 
ful obftinacy  do  not  hinder  it,  and  refifl  the  kind- 
nefs  and  the  counfei  of  God  againft  our  felves  :  for 
if  we  be  refolved  to  continue  impenitent,  there  is 
no  help  for  us  \  we  muft  die  in  our  fins,  and  falva« 
tion  it  felf  cannot  fave  us. 

But  to  proceed  -,  it  cannot  furely  but  be  matter 
of greateftconfolation  to  us,  that  "the man  Christ 
Jesus"  who  is  now  fo  "  highly  exalted  at  the 
"  right-hand  of  God,"  and  who  hath  "  all  power 
"  in  heaven  and  earth  committed  to  him,"  is  our 
patron  and  advocate  in  heaven  to  plead  our  caufe 
with  God  :  fince  we  cannot  but  think,  that  he  who 
was  pleafed  to  become  brother  to  us  all  does  bear  a 
true  affe6tion  and  good  will  to  us  :  and  that  he,  who 
alTumed  our  nature,  will  heartily  efpoufe  our  caufe, 
and  plead  it  powerfully  for  us  •,  and  will  with  all 
pofTible  advantage  recommend  our  petitions  and  re- 
quefts  to  God. 

Vol.  III.  ^  D  Buu 

6 


0  14  Concerning  the  incarnation  of 

S  E  R  M.  But  then  if  we  confider  farther,  that  he  did  not 
,^^^,^  only  take  our  nature,  but  hkewife  took  our  infir- 
mities and  bore  them  many  years,  in  which  he  had 
long  and  continual  experience  of  the  faddeft  fuffer- 
ings  to  which  human  nature  is  fubjeft  in  this  world, 
and  "  was  tempted  in  all  things  like  as  we  are :" 
this  gives  us  ftill  greater  aPlirance  that  he  who  fuf- 
fered  and  was  tempted  himfelf,  cannot  but  be  touch- 
ed with  a  lively  fenfe  of  our  infirmities,  and  muft 
have  learned  by  his  own  fufferings  to  compaffionate 
ours,  and  to  be  ready  to  fuccour  us  when  we  are 
tempted,  and  to  afford  us  grace  and  help  fuitable  to 
all  our  wants  and  infirmities :  for  nothing  gives  us 
fo  juft  a  fenfe  of  the  fuff^erings  of  others,  as  the  re- 
membrance of  our  own,  and  the  bitter  experience 
of  the  like  fufferings  and  temptations  in  our  felves. 
And  this  the  apoflle  to  the  Hebrews  doth  very 
particularly  infill  upon  as  matter  of  greatefi  comfort 
and  encouragement  to  us,  that  the  Son  of  God  did 
not  only  affume  our  nature,  but  "  was  made  in  all 
things  hke  unto  us,'*  and  during  his  abode  here  up- 
on earth,  did  fuffer  and  "  was  tempted  like  as  we 
Heb.  ii.  are  :"  for  verily,  fays  the  apoflle,  "  he  took  not 
16,17,18.  n  ^^  j^^j^  fj^g  nature  of  angels,  but  of  the  feed  of 
"  Abraham  :  wherefore  in  all  things  it  behoved 
"  him  to  be  made  like  unto  his  brethren,  that  he 
"  might  be  a  merciful  and  faithful  high-prieft  in 
"  things  pertaining  to  God  :  for  in  that  he  himfelf 
"  fuflfered  being  tempted,  he  is  able  to  fuccour 
"  them  that  are  tempted." 

And  again,  exhorting  the  Jews  who  were  newly 

converted  to  Chriftianity  to  continue  fledfall  in  their 

profefTion,  notwithftanding  all  the  fufferings  to  which 

3  upon 


our  iflejed  Saviour,  315 

upon  that  account  they  were  expofed  ;  he  comforts  S  ERM. 
them  with  this  confideration,  that  we  have  at  the  ._  _'^ 
right  hand  of  God  fo  powerful  an  advocate  and  inter- 
ceflbr  for  us  as  the  Son  of  God,  who  is  fenfible  of 
our  cafe,  having  fuffered  the  fame  things  himfelf, 
and  therefore  we  cannot  doubt  of  his  compafTion  to 
us,  and  readinefs  to  fupport  us  in  the  lilce  fufFer- 
ings :  feeing  then,  fiys  he,  "  that  we  have  a  great  Heb.  iv, 
"  high-prieft  that  is  paflfed  into  the  heavens,  Jesus  H'^S''"- 
"  the  Son  of  God,  let  us  hold  faft  our  profeffion  : 
"  for  we  have  not  an  high-prieft  that  cannot  be 
"  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities,  but 
"  was  in  all  points  tempted  like  as  we  are,  yet  with- 
"  out  fin :"  from  whence  he  concludes,  that  having 
fuch  an  interceflbr  we  may  with  great  confidence 
and  affurance  addrefs  our  fupplications  to  God  for 
his  mercy  and  help  in  all  our  wants  and  weaknefs,  to 
fupply  the  one,  and  to  affift  the  other :  let  us  there- 
fore, fays  he,  "  come  boldly  to  the  throne  of  grace, 
"  that  we  may  obtain  mercy  and  find  grace  to  help 
"  in  time  of  need,  ;:^«e/tv  eig  gujtajpav  /3o>)'9««v,  grace 
"  for  feafonable  relief." 

So  that  our  bleiTed  Saviour  and  redeemer,  now 
that  he  is  advanced  to  heaven  and  exalted  to  the 
right-hand  of  God,  is  not  unmindful  of  us  in  this 
height  of  his  glory  and  greatnefs  ;  but  with  the 
tendereft  affection  and  compaffion  to  mankind  doth 
ftill  profecute  the  defign  of  our  falvation  -,  and  in 
virtue  of  his  meritorious  obedience  and  fufferings, 
which  he  prefents  to  God  continually,  he  offers  up 
our  prayers  to  him,  and  pleads  our  caufe  with  him, 
and  reprefents  to  him  all  our  wants  and  necelTities, 
and  procures  for  us  a  favourable  anfwer  of  our  pray- 
5  D  2  ers. 


3 16  Concerning  the  incarnation  of 

S  E  R  M.  ers,  and  fupplies  of  grace  and  ftrength  proportion- 
able to  our  temptations  and  infirmities. 

And  thus,  by  virtue  of  this  prevalent  interceflion 
of  his  with  God  for  us,  our  fins  are  forgiven,  and 
our  wants  fupplied,  and  our  requefts  granted,  and 
the  gracious  afTi fiance  and  fupports  of  God's  holy 
fpiritare  feafonably  afforded  to  us,  and  we  are  "  kept 
*'  by  the  mighty  power  of  God  through  faith  unto 
"  falvation :"  in  a  word,  all  thofe  bleffings  and  be- 
nefits are  procured  for  us  by  his  intercefTion  in  hea- 
ven, which  he  purchafed  for  us  by  his  blood  upon 
earth. 

So  that  in  this  method  of  our  falvation,  befides 
many  other  gracious  condefcenfions  which  God  hath 
made  to  the  weaknefs  and  prejudices  of  mankind, 
our  bleffed  Saviour  hath  perfectly  fupplied  the 
two  great  wants  concerning  which  mankind  was  at 
fo  great  a  lofs  before,  namely  the  want  of  an  ef- 
fedual  expiatory  facrifice  for  fin  upon  earth,  and  of 
a  prevalent  mediator  and  intercelfor  with  God  in 
heaven. 

And  he  hath,  in  great  goodnefs  and  condefcen- 
fion  to  our  inveterate  prejudices  concerning  thefe 
things,  taken  effedual  care  fully  to  fupply  both 
thefe  wants  •,  having  "  appeared  in  the  end  of  the 
''  world,  to  take  away  fin  by  the  facrifice  of  him- 
*'  felf;"  and  in  virtue  of  that  facrifice  appearing 
now  in  heaven  in  the  prefence  of  Go  d  for  us,  he  is 
become  our  perpetual  advocate,  and  a  mofl  preva- 
lent interceflTor  with  God  in  our  behalf 

For  inftead  of  the  various  and  endlefs  facrifices  of 
the  jews  and  heathens,  the  Son  of  God  hath  "  by 
^'  one  facrifice  for  fins  perfeded  for  ever  them  that 

"  are 


our  blejj'ed  Saviour.  ^  I7 

"  are  fanftified :"  and  inftead  of  the  mediation  of  S  E  R  M. 

xr  VT 
daemons  and  heroes,  to  offer  up  our  prayers  to  God, 

which  were  the  interceffors  made  ufe  of  among  the 
heathen,  we  have  "  one  mediator  between  God 
"  and  men,"  appointed  by  God  himfelf,  even  the 
"  Son  of  God,  who  is  entred  into  heaven  itfelf, 
"  there  to  appear  in  the  prefence  of  God  for  us  :'* 
and  to  aflfure  us  that  he  commiferates  our  cafe,  and 
hath  a  true  and  tender  fenfe  of  our  infirmities  and 
fufferings,  the  very  manner  of  his  interceffion  for 
us,  as  the  fcripture  reprefents  it  to  us,  is  a  plain 
demonftration  of  the  thing :  for  he  intercedes  for 
us  in  heaven,  by  reprefenting  to  God  his  Father  his 
fufferings  upon  earth,  and  pleading  them  in  our  be- 
half: fo  that  the  very  argument  which  he  ufeth  to 
God  for  us,  cannot  but  flir  up  compaffion  in  him 
towards  us,  and  whilfl  he  reprefents  his  own  fuffer- 
ings in  our  behalf,  we  cannot  think  that  he  is  un- 
mindful and  infenfible  of  ours. 

You  fee  then  that  in  this  difpenfation  of  God  for 
our  falvation,  by  fending  his  Son  in  our  nature, 
things  that  are  not  only  fuited  in  great  condefcenfion 
to  our  apprehenfions,  but  are  likewife  in  great  com- 
paffion to  us  every  way  fitted  for  our  comfort  and 
encouragement.  God  hath  made  him  our  great 
patron  and  advocate,  who  was  our  facritice  and  pro- 
pitiation. And  furcly  we  have  all  the  reafon  in  the 
world  to  believe,  that  he,  who  in  the  days  of  his 
fiefh  humbled  himfelf,  and  became  obedient  to  the 
death  for  our  fakes,  will  be  ready  to  do  us  all  good 
offices  now  that  he  is  advanced  to  the  right  hand  of 
God  ;  that  he  who  died  for  us  upon  earth,  now  that 
he  lives  again  will  make  interceffion  for  us  in  heaven, 

and 


2 1 8  Concerning  the  incarnation  of 

Se  RM.   and  perfeft  that  faJvation  which  he  piirchafed  for  us 

^^^^^* .  upon  the  crofs. 

And  therefore  we  find  in  fcripture,  that  as  the  pur- 
chafingof  ourfalvation  is  afcribcd  to  the  death  and  fuf- 
ferings  of  Christ,  fotheperfeding  of  it  is  attributed 
to  his  interceffion  for  us  at  the  right  hand  of  his  Fa- 
ther :  "  Wherefore,"  fays  the  apoftleto  the  Hebrews, 
"  he  is  able  to  fave  to  the  uttermoft  all  thofe  that 
"  come  to  God  by  him,  feeing  he  liveth  for  ever 
"  to  make    interceffion  for  us :"  he  died  once  to 
purchafe  thefe  benefits,  but  he  lives  for  ever  to  pro- 
cure them  for  us,  and  to  apply  them  to  us :  and 
now  that  he  is  in  heaven,  he  is  as  intent  upon  our 
concernments,  and  lays  our  happinefs  as  much  to 
heart  as  when  he  dwelt  here  among  us  on  earth, 
and  poured  out  his  blood  a  facrifice  for  fin  upon  the 
crofs :  and  that  when  he  lived  here  below,  he  fufFer- 
ed  and  was  tempted  as  we  are  ;  this  very  confidera- 
tion  gives  us  the  greateft  affurance  poiTible,  that  he 
is  ftill  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities,  and 
hath  a  lively   fenfe  of  our  fufiiln-ings  -,  and  confe- 
quently,  that   he  doth  compafllonate  our  cafe,  and 
will  ufe  all  his  power  and  intereit  for  our  advantage, 
for  our  feafonable  fupport  and  fuccour  in  all  our 
trials  and  fuff'erings.     But  befides  the  wonderful  con- 
defcenfion  of  this  difpenfation,  there  is  likewife  in  the 
Fifth  and  laft  place,  a  great  congruity  and  fitnefs 
in  the  thing  itfelf ;  and  this  method  of  our  falvation 
which  the  wifdom  of  God  hath  pitched  upon,  is  in 
many  other  refpefts  very  much  for  our  real  benefit 
and  comfort.     For  by    this  means  we  have  a  per- 
fect and  familiar  example  of  holinefs  and  obedience 
in  our  own  nature,  by  which  we  plainly  fee  that  God 

requires 


cur  Mfjfed  Saviour.  319 

requires  nothing  of  us,  but  what  he  himfelf  when  ^ERM. 
he  fubmitted  to  become  man  did  think  fit  to  do  :  ■_-  -^, 
for  "  being  made  of  a  woman,"  he  was  of  necef- 
fity  "  made  under  the  law,'*  and  by  affuming  hu- 
man nature,  he  became  naturally  fubjed  to  the  laws 
and  conditions  of  his  being. 

And  here  likewife  is  a  provifion  made  for  the  ex- 
piation and  forgivenefs  of  our  fins,  in  a  way  not  on- 
ly very  honourable  to  thejuftice  of  God  and  the  au- 
thority of  his  laws,  but  likewife  very  cffedual  to 
difcountenance  fin  and  to  deter  men  from  it  ;  fince 
God  did  not  think  fit  to  forgive  the  fins  of  men 
without  great  fuiFerings,  and  that  in  our  nature: 
for  though  God  was  willing  to  fave  the  finner,  yet 
rather  than  encouragement  Iliould  be  given  to  fin  by 
letting  it  go  unpunifhed,  he  was  contented  to  give 
up  the  "  dearly  beloved  of  his  foul  to  be  a  facrifice 
"  and  propitiation  for  the  fins  of  the  v/hole  world.'* 

By  the  fame  means  alfo  we  have  a  moft  powerful 
antidote  againil  the  fear  of  fufi'ering,  and  particular- 
ly againft  the  fear  of  death,  one  of  the  greateft  fiave- 
ries  of  human  nature  :  fo  alfo  the  apofl:le  to  the 
Hebrews  tells  us,  "that  for  this  caufe  Chri  st  Heb.  H. 
"  himfelf  alfo  took  part  of  flefli  and  blood,  that  *'^'  ^^' 
"  by  death  he  might  deftroy  him  that  had  the  pow- 
"  er  of  death,  that  is  the  devil ;  and  might  deliver 
"  thofe  who  through  fear  of  death  were  all  their 
"  life-time  fubjed:  to  bondage." 

Again,  we  have  hereby  full  afTurance  of  a  blefi!ed 
immortality  in  another  life,  becaufe  in  our  nature 
death  and  all  the  powers  of  darknefs  were  baffled 
and  overcome.  The  death  of  Christ,  which 
could  not  have  been  without  his  incarnation,  and 

like- 


XLVL 


2 20  Concerning  the  incarnation  of 

S  E  R  M.  likewife  his  refurredion  from  the  dead,  and  his  af^ 
cenfion  into  heaven,  are  fenfible  demonftrations  to 
all  mankind  of  a  bleffed  immortality  after  death  ; 
which  is  the  moft  powerful  motive  in  the  world  to 
obedience  and  a  holy  life. 

And  laftly,  we  may  upon  this  account  promife  to 
our  felves  a  fair  and  equal  trial  at  the  judgment  of 
the  great  day,  becaufe  we  fhall  then  be  j  udged  by  a 
man  like  our  felves.  Our  Saviour  and  judge  him- 
felf  hath  told  us,  that  for  this  reafon  "  God  hath 
Johnv.      «  committed  all  judgment  to  the  Son,  becaufe  he 

22     27 

"is  the  Son  of  man."  And  this  in  human  judg- 
ments is  accounted  a  great  privilege,  to  be  judged  by 
thofe  who  are  of  the  fame  rank  and  condition  with 
our  felves,  and  who  are  likely  to  underftand  beft 
and  moft  carefully  to  examine  and  confider  all  our 
circumftances,  and  to  tender  our  cafe  as  if  it  were 
their  own. 

So  equitably  doth  God  deal  with  us,  that  we 
ihall  be  acquitted  or  condemned  by  fuch  a  judge,  as 
according  to  human  meafures  we  our  felves  fhould 
have  chofen  ;  by  one  in  our  own  nature  "  who  was 
"  made  in  all  things  like  unto  us,"  that  only  ex- 
cepted which  would  have  rendered  him  incapable  of 
being  our  judge,  becaufe  it  would  have  made  him  a 
criminal  like  our  felves.  And  therefore  the  apoftle 
offers  this  as  a  firm  ground  of  alfurance  to  us  that 
«  God  will  judge  the  world  in  righteoufnefs,"  be- 
caufe this  judgment  fhall  be  adminiftred  by  a  man 
.  like  our  felves  •,  "  he  hath,"  faith  he,  "  appointed 
*'  a  day  wherein  he  will  judge  the  world  in  righte- 
*'  oufnefs,  by  that  man  whom  he  hath  ordained,  &c.'* 

I  fhall 


our  bleffedSAwio\j-R.  021 

I  fhall  now  only  make  a  pra6lical  inference  or  two  S  F.r  m. 
from  what  hath  been  delivered  upon  this  argument,   ^^^^• 
and  fo  conclude  this  whole  difcourfe. 

Firft,  The  ferious  confideration  of  what  hath  been 
faid,  concerning  the  incarnation  of  our  blefTed  Sa- 
viour, fhould  efFeftually  prevail  with  us  to  comply 
with  the  great  end  and  defign  of  the  Son  of  God's 
becoming  man  and  dwelling  amongft  us,  and  of 
his  doing  and  fuffering  all  thofe  things,  which  are 
recorded  of  him  in  the  hiftory  of  his  life  and  death, 
written  by  the  holy  evangelifls  :  I  fay,  the  con- 
fideration hereof  fhould  perfuade  us  all  to  comply 
with  the  great  defign  of  all  this,  which  is  the  re- 
formation of  mankind,  and  the  recovery  of  us  out 
of  that  finful  and  miferable  eftate  into  which  we 
were  fallen  :  becaufe  the  falvation,  which  the  Son  of 
God  hath  purchafed  for  us,  and  which  he  offers  to  us 
by  the  gofpel,  is  not  to  be  accompli Ihed  and  brought 
about  any  other  way  than  by  our  forlaking  our 
fins  and  reforming  our  lives.  "  The  grace  of  God, 
"  which  hath  appeared  to  all  men  and  brings  fal- 
"  vation,**  will  nor  make  us  partakers  of  it  in 
any  other  way,  nor  by  any  other  means,  than  by 
"  teaching  us  to  deny  ungodlincfs  and  worldly 
"  lufls,"  and  to  "  live  foberly  and  righteoufly,  and 
"  godly  in  this  prefent  world."  God  fen t  his  Son 
"  Jesus  to  blefs  us,  by  turning  us  away  every 
"  one  from  his  iniquities  •,"  and  unlels  this  change 
be  effeftually  wrought  in  us,  we  are  utterly  inca- 
pable of  all  the  blelfings  of  the  gofpel  of  Chr  i  st. 
All  that  he  hath  done  for  us  without  us  will  avail 
us  nothing,  unlefs  we  be  inwardly  transformed  and 
"  renewed  in  the  fpirit  of  our  minds/'  unlefs  we  be- 

VoL.  III.  5  E  come 

6. 


Concerning  the  incarnation  of 
come  new  creatures ;  unlefs  we  mal<.e  it  the  continual 
and  fincere  endeavour  of  our  lives  to  "  keep  the 
*'  commandments  of  God." 

For  the  fcripture  is  moft  exprefs  and  pofitive  in 
Heb.xii.    this  matter  ;  that  "  without  holinefs  no  man  fliall 

*i* ,    ...   "  fee  the  Lord  :"  that  "  every  man  that  hath  this 
1  John  111.  ■,.»,,        .      .     „  1      r       J  1 

J.  "  hope  m  him,     that  is,  in  Christ  to  be  laved  by 

him,  muft  "  purifie  himfelf  even  as  he  is  pure." 
We  do  not  rightly  and  truly  believe  "  that  Jesus 
"  Christ  came  into  the  world  to  fave  finners,"  if 
we  be  not  alfo  thoroughly  convinced,  that  it  is  as 
necefiary  for  us  to  leave  our  fins,  as  to  believe  this 
moft  faithful  and  credible  faying. 

The  obedience  and  fufferings  of  our  blefled  Sa- 
viour are  indeed  accounted  to  us  for  righteoufnefs, 
and  will  moft  certainly  redound  to  our  unfpeakable 
benefit  and  advantage  upon  our  performance  of  the 
condition  which  the  gofpel  doth  require  on  our  part, 
namely,  that  "  every  man  that  names  the  name  of 
Christ  depart  from  iniquity:"  and  the  grace  of 
God's  holy  Spirit  is  ready  to  enable  us  to  perform 
this  condition,  if  we  earneftly  afk  it,  and  do  fincere- 
ly  co-operate  with  it :  provided  we  do  what  we  can 
on  our  part,  God  will  not  be  wanting  to  us  on  his. 
But  if  we  "  receive  the  grace  of  God  in  vain,"  and 
take  no  care  to  perform  the  condition,  and  do  ne- 
gledt  to  implore  the  grace  andafliftance  of  God's  holy 
Spirit  to  that  purpofe,  we  have  none  to  blame  but 
our  felves  ;  becaufe  it  is  then  wholly  our  own  fault 
if  we  fall  fhort  of  that  happinefs  which  Christ 
hath  purchafed,  and  promifed  to  us  upon  fuch  eafy 
and  reafonable  conditions  as  the  gofpel  propofeth. 

But 


our  hmfed^kviov^,  ^23 

But  I  no  where  find  that  God  hath  promifed  to  S  E  R  m. 
force   happinefs  upon  the  negligent,  and  a  reward    ^LVI. 
upon  the  ".wicked  andflothful  fervant:"  a  gift  may 
be  given  for  nothing,  but  furely  a  reward  does  in  the 
very  nature  of  it  always  fuppofe  fome  fervice.  None 
but  a  righteous  man  is  capable  of  a  righteous  man's 
reward  :  and  St.  John  hath  fufficiently  cautioned  us 
not  to  think  our  felves  righteous  unlefs  we  be  "  doers  »  JohniH. 
"  of  righteoufnefs :  little  children,"  fays  he,  *'  let  ^' 
"  no  man  deceive  yon,  he  that  doth  righteoufnefs 
*'  is  righteous,  even  as  he  is   righteous."     This  is 
fo  very  plain  a  text,  that   if  men  were  not  either 
very  eafy  to  be  deceived  by  others,  or  very  willing 
to  deceive  themfelves,  they  could  not  pofTibly  mif- 
take  the  meaning  of  it :  and  therefore  I  will  repeat 
it  once  more,  "  little  children,  let  no  man  deceive 
"  you  i  he  that  doth  righteoufnefs  is  righteous,  even 
"  as  he  is  righteous." 

Secondly,  the  other  inference  which  I  would 
make  from  the  precedent  difcourfe  is  this,  that  with 
all  poITible  thankfulnefs  we  fhould  acknowledge  and 
adore  the  wonderful  goodnefs  and  condefcenfion  of 
Almighty  Go  d  in  fending  his  only  begotten  Son 
into  the  world  in  our  nature,  to  be  "  made  fiefh," 
and  to  "  dwell  amongft  us"  in  order  to  our  recovery 
and  falvation  :  a  method  and  difpenfation  not  only 
full  of  mercy  and  goodnefs,  but  of  great  conde- 
fcenfion to  our  meannefs,  and  of  mighty  virtue  and 
efficacy  for  our  redemption  and  deliverance  from  the 
guilt  and  dominion  of  fin  •,  and  upon  all  accounts 
every  way  fo  much  for  our  benefit  and  advantage. 
So  that  well  may  we  fay  with  St.  Paul,  "  this  is  a 
"  faithful  faying,  "?r«f(jf  Ao'yo?,  a  credible  word,"  and 
5  E  2  "  worthy 


324  Concerning  the  incarnation  of 

SERM.   «  worthy  of  all  acceptation,"  that  is,  fit  to  be  em- 
^^^^-    braced  and    entertained  with   all   pofTible  joy   and 
thankfulnefs,  "  that  Jesus  Christ  came  into  the 
"  world  to  fave  finners.'* 

What  an  everlafting  fountain  of  the  moft  inva- 
luable blefllngs  and  benefits  to  mankind  is  the  in- 
carnation of  the  Son  of  God  ?  His  vouchfafing  to 
afiume  our  nature,  and  to  refide  and  converfe  fo 
long  with  us  ?  And  what  are  we,  that  the  eternal  and 
only  begotten  Son  of  God  fhould  condefcend  to 
do  all  this  for  us  ?  That  the  high  and  glorious  ma- 
jefty  of  heaven  fhould  ftoop  down  to  the  earth,  and 
be  contented  to  be  clothed  with  mifery  and  morta- 
lity ?  That  he  ihould  fubmit  to  fo  poor  and  low  a 
condition,  to  fuch  dreadful  and  difgraceful  fufi^erings 
for  our  fakes  ?  For  what  are  we  ?  Vile  and  defpicable 
creatures,  guilty  and  unworthy,  offenders  and  apo- 
ftates,  enemies  and  rebels,  Blefied  God  !  how  great 
is  thy  goodnefs  ?  How  infinite  are  thy  tender  mercies 
and  compaffions  to  mankind  ?  That  thou  fhouldil 
regard  us  whilft  we  negleded  thee,  and  remember  us 
in  our  low  condition,  when  we  had  "  forgotten  thee 
"  days  without  number ;"  and  fhouldft  take  fuch 
pity  on  us  when  we  Ihewed  none  to  our  felves  ;  and 
whilft  we  were  thy  declared  and  implacable  enemies, 
fhouldft  exprefs  more  kindnefs  and  good-will  to  us, 
than  the  beft  of  men  ever  did  to  their  bed  friends. 

When  we  relied;  ferioufly  upon  thofe  great  things 
which  God  hath  done  in  our  behalf,  and  confider 
that  mighty  falvation  which  God  hath  wrought  for 
us  i  what  thanks  can  we  pofllbly  render,  what  ac- 
knowledgments fhall  we  ever  be  able  to  make,  I  do 
not  fay  equal,  but  in  any  wife  meet  and  becoming, 
I  to 


our  Me  fed  Say  1 6vR.  22? 

to  this  great  benefador  of  mankind  ?  Who,  when  S  E  R  M. 
we  had  fo  highly  offended  and  provoked  him,  and 
fo  fooHihly  and  fo  fatally  undone  ourfelves  j  when 
we  were  become  fo  guilty  and  fo  miferable,  and  fo 
much  fitter  to  have  eternally  been  the  objefls  of  his 
wrath  and  indignation  than  of  his  pity  and  com- 
paflion,  was  pleafed  to  fend  his  own,  his  only  Son 
into  the  world  to  feek  and  fave  us  j  and  by  him  to  re- 
pair all  our  ruins,  to  "  forgive  all  our  iniquities,'*  to 
"  heal  all  our  fpiritual  difeafes,  and  to  crown  us  with 
"  loving-kindnefs  and  tender  mercies.'* 

And  what  facrifices  of  praife  and  thankfgiving 
fhould  we  alfo  offer  up  to  this  gracious  and  molt 
merciful  redeemer  of  ours,  the  everlafting  Son  of 
the  Father,  who  debafed  himfelf  fo  infinitely  for 
our  fakes,  and  "  when  he  took  upon  him  to  deliver 
"  man  did  not  abhor  the  virgin's  womb  :"  who  was 
contented  to  be  born  fo  obfcurely,  and  to  live  all 
his  life  in  a  poor  and  perfecuted  condition  ;  and 
was  pleafed  both  to  undergo  and  to  "  overcome 
"  the  fharpnefs  of  death,  that  he  might  open  the 
"  kingdom  of  heaven  to  all  believers?" 

Every  time  we  have  occafion  to  meditate  upon 
this,  efpecially  when  we  are  communicating  at  his 
holy  table,  and  receiving  the  bleffed  fymbols  and 
pledgv.^s  of  his  precious  death  and  paffion  :  how 
fhould  "  our  hearts  burn  within  us"  and  leap  for  joy  ? 
How  fhould  the  remembrance  of  it  revive  and  raife 
our  fpirits,  and  pat  1.3  into  an  extafy  of  love  and  gra- 
titude, to  this  great  friend  and  lover  of  fouls  :  and 
with  the  bleffed  mother  of  our  Lord,  how  fhould 
our  fouls,  upon  that  blpffed  occafion,  "  magnify  the 
"  Lord,  and  our  fpirits  rejoice  in  God  our  Sa- 
^«  viouR?"  The 


326  Concerning  the  Incarnation  of 

S  ERM.  The  holy  men  of  old  were  tran  (ported  with  joy, 
^  _  ' J  at  the  obfcure  and  confufed  apprehenfion,  and  re- 
mote forefight  of  fo  great  a  bleffing,  at  fo  great  a 
•diftance :  it  is  faid  of  "  Abraham  the  father  of  the 
*'  faithful,  that  he  faw  his  day  afar  off  and  was 
"  glad  :"  how  fhould  we  then  be  affedted  with  joy 
and  thankfulnefs,  to  whom  the  Son  of  God  and 
blefled  Saviour  of  men  is  adually  come  ?  He  is 
tome  many  ages  ago,  and  hath  enhghtened  a  great 
part  of  the  world  with  his  glory.  Yea,  he  is  come 
to  us,  who  were  in  a  manner  feparated  from  the  reft 
TOf  the  world  :  to  us  is  this  great  light  come,  who 
had  fo  long  "  fat  in  darknefs  and  in  the  fhadow  of 
**  death  :'*  and  this  mighty  falvation  which  he  hath 
wrought  for  us,  is  near  to  every  one  of  us  that  is 
willing  to  lay  hold  of  it,  and  to  accept  it  upon 
thofe  gracious  terms  and  conditions,  upon  which  it  is 
offered  to  us  in  his  holy  gofpel. 

And  by  his  coming,  he  hath  delivered  mankind 
t  John  V.  from  that  grofs  ignorance  and  "  thick  darknefs  which 
"  covered  the  nations :  and  we  know  that  the  Son 
"  of  God  is  come,  and  hath  given  us  an  under- 
**  ftanding  to  know  him  that  is  true  :  and  we  are  in 
"  him  that  is  true,  even  in  his  Son  Jesus  Christ  : 
Ver.  21.  «  this  is  the  true  GoD,  and  eternal  life."  And 
then  it  immediately  follows,  *'  Little  children,  keep 
"  yourfelves  from  idols."  What  can  be  the  mean- 
ing of  this  caution  ?  And  what  is  the  connexion  of 
it  with  the  foregoing  difcourfe  ?  It  is  plainly  this : 
that  the  Son  of  God  by  his  coming  had  refcued 
mankind  from  the  fottifh  worfhip  of  idols ;  and 
therefore  he  cautions  Chriftians  to  take  great  heed  of 
relapfing  into  idolatry  by  worlhipping  a  creature,  or 

the 


our  blejfed  Saviour.  327 

the  image  and   likenefs  of  any  creature  inftead  of  S  E  R  M. 

God.     And  becaufe  he  forefaw  that  it  might  be  ob-  ' 

je6led  to  Chriftians,  as  in  fa£l  it  was  afterwards  by 

the  heathen,  that  the  worfliip  of  Christ,  who  was 

a  man,  was  as  much  idolatry  as  that   which  the 

Chriftians  charged  the  heathen  withal :    therefore 

St.  John  effedually  to  prevent  the  force  of  thisplau- 

fible  objedlion,  though  he  perpetually,  throughout 

his  gofpel,  declares  Christ  to  be  really  a  man,  yet 

he  expredy  alfo  affirms  him  to  be  God,  and  the  true 

God  i    and  confequently,    Chriftians   might  fafely 

pay  divine  worlhip  to  him  without  fear  or  danger 

of  idolatry  :  "  "We  are  in  him  that  is  true,  even  in 

"  his  Son  Jesus  Christ  :  this  is  the  true  God,  and 

"  eternal  life :  little  children,  keep  yourfelves  from 

«  idols." 

But  this  I  am  fenfible  is  a  digreffion,  yet  fuch  a 
one  as  may  not  be  altogether  ufelefs. 

To  proceed  then  in  the  recital  of  thofe  great 
bleffings,  which  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  God  hath 
brought  to  mankind.  He  hath  refcued  us  from  the 
bondage  of  fin,  and  from  the  flavery  of  Satan  :  he 
hath  openly  proclaimed  pardon  and  reconciliation 
to  the  world :  he  hath  clearly  revealed  eternal  life  to 
us,  which  was  but  obfcurely  made  known  before, 
both  to  Jews  and  Gentiles ;  "  but  is  now  made  ma- 
"  nifeft  by  the  appearance  of  our  Lord  and  Savi- 
"  our  Jesus  Christ,  who  hath  abolilhed  death, 
"  andjbrought  life  and  immortality  to  light  by  the 
"  gofpel :"  he  hath  purchafed  this  great  blefling 
for  us ;  and  is  ready  to  confer  it  upon  us,  if  we  will 
be  contented  to  leave  our  fins  and  to  be  faved  by 
him :  a  condition  without  which  as  falvation  is  not 

to 


-3  28  Concerning  the  incarnation  of 

S  E  R  M.  to  be  had,  fo  if  it  were,  it  would  not  be  defirable, 
^^^  it  could  not  make  us  happy  -,  becaufe  our  fins  would 
ftill  feparate  between  God  and  us,  and  the  guilt  and 
horror  of  our  own  minds  would  make  us  eternally 
miferable. 

And  now  furely  we  cannot  but  thus  judge,  that 
all  the  praifes  and  acknowledgments,  all  the  fervice 
and  obedience,  which  we  can  poflibly  render  to  him, 
are  infinitely  beneath  thofe  infinite  obligations  which 
the  Son  of  God  hath  laid  upon  the  fons  of  men, 
by  his  "  coming  into  the  world  to  fave  Tinners.'* 

What  then  remains,  but  that  at  all  times,  and 
more  efpecially  at  this  feafon,  we  gratefully  acknow- 
ledge and  joyfully  commemorate  this  great  and  a- 
mazing  goodnefs  of  God  to  us,  in  the  incarnation 
of  his  Son  for  the  redemption  and  falvation  of  the 
fmful  and  miferable  race  of  mankind  ?  A  method 
and  difpenfation  of  the  divine  grace  and  wifdom, 
not  only  full  of  mercy  and  condefcenfion,  but  of 
great  power  and  virtue  to  purify  our  hearts  and  to  re- 
form our  lives ;  to  beget  in  us  a  fervent  love  of  God 
our  Saviour,  and  a  perfed  hatred  and  deteftation 
of  our  fins,  and  a  ftedfaft  purpofe  and  refolution  to 
lead  a  new  life,  following  the  commandments  of 
God,  and  walking  in  his  ways  all  the  days  of  our 
life.  In  a  word,  a  method  that  is  every  way  calcu- 
lated for  our  unfpeakable  benefit  and  comfort. 

Since  then  the  Son  of  God  hath  fo  gracioufly 
condefcended  to  be  "  made  in  all  things  like  unto 
"  us,  fin  only  excepted  ;"  let  us  afpire  to  be  as  like 
to  him  as  is  pofTible  in  the  exemplary  holinefs  and 
virtues  of  his  life.  We  cannot  be  like  him  in  his 
miracles,  but  we  may  in  his  mercy  and  compaffion  : 

we 


our  bleffed^ AY lOM^i  2^g 

wc cannot  imitate  his  divine  power,  but  we  may  re-  SERlvli 
femble  him  in  his  innocency  and  humility,  in  his 
meeknefs  and  patience.  And  a?  he  aiTumed  human 
nature,  fo  let  us  re-aiTume  humanity,  which  we  have! 
in  great  meafure  depraved  and  put  off;  and  let  us 
'*  put  on  bowels  of  mercy'*  towards  thofethat  are  in 
milery,  and  be  ready  to  relieve  the  poor  for  his  fake^ 
"  who  being  rich,  for  our  fakes  became  poor,  that 
"  we  through  his  poverty  might  be  made  rich." 

To  conclude,  let  us  imitate  him  in  that  which 
was  his  great  work  and  bufinefs  here  upon  earthy 
and  which  of  all  other  did  beft  become  the  Son  of 
God  ',  I  mean  in  his  "  going  about  doing  good:" 
that  by  giving  glory  to  God  in  the  higheft,  and  by 
endeavouring  as  much  as  in  us  lies  to  procure  and 
promote  "  peace  on  earth,  and  good  will  amongft 
"  men/'  we  may  at  laft  be  "  made  meet  to  be 
"  partakers  of  the  inheritance  of  the  faints  irt 
"  light :"  through  the  mercies  and  merits  of  out* 
blefled  Saviour  and  Redeemer.     Amen. 

"  Almighty  God,  who  haft  given  us  thy  only" 
"  begotten  Son  to  take  our  nature  upon  him,  and  as 
"  at  this  time  to  be  born  of  a  pure  virgin  :  grant 
"  that  we,  being  regenerate  and  made  thy  children 
"  by  adoption  and  grace,  may  daily  be  renewed  by 
"  thy  holy  Spirit  ;  through  the  fame  our  Lord  Je- 
"  sus  Christ,  who  liveth  and  reigneth  with  thee' 
"  and  the  fame  Spirit,  ever  one  God,  world  withouf 
*'  end.     Amen." 


Vol.  lit  5F  .         $EM^ 

6»  ' 


330  Concerning  the facrljice  and 

SERMON   XLVII. 

Concerning  the  Sacrifice  and  Satisfadion 
of  Christ,  ^c, 

H  E  B.    ix.  26. 

But  now  once  hath  he  appeared  in  the  end  of  the  worlds 
to  take  away  Jin  by  thefacrifice  of  himfelf. 

SERM.  \  MONG  many  other  great  ends  and  reafons, 
«^-^_ 'i  JTJL  for  which  God  was  pleafed  to  fend  his  Son  in- 
to the  world  to  dwell  amongft  us,  this  was  one  of 
the  chief,  that  by  a  long  coiirfe  of  the  greatefl  in- 
nocency  and  the  grcateft  fufferings  in  our  nature, 
he  might  be  capable  to  make  a  perfect  expiation  of 
fin  :  "  but  now  once  in  the  end  of  the  world,'* 
i-jt)  ffvvuhiiix,  Twv  almcav,  in  the  conclufion  of  the  ages, 
that  is  in  the  lafl:  age  of  the  world,  which  is  the  gof- 
pel  age,  "  hath  he  appeared  to  take  away  fin  by  the 
*^  facrifice  of  himfelf* 

The  general  defign  of  God   in  fending  his  Son 
into  the  world,  was  to  fave  mankind  from  eternal 
death  and  mifery,  and  to  purchafe  for  us  eternal  life 
and  happinefs.     So  the  author  of  our  falvation  him- 
John  iii     f^^f  ^^^^^  "^»  "  ^^^^  ^^^   ^'^  loved   the  world,  that 
16.  «  he  gave  his  only  begotten  Son,  that  whofoever 

"  believeth  in  him  fhould  not  periih,  but    have 
«  everlafting  life." 

•    Now 


fatisfaBion  o/*  Ch R  isT.  531 

Now  in  order  to  the  procurinp;  of  this  falvation  SER  M.* 
for  us,  the  impediments  and  hindrances  of  it  were 
to  bte  removed  :  thefe  were  the  guilt  and  the  domi- 
nion of  fin  :  by  the  guilt  of  fin  we  were  become  ob- 
noxious to  the  wrath  of  God  and  to  eternal  con- 
demnation ;  and  by  the  defilement  and  dominion  of 
it,  we  were  incapable  of  the  happinefs  of  heaven  and 
the  reward  of  eternal  life. 

To  remove  thefe  two  great  hindrances  two  things 
were  necefifary  :  the  forgivenefs  of  fins  paft,  in  or- 
der to  our  deliverance  from  the  wrath  of  God  and 
the  eternal  torments  of  the  next  life  ;  and  the  re- 
formation of  our  hearts  and  lives,  to  make  us  ca- 
pable of  eternal  life  and  happinc.jin  another  world. 
And  both  thefe,  if  God  had  fo  pleafed,  might,  for 
any  thing  we  certainly  know  to  the  contrary,  have 
been  effeded  by  the  abundant  mercy  and  powerful 
grace  of  God,  without  this  wonderful  method  and 
difpenfation  of  fending  his  Son  in  our  nature  *'  to 
"  take  away  fin  by  the  facrifice  of  himfelf :"  but 
it  feems  the  wifdom  of  God  thought  fit  to  pitch 
upon  this  way  and  method  of  our  falvation,  and 
no  doubt  for  very  good  reafons ;  amongft  which, 
thefe  three  feem  to  be  very  obvious  and  very  con- 
fiderable. 

f  irft,  to  vindicate  the  honour  of  his  laws,  which, 
if  fin  had  gone  altogether  unpunifhed,  would  have 
been  in  great  danger  of  falling  into  contempt.  For 
if  God  had  proclaimed  a  general  pardon  of  fin  to 
all  mankind,  without  any  teftimony  of  his  wrath 
and  difpleafure  againft  it,  who  would  have  had  any 
great  veneration  for  his  laws,  or  have  believed  in 
good  earneft,  that  the  violation  of  them  had  cither 
5  F  2  been 


^y>.  Concerning  thefacrifice  and 

^^  E  R  M.  |3een    fo  extremely  oifenfive  to  him,  or  fo    very 
XLVII 

dangerous  to  the  firmer  ? 

Therefore  to  maintain  the  honour  of  his  laws, 
rather  than  fin  Hiould  pafs  iinpunifhed,  God  would 
lay  the  punifliment  of  it  upon  his  only  begotten 
Son,  the  deareft  perfon  to  him  in  the  world  :  which 
js  a  greater  teftimony  of  his  high  difpleafure  againfl: 
fin,  and  of  his  tender  regard  and  concernment  for 
the  honour  of  his  laws,  than  if  the  finner  had  fuf- 
fered  the  punifhment  due  to  it  in  his  own  perfon. 

Secondly,  another  reafon  of  this  difpenfation, 
^nd  that  likewife  very  confiderable,  was,  that  God 
flight  forgive  fin  in  fuch  a  way  as  yet  effeftually  to 
difcountenance  and  difcourage  it,  and  to  create  in 
m  the  greateft  horror  and  hatred  of  it :  which  could 
not  have  been  by  an  abfolute  pardon,  without  any 
punifhment  inflided,  or  fatisfaftion  made  to  the  ho- 
nour of  his  juftice.  For  had  fin  been  fo  eafily  for- 
given, who  would  have  been  fenfible  of  the  great 
^vil  of  it,  or  afraid  to  offend  for  the  future  ? 

But  when  God  makes  his  own  Son  a  facrifice, 
^nd  lays  upon  him  the  punifhment  due  for  the  ini- 
quities of  us  all,  this  is  a  demonRration  that  God 
Jiates  fin  as  much,  if  it  be  poffible,  as  he  loved  his 
pwn  Son.  For  this  plainly  fliews  what  fin  deferves, 
p,nd  what  the  finner  may  juftly  expecft,  if  after  this 
Severity  of  God  againfl  it  he  will  venture  to  com- 
pnit  it. 

And  if  this  facrifice  for  fin,  and  the  pardon  pur- 
ch^fsd  by  it,  be  not  efFedlual  to  reclaim  us  from  fin, 
^nd  to  beg(  t  in  us  an  eternal  dread  and  deteflation 
of  it:  if  we  fin  wilfully  after  fo  clear  a  revelation  of 
^he  "  wrath  of  G  od   from  heaven  againfl  all  un- 

"  godlinefs 


fathfaBion  of  en's.! sr.  333 

"  godlinefs  and  unriffhteoufnefs  of  men,"  there  re-  SERM. 

.  .      XLVII 

mains    "  no  more  facrifice  for  fin,  but  a  certain  1  \ 

"  fearful  looking  for  of  judgment,  and  fiery  indig- 

"  nation  to  confume   the  adverfarics."     For  what 

could  God  do  more  to  teftify  his  difpleafure  againft 

fin,  and  to  difcountenance  the  pradlice  of  it,  than 

to  make  his  only  Son  an  offering  for  fin,  and  to  give 

him   up  to  be  wounded  for   our  tranfgrelTions,  and 

bruifed  for  cur  iniquities  ?  In  what  clearer  glafs  can 

we  at  once  behold  the  great  evil  and  demerit  of  fin, 

and  the  infinite  goodnefs  and  mercy  of  God  to  fin- 

ners,  than  in  the  forrows  and  fufferings  of  the  Son 

of  God  for  our  fins  and  for  our  fakes  ? 

Thirdly,  another  reafon  of  this  difpenfation  feems 
to  have  been  a  gracious  condefcenfion  and  compli- 
ance of  Almighty  God  with  a  certain  apprehenfion 
and  perfuafion,  which  had  very  early  and  univer- 
fally  obtained  among  mankind,  concerning  the  ex- 
piation of  fin,  and  appeafing  the  offended  deity  by 
facrifices :  by  the  facrifices  of  living  creatures,  of 
birds  and  beafts  ;  and  afterwards  by  human  facrifices 
and  "  the  blood  of  their  Ions  and  daughters ;"  by 
offering  to  God,  as  the  expreffion  is  in  the  prophet, 
"  their  firft-born  for  their  tranfgreffion,  and  the  fruit 
"  of  their  body  for  the  fin  of  their  fouls." 

And  this  notion  of  the  expiation  of  fin  by  facri- 
fice, whether  it  had  it's  firft  rife  from  divine  reve- 
lation, and  was  afterwards  propagated  from  age  to 
age  by  tradition  :  I  fay,  from  whencefoever  this 
notion  came,  it  hath  of  all  other  notions  concern- 
ing religion,  excepting  thofe  of  the  being  of  God 
and  his  providence,  and  of  the  recompences  of  another 
life,  found   the  moft  univerfal  reception,  and   the 

thing 


Concerning  the  facrlfice  and 
thing  hath  been  the  moft  generally  pra6lifed  in  all 
ages  and   nations,  not  only  in  the  old,  but  in  the 
new  diicovei-ed  parts  of  the  world. 

And  indeed  a  very  great  part  of  the  jewilh  reli- 
gion, which  was  inftituted  by  God  himfelf,  fcems 
to  have  been  a  plain  condefcenfion  to  the  general  ap- 
prehenfion  of  mankind,  concerning  this  way  of  ap- 
peafing  the  offended  deity  by  facrifices  :  as  it  was  alfo 
a  figure  of  that  great  and  efficacious  facrifice,  which 
fliould  in  due  time  be  offered  to  God  to  make  a- 
tonement  once  for  all  for  the  fins  of  all  mankind. 

And  the  apoflle  to  the  Hebrews  doth  very  parti- 
cularly infift  upon  this  condefcenfion  of  G  o  d  to 
them,  in  the  difpenfation  of  the  gofpel :  and  where- 
as they  apprehended  fo  great  a  necefTity  of  an  high- 
priell  and  of  facrifices  to  make  expiation  for  the  fins 
of  the  people,  that  it  was  an  eftabliflied  principle 
among  them,  that  "  without  fhedding  of  blood 
*'  there  was  no  remiffion  of  fins  :'*  God  was  pleafed 
to  comply  fo  far  with  thefe  notions  and  apprehen- 
fions  of  theirs,  as  to  make  his  own  Son  both  a  priefl: 
and  a  facrifice,  to  do  that  once  for  all  which  their 
own  high-pricfi:  pretended  to  do  year  by  year. 

And  from  hence  the  fame  apoftle  takes  occafion  to 
recommend  to  them  the  new  covenantand  difpenfation 
of  the  gofpel,  as  having  a  greater  and  more  perfeft 
high-priefl  and  a  more  excellent  facrifice,  than  werfe 
the  high-priefl:s  and  the  facrifices  under  the  law ;  the 
Son  of  God  having  "  by  one  facrifice  of  hin> 
«  felf  obtained  eternal  redemption  for  us,  and  per- 
«'  feftfed  for  ever  them  that  are  fandified.'* 

And  this  lapprehenfion  prevailed  no  lefs  in  the 
heathen  world,  and  proceeded  to  the  facrifices  of 

men. 


fathfaSiion  of  Ch R  i s x.  33  ^ 

men,  even  of  their  firll-born.  And  with  this  ap-  SERM. 
p.rehenfion,  not  to  countenance  but  to  abolifh  it,  .  .  J^ 
God  was  pleafed  to  comply  fo  far  as  to  make  a  ge- 
neral atonement  for  the  fins  of  mankind  by  the  death 
of  his  Son,  appearing  in  our  nature  to  become  a  vo- 
luntary facrifice  for  us  :  God  permitting  him  to  be 
unjuftly  put  to  death,  and  his  blood  to  be  fhed  by 
the  malice  of  men,  in  appearance  as  a  malefacftor, 
but  in  truth  as  a  martyr ;  and  accepting  of  his  death 
as  a  meritorious  facrifice  and  "  propitiation  for  the 
"  fins  of  the  whole  world  :"  that  by  this  wife  coun- 
fel  and  permiffion  of  his  providence  he  might  for 
ever  put  an  end  to  that  barbarous  and  inhuman  way 
of  ferving  God,  which  had  been  fo  long  in  ufe  and 
pra^flice  among  them  :  the  Son  of  God  by  the  vo- 
luntary facrifice  of  himfelf  having  effefted  all  that 
at  once,  and  for  ever,  which  mankind  from  the  be- 
ginning of  the  world  had  in  vain  been  endeavouring 
to  accomplifh  by  innumerable  and  continual  facri- 
fices  j  namely,  the  pardon  of  their  fins,  and  perfedl: 
peace  and  reconciliation  with  God. 

For  thefe  ends  and  reafons,  and  perhaps  for  many 
more  as  great  and  confiderable  as  thefe,  which  our 
fhallow  underftandings  are  not  able  to  fathom,  the 
wifdom  of  God  hath  pitched  upon  this  way  and  me- 
thod of  delivering  mankind  from  the  guilt  and  do- 
minion of  fin  by  the  facrifice  of  his  Son.  And  to 
this  end  it  was  requifite  that  he  fhould  appear  in  our 
nature,  and  dwell  amongft  us  for  fome  confiderable 
time,  that  by  a  long  courfe  of  the  greateft  innocency 
and  of  the  greateft  fuff'erings  in  our  nature  he  might 
be  capable  of  making  a  perfed  expiation  of  fin. 

So 


XLVII. 


2^6  Concerning  the  facrijice  and 

S  E  R  M.  So  that  two  things  were  requifite  to  qualify  hirri 
for  this  purpofe  ;  perfed:  innocency  and  obedience, 
and  great  fuffcrings  in  our  nature,  even  to  the  fuf- 
fering  of  death.  Both  thefe  the  fcripture  declares 
to  be  neccffary  qualifications  of  a  perfon  capable  to 
make  expiation  of  fin  \  and  both  thefe  were  found 
in  the  perfon  of  our  bleffed  Saviour. 

Firft,  unfpotted  innocency  and  perfed  obedience. 

This  the  fcripture  teftifies  concerning  him,  and  the 

Heb  ir      whole  courfe  of  his  life  and  aftions.     *'  He  was  in 

ij.  "  all  points   tempted  like   as  we  are,  yet  without 

T  ,      ...    "  fin,'*  faith  the  apoftle  to  the  Hebrews.     "  He 
Johnvm.  '  ^ 

29,  "  always  did  the  things  which  pleafed  God,"  as  he 

teftifies  concerning  himfelf,  "  and  we  are  fure  that 
iPet.  ii.  "  his  witnefs  is  true."  "  He  did  no  fin,  neither  was 
>S«  "  guile  found  in  his  mouth,"  as  St.  Peter  tells  us 

of  him.  And  this  was  neceflfary  to  qualify  him  for 
the  perfect  expiation  of  fin,  whether  we  confider 
him  as  a  prieft,  or  as  a  facrifice. 

As  a  prieft,  he  could  not  have  been  fit  to  make  • 
expiation  for  the  fins  of  others,  had  he  not  been 
without  fin  himfelf   And  this,  the  apoftle  tells  us,  is 
one  great  advantage  of  our  high-prieft  under  the  gof- 
pel,  above  the  high-prieft  under  the  law,  who  being 
a  finner  himfelf,  as  well  as  thofe  for  whom  he  off'er-- 
ed,  had  need   to  offer  for  himfelf  before  he  could' 
make  fo  much  as  a  legal  expiation   for  the  fins  of 
others  :  but  a  perfect  and  tiFedual  expiation  of  fin, 
fo  as  to  purge  the  confcience  from  the  guilt  of  it, 
cannot  be  made  but  by  an  high  prieft  who  is  holy 
Heb.  vii.    and  innocent  himfelf  i  "For   fuch  an  high-prieft,** 
»6,  27.      faith  the  apoftle,  "  became  us,"  that  is,  now  under 
the  difpenfation  of  the  gofpel,  when  a  perfed  ex- 

3  piatioa 


fatisfaBion  o/'Christ,  337 

piation  of  fins  is  to  be  made,  fuch  an  hkh-priefl  is  s  v.  r  m. 
necellary,  "  as  is  holy,  harmlefs,  undefiled,  feparate  ._  ^^_.'j 
"  from  finners^  who  needs  not  as  thofe  high-priefls," 
that  is,  as  the  high-priefhs  under  the  law,  "  to  of- 
"  fer  up  facrifice  firif  for  his  own  fins,  and  then  for 
"  the  people  :"  the  plain  force  of  which  argument 
is  this,  that  he,  who  will  be  qualified  to  make  atone- 
ment for  the  fins  of  others,  mud  be  without  fin 
himfelf. 

And  then  if  we  confider  Christ  as  a  facrifice  for 
fin,  psrfefl  holinefs  is  necelfary  to  make  a  facrifice 
acceptable  and  available  for  the  expiation  of  fin. 
The  neceflity  of  this  v/as  typified  by  the  quality  of 
the  expiatory  facrifices  under   the  law  :  the  bealts 
that  were  to  be  offered  were  to  be  "  without  fpot 
"  and  blemifh  :"  to  which  the  apoftle  alludes,  fpeak- 
ing  of  the  quality   and  efficacy   of  the  facrifice  of 
Christ:  "  How   much   nv^re,"  fays   he,  "  Ihall  Heb.  k, 
"  the  blood  of  Chris -:'•.  who  through  the  eternal  ^'^' 
"  Spirit  offered  himfelf  without  fpot  to  God,  purge 
"  your  confciences  from  dead  works  to  ferve  the  liv- 
*'  ingGoD  ?"   And  to   the  fame  purpofc  St.  Peter, 
"  Forafmuch  as  ye  know  ye  were  not  redeemed  with  i  Pet.  u 
"  corruptible  things,  asfilvcr  and  gold,  but  with  the  ^^'  ^9= 
"  precious  blood  of  Christ,  as  of  a  lamb  without 
"  blemifli  and  without  fpot,  &c."  hereby  intimating, 
that  nothing  lefs  than  the  perfefl  innocency  and  holi- 
nefs of  him  who  was  to  be  a  facrifice  for  us  could 
have  expiated  the  guilt  cf  our  fins,  and  purchafed 
eternal  redemption  for  us. 

Secondly,  great  fufferings  llkcwife  in  our  nature, 
even  to  the  fuifering  of  death,  vvere  requifite  to  the 
perfeft  expiation  of  fin  :  I  fay,  even  to  the  futfering 

Vol.  III.  5  G  of 

7 


33^  Concerning  the  facrifice  and 

S  E  R  M.  of  death.  For  the  facrifices  which  were  to  make 
n__  ^^i  expiation  were  to  be  flain.  And  it  was  a  conftant 
maxim  and  principle  among  the  Jews,  and  the  apo- 
ftle  more  than  once  in  this  epiftle  feems  to  allow  and 
confirm  it,  that  "  without  fhedding  of  blood  there 
"  is  no  remifTion  of  fins." 

Not  that  God  could  not  have  pardoned  fin  with- 
out fatisfadlion  made  to  his  juftice,  either  by  the  fuf- 
fering  of  the  finner  himfelf,  or  of  a  facrifice  in  his 
Head  :  but,  according  to  the  method  and  difpenfa- 
tion  which  the  wifdom  of  God  had  pitched  upon^ 
he  was  refolved  not  to  difpenfe  forgivenefs  in  any 
other  way.  For  which  reafon  he  feems  either  to 
have  poffelTed  mankind  with  this  principle,  or  to 
have  permitted  them  to  be  fo  perfuaded,  that  "  fin 
"  was  not  to  be  expiated  but  by  blood,"  that  is,  either 
by  the  death  of  the  finner,  or  of  the  facrifice. 

Now  the  life  of  our  blefifed  Saviour,  as  well  as 
his  death,  was  made  up  of  fufferings  of  one  kind  or 
other :  continual  fufi'erings  from  his  cradle  to  his 
crofs,  from  the  time  he  drew  his  firft  breath,  to  his 
giving  up  the  ghoft  :  and  not  only  continual  fuf- 
ferings, but  the  greateft  that  ever  were,  confidering 
■the  dignity  of  the  perfon  that  fuff^ered,  and  the 
nature  of  the  fufferings  :  confidering  likewife  that 
thefe  fufferings  were  not  only  wholly  undeferved  on 
his  part,  but  unmerited  alfo  on  ours,  for  whofe  fake 
he  fubmitted  himfelf  to  them :  Nay,  on  the  con- 
trary, he  had  obliged  to  the  utmoft  thofe  for  whom 
and  by  whom  he  fuffered,  and  continued  ftill  to  o- 
blige  them  by  the  greateit  bleffings  and  benefits  pur- 
chafed  and  procured  for  them  by  thofe  very  fuffer- 
ings which  with  fo  much  malice  and  cruelty  they  in- 
flided  on  him.  Had 


fathfaBion  of  Ch  rist.  339 

Had  our  blefled  Saviour  been  a  mere  man,  the  5ERM. 
perfect  innocency  and  unfpotted  purity  of  his  whole  rj^  ' 
life ;  his  zeal  to  do  the  will  of  God,  and  his  delight 
in  doing  it ;  his  infinite  pains  and  unwearied  dili- 
gence in  "  going  about  doing  good  :"  his  conftant 
obedience  to  God  in  the  moil  difficult  inftances, 
and  his  perfeverance  in  well-doing,  notwithftanding 
the  ill  ufage  and  hard  meafure,  the  bitter  reproaches 
and  perfecutions  he  met  withal  for  it,  from  a  wicked 
and  ill-natured  world  :  his  perfedl  fubmiffion  to  the 
will  of  God,  his  invincible  patience  under  the 
greateft  and  bittereft  fufferings,  and  his  infinite 
charity  to  his  enemies  and  perfecutors :  thefe  muft 
needs  be  highly  acceptable  to  God,  and,  if  man 
could  merit  of  God,  likely  enough  to  be  available 
for  the  fins  of  others. 

But  our  Saviour  and  our  facrifice  being  the 
Son  of  God  in  our  nature  j  and  he  voluntarily  af- 
fuming  it,  and  fubmitting  to  the  condition  of  hu- 
manity in  it's  loweft  and  moil  miferable  flate,  fin 
only  excepted  •,  and  his  being  contented  to  live  a 
life  of  doing  good  and  fuffering  evil,  and  at  lafl  to 
be  put  to  death  and  fiain  a  facrifice  for  us  :  the  dig- 
nity of  the  perfon  who  did  and  fufFered  all  this  for 
us,  and  his  dearnefs  to  God,  muft  needs  add  a 
mighty  value  to  fo  perfe<5l  an  obedience  and  fuch 
patient  fufferings  •,  fo  as  to  render  them  a  full,  per- 
fect and  fufRcient  facrifice,  oblation  and  fatisfacflion 
for  the  fins  of  the  whole  world. 

And  all  this   being  willingly  performed  in  our 
nature,  and  accepted  by  God  as  done  upon  our  ac- 
count, may  reafonably  be  prefumed  io  redound  to 
our  benefit  and  advantage,  as  much  as  if  we  our 
5  G  2  felves 


Concerning  the  facrlfice  and 

felves  had  performed  it  in  our  own  perfons :  nothing 
being  fo  proper  and  fo  available  to  make  an  honour- 
able amends  and  fatisfaflion  tothe  juflice  of  God  for 
the  fins  of  all  mankind,  as  the  vokintary  obedience 
and  fufferings  of  human  nature  in  a  perfon  of  fo 
great  dignity  and  dearnefs  to  God  as  his  eternal  and 
entirely  beloved  Son. 

Now  that  expiation  of  fm  was  made  by  the  fuf- 
ferings  of  Christ  in  our  flead,  I  fliall  endeavour 
to  make  good  thefe  three  ways. 

Firll,  from  plain  teftimonies  of  holy  fcripture, 
declaring  this  matter  to  us  as  clearly  and  fully  as  it 
is  pofilble  for  words  to  do  it. 

Secondly,  from  the  nature  and  intention  of  ex- 
piatory facrifices,  both  among  the  Jews  and  heathen  ; 
to  which  the  death  of  Christ  is  in  the  new  tefla- 
ment  fo  frequently  compared,  and  in  point  of  virtue 
and  efficacy  to  take  away  fin  infinitely  preferred  to  it. 
Thirdly,  by  vindicatinpj  this  method  and  difpen- 
fation  of  tiie  divine  wifr'om  from  the  objeftions 
whtuh  are  brought  againft  it  ;  and  by  fhewing  that 
ti\Q^t  is  nothing  in  it  that  is  unreafonable,  or  any 
wile  unworthy  of  Goo. 

I.  I  fliall  produce  fome  plain  teflimonies  of  holy 
fcripture  which  declare  this  matter  as  clearly  and 
fully  as  it  is  poiTible  for  words  to  do  it ;  namely,  that 
the  Son  of  God,  in  order  to  the  effedtual  expiation 
of  fin,  fuffered  in  our  Read,  and  bore  the  wrath  of 
God  for  us,  and  made  a  perfed:  atonement  for  fin, 
and  obtained  eternal  redemption  for  us. 

This  the  fcripture  declares  to  us  in  great  variety 
of  exprefTions  ;  as,  that  "Christ  died  for  iis,*» 
and  "  for  our  fins  ;'*  that  he  was  "  a  facrifice  for 


«^us'' 


fatisfaBion  of  CwRisr.  541 

•''  us,"  and  "  a  propitiation  for  the  fins  of  the  whole  S  E  R  M. 
"  world,"  that  is,  of  all  mankind ;  that  "  he  bare  ^^^ 
"  our  fins  in  his  own  body  on  the  tree,'*  and  "  ap- 
"  peared  to  take  away  fin  by  the  facrifice  of  him- 
*'  felf ;"  that  "  we  are  juftified  in  his  blood,"  and 
*'  redeemed  by  the  price  of  it  /'  and  in  very  many 
other  exprefiions  to  the  fame  purpofe. 

And  this  is  fo  evidently  the  fcope  and  meaning  of 
thefe  exprefiions,  that  it  cannot  be  denied  without 
offering  the  greateft  violence  imaginable  to  the  holy 
fcriptures.  For  can  any  man  think  that  God  would 
have  ufedfo  many  expreffions  in  fcripture,  the  plain 
and  mod  obvious  fenfe  of  all  which  is,  that  the  Son 
of  God  fuffered  for  our  fins  and  in  our  (lead,  if  this 
had  not  been  his  defign  and  meaning  ?  Would  not 
this  be  in  effect  to  fay,  that  God  had  written  a  great 
book  to  puzzle  and  confound,  but  not  to  inflrudt 
and  teach  m.ankind  ? 

I  will  at  prefent  fingie  out  fome  few  of  thofe  ma- 
ny texts  of  fcripture,  which  might  be  produced  to 
this  purpofe  :  "  he  hath  made  him  to  be  fin  for  us,  2  Cor.  r. 
•'  who    knew  no  fin,"  that  is,  he  had  made  him  ^^' 
who  had  no  fin  himfelf  a  facrifice  for  our  fins.     A- 
gain-,  "  and  walk  in  love,  as   Christ   alfo   hath  Eph.  v. 
"  loved  us  and  given  himfelf  for  us,  an  offering  and  *•■ 
"  a  facrifice  to  God."     St.  Peter  to  the  fame  pur- 
pofe tells  us,  that  "  Christ  alfo  hath  once  fufier-  iPet. «^ 
"  ed  for  fins,  the  jufl:  for  the  unjufl:,  that  he  might  '  " 
^'  bring  us  to  God,  being  put  to  death  in  the  flefh:" 
here  Chri  st  is  faid  to  have  fuffered  for  fin  ;  and  to 
declare  that  the  apoftle  did  not  only   mean  that 
Christ  fuffered  upon  the  occafion  of  our  fins,  but 
that  he  fuffered  in  the  place  and  ftead  of  the  finner, 

2  he 


242.  Concerning  the  facrifice  and 

SERM.   he  adds,  "  the  juft  for  theunjufl,'*  that  is,  the  Son 

^^"^llli  °^  God,  who  was  innocent  and  had  no  fin,  fi.]ffered 
for  us  who  were  finners ;  or  as  it  is  elfe where  ex- 
preiTed,  "  he  bare  our  fins  in  his  own  body  on  the 
«  tree.'* 

It  is  true  indeed,  that  Christ  fuffered  for  our 
benefit  and  advantage ;  which  the  Socinians  would 
have  to  be  all  that  is  meant  in  the  texts  which  I 
have  cited :  but  then  it  ought  to  be  confidered,  that 
Christ's  fuffering  for  our  benefit  and  advantage 
does  by  no  means  exclude,  nor  is  any  wife  incon- 
fiftent  with  his  fufi^ering  in  our  ftead.  For  whoever 
fuffers  in  another  man's  flead,  and  to  fave  him  from 
fuffering,  does  undoubtedly  fuffer  for  his  benefit  and 
advantage,  and  gives  the  bell  demonflration  of  it 
that  can  be :  but  the  manner  of  the  exprefTion,  if 
compared  with  other  parallel  texts  of  fcripture,  and 
efpecially  with  what  is  fo  often  faid  of  our  Savi- 
^  cur's  being  a  facrifice,  which  I  fliall  have  occafion 
farther  to  urge  by  and  by :  I  fay,  the  manner  of  the 
exprefiion,  if  well  confidered,  will  appear  to  any  man 
that  is  not  contentious  to  fignify  our  Saviour's  fuf- 
fering inftead  of  the  finner. 

But  not  to  argue  from  words  and  phrafes,  I  will 
produce  two  texts  which  declare  this  matter  fo  plain- 
ly, that  the  force  of  them  is  not  to  be  avoided, 
without  the  mofi:  fhameful  wrefi:ing  and  perverting 

John  XV.    of  them.     "  This  is  my  commandment,"  fays  our 

»2.  Saviour,  "  that  you  love  one  another,  as  I  have 

"  loved  you."     How  is  that  ?  He  declares  in  the 

-^  ^  next  words,  "  Greater  love  than  this  hath  no  man, 

"  that  a  man  lay  down  his  life  for  his  friend,"  that 
is,  that  he  be  contented  to  die  in  his  flead.     And  to 

the 


fatisfaSflon  of  CuRi^r:  343 

the  fame  purpofe  St.  Paul,  "  For  when  ye  were  yet  S  E  R  U. 
"  finners  in  due  time  Christ    died  for  the  un-  ._-^-  1^ 
"  godly:"  now  the  queftion  is,  whether  by  this  ^'''"•'*^^' 
exprefTion  of  "  Christ's  dying  for  the  ungodly," 
be  meant  only  his  dying  for  the  benefit  and  advan- 
tage of  finners,  but  not  his  dying  in  their  ftead  ? 
This,  let  the  words  which    immediately  follow  de- 
termine :  "  For  fcarcely   for  a  righteous  man  will 
"  one  die,  yet  peradventure    for  a  good  man  one 
"  would  even  dare  to  die :  but  God  commendeth 
"  his  love  to  us,  in  that  whilft  we  were  yet  finners 
*'  Christ  died  for  us.'*     And  now  I  appeal  to  any 
man  of  good  fenfe,  whether  it  be  not  plain  that  the 
apoftle  here  fpeaks  of  Christ's  dying   for  finners 
in  the  fame  fenfe  as  one  man  is  faid  to  die  for  ano- 
ther, that  is,  to  fave  another  from  death;  which 
what  is  it  elfe  but  to  die  in  his  ftead  ?  He   that  can 
deny  this,  is  perverfe  to  the  higheft  degree,  and  I 
fear  almoft  beyond  the  poflibility  of  being  convinced. 
And  the  argument  from  thefe  two  texts  is  fo  much 
the  ftronger,  becaufe  we  do  not  here  reafon  merely 
from  the  phrafe   and  exprefTion,  but  from  the  main 
fcope  of  our  Saviour's  difcourfe  in  the  one,  and  of 
St.  Paul's  in  the  other.     For  the  defign  of  both,  is 
to  recommend  the  fuperlative  love  of  Christ  to  us, 
above  the  greateft  love  that  ever  any  man  exprefled 
to  another.     The  higheft  pitch  that  human  affcdli- 
on  .-^.id  ever  rife  to,  was  for  a  man  to  lay  down  his 
life  for  his  friend  i  but  the  Son  of  God  laid  down 
his  life  for  his  enemies.     "  Scarcely,"  fays  St.  Paul, 
"  would  one  lay  down  his  life  for  a  righteous  man," 
that  is,  for  one   who  is  but  ftri6lly  juft  and  honeil, 
and  does  no  body  wrong  i  but  for  a  good  man,  that 

is, 


XI.VII. 


344  Concerning  the  facfifice  arid 

S  E  R  M.  is,  for  one  that  is  kind  and  beneficial  to  all,  and  hatii 
obliged  mankind  by  great  benefits,  fome  one  may- 
be found  that  would  lay  down  his  hfe  to  fave  the 
life  of  fuch  a  perfon  :  but  the  love  of  Christ  hath 
gone  far  beyond  this  :  he  "  died  for  finners,"  for 
thofe  who  were  neither  good  men  nor  righteous  • 
"  But  God  commendeth  his  love  to  us,  in  that 
"  whilfl:  we  were  yet  finners  Christ  died  for  us.'* 
Now  where  doth  the  force  of  this  argument  lye,  if 
not  in  this  ?  That  Christ  hath  done  that  for  us, 
who  were  enemies  and  finners,  which  fome  very  few 
perfons  in  the  world  have  done  for  their  friend,  or 
for  fome  very  eminently  good  man  :  and  what  is 
that?  Why  they  have  laid  down  their  lives  in  their 
ftead :  and  fo  Christ  hath  done  for  us.  This 
feems  to  be  fo  very  plain,  that  I  do  not  fee  how  the 
force  of  this  argument  is  poffible  to  be  avoided. 

It  is  evident  then  from  fcripture,  that  Christ 
died  not  only  for  our  advantage  but  in  our  ftead  ;  as 
truly  and  really  as  any  man  ever  did  or  can  die  for 
another,  who  lays  down  his  own  life  to  fave  another 
from  death.  For  if  Christ  had  not  died,  we 
had  periflied  everlaftingly  ;  and  becaufe  he  died, 
we  are  faved  from  eternal  death  and  mifery. 

And  though  this  be  no  where  in  fcripture  fpoken 
of  by  the  name  or  term  of  fatisfadlion,  yet  it  is  faid 
to  be  the  price  of  our  redemption  •,  which  furely  is  the 
fame  thingin  effect  with  fatisfaftion.  For  as  we  are 
finners  we  are  liable,  and,  as  I  may  fay,  indebted 
to  the  juftice  of  God  :  and  the  Son  of  God,  by  his 
death  and  fufferings  in  our  nature,  hath  dilcharged 
this  obligation  and  paid  this  debt  for  us  :  which  dif- 
charge  fince  it  was  obtained  for  us  by  the  ,fhedding 

of 


fatisfaBion  o/'Christ.  34^ 

of  Christ's  blood,  and  the  fcripture  tells  us,  that  SERM. 
"  without  fhedding  of  blood  there  is  no  remifllon  ,^^^ 
"  of  fins :"  and  fince  God  is  gracioudy  pleafed  to  ac- 
cept of  it  for  the  debt  which  we  owed  to  his  juftice, 
and  to  declare  himfelf  fully  pleafed  and  contented 
with  it ;  why  it  may  not  properly  enough  be  called 
payment  or  fatisfadion,  I  confefs  I  am  not  able  to 
underltand.  Men  may  eternally  wrangle  about  any 
thing,  but  what  a  frivolous  contention,  what  a 
trifling  in  ferious  matters,  what  barretry  in  divinity 
is  this  ? 

Not  that  God  was  angry  with  his  Son,  when  he 
thus  "  laid  on  him  the  iniquities  of  us  all  :'*  no,  he 
was  always  well  pleafed  with  him  ;  and  never  better, 
than  when  he  "  became  obedient  to  the  death,  even 
'*  the  death  of  the  crofs,"  and  "  bore  our  fins  in 
"  his  own  body  on  the  tree.'* 

Nor  yet  that  our  Saviour  fufFered  the  very  fame 
that  the  finner  fhould  have  fufFered,  namely,  the 
proper  pains  and  torment  of  the  damned  :  but  that 
his  obedience  and  fufFerings  were  of  that  value  and 
efteem  with  God,  and  his  voluntary  facrifice  of  him- 
felf fo  well  pleafing  to  him,  that  he  thereupon  en- 
tered into  a  covenant  of  grace  and  rnercy  with  man- 
kind, wherein  he  hath  engaged  himfelf  to  forgive 
the  fins  of  thofe  who  believe  and  repent,  and  to 
make  them  partakers  of  eternal  life.  And  hene© 
the  "blood  of  Christ"  which  was  fhed  for  ui^'' 
upon  the  crofs,  is  called  "  the  blood  of  the  coVe- 
«  nant,"  as  being  the  fandion  of  that  new'  cove- 
nant, into  which  God  is  entred  with  mankind  :  and 
not  only  the  fandion  and  confirmation  of  that  co- 
venant, but  the  very  foundation  of  it :  for  which 

Vol.  III.  5H  reafon 

7- 


34^  Concerning  the facrijice  and 

S  E  R  M.  reafon  the  cup  in  the  Lord's  fupper  is  called  the 
XL  VII 

,^^^     "j  new  teftament,  or,  as  the  word  fhould  rather  be  ren- 
dered, "  the  new  covenant  in  his  blood,  which  was 
♦'  fhed  for  many  for  the  remiflion  of  fins."     I  pro- 
ceed now  to  the 
II.  lid  Thing  propounded,  which  was  to  fhew  that 

the  expiation  of  our  fins  was  made  by  the  fufferings 
of  Christ,  from  the  nature  and  intention  of  ex- 
piatory facrifices,  both  among  the  Jews  and  Hea- 
thens ;  to  which  the  death  of  Christ  is  in  the  nev/ 
teftament  fo  frequently  compared,  and  in  point  of 
virtue  and  efficacy  to  take  away  fin  infinitely  pre- 
ferred to  it. 

Now  the  nature  and  defign  of  expiatory  facri- 
fices -v^as  plainly  this :  to  fubftitute  one  living  crea- 
ture to  fuffer  and  die  inftead  of  another  j  fo  that 
what  the  finner  deferved  to  have  fuffered,  was  fup- 
pofed  to  be  done  to  the  facrifice,  that  is,  it  was 
flain  to  make  an  atonement  for  the  finner. 

And  though  there  was  no  reafon  to  hope  for  any 
fuch  eff'efb  from  the  blood  of  bulls  or  goats,  or  of 
g,ny  other  living  creatures  that  were  wont  to  be  of- 
fered up  in  facrifice ;  yet  that  both  Jews  and  Hea- 
then did  expedt  and  hope  for  it,  is  fo  very  evident, 
|;hat  it  cannot  without  extreme  ignorance  or  obfti- 
nacy  be  denied. 

But  this  expectation,  how  unreafonable  foever, 
plainly  fhews  it  to  have  been  the  common  apprehen- 
fion  of  mankind,  in  all  ages,  that  God  would  not  be 
appeafed,  nor  fhould  fin  be  pardoned,  without  fuf- 
fering :  but  yet  fo  that  men  generally  conceived 
good  hopes,  that  upon  the  repentance  of  finners 
God  would  accept  of  a  vicarious  punilhment  j  that 

is. 


Jafisfa^ion  ^Christ. 
is,  of  the  fuffering  of  feme  other  in  their  ftead. 
And  very  probably,  as  I  faid  before,  in  compliance 
with  this  apprehenfion  of  mankind,  and  in  conde- 
fcenfion  to  it,  as  well  as  for  other  weighty  reafons 
beft  known  to  the  divine  wifdom,  God  waspleafed 
to  find  out  fuch  a  facrifice  as  fhoiild  really  and  ef- 
feftually  procure  for  them  that  great  bleffing  of  the 
forgivenefs  of  fins,  which  they  had  fo  long  hoped 
for  from  the  multitude  of  their  own  facrifices. 

And  the  apoftle  to  the  Hebrews  doth  in  a  large 
difcourfe  fhew  the  great  virtue  and  efficacy  of  the 
facrifice  of  Christ,  to  the  purpofe  of  remiffion 
of  fins,  above  that  of  the  facrifices  under  the  law  : 
and  that  the  death  of  Christ  is  really  and  eff'edu- 
ally  to  our  advantage,  all  that  which  the  facrifices 
under  the  law  were  fuppofed  to  be  to  the  finner : 
*'  but  now  once,"  faith  tlie  apoftle  here  in  the  text, 
"  in  the  end  of  the  world,  hath  he  appeared  to 
"  take  away  fin  by  the  facrifice  of  himfelf.'*  This 
is  the  great  virtue  and  efficacy  of  the  facrifice  of 
Christ,  that  whatever  was  expedted  from  any  other 
facrifices,  either  by  Jews  or  Heathens,  was  really 
effeded  by  this. 

This  was  plainly  fignified  by  the  Jewifh  paflbver, 
wherein  the  lamb  was  flain,  and  the  finner  did  efcape 
and  was  pafled  by.  In  allufion  whereto,  St.  Paul 
makes  no  fcruple  to  call  Christ  our  paffover  or 
pafchal  lamb,  who  was  flain  that  we  might  efcape : 
*«  Christ  our  paffover,'*  fays  he,  "  is  flain,  or  of-  ,  Cor. 
"  fered  for  us ;"  that  is,  he  by  the  gracious  appoint-  7* 
ment  of  God  was  fubftituted  to  fuffer  all  that  in  our 
ftead,  which  the  pafchal  lamb  was  fuppofed  to  fuf- 
fer for  the  finner. 

5  H  2  And 


xLvir. 


348  Concerning  thefacrijice  and 

SE^R  M.  And  this  was  likewife  fignified  by  the  finner's  lay- 
ing his  hand  upon  the  facrifice  that  was  to  be  (lain, 
thereby  as  it  were  transferring  the  punifhment 
which  was  due  to  himfelf  upon  the  facrifice  that 
was  to  be  (lain  and  offered  up.  For  fo  God  tells 
Mofes,  that  the  finner,  who  came  to  offer  an  expi- 
Lev.  i.  4.  atory  facrifice,  fhould  do  :  "  He  fhall  put  his  hand 
"  upon  the  head  of  the  burnt-offering,  and  it  fhall 
"  be  accepted  for  him,  to  make  an  atonement  for 
"  him."  And  the  apoftle  tells  us,  that  it  was  an 
eftablifhed  principle  in  the  Jewifh  religion,  that 
"  without  fhedding  of  blood  there  was  no  remiffion 
*'  of  fins :"  which  plainly  fhews  that  they  expeded 
this  benefit  of  the  remiffion  of  fins,  from  the  blood 
of  their  facrifices. 

And  then  he  tells  us,  that  we  are  really  made  par- 
takers of  this  benefit  by  the  blood  of  Christ,  and 
by  the  virtue  of  his  facrifice  :  and  again,  "  Christ,'* 
Heb.  ix.    fays  he,  "  was  once  offered  to  bear  the  fins  of  many  ;** 
^^'  plainly  alluding  to   the  facrifices   under  the   law, 

Ivhich  did,  as  it  were,  bear  the  faults  of  the  finner. 
And  that  this  expreffion,  of  Christ's  being 
'*  offered  to  bear  our  fins,"  cannot  be  meant  of  his 
taking  away  our  fins  by  his  holy  dodlrine  which  was 
confirmed  by  his  death,  but  of  his  bearing  our  fins 
by  way  of  imputation,  and  by  his  fuffering  for 
them  in  our  flead,  as  the  facrifice  was  fuppofed  to 
do  for  the  finner :  this,  I  fay,  is  evident  beyond  all 
denial,  from  the  oppofition  which  follows  after  the 
text,  between  his  firll  appearance  and  his  fecond  ; 
Ver.  28.  "  Christ,"  fays  our  apoftle,  "  was  once  offered 
"  to  bear  our  fins ;  but  unto  them  that  look  for  him 
"  he  Ihall  appear  a  fecond  time  without  fin  unto 

"  falvation." 


fatisfaBion  of  CURUT»  3 49 

«  falvatlon."  Why  ?  Did  he  not  appear  the  firft  SERM. 
time  without  fin  ?  Yes  certainly,  as  to  any  inherent  '  -,-.j 
guilt ;  for  the  fcripture  tells  us,  "  he  had  no  fm.'* 
What  then  is  the  meaning  of  the  oppofition,  that 
at  his  firft  coming  "  he  bore  our  fins,"  but  at  his 
fecond  coming  "  he  fhall  appear  without  fin  unto 
"  falvation  ?"  Thefe  words  can  have  no  other  ima- 
ginable fenfe  but  this,  that  at  his  iirft  comino-  he 
fuftained  the  perfon  of  a  finner  and  fufFered  inftead 
of  us  •,  but  his  fecond  coming  (hall  be  upon  another 
account,  and  "  he  fhall  appear  without  fin  unto 
"  falvation ;"  that  is,  not  as  a  facrifice,  but  as  a 
judge,  to  confer  the  reward  of  eternal  life  upon  thofe 
who  are  partakers  of  the  benefit  of  that  facrifice 
which  he  offered  to  God  for  us  "  in  the  days  of 
*'  his  flefh."     I  proceed  to  the 

Illd  Thing  I  propofed,  and  which  yet  remains  to  m* 
be  fpoken  to ;  namely,  to  vindicate  this  method  and 
difpenfation  of  the  divine  wifdom  from  the  objec- 
tions which  are  brought  againft  it ;  and  to  fiiew 
that  there  is  nothing  in  it  that  is  unreafonable,  or 
any  wife  unworthy  of  God.  I  fiiall  mention  four 
objedions  which  are  commonly  urged  in  this  mat- 
ter, and  I  think  they  are  all  that  are  confiderable. 

Firft,  That  this  method,  of  the  expiation  of  fin  Obj.  ift. 
by  the  fufferings  of  Christ,  feems  to  argue  fome 
defe<5b  and  want  of  goodnefs  in  God,  as  if  he  need- 
ed fome  external  motive,  and  were  not  of  himfelf 
difpofed  to  forgive  finners. 

To  which  I   think  the  anfwer  is  not  difficult, 

namely,  that  God  did  not  want  goodnefs  to  have 

forgiven  fin  freely  and  without  any  fatisfacftion,  but 

his  wifdom  did  not  think  it  meet  to  give  encourage- 

I  mcnt 


350  Concernmg  the  ficrifice  and 

S  E  R  M,  ment  to  fin  by  too  eafy  a  forgivenefs,  and  without 
t  -  '_j  fome  remarkable  teftimony  of  his  fevere  difpleafure 
againft  it :  and  therefore  his  greater  goodnefs  and 
compafilon  to  mankind  devifed  this  way  to  fave  the 
finner,  without  giving  the  leafl  countenance  and  en- 
couragement to  fin. 

For  God  to  think  of  faving  us  any  way,  was  ex- 
ceflive  goodnefs  and  mercy  ;  but  to  think  of  doing 
it  in  this  way,  by  fubftituting  his  dearly  beloved 
Son  to  fuflfer  in  our  Head,  is  a  condefcenfion  fo  very 
amazing,  that  if  G  o  d  had  not  been  pleafed  of  his 
own  goodnefs  to  ftoop  to  it,  it  had  almofl:  been 
blafphemy  in  man  to  have  thought  of  it,  or  de- 
fired  it. 
Obj.  2d.  Secondly,  How  can  our  fins  be  faid  to  have  been 
forgiven  freely,  if  the  pardon  of  them  was  purchaf- 
ed  at  fo  dear  a  rate  and  fo  mighty  a  price  was  paid 
for  it  ? 

In  anfwer  to  this  I  defire  thefe  two  things  may  be 
confidered.  ifl,  That  it  is  a  wonderful  grace  and 
favour  of  God,  to  admit  of  this  tranflation  of  the 
punifhment  which  was  due  to  us,  and  to  accept  of 
the  fufferings  of  another  in  our  (lead,  and  for  our 
benefit ;  when  he  might  juftly  have  exaded  it  of  us  in 
our  own  perfons  :  fo  that  even  in  this  refpedt  we 
are,  as  St.  Paul  fays,  "  juftified  freely  by  his  grace, 
*'  through  the  redemption  that  is  in  Jesus  C  h  r  ist  :" 
and  freely  too  in  refpeft  of  any  necefTity  that  lay 
upon  God  to  forgive  us  in  this  or  any  other  way.  It 
was  a  free  a6l  of  his  goodnefs  to  fave  us,  even  by 
the  fatisfadlion  and  fufferings  of  his  own  Son.  2dly, 
It  was  in  effedt  freely  too,  notwithftanding  the 
mighty  price  which  was  paid  for  our  redemption. 

Becaufe 


fathfaBion  of  Ch r  i s t,  ^yi 

Becaufe  this  price  was  not  of  our  own  procuring,  S  E  R  M. 
but  of  GoD*s  providing  -,  he  "  found  out  this  ran-  .  J^ 

"  fom  for  us."  And  will  any  man  fay,  that  a 
prince  who  prevails  with  his  fon  to  intercede  for  the 
pardon  of  a  rebel,  yea  and  to  fufFer  fome  punifh- 
ment  or  to  pay  a  fine  for  the  obtaining  of  it,  does 
not  in  effed  and  in  all  equitable  and  grateful  con- 
flruftion  forgive  him  freely  ? 

Thirdly,  it  is  yet  further  objedled,  that  this  feems  Obj.  3d. 
to  be  more  unreafonable  than  the  facrificing  of  beads 
among  the  Jews,  hay,  than  the  facrificing  of  men 
among  the  heathen,  and  even  of  their  own  fons  and 
daughters :  becaufe  this  is  the  oiEfering  up  of  the 
"  Son  of  God,'*  the  moft  innocent  and  the  moft 
excellent  perfon  that  ever  was. 

To  which  I  anfwer,  that  if  we  confider  the  man- 
ner, and  the  defign  of  it,  the  thing  will  appear  to 
be  quite  otherwife. 

As  to  the  manner  of  it,  God  did  not  command 
his  Son  to  be  facrificed,  but  his  providence  permit- 
ted the  wickednefs  and  violence  of  men  to  put  him 
to  death :  and  then  his  goodnefs  and  wifdom  did 
over-rule  this  worft  of  actions  to  the  beft  of  ends. 
And  if  we  confider  the  matter  aright,  how  is  this 
any  more  a  refledlion  upon  the  holy  providence  of 
God,  than  any  enormities  and  cruelties  which  by  his 
permifTion  are  daily  committed  in  the  world  ? 

And  then  if  we  confider  the  end  and  defign  of 
this  permifllon  of  Christ's  death,  and  the  appli- 
cation of  it  to  the  purpofe  of  a  general  expiation  ; 
we  cannot  but  acknowledge,  and  even  adore  the 
gracious  and  merciful  defign  of  it.  For  by  this  means 
Gop  did  at  once  put  an  end  to  that  unreafonable 

and 


^^2  Concerning  the  facrijice  and 

SE  R  M.  and  bloody  way  of  worfliip,  which  had  been  fo  long 
^jji^^j  pradlifed  in  the  world  :  and  after  this  one  facrifice, 
which  was  fo  infinitely  dear  to  God,  the  benefit  of 
expiation  was  not  to  be  expected  in  any  other  way  \ 
all  other  facrifices  being  worthlefs  and  vain  in  com- 
parifon  of  this  :  and  it  hath  ever  fipce  obtained  this 
effed,  of  making  all  other  facrifices  to  ceafe,  in  all 
parts  of  the  world  where  Chriftianity  hath  prevailed. 
Obj.4tli.  Fourthly,  the  laft  objection  is,  the  injuftice  and 
cruelty  of  an  innocent  perfon's  fuffering  inftead  of 
the  offender. 

To  this  I  anfwer,  that  they  who  make  fo  great  a 
noife  with  this  objedlion  do  feem  to  me  to  give  a  full 
and  clear  anfwer  to  it  themfelves,  by  acknowledg- 
ing, as  they  conftantly  and  exprelly  do,  that  our 
Saviour  fuffered  all  this  for  our  benefit  and  advan- 
tage, though  not  in  our  place  and  ftead.  For  this,  to 
my  apprehenfion,  is  plainly  to  give  up  the  caufe> 
unlefs  they  can  fliew  a  good  reafon  why  there  is  not 
as  much  injuftice  and  cruelty  in  an  innocent  perfon's 
fuflfering  for  the  benefit  and  advantage  of  a  male- 
fador,  as  in  his  fuffering  in  his  ftead  :  fo  little  do 
men,  in  the  heat  of  difpute  and  oppofition,  who 
are  refolved  to  hold  faft  an  opinion  in  defpite  of 
reafon  and  good  fenfe,  confider,  that  they  do  many 
times  in  eff'ed:,  and  by  necelTary  confequence,  grant 
the  very  thing  which  in  exprefs  terms  they  do  fo 
iliffiy  and  pertinacioufly  deny. 

The  truth  of  the  matter  is  this  ;  there  is  nothing 
of  injuftice  or  cruelty  in  either  cafe ;  neither  in  an 
innocent  perfon's  fuffering  for  the  benefit  of  an  of- 
fender, nor  in  his  ftead  j  fuppofing  the  fuffering  to 
be  voluntary  :  but  they  have  equally  the  fame  ap- 
pearance 


fatisfaciion  o/'ChrisT,  ^j;j 

pearance  of  injuilice  and  cruelty  :  nor  can  I  pofTibly  S  E  R  M, 
difcern  any  reafon  why  injuftice  and  cruelty  lliould  be 
objefted  in  the  one  cafe  more  than  in  the  other  ;  there 
being  every  whit  as  little  reafon  why  an  innocent 
perfon  Hiould  fuller  for  the  benefit  of  a  crimina:!,  as 
why  he  fliould  fuffer  in  his  (lead.  So  that  I  hope  this 
objed:ion,which  above  all  the  reft  hath  been  fo  loudly 
and  fo  invidioully  urged,  hath  received  a  juft  anfwer. 
And  I  believe,  if  the  matter  v/ere  fearched  to  the 
bottom,  all  this  perverfe  contention,  about  our  Sa- 
viour's fuffering  for  our  benefit  but  not  in  ouf 
Head,  will  fignify  juft  nothing.  For  if  Christ 
died  for  our  benefit  fo  as  fome  way  or  other,  by 
virtue  of  his  death  and  fufferings,  to  faveus  from  the 
v/rath  of  God  and  to  procure  our  efcape  from  eternal 
death,  this,  for  ought  I  know,  is  all  that  any  body 
means  by  his  dying  in  our  ftead.  For  he  that  dies 
with  an  intention  to  do  that  benefit  to  another  as  to 
fave  him  from  death,  doth  certainly  to  all  intents 
and  purpofes  die  in  his  place  and  ftead. 

And  if  they  will  grant  this  to  be  their  meanings 
the  controverfy  is  at  an  end  ;  and  both  fides  art2 
agreed  in  the  thing,  and  do  only  differ  in  the  phrafd 
and  manner  of  exprefTion  :  which  is  to  feek  a  quar-- 
rel  and  an  occafion  of  difference  where  there  is  no 
real  ground  for  it  \  a  thing  which  ought  to  be  very 
far  from  reafonable  and  peaceable  minds. 

For  the  Socinians  fay,  that  our  Saviour^s  Vo- 
luntary obedience  and  fufferings  did  procure  his  exaK 
tation  at  the  right-hand  of  God,  and  power  and  au- 
thority to  forgive  fins,  and  to  give  eternal  life  to  as 
many  as  he  pleafed  :  fo  that  they  grant  chat  his  obe-- 
dience  and  fufferings,  in  the  meritorious  confequence 
Vol.  III.  5 1  ^i 

7 


Concerning  the  facrifice  and 

of  them,  do  redound  to  our  benefit  and  advantage 
as  much  as  we  pretend  and  fay  they  do  -,  only  they 
are  loth  in  exprefs  terms  to  acknowledge  that 
Christ  died  in  our  Head  :  and  this,  for  no  other 
reafon  that  I  can  imagine,  but  becaufe  they  have 
denied  it  fo  often  and  fo  long. 

But  I  appeal  to  the  ingenuity  of  our  adverfaries, 
whether  this  do  not  in  the  laft  ilTue  come  all  to  one  ^ 
and  be  not,  on  their  part,  a  mere  controverfy  about 
words  :    for  fuppofe  a  malefadtor  condemned   to- 
fome  grievous  punifliment,  and  the  king's  fon  ta 
fave  him  from  it  is  contented  to  fubmit  to  great  dif- 
grace  and  fufFerings :  in  reward  of  which  fufferings 
the  king  takes  his  fon  into  his  throne  and  fets  him 
at  his  own  right-hand,  and  gives  him  power  to  par- 
don this  malefactor,  and  upon  a  fitting  fubmifiion 
and  repentance  to  advance  him  to  honour  :  will  not 
any  man  in  this  cafe  allow  that  the  king's  fon  fuffered 
inftead  of  this  malefadlor,  and  fmile  at  any  man 
that  Ihall  be  fo  nice  as  to  grant,  that  indeed  he  fuf- 
fered for  him,  but  yet  to  deny,  that  he  was  puniflied 
for  him ;  to  allow  that  he  bore  the  inconyenience  of 
his  faults,  but  yet  obftinately  to  ftand  it  out,  that 
the  faults  of  this  malefadlor  were  not  laid  upon  him, 
or  in  any  wife  fo  imputed  to  him  that  he  can  be 
faid  to  have  fuffered  in  his  flead  ?  This  is  juft  the 
cafe,  and  the  difference  in  reality  and  in  the  laft  re- 
fult  of  things  is  nothing  but  words. 

Thus  far  have  I  tried  your  patience  in  a  conten- 
tious argument ;  in  which  I  take  no  pleafure,  but 
yet  fliall  be  glad  if  I  may  be  fo  happy  as  by  any 
thing  that  hath  been  faid  to  contribute  towards  the 
putting  an  end  to  fo  unhappy  ^  controverfyj  which 
2  hath 


fatufaBion  of  Ckrist.  9^^ 

hath  troubled  the  world  fo  long,  and  ralfed  fuch  a  S  E  R  M. 
dud  that  very  few  have  been  able  to  fee  clearly  ^^^^^• 
through  it. 

However  I  cannot  difmifs  this  argument  without 
making  fome  ufeful  but  very  fhort  reiledlions  upon 
this  great  doftrine  of  our  religion,  namely,  that  the 
Son  of  God  being  made  a  facrifice  for  us,  and  ex- 
pofed  to  fuch  bitter  fufFerings  and  fo  cruel  a  death 
for  the  expiation  of  our  fms,  fhould  create  in  us  the 
grcateft  dread  and  deteflation  of  fin,  and  for  ever 
deter  us  from  all  wilful  tranfgrelTion  and  difobedi- 
ence.  For  if  the  guilt  of  our  fins  was  done  away 
upon  fuch  hard  terms,  and  coft  the  dearly  beloved 
Son  of  God  fo  much  fweat  and  blood,  then  furely 
we  ought  to  take  great  heed  how  by  our  renewed 
provocations  we  renew  his  paflion,  and  do  what  in 
us  lies  to  "  crucify  to  our  felves  the  Son  of  God 
**  afrelh,  and  to  put  him  to  an  open  fhame.'* 

If  God  did  fo  terribly  afflidl  the  dearly  beloved  of 
his  foul  for  our  fakes ;  if  the  Son  of  God  was  fo 
grievoufly  '*  wounded  for  our  trangreflions"  and  fo 
forely  "  bruifed  for  our  iniquities :"  if  fo  fearful  a 
ftorm  of  vengeance  fell  upon  the  moft  innocent  perr 
fon  that  ever  was  for  our  fins,  then  we  have  reafon 
to  take  that  kind  and  merciful  admonition  of  the 
Son  of  God  to  finners,  to  "  fin  no  more,  left  a 
"  worfe  thing,"  if  it  be  poffible,  "  come  upon"  our 
felves. 

In  this  difpenfation  of  God's  grace  and  mercy  to 
mankind,  by  the  death  of  his  Son,  God  feems  to 
have  gone  to  the  very  extremity  of  things,  and  al- 
moft  further  than  goodnefs  and  juftice  will  well  ad- 
mit ',  to  afflidt  innocency  it  felf  to  fave  the  guilty  : 

5  I  2  and 


.  35^  Concerning  the  facrifice  and 

^XLvfi  ^"*^  ^^  herein  God  hath  exprefled  his  hatred  of  fin  in 
^g^^Iy— ^  fuch  a  wonderful  way  of  love  and  kindnefs  to  the 
fons  of  men  as  looks  almoil:  like  hatred  of  innocency 
and  his  own  Son  :  this  ought  in  all  ingenuity  and 
gratitude  to  our  gracious  Redeemer,  who  "  was 
*'  made  a  curfe  for  us,  and  "  loved  us"  to  that 
degree  as  to  "  wafh  us  from  our  fins  in  his  own 
^'  blood  •,"  Ifiy,  this  ought  to  beget  in  us  a  greater 
difpleafure  againft  fm,  and  a  more  perfect  deteftation 
of  it,  than  if  we  had  fuffered  the  punifliment  due 
to  it,  in  our  own  perfons  :  for  in  this  cafe,  we  could 
only  have  been  difpleafed  at  our  felves,  and  our  fins 
as  the  jufl  caufe  of  our  fufferings  -,  but  in  the  other, 
we  ought  to  hate  fm  as  the  unhappy  occafion  of  the 
faddeft  misfortune  and  foreft  calamities  to  the  beft 
rnan  that  ever  was,  and  to  our  beft  friend,  for  our 
fins  and  four  our  fakes. 

Since  then  the  Son  of  God  hath  fo  gracioufly  con- 
defcended  to  be  "  made  in  all  things"  like  unto 
ns,  "  fin  only  excepted  •"  let  us  afpire  as  much  as 
is  pofiible,  to  become  like  to  him  :  above  all,  let 
us  hate  and  avoid  fin  as  the  only  thing  in  which  the 
Son  of  God  would  have  no  part  with  us,  though 
he  was  contented  to  fuffer  fuch  bitter  things  to  fave 
us  from  the  defilement  and  dominion  of  it,  from 
the  punifhmentand  all  the  difmal  confequences  of  it. 
He  had  no  fin,"  "  but  God  was  pleafed  to  "  lay 
«^'  upon  him  the  iniquities  of  us  all,"  and  "  to 
^'-  make  his  foul  an  offering  for  fm,"  and  to  permit 
all  that  to  be  done  to  him  which  was  due  to  us  :  he 
was  contented  to  be  facrificed  once  for  all  mankind, 
f;hat  men  might  for  ever  ceafe  from  that  inhuman 

and  ineffedual  way  of  ftcrificing  one  another,  where- 
by 


fat isfaBion  of  Christ.  ^pj 

by  inftead  of  expiating  their  guilt  they  did  inflame  SERai. 
it,  and  by  thinking  to  make  atonement  for  their  XLVII. 
fins  they  did  in  truth  add  to  the  number  and  hei- 
noufnefs  of  them. 

And  let  us  likewife  learn  from  this  admirable  pat- 
tern, to  pity  thole  that  are  in  mifery,  as  Christ 
alfo  hath  pitied  us  ;  and  to  "  fave  them  that  are 
"  ready  to  perifli,"  for  his  fake  who  "  came  to  feek 
"  and  to  fave  us  that  were  loll.'* 

Let  us,  upon  all  occasions,  be  ready  to  open  our 
bowels  of  compaffion  towards  the  poor  •,  in  a  thank- 
ful imitation  of  his  grace  and  goodnefs  who  for  our 
fakes  chofe  to  be  a  beggar,  that  we  for  his  fake 
might  not  defpife  the  poor,  but  might  have  a  tender 
regard  and  compaffion  to  thofe  whofe  condition  in 
this  world  does  fo  nearly  refemble  that  in  which  the 
Son  of  God  thought  it  fitteft  for  him  to  appear  when 
he  was  pleafed  to  become  man. 

In  a  word,  let  us  in  the  whole  courfe,  and  in  all 
the  aflions  of  our  lives,  "  fhew  forth  the  virtues  of 
"  him  who  hath  called  us  out  of  darknefs  into  his 
"  marvellous  light  j"  and  "  iiath  raifed  up  a  migh- 
"  ty  falvation  for  us,"  that  "  being  delivered  from 
"  all  our  fpiritual  enemies,"  from  fin  and  all  the 
the  powers  of  darknefs,  we  might  "  ferve  him"  who 
hath  "  faved  us  •,  walking  in  hoUnefs  and  righteouf- 
"  nefs  before  him,  all  the  days  of  our  lives." 

Now,  "  to  him  that  fitteth  upon  the  throne,  and 
*'  to  the  Lamb  that  was  (lain  :  to  God  even  ourFa- 
"  ther,  and  to  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  firft 
"  begotten  from  the  dead,  and  the  prince  of  the 
**  kings  of  the  earth  :  unto  him,  who  hath  loved  us, 
'*  and  waihed  us  from  our  fins  in  his  own  blood  ;" 

and 


J  |S  Concernmg  the  unity  of 

and  whiJfl  vye  were  enemies  to  him,  loved  us  at 
fuch  a  rate  as  n'cver  any  man  did  his  friend.  To 
him,  who  became  man,  that  he  might  bring  us  to 
God  ;  and  aflumed  our  frail  and  mortai  nature,  that 
he  might  clothe  us  with  immortahty  and  hfe:  to 
him,  who  was  pleafed  to  dwell  and  live  amongft 
us,  that  he  might  teach  us  how  to  live  :  to  him, 
"  who  died  for  our  fins,  and  rofe  again  lor  our  jufti- 
"  fication,  and  lives  for  ever  to  make  interceffion 
*'  for  us  :"  to  him  be  glory  and  dominion,  thankf- 
giving  and  praife  to  eternal  ages.     Amen. 


SERMON  XLVIII. 

Concerning  the  Unity    of  the   Divine 
Nature,  and  the  Bleffed  Trinity,  ^c. 


I  T  I  M.  ii.  5. 

For  there  is  one  God. 

S  E  R  M  T^  ^  ^  particle  for  leads  us  to  the  confideration 
XLVIII.  X.  of  the  context  and  occafion  of  thefe  words, 
which  in  fhort  is  this.  The  defign  of  this  epiftle  is 
to  direct  Timothy,  to  whom  St.  Paul  had  commit- 
ted the  government  of  the  church  of  Ephefus,  how 
he  ought  to  demean  himfelf  in  that  great  and 
weighty  charge.  And  at  the  beginning  of  this 
chapter  he  gives  dire(5tion  concerning  publick  pray- 
ers in  the  church  •,  that  "  prayers  and  thankfgiving 
"  be  made  for  all  men,'*  and  for  all  .ranks  and  or- 
ders 


the  divine  nature y  &c.  359 

ders  of  men  :  efpecially  for  "  kings  and  all  that  are  S  E  R  M. 

XLviir 
"  in  authority,  that  under   them  Chriflians  might 

"  lead  a  quiet  and  peaceable  life  in  all  godlinefs  and 

*'  honefty." 

And  this  he  tells  us  was  very  fuitable  to  the  Chrif- 
tian  religion,  by  which  God  defigned  the  falvation 
of  mankind  -,  and  therefore  it  mud  needs  be  very 
acceptable  to  him  that  we  fhould  offer  up  prayers 
and  thankfgivings  to  him  in  behalf  of  all  men  : 
"  For  this,"  faith  the  apoflle,  "  is  good  and  ac- 
*'  ceptable  in  the  fight  of  God  our  Saviour,  who 
*'  will  have  all  men  to  be  faved,  and  to  come  to  the 
"  knowledge  of  the  truth.'* 

And  then  it  follows  in  the  next  words,  "  For 
*'  there  is  one  God,  and  one  Mediator  between  God 
'*  and  men,  the  man  Christ  Jesus,  who  gave 
"  himfelf  a  rajifom  for  all  :*'  as  if  he  had  faid,  this 
univerfal  charity  of  ChrifliarLs,  in  "  praying  for  all 
*'  men,"  mufi  needs  be  very  acceptable  to  him  to 
whom  we  put  up  our  prayers,  God  the  Father,  who 
fent  his  Son  for  the  falvation  of  all  men  :  and  to  him 
likewife  by  whom  we  offer  up  our  prayers  to  God, 
and  is  amongd  us  Chriillans  the  only  "  Mediator  be- 
"  tween  God  and  men,"  in  virtue  of  that  price  and 
ranfom  which  he  paid  for  the  redemption  of  all 
mankind  i  I  fay,  for  this  reafon  it  muft  needs  be  ve- 
ry acceptable  to  him  that  we  fhould  pray  for  all  men, 
becaufe  he  died  for  all  men,  and  now  that  he  is  in 
heaven  at  the  right  hand  of  God  intercedes  with 
him  for  the  falvation  of  thofe  for  whom  he  died  : 
*'  there  is  one  God,  and  one  Mediator  between 
"  God  and  men,  the  man  Christ  Jesus,  whogave 
"  himfelf  a  ranfom  for  all." 

Which 


^5o  Concerning  the  unity  of 

SERM.  Which  words,  though  they  be  brought  in  ta 
XLVIII.  prove  more  immediately  that  it  is  "  acceptable  to 
"  God  our  Saviour,"  that  we  fhould  put  up  pray- 
ers to  him  for  all  men,  becaufe  he  defires  the  falva-  • 
tion  of  all  men,  and  hath  fent  his  Son  to  purchafe 
the  falvation  of  all  men,  by  the  facrifice  of  him- 
felf  i  and  in  virtue  of  that  facrifice  to  be  the  only 
Mediator  between  God  and  us  :  I  fay,  though  this 
be  the  immediate  fcope  and  defign  of  thefe  words^ 
yet  they  are  likewife  a  diredlion  to  us,  unto  whom 
we  ought  to  addrefs  our  prayers,  namely,  to  God  ; 
and  by  whofe  mediation  and  intcrceffion  we  ought  to 
put  up  our  prayers  to  God  the  Father,  namely,  by 
his  Son  Jesus  Chr  i  st,  who  is  conllituted  the  only 
"  Mediator  between  God  and  men." 

There  are  feveral  other  propofitions  contained  in 
this  and  the  following  vcrfe  ;  but  I  fhall  at  prefent 
confine  myfelf  to  the  fird,  namely,  that  there  is  one 
God,  that   is,  but  one,  as  St.  Paul   elfewhere  ex- 
I  Cor.viii.  prefTeth  it,    "  There  is  none  other  God  but  one." 
4-  And  Mofes  lays  this  as  the  foundation  of  the  natu- 

Deut.  iv.    rai  law,  as  well  as   of  the  Jewilli  religion,  "  The 
^^'  "  Lord  he  is  one  God,  and  there  is  none  befides 

"  him,"  that  is,  befides  Jehovah,  whom  the  peo- 
ple of  Ifrael  did  worlliip  as  the  only  true  God. 
And  this  the  prophet  Ifaiah  perpetually  declares  in 
oppofition  to  the  polytheifm  and  variety  of  gods  a- 
Ifai.  xliv.  mong  the  heathen.  "  I  am  the  fir  ft,  and  I  am  the 
^-  "  laft,  and  befides  me   there  is  no  god."     And  a- 

Ver.  8.  gain,  *'  Is  there  any  god  befides  me  .?  There  is  no 
"  god,  I  know  not  any  :"  he,  who  hath  an  infinite 
knowledge  and  knows  all  things,  kn»  avs  no  other 
god.     And   our  bleifed  Saviour  makes  this  the 

fundamental 


the  divine  nature,  &c.  361 

fu'hdamental  article  of  all  re]iLt;ion,  and   the  know-  5  E  R  M. 

XIVI'I 
ledge    of   it  neceflary   to    every   man's    falvation  •, 

"  this,"  fays  he,    "  is   life  eternal,  to  know  thee 

"  the  only  true  God.  ' 

The  unity  of  the  divine  nature  is  a  notion,  where- 
in the  greateft  and  the  wifeft  part  of  mankind  did  al- 
ways agree,  and  therefore  may  reafonably  be  pre- 
fumed  to  be  either  natural,  or  to  iiave  fprung  from 
fome  original  tradition  delivered  down  to  us  from 
the  firfl  parents  of  mankind  :  I  mean,  that  there  is 
one  fupreme  being,  the  author  and  caufe  of  all 
things,  whom  the  moft  ancient  of  the  heathen 
poets  commonly  called  the  father  of  gods  and  men. 
And  thus  Ariftotle  in  his  metaphyficks  defines  God, 
the  eternal  and  moft  excellent,  or  beft  of  all  living 
beings.  And  this  notion  of  one  fupreme  being, 
agrees  very  well  with  that  exa6t  harmony  which  ap* 
pears  in  the  frame  and  government  of  the  world, 
in  which  we  fee  all  things  confpiring  to  one  end, 
and  continuing  in  one  uniform  order  and  courfe  ; 
which  cannot  reafonably  beafcribed  to  any  other  buc 
a  conftant  and  uniform  caufe  ;  and  which  to  a  con- 
fidering  man  does  plainly  fhew  that  all  things  are 
made  and  governed  by  that  one  powerful  principle, 
and  great  and  wife  mind  which  we  call  God. 

But  although  the  generality  of  mankind  had  a  no- 
tion of  one  fuprem.e  God,  yet  the  idolatry  of  the 
heathen  plainly  fhews,  that  this  notion  in  prccefs  of 
time  was  greatly  degenerated,  and  corrupted  into 
an  apprehenfion  of  a  plurality  of  gods ;  though  in 
reafon  it  is  evident  enough,  that  there  can  be  no 
more  gods  than  one ;  and  that  one,  who  is  of  inii- 
nite  perfeflion,  is  as  fufficient  to  all  purpofes  what- 

Vol.  III.  5  K  foevcr, 

7- 


XLVIII. 


362  Concerning  the  tinity  of 

S  E  R^M.  foever,  as  ten  thoufand  deities,  if  they  were  poffi- 
ble,  could  pofiibly  be  ;  as  Ifhallfhew  in  the  follow- 
ing difcoLirfe. 

Now  this  multitude  of  deities,  which  the  fond 
fuperftition  and  vain  imagination  of  men  had  form- 
ed to  themfelves,  were  by  the  wifer  fort,  who  being 
forced  to  xomply  with  the  follies  of  the  people  en- 
deavoured to  make  the  beft  of  them,  fuppofed  to 
be  either  parts  of  the  univerfe,  which  the  Egyptians, 
as  Plutarch  tells  us,  thought  to  be  the  fame  with 
God  •,  but  then  the  more  confiderable  parts  of  the 
univerfe  they  parcelled  out  into  feveral  deities :  and 
as  the  ocean  hath  feveral  names,  according  to  the 
feveral  coafts  and  countries  by  which  it  paffeth  ;  fo 
they  gave  feveral  names  to  this  one  deity,  according 
to  the  feveral  parts  of  the  world  which  feveral  na- 
tions made  the  objedls  of  their  worfhip. 

Or  t\k^  they  adored  the  feveral  perfedions  and 
powers  of  the  one  fupreme  God,  under  feveral  names 
and  titles,  with  regard  to  the  various  bleflings  and 
benefits  which  they  thought  they  received  from  him. 

Thus  the  Indian  philofophers,  the  brachmans, 
are  faid  to  have  worfhipped  the  fun  as  the  fupreme 
deity  ;  and  he  certainly  is  the  moft  worfhipful  of 
all  fenfible  beings,  and  bids  faireft  for  a  deity  -,  efpe- 
cially  if  he  was,  as  they  fuppofed,  animated  by  a 
fpirit  endued  with  knowledge  and  underftanding. 
And  if  a  man,  who  had  been  bred  in  a  dark  cave, 
fhould  all  on  the  fudden  be  brought  out  at  noon- 
day to  behold  this  vifible  world  ;  after  he  had  view- 
ed and  confidered  it  a  while,  he  would  in  all  proba- 
bility pitch  upon  the  fun  as  the  molt  likely,  of  all 
the  things  he  had  feen,  to  be  a.  deity.  For  if  fuch  a 
3  man 


the  divine  nature ^  Sec,  363 

man  had  any  notion  of  a  god,  and  were  to  chufe  SERM. 
one  upon  fight,  he  would  without  difpute  fix  upon 
the  fun,  and  fall  down  before  him  and  worfhip  him. 

And  Macrobius  manageth  this  as  his  main  plea 
for  the  idolatry  of  the  heathen,  that  under  all  the 
feveral  names  of  their  gods  they  worfliipped  the 
fun :  and  this  diverfity  of  names  was  but  a  more 
diftin6b  conception  and  acknowledgment  of  the  ma- 
ny bleflings  and  advantages  which  mankind  received 
from  him,  and  a  more  particular  and  exprefs  adora- 
tion of  the  feveral  powers  and  perfedtions  which 
were  in  him.  And  this  was  the  very  beft  defence, 
and  all  the  tolerable  fenfe  which  the  wifeft  among 
the  heathen  could  make  of  the  multitude  of  their 
deities. 

And  yet  whilft  they  generally  owned  one  fupreme 
being  that  was  the  principle  and  original  of  all 
things,  they  worfliipped  feveral  fubordinate  deities 
as  really  difliind  from  one  another.  Some  of  thefe 
they  fancied  to  be  fuperior  to  the  refl:,  and  to  have 
their  refidence  in  heaven  i  by  which  Marfilius  Fici- 
nus  fuppofes  Plato  to  mean  no  more  but  the  chief 
of  the  angels.  Thefe  were  called  9-soi,  diifuperi  and 
dii  ccelefies^  fuperior  and  heavenly  gods :  the  fcripture 
terms  them  the  hoft  of  heaven,  meaning  the  fun, 
moon  and  ftars,  which  they  fuppofed  to  be  ani- 
mated, or  at  leaft  to  be  inhabited  by  angels  or  glo- 
rious fpirits,  whom  they  called  gods. 

Other  of  their  deities  were  accounted  much  infe- 
rior to  thefe,  being  fuppofed  to  be  the  fouls  of  their 
deceafed  heroes  •,  who  for  their  great  and  worthy 
deeds,  when  they  lived  upon  earth,  were  fuppofed 
after  death  to  be  tranflated  into  the  number  of  their 
5  K  2  gods. 


364  Concerning  the  unity  of 

S  E  R  M.   eods.      And  thefe   were  called  femidei  and  deaftri, 

XLVIII  -'  -' 

^^^^^.^.^  that  is,  half  gods  and  a  fort  of  gods :  and  as  the 
other  were  celeftial,  fo  thefe  were  Saiy-ovig  e7r/%6o\io<, 
a  kind  of  terreftrial  fpirits.,  that  were  prefidents  and 
procurators  of  human  affairs  here  below,  that  is,  a 
middle  fort  of  divine  powers  that  were  mediators 
and  agents  between  God  and  men,  and  did  carry  the 
prayers  and  fupplications  of  men  to  God,  and  bring 
down  the  commands  and  bleffings  of  God  to  men. 

But  in  the  midfl  of  all  this  crowd  and  confufion 
of  deities,  and  the  various  fuperftitions  about  them, 
the  wifer  heathen,  as  Thales,  Pythagoras,  Socrates, 
Plato,  Ariftotle,  Tully,  Plutarch  and  others,  pre- 
ferved  a  true  notion  of  one  fupreme  God,  whom 
they  defined  an  infinite  fpirit,  pure  from  all  matter 
and  free  from  all  imperfedlion  :  and  all  the  variety 
of  their  worfhip  was,  as  they  pretended  in  excufe  of 
it,  but  a  more  particular  owning  of  the  various  re- 
prefentations  of  the  divine  power  and  excellencies 
which  manifefted  themfelves  in  the  world,  and  of 
the  feveral  communications  of  blefTings  and  favours 
by  them  imparted  to  men  :  and  *  Tertullian  ob- 
ferves,  that  even  when  idolatry  had  very  much  ob- 
fcured  the  glory  of  the  fovereign  deity,  yet  the 
greater  part  of  mankind  did  Itill  in  their  common 
forms  of  fpeech,  appropriate  the  name  of  God  in  a 
^nore  efpecial  and  peculiar  manner  to  one,  faying, 
*'  if  God  grant,  if  God  pleafe,'*  and  the  like. 

So  that  there  is  fufficient  ground  to  believe  that . 
the  unity  of  the  divine  nature,  or  the  notion  of  one 
fupreme  God,  creator  and  governor  of  the  world, 
was  the  primitive  and  general  belief  of  mankind  : 

*  Adverfus  Marcionem,  I.  i.  c.  lo. 

and 


the  divine  nature,  &c.  36  r 

and  that  poly theifm  and  idolatry  were  a  corruption  S  E  R  M. 
and  degeneracy  from  the  original  notion  which  man- 
kind had  concerning  God  ;  as  the  fcripture  hiftory 
doth  declare  and  teftify. 

And  this  account,  which  I  have  given  of  the 
heathen  idolatry,  doth  by  no  means  excufe  it.  For 
whatever  may  be  faid  by  way  of  extenuation  in  be- 
half of  fome  few  of  the  wifer  and  more  devout  among 
them,  the  generality  were  grofsly  guilty  both  of 
believing  more  gods,  and  of  worfhipping  falfe  gods. 

And  this  muft  needs  be  a  very  great  crime,  fince 
the  fcripture  every  where  declares  God  to  be  parti- 
cularly jealous  in  this  cafe,  and  that  "  he  will  not 
"  give  his  glory  to  another,  nor  his  praife  to  graven 
"  images."  Nay,  we  may  not  fo  much  as  make  ufe  of 
fenfible  images  to  put  us  in  mind  of  God,  left  devout 
ignorance,  feeing  the  worfhip  which  wife  men  paid 
towards  an  idol,  fliould  be  drawn  to  terminate  their 
worfhip  there,  as  being  the  very  deity  it  felf ;  which 
was  certainly  the  cafe  of  the  greateft  part  of  the 
heathen  world. 

And  furely  thofe  Chriftians  are  in  no  lefs  danger 
of  idolatry,  who  pay  a  veneration  to  images  by 
kneeling  down  and  praying  before  them  ;  and  in 
this  they  are  much  more  inexcufable,  becaufe  they 
offend  againft  a  much  clearer  light  ;  and  yet  when 
they  go  about  to  juftify  this  praftice,  are  able  to 
bring  no  other  nor  better  pleas  for  themfelves  than 
the  heathen  did  for  their  worfhipping  of  images, 
and  for  praying  to  their  inferior  deities,  whom 
they  looked  upon  as  mediators  between  the  gods  in 
heaven  and  men  upon  earth. 

TJiere 


XLVIII. 


2  66  Concerning  the  unity  of 

S  E  R  M.  There  Is  but  one  objed:ion,  that  I  know  of,  againft 
the  general  confent  of  mankind  concerning  the 
unity  of  God  •,  and  it  is  this,  that  there  was  an 
ancient  dodrine  of  fome  of  the  mod  ancient  nations, 
that  there  were  two  firll  caufes  or  principles  of  all 
things ;  the  one  the  caufe  of  all  good,  and  the  other 
of  all  the  evil  that  is  in  the  world  :  the  reafon 
"whereof  feems  to  have  been,  that  they  could  not 
apprehend  how  things  of  lb  contrary  a  nature,  as 
good  and  evil,  could  proceed  from  one  and  the 
fame  caufe. 

And  thefe  two  principles  in  feveral  nations  were 
called  by  feveral  names.  Plutarch  fays  that  among 
the  Greeks  the  good  principle  was  called  God,  and 
the  evil  principle  S'alfAm  or  the  devil.  In  confor- 
mity to  which  ancient  tradition  the  Manichees,  a 
fedt  which  called  themfjlves  Christians,  did  advance 
two  principles,  the  one  infinitely  good,  which  they 
fuppofed  to  be  the  original  caule  of  all  the  good 
which  is  in  the  world  ;  the  other  infinitely  evil,  to 
which  they  afcribed  all  the  evils  that  are  in  the 
world. 

But  all  this  is  very  plainly  a  corruption  of  a  much 
more  ancient  tradition  concerning  that  old  ferpent 
the  devil,  the  head  of  the  fallen  angels,  who  by 
tempting  our  firft  parents  to  tranfgrefs  apofuive  and 
exprefs  law  of  God,  brought  fin  firil:  into  the 
world  and  all  the  evils  confcquent  upon  it  ;  of 
which  the  fcripture  gives  us  a  moil  exprefs  and  par- 
ticular account,      v 

And  as  to  the  notion  of  a  being  infinitely  evil, 
into  which  this  tradition  was  corrupted,  after  ido- 
latry had  prevailed  in  the  world,  befides  that  it  is  a 

con- 


the  divine  nature^  &c.  367 

contradiftion,  it  would  likewife  be  to  nopurpofe  to  S  ERM. 

•        XLv  in 
afiert  two  oppofite  principles  of  infinite,  that  is  of 

equal  force  and  power,  for  two  infinites  muft  of  ne- 

ccfiity   be   equal  to  one  another  ;  becaufe  nothing 

can  be  more  or  greater   than  infinite,  and  therefore 

if  two  infinite  beings  were  poffible  they  would  cer- 

tainiy  be  equal,  and  could  not  be  otherwife. 

Now  that  the  notion  of  a  principle  infinitely  evil 
is  a  contradiflion  will  be  very  plain,  if  we  confider 
that  what  is  infinitely  evil  muft  in  ftricSt  reafoning, 
and  by  neceffary  confequence,  be  infinitely  imper- 
fe(5l,  and  therefore  infinitely-  weak ;  and  for  that  rea- 
fon,  though  never  fo  malicious  and  mifchievous,  yet 
being  infinitely  weak  and  foolifli,  could  never  be  in 
capacity  either  to  contrive  mifchief  or  to  execute  it. 

But  if  it  fhould  be  admitted  that  a  being  infinite- 
ly mifchievous  could  be  infinitely  knowing  and  pow- 
erful, yet  it  could  effed:  no  evil  ;  becaufe  the  oppo- 
fite principle  of  infinite  goodnefs,  being  alfo  in- 
finitely wife  and  powerful,  they  would  tie  up  one 
another's  hands.  So  that  upon  this  fuppofition  the 
notion  of  a  deity  mufl  fignify  jufl  nothing,  becaufe 
by  virtue  of  the  eternal  oppodtion  and  equal  con- 
fii(5t  of  thefe  two  principles  they  would  keep  one 
another  at  a  perpetual  bay  ;  and  being  jull  an 
equal  match  ro  one  another,  the  one  having  as  much 
mind  and  power  to  do  good  as  the  other  to  do  evil, 
inflead  of  being  two  deities  they  would  be  but  two 
idols,  able  to  do  neither  good  nor  evil. 

And  having,  Ihope,  now  fufRciently  cleared  this 
objeftion,  I  fhall  proceed  to  fhew  how  agreeable 
this  principle,  that  "  there  is  but  one  God,"  is  to 
the  common  reafon  of  mankind,  and  to  the  clearefl 

and 


368  Concerning  the  unify  of 

S  E  RM.  and  moft  efTential  notions  v/hich  we  have  of  God  : 

XLVIII 

and  this  will  appear  thefe  two  ways. 

Firft,  by  confidering  the  moft  efTential  perfedti' 
ons  of  the  divine  nature. 

Secondly,  from  the  repugnancy  and  impoflibility, 
the  great  abfurdity  and  inconvenience  of  fuppofing 
more  gods  than  one. 

Firft,  by  confidering  the  moft  efiential  perfeflions 
of  the  divine  nature.  Abfolute  perfedion  which 
we  afcribe  to  God,  as  the  moft  efiential  notion 
which  mankind  hath  always  had  concerning  him, 
does  necefiarily  fuppofe  unity  ;  becaufe  this  is  ef- 
fential  to  the  notion  of  a  being  that  is  abfolutely 
perfedl,  that  all  perfection  meets  and  is  united  in 
fuch  a  being  :  but  to  imagine  more  gods,  and  fome 
perfeftions  to  be  in  one  and  fome  in  another,  does 
deftroy  the  moft  efiential  notion  which  men  have  of 
God,  namely,  that  he  is  a  being  abfolutely  perfed:, 
that  is,  as  perfedl  as  is  pofllble  :  now  to  fuppofe 
fome  perfe«5lions  in  one  God  which  are  not  in  ano- 
ther, is  to  fuppofe  fome  pofiible  perfeftion  to  be 
wanting  in  God,  which  is  a  contradidion  to  the 
moft  natural  and  the  moft  eafy  notion  which  all 
men  have  of  God,  that  he  is  a  being  in  whom  all 
perfedlions  do  meet  and  are  united :  but  if  we  fup- 
pofe more  gods,  each  of  which  hath  all  perfedtions 
united  in  him,  then  all  but  one  would  be  fuperflu- 
ous  and  needlefs  ;  and  therefore  by  juft  and  necef- 
fary  confequence  not  only  may,  but  of  necefllty  muft 
be  fuppofed  not  to  be  ;  fince  necefiary  exiftence  is 
efiential  to  the  deity  ;  and  therefore  if  but  one  God 
be  necefliary,  there  can  be  no  more. 

Secondly, 


the  divine  nature.  Sec.  •^60 

Secondly,  from  the  repugnancy  and  impofiibility,  S  e  k  m. 
the  great  abfurdity  and  inconvenience  of  the  con-  ^  ^^j^' 
trary.  For  fuppofe  there  were  more  gods,  two  for 
example  ;  and  if  there  may  be  two,  there  may  be 
a  million,  for  we  can  flop  no  where  :  I  fay,  fup- 
pofe two  gods ;  either  thefe  two  would  be  in  ail 
perfe6lions  equal  and  alike,  or  unequal  and  unlike  : 
if  equal  and  alike  in  all  things,  then,  as  I  faid  before, 
one  of  them  would  be  needJefs  and  fuperfluous,  and 
if  one,  why  not  as  well  the  other  ?  They  being 
fuppofed  to  be  in  all  things  perfe6tly  alike  ;  and 
then  there  would  be  no  neceffity  at  all  of  the  being 
of  a  God  •,  and  yet  it  is  granted  on  all  hands,  that 
neceflary  exiftence  is  effential  to  the  notion  of  a 
God  :  But  if  they  be  unequal,  that  is,  one  of  them 
inferior  to  and  lefs  perfeft  than  the  other,  that 
which  is  inferior  and  lefs  perfedl  could  not  be  God, 
becaufe  he  would  not  have  all  perfeftion.  So  that 
which  way  foever  we  turn  the  thing  and  look  upon 
it,  the  notion  of  more  gods  than  one  is  by  it's  own 
repugnancy  and  felf-contradiflion  deftrudtive  of  it 
felf 

Before  I  come  to  apply  this  doi5lrine  of  the  unity 
of  God,  I  muft  not  pafs  by  a  very  confiderable  dif- 
ficulty, which  will  moft  certainly  arife  in  every 
man's  mind,  without  taking  particular  notice  of  it, 
and  endeavouring  to  remove  it,  if  I  can.  And  it  is 
the  doftrine  of  the  bleffed  Trinity,  or  of  three  real 
differences  or  diftin6t  perfons  in  one  and  the  fame 
divine  nature. 

And  though  this  be  not  a  difficulty  peculiar  only 
to  the  Chriftian  religion,  as  by  the  generality  of 
thofe  who  urge  this  objedion  againfl  Chriftians  hath 

Vol.  III.  5  L  been 

7 


^yo  Concerning  the  unity  of 

S  E  R  M.  been  inconfiderately  thought ;  for  it  is  certain,  that 
x_-  -  J  long  before  Chriftianity  appeared  in  the  world,  there 
was  a  very  ancient  tradition,  both  among  Jews  and 
heathen,  concerning  three  real  differences  or  diftinc- 
tions  in  the  divine  nature,  very  nearly  refembling 
the  Chriftian  doftrine  of  the  Trinity,  as  I  Ihall  have 
occafion  more  fully  to  fliew  by  and  by :  yet  it  cannot 
be  denied,  but  that  this  difficulty  doth  in  a  more 
efpecial  manner  affeft  the  Chriftian  religion  ;  the 
generality  of  Chriftians,  who  do  moft  firmly  be- 
lieve the  Trinity,  believing  likewife  at  the  fame 
time,  more  ftedfaftly  if  it  be  poffible,  that  there 
I  Cor.viii,  is  but  one  God.  "  To  us,"  faith  St.  Paul, 
that  is,  to  us  Chriftians,  "  there  is  but  one  God.'* 
But  how  can  this  poffibly  confift  with  the  common 
dodlrine  of  Chriftians  concerning  the  Trinity,  God 
the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghoft,  to  each  of  whom 
they  attribute,  as  they  verily  believe  the  fcripture 
does,  the  moft  incommunicable  properties  and  per- 
fedions  of  the  divine  nature  ?  And  what  is  this  lefs 
in  effed  than  to  fay,  that  there  are  three  gods  ? 

For  the  clearing  of  this  difficulty  1  fhall,  with  all 
the  brevity  I  can,  offer  thefe  following  confiderations ; 
which  I  hope,  to  an  impartial  and  unprejudiced 
judgment,  will  be  fufficient  to  remove  it,  or  at 
leaft  to  break  the  main  force  and  ftrength  of  it. 

1.  I.  I  defire  it  may  be  well  confidered,  that  there  is  a 

wide  difference  between  the  nice  fpeculations  of  the 
fchools,  beyond  what  is  revealed  in  fcripture,  con- 
cerning the  dodrine  of  the  Trinity,  and  what  the 
fcripture  only  teaches  and  aflerts  concerning  this  my- 
fleiy.  For  it  is  not  to  be  denied,  but  that  the  fchool- 

men. 


the  divine  nature^  &c.  371 

men,  who  abounded  in  wit  and  leifure,  though  very  SERM. 
few  among  them  had  either  exa6t  fl^ill  in  the  holy  v.^....^,^ 
fcriptures,  or  in  ecclefiaftical  antiquity  and  the  wri- 
tings of  the  ancient  fathers  of  the  Chriftian  church : 
I  fay,  it  cannot  be  denied  but  that  thefe  fpeculative 
and  very  acute  men,  who  wrought  a  great  part  of 
their  divinity  out  of  their  own  brains,  as  fpiders  do 
cobwebs  out  of  their  own  bowels,  have  ftarted  a 
thoufand  fubtleties  about  this  myftery,  fuch  as  no 
Chriftian  is  bound  to  trouble  his  head  withal ;  much 
lefs  is  it  neceifary  for  him  tounderftand  thofe  niceties, 
which  we  may  reafonably  prefume  that  they  who 
talk  of  them  did  themfelves  never  thoroughly  un- 
derftand  ;  and  leaft  of  all  is  it  neceifary  to  believe 
them.     The  modefty  of  Chriftians  is  contented  in 
divine  myfteries  to  know  what  God  hath  thought 
fit  to  reveal  concerning  them,  and  hath  no  curiofity 
to  be  "  wife  above  that  which  is  written."     It  is 
enough   to  believe  what  God  fays  concerning  thefe 
matters  ;  and  if  any  man  will  venture  to  fay  more, 
every  other  man  furely  is  at  his  liberty  to  believe  as 
he  fees  reafon. 

II.  I  defire  it  may  in  the  next  place  be  confideredj  \\^ 
that  the  do6trine  of  the  Trinity,  even  as  it  is  affert- 
ed  in  fcripture,  is  acknowledged  by  us  to  be  ftill  a 
great  myftery,  and  fo  imperfedtly  revealed  as  to  be 
in  a  great  meafure  incomprehenfible  by  human  rea- 
fon. And  therefore  though  fome  learned  and  judi- 
cious men  may  nave  very  commendably  attempted 
a  more  particular  explication  of  this  great  myftery 
by  the  flrength  of  reafon,  yet  I  dare  not  pretend  to 
that,  knowing  both  the  difficulty  and  danger  of 

5  L  3  fvich 


XLIV 


372  Concerning  the  unity  of 

S  E  R  M.  fuch  an  attempt,  and  mine  own  infufRciency  for  it. 
All  that  I  ever  defigned  upon  this  argument,  was 
to  make  out  the  credibility  of  the  thing  from  the 
authority  ot  the  holy  fcriptures,  without  defcending 
to  a  more  particular  explication  of  it  than  the  fcrip- 
ture  hath  given  us  ;  left  by  endeavouring  to  lay  the 
difEculties  which  are  already  ftarted  about  it  new 
ones  fhould  be  raifed,  and  fuch  as  may  perhaps  be 
much  harder  to  be  removed  than  thofe  which  we 
have  now  to  grapple  withal.  And  this  I  hope  I 
have  in  fome  meaiure  done  in  one  of  the  former 
Serm.  difcourfcs.  Nor  indeed  do  I  fee  that  it  is  any  ways 
ncceffary  to  do  more  ,  it  being  fufficient  that  God 
hath  declared  what  he  thought  fit  in  this  matter, 
and  that  we  do  firmly  believe  what  he  fays  concern- 
ing it  to  be  true,  though  we  do  not  perfectly  com- 
prehend the  meaning  of  all  that  he  hath  faid  a- 
bout  it. 

For  in  this  and  the  like  cafes,  I  take  an  implicit 
faith  to  be  very  commendable,  that  is,  to  believe 
whatever  we  are  fufficiently  afllired  God  hath  reveal- 
eJ.,  tliough  we  do  not  fully  underftand  his  meaning 
in  fuch  a  revelation.  And  thus  every  man,  who 
believes  the  holy  fcriptures  to  be  a  truly  divine  re- 
velation, does  implicitly  believe  a  great  part  of  the 
prophetical  books  of  fcripture  and  feveral  obfcure 
exprcfiions  in  thofe  books,  though  he  do  not  parti- 
cularly underftand  the  meaning  of  all  the  predidions 
and  expreftions  contained  in  them.  In  like  manner, 
there  are  certainly  a  great  many  very  good  Chriftians, 
who  do  not  believe  and  comprehend  the  myfteries  of 
faith  nicely  enough  to  approve  themfelves  to  a  fcho- 
laftical  and  magifterial  judge  of  controverfies,  who 

yet 


the  divine  nature ^  5cc.  .373 

yet  if  they  do  heartily  embrace  the  doftrines  which  S  E  R  M. 
are  clearly  revealed  in  fcripture,  and  live  up  to  the  v— ^y— ^1 
plain  precepts  of  the  Chriftian  religion,  will  I  doubt 
not  be  very  well  approved  by  the  great  and  juft,  and 
by  the  infallibly  infallible  judge  of  the  world. 

III.  Let  it  be  farther  confidered,  that  though  nei-  HI. 
ther  the  word  trinity,  nor  perhaps  perfon,  in  the 
fenfe  in  which  it  is  ufed  by  divines  when  they  treat 
of  this  myftery,  be  any  where  to  be  met  with  in 
fcripture  i  yet  it  cannot  be  denied  but  that  three  are 
there  fpoken  of  by  the  names  of  Father,  Son,  and 
Holy  Ghoft,  in  whofe  name  every  Chriftian  is  bap- 
tized, and  to  each  of  whom  the  higheft  titles  and 
properties  of  God  are  in  fcripture  attributed:  and 
thefe  three  are  fpoken  of  with  as  much  diftindlion 
from  one  another,  as  we  ufe  to  fpeak  of  three  fe- 
veral  perfons. 

So  that  though  the  word  trinity  be  not  found  in 
fcripture,  yet  thefe  three  are  there  expredy  and  fre- 
quently mentioned  •,  and  a  trinity  is  nothing  but  three 
of  any  thing.  And  fo  likewife  though  the  word  per- 
fon be  not  there  exprefly  applied  to  Father,  Son, 
and  Holy  Ghoft  s  yet  it  will  be  very  hard  to  find  a 
more  convenient  word  whereby  to  exprefs  the  dif- 
tinftion  of  thefe  three.  For  which  reafon  I  could 
never  yet  fee  any  juft  caufe  to  quarrel  at  this  term. 
For  fmce  the  holy  Spirit  of  God  in  fcripture  hath 
thought  fit  in  fpeaking  of  thefe  three  to  diftinguifli 
them  from  one  another,  as  we  ufe  in  common 
fpeech  to  diftinguifli  three  feveral  perfons,  I  cannot 
fee  any  reafon  why,  in  the  explication  of  this  myf- 
tery which  purely  depends  upon  divine  revelation, 
I  wc 


374  Concerning  the  unity  of 

SERM.  we  fhould  not  fpeak  of  it  in  the  fame  manner  as 
^  'j  the  fcripture  doth  :  and  though  the  word  perfon  is 
now  become  a  term  of  art,  I  fee  no  caiife  why  we 
Ihould  decline  it,  fo  long  as  we  mean  by  it  neither 
more  nor  lefs  than  what  the  fcripture  fays  in  other 
words. 

IV.  IV.  It  deferves  farther   to  be  confidered,    that 

there  hath  been  a  very  ancient  tradition  concerning 
three  real  differences  or  diftindlions  in  the  divine  na- 
ture ;  and  thefe,  as  I  faid  before,  very  nearly  re- 
fembling  the  Chriflian  doftrine  of  the  Trinity. 

Whence  this  tradition  had  it's  original  is  not  eafy 
upon  good  and  certain  grounds  to  fay  \  but  certain 
it  is,  that  the  Jews  anciently  had  this  notion  :  and 
that  they  did  diftinguifh  the  Word  of  God,  and  the 
holy  Spirit  of  God,  from  him  who  was  abfolutely 
called  God,  and  whom  they  looked  upon  as  the 
firft  principle  of  all  things  -,  as  is  plain  from  Philo 
^  It  V  J'-^'^^"^'>  ^^^  Mofes  Nachmanidcs,  and  others  cited 
by  the  learned  Grotius  in  his  incomparable  book  of 
the  truth  of  the  Chriflian  religion. 

And  among  the  heathen,  Plato,  who  probably 
enough  might  have  this  notion  from  the  Jews,  did 
make  three  diftindions  in  the  deity  by  the  names  of 
cffential  goodnefs,  and  mind,  and  fpirit. 

So  that  whatever  objeiElions  this  matter  may  be 
liable  to,  it  is  not  fo  peculiar  a  doftrine  of  the 
Chriflian  religion  as  many  have  imagined,  though 
it  is  revealed  by  it  with  much  more  clearnefs  and 
certainty  :  and  confequently,  neither  the  Jews  nor 
Plato  have  any  reafon  to  obje6l  it  to  us  Chriflians ; 
cfpecially  fince  they  pretend  no  other  ground  for  it 

but 


the  divifie  nature^  &c.  yj^ 

but  either  their  own  reafon,  or  an  ancient  tradition  S  E  R  M. 
from  their  fathers  :  whereas  we  Chriftians  do  appeal  ,  ^     ^ 
to  exprefs  divine  revelation  for  what  we  beheve  in 
this  matter,  and  do  beheve  it  fingly  upon  that  ac- 
count. / 

V.  It  is  befides  very  confiderable,  that  the  fcrip-      V. 
tures  do  dehver  this  doftrine  of  the  Trinity,  without 

any  manner  of  doubt  or  queftion  concerning  the 
unity  of  the  divine  nature :  and  not  only  fo,  but 
do  moil  ftedfaftly  and  conftantly  affert,  that  there^is 
but  one  God  :  and  in  thofe  very  texts,  in  which 
thefc  three  differences  are  mentioned,  the  unity  of 
the  divine  nature  is  exprefly  alTerted  ;  as  where  St. 
John  makes  mention  of  the  Father,  the  Word,  and 
the  Spirit,  the  unity  of  thefe  three  is  likewife  affirm- 
ed, "  There  are  three  that  bear  record  in  heaven, 
"  the  Father,  the  Word,  and  the  Spirit ;  and  thefc 
*'  three  are  one." 

VI.  It  is  yet  farther  confiderable,  that  from  this      vi. 
myftery,  as  delivered  in  fcripture,  a  pkirality  of  gods 
cannot  be    inferred  without  making  the  fcripture 
groQy  to  contradidl  itfelf ;  which  I  charitably  fup- 

pofe  the  Socinians  would  be  as  loth  to  admit  as  we 
ourfelves  are.  And  if  either  councils,  or  fathers, 
or  fchoolmen,  have  fo  explained  this  myftery  as  to 
give  any  juft  ground,  or  fo  much  as  a  plaufible  co- 
lour for  fuch  an  inference,  let  the  blame  fall  where 
it  is  due,  and  let  it  not  be  charged  on  the  holy 
fcriptures  •,  but  rather,  as  the  apoftle  fays  in  another 
cafe,  *'  Let  God  be  true,  and  every  man  a  liar." 

yilthly. 


2^6  Concerning  the  unity  of 

SERM.  Vllthly  and  laftly,  I  defire  it  may  be  ccnfidered, 
XLVIII.  ^2X  it  is  not  repugnant  to  reafon,  to  believe  feme 
VJI.  things  which  are  incomprehenfible  by  our  reafon  ; 
provided  that  we  have  fufficient  ground  and  reafon 
for  the  behef  of  them  :  efpecially  if  they  be  con- 
cerning God,  who  is  in  his  nature  incomprehenfible ; 
and  we  be  well  affured  that  he  hath  revealed  them. 
And  therefore  it  ought  not  to  offend  us  that  thefe 
differences  in  the  deity  are  incomprehenfible  by  our 
finite  underftandings ;  becaufe  the  divine  nature  it- 
felf  is  fo,  and  yet  the  belief  of  that  is  the  founda- 
tion of  all  religion.  * 

There  are  a  great  many  things  in  nature  which 
we  cannot  comprehend  how  they  either  are,  or  can 
be:  as  the  continuity  of  matter,  that  is,  how  the 
parts  of  it  do  hang  fo  faft  together  that  they  are 
many  times  very  hard  to  be  parted ;  and  yet  we  are 
fure  that  it  is  fo,  becaufe  we  fee  it  every  day.  So 
likewife,  how  the  fmall  feeds  of  things  contain  the 
whole  form  and  nature  of  the  things  from  which 
they  proceed,  and  into  which  by  degrees  they  grow; 
and  yet  we  plainly  fee  this  every  year. 

There  are  many  things  likewife  in  our  felves, 
which  no  man  is  able  in  any  meafure  to  compre- 
hend, as  to  the  manner  how  they  are  done  and  per- 
formed :  as  the  vital  union  of  foul  and  body  :  who 
can  imagine  by  what  device  or  means  a  fpirit  comes 
to  be  fo  clofely  united  and  fo  firmly  linked  to  a  mate- 
rial body,  that  they  are  not  to  be  parted  without  great 
force  and  violence  offered  to  nature  ?  The  like  may 
be  faid  of  the  operations  of  our  feveral  faculties  of 
fenfe  and  imagination,  of  memory  and  reafon,  and 
efpecially  of  the  liberty  of  our  wills ;  and  yet  we 

certainly 


the  divine  nature^  &c.  37^ 

certainly  find  all  thcfe  faculties  in  ourfelves,  though  S  E  R  M. 

•  •  XLVIII 

we  cannot  either  comprehend  or  explain  the  particu- 
lar manner  in  which  the  feveral  operations  of  them 
are  performed. 

And  if  we  cannot  comprehend  the  manner  of 
thofe  operations,  which  we  plainly  perceive  and 
feel  to  be  in  ourfelves,  much  lefs  can  we  expe6l  to 
comprehend  things  without  us  -,  and  lead  of  all  can 
we  pretend  to  comprehend  the  infinite  nature  and 
perfe6lions  of  God,  and  every  thing  belonging  to 
him.  For  God  himfelf  is  certainly  the  greatefl 
myftery  of  all  other,  and  acknowledged  by  man- 
kind to  be  in  his  nature,  and  in  the  particular  man- 
ner of  his  exiftence,  incomprehenfible  by  human 
underftanding.  And  the  reafon  of  this  is  very  evi- 
dent, becaufe  God  is  infinite,  and  our  knowledge 
and  underftanding  is  but  finite :  and  yet  no  fobei* 
man  ever  thought  this  a  good  reafon  to  call  the  be- 
ing of  God  in  queftion. 

The  fame  may  be  faid  of  God's  certain  know- 
ledge of  future  contingencies,  which  depend  upori 
the  uncertain  wills  of  free  agents :  it  being  utterly 
inconceivable  how  any  underftanding^  how  large 
and  perfeft  foever,  can  certainly  know  beforehand 
that  which  depends  upon  the  free  will  of  another^ 
which  is  an  arbitrary  and  uncertain  caufe. 

And  yet  the  fcripture  doth  not  only  attribute  this 
foreknowledge  to  God,  but  gives  us  alfo  plain  in- 
ftances  of  God's  foretelling  fuch  things,  many 
ages  before  they  happened,  as  could  not  come  to  pals 
but  by  the  fins  of  men,  in  which  we  are  fjre  that 
God  can  have  no  hand  •,  though  nothing  can  hap- 
pen without   his  permifTion  :  fuch   was  that  mofl 

Vol.  hi.  5  M  memora- 

7- 


378  Concernmg  the  unity  of 

ERM.  memorable  event  of  Christ,  who,  as  the  fcripture 
_  'j  tells  us,  was  "  by  wicked  hands  crucified  and  (lain  \* 
and  yet  even  this  is  faid  to  have  happened  "  accord- 
"  ing  to  the  determinate  foreknowledge  of  God,"  and 
was  punctually  foretold  by  him  fome  hundreds  of 
years  before.  Nay,  the  fcripture  doth  not  only  a- 
fcribe  this  power  and  perfedion  to  the  divine  know- 
ledge, but  natural  reafon  hath  been  forced  to  ac- 
knowledge it,  as  we  may  fee  in  fome  of  the  wifeft 
of  the  philofophers.  And  yet  it  would  puzzle  the 
greateft  philofopher  that  ever  was,  to  give  any  to- 
lerable account  how  any  knowledge  whatfoever  can 
certainly  and  infallibly  forefee  an  event  through  un- 
certain and  contingent  caufes.  All  the  reafonable 
fatisfa6lion  that  can  be  had  in  this  matter  is  this,  that 
it  is  not  at  all  unreafonable  to  fuppofe  that  infinite 
knowledge  may  have  ways  of  knowing  things, 
which  our  finite  underftandings  can  by  no  means 
comprehend  how  they  can  pofTibly  be  known. 

Again,  there  is  hardly  any  thing  more  incon- 
ceivable than  how  a  thing  fhould  be  of  itfelf,  and 
without  any  caufe  of  it's  being ;  and  yet  our  reafon 
compels  us  to  acknowledge  this :  becaufe  we  certain- 
ly fee  that  fomething  is,  which  muft  either  have 
been  of  itfelf  and  without  a  caufe,  or  elfe  fomething 
that  we  do  not  fee  muft  have  been  of  itfelf  and  have 
made  all  other  things  :  and  by  this  reafoning  we  are 
forced  to  acknowledge  a  deity,  the  mind  of  man 
being  able  to  find  no  reft  but  in  the  acknowledgment 
of  one  eternal  and  wife  mind,  as  the  principle  and  firft 
caufe  of  all  other  things  j  and  this  principle  is  that 
v/hich  mankind  do  by  general  confent  call  God.  So 
that  God  hath  laid  a  fure  foundation  of  our  acknow- 
ledgment 


the  divine  nature,  &c.  379 

leclo;ment  of  his  beins  in    the   reafon  of  our  own   SERM. 

.  .  xLviir. 

minds  :  and  though  it  be  one  of  the  hardeft  things 

in  the  world  to  conceive  how  any  thing  can  be  of 
itfelf,  yet  necefTity  drives  us  to  acknowledge  it  whe- 
ther we  will  or  no,  and  this  being  once  granted, 
our  reafon,  being  tired  in  trying  all  other  ways, 
will,  for  it's  own  quiet  and  eafe,  force  us  at  laft  to 
fall  in  with  the  general  apprehenfion  and  belief  of 
mankind  concerning  a  deity. 

To  give  but  one  inftance  more  ;  there  is  the  like 
difficulty  in  conceiving  how  any  thing  can  be  made 
out  of  nothing  -,  and  yet  our  reafon  doth  oblige  us 
to  believe  it :  becaufe  matter,  which  is  a  very  im- 
perfefl  being  and  merely  paffive,  muft  either  always 
have  been  of  itfelf;  or  elfe,  by  the  infinite  power 
of  a  moft  perfect  and  aftive  being,  muft  have  been 
made  out  of  nothing  :  which  is  much  more  credi- 
ble, than  that  any  thing  fo  imperfed:  as  matter  is 
lliould  be  of  itfelf:  becaufe  that  which  is  of  itfelf 
cannot  be  conceived  to  have  any  bounds  and  limits 
of  it's  being  and  perfection  -,  for  by  the  fame  rea- 
fon that  it  neceffarily  is  and  of  itfelf,  it  muft  ne- 
ceftarily  have  all  perfe6tion,  which  it  is  certain  mat- 
ter hath  not  •,  and  yet  neceffary  exiftence  is  fo  great 
a  perfe<51:ion,  that  we  cannot  reafonably  fuppofe  any 
thing  that  hath  this  perfection  to  want  any  other. 

Thus  you  fee  by  thefe  inftances,  that  it  is  not  re- 
pugnant to  reafon  to  believe  a  great  many  things  to 
be,  of  the  manner  of  whofe  exiftence  we  are  not  able 
to  give  a  particular  and  diftind  account.  And 
much  lefs  is  it  repugnant  to  reafon  to  believe  thofe 
things  concerning  God,  which  we  are  very  well  aflured 
he  hath  declared  concerning  himfelf,  though  thefe 
5  M  2  things 


380  Concerning  the  unity  of 

SERM.  things  by  our  reafon  fhould  be  incomprehenfible. 
And  this  is  truly  the  cafe  as  to  the  matter  now 
under  debate  :  we  are  fufficicntly  afllired  that  the 
fcriptiires  are  a  divine  revelation,  and  that  this  myf- 
tery  of  the  Trinity  is  therein  declared  to  us.  Now 
that  we  cannot  comprehend  it,  is  no  fufficient  rea- 
fon not  to  believe  it :  for  if  this  were  a  good  reafon 
for  not  believing  it,  then  no  man  ought  to  believe 
that  there  is  a  God,  becaufe  his  nature  is  mod  cer- 
tainly incomprehenfible.  But  we  are  afllired  by 
many  arguments  that  there  is  a  God  ;  and  the  fame 
natural  reafon  which  aflurcs  us  that  he  is,  doth  like- 
wife  aflure  us  that  he  is  incomprehenfible  ;  and 
therefore  our  believing  him  to  be  fo  doth  by  no 
fneans  overthrow  our  belief  of  his  being. 

In  like  manner,  we  are  afllired  by  divine  revela- 
tion of  the  truth  of  this  dodlrine  of  the  Trinity  ; 
and  being  onee  afllired  of  that,  our  not  being  able 
fully  to  comprehend  it,  is  not  reafon  enough  to 
flagger  our  belief  of  it.  A  man  cannot  deny  what 
he  ftes,  though  the  neceflary  confequence  of  ad- 
mitting it  may  be  fomething  which  he  cannot  com- 
prehend. One  cannot  deny  the  frame  of  this  world 
which  he  fees  with  his  eyes,  though  from  thence  it 
will  neceflarily  follow,  that  either  that  or  fomething 
clfe  muft  be  of  itfelf ;  which  yet,  as  I  faid  before, 
is  a  thing  which  no  man  can  comaprehend  how  it 
can  be. 

And  by  the  fame  reafon  a  man  muft  not  deny 
what  God  fays,  to  be  true  ;  though  he  cannot  com- 
prehend many  things  which  God  fays  :  as  particu- 
larly concerning  this  myftery  of  the  Trinity.  It 
ought  then  to  fatisfy  us  that  there  is  fufficient  evi- 
dence 


the  divine  nature.  Sec,  3S  i 

dence  that  this  dodlrine  is  delivered  in  fcripture,  and  ^^^i^' 
that  what  is  there  declared  concerning  it  doth  not 
imply  a  contradidlion.  For  why  fliould  our  finite 
underftandings  pretend  to  comprehend  that  which  is 
infinite,  or  to  know  all  the  real  differences  that  are 
confiftent  with  the  unity  of  an  infinite  being  •,  or  to 
be  able  fully  to  explain  this  myftery  by  any  fimili- 
tude  or  refemblance  taken  from  finite  beings? 

But  before  I  leave  this  argument,  I  cannot  but 
take  notice  of  one  thing  which  they  of  the  church 
of  Rome  are  perpetually  objeding  to  us  upon  this 
occafion.  And  it  is  this,  that  by  the  fame  reafon 
that  we  believe  the  doflrine  of  the  Trinity,  we  may 
and  muft  receive  that  of  tranfubftantiation.  God 
forbid  :  becaufe  of  all  the  doftrines  that  ever  were 
in  any  religion,  this  of  tranfubftantiation  is  certainly 
the  moft  abominably  abfurd. 

However,  this  objeftion  plainly  fhews  how  fond- 
ly and  obftinately  they  are  addicted  to  their  own  er- 
rors, how  milhapen  and  monftrous  foever,  infomuch 
that  rather  than  the  dictates  of  their  church,  how 
abfurd  foever,  fhould  be  called  in  queftion,  they 
will  queftion  the  truth  even  of  Chriftianity  it  (df ; 
and  if  we  will  not  take  in  tranfubftantiation,  and 
admit  it  to  be  a  necefi^ary  article  of  the  Chriftian 
faith,  they  grow  fo  fullen  and  defperate  that  they 
matter  not  what  becomes  of  all  the  reft  :  and  rather 
than  not  have  their  will  of  us  in  that  which  is  con- 
troverted, they  will  give  up  that  which  by  their 
own  confefllon  is  an  undoubted  article  of  the  Chri- 
ftian faith,  and  not  controverted  on  either  fide  j  ex- 
cept only  by  the  Socinians,^  who  yet  are  hearty  ene- 
mies to  tranfubftantiation,  and  have  cxpofed  theab- 
furdity  bf  it  with  great  advantage.  But 


282-  Concernifig  the  unity  of 

S  r.  1  M.  But  I  fhall  endeavour  to  return  a  more  particular 
\_  \  [j  anfwer  to  this  objedlion  -,  and  fuch  a  one  as  I  hope 
will  fatisfy  every  confiderate  and  unprejudiced  mind, 
that  after  all  this  confidence  and  fwaggering  of  theirs 
there  is  by  no  means  equal  reafon  either  for  the  re- 
ceiving or  for  the  rejecting  of  thefe  two  doftrines 
of  the  Trinity  and  tranfubftantiation. 

Firft,  there  is  not  equal  reafon  for  the  belief  of 
thefe  two  doftrines.  This  objedlion,  ,if  it  be  of 
any  force,  muft  fuppofe  that  there  is  equal  evidence 
and  proof  from  fcripture  for  thefe  two  doctrines  : 
but  this  we  utterly  deny,  and  with  great  reafon  ; 
becaufe  it  is  no'  more  evident  from  the  words  of 
fcripture  that  the  facramental  bread  is  fubftantialiy 
changed  into  Christ's  natural  body  by  virtue  of 
thofe  words,  "  this  is  my  body,"  than  it  is  that 
Tohnxv.  Chp-is  t  is  fubftantially  changed  into  a  natural  vine 
«•  by  virtue  of  thofe  words,  "  I  am  the  true  vine  -,"  or 

than  that  the  rock  in  the  wildernefs,  of  which  thelf- 
raelites  drank,  was  fubftantially  changed  into  theper- 
fonof  Chris  T,  becaufe  it  is  exprefly  faid,  "that  rock 
'*  was  Christ  ;"  or  than  that  the  Chriftian  church 
is  fubftantially  changed  into  the  natural  body  of 
Christ,  becaufe  it  is  in  exprefs  terms  faid  of  the 
Eph.  i.23.  church,  that   "  it  is  his  body." 

But  befides  this,  feveral  of  their  own  moft  learned 
writers  have  freely  acknowledged,  that  tranfubftan- 
tiation  can  neither  be  diredly  proved,  nor  neceffari- 
ly  concluded  from  fcripture  :  but  this  the  writers  of 
the  Chriftian  church  did  never  acknowledge  con- 
cerning the  Trinity,  and  the  divinity  of  Chri  s  t  -, 
but  have  always  appealed  to  the  clearand  undeniable 
teftimonies  cffcripture  for  the  proof  of  thefe  dodlrines. 
Q.  And 


the  dhine  nature^  &c.  383 

And  then  the  whole  force  of  the  obieflion  amounts  S  RR  M. 

.  -  XLVIII 

to  this,  that  if  I  am  bound  to  beheve  what  I  am 

fure  God  fays,  though  I  cannot  comprehend  it  ♦, 
then  I  am  bound  by  the  fame  reafon  to  believe  the 
greateft  abfurdity  in  the  world,  though  I  have  no 
manner  of  afTurance  of  any  divine  revelation  concern- 
ing it.  And  if  this  be  their  meaning,  though  we 
underfband  not  tranfubftantiation,  yet  we  very  well 
underftand  what  they  would  have,  but  cannot  grant 
it  ;  becaufe  there  is  not  equal  reafon  to  believe  two 
things,  for  one  of  which  there  is  good  proof,  and 
for  the  other  no  proof  at  all. 

Secondly,  neither  is  there  equal  reafon  for  the  re- 
jecting of  thefe  two  do6trines.  This  the  obje6lion 
fuppofes,  which  yet  cannot  be  fuppofed  but  upon 
one  or  both  of  thefe  two  grounds  :  either  becaufe 
thefe  two  doflrines  are  equally  incomprehenfible,  or 
becaufe  they  are  equally  loaded  with  abfurdities  and 
contradidlions. 

The  firil  is  no  good  ground  of  rejedling  any  doc- 
trine, merely  becaufe  it  is  incomprehenfible  j  as  I 
have  abundantly  (hewed  already.  But  befides  this^ 
there  is  a  wide  difference  betv/een  plain  matters  of 
fenfe,  and  myfteries  concerning  God  ;  and  it  does 
by  no  means  follov/,  that,  if  a  man  do  once  admit 
any  thing  concerning  God  v/hich  he  cannot  com- 
prehend, he  hath  no  reafon  afterwards  to  believe 
what  he  himfelf  fees.  This  is  a  mod  unreafonable 
and  deflruflive  way  of  arguing,  becaufe  it  flrikes 
at  the  foundation  of  all  certainty,  and  fets  every 
man  at  liberty  to  deny  the  moft  plain  and  evident 
truths  of  Chriftianity,  if  he  may  not  be  humoured 
in  having  the  abfurdeft  things  in  the  world  admitted 

for 


XLviir. 


384  Concerning  the  unity  of 

S^E^R^M.  for  true.  The  next  ftep  will  be  to  perfuade  us  that 
we  may  as  well  deny  the  being  of  God,  becaufe 
his  nature  is  incomprehenfible  by  our  reafon,  as  deny 
tranfubftantiation,  becaufe  it  evidently  contradifts 
our  fenfes. 

zdly,  Nor  are  thefe  two  dodlrines  loaded  with  the 
like  abfurdities  and  contradictions :  fo  far  from  this^ 
that  the  doftrine  of  the  Trinity,  as  it  is  delivered  in 
the  fcriptures,  and  hath  already  been  explained,  hath 
no  abfurdity  or  contradicflion  either  involved  in  it, 
or  neceflarily  confequent  upon  it :  but  the  dodlrine  of 
tranfubftantiation  is  big  with  all  imaginable  abfur- 
dity and  contradiction.  And  their  own  fchoolmen 
have  fufficiently  expofed  it ;  efpecially  Scotus,  and 
he  defigned  to  do  fo,  as  any  man  that  attentively 
reads  him  may  plainly  difcover  :  for  in  his  difputa- 
tion  about  it  he  treats  this  doflrine  with  the  greateft 
contempt,  as  a  new  invention  of  the  council  of  La- 
teran  under  pope  Innocent  III.  To  the  decree  of 
which  council  concerning  it  he  feems  to  pay  a  for- 
mal fubmifllon,  but  really  derides  it  as  contrary  to 
the  common  fenfe  and  reafon  of  mankind,  and  not 
at  all  fupported  by  fcripture  ;  as  any  one  may  eafily 
difcern  that  will  carefully  confider  his  manner  of 
handling  it,  and  the  refult  of  his  whole  difputation 
about  it. 

And  now  fuppofe  there  were  fome  appearance  of 
abfurdity  and  contraditflion  in  the  doftrine  of  the 
Trinity  as  it  is  delivered  in  fcripture,  muft  we  there- 
fore believe  a  do6lrine  which  is  not  at  all  revealed  m 
fcripture,  and  which  hath  certainly  in  it  all  the  ab- 
furdities in  the  world,  and  all  the  contradidlions  to 
fcijfe  and  reafon  ;  and  which  once  admitted,  doth 

at 


the  divine  niXtuye^  tsco,]  38 J 

at  once  deftroy  all  certainty  ?  Yes,  fay  they, why  not  ?  S  E  R  M. 
Since  we  of  the  church  of  Rome  are  fatisfied  that 
this  do6lrine  is  revealed  in  fcripture ;  or,  if  it  be 
hot,  is  defined  by  the  church,  which  is  every  whit 
as  good.  But  is  this  equal,  to  demand  of  us  the 
belief  of  a  thing  which  hath  always  been  contro- 
verted, not  only  between  us  and  them,  but  even  a- 
mong  themfelves,  at  leaft  till  the  council  of  Trent? 
And  this  upon  fuch  unreafonable  terms,  that  we 
muft  either  yield  this  point  to  them,  orelfe  renounce 
a  doftrine  agreed  on  both  fides  to  be  revealed  in 
fcripture. 

To  Ihew  the  unreafonablenefs  of  this  proccedingi 
Jet  us  fuppofe  a  prieft  of  the  church  of  Rome  pref 
fing  a  Jew  or  Turk  to  the  belief  of  tranfubftantia- 
tion  -,  and  becaufe  one  kindnefs  deferves  another,  the 
Jew  or  Turk  Ihould  demand  of  him  the  belief  of 
all  the  fables  in  the  talmud,  or  in  the  alcoran  i 
fince  none  of  thefe,  nor  indeed  all  of  them  toge-^ 
ther,  are  near  fo  abiurd  as  tranfubftantiation  :  would 
not  this  be  much  more  reafonabJe  and  equal  than 
what  they  demand  of  us  ?  Since  no  abfurdity,  how 
monftrous  and  big  foever,  can  be  thought  of,  which 
may  not  enter  into  an  underftanding,  in  whicli  a 
breach  hath  been  already  made  wide  enough  to  ad- 
mit traniubllantiation.  The  prietts  of  Baal  did  not 
half  fo  much  defeive  to  be  expofed  by  the  prophet 
for  their  fuperftition  and  folly,  as  the  priefts  of  the 
church  of  Rome  do  for  this  fenllefs  and  ftupid  doc- 
trine of  theirs  with  a  hard  name,  i  lliall  only  add 
this  one  thing  more,  that  if  this  do6lrine  were  poiTi- 
ble  to  be  true,  and  clearly  proved  to  be  fo  ;  yet  ir- 
would  be  evidently  ufekfs  and  to  no  purpole.     For 

Vol.  Ill  5  N  it 


XLVIII. 


Mark  xii. 
29,30,31 


386  Concerning  the  unity  of 

SERjVI.  it  pretends  to  change  the  fubftance  of  one  thing  in- 
to the  fubftance  of  another  thing,  that  is  already 
and  before  this  change  is  pretended  to  be  made. 
But  to  what  purpofe  ?  Not  to  make  the  body  of 
Christ,  for  that  was  already  in  being  i  and  the 
fubftance  of  the  bread  is  loft,  nothing  of  it,  remain- 
eth  but  accidents  which  are  good  for  nothing,  and 
indeed  are  nothing  when  the  fubft:ance  is  deftroyed 
and  gone. 

All  that  now  remains,  is  to  make  fome  prafbical 
inferences  from  this  dodlrine  of  the  unity  of  the  di- 
vine nature.  And  they  fhall  be  the  fame  which 
God  himfelf  makes  by  Mofes,  which  text  is  alfo 
DeaLvi.4.  cited  by  our  Saviour,  '*  fiear,  O  Ifrael,  the  Lord 
"  thy  God  is  one  Lord  ;  and  thou  ilialt  love  the 
"  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thine  heart,  and  with  all 
"  thy  foul,  and  with  all  thy  mind,  and  with  all 
"  thy  ftrength  :  and  thou  flialt  love  thy  neighbour 
"  as  thyfelf "  So  that  according  to  our  Saviour, 
the  whole  duty  of  man,  the  love  of  God  and  of 
our  neighbour,  is  founded  in  the  unity  of  the  di- 
vine nature. 

L  The  love  of  Goo  -,  "  the  Lord  thy  God  is 
"  one  Lord,"  therefore  "  thou  fhalt  love  him  with 
*'  all  thy  heart,  &c.  this  is  the  firft  and  great  com- 
"  mandment :"  and  it  comprehends  in  it  all  the  du- 
ties of  the  firft  table  as  naturally  flowing  from  it. 
As  that  we  ftiould  ferve  him  only,  and  pay  no  reli- 
gious worftiip  to  any  but  to  him.  For  to  pay  reli- 
gious worftiip  to  any  thing,  is  to  make  it  a  God  and 
to  acknowledge  it  for  fuch  :  and  therefore  God  be- 
ing but  one,  we  can  give  religious  worfliip  to  none 
3  '  but 


the  divine  nature,  &c.  387 

but  to  him  only.  And  among  all  the  parts  of  re-  |lviii*. 
ligioLis  worlhip,  none  is  more  peculiarly  appropri-  v. — \r^-> 
ated  to  the  deity  than  folemn  invocation  and  prayer. 
For  he  to  whom  men  addrefs  their  requefts  at  all 
times,  and  in  all  places,  muft  be  fuppofed  to  be  al- 
ways every  where  prefent,  to  underftand  all  our  de- 
fires  and  wants,  and  to  be  able  to  fupply  them  ;  and 
this  God  only  is  and  can  do. 

So  likewife  from  the  unity  of  the  divine  nature 
may  be  inferred,  that  we  Ibould  not  worfhip  God 
by  any  fenfible  image  or  reprefentation :    becaufe 
God  being  a  fingular  being  there  is  nothing  like 
him,  or  that  can  without  injuring  and  debafing  his 
moll  fpiritual  and  perfect  and  immenfe  being  be  com- 
pared to  him  :  as  he  himfelf  fpeaks  in  the  prophet, 
• "  To  whom  will  ye  liken  me,  faith  the  Lord,  and  ^^^^'  ^^^^' 
"  make  me  equal  ?"   And  therefore   with  no  di- 
llinftion  whatfoever  can  it  be  lawful  to  give  religious 
worfliip,  or   any  part  of  it,  to  any  but  God  :  we 
can  pray  to  none  but  to  him,  becaufe  he  only  is 
every  where  prefent,  and  "  only  knows  the  hearts  i  Kings 
«  of  all   the  children  of  men;"  which  Solomon  """'•  ^9* 
gives  as  the  reafon  why  we  Ihould  addrefs  our  fup- 
plications  to  Gop  only,  "  who  dwelleth  in  the  hea- 
«  vens." 

So  that  the  reafon  of  thefe  two  precepts  is  found- 
ed in  the  unity  and  fingularity  of  the  divine  nature, 
and  unlefs  there  be  more  gods  than  one,  we  muft 
worfhip  him  only,  and  pray  to  none  but  him :  be- 
caufe we  can  give  invocation  to  none  but  to  him  on- 
ly whom  we  believe  to  be  God  ;  as  St.  Paul  reafons, 
*'  How  fliall  they  call  on  him  in  whom  they  have  Rom.  x. 
"  not  believed?"  14. 

5  N  2  II.  The 


lO. 


388  Concerning  the  unity  of 

E  R  M,  n.  The  love  likewife  of  our  neighbour  is  found, 
ed  in  the  unity  of  the  divine  nature,  and  may  be  in- 
ferred from  it:  "  Hear,  O  Ifrael,  the  LoR.p  thy 
"  God  is  one  Lord,  therefore  thou  fhalt  love  thy 
"  neighbour  as  thyfelf "  And  the  apoftle  gives  this 
reafon  why  all  mankind  fhould  be  at  unity  among 
gph.iv.6.  themfelves  j  "  there  is  one  God  and  Father  of  all," 
and  therefore  we  fhould  "  keep  the  unity  of  the 
"  fpirit  in  the  bond  of  peace,"  that  is,  live  in  mu- 
tual love  and  peace.  The  prophet  likewife  affigns 
this  reafon  why  all  mankind  fhould  be  upon  good 
terms  with  one  another,  and  not  be  injurious  one  to 
Mai.  ii.  another,  "  Have  we  not  all  one  Father  ?  Hath  not 
"  one  God  created  us  ?  Why  do  we  then  deal  trea- 
"  cheroudy  every  man  againft  his  brother." 

And  therefore  when  we  fee  fuch  hatred  and  en- 
mity among  men,  fuch  divifions  and  animofities 
among  Chriftians,  we  may  not  only  afk  St.  Paul's 
queftion,  "  Is  Christ  divided?"  that  we  cannot 
agree  about  ferving  him ;  either  all  to  ferye  him 
one  way,  or  to  bear  with  one  another  in  our  diffe- 
rences :  I  fay  we  may  not  only  afk  St.  Paul's  quef- 
tion, "  Is  Christ  divided  .?"  But  may ^fk  farther, 
"  Is  God  divided  .f*"  Is  there  not  one  God,  and  are 
we  not  all  his  offspring  ?  Are  we  not  all  the  fons  of 
Adam,  "  who  was  the  fon  of  God  ?"  So  that  if  we 
trace  ourfelves  to  our  original,  we  fhall  find  a  great 
nearnefs  and  equality  among  men  :  and  this  equali- 
ty that  we  are  all  God's  creatures  and  image,  and 
that  the  one  only  God  is  the  Father  of  us  all,  is  a 
more  real  ground  of  mutual  love,  and  peace,  and 
equity  in  our  dealings  one  with  another,  than  any 
of  thofe  petty  differences  and  diftindlions  of  ftrong 

and 


the  divine  nature^  &c.  389 

and  weak,  of  rich  and  poor,  of  wife  and  foolifli,  S  E  R  M. 

XLVIII 
of  bafe  and  honourable,  can  be  to  encourage  men 

to  any  thing  of  infolencc,  injuftice,  and  inequahty 
of  deaUng  one  towards  another.  Becaufe  that 
wherein  we  all  agree,  that  we  are  the  creatures  and 
children  of  God  and  have  all  one  common  father, 
is  eflential  and  conftant  -,  but  thofe  things  wherein 
we  differ  are  accidental  and  mutable,  and  happen  to 
one  another  by  turns. 

Thus  much  may  fuffice  to  have  fpoken  concern- 
ing the  firfl:  propofition  in  the  text,  "  there  is  one 
"  God  :"  to  him,  Father,  Son,  and  holy  Ghoft, 
be  all  honour  and  glory,  dominion  and  power,  now 
and  for  ever.    Amen. 


Stead- 


Steadfaftnefs  in  Religion* 
A 

SERMON 

Preached  in  the 
Churcli  of  St.  Lawrence- Jury,  June  3.   i6S4, 


39S 


THE 

PREFACE 

T  O    T  H  E 

READER. 

BE  I  N  Gy  I  hope,  Jor  the  remainder  of 
my  life,  releafed  from  that  irkfom  and 
U7ipleafant  work  of  controverfy  and  wrang- 
ling about  religion,  Ifhall  now  turn  my  thoughts 
to  fomething  more  agreeable  to  my  temper,  and  of 
a  more  direB  and  immediate  tendency  to  the  pro- 
moting of  true  religion,  to  the  happinefs  of  human 
fociety,  and  the  reformation  of  the  world, 

I  have  no  intention  to  refle^i  upon  any  that 
ft  and  up  in  defence  of  the  truth,  and  contend  ear- 
nefily  for  it,  endeavouring  in  thefpirit  of  meek^ 
nefs  to  reclaim  thofe  that  are  in  error.  For  I  doubt 
not  but  a  very  good  man  may,  uponfeveral  occafom, 
be  almoft  unavoidably  engaged  in  controverfes  of 
religion  -,  and  if  he  have  a  head  clear  and  cool 
enough,  fo  as  to  be  mafler  of  his  own  notions  and 
temper  in  that  hot  kind  of  fervice,  he  may  there-- 
in  do  confiderahle  advantage  to  the  truth :  though 
a  man  that  hath  once  drawn  blood  in  controverfy, 
as  Mr.  Mede  exprejfeth  it,  isjeldom  known  ever 
perfeSily  to  recover  his  own  good  temper  afterwards. 
Vol.  III.  5  O  For 


^94  The   P  R  E  F  A  C  E. 

For  this  reafon  a  good  man  jhould  not  be  very 
'willing^  "  when  his  lord  comes,''  to  "  be  found 
"  fo  doing"  and  as  it  were  "  beating  his  fellow- 
"  fervants  :"  and  all  controverfy,  as  it  is  ufual- 
ly  managed,  is  little  better.  A  good  man  would 
be  loth  to  be  taken  out  of  the  world  reeking  hot 
from  a  fharp  contention  with  a  perverfe  adver- 
fary  j  and  not  a  little  out  of  countenance,  to  find 
himfelf  in  this  temper  tranfiated  into  the  calm 
and  peaceable  regions  of  the  blejfed,  where  nothiftg 
but  perfeB  charity  and  good-will  reign  for  ever. 

1  know  not  whether  St.  Paul,  who  had  been 
"  taken  up  into  the  third  heavens^'  did  by  that 
queflion  of  his,  "  where  is  the  difputer  of  this 
WORLD  ?"  intend  to  infnuate,  that  this  wrangling 
work  hath  place  only  in  this  world,  and  upon  this 
earth,  where  only  there  is  a  dufi  to  be  raifed  -,  but 
will  have  no  place  in  the  other.  But  whether  St. 
Paul  intended  this  or  not,  the  thing  it  felf  I  think 
is  true,  that  in  the  other  world  all  things  will  be 
clear  and  pafl  difpute.  'To  be  fur  e,  among  the  blef- 
fed;  and  probably  alfo  among  the  miferable,  un- 
lef  fierce  a?idfurious  contentions,  with  great  heat 
without  light,  about  things  of  no  moment  and 
concernment  to  them,  Jhould  be  defignedfor  apart 
of  their  torment. 

As  to  the  following  frmons,  I  am  fenfible  that 
the  jiile  of  them  is  tnore  loofe  and  full  of  words j 
than  is  agreeable  to  juft  and  exaB  difcourfes  : 
hutfo  I  think  the  ftile  of  popidar  Jkrmons  ought  to 

be. 


The   PREFACE.  395 

be.  And  therefore  I  have  been  not  very  careful 
to  mend  this  matter  j  chuftng  rather  that  they 
fiould  appear  in  that  native  fmpUcity  in  which ^ 
fo  many  years  ago,  they  were  frji  framed,  than 
dreffed  up  with  too  much  care  and  art.  As  they 
are,  I  hope,  the  candid  and  ingenuous  readers  will 
take  them  in  good  part. 

And  1  do  heartily  wifh,  that  all  that  are  con- 
cerned in  the  reJpeBive  duties,  treated  on  in  the 
following  fermons,  would  be  perfuaded  fo  to  lay 
them  to  heart,  as  to  put  them  effedlually  in  prac- 
tice :  that  how  muchfoever  the  refortnation  of  this 
corrupt  and  degenerate  age  in  which  we  live  is  al- 
moft  utterly  to  be  defpaired  of  we  may  yet  have  a 
more  comfortable  profpeB  of  future  timts^  by  feeing 
the  foundation  of  a  better  world  begun  to  be  laid  in 
the  careful  and  confcientious  dif charge  of  the  duties 
here  mentioned:  that  by  this  means  ''  the  gene- 
"  rations  to  come  may  know  God,  and  the  chil- 
"  dren  yet  unborn  may  fear  the  Lord." 

/  have  great  reafon  to  be  fnfible  how  f aft  the 
infirmities  of  age  are  coming  upon  fne,  and  there- 
fore "  mifl  work  the  works  of  him,"  whofe  pro- 
vidence hath  placed  me  in  the  fiation  wherem  I 
am,  "  whilfl  it  is  day,  becaufe  the  night  cometh 
"  when  no  man  can  work.'' 

I  knew  very  well,  before  I  entered  upon  this 

great  and  weighty  charge^  my  own  manifold  de- 

feBs,  and  how  unequal  m'^  be ji  abilities  were  for 

the  due  dif  charge  of  it ;  but  I  did  not  feel  this  fo 

5  O  2  Jenflbly 


396  The   P  R  E  F  A  C  E. 

fejijibly  as  I  now  do  every  day  more  and  more* 
And  therefore  that  I  might  make  fome  fmall 
amends  for  greater  failings^  I  knew  not  how  bet- 
ter to  place  the  broken  hours  I  had  to  f pare  from 
almoft  perpetual  bufmefs  of  one  kind  or  other  ^  than 
in  preparing  fomething  for  the  publick  that  might 
he  of  ufe  to  recover  the  decayed  piety  and  virtue 
of  the  prefent  age  j  in  which  iniquity  dothfo  much 
abound,  and  the  love  of  God  and  religion  is 
grown  fo  cold, 

To  this  end  I  have  chofen  to  publijh  thefe  plain 
fermons,  and  to  recommend  them  to  the  ferious  per- 
ufal  and  faithful  pra&ice  both  of  the  pajlors  and 
people  committed  to  my  charge ;  earneftly  befeech- 
ing  Almighty  God,  that  by  his  blefjing  they  may 
prove  effeSiualto  that  good  end  for  which  they  are 
fincerely  defigned. 


S  E  R- 


A 


397 

SERMON  XLIX. 

Concerning  Refolution  and  Stedfaftnels 
in  Religion. 

JOSH.   XXIV.  15. 

— But  as  for  me  and  my  houfe^  we  will  ferve  the  Lord. 

F  T  E  R  JoOiua  had  brought  the  people  of  SERM. 
Ifrael  into  the  promifed  land,  and  fettled  them  ._  -  -  'j^ 
in  the  quiet  polfeffion  of  it,  his  great  defire  was  to 
eftablifli  them  in  the  true  religion,  namely,  in  the 
worfhip  of  the  one  true  God,  who  had  brought  them 
out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  and  given  them  the  pof- 
feflion  of  that  good  land,  the  land  of  Canaan. 

And  now  finding  himfelf  weak  and  declining, 
being  an  hundred  and  ten  years  old,  and  fearing 
left  after  his  death  the  people  Ihould  fall  off  from 
the  true  religion  to  the  worfhip  of  idols,  he,  like  a 
wife  and  good  governor,  confiders  with  himfelf  what 
courfe  he  had  beft  to  take  to  keep  them  firm  and 
ftedfaft  in  their  religion,  and  to  prevent  their  defedli- 
on  to  the  idolatry  of  the  nations  round  about  them. 

And  to  this  end  he  calls  a  general  aflfembly  of  all  Ch.  xxili« 
Ifrael,  that  is,  of  the  elders,  and  heads,  andjudges>  '• 
and  officers  of  the  feveral  tribes ;  and  in  a  very  wife 
and  eloquent  fpeech  reprefents  to  them  in  what  a 
miraculous  manner  God  had  "  driven  out  the  na- 
*^  tions  before  them,  much  greater  and  flronger  na- 
I  "  tions 


PS 


^gS  Concerning  Jledfajinefs  in  religion. 

SerM.  «  tions  than  they,"  and  had  given  them  their  land 
to  poflefs  it.  And,  in  a  word,  had  performed  punc- 
tud,l]y  all  that  he  had  promifed  to  them. 

And  therefore  they  ought  "  to  take  great  heed  to 

"  themfelves,  to  love  God  and  to  ferve  him  -,'*  and  if 

they  did  not,  he  tells  them  that  it  fhould  "  come  to 

Ch.  xxiii.  tc  p^fg^  jI^^j.  ^5  ^  gQQ^^  things  are  come  upon  you 

"  which  the  Lord  your  God  promifed  you,  fo  fhall 
"  the  Lord  bring  upon  you  all  evil  things,  until 
"  he  have  deftroyed  you  from  off  this  good  land 
"  which  the  Lord  your  God  hath  given  you" 

After  this,  he  calls  them  together  a  fecond  time, 
and  gives  them  a  brief  hiilorical  account  and  de- 
duflion  of  the  great  mei^cies  of  God  to  them  and 
their  fathers,  from  the  days  of  Abraham,  whom  he 
had  called  out  from  among  his  idolatrous  kindred 
and  countrymen,  unto  that  day. 

From  the  confideration  of  all  which,  he  carneftly 
exhorts  them  to  renew  their  covenant  with  God  ; 
and  for  his  particular  fatisfadion,  before  he  left  the 
world,  folemnly  topromife  that  they. would  forever 
ferve  God  and  forfake  the  fervice  of  idols :  "  Now 
*'  therefore  fear  the  Lord,  and  ferve  him  in  fince- 
*'  rity  and  in  truth  :  and  put  away  the  gods  which 
"  your  fathers  ferved  on  the  other  fide  of  the  flood, 
^'  and  in  Egypt  ;  and  ferve  ye  the  Lord." 

And  then  in  the  text,  by  a  very  elegant  fcheme 
of  fpeech  he  does,  as  it  were,  once  more  fet  them 
at  liberty  ;  and,  as  if  they  had  never  engaged  them- 
felves to  God  by  covenant  before,  he  leaves  them  to 
their  free  choice  •,  "and  if  it  feem  evil  unto  you  to 
*'  ferve  the  Lord,  chufe  you   this  day  whom  ye 

"  will 


Concerning  Jledfaflnefs  in  religio?i^  ^gg 

**  will  ferve  ;  whether  the  gods  whom  your  fathers  S  E  R  M. 

XLIX 
*'  ferved  on  the  other  fide  of  the  flood,  or  the  gods 

*'  of  the  Amorltes  in  whofe  land  ye  dwell.** 

Not  that  they  were  at  liberty  whether  they  would 
ferve  the  true  God,  or  not ;  but  to  infinuate  to 
them  that  religion  ought  to  be  their  free  choice  : 
and  likewife,  that  the  true  religion  hath  thofe  real 
advantages  on  it's  fide,  that  it  may  fafely  be  referred 
to  any  confiderate  man's  choice  :  "  If  it  feem  evil 
"  unto  you ;"  as  if  he  had  laid,  if  after  all  the  de- 
monftrations  which  God  hath  given,  of  his  miracu- 
lous prefence  among  you,  and  the  mighty  obhga- 
tions  which  he  hath  laid  upon  you  by  bringing 
you  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt  and  the  houfe  of 
bondage,  by  fo  out-ftretched  an  arm  ;  and  by  driv- 
ing out  the  nations  before  you,  and  giving  you  their 
land  to  polTefs :  if  after  all  this,  you  can  think  it 
fit  to  quit  the  fervice  of  this  God,  and  to  worihip 
the  idols  of  the  nations  whom  you  have  fubdued, 
thofe  vanquilhed  and  baffled  deities ;  if  you  can 
think  it  reafonable  fo  to  do,  but  furely  you  cannot  ; 
then  take  your  choice  :  "  If  it  feem  evil  unto  you 
"  to  ferve  the  Lord,  chufe  you  this  day  whom  ye 
«  will  ferve." 

And  to  direfl  and  encourage  them  to  make  a  right 
choice,  he  declares  to  them  his  own  refolution,  which 
he  hopes  will  alfo  be  theirs  ;  and  as  he  had  hereto- 
fore been  their  captain,  fo  now  he  offers  himfelf  to 
be  their  example  :  but  whether  they  will  follow  him 
or  not,  he  for  his  part  is  fixed  and  immoveable  in 
this  refolution  j  "  But  as  for  me  and  my  houft,  ws 
"  will  ferve  the  Lord.'* 

In 


XLIX. 


400  Concerning  fledfajlnefs  in  religion, 

SE  R M.  In  efFed  he  tells  them  ;  I  have  propofed  the  beft 
religion  to  your  choice,  and  I  cannot  but  think,  nay 
I  cannot  but  hope,  that  you  will  all  fledfaftly  ad- 
here to  it.  It  is  fo  reafonable  and  wife,  fo  much 
your  intereft  and  your  happinefs  to  do  it.  But  if 
you  fiiould  do  otherwife,  if  you  fhould  be  fo  weak 
as  not  to  difcern  the  truth,  fo  wilful  and  fo  wicked 
ds  not  to  embrace  it  :  though  you  fhould  all  make 
another  choice,  and  run  away  from  the  true  God  to 
the  worfhip  of  idols  -,  I  for  my  part  am  fledfaftly  re- 
folved  what  to  do :  in  a  cafe  fo  manifeft,  in  a  matter 
fo  reafonable,  no  number,  no  example  fhall  prevail 
with  me  to  the  contrary  •,  I  will,  if  need  be,  ftand 
alone  in  that  which  is  fo  evidently  and  unqueftiona- 
bly  right :  and  though  this  whole  nation  fhould  re- 
volt all  at  once  from  the  worfhip  of  the  true  God, 
and  join  with  the  reft  of  the  world  in  a  falfe  religion 
and  in  the  worfhip  of  idols  -,  and  mine  were  the 
only  family  left  in  all  Ifrael,  nay  in  the  whole  world, 
that  continued  to  worfhip  the  God  of  Ifrael,  I  would 
ftill  be  of  the  fame  mind  ;  I  would  ftill  perfift  in 
this  refolution,  and  a6l  according  to  it  \  "  as  for 
•*  me  and  my  houfe,  we  will  ferve  the  Lord.'* 

A  refolution  truly  worthy  of  fo  great  a  prince  and 
fo  good  a  man  :  in  which  he  is  a  double  pattern 
to  us. 

Firft,  of  the  brave  refolution  of  a  good  man, 
namely,  that  if  there  were  occafion,  and  things 
were  brought  to  that  extremity,  he  would  ftand 
alone  in  the  profefTion  and  praftice  of  the  true  re. 
ligion  :  "  as  for  me,  I  will  ferve  the  Lord." 

Secondly, 


Cone enthig  fie dfaftficfs  i?2  religion.  40 1 

Secondly,  of  the  pious  care  of  a  f^ood  father  and  S  E  R  M. 
•  -  XLIX 

mailer  of  a  famiiy,    to  train    up  thofe    under   his 

charge  in   the  true  religion  and  worfhip  of  God  : 

*'  as  for  me  and  my   house,  we   will  fcrve  the 

**  Lord." 

I  Ihall  at  this  time,  by  God's  affiftance,  treat  of 

the  firft  of  thefe,  namely, 

I.  Of  the  brave   refolution  of  a  good  man,  that 
if  there  were  occafion,  and  things  were  brought  to 
that  extremity,  he  would  ftand  alone  in  the  profef- 
fion  and  pradlice  of  God's  true  religion  :  "  Chufe 
"  you  this   day,"    fays  Jofhua,    "  whom   ye  will 
"  ferve  ;  but  as  for  me,  I  will  ferve  the  Lord.'* 
Jofhua  here  puts  the  cafe  at  the  utmoft  extremity, 
that  not  only  the  great  nations  of  the  world,  the 
Egyptians  and  Chaldeans,  and  all  the  leffer  nations 
round  about  them,  and  in  whofe  land  they  dwelt, 
were  all  long  fince  revolted  to  idolatry,  and  pretend- 
ed great  antiquity  and  long  prefcription  for  the  wor- 
fhip  of  their   falfe  gods  :    but  he   fuppofeth  yet 
farther,  that  the  only  true  and  vifible  church  of  God 
then  known  in  the   world,    the   people   of  Ifrael, 
fhould  Jikewife   generally  revolt  and   forfake   the 
worfhip  of  the  true  God,  and  cleave  to  the  fervice 
of  idols  :  yet  in  this  cafe,  if  we  could  fuppofe  it  to 
happen,  he  declares  his  firm  and  ftedfaft  refolution 
to  adhere  to  the  worfhip  of  the  true  God  :  and 
though  all  others  fhould  fall  off  from  it,  that  he 
would  ftand  alone  in  the  profefTion  and  praftice  of 
the  true  religion:  "  but  as  for  me,  I  will  ferve  the 

"  Lord." 
Vol.  III.  5  P  In 


Concerning  Jledfafinefs  in  religion. 

In  the  handling  of  this  argument  I  Ihall  do  thefc 
two  things. 

Firft,  I  fhall  confider  the  matter  of  this  refolu- 
tion,  and  the  due  bounds  and  limits  of  it. 

Secondly,  I  fhall  endeavour  to  vindicate  the  rea- 
fonablenefs  of  this  refolution  from  the  objedlions,  to 
t^'hich  this  fingular  and  peremptory  kind  of  refolu- 
tion may  feem  liable. 

Firft,  I  fhall  confider  the  matter  of  this  refolution, 
and  the  due  bounds  and  limits  of  it. 

I  ft.  The  matter  of  this  refolution.  Jofhua  here 
refolves  that  if  need  were,  and  things  were  brought 
to  that  pafs,  he  would  ftand  alone,  or  with  very  few 
adhering  to  him,  in  the  profeffion  and  praftice  of 
the  true  religion.  And  this  is  not  a  mere  fuppofi- 
tion  of  an  impoffible  cafe,  which  can  never  happen: 
for  it  may,  and  hath  really  and  in  fadl  happened  in 
feveral  ages  and  places  of  the  world. 

There  hath  been  a  general  apoftafy  of  fome  great 
part  of  God's  church,  from  the  belief  and  profef- 
fion of  the  true  religion  to  idolatry,  and  to  dam- 
nable errors  and  herefies :  and  fome  good  men  have, 
upon  the  matter,  flood  alone  in  the  open  profeffion 
of  the  true  religion,  in  the  midft  of  this  general  de- 
fedlion  from  it. 

Elijah  in  that  general  revolt  of  the  people  of  If- 
rael,  when  they  had  "  forfaken  the  covenant  of  the 
"  Lord,  and  broken  down  his  altars,  and  flain  his 
*'  prophets,"  and  he  only,  as  he  thought,  was  left 
to  ftand  alone  :  I  fay,  in  tliis  cafe  when,  as  he  verily 
1  Kings  believed,  he  had  no  body  to  ftand  by  him,  **  he  was 
livm-  1 8.  t^  ^gj,y  zealous  for  the  Lord  Gop  of  hofts  "  and 

with 


Concerning  Jledfajlnefs  in  religion.  403 

with  an  undaunted  courage  flood  up  for  the  worlhip  SERM. 

XLIX 
of  the  true  God,  and  reproved  Ahab  to  his  face  for  ^     _'j 

his  defection  to  the  worfhip  of  idols. 

And  thofe  three  brave  youths,  in  the  prophecy  of  Dan*  iii, 
Daniel,  did  in  the  hke  refolute  and  undaunted  man- 
ner refufe  to  obey  the  command  of  the  great  king 
Nebuchadnezzar,  '*  to  worfhip  the  image  which  he 
"  had  fet  up  •,"  when  all  others  fubmitted,  and  paid 
honour  to  it :  telling  him  plainly,  "  if  it  be  fo,  our  ^  j-^  jj^ 
"  God  whom  we  ferve  is  able  to  deliver  us  from  the 
"  burning  fieiy  furnace,  and  he  will  deliver  us  out 
"  of  thy  hand  :  if  not,  be  it  known  unto  thee,  O 
"  king,  that  we  will  not  ferve  thy  gods,  nor  wor- 
*'  fhip  the  golden  image  which  thou  haft  fet  up.'* 

In  like  manner,  and  with  the  fame  fpiritand  cou- 
rage, Daniel  withftood  the  decree  of  Darius,  which 
forbad  men  to  "  afk  a  petition  of  any  god  or  man  D^n. 
"  for  thirty  days,  fave  of  the  king  only  ;'*  and  this  7' 
under  the  pain  of  being  "  caft  into  the  den  of  lions:'* 
and  when  all  others  gave  obedience  to  it,  he  *'  fet 
"  open  the  windows  of  his  chamber  towards  Jeru-  v.  10. 
*'  falem,  and  kneeled  down  upon  his  knees  three 
"  times  a  day,  and  prayed  and  gave  thanks,  as  he 
'«  did  aforetime." 

In  the  prevalency  of  the  Arian  herefy,  Athana- 
fius  atmoft  ftood  alone  in  the  profeffion  and  main- 
tenance of  the  truth.  And  in  the  reign  of  anti- 
chrift,  the  true  church  of  God  is  reprefented  by  a 
woman  flying  into  the  wildernefs,  and  living  there 
in  obfcurity  for  a  long  time ;  infomuch  that  the 
profeffors  of  the  truth  fhould  hardly  be  found.  And 
yet  during  that  degeneracy  of  fo  great  a  part  of  the 
5  P  2  Chriftian 


Vl« 


4C>4  Concerning  Jiet^fajincfi  in  religion, 

S  E  R  M.  Chriftian  church,  and  the  prevalency  of  antichrlfl: 
XLIX  •  • 

for  fo  many  ages,  fome  few  in  every  age  did  appear 

who  did  refolutely  own  the  truth,  and  bear  witnefs 

to  it  with  their  blood.     But  thefe  did  almoft  Hand 

alone  and  by  themfelves,  like  a  few  fcattered  fheep 

wandering  up  and  down  in  a  wide  wildernefs. 

Thus  in  the  height  of  popery,  Wickliffe  appear- 
ed here  in  England ;  and  Hierome  of  Prague,  and 
John  Hufs  in  Germany  and  Bohemia.  And  in  the 
beginning  of  the  reformation,  when  popery  had 
quite  overrun  thefe  weftern  parts  of  the  world,  and 
fubdued  her  enemies  on  every  fide,  and  antichrift 
fat  fecurely  in  the  quiet  poflefllon  of  his  kingdom  ; 
Luther  arofe,  a  bold  and  rough  man,  but  a  fit  wedge 
to  cleave  in  funder  fo  hard  and  knotty  a  block  -,  and 
appeared  floutly  againft  the  grofs  errors  and  corrup- 
tions of  the  church  of  Rome  :  and  for  a  long  time 
flood  alone,  and  with  a  mofl  invincible  fpirit  and 
courage  maintained  his  ground,  and  refilled  the 
united  malice  and  force  of  antichrifl  and  his  ad- 
herents ;  and  gave  him  fo  terrible  a  wound,  that  he 
is  not  yet  perfedlly  healed  and  recovered  of  it. 

So  that  for  a  man  to  fland  alone,  or  with  a  very 
few  adhering  to  him  and  flanding  by  him,  is  not  a 
mere  imaginary  fuppofition,  but  a  cafe  that  hath 
really  and  in  fa6t  happened  in  feveral  ages  and 
places  of  the  world.  Let  us  then  proceed  to  con- 
fider  in  the 

2d  Place,  the  due  limits  and  bounds  of  this  pe- 
remptory refolution.  In  all  matters  of  faith  and 
practice,  which  are  plain  and  evident  either  from 
natural  reafon,  or  froin  divine  revelation,  this  refo- 

hition 


Concerning  fiedfaftnefs  in  religion,  405 

lutlon  feems  to  be  very  reafonable ;  but  in  things  S  E  R  M. 

XLIX 
doubtful  a  modeft  man,  and  every  man  hath  reafon  ._     _^ 

to  be  fo,  would  be  very  apt  to  be  daggered  by  the 

judgment  of  a  very  wife  man ;  and  much  more  of 

many  fuch,  and  cfpecially  by  the  unanimous  judg~ 

ment  of  the  generality  of  men  ;  the  general  voice 

and  opinion  of  mankind  being  next  to  the  voice  of 

God  himfelf. 

For  in  matters  of  an  indifferent  nature,  which 
God  hath  neither  commanded  nor  forbidden,  fuch 
as  are  many  of  the  circumftances  and  ceremonies  of 
GoD*s  worfhip,  a  man  would  not  be  fingu'v^,  much 
lefs  ftiff  and  immoveable  in  his  Angularity  j  but 
would  be  apt  to  yield  and  furrender  himfelf  to  the 
general  vote  and  opinion,  and  to  comply  with  the 
common  cuftom  and  practice  ;  and  much  more  with 
the  rules  and  conllitutions  of  authority,  whether  ci- 
vil or  ecclefiaftical.  Becaufe  in  things  lawful  and  in- 
different, we  are  bound  by  the  rules  of  decency  and 
civility  not  to  thwart  the  general  praftice  ;  and  by 
the  commands  of  God,  we  are  certainly  obliged  to 
obey  the  lawful  commands  of  lawful  authority. 

But  in  things  plainly  contrary  to  the  evidence  of 
fenfe  or  reafon,  or  to  the  word  of  Goo,  a  man 
would  compliment  no  man,  or  number  of  men  ; 
nor  would  he  pin  his  faith  upon  any  church  in  the 
world  •,  much  lefs  upon  any  fingle  man,  no  not  the 
pope  J  no,  though  there  were  never  fo  many  pro- 
bable arguments  brought  for  the  proof  of  his  in« 
falhbility. 

In  this  cafe,  a  man  would  be  fingular  and  fland 
alone  againft  the  whole  world ;  againfi:  the  wrath 


4o6  Concernmg  fiedfajlnefs  in  religion, 

SERM.  2iXi^  rage  of  a  king,  and  aJl  the  terrors  of  his  fiery 
furnace  ;  as  in  other  matters,  a  man  would  not  be- 
lieve all  the  learned  men  in  the  world  againft  the 
clear  evidence  of  fenfe  and  reafon.  If  all  the  great 
mathematicians  of  all  ages,  Archimedes,  and  Eu- 
clid, and  Apollonius,  and  Diophantus,  &c.  could 
be  fuppofed  to  meet  together  in  a  general  council, 
and  fhould  there  declare  in  the  moftfolemn  manner, 
and  give  it  under  their  hands  and  feals,  that  twice 
two  did  not  make  four,  but  five ;  this  would  not 
move  me  in  the  leaft  to  be  of  their  mind ;  nay,  I 
who  am  no  mathematician  would  maintain  the  con- 
trary, and  would  perfift  in  it  without  being  in  the 
leaft  ftartled  by  the  pofitive  opinion  of  thefe  great 
and  learned  men ;  and  fliould  moft  certainly  con- 
clude, that  they  were  either  all  of  them  out  of  their 
wits,  or  that  they  were  biafled  by  fome  intereft  or 
other,  and  fwayed  againft  the  clear  evidence  of  truth, 
and  the  full  convidion  of  their  own  reafon  to  make 
fuch  a  determination  as  this.  They  might  indeed 
overrule  the  point  by  their  authority,  but  in  my  in- 

\, ward  judgment  I  ftiould  ftill  be  where  I  was  before. 

x'  Juft  fo  in  matters  of  religion,  if  any  church, 
though  with  never  fo  glorious  and  confident  a  pre- 
tence to  infallibility,  fhould  declare  for  tranfubftan- 
tiation,  that  is,  that  the  brcad  and  wine  in  the  fa- 
crament,  by  virtue  of  the  confecration  of  the  prieft, 
are  fubftantially  changed  into  the  natural  body  and 
blood  of  Christ  ;  this  is  fo  notorioufly  contrary 
both  to  the  fenfe  and  reafon  of  mankind,  that  a 
man  would  chufe  to  ftand  fingle  in  the  oppofition 
of  it,  and  laugh  at  or  rather  pity  the  reft  of  the 

"^  I  world, 


XLIX. 


Concerning  fledfaflnefs  in  religion,  407 

world,that  could  be  fo  fervidly  blind  as  feemingly  to  S^E  R^M. 
confpire  in  the  belief  of  fo  monftrous  an  abfurdity. 

And  in  like  manner,  if  any  church  fnould  de- 
clare, that  images  are  to  be  worfliipped  -,  or  that  the 
woriliipof  God  is  to  be  performed  in  an  unknown 
tongue ;  and  that  the  holy  fcriptures,  which  con- 
tain the  word  and  will  of  God,  and  teach  men 
what  they  are  to  believe  and  do  in  order  to  their 
eternal  falvation,  are  to  be  locked  up  and  kept  con- 
cealed from  the  people  in  a  language  which  they  do 
not  underftand,  left  if  they  were  permitted  the  free 
ufe  of  them  in  their  mother  tongue,  they  Ihould 
know  more  of  the  mind  and  will  of  God  than  is 
convenient  for  the  common  people  to  know,  whofe 
devotion  and  obedience  to  the  church  does  mainly 
depend  upon  their  ignorance :  or  Ihould  declare, 
that  the  facrifice  of  Chri  st  was  not  offered  once  for 
all,  but  is  and  ought  to  be  repeated  ten  millions  of 
times  every  day :  and  that  the  people  ought  to  re- 
ceive the  communion  in  one  kind  only,  and  the  cup 
by  no  means  to  be  trufted  with  them  for  fear  the 
profane  beards  of  the  laity  fhould  drink  of  it :  and 
that  the  faving  efficacy  of  the  facraments  doth  de- 
pend upon  the  intention  of  the  prieft,  without 
which  the  receiver  can  have  no  benefit  by  them : 
thefe  are  all  of  them  fo  plainly  contrary  to  fcripture, 
and  moft  of  them  in  reafon  fo  abfurd,  that  the  au- 
thority of  no  church  whatfoever  can  oblige  a  man  to 
the  belief  of  them. 

Nay,  I  go  yet  farther,  that  being  evidently  con- 
trary to  the  doftrine  of  the  gofpel,  though  an  apof- 
tlej  or  an  angel   from  heaven  fhould  declare  them. 


4o8  •  Concerning  ft edfaflnefi  in  religion, 
SERM.  we  c light  to  reie(5t  them.  And  for  this  I  have  %t. 
^  1'  ,  Paul's  authority  and  wajrant,  who  fpeakingof  fome 
that  perverted  the  gofpel  of  Christ  by  teaching 
Gal.  i.  7.  things  contrary  to  it,  "  though  we,"  fays  he,  "or 
8,  9-  "  an  angel  from  heaven,  preach  any  other  gofpel 
"  unto  you  than  that  which  we  have  preached  unto 
"  you,  let  him  be  accurfed :  as  we  faid  before,  fo 
*'  fay  I  now  again,  though  an  apoftle,  though  an 
"  angel  from  heaven  preach  any  other  gofpel  unto 
"  you  tharj  that  which  ye  have  received,  let  him  be 
"  accurfed."  You  fee  he  repeats  it  over  again,  to 
exprefs  not  only  his  own  confident  affurance,  but  the 
certainty  of  the  thing.  And  here  is  an  anathema 
with  a  witnels,  which  we  may  confidently  oppofe 
to  all  the  anathemas  which  the  council  of  Trent 
hath  fo  liberally  denounced  againft  all  thofe  who 
Ihall  prefume  to  gainfay  thefe  new  doftrines  of  their 
church  ;  which  are  in  truth  another  gofpel,  than 
that  which  our  blefled  Saviour  and  his  apoftles 
taught  :  and  yet  on  their  fide  there  is  neither  an 
apoftle,  nor  an  angel  from  heaven  in  the  cafe. 

To  give  but  one  inftance  more :  if  Bellarmine 
fhall  tell  me,  as  he  exprefly  does,  that  "  if  the 
"  pope  fhould  declare  virtue  to  be  vice,  and  vice  to 
"  be  virtue,  I  were  bound  to  believe  him  unlefs 
"  I  would  fin  againft  confcience  :"  and  if  all  the 
world  fliould  fay  t\\Q,  fame  that  Bellarmine  does,name- 
]y,  that  this  infallible  declarer  of  virtue  and  vice 
were  to  be  believed  and  followed  -,  yet  I  could  not 
poflibly  be  of  their  mind,  for  this  plain  and  unde- 
niable reafon  ;  becaufe  if  virtue  and  vice  be  all  one, 
then  religion  is  nothing  ;  fince  the  main  defign  of 

'  religion 


Concerning  fiedfa/Inefs  in  rcltgion,  409 

religion  is  to  teach  men  the  difference  between  virtue  S  E  R  M. 

XLIX. 
and  vice,  and  to  oblige  them  to  praftife  the  one  and 

to  refrain  from  the  other :  and  if  religion  be  no- 
thing, then  heaven  and  hell  are  nothing :  and  if 
heaven  be  nothing,  then  an  infallible  guide  thither 
is  of  no  ufe  and  to  no  manner  of  purpofe  ;  becaufe 
he  is  a  guide  no  whither,  and  To  his  great  office 
ceafes  and  falls  of  itfelf. 

And  now  left  any  (hould  think  me  fingular  in  this 
aflertion,  and  that  thereby  I  give  a  great  deal  too 
much  to  the  fingle  judgment  of  private  perfons,  and 
too  little  to  the  authority  of  a  church,  I  will  pro- 
duce the  deliberate  judgment  of  a  very  learned  man 
and  a  great  affertor  of  the  church's  authority,  con- 
cerning the  matter  I  am  now  Tpeaking  of:  I  mean 
Mr.  Hooker,  in  his  defervedly  admired  book  of 
ecclefiaftical  polity.  His  words  are  thefe,  "I  grant," 
fays  he,  "  that  proof  derived  from  the  authority  of 
*'  man's  judgment  is  not  able  to  work  that  aifu- 
"  ranee  which  doth  grow  by  ftronger  proof:  and 
*'  therefore  although  ten  thoufand  general  councils 
"  fhould  fet  down  one  and  the  fame  defiriitive  fen- 
*'  tence  concerning  any  point  of  religion  whatfo- 
"  ever,  yet  one  demonftrative  reafon  alledged,  or 
**  one  teftimony  cited  from  the  word  of  God  him- 
"  felf  to  the  contrary,  could  not  chufe  but  over- 
*'  fway  them  all :  in  as  much  as  for  them  to  be  de^ 
"  ceived  it  is  not  fo  impofilble,  as  it  is  that  demon- 
"  ftrative  reafon  or  divine  teftimony  fhould  deceive.'* 

And  again,  "  For  men,"  fays  he,  "  to  be  tied 
*'  and  led  by  authority,  as  it  were  with  a  kind  of 
*'  captivity  of  judgment,  and  though  there  be  rea- 

VoL.  III.  5  0^  «  foa 

8 


XLIX. 


410  Concerning  Jledfajlnefs  in  religion . 

SERM.  ''  fon  to  the  contrary  not  to  liflen  to  it,  but  follow 
**  like  beafts  the  6rft  in  the  herd,  this  were  brutifh." 

Again,  "  That  the  authority  of  men  fhould  pre- 
"  vail  with  men,  either  againft  or  above  reafon,  is 
"  no  part  of  our  belief.  Companies  of  learned 
**  men,  though  they  be  never  fo  great  and  reverend, 
"  are  to  yield  unto  reafon,  the  weight  whereof  is  no 
"  whit  prejudiced  by  the  fimplicity  of  the  perfon 
"  which  doth  alledge  it ;  but  being  found  to  be 
*'  found  and  good,  the  bare  opinion  of  men  to  the 
I"  contrary  muft  of  neceffity  Hoop  and  give  place.** 
And  this  he  delivers  not  only  as  his  own  particular 
judgment,  but  that  which  he  apprehended  to  be  the 
judgment  of  the  church  of  England. 

I  have  produced  thefe  clear  and  pofitive  tefti mo- 
nies of  fo  learned  and  judicious  a  perfon,  and  of  fo 
great  efteem  in  our  church,  on  purpofe  to  prevent 
any  mifapprehenfion,  as  if  by  this  difcourfe  I  in- 
tended to  derogate  from  the  authority  of  the 
church  and  her  juft  and  reafonable  determinations, 
in  things  no  wife  contrary  to  plain  reafon  or  the 
word  of  God.  And  beyond  this  pitch  no  judicious 
proteftant,  that  I  know  of,  ever  drained  the  autho- 
rity of  the  church.     I  proceed  now  in  the 

Second  place,  to  vindicate  the  reafonablenefs  of 
this  refokition,  from  the  objections  to  which  this 
fmgular  and   peremptory  kind  of  refolution  may 
feem  liable,  as 
Obj.  I.  Firft,  it  may  very  fpeciouOy  be  faid,  that   this 

does  not  feem  modeft  for  a  man  to  fet  up  his  own 
private  judgment  againft   the  general  fufFrage  and 

vote. 


XLIX. 


Concerning  Jiedfajnejs  in  religion,  41 1 

vote.  And  it  is  very  true,  as  I  faid  before,  that  S ER  M. 
about  things  indifferent  a  man  fhould  not  be  ftiff  and 
fingular;  and  in  things  doubtful  and  obfcure,  a  man 
lliould  not  be  over-confident  of  his  own  judgment, 
and  infift  peremptorily  upon  it  againft  the  general 
opinion :  but  in  things  that  are  plain  and  evident, 
either  from  fcripture  or  reafon,  it  is  neither  immo- 
defty  nor  a  culpable  fingularity,  for  a  man  to  ftand 
alone  in  defence  of  the  truth.  Becaufe  in  fuch  a 
cafe  a  man  does  not  oppofe  his  own  fingle  and  pri- 
vate judgment  to  the  judgment  of  many,  but  the 
common  reafon  of  mankind  and  the  judgment  of 
God  plainly  declared  in  his  word. 

If  the  generality  of  men  fhould  turn  atheifts  and 
infidels,  and  fhould  deny  the  being  of  God,  or  his 
providence  ;  the  immortality  of  mens  fouls,  and  the 
rewards  and  punifhments  of  another  world  :  or 
Ihould  deny  the  truth  of  the  gofpel  and  of  the 
Chriflian  religion,  it  would  not  certainly  be  any 
breach  of  modefty  for  a  man  to  appear  fingle,  if  no 
body  elfe  would  ftand  by  him,  in  the  refolute  de- 
fence of  thefe  great  truths. 

In  like  manner  when  a  whole  church,  though 
never  fo  large  and  numerous,  (hall  confpire  together 
to  corrupt  the  Chriftian  religion  fo  far  as  to  impofe 
upon  mankind,  under  the  name  of  Chriftian  doc- 
trines and  articles  of  faith,  things  plainly  contrary 
to  the  fenfe  and  reafon  of  mankind,  and  to  the  clear 
and  exprefs  word  of  God,  why  muft  a  man  needs 
be  thought  immodeft,  if  he  oppofe  fuch  grofs  er- 
rors and  corruptions  of  the  Chriftian  do6lrine  ?  And 
what  reafon  have  the  church  of  Rome  to  talk  of 
^  5  0^2  modefty 


Ccncendng  Jledfajlnefi  In  religion. 

modefty  in  this  cafe,  when  they  themlelves  have  the 
face  to  impofe  upon  mankind  the  belief  of  things 
contrary  to  what  they  and  every  man  elfe  fees  ?  As 
they  do  in  their  dodrine  of  tranfubftantiation  :  and 
to  require  of  them  to  do  what  God  hath  exprefly 
forbidden,  as  in  the  worfliip  of  images  \  befides  a 
great  many  other  idolatrous  practices  of  that  church  : 
to  deny  the  people  the  free  ufe  of  the  holy  fcrip- 
tures,  and  the  publick  fervice  of  God  in  a  known 
tongue  i  contrary  to  the  very  end  and  dcfign  of  all 
religion,  and  in  affront  to  the  common  reafon  and 
liberty  of  mankind. 

Obj.  2.  Secondly,  it   is  pretended  that  it  is  more  prudent 

for  private  perfons  to  err  with  the  church,  than  to 
be  fo  pertinacious  in  their  own  opinions.  To  which 
I  anfwer,  that  it  may  indeed  be  pardonable  in  fomc 
cafes  to  be  led  into  miftake  by  the  authority  of  thofe 
to  whofe  judgment  and  inflruction  we  ought  to  pay 
a  great  deference  and  fubmifTion  :  provided  always 
it  be  in  things  which  arc  not  plain  and  neccffary ; 
but  furely  it  can  never  be  prudent  to  err  v/ith  any 
number,  how  great  foever,  in  matters  of  religion 
which  are  of  moment,  merely  for  numbers  fake  : 
but  to  comply  with  the  known  errors  and  corrup- 
tions of  any  church  whatfoever,  is  certainly  dam- 
nable. 

Obj.  3.  Thirdly,  it  is  pretended  yet   farther,  that  men 

Ihall  fooner  be  excufed  in  following  the  church, 
than  any  particular  man  or  feci.  To  this  I  anfwer, 
that  it  is  very  true  if  the  matter  be  doubtful,  and 
efpecially  if  the  probabilities  be  equal,  or  near 
equal  on  both  fides :  but  if  the  error  be  grofs  and 
2  palpable. 


Concerni7tg  ftedfijlnefs  in  religion.  41I 

palpable,  it  will  be  no  excLife  to  have  followed  any  SERM. 
number  of  men,  or  any  church  whatfoever.  For 
here  the  competition  is  not  between  men  and  men, 
but  between  God  and  men  :  and  in  this  cafe  we 
mud  forfake  all  men  to  follow  God  and  his  truth. 
"  Thou  flialt  in  no  wife  follow  a  multitude  in  a 
*'  known  error,"  is  a  rule  which  in  reafon  is  of  equal 
obligation  with  that  divine  law,  "  thou  Hialt  in  no 
*'  wife  follow  a  multitude  to  do  evil  i"  or  rather  is 
comprehended  in  it,  becaufe  to  comply  with  a  known 
error  is  certainly  to  do  evil. 

And  this  very  objedtion  the  Jews  made  againft 
our  bleifed  Saviour  and  the  dodrine  which  he 
taught,  that  the  guides  and  governors  of  the  Jewifh 
church  did  utterly  differ  from  him,  and  were  of  a 
contrary  mind  ;  *'  have  any  of  the  rulers,"  fay 
they,  "  believed  on  him?"  What?  will  you  be 
wifer  than  your  rulers  and  governors  ?  "What  ?  fol- 
low the  doctrine  of  one  fmgle  man  againft  the  una- 
nimous judgment  and  fentence  of  the  great  fanhe- 
drim,  to  whom  the  trial  of  do6lrines  and  pretended 
prophets  doth  of  right  belong  ? 

But  as  plaufible  as  this  objedion  may  feem  to  be, 
it  is  to  be  confidered  that  in  a  corrupt  and  degene- 
rate church,  the  guides  and  rulers  of  it  are  com- 
monly the  worft,  and  the  moft  deeply  engaged  in 
the  errors  and  corruptions  of  it.  They  brought  them 
in  at  firft,  and  their  fuccefTors,  who  have  been  bred 
up  in  the  belief  and  practice  of  them,  are  concern- 
ed to  uphold  and  maintain  them  :  and  fo  longaprer 
fcription  gives  a  kind  of  facred  ftamp  even  to  error, 
and  an  authority  not  to  be  oppoH^d  and  refilled. 

And 


4^4  Concerningfiedfajlttefs  in  religion. 

SF.RM.  And  thus  it  was  in  the  corrupt  ftate  of  the  Jew- 
^  ^  J  ifli  church,  in  our  Saviour's  time:  and  fo  Jike- 
wife  in  that  great  degeneracy  of  the  Chriftian' 
church,  in  the  times  of  popery,  their  rulers  made 
them  to  err  :  infomuch  that  when  Martin  Luther 
appeared  in  oppofition  to  the  errors  and  fuperftiti- 
ons  of  that  church,  and  was  hard  prefTed  with  this 
very  obje6lion  wliich  the  Pharifees  urged  againft  our 
Saviour,  he  was  forced  to  bolt  out  a  kind  of  un- 
mannerly truth,  religio  nunquam  magis  peridUatur 
quam  inter  reverendijfmws^  "  religion,"  fays  he,  "  is 
"  never  in  greater  hazard  and  worfe  treated,  than 
*'  amongft  the  moft  reverend ;"  meaning  the  pope 
and  his  cardinals,  and  all  the  Flomilh  hierarchy  who 
had  their  dependance  upon  them. 
Obj.  4.  Fourthly,  it  is  objected,  that  as  on  the  one  fsand 

there  may  be  danger  of  error  in  following  blindly  '^ 
the  belief  of  the  church,  fo  on  the  other  hand  there 
is  as  great  a  danger  of  fchifm  in  forfaking  thecom- 
nrunion  of  the  church  upon  pretence  of  errors  and 
corruptions.  Very  true  ;  but  where  great  errors 
and  corruptions  are  not  only  pretended,  but  are  real 
and  evident :  and  where  our  compliance  with  thofe 
errors  and  corruptions  is  made  a  necefTary  condition 
of  our  communion  with  that  church  :  in  that  cafe, 
the  guilt  of  fchifm,  how  great  a  crime  foever  it  be, 
doth  not  fall  upon  thofe  who  forfake  the  communi- 
on of  that  church,  but  upon  thofe  who  drive  them 
out  of  it  by  the  finful  conditions  which  they  impofe 
upon  them. 

And  this  is  truly  the  cafe  between  us   and  the 
church  of  Rome,  as  we   are  ready  to  make  good, 

and 


Concerning  fiedfaflnefs  in  religion,  4 1 5 

and  have  fully  done  it  upon  all  occafions  ;  and  they  S  F,  R  M. 
have  never  yet  been  able  to  vindicate  and  clear 
themfelvcs  of  thofe  grofs  errors  and  corruptions  which 
have  been  charged  upon  them,  and  which  they  re- 
quire of  all  their  members  as  necefiary  conditions 
of  communion  with  them  here,  and  of  eternal  fal- 
vation  hereafter. 

For  we  do  not  objed  to  them  doubtful  matters, 
but  things  as  plain  as  any  are  contained  in  the  bible 
as  every  body  would  fee  if  they  durft  but  let  every 
body  read  it.  The  worfhip  of  images  is  there  as 
plainly  forbidden  in  the  decalogue,  as  murder  and  a- 
dultery  are.  The  communion  in  both  kinds  is  as  ex- 
prefs  an  inftitution  of  our  Saviour,  as  any  in  all 
the  new  teftament ;  and  even  as  the  facrament  of 
the  LoRo's-fupper  it  felf ;  only  that  church  pre- 
tends to  a  difpenfing  power,  as  a  privilege  inherent 
in  their  church  and  infeparable  from  it. 

And,  to  add  but  one  inilance  more  ;  publick 
prayers  and  the  fervice  of  God  in  an  unknown 
tongue,  are  as  plainly  and  fully  declared  againfl  by 
St.  Paul,  in  a  long  chapter  upon  this  Tingle  argu- 
ment, as  any  one  thing  in  all  his  epiftles. 

Thefe  things  are  plain  and  undeniable,  and  being 
fo,  are  a  full  juftification  not  only  of  the  church  of 
England,  in  the  reformation  which  fhe  thought  fit 
to  make  within  her  felf  from  the  grofs  errors  and 
corruptions  of  the  church  of  Rome  •,  but  likewife 
of  particular  perfons  who  have  at  any  tims  for  the 
fame  reafons  withdrawn  themfelves  from  her  commu- 
nion, in  any  of  the  popidi  countries  :  yea  though 
that  fmgle  perfon  (hould  happen  to  be  in  thofe  cir- 

cumftanc^s 


4i6  Concerning  Jledfajlnejs  In  religion. 

S  E  R  M.  cumllances  that  he  could  not  have  the  opportunity 

^ _  _^j  of  holding  communion  with  any  other  church,  that 

was   free  from   thofe   errors  and   corruptions,    and 

which  did  not  impoie  them  as  neceflary  conditions  of 

communion. 

For  if  any  church  fall  off  to  idolatry,  every  good 
Chriftian  not  only  may,  but  ought  to  forfake  her  com- 
munion ;  and  ought  rather  to  ftand  fingle  and  alone 
in  the  profeflion  of  the  pure  and  true  religion, 
than  to  continue  in  the  communion  of  a  corrupt 
and  idolatrous  church. 

I  know  that  fome  men  are  fo  fond  of  the  name 
of  a  church,  that  they  can  very  hardly  believe  that 
any  thing  which  bears  that  glorious  title  can  mifcarry, 
or  do  any  thing  fo  much  amifs  as  to  give  jufl:  occa- 
fion  to  any  of  her  members  to  break  off  from  her 
communion.  What?  the  church  err  ?  That  is  fuch 
an  abfurdity,  as  is  by  many  thought  fufficient  to  put 
any  objedion  out  of  countenance.  That  the  whole 
church,  that  is,  that  all  the  Chriftians  in  the  world 
Ihould  at  any  time  fail  off  to  idolatry  and  into  errors 
and  practices  di redly  contrary  to  the  Chriftian  doc- 
trine revealed  in  the  holy  fcriptures,  is  on  all  hands, 
I  think,  denied  :  but  that  any  particular  church  may 
fall  into  fuch  errors  and  pra6lices  is,  I  think,  as  uni- 
verfally  granted  :  only  in  this  cafe  they  demand  to 
have  the  Roman  cathoiick  church  excepted :  and  why 
I  pray  ?  Becaufe  though  the  Roman  church  is  a  parti- 
cular church,  it  is  alfo  the  univerfal  church  ;  if  this 
can  be,  and  good  fenfe  can  be  made  of  a  particular 
iiniverfal  church,  then  theRoman  church  may  demand 
this  high  privilege  of  being  exempted  from  the  fate 

of 


Concerning  fiedfajinefi  in  religim,  4^7 

of  all  other  churches ;  but  if  the  Roman  chatholick,  S  E  R  M* 

XLIX 
that  is  a  particular  univerfal  church  be  a  grofs  and 

palpable  contradid:ion^,  then  it  is  plain  that  the 
church  of  Rome  hath  no  more  pretence  to  this  pri- 
vilege, than  any  other  particular  church  whatfoever* 

And  which  is  yet  more,  fome  men  talk  of  thefe 
matters  at  that  rate,  as  if  a  man,  who  thought  him- 
felf  obliged  to  quit  the  communion  of  the  church 
of  Rome,  fhould  happen  to  be  in  thofe  circum- 
ftances  that  he  had  no  opportunity  of  joining  him- 
felf  to  any  other  communion^  he  ought  in  that  cafe 
to  give  over  all  thoughts  of  religionj  and  not  be  io 
conceited  and  prefumptuous  as  to  think  of  going  to 
heaven  alone  by  himfelf. 

It  is  without  doubt  a  very  great  fin  to  defpife  the 
communion  of  the  church,  or  to  break  off  from  it 
fo  long  as  we  can  continue  in  it  without  fin  :  but  if 
things  Ihould  once  come  to  that  pafs,  that  we  muft 
cither  difobey  God  for  company,  or  (land  alone  ia 
our  obedience  to  him,  we  ought  mod  certainly  to 
obey  God  whatever  comes  of  it  ;  and  to  profefs  his 
truth,  whether  any  body  elfe  will  join  with  us  in  that 
profeffion  or  not. 

And  they  who  fpeak  otherwife  condemn  the  whole 
reformation,  and  do  in  effeft  fay  that  Martin  Lu- 
ther had  done  a  very  ill  thing  in  breaking  off  from 
the  church  of  Rome,  if  no  body  elfe  would  have 
joined  with  him  in  that  honeft  defign.  And  yet  if 
it  had  been  fo,  I  hope  God  would  have  given  him 
the  grace  and  courage  to  have  flood  alone  in  fo  good 
and  glorious  a  caufe,  and  to  have  laid  down  his  life 
for  it. 

Vol.  III.  5  R  AnsS 


4 1 8  Concerning  fledfafinefs  in  religion, 

S  E  R  M.       And  for  any  man  to  be  of  another  opinion,  is 
XLIX  • 

juft  as  if  a  man  upon  great  deliberation  fhoiild  chufe 

rather  to  be  drowned,  than  to  be  faved  either  by  a 
plank  or  a  fmall  boat  -,  or  to  be  carried  into  the  har- 
bour any  other  way,  than  in  a  great  fhip  of  fo  many 
w  hundred  tuns. 

In  fhort,  a  good  man  mult  refolve  to  obey  God 
and  to  profefs  his  truth,  though  all  the  world  fhould 
happen  to  do  otherwife.  Christ  hath  promifed 
to  preferve  his  church  "  to  the  end  of  the  world," 
that  is,  he  hath  engaged  his  word  that  he  will  take 
care  there  fhall  always  be,  in  fome  part  of  the 
world  or  other,  fome  perfcns  that  fhall  make  a 
fincere  profeflion  of  his  true  religion. 

But  he  hath  no  where  promifed  to  preferve  any 
one  part  of  his  church  from  fuch  errors  and  corrup- 
tions, as  may  oblige  all  good  men  to  q.iit  the  com- 
munion of  that  part  ;  yea,  though  when  they  have 
done  fo,  they  may  not  know  whither  to  refort  for 
aftual  communion  with  any  other  found  part  of  the 
Chriftian  church.  As  it  happened  to  foime  particu- 
lar perfcns,  during  the  reign  and  rage  of  popery  in 
thefe  weftern  parts  of  the  Chriftian  church. 

The  refult  from  all  this  difcourfe  is,  to  confirm 
and  eftablifli  us  all,  in  this  "  hour  of  temptation'* 
and  of  "  the  powers  of  darknefs,"  in  the  well- 
grounded  belief  of  the  neceffity  and  juftice  of  ourre* 
formation  from  the  errors  and  corruptions  of  the  Ro- 
man church.  And  to  engage  us  "  to  hold  fall  the 
*'  profeflion  of -our  faith  without  wavering  :"  and 
not  only  to  profefs  and  promife  as  Peter  did  to  our 
Lord,  "  though  all  men  forfake  thee,  yet  will  not  I:" 

3  but 


Concerni77g  Jledfafinefs  in  religion*  419 

but   if   there   ihouJd    be    occafion,     to    perform  S  E  R  M. 

XLIX 
and  make  good  this  promife  with  the  hazard  of  all 

that  is  dear  to  us,  and  even  of  life  it  felf.     And 

whatever  trials  God  may  permit  any  of  us  to  fall 

into,  to  take  up  the  pious  refolution  of  Jofhua  here 

in  the  text,   that  whatever  others   do,  "  we  will 

"  ferve  the  Lord." 

I  will  conclude  my  difcourfe,  upon  this  firft  par- 
ticular in  the  text,  with  the  exhortation  of  St.  Paul 
to  the  Philippians,  "  only  let  your  converfation  be  qj^  j^ 
"  as  it  becometh  the  gofpel  of  Christ.  Stand  v.  27. 
"  fall  in  one  fpirit,  be  of  one  mmd,  ftriving  to- 
"  gether  for  the  faith  of  the  gofpel  :  in  nothing 
**  terrified  by  your  adveriUries,  which  to  them  is 
"  an  evident  token  of  perdition,  but  to  you  of  fal- 
"  vation,  and  that  of  God.'* 

And  thus  much  may  fuffice  to  have  fpoken  to  the 
firft  thing  in  the  text,  namely,  the  pious  refolution 
of  Jolhua,  that  if  there  were  occafion  and  things 
were  brought  to  that  extremity,  he  would  ftand 
alone  in  the  profeflion  and  pradlice  of  God's  true 
religion  :  "  chufe  you  this  day  whom  ye  will  ferve, 
"  but  as  for  me,  I  will  ferve  the  Lord." 

I  Ihould  now  have  proceeded  to  the  fecond  thing, 
and  which  indeed  1  chiefly  intended  to  ipeak  to 
from  this  text,  namely,  the  pious  care  of  a  good 
father  and  mafter  of  a  family,  to  train  up  thofe 
under  his  charge  in  the  religion  and  worfliip  of  the 
true  God  "  as  for  me  and  my  house,  we  will 
"  ferve  the  Lord."  But  this  I  fhall  now  enter 
upon,  but  defer  it  to  fome  other  opportunity.  "  Con- 
"  fider  what  ye  have  heard,  and  the  Lo  r  d  give 
*'  you  underftanding  ia  all  things." 

5R2  SER- 


4«o 

S  E   R  M   O  N    L. 

Concerning  Fanjily-Religion. 
preached  at  St.  Lawrence- Jury,  July  13,  1684, 

^'     ■-     ■ I.    ■■^■■B    ■■!■■■■    .,  ,.^  .         _,  ,1,.  .         ,  ■■     ■    ■■■^-       ■    I      IM      -■■■         l|.  ■        ..-I     ■  .■ 

JOSH.  XXIV.  15. 
^—But  as  for  me  and  my  houfe,  we  will  ferve  the  Lord. 
S ER  M.  y  SH  A LL  now  proceed  to  the fecond  point  con- 


r 


tained  in  the  text,  namely, 


n.  II.  The  pious  care  of  a  good  mafter  and  father  of 

a  family,  to  train  up  thofe  under  his  charge  in  the 
■worihip  and  fervice  of  the  true  God  :  "  as  for  me 
"  and  my  houfe,  we  will  ferve  the  Lord." 

And  this  is  the  more  necelTary  to  be  fpoken  to, 
bccaufe  it  is  a  great  and  very  eflential  part  of  reli- 
gion, but  ftrangely  overlooked  and  negle(5ted  in  this 
Joofe  and  degenerate  age  in  which  we  live.  It  is  a 
great  part  of  religion  j  for  next  to  our  perfonal  ho- 
mage and  fervice  to  Almighty  God,  and  the  care  of 
our  own  fouls,  it  is  incumbent  upon  us  to  make 
thofe,  who  are  under  our  charge  and  fubjeft  to  our 
authority,  God's  fubjeds,  and  his  children  and  fer- 
vants ;  which  is  a  much  more  honourable  and  hap- 
py relation,  than  that  which  they  bear  to  us. 

Our  children  are  a  natural  part  of  ourfelves,  and 
the  reft  of  our  family  are  a  civil  and  political  part : 

and 


Concerning  family-religion,  42 1 

and  not  only  we  ourfelves,  but  all  that  we  have  and  S  E  R  M. 
that  belongs  to  us  is  God's,  and  ought  to  be  devoted 
to  his  fervice.  And  they  that  have  the  true  fear  of 
God  themfelves,  will  be  careful  to  teach  it  to  others  j 
to  thofe  elpecially  who  are  under  their  more  imme- 
diate care  and  inftrudion.  And  therefore  God  had 
fo  great  a  confidence  concerning  Abraham  as  to  this 
particular,  as  to  undertake  for  him,  that  being  fo 
very  good  a  man  himfelf,  he  would  not  fail  in  fo  great 
and  neceffary  a  part  of  his  duty.  "  For  I  know  him," 
fays  God  of  him,  "  that  he  will  command  hischil- 
"  dren  and  his  houfhold  after  him,  and  they  fhall 
"  keep  the  word  of  the  Lord,  to  do  juftice  and 
"  judgment."  God  paffeth  his  word  for  him,  that 
he  would  not  only  take  care  to  inftrud  his  children 
and  the  reft  of  his  numerous  family  in  the  true  reli- 
gion, but  that  he  would  likewife  lay  a  ftrid  charge 
upon  them  to  propagate  and  tranfmit  it  to  their 
pofterity. 

And  this  certainly  is  the  duty  of  all  fathers  and 
mafters  of  families  ;  and  aneflential  part  of  religion, 
next  to  ferving  God  in  our  own  perfons,  to  be  very 
careful  that  all  that  belong  to  us  do  the  fame.  For 
every  man  muft  not  only  give  an  account  of  him- 
felf to  God,  but  of  thofe  likewife  that  are  com- 
mitted to  his  charge,  that  they  do  not  mifcarry 
through  his-^negleft. 

In  fpeaking  of  this  great  and  neceHary  duty,  I 
Ihall  do  thefe  four  things. 

Firft,  I  fhall  Ihew  wherein  it  doth  confift. 

Secondly,  I  fhall  confider  our  obligation  to  it, 
both  in  point  of  duty  and  of  intereft. 

Thirdly, 


422  Concerning  family-religion, 

^  E  R  M.  Thirdly,  I  fhalJ  enquire  into  the  caufes  of  the  fo 
common  and  fhameful  negledt  of  this  duty,  to  the 
exceeding  great  decay  of  piety  amongft  us. 

Fourthly,  as  a  motive  and  argument  to  us  to  en- 
deavour to  retrieve  the  pradice  of  this  duty,  I  fhall 
reprefent  to  you  the  pernicious  confequences  of  the 
negled  of  it,  both  with  regard  to  ourfelves  and  to 
the  pub',ck.  In  all  which  I  fhall  be  very  brief,  be- 
caufe  things  that  are  plain  need  not  to  be  long. 

•I.  I  fhall  fhew  wherein  the  pra<5tice  of  this  duty 
doth  confift.  And  in  this  I  am  fure  there  is  no  need 
to  be  long,  becaufe  this  duty  is  much  better  known 
than  pradifed.  The  principal  parts  of  it  are  thefe 
following. 

Firft,  by  fetting  up  the  conftant  worfhip  of  God 
in  our  families.  By  daily  prayers  to  God,  every 
morning  and  evening  i  and  by  reading  fome  portion 
of  the  holy  fcriptures  at  thofe  times,  efpecially  out 
of  the  pfalms  of  David,  and  the  new  teftament. 
And  this  is  fo  neceffary  to  keep  alive  and  to  main- 
tain a  fenfe  of  God  and  religion  in  the  minds  of 
men,  that  where  it  is  negledted  I  do  not  fee  how  any 
family  can  in  reafon  be  efteemed  a  family  of  Chrif- 
tians,  or  indeed  to  have  any  religion  at  all. 

And  there  are  not  wanting  excellent  helps  to  this 
purpofe  for  thofe  that  ftand  in  need  of  them,  as  I 
think  moft  families  do  for  the  due  and  decent  dif- 
charge  of  this  folemn  duty  of  prayer :  I  fay,  there 
are  excellent  helps  to  this  purpofe,  in  the  feveral 
books  of  devotion  calculated  for  the  private  ufe  of 
families,  as  well  as  for  fecret  prayers  in  our  clofets. 

So 


Cojicerning  family-religion,  42;^. 

So  that  befides  the  reading  of  the  holy  fcriptures,  S  E  R  M. 
which  are  the  great  fountains  of  divine  truth  ;  we 
may  do  well  likewife  to  add  to  thefe  other  pious 
and  profitable  books,  which  by  their  plainnefs  are 
fitted  for  the  inftrudion  of  all  capacities  in  the  moft 
necellary  poincs  of  belief  and  praftice  :  of  which 
fort,  God  be  thanked,  there  is  an  abundant  ftore; 
but  none  that  I  think  is  more  fitted  for  general  and 
conftant  ufe,  than  that  excellent  book  fo  well  known 
by  the  title  of  "  the  whole  duty  of  m-an ;"  becaufe 
it  is  conveniently  divided  into  parts  or  fedbions  -,  one 
of  which  may  be  read  in  the  family,  at  any  time 
when  there  is  leifure  for  it ;  but  more  efpecially  on 
the  Lord's  day,  when  the  whole  family  may  the 
more  eafily  be  brought  and  kept  together,  and  have 
the  opportunity  to  attend  upon  thefe  things  without 
diftradtion. 

And,  which  I  muft  by  no  means  omit,  becaufe  it 
is  in  many  families  already  gone,  and  in  others  go- 
ing out  of  fafliion  :  I  mean  a  folemn  acknowledg- 
ment of  the  providence  of  God,  by  begging  his 
blelTing  at  our  meals,  upon  his  good  creatures  pro- 
vided for  our  ufe;  and  by  returning  thanks  to  him 
for  the  benefit  and  refrelhment  of  them  :  "this  being 
a  piece  of  natural  religion  owned  and  praftifed  in  all 
ages,  and  in  moft  places  of  the  world  ;  but  never  fo 
ihamefully  and  fcandaloufly  neglefted,  and  I  fear  by 
many  flighted  and  defpifed,  as  it  is  amongft  us  at 
this  day :  and  moft  negleded  where  there  is  greateft 
reafon  for  the  doing  of  it,  I  mean  at  the  moft  plen- 
tiful tables,  and  among  thofe  of  higheft  quality :  as 
if  great  perfons  werealhamed,  or  thought  fcorn  to 

own 


424  Concerning  family -religion, 

SERM.  own  from  whence  thefe  bleflings  come;  like  the 
._.-^'-,_^  nation  of  the  Jews,  of  whom  God  complains  in  the 
Hof.  ii.  8.  prophet,  "  fhe  knew  not  that  I  gave  her  corn, 
"  and  wine,  and  oil,  and  multiplied  her  filver  and 
*«  gold  :"  fhe  knew  not,  that  is,  fhe  would  not  ac^ 
knowledge  from  whofe  bounty  all  thefe  bleflings  came: 
or,  as  if  the  poor  were  obliged  to  thank  God  for  a  ht- 
tie,  but  thofe  who  are  fed  to  the  full,  and  whofe  cups 
overflow,  fo  that  they  are  almoft  every  day  furfeited 
of  plenty,  were  not  at  leaft  equally  bound  to  make 
returns  of  thankful  acknowledgment  to  the  great  giver 
of  all  good  things ;  and  to  implore  his  bounty  and 
blefling,  upon  whom  "  the  eyes  of  all  do  wait,'* 
that  "  he  may  give  them  their  meat  indue  feafon.'* 
"  O  crooked  and  perverfe  generation !"  Do  you 
thus  reafon  ?  **  Do  ye  thus  requite  the  Lord,  fool* 
*'  ifli  and  unwife  ?'*  This  is  a  very  fad  and  broad 
fign  of  the  prevalency  of  atheifm  and  infidelity  a- 
mong  us,  when  fo  natural  and  fo  reafonable  a  piece 
of  religion,  fo  meet  and  equal  an  acknowledgment 
of  the  conftant  and  daily  care  and  providence  of  al- 
mighty God  towards  us,  begins  to  grow  out  of 
date  and  ufe  j  in  a  nation  profefling  religion,  and 
the  belief  of  the  being  and  providence  of  God.  Is 
it  not  a  righteous  thing  with  God  to  take  away  his 
bleflfmgs  from  us,  when  we  deny  him  this  juft  and 
eafy  tribute  of  praife  and  thankfgiving  ?  "  Shall 
*'  not  God  vifit  for  this  horrible  ingratitude  ?  And 
•'  (hall  not  his  foul  be  avenged  on  fuch  a  nation  as 
•'  this  ?  Hear,  O  heavens,  and  be  ye  horribly  afto- 
*'  nilhed  at  this  !'*  I  hope  it  cannot  be  thought 
mifbecoming  the  meaneft  of  God*s  minifters,  in  a 

matter 


L. 


Concerning  family-religion.  42  c 

matter  wherein  the  honour  of  God  is  fo  nearly  con-  S  E  R  M. 
cerned,  to  reprove,  even  in  the  higheft  and  greateft 
of  the  fons  of   men,  fo  fliameful   and  heinous  a 
fault,   with  a  proportionable   vehemence    and    fe- 
verity. 

Secondly,  another,  and  that  alfo  a  very  confider- 
able  part  of  this  duty,  confifts  in  inftruding  thofe 
committed  to  our  charge  in  the  fundamental  prin- 
ciples, and  in  the  careful  praftice  of  the  neceflary 
duties  of  religion ;  inftilling  thefe  into  children  in 
their  tender  years,  as  they  are  capable  of  them, 
"  line  upon  line,  and  precept  upon  precept,  here  a 
*'  little  and  there  a  little  j"  and  into  thofe  that  are 
more  grown  up,  by  proper  and  fuitable  means  of 
inftru6lion,  and  by  furnifliing  them  with  fuch  books 
as  are  moft  proper  to  teach  them  thofe  things  in  re- 
ligion, which  are  moft  neceflary  by  all  to  be  believed 
and  praflifed. 

And  in  order  hereunto  we  fhould  take  care  that 
thofe  under  our  charge,  our  children  and  fervants 
fliould  be  taught  to  read,  becaufe  this  will  make  the 
bufinefs  of  inftruftion  much  eafier ;  fo  that  if  they 
are  diligent  and  well-difpofed  they  may,  after  hav- 
ing been  taught  the  firft  principles  of  religion,  by 
reading  the  holy  fcriptures  and  other  good  books, 
greatly  improve  themfelves,  fo  as  to  be  prepared  to 
receive  much  greater  benefit  and  advantage  by  the 
publick  teaching  of  their  minifters. 

And  in  this  work  of  inftrudlion,  our  great  care 
fhould  be  to  plant  thofe  principles  of  religion  in  our 
children  and  fervants  which  are  moft  fundamental 
and  neceflary,  and  are  like  to  have  the  greateft  and 

Vol.  III.  ^  S  moft 


L. 


426  Concerning  family -religion. 

S  E  R  M.  moft  lafting  influence  upon  their  whole  Jives :  as 
right  and  worthy  apprehenfions  of  God,  efpecially 
of  his  infinite  goodnefs,  and  that  "  he  is  of  purer 
"  eyes  than  to  behold  iniquity  :'*  and  a  lively  fenfe 
alfo  of  the  great  evil  and  danger  of  fin  :  a  firm  be- 
lief of  the  immortality  of  our  fouls,  and  of  the 
unfpeakable  and  endlefs  rewards  and  punifhments  of 
another  world.  If  thefe  principles  once  take  root, 
they  will  fpread  flrangely,  and  probably  flick  by 
them  and  continue  with  them  all  their  days. 

Whereas  if  we  plant  in  them  doubtful  doftrines 
and  opinions,  and  inculcate  upon  them  the  notions  of 
a  fe6i:,  and  the  jargon  of  a  party,  this  will  turn  to  a 
very  pitiful  account,  and  we  mufh  expedt  that  our 
harveft  will  be  anfwerable  to  our  hufoandry  :  '*  we 
*'  have  fown  the  wind,  and  Ihall  reap  the  whirl- 
•'  wind."  But  of  this  I  fhall  have  occafion  to 
fpeak  more  particularly  and  fully  in  the  enfuing  fer- 
jnons  concerning  the  good  education  of  children. 

And  this  work  of  inftruftion  of  thofe  that  are 
under  our  charge,  as  it  ought  not  to  be  neglefled 
at  other  times,  fo  is  it  more  peculiarly  feafonable  on 
the  LoRD*s  day,  which  ought  to  be  em.ployed  by  us 
to  religious  purpofes,  and  in  the  exercifes  of  piety 
and  devotion :  chiefly  in  the  publick  worfliip  and 
fervice  of  God,  upon  which  we  fhould  take  care 
that  our  children  and  fervants  fhould  diligently  and 
devoutly  attend.  Becaufe  there  God  affords  the 
means  which  he  hath  appointed  for  the  begetting 
and  increafing  of  piety  and  goodnefs,  and  to  which 
he  hath  promifed  a  more  efpecial  bleffing :  there 
they  will  have  the  opportunity  of  joining  in  the 

pub- 


Concerning  family  -religion. 
publick  prayers  of  God's  church,  and  of  fharing 
in  the  unfpeakable  benefit  and  advantage  of  them : 
and  there  they  will  alfo  have  the  advantage  of  be- 
ing inftru6led  by  the  miniders  of  God  in  the  ^oz- 
trine  of  falvation,  and  the  way  to  eternal  life  ;  and 
of  being  powerfully  incited  to  the  praftice  of  piety 
and  virtue. 

There  likewife  they  will  be  invited  totheLoRD*s 
table,  to  participate  of  the  holy  facrament  of 
Christ's  moft  blefled  body  and  blood;  which  be- 
ing the  moft  folemn  inftitution  of  the  Chriftian  re- 
ligion, the  frequent  participation  whereof  is  by  our 
ble fifed  Lord,  in  remembrance  of  his  dying  love, 
enjoined  upon  all  Chriftians,  we  ought  to  take  a  very 
particular  care  that  thofe  who  are  under  our  charge, 
fo  foon  as  they  are  capable  of  it,  be  duly  inftrufted 
and  prepared  for  it ;  that  fo,  as  often  as  opportunity 
is  offered  for  it,  they  may  be  prefent  at  this  holy 
adion,  and  partake  of  the  ineftimable  benefits  and 
comforts  of  it. 

And  when  the  publick  worfbip  of  that  day  is 
over,  our  families  fhould  be  inftruded  at  home,  by 
having  the  fcriptures  and  other  good  books  read  to 
them  ;  and  care  likewife  fhould  be  taken  that  they 
do  this  themfelves  -,  this  being  the  chief  opportuni- 
ty that  moft  of  them,  efpecially  thofe  that  are  fer- 
vants,  have  of  minding  the  bufmefs  of  religion, 
and  thinking  ferioufly  of  another  world. 

And  therefore  I  cannot  but  think  it  of  very  great 
confequence  to  the  maintaining  and  keeping  alive  of 
religion  in  the  world,  that  this  day  be  religiouOy 
obferved,  and  fpent  as  much  as  may  be  in  the  exer- 

5  S  2  cifes 


428  Concerning  family-religion, 

E  R  M.  cifes  of  piety,  and  in  the  care  of  our  fouls.  For 
furely  every  one  that  hath  a  true  fenfe  of  religion, 
will  grant  that  it  is  neceflary  that  fome  time  fhould 
be  folemnly  fet  apart  for  this  purpofe,  which  is  of 
all  other  our  greateft  concernment :  and  they  who 
negleft  this  fo  proper  feafon  and  opportunity,  will 
hardljt  find  any  other  time  for  it :  efpecially  thofe 
who  are  under  the  government  and  command  of 
others,  as  children  and  fervants,  who  are  feldom  up- 
on any  other  day  allowed  to  be  fo  much  mailers  of 
their  time,  as  upon  this  day. 

Thirdly,  I  add  farther,  as  a  confiderable  part  of 
the  duty  of  parents  and  mailers  of  families,  if  they 
be  defirous  to  have  their  children  and  fervants  reli- 
gious in  good  earneft,  and  would  fet  them  forward 
in  the  way  to  heaven,  that  they  do  not  only  allow 
them  tiilfie  and  opportunity,  but  that  they  do  alfo 
flridlly  and  earneftly  charge  them  to  retire  them- 
felves  every  day,  but  more  efpecially  on  the  Lord's 
day,  morning  and  evening,  to  pray  to  God  for  the 
forgivenefs  of  their  fins,  and  for  his  mercy  and 
blefling  upon  them  ;  and  likewife  to  praife  him  for 
all  his  favours  and  benefits  conferred  upon  them 
from  day  to  day. 

And  in  order  to  this,  they  ought  to  take  care 
that  their  children  and  fervants  be  furnifhed  with 
fuch  fhort  forms  of  prayer  and  praife,  as  are  proper 
and  fuitable  to  their  capacities  and  conditions  re- 
fpe<ftively  ;  becaufe  there  are  but  very  few  that 
know  how  to  fet  about  and  perform  thefe  duties, 
efpecially  at  firft,  without  fome  helps  of  this  kind.- 

Fourthly 


Concerning  family-religion.  '      429 

Fourthly  and  laftly,  another  principal  part  of  this  SERM. 
duty  confifts  in  giving  good  example  to  our  families.  ^^^'^^ 
This  was  David's  refolution,  "  I  will  behave  mylelf  Pf.  d.  2. 
**  wifely  in  a  perfect  way,  I  will  walk  within  my 
*'  houfe  with  a  perfed  heart."     Take  grcat  care  to 
be  exemplary  to  thy  family  in  the  bed  things  ;  in 
a  conftant  and  devout  ferving  of  God,  and  in  a  fo- 
ber  and  prudent  and  unblameable  converfation. 

One  of  the  beft  and  moil  effedliial  ways  to  make 
thofe,  who  are  under  our  care  and  authority,  good, 
is  to  be  good  our  felves,  and  by  our  good  example 
to  (hew  them  the  way  to  be  fo.  Without  this  our 
beft  inftru6lions  will  fignify  but  very  little,  and  the 
main  force  and  efficacy  of  them  will  be  loft.  We 
undermine  the  beft  inftrudlions  we  can  give,  when 
they  are  not  feconded  and  confirmed  by  our  own 
example  and  practice.  The  want  of  this  will 
weaken  the  authority  of  all  our  good  counfel,  and 
very  little  reverence  and  obedience  will  be  paid  to 
it.  The  precepts  and  admonitions  of  a  very  good 
man  have  in  them  a  great  power  of  perfuafion,  and 
are  apt  ftrongly  to  move  and  to  inflame  others  to  "  go 
*'  and  do  likewife :"  but  the  good  inftrudlions  of  a  bad 
man  are  languid  and  faint,  and  of  very  little  force  ; 
becaufe  they  give  no  heart  and  encouragement  to 
follow  that  counfel,  which  they  fee  he  that  gives  it 
does  not  think  fit  to  take  himfelf  But  of  this  like- 
wife  I  Ihall  have  occafion  to  fpeak  more  fully  in  the 
following  difcourfes  concerning  the  good  education 
of  children.  And  thus  much  may  fuffice  to  have 
fpoken  of  the  firft  thing  which  I  propofed,  nam-ely, 
wherein  the  pradice  of  this  duty  doth  confift.  I 
proceed  to  the  fecond,  namely,  ,        II.  Td 


430  Concerning  fafjtily-religton. 

S  E  RM.       j-j-_  'j^Q  confider  our  obligation  to  it,  both  in  point 
of  duty  and  of  intereft. 

Firfb,  in  point  of  duty.  All  authority  over  others 
is  a  talent  entrufted  with  us  by  God  for  the  benefit 
and  good  of  others  ;  and  for  which  we  are  account- 
able, if  we  do  not  improve  it  and  make  ufe  of  it  to 
that  end.  We  are  obliged  by  all  lawful  means  to 
provide  for  the  temporal  welfare  of  our  family,  to 
feed  and  clothe  their  bodies,  and  to  give  them  a 
comfortable  fubfiflence  here  in  the  world :  and  fure- 
]y  much  more  are  we  obliged  to  take  care  of  their 
fouls,  and  to  confult  their  eternal  happinefs  in  ano- 
ther life  -,  in  comparifon  of  which  all  temporal  con- 
cernments and  confiderations  are  as  nothing. 
"  It  would  be  accounted  a  very  barbarous  thing  in  a 
father  or  mafter  to  fuffer  a  child  to  ftarve  for  want 
of  the  neceflaries  of  life,  food  and  raiment,  and  all 
the  world  would  cry  fhame  upon  them  for  it  :  but 
how  much  greater  cruelty  muft  it  in  reafon  be 
thought  to  let  an  immortal  foul,  and  one  for  whom 
Christ  died,  perifh  for  want  of  knowledge  and 
necefiary  inftrudion  for  the  attaining  of  eternal 
falvation  ? 

The  apoftle  St.  Paul  thinks  no  words  bad  enough 
for  thofe  who  negle6l  the  temporal  welfare  of  their 
families,  "  he  that  provideth  not,"  faith  he,  "  for 
«'  his  own,  efpecially  for  thofe  of  his  own  houfe, 
"  hath  denied  the  faith,  and  is  worfe  than  an  infidel  ;'* 
that  is,  he  does  not  deferve  the  name  of  a  Chrillian, 
who  neglefls  a  duty  to  which  from  the  plain  di(5tates 
of  nature  a  heathen  thinks  himfelf  obliged.  What 
then  fhall  be  faid  for  tjiem  who  take  no  care  to 
\  provide. 


Concerning  family -religion, 
provide  for  the  everlafting  happinefs,  and  to  pre- 
vent the  eternal  mifery  and  ruin  of  thofe  who  are 
fo  immediately  under   their   charge,  and  fo  very 
nearly  related  to  them  ? 

We  are  obliged  to  procure  the  happinefs  of  our 
children  not  only  by  the  laws  of  Chriilianity,  but 
likewife  by  all  the  natural  bonds  of  duty  and  affec- 
tion. For  our  children  are  a  part  of  our  felves,  and 
if  they  periih  by  our  fault  and  negled,  it  will  be  a 
perpetual  wound  and  fling  to  us  \  their  blood  will  be 
upon  our  heads,  and  the  guilt  of  it  will  for  ever 
lye  at  our  doors. 

Nay,  we  are  obliged  likewife  in  juftice,  and  by 
way  of  reparation,  to  take  all  poffible  care  of  their 
happinefs  ;  for  we  have  conveyed  a  fad  inheritance 
to  them,  in  thofe  corrupt  and  evil  inclinations  which 
they  have  derived  from  us  :  and  therefore  we  fhould 
with  the  greatefl  care  and  diligence  endeavour  to 
redlify  their  perverfe  natures,  and  to  cure  thofe 
curfed  difpofitions  to  evil  which  we  have  tranfmit- 
ted  to  them  :  and  fjnce  God  hath  been  pleafed  in 
fo  much  mercy  to  provide,  by  the  abundant  grace 
of  the  gofpel,  fo  powerful  a  remedy  for  this  here- 
ditary difeafe  of  our  corrupt  and  degenerate  nature, 
we  fliould  do  what  in  us  lies,  that  they  may  partake 
of  the  bleffing  and  benefit  of  it. 

And  as  to  other  members  of  our  family,  whether' 
they  be  fervants,  or  other  relations  of  whom  we 
have  taken  the  charge  ;  common  humanity  will 
oblige  us  to  be  concerned  for  their  happinefs  as  they 
are  men,  and  of  the  fame  nature  with  our  felves  ; 
and  charity  likewife,  as  they  are  Chriftians  and  bap- 

tifed 


Concerning  family'rdigion? 

tifed  into  the  fame  faith,  and  capable  of  the  fame 
common  falvation,  does  yet  more  llridlly  oblige  us 
by  all  means  to  endeavour  that  they  may  be  made 
partakers  of  it ;  efpecially  fince  they  are  committed 
to  our  care,  and  for  that  reafon  we  muft  exped  to 
he  accountable  to  God  for  them. 

So  that  our  obligation  in  point  of  duty  is  very 
clear  and  ftrong,  and  if  we  be  remifs  and  negligent 
in  the  difcharge  of  it,  we  can  never  anfwer  it  either 
to  God,  or  to  our  ov/n  confciences  :  which  I  hope 
will  awaken  us  all  who  are  concerned  in  it  to  the 
ferious  confideration  of  it,  and  effedually  engage 
us  for  the  future  to  the  faithful  and  confcientious  per- 
formance of  it. 

Secondly,  we  are  hereto  likewife  obliged  in  point 
of  intereft  ;  becaufe  it  is  really  for  our  fervice  and 
advantage  that  thofe  that  belong  to  us  fhould  ferve 
and  fear  God  :  religion  being  the  beft  and  fureft 
foundation  of  the  duties  of  all  relations,  and  the  beft 
caution  and  fecurity  for  the  true  difcharge  and  per- 
formance of  them. 

Would  we  have  dutiful  and  obedient  children, 
diligent  and  faithful  fervants  ?  Nothing  will  fo  ef- 
fedually  oblige  them  to  be  fo,  as  the  fear  of  God 
and  the  principles  of  religion  firmly  fettled  and 
rooted  in  them.  Abraham,  who  by  the  teftimony 
of  God  himfclf  was  fo  eminent  an  example  in  this 
kind,  both  of  a  good  father  and  a  good  mafter  of 
his  family,  found  the  good  fuccefs  of  his  religious 
care  in  the  happy  efFeds  of  it,  both  upon  his  fon 
Ifaac,  and  his  chief  fervant  and  fteward  of  his  houfe, 
Eliezer  of  Damsfcus, 

What 


Concerning  family -religion. 

What  an  unexampled  inftance  of  the  moft  pro- 
found refpeft  and  obedience  to  the  commands  of  his 
father  did  Ifaac  give,  when  without  the  lead  mur- 
muring or  reluftancy  he  fubmitted  to  be  bound  and 
laid  upon  the  altar,  and  to  have  been  flain  for  a  fa- 
crifice  ;  if  God  had  not,  by  an  angel  fent  on  pur- 
pofe,  interpofed  to  prevent  it  ? 

What  an  admirable  fervant  to  Abraham  was  the 
fteward  of  his  houfe,  Eliezer  of  Damafcus  ?  How 
diligent  and  faithful  was  he  in  his  mailer's  fervice  ? 
So  that  he  trufted  him  in  his  greatefl:  concernments 
and  with  all  that  he  had.  And  when  he  employed 
him  in  that  great  affair  of  the  marriage  of  his  fon 
Ifaac,  what  pains  did  he  take,  what  prudence  did  he 
ufe,  what  fidelity  did  he  fliew  in  the  difcharge  of 
that  great  truft,  giving  himfelf  no  reft  till  he  had 
accompli fhed  the  bufinefs  he  was  fent  about  ?  God 
feems  purpcfely  to  have  left  thefe  two  inftances  up-^ 
on  record  in  fcripture,  to  encourage  fiuhers  and  ma* 
fters  of  families  to  a  religious  care  of  their  childreri 
and  fervants. 

And  to  fhew  the  power  of  religion  to  oblige  rrieri 
to  their  duty,  I  will  add  but  one  inftance  more. 
How  did  the  fear  of  God  fecure  Jofeph's  fidelity 
to  his  mafter,  in  the  cafe  of  a  very  great  and  violent 
temptation  ?  When  there  was  nothing  tl'^o.  to  re- 
train him  from  fo  lewd  and  wicked  an  a6l,  and  to 
which  he  was  fo  powerfully  tempted,  the  confidera- 
tion  of  the  great  truft  his  mafter  repofed  in  him  and 
the  fenfe  of  his  duty  to  him,  but  above  all  the  fe^ir 
of  God  preferved  him  from  confenting  to  fo  vile 
and  wicked  an  a6lion,  "  how  can  I,"  fays  he,  "  do 
"  this  great  wickednefs  and  fin  againft  God  ?" 

Vol.  III.  5  T  S© 


Concerning  family -religion. 
So  that  in  prudence,  and  from  a  wife  confidera- 
tion  of  the  great  benefit  and  advantage  which  will 
thereby  redound  to  us,  we  ought  with  the  great- 
eft  care  to  inftil  the  principles  of  religion  into 
thofe  that  belong  to  us.  For  if  the  feeds  of  true 
piety  be  fown  in  them,  we  fhall  reap  the  fruits  of 
it :  and  if  this  be  negleded,  we  fhall  certainly  find 
the  mifchief  and  inconvenience  of  it.  If  our  chil- 
dren and  fervants  be  not  taught  to  fear  and  reve- 
rence God,  how  can  we  expeft  that  they  fhould  re- 
verence and  regard  us  ?  At  leaft  we  can  have  no  fure 
hold  of  them.  For  nothing  but  religion  lays  an 
obligation  upon  corfcience,  nor  is  there  any  other 
certain  bond  of  duty  and  obedience  and  fidelity: 
men  will  break  loofe  from  all  other  ties  when  a  fit 
occafion  and  a  fair  opportunity  doth  ftrongly  tempt 
them.  And  as  religion  is  necefTary  to  procure  the 
favour  of  God,  and  all  the  comfort  and  happinefs 
which  that  brings  along  with  it,  fo  it  is  necelTary 
like  wife  to  fecure  the  mutual  duties  and  offices  of 
men  to  one  another.  I  proceed  to  the  third  thing 
which  I  propofed,  namely, 

III.  To  enquire  into  the  caufes  of  the  fo  common 
and  (hameful  negledl  of  this  duty,  to  the  exceeding 
great  decay  of  piety  among  us.  And  this  may  in 
part  be  afcribed  to  our  civil  confufions  and  diftrac- 
tions,  but  chiefiy  to  our  dilTentions  and  differences 
in  religion,  which  have  not  only  divided  and  fcat- 
tered  our  parochial  churches  and  congregations,  but 
have  entred  likewife  into  our  families,  and  made 
great  diflurbances  and  diforders  there. 

Firfl. 


Concernmg  family-religion,  435 

Firft,  this  may  in  good  part  be  afcribed  to  our  SERM. 
civiJ  confufions  and  diftradions,  wriich  for  the  time 
do  lay  all  laws  aQeep,  and  do  not  only  occafion  a 
general  licentioufnefs  and  diffolutenefs  of  manners, 
but  have  ufually  a  proportionable  bad  influence  up- 
on the  order  and  government  of  families;  by  weak- 
ning  the  authority  of  thofe  that  govern,  and  by 
giving  the  opportunity  of  greater  licenfe  to  thofe 
that  fhould  be  governed  :  for  when  publick  laws 
lofe  their  authority,  it  is  hard  to  maintain  and  keep 
up  the  ftri6t  rules  and  orders  of  families,  which  af- 
ter a  great  and  long  diforder  are  very  hard  to  be 
retrieved  and  recovered. 

Secondly,  this  great  negleft  and  decay  of  reli- 
gious order  in  families  is  chiefly  owing  to  our  dif- 
fentions  and  differences  in  religion,  upon  occafion 
whereof  many  under  the  pretence  of  confcience  have 
broke  loofe  into  a  boundlefs  liberty.  So  that  among 
the  manifold  ill  confequences  of  our  divifions  in  re- 
ligion this  is  none  of  the  leaft,  that  the  religious 
order  of  families  hath  been  in  a  great  meafure  broken 
and  diffolved.  Some  will  not  meet  at  the  fame 
prayer  in  the  family,  nor  go  to  the  fame  church  and 
place  of  publick  worfhip  -,  and  upon  that  pretence 
take  the  liberty  to  do  what  they  pleafe,  and  under 
colour  of  ferving  God  in  a  different  way  according 
to  their  confciences,  do  either  wholly  or  in  great 
meafure  negled  the  worfhip  of  God  ;  nay,  it  is 
well  if  they  do  not  at  that  time  haunt  and  frequent 
places  of  debauchery  and  lewdnefs  \  which  they  may 
fafely  do,  being  from  under  the  eye  of  their  parents 
and  mailers:  however,  by  this  means  it  becomes 
5  T  2  impoffible 


436  Concerning  family -religion. 

S.ERM.  impoflible  for  the  moft  careful  mafters  of  families, 
to  take  an  account  of  thofe  under  their  charge, 
how  they  fpend  their  time  on  the  Lord's-day,  and 
to  train  them  up  in  any  certain  and  orderly  way  of 
religion. 

And  this  methinks  is  fo  great  and  fenfible  an  in- 
convenience, and  hath  had  fuch  difmal  effeds  in 
many  families,  as  ought  effedually  to  convince  us 
of  the  neceffity  of  endeavouring  a  greater  union  in 
matters  of  religion  ;  and  to  put  us  in  mind  of  thofe 
happy  days  when  God  was  ferved  in  one  way,  and 
whole  "  families  went  to  the  houfe  of  God  in 
"  companies ;"  and  fathers  and  mafters  had  their  chil- 
dren and  fervants  continually  under  their  eye,  and 
they  were  all  united  in  their  worfhip  and  devotion, 
both  in  their  own  houfes,  and  in  the  houfe  of  God  ; 
and  by  this  means  the  work  of  religious  education 
and  inftruftion  was  effeftually  carried  on,  and  a 
fteady  authority  and  decent  order  was  maintained 
in  families  ;  men  were  edified  and  built  up  in  reli- 
gion, and  God  in  all  things  was  glorified. 

And  we  may  afllire  our  felves,  that  till  we  are 
better  agreed  in  matters  of  religion,  and  our  un- 
happy and  childifh  difi?erences  are  laid  afide  ;  and 
till  the  publick  and  unanimous  worfhip  of  God  do 
in  fome  meafure  recover  it's  reputation,  the  good 
order  and  government  of  families  as  to  the  great 
ends  of  religion  is  never  likely  to  obtain  and  to  have 
any  confiderable  effect.  Which  I  hope  will  make 
all  men  who  heartily  love  God  and  religion,  ta.coiv 
fider  ferioufly  how  neceffary  it  is  to  put  an  end  to 
thefe  differences  \  that   in  our  private  families,  as 

well 


Concerning  family-religion.  4.3  7 

well  as  in  the  publick  aflemblies  of  the  chiirchj  \Ve  S  E  R  M. 
may  "  with  one  mind  and  with  one  mouth  glorify  ,   -'~_f 
"  God,    even   the  Father  of  our   Lord  Jesus 
"  Christ." 

"  I  befeech  you  therefore,  brethren,"  as  St.  Paul  '  ^^'  ^• 
exhorts  the  Corinthians,  "  by  the  name  of  our  Lord 
"  Jesus  Christ,  that  ye  all  fpeak  the  fame  thing, 
"  and  that  there  be  no  divifions  among  you,  but  that 
•*  ye  be  perfe6lly  joined  together  in  the  fame  mind, 
"  and  in  the  fame  judgment  •,"  that  is,  fo  far  as  is 
neceffary  to  the  "  keeping  of  the  unity  of  the  fpirit 
"  in  the  bond  of  peace,"  and  to  prevent  divifions 
and  feparations  among  Chriftians.  I  proceed  to  the 
fourth  and  laft  thing  I  propofed,  and  which  remains 
to  be  very  briefly  fpoken  to,  namely, 

IV.  The  very  mifchievous  and  fatal  confequences 
of  the  negledt  of  this  duty,  both  to  the  publick, 
and  to  our  felves. 

Firft,  to  the  publick.  Families  are  the  firft  fe- 
minaries  of  religion,  and  if  care  be  not  there  taken 
to  prepare  perfons,  efpecially  in  their  tender  years, 
for  publick  teaching  and  inftru(5lion,  it  is  like  to 
have  but  very  little  effed:.  The  negledl  of  a  due 
preparation  of  our  children  and  fervants  at  home, 
to  make  them  capable  of  profiting  by  what  they 
hear  and  may  learn  at  church,  is  like  an  error  in 
the  firft  conco6tion  which  can  hardly  ever  be  cor- 
re(5ted  afterwards.  So  that  in  this  firft  negledt  the 
foundation  of  an  infinite  mifchief  is  laid  -,  becaufe  if 
no  care  be  taken  of  perfons  in  their  younger  years, 

when 


43  8  Concerning  family-religion, 

SERM.  when  they  are  moft  capable  of  the  imprefTions  of  re- 
ligion, how  can  it  reafonably  be  expe6led  that  they 
fliould  come  to  good  afterwards  ?  And  if  they  con- 
tinue void  of  the  fear  of  God,  which  there  hath 
been  no  care  taken  to  plant  in  them,  they  will  al- 
nioft  neceffarily  be  bad  in  all  relations  ;  undutiful 
children,  (lothful  and  unfaithful  fervants,  fcanda- 
lous  members  of  the  church,  unprofitable  to  the 
commonwealth,  difobedient  to  governors  both  ec- 
clefiaflical  and  civil  \  and  in  a  word,  burthens  of 
the  earth,  and  fo  many  plagues  of  human  fo- 
ciety  :  and  this  evil,  if  no  remedy  be  applied  to 
it,  will  continually  grow  worfe,  and  diffufe  and 
fpread  it  felf  farther  in  every  age,  till  impiety  and 
wickednefs,  infidelity  and  profanenefs  have  over- 
run ail,  and  the  world  be  ripe  for  it's  final  ruin  : 
juft  as  it  was  before  the  deftrucflion  of  the  old 
world,  when  "  the  wickednefs  of  man  was  great 
"  upon  the  earth,"  and  "all  fiefh  had  corrupted  their 
*'  way,'*  then  "  the  flood  came  and  fwept  them 
«  all  away." 

Secondly,  the  confequences  of  this  negle<5l  will 
likewife  be  very  difmal  to  our  felves.  We  fnall  firft 
of  all  others  feel  the  inconvenience,  as  we  had  the 
greateft  fhare  in  the  guilt  of  it.  We  can  have  no 
manner  of  fccurity  of  the  duty  and  fidelity  of  thofe 
of  our  family  to  us,  if  they  have  no  fenfe  of  reli- 
gion, no  fear  of  God  before  their  eyes.  If  we 
have  taken  no  care  to  inflruft  them  in  their  duty  to 
God,  it  is  no  wife  probable  that  they  will  make 
confcience  of  their  duty  to  us. 

So 


Concerning  family'religion,  4^^ 

So  that  we  Ihall  have  the  firft  ill  confequences  S  E  R  M. 
of  their  mifcarriagc,  befides  the  fliame  and  forrow 
of  it  :  and  not  only  fo,  but  all  the  evil  they  com- 
mit ever  after,  will  be  in  a  great  meafure  chargeable 
upon  us,  and  will  be  put  upon  our  fcore  in  the 
judgment  of  the  great  day.  It  ought  to  make  us 
tremble  to  think  with  what  bitternefs  and  rage  our 
children  and  fervants  will  then  fly  in  our  faces,  for 
having  been  the  caufe  of  their  eternal  ruin,  for 
want  of  due  care  on  our  part  to  prevent  it.  In 
that  day,  next  to  Go  d  and  our  own  confciences, 
our  moft  terrible  accufers  will  be  thofe  of  our  own 
houfe,  nay  thofe  that  came  out  of  our  own  bowels, 
and  were  not  only  part  of  our  family,  but  even  of 
our  felves.  But  this  alfo  I  fhall  have  a  proper  oc- 
cafion  to  profecute  more  fully  in  the  following  dif- 
courfes  concerning  the  education  of  children,  to 
which  I  refer  it. 

Upon  all  thefe  confiderations  and  many  more 
that  might  be  urged  upon  us,  we  fhould  take  up 
the  pious  refolution  of  Jofhua  here  in  the  text, 
that  "  we  and  our  houses  will  ferve  the  Lord  :'* 
and  that,  through  God's  grace,  we  will  do  all  that 
in  us  lies  by  our  future  care  and  diligence  to  repair 
our  former  neglefls  in  this  kind. 

I  Ihall  only  add  this  one  confideration  more  to 
all  that  I  have  already  mentioned  :  if  children  were 
carefully  educated,  and  families  regularly  and  reli- 
gioufly  ordered,  what  a  happy  and  delightful  place, 
what  a  paradife  would  this  world  be,  in  comparifon 
of  what  now  it  is  ? 

I  befeech 


L. 


4/J.0  Concerning  family-religion. 

S  E  R  M-  I  befeech  you  therefore,  brethren,  that  thefe  things 
which  I  have  with  fo  much  plainnefs  and  faithful- 
nefs  laid  before  you,  may  fink  into  your  hearts, 
before  it  be  too  late,  and  whilft  the  thing  may  be 
remedied  •,  that  you  may  not  for  ever  lament  this 
negleft  and  repent  of  it,  when  the  thing  will  be 
pad  remedy,  and  there  will  be  no  place  for  repent- 
ance. "  But  I  hope  better  things  of  you,  bre- 
"  thren,  and  things  that  accompany  falvation, 
"  though  I  thus  fpeak." 


r- 


A  Tabic 


A  Table  of  the  Texts  of  each 
Sermon, 

SERMON    XXXV. 

MATTH.  XXV.  46.  And  thefe  Jhall go  away 
hito  everlajiing  punijhment^  but  the  righteous 
into  life  eternal.  page  3- 

SERMON    XXXVI. 

ECCLES.  ix.  II.  1  returned,  and  faw  under  the 
fun,  that  the  race  is  not  to  the  fwift,  nor  the  battel 
to  the  flrong,  Jior  yet  bread  to  the  wife,  nor  yet  riches 
to  men  of  underfianding,  nor  yet  favour  to  men  of 
Jkill  \  hit  time  and  chance   ha-ppeneth  to  them  all. 

p.  26. 

SERMON    XXXVII. 

J  E  R  E  M I A  H  vi.  8.  Be  thou  inflru^ed,  0  Jerufa- 
lem,  left  my  foul  depart  from  thee,  tefl  I  make  thee 
defolate,  a  land  not  inhabited.  p.  c^c^. 

SERMON    XXXVIII. 

ACTS  xxiv.  1 6.  And  herein  do  I  exercife  myfelf^ 
to  have  always  a  confcience  void  of  offence^  towards 
God,  and  towards  men.  p.  81. 


Vol.  III.  5  U  S  E  R- 

8 


A  Table  of  the  Texts. 
SERMON    XXXIX. 

Z  E  C  H.  vii.  5.  Speak  unto  all  the  people  of  the 
land,  and  to  the  priejts,  faying,  when  ye  fafied  and 
mourned  in  the  fifth  and  feventh  month,  even  thofe 
feventy  years,  did  ye   at  all  fast  unto   me, 

EVEN  UNTO  ME?  p.  IO7. 

SERMON    XL. 

PSALM  Ixxiii.  25,  Whom  have  I  in  heaven  hut 
thee  ?  and  there  is  none  upon  earth  that  I  defire  he- 
fides  thee.  p.  185. 

SERMON     XLI. 

JEREM.  ix.  23,  24.  '^hus  faith  the  Lord,  let 
not  the  wife  man  glory  in  his  wifdom,  neither  let  the 

•  7nighty  man  glory  in  his  might :  let  not  the  rich  man 
glory  in  his  riches  :  hut  let  him  that  glorieth  glory  in 
this,  that  he  iinderftandeth  and  knoweth  me,  that  I 
am  the  Lord,  which   exercife  loving-hndnefs,  and 

■ '  judgment,  and  righteoufnefs  in  the  earth :  for  in  thefe 
things  I  delight,  faith  /^^  Lor  d  .  p.  j  6 2 . 

SERMON     XLII. 
TIT.  iii.  2.  To  fpcak  evil  of  710  man.  p.  189. 

SERMON    XLIII. 

J  O  H  N  i.  14.  The  Word  was  made  flcflo,  and  dwelt 
amongfi  us  -,  and  we  beheld  his  glory,  the  glory  as 

of 


A  Table  of  the  Texts. 

of  the  only  begotten  of  the  Father ^  full  of  grace  and 
truth.  p.  2  21', 

SERMON    XLIV. 

J  O  H  N  i.  14.  'The  Word  was  rmdeflefh.      p.' 247. 

SERMON    XLV. 
J  O  H  N  i.  14.  The  Word  was  inadeflefld.       p.  284. 

SERMON    XLVI. 
J  O  H  N  i.   14.  The  Word  was  madeflefh.      p.  304. 

SERMON    XEVIL. 

H  E  B.  ix.  6.  But  720ZV  once  hath  he  appeared  in  the 
end  of  the  worlds  to  take  away  fin  by  the  facrifice  of 
himfelf  p.  330; 

SERMON    XLVIII. 

I  T  IM.  ii.  5.  For  there  is  one  God.  p.  358.. 

SERMON    XLIX. 

JOSH,  xxlv,  15. — But  as  for  me  and  my  houfe,  we 
willferve  the  Lord.  p.  397. 

SERMON    L. 

JOSH.  xxiv.  15. — But  as  for  me  and  my  houfe,  we 
willferve  the  Lord.  p.  4^0, 

The  End  of  the  Third  Volume. 


ytifi  piihlijhed  the  tenth  Edition,   with  con/ider* 
able  Improvements, 

An  Univerfal  Etymological 

jEiVGZ./^'iy  DICTIONARY; 

Comprehending  the  Derivations  of  the  Generality  of  Words  in 
the  Englifh  Tongue,  either  Ancient  or  Modern^  from  the  Ancient 
Britifh,  Saxon,  Danifli,  Norman,  and  Modern  French,  Teutonic, 
Dutch,  Spanifh,  Italian  ;  as  alfo  from  the  Latin,  Greek,  and  He- 
brew Languages,  each  in  their  proper  Chara£ters. 

And  alfo  a  brief  and  clear  Explication  of  all  difficult  Words,  de- 
rived from  any  of  the  aforefaid  Languages,  and  Terms  of  Art,  re- 
lating to  Anatomy,  Botany,  Phyfick,  Pharmacy,  Surgery,  Chy- 
jniftry,  Philofophy,  Divinity,  Mathematicks,  Grammar,  Logick, 
Rhetorick,  Mufic'k,  Heraldry,  Maritime  Affairs,  Military  Difci- 
pline,  Horfemanfnip,  Hunting,  Hawking,  Fowling,  Fifhing, 
Gardening,  Huftandry,  Handicrafts,  Confeftionary,  Carving, 
Cookery,  &c. 

Together  with  a  large  Cclleftion  and  Explication  of  Words  and 
Phrafes  ufed  in  our  ancient  Statutes,  Charters,  Writs,  Old  Re- 
cords, and  Proceffes  in  Law  ;  and  the  Etymology,  and  Interpre- 
tation of  the  Proper  Names  of  Men,  Women,  and  Remarkable 
Places  in  Great-Britain:  Alio  the  Dialefts  of  our  diirerent  Coun- 
tries. Containing  many  Thoufand  Words  more  than  either  Har- 
ris, Philips,  Kerfey,  or  any  Englifh  Didionary  before  extant. 

To  which  is  added,  a  ColIe£lion  of  our  moft  common  Proverbs, 
with  their  Explication  and  Illullration. 

The  whole  Work  compiled  and  methodically  digefted,  as  well 
for  the  Entertainment  of  the  Curious,  a£  the  Information  of  the 
Ignorant ;  and  for  the  Benefit  ofyoung  Students,  Artificers,  Tradef- 
men,  and  Foreigners,  who  are  defirous  thoroughly  to  underftand 
what  they  Speak,  Read,  or  Write. 

By  N.  BAILEY,  ^^AcAo^of. 

Printed  for  R.  Ware,  A.  Ward,  J .  and  P.  Knaptot?,  T.  Longman, 
R.  Hetty  C.  Hitch,  J.  H:dges,  S.  Aujien,  J.  and  H.  Pcmber- 
ton^   and  J .  Rh^ington.  z 


•/ 


.H^ 


^ 


O  if 


.  O  O 


•  i 


LftC 


^-SKsl' 


;^/.: '• 


