J'MI 


r 


I'l.   f 


'V 


* 


'#- 


^ 


K  ' 


4         / 

:  r- 


M 


LIBRARY  OF  THE  THEOLOGICAL  SEMINARY 


PRINCETON,  N.  J. 

Presented  by 


rO rs.W\\\\CAm  'b\AfcAr> 


Diinsion. 


scc^ 


SERMONS 


ON    SEVERAL 


Subjects  and  Occasions^ 

By  the  mof^  Reverend  ^ 

Dr.  John  tillotsok 


LATE 


Lord  Arclibifliop  of  Ca^iterbury. 


VOLUME    the   SIXTH. 


LONDON: 

Printed  for  7^.  Ware,  A.  Ward,  J.  and  P.  Knapion,  T.  lovgman^ 

R.  Hetf,  C.  Hitch,  J.  Hodges,  5.  Aijlen,  J.  and  R.  Ton/on, 

y.  and  H.  Femhcrtoity  and  y .  Ri'vin^ton, 

M  DCC  XLIL 


C  1351  ] 

SERMON    LXXXV. 

The  love  of  God  to  men,  in  the  In- 
carnation of  Christ. 


I  J  O  H  N    iv.  p. 

In  this  was  manifejied  the  love  of  God  towards  usy  he» 
caufe  that  God  fent  his  only 'begotten  Son  into  the 
worldy  that  we  might  live  through  him. 

^H  E  S  E  words  contain  a  clear  and  evident  s  E  R  M. 
demonftration  of  the  love  of  God  to  us ;  LXXXV. 
*'  In  this  was  manifefled  the  love  of  God  Preached 
"  towards  us  j'*  that  is,  by  this  it  plainly  appears,  *" '^^^^^" 
that  God  had  a  mighty  love  for  us,  "  that  he  fent  Lambeth- 
*'  his  only  begotten  Son  into  the  world,  that  we  !T^^°" 
*'  might  live  through  him.'*     In  which  we  may  con-  j^^ 
fider   this  threefold  evidence  of  God's  love  to  man- 1697. 
kind. 

I.  That  he  fhould  be  pleafed  to  take  our  cafe  into 
confideration,  and  to  concern  himfelf  for  our  hap- 
pinefs. 

II.  That  he  fliould  defign'fo  great  a  benefit  to  us, 
which  is  here  exprcfl  by  life  j  "  that  we  might  live 
"  through  him." 

III.  That  he  was  pleafed  to  uie  fuch  a  means  for  the 

obtaining  and  prdturing  of  this  benefit  for  us ;  "  he 

*'  fent  his  only  begotten  Son  into  the  world,  that  we 

*'  might  live  through  him."    Eachof  thefe  fingly  is 

Vol.  VI.  '  10  T  2  a 

I, 


.135^  ^^^  ^^'^^  ^f  God  to  men^ 

S  E  R  M.  a  great  evidence  of  God's  love  to  us ;  much  more  all 
or  them  together. 

I.  It  is  a  great  evidence  of  the  love  of  God  to 
mankind,  that  he  was  pleafed  to  take  our  cafe  into 
confideration,  and  to  concern  himfelf  for  our  happi- 
iiels.  Nothing  does  more  commend  an  ad  of  kind- 
nefs,  than  if  there  be  great  condefcenfion  in  it.  We 
ufe  to  value  a  fmall  favour,  if  it  be  done  to  us  by  one 
that  is  far  above  us,  more  than  a  far  greater  done  to 
us  by  a  mean  and  inconfiderable  perfon.  This  made 
David  to  break  out  into  fuch  admiration,  when  he 
confidered  the  ordinary  providence  of  God  towards 
mankind,  "  Lord,  what  is  man,  that  thou  artmind- 
**  ful  of  him !  or  the  Ion  of  man,  that  thou  fhouldft 
•'  confider  him  !  "  This  is  a  wonderful  condefcenfioii 
indeed,  for  God  to  be  mindful  of  man. 

At  the  bed  we  are  but  his  creatures,  and  upon  that 
very  account  at  an  infinite  diftance  from  him  *,  fo  that 
were  not  he  infinitely  good,  he  would  not  be  con- 
cerned for  us,  who  are  fo  infinitely  beneath  the  con- 
fideration of  his  love  and  pity.  Neither  are  we  of 
the  higheft  rank  of  creatures ;  we  are  much  below  the 
angels,  as  to  the  excellency  and  perfediion  of  their  be- 
ings ;  fo  that  if  God  had  not  had  a  peculiar  pity  and 
regard  to  the  fons  of  men,  he  might  have  placed  his 
affection  and  care  upon  a  much  nobler  order  of  crea- 
tures than  we  are,  and  fo  much  the  more  miferable, 
becaufe  they  fell  from  a  higher  flep  of  happinefs,  1 
mean  the  loft  angels ;  but  yet  for  reafons  beft  known 
to  his  infinite  wifdom,  God  paft  by  them,  and  was 
pleafed  to  confider  us.  This  the  apoftle  to  the  He- 
brews takes  notice  of,  as  an  argument  of  God's  pe- 
culiar and  extraordinary  love  to  mankind,  "  that 

«  he 


in  the  Incarnation  of  Christ,  1353 

"  he  ferit  his  Son,  not  to  take  upon  him  the  nature  ^^^y^; 
"  of  ano-els,  but  of  the  feed  of  Abraham."  ^ 

Now  that  he,  who  is  fo  far  above  us,  and  after 
that  we  by  wilful  tranfgreflion  had  loft  ourfelves,  had 
no  obligation  to  take  care  of  us,  but  what  his  own 
oxDodnefs  laid  upon  him,  that  he  fhould  concern  him- 
felf  fo  much  for  us,  and  be  fo  folicitous  for  our  reco- 
very, this  is  a  great  evidence  of  his  kindnefs  and 
good-will  to  us,  and  cannot  be  imagined  to  proceed 
from  any  other  caufe. 

II.  Another  evidence  of  God's  great  love  to  us,  is, 
that  he  was  pleafed  to  defign  fo  great  a  benefit  for 
us.  This  the  fcripture  expreffcth  to  us  by  life ;  and 
it  is  ufual  in  fcripture  to  exprefs  the  beft  and  moft  ^ 
defirable  things  by  life ;  becaufe  as  it  is  one  of  the 
oTcateft  bleffings,  fo  it  is  the  foundation  of  all  other 
enjoyments:  and  therefore  the  apoftle  ufeth  but  this 
one  word  to  exprefs  to  us  all  the  blefTings  and  bene- 
fits of  Christ's  coming  into  the  world  ;  "  God 
**  fent  his  only-begotten  Son  into  the  world,  thatwc 
<*  might  live  through  him/* 

And  the  expreffion  is  very  proper  in  our  cale;  be- 
caufe life  fignifies  the  reparation  of  all  that  which 
was  loft  by  the  fall  of  man.     For  man  by  his  wilful 
degeneracy  and  apoftafy  from  God,  is  funk  into  a 
ftate  of  fm  and  mifery,  both  which  the  fcripture  is 
wont  to  exprefs  by  death.     In  refpcd  of  our  finful 
ftate  we  are  fpiritually  dead  ;  and  in  refpedl  of  the 
puniftiment  and  mifery  due  to  us  for  our  fins,  we  are 
judicially  dead,  dead  inlaw  -,  "  for  the  wages  of  fin  is 
«'  death."     Now  God  hath  fent  his  Son  into  the 
world,  that  in  both  thefe  refpcds  *'  we  might  hve 
*^  throuo;h  him." 


'354  ^^^  ^ove  of  Gotj  to  men,    ■ 

?  Ixxv  r  '■  ^'/'''  *'""'"'"^  ^'^'^^  ^'"^^  '"  trt^p^!^^  and 
^  fins,  as  the  apoftle  fpeaks,  Eph.  ii.  i,  2.  "  You  hath 

"  he  quickened  who  were  dead  In  trefpaffes  and  fins, 
"  wherein  in  times  part  ye  walked  according  to  the 
"  courfe  of  this  world."    Every  wicked  man,  tho' 
in  a  natural  fenfe  he  be  alive,  yet  in  a  moral  fenfe  he 
js  dead.     So  the  apoftle  fpeaking  of  thofe  «  who 
•'  live  in  finful   lufts  and  pleafures,   fays  of  them, 
"  that  they  are  dead  while  they  live,"  i  Tim.  v.  6. 
What  corrupt  humours  are  to  the  body,  that  fin  is  to 
the  foul,  their  difeafe  and  their  death.     Now  God 
fent  his  Son  to  deliver  us  from  this  death,  by  renew- 
ing our  nature,  and  mortifying  our  lufts;  by  reftoring 
us  to  the  life  of  grace  and  holinefs,  «  and  deftroyin| 
"  the  body  of  fin  in  us,  that  henceforth  we  fliould  not 
«  ferve  fin."    And  that  this  is  a  great  argument  of 
the  mighty  love  of  God  to  us,  the  apoftle  tells  us, 
Eph.  II.  4,  5.  «  God  who  is  rich  in  mercy,  for  his 
«  great  love  wherewith  he  loved  us,  even  when  we 
•|  were  dead  in  fins,  hath  quickened  us  together  with 
"  Christ."     It  is  an  argument  of  the  richnefs  of 
God's  mercy,  and  of  his  great  love  to  us  to  recover 
us  out  of  this  fad  and  deplorable  cafe.     It  is  a  kind- 
nefs  infinitely  greater,  than  to  redeem  us  from  the 
moft  wretched  fiavery,  or  to  refcue  us  from  the  moft 
dreadfal  and  cruel  temporal  death  ;  and  yet  we  Ihould 
value  this  as  a  favour  and  benefit,  that  could  never 
be  fufficiently  acknowledged :  but  God  hath  fent  his 
Son  to  deliver  us  from  a  worfe  bondage,  and  a  more 
dreadful  kind  of  death ;  fo  that  well  might  the  apoftle 
alcribe  this  great  deliverance  of  mankind   from  the 
flavery  of  our  lufts,  and  the  death  of  fin,  to  the  bound- 
Jels  mercy  and  love  of  God  to  us.    «  God  who  is 

"  rich 


in  the  incarnation  of  Christ.  ^355 

«*  rich  in  mercy,  for  the  great  love  wherewith  he  S  E  R  M' 
*'  loved  US,  hath  quickened  us  together  with  Christ,  ^^^^  * 
*'  even  when  we  were  dead  in  fins  ;"  when  our  cafe 
was  fo  defperate  as  could  well  be  imagined  ;  then  was 
God  pleafed  to  undertake  this  great  cure,  and  to  pro- 
vide fuch  a  remedy,  as  cannot  fail  to  be  efFc6lual  for 
our  recovery,  if  we  will  but  make  ufe  of  it. 

2,  "We  were  likewife  judicially  dead,  dead  inlaw, 
being  condemned  by  the  juft  fentence  of  it.     So  foon 
as  ever  we  finned,  eternal  death  was  by  the  fentence 
of  God's  law  become  our  due  portion  and  reward  ; 
and  this  being  our  cafe,  God  in  tender  commife- 
ration  and  pity  to  mankind,  was  plsafed  to  lend  his 
Son  into  the  world  to  interpofe  between  the  juftice  of 
God  and  the  demerits  of  men  ;  and  by  reverfing 
the  fentence  that  was  gone  out  againft  us,  and  pro- 
curing a  pardon  for  us,  to  refcue  us  from  the  mifery 
of  eternal  death ;  and  not  only  fo,  but  upon  the  condi- 
tion of  faith  and  repentance,    of  obedience  and  a 
holy  life,  to  beftow  eternal  life  upon  us ;  and  by  this 
means  to  reftore  us  to  a  better  condition  than  that 
from  which  we  were  fallen,  and  to  advance  us  to  a 
happinefs  greater  than  that  of  innocency. 

And  was  not  this  great  love,  to  defign  and  provide 
fo  great  a  benefit  and  blefllng  for  us,"  to  fend  his  Son 

*' Jesus  to  blefs  us  in  turningaway  every  oneof  us  from 
"  our  iniquities  ?"  Our  bleifed  Saviour,  who.  came 
from  the  bofom  of  his  Father,  and  knew  his  tender 
affedion  and  compaflion  to  mankind,  fpeaks  of  this 
as  a  mod  .wonderful  and  unparaliel'd  expreflion  of 
his  love  to  us,  John  iii.  i6.  "  God  fo  loved  the 
**  world,  that  he  gave  his  only-begotten  Son.'* 
^'  God  fo  loved  i\\t  world,"  fo  greatly,  fo  Itrangely, 

fo 


i-^  r6  The  love  of  God  to  men, 

SERM.  fo  beyond  our  biggefl  hopes,  nay,  fo  contrary  to  all 
^"^^^^ ;  reafonable  expe<5lations,  "  as  to  fend  his  only-begot- 
*'•  ten  Son,  to  leek  and  to  fave  the  finful  Ions  of 
«  men." 

If  it  had  only  in  general  been  declared  to  us,  that 
God  was  about  to  fend  his  Son  into  the  world  up- 
on fome  great  defign,  and  been  left  to  us  to  con- 
jecture, what  his  errand  and  bufinefs  ihould  be  j  how 
would  this  have  alarmed  the  guilty  confciences  of 
finful  men,  and  filled  them  with  infinite  jealoufies 
and  fufpicion,  with  fearful  expedations  "  of  wrath 
*'  and  fiery  indignation  to  confume  them ! "  For 
confidering  the  great  wickednefs  and  degeneracy  of 
mankind,  what  could  we  have  thought,  but  that 
furely  God  was  fending  (lis  Son  upon  a  defign  of 
vengeance  to  chafi:ife  a  finful  world ,  to  vindicate 
the  honour  of  his  defpifed  laws,  and  to  revenge  the 
multiplied  affronts  which  had  been  offered  to  the 
higheft  majefi:y  of  heaven,  by  his  pitiful  and  un- 
grateful creatures  ?  Our  own  guilt  would  have  been 
very  apt  to  have  filPd  us  with  fuch  imaginations  as 
thefe,  that  in  all  likeliho*»i  the  Son  of  God  was 
coming  to  judgment,  to  call  the  wicked  world  to  an 
account,  to  procmd  againfi:  his  father's  rebels,  to 
pafs  fentence  upon  them,  and  to  execute  the  ven- 
geance which  they  had  dcferved.  This  we  fnight 
jullly  have  dreaded  ;  and  indeed  confidering  our 
cafe,  how  ill  we  have  deferved  at  God's  hands,  and 
how  highly  we  have  provoked  himj  what  other 
weighty  matter  could  we  hope  for  ? 

But  the  goodnefs  of  God  hath  flrangcly  out-done 
our  hopes,  and  deceived  our  expectation  ;  fo  it  fol- 
lows in  the  next  words,  "  God  fent  not  bis  Son 

"  int© 


in  the  incarnatloji  ^Christ.  i357 

*'  into  the  world  to  condemn  the  world,*'  (inti-  S  E  R  M. 
mating  that  this  we  might  juftly  have  imagin'd  ^fll^il; 
and  feared)  but  upon  a  quite  contrary  defign,  ''  that 
*^  through  him  the  world  might  be  faved.  "  What 
a  furprize  of  kindnefs  is  here !  that  inftead  "  of 
"  fending  his  Sofj  to  condemn  us,  he  fhoulJ  fend 
*'  him  into  the  world  to  fave  us  j  "  to  refcue  us  from 
the  jaws  of  death  and  of  hell,  from  that  eternal  and 
intolerable  mifery  which  we  had  incurred  and  de- 
ferved  ! 

And  if  he  had  proceeded  no  farther,  this  had  been 
wonderful  mercy  and  kindnefs :  But  his  love  flopc 
not  here,  it  was  not  contented  to  fpare  us,  and  free 
us  from  mifery ;  but  was  reftlefs  till  it  had  found 
out  a  way  to  bring  us  to  happinefs  >  "  for  God  fo 
*'  loved  the  world,  that  he  gave  his  only-begotten 
*'  Son-,  not  only  that  whofoever  believes  in  him 
*  might  not  perifh,  but  might  have  everlading  life." 
This  is  the  fecond  evidence  of  God's  great  love 
to  us,  the  greatnefs  of  tiie  blefTing  and  benefit 
which  he  had  defigned  and^provided  for  us,  "  that 
"  we  might  live  through  him  ;"  not  only  be  deli- 
vered from  fpiritual  and  eternal  dc.idji,  but  be  made 
partakers  of  eternal  life. 

III.  The  lad  evidence  of  God's  great  love  to  u.^ 
which  I  mentioned,  was  this,  that  God  was  picafcd 
to  ufe  fuch  a  means,  for  the  obtaining  and  procu- 
ring of  this  great  blefiing  and  benefit ;  "  he  fent  his 
"  only-begotten  Son  into  the  world,  that  we  mi^ht 
"  live  through  him."  And  this  will  appear  to  be 
great  love  indeed,  if  we  confider  thcfe  four  thin<^s. 

I.  The  perfon  whom    he  was  pleafed  to  employ 

upon  this  defign,  "  he  fent  his  only-begotten  Son-." 

Vol.  VI.  10  U  2.  How 

I. 


145S  ^he  love  of  God  to  77ien, 

S  R  R  M.      2.  How  much  he  abafed  him,  in  order  to  the  ef- 

1    V  V  "V  \T 

'  feding  and  accomplifhing  this  dcfign,    impUed   in 
thefe  words,  ''  he  fent  him  into  the  world." 

3.  If  we  confider,  to  whom  he  was  fent,  "  to  the 
"  world.'*     And, 

4.  That  he  did  all  that  voluntarily  and  freely,  out 
of  his  mere  pity  and  goodnefs  -,  not  conftrained  here- 
to by  any  neceffity,  not  prevail'd  upon  by  any  ap- 
plication or  importunity  of  ours,  nor  obliged  by  any 
benefit  or  kindnefs  from  us. 

I.  Let  us  confider  the  perfon  whom  God  was 
pleafed  to  employ  in  this  defign,  "  he  fent  his  only-be- 
"  gotten  Son  "  ;  no  lefs  perfon  than  his  own  Son,  and 
no  lefs  dear  to  him,  than  his  only-begotten  Son. 

(i  )  No  lefs  perfon  than  "  his  own   Son;'*  and 
the  dignity  of  the  perfon  that  was  employed  in  our 
behalf,  doth  flrangely  heighten  and  fet  off  the  kind- 
nefs.    What  an  endearment  is  it  of  the  mercy   of 
our  redemption,    that  God  was  pleafed  to  employ 
upon  this  defign  no  meaner  perfon   than  ''  his  own 
*•  Son,  his  begotten  Son  ;  "  fo  he  is  called  in  the 
text,    his  SOiV,    in   fo  peculiar  a    manner,    as     no 
creature  is,  or  can  be ;  the  creatures  below  man  are 
called  the  v*^orks  of  God,  but  never    his  children  ; 
the  angels  are  in  fcripture  call'd  the   fons  of  God  ; 
and  Adam  likewife    is  call'd  the   fon  of  God,  be- 
caufe  God  made  him  after  his  own  image  and  like- 
nefs  in  holinefs  and  righteoufnefs,  and  in    his  domi- 
nion and  fovereignty  over  the  creatures  below  him  ; 
but  this  title  of  begotten  Son  of  God  was  never  given 
to  any  of  the  creatures,  man  or  angel  ;  "  for  unto 
"  which  of  the  angels  faid  he  at  any  time,  thou  art 
''  my  S0.V5  this  day  have  I  begotten  thee, "  as  the 

apoflle 


in  the  hicarjiation  ^^^  Christ.  '359 

apoftle  reafons,  Hcb.  i.  5.  He  mud  be  a  preaf  per-  S  ER  M. 
fon  indeed  to  whom  this  tide  belongs,  "  of  the  be- .  _  \ 
"  gotten  Son  of  God  •,"  and  it  mull  be  a  mighty 
love  indeed  which  moved  God  to  employ  fo  great  a 
perfon,  on  the  behah^  of  fo  pitiful  and  wretched 
creatures  as  we  are.  It  had  been  a  mighty  conde- 
fcenfion  for  God  to  treat  with  us  at  all  s  but  that  no 
lefs  perfon  than  his  own  Son  fhould  be  the  ambaf- 
fador,  is  an  aflonifliing  regard  of  heaven  to  poor 
finful  duft  and  a  flies. 

(2.)  The  perfon  was  as  dear  to  God,  as  he  was 
great ,  *'  he  was  his  only-begotten  Son.'*  It  had  been 
a  great  inftance  of  Abraham's  love  and  obedience  to 
God,  to  have  facrificed  a  fon  at  his  command;  but 
this  circumftance  makes  it  much  greater,  that  it 
was  his  only  Son  i  "  hereby  I  know  that  thou  feareft 
*'  God'  (fays  the  angel)  fince  thou  hafl:  not  withheld 
*'  thy  fon,  thine  only  fon  from  me.*'  This  is  a  de- 
monflration  that  God  loved  us  at  a  ftupendous  rare, 
when  he  would  fend  his  only-begotten  Son  into  the 
world  for  us. 

Before  this,  God  had  tried  feveral  ways  with  man- 
kind, and  employed  feveral  meiTcngers  to  us ;  fome- 
times  he  fent  his  angels,  and  many  times  his  fervanf? 
the  prophets  ;  "  but  in  thcfe  Jaft  days  he  hath  f^nt  his 
*'  Son."  He  had  many  more  fervants  to  have  employ- 
ed upon  this  melTage,  but  he  had  but  one  Son  ;  and 
rather  than  mankind  fliould  be  ruined  and  loll,  he 
would  fend  him.  Such  v/as  the  love  of  God  towards 
us,  that  rather  than  our  recovery  fhould  not  be  ef- 
fedfed,  he  would  employ  in  this  work  the  greatefl 
and  deared  perfon  to  him  both  in  heaven  and  earth, 
his  only-begotten   Son;  ''  in  this  was  the  love  of 

10  U  2  God 


LXXX\^. 


1360  7he  love  of  God  to  men^ 

S  E  R  M.  "  God  manifefted,  that  he  fent  his  only-begotten 
''  Son,  that  we  mrght  live  through  him." 

2.  Let  us  confider  how  much  this  glorious  and  ex- 
cellent perfon  was  abafcd  in  order  to  the  efFedling 
and  accompjifhing  of  this  defign,  which  is  here  ex- 
preft,  by  fending  him  into  the  world;  and  this 
comprehends  his  incarnation  with  all  the  mean  and 
abafing  circumftances  of  it.  This  the  apoftle  de- 
clares fuIJy  to  us,  Phil.  ii.  6,  7.  "  tho'  he  was  in 
*'  the  form  of  God,  (that  is,  truly  and  really  God) 
*'  yet  he  made  himfelf  of  no  reputation,  ^o'xnov  hX" 
"  vcucrg,  he  empty'd  himfelf,"  was  contented  to  be 
flrangely  Icflen'd  and  diminifli'd,  "  and  took  upon 
"  him  the  form  of  a  fervant,  or  flave,  and  was 
"  made  in  the  likenefs  of  men  \ "  that  is,  did  really 
aflume  humane  nature.  Here  was  an  abafement  in- 
deed, for  God  to  become  man,  "  for  the  only-be- 
"  gotten  Son  of  God  to  take  upon  him  the  form  of 
*'  a  fervant,  and  to  become  obedient  to  death,  even 
*'  the  death  of  the  crofs,"  which  was  the  death  of 
flavcs,  and  infamous  malefadlors.  Flere  was  love  indeed, 
that  God  was  willing  that  his  own  dear  Son  fhould 
be  thus  obfcured  and  diminifhed,  and  become  fo  mean 
and  fo  miferable  for  our  fakes  -,  that  he  lliould  not 
Only  (loop  "  to  be  made  man,  and  to  dwell  among 
*'  us,"  but  that  he  fhould  likewife  fubmit  "  to  the 
*'  infirmities  of  our  nature,  and  to  be  made  in  all 
*'  things  like  unto  us,  fin  only  excepted  ;  "  that  he 
fhould  be  contented  to  bear  fo  many  affronts  and 
indignities  from  perverfe  and  unthankful  men, 
*'  and  to  endure  fuch  contradiction  of  finners  againft 
*'  himfelf-,  that  he  who  was  the  brightnefs  of  his 
"  Father's  glory,  fhould  be  dcfpifed  and  rejedled 

"  of 


in  the  incarnaticn  ^Christ.  1361 

*'  of  men,  a  man  of  forrows,  and  acquainted  with  SERM. 
"  griefs,"  and  rather  than  we  fhould  perilli,  fliould  ^i^^^'j 
put  himfelf  into  our  place,  and  be  contented  to  fuf- 
fer  and  die  for  us;  and  that  God  Inould  be  willing 
that  all  this  fhould  be  done  to  his  only  Son,  to  favc 
finncrs,  what  greater  teftimony  could  he  give  of  his 
love  to  us  ! 

3.  Let  us  confider  farther  to  whom  he  was  fent, 
which  is  alfo  implied  in  thefe  words,  *'  he  fent  his 
"  Son  into  the  world ;"  into  a  wicked  world,  that 
was  altogether  unworthy  of  him  ;  and  an  ungrateful 
world,  that  did  mod  unworthily  ufe  him. 

Firft,  into  a  wicked  world,  that  was  altogether  un- 
worthy of  him,  that  had  deferved  no  fuch  kindncfs 
at  his  hands.  For  what  v/ere  we,  that  God  fhould 
fend  fuch  a  perfon  amongil  us,  that  he  fhould  make 
his  Son  ftoop  fo  low  as  to  dwell  in  our  nature,  and 
to  become  one  of  us  ?  We  were  rebels  and  enemies, 
"  enemies  to  God  by  evil  works,*'  up  in  arms  againft 
heaven,  and  at  open  defiance  with  God*  our  maker. 
When  the  world  was  ia  this  poilure  of  enmity  and 
hoftility  againft  God  ;  then  he  fent  his  Son  to  treat 
with  us,  and  to  offer  us  peace.  What  can  more 
commend  the  love  of  God  than  this,  that  he  fhould^ 
fhew  fuch  kindnefs  to  us,  when  we  were  fmners  and^ 
enemies!  Herein  "  God  hath  commended  his  love 
"  towards  us;  (fays  the  apoille,  Rom.  v.  8.)  in  that 
''  whilft  we  were  yet  finncrs  Christ  died  for  us." 

Seondly,  Into  an  ungrateful  world,  that  did  mofl 
unworthily  ufe  him,  that  gave  no  becoming  enter- 
tainment to  him  ("  the  foxes  had  holes,  and  the  birds 
'^  of  the  air  had  nefts ;  but  the  Son  of  man  had  not 
"  where  to  lay  his  head")  that  heaped  all  manner  of 

con- 


1262  T/6^  love  of  Go  D  to  men^ 

S£rM.  contumelies  and  indignities  upon  him,  that  perfecu ted 
LXXXV.  }^ini  all  his  life,  and  at  lad  put  him  to  a  mod  painful 
and  fhameful  death  \  in  a  word,  that  was  fo  far  from 
receiving  him  as  the  Son  of  God,  that  they  did  not 
treat  hmi  with  common  humanity,  and  like  one  of 
the  fons  of  men. 

4.  He  did  all  this  voluntarily  and  freely ;  "  God 
*'  fent  his  Son  into  the  world,"  mero  motu^  of  his 
own  mere  grace  and  goodnefs,  moved  by  nothing 
but  his  own  bowels,  and  the  confideration  of  our 
mifery  •,  not  overpowered  by  any  force ;  (for  what 
could  offer  violence  to  him  to  v/hom  all  power  be- 
longs ?)  not  conflrained  by  any  ncceffity,  for  he  had 
been  happy,  tho' we  had  remained  for  ever  miferable  ^ 
he  might  have  chofen  other  objeds  of  his  love  and 
pity,  and  have  left  us  involved  in  that  mifery  which 
we  had  v/ilfully  brought  upon  ourfelves. 

Nor  was  he  prevailed  upon  by  any  application  from, 
ns,  or  importunity  of  ours  to  do  this  for  us.  Had 
we  been  left  to  have  contrived  the  way  of  our  reco- 
very ;  this  which  God  hath  done  for  us,  could  never 
have  entered  into  the  heart  of  man  to  have  imagin'd, 
much  lefs  to  have  defir'd  it  at  his  hands.  If  the  way 
kof  our  falvation  had  been  put  into  the  hands  of  our 
own  counfel  and  choice,  how  could  we  have  been  fo 
impudent  as  to  have  begg'd  of  God,  that  his  only 
Son  might  defcend  from  heaven  and  become  man, 
be  poor,  defpifed  and  miferable  for  our  fakes  ?  God 
may  ftoop  as  low  as  he  pleafeth,  being  fecure  of  his 
own  majelly  and  greatnefs ;  but  it  had  been  a  bold- 
nefs  in  us,  not  far  from  blafphemy,  to  have  defired 
of  him  to  condefcend  to  fuch  a  fubmifiion. 


Nor 


in  the  incarnation  ?/*  Christ.  ^3^3  x 

Nor,  laftly,  was  he  pre-oblig'd  by  any  kindnefs  or  S  E  R  M. 
beneHc  from  us  •,  ^o  far  from  that,  that  we  had  given  .  _'^_1  i 
him  all  pofnble  provocation  to  the  contrary,  and  had 
rcafon  to  expe6t  the  effedl  of  his  heavieft  difplcafure  : 
and  yet  though  he  was  thtpars  Ufa^  the  party  that 
had  been  difoblig'd  and  injur'd-,  though  we  were 
firft  in  the  offence  and  provocation,  he  was  picafed  to 
make  the  firft  overtures  of  peace  and  reconciliation ; 
and  tho'  it  was  wholly  our  concernment,  and  not  his ; 
yet  he  was  pleafed  tocondefcend  fofar  to  our  perverfe- 
nefs  and  obftinacy,  as  '^  to  fend  his  Son  to  us^  and  to 
"  befcech  us  to  be  reconciled." 

Now  herein  (fays  the  apoftle,- immediately  after 
the  text)  "  herein  is  love,  not  that  we  loved  God, 
*'  but  that  he  loved  us,  and  fent  his  Son  to  be  the 
"  propitiation  for  our  fins  :"  herein  is  the  love  of 
God  manifefced,  that  the  kindnefs  began  on  his  part, 
and  not  on  ours ;  that  being  neither  obliged  nor  de- 
fired  by  us,  he  did  freely  and  of  his  own  accord, 
*'  fend  his  only-begotten  Son  into  the  world,  that 
*'   we  might  hve  through  him." 

What  now  remains  but  to  apply  this  to  ourfelves  ? 

I.  Let  us  propound  to  ourfelves  the  love  of  God 
for  our  pattern  and  example.  This  is  the  inference/j 
which  the  apoftle  makes  in  the  next  verfe  but  one" 
after  the  text,  ''  Beloved,  if  God  fo  loved  us,  we 
*'  ought  alfo  to  love  one  another.*'  One  would  have 
thought  the  inference  fliould  have  been,  "  if  God 
*'  fo  loved  us,  that  we  ought  alfo  to  love  him.'* 
Bjt  the  apofllc  doth  not  fpeak  fo  much  of  the  affec- 
tion, as  the  effedl  of  love ;  and  his  meaning  is,  if 
God  hath  bellowed  fuch  benefits  upon  us,  we  ought, 
in  imitation  of  him,  to  be  kind  and  beneficial  one 

to 


1564  ^^^^  ^^'^^  of  Go T>  to  meriy 

S  E  R  M.  to  another.  Not  but  that  we  ou<^ht  "  to  love  God 
<'  with  all  our  hearts,  and  fouls,  and  (Irength  -,"  but 
in  this  fenfe  we  are  not  capable  of  it.  We  cannot 
be  beneficial  to  him  ;  becaufe  he  is  feif-fufficicnt,and 
Hands  in  need  of  nothing  \  and  therefore  the  apoftle 
adds  this  as  a  reafon,  why  he  does  not  exhort  men 
to  love  God,  but  one  another ;  "  no  man  hath  ittn 
**  God  at  any  time;"  he  is  not  fenfible  to  us,  and 
therefore  none  of  thefe  fenfible  things  can  fignify  any 
thing  to  him.  But  he  hath  friends  and  relations  here  in 
the  worldjwho  are  capable  of  the  fenfible  cfFeds  of  our 
love,  and  to  whom  we  may  ihew  kindnefs  for  his 
fake  ;  we  cannot  be  beneficial  to  God,  but  we  may 
teftify  our  love  to  him,  by  our  kindnels  and  charity 
to  men  who  arc  m.ade  after  the  image  of  God  ;  and 
if  we  fee  any  one  miferable,  that  is  confideration 
enough  to  move  our  charity.  There  was  nothing 
but  this  in  us  to  move  him  to  pity  us,  "  when  we 
<'  were  in  our  blood,  and  no  eye  pitied  us.'* 

God  is  a  pattern  of  the  mod  generous  kindnefs 
and  charity.  Tho'  he  be  infinitely  above  us,  yet  he 
thought  it  not  below  him  to  confider  our  cafe,  and 
to  employ  his  only  Son  to  fave  us;  he  had  no  obli- 
gation to  us,  no  expedlation  of  advantage  from  us, 
and  can  never  be  in  a  pofiibility  to  ftand  in  need  of 
us  5  and  yet  he  loved  us,  and  hath  conferred  the 
greateft  benefits  upon  us :  fo  that  no  man  can  have 
deferved  fo  ill  at  our  hands,  but  that  if  he  be  in 
want,  and  we  in  a  condition  to  help  him,  he  ought 
to  come  within  the  compafs  and  confideration  of  our 
charity. 

And  diis  is  the  proper  feafon  for  it,  when  we  com- 
jrnemorate  the  greatell  blefilng  and  benefit  that  was 

ever 


172  the  incarnation  (^/Christ.  ^3^5 

ever  conferr'd  on  mankind,  "  the  Son  of  God  fent  SERM. 

LXXX  V 

*'  into  the  world,  on  purpofe  to  redeem  and  fave  us."  >  -,-0 
And  therefore  I  cannot  but  very  much  commend  the 
cuftom  of  feeding  and  reheving  the  poor,  more  efpeci- 
ally  at  this  time,  when  the  poor  do  ufually  ftand  mofl  in 
need  of  it,  and  when  we  commemorate  "  the  grace 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  being  rich  be- 
came poor  for  our  flikes,  that  we  through  his  po- 
verty might  be  made  rich." 
2.  Let  us  readily  comply  with  the  great  defign  of 
this  great  love  of  God  to  mankind.  ''  He  hath  fent 
"  his  Son,  that  we  might  live  through  him."  But 
tho'  he  had  done  all  this  for  us,  tho'  he  hath  pur- 
chafed  fo  great  bleffings  for  us,  as  the  pardon  of  our 
fins,  and  power  againft  them,  and  eternal  life  and 
happinefs  ;  yet  there  is  fomething  to  be  done  on  our 
parts,  to  make  us  partakers  of  thefe  benefits.  God 
hath  not  fo  loved  us,  as  to  fend  his  Son  into  the 
world,  to  carry  men  to  heaven  whether  they  will  or 
no  ;  and  to  refcue  thofe  from  the  flavery  of  the  devil, 
and  the  damnation  of  hell,  who  are  fond  of  their  fet- 
ters, and  wilfully  run  themfelves  upon  ruin  and  de- 
ftrudion.  But  the  Son  of  God  came  to  offer  hap- 
pinefs to  us,  upon  certain  terms  and  conditions,  fuch 
as  are  fit  for  God  to  propound,  and  necefTary  for  us 
to  perform,  to  make  us  capable  of  the  blelTcdnels 
which  he  offers ;  as  namely,  "  repentance  towards 
"  God,  and  faith  in  our  Lord  Je  s  u  s  Christ  ;'* 
a  fincere  and  conflant  endeavour  of  obedience  to  the 
laws  and  precepts  of  our  holy  religion. 

Thefe  are  the  terms  of  the  gofpel ;  '*  and  the  grace 

*'  of  God  which   brings  falvation,"  offers  it  only 

upon  thefe  terms,  '*  that  we  deny  ungodlinefs  and 

Vol.  VI,  10  X  "  worldly 

I. 


J 266  7 he  love  of  God  fo  men, 

S  E  R  M.  "  worldly  lufts,  and  Jivefoberjy,  righteoufly,  and  godly 
LXXXV.  tt  -j^  ^j^jg  pi-efent  world  :"  then  we  may  "  expe6l  the 
"  blefled  hope."  Bat  if  we  will  not  fubmit  to 
thefe  conditions,  the  Son  of  God  will  be  no  Savi- 
our to  us  5  "  for  he  is  the  author  of  eternal  falva- 
"  tion  only  to  them  that  obey  him."  If  men 
will  continue  in  their  fins,  the  redemption  wrought 
by  Christ  will  be  of  no  advantage  to  them  ;  luch 
as  obftinately  perfifl:  in  an  impenitent  courfe,  Ipfaji 
veUt  falus  fervare  non  potefty  '*  falvation  itfeJf  cannot 
"  fave  them." 

Thefe  are  the  conditions  of  our  happinefs,  and  if 
we  fubmit  to  them  we  are  heirs  of  eternal  life  j  if  we 
refufe,  we  are"  fons  of  perdition,  eternally  loll  and 
undone  ;  for  we  may  afFure  ourfelves,  that  thefe  are 
the  befl  and  eafieft  terms  that  can  ever  be  offered  to 
us,  becaufe  God  fent  them  by  his  Son.  This  is  the 
lad  effort  of  the  divine  love  and  goodnefs,  towards 
the  recovery  and  falvation  of  men;  fo  the  apoftle  tells 
us,  Hcb.  i.  1,2.  "  that  God,  who  at  fundry  times, 
*'  and  in  divers  mianners,  fpake  to  the  fathers  by  the 
*'  prophets,  hath  in  thefe  lad  days  fpoken  to  us  by 
''  his  Son  *,"  and  if  we  refufe  to  hear  him,  he  will 
fpeak  no  more.  After  this  it  is  not  to  be  expeded, 
that  God  fliould  make  any  farther  attempts  for  our 
recovery  j  for  he  can  fend  no  greater  nor  dearer  per- 
fon  to  us,  than  his  own  Son  ;  and  if  we  refufe  him, 
whom  will  we  reverence  ^  if  after  this  we  ftill  wilfully 
go  on  in  our  Sins ;  "  there  remains  no  more  facrifice 
*'  for  fin  ;  but  a  fearful  looking  for  of  judgment, 
*'  and  fiery  indignation  to  confume  us." 

3.  With  what  joy  and  thankfulnefs  fliould  we  com- 
memorate this  great  love  of  God  to  mankind,  "  in 

"  fending 


in  the  incarnation  of  Christ,  ^3^7 

"  fending  his  only-begotten  Son  into  the  world,  that^  E  R  M. 
''  we  might  live  through  him !  " 

This  is  the  proper  end  of  the  blefled  facrament, 
which  we  arc  now  going  to  receive,  to  reprefent  to 
our  minds  the  incarnation  and  pafHon  of  our  dear 
Lord,  by  the  fymbols  of  his  body  broken,  and  his 
blood  fhed  for  us.  With  what  acknowledgments 
fhould  we  celebrate  the  memory  of  this  wonderful 
love, which  the  Son  of  God  hath  fhewn  to  the  fbns  of 
men ;  endeavouring  to  make  ail  the  world  in  love 
with  him,  v/ho  hath  fo  loved  all  mankind  ! 

Whenever  we  fee  his  blood  poured  forth,  and  his 
body  broken  for  us,  fo  moving  a  Sight  fhould  raife 
ftrange  pafTions  in  us,  of  love  to  our  Saviour,  and 
hatred  to  our  fins;  and  fhould  infpireus  with  mighty 
refolutions  of  fervice  and  obedience  to  him  ;  and 
whenever  the  pledges  and  feals  of  thefe  benefits  are 
delivered  into  our  hands,  the  fight  of  them  fiiould  at 
once  wound  and  revive  our  hearts,  and  make  us  to  cry 
out,  "  Lord,  how  unworthy  am  I,  for  whom  thou 
**  fhouldfl:  do  and  fuffer  all  this!  lam  overcome  by 
"  thy  love,  and  can  no  longer  hold  out  again fl:  the 
^'  mighty  force  of  fuch  klndnefs  !  I  render  rnyfelf  to 
^'  thee,  and  will  ferve  thee  for  ever,  who  haft  re- 
'^  deemed  me  at  fo  dear  a  rate  ! " 

"  Now  to  him  that  fitteth  upon  the  throne,  and  to 
*'  the  lamb  that  was  flain,  to  God  even  our  Fa- 
ther, and  to  the  Lord  Jlsus  Christ,  the 
firfl-begotten  from  the  dead,  and  the  prince  of  the 
kings  of  the  earth  ;  unto  him  that  hath  loved  us, 
''  and  w^afhedus  from  our  fins  in  his  own  blood,  and 
*'  hath  made  us  kings  and  priefbstoGoD  and  his  Fa- 
•'  THER,tohimbe  glory  and  dominion  for  everand 
"  ever.  Amen."  loX  2  S  E  R- 


[  ^368  ] 

SERMON  LXXXVI. 

The  fin  and  danger  of  adding  to  the 
dodrine  of  the  gofpel. 

G  A  L  A  T.  i.  8,  9. 

But  iho*  we^  or  an  angel  from  heaven,  preach  any  other 
gofpel  unto  yon,  than  that  which  we  have  preached 

unto  you,  let  him  be  accurfed.  As  we  faid  before,  ff 
fay  I  now  again,  if  any  man  preach  any  other  gofpel 

unto  you  J  than,  that  ye  have  received^  let  him  be  ac^ 

curfed. 

SERM.  T^EFORE  I  come  to  handle  the  words,  for 
^^fl^i  ■■  ^^^  better  underdanding  of  them,  I  fhall  give 
-*— ^  a  brief  account  of  the  occafion  of  them,  which 
was  this.  Some  fahe  apoftles  had  made  a  great  dif- 
turbancc  in  the  churches  planted  by  the  apoflles  of 
Christ,  by  teaching  that  it  was  neccflary  for  chri- 
flians,  not  only  to  embrace  and  entertain  the  doc- 
trines and  precepts  of  the  chriftian  religion,  but  like- 
wife  to  be  circumcifed,  and  keep  the  law  of  Mofes. 
Of  this  difturbance  which  was  raifed  in  the  chriftian 
church,  you  have  the  hiftory  at  large,  A6ls  xv.  and 
as  in  feveral  other  churches,  particularly  in  that  of 
Galatia,  thefe  flilfe  apoftles  and  feducers  had  per- 
verted many,  as  appears  by  this  epiftle ;  in  the  be- 
ginning whereof  St»  Paul  complains,  that  thofe  who 
were  fo  feduced  into  this  error  of  the  neceiTity  of  cir- 
cumcifion,  and  keeping  the  law  of  Mofes,  had  by 
this  new  article  of  faith,  which  they  had  added  to 

the 


Tie  fin  and  danger  of  adding.   Sec.  1369 

the  chriftian  religion,  quite  alter'd  the  frame  of  it,   SERM. 
and  made  the  gofpel  another  thing  from  that  which  ^'^''^'^^'^ 
cur  Saviour  dehvered,  and  commanded  his  apofties 
to  teach  all  nations. 

For  he  tells  ns,  ver.  6.  of  this  chapter,  "  that  he 
"  marvelled,  that  they  v^^ere  fo  foon  removed  from 
"  him  that  called  them  by  (or  through)  the  grace  of 
"  Christ,  unto  another  gofpel,"  that  is  fo  diffe- 
rent from  that  which  they  had  been  inftruded  ia 
by  thofe  who  firfl  preached  the  'gofpel  unto  them  : 
for  the  making  of  any  thing  necelTary  to  Salvation, 
which  our  Saviour  in  his  gofpel  had  not  made 
fo,  he  calls  another  gofpel.  "  I  marvel  that  ye  are 
"  fo  foon  removed  from  him  that  called  you  by  the 
*'  grace  of  Christ,  unto  another  gofpel,  which  is 
*'  not  another,  0  ila  sVrv  aXXc,  which  is  no  other 
''  thing,  or  by  which  I  mean  nothing  dih^  but  that 
"  there  are  fome  that  trouble  you,  and  would  per- 
"  vert  the  gofpel  of  Christ  ;  "  as  if  he  had  faid, 
when  I  fay  that  "  ye  are  removed  to  another  gof- 
"  pel,  "  1  do  not  mean,  that  ye  have  renounced 
chriftianity,  and  are  gone  over  to  another  religion, 
but  that  ye  are  feduced  by  thole  who  have  a  mind 
to  pervert  the  gofpel  of  Christ,  by  adding  fome- 
thing  to  it,  as  a  neceffary  and  eilcntial  part  of  it, 
which  Christ  hath  not  made  fo  :  this  the  apoftle 
calls  a  perverting  or  overthrowing  of  the  gofpel ; 
becaufe,  by  thus  altering  the  terms  and  conditions  of 
it,  they  made  it  quite  another  thing  from  what  our 
Saviour  delivered  it. 

And  then  at  the  8th  and  9th  verfes  he  denounceth 
a  terrible  anathema  againft  thofe,  whdever  they  (liall 
|?e,  yea  tho'  it  were    an  apodle,  or  an  angel  from 

heaven^ 


cc 


3  3  y  o  The  Jin  and  danger  of  adding 

^^^'^-  heaven,  who  by  thus  perverting  the  gofpel  of 
Christ  (that  is,  by  making  any  thing  necefTary  to 
be  believed  or  praftifed,  which  our  Saviour  in  his 
gofpel  hath  not  made  fo)  ihould  in  effect  "  preach 

another  gofpel ;  but   tho'  we,  or  an  angel  from 

heaven,  preach  any  other  gofpel  unto  you,  than 

that  which  we  have  preached  unto  you,  let  him 
*'  be  anathema,  an  accurfed  thing.'*  And  then  to 
exprefs  his  confidence  and  vehemency  in  this  matter, 
and  to  fhcw  that  he  did  not  fpeak  this  radily,  and 
in  a  heat,  but  upon  due  confidcration,  he  repeats 
it  ao-ain  in  the  next  verfe,  "  as  we  faid  before,  fo  fay 
*'  I  now  again,  if  any  man  preach  any  other  gofpel 
*'  unto  you,  than  that  ye  have  received,  let  him  be 
*'  accurfed." 

From  the  words  thus  explained  by  the  confidcra- 
tion of  the  context,  and  of  the  main  fcope  and  de- 
fio-n  of  this  epiftle,  thefe  following  obfervations  do 
naturally  arife. 

Fird,  that  the  addition  of  any  thing  to  the  chrl- 
flian  religion,  as  neceflary  to  be  believed  and  prac- 
tifed  in  order  to  falvation,  is  "  a  perverting  of  the 
"  gofpelof  Christ,  and  preaching  another  gofpel.'* 

Secondly,  that  no  pretence  of  infallibility  is  fuf- 
ncient  to  authorife  and  warrant  the  addition  of  any 
thin'^  to  the  chriftian  dodrine,  as  neceflary  to  be 
believed  and  praftiled  in  order  to  filvation. 

Thirdly,  that  chriftians  may  judge  and  difccrn 
when  fuch  additions  are  made. 

Fourthly,  and  confequently,  that  fince  the  declara- 
tion of  the  gofpel,  and  the  confirmation  of  it,  there 
is  no  authority  in  the  chriflian  church  to  impofc  up- 
on chriftians  any  thing  as  of  neceffiry  to  falvation, 
which^the  gofpel  hath  not  made  Xo,  Fifthly, 


I 

to  the  doBrlne  of  the  gofpeL  I'^yi 

Fifthly,  that  there  is  no  vifible  judge  (how  infal-  SERM. 
libic  Ibever  he  may  pretend  to  be)  to  whofe  defini- ^^^fYl 
tions  and  declarations  in  matters  of  faith  and  prac- 
tice, neceOTary  to  filvation,  we  are  bound  to  fubmit, 
without  examination,  whether  thefe  thin*];s  be  a^^ree- 
able  to  the  gofpel  of  Christ,  or  not. 

Sixthly,  and  Jaftly,  whofoever  teacheth  any  thing 
as  of  nccefilty  to  lalvation,  to  be  believed  or  pradi- 
fed,  befides  what  the  gofpel  of  Christ  hath  made 
neceiTary,  doth  fall  under  the  anathema  here  in  the 
text,  becaufe  in  fo  doing,  "  he  perverteth  the  gof- 
*'  pel  of  Christ,  and  preacheth  another  gofpeL" 
Now  the  apoftle  expreHy  declares,  "  that  tho*  we 
"  (that  is,  he  himfelf,  or  any  of  the  apoflles)  or  an 
*'  angel  from  heaven,  preach  any  other  gofpel  unta 
you,  than  what  we  have  preached  unco  you,  ]tt 
him  be  accurfed  :  as  we  fiid  before,  fo  fay  I  now 
again,  if  any  man  preach  any  otlier  gofpel  unto 
you,  than  that  ye  have  received,  let  him  be  ac- 


«  curfed/* 


I.  That  the  addition  of  any  thing  to  the  chriftian 
religion,  as  necelTary  to  be  believed  or  pracflifed,  in 
order  to  falvation,  "  is  a  perverting^  of  tiie  gofpel 
*'  of  Christ,  and  preaching  another  gofpel.'*  ^ 

This  is  evident  from  the  inflances  here  given  int 
this  epiflle  -,  for  the  apoflle  chargeth  the  falfe  apo- 
flles, with  "  perverting  the  gofpel  of  Christ,  and 
*'  preaching  another  gofpel,"  upon  no  other  ac- 
count, but  becaufe  they  added  to  the  chriftian  reli- 
gion, and  made  circumcifion,  and  the  keeping  of 
the  law  of  Mofes,  an  effential  part  of  the  chriftian  re- 
ligion, and  impofed  upon  chriftians  the  pradlice  of 
thefe  things,  and  the  belief  of  the  necclFity  of  them, 
as  a  condition  of  eternal  falvation.  That 


WiZ  Tihe  fin  {i7id  dmiger  of  adding 

S  E  R  M.      That  this  was  the  dodlrine  of  thofe  falfe  teachers, 
LXXXVI^g  find  exprefly,  Ads  xv.  i.  "    And  certain  men 
''  which  came  down  from  Judea,  taught  the  brethren, 
*'  and  faid,  except  ye  be  circumcifed  after  the  man- 
"  ner  of  Mofes,  ye  cannot  be  faved  ,"  and  ver.  24.  in 
the  letter  written  by  the  apoilles  and  elders  at  Jeru- 
falem,  to  the  churches  abroad,  there  is  this  account 
o-iven  of  it ;  "  forafmuch  as  we   have   heard,  that 
*'  certain  which  went  out  from  us,  have  troubled  you 
«'  with  words,  fubverting  your  fouls,  faying,  ye  mud 
«'  be  circumcifed,  and  keep  the  law,  to  whom  we 
««  crave  no  fuch  commandment."  Where  you   fee 
that  this  dodrine  is  declared  to  be  of  pernicious  con- 
fequence,  tending  to  fubvert  the  fouls  of  men,  and 
likewife  to  be  an  addition  to  the  dodrine  of  the  gof- 
pel  which  was  delivered  by  the  apoilles,  who  here 
with  one  confent  declare,  "  that  they  had  given  no 
*'  fuch  commandment  j'*  that  is,  had  delivered  no 
fuch  dodrine  as  this,  nor  put  any  fuch  yoke  upon  the 
necks  of  chriftians ;  but  on  the  contrary  had  declared, 
that  the  death  of  Christ  having  put  an  end  to  the 
Jewilh  difpenfation,    there  was  now  no  obligation 
upon  chriftians  to  obferve  the  law  of  Mofes. 

And  from  the  reafon  of  the  thing  it  is  very  plain, 
that  the  addition  of  any  thing  to  the  chriftian  religi- 
on as  neceflary  to  be  believed  or  pradlifed  in  or- 
der to  falvation,  which  the  gofpel  hath  not  made  fo, 
is  preaching  another  gofpel  ;  becaufe  it  makes  an  ef- 
fential  change  in  the  terms  and  conditions  of  the  gof- 
pel-covenant,  which  declares  falvation  unto  men  upon 
fuch  and  fuch  terms,  and  no  other.  Now  to  add  any 
other  terms  to  thefe,  as  of  equal  necefTity  with  them, 
is  to  alter  the  condition  of  the  covenant  of  the  gof- 
pel, 


to  the  doBrine  of  the  gofpeJ,  ^  3  7  3 

pel,  and  the  terms  of  the  chriftian  religion,  and  confe-  S  E  R  M 
quently  "   to  preach  another  gofpel,'*  by   declaring  ^ 

other  terms  of  falvation,    than  Christ  in  his  gofpel 
hath  declaredjwhich  is  to  pervert  the  gofpel  of  Ch  r  ist. 
II.  No  pretence  of  infallibility  is  fufficient  to  au- 
thorife  and  v/arrant  the  addition  of  any  thing  to  the 
chriflian  dodrine,  as  neceffary  to  be  believed  or  prac- 
tifed,in  order  to  falvation.     After  the  delivery  of  the 
gofpel  by  the  Son  of  God,  and  the  publication  of  ic 
to  the  world  by  his  apoilles,  who  were  commifTion'd 
and  infpir'd  by  him  to  that  purpofe,  and  the   confir- 
mation of  all,  by  the  greatefl:  and  mod  unquedionable 
miracles    that  ever  were,  no  perfon   whatever  that 
brought  any  other  doctrine,  and  declared  falvation 
to  men  on  any  other  terms  than  thofe  which  are  de- 
clared in  the  gofpel,  was  to  be  credited,  what  pre- 
tence foever  he  lliould  make  to  a  divine  commiiTion 
or  an  infallible  affiflance.     The  apoille  makes  a  fup» 
pofition  as  high  as  can  be,  '^  tho'  we  (fays  he)  or  an 
''  angel  from  heaven  preach  any  other  gofpel  unto 
''  you,  than  that  which  we  have  preached  unto  you, 
"  let  him  be  an  anathema."     If  the  apoftles  thcm- 
felves,  who  were  divinely  commilTioned,  and  infalli- 
bly aiTifted   in  the  preaching  of  the  gofpel,  fhould 
afterwards  make  any  addition  to  it,  or  declare  any 
other  terms  of  falvation  than  thofe  which  are  declared 
in  the  gofpel  which    they  had  already  publiflied  to 
the  world,  they  ought  not  to  be  regarded. 

And  the  reafon  is  plain  -,  becaufe  what  claim  foever 
any  perfon  may  make  to  infallibility,  and  what  de- 
monftration  foever  he  may  give  of  it,  we  cannot  pof- 
fibly  believe  him,  if  he  contradid:  himfelf,  and  de- 
liver doctrines  which  do  plainly  clafh  with  one  ano- 
ther: for  if  he  fpake  true  at  firft,  I  cannot  believe 

Vol.  VI.  loY  hiai 


1374  I'he  fm  and  danger  of  adding 

S  K  R  \^,  him  ckclarin:^  the  contrary  afterwards:  and  if  he  did 
''    not  fpeak  true  at  firit,  I  cannot  behcve  him  at  all ; 
becaufe  he  can  give  no  greater  proof  of  his  divine 
commiflion,  and  infallible  afTiftance  and  infpiration, 
than  he  did  at  firft. 

And  the  reafon  is  the  fame,  if  an  angel  from 
heaven  fliould  come  and  preach  a  contrary  doc- 
trine to  that  of  the  gofpel,  he  v/ere  not  to  be  believed 
neither  \  becaufe  he  could  bring  no  better  credentials 
of  his  divine  commiflion  and  authority,  than  thofe 
had  vv^ho  publifh'd  the  gofpel,  and,  confequently,  he 
ought  not  to  be  credited  in  any  thing  contrary  to 
what  they  had  publiflied  before.  For  tho'  a  man 
were  never  fo  much  difpofcd  to  receive  a  Revelation 
from  God,  and  to  fubmit  his  faith  to  it ;  yet  it  is  not 
pomble  for  any  man  to  believe  God  againft  God 
himlclf;  that  is,  to  believe  two  revelations,  plainly 
contradictory  to  one  another,  to  be  from  God  ;  and 
the  reafon  of  this  is  very  obvious ;  becaufe  every  man 
doth  firft,  and  more  firmly,  beheve  this  proportion  or 
principle,"  that  contradidlions  cannot  be  true,"  than 
any  revelation  whatfoever  •,  for  if  contradictions  may 
be  true,  then  no  revelation  from  God  can  fignify  any 
thing,  becaufe  the  contrary  may  be  equally  true,  and 
ib  truth  and  falfliood  be  all  one. 

The  apoftle  indeed  only  makes  a  fuppofition,  when 
he  lays,"  tho'  we,  or  an  angel  from  heaven,  preach  any 
"  other  do6trine  unto  you-,"  but  by  this  fuppofition 
he  plainly  bars  any  man,  or  company  of  men,  from 
adding  to  thcchriflian  religion  any  article  offliith,  or 
point  of  practice,  as  ofnccelllty  to  falvation,which  the 
gofpel  hath  not  made  foj  I  lay,  any  man,  or  company 
©f  men.  whatever  authority  or  infallibility  they  may 
lay  claim  to,  becaufe  they  cannot  pretend  to  a  clearer 

com- 


to  the  dccirlne  ^f  the gofpeh  ^375 

commllTion,  and  greater  evidence  of  infallible  afTi-  s  E  R  M- 

F  "V  T  y  V  X 
fiance,  than  an  apollleor  an  angel  from  heaven,  and  ^ 

yet  the  text  tells  us,  that  v/ould  not  be  a   fufficient 
warrant  to  preach  another  gofpel  ;  it  might  indeed  . 
bring  in  quedion  that  which  they  had  preached  be- 
fore, bur  could  not  give  credit  and  authority  to  any 
thing  plainly  contrary  to  it,  and  inconfif{:ent  v^^ith  ir. 

III.  Chriftians  may  judge  and  difcern  when  ano-\\ 
ther  gofpel  is  preached,  when  new  articles  of  faith, 
or  points  of  pradice,  not  enjoined  in  the  gofpel,  arc 
impofed  upon  Chriflians.  This  the  apofllc  fuppofcth' 
every  particular  church,  and  for  ought  I  know  every 
particular  chriftian,  that  is  duly  infrrudled  in  the  chri- 
ftian  religion  to  be  a  competent  judge  of,  and  to  be 
fufficiently  able  to  difcern  when  another  goipel  is 
preached,  and  new  terms  and  conditions,  not  de-  ' 
clared  in  the  p;ofpe],  are  added  to  the  chriftian  religion ; 
for  if  they  be  not  able  to  judge  of  this,  the  apoftle 
does  in  vain  caution  them  againfl  the  fedudlion  of 
thofe  "  who  perverted  the  doctrine  of  Christ, and 
"  endeavoured  to  remove  them  from  him  that  had 
*'  called  them  by  the  grace  of  Christ,  unto  ano- 
*'  ther  gofpel." 

It  may  perhaps  be  faid,  that  there  was  no  nqed 
that  they  fliould  be  able  to  difcern  and  judge  of  the 
do6lrines  of  thofe  falfe  teachers,  it  was  fuflicient  for 
them  to  believe  the  apoftle  concerning  the  doctrines 
of  thofe  feducers,  when  he  declared  to  them  the  falf. 
hood  and  pernicious  confequence  of  them.  Bjt  the 
apoftle  fpeaks  to  them  upon  another  fuppoficion, 
which  does  neceftarily  imply,  that  they  were  able  to 
difcern  and  judge  what  doctrines  were  agreeable  to 
the  gofpel,  and  what  not ;  for  h?  puts  the  cafcj  that 

10  Y  2  if 


1 3  7^  The  fm  and  danger  of  adding 

^^^^^-  if  he  himfdf,   or  any  of  the  apoftles,   or  an  angel 
^froni  heaven,  fhould  preach  to  them  another  dodlrine, 
contrary  to  that  of  the  gofpel,  they  ought  to  reje6t  it 
with  deteftation ;  but  this  doth  neceffarily    fuppofe 
them  able  to  judge,  when  fuch  doctrines  were  preached, 
and  confequently  that  aiJ  things  neceflary  to  be  be- 
lieved and  pradifed  by  all  chriftians,  are  clearly  and 
plainly  declared  in  the  gofpel  \  all  the  dodrines  where- 
of are  now  contained  in  the  holy  fcriptures,  in  which 
all  things  neceffary  to  faith  and  a  good  life,   are  fo 
plainly  delivered,  that  any  fober  and  inquifitive  per- 
fon  may  learn  them  from  thence,  and  the  meaneft 
capacity,  by  the  help  and  diredion  of  their  guides 
and  teachers,  may  be  inftruded  in  them. 
I      And  this  is  not  only  the  principle  of  proteftants, 
I  but  the  exprefs  and  conilant  dodrinc  of  the  ancient 
'  fathers  of  the  church,  whatever  the  church  of  Rome, 
for  the  maintaining  of  her  ufurpcd  authority  over  the 
confciences  of  men,  pretends  to  the  contrary.     And 
if  this  were  not  fo,  that  men  are  able  to  difcern  and 
judge  which  are  the  dodrines  of  the  gofpel,  and  what 
is  contrary  to  them  ;  the  dodrine  of  ^^t  gofpel  was 
in  vain  preached,  and  the  holy  fcriptures  containing 
^that  dodrine  were  written  to  no  purpofe. 

Some  things  in  fcripture  are  granted  to  be  obfcure 
and  difficult,  on  purpofe  to  exercife  the  fludy  and 
enquiries  of  thofc  who  have  leifure  and  capacity  for 
it:  but  all  things  necelTary  are  fufficiently  plain; 
otherwife  it  would  be  impoflible  to  judge  when  ano- 
ther gofpel  is  preached,  which  the  apoltle  here  fup- 
pofeth  theGalatians  capable  of  doing.  For  if  the  re- 
velation of  the  gofpel  be  not  fufficiently  plain  in  all 
things  necelTary  to  be  believed  and  pradifed,  then 

chriflians 


to  the  doBrine  of  the  gofpeL  ^377 

chrlftians  have  no  rule  whereby  to  judge  what  doftrines  SE  R  M. 
are  agreeable  to  the  gofpel,  and  what  not,  for  an  obfcure 
rule  is  of  no  ufe ;  that  is,  in  truth  is  no  rule  to  thofe 
to  whom  it  is  obfcure. 

I  proceed  to  the  IVth  obfervation,  which  Is  plaln- 
iy  con fcquent  from  thofe  laid  down  before;  namely, 
that  fince  the  declaration  of  the  gofpel,  and  the  con- 
firmation given  to  it,  there  is  no  authority  in  the 
chriftian  church  to  impofe  upon  chridians  any  thing, 
as  of  necelTity  to  falvation,  which  the  gofpel  hath  noi; 
made  fo. 

The  commllTion  given  by  our  Lord  and  Saviour 
to  his  apoflles,  was  "  to  preach  the  golpel  to  all  na- 
'*  tions,  (or  as  St.  Matthew  exprefles  it)  to  go  and 
*'  teach  all  nations,  to  obferve  all  things  whatfoev<:r 
"  he  had  commanded  them  ;"  and  this  is  that  whick 
we  call  the  gofpel,  viz.  that  dodrine  which  Christ 
commanded  his  apoftles  to  preach  and  publifh  to  thz 
world  j  and  if  the  apoflles  themfclves  had  exceeded 
their  commiflion,  and  added  any  other  points  of  faitii 
or  practice  to  thofe  which  our  Saviour  gave  them 
in  ch^irge  to  teach  and  publiili  to  the  world,  they  hd,d^ 
in  fo  doing,  been  guilty  of  that  which  St,  Paul  here 
in  the  text  chargeth  the  falfe  apoftles  with,  viz,  "  of 
*'  preaching  another  gofpel,"  And  if  the  apoftles  had 
no  authority  to  add  any  thing  to  the  gofpel,  much  leis 
can  any  others  pretend  to  it,  fince  they  have  neitiier  fo 
immediate  a  commiffion,  nor  fuch  a  miraculous  power 
to  give  teftimony  to  them,  "  that  they  are  teachers 
*'  come  from  God." 

Now  this  dodrine  of  the  gofpel,  which  the  apoftles 

preached  to  the  world,  is  that  which  chriftians  are  lb 

often,  and  fo  earncftly  by  the  apoftles  in  ail  their 

^pifties  "  exhorted  to  continue  in,  and  not  to  fufter 

''  thcai- 


1 2  7  S  7 he  fm  cind  danger  of  adding 

S  ERA!   <«  themfelves  to  be  fliaken  in  mind,  by  every  wind  of 
^^  S^  '^  new  dcdrine,"  becaufe  that  which  the  apoRIcs  had 
delivered  to  them,  was  the  intire  doclrine  of  the  gos- 
pel, which  v/as  never  to  receive  any  addition  or  alte- 
ration.    This  is  that  which  St.  Peter  calls  "  the  holy 
''  commandment  which  was  delivered  unto  them," 
2  Pet.  ii.  21.  *'  It  had  been  better  for  them  not  to 
*'  have  known  the  way  of  righteoufnefs,  than  after 
"  they  have  known  it,  to  turn  from  the  holy  com- 
*'  mandment  delivered  unto  them,"  fpeaking  in  all 
probability  of  thofewho  were  fed uced  by  the  errors 
of  the  gnofticks,  from  the  purity  of  the  chriftian 
dodrine  delivered  to  them  by  the  apoflles.  This  like- 
wife  St.  Paul  calls  '*  the  common  fiith,"  Titus  i.  4. 
and  St.  Jude  ver.  3.  "  the  common  falvation  i"  that  is, 
the    doflrine  which   contains   the   common    terms 
of  falvation,  and  "  the  faith  which  was  once  de- 
*'  livered  to  the  faints,"  that  is,  by  the  apoftles  of 
our  Lord,  who  pubhfhed  the  gofpeU    "once  de- 
*'  livered,"  that  is,  once  for  all,  fo  as  never  afterwards 
to  admit  of  any  change  or  alteration.     This  faith  he 
exhorts  chriftians,  *'  earneftly  to  contend  for,"  againft 
thofe  feveral  feds  of  feducers,  which  were  crept  in- 
to the  chriftian  church,  and  did  endeavour  by  feveral 
arts  to  pervert  the  gofpel  of  Christ,  and  to  de- 
prave the  futh  delivered  by  the  apoftles. 

So  that  thedodlrine  of  the  gofpel  publifh'd  by  the 
apoftles,  is  fix'd  and  unalterable,  and  there  can  be  no 
authority  in  the  church  to  make  any  change  in  it, 
cither  by  taking  from  it,  or  adding  any  thing  to  it, 
as  neceflary  to  be  believed  or  pradifed  in  order  to  fal- 
vation. 

5.  It  follows  likewife  from  the  foregoing  obferva- 
tions,  that  there  is  no  vifible  judge  (how  much  Co- 

ever 


to  the  doBtine  of  the  gofpcL  ^379 

ever  he  may  pretend  to  infallibility)   to  whofe  deter-  SE  RM. 

.  •  LXXXVI 

mination  and  decifion  in  matters  of  faith  and  prac- 
tice neceiTary  to  ialvation,  chriflians  are  bound  to 
fubmit  without  examination,  whether  thofe  things  be 
agreeable  to  the  dodrine  of  the  gofpel,  or  not. 

When  our  Saviour  appeared  in  the  world,  tho* 
he  had  authority  enough  to  exadl  belief  from  men, 
yet  becaufe  there  was  a  Handing  revelation  of  God 
made  to  the  Jews,  he  appeals  to  that  revelation,  as 
well  as  to  his  own  miracles,  for  the  truth  of  what  he 
faid,and  offered  himfelf,  and  his  dodrine,  to  be  tried 
by  the  agreeablenefs  of  it  to  the  fcriptures  of  the  old 
teftament,  and  the  prediflions  therein  concerning 
him.  And  this  was  but  reafonable,  it  being  impol- 
•fible  for  any  man  to  receive  two  revelations,  as  from 
God,  without  liberty  to  examine  whether  they  be 
agreeable  to,  and  confident  with  one  another.  In 
like  manner  the  apoftles  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour, 
tho'  they  were  guided  and  afTifted  by  an  infallible 
fpirit,  and  had  an  immediate  commiffion  from 
Christ  to  preach  the  dodlrine  of  the  gofpel,  did 
not  require  from  men  abfolute  fubmifTion  to  their  doc- 
trines and  di&ates,  without  examination  of  what  they 
delivered,  whether  it  were  agreeable  to  the  divine  re- 
velation which  was  contained  in  the  ancient  fcriptures. 

This  was  St.  PauPs  conflant  cuflom  and  way  of 
teaching  among  the  Jcv/s,  who  had  received  the  re- 
velation of  the  old  teflament ;  he  did  not  didlate  to 
them  by  virtue  of  his  infallibility,  but  "  realbned 
*'  with  them  out  of  the  fcriptures,"  and  required 
their  belief  no  farther  than  what  he  faid  fliould,  upon 
examination,  appear  agreeable  to  the  fcriptures.  So 
we  find,  A6ls  xvii.  2,  3.  "And  Paul,  as  his  manner 


*'  v/as 


d 


J  -^  8o  ^hejtn  and  danger  of  adding 

SERM.  '^  was;  went  in  unto  them  (fpeaking  of  the  Jews)  and 
Y^^^^\  **  ^f^r^^  fabbath-days  reafoned  with  them  out  of  the 
*'  fcriptures,    opening  and  alledging  that  Christ 
•*  mud  needs  have  fuffered,  and  rifen  again  from  the 
*'  dead ;  and  that  this  Jesus  whom  I  preach  unto  you, 
*^  is  the  Christ."  And  chap,  xviii.  28.  "  he  mighti- 
*^  \^  convinced  the  Jews,  and  that  publickly,   fliew- 
*'  ing  by  the  fcriptures,  that  Jesus  was  the  Christ.'* 
And  St.  Paul  was  fo  far  from  reproving  them  for  exa- 
mining his  dodtrine  by  the  fcriptures,  that  he  com* 
mended  it>  as  an  argument  of  a  noble  and  generous 
mind  in  the  Bereans,  that  they  did  not  give  full   af- 
fent  to  his  dodrinc,  till  upon  due  fearch  and  exami- 
nation they  were  fatisned  that  what  he  had  faid  was 
agreeable  to  the  fcriptures.      Chap.  xvii.    ii,  12, 
Where  fpeaking  of  the  Bcreans,  it  is  faid,  "  That 
**  thefe  were  more  noble  than  thofe  in  TheiTalonica, 
^^  in  that  they  received  the  word,  with  all  readinels 
«••  of  mind,  and  fearched  the  fcriptures  daily,  whe- 
"  thcr  thofe  things  v/ere  fo  ;  therefore  many  of  them 
**  believed  j"  that  is,  becaufe  upon  fearch  they  found 
"what  he  delivered  to  be  agreeable  to  the  fcriptures  \ 
and  it  was  not  a  flight,  but  diligent  and  deliberate 
fearch,  they  took  time  to  examine  things  thoroughly  ; 
for  it  is  laid,   "  they  fearched  the  fcriptures  daily/* 
And  here  in  the  text  St.  Paul  puts  the  cafe,  that  if  he, 
or  any  other  of  the  apoilles,  concerning  whofe  divine 
commifTion  and  affiilance  they  were  fo  fully  latisfied, 
Hiould  deliver  a^ny  thing  to  them  contrary  to  the  gof- 
pel  which  they  had  formerly  preached,  they  were  to 
xejed  it  with  the  grcateft  abhoi*rence  and  dctellation  ; 
and  this  nccefiarily   fuppoieth  a  liberty  to  examine 
what  was  d^livered^even  by  thofe  whom  they  believed 


ib  the  doclrine  of  the  gofpel.  1 3  S  r 

to  be   infallibly    alTifted,    and  a  capacity  to  difcern  S  E  R  if  • 
and  judge  whether  what  they  faid  was  agreeable  to 
the  golpel  at  firft  delivered  to  them  or  not. 

And  after  this,  fhall  any  perfon  or  church  (what 
claim  foever  they  may  make  to  infalhbility)  afTume 
to  themfelves  an  authority  to  dictate  in  matters  of 
fliith,  and  that  their  didates  ought  to  be  received 
with  an  abfolute  fubmiffion,  and  without  liberty  to 
examine  whether  they  be  agreeable  to  "  the  faith 
''  once  delivered  to  the  faints  j"  and  tho'  they  add 
new  articles  to  the  chriflian'  faith^  and  of  which 
there  is  not  the  lead  footfrep  or  intimation  in  any  of 
the  ancient  creeds  of  the  chriflian  church,  and  do 
plainly  impofe  upon  chriftians  the  pradice  and  be- 
lief of  feveral  things  as  neceffary  to  lalvation,  which 
the  gofpel  never  declared  to  be  fo,  yet  no  body  ihall 
judge  of  this,  but  every  man  ought  v/ithout  more 
ado,  to  believe  bhndfold,  and  to  refign  up  his  un- 
derftanding  and  judgment  to  the  diredtions  of  this 
vifible  infallible  judge  ? 

Bat  furely  this  is  not  the  reafonable  "  obedience 
««  of  faith,''  but  the  forc'd  fubmilTion  of  flaves  to 
the  tyranny  of  their  maders.  Chriftians  are  expref- 
ly  forbid  "  to  call  any  man  father  or  mafler  upoa 
''  earth,  becaufe  we  have  one  father  and  mafler  in 
"  heaven."  Now  to  make  an  abfolute  fubmifiioii 
of  our  underflandings  to  any  upon  earth,  fo  as  w^ith- 
out  examination  to  receive  their  didates  in  matters  of 
faith)  is  furely,  if  any  thing  can  be  fo,  "  to  call  fuch 
*'  a  perfon  father  or  mafter,"  becaufe  a  greater  fub- 
milTion than  this  we  cannot  pay  to  our  Father  who 
is  in  heaven,  even  to  God  himfelf.  1  come  now 
to  the 

Vol.  VI.  10 Z  IV  and 


13  8  2  The  fin  and  danger  of  adding 

S  E  R  M.       VI  and  lafl  obfervation  from  the  text,  that  who- 
foever  teacheth  any  thing   as   of  neccfllty  to  falva- 
tion,  to  be  believed  or  praclifed,  befides  what   the 
gofpel  of  Christ   hath    made  neceflry,   does  fall 
under  the  anathema  here  in  the  text  j  becaufe  they 
that  do  fo,  do,   acsording  to  the  mind  of  St.  Paul, 
♦'.pervert  the  gofpel  of  Christ,  and  preach  ano- 
''  ther  gofpel."     For  the  reafon   why  he  chargeth 
the  falfe  apofcles  with  "  preaching  another  gofpel,'* 
and  thofe  that  were  fcduced  by  them,  as  ^'  being  re- 
*'  moved  from  him  that  called  them  into  the  grace  of 
•'  Christ   unto  another  gofpel,"    is  plainly  this; 
that  they  had  changed  the  terms  of  the  chriflian  re- 
ligion, by  adding  new  articles  to  it,  which  were  not 
contained  in  the  gofpel  •,  that  is,  by  making  it  ne- 
ceflary  to  believe  it  to  be  fo.  becaufe  they  taught  fo. 
Now  St.  Paul  exprefly  declares  this  to  be  "■  preach- 
*'  ing  another  gofpel,"  becaufe  they  plainly  alter'd 
the  terms  of  falvation  declared  in  the  gofpel,  and 
made  that  to  be  neceffary  to  the  falvation  of  men, 
which  the  gofpel  had  not  made  fo. 

And  whatever  perfon  or  church  .does  the  fame, 
docs  incur  the  fame  guilt,  and  falls  under  the  ana- 
thema and  cenfure  here  in  the  text;  yea,  "  tho'  he 
*'  were  an  apoftle,  or  an  angel :  '*  and  I  am  fure  no 
bifhop  or  church  in  the  world  can  pretend  either  to 
an  equal  authority  or  infallibility  with  an  apoftle,  or 
an  ang:el  from  heaven. 

Let  us  then  hear  what  St.  Paul  declares  in  this 
cafe,  and  confider  feriouOy,  with  what  earnefmefs  and 
vehemency  he  declares  it ;  "  tho'  we  (fays  he)  or 
"  an  angel  from  heaven  preach  any  other  gofpel  un- 
*^  to  you,  than  that  which  we  have  preached  unto 

"  you, 


to  the  doEfrine  of  the  gofpel.  1383 

*^  you,  let  him  be  accurfed.  As  wc  faid  before,  lb  /ay  S  E  R  M. 

•  -  LXXXVI 

"  I  now  again,  it  any  man  preach  any  other  gofpel 

"  unto  you,  than  that  ye  have  received,  let  him  be 
"  accuried."  Sr.  Paul  you  fee  is  very  earned  in 
this  matter,  and  very  peremptory,  and  therefore  I 
cannot  but  think  this  declaration  of  his  to  be  more 
confiderable,  and  every  way  more  worthy  of  our  re- 
gard aid  dread,  than  aH  the  anathema's  of  the  coun- 
cil oF  Trent,  which  in  direct  affront  and  contempt 
of  this  anathema  of  St.  Puul,  hath  prefumed  to  add 
fo  many  articles  to  the  chriflian  religion,^  upon  the 
counterfeit  warrant  of  tradition,  for  which  there  is 
no  ground  or  warrant  from  the  fcripture,  or  from 
any  ancient  creed  of  the  chriilian  church. 

And  for  the  truth  of  this,  I  appeal  to  the  creed  of 
po^>e  Pius  the  IVth,  compiled  out  of  the  definiti- 
ons  of  the  council  of  Trent ;  by  which  council  the 
pope  only  is  authorifed  to  interpret  the  true  fenfe 
and  meaning  of  the  canons  and  decrees  of  that  coun- 
cil ;  and  confequently  his  interpretations  muil  be  of 
equal  force  and  authority  with  that  of  the  courcll  it 
felf.  So  that  whatfoever  he  hath  put  into  his  new 
creed  for  an  article  of  faith,  ought  to  be  received 
with  the  fame  pious  afFcdion  and  veneration,  as  if 
the  creed  had  been  compiled  by  the  council  it  M^; 
becaufe  the  pope,  it  feems,  and  no  body  clfe  under- 
flands  the  true  meaning  of  that  council,  at  leaft  is 
thought  fit  to  declare  it.  And  therefore  one  may 
juftly  wonder  at  the  prefumption  of  thofe,  who  after 
this  declaration  of  the  council,  have  taken  upon 
them  to  expound  the  catholick  faith,  and  to  repre- 
fent  that  religion  to  us,  as  it  is  defined  in  that  coun- 
cil ;  becaufe  if  there  be  any  controverfy  about  the 

10  Z  2  meaning: 


1384  Olefin  and  danger  of  addi?ig 

SERM.  meanins:  of  its  definitions  (as  there  have  been  a  ffreat 

1    V  V  y-  v,    I  O  V  O 

many  even  betwixt  thofe  who  were  prefent  at  the 
council  when  thofe  definitions  were  made)  none  but 
the  pope  himfelf  can  certainly  tell  the  meaning  of 

them. 

Now  in  this  creed  of  pope  Pius,  there  are  added 
to  the  ancient  creed,  of  the  chriflian  church,  twelve 
1  or  thirteen   new  articles,    as  concerning  purgatory, 
I  tranfubftantiation,  the  worfhip  of  images,  the  invo- 
•  cation  of  faints,  the  communion  in  one  kind,   and 
that  the  church  of  Rome  is  the  mother  and  miflrefs 
of  all  churches,  and  that  there  is  no  filvation  to  be 
had  out  of  it ;  and  feveral  other  points,  all  which 
have  either  no  foundation  in  fcripture,  or  are  plainly 
contrary  to  it,  and  none  of  them  ever  eileemed  as 
articles  of  faith  in  the  ancieat  chriftian  church  for 
the  firft  five  hundred  years  \  and  yet  they  are  now 
obtruded  upon  chriftians,  as  of  equal  necefuty  to  falva- 
tion,  vi^ith   the    twelve  articles  of  the  apoftles  creed, 
and   this   under  a  pretence  of  infallibility,    which 
Si.  Paul  tells  us  would  not  have  juftined  an  apoftle, 
or  an  angel  from  heaven,  in  making  fuch  additions 
to    the    chriftian   religion,    and  the  impofing   any 
thing  as  neceflliry  to  falvation,  which  is  not  fo  decla- 
red by  the  gofpcl  of  Christ. 

And  all  that. they  have  to  Hiy  for  this,  is,  that  we 
do  not  pretend  t.o  be  infallible  :  but  there  is  a  necef- 
'  fity  of  an  infiiliible  judge  to  decide  thefe  controver- 
fies,  and  to  him  they  are  to  be  referred.  Which  is 
juft  as  if  in  a  plain  matter  of  right,  a  contentious 
and  confident  man  fhould  defire  a  reference,  and  con- 
trive the  matter  fo  as  to  have  it  refer'd  to  himfelf, 
ppon  a  Gcevelefs  pretence,  without  any  proof  or  evi- 
dence. 


to  the  doBrlne  of  the  gofpcL  ^3^5 

dence,  that  he  is  the  only  perfon  in  the  world  that  S  E  R  M. 
hath  authority  and  infallible  skill  to  decide  all  luch^^^^^^ 
differences.  Thus  the  church  of  Rome  would  deal 
with  us  in  things  which  are  as  plain  as  the  noon- 
day ;  as 'whether  God  hath  forbidden  the  worfhip  of 
images  in  the  fecond  commandment  ?  whether  our 
Saviour  did  inftitute  the  facrament  in  both  kinds? 
whether  the  people  ought  not  to  read  the  fcriptures, 
and  to  have  the  publick  fervice  of  God  in  a  known 
tongue  ?  thefe,  and  the  like,  they  would  have  us  re- 
fer to  an  infallible  judge  ^  and  wlien  vvx  ask  who 
he  is,  they  tell  us  that  their  church,  which  hath  im- 
pofed  thefe  things  upon  chriftians,  and  made  thefj 
additions  to  the  gofpel  of  Christ,  is  that  infallible 
judge.  But  ifilie  were  as  infallible  as  Hie  pretends 
to  be,  even  as  an  apofcle,  or  an  angel  from  hea- 
ven, St.  Paul  hath  denounced  an  anathema  againfl: 
her,  for  preaching  another  gofpel,  and  making  thofc 
things  necelTary  to  the  falvation  of  men,  which  are 
not  contained  in  the  gofpel  of  Christ. 

The  inference  from  all  this  difcourfc  in  fhort,  is 
this ;  "  that  we  fliould  contend  earneftly  for  the 
"  faith  once  delivered  to  the  faints,"  and  not  fuffer 
our  felves  by  the  confident  pretences  of  fcducers, 
"  to  be  removed  from  him  that  hath  called  us 
"  through  the  grace  of  Christ  unto  another  gof- 
*^  pel."  The  neceffary  dodlrines  of  the  chriflian  re- 
ligion, and  the  common  terms  of  falvation  are  fo 
plain,  that  if  any  man  be  ignorant  of  them,  it  is 
his  own  fault  -,  and  if  any  go  about  to  impofe  upon 
us  any  thing  as  of  necefficy  to  be  believed  and  prac- 
tifed  in  order  to  falvation,  which  is  not  declared  to 
be  fo  in  the  holy  fcriptures,  which  contain  the  true 

doctrine 


1386  Honejly  the  bejl  prefervative 

dodrlne  of  the  gofpeJ,  what  authority  foeverthey  pre- 
tend for  it,  yea,  tho'  th^y  afTume  to  themfelves  to  be 
infallible  ^  the  apoflle  hath  plainly  told  us  what  *we 
arc  to  think  of  them  ;  for  he  hath  put  the  cafe  as  high 
as  pollible  here  in  the  text,  when  he  lays,  ''  tho'  wc, 
*'  or  an  angel  from  heaven  preach  any  other  gofpel 
"  unto  you,  than  that  which  we  have  preached  unto 
"  you,  let  him  be  accurfed." 

I  will  conclude  all  with  that  counfel  which  the 
Spirit  of  God  gives  to  the  churches  of  Afia,  Rev. 
iii.  3.  "  Remember  therefore  how  thou  haft  received 
*'  and  heard, and  hold  faft ;" and  chap.  ii.  10.  "Fear 
*'  none  of  thofe  things  which  thou  fhalt  fuffer,  be 
^'  thou  faithful  unto  death,  and  I  will  give  thee  a 
"  crown  of  Life.'* 


SERMON    LXXXVIL 

Honefty    the  beft  prefervative   againft 
dangerous  miftakes  in  religion. 


JOHN    vii.   17. 

If  any  man  do  his  will ^  hejhall  know  of  the  do^frine^ 
whether  it  l^e  of  God,  or  whether  I  fpeak  of  my fe If 

S  E  R  M.  ^^  I N  C  E  there   are  fb  many  different  opinions 
"^^  and  apprchenfions  in  the  world  about  matters 
of  religion,  and  every  fe6l  and  party  does  with 
fo  much  confidence  pretend  that  they,  and  they  only, 

are 


agahijl  dangerous  miflahs  In  religion.  13  ^.j 

are  in  the  truth  ;  the  great  difficulty  and  queflion  is,  S  E  R  .VT. 
by  what  means  men  may  be  fecurcd  from  dangerous  ^^■^'^^^^• 
errors  and  miflakes  in  religion.  For  this  end  fome 
have  thought  it  necefTary  that  there  fhould  be  an  in- 
falhblc  church,  in  the  communion  whereof  every  man 
may  be  fecured  from  the  dangers  of  a  wrong  behef. 
Bat  it  fecms  God  hath  not  thought  this  necefTary  :  if 
he  had,  he  would  have  revealed  this  very  thing  more 
plainly  than  any  particular  point  of  faith  whatibever. 
He  would  have  told  us  exprelly,  and  in  the  plaineft 
terms,  that  he  had  appointed  an  infallible  guide  and 
judge  in  matters  of  fliith,  and  would  likewife  have 
told  us  as  plainly  who  he  was,  and  where  we  might  find 
him,  and  haverecourfe  to  him  upon  all  occafions  ^  be- 
caufe  the  fincerity  of  our  faith  depending  upon  him> 
we  could  not  be  fafe  from  miflakc  in  particular  points, 
without  fo  plain  and  clear  a  revelation  of  this  infalli- 
ble judge,  that  there  could  be  no  miftake  about  him ; 
nor  could  there  be  an  end  of  any  otlier  controverfies 
in  religion,  unlefs  this  infalliblejudge  (both  that  there 
is  one,  and  who  he  is)  were  out  of  controverfy.  But 
neither  of  thefe  are  lb :  it  is  not  plain  from  fcripture 
that  there  is  an  infallible  judge  and  guide  in  matters  of 
faith  ;  much  lefs  is  it  plain  who  he  is  ;  and  therefore 
we  may  certainly  conclude,  that  God  hath  not 
thought  it  necefTary  that  there  fhould  be  an  infallible 
guide  and  judge  in  matters  of  faith,  becaufe  he  hath 
revealed  no  fuch  thing  to  us :  and  that  bifhop  and 
that  church  v/ho  only  have  arrogated  infallibility 
to  themfclves,  have  given  the  greatefl  evidence  m 
the  world  to  the  contrary  \  and  have  been  deteded 
and  fland  convinced  of  the  greatefl  errors :  and  it  n 
in  vain  for  any  man  or  company  of  men,  to  pretend 


1 3 S8  tionejly  the  heji  prejervaiive 

S  E  R  M.  to  infallibility,  fo  long  as  the  evidence  that  they  ard 
deceived  is  much  greater  and  clearer  than  any  proof 
they  can  produce  lor  their  infalhbility. 

If  then  Got)  hath  not  provided  an  infallible  guide 
and  judge  in  matters  of  taith  5  there  is  fonie  other 
way  whereby  men  may  be  fecured  againfl:  dangerous 
and  damnable  errors  in  religion,  and  whereby  they 
may  difcern  truth  from  impoilure,  and  what  doctrines 
are  from  God,  and  what  not;  and  this  our  Savi- 
our declares  to  us  here  in  the  text,  namely,  that  an 
honeft  and  fincere  mind,  and  a  hearty  defire  to  do 
the  will  of  God,  is  the  bed  prefer vative  againfl:  fatal 
errors  and  miftakes  in  matters  of  religion  ;  sav  tk  ^i\n 
TToieiv  "  If  any  man  defire  todohis  will,  he  fhall  know 
"  of  the  do6lrine,  whether  it  be  of  God,  or  whether 
<6  I  fpeak  of  myfelf " 

There  are  two  dangerous  miftakes  in  religion  :  to 
reie6l  any  thing  which  really  comes  from  God  ;  and 
to  receive  and  entertain  any  thing  as  from  God^ 
which  doth  not  really  come  from  him. 

Firft,  to  rejedl  any  thing  which  really  comes  from 
God.  This  miftake  the  Jews  frequently  fell  into, when 
they  rejedled  the  true  prophets  which  God  from  time 
to  time  fcnt  to  them,  flighting  their  mefiagc,  and  per- 
fecuting  their  perlbns :  but  they  mifcarned  moil:  fa- 
tally and  remarkably  in  their  contempt  of  the  true 
Me  SSI  AS,  that  great  prophet  v/hom  they  had  fo 
lon<^  expeded,  and  whom  God  fent  at  laft,  to  bring 
falvation  to  them  •,  but  when  he  came,  they  knew 
him  not,  nor  would  receive  him,  but  ufed  him  with 
all  the  defpite  and  contempt  imaginable,  not  as  "  a 
*'  teacher  come  from  God,"  but  as  a  deceiver,  and 

impoflor. 

Now 


againfl  dangerous  ??tijiakes  m  reUgiori,  13^9 

Now  the  danger  of  rejeding  any  thing  that  comes  S  E  R  M^ 
from  God,  confifts  in  this,  that  it  cannot  be  done 
without  the  higheft  affront  to  the  divine  majefly. 
To  reje6l  a  divine  meflage,  or  revelation  is  to  oppofe 
God,  and  fight  againft  him.  So  our  Saviour  x.€ih 
the  Jews,  "  that  in  defpifing  him,  they  defpifcd  him 
''  that  fent  him." 

Secondly,  there  is  alfo  another  dangerous  miftake 
on  the  other  hand,  in  entertaining  any  thing  as  a  re- 
velation from  God,  which  is  not  really  from  him. 
And  this  likewife  the  Jews  were  frequendy  guilty  of, 
in  receiving  the  falfe  prophets  which  fpake  in  the 
name  of  the  Lord,  when  he  had  not  fent  them. 
And  this  is  commonly  the  temper  of  thofe  who  re- 
je6t  the  truth,  greedily  to  fwallow  error  and  delu- 
fion.  So  our  Saviour  tells  us  of  the  Jews,  John  v. 
43.  "  I  am  come  in  my  Father's  name,  and  ye 
^'  receive  me  not  \  if  another  fhall  come  in  his  owri 
*'  name,  him  ye  will  receive  ? "  This  prediction  of 
our  Saviour's  concerning  the  Jews,  was  fully  ac- 
complifh'd ;  for  after  they  had  rejeded  him,  who 
gave  fuch  abundant  evidence  that  he  was  the  true 
Messias,  and  ''  a  teacher  fent  from  God,'*  they 
received  others,  who  really  came  in  their  own 
names,  and  ran  after  thofe  who  pretended  to  be 
the  Messias,  and  were  in  great  numbers  deftroycd 
with  them.  And  this  is  very  juft  with  God,  that 
*'  thofe  who  receive  not  the  truth  in  the  Jove 
*'  of  it,  fhould  be  given  to  ftrong  delufions,  to  be- 
**  lieve  lies." 

Now  thefe  being  the  two  great  dangerous  mif- 
takes  in  religion  which  men  are  liable  to,  rny  work 
at  this  time  Ihall  be  to  fhew,  how  a  fincere  defirc 

Vojt,  VL  II  A  and 


LXXXVII. 


1390  llonefty  the  heft  prefers  a  tive 

SE  RM.  and  endeavour  to  do  the  will  of  God,  is  a  fecurlty  to 
men  againfl  both  thofe  dangers ;  and  it  will  appear 
to  be  fo,  upon  thefc  two  accounts. 

I.  Becaufe  he  who  finccrcly  defires  and  endeavours 
to  do  the  will  of  God,  is  hereby  better  qualified  and 
difpofed  to  make  a  right  judgment  of  Ipiritual  and 
divine  things. 

II.  Becaufe  God's  providence  is  more  efpecially 
concerned  to  fecure  fuch  perfons  from  dangerous  er- 
rors and  miflakes  in  things  which  concern  their  eter- 
nal falvation.  Thefe  Ihall  be  the  two  heads  of  my 
following  difcourfe. 

Firft,  becaufe  he  who  fincerely  defires  and  endea- 
vours to  do  the  will  of  God,  is  hereby  better  quali- 
fied and  difpofed  to  make  a  right  judgment  of  fpiri- 
tual  and  divine  things,  and  that  for  thefe  two  reafons, 

1.  Becaufe  fuch  a  perfon  hath  a  truer  notion  of 
God,  and  divine  things. 

2.  Becaufe  he  is  more  impartial  in  his  fearch  and 
enquiry  after  truth. 

I,  Becaufe  fuch  a  perfon  hath  a  truer  notion  of 
God  and  divine  things.  No  man  is  fo  hkely  to  have 
clear  and  true  apprehenfions  of  God,  as  a  good  man, 
becaufe  he  hath  tranfcribed  the  divine  perfedlions  in 
his  own  mind,  and  is  himfelf  in  fome  meafure  and 
degree  what  God  is.  And  for  this  reafon  it  is,  that 
the  fcripture  fo  often  lays  the  foundation  of  all  di- 
vine knowledge  in  the  pradlice  of  religion.  Jobxxviii. 
28.  "  The  fear  of  the  Lord,  that  is  wifdom,  and 
*'  to  depart  from  evil,  is  underflanding  ;  "  and  Pfal. 
Cxi.  10.  *'  The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  beginning  of 
''  wifdom,"  that  is,  the  principal  and  foundation  of 
it  J  "  a  good  underflanding  have  all  they  that  do  his 

"  command- 


cgainjl  danger oin  mijiakes  in  religion.  1391 

**  commandments."    Whereas  the  vices  and  lufts  oF  l^f^xvu. 
men  darken  their  reafon,  and  diftort  their  underfland- 
ings,  and  fill'  the  mind  with  grofs  and  fenfual  ap- 
prehenfions  of  things,  and  thereby  render  men  unfit 
to  difcern  thofe  truths  which  are  of  a  fpiritual  nature 
and   tendency,  and  altogether  indifpofed  to  receive 
them.     For  tho'  the  vices  of  men  be  properly  feated 
in  their  wills,  and  do  not  pofTefs  their  underftand- 
ings ;  yet  they  have  a  bad  influence  upon  them,  as 
fumes  and  vapours  from  the  (lomach  are  wont  to  af- 
fed:  the  head. 

Nothing  indeed  is  more  natural  to  the  mind  and 
undcrfl:anding  of  men,  than  the  knowledge  of  God. 
but  we  may  abufe  our  faculties,  and  render  them  un- 
fit for  the  difcerning  even  of  their  proper  objects. 

When  men  by  wicked  pradlices,  have  rendred 
themfelves  unhke  to  God,  they  will  not  love  to  "  re- 
"  tain  the  knowledge  of  him  "  in  their  minds,  but  will 
^'  become  vain  in  their  imaginations"  concerning 
him.  What  clouds  and  mifts  are  to  the  bodily  eye, 
that  the  lufts  and  corruptions  of  men  are  to  the  un- 
derftanding  ;  they  hinder  it  from  a  clear  perception 
of  heavenly  things  -,  the  pure  in  heart,  they  are  bed 
qualified  for  the  fight  of  God. 

Now  according  as  a  man's  notions  of  God  are, 
fuch  will  be  his  apprehenfions  of  religion.  All  reli- 
gion is  either  natural,  or  revealed  :  natural  religion 
confifts  in  the  belief  of  a  God,  and  in  right  con- 
ceptions and  apprehenfions  concerning  him,  and  ia 
a  due  reverence  and  obfervance  of  him,  and  in  a 
ready  and  chearful  obedience  to  thofe  laws  which  he 
hath  imprinted  upon  our  nature  ;  and  the  fum  of  our 
olpedience  confifts  in  our  conformity  to  God,  and  an 

H  A  z  ende^s 


1 3  9  -  Honejly  the  bejl  prefervative 

SERM.  endeavour  to  be  like  him.  For  fuppofing  God  to 
^^^^  '  have  made  no  external  revelation  of  his  mind  to  us, 
we  have  no  other  way  to  know  his  will,  but  by 
confidering  his  own  nature,  and  our  own  ;  and  if  fo, 
then  he  that  refembles  God  mod,  is  like  to  under- 
ftand  him  bed,  becaufe  he  finds  thofe  perfe6lions  in 
fome  meafure  in  himfelf,  which  he  contemplates  in 
the  divine  nature;  and  nothing  gives  a  man  fo  fure  a 
notion  of  things,  as  pradice  and  experience :  every 
good  man  is  in  fome  degree  '^  partaker  of  a  divine 
*'  nature,"  and  feels  that  in  himfelf,  which  he  con- 
ceives to  be  in  God  :  fo  that  this  man  does  experi- 
ence what  others  do  but  talk  of;  he  fees  the  image 
of  God  in  himfelf,  and  is  able  to  difcourfe  of  him 
from  an  inward  fenfe  and  feeling  of  his  excellency 
and  perfedions. 

And  asYor  revealed  religion,  the  only  defign  of 
that  is,  to  revive  and  improve  the  natural  notions 
which  we  have  of  God,  and  all  our  reafonings  about 
divine  revelation,  are  neceflarily  gathered  by  our  na- 
tural notions  of  religion  ;  and  therefore  he  that  fm- 
cerely  endeavours  "  to  do  the  will  of  God,"  is  not 
apt  to  be  impofed  upon  by  the  vain  and  confident 
pretences  of  divine  revelation ;  but  if  any  dodlrine  be 
propofed  to  him,  which  pretends  to  come  from  God, 
he  meafures    it  by  thofe   fleady  and    fure  notions 
which  he  hath  of  the  divine  nature  and  perfections, 
and  by  thofe  he  will    eafily  difcern   whether  it    be 
worthy  of  God,  or  not,   and  likely  to  proceed  from 
him :  he  will  confider  the  nature  and  tendency  of  it, 
and  whether  it  be  (as  the  apoflle  expreffes  it)  "  a  doc- 
^'  trine  according  to  godlinefs,"  fuch  as  is  agreeable  to 
the  divine  nature  and  perfedions,  and  tends  to  make 

us 


^(rainji  dangerous  Tnijlakes  in  religion,  1393 

us  like  to  God  ;  if  it  be  not,  tho'  an  angel  from  hea-  S  E  R  M. 

LXXXVII. 

ven  fhould  bring  it,  he  will  not  receive  it :  if  it  be, 
he  will  not  rejed:  it  upon  every  idle  pretence,  and 
frivolous  exception  that  prejudiced  and   ill-minded 
men  may  make  againft  it ;  but  after  he  is  fatisfied  of 
the  reafonablenefs  and  purity  of  the  doflrinc,  he 
will  accept  of  fuch  evidence  and  confirmation  of  it, 
as  is  fit  for  God  to  give  to  his  own  revelations ; 
and  if  the  perfon  that  brings  it,  hath  an  atteftation 
of  miracles  (which  is  neceffary  in  cafe  it  be  a  new 
do6lrine)  and  if  he  carry  on  no  earthly  interefl  and 
defign  by  it,  but  does  by  his  life  and  anions  make 
it  evident  that  he  aims  at  the  glory  of  God,  and 
the  good  of  men  ;  in  this  cafe  a  good  man,  whole 
mind  is  free  from  pafTion  and  prejudice,  will  eafily 
aflent,  that  this  man's  "  dodlrine  is  of  God,  and  that 
"  he  does  not  fpeak  of  himfelf."     This  was  the 
evidence  which  our  Saviour  offered  to  the  Jews  in 
vindication  of  himlelf,  and  his  do6lrine,  John  vii.  18. 
**  He  that  fpeaketh  of  himfelf,  feeketh  his  own  glory  : 
"  but  he  that  feeketh  his  glory  that  fent  him,  the 
*'  fame  is  true,  and  no  unrighteoufnefs  in  him  ;  '* 
as  if  he  had  faid,   hereby  may  you  diftinguifh  one 
that  really  comes  from  God,   from  an  impoflor  :  if 
any  man  feek  his  own  glory,  you  may  conclude  that 
God  hath  not  fent  him,  but  whatever  he  pretends, 
that  he  fpeaks  of  himfelf ;  but  he  who  by  his  life, 
and   the  courfe  of  his  adlions,   demonftrates  that  he 
feeks  the  honour  of  God,  and  not  any  interefl  and 
advantage  of  his  own,  "  the  fame  is  true,  and  there 
*'  is  no  unrighteoufnefs  in  him ; "  that  is,  no  fall- 
hood  or  defign  to  deceive  (for  fo  the  word  dJ^iKia. 
does  fometimes  fignify  j)  you  may  conclude  fuch  an 

one 


1394  Honejly  the  bejl  prefervative 

5  R  R  M.  one  to  be  no  deceiver,  or  impoftor.     And  if  any 

T   V  V  V  \TJ  T 

man  fincereJy  defires  and  endeavours  to  do  the  will 
of  God,  he  may,  by  fuch  marks  and  charadlers  as 
thefe,  judge  of  any  dodlrine  that  pretends  to  be  from 
God,  whether  it  be  fo  or  not.  This  is  the  firft 
reafon  •,  becaufe  he  that  fincerely  defires  and  endea- 
vours to  do  the  will  of  God,  hath  the  trueft  notion  of 
God,  and  of  divine  things. 

2.  Such  a  perfon  is  more  impartial  in  his  fearch 
and  enquiry  after  truth,  and  therefore  more  likely  to 
find  it,  and  to  difcern  it  from  error.  He  that  hath 
an  honeft  mind,  and  fincerely  endeavours  to  do  the 
will  of  God,  is  not  apt  to  be  fwayed  and  biafifed  by 
any  intereft  or  lufl  ;  for  his  greateft  intereft  is  to 
pleafe  God,  and  he  makes  all  his  other  interefi:s  and 
concernments  to  ftoop  and  yield  to  that.  But  if  a 
man  be  governed  by  any  earthly  intereft  or  defign, 
he  will  meafure  all  things  by  that,  and  is  not  at  li- 
berty to  entertain  any  thing  that  crofifes  it,  and  to 
judge  equally  of  any  dodlrine  that  is  oppofite  to  his 
intereft".  This  our.SAviouR  gives  for  a  reafon,  why 
the  great  rabbies  and  teachers  among  the  !jews  did 
not  believe  and  embrace  his  dodirine,  John  v.  44. 
''  How  can  ye  believe,  which  receive  honour  one 
"  of  another?"  if  men  have  any  other  defign  in 
religion  than  to  pleafe  God,  and  to  advance  his  ho- 
nour and  glory  in  the  world,  no  wonder  if  they  be 
apt  to  rejed:  the  mofl  divine  truths  \  becaufe  thefe 
are  calculated,  not  to  approve  us  to  men,  but  to  God. 

And  as  vain-glory,  and  (defire  of  the  applaufe  of 
men ;  fo  likewife  doth  every  other  luft  make  a  man 
partial  in  his  judgment  of  things,  and  clap  a  falfe 
bias  upon  his  underftanding,  which  carries  it  off  from 

truth. 


againfi  dangerous  mijlakes  in  religion.  ^395 

truth,  and  makes  it  to  lean  towards  that  fide  of  the  S  E  R  m: 

LXXXVlI 

queftion  which  is  moft  favourable  to  the  interefl  of' 
his  lulls.  A  vicious  man  is  not  willing  to  entertain 
thole  truths  which  would  crols  and  check  him  in  his 
courfe  :  he  hath  made  the  truth  his  enemy,  and 
therefore  he  thinks  himfelf  concerned  to  oppofe  it, 
and  rife  upagainft  it  :  the  light  of  it  offends  him, 
and  therefore  he  ihuts  his  eyes  that  he  may  not  fee  it. 
Thofe  holy  and  pure  dodrines  which  are  from  God, 
reprove  the  lulls  of  men,  and  difcover  the  deformity 
of  them  \  and  therefore  no  wonder  if  bad  men  be  {o 
hard  to  be  reconciled  to  them.  This  account  our 
Saviour  likewife  gives  of  the  fierce  enmity  of  the 
Jews  to  him,  and  his  dodlrine,  John  iii.  19,  20. 
"  Light  is  come  into  the  World,  and  men  loved 
*'  darknefs  rather  than  light,  becaufe  their  deeds  were 

evil  \  for  every  one  that  hath  done  evil  hateth  the 

light,  neither  cometh  to  the  light,  left  his  deeds 

Ihould  be  reproved." 

The  vicious  inchnations  of  men  are  a  dead  weight 
upon  their  underltandings,  and  able  to  draw  down 
the  fcales  againft  the  cleareft  truths :  for  tho'  it  be 
abfolutely  in  no  man^s  power  to  believe  or  to  disbelieve 
what  he  wilh  yet  mens  lives  have  many  times  a 
great  influence  upon  their  underltandings,  to  make  af- 
fent  eafy,  or  difficult  \  and  as  we  are  forward  to  believe 
what  we  have  a  mind  to,  fo  are  we  very  backward 
and  flow  in  yielding  our  alTent  to  any  thing  thatcrof- 
feth  our  inclinations.  Men  that  allow  themfelves  in 
ungodUnefs  and  worldly  lulls,  will  not  eafily  believe 
thofe  dodrines  which  charge  men  fo  ftridly  with  all 
manner  of  holinefs  and  purity. 

This  is  the  way  which  the  devil  hath  always  ufed 

to 


J  >.  q5  lionefty  the  heft  prefervafive 

S  E  R  M.  to  "  blind  the  eyes  of  men,  that  the  light  of  the  glo^* 
Lxxxvi .  ^j  ^.^^^  gofpel  of  Christ  might  not  Ihine  into 
"  them."  And  certainly  the  moil  effe(5lual  way 
to  keep  men  in  infidelity,  is  to  debauch  them  in  their 
lives ;  therefore  the  apoftle  gives  this  as  the  realbn  of 
the  infidelity  of  men  in  the  iaft  times,  2  Thef.  ii.  12. 
*'  They  believed  not  the  truth,  but  had  pleafure  in 
*'  unrighteoufnefs."  When  men  once  abandon  them- 
felves  to  lewd  and  vicious  pradlices,  infidelity  becomes 
their  interefl,  becaufe  they  have  no  other  way  to  de- 
fend and  excufe  a  wicked  life,  but  by  denying  the 
truth  which  oppofeth  it,  and  finds  fault  with  it. 

That  man  only  ftands  fair  for  the  entertainment  of 

truth,  who  is  under  the  dominion  of  no  vice,  or  lull  > 

becaufe  he  hath  nothing  to  corrupt  or  bribe  him,  to 

feduce  him,  or  draw  him  afide  in  his  enquiry  after 

truth  ;  he  hath  no  interefl  but  to  find  the  truth,  and 

follow  it :   he  is  enquiring  after  the  way  to  heaven, 

and  eternal  happinels,  and  he  hath  the  indiff^erency  of 

a  traveller  which  is  not  inclined  to  go  this  way  rather 

than  another ;  for  his  concernment  is  to  find  out  the 

right  way,  and  to  walk  in  it :  fuch  an  indifFerency  of 

mind  hath  every  good  man,  who  fincerely  defires  to 

do  the  will  of  God  ;  he  (lands  ready  to  receive  truth, 

when  fufficient  evidence  is  off^ered  to  convince  him  of 

it ;  becaufe  he  hath  no  manner  of  concernment  that 

the  contrary  propofition  Iliould  be  true.     As  in  ma- 

thematicks,  a  man  is  ready  to  give  his  aflfent  to  any 

propofition,  that  is  fufficiently  demonflrated  to  him, 

becaufe  he  hath  no  inclination  or  affedion  to  one  fide 

of  the  queflion  more  than  to  the  other ;  all  his  defign 

and  concernment  is  to  find  out  the  truth  on  which 

fide  foevcr  it  lies  j  and  he  is  like  to  find  it,  becaufe 

he 


Ggainft  dangerous  mijrakes  in  religion,  ^297 

he  IS  fo  indifferent,  and  impartial.  But  if  a  man  be  S  E  R  M. 
biafs'd  by  any  luft,  and  addided  to  any  vicious  prac 
tice,  he  is  then  an  intereiled  perfon,  and  concerned 
to  be  partial  in  his  judgment  of  things,  and  is  under  a 
great  temptation  to  infidehty,  when  the  truths  of 
God  are  propofed  to  him  ;  becaufe  whatever  the  evi- 
dence for  them  be,  he  cannot  but  be  unwilhng  to  own 
the  truth  of  tiiat  dodlrine,  which  is  fo  contrary  to  his 
inchnation  and  intereil.  If  the  affedions  and  interefls 
of  men  were  as  deeply  concerned,  and  as  fenfibly 
touched  in  the  truth  of  mathematical  propofitions,  as 
they  are  in  the  principles  of  morality  and  relio-ion, 
we  (hould  find  that  when  a  propofition  flood  in  their 
way,  and  lay  crofs  to  their  intereft,  though  it  were 
never  fo  clearly  demonftrated,  yet  they  would  raife 
a  duft  about  it,  and  make  a  thoufand  cavils,  and  fence 
even  againft  the  evidence  of  a  demonftration  ;  thev 
would  palliate  their  error  with  all  the  skill  and  arc 
they  could,  and  tho'  the  abfurdity  of  it  was  never  fo 
great  and  palpable,  yet  they  would  hold  it  faft  againft 
all  fenfe  and  reafon,  and  face  down  mankind  in  the 
obftinate  defence  of  it ;  for  we  have  no  reafon  to 
doubt,  but  that  they  who  in  matters  of  religion  will 
believe  diredly  contrary  to  what  they  fee,  would,  if 
they  had  the  fame  intereft  and  palTions  to  fvvay  them 
in  the  cafe,  believe  contrary  to  the  cleareft  mathema- 
tical demon (Iration ;  for  where  there  is  an  obftinate 
refolution  not  to  beconvinc'd,  all  the  reafon  and  evi- 
dence in  the  world  fignifies  noching. 

Whereas  he  that  is  biaflfed  by  no  pallion  or  intereft, 

but  hath  an  honeft  mind,  and  is  fincerely  defirous  to. 

do  the  will  of  God  fo  far  as  he  knows  it,  is  likely  to 

judge  very  impartially  concerning  any  doiftrines  that 

Vol.  VI.  II  B  are 

I. 


1 3  9  S  Ilonejly  the  bell  prefervative 

S  E  R  M.  are  propofed  to  him  :  for  if  there  be  not  good  evi- 
dence  that  they  are  from  God,  he  hath  no  reafon  to 
deceive  himfelf,  in  giving  credit  to  them;  and  if  there 
be  good  evidence  that  they  are  divine,  he  hath  no  inte- 
reft  or  inchnation  to  rejedl  them  -,  for  it  being  his  great 
defign  to  do  the  will  of  God  ,  he  is  glad  of  all  opportuni- 
ties to  come  to  the  knowledge  of  it,  that  he  may  doit. 
Thus  you  fee,  how  a  fincere  defire  and  endeavour 
to  obey  the  will  of  God,  does  fecure  men  againll  fatal 
errors  and  miflakes  in   matters  of  religion  •,  becaufe 
fuch  perfons  are  hereby  better  difpofed  to  make  a  right 
iudgment  of  divine  things,  both  becaufe  they  have 
truer  and  furer  notions  of  God  and  rehgion,  and  are 
more  impartial  in  their  fearch  and  enquiry  after  truth. 
This  is  the  firft  account. 

II.  Another  reafon  why  they  who  fmcerely  defire 
to  do  the  will  of  God,  have  a  great  lecurity  in  dif- 
cerning  truth  from  error,  is,  becaufe  the  providence 
of  God  is  more  efpecially  concerned  to  preferve  fuch 
perfons  from  dangerous  errors  and  miftakes,  in  things 
which  concern  their  eternal  falvation.     When  men 
are  of  a  teachable  temper,  God  loves  to  reveal  him- 
felf and  his  truth  to  them  ;  and  fuch  is  an  humble  and 
obedient  frame  of  mind,  Pfal.  xxv.  9.  "  The  meek 
*'  will  he  guide  in  judgment ;  the  meek  will  he  teach 
*'  his  way.'*     The  proper  difpofuion  of  a  fcholar,  is 
to  be  willing  to  learn  -,  and  that  which    in   religion 
we  are  to  learn  ;  is  "   what  is  the   good  and  ac- 
^'  ceptable  will  of  God,"  that  we  may  do  it,  for 
pradtice  is  the  end   of  knowledge.  "  If  you  know 
"  thefe  things  (fays  our  bleffcd  Lord)  happy  arc 
''  ye  if  ye  do  them."  It  is  neceflary  to  know  the  will 
of  God  i  becaufe  we  are  happy  only  in  the  doing  of 

it: 


cigainfl  dangerous  mijtakes  in  religion.  ^399 

it:  and  if  any  man  be  defirous  to  do  the  willof  SERM. 
God,  his  goodiiefs  is  luch,  that  he  will  take  effedual  .^^^^-^i 
care  to  fecure  fuch  an  one  againft  dangerous  and  fatal 
errors.  He  that  hath  an  honeft  mind,  and  wotild  do 
the  will  of  God,  if  he  knew  it,  God  will  not  fuffer 
him  to  remain  ignorant  of  it,  or  to  bemiftaken  about 
it,  in  any  necefliiry  points  of  faith  and  pradlice. 

St.  Paul  is  a  wonderful  inftance  of  the  goodneQ  of 
God  in  this  kind.  He  was  undoubtedly  a  man  of  a 
very  honeft  mind ;  he  had  entertained  the  jewifh  re- 
ligion, as  revealed  by  God,  and  been  bred  in  it; 
and  out  of  a  blind  reverence  and  belief  of  his  teachers, 
who  rejedled  Christ  and  his  do6lrine,  he  likewife 
oppofed  and  perfecuted  them  with  a  mighty  zeal,  and 
an  honeft  intention,  being  "verily  perfuaded  (as  he 
*^  himfelf  tells  us)  that  he  ought  to  do  what  he  did, 
*'  againft  the  name  of  Je  s  u  s  of  Nazareth  ;"  he  was 
under  a  great  prejudice  upon  account  of  his  educa- 
tion, and  according  to  the  heat  of  his  natural  tem- 
per, tranfported  with  great  paffion :  but  becaufe  he 
did  what  he  did,  ignorantly,  and  in  unbelief;  God 
was  pleafed  to  lliew  mercy  to  him,  and,  in  a  mira- 
culous manner,  to  convince  him  of  the  truth  of 
that  religion  which  he  perfecuted.  He  was  fincerely 
defirous  to  do  the  will  of  God,  and  therefore  God 
would  rather  work  a  miracle  for  his  converfion,  than 
fuffer  him  to  o;o  on  ifi  fo  fatal  a  m.iftake  concernino- 
the  chriftian  reh'gion. 

And  as  the  providence  of  God  doth  concern  itfelf 
to  fecure  good  men  from  dangerous  errors  and  mif- 
takes  in  matter  of  religion  •,  fo  by  a  juft  judgment  he 
gives  up  thofe  who  allow  themfelves  in  vicious  prac- 
tice.?, to  error  and  infidelity.     And  this  is  the  mean- 

II  B   2  xwy 


Hone/ly  the  hejl  frefervative 

ing  of  that  palTage  of  the  prophet,  Ifa.  vi.  lo.  fb  of- 
ten ciied  by  our  Saviour,  and  applied  to  the  Jews, 
"  of  making  the  heart  of  that  people  fat,  and  their 
"  ears  heavy,  and  clofing  their  eyes,  left  they  fhould 
"  underftand,  and  be  converted."  So  again,  Ifa. 
Ixvi.  3,4.  God  threatens  the  people  oflfrael,  that 
b'jcaufe  they  were  wicked  and  abominable  in  their 
lives,  he  would  abandon  them,  and  give  them  over 
to  a  fpirit  of  delufion ;  '*  they  have  chofen  their  own 
*'  ways,  and  their  foul  delighteth  in  thei/  abomina- 
"  tions  ;  I  alfo  will  choofe  their  delufions.''  God  is 
faid  to  choofe  thofe  things  for  us,  which  he  permits 
us  to  fall  into :  fo  Rom.  i.  28.  God  is  faid  to  give 
over  the  abominable  heathen  to  a  reprobate  mind. 
*'  As  they  did  not  like  to  retain  Goo  in  their  know- 
*'  ledge,  God  gave  them  over  «?  a^oKiixov  V8v,  to 
*'  an  injudicious  and  undifccrning  mind."  When 
men  abandon  them  lei  ves  to  wickednefs  and  impiety, 
God  withdraws  his  grace  from  them  j  and  by  his  fe- 
cret  and  juft  judgment  they  are  deprived  of  the  facul- 
ty of  difcerning  between  truth  and  error,  between 
good  and  evil,  2  Thefif.  ii.  10, 1 1,  12.  It  is  faid,  "  that 
^^  the  man  of  fin  fhould  come  with  all  deceivablenefs 
*«  of  unrighteoufnefs  in  them  that  perifh,  becaufe  they 
"  received  not  the  love  of  the  truth,  that  they  might 
*'  be  faved."  And  that  *'for  this  caufe,  God  would 
*'  fend  them  ftrong  delufion,  that  they  fhould  believe 
*'  a  lye  •,  that  they  might  all  be  damned,  who  believed 
*'  not  the  truth,  bat  had  pleafure  in  unrighteoufnefs.'* 
And  it  is  jdft  with  God,  that  men  of  vicious  inclina- 
tions and  pradices  fliould  be  expofcd  to  the  cheat  of 
the  groffcit  and  vileft  impoftors.  God's  providence 
is  coricerned  for  men  ot  honeft  minds,  and  fincerc 

in- 


againjl  dangerous  mijlakes  in  religion.  140 1 

intentions :  but  if  men  "  take  pleafure  in  unrighteouf- 
''  nelV  God  takes  no  further  care  of  tht-m,  but 
*'  delivers  them  up  to  their  own  hearts  lufts,"  to  be 
feduced  into  all  thofe  errors,  into  which  their  own  vain 
imaginations,  and  their  foolifh  hearts  are  apt  to  lead 
them. 

Thus  have  I  endeavoured,  as  briefly  as  T  could,  to 
Ihew  that  an  honeft  mind,  "  that  fincerely  defires 
''  and  endeavours  to  do  the  will  of  God,*'  is  the  befl: 
fecurity  againfl:  fatal  errors  and  miftakes  in  matters  of 
religion  -,  both  becaufe  it  difpofeth  a  man  to  make  a 
true  judgment  of  divine  things,  and  becaufe  the  pro- 
vidence of  God  is  more  efpecially  concerned  for  the 
fecurity  of  fuch  perfons. 

There  remains  an  objection  to  be  anfwered,  to 
which  this  difcourfe  may  feem  liable ;  but  this,  toge- 
ther with  the  inferences  which  may  be  made  from  this 
difcourfe,  I  fhall  refer  to  another  opportunity. 

J  -  II    ■  I         II  .1.1        .      i_L_i^_i^-_    .J u.    ■■Ill-   n -II ~- ^^^ 

SERMON  LXXXVIII. 

Honefty  the  bell    prefervative    againft 
dangerous  miftakes  in  religion* 


JOHN   vii.   17. 

If  any  man  will  do  his  vnll^he  fljoll  know  of  the  do5lrine^ 
whether  it  be  of  God,  or  whether  Ifpeak  of  myfelf 

I  Made  entrance  into  thefe  words  the  lad  day  ;  in  s  E  R  M, 
which  our  Saviour  declares  to  us,  that  an  honeft  ^f^Jli 
and  fincere  mind,    and  an  hearty  defire  and  en-     The  fe- 
deavour  to  do  the  will  of  God,  is  the  beft  fecurity  ^onon^' 

and  this  Text. 


1 40  2  Honejly  the  bejl  prefervative 

S  E  R  M  and  prefervative  againft  dangerous  errors  and  mlf!:akes 

^r^"i^!i^  in  matters  of  religion  \  lav  tk  ^i\r\  ttoiuv,  ''  if  any 

"  man  defire  to  do  his  will,  hefhall  know  of  the  doc- 

"  trine,  whether  it  be  of  God,  or  whether  I  fpeak 

"  of  ,my  felf" 

Now  there  are  (I  told  you)  two  great  mi  (lakes  in 
religion :  "  to  reject  any  thing  which  really  is  from 
*'  God  ;  and  to  receive,  and  entertain  any  thing  as 
"  from  God,  which  is  not  really  from  him."  /\nd 
therefore  I  propofed  from  this  text  to  fhew  how  a 
fincere  defire  and  endeavour  to  do  the  will  of  God, 
is  a  fecurity  to  men  againfl  both  thefe  Dangers, 
namely  upon  thefe  two  accounts. 

Firftj  Becaufe  he  who  fincerely  defires  and  endea- 
vours to  do  the  will  of  God,  is  hereby  better  qualified 
and  difpofed  to  'make  a  right  judgment  of  fpiritual 
and  divine  things  •,  and  that  for  thefe  two  reafons. 

I.  Becaufe  fucha  perfon  hath  a  truer  notion  of  God, 
and  divine  things.  He  that  refembleth  God  mofl:,  is 
like  to  underftand  him  bed,  becaufe  he  finds  thofe 
perfedions,  in  fome  meafure,  in  himfelf,  which  he 
contemplates  in  the  divine  nature  *,  and  nothing  gives 
a  man  fo  fure  a  notion  of  things,  as  pradlice  and  expe- 
rience. 

II.  Becaufe  fuch  a  perfon  is  more  impartial  in  his 
fearch  and  enquiry  after  truth,  and  therefore  more  like- 
ly to  find  it,  and  to  difcern  it  from  error.  That  man 
only  ftands  fair  for  the  entertainment  of  truth,  who 
is  under  the  power  and  dominion  of  no  vice  or  luft, 
becaufe  he  hath  nothing  to  corrupt  or  bribe  him,  to 
feduce  and  draw  him  afide  in  his  enquiry  after  truth : 
he  hath  no  manner  of  concernment  that  the  contrary 
propofition  fiiould  be  true,having  the  indifferericy  of  a 

traveller. 


agalnji  dmtgerous  fnijlakes  in  rellgmu  1403 

traveller,  and  no  other  interefl,  but  to  find  out  theSERM. 
right  way  to  heaven,  and  to  walk  in  it.  But  if  a  man 
be  biafied  by  any  lufl:,  and  addided  to  any  vicious 
pradlice,  he  is  then  an  interefted  peribn,  and  con- 
cerned to  make  a  partial  judgment  of  things,  and  is 
under  a  great  temptation  to  infidelity,  when  the  truths 
ot  God  are  propoled  to  hinij  becaufe,  whatever  the 
evidence  for  them  be,  he  cannot  but  be  unwiilino;  to 
own  the  truths  of  thofe  doflrines,  which  are  fo  con- 
trary to  his  inclination  and  intereft. 

Secondly,    Another  reafon  why  they  who  fincerely 
defire  to  do  the  will  of  God,  have  a  greater  fecurity 
in  difcerning  truth  from  error,  is,  becaufe  the  provi- 
dence of  God  is  more  efpecially  concern'd  to  pre- 
ferve  fuch  perfons  from  dangerous  errors  and  miftakes, 
in  things  which  concern  their  eternal  falvation.   When 
men  are  of  a  teachable  temper,  of  an  humble  and 
obedient  frame  of  mind,  God  loves  to  reveal  himfelf, 
and  his  truth   to  them,    Pfal.  xxv.  9.  ''  The  meek 
'^  will  he  guide  in  judgment,  and  the  meek  will  he 
*'  teach  his  way."  The  proper  difpofition  of  afcholar, 
is  to  be  willing  to  learn  ;  and  that  which  in  religion 
we  are   to  learn,   is,  *^  what  is  the  good  and   ac- 
"  ceptable  will  of  God,  that  we  may  do  it  j"  for 
pradice  is   the  end  of   knowledge ;   "  if  ye  know 
*'  thefe  things  (faith  our  Saviour)  happy  are  ye  if 
"  ye  do  them."   It  is  neceffary  to  know  the  will  of 
G  >D  •,  but  we  are  only  happy  in  the  doing  of  it ;  and 
if  any  man  be  defirous  to  do  the  will  of  God,    his 
goodnefs  is  fuch,  that  he  will  take  cfledual  care  to 
fecure  fuch  a  one  againft  dangerous  and  fatal  errors. 
He  that  hath  an  honeft  mind,   and  will  do  the  will  of 
God,  if  he  knew  it,  God  will  not  fufferhim  to  remain 

ignorant 


I^XXXVII]. 


1404  Uonejiy  the  heji  prefervatlve  ^ 

S  E  R  M  ignorant  oF  it,  or  to  be  miflaken  about  it  in  any  necef- 
fary  point  of  faith,  or  pradice.  Thus  far  I  have  gone. 

I  fhall  now  proceed  to  remove  an  objedion,  to 
which  this  difcourfe  may  feem  liable,  and  then  draw 
fome  inferences  Jrom  the  whole. 

After  all  that  hath  been  faid,  fome  perhaps  may 
ask,  Is  tvery  good  man  then  fccure  from  all  error  and 
miftake  in  matters  of  religion  ?  Tnis  is  a  mighty  pri- 
vilege indeed  :  but  do  not  wc  find  the  contrary  in  ex- 
perience? That  an  honell  heart,  and  a  weak  head,  do 
ofcen  meet  together. 

For  anfwer  to  this,  I  Ihall  lay  down  thefe  following 
•propofitions. 

Fir  ft,  That  if  there  were  any  neceflity,  that  a  good 
man  fhould  be  fecured  from  all  manner  of  error  and 
miftake  in  religion,  this  probity  of  mind,  and  fmcere 
defire  to  do  the  will  of  G:)D,  is  the  beft  way  to  do  it ; 
becaufe  fuch  a  temper  and  difpofition  of  mind  gives  a 
man  the  beft  advantages  to  diicern  betwixt  truth  and 
error ;  and  God  is  moft  likely  to  reveal  his  will  to  fuch 
perfons.  Bat  there  is  no  neceflity  of  this,becaufe  a  man 
may  be  a  good  man,  and  go  to  heaven,  notwithftand- 
ing  a  great'many  miftakes  in  religion  about  things  not 
necefiary.  For  while  we  are  in  this  imperfed:  ftate, 
*'  we  know  but  in  part,"  and  fee  many  things  very 
im perfectly :  but  when  we  fhall  come  into  a  more 
perfcdl  State,  "  ihat  which  is  im  per  fed  fhall  be  done 
*«  away  -,"  the  light  of  glory  fhall  fcatcer  all  thofc 
mlfts  and  cloudb,  which  are  now  upon  our  underftand- 
in^s,  and  hinder  us  from  a  clear  fight  and  judgment 
of  things;  we  fhall  then  fee  God,  and  other  things^ 
as  they  are ;  and  be  freed  from  all  that  ignorance,  and 
thofe  many  cnildifti  miftakes  which  we  are  liable  to 

here 


againfi  dangerous  mtjlakes  in  religion.  1405 

here  below  ;  and  till  then,   it  is  not  necefTary  that  we  §  E  R  M. 

.  .  Lxxxvni. 

ihoLild  be  iecured  from  them.  Humility,  under  a  fcnfe 

of  our  ignorance,  is  better  for  us,  than  infallibility 

would  be. 

Secondly,  this  temper  and  difpofition  of  mind, 
which  I  have  been  fpeaking  of,  is  a  certain  fecurity 
againft  fatal  miflakes  in  religion,  and  a  final  conti- 
nuance in  fuch  errors,  as  would  prove  damnable ;  and 
this  is  all  that  this  difcourfe  pretends  to,  or  our  Sa- 
viour hath  promifed  in  this  ttxt.  And  confidering 
thegoodnefsofGoD,  nothing  is  more  improbable,than 
that  an  honeft  mind  that  feeks  impartially  after  truth, 
fhould  mils  of  il^  in  things  that  are  fundamentally 
necefTary  to  ialvation.  And  if  we  could  fuppofe  fuch 
a  man  to  fall  into  fuch  an  error,  either  it  would  not 
be  fundamental  to  him,  having  not  been,  perhaps, 
propofcd  to  him  withfufHcient  evidence,  and  wouJd  be 
forgiven  him  upon  a  general  repentance  for  all  fins  and 
errors  known,  or  unknown  j  or  he  would  not  be  per- 
mitted to  continue  in  it ;  but  the  providence  of  God 
would  find  out  fome  way  or  other  to  convince  him  of 
hiserror,and  to  bring  him  "  to  theacknov/ledgement 
*'  of  the  truth,^that  he  might  be  faved."  God  would 
rather  fpeak  to  him  immediately  from  heaven  (as  he 
did  to  St.  Paul)  than  fufFer  him  to  continue  in  fuch  an 
error,  as  would  infallibly  carry  him  to  hell. 

Thirdly,  there  is  no  fuch  depth  of  judgment, 
and  fubtilty  of  wit  required,  to  difcern  between  grols 
and  damnable  errors  in  religion,  and  neceffary  and 
faving  truth,  but  that  an  ordinary  capacity  may  be 
able  to  do  it.  There  is  fo  plain  a  line  drawn  between 
great  truth,  and  grofs  errors,  that  it  is  vifible  to  every 
capacity  ;  and  an  ordinary  underflanding,  that  is  noc 

Vo  L.  VI.    .  11  C  under 

2. 


1406  llonejly  the  bej}  prefer  vat  he 

s  K  R  vr.  under  a  violent  prejudice,  or  blinded  by  fome  vice  or 
\_,\-^  fault  of  the  will,  may  eaflly  difcern  it.  Indeed,  in 
matters  ofleflcr  moment  and  concernment,  and  which 
have  no  fuch  confiderable  and  immediate  influence 
upon  the  pradiice  of  an  holy  life,  the  difference  be- 
twixt truth  and  error  is  not  always  fo  grofs  and  fenfi- 
Tible,  as  to  be  obvious  to  every  unprejudiced  eye.  But 
we  have  all  the  realbn  in  the  world  to  believe,  that 
the  goodnefs  and  juftice  of  God  is  fuch,  as  to  make 
nothing  neceflary  to  be  believed  by  any  man,  which, 
by  the  help  of  due  inftru6lion,  may  not  be  made 
fufficiently  plain  to  a  common  underllanding.  God 
hath  fo  tender  a  care  of  good  men,  who  fincerely  love 
him  and  his  truth,,  that  we  may  reafonably  prefume, 
that  he  will  not  leave  them  under  an  unavoidable  mis- 
take, concerning  thofe  matters  upon  which  their 
eternal  ialvation  does  depend.  "  The  judge  of  all  the 
*'  v/orld  will  do  right  ;"  and  then  we  may  certainly 
conclude,  that  he  will  not  condemn  any  man  for  no 
fault,  and  make  him  for  ever  miferable,  for  falling 
into  an  error,  which,  with  all  his  care  and  diligence, 
he  could  not  pofTibly  either  difcern  or  avoid. 

Fourthly,  God  hath  made  abundant  provifion  for 
our  fecurity  from  fatal  and  dangerous  errors  in  reli- 
gion,  by  thefe  three  ways. 

I.  By  an  infallible  rule,  fufficiently  plain  in  all 
things  neceflary. 

II.  By  fufficient  means  of  inftrudion,  to  help  us 
to  underfland  this  rule. 

III.  By  an  infallible  promife  of  fecurity  from  dan- 
tyerous  errors  and  miftakes,  if  with  an  honeft  mind 
and  due  diligence  we  apply  our  felves  to  under- 
iland  this  rule,  and  make  ufe  of  the  means  of  in- 

ftrudlion. 


againjl  dangerous  mijlahs  in  rel/gtcn,  H^7 

ilraftion,  which  God  hath  provided  for  that  pur- ^  E  ^^^^^-^^ 
pole. 

I.  God  hath  given  us  an  infallible  rule,  fufficiently 
plain  in  all  things  necefTary.  He  hath  given  us  the  holy 
fcriptures,  v/hich  were  given  at  firft  by  divine  infpi- 
ration,  i.  e.  by  men  infallibly  affiled  in  the  writing 
of  them,  and  therefore  muft  needs  be  an  infallible 
rule  ;  and  "  all  fcripture  divinely  infpired,  is  profitable 
"  for  do6lrine,  for  reproof,  for  correction,  for  in- 
*'  ftruftion  in  righteoufnefs,"  as  St.  Paul  tells  us, 
2  Tim.  iii.  i6.  fpeaking  there  of  the  books  of  the  old 
teftament ;  and  there  is  the  fame  reafon  as  to  the  in- 
jpired  writings  of  the  new. 

Now  if  the  fcriptures  be  an  infallible   rule,    and 
"  profitable  for  do6i:rine  and  in(lru6tion  in  righte- 
*'  oufnefs,"  i.  e.  to  teach  us  to  believe,  and  do ;  it 
follows  of  necefTity,  that  they  are  fufnciently  plain  in 
all  things  necelTary  to  faith,    and  a  good  life;  other- 
wife  they  could  not  be  ''  ufeful  for  dodlrine  and  in- 
''  ftruclion  in  righteoufnefs;"  for  a  rule  that  is  not 
plain  to  us  in  thefe  things,  in  which  it  is  neceflary  for 
us  to  be  direded  by  it,  is  of  no  ufe  to  us ;    that  is  in 
truth,  it  is  no  rule.    For  a  rule  muft  have  thefe  two 
properties ;   it  muft  be  perfed,  and  it  mud  be  plain. 
The  fcriptures  are  a  perfed  rule,  becaufe  the  writers 
of  them  being  divinely  infpired,  were  infallible  :  and 
they  mufh  likewife  be  plain ;   otherwife,  tho'  they  be 
never  fo  per  fed:,  they  can  be  of  no  more  ufe  to  di- 
rect our  faith  and  praclicc,    than  a  fun-dial  in  a  dark 
room  is,  to  tell  us  the  hour  of  the  day :  for  tho'  it  be 
never  fo  exadly  made,  unlefs  the  fun  fhine  clearly  u'> 
on  it,  we  had  as  good  be  without  it.    A  rule  that  is 
not  plain  to  us,  v/hatever  it  may  be  in  it  fdf^  U  of  no 

II  C  2  iifq 


1408  Hone  fly  the  hejl  prefervative 

SR  R  M.  ufe  'at  all  to  us.  'tiJl  it  be  made  plain,  and  we  iin- 

LXXXVIII.     1       n        J    • 

deritand  it. 

11.  God  hath  likewife  provided  fufficient  means  of 
indrudlion  to  help  us  to  underftand  this  rule.  It  is  not 
neceffary     that  a  rule  lliould  be  To  plain,    that  we 
fhould  perfediy  underfiand  it  at  firft  fight ;  it  is  fuf- 
ficient, if  it  be  fo  plain,  that  thofe  of  better  capacity 
and  underftanding  may,  with  due  diligence  and  ap- 
plication of  mind,  come  to  the  true  knowledge  of  it; 
and  thofe  of  a  lower  and  more  ordinary  capacity  by 
the  help  and  inftrudlion  of  a  teacher.  Euclid's  elements 
is  a  book  fufliciently  plain  to  teach  a  man  geometry  ; 
but  yet  not  fo  plain  that  any  man  at  firft  reading  Ihould 
underftand  it  perfeftly ;  but  that  by  diligent  reading,by 
a  due  application,  andfteady  attention  of  mind,  a  man 
of  extraordinary  fagacity  andunderftanding  may  come 
to  underftand  the  principles  and  demonftrations  of  it, 
and  thofe  of  a  more  ordinary  capacity  with  the  help 
of  a  teacher,  may  come  to  the  knowledge  of  it.  So 
when  we  fay  that  the  fcriptures  are  plain  in  all  things 
neceflary  to  faith,  and  a  good  life,    we  do  not  mean 
that  every  man  at  firft  hearing  or  reading  of  thefe 
things  in  it,  ftiall  perfe&ly  underftand  them ;  but  by 
diligent  reading  and  confideration,  if  he  be  of  good 
apprehenfion  and  capacity,  he  may  come  to  a  fuffi- 
cient knowledge  of  them ;  and  if  he  be  of  a  meaner 
capacity,   and  be  willing  to  learn,  he  may,  by  the 
help  of  a  teacher,    be  brought  to  underftand   them 
without  any  great  pains ;  and   fuch  teachers   God 
hath  appointed  in  his  church  for  this  very  purpofe, 
and  a  fucceftion  of  them  to  continue  to  the  end  of 
the  world. 

In 


agalnjl  dangerous  mijiakes  in  religion.  1409 

In  a  word,  when  we  fay  the  fcriptures  are  plain  to  S  E  R  M. 

LXXJ^VIIT. 

all  capacities,  in  all  things  neceflary,  we  mean,  that 
any  man  of  ordinary  capacity,  by  his  own  diligence 
and  care,  in  conjundion  with  the  helps  and  advan- 
tages which  God  hath  appointed,  and  in  the  due  ufe 
of  them,  may  attain  to  the  knowledge  of  every  thing 
neceflary  to  his  falvation  -,  and  that  there  is  no  book 
in  the  world  more  plain,  and  better  fitted  to  teach  a 
man  any  art  or  fcience,  than  the  bible  is  to  dired 
and  inftrudl  men  in  the  way  to  heaven ;  and  it  is 
every  man's  fault  if  he  be  ignorant  of  any  thing  ne- 
ceflTary  for  him  to  believe,  or  do,  in  order  to  his  eter- 
nal happinefs. 

III.  Good  men  are  likewife  fecured  from  fatal  er- 
rors in  religion,  by  the  infallible  promife  of  God,  if 
fo  be  that  with  honeft  minds  and  due  diligence  they 
apply  themfelves  to  the  underftanding  of  this  rule, 
and  make  ufe  of  the  means  of  inftrudlion  which  God 
hath  provided  for  that  purpofe.     God  hath  promifed 
*'  to  guide  and  teach  the  humble  and  meek  ;  '*  that 
is,  fuch  as  are  of  a  fubmiffive  and  teachable  temper, 
defirous  and  diligent  to  be  infcrucled  in  the  truth. 
Prov.  ii.   3, 4,  5.    "  If  thou    incline    thine  ear    to 
''  wifdom,  and  apply  thine  heart  to  underllanding  *, 
"  yea,  if  thou  criefl:  after  knov/ledge,  and  liftefl  up 
*'  thy  voice  for  underfl:anding  •,  if  thou  feekeft  her 
*'  as  filver,  and  fearchefl  for  her  as  for  hid  treafures  ; 
"  then  fhalt  thou  underfland  the  fear  of  the  Lord, 
"  and  find  the  knowledge  of  God."     And  here  in 
the  text  our  Saviour  aflTures  us,   "  that  if  any  man 
"  be  defirous  to  do  his  will,  he  fliall  know  of  the  doc- 
*'  trine,  whether  it  be  of  God,  or  whether  hefpake 
*'  of  himfelf  i  "  i.  e.  he  fhall  be  able  to  difcern  the 
dcdlrines  which  are  from  God.  This 


LXXXVIII. 


1 4 1  o  Honejiy  the  bejl  prefer  vat  ive 

SKRM.  This  is  the  provifion  which  God  hath  made  for 
ourkcurity  from  fatal  miflakcs  in  religion ;  and  this 
is  in  all  refpeds  a  better  fecurity,  and  more  likely 
to  guide  and  condadt  us  fafely  to. heaven,  than  any 
infallible  church  \  and  that  for  thefe  reafons. 

Firfl,  becaufe  it  is  much  more  certain  that  God 
hath  made  this  provifion  which  I  have  mentioned, 
than  that  there  is  an  infallible  church  appointed  and 
airitled  by  him  to  this  purpofe.  That  the  fcriptures 
are  an  infallible  and  adequate  rule,  and  fufficiently 
plain  in  all  things  necefTary,  I  have  already  proved ; 
and  I  add  further,  that  this  was  the  confiant  judg- 
ment of  the  ancient  church,  and  fo  declared  by  the 
unanimous  confent  of  the  fathers  of  it  for  many  ages  ; 
and  that  all  councils  in  their  determination  of  faith, 
proceeded  upon  this  rule,  till  the  fecond  council 
of  Nice. 

I  have  likevvife  proved,  that  God  hath  provided  a 
fjccefiion  of  paftors  and  teachers  in  his  church,  to  in- 
fi;ru6l  us  in  this  rule  ;  and  that  we  have  God's  infal- 
lible promife  for  our  fecurity  from  dangerous  errors 
and  m.ifcakes,  if  with  an  honefl:  mind  and  due  dili- 
gence we  apply  our  felves  to  underftand  this  rule,  and 
make  ufe  of  the  means  of  inftrudlion  which  God 
hath  provided  for  that  purpofe. 

But  that  there  is  an  infallible  church  appointed 
and  aOifted  by  God,  to  declare  and  determine  mat- 
ters of  faith,  and  to  be  an  infallible  interpreter  of 
fcripture,  is  not  certain,  becaufe  there  is  no  clear  and 
exprefs  text  of  fcripture  to  that  purpofe,  that  any 
church  whatfoever,  much  Icfs  tliat  the  church  of 
Rome  hath  this  power  and  privilege.    > 

Nay,  I  add  further,  that  it  is  impolTible,  accord- 


in^ 


againjl  danger oin  mijlakes  m  religion.  14.  j  i 

ing  to  the  principles  of  the  church  of  Rome,  that  SER]\f. 
this  fhould  be  proved  from  fcripture  ;  becaufe,  ac-  ^^'^-^-'^^'^• 
cording  to  their  "principles,  we  cannot  know  either ' 
which  are  the  true  books  of  fcripture,  or  what  is  the 
true  ka^t  of  fcripture,  but  from  the  authority  and 
infalhble  declaration  of  that  church.  And  if  fo,  then 
the  infallibility  of  the  church  mud:  be  firft  known, 
and  proved,  before  we  can  either  know  the  fcrip- 
tures  or  the  fenfe  of  them  ;  and  yet  till  we  know 
the  fcriptures,  and  the  fenfe  of  them,  nothing  can 
be  proved  by  them.  Nov/  to  pretend  to  prove  the 
infallibility  of  their  church  by  fcripture,  and  at  the 
fame  time  to  declare,  that  which  are  the  true  books 
of  fcripture,  and  what  is  the  true  fenfe  of  them,  can 
only  be  proved  by  the  infallible  authority  of  their 
church,  is  a  plain  and  fhameful  circle,  out  of  which 
there  is  no  way  to  efcape ;  and  confequently  that 
God  hath  appointed  an  infalhble  church  is  impof- 
fible,  according  to  their  principles,  ever  to  be  proved 
from  fcripture,  and  the  thing  is  capable  of  no  other 
proof.  For  that  God  will  infallibly  afTift  any  fo- 
ciety  of  men,  is  not  to  be  known,  but  by  divine  re- 
velation. So  that  unlcfs  they  can  prove  it  by  fome 
other  revelation  than  that  of  fcripture  (which  thcv 
do  not  pretend  to)  the  thing  is  not  to  be  proved  at 
all.  Yes,  they  fay,  by  the  notes  and  marks  of  the 
true  church  ;  but  what  thofc  marks  are  mufl;  either 
be  known  from  fcripture,  or  fome  other  divine  reve- 
lauon,  and  then  the  fame  difficulty  returns ;  befides 
that  one  of  the  mod  elTential  marks  of  the  true 
church  mufl  be  the  profeflion  of  the  true  faith;  and 
then  it  muft  firft  be  known  which  is  the  true  faith, 
before  we  can  know  which  is  the  true  church  ;  and 

yec 


j^j2  Honefty  the  be  ft  prefervative 

SERM.  yet  they  fay,  that  no  man  can  Jearn  the  true  faith, 
ii^Jili  but  from  the  true  church  ;  and  this  runs  them  una- 
voidably into  another  circle  as  fhameful  as  the  other. 
So  that  which  way  foever  they  go  to  prove  an  infal- 
lible church,  they  are  fhut  up  in  a  plain  circle,  and 
muft  either  prove  the  fcriptures  by  the  church,  and 
the  church  by  the  fcriptures  ;  or  the  true  church  by 
the  true  faith,  and  the  true  faith  by  the  true  church. 
Secondly,  this  .provifion  and  fecurity  which  I  have 
mentioned,  is  more  humane,  better  accommodated 
and  fuited  to  the  nature  pf  man  ;  becaufe  it  doth  not 
fuppofe  and  need  a  {landing  and  perpetual  miracle, 
as  the  other  way  of  an  infallible  church  doth.     All 
infpiration  is  fupernatural  and  miraculous,    and  this 
infallible  ailifla nee' which  the  church  of  Rome  claims 
to  her  felf,  muft  either  be  fuch  as  the  apoflles  had, 
which  was  by  immediate  infpiration,  or  fomething 
equal  to  it,  and  alike  fupernatural:  but  God  does 
not  work  miracles  without  need,  or  continue  them 
when  there  is  no  occafion  for  them.     When  God  de- 
livered the  law  to  the  people  of  Ifrael,  it  was  accom- 
panied with  miracles,    and  the  prophets  which  he 
fent  to  them  from  time  to  time,  had  an  immediate 
infpiration ;  but  their  fupreme  judicature,  or  their  ge- 
neral  council,   which  they  call  the  fanhedrim,  was 
not  infallibly  alFifled  in  the  expounding  of  the  law, 
when  doubts  and  difficulties  arofe  about  it ;  no,  nor 
in  judging   of  true  and  falfe  prophets ;    but  they 
determined  this,  and  all  other  emergent  cafes,  by  the 
{landing  revelation   and  rule  of  their   written  law  ; 
and  that  they  were  not  infallibly  aflifted,  is  evident 
from  the  great  errors  they  fell  into,  "  in  making 
*'  void  the  commandments  of  God  by  their  tradi- 


*'  tions,'* 


agaifiji  da?7gerous  mi/lakes  in  religion.  141^ 

"  tions,"  and   in  their  rejec^ling  and  crucifying  the  "^  E  R  M. 
true  Mess  I  AS,  and  the  Son  of  God.  '    ^^'^* 

In  like  manner  the  apoflles  and  firfl  teachers  of 
the  chriftian  religion,  were  immediately  infpired,  and 
miraculoufly  alTiIled  in  the  pubhlliing  of  the  chriflian 
dodrine,  and  for  the  fpeedy,  and  more  efFedtual  pro- 
pagating and  planting  of  it  in  the  world,  in  defpite 
of  the  violent  prejudices  that  were  againd  it,  and 
the  fierce  oppofition  that  was  made  to  it.  But  when 
this  was  done,  this  miraculous  and  extraordinary  af- 
fiftance  ceafed,  and  God  left  thechriftian  religion  to 
be  preferved  and  continued  by  more  humane  and  or- 
dinary ways,  the  dodlrines  of  it  being  committed  to 
writing  for  a  ftanding  rule  of  faith  and  pradice  in  all 
ages,  and  an  order  of  men  appointed  to  inflruft  peo- 
ple in  thofe  doctrines,  with  a  promife  to  fecure  both 
teachers  and  people  that  fincerely  defire  to  know, 
and  do  the  will  of  God,  from  all  fatal  errors  and 
miilakes  about  things  neceffary  to  their  eternal  falva- 
tion  •,  and  this  is  a  provifion  more  likely  to  be  made 
by  God,  and  better  fuited  to  the  nature  of  man, 
than  the  perpetual  and  needlefs  miracle  of  an  infpired, 
or  any  otherwife  infallible  church. 

Thirdly,  this  way  is  likewife  more  agreeable  to  the 
nature  of  religion,  and  the  virtue  of  faith.  The  de- 
fign  of  an  infallible  church  is  to  fecure  all  that  con- 
tinue in  the  communion  of  it,  againfb  all  poffibi- 
lity  of  error  in  matters  of  faith.  The  queftion  now 
is  not,  whether  an  infallible  church  would  do  this  ? 
but  whether  that  church  which  arrogates  infallibility 
to  itfelf,  does  not  pretend  to  do  this  ?  and  if  they 
could  do  it,  it  would  not  be  agreeable  to  the  nature 
of  religion,  and  the  virtue  of  £iith.  Fur  faith. 
Vol.  VI.  II  D  whicU 

2. 


14 14  Honejly  the  bejl  prefervative 

SERM.  which  is  the  principle  of  all  religious  adlions,  v/ould 
*  be  no  virtue,  if  it  were  necelliry.    A  true  and  right  be- 
lief can  be  no  virtue,  where  a  man  is  infallibly  fecured 
againfl  error. There  is  the  fame  reafon  of  virtuous  and 
criminal  adlions;  and  as  there  can  be  no  crime  or  fault 
in  doing  what  a  man  cannot  help  ;  fo  neither  can  there 
be  any  virtue.     All  virtuous  adlions  are  matter  of 
praife  and  commendation,  and  therefore  it  can  be  no 
virtue  in  any  man  •,  becaufe  it  defervcs  no  comnienda- 
tion,  to  believe  and  own  that  the  fun  fhines  at  noon- 
day, when  he  fees  it  does  fo.     No  more  would  it  be 
a  virtue  in  any  man,  and  deferve  praife,  to  believe 
aright,  who  is  in  a  church,  wherein  he  is  infallibly 
fecured  againft  all  errors  in  matters  of  faith.     Make 
any  thing  neceffary,  and  impolTible  to  be  otherwife, 
and  the  doing  of  it  ceafes  to  be  a  virtue.     God  hath 
fo  framed  religion,   that  the  evidence  of  truth,  and 
the  means  of  coming  to  the  knowledge  of  it,  as  to 
be  a  fuflicient  fecurity  to  men  of  honeft  minds  and 
teachable  tem.pers,  againfl  all  fatal  and  final  millakes 
concerning  things  neceflary  to  falvation  j  but  not  fo, 
that  every  man  that  is  of  fuch  a  church,  fhould  be  in- 
fallibly fecured  againfl:  all  errors  in  matters  of  faith  \ 
and  this  on  purpofe  to  try  the  virtue  and  difpoficion 
of  men,  whether  they  will  be  at  the  pains  to  fearch 
for  truth,  and  when  it  is  propofed  to  them  with  fuf- 
ficient  evidence,  tho'  not  by  an  infallible  hand,"  they 
"  v/ill  receive  it  in  the  love  of  it,  that  they  may  be 
''  faved." 

Fourthly,  this  is  as  much  fecurity  againfl  errors  in 
matters  of  faith,  as  God  hath  provided  again ll  fin 
and  vice  in  matters  of  practice  j  and  fince  a  right  be- 
lief is  only  in  order  to  a  good  life,  a  man  would  be 

hard 


again jl  dangerous  mijlakes  in  religion,  1415? 

hard  put  to  it,  to  sive  a  wi'P-  reafon  why  God  (hould  ^^  '^- 1^  '^^ 
take  greater  care  for  the  infallible  fecuricy  of  mens 
faith,  than  of  their  obedience.  The  reaibn  pretended 
why  God  fhould  make  fuch  infallible  provifion  for 
a  right  faith,  is,  for  the  better  iecurity  of  mens  eter- 
nal lalvation  and  happincfs,  Now  the  virtues  of  a 
good  life  have  a  more  direcfl  and  immediate  influence 
upon  that,  than  the  moll  orthodox  belief.  *'  The 
*'  end  of  the  commandment  (i.  e.  of  the  declaration 
*'  of  the  gofpel)  is  charity."  In  the  chridian  re- 
ligion  that  which  mainly  avails  to  our  juffificationand 
falvation  is, "  a  faith  that  worketh  by  charity,  and  the 
*'  keeping  of  the  commandments  of  God.  He  that 
*'  heareth  thcfe  fayings  of  mine,  and  doth  them 
"  (faith  our  blelTed  Lord)  I  will  liken  him  to  a 
*'  wife  man  that  built  his  houfe  upon  a  rock."  and 
again,  "  not  every  one  that  faith  unto  me.  Lord, 
*'  Lord,  (i.  e.  makes  profefTion  of  faith  in  mc) 
*'  fliall  enter  into  the  Kingdom  of  heaven  ;  but  he 
*'  that  doth  the  will  of  my  Fi\THER  which  is  in 
"  heaven  i"  and  again,  "  if  ye  know  thefe  thinrr.<^, 
*'  happy  are  ye  if  ye  do  them."  And  the  apo- 
flle  St.  Peter  exhorts  chriftians  "  to  add  to  their  faith 
knowledge,  and  virtue,  and  godlinefs,  and  bro- 
therly kindnefs,  and  charity,  that  fo  an  abundant 
entrance  may  be  miniflred  to  them,  into  the  ever- 
-"  lading  kingdom  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour 
"  Jesus  Christ."  So  that  the  virtues  of  a  good 
life  have  the  greatefl  influence  upon  our  falvation, 
and  the  main  ftrels  of  chridianity  is  to  be  laid  t!icre. 
And  therefore  whatever  reafon  can  be  affign'd,  why 
God  fliould  provide  for  the  infiillible  ihcumy  of  our 
faith,    is   much   flronger,    why  an  eq[ual    provifion 

1 1  D  2  lliouid- 


J  ^  1 6  Ilonejly  the  hejl  prefervative 

S  E  R  M.  fhould  be  made  to  fecure  holinefs,  and  obedience  of 
Lxxxvm.  j.^^  ^  becaufe  without  this,  faith  cannot  infallibly  at- 
tain its  end,  which  is,  "  the  falvation  of  our  fouls." 
But  this  it  is  granted  God  hath  not  done,  and  expe- 
rience ihews  it  \  and  therefore  it  is  unreafonable  to 
fuppofe  that  he  hath  done  the  other.     It  is  fufficient, 
that  in  both  kinds  he  hath  done  that  which  is  fuffi- 
cient to  make  us  capable  of  happinefs,  if  we  be  not 
wanting  to  ourfelves  \  the  reft  he  hach  left  to  the  fin- 
cerity  of  our  endeavours ;  expeding  that  we  on  our 
part,  fhould  "  work  out  our  falvation  with  fear  and 
*'  trembling  •,"  and'^  give  all  diligence  to  make  our 
*'  calling  and  eletftion  fure.'*   And  if  God  hath  made 
fuch  provifion  by  the  gofpel,  for  all  that  enjoy  the 
lig;ht  and   advantage  of  it,  that  none  can  mifcarry 
without  their  own  tault  -,  then  both  his  goodnefs  and 
wifdom  are  fufficiently  acquitted  without  an  infallible 
guide  and  judge  in  matters  of  faith  j  and  that  irreve- 
rent way  of  arguing  in  the  canon  law  might  well  have 
been  fpared  ;  that  of  neceffity  there  muft  be  an  infal- 
lible judge  of  controverfies  in  religion  \  aliler  Do?nmus 
non  videretur  fuijfe  difcretus^  "  otherwife  Goo  would 
*'  not  feem  to  have  ordered  matters  difcreedy.'* 

But  what  infallible  fecurity  foever  they  have  in  the 
church  of  Rome,  as  to  matters  of  faith,  they  are  cer- 
tainly the  wortl:  provided  of  wholfom  and  fafe  di- 
rections for  the  confciences  and  lives  of  men,  of  any 
church  in  the  world.  No  religion  diat  I  know  of  in 
the  world,  ever  had  fuch  lewd  and  fcandalous  cafuifls. 
Witnefs  the  moral  divinity  of  the  jefuits,  which  hath 
been  fo  expofed  to  the  world,  not  only  by  thofe  of 
our  religion,  but  by  their  own  writers  alfo.  Nor  is 
this  mifchief  onlv  confined  to  that  order  j  their  ca- 

fuills 


agahijl  danger  our  tni flake's  in  religion.  ^A^7 

fuifts  in  general)  and  even  the  more  ancient  of  them,  SE  RM- 
who  writ  before  the  order  of  jefuits  appeared  in  the^"^ 
world,  have  given  fuch  a  liberty,  and  loole,  to  great 
immorahty  in  feveral  kinds,  as  is  infinitely  to   the 
the  reproach  of  the  bed  and  pureft  religion  in  the 
world.     Infomuch   that   Sir  Thomas  More  himfelf, 
who  was  a  great  zealot  for  that  religion,  could  not 
forbear  to  make  a  loud  complaint  of  it,  and  to  pafs 
this  fevere  cenfure  upon  the  generality  of  their  ca- 
fuifts  :  "  that  their  great  bufmcis  feem'd   to  be,  not 
"  to  keep  men  from  fin,  but  to  teach  them  quam 
' '  prope  adpe€catum  liceat  accedere  fine  peccato  *,    how 
<'  near  to  fin  they  might  lawfully  come  without  fin- 
*'  ning."  In  the  mean  time  the  confciences  of  men 
are  like  to  be  well  direded,  when  inftead  of  giving 
men  plain  rules  for  the  government  of  their  hearts 
and  lives,  and  clear  refolutions  of  the  material  doubts, 
whi.^h  frequently  occur  in  human  Yift^  they  intangle 
them  in  niceties  and  endlefs   fcrupulofities,  teaching 
them  to  fplit  hairs  in  divinity,  and  how  with  great 
vart  and  cunning  they  may  avoid  the  committing  of 
any  fin,  and  yet  come  as  near  to  it  as  pofTible.    This 
is  a  thing  ot  a  mofl  dangerous  confequence  to  the 
fouls  of  men  ;  and  if  men  be  but  once  encouraged 
to  pafs  to  the  utmofl  bounds  of  what  is  lawful,  the 
next  flep  will  be  into  diat  which  is  unlawful. 

So  that  unlefs  faith  without  works  will  hvt  men, 
notwithfcanding  the  infallible  fecurity  which  they 
pretend  to  give  men  of  a  found  and  right  belief  (if 
it  were  really  as  much  as  they  talk  of)  the  falvation 
of  men  would  flill  be  in  great  hazard  and  uncertainty, 
for  want  of  better  and  fafer  directions  for  a  good  life, 
than  are  ordinarily  to  be  met  with  in  the  cafuiflical 


writings 


1418  Honefly  the  b^Jl  prefervathe^  &c. 

S  E  R  M.  writings  of  that  church  ;  efpecially  if  we  confider  that 
Lxxxviii.  ^^^  fcriptures  are  locked  up  from  the  people  in  an 
unknown  tongue,  where  the  furefl:  and  plained  di* 
regions  for  a  good  life  are  mofl  plentifully  to  be  had  ; 
infomuch,  that  a  man  had  better  want  all  the  volumes 
of  cafuiftical  divinity,  that  ever  were  written  in  the 
world,  than  to  be  without  the  bible  •,  by  the  diligent 
fludying  of  which  book  alone,  he  may  fooner  learn 
the  way  to  heaven,  than  by  all  the  books  in  the 
world  without  it. 

Fifthly  and  laftly,  this  provifion  which  God  hath 
made,  is,  when  all  is  done,  as  good  a  fecurity  again il 
fatal  errors  and  miftakes  in  religion,  as  an  infallible 
church  could  give,  if  there  were  one ;  and  it  is  as 
good  a  way  to  prevent  and  put  an  end  to  controverfies 
in  religion,  fo  far  as  it  is  necelfary  that  they  fhould 
be  prevented,  and  have  an  end  put  to  them :  and 
thefe  are  the  two  great  realbns  why  an  infallible  judge 
is  ^o  importunately  demanded,  and  infixed  upon.  I 
fhall  fpeak  to  thefe  diflindly,  and  ieverally  ;  but  be- 
caufe  they  will  require  a  longer  difourfe  than  the  time 
will  allow,  I  Ihall  not  enter  upon  them  at  prefent, 
but  refer  them  to  another  opportunity. 


SERMON 


C  1419  ] 

SERMON    LXXXIX. 

Honefiy    the  beft  prefervative    againft 
dangerous  miflakes  in  religion. 

JOHN    vii.   17. 

If  any  man  will  do  his  will^  he  jhall  know  of  the  do5lrine^ 
whether  it  he  of  God ^  or  whether  I  fpeak  of  myfelf. 

HEN  I    made  my  entrance    into  thefesERM. 

words,  I  propofed  from  this  text,  illX~i 

Firft,  to  fhew  that  an  honeft  and  fincere  The  third 

mind,  and  a  hearty  defire  and  endeavour*  to  do  the  1?^."^^"  f'^ 
_  J  this  text. 

wiil  of  God,  is  the  greatefl  fecurity  and  beft  prefer- 
vative  againft  dangerous  errors  and  mifbakes  in  mat- 
ters of  religion. 

In  the  next  place,  I  proceeded  to  remove  an  ob- 
jedlion,  to  which  my  difcourfe  upon  this  fubjecl  might 
feem  liable.  Some  perhaps  might  ask.  Is  every  good 
man  then  fecure  from  all  error  and  miftake  in  mat- 
ters of  religion  .?  this  is  a  mighty  privilege  indeed. 
But  do  we  not  find  the  contrary  in  experience,  that 
an  honeft  heart,  and  a  weak  head  do  often  meet 
together  ?  for  anfvver  to  this,  I  laid  down  feveral 
propofitions  ; 

By  the  laft  of  which  I  fliew'd,  that  God  hath 
made  abundant  provifion  for  our  fecurity  from  fatal 
and  dangerous  errors  in  religion,  both  by  the  infal- 
lible rule  of  the  holy  fcripture,  and  by  fufficient  means 
of  inftrudiion  to  help  us  to  underftand  this  rule,  and 
by  his  inhillible  promifi  of  alTifting  us,  if  with  ho- 
neft 


3420  Hcnefty  the  bcjl  prefervative 

5ERM.  ncft  minds,  and  a  due  diligence  we  apply  our  felve.^ 
LXXXlX  ^Q  |.j^g  underftanding  of  this  rule,  and  the  ufe  of 
thefe  means.  And  this,  I  told  you,  was  in  all  re- 
fpecls  a  better  fecurity,  and  more  likely  to  condud 
us  fafe  to  heaven,  than  any  infallible  church  whatfo- 
ever  ;  and  that  for  five  reafons ;  four  of  which  I  have 
already  treated  of,  and  now  proceed  to  the  fifth,  and 
lail,  viz. 

Becaufe  this  provifion  which  I  have  (hewn  God 
hath  made,  is  both  as  good  a  fecurity  againft  fatal 
errors  and  miflakcs  in  religion,  as  an  infallible 
church  could  give,  if  there  were  one  :  and  it  is  like- 
urifc  as  good  a  way  to  prevent  and  put  an  end  to 
controverfies  in  religion,  fo  far  as  it  is  necefTary  they 
ihould  be  prevented,  or  have  an  end  put  to  them. 
And  thefe  are  the  two  great  reafons  why  an  infalli- 
ble judge  is  fo  importunately  demanded,  and  infilled 
upon.  1  iluU  fpeak  to  thefe  two  points  diftin6tly> 
and  feverally. 

Firft,  becaufe  this  is  as  good  a  fecurity  againft 
fatal  errors  and  mifiakes  in  religion,  as  an  infallible 
church  could  give,  if  there  were  one.  For  an  infal- 
lible church,  if  there  were  fuch  an  one  upon  earth, 
could  not  infallibly  fecure  particular  chrifiians  againll 
errors  in  faith,  any  other  way,  than  by  the  defini- 
tion and  declaration  of  thofe  v/ho  are  infallible  in 
that  church.  And  there  are  but  three  that  pretend 
to  it;  either  the  pope,  or  a  general  council,  or  the 
pope  and  a  general  council  agreeing  in  the  fame 
definitions.  Not  the  pope  by  hlmfclf,  nor  the  gene- 
ral council  without  the  pope  ;  becaule  the  church 
which  pretends  to  infiillibility,  is  not  agreed,  that 
either  of  thefe  alone  is  infallible,  and  therefore  their 

definitions 


cgainft  dangerous  mijlakes  in  reHgion.  1421 

definitions  can   be  no  certain,   much  Icfs  infallible  SER  M. 

LXXXIX 
foundation  of  faith  -,  no,   not  to  that  church  which 

pretends  to  infallibility.  So  that  if  there  be  an  in- 
fallible oracle  in  that  church,  it  mud  be  the  pope 
and  council  in  conjundion,  or  the  definition  of  a 
council  confirmed  by  the  pope.  Now  in  that  cafe, 
either  the  council  was  infallible  in  its  definitions,  be- 
fore they  had  the  pope's  confirmation,  or  not.  If 
the  council  was  infallible  in  its  definitions,  before 
they  had  the  pope's  confirmation  i  then  the  council 
alone,  and  of  it  M^^  was  infallible  (which  a  great 
part  of  the  church  of  Rome  deny)  and  then  it  needed 
not  the  pope's  confirmation  to  make  it  infalhble  :  or 
elfe  a  general  council  is  not  infallible  in  its  definiti- 
ons, before  they  receive  the  pope's  confirmation; 
and  then  the  pope's  confirmation  cannot  make  it  fo  : 
for  that  which  was  not  infallibly  defined  by  the 
council,  cannot  be  made  infallible  by  the  pope's  con- 
firmation. 

But  there  is  another  difficulty  yet :  it  is  a  maxim 
generally  received,  and  that  even  in  the  Roman 
church,  "  that  the  definitions  of  a  general  council, 
*'  confirmed  by  the  pope,  are  not  obligatory,  unlels 
*'  they  be  received  by  the  univerfal  church."  From 
whence  thefe  two  great  inconveniences  will  unavoid- 
ably follow. 

I.  That  no  man  is  obliged  to  believe  fuch  defini- 
tions, 'till  he  certainly  know  that  they  are  received 
by  the  univerfal  church ;  which  how  he  fliould  cer- 
tainly, much  lefs  infallibly  know,  I  cannot  under- 
ftand  ;  unlefs  he  either  fpeak  with  all  the  chriftians 
in  the  world,  or  the  reprefentatives  of  all  particular 
churches  return  back  and  meet  'again  in  council,  to 

Vol.  VI.  II  E  declare 

2. 


1 42  2  Honejiy  the  hejl  prefervafhe 

SERM  declare  that  the  univerfal  church  hath  received  their 
definitions  •  which  I  think  was  never  yet  done. 

II.  It  will  follow,  that  the  definitions  of  a  general 
council  confirmed  by  the  pope,  are  not  infallible,  'till 
they  be  received  by  the  univerfal  church.  For  if  they 
were  infallible  without  that,  they  would  be  obligatory 
without  it  •,  becaufe  an  infallible  definition,  if  we 
knov/  it  to  be  lb,  lays  an  obligation  to  believe  it,  whe- 
ther it  be  receiv'd  by  the  univerfal  church  or  not. 
And  if  fuch  definitions  are  not  infallible  'all  they  be 
received  by  the  univerfal  church,  they  cannot  become 
infallible  afterwards  ;  becaufe  if  the  definitions  were 
not  infallible  before,  they  cannot  be  received  as  fuch 
by  the  univerfal  church,  nor  by  the  meer  reception  of 
them,  be  made  to  be  infallible  definitions,  if  they 
were  not  fo  before. 

But  if  we  fhould  pafsover  all  thefe  difficulties,  there 
is  a  greater  yet  behind,  and  that  is,  fuppofing  the 
definitions  of  general  councils  confirmed  by  the  pope 
to  be  infallible,  particular  chriftians  cannot  be  fecured 
infallibly  from  error  without  the  knowledge  of  thofe 
definitions.  And  there  are  but  two  ways  imaginable  of 
conveying  this  knowledge  to  them  :  either  by  the 
living  voice  of  their  particular  pallors,  whom  they 
are  imphcitly  to  believe  in  thele  matters  ;  but  particu-  ^^ 
lar  paftors  are  fallible  (as  they  themfelves  grant)  and 
therefore  their  words  can  neither  be  an  infallible  foun-* 
dation  of  faith,  or  an  infallible  means  of  conveying 
it  •,  and  it  is  unreafonable,  they  fay,  for  men  to  own 
themfelves  to  be  fallible,  to  require  an  implicit  belief 
to  be  given  to  them :  or  tKt  the  knowledge  of  the 
definitions  of  councils  mufl  be  conveyed  to  particular 
ehriftians  by  writing  j  and  if  fo,  then  there  will  only  be 

an 


againjl  dangerous  mijlakes  in  religion.  1423 

an  infallible  rule,but  no  living  infalliblejudgc.  And  if  SERM. 
an  infallible  rule  will  ferve  the   turn,    we  have  the  ^if^^-^' 
fcripcures,  which  we  are  fure  are  infallible,  and  there- 
fore at  leafl  as  good  as  any  other  rule.    But  they  lay, 
that  the  definitions  of  councils  give  us  an  infallible 
interpretation  of  fcripture,  and  therefore  are  of  greater 
advantage  to  us.  But  do  not  the  definitions  of  councils 
fometimes  alfo  need  explication,    that  we  may  know 
the  certain  fenfe  of  them,  without  which  we  cannot 
know  the  doarines  defined  ?  Yes  certainly,  they  need 
explication  as  much  as  fcripture,  if  there  be  any  dlf^ 
ference  about  the  meaning  of  them  ;    and  there  have 
been,  and  flill  are,  great  differences  among  thofe  of 
their  own  church  about  the  meaning  of  them.  And 
if  the  explications  of  general  councils  need  themfelves 
to  be  explained,  then  there  is  nothing  got  by  them, 
and  we  are  but  where  we  were  before:  for  difxerences 
about  the  meaning  of  the  definitions  of  general  coun- 
cils, make  as  great  difiiculties    and  uncertainties   in 
faith,  as  the  differences  about  the  meaning  of  fcripture. 
Well,    but  the  people  have  the   living  voice   of 
their  particular  paftors  to  explain  the  definitions  of 
councils  to  them.   But  this  does  not  help  the  matter 
neither,  for  thefe  two  reafons. 

I.  Becaufe  particular  paflors  have  no  authority  to 
explain  the  definitions  of  general  councils.  The  coun- 
cil of  Trent  hath,  by  exprefs  decree,  referved  to  the 
pope,  and  to  him  only,  the  power  to  explain  the 
definitions  of  the  council,  if  any  difi^erence  arife  about 
tiie  meaning  of  them.  So  that  if  there  be  any  diffe- 
rence about  the  true  fenfe  and  meaning  of  any  of 
the  definitions  of  the  council,  particular  paflors  have 
no  authority  to  explain  them  ;  and  where  there  \s  no 


1424  TJoneJly  the  lejl  prefervative 

SE  R  M.  doubt  or  difference  about  the  meanins;  of  them,  there 
'  is  no  occafion  for  the  explication  of  them. 

2.  But  fuppofe  they  had  authority  to  explain  them, 
this  can  be  no  infallible  fecurity  to  ii\^  people,that  they 
explain  them  right  j  both  becaufe  particular  pallors 
are  fallible  •,  and  likewife  becaufe  we  fee  in  experience, 
that  they  differ  in  their  explications  ♦,  witnefs  the  bi- 
jfhop  of  Condom's  expofition  of  the  catholick  faith, 
and  of  tiie  definitions  of  the  council  of  Trent,  which 
in  many  material  points  very  different  from  that  of 
Bellarmine,  and  many  other  famous  doctors  of  that 
church.  And  which  is  more,  witnefs  the  many  diffe- 
\  rences  betwixt  Ambrofius,  Catharinus,  and  Domini- 
\  cus  Afoto,  about  the  definitions  of  that  council,  in 
i  which  they  were  both  prefent,  and  heard  the  debates, 
and  themfelves  bore  a  great  part  in  them.  Now  if  they 
who  were  prefent  at  the  framing  of  the  definitions  of 
that  Council,  cannot  agree  about  the  meaning  of 
them,  much  lefs  can  it  be  expeded  from  thofe  that 
were  abfent. 

Secondly,  this  provifion  which  I  have  mentioned, 
is  likevv/ife  as  good  a  way  to  prevent  and  put  an  end 
to  controverfies  in  religion,  fo  far  as  it  is  neceflary 
they  Ihould  be  prevented,  or  have  an  end  put  to  them, 
as  any  infallible  church  would  be,  if  there  were  one: 
and  this  is  another  reafon  why  an  infallible  church  is 
fo  much  infiiltd  upon,  that  there  may  be  fome  way 
and  means  for  a  final  decifion  of  controverfies,  which 
the  fcriptures  cannot  be,  becaufe  they  are  only  a  dead 
rule,  which  can  end  no  controverfy  without  a  living 
judge  ready  at  hand,  to  interpret  and  apply  that  rule 
iipon  emergent  occafions. 

Jt  is  not  neceflary  that  all  controverfies  in  religion 

ihould 


again fl  dangerous  inijlakes  In  religion,  142  ij 

fhould  either  be  prevented,  or  decided  :  this  the  church  s  e  r  M. 
which  pretends  to  beinfalhble,  cannot  pretend  to  have  ^^^^^^ 
done  •,  becaufe  there  are  manifold  controverfies,  even 
in  the  church  of  Rome  her  felf,    concerning  matters 
of  religion,    which  (till  remain  undecided  -,    and  in 
their  commentaries  upon  fcripture,   many  differences 
about  the  ^ttn^c  of  feveral  texts,  concerning  which  fhe 
hath  not  thought  fit  to  give  an  infalhble  interpreta- 
tion.   And  where  their  popes,  and  feveral  of  their 
general  councils,   have  thought  fit  to  meddle  with 
fcripture,  they  have  applied  and  interpreted  texts  more 
improperly  and  abliirdly,    than    even  their  private 
doctors.    And  which  is  more,    in  differences  about 
points  of  faith,  which  are  pretended  on  both  fides  to 
be  fundamental,    this  church  hath  not  thought  fit  to 
put  an  end  to  them  by  her  infallible  decifion,    after 
two  hundred  years  brangling  about'them.  For  inflance,  \ 
in  that  fierce  and  long  difference  about  the  immacu- 
late conception  of  the  bleffed  virgin,    which  on  both 
fides,  is  pretended  to  be  an  article  of  faith,    and  for 
which  contrary  revelations  of  their  canoniz'd  faints 
are  fo  frequently  pretended ;  and  yet  neither  pope,  nor 
general  council,  have  thought  fit  to  exert  their  infalli-  [ 
bility  for  the  decifion  of  this  controverfy.   So  that  if  | 
their  church  had  this  talent  of  infallibility  ever  com- 
mitted  to  them,    they  have,  with  ''  the  ilothful  fer- 
"  vant,  laid  it  up  in  a  napkin ;"  and,  according  to ; 
our  Saviour's  rule,  have  long  fince  forfeited  it,  for 
not  making  ufe  of  it. 

And  whereas  it  is  pretended,  that  the  fcripture  is 
but  a  dead  rule,  which  can  end  no  controverfies  with- 
out a  living  judge  ready  at  hand,  to  interpret  and 
apply  that  rule  upon  emergent  occafions  >   the  fluiie 

objedlion 


I  /{ 2  6  Honejly  the  hejl  prefervaiive 

SE  R  M  objecftlon  lies  againfb  them,  unlefs  a  general  council, 
which  is  their  living  judge,  were  always  fitting.  Por 
the  definitions  of  their  councils  in  v/riting  are  liable 
to  the  fame,  and  greater  objedlions,  than  the  written 
rule  of  the  fcriptures. 

The  fum  of  all  is  this.  In  difierences  about  lefl^er 
matters,  mutual  charity  and  forbearance  will  fecure 
the  peace  of  the  church,  tho'  the  diiferences  remain 
undecided;  and  in  greater  matters,  an  infalhble  rule 
fearched  into  with  an  honefl:  mind,  and  due  diligence, 
and  with  the  help  of  good  inflrudlion,  is  more  likely 
toextinguifh  and  put  an  end  to  fuch  differences,  than 
any  infallible  judge,  if  there  were  one  j  becaufe  an 
humble  and  honed  mind  is  more  likely  to  yield  to 
realon,  than  a  perverfe  and  cavilling  temper  is  to  fub- 
Tnit  to  the  fentence  of  an  infallible  judge,  unlefs  it 
•were  back'd  with  an  inquifition.  The  church  of  Rome 
fuppoleth  her  felf  infallible,  and  yet  notwithflanding 
that,  fne  finds  that  fome  queftion  and  deny  her  infal- 
iibility,  and  then  her  fentence  fignifies  nothing.  And 
of  thole  who  own  it,  many  difpute  the  fenfe  and 
meaning  of  her  fentence  ;  and  whether  they  deny  the 
infallibility  of  her  fentence,  or  difpute  the  fenfe  of  it, 
in  neither  of  thefe  cafes  will  it  prove  effedlual  to  the 
deciding  of  any  difference. 

But  after  all  this  pro vifion  which  we  pretend  God 
hath  made  for  honed  and  fincere  minds,  do  we  not 
fee  that  men  fall  into  dangerous  and  damnable  errors, 
who  yet  cannot,  without  great  uncharitablencls,  be 
fuppofed  not  to  be  fincercly  defirous  to  know  the  truth, 
and  to  do  the  will  of  God  ? 

To  this  I  Ihall  briefly  return  thefe  two  things. 

I.  That  the  fame  errors  are  not  equally  damnable 

to 


agalnft  dangerous  mijlakes  in  religion.  1427 

to  all.  The  innocent  and  (humanely  fpeakino;)  al-  S  E  R  M. 
mod  invincible  prejudices  of  education  in  fome  per-  '  ' 
fons  even  againft  a  fundamental  truth  ;  the  different 
capacities  of  men,  and  the  different  means  of  convic- 
tion afforded  to  them ;  the  greater  and  leffer  degrees 
of  obfliriacy,  and  a  faulty  will  in  oppofing  the  truths 
propoled  to  them  -,  all  thefe,  and  perhaps  fcveral 
other  confiderations  befides,  may  make  a  great  diffe- 
rence in  the  guilt  of  mens  errors,  and  the  danger 
of  them. 

11.  When  all  is  done,  the  matter  muft  be  left  to 
God,  who  only  knoweth  the  hearts  of  the  children  of 
men.  We  cannot  fee  into  the  hearts  of  men,  nor 
know  all  their  circum (lances,  and  how  they  may  have 
provoked  God  to  forfake  them,  and  give  them  up  to 
error  and  deluiion,  ''  becaufe  they  would  not  receive 
"  the  truth  in  the  love  of  it,  that  they  might  be 
''  faved.*'  And  as  on  the  one  hand  God  will  confi- 
der  all   mens  circumftances,  and  the  difadvantao-es 

o 

they  were  under  for  coming  to  the  knowledge  of 
the  truth,  and  make  allowance  to  men  for  their  in- 
vincible errors,  and  forgive  them  upon  a  general  re- 
pentance :  fo  on  the  other  hand,  he  who  fees  the  in- 
fincerity  of  men,  and  that  the  errors  of  their  under- 
ftandings  did  proceed  from  grofs  faults  of  their  lives, 
will  deal  with  them  accordingly.  But  if  men  be  ho- 
ned and  fincere,  God,  who  hath  faid,  ^^  if  any  man 
*'  will  do  his  will,  he  fhall  know  of  the  dodlrine," 
will  certainly  be  as  good  as  his  word. 

It  now  remains  only  to  draw  fome  inferences  from 
this  difcourfe,  and  they  fhall  be  thefe  three. 

Firlt,  from  this  text,  and  what  hath  been  difcourfcd 
wpon  it,  we  may  infer  how  Qender  and  ill-grounded 

the 


r 


1428  Honefty  the  he  [I  prefervative 

SERM.  the  pretence  of  the  church  of  Rome  to  infallibility 
^^^3  ^^ '  whether  they  place  it  in  the  pope,  or  in  a  gene- 
ral coLincJl,  or  in  both.     The  laft  is  the  moft  gene- 
ral opinion;  and  yet  it  is  hard  to  underhand  how  in- 
fallibility can  refuk  from  the  pope's  confirmation  of  a 
general  council,  when  neither  the  council  was  infalli- 
ble  in  framing   its  definitions,  nor  the  pope  in  con- 
firming them.    If  the  council  were  infallible  in  fram- 
ing them,  then  they  needed  no  confirmation  :  if  they 
were  not,  then  infallibility  is  only  in  the  pope  that 
confirms  them,  and  then  it  is  the  pope  only  that  is 
infallible.     But  no  man  that  reads  thefe  words  of  our 
Saviour,"  if  any  man  willdo  his  will,  he  fliall  know 
''of  the  doctrine,"  would  ever  imagine  that  the  bifhop 
of  Rome  (whoever  he  fliull  happen  to  be)  were  fe- 
cured  from  all  fatal  errors  in  mutters  of  faith,  much 
lefs  that  he  were  endowed  with  an  infallible  fpirit,  in 
judging  what  dodrines  are  from  God,  and  what  not. 
For  It  cannot  be  denied,  but  that  many  of  their  popes 
have  been  notoriouQy  wicked  and  vicious  in  their 
lives :    nay  Bellarmine  himfelf  acknowledgeth,  that 
for  a  fuccefTion  of  fifty  popes  together,  there  was  not 
one  pious  and  virtuous  man  that  fat  in  that  chair  \  and 
foine  of  their  popes  have  been  condemned  and  de- 
pofed  for  herefy,  and  yet   for  all    this,  the  pope, 
and  the  governing  part  of  the  church,  would  bear 
the  world   in  hand  that  he  is  infallible.     But  if  this 
faying  of  our  Saviour  be  true,  ''  that  if  any  man 
*'  will  do  his  will,  he  fhall  know  of  his  doctrine, 
*'  whether  it  be  of  God  *,"  then  every  honeft  man 
that  fincerely  dcfires  to  do  the  will  <)f  God,  hath  a 
fairer  pretence  to  infallibility,  and  a  clearer  text  for  it, 
than  is  to  be  found  in  the  whole  bible  for  the  infjlli- 
^  bility 


again/}  dangerous  mijlakes  in  religion.  1429 

billty  of  the  bl(hop  of  Rome.  What  would  the  SJ.  R  M. 
church  of  Rome  give,  that  there  were  but  as  exprefs 
a  text  of  fcripture  for  the  infillibiHty  of  their  popes, 
as  this  is  for  the  fecurity  of  every  good  man,  in  his 
judgment  of  dodrines ;  which  makes  infallibility 
needlefs?  what  an  infufFerable  noife,  and  whatcndlefs 
triumphs  would  they  make  upon  it,  if  it  had  been 
any  where  faid  in  the  bible,  that  if  any  man  be  bifliop 
of  Rome,  and  fit  in  St.  Peter's  chair,  he  fhall  know  of 
my  dodrine  whether  it  be  of  God  ?  Had  there  been 
but  fuch  a  text  as  this,  we  fliould  never  have  been 
troubled  with  their  impertinent  citation  of  texts,  and 
their  remote  and  blind  inferences  from  pafce  eves 
zrAfiiper  banc  fetram  \  "  feed  my  flieep  j"  and  "upon 
"  this  rock  will  I  build  my  church  j"  to  prove  the 
pope's  infallibility.  And  yet  no  man  of  {txiio,  or  rea- 
fon  ever  extended  the  text  I  am  fpeaking  to,  fo  far  as 
to  attempt  to  prove  from  it  the  infallibility  of  every 
good  man  s  but  only  his  fecurity  from  fatal  errors 
and  miflakes  in  religion.  The  largefl:  promifes  that^ 
are  made  in  fcripture  of  i^zm'iX.'j  from  error  and  mif- 
take  about  divine  things,  are  made  to  good  mien,who 
fincerely  defire  to  do  the  will  of  God.  And  if  this 
be  fo,  we  mud  conclude  feveral  popes  to  have  been 
the  farthefl  from  infliUibility  of  any  men  in  the 
world.  And  indeed  there  is  not  a  more  compendious  If 
-way  to  perfuade  men  that  the  chriftian  relio-ion  is  a 
fable,  than  to  k\.  up  a  lewd  and  vicious  man  for  the  J' 
oracle  of  it. 

Nay,  I   will   go   farther    yet  j  that  there  are  no 
promifes  made  in  fcripture,  of  diredion  or  aiTiilance 
or  fecurity  from  miftake,  to  any  church  j  but  the  fame 
are  made  in  as  full  and  exprefs  terms  to  every  oood 

Vol.  VI.  II  F  man 

2. 


1 4^0  HGneJly  the  beji  prefervathe 

SERM.  man  that  fincerely  defires  to  know  the  truth,  and  to 

T  XXXIX 

'  practife  it.  Is  it  promifcd  to  the  church,  or  to  the  pa- 
llors of  it,  "  I  will  be  with  you  always  ?  "  and  hath 
not  our  Saviour  promifed  the  fame  to  every  one 
that  is  obedient  to  his  word?  Johnxiv.  23.  *'  If  a 
*'  man  love  me,  he  will  keep  my  words  j  and  my 
"  Father  v/ill  love  him,   and  we  will  come  unto 
*'  him,  and  make  our  abode  with  him."  And  does  not 
the  apoflle  apply  the  fame  promife  to  every  good 
chriflian,  Heb.  xiii.  5.  "  I  will  never  leave  thee,  nor 
"  forfake  thee  ? "  for  where  is  the  difference  between 
thefe  expreffions?  "  I  will  be  with  you,"  and  *'  I 
"  will  make  my  abode  with  him  ?  '*^"  I  will  be  with 
*'  you  always,"  and  "  I  will  never  leave  thee,  nor 
"  forfake  thee?"    Is   it  promifed  to   the    church, 
"  that  the  Spirit   Ihall  lead  her  into  all  truth  ?" 
and  is  not  the  fame  promife  made  to  every  good  man  ? 
Johnxiv.  21.  "  He  that  hath  my  commandments, 
"  and  keepeth  them,  he  it  is  that  loveth  me:  and  he 
*'  that  loveth  me,  fhall  be  loved  of  my  Father  ; 
•'  and  I  will  love  him,  and  will  manifeft  myfelf  to 
*'  him  i"  that  is,  God  will  reveal  his  will  to  thofe 
that  love  him,  and  keep  his  commandments.     Hath 
God  promifed  "  to  build  his  church  upon  a  rock  ?" 
and  doth  not  our  Saviour  ufe  the  fame  metaphor 
concerning  every  man  that  doth  the  will  of  God  ? 
Matt.  vii.  24.   *'  whofoever  heareth  thefe   fayings  of 
*'  mine,  and  doth  them^  is  like  a  wife  man  that  built 
♦'  his  houfe  upon  a  rock."     So  that  if  to  be  built 
upon  a  rock  fignifies  infallibility,  it  belongs  to  eve- 
ry good  man,  who  fincerely  pradlifeth  what  he  knows, 
as  much  as  to  any  church. 

Wlien  men  are  enabled  by  God  to  work  miracles 

for 


againjl  dangerous  mtjlakes  in  religion*  ^43^ 

for  the  confirmation  of  the  docflrines  which  they  de-  f^^Jf' 

,  .  f.  II*  11  •        IjAAaIA. 

hver,  there  is  great  reaion  to  beheve  that  they  are  in-  v- 
faUibly  aflifted  in  the  dehvery  of  thofe  doflrincs : 
but  without  this,  'tis  the  vainefl  thing  in  the  world, 
for  any  perfon  or  church  to  pretend  to  it ;  becaufe 
they  offer  no  evidence  fit  to  fatisfy  any  man,  that 
they  are  fo  affifled :  and  I  do  not  hear  that  the  pope, 
among  all  his  privileges,  does  pretend  to  the  power 
of  miracles.! 

Secondly,  from  hence  likewife  we  may  infer  the 
great  reafon  of  error  and  infidelity  in  the  world.     If 
any  man  be  an  infidel,  it  is  not  the  fault  of  his  un- 
derftanding,  but  of  his  will ;  it  is  not  becaufe  there  is 
not  fuffi-cient  evidence  that  the  chriftian  religion  is 
from  God,  but  becaufe  mens  interefts  and  lufts  make 
them  partial  and  incompetent  judges  of  matters  of  re- 
ligion.   The  evidence  of  the  chriftian  religion  is  fuch, 
as  recommends  it  to  every  man's  reafon  and  confci- 
ence  ;  fo  that  (as  St.  Paul  argues)  "  if  the  gofpel  be 
*'  hid,  it  is  hid  to  them  that  are  loft ;  in  whom  the 
«'  God  of  this  world  hath    blinded  the  minds  of 
<*  them  that  believe  not,  left  the  light  of  the  glorious 
"  gofpel  of  Christ,  who   is  the  image  of  God, 
"  fhould  Ihineunto  them,"  2  Coniv.  3,  4. 

If  men  did  but  ftand  indifferent  for  the  entertain- 
ment of  truth,  and  were  not  fwayed  by  the  intereft  of 
any  luft  or  paffion,  I  am  confident  that  no  man  that 
hath  the  gofpel  fairly  propofed  to  him,  would  con- 
tinue an  infidel.  If  men  did  but  truly  live  up  to  the 
principles  of  natural  religion,  they  would  eafily  be 
convinced,  that  the  chriftian  religion,  which  is  fo 
iuitable  thereto,  is  from  God. 

Thirdly,  and  laftly,  what  hath  been  faid,  is  a  great 

1 1  F  2  argU' 


143^  Honejly  the  be/l  prefervativCy  &c. 

SERM.  aro-'jment  and  encouragement  to  obedience,  andho- 
^,JL!^  linels  of  life.     Do   we  defire   not   to     be  miftaken 
about  the  mind  of  God  ?  let  us  heartily  endeavour  to 
do  his  will.     If  we  would  not  be  feduced  by  the  er* 
ror  of  the  wicked,  let  us  take  heed  of  their  vicious 
practices.   The  beft  way  certainly  to  prefcrve  a  right 
judgment  in  matters  of  religion,  is  to  take  great  care 
of  a  goo  1  lifv?.     God's  goodnefs    is  fuch,  that  he  will 
not  lulicr  any  man's  judgment  to  be  betrayed  into  a 
damnable  error,  without  fome  vice  and   fault  of  his 
wilL    The  principles  of  natural  religion  are   born 
with  us,  and  imprinted  upon  our  minds,  fo  that  no 
man  can  be  ignorant  of  them,  nor  need  to  be  midaken 
^bout  them  ;  and  as  for  thofe  revelations  which  God 
hath  made  oF  himfelf  to  the  world,  he  hath  been 
p'eafed  to  accompany  them  with    fo  much  evidence, 
that  an  honeft  and  fincere  mind  may  eafily  difcern 
them    from    error,  and    impoilure.      So   our   Sa- 
viour hath  aflured  us,  "  that  if  any  man  defire  to 
''  do  his  will,  he  fliall  know  of  the  do6trine,  whe- 
«'  ther  it  be  of  God." 

On  the  other  hand,  if  we  fee  any  oppofe  the  clear 
truth,  cr  depart  from  it,  and  embrace  grofs  errors 
and  delufions,  we  may  almoft  certainly  conclude,  that 
there  is  fome  vv'orldly  interefl  or  lufl  at  the  bottom 
oF  it.  So  our  Saviour  haslikewife  told  us,  that  the 
reafon  why  "  men  love  darknefs  rather  than  light,  is, 
"  becaufe  their  deeds  are  evil  ;  and  every  one  that 
«'  doth  evil  hateth  the  light,  neither  cometh  to  the 
*'  light,  left  his  deeds  fhould  be  reproved."  I  will 
conclude  this  whole  difcourfe  with  St.  Peter's  exhor- 
tation, the  2d  of  Pet.  iii.  17,  18.  "  Ye  therefore,  be- 
*«  loved,  feeing  ye  know  thefe  things  before,  beware, 

''  left 


"The  nature  of  covet oufnefs.  1 43  3 

**  led  ye  alfo  being  led  away  with  the  error  of  the 

"  wicked,  fall  from  your  own  ftedfaflnels.  Bat  grow 

*'  in  grace,  and  in  the  knowledge  of  our  Lord  and 

*'  Saviour   Jesus  Christ.     To  him  be  gloryj 

"  both  now  and  for  ever.     Amen." 


SERMON     XG 

The  nature  of  covetouinels. 

LUKE     xii.  15. 

j^nd  he  /aid  unto  them,  take  heed^  and  beware  of  cove^ 
toufnefs  ;  for  a  man's  life  conjijleth  not  in  the  ahun^ 
dance  of  the  things  which  he  poffefjeth. 


L/VNJ 


Mong  all   the   irregular   appetites  of    men,  s  E  R  M: 
there  is  none  that  is  more  common  and  un-  .  ^l 
rcafonable,  and  of  a  more  univerlal  bad  in- 
fluence upon  the  hearts  and  lives  of  men,  than  this 
of  covetoufnefs ;    and  therefore  in  fpeaking  of  this 
vice,  I  fhall  ftrike  at  the  root  of  a  great  many  others ; 
even  of  apoflacy  from  God's  truth  and  religion,  of 
which  covetoufnefs,  and  the  love  of  this^prefent  world, 
is  one  of  the  mod  common  caufes.     So  that  if  I  can 
contribute  any  thing  to  the  cure  of  this  great  didem- 
per  of  mens  minds,.  I  fhall  in  lb  doing  remove  thac 
which  is  the  caufe  and  occafion  of  a  great  part  of  the 
evils  and  mifchiefs  which  are  in  the  world.     And  to 
this  end  I  have  pitched  upon  thefe  words  of  our  blef- 
fed  Saviour  to  his  hearers  \    '^  and  he  faid  unto 
"  them,  take  heed  and  beware  of  covetoufnefs  ;  for 
"  a  man's  life  confifteth  not  in  the  abundance  of  the 
"  things  which  he  poffclTeth.*'  la 


xc. 


1434.  The  nature  of  covetoufnefs. 

S  E  R  M.       In  which  words  are  thefe  three  things  obfervable  * 

Firfb,  the  manner  of  the  caution  which  our  Savi- 
our here  gives,  "  take  heed  and  beware;"  he 
doubles  it,  to  (hew  the  great  need  and  concernment 
of  it. 

Secondly,  the  matter  of  the  caution,  or  the  vice 
which  our  Saviour  here  warns  his  hearers  againfl:, 
and  that  is  covetoufnefs,  "  take  heed  and  beware  of 
''  covetoufnefs.'* 

Thirdly,  the  reafon  of  this  caution,  "  becaufe  a 
*'  man's  hfe  confifbeth  not  in  the  abundance  of  the 
*'  things  which  he  pofTeffeth."  Humane  life  is  fuf- 
tain'd  by  a  little,  and  therefore  abundance  is  not  ne- 
ceflary,  either  to  the  fupport,  or  comfort  of  it.  'Tis 
not  a  great  eftate  and  vail  pofTellions  that  make  a 
man  happy  in  this  v/orld  -,  but  a  mind  that  is  equal 
to  its  condition,  whatever  it  be. 

Firft,  the  manner  of  the  caution  which  our  Savi- 
ou  R  here  gives,  "  take  heed  and  beware."  This  is 
a  peculiar  kind  of  caution,  and  no  where  t]^,  or 
upon  any  other  occafion,  that  I  know  of,  ufed  in 
fcripture  ;  in  which,  for  the  greater  emphafis  and 
weight,  the  words  of  caution  are  doubled,  as  if  the 
matter  were  of  fo  much  concernment,  that  no  cau- 
tion about  it  could  be  too  much ;  to  fignify  to  us 
both  the  great  danger  of  this  fm  of  covetoufnefs,  and 
the  great  care  men  ought  to  ufe  to  prefer ve  them- 
felves  from  it. 

I.  The  great  danger  of  this  fin  •,  how  apt  we  are 
to  fall  into  this  vice,  and  of  how  pernicious  a  confe- 
qucnce  it  is  to  thofe  in  whom  it  reigns. 

I.  How  apt  we  arc  to  f.ill  into  this  vice:  and 
excepting    thofe    vices     which     are    immediately 

founded 


^e  nature  of  covetotifjiefs.  143^ 

founded  in  a  man's  natural  temper  and  conftltution,  SERM. 
there  is  none  that  men  have  a  more  univerfal  pro-  ■^^• 
penfion  to,  than  this  of  covetoufnefs.  For]  there  arc 
two  things  which  humane  nature  does  more  efpeci- 
ally  defire  to  be  fccured  againft,  which  are  want, 
and  conteniDt :  and  riches  fcem  to  be  a  certain  re- 
medy  againft  both  thefe  evils.  And  bccaufe  men 
think  they  can  never  be  fufficiently  fecured  againfl 
thefe,  therefore  their  defire  of  riches  grows  endlefs 
and  infatiable  \  fo  that  unlefs  men  be  very  jealous 
and  watchful  over  themfelves,  this  defire  will  grow 

upon  them,  and  enlarge  it  M^  beyond  all  bounds. 
2.  As  men  are  very  apt  to  fall  into  this  vice,  ^o 

is  it  of  very  pernicious  confequence  to  thofe  in  whom 
it  reigns.  The  mifchief  of  it  is  very  great,  and 
very  cxtenfive:  So  St.  Paul  tells  us,  i  Tim.  vi.  8,  9, 
10.  where  he  prefTeth  men  to  be  contented  v/ith  a 
fmall  competency  of  the  things  of  this  life,  becaufc 
of  the  great  danger  and  mifchief  of  a  covetous  mind ; 
*'  having;  food  and  raiment,  let  us  be  therewith 
*'  content,  But  they  that  will  be  rich  (that  is,  they 
''  that  are  bent  and  refolved  upon  being  rich)  fall. 
•'  into  temptation  and  a  fnare,  and  into  many  foolilli 
*«  and  hurtful  lulls,  which  drown  men  in  deftruc- 
''  tion  and  perdition.  For  the  love  of  money  is  the 
^'  root  of  all  evil"  But  this  I  fhall  fpeak  mora 
fully  to,  when  I  come  to  fliew  the  great  evil  and  un- 
reafonablenefs  of  this  vice. 

II.  This  earned  kind  of  caution,  as  it  fignlfies  the 
great  danger  of  this  fin  of  covetoufnefs,  fo  likewife 
the  great  care  that  men  ought  to  ufe  to  prefervc 
themfelves  from  it;  for  the  greater  the  danger  is  in 
any  kind,  fo  much  the  greater  care  fhould  be  ufed 

for 


1^25  ^^^  nature  of  covetoufnefs, 

S  E  R  M.  for  the  avoiding  of  it.     Men  are  not  fb  folicitoufly 

il^^j  concerned  to  defend  themfelves  againfl  a  fiiglit  mif- 
chief  *,  but  when  a  terrible  one  threatens  us,  we 
fhould  be  continually  upon  our  guard  againfl  it,  and 
fumnion  all  our  Rrength  and  force  to  refill  it.  Thus 
much  for  the  manner  of  the  caution. 

I  proceed  to  the  fecond  thing  to  be  confider'd  in 
the  text,  viz.  The  matter  of  the  caution,  or  the  vice 
which  our  Saviour  here  warns  his  hearers  againfl, 
and  that  is  covetoufnefs ;  "  take  heed  and  beware  of 
*'  covetoufnefs."  And  in  fpeaking  of  this,  I  fliall 
confider  thefe  two  things. 

I.  Wherein  the  nature  of  this  vice  conHfls. 

II.  I  fliall  endeavour  to  fhevv  the  great  evil  and  un- 
reafonablenefs  of  it.    I  fliail  be  large  in  both. 

I.  For  the  nature  of  this  vice  of  covetoufnefs.  The 
Ihortefl ;  defcription  that  I  can  give  of  it  is  this  ; 
*'  that  it  is  an  inordinate  defire  and  love  of  riches  ♦,  '* 
but  when  this  defire  and  love  are  inordinary,  is  not  fo 
eafy  to  be  determined.  And  therefore  that  we  may 
the  better  underftand  what  this  fm  of  covetoufnefs 
is,  which  our  Saviour  doth  fo  earnellly  caution 
again il,  it  will  be  requifite  to  confider  more  parti- 
cularly wherein  the  vice  and  fault  of  it  doth  confift  j 
that  whilfl:  we  are  fpeaking  againfl  covetoufnefs,  we 
may  not  under  that  general  word  condemn  any  thing 
that  is  commendable  or  lawful.  To  the  end  then 
that  we  may  the  more  clearly  and  diflinclly  under- 
lland  wherein  the  nature  of  this  vice  doth  confifl, 
I  fliall, 

Firfl,  endeavour  to  ffiew  what  is  not  condemned 
under  this  namej'of  covetoufnefs,  either  in  fcripture, 
or  according  to  right  rcafon  :  And, 

Secondly, 


^he  nature  ef  covctoiifnefs.  14-^7 

Secondly,  what  is  condemned  by  either  of  thefe  SERM. 
as  a  plain  inflance  or  branch  of  this  fin.  ^    •^^• 

Firft,  what  things  are  not  condemned  under  the 
name  of  covetoufnels,  cither  in  fcripture,  or  accord- 
ing to  right  reafon,  which  yet  have  fome  appearance 
of  it ;  namely,  thefe  three  things. 

1.  Not  a  provident  care  about  the  things  of  this 
prefent  life. 

2.  Not  a  regular  indudry  and  diligence  for  the 
obtaining  of  them  :  Nor 

3.  Every  degree  of  love  and  affedion  to  them.  I 
mention  thefe  three,  becaufe  they  may  all  feem  to  be 
condemned  by  fcripture,  as  parts  or  deorees  of  this 
vice,  but  really  are  not. 

1.  Not  a  provident  care  about  the  things  of  this 
prefent  life.  This  indeed  feems  to  be  condemned  in 
fcripture  as  a  branch  of  covetoufnefs ;  namely,  in  our 
Saviour's  fermon  upon  the  mount.  Mat.  vi.  2r. 
*'  Take  no  thought  for  your  life,  what  ye  ihall  eat, 
*'  or  what  ye  lliall  drink  ;  nor  yet  for  your  body, 
"  what  ye  fhall  put  on."  Here  our  Saviour  fcems 
to  forbid  all  care,  even  about  the  neceffaries  of  life 
meat,  and  drink,  and  clothing  ;  much  more  about 
the  delights  and  conveniences  of  it.  But  this  is  not 
abfolutely,  and  in  ordinary  caies,  intended  by  our 
Saviour  to  be  condemned,  as  I  fhdiW  fl^ew  by  and 
by  under  the  next  head. 

2.  Neither  is  a  regular  induflry  and  diligence  for 
the  obtaining  of  thefe  things  condemned  in  fcrin^ 
ture  *,  tho'  this  alfo  feems  to  be  prohibited  by  out 
Saviour  in  the  fame  chapter,  ver.  26.  "  Behold 
"  the  fowls  of  the  air  :  for  they  fow  not,  neidier  do 
««  they  reap,  nor  gather  into  barns,  yet  your  hca- 

Vo  L,  VI.  II  G  "  venly 

2. 


1438  ^hs  nature  of  covet oufnefs. 

SERM.  «  venly  Father  feedeth  them;"  and  ver.  t%, 
".^  "  Why  take  ye  thought  for  raiment  ?  confider  the 
"  lihes  of  the  field,  how  they  grow  ;  they  toil  not, 
"  neither  do  they  fpin.'*  In  which  words  our  Sa- 
viour feems  to  intimate,  that  we  ought  to  depend 
upon  the  providence  of  God  for  food  and  raiment, 
and  to  ufe  no  more  induftry  for  the  obtaining  of 
them,  than  the  fowJs  of  the  air  do,  or  the  lihes  of 
the  field :  and  the  fame  may  feem  to  be  colleded 
out  of  this  chapter  of  ^t.  Luke  :  for  after  our  Savi- 
our had  in  my  text  cautioned  them  againfl  cove- 
toufnefs,  and  fpoken  to  them  a  parable  to  that  pur- 
pole,  "  of  a  rich  man  who  enlarged  his  barns,  and  laid 
*'  up  goods  for  many  years,"  He  infers  from  thence, 
ver.  22,  that  men  lliould  take  no  thought  for  the 
things  of  this  life,  nor  ufe  any  induftry  about  them  ; 
*'  and  he  faid  unto  his  difciples,  therefore  I  fay  unto 
"  you,  take  no  thought  for  your  life,  what  ye  lliall 
"  eat;  neither  for  the  body,  what  ye  Ihall  put  on." 

Now  to  avoid  all  inconvenience  from  our  Savi- 
our's words,  I  think  that  it  is  commonly  faid  by 
interpreters,  that  he  does  here  only  condemn  a  dif. 
truftful  and  anxious  care  about  the  things  of  this  life, 
and  an  over-folicitous  induftry  and  diligence  for  the 
obtaining  of  them  ;  but  that  he  allows  a  prudent 
care,  and  regular  induftry  about  thefe  things  :  and 
this  were  very  well  faid,  if  it  would  agree  with  the 
fcope  and  defign  of  our  Saviour's  difcourfe ;  but 
the  inftances  which  he  gives  of  the  fowls  of  the 
air,  and  the  lihes  of  the  field,  which  are  fufficiently 
provided  for  without  any  care  and  induury  of  theirs, 
and  which  he  feems  to  fet  before  us  for  a  pattern, 
^'  behold  (fays  he)  the  fowls  of  the  i\ir."  I  fiy,  thefe 

jinftances. 


7he  nature  of  covetoufnef!:,  ^  4  3  9 

inftances,  which  he  gives,   feem  to  exclude  even  all  SE  R  M; 

xc 
regular  and  ordinary  care  and  diligence  about  thefe, 

things. 

What  fliall  we  fay  then,  that  our  Saviour  in- 
tended by  his  religion  to  take  men  off  from  all  la- 
bour and  indudry  in  their  callings  ?  this  feems  to  be 
unreafonable  ;  and  indeed  fo  it  certainly  were,  if  our 
Saviour  had  given  this  for  a  {landing  and  ordinary 
rule  to  all  chriftians  •,  and  not  only  fo,  but  contrary 
to  the  apoftles  do6lrine,  who  conflantly  charged 
chriftians  to  labour  with  great  diligence  in  their  call- 
ings, that  they  might  be  able  to  provide  for  them- 
felves  and  their  families. 

But  this  difcourfe  of  our  Saviour's  was  not  in- 
tended for  a  general  and  ftanding  rule  to  all  chriftians ; 
but  only  defigned  for  his  difciples,  to  take  them 
off  from  all  care  about  the  things  of  this  life,  that, 
they  might  attend  upon  his  perfon,  and  wholly  give 
up  themfelves  to  that  work  to  which  he  had  called 
them.  And  therefore  ^t.  Luke  takes  notice,  that 
after  he  had  cautioned  his  hearers  in  general  againft: 
covetoufnefs,  he  applies  himfelf  particularly  to  his 
difciples,  and  tells  them  that  he  v/ould  have  them  fo 
far  from  this  vice  of  covetoufnefs,  that  they  fhould 
not  fo  much  as  ufe  that  ordinary  care  and  induftry 
about  the  things  of  this  life,  which  is  not  only  lawful, 
but  neceffiry  for  men  in  all  ordinary  cales,  ver.  22. 
"  And  he  faid  unto  his  difciples,  therefore  I  fay  unto 
^'  you,  take  no  thought  for  your  life,  what  you  (hall 
''  eat."  And  this  agrees  very  well  with  the  direction 
which  our  Saviour  gave  to  his  difciples,  when  he 
iTrft  fent  them  forth  to  preach.  Matt.  x.  9.  ''  Pro- 
^^  vide  neither  gold  nor  filver,  nor  bra  Is  in  your  pur- 

j  I  G  2  fcs^ 


1 4  \o  ^he  nature  of  covet  cufnefs . 

SERM.<  fes,  neither  coat  nor  fcrip^"  which  no  man  ever 
underilood  as  a  general  law  to  all  chriftians,  but  as  a 
particular  precept  to  the  apoftles  at  that  time. 

And  if  this  be  our  Saviour's  meaning,  there  is 
thefi  no  reafon  to  think,  that  this  caution  againft  co- 
vetoufnels  does  fotbid  men  to  ufe  a  provident  care 
and  regular  induftry  about  the  things  of  this  life. 

3.  Nor  is  every   degree  of   love  and  affedlion  to 
the  things  of  this  world  condemned  in   fcripture,  as 
any  branch,  or  part  of  this  vice  of  covetoufnefsj  but 
fuch  a  love  of  the  things   of  this  v/orld  as  is  truly 
confident  with  the  love  of  God,  and  a  due  and  a  feri- 
ous  care    of    cur   fouls,   is  allov/ed  both   by  fcrip- 
ture  and  reafon.  ^l,  John  indeed  feems  to  condemn 
all  love  of  the  world,  and  of    the  things  of   it,  as 
utterly  inconfiftent  with  the  love  of  God,    i  John 
ii.  15.  "  Love  not  the  world,  neither  the  things  that 
''  are  in  the  world  ;  if  any  man  love  the  world,  the 
*'  love  of  the  Father   is  not  in  him  f    But  this  is 
according  to  the  hebrev/  phrafeand  manner  of  fpeak- 
ing,  to  forbid  things  abfolutely,   which  are  to  be  un- 
derftood  only  comparatively.  So  Matt.  vi.  19.  "  Lay 
*'  not  for  up  your  felves  treafures  upon  earth  ;  but  lay 
*'  up  for  your  felves  treafures  m.  heaven  ;'*  i.  e.    be 
not  fo  felicitous  for  the  good  things  of  this  world,  as 
for  the  glory  and  happinefs  of  the  next.    And  Luke 
xii.  4.  "  Be  not  afraid  of  them  that  kill  the  body  •," 
that  is,  fear  them  not  fo  much  as  "  him  that  can  de- 
"  flroy  both  body  and  foul  in  hell  :'*  and  Luke  xiv. 
26.  "  If  any  man  come  unto  me,  and  hate  not  his 
"  father  and  mother,  and  all  that  he  hath ;"  that  is, 
if  he   do  not  love  me  more  than  all   thefe  things, 
*'  he  cannot  be  my  difciple:"  and  John  vi.  27.    La- 

"  bour 


The  nature  of  covet oufnefs,  I44^ 

*^  hour  not  for  the   meat  which  periflieth,   but  forSERM 
"  that  which  endureth  to  everlafting  life;,"  that  is, 
labour  not  fo  much  for  the  one  as  for  the  other,  be 
not  fo  felicitous  about  the  things  of  this  life,  as  about 
the  great  concernments  of  eternity.  So  likewife  ColofT. 
iii.  2.  "  Set  your  afFedions  on  things  above,  not  on 
''  thingson  the  earth-,"  i.e.  fet  them  more  on  things 
above,  than  on  earthly  things.    So  here,  "  love  not 
*'  the  world,  "neither  the  things  of  the  world  i"  that 
is,  do  not  over-value  them,  do  not  love  them  fomuch 
as  not  to  be  able  to  part  with  them  for  Christ  j  for 
if  any  man  thus  love  the  world,    he  does  not  love 
God  as  he  ought.    So  that  when  the  fcripturc  com- 
mands us  not  to  love  the  world,    this  is  to  be  under-^ 
flood  comparatively,    that  we  fhould  not  love  thefe 
things  in  comparifon  of  God,  and  the  great  concern- 
ments of  another  world :  but  it  does  not  forbid  us  to 
love  thefe  things  in  a  due  degree,  and  with  a  due  fub- 
ordination  to  thofe  things  which  are  more  excellent, 
and  of  infinitely  greater  concernment  to  us.  For  no- 
thing can  be  more  inconfident  than  to  recommend 
to  men  diligence  in  their  callings  and  employments 
(as  the  fcripture  frequently  does)  and  that  in  order  to 
the  attaining  of  the  good  things  of  this  life  ;  and  yet 
to  forbid  us  to  love  thefe  things  at  all.    For  if  men 
have  no  degree  of  love  to  them,  the  beil  argument 
to  diligence  for  the  obtaining  of  them  would  be  taken 
away.  BeHdes  that  we  are  commanded  in  fcripture  to 
be  thankful  to  God  for  beftowing  on  us  the  bleflings 
of  this  life,  and  we  are  to  love  him  upon  this  account. 
Now  can  any  man  love*  the  giver,  for  beftowing  fuch 
gifts  upon  him,  wlYich,  if  he  do  as  he  ought,  he  muft 
not  love  ? 

You 


1442  The  nature  of  covet  oufnefs. 

S  ERM.  You  {^z  then  what  thofe  things  arc,  which  the 
fcripture  does  not  condemn  as  any  branch  or  degree 
of  this  vice  of  covetoufnefs ;  a  provident  care,  and  a 
regular  induftry,  and  fuch  a  degree  of  love  to  the 
things  of  this  world,  as  is  confident  v/ith  the  love  of 
God,  and  the  care  of  our  fouls. 

Secondly,  I  come  now  to  fliew  what  is  condemned 
in  fcripture  under  the  name  of  covetoufnefs ;  and  by 
this  we  iliall  bed  underftand  wherein  the  nature  of 
this  fin  doth  confid.  Now  covetoufnefs  is  a  word  of 
a  large  fignification,  and  comprehends  in  it  moft  of 
the  irregularities  of  mens  minds,  either  in  defiring  or 
getting,  or  in  pofifelTing,  and  ufing  an  eftate.  I  fhall 
fpeak  to  each  of  thefe  feverally. 

I.  Covetoufnefs  in  the  defire  of  riches,  confifi:s  in 
an  easer  and  unfatiable  defire  after  the  thino;s  of  this 
world.  This  the  fcripture  condemns,  tho'  it  be  free 
from  injufi:ice,  as  it  feldom  happens  to  be.  ■  This  infa- 
tiable  defire  of  wealth,  God  plainly  condemns  by  his 
prophet,  I  fa.  v.  8.  "^Wo  unto  them  that  join  houfe 
*'  to  houfe,  and  lay  field  to  field,  till  there  be  no 
*'  place,  that  they  may  be  placed  alone  in  the  midfi:  of 
''  the  earth." And  thisis|that  which  our  Saviour  here 
in  the  text^fcems  to  have  a  more  particular  refpedl  to, 
when  he  cautions  men  againft  the  fin  of  covetoufnefs, 
as  appears  both  from  the  reafon  which  he  gives  of 
this  caution,  and  from  the  parable  whereby  he  illu- 
ftrates  it.  From  the  reafon  which  he  gives  of  this 
caution,  ''  take  heed  and  beware  of  covetoufnefs ; 
*'  for  the  life  of  man  doth  not  confifl  in  the  abun- 
*«  dance  of  the  things  which  he  pofiTefiTcth."  As  if  he 
had  faid,  take  great  care  to  {oit  fome  bounds  to  your 
dcfires  after  the  things  of  this  world.  For  whatever 

oiea 


^he  nature  of  coijetoiijnefs.  ^443 

men  may  imagine,  \i  is  certain  m  experience,  that  it  S  E  R  M. 
is  not  the  abundance  of  outward  things  which  makes  ,   i:  1! 
the  life  of  man  happy.     Wealth  and  content  do  not 
alway   dwell    together ;  nay   fo  far  from  that,  that 
perhaps  they  very  feldom  meet. 

And  the  parable  likewife  which  follows  upon  this 
caution,  doth  fufficiently  fliew  this  to  be  our  Savi- 
our's meaning  ;  for  he  illuflrates  what  he  was  fpeak- 
ing  of,  by  a  rich  man  whole  defire  of  wealth  was 
never  fatisfied,  but  he  was  continually  increafing  his 
eflate,  and  enlarging  his  barns,  to  make  more  room 
flill  for  his  fruits,  that  he  might"  lay  up  goods  m  (lore 
*'  for  many  years."  The  parable  doss  not  fo  much  as 
intimate  any  indired:  or  unjuft  v/ays  of  gain,  which 
this  man  ufed  to  increafe  his  edate  j  but  condemns 
his  infatiable  defire  and  thirfl  after  more  5  fo  that 
even  this  alone  is  covetoufnefs,  and  a  great  fault,  tho' 
it  were  attended  with  no  other  5  becaufe  it  is  unrea- 
fonable,  and  without  end. 

II.  There  is  covetoufhefs  likcwile  in  getting  an 
eflate ;  and  the  vice  or  evil  of  this  kind  of  covetouf- 
nefs confifls  chiefly  in  thefe  three  things. 

I .  In  the  ufe  of  unlawful  and  unjufi:  ways  to  get  or 
increafe  an  eflate.  He  i^  a  covetous  man,  who  by  the 
greedinefs  of  gain,  is  tempted  to  do  any  unjufi  adtion, 
whether  it  be  in  the  way  of  fraud  and  deceit,  or  of 
violence  and  opprefTion.  And  this  perhaps  is  that 
which  is  mofl  frequently  in  fcripture  called  covetouf- 
nefs. [And  this  I  take  to  be  the  meaning  of  the  tenth 
commandment,"  thou  fhaltnot;covet  i"  wherein  is  for- 
bidden all  unjufi  defire  of  that  which  is  another  man's, 
ai)d  all  unjufi  endeavours  and  attempts  to  deprive  him 
of  it.     For  foour  Saviour  renders  ix^  Markx.  19. 

where 


1444  ^^^  nature  of  covetoufnefs. 

S.E  R  M.  where  he  fays  to  the  young  man  that  came  to  be  di- 
reded  by  him,  "  what  good  thing  he  fhould  do  that 
*'  he  might  inherit  eternal  hfe  ;  thou  knoweft  the  com- 
"  mandments,  do  not  commit  adultery,  do  not  kill, 
"  do  not  flea],  do  not  bear  falfe  witnefs  j"  and  then 
inftead  of  the  tenth  commandment,  "  thou  fhalt  not 
"  covet,"  or  rather  by  way  of  explication  of  it,  he 
adds  "  /jtyi  axo?epoV/is-,  defraud  not  i"  as  if  he  had 
faid  in  a  word,  be  not  injurious  to  thy  neighbour  in 
any  kind,  in  defiring  or  endeavouring  to  deprive  him 
of  any  thing  that  is  his.  As  the  Romans  in  their  laws 
were  wont  to  comprehend  thofe  crimes  which  had 
no  proper  name,  by  the  general  name  of  ftellionatus 
and  dolm  malus  -,  fo  here  in  the  decalogue,  after  that 
God  had  inftanced  in  the  chief  and  mod  common 
forts  of  injuries  v/hich  men  are  guilty  of  towards 
their  neighbour,  as  "  murder,  adultery,  theft,  bearing 
^'  of  falfe  witnefs  •,"  he  fums  up  all  the  reft,  which 
could  not  fo  eaPiIy  be  reckoned  particularly  in  this 
fhort  and  generaljprohibition, ''  thou  flialt  not  covet ;" 
that  is,  thou  fhalt  not  be  injurious  to  thy  neighbour 
in  any  other  kind  -,  "  in  his  wife,  or  fervant,  or  houle, 
*'  or  cattle,  or  any  thing  that  is  his."  Covetoufnels, 
or  any  inordinate  defire  of  that  which  is  our  neigh- 
bour's, being  commonly  the  root  and  parent  of  all 
thofe  kinds  of  injuries. 

And  for  the  fame  reafon  St.  Matthew,  inftead  of 
the  tenth  commandment,  puts  this  generakprecept, 
*'  thou  fhalt  love  thy  neighbour  as 'thy  felf,'**  as  be- 
ins  the  fenfe  of  it  in  other  words  5  Matt.  xi-x.  18, 19. 
"  Thou  fhalt  do  no  murder,  thou  fhalt  not  commit 
**  adultery,  thou  flialt  not  fteal,  thou  fnalt  not. bear 
*'  falfe  witnefs,  honour  thy  father  and  thy  mother, 

"  and 


<c 


T^he  nature  of  covetciifncfi.  14 45 

and  thou   fhalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thy  felf."  3  E  R  M. 
And    this  command  of    loving    our  neighbour    as' 
our  {t\v^%^  our  Saviour  elfevvhere  telJs  us  was  the 
fum  of  the  duties  of  the  fecond  table ;  and  it  is  the 
fluiieinfenfewith  that  precept  of  our  Saviour,  Mate, 
vii.  12.  "  Therefore  all  things  whatfoever  ye  would 
"  that  men  fliouid  do  unto  you,  do  ye  even  fo  to 
*'  them."  That  is,  as  thou  vvouldeft  have  no  man  to  be 
injurious  to  thee  in  any  thing,  fo  be  not  thou  to  any 
other  man  in  any  kind.     And  ii\z  apofde,  Rom.  xiii. 
8,  9,  10.  fliews  us  upon  what  account  this  general 
precept,  "  thou  fhall  love  thy  neighbour  as  thy  felf," 
is  the  fum  of  the  fecond  table.     "  He  that  loveth 
''  another  hath  fulfilled  the  law  ;  for  this,  thou  fhalc 
''  not  commit  adultery,   thou  fhalt   not   kill,  thou 
fhalt  notfleal,  thouflialt  not  bear  falfe  witnefs,thou 
fhalt  not  covet  j  and  if  there  be  any  other  com- 
mandment, it  is  briefly  comprehended  in  this  fay- 
ing, nam.ely,  thou  fhalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thy 
*^  felf."    And  then  he  adds  in  the  next  words,  '*-  love 
*'  worketh  no  ill  to  his  neighbour  -,  therefore  love  is 
*'  the  fulfilling  of  the  law."    That  is,  he  that  truly 
loves  his  neighbour,  will  not  be  injurious  to  him  in 
any  kind  :  "  therefore  love  is  the  fum  of  the  law." 

The  defign  of  all  this  is  to  fiiew  that  he  that  is 
injurious  to  his  neighbour  in  his  eflate  in  any  kind,  is 
prooerly  guilty  of  the  fin  of  covctoufnels,  which  is 
forbMden  in  the  tenth  commandment.  So  that  all 
arts  oMraud  and  oppreflion,  whereby  men  endeavour 
to  getmnd  increafe  an  eftate  by  the  injury  of  their 
neighbqir,  is  a  branch  of  the  fin  of  covetoufnefs. 

2.  The  vice  of  covetoufnefs  in  getting  v/ealth,  does 

likewife  confift  in  an  anxious  and  tormenting  care 

VoLiVI.  11  H  about 


i44'5  ^!'>^  nature  of  covefoujltefs,^ 

S  E  KM.  about  obtaining;  the  thino;s  of  this  life.    The  regular 
and  due  temper  of  a  man's  mind  about  the  things  of 
this  world,  is  to  commit  ourfelves  to  the  providence 
of  God  in  the  ufe  of  honed  and  lawful  endeavours, 
and  to  refer  the  luccels  of  all  to  his  good  pleafure ,  and 
whatfoever  is  beyond  this,  is  a  branch  from  the  evil 
root  of  covetoufnefs.     We  difiruft  the  providence  of 
God,  when  after  we  have  ufed  our  beft  endeavours, 
and  begged  his  blelfing  upon  them,  we  torment  our- 
felves about  the  ifTue  and  event  of  things.     And  as 
this  is  finfu],  fo  it  is  vain,  and  to  no  purpofe.    Di- 
ligence in  our  bufinefs  is  the  way  to  get  an  ellate  ;  but 
iio  man  was  ever  the  richer  for  tormenting  himfelf, 
becaufe  he  is  not  fo.    The  reafon  v,'hy   men  feek   the 
things  of  this  world,  and  take  pains  to  get  them,  is 
to  make  life  convenient  and  comfortable  ;  and  con- 
fequently  he  that  torments  himfelf  about  the  getting 
I'  of  thefe  things,  contradids  himfelf  in  his  own  defign, 
becaufe  he  makes   his  life  miferable,    that  he  may 
make  it  comfortable. 

3.  The  fin  of  covetoufnefs  in  getting,   confifls  in 

feeking  the  things  of  this  life,  with  the  neglcd  of 

things  infinitely  better,  and  which  are  of  far  greater 

and  nearer  concernment  to  us.  He  is  a  covetous  man, 

who  fo  minds  the  world,  as  to  negledt  God,  and  his 

foul  *,  who  is  fo  bufy  and  intent  upon  making  provi- 

fion  for  this  life,  as  to  take  no  care  of  the  other ;  i^o 

concerned  for  a  few  days  of  his  pilgrimage  here,  as  to 

have  no  confideration  and  regard  for  his  eternal  abode 

in  another  world.     God  allows  us  to  provide  for  this 

life,  and  confiders  the  necefTides  which  do  continually 

prefs  us  while  we  are  in  the  body  :  but  while  we  are 

making  provifion  for  thefe  dying  bodies,  he  expeds 

tha?: 


7he  nature  of  covetonfiiefs,  ^449 

that  we  jfhould  remember  we  have  immortal  fouL^?^?;^* 
which  fince  they  are  to  have  an  endlefs  duration  in  ->r— ' 
another  world,  ought  to  be  provided  for  with  far 
greater  care.  'Tis  an  inordinate  defire  of  riches,  when 
men  fo  lay  out  all  their  care  and  induftry  for  the  ob- 
taining of  them,  as  if  nothing  elfe  were  to  be  regarded, 
as  if  no  confideration  at  all  were  to  be  had  of  ano- 
ther world,  and  of  that  better  part  of  ourfelves  which 
is  to  continue  and  live  for  ever.  All  defires  and  en- 
deavours after  riches,  which  take  men  off  from  the 
bufinefs  of  reh'gion,  and  the  care  of  their  foals,  which 
allow  men  neither  the  leifure  and  opportunity,  nor  the 
heart  and  affe6lion  to  love  God,  and  to  ferve  him, 
are  to  be  referred  to  this  fin  of  covetoufnefs,  which 
is  here  condemned  by  our  Saviour  in  the  text. 

III.  There  is  covetoufnefs  likewife  in  pofiefTing  or 
ufing  an  eflate  :  and  this  confifts  chiefly  in  thefe  three 
things. 

Firft,  when  men  are  fordid  towards  themfelves, 
and  cannot  find  in  their  hearts  to  ufe  and  enjoy  what 
they  pOiTefs ;  are  continually  adding  to  their  eftate, 
without  any  defign  of  enjoyment ;  and  take  infi- 
nite pains  to  raife  a  huge  fortune,  not  that  they  may 
ufe  it,  but  that  they  may  be  faid  to  have  it.  This 
is  a  degree  of  covetoufnefs  even  beyond  that  of  the 
rich  man  in  the  'parable  after  the  text :  for  he,  it 
feems,  after  he  had  "  enlarged  his  barns"  to  his 
mind,  and  "  laid  up  goods  for  many  years"  de- 
figned  at  laft  to  have  "  taken  his  eafe,"  and  have 
fallen  to  the  enjoyment  of  what  he  had  gotten  ; 
''  to  have  eat  and  drank,  and  to  have  been  merry  i" 
and  this,  thoVit  proved  but  a  fool ilh  defign  in  the 
ifliie,  he  being  cut  off  in  that  very  inftant  when  he 

II  H  2  was 


'TJjc  nature  of  covetoufnefs. 
was  come  to  the  point  of  fatisfaftion  and  enjoyment ', 
yet  is  it  infinitely  more  reafonable,  than  to  take  great 
pains  to  get  an  eflate,  with  a  full  refolution  never  to 
be  the  better  for  it. 

Secondly,  men  are  covetous  in  keeping  an  ellate, 
when  they  do  not  ufe  it  charitably,  when  they  cannot 
find  in  their  hearts  to  fpare  any  thing  out  of  their 
abundance,  to  the  relief  of  thofe  who  are  in  want. 
Tho'  a  man  get  an  eftate  without  covetoufnels,  and 
have  an  heart  to  enjoy  it,  yet  i^o  flir  he  is  covetous, 
as  he  is  uncharitable.  He  loves  money  more  than 
he  ought,  who  having  enough  to  fpare,  choofeth 
rather  to  keep  it,  than  to  do  good  with  it,  and 
to  ufe  it  to  one  of  the  principal  ends  for  which  God 
s:ives  an  eflate. 

Thirdly,  they  likewife  are  covetous,  who  place 
their  chief  truft  and  happinefs  in  riches,  who  (as  the 
expreflion  is,  Job  xxxi.  24.)  "  make  gold  their  hope, 
"  and  fay  to  the  fine  gold,  thou  art  my  confidence.'* 
And  this  is  the  reafon  why  covetoufnels  is  fo  often 
in  fcripture  called  idolatry  •,  becaufe  the  covetous 
man  fets  up  his  riches  in  the  place  of  God,  put- 
ting his  truft  and  confidence  in  them,  and  fetting  his 
whole  heart  upon  them,  loving  them  as  he  fhould 
love  God  only,  "  with  all  his  heart,  and  foul,  and 
''  ilrength  :"  and  therefore  mammon,  which  fig- 
n-ifies  riches,  is  in  fcripture  reprefented  as  a  deity, 
and  the  covetous  man,  as  a  fervant,  or  worfhipper  of 
mammon. 

So  that  in  fcripture  he  is  a  covetous  man  who 
placeth  his  chief  felicity  in  a  great  fortune,  and  will 
venture  to  lofe  any  thing,  rather  than  to  part  with 
that  J  who  will  quit  his  religion,  and  violate  his  con- 

fcience^ 


The  nature  of  covefoufnefs.  ^449 

fcience,  and  run  the  hazard  of  his  foul,  rather  than  SERM. 

•  .      .  xc 

forfeit  his  eftate,  or  the  hopes  of  advancing  it  to  his 

mind. 

And  this  in  times  of   trial  and  difficulty,    is  the 
great  temptation  to  which  the  covetous  man  is  expo- 
fed.   When  a  man  may  not  only  fave  himfelf,  but 
get  confiderable  advantage  by   departing  from   the 
truth ;  and  in  changing  his  religion,    may    have  a 
good  fum  of  money  to  boot,  or  which  is  equal  to  it, 
a  good  place  *,  this  to  a  covetous  mind  is  a  very  ftrong 
temptation,   and  almofl  irrefidible.    When  error  and 
delufion  can  bid  fo  high,  and  offer  fo  good  terms,  no 
wonder  if  it  gain  fome  profelytes  among  the  cove- 
tous and  ambitious  part  of  mankind.  This  the  apoflle 
gives  warning  of,  as  a  great  temptation  to  rich  men 
in   times  of  fuffering,   i  Tim.  vi.  9,   i.o.    "  They 
''  that  will  be  rich,  fall  into  temptation,  and  a  fnare: 
*^  for  the  love  of  money  is  the  root  of  all  evil ;  which 
''  while  fome  have  lufled  after,  they  have  erred  frorri 
*"  the  faith. "The  young  man  in  the  gofpelis  a  fad  in- 
llance  of    this   kind,    who  chofe    rather   to   leave 
Christ,  than  to  part  with  his  great  pofTefTions.  And 
fuch  a  one  was  Demas,   who  forfook  the  apoflles, 
and  chriftianity  it  felf,  to  cleave  to*  this  prefent  world. 

Thus  I  have  done  with  the  firfl  thing  I  propofed 
to  fpeak  to,  the  nature  of  this  vice,  which  our  Sa- 
viour in  the  text  cautions  men  fo  earneftly  againft; 
&'  take  heed  and  beware  of  covetoufnefs."  I  fhall 
now  proceed  in  the  fecond  place  to  fhew  the  evil  and 
unreafonablenefs  of  this  vice.  But  that  fhall  be  the 
fubjed  of  another  difcourfe. 

SERMON 


C  1450  ] 

SERMON    XCI. 

The  evil  and  unreafonablenefs  of  cove- 

toufnels. 


LUKE  xii.  15. 
And  he  faid  unto  them^take  heed^  and  beware  of  covet ouf- 
nefs  ;  for  a  man^s  life  confijieth  not  in  the  abundance  of 
the  things  which  he  poffejfeth, 

XCI.  *   g  Have  made  entrance  into  a  difcourfe  upon  thefe 
^— -v^*-'  I    words,  in  which  I  have^told  you  there  are  three 
Thefe-  things  obfervab I e.>  ' 

cond  far-        Firft,  the  manner  of  the  caution  which  our  Savi- 
this  text.  ^^^  ^^^^  gives,  "  take  heed  and  beware." 

Secondly,  the  matter  of  the  caution,  or  the  fin 
which  our  Saviour  here  v/arns  his  hearers  againfl, 
*'  take  heed  and  beware  of  covetoufnefs'* :  and 

Thirdly,  the  reafon  of  this  caution,  becaufe  "  a 
"  man's  life  confifteth  not  in  the  abundance  of  the 
"  things  which  he  pofifefleth." 

In  difcourfing  of  the  fecond  of  thefe,  viz.  the  mat- 
ter of  the  caution,  I  propofed, 

1 .  To  confider  wherein  the  nature  of  this  vice  of 
covetoufnels  does  confifl:. 

2.  To  lliew  the  evil  and  unreafonablenefs  of  it. 
The  firft  of  thefe  I  have  difpatched,   and  now  go 

on  to  the  fecond,  viz.  to  fhew  the  great  evil  and  un- 
reafonablenefs of  the  vice  of  covetoufnefs. 

Now  covetoufnefs  will  appear  to  be  very  evil  and 
unreafonable,   upon  thefe  following  accounts. 

I.  Becaufe  it  takes  men  off  from  religion,  and  the 
care  of  their  fouls.  11.  Becaufe 


The  evil  and  unreafonahlenefs  of  covetoufnefs.     14 r  i 

II.  Becaufe  it  tempts  men  to  do  many  things  which  S  E  R  M. 
are  inconfiftent  with  reh'gionjand  diredlJy  contrary  to  it.    ^^^' 

III.  Becaufe  it  is  an  endlefs  and  infatiable  defire. 
'  IV.  Becaufe  the  happinefs  of  human  life  doth  not 

confifl  in  riches. 

V.  Becaufe  riches  do  very  often  contribute  very 
much  to  the  mifery  and  infehcity  of  men. 

Firil,  covetoufnels  takes  men  off  from  religion, 
and  the  care  of  their  fouls.  The  covetous  man  is 
wholly  intent  upon  this  world  j  and  his  inordinate  de- 
fire  after  thefe  things,  makes  him  to  negledl  God,  and 
the  etei-nal  concernments  of  his  foul.  He  employs  all 
his  time,  and  care,  and  thoughts  about  thefe  tempo- 
ral things,  and  his  vehement  love  and  eager  purfuit 
of  thefe  things  fteals  away  his  heart  from  God,  robs 
him  of  his  time,  and  of  all  opportunities  for  his  foul, 
and  diverts  him  from  all  ferious  thoughts  of  another 
world,  and  the  life  to  come.  And  the  reafon  of  this 
is  that  which  our  Saviour  gives.  Matt.  vi.  24, 
''  No  man  can  ferve  two  mafters;  for  either  he  will 
"  hate  the  one,and  love  the  other ;  or  tM^  he  will  hold 
1'  to  the  one,  and  defpife  the  other.  Ye  cannot  ferve 
"  God,  and  mammon."  No  man  can  ferve  two 
mailers  fo  different  as  God  and  the  world  are;  becaufe 
they  will  give  crofs  commands,  and  enjoin  contrary 
things.  God  calls  upon  us  to  mind  the  duties  of  his 
worlhip  and  fervice,  to  have  a  ferious  regard  to  re- 
ligion, and  a  diligent  care  of  our  fouls  :  but  the  cares 
of  the  world,  and  the  importunity  of  bufinefs,  and 
an  eager  appetite  of  being  rich,  call  us  off  from  thefe 
divine,  and  fpiritual  employments,  or  diflurb  us  in 
them.  God  calls  upon  us  to  be  charitable  to  thofe  that 
are  in  want,  to  be  willing  to  diftribute,  and  ready  to 

commu- 


1452     7J6^  evil  and  imreafonableitefs  of  tovetoufnefi, 

communicate  to  the  necefTitles  of  our  brethren :  but 
our  covetoufnefs  pulls  us  back,  and  hales  us  another 
way,  and  checks  all  merciful  and  charitable  inclinati- 
ons in  us.  God  calls  us  to  felf-denial,  and  fuffering 
for  the  fake  of  him,  and  his  truth,  and  commands 
us  to  prefer  the  keeping  of  faith  and  a  good  confci- 
ence,  to  all  worldly  confiderations.  whatfoever  :  but 
the  world  infpires  us  with  other  thoughts,and  whifpers 
to  us  "  to  fave  our  felves,  not  to  be  righteous  over 
*'  much,"  and  rather  to  truft  God  with  our  fouls,  than 
men  with  our  bodies  and  eftates. 

If  we  fet  our  hearts  and  atfedions  flrongly  upon 
any  thing,  they  v/ili  partake  of  the  object  which  they 
'are  converfant  about  j    for  "  where  our  treafure  is 
*'  (as  our  Lord  hath  told  us)  there  will  our  hearts  be 
«'  alio."  If  a  great  eftate  be  our  chief  end  and  dcfign, 
if  riches  be  our  treafure  and  our  happinefs,  our  hearts 
will  be  found  among  the  fluff.  We  cannot  beftow  our 
affedions  freely  upon  two  obje6ls.    We  cannot  in- 
tenfely  love  God,    and  the  world  \   for  no  man  can 
have  two  ultimate  ends,  two  principal  defigns.  Our 
riches  may  increafe  ;    but  if  we  fet  our  hearts  upon 
them,  and  give  them  the  chief  place  in  our  affedlions, 
we  make  them  our  lord  and  maftcr.  Whatever  we  make 
our  ultimate  end,  we  give  it  a  fovereignty  and  em- 
pire over  us  \  we  put  our  felves  under  its  dominion, 
and  make  our  felves  fubjedl  to  all  its  commands.  So 
that  if  "  it  bid  us  go,  we  mufl  go  ;    come,  we  mud 
"  come ;  do  this,  we  muil  do  it  \  becaufe  we  are  un- 
*'  der  authority :"    The  world  is  our  mailer,  and  we 
are  its  flaves.    Now  he  that  is  under  the  rule  and  do- 
minion of  this  mafter,    mufl:  withdraw  his  obedience 
from  GoDjand  in  many  cafes  decline  obedience  xo  his 
laws.  This 


The  evil  and  imreafo7iablenefs  of  covet oufnefs.      iA.^i 
This  worldly  covetous  difpofition  was  that  which  S  E  R  iVf , 
made  thole  in  the  parable  to  make  fo  many  excufes,     ^^^' 
when   they  were  invited   to  the  fupper,    Luke  xiv. 
1 8.  "  One  had  bought  a  farm,  and  he  could  not 
"  come  :  another  had  bought  To  many  yoke  of  oxen, 
"  and  therefore  he  defired  to  be  excufed."    Riches  do 
fo  fill  the  covetous  man's  heart,  and  the  cares  of  the 
world  fo  pofTefs  his  mind,   that  he  hath  no  room  left 
in  his  foul  for  any  other  guefts :  Intus  exijlens  prohi- 
bet  alienum^  "  that   which  is    full  already   can    re- 
*'  ceive  no  more.''  The  covetous  man's  heart  is  taken 
up  with  fuch  things  as  keep  out  God  and  Christ, 
and  better  things.   "  If  any  man  love  the  world,  and 
"  the   things   of  it  '*    to    this    degree,    ^i,    John 
tells  us  "  that  the  love  of  the  Father  is  not  in 
"  him."     In  the  parable  of  the  fower.  Mat.  xiii.  7. 
Our  Saviour  reprefents  to  us  "  the  cares  of  the 
"  world,  which  choke  the  word  of  God,  by  thorns 
"  which  fprung  up  among  the  feed,  and  ftifled  the 
"  growth  of  it."      The  cares  of  the  world  will  not 
fufFer  the  word  of  God  "  to  take  deep  root  in  our 
"  hearts,"  and  to  have  any  permanent  efFe6l  upoa 
them  :  and,  Ezek.  xxxiii.  31.  God  gives  this  as  a  rea- 
fon  why  the  people  of  Ifrael  would  not  hearken  to  the 
words  of  his  prophet^  becaufe  their  hearts  were  upon 
the  world."  They  come  unto  thee  (fays  God  there  to 
''  the  prophet)  as  the  people  cometh,   and  they  fit 
*'  before  thee  as   my    people,    and    they   hear  thy 
"  words,  but  they  will  not  do   them  :  for  with  their 
*'  mouth  they  fhew  much  love,  but  their  heart  go- 
"  eth  after  their  covetou fuels."  A  heart  that  is  deeply 
engaged  in  the  world,  will  fland  out  again  ft  all  the 
invitations,  and  promifes,  and  threatnings  of  God's 
Vol.  VI.  II  I  word. 

2. 


1454      ^^^^  ^'^^^  ^^^  unreafonablenefs  of  covet oufnefs, 
SRRM.  word.     When  the  word  of  God   invites  fuch  per- 
fons,  it  is  like  making  love  to  thofe  who   have  al- 
ready fix'd  their  hearts  and  affecflions  elfewhere  *,  the 
promifes  and  threatnings  of  the  gofpel  fignify  but 
very  little  to  fuch  men,  becaufe  their  hearts  are  fet 
upon  worldly  things,  and  all  their  afredions  are  bent 
that  way  •,  all  their  hopes  and  defires  are  worldly  ; 
to  be  rich,  and  abound  in  wealth  ;  and  all  their  fears 
are  of  poverty  and  lofs.     Now  fuch  a  man  can  only 
be  moved  with  the  promifes  and  threatnings  of  tem- 
poral things  *,  for  no  promifes  have  any  effedl  upon 
us,  but  fuch  as  are  of  fome  good,  which  we  care  for 
and  value  :  nor  are  any  threatnings  apt  to  move  us, 
but  fuch  as  are  of  fome  evil  which  we  dread,  and 
are  afraid  of.     And  therefore  when  eternal  life,  and 
the   happinefs  of  another   world,    are  offered   to  a 
worldly-minded    man,  he  does  not  defire  it,  he  is 
not  at  all  fenfible  of  the  value  of  it ;  the  man's  heart 
is  full  already  of  other  hopes  and  defires,  and  "  the 
*'  full  foul  loatheth  the  honey-comb.'*     Promife  to 
fuch  a  man  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  and  the  plea- 
ilires  of  God's  prefence,  and  the  joys  of  eternity,  this 
docs  not  Tignify  to  fuch  a  man  any  good  or  hap- 
pinefs that  he  is  fenfible  of,  or  knows  how  to  relifh. 
And  on  the  other  hand,  threaten  him  with  the  lofs 
of  God,   and   eternal    feparation  from    that   foun- 
tain of  happinefs,  and  with  the  unfpeakable  anguifh 
and  torments  of  a  long  eternity  ;  thefe  things,  tho' 
they  be  terrible,  yet  they  are  at  a  diftance,  and  the 
covetous  man  is  inured  to  fenfe,  and  is  only  to  be 
moved  with  things  prefent  and  fenfible ;  he  cannot 
extend  his  fears  fo  far  as  another  world,  fo  long  as 
he  finds  himfelf  well  and  at  eafc,  as  to  the  things  of 
this  prefent  life.  If 


T^he  evil  and  wireafonablenefs  of  covefoufnefs.      1455 

If, we  would  affedt  fuch  a  man,  we  muft  offer  toSERAr. 
his  confideration  fomething  that  is  fit  to  work  upon 
him  ;  threaten  him  with  breaking  open  his  houfc, 
and  rifling  his  coffers,  and  carrying  away  his  full 
bags ;  with  queflioning  his  title  to  his  cflate,  or 
flatting  a  precedent  mortgage,  or  fomething  of  the 
like  nature  :  thefe  things  indeed  are  dreadful  and  ter- 
rible to  him  *,  now  you  fpcak  intelligibly  to  him, 
and  he  underilands  what  you  mean  :  tell  him  of  a 
good  bargain,  or  an  advantageous  purchafe,  offer 
him  decently  a  good  bribe,  or  give  him  notice  of  a 
young  heir  that  may  be  circumvented,  and  drawn 
in,  then  you  fay  foomething  to  him  that  is  worthy 
of  his  regard  and  attention  ;  the  man  may  be  tempt- 
ed by  fuch  offers  and  promifes  as  thefe  :  but  dif- 
courfe  to  him  with  the  tongue  of  men  and  ano-els,  of 
the  excellency  of  virtue  and  goodnefs,  and  of  the  ne- 
celTity  of  it,  to  the  obtaining  of  a  glory  and  happinefs 
that  fhall  neither  have  bounds  nor  end  ;  "  and  Jo  f 
*'  thou  art  unto  him  as  a  very  lovely  fong  of  one 
*'  that  hath  a  pleafant  voice,  and  can  play  well  up- 
"  on  an  inftrument ;  for  he  hears  thy  words,  but 
"  he  will  not  do  them  ;"  as  the  prophet  expreffeth 
it,  Ezek.  xxxiii.  32.  Such  difcourfes  as  thefe  they  look 
upon  as  fine  talk,  or  a  melodious  found,  that  vanifli- 
eth  into  air,  but  leaves  no  imprefTion  behind  it. 
Perhaps  even  thefe  dull  and  llupid  kind  of  men  are 
affedled  a  little  for  the  prefent  with  the  livelinefs  of 
the  romance,  and  the  poetical  vein  of  the  preaclicr ; 
but  thefe  things  pafs  away  like  a  tale  that  is  told, 
but  have  no  lading  effed  upon  them.  So  effet^ually 
doth  covetoufnefs,  and  the  love  of  this  prefent  world, 
obflrucl  all  thofe  paffages,  through  which  the  con- 

1 1   I  2  fideratiun 


1456       ^1^^  ^"t;//  and  unreafonaleiiefe  of  covefeufnefs. 

S  E  R  M.  fideration  of  religion  and  heavenly  things  Ihould  en- 
^  i'  ,  ter  into  our  minds. 

Secondly,  as  covetoufnefs  hinders  men  from  reli- 
gion, and  takes  them  off  from  a  due  care  of  their 
fouls;  fb  it  many  times  tempts  and  engageth  men 
to  do  many  things  contrary  to  religion,  and  incon- 
Ment  with  it ;  it  is  the  natural  fource  and  fountain 
of  a  great  many  evils,  and  the  parent  of  moft 
of  the  worfl:  of  vices.  He  that  will  engage  deep 
in  the  world,  muft  ufe  much  more  guard  and  cau- 
tion than  mofl  men  do,  to  do  it  without  fin.  How 
many  temptations  is  the  covetous  man  expofed  to 
in  the  getting  and  in  the  fecuring,  and  in  the 
fpending  and  enjoying  of  a  great  eflate?  It  is  no 
eafy  task  to  reckon  them  up,  and  much  more  diffi- 
cult to  efcape  or  refill  them  ^  and  yet  each  of  thefe 
temptations  brings  him  into  the  danger  of  a  great 
many  fins.     For, 

I.  In  the  getting  of  an  eftate,  he  is  expofed  to  all 
thofe  vices  which  may  feem  to  be  ferviceable  in  this 
defign.  Nothing  hath  been  the  caufe  of  more 
and  greater  fins  in  the  world,  than  covetoufnefs, 
and  making  hafte  to  be  rich.  It  is  Solomon's  ob- 
fervation,  Prov.  xxviii.  20.  ''  He  that  maketh  hafte 
"  to  be  rich,  fhall  not  be  innocent."  He  does  not 
fay  he  cannot  be  innocent,  but  he  fpeaks  as  if  there 
were  all  the  probability  in  the  world  that  he  will 
not  prove  to  be  fo ;  but  being  fo  much  in  hafte,  will 
almoft  unavoidably  fall  into  a  great  many  overfights 
and  faults.  And  the  heathen  poet  makes  the  fame 
obfervation  in  more  words. 

Inde  fere  feeler  urn  cat  fee  ^  nee  pliira  vencna 

Mfcuity  aiit  ferro  grafjatur  fcepih  ullum. 


The  evil  and  unreafonahlneefi  of  covetoufnefs,        1 45  7 
Humane  mentis  vitium^  quam  fava  cupido  S  E  R  M. 

hnmodici  census',  nam  dives  qui  fieri  vult, 
Et  cito  vuU  fieri',  fed  qua  reverentia  legum^ 
^is  metus  ant  pudor  efi;  unquam  proper antis  avari  ? 
*'  This,   fays  he,  is  the  caufe  of  moft  fins :   nor  is 
''  there  any  vice  of  which  the  mind  of  man  is  ca- 
*'  pable,  that  hath    been    guilty  of  more    murders 
"  and  poifonings,  than  a  furious  defire  of  immode- 
*'  rate  wealth  ;    for  he  that  will  be  rich,  will  make 
"  hade  to  be  fo  :  and  what  reverence  of  laws,   what 
"  fear  of  fhame  was  ever  {ktn  in  any  man  that  was 
*'  in  hafte   to  be  rich?"  And   this  is  the  fenfe  of 
what  the  apoftle  fays  concerning  this  vice  of  cove- 
toufnefs, this    peremptory  refolution  of  being  rich, 
I  Tim.  vi.  9,10,  "  They  that  will  be  rich,   fall  in- 
*'  to  temptation,  and  a  fnare,  and  into  many  foolifh 
*'  and  hurtful  lufts,  which  drown  men   in  dedruc- 
"  tion  and  perdition.     For  the  love  of  money  is  the 
*'  root  of  all  evil."     If  this  vice  of  covetoufnefs  once 
reigns  in   us,  if  we  once  have  fix'd  our  end,  and  ^tt 
up  this   refolution  with  ourfelves,    that  we  will  be 
rich,  we  fhall  then  make  every  thing  floop  and  fub- 
niit  to  this  defign.     A  covetous  man  will  make  his 
principles  and  his  confcience  to  bend  to  his  refolu- 
tion of  being  rich,    and  to  bow  to  that   intereft. 
The  eager  defire  of  riches  makes  men  to   purfue 
them  in  indiredl  and  uncharitable  ways,  by  falfhood 
and  perjury,  by  undermining  and  over-reaching,  by 
diiTembling    and  flattery,   by   corrupting  and  imba- 
fing  of  commodities,    by  falfe  weights  and  meafures, 
by  taking  fees  with  both  hands,  and  making  ufe  of 
their  power  and  wit  to  opprefs  and  defraud  their 
brother,  by  impofing  upon  his  ignorance  and  fim- 

plicity. 


1 4  5  8      T'he  evil  and  tinreafonableriefs  of  covetoiifnefs, 

S  R  E  ]VI.  plicity,  or  by  making  a  prey  of  his  poverty  and 
^^  J  neceflity, 

Covetoufneis  many  times  makes  men    cruel  and 
unjuft  ;  nay,  it  makes  them  guiky  of  the  vvorft  fort 
of  crueky  and  opprefTion.     For  (as  one  fays  well) 
the  covetous  man  oppreiTeth  his   neighbour,  not  for 
any  good  to  himfelf ;  for  he  does  not  enjoy  what 
be  tears  and  rends  from   others ;  fo   that  he  is  of 
that  moft  hateful  kind  of  beads  of  prey,  that  kill 
other  creatures,  not  to  eat  them,  but  that  they  may 
fee  them  lie  dead  by  them.     Lions  and  wolves  kill 
out  of  hunger  ;  but  the  covetous  man,  like  a  ferpent 
or  fcorpion,   flings    and  bites  others  to  death,    not 
for  his  need,  but    for   his  pleafure  and  recreation. 
Covetoufnefs  is  the  parent  of  the  moft  monftrous 
fins ;  becaufe  it  fixeth  a  man  in  a  refolution  of  get- 
ting an  eftate  by  any  means.     If  falfenefs  and  deceit, 
violence  and  opprefTidn  will  further  this  end  ;   the 
'•earneil  defire  of  the  end  tempts  men  to  ufe  any  fort 
of  means  whereby  the  end  may  be  compafTed  \  and 
tho'  a  man  may  have  fome  averfenefs  from  them  at 
.  firft,  yet  that  wears  off  by  degrees,  and  the  ftrong 
defire  of  the  end,  reconciles  a  man  at  laft  to  the  love 
and  liking  of  the  means,  how  wicked  and  unwar- 
rantable foever.     Covetoufnefs   tempted  Achan   to 
fteal  the  accurfed  thing,  and  Gehazi  to  lye  to  the 
prophet,  and  Ahab  to  opprefs  and  murder  Naboth. 
Nay,  a  fmall  fum  tempted  the  covetous  mind  of 
Judas  to  betray  his  mafter,  and  his  Saviour.  And 
how  do  many  men  every  day  ftrain  their  con  faiences  to 
get  an  eftate,  and  hazard  their  own  fouls  for  money  ; 
nay  exchange  their  fouls,  which  arc  of  more  value 
than  the  whole  world,  for  a  very  fmall  portion  of  it  ? 

II.  There 


The  evil  and  unreafonahlenefs  of  covet  oil fnefs.      1459 

II.  There  are  likewife  many  other   temptations  SERM. 
■which  a  covetous  man  is  expofed  to  in  the  keeping  and 
fecuring  of  an  eftate,  v/hen  he  hath  got  it.  A  covetous 
and  worldly-minded  man,  when  it  comes  to  the  trial, 
is   in  great  danger   of  quitting    his   rehgion,    and 

^  "  making  fhipwreck  of  faith  and  a  good  confcience." 
When  his  eflate  comes  to  be  in  hazard,  he  is  very 
apt  to  fall  off  from  the  truth  ;  'tis  an  hundred  to  one 
but  in  thefe  circumftances,  he  will  choofe  rather  to 
violate  his  confcience,  than  to  forfeit  his  eflate.  What 
the  devil  falfly  faid  of  Job,  is  true  of  the  covetous 
man,  "  he  does  not  ferve  God  for  nought."  Upoa 
thefe  terms  it  was,  that  Christ  and  the  young  man 
parted  ;  "  he  had  great  pofTeffions,"  and  it  troubled 
him  to  part  with  them.  When  Demas  was  brought 
to  the  trial,  and  put  to  it,  v/hethcr  he  would  Hick  to 
the  profeflion  of  the  gofpel,  or  his  worldly  pofleflions, 
he  quitted  'SiX.,  Paul,  and  declared  for  the  world,  2Tim. 
iv.  10.  ''  Demas  hath  forfaken  me,  having  loved  this 
*'  prefent  world."  So  far  has  his  covetous  humour 
befotted,  him  as  to  make  him  prefer  his  prefent  inte- 
reft  in  thefe  temporal  things,  before  thofe  eternal  re- 
wards which  the  gofpel  offered. 

III.  There  are  likewife  many  temptations  which 
men  are  expofed  to  in  the  enjoying  and  fpending  of  a 
great  eftate.  It  is  hard  to  have  a  great  eflate,  and 
not  to  be  maftered  by  the  love  of  it ;  nor  to  have 
our  cares  and  thoughts,  our  hearts  and  affe6lions  fvval- 
lowed'  up  by  of  it.  'Tis  no  eafy  thing  for  a  man 
that  hath  riches,  not  to  overvalue  them,  and  love  them 
more  than  he  ought  j  not  to  be  puft  up  by  them,  and 
fo  place  his  truft  and  confidence  in  them,  Prov, 
xviii.  II,  ^\  The  rich  man's  wealth  is  his  flrong  city, 

'^  and 


1460      ^he  evil  and  iinreafonahlenefs  of  covetoufnefs. 

"  and  as  an  high  wall  in  his  own  conceit."  The  co- 
vetous man  fetteth  up  his  riches  in  the  place  of  God, 
and  is  apt  "  to  fall  down  before  this  golden  calf, 
*'  and  worfhip  it  :  to  fay  to  the  gold,  thou  art  my 
''  hope,  and  to  the  fine  gold,  thou  art  my  confidence : 
*'  to  rejoice,  becaufe  his  wealth  is  great,  and  becaufe 
«  his  hand  hath  gotten  much." 

Riches  are  a  great  temptation  to  irreligion  and 
atheifm.  Upon  this  account  Agur  wifely  prays  to 
God  for  a  moderate  eftate,  becaufe  of  the  danger  of 
both  the  extremes  of  riches  and  poverty  ;  becaufe  of 
the  great  and  violent  temptations  which  men  are  ex- 
pofed  to  in  both  thefe  conditions,  Prov.  xxx.  8,  9. 
''  Give  me  neither  poverty  nor  riches,  but  feed  me 
«  with  food  convenient  for  me."  Why  not  riches  ? 
''  left  I  be  full  and  deny  thee,  and  fay  who  is  the 
*'  Lord  ?"  And  much  more  do  riches  tempt  men 
to  pride  and  infolence  towards  others,  Prov.  xviii.  23. 
"  The  poor  ufeth  intreaties,  but  the  rich  anfwereth 
"  roughly."  Mens  fpirits  are  commonly  blown  up 
and  bloated  with  their  fortunes,  and  their  pride,  and 
ftomach,  and  paiTion,  do  ufually  increafe  in  propor- 
tion to  their  wealth. 

And  many  times  riches  tempt  men  to  luxury  and 
intemperance,  and  all  manner  of  excels.  Rich  men 
have  a  mighty  temptation  to  allow  themfelves  all  man- 
ner of  unlawful  pleafures ;  becaufe  he  who  hath  a  great 
eftate,  is  furniftied  with  that  to  which  hardly  any  thing 
can  be  denied.  And  this  is  not  inconfiftent  with  a 
covetous  humour  ;  for  diere  are  many  times,  men 
who  are  covetous  in  getting,  for  no  other  end  and 
reafon,  but  that  they  may  "  fpend  it  upon  their  lufts." 
As  covetoufnefs  fometimesftarves  other  vices,  fo  fome- 

timcs 


The  evil  and  unreafonabknefs  of  covetoufnefs,      146 1 

times  it  ferves  them,  and  is  made  fubordinate  to  a  S  ^^^^' 
man's  ambition,  or  luft,  or  fome  other  reigning  vice. 
There  is  no  fuch  abfolate  inconfiftency  between  riches 
and  virtue,  but  that  it  is  pofllble  that  a  man  that  is 
very  rich  may  be  very  good.     But  yet  if  we  confuk 
experience,  I  doubt  it  will  be  found  a  true  obferva- 
tion,  that  there  are  but  very  few  rich  men,  who  are 
not  infupportable  either  for  their  vanity  or  their  vices ; 
fo  that  our  Saviour  had  reafon  for  that  feverequc- 
llion,  "  how  hard  is  it  for  a  rich  man  to  enter  into 
"  the  kingdom  of  God  ?  "  and  well  might  he  upon 
this  account  pronounce  the  poor,  (the  poor  in  eftate, 
as  well  as  the  poor  in  fpirit)  blefTed,  as  we  find  he  does, 
Luke  vi.  20.  "  BlefTed  be  ye  poor,  for  yours  is  the 
"  kingdom   of  God."     They  ofcener    enter  there 
than  the  rich. 

Thirdly,  covetoufnefs  is  likewifeevil  and  unreafo- 
nable,  becaufe  it  is  an  endlefs  and  infatiable  defire.  A 
covetous  mind  may  propofe  to  itfelf  fome  certain  bounds 
a-nd  limits,  and  a  man  may  think  that  when  he  is  ar- 
rived to  fuch  an  eflate,  and  hath  raifed  his  fortune  to 
fuch  a  pitch,  that  he  will  then  fit  down  contented  and 
fatisfied,  and   will  feek  after  no  more.     But  he  de- 
ceives himfelf  in  this  matter;  for  when  he  hath  at- 
tained to  that  which  he  propofed  to  himfelf,    he  will 
be  never  the  nearer  being  fatisfied.     So  Solomon  tells 
us,  Ecclef.  v.  ID.  "  He  that  loveth  filver,  fhall  not 
*'  be  fatisfied  with  filver  ;  nor  he  that  loveth  abun- 
*'  dance  with  increafe  ;"  for  no  degree  of  wealth 
can  fatisfy  a  covetous  mind.    He  may  think  fo  before- 
hand, that  if  he  had  fo  much  it  would  be  enough  j 
but  when  he  hath  attained  it,  he  will  be  ilill  reach- 
ing after  more  \  for  covetouihefs  is  a  difeafe  of  the 
Vol,  VI,  ^      II  K  mind, 

3- 


1462      T'he  evil  and  unreajonahlenefs  of  covetoufnefs, 

S  E  R  M.  mind,  and  an  unnatural  thirfl,  which  is  inflamed  by 
*     that  which  fhould  quench  ft.     Every  defire  that  is 
natural,  is  fatisfied  and  at  reft,  when  it  hath  once  ob- 
tained the  thing  it  dcfired.     If  a  man  be  hungry,  he 
is  fatisfied  when  he  hath  eaten;  or  if  he  be  thirfty, 
the  thirft  is  allay'd  and  quenched  when  he  hath  drank 
to  fdch  a  proportion  as  nature  doth  require ;  and  if  he 
eat  and  drink  beyond  this  meafure,  nature  is  opprefled, 
and  it  is  a  burden  to  him.     But  covetoufnefs  is  not 
the  thirft  of  nature,  but  of  a  difeafed  mind.     It  is  the 
thirft  of  a  fever,  or  of  a  dropfy ;  the  more  a  man 
drinks,  the  more  he  defires,  and  the  more  he  is  in- 
flamed.    In  like  manner,  the  more  the  covetous  man 
increafeth  his  eftate ;  the  more  his  defires  are  enlarged 
and  extended,  and  he  finds  continually  new  occafions 
and  new  neceflities ;  and  every  day  as  he  grows  richer, 
he  difcovers  new  wants ;  and  a  new  poverty  to  be 
provided  agairift,  which   he  did  not  think  of  before, 
comes  into  his  mind :  E^  minus  hac  optat^  qui  non  ha^ 
het\  "  and  he  that  is  without  thefe  things,  covets  them 
"  lefs  than  he  that  hath  them."    So  far  is  a  covetous 
man's  attaining  to  riches  from  giving  him  fatisfadlion, 
that  he  who  hath  fcarce  any   thing  at  all,   is  many 
times  much  nearer  to  contentment,  than  he  that  hath 
got  fo  much ;  nay  fo  unreafonable  is  this  appetite, 
as  to  defire  more,  even  when  the  man  knows  not  how 
to  beftow   what   he  hath  already.     This  Solomon 
obferved  long  fince  (for  the  vices  and  humours  of 
men  arc  much  the  fame  in  all  ages)  Ecc lef.  iv.  ?. 
*'  There  is  one  alone,  and  there  is  not  a  fecond  \  yea, 
*'  he  hath  neither  child  nor  brother;  yet  there  is  no 
"  end  of  all  his  labour,  neither  is  his  eye  fatisfied 
*'  with  riches,  neither  faith  he,  for  whom  do  I  la- 

"  bour 


^he  evil  and  unreafonahlenefs  of  covefottfnefs.  1463 
"  bour,  and  bereave  my  foul  of  good  ?  This  alfo  is  S  E  R  M. 
**  vanity,  yea  it  is  a  fore  travel."  And  indeed  what 
can  be  greater  vanity  and  folly,  than  to  be  at  certain 
pains  and  labour  all  the  days  of  a  man's  life,  and  yet 
to  be  uncertain  all  the  while,  for  whom  it  is  that  he 
drudgeth,  and  taketh  all  thefe  pains. 

And  if  this  be  the  nature  of  this  vice,  the  more  it 
gets,  flill  to  covet  the  more ;  then  nothing  can  be 
more  unreafonable,  than  to  think  to  gratify  this  apper 
tite,  becaufe  at  this  rate,  the  man  can  never  be  con- 
tented, becaufe  he  can  never  have  enough  -,  nay,  fb 
far  is  it  from  that,  thsit  every  new  accelTion  to  his 
fortune,  fets  his  defires  one  degree  farther  from  reft: 
and  fatisfadlion :  for  a  covetous  mind  having  no 
bounds,  it  is  very  probable  that  the  man's  defire 
will  increafe  much  fader  than  his  eftate ;  and  then  the 
richer  he  is,  he.'sftill  the  poorer,  becaufe  he  is  ftill  the 
lefs  contented  vvith  his  condition.  However  it  is  impof- 
fible  thut  the  man's  defire  fhould  ever  be  fatisficd ; 
for  defire  being  always  firft,  if  the  man's  defire  of 
riches  advanceth  and  goes  forward  as  fafl:  as  riches 
follow,  then  it  is  not  poftible  for  riches  ever  to  overtake 
the  defire  of  them,  no  more  than  the  hinder  wheels 
of  a  coach  can  overtake  thofe  which  are  before :  be- 
caufe as  they  were  at  a  diftance  at  firft:  ferting  out,  ib 
hi  them  go  never  fo  far,  oi:  fo  fafl,  they  keep  the 
fame  diftance  flill. 

So  that  it  is  the  vainefl  thing  in  the  world,  for  a 
man  to  defign  his  own  fatisfadion  by  the  perpetual 
increafe  of  his  fortune,  becaufe  contentment  doth  not 
arife  from  the  abundance  of  what  a  man  hath,  but 
it  muft  fpring  from  the  inward  frame  and  temper  of 
our  minds  i  and  the  true  way  to  it,  is  not  to  enlarge 

n  K  2  our 


14^4  ^^^'^  ^'^^^  ^^^^  unreafonabhiefs  of  covet oufnefs. 
S  F  R  M.  our  eftate,  but  to  contra<^  our  defires ;  and  then  it  is 
pofTible  that  a  man's  money  and  his  mind  may  meet ; 
otherwife  the  purfuit  is  endlefs,  and  the  farther  a  man 
follows  contentment,  it  will  but  flee  fo  much  the 
farther  from  him  ;  and  when  he  hath  attained  the 
eftate  of  a  prince,  and  a  revenue  as  great  as  that  of 
France,  or  the  Turkifh  empire,  he  fhall  be  farther 
from  being  fatisfied,  than  when  he  began  the  world, 
and  had  no  more  beforehand  than  would  juft  pay  for 
his  next  meal. 

I  fhould  now  have  proceeded  to  the  fourth  thing, 
whereby  the  unreafonablenefs  of  covetoufnefs  doth 
appear  ;  bccaufe  the  happinels  of  human  life  doth  not 
confift  in  riches.  And  this  is  the  argument  which  I 
fhall  more  efpeclally  infift  upon,  becaufe  it  is  that 
•which  our  Saviour  ufeth  here  in  the  text,  to  take 
men  off  from  this  vice.  "  The  li/j  of  man  confifl- 
"  eth  not  in  the  abundance  of  the  things  which  he 
*«  pofleflfeth."  And  this  certainly  is  one  of  the  befl 
and  mofh  reafonable  confiderations  in  the  world,  to 
moderate  mens  affedlions  towards  thefe  things.  Eve- 
ry reafonable^  defire  propounds  fome  end  to  itfelf. 
Now  to  what  purpofe  fhould  any  man  defire  to  in- 
creafe  his  wealth  fo  vaftly  beyond  the  proportion  of 
his  necefiities  and  real  occafions  ?  What  benefit  and 
advantage  would  it  be  to  any  man,  to  have  a  hun- 
dred times  more  than  he  knows  what  to  do  withal  ? 
But  I  fhall  not  enlarge  upon  this  argument  at  prefentj 
but  refer  it  to  another  opportunity. 


SERMON 


[  h65  3 

SERMON     XCII. 

The  evil  and  unreafonablenefs  of 
covetoufnefs. 


LUKE  xii.  15. 

And  he  faid  unto  them  y  take  heed^  mid  beware  of  cove- 
toufnefs ;  for  a  man^s  life  conjifieth  not  in  the  abun- 
dance of  the  things  which  he  poffeffeth, 

FTER  I  had,  in  my  firft  difcourfe   uponSERM, 
this  fubjecb,  given  you  an  account  of  the  _-fl'_f 
nature  of  the  vice  of  covetoufnels,   I  pro-  The  third 
ceeded  in  the  next  place  to  reprefent  the  great  evil  [ui^^gxt^^ 
and  unreafonablenefs  of  it. 

Firft,  becaufe  it  takes  men  off  from  religion,  and 
the  care  of  their  fouls. 

Secondly,  becaufe  it  tempts  men  to  many  things 
which  are  inconfiftent  v^^ith  religion,  and  diredly 
contrary  to  it. 

Thirdly,  becaufe  it  is  an  endlefs  and  infatiable  de- 
fire.     Thus  far  1  have  gone  ;  I  proceed  to  the 

Fourth  thing,  v^hereby  the  unreafonablenefs  of 
covetoufnefs  v^^ill  yet  further  appear.  Namely,  becaufe 
thehappinefs  of  humane  lifedoth  not  confifl:  in  riches, 
and  abundance.  And  this  I  fhall  infift  upon  fomewhat 
the  more  largely,  becaufe  it  is  the  argument  which  our 
Saviour  makes uie  of  here  in  the  text,  to  take  men 
off  from  this  fin.  "  The  life  of  man  confifteth  not 
•'  in  the  abundance  of  the  things  which  he  polTefTeth. 

*'  there- 


1466       TZy  evil  and  iinreafonahlenefs  of  covet  oufmfs. 
S  E  R  M.  tc  therefore  take  heed,    and  beware  of  covetoufnefs.'* 

^^[^  And  this  certainly  is  one  of  the  bed  and  moft  reafo- 
nable  confiderations  in  the  world,  to  moderate  our 
afFe{5lions  towards  thefe  things.  For  every  reafonable 
defire  propounds  fome  end  to  it  felf.  Now  to  what 
purpofe  Ihould  any  man  defire  to  increafe  his  wealth 
fo  vaftly,  and  beyond  the  proportion  of  his  neceflities 
and  real  occafions  ?  what  benefit  and  advantage  could 
it  be  to  any  man,  to  have  an  hundred,  or  perhaps  a 
thoufand  times  more  than  he  knows  what  to  do  withal. 
And  as  for  the  other  world,  no  man  ever  pretend- 
ed that  the  heaping  up  riches  here,  would  be  ufeful 
to  him  there;  "  riches  will  not  deliver  him  in  the 
'^  day  of  wrath."  No  man  was  ever  fo  fenfelefs,  as  to 
imagine  that  he  could  take  his  eftate  along  with  him 
into  the  other  world  \  or  if  he  could,  that  heaven 
was  to  be  bought  with  money  ;  or  that  a  great  eftate, 
or  a  great  many  lordihips  would  recommend  him  to 
the  favour  of  God.  *Tis  true  indeed,  a  man  may 
fo  ule  riches  in  this  world,  as  thereby  to  promote  and 
further  his  happinefs  in  the  next.  But  then  it  is  like- 
wife  as  true,  that  a  man^may  fo  demean  himfelf  in  a 
poor  and  low  condition,  as  thereby  to  render  himfelf 
as  acceptable  to  God,  and  capable  of  as  great  a  re- 
ward, as  the  richeft  man  can  do.  The  poor  woman's 
two  mites,  chearfully  given  to  pious  and  charitable 
ufes,  will  go  as  far  in  the  other  world,  and  find  as 
great  a  reward  there,  as  the  rich  man's  thoufands  of 
gold  and  filver.  And  a  man  may  be  as  truly  generous 
and  charitable  out  of  a  litde,  as  out  of  the  greateft 
'fortune.  Befides  that  the  poor  man's  contentednefs  in  a 
mean  condition,is  more  admirable  in  it  felf,  and  more 
valuable  with  God  ,  than  for  a  rich  man  to  be  fo. 

So 


The  evil  and  unreafonablenefs  of  coveioufnefs,       1467 

So  that  the  great  ufe  of  riches  refpecfts  this  world,  SE  RM. 
and  the  belt  ufe  of  them  is  in  ways  of  charity ;    and 
the  poor  man's  charity,    tho'  it  cannot  be  of  fo  great 
an  extent  in  the  effedls  of  it,  yet  in  the  degree  of  its 
virtue  and  merit  it  may  be  equal  to  it. 

Now  the  two  great  defigns  of  men,  in  regard  to 
this  world,  are  thefe. 

1.  To  maintain  and  fupport  our  lives  as  long  as  we 
can. 

2.  To  make  our  lives  as  truly  happy  and  comfor- 
table as  we  can. 

To  the  firft  of  thefe  ends,  namely,  the  fupport  of 
our  lives,  a  very  little  will  fufRce ;  and  'tis  not  much 
that  is  necefiary  to  the  other,  to  render  our  lives  as 
truly  comfortable  as  this  world  can  make  them ;  fo 
that  a  vaft  eftate  is  not  necefiary  to  either  of  thefe 
ends ;  for  a  man  may  live  by  having  what  is  necefiary, 
and  may  live  comfortably  by  having  that  which  is 
convenient. 

No  man  lives  the  longer  by  having  abundance  ;  it 
is  many  times  an  occafion  of  fhortning  a  man's  life, 
by  miniftring  to  excefs;ind  intemperance ;  but  feldom 
of  prolonging  it.  And  fetting  afide  the  vain  fancy 
and  coneeit  of  men,  no  man  lives  the  more  happily, 
for  having  more  than  he  hath  real  ufe  and  occafion 
for. 

Thefe  two  heads  I  fhallat  prefent  Ipeak  to,  to  make 
out  the  full  force  of  this  reafon,  which  our  Saviour 
here  ufeth ;  namely,  "  that  a  man's  life  confide th  not 
"  in  the  abundance  of  the  things  which  hepofieflfeth.'* 

I.  That  riches  do  not  contribute  to  the  fupport  of 
our  lives  -y  nor 

II.  To  the  happinefs  and  comfort  of  them.   That 

isj 


1 4.6  8      The  evil  and  unreafonablenefs  of  covet oufnefs, 
S  E  R  vl.  is    they  are  not  neceflary  to  either  of  thele  zx\^s.  For 
by  riches  1   mean,    whatever  is  beyond  a  fufficienc 
competency  of  thofe  things,  which  are  requifite  to  the 
real  ules  and  occafions  of  humane  life. 

Firft,  riches  and  abundance  do  not  contribute  to 
the  fupport  of  our  lives.  And  this  our  Saviour  very 
well  reprefents  to  us  in  the  parable  immediately  after 
the  text,  of  the  rich  man,  who  was  continually   in- 
creafing  his  eftate,  fo  that  "  he  had  goods  laid  up  for 
*'  many  years  -,"   but  he  lived  not  one  jot  the  longer, 
for  being  provided  of  the  conveniencies  of  life  for  fo 
long  a  time  beforehand  *,  for  whilft  he  was  blefTing 
himfelf,  as  if  he  had  fecured  his  happinefs  fufnciently 
for  this  World,  he  was  uncertain  of  his  continuance 
in  it^  God  having  decreed  to  take  him  out  of  this 
world,  at  that  very  time  when  he  had  determin'd  to 
enter  upon  the  enjoyment  of  thofe  things,    v/hich  he 
had  been  fo  long  laying  up.  God  fays  to  him,  ''  thou 
*'  fool,  this  night  fhall  thy  foul  be  required  of  thee  ; 
"  and  then  whofe  fhall  thofe  things  be  which  thou 
"  haft  provided  ? "  that  is,    what  good  then  will  all 
thefe  things  do  thee,  when  thou  hall  no  further  ufe  of 
and  occalion  for  them  ?  fo  that  if  he  had  been 'the  pooreft: 
man  in  the  world,  and  had  not  been  provided  for  the 
next  meal,    he  might  have  lived  as  long  as  he  did 
with  all  his  ftores.  You   fee    that  in  this  fenfe,  "  a 
*'  man's  life  confifteth  not  in  the  abundance  of  the 
"  things  which  he  poflelTeth."  For  notwithftanding 
all  his  great  barns,  and  the  abundance  of  fruits  he  had 
ftowed  in  them,  he  did  not  live  one  jot  the  longer, 
than  the  pooreft  man  might  have  done. 

Secondly,  nor  do  riches  contribute  to  the  happi- 
nefs and  comfort  of  our  lives.  Happinefs  is  not  to  be 

bought 


The  evil  and  unreafojiahknefs  of  covetoufnefs,     1469 

bought  and  purchased  together  with  great  Jordfhipsj  S  E  R  M,' 
it  depends  upon  a  great  many  caufes,  among  which  a 
competency  of  the  things  of  this  world  is  one  j  but 
riches  and  abundance  is  none  of  them.  The  happincis 
of  this  world  confifts  in  thefe  two  things. 

1.  In  the  enjoyment  of  good.  And, 

2.  In  a  ftate  of  freedom  from  evil. 
Now  riches  do  not  neccfTarily  make  a  man  happy 

in  either  of  tiiefe  rerpe6ls. 

Firft,  for  the  enjoyment  of  good,  a  competent 
eftate  fuicable  to  the  condition  and  ftation  in  which 
God  hath  fet  us  in  this  world,  will  give  a  man  what- 
ever nature  and  reafon  can  defire ;  and  abundance 
cannot  make  a  man  happier.  If  a  man  had  an  hun- 
dred times  more  than  he  needed,  he  could  but  enjoy 
it  according  to  the  capacity  of  a  man  ;  for  if  he  con- 
fulted  his  own  happinefs,  and  would  truly  enjoy  what 
he  hatn,  he  mud  eat  and  drink  within  the  bounds  of 
temperance  and  health,  and  mud  wear  no  more 
clothes  than  are  for  his  convenience.  'Tis  true,  he 
hath  wherewithal  to  put  on  a  new  fiait  every  day ; 
whicii  IS  to  be  unea'fy  all  the  days  of  his  life ;  and  may 
drink,  if  he  pleafes,  every  time  out  of  a  new  cup ; 
which  would  be  a  vain  expence,  and  a  great  trouble 
to  his  fervants,  without  any  manner  of  convenience 
to  himfelf. 

But  then  if  riches  fall  into  the  covetous  man's 
hands,  they  can  be  no  happinefs  to  him,  becaufe  he 
hath  no  heart  to  enjoy  them.  He  hath  indeed  the 
eftate  of  a  rich  man,  but  he  wants  the  comfort  of  ir, 
becaule  he  hath  the  mind  of  a  poor  man ;  and  enjoy- 
ment is  all  the  felicity  that  is  in  a  great  fortune ;  v/hat 
we  enjoy  is  ours,  but  what  we  lay  up,  is  from  that 

Vol  .  VI.  II  L  time 

3- 


I 


^-/ 


o     7he  evil  and  unreafo?tahlenefs  of  covetoufnefs. 

time  not  ours,  but  fome  body's  elfc.  He  that  heaps 
up  riches,  and  enjoys  them  not,  is  rich  only  for  his 
heir,  but  a  beggar  for  himfelf. 

We  are  apt  to  pity  poor  men,  and  too  apt  to  def- 
pife  them  •,  but  furely  no  man's  condition  is  more  to 
be  deplored  than  his,  who  flarves  himfelf  in  the 
inidft  of  plenty,  and  being  furrounded  with  the  blef- 
fino-sof  God,  turns  them  into  the  greatefl:  curfe  j  for 
it  is  a  much  greater  curfe,  not  to  ufe  an  eilate  when 
one  has  it,  than  not  to  have  it.  It  is  like  a  plentiful 
table  without  an  appetite. 

Bat  it  may  be  it  is  a  great  happinefs  to  have  a  great 
cftate,  tho'  a  man  never  ufe  it;  the  picafure  of  feeing 
it,  and  telling  it  over,  may  be  like  the  removing  of 
billets,  which  may  warm  a  man  as  much  as  if  he  had 
jpent  and  confumed  them.  But  this  is  real,  and   the 
other  only  imaginary.    I  doubt  not,  many  covetous 
men  take  a  great  deal  of  pleafure  in  ruminating  upon 
their  wealth,  and  in  re-counting  what  they  have-,  but 
they  have  a  great  deal  of  tormenting  care  and  fear 
about  it  J  and  if  they  had  not,    it  is  very  hard  to  un- 
derhand where  the  reafonabie  pleafure  and  happinefs 
]ies  of  having  things  to  no  end.   It  is  at  the  beft,  like 
that  of  fome  foolifh  birds,  which,  they  fay,  take  plea- 
fure in  Healing  money,   that  they  may  hide  it ;  as  if 
it  were  worth  the  while,    for  men  to  take  pains  to 
^icr  filver  out  of  the  earth,  for  no  other  purpofe,  but 
to  melt  it  down  and  flamp  it,  and  bury  it  there  again. 
But  many  necelTities  may  happen,    which  we  can- 
not forefee,  and  it  is  good  to  provide  againfl  them. 
There  is  nothing  fo  bad,  but  fomething  may  be  fiid 
in  excufe  of  it  j  and  I  do  not  deny,  but  that  a  provi- 
dent care  againft  the  common  accidents  of  humane 
life  is  very  commendable  5    but  it  is  unreafonable  to 

think 


7he  evil  and  iiureaformblenefs  of  covefoufnefs,  147 1 
think  of  providing  againft  all  polTibilities,  which  ith  SERM. 
impoilible  either  to  forefee,  or  prevent.  'Tjs  very 
polTible,  that  after  a  man  hath  gotten  the  greateO: 
edate  imaginable,hemay  lofe  it  all  by  fome  fatal  acci- 
dent ;  and  then  to  what  purpofe  was  all  this  provi- 
fion  made,  when  that  which  was  fo  long  a  time  a 
getting  and  laying  up,  is  loil  at  once  ? 

Befides,    that  it  is  not  eafy  to  conceive  what  necef- 
fity  can  happen  to  a  covetous  man,    to  give  him  an 
occafion  of  ufing  his  eRate ;    he  cannot  find  in  his 
heart  to  beftow  it  upon  himfelf  in  fuch  things  as  are 
convenient,  nay,   almofl:  neceflary  for  the  fupport  of 
his  life  5  for  no  man  can  feed  his  fervants  more  penu- 
rioudy  than  he  does  himfelf;    all  the  religion  he  va* 
lues  himfelf  upon,  is  a  (Iridl  obfervance  of  theleflian 
diet,    which  he  recommends  to  thofe  few  that  can  de- 
ny themfelvesto  dine  with  him,  in  hopes  to  make  bet- 
ter meals  upon  his  eftate  when  he  is  gone.  And  if  he 
be  fo  penurious  to  himfelf,  the  neceffities  of  others  are 
not  like  to  move  him  to  be  liberal.  I  can  but  imagine 
one  occafion  that  could  tempt  fuch  a  man  to  lay  out 
v/hat  he  hath  ;  namely,    when  one  part  of  his  cflate 
is  in  danger,  to  fpend  the  other  to  fecure  it.     And 
yet  even  in  that  cafe,  if  his  caufe  were  not  very  clear 
and  good,  he  would  go  nigh  to  lofe  it,  ufing  it  as  he 
does  himfelf;   that  is  by  flarving  it.  And  if  this  be 
all,  then  a  man  had  as  good  be  without  an  edate,  and 
fave  himfelf  the  trouble  either  of  settino;  it,  or  fecu- 
ring  it  -,  for  if  it  were  all  gone,  he  might  live  as  well 
as  he  does,  and  that  with  half  the  care  and  pains. 

Secondly,  the  happinefs  of  this  world  confifls  in  a 
(late  of  freedom  from  evil.  Now  the  great  evils  that 
men  are  liable  to  in  this  world,  are  fuch  as  are  incident: 

1 1  L  2  to 


T47^       *^^  ^'^^'^  ^^^  unreafonable7iefs  of  covet  oufiiefs. 
S  E  R  M.  to  tliem,  either  in  the  courfe  of  their  lives,   or  at  the 
^IL  J  time  of  their  death  j  and  riches  do  not  contribute  to 
mens  happinefs,  by  freeing  them  from  either  of  thefe; 
I  fhall  fpeak  to  thefe  feverally. 

I.  Not  from  the  evils  which  are  incident  to  men 
in  the  courfe  of  their  lives.  Thefe  are  of  two  kinds, 
inward,  or  outward. 

I.  Inward  evils,  by  which  I  mean  thofe  of  the 
mind ;  and  our  greatefl  troubles  are  from  within, 
from  the  anxiety  of  our  minds  and  the  guilt  of  our 
confciences,  from  the  vicious  inchnations  of  our  wills, 
and  the  irregularity  and  difordc^rs  of  our  pafTions. 
Now  riches  were  an  admirable  thing  indeed,  and 
worth  our  covedng,  if  they  would  help  to  cure  thefe 
diftempers  of  our  minds ;  but  they  are  the  leaft  fitted 
for  fuch  a  purpofe  of  any  thing  in  the  world  ;  for  not 
he  that  hath  the  greatefl  ePcate,  but  he  that  hath  the 
fewefl  and  moft  reafonable  dciires,  and  the  beft  go- 
verned pafiions,  and  the  mofl  virtuous  inclinations,  is 
the  happieft  man,  and  dwells  nearefl  to  fati.Jadion. 
Nemo  7nahisfelh\  "  no  bad  man  can  be  happy,"  tho* 
he  were  polTefl:  of  the  whole  world  ;  becaufe  he  hath 
that  within  him,  which  frets  and  dilcon tents  him, 
which  galls  his  fpirit,  and  keeps  his  mind  refllefs  and 
uneafy  ;  and  he  that  does  not  enjoy  himfelf,  can  enjoy 
nothing  elfe. 

Did  but  men  know  how  much  happinefs  hath  been 
enjoyed  by  many  a  pious  and  virtuous  man  in  a  mean 
fortune,  how  quiet  and  eafy  their  minds  have  been, 
how  much  fuller  of  joy  and  pleafure,  than  the  heart 
of  any  covetous  worldfing  ever  was  in  his  moft  pro- 
sperous eftate,  and  when  "  his  corn  and  wine  and  oil 
^'  abounded  j"  did  we   (I  fay)  but  know  this,  we 

fhould 


The  evil  and  unreafonahknefs  of  covet oufnefs,      1473 

(hould  not  envy  the  men  of  mighty  fortunes.     Nam  ^|j^^j^- 
neqiie  divitibus  contingunt  gmdia  foils ,  "  Rich  men  are 
"  not  the  only  happy  people  in  the  world."  If  they  be 
not  good  as  well  as  rich,  happinefs  is  a  greater  flranger 
to  their  dwellings,  than  to  the  cottages;  of  poorer  men. 
Now  riches  are  fo  far  from  helping  to  make  men 
good,  that  they  are  one  of  the  greatelt  temptations  to 
them  in  the  world  to  be  otherwife  ;  which  is  the  rea- 
fon  why  our  Saviour  fays,  "  it  is  fo  very  hard  for 
"  a  rich  man  to  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven  j" 
becaufe  confidering  the  powerful,  and  almofl  irrefiftible 
temptations  of  a  great  eflate,  and  the  impotency  and 
weaknefs  of  human  nature  to  govern  itfelf  in  a  plen- 
tiful fortune,  it  is  very  hard  for  a  rich  man  to  be  fo 
good  as  he  ought,  it  requires  a  great  force  and  firm- 
nels  of  refolution,  a  very  folid  and  vigorous  conili- 
tution  of  mind,  to  bear  a  great  fortune,  and  not  to 
be  corrupted  by  it ;  and  a  man  hath  never  more  rea- 
fon  to  implore  God's  gracious  help  and  afliftance, 
and  to  confult  his  own  befl  and  coolefi:  thoughts,  to 
know  what  he  ought  fto  do,  and  how   he  ought  to 
demean  himfelf,  than  when  the  outward  bleflings  of 
this  life  flow  in  amain  upon  him  \  felicitate  corrumpimiir^ 
"   nothing  fooner  debaucheth  men  than  profperity^" 
and  he  is  a  very  happy  man,  whom  wealth  and  a  good 
fortune  do  not  make  licentious  and  diilblute  ;  becaufe 
thefe  tempt  men  with  the  power  and  opportunity  to  do 
all  the  ill  that  their  wicked  hearts  can  defign,  or  defire- 
The  temptation  of  riches,  and  the  power  that  goes 
along  with  them,  is  fo  forcible  and  prevalent,  that  the 
devil,  who  is  a  fagacious  fpirit,    and  hath  great  and 
long  experience  in  this  kind,  when  he  was- making  the 
experiment,  whether  Christ  was  a  mere  man,  or 
the  Son  of  God,  referved  this  fpr  his  lad  temptacion 

refolving. 


XCII. 


if, 


1474      7 he  evil  and  iinreaJGnablenefs  of  cGvefoufnefs, 

SER^J^I-  refolving,  if  that  would  not  do,  to  try  him  no  far- 
ther. After  he  had  afiliulted  him  in  feveral  kinds,  he 
reprefents  to  him  at  Jad,  that  which  was  fufHcient  to 
have  furfeited  two  of  the  mofl  infatiable  defires  of 
human  nature,  ambition  and  covetoufnefs,  even  "  all 

the  kingdomsof  the  world,  and  the  glory  of  them, 

in  a  moment,"  or  point  of  time;  he  brings  all  the 
rays  of  his  glory  to  one  point,  that  the  temptation 
might  kindle  and  take  hold  the  fooner  ;  and  fays  to 
him,  "all  this  will  1  give  thee,  if  thou  wilt  fall  down 
**  and  worfhip  me."  He  fuppofed  with  great  pro- 
bability, that  if  he  were  but  a  mere  man,  the 
ftrongeft  and  mofc  refolved  mind  v/ould  bend  and 
yield  to  fo  dazzling  a  temptation  as  this  ;  but  when  he 
faw  that  this  temptation  was  rejeded,  he  found  him- 
felf  baiiled,  and  gave  him  over ;  fince  this  did  not  move 
him,  he  concluded  nov/,  that  he  was  the  Son  of  God 
i.ideed,  and  that  it  was  in  vain  to  tempt  him  any  farther. 

From  all  this  it  appears,  that  riches  are  fo  far  from 
making  men  virtuous,  that  nothing  is  more  dangerous 
to  virtue,  than  a  full  condition ;  if  men  have  not  a 
great  degree  of  grace,  as  well  as  difcretion  to  manage  it. 
Solomon  tells  us,"  that  theprofperity  of  fools  diftroy- 
^5  eth  them/' 

And  yet  hov/  do  mofl  of  us  court  this  temptation,  and 
are  forward  to  thruft  and  venture  ourfelves  upon  it  .^^ 
I'herearea  great  many  other  things,  in  which  mofl:  men 
make  a  right  judgment  of  themfelves,  and  will  readily 
acknowledge  that  they  are  altogether  unfit  for  them. 
Every  man  will  not  take  upon  him  to  be  aphyfician, 
or  a  lawyer,  to  prefcribe  medicines  in  dangerous  cafes, 
and  to  give  counfel  to  men  in  knotty  and  difficult 
points  about  their  edates;  but  every  man  thinks  him- 
fel f  fit  enough  to  be  rich,  and  fufficiently  qualified  to 


manage 


The  evil  and  iinreaforiahUnefs  of  covetoufnefs,      1475 
manage  a  great  eftate,  if  he  can  but  get  it;  when  SERM. 
perhaps   there   are  few  things  in  the  world,  which    ^^^^' 
men  are  more  infufficient  for,  than  to  wield  and  j^o- 
vern  a  great  fortune,  nor  wherein  there  is  greater  dan- 
ger of  mifcarriage.     It   is  not  every  body's  talent  to 
be  wealthy  and  wife,  rich  and  innocent. 

2.  As  for  the  outward  evils  of  this  hfe,  fuch  as  want 
and  contempt,  bodily  pains  and  difeafes,  unhappinefs  in 
friends  and  relations,  a  great  eftate  is  by  no  means  a  fuffi- 
cient  fccurity  or  remedy  to  a  covetous  man  againft  thefc. 

(i.)  As  for  v/ant.  And  furely  one  would  think, 
that  if  riches  were  good  for  any  thing,  they  are  a  very- 
proper  remedy  againfl  this  tvW^  and  a  mod  certain 
and  infallible  cure  of  it;  but  experience  tdh  us  quite 
otherwife.  Socrates  was  wont  to  fay,  that,  "  To 
"  want  nothing,  is  the  privilege  of  the  deity,  and  pro- 
"  per  to  God  alone  ;  but  to  Hand  m  need  of  as  ft^ 
*'  things  as  may  be,  is  the  privilege  of  a  wife  and 
*'  good  man,  and  a  (late  of  happinefs  next  to  that  of 
''  God  himfelf ;  becaufe  he  that  hath  the  fewefl  vv^ants 
"  is  the  mod  eafily  fupplied,  and  is  ntxt  to  him  that 
"  is  felf-fufHcient."  Now  a  rnan  of  moderate  de- 
fires  hath  infinitely  fewer  wants  than  a  covetous 
man  ;  and  becaufe  his  defires  are  m.oderate,  a  mode- 
rate  edate  will  fatisfy  them :  but  the  v/ants  of  a  cove- 
tous mind  are  never  to  be  fupply'd,  becaufe  it  hath 
order'd  the  matter  fo  cunningly,  as  to  want  even  that 
which  it  hath ;  fuch  a  man  does  not  get  riches  to  fui> 
ply  his  wants,  but  is  content  to  want  that  he  may  be 
rich  ;  infomuch  that  he  hath  not  the  heart  to  ufe  his 
eftate  for  the  fupply  of  his  real  necefTi&ics.  Plow  many 
do  almoft  ftarve  themfeives  in  the  midft  of  plenty  and 
abundance  ?  There  is  no  greater  fign  of  poverty,  than 

to 


'i47^     ■  ^'^^  ^"^^'^  ^^^  «;2r^^;?^^/^/z^  of  covetoufnefe. 
S  E  R  M.  to  be  deeply  in  debt  5  now  the  covetous  man  lives  and 
XCII.  ^  j^jg3  in  (^cbt  to  himfelf.     Some  men  have   been  (b 
fhamefully  penurious  and  ftingy  to  themfelves,  as 
even  to  die  to  fave  charges,  which^yet  perhaps  is  the 
nioft  generous  thing  they  ever  did  in  their   whole, 
lives,  in  refpetfl  to  the  world  ;  becaufe  by  this  means 
fome  body  may  come  to  the  enjoyment  of  their  eftates, 
and  that  great  dunghil  which  they  have  been  fo  long 
in  raking  together,  may  by  this  means  come  to  be 
Ipread  abroad  ior  the  publick  benefit. 

So  that  if  a  covetous  man  were  poflcfled  of  the 
wealth  of  both  the  Indies,  all  this  would  not  free  him 
from  want.  A  poor  man's  wants  may  be  fatisfied, 
when  he  hath  obtained  what  he  wants :  but  the  cove- 
tous man  labours  of  an  incurable  want  •,  becaufe  he 
wants  that  which  he  hath,  as  well  as  that  which  he 
hath  not. 

(2.)  As  for  contempt,  riches  will  not  fecure  a  cove- 
tous man  againft  this  neither  \  nay,  fo  far  is  it  from 
that,  that  he  is  commonly  the  more  ridiculous  and  de- 
fpifed  for  living  poor  in  the  midft  of  abundance,  than 
if  he  were  really  fo.  Did  I  fay  really  fo  ?  He  is  the 
mod  really  poor  of  all  other  men.  For  as  one  fays 
well,  "  the  rich  poor  man  is  emphancally  poor." 

(3.)  Neither  will  riches  free  men  from  bodily  ill- 
nefs  and  pain.  The  rich  are  liable  to  as  many 
difeafes,  and  as  fharp  pains  as  the  poor,  and  they  have 
commonly  lefs  patience  to  bear  them  than  the  poor ; 
becaufe  they  have  not  been  inured  to  other  forts  of 
evils.  They  that  have  been  accuftomed  to  labour, 
are  generally  belt  fitted  to  bear  pain ;  the  rich  are 
commonly  more  tender  and  delicate,  and  have  a 
quicker  fenfe  of  pain,  more  matter,  and  greater  quan- 
tity 


The  evil  and  unreafonahlenefs  of  covet otifnefs,       jA^y 

tity  of  humours  to  feed  a  Mc2i{Q^  and    to  inflame  it  S  E  R  M, 
to  a  greater  height.  XCII. 

I  mud  not  here  forget  that  there  is  a  fort  of  rich 
men,  I  mean  the^enurious  mifers,  vvlio  flarve  them- 
felves  more  than  the  poor,  and  fare  many  times 
more  hardly  ;  and  for  this  reafon,  tho*  they  be  not 
in  danger  of  the  difeafcs  that  come  from  intempe- 
rance, and  a  plentiful  table;  yet  they  are  liable  to 
the  difeafes  which  proceed  from  flarving  and  empti- 
nefs ;  which  the  phyficians  fay  are  more  dangerous 
than  the  other  :  fo  that  neither  the  prodigal  nor  the 
niggardly  rich  man  is  fecured  from  bodily  pains  and 
difeafes,  by  a  great  eftate. 

(4.)  Neither  will  riches,  fecure  a  man  from  being 
unhappy  in  his  friends  and  relations.  A  great  eftate 
will  not  make  a  man's  children  either  more  duti- 
ful or  wife,  than  the  children  of  meaner  perfons; 
and  if  they  be  not  fo,  his  eftate  cannot  be  fo  great 
an  happinefs  to  him,  as  they  may  prove  an  afflidion. 
Solomon  tells  us,  that  the  very  fear  and  apprehen- 
fion  of  this  did  very  much  imbitter  the  fruit  of  all 
his  labour  ;  and  he  feems  to  fpeak  k  fenfibly,  and 
very  probably  with  a  melancholy  reflexion  upon  his 
fon  Rehoboam,  Ecclef.  ii.  18,  19.  '^  Yea,  I  hated 
''  all  my  labour  which  I  had  taken  under  the, fun, 
*'  becaufe  Ifhould  leave  it  unto  the  man  that  fli.ill  be 
"  after  me ;  and  who  knows  whether  he  Ihall  be  a 
''  wife  man,  or  a  fool  ?  yet  fiiall  he  have  rule  over 
*'  all  my  labour,  wherein  I  have  laboured,  and 
''  wherein  I  have  fhewed  my  felf  v/ife  under  the 
*«  fun."  Who  knows  whether  he  fhall  be  a  wife 
man,  or  a  fool  ?  He  feems  to  fpeak  doubtfully  :  but 
he  had  a  very  fhrewd  guefs  what  kind  of  man  his 

Vol.  VI.  II  M  foQ 


XCII. 


478      The  evil  and  iinreafonahlenejs  of  covetoufnefs, 

SE  RM.  fori  would  make  •,  for  he  fpeaks  more  defpondingly* 
in  the  next  words,  (ver.  20,  21.)  "  therefore  I  went 
*'  about  to  caufe  my  heart  to  defpair  of  all  the  la- 
*'  hour  which  I  took  under  the  fun  j  '*  that  is,  when 
I  thought  ferioufly  of  it,  I  began  to  think  that  all  the 
pains  I  had  taken  to  get  an  eftate,  would  be  but  to 
little  purpofe;  "  for  there  is  a  man  (faith  he) 
*'  whofe  labour  is  in  wifdom,  and  in  knowledge, 
*'  and  in  equity,"  (that  is,  who  by  wife  and  honeft 
means  hath  rais'd  a  great  eflate)  "  yet  to  a  man 
"  that  hath  not  laboured  therein*'  (that  is,  to  a 
man  who  is  endowed  with  none  of  thefe  qualities) 
*'  Ihall  he  leave  it  for  his  portion  5  this  alfo  is  vanity, 
^'  and  a  great  evil."  I 

And  as  for  friends,  tho*  the  rich  man  have  many 
that  will  call  themfelves  fo,  yet  he  had  almoft  as 
o-ood  have  none  -,  for  he  can  hardly  ever  know  whe- 
ther  they  be  fo  or  not,  unlefs  he  chance  to  fall  into 
poverty,  and  then  indeed  the  change  of  his  con- 
dition may  give  him  that  advantage  and  opportu- 
nity, which  otherwife  he  is  never  like  to  have  of 
difcerning  between  his  friends  and  his  flatterers. 
Thus  you  fee  that  riches  are  no  fecurity  againft  the 
mod  confiderable  evils  which  attend  us  in  the  courfe 
of  our  lives. 

II.  When  w^e  come  to  die,  nothing  will  minifler 
kfs  comfort  to  us  at  that  time,  than  a  great  effate. 
It  is  then  a  very  fmall  pleafure  to  a  man,  to  refled 
how  much  he  hath  gotten  in  the  world,  when  he 
fees  that  he  muft  leave  it ;  nay,  like  the  young  man 
in  the  gofpel,  he  goes  away  fo  much  the  more 
**'  forrowful,  becaufe  he  had  great  polTeflions."  All 
the   things  of  this  world   feem  very   inconfidera- 

blc 


The  evil  and  iinreafonahlcncfs  of  covefoufnefs,      1479 

ble  to  a  man,  when  he  approaches  to  the  confines  S  E  R  M, 
of  the  other:  for  when  he  fees  that  he  mud  leave,  ^^ 
this  world,  then  he  would  fain  make  a  virtue  of 
neceflity,  and  begins  to  change  his  apprehenfions  of 
thefe  things,  and  to  have  very  flight  and  mean 
thoughts  of  them,  when  he  is  convinc'd  he  can  en- 
joy them  no  longer.  What  the  philofopher  was 
wont  to  fay  of  the  pleafuresof  this  world,  is  as  true  of 
riches,  and  all  the  other  enjoyments  of  it ;  that  "  if 
they  did  but  put  on  the  fame  countenance,  and 
look  with  the  fame  face,  when  they  come  to  us,  that 
they  will  do,  when  they  turn  from  us,  and  take 
"  their  leave  of  us,  we  fhould  hardly  entertain 
*«  them." 

Now  if  a  man  have  placed  his  chief  happinels  m 
this  world,  as  the  covetous  man  does  in  his  riches, 
his  great  trouble,  when  he  comes  to  die,  will  be, 
that  he  muft  leave  them.  Nothing  could  be  more 
feverely  laid  to  the  covetovis  man,  than  that  which 
God  fays  to  the  rich  man  in  the  parable  ;  "  thou 
*'  fool,  this  night  fhall  thy  foul  be  required  of  thee„ 
"  and  then  whofe  ihall  thefe  things  be?"  For  of  all 
things  in  the  world,  fuch  men  cannot  endure  to 
think  of  parting  with  thefe  things,  or  that  what 
they  have  got  with  fuch  great  care  and  labour,  fhould 
come  to  the  pofTellion  of  another. 

And  therefore  when  we  are  fo  hot  and  eager  in 
the  purfuit  of  thefe  things,  we  fhould  do  well  to 
confider,  how  they  will  appear  to  us  in  a  dying 
hour.  And  this  confideration  well  imprinted  upon 
our  minds,  will  make  us  veiy  careful,  to  trcafure 
up  other  kind  of  comforts  to  our  Mv&%  againfl:  fuch 
ft  time,  and  to  labour  after  thofe   things  which  we 


1 4  8  o       The  evil  and  unreafonalenefs  of  covefeuffiefs. 
S  E  R  M.  fhall  never  srow  out  of  conceit  withal,  but  Ihall  va- 

XCII 

lue  them  to  the  Jafl,  and  then  moft  of  all  when  we 

come  to  die,  and  leave  this  world.     For  as  a  poet  of 

our  own  fays  excellently. 

"  'Tis  not  that  which  firfl  we  love  : 

"  But  what  dying  we  approve." 

Thus  I  have  done  with  the  fourth  thing,  where- 
by the  evil  and  unreafonablenefs  of  covetoufnefs  doth 
appear  ;  namely,  that  the  happinefs  of  humane  life 
doth  not  confill  in  a  great  eflate  ',  "  the  life  of  man 
*'  doth  not  confift  in  the  abundance  of  the  things 
"  which  he  poiTeiTeth.*'  The  great  ends  of  religion, 
and  covetoufneis,  are  very  different.  The  great  end 
which  religion  propofeth  to  it  felf,  is  happinefs  : 
but  the  great  end  which  covetoufneis  propofeth  is 
riches  j  which  are  neither  a  neceflary  nor  a  probable 
means  ot  happinefs.  I  fliould  now  have  proceeded 
to  the  fifth  and  kit  particular  j  namely,  that  riches 
are  fo  far  from  being  the  happinefs  of  humane  life, 
that  they  ufually  contribute  very  much  to  our  mifery 
and  lorrow  ;  as  will  appear,  if  we  confider  thefe  four 
things. 

Firft,  the  labour  and  care  which  covetous  men  are 
at  in  the  getting  of  a  great  eftate. 

Secondly,  the  anxiety  of  keeping  it,  together  with 
the  fears  of  lofng  it. 

Thirdly,  the  trouble  and  vexation  of  having  loft 

it ;  and. 

Fourthly,  the  dreadRil  and   heavy  account  which 

every  man  muit  give  of  a  great  eftate.     But  thefe 

particulars,     together  with    the  application  of  this 

whole  difcourfe,  I  fhall  refer  to  another  opportunity. 

SERMON 


C  1481  ] 

SERMON     XCIII. 

The  evil  and  unreafonablenels  of  cove- 

toufnels. 


LUKE  xii.  15. 
And  he  f aid  unto  them^take  heed^  and  beware  of  covet  ouf- 
nefs  ;  fcr  a  man^s  life  confijieth  not  in  the  abundance  of 
the  things  which  he  pof]eJ]^eth, 

IN  my  two  lad  difcourfes  on  this  fubjedl,    I  have  - g r m 
reprcfented  the  evil  and  unreafonablenels  of  the  XCIII. 
vice  of  covetoufnefs  in  four  particulars.  I  proceed  Thefbunh. 
now  to  the  fifth  and  lafl  particular,    whereby  I  told  ^e'"'"^"  on 
you  the  evil  and  unreafonablenefs  of  it  would  appear,  ^^^^  '^^^' 
viz. 

That  riches  are  fo  far  from  being  the  happinefs  of 
humane  life,  that  they  ufualJy  contribute  very  much 
to  our  mifery  and  forrow ;  as  will  evidently  appear,  if 
we  confider  thefe  four  things. 

Firfl,  the  labour  and  care  which  the  covetous  man 
is  at  in  getting  of  a  great  eftate. 

Secondly,  the  anxiety  of  keeping  it,  together  with 
xk\z  fears  of  lofing  it. 

Thirdly,  the  trouble  and  vexation  of  having  loft  it. 

Fourthly,  the  heavy  and  dreadful  account  which 
every  man  muft  give  of  a  great  eftate. 

Firft,  the  labour  and  care  which  the  covetous  man 
hath  in  getting  a  great  eftate.  He,  that  will  be  rich, 
muft  fweat  for  it,  and  refufe  no  pains  and  trouble  \  he 
muft  *^  rife  up  early,    and  lie  down  late,  and  eat  the 

bread 


# 

1482  The  evil  and  unreafonablenefs  of  co'Defoufiiefs, 
SERM."  bread  of  carefulnefs.'*  A  flave  that  digs  in  the 
^ii^*.  mines,  or  rows  in  the  gallies,  is  not  a  greater  drudge 
than  fome  covetous  worldlings  are  -,  only  with  this 
difference,  that  the  covetous  man  thinks  that  he  la- 
bours and  takes  all  thefe  pains  forhimfelf;  whereas 
the  flave  undcrftands  the  matter  more  truly,  and  thinks 
that  he  does  it  for  another. 

But  befides  the  pains  he  takes,  he  is  full  of  care 
and  anxiety.  How  is  he,  through  the  greedy  defire  of 
having,  racked  between  the  hopes  of  getting,  and  the 
fear  of  miffing  what  he  feeks  ?  the  apoflie  obferves  what 
tormenting  cares  accompany  this  vice :  i  Tim.  vi.  10. 
^'  The  love  of  money  (faith  he)  is  the  root  of  all  evil;'* 
not  only  of  the  evil  of  fin,  but  of  the  evil  likewife 
of  trouble  and  difquict.  For  it  follows,  "  which  while 
*'  fome  coveted  after,  they  have  pierced  themfclves 
*'•  through  with  manyforrows:  variety  of  troubles  at- 
«'  tend  them  that  will  be  rich." 

Secondly,  if  we  confider  the  anxiety  of  keeping 
•what  they  have  got,  together  with  the  fear  of  iofing 
it  again,  this  is  another  great  part  of  a  covetous 
man's  infelicity.  The  rich  man  here  in  the  parable 
after  the  text,  when  he  faw  his  eftate  coming  upon 
him  fo  fad,  cries  out,  "  what  fhall  I  do"  ?  poor  man ! 
who  would  not  pity  his  condition,  to  fee  him  put  to 
this  difficulty  and  diilrefs,  and  to  hear  him  make  as 
heavy  a  moan  as  the  pooreft  man  could  do !  now  that 
he  hath  a  plentiful  harve(l,and  his  crop  hath  anfwered, 
if  it  were  poffible,  his  covetous  defire,  he  is  in  a  great 
deal  of  perplexity,  and  almoff  at  his  wits  end  how  to 
difpofe  of  if,  he  was  horribly  afraid  left  any  of  it 
Jhould  be  loft  for  want  of  a  fecure  place  to  ftore  it 
UD  in.  '"  What  fliall  I  do,  becaufe  I  have  no  room, 

*'  where 


The  evilandtinreafoJiahlenefsofcDvefoufnefs.      14S3 

*'  where  to  beftovv  my  fruits"  ?  where  was  the  difficulty  S  E  R  M. 
of  this  ?  why,  he  was  loth  to  lay  out  money  to  fc- 
cure  them.  But  upon  farther  confideration,  he  re- 
folves  of  the  two  evils,  to  choofe  the  lead  ;  and  he 
faid,  *'  this  will  I  do,  I  will  pull  down  my  barns, 
*'  and  build  greater,  and  there  will  I  beftow  all  my 
"  fruits,  and  my  goods."  But  why  could  he  not  let  the 
barns  he  had  Hand,  and  build  more.?  no,  that  he  did 
not  think  fo  well,  he  loved  to  fee  all  his  good  things 
at  one  view,and  what  a  goodly  fhow  they  would  make 
together.  Befides  that  it  is  the  humour  of  covetouf- 
nefs,  when  it  breaks  out  into  expence,  to  over-do ; 
the  mifer's  buildings  are  like  his  feafls,  always  extra- 
vagant. The  covetous  man  (as  to  the  bufinefs  of  ex- 
pence)  is  like  a  coward  as  to  fighting,  he  declines  it 
as  long  as  he  can ;  but  when  he  is  pudi'd  to  the  lafl: 
necefiity,  he  grows  defperate,  and  lays  about  him. 

Tantis  parta  malis^  curd  major e  metuque 

Servantur^  mifera  eft  magni  cuftodia  census* 
*'  Riches  which  ar^  got  with  fo  much  trouble,  are 
*'  not  kept  v/ithout  greater  fear  and  care.  A  cove- 
"  tous  man  is  nothing  more  miferable,  than  in  the 
*'  anxiety  and  care  of  difpofing  and  fecuring  what  he 
"  hath  got."  When  a  man's  defires  are  endlefs,  his 
cares  and  fears  will  be  fo  too. 

Thirdly,  as  great  an  evil  as  any  of  the  former,  is 
the  vexation  of  having  loft  thefe  things.  If  by  any 
accident  the  man  happens  to  be  deprived  of  them, 
then  he  takes  on  heavily,  hangs  down  his  head,  and 
mourns,  "  as  a  man  would  do  for  his  firft-born ; " 
and  is  ready  to  cry  out  with  Micah,  ''  they  have  taken 
"  away  my  gods,  and  what  have  I  more  ?'*  upon 
every  little  lols  the  covetous  man  is  undone,   tho'  he 

have 


1 484      ^^^  ^'^^'^  ^^^  unreafonahlenefs  of  covetoufnefs. 
S  ERM-have  a  hundred  times  more  left  than  he  knows  wh^t 

■y-  p  T  1  r 

to  do  withal.  So  deeply  ar,e  the  hearts  of  earthly- 
minded  men  many  times  pierced  with  earthly  lofTes, 
as  with  Rachel  to  refufe  to  be  comforted.  Nay,  St. 
Paul  obferves,  "  that  the  forrow  of  the  world  fome- 
*'  times  worketh  death,"  i  Cor.vii.  10. 

Fourthly,  but  the  faddeft  confideration  of  all  is, 
that  heavy  and  dreadful  account  that  mud  one  day 
be  given,  both  of  the  getting  and  ufing  of  a  great 
eftate.  They  that  have  got  an  eftate  by  fraud  and 
falfhood,  or  by  opprefTion  and  grinding  the  face  of 
the  poor,  may  read  their  doom  at  large,  James  v. 
I,  2,  3,  4,  5.  "  Go  to  now,  ye  rich  men,  weep  and 
*'  howl  for  your  miferies  that  fhall  come  upon  you ; 
*'  your  riches  are  corrupted,  and  your  garments  are 
*'  moth-eaten ;  your  gold  and  filver  is  canker'd,  and 
''  the  rufl  of  them  fhall  be  a  witnefs  againft  you, 
'^  and  fhall  eat  your  flefh  as  it  were  fire :  ye  have 
*'  heaped  treafure  together  for  the  laft  days.  Behold, 
*'  the  hire  of  the  labourers,  which  have  reaped  down 
"  your  fields,  which  is  of  you  kept  back  by  fraud,  ^ 
"  crieth,  and  the  cries  of  them  which  have  reaped, 
*'  are  entred  into  the  cars  of  the  Lord  of  Sabaoth; 
*'  ye  have  Hved  in  pleafure  on  the  earth,  and  been 
^'  wanton,  ye  have  nourilhed  your  hearts,  as  in  a  day 
*'  of  flaughter.'* 

And  we  mufl:  be  accountable  likewife  for  the  ufing 
of  our  eftates.  God  gives  them  to  us  in  truft,  and 
the  greater  they  are,  the  more  we  are  to  account  for  ; 
fo  much  as  we  need  is  ours,  but  beyond  what  will 
fupport  us,  and  be  a  convenient  provifion  for  our 
families,  in  the  rank  God  hath  placed  them ;  all  that 
is  given  to  us,  that  we  may  give  it  to  others,  and 

indeed 


7h^  evil  and  tinreafonahlenefs  ofcon:efotifnefsP     ^4^5 
indeed  it  is  not  ours ;   we  are  the  proprietors  of  it  in  S  ERM; 
refpedb  of  men,  but  in  refped:  of  God  we  are  but 
truftees,  -  and  ftewards,    and   God  will  require  an  ac- 
count of  us  how  we  have  difpofed  of  it. 

And  can  there  be  a  more  reigning  madnefs  among 
men,  than  to  take  care  only  to  increafe  their  account 
more  and  more,  by  receiving  much ;    whereas  our 
great  care  and  concernment  fhould   be  to    clear  ou^* 
account,    by  laying  out  what  we  receive,    according 
to  the  trufl  repofcd  in  us  ?    how  much  we  fhall  re- 
ceive of  the  things  of  this  world,  is  in  the  care  and 
will  of  our  mafter ;  but  our  care  and  fidelity  are  ktn 
in  laying  it  out  as  we  ought.   Among  men  (fays  one) 
it  is  well  enough,  if  a  He  ward  can  give  an  account  of 
fo  much  laid  out,  and  fo  much  in  calh,  and  upon  this 
he  fhall  have  his  difcharge :  but  wc  cannot  this  way 
clear  our  account  with  God;    for  it  is  not  offering 
him  his  own  again  that  will  fatisfy  him,  as  we  may 
learn  from  the  parable  of   the  talents.    So  that  upon 
the  whole  matter,    wc  fhould  be  fo  far  from  envying 
the  rich,  that  we  fhould  rather  envy  the  fafety  and 
happinefs  of  thofe  who  are  not  intrufted  with  fuch 
dangerous  blefTings,  and  who  are  free  from  the  temp- 
tations of  a  plentiful  fortune,  and  the  curfe  of  a  co- 
vetous mind,    and  from  the  heavy  account  of  a  great 
eftate. 

I  come  now,  m  the  laft  place,  to  make  fomc  ap- 
plication of  this  difcourfe  to  our  felves. 

I.  Let  our  Saviour's  caution  take  place  with  us, 
let  thefe  words  of  his  fink  into  our  minds,  "  take 
*'  heed  and  beware  of  covetoulhefs."  Our  Saviour, 
I  told  you,  doubles  the  caution,  that  we  may  double 
our  care.  It  is  a  fin  very  apt  to  fteal  upon  us,    and 

Vol.  VI.  II  N  ^i\j 


JA 


i85      Tie  evil  and  tinreafonablenefs  of  covetoufnefs, 

S  E  R  M .  flily  to  infinuate  it  felf  into  us  under  the  fpecious  pre- 
'  tence  of  induftry  in  our  callings,  and  a  provident 
care  of  our  families :  but  however  it  may  be  coloured 
over,  it  is  a  great  evil,  dangerous  to  our  felves,  and 
mifchievous  to  the  world.  Now  to  kill  this  vice  in 
us,  befides  the  confiderations  before-mentioned  taken 
from  the  evil  and  unreafonablenefs  of  it,  I  v/ill  urge 
thefe  three  more. 

1.  That  the  things  of  this  world  are  uncertain. 

2.  That  our  lives  are  as  uncertain  as  thefe  things : 
and, 

3.  That  there  is  another  life  after  this. 
I.  The  uncertainty    of  the  things  of  this  world. 

This  fhould  very  much  cool  our  afFedions  toward 
them,  that  after  all  our  care  and  diligence  for  the  ob- 
taining of  them,  we  are  not  furc  to  enjoy  them ;  v/e 
may  be  deprived  of  them  by  a  thoufand  accidents. 
This  confideration  Solomon  urgeth,  to  take  men  off 
from  an  over-eager  purfuit  of  thefe  things,  Prov. 
xxiii.  5.  "  Wilt  thou  kt  thine  eyes  upon  that  which 
*'  is  not?  for  riches  certainly  make  to  themfdves 
^'  wangs,  they  fly  away  as  an  eagle  towards  heaven." 
After  v/e  have  fat  brooding  over  an  eflate  many  years, 
it  may  all  on  a  fudden,  before  we  are  aware,  take 
wing,  and  fly  away,  like  an  eagle  towards  heaven, 
foaring  fuddenly  out  of  our  fight,    and  never  to  re- 


turn again. 


And  the  fame  argument  St.  Paul  ufeth,  to  take  off 
mens  affc(^ions  from  the  world,  1  Cor.  vii.  31.  be- 
caufe,  ''  the  fafliion  of  this  world  paffeth  away  ; 
''  -Ka^yn  to  ^J),aa  r3  xocr/jta  rary."  He  compares  the 
things  of  this  world  to  a  fcene,  which  is  prefently 
changed,   and  vaniflieth  almoft  as  foon  as  it  appears. 

Now 


^he  evil  and  imreafonabkftefs  of  covetoufnefs.  1487 
Now  feeing  thefe  things  arefo  uncertain,  we  Ihould  S  E  R  ^j^^- 
take  heed  how  we  fix  our  hearts  too  much  upon 
them ;  we  iliould  not  make  love  to  any  thing  that 
is  fo  fickle  and  inconftant  as  this  world  is.  We  fhould 
be  afraid  to  contra6l  too  near  and  intimate  a  friend- 
fhip  with  any  thing  which  will  forfake  us,  after  we 
have  courted  it  with  fo  much  importunity,  and  pur- 
chas'd  it  with  {q  much  pains,  and  endeavoured  to  fc- 
cure  it  with  fo  much  caution  and  tendernefs. 

2.  Our  lives  are  as  uncertain  as  thefe  things.  If 
our  eftates  remain  with  us,  we  are  continually  in 
danger  of  being  removed  from  them.  And  (as  one 
fays)  it  is  folly  to  build  our  hopes  upon  a  match, 
where  both  parties  are  fo  uncertain  and  inconftant. 
Why  fliould  we  place  our  dearefb  affections  upon 
things  which  we  are  not  fure  to  enjoy  one  moment  ? 
'^  thou  fool,  this  night  fhall  thy  foul  be  taken  from 
"  thee,  and  then  whofe  fhall  thofe  things  be  ?''  I 
remember  Seneca  tells  us  a  real  flory,  juft  anfwerable 
to  the  rich  man  in  the  parable,  of  an  acquaintance  of 
his,  who  by  long  and  great  induftry  had  arrived  to  a 
vaft  eftate;  and  juft  when  he  began  to  enjoy  it,  after 
one  of  the  firfl:  good  meals  which  perhaps  he  ever 
made  in  his  life,  that  very  night  \\i^  foul  was  taken 
from  him,  for  prefently  after  fupper  he  died.  In  ipfo 
aUu  bene  fedentium  rerum^  in  ipfo  procurrentis  fortune 
impetu,  "  In  the  height  of  his  profperity,  and  in  the 
*'  full  career  of  his  good  fortune.'* 

But  if  we  live  to  enjoy  for  any   time  what  we 

•  have  got,  we  fhould  remember  that  our  life  is  but  a 

paflage    through  the  world,    and    that  we  are  but 

*'  pilgrims  and  llrangcrs  in  the  world,  as  all  our  fa- 

*'   thers  were,  that  we  have  here  no  abiding- place, 

1 1  N  2  *'  no 


cxir. 


14S  8      7he  evil  and  unreafonablenefs  of  covet oitfnefs. 

SERM.  "  no  continuing  city,"  but  are  travelling  towards 
our  own'  country.  And  why  fhould  we  load  our 
ielves  whilil  we  are  upon  our  journey,  and  cumber 
our  felves  with  thofe  things  which  will  be  of  no  ufe 
to  us  there,  where  we  are  going  ? 

But  the   great  wonder  of  all  is,   that  this    vice 
fliould  fo  ftrongly  reign,  and  even  grow  upon  men 
in  old  age,  and  get  ftrength,   as  weaknefs  creeps  up- 
on us.     This  very  thought,  ''  that  we  are  to  die,'* 
fhould  work  in  us  a  great  indifferency  towards   the 
things  of  this  world.     But  when  men  are  convinced 
they  cannot  hve  long,  and  that  every  ftep  they  take, 
they  are  in  danger  of  fhumbling  into  the  grave,    this 
one  would  think  fhould  wean  our  affedlions  from  this 
world  ;  and  yet  ufually  none  take  fo  faft  hold  of  it, 
and  embrace  it  fo  kindly  as  old  men ;  like  friends, 
who  tho'  they  know  they  muft  leave  one  another, 
yet  are  loth  to  part.  Do  we  not  fee  many  purfue  thefe 
things  with  as   much  eagernefs  and  appetite,  when 
they  are  leaving  the  world,  as  if  they  were  to  flay 
in  it  an  hundred  years  longer }  So  that  in  this  fenfe 
alfo,  they  are  children   again,  and    are  as  fond  of 
thefe  toys,  as  if  they  werejuft  beginning  the  world, 
and  fetting  out  for  their  whole  life. 

3.  There  is  another  life  after  this,  to  be  ferioufly 
thoucrht  on,  and  provided  for  with  great  care  :  and  did 
men  firmly  believe  this,  they  would  not  with  Martha, 
*■'  bufy  thcmfelves  about  many  things,  but  would 
<«  mind  the  one  thing  necefTary,  and  with  Mary 
*'  choofe  that  better  part  which  could  not  be  taken 
*'  from  them."  They  would  overlook  the  trifles 
of  diis  world,  and  fcarce  take  notice  of  "  the  things 
«'  which  are  feen,"  but  be  only  intent  upon  ^'  the 

*'  things 


The  evil  and  iinreafonahUnefi  of  covetoufiiefs.        1 4  P  9 

"  things   which   are  not  feen  ♦,    becaufe  the  thing's  SERM- 
''  which  are  fccn  are  but  temporal,  but  the  thinf>-s 
*'  which  are  not  iccn  are  eternal."     The  great  con- 
cernments of  another  world  would  employ  their  ut- 
moft  care,  and  their  beil  thoughts. 

Whilft  we  are  in  this  world,  we  iliould  remem- 
ber "  that  this  is  not  our  home,  nor  the  place 
"  of  our  reft ;  "  and  therefore  as  men  do  in  an  inn, 
we  fliould  make  a  fhifc  with  thofe  indiflferent  accom- 
modations which  the  world  will  afford  us,  and 
which  we  can  have  upon  eafy  terms,  without  too 
much  trouble  and  ftir,  becaule  we  are  not  to  continue 
long  here ;  and  in  the  mean  time  we  fhould  cheer  up 
our  felves  with  the  thoughts  of  the  plealure  and  the 
plenty  of  our  Father's  houfe,  and  of  that  full  con- 
tentment and  fatisfa6tion  which  we  fhall  meet  withal, 
when  we  come  to  thofe  everlafting  habitations. 

So  that  our  great  care  fhould  be  to  provide  for 
eternity.  If  we  have  unbounded  defires,  let  us  place 
them  upon  fuch  objeds  as  are  worthy  of  them.  Let 
us  '^  earneftly  covet  the  bed  things,"  and  feek  after 
the  true  riches.  We  fhould  fo  mind  the  world, 
as  to  make  heaven  our  great  carej  as  to  make 
fure  to  "  provide  our  felves  bags  that  wax  not  old, 
"  a  treafure  in  the  heavens,  that  faileth  not,  where 
"  no  thief  approacheth,  neither  moth  corrupteth,'* 
as  our  Saviour  advifeth,  Luke  xii.  33  .  To  the 
fame  purpofe  is  the  counfel  of  St.  Paul,  i  Tim.  vi. 
17,  18,  19.  "  Charge  them  that  are  rich  in  this 
"  world,  that  they  be  rich  in  good  works,  willing 
"  to  diftribute,  ready  to  communicate,  laying  up 
"  for  themfelves  a  good  foundation,  or  (as  the  word 
*'  ^iiAKi(B'  J^^^y  al^o  ^^  rendred)  a  good  treafure, 

"  againft 


I A  c  o      'The  evil  aiid  iinreafonablenefi  of  covet  oufnefs, 

S  E  R  M.  ««  againft  the  time  v/hich  is  to  come,  that  they  may 
^_^^Jii,  "  lay  hold  of  eternal  life." 

I  have  told  you  that  all  thefe  things  will  fail  in  a 
fliort  fpace;  we  fhall  either  be  ftripp'd  of  them,  or 
feparaced  from  them  when  we  come  to  die,  and  fhall 
look  over  to  that  vaft  eternity  which  we  mufi:  fhortly 
enter  upon  ,  this  world,  and  all  the  enjoyments  of 
it,  will  then  be  as  nothing  to  us,  and   we  fliall  be 
wholly  taken  up  with  the  thoughts  of  another  world, 
and  be  heartily  forry  that  the  things  of  this  world 
have  taken  up  fo  much  of  our  time  and  care,  and 
that  the  great  and  weighty  concernments  of  all  eter- 
nity have  been  fo  little  minded  and  regarded  by  us. 
Now  feeing  all  thefe  things  lliall  be,  pardon  me,  if  I 
carneftly  beg  of  you  in  the  midft  of  all  your  worldly 
cares,  to  have  fome  confideration  for  your  immor- 
tal fouls,  which  are  in  no  wife  provided  for  by  a  great 
eftate,  but  are  defigned  for  nobler  enjoyments  than 
this  v/orld  can  afford.     When  you  are  taking  care 
.to    feed   and  clothe  thefe  dying    bodies,  remember 
that  better  part  of  your  felves  which  is  to  live  for 
ever.  Let  not  all  your  enquiry  be,  *'  what  fhall  I  eat .? 
*'  or  what  fhall  I  drink }  or  wherewithal  fhall  I  be 
«'  clothed  ?  "    but  fometimes'  ask  your  felves   this 
queftion,  "  what  fhall  I  do  to  be  faved .? "  I  have 
an  immortal  fpirit,  it  is  but  fit  fome  care  fhould  be 
taken  of  that,    to  train   it  up  to  eternity,    and  to 
make   it  *'  fit   to  be  made  partaker  of  an   inheri- 
"  tance  among  them  that  are  fandified.'* 

The  firm  belief  and  ferious  confideration  of  the 
great  things  of  another  world  cannot  furely  but  cool 
the  heat  of  our  affedions  towards  thefe  dying  and 
perifhing  thing,    and  make  us  refolved  not  to  do 

any 


^he  evil  and  unreafonablenefs  of  covet oufncfi.      1 49 1 

any  thing  whereby  we  may  violate  the  peace  of  our  s  E  R  M. 
confciences,  or  forfeit  our  interell  and  happinefs  in .  ^^l^ 
another  world. 

II.  By  way  of  remedy  againft  this  vice  of  cove- 
toufnefs,  it  is  good  for  men  to  be  contented  with 
their  condition.  This  the  apoflle  prefcribes  as  the 
beft  cure  of  this  vice,  Heb.  xiii.  5.  '*  Let  your  con- 
"  verfation  be  without  covetoufnefs,  and  be  content 
''  with  fuch  things  as  you  have ;  apKs/jtsvoi  t6T?  Traoa- 
^*  criv,"  being  contented  with  the  prcfentjand  think- 
ing that  fufficient.  A  covetous  man  cannot  enjoy  the 
prefent,  for  fear  of  the  future  ;  either  out  of  fear  that 
he  fhall  come  to  v/ant,  or  out  of  a  ficknefs  and  un- 
eafinels  of  mind,  which  makes  that  nothing  pleafeth 
him ;  but  if  we  could  bring  our  minds  to  our  condi- 
tion, and  be  contented  with  what  we  have,  wefliould 
not  be  fo  eager  and  impatient  after  more. 

This  contentednefs  with  our  prefent  condition  doth 
not  hinder,but  that  men  by  providence,  and  induflry, 
and  lawful  endeavours,  may  lay  the  foundation  of  a 
more  plentiful   fortune  than  they   have  at  prefent. 
For  provided  a  man  ufe  no  indirefl  and  difhonefl  ways 
to  increafe  his  eflate,  and  do  not  torment  himfelf  with 
anxious  cares,  do  neither  make  himfelf  guilty,  nor 
mifcrable,  that  he  may  be  rich  ;  provided  he  do  noC 
negledt  better  things,  to  attaia  thefe,  and  have  not 
an  infatiable  appetite  towards  theip ;  provided  he  do 
not  idolize  his  eilate,  and  fet  hi$  heart  upon  thefe 
things-,  and  if  he  can  find  in  his  heart  to  enjoy  them 
himfelf,  and  to  be  charitable  to  others  *,  nothing  hin- 
ders but  that  he  may  be  contented  with  his  prefent 
condition,  and  yet  take  all  fair  opportunities  which 
the  providence  of  God  puts  into  his  hands  of  enlarg- 


ing 


1492      The  evil  a?2d  U7ireafo72ablenefs  of  covetoufnefs, 

S'E  R  M.  ing  his  fortune.     It  is  a  good  charader  which  the 
poet  gives  us  of  Ariftippus, 

Omnis  Arijlippmn  decuit  color ^  i^  ftatus  i£  res  5 

Tentantem  majora^  fere  prafentihus  <equum, 

"  Every  ftate  and  condition  became  him ;  for  tho* 

*'  he  endeavoured  after  more,  yet  his  mind  was  al- 

"  ways  in  a  manner  equal  to  his  prefent  condition." 

But  if  a  man  be  difcontented  with  the  prefent,  and 

reftlefs  becaufe  he  hath  no  more,  the  whole  world  will 

not  fatisfy  him;  and  if  God  fhould  raife  him  from 

one  ftep  to  another,  he  would  never  think  his  fortune 

high  enough,  and  in  every  degree  of  it  would  be  as 

little  contented  as  he  was  at  firft.     Our  Saviour  re- 

prefents  this  fort  of  men  by  the  rich  man  here  in  the 

parable,  who  when  his  barns  were  full,  and  ready  to 

crack,  his  mind  was  not    filled  \  therefore  he  pulls 

them  down  and  builds  greater ;  and  if  he  had  lived 

'till  thefe  had  been  full,  they  mufl  have  gone  dov;n 

too,  and  he  would  ftill  have  built  greater.     So  that 

tho'  he  defign'd  when  he  had  raifed  hiseftateto  fuch 

a  pitch,  to  have  fat  dov/n,  and  taken  his  eafe,  yet 

his  covetous  humour  would  have  been  flirring  again, 

and  flill  have  flept  in  between  him  and  contentment, 

and  for  ever  have  hindred  him  from  arriving  at  it. 

III.  Byway  of  direction,  T  would  perfuade  thofe 
who  are  rich,  to  be  charitable  with  what  they  have. 
If  God  hath  blefl  us  with  abundance,  and  we  would 
not  be  like  this  rich  man  here  in  the  parable,  we  mufl 
lay  out  of  our  eflates,  in  ways  of  piety  and  charity,  for 
the  publick  good,and  for  the  private  relief  of  thofe  who 
are  in  want ;  for  that  is  the  aVoc/^co-ir,  or  moral  of  the 
parable  •,  "  fo  is  he  that  layethup  treafures  to  himfelf, 
«'  and  is  not  rich  towards  God."     So  fliall  he  be; 

fuch 


The  evil  and  unreafonablenep  of  coveioufnefs.      1493 

fuch  an  iirae  of  his  folly  may  every  one  expedl,  (to  ^^^^^ 
be  taken  away  from  his  eftate  before  he  comes  to  en-  ^ 
joy  it)  "  who  layeth  up  treafures  for  himfelf,  but  is 
'^  not  rich  towards  God  ;"  but  does  not  lay  up  riches 
with  God.     How  is  that?  By  works  of  mercy,  and 
charity.     This  our  Saviour  calls  "  laying  up  for 
*'  ourfelves  treafure  in  heviven  ;"  iVTatt.  xvi.  20.  And 
at  the  33d  verie  of  this  chapter,  he  calls  giving  of 
alms,  "  providing  for  ourfelves  bags  which  v/ax  not 
"  old,  a  treafure  in  the  heavens  which  faileth  not:" 
they  who  do  thus,  who  "  are  rich  in  good  works, 
"  ready  to  diftribute,  willing  to  communicate,'*  are 
faid  to  ''  lay  up  for  themfelvcs  a  good  treafure  againft 
"  the  time  which  is  to  come,  that  they  may  lay  hold 
"  on  eternal  life,"    i  Tim.  vi.  18,  19.  Extra  fortu- 
nam  eft  quicquid  donatur-y  *'  whatfocver   we  give  to 
"  the  poor  is  fafely  difpofed,  and  put  out  of  the  reach 
''  of  fortune,"  becaufe  it  is  laid  up  in  heaven,  where 
we  may  exped:  the  return  and  recompence  of  it. 
Charity  to  our  poor   brethren  is  a  certain  way  of 
tranfmitting   our  riches  into  the  other   world,  for 
our  reception  there.     So  our  Lord   tells  us,  Luke 
xvi.  9.  "  I  fay  unto  you,  make  to  yourfelves  friends 
"  of  the  mammon  of  unrighteoufnefs,  that  when  ye 
"  fhall  fail  (that  is,  when  ye  fhall  leave  this  world, 
*'  and  the  enjoyments  of  it)  they  may  receive  you 
**  into  everlafting  habitations." 

At  the  great  day  of  judgment,  when  we  fhall  ap- 
pear before  God,  and,  according  to  our  Saviour's 
reprefentation  of  the  proceedings  of  that  day,  fhall 
hear  him  thus  expoftulating  with  men,  "  I  was  hun- 
*'  gry,  and  ye  gave  me  no  meat ;  thirfl:y,  and  ye  gave 
"  me  no  drink-,  naked,  and  ye  clothed  me  not; 
Vol.  VI.  II  O  "  fick 


T494  *^^^  ^'^^'^  ^^^  unreafonahlenefs  of  covet  ouftiefs, 
S  E  RM.  "  fick,  and  in  prifon,  and  ye  vifitcd  me  not  •,"  what 
^'^^^}'  would  we  then  give,  how  much  of  our  eftates,  if  we  had 
them  then  at  our  command,  would  we  not  be  willing 
to  part  withal,  to  have  that  comfortable  fentence 
pad  upon  us  ;  *'  come,  ye  blefied  of  my  Father," 
«  inherit  the  kingdom  prepared  for  you  before  the 
*'  foundation  of  the  world !  "  But  if  we  be  found 
among  thofe  who  would  fpare  nothing  out  of  their 
abundance  to  any  charitable  ufe  and  purpofe,  I  have 
not  the  heart  to  tell  you  how  miferable  the  condition 
of  fuch  perfons  will  be,  and  how  dreadful  a  doom  will 
be  palTed  upon  them. 

It  is  a  fad  confideration,  that  there  are  fome  per- 
fons in  the  world,  who  feem  to  be  only  defedive  in 
this  duty  i  like  the  young  man  in  the  gofpel,  who 
lacked  but  "  this  one  thing  "  to  make  him  pcrfedl  ; 
"  he  had  kept  the  commandments  from  his  youth  j" 
and   preferved  himfelf  fro  m  thofe  grofs  fins  which 
the  law  did  plainly  forbid  j  and  yet  for  want  of  "this 
*' one  thing"  he   parted   from  his  Saviour,  and, 
for  any  thing  we  know,  fell   fhort  of  eternal  life. 
There  are  many  who  are  very  devout  and  religious, 
much  in  prayer  and  failing,  and  all  the  other  frugal 
exercifes  of  piety,  which  coft  them  no  money  j  but  yet 
are  very  defe6live  in  alms  and  charity,  which  in  fcrip- 
ture  are  fo  frequently  joined  with  the  fadings  and 
prayers  of  good  men  ,  and  by  this  means,  all  their  de- 
votion and  diligence  in  the  other  parts  of  religion  is 
loft, and  will  not  bring  them  to  heaven.  And  is  it  not 
great  pity, that  they  who"  are  not  far  from  the  king- 
*'  dom  of  God  fhould  fall  fhort  of  it  ? "  that  they, who 
in  moft  other  things  bid  fo  fair  for  heaven,  fhould 
break  with  God  upon  this  fingle  point? 

I  know 


7 he  evil  and  unreafonahlenefi  of  coveioufnefs,    1495 
I  know  men  have  feveral  ways  to  deceive  their  SERM. 

vp  J  r  r 

own  hearts,  and  to  defend  themfelves  againft  all  thefe 
afTaults. 

Firfl:,  they  fay,  they  are  injurious  to  no  man,  in  not 
being  charitable.  And  'tis  true,  that  in  human  courts 
the  poor  can  have  no  a6lion  againft  the  rich  for  want 
of  charity  to  them  ;  but  yet  for  all  that,  they  do  in- 
jurioufly  detain  that  which  doth  not  of  right  belong 
to  them.  They  are  cruel  and  hard-hearted,  and  they 
are  guilty  of  high  breach  of  truft,  in  refped  of  God, 
whofe  ftewards  they  are,  and  who  hath  dealt  fo  libe- 
rally with  them  in  the  things  of  this  life,  on  purpofe 
to  oblige  them  to  be  {6  to  others.  That  which  thou 
floreft  up,  without  regard  to  the  neceffities  of  others, 
is  unlawfully  detained  by  thee,  fince  God  intended  it 
fliould  have  been,  "  for  bread  to  the  hungry,  and 
"  clothes  to  the  naked,"  and  for  help  and  relief  "  of 
<'  thole  who  are  ready  to  perifh."  For  why  art  thou 
rich,  and  another  poor  .?  but  that  thou  mighteft  exer- 
cife  thy  charity  upon  thofe  fitting  objects  which  the 
providence  of  God  prefents  to  thee.  It  had  been 
eafy  for  God  (fince  "  the  earth  is  his,  and  the  fulnefs 
*'  thereof")  fo  to  have  contrived  things,  that  every 
r^an  fhould  have  had  a  fufHciency,  and  have  been 
in  a  moderate  condition  ;  but  then  a  great  many 
virtues  would  have  been  lliut  out  of  the  world,  and 
loft,  for  want  of  opportunity  to  exercife  them. 
Where  then  liad  been  the  poor  man's  patience, 
and  the  rich  man's  pity  ?  and  the  contentednefs  of 
men  of  moderate  fortune  ? 

Secondly,  men  fay  that  they  have  children  to  pro- 
vide for.  And  do  fo  in  Goo's  name,  for  he  allows 
us  to  do  it  liberally  j  but  unlefs  their  condition  and 

1 1  O  2  wealth 


1 196     The  evil  and  imreafojiablenefi  of  covet  on fnefs 

^xcvi'  ^^'^^^^^^  ^^^  ^^^^  above  an  ordinary  calling,  do  not 
choofe  fo  to  provide  for  them,  as  to  take  them  off  from 
all  employment,  left  you  put  them  in  the  ready  way  to 
be  undone;  have  a  care  of  leaving  them  no  other  bu- 
finefs,  but  to  fpend  what  you  have  left  them  ;  if  you 
do  fo,  they  will  in  all  probability  do  that  v/ork  very 
effe(R:ually,and  make  as  much  hafle  to  be  poor,  as  you 
did  to  make  them  rich.  If  men  could  be  but  contented 
to  do  that  which  is  befl:  for  their  children,  they  might 
do  a  great  deal  better  for  themfelves,  by  difpofing 
what  they  have  to  fpare  in  charity. 

Thirdly,  others  would  fain  excufe  themfelves  from 
this  duty  at  prefent  by  telling  what  they  intend  to  do 
when  they  come  to  die,  that  is,  when  they  can  keep 
\vhat  they  have  no  longer.  It  feems  then  thou  wilt  leave 
it  to  thy  executor  to  do  good  in  thy  flead.  This  Ihews 
thou  haft  no  great  heart  to  the  bufmefs,  when  thou  de- 
ferred it  as  long  as  ever  thou  canfl.     But  why  wilt  thou 
truft  another  with  the  difpofal  of  thy  charity,   rather 
than  thyfelf  ?  This  is  hardly  to  offer  either  "  a  reafona- 
j  *'  ble,  or  a  living  facrifice  to  God,"  to  do  good  only 
when  we  are  dead.   It  is  well  that  God  hath  made  all 
fmen  mortal,  and  that  "  it  is  appointed  for  all  men  once 
I  *'todiej"  otherwife  fome  men  would  never  do  good  at 
'  all. 

Wherefore  fetting  afide  thefe,  and  all  other  excufes, 
which  will  not  be  admitted,  nor  will  any  of  us  have  the 
face  to  plead  them  at  the  day  of  judgment ;  I  fay,  fet- 
ting afide  all  excufes  whatfoever,  let  us  refolve  to  do 
good  with  what  we  have  whilft  we  can  ;  and  to  that 
end  let  us  lay  afide  fome  portion  of  what  God  hath  bled 
us  withal,  for  the  ufes  of  piety  and  charity,  and  let  it 
bear  fome  decent  proportion  to  what  God  hath  given 
us,'  .   '  There 


Religion^  ourjirjl  and  great  concernment.        1497 

There  is  never  want  of  proper  objedts  for  our  large  ft 
charity,  and  now  lefs  than  ever.  Befides  thofe  at  home, 
which  prefent  themfelves  to  us  in  great  numbers  every 
day,  God  hath  fent  us  many  from  abroad,  who  call 
loud  upon  us  for  our  pity  and  help,  both  as  they  are  re- 
duced to  the  greateft  extremity,  and  are  fufferers  in  the 
beft  caufe,  that  of  our  common  religion,  which  ought 
now  to  be  dearer  to  us  than  ever.  Let  us  fhew  mercy 
now,  as  we  expedl  mercy  from  others,  in  any  day 
of  our  diftrefs  in  this  world,  and  as  ever  we  hope,  when- 
ever we  come  to  appear  before  the  judgment-feat  of 
Christ,  "  to  find  mercy  with  theLoRointhatday/' 

Confider  what  I  have  faid  upon  this  argument,  and 
let  this  extraordinary  kind  of  caution  which  our  Sa- 
viour here  gives,  make  a  deep  impreffion  upon  your 
minds  5  ^' take  heed,  and  beware  of  covetoufnefs ; 
*'  for  a  man's  life  confifteth  not  in  the  abundance  of 
*'  of  the  things  which  he  pofTefleth." 

SERMON    XCIV* 

Religion,    our    firll    and    great  con- 
cernment. 

M  A  T  T  H.   vi.  zZ' 

But  feek  ye  firft  the  Kingdom  of  God ^  and  his  Rightouf" 
nefs  \  and  all  thefe  things  jloall  he  added  unto  you. 

IN  the  latter  part  of  this  chapter,  our  Saviour  s  E  R  M. 
doth  in  a   long  difcourfe   caution  his  difciples   ^^^_^- 
againft  an  inordinate  care  about  the  things  of  this 
life,  which  he  concludes  v/ith  a  flridl  charge  to  make 

religion 


149  S  2?^%/^/^,  our  Jirfi  and  great  concernment. 
SE  R  M.  religion  their  firfl:  and  great  concernment,  and  above 
■  alJ  things  to  take  care  to  fecure  to  themfelves  the 
happinefs  of  another  life;  "  but  fcek  ye  firfl  the 
"  kingdom  of  God,  and  his  righteoufnefs,"  &c.  In 
the  handling  of  which  v;ords,  I  fhall  do  thefe  four 
things. 

Firfl:,  I  fhall  explain  v/hat  is  here  meant  by  "  the 
''  kingdom  of  God,  and  hisrighteoufnefs." 

Secondly,  What  by  feeking  of  thefe. 

Thirdly,  1  fhall  lay  down  fome  neceffary  and  plain 
dirciftions,  which  if  we  obferve,  we  cannot  m^ifcarry 
in  this  matter. 

Fourthly,'  I  fhall  {'^x.  before  you  fbme  of  the  mofl 
proper  and  powerful  motives  and  encouragements  to 
the  minding  of  this  great  interefl  and  concernment ; 
among  which,  I  fhall  particularly  confider  the  argu- 
ment or  encouragement  here  ufed  in  the  text,  ''  and 
"  all  thefe  things  fhall  be  added  unto  you." 

Firfl,  I  fhall  explain  to  you  what  is  here  meant  by 
«'  the  kingdom  of  God,   and  his  righteoufnefs/' 

I.  What  is  meant  by  the  kingdom  of  God.  And 
there  are  two  famous  acceptations  of  this  phrafe,  and 
both  of  them  very  frequent  in  the  new  teftament. 
Sometimes  it  is  ufed  to  fignify.the  flateof  the  gofpel, 
or  the  chriflian  religion,  which  by  the  Jews  was 
called  the  kingdom  of  God,  or  the  kingdom  of  the 
MefTias,  tVlark  i.  15.  ''  The  kingdom  of  God  is 
^'  at  hand,"  that  is,  the  flate  or  difpenfation  of  the 
gofpel  is  now  approaching,  and  ready  to  take  place. 
Luke  xvii.  20.  The  Pharifees  demanding  of  our  Sa- 
viour, ''  when  the  kingdom  of  God  fhould  come  ^" 
that  is,  when  the  reign  of  the  Meflias  fhould  com- 
mence i   he  anfwers  them,  *'  the  kingdom  of  God 

"  cometh 


'Religion^  our  jlrjl  mid  great  concernment.        1499 
*^  Cometh   not  with  obfervation  i"  that  is,  not  with  S  E  R  M.- 
any   temporal   pomp    and   fplendor,  fo  as  to  draw 
the  eyes  of  people  after  it,  as  the  Jews  did  vainly  ima- 
o-ine;  but"  the  kino;dom  of  God,  Ivtoj-  -oaml^v^ 
*^  is  among  you  j"  not  within  you,  as  our  tranflation 
hath  improperly  rendred  it ;   the  kingdom  of  God 
(he  tells  them)  is  already  come  unto  you,  the  MefTias 
is  among  you,  and  ye  are  not  aware  of  him.    In  the 
like  fenfe  this  phrafe  is  ufed.  Matt.  xxi.  43.  "  The 
*'  kingdom  of   God   (that  is,  the  gofpel)    fliall  be 
''  taken  from  you,  and  given   to  a  nation  bringing 
<«  forth  the  fruits  thereof."    And  fo    likewife   the 
phrafe  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  ufed.  Matt,  xi, 
II.  v*'here  fpeaking  of  John  the  baptift,   our  Savi- 
our faith,  "  that  among  them   that  were  born  of 
*'  women,    there  hath  not  rifen  a  greater  than  John 
^'  the  Baptifc  ;*'  that  is,    there  was  no  greater  perfon 
than  he,  under  the  Jewilh  difpenfation  \  and  yet  "  he 
*'  that  is  lead  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven,'*  that  is, 
under  the  difpenfation  of  the    gofpel,  "  is  greater 
*^  than  he." 

Now  tho'  this  fenfe  of  the  kingdom  of  God  be 
not  wholly  excluded  in  the  text,  yet  there  is  another 
fenfe  of  this  phrafe  very  ufual  likewife  in  the  fcrip- 
ture,  and  v/hich  is  more  agreeable  to  the  fcope  of  our 
Saviour's  argument  and  difcourfe,  and  fo  it  fignifies 
that  future  ftate  of  happinefs  and  glory  which  good 
men  Ihall  be  advanced  to  in  another  world,  in  oppofi- 
tion  to  this  life,  and  the  enjoyments  of  it,  which  our 
Saviour  had  before  forbidden  his  difciples  to  be  fo 
felicitous  about.  "  Take  ye  no  thought,  faying,  what 
<'  Ihall  we  eat  ?  or  what  fhall  we  drink  ?  or  v/here- 
"  withal  fhall  we  be  clothed :"    and  then   it  follows 

in 


2500        ReHgioHy  our  Jirji  mid  great  cojicernraent, 

SERM.in  diredl  oppofition  to  this  inordinate  and  folicitous 
-^^  care  about  worldly  things,  "  but  feek  ye  firft  the 
"  kingdom  of  God,  and  his  righteoufnefs."  That 
is,  be  not  fo  fohcitous  about  the  conveniencies  and 
neceflaries  of  this  hfe,  as  about  the  happinels  of  the 
other,  and  the  means  to  it.  And  this  fenfe  of  this 
phrafe  of  the  kingdom  of  God  is  fo  very  frequent  in 
the  new  teftament,  that  I  fhall  not  need  to  give  par- 
ticular inflances  of  it. 

II.  What  is  meant  by  rlghteoufnefs,  "  feek  ye 
*'  firft  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  his  righteoufnefs.'* 
Righteoufnefs,  in  the  ftridteft  and  m.oft  proper  fenfe 
of  the  word,  fignifies  the  particular  virtue  of  jufticej 
and  very  frequently  in  the  old  teftament  it  is  ufed  for 
charity  to  the  poor,  or  almfgiving,  Pfal.  xxxvii.  25, 
26.  "  I  have  been  young,  aud  now  am  old,  yet  have 
*'  1  not  feen  the  righteous  forfaken,  nor  his  feed 
*'  begging  bread  -,  he  is  ever  merciful,  and  lendeth,'* 
and  Pfal.  cxii.  9.  "  he  hath  difperfed,  he  hath  given 
•'  to  the  poor,  his  righteoufnefs  endureth  for  ever." 
But  'righteoufnefs  in  its  largeft  and  moft  extended 
fenfe,  comprehends  all  the  virtues  of  a  good  man; 
and  fo  it  fignifies  here  in  the  text,  and  in  many  other 
places  of  fcripture. 

So  that  "  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  his  righte- 
'^  oufnefs,"  comprehends  the  whole  bufineis  of  re- 
ligion, our  laft  end,  which  is  eternal  life  and  happi- 
nefs  in  another  world ;  and  the  way  and  means  to 
this  end ;  which  is  righteoufnefs,  or  that  univerfal 
goodnefs  which  God  requires  of  us,  and  whereof  he 
himfelf  is  a  pattern  and  example  to  us ;  for  which 
reafon  'tis  call'd  "  his  righteouinefs."  And  in  this  fenfe 
of  our  laft  end,   and  the  way  and  means  to  it,  "'  the 

''  kingdom 


XCIV. 


Rel/gion,  our  Ji^Jl  and  great  cojicernmenf.  1501 
^^  kingdom  of  heaven,  and  righteoufnefs,'*  are  ufedSERM. 
in  another  place,  even  of  this  fermon  of  our  Savi- 
our's upon  the  mount,  Matt.  v.  20.  ^'  except  your 
*'  righteoufnefs  fhall  exceed  the  righteoufnefs  of  the 
*'  fcribes  and  pharifees,  yc  fhall  in  no  cafe  enter  into 
*'  the  kingdom  of  heaven  '* ;  where  righteoufnefs  is 
made  the  necefTary  means  and  condition  of  eternal 
life.     I  proceed  in  the 

Second  place,  to  explain  what  is  meant  by  ''  feek- 


CC 


ing  firfl  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  his  righteouf- 
*'^  nefs, "  And  this  fignifies  the  greateft  intention  of 
mind,  and  earneftnefs  of  endeavour  about  the  bufi- 
nefs  of  religion,  in  order  to  our  attaining  of  eternal 
happinefs;  fuch  a  ferioufnefs  and  earneftnefs  of  endea- 
vour as  earthly-minded  men  ufe  about  the  things  of 
this  world.  ''  For  after  all  thefe  things  flays  our  Sa- 
''  viouR  immediately  after  the  text,j  do  the  Gcn- 
**  tiles  feek  \  rd  i^m  sTrj^nTei,"  which  words  fignify 
an  intenfe  care,  and  vigorous  endeavour ;  "  but  leek 
"  ye  firfl  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  his  righteouf- 
*'  nefs^'*  that  is,  be  ye  who  profels  your  felves  chri- 
ftians,  as  intent  upon  the  bufineis  of  religion,  and  the 
falvation  of  your  fouls,  as  the  heathen,  who  are  in  a 
gr-^a^  meafure  ignorant  of  God  and  another  life,  are 
a^out  the  things  of  this  life. 

And  here  are  two  things  to  be  explained. 

I.  What  is  here  meant  by  "  feeking  the  kingdom 
*'  of  GoD^  and  his  righteoufnefs  ;''  and 

II.  What  by  "  feeking  them  in  the  fird  place,  " 
For  the  firft :  a  fincere  and  earned  "  feeking  of 

"  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  his  righteoufnefs,"  does 
imply  in  it  thefe  four  things. 

I.  A  fix'd  defign  and  refolutlon  as  to  the  end; 

Vol.  VI.  II  P  that 


1502  Religion^  ourjirjl  and  great  concernment, 
S  E  R  M.  that  we  do  not  only  propound  to  our  felves  the  eter- 
nal happinefs  and  falvation  of  our  fouls  as  our  chief 
end,  but  that  we  be  immoveably  fixed  upon  it,  and 
always  have  it  in  our  aim  and  defign  *,  that  here  we 
fet  up  our  refolution,  if  it  be  pofTible,  to  be  happy 
for  ever  ♦,  that  we  have  this  end  always  in  our  eye,  and 
be  firmly  refolved  to  do  all  that  we  can  towards  at- 
taining! t. 

Not  that  we  are  obliged  always  a6lually  to  think 
upon  it-,  but  to  have  it  frequently  in  our  minds,  and 
habitually  to  intend  and  defign  it,  fo  as  to  make  it 
the  fcope  of  all  our  endeavours  and  adions,  and  that 
every  thing  we  do  be  either  diredly  and  immediately 
in  order  to  it,  or  fome  way  or  other  fubfervient  to  this 
defio-n,  or  however  not  inconfiftent  with  it  5  like  the 
term  and  end  of  a  man's  journey,  towards  which  the 
traveller  is  continually  tending,  and  hath  it   always 
habitually  in  his  intention,  tho'  he  doth  not   always 
think  of  it  every  ftep  that  he  takes,  and  tho*  he  be 
not  always  diredly  advancing  and  moving  towards  it, 
yet  he  never  knowingly  goes  out  of   the  way.  And 
tho'  he  bait  and  lodge  by  the  way,  and  does  many 
other  things  which  do  not  diredly  fet  him  forward, 
yet  they  are  all  fubfervient  to  his  journey,  or  in  profe- 
cution  of  it ;  or  at  leaft  no  wilful  deviations  from  it. 
Thus  it  fhould  be  with  us,   while  we  are  fojourning  in 
this  world  s  our  fix'd  aim  and  defign  fhould  be  to  get 
to  heaven,  and  thither  we  fhould  be  continually  tend- 
ing in  our  defires  and  endeavours. 

And  if  this  refolution  be  deeply  rooted  and  fixed  in 
our  minds,  it  will  govern  all  our  adtions,  and  keep 
them  fleady  to  their  main  end.  Whereas,  if  we  be 
uncertain  and  unrefolved  upon  our  great  end,  and  be 

divided 


Religtoriy  our  frji  and  great  concernment.  1503 
divided  between  the  happinefs  of  the  next  life,  and  S  R  E  M. 
the  prefent  enjoyments  of  this,  we  fhall  be  fickle 
and  unfteady  in  all  our  motions.  He  that  hath  two 
ends,  can  purfue  neither  vigoroufly,  but  while  he  is 
moving  towards  the  one,  he  leans  and  inclines  to 
the  other  ;  and  like  a  needle  between  two  load- 
flones,  is  always  in  a  doubtful  and  trembling  con- 
dition ;  inclines  to  both,  but  is  conflant  to  neither  ; 
and  this  is  the  meaning  of  that  aphorifm  of  St.  James, 
"  the  double-minded  man  is  unflable  in  all  his 
"  ways."  He  that  is  unrefolv'd  as  to  his  main  end, 
hath  two  minds,  and  can  profecute  nothing  vigo- 
roufly :  but  if  our  mind  be  once  fixed  and  refolved, 
that  will  determine  and  govern  all  our  motions,  and 
infpire  us  with  diligence,  and  zeal,  and  perfeverance 
in  the  profecution  of  our  end. 

2.  "  Seeking  the  kingdom  of  God  and  his  righ- 
"  teoufnefs  ;"  implies  incefiTant  care  and  diligence 
as  to  the  means ;  that  we  make  religion  our  bufinels, 
and  exercife  our  felves  in  the  duties  of  it,  both  in 
publick  and  private,  at  proper  times  and  feafons, 
with  the  fame  ferioufnefs  and  application  of  mind, 
as  men  do  in  their  callings  and  profeflions,  for  the 
gaining  of  wealth  and  preferment ;  efpecially  on 
the  LoRD's-day,  which  God  hath  taken  to  himfelf, 
and  fet  apart  for  the  duties  of  his  v/orfliip  and  fcr- 
vice.  Not  that  we  are  excufed  from  minding  religion 
at  other  times  ^  but  that  thofe  who  are  prefied  and 
ftraitned  by  the  neceffary  cares  of  this  life,  may  be 
fure  to  mind  it  then,  and  may  have  no  colour  of 
excufe  for  the  negled  of  it  at  that  time,  which  God 
hath  allotted  for  that  very  purpofe,  and  which  it  is 
unlawful  to  employ  about  our  v/orldly  affairs.     God 

II  P  2  expects 


1504        Religion^  our  Jirjl  mid  great  concernment, 
S  ER  M.  expefls  that  we  fhould  ferve  him  at  other  times,  that 
^^^^-1'  i  we  iliould  iive  in  an  habitual  fenfe  of  him,  and  (as 
Solomon  exprefTeth  it,  Prov.  xxiii.  17.)  "  Be  in  the 
"  fear  of  the  Lord  all  the  day  long;"  fo  as  to  be 
careful  not  to  offend  or  tranfgrefs  in  any  thing,  and 
fo  as  to  redeem  fall  opportunities  for  the    exeicife  of 
piety,  and  devotion  \  but  this  day  he  peremptorily 
challengeth  to  himfelf,  and  expedts  we  fhould  em- 
ploy it  in  his  fervice,  and  dedicate  it  to  religion  to  the 
contemplation  of  God  and  heavenly  things,  and  the 
care  of  our  immortal  fouls,   with  the  fame  ferioufnefs 
and  diligence,  as  we  do  upon  other  days  "  labour  for 
"  the  bread  which  periflieth  ;  '*  and  the  lefs  leifure  wc 
have  upon  other  days  for  this  purpofe,  the  more  in- 
tirely  fliould  we  devote  and  confecrate  this  day  to 
the  purpofcs  and  duties  of  religion. 

Not  but  that  our  whole  life,  and  all  the  aflions  of 
it,  jfhoald  be  under  the  government  of  religion,  and 
diredbed  by  the  laws  and  rules  oF  it ;  and  it  fhould 
be  our  continual  care  and  endeavour  to  pleafe  God 
in  all  things,  and  we  fhould  take  as  much  pains, 
and  be  as  heartily  concerned  to  be  good  men,  as 
men  of  the  world  are  to  grow  rich  and  great  in  this 
world  'y  nay  fo  much  more,  by  how  much  it  is  a 
better  and  nobler  defign  to  improve  in  grace  and 
virtue,  than  to  profper  and  thrive  in  our  temporal 
eftate  j  and  we  do  not  in  good  earneft  "  feek  the 
"  kingdom  of  God,  and  his  rightcoufnefs, "  if  this 
be  not  our  great  ftudy  and  endeavour,  to  fubdue 
pur  lufts,  and  govern  our  paflions,  and,  in  a  word, 
to  reform  whatever  is  amifs  in  the  inward  frame  and 
temper  of  our  minds,  and  in  our  outward  converfa- 
tion.  And  indeed  nothing  does  requires  greater  di- 
ligence. 


Religion,  our  fir fl  and  great  concernment.         ^S^f 
ligence,  and  attention,  and  care,  than  for  a  man  to  S  E  R  M, 
become  truly  and  thoroughly  good,  to  be  meek  and 
humble,   and  patient  and  contented,   and  refigned  to 
the  will  of  God  in  every  condition  ;  to  be  peaceable, 
and  charitable,  and  placable,  and  ready  to  forgive  ; 
thefe  are  great  and   difficult   things,   and,  whatever 
we  think,  not  the  work  of  a  wifh,  or  the  efFecfl  of  a 
fudden  refolution  before  the  receiving  of  the  holy  fi^ 
crament,  no  nor  the  fruit  of  frequent  and  fervent 
prayers,  without  the  hearty  concurrence  of  our  own 
care  and  endeavour,  to  render  our  lives  fuch,    as  v/e 
pray  God  by  his  grace  to  afild  and  enable  us  to  be. 
3,   ''  Seeking  the  kingdom  of 'God  and  his  rlgh.- 
"  teoufncfs,"  does  further  imply  zeal  and  earneRnels 
in  the  purfuit  of  this  defign  :  and  this  is  a  degree 
above  diligence  ;  for  zeal  is  an  ardour  and   fervency 
of  mind  in   the  profecution   of  a  thing  for    which 
you  are  greatly  concerned,  and  which  we  vehement- 
ly defire  to  obtain  ;  it  is  the  hottefl  and  moll  inrenfc 
degree  of  our  affedlion  towards  any  thing,  of  our 
defire  and  love,  mixed  with  anger  at  every  thing  that 
flands  in  our  way  and  hinders   us   from  obtaining 
what  we  feek  after ;  fuch  an  heat  as  ambition  does 
commonly  infpire   men  withal,    in    the    purfuit  of 
power  and  preferment.     Such  ought  to  be  the  tem- 
per of  our  minds,  and  the  edge  of  our  fpirits,    "in 
"  feeking  the   kingdom  of  God,"   as  does  ufually 
pofTefs  men  in  feeking  the  kingdoms  of  this  world, 
and  the  glory  of  them.      We  mufb  remember,  that 
it  is  a  kingdom  which  we  feek  for,  and  afpire  after; 
not  like  the  unfrable  and  tottering  kingdoms  of  this 
world,  but  "  a  kingdom  which  cannot  be  fliaken,'* 
as  the  apollle  calls  it. 

So 


1506         Religion,  our JirJI:  and  great  concernment. 

S  E  R  M.  So  that  the  greatnels  of  the  defiorn,  and  the  excel- 
lency  of  what  we  feek  after,  will  juflify  and  warrant 
the  higheft  degree  of  a  difcreet  zeal  and  fervour  in 
the  profecution  of  it ;  and  therefore  no  wonder  that 
the  fcripture  in  this  matter  ufeth  words  that  import 
the  greateft  vehemency  and  earnednefs,  bidding  us 
*'  to  drive  to  enter  in  at  the  flrait  o;ate,  to  labour 
^'  and  watch,  to  run,  and  v/reftle,  and  fight,"  and, 
in  a  word,  "  to  give  all  diligenee,  to  make  our 
*'  calling  and  election  fure." 

Laftiy,  "  feeking  the  kingdom  of  God  and  his 
*'  righteoufnefs,"  does   imply  patience  and  perfevc- 
rance  in  our  endeavours  after  them,  and  that  we  ne- 
ver ceafe  our  purfuit  of  them,  'till  we  have  obtained 
them  j  and  this,  notwithftanding  all  the  difficulties 
and  difcouragements,  the  oppofition  and  perfecution 
that  we  meet  with  "  for  righteoufnefs  fake.'*     For 
this  we  mud  expe6t,  and  reckon  upon  before-hand, 
to  encounter  many  difficulties,  and  many  difcourage- 
ments  in  the  ways  of  religion  j  for  "  flrait  is  the 
"  gate,  and  narrow  is  the  way  that  leads  to  life,"  as 
our  Lord  himfelf  hath  told  us  :  nay  we  mud  count 
to  be  grievoufly  "  perfecuted  for  righteoufnefs  fake,'* 
and,  if  God  fee  it  good   for  us,  "  to  pafs   through 
"  many  tribulations,"  before  we  ffiall  enter  "  into 
*'  the   kingdom   of  Godj"  and  therefore  we  had 
need  to  be  armed  with  a  great  deal  of  patience,  and 
a  very   firm  and  obdinate  refolution,  to  enable  us 
to  bear  up,  and  to  hold   out  againd  all  thefe ;  for 
this  is  a  neceflary  qualification  for  our  "  feeking  the 
"  kingdom  of  God  and  his  righteoufnefs.'*     So  our 
Lord  hath  told  us,  Matth.  x.  21.  "  he  that  en- 
"  dureth  to  the  end,  ffiall  be  faved  5  "  if  we  "  hope 

"  to 


Religion^  our  jirjl  and  great  concernment,  i  roj 

"  to  receive  the  crown  of  life,  we  muft  be  faithful  S  E  R  M. 
"  to  the  death.  Rev.  ii.  lo."  And  to  the  fame  pur-  ^^^^• 
pofe  St,  Paul   declares,   Rom.  ii.  7.    that  they  only 
fliall  be'made  partakers  of  "eternal  hfe,who  by  patient 
"  continuance  in  well-doing,  feek  for  glory,  and  ho- 
"  nour,  and  immortality." 

You  fee  what  is  meant  by  ''  feeking  the  kingdom 
"  of  God,  and  his  righteoufnefs  ;"  it  remains  briefly 
to  be  fhewn,  in  the  fecond  place,  what  is   meant  by 
feeking  thefe  firfl ;  "   feek  ye  firft  the  kingdom  of 
*'  God,  and  his  righteoufnefs  j"  that  is,  let  this   be 
your  main  and  principal  defign,  fo  as  to  take  place  of 
all  others  in  your  efteem  and  affedlions,  in  your  aim 
and  endeavour ;  in  comparifon  of  this,  mind  nothing 
elfe,  not   the  comforts  and    conveniencies,  not   the 
neceflaries  of  life,  "  what  ye  (hall  eat,  and  what  ye  fhall 
"  drink,  and  wherewithal  ye  fhall  be  clothed."  Thefe 
you  fee  our  Saviour  inflanceth  in  before  the  text,  as 
not  to  be  regarded  and'taken  care  of,  when  they  come 
in  competition  with  "  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  his 
*'  righteoufnefs."     And  our  Saviour  tells  us  elfe- 
where,  that  not  only  none  of  the  comforts  and  necef- 
aries  of  life  are  to  be   valued  againft  him,  and  his 
religion*,  but  that   even  this  temporal  life  itfelf,  as 
dear  as  it  is  to  us,  is  to  be  parted  withal,  and  given  up, 
rather  than  to  quit  the  profelTion  of  his  truth  and  re- 
ligion; Matt.  X.  37,  38.  "  He  that  loveth  father  or 
*'  mother  more  than  me,  is  not  worthy  of  me ;  and 
'^  he  that  loveth  fon  or  daughter  more  than  me,  is 
*'  not  worthy  of  me."     He  inflanceth  in  the  neared 
relations,  thofe  towards  whom  we  have  the  mofl  ten- 
der and  relenting  affedlions,    and  yet  he  tells    us, 
that  the  confideration  of  his  truth  and  religion  ought 

to 


1508  Religion,  ourjirjl  and  great  concernment, 
SE  R  M.  to  take  place  of  thefe,  nay  even  of  life  itfeJf :  fot  fo 
■^  it  follows,  and  "  he  that  taketh  not  his  crofs,  and  fol- 
^'  lovveth  after  me,  is  not  worthy  of  me."  St.  Luke  ex- 
prefTeth  it  more  ftrongly  and  vehemently,  Luke  xiv. 
26.  "  li  any  man  come  to  me"  (that  is,  take  upon 
him  the  profelTion  of  my  religion)  "  and  hate  not 
"  his  father,  and  mother,  and  wife,  and  children, 
''  and  brethren,  and  fillers,  yea,  and  his  own  life  alio, 
^'  he  cannot  be  my  difciple."  When  thefe  come  in 
competition  with  our  religion,  and  the  great  intereit 
of  our  eternal  falvatlon,  we  are  to  regard  and  value 
them  no  more  than  if  they  w^ere  the  objects  of  our 
hatred,  but  to  fet  afide  all  confideration  of  affedlioii 
tQ  them,  fo  far  as  it  would  tempt  us  from  coriflancy 
in  our  religion,  and  the  care  of  our  fouls. 

So  that  when  our  Saviour  bids  us  "  lirfh  to  feek 
''  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  his  righteoufnefs,"  his 
meaning  is,  that  religion,  and  the  concernments  of 
our  fouls,  and  the  eternal  happinefs  of  them  in  another 
"world,  fnould  be  our  firft  and  chief  care;  and  that  all 
other  things  fliould  be  made  fubordinate  and  fubfjrvi- 
ent  to  this  great  defign,  and  to  be  no  farther  minded  by 
uSj  than  they  really  are  fo:  for  that  which  is  our  great 
end,  will  fubdue  all  other  things,  and  bring  them  into 
fubjedlion  to  it,  and  will  rejed;  them,  and  throw  them 
afide,  if  they  be  inconfiltent  with  it.  If  heaven  be 
our  utmofl  ami,  and  in  order  to  that,  it  be  our  great 
fludy  and  endeavour  to  be  righteous  and  holy,  this 
refolution  and  defign  fincerely  entertained,  will  over- 
rule all  other  confiderations,  and  make  all  the  things  of 
this  v^orld  to  floop  and  give  way  to  that  which  is  our 
chief  end,  the  eternal  happinefs  and  falvation  of  our 
fouls.     And  thus  I  have  done  with  the  fecond  thing 

I 


'Religion^  our  ftrjl  and  great  coficernment.  ^5^9 

I  propofed,  namely,   what  is  meant,  by  "^  feeking  S  E  R  M, 


€( 


the  kingdom  of  God,  and  his  righteoufnefs ,"  and 


what  *'  by  feeking  them  fir  ft.'* 

I  proceed  in  the  third  place,  to  Jay  down  feme 
plain  rules  for  our  diredionand  furtherance  "  in  feek- 
*'  ing  the  kingdt)m  of  God,  and  his  righteoufnefs  j  " 
that  is,    in  the  great  bufinefs  of  religion. 

Firft,  let  us  always  live  under  a  lively  and  power- 
ful fenfe  of  another  world  ;  that  we  are  placed  here 
in  this  world,  but  for  a  little  while,  and  that  wholly 
in  order  to  our  preparation  for  a  better  and  happier 
life.  Let  this  thought  be  often  in  our  minds  :  that 
eternity  is  the  moll  confiderabie  duration,  and  the 
next  world  the  place  of  our  everlafting  abode,  where 
we  muft  dwell  and  continue  for  ever  ;  and  therefore 
our  prefent  ftate  is  but  of  little  moment  and  confide- 
ration  to  us,  but  only  in  order  to  our  future  and  ever- 
lafting condition.  We  may  pleafe  ourfelves  here  for 
a  little  while  with  toys  and  trifles,  with  dreams  and 
fliadows  of  pleafare  and  happinefs,  and  may  be  exercifed 
with  fome  troubles  and  afFiidions  for  a  Ihort  fpace, 
•'  for  a  moment  (as  the  apoftle  calls  it)  our  light  af- 
**  fiidions  which  are  but  for  a  moment,''and  fo  indeed 
it  is,  compared  with  all  eternity  ;  but  the  fubftantial 
and  durable  happinefs  or  mifery  remain  for  men  in 
the  other  world,  and  will  certainly  be  their  portion, 
according  as  they  have  demeaned  themfeJyes  in  this 
world. 

Now  the  ferious  confideration  of  this  cannot  fiil 
to  put  us  upon  vigorous  preparations  for  another 
world,  and  to  make  us  wholly  intent  upon  our  eter- 
nal concernments,  and  to  refolve,  whatever  becomes 
of  us  in  this  world,  to  take  effedual  care  that  we  may 

Vol.  VI.  II  Q^  be 


J  5 1  o  Religion^  our  jlrft  and  great  concernment, 
S  E  R  M.  be  happy  for  ever.  He  that  firmly  beheves  the  immor- 
^^^\  tality  of  his  foul,  and  a  Hfe  after  death,  which  will 
never  have  an  end,  mufi:  needs  take  into  confideration 
his  whole  duration,  and  bend  all  his  care  and  thoughts, 
how  he  may  avoid  the  greateft  and  moft  lading  mi- 
fery,  and  fecure  to  himfelf  an  immortality  of  blils 
and  happinefs. 

Secondly,   let  us  always  be  under  a  convi(flion  of 
the  abfolute  and  indifpenfable  neceffity  of  hohnefsand 
righteoufnefs,  as  the  only  way  and  means  whereby 
the  kingdom  of  God  is  to  be  attained,  and  that  holi- 
nefs  and  happinefs  are  not  to  be  feparated,  the  one 
being  a  neceiTary  condition  and  qualification  for  the 
other  ;and  confequcndy,  that  it  is  the  vaineft  thing  in 
the  world  for  any  man  to  hope  to  enter  into  the  king- 
dom of  God,  without  endeavouring  after  his  righte- 
oufnefs ;  there  is  fo  ftrong  a  connexion  between  them, 
that  a  man  may  as  rcafonably  exped:  to  be  well  and 
at  eafe  without  health,  as  to  be  happy  without  holi- 
nefs ;  for  this  makes  us  like  to  God,  and  our  hkc- 
nefs  and  conformity  to  God,  is  that  alone  which  can 
make  us  capable  of  the  bleifed  fight  and  enjoyment  of 
God.  We  mud  be  "  partakers  of  the  divine  nature,'* 
in  order  to  our  participation  of  the  divine  bleffednefs. 
And  the  confideration  of  this  will  effedually  engage 
us  ''  to  feek  the  righteoufnefs  of  God,"  without  which 
we  fliall  never  enter  into  his  kingdom ;  and  "  to  fol- 
<«  low  holinefs,  without  which  no  man  fhall  fee  the 
«  Lord." 

Thirdly,  let  us  always  remember  that  righteouf- 
nefs is  of  a  great  extent,  and  comprehends  in  it  all 
goodnefs ;  it  takes  in  all  the  duties  of  religion,  and 
the  pradice  of  all  of  them  i  it  is  a  complication 

of 


Religion,  oiirfirfi  and  great  concernment.  15 1 1 
of  all  graces  and  virtues,  of  all  the  parts  and  ingre-SE^^M. 
dients,  of  all  the  duties  and  offices  of  a  good  man. 
To  denominate  a  man  righteous,  all  caufes  muft  con- 
cur ;  all  the  cflential  principles  and  parts  of  religion 
and  goodnefs  muft  meet  to  together  v  knowledge  and 
pradice,  faith  and  good  works,  right  opinions  and 
real  virtues,  an  orthodox  Drofeffion  and  a  holy  life, 
abftaining  fromfiii  and  doing  of  righteoufnefs,  purity 
of  heart  and  unfpotted  manners,  godlinefs  and  ho- 
nefty,  the  bridling  of  our  tongue,  and  the  govern- 
ment of  our  palTions,  and  "  above  all  things  charity, 
*'  which  is  the  band  of  perfection." 

For  righteoufnefs  is  our  conformity  to  the  law  of 
God,  as  unrig hteoufnefs  and  fin  is  the  tranfgreflion 
of  it :  now  this,  if  it  be  real  and  fincere,   will  be 
uniform  and  univerfal,  equally  refpedling  all  the  laws 
of  God,  and  every  part  of  our  known  duty,  and  will 
not  content  itfelf  Vv^ith  an  efpecial  regard  to  one  or 
two  precepts  of  the  law,  tho'  never  fo  conliderable, 
and  then  allow  itfelf  in  the  negledl  and  violation  of 
the  reft,  no,  nor  with  the  obfervation  of  the  duties  of 
one  table  of  the  law,  if  it  overlook  the  other  ;  no, 
nor  with  obedience  to  all  the  commandments  of  God, 
one  only  excepted.  St.  James  hath  put  this  very  cafe, 
and  determined  it,  "  that  he  that  fhall  keep  the 
"  whole  law,  fave  only  that  he  offend  in  one  point, 
"  is  guilty  of  all  j"  that  is,  he  is  not  fincere  in  his 
obedience  to  the  reft :    and  therefore  if  we* "  feek 
"  the  righteoufnefs  of  God,'*  our  righteoufnefs  muft 
be  univerfal ;  "  as  he  that  hath  called  us  is  holy,  fo 
*'  muft  we  be  holy  in  all  manner  of  converfation,"  in 
the  tenor  of  our  adtions,  and  the  whole  courfe  of  our 
lives  %  and  any  one  reigning  fin  and  vice,  any  grofs 

n  0^2  and 


1 5 1 2         Religion^  our  fir jl  and  great  concernment, 

SER  M.  and  notorious  defe6l  in  the  virtues  of  a  good  life,  will 
^^^_^  -^  fpoil  our  righteoufnels,  and  will  effedlually  ihut  us 
out  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 

Fourthly,  let  us  wifely  fubordinate  the  feveral  parts 
?Lnd  duties  of  religion  to  one  anotherjaccording  to  the 
intrinfical  worth  and  value  of  them,  that  fo  we  may 
mind  every  part  of  religion  in  its  due  place,  and  ac- 
cording to  the  true  nature  and  importance  of  it. 
Knowledge  and  faith  are  in  order  to  pratlice,  and  a 
eood  life  \  and  fignify  nothing  unlefs  they  produce 
that ;  the  means  of  religion,  fuch  as  prayer  and  fad- 
ing, diligent  reading,  and  hearing  the  word  of  God, 
reverent  and  devout  receiving  of  the  bleffed  facrament, 
are  of  lefs  account  and  value,  than  that  which  is  the 
end  of  all  thefe,  which  is  to  make  us  inwardly  and 
really  good,  and  "  fruitful  in  all  the  works  of  righ- 
"  teoufnefs,  which  by  Jesus  Christ  are  to  the 
"  praife  and  glory  of  God."  And  therefore  the 
means  of  religion  w^hich  I  have  mentioned,  are  to  be 
regarded  and  ufed  by  us,  in  order  to  the  attaining  of 
thefe  ends,  without  which  they  are  mere  formality 
and  hypocrify,  and  inftead  of  finding  acceptance 
with  God,  they  are  "  an  abomination  to  him,  and 
^'  his  foul  hates  them.'* 

And  fo  likewife  the  circumflances  of  religion  arc 
lefs  confiderable  than  the  fubftantial  means  and  inftru- 
mcnts  of  it.  And  therefore  all  rites  and  ceremonies 
are  in  religion  of  lefs  confideration,  than  the  fub- 
flance  of  God's  worfhip,  and  ought  always  to  be 
fubordinate  to  it.  In  like  manner  the  rhoral  duties 
of  religion,  comprehended  under  "  the  two  great 
*'  commandments  of  the  love  of  God,  and  our 
f?  neighbour,"  becaufe  they  are  of  eternal  and  indif- 

pen  fable 


Religion,  our  fir fl  and  great  concernment.         15 13 
penfable  obligation,  are  to  be  preferred  to  matters  of  S  E  R  M. 
meer  pofuive  inftitution ;    and  where  they   cannot  ^^^^ ' 
ftand  together,  that  which  is  pofitive  ought  to  be  fee 
afide,  and  to  give  way  for  the  prefent  to  that  which 
is  moral  and  good  in  its  own  nature,    and  not  only, 
becaufe  it  is  commanded  and  enjoin'd ;    for  in  this 
cafe  God  hath  expredy  declared,  that  ^'  he  will  have 
"  mercy,    and  not  facriiice/'  Upon  which  ground 
our  Saviour  declares,  that  the  law  of  the  fibbath 
ought  to  give  place  to  works  of  mercy.    Upon  the 
fame  account  peace  and  charity  are  to  be  valued  above 
matters  of  nicety  and  fcruple,  of  doubtful  difpute  and 
controverfy  ;    becaufe  the  former  are  unqueftionably 
good,  the  latter  doubtfully  and  uncertainly  fo. 

All  thefe  things  ought  to  be  confider'd,  and  are  of 
great  moment  to  make  a  man  fmcerely  and  wifely 
religious.  For  men  may  keep  a  great  ftir  about  Ibme 
parts  of  religion,  and  be  very  careful  and  diligent, 
zealous  and  earnefi:  about  the  means  and  inftruments 
of  religion,  and  in  the  exercifes  of  piety  and  devo- 
tion ;  and  yet  be  deflitute  of  the  power  and  life  of  it 
and  fall  fhort  of  that  inward,  and  real,  and  fubflan- 
tial  righteoufnefs,  v/hich  alone  can  qualify  us  for  the 
kingdom  of  God. 

The  fifth  and  lafl  diredlon  I  would  give,  is  this ; 
that  we  have  a  particular  regard  to  the  great  duty  of 
charity,  or  almfgiving,  this  being  very  frequently  in 
fcripture  called  righteoufnefs,  as  being  an  eminent 
part  of  religion,  and  a  great  evidence  of  the  truth 
and  fincerity-of  our  piety.  And  this  our  Saviour 
particularly  diredls  to,  as  the  way  to  *'  the  kingdom 
"  of  G0D5"  Luke  xii.  '},'}^',  After  this  general  ex- 
hortadon,  "  to  feek  the  kingdom  of  God,'*  he  in- 

ftanceth 


15 14         Rellgwi,  ourjirjl  and  great  concernment. 
S E R M  ftanceth  in  chanty,    as  the  dire6t  way  to  it;  "  eive 
'  '^  ahns,  provide  for  your  felves  bags  that  wax  not 
■'  old,  a  treafure  in  the  heavens,  which  faileth  not.'* 
And   elfewhere  our  Saviour  fpeaks  of  this   grace 
and  virtue,  as  that  which,  above  all  others,  will  make 
way  for  our  admiflion  into  heaven,  Luke  xvi.  9.  ''  I 
*'  fay  unto  you,  make  to  your  felves  friends  of  the 
*'  mammon  of  unrighteoufnefs,  that  when  ye  fail, 
"  they  may  receive  you  (or  ye  may  be  received)  into 
*^  everlafting    habitations*'.    And  St.  Paul  calls  it, 
*^  laying  up  in  (lore  for  our  felves  a  good  foundation  j" 
or  ("as  the  word  may  better  be  rendered  in  this  placed 
"  a  good  treafure  againfl  the  time  to  come,  that  we 
"  may  lay  hold  on  eternal  h*fe,"  i  Tim.  vi.  19.  '^x.. 
James  fpeaks  cf  it,    as  a  main  and  mod  efiential  part 
of  religion,  and  the  great  evidence  of    a  true  and 
fmcere  piety.  Jam.  i.  27.  "  Pure  religion,   and  un- 
*•'-  defiled  before  God  and  the  Father,  is  this;  to 
*'  vifit  the  fatherlefs  and  widows  in  their  afflidion.'* 
Finally,  oul'  Lord  inflanceth  in  this,    as  the  very 
thing  which  will  admit  us  into,  or  fhut  us  out  of  hea- 
ven ;  by  the  performance  whereof   we  (hall  be  ab- 
folved,  and  for  the  negledl  thereof  we  fhall  be  con- 
demned in  the  judgment  of  the  great  day,  Matt.  xxv. 
So  that  this  part  of  righteoufnefs  or  ^religion,  ought 
in  a  more  efpecial   manner  to  be   regarded  by   us; 
becaufe  upon  the  performance  or  negle6t  of  this  duty, 
our  eternal  happinels  doth  fo  much  depend. 

The  fourth  and  lad  thing  only  remains  to  be  fpoken 
to ;  which  is,  to  fet  before  you  the  moft  proper  and 
poweriul  motives  and  encouragements,  to  the  mind- 
ing ot  this  great  mtereft  and  concernment.  But  this 
will  be  the  fubjed  of  another  difcourfe. 

SERMON 


SERMON     XCV. 

Religion,    our  firft:    and    great   con- 
cernment. 


M  A  T  T  H.  vi.  33. 

But  feek ye  Jirft  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  his  righteouf- 
nefs  'i  and  all  thefe  things  Jhall  he  added  unto  you, 

THESE  words,  which  I  began  to  difcourfc  SER  M, 
upon  the  laft  day,  are  a  ftridt  charge  and  "^^1^ 
command  to  all  chriftians,  to  mind  the  bufi-Thc  fe- 

nefs  of  religion  in  the  firft  place,  and  to  take  all  ima-^^'"''^  ^"• 
"  r        '  nion  on 

ginable  care  to  fecure  the  happinefs  of  another  life ;  this  cext. 
*'  but  feek  ye  firft  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  his  righ- 
*'  teoufnefs  j  and  all  thefe  things  ftiall  be  added  un- 
to you."     In  the  handhng  of  which  argument, 
Firft,  I  explained  what  is  meant  "  by  the  king- 
dom of  God,  and  his  righteoufnefs." 
Secondly,  I   ftiew'd  what  is  meant  "  by  feeking 
thele  ;  "  and  what  "  by  feeking  them  firft." 
Thirdly,  I  laid  cown  fome  rules  for  our  diredlion 
and  furtherance  in  cius  great  bu'inefs. 

I  ftiall  now  proceed  to  repreicnt  to  you  in  the 
Fourth  and  laiL  place,  fome  of  the  moft  proper 
and  powtrful  arguments  and  encouragements,  to 
engage  us  to  the  minding  of  this  great  intereft  and 
concernment;  amongft  which,  I  fnall  in  the  laft 
place  particularly  confider  the  encouragement  here 

given  in  the  text,  *'  feek  ye  firft  the  kingdom  of 

''  G0D5 


(C 


cc 


(C 


15 1 6         Keliglon^  our  firft  and  great  c  oncer  72ne72t. 

SERM. '•  God,  and  his  righteoufnefs ;  and  all  thefe  things 
XC\^     cc  ii^^ii  |3g   added  unto  you." 

"  Firfl,    my    firit     argument    iliall    be    from    the 
worth  and  excellency  of  the  tilings  we  feek,  "  the 
"  kingdom  of  God,  and  his  righteoufneis  \  *'  Vv'hich 
are  certainly   the   greateft  and   beil    things  we  can 
feek.     The  kingdom  of  God,  is  tlie  eternal  falva- 
vation  of  oar  fouls,  everlafting  life  and  happinefs  in 
another  world,   which,  to  animate  our  endeavours, 
and  to  tempt  our  ambition  the  more,  are  fet  forth 
to  us  under  the  notion  of  a  kingdom.    And  what 
will  not  men  do  to  obtain  that  .?  what  pains  will  they 
not  take  .'*  what  hazards  will  they  not  run  .^  what  diffi- 
culties will  they  not  grapple  with,   to  break  through 
if  they  can,  to  come  to  a  kingdom  ?  which  when 
they  have  obtained,   they  are  expofcd  to  as  many, 
and  commonly  to  more   cares  and  fears,  to  greater 
difficulties  and  dangers  in  the  keeping,  than  they 
vv^ere  for  the  getting  of  it  :  and  yet  all  this  men  will  do 
for  a  corruptible  crown,  for  one  of  the  petty  king- 
doms and   principalities  of  this  world,    which    are 
continually  tottering,    ind  ready  to  be   overturned 
by  open   violence,  or  to  be  undermined    by  fecrct 
treachery.     But  the  kingdom  which  I  am  fpeaking 
of,  and  perfaading  you  and  my  felf  to  feek  after,  is 
not  like  the  kingdoms  of  men,   and  of  this  world  ; 
it  is  called  the  kingdom  of  God,  to  fignify  to  us 
the  excellency  and   flability  of  it;  as  much  beyond 
any  oF  the  kingdoms  of  this  world,  as  the  heavens 
are  high  above   the  earth,  and  as   God  is  greater 
than  man  ;    "  a  kingdom  which  cannot  be  fhaken, 
*'  a  crown  which  fadeth  not  away,"  a  fcep ter  which 

cannot  be  wrefled  from  us. 

But 


ReltgioJiy  our  firfl  and  great  concernment  ^S^7 
But  to  quit  the  metaphorj  and  fpeak  to'  the  thing  ;  s  E  R  M, 
the  kingdom  of  God  imports  the  eternal  falvation^  ^2-. 
of  ofer  fouls ',  I  fliy  of  our  fouls,  which  both  in  re- 
lpe6t  of  the  dignity  of  our  nature,  and  tiieir  im- 
mortal duration,  are  infinitely  more  valuable  than 
any  of  the  perifning  things  of  this  world,  and  ought 
to  be  much  dearer  to  us.  Other  things  are  without 
us,  they  neither  conftitute  our  being,  nor  are  eflen- 
tial  to  our  happinefs  -,  but  our  fouls  are  our  felves, 
and  the  lofs  of  them  is  our  utter  ruin  and  deftruc- 
tion.  So  that  nothing  is  to  be  regarded  by  us  with 
equal  care  and  concernment,  as  the  falvation  of  our 
immortal  fouls ;  that  is,  that  we  may  be  refcued 
from  eternal  mifery,  and  everlaftingly  happy  ia 
another  world.  And  can  we  be  at  too  much  coil 
and  pains  upon  fuch  a  defign,  to  efcape  fo  difmal  a 
condition,  fo  dreadful  a  ruin,  as  that  of  body  and 
foul  to  all  eternity  ?  can  any  man  be  concerned  enough 
to  bring  about  fo  great  a  good  to  himfelf  ?  or,  can 
he  purchafe  it  too  dear,  whatever  he  give  or  pare 
with  for  it  ?  a  good  fo  defirable,  and  fo  dura- 
ble, as  our  being  happy  for  ever.  When  We 
purchafe  the  things  of  this  world,  the  riches  and 
honours  of  it,  at  the  expence  of  fo  much  time,  and 
care,  and  trouble,  we  pay  dear  for  trifles  and 
fancies  ;  but  eternal  happinefs  is  a  jewel  of  fo  inefti- 
mable  a  price,  that  a  wife  merchant  will  have  it 
at  any  rate,  and  "  fell  ^11  that  he  hath  to  pur- 
"  chafe  it." 

Of  fuch  value  is  the  kingdom  of  Got}  -,  and  next 

to  it  is   righteoufnefs,   which   is   the  only  way  and 

means  whereby  this  kingdom  is  to  be  attained,  and 

therefore  to  be  fought  by  us  with  the  greateft  dili-  * 

Vol.  VI.  II  R  gence 

4. 


jriS        Religion^  our  fir fi  and  great  concernment, 

S  E  R  M-  gence  and  earneftnefs :  for  that  which   is  the  only 
xCv .    j^-j£^j^5  |-Q  r^  great  and  defirable  end,  and  which  alone 
can  make  us  capable  of  that  end,  and  which  in  ttuth 
is  a  degree  of  it,  is  valuable  next  to  the  end,  and 
almoil  equally  with  it  •,    and  fuch  is  righteoufnefs , 
in  refpect  of  the  kingdom  of  God  *,  it  is  the  only 
means  to  it,  it  is  that  alone  which  qualifies  us,  and 
makes  us  capable  of  happinefs  %  nay,  it  is  an  eflential 
ingredient  into  it,  and   that  which  does  in  a  great 
meafure  conftitute  the  happinefs  of  heaven :   for  that 
temper  of  mind,    that   conformity  and   likenefs   to 
God,  which  holinefs  and  righteoufnefs  brings  us  to, 
is  the  true  foundation  of  our  happinefs,  and  accord- 
ing to  the  beft  apprehenfions  we  have  now  of  it, 
is  the  very  formal  caufe  and  eflence  of  our  blefied- 
nefs.     So  St.  John  tells  us,   i  Joh.  iii.   2.  ''  It  doth 
*'  not  yet  appear  what  we  fhall  be  -,  but  we  know 
^'  that  when  he  fhall  appear,  we  fhall  be  like  him  •, " 
that  is,  we  do  not  now   diftindtly  underfland  where- 
in  the  happinefs  of  the  next  life  confifts,    we    are 
not  able  to  frame   a  clear  ancj  perfed;  idea  of  it  , 
but  this  we  know  in  general,  that  it  confifts  in  our 
jikenefs   to    God,    in  a  conformity    to    the  moral 
perfedlions  of  the  divine  nature,  which  are   expreft 
by  the  name  of  purity  and  holinefs  -,  and   therefore 
every  one  that  hopes  for  the  happinefs  of  heaven, 
muft  endeavour  after   holinefs  \   "  every  man  that 
"  hath  this  hope  in  him,  muft  purify  himfelf,  even 
*'  as  he  is  pure." 

So  that  the  things  which  I  am  prefllng  you  to 
feek  after,  are  mofl  eftedually  recommended,  by  tel- 
ling you  what  they  are;  the  kingdom  of  God  is 
eternal  life  and  happinefs,  and  his  righteoufnefs  is 

univerfal 


Religion,  our  fir  ft  and  great  concernment,  1519 

uniyerfal  holinefs  and  goodnefs,  without  which  noSERM; 
man  is  qualified  for  this  blelTcd  flate.  Now  if  there 
be  any  thing  better  than  goodnefs,  any  thing  more 
defirable  than  a  happinefs  which  hath  no  bounds,  nor 
no  end ;  do  not  mind  them,  nor  look  after  them  : 
but  if  there  be  not ;  then  certainly  thefe  are  worthy 
of  the  care  and  endeavour  of  our  whole  life. 

Secondly,  another  confideration  that  fhould  very 
much  excite  and  quicken  our  endeavour  and  diligence 
in  fceking  thefe  things,  is  the  difficulty  of  obtaining 
them.  This,  I  confefs,  is  no  encouragement,  buc 
it  is  a  very  good  motive  and  argument  to  whet  our 
induftry  in  feeking  thefe  things,  when  we  plainly  fee 
that  they  are  not  to  be  had  upon  other  Terms.  And 
this  confideration  our  Saviour  ufeth  to  quicken  us 
to  ftrive  and  to  contend  earneftly  for  eternal  life. 
Matt.  vii.  14.  "  becaufe  flrait  is  the  gate,  and  nar- 
"  row  is  the  way  which  leadeth  to  life,  and  few 
*'  there  be  that  find  it  .^"  And  Luke  xiii.  24.  "  drive 
"  to  enter  in  at  the  flrait  gate;  for  many,  I  fay  unto 
*'  you,  will  feek  to  enter  in,  and  fhall  not  be  able.'* 

Seeking  here,  in  oppofition  to  ilriving,  is  a  faint 
and  weak  endeavour,  which  will  not  carry  us  through 
this  narrow  and  diflicuk  pafTage ;  and  this  is  the  rea- 
fon  why  many  mifcarry,  who  make  fome  attempts 
towards  heaven  ;  but  they  do  not  ftrive,  they  do  not 
put  forth  any  vigorous  endeavours  to  get  thither. 

Now  the  difficulty  of  attaining  eternal  happinefs, 
arifeth  fr6m  the  difficulty  of  ths  way  and  means  to 
it ;  and  it  is  therefore  hard  to  attain  the  kingdom  of 
God,  becaufe  it  is  hard  to  attain  his  righteoufnefs. 
As  defirable  as  it  is,  it  mud  be  acknowledged  very 
difficult  for  a  man  to  raife  himfelf  to  that  temper 

1 1  R  2,  and 


152^'  Religio?:,  our  fir ji  and  great  C072cernmenf, 

S  ERM.  and  difpofition  of  mind,  fo  to  fubdue  his  lufts,  and 
govern  his  pafTions,  to  bridle  his  tongue,  and  order 
all  the  adions  qf  his  life,  as  is  neceflary  to  qualify 
him  for  happinefs,  and  to  make  him  fit  to  be  admit- 
ted into  the  kingdom  of  God. 

And  this  difficulty  is  chiefly  in   our   felves,    but 
greatly  increafed  by  temptation  and  oppofition  from 
without :    chiefly,   I    fay,    in   our  felves,    from  the 
flrong  bias  of  our  evil  and  corrupt  inclinations,  and 
the  ftrong  power  of   vicious   habits   and  cufloms, 
which  when  they  are  grown  inveterate,    do  tyrannize 
over  us,    and  make  us  perfed:  flaves,    and   lead  us 
captive  at  their  pleafure;   io  that  our  nature  mud  be 
quite  chang'd,  and  as  the  apoftle  exprefTcth  it,  we 
muft  be  "  renewed  in  the  fpirit  of  our  minds,"  our 
fouls  muft  be  nev/  moulded  and  fafhioned,  we  muft 
be,  as  it  were,  created,   and  born  again,  before  we 
can  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God.     In  this  our 
Saviour  is  pofidve  and  peremptory,  John  iii.  33. 
*'  Verily,  verily,  I  fay  unto  you, except  a  man  be  born 
^'  again,  he  cannot  fee  the  kingdom  of  God.'*   This 
difficulty  indeed  is  greateft  at  firft,  but  it  is  confide - 
rable  afterwards,    *till  a  thorough  change  be  made^ 
and  new  inclinations  planted  in  us,  and  the  contrary 
habits  of  grace  and  virtue  be  fuper-induced. 

And  that  which  increafeth  the  difficulty  is  out- 
ward  temptation  and  oppofition  from  the  world, 
and  the  devil  -,  which  to  withftand  and  refift,  re- 
quires great  courage  and  refolution,  great  watch- 
vfulnefs  and  guard  over  our  felves.  But  yet  for  our 
comfort,  thefe  difficulties  are  not  infuperable  to  that 
grace  and  affiftance,  which  God  is  always  ready  to 
afford  to  us  upon  fo  good  an  occaflon,  and  to  fo  good 

a 


Religion^  oiirjirjl  and  great  concernment.         1521 
a  purpofe  -,  "  greater  is  he  that  is  in  y o;i,than  he  that  S  E  R  MJ 
**  is  in  the  world."  And  this,  I  am  fare,  is  matter    ^^^' 
of  great  encouragement  tons,  thattho*  the  difficult/ 
oF  '•'  working  out  our  falvation"  be  great,   yet  if  we 
do  in  good  earneft  fet  about  it,  God  is  ready  to  affift 
and  fecond  our  fmcere  endeavours,  "  to  work  in  us 
''  both  to  will  and  to  do  of  his  own  goodnefs,"  and 
fo  to  prevent  us  with  his  gracious  favour,  and  to  fur- 
ther us  with   his  continual   aid,  that  finally  by   his 
iTiercy  we  may  obtain  eternal  life. 

Thirdly,  another  powerful  argument  to  care  and 
diligence,  is  the  fatal  danger  of  mifcarriage  in  a  mat- 
ter of  fo  great  concernment.  We  may  do  many 
things  in  religion,  and  take  fome  pains  to  get  to 
heaven,  and  yet  flill  fhort  of  it.  The  rich  youno- 
man  in  the  gofpel,  our  Saviour  tells  us,  was  "  not 
*'  far  from  the  kingdom  of  God,'*  and  he  broke 
with  our  Saviour  only  upon  one  point,  he  was  too 
much  addided  to  the  world,  and  loth  to  part  with 
his  great  poflelTions,  and  diftribute  them  in  charity 
to  the  poor,  and  thereupon  he  left  our  Saviour,  and 
for  any  thing  we  can  find,  never  returned  to  him 
again. 

If  the  world  govern  and  bear  fway  in  our  hearts, 
if  we  "  rpind  earthly  things"  firft,  and  make  thefe 
our  chief  care  and  defign,  ''  the  Hingdom  of  God 
*'  and  his  righteoufnefs  fliall  not  be  added  unto  us;'* 
if  we  will  not  mind  them  in  the  firll  place,  they  are 
too  good  to  be  acceffarics. 

And  if  upon  any  one  point  we  mifcarry,  either 
out  of  love  to  the  world ,  or  alfedlion  to  any  other 
luft  or  vice  that  we  are  loth  to  part  withal,  our  mif- 
carriage is  ftitalj  and  the  ruin  which  we  bring  upon 

our 


1522        Re/lghn,  our  firjl  and  great  concernment, 

SERM.Qur  felves  irreparable;  for  the  foul  once  loft,  is  loft 
^^y^  for  ever.  If  we  have  negleded  the  opportunity  of 
"  working  out  our  own  falvation,'*  while  we  are  in 
this  world,  it  will  never  return  into  our  power  again, 
death  will  fhut  the  door  againft  us,  and  we  lliall  never 
*'  fee  the  kingdom  of  God.'* 

Fourthly,  it  is  a  mighty  encouragement  to  us  to 
confider,  that  if  we  fmcerely  ^'  feek  the  kingdom  of 
''  God,  and  his  righteoufnefs,"  there  is  not  only  a  fair 
probability  of  obtaining  them,  but  all   the  fecurity 
we  can  defire.    Men  may  be  in  good  earneft  for  the 
things  of  this  World,  may  love  them  v/ith  all  their 
hearts  and  fouls  (as  we  fee  too  many   do)  and  feek 
them  with  all  their  might  and  ftrength,  and  yet  after 
all  their  endeavours  may  be  fhamefully  fruftrated  and 
difappointed  of  their  end.    There  are  many  examples 
of  this  kind  daily  before  our  eyes,  and  yet  men  are 
not  difcouraged.  from  feeking  thefe  things.      A  fair 
probability,    nay  almoft  a   pofTibility   of  attaining 
them,  is  enough  to  a  worldly-minded  man  to  drudge 
and  toil  for  them.   Why  the  fame  affe(rtion,  the  fime 
zeal,  the  fame  unwearied  endeavour  to  pleafe   God, 
and  to  fave  our  fouls,  would  infallibly  bring  us  to  hea- 
ven* fit  was  a  fad  but  true  faying  of  cardinal  Wolfey, 
when  he  was  leaving  the  world,  ''  had  I  been  but  as 
*'  careful  to  pleafe  God,  as  I  have  been  to  ferve  my 
^'  prince,  he  would  not  have  forfaken  me  now  in  the 
*'  time  of  my  gray  hairs." 

Nay.  it  is  to  be  hoped,  that  lefs  diligence  and  care 
about  the  co.  icernments  of  our  fouls,  and  another 
life,  than  many  men  ufe  about  the  things  of  this  life, 
will  lecure  our  eternal  happinefs,  or  elfe  it  is  to  be 
feared,  that  but  very  few  would  be  laved ;  and  who 

would 


Religiofi,  our  firfl  and  great  concernment.         '^5'^'i 
would  not  place  his  induftry  and  endeavour  upon  a  S  E  R  M. 
defign  in  which  he  is  fure  not  to  mifcarry,  if  he  do  but  ' 

heartily  and  in  good  earneft  purfue  it  ?  eipecially  when 
it  will   be  of  infinite  greater  advantage  to  him,  than 
any  defign  he  can  propound  to  himfelf  for  this  world. 
If  a  man  may  be  certainly  happy  for  ever,  upon  the 
fame,  or  eafier  terms,  than  he  can  ordinarily  compafsany 
of  thofe  little  defigns  which  men  propofe  to  themfelves 
in  this  world,  who  would  not  feck  that  which  is  moil 
worthy  the  having,  and  which  he  is  furell  to  obtain? 
Fifthly,  and  ladly,  the  encouragement  here  in  the 
text  is  not  inconfiderable  ;  that  if  "  we  feek  the  king- 
*'  dom  of  God  and  hisrighteoufnefs,  all  thefe  things 
"  fhall  be  added  unto  us."  '   This  certainly  is  a  very 
tempting  confideration  ;  for  who  would  not  be  glad 
to  reconcile  the  enjoyment   of  this  world  v^'ith  the 
hopes  of  heaven,  and  eternal  happinefs  ?    But  men 
do  not  generally  like  our  Saviour's  method,  they 
would  feek  the  things  of  this  world  in  the  firfl:  place, 
and  get  to  heaven  at  lad  j  they  v^rouldbe  content  to 
feek  the  one,  and  have  the  other  caft  in  and  conferred 
upon  them,  without  their  feeking.     But  this  will  not 
be  granted,  this  way  will  not  do.     And  yet  our  Sa- 
viour has  gone  as  far  as  one  would  think  could  in 
reafon  be  defired  j  he  hath  promifed  that  if  we  will 
make  religion,  and  the  falvation'of  our  fouls,  our  firfl 
and  chief  care,  that  ''  all  thefe  things  fhall  be  added 
"  unto   us."     So  that  the  > defign  of  going  to  hea- 
ven, and  being  happy  for  ever,  is  no  ways  inconfi- 
ftent  with  a  competent  portion   of  the   things   of 
this  life.     *'  Godliiiefs  (the  apoille  tells  us)  hath  the 
*'  promife  of  this  life,  and  of  that  which  is  to  come." 
Thebufinefs  of  religion,  the  pradice  of  a  holy  and 

virtuous 


1524         Religion  J  ourjjrji  and  great  concernment, 

SER  Ai  virtuous  lite,  is  no  hindrance  to  a  man's  thrivinec  in 
his  temporal  eflate;  nay.  In  many  refpeds  it  is  apt  to 
promote  and  advance  it ;  by  engaging  us  to  diligence 
in  our  calling,  and  by  deriving  the  blefling  of  God 
upon  our  honelt  and  lawful  endeavours  ;  by  obliging 
us  to  the  Uriel  and  conftant  practice  of  truth  and 
juftice,  and  fidelity  in  all  our  dealings  and  commerce, 
which  are  the  bell  way  to  eftablifli  a  clear  and  folid 
reputation,  and  good  efteem  among  men,  which  is 
an  unfpeakable  advantage  in  bufinefs,  and,  at  the  long 
run,  one  of  the  beft  and  mofl  lading  inflruments  of 
profperity  and  fuccefs. 

Befides,  that  religion  frees  a  man  from  thofe  paf- 
fions  and  vices,  which  do  naturally  tend  to  diffipate 
and  ruin  mens  eftates ;  as  intemperance  and  Jewdnefs, 
which  are  every  way  chargeable  vices,  and  do  not  on- 
ly take  men  off  from  bufinefs,  and  render  them  unfit 
for  it ;  but  wade  their  efbates,  and  bring  many  other 
inconveniences  upon  their  perfons and  families.  Re- 
ligion makes  men  meek  and  peaceable,  and  inoffenfive 
in  word  and  deed,  which  is  a  great  fecurity  againfl 
chargeable  fuits  and  contentions,  and  all  forts  of  in- 
juries and  affronts  from  others.  Among  all  the  bea- 
titudes of  our  Saviour,  he  only  promifeth  temporal 
happinefs  to  meeknefs,  "  bleflcd  are  the  meek,  for 
*'  they  fhall  inherit  the  earth."  They  who  provoke 
and  offend  no  body,  are  likely  to  be  the  leaft  difturbed 
and  difquieted  by  others  in  their  pofTeflions  and  enjoy- 
ments; "  who  will  harm  you  (faith  the  apoflle,  i  Pet. 
♦'  iii.  13.)  if  ye  be  followers  of  that  which  is  good  ? " 
Some  may  be  fo  perverfe  as  to  perfecutea  man  for  his 
goodnefs ;  but  it  rarely  happens ;  moft  men  have  not 
only  a  kindnefs,  but  a  veneration  for  true  goodnefs. 

By 


Religiofiy  ourjirjl  and  great  concernment.         152^ 

By  all  thefe  ways  religion  naturally  tends  to  theSERM. 
temporal  profperity  of  men,  and  the  promorino-  of  ^^^" 
their  welfare  and  happinefs  even  in  this  world  ;  be- 
fides  that  the  providence  of  God  is  very  peculiarly 
concerned  for  good  men,  and  a  fpecial  blelTing  attends 
them  in  all  their  undertakings.  So  that  exceptino-  the 
cafe  of  perfecution  (which  God  will  particularly  con^ 
fider,  and  reward  in  another  world)  the  religious  and 
good  man,  who  fincerely  "  fceks  the  kingdom  of  God, 
"  and  his  righteoufncfs,"  flands  as  fair,  and  is  upon  as 
good  terms,  for  all  the  lawful  enjoyments  of  this  world, 
as  he  that  makes  it  his  only  defign  to  be  rich  and  o-reac 
in  this  world ;  nay,  as  to  the  neceffaries  of  this  life, 
and  a  competency  of  outward  things,  he  hath  a  much 
greater  and  better  fecurity  from  the  providence  and 
promife  of  God,  than  the  men  of  the  world  have  by 
all  their  care  and  pains. 

Befides,  that  he  hath  this  confiderable  advantage, 
by  minding  thefe  things  only  as  accefTaries,  that  if 
he  mifs  of  them,  he  hath  fomething  better  to  fup- 
port  him  in  the  want  of  them  ;  being  fecure  of  a  hap- 
pinels  which  this  world  can  neither  give  nor  take  from 
him.  But  now  the  worldly  man,  if  he  be  defeated 
in  his  defigns,  is  of  all  men  moil  miferable,  becaufe 
he  hath  nothing  elle  to  comfort  him,  nothing  elfe  to 
truft  to ;  he  fails  of  his  hopes  as  to  this  world,  and 
hath  done  what  in  him  lies  to  make  his  cafe  defpe- 
rate  as  to  the  other. 

Upon  all  thefe  confiderations  and  encouragements, 
you  fee  how  reafonable  it  is,  that  we  fliould  make  reli- 
gion, and  the  concernment  of  another  life,  our  great 
care  and  bufinefs.  And  yet  how  are  thefe  negleded  by 
the  greateft  part  of  mankind !  and  by  the  bed  of  us 

Vol.  VI.  II  S  (God 


t  r26       Religiojiy  our  jirjl  and  great  concernment, 

SERM.  (God  knows)  not  minded  as  they  ought,  and  as  they 
^^y*  ^  delerve!  What  can  wc  fay  for  ourfelves  in  excufe  of 
fo  intdlerable  a  folly  ?    There  are  two  or  three  things 
which  men  commonly  pretend,    if  not  in  juftifica- 
tion,  yet  in  mitigation  and  excufe  of  this  great  neg- 

ledl. 

Firll,  they  pretend  great  difficulties  and  difcouragc- 
ments  in  the  ways  of  religion.     This  I  have  already 
acknowledged  to  be  true,  fo  far  as  to  awaken  our 
care,  and  to  whet  our  induflry  \  but  by  no  means  to 
make  us  defpond  and  give  over  all  care  of  fo  great  a 
concernment,  becaufeof  the  difficulties  it  is  attended 
withal.     Men  who  have  no  mind  to  a  thing  are  apt 
to  imao-ine  great  difficulties  in  the  attaining  of  it,  and 
to  mao-nify  them  in  their  fancies  beyond  reafon.    As 
the  people  of  Ifrael,  when  they  were  to  enter  into  Ca- 
naan (which  was  the  type  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven) 
reprefented  the  inhabitants  of  theland,whom  they  were 
to  conquer,  more  terrible  than  in  truth  they  were ;  re- 
porting to  one  another,  that  the  land  was  full  of  giants, 
and  fons  of  Anak,  men  of  prodigious  flature,  and  cities 
v/alled  up  to  heaven.     And  this  the  wife  man   ob- 
ferves  to  be  the  perpetual  excufe  of  the  flothful ;  when 
they  have  no  mind  to  a  thing,  they  fiy  "  tiiere  is 
*'  a  lion  in  the  v/ay  ;"  that  is,  they  fancy  to  them- 
felves  dangers  and  terrors  which  are  not.     Thus  mea 
who  are  averfe  from  religion,  and  have  no  mind  to 
be  at  the  trouble  and  pains  to  get  to  heaven,  are  apt 
to  complain  of  the  monflrous  and  infuperable  diffi- 
culties of  religion,  and  how  hard  it  is  for  a  man  to 
mortify  his  luds,  and  fubdue  his  appetites,  and  go- 
vern his  paffions,  and  to  do  all  thofe  things  which  are 
nccellliry  to  bring Jiim  to  heaven.     Well!  it  is  ac- 
knowledged 


Religion,  our  Jirjl  and  great  concernment,         1527 
knowledged  to  be  difficult,  and  is  it  not  fo  to  o-et  an  S  E  R  M. 

CL  ^  XCV 

eltate,  and  to  rife  to  any  thing  in  this  world  ?  The  > 
true  pains  which  men  take  about  thefe  things,  fhew 
that  they  are  difficult;  only  when  men  have  a  mind 
to  a  thing,  and  their  heart  is  fee  upon  it,  they  do 
not  fland  to  complain  of  the  difficulty,  but  buckle 
to  it,  and  grapple  with  it. 

Is  religion  difficult?  and  what  is  notfo,  that  is  good 
for  any  thing?  is  not  the  law  a  difficult  and  crabbed 
ftudy  ?  does  it  not  require  great  labour,  and  perpetual 
drudging  to  excel  in  any  kind  of  knowledge,  to  be 
mafter  of  any  art  or  profeffion.  In  a  word,  is  there  any 
thing  in  the  world  worthy  the  having,  that  is  to  be 
gotten  without  pains  ?  and  is  eternal  life  and  glory 
the  only  flight  and  inconfiderable  thing,  that  is  not 
worth  our  care  and  induftry  ?  Is  it  fit  that  fo  great  a 
good  fhould  be  expofed  to  the  faint  and  idle  wifhe^, 
to  the  cheap  and  lazy  endeavours  of  flothful  men  ? 
For  what  reafon  ?  nay,  with  what  confcience  can  we 
bid  lefs  for  heaven  and  eternal  \\^q^  than  men  are  con- 
tented to  give  for  the  things  of  the  world  ;  things  of 
no  value  in  comparifon,  not  worthy  the  toiling  for, 
not  fure  to  be  attained  by  all  our  endeavours ;  things 
which  '^  perilh  in  the  ufing,"  and  which,  when  we 
have  them,  v/e  are  liable  to  be  deprived  of  by  a  thou- 
fand  accidents?  one  fit  of  a  fever  may  ffiatter  ourun- 
derflandings,  and  confound  all  our  knowledge,  and 
turn  us  into  fools  and  idiots;  an  inund.ation  or  a  fire 
may  fweep  away  and  devour  our  eflates ;  a  fucccffio!^ 
of  calamities  may  in  a  few  hours  make  the  richell  and 
greatell:  man  as  poor  as  Job,  and  fet  him  upon  a  dung- 
hil. 

But  be  the  difficulty  what  it  will  of  attaining  "  the 
II  S  2  «^  ki,v 


1:28         Religion y  our  Jirji  and  great  concernment. 

S  E  RM  *^  kingdom  of  God,  and  his  righteoufnefs,"  they  are 
^-^^-  ,  to  be  fought  at  any  rates  becaufe  they  are  abfolutely 
necefiary,  and  we  miferable  and  undone  if  we  have 
them  not.  And  therefore  not  to  diffemble  in  the 
matter,  the  difficulties  of  reh'gion  are  confiderable ; 
but  then  they  are  much  greater  at  firft,  and  will  every 
day  abate  and  grow  lefs,  and  the  work  by  degrees 
will  become  eafy,  and  turn  into  pleafure  and  delight  \  a 
pleafure  fo  great,  as  none  knows  but  he  that  hath  it ; 
and  he  that  hath  it,  would  not  exchange  it  for  all  the 
fenfual  pleafures  and  enjoyments  of  this  world. 

Secondly,  others  pretend  want   of  time   for  the 
minding  of  fo  great  a  work,  and  'tis  very  true,  that 
all  perfons  have  not  equal  leifure  for  this  purpofe  j  fome 
are  much  more  flraitned  than  others,  and  more  taken 
up  with  the  neceffary  cares  of  this  life :  but  God  hath 
put  no  man  upon  this  hard  neceffity,  that  for  want  of 
time  he  fhall  be  forced  to  negledl  his  body  and  his 
health,  his  family  and  eftate,  to  fave  his  foul.     And 
yet  if  any  man  were  brought  to  this  diftrefs,  it  were 
well  worth  his  while  to  fecure  his  eternal  falvation, 
tho'  it  were  with  the  neglecSI;  and  lofs  of  all  other  things. 
But  thofe  who  are  moil  ftraitned  for  time,    have  fo 
much  as  is  abfolutely  neceffary:  for  there  is  a  confi- 
derable part  of  religion  which  does  not  require  time, 
but  refolution  and  care:  not  to  commit  fin,  not  to 
break  the  laws  of  God,  not  to  be  intemperate,  "  to 
"  make  no  provifion  for  the  flefh  to  fulfil  the  lufi:s 
*'  thereof,"  does  not   fpend  time,  but  faves  it  for 
better  purpofes ;  fo  that  every  man  hath  time  not  to 
do  that  which  he  ought  not  to  do :  and  for  the  pofi- 
tiye  part  of  religion,  whether  it  confifi:s  in  the  exer- 
cife  of  our  minds,  or  in  the  external  adls  of  religion : 

no 


Religion y  our  Jirjl  and  great  concernment.         1529 

no  man  is  fo  diflrefied,  but  he  hath  time  to  think  of  S  E  R  Af. 

xcv 
heaven,  and  eternity  ;  time  to  love  God,  to  efteem 

him,  and  dehght  in  him  above  all  things.  And 
this  a  man  may  do  very  frequently,  and  very  ac- 
ceptably, while  he  is  labouring  and  travelling  about 
his  worldly  affairs,  while  his  hand  is  upon  the 
plough,  his  heart  may  be  with  God  ;  and  while 
he  converfeth  here  upon  earth,  his  thoughts  and  af- 
fedlions  may  be  in  heaven.  Every  man  hath  time 
to  pray  to  God  everyday,  for  his  mercy  and  for- 
giveneis,  for  his  grace  and  affiitance,  for  his  prefer- 
vation  and  fupport,  and  to  thank  him  heartily  for  all 
his  bleiTings  and  benefits.  Apd  a  litde  time  feriouf- 
ly  employed  in  this  kind,  would  have  the  fame  ac- 
ceptance with  God,  as  the  more  folemn  and  longer 
devotions  of  thofe  who^  have  more  leifure  and  op- 
portunities for  them.  To  be  fure  we  have  all  of  us 
time  to  ferve  God  upon  his  own  day,  and  to  em- 
ploy it  wholly  in  the  exercifes  of  piety,  and  in  the 
care  and  confideration  of  our  fouls. 

But  this,  when  all  is  faid,  is  the  cafe  but  of  a  very 
few  ',  moft  of  us  have  no  colour  for  this  complaint ; 
non  inopes  temporis^  fed  prodigi  fumus^  (as  Seneca 
fays)  "  we  are  not  poor,  but  prodigal  of  our  time, 
"  and  lavifli  it  away  profufely  upon  folly  and  va- 
*'  nity.'*  Our  vices  and  lulls,  our  pleafures  and  di- 
yerfions,  confume  and  divert  thofe  precious  hours, 
which  fhould  be  employed  to  thele  better  purpofcs  ; 
nay  many  times  time  opprefleth  us,  and  is  a  burden 
to  us,  and  lies  upon  our  hands,  and  we  know  not  how 
to  get  rid  of  it  ^  and  yet  we  choofe  rather  to  let  it 
run  wafte,  than  to  beftow  it  upon  religion,  and  the 
c^re  of  our  fouls-,  infoniuch  that  I  fear  this  will  be 

the 


1 53^  R^l^gion,  ourjirji  and  great  concernment. 
SERM.  the  condition  of  many,  that  when  they  were  at  a 
•  lofs  what  to  do  with  their  time,  and  knew  not  how 
to  fpend  it,  they  would  not  lay  it  out  upon  that 
v/hich  was  beft  and  mod  necefiary ;  for  this  furely 
is  the  very  beft  ufe  that  can  be  made  of  time,  to 
prepare  and  provide  for  eternity. 

Thirdly,  others  preterrd  it  will  be  time  enough  to 
mind  thefe  things  hereafter.  But  this  (as  bad  ex- 
cufes  feldom  hang  together,  and  agree  with  one 
another)  diredly  contradi6ts  the  former  pretence, 
which  fuppofeth  fo  much  time  neceiTary,  and  more 
than  many  have  to  fpare  ;  and  yet  now  they  would 
make  us  believe  that  a  very  little  time  will  fuffice 
for  this  work,  that  it  may  be  done  at  any  time,  even 
juft  when  we  are  going  out  of  this  world.  But  this, 
of  all  other,  is  the  ftrangefl:  interpretation  of"  feek- 
^^  ing  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  his  righteoufnefs 
''  firft,"  to  put  it  off  to  the  very  laft.  This  furely 
is  a  greater  error  on  the  other  hand,  to  think  that 
the  bufinefs  of  religion  is  fo  quickly  to  be  difpatched, 
and  that  the  great  work  of  our  lives  can  be  crowded 
into  fo  narrow  a  corner  of  ix.^  that  the  time  of  fick- 
nefs  and  old  age,  nay,  the  hour  of  death,  well  em- 
ployed to  this  purpofe,  will  be  fufficient.  Alas ! 
what  can  we  then  do  that  is  good  for  any  thing  > 
that  can  in  reafon  be  thought  either  acceptable  to 
God,  or  available  for  our  fclves  ?  when  we  have  not 
fenfe  and  underftanding  enough  to  difpofe  of  our 
temporal  concernments,  and  to  make  our  wills,  do 
we  think  we  fhall  be  fit  to  repent  of  the  fins  and 
mifcarriages  of  our  whole  lives,  and  to  make  our 
peace  with  God  ?  every  man  muft  not  expect  to  have 
Saul's  fortune,  who  when  he  was  wearied  with  feek- 


mg 


Religion^  mr  firji  and  great  concernment.  1 53 1 

ino;  his  father's  alTes,  met  with  a  kingdom.     We  SERM. 

•  xcv 

mufl   not  think  when  we  are  tired  with  purfuing  . 

the  folHes  and  vanities  of  this  world,  to  retire  into 

heaven,   and  "  to  fit  down  with   Abraham,  Ifaac, 

*'  and  Jacob,  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven." 

Our  Saviour  hath  taken  care  to  caution  us 
againil  this  defperate  folJy,  by  a  parable  to  this  very 
purpofe,  of  the  foohfh  virgins,  who  having  trifled 
away  their  time  till  the  bridegroom  was  coming, 
and  negleded  to  get  oil  into  their  lamps,  (by  which 
v;e  are  to  underfland  all  thofe  good  preparations  and 
difpofitions  which  are  neceifary  to  qualify  us  for  the 
kingdom  of  God)  I  fay,  having  negleded  their  op- 
portunity of  getting  this  oil,  while  they  were  look- 
ing after  it  too  late,  the  door  was  fhut  againft 
them  \  they  thought  to  have  repaired  all  at  lafl,  by 
borrowing  of  others,  and  fupplying  themfelves  that 
way. 

And  thus  many  deceive  themfelves,  hoping  to 
be  fupplied  out  of  another  flore,  when  they  have  no 
grace  and  goodnefs  of  their  own  ;  out  of  the  treafure 
of  the  church,  from  the  redundant  merit  of  the 
faints,  and  their  works  of  fupererogation  \  of  v/hich 
fome  believe  (I  know  not  for  what  reafbn)  that 
there  is  a  great  flock  which  the  pope  may  difpofe  of, 
to  fupply  thofe  who  have  taken  no  care  to  get  oil 
into  their  lamps.  But  I  know  not  for  what  rtdSon 
works  of  fupererogation  are  fuppofed  ;  the  wife  vir- 
gins knew  not  of  any  merit  they  had  to  /pare,  it 
was  the  foolifh  virgins  only  that  entertained  this 
fenfelefs  conceit.  I  am  fure  the  parable  infinuatcs 
the  quite  contrary,  that  the  befl:  and  holieft  perfons 
(which  are  reprefented  by  the  wife  virgins)  have  no- 
thing 


'l  ?32  Religion  y  our  fir ji  and  great  concernment, 
S  E  R  Al.  thing  to  fpare  for  the  fupply  of  others,  who  have 
^Xl  i  been  carelefs  of  their  fouls  \  "  the  foohfh  faid  unto 
c«  the  wife,  give  us  of  your  oil,  for  our  lamps  are 
<'  o-one-out  •,  but  the  wife  anfwered,  faying,  not  fo, 
<«  left  there  be  not  enough  for  us  and  you,  but  go 
*'  ye  rather  to  them  that  feJ],  and  buy  for  your 
<c  felves."  It  feems  they  had  no  works  of  fuperero- 
o;ation  that  they  knew  of,  but  they  do  ironically 
fend  them  to  a  market  that  was  fet  up  fomewhere, 
and  where  thefe  things  were  pretended  to  be  fold  *, 
but  how  they  fped,'  the  conclufion  of  the  parable  tells 
us,  that  whilft  they  were  running  about  in  great 
hafte  to  make  this  purchafe  of  the  merits  and  good 
works  of  odiers,  "  the  bridegroom  came,"  and  the 
wife  virgins  that  were  ready  went  in  with  him  to 
the  marriage,  and  the  reft  were  fhut  out.  ■ 

And  there  are  thofe  like  wife  among  our  felves, 
who  having  been  carelefs  to  qualify  themfelves  for 
the  kingdom  of  God,  hope  to  be  fupplied  out  of  the 
infinite  treafures  of  Christ's  merits:  but  this  alfo 
is  a  vain  hope.  For  tho'  there  be  merit  enough  in 
the  death  and  fufferings  of  Christ.,  to  fave  man- 
kind, yet  no  man  can  lay  claim  thereto,  who  does 
not  perform  the  conditions  of  the  gofpel. 

Others  think  by  fending  for  the  minifter,  when 
the  phyfician  hath  given  them  over,  to  receive  in 
few  hours  fuch  advice  and  direction,  as  will  do  their 
bufinefs,  as  effedlually,  as  if  they  had  minded  reli- 
gion all  their  lives  long  ;  and  that  a  few  devout 
prayers  faid  over  them  when  they  are  juft  embark- 
ing for  another  world,  will,  like  a  magical  wind, 
immediately  waft  them  over  into  the  regions  of  blils 

and  immortality. 

But 


T[he  wifdom  of  religion,  ^  5  3  3 

But  let  us  not  deceive  oar  felves  -,  we  may  defer 
the  bufinefs  fo  long,  'till  we  ihall  get  nothing  by  our 
late  application  to  God,  and  crying  to  him,  "Lord, 
"  Lord,  open  unto  us,  '*  but  that  fevero  anfwer, 
"-  depart  from  me,  ye  workers  of  inquity,  I  know 
''  ye  not  whence  yc  are."  If  we  would  not  have 
this  our  doom,  \tt  us  *'  firfl  feek  the  kingdom  of 
"  God,  and  his righteoufnefs ; "  that  fo,  "  having 
<'  our  fruit  unto  holinefs,  cur  end  may  be  everlaft- 
"  ing  life." 

SERMON    XCVI. 

The  wifdom  of  religion. 

P  S  A  L.   cxix.  9(5. 

t  have  fe en  end  of  ef  all  perfe5fion  ;  but  thy  command" 
ment  is  exceeding  broad, 

THis  pfalm  feems  to  have  a  great  deal  more  s  e  R  M, 
of    poetical  number  and  skill  in  it,  than  at  -^^Y^- 
this  dillance  from  the  time  and  age  in  which 
it  was  written,    we  can  eafily  underftand  :    the  main 
fcope   and  defign  of  it  is  very  plain  and  obvious  > 
namely,  to  magnify  the  law  of  God,  and  the  obfer- 
vation  of  its  precepts^    as  that  wherein  true  religion 
doth  mainly  confift.     And  indeed  if  we  attentively 
read  and  confider  it,  every  part  of  this  pHilm  does 
v/ith  great  variety  of  expreflion,  and  yet  very  litde 
difference  of  the  fenle,  defcant  upon  the  fame  ground, 
viz.    the  excellency  and  perfedion  of  the  law  of  God- 
And  the  words  of  the  text  feem  to  be  as  full  and 
Vo  L.  VL  n  T  com- 

4. 


1^34  ^^^*  wifdom  of  religion. 

S  E  R  M.  comprehenfive  of  the  fenfc  and  defign  of  the  whole 
pfalm,  as  any  one  fentence  in  it ;  ''  I  have  ittxi  an 
"  end  of  all  perfedionjbut  thy  commandment  is  ex- 
"  ceeding  broad." 

Thefe  words  are  varloufly  rendred,  and  underftood 
by  interpreters,  who  yet  in  this  variety  do  very  much 
confpire  and  agree  in  the  fame  fenfe.  The  chaldee 
paraphrafe  renders  the  words  thus,  ''  I  have  feen  an 
*-'  end  of  all  things,  about  which  I  have  employ 'd 
*'  my  care;  but  thy  commandment  is  very  large." 
The  Syriac  verfion  thus,  *'  I  have  feen  an  end  of  all 
''  regions  and  countries"  (that  is,  I  have  found  the 
compafs  of  this  habitable  world  to  be  finite  and  limi- 
ted) "  but  thy  commandment  is  of  a  vafl  extent.'* 
Others  explain  it  thus,  *'  I  have  ^t^n  an  end  of  all 
^'  perfection ;"  that  is,  of  all  the  things  of  this 
world,  which  men  value  and  efteem  at  fo  high  a  rate ; 
of  all  worldly  wifdom  and  knowledge,  of  wealth 
and  honour,  and  greatnefs,  which  do  all  perifh  and 
pafs  away  •,  "  but  thy  law  is  eternal,  and  ftill  abideth 
"  the  fame;"  or,  as  the  fcripture  elfewhere  exprefleth 
it,  "  the  word  of  the  Lord  endureth  for  ever." 

Thy  law;  that  is,  the  rule  of  our  duty  natural  and 
revealed ;  or,  in  a  word,  religion,  which  confifls  in 
the  knowledge  and  pradlice  of  the  laws  of  God,  is 
of  greater  perfe6lion,  than  all  other  things  which  are 
fo  highly  valued  in  this  world :  for  the  perfection  of 
it  is  infinite,  and  of  a  vaft  influence  and  extent ;  it 
reacheth  to  the  whole  man,  to  the  happinefs  of  body 
and  foul,  to  our  whole  duration  both  in  this  world, 
and  the  next,  of  this  life,  and  of  that  which  is  to 
come.  And  this  will  clearly  appear,  if  we  confider 
the  reafonablenefs  and  the  wifdom  of  religion,  which 

confifts 


^he  wtfdom  of  rellgloit.  ^535 

ton  fills  in  the  knowledge  of  God,  and  the  keeping  of  S  E  R 


M, 


his  Jaws. 

Fird,  the  realbnabJenefs  of  religion,  which  is  able 
to  give  a  very  good  account  of  it  felf,  becaufe  it  fet- 
tles the  mind  of  man  upon  a  firm  bafis,  and  keeps 
it  from  rolling  in  perpetual  uncertainty;  whereas 
atheifm  and  infidelity  wants  a  flable  foundation,  it 
centers  no  where  but  in  the  denial  of  God  and  reli- 
gion, and  yet  fubftitutes  no  principle,  no  tenable 
and  conftituent  fcheme  of  things  in  the  place  of 
them  ;  its  whole  bufinels  is  to  unravel  all  things,  to 
unfettle  the  mind  of  man,  and  to  fliake  all  the  com- 
mon notions  and  received  principles  of  mankind  ;  it 
bends  its  whole  force  to  pull  down  and  to  deflroy,  but 
jays  no  foundation  to  build  any  thing  upon,  in  the 
(lead  of  that  which  it  pulls  down. 

It  runs  upon  that  great  abfurdity  which  Ariftotle 
(who  was  always  thought  a  great  mailer  of  reafon) 
does  everywhere  decry,  as  a  principle  unworthy  of  a 
philofopher ;  namely,  a  progrefs  of  caufes  in  infinitum^ 
and  without  end ;  that  this  was  the  caufe  of  that,  and 
a  third  thing  of  that,  and  fo  on  without  end,  which 
amounts  to  jufl  nothing ;  and  finally  refolves  an  in- 
finite number  of  effedls  into  no  firil  caufe ;  than 
which  nothing  can  be  more  unskilful  and  bunsHncr, 
and  lefs  worthy  of  a  philofopher.  But  this  I  do  not 
intend  at  prefent  to  infifl  upon,  having  treated  largely 
on  the  fame  fubjedl  upon  another  *  occafion.  I  fhail 
therefore  proceed  in  the 

Second  place,  to  confider  the  wifdom  of  religion, 
"  the  fear  of  the  Lord  is  wifdom'',  fo  faith  the 
pfalmifl: ;  it  is  true  wifdom  indeed,  it  is  "  the  begin- 

'^;  Vide  Sermon  ift,   ofthefirjl  Volume  publijhed  hjth&  Author. 

1 1  T  2  ning 


153^  ^^^  ''^'^fdom  of  religion. 

SER.M.  «  ning  of  wifdom,"  caput [apientia^  the  top  and 
perfcdlion  of  all  wifdom.  Here  true  wifdom  begins 
and  upon  this  foundation  it  is  raifed  and  carried  on 
to  perfedion  ;  and  I  fhall  in  my  following  difcourfe 
endeavour  to  make  out  thele  two  things. 

Firfl:,  that  true  wifdom  begins  and  is  founded  in 
religion,  in  the  fear  of  God,  and  in  the  keeping  of 
his  commandments. 

Secondly,  that  this  is  the  perfeclion  of  wifdom  s 
there  is  no  wifdom  without  this^^or  beyond  it. 

Firit,    true  wifdom  begins  and  is  founded  in  reli- 
gion, and  the  fear  of  God,  and  regard  to  his  lav/s. 
This  is  the  firft  principle  of  wifdom,   and  the  foun- 
dation upon  which  the  whole  defign  of  our  happinefs 
is  to  be  built.  This  is  in  the  firfl  place  to  be  fuppofed, 
and  to  be  taken  into  confideration  in  all   the  defigns 
and  actions  of  men :  this  is  to  govern  our  whole  life, 
and  to  have  a  main  influence  upon  all  the  affairs  and 
concernments  of  it.   As  the  firft  principle  of  humane 
fociety,    and   that  which  is  to  run  thro'   the  whole 
frame  of  it,    is  the  publick  good  ;  this  was  always  to 
be  taken  into  confideration,    and  to  give  law  to  all 
laws  and  conilitutions  about  it:  fo  religion  is  the  firfl 
principle  of  humane  wifdom,  by  which  all  our  adliong 
are  to  be  conduced  and  governed  \    and  all  wifdom 
which  does  not  begin  here,    and  lay  religion  for  its 
foundation,  is  prepoflerous,  and  begins  at  the  wrong 
end  jandis  juflasif  in  the  forming  of  humane  fociety, 
every  one  in  the  fettlement  of  the  conftitution,  and 
the  framing  of  laws,  ihould  have  an  eye  to  his  own 
private  and  particular  advantage,    without  regard  to 
the  publick  good,  which  is  the  great  end  of  fociety, 
i.nd  the  rule  and  meafure  of  government   and  laws, 

and 


The  wijdom  of  religion,  ^537 

and  in  the  laft  ifilie  and  refulc  of  thino;s,    the  onlyS^^A'^- 
way  to  procure  the  fettled  welfare,  and  to  fecure  the  C^-v-*^ 
lading  interefls  of  particular  perfons,     fo  far  as  that 

is  confident  with  the  publick  good.  And  it  would 
be  a  very  prepofterous  policy  to  go  about  to  found 
humane  fociety  upon  any  other  terms,  and  would  cer- 
tainly end  in  mifchief  and  confufion. 

And  fuch  is  all  the  wifdom  of  men,  in  relation  to 
their  true  happinels,  which  does  not  begin  with  re- 
ligion, and  lay  its  foundation  there :  which  does  not 
take  into  confideration  God  and  his  providence,  and 
a  future  ftate  of  rewards  and  punifliments  after  thig 
life.  All  wifdom  which  does  not  proceed  upon  afup- 
pofition  of  the  truth  and  reality  of  thefe  principles, 
will  certainly  end  in.  Ihame  and  difappointment,  in 
mifery  and  ruin  -,  becaufe  it  builds  a  houfe  upon  th^ 
fand,  which  when  it  comes  to  be  tried  by  flrefs  of 
weather,  and  affaulted  by  violent  ftorms,  will  un» 
doubted ly  fall,  and  the  fall  of  it  will  be  great. 

And  this  error  every  man  commits,    who  purfues 
happinefs  by  following  his  own  inclination,  and  gra^ 
tifying  his  irregular  defires,  without  any  confideration 
of  God,  and  of  the  reftraint  v/hich  his  laws  have 
laid  upon  us,  not  for  his  own  pleafure,    but  for  our 
good.  For  v/hen  all  things  are  duly  confider'd,    and 
all  accounts  caft  up,  it  will  appear  upon  a  jufi:  calcula- 
tion of  things,  that  all  the  reftraints  which  the  laws 
of  God  lay  upon   men,  are  highly   reafonable,  and 
greatly  for  their  benefit  and  advantage,  and   do  not 
abridge  us  of  any  true  pleafure  or  happinefs  ;  but  are 
v/ife  and  merciful  provifions  of  heaven,    to  prevent 
our  harm  and  mifchief;  fo  that  we  are  not  wife,    if 
we  a6t  without  regard  to  God,  and  his  laws,  and  are 

not 


J  r  3  S  7h^  wlfdom  of  religion. 

S  E  R  M.  not  willing  to  be  govem'd  by  hlin,  who  loves  us  bet- 
^^2i1j  ter  than  we  do  ourfdves,  and  truly  defigns  our  hap- 
pinefs,  and  commands  us  nothing  but  what  diredlly 
tends  to  it.  For  the  laws  of  God  are  not  ar- 
bitrary conftitutions,  and  mere  inilances  of Tovereign 
will  and  power  ,  but  wife  rules  and  means  to  procure 
and  advance  our  happinefs. 

And  in  like  manner,  all  that  wifdom  which  men 
ufe  to  compafs  their  worldly  defigns,  of  riches  and 
greatnefs,  without  confideration  of  the  providence  of 
God,  and  dependence  upon  it  for  the  fuccefs  of  our 
aiiairs,  is  all  perfe6l  folly  and  mifliake.     For  tho'  the 
defignbe  never  fo  well  laid,  and  vigorouily  profecuted, 
and  no  means  which  humane  v/ifdom  can  devife  for  the 
attaining  of  our  end,  have  been  omitted  by  us  ;  yet 
if  we  leave  God  out  of  the  account,  we  forget  that 
which  is  principal,  and  fignifies  more  to  the  fuccefs 
of  any    defign,  than  all  other  things  put  together. 
For  if  God  favours  our  defigns,  the  mofl  improba- 
ble fiiali  take  eftedl ;  and  if  he  blow  upon  them  the 
mod  likely  fliall  mifcarry.     Whenever  he  pleafeth  to 
interpofe  to  crols  the  counfels  and  defigns  of  men, 
''  the  race  is  not  to  the  fvvifr,  nor  the  battle  to  the 
*'  {Irong  5  neither  yet  bread  to  the  wife,  nor  riches  to 
*'  men  of  underftanding,  nor  favour  to  men  of  skill  j 
*'  but  time  and  chance  happens  to  all." 

So  that  it  is  great  folly  not  to  confider  the  provi- 
dence of  God  in  all  our  defigns  and  undertakings, 
not  to  implore  his  favour  and  blefling,  without  which 
nothing  that  we  take  in  hand  can  profper.  That 
which  is  principal  to  any  purpofe,  ought  to  be  con- 
fidered  in  the  firll  place,  nothing  being  to  be  attemp- 
ted either  without  or  againil  it.  Andfuch  is  the  provi- 
dence 


^he  wifdom  of  religion,  ^539 

dence  of  God  in  all  humane  affairs ;  it  is  more  confi-  S  E  R  m. 
derable  to  th'e  promoting  or  hindring  of  any  event,   ■^^^^* 
than  all  things  in  the  world  befides  ;  and  therefore  all 
policy,  which  fets  afide  God  and  his  providence,  is 
vain  ;  becaufe  "  there  is  no  wifdom,  nor  underlland- 
*'  ing,  nor  counfel  againft  the  Lord." 

So  likevvife  all  that  wifdom  which  only  confiders  and 
regards  this  Ihort  life,  and  the  narrow  concernments 
of  it,  and  makes  provilion  only  for  our  welfare  in  this 
world ',  and  therefore  can  only  be  tempted  with  the 
hopes  of  temporal  advantages,  and  terrified  only  v/ith 
the  danger  of  temporal  evils  and  fufferings ;  but  hath 
no  fenfe  of  an  immortal  fpirit  within  us,  no  profpedt 
of  a  life  after  death,  no  confideration  of  a  happy  or 
miferable  eternity,  of  rewards  and  punifhments,  in- 
finitely greater  than  all  the  temptations  and  terrors 
of  time  and  ^cn^Q  ;  1  fay,  all  this  is  a  prepoderous  and 
pernicious  wifdom,  and  proceeds  upon  a  falfe  fuppc- 
fition,  and  a  quite  contrary  fcheme  of  things  to  what 
really  is;  and  confequently  our  whole  life,  and  all  the 
defigns  and  adlions  of  it  do  run  upon  a  perpetual  mif. 
take,  and  a  falfe  dating  of  our  own  cafe  ;  and  whatever 
we  do  purfuant  to  this  midake  is  foolidi  and  hurtfuljand 
fo  far  from  conducing  to  our  true  intered,  that  it  is  all 
either  befides  it,  or  contrary  to  it ;  becaufe  v/e  a6l  upon 
a  fuppofal  only  of  this  life,  and  a  being  only  in  this 
world,  and  that  there  is  nothing  either  to  be  feared 
or  hoped  for  beyond  it ;  and  being  thus  grofly  mii^ 
taken,  we  fet  our  hearts  only  upon  temporal  things, 
and  dudy  ourprefent  fecurity  and  fatisfadtion,  and  in 
all  our  couafels  and  adions  are  fwayed  only  by  the 
confideration  of  temporal  good  and  evil,  of  the  pre- 
fent  eafe  and  pleafure,  the  didurbance  and  pain  of 

our 


jf^^o  7he  wifdom  of  reUgioti. 

S  E  R  M.  our  fieliily  and  fenfual  parts ;    without  any  fenfe  of 
^  our  own    immortality  and  of  that  everlafting  (late 

which  remains  for  us  in  another  world. 

But  there  is  (my  brechren)  moft  certainly,  there 
is  another  life  after  this  j  we  are  not  beafts,  if  we 
do  not  make  ourfelves  fo  \  and  if  we  die,  we 
Ihall  not  die  like  them,  neither  fhall  our  laft  end 
be  like  theirs.  For  whatever  we  may  think 
or  willi,  it  fhalf  not  be  in  our  power  to  extinguifh 
our  own  beino;s  when  we  have  a  mind  to  be  rid 
of  them,  and  to  chcofe  whether  or  no  we  fhall  live 
for  ever. 

And  if  this  be  a  falfe  fchcme  of  things  which  we 
have  framed  to  ourfelves,  and  proceeded  upon  (as  un- 
doubtedly it  is)  then  our  v;hole  life  is  one  great  error, 
and  a  perpetual  miftake,  and  we  are  quite  wrong  in 
all  that  we  defign  to  do.  Our  wifdom  hath  begun  at 
the  wrong  end,  and  we  have  made  a  falfe  calculation 
and  account  of  things,  and  have  put  our  cafe  other- 
wife  than  it  is ;  and  the  flirther  v/e  proceed  upon  this 
miilake,  our  mifcarriage  will  be  {o  much  the  more 
fatal  in  the  ifTue.  But  if  our  wifdom  begin  at  the 
right  end,  and  our  cafe  be  truly  ftated,  that  God 
hath  put  into  thefc  frail  and  mortal  bodies  of  ours, 
immortal  fpirits  that  fhall  live  for  ever;  and  hath  fent 
us  into  this  world  to  fojourn  here  for  a  litde  while,  and 
to  be  difciplined  and  trained  up  for  eternity  ;  and  that 
after  a  fliort  proof  and  trial  of  our  obedience,  we  ihall 
be  tranflated  into  an  everlafting  flate  of  unfpeakable 
happinefs  or  mifery,  according  as  we  have  demeaned 
ourfelves  in  this  world  i  if  we  believe  this  to  be  truly 
our  cafe,  our  interefb  is  then  plainly  before  us,  and  we 
fee  where  our  happinefs  lies,  and  what  remains  for  us  to 

do. 


The  wifdom  of  religion.  J  54^ 

do,  in  order  to  die  obtaining  of  it,  and  what  we  are  SE  R  M. 
to  expe6t  to  fufferifv/e  do  it  not.  XCVI; 

Now  this  foundation  being  laid,  It  Is  evident,  that 
the  beit  thing  we  can  do  for  ourielves,  is  to  provide 
for  our  future  ftate,  and  to  fecure  the  cverlafting  hap- 
pinefs  of  another  life.  And  the  bed  way  to  do  that, 
is  to  live  in  obedience  to  thofe  laws  which  our  maker 
and  our  fovereign  hath  prefcribed  to  us  •,  and  accord- 
ing to  which  he  Vv^ill  one  day  fentenceus  to  eternal  re- 
wards or  punifhments. 

.It  is  evident  likewife,  that  all  our  fenfual  appetites 
and  defires  are  to  be  bounded  by  the  rules  of  reafon 
and  virtue,  which  are  the  laws  of  God  ;  and  that  no 
prefent  eafe  and  pleafure,  trouble  and  fufFering,  are  to 
be  confidered  and  regarded  by  us,  in  competition 
with  the  things  which  are  eternal ;  and  that  fin  is  of 
all  other  the  greateft  evil,  and  mod  mifchievous  to 
our  main  interefl:,  and  therefore  with  all  pofTible  care 
to  be  avoided ;  and  that  the  favour  of  God  is  to  be 
fought,  and  the  falvation  of  our  fouls  to  be  provided 
for  at  any  pains  and  expence  whatfoever,  and  even 
with  the  hazard  and  lois  of  our  dearefl  interefls  in  thi^ 
world,  yea  and  of  life  itfelf 

And  now  if  this  matter  hath  been  rightly  dated, 
then  religion,  and  the  fear  of  God,  is  the  firft  principle 
and  foundation  of  true  wifdom,  and  that  which  we  are 
to  confider,  and  take  along  with  us  in  all  the  defigns 
and  adtions  of  our  lives,  and  all  wifdom  which  does 
not  begin  here,  is  prepoflerous,  and  will  prove  folly 
in  the  ififue. 

Secondly,  as  religion  is  the  beginning  of  wifdorn, 
fo  it  is  the  perfedlionof  it,  it  is  the  higheft  point  of 
wifdom  in  which  we  can  be  inftruded.     "  The  fear 

Vol.  VI.  II  U  "of 

4- 


1542  The  mfdom  of  religion, 

S  E  R  M.  «  of  the  Lord  (fays  Solomon,  Prov.  xv.  33.)  is  the 
_,_^^.,^  "  inflrudion  of  wifdom."     ''  A  good underftanding 

(fays  David,  Pial.  cxi.  10.)  have  all  they  that  do 

his  commandments."  The  pradlice  of  religion  is 
the  perfedbion  of  wifdom  ;  and  he  iinderftands  him- 
feif  bed,  who  lives  mofl  according  to  the  Laws  of 
God,  And  this  I  might  fhew,  by  inftancing  in  par- 
ticular virtues,  the  praftice  whereof  is  much  wifer, 
and  every  way  more  for  our  intereft,  than  the  contra- 
ry vices  'y  but  this  is  too  large  an  argument  to  engage 
in,  and  therefore  I  fhall  content  my  felf  at  prefent, 
briefly  to  fbevv,  that  the  chief  charadlers  and  proper- 
ties of  wifdom  do  all  meet  in  religion,  and  agree  to  it. 

The  firft  point  of  wifdom  is  to  underlland  our  true 
interelt,  and  to  be  right  in  our  main  end  ;  and  in  this, 
religion  will  bed  inftrudl  and  dire<n:  us.  And  if  we 
be  right  in  our  main  end,  and  true  to  the  interefl  of 
it,  \Nt  cannot  mifcarry ;  but  if  a  man  miftake  in  this, 
he  errs  fatally,  and  his  whole  life  is  vanity  and  folly. 

Another  property  of  wifdom  is  to  be  fteady  and 
vigorous  in  the  profecution  of  our  main  end,  to  oblige 
us  hereto,  religion  gives  us  the  mod  powerful  argu- 
ments, the  glorious  happinels,  and  the  difmal  mifery 
of  another  world. 

The  next  point  of  wifdom  is,  to  make  all  things 
floop,  and  become  fubfervient  to  our  main  end.  And 
wherever  religion  bears  fway,  it  will  make  all  other 
thinpis  fubordinate  to  the  falvation  of  our  fouls,  and 
the  interefts  of  our  everlafting  happinefs;  as  the  men 
of  this  world  make  every  thing  to  fubmit  and  give  way 
to  their  covetous,  and  ambitious,  and  fenfual  defigns. 

Another  part  of  wifdom  is  to  confider  the  future, 
and  to  look  to  the  laft  end  and  iflue  of  things.     It  is 


The  "wifdom  of  religion.  1543 

a  common  folly  among  men,  to  be  fo  intent  upon  SERM. 
the  prefent  as  to  have  little  or  no  regard  to  the  future, 
to  what  will  be  hereafter.  Men  defign  and  labour 
for  this  prefent  life,  and  their  fliort  continuance  here 
in  this  world,  without  taking  into  ferious  confidera- 
tion  their  main  duration,  and  their  eternal  abode  in 
another  world.  But  religion  gives  us  a  clear  profpedt 
of  a  life  after  death,  and  overlooks  time,  and  makes 
eternity  always  prefent  to  us,  and  minds  us  of  mak- 
ing-timely provifion  and  preparation  for  it.  It  takes 
into  confideration  our  whole  duration,  and  infpires 
us  with  wifdom,  to  look  to  the  end  of  things,  and 
to  what  will  be  hereafter,  as  well  as  to  what  is 
prefent. 

It  is  likewife  a  great  property  of  wifdom,  to  fe- 
cure  the  main  chance,  and  to  run  no  hazard  in  that. 
And  this  religion  diredls  us  to  take  care  of,  becaufe 
the  neglefb  of  it  will  prove  fatal. 

Another  mark  of  wifdom  is,  to  lay  hold  of  oppor- 
tunities, thofe  efpecially,  which,  when  they  arc  once 
paft,  will  never  return  again.  There  are  fome  fea- 
fons  wherein  great  things  may  be  done,  which  if 
they  be  let  flip,  are  never  to  be  retrieved.  A  wife 
man  will  lay  hold  of  thefe,  and  improve  them  ;  and 
religion  inculcates  this  principle  of  wifdom  upon  us, 
that  this  life  is  the  opportunity  of  doing  great  things 
for  ourfelves,  and  of  making  ourfelves  for  ever ;  this 
very  day  ^nd  hour  may,  for  ought  we  know,  be  the 
laft  and  only  opportunity  of  repentance,  and  making 
our  peace  with  God  :  therefore  "  to  day,  whilfl:  it  is 
"  called  to  day,"  let  us  fet  about  this  neceflliry  work, 
^'  left  any  of  us  be  hardned  through  the  deceitfulnefs 
^^  of  fin  i*'  to-morrow  it  may  to  be  too  late  to  bcg^n 

1 1  U  2  it, 


XCVl. 


1^44  The  wifdom  of  religion. 

SE  R  M  it,  and  the  juftice  of  God  may  cut  us  off  whilft  we 
are  wilfully  delaying  it;  and  the  opportunities  of 
faving  our  immortal  fouls,  may  vanifh,  and  be  for 
ever  hid  from  our  eyes. 

The  next  property  of  wifdom,  is  to  forefee  dan- 
gers, and  to  take  timely  care  to  prevent  them.  "  The 
•^  prudent  man  (faith  Solomon)  forefeeth  the  evil, and 
*'  hideth  himfelF;"that  is,  fhelters  and  fecures  himfelf 
againft  it  >  "  but  the  fimple  pafs  on,  and  are  punifhed*," 
that  is,  the  evil  overtakes  them,  and  their  folly  is 
punifhed  in  their  fatal  ruin.  Now  the  greatefl:  danger 
is  from  the  greateft  power ;  even  from  "  him  who 
"  is  able  to  fave  and  to  deftroy  j"  "  I  will  tell  you 
''  (fays  the  wifdom  of  God)  whom  ye  fhall  fear ;  fear 
'*  him,  who  after  he  hath  killed,  can  deftroy  both 
*'  body  and  foul  in  hell.'* 

Again,  another  main  point  of  wifdom,  is  to  do  as 
little  as  we  can  to  be  repented  of,  trufting  rather  to 
the  wifdom  of  prevention,  than  to  that  of  remedy. 
Religion  firft  teacheth'  men  innocency,  and  not  to 
offend  •,  but  in  cafe  we  do,  (as  "  in  many  things  we 
«'  offend  all")  it  then  diredls  us  to  repentance,  as  the 
only  remedy.  But  this  certainly  is  folly,  to  fin  in 
hopes  of  repentance,  that  is,  firft  to  make  work  for 
repentance,  and  then  run  the  hazard  of  it ;  for  we  may 
certainly  fin,  but  it  is  not  certain  that  we  fhall  repent. 
And  if  it  were,  yet  it  is  great  folly  to  lay  in  before- 
hand, and  to  make  work  for  trouble;  natujiultus 
homunicio  es^  qui  malts  veniam  precari^  quam  mn  peccare^ 
was  a  wife  faying  of  old  Cato ;  "  thou  art  ffays  he^  a 
*'  filly  man  indeed,  who  choofeft  rather  to  ask  for- 
«'  givenefs,  than  not  to  offend."  If  a  man  had  the 
belt  remedy  in  the  world,  he  would  not  make  him- 
felf 


^he  ivifdom  of  religion.  ^545 

felf  Tick  to  try  the  virtue  of  it;   and  it  is  a  krown  SERM, 
comparifon,    and  a  very  fie  one,  that  repentance  is  .^^Xil. 
tabula  pojl  naufragium^  ''  a  plank  after  (hip wreck  j" 
but  I  am  greatly  afraid  that  thoufands  of  fouls  who 
have  truded  to  it,    have  periflied  before  they   could 
get  to  land,  with  this  plank  in  their  arms. 

The  lad  chara6ler  of  wifdom  I  fhall  mention  is,  in 
all  things  to  confult  the  peace  and  fatisfadion  of  our 
own  minds,  without  which  nothing  elfe  can  make  us 
happy  ;  and  this  obedience  to  the' laws  of  God  does 
naturally  procure.  "  Great  peace  have  they  ffays 
''  DavidJ  that  love  thy  law,  and  nothing  ihall  offend 
*  *  them."  "  The  work  of  righteoufnefs,"  fays  \^i\^  pro- 
phet, "  Ihall  be  peace^and  the  effed  of  righteoufnefs, 
"  quietnefs,  and  afliirance  for  ever."  The  fear  of 
God,  and  the  keeping  of  his  commandments,  is  the 
bed  prefervative  againd  the  troubles  of  a  guilty  con- 
fcience,  and  the  terrifying  apprehenfions  of  a  future 
judgment.  And  this  is  the  great  wifdom  of  religion, 
that  whofoever  liveth  according  to  the  rules  and  pre- 
cepts of  it,  prevents  the  chief  caufes  of  difcontent, 
and  lays  the  fured  foundation  of  a  perpetual  fatis- 
faction  of  mind,  a  jewel  of  inedimable  price,  which 
none  knows  but  he  that  has  it;  and  he  that  hath  it^ 
knows  the  value  of  it  too  well  to  part  with 
it  for  "  the  pleafures  of  fin,  which  are  but  for  a 
^'  feafon,"  and  which  always  prove  ''  bitternefs  \\\ 
*'  the  end"  and  for  the  little  fweetnefs  which  they 
yielded,  leave  a  terrible  ding  behind  them. 

Thus  have  I  briefly  reprefented  the  reafonablenefs 
and  wifdom  of  religion.  It  is  of  infinite  perfection, 
and  of  a  vad  influence  and  extent,  it  reacheth  to  the 
whole  man,  the  happinefs  of  foul  and  body  ;  and  to 

our 


154^  ^^^ '^'if^om  of  religion. 

S  E  R  M.  our  whole  duration,  the  happinefs  of  this  world  and 
the  next;  for  "  godhnefs  (^that  is,  true  rehgion  and 
"  piety j  hath  the  promife  of  this  hfe,  and  of  that 
"  which  is  to  come.'* 

But  now  where  arc  the  effefls  of  true  religion,  in 
the  full  compafs  and  extent  of  ir,  to  be  found  ?  fuch 
real  efFeds  as  do  in  any  mcafure  bear  a  proportion  to 
the  power  and  perfedion  of  their  caufe  ?  for  nothing 
certainly  is  more  excellent  and  amiable  in  its  defini- 
tion than  true  religion  is ;  but,  alas !  how  impcrfecl 
is  it  in  the  fubjed:  ?  I  mean  in  us,  who  ought  to  fhew 
forth  the  power  and  perfe6lion  of  it,  in  the  praflice 
and  a6lions  of  our  lives,  the  bed  demonftration  of 
the  excellent  frame  and  temper  of  our  minds. 

What  a  conflid  and  ftruggling  do  the  bed  men 
find  between  their  inclination  and  their  duty .?  how 
hard  to  reconcile  our  pra&ice  and  our  knowledge, 
and  to  make  our  lives  to  agree  with  the  reafon  of  our 
minds,  and  the  clear  convi6tion  of  our  confciences  ? 
how  difficult  for  a  man  in  this  dangerous  and  imper- 
fe6t  (late,  to  be  in  any  meafure  either  fo  wife  or  fb 
good  as  he  ought  ?  how  rare  is  it  for  man  to  be  good- 
natur'd,  gentle  and  eafy  to  be  intreated,  w^ithout 
being  often  betray'd  into  fome  weaknels  and  finful 
compliances,  efpecially  in  the  bad  company  of  our 
betters  ?  how  next  to  impofTible  is  it  to  be  ftrid  and 
fevere  in  our  lives,  without  being  four  ?  to  govern  our 
lives  with  that  perpetual  caution,  and  to  maintain  that 
cvenncfs  of  temper,  as  not  to  be  fometimes  peevifh 
and  paflionate }  and  when  we  are  fo,  not  to  be  apt 
to  fay   with  Jonah,  "  we  do   well  to  be  angry  ?" 

There  are  two  precepts  in  the  new  teftament,  that 
feem  to  nie  to  be  the  nicell  of  all  other,  and  hard  eft 

to 


^he  loifdo^n  of  religion,  j  547 

to  be  put  in  pradlice.  One  is  that  of  our  blefTed  Sa-  S  ERM. 
viouR,  "  be  wife  as  ferpents,  and  innocent  as  doves.** 
how  hard  is  it  to  hit  upon  the  jufb  temper  of  wifdom 
and  innocency  ;  to  be  wife,  and  hurt  no  body  ^  to  be 
innocent,  without  being  filly  ?  the  other  is,  that  of 
the  apoftle,  "  be  angry  and  fin  not."  How  difficult  is 
this,  never  to  be  angry  but  upon  juft  caufe  ?  and  when 
the  caufe  of  our  anger  is  juft,  not  to  be  tranfported 
beyond  due  bounds,  either  as  to  the  degree  of  our 
anger,  or  as  to  the  duration  and  continuance  of  it ; 
this  is  fo  very  nice  a  matter,  that  one  would  be  almofl 
tempted  to  think  that  this  were  in  efFe6i:  a  prohibi- 
tion of  anger  in  any  cafe ;  "  be  ye  angry,  and  fin 
*'  not  ;'*  be  ye  fo,  if  ye  can  without  fin.  I  believe 
whofoever  obferves  it,  will  find  that  it  is  as  eafy  to 
fupprefs  this  palTion  at  any  time,  as  to  give  way  to 
it,  without  offending  in  one  kind,  or  other.  But  to 
proceed, 

How  hard  a  matter  is  it,  to  be  much  in  company, 
and  free  in  converfation,  and  not  to  be  infeded  by 
it  ?  to  live  in  the  midft  of  a  wicked  world,  and  yet 
to  keep  ourfelves  free  from  the  vices  of  it .?  to  be 
temperate  in  the  ufe  of  things  pleafing,  fo  as  nei- 
ther to  injure  our  health,  nor  to  lofe  the  ufe  of  our 
reafon,  nor  to  offend  againft  confciencei*  to  fad 
often,  without  being  conceited  of  it,  and  bargaining 
as  it  were  with  God  for  fome  greater  liberties  in  ano- 
ther kind  ;  and  without  cenfuring  thofe  v/ho  do  not 
tie  up  themfelves  to  our  ftrid  rules  either  of  piety 
or  abftinence  ?  when  perhaps  they  have  neither  the 
fame  opportunities  of  doing  it,  nor  the  fame  reafon 
to  do  it  that  we  have  ;  nay  perhaps  have  a  much 
better  reafon  for  not  doing  juft  as  we  do  :  for  no 

man 


1^4^  ^^^  ^'f7^(?/^  of  religion. 

^^^p^^  man  Is  to  prefcri be  to  others  his  own  private  me-^ 
xcvr.  thod,  either  of  fading,  or  of  devotion,  as  if  he  were 
the  rule,  and  his  example  a  kind  of  proclamation, 
.  enjoining  all  his  neighbours  the  fame  days  of  failing 
:  and  prayer  which  he  himfelf,  for  reafons  bed  known 
to  himfelf,  thinks  fit  to  obferve* 

And  then  how  hard  is  it  to  be  chearful  v/ithout 
being  vain  ?  and  grave  and  ferious,  without  being 
morofe  ?  to  be  ufeful  and  inftrudive  to  others,  in 
our  converfation  and  difcourfe,  without  afifuming  too 
much  authority  to  our  felves  ?  v/hich  is  not  the  bed 
and  moil  effectual  v/ay  of  doing  good  to  others  ; 
there  being  fomething  in  the  nature  of  man,  v/hich 
had  rather  take  a  hint  and  intimation  from  another, 
to  advife  himfelf,  and  would  rather  choofe  to  imi- 
tate the  filent  good  example  v/hich  they  fee  in  ano- 
ther, than  to  have  either  his  advice  or  his  example 
impofed  upon  them. 

How  difficult  it  is  to  have  a  min<3  equal  to  every 
condition,  and  to  be  content  with  mean  and  mode- 
rate things  ?  to  be  patient  in  adverfity,  and  humble 
in  profperity,  and  meek  upon  fudden  and  violent 
provocations  ?  to  keep  our  palTions  free  from  getting 
head  of  our  reafon,  and  our  zeal  from  out-running 
our  knowledge  ?  to  have  a  will  perfectly  fubmitted 
and  refigned  to  the  will  of  Qi^-Q^  even  when  it  lies 
crofs  and  thwart  to  ours,  fo  that  whatever  pleafes 
God,  fhould  pleafe  us  ?  to  be  refolute,  when  our 
duty  happens  to  be  difficult  and  dangerous  ;  or  even 
to  believe  that  to  be  our  duty  (tho'  it  certainly  be 
fo)  which  is  very  inconvenient  for  us  to  do  ?  to  hold 
out  and  be  unwearied  in  well-doing  ?  to  be  careful 
to  preferve  our  lives,  and  yet  upon  a  great  occafion, 

and 


The  wlfdom  of  religion.  i  r^n 

and  whenever  Gop  calls  for  them,  to  be  content  to  S  ERA'!. 

XCVJ 

Jay  them  down  ? 

To  be  wife  and  innocent ;  ^'  men  in  underftand- 
"  ing,'*  and  yet  "  in  malice  children  ?  "  to  have 
many  great  virtues,  and  not  to  want  that  which  o-ives 
the  great  luftre  to  them  all,  I  mean  real  and  unaf- 
fected modcfty,  and  humility  ?  In  fliort, 

How  difficult  is  ir,  "  to  have  regard  to  all  God's 
''  commandments,  and  to  hate  every  evil  and  falfe 
<'  way  ?  "  to  have  our  duty  continually  in  our  eye, 
and  ready  to  be  put  into  practice  upon  every  pro- 
per occafion  ?  to  have  God,  and  the  confideration 
of  another  world  always  before  us,  prefent  to  our 
minds,  and  operative  upon  our  pradlice  ?  to  live  as 
thofe  that  know  they  mud  die,  and  to  have  our 
thoughts  perpetually  awake,  and  intent  upon  the 
great  and  everlafting  concernments  of  our  immortal 
fouls  ? 

Thefe  are  great  things  indeed,  eafy  to  be  talked 
of,  but  hard  to  be  done  -,  nay  not  to  be  done  at  all, 
without  frequent  and  fervent  prayer  to  Qo^^  and 
the  continual  aids  and  fupplies  of  his  grace  j  not 
without  an  earneft  endeavour  on  our  parts,  a  vigo- 
rous refiftance  of  temptations,  and  many  a  fore  con- 
flid  with  our  own  pervcrfe  wills  and  fenfual  incli- 
nations ;  not  without  a  perpetual  guard  and  watch- 
fulnefs  over  our  lives,  and  our  unruly  appetites  and 
paffions. 

Little  do  unexperienced  men,  and  thofe  who  have 
taken  no  great  pains  with  themfclves,  imagine  what 
thought  and  confideration,  what  care  and  attention, 
what  refolution  and  firmnefs  of  mind,  what  dili- 
gence and  "  patient  condnuance  in  well-doing," 
Vol.  VI.  II  X  are 

4. 


1  c^5'o  ^'^^  tvifdom  of  religion, 

SE  R  M.  are  requldte  to  make  a  truly  good  man  -,  fuch  a  one 
■^^^'^"  as  St.  Paul  defcribes,  that  is,  "  perfedt  and  entire, 
^'  and  wanting  nothing ; "  that  "  follows  God 
''  fully  •, "  and  fulfils  every  part  of  his  duty,  "  hav- 
*'  ing  a  confcience  void  of  offence  towards  God,  and 
*'  towards  man."  Who  is  there  among  us,  that  is 
either  wife  enough  for  his  own  direction,  or  good 
enough  for  the  peace  and  fatisfadion  of  his  own 
mind  ;  that  is  fo  happy  as  to  know  his  duty,  and 
to  do  it  •,  as  to  have  both  the  underftanding  and  the 
will  to  do  in  all  things  as  he  ought  ? 

After  our  bell  care,  and  all  our  pains  and  endea- 
vours, the  mod  of  us  will  ftill  find  a  great  many 
defeats  in  our  lives,  and  cannot  but  difcern  great  and 
manifold  imperfedions  in  our  very  befl  duties  and 
lervices ,  infomuch  that  we  fhall  be  forced  to  make 
the  fime  acknowledgment  concerning  them,  which 
Solomon   does   concerning    the  imperfedion  of  all 
thino-s  under  the  fun  •,  "  that  which  is  crooked  can- 
"  not  be  made  ilraight,  and  that  which  is  wanting 
*'  cannot  be  numbred."     And  when  all  is  done,  we 
have  all  of  us  reafon  to  fay,  not  only  that  '^  we  are 
*'  unprofitable   fervants,  having  done  nothing  but 
«  what  was  our  duty  to  do  ;''  but  have  caufe  like- 
wife,  with   great   fhame  and  confufion    of  face,  to 
acknowledge  that  we  have  been  in   many  refpefts 
*'  wicked  and    flothful   fetvants,"   and  fo  very  far 
from    having  done   what  was  "  our  duty  to  do,'* 
that  the  greateft  part  of  the  good  which  the  moil 
of  us  have  done,  is  the  lead  part  of  the  good  which 
we  might  and  ought  to  have  done. 

The  practice  of  religion,  in  all  the  parts  and  in- 
flanccs  of  our  duty,  is  work  more  than  enough  for 

the 


Ihe  wijdom  of  religion,  ,         1551 

the  beft  and  greateft  mind,  for  the  longefl  and  bed  ^^Fp^^"^* 
order'd  life,  ''  the  commandment  of  God  is  exceed- 
*'  ing  broad  i  "  and  an  obedience  in  any  good  meafure 
equal  to  the  extent  of  it,  extremely  difficult.  And 
after  all,  as  the  man  in  the  gofpel  faid  with  tears  to 
our  Saviour,  concerning  the  weak nefs  of  his  own 
faith,  ''  Lord,  I  believe,  help  thou  my  unbelief," 
Mark  ix.  24.  So  the  befl:  of  men  may  fay,  and  fiy  it 
with  tears  too,  concerning  every  grace  and  virtue 
wherein  they  excel  moft,  "  Lord,  I  afpire,  I  endeavour 
"  after  it,  be  thou  pleafed  to  affift  my  v/eaknefs,  and 
*'  to  help  me  by  thy  grace  continually  to  do  better.** 

The  fum  of  all  is  this,  if  we  be  careful  to  do 
our  bed,  and  make  it  the  conftant  and  fincere  en- 
deavour of  our  lives  to  pleafe  God,  and  to  keep  his 
commandments,  v/e  ihall  be  accepted  of  him :  for 
God  values  this  more  than  "  whole  burnt-offerings 
"  and  facrifices,"  more  than  "  thoufands  of  rams, 
"  and  ten  thoufands  of  rivers  of  oil  ;  "  becaufe  this 
is  an  effential  part  of  religion,  *'  to  love  God  with  all 
''  our  hearts,  and  minds,  and  ftrength,  and  to  love 
*'  our  neighbours  as  our  felves/'  The  duties  com- 
prehended in  thefe  two  great  commandments,  fin- 
cerely  pradifed  by  us  (though  with  a  great  deal  of 
imperfedlion)  will  certainly  be  acceptable  in  the  fight 
of  God,  in  and  through  the  merits  and  mediation 
of  Jesus  Christ  the  righteous.  "  Blefled  are 
"  they  "  (faith  St.  John  very  plainly,  in  the  conclu- 
fion  of  that  obfcure  book  of  his  Revelation)  "  blefTcd 
"  are  they  that  do  his  commandments,  that  they 
''  may  have  right  to  the  tree  of  life,"  Rev.  xxii.  14. 

I   fpeak  now   to  a  great   many  who  are  at  the 
upper  end  of  the  world,  and  command  all  the  plea- 

11X2  furesi 


J  r  r2  7he  wifdom  of  religion. 

S  E  R  AI.  fures  and  enjoyments  of  it ;   but  the  time  is  coming, 
^^^^^-  .  and  Cwhethcr  we  think  of  it  or  not)  is  very  near  at 
hand,  when  we  fliall  "  fee  an  end  of  all  perre6i:ion,'* 
and  of  all  that  is  defirable  upon  earth,    and   upon 
which  men  are  apt  to  value  themfeves  fo  much  in  this 
world  ;  and  then  nothing  but  religion,    and  the  con- 
fcience  of  having  done  our  duty  to  God   and  man, 
will  (land  us  in  llead,  and  yield  true  comfort  to  us. 
When  we  are  going  to  leave  the  world,  how  fliall  we 
then  wi(h  that  we  had  made  religion  the  great  bufi- 
nefs  of  our  lives ;  and  in  the  day  of  God's  grace  and 
mercy,  had  exercifed  repentance,  and  made  our  peace 
with   God,    and    prepared    our   felves    for  another 
world  ♦,  that  after  our  departure  hence,  we  might  be 
admitted  into  "  theprefence  of  God,  where  is  ful- 
*'  neis  of  joy,  and  at  whofe  right  hand  are  pleafures 
*'  for  evermore." 

Let  no  man  therefore,  of  what  rank  or  condition 
foever  he  be  in  this  world,  think  himfelf  too  great  to 
be  (^ood,  and  too  wife  to  be  religious,  and  to  take 
care  of  his  immortal  foul,  and  his  everlafling  happi- 
nefs  in  another  world  ;  fince  nothing  but  this  will 
approve  it  felf  to  be  true  wifdom  at  the  laft.  All 
other  things  will  have  an  end  with  this  life ;  but  reli- 
gion and  the  fear  of  God  is  of  a  vaft  extent,  and 
hath  an  influence  upon  our  whole  duration,  and,  after 
the  courfe  of  this  life  is  ended,  will  put  us  into  the 
fecure  poireflion  of  a  happinefs  which  Ihall  never  have 
an  end. 

I  will  conclude  this  whole  difcourfe  with  thofe 
words  of  our  blefled  Saviour,  "  if  ye  know  thefe 
*'  things,  happy  are  ye  if  ye  do  them."  "  Which 
«^  thou,  who  art  the  eternal  fpring  of  truth  and  good- 

"  reis. 


The  nature  and  influence^  &c.  '553 

< '  nefs,  grant  that  we  may  all  know  and  do  in  this 
"  our  day,  for  thy  mercies  fake  in  Jesus  Christ  > 
"  to  whom,  with  the  Father  and  the  Holy 
"  Ghost,  be  all  honour  and  glory,  dominion  and 
"  power,  now  and  for  ever.  Amen. 

SERMON     XCVIL 

The  nature  and    influence    of    the 
promifes  of  the  gofpel. 

2  PETER  i.  4. 

Whereby  are  given  iinto  us  exceeding  great  and  precious 
prcmifes  ,  that  hy  thefe  ye  might  he  partakers  of  the 
divine  nature, 

•iHE  connexion  of  thefe  words  with  the  for-SERM. 

xcvi  r 
mer  is  fomewhat  obfcure,    but  it  feems  to  be  ^_  _     ^ 

this.    The   apoftle  had  in    the  verfe   before   The  firft 

faid,  "  that  the  divine  power  of  Christ  hath  by  ?^^^"^^" 

"  the  knowledge  of  the  gofpel  given  us  all  things 

"  that  pertain  to  life  and  godlinefsj"  that  is  by  the 

knowledge  of  the  gofpel  we  are  furnifh'd  with   alj 

advantages  which  conduce  to  make  men  happy  in  the 

next  life,  and  religious  in  this  ;    and  then  it  follows, 

"  whereby  are  given  unto  us  exceeding  great  and 

**  precious  promifes."  whereby  this  feems   to   refer 

to  the  whole  of  the  foregoing  verfe  •,  as  if  it  had  been 

faid,  "  Christ  by  the  gofpel  hath  given  to  us  all 

'*  things  that  conduce  to  our  future  happinefs  ;    and 

*'  in  order  thereto,  all  things  which   tend   to  make 

**  men  holy  and  good.'*  Or  elfe  life  and  godlinefs 

are. 


1554  ^^^  nature  and  ijtjlueiice 

S  E  R  M.  are,  by  a  hebraifm  frequent  in  the  new  teftamcnt,  put 
for  a  godly  life.  And  then  among  all  thofe  things 
which  conduce  to  a  godly  life,  the*apofl:le  inftanceth 
in  the  promifes  of  the  gofpel  which  do  fo  diredlly 
tend  to  make  men  ''  partakers  of  a  divine  nature.'* 

In  the  handling  of  thefe  words,  I  fhall, 

Firll,  confidcr  the  promifes  here  fpoken  of; 
"  whereby  are  given  unto  us  exceeding  great  and 
*'  precious  promifes." 

Secondly,  the  influence  which  thefe  promifes  ought 
to  have  upon  us ;  "  that  by  thefe  ye  might  be  made 
*'  partakers  of  a  divine  nature." 

Firfl,  we  will  confider  the  promifes  which  are  here 
fpoken  of  ;  "  whereby  are  given  unto  us  exceeding 
\  *'  great  and  precious  promifes."  And  becaufe  the  chief 
promifes  of  the  gofpel  are  here  intended,  I  fhall  take 
occafion  from  this  text  to  handle  the  doctrine  of  the 
promifes,  which  is  frequently  difcours'd  of  in  divini- 
ty, but  not  always  fo  clearly  ftated.  And  to  this  pur- 
pofe,  it  will  be  proper  to  take  into  confideration  thele 
four  things. 

I.  What  the  promifes  are  which  are  fpoken  of^ 
whereby  are  given  unto  us  promifes.'* 

II.  Why  they  are  faid  to  be  fo  great  and  precious  5 
exceeding  great  and  precious  promifes." 

III.  We  will  confider  the  tenor  of  thefe  promifes, 

IV.  When  men  are  faid  to  have  a  right  to  them, 
fo  as  they  may  apply  them  to  themfelves.  Thefe  four 
heads  will  comprehend  what  I  have  to  fay  upon  this 
argument. 

I.  What  the  promifes  are  which  the  apoftle  here 
fpeaks  of ;  "  whereby  are  given  unto  us  promifes.** 
And  no  doubt,  the  apoftle  here  intends  thofe  great  and 

excellent 


cc 


cc 


of  the  promifes  of  the  gofpeL  ^55^ 

excellent  promifes  which  Christ  hath  made  tousSERM. 
in  the  gofpel.  So  that  to  fatisfy   our  felves  in  this' ^^^^^' 
enquiry,  we  need  only  to  confider  what  are  the  prin- 
pal  promifes  of  the  gofpel.  Now  the  great  promifes 
of  the  gofpel  are  thefe  three. 

1.  The  promifeof  the  free  pardon  and  forgivenefs 
of  our  fins,  upon  our  faith  and  repentance. 

2.  The  promifeofGoD's  grace  and  Holy  Spirit 
to  affifl:  our  obedience. 

2.  The  promife  of  eternal  life  to  reward  it. 

1 .  The  promife  of  the  pardon  and  forgivenefs  of 
our  fins,  upon  our  faith  and  repentance.  The  gofpel 
hath  made  full  and  clear  promifes  to  this  purpofe ; 
that  if  we  believe  the  gofpel,  and  will  forfake  our 
fins,  and  amend  our  wicked  lives,  all  that  is  pafl: 
fliall  be  forgiven  us,  and  that  Christ  died  for  this 
end,  to  obtain  for  us  remiflion  of  fins  in  his  blood. 
The  light  of  nature,  upon  confideration  of  the  mercy 
and  goodnefs  of  God,  gave  men  good  hope^,  that 
upon  their  repentance  God  would  forgive  their  fins, 
and  turn  away  his  wrath  from  them.  But  mankind 
was  doubtful  of  this,  and  therefore  they  ufed  expia- 
tory facrifices  to  appeafe  the  offended  deity.  The 
Jewilh  religion  allowed  of  no  expiation,  but  for  leo-al 
impurities,  and  involuntary  tranfgreffions,  fuch  as  pro- 
ceeded from  ignorance  and  inadvertency;  but  not 
for  "  fins  of  prefumption,"  and  fuch  as  were  com- 
mitted "  with  an  high  hand."  If  men  finn'd  wil- 
fully, there  was  no  facrifice  appointed  by  the  law  for 
fuch  fins.  Bat  the  grace  of  the  gofpel  juftifies  us 
from  the  greatefl  fins,  upon  our  faith  and  fincere 
repentance.  So  St.  Paul  tells  the  Jews,  Adls  xiii.  ^^, 
39.  "  Be  it  known  unco  you  therefore,    men  and 

*'  brethren^ 


I  c  ^  6  ^h^  nature  and  influence 

SERM.  <«  brethren,  that  through  this  man  is  preached 
"  unco  you  the  forgivenefs  of  fins:  and  by  him  all 
'^  that  believe  are  jufti6ed  from  all  things,  from 
*^  which  ye  could  not  be  juftifted  by  the  law  of 
«'  Mofes."  There  was  no  general  promife  of  par- 
don, nor  way  of  expiation  under  the  lav/  ;  perfedl 
remiflion  of  fins  is  clearly  revealed,  and  afcertain'd 
to  us  only  by  the  gofpel. 

2.  Another  great  promife  of  the  gofpel,  is  the  pro- 
mife of  God's  grace  and  Holy  Spirit  toaflift  our 
obedience.     Oar  bleflcd   Saviour  hath  promifed, 
*'  that  our  heavenly  Father  will  give  his  Holy 
*^  Spirit  to  them  that  ask  him."  'Tis  true  indeed, 
there  was  a  peculiar  promife  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
"to  the  apoftles  and  chriilians  of  the  firfl:  ages,  which 
is  not  nov/  to  be  expeded  ;  namely,  an  extraordinary 
and  miraculous  pov/er,  whereby  they  v/ere  qualified  to 
publifn  the  gofpel  to  the  v/orld,  and  to  give   con- 
firmation to  it.  But  now  that  the  chritlian  religion  is 
propagated  and  fettled  in  the  world,  the  great  end  and 
ufe  of  chefe  miraculous  gifis  is  ceafed :  but  yet  the 
Spirit  of  God  doth  flili  concur  with  the  gofpel, 
and  work  upon  the  minds  of  men,  to  excite  and 
alTift  them  to  that  which  is  good.     And  tho*  this 
operation  be  very  fecret,  fo  as  we  cannot  give  an  ac- 
count of  the  manner  of  it,  yet  the  efiedls  of  it  are 
very  fenfible,  and  this  influence  of  God's  Holy  Spi- 
rit is  common  to  all  chriilians  in  all  ages  of  the 
world.     This  propofition  is  univerfally  true,  and  in 
all  ages  and  times  ;  "  if  any  man  hath  not  the  Spi- 
"  RiT  of  Christ,  he  is  none  of  his." 

It  muft  be  acknowledged,  that  the  Spirit  doth 
not  now  work  upon  men  in  that  fudden  and  fenfible 

manner, 


of  the  promifes  of  the  gofpel.  ^557 

manner,  as  it  did  in  the  firfl  times  of  chriflianlty  jSERM. 

XCVIf 
becaufe  then  men  were  ftrongly  pofTefs'd  with  the  pre- 
judices of  other  religions,  which  they  had  been  brought 
up  in ;  and  therefore  as  more  outward  means  of  con- 
vidlion  were  then  neceflliry,  fo  likewife  a  more  power- 
ful internal  operation  of  the  Spirit  of  God  upon 
the  minds  of  men,  to  conquer  and  bear  down  thofe 
prejudices,  and  to  fubdue  them  to  the  obedience  of 
faith.  But  now  the  principles  of  religion  and  good- 
nefs  are  more  gradually  inftill'd  into  the  minds  of 
men,  by  the  gentle  degrees  of  pious  indrudlion  and 
education  ;  and  with  thefe  means  the  Spirit  of  God 
concurs  in  a  more  humane  way,  which  is  more  fuited 
and  accommodated  to  our  reafon,  and  offers  lefs  vio- 
lence to  the  nature  of  men.  So  that  this  promife  of 
God's  Holy  Spirit  is  now  made  good  to  us,  as 
the  necefTity  and  circumftances  of  our  prefent  ftate 
do  require.  God  does  not  ufe  fuch  extraordinary 
means  for  the  producing  of  thofe  effeds,  which  may 
be  accomplilh'd  in  a  more  ordinary  way.  The  af- 
fi (lance  of  God's  Holy  Spirit  is  ftill  necelTary  to 
men,  to  incline  and  enable  them  to  that  which  is 
good ;  but  not  in  that  manner  and  degree  that  it  was 
necefiary  at  firfl :  becaufe  the  prejudices  againfl  chri- 
llianity  are  not  now  fo  great,  and  many  of  thofe  ad- 
vantages which  were  neceflarily  wanting  at  firfl,  are 
now  fupplied  in  an  ordinary  way  ;  and  therefore  it  is 
not  reafonable  now  to  exped  the  fame  extraordinary 
operation  of  the  Spirit  of  God  upon  the  minds 
of  men,  which  we  read  of  in  the  firfl  beginning  of 
chriflianity. 

3.  There  is  likewife  the  promife  of  eternal  life  to 
reward  and   crown  our  obedience.     And  this  the 
Vol.  VI.  II  Y  fcrip^ 

4. 


I  ^5 8  ^be  nature  and  vijluence 

S  E  R  M/  fcripture  fpeaks  of  as  the  great  promife  of  the  gof- 
^        '  peJ,   I  John  ii.  25.  "  This  is  the  promife  which  he 
"  hath  promifed  us,  even  eternal  life."    And  upon 
this  account,  the  new  covenant  of  the  gofpel,  is  pre- 
ferred before  the  old  covenant  of  the  law,  becaufe  it 
is  "  eftablifhed  upon  better  promifes."     All  the  fpe- 
cial  and  particular  promifes  of  the  Jaw  were  of  tem- 
poral good  things,  and  thefe  were  the  great  encou- 
ragements that  were  given  to  obedience,  under  that 
imperfecfl  difpenfation :  but  now  ''  godlinefs  hath  not 
"  only  the  promife  of  the  life  that  now  is,  but  of  that 
"  which  is  to  come;"  as  the  apoftle  tells  us,iTim.  iv. 
8.  The  gofpel  hath  clearly  revealed  to  us  a  happy 
ftate  of  immortality  after  this  life,  of  which  men 
had  but  very   obfcure  and  doubtful  apprehenfions. 
So  the   apoftle   tells   us,   2  Tim.  i.  lo.    "  That  it 
is  now  made  manifeft,  by  the  appearance  of  our 
Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  who  hath  abolifhed 
death,  and  hath  brought  life  and  immortality  to  light 
through  the  gofpel."     Holy  men  had  good  hopes 
of  it  before  ,  but  they  had  no  lure,  diftincc  apprehen- 
fions of  it,  no  fuch  full   aiTurance  concerning  it,  no 
fuch  clear  and  exprefs  promifes  of  it,  as  the  gofpel 
hath  given  us. 

Thus  you  fee  what  thofe  great  promifes  are  which 
tiie  gofpel  hath  given  us,  namely ,  the  promife  of  the 
free  pardon  and  forgivenefs  of  our  fins,  upon  our 
faith  and  repentance  \  the  promife  of  God's  grace  and 
Holy  Spirit  to  affift  our  obedience,  and  the  pro- 
mife of  eternal  life  and  happinefs  to  reward  it.  Thefe 
are  the  three  eminent  promifes  of  the  goipel,  and  in 
all  probability  thofe  which  the  apoftle  here  calls 
"  great  and  precious  promifes,"  which  brings  me 
tO  the  lid  Thing 


of  the  profmfes  of  the  go/pel  1559 

lid  Thing  which  I  propounded  to  confider,  namely,  S  E  R  M. 
why  they  are  faid  to  be  exceeding  "  great  and  pre- 
*'  cious,"  rd  [xiyi'^a.  Kj  rliJ-ict  iTrctyyiXfxarcf.y  "  the 
*'  greateft  and  the  mofl:  valuable  promifes."     And 
to  fatisfy  us  that   they  are  fuch,  the  very  confidera- 
tion  of  the  bleffings  and  benefits  that  they  carry  in 
them  will  be  fufficicnt :  if  we  confider  the  condition 
that  mankind  was  in,  when  God  was  pleafed  to  make 
thefe  gracious  declarations  to  us,  we  fhall  fee  great 
reafon  to  fet  a  high  value  upon  every  one  of  thefe 
promifes.  Mankind  was  extremely  degenerated,  "all 
*'  flefli  had  corrupted  its  ways,  and  the  whole  world 
''  was  guilty  before  God,"  and  liable  to  all  that  mife- 
ry  which  the  finner  had  reafon  to  apprehend  from  the 
incenfedjuftice  of  the  Almighty.     We  had  forfeited 
that  happinefs  to  which  our  immortal  nature  was  de- 
figned,  and,  which  made  our  condition  more  fad,  we 
were  ''  without  ftrength"  to  recover  ourfelves  out  of  it, 
by  our  repentance  for  what  was  pad  (if  God  would 
have  accepted  of  it)  and  by  our  future  obedience. 
Now  the  promifes  of  the  gofpel  offer  relief  to  us  in  all 
thefe  refpeds,  and  thereby  obviate  all  the  difficulties 
and  difcouragements  which  mankind  lay  under. 

The  gracious  promife  of  pardon  frees  us  from  guilt, 
and  fecures  us  from  the  terrible  wrath  of  God,  which 
our  guilty  confciences  did  fo  much  dread  ;  and  with- 
out this  promife,  mankind  would  have  been  under  the 
greateft  doubts  and  difcouragements.  For  when  men 
are  afraid  their  fins  are  greater  than  will  be  forgiven 
them,  they  are  apt  to  fall  into  defpair,  and  defpair  is 
an  effedual  bar  to  repentance  *,  for  when  men  think 
their  condition  is  defperate,  they  care  not  what  they 
do, 

1 1  y  2  And 


xcvir. 


T^6o  ^he  nature  and  influence 

S  F^RM.      And  the  promife  of  God's  grace  and  Holy  Spi- 
rit, to  aflift  and  enable  us  to  do  our  duty,  does  ful- 
ly anfwer  all  the  difcouragements  and  objedtions  from 
our  own  weaknefs,  and  the  power  of  temptation.  We 
may  "  do  all  things  through  Christ  ftrengthening 
*'  us  ♦,"  and  how  weak  foever  we  are  of  ourfelves,we  arc 
*'ftrongin  the  Lord,  andjn  the  power  of  his  might." 
If  God   be  for  us,  who  or  what  can  ftand  againft 
us  ?   The  devil  is  a  very  powerful  enemy,  and  much 
too  ilrong  for  flefh  and  blood  to  encounter  in  its  own 
flrength  ;  but  there  is  another  principle  in  the  world, 
which  is  mightier  and  more  powerful  than  he,  the  Ho- 
lvSpirit  ofGoDjwho  is  always  ready  to  help,  when 
we  do  not  repulfe  and  refufe  his  afTifiance  \  "  greater  is 
*'  he  that  is  in  you,  than  he  that  is  in  the  world," 
fays  the  apoftle,  i  John  iv.  4.  The  Spirit  of  God 
dwells  in  all  thofe  who  are  willing  to  admit  him, 
and  is  ever  ready  to  afTift  thofe  who  comply  with  his 
blefled  motions,  and  do  vigouroufly  put  forth  their 
own  endeavours. 

And  then  the  promife  of  eternal  life,  that  anfwers  all 
the  difficulties  of  ourobedience,[and  fets  us  above  any 
thing  that  the  world  can  threaten  us  withal,  for  our 
conftancy  to  God,  and  his  truth.  A  wife  man  will  be 
content  to  fuffer  any  thing,  or  to  quit  any  thing,  upon 
terms  of  far  greater  advantage :  and  what  greater 
confideradon  can  be  offered  to  encourage  our  con- 
ftancy and  obedience,  than  an  eternity  of  happinefs  ^. 
So  that  the  apoftle  had  reafon  to  call  thefe, "  exceed- 
*'  ing  great  and  valuable  promifes ;"  fo  valuable,  rhat 
if  any  one  of  them  had  been  wanting,  our  redemp- 
tion and  recovery  had  either  been  abfolutely  impofii- 
blc,  or  extremely  difficult.     I  proceed  to  the 

Illd  thing 


of  the  promifes  of  the  gofpcL  1 5  ^  f 

Illd  thing  I  propounded,  which  was  to  confider  S  E  R  M, 
the  tenor  of  thefe  promifes;  that  is,  whether  God  XCVII. 
have  made  them  abfolutely  to  us,  without  requiring 
any  thing  to  be  done  on  our  pajt,  or  upon  certain 
terms  and  conditions  to  be  performed  by  us.  That 
God  may  ("if  he  pleafe^  make  an  abfolute  promife 
of  any  blefUng  or  benefit  to  us,  ther-e  is  no  doubt  ; 
and  that  God's  grace  does  prevent  many,  and  is  be- 
-  fore-hand  with  them,  is  as  Jittle  to  be  doubted :  the 
Spirit  of  God  goes  along  with  the  gofpel,  mov- 
ing and  inchning  men  to  yield  obedience  to  it,  many 
times  before  any  inchnation  and  difpofition  thereto 
on  their  parts.  But  as  to  this  promife  of  God's 
grace  and  Holy  Spirit,  the  great  queftion  is  not 
about  the  firft  motion  of  it,  but  the  continuance  of 
this  alTidance,  and  the  increafe  of  it;  and  this,  I 
think,  may  fafeiy  be  affirmed,  is  promifed  only 
conditionally,  as  alfo  the  pardon  of  fin,  and  eternal 
life.  And  concerning  each  of  thefe,  the  matter  may 
quickly  be  decided,  by  plain  texts  of  fcripture. 

Concerning  the  promife  of  the  grace  and  affiftance 
of  God's  Holy  Spirit,  the  fcripture  takes  notice 
of  two  conditions.  Firfl,  that  we  beg  it  earneftly  of 
God:  and  this  our  Saviour  exprefleth  "by  asking, 
*'  feeking,  and  knocking,"  which  fignifies  the  impor- 
tunity of  our  requeils;  "  our  heavenly  Father  will 
"  give  his  Holy  Spirit  to  them  that  thus  ask  it." 
And  then,  fecondly,  that  we  improve  and  make  ufe 
of  the  grace  which  God  affords  us ;  "to  him  that 
"  hath,  fhall  be  given,  and  from  him  that  hath  not, 
*'  Ihall  be  taken  away  even  that  which  he  feems  to 
*'  have."  That  is  (as  appears  plainly  from  the  fcope 
of  the  parable)  to  him  that  ufeth  that  grace,  and 

thofe 


1^62  The  nature  and  ijifluence 

S  R  E  M.  thofe  advantages  which  God  affords  him,  more  fliall 

^^J^  be  given  ;  but  from  him  that  makes  no  ufe  of  them, 

and  therefore  is  as  if  he  had  them  not,  fhall  be  taken 

away  that  which  h^  but  feems  to  have,  becaufe  he 

makes  no  ufe  of  it. 

Concerning  the  pardon  of  fins;  the  fcripture 
plainly  fufpends  that  upon  the  general  condition  of 
repentance,  and  the  change  of  our  lives -,  "  repent, 
*'  that  your  fins  may  be  forgiven  you  :  "  and  upon 
the  condition  of  our  forgiving  others-,  *'  if  ye  for- 
''  give  men  their  trefpafies,  then  will  your  heavenly 
^'  Father  alfo  forgive  you  ;  but  if  you  forgive 
not  men  their  trcfpaffcs,  neither  will  your  Fa- 
ther forgive  your  trefpafies,"  fays  our  Savi- 
our, Matth.  vi.  14,  15. 

And  then  the  promife  of  eternal  life,  is  every 
where  in  fcripture  fufpended  upon  the  condition  of 
faith  and  repentance,  and  perfeverance  in  well-doing. 
*«  He  that  believes  (fays  our  Saviour)  fhall  be  fa- 
*'  ved,"  vv'hich  indeed  implies  the  whole  condition 
of  the  gofpel.  ''  He  that  believes,"  that  is,  he  that 
effedually  affents  to  the  doctrine  of  Christ,  and 
is  fo  perfuaded  of  the  truth  of  it,  as  to  live  accord- 
ing to  it,  "  fhall  be  fa  ved."  But  if  obedience  were 
ROt  included  in  the  fcripture  notion  of  faith,  yet  the 
fcripture  elfewhere  exprefly  makes  it  the  condition 
of  our  eternal  filvation.  Heb.  v.  9.  Christ  is  there 
faid  to  be  "  the  author  of  eternal  falvation  to  them 
"  that  obey  him  *, "  thereby  implying  that  none 
fhall  be  faved  by  Christ,  but  thofe  that  obey  the 
gofpel.  Heb.  xii.  14.  "  Follow  holinefs,  without 
*'  which  no  man  fhall  fee  the  Lord,"  Rom.  ii.  7, 
8,  9.  "  To  them  who   by  patient  continuance    in 

*'  well- 


of  the  promifes  of  the  gofpel,  1563 

•^  well-doing  feek  for  glory,  and  honour,  and  im-  S  E  R  M, 
<'  mortality,'*  God  will  give  *'  eternal  life  \  but  to  ^^^\ 
*'  them  that  are  contentious,  and  obey  not  the 
''  truth-,"  that  is,  the  gofpel,  "  but  obey  unrigh- 
*'  teoufnefs,  indignation  and  wrath,  tribulation  and 
"  anguifh  upon  every  foul  of  man  that  doth  evil*'. 

I  cannot  well  imagine  what  can  reafonably  be  an- 
fwered  to  fuch  plain  ttxts  ;  but  I  will  ttW  you  what 
is  commonly  anfwered  ;  namely,  that  God  gives  the 
condition  whicii  he  requires ;  and  therefore  though 
thefe  promifes  run  in  a  conditional  form,  yet  in 
truth  they  are  abfolute ;  becaufe  he  that  makes  a  pro- 
mife  to  another,  upon  a  condition  which  he  will  alfo 
perform,  doth  in  effedl  make  an  abfolute  promife. 
As  if  a  man  promifed  another  fuch  an  eftate,  upon 
condition  he  pay  fuch  a  fum  for  it,  and  does  pro- 
mife withal  to  furnifli  him  v/ith  that  fum,  this  in 
effed:  amounts  to  an  abfolute  promife  of  the  eftate. 

And  this  is  very  well  argued,   if  the  cafe  were 
thus.   But  God  hath  no  where  promifed  to  work  the 
condition  in  us,  without  the  concurrence  of  our  own 
endeavours.     God  may,  and   oftentimes  doth,  pre- 
vent men  by  his  grace  ;  but  he  hath  no  where  pro- 
mifed to  give  his  Holy  Spirit    but  to  them  that 
ask  it  of  him.     And  he  hath  no   where   promifed 
to  continue  his  grace  and  afllftance  to  us,   unlels  we 
will  ufe  our  fincere  endeavours  -,  nay,  in  cafe  we  do 
not,  he  hath  thrcatned  to  take  away  his  grace  and 
afllftance  from  us.     And  if  this  be  fo,  then  the  pro- 
mifes of  the  gofpel  do  not  only  feem  to  be  condi- 
tional, but  are  really  fo.     And  it  is  a  wonder  that 
any  man  fhould  doubt  of  this,  who  considers  how 
frequendy  in  the  new  teftament  the  gofpel  is  repre- 

fented 


1^64  ^'^^  nature  and  influence 

SERM.  fented  to  us  under  the  notion  of  ''  a  covenant,'* 
fince  a  covenant  in  the  very  nature  of  it  doth  imply 
a  mutual  obligation  between  the  parties  that  enter 
into  it.     But  if  the   gofpel    contain  only  bleflings 
which   are  promifed  on   God's  part,  without  any- 
thing  required  to  be  done  and  performed  on  our 
part,  in  order    to  the  obtaining  of  thofe  blefTings, 
then  the  gofpel  is  nothing  elfe  but  a  promife,  or  deed 
of  gift,  making  over  certain  benefits  and   bleflings 
to  us ;  but  can  in   no  propriety  of  language  in   the 
world  be  called  "   a  covenant :  "  but  if  there   be 
fome  things  required  on  our  part,  in  order   to  our 
beino-  made  partakers  of  the  promifes  which  God 
hath  made  to  us  (as  the  fcripture  every  where  tells 
us  there  is)  then  the  promifes  are  plainly  conditional. 
To  inftance  in  the  promife  of  forgivenefs  of  fins ; 
*'  repent,  that  your  fins  may  be  blotted  out; '*  that 
is,  upon  this  condition  that  ye  repent  of  your  fins, 
they  fhall  be  forgiven,  and  not  otherwife.  Can  there  be 
any  plainer  condition  in  the  world,  than  this  in  thofc 
words  of  our  Saviour  ?  "  If  ye  forgive  men  their 
*'  trefpafles,  your  heavenly  Father  will  alfo  for- 
<t  give  your  trefpafles ;  but  if  ye  forgive  .'not  men 
*'  their    trefpaflfes,   neither  will  your   heavenly  Fa- 
"  THER  forgive  your  trefpafl^es." 

This  is  fo  far  from  being  any  prejudice  to  the 
freenefs  of  Goo's  grace,  who  is  infinitely  gracious  in 
ofi^ering  fuch  great  bleflings  to  us  upon  any  condi- 
tion that  we  can  perform ;  that  it  were  one  of  the 
abfurdefl:  things  in  the  world  to  imagine  God  fhould 
grant  to  men  forgivenefs  of  fins,  and  eternal  life,  let 
them  behave  themfelves  as  they  will. 

IV.  The  lafl:  thing   I  propofed  for  the  explaining 

of 


of  the  promifes  of  the  gofpel  1 565 

of  this  doflrine  of  the  promifes  of  God,  was  to  con-  S  E  R  M. 
fider  when  men  may  be  faid  to  have  a  right  to  thefe  ^^^^^• 
promifes,  fo  as  to  be  able  upon  good  grounds  to  apply 
them  to  themfelves :  and  the  anfwer  to  this  is  very 
plain  and  eafy  ;  namely,  when  they  find  the  conditions 
of  thefe  promifes  in  themfelves;  and  not  till  then. 

When  a  man  hath  truly  repented  of  his  fins  fo  as 
to  forfake  them,  and  lead  a  new  life ;  and  when  he 
does  from  his  heart  forgive  thofe  that  have  offended 
him,  and  hath  laid  down  -aW  animofity  againft  them, 
and  thoughts  of  revenge  ^  then  hath  he  a  right  to  the 
promife  of  pardon  and  forgivenefs,  and  may  apply  to 
himfelf  in  particular  what  the  fcripture  faith  in  general, 
*'  that  God  will  blot  out  all  his  tranfgrelTions,  and 
"  remember  his  iniquities  no  more."  When  a  man 
doth  conftantly  and  earneilly  implore  the  affiftance  of 
God's  Holy  Spirit,  and  is  ready  to  yield  to  the 
motions  of  it,  and  does  faithfully  make  ufe  of  that 
flrength  and  afTiftance  which  God  affords  him,  then 
he  may  exped  the  continuance  of  his  grace,  and  fur- 
ther degrees  of  it.  When  a  man  makes  it  the  con- 
ftant  and  fincere  endeavour  of  his  life,  to  pleafe  God, 
and  "  to  walk  in  all  the  ordinances  and  command- 
"  ments  of  the  Lord  blamelefs,  and  is  effedually 
"  taught  by  the  grace  of  God  to  deny  ungodlineis 
*'  and  worldly  lufts,  and  to  Jive  foberiy,  and  ricrhte- 
"  ouQy,  and  godly  in  this  prefent  world,"  then  he 
may  with  comfort  and  joy  "  wait  for  die  bJeffed 
"  hope,  and  the  glorious  appearance  of  the  great 
*'  God,  and  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ  ;"  then 
he  may  with  confidence  depend  upon  God,  "  in 
"  fure  and  certain  hope  of  that  eternal  life,  which 
"  God,  that  cannot  lye,  hath  promifed."   When  he 

Vol.  VI.  II  Z  CJlti 

4. 


i56f)  T^he  nature  and  infuence 

SERM.  can  lay  with  St.  Paul,  '^  I  have  fouehtagood  fisht^ 
''  I  have  finifl:ied  my  courfe,  1  have  kept  the  faith,'* 
then  he  may  hkewife  triumph,  as  he  did,  "  hence- 
*'  forth  there  is  laid  up  for  me  a  crown  of  righteouf. 
*'  nefs,  which  God  the  righteous  judge  fhall  give  mc 
"  in  that  day.'* 

Upon  thefe  terms,  and  in  thefe  cafes,    men  may 
upon  good  grounds  apply  to  themfelves  thefe  "  ex- 
*'  ceeding  great  and  precious  prom ifes"  of  the  gofpel  5 
and  fo  far  as  any  man  is  doubtful  and  uncertain  of  the 
performance  of  the  conditions  which  the  Gofpel  re- 
quires, fo  far  he  muft  neceflarily  queftion  his  right 
and  title  to  the  bleffings  promifed.    And  if  any  man 
think  this  do6lrine  too  uncomfortable,    and  be  wil- 
ling to  rejed  it  upon  this  account,  I  fliall  only  fay 
this,  that  men  may  cheat  themfelves,  if  they  pleafe, 
but  mofi:  certainly  they  will  never  find  any  true  and 
folid  comfort  in  any  other.  This  is  a  plain  and  lenfible 
account  of  a  man's  confidence  and  good  hopes  in  the 
promifes  of  God  ;  but  for  a  man  to  apply  any  pro- 
mife  to  himfelf,    before  he  finds  the  condition  in  him- 
felf,  is  not  faith,  but  either  fancy  or  prefumption. 

And  thereiore  it  is  a  very  prepofterous  courfe 
which  many  take,  to  advife  and  exhort  men,  with 
fo  much  earneftnefs  to  apply  the  promifes  of  God  to 
themfelv^es,  and  to  tell  them  that  they  are  guilty  of 
great  unbelief  in  not  doing  it.  That  which  is  pro- 
per to  exhort  men  to,  is  to  endeavour  to  perform 
the  condition  upon  which  God  hath  promifed  any 
blefling  to  us ;  and  when  men  find  the  condition  in 
themfelves,  they  will  without  any  great  perfuafion 
take  comfort  from  the  promife,  and  apply  it  to 
themfelves  r,   but  till  they  difccrn  the  condition   in 

them- 


of  the  protnifes  of  the  gofpch  ^5^7 

themfelvcs,   it  is  impoPilble  for  a  man  that  under-  S  E  R  M. 

YCVII. 

Hands  himfelf,  to  apply  the  promife  to  himfelf ;  for 
till  the  condition  be  performed,  he  hath  no  more 
right  to  the  promife,  than  if  fuch  a  promife  had  ne- 
ver been  made.  And  *tis  fo  far  from  being  a  fin  in 
fuch  a  man,  to  doubt  of  the  benefit  of  fuch  a  pro,- 
mife,  that  it  is  his  duty  to  do  fo  ;  and  no  man  that 
undcrdands  himfelf,  and  the  promifes  of  God,  can 
poflibly  do  othcrwife. 

Therefore  'tis  a  vain  and  groundlefs  trouble  which 
perplexeth  many  people,  that  they  cannot  apply  the 
promifes  of  God  to  themfelves ;  v/hereas  the  true 
ground  of  their  trouble  fhould  be  this,  that  they  hav^ 
not  been  careful  to  perform  the  condition  of  thoie 
promifes  v/hich  they  would  apply  to  themfelves; 
the  other  is  an  endlefs  trouble  \  let  them  but  look  to 
the  condition,  and  the  promife  will  apply  it  felf  I 
fpeak  all  this  on  purpofe  to  free  men  from  thofe  per- 
plexities wherewith  many  have  entangled  themfelves, 
by  falfe  apprehenfions  of  the  promifes  of  God,  either 
as  if  they  were  not  made  to  us  upon  certain  conditions 
to  be  performed  by  us,  or  as  if  any  man  could  com- 
fortably apply  them  to  himfelf,  before  he  hath  per- 
formed thofe  conditions  upon  which  God  hath  made 
fuch  promifes.  For  if  men  will  believe  that  which  is 
not  true,  or  exped  things  upon  fuch  terms  as  th^y  are 
not  to  be  had,  they  may  trouble  themfelves  eternally, 
and  all  the  world  cannot  help  it. 

I  have  now  done  with  the  firfl  thing  I  propounded 
to  fpeak  to,namely  the  promifes  which  are  here  fpoken 
of  The  fecond  thing,  {viz)  what  influence  thefe  pro- 
mifes ought  to  have  upon  us,  *'  that  by  them  we  may 
''  be  partakers  of  the  divine  nature,"  I  /hall  re. 
fcrve  to  another  opportunity, 

11Z2  SERMON 


[  1568  ] 

SERMON    XCVIII. 

The   nature   and    influence  of  the 
promifes  of  the  gofpel. 

2   P  E  T  E  R  i.  4. 

Whereby  are  given  unto  us  exceeding  great  and  precious 
prc?nifes  ,  that  by  thefe  ye  might  be  partakers  of  the 
divine  nature, 

S-^^i^r!^?"  Y  Made  entrance  into  thefe  words  the  kft  day, 
«-^-v— — ^   I    in  the  handling  whereof  I  propofed  to  do  thefe 

'^^S  ?  ^^^^  things. 

mon  on         Firfl,   to  confider  the  promifes  here  fpoken  of; 

this  text,    cc  whereby  are  given  unto  us  exceeding  great  and 
*'  precious  promifes." 

Secondly,  the  influence  which  thefe  promifes 
ought  to  have  upon  us ;  "  that  by  thefe  ye  might 
*'  be  partakers  of  a  divine  nature." 

The  fir  ft  of  thefe  I  have  done  with,  and  proceed 
now  to  the 

Second,  viz.  The  influence  which  thefe  promifes 
ought  to  have  upon  us  ;  "  whereby  are  given  unto 
*'  us  exceeding  great  and  precious  promifes,  that  by 
"  thefe  ye  might  be  partakers  of  a  divine  nature." 
Not  that  we  can  partake  of  the  efl^ence  and  nature 
of  God,  asfome  have  blafphemoufly  affirmed,  pre- 
tending, in  their  canting  and  fenflefs  language,  to 
be  "  godded  with  God,  and  chrifted  with  Christ." 
In  this  fenfe  it  is  impoffible  for  us  to  "  partake 
<'  of  the  divine  nature,"  for  this  would  be  for 
men  to  become  gods,  and  to  be  advanced  to  the 

flat 


^he  nature  and  ijifluence,  Cid  1569 

ftate  and   perfedion  of  the  deity.     But  the  word  SERM. 

Y  (~^  \T  \  XT 

(p Jcrr?  doth  frequently  in  fcripture  fignify  a  temper 
and  difpofition  j  and  to  be  "  partakers  of  a  divine 
*'  nature,"  is  to  be  of  a  divine  temper  and  difpofi- 
tion, to -have  our  corrupt  natures  redlified  and  purged 
from  all  finful  lufts,  and  irregular  pafTions,  and  from 
all   vicious  and  corrupt  afFedions ;   and  therefore  it 
follows  in  the  text,  "  having  efcaped  the  corruption 
"  that  is  in  the  world  through  luft ;  and  befides  this, 
"  giving  all  diligence,  add  to    your  faith    virtue, 
and    to   virtue    knowledge,    and    to  knowledge 
temperance,  and  to  temperance  patience,  and   to 
patience  godlinefs,  and  to  godlinefs  brotherly  kind- 
nefs,  and  to  brotherly  kindnefs  charity."     So  that 
we  are  "  made  partakers  of  a  divine  nature,"  as  the 
apoftle  here  explains  it,  thefe  two  ways ;  by  clean- 
fing  ourfelves  from  the  Jufts  of  the  flelli,  which   the 
apoftle  here  calls  "  the  corruption  or  defilement  which 
"  is  in  the  world  through  lufl  j"  and   by  a  diligent 
endeavour  after  all  chriftian  graces  and  virtues,  faith 
and  temperance,  and  patience,  a  fincere  love  of  the 
brethren,  and  an  univerfal  charity  and  good-will  to- 
wards all  men. 

And  that  this  is  the  proper  influence  and  and  effi- 
cacy of  the  great  promifes  of  the  gofpel  upon  the 
hearts  and  lives  of  men,  the  apoftle  St.  Paul  fully  de- 
clares to  us,  2  Cor.  vii.  i.  "  Having  therefore  thefe 
*'  promifes,  dearly  beloved,  let  us  cleanfe  ourfelves 
*'  from  all  filthinefs  of  the  fleih  and  fpirit ;"  that  is, 
from  the  lufts  of  theflefh  and  of  uncleannefs,  and 
from  all  evil  and  corrupt  affedlions  of  the  mind,  fuch 
as  wrath,  envy,  malice,  hatred,  ftrife,  revenge,  cruelty, 
jpride^and  the  like  5  "  perfecting  holinefs  in  the  fear 

"   GoDi" 


jcjo  ^^^  nature  and  influence 

SERM.  ''  God*,"  that  is,  continually  afpiring  ftill  more  and 
XCVIH-^  more  after  further  degrees  of  holinefs,  and  virtue,  and 
goodnefs,  which  are  the  great  perfections  of  the  divine 
nature.  And  thus  by  a  conflant  and  fincere  endeavour 
*'  to  cleanfe  ourfelves  from  all  impurity  of  the  fiefh 
"  and  fpirit,"  and  by  praclifing  all  the  virtues  of  a 
good  life,  we  fliall  by  degrees  raife  and  advance  our- 
felves  to  a  god-like  temper  and  dilJDofition,  imitating 
in  all  our  anions  the  goodnefs,  and  mercy,  and  pa- 
tience, and  truth,  and  faithfulnefs  of  God,  and  all 
thofe  other  pcrfedons  of  the  divine  nature,  which  are 
comprehended  under  the  term  of  holinefs.  This  is 
that  which  the  apoftlc  here  calls  "  partaking  of  a 
*'  divine  nature;"  or,  as  our  blefled  Saviour  ex- 
prefTcth  it,  "  to  be  perfect,  as  our  Father  which 
*'  is  in  heaven  is  perfed." 

This  the  gofpel  defigns  to  raile  us  to  •,  and  one  of 
the  great  indruments  whereby  this  is  effeded,  are 
thofe  ^'exceeding  great  and  precious  promifes"  which 
I  have  infilled  upon  :  and  they  are  capable  of  eifecft- 
ing  it  thefe  two  ways : 

Firft,  by  way  of  internal  efficacy  and  afliflancej 
and, 

Secondly,  by  way  of  external  motive  and  argu- 
ment :  both  thefe  ways  fome  or  other  of  thefe  pro- 
jnifes  have  a  mighty  influence  upon  us  (if  we  be  not 
wanting  to  ourfelves)  to  raife  us  to  a  god-like  tem- 
per and  difpofition,  that  is,  to  the  greatefb  perfec- 
tion of  virtue  and  goodnels  which  we  are  capable  of  in 
this  life. 

Firft,  by  way  of  internal  efficacy  and  affiftance. 
And  this   influence  the  promile    of   God's  Holy 
Spirit,  and  of  his  gracious  help  and  affiftance  there- 
of, 


of  the  promifes  of  the  go/pel,  1 57 1 

of,  hath  upon  the  minds  of  men,  inclining  them  to  S  E  R  M, 
that  which   is  good,  and  enabling  them   to  do   it. 
For  the  Holy  Spirit  ispromiled  to  us,  in  confi- 
deration  and  commiferation  of  that  impotency  and 
weaknefs  which  we  have  contradled  in  that  degenerate 
and  depraved  condition  into  which  mankind  is  funk  ; 
to  help  us,  who  are  "  without  flrength"  to  recover 
ourfelves  out  of   that  evil  and  miferable  flate   into 
which  by  wilful  tranfgrefTion  we  are  fallen  -,   "  to 
''  quicken  us  who  are  dead  in  trefpafles  and  fms,'* 
(as  the  fcripture  exprefTeth  the  condition  of  unrege- 
nerate  perlbns)    to  ''  raife  us  to  a  new  life,**  and  to 
cherifh  this  principle  of  fpiritual  life,  which  is  com- 
monly weak  at  firft,  and  to  carry  it  through  all  dif- 
couragements  and  oppofitions  -,  to  excite  us  continual- 
ly to  our  duty,  and  to  enable    us  to  the  mod  diffi- 
cult parts  of  obedience,  fuch  as  are  mofl:  contrary  to 
.  our  natural  inclinations,  and  againfl:  the  grain  Of  fiefh 
and  blood,  to  bear  down  the  ftrcngthof  fin  and  temp- 
tation ;  and  in  all  our  conflids  with  the  world,  and 
the  flefli,  the  devil,  and  all  the  powers  of  darknefs, 
to  make  us  viclorious  over  them  •,  and,  in  a  word, 
to  be  a  principle  widiin  us,  more  mighty  and  power- 
ful than  the  lulls  and  inclinations  of  our  evil  hearts, 
than  the  moftobftinateand  inveterate  habits  of  fin  and 
vice,  and  than  all  the  temptations  and  terrors  of  fenie. 
So  that  if  we  will  make  ufe  of  this  alliflance,  and  lay 
hold  of  this  ftrength   which  God  affords  us  in  the 
gofpel,  and  (as  the  apoftle  exprefTeth  it) ''  be  workers 
*'  together  with  God,"  we  need  not  defpair  of  vic- 
tory and  fuccefs  •,  for  our  ftrength  will  continually  in- 
creafe,  and  the  force  and  violence  of  our  lufls  will 
be  abated,  God  will  give  us  more  grace,  and  we  fl:iall 

*'  walk 


» -• 


1^7  2  The  nature  and  injluence  ' 

S  E  R  M.  «  walk  from  (Ireno-rh  to  (Ireno-th,  and  our  path  will 
"  be"  (as  Solomon  fays  of  the  way  of  the  righteous) 
"  as  the  light  which  fhines  more  and  more  unto  the 
"  perfect  day." 

For  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God  conducts  andma- 
nageth  this  great  work  of  our  fandlification  and  fal- 
vation  from  firft  to  laft,  by  opening  our  hearts  to  let 
in  the  light  of  divine  truth  upon  our  minds,  by  repre- 
fenting  to  us  with  advantage  fuch  arguments  and  con- 
fiderations  as  are  apt  to  perfuade  us  to  embrace  it, 
and  yield  to  it ;  by  fecret  and  gentle  reprehenfions 
foftning  our  hard  hearts,  and  bending  our  ftiff  and 
flubborn  wills  to  a  compliance  with  the  will  of  God, 
and  our  duty.  And  this  is  that  great  work  which  the 
fcripture  calls  our  "  regeneration,  and  fandtification,'* 
"  the  turning  us  from  darknefs  to  light,  and  from 
"  the  power  of  fatan  unto  God,  a  new  creation,  and 
"  a  refurredion  from  the  death  of  fin,  to  the  life  of 
"  holinefs.'*  And  then  by  leading  and  diredting  us 
in  the  ways  of  holinefs  and  obedience  ;  by  quickning 
our  devotion,  and  (lirring.  up  in  us  holy  defires  and 
difpofitions  of  foul,  rendring  us  fit  to  draw  near  to 
God  in  prayer,  with  a  due  fenfe  of  our  own  wants 
and  unworthineis,  and  an  humble  confidence  in  the 
o-oodnefs  of  God,  that  he  will  grant  us  thofe  good 
things  that  we  ask  of  him  \  in  fupporting  and  comfort- 
incr  us  in  all  our  afflidions  and  fufFerings,  efpecially 
for  truth  and  righteoufnefs  fake ;  and  by  fealing  and 
confirming  to  us  the  bleiTed  hopes  of  eternal  life. 
Thus  the  Spirit  of  God  carries  on  the  work  of 
our  fandlification,  and  makes  us  "  partakers  of  a 
«'  divine   nature/*    by  way  of  inward  efficacy  and 

afliftance. 

Secondly, 


of  the  promlfes  of  the  gofpel  I  $J  3 

Secondly,  the  promifes  of  the  gofpel  are  apt  Uke-  ^^^.^1' 
wife  to  have  a  mighty  influence  upon  us  by  way  of  mo- 
tive and  argument,  to  engage  and  encourage  us  "  to 
*'  cleanfe  ourfelves  from  ail  fikhinefs  of  flefh  and 
"  fpirit,  and  toperfec^l  holinefs  in  the  fear  of  God." 
For, 

Firft,  a  full  pardon  and  indemnity  for  what  is 
paft,  is  a  mighty  encouragement  for  us  to  return  to 
our  duty,  and  a  forcible  argument  to  keep  us  to  it 
for  the  future.  For  fince  God,  who  hath  been  fo 
highly  injured  and  affronted  by  us,  is  fo  wilHng  and 
ready  to  forgive  us,  as  not  only  to  provide  and  pur- 
chafe  for  us  the  means  of  our  pardon,  by  the  grie- 
vous fufFerings  of  his  dear  Son,  but  to  offer  it  fo  free- 
ly, and  invite  us  fo  earneflly  to  accept  of  it,  and 
to  be  reconciled  to  him  ;  the  confideration  of  this 
ought  in  all  reafon,  ingenuity,  and  gratitude,  to  melt 
us  into  forrow  and  repentance  for  our  fins,  and  a  deep 
fenfe  of  the  evil  of  them,  and  to  infiame  our  hearts  with 
a  mighty  love  toGoDjand  our  blefTed  Redeemer, 
*'  who  hath  loved  us,  and  wafhed  us  from  our  fins  in  his 
"  own  blood  ;"  and  to  make  us  extremely  unwilling, 
nay,  mofl  firmly  refolved  never  more  to  offend  that 
merciful  and  gracious  God,  who  is  fo  fiow  to  punifh, 
and  fo  forward  to  forgive;  and  effcdually  to  eno-ao-e 
us  to  a  dutiful  and  conftant  and  chearful  obedience 
to  God's  holy  laws  and  commandments,  left  by  our 
wilful  tranfgreffion  and  violation  of  them,  we  fliould 
run  ourfelves  into  a  deeper  guilt,  and  aggravate  our 
condemnation.  Now  that  by  the  tender  mercies  of 
our  God  we  are  made  whole,  we  fliould  be  infinitely 
afraid  "  to  fin  any  more,  lefi:  worfe  things  come 
*«  to  us;"  left  we   relapfe  into  a   more  incurable 

Vol.  VI.  12  A  flate, 

5- 


J  r74  ^^'^  nature  and  influence 

S  E  R  M.  {late,  and  brinff  a  heavier  load  of  guilt  and  mifery 

XCVIII  r  1 

:  .  upon  ourfelves. 

Secondly,  the  promife  of  God's  grace  and  Holy 
Spirit  is  likewife  a  very  powerful  argument  and 
encouragement  to  holinefs  and  goodnefs,  engaging 
us  "  to  cleanfe  ourfelves  from  all  filthinefs  of  fiefl^ 
''-  and  fpirit,"  that  our  fouls  and  minds    may  be  a 
fit  temple  for  the  Holy  Ghost,  which   will  not 
dwell  in  an  impure  foul :  and  likewife  encouraging  us 
hereto,  by  this  confideration,  that  we  have  fo  uner- 
ring a  guide  to  counfel  and  dired:  us,  fo  powerful  an 
affillant ''  to  flrengthen  us  with  all  might  in  the  in- 
*-'  ner  man,"  to  ftand  by  us  in  all  cur  conflids  with 
fin  and  fatan,  and  make  us  (as  the  apoftle  exprefleth 
it)  "  more  than   conquerors"  over  all  our  fpiritual 
enemies.    For  tho'  we  be  weak,  and  our  lufts  ftrong^ 
our   enemies   many,    and  temptations   mighty   and 
violent  ;  yet  we  need   not  be  difheartned,  fo  long 
as  we  know  that  "  God  is  with  us,  and  the  grace  of 
«'  his  Holy  Spirit  fufficient  for  us,"  againft  all 
the  flrength  of  fin  and  hell  •,  tho'  our  duty  be  hard, 
and  our  flrength  fmall,  yet  we  cannot  fail  of  fuccefs, 
if  we  be  fure  that  the  omnipotent  grace  of  God  is  al- 
ways ready  to  fecond  our  fincere,  tho'  never  fo  weak, 
endeavours.     So  that  when  we  fee  all  the  enemies  of 
our  falvation  drawn  up  in  array  againft  us,  v/e  may 
encourage  ourfelves,  as  the  prophet  Elifha  did  his 
fervant,    when  he  told  him,  "  that  an  hofl:   com- 
*'  paiTed  the  city  with  horfes  and  chariots,"  and  faid, 
''  alas !  my  mailer,  hov/  fhall  we  do  ?  "  And  "  he 
anfwered,   fear  not,  for  they  that  be  with  us,  are 
more  than  they  that  be  with  them  ;'*  2  Kings  vi. 
16.  Or  as  Hezekiah  comforted  the  people,  when  they 

were 


^  of  the  promifes  of  the  gofpel  j  ^.^^ 

were  afraid  of  the  mighty  force  of  the  king  of  Af-  S  E  R  M 
yria,  2  Chron.  xxxii.  7,  8.  "  Be  flrong  and  coura-  ^C^^^* 
*'  gcous,  be  not  afraid,  nor  difmayed  for  the  kino-  of  ^ 
*^  Ailyria,  nor  for  all  the  multitude  that  is  with  him  • 
**  for  there  be  more  with  us  than  with  him.  With 
«'  him  is  an  arm  of  flefh,  but  with  us  is  the  Lord 
«*  our  God,  to  help  us,  and  to  fight  for  us."  This  is 
the  cafe  of  every  chriftian  -,  the  force  that  is  again  11 
us  is  finite  and  limited;  but  the  almighty  God  is 
on  our  fide,  and  fights  for  us ;  and  every  one  of  us 
may  fay  with  St.  Paul,  Phil.  iv.  13.  "I  can  do  all 
"  things  through  Christ  which  ftrengthneth  me.'* 
Thirdly,  the  promife  of  eternal  \\{t  and  happinefs, 
if  duly  weighed  and  confidered,  hath  a  mighty  force 
in  it  to  take  us  off  from  the  love  and  pradice  of  fin, 
and  to  encourage  our  obedience,  "  and  patient  conti- 
"  nuance  in  well-doing."  The  afiTurance  of  enjoying 
unfpeakable  and  endlefs  happinefs  in  another  world, 
and  of  efcaping  extreme  and  eternal  mifery,  is  a  con- 
fideration  of  that  weight,  as  one  would  think  could 
not  fail  of  its  efficacy  upon  us,  to  put  all  temptations 
to  fin  out  of  countenance,  and  to  bear  down  before 
us  all  the  difficulties  and  difcouragements  ih  the  way 
of  our  duty.  And  if  this  make  no  impreffion  upon 
us,  if  heaven  and  hell  be  of  no  weight  with  us,  it 
will  be  in  vain  to  ufe  any  other  arguments,  which 
in  comparifon  of  this,  are  "  but  as  the  very  fmall 
"  duft  upon  the  balance.'*  For  if  on  the  one  hand 
the  hopes  of  perfed  comfort  and  joy,  and  felicity, 
perpetual  in  duration,  and  vafl  beyond  all  imagina- 
tion "  fuch  as  eye  hath  not  feen,  nor  ear  heard,  nor 
"  hath  entred  into  the  heart  of  man  to  conceive:" 
and  if  on  the  other  hand,  the  dread  of  the  terrible 

1 2  A  2  wrath 


1 576  ^he  nature  and  infuence 

SE  R  M.  wrath  of  God*  and  of  the  venoreance  of  eternal  fire, 
'  together  with  the  infupportable  torments  of  a  guilty 
confcience,  and  the  perpetual  ftings  of  bitter  remorfe 
and  anguifh  for  the  wilful  folly  of  our  wicked  lives, 
and  the  rage  of  horrible  defpair  of  ever  getting  out  of 
fo  miferable  a  ftate ;  if  neither  of  thefe  confiderati- 
onSjif  both  of  them  will  not  prevail  upon  us  "to  ceafe 
*'  to  be  evil,  and  to  refolve  to  be  good,"  that  we  may 
obtain  one  of  thefe  conditions,  and  may  efcape  the 
other ;  there  is  no  hope  that  any  words  that  can  be 
ufed,  any  arguments  and  confiderations  that  can 
be  offered,  fhould  work  upon  us,  or  take  place 
with  us.  He  that  is  not  to  be  tempted  by  fuch  hopes, 
nor  to  be  terrified  by  fuch  fears,  is  proof  againft  all 
the  force  of  perfuafion  in  the  world. 

And  thus  I  have  done  with  the  two  things  which  I 
propofed  to  confider  from  thefe  words  j  the  nature  of 
thefe  promifes,  and  the  influence  they  are  apt,  and 
ouG^ht  to  have  upon  us,  to  raife  us  to  the  perfe6lion 
of  virtue  and  goodnefs,  which  the  apoifle  here  calls 
our  being  ''  partakers  of  a  divine  nature."  All  that 
now  remains  is,  to  make  Ibme  ufeful  reflexions 
upon  what  hath  been  difcourfed  upon  thefe  two 
heads. 

Firft  of  all,  if  we  expefl  the  blefllngs  and  benefits 
of  thefe  "  exceeding  great  and  precious  promifes'* 
of  the  gofpel,  we  mufl:  be  careful  to  perform  the 
conditions  which  are  indifpenfibly  required  on  our 
parts.  It  is  a  great  miftake,  and  of  very  pernicious 
confequence  to  the  fouls  of  men,  to  imagine  that 
the  gofpel  is  all  promifes  on  God's  part,  and  that 
our  part  is  only  to  believe  them,  and  to  rely  upon 
God  for  the  performance  of  them,  and  to  be  very 

confident 


of  the  promifes  of  the  gofpeh  1 577 

confident  that  he  will  make  them  good,  tho'  we  do  S  E  R  M." 
nothing  elfe  but  only  believe  that  he  will  do  fo.  That  }^^1^\ 
the  chriftian  religion  is  only  a  declaration  of  God's 
good-will  to  us,  without  any  expedlation  of  duty 
from  us ;  this  is  an  error  which  one  could  hardly 
think  could  ever  enter  into  any  who  have  the  liberty 
to  read  the  bible,  and  do  attend  to  what  they  read,  and 
find  there. 

The  three  great  promifes  of  the  gofpel  all  are  very 
exprefly  contain'd  in  our  Saviour's  firft  fermon  up- 
on the  mount.  There  we  find  the  promife  of  bleifed- 
nefs  often  repeated ;  but  never  abfolutely  made,  but 
upon  certain  conditions,  and  plainly  required  on  our 
parts ;  as  repentance,  humility,  righteoufnefs,  mercy, 
peaceablenefs  meeknefs,  patience.  Forgivenels  of 
fins  is  likewife  promifed  ;  but  only  to  thofe  that  make 
a  penitent  acknowledgement  of  them,  and  ask  for- 
givenefs  for  them,  and  are  ready  to  grant  that  for- 
givenefs  to  others,  which  they  beg  of  God  for  them- 
felves.  ''  The  gift  of  God's  Holy  Spirit"  is 
likewife  there  promifed ;  but  it  is  upon  condition  of 
our  earned  and  importunate  prayer  to  God.  The  gofpel 
is  every  where  full  of  precepts,  enjoining  duty  and  obe- 
dience on  our  part,as  well  as  of  promifes  on  God's  part, 
affuring  blelTings  to  us ;  nay,  of  terrible  threatnings 
alfo  if  we  difobey  the  precepts  of  the  gofpel.  St.  Paul 
gives  us  the  fum  of  the  gofpel  in  very  few  and  plain 
words,  declaring  upon  what  terms  we  may  expedl 
that  falvation  which  the  gofpel  offers  to  all  men. 
Tit.  ii.  II,  12,  13,  14.  "  The  grace  of  God  which 
''  bringeth  falvation  hath  appeared  to  all  men; 
''  teaching  us,  that  denying  ungodlinefs  and  worldly 
*'  lufts,  we  (hould  live  foberly,  and  righteoudy,  and 

"  godly 


1^7^  ^^^^  ;/^/^/r^  and  influence 

SERM.  «'  o-odly  in  this  prefent  world,  lookinej  for  that  blef- 
XCVIII        o      •'  *  ^  y 

*  '^  fed  hope,   and  the  glorious  appearing  of  the  great 

*'  God,    and  our  Saviour   Jesus  Christ;    who 

*'  gave  himfelf  for  us,  that  he  might  redeem  us  from 
*'  all  iniquity,  and  purify  to  himfelf  a  peculiar 
"  people,  zealous  of  good  works.''  And  then  he 
adds, /'thefe  things  fpeak  and  exhort,  and  rebuke 
*^'  with  all  authority ;"  intimating,  that  tho'  men 
were  very  averfe  to  this  dodlrine,  it  ought  to  be  in- 
culcated with  great  authority  and  earneftnefs,  and 
thofe  who  oppofed  and  defpifed  ir,  to  be  fe-  - 
verely  rebuked :  and  with  great  reafon,  becaufe 
the  contrary  doflrine  does  mod  effedually  under- 
mine and  defeat  the  whole  defign  of  the  chriftian 
religion. 

Secondly,  from  hence  we  learn,  that  if  the  proml- 
fes  of  the  gofpel  have  not  this  effedl  upon  us,    to 
make  us  ^'  partakers  of  a  divine  nature,"  it  is  our 
own  fault,  and  becaufe  we  are  wanting  to  our  felves. 
God  is  always  ready  to  do  his  part,  if  we  do  not  fail 
in  ours.  There  is  a  divine  power  and  efficacy  goes 
along  with  the  gofpel,  to  make  v/ay  for  the  entertain- 
ment of  it  in  the  hearts  of  men,  where  they  put  no 
bar  and  obflacle  to  it.  But  if  men  will  refift  the  mo- 
tions of  God's  blefled  Spirit,  and  quench  the  light  of 
it,  and  obftinately  hold  out  againft  the  force  of  truth  ^ 
God  will  withdraw  his  grace  and  Holy  Spirit  from 
them.  The  gofpel  would  raife  us  to  the  perfection  of 
all  virtue  and  goodnefs,  and  the  promifes  of  it  are  ad- 
mirably fitted  to  relieve  the  infirmities  and  weaknefs 
of  humane  nature,  and  "  to  renew  us  after  the  image 
*'  of  God,    in  righteoufnefs  and  true  holinefs ;"    to 
take  us  off  from  fin  and  vice,  and  to  allure  us  to  good- 
nefs, 


of  the  promijes  of  the  gofpeL  "^579 

uqCs,  and  to  afTifl  and  encourage  us  in  the  pradice  of 5E  R  M. 

.  •  XCVJII 

it :  but  if  we  will  not  comply  with  the  gracious  de-, 

fign  of  God  in  the  gofpel,  and  fuffcr  thefe  promifes 
to  have  their  due  influence  and  efficacy  upon  us  ;  we 
wilfully  deprive  our  fclves  of  all  the  bleflings  and  be- 
nefits of  it,  "  we  reject  the  counfel  of  God  againfl 
''  our  felves,  and  receive  the  grace  of  God  in  vain  *,'* 
and  by  rejeding  and  defpifing  his  promifes,  we  pro- 
voke him  to  execute  his  threatnings  upon  us. 

Thirdly,  and  laftly,  if  the  promifes  of  the  chrifliaa 
religion  are  apt  in  their  own  nature  to  work  this  great 
effed  upon  us,  to  make  us  like  to  God,  and  to  bring 
us  to  fo  near  a  refemblance  of  the  divine  perfedions, 
to  make  us  good  and  juft,  and  merciful  and  patient, 
and  "  holy  in  all  manner  of  converfation,  to  purge 
^^  us  from  our  iniquities,    and  to  make  us  a  peculiar 
*'  and  excellent  people,  zealous  of  good  works-,"  I 
fay,  if  this  be  the  proper  tendency  of  the  gofpel,  and 
the  promifes  of  it,  how  doth  this  upbraid  the  dege- 
nerate ftate  of  tlie  chriftian  world  at  this  day,  which 
does  fo  abound  in  all  kind  of  v/ickednefs  and  impiety? 
fo  that  we  may  cry  out  as  he  did,  upon  reading  the 
gofpel ;  profe^o  aut  hoc  non  eft  evaugelium  j  aut  nos  non 
ftimus  evangelici',  '*■  either  this  is  not  the  gofpel  which 
"  we  read,    and  the  chriftian  religion  which  we  pro- 
*'  fefs ;  or  we  are  no  chriftians."  We  are  fo  far  from 
that  pitch  of  goodnefs  and  virtue  which  the  chriftian 
religion  is  apt  to  raife  men  to,  and  which  the  apoftle 
here  calls  the  ''  divine  nature,"  that  a  great  part  of 
us  are  degenerated  into  beafts  and  devils,  wallowing  in 
abominable  and  filthy  lufts,    indulging  ourfelves  in 
thofe  deviliih  paftions  of  malice  and  hatred,  of  ftrife 
and  difcord,  of  revenge  and  cruelty,  of  fedition  and 

difturbancc 


X  5  8  a  The  fupport  of  good  fnen^ 

difturbance  of  the  publick  peace  to  that  degree,  as 
if  the  grace  of  God  had  never  appeared  to  us  to 
teacii  us  the  contrary.  And  therefore  it  concerns  all 
thofe  who  have  the  face  to  call  fhemfelves  chriftians, 
to  demean  themfelves  at  another  rate,  and  for  the  ho- 
nour of  their  religion,  and  the  falvation  of  their  own 
fouls,  "  to  have  their  converfation  as  becometh 
"  the  gofpel  of  Christ;"  and  by  departing  from 
the  vicious  pra6lices  of  this  prefent  evil  world5to  do 
what  in  them  lies  to  prevent  the  judgments  of  God 
which  hang  over  us  ;  or  if  they  cannot  do  that,  "  to 
"  fave  themfelves  from  this  untoward  generation.'* 

SERMON     XCIX. 

The   fupport    of  good    men,    under 
their  fufferings  for  religion. 


I  P  E  T  E  R   iv.  19. 

Wherefore  let  them  that  fuffer  according  to  the  will 
cf  God,  commit  the  keeping  of  their  fouls  to  him  in 
well- doings  as  unto  a  faithful  creator. 

SERM.  f-np^HIS  epiftle  was  written  by  St.  Peter,  who 

,_^^-0       I        was  the  apoftle  of  the  circumcifion,  to  the 

The  lirft      -*•       difperfed  Jews,  who  were  newly  converted 

this  text,   to  chriftianity  ;  and  thedefign  of  ^it  it  is  to  confirm 

and  eftablifli  them  in  the  profeflion  of;  and  to  in- 

flrud  them  how  they  ought  to  demean  themfelves 

towards  the  heathen,  or  gentiles,  among  whom  they 

lived ;   and  more  particularly  to  arm  and  prepare 

them 


tin  der  their  fufferhigs  for  religion.  1581 

them  for  thofe  fufferings  and  perlecutions,  which  he  S  E  R  M. 
foretels  would  fhortly  overtake  them  for  the  profeA  .  ^^^ 
fion  of  chriliianity,  that  when  they  fliould  happen, 
they  might  not  befurprifed  and  fcartled  at  them,  as 
if  fome  flrange  and  unexpeded  thing  were  come 
upon  them  ;  at  tlie  12th  verfe  of  this  chapter,  "  be- 
"  loved,  think  it  not  ftrange  concerning  the  fiery 
"  trial  which  is  to  try  you  ^^  that  is,  do  not  wonder 
and  be  not  aftonifli'd  at  ii^  "  as  if  fome  flrange 
"  thing  happened  unto  you." 

And  then  he  indrucls  them  more  particularly, 
how  they  ought  to  behave  themfelves  under  thofe 
trials  and  fufferings,  when  they  fliould  happen  j  not 
only  with  patience,  which  men  ought  to  exercife  under 
all  kinds  of  fufferings,  upon  what  account  and  caufe 
foever  i  but  with  joy  and  chearfulnels ;  confidering 
the  glorious  example  and  reward  of  them,  ver.  13. 
''  but  rejoice,  in  as  much  as  ye  are  partakers  of 
"  Christ's  fufferings;  that  when  his  glory  fliall  be 
"  revealed,  ye  may  be  gladalfo  v/ith  exceeding  joy.'* 
And  at  the  14th  verfe  he  tells  them,  that  befides  the 
encouragement  of  fo  great  an  example,  and  io  glori- 
ous a  reward,  they  fnould  be  fupported  and  alfifted 
in  a  very  extraordinary  manner,  by  the  Spirit  of 
God  refling  upon  them  in  a  glorious  manner,  as  a 
teftimony  of  the  divine  power  and  prefence  with' 
them;  ver.  14,  "  If  ye  be  reproached  for  the  name 
"  of  Christ,  happy  are  ye;  for  the  Spirit  of 
*'  glory  and  of  God  refleth  upon  you  ;  "  or,  as  \x.  is 
in  the  bed  copies,  "  for  the  Spirit  of  glory  and  of 
<'  power,  even  the  Spirit  of  God  refteth  upon 
"  you  ; "  that  is,  the  glorious  power  of  xht  divine 
Spirit  is  prefcnt  with  you,  to  comfort  and  bear 

Vol.  Vr,  ;i  B  ud 

5- 


1582  Thefupport  of  good  men^ 

S  E  R  M.  up  your  fpirits  under  thefc  fufFerings.  But  then  hd 
'^  '  *  cautions  them,  to  take  great  care,  that  their  fuffer- 
ings  be  for  a  good  caufe,  and  a  good  confcience ; 
ver.  15.  "  But  let  none  of  you  fuffer  as  a  mur- 
"  derer,  or  as  thief,  or  as  an  evil-doer,"  (that  is,  as  an 
offender  in  any  kind  againft  humane  laws,  made  to 
preferve  the  peace  and  good  order  of  the  world)  "  or 
*'  as  a  bufy-body  in  other  mens  matters  \ "  that  is, 
as  a  pragmatical  perfon,  that  meddles  out  of  his 
own  fpherc,  to  the  difquiet  and  difturbance  of  hu- 
mane fociety  :  for  to  fuffer  upon  any  of  thefe  ac- 
counts, would  be  matter  of  fhame  and  trouble,  but 
not  of  joy  and  comfort ;  but  if  they  fuffered  upon 
account  of  the  profefiion  of  chrillianity,  this  would 
be  no  caufe  of  Ihame  and  reproach  to  them  ;  but  they 
ouf^ht  rather  to  give  God  thanks  for  calling  them 
to  fuffer  in  fo  good  a  caufe,  and  upon  fo  glorious 
an  account,  verfe  16.  "  Yet  if  any  man  fuffer  as  a 
*^'  chriftian"  (if  that  be  his  only  crime)  "  let  him 
"  not  be  afliamed,  but  let  him  glorify  God  on  this 
«'  behalf-,  for  the  time  is  come,  -that  judgment  muft 
*'  begin  at  the  houfe  of  God  s  '*  that  is,  the  wife 
and  jutl  providence  of  God,  hath  fo  order'd  it  at  this 
time,  for  very  good  reafons  and  ends,  that  the  firfl: 
calamities  and  fufferings  fhould  fall  upon  chriftiahs, 
the  peculiar  people  and  church  of  God,  for  their 
trial,  and  a  teftimony  of  the  truth  of  that  religion, 
which  God  was  now  planting  in  the  world  :  "  and 
^'  ifitfirft  begin  at  us,"  (chat  is,  at  us  Jews,  who 
were  the  ancient  people  of  God,  and  have  now  em- 
braced and  entertained  the  revelation  of  the  gofpcl) 
"  what  fliall  the  end  be  of  them,  that  obey  not  the 
"  gofpel  of  God  r  "  (that  is,  how  much  more  fe- 

verely 


under  their  Offerings  for  religion.  ^5^3 

verely  will  God  deal  with  the  Jews  who  have  cruci-  SERM. 
lied  the  Son  of  God,  and  ftill  perfift  in  their  infide- vj.,...^^^^ 
lity  and  difobedience  to  the  golpel  ?)  "  and  if  the 
"  righteous  fcarcely  be  faved,  where  fhall  the  un-  * 

*'  godly  and  finner  appear?"  (that  is,  if  good  men 
be  faved  with  fo  much  difficulty,  and  "  mud 
*'  through  fo  many  tribulations  enter  into  the  king- 
<«  dom  of  God,"  what  will  become  of  all  ungodly 
and  impenitent  finners  ?  where  fhall  they  appear  ? 
how  fliall  they  be  able  to  fland  in  the  judgment  of 
the  great  day  ?  }  from  the  confideration  of  all  which, 
the  apoflle  makes  this  inference  or  conclufion,  in  the 
Jaft  verfe  of  this  chapter,  "  Wherefore  let  them 
"  that  fuffer  according  to  the  will  of  God,  commit 
"  the  keeping  of  their  fouls  to  him  in  well-doino-,  as 
**  unto  a  faithful  creator^'* 

Thus  you  fee  the  connexion  and  dependence  of 
thefe  words,  upon  the  apoftle's  foregoing  difcourfe.  I 
fnall  explain  the  feveral  expreflions  in  the  text,  and 
then  handle  the  main  points  contained  in  them. 

The  expreflions  to  be  explained  are  thefe : 
what  is  meant  by  "  thofe  that  fuffer  according  to 
"  the  will  of  God  ? "  what  by  "  committing  the 
*«  keeping  of  our  fouls  to  God,  as  unto  a  faithful 
*«  creator  :  "  and  what  by  "  well-doing  ?  '* 

Firft,  what  is  meant  by  "  fufFering  according  to 
*'  the  will  of  God  ? "  this  may  be  underflood  of  fuf- 
fering  in  a  good  caufe,  fuch  as  God  will  approve: 
but  this  is  not  fo  probable ;  becaufe  this  is  mentioned 
afterwards,  in  the  following  expreflions  of  "  com- 
"  mitting  the  keeping  of  our  fouls  to  God  in  weli- 
"  doing  ;  "  that  is,  in  fufFering  upon  a  good  account : 
and  therefore  the  plain  and  genuine  fenfe  of  this  ex- 

II  B  ^  prefllon 


1 5^+  "Tie  fuppori  of  good  men, 

^•Kf^ix'  P^^^^^"  ^^^^^  ^°  ^^  ^^^s '  ^^^^  ^ho^e  who  according 
to  the  good  pleafure  oF  God's  will,  and  the  wifedif- 
penfation  of  his  providence,  are  appointed  to  fuffer 
for  his  caufe,  Hiouid  demean  themfclves  fo  and  fo  ; 
"  let  them  that  fuffer  according  to  the  will  of  God  j " 
that  iSj  thofe  whom  God  thinks  fit  to  call  to  fuffer- 
ing.  And  this  agrees  very  well  with  the  like  expref- 
fion,  chapter  iiid  of  this  epiflle,  ver.  17.  "  For  it  is 
*'  better,  if  the  will  of  God  be  fo,'*  (that  is,  if  God 
have  fo  appointed  it,  and  think  it  fit)  ''  that  ye 
*«  fuffer  for  well-doing  than  for  evil-doing." 

Secondly,  what  is  here  meant  by  '*  committing 
"  the  keeping  of  our  fouls  to  God,  as  to  a  faithful 
*'  creator  t "  that  is,  to  depofite  cur  lives,  and  all  that 
belongs  to  us,  in  a  word,  ourfelvcs,  in  the  hands 
and  cuilody  of  his  merciful  care  and  providence  who 
made  us,  and  therefore  we  may  be  fure  will  faithfully 
keep  what  we  commit  to  him  :  for  as  we  are  his 
creatures,  he  is  engaged  to  take  care  of  us,  and  will 
not  abandon  the  work  of  his  ov/n  hands.  Befides  that 
he  hath  promifed  to  be  more  efpecially  concerned  for 
good  men,  to  fupport  them  in  their  fufferings  for  a 
good  caufe,  and  to  reward  them  for  it;  and  "  he 
"  is  faithful  that  hath  promifed." 

And  therefore  there  is  great  reafon  and  great  en- 
coura<^ement,  in  all  our  fufferings  for  God's  caufe 
and  truth,  to  commit  our  fouls  to  his  care  and  cu- 
flody  :  our  fouls,  that  is  (as  I  faid  before^  our  lives, 
and  all  that  belongs  to  us ;  in  a  word,  ourfelves : 
for  fo  the  word  foul  is  frequently  ufed  both  in  the 
old  and  new  teftament,  Pfal.  vii.  5.  "  Let  the  ene- 
«  my  perfecute  my  foul,  and  take  it,"  that  is, 
tny  life  i  for  fo  it  follows  in  the  next  words ;  "  yea, 

"  let 


wider  their  fiifferings  for  religion.  ^5^5 

"  let  him  tread  down  my  life  upon  the  earth."  And  S  E  R  M. 
Pfal.  liv.  3.  "  OpprefTors  feek  after  my  foul."  And  ^^^^' 
Pfal.  lix.  3.  "  they  lie  in  wait  for  my  foul ;"  that  is, 
my  life.  And  Pfal.xvi.  10,  "  Thou  wilt  not  leave 
''  my  foul  in  hell,"  my  foul ;  that  is  myfelf,  thou  wilt 
not  fufFer  me  to  continue  in  the  grave,  and  under  the 
power  of  death,  but  wilt  raife  me  up  to  life  again. 
And  fo  like  wife  in  the  new  teftament,  Mark  viii. 
^5.  ''  Whofoever  will  fave  his  life,  fhall  lofe  it; 
"  but  whofoever  fl-iall  lofe  his  life  for  my  fake  and  the 
*'  gofpel's,  the  fame  fhall  fave  it."  The  fame  word 
which  is  here  rendred  life,  in  the  very  next  verfe  is 
rendred  foul :  "  for  what  fhall  it  profit  a  man,  if  he 
"  fhall  gain  the  whole  world,  and  lofe  his  own  foul  ?  " 
that  is,  his  life.  And  fo  likewife  John  xii.  25.  "He 
''  that  loveth  his  life,  fhall  lofe  it :  and  he  that  hat- 
"  eth  his  life  in  this  world,'!  (in  the  original  the  word 
fignifies  foul)  "  he  that  hateth  his  life  in  this  world  ;'* 
(that  is,  who  negledeth  and  expofeth  his  life  in  this 
world  for  the  fake  of  Christ)  "  fliall  keep  it  unto 
^'  life  eternal."  And  Luke  ix.  25.  that  which  the 
other  evangelift  renders  by  the  word  foul,  or  life,  he 
renders  himfelf ;  "  for  what  is  a  man  advantaged, 
"  if  he  gain  the  whole  world,  and  lofe  himfelf?" 
And  fo  here  in  the  texty  '^  to  commit  the  keeping 
"  of  our  fouls  to  God,"  is  to  commit  ourfelves  to 
his  care  and  providence. 

Thirdly,  Vv'hat  is  here  meant  by  "  committing  our- 
"  felves  to  him  in  well-doing  ^  "  By  well-doing  is 
here  meant,  a  fixed  purpofe  and  refolution  of  doing 
our  duty,  notwithftanding  all  hazards  and  fufi^erings ; 
which  is  called  by  St.  Paul,  Rom.  ii.  7.  "a  patient 
*'  continuance  in  well-doing."    It  fignifies  fome^ 

times 


I  r86  T!he  fupport  of  good  men, 

SE  R  M.  times  a6ls  of  goodnefs  and  charity ;  but  in  this  epidk 
^^^^'  ^  it  is  taken  in  a  larger  fenfc,  for  conftancy  and  refolu- 
tion  m  the  doing  of  our  duty  ;  as  chap.  ii.  15.  "  for 
"  {q  is  the  will  of  God,  that  with  well-doing  "  (that 
is,  by  a  refolute  conftancy  in  a  good  courfe)  "  ye  may 
*'  put  to  filcnce  the  ignorance  of  foolifh  men.'* 
And  ver.  20.  "  But  if  when  ye  do  w^ell,  and  fufFer 
*'  for  it"  (that  is,  if  when  ye  fufFer  for  vveil-doing) 
*'  ye  take  it  patiently,  this  is  acceptable  with  God.** 
And  chap.  iii.  ver.  6.  "  as  long  as  you  do  well, 
*'  and  are  not  afraid  with  any  amazement  ;'*  that  i*', 
are  refolute  and  conflant  in  your  duty,notv/ithftanding 
all  threatnings  and  terrors.  And  ver.  1 7.  "  for  it  is 
"  better,  if  the  will  of  God  be  fo,  that  ye  fufFer  for 
*'  well-doing,  than  for  evil-doing  ;"  that  is,  for  your 
religion  and  conftancy  in  fo  good  a  caufe,  as  chrifti- 
{lians,  and  not  as  crimiinals  upon  any  other  account. 

So  that  the  plain  meaning  of  the  words  is,  as  if  the 
apoftle  had  faid, wherefore  being  forwarnedof  fafFering 
and  periecution  for  the  caufe  of  religion,  the  fum  of 
niy  diredlion  and  advice  upon  the  whole  matter  is  this ; 
that  ftnce  it  is  the  will  of  God  that  ye  fhould  fufFer 
upon  this  account,  commit  yourfclves  in  the  conftant 
difcharge  of  your  duty,  and  a  good  confcience,  to 
the  particular  care  and  providence  of  almighty  God, 
and  your  faithful  creator. 

And  now  I  come  to  handle  the  particular  points 
contained  in  the  words  ;  and  they  are  thefe  three. 

Firft,  that  when  men  do  fufFer  really  and  truly  for 
the  caufe  of  religion,  they  may  with  confidence  com- 
mit themfelves  (their  lives  and  all  that  is  dear  to  them) 
to  the  particular  and  more  cfpecial  care  of  the  divine 
providence. 

Secondly, 


under  their  fuff en ngs  for  religion.  ^S^7 

Secondly,  always  provided,  that  we  do  nothing  con-  S  E  Pv  M. 
tra-ry  to  our  duty,  and  a  good  confcience  ;  for  this  v^ 
the  apoftle  means,  "  by  committing  ourfelves  to 
"  God,  in  weli-doing."  If  we  ftep  out  of  the  way 
of  our  duty,  or  do  any  thing  contrary  to  it,  God*s 
providence  will  not  be  concerned  for  us,  to  bear  us 
out  in  fuch  fufFerings. 

Thirdly,  I  fliall  confider  what  ground  of  comfort 
and  encouragement  the  confideration  of  God,  as 
"  a  faithful  creator,"  affords  us  in  all  our  fuffer- 
ings,  for  a  good  caule,  and  a  good  confcience. 

Firft,  when  men  do  fufter  really  and  truly  for  the 
caufe  of  religion,  and  God's  truth,  they  may  with 
confidence  and  good  affurance  commit  themfelves, 
(their  lives  and  all  that  is  dear  to  them)  to  the  par- 
ticular and  more  efpecial  care  of  his  providence. 
In  the  handling  of  tliis,  I  fhall  confider  thefe  three 
things. 

I,  When  men  may  be  faid  to  fuffer  really  and  truly 
for  the  caufe  of  religion  ;  and  v/hen  not. 

II.  How  far  they  may  rely  upon  the  providence  of 
God,  to  bear  them  out  in  thefe  fufFerings. 

III.  What  ground  and  reafon  there  is  to  exp€6l  the 
more  particular  and  efpecial  care  of  God's  providence, 
in  cafe  of  fuch  fulferings. 

I.  When  men  may  be  faid  to  fuffer  really  and  truly 
for  the  caufe  of  religion,  and  God's  truths  and  when 
not.     In  thefe  cafes, 

Firft,  when  men  fufFcr  for  not  renouncing  the  true 
religion,  and  becaufe  they  will  not  openly  declare 
againft  it,  and  apoftatize  from  it.  But  it  will  be  faid, 
that  in  all  thefe  cafes  the  queftion  is,  what  is  the  true 
religion?  To  which  I  anfwer-,  that  all  difcourfes  of 

this 


1 58  8  ^hefupport  of  good  men^ 

S  E  R  M.  this  nature,  about  fufFering  for  religion,  do  Tuppole 
the  truth  of  fame  religion  or  other.  And  amo;ig 
chriftians,  the  truth  of  the  chrifTian  religion  is  taken 
for  granted,  wherever  we  fpeak  of  mens  fufFering 
perfecution  for  it.  And  the  plained  cafe  among 
chriilians,  is,  when  they  are  perfecuted,  becaufe  they 
will  not  openly  deny  and  renounce  the  chriilian  reli- 
gion. And  this  was  generally  the  cafe  of  the  primi- 
tive chriftians;  they  were  threatned  with  tortures  and 
death,  becaufe  they  v/ould  not  renounce  Jesus 
Christ,  and  his  religion,  and  give  demonftration 
thereof,  by  offering  facrifiees  to  the  heathen  gods. 

Secondly,  men  do  truly  fuffer  for  the  caufe  of  re- 
ligion, v/hen  they  are  perfecuted' only  for  making  an 
open  profeflion  of  the  chriftian  religion,  by  joining 
in  the  affemblies  of  chriftians  for  the  worftiip  of  God  \ 
tho*  they  be  not  urged  to  deny  and  difclaim  it, 
but  only  to  conceal  and  diftemble  the  profelTion  of 
it,  fo  as  to  forbear  the  maintinance  and  defence  of 
it  upon  fitting  occafions,  againft  the  obje£tions  of 
thofe  v/ho  are  adverfaries  of  it.  For  to  conceal  the 
profeffion  of  it,  and  to  decline  the  defence  of  it, 
when  juft  occafion  is  offered,  is  "  to  be  afliamed  of 
"  it,"  which  our  Saviour  interprets  to  be  a  kind 
of  denial  of  it,  and  isoppofed  to  ''  the  confefTing  of 
*'  him  before  men,"  Match,  x.  32,  33.  "  Wholb- 
*'  ever  fhall  confefs  me  before  men,  him  will  I  alio 
confefs  before  mypATHi^R  which  is  in  heaven: 
but  whofoever  fhall  deny  me  before  men,  him  will 
I  alfo  deny  before  my  Father  which  is  in  hea* 
"  ven."  And  this  by  Sr.  Mark  isexprefs'd  by  "  be- 
''  ing  afhamed  of  Christ  •,"  that  is,  afraid  and 
alhamed  to  make  an  open  profeffion  of  him,  and  his 

religion  ; 


cc 


under  their  fufferin^^  for  religion.  ^5^9 

religion  ;  Mark  viii.  38.  "  Whofoever  therefore  fhall  S  E  R  M. 
"  be  afhamed  of  me,  and  of  my  words,  in  this  adul-  ,^^^_^ 
*'  terous  and  finful  generation,  of  him  alfb  fliall  the 
*'  Son  of  man  be  afhamed,  when  he  cometh  in  the 
'*  glory  of  the  Father,  with  his  holy  angels.'* 

And  this  likewife  was  the  cafe  of  the  primitive 
chriftians  under  the  moderate  emperors,  when  the 
perfecution  of  them  was  not  fo  hot,  as  to  drive 
them  to  a  denial  of  Christ,  provided  they  would 
be  contented  to  conceal  and  dilfemble  their  religion, 
in  that  cafe  they  did  not  hunt  them  out,  nor  profe- 
cute  them  to  renounce  their  religion,  if  they  made  no 
difcovery  of  themfelves.  But  yet  they  who  fuffered, 
becaufe  they  would  not  conceal  their  profeffion  of 
chriftianity,  did  truly  fufferfor  the  caufe  of  religion. 

Thirdly,  men  do  likewife  truly  fuffer  for  the  caufe 
of  religion,  when  they  fuffer  for  not  betraying  k, 
by  any  indiredl  and  unworthy  means ;  fuch  as  among 
the  primitive  chriftians  was  their  delivering  up  their 
bibles  to  the  heathen,  to  be  burnt  and  deltroyed  by 
them  :  for  to  give  up  that  holy  book,  which  is  the 
great  inftrument  of  our  religion,  Ts.in  eiFedl  to  give 
up  chriftianity  itfelf,  and  confent  to  the  utter  ex- 
tirpation of  it. 

And  fuch  likewife  is  the  cafe  of  thofe,  who  fuffer 
in  any  kind  for  not  contributing  to  break  down  the 
fences  of  religion  in  any  nation,  where  the  provi- 
dence of  God  hath  given  it  a  legal  eftablifhment  and 
fecurity  ;  or,  in  a  word,  for  ret'ufmg  to  countenance 
and  further  any  defign,  which  vifibly  tends  to  thp 
ruin  of  religion  :  for  to  deftroy  religion,  and  to  take 
away  that  which  hinder.^  the  deftrudion  of  it,  are  ia 
effedt  muca  the  fame  thing. 

Vo  L.  VI.  12  C  Fourthly, 


I  £•  9  o  ^hefupport  of  good  tnen^ 

SERM.  Fourthly,  men  do  truly  fuffer  for  the  caufe  of  re- 
^^^^'  ligion,  when  they  fufFer  for  the  maintenance  and  de- 
fence of  any  necefTary  and  fundamental  article  of  it, 
tho'  they  be  not  required  to  renounce  the  whole  chri- 
ftian  religion ,  for  what  St.  Paul  fays  of  the  article  of 
*'  the  refurre(^ion  of  the  dead,"  is  true  of  any  other 
necefTary  article  of  the  chridian  religion,  that  the 
denial  of  it  is  a  fubverfion  of  the  whole  chridian 
faith  j  becaufe  it  tends  diredlly  to  the  overthrowing 
of  chriftianity,  being  a  wound  given  to  it  in  a  vital 
and  eflfential  part.  And  this  was  the  cafe  of  thofe,  who 
in  any  age  of  chriftianity  have  been  perfecuted  by 
hereticks,  for  the  defence  of  any  article  of  chri- 
ftianity. 

And  I  cannot  but  obferve  by  the  way,    that  after 
the  heathen  pcrfecutions  were  ceafed,  perfecution  was 
firft  begun  among  the  chriftians  by  hereticks ;   and 
hath  ftnce  been  taken  up,  and  carried  much  beyond 
that  bad  pattern,   by  the  church  of  Rome,   which, 
befides  a  ftanding  inquifition  in  all  countries,    which 
are  entirely   of   that   religion-,    (a  court,    the  like 
whereto,  for  the  clancular  and  fecret  manner  of  pro- 
ceeding, for  the  unjuft  and  arbitrary  rule^  of  it,    for 
the  barbarous  ufage  of  mens  perfons,  and  the  cruelty 
of  its  torments,  to  extort  confeftions  from  them,  the 
fun  never  faw  erefted  under  any  government  in  the 
world,  by  men  of  any  religion  whatfoever^   I   fay» 
which,  befides  this  court,  hath  by  frequent  croifadoes 
for  the  extirpation  of  hereticks,  and  by  many  bloody 
maffacres  in  France  and  Ireland,    and  feveral  other 
i  places,  deftroyed  far  greater  numbers  of  chriftians, 
1  than  all  the  ten  heathen  perfecutions  *,    and  hath  of 
late  revived,  and  to  this^very  day  continues  in  the  fame 
"•  or 


under  their  fufferings  for  religion,  1 59 1 

cr  greater  cruelties,  and  a  fiercer  perfecution  of  pro-  5  E  R  M. 
teftants,  if  all  the  circumftances  of  it  be  confidered,  .^ 
than  was  ever  yet  pridlifed  upon  them  ;  and  yet 
whilft  this  is  doing  almoft  before  our  eyes,  in  one  of 
our  next  neighbour  nations,  they  have  the  face  to 
complain  of  the  cannibal  laws,  and  bloody  perfecu- 
tions  of  the  church  of  England,  and  the  confidence 
to  fet  up  for  the  great  patrons  of  liberty  of  confcience, 
and  enemies  of  all  compulfion  and  force  in  matters 
of  religion. 

Fifthly,  men  do  truly  fuffer  for  the  caufe  of  God 
and  religion,  when  they  fufFer  for  alTerting  and  main- 
taining the  purity  of  the  chriftian  dodrine  and  wor- 
ihip  ;  and  foroppofing  and  not  complying  with  thofe 
grofs  errors  and  corruptions,  which  fuperftition  and 
ignorance  had,  in  a  long  courfe  of  time,  brought 
into  the  chriftian  religion.  Upon  this  account  many 
good  people  fuffered  in  many  pad  ages,  for  refifting 
the  growing  errors  and  cqrruptions  of  the  church  of 
Rome,  which  at  firfl  crept  in  by  degrees,  but  at  laft 
broke  in  like  a  mighty  flood,  which  carried  down  all 
before  it,  and  threatned  ruin  and  dellrudtion  to  all 
that  oppofed  them;  Upon  this  account  alfo,  infinite 
numbers  fuffered  am.ong  the  Waldenfes  and  Albigen- 
fes,  in  Bohemia,  and  in  England,  and  in  mofl  other 
countries  in  this  weflern  part  of  chriflendom.  And 
they  who  fuffered  upon  this  account,  fuffered  in  a  good 
caufe,  and  for  the  teflimony  of  the  truth. 

Sixthly,  and  laftlyjmen  do  truly  fuffer  for  the  caufe 
of  religion,  when  they  fuffer  for  not  difclaiming  and 
renouncing  any  clear  and  undoubted  truth  of  God 
whatfoever  ;  yea  though  it  be  not  a  fundamental  point 
and  article  of  religion. 

iiC2  And 


1 J  g  2  ^he  ftipporf  of  good  metty 

And  this  is  t^e  cafe  of  thofe  many  thoufands,  who 
ever  fince  the  IVth  council  of  Lateran,    which  was 
in  the  y^ar  12 15,  fwhen  tranfubftantiation  ,was  firft 
defin'd  to  be  an  article  of  faith,  and  neceffary  to  falva- 
Ition  to  be  believ'd)  were  perfecuted   with  fire  and 
fword,  for  not  underftanding  thofe  words  of  our  Sa- 
viour, "  this  is  my  body,"  (which  are  fo  eafily  ca- 
pable of  a  rearonable  lenfe^  in  the  abfjrd  and  impof- 
fibleielife-oi-tf4nfab(lantiation.  And  though  this  dif- 
owning  of  this  dbdrine,  be  no  exprefs  and  dire(fl  ar- 
ticle of  tiie  chriilian  religion  j  yet  it  is  a  fundamental 
article  of  right  reafon  and  common  fenfe :    becaufe 
the  admitting  of  tranfubftantiarion,  does  undermine 
the  foundation  of  all  certainty  v/haifoever,  and  does 
more  immediately  fhake  the  very  ioundation  of  chri- 
ftianity  it  felf.     Yea,  tho'  the  chriftian  religion  were 
no  ways  concerned  in  this  dodlrine,  yet  out  of  reve- 
r-ence  to  reafon   and  truth,  and  a  juft  animofity  and 
indignation  at  confident  nonfenfe,  a  man  of  an  ho- 
ned and  generous  mind  would  as  loon  be  brought  to 
declare  or  fwear,   that  twice  two  do  not  make  four, 
but  five,  as  to  profefs  his  belief  of  tranfubftantiation. 
And  tho'  all  truths  are  not  of  equal  confequence 
and  concernment,  yet  all  truth  is  of  God  ^  and  for 
that  reafon,  tho*  we  are  not  obliged  to  make  an  open 
profefTion  of  all  truths  at  all  times,  yet  we  are  bound 
not  to  deny  or  renounce  any  truth,  nor   to  make 
profefllon  of  a  known  falHiood  or  error :    for  it  is 
merely  becaufe  of  the  intrinfical  evil  of   the  thing, 
that,  "  it  is  impolTible  for  God  to  lye  j"  and  the  Som 
of  God  thought  it  worth  his  coming  into  the  world, 
and  laying  down  his  life,  "  to  bear  witnels    to  the 
«'  truth,"    So  he  himfclf  idh  us,    John  xviii.  ^j' 

Tq 


under  their fiiffenngs  for  religion.  ^^593 

"  To  this  end  was  I  born,   and  for  this  caule  came  S  E  R  M". 
*^  1  into  the  world,   that  I  fhould  bear  witnefs  to  the  ^^^^.^ 
^'  truth.'* 

Thus  have  I  fhewn  you  in  thefe  plain  inftances  Cto 
which  mofl:  other  cafes  may  be  reduced^  when  men 
may  be  faid  to  fufrer  truly  for  the  caufe  of  religion, 
^nd  truth. 

I  fhall  mention  two  or  three  cafes  wherein  men 
may  feem  to  fufFer  for  the  caufe  of  religion,  but  can- 
not truly  be  faid  to  do  fb. 

Firfl,  when  men  raflily  expofe  themfelves  to  dan- 
ger, and  run  upon  fufferings  for  the  fake  of  religion. 
Thus  feveral  of  the  primitive  chriftians  voluntarily 
lexpofed  themfelves  when  they  were  not  called  in  que- 
flion,  and  in  the  heat  of  their  affeftion  and  zeal  for 
God  and  religion,  offered  themfelves  to  ipartyrdom, 
when  none  enquired  after  them.  This,  in  the  gra- 
cious interpretation  of  God,  who  knowing  the  fince- 
rity  of  their  zeal,  was  pleafed  to  overlook  the  indif^ 
creet  forwardnefs  and  rafhnefs  of  it,  might  be  accept- 
ed for  a  kind  of  martyrdom  j  but  cannot  in  reafon  be 
juftified,  fo  as  to  be  fit  to  be  made  a  pattern,  and  to 
be  recommended  to  our  imitation.  For  though  God 
may  be  pleafed  to  excufe  the  weaknefs  of  a  well- 
meaning  zeal  y  yet  he  can  approve  nothing  but  what 
is  reafonable. 

To  fuffer  chearfully  for  the  caufe  of  God  and  his 
truth,  when  he  calls  us  '^  to  fight  this  good  fight  of 
*?  faith,  and  to  refiflunto  blood  j"  and  when  we  are 
reduced  to  that  flrait,  that  we  mud  either  die  for 
God  and  his  truth,  or  deny  them ;  to  fufFer,  I  fay,  in 
this  cafe  with  courage  and  patience,  is  one  of  the  no- 
jblcfl  of  all  the  chriftian  virtues.     But  to  be  perfect 

volunteers. 


1 594  The  fupport  of  good  men^ 

S REM. volunteers,  and  to  run  ourfelves  upon  fufFerings, 
^^j~^  when  we  are  not  called  to  them,  looks  rather  like 
"  the  facrificeof  fools;"  which  tho'  God  may  mer- 
cifully excufe,  and  pardon  the  evil  of  the  adtion,  for 
the  good  meaning  of  it ;  yet  he  can  never  perfedly 
approve  and  accept  of  it.  But  I  think  there  is  little 
need  now-a»days  to  caution  men  againft  this  rafhnefs; 
it  is  well  if  they  have  the  grace  and  refolution  to 
fuffer  when  it  is  their  duty,  and  when  they  are  called 
to  it. 

Secondly,  nor  can  men  be  truly  faid  to  fuffer  for 
the  caufe  of  religion,  when  they  fuffer  not  for  their 
faith,  but  their  fancy,  and  for  the  wilful  and  affeded 
error  of  a  miilaken  confcience.  As  when  men  fuffer 
for  indifferent  things,  which  in  heat  and  palTion  they 
call  fuperflition  and  idolatry  ?  and  for  their  own  falfe 
opinions  in  religion,  which  they  miftake  for  funda- 
mental articles  of  the  chriftian  faith.  In  this  cafe, 
their  miflake  about  thefe  things  will  not  change  the 
nature  of  them,  nor  turn  their  fufFerings  into  mar- 
tyrdom j  and  yet  many  men  have  certainly  fuffered 
for  their  own  miilakes.  For  as  men  may  be  fo  far 
deluded,  "  as  to  think  they  do  God  good  fervice, 
««  when  they  kill  his  faithful  fervants;"  fo  likewife 
may  they  be  fo  far  deceived,  as  to  facriHce  their  lives, 
and  all  that  is  dear  to  them,  to  their  own  culpable 
errors  and  miftakes.  Bat  this  is  zeal  without  know- 
ledge, not  "  the  wifdom  which  defcends  from  above," 
but  that  which  comes  from  beneath,  and  is  like  the 
fire  of  hell,  which  is  heat  without  light. 

Thirdly,  and  laftly ;  nor  can  men  truly  be  faid  to 
fuffer  for  the  caufe  of  God  and  religion,  when  they 
fuflfcr  for  the  open  profefTion  and  defence  of  truths 

noc 


under  their  fufferings  for  reJigio?!*  1 59  /f 

not  neceflary.  For  tho'  a  man  be  obliged  to  make  an  s  E  RM. 
open  profefilon  of  all  fundamental  and  neceflary  truths ;  >^CIX. 
yet  he  is  under  no  fuch  obligation  to  make  profef- 
fion  of  truths  not  neceflary  at  all  times ;  and  unlefs 
he  be  called  to  deny  them,  he  is  not  bound  either  to 
declare  or  defend  them  5  he  may  hold  his  peace  at 
other  times,  and  be  fllent  about  them,  efpecially  when 
the  open  profeflion  of  them  will  probably  do  no 
good  to  others,  and  will  certainly  do  hurt  to  our- 
felves,  and  the  zealous  endeavour  to  propagate  fuch 
truths  will  be  to  the  greater  prejudice  of  charity,  and 
the  difl:urbance  of  the  publick  peace  of  the  church. 

It  was  a  good  faying  of  Erafmus  (if  we  underfland 
it,  as  I  believe  he  meant  it,  of  truths  not  neceflTary) 
adeo  invifa  fiint  mihi  difcordia^  ut  Veritas  etiam  content 
tiofa  difpliceat ;  "  I  am  (fays  he)  fo  perfe6t  a  hater 
*«  of  dilcord,  that  I  am  even  difpleafed  with  truth, 
*'  when  it  is  the  occafion  of  contention."  As  a  man 
is  never  to  deny  truth,  fo  neither  is  he  obliged  to  make 
an  open  protellion  of  truths  not  neceflary  at  all  times  5 
and  if  he  fuffer  upon  that  account,  he  cannot  jufl:ify 
it  to  his  own  prudence,  nor  have  comfort  in  fuch 
fufferings;  becauf^  he  brings  them  needlefly  upon 
himfeif  j  and  no  man  can  have  comfort,  but  in 
fuffering  for  doing  his  duty. 

And  thus  I  have  done  with  the  firfl:  thing  I  pro- 
pofed  to  enquire  into ;  namely,  when  men  may  be 
truly  faid  to  fuffer  for  the  caufe  of  religion. 
I  proceed  now  to  the 

lid  enquiry  ^  namely,  how  far  men  may  rely  upon 
the  providence  of  God,  to  bear  them   out  in  fuch 


fufi^erings  ? 


To 


i^g6  ^'hefuppoH  of  goad  men  ^ 

S  E  R  M.  To  which  I  anfwer  ;  that  provided  we  do  what  be- 
comes  us,  and  is  our  duty  on  our  part,  the  provi- 
dence of  God  will  not  be  wanting  on  his  part,  to 
bear  us  out  in  all  our  fufFerings  for  his  caufe,  one  of 
thefe  three  ways. 

Firll,  to  fecure  us  from  diat  violent  degree  of  temp- 
tation and  fuftering,  which  would  be  too  (Irong  for 
humane  ftrength  and  patience  ;  or. 

Secondly,  in  cafe  of  fuch  extraordinary  temptation 
and  trial  to  give  us  the  extraordinary  fupports  and 
comforts  of  his  Holy  Spirit  j  or  elfe, 

Thirdly,  in  cafe  of  a  temporary  fall  and  mifcar- 
riage,  to  raife  us  up  by  repentance,  and  a  greater  re- 
folution  and  condancy  under  fufferings.  I  fhall  fpeak 
feverally  to  thefe. 

Firft,  either  the  providence  of  God  will  not  be 
wanting  to  fecure  us  from  that  violent  degree  of 
temptation  and  fuffering,  which  would  be  too  ftrong 
for  humane  llrcngth  and  patience  to  bear.  And  this  is 
a  great  fecurity  to  good  men  againlt  the  fears  of  fi- 
nal mifcarriage,  after  all  their  labours,  and  pains,  and 
liifFeringsin  a  religious  courfe,  by  being  over- born  at 
lad  by  the  aflauk  of  a  very  violent  and  powerful 
temptation.  Not  but  that  the  beft  of  men  ought  al- 
ways  to  have  a  prudent  diflrufl  of  themfelves,  fo  as 
to  keep  them  from  fecurity  ;  according  to  theapodlc's 
caution  and  counfel,  "  be  not  high-minded  but  fear-,'* 
and  "  let  him  that  ftands,  take  heed  left  he  fall \* 
becaule  *till  we  come  to  heaven,  we  (hall  never  be 
out  of  the  danger  and  poflibihty  of  falhng:  but  yet 
for  all  this,  we  may  hope,  by  the  fincerity  and  firm- 
nefs  of  our  refolution,  under  the  ufual  influence  of 
God's  grace,  "  to  acquit  ourfelves  like  men,"  in  or- 
dinary cafes  of  temptation  and  fuffering.  And 


under  their  fiiferings  for  religion.  1 597 

And  to  this  end,  we  fhould  rcprefent  to  ourfelves  S  E  R  M. 
*'  thole  exceeding  great  and  precious  promifes,"  which 
he  hatli  made  to  good  men,  and  his  merciful  provi- 
dence, which  continually  watcheth  over  them,  and 
fleers  their  courfe  for  them  in  this  world,  among  thofe 
many  rocks  which  they  are  in  danger  to  fplit  upon  ; 
that  he  is  able  "  to  (lablifb  us  in  the  truth,  and 
*'•  to  keep  us  from  flilling,  to  prefent  us  faultlefs 
*'  before  the  prefence  of  his  glory  with  exceeding 
"  joy,  and  to  preferve  us  to  his  heavenly  kingdom  j" 
and  that  if  wc  do  not  forfake  him,  and  forleit  his 
care  and  protedlion,  he  will  "  keep  us  by  his  mighty 
"  power  through  faith  unto  falvation  ;'*  either  by 
his  merciful  forefight  and  prevention  of  thofe  temp- 
tations which  would  probably  be  too  hard  for  us ; 
or  if  he  thinks  fit  they  fhould  befal  us,  by  fupport- 
ing  us  under  them  in  an  extraordinary  manner. 

For  I  doubt  not,  but  that  the  bed  men  do  owe 
their  fecurity  and  perfcverance  in  goodnefs,  mucli 
more  to  the  merciful  providence  of  God,  preventincr 
the  affaults  of  violent  and  dangerous  temptations, 
than  to  the  firmnefs  and  conftancy  of  their  ov/n  re- 
folutions.  For  there  are  very  few  perfons  of  fo  firm 
and  refolute  virtue,  but  that  one  time  or  other  a 
temptation  might  alTault  them  upon  fuch  a  difadvan- 
tage,  as  would  in  all  probability,  not  only  ftagger 
them,  but  bear  them  down.  Now  herein  zac  pro- 
vidence of  God  towards  good  men  is  very  remarka- 
ble, in  fecuring  them  from  thofe  temptations  which 
are  too  ilrong  for  them  to  grapple  wittial  j  like  a 
kind  and  tender  father,  who,  if  he  be  liitistied  of 
the  dutiful  difpofition  of  his  child  towards  him,  will 
not  try  his  obedience  to  the  utmofl,  nor  permit  too 
Vol.  VI.  12  D  ftroncr 

5' 


1 5p8  "Thefupport  of  good  men^ 

SE  R  M.  ftrono;  a  temptation  to  the  contrary  to  come  m  his 
'  '  way.  So  the  pfalmift  reprelents  God's  tender  regard 
and  confideration  of  the  frailty  and  infirmity  of  his 
children,  Pfal.  ciii.  13,  14.  "  Like  as  a  father  piti- 
*'  eth  his  children,  fo  the  Lord  pitieth  them  that 
*'  fear  him:  for  he  knoweth  our  frame,  he  remem- 
<'  breth  that  we  are  but  duft,"  that  is,  he  confidereth 
us  as  men,  and  deals  with  us  accordingly.  Provided 
we  be  fincere,  he  will  not  fuffer  us  to  be  fet  upon  by 
temptations  that  are  too  big  for  us.  And  therefore 
our  bleffed  Saviour  makes  it  one  of  the  petitions 
of  that  excellent  prayer,  which  he  hath  recommend- 
ed to  us  •,  "  lead  us  not  into  temptation  -, "  that  is,  wc 
fhould  every  day  beg  of  God,  that  his  providence 
would  keep  us  out  of  the  way  of  great  and  dange- 
rous temptations,  as  knowing  that  this  will  be  a 
<yreater  fecurity  to  us,  than  any  ftrength  and  refolu- 
tion  of  our  own. 

Secondly,  or  in  cafe  of  fuch  violent  and  extraor- 
dinary temptations,  the  providence  of  God  will  not 
be  v/anting  to  give  us  the  extraordinary  fupport  and 
comfort  of  his  Holy  Spirit,  to  bear  us  up  un- 
der them.  The  providence  of  God  did  take  care 
of  good  men  in  all  ages,  and  did  afford  comfort 
to  them  under  great  trials  and  fufferings ;  but  God 
never  made  fo  cxprefs  and  general  a  promife  of  this, 
to  all  good  men,  as  he  hath  done  by  the  chri- 
fl:ian  religion.  Never  was  fo  conftant  a  prefence 
and  influence  of  the  divine  Spirit  vouchfafed  and 
aiTured  to  men  under  any  difpenfation,  as  that  of  the 
gofpel  J  wherein  the  Spirit  of  God  is  promifed  to 
all  that  fincerely  embrace  the  chriliian  religion,  to 
refide  and  dwell  in  them  j  not  only  to  all  the  pur- 

pofes 


under  their  fufferhig^  for  religion.  ^599 

pofes  of  fandification  and  holinefs,  but   of  fupport  S  R  E  M. 
and  comfort  under  the  heaviefl  prefiures  and  fuffer-  ^_j^'^ 
ings.     For  which  reafon   the  gofpel  is  called  "  the 
"  miniftration  of  the  Spirit  •,' '  and  is  upon  this  ac- 
count faid  to  be  more  glorious  than  any  other  reve- 
lation which  God  had  ever  made  to  mankind. 

We  are  naturally  apt  to  be  very  much  difheartned 

and  caft  down  at  the  apprehenfion  of  great  fuffer- 

ings,  from  theconfideration  of  our  own  weaknelsand 

frailty;    but  the  Spirit  of  Christ  dwells  in  all 

true  chriftians,  and  the  fame  glorious  power,   which 

raifed  up  Jesus  from   the  dead,  v/orks  mightily   in 

them   that  believe.     St.  Paul  ufeth   very   high  ex- 

prefTions  about  this  m.atter,  Eph.  i.   19.  "  That  ye 

"  may  know,  (laith  he,  fpeaking  to  all  chriftians) 

*'  what  is  the  exceeding  greatnefs  of  his  power  to 

"  us- ward  who  believe,  according  to  the  working  of 

^'  his  mighty  power,  which  he  wrought  in  Christ 

*'  when  he  raifed  him  from  the  dead,  and  fet  him 

*'  at  his  own  right  hand.'*     So  that  every  chriftian 

is  endowed  with   a  kind  of  omnipotence,  "  being 

''  able  (as  St.  Paul  fpeaks  of  himfelf)  to  do  and  to  en- 

"  dure  all  things,  thro'  Christ  ftrengthning  him.'* 

Of  our  felves  we  are  very  weak,  and  the  temptations 

and  terrors  of  the  world  are   very  powerful  -,   but 

there  is  a  principle  refiding  in  every  true  chriflian 

that  is  able  to  bear  us  up  againft  the  world,  and  the 

power  of  all  its  temptations.  "  Whatfoever  is  born  of 

*■'  God  (faith  St.  John)  overcometh  the  world*,  for 

*'  greater  is  he  that  is  in  you,  than  he  that  is  in  the 

*'  world."     The    Holy   Spirit  of  God    which 

dwells   in   all   true  chriftians,    is  a  more   powerful 

principle  of  refolution,  and  courage,  and  patience,  un- 

12  D  2  der 


1 6 :,  o  77?^  fupport  of  good  men, 

S  E  R  M.  der  the  ftarpeft  trials  and  fufterino-s,  than  the  evil 
fpirit  which  rules  in  the  world  is,  to  ftir  up,  and  fee 
on,  the  malice  and  rage  of  the  v/orld  agaiinft  us. 
^'  Ye  are  of  God,  little  children"  (he  fpeaks  this  to 
the  youngeli  and  weakeft  chriflians)  "  ye  are  of 
*'  God,  little  children,  and  have  overcome  ;  becaufe 
y-  greater  is  he  tiiat  is  m  you,  than  he  that  is  in 
^'  the  world."  The  malice  and  power  of  the  devil 
is  very  great  j  but  the  goodnefs  and  power  of  God 
is  cyreater.  And  therefore  in  cafe  of  extraordinary 
temptation,  good  men,  by  virtue  of  this  promiCe  of 
God's  Holy  Spirit,  may  exped  to  be  born  up 
and  comforted  in  a  very  extraordinary  and  fuperna- 
turai  manner,  under  the  greateft  tribulations  and  fuf- 
ferings  for  righteoufnefs  fake. 

And  this  was  in  a  very  fignal  and  remarkable 
manner  afforded  to  the  primitive  ch rifti^ans,  under 
thofe  fierce  and  cruel  perfecutions  to  which  they 
were  expofed.  And  this  may  itill  be  expected,  in 
like  cafes  of  extraordinary  fafferings  for  the  tefti- 
rnony  of  God*s  truth.  "  If  ye  be  reproached  (faith 
"  St.  Peter  in  this  ivth  chap.  ver.  14 )  for  the  name 
«'  of  Christ,  happy  are  yej  for  the  Spirit  of 
««  ojory  and  of  God  refteth  upon  you."  The  Spi- 
rit of  God  is  here  promifed  to  Ifrengthen  and 
fiipport  all  that  fuffer  for  the  name  of  Christ,  in 
a  very  confpicuous  and  glorious  manner,  according 
to  that  prayer  of  St.  Paul,  Col.  i.  11.  that  chrifti- 
ans  might  be  "  ftrengthened  with  all  might:,  ac- 
*'  cording  to  God's  glorious  power,  unto  all  pati- 
*^*  ence  and  long-fuffering,  with  joyfulnefs.'*  For 
when  God  is  pleafcd  to  exercife  good  men  with 
trials  more  than  humane,  and  fuch  fuficrings  as  are 

beyond 


tifider  their  fiifferings  for  religion,  1 60  r 

beyond  the  common  rate  of  humane  llrength  and  S  E  R  ]vc. 
patience  to  bear,  he  hath  engaged  himfelf  to  endue  ^^^^- 
and  afTifl  them  with  more  than  humane  courage  and 
refolution.  So  Sr.  Paul  tells  the  Corinthians,  who 
had  then  felt  the  utmoft  rage  of  perfecution, 
I  Cor.  X.  13,  "  No  temptation  or  trial  hath  yet 
"  befallen  you,  but  what  is  common  to  man;"  that 
is,  nothing  but  what  is  frequently  incident  to  humane 
nature,  and  what  by  humane  ftrength,  with  an  ordi- 
nary alTiftance  of  God's  grace,  may  be  grappled 
withal.  But,  in  cafe  God  fliall  call  you  to  extraor- 
dinary fufFerings,  "  he  is  faithful  that  hath  promifed, 
'^  who  will  not  fuffer  you  to  be  tempted  above 
"  that  ye  are  able,  but  will  with  the  temptation  alfo 
''  make  a  way  to  efcape,  that  ye  may  be  able  to  bear 
"  it ; "  that  is,  as  he  hath  ordered  and  appointed 
fo  great  a  temptation  or  trial  to  befal  you,  fo  he 
will  take  care  that  it  (liall  have  a  happy  iiliie,  by 
enabling  you  to  bear  it,  by  affording  you  grace  and 
flrength  equal  to  the  violence  and  power  of  the 
temptation.  For  as  he  is  faid  '^  to  fall  into  tempta- 
tion,'* that  is  conquered  by  it ;  fo  he  is  faid  ''  to 
"  get  out  of  it,  or  efcape  it,"  who  is  enabled  to 
bear  it,  and,  in  fo  doing,  gets  the  better  of  it.  And 
for  this  we  may  rely  upon  the  faithfulnefs  of  God, 
who  hath  promifed  "  that  v/e  fliall  not  be  tried 
"  above  our  ftrength  ;  '*  either  not  above  the 
flrength  which  we  have,  or  not  above  the  flrengtli 
which  he  will  afford  us  in  fuch  a  cafe. 

And  why  then  fliould  we  be  daunted  at  the  ap- 
prehenfion  of  any  fulfering  whatfoever,  if  we  be  fe- 
cured    that  our  comfort  fhall  be    increafed  in  pro- 
portion to  our  trouble,  and  our  flrength  in  propor- 
tion 


i6c2  TChe  fupport  of  good  men^  ' 

SERM.  tlon  to  the  iharpnefs  and  weight  of  our  fufFerings  ? 
XCIX.   Qi-elfe, 

Thirdly,  in  cafe  of  temporary  falling,  the  provi- 
dence and  goodnefs  of  God  will  give  them  the  grace 
and  opportunity  of  recovering  themfelves  from  their 
fall  by  repentance.     For  the  providence  of  God  may 
lometimes,    for  wife  ends  and  reafons,   fee  it  fit  to 
leave  good  men  to  their  own  frailty,  and  to  faint  and 
fall  fliametully  under  fufferings,  fo  as  to  renounce  and 
deny  the  truth;    fometimes  to  punifh  their. vain  con- 
fidence in  themfelvcs,  as  in  the  cafe  of  Peter,    who 
declared   more  refoludon,  and   bore  it  out  with    a 
greater  confidence  than  any  of  the  difciples,  when  he 
fud  to  our  Saviour,   "  tho*  all  men  forfake  thee, 
^^  yet  will  not  I  j**  and  yet  after  this  he   fell  more 
fhamefully   than  any  of  the   reft,  fo  as  to  deny   his 
matter  with  horrid  oaths  and  imprecations,  and  this,' 
tho' our  Saviour  had  prayed  particularly  for  him, 
*'  that  his  faith  might  not  fail."  From  which  in- 
ilance  we  may  learn,  that  God  doth  not  engage  him- 
felf  abfolutely  to   fecure  good  men  from  falling,  in 
cafe  of  a  great  temptation  and  trial ;    but  if  they  be 
fincere,  he  will  not  permit  them  to  fall  finally,  though 
he  may  fufFer  them  to  mifcarry  grievoufly  for  a  time, 
to  convince  them  of  the  vanity  of  their  confidence  in 
themfelves  and  their  own  ftrength. 

Somedmes  God  may  fuffer  good  men  to  fall,  in 
order  to  their  more  glorious  recovery,  and  the  greater 
demonftration  and  triumph  of  their  faith  and  con- 
flancy  afterwards ;  which  was  the  cafe  of  that  happy 
inflrument  of  our  reformation  here  in  England, 
archbifliop  Cranmer,  who  after  he  had  been  fo  great 
a  champion  of  the  reformation,   was  fo  overcome 

witH 


under  their  fiifferifigs  for  religion.  i6o-» 

with  fear,  upon  the  apprehenfion  of  his  approaching  SE  R  M. 
fufferings,  as  to  fubfcribe  thofe  errors  of  the  church  ■^^^^• 
of  Rome,  which  he  had  fo  floutly  oppofed  a  great 
part  of  his  life :  but  he  did  not  long  continue  in  this 
flate,  but  by  t\\t  grace  of  God,  which  had  not  for- 
laken  him,  was  brought  to  repentance ;  and  when 
he  came  to  fuffer,  gave  fuch  a  teltimony  of  it,  and 
of  his  faith  and  conitancy,  as  was  more  glorious,  and 
more  to  the  confirmation  of  the  faith  of  others,  than 
a  fimple  martyrdom  could  have  been,  if  he  had  not 
fallen  ;  for  when  he  was  brought  to  the  ftake  he  put 
his  right  hand  (with  v/hich  he  had  figned  the,  recan- 
tationj  into  the  fire,  and  with  an  undaunted  conftancy 
held  it  there,  till  it  was  quite  burnt,  for  a  teftimony 
of  his  true  repentance  for  that  foul  mifcarriage ;  and 
when  he  had  done,  gave  the  reft  of  his  body  to  be 
burnt,  which  he  endured  with  great  courage  and 
chearfulnefs  to  the  laft.  So  that  he  made  all  the 
amends  poffible  for  fo  great  a  fault ;  and  the  goodneis 
of  God,  and  the  power  of  his  grace  was  more  glo- 
rified in  his  repentance  and  recovery,  than  if  he  had 
never  fallen. 

But  what  fliall  we  fay,  when  notwithdanding  thefe 
promifesof  extraordinary  comfort  and  fupport,  in 
eafe  of  extraordinary  fuffcrings,  fo  great  numbers  are 
feen  to  faint  in  the  day  of  trial,  and  to  fall  ofi^  from 
their  ftedfaftnefs  ?  of  which  there  were  many  flid  in- 
ftanccs,  among  the  primitive  chrhlians,  and  have 
likewife  been  of  late  in  our  own  times,  and  in  places 
nearer  to  us.  This  I  confefs  is  a  very  melancholy  con- 
fideration,  but  yet  I  think  is  capable  of  a  fufficient 
anfwer. 


And 


xcix. 


1604  "Thefupport  of  good  meHy 

SERiyf.      Andfiril  of  aJi,   Jet  this  be  eflablillied  for  a  firm 
and  undoubted  principle,  ''  that  God  is  faithful  to 
"  hispromife;"  and  therefore  we  ought  much  ra- 
ther to  fuppofc  in  all   thele    cafes,  that  there  is  fome 
default  on  our  part,    than  any  failure  and  unfaithful- 
nefs  on  God's  part.     Thus  St.  Paul  determines  in  a 
like  cafe,  when  the  promife  of  God  feemed  not  to  be 
made  good  to  the  Jews,  he  lays  the  blame  of  it  on 
their  unbelief,    but  acquits  God  of  any  unfaithfulncis 
in  his  promile,    Rom.  iii.  3,  4.  "   For  what  if  fome 
*'  did  not  believe,  fnall  their  unbelief  m?.ke  the  faith 
*'  (or  fidelity)  of  God  without  efTedl  ?  God  forbid: 
*'  yea, let  God  be  true,  but  every  man  a  liar.'*  This  I 
confefs   does   not  anfwer  the   difficulty  ;    but  yet  it 
ought  to  incline  and  difpofe  us,  to  interpret  what  can 
fairly  be  offer'd  for  the  removal  of  it,  with  all  the  fa- 
vour that  may  be  on  G'>d's  fide.    I  lay  then. 

Secondly,    that  when  good  men  fall  in  cafe  of  ex- 
traordinary temptation,    and  recover  again  by  repen- 
tance,   and  give  greater  demonilration  afterwards  of 
their  conflancy  and  reiblution,  in  the  caufe  of  God 
and  his  truth,  the  faithfuinefs  of  God  in  hispromifes 
is  fjfMciently  vindicated,  as  in  the  cafes  I  mentioned  ; 
becaufe  the  promife  of  ~God  is  not  abfolute,    that 
good  men  fliould  be  preferved  from  falling;  but  that 
*'  the  temptation  Ihall  have  a  happy  ilTue,"    and  that 
they  fliall  not  finally  mifcarry.      For  promifes  of  this 
nature  are  to  be  interpreted  by  us,  and  underttood  as 
we  do  our  Saviour's  prayer  for  Peter  before  his  fall, 
*'  that  his  faith  fliould  not  fail  finally  ;"  but  though 
he  fell  through  too  much  confidence  in  himfelf,  he 
fhould    through    the  grace  of  God  aflifting  him  be 
enabled  to  recover  by  repentance. 

Thirdly, 


zmder  their fiifferings  for  religion,  1605 

Thirdly,  the  fmcerity  or  infincerity  of  men  ia  the  SE  R  M, 
profeflion  of  the  true  reh'gion,  is  a  thing  which  we  ^ 
cannot  certainly  know,    becaufe  we  do  not   fee  into 
mens  hearts ;  but  "  he  who  knows  the  heart,  and  tries 
*'  the  fpirits  of  men  m  a  baIance,"cannot  be  deceived 
in  this  matter ;  and  where  men  are  not  fincere,    the 
promife  of  God  is    not  concerned  to  hinder  them 
from  difcovering  themfelves ;    and  the  fall  of  fuch 
perfons,  is  no  reflexion  upon  the  faithfulnefs  of  God. 
And  it  is  reafonable  enough  to  prefume,  that  this  may 
be  the  cafe  of  not  a  few,  and  that  (like  Simon  Magus) 
after  they  have  made  a   very   folemn  profeflion   of 
chriftianity,  "  their  hearts  may  not  be  right  m  the 
"  fight  of  God." 

Fourthly,  if  we  put  the  cafe  at  i\\Q  hardeft,  that 
fome  that  were  very  fincere,  after  they  have  held  out 
a  great  while,  under  the  extremity  of  torments,  have 
at  laft  fainted  under  them,  and  yielded  to  the  malice 
and  cruelty  of  their  perfecutor-s,  and  in  this  amaze- 
ment and  diftradtion  have  not  long  after  expired, 
without  any  teftimony  of  their  repentance:  in  this 
cafe  both  reafon  and  charity  ought  to  reflrain  us  from 
pafllng  any  very  poiitive  and  fevere  fcntence  upon  the 
Hate  of  fuch  perfons.  For  what  do  we  know,  but 
God  whole  goodnefs  will  certainly  make  all  the  al- 
lowance to  humane  frailty  that  reafon  can  require ; 
*'  (for  he  knows  whereof  we  arc  made  ;  and  remem- 
*'  bers  that  we  are  but  duft  j"  he  mercifully  confiders 
every  man's  cafe,and  weighs  all  thecircumilances  of  it 
in  an  exadt  balance  •,)  I  fay  who  can  tell,  but  in  fiich 
a  cafe  as  I  have  mentioned,  God  may  graciouily  be 
pleafed  to  accept  fuch  a  degree  of  conilant  fuffering 
of  great  torments  for  fo  long  a  time^  for  a  true  mar. 

Vo  L.  VI.  12  E  tyrdom, 

5- 


1 6o6  T^he  fupport  of  good  men.^ 

SERM.  tyrdonrijand  not  exped  a  more  than  humane  patiencrc- 
and  refolution,  where  he  is  not  pleafed  to  afford  more 
than  humane  flrength  and  fupport ;  and  whether  he 
may  not  look  upon  their  failing  and  mifcarriage  at  lad, 
in  the  fame  rank  with  the  indeliberate  actions  of  men 
in  a  frenzy,  and  befides  themfelves  ? 

And  thus  God  may  befaid,  "  with  the  temptation 
*'  to  make  a  way  to  efcape."  or  to  give  a  happy  illue 
to  it  \  fince  they  were  enabled  to  bear  it/till  being  dif- 
traded  by  their  torments,  their  underflandings  were 
thrown  off  the  hinges,  and  incapable  of  exercifing  any 
deliberate  adls  of  reafon.  And  without  fome  fuch 
equitable  confideration  of  the  cafe  of  fuch  perfons,  it 
will  be  very  hard  to  reconcile  fome  appearances  of 
things  with  the  goodnefs  of  God,  and  the  faithful- 
nefs  of  his  promife. 

However,  it  will  become  us  to  abflain  from  all  un- 
charitablenefs  and  peremptory  cenfure  of  the  final 
eftate  of  fuch  perfons,  efpecially  till  we  ourfelves  have 
given  greater  and  better  teflimony  of  our  conflancy  \ 
and  in  the  mean  time,  to  leave  them  to  the  righteous 
and  merciful  fen tence  of  their  mafier  and  ours,  to 
whofe  judgment  we  mufl  all  fland  or  fall. 

I  am  fure  it  will  very  ill  become  thofe,  who  by  the 
providence  of  God  have  efcaped  thofe  fufferings,  and 
are  at  prefent  out  of  danger  themfelves,  to  fit  in  judg- 
ment upon  thofe  who  are  left  to  endure  this  terrible 
confli6i:,  and  have  perhaps  held  out  as  long,  or  longer, 
than  they  themfelves  would  have  done  in  the  like  eir- 
cumftances.  Let  us  rather  earneftly  beg  of  "  the 
"  God  of  all  grace  and  patience,*'  that  he  would 
endue  us  with  a  greater  meafure  of  patience  and  con- 
ftancys  if  he  fee  fit  to  call  us  to  the  exercile  of  it, 

and 


under  their  fufferings  for  religion.  1 6 07 

and  (which  we  lawfully  may,  after  the  example  ofSERJVf. 
our  blefTed  Saviour)  *'  that  if  it  be  his  will,  he;  ^^^^• 
"  would  let  this  cup  pafs  from  us,"  and  not  try  us 
with  the  like   fufFerings,  "  left  we  alfo  be  weary, 
*'  and  faint  in  our  minds."     I  come  now  to  the 

lild  and  laft  enquiry  which  I  propofed  ;  what 
ground  and  reafon  there  is,  for  good  men  to  expert 
the  more  pecuhar  and  efpecial  care  of  God*s  provi- 
dence in  cafe  of  fuch  fuflerings.? 

The  providence  of  God  extends  to  all  his  creatures, 
according  to  that  of  the  Pfalmift,  "  the  Lord  is 
*^  good  to  all,  and  his  tender  mercies  are  over  all  his 
*'  works."  But  he  exercifeth  a'more  particular  pro- 
vidence towards  mankind  ;  and  more  peculiar  yet  to- 
wards thofe  who  fludy  to  pleafe  him,  by  obeying  his 
laws  and  doing  his  will.  He  that  is  aflured  of  his 
own  heart,  that  he  loves  God,  and  would  do  or  liif- 
fer  any  thing  for  him,  can  have  no  caufe  to  doubt 
but  that  God  loves  him,  and  is  concerned  for  his 
happinefs.  No  man  was.  ever  afraid  of  God,  that  was 
not  confcious  to  himfelf  that  he  had  offended  him, 
and  by  the  wilful  breach  of  his  laws  had  put  himfelf 
out  of  the  care  of  his  providence.  But  on  the  contra- 
ry, if  our  hearts  give  us  this  teftimony,  that  we  have 
made  it  our  fincere  endeavour  to  pleaie  him,  we  are 
naturally  apt  to  have  good  aflurance  and  confidence 
of  his  favour  and  good- will  towards  us.  This  com- 
fort the  mind  of  every  good  man  is  apt  to  give  him, 
from  his  own  reafon,  and  the  natural  notions  which 
he  hath  of  God. 

But  to  free  us  from  all  doubt  in  this  matter,"  God 
himfeif  hath  told  us  fo,  and  given  us  plentiful  afTurance 
pf  itin  his  word,  Pfal.  xi.  7.  ''  The  righteous  Lord 

12  E  2  "  loveth 


x6c8  Thefuppori  cf  good  men, 

S  F.  R  ivl.  ««  loveth  riofhteoufners,  his  countenance  doth  behold 
^  '  '    ''the  upright ;"    that  is,  he  will  be  favourable  unto 
them.  Pfal.xxxiii.  i8.  *'  Behold  the  eye  of  the  Lord 
*'  is  upon  theni  that  fear  him  ;"  upon  them  that  hope 
"^  in   his  mercy.'*     The  eye  of  God   fignifies  his 
watchful  care  and  providence  over  good  men.     So 
that  befides  the  fure  and  well-grounded  reafonings, 
froqn  the  elTential  perfedlions   of  the  divine  nature, 
the  mercy  and   goodnefs   of  God  ;    '*  we  have   a 
*'  more  fure  word  of  promife,"  in  the  exprefs  decla- 
rations of  God's  word,  and  more  particularly  in  the 
cafe  of  great  temptations  and  fufFerings.     For  can  we 
think,  that  the  fcripture  faith  in  vain,  "  wait  on  the 
*'  Lord,    and  be  of  good  courage,   and  he   fhall 
^«  ftrengthen  thine  heart  ?  Many  are  the  afflidlions  of 
*'  the  rio-hteous,  but  the  Lord  delivereth  him  out 
"  of  all  ?    the  fleps    of  a  good   m.an  are   ordered 
"  by   the  Lord,  and  he  delighteth  in   his    ways, 
*'  thouc^h  he  fall  he  fhall  not  utterly  be  caft  down, 
<^  for  the  Lord   upholdeth   him    with   his   hand? 
**  the  falvafton  of  the  righteous  cometh  of  the  Lord, 
"  he  is  their  help  in  time  of  trouble?"     The  fame 
promifes  we  find  in  the  new  tefcament.    ''  All  things 
''  il:iaU  work  together  for  good,  to  them  that  love 
"  God.     God  is  faithful,  who  hath  promifed,  that 
*^  he  will  not  fufFer  you  to  be  tempted  above  what  ye 
*'  are  able,  but   will  with  the   temptation  make  a 
'^  way  to  efcape."  And  to  mention  no  more  ;''  hold 
'^  faft:  the  profelTion  of  your  faith  without  wavering, 
*'  he  is  faithful  that  hath  promifed  ;"  viz.  tofupport 
you  under  fufFerings,  and  to  reward  them. 

Thus  much  for  the  firlt  point,  namely,  that  when 
rpen  do  fufter  truly  for  the  caufe  of  religion,  they 


under  their  fufferings  for  religion'.  1609 

may  with  confidence  commit  themfelves  to  the  more 
pecuhar  care  of  the  divine  providence. 

SERMON     C. 

The  fuppoit  of  good  men,  under  their 
fufferings  for  reHgion. 

I   P  E  T  E  R   iv.  19. 

wherefore  let  them  that  fuffer  according  to  the  will 
of  God,  commit  the  keeping  of  their  fouls  to  him  in 
well-doings  as  unto  a  faithful  creator, 

ROM  thefe  words  I  propofed  to  confider  thefe  s  e  R  m, 
three  points.  ^» 

Firfl,  that  when  men  do  fuffer  really  and  truly  The  fe- 
for  the  caufe  of  religion,  they  may  with  confidence  cond  fer- 
commit  themfelves  (their  lives,  and  all  that  is  dear  to  thistexu 
them)  to  the  peculiar  and  more  efpecial  care  of  the 
divine  providence. 

Secondly,  this  we  may  do,  always  provided  that 
we  be  careful  of  our  duty,  and  do  what  is  required 
on  our  part ;  and  that  neither  to  avoid  fufferings,  nor 
to  refcue  ourfelves  out  of  them,  we  do  any  thing 
contrary  to  our  duty  and  a  good  confcience  ;  for  this 
is  the  meaning  of  "  committing  ourfelves  to  God  m 
*^  well-doing." 

Thirdly,  to  fhew  what  ground  of  comfort  and  en* 
couragement  the  confideration  of  God,  under  the  no- 
tion of  "a  faithful  creator,"  does  afford  to  us,  under  all 
our  fufferings  for  a  good  caufe  and  a  good  confcience. 

The  firfl  of  thefe  points  I  have  treated  on  at  large 

in  my  forr?xrdifcourfe,     I  proceed  now  to  the 

Second, 


c. 


1 6 1  o  ^hefupport  of  good  men, 

SERM.       Second,  namely,  when  in  all  our  fufferings  for  the 
caufe  of  religion,  we  may  with  confidence  and  good 
aflurance,  commit  ourfelves  to  the  peculiar  and  more 
efpecial  care  of  God's  providence  j  this  is  to  be  under- 
flood,  always  provided  that  we  be  careful  of  our  duty, 
and  do  v/hat  is  required  on  our  part  j  and  that  neither 
to  avoid  fufrerings,  nor  to  refcue  ourfelves  out  of  them, 
we  do  any  thing  contrary  to  our  duty  and  a  good 
confcience,    and  this  I  told  you  was  the  meaning  of 
*'  committing  o'lrfeives  to  God  in  well-doing  ;^'  for  if 
we  either  negledl:  our  duty,  or  fcep  out  of  the  way  of  it, 
by  doing  things  contrary  to  it,  the  providence  of  God 
will  not  be  concerned  to  bear  us  out  m  fuch  fufTerings. 
So  that  in  our  fufferings  for  the  caufe  of  God  and  religion, 
'^  to  commit  ourfelves  to  him  in  well-doing,'*  may 
reafonably  comprehend  it  in  thefe  following  particulars. 
I.  Provided  always,   that  we  negled  no  lawful 
jaieans  of  our  prefervation  from  fufferings,  or  our  deli- 
verance out  of  them  :  in  this  cafe  men  do  not' com- 
mit themfelves   to  the  providence  of  God,  but  cad 
themfelves  out  of  his  care  and  prote6lion ;  they  do 
not  truft  Gop,  but  tempt  him,  and  do  as  it  were  try 
whether   he    will  Hand  by  us,  when  we  defert  our- 
felves, and  bring  us  out  of  trouble,  when  v/e  would 
take  no  care,  would  ufe  no  endeavours  to  prevent  it. 
If  we  will  needleily  provoke  trouble,  and  run  our- 
felves upon  fuffering  •,  if  we  will   neglecl  ourfelves, 
and  the  lawful  m.eans  of  our  prefervation  ;  if  we  will 
give  up,  and  part  with  thofe  fecurities  of  our  religion, 
which  the  providence  of  God,  and  the  laws  of  our 
country  have  given  us  *,  if  we  ourfelves  will  help  to 
pull  down    the  fence  which  is  about  us  •,  if  we  will 
difarm  ourfelves,  and  by  our  own  ad  expofe  ourfelves 

naked 


under  their  fufferings  for  religion,  1 6 1 1 

naked  and  open  to  danger  and  fufferings ;  why  Ihould  S  E  R  M. 
we  think  in  this  cafe,  that  God  will  help  us,  when  we      ^' 
would  not  help  ourfelves  by  thofe  lawful  ways,  which 
the  providence  of  God  hath  put  into  our  hands? 

All  truft  in  God,  and  dependence  upon  his  pro- 
vidence, does  imply,  that  we  join  prayer  and  en- 
deavour  together ;  faith  in  God,  and  a  prudent  and 
diligent  ufe  of  means :  if  we  lazily  truft  the  provi-^ 
dence  of  God,  and  fo  «'  cafl  all  our  care  upon  him," 
as  to  take  none  at  all  ourfelves,  God  will  take  no 
care  of  us.  In  vain  do  we  rely  upon  the  wifdom» 
and  goodnefs,  and  power  of  God  ;  in  vain  do  we  im- 
portune and  tire  heaven  with  our  prayers,  to  help 
us  againft  our  enemies  and  perfecutors,  if  we  ourfelves 
v/ill  do  nothing  for  ourfelves :  in  vain  do  we  hops 
that  God  will  maintain  and  defend  our  religion, 
againft  all  the  fecret  contrivances  and  open  affaults  of 
our  enemies,  if  we,  who  are  united  in  the  profeffion  of 
the  fame  religion^  and  in  all  the  effentials  of  faith 
and  worlhip,  will  for  fome  fmall  differences  in  leffer 
matters,  which  are  of  no  moment  in  comparifon  of 
the  things  wherein  we  are  agreed  :  I  fay,  if  for  fuch 
flight  matters,  we  will  divide  and  fall  out  among  our- 
felves ;  if  when  the  enemy  is  at  the  gates,  we  will  ftill 
purfue  our  heats  and  animofities,  and  will  madly 
keep  open  thofe  breaches,  which  were  fooliflily  made' 
at  firft  *,  what  can  we  expedl,  but  that  the  common 
enemy  fhould  take  the  advantage,  and  enter  in  at 
them  ;  and  whilft  we  are  founfeafonably  and  fenfeledy 
contending  with  one  another,  that  they  fhould  take 
the  opportunity  which  we  give  them  todeftroyus  all. 

2.    Provided  hkewife,  that    we  do  not   attempt 
our   prefervation  or  deliverance  from  fuffering,  by 

evil 


1 6 1 2  l^hefupport  of  good  men^ 

6ERM.  evil  atid  unlawful  means:  we  mufl:  do  nothing;  that 

c  . 

is  contrary  to  our  duty,  and  to  a  good  confcience ; 
nor  comply  with   any  thing,   or  lend  our  helping 
hand  thereto,  that  apparently  tends  to  the  ruin  of 
our  religion,  neither  to  divert  nor  put  off  fufferings 
for  the  prefent,  nor  to  refcue  ourfelves  from  under 
them ;  becaufe  we  cannot  with  confidence  commit  our 
felves  to  the  providence  of  God,  but  in  well-doing. 
This  is  an  eternal  rule,  from  whence  we  mufb  in 
no  cafe  depart,  "  that  men  mufl:  do  nothing  contrary 
*'  to  the  rules  and  precepts  of  religion,  no  not  for  the 
*'  fake   of  religion   itfelf :"  we  mufl:  not  break  any 
law  of  God,  nor  difobey  the  lawful  commands  of  law- 
ful authority,  to  free  ourfelves  from   any  fufferings 
whatfoever^    becaufe    the  goodnefs  of  no  end   can 
fanftify  evil  means,  and  make  them  lawful :  we  mufl: 
not  ''  fpeak  deceitfully  for  God,"  nor  lye,  no,  not 
for  the  truth  s  nor  kill  men,  though  we  could  there- 
by do  God  and  religion  the  greatefl:  fervice.     And 
tho*  all  the  cafuifl:s  in  the  world  fliould  teach  the  con- 
trary dodrine,  (as  they  generally  do  in  the  church 
of  Rome)  yet  I  would  not  doubt  to  oppofe  to  all 
thofe,  the  fingle  authority  of  St.  Paul,  who  exprefly 
condemns  this  principle,  and  brands  it  for  a  damna- 
ble dodrine,  "  that  evil  may  be  done  by    us,  that 
*'  good  may  come."  Rom.  iii.  8.  "  And  not  as  we 
*'  be  flanderoufly  reported,  and  as  fome  affirm  that 
*'  we  fay,  let  us  do  evil,  that  good  may  come,  whole 
*'  damnation  is  jufl:."  ^l,  Paul,  it  fcems,  looked  upon 
it  as  a  mofl:  devihfli  calumny,  to  infinuate  that  thechri- 
llian  religion  gives  the  leafl:  countenance  to  fuch  dam- 
nable dodrines  and  doings  as  thefe  \  and  pronounceth 
*Uheir  damnation  to  bejufl:,"  who  either  teach  any  fuch 

principle. 


under  their  fifferings  for  religion.  i(J 1 3 

principle,  as  the  dodrine  of  chriilianity,  or  pradife  S E  R  M. 
according  to  it.  ^• 

Let  thofe  look  to  it,  who  teach,  that  a  right  in- 
tention, and  a  good  end,  wiJl  render  things,  which 
are  otherwife  evil  and  unlawful,  not  only  lawful  to 
be  done  by  us,  but  in  many  cafes  meritorious  %  efpe- 
cially  where  the  good  of  the  church,  and  the  extir- 
pation of  herefy  are  more  immediately  concerned. 
OF  this  nature  are  the  do6lrines  of  equivocation  and 
mental  refervation,  and  the  lawfulnefs  of  fuch  arti- 
ficial ways  of  lying,  to  avoid  the  danger  of  the 
law,  when  they  are  brought  before  heretical  magi- 
ftrates  ;  and  this  is  the  common  doflrine  of  the  moil 
learned  cafuifls  of  all  orders  in  the  church  of  Rome: 
and  fuch  likewife  are  their  dotlrines,  of  the  lawful- 
neis  of  extirpadng  hereticks,  by  i\\q  moft  barbarous 
and  bloody  means,  and  of  breaking  faith  with 
them,  tho'  given  by  emperors  and  princes,  in  the 
mod  pubJick  and  folemn  manner  \  both  which  are 
the  avowed  doftrines  of  their  general  councils,  and 
have  frequently  been  put  m  pradice,  to  the  dedruc- 
tion  of  many  millions  of  chrillians,  better  and  more 
righteous  than  themfelves.  "^  But  we  have  not  fo 
''•  learned  Christ,  who  have  heard  him,  and 
*'  been  taught  by  him  as  the  truth  is  in  Jesus." 
They  who  are  rightly  inftruclcd  in  the  chriilian  re- 
ligion, are  fb  far  from  thinking  it  lawful  to  do  any 
thing  that  is  evil,  to  bring  others  under  fuffering, 
that  they  do  not  allow  it  m  any  cafe  whatlbever,  no, 
not  for  the  caufe  of  God  and  religion,  and  to  frc« 
themfelves  from  the  greatefl:  fufferings  that  can  be  in- 
fiidled  upon  them. 

Vol.  VI.  II  F  3.  Pro< 

5- 


1 5 1 4  ^^'^  flip  fort  of  good  men^ 

3.  Provided  alfo,  that  we  do  truft  the  providence 
of  God,  and  do  indeed   commit  our  felves  to  it  % 
relying  upon  his  wifdom  and  goodnefs,  and  entirely 
fubmitting  and  refigning  up  ourfelves  to  his  will  and 
difpofal,  both  as  to  the  degree  and  duration  of  our 
iufFerings  j  beHeving  that  he   will   do  that  for  us, 
which  upon  the  whole  matter,  and  in  the  final  ifllie 
and   refult   of  things,  will   be  bed  for  us.     That 
blefTing,   wherewith  Mofes  the  man  of  God  bleft 
the   people  of  Ifrael  before  his   death,    doth   be- 
long to  good    men   in   all  ages :  "  he  loveth  his 
*«  people,  and  all  his  faints  are  in  his  hand  : "  Deut. 
xxxiii.  3.    Innumerable  are  the  promfes  in  fcripturs 
concerning  the  merciful  providence  and  goodnels  of 
God,  towards  thofe  ''  who  truft  in  him,  and  hope 
*'  in  his  mercy,'*  Pfal.  xxxii.  10.  ''  Many  forrows 
«*  liiall  be  to  the   wicked:  but  he  that  trufteth  in 
*^  the  Lord,   mercy    fhall   compafs   him   about.'* 
Pfal.  xxxiii.  18,  19,  20,  21,  22.  "  Behold  the  eye 
"  of  the  Lord   is  upon  them  that  fear  him  :  upon 
**  them  that  hope  in  his  mercy  :    to  deliver  their 
"  foul  from  death,  and  to  keep  them  alive  in  fa- 
«'  mine.     Oar  foul   v/aiteth    for  the  Lord  :  he  is 
*'  our  help  and  our  fliield.     For  our  heart  fhall  re- 
*'  joice  in  him  :  becaufe  we  have  trufted  in  his  holy 
*'  name.     Let  thy  mercy,  O   Lord,  be  upon  us, 
*'  according  as  we  hope  in  thee."     Pfal.  xxxlv.  22. 
*'  The  Lord  redeemeth  the  foul  of  his  fervants: 
''  and  none  of  them  that  truft  in  him  Ihall  be  de- 
"  folate.''     Pfal.  xxxvii.  39,  40.  "  But  the  falva- 
*'  tion  of  the  righteous  is  of  the  Lord,  he  is  their 
*'  ftrength  in  the  time  of  trouble.     And  the  Lord 
*'  fhall  help  them  and  deliver  them :  he  flialJ  deliver 

"  them 


under  their  fufferings  for  religion,  1 6 1 5 

**  them  from  the  wicked,  and  fave   them   becaufe  SERM. 

"  they  truft  in  him."     Pfal.  xxxi.   19,  ''  O  how 

"  great  is  thy  goodnefs,   which  thou  haft  laid  up 

*'  for  them  that  fear  thee  ;  which  thou  haft  wrought 

*'  for  them  that  truft  in  thee  before  the  fons  of  men  !  " 

Pfal.  Jv.  22.  ''  Caft  thy  burden  upon  the  Lord,  and 

*'  he  fhall  fuftain  thee  :  he  ftiall  never  fuffer  the  righte- 

"  ous  to  be  moved."     Pfal.  cxxv.  i.  "  They  that 

*'  truft  in  the  Lord  fhall  be  as  mount  Zion,   which 

*'  cannot  be  removed,  but' abideth  for  ever."     Ifa. 

xxvi.  3,  4.  "  Thou  wilt  keep,  him  in  perfe6l  peace, 

"  whofe  mind  is  ftayed  on  thee,  becaufe  he  trufteth 

*'  in  thee.     Truft  ye  in  the  Lord  for  ever:  for  in 

*'  the  Lord  Jehovah  is  everlafting  ftrength.'* 

4.  Provided  yet  further,  that  we  pray  earneftly 
to  God  for  his  gracious  help  and  afTiftance,  for  his 
merciful  comfort  and  fupport  under  fufferings ;  that 
he  would  be  pleafed  to  ftrengthen  our  faith,  and  to 
increafe  and  lengthen  out  our  patience,  in  propor- 
tion to  the  degree  and  duration  of  our  fufferings. 

All  the  promifes  which  God  hath  made  to  us,  are 
upon  this  condition,  that  we  earneftly  feek  and  fue 
to  him  for  the  benefit  and  blefTing  of  them.  Pfal.  ]. 
15.  "  Call  upon  me  in  the  day  of  trouble ;  I  will 
*'  deliver  thee,  and  thou  Ihalt  glorify  me."  Ezek. 
xxxvi.  37.  After  a  great  deliverance,  and  many  blcf- 
fings  promifed  to  them,  this  condition  is  at  laft 
added,  ''  thus  faith  the  Lord  God,  I  will  yet  for 
*'  this  be  enquired  of  by  the  houfe  of  Ifrael,  to  do 
^'  it  for  them."  And  this  likewife  is  the  tenor  of 
the  promifes  of  the  new  teftamcnt,  Matth.  vii.  7. 
"  Ask,  and  it  fhall  be  given  you :  feek,  and  ye 
"  llaall  find  :  knock,  and  it  fhall  be  opened  unto 

12  F  »  "  you." 


1 6 1  ^  ^he  fupport  of  good  men^ 

^'  ycu."  And  in  this  very  cafe  that  I  am  fpeaking 
of,  God  expe6ls  that  we  fliould  apply  ourfelves  to 
him,  for  fpiritual  vvifdom  and  grace,  to  behave  our- 
felves under  fufferings  as  we  ought :  Jam.  i.  2,3,  4. 
where  fpeaking  of  the  manifold  temptations  that 
chriftians  would  be  exercifed  withal,  he  direds  them 
to  pray  to  GoD  for  wifdom  to  demean  themfelves 
vnder  perfecutions.,  with  patience,  and  conftancy, 
and  chearfulnefs,' ''  my  brethren,  account  it  all  joy, 
*'  when  ye  fall  iJito  divers  temptations ,  "  (meaning 
the  temptations  and  trials  of  fuffering  in  feveral 
kinds)  "  knowing  this,  that  the  trying  of  your  faith 
"  worketh  patience.  But  let  patience  have  its  per- 
''  fefl  work."  And  becaufe  this  is  a  very  difficult 
duty,  and  requires  a  great  deal  of  fpiritual  skill,  to 
(demean  ourfelves  under  lufferings  as  we  ought,  there^ 
fore  he  adds  in  the  next  words:  ''  if  any  of  you 
*'  lack  wifdom,  let  him  ask  of  God,  that  giveth  to 
'-^  all  men  liberally,  and  upbraideth  not ;  and  it 
^''  fhali  be  given  him." 

And  this  earnell  application  we  are  to  make  to 
God,  for  "  his  grace  and  feafonable  help  in  time 
«'  of  need;'*  not  to  put  him  in  mind  of  his  pro- 
mife,  but  to  tedi fy  our  dependence  upon  him,  and 
expectation  of  all  good  from  him.  And  we  muft 
likewife  ufe  great  importunity  \n  our  prayers  t« 
God,  to  alTifl  us  and  (land  by  us  in  the  day  of  trial, 
and  the  hour  of  temptation.  And  therefore  our 
Saviour  heaps  up  feveral  words,  to  denote  the 
great  earnedne/s  and  importunity  which  we  ought 
to  ufe  in  prayer,  bidding  us  "  to  ask,  and  feek, 
f  and  knock."  And  to  flicw  that  he  lays  more 
than  ordinary  weight  upon  this  matter,  and  to  en- 


courage 


tinder  their  fuffering^  for  religion,  1617 

courage  our  importunity,  he  fpake  two  feveral  para-  SERM. 
bles  to  this  purpofe;  the  firft,  Luke  xi.  5.  of  the 
man  who  by  meer  importunity  prevailed  with  his 
friend  to  rife  at  midnight  to  do  him  a  kindnels, 
which  our  Saviour  appHes  to  encourage  our  impor- 
tunity in  prayer,  ver.  9.  "  And  I  fay  unto  you,  ask» 
«'  and  it  Ihall  be  given  you ;  feek,  and  ye  fliall  find ; 
«'  knock,  and  it  Ihall  be  opened  unto  you."  The 
other  is  the  parable  of  the  importunate  widow,  and 
unjuft  judge,  related  by  the  fame  evangelift,  Luke 
xviii.  I.  with  this  preface  to  it;  "  and  he  fpake  a 
"  parable  unto  them  to  this  end,  that  men  ought 
"  always  to  pray,  and  not  to  faint."  And  to  fpeak 
the  truth,  they  feem  at  firfl  fight  two  of  the  oddeft  of 
all  our  Saviour's  parables,  as  if  the  defign  of  them 
were  to  infinuate  to  us,  that  God  is  to  be  prevailed 
upon  by  the  meer  importunity  of  our  prayers,  to 
grant  our  requefts:  but  our  blclTed  Saviour,  who 
belt  knew  his  own  meaning,  tells  us,  that  all  that  he 
deHgn'd  by  it,  was  only  to  fignify,  "  that  we  ought 
*^  always  to  pray,  and  not  to  faint ;"  that  is,  *'  to 
**  continue  inftant  in  prayer,"  and  not  to  give  over 
after  once  asking,  as  if  we  deipaired  of  prevailing. 
Not  that  mere  importunity  prevails  with  God  to  give 
us  thofe  things  which  he  is  otherwife  unwilling  to 
grant ;  but  becaufe  it  becomes  us  to  be  fervent,  and 
earneft,  to  teftify*  our  faith  and  confidence  in  the 
goodnels  of  God,  and  the  deep  fenfe  we  have  of  our 
own  weakneis,  and  wants,  and  unworthinefs ;  and 
likewife  that  we  fet  a  true  value  upon  the  blelTings 
and  favours  of  God,  as  worth  all  the  earneftnefs  and 
importunity  we  can  ufe :  and  in  this  decent  and  fobcr 
fenfe,  the  luccels  of  our  prayers  may  truly  be  faid  to 

depend 


J  6 1 8  ^he  fupp  ort  of  good  men^ 

S E  RM.  depend  upon  our  importunity  j  not  that  it  is  necefiar)^ 
^'^  to  move  God  to  grant  our  requefts,  but  that  it  be- 
comes us  to  be  thus  afFeded,  that  we  may  be  thq 
more  fitly  qualified  for  the  grace  and  mercy  which 
God  is  willing  to  confer  upon  us. 

I  have  been  the  longer  upon  this,  to  give  us  a  right 
notion  of  this  matter,  and  that  we  may  the  more 
diftindly  underftand  the  true  reafon  why  our  Savi- 
our does  require fo  much  earneftnefs  and  importunity 
of  prayer  on  our  part ;  not  at  all  to  work  upon  God, 
and  to  difpofe  him  to  .(hew  mercy  to  us  ("for  that  he  is 
always  inclinable  to  whenever  we  are  fit  for  it)    but 
only  to  difpofe  and  qualify  us  to  receive  the  grace  and 
mercy  of  God,  with  greater  advantage  to  our  felves. 
5.  Provided  moreover,  that  we  be  not  conBdent 
of  our  felves,    and  of  the  force  and  flrength  of  our 
own  refolution.     We  know  not  our  felves,    nor  the 
frailty  and  weaknefs  of  our  own  refolution,    'till  we 
arc  tried.     'Tis  wife  advice  which  Solomon  gives  us, 
and  never  more  feafonable  than  in  the  day  of  trial, 
Prov.  iii.  5,  6,  7.*  "  Truft  in  the  Lord   with  all 
"  thine  heart,  and  lean  not  to  thine  own  underfland- 
*'  ing;    in  all  thy  ways  acknowledge  him,    and  he 
<'  fhall  diredc  thy  paths;  be  not  wife  in  thine  own 
^'  eyes  •,'*  that  is,  be  not  conceited  and  confident  of 
thine  own  wifdom  and  flrength,  or  ability  in  any 
kind ;  there  is  a  fecret  providence  of  God,  which 
mingles  itfelf  with  the  adionsand  fpirits  of  men,  and 
difpofeth  of  us  unknown  to  our  felves ;  and  what  wc 
think  to  be  the  effx^dl  of  our  own  flrength  and  refolu- 
tion, of  our  own  wifdom  and  contrivance,  proceeds 
from  an  higher  caufe,  which  unfeen  to  us,  does  fleer 
and  govern  us.    So  the  wife  man  obferves,  Prov.  xjc. 

.24. 


under  their fufferings  for  religion.  1 6 1 9 

24.  "  Man's  goings  are  of  the  Lord,  how  can  a  SERM- 
"  man  then  underlland  his  own  ways?"  and  there-  ^' 
fore  we  have  reafon  every  one  to  fay  with  the  pro- 
phet, Jer.  X.  23.  *'  O  Lord,  I  know  that  the  way 
*'  of  man  is  not  in  himfelf,  it  is  not  in  man  that 
^^  walketh  to  diredl  his  flcps."  Our  feet  will  fooa 
flip,  if  God  do  not  "  uphold  us  by  his  hand."  Re- 
member how  fhamefulJy  the  chief  of  our  Lord's 
difciples  mifcarried,  by  too  much  confidence  in  him- 
felf, I  mean  St.  Peter  •,  in  whofe  fall  we  may  all  fee 
our  own  frailty  ;  if  God  do  but  permit  the  devil  to 
have  the  winnowing  of  us,  there  will  be  a  great  deal 
of  chaff  found  in  the  befl  of  us.  What  St.  Paul  faid 
of  himfelf,  2  Cor.  xii.  10.  "  when  I  am  weak, 
♦'  then  am  I  ftrong,"  we  fhall  all  find  true,  when  it 
comes  to  the  trial ;  we  are  then  ftrongefl,  when,  in 
a  juit  fenfe  of  our  own  weakneis,  we  rely  moll  upon 
the  ftrength  and  pov;er  of  God. 

6,    Provided  furthermore,   that  according  to  our 
ability,  we  have  been  much  in  the  exercife  of  alms 
and  charity.  For  well-doing,  or  doing  good  is  fome- 
times  taken  in  a  narrower  fenfe,    not  improper  here 
to  be  mentioned,    tho'  perhaps  not  fo   particularly 
intended  here  in  the  text,  "  for  works  of  charity  and 
*'  alms."   As  Heb.  xiii.  16.  "  But  to  do  good,  and 
*'  to  communicate"  (that  is,  to  the  necefllties  of  the 
poor)  *'  forget  not,  for  with  fuch  facrifices  God  is 
*'  well  pleafed."    This  kind  of  well-doing  is  a  fpe- 
cial  prefervative  in  times  of  evil ;    there  is  no  kind  of 
grace  or  virtue  to  which  there  are  in  fcripture  more 
fpecial  promifes  made  of  our  protedlion  and  prefer- 
vation  from  evil  and  fuffering,  of  fupport  and  com- 
fort under  them,   and  deliverance  out  of  them,  than 

to 


i620  Thefupport  of  good  men y 

SERM.  to  this  of  a  charitable  and  compafTionatc  confidera- 
tion  of  thofe  who  labour  under  want  or  fufFering. 
Pfal.  xxxvii.  3.  "  Truft  in  the  Lord,  and  do  good, 
*'  fo  fhalt  thou  dwell  in  the  land,  and  verily  thou 
*'  {halt  be  fed:"  and  ver.  19.  fpeaking  of  righteous 
or  merciful  men,  "  they  fhall  not  be  afhamed  in 
''  the  evil  time,  and  in  the  days  of  famine  they 
*'  fhall  be  fatisfied."  Pfal.  ^Xu  i,  2.  "  BlelTed  is  he 
*'  that  confidereth  the  poor,  the  Lor  d  will  deliver 
*^  him  in  time  oftrouble;  the  Lord  will  preferve  him 
''  and  keep  him  alive,  and  he  iliall  be  blefied  upon 
*'  the  earth  j  and  thou  wilt  not  deliver  him  unto  the 
"  will  of  his  enemies." 

There  are  likewife  in  the  apocryphal  books  excel- 
lent fayings  for  the  encouragement  of  charity,  as 
that  which  will  be  particularly  confidered  and  re- 
warded to  us  in  the  times  of  danger  and  diftrels,  in 
the  days  of  affliction  and  fuffering,  Tob.  iv.  "j^^^  9, 
10.  "  Give  alms  of  thy  fubftance,  and  turn  not 
"  thy  face  from  any  poor  man,  and  the  face  of  God 
*'  fhall  not  be  turned  away  from  xh^t  \  if  thou  haft 
*'  abundance,  give  alms  accordingly  ;  if  thou  haft 
'*  but  a  little,  be  not  afraid  to  give  according  to  that 
"  little,  for  thou  layeft  up  for  thy  id'i  a  good  trea- 
"  fure  againft  the  day  of  neceflity,  becaufe  that  alms 
*'  do  deliver  from  death,  and  fuftereth  not  to  come 
''  into  darknefs."  Ecclus.  iii.  31.  fpeaking  of  him 
that  gives  alms,  and  is  ready  to  do  kindnefs  to  others ; 
*'  he  is  mindful  of  that  which  may  come  hereafter ; 
"  and  when  he  falleth  he  fhall  find  a  ftay."  And 
chap.  xxix.  11,  12,  13.  ''  Lay  up  thy  treafure  ac- 
''  cording  to  the  commandment  of  the  moft  high^ 
*'  and  it  fhall  bring  thee  more  profit  than  gold,  fhut 

"  up 


tinde^  their  fufferihgs  for  religion.  162 1 

**  up  alms  in  thy  flore-houfes,  and  it  fhall  deliver  S  E  R  M. 
"  thee  from  all  afflidion,  it  fhall  fight  for  thee  againfl:,     ^'.  j^ 
*'  thine  enemies,    better  than  a  mighty  Ihield,  and 
*^  ftrong  fpear." 

I  have  often  faid  it,  and  am  verily  perfuadedof  it, 
that  one  of  the  bed  figns  of  God's  mercy  and  favour 
to  this  poor  nation,  is,  that  God  hath  been  pleafed 
of  late  years  to  (lir   up  fo  general  a  difpofition  in 
men  to  works  of  alms  and  chanty,    and  thereby  to 
revive  the  primitive  fpirit  of  chriftianity,  which  fo 
eminently  "  abounded   in   this  grace,"  and   taught 
*'  thofe  who  believed  in  God,  to  be  careful  to  main- 
«  tain  and  pra6life  good  works.**  And  nothing  gives 
me  greater  hopes  that  God  hath  mercy  Itill  in  ftore 
for  us,    than  that  men  are  fo  ready  to  fhew  mercy ; 
there  are  great  objeds  to  exercife  our  charity  upon 
in  this  time  of  the  general  fufpenfion  of  trade  and 
bufinefs,  from  an  apprehenfion  of  approaching  trou- 
bles-   by  reafon    whereof^    both  the    numbers  and 
necefTities  of  our  poor,  are  greatly  and  daily  increafed 
among  us  ;  and  befides  the  poor  of  our  own  nation, 
God  has  fent  us  great  numbers  from  abroad ;  I  rrlean  ^  -l 

thofe  who  are  fled  hither  for  flielter,  from  that  violent  ^^''^'^^^ 
florm  of  perfccution    which  hath  lately  fallen  upon 
them  for  the  caufe  of  our  common  relio-ion.  According 
to  the  compafTion  we  fhew  to  them,  we  may  exped 
that  God  will  either  preferve  us  from  the  like  fufferino-s 
or  gracioufly  fupport  us  under  them.  What  do  we  know, 
but  that  God  is  now  trying  us,  and  hath  purpofely 
put   this  opportunity  into  our  hands,   of   prevent- 
ing  or  mitigating,  or  fhortening  our  own  fufFerings, 
according  as  we  extend  our  charity  and  pity  co  thole 
Vol.  VI.  12  G  who 


1 6  2  2  "The  fupport  of  good  men^ 

S  E  R  M.  who  have  fuffered  fo  deeply  for  the  caufe  of  God,  and 
his  truth. 

7.  Provided  in  the  lafb  place,  and  above  all,  that 
we  be  fincere  in  our  religion,  and  endeavour  to  be 
univerfally  good,  and  "  holy  in  all  manner  of  con- 
*^  verfation,^'  and  "  to  abound  in  all  the  fruits  of  righ- 
"  teoufnefs,  which  are  by  Jesus  Christ,  to  the 
"  praife  and  glory  of  God.'*  This  is  the  largeft  fenfe 
of  well-doing,  and  the  mod  neceflary  of  all  the  reft, 
to  prepare  us  for  fufferings,  and  to  give  us  courage 
and  conftancy  under  them  \  and  likewife  to  engage 
the  providence  of  God  td  a  tender  care  of  us,  and 
concernment  for  us,  if  he  Ihall  fee  it  fit  to  bring  us 
into  a  ftate  of  fuffering. 

But  if  wc  live  in  open  contempt  and  violation  of 
God's  laws,  if  we  make  no  confcience  of  our  ways 
and  adlions,  we  cannot  polfibly  have  any  well- 
grounded  truft  and  confidence  in  God,  for  "  he 
"  hates  all  the  workers  of  iniquity,'*  and  his  provi- 
dence "  fets  it  felf  againft  them  for  evil."  Bad  men 
draw  many  mifchiefs  and  inconveniencies  upon  them- 
felves,  as  the  natural  confequences  of  their  adlions ; 
but  befides  this,  the  vengeance  of  God  haunts  and 
purfues  evil-doers,  and  his  juft  providence  many 
times  involves  them  in  many  difficulties  and  dan- 
gers, befides  and  beyond  the  natural  courfe  of 
things :  "  upon  the  wicked  (fays  David)  he  will  rain 
*'  fnares.*'  So  that  as  ever  we  expe6l  the  comfortable 
effefts  of  the  divine  care  and  providence,  we  mufl 
live  in  a  dutiful  obedience  to  God's  holy  will  and  laws. 
Bad  men  may  make  a  profeffion  of  the  true  reli- 
gion, and  may  in  fome  fort  believe  it,  tho'  they  do 

not 


under  their  fufferings  for  religion.  1623 

not  live  according  to  it ;  and  yet  perhaps  for  all  this,  S  E  R  M. 
out  of  a  mere  generofity  and  obftinacy  of  mind,, 
they  cannot  bear  to  be  threatned  and  terrified  out  of 
the  profefHon  of  the  truth ;  and  will  endure  a  o-reat 
deal  of  trouble  and  inconveniencies,  before  they  will 
renounce  it ;  knowing  themfelves  to  be  fo  far  in  the 
right,  that  they  Hand  for  the  truth,  and  hoping  per- 
haps thereby  to  make  fome  amends  for  their  bad  prac- 
tice. But  when  all  is  done,  nothing  gives  a  man 
true  courage  and  refolution,  like  the  teftimony  of  our 
own  hearts,  concerning  our  own  fmcerity,  and  the 
confcience  of  well-doing.  And  on  the  contrary,  he 
that  hath  not  the  refolution  and  patience  to  mortify 
his  lulls,  and  toreftrain  his  appetites,  and  to  fubdue  his 
irregular  pafTions,  for  the  fake  of  God  and  religion, 
will  not  eafily  bring  himfelf  to  fubmit  to  great  fufl 
ferings  upon  that  account.  There  is  confiderable 
difficulty  in  the  praflice  of  religion,  and  the  refolutc 
courfe  of  a  holy  life  ;  but  furely  it  is  much  cafier  to 
live  as  religion  requires  we  fhould  do,  than  to  lay 
down  our  lives  for  it ;  and  (as  I  have  told  you  upon 
another  occafion)  he  that  cannot  prevail  with  himfelf 
to  live  a  faint,  will  much  more  hardly  be  per- 
fuaded  to  die  a  martyr.     I  proceed  to  the 

Third  point,  namely,  what  ground  of  comfort 
and  encouragement  the  confideration  of  God  under 
the  notion  of  "  a  faithful  creator,"  does  afford  to  us 
under  all  our  fufFering  for  a  good  confcience  and  a 
good  caufe.  "  Let  them  that  fufferPaccording  to  the 
''•  will  of  God,  commit  the  keeping  of  their  fouls 
"  to  him,  in  well-doing,  as  unto  a  faithful  creator." 
And  in  this  I  fhall  be  very  brief. 

And  this  is   a  firm  ground  of  comfort  and  en- 

12  G  2  couragement 


1624  215^  fupporf  of  good  men^ 

SE  R  M.  couragement  to  us,  under  all  our  fufferings  for  God^ 
to  confiderhim  as  the  author  of  our  beings,  or  as  it 
is  expreft  in  the  text,  "  as  a  faithful  creator-,"  one 
that  is  not  fickle  and  inconflant  in  his  affedion 
and  kindnefs  to  his  creatures  ;  but  is  true  to  his  own 
defign,  and  will  not  abandon  and  forfake  the  work 
of  his  own  hands :  fo  great  a  benefit  as  that  of  our 
beings,  freely  conferred  upon  us,  is  but  an  earnefl  of 
God's  further  kindnefs  to  us,  and  future  care  of  us  i 
if  by  our  ill  carriage  towards  him,  we  do  not  render 
ourfelves  unworthy  and  incapable  of  it:  that  we  are 
God's  creatures,  is  a  demonllration  that  he  hath  a 
kindnefs  for  us ;  if  he  had  not,  he  would  never  have 
made  us  *,  as  it  is  excellently  faid  in  the  Wifdom  of 
Solomon,  chap. xi.  23,  24.  "  Thou  haft  mercy  upon 
*'  all,  for  thou  loveft  all  the  things  that  are,  and 
«'  abhorreft  nothing  which  thou  haft  made  :  for  ne- 
''  ver  wouldft  thou  have  made  any  thing,  if  thou 
''  hadft  hated  it."  And  ver.  26.  "  Thou  fpareft  all, 
"  for  they  are  thine,  OLord,  thou  lover  of  fouls." 
To  whom  then  may  we  with  fo  much  confidence 
commit  ourfelves,  as  to  him  who  freely  gave 
us  our  being?  from  whom  may  we  exped  fo 
tender  a  regard  and  confideration  of  our  cafe,  and 
all  the  circumftances  of  it;  as  from  this  great 
founder  and  benefac5lor  ?  for  "  he  that  made  us 
*'  knows  our  frame,  and  whereof  we  are  made,'* 
and  how  much  we  are  able  to  bear ;  he  con- 
fide rs  our  ftrength,  or  rather  our  weaknels,  and 
what  courage  and  refolution  he  hath  endued  us  withal, 
and  what  comfort  and  fupport  we  ftand  in  need  of 
in  the  day  of  tribulation.  And  as  they  who  make  ar- 
rnour^  are  wont  to  try  that  which  they  think  to  be 

good 


nnder  their fufferings  for  religion.  ^625 

good  and  well  tempered,  with  a  ftronger  charge,  notS  E  R  m.' 
to  break  and  hurt  if,  but  to  prove  and  praife  it :  fo 
God  exercifeth  thofe  whom  he  hath  fitted  and  tem- 
pered for  it,  with  manifold  temptations,  "  that  the 
"  trial  of  your  faith,"  as  St.  Peter  exprefTeth  it,  i  Pet. 
i,  7.  ^'  being  much  more  precious  than  of  gold  tried 
*'  in  the  fire,  may  be  found  unto  praife,  and  honour, 
•'  and  glory,  at  the  appearing  of  Jesus  Christ." 

So  that  this  confideration  that  we  are  God's  crea- 
tures, does  (as  I  may  fay)  oblige  him  in  faithfulnefs 
to  his  own  adl,  and  in  confequence  of  his  bringing 
us  into  being  at  firfl,  to  be  concerned  for  us  after- 
.  wards,  fo  as  never  to  abandon  us,  nor  quite  to  take 
away  his  loving-kindnels  and  mercy  from  us ;  till 
we  are  good  for  nothing,  and  do  in  a  manner  ceafe 
to  be  what  he  made  us,  that  is  reafonable  creatures. 
A  perfon  or  people  muft  have  proceeded  to  the 
utmoft  degree  of  degeneracy,  when  God  will  con- 
fider  them  no  longer  as  his  creatures,  nor  ihew  any 
pity  or  favour  to  them  ;  things  muft  be  come  to  ex- 
tremity, when  God  deals  thus  with  us,  as  he  threatned 
the  people  of  Ifrael,  Ifa.  xxvii.  11.  "  When  the 
boughs  are  withered,  they  fhall  be  broken  off,  and 
fet  on  fire  ?  for  it  is  a  people  of  no  underflanding : 
*^  therefore  he  that  made  them  will  not  have  mercy 
"  on  them,  and  he  that  formed  them,  will  fhew  them 
*'  no  favour." 

And  now  I  have  done  with  thefe  three  points  which 
I  propofed  to  handle  from  this  text,  and  thedifcourfe 
which  I  have  made  upon  them,  does  all  along  apply 
itfelf,  by  direding  us  how  we  ought  "  to  commie 
*'  ourfelves"  to  the  providence  of  God,  in  all  cafes 
pf  danger  and  fuffering,  efpecially  for  the  caufe  of 

God 


4C 


c. 


1626  The  fupport  of  good  men,  Sec. 

SERM.  God  and  his  truth,  viz.  in  the  faithful  difcharge  of 
our  duty  and  a  good  confcience,  by  a  firm  truft  and 
confidence  in  the  wifdom  and  goodnefs  of  the  divine 
providence,  not  doubting  but  that  "  he  who  made 
*'  us,  anfl  knows  our  frame,"  will  have  a  tender  care 
of  us,  and  "  not  fufFer  us  to  be  tempted  above 
**  what  we  are  able." 

And  as  to  our  prefent  danger,  and  that  terrible 
florm  which  threatens  us,  kt  us  pray  to  God,  if  it 
be  his  will,  to  divert  it ;  but  if  otherwife  he  hath 
determined,  to  fit  and  prepare  us  for  it.  And  let 
us  be  fervent  and  earned  in  our  prayers  to  him,  not 
that  he  is  moved  by  our  importunity,  but  that  we 
may  thereby  be  qualified  and  made  fit  to  receive  the 
mercy  which  we  beg  of  him. 

And  let  us  take  this  occafion  to  do  that  which 
we  fiiould  have  done  without  it,  "  to  break  off^our 
*'  fins  by  repentance,  and  to  turn  every  one  of  us 
''  from  the  evil  of  our  ways ; "  that  hereby  we  may 
render  God  propitious  to  us,  and  put  ourfelves  unde^ 
the  more  immediate  care  and  protecfcion  of  his  pro- 
vidence ;  that  we  may  prevent  his  judgments,  and 
turn  away  his  wrath  and  difpleafure  from  us,  as  he 
did  once  from  a  great  and  finful  city  and  people> 
upon  their  fincere  humiliation  and  repentance,  Jonah 
iii.  10.  where  it  is  faid  of  the  people  of  Nineveh, 
*'  That  God  faw  their  works,  that  they  turned  from 
«'  their  evil  way,  and  God  repented  of  the  evil  that 
*'  he  had  faid  he  would  do  unto  them,  and  he 
•'  did  it  not."  Above  all,  let  us  be  fincere  in  the 
profeflion  of  our  religion,  and  confcientious  in  the 
pradice  of  it ;  nothing  will  bear  us  up  under  great 
trials  and  fufierings,  like  "  the  teftim.ony  of  a  good 

^'  con- 


7 he  work  ajjigiid  to  every  man.  Sec.  1627 

*^  confcience,  void  of  offence  towards    God   and 
*'  towards  men.'* 

I  will  conclude  this  whole  difcourfe,  with  thofc 
apoftolical  bleiTings  and  prayers,  Coloff  i.  lo,  11. 
"  That  ye  may  walk  v/orthy  of  the  Lord,  unto 
"  all  pleafing,  being  fruitful  in  every  good  v/ork, 
"  flrengthned  with  all  might  according  to  his  glo- 
*'  rious  power,  unto  all  patience,  and  Jong-fuffer- 
"  ing,  with  joyfulnefs."  And  2  Thef.  ii.  16,  17, 
"  Now  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  himfelf,  and 
"  God  even  our  Father  who  hath  loved  us, 
''  and  hath  given  us  everlafling  confolation  and 
*'  good  hope  through  grace,  comfort  your  hearts, 
"  and  flablifh  you  in  every  good  word  and  work.'* 
To  him  be  glory  and  dominon  for  ever  and  ever. 
Amen. 


SERMON     CI. 

Of  the  work  aflign  d   to  ev^ery  man, 
and  the  feafon  for  doing  it. 


JOHN   ix.  4. 

/  muft  work  the  works  of  him  that  fent  me,  while  it  is 
day  ;  the  night  cometh  when  no  man  can  work, 

THESE  words  our  blefled  Saviour  fpake  SERM. 
of  himfelf,    whilfl:   he    was    upon    earth .      ^^' 
in  which  he  tells  us,  that  he  was  fent  by 
God  into  the  world,  and  had  a  certain  work  and 
employment  appointed  him  during  his  abode  \n  ic. 

A 


162S  Th  work  cijjlgtid  to  every  tfiarty 

SERM.  A  ereat  work  indeed!  to  inftrudl,  to  reform,  and 
CI  .  - 

fave  mankind.     A  work  of  great  labour,  and  pains, 

and  patience,  not  to  be  done  in  a  Ihort  time ;  and 
yet  the  time  for  doing  it  was  not  long,  after  he 
came  into  the  world  :  it  was  a  good  while  before  he 
began  it,  and  after  he  began  it,  the  time  of  work- 
ing was  not  long,  before  the  night  came  and  put  an 
end  to  it :  "  I  mufl  work  the  works  of  him  that 
"<  fent  me,  while  it  is  day  :  the  night  cometh,  when 
*'  no  man  can  work.'* 

But  that  which  our  Saviour  here  fpeaksof  him- 
felf,  and  which  properly  belongs  to  him,  and  no 
other  ;  may  yet  be  accommodated  to  every  man, 
with  fome  allowance  for  the  difference  and  difpro- 
portion.  For  tho*  every  man  be  not  fent  by  God 
into  the  world,  after  (o  peculiar  a  manner,  and  upon 
fo  particular  and  vaft  a  defign  :  yet  upon  a  general 
account,  every  man  is  fent  by  God  into  this  world, 
and  hath  a  work  given  him  to  do  in  it,  which  he  is 
concern'd  vigoroufly  to  mind  and  to  profecute  with 
all  his  might.  And  tho'  every  man  be  not  fent  to 
fave  the  whole  world,  as  the  Son  of  God  was,  yet 
every  man  is  fent  by  God  into  the  world,  "  to 
•*  work  out  his  own  falvation,*'  and  to  take  care  of 
that  in  the  lirft  place,  and  then  to  promote  the  fal- 
vation  of  others,  as  much  as  in  him  lies.  So  that 
every  one  of  us  may,  in  a  very  good  fenfe,  accommo- 
date thefe  words  of  our  Saviour  to  himfelf:  "  I 
*'  mud  work  the  works  of  him  that  fent  me,  while 
*'  it  is  day  :  the  night  cometh  when  no  man  can 
«  work." 

I  fliall  therefore  at  this  time  take  the  liberty  to 
handle  thefe  words  according  to  this  moral  accom- 
modation 


and  the  feafon  of  doing  it.  162a 

modation  of  them,  and  apply  what  our  Saviour  SERAf. 
here  fays  of  himfelf,  to  every  man  that  cometh  into .  ^' 
the   world  :  and  this  I  fhall  do,  by  Ihewing  thefe 
three  things. 

Firft,  that  every  man  hath  a  work  affigned  him 
to  do  in  this  world,  by  hmi  that  fent  him  into  it ; 
and  may  in  fome  fenfe  fay,  as  our  bleifed  Saviour 
did  of  himfelf,''  I  mult  work  the  works  of  him  that 
"  fent  me," 

Secondly,  that  there  is  a  efSrtain  and  limited  time 
for  every  man  to  do  this  work  in.  "  While  it  is 
"  day." 

Thirdly,  that  after  this  feafon  is  expired,  there 
will  be  no  further  opportunity  of  working.  '*  The 
"  night  cometh,  when  no  man  can  work." 

Firft,  every  man  hath  a  work  affigned  him  to  do 
in  this  world,  by  him  that  fent  him  into  it;  and 
may  in  fome  fenfe  fay,  as  our  blelTed  Saviour  did 
of  himfelf,  "  I  mufl:  work  the  works  of  him  thac 
*'  fent  me."  God  who  made  man  a  reafonable 
creature,  and  hath  endowed  him  with  faculties, 
whereby  he  is  capable  of  knowing  and  ferving  him  ; 
hath  appointed  him  a  work  and  fervice  fuitable  to ' 
thefe  faculties :  and  having  infufed  an  immortal  foul 
into  this  earthy  body,  hath  certainly  defigned  him 
for  a  ftate  beyond  this  life,  in  which  he  Ihall  be  for 
ever  happy  or  miferable,  according  as  he  ufeth  and 
demeans  himfelf  in  this  world. 

So  that  the  work  which  every  one  of  us  hath  to 

do  in  this  world,  is  to  prepare  and  fit  our  felves  for 

that   eternal   duration   which   remains  for    us  after 

death.     For  the  life  which  we  live  now  in  this  world 

is  a  time  of  exercife,  a  fhort  flate  of  probation  and 

Vol  ,  VI.  12  H  trial, 

6, 


1630  Of  the  work  ajfignd  to  every  man^ 

SERM.  trial,  in  order  to  a  durable  and  endlefs  (late,  in 
^^^  ,  which  we  fhall  be  immutably  fix'd  in  another  world. 
This  world,  into  which  we  are  now  fent  for  a  little 
while,  is  as  it  were  God's  fchool,  in  which  immortal 
fpirits,  clothed  with  flefh,  are  trained  and  bred  up 
for  eternity  -,  and  therefore  the  be  ft,  the  only  fore 
way  to  be  happy  for  ever,  is,  fo  to  improve  the 
Ihort  and  uncertain  time  of  this  life,  that  wc  may 
approve  our  felves  to  God  in  this  world,  and  enjoy 
him  in  the  next ;  or  (as  St.  Paul  exprefleth  it)  "  that 
*'  having  our  fruit  unto  holinefs,  our  end  may  be 
*'  everlailing  life.'^ 

And  this  work  confifls  in  thefe  three  things. 

I.  In  the  care  of  our  own  falvation. 

II.  In  doing  what  we  can  to  promote  the  falva- 
tion of  others. 

III.  And  in  order  to  both  thefe,  in  the  careful 
improvement  and  good  husbandry  of  our  time. 

I.  In  the  care  of  our  own  falvation.     And  this 
confifls  in  two  things. 

1.  In  the  worlhip  of  almighty  God. 

2.  In  the  careful  and  confcientious  praflice  and 
obedience  of  his  holy  laws. 

I.  The  care  of  our  own  falvation  confifls  in  the 
pious  and  devout  worfhip  of  almighty  God  ;  that  we 
honour  him,  and  pay  him  that  homage  and  refpecl, 
which  is  due  from  creatures  to  him  that  made  them, 
and  is  the  great  fovereign  and  judge  of  the  world  ; 
that  we  have  an  inward  reverence  and  eflcem  of 
him,  and  that  we  exprels  this  by  all  folemn  external 
ack-nowledgments  of  him  5  as  by  praying  to  him  for 
the  fupply  of  our  wants ;  by  praifing  him  for  all  the 
blelTings  and  benefits  which  we  have  received  at  his 

hands  ^ 


and  thefeafon  of  doing  /?.  1 63 1 

hands-,  and  that  we  fet  apart  conftant  and  ibIemnSERM. 
times  for  the  performance  of  thefe  duties  •,  and  then  ^^ 
when  we  are  employed  in  them;  we  be  ferious,  and 
hearty,  and  attentive  to  what  we  are  about,  and 
perform  every  part  of  divine  worfhip  with  thofe 
circumflances  of  reverence  and  refped,  which  may 
teftify  our  awful  fenfe  of  the  divine  majefty,  and 
our  inward  and  profound  veneration  of  him,  with 
whom  we  have  to  do.  And  this  is  that  which  is 
diredlly  and  properly  religion. 

2.  This  care  of  our  own  flilvation  does  con  fill 
likewife  in  the  confcientious  and  condant  obedience 
and  praflice  of  God*s  holy  laws,  in  the  conformity 
of  our  lives  and  aclions  to  the  laws  which  he  hadi 
given  us,  whether  they  be  natural,  or  written  upon 
our  hearts,  or  made  known  to  us  by  the  revelation 
of  his  word  ;  that  we  govern  our  pafllons  by  reafon, 
and  moderate  our  felves  in  the  ufe  of  fenfual  delights, 
fo  as  not  to  tranfgrefs  the  rules  of  temperance  and 
chaftity ;  that  we  demean  our  felves  towards  others, 
and  converfe  with  them  with  juftice  and  fidelity,  with 
kindnefs  and  charity. 

Thefe  are  the  fum  of  the  divine  laws,  and  the  heads 
of  our  duty  towards  our  felves  and  others  •,  all  which 
are  more  powerfully  enforced  upon  us  by  the  revela- 
tion of  the  gofpel,  and  the  plain  promifes  and  threat- 
nings  of  it;  the  faith  of  Christ  being  the  moft 
firm  and  effedlual  principle  both  of  piety  towards 
God,  and  of  univerfal  obedience  to  all  his  particular 
commands. 

And  this  is  the  great  work  which  God  hath  fent 
us  to  do  in  the  world.  So  the  wife  man  fum.s  up  our 
duty,    Ecclef.  xii.  13.  "  Fear  God,    and  keep  his 

16  Hz  ''  com- 


1632  Of  the  work  cJfigrHd  to  every  man., 

"  commandments ;  for  this  is  the  whole  duty  oF 
*^  man."  The  fear  and  reverence  of  the  divine  ma- 
jedy  is  the  great  foundation  and  principle  of  religion ; 
but  obedience  to  God's  laws,  is  the  life  and  pra6bice 
of  it.  God  doe^  not  expe(5l  that  we  fhould  fpend  the 
greateft  part  of  our  time  in  the  immediate  ads  of 
religion,  and  in  the  folemn  duties  of  his  worfhip  and 
fervice^  but  only  that  we  fhould  allot  a  fitting  portion  of 
our  time  to  thefe,according  to  the  circumftances  of  our 
condition  in  this  world,  and  the  example  of  holy  and 
good  men  that  are  in  the  like  circumftances  with  our 
felves.  For  fuch  is  the  goodnefs  of  God,  that  he  does 
not  only  allow  us  to  provide  for  the  necefTaries  and 
conveniencies  of  this  life  ;  but  hath  made  it  our  duty 
fo  to  do.  It  is  one  of  the  precepts  of  the  gofpel, 
which  the  apoftle  chargeth  the  bifhops  and  teachers 
of  the  gofpel  to  inculcate  frequently  upon  chriftians, 
*'  that  they  which  have  believed  in  God,  (hould  be 
c^  careful  to  maintain  good  works,"  that  is,  to  em- 
ploy themfeives  in  the  works  of  an  honeft  calling,' ' 
'«  for  neceflary  ufes  s"  that  is,  for  the  fupport  of  their 
families,  and  the  relief  of  thofe  who  are  in  want  and 
necefTity.  And  the  apoftle  lays  great  weight  and 
ilrefs  upon  this,  as  a  very  great  duty.  Tit.  iii.  8. 
*•  This  is  a  faithful  fiying,  and  thefe  things  I  will 
*'  that  thou  affirm  conftantly,  that  they  which  have 
f«  believed  in  God,  might  be  *reful  to  maintain 
<^  good  works.  Thefe  things  are  good  and  profitable 
<<  unto  men  •,"  that  is,  of  general  beneftt  and  advan- 
tage to  mankind. 

So  that  no  man's  calling  is  a  hindrance  to  religion, 
but  a  part  of  it  \  and  by  performing  the  duties  of 
oiety  in  their  proper  feafons,   and  fpending  the  reft 


and  the  feafon  of  doing  If,  '633 

of  our  time  in  any  honed  and  ufeful  employment,~we  SE  RM. 
may  make  our  whole  life  a  perpetual  ferving  of  God  ;  ^^" 
we  may  glorify  God  in  our  eating  and  drinking,  and 
in  all  other  lawful  and  ufeful  adlions  of  Jife.  In  fer- 
ving the  occafions  and  neceflities  of  life,  with  fobriety 
and  temperance,  and  in  managing  our  worldly  com- 
merce with  juflice  and  integrity,  we  may  ferve  God, 
and  perform  confiderable  duties  of  religion. 

So  that  provided  we  do  nothing  that  is  finful,  and 
manage  the  aftions  and  concernments  of  this  life, 
with  a  due  regard  and  fubferviency  to  the  great  inte- 
refts  of  eternity,  we  may  do  the  work  of  God  all  the 
while  we  are  providing  for  our  felvcs,  and  employed 
jn  the  works  of  an  honed  calling;  for  God,  who 
hath  defigned  this  life  in  order  to  the  other,  confiders 
the  neceflities  of  our  prefent  date,  and  allows  us  to 
make  provifion  for  it. 

There  are  fome  perfons  indeed  whofe  birth  and 
condition  fets  them  above  the  common  employments 
of  Jife,  and  the  works  of  an  ordinary  calling  :  but 
thefe  alfo  have  a  work  given  them  to  do;  for  God 
hath  fent  no  man  into  the  world  to  no  purpofe,  and 
only  to  take  his  padime  therein ;  neque  enim  it  a  gene- 
rati  fumus  a  naturay  lit  adludum  (^  jocumfaBieJp 
"uideamur ;  fed  ad  feveritatem  potiiis^  ^  quadam  ftudia 
graviora  atque  majora  ;  "  for  we  are  not  ('fays  Tully 
*'  de  off.  lib.  I.)  TO  framed  by  nature,  as  if  we  were 
"  made  for  fport  and  jed,  but  for  more  fcrious  em- 
*'  ployments,  and  for  greater  and  weightier  bufi- 
f'  neis;"  and  thofe  who  are  tied  to  no  particular  call- 
ing, may  allow  fo  much  larger  portions  of  their  time 
to  religion,  and  the  fervice  of  God  ;  and  God  like- 
wife  expeds  from  them,  th.'^t  they  fhould  bs  ufeful 

to 


1634  Of  the  work  qffignd  to  every  man^ 

S  E  R  M.  to  mankind  in  fome  higher  and  nobler  way,  accord- 
ing  to  the  publicknefs  of  their  ftation  and  influence. 
Such  perfons  may  be  ferviceable  to  their  country,  and 
the  affairs  of  government,  and  in  the  care  of  pub- 
lick  juftice,  and  may  employ  their  time  in  preparing 
and  rendring  themfelves  more  fit  for  this  fervice. 
They  may  find  a  great  deal  of  work  to  do  in  the 
good  government  of  their  families,  and  in  the  pru- 
dent care  and  management  of  their  eftates,  and  in 
reconciling  differences  among  their  neighbours,  and 
in  confidering  the  necefiities  of  the  poor,  and  provi- 
ding for  their  fupply. 

So  that  befides  the  proper  work  of  religion,  and 
the  more  immediate  fervice  of  God,  every  man  in  the 
world,  how  exempt  foever  his  condition  be  from  the 
common  care  and  drudgery  of  humane  life,  may 
find  work  enough  wherein  he  may  ufefully  employ  all 
his  time,  and  provide  for  his  own,  and  for  the  com- 
mon benefit  of  mankind  \  and  God  expefts  it  as  a 
duty  from  fuch,  that  every  man  fhould  employ  him- 
felf  in  fome  work  or  other,  fui table  to  the  ftation  in 
which  God  hath  placed  him  in  this  world. 

II.  The  work  which  God  hath  given  us  to  do  m 
the  world,  confifls  in  doing  what  we  can  to  further 
and  promote  the  falvation  of  others.  This  chiefly 
lies  upon  us,  who  are  *'  the  mmifters  of  God,  and 
*'  to  whom  the  word  of  reconcifflftion  is"  committed.** 
We  are  more  efpecially  commifllon'd  and  appointed 
for  this  work,  and  are  "  ambaflfadors  for  Christ, 
"  to  befeech  mxn  in  his  fl:ead  to  be  reconciled  to 
"  God."  We  are  fent  by  God  in  a  more  peculiar 
manner,  and  appointed  for  this  very  work,  "  to 
^^  watch  for  mens  fouls,"    and  to  be   initruments 

and 


i!nd  the  feafon  for  doing  it  1635 

and  means  of  their  eternal  happinefs.  And  therefore  S  E  R  M. 
we  who  are  fent  by  God  in  a  more  peculiar  manner, 
and  have  this  work  afTigned  us  to  do  in  the  world, 
ought  to  be  very  vigorous  and  induftrious  in  it  •,  and 
this,  whether  we  confider  the  nature  of  our  employ- 
ment, or  the  glorious  reward  of  it. 

I .  If  we  confider  the  nature  of  our  employment, 
both  in  refpedl  of  the  honour  and  the  happinefs  of  it. 
'Tis  the  mofl  honourable  work  that  mortal  man  can 
be  employed  in  ;  'tis  the  fame  in  kind,  and  in  the. 
main  end  and  defign  of  it,  with  that  of  the  bleffed 
angels ;  for  we  alfo  are  "  miniftring  fpirits,  fent  forth 
*'  by  God  to  niinifler,  for  the  good  of  thofe  who 
*'  fhall  be  heirs  of  falvation/*  We  are  the  meifen- 
gers  and  ambafladors  of  God  to  men,  fent  to  treat 
with  them  about  the  terms  of  their  peace  and  recon- 
ciliation with  God,  to  offer  falvation  to  them,  and 
to  dired  them  to  the  bed  ways  and  means  of  pro- 
curing it.  Nay,  we  have  the  honour  to  be  employed 
in  the  very  fame  work  that  the  Son  of  God  was,  when 
he  was  upon  the  earth,"  to  feek  and  to  fave  them  that 
*'  are  loll  •,  and  to  call  finners  to  repentance  ;'*  and 
to  carry  on  that  work,  whereof  he  himfelf  hid  the 
foundation,  when  he  was  in  the  world.  And  what 
greater  honour  can  be  put  upon  the  fons  of  men, 
than  to  help  forward  that  glorious  defign  and  under- 
taking of  the  SoN^f  God,  for  the  falvation  of  man- 
kind. 

And  'tis  an  employment  no  lefs  happy  and  honou- 
rable-, 'tis  not  to  drudge  about  the  mean  and  low 
concernments  of  this  life  ;  a  perpetual  toil  and  care 
about  "  what  we  fhall  eat  and  drink,  and  where- 
«  withal  we  fhall  be  clothed."  which  is  the  bufinefs 

of 


3636  ^h^  ivork  ajjignd  to  evef'y  man^ 

SERM.  *^  of  a  worldly  empJoyment;  but  it  is  a  diredl  and 
^^  J  immediate  "  feeking  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  and 
*'  his  righteoufnefs,"  and  a  continual  endeavour  to 
promote  thefe.  It  does  not  confiti  in  the  labour  of 
our  body,  and  in  bodily  toil ;  but  in  the  delightful 
exercife  of  our  minds,  about  the  beft  and  nobleft  ob- 
jedts,  God,  and  heaven,  and  eternity  ;  in  an  earned 
and  faithful  endeavour  by  all  wife  ways  and  means  to 
o-ain  fouls  to  God,  and  "  to  turn  fmners  from  the 
"  errors  of  their  ways,"  and  to  prevent  their  eternal 
ruin  and  deftrudion  ;  and  next  to  the  procuring  of 
our  own  happinels ,  to  be  inftrumental  to  the  happi- 
nefs  of  others,  which  is  certainly  the  moft  pleafant 
and  noble  work  that  we  can  pofTibly  be  employed  in  ; 
efpecially  if  we  confider,  that  by  the  very  nature  of 
our  employment,  we  do  at  the  fame  time,  and  by  the 
very  fame  means,  carry  on  both  thefe  defigns,  of  the 
falvation  of  ourfelves  and  others.  So  ^x.,  Paul 
tells  Timothy,  when  he  exhorts  him  upon  this  very 
confideration,"  to  give  himfelf  wholly"  to  this  bleffed 
work;  becaufe,  fays  he,  "  in  doing  this,  thou  fhalc 
*'  fave  thyfelf,  and  them  that  hear  thee,"  i  Tim. 
iv.  16.  And  when  two  of  the  greateft  and  beft  de- 
figns in  the  world,  our  own  happinefs,  and  the  fal- 
vation of  others,  do  fo  happily  meet  in  one,  and  are 
jointly  carried  on  by  the  fame  labour ;  this  ought  to 
be  a  great  fpur  and  incitement  t^s,  to  be  vigorous 
and  unwearied,  *^  and  abundant  in  the  work  of  the 
«'  Lord  i"  and  a  mighty  encouragement  to  us  '^  to 
»'  preadi  the  word,  to  be  inftant  in  feafon,  and  out 
"  of  feafon,"  and  "  to  be  examples  to  others,  in 
**  word,  in  converfation,  in  charity,  in  fpirit,  in 
**  faith,  in  purity;"  as  St.  Paul  chargeth  Timothy 


m 


and  thefeafonfor  doing  if,  ^  ^3  7 

in  the  mod  folemn  an^  awful  manner,  '^  before  God,  SE  RM: 
*'  and  the  Lord  Jesus   Christ,  who  fliall   judge      ^^* 
"  the  quick  and  t\\t  dead  at  his  appearing,' and  his 
"  kingdom,"  i  Tim.  iv.  12.  and  2  Tim.  iv.  i.  And 
then, 

2.  If  we  confider  the  glorious  reward  of  this  work. 
If  we  be  faithful  and  induftrious  in  it,  it  will  advance 
us  to  a  higher  degree  of  glory  and  happinefs  in  the 
other  world.  "  They  that  be  wife"  (fays  the  pro- 
phet, Dan.  xii.  3.)  ''  fhall  fhine  as  the  brightnefs  of 
"  the  firmament,  and  they  that  turn  many  to  righ- 
*'  teoufnefs,  as  the  flats  for  ever  and  ever."  They 
that  are  induftrious  in  this  work,  as  they  are  "  worthy 
*'  of  double  honour"  in  this  world,  fo  they  fhall 
fhine  with  a  double  glory  and  luftre  in  the  other. 

But  tho'  this  work  of  promoting  the  falvation  of 
others,  be  chiefly  incumbent  upon  thofe  whofe  office  it 
is  to  attend  upon  this  very  thing  \  yet  we  are  all  of  us 
concerned  in  it,  according  to  the  advantages  and  op- 
portunities we  have  for  it.  Every  man  is  concerned 
to  help  forward  the  falvation  of  his  brother,  and  not 
let  him  perifh  if  he  can  help  it ;  and  it  is  in  every 
man's  power  to  contribute  fomething  to  this  blefled 
work  of  faving  others  by  feafonable  counfel  and  ad- 
vice, by  kind  and  gende  reproof,  but  efpecially  by 
a  holy  and  exernplary  converfation,  by  a  fliining 
virtue,  which  hatn  a  filent  power  of  perfuafion,  and 
I  know  not  what  fecret  charm  and  attradlion  to 
draw  and  allure  others  to  the  imitation  of  it. 

Iir.  And  in  order  to  both  thefe,  the  laving  ofour- 
felves  and  others,  this  work,  which  God  hath  give/i 
us  to  do  in  the  world,  confifls  in  the  careful  ufe  ■^^'^ 
good  husbandry  of  our  time  ;  for  without  this,  nd^^^^ 

VoL.yi,  12 1  ^^^ 

6. 


1638  ^he  work  ajjigrid  to  every  man^ 

SE  R  M.  the  one  nor  the  other  can  be  promoted  and  carried  on 
to  any  purpofe.  Time  is  the  feafon  and  opportunity  of 
carrying  on  of  any  work,  and  for  that  reafon  is  one 
of  the  mod  valuable   things ;  and   yet   nothing  is 
more  waftefully  fpent,  and  more  prodigally  fquandered 
away  by  a  great   part  of  mankind  than  this,  which 
next  to  our  immortal  fouls,  is  of  all  other  things  moil 
precious  5   becaufe  upon   the  right  ufe   or  abufe  of 
our  time,   our  eternal  happinefs  or  mifery  does  de- 
pend.    Men  have  generally  fome  guard  upon  them- 
felves,  as  to  their  money  ande{lates,and  will  not  with 
eyes  open  fufFer  others  to  rob  and  deprive  them  of  it : 
but  we  will  let  any  body  almoft  rob  us  of  our  time, 
and  are  contented  to  expofe  this  precious  treafure  to 
every  body's  rapine  and  extortion,  and  can  quietly  look 
on,  whilfl  men  thruft  in  their  hands  and  take  it  out  by 
whole  handfuls,  as  if  it  were  of  no  greater  value  than 
filver  was  in  Solomon's  days,  no  more  than  the  flones 
in  the  ftreet.     And  yet  when  it  is  gone,  all  the  filver 
aftd  gold  in   the  world  cannot  purchafe  and   fetch 
back  the  lead  moment  of  it,  when  perhaps  we  would 
crive  all    the  world  for  a  very   fmall   part  of  that 
time,  which  we  parted  with  upon  fuch  cheap  and 
cafy  terms. 

Good  God  !  what  a  ftupid  and  fenfelefs  prodigali- 
ty is  this !  do  we  confider  what  we  do,  when  we  give 
away  fuch  large  portions  of  oii!^  time  to  our  eafe 
and  pleafure,  to  diverfion  and  idlenefs,  ,or  trifling 
and  unprofitable  convevJation,  to  the  making  and 
receiving  of  impertinent  vifits,  and  the  ufual  and 
almoft  infeparable  attendants  thereof,  fpiteful  obfer- 
vations  upon  them  that  are  prefent,  and  flandering 
,  and  backbiting  thofe  that  are  abfent ;  (for  the  great 

defign 


and  thefeafon  of  doing  it.  ^^39 

defign  of  moft  people  in  vifits,  is  not  to  better  one  S  E  R  M. 
another,  but  to  fpy  and  make  faults,  and  not  to  ^^* 
mend  them  \  to  get  time  off  their  hands,  to  fhew 
their  fine  clothes,  and  to  recommend  themfelves  to 
the  mutual  contempt  of  one  another,  by  a  plentiful 
impertinence  ;)  when  we  part  with  it  by  wholelale 
in  fleep  and  drefTings,  and  can  fpend  whole  mornings 
between  the  comb  and  the  glafs,  and  the  afternoon 
at  plays,  and  whole  nights  in  gaming,  or  in  riot, 
and  lewdnefs,  and  intemperance ;  in  all  which  people 
commonly  wafte  their  money  and  their  time  toge- 
ther! 

Nay  how  do  even  the  beft  of  us  mifplace  this 
precious  treafure  ;  and  tho'  we  do  not  employ  it  to 
wicked  purpofes,  and  in  works  of  iniquity,  yet  we 
do  not  apply  it  to  the  beft  and  nobleft  ufe,  to  the 
glory  of  God,  and  the  good  and  falvation  of  men ! 
by  thus  laying  out  this  treafure,  we  might  "  lay  up 
^'  for  our  'idYtz  treafures  in  lieaven,"  and  help  others 
on  in  the  way  thither. 

Thus  our  blelTed  Saviour  employed  his  precious 
time,  in  "  going  about  doing  good,"  in  all  kinds, 
and  upon  all  occafions,  healing  the  bodies,  and  en- 
lightning  the  minds,  and  faving  the  fouls  of  men  : 
this  was  his  bufinefs,  and  this  v/as  his  delight  •,  it  was 
"  his  meat  and  drink,"  and  his  very  life,  he  fpent 
himfelf  in  it,  and  facrificed  his  eafe,  and  his  i^^^tiy^ 
and  his  life  to  thefe  great  ends,  for  which  he  came 
into  the  world  \  he  confidered  the  goodnefs  and  the 
greatnefs  of  this  work,  and  the  little  time  he  had  to 
do  it  in,  which  made  him  incefilindy  induftrious  in 
it,  and  to  run  the  race  which  was  fet  before  him  with 
great   fpeed,   and  ^'  to  work  while  it  is  day,"  be- 

j  1 1  2  caufe, 


1640  TX"?  ijoork  afftgfid  to  every  man\ 

SERM.caufehe  knew   ''  the  night  would  come  when  no 
5^:    ."  man  can  work.'*  And  this  brings  me  to  the 

Second  thing  I  obferved,   from  the  text,  namely, 
that  there  is  a  certain  and  limited  time  for  every  man 
to  do  this  work  in  ;  ''  while  it  is  day.    I  muft  work 
"  the  works  of  him  that  fent  me,   whilfl  it  is  day.^ 
And  this  day  comprehends  all  the  opportunities  of 
our  life,  which  will  foon  be  over,    and  therefore  had 
need  to  be  well  fpent.       A  great  part  of  our  life  is 
pad  before  the  feafon  of  working  begins  ^  it  is  a  great 
while  before  the  ufe  of  our  reafon  begins,   and  we 
come  to  have  our  fenfes  exercifed  to  difcern  between 
good  and  evil ;  before  our  under  [landings  are  ripe  for 
the  ferious  confideration  of  God  and  religion,  and 
for  the  due  care  of  our  fouls,  and  of  the  eternal  con- 
cernment of  another  world  ;    fo  that  this  firft  part  of 
our  life  is  in  a  great  meafure  ufelefs  and  unprofitable 
to  us,  in  regard  to  our  great  defign.  For  infancy  and 
childhood  are  but  the  dawnings  of  this  day,  and  no 
fit  time  to  work  in ;  and  youth,  which  is  as  the  morn- 
ino-  of  this  day,  tho'  it  is  the  flov/er  of  our  time,  and 
the  moft  proper  feafon  of  all  other,  for  the  remem- 
brance of  God,  and  the  imprefTions  of  religion  •,  yet 
it  is  ufually  poflfefl:  by  vanity  and  vice;  the  common 
cuftom  and  pradice  of  the  world,    hath  devoted  this 
beft  part  of  our  age  to  the  worft  employments,  to  the 
fervice  of  fm  and  of  our  lulls.    How  very  few  are 
there  that  lay  hold  of  this  opportunity,  and  employ 
it  to  the  beft  purpofes  ?    and  yet  the  following  courfe 
of  our  lives  doth  in  a  great  meafure  depend  upon  it ; 
for  moft  perfons  do  continue  and  hold  on  in  the  way 
which  they  fet   out  at  firft,  whether  it  be  good  or 
bad.  And  taofe  who  ncgled  to  improve  this  firft  op- 

por- 


and  thefeafon  of  doing  It,  1641 

portunity  of  thVir  lives,  do  feldom  recover  them-SERM. 
felves  afterwards.  God's  'grace  may  feize  upon  men  ^^" 
in  any  part  of  their  lives  ;  but  according  to  the  mod 
ordinary  methods  of  it,  the  foundations  and  princi- 
ples of  religion  and  virtue  are  mod  commonly  laid  in 
a*pious  and  virtuous  education.  This  is  the  great 
opportunity  of  our  lives,  which  fettleth  and  fixeth 
mofl  men,  either  in  a  good  or  bad  courfe,  and  the 
fortune  of  their  whole  lives  does  ufually  foJlow  it,  and 
depend  upon  it. 

'Tis  true  indeed  our  day  continues  many  times  a 
great  while  longer,  and  we  are  to  work  while  it 
continues;  and  'tis  never  too  late  to  begin  to  do  well, 
and  to  enter  upon  a  good  courfe  :  but  there  is  no  fuch 
proper  and  advantageous  feafon  for  the  beginning  of 
this  work,  as  in  our  youth  and  tender  years.  "  This 
*'  is  the  accepted  time,  this  is  the  day  of  falvation." 
God's  grace  is  then  mofl  forward  and  ready  to  aflift 
us ;  and  we  are  then  lead  of  all  indifpos'd  for  the 
receiving  of  the  impreffions  of  it ;  and  the  impref- 
fions  of  it  do  then  go  deeped  into  our  minds,  and 
are  mod  lading  and  durable.  But  if  we  negle6t  this 
opportunity,  we  provoke  God  by  degrees  to  with- 
draw  his  grace,  and  to  take  away  his  Holy  Spirit 
from  us,  and  by  degrees  we  fettle  in  vicious  habits, 
and  are  every  day  more  and  more  "  hardened 
*'  through  the  deceitfulnefs  of  fin."  It  is  never  too 
late  to  work  while  the  day  lads ;  but  the  fooner  we 
begin  this  work,  and  fet  about  it  in  good  earned,  the 
eafier  we  diall  find  it ;  if  we  defer  it  late,  every  dep 
will  be  up  the  hilJ,  and  againd  the  grain. 

Thirdly,  after  this  feafon  is  expired,  there  will  be 
no  further  opportunity  of  working  •,  when  this  day  is 

once 


1642  The  work  ^JJign'd to  every  man^^ 

SERM.  once  at  an  end,  then  "  cometh  the  night  when  no 
CI  .  • 

"  man  can  work.**  The  night  is  a  time  unfit  for 

work,  when  we  can  hardly  do  any  thing,  if  we  had 
never  fo  great  a  mind  to  it;  and  there  is  fuch  a  night 
coming  upon  every  one  of  us,  and  wo  be  to  us  if 
we  have  our  work  to  do  when  the  night  over- 
takes us. 

There  is  ufually  an  evening  before  this  night, 
when  it  will  be  very  difficult  for  us,  and  next  to  impof- 
fible,  to  do  this  work  ;  and  this  is  the  time  of  fick- 
nefs  and  old-age,  in  which  men  are  commonly  unfit 
for  any  work  -,  but  mofl  of  all,  that  which  requires 
the  whole  force  and  vigour  of  our  minds,  the  bufi- 
nefs  of  religion.  If  we  attempt  this  work  then,  we 
iliall  go  very  heartlefly 'about  itjand  do  it  very  imper- 
fectly, and  be  forc'd  to  flubber  it  over,  and  to  hud- 
dle it  up  in  great  hafte  and  confufion,  and  fo  as  we 
can  hardly  hope  that  God  will  accept  it.  For  how 
unfit  are  men  to  do  any  thing,  when  they  are  full  of 
the  fenfe  of  their  own  infirmities,  and  \\t(t  it  felf  is 
become  fo  great  a  burden  to  them,  that  they  are 
hardly  able  to  ftand  under  it !  how  uncapable  fhall  we 
then  be  of  doing  the  greateft  and  moft  momentous 
work  of  our  lives,  when  our  faculties  are  almoll  quite 
fpentand  worn  out^andall  the  powers  of  life  are  decay- 
ed in  us  5  when  our  underftandings  are  dark  and  dull, 
our  memories  frail  and  treacherous,  and  our  hearts 
hard  and  ''  deceitful  above  all  things  !  "  when  fick- 
nefs  and  old  age  overtake  us,  we  fliall  then  find  to 
our  forrow  that  "  fufficient  for  that  day  is  the  evil 
''  thereof-,"  we  fhall  have  need  then  of  nothing  elfe 
to  do,  but  to  bear  our  infirmities  with  patience  and 
decency  5  and  it  is  well  if  we  can  rally  together  of  the 

broken 


cc 


and  the  feafon  of  doing  it.  1643 

broken  forces  of  our  reafon,   fo  much  as  may  be  a  S  E  R  M. 
fufficient  guard  to  us  againft  peeviflmefs  and  difcon- 
tent  j  we  had  need  then  have  nothing  t\[Q  to  do,  but 
to  be  old  and  weak,   to  be  fick  and  die. 

Befides,  how  can  we  expedt  that  God  fiiould  ac- 
cept of  any  work  that  v/e  do  at  fuch  a  time?  with 
what  face  can  we  put  off  God  with  the  dregs  of  our 
life  ?  or  how  can  we  hope  that  he  will  be  pleafed 
with  the  fervice  of  thofe  years,  which  we  ourfelves 

take  no  pkafure  in?  if  we  offer  the  lame  in  fa- 

crifice,  is  it  not  evil  ?  and  if  we  offer  the  blind, 
''  is  it  not  evil  ?  offer  it  now  to  thy  governour,  and 
"  fee  if  he  will  be  pleafed  with  thee  ?  " 

And  ficknefs  is  commonly  as  bad  a  time  as  old 
age,  and  ufually  incumbered  with  greater  difHculties, 
and  clog'd  with  more  indilpofitions.  If  a  violent 
diftemper  feize  upon  us,  it  many  times  takes  away  the 
ufe  of  our  reafon,  and  deprives  us  of  all  opportunity 
ofconfiderationj  it  makes  us  both  infcnfible  of  the 
danger  of  our  condition,  and  incapable  of  ufing  the 
means  to  avoid  it.  And  if  we  have  ncgledled  reli- 
gion before,  and  have  put  off  the  great  work  of  our 
life  to  the  end  of  it,  our  opportunity  is  irrecovera- 
bly loft  J  for  there  is  nothing  to  be  done  in  reli- 
gion, when  our  reafon  is  once  departed  from  us ; 
''  the  night  is  then  come"  indeed,  and  '^  darknefs 
*'  hath  overtaken  us  j  "  and  tho'  we  be  ftill  alive, 
yet  are  we  as  unfit  for  any  work,  as  if  we  were  natu- 
rally dead. 

And  this  is  no  fuch  rare  and  extraorJinary  cafe; 
for  it  happens  to  many  ;  and  every  man  that  wilfully 
defers  the  work  of  religion  and  repentance  to  a  dy- 
ing hour,  hath  reafon  to  fear  th^t  he  fhall  be  thus 

furprifed 


1644  ^^^  i^ork  ajjtgn'd  to  every  man, 

S  E  R  M.  furprifed  in   his  fin  and  fecurity,    and  by  the  jufl: 
(judgment  of  God  dprived  of  all  the  opportunity  of 
life  and  falvation,  while  he  is  yet  in  the  land  of  the 
living. 

But  if  God  be  more  merciful  unto  us,  and  vifit 
us  with  fuch  a  ficknefs,  as  leaves  us  the  ufe  of  our 
underftandings,  yet  all  that  we  do  in  religion  at  fuch 
a  time,  proceeds  from  fo  violent  a  caufe,  from  the 
prefent  terror  of  death,  and  the  dreadful  apprehen- 
fion  of  that  eternal  mifery  which  is  juft  ready  to 
fwallow  us  up,  that  it  is  one  of  the  hardeft  things  in 
the  world,  not  only  for  others,  but  even  for  our- 
felves,  to  know  whether  our  refolutions,  and  this 
fudden  and  hafty  fit  of  repentance  be  fincere  or  not : 
for  it  is  natural,  and  almoft  unavoidable,  for  a  man 
to  repent,  and  be  forry  for  what  he  hath  done, 
when  he  is  going  to  execution  :  but  the  great  quefti- 
on  is,  what  this  man  would  do,  if  his  life  were 
fpared?  whether  his  repentance  would  hold  good, 
and  he  would  become  a  new  man,  and  change  his 
former  courfe  of  fife,  or  relapfe  into  it  again  ?  and 
it  is  by  no  means  certain,  that  he  would  not  be  as 
bad  as  he  was  before  :  becaufe  we  fee  many,  who, 
when  they  lie  upon  a  fick  bed  give  all  imaginable  tefti- 
mony  of  a  deep  forrow,  and  a  hearty  repentance  for 
their  fins,  who  yet  upon  their  recovery,  return  to 
their  former  fins  with  a  greater  appetite,  and  make 
themfelves  "  ten  times  more  the  children  of  wrath 
*'  than  they  were  before."  So  that  all  the  work 
that  we  can  do  at  fuch  a  time,  ought  not  to  be 
much  reckoned  upon,  and  can  give  us  httle  or  no 
comfort ;  becaufe  it  is  fo  infinitely  uncertain  whether 
it  it  be  real  and  fincere,  and  whether  the  efi^edt  of  (o 

violent 


and  the  feafon  of  doing  it,  1645, 

violent    a   caufe    would    laft  and    continue,   if  the  SERM. 

cr 
caufe  were  removed.    Therefore  '^  we  fhou'd  work 

''  while  it  is  day  \  "  for  whatever  wc  do  in  the 
evening  of  oar  lives,  will  be  done  with  great  diffi- 
culty, and  widi   very  doubtful  fuccefs. 

Batbefides  this  evening,  there  is  "  a  night  coming 
^'  when  no  man  can  work  ; "  death  v/ill  feize  upon 
us,  and  then  our  Itate  will  be  irrecoverably  con- 
cluded •,  after  that  it  will  be  impofllble  for  us  to  do 
any  thing  towards  our  own  falvation,  or  to  have  any 
thing  done  for  us  by  others  :  the  prayers  of  the  liv- 
ing will  not  avail  the  dead,  "  as  the  tree  falls  fo  ic 
*'  lies ;  there  is  no  wifdom,  nor  counfel,.  nor  device 
"  in  the  grave  whither  we  are  going,  "  therefore, 
according  to  the  counfel  of  the  wife  man,  "  what  our 
*'  hand  findeth  to  do,  \tx.  us  do  it  with  our  mi^ht.'* 

This  counfel  concerns  all  ages  and  perfons.  I  v/ill 

apply   it  to  the  young,    in    the  words  of  the  wife 

preacher,  Ecclef  xii.  i.  "  Remember  now  thy  crea- 

*'  tor  in  the  days  of  thy  youth,  while  the  evil  days. 

"  come  not,  nor  the  years  draw   nigh,   when  thou 

''  (halt  fay,  I  have  no  pleafure  in  them."    To  them 

who  are  in  the  vigour  of  their  age,  in  the  words  of 

the  prophet,  Ifa.  ch.  Iv.  6.  "  Seek  the  Lord  while 

*'  he  may  be  found,  call  ye  upon   him  while  he  is 

*'  near."     And  to  them  that  are  old,  in  the  words 

of  another   prophet,   Jer.  xiii.  16.  "  Give  glory  to 

*'  the  Lord  your  God,  before  he  cauferh  darknels, 

"  and  before  your  feet  ftumble  upon  the  dark  moun- 

*'  tains,   and  while  ye  look  for  light,  he  turn  it  into 

*'  the  ihadow  of  death,   and  mikc   it  grofs   dark- 

''  nefs."     And  let  us  every  one  of  us,  of  what  age 

or  condition  foever,  apply    it    to  ourf^'lves,    in  the 

Vol.  VI.  12  K  words 

6, 


1 6  -i  6  Of  the  great  duties  of  natural  religion^ 

words  of  our  blefled  Saviour  here  in  the  text,  "  I 
"  muft  work  the  works  of  him  that  fent  me,  while 
"  it  is  day :  the  night  cometh  when  no  man  can 
«  work." 


SERMON     CIL 

Of  the  great  duties  of  natural  religion, 
with  the  ways  and  means  of  know^ 
ing  them. 

M  I  C  A  H   vi.  6,  7,  8. 

Whercdoith  Jhall  I  come  before  the  Lord,  and  low  my 
felf  before  the  high  God  ?  floall  I  come  before  him 
with  biirnt'offeriyigs^  with  cahes  cf  a  year  old  ?  . 

Will  the  Lo kd  be  pleafed  with  thoufands  of  rams^  or 
with  ten  thoufands  of  rivers  of  oil  ?  fhall  I  give 
wy  firfl-born  for  my  tranfgreffion^  the  fruit  of  my  body 
for  the  fin  of  my  foul  ? 

He  hath  fhewed  thee^  O  man^  what  is  good ;  and  what 
doth  the  Lord  require  of  thee,  but  to  do  jujlly,  and 
to  love  mercy y  and  to  walk  humbly  with  thy  God  ? 

S  E  R  M.  TT  N  the  beginning   of  this   chapter,  the  prophet 

^]^ ,  i    tells  the  people  of  Ifrael,  "  that  the  Lord  had 

"^  "  a  controverfy  with  them  ;"  and  that  he  might 
direct  them  how  to  take  up  this  quarrel,  he  brings 
in  one  making  this  inquiry  in  the  name  of  the  peo- 
ple \  ''  wherewith  fhall  I  come  before  the  Lord, 
"  and  bow  my  felf  before  the  high  God  ?  "  that  is, 
by  what  kind  of  vvorfhip  or  devotion  may  I  addrefs 

ray 


with  the  ways  and  means  of  knowing  them,  1647 
my  felf  to  him  in  the  mod  acceptable  manner  ?  by  S  E  R  U, 
what  means  may  I  hope  to  appeafe  his  difpleafare  ?  ^^^' 
to  fatisfy  this  enquiry,  he  firfl  inflanceth  in  the  chief 
kinds  of  facrifices  and  expiations  tint  were'  in  ufe 
among  the  Jews  and  Heathens ;  "  fhall  I  come  be- 
*'  fore  him  with  burnt-offerings  ?  "  the  conftant  fa- 
crifice  that  was  offered  to  God  by  v/ay  of  acknow- 
ledgment of  his  dominion  over  the  creatures ;  "  with 
**  calves  of  a  year  old?"  which  was  the  fm-offering 
v/hich  the  high-pried  offered  for  himfelf.  Or  will 
he  rather  accept  of  thofe  great  and  codly  facrifices 
which  were  offered  upon  folemn  and  publick  occa- 
fions,  fuch  as  that  was  which  Solomon  offered  at  the 
dedication  of  the  temple  ?  "  will  the  Lord  be  plca- 
''  fed  with  thoufands  of  rams,  or  with  itn  thoufands 
"  of  rivers  of  oil  ?  "  Or  if  none  of  thefe  will  do, 
fhall  I  try  to  atone  him  after  the  manner  of  the 
heathen,  by  the  deareft  thing  in  the  v/orld,  the 
iirft-born  of  my  children  ?  "  Ihall  I  give  my  firft- 
*'  born  for  my  tranfgreffion,  the  fruit  of  my  body 
''  for  the  fm  of  my  foul  ?  "  if  God  was  to  be  ap- 
peafed  at  all,  furely  they  thought  it  muft  be  by 
fome  of  thefe  ways,  for  beyond  thefe  they  could  ima- 
gine nothing  of  greater  value  and  efHcacy. 

Eat  the  prophet  tells  them  that  they  were  quite 
out  of  the  way,  in  thinking  to  pacify  God  upon 
thefe  terms,  that  there  are  other  things  which  arc 
much  better  and  more  pleafing  to  him  than  any  of 
thefe  facrifices.  For  fome  of  them  were  expredy 
forbidden  by  God,  "  as  the  offering  up  of  our  chil- 
*'  dren  ;  '*  and  for  the  refl,  they  were  not  good  in 
themfelves,  but  m.eerly  by  virtue  of  their  inftitution, 
and  becaufe  they  were  commanded.  But  the  things 

12  K  2  which 


Cil. 


1 648  Of  the  great  duties  of  natural  religion^ 

v;hich  he  would  recommend  to  them,  are  fuch  as  arc 
good  in  their  own  nature,  and  required  of  us  by 
God  upon  that  account.  "  He  hath  fhewed  thee, 
'•  O  man,  what  is  good,  and  what  doth  the  Lord 
*'  require  of  thee,  but  to  do  judly,  and  to  love  mercy, 
^^  and  to  walk  humbly  with  thy'GoD?  '* 

So  that  in  thefe  words  you  have, 

Fird,  an  enquiry  which  is  the  bed  way  to  appeafe 
God  when  he  is  offended;  "  wherewith  fhall  I  come 
*'  before  the  Lord,  and  bow  myfelf  before  the 
"  high  God  ? " 

Secondly,  the  way  that  men  are  apt  to  take  in  this 
cafe;  and  that  is  by  fome  external  piece  of  religion 
and  devotion  •,  fuch  as  facrifice  was  both  among  Jew$ 
and  Fleathcns.  "  Shall  I  come  before  him  with  burnt- 
'^  offerings,  &c."  By  which  queftions  the  prophet 
intimates  that  men  are  very  apt  to  pitch  upqn  this 


courfe. 


Thirdly,  the  courfe  which  God  himfelf  direds 
to,  and  which  will  effedually  pacify  him.  "  He 
*'  hath  fliewed  thee,  O  man,  what  is  good  ;  and 
'^  what  doth  the  Lord  thy  God  require  of  thee,  &c.-' 

The  firft  being  a  mere  queftion,  there  needs  no 
more  to  be  faid  of  it  ;  only  that  it  is  a  queftion  qf 
areat  importance-,  what  is  the  moft  effedlual  way  to 
-appeafe  God  Vv^hen  we  have  offended  him  ?  for  who 
can  bear  his  indignation,  and  who  can  ftand  before 
him,  when  once  he  is  angry  ?   Let  us  confider  then, 

in  the 

Second  place,  the  way  that  men  are  apt  to  take  to 
pacify  God  ;  and  that  is  by  fome  external  piece 
of  religion  and  devotion,  fuch  as  were  facrihces 
jimong  the  Jews  and  Heathens^"  ff^all  I  come  before 


with  the  ways  and  me  am  of  knowing  them.       1649 
*'  him  witxh  burnt-offerings?"  This  is  the  way  which  SERM. 
men   are  mofl  apt  to  choofe.     The  Jews,  you  fee,     ^^^' 
pitched  upon  the  external  parts  of  their  religion,  thofe 
v/hich  were  mod  pompous  and  folemn,  the  richefl: 
and  mofl   coftly  facrifices,  fo  they  might  but  keep 
their  fins,  they  were  welJ  enough  content  to  offer  up 
any  thing  ehe  to  God  ;  they  thought  nothing  too 
good  for  him,  provided  he  would  not  oblige  them 
to  become  better. 

And  thus  it  is  among  ourfelves,  when  we  appre- 
hend God  is  difpleafed  with  us,  and  his  judgments  are 
abroad  in  the  earth,  we  are  content  to  do  any  thino- 
but  "  to  learn  righteoufnefs  j"  we  are  willing  to  fub- 
mit  to  any  kind  of  external  devotion  and  humilia- 
tion, to  faff,  and  pray,  to  afflidt  ourfelves  and  to 
cry  mightily  unto  God  ;  things  fome  of  them  good 
in  themfelves,  but  the  leaff  part  of  that  which  God 
requires  of  us. 

And  as  for  the  church  of  Rome,  in  cafe  of  publick 

judgments  and  calamities,  they  are  the  moft  inquifitive 

and  (as  they  pretend)  the  moft  skilful  people  in  the 

world  to  pacify  God  ;  and  they  have  a  thoufand  folemn 

devices  to  this  purpofe.  I  do  not  wrong  them,  by  re- 

prefenting  them  enquiring  after  this  manner.  "Shall 

"  I  go  before  a  crucifix,  and  bow  myfelf  to  it,  as 

"  to  the   high  God  ?  And  becaufe  the  Lord  is  a 

'^  great  king,  and  it  is  perhaps  too  much  boldnefs 

^'  and   arrogancy  to  make  immediate  addreffes  al- 

^^  ways  to  him  •,  to  which   of  the  faints  or  angels 

"  ffiall  I  go  to  mediate  for  me,  and  intercede  on 

*'  my  behalf?  Will  the  Lord  be  pleafed  with  thou- 

«'  fands  of  pater-nofters,  or  with  ten  thoufinds  of 

**  ave-marys  ?  Shall  the  hoff  travel  in  proceflion,  or 

myfelf 


err. 


1650  Of  the  great  duties  of  natural  religion^ 

SERM.  "  myfeif  undertake  a  tedious  pilgrimage?  Or  fhall 
''  I  lift  myfelf  a  foldier  for  the  holy  war,  or  for  the 
"  extirpation  of  hereticks  ?  Shall  I  give  half  my 
*'  eftate  to  a  convent  for  my  tranfgreffion,  or  chaftile 
*'  and  punifh  my  body  for  the  fm  of  my  foul  ?  " 
Thus  men  deceive  themfelves,  and  will  fubmit  to  all 
the  extravagant  feverities,  that  the  petulancy  and  fol- 
ly of  men  can  devife  and  impofe  upon  them.  And 
indeed  it  is  not  to  be  imagined,  when  men  are  once 
under  the  power  of  fuperfbition,  how  ridiculous 
they  may  be,  and  yet  think  themfelves  religious ;  how 
prodigioufly  they  may  play  the  fool,  and  yet  believe 
they  pleafe  God  ;  what  cruel  and  barbarous  things 
they  may  do  to  themfelves  and  others,  and  yet  be 
*«  verily  perfuaded  they  do  God  good  fervice.'* 

And  what  is  the  myftery  of  all  this,  but  that  men 
are  loth  to  do  that  Vv^ithout  which,  nothing  d{<z  that 
we  do  is  acceptable  to  God?  They  "  hate  to  be  re- 
*'  formed  i'*  and  for  this  reafon,  they  will  be  con- 
tent to  do  any  thing,  rather  than  be  put  to  the  trouble 
of  mending  themfelves  ;  every  thing  is  eafy  in  com- 
parifon  of  this  task,  and  God  may  have  any  terms 
of  them,  fo  he  will  let  them  be  quiet  in  their  fms, 
and  excufe  them  from  the  real  virtues  of  a  good  life. 
And  this  brings  me  to  the 

Third  thing,  which  I  principally  intended  to  ipeak 
to.  The  courfe  which  God  himfelf  direds  to,  and 
which  will  effedlually  pacify  him.  "  He  hath  fhewed- 
<'  thee,  O  man,  what  is  good  ;  and  what  doth  the 
«'  Lord  require  of  thee,  but  to  do  juftly,  and  to 
"  love  mercy,  and  to  walk  humbly  with  thy  God  ?** 
In  the  handling  of  which,  I  Ihall, 

Firft, 


with  the  ^^ays  and  means  of  knowing  them,'       1 65 1 

Firft,  confider  thofe   feveral    duties  which   God  SERM. 
here  requires   of  us,  and  upon  the  performance  of 
which  he  will  be  pacified  towards  us. 

Secondly,  by  what  ways  and  means  God  hath 
difcovered  thefe  duties  to  us,  and  the  goodne/s  of 
them  ;  "  he  hath  ihewed  thee,  O  man,  what  is 
*'  good,  &c." 

I.  We  will  briefly  confider  the  feveral  duties  which 
God  here  requires  of  us,  and  upon  the  performance 
of  which  he  will  be  pacified  towards  us;  "  What 
"  doth  the  Lord  require  of  thee,  but  to  do  juftly, 
*'  and  to  love  mercy,  and  to  walk  humbly  with  thy 
«  God?" 

It  was  ufual  among  the  Jews  to  reduce  all  the  duties 
of  religion  to  thefe  three  heads,  juftice,  mercy,  and 
piety  ;  under  the  firft  two,  comprehending  the  duties 
which  we  owe  to  one  another,  and  under  the  third, 
duties  which  we  owe  to  God. 

I.  Juftice,  And  I  was  going  to  tell  you  what  it 
is,  but  I  confidered  that  every  man  knows  it,  as  v/ell 
as  any  definition  can  explain  it  to  him.  I  fhall  only 
put  you  in  mind  of  fome  of  the  principal  Inftances 
of  it,  and  the  feveral  virtues  comprehended  under  it. 
And, 

Firft,  juftice  is  concerned  in  the  making  of  laws ; 
that  they  be  fuch  as  are  equal  and  reafonable,  ufeful 
and  beneficial,  for  the  honour  oF  God  and  religion, 
and  for  the  publick  good  of  human  fociety ;  this  is 
a  great  truft,  in  the  difcharge  of  which,  if  men  be 
biaflfed  by  favour  or  intereft,  and  drawn  afide  from 
the  confideration  and  regard  of  the  publick  good, 
it  is  a  far  greater  crime  and  of  worle  confequcnce 
than  any  private  a6l  of  injufticc  ^ between  man  and 
man.  ^^-^ 


Of  the  gnat  duties  of  natural  religion^ 

And  then,  juflice  is  alfo  concerned  in  the  due 
execution  of  the  laws ;  which  are  the  guard  of  pri- 
vate property,  the  fecurity  of  publick  peace,  and  of/ 
religion  and  good  manners.     And, 

Laftly,  in  the  obfervance  of  laws  and  obedience 
to  them  j  which  is  a  debt  which  every  man  owes  to 
humane  fociety. 

But  more  efpecially  juflice  is  concerned  in  the  ob- 
fervance of  thofe  laws,  whether  of  God  or  man,which 
refped  the  rights  of  men,  and  their  mutual  com- 
merce and  intercourfe  with  one  another.  That  we 
ufe  honefty  and  integrity  in  all  our  dealings,  in  op- 
pofition  to  fraud  and  deceit ;  truth  and  fidelity,  in  op- 
pofition  to  falfliood  and  breach  of  truft  ;  equity  and 
good  confcience,  in  oppofition  to  all  kind  of  oppref- 
fion  and  exadion.  Thefe  are  the  principal  branches, 
and  inilances  of  this  great  and  comprehenfive  duty 
of  juflice ;  the  violation  whereof  is  fo  much  the 
greater  fin,  becaufe  this  virtue  is  the  firmeft  bond  of 
humane  fociety,  upon  the  obfervation  whereof,  the 
peace  and  happinefs  of  mankind  does  fo  much  de- 
pend. 

2 .  Mercy,  which  does  not  only  fignify  the  inward 
affection  of  pity  and  compafTion  towards  thofe  that 
are  in  mifery  and  neceffity,  but  the  effeds  of  it,  in 
the  adlual  relief  of  thofe  whofe  condition  calls  for 
our  charitable  help  and  aflidance  ;  by  feeding  the 
hungry,  and  clothing  the  naked,  and  vifiting  the  fick, 
and  vindicating  the  opprefled,  and  comforting  x.\\z 
afflicted,  and  miniflring  eafe  and  relief  to  them  if  it 
be  in  our  power.  And  this  is  a  very  lovely  virtue, 
and  argues  more  goodnels  in  men  than  mere  juflice 
doth.     For  juflice  is  a  ftridl  debt  \  but  mercy  is 

favour 


with  the  ways  and  ?neam  of  knowing  them,  1653 
favour  and  kindnefs.  And  diis  perhaps  may  be  the  ^  ^rn^' 
reafon  of  the  different  expreffions  in  the  text,  that 
when  God  barely  commands  us  '*^  to  do  juflly,"  he 
requires  we  fhould  *'  love  mercy/'  that  is,  take  a 
particular  pleafure  and  deh'ght  in  the  exercife  of  this 
virtue,  which  is  fo  proper  and  agreeable  to  mankind, 
that  we  commonly  call  it  humanity,  giving  its  name 
from  our  very  nature.  In  fhort,  it  is  fo  excellent  a 
virtue,  that  I  ihould  be  very  forry  that  any  relio-ion 
fliould  be  able  to  pretend  to  the  pradice  of  it  more 
than  our  own. 

^.  Piety;  "  to  walk  humbly  with  thy  God." 
"  To  walk  humbly  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord  ;"  fo  the 
Chaldee  paraphrafe  renders  thefe  words.  And  this 
phrafe  may  comprehend  all  thofe  adls  of  religion 
which  refer  immediately  to  God  ;  a  firm  belief  of 
his  being  and  perfedions;  an  awful  fenfe  of  him 
as  the  dread  fovereign  and  righteous  judge  of  the 
world  *,  a  due  regard  to  his  fervice,  and  a  reverent  be- 
haviour of  ourfelves  towards  him  in  all  adls  of  vvor- 
fhip  and  religion,  in  oppofition  to  atheifm  and  a 
prophane  negleft  and  contempt  of  God  and  relio-i- 
on ;  a  new  and  monftrous  kind  of  impiety!  which 
of  late  years  hath  broke  in  upon  us,  and  got  head 
among  us,  not  only  contrary  to  the  example  of  for- 
mer ages,  but  in  defpite  of  the  very  genius  and 
temper  of  the  nation,  which  is  naturally  devout  and 
zealous  in  religion. 

Or  ellc  this  phrafe  *'  of  walking  humbly  with 

"  God,"  may  refer  more  particularly  to  the  pofture  and 

condition  of  the  people  of  Ifrael  at  that  time,  who 

were  fallen  under  the  heavy  difplcafure  of  God  for 

their  fins.  And  then  the  duty  required  is,  that  being 

Vol.  VI.-  12  L  fenfible 

6. 


2654  Of  the  great  duties  of  natural  religion, 

SERM.  fenfible  how  highly  God  hath  been  offended  by  us, 
by  the  general  corruption  and  vitioufncfs  of  the  age, 
which  like  a  leprofy  hath  fpread  it  felf  almoft  over 
the  whole  body  of  the  nation,  and  by  that  open 
lewdnefs  and  that  infolent  impieties  which  are  daily 
committed  amongft  us;  I  fay,  that  being  deeply  {tx\- 
fibly  of  this,  we  do  with  all  humility  acknowledge 
our  fins  to  God,  and  repent  of  them,  and  implore 
his  mercy  and  forgivenefs,  and  refolve  by  his  grace 
**  to  turn  every  one  from  the  evil  of  our  ways,"  and 
from  "  the  wickednefs  that  is  in  our  hands  j"  which 
God  grant  we  may  every  one  do  *  this  day,  accord- 
ing to  the  pious  defign  and  intention  of  it.  And  if 
we  be  fincere  in  this  refolution,  "  who  can  tell  but 
*'  God  will  turn  and  repent,and  turn  away  his  anger 
*'  from  us,  that  we  peridi  not."  Nay,  we  have  great 
reafon  to  believe,  that  he  will  be  pacified  towards  us. 
So  he  hath  declared,  Ifa.  i.  16.  "  Waili  ye,  make 
''  you  clean,  put  away  the  evil  of  your  doings  from 
*^  before  mine  eyes,  ceafe  to  do  evil,  learn  to  do 
well,  feek  judgment,  relieve  the  opprefTed,  judge 
the  fatherlefs,  plead  for  the  widow  *,  come  nov/, 
*'  and  let  us  reafon  together,  faith  the  Lord  \  though 
''  your  fins  be  as  fcarlet,  they  fhall  be  as  white  as 
''  fnow  \  though  they  be  red  like crimibn, they  fhall  be 
*^  aswooll."  But  if  we  continue  unreformed,GoD  will 
fay  to  us,  as  he  does  there  to  the  people  of  Ifrael, 
**  to  what  purpofe  is  the  multitude  of  your  facrifices 
*'  unto  me?  your  calling  of  alTemblies  I  cannot  away 
*'  with,  it  is  iniquity,  even  the  folemn  meeting-,  and 
*'  when  ye  fpread  forth  your  hands,  I  will  hide  mine 
*  ^  eyes  from  you  •,  when  ye  make  many  prayers,  I 
«*  will  not  hear.'*  To  which  let  me  add  that  excel- 
lent 
*  7his/(;nm?i  "wcs  preadid  upon  QQcafiQn  of  a  publid  faji. 


CC 


with  the  ways  and  means  of  kmmng  them,        1 6^^ 
lent  faying  of  the  fon  ofSirach  to  this  purpofe,  Ecclus.  SE  R  A/f- 
'^  xxxiv.  25,  z6,   *'  He  that  wafheth  himfelf  after     ^^^' 
"  the  touching  of  a  dead  body,  if  he  touch  it  again, 
"  what  availeth  his  wafhing?  fo  is  it  with  a  man  that 
"-"  fafteth  for  his  fins,   and  goeth  again  and  doth  the 
*'  fame  things.    Who  will  hear  his  prayer,    or  what 
*'  doth  his  humbling  profit  him?*' 

II.  Let  us  confider  by  what  ways  and  means  God 
hath  made  known  thefe  duties  to  us,  and  the  good- 
nefs  and  the  obligation  of  them.  "  He  hath  ilicwed, 
"-'  thee,  O  man,  what  is  good ;  and  what  doth  the 
"  Lord  require  of  thee?"  I  fhall  mention  five  ways 
whereby  God  hath  difcovered  this  to  us. 

1.  By  a  kind  of  natural  inltindl. 

2.  By  natural  realbn. 

3.  By  the  general  vote  and  confent  of  mankind. 

4.  By  external  revelation. 

5.  By  the  inward  didates  and  motions  of  God's 
Spirit  upon  the  minds  of  men. 

Firfl,  by  a  kind  of  natural  inftindl,  by  which  I 
mean  a  fecret  imprefTion  upon  the  minds  of  men, 
whereby  they  are  naturally  carried  to  approve  fome 
things  as  good  and  fit,  and  to  diflike  other  things,  as 
having  a  native  evil  and  deformity  in  them.  And 
this  I  call  "  a  natural  inftindl,"  becaufe  it  does  not 
feem  to  proceed  fo  much  from  the  exercile  of  our 
reafon,  as  from  a  natural  propenfion  and  inch'nation, 
like  thofe  inftindls  which  are  in  brute  creatures,  of 
natural  affedion  and  care  towards  their  young  ones. 
And  that  thefe  inclinations  are  precedent  to  all  rea- 
fon and  difcourfe  about  them,  evidendy  appears  by 
this,  that  they  do  put  forth  themfelves  every  whit  as 
vigoroudy  in  young  perfons,    as  in   thefe   0^   riper 

1 2  L  2  reaf  jn  ^ 


1656  Of  the  great  duties  of  natural  religion ^ 

SERM.  reafonj  in  the  rude  and  ignorant  fort  of  people,  as 

___j  \Ti  thofe  who  are  more  pohlh'd  and  refin*d.     For  we 
fee   plainly  that  the  young  and    ignorant  have   as 
Arong  irnprellions  of  piety  and  devotion,  as  true  a 
fenfe  of  gratitude  and  judice  and  pity,    as  the  wifer 
and  more  knowing  part  of  mankind.     A  plain  indi- 
cation, that  the  realbn  of  mankind  is  prevented  by 
a  kind  of  natural  inflinfl  and  anticipation  concern- 
ing the  good  or   evil,    the  comelinefs  or  deformity 
of  thefe  things.  And  though  this  do  not  equally  ex- 
tend to  all  the  inftances  of   our  duty,  yet  as  to  the 
great    lines    and    elTential    parts   of   it,     mankind 
hardly  need  to   confult  any  other  oracle,    than  the 
mere  propenlions  and  inclinations  of  their  nature ; 
as,  whether  we  ought  to  reverence  the  divine  nature, 
to  be  grateful  to  thofe  who  have   conferred  benefits 
upon  us,  to  fpeak  the  truth,  to  be  faithful  to  our  pro- 
mife,  to  reflore  that  which  is  committed  to  us  in 
truft,  to  pity  and  relieve  thofe  that  are  in  mifery,  and 
in  all  things  to  do  to  others  as  we  would  have  them 
do  to  us.     And  this  would  further  appear,    if  we 
confider  thefe  two  things. 

I.  That  men  are  naturally  innocent  or  guilty  to 
themfelves,  according  to  what  they  do  in  thefe  things. 
So  the  apoftle  tells  us,  Rom.  ii.  14,  15.  ''  When 
''  the  gentiles  which  have  not  the  law,  do  by  nature 
*'  the  things  contained  in  the  law,  thefe  having 
"  not  the  law,  are  a  law  unto  themfelves,  and  do 
"  Ihew  the  efxed:  of  the  law  written  in  their  hearts, 
**  their  confciences  alio  bearing  witnefs,  and  their 
*'  thoughts  by  turns  (that  is  according  as  they  do 
"  well  or  ill)  accufing  orexcufing  them."  There  is 
a  fecrct  comfort  in  innocence,  and  a  ftrange  pleafure 

and 


with  the  waySy  and  means  ofkm%mng  them.  1 6  r  7 
and  fatisfaclion  in  being  acquitted  by  our  own  minds  S  e  R  M. 
for  what  we  do.  But  on  the  contrary,  when  we  con-  ^  ^^^1 
tradidl  thefe  natural  diftates,  what  uneafinefs  do  we 
find  in  our  own  breads  ?  nay  even  before  the  fad  is 
committed,  our  confcience  is  ftrangely  difquieted  at 
the  thoughts  of  it.  When  a  man  does  but  defign  to 
do  a  bad  thing,  he  is  as  guilty  to  himfelf,  as  if  he 
had  committed  it.  Of  this  we  have  a  confiderable 
inftance,  in  the  firfl  violence  that  was  offered  to 
nature,  Gtn,  iv.  6.  "  The  Lord  faid  unto  Cain,  why 
"  art  thou  wroth,  and  why  is  thy  countenance  fallen  ?" 
the  very  thought  of  that  wickednefs  which  he  did 
but  then  defign,  did  diforder  his  mind,  and  make  a 
change  in  his  very  countenance.  Guilt  is  the  natqral 
concomitant  of  heinous  crimes,  which  fb  foon  as 
ever  a  man  commits,  his  fpirit  receives  a  fecret  wound, 
which  caufeth  a  great  deal  of  fmart  and  anguifli.  For 
guilt  is  refllefs,  and  puts  the  mind  of  man  into  an 
unnatural  working  and  ferm-entation,  never  to  be  fet- 
tled again  but  by  repentance.  ''  The  wicked  are  like 
*<  the  troubled  fea  when  it  cannot  reft^"  which 
plainly  fhews  that  the  mind  of  man  hath  a  kind  of 
natural  fenfe  of  good  and  evil ;  becaufe  whenever  we 
offend  againfl  nature,  our  confciences  are  touched  to 
the  quick,  and  we  receive  a  fting  into  our  foul, 
which  fhoots  and  pains  us,  whenever  we  refieft  upon 
what  we  have  done.  I  appeal  to  that  witnefs  which 
every  man  carries  in  his  breafl,  whether  this  be  not 
true. 

2.  Men  are  naturally  full  of  hopes  and  fears,  ac- 
cording as  they  follow  or  go  againfl  thefe  natural 
didtates.  A  good  confcience  is  apt  to  fill  men  with 
confidence  and  good  hopes.   It  does  not  only  give 


1658  Of  the  great  duties  of  natural  religioij] 

S  E  R  M.  cafe,    but  fecurity  to  the  mind  of  man,  againft  the 
'     dre^d  of  invifible  powers,  and  the  fearful  apprehen- 
fions  of  a  future  judgment.     Whereas  guilt  fills  WiZxs. 
with  difmal  apprehenfions  of  danger,  and  continual 
mifgivings  concerning  their  own  faftety.     Thus  it 
was  with  Cain  after  he  had  flain  his  brother  ;  "  it 
*^  fhall  come  to  pafs  that  every  one  that  findeth  me 
"  fhall  flay  me.'*     Nay,  when  a  man    hath  done  a 
fecret  fault,  which  none  can  accufe  him  of,  yet  then 
is  he  haunted  with  the  terrors  of  his  own  mind,  and 
cannot  be  fecure  in  his  own    apprehenfions  -,     which 
plainly  fliews  that  men  are  confcious  to  themfelves, 
when  they  do  well,  and  when  they  do  amifs;    and 
that  the  fame  natural  inflindl  which  prompts  men 
to  their  duty,  fills  them  with  good  hopes  when  they 
haye  done  it,  and  with  fecret  fears  and  apprehen- 
fions of  danger  when  they  have  done  contrary  to  it. 
Secondly,  God  fhews  men  what  is  good,  by  na- 
tural reafon  ;  and  that  two  ways  ;  by  the  convenience 
of  things  to  our  nature ;  and  by  their  tendency  to  our 
bappinefs  and  interefl. 

Firft,  reafon  fhews  us  the  convenience  of  things 
to  our  nature  \  and  whatever  is  agreeable  to  the 
primitive  defign  and  intention  of  nature,  that  we 
call  "  good  i"  whatever  is  contrary  thereto,  we  call 
*'  evil."  For  example,  "  to  honour  and  love  God.** 
It  is  natural  to  honour  great  power  and  perfedion, 
and  to  love  goodnefs  wherever  it  is.  So  likewile, 
o-ratitude  is  natural,  to  acknowledge  benefits  received, 
and  to  be  ready  to  requite  them,  and  the  contrary  is 
monflrous,  and  univcrfally  abhorred  ;  and  there  is 
no  greater  fign  that  any  thing  is  contrary  to  nature, 
than  if  i:  be  detefred  by  the  v;hole  kind.  It  is  agree- 
ably 


with  the  ways  and  means  ofkmwmg  them.        1659 
able  alfo  to  nature  « to  be  juft,"  and  "  to  do  to  others,  S  E  R  \f. 
"  as  we  would  have  them  do  to  us ;"  for  this  is  to,    ^^i 
make  our  own  natural  inclinations  and  defires,   the 
rule  of  our  dealing  with  others;  and  "to  be  mercifuU" 
for  no  man  that  hath  not  divcfted  himfelf  of  huma« 
nity,  can  be  cruel  and  hard-hearted  to  others,  with- 
out feeling  a  pain  in  himfelf. 

Secondly,  reafon  fhews  us  the  tendency  of  t\\t^Q 
things  to  our  happinefs  and  intereft.  And  indeed 
the  notion  of  good  and  evil  does  commonly  refer 
to  the  confequenccs  of  things,  and  we  call  that  good, 
which  will  bring  feme  benefit  and  advantage  to  us, 
and  that  evil,  which  is  likely  to  produce  fome  mif- 
chief  and  inconvenience  ;  and  by  this  rule  reafon  dif- 
covers  to  us  that  thefe  duties  are  good. 

To  begin  with  piety  towards  God.  Nothing  can 
more  evidently  tend  to  our  interefl,  tlian  to  make 
him  our  friend,  upon  whole  favour  our  happinefs 
depends.  So  likewife  for  "  gratitude;"  it  is  a  vir- 
tue, to  which  if  nature  did  not  prompt  us,  our  inte- 
rell  would  diredl  us  ;  for  every  man  is  ready  to 
place  benefits  there  where  he  may  hope  for  a  thank- 
ful return.  Temperance  docs  apparently  conduce  to 
our  health,  which,  next  to  a  good  conlcience,  is  the 
molt  pleafant  and  valuable  thing  in  the  world  ; 
whereas  the  intemperate  man  is  an  open  enemy  to 
himfelf,  and  continually  making  afTaults  upon  his 
own  life.  Mercy  and  pity  are  not  more  welcome  to 
others,  than  they  are  delightful  and  beneficial  to  our- 
fclves ;  for  we  do  not  only  gratify  our  own  nature 
and  bowels,  by  relieving  thofe  who  are  in  mifery, 
but  we  provoke  mankind  by  our  example  to  the  like 
tendernefs,  and  do  prudently  bcfpeak  the  commifera- 

tion 


i66o  Of  the  great  duties  of  natural  reltgiotty 

s  E  R  \l.  tion  of  others  towards  us,  when  it  (hall  be  our  turn 
'  to  ftand  in  need  of  it.  And  if  we  be  wife  enough, 
our  reafon  will  likewife  diredt  us  to  be  juft,  as  the 
furefl  art  of  thriving  in  this  world  ;  it  gives  a  man  a 
reputation,  which  is  a  powerful  advantage  in  all  the 
affairs  of  this  world  ;  it  is  the  fhorteft  and  eafieft 
way  of  difpatching  bufinefs,  the  plained,  and  leaft 
entangled  ;  and  though  it  be  not  fo  fudden  a  way  of 
growing  rich,  as  fraud  and  oppreflion  ;  yet  it  is  much 
furer  and  more  lading,  and  not  liable  to  thofe  terrible 
back-blows  and  after- reckonings,  to  which  eitates  got 
by  injuftice  are. 

And  natural  reafon  does  not  only  fhew  us  that 
thele  things  are  good,  but  that  "  the  Lord  requires 
*'  them  of  us,"  that  is,  that  they  have  the  force  and 
obligation  of  laws.  For  there  needs  nothing  more 
to  make  any  thing  a  law,  than  a  fufficient  declaration, 
that  it  is  "  the  will  of  God  ;'*  and  this  God  hath 
fufHciently  fignified  to  mankind  by  the  very  frame 
of  our  natures,  and  of  thofe  principles  and  faculties 
which  he  hath  endued  us  withal ;  fo  that  whenever 
we  ad  contrary  to  thefe,  we  plainly  difobey  the  will 
of  him  that  made  us,  and  violate  thofe  laws  which 
he  hath  enaded  in  our  natures,  and  written  upon  our 
hearts. 

And  this  is  all  the  law  that  the  greatefl:  part  of 
mankind  were  under,  before  the  revelation  of  the 
gofpel.  From  Adam  to  Mofes,  the  world  was  al- 
moft  folely  governed  by  the  natural  law,  which  feems 
to  be  the  meaning  of  that  hard  text,  Rom.  v.  13. 
"  For  until  the  law  fin  was  in  the  world,"  that  is, 
before  the  law  of  Mofes  was  given,  men  were  "capa- 
ble of  offending  againfl  fome  other  law,  for  othervvifc 

fin 


with  the  ways  and  means  of  knowing  them.        1 66  r 
fin  could  not  have  been  imputed  to  them,  for  "  fin  S  E  RM. 
"  is  not  imputed  where  there  is  no  law.'*     And  then  .  ^^h 
it  follows ;  "  neverthelefs  death  reigned  from  Adam 
"  to  Mofes,  even  over  them   that  had  not  finned 
"  after  the  fimilitude  of  Adam's  tranfgreflion  ;"  that 
is,  during  that  fpace  from  Adam  to  Mofes  men  fin- 
ned againft  the  natural  law,  and  were  liable  to  death 
upon  that  account,  though  they  had  not  offended 
againft  an  exprefs  revelation  from  God,  as  Adam 
had  done;  for  that  the  apoftle  feems  to  mean,  by 
"  finning    after   the    fimilitude  of  Adam's   tranf- 
*'  grelfion." 

Thirdly,  God  hath  fhewn  us  what  is  good  by  the 
general  vote  and  confent  of  mankind.  Not  that  all 
mankind  do  agree  concerning  virtue  and  vice ;  but 
that  as  to  tht  greater  duties  of  piety,  juftice,  mercy, 
and  the  like,  the  exceptions  are  but  few  in  com- 
parifon,  and  not  enough  to  infringe  a  general  con- 
fent. And  of  this  I  Ihall  offer  to  you  this  threefold 
evidence. 

I.  That  thefe  virtues  are  generally  prais'd  and  held 
in  efteem  by  mankind,  and  the  contrary  vices  gene- 
rally reproved  and  evil  ipoken  of.  Now  to  praife 
any  thing,  is  to  give  teftimony  to  the  goodnefs  of  it, 
and  to  cenfure  any  thing,  is  to  declare  that  we  be- 
lieve it  to  be  evil.  And  if  we  confuk  the  hiflory  of 
all  ages,  we  fhall  find  that  the  things  which  arc  gene- 
rally praifed  in  the  lives  of  men,  and  recommended 
to  the  imitation  of  pollerity  are  piety  and  devotion, 
gratitude  and  juftice,  humanity  and  charity  j  and  that 
the  contrary  to  thefe  are  marked  with  ignominy  and 
reproach  ;  the  former  are  commended  even  in  ene- 
mies, and  the  latter  are  branded  even  by  thofe  who 

Vol.  VI.  12  M  had 

6. 


Clf. 


1662  Of  the  great  duties  of  natural  religion^ 

$ERM.  had  a  kindnels  for  the  perfons  that  were  guilty  of 
them.  So  conftant  hath  mankind  always  been  in 
the  commendation  of  virtue,  and  in  the  cenfure  of 
vice.  Nay  we  find  not  only  thofe  who  are  virtuous 
themfelves,  giving  their  teftimony  and  applaufe  to 
virtue,  but  even  thofe  who  are  vicious ;  not  out  of 
love  to  goodnefs,  but  from  the  convidion  of  their 
own  minds,  and  from  a  fecret  reverence  they  bear 
to  the  common  confent  and  opinion  of  mankind. 
And  this  is  a  great  teftimony,  becaufe  it  is  the  tefti- 
mony  of  an  enemy  extorted  by  the  meer  light  and 
force  of  truth. 

And  on  the  contrary ;  nothing  is  more  ordinary 
than  for  "  vice  to  reprove  fin,"  and  to  hear  men 
condemn  the  like,  or  the  fame  things  in  others, 
which  they  allov/  in  themfelves.  And  this  is  a  clear 
evidence,  that  vice  is  generally  condemned  by  man- 
kind, that  many  men  condemn  it  in  themfelves ; 
and  thofe  who  are  fo  kind  as  to  fpare  themlelves,  are 
very  quick- fighted  to  fpy  a  fault  in  any  body  t.\k^ 
and  will  cenfure  a  bad  action  done  by  another,  with 
as  much  freedom  and  impartiality,  as  the  moft  vir- 
tuous man  in  the  world. 

And  to  this  confent  of  mankind  about  virtue  and 
vice,  the  fcripture  frequently  appeals.  As  when  it 
commands  us  "  to  provide  things  honeft  in  the  fight 
*<  of  all  men  ;  and  by  well-doing  to  put  to  filence 
*'  the  ignorance  of  foolilli  men  •,  "  intimating  that 
there  are  fome  things  fo  confefTedly  good,  and  owned 
to  be  fuch  by  fo  general  a  vote  of  mankind,  that 
the  word  of  men  have  not  the  face  to  open  their 
mouths  againft  them.  And  it  is  made  the  charader 
of  a  virtuous  adion,  if  ic  be  *^  lovely,  and  commen- 

*'  dable. 


with  the  ways  and  means  of  knowujg  them,       1 6^3 
«  dable,  and  of  good  report."  Philip,  iv.  8.  "  Whatfo-  S  E  R  M* 
<'  ever  things  are  lovely,  whatfoever   things  are  of;   ^^^' 
**  good  report,  if  there  be  any  virtue,  if  there   be 
*'  any  praife,   make  account  of  thefe  things  •,'*   in- 
timating  to  us,  that  mankind  do  generally  concur 
in  the  praife  and  commendation  of  what  is  virtuous. 

2.  Men  do  generally  glory  and  ftand  upon  their 
innocency,  when  they  do  virtuoufly  ;  but  are  alham'd, 
and  out  of  countenance,  when  they  do  the  contrary. 
Now  glory  and  fliame  are  nothing  ^\{q  but  an  ap- 
peal to  the  judgment  of  others  concerning  the  good 
or  evil  of  our  actions.     There  are  indeed  fome  fuch 
monfters  as   are    impudent  in  their  impieties,  but 
thefe  are  but  few  in  comparifon.     Generally  man- 
kind is  modeft,  the  greateft  part  of  thofe  who  do 
evil  are  apt  to  blufh  at  their  own  faults,  and   to 
confefs  them  in  their  countenance,    which  is  an  ac« 
knowledgment  that  they  are  not  only  guilty  to  them- 
felves  that  they  have  done  amifs,  but  that  they  are 
apprehenfive  that  others  think  fo.     For  auilt  is  a 
paflion    refpeding    our    felves,    but    fhame   rco^ards 
others.     Now  it  is  a  fign  of  lliame,  that  men  love 
to  conceal  their   faults   from   others,   and    commit 
them  fecretly,   in  the   dark   and  without  witnefles 
and  are  afra^ji  even  of  a  child  or  a  fool :  or  if  thev 
be  difcovered  in  them,  they  are  folicitous  to  excule 
and  extenuate  them,  and  ready  to  lay  the  fault  upon 
any  body  ^Vk^  or  to  transfer  their  guilt,  or  as  much 
of  it  as  they  can,  upon  others.     All  which  are  cer- 
tain tokens,  that  men  are  not  only  naturally  jruilty  to 
themfelves,  when  they  commit  a  fault ;  but  that  they 
are  fenfible  alfo  what  opinions  others  have  of  thefe 
things. 

12  M  2  And 


CII. 


1664          of  the  great  duties  of  natural  religion^ 

Serm.  And  on  the  contrary,  men  are  apt  to  ftand  upon 
their  juftification,  and  to  glory  when  they  have  done 
well.  The  confcience  of  a  man's  own  virtue  and 
integrity,  lifts  up  his  head  and  gives  him  confidence 
before  others,  becaufe  he  is  fatisfied  they  have  a  good 
opinion  of  his  adlions.  What  a  good  face  does  a 
man  naturally  ^Qt  upon  a  good  deed  ?  and  how  does 
he  fneak,  when  he  hath  done  wickedly,  being  fenfi- 
ble  that  he  is  condemned  by  others,  as  well  as  by 
himfelf?  no  man  is 'afraid  of  being  upbraided  for 
having  dealt  honeflly  or  kindly  with  others,  nor 
does  he  account  it  any  calumny  or  reproach,  to  have 
it  reported  of  him,  that  he  is  a  fober  and  chafte 
man.  No  man  blufheth,  when  he  meets  a  man 
with  whom  he  hath  kept  his  word,  and  difcharged 
his  trufl :  but  every  man  is  apt  to  do  fo,  when  he 
meets  one  with  whom  he  has  dealt  dillioneftly,  or 
who  knows  fome    notorious  crime  by  him. 

3.  Vice  is  generally  forbidden  and  punifhed  by 
humane  laws :  but  againfl  the  contrary  virtues  there 
never  was  any  law.  Some  vices  are  fb  manifeftly 
evil  in  themfelves,  or  fo  mifchievous  to  humane  fo- 
ciety,  that  the  laws  of  mofl  nations  have  taken  care 
to  difcountenance  them  by  fcvere  penalties.  Scarce 
any  nation  was  ever  fo  barbarous,  as  not  to  maintain 
and  vindicate  the  honour  of  their  gods  and  religion 
by  publick  laws.  Murder  and  adultery,  rebellion 
and  fedition,  perjury  and  breach  of  trufl,  fraud  and 
oppreflion,  are  vices  feverely  prohibited  by  the  laws 
of  mod  nations.  A  clear  indication,  what  opinion 
the  generality  of  mankind,  and  thewifdom  of  nati- 
ons have  always  had  of  thefe  things. 

But 


with  the  ways  and  means  of  knowing  them.  1665 
But  now  againfl  the  contrary  virtues  there  never  SERAI, 
was  any  law.  No  man  was  ever  impeached  for  ^^^" 
**  living  foberly,  righteoufly,  and  godly  in  this  pre- 
"  fent  world."  A  plain  acknowledgment,  that  man- 
kind always  thought  them  good,  and  never  were 
fenfible  of  the  inconvenience  of  them  ;  for  had  they 
been  fo,  they  would  have  provided  againfl  them  by 
laws.  This  St.  Paul  takes  notice  of  as  a  great  com- 
mendation of  the  chriflian  virtues ;  ^'  the  fruit  of 
"  the  Spirit  is  love,  joy,  peace,  long-fufFering^ 
"  gentlenefs,  kindnefs,  fidelity,  meeknefs,  tempe- 
"  ranee ;  againfl  fuch  there  is  no  law ;  "  the  greatefl 
evidence  that  could  be  given,  that  thefe  things  are- 
unqueflionably  good  in  the  efleem  of  mankind, 
*'  againfl  fuch  tiiere  is  no  law.'*  As  if  he  had  faid, 
turn  over  the  law  of  Mofes,  fearch  thofe  of  Athens, 
and  Sparta,  and  the  twelve  tables  of  the  Romans, 
and  thofe  innumerable  laws  that  have  been  added 
fmce  ;  and  -you  fhall  not  in  any  of  them  find  any 
of  thofe  virtues  that  I  have  mentioned,  condemned 
and  forbidden.  A  clear  evidence  that  mankind  ne- 
ver took  any  exception  againfl  them,  but  are  gene- 
rally agreed  about  the  goodnefs  of  them. 

Fourthly,  God  hath  fhewn  us  what  is  good  by 
external  revelation.  In  former  ages  of  the  world,  God 
revealed  his  will  to  particular  perfons  in  an  extraor- 
dinary manner,  and  more  efpecially  to  the  nation 
of  the  Jews,  the  refl  of  the  world  being  in  a  great 
meafure  left  to  the  condud  of  natural  light.  But 
in  thefe  latter  ages  he  hath  made  publick  revelation 
of  his  will  by  his  Son.  And  this  as  to  the  matter 
of  our  duty,  is  the  fame  in  fubflance  with  the  law 
of  nature,    for   our    Saviour    comprehends    all 


under 


2  666  Of  the  great  duties  of  natural  religioHy 

SERM.  undei"  thele  two  general  heads,  "  the  love  of  God, 
}^  and  of  our  neighbour.  "The  apoftle reduceth  all  to 
three,  fobriety,  juftice  and  piety  \  "  the  grace  of 
*'  God  that  brings  faivation  hath  appeared  to  all 
**  men,  teaching  us  that  denying  ungodlinefs  and 
*^  worldly  lufts,  we  Ihould  live  foberly,  righteoufly, 
*'  and  godly  in  this  prefent  world."  So  that  if  we 
believe  the  apoflle,  the  gofpel  teacheth  us  the  very 
fame  things  which  nature  dictated  to  men  before^ 
only  it  hath  made  a  more  perfed  difcovery  of  them. 
So  that  whatever  was  doubtful  and  obfcure  before,  is 
jiow  certain  and  plain  ;  the  duties  are  ftill  the  fame, 
only  it  offers  us  more  powerful  arguments  and  a 
greater  alTiftance  to  the  performance  of  thole  duties ; 
fo  that  we  may  now  much  better  fay,  than  the  pro- 
phet could  in  his  days,  "  he  hath  fhewed  thee,  O 
*<  man,  what  is  good  ,  and  v/hat  it  is  that  the  Loed 
*'  requires  of  thee.'' 

Fifthly,  and  laftly,  God  fhews  us  what  is  good  by 
the  motions  of  his  Spirit  upon  the  minds  of  men. 
This  the  fcripture  allures  us  of,  and  good  men  havi^ 
experience  more  efpecially  of  it ;  though  it  be  hard 
to  give  an  account  of  it,  and  to  fay  what  motions  are 
from  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  what  from  our  own 
minds;  for  ''  as  the  wind  blows  where  it  lifteth,  and 
*'  we  hear' the  found  of  it,  but  know  not  whence  it 
t'  comes,  nor  whither  it  goes;"  fo  are  the  operations 
of  the  Spirit  of  Qoiy  upon  the  minds  of  men, 
fecret  and  imperceptible. 

And  thus  1  have  done  with  the  three  things  I  pror 
pounded  to  fpeak  to.  All  that  now  remains,  is  to 
make  fome  inferences  from  what  hath  been  iiud,  by 
way  of  application. 

Fird, 


with  the  way^  mtd  mea?2s  of  kfiowing  them,  i66j 
Firll,  feeing  God  hath  fo  abundantly  provided  S  E  R  M. 
that  we  fliould  know  our  duty,  we  are  altoo-ether  in-  ^^\ 
cxcufable,  if  we  do  not  do  it.  Becaufe  "  he  hath 
"  Ihewed  thee,  O  man,  what  is  good,  and  what  the 
"  Lord  requires  of  thee  j"  therefore  "  thou  art 
''  inexcufable,  O  man,  whofoever  thou  art,"  who 
lived  in  a  con  trad  id  ion  to  this  light.  God  hath  ac- 
quainted us  with  our  duty,  by  fuch  ways  as  may  moll 
cfFedually  both  dire6l  and  engage  us  to  the  pradlice 
of  it ;  we  are  prompted  to  it  by  a  kind  of  natural 
inftind,  and  ftrong  imprefTions  upon  our  minds  of 
the  difference  of  good  and  evil  -,  we  are  led  to  the 
knowledge,  and  urged  to  the  praftice  of  it,  by  our 
nature,  and  by  our  reafon,  and  by  our  interefl-,  and 
by  that  which  is  commonly  very  prevalent  among 
men,  the  general  voice  and  confent  of  mankind  ;  and 
by  the  moll  powerful  and  governing  pafllons  in  hu- 
mane nature,  by  hope  and  by  fear,  and  by  ihame  ; 
by  the  profped  of  advantage,  by  the  appreheniion  of 
danger,  and  by  the  fenfe  of  honour  5  and  to  take 
away  all  poilible  excufe  of  ignorance  from  us,  by  an 
exprefs  revelation  from  God,  the  xieareil  and  moll 
perfed  that  ever  was  made  to  the  world.  Sothas 
whenever  we  do  contrary  to  our  duty,  in  any  of  thefc 
great  inllances,  we  offend  againft  all  thefe,  and  do  in 
the^highed  degree  fall  under  the  heavy  fentence  of  our 
Saviour,  "  this  is  the  condemnation,  that  light 
"  is  come  into  the  world,  and  men  loved  darknefs 
**  rather  than  liffht." 

Secondly,  you  fee  hence  what  are  the  great  duties 
of  religion,  which  God  mainly  requires  of  us,  and 
how  reafonable  they  are;  piety  towards  God,  and 
juftice  and  charity  towards   men ;     the  knowledge 

whereof 


i668'        Of  the  great  duties  of  natural  religion^ 

whereof  is  planted  in  our  nature,  and  grows  up  with 
our  reafon.  And  thefe  are  things  which  are  unqueftio- 
nably  good,  and  againfl  which  we  can  have  no  ex- 
ception J  things  that  were  never  reproved,  nor  found 
fault  with  by  mankind,  neither  our  nature  nor  our 
reafon  rifeth  up  againft  them,  or  diftates  any  thing 
to  the  contrary.  We  have  all  the  obligation,  and 
we  have  all  the  encouragement  to  them,  and  are  fe- 
cure  on  all  hands  in  the  pradlice  of  them.  In  the 
doing  of  thefe  things,  there  is  no  danger  to  us  from 
the  laws  of  men,  no  fear  of  difpieafure  from  God, 
no  offence  or  fling  from  our  own  minds. 

And  thefe  things,  which  are  fo  agreeable  to  our 
nature,  and  our  reafon,  and  our  interefl,  are  the 
o-reat  things  which  our  religion  requires  of  us,  more 
valuable  in  themfelves,  and  more  acceptable  to  God 
than  *'  whole  burnt-offerings  and  facrifices,"  more 
than  "  thoufands  of  rams,  and  ten  thoufands  of  ri- 
«'  vers  of  oil  ♦,"  more  than  if  we  offered  to  him 
*'  all  the  beads  of  the  forefl,  and  the  cattle  upon  a 
^t  thoufand  hills."  We  are  not  to  negled  any  inilitu- 
tion  of  God  ;  but  above  all,  we  are  to  fecure  the  ob- 
fervance  of  thofe  great  duties  to  which  we  are  dired- 
ed  by  our  very  nature,  and  tied  by  thefurefland  mod 
facred  of  all  other  laws,  thofe  which  God  hath  rive- 
ted in  our  fouls,  and  written  upon  our  hearts :  and 
that  mankind  might  have  no  pretence  left  to  excufe 
them  from  thefe,  the  chriflian  religion  hath  fet  us 
free  from  thofe  many  pofitive  and  outward  obfer- 
vances,  that  the  Jewifh  religion  was  incumbred 
withal  •,  that  we  might  be  wholly  intent  upon  thefe 
great  duties,  and  mind  nothing  in  comparifonof  the 

real  and  fubftantial  virtues  of  a  good  life. 

Thirdly, 


<with  the  ways  and  me  am  ofknomjig  them.       1669 

Thirdly,  you  fecj  in  the  Jafl:  place,  what  h  the  SERM, 
bed  way  to  appeafe  the  difpleafure  of  God  towards  a  ^^^* 
finful  nation.  God  feems  to  have  as  great  a  contro- 
verfy  with  us,  as  he  had  with  the  people  of  Ili*aeJ, 
and  his  wrath  is  of  Jate  years  moft  vifibly  gone  out 
againft  us  ;  and  proportionably  to  the  full  meafure  of 
our  fins,  it  hath  been  poured  out  upon  us  in  full 
vials.  How  have  the  judgments  of  God  followed 
us  ?  and  how  clofe  have  they  followed  one  another  ? 
v/hat  fearful  calamities  have  our  eyes  feen  ?  enough  to 
make  the  ears  of  every  one  that  hears  them  to  tino-je. 
What  terrible  and  hazardous  wars  have  we  been  en- 
gaged in  ?  what  a  raging  peftilence  did  God  fend 
among  us,  that  fwept  away  thoufands,  and  ten  thou- 
fands  in  our  ftreets  ?  what  a  dreadful  and  fatal  fire, 
that  was  not  to  be  checked  and  refilled  in  its  courfe, 
till  it  had  laid  in  alhes  one  of  the  greateft  and  richeft 
cities  in  the  world  ?  what  unfeafonable  weather  havs- 
we  had  of  late?  as  if  for  the  wickednefs  of  men  upon 
the  earth,  the  very  "  ordinances  of  heaven  were 
*'  changed,  and  fummer,  and  winter,  feed-time,  and 
*'  harveft,  had  forgotten  their  appointed  feafons." 
And  which  is  more  and  fadder  than  all  this,  what 
dangerous  attempts  have  been  made  upon  our  reli- 
gion, by  the  reftlefs  adyerfaries  of  it  ? 

And  now  furely,  ''  after  all  this  is  come  upon  us 
*'  for  our  fins,"  it  is  time  for  us  to  look  up  to  him 
that  fmites  us,  and  to  think  of  taking  up  this  quar- 
rel. 'Tis  time  to  inquire  as  they  do  in  the  text, 
"  wherewithal  jfhall  we  come  before  the  Lord,  and 
*'  bow  our  felves  before  the  high  God  ?*'  and  we  are 
apt  to  take  the  fame  courfe  as  they  did,  to  endeavour 
to  appeafe  God  by  fome  external  devotion.  We  have 

Vol.  VI.  12  N  now 

6, 


i6jo  Of  the  great  duties  of  natural  religion^ 

S  E  R  M.  now  betaken  our  felves  to  prayer  and  failing,  anj 
•  'twas  very  fit,  nay  necefifary  we  fhould  do  fo  ;  but  let 
us  not  think  this  is  all  God  expedls  from  us.  Thefc 
are  but  a  means  to  a  further  end,  to  oblige  us  for  the 
future  to  the  pradlice  of  a  good  life.  The  outward 
profeffion  of  religion  is  not  loft  amongft  us,  there 
appears  ftill  in  men  a  great  and  commendable  zeal 
for  the  reformed  religion,  and  there  hath  been  too 
much  occafion  for  it;  but  that  which  God  chiefly  ex- 
pedis  from  us,  is  reformed  lives.  Piety  and  virtue  are 
in  a  great  meafure  gone  from  among  us,  the  manners 
of  men  are  ftrangely  corrupted,  "  the  great  and 
*'  v/eighty  things  of  the  law'*  are  negle6led,  "  juftice 
*'  and  mercy,  temperance  and  chaftity,  truth  and 
*'  fidelity ,"fo  that  we  may  take  up  David's  com- 
plaint, "  help  Lord  !  for  the  righteous  man  ceafeth, 
for  the  faithful  fail  from  among  the  children  of 


«( 


'«  men." 


And  till  the  nation  be  brought  back  to  a  fober  fenfe 
of  religion,  from  an  airy  and  phantaftical  piety,  to 
'real  and  unafFecftcd  devotion,  and  from  a  fadious 
contention  about  things  indifferent,  to  the  ferious 
pradlice  of  what  is  neceffary ;  from  our  violent  heats 
and  animofities,  to  a  more  peaceable  temper,  and  by 
a  mutual  condefcenfion  on  all  fides,  to  a  nearer  and 
flronger  union  among  our  felves,  'till  we  recover  in 
fome  meafure  our  ancient  virtue  and  integrity  of 
manners,  we  have  reafon  to  fear,  that  God  will  ftill 
have  a  controverfy  with  us,  notwithftanding  all  our 
noife  and  zeal  about  religion. 

This  is  the  true,  this  is  the  only  courfe  to  appeafc 
the  indignation  of  God,  and  to  draw  down  his  fa- 
vour and  bleifing  upon  a  poor  diftradled  and  gafping 

nation, 


cc 


with  the  ways  and  means  of  knowing  them,       167  j 

nation.  "  He  hath  fhewed   thee,   O  man,    what  is  SER  M. 
**  good;    and  what  doth  the  Lord  require  of  thee, 

but  to  do  juftly,  and  to  love  mercy,  and  to  walk 

humbly  with  thy  God  f" 
.    I  have  but  one  word  more,  and  that  is  to  put  you 
prefently  upon  the  pradice  of  one  of   thefe  duties 
that  I    have  been  perfuading    you   to,  and   that  is 
"  mercy,  and  alms  to  the  poor."  If  what  I  have 
already  faid,  have  had  its  efFed  upon  you,  I  need  not 
ufe  any    other  arguments;    if  it  have  not,    I  have 
hardly  the  heart  to  ufe  any.     1  (hall  only  put  you  in 
mind  again,  that  God  values  this  above  all  our  exter- 
nal devotion,  "  he  will   have  mercy  rather  than  fa- 
*'  orifice;"    that  this  is  the  way  to  find  mercy  with 
God,  and  to  have  our  prayers  fpced  in  heaven ;  and 
without  this,  all  our  falling  and  humiliation  fignifies 
nothing.  And  to  this  purpofe  I  will  only  read  to  you 
thofe   plain  and  perfuafive  words  of   the  prophet, 
which  do  fo  fully  declare  unto  us  the  whole  duty  of 
this  day,  and  particularly  urge  us  to  this  of  charity, 
Ifa.  Iviii.  5,  6,  7,  8,  9.    *'  Is  it  fuch  a  faft  that  I  have 
6^  chofen }  a  day  for  a  man  to  afflid:  his  foul  ?  is  it  to 
''  bow  down  his  head  as  a  bulrufh,and  to  fpread  fack- 
*'  cloth  and  alhes  under  him  ?  wilt  thou  call  this  a 
**  fad,  and  an  acceptable  day   unto  the  Lord  ?  is 
*'  not  this  the  faft  that  I  have  chofen  ?    to  loofe  the 
"  bands  of  wickednefs,to  undo  the  heavy  burdens,and 
"  to  let  the  opprefTed  go  free,and  that  ye  break  every 
"  yoke?    is  it  not  to  deal  thy  bread  to  the  hungry, 
**  and  that  thou  bring  the  poor  that  are  caft  out  to 
"  thy  houfe  ?  when  thou  feeft  the  naked,  that  thou 
^'  cover  him,  and  that  thou  hide  not  thy  felf  from 
"  thine  own  flelh  ?  then  fliall  thy  light  break  forth  as 

12  N  2  the 


1672  Injlitufed  religion  not  intended 

'^  the  morning,  and  thy  falvation  fhall  fpring  forth 
*f  fpeedily,  and  thy  righteoufnefs  fhall  go  before 
*'  thee,  and  the  glory  of  the  Lord  fhall  be  thy  rere- 
'^  ward.  Then  thou  fhalt  call,  and  the  Lord 
^^  (hall  anfvver  ;  thou  fhalt  cry,  and  he  fhall  fay, 
*^  here  I  am.'- 


SERMON     cm. 

Inftituted  religion  not  intended  to  un- 
dermine natural. 


M  A  T  T  H  E  W    ix.  13. 

'But  ^0  ye  and  learn  what  that  meaneth\  I  will  have 
mercy ^  and  not  facrijice, 

S  E  R  M.  ^^"^  N  E  of  the  moft  fuccefsful  attempts  that  have 
tSii^L-f  C  M  ^^^"  made  upon  religion,  by  the  devil  and 
^-^  his  inflruments,  hath  been  by  fetting  the  laws 
of  God  at  variance  with  themfelves,  and  by  dafhing 
the  feveral  parts  of  religion,  and  the  two  tables  of 
the  law  againfl  one  another,  to  break  all  in  pieces ; 
and  under  a  pretence  of  advancing  that  part  of  re- 
ligion which  is  inftituted  and  revealed,  to  under- 
jnine  and  deftroy  that  which  is  natural,  and  of  pri- 
mary obligation. 

To  manifefl  and  lay  open  the  mifchievous  con- 
fequences  of  this  defign,  I  fliall  at  this  time  (by 
God's  afTiftance)  endeavour  to  make  put  thefe  two 

thingSo 

Firfl, 


to  undermine  natural.  ^673 

FIrft,  that  natural  religion  is  the  foundation  of  alJ  S  E  RM, 
inftituted  and  revealed  religion.  . 

Secondly,  that  no  revealed  or  inftituted  religion 
was  ever  defigned  to  take  away  the  obligation  of 
natural  duties,  but  to  confirm  and  eftablifli  them. 

And  to  this  purpofe,  I  have  chofen  thcfe  words 
of  our  Saviour  for  the  foundation  of  my  following 
difcourfe  \  "  but  go  ye  and  learn  what  that  meaneth  ; 
**  I  will  have  mercy,  and  not  facrifice."  The  occa- 
fion  of  which  words  was  briefly  this  j  the  pharifees 
found  fault  with  him  for  keeping  company,  and 
eating  with  publicans  and  finners.  He  owns  the 
thing  which  they  objedled  to  him,  and  endeavours 
to  vindicate  himfelf  from  any  crime  or  fault  in  fo 
doing  -,  and  that,  thefe  two  ways. 

I.  By  telling  them,  that  it  was  allowed  to  a  phy- 
Hcian,  and  proper  for  his  office  and  profeflion,  to 
converfe  with  the  fick,  in  order  to  their  cure  and 
recovery.  He  may  abftain,  if  he  pleafeth,  from 
the  converfation  of  others;  but  the  fick  have  need  of 
him,  and  are  his  proper  care,  and  his  bufinefs  and 
employment  lies  among  them  ;  "  he  faid  unto  them, 
''  they  that  be  whole  need  not  a  phyfician,  but  they 
"  that   are  fick;  I  came  not  to  call  the  righteous, 

but  finners  to  repentance;'*  they  who  were  already 
good,  needed  not  to  be  call'd  upon  to  amend  and 
reform  their  lives,  and  they  that  were  fo  conceited  of 
their  own  righteoufnefs,  as  the  pharifees  were,  and 
fo  confident  that  they  were  found  and  whole,  would 
not  admit  of  a  phyfician,  and  thereby  rendred  them- 
felves  incapable  of  cure ;  and  therefore  he  did  not  ap- 
ply himfelf  to  them  ;  but  to  the  publicans  and  finners, 
who  were  acknowledged  on  all  bands,  both  hy  them- 

felves 


<c 


J  674  Inftituted  religion  not  intended 

S  E  R  M.  felves  and  others,  to  be  bad  men ;  fo  that  it  could  not 
^^^j-  .  be  denied  to  be  the  proper  work  of  a  fpiritual  phyfi- 
cian  to  converfe  with  luch  perfons. 

2.  By  endeavouring  to  convince  them  of  their 
ignorance  of  the  true  nature  of  religion,  and  of 
the  rank  and  order  of  the  feveral  duties  there- 
by required ;  "  but  go  ye  and  learn  what  that 
"  meaneth  j  I  will  have  mercy  and  not  facrifice  ;** 
which  faying  is  quoted  by  him  out  of  the  pro- 
phet Hofea,  chap.  vi.  6.  "  I  defired  mercy  and 
"  not  facrifice;  and  the  knowledge  of  God  more 
*'  than  burnt-offerings  j'*  which  text  our  Savi- 
our cites  and  applies  upon  two  feveral  occafions  ; 
the  confidering  and  comparing  of  which^  will  give 
full  light  to  the  true  meaning  of  it. 

The  firfl  is  here  in  the  text,  upon  occafion  of  the. 
pharifees  finding  fault  with  him,  for  converfmg  with 
publicans  and  fmners ;  the  other  is  Matth.  xii.  7. 
where  the  pharifees  blaming  the  difciples  of  our 
Saviour  for  plucking  the  ears  of  corn  on  the  fab- 
bath- day,  our  Saviour  tells  them,  "  if  he  had 
''  known  what  this  meaneth,  I  will  have  mercy  and 
''  not  facrifice,  ye  would  not  have  condemned  the 
*'  guiltlefs  i"  that  is,  if  they  had  underflood  the  true 
nature  of  religion,  and  what  duties  of  it  are  chiefiy 
and  in  the  firft  place  to  be  regarded,  they  would  not 
have  ;been  fo  forward  to  cenfure  this  adtion  of  his 
difciples. 

So  that  the  plain  meaning  of  this  faying  is  this, 
that  in  comparing  the  parts  of  religion  and  the  obli- 
gation of  duties  together,  thofe  duties  which  are  of 
moral  and  natural  obligation  are  mofl:  valued  by  God, 
and  ought  to  take  place  of  thofe  which  are  pofitive 

and 


to  undermine  natural,  ^^75 

and  ritual.  "  I  will  have  mercy,  andf  not  facrifice,"  SE  R  M. 
that  is,  "  rather  than  facrifice,"  according  to  the.  '^^_- 
true  meaning  of  this  Hebrew  phrafe,  which  is  to  be 
underftood  in  a  comparative  fenfe,  as  is  evident  from 
the  text  itfelf,  in  Hofea,  ^'  I  defired  mercy,  and  not 
*'  facrifice ;  and  the  knowledge  of  God  rather  than 
*'  burnt-offerings  i"  if  they  cannot  be  obferved  to- 
gether, let  facrifice  be  negleded,  and  the  work  of 
mercy  be  done. 

And  the  reafon  of  this  (eems  very  plain ;  becaufe 
fhewing  mercy,  or  doing  good  in  any  kind  is  a  prime 
inflance  of  thofe   moral  duties,  which  do  naturally 
and  perpetually  oblige ;  but  facrifice  is  an  inftance  of 
pofitive  and  ritual  obfervances,  and  one  of  the  chief 
of  the  kind  :  fo  that  when  moral  duties,  and  ritual  oI> 
fervances  come  in  competition,  and  do  clafh  with  one 
another,  the  obfervation  of  a  rite,  or  pofitive  inftita- 
tion,  is  to  give  way  to  a  moral  duty  -,  and  it  is  no  Cm 
in  that  cafe  to  neglecfl  the  obfervation  of  fuch  a  rite, 
yea  though  it  were  commanded  and   appointed  by 
God  himfelf.     And  though  this  may  feem  to  be  a 
breach  of  the  letter  of  the  law ;  yet  it  is  according 
to  the  true  mind  and  meaning  of  the  law  -,  it  being 
a  tacit  condition  implied  in  all  laws  of  a  ritual  and  po- 
fitive nature,  provided  the  obfervance  of  them  be 
not  to  the  hindrance  and  prejudice  of  any  duty,  which 
is  of  a  higher  and  better  nature ;  in  that  cafe  the 
obligation  of  it  does  for  that  time  give  way  and  is 
fufpended. 

And  this  will  appear  to  be  the  true  meaning  of 
this  rule,  by  comparing  more  particularly  the  inftances 
to  which  our  Saviour  applies  it.  His  difciples  paf- 
fing  through  the  corn  on  the  fibbath-day,  and  being 

hungry. 


iQib  InJiitUted  religion  not  intended 

ERM. hungry,  pluck'd  the  ears  and  did  eat;  this  our  Sa- 
^^^}'  ,  viouR  doesjuftify  to  be  no  breach  of  the  Jaw  of  the 
fabbath  j  becaufe  in  that  cale,  and  in  fuch  circum- 
ftances,  it  dfd  not  oblige :  for  the  difciples  being  called 
to  attend  upon  our  Saviour  to  be  inftrudled  by  him 
in  the  things  which  concerned  the  kingdom  of  God, 
that  is,  in  the  dodrine  of  the  gofpel,  which  they 
were  to  publifh  to  the  world,  this  attendance  hindred 
them  from  making  necefTary  provifions  againft  the 
fabbath,  they,  in  obedience  to  their  mafter,  being  in- 
tent upon  a  better  work ;  but  that  they  might  not 
flarve,  the  neceffities  of  nature  mufl  be  provided  for  ; 
and  therefore  it  was  fit  that  the  law  of  the  fabbath, 
which  was  but  pofitive  and  ritual,  fliould  give  way 
to  an  a6t  of  mercy  and  felf-prefervation  -,  "  If  ye 
*'  had  known  what  this  meaneth,  I  will  have  mercy 
"  and  not  facrifice,  ye  would  not  have  condemned 
*'  the  guiitlefs.'* 

And  the  reafon  is  the  lame  as  to  any  inilrumental 
part  of  religion,  by  which  I  mean  any  thing  which 
may  be  a  means  to  promote  piety  and  goodneis  ;  as 
prayer,  hearing  the  word  of  God,  keeping  good 
company,  and  avoiding  bad ;  the  duties  of  this  kind, 
our  Saviour  here  in  the  text  (where  he  likewife  ap- 
plies this  rule)  compares  with  moral  duties/  To  avoid 
the  company  of  vicious  and  wicked  perfbns,  is  a  good 
means  topreferve  men  from  the  contagion  of  their  vices, 
and  was  always  efteemed  a  duty  among  prudent  men, 
both  Jews  and  Heathens,  and  is  no  wife  difallowed  by 
our  Saviour  :  but  yet  not  fo  a  duty,  as  to  hinder  a 
greater  duty,  nor  fo  flridly  and  perverfely  to  be  infifted 
upon  as  if  one  ought  not  to  converfe  with  bad  men  in 
any  cafe,  or  upon  any  account,  no  not  for  fo  great  and 

good 


to  undermine  natural.  ^^77 

good  an  end  as  to  reclaim  them  from  their  vices.  SE  RM. 
cm. 
In  this  cafe  we  ought  to  confider,  that  our  firft  and 

highefl:  obligation  is  to  moral  duties,  comprehended 
under  "  the  love  of  God  and  our  neighbour  •,  " 
among  v/hich  one  of  the  chief  is  to  do  good  to 
men,  and  to  fhew  mercy  and  pity  to  thofe  that 
are  in  mifery ;  and  the  greateft  good  that  one  man 
can  do  to  another,  is  to  be  inftrumental  to  reclaim 
him  from  the  evil  and  error  of  his  way ;  becaufe 
this  is  "to  fave  his  foul  from  death  j "  ^nd  we  can- 
not imagine  that  God  ever  intended,  by  any  rule  of 
prudence,  or  pofitive  conftitution  of  the  jewifli  law, 
{o  to  forbid  their  accompanying  with  bad  and  fcan- 
daloiis  men,  that  it  fhould  be  unlawful  to  converfe 
with  them  in  order  to  their  recovery  and  amend- 
ment; "  Go  ye  and  learn  what  that  meaneth,  I  will 
*'  have  mercy  and  not  facrifice." 

And  St.  Paul  was  of  the  fame  mind  in  the  pi-e- 
cepts  he  gives  concerning  avoiding  the  company  of 
fcandalous  chriflians,  2  Thef.  ill.  14,  15.  "  And  if 
*'  any  man  obey  not  our  word  by  this  epiille,  note 
*'  that  man,  and  have  no  company  with  him,  that  he 
*'  may  be  afhamed  ;  yet  count  him  not  as  an  enemy, 
*'  but  admonifh  him  as  a  brother."  St.  Paul  qua- 
lifies his  precept,  left  chriftians  ihould  miftake  it, 
and  fall  into  the  jewifh  extreme,  not  to  converfe  with 
thole  whom  they  efteemed  fcandalous  and  wicked 
upon  any  account  whatfoever,  no  not  m  order  to 
their  amendment  and  reformation.  The  bond  of 
intimacy  and  friendfhip  with  bad  men  ought  to  be 
broken,  and  yet  the  bond  of  common  humanity 
may  be  as  ftrong  as  ever.  It  is  one  thing  to  d'li- 
countenance  bad  men,  to  bring  them  to  (hame,  and 

Vol.  VI,  12  O  a 


167^  tnJiitziteS  religion  not  intended 

SERM.  a  fcnfe  of  their  fault •,  and  quite  another  thinsr  tt> 
abandon  them  to  ruin  j  and  even  in  cafe  of  notorious 
herefy,  or  wickednefs  of  life,  it  is  one  thing  to  cut 
them  off  from  the  fociety  and  communion  of  chri- 
llians  •,  and  quite  another,  to  cut  them  off  from  hu* 
mane  fociety,  to  cut  their  throats,  and  to  extirpate 
them  out  of  the  world. 

And  yet  the  matter  was  carried  thus  far  by  the 
furious  zeal  of  the  Jews,  when  chriftianity  firft  ap- 
peared in  the  world  ;  they  thought  that  no  mercy 
in  fuch  cafes  was  the  bed  fervice  that  could  be  done, 
and  the  befi:  facrifice  that  could  be  offered  to  al- 
mighty God  5  and  this  pattern  hath  been  fince,  not 
only  ciofely  foUov/ed,  but  out-done  by  the  doctrines 
and  pra6lices  of  the  church  of  Rome ;  as  we  have 
too  much  reafon  to  remember  upon  *  this  day. 

But  to  proceed  in  the  farther  explication  of  the 
text,  the  meaning  whereof  in  fhort  is  this  5  that  the 
ritual  and  inftrumental  parts  of  religion,  and  all 
laws  and  duties  concerning  them,  are  of  lefs  value 
and  efteem  with  God,  than  thofe  which  are  of  a 
moral  nature,  efpecially  the  great  duties  and  offices 
of  piety  and  humanity,  of  the  love  of  God,  and  of 
our  neio-hbour.  And  if  v/e  confider  the  matter  well, 
we  fhall  fee  the  reafon  of  it  to  be  very  plain  •,  be- 
caufe  natural  and  moral  duties  are  approved  of  God, 
for  themfelves  and  for  their  own  fake  upon  account 
of  their  own  natural  and  intrinfical  goodnefs  j  but 
the  ritual  and  inftrumental  parts  of  religion  are  only 
pleafing  to  God  in  order  to  thefe,  and  fo  far  as  they 
tend  to  beget  and  promote  them  in  us ;  they  are  not 
naturally  good  in  themfelves,  but  are  inftituted  and 

*  TrtaihU  on  Nov.  5,  i6S2. 

appointed 


ta  undermine  natural  16*7^ 

appointed  by  God   for  xX\t  fake  of  the  other  ;  and  SERM. 
therefore  great   reafon  there  is  that  they  fnould  be    ^'^^• 
fubordinate,  and  give  way  to  them  when  they  come  "'"^ 
in  competition  v/ith  one  another. 

For  this  is  a  known  rule,  which  takes  place  in  all 
laws,  "  that  laws  of  lefs  importance  fhou]d  grive 
*'  way  to  thofe  that  are  of  greater;  "  aiwties  kgel  e< 
circumftantid  colliduntii}\  ita  tit  tttraque  fervari  non 
foteft^  fervanda  eft  lex  potior.  "  Whenever  two  Jaws 
"  happen  to  be  in  fuch  circumftances  as  to  clafli 
"  with  one  another,  fo  that  both  of  them  cannot  be 
**  obferved,  that  law  which  is  better  and  of  greater 
«'•  confequence  is  to  be  kept."  And  Tully  gives 
much  the  fame  rule  in  this  matter.  "  In  comparino" 
*'  of  laws  Cfays  he)  we  are  to  confider  which  law  is 
«'  mod  ufeful,  and  jull,  and  reafonabie  to  be  ob- 
*'  ferved."  From  whence  it  wiJ]  follow,  that  when 
two  laws,  or  more,  or  how  many  foever  they  be, 
cannot  be  obferved,  becaufe  they  clafh  with  one  ano- 
ther •,  ea  maxime  confervanda  putetur^  qiu  ad  7naxmas 
res  pertinere  videatur.  ^'  It  is  reafonabie  that  that 
«'  law  fhould  be  obferved,  which  is  of  greateft  mo- 
^'  ment  and  concernment  *' 

By  what  hath  been  faid,  we  may  learn  what  is 
the  meaning  of  this  faying,  which  our  Saviour 
more  than  once  cites  out  of  the  prophet,  ''  1  will 
*'  have  mercy,  and  not  facrifice.'* 

From  the  words  thus  explained,  I  Hiall  take  occa- 
fion  to  profecute  the  two  propofitions  which  1  men- 
tioned before,  namely, 

Firft,  that  natural  religion  is  the  foundation  of 
inflituted  and  revealed  religion. 

12  O  2  Secondly, 


1 6  8  o  Injiituted  religion  not  intended 

SERM.  Secondly,  that  no  inftituted  relimon  was  ever  de- 
i  figned  to  take  away  the  obligation  of  natural  duties  ; 
but  is  intended  to  eftablifh  and  confirm  them.  And 
both  thefe  are  fufficiently  grounded  in  the  reafon  of 
our  Saviour's  difcourfe  from  this  rule,  "  I  will 
*'  have  mercy,  and  not  facrifice.'* 

I.  That  natural  religion  is  the  foundation  of  in^ 
flituted  and  revealed  religion  ;  and  all  revealed  re- 
ligion does  fuppofe,  and  take  for  granted,  the  clear 
and  undoubted  principles  and  precepts  of  natural  re- 
licrion,  and  builds  upon  them.  B^^  natural  religion, 
I  mean  obedience  to  the  natural  law,  and  the  per- 
formance of  fuch  duties  as  natural  light,  without 
any  exprefs  and  fupernatural  revelation,  doth  di6iate 
to  men.  Thefe  lie  at  the  bottom  of  all  religion, 
and  are  the  great  and  fundamental  duties  which  God 
requires  of  all  mankind  ;  as,  that  we  fnould  love 
God,  and  behave  ourfelves  reverently  towards  him  ; 
that  vve  fhould  believe  his  revelations ;  and  teftify 
our  dependence  upon  him,  by  imploring  his  aid  and 
diredion  in  all  our  necefiities  and  diftrefTes  -,  and 
acknowledge  our  obligations  to  him  for  all  the  ble(^ 
fm^s  and  benefits  which  we  receive ;  that  we  fhould 
moderate  our  appetites,  in  reference  to  the  pleafures 
and  ejnoyments  of  this  world,  and  u(c  them  tempe- 
rately and  challly  ',  that  we  fhould  be  juft  and  up- 
r'o-ht  in  all  our  dealings  with  one  another ;  true  to 
our  word,  and  faithful  to  our  truft  -,  and  in  all  our 
words  and  adions  obferve  that  equity  towards  others, 
which  we  defire  they  iliould  ufe  towards  us  ;  that 
we  Ihould  be  kind,  and  charitable,  merciful,  and 
companionate  one  towards  another  ;  ready  to  do 
good  to  all,  and*apt  not  only  to  pity,  but  to  relieve 

them 


io  undermine  ?jafuraL  168  r 

them  in  their  mifery  and  necellity.  Thefe,  and  fuch  SERM. 
like,  are  thofe  which  we  call  moral  duties ;  and  they  ^^^^' 
are  of  eternal  and  perpetual  obligation,  btcaufe  they  do 
naturally  oblige,  without  any  particular  and  expreis 
revelation  from  God.  And  thefe  are  the  founda- 
tion of  revealed  and  inftituted  religion,  and  all  re- 
vealed religion  does  fuppofe  them,  and  build  upon 
them  ;  for  all  revelation  from  God,  fuppofeth  us  to 
be  men,  and  alters  nothing  of  thofe  duties  to  which, 
we  were  naturally  obliged  before.  And  this  will 
clearly  appear  if  we  confider  thefe  three  things ; 

Firfl,  that  the  fcripture  every  where  fpeaks  of 
thefe,  as  the  main  and  fundamental  duties  of  the 
jewifh  religion. 

Secondly,  that  no  inftituted  fervlce  of  God,  no 
pofitive  part  of  religion,  was  ever  acceptable  to 
him,  when  thefe  were  negledled. 

Thirdly,  that  the  great  defign  of  the  chriftian  re- 
ligion, was  to  reftore  and  reinforce  the  prad:ice  of  the 
natural  law. 

I.  That  the  fcripture  every  where  fpeaks  of  thefe 
as  the  main  and  fundamental  duties  of  the  jewifh  re- 
ligion. When  our  Saviour  was  ask'd  "  which 
*'  was  the  firft  and  great  commandment  of  the 
^'  law  \ "  he  anfwered,  "  thou  fhalt  love  the  Lord 
"  thy  God  v/ith  all  thy  heart,  and  with  all  thy 
*'  foul,  and  with  all  thy  ftrength  ;  and  thou  ilialt 
*'  love  thy  neighbour  as  thy  Mi,"  One  would  have 
expeded  he  would  have  given  quite  another  anfwer, 
and  have  pitched  upon  fome  of  thofe  things  which 
were  fo  much  magnified  among  the  Jews,  and 
which  they  laid  fo  much  weight  upon  5  that  he 
Diould  have  inftanced  in  facrifice,  or  circumcifion,  or 

the 


iStz  Ifijlifuted  religion  not  intended 

^ERMthelaw  of  the  fabbath:  but  he  overlooks  all  thelc 
as  inconfiderable  in  comparifon,  and  inftances  only 
in  thofe  two  great  heads  of  moral  duty,  "  the  love 
**  of  God,  and  our  neighbour ;"  which  are  of  natu- 
ral and  perpetual  obligation,  and  comprehend  under 
them  all  other  moral  duties. 

And  thefe  are  thofe  which  our  Saviour  calls 
*'  the  law  and  the  Prophets,**  and  which  he  fays 
*'  he  came  not  todeftroy,but  to  fulfil,'*  Matth.  v.  17, 
1 8,  19,  io.  "  Think  not  that  I  am  come  to  deftroy 
«'  the  law  or  the  prophets.  I  am  not  come  to  de- 
*'  ftroy  ;  but  to  fulfil :  for  verily  I  fay  unto  you,  'till 
**  heaven  and  earth  pafs,  one  jot  or  one  tittle  fl^^all  in 
*'  no  wife  pafs  from  the  law 'till  all  be  fulfilled.  Who- 
«'  foever  therefore  fliall  break  one  of  thefe  lead  com- 
*'  mandments,  and  fhall  teach  men  fo,  he  fball  be 
«'  called  the  leaft  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven  \  but 
*«  whofoever  fliall  do  and  teach  them,  the  fame  fhall 
*«  be  called  great  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  For  I 
*'  fay  unto  you,  that  except  your  righteoufnels  Hiall 
«  exceed  the  righteoufnefs  of  the  fcribes  and  phari- 
*'  fees,  ye  fhali  in  no  cafe  enter  into  the  kingdom  of 
*'  heaven.'* 

That  our  Saviour  doth  not  here  fpeak  of  the 
judicial  or  ceremonial  law  of  the  Jews,  but  of  the 
duties  of  the  moral  law,  will,  I  think,  be  very  plain, 
from  thefe  following  confiderations. 

Firft,  that  the  judicial  or  ceremonial  laws  of  the 
Jews  were  to  pafs  away,  and  did  fo,  not  long  after  ; 
but  this  law  which  our  Saviour  fpeaks  of,  was  to 
be  perpetual  and  immutable  \  for  he  tells  us,  "  that 
**  heaven  and  earth  fhould  pafs  away,  but  one  jot  or 
^y  one  tittle  oF  this  law  fliould  not  pafs." 

Secondly, 


to  undermine  naturah  1683 

Secondly,  the  obfervation  of  the  law  which  our  S  E  R  M. 
Saviour  fpeaks  of,  confifted  in  fuch  thino-s  as  the  ^^^^" 
fcribes  and  pharifees  negleded  ;  for  he  tells  his  difci- 
plos,  upon  this  occaiion,  "  that  except  their  righte- 
"  oufnefs  did  exceed  the  righteoufnefs  of  the  fcribes 
"  and  pharifees,  they  Ihould  in  no  cafe  enter  into  the 
*'  kingdom  of  heaven.'*  But  now  the  fcribes  and 
pharifees  were  the  moft  accurate  and  pundual  people 
in  the  world,  in  obferving  the  precepts  of  the  judicial 
and  ceremonial  Jaw,  they  were  fo  far  from  takiiig 
away  any  thing  from  thefe  obfervances,  that  they  had 
added  to  them,  and  enlarged  them,  by  innumera- 
ble  traditions  of  their  own  :  fo  exad  were  they, 
that  they  would  "  pay  tithe  of  mint,  and  anife, 
*'  and  cummin,"  as  our  Saviour  obferves;  but 
then  they  were  extremely  defedlive  in  moral  duties  j 
they  were  unnatural  to  their  parents,  and  would  pre- 
tend that  their  eflates  were  confecrated  to  God,  that 
under  this  pretence  of  pofitive  religion,  they  miglit 
cxcufe  themfelves  from  a  natural  duty,  and  let  their 
parents  ftarve  for  God's  fake  \  they  were  covetous, 
and  unjuft,  and  devoured  widows  houfes  5  in  a  word, 
our  Saviour  tells  us,  they  negledcd  *^  the  weightier 
**  matters  of  the  law,  mercy,  judgment,  and  the 
*'  love  of  God,  and  keeping  faith  with  men ;"  io 
that  it  is  in  thefe  things,  that  our  Saviour  means, 
*'  that  our  righteoufnefs  muft  exceed  the  righteoui- 
''  nefs  of  the  fcribes  and  pharifees,"  viz.  in  the  pra- 
ctice of  moral  duties,  which  were  neglededby  them; 
and  confequently  'tis  the  moral  law  which  our  Savi- 
our came  to  confirm  and  eilabliili. 

Thirdly,  if  we  confider  the  inftances  which  our 
SAViOVR  gives  in  bis  following difcourfe,  by  wliich 

wc 


i634  Injlltuled  religion  not  intended 

SERM.  we  may  bed  judge  v/hat  he  means.  He  inftances  in 
murder,  and  adultery,  and  perjury,  which  are  un- 
doubtedly forbidden  by  the  natural  Jaw ;  and  then 
he  inftanccs  in  feveral  permidions  which  were  indulg- 
ed to  them  for  the  hardnefs  of  their  hearts,  but  yet 
did  intrench  upon  the  di6tates  of  right  reafon,  and 
the  firll  and  original  conflitution  of  things ;  as  the 
permJfTion  of  divorce  upon  every  (light  occafion,  and 
of  revenge,  and  retaliation  of  injuries. 

Fourthly,  if  we  confider  that  by  the  law  and  the 
prophets,  our  Saviour  means  that  v/hich  was  princi- 
pally defigned  and  ultimately  intended  by  them  \  which 
was  the  obfervation  of  moral  duties ;  which  as  they 
were  written  in  the  two  tables  by  the  immediate  fin- 
ger of  God  himfelf,  fo  are  chiefly  inculcated  by  the 
prophets.  And  fo  we  find  this  phrafe  of  ''  the  law 
*«  and  the  prophets,'*  elfewhere  ufed  by  our  Saviour, 
when  he  mentions  that  great  rule  of  equity,  "  that 
'^  we  fhould  do  toothers  as  we  would  have  them 
*'  do  to  us.'*  Matth.  vii.  12.  "  Therefore  all  things 
t'  wnatfoever  ye  would  that  men  fhould  do  to  you, 
««•  do  ye  even  fo  to  them;  for  this  is  the  law  and  the 
*^  prophets.*'  But  how  v/as  *'  this  the  law  and  the 
•'  prophets,'*  when  this  rule  was  never  fb  much  as 
mentioned  in  either.?  our  Saviour  means,  that  this 
IS  the  foundation  of  all  thofe  duties  of  juftice  and 
mercy,  which  are  fo  much  inculcated  in  "  the  Jaw 
"  and  the  prophets." 

So  that  our  Saviour  makes  the   obfervation  *of 
pioral  duties  to  be  the  principal  defign  of  the  jewifh 
law,  and  as  it  were  the  foundation  of  it,  and  there- 
fore he  calls  moral  duties,    ra  ViC.cdx'i^   tS  -^hixa^ 
*•  the  weightier  matters  of  the  law,"   Matth,  xxiii. 

23. 


to  undermine  natural  1685 

Z3.  "  But  ye  (fays  he  to  the  fcribes  and  pharifees)  SERM, 
«'  have  negleded  the  weightier  things  of  the  law,  ^ 
«'  judgment,  and  mercy,  and  fidelity."  The  fcribes 
and  pharifees  bufied  themfelves  chiefly  about  ritual 
obfervances ;  but  our  Saviour  tells  them,  that  thofe 
other  were  the  mod  confidcrable  and  important  duties 
of  the  law,  and  lay  at  the  bottom  of  the  jewifh  reli- 
gion. And  much  the  fame  enumeration  the  prophet 
makes,  where  he  com.pares  facrifices  and  thefe  moral 
duties  together,  Mic.  vi.  6,  ;,  8.  "  Wherewith  fhali 
"  I  come  before  the  Lord,  and  bow  my  kK  before 
*'  the  high  God  ?  fhall  I  come  before  him  with  burnt- 
*'  offerings,  with  calves  of  a  year  old?  will  the 
"  Lord  be  pleafed  with  thoufands  of  rams,  or  with 
"  ten  thoufands  of  rivers  of  oil.?  fhall  I  give  mv 
"  firft-born  for  my  tranfgreffion,  the  fruit  of  my 
"  body  for  the  ^m  of  my  foul  ?  he  hath  Ihevved  thee, 
"  O  man,  what  is  good  ;  and  what  doth  the  Lord 
"  require  of  thee,  but  to  do  juftly,  and  to  love 
*'  mercy,  and  to  walk  humbly  with  thy  God  .?"  he 
had  required  facrifices  but  had  no  regard  to  them  in 
comparifon  with  thefe. 

n.  No  inflituted  fervice  of  God,  no  pofitive  part 
of  religion  whatfoever,  was  ever  acceptable  to  God, 
when  moral  duties  w^ere  negleded  5  nay,  fo  far  from 
being  acceptable  to  him,  that  he  reje(5ls  them  with 
difdain  and  abhorrence.  To  this  purpofe  there  are  al- 
mofl  innumerable  pallages  in  the  prophets ;  Ifa.  i. 
II,  &c.  ''  To  what  purpofe  is  the  multitude  of  your 
*'  facrifices  unto  me  }  when  ye  come  to  appear  before 
''  me,  who  hath  required  this  at  your  hands,  to 
*'  tread  my  courts  ?  bring  no  more  vain  oblations  ; 
*'  incenfe  is  an  abomination  to  me  \   the  new  moons 

Voii.  VI.  12  P  *  and 

6. 


1 68 5  Injlituted  religion  not  intended 

SERM.  <«  and  fabbaths,  the  callino;  of  alTemblies,    I  cannot 

"  away  with  ;    it  is  iniquity,  even  the  folemn  meet- 
''  ing,    and  when  ye  Ipread  forth   your  hands,    I 
'*  will  hide  mine  eyes  from  you;   when  ye  make 
*f  many  prayers,  I  will  not  hear."     What   is  the 
reafon  of  ail  this  ?  Becaufe  they  v/ere  defedlive  in 
the  moral  duties  of  religion ;  fo  it  follows ;  "  your 
"  hands   are   full    of  blood  ;    wafh  ye,    make  ye 
* '  clean,  put  away  the  evil  of  your  doings  from  be- 
t'  fore  mine  eyes,  ceafe  to  do  evil,  learn  to  do  well, 
«'  feek  judgment,    relieve  the  opprelTed,  judge  the 
*'  fatherlefs,  plead  for  the  widow  ;  come  now  and 
*«  let  us  reafon  together,  faith  the  Lord  ;"  imply- 
ing that  till  they  had  refpe(ft  to  moral  duties,  all 
their  external  worfliip  and  facrifices  fignified  nothing. 
And  fo  like  wife,  Ifa.  Ixvi.  3.  he  tells  them  that  no- 
thing could  be  more  abominable  than  their  facrifices, 
fo  long  as  they  allowed  themfelves  in  wicked  prac- 
tices ;  "  he   that  killeth  an   ox   is  as  if  he  flew  a 
*'  man  -,  he  that  lacrificeth  a  lamb,  as   if  he  cut  off 
*'  a  dog's  neck  ;  he  that  offereth  an  oblation,  as  if 
*'  he  offered  fwine's  blood  ^  and  he  that  burneth  in- 
*'  cenfe,   as  if  he   bleffed  an   idol ;  yea,  they  have 
<'  chofen  their  own  ways,  and  their  foul  delighteth 
"  in  their   abominations."     And   to   mention   but 
one  text  more  out  of  the  old  teflament,  Jer.  vii.  4, 5. 
"  Truft  ye  not  in  lying  words,  faying,  the  temple 
*'  of  the  Lord,  the  temple  of  the  Lord,  the  tem- 
**  pie  of  the  Lord  are  thefe.     Throughly  amend 
*'  your  ways  and   your   doings,    throughly  execute 
*' judgment    between  a  man  and    his  neighbour; 
"  opprefs  not  the  flranger,    the  fatherlefs   and  the 
*'  widow,  and  ihed  not  innocent  blood."     If  they 
did  not  pradlife  thefe  duties,  and  forbear  thofe  fins, 

all 


to  undermine  7iattiraL  1687 

all  the  reverence  for  the  temple  and  the  worihip  of  S  E  R  M. 
God  fignifies  nothing.  You  fee  in  the  jewifli  reli- ,  ^^^^' 
gion  what  it  was  that  was  acceptable  to  God  for  its 
felf  and  its  own  fake,  viz.  the  pradice  of  moral  du- 
ties ;  and  that  all  inftituted  religion,  that  did  not 
promote  and  further  thefe,  or  was  deftitute  of  them, 
was  abominable  to  God.  And  under  the  gofpel 
our  Saviour  prefers  a  moral  duty  before  any  gifc 
we  can  offer  to  God,  and  will  have  it  to  take  place, 
Matth.  V.  23,  24.  «'  If  thou  bring  thy  gift  unto 
*'  the  altar,  and  there  remembreft  that  thy  brother 
*'  hath  ought  againfl  thee,  leave  there  thy  gifc  be- 
*'  fore  the  altar,  and  go  thy  way,  firft  be  recon- 
ciled to  thy  brother,  and  then  come  and  offer 
thy  gift.'* 

But  It  fhould  feem  by  this,  and  what  hath  been 
faid  before,  that  God  prefers  goodnefs  and  rio-hte- 
cufnefs  to  men,  before  his  own  woriliip,  and  obedi- 
ence to  the  precepts  of  the  fecond  table,  before  obe- 
dience to  thofe  of  the  firft. 

But  this  does  but  feem  fo;  all  that  can  be  col- 
leded  from  this  paffage  of  our  Saviour,  or  any 
thing  that  hath  been  already  faid,  are  only  theie  two 
things, 

1.  That  God  prefers  the  praclice  of  the  moral 
duties  of  the  fecond  table,  before  any  inflituted  wor- 
fhip,  fuch  as  facrifice  was  ;  and  before  obedience  to 
the  laws  of  religion,  which  are  mcerly  pofitive, 
tho'  they  do  immediately  concern  the  woriliip  of 
God. 

2.  That  if  we  neglect  the  duties  of  the  fecond 
table,  of  goodnefs  and  rightcoufnefs  towards  men, 
God  will  not  accept  of  our  obedience  to  the  pre- 

12  P  2  cepts 


1 6  8  8  Infli tilted  religion  not  intended 

S  E  R  M.  cepts  of  the  firft,  nor  of  any  a6l  of  religious  wor- 
^^^^V^  lliip  that  we  can  perform.  This  our  Saviour 
means  when  he  fays,  ''  leave  there  thy  gift  before 
^  "  the  altar,,  firft  be  reconciled  to  thy  brother,  then 
*'  come  and  olfer  thy  gift,'*  intimating,  that  fo 
Jong  as  we  bear  a  revengeful  mind  towards  our  bre- 
thren, God  will  not  accept  of  any  gift  or  facrifice 
that  we  can  offer  to  him ;  or  indeed  of  any  aft  of 
religious  worfhip  that  we  can  perform. 

Thirdly,  the  great  defign  of  the  chrillian  religion 
is  to  reftore  and  reinforce  the  praftice  of  the  na- 
tural law,  or  which  is  all  one,  of  moral  duties ;  and 
therefore  our  Saviour  begins  his firfl fermon, by  pro- 
mifing  bleffednefs  to  the  praftice  of  thefe  duties ;  of 
purity,  and  meeknefs,  and  righteoufnels  and  peace- 
ableneis,  and  mercifulnefs,  and  patience,  and  fub- 
miffion  to  the  will  of  God  under  perfecutions  and 
fufferings  for  righteoufnels  fake ;  and  tells  us  (as  I 
fhewed  before)  that  he  came  not  to  releafe  men 
from  the  praftice  of  thefe  duties,  but  to  oblige  them 
thereto  more  effedually  ;■  and  that  as  thefe  were  the 
*'  law  and  the  prophets,"  that  is,  the  main  duties 
and  the  foundation  of  thejewifh  religion,  fo  were 
they  much  more  to  befb of  the  chriflian.  This  the 
fcripturesof  the  new  tcftament  do  every  where  declare 
to  be  the  great  defign  of  the  gofpel,  and  the  chriflian 
religion,  to  infbruft  us  in  thefe  duties,  and  to  engage 
us  efFeftually  to  the  pradice  of  them.  In  that  known 
and  excellent  text,  Tit. ii.  ii,  12.  "  The  grace  of 
"  God  (which  is  in  and  by  the  doflrine  of  the 
6'  gofpel)  hath  appeared  to  all  men,  teaching  us,  that 
*'  denying  ungodlinels  and  worldly  lufts,  we  fhould 
^*  )jve  foberly,  righteoufly,  and  godly  in  this  prefent 

"  world/' 


to  undermme  natural,  1689 

^  world."  And  herein  St,  James  tells  us,  the  true  SERM. 
nature,  and  the  force  and  virtue  of  the  chriftian  re- .  ^^1: 
ligion doth  confift,  James i.  27.  "pure  religion,  and 
"  undefiled  before  God  and  the  Father  is  this,  to 
*'  vifit  thefatherlefsand  the  widows  in  their afHidion, 
"  and  to  keep  ourfelves  unfpotted  from  the  world." 
And  chap.  iii.  17.  "  The  wifdom  which  is  from 
*'  above"  (that  is,  that  heavenly  and  divine  know- 
ledge revealed  to  us  by  the  gofpel)  hath  thefe  pro- 
perties, and  is  apt  to  produce  thefe  effefls  ;  "  it  is 
"  firft  pure,  and  then  peaceable,  gentle,  and  ttx^^ 
"  to  be  intreated,  full  of  mercy,  and  of  good 
*'  fruits." 

And  the  planting  of  thefe  diipofitions  in  us  is  that 
which  the  fcripture  calls  "  the  new  creature,  and  the 
"  image  of  God,"  Eph.  iv.  20,  &c.  The  apoflle 
fpeaking  there  of  the  vices  and  lufls  wherein  the 
gentiles  lived,  tells  chriftians  that  they  were  other- 
wife  inftrudled  by  the  gofpel  ;  *^  but  you  have  not 
fo  learned  Christ,  if  fo  be  that  ye  have  heard 
him,  and  have  been  taught  by  him,  as  the  truth 
is  in  Jesus,  that  ye  put  off  concerning  the  for- 
**•  mer  converfation  the  old  man  which  is  corrupt 
*'  according  to  the  deceitful  lulls,  and  be  renewed  in 
*'  the  fpirit  of  your  mind,  and  that  ye  put  on  the 
*'  new  man,  which  after  God  is  created  in  righteouf- 
'^  nefs,  and  true  holinefs,"  or,  (as  the  words  perhaps 
may  better  be  rendred)  "  in  the  holine/s  of  truth  i" 
for  it  immediately  follows,  "  wherefore  putting  away 
*'  lying,  fpeak  every  man  truth  with  his  neighbour." 
And  this  is  that  which  the  apoflle  elfewhere  makes 
to  be  all  in  all  in  the  chriftian  religion.  "  In 
'  Christ  Jejus,  neither  circumcifion  availeth  any 

*'  thing. 


269^  hijlituted  religion  not  intended 

SERM.  «'  thing,  nor  uncircumcifion,  but  anew  creature,'* 
^^^^'  Gal.  vi.  15.  which  the  apoftle  in  the  chapter  before 
expreffeth  thus  \  "  in  Christ  Jesus  neither  circum- 
"  cifion  availeth  any  thing,  nor  uncircurncifion,  but 
"  faith  which  worketh  (or  is  infpired)  by  charity.'* 
And  yet  more  expreily,  i  Cor.  vii.  19.  "  circumci- 
*'  fion  is  nothing,  and  uncircumcifion  is  nothing; 
''  but  the  keeping  of  the  commandments  of  God.** 
By  the  comparing  of  which  texts,  it  appears,  that 
the  main  thing  in  chriftianity  is  the  practice  of  mo- 
ral duties,  and  this  is  "  the  new  creature,^  and  this 
the  proper  effed;  of  the  chriftian  faith  to  produce 
thefe  virtues  in  us.  And  indeed  the  great  defign  of 
the  christian  religion  and  every  thing  in  it,  of  the 
love  of  God  in  giving  his  Son  to  die  for  us,  of  the 
pardon  of  our  fins,  and  j unification  in  his  blood,  of 
all  the  promifes  and  threatnings  of  the  gofpel,  and 
of  the  affiMance  therein  promifed,  is  to  engage, 
and  encourage  and  enable  to  the  pradice  of  moral 
duties. 

And  thus  I  have  done  with  the  firfl:  thing  I  pro- 
pofed  to  fpeak  to,  namely,  that  natural  religion  is 
the  foundation  of  inftituted  and  revealed  religion  ; 
and  all  revealed  religion  does  fuppol'j  it,  and  builds 
upon  it.     I  proceed  to  the 

Second,  namely,  that  no  revealed  and  jinftituted 
religion  was  ever  defigned  to  take  away  the  obliga- 
tion of  natural  duties,  but  was  intended  to  confirm 
and  cftablifli  them.  And  this  alfo  will  be  evident, 
if  we  confider  thefe  three  things. 

1.  That  all  revealed  religion  calls  men  to  the  prac- 
tice of  natural  Duties.  This  the  jewifh  religion  did. 
The  firfl  laws  which  God  gave  them,  and  which  he 

diltinguifhed 


to  undermine  natural.  1691 

dlfllnsulflied  from  the  reft,  by  writing;  them  In  ta-  S  E  R  M, 

.       .  cm. 

blesof  ftone  with  his  own  finger,  were  the  precepts, 
of  the  moral  Jaw.  And  the  great  bufmefs  of  the 
prophets  whom  God  raifed  up  among  them  from 
time  to  time,  was  to  reprove  not  fo  much  their  de- 
fers in  their  facrifices,  and  in  the  duties  of  inftituted 
worihip,  as  the  breach  of  the  natural  law  by  their 
vices  and  immoralities;  and  to  threaten  them  with 
the  judgments  of  God,  if  they  did  not  reform  and 
amend  their  faults. 

And  now  under  the  gofpel,  the  preceptive  part 
of  it  is  almoft  wholly  made  up  of  moral  duties, 
namely,  thofe  which  are  comprehended  under  thofe 
two  great  commandments,  "  of  the  love  of  God, 
*'  and  our  neighbour.^'  In*the  chrlftian  religion, 
there  is  very  little  that  is  merely  pofitive  and  infti- 
tuted, befides  "  the  two  facraments,  and  praying 
*'  to  God  in  the  name  and  mediation  of  Jesus 

*'  Chris  t." 

2.  The   moft  perfed   revelation  that  ever  God 

made  to  mankind  (I  mean  that  of  the  chriftian  reli- 
gion) doth  furnifli  us  with  the  beft  helps  and  advan- 
tages for  the  performance  of  moral  duties  •,  it  difco- 
vers  our  duty  more  clearly  to  U3 ;  it  offers  us  the 
greateft  afTiftance  to  enable  us  to  the  performance  of 
it-,  it  prefents  us  with  the  moft  powerful  motives 
and  arguments  to  engage  us  thereto ;  fo  that  this  re- 
velation of  the' gofpel  is  fo  far  from  weakening  the 
obligation  of  natural  duties,  that  it  confirms  and 
ftrengthens  it,  and  urgeth  us  more  forcibly  to  the 

pradice  of  them. 

3.  The  pofitive  rites  and  inftitutions  of  revealed 
religion  are  fo  far  from  entrenching  upon  the  laws 

of 


1692  Injlituted  religion  not  intended 

S  ER  M.  of  nature,  that  they  were  always  defigned  to  be  Tub- 
^Jli;  J  ordinate  and  fubfervient  to  them ;  and  whenever 
they  come  in  competition,  it  is  the  declared  will  of 
God,  that  pofitive  inftitutions  fhould  give  way  to 
natural  duties ,  and  this  I  have  ihewn  to  be  plainly 
the  meaning  of  this  faying  in  the  text,  "  I  will 
*'  have  mercy,  and  not  facrifice. "  If  circu^i- 
ftances  be  fuch,  that  one  part  of  religion  mufl 
give  place,  God  will  have  the  ritual  and  inflituted 
part  to  give  way  to  that  which  is  natural  and  moral. 
It  is  very  frequent  in  fcripture,  when  the  duties  of 
natural  religion,  and  rites  of  divine  inftitution  come 
in  competition,  to  flight  and  difparage  thefe  in  coni- 
parifon  of  moral  duties,  and  to  fpeak  of  them  as 
things  which  God  hath  no  plcafure  in,  and  which 
in  comparifon  of  the  other  he  will  hardly  own  that 
he  hath  commanded.  "  When  ye  come  to  appear 
*'  before  me,  who  hath  required  this  at  your  hands.'* 
Ifa.  i.  12.  *'  Thou  defireft  not  facrifice,  thou  de- 
**  lighteft  not  in  burnt- offerings,"  Pfal.  li.  16.  "  Will 
**  the  Lord  be  pleafed  with  thoufands  of  rams,  or 
««  ten  thoufands  of  rivers  of  oil?  he  hath  fhewed 
**  thee,  O  man,  what  is  good  \  and  what  doth  the 
*'  Lord  require  of  thee,  but  to  do  juftly,  and  to 
*'  love  mercy." 

But  God  no  where  makes  any  comparifon  to  the 
difadvantage  of  natural  duties ;  he  never  derogated 
from  them  in  any  cafe ;  he  never  faid  "  he  would 
«  have  fuch  a  thing,  and  not  mercy,'*  or  "  that  he 
*'  hath  rather  fuch  a  rite  of  religion  fliould  be  per- 
*'  formed,  than  that  men  fliould  do  the  greatefl: 
«'  goodjand  fliew  the  greatefl:  charity  to  one  anotlier." 
It  is  no  where  made  a  quefl:ion,  ''   will  the  Lord 

♦'  be 


to  undermine  natural  1693 

"  be  pleafed  that  wc  deal  juftly  every  man  with  his  SERIVf, 
*'  neighbour,  and  fpeak  the  truth  one  to  another?    ^^^^' 
**  that  we  be  kind  and  tender-hearted,  and  ready  to 
«  forgive  ?  that  we  be  wilhng  to  diftribute  and  give 
*'  ahns  to  thofe  that  are  in  need  ?'*  there  is  no  fuch 
queftion  as  this  put  in  fcripture ;  nay  it  is  pofitive 
in  thefc  matters,  that  "  with  fuch  facrifices  God  is 
*'  well  plei(ed."  I  inflance  in  this  virtue  more  efpeci. 
ally  of  kindnefs  and  compafTion,  becaufc  it  is  one 
of  the  prime  inftances  of  moral  duties ;  as  facrifice 
is  put  for  all  the  ritual  and  indituted  part  of  religion, 
and  this  difpofuion  of  mind  our  Saviour  makes 
the  root  of  all  moral  duties,  "  love  is  the  fulfilling  of 
«'  the  law;"  and  the  apoftle  fpeaks  of  it  as   the 
great  end  and  fcope   of  the  gofpel;  "  the  end  of 
*'  the  commandment  is  charity."     And  this  temper 
and  difpofuion  of  mind  he  advanceth  above  know- 
ledge, and  faith,  and  hope ;  "  the  greatefl:  of  thefe 
"  is  charity :  "  and  without  this,  he  will  not  allow 
a  man  to  be  any  thing  in  chridianity  ;  this  he  makes 
our   highefl:    perfedlion   and    attainment,  and  that 
which  abides  and  remains  in  the  future  (late;  ^«  cha- 
*'  rity  never  fails." 

This  our  Saviour  mod:  effedlually  recommends 
to  us,  both  in  his  do61:rine,  and  by  his  example ; 
this  he  prefleth  as  a  peculiar  law  of  his  relio-jon, 
and  the  proper  mark  and  character  of  a  diiciple. 
This  he  requires  us  to  exercife  towards  thofe  who 
pradlife  the  contrary  towards  us ;  ''  to  love  our  ene- 
*^  mies,  and  to  do  good  to  them  that  hate  us.'* 
And  of  this,  he  hath  given  us  t\\^  greatefl  examp'c 
that  ever  was  ;  "  when  we  were  enemies  to  him,'* 
he  loved  us  fo  as  hardly  ever  any  man  did  his  friend. 

Vol.  VI,  12  Q^  fo 

7« 


1694  Injlitiited  religion  not  intejided 

SERM.  foas  "  to  lay  down  his  life  for  us ;"  and  he  indi- 
^}^l:  i  tuted  the  facrament  for  a  memorial  of  his  love  to 
mankind,  and  to  put  us  in  mind  how  we  ought  to 

love  one  another. 

And  now  the  application  of  what  hath  been  faid 
upon  this  argument,  to  the  occafion  of  this  day,  is 
very  obvious,  and  there  arc  two  very  natural  infe- 
rences from  it. 

Firft,  from  what  hath  been  faid  upon  this  argu- 
ment, it  plainly  appears  what  place  natural  and  mo- 
ral duties  ought  to  have  in  the  chriflian  religion  ; 
and  of  all  natural  duties,  "  mercy,  and  goodnefs.'* 
This  is  fo  primary  a  duty  of  humane  nature  ;  fo 
great  and  confiderable  a  part  of  religion,  that  all 
pofitive  inftitutions  mufl  give  way  to  it,  and  nothing 
of  that  kind  can  cancel  the  obligation  of  it,  nor 
iuftify  the  violation  of  this  great  and  natural  law. 
Our  blefled  Saviour  in  his  religion  hath  declared 
nothing  to  the  prejudice  of  it  ;  but  on  the  contrary 
hath  heightned  our  obligation  to  it,  as  much  as  is 
'polnble,  by  telling  us  that  "  the  Son  of  man  came 
*'  not  to  deilroy  mens  lives,  but  to  fave  them." 

So  that  "  they  know  not  what  manner  of  fpirit 
*«.  they  are  of,  Vv^ho  will  kill  men  to  do  God  fer- 
«'  vice^"  and  to  advance  his  caufe  and  religion  in 
the  world,  will  break  through  all  obhgations  of  na- 
ture, and  civil  fociety,  and  difturb  the  peace  and  hap- 
pinefs  of  mankind. 

Nor  did  our  Saviour  by  any  thing  in  his  reli-' 
oion  defign  e>  releafe  men  from  the  obligation  of 
natural  and   civil  duties.     He   had    (as  one  would 
imagine)  as  much  power  as  the  pope  \  but  yet  he 
dcpofcd  none  of  the  princes  of  this  world,  nor  did 

abfolvc 


to  undermine  natural  jg^^ 

abfolve  their  fubjeds  fronx  their  fidelity  and  obedi-SERM. 
cnce  to  them,' for  their  oppofition  to  his  relio-ion  •     ^^^^• 
he  aflLitned  no  fuch  power  to  himfeJf  (no  not  in  or-  "^ 
dine  ad  fpiritnalia)  nor,  that  ever  we  read  of,  dki  he 
give  it  to  any  other.     Whence  then  comes  his  pre- 
tended vicar   to  have  this  authority?  And  yet  the 
horrid  attempt  of  this  day  was  firll  defigned,  and 
afterwards  carried  on,  in  profecution  of  the  pope's 
bull  of  excommunication,  and  was  not  fo  much  the 
cifed:  of  the  defpair  and  difcontent  of  that  party  here 
in   England,,  as  the   natural    confcquence   of  their 
dodrines   of  "  extirpating  hereticks,  and  depofing 
«'  kings,  and   abfolving  fubjecls   from   their  allegi- 
"  ance  to  them." 

No  zeal  for  any  pofitive  inflitution  in  religion,  can 
juftify  the  violation  of  the  natural  law,  the  precepts 
whereof  are  of  primary  and  indifpcnfable  obligation. 
The  pope's  fupremacy  is  not  fo  clear,  as  the  duty 
cf  "  obedience  to  civil  government  ;'*  nor  is  tran- 
fubftantiation  fo  plainly  revealed  in  fcripture,  as  ic 
is  both  in  nature  and  fcripture,  that  we  fliould 
^'  do  no  murder."  And  yet  how  many  thouiands 
have  been  put  to  death,  becaufe  they  could  not  un- 
derhand this  hard  word,  and  believe  this  impoilible 
thing !  and  yet  if  the  fupremacy  of  the  pope  were 
clearly  of  divine  right,  and  the  dodlrine  of  tranfub- 
llantiation  as  plain  as  the  inflitution  of  the  facra^ 
ment ;  yet  thefe  being  but  pofidve  matters  in  reli- 
o-ion,  there  would  be  no  reafon  to  kill  men  for  net 
underdanding  and  believing  thefe^hings  j  nay  it 
would  be  contrary  to  religion  to  do  it  \  becaufe  the 
law  of  mercy  and  humanity,  which  is  the  law  c/ 
nature,  ought  not  to  be  violated  for  the  promoting 

12    (\7.  of 


cin. 


1696  Injlihted  religion  mf  intended 

S  E  R  M.  of  any  pofitivc  inflitution  5  and  God  ^  hath  plainly 
faid,  "  that  he  will  have  mercy  rather  than  facri- 
"  ficc ; "  yea   rather   than  the  facrifice  of  the  mafs, 
if  it  were  what  they  pretend  it  is,  the  offering  of 
the  natural  body  and  blood  of  Christ;  becaufe 
it  v/ould  be  needlefs :    for  propitiation  of  (In  being 
once  made  by  "  Christ's  offering  himfelf  once  for 
^'  all "  upon  the  crofs ;  *^  there  needs  no  more  fa- 
''  crifice  for  fin."     Nay,  I  will  go  further  yet ,  I 
had  rather  never  adminifler  the  facrament,  nor  ever 
receive  it,  than  take  away  any  man's  hfe  about  it ; 
becaufe  the  facrament  is  but  a  pofitive  rite  and  infli- 
tution of  the  chriftian  religion,   and  God    prefers 
mercy,  which  is  a  duty  of  natural  religion,  before 
any  rite  or  inflitution  whatfoever.     Befides,  that  all 
adls  of  malice  and  cruelty  are  dire6lly  contrary  to  the 
particular  nature  and  defign  of  this   bleffed   facra- 
ment, which   is  to  commemorate  the  fufferings  of 
the  Son  of  God  for  our  fakes,  and  to  give  us  an 
example  of  the  greatefl  love   that  ever  was,    and 
thereby  to  excite  us  to  the  imitation  of  it. 

2.  What  hath  been  faid  gives  us  a  right  notion 
and  charafter  of  that  church  and  religion,  which 
prefers  the  pofitive  rites  and  inflitutions  of  religion, 
and  the  obfervance  of  them,  to  thofe  duties  which 
are  of  natural  and  eternal  obligation,  mercy  and 
goodnefs,  fidelity  and  juflice  •,  and  which  for  the 
fake  of  a  pretended  article  of  religion,  or  rite  of 
worfhip,  (which  if  it  were  certain  that  they  were 
revealed,  and  inflituted  by  God  are  yet  merely  po- 
fitive^ will  break  the  greatefl  of  God's  command- 
rnents,  and  teach  m,en  fo, 


A 


It 


to  undermine  natural,  1^97 

It  is  too  pla'm  to  be  denied,  that  the  principles  SERM 
and  precepts  of  natural  religion  were  never  fo  effcdlu-    ^^^' 
ally  undermined,  and   the  moralit/  of  the  chriflian 
religion  never  fo  intolerably  corrupted  and  debauched, 
by  any   thing  that  ever   had  the  face    of   relip-ion 
in  the  world,  as  by  the  allowed  dodlrines  and  prac- 
tices of  the  church  of  Rome,    and   this  out  of  a 
blind  and  furious  zeal  for  fome  imaginary  dodlrines 
and  rites  of  the  chriflian  religion,  which  at  the  befl 
are  of  meer   pofitive   inflitution,    and  of  the  fame 
rank  among  chriftians,  that  facrifices  were  in  the 
jewifh  religion.     For  which  we  need  go  no  further 
for  an  inftance,  than  in  the  occafion  of  this  day's  fo- 
lemnity;  upon   which  day,    (about  fourfcore  years 
ago)  there  was  defigned  a  mighty  facrifice  indeed, 
the  greateft  and  richell  burnt-offering  that  ever  was 
pretended  to  be  offered  up  to  almighty   God,  by 
thofe  of  any  religion  whatfoever ;  not  *'  the  blood 
*'  of  bulls  and   goats,"  but  of  king,  and  princes, 
and  nobles  more  in  value,  than  "  thoufands  of  rams, 
"  and  ten  thoufands  of  rivers  of  oil  \  than  all  the 
*'  beafts  of  the  foreft,  and  the  cattle  upon  a  thou- 
«  fand  hil  V 

Here  was  a  prodigious  facrifice  indeed ;  but  where 
"was  mercy  ?  the  thing  God  chiefly  defires,  and 
which  above  all  other  things  is  acceptable  to  him  ; 
no  mercy,  not  even  to  thofe  of  their  own  religion, 
whom  thefe  nice  and  tender  cafuifts,  after  a  folemn 
debate  of  the  cafe,  had  refolved  to  involve  in  the 
fame  common  deftruftion  with  the  reft  ;  rather  no 
mercy,  than  that  this  facrifice  which  their  mad  zeal 
had  prompted  them  to,  fhould  be  omitted, 

Tq 


199^  C^r^/f?«//y  doth  not  deJlroy\ 

To  conclude,  they  that  can  do  fuch  inhumane 
things,  and  think  them  to  be  religion,  do  not  un- 
derfland  the  nature  of  it,  but  had  need  to  be  taught 
the  firll  rudiments  of  natural  reh'gion  ;  that  natural 
duties  are  not  to  be  violated  upon  pretc;ice,  no,  not 
for  the  Take  of  pofitive  inftitutions  ;  becaufe  natural 
religion  is  the  foundation  of  that  which  is  inftitu- 
ted  i  and  therefore  to  violate  any  natural  duty  for 
the  fake  of  that  which  is  inflituted,  is  for  religion  to 
undermine  and  blow  up  itfelf.  Let  thofe  v/ho  do 
fuch  things,  and  teach  men  fo,  "  go  and  learn  what 
*'  that  meaneth,  I  will  have  mercy,  and  not  facrifice.'* 


S  E  Pv  M  O  N     CIV. 

Chriflianity    doth     not    deftroy ,    but 
perfect  the  law  of  Mofes. 

MATTHEW   V.    17. 

^hink  not  that  I  am  come  to  deftroy  the  law  or  the 
-[rochets,   '  I  am  not  come  to  deftroy^  hut  to  fulfil, 

SERM.  nr^HERE   is  no  faying  in  the  whole  gofpel, 

^^y*  i        which  the  Jews  did  fo  frequently  objedl  to 

The  f:rfl       -*"       the  chriftians  as  this  of  our  blefled  Savi- 

icimonon  Q^j^    ^5  jf  j^js  words  and  aftions  were  plainly  re- 

tills  text  • 

pugnant,  and  contrary  to  one  another :  for  when  it 
is  evident,  fay  they,  that  he  took  away  fo  many  cere- 
monies, purifications,  diftindions  of  meats,  facrifices, 
judicial  laws,  and  many  other  things ;  yet  he  fays, 
*'  he  came  not  to  deflroy  the  law  or  the  prophets ; '' 
i •   fo 


but  perfeB  the  law  of  Mo  ft  s,  ^699 

fb  that  it  is  plain,  that  he  did  throw  down  the  law  S  E  R  M. 
of  Mofes,  and  in  fo  doing  contradidtcd  his  own  fay- 
ing, that  he  did  not  intend  "  to  deftroy  the  law." 
To  clear  our  Saviour's  words  of  this  objedion,  it 
will  be  requifite  to  confider  the  fcope  and  defign  of 
his  difcourfe  in  this  chapter;  by  which  we  fliali  fully 
underftand  the  fenfe  and  meaning  of  thele  words  in 
the  text. 

Our  Saviour  in  this  fermon,  (which  contains  the 
fum  and  fubfiance  of  his  religion)  doth  earneflly  re- 
commend to  his  difciples  and  followers,  and  flridlly 
enjoins  the  perfed:  practice  of  all  goodnefs  and  vir- 
tue, declaring  to  them,  that  he  came  to  bring  in  and 
eftablifh  that  righteoufnefs,  which  the  jewiili  reli- 
gion indeed  aimed  at,  but  through  the  weaknefs  and 
imperfedlion  of  that  di/penfation,  was  not  able  to 
effed  and  accomplilh.  And  to  take  away  all  fufpi- 
cion  of  a  defign,  to  contradidl  the  former  revelations 
of  God,  made  to  the  Jews  by  Mofes  and  the  pro- 
phets, or  to  deftroy  their  divine  authority,  by  car- 
rying on  a  defign  contrary  to  them,  I  fay,  to  pre- 
vent any  imagination  of  this  kind,  he  does  here  in 
the  text  exprelly  declare  the  contrary  ;  "  Think 
*'  not,  &c."  intimating  that  fome  either  did,  or  at 
lead  might  be  apt  to  fufped,  that  his  defign  was 
to  deftroy  the  obligation  of  the  law,  and  to  under- 
mine the  authority  of  Mofes  and  the  prophets  ;  to 
free  them  from  this  jealoufy,  he  declares  plainly,  that 
he  had  no  fuch  thought  and  intention,  it  was  far  from 
him. 

*'  I  come  not  to  deftroy,  xolaXuVar,  to  abro- 
*'  gate  or  difTolve  the  law,"  to  encourage  men  to 
the   breach  and  violation  of  it ;  for  the  word  is  of 

the 


1700  Chrijiianify  doth  not  dejlroy^ 

SE  R  M.  the  fame  fenfe  with  Xu«v,  at  the  19th  verfe,  "  who- 
^^^'  .  "  foever  ihall  break  gne  of  thefe  lead  command- 
♦'  ments ; "    and  with   y.arapysiVaf,    Rom.  iii.  3X. 
vo.aov  Sv  y.arapySjjLiVy  "  do  we  then  make  void  the 
*'  law  by  faith  ?"  which  is  the  fame  queftion  with 
that  of  the  fame  apoftle.  Gal.  iii. 2 1. ''  Is  the  lav/  then 
"  againft  the  promifes  of  God  ?  "  that  is,  "  are  the 
*'  law  and  the   gofpel  contrary  ?  do  they  contradi(5t 
«'  one  another ;  '*  fo  that  the  meaning  of  our  Savi- 
our's  declaration  is  this,   that  he  was  not  come  to 
diflblve,  and  abrogate,  and  make  void  the  law,  or 
to  encourage  men  to  the  breach  of  it ;  that  the  pre- 
cepts of  his  religion  were  in  no  wife  contrary  to  thofe 
of  the  law  and  thef  prophets,  did  not   thwart  and 
oppofe  them,  or  any  ways  contradid  the  main  de- 
fign  and  intention  of  the  law  gind  the  prophets  ;  that 
is,  of  the  jewifh  religion  -,  for   fo  the  law  and  the 
prophets  do  frequently  fignify,Matth.  vii.  i2.*'There- 
**  fore  all  things  whatfoever  ye    would   that  men 
'  Ihould  do  to  you,  do  ye  even  fo  to  them ;  for 
*  this  is  the  law  and  the  prophets  ;  '*  that  is,  this  is 
the  main  fcope  and  intention  of  what  your  religion, 
contained  ^'  in  the  law  and  the  prophets,"  teacheth, 
concerning  your  duty  to  one  another.     So  likewifc, 
Matth.  xxii.  4.0,   "  On  thefe  two   commandments 
*'  hang  all  the  law  and  the  prophets;"  that  is,  this 
is  the  fum  of  all  the  duties  of  religion  ;  to  thefe  two 
laws,  all  that  the  jewifh  religion  teacheth,  may  be  re- 
fer'd.     "  I  am  not  come  to  deftroy  but  to  fulfil  •,  '* 
to  carry  on  the  fame  defign  which  was  intended  by 
the  jewifli  religion,  and  to  perfedl  and  accomplifh 
it  i  to  fupply  all  the  defers  and  weakneiles  and  im- 

perfedlionsof  thatdifpenfation  ;  this  is  the  plain  mean- 

ing^ 


but  perfedi  the  law  of  Alofes,  1 70 1 

inor  of  this  caution  and  decUration  of  our  Savi-  S  E  R  M 
ouR*S;  "  think  not,  &c.'*  ^^' 

For  the  clearing  of  this  matter,  viz.  that  the  de- 
fign  of  our  Saviour's  dodrine  and  rehgion,  is  not 
contrary  to  thofe  former  revelations,  which  God 
made  to  the  Jews  by  Mofes  and  the  prophets  \  this 
will  evidently  appear,  whether  we  confider  the  pro- 
phefies  and  prediclions  of  the  old  teftament,  or  the 
laws  and  precepts  therein  contained. 

Firft,  the  prophefies  and  predictions  of  the  old 
teftament ;  our  Saviour  came  not  to  contradid 
and  overthrow  thefe;  but  to  fulfil  them.  The  chief 
predidlions  of  the  law  and  the  prophets  'were  con- 
cerning the  Me  ssi  as,  and  his  fpiritual  kingdom..  In 
the  law  it  was  foretold,  "  that  God  would  raife  to 
''  them  a  prophet  like  unto  Mofes,  whom  they 
*'  ought  to  hear  and  obey  ;  and  to  him  all  the  pro- 
*'  phets  of  the  old  teftament  gave  witnefs,"  foretell- 
ing the  time  of  his  coming,  his  extradlion,  the  man- 
ner and  circumftances  of  his  birth,  the  purity  and 
efficacy  of  his  dodlrine,  the  aflions  and  miracles  of 
his  life,  his  paflion,  death,  and  burial,  with  the  par- 
ticular circumftances  of  them,  his  refurre6lion  from 
the  dead,  and  his  afcenfion  into  heaven,  and  exal- 
tation at  the  right  hand  of  God  ;  fo  that  this  part 
of  the  law  and  prophets  he  did  accomplifti  and  ful- 
fil in  a  moft  eminent  and  remarkable  manner  j  all 
things  that  the  prophets  had  foretold  concerning  the 
Messias,  were  pundually  made  good  in  the  perfon, 
and  adiions,  and  fufferings  of  our  S  a  viou  a. 

Secondly,  as  to  the  laws  and  precepts  of  the 
jewilh  religion,  the  do(5lrine  and  the  laws  of  chrifti- 
anity  did  not  clafh  with  them  ;  nor  properly  abro- 

Vo  L.  VI.  12  R  gate 

7. 


1702  Chrijlianity  doth  not  defiroy^ 

S ER  M.  gate  them,  and  make  them  void,  efpecially  as  to  the 
moral  precepts,  which  were  the  very  hfe  and  fpirit, 
the  ultimate  fcope  and  defign  of  that  rehgion  5  nay, 
fo  far  was  it  from  doing  fo,  that  the  main  and  proper 
intention  of  chriftianity,  was  to  clear,  and  eftablifh 
that,  which  was  the  main  defign   of  the   law  and 
prophets,  to   perfe6l  the  law  in    this  part,    and  to 
raife   and    advance   morality   to   its   highetl  pitch, 
to    fupply    all     the   defeats    and     imperfedions  of 
the  jewifh  religion,  and   to    make  men  much  bet- 
ter    than     that     weak    and    imperfed    inftitution 
was  able   to    do.     This   was    the    great   defign  of 
chriftianity,  and  it  is  very  probable  that  our  Savi- 
ouR  had  a  principal,  if  not  a   fole  refped  to  the 
precepts  of  the  moral  law,  when  he  here  fays,  that 
"  he  came  not  to  deftroy  the  law  and  the  prophets, 
*'  but  to  perfeft  and  fulfil  them  j "  as  I  fhall  have 
occafion  by  and  by  to  fhew  more  at  large. 

But  that  we  may  give  a  full  anfvver  to  the  objec- 
tion of  the  Jews  againft  this  faying  of  our  Savi- 
our's, I  lliall  fhew  that  he  did  not  come  to  thwart 
and  contradidl,  and  properly  to  abrogate  and  make 
void  the  jewifh  law,  in  any  part  of  it,  neither  the 
civil  and  judicial,  nor  the  ritual  and  ceremonial,  much 
lefs  the  moral  and  natural  precepts  of  it.     This  is 
more   than  I   think  to  be  abfolutely  neceffary,  to 
reconcile  this  faying  of  our  Saviour  with  the  refl 
of  his  do6lrine  and  adlions,  for  tho'  he  had  properly 
abrogated  the  ceremonial  law,  and  in  no  fenfe  ful- 
fiird  it ;  yet,  notwithftanding  this,  it  may  be  true, 
that  "  he  came  not  to  deftroy  the  la  v  and  the  pro- 
•'  phcts  j'*  that  is,  to  deftroy  the  obligation  of  moral 
duties,    which    he  fpeaks  of  in  this  chapter,   and 

clfe- 

I 


but  perfeSl  the  law  of  Mofes,  1707 

elfewhere  declares  to  be  the  ultimate  fcope,  the  Tum  3  E  R  ivf. 
and  fubftance  of  the  law  and  the  prophets ;  for  if  ^^^' 
the  ceremonial  law  was  not  defigned  by  God  to  be 
perpetual,  but  to  give  way  to  a  more  perfed:  dif- 
penfation  j  then  our  Saviour  did  no  way  thwarc 
and  contradidl  the  law  and  the  prophets ;  by  abro- 
gating the  ceremonial  law,  at  that  time,  when  Goa 
defigned  that  a  period  fhould  be  put  to  it.  But  yet 
for  the  fuller  Hitisflidion  to  this  objedion,  I  fliall  Ihew 
that  our  Saviour  did  not  properly  abrocrate  any 
part  of  the  jewilli  law,  no  not  the  ritual  and  ceremo- 
nial part  of  it  ;  but  did  fulfil  it. 

Firfb,  not  their  civil  and  judicial  laws.  Thefe  in 
the  original  intention  of  them,  were  not  laws  defigned 
for  mankind,  but  fuited  and  fitted  to  the  difpofition 
and  temper,  the  condition  and  circumftances  of  a 
particular  people  and  nation  ;  to  thefc  our  Saviour 
taught  obedience,  and  paid  it  himfelf,  and  never  did 
any  thing  contrary  to  them,  nor  in  the  leaft  weakca 
the  obligation  of  them  ;  but  they  continued  in  full 
force,  'till  that  nation  and  commonwealth  was  dif- 
folved.  So  that  thefe  laws  were  no  way  impeached 
or  abrogated  by  the  chriftian  religion  ;  but  they  fell 
for  want  of  a  fubjedl  to  exercife  their  power  upon, 
and  becaufe  the  people  that  were  to  be  governed  by 
them  were  deftroyed  or  difTipated  ;  and  tho'  they 
neither  are,  nor  ever  were  obligatory  to  other  nati- 
ons, as  given  by  Mofes,  and  as  thty  were  the  pecu- 
liar laws  of  a  particular  nation  ;  yet  the  natural  rea- 
fon  and  equity  of  them,  fo  far  as  it  concerned  man- 
kind, is  duly  confidered  and  regarded  by  us,  and 
many  of  thefe  laws  are  adopted  into  the  lav/s  of  molt 
chriftian  nations.     It  is  plain  then,  that  this  part  of 

17  R  z  the 


CIV. 


1704  Chrijlianity  doth  not  dejlroy,  ' 

S  E  R  M.  the  jewifh  law  received  no  prejudice  by  chriftianity, 
but  continued  in  full  force,  fo  Jong  as  that  nation  and 
commonwealth  lafted,  which*  was  to  be  governed 
by  it. 

Secondly,  as  to  the  ritual  and  ceremonial  part  of 
thejewifli  law,  which  confided  in  circumcifion,  and 
purifications,  and  facrifices,  in  didinftion  of  meats, 
and  times,  and  innumerable  other  rites  and  obfer- 
vances  j  this  was  not  properly  abrogated  and  made 
void  by  the  coming  of  Christ,  but  fulhll'd  and 
made  good  by  him.  The  rites  and  ceremonies  of 
the  law,  were  the  types  and  fhadows  of  thofe  future 
good  things  which  were  promifed  under  the  gofpeJ, 
a  kind  of  rude  draught  of  a  better  and  more  perfect 
inftitution,  which  was  defigned,  and  at  laft  finifhed 
and  perfedled  by  the  chriftian  religion.  This  ac- 
count the  apoftle  gives  of  the  legal  rites  and  obfer- 
vances,  Col.  ii.  16,  17.  ^'  Let  no  man  judge  you  in 
meat  or  in  drink,  or  in  refped  of  a  holy-day,  or 
of  the  new-moon,  or  of  the  fabbath-days,  which 
«'  are  a  fhadow  of  things  to  come,  but  the  body  is 
*'  of  Christ  ;  "  that  is,  he  is  the  fubflance  and  rea- 
lity of  all  thofe  things,  which  were  fhadowed  and 
figured  by  thofe  legal  obfervances.  And  fo  the 
apoftle  to  the  Hebrews  calls  the  priefts  and  facrifices 
of  the  law,  the  "  examples  and  fhadows  of  heavenly 
*'  things,"  chap.  viii.  5.  and  fo  chap.  x.  i.  "  the 
*'  law  having  a  fhadow  of  good  things  to  come, 
*'  and  not  the  very  image  of  the  things,"  that  is, 
being  but  an  obfcure  type,  and  not  a  perfed  repre- 
fcntation  of  the  blefTings  and  benefits  of  the  gofpel, 
which  we  now  have  in  truth  and  reality.  Now  rea- 
fon  will  tell  us,  that  the  laws  concerning  thefe  types 

and 


CIV. 


lilt  perfeB  the  law  of  Mofes.  170  c 

and  fhadows,  were  only  to  continue  till  the  fubflance  SERm. 
of  the  things  fignified  by  them  fhould  come,  and 
that  they  would  be  of  no  longer  ufe,  when  that 
more  perfed  inftitution,  which  was  figured  by  them, 
fliould  take  place,  and  then  they  would  expire,  and 
become  void  of  themfeJves,  becaufe  the  reafon  and 
ufe  of  them  ceafing,  they  mud  ncceflarily  flill. 

But  they  did  not  expire  immediately  upon  the 
coming  of  Christ,  and  therefore  he  himfelf  fub- 
mitted  to  thefe  laws,  fo  Jong  as  they  continued  in 
force  ;  he  was  circumcifed  and  prefented  in  the  tem- 
ple, and  performed  all  other  rites  required  by  the 
Jaw,  that  firft  covenant  to  which  thefe  laws  and  or- 
dinances belonged,  continuing  in  force  'tilJ  the  rati- 
fication of  the  fecond  covenant  by  the  death  of 
Ch  rist,  and  then  thefe  Jaws  expired,  or  rather  were 
fulfill'd,  and  had  their  accomplifhment  in  the  fi- 
crifice  of  Christ,  which  made  alJ  the  facrifices  and 
other  rites  of  the  jewifii  religion  needlefs,  and  of  no 
ufe  for  the  future  ;  Christ  having  by  this  '^  one 
*'  facrifice  of  himfelf,  perfeded  for  ever  them  that  are 
"  fandlified,"  as  the  fame  apodle  fpeaks,  Heb.  x.  14. 
So  that  Christ  did  not  properly  abrogate  and  re- 
peal thofe  rites  and  ceremonial  Jaws ;  but  they  hav- 
ing continued  as  Jong  as  they  were  defigned  to  do, 
and  there  was  any  ufe  of  them,  they  abated  and 
ceafed  of  themfelves. 

And  that  the  death  of  Christ  was  the  time  of 
their  expiration,  becaufe  then  the  new  covenant  took 
place,  St.  Paul  exprefly  tells  us,  Eph.  ii.  15.  "  hav- 
*'  ing  aboJifhed  cr  voided  in  his  flefJi  the  law  of 
*'  commandments,  contained  in  ordinances,''  and 
this,  verfe  i6th,  he  is  faid  to  have  clone  by  his  croli  •, 

and 


i7of>  Chriflianity  doth  not  deJlro)\ 

SERM.and  more  plainly,  Col.  ii.  14.  "  blotting  out  the 
CIV.  ci  hand-writing  of  ordinances,  which  was  againfl  us, 
"  and  took  it  out  of  the  way,  nailing  it  to  his  crofs.'* 
So  that  ye  fee  that  even  the  ceremonial  law  was 
not  fo  properly  abrogated  by  the  facrifice  and  death 
of  Christ,  but  rather  had  its  accomplifhment,  and 
attained  its  end  in  the  facrifice  of  Christ,  which 
by  the  eternal  efficacy  of  it  to  the  expiation  of  fin, 
and  the  purifying  of  our  confciences,  hath  made  all 
the  facrifices  and  wafhings,  and  other  rites  of  the 
ceremonial  law,  for  ever  necdlels  and  fuperfiuous. 

Thirdly,  but  efpeciallyas  to  the  moral  law,  and 
thofe  precepts  which  are  of  natural  and  perpetual  ob- 
ligation, our  Saviour  did  not  come  cither  to  dif- 
'  folve,  or  to   lefiTcn  and  flacken  the  obligation   of 
them. 

And  of  this  I  told  you  our  Saviour  doth  prin- 
cipally, if  not  folcly  fpeak  here  in  the  text,  as  will 
appear  to  any  one  that  fhall   attentively  confider  the 
fcope  of  his  difcourfe.    In  the  beginning  of  his  fer- 
mon,  he  promifeth  blefTing  to  thofe,  and  thofe  only 
who  were  endowed  with  thofe  virtues  which  are  re* 
quired  by   the  precepts  of  the  moral  law,  or  com- 
prehended in   them  \  and  then  he  tells  them,  that 
chriftians  mufl:  be  very  eminent  and  confpicuous  for 
the  practice  of  them,  ver.  i6th,  "  Let  your  light 
"  fo  fhine  before  men,  that  they  may  fee  your  good 
*'  works,  and  glorify  our  Father  which  is  in  hea- 
**  ven  ;  "  and  then  he  cautions  them  not  to  enter- 
tain any  fuch  imagination,  as  if  he  intended  to  dif- 
folve  the  obligation  of  the  law,  and  to  free  Men 
from  the  praclice  of  moral  duties,  which  probably 
Ibme  might  have  fuggefted  againfl  him  ^  ''  think 

^^  not 


but  perfeB  the  law  ofMofes.  17^7 

^^  not   that  I  am  come  to  deftroy  the  law  and  the  SERM. 
"  prophets ;  '*  as  if  he  had  faid,  you  cannot  enter-  ,     ^^• 
tain  any  fuch    conceit,  if  you  confider  that  the  pre- 
cepts  which   I  inculcate  upon  you,    and  thofe  vir- 
tues,   the    pradtice  whereof  I  recommend  to    you, 
are  the  fame  which  are  contained  in  the  law  and  the 
prophets.    So  that  I  am  fo  far  from  crofTing  the  main 
defign  of  the  law  and  the  prophets,  and  taking  away 
the  obligation  of  moral  duties  enjoined  by  the  jewifli 
religion,  that  1  come  purpofely  to  carry  on  the  iame 
defign  to  further  perfedion,    to  give  a  more  perfed: 
and  clear  law,  and  to  give  a  greater  enforcement  and 
encouragement  to  the  practice  of  moral  duties ;  tliefe 
were  always  the  fum  and  fubftancc  of  reHgion,theulti-  ' 
mate  defign  of  the  law  and  the  prophets, and  therefore 
I  am  fo  far  from  difcharging  men  from  the  obh'gation 
of  the  moral  precepts  of  the  law,  that  I  come  to  bind 
them  more  ftrongly  upon  you.  And  "  verily  I  fay  unto 
*'  you,"  that  is,  I  folemnly  declare,  "  that  whofo- 
*'  ever  fliall  break  one  of  thefe  leafl  commandments, 
*'  and  fhall  teach  men  fo,he  fhall  be  called  the  leaft  in 
the  Kingdom  of  heaven  *,    that  is,  he  fhall  m  no  wife 
enter    therein.  You    think  the  fcribes  and  pharilees 
very  pious  and  excellent  men,  and  to  have  attained 
to  a  high  pitch  of   righteoufnefs ;  "  but  I  fay  unto 
*'  you,  that  except  your  righteoufnefs  fhall  exceed 
"  the  righteoufnels  of   the  fcribes  and  pharifees,    ye 
*'  Ihall  in  no  wife  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven." 
And  then  he  inftanceth  in  feveral  precepts   of    die 
moral  law,  which  in  the  letter  of  them,  efpecially  as 
they  were    interpreted  by  the  teachers  of   the  law 
among  the  Jews, were  very  much  fhort  of  that  righte- 
oufnefs and  perfe(^ion  which  he  now  requires  of  his 

j  difciples 


1708  Chrijiianity  doth  not  deflroy^ 

SER  M.  difclples  and  followers.    So  that  his  whole  difcourft 
CIV 

is  about  precepts  and  obligations  of  the  moral  law, 

and  not  a  word  concerning  the  ritual  and  ceremonial 
law ;  which  makes  me  very  prone  to  think,  that  our 
Saviour's  meaning  in  the  text  is  this,  that  his  reli- 
gion was  fo  far  from  thwarting  and  oppofing  that 
which  was  the  main  defign  of  the  law  and  the  pro- 
phets, that  is,  of  the  jewifh  religion,  that  the  prin- 
cipal intention  of  chriftianity  was  to  advance  the  pra- 
ctice of  goodnels  and  virtue,  by  ftrengthning  the  ob- 
ligation of  moral  duties,  and  giving  us  a  more  per- 
fect law  and  rule  of  life,  and  offering  better  argu- 
ments, and  greater  encouragements  to  the  obedience 
of  this  law.  Therefore  for  the  fuller  explication  and 
illuftration  of  this  matter,  I  fliall  endeavour  to  clear 
thefe  three  points. 

Firft,  that  the  main  and  ultimate  defign  of  the 
law  and  the  prophets,  was  to  engage  men  to  the  pra- 
ctice of  moral  duties,  that  is,  of  real  and  fubftantial 
goodnefs. 

Secondly,  that  the  law  of  Mofes,  or  the  difpenfa- 
tion  of  the  jewifh  religion,  was  comparatively  very 
weak  and  infuHicient  to  this  purpofe. 

Thirdly,  that  the  chriftian  religion  hath  fupplied 
all  the  defeCls,  and  weaknefTes  and  imperfeftions  of 
that  difpenfation ;  thefe  three  particulars  will  fully 
clear  our  Saviour's  meaning  in  this  text. 

Firfb,  that  the  main  and  ultimate  defign  of  the 
law  and  the  prophets,  was  to  engage  men  to  the  pra- 
ctice of  moral  duties ;  that  is,  of  real  and  fubftantial 
goodnefs,  confifting  in  thofe  virtues  which  our  Sa- 
viour mentions  at  the  beginning  of  this  fermon; 
humility,  and  meeknefs,  and  mercy,  and  righteoufnefs, 

and 


but  perfect  the  law  of  Mofes,  '7^9  1 

and  purity,  and  peaceablenefs.  This  our  Saviour  SERM. 
more  than  once  tells  us  was  the  fuin  and  fub-» 
fiance,  the  main  fcope  and  defign  of  the  whole 
dodrine  of  the  Jaw  and  the  prophets,  Matth.  vii. 
12.  "  Therefore  all  things  whatfoever  ye  would 
"  that  men  fhould  do  unto  you,  do  ye  even  fo 
"  unto  them,  for  this  is  the  law  and  the  prophets.'* 
And  Mattli.  xxii.  40.  That  the  love  of  God  and  our 
neighbour,  thofe  two  great  comm'ands,  to  which  all 
moral  duties  are  reduced,  are  the  two  great  hinges  of 
the  jewifli  religion  ;  "  on  thefe  two  hang  all  the  law 
"  and  the  prophets."  St.  Paul  calls  love,  "  the  fuL 
*'  filling  of  the  whole  law,'*  Rom.  xiii.  10.  St. 
James,  ''  the  perfed:  and  the  royal  law,"  as  that 
which  hath  a  fovereign  influence  upon  all  parts  of  re- 
ligion. And  therefore  the  apoUle  Rom.  iii.  21.  tells 
us,  that  this  more  perfed  righteoufnefs  which  was 
brought  in  by  the  gofpel,  or  the  chriftian  religion,  is 
*'  witnefTcd  by  the  law  and  the  prophets."  And  in- 
deed the  prophets  every  where  do  flight  and  under- 
value the  ritual  and  ceremonial  part  of  religion,  ia 
comparifon  of  the  praftice  of  moral  duties,  lla.  i.  n. 
"  To  what  purpofe  is  the  multitude  of  your  facrifices 
"  unto  me.?  bring  no  more  vain  oblations;  your 
''  new-moons  and  your  appointed  feafts  my  foul 
"  hateth."  But  v/hat  then  are  the  things  that  are  ac- 
ceptable to  God  ?  he  tells  us  at  the  1 6th  ver.  "  waffi 
«'  ye,  make  you  clean,  put  away  the  Q\n\  of  your 
''  doings  from  before  mine  eyes,  ceafe  to  do  evil 
*'  learn  to  do  well;  feek  judgment,  relieve  the  op- 
''  prefled,  judge  the  fluherlefs,  plead  for  the  wi- 
"  dow."  And  by  the  prophet  Jeremiah  God  tells 
that  people,  that  the  bufmefs  of  facrifices  was  not 
Vol.  VI.  ^2  S  the 

7. 


1720  tlhriftianity  doth  not  dejlrofy 

SERM.  the  thing  primarily  defigned  by  God,  but  obedience 
to  the  moral  law  ;  the  ritual  law  came  in  upon  occa- 
fion,  for  the  prevention  of  idolatry,   and  by  way  of 
condefcenfion  to  the  temper  of  that  people  ;  and  thus 
Maimonides   and   the  learned  Jews  underftand  thefe 
words,  Jer.  vii.  22,  23.  ''  I  fpake  not  unto  your  fa- 
*'  thers,  nor  commanded  them  in  the  day  I  brought 
'«  them  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  concerning  burnt- 
*^  offerings  and  facrifices  ^  but  this  thing  commanded 
"  I  them,  faying,  obey  my  voice,  and  walk  in  all 
*'  the  ways  that  I  have  commanded,    and  I  will  be 
"  your  God  and  ye  fhall  be  my  people."  So  likewife 
in  the  prophet  Hofea,  God  plainly  prefers  the  moral 
before  the  ritual  part  of    religion,   as    that   which 
was  principally  defigned  and  intended  by  him,  Hof. 
vi.  6.  "  I  defired  mercy,   and  not  facrifice^  and  the 
*'  knowledge  of  God  more  than  burnt-offerings  *,'* 
but     moil    plainly    and    exprefly,     Mic.    vi.     6. 
''  Wherewith  fhall  I  come  before  the  Lord?    fhail 
"  \  come  before  him  with  burnt-ofierings  .^^  will  the 
"  Lord  be  plcafed  with  thoufands  of  rams,  and  ten 
"  thoufands  of  rivers  of  oil  ?  he  hath  fhewed  thee, 
*'  O  man,  what  is  ^ood ;  and  what  doth  the  Lord 
*'  require  of  thee,    but  to  do  juftiy,  and  to  love 
*'  mercy,  and  to  walk  humbly  with  thy  God  ?"  thefe 
it  feems  were  the  great  things  which  God  flood  upon 
and  required  of  men  even  under  that  imperfed:  dif- 
penfation  ;  and  thefe  are  the  very  things  which  the 
chriflian    religion  doth  fo  flridly   enjoin  and  com- 
mand ;  fo  that  this   righteoufnefs  which  the   gofpel 
requii'es,  "  was  witnefled  to  by  the  law  and  the  pro- 
"  phcts."  I  proceed  to  the 

Second  point,  that  the  law  of  Mofes,  or  the  dif^ 
penfation  of  the  jevvifh  religion,  was  comparatively 

very 


hut  perfeci  the  law  of  Mofes,  1 7 1 1 

very  weak,  and  infufficient  to  make  men  truly  good,  SE  R  wi. 
and  for  the  promoting  of  real  and  inward  righte- 
cufnefs;  it  gave  laws  indeed  to  this  purpofe,  but 
thofe  not  fo  clear  and  perfedl,  or  at  lead  not  fo 
clearly  underftood,  as  they  are  now  under  the  gof- 
pel  \  and  it  made  no  exprefs  promifes  of  inward 
grace,  and  alTiftance,  to  quicken  and  ftrengthen  us 
in  the  doing  of  our  duty  •,  it  made  no  explicit  pro- 
miles  of  any  blefling  and  reward  to  the  doing  of  our 
duty  beyond  this  Mq-^  fo  that  the  bcft  and  moft 
powerful  arguments  and  encouragements  to  obedience, 
were  either  wholly  wanting,  or  very  obfcurely  re- 
vealed under  this  difpenfation. 

And  this  infufficiency  of  thejewiOi  difpenfation, 
both  to  our  juftification  and  fandlification,  to  the  re- 
conciling of 'us  to  God,  and  the  making  of  us  really 
good,  the  apoflle  frequently  inculcates  in  the  new 
teftamentj  Si,  Paul,  A6ls  xiii.  '^?>^  39.  ''  Be  it 
*'  known  unto  you  therefore,  men  and  brethren,  that 
*'  through  this  man  is  preached  unto  you  the  for- 
*'  givenefs  of  fins,  and  by  him  all  that  believe  are 
*^'  juftified  from  all  thofe  things,  from  which  ye 
*'  could  not  be  ju (lined  by  the  law  of  Mofes  •,'* 
and  Rom.  viii.  3.  "  What  the  law  could  not  do, 
^'  in  that  it  was  weak  through  the  flefh  •,"  that  is, 
by  reafon  of  the  carnality  of  that  difpenfation,  con- 
fifling  in  the  purification  of  the  body.  Gal.  iii.  21. 
he  calls  it  a  law  unfit  to  give  life ;  ^'  if  there  had 
*'  been  a  law  which  could  have  given  life,  verily 
"  righteioufnels  had  been  by  the  law.'*  And  the 
apoftle  to  the  Hebrews,  chap.  viii.  6,  7,  8,  &:c,  finds 
fault  with  the  difpenfation  of  the  law,  for  the  low- 
nefs  and  meannefs  of  its  promifes,  being  only  of 

12  S  2  temporal 


1 7 1 2  Chnjllanliy  doth  not  dejlroy^ 

S  £  R  M.  tcmpbral  good  things  ;  and  for  want  of  conferring 

an  inward  and  a  powerful  principle  to  enable  men  to 

obedience  ,  "  but  now  hath  he  obtained  (fpeaking 

"  of  Christ)  a  more  excellent  miniftry,  by  how 

"  much  alfo  he  is  the  medijitor  of  a  better  covenant, 

*'  which  was  eflablifhed  upon  better  promifes  *,  for 

*'  if  that  firfl  covenant  had  been  faultlefs,  then  fhould 

"  no  place  have  been  fought  for  a  fccond  i"  and 

this  lecond   and -better   covenant,    he   tells  us,  was 

foretold  by  the  prophets  of  the  old  teftament;  "  for 

''  finding  fiult  with  them,  he  faith,  behold  the  days 

*'  come,  faith  the  Lord,  when  I  will  make  a  new 

«'  covenant  with  the   houfe  of  Ifrael,  and  the  houfe 

"  of  Judah  j  not  according  to  die  covenant  which 

'^  I  made  with  their  fathers.      For  this  is  the  cove- 

«'  nant  which  I   will  make  with  the  houfe  of  Ifrael 

^'  after  thofe  days,  faith  the  Lord,     1.  will  put  my 

*'  laws   into  their   minds,  and    write  them  in  their 

*'  hearts."     And  chap.  x.  1,4.  he  fhews  the  inef^- 

cacy   of  their  facrifices  for  the  real  expiation  of  fin, 

*'  the   law    having  but  a  fhadow   of  good    things 

"  to  come,  and  not  the  lively  reprefentation  of  the 

*'  things  themfelves,  can  never  with  thofe  facrifices 

"  which  they  ofFer'd  year  by  year  condnually,  make 

*'  the  comers  thereunto  perfect  j  for  it  is  not  pofTi- 

«'  ble    that    the  blood   of    bulls  and  goats   fhould 

«•  takeaway  fins." 

I  fliould  now  have  proceeded  to  the  third  particu- 
lar; namely,  that  the  chriftian  religion  hath  fupplied 
all  the  defeds  and  weaknefs  and  imperfedion  of  the 
jewifli  difpeniation ;  but  that  I  fliall  not  now  enter 
upon,  but  make  one  plain  inference  from  the  fub- 
llaiice  of  what  Lhave  ah*eady  difcourfed  upon  this 
argument.  If 


hut perfedi  the  law  ofMofes.  ^7^'X 

If  our  Saviour  came  not  to  diiTolve  and  loofen  SERM. 
the  obligation  of  moral  duties,  but  to  confirm  and  ^^^ 
eftablifh  it,  and  to  enforce  and  bind  the  pradice  of 
thefe  duties  more  Urongly  upon  us,  then  they  do 
widely  and  wilfully  miftake  the  defign  of  chriftiani- 
ty,  v/ho  teach  "  that  it  difchargeth  men  from  the 
*'  obligation  of  the  moral  law,"  which  is  the  funda- 
mental and  avowed  principle  of  the  antinomian  doc- 
trine, but  dire6lly  contrary  to  this  declaration  of  our 
Saviour  in  the  text,  "  that  he  came  not  to  de- 
*'  flroy  the  law  and  the  prophets^but  to  perfect  and 
"  fulfil  themj'*  (for  to  take  away  the  obligation 
of  a  law,  is  plainly  to  deftroy  and  make  it  void  ;) 
and  contrary  to  the  apoflle's  folemn  refolution  of  this 
matter,  Rom.  iii.  31.  "  Do  we  then  make  void  the 
*'  law  through  faith  ? "  that  is,  does  the  gofpel  de- 
flroy  and  take  away  the  obligation  of  the  law  ? 
*^  God  forbid,  yea  we  eftablifh  the  law;"  thechri- 
flian  religion  is  lb  far  from  defigning  or  doing  any 
iuch  thing,  that  it  gives  new  ftrength  and  force  to  it. 
Bat  furely  they  that  teach  this  dodtrine,  did  ne- 
ver duly  confider  that  terrible  threatning  of  our  Sa- 
viour after  the  text,  which  feems  to  be  i^o  directly 
levell'd  at  them  ;  *'  whofoever  lliall  break  one  of 
*'  thefe  lead  commandments,  and  fliall  teach  men  ^Oy 
"  he  fhall  be  called  the  leaft  in  the  kingdom  of 
"  heaven  ;"  for  how  can  men  more  cfi^ectually 
teach  the  violation,  notonlyof  the  leaft,  but  of  the 
greateft  of  God's  commandments,  than  by  declaring 
*'  that  the  gofpel  hath  fet  men  free  from  the  obliga- 
^'  tion  of  the  moral  law?"  which  is  in  efted  to 
fay,  that  chriftians  may  a6l  contrary  to  all  the  du- 
|;i(ss  of  morality,  that  is,  do  the  moft  impious  things 

in 


1 7  ^4.  Chrijlianity  doth  not  dejiroy^ 

SERM.  in  the  world,  without  any  offence  ao;ainfl  God,  and 

CIV  •  •  • 

'     notwithflanding  this,  continue  to  be  his  children, 
and  highly  in  the  favour  of  God. 

And  all  the  fecurity  they  have  agalnft  this  impious 
confequence,  is  that  weak  and  fiender  pretence,"  that 
*'  gratitude  and  love  to  God  will  prefer ve  them 
*'  from  making  this  ill  ufe  of  the  grace  of  the  gof- 
*•  pel,  and  oblige  them  to  abftain  from  fin,  and  to 
*'  endeavour  to  pleafe  God  as  much  as  any  law  could 
*'  do."  But  then  they  do  not  confider  the  nonfenfe 
of  this;  for  there  can  be  no  fuch  thing  as  fin,  if  the 
obligation  of  the  law  be  taken  away  ;  for  "  where 
*'  there  is  no  law,  there  can  be  no  tranfgreflion,''  as 
the  apoftle,  and  common  reafon  likewife  tells  us ; 
fo  that  the  law  being  removed  and  taken  away,  all 
aflions  become  indifferent,  and  one  thing  is  not  more 
a  fin  or  offence  againft  God  than  another.  And 
what  then  is  ^'t  they  m^an  that  gratitude  will  oblige 
men  to,  or  p-eierve  them  from  ?  when  there  can  be 
no  i':^^^^'^  thing  as  fin  or  duty,  as  pleafing  or  offending 
God,  if  there  be  no  law  to  oblige  us  to  the  one,  or 
reflrain  us  from  the  other. 

And  what  is,  if  this  be  not,  "  to  turn  the  grace 
«'  of  God  into  wantonnefs,"  and  to  make  chriftian 
liberty  a  cloke  for  all  forts  of  fins?  a  man  cannot  do 
a  greater  defpite  to  the  chriftian  religion,  nor  take 
a  more  cffedual  courfe  to  bring  it  into  contempt,  and 
to  make  it  to  be  hifs'd  out  of  the  world,  than  to  re- 
prefcnt  it  as  a  lewd  and  licentious  dodlrine,  which  gives 
men  a  perfe6l  difcharge  from  all  the  duties  of  mora- 
lity, and  obligeth  them  only  to  believe  confidently, 
*^  that  Christ  hath  purchafed  for  them  a  liberty  to 
"  do  what  they  will,  and  that  upon   thofe    terms, 

"  and 


hut perfeSi  the  law  of  Mofes.  '^7^5 

*'  and  no  other,  they  are  fecured  of  the  favour  of 

*^  God  in  this  world,  and  eternal   falvation  in  the 

*'  other."    This  is  the  fum  and  plain  refult  ofthean- 

tinomian  dodrine,  the  rnoft  pernicious  herefy,  and 

molt  diredtly  deftru6live  of  the  great  end  and  de- 

fign  of  chriflianity,  that  ever  yet  was  broached  in 

the  v/orld.     "  Bat  ye  have  not  fo  learned  Christ, 

*'  if  fo  be  ye  have  heard  him,  and  have  been  taught 

**  by  him,  as  the  truth  is  in  Jesus,  that  ye  put  off 

*'  concerning  your  former   converfation  ,    the  old 

"  man,  which  is  corrupt  according  to  the  deceitful 

**  lulls,  and  that  ye  be  renewed  in  the  fpirit  of  your 

"  mind,    and  put  on  the   new  man,    which  after 

"  God   is  created  in  righteoufnefs,  and  true  holi- 


<<      rv^fc  " 


nefs/ 


SERMON     CV. 

Chriflianity    doth    not    deftroy ,    but 
perfedl  the  law  of  Mofes. 


M  AT  T  H  E  W   V.    17. 

4 

Think  not  that  I  am  come  to  deftroy  the  law  cr  the 
^prophets.     I  am  not  come  to  deftroy^  hit  to  fulfiL 

'  S  E  R  M. 
Have  confider'd  this  faying  of  our  Saviour's     cv. 

with  refped  to  the  moral  law,  and  thofe  pre-  '--^w^-' 

cepts  which  are  of  natural  and  perpetual  force,  cond  fer- 

and  that  our  Saviour  did  not  come  either  to  dif-"^^"  ^'^ 

this  tC'it. 

folve  or  loofen  the  obligation  of  them ;  for  the  illu- 
flration  of  which,  I  propounded  to  "clear  thefe  three 
points,  Firfl, 


I 


Chrijiianlty  doth  not  dejiroy^^ 

Firft,  that  the  main  and  ultimate  defign  of  the 
law  and  the  prophets,  was  to  engage  men  to  the 
pradice  of  moral  duties,  that  is,  of  real  and  fubftan- 
tial  goodnefs. 

Secondly,  that  the  lav,?  of  Mofes,  or  the  difpenfa- 
tion  of  the  jewifli  religion,  was  comparatively  very 
weak,  and  infufficient  to  make  men  truly  good,  and 
inefFedlual  to  promote  inward  and  real  righteoufnels, 
Thefe  two  points  I  have  fpoken  to.  I  fliall  now 
proceed  to  the 

Third,  namely,  that  the  chrillian  religion  doth 
fupply  all  the  defeds  and  weaknelTes  and  imperiec- 
tions  of  the  jevv^ifh  difpenfation. 

The  jewifh  religion  had  very  confiderable  advan- 
tacres  above  the  mcer  light  of  nature^  which  was  all 
that  the  heathen  world  had  to  condudl  them  towards 
eternal  happinefs  ;  the  Jews  had  the  knowledge  of 
the  one  true  God,  and  very  fignal  and  particular 
teftimonies  of  the  divine  providence,  which  did  na- 
turally tend  to  beget  in  them  good  hopes  of  a  future 
life,  and  the  rewards  of  another  world  ;  they  had 
the  natural  law  revealed,  and  the  main  precepts  of  it 
written  with  God's  own  hand,  and  by  Mofes  deli- 
vered to  them ;  by  which  means  they  had  a  more 
certain  and  diftindl  knowledge  of  their  duty ;  they 
had  prophets  frequently  fent  to  them,  to  admonifh 
them  of  their  duty,  and  to  exhort  them  to  repen- 
tance, and  to  warn  them  of  approaching  judgments. 
They  had  good  encouragement  given  to  hope  for 
the  pardon  of  fin,  by  God's  appointment  of  leveral 
ways  of  expiation  •,  which,  how  unlikely  foever  they 
were  to  be  available  to  the  effedual  expiation  of  i\x)^ 
yet  they  did  fignify  that  the  divine  nature  was  pla- 
cable. 


but  perfect  the  Jaw  Mofeu  lyiy 

cable,  and  did  Teem  to  figure  fome   more  effectual  S  E  R  M. 
way,  defigned  by  God  for  that  purpofe,  that  fliould     ^^' 
be  exhibited  in  due  time.    And  finally  they  had  mod 
exprefs  promifes  and  threatnings  of  temporal  blef-  ■ 
fings  and  judgments,  to  encourage  them  in  their  obe- 
dience, and  to  deter  them  from  the  tranfgrcfTion  of 
God's  laws.     Thefe  advantages  the  Jews  plainly  had 
above  the  reft  of  the  world,  God   did  not  deal  fo 
with  other  nations,  neither  had  the  heathen  fuch  a 
knowledge  of  God's  laws. 

But  notwithdanding  this,  thejewifli  religion  was 
very  fhort  and  defcdive,  very  weak  and  ineffedlual 
to  the  great  end  of  righteoufnefs  and  true  holiqcfs, 
and  to  raife  men  to  that  perfection  of  goodncfs,  of 
which  humane  nature  through  the  grace  of  God  is 
capable ;  and  therefore  there  wanted  a  more  perfccl 
inftitution,  to  fupply  the  defeds  and  weaknefs  and 
imperfedion  even  of  that  divine  revelation  which  God 
had  made  to  the  Jews,  and  really  to  effed  and  ac- 
complifh  that  which  the  jewifh  religion  attempted 
and  aimed  at,  and  was  but,  as  I  may  fay,  rudely 
begun  under  that  imperfecl  inflitucion.  And  this  the 
gofpel,  or  the  chriftian  religion  rev^ealed  by  our  Lor  d 
and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  hath  fully  effeded,  as 
will  evidently  appear  by  a  particular  furvey  and  con- 
fideration  of  the  main  defedls  of  the  jewiOi  religion, 
which  I  fhall  flievv  to  be  all  perfedly  made  up  by 
the  revelation  of  the  gofpel,  and  the  dodrine  of 
chriftianity,  in  thefe  following  particulars. 

Firft,  it  was  a  great  deled:  of  the  jewifh  religion, 
that  a  confiderable  part  of  it  was  meerly  exctrnal, 
concerning  the  purification  of  the  body  and  the  fielh, 
and  only  figurative  of  that  inward  purity  and  r<x\ 

Vol.  VI,  12  T  rightc- 

7- 


lyi^  Cbrijlianity  doth  not  de/lroy^ 

S  E  R  M.  righteoLifn efs,  which  renders  men  truly  good,  and 
like  to  God  ;  for  which  realbn  the  jewifh  inftitution 
is  by  the  apoftle  to  the  Hebrews  called  "  the  law 
*'  of  a  cirnal  commandment,"  Pleb.  vii.  i6,  and 
chap.  ix.  lo  ;  is  faid  ''  to  confifl:  only  (that  is  chiefly) 
*'  in  meats  and  drinks,  and  divers  wafhings,  and 
*'  carnal  ordinances  impofed  on  them  until  the  time 
*'  of  reformation  ;  *'  that  is,  'till  the  M  e  s  s  i  a  s 
ihould  come,  and  give  fuch  laws  as  ihould  really 
tend  to  reform  the  hearts  and  lives  of  men  ;  and 
therefore  thefe  laws  and  ordinances  are  call'd  ''  poor 
*'  pitiful  elements,"  and  "  the  rudiments  of  the 
"  world,"  fitted  rather  for  children  in  underftand- 
ing  and  goodnefs,  than  to  bring  men  to  any  matu- 
rity and  perfedion  in  goodnefs.  All  their  rites  of 
purification  did  "  only  fandlify  to  the  purifying  of 
"  the  flefh ;"  but  "  did  not  purge  the  confcience 

*'  from  dead  works,"  as  the  apoftle  to  the  He- 
brews fpeaks,  chap.  ix.  13,  14.  "  they  could  not  make 

*'  thofe  that  performed  and  obfert^ed  them  perfe6t, 
"  as  pertaining  to  the  confcience,"  ver.  9.  that  is, 
thefe  laws  had  no  efied  upon  the  minds  of  men, 
to  make  them  really  better,  to  cure  them  of  their 
moral  defedls  and  impurities,  their  fins  and  vices. 

But  the  chrifbian  inflitution  doth  perfedlly  fup- 
ply  this  defe6l,  by  taking  us  off  from  thofe  carnal 
and  external  obfervances,  and  principally  requiring 
that  w^e  "  worfhip  God  in  fpirit  and  in  truth ;  " 
by  giving  us  fuch  laws  as  wholly  tend  to  ad- 
vance real  and  fubftantial  goodnefs,  purity  and  ho- 
jinefs  of  heart  and  life,  fuch  as  mainly  tend  to  re- 
form the  minds  and  manners  of  men,  and  to  make 
us  like   to  that  holy  and  perfe(^  being  whom  wc 

worihip : 


but  perfcEl  the  law  of  Mofes,  '7^9 

worflilp  :  and  befides  an  external  humble  and  revc-  S  E  R  M. 
rent  demeanour  of  our  felves  in  the  woriliip  of  God,; 
(to  which  natural  religion  doth  likevvife  dirc6f : ) 
chriftianity  hath  only  inflituted  two  Iblemn  external 
rites,  viz.  "  baptifm,  and  tlie  Lord's  fupper  ; '* 
whereby  we  folemnly  oblige  our  felves  to  the  prac- 
tice of  all  virtue  and  goodnefs,  I  fay  only  diefe  two, 
that  by  the  multitude  of  external  obfervances,  chri- 
ftians  might  not  be  taken  off  from  the  minding  of 
the  real  and  fubftandal  duties  of  reh'gion. 

And  therefore  the  church  of  Rome  have  extremely 
abated  and  weakned  t\\z  force  of  chriftianity  upon 
the  hearts  and  lives  of  men,  by  amufing  them  with 
external  rites,  which  they  have  multiphed  to  that 
exceflive  degree,  as  to  make  the  yoke  of  Christ 
really  heavier  than  that  of  Mofes,  and  ih^  chridiaii 
religion,  a  more  external  and  carnal  commandment 
than  that  of  the  law,  and  by  this  means  have  di- 
verted and  taken  off  the  minds  of  men  from  tlie 
main  defign  of  chriftianity,  infomuch  tliat  they  are 
fo  employed  and  taken  up  with  matters  of  external 
ceremony,  that  they  have  no  leifure  to  think  of  be- 
ing good  men,  and  to  mind  the  great  and  fubllan- 
tial  duties  and  virtues  of  the  chriftian  life  ;  fo  that 
they  have  fpoil'd  the  chriftian  rehgion  of  one  of  its 
chief  excellencies  and  perfedlions,  I  mean  the  fim- 
plicity  of  its  worfhip,  which  they  have  now  cncum- 
bred  with  fo  many  foolidi  and  frivolous  rites  and 
obfervances,  as  do  not  only  render  it  more  burden- 
fom,  but  lefs  apt  to  make  men  inwardly  and  fub^ 
flantialiy  good,  that  even  judaifm  it  felf.  This  is 
fp  true  and  fo  vifible,  than  the  wifer  and  better  fort 
of  them  have  complain'd  of  it  for  feveral  ages,  and 

12  T  2  ilil 


1720  Chrijluinlfy  doth  not  dejlroy^ 

S  E  RM.  dill  do,  as  much  as  they  dare  for  fear  of  the  inquifi- 
J    .  tion,  or  feme  other  cenfure. 

Secondly,  another  defedl  of  the  Jaw  ofMofes  was, 
that  it  did  not  give  encouragement  enough  to  re- 
pentance, by  declaring  and  alluring  to  us  any  cer- 
tain way  and  method  for  the  expiation  and  forgive- 
nefs  of  fin.  This  the  rites  of  all  religions  aimed  at, 
and  pretended  to  ;  but  were  very  ineifeduai  to  that 
end.  The  heathen  facrifices,  and  all  the  cruel  and 
barbarous  rites  belonging  to  them,  did  all  pretend 
to  be  fo  many  ways  of  appeafing  the  offended  deity, 
and  of  making  atonement  and  expiation  for  fin  ; 
and  the  facrifices  of  the  Jews  were  inftituted  by  God 
himlelf,  to  make  an  external  and  legal  expiation, 
and  to  be  types  and  fliadows  of  a  better  and  more 
perfed  facrifice,  which  fhould  really  expiate  fin ;  but 
even  this  was  very  darkly  and  imperfectly  difcovered 
to  them  j  befides,  that  the  expiations  of  the  law  did 
only  extend  to  the  lead  forts  of  fins,  thofe  of  igno- 
rance and  inadvertency,  but  not  at  all  to  prefumptu- 
ous  fins,  and  fuch  as  were  committed  with  a  high 
hand,  nor  to  wilful  and  deliberate  fins,  except  in 
fome  very  few  and  rare  cafes  particularly  mentioned 
in  the  law  ;  fo  that  tho'  a  great  part  of  the  religious 
rites  both  of  the  pagan  and  jewifh  religion,  aimed 
at  the  expiation  of  fin,  yet  were  they  really  ineffec- 
tual to  that  end ;  and  upon  the  whole  matter,  man- 
kind, tho'  they  conceived  good  hope  of  God's 
mercy  and  forgivenefs  in  cafe  of  repentance,  "  (^who 
«*  can  tell  if  God  will  turn  and  repent,  and  turn 
«'  away  from  his  anger?")  yet  they  were  unac- 
quainted with  any  certain  and  efFed:uaI  means  to  that 
purpofe. 

It 


hut  perfeB  the  law  of  Mofes.  i  ^2 1 

It  remains  then,  that  this  great  blefllng  of  the  for-  S E  RM. 
givenefs  of  fins,  was  never  fufficiently  declared  and  ^Xl 
afTured  to  mankind,  but  through  Jesus  Christ  in 
the  gofpel.  So  St.  Paul  exprefly  afTerts,  A6ls  xiii. 
38,  39.  "  Be  it  known  unto  you  therefore,  men  and 
"  brethren,  that  through  this  man  is  preached  unto 
*'  you  the  forgivenefs  of  fins,  and  by  him  all  chat 
*'  believe  are  juftified  from  all  things,  from  which  ye 
"  could  not  be  juftified  by  the  law  of  Mofes."  The 
gofpel  hath  provided  an  expiation  for  all  fins  in  ge- 
neral, and  that  by  a  facrifice  of  ineftimabJe  value, 
"  the  blood  of  the  fon  of  God."  And  this  is  a 
mighty  encouragement  to  repentance,  and  one  moft 
efFedual  means  to  reclaim  men  from  their  fins,  to  be 
aflfured  that  they  are  indemnified  for  what  is  pafl. 
And  this  the  apoftle  means,  when  he  fays.  Gal.  iif. 
13.  "  that  Christ  hath  redeemed  us  from  the  curfe 
*'  of  the  law,  being  made  a  curfe  for  us  j"  that  is, 
whereas  the  law  left  finners,  as  to  thofe  fins  which 
flood  moft  in  need  of  pardon,  under  a  curfe,  havino- 
provided  no  expiation  for  them.  Christ  hath  re- 
deemed them  from  that  curfe,  by  making  a  general 
expiation  for  fin  ;  and  in  this  fenfe  it  is  that  the  au- 
thor to  the  Hebrews  fays,  chap.  ix.  15.  that  Christ 
died  ''  for  the  redemption  of  the  tranfgrelfions  that 
^'  were  under  thefirfl:  covenant''  ;  that  is,  for  thofe 
fins  for  which  the  covenant  of  the  law  had  provided 
no  way  of  forgivenefs ,  and  therefore  St.  John  fays 
emphatically,  i  John  i.  7.  "  that  the  blood  of  Jesus 
^'  Christ  cleanfeth  us  from  all  fin." 

Thirdly,  the  law  did  not  afford  fufficiendy  plain 
and  certain  rules  and  diredions  for  a  good  life.  As 
the  corruption  and  dcseneracv   of  mankind  o;rew 

worfe. 


1722  Chrijlianity  doth  not  dejlroy^ 

SE  R  M.  worfe,  fo  the  Jis-ht  of  nature  waxed  dimmer  and  dim- 

cv 

'  mer,  and  the  rule  of  good  and  evil  was  more  doubt- 
ful and  uncertain,  and  that  in  very  confiderable  in- 
llances  of  our  duty.  The  law  of  Mofes  was  peculiar 
to  the  Jews;  and  even  to  them,  who  only  had  the 
benefit  and  and  advantage  of  it,  it  did  not  give  clear 
and  perfeft  light  and  diredion  as  to  moral  duties, 
and  thofe  things  which  are  of  an  eternal  and  immu- 
table reafon  and  goodnefs.  And  therefore  our  Savi- 
our in  this  ferrnon  explains  it  to  a  greater  perfedion 
than  it  was  underftood  to  have  among  the  Jews,  or 
the  letter  of  it  feemed  to  intend,  and  hath  not  only 
forbidden  feveral  things  permitted  by  the  law,  as  di- 
vorce, and  retaliation  of  injuries  \  but  hath  heightned 
our  duty  in  feveral  inftances  of  it,  requiring  us  "  to 
*'  love  our  enemies,"  and  "  to  forgive  the  greatefl: 
*'. injuries  and  provocations,  tho'  never  {o  often  re- 
*'  peated,"  and  not  only  ''  not  to  revenge  them,  but 
*'  to  requite  them  with  good  turns,"  which  were  not 
underftood  by  mankind  to  be  laws  before,  but  yet 
when  duly  confider'd,  are  very  agreeable  to  right 
reafon,  and  the  fenfe  of  the  wifeft  and  bell  men.  So 
that  the  chriftian  religion  hath  not  only  fixt  and  de- 
termined our  duty,  and  brought  it  to  a  greater  cer- 
tainty, but  hath  raifed  it  to  a  greater  perfection,  and 
rendered  it  every  way  fit  to  bring  the  minds  of  men 
to  a  more  divine  temper,  and  a  more  reafonable  and 
perfect  way  of  ferving  God,  than  ever  the  world 
was  inflrudled  in  before. 

Fourthly,  the  promifes  and  threatnings  of  the  law 
were  only  of  temporal  good  and  evil  things,  which 
are,  in  comparifon  of  the  endlefs  rewards  and  punifh- 
Kients  of  another  world,    but  very  languid  and  faint 

motives 


but  perfeSi  the  law  of  Mofes,  1723 

motives  to  obedience.     Not  but  that  the  Jews  under  S  E  R  M- 
the  law  had  fuch  apprehenfions  of  their  own  immor-,^^;^^ 
tality,  and  of  a  future  ftate  of  happinefs  and  mifery 
after  this  life,    as  natural  light  fuggefted   to  them  \ 
which  was  in  mofl:  but  a  wavering  and  uncertain  per- 
fuafion,  and  confequently  of  fmajl  efficacy  to  engage 
men  to  their  duty  ;  but  the  law  of  Mofes  added  little 
or  nothing  to  the  clearnefs  of  thofe  natural  notions 
concerning  a  future  (late,  and  the  flrengthning  of 
this  perluafion  in  the  minds  of  men  ^  it  did  rather 
fuppofe  it,    than  give  any  new  force  and    life  to  it. 
And  for  this  reafon  more  particularly  the  apoftle  tells 
us  that  the  law  was  but  weak  to  make  men  good  -,  be- 
caufe  it  did  not  work    ftrongiy   enough   upon  the 
hopes  and  fears  of  men  by  the  weight  of  its  promifes, 
and  the  terror  of  its  threatnings ;    and  that   for  this 
weaknefs  and  imperfedlion  of  it,  it  was  removed,  and 
a  more  pov/erful  and  awakning  difpenfation  brought 
in  the  place  of  it;   Heb.  vii.  18,  19.   "  For  there  is 
"  verily  a  dilannulling  of  the  commandment   that 
"  was  before  ('that  is  of  the  jewifli  law  J  for  the  wcak- 
**  nefs  and  unprofitablenefs   thereof;     for   the  law 
t'  made  nothing  perfetfl,  but  the  bringing  in  of  a 
*'  better  hope  did  ;"    that  is,  the  covenant  of   the 
gofpel,  which  promifcth  eternal  life.     And  chap.  viii. 
6.  for  this  reafon  more  efpecially   the  apoftle  fays, 
that  Christ  had  "  obtained  a  more  excellent  mi- 
*'  niftry,  being  the  mediator  of  a   better  covenant, 
<'  which  was  eflabliffied  upon  better  promifes.*'  And 
Rom.  i.   16,  18.  St.  Paul  tell  us,  that  for  this  reafon 
*'  the  gofpel  is  the  power  of  God  unto  falvation," 
becaufe  "  therein  the  wrath  of  God  is  revealed  from 
"  heaven,  againft  all  ungodlinefs  and  unrighteouf- 

"  nefs 


1724  Chrijiianity  doth  not  dejiroy^ 

SERM.  "  nefsof  men."  the  clear  revelation  of  a  future  judg, 
£^  ,  ment,  was  that  which  made  the  gofpel  fo  proper  and 
fo  powerful  an  inftrumcnt  for  the  lalvation  of  men. 
The  great  impiety  of  mankind,  and  their  impeni- 
tcncy  in  it,  was  not  io  much  to  be  wondred  at  be- 
fore, while  the  world  was  in  a  great  meafure  igno- 
rant of  the  infinite  danger  of  a  wicked    life ;    and 
therefore  God  is  faid  in  fome  fort  to  overlook  it ; 
*^  but  now  he  commands  all  men  every  where  to  re- 
"  pent,  becaufe  he  hath  appointed  a  day  in  which  he 
''  will  judge  the  world  in  righteoufnefs  by  that  man, 
**  whom  he  hath  ordained,  whereof  he  hath  given 
*'  aiTurance  unto  all  men,    in  that  he  hath  raifed  him 
*'  from  the  dead,"  Adlsxvii.  30,  31.    The  clear  dif- 
covery  and  perfed:  afluranceof  a  future  judgment,  calls 
ioudly  upon  all  men  to  leave  their  fins,  and  turn  to  God, 
Fifthly,  the  covenant  of  the  law  had  no  fpiritual 
promifes  contained  in  it,  of  the  grace  and  afliftance 
of  God's  Holy  Spirit,    for  the    mortifying    of 
fin,  and  enabling  men  to  their  duty,  and  fupporting 
them  under  fufferings  :  but  the  gofpel  is  full  of  clear 
and  exprefs  promifes  to  this  purpofe.     Our  Saviour 
hath  affured  us,   ''  that  God  will  give  his  Holy 
'^  Spirit  to  them  that  ask  him,"  Luke  xi.  13.  and 
this  the  apoftle  tells  us  is  adually  confcrr'd  upon  all 
true  chriftians,  thofe  who  do  fmcerely  embrace  and 
believe  the  gofpel,  Rom.  viii.  9.  ''If  any  man  have 
««  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  he  is  none  of  his." 
Hence  tlic  gofpel  is  called  by  the  fame  apoftle,  "  the 
*'  law  of  the  Spirit  of  life  in  ChristJesus,"  ver. 
2d  of  that  chap.    "  The  law  of  the  Spirit  of  life  in 
*'  ChristJesus,  hath  made  me  free  from  the  law  of 
*«  fin  and  death  j"  and  in  the  next  words  he  tells  us,  that 

herein 


hut  perfeB  the  law  of  Mofes.  1725 

herein  manifeftly  appeared  the  weaknefs  of  the  law,  SERM. 
that  it  left  men  dcttitLiie  of  this  mighty  help  and 
advantage  (at  leaft  as  to  any  fpecial  promilc  of  it) 
*'  What  the  law  could  not  do,  in  that  it  was  weak 
*'  through  the  flefh,  God  fent  his  own  Soisr  in  the 
*'  likenefs  of  finful  fledi,  and  by  making  him  a 
*'  facrifice  for  (in,  condemned  fm  in  the  Hefli,  that 
*'  the  righteoufnefs  of  the  law  might  be  fulhlJcd  in 
*'  us,  who  v/aik  not  after  the  fle/li  but  afcer  the 
"  fpirit  ; "  that  is,  that  that  righteoufnefs  which 
the  law  aimed  at  and  fignified,  but  was  too  weak  to 
effedt,  might  be  really  accomplifh'd  in  us,  "  who 
*'  walk  not  after  the  flefh,  but  after  the  fpirit ;" 
that  is,  who  are  adled  and  afTifted  by  a  higher  and 
better  principle  than  men  either  have  in  nature,  or 
the  carnal  difpenfition  of  the  law  did  endow  men 
withal.  And  becaufe  of  this  great  defecfl  the  law  is 
fliid  to  be  a  flate  of  bondage  and  fervitudc  -,  and  on 
the  contrary,  the  gofpel,  by  reafon  of  this  mighty 
advantage,  is  called  a  (late  of  adoption  and  liberty, 
ver.  15.  "  for  ye  have  not  received  the  fpirit  of 
*'  bondage,  but  the  fpirit  of  adoption,  whereby 
*'  we  cry  Abba  Father-,"  and  2  Cor.  iii.  17. 
*'  where  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is,  there  is  liberty.'* 
And  to  this  very  thing  St.  Paul  appeals,  as  that 
whereby  men  might  judge  whether  the  law  of  the 
gofpel  were  the  more  excellent  and  powerful  difpen- 
lacion.  Gal.  iii.  2.  "  This  only  would  I  learn  ot  you, 
"  received  ye  the  Spirit  by  the  works  of  the  law, 
*'  or  by  the  hearing  of  flnth  V  As  if  he  had  faid, 
let  this  one  thing  determine  that  whole  matter;  were 
ye  made  partakers  of  this  great  privilege  and  blcifnig 
of  the  Spirit,  while  ye  were  of  die  jewifh  religion. 
Vol.  VI.  12  U  or 

7- 


1726  Chrijlianlfy  doth  not  dejlroj^ 

or  fince  ye  became  chriftians  ?  And  ver.  14.  he  calls 
it  *' die  blefTingof  Abraham-,"  that  is,  the  blefling 
promifed  to  all  nations  by  Abraham's  feed,  namely, 
the  MefTias ;  "  that  the  blefTing  of  Abraham  might 
*'  come  on  the  gentiles  through  Jesus  Christ, 
•'  that  we  might  receive  the  promife  of  the  Spirit 
*'  throuQ;h  faith." 

And  then  for  the  fupporting  us  under  affli6lions, 
the  gofpel  promifeth  an  extraordinary  afliftance  of 
God's  Holy  Spirit  to  us,  i  Pet.  iv.  14.  '^  if  ye 
"  be  reproached  for  the  name  of  Christ,  happy 
*'  are  ye,  for  the  Spirit  of  glory  and  of  God  reft- 
"  eth  upon  you." 

But  were  there  no  good  men  under  the  difpenfa- 
tion  of  the  law  ?  Yes  certainly  there  were,  and  they 
were  fo  by  the  grace  and  afTiftance  of  God's  Holy 
Spirit  :  but  then  this  was  an  cffed  of  the  divine 
goodnefs  j  but  not  of  any  fpecial  promife,  contained 
in  that  covenant,  of  divine  grace  and  afliflance  to 
be  conferred  on  all  thofe  that  were  admitted  into 
it.     But  thus  it  is  in  the  new  covenant  of  the  gofpel ; 
and    therefore    the  law    is   called  "  a   dead  letter, 
"  the  oldnels  of  the  letter,  and  the  miniilration  of 
"  the  letter,"  in  oppofition  to  the  gofpel,  which  is 
called   the  "  miniftration  of  the  Spirit."     And 
this  the  apoftle  lays  fpecial  weight  upon,  as  a  main 
difference  between  thefe  two  covenants,  that  the  firft 
save  an  external  law,   but  the  new  covenant  offers 
inward  grace  and  aififtance  to  enable  men  to  obedi- 
ence, and  hath  an  inward  and  powerful  elHcacy  upon 
the  minds  of  men,  accompanying  the  miniftration  of 
it,    Heb.  viii.  7,  8,  9,  10.      "  For  if  that   firft 
"  covenant  had  been  faultlels,  then  fhould  no  place 

*'  have 


66 


but  perfect  the  law  ofMofes.  1727 

**  have   been  fought  for  the  fccond.      For  findino-  S  K  R  M. 
"  fault  with  them,  he  faith,  behold  the  days  come       ^'^^• 
"  faith  the  Lord,  when  I  will  make  a  new  cove-        "^ 
'^  nant  with  the  houfe  of  Ifrael,  and  with  tht  houfc 
**  of  Judah,    not  according  to  the  covenant  which 
"  I  made  with  their  fathers,   &c.  For  this  is  the  co- 
venant which  I  will  make  with  the  houfe  of  Ifrael 
after  thofe  days,  faith  the  Lord  -,  I  will  put  my 
laws   into  their  minds,  and  write  them  in  their 
*'  hearts.'* 

And  of  this  inward  grace  and  afTidance  we   are 
further  fecured^  by  the  powerful  and  prevalent  and 
perpetual  intercelfion  of  our  high-priefl:  for  finners, 
at  the  right  hand  of  God  ;  not  like  the  intercelTion 
of  the  priefts  under  the  law,  who  being  finners  them- 
felves,  were  lefs  fit  to  intercede  for  others  ;  but  "  wc 
have  an  high-pried  that  is  holy,  harmlefs,  unde- 
filed,  and  feparate  from  finners,  who  by  the  eter- 
nal Spirit  offer'd  himfelf  without  fpotto  God," 
to  purchafe  for  us  thofe  bleflings  which  he  intercedes 
for.    The  priefts  under  the  law  were  intercefiTors  upon 
earth;  but  "  Christ  is  entred  into  heaven  itielf, 
''  now  to  appear  in  the  prefence  of  God  for  us," 
Heb.  ix.  24.     The   priefts   under  the  law  were  re- 
moved from  this  office  by  death ;  but    "   Christ, 
*'  becaufe  he  continues  for  ever,   hath  an  unchange- 
"  able  priefthood,"  and  is  an  everlafting  advocate 
and  interceflTor  for  us,  m  the  virtue  of  his  moft  meri- 
torious facrifice continually  prefented  to  his  Father, 
where  he  is  *'  always  at  the  right  hand  of  God,"  to 
prefent  our  prayers  to  him,  and  to  obtain  pardon  of 
our  fins,  and  "  grace  to  help  in  time  of  need,'*  and 
by  his   intercelTion  in  heaven  to  procure  all   thofe 

12  U  2  bleffings 


1 7  2  S  Chrijiianity  doth  not  deJlro\\ 

S  F  R  M.  blelTings  to  be  aclually  conferred  upon  us,  which  he 
purchafed  for  us  by  his  blood  upon  earth  ;  ''  where- 
*'  fore  he  is  able  to  fave  to  the  utmofl  all  thofe  that 

come   to  God  by  him,  feeing  he  ever  liveth  to 

make  intercefllon  for  them,"  as  the  fame  apoflle 
fpeaks,  Heb.  vii.  25. 

And  thus  1  have,  as  briefly  as  well  I  could,  fhewed 
how  the  chriilian  religion  doth  fupply  all  i\\Q.  weak- 
neffes  and  imperfedions  of  the  jewifn  religion,  and 
confequently  does  in  no  ways  contradict  or  interfere 
with  the  great'  dcfign  of  the  law  and  the  prophets, 
but  hath  perfeded  and  made  up  whatever  was  weak 
or  wanting  in  that  inftitution  to  make  men  truly 
good,  or,  as  the  expreffion  is  in  the  prophet  Da- 
niel, "  to  bring  in  everlafhing  righteoufnefs ,"  that 
is,  to  clear  and  confirm  thof©  laws  of  holinefs  and 
righteoufnels,  which  are  of  indifpenfible  and  eternal 
obligation . 

And  if  this  be  the  great  defign  of  our  Saviour's 
coming,  and  the  chriftian  dodrine  be  every  way  fit- 
ted to  advance  righteoufnels  and  true  hohnefs,  and 
to  make  us  as  excellently  good  as  this  imperfe6b  ftatc 
of  mortality  will  admit,  fince  it  hath  many  advan- 
tages incomparably  beyond  any  religion  or  inftitution 
that  ever  was  in  the  world,  both  in  refpedl  of  the 
perfe6lion  of.  its  laws,  and  the  force  of  its  Motives 
and  arguments  to  repentance,  and  a  holy  life,  and  in 
refpecft  of  the  encouragements  which  it  gives,  and  the 
examples  which  it  fets  before  us,  and  the  powerful 
aiTiftance  which  it  offers  to  us,  to  enable  us  "  to 
*'  cleanfe  ourfelves  from  all  filthinefs  of  flefh 
**  and  fpirit,  and  to  pcrfed  holinefs  in  the  fear  of 
^^  God  j"  what  a  fhame  is  this  to  us,  who  are  under 

the 


hut  perfeB  the  law  of  Mofes,  1729 

the  power  of  this  excellent  inftitution,  if  the  temper  S  E  r  m- 
of  our  minds,  and  the  tenor  of  our  converlation  be,  ^^' 
not  in  Ibme  meafure  anfwerable  to  the  gofpel  of 
Christ  !  the  greater  helps  and  advantages  we  have 
of  being  good,  the  greater  things  may  juflly  be  ex- 
peded  from  us ;  for  ''  to  whomfoever  much  is  given, 
"  of  him  much  fhall  be  required." 

Chriflianity  is  "  the  fulfilling  of  the  righteoufnefs 
^^  of  the  law,  by  walking  not  after  the  fleili,  but  af- 
*'  ter  the  fpirit,  by  mortifying  the  deeds  of  the 
"  flefh,  and  by  bringing  forth  the  fruits  of  the 
"  Spirit,"  which  are  "  love,  joy,  peace,  long- 
"  fuffering,  gentlenefs,  goodnefs,  fidelity,  meek- 
"  nefs,  and  temperance."  The  righteoufnefs  of 
faith  doth  not  conlift  in  a  barren  and  ineffedlual  be- 
lief of  the  gofpel,  in  a  mere  embracing  of  the  pro- 
mifes  of  it,  and  relying  upon  Christ  for  falvation, 
in  "  a  faith  without  works,  which 'is  dead  ;"  but  in 
*'  a  faith  which  worketh  by  love,**  in  becoming 
*'  new  creatures,"  and  in  "  keeping  the  command- 
*'  ments  of  God."  "  The  righteoufnefs  of  faith 
"  fpeakethon  this  v^ife.  This  is  his  commandment, 
*'  that  we  fhould  believe  on  the  name  of  his  Son 
"  JesusChrist,  and  love  one  another,  as  he  gave 
''  us  commandment,"  i  John  iii.  23.  and  "  this 
"  commandment  have  we  from  him,  that  he  who 
<*  loveth  God,  love  his  brother  alfo,"  i  John  iv.  2 1. 
"  That  we  approve  the  things  that  are  exccrllent,  be- 
"  ing  filled  with  the  fruits  of  righteoufnels,  which 
*'  are  by  Jesus  Christ  to  the  glory  and  praife  of 
"  God,"  Philip,  i.  10,  11."  Whatfoever  things  are 
*'  true,  whatfoever  things  are  honcfb,  whatlbever 
^'  things  are  jufl,  whatfoever  things  are  pure,  what- 

"  foever 


1730  Chrijlianify  doth  not  dejiroy^  &c. 

SERM  "  foever  things  are  lovely,  whatfoever  things  are  of 
•     "  good  report,  if  there  be  any  virtue,  if  there  be 
"  any  praife,  mind  thefe  things,"  chap.  iv.  c^. 

And  then  confidering  what  abundant  provifion  the 
gofpel  hath  made  for  our  attainment  of  everlaft- 
ing  falvation,  we  are  altogether  without  excufe  if  we 
perifh.  Since  God  ''  hath  raifed  up  fo  mighty  a  fal- 
*^  vation  for  us;  how  fhalJ  we  efcape?"  If  we 
*'  die  in  our  fins  ;'*  it  is  not  becaufe  God  would  not 
forgive  them,  but  becaufe  we  would  not  repent  and 
be  laved  j  the  fault  is  all  our  own,  and  we  owe  it 
wholly  to  ourfelves,  if  we  be  loft  and  undone  for 
ever.  If  when  life  and  death,  heaven  and  hell,  are  fo 
plainly  {&t  before  us,  eternal  mifery  and  perdition  fall 
to  our  lot  and  portion,  it  is  not  becaufe  we  were 
not  warned  of  our  danger,  or  becaufe  happinefs  and 
^'  the  things  of  our  peace  were  hid  from  our  eyes,'* 
but  becaufe  we  have  made  death  and  deflrudion  cur 
obflinate  and  final  choice. 

"  But,  beloved,  I  hope  better  things  of  you,  and 
'^  things  which  accompany  falvation,  tho'  I  thus 
"  fpeak."  "  Only  let  your  convcrfation  be  as  be- 
*'  Cometh  the  gofpel  of  Christ;"  and  if  we  be 
careful  to  perform  the  conditions  which  the  gofpel 
requires  on  our  part,  we  fhall  not  fail  to  be  made 
partakers  of  that  "  eternal  life,  which  God,  that 
*'  cannot  lye,  hath  promifed  to  us,  for  his  mercy's 
*'  fake  in  Jesus  Christ." 


SERMON 


[  1731  ]       - 

SERMON,  CVL 

» 

Of  the  nature  of  regeneration,  and  its 

neceflity,  in  order  to  juftification  and 
falvation. 

G  A  L  A  T.  vi,  If. 

For  in  Christ  Jesus,    7t either  circiimcifton  avatleth 
any  things  nor  uncircumcifion  \  hut  a  new  creature. 

r  i""^.H  ERE  are  two  epiftles  ot  St.  Paul, namely,  S  E  RM, 
H        that  to  the  Romans,  and  this  to  the  Gala-  y_^^-^ 
"*•       tians,  which  are  principally  and  particularly 
defign'd  to  confute  a  falfe  perfuafion,  which  had  pre-  jermon  en 
vailed  amongfi:  many  chriflians,   efpecially  thofe  who  this  text, 
were  converted  from  judaifm  ;    "  that  it   was  not 
"  enough  for  men  to  embrace  and  confefs  the  chri- 
*'  flian  religion,  unlefs  they  kept  the  law  of  Mofes, 
i'  or  at  lead  fubmitted  to  that  great  precept,  of  cir- 
''  cumcifion ;    the  negledl  whereof  among  all    the 
"  affirmative  precepts  of  the  law,  was  only  threatned 
*'  with  excifion,   or  being  cut  'o?i  from  among   the 
"  people."    And  of  the  prevalency  of  this  error, 
and  the  great  diflurbance  which  it  made  in  the  chri- 
ftian  church,  we  have  a  particular  account,  Acts  xv. 
where  a  general  council  of  the  apofllcs  is  call'd,  and 
a  letter  written    in  their  names  to  all  the  chriftian 
churches,  to  redlify  their  apprehenfions  in  this  mat-  *" 

ter,  ver.  24.  of  that  chap.  "  For  as  much  as  we  have 
"  heard,  that  certain  which  went  out  irom  us,  have 
^^  troubled  you  with  words,   fubverting  your  fouls, 

faying. 


C( 


«c 


1 73  ^     O/'Z/ji?  nature  of  regeneration^  and  its  necej]it)\ 
S  E  R  M-  laying,  ye  mud:    be  circumcis'd,  and  keep  the  law, 
^^  >  "  to  whom  we  gave  no  fuch  commandment,  &c. 

And  upon  this  occafion  likewifc  it  was,  that  St. 
Paul  wrote  this  epiftle  to  the  Galatians,  as  likewife 
that  to  the  Romans ;  in  the  former  of  v/hich,  after 
he  had  at  large  confuted  this  error,  (which  he  calls 
"  the  preaching  of  another  gofpel,  than  what  the 
*'  apodlcs  had  preached,  and  i\\t  chriflians  firft  re- 
'^  ceived")  In  the  beginning  of  the  vth  chap,  he  ex- 
horts them  to  affert  the  liberty,  which  Christ  had 
purchas'd  for  them,  from  the  obligation  of  the  law  of 
Mofes,  ver.  !,  2.  "  Stand  fall  therefore  in  the  liberty 
*'  wherewith  Christ  hath  made  us  free,  and  be  not 
entangled  again  with  the  yoke  of  bondage.  Be- 
hold, 1  Paul  fay  unto  you,  that  if  ye  be  circum- 
cifcd,  Christ  fliall  profit  you  nothings"  not 
that  hereby  he  condemneth  circumcifion,  as  a  thing 
evil  in  it  felf ;  for  God  never  inflituted  or  command- 
ed any  thing  that  was  fo ;  but  he  oppoferh  the  opi- 
nion of  the  necefTity  of  it  to  our  juftification  and 
falvation,  when  the  gofpel  had  fo  plainly  taken  away 
the  obligation  and  ufe  of  it ;  and  confequently  to 
affirm  Itill  the  neceffity  of  it,  was  really  to  renounce 
chriftianity.  For  if  judaifm  was  ftill  the  way  to  fal- 
vation,  chriftianity  was  to  no  purpofe ;  and  if  chri- 
flianity  be  now  the  way,  then  the  obligation  to  l\\t 
jewifh  religion  was  ceafed.  To  avoid  the  force  of 
this  reafoning,  it  was  not  enough  for  tb.  falfe  apoftles 
to  fay  (as  it  feems  they  did)  that  chriicians  were  not 
obliged  univerfally  to  the  whole  Jaw  of  Mofes,  but 
principally  to  the  law  of  circun  .^ifion  ;  becaufe  cir- 
cumcifion being  the  fign  and  ^.dge  of  that  cove- 
nant, whoever  took  that  upon  him,  did  thereby  own 

his 


in  order  to  jujiijication  and fahation*  1733 

his  oblioration  to  the  whole  law,  ver.  2,4.  "  Fori  SERM. 
*'  teftify  again  to  every  man  that  is  circumcifed,  that  * 

*'  l*e  is  a  debtor  to  do  the  whole  law  j  Christ  is  be* 
*'  come  of  no  efFed:  to  you,  whofocver  of  you  are 
"  juftified  by  the  law,  ye  are  fallen  from  grace  •,'• 
that  IS,  whoever  of  y-^u  exped  and  profefs  to  be  jufti- 
fied  by  the  law  of  Moic?,  ye  take  away  the  necef- 
fity  and  ufe  of  the  chriiu'an  religion  ;  and  "  are 
*'  fallen  from  grace ;"  that  is,  do  in  cffe6t  renounce 
the  gofpel ;  "  for  we,  tiirough  the  Spirit,  wait  for 
*'  the  hope  of  righteoufnefs  by  faitii,"  ver  5.  we  by 
the  Spirit,  in  oppofition  to  circumcifion,  which 
was  in  the  flefh,  do  expedl  to  be  juftified  by  the  be- 
lief of  the  gofpel.  "  For  in  Jesus  Christ,  neither 
*'  circumcifion  availeth  any  thing,  nor  uncircumci- 
"  fion,"  ver.  6.  that  is,  now  under  the  difpenlation 
of  the  gofpel  by  Christ  Jesus,  it  fignifies  nothing 
to  a  man's  juftification  or  falvation,  whether  he  be 
circumcifed,  or  not  circumcifed,  whether  he  be  a 
jew  or  a  gentile.  All  that  the  gofpel  requires  as  ne- 
cefTary  to  thefe  purpofes,  is,  that  we  perform  the 
conditions  of  the  gofpel,  that  fo  we  may  be  capable 
of  being  made  partakers  of  the  bleflings  of  it. 

Now  as  the  great  blelTing  and  benefit  of  the  gofpel 
is  varioufly  expreft,  as  by  "  the  forgivenefs  of  our 
*'*  fins,"  by  "  our  acceptance  with  God,\'  or  (which 
comprehends  both  J  by  "  our  juflification,"  fome- 
times  "  by  adoption,"  and  "  our  being  made  thefons 
*'  and  children  of  God,"  fometimes  "  by  redemp- 
*'  tion,"  and  fwhich  is  the  confummation  of  all) 
«'  by  falvation  and  eternal  life-,"  1  lay,  as  the  blci^ 
fing  and  benefit  of  the  gofpel,  is  in  fcripture  exprcft 
to  us  by  thefe  feveral  terms,  which  do  in  effei^l  all 

Vo  L.  VI.  12  X  .         {\^^):\\'i^ 

7- 


1734     Of  the  nature  of  regeneration,  and  its  neceffity^ 

S  ER  M.  fienify  the  fame  thin^-,  fo  our  duty,    and  the  condi- 
tion  the  gofpel  requires  on  our  part,  is  likewile    as 
varioufly  expreil,  fometimes,  and  that  very  frequently, 
by    the   word   faith,  as  being  the    great   fource  and 
principle  of  all  rehgious  ads  and  performances  •,  but 
then  this  faith  mud  not  be  a  bare  aflt-nt  and  perfua- 
fion  of  the  truth  of  the  gofpel,    but  fuch  an  effedlua] 
belief,  as  expreffeth  it  felf  in   fuitable  ads  of  obedi- 
ence and  holinefs,  fuch  as  the  apollle  here  calls  tt.'s-i?  c/^t* 
a7^'^^'^"^^=p7^/^^^^'  "  ^  faith  which  worketh  by  love", 
a  faith  that  is  infpir'd  and  aded,  or  rather  confummate 
and  made  perfed  by  charity,  (for  fo  the  word  doth 
often  fignify,)  and  then  this  phrafe  will  be  juft  of  the 
fame  importance  with  that  of  St.  James,  chap.  ii.  22. 
*'  by  works  is  faith  made  perfed."  Sometimes,  and 
that  alfo  very  frequently,  the  condition  of   the  gof- 
pel is  expreil  by  words  which  fignify  the  change  of  our 
ftate,  as  by    *'  repentance,  converfion,  regeneration, 
"  renovation,  fandification,  the  new  creature,  and  the 
"  new  man,"  which  expreffions  are  all  fo  well  known, 
that  I  need  not  refer  to  particular  texts  ;  fometimes 
the  condition  of  the  gofpel  is  exprefl  by   the  vifible 
and  fenfible  effeds  of  this  inward  change  in  our  out- 
ward life  and  adions ;  as    namely  by  "  obedience 
*'  and  keeping  the  commandments  of  G©d."     So 
Heb.  V.  9.  Christ  is  faid  to  be  "  the  author  of 
''  eternal  falvation  to  them  that  obey  him  i'*  where 
obedience  is  plainly  put  for  the  whole  condition  of 
the  o-ofpel,  the  performance  whereof   entitles   us  to 
eternal  life  and  happinefs. 

Now  that  by  thefc  various  expreflions,  one  and 
the  fame  thing  is  certainly  intended  and  meant,  viz. 
the  condition  of  the  gofpel  •,  that  which  is  required 

on 


i?i  order  tojujllfication  ajid  fahation,  173  5 

on  our  part,  in  order  to  our  full  and  perfedt  juftifi-SER  M. 
cation  and  acceptance  with  God,  is  evident  beyond  ' 

all  denial ;  by  comparing  the  three  different  ways 
whereby  St.  Paul  doth  exprefs  the  lame  propofition 
for  lenfe  and  fubflance ;  in  which  he  tells  us,  what  it 
is  that  will  avail  to  our  juftification  under  the  o-of- 
pel,  that  is,  according  to  the  terms  of  the  chriftian 
religion  ;  that  is  neither  here  nor  there,  that  it  'ix'g- 
nifies  nothing  whether  a  man  be  circumcifed  or  nor, 
but  that  we  be  fo  qualified  as  the  gofpel  requires,  that 
the  conditions  upon  which  the  blelTings  of  the  gofpel 
are  promifed  be  found  in  us.  And  there  are  three 
texts  wherein  the  fame  thing  is  plainly  intended  in 
three  very  diffc^rent  ^  exprelTions.  Gal.  v.  6.  ''  In 
"  Jesus  Christ  neither  circumcifion  availethany 
*'  thing,  nor  uncircumcifion  :  but  faith,  which  is 
"  confummate,  or  made  perfed:  by  charity."  GaJ. 
vi.  15.  "  For  in  Christ  Jesus  neither  circumci- 
*'  fion  availeth  any  thing,  nor  uncircumcifion  ;  but 
*'  a  new  creature."  i  Cor.  vii.  19.  "  Circumci- 
*'  fion  is  nothinj^,  and  uncircumcifion  is  nothino-  • 
«'  but  the  keeping  of  the  commandments  of  God." 
It  is  evident,  that  in  thefe  three  texts  the  apoftle  de- 
figns  to  lay  the  ilime  thing,  and  conlequently  that 
"  faith  which  is  made  perfed  by  charity,  and  the 
"  new  creature,  and  keeping  of  the  commandments 
*'  of  God,"  are  the  fame  in  fenfe  and  fubftance,  viz. 
the  condition  of  our  juflification  and  acceptance  with 
God  under  the  covenant  of  the  gofpel,  or  in  the 
chriftian  religion. 

I  (hall  at  prefent,  by  God's  afliftance,  handle  the 
fecond  of  thefe  texts.  "  In  Christ  Jesus  neither 
"  circumcifion  availeth  any  thing,  nor  uncircumci- 

12  X  2  "  fion: 


1736  Of  the  nature  ofregeneratiofiy  and  its  necej/tty^ 
SE  R  M.  ^'  fion  :  but  a  new  creature."  And  here  the  condi- 
tion  of  the  gofpel  is  exprefb  to  us,  by  the  change 
of  our  ilate,  which  in  fcripture  is  call'd  our  "  rege- 
*'  neration,  or  becoming  new  creatures,  and  new 
*'  men.'*  Circnmci.^ion  was  but  an  outward  fign 
and  mark  upon  ihe  body  and  the  flefh,  though  it 
did  indeed  prefigure  and  typify  the  inwaid  circumci- 
fion  of  the  heart,  the  giving  of  men  new  hearts, 
and  new  fpirits,  under  the  more  perfedl  difpenfa- 
tion  of  the  gofpe!  :  but  now  in  Jesus  Christ,  that 
is,  in  the  chriftian  rc' /^ion,  tne  prefence  or  the 
want  of  this  outward  mark  will  avail  nothing  to  our 
juftification  ;  but  that  which  was  fignified  by  it,  the 
renovation  of  our  hearts  and  fpirits,  our  becoming 
new  creatures,  is  now  the  condition  of  our  juftifica- 
tion  and  acceptance  with  God. 

The  falfe  apoftles  indeed  did  lay  great  flrefs  upon 
the  bufmefs  of  circumcifion,  not  fo  much  out  of  zeal 
to  the  law  of  Mofes,  as  to  avoid  perfecution,  ver.  12. 
*'  They  conftrain  you  to  be  circumcifed,  only  left 
''  they  fhould  fuffer  perfecution  for  the  crofs  of 
*'  Christ."  For  at  that  time,  though  the  chrifti- 
ans  were  perfecuted,  yet  the  Jews  by  the  Roman 
edidls  had  the  free  exercife  of  their  religion,  anci 
therefore  they  gloried  in  this  external  mark  of  cir- 
cumcifion, becaufe  it  exempted  them  from  fuffering  ; 
but  St.  Paul  gloried  in  his  fufFerings  for  Christ, 
and  die  ma^ks  of  that  upon  his  body,  ver.  14. 
"  God  forbid  that  I  Ihould  glory  five  in  the  crofs 
*'  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  i "  and  ver.  17.  "I 
*'  bear  in  my  body  the  marks  of  the  Lord  Jesus." 
He  tells  them,  what  neceffities  foever  they  might 
pretend  of  circumcifion,  either  for  their  juftification, 

pr 


in  order  tojujlification  and  fakatton.  7737 

Or  falvation,  the  true  ground  of  all  was  to  fave  S  E  R  u. 
themfelves  from  temporal  fufferings  -,  and  that  in  the  ^[1^ 
chriftian  religion  it  fignifieth  nothing  to  recommend 
them  to  the  favour  of  God,  whether  they  were  cir- 
cumcifed  or  not ;  nothing  would  be  available  to  this 
purpofe,  but  the  renovation  and  change  of  their 
hearts  and  lives.  "  For  in  Christ  Jesus  neither 
"  circumcifion  availeth  any  thing,  nor  uncircumci- 
"  fion  ;  but  a  new  creature,  y,ain  vrilcTi^^  a  new 
*'  creation,"  to  intimate  the  greatnefs  of  the  change, 
which  chriilianity,  throughly  entertained,  made  in 
men. 

Having  thus  cleared  the  occafion  and  meanino- 
of  thefe  words,  I  come  now  to  confider  the  particu- 
lars contained  in  them,  namely,  thefe  two  thincrs. 

Firft,  that  the  gofpel  hath  taken  away  the  obli- 
gation of  the  law  of  Mofes ;  "  in  Christ  Jesus 
*'  neither  circumcifion  availeth  any  thtng,  nor  uncir- 
*'  cumcifion." 

Secondly,  that  according  to  the  terms  of  the  chri- 
llian  religion,  nothing  will  avail  to  our  juftification 
and  acceptance  with  God,  but  the  real  renovation 
of  our  hearts  and  lives ;  "  neither  circumcifion,  nor 
*'  uncircumcifion  :  but  a  new  creature." 

I.  That  the  gofpel  hath  taken  away  the  obligation 
of  the  law  of  Mofes.  "  In  Christ  Jesus,'*  that 
is,  now  under  the  difpenfation  of  the  gofpel,  "  nei- 
"  ther  circumcifion  availeth  any  thing,  nor  uncir- 
"  cumcifion."  There  never  was  any  general  obli- 
gation Jupon  mankind  to  this  rite  of  circumcifion, 
but  only  upon  the  feed  of  Abraham  -,  but  yet  upon 
the  preaching  of  the  gofpel,  many  of  the  jewilli  chri- 

ftians  would  have  brought    the    Gentiles  under  this 

yoke  s 


CVl. 


1758     Gf  the  nature  of  regeneration^  and  its  necejjity'y 

SERM.  yoke;  pretending  that  chriftianity  was  but  a  fuper- 
flru6ture  upon  the    law   of  Mofes,  which    together 
with  the  gofpel,  was  to  be  the  religion  of  the  whole 
world  \  and  there  was  fome  colour  for  this,  becaufe 
our  Saviour  himfelf  fubmitted    to  this  rite,  and 
was  circumcifed  •,  which  the  apoftle  takes  notice  of 
in  the  ivth  chap,  of  this  epift.  ver.  4.   "  When  the 
t'  falnefs  of  time  was  come,    God    fent    forth    his 
<«  Son  made  of  a  woman,  made  under  the  law,'* 
that  is,  "  circumcifed."     And  *tis  true  indeed,  that 
our  blefled  Saviour   was  circumcifed,    but  not  to 
fip;nify  to  us  the  perpetuity  of  circumcifion,  and  the 
continuance  of  it  under  the   chriftian  religion,   but 
for  a  quite  different  end  ;  as  a  tefiimony  of  his  obe- 
dience to  that  law,  which  tho'  afterwards  it  was  to 
expire,  yet  was  to  be  obeyed  whilft  it  was  in  force, 
by  ail  that  were  born  under  it ;  he  was  "  made  un- 
*'  der  the  law,"  and  "   it  became  him,"  who  canie 
to  teach  mankind  obedience  to  the  laws   of  God, 
"  to  fulfil  all  rightcoufnefs**  himfelf.     And  therefore 
the  apoille  in  this  cpiftle,  wliere  he  takes  notice  of 
this,    that  Christ   was  "  made  under   the  law," 
o-ives  this  reafon  of  it,  that  he    might  be  the  fitter 
to  free  thofe  who  were  under  it,  from  the  fervitude 
of  it*,  he  was  "  made  under  the  law,   that  he  might 
«'  redeem  them  that  were  under  the  law  ;"  and  that 
thofe  who  were  in  the  condition  of  fervants  before, 
might  be  fet  at  liberty,  and  "  receive  the  adoption 
*'  offons." 

But  how  did  his  being  "  made  under  the  law," 
qualify  him  "  to  redeem  thofe  who  were  under  the 
"  law  ?  "    thus,    by  fubmitting    to   it   himfelf,    he 

lliewed  that  he  owned  the  authority  of  it,  and  that 

he 


in  order  to  jujlification  and  fahation,  1739 

he  had  no  malice  or  enmity  againft  it  •,  as  he  him-  SE  RM. 
felf  exprelTcs  it,  that  "  he  came  not  to  deftroy  the    ^^"^' 
"  law,  but  to  fulfil  it."     And   being  fulfili'd,  and^ 
having    ferv'd    the  time  and  end    for    which  God 
intended  it,   it  expirM  of  it  felfj  like  a  law  which 
is  not   made  for  perpetuiL7,    but  limited  to  a  cer- 
tain period.     And  our  bJefTcd  Saviour,  who  came 
with  greater  authority  than  Mofes,  and  gave  greater 
teftimony   of  his    divine   authority,    had    fufficient 
power  to  declare  the  expiration  of  it ;  and  by  com- 
mifiioning  his  difciples  before  and  after  his  death  to 
preach  the  gofpel  to  the  whole   world,  he  put  an 
end   to  that  particular  law   and  difpenfation,  which 
only  concern'd  the  jewifli  nation,  by  giving  a  gene- 
ral law  to  all  mankind. 

So  that  from  the  death  of  our  Saviour,  and  his 
afcenfion  into  heaven,  upon  which  followed  the  ge- 
neral publication  of  the  gofpel,  the  law  of  Mofes 
ceafed,  and  according  to  our  Saviour's  exprefs 
appointment,  profelytes  were  to  be  admitted  into 
the  chriftian  church  only  by  baptifm,  and  not  by 
circumcifion.  And  if  circumcifion,  which  was  the 
fign  of  that  covenant,  was  kid  afide,  then  the 
whole  obligation  of  that  law  and  covenant  which 
God  had  made  with  the  Jews,  was  alio  ceafed.  It 
was  once  indeed  the  mark  of  God's  chofen  and  pe- 
culiar people  \  but  now  that  God  hath  revealed  him- 
felf  to  the  whole  world  by  his  Son,  and  offers  fal- 
vation  to  all  mankind,  Gentiles  as  well  as  Jew?, 
*'  the  wall  of  feparation  is  broken  down,"  and  cir- 
cumcifion, which  was  the  mark  of  diftindlion 
between  Jews  and  Gentiles,  is  taken  away  ;  and 
therefore  he  is  faid   "  to  have  made  peace  by  liis 

*'  crofs. 


Of  the  nature  of  regeneration,  and  it  ^  necefjli 

"  crols,  and  to  have  blotted  out,  and  taken  away 
''  the  hand-writing  of  ordinances,  nailing  it  to  his 
"  crofs  \  '*  that  is,  from  the  time  of  his  death 
to  have  taken  away  the  obligation  of  the  lav/  of 
Mofes,  tho'  it  was  a  good  while  after,  before  the 
Jews  were  wholly  weaned  from  the  veneration  and 
ufe  of  it. 

Nay,  it  was  fome  time  before  the  apoftles  were 
clearly  convinc'd,  that  the  gofpel  was  to  be  preached 
to  the  gentiles  j  this  being  one  of  thofc  truths,  which 
our  Saviour  promifed  after  his  departure,  his  Spi- 
rit fhould  lead  them  into  the  perfefl  knowledge  of ; 
and  then  they  were  fully  inf.rudei,  that  the  law  of 
Mofes  was  expired,  and  that  it  was  no  longer  necef- 
fary  to  the  falvation  of  men,  that  they  fliould  be  cir- 
cumcifed,  and  keep  that  law.  And  though  it  was 
once  enjoined  by  God  himfelf  to  the  Jews,  and 
their  obedience  to  it  was  neceflary  to  their  acceptance 
with  God,  yet  now  by  Christ  Jesus,  God  had 
offered  falvation  to  men  upon  other  terms ;  and  whe- 
ther they  were  circumcifed,  or  not,  was  of  no  moment 
to  their  juftification  or  falvation  one  way  or  other ; 
but  provided  they  perform 'd  the  condition  of  this 
new  covenant  of  the  gofpel,  they  were  all  alike  ca- 
pable of  the  divine  favour  and  acceptance. 

But  I  proceed  to  that,  which  I  mainly  intended  to 
profecute  from  thefe  words  j  and  that  is  the 

Second  particular  in  the  text,  namely  that  according 
to  the  terms  of  the  gofpel,  and  the  chriftian  religion, 
nothing  will  avail  to  our  juftification  and  acceptance 
with  God,  but  the  real  renovation  of  our  hearts  and 
lives  i  ''  neither  circumcifion  nor  uncircumcifion  :  but 
"  a  new  creature."  For  the  full  explication  of  this, 
I  ihall  do  thefe  three  things.  Firft, 


2?2  order  to jujlificatlon  and falvation.  1741 

Firfl,  fhew  what  is  imply 'd  in  this  phrafe  of  '^aSERM. 
''  new  creature." 

Secondly,  that  this  is  the  great  condition  of  our 
juflification  and  acceptance  with  God,  and  that  it  is 
the  fame  in  fubtlance  with  '•  faith  perteded  by 
''  charity,"  and  with  ''  keeping  the  commmand- 
*'  ments  of  God." 

Thirdly,  that  it  is  very  reafbnable  it  fliould 
be  fo. 

I.  What  is  imply 'd  in  this  phrafe  of  "  a  new  crea- 
"  ture."  It  is  plain  at  firli  fight,  that  it  is  a  meta- 
phorical expreffion  of  that  great  and  thorough  change 
which  is  made  in  men  by  the  gofpel,  or  the  chriftiaa 
religion.  The  fcripture  fets  forth  to  us  this  change 
by  great  variety  of  exprefiions,  "  by  converfion,  and 
"  turning  from  our  iniquities  unto  God;"  ''  by  re- 
*'  pentance,"  (which  fignifies  a  change  of  our  mind 
and  refolution,  and  is  in  Icripture  call'd  "  repentance 
"  from  dead  works,"  and  "  repentance  unto  life  j") 
*'  by  regeneration,  or ,  being  born  again  i"  "  by  re- 
*•'•  furredlion  from  the  dead,  and  rifing  to  newnefs  of 
''  life  i"  "  by  fandlification,"  and  being  "  waHied 
''  and  cleans'd "  from  all  fikhinefs  and  impurity, 
(which  three  lad  metaphors  are  imply'd  in  baprifm, 
which  is  called  regeneration,  Tit.iii.  5.  ''Accordino- 
*'  to  his  mercy  he  laved  us  by  the  walTiing  of  reae- 
*'  neration,  and  renewing  of  theFIoLv  Ghost  j" 
and  our  being  "  born  again  of  water  and  the  Holy 
"  Ghost,'*  John  iii.  3."  Except  a  man  be  born  again, 
*'  &c."and  ver.  5.  "  Except  a  man  be  born  of  water 
"  and  of  the  Spirit,  he  cannot  enter  into  the  kinp-- 
*'  dom  of  God  •,"  and  "  the  purifying  of  our  con- 
"  fcienccs/*  Heb.  x.  22.  "  having  our  hearts  fprink- 

VoL.  VI.  iz  Y  ''  kd 

7- 


1742     Of  the  yi^ture  of  regeneration,  and  its  necejfity^ 

SERM.  "  led  from  an  evil  confcience,  and  our  bodies  wafh'd 
"  with  pure  watery"  and  "  the  anfwer  of  a  good 
"  confcience  towards  God,"   i  Pet.  iii.  21.  "  bap- 
*'  tifm  doth  now  fave  us,  not  the  putting  away  of 
*'  the  filth  of  the  flefh,  but  the  anfwer  of  a  good  con- 
*'  fcience   towards   God>"    and   finally  our  being 
baptiz'd    into    the    death    and    rcfurredion     of 
Christ,"  Rom.  vi.  3,  4.  "  Know  ye   not  that 
fo  many  of  us  as    were  baptized    into  Jesus 
Christ,  were  baptized  into  his  death  ,  therefore 
we  are  buried  with  him   by  baptifm    into  death, 
*'  that  like  as  Christ  was  raifcd  up  from  the  dead 
"  by  the  glory  of  the  Father,    even  fo  we  alfo 
''  fliould   walk  in  newnefs  of  life/')     And  laftly, 
this  change  is  fet  forth  to  us  by  renovation,  and  our 
being  made  "  new  creatures,  and  new  men,"  2  Cor. 
V.  17.  "  Therefore  if  any  man  be  in  Christ,"  that 
is,   profefTeth  himfdf  a   chriftian,    "  he  is  a  new 
*^  creature  -,  old  things  are  pad  away,    behold  all 
^'  things  are  become  new."     And  fo  likewife,   Eph. 
iv.    22,  23,   24.  this   great  change  is  exprefh    by 
*'  putting  off  concerning  the  former  converfation, 
"  the  old  man,  which  is  corrupt  according  to  the 
"  lufis  of  deceit,  and  being  renewed  in  the  fpirit  of 
*'  our  minds,  and  putting  on  the  new  man,  which 
*'  after  God  is  created  in  righteoufnefs  and  true  ho- 
*'  linefs.'*     The  exprefTion  is  very  emphatical,  "  re- 
«'  newed  in  the  fpirit  of  our  minds,"  that  is,  in  our 
very  minds  and  fpirits,  to  fignify  to  us  that  it  is  a 
mod  inward  and  thorough  change,  reaching  to  the 
very  center  of  our  fouls  and  fpirits.    And,  CololT.  iii. 
9,  10,  II.  it  is  reprefented   much  after  the  fame 
manner,  "  feeing  ye  have  put  off  the  old  man  with 

"  his 


in  order  tojiijltjication  and  fahation,  1743 

«'  his  deeds,  and  have  put  on  the  new  man,  which  is  SERM. 
*'  renewed  in  knowledge  after  the  image  of  him  that .  ^^^ 
"  created  him,  where  there  is  neither  greek  nor  jew, 
*'  circumcifion  nor  uncircumcifion,  barbarian,  fcy- 
«'  thian,  bond  nor  free;  butCHKisT  is  all  and  in 
"  all."  Which  is  the  fame  with  what  tlie  apoftle 
fays  here  in  the  text,  ^«  that  in  Christ  J  es  u  s 
''  neither  circumcifion  availeth  any  thing,  nor  un- 
*'  circumcifion :  but  a  new  creature ;"  that  is,  thefc 
external  marks  and  differences  fignify  nothing  :  but 
this  inward  change,  "  the  new  creature,  Christ 
"  formed  in  us,"  this  in  the  chriflian  religion  is 
*'  all  in  all.'* 

But  that  we  may  the  more  clearly  underftand  the 
jufl:  importance  of  this  metaphor  of  "  a  new  creature, 
''  or  a  new  creation,"  I  fhall, 

Firft,  confider  what  it  doth  certainly  fignlfy,  by 
comparing  this  metaphorical  phrafe  with  other  plain 
texts  of  fcripture. 

And  fecondly,  that  it  doth  not  import  what  fome 
would  extend  it  to,  fo  as  to  found  dodrines  of  great 
confequence  upon  the  fingle  flrength  of  this,  and 
the  like  metaphors  in  fcripture,  without  any  manner 
of  countenance  from  plain  texts. 

Firfl,  I  ihall  confider  what  this  metaphor  doth  cer- 
tainly import,  fo  as  to  be  undeniably  evident  from 
other  more  clear  and  full  texts  of  fcripture,  namely, 
thefe  two  things. 

1.  Thegreatnefs  of  this  change. 

2.  That  it  is  cffeded  and  wrought  by  a  divine 
power. 

I.  The  greatnefs  of  this  change  •,  it  is  called  xo«vn 
y.l.'cri?,  /'  a  new  creation  ;"  as  if  the  chriftian  doc- 

12  Y  2  trine 


Of  the  nature  of  regeneratmt,  and  Us  necefft\\ 
trine,  firmly  entertained  and  believed,  did  as  it 
were  mould  and  fafhion  men  over  again,  transform- 
ing them  into  a  quite  other  fort  of  perfons  than 
what  they  were  before,  and  made  fuch  a  change  in 
them,  as  the  creating  power  of  God  did,  in  bringing 
this  beautiful  and  orderly  things  out  of  their  dark 
and  rude  chaos.  Thus  the  apodie  reprefents  it, 
2  Cor.  iv.  6.  "  Gop  who  commanded  the  light  to 
^'  Ihine  out  of  darkncfs,"  (alluding  to  the  firft  crea- 
tion) ''  hath  lliined  into  our  hearts,  to  give  the  light 
"  of  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God  iii  the  face  of 
'•^  Jesus  Christ."  ¥/e  are  tranflated  from  one 
extreme  to  another,  Ads  xxvi.  i8.  When  our  Lord 
fends  Paul  to  preach  the  gofpel  to  the  gentiles,  he  tells 
him  what  a  change  it  would  make  in  them,  by 
*'  opening  their  eyes,  and  turning  them  from  dark- 
*^  nels  to  light,  and  from  the  power  of  Satan  unto 
"  God."  And  St.  Peter  exprefles  the  change  which 
chriftianity  makes  in  men,  by  their  being  ''  cali'd 
*'  out  of  darknefs  into  a  marvellous  light,"  i  Pet. 
ii.  9.  And  fo  St.  Paul,  Eph.  v.  8.  "  Ye  were 
'^  fometimes  darknels,  but  now  are  ye  light  in  the 

«'  Lord." 

And  indeed,  wherever  the  dodrine  of  Christ 
hath  its  full  effed:,  and  perfedl  work,  it  makes  a 
mighty  change  both  in  their  inward  principles,  and 
outward  practice  ;  it  darts  a  new  light  into  their 
minds,  fo  that  they  fee  things  otherwife  than  they 
did  before,  and  form  a  different  judgment  of  things 
from  what  they  did  before  \  it  endows  them  with 
a  new  principle,  and  new  refolutions,  gives  them 
another  fpirit,  and  another  temper,  a  quite  different 
fenfe  and  guft  of  things  from  what  they  formerly 

had. 


in  order  to  jiijlification  arid  fahcition.  1 74  5 

had.     And  this  inward  change  of  their  minds  ne-SERM. 
ceiTarily  produceth   a  proportionable  change  in  their     ^^  '" 
Jives  and  converfations,  {o  that  the  man   fleers  quite 
another  courfe,    a6ls  after  another  rate,  and  drives 
on    quite   other     defigns    from   what    lie    did    be- 
fore. 

And  this  is  remarkably  fcen  in  thofe  who  are  re- 
claimed from  impiety  and  prophanenefs  to  religion, 
and  from  a  vicious  to  a  virtuous  courfe  of  life. 
The  change  is  great  and  real  in  all  s  but  not  fo  fcn- 
fible  and  vifible  in  fome,  as  others  ;  in  thofe  who 
are  made  good  by  the  infenfibie  fteps  of  a  pious 
and  virtuous  education  ;  as  in  thofe  who  arc  tranf- 
lated  out  of  a  quite  contrary  ftate,  and  "  turn'd  from 
*'  the  power  of  Satan  unto  God,"  and  "  tranflated 
"  out  of  the  kingdom  of  darknefs,  into  the  kingdom 
"  Christ-,"  which  was  the  cafe  of  the  heathen 
world,  in  their  firfl  converfion  to  chridianity. 

Secondly,  this  change  is  effeded  and  wrought  by 
a  divine  power,  of  the  fame  kind  with  that,  which 
created  the  world,  and  raifed  up  Christ  Jesus 
from  the  dead ;  two  great  and  glorious  inftances  of 
the  divine  powerjand  to  thefe  the  fcripture  frequendy 
alludes,  when  it  fpeaks  of  this  new  creation.  "  God, 
'^  who  commanded  the  light  tofhineout  of  darknef^j 
''  hath  fliined  into  our  hearts."  '^  Like  as  Christ 
"  was  raifed  from  the  dead  by  the  glory  of  the  Fa- 
''  THER,fov/e  alio  are  raifed  to  newnefs  of  life,"  faith 
St.  Paul,  Rom.  vi.  4.  And  to  the  fame  purpofe  the 
apoftle  fpeaks,  Ephef.  i.  19,  20.  "  And  that  ye  may 
^'  know  what  is  the  exceeding  greatnefs  of  his  power 
"  to  us- ward  who  believe,  according  to  the  operation 
^'  oft  his  mighty    power,     which   he    wrought   in 

''  Christ, 


174^       Of  the  nature  of  regeneration,  and  its  necejjttyy 

"  Christ,  when  he  raifed  him  from  the  dead.'*  So 
that  our  renovation,  and  being  made  new  creatures, 
is  an  inflance  of  the  fame  glorious  power,  which  ex- 
erted it  felf  in  the  firit  creation  of  things,  and  in  the 
refurredion  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  from  the 
dead;  but  not  altogether  after  the  fame  manner,  as 
I  fhall  fhew  under  the  next  head. 

I  lliould  now  in  the  fecond  place  proceed  to  fhew, 
that  this  metaphor  of  a  new  creation  doth  not  import 
what  fome  men  would  extend  it  to,  fo  as  to  found 
doftrines  of  great  confequence  upon  the  fingle  flrength 
of  this  and  other  like  metaphors  of  fcripture,  with- 
out any  manner  of  countenance  and  confirmation 
from  plain  texts.     But  this  I  refcrve  to  another  dif- 


courfe. 


SERMON     CVII. 

Of  the  nature  of  regeneration,  and  its 
neceffity,  in  order  to  juftification  and 
falvation. 


G  A  L  A  T.  vi.  15. 

For  in  Christ  Jesus,  neither  circumcifion  availeth  any 
things  nor  uncircumcifton ;  hut  a  new  creature, 

SERM.  „^         -_  ,  .,,^ 

CVII.      g  N  thefe  words  are  contained  thefe  two  things. 

/r"*^r**^  I      Firfl,  that  the  golpel  hath  taken  away  the  ob- 

cond  fer-  ligation  of  the  law,  having  taken  away  the  fign 

mon  on    ^f  j.|^^|.  covenant,  which  was  circumcifion. 

this  text.  ^  ^  ,1 

Secondly, 


in  order  to  jujlificatlon  and f ah  at  ton.  ijaj 

Secondly,    that  according  to  the  terms  of  tlie  gof-S  E  R  M. 
pel,  and  the  chriftian  religion,  nothing  will  avail  to,  ^y}l' 
our  juflification  and  acceptance  with   God,    but  the 
real  renovation  of  our  hearts  and  lives.   For  the  full 
explication  of  this,    I  propounded  to  do  thefe  three 
things. 

I.  To  fhew  what  is  imply'd  in  this  phrafe  of  '^  a 
**  new  creature. 

II.  That  this  is  the  great  condition  of  our  juflifi- 
cation and  acceptance  with  God,  and  that  it  is  the 
fame  in  fenfe  and  fubftance  with  thofe  other  expref- 
fions,  in  the  two  parallel  texts  of  "  faith  perfected  by 
*'  charity/'  and  "  keeping  the  commandments  of 
"  God.'* 

III.  That  it  is  very  rcafonable  that  this  fhould  be 
the  condition  of  our  juflification,  and  acceptance  to 
the  favour  of  God. 

I  began  with  the  firfl  of  thefe,  viz.  to  Ihew  what 
is  imply'd  in  this  phrafe  of  '^  a  new  creature  j"  as  to 
which  I  fhew'd, 

Firfl,  What  this  metaphor  doth  certainly  import, 
fo  as  to  be  undeniably  evident  from  other  more  clear 
and  full  texts  of  fcripture ;  namely,  the  greatnels  of 
this  change ;  and  that  it  is  effeded  by  a  divine  power. 
I  now  proceed. 

Secondly,  to  fhew  that  it  doth  not  import  what 
fome  would  extend  it  to,  and  that  fo  as  to  found  do- 
d:rinesof  great  confequence  upon  the  meerand  fingle 
ftrength  of  this  and  other  like  metaphors  of  fcrip- 
ture, without  any  manner  of  countenance  and  confir- 
mation from  plain  texts:  fuch  dodlrines  as  thefe 
three. 

I.  That 


J  7  4  8     Of  the  nature  of  regeneratmi^  and  its  7iecpffity^ 

S  ER  M.        I.  That  as  the  creation  was  by  an  irrefiftible  act  of 
''  ^  the  divine  power,    lo  is  this  nev/  creation,  or  conver- 
fion  of  a  fmner. 

2.  That  as  creatures  were  meerly  paflive  in  their 
being  made,  and  contributed  nothing  at  all  to  it  \  no 
more  do  we  to  our  converfion  and  regeneration. 

3.  That  as  the  creation  of  the  feverai  ranks  and 
kinds  of  creatures  was  in  an  inftant,  and  efie&d  by 
the  powerful  word  of  God,  only  faying,  "  let  fuch 
*'  and  fuch  things  be,"  and  immediately  they  were  ; 
fo  this  new  creation,  or  the  work  of  regeneration  is 
in  an  inftant,  and  admits  of  no  degrees. 

Concerning  thefe  three  dodrines  of  great  moment 
and  confequence  in  divinity,  I  fhall  fhcvv,  with  all 
the  clearnefs  and  brevity  i  can,  that  they  are  built 
iblely  upon  metaphors  of  fcripture,  tortur'd  and 
flrain'd  too  far  without  any  real  ground  or  founda- 
tion from  fcripture  or  reafon  ;  nay,  contrary  to  the 
tenor  of  the  one  and  the  didates  of  the  other ;  nay 
indeed  contrary  to  the  general  experience  of  the  opera- 
tion of  God's  grace  upon  the  minds  of  men  in  their 
converfion. 

Firft,  it  is  pretended,  that  as  the  creation  was  by 
an  irrefiftible  act  of  the  divine  power,  fo  is  the  new 
creation,  or  the  converfion  of  a  finner  v  and  this  is 
folely  argued  from  the  metaphorical  expreftions  of 
fcripture  concerning  converfion ;  fuch  as  being  "  cal- 
''  led  out  of  darknefs  into  light/'  alluding  to  that 
powerful  word  of  God,  which  in  the  firft  creation 
*'  commanded  the  light  to  fhine  out  of  darknefs  \  be- 
*'4ng  quicken'd  and  rais'd  to  a  new  life;"  and 
from  this  metaphor  here  in  the  text,  of  "  a  new 
*'  creation." 

But 


in  order  to  jujlificatlon  and  fahatloju  W^o 

Butfurely  it  is  a  dangerous  thing  in  divinity,  to'SERM. 
build  dodlrines  upon  metaphors,  efpeciaJJy  if  we  ^^^^ 
flrain  them  to  all  the  fimilitudes  which  a  quick  and ' 
lively  imagination  can  find  out ;  whereas  fome  one 
obvious  thing  is  commonly  intended  in  the  metaphor, 
and  the  meaning  is  abfolv'd  and  acquitted  in  that 
and  it  is  foJly  to  purfue  it  into  all  thole  fimilitudes, 
which  a  good  fancy  may  fugged.  When  our  Sa- 
viour fays,  "  that  he  will  come  as  a  thief  in  the 
*'  night,"  it  is  plain  what  he  means;  that  the  day 
of  judgment  will  furprize  the  carelefs  world,  when 
they  leaft  look  for  it,  that  "  he  will  come  at  an  hour 
''  when  they  are  not  aware;*'  and  tho*  he  refemble 
his  coming  to  that  of  "  a  thief  in  the  nicrht,"  yet 
here  is  nothing  of  robbery  in  the  cafe.  So  here  when 
the  change  which  chridianity  makes  in  men,  is  called 
"  a  new  creation,"  this  only  imports  the  o-reatnefs 
of  the  change,  which  by  the  power  of  God's  grace 
is  made  upon  the  hearts  and  lives  of  men ;  and  the 
metaphor  is  fufficiently  abfolv'd  in  this  plain  fenfe  and 
meaning  of  it,  agreeable  to  the  literal  exprelfions  of 
fcripture  concerning  this  thing,  and  there  is  no  need 
that  this  change  Ihould  in  all  other  relpecls  anfwer 
the  work  of  creation ;  and  confcqucntly  there  is  no 
necelTity  that  it  fhould  be  effedcd  in  an  irrefiftible 
manner,  or  that  we  fliould  be  altogether  paifive  in 
this  change,  and  that  we  fhould  no  ways  concur  to  in 
by  any  adl  of  our  own,  or  that  this  work  Ihould  be 
done  in  an  inftant,  and  admit  of  no  fteps  and   de- 


grees. 


It  is  not  nccefHiry  that  this  change  fliould  be  effccfl- 
cd  in  an  irrefiitible  manner.  God  may  do  lb,  when 
he  pleafeth,  without  any  injury  to  his  creatures;    for 

Vol.  VI.  II Z  it 

7- 


)r  750     Of  the  nature  of  regeneration^  and  its  necefjltj^ 

S  E  R  M.  it  is  certainly  no  wrong  to  any  man  to  be  made  good 
^^f^and  happy  againft  his  will;    and  I  do  not  deny,  but 
that  God  fometimes  does  fo.  The  call  of  the  difciplcs 
to  follow  Christ  feems  to  have  been  a  very  fudden 
and  forcible  imprefTion  upon   their  minds,    without 
any  appearing  reafon  for  it  •,    for  it  is  not  reafonable 
for  any  man  to  leave  his  calling,  and  follow  every  one 
that  bids  him  do  fo.    The  converfion  of  Saul  from  a 
perfecutor  of  chriftianity,  to  a  zealous  preacher  of  it, 
was  certainly  effeded,  if  not  in  an   irrefiftible,    yet 
in  a  very  forcible  and  violent  manner.    The  conver- 
fion of   three   thoufand  at  one  fermon,  when  the 
Holy  Ghost  defcended  in  a  vifible  manner  upon 
the  apoflles,  was  certainly  the  eifed  of  a  mighty  and 
'  over-powering  degree  of  God's  grace.    And  the  like 
may  be  faid  of  the  fudden  converfion  of  fo  many 
perfons  from  heathenifm,    and  great  wickednefs  and 
impiety  of  life,    to  the  fincerc  profefTion  of  chriftia- 
nity,  by  the  preaching  of  the  apoillcs  afterwards. 

But  that  this  is  not  of  abfolute  neceffity,  nor  the 
ordinary  method  of  God's  grace,  to  work  upon  the 
minds  of  men  in  fo  over-powering,  much  lefs  in  an 
irrefiftible  manner,  is  as  plain  as  any  thing  of  that 
nature  can  be,  both  from  experience,  and  the  reafon 
•  of  the  thing,  and  the  confl:ant  tenor  of  the  fcripture. 
We  find  that  many  (perhaps  the  greateft  part)  of 
thofe  that  are  good  are  made  fo  by  the  infenfible  fteps 
and  degrees  of  a  religious  education,  and  having  been 
never  vicious,  can  give  no  great  account  of  any  fen- 
fible  change,  only  that  when  they  came  to  years  of 
underftanding,  they  confider'd  things  more,  and  the 
principles  that  were  inftill'd  into  them  in  their 
•younger  years,  did  put  forth  themfelves  more  vigo- 

roufly 


in  order  to  jujlification  andfahation.  1 75  ^ 

roufly  at  that  time,  as  feeds  fprout  out  of  the  p-round,^  E  R  M. 
after  they  have  a  good  while  been  buried,  and  lain 
hid  in  the  earth. 

And  it  is  contrary  to  reafon,  to  make  an  irrefiltible 
a(5l  of  divine  power  neceflary  to  our  repentance,  and 
converfion;  becaufe  this  necefiarily  involves  in  it  two 
things  which  feem  very  unreafonable. 

Firft,  that  no  man  repents  upon  confideration  and 
choice,  but  upon  meer  force  and  violent  nccelTity, 
which  quite  takes  away  the  virtue  of  repentance, 
whatever  virtue  there  may  be  in  the  confequcnt  ads 
of  a  regenerate  ilate. 

Secondly,  it  implies  that  the  converfion  and  re- 
pentance of  thofe,  upon  whom  God  doth  not  work 
irrefiftibly  is  impoffible,  which  is  the  utmofb  can  be 
faid  to  excufe  the  impenitency  of  men,  by  taking  it 
off  from  their  own  choice,  and  laying  it  upon  tho. 
impofTibility  of  the  thing,  and  an  utter  dilabiiity  in 
them  to  choofe  and  do  otherwife. 

And  it  is  likewife  contrary  to  the  conftant  tenor 
of  the  bible,  which  fuppofeth  that  men  do  very  fre- 
quently refill  the  grace  and  Holy  Spirit  of  God. 
It  is  faid  of  the  pharifees  by  our  Saviour,  Luke 
vii.  30.  "  that  they  reje6led  the  counfcl  of  God 
"  againft  themfelves  ;"  that  is,  the  merciful  defign 
of  God  for  their  falvation.  And  of  the  Jews,  A<5ls 
vii.  51.  "  that  they  always  refifled  the  Holy 
'^  Ghost."  So  that  fome  operations  of  God's 
grace  and  Holy  Spirit  are  reHflible,  and  fuch,  as 
if  men  did  not  refill  them,  would  be  cfTciftual  to 
bring  them  to  faith  and  repentance,  elfe  why  are  the 
pharifees  faid  "  to  rejed  the  counfcl  of  God  againll 
^^  themfelves,''   that  is,  to  their  own  ruin  j  imply- 

12.  Z  2  ii^g, 


J  ji^  2     Of  the  nature  ofj'egeneration^  ajzd  its  iiecejjity^ 

E  R  M.  ing,  that  if  they  had  not  rejeded  it,  they  might  have 
^^  _^,^  been  faved ;  and   if  they  had,  it  had   been  without 
irrefiftible    grace;    for  that  which    was  oiT<;red  to 
them,  was  adualJy  refilled  by  them.     Other  texts 
plainly  fhew,   that  the  reafon  of  mens  impenitency 
and  unbelief  is  not  any  thing  wanting  on  God's  part, 
but  on  theirs ;  as  thofe  known  texts,  wherein  our 
Saviour  laments  the  cafe  of  Jerufalem,  becaufe  they 
obttinatcly    brought    deftrudtion   upon    themfelves, 
Luke  XIX.  42.  "  If  thou  hadft  known  in  this  thy 
"  day,  the  things  that  belong  to  thy  peace  :"  inti- 
mating that  they  might  have  known  them,  fo  as  to 
have  prevented  that  defolation  which  was  coming  up- 
on them,  and  was  a  forerunner  of  their  eternal  ruin  ; 
"  but  now  they  are  hid  from  thine  eyes  \  "  intima- 
ting, that  then  God   gave   them  up  to  their  own 
blindnefs  and  obftinacy  •,  but    the   time  was,  when 
they  might  have  "  known  the  things  of  their  peace  \ " 
which  cannot  be  upon  the  fuppofition  of  the  necef- 
fity  of  an  irrefiftible   ad  of  God's   grace  to  their 
converfion,  and  repentance ;    becaufe    then  without 
that  they  could  not  have  repented,  and  if  that  had 
been  afforded  to  them,  they  had  infallibly  repented. 
So  likewife   in  that   other  text,    Matth.  xxiii.   37. 
*'  Oh!  Jerufalem,    Jerufalem,  how    often   would   I 
*'  have  gathered  thee,  even  as  an   hen  gathereth  her 
"  chickens  under  her  wings,  and  you  would  not." 
And  in  John  v.  40.  "  Ye  will  not  come  unto  mc 
^'  that  ye  might  have  life."  "He  would  have  gathered 
*'  them,    and    they  would  not ; "    he  would  have 
given  them  life,  but ''  they  would  not  come  to  him." 
Are  thefe  ferious  and  compafiionate   expoftulations 
and  declarations  of  our  Saviour's  gracious  inten- 
tion 


CV'IJ. 


in  order  to  jujiif  cation  and  falvation,  1753 

tion  towards  them,  any  ways  confident  with  an  ini-  S  E  R  M. 
pofTibihty  of  their  repentance  ?  which  yet  mufl  be 
faid,  if  irrefiftible  grace  be  neceffary  thereto ;  for 
then  repentance  is  impofTible  without  it,  and  that  it 
was  not  afforded  to  them  is  plain,  becaufe  they  did 
not  repent.  The  Hime  may  be  faid  of  that  folemn 
declaration  of  God,  Ezek.  xxxiii.  11.  "As  I  live, 
''  faith  the  Lord  God,  I  have  no  pleafure  in  the 
*'  death  of  the  wicked,  but  that  the  wicked  turn 
*'  from  his  way  and  Jive."  Can  it  be  faid  that  God 
hath  ''  no  pleafure  in  the  death  of  finners,'*  and 
yet  be  true,  that  he  denies  to  the  greatefl:  part  of 
them,  that  grace  which  is  neceffary  to  their  repen- 
tance ?  upon  this  fjppofition,  how  can  it  be  true, 
*'  that  if  the  mighty  works  that  were  done  in  Cho- 
*'  razin,  and  Bethfaida,  had  been  done  in  Tyre  and 
*'  Sidon,  they  would  have  repented,"  Matth.  xi.  21. 
fince  irrefifl'ible  grace  did  not  accompany  thofe  mi- 
racles ?  for  if  it  had,  Chorazin  and  Bethfaida  had 
repented,  and  without  it  Tyre  and  Sidon  could  not 
repent. 

The  fame  difficulty  is  in  thofe  texts,  wherein  God 
is  reprefented  as  expeding  the  repentance  and  con- 
yerfipn  of  finners;  and  our  Savioup.  wondering  at 
th^ir  unbelief  and  hardnefs  of  heart,  and  upbraid- 
ing them  with  it,  Ifa.  v.  4.  ^'  What  could  I  have 
"  done  more  to  my  vineyard,  that  I  have  not  done 
"  in  it  ?  wherefore  when  I  looked  that  it  fliould 
"  bring  forth  grapes,  brought  it  forth  wild  grapes.?" 
Mark  vi.  6.  'tis  faid  "  our  Saviour  marveli'd  at 
*«  the  unbelief  of  the  Jews."  And  chap.  xvi.  14. 
*'  that  he  upbraided  his  difciples  with  their  unbelief 
*'  and  hardnefs  of  heart."_    But  why  fliould  the  re- 

pcntancc 


1754  Of  the  nature  of  re  generation ^  mid  its  neceffity^ 
SERM.  pentance  of  finners  be  expedled,  or  their  unbelief 
^^^  marvell'd  at,  or  indeed  be  upbraided  to  them,  by 
him  who  knew  it  impofiTible  to  them,  without  an 
irrefiftible  power  and  grace,  which  he  knew  hkewife 
was  not  afforded  to  them  ?  neither  God  nor  man 
have  reafon  to  wonder  that  any  man  does  not  do 
that,  which  at  the  fame  time  they  certainly  know 
he  cannot  do. 

The  bottom  of  all  that  is  faid  to  avoid  this  pref- 
fing  difiiculty,  is  diis  j  "  that  this  impotence  and 
''  difability  of  Tinners  is  their  fin,  and  therefore 
''  cannot  be  pleaded  in  their  excufe,  for  their  impe- 
"  nitency  j  but  God  may  flill  juftly  require  that  of 
^'  them,  which  they  had  once  a  natural  power  to 
"  do,  but  wilfully  forfeited  and  loft  it;  they  had 
"  this  power  in  Adam,  and  forfeited  it  by  his  difl 
''  obedience."  To  fhew  how  flight  this  evafion  is, 
I  need  not  run  into  that  argument,  how  far  we  are 
guilty  of  the  fin  of  our  firft  parents.  That  by  that 
iirft  tranfgrefTion  and  difobedience  all  mankind  fuffers, 
and  our  natures  are  extremely  corrupted  and  depra- 
ved, cannot  be  denied  %  but  the  corruption  of 
our  natures  is  a  thing  very  different  from  perfonal 
guilt,  ftridly  and  properly  fo  call'd.  I  will  take 
vciz  bufinefs  much  fhorter,  and  granting  that  man- 
kind had  in  Adam  a  natural  power  to  have  conti- 
nued obedient  to  the  laws  of  God,  yet  fince  "  by 
^'  one  man  ^m  enter'd  into  the  world,  and  all  are 
"  now  finners,"  here  is  an  obligadon  to  repentance, 
as  well  as  to  obedience,  and  men  fhall  be  condem- 
ned for  their  impenitency.  I  ask  now,  whether  in 
Adam  we  had  a  power  to  repent  ?  'ds  certain  Adam 
had  not  this  power,  and  therefore  I  cannot  fee  how 

v/e 


in  order  to  jujllfication  and  fcilvatlon,  17  rr 

we  could  lofe  it,  and  forfeit  it  in  him.  Adam  SERM. 
indeed  had  a  natural  power  not  to  have  finned,  C^^^- 
and  fo  not  to  have  needed  repentance  ;  but  no  power 
to  repent  in  the  ftate  of  inaocency,  becaufe  in  that 
ftate  repentance  was  impolTible,  becaufe  there  could 
be  no  occafion  for  it.  He  had  it  not  after  his  fall, 
becaufe  by  that  he  forfeited  all  his  power  to  that 
v^rhich  is  fpiritually  good.  *Tis  faid  indeed  he  had 
it  in  innocency,  but  forfeited  it  by  his  fall  ;  fo  that 
he  had  it,  when  there  was  no  occafion  or  pofTibility 
of  the  exercife  of  it,  and  loll:  it  when  there  was  oc- 
cafion for  it :  or  if  he  did  not  lofe  it  by  his  fiill, 
we  have  it  ftili,  and  then  there  is  no  need  of  any 
fupernatural,  much  lefs  irrefiifible  grace  to  repen- 
tance ;  fo  that  our  impotency  as  to  the  particular 
duty  of  repentance,  cannot  be  charged  upon  us  as 
our  fault,  not  fo  much  as  upon  the  account  of  ori- 
ginal fin. 

But  the  want  of  this  power  is  the  confequent  and 
juft  punifliment  of  our  firft  tranfgrefTion.  Be  it  fo  ;  but 
if  this  impotency  ftill  remain  in  all  thofetowhom  God 
doth  not  afford  his  irrefiflible  grace,  how  comes  the 
grace  ofFer'd  in  the  gofpcl  to  aggravate  the  impeni- 
tencyofmen,  and  increafe  their  condemnation  ?  For 
if  it  be  no  remedy  againfl  this  impotency,  how  comes 
it  to  inflame  the  guilt  of  impcnitency  ?  Or  how  is 
it  grace  to  offer  mercy  to  thofe  upon  their  repen- 
tance, who  were  out  of  a  pofTibility  of  repenting  ; 
and  yet  to  punifli  them  more  fevercly  for  their 
impenitency  after  this  offer  made  to  them,  which 
they  cannot  accept  without  that  grace  which  God 
is  refolved  not  to  afford  them  .?  If  this  be  the  calc, 
the  greatefl  favour  had  been  to  have   had   no  fuch 

oltlr 


1756  Of  the  nature  of  regeneration^  and  its  necejjtty,, 
SERM.  offer  made  to  them,  and  it  had  been  happier  for 
mankind,  that  *'  the  grace  of  God  had  not  ap- 
''  peared  to  all  men,"  but  only  to  thofe  who 
fhall  irrefiftibly  be  made  partakers  of  the  benefit 
of  it. 

Secondly,  another  do6lrine  grounded    upon    this 
metaphor  of  "  a  new  creation,"  is,  that  we  are  mere- 
ly paiTive  in  the  work  of  converfion,  and  regenera- 
tion, and  contribute  nothing  to  it;  that  God  does 
all,  and  we  do  nothing  at  all ;  and  this  follows  from 
the  former,  efpecially  if  we  allow  that  metaphor  as 
tar  as  it  will   carry  us.     For  as  the  firil  creation  of 
things  was  by  an  irrefillible  adl  of  divine  power,  fo 
the  things  that  were  made,  were  only  pafnve  in  their 
creation  ;  and  as  they  could  make  no  refiftance,  fo 
neither  could  they  contribute  any  thing  to  their  be- 
ing what  they   are.     And  this  dodrine  is  not  only 
argued  from  the  metaphor  of  a  new  creation,"  but 
from  feveral  other  metaphors  ufed  in  fcripture  to  de- 
fcribe  our  natural  ftate;  as  namely,  *'  darknefs,  blind- 
*'  nefs,"  and   our  being  "  dead  in   trefpafies  and 
*'  fins  i"  from  whence  it  is  inferr'd,  that  we  contri- 
bute no  more  to  our  renovation,  than  darknefs  doth 
to  the   introdu6i:ion   of  light,    than  a    blind   man 
can  do  to  the  recovery  of  his  fight,  or  a  dead  man 
to  his  own  refurredion ;   but  are  wholly  pafiive  in 
this  work.     And  to  countenance  this  notion,  they 
make  great  advantage   of  the  charadter  which    is 
given  in  fcripture  of  the  mofi  degenerate  heathen, 
taking  it  for  granted,  that  their  condition  is  the  true 
ftandard  of  a  natural  and  unregenerate   fi:ate ;  and 
to  this  purpofe    they    infift    particularly  upon  that 
defcription  of  the  gentile  idolaters,  Eph.  iv.  18,  19. 

"  Having 


in  order  to  jujilficatlon  andfalvaCion,  ^7S7 

*'  Havino;  tlie  underflandino;  darkened,  being  alie-  SHRM. 

*'  nated  from  die  life   of  Gou,  through   the  igno- '^ 

"  ranee  that  is  in  them,   becaufe  of  the  blindnefs 
*'  of  their  hearts  •,    who  being   pail    feehng,  liave 
*'  given  theniielves  over  to  Jarcivioufnefs  j  to  work 
*'  all   uncleanncfs  with  greedinefs."     Which  is  in- 
deed a  defcriprion  of  men  in   their  natural  (late,  but 
not  of  all,  but  of  fuch  as  by  the  word  Ibrt  of  vi- 
cious pradices   of  the  groiTeit    idolatry,    and  mod 
abominable  lewdnefs,  were  degenerated  totheutmoil, 
fo  that  their  condition  feemed  dcfperarc,  without  a 
miraculous  and  an  extraordinary  grace  of  GoD,which 
was  probably   afforded  to  many  of  thefe.     In  like 
manner  they  argue  the  common  condition  of   man- 
kind, from  the  description    which  is  given  of  the 
wickednefs  of  men,  bi-^fore  God  brought  the  flood 
upon  them.  Gen.  vi.  5.  "  God  faw  that  the  wick- 
*'  ednefs  of  man  was  great  in  the  earth,  and  that 
*'  every  imagination  of  the  thoughts   of  his  heart 
*'  was  only  evil  continually."     This  they  make  the 
charader  of  all  men  in  their  natural  ftate,  whereas 
this  is  a  defcription  of  an  extraordinary  degeneracy 
of  men,   fignifying  that   the   world  was    then  ex- 
tremely bad,  and  depraved  to  the  higheft  degree  ; 
for  God  gives  this  as  a  reafon  why  he  was  reibived 
to    drown     the    world,    and    ''    to    deQroy     man 
"  from    the  face  of  die   earth,"    becaufe    "    their 
"  wickednefs    was    grown    to   fo  great  an  hei^Jii." 
But  if  this  were  a  defcription  of  the  natural  Hate 
of  mankind,  this  could  be  no  particular  rcxio\-\  for 
bringing  a  flood  upon  the  world  at  that  time,  there 
being  the  fame  reafon  for  it,  for  fifteen  hundred  years 
before,  and  ever  will  be  tl^e  fime  reafon  to  the  end  of 
Vol   VI.  J3  A  tho 


^  75  ^     0///j^  jiature  of  regeneration,  and  Its  Jiecejf^ty, 

^  ^^?;  ^'  the  world,  that  is,  that  men  are  naturally  corrupted 
and  depraved.  Surely  they  confider  the  fcripture 
very  fupenicially,  that  interpret  it  at  this  rate. 

'Tis  too  true,  that  the  nature  of  man  is  fadly 
corrupted  and  depraved  ;  but  not  fo  bad  as  by  vi- 
cious pradlices  and  habits  it  may  be  made  •,  all  men 
are  not  equally  at  the  fame  diftance  from  the  grace 
of  God  •,  fome  are  nearer  to  the  kingdom  of  God 
'than  others,  and  lefs  force  and  violence  will  ferve 
*'  to  refcue  them  from  the  power  of  Satan,'*  and 
*'  to  tranfplant  them  into  the  kingdom  of  Christ." 
The  prevalency  and  dominion  of  fin  makes  an  unre- 
generate  fcate,  as  the  prevalency  of  grace  puts  a  man 
into  a  regenerate  (late.  An  unregenerate  man  is  not 
necefilirily  as  bad  as  is  pofTible,  no  more  than  it  is  necef- 
iary  to  a  regenerate  liate,  that  a  man  be  perfeftly 
o;ood  ;  fo  that  it  is  a  great  miftake  to  argue  the 
common  condition  of  all  mankind,  from  the  de- 
fcriptions  that  are  given  in  the  fcripture  of  the  worft 
of  men  j  and  therefore  if  it  were  granted  that  irrefifti- 
•  ble  grace  w^ere  necefTary  for  the  converfion  of  fuch, 
it  will  not  follov/  that  the  fame  is  necclfary  to  all. 

Ail  unregenerate  men  are  not  equally  devoid  of  a 
fenie  of  God,  and  fpiritual  things ;  they  have  many 
convidions  of  what  they  ought  to  be  and  do,  and 
under  thofe  convidhons  are  very  capable  of  per- 
fuafion,  which  dead  men  are  not.  The  grace  of 
God  is  neceflary  to  the  converfion  of  a  finner,  but  it 
is  not  neceflary  that  he  (hould  be  only  paflive  in  this 
work.  Experience  telJs  us  the  contrary,  that  we  can 
do  fomething,  that  v/e  can  co-operate  with  the  grace 
of  God  ;  and  the  fcripture  tells  us  the  fame,  and 
makes    it    an    argument   and    encouragement    to 

us 


272  order  tojuJlifLcafio7i  a7id  fahatloft,  1759 

us  ''  to  work  out  our  own  falvation,  '*  bccaufe  SERM. 
"  God  works  in  us  both  to  will  and  to  do  of  his  ^T_* 
*'  own  goodnels,"  Philip,  ii.  12,  i^.  Bcfides  that, 
it  is  the  greateft  and  juftcft  difcouragement  in  the 
world  to  all  endeavours  of  repentance  and  reforma- 
tion, to  tell  men  that  they  can  do  nothing  in  it. 
He  that  is  fure  of  this,  that  he  can  do  nothing  ja 
this  work,  is  a  fool  if  he  make  any  attempt  to  be- 
come better,  becaufe  he  flruggles  with  an  impo/- 
fibility;  and  if  the  work  will  be  done  at  all,  it  will 
be  done  without  him,  and  he  neither  can,  nor  ought 
to  have  any  hand  in  it.  But  will  any  metaphor  bear 
men  out  againft  fo  palpable  an  abfurdity  as  this? 

And  yet  af.er  all,  there  is  no  force  in  thefe  me- 
taphors, to  prove  what  they  aim  at  by  them.  For 
if  to  be  dead  in  fms  fignifies  an  utter  impotency  to 
goodnels,  then  to  be  dead  to  fm  mud  on  the  contrary 
^v^^ml'j  an  impoflibility  of  finning  •,  for  juft  as  the 
iinregenerate  man  is"  dead  in  fin,"  fo  he  th.it  is  rege- 
nerate is  faid  in  fcripture  to  hi  "  de.id  to  fin  :"  but  yet 
the  bed  of  regenerate  men,  notwithftanding  they  are 
4'  dead  to  fin,  and  alive  to  God,  do  offend  in  many 
''  things,"  and  too  frequently  fall  into  fin.  Why 
then  fliould  the  metaphor  be  fo  flrong  on  the  one 
fide,  that  a  man  who  is  faid  ''  to  be  dead  in  fin," 
fhould  not  be  able  fo  much  as  to  co-operate  with 
the  grace  of  Q^iXi  in  the  work  of  repentance  and 
converfion  ? 

In  fliorr,  if  this  be  true,  that  men  in  an  unrcge- 
ncrate  and  unconverted  flate  are  perfedly  dead,  and 
have  no  more  fenfe  of  fpiritual  things,  than  a  dead 
man  hath  of  natural  objedls,  then  all  precepts  and 
exhortations  to    repentance,  and  all  promiles  and 

13  A  2  thre.u- 


176c     Of  the  nature  of  regeneration^  and  its  necejjity\ 

S  E  R  M.  threatnings  to  argye  and  perfuade  men  thereto  are 
vain,  and  to  no  purpofe  ;  and  it  would  be  every 
whit  as  proper  and  reafonable  for  us  to  preach  in 
the  church-yard,  over  the  graves  of  dead  men,  as  in 
the  church  to  the  unregenerate;  becaufe  they  can 
no  moie  acl  and  move  towards  their  own  recove- 
ry out  of  a  ftate  oi  fin  and  death,  than  the  dead 
bodies  can  rife  out  of  iheir  graves. 

B  u  it  is  faid,  th^r.  the  end  of  exhortations  and  pro- 
mifes  is  not  to  declare  to  men  their  power,  but 
their  duty.  But  if  they  be  infenfible,  it  is  to  as 
Jitde  purpofe  to  declare  to  them  their  duty,  as  their 
power.  Befides,  \i  will  be  a  hard  thing  to  con- 
vince men  that  any  thing  is  their  duty,  which  at 
the  fame  time  we  declare  to  them  to  be  out  of  their 
power. 

But  this  is  pelagianifm,  to  fav  that  of  ourfelve? 
we  can  repent  and  turn  to  Guo.  And  who  fays 
we  can  of  ourfelves  do  this  befides  the  pelagians  ? 
We  affirm  the  neceiTity  of  God*s  grace  hereto,  and 
withal  the  neceffity  of  our  co-operating  with  the 
grace  of  God.  We  fay  that  without  the  powerful 
excitation  and  aid  of  God's  grace,  no  man  can  re- 
pent and  turn  to  God  \  but  we  fay  likewife,  that 
God  cannot  be  properly  faid  to  aid  and  aflift  thofe, 
who  do  nothing  themfclves. 

But  men  can  do  no  more  than  they  do,  and 
therefore  are  judly  condemned.  Not  in  the  work 
of  converfion  lure ;  if  they  can  do  nothing  at  all. 
But  they  can  do  more  by  way  of  preparation  to* 
wards  it.  Suppofe  they  do  all  they  can  towards  it, 
will  this  fave  them,  or  will  God  upon  this  irre- 
fiRibly  work  fheir  converfion  .^    No,  they  fay,    not- 

withftanding 


/;;  order  to jujlijicatton  and fahation.  1761 

withflanding  any  preparatory  work  that  we  can  do,  S  E  R  M. 
converfion  may  not  follow  j  how  then  does  this  mend  ^^J^ 
the  matter  ? 

But  ftill  they  fay  the  fault  is  in  mens  want  of  will, 

and  not  of  power ;  ''  you  will  not  come  unto  me] 

*'  that  ye  might  have  life."     But  can  they  will  to 

come  ?  No,  that  they  cannot  neither.     Why  then 

it  is  (till  want  of  power  that  hinders  them.     The 

offer  of  life  is  a  very  gracious  offer  to  them   that 

are  guilty,  and  liable  to  death,  as  we  all  are  ;   but 

not  if  the  condition   be   utterly   impoffible   to    us, 

tho*  the  impoffibility  fprings  from   our  own  fault, 

as   I  will  plainly  fliew  by  a  fair  inftance.    A  prince 

offers  a   pardon  xx^  a  traitor   faft  lock'd  in  chains, 

if  he   will   come  to  him  and  fubmit  himfelf ;  but 

if  he  be  dill  detained  in  chains,  and  the  prince  do 

not  fome  way  or  other  help  him  to  his  liberty,  'tis 

fo  far  from  being  a  favour  to  offer  him  a  pardoa 

upon  thefe  terms,  that  it  is  a  cruel  derifion  of  his 

mifery,  to  fay  to  him  ''  you  will  not  come  tome 

*'  that  you  may   be  pardon'dj"  and  this  notwith- 

ftanding  that    hi'   being   caft  into  chains,  was  the 

effedl  of  his  own  crime  and  fault ;   the  application 

is  obvious.     I  fhould  now  proceed  to  anfwer  an  ob- 

jedion  or  two,  and  then  to  give  a  clear  (late  of  this 

matter,  lb  as  is  moll  agreeable  to  fcripture,  and  the 

attributes  and  perfedions  of  God  ;  but  this  I  fhall 

referve  for  another  difcourfe. 


SERMON 


[  ^7^2  ] 


SERMON      CVIIL 


Of  the  nature  of  regeneration,  and  its 
neceffity,  in  order  to  juftilication  and 
falvation. 

G  A  L  A  T.  vi.  If. 

lor  in  Christ  Jesus,    jzcither  circumcijion  avaiktb 
any  things  nor  uncircumcifion ;  hut  a  new  creature. 

F  g  ^HE   point   which   I   am  upon  from  thefe 
CVIIfV        1        words  is,  "  that  according  to  the  terms  of 


the  gofpel,  nothing  will  avail  to  ourjufti- 
The  third  '^  ficatioD,  but  the  real  renovation  of  our  hearts  and 

fermon  on  ^c   lives." 

this  text.        -p^j,  ^^^  ^j^ii  explication  of  this,    I  propounded  to 
Ijhew, 

Firfr,  what  is  implied  in  this  expreffion  of  the 
*'  new  creature." 

Secondly,  that  this  is  the  great  condition  of  our 
juftification  and  acceptance  with  God. 

Thirdly,  that  it  is  highly  reafonable  that  this  Ihould 
be  the  condiiion  of  our  juftification. 

In  fpeaking  to  the  firfl  of  thefe,  I  have  fliewed, 
I  (I,  what  this  metaphor  doth  certainly  import  j  and 
idly^  that  it  doth  not  import  what  fome  would  ex- 
ten^  it  to,  whereon  to  found  fuch  dodlrines  as  thefe. 

Firil",  That  as  the  creation  was  an  irrefiftible  adl 
of  the  divine  power,  fo  is  this  new  creation,  or  the 
converfion  of  a  finner. 

Secondly, 


iri  order  to  jujiificafion  and  falvation.  1^61 

Secondly, .  as  creatures  are  merely  paflive  in  their  s  F,  R  M 
being  made,   and  contributed  nothing   at  all  to  it,   CVlir 
no  more    do  we  in    our   converfion,    and    reo-ene- 
ration. 

Thirdly,  that  as  the  creation  of  the  feveral  kinds 
and  ranks  of  creatures  was  efFedcd  in  an  inftant,  by 
the  powerful  word  of  God,  faying,  "  Jet  fuch  and 
'*  fuch  things  be,"  and  immediately  they  were;  fo 
this  new  creation  is  in  an  inftant,  and  admits  of  no 
degrees. 

The  firll  of  thefe  I  have  confider'd,  and  entered 
upon  the  fecond  ;  namely,  that  as  the  creatures  were 
merely  pafiive  in  their  being  made,  and  contributed 
nothing  at  all  thereto,  no  more  do  we  in  our  conver- 
fion and  regeneration. 

This  I  told  you  does  plainly  make  void  all  the 
precepts  and  exhortations,  and  all  the  promifes  and 
threatnings  of  fcripture,  to  argue  and  perfuade  men 
to  repentance. 

That  which  remains  to  be  done  upon  this  argu- 
ment, is, 

Firft,  to  anfwer  an  objcdion  or  two,  which  are 
commonly  urged  by  the  aficrtors  of  this  dodlrine, 
that  we  are  merely  paiTive  in  the  work  of  con- 
verfion. 

Secondly,  to  give  a  clear  ftate  of  this  matter,  fo 
as  is  moft  agreeable  to  fcripture,  and  the  attributes 
and  perfedlions  of  God.     For  the 

Firfl,  the  objedions  are  thefe  three. 

I.  That  if  we  be  not  merely  palFive  in  the  work 
of  regeneration  and  converfion,  we  afcribc  the  whole 
glory  of  this  work  to  our  felves,  and  not  to  God. 

Or 


1 764     Of  the  nature  of  re^  tueration^  and  its  neceffity^ 
SERM.     Or  2dly,  we  do  however  extenuate  or  leflen  the 
^^^^^'  grace  of  God,  if  there  be  any  adive  concurrence 
and  endeavours  of  our  own  towards  this  change. 

3d]y,  they  ask  St.  PauPs  queftion,  "  who  maketh 
*'  thee  to  differ?"  and  think  it  impofTible  to  be  an- 
fwer'd,  if  the  efficacy  of  God's  grace  do  depend  up- 
on our  concurrence  and  compliance  with  it.  Thefe 
are  all  the  material  objediions  I  know  j  to  every  one 
of  which  I  hope  to  give  a  very  clear  and  fufficient 
anfwer. 

I.  Objedion,  if  we  be  not  merely  pafTive  in  the 
work  of  regeneration  and  converfion,  we  afcribe  the 
whole  glory  of  this  work  to  our  felves,  and  not  to 
God.  But  that  I  certainly  know  this  objedlion  is 
commonly  made,  and  have  feen  it  in  very  confidera- 
ble  aljthors,  I  could  not  believe  that  men  of  fo  good 
fenfe  could  make  it.  For  this  is  to  fay,  that  if  we 
do  any  thing  in  this  v/ork,  tho'  we  acknowledge  that 
what  we  do  in  it,  we  do  by  the  affiflance  oF  God's 
grace,  we  afcribe  it  wholly  to  our  feivea,  and  rob 
God  altogether  of  the  glory  oF  his  graces  or  in 
plainer  terms,  it  is  to  fay,  that  tho'  we  fay  God 
does  never  fo  much,  and  we  but  very  little  in  this 
work,  yet  if  we  do  not  fay  that  God  does  all,  and 
we  nothing  at  all,  we  take  the  whole  work  to  our 
felves,  and  fay  God  does  nothing  at  all  5  which  let 
any  one  that  confiders  what  we  fay  judge,  whether 
we  fay  fo  or  no. 

The  fcripture  which  never  robs  God  of  the  glory 
of  his  grace,  does  I'm  fure  afcribe  our  converfion 
and  repentance,  our  regeneration  and  fandification 
to  feveral  caufes ;  to  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God,  to 
his  minifters,  to  his  word,   and     to  our   felves.To 

the 


in  order  to  juftification  ajid  fahatlon,  r  -  ';  c 

the  Holy  Spirit  of  God,  as  the  principal  au-SFJ^M 
thor,  and  efHcienr.  Hence  we  are  laid  *'  ro  be  born  ^^^'^■ 
"  of  the  Spirit,  to  be  funaified  by  the  renew- ^ 
*'  ing  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  lb  the  miniflers  of 
God,  as  the  inftruments  of  our  converfion.  Hence 
they  are  Hiid  "  to  turn  men  to  righteoufnefs,  to 
*'  convert  a  finner  from  the  evil  of  his  ways,'  ro 
*«  fave  fouls  from  death,  to  lave  thcmfelves,  and 
"  them  that  hear  them  ;  to  be  ourfpiritual  father? 
"  and  to  beget  us  in  Cf^rist."  To  the  v/ord  of 
God,  as  the  fubordinate  means  and  inftruments  of 
our  converfion.  Hence  we  are  Hiid  "  to  be  bc-- 
*'  gotten  by  the  word  of  truth,  to  be  fandified  by 
"  the  truth."  And  Jaflly,  to  our  felves,  as  con- 
curring fome  way  or  other  to  U\i%  work.  Hence 
we  are  faid  "  to  beheve  and  repent,  to  turn  from 
*'  our  evil  ways,  and  to  turn  to  x.\\t  Lord,  to 
"  cleanfe  and  purify  our  felves."  Hence  likewife  arc 
thofe  frequent  commands  in  fcripture, "  to  amend  our 
"  v/ays  and  doings,  to  wafh  our  hearts  from  wicked- 
"  nefs,  to  repent  and  turn  ouriclves,  and  to  make  our- 
"  felves  new  hearts,  and  new  fpirits."  So  that  all  thefo 
caufes,  the  Spirit  of  God,  his  miniilers,  his  word, 
and  we  our  felves,  do  all  fome  way  or  other  concur 
and  contribute  to  this  efFed.  Goo  indeed  is  the  princi- 
pal, and  hath  kt  great  an  hand  in  this  work  from 
beginning  to  end,  that  all  the  rell  are  nothing  in 
comparifon,  and  we  do  well  to  afcribe  to  him  rhc 
glory  of  it,  ''  that  no  flefh  may  glory  in  his 
''fight:'*  but  neverthelefs  in  ftridnels  ofipcech  fuffi- 
ciently  warranted  by  fcripture,  the  miniilers  of  God, 
and  the  word  of  God,  and  we  our  felves,  do  all 
GO-operatc  fome  way  or  other  to  our  converfion,  and 
Vol.  VI.  13  B  rege- 


2766  Of  the  nature  of  regeneration^  and  its  necefjlt)\ 
S  E  R  M.  regeneration  \  and  by  afcribing  to  any  of  thefe  fuch 
pirts  as  they  truly  have  in  this  v/ork,  God  is  not 
robbed  of  any  part  of  the  glory  of  his  grace,  much 
Jefs  of  the  whole.  Much  lefs  is  it  the  afcribing  it  all 
to  our  felves,  whom  we  affirm  to  have  the  lead  part 
in  it,  nor  v/orthy  to  be  mentioned,  in  comparifon  of 
the  riches  of  God's  grace  towards  us.  And  yet  un- 
lefs  we  do  ibmething,  what  can  be  the  meaning  of 
''  making  our  felves  new  hearts  and  new  fpirits.'* 
Is  it  only  that  wc  lliould  be  pafllve  to  the  irrefilli- 
ble  operations  of  God*s  grace  I  that  is,  that  we 
Ihould  not  hinder,  what  we  can  neither  hinder  nor 
promote  ;  that  we  fhould  fo  demean  our  felves,  as 
of  neceffity  we  mufi:  whether  we  will  or  no.  So 
then  "  to  make  our  felves  new  hearts  and  new 
"  fpirits,*'  is  to  do  nothing  at  all  towards  the  hin- 
drance or  furtherance  of  this  work  ,  and  if  this  be 
iwt  meaning  of  it,  it  is  a  precept  and  exhortation 
juil  as  fit  for  Hones,  as  for  men  s  that  is,  very  im- 
proper for  either, 

2.  Objciftion..  But  however,  we  do  extenuate  and 
leflfen  the  grace  of  God,  if  there  be  any  adive  con- 
currence and  endeavours  on  our  part  towards  this 
change;  For  anuver  to  this,  three  things  deferve  tc^ 
be  confider'd. 

Firft,  it  is  very  well  worthy  our  confideration, 
that  they  v/ho  make  this  objection,  have  the  confi- 
dence to  pretend  that  they  do  not  diminifh  the  grace 
of  God,  by  confining  it  to  a  very  fmall  part  of 
mankind  in  comparifon ;  nay,  they  will  needs  face 
us  down,  that  by  this  very  thing  they  do  very  much 
exalt  and  magnify  it,  and  that  the  grace  of  God 
is  fo  much  the  greater,    by   how  much  the  fewer 

they 


in  order  to  jujllfication  afid  fahatiojt.  1767 

they  are  that  are  partakers  of  it.  Bit  1  hope  they  SER  xr. 
only  mean  that  the  grace  is  greater  to  themfclves  •,  ^^'^'^• 
(in  which  conceit  there  is  commonly  as  much  of 
envy  as  gratitude)  but  furely  they  cannot  mean  that 
the  grace  which  is  hmited  to  a  few,  is  greater  in  it 
felf,  and  upon  the  whole  matter,  than  that  which  is 
extended  to  a  great  many  ;  it  being  a  downright 
contradidtion,  to  fay  that  the  grace  of  Go©  is  ma^- 
iiified  by  being  confined.  For  at  this  rate  of  rca- 
foning,  the  lefTer  it  is,  the  greater  it  mull  be,  and 
by  undeniable  confequence  would  be  greatefl  of  all, 
if  it  were  none  at  all.  So  that  it  feems  the  c^race  of 
God  may  be  extenuated  in  favour  of  our  felves  but 
when  we  do  fo  we  mufb  fay  we  magnify  \t. 

Secondly,  but  to  come  clofe  to  the  objedion ;  tho* 
it  be  true,  that  if  God's  grace  in  our  converfion  do 
not  do  all ;  it  does  not  do  fo  much  as  if  h  did  all  ; 
yet  this  is  really  no  injury  or  difhonour  to  the  grace 
of  God  ;  and  tho'  in  fome  fenfe  it  doth  extenuate  ky 
It  doth  not  in  truth  and  reality  take  off  from  the 
glory  of  it.  In  my  opinion,  the  grace  and  favour 
of  a  prince  is  not  tho.  Jefs  in  offering  a  pardon  to  a 
traitor,  who  puts  forth  his  hand  and  gladly  receives 
it,  than  if  he  forc'd  it  upon  him  whether  he  would 
or  no.  I  am  fure  it  is  in  the  firft  cafe  much  fitter  to 
give  it,  and  he  on  whom  it  is  confcrr'd  much  bet- 
ter qualified  to  receive  it.  'Tis  no  difparagcment  to 
a  prince's  flivour,  that  it  is  beflow'd  on  one  who  is 
in  fome  meafure  qualified  to  receive  it.  But  be  ic 
more  or  lefs  in  one  cafe  than  the  other,  this  is  cer- 
tain, that  in  both  cafes  the  man  owes  his  life  to  the 
great  grace  and  goodnefs  of  his  prince  ;  and  I  can- 
not  fee  how  it  leflcns  the  grace,   that  the  miferablc 

ij  B  2  object 


1768     Of  the  nature  of  regeneration^  arid  its  neccjjity , 

SKRVf.  obje6lofit,  the  guilty  and  condemned  perfon,  was 
cviir.  either  by  his  humble  fubmilFion,  or  thankful  accep- 
tance oF  it,  in  fome  degree  better  qualified  to  receive 
luch  a  favour,  than  an  obftinate  refufer  of  it. 

Thirdly,  which  is  the  principal  confideration  of 
all,  we  mud:  take  great  heed,  that  while  we  endea- 
vour to  make  God  to  do  all  in  the  converfion  of 
Tinners,  we  do  not  by  this  means  charge  upon  him 
the  ruin  and  deflruclion  of  impenitent  Tinners,  which 
I  doubt  we  fliould  do,    if  we  make  the   reafon  of 
their  impenitency  and   ruin  their  utter   impotency 
and  difability  to  repent ;  and  we  certainly  make  this 
the  reafon  of  their  impenitency  and  ruin  if  there  be 
no  other  difference  but  this  between  penitent  and  im- 
penitent fmners,  namely,  that  in  the  one  God  works 
repentance   by  an  irrefiilible  ad:  of  his  power,   fo 
that  he  cannot  but  repent,  and  denies  this  grace  to 
the  other,  without  which  he  cannot  pofiibly  repent. 
But  tiie  fcripLure  chargeth  the  deftrudlion  of  men 
upon  themfclves,  and  lays  their  impenitency  at  their 
own  door.     "  O  Ifrael!    thou  haft   deflroyed    thy 
*'  felf ;  but  in  me  is  thy  help,"  Hofca  xiii.  9.     But 
where  is  the  help,  when  the  grace  abfoiutely  necei- 
fary  to  repentance  is  denied  ^  and  how  is  their  de- 
flrudlion  of  themfelves,  if  it  is  unavoidable,  let  them 
do  what  they  can  .?   Id.  v.  3,  4.     God  appeals  to  his 
people  Ifrael,  that  nothing  was  wandng  on  his  part, 
that  was   fit  and  necefHry  to  be   done,    that   they 
might  bring  forth  the  fruits  of  repentance,  and  bet- 
ter obedience.     "  And  now,  O  inhabitants  of  Jeru- 
<■'  falem,  and   men  of  Judah,  judge,    I  pray  you, 
*'  between  me  and  my  vineyard :  what  could  have 
*'  been  done  more  to  my  vineyard,  that  I  have  not 

*■'  done 


in  order  to  jujlljication  andfalvation,  1760 

"  done  in  it?  wherefore  when  I  looked  that  It  SERM. 
*'  fliould  bring  forth  grapes,  brought  it  forth  wild  ^^'^^^' 
"  grapes?"  Is  it  true  that  God  hath  done  all  that 
was  neceflary  to  have  brought  them  to  repentance? 
then  if  irrefiftible  grace  be  necefTary,  he  afforded 
them  that;  but  that  was  not  afforded  them,  becaufe 
then  they  muft  unavoidably  have  repented,  and  there 
had  been  no  caufe  for  this  complaint :  if  he  did 
not  afford  it,  but  only  the  outward  means  of  repen- 
tance without  the  inward  grace  (as  fome  fay  \ )  then 
it  is  eafy  to  judge  why  they  did  not  repent;  becaufe 
they  could  not  •,  and  there  feems  to  be  no  caufe  ei- 
ther of  wonder,  or  complaint.  Btfides  that  it  will 
be  hard  to  juitify  that  faying,  "  what  could  J  have 
''  done  more  to  my  vineyard,  that  I  have  not  done 
*'  in  it?  "  when  it  is  acknowledg'd  by  the  alTertors 
of  this  dodlrine,  that  the  main  thing  was  not  done, 
and  that  without  which  all  the  reft  fignify'd  nothing, 
leaving  them  under  the  fame  impofllbility  of  repen- 
tance, as  if  nothing  at  all  had  been  done  to  them. 

But  now  upon  our  fuppofition,  that  fuificient  grace 
was  afforded  to  them,  which  they  wilfully  ncgledled 
to  make  ufe  of,  the  reafon  and  equity  of  this  com- 
plaint is  evident,  and  God  is  acquitted,  as  having 
done  what  was  needful  on  his  part,  and  the  finner 
juftly  condemned,  for  not  concurring  with  the  grace 
of  God  as  he  might  have  done  ;  which  Ihcws  that 
we  are  not  meerly  pafTive  in  this  work,  but  fome- 
thing  is  expe&d  from  us,  after  God  hath  done  his 
part,  which  if  we  neglecl  to  do,  "  our  deftrudlion 
"  is  of  our  felves."  Whereas  the  contrary  fuppofi- 
tion, upon  pretence  of  glorifying  Goo's  grace,  by 
making  him  to  do  all  in  the  converfion  of  finncrs, 

indangcrs 


cviir. 


\nno     Of  the  nature  of  n generation  ^  audits  necejfit)\ 

SERM.  indangers  the  honour  of  his  juftlce,  by  laying  the 
impcnitency  of  finncrs,  and  their  ruin  confequent  up- 
on it,  at  his  door ;  which  is  to  advance  one  attri- 
bute of  God  upon  the  ruin  of  another ;  whereas  it 
is  a  fundamental  principle  of  religion,  to  take 
care  to  reconcile  the  attributes  and  perfections  of 
God  to  one  another  ;  for  that  is  not  a  divine  per- 
fedlion,  w^hich  contradidls  any  other  perfection. 

The  3d  objedlion  is  grounded  upon  that  queftion 
of  St.  Paul,  I  Cor.  iv.  7.  "  Who  maketh  thee  to 
*'  differ,"  which  they  think  impolTible  to  be  an- 
fwer'd,  if  the  efficacy  of  God's  grace  depend  upon 
our  concurrence  and  compliance  with  it.  For,  fay 
they,  when  God  offers  his  grace  to  two  perfons  for 
their  repentance,  if  the  true  reafon  why  the  one  repents, 
and  the  other  remains  impenitent,  be  this,  that  the 
one  complieih  with  this  grace  of  God,  and  yieldeth 
to  it,  the  other  refifls  and  flands  out  againfl:  it  j 
then  it  is  not  the  grace  of  God  which  makes  the 
din^erence,  for  that  is  equal  to  both,  but  fomething 
in  themfelves,  and  fo  it  is  not  God  that  makes  them 
to  differ,  but  they  themfelves. 

Bat  this  queftion  is  impertinent  to  this  cafe.  The 
apoftle  fpeaks  it  concerning  fpiritual  gifts,  upon  ac- 
count of  which,  they  fadioufly  admir'd  fome  of  the 
apoftles  above  others,  and  concerning  them  the 
Queftion  is  very  proper,  "  who  maketh  thee  to  dif- 
**•  fer  ?  "  Miraculous  gifts  were  fo  order'd  by  God, 
that  men  were  meerly  paffive  in  the  receiving  of 
them,  and  contributed  nothing  to  the  obtaining  of 
them  j  and  therefore  if  one  had  greater  gifts  than 
another,  it  was  meerly  the  pleafure  of  God  that 
jwade  the  difference.    But  the  cafe  is  not  the  fame 

in 


in  order  to  jujlification  and  f ah  at  to??,  1771 

in  the   graces  of  God's  Spirit,  towards  the  ob-  SERlvi. 
raining  and  improving  whereof,  wc  our  fclves  may    ^^'^'^* 
contribute  fomething  •,  our  Saviour  having  afibr'd 
us,  that  "  to  him  that  hath,  fliall  be  given."    And 
here  the  queftion  is  not  proper,  nor  is  it  true  "  that 
"  the  grace  of  God  makes  all  the  difference."     It 
is  indeed  t\\t  foundation  of  all  the  good  that  is   in 
us  :  but  our  different  improvement  makes  different 
attainments  in  grace  and  goodnefs.     Among  thofc 
to  whom  the  talents  were  intruded,  what  made  the 
difference  between  the  man  "  who  wrapt  his  talent 
*'  in  the  napkin,  and  buried  it,"  and  thofe  "  who 
*'  gained  double  by   theirs,"  but  that  the  one  im,- 
prov'd   the  grace  conferr'd  on  him,  the  other  ncg- 
leded  it,  and  this  without  any  manner  of  reflexion 
upon,  or  diminution  of  the  grace  of  God,  or  any  dan- 
ger from  St.  Paul's  queftion  -,  "  who  maketh  thee  to 
•'  differ?"  Put  the  cafe  a  pardon  is  offered  to  two 
malefa6lors,  the   one  accepts,  the  other  refufes   it; 
*'  their  own  choice   makes  the  difference    between 
"  them ; "  but  he  that  is  faved  is  neverthelefs   be- 
holden to  the  king's  pardon  for  his  life,  and  it  were 
a  fenfelefs    ingratitude   in   him,  becaufe   he  accepts 
the  pardon,   when  the  other  refufeth   it,  to  fay  that 
he  did  not  owe  his  life  to  the  grace  and  favour  of 
his  prince,  but  might  thank  himfelf  for  it  •,  whereas 
that  he  was  in  a  capacity  to  accept  a  pardon,   w'as 
wholly  due  to  the  clemency  of  his  prince,  who  of- 
fer'd  it  to  him  when  he  no  wife  deferved  it.     In 
this  cafe  the  thing  plainly  appears  as  it  is,  by  which 
every  man  may  fee,  that  it  is  againft  common  fenfe  to 
pretend  that  the  grace  of  God  is  deflroyed,  if  there 

be  any  compliance  on  our  part  with  it  3  that  it  is  no 

grace. 


CVill. 


1772     Of  the  nature  of  regeneration ^  and  it^  necejfty^ 

SE  RM.  grace,  if  it  be  not  forc'd  upon  us,  and  we  be  not 
meerly  paflive  in  the  reception  of  it.  I  proceed 
in  the 

Second  place,  to  give  a  clear  flate  of  this  matter, 
fo  as  is  moft  agreeable  to  the  do6lrine  of  the  holy 
fcriptures,  and  the  efTentiaJ  attributes  and  perfedions 
of  God.  In  order  to  which,  I  will  give  you  a  fhort 
view  of  the  feveral  opinions  concerning  this  matter. 
And  there  are  two  extreme,  and  two  middle  opi- 
nions, concerning  the  operation  of  God's  grace  in 
the  converfion  of  a  finner. 

The  firft  of  the  extreme  opinions  is  that  which  all 
this  while  1  have  been  arguing  againd,  namely, 
that  all  that  are  converted  and  regenerated,  are 
wrought  upon  in  an  irrefifiible  manner,  and  are  meerly 
palTive  in  it ;  and  that  thofe  who  are  not  thus 
wrought  upon,  their  repentance  and  converfion  is 
impofTible.  What  the  inconveniencies  of  this  opinion 
are,  I  have  fhewed  at  large. 

The  other  extreme  opinion  is,  that  none  are  thus 
wrought  upon,,  becaufe  it  would  be  a  violence  and 
injury  to  man's  natural  liberty  ;  but  that  fufficient 
grace  is  offered  to  all,  one  time  or  other,  who  live 
under  the  gofpel,  which  they  may  comply  with  or 
refift,  and  confequendy  if  they  be  not  brought  to 
repentance,  their  impenitency  and  ruin  is  the  effedof 
their  own  choice,  and  God  is  "  free  from  the  blood 
"  of  all  men."  But  this  opinion,  tho'  infinitely 
more  reafonable  than  the  other,  feems  not  to  have 
any  necefliiry  foundation  either  in  fcripture  or  rea- 
fon.  There  are  fome  inftances  in  fcripture  of  the 
converfion  of  men  after  a  very  violent,  if  not  an 
irrefiftible  manner,  which  feems  to  be  attributed  to 

a 


in  order  to  jujlijicatton  and falvatkn.  1775 

a  particular  predeflination  of  God  ;  as  that  of  St.  Paul,  S  E  R  M. 
who  fays  of  hirnfelf,  Gal.  i.  15.  "  that  he  was  fepa-  ^^^^^• 
*'  rated  from  his  mother's  womb  to  that  work  to 
*'  which  he  was  called  ;"  and  the  manner  of  his  con- 
verfion  was  anfwerable  to  fuch  a  predeflination  j  and 
there  is  nothing  in  reafon  againfl  this,  fince  it  is  no 
injury  to  any  man  to  be  made  good  and  happy  againfl: 
his  will. 

The  two  middle  opinions  are  thefe. 

Firfl:,  that  irrefiftible  grace  is  afforded  to  all  the 
ele61:,  and  fufHcient  grace  to  all  others  who  li'.  -  un- 
der the  gofpel  (for  of  thofe  only  we  fpeak,  the  cafe  of 
others  being  peculiar,  and  belonging  to  the  extra- 
ordinary mercy  of  God)  but  then  they  fay,  that 
none  of  thofe  to  whom  this  fufBcient  grace  is  aiforded 
fhall  effedually  comply  with  it  and  be  laved.  This 
opinion  feems  more  moderate,  and  hath  this  advan- 
tage in  it,  that  it  acquits  the  juftice  of  God  in  x\\q, 
condemnation  of  thofe,  who  having  fulficient  grace 
afforded  to  them,  did  yet  notwithftanding  continue 
impenitent  j  but  yet  it  hath  two  great  inconveniencies 
in  it. 

Fir  If,  that  this  fuppofition  is  to  no  purpofe,  ns  to 
any  real  efte6t  for  the  falvation  of  men,  becaule  not 
one  perfon  more  is  faved,  notwithftanding  this  uni- 
vcrfal  fuf^cient  grace,  which  they  fay  is  afforded  to 
all  ;  for  they  take  it  for  granted  it  is  never  efiedual, 
and  then  it  feems  very  unreafonable  to  fuppofe,  that 
a  means  fufBcient  to  its  end  fhould  univerfaliy 
prove  inefFe^lual ;  nay,  on  the  contrary,  it  is  ncxc 
to  a  demonfcration  againfl  the  llifTiciency  of  a 
means  if  perpetually  and  in  all  inflances  it  fails  of 
its  end.     This    would    ternpc  any  man   to  think. 

Vol.  Vr.  ijG  that 

8. 


]  774  Of  the  nature  of  regeneration^  and  its  necejjlty\ 
S  E  R  M.  that  furely  there  is  fome  defed:  in  it,  or  fomething 
CVIII.  that  hinders  the  efficacy  of  it;  if  being  perpetually 
and  generally  afforded,  it  doth  perpetually  and  uni- 
verfally  mifcarry,  without  fo  much  as  one  inftance 
among  fo  many  millions  to  the  contrary.  So  that 
this  opinion  feems  rather  to  be  contrived  for  a  co- 
lour and  fhelter  againft  fome  abfurdity,  which  men 
know  not  how  to  avoid  otherwife,  than  to  ferve 
any  good  purpofe,  or  to  be  embraced  for  the  truth 
and  probability  of  it. 

The  other  middle  opinion  is,  that  fome  are  con- 
verted in  an  irrefiitible  manner,  when  God  pleafeth, 
and  whom  he  defigns  to  be  extraordinary  examples, 
and  inftruments  for  the  good  of  others,  and  that  fuffi- 
cient  grace  is  afforded  to  others,  which  is  effedlual 
to  the  falvation  of  many,  and  rejeded  by  a  great 
many.  And  this  avoids  all  the  inconveniency  of 
the  other  opinion,  and  is  evidently  mofl  agreeable 
both  to  the  tenor  of  fcripture  and  to  the  bed  notions 
v/hich  men  have  concerning  the  attributes  and  per- 
fedions  of  God,  and  gives  greatefl  encouragement 
to  the  endeavours  of  men.  It  agrees  very  well 
with  the  folemn  declarations  of  fcripture,  that  God 
is  not  wanting  on  his  part  to  afford  men  fufficient 
means  to  bring  them  to  repentance ;  that  he  *'  de- 
"  fires  not  the  death  of  a  finner,  but  rather  that 
**  he  fhould  turn  from  his  wickednels  and  live  ; " 
that  "  he  would  have  all  men  to  be  faved,  and 
*'  to  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth  ;"  that 
*'  he  would  not  that  any  fliould  perifh,  but  that 
*'  all  Ihould  come  to  repentance  ;  "  that  "  mens 
''  deftru(5lion  is  of  themfelves."  And  this  makes 
all  the  exhortations  and  motives  of  fcripture  to  re- 
pentance 


in  order  to  jujiification  aiidfahadon,  1 7  75 

pentance  to  be  of  fome  force  and  fignificancy,  and  S  E  R  M. 
gives  encouragement  to  the  refolutlons  and  endea- 
vours of  men  to  become  better.     This  clearly   ac- 
quits the  juftice   of  God   in    the  condemnation  of 
impenitent   finners,  and  fixeth  the   reafon   of  their 
ruin  upon  their  own  choice.     This  perfedly  recon- 
ciles the  operation  and  afiidance   of   God's  grace 
in  our  converfion   and  regeneration,  in  our  fancii- 
fication   and  perfeverance   in   a    good  courle,  with 
the  concurrence  of  our  own  endeavours,  and  makes 
thofe  plain  texts    of  fcripture  have   fome  fcnfe  and 
fignificancy  in  them  -,  "  work  out  your  own   falva- 
*'  tion  ;  repent  and  turn  yourfelves  from  all    your 
''  evil  ways  ;  make  ye  new  hearts  and  new  fpirits.*' 
Thcfe  are  more  than  a  thouflmd  metaphors   to  con- 
vince a  man  that  we  may  and  ought  to  do  fome- 
thing  towards  our  repentance  and  converfion.  And 
if  any  man  be  fure  that   we  neither  do  nor  can  do 
any  thing  in  this  v/ork,  then  I   am    fure   that  thefe 
texts   fignify    nothing.     Finally,    thofe  texts   which 
fpeak   mod  clearly   of  the  neccflity  of   the  divine 
grace  and  afliftance,    to  our    doing  of  any   thing 
that   is  fpiritually    good,  do  fuppofe  fomething    to 
be   done    on   our   part.     That   of  our    Saviour, 
*'  without   me  ye  can    do  nothing,"    implies   that 
with  his  grace  and  afliftance  we  can.     That  ot  St. 
Paul,  "  I  am  able  to  do  all  things  through  Christ 
*'  ftrengthning  me,"  implies,  that  what  we  do    by 
the  ftrength  of  Christ  is  truly  our  own  ad-,  "  I 
*'  am  able  to  do  all  things."     And   this  does  not 
in  the  leaft  prejudice  nor  obfcure  the  glory  of  God's 
grace.     St.   Paul  it  fecms  knew  very  well  how  to 
reconcile  thefe  two,  and  to  give  the  grace  of  God 

13  C  2  i^^ 


1776  Of  the  nature  of  regeneration^  ^c, 

SERM.  its  due,  without  rejedino;  all  concurrence  of  our 
own  induflry  and  endeavour,  i  Cor.  xv.  10.  "  But 
"  by  the  grace  of  God  I  am  what  I  am ;  and  his 
'^  grace  which  was  beftowed  upon  me  was  not 
*'  in  vain  i"  not  becaufe  it  was  irrefiftible,  and 
he  merely  pafTive  in  the  reception  of  it ;  but  becaufe 
he  did  concur  and  co-operate  with  it.  So  he  tells 
us,  '*  his  grace  that  was  bellowed  upon  me  was 
''  not  in  vain,  but  I  laboured  more  abundantly 
*'  than  they  all ;  yet  not  I,  but  the  grace  of  God 
*'  v/hich  was  with  me.'*  So  that  our  concurrence 
and  endeavour  in  the  doing  of  any  thing  that  is 
good,  docs  not  derogate  from  the  grace  of  God, 
provided  that  v/e  afcribe  the  good  which  we  do  to 
the  adlilance  of  divine  grace,  to  which  it  is  incom- 
parai)ly  ijiore  due,  than  to  our  own  a6livity  and 
endeavour.  And  fo  St,  Paul  does,  "  I  labour'd 
"  abundantly  ;  yet  fnot  I,  but  the  grace  of  God, 
*'  which  was  with  me." 

So  that  the  glory  of  God's  grace  may  be  advanced 
to  its  due  pitch,  without  afierting  that  we  are  mere- 
ly pafHve  to  the  operations  of  it.  God's  grace 
may  be  abundantly  beftowed  upon  us,  and  yet  we 
may  '^  labour  abundantly  ;"  "  God  may  work  in 
"  us  to  will  and  to  do,"  and  yet  ''  we  may  work 
"  out  our  own  falvation."  I  have  done  with  the 
fecond  dodlrine  grounded  upon  this  metaphor  of 
*^a  new  creature." 


SERMON 


SERMON     CIX. 

Of  the  nature  of  regeneration,  and  its 
neceffity,  in  order  to  juftification  and 
falvation. 


G  A  L  A  T.  vi.  15. 

For  hi  Christ  Jesus,  neither  circumcifwn avaUeth  a}^ 
things  nor  uncircumcifion  -,  hnt  a  new  creature. 


I 


N  difcourfing  on  thefe  words,  that  which  I  was  S  E  R  M. 
lafl:  upon  was   to  fhew,  that  this  metaphor  of  ,_5!^^ 
*'  a  new  creature"  doth  not  import  what  ^ome 
would  extend  it  to,  and  that  fo  as  to  found  doctrines  femion  on 
of  great  confequence  upon   the   fingb  llrength  of  ^^stex:. 
this,  and  other  like  metaphors,  viz.  fuch  dodrines 
as  thefe  three, 

Firft,  that  as  the  creation  was  by  an  irrcfiftible  a£l 
of  the  divine  power,  fo  is  this  new  creation,  or  the 
converfion  of  a  (inner. 

Secondly,  that  as  creatures  were  merely  pafllve  in 
their  being  made,  and  contributed  nothing  at  all 
thereto,  no  more  do  we  to  our  converfion  and  re- 
generation. 

Thirdly,  that  as  the  creation  was  in  an  inftant, 
only  by  the  powerful  word  of  God,  fo  this  new  crea- 
tion is  in  an  inftant,and  admits  of  no  degrees.  The 
two  firft  of  thefe  I  have  fpoken  to,  and  fhcwed,  that 
as  they  had  no  necefTary  foundation  in  this  and  the 
like  metaphors  of  fcripture,  fo  they  are  contrary  to 

rcafoa 


1 77S     Of  the  nature  of  regeneration^  and  its  iiecejjity, 
SERM.  reafon  and  experience,  and  the  plain  and  conftant 
tenor  of  fcripture,  which  is  the  rule  and  meafure  of 
Christ's  do6lrine.     I  proceed  now  to   confider 
the 

Third  doftrine,  v/hich  is  grounded  upon  this  me- 
taphor, namely,  that  as  the  creation  of  the  feveral 
ranks  and  orders  of  creatures  was  in  an   inflant,  and 
effedled  by  the  powerful  word  of  God,  faying,  "  \tx. 
*'  fuch  and  fuch  things  be,"  and  immediately  they 
were ;  fo  this  new  creation  is  in  an  inftant,  and  ad- 
mits of  no  Heps  and  degrees.     And  this  do6lrine  is 
nothing  elfe  but  a  farther  purfuit  of  the  metaphor ; 
and  admitting  the  two  former  dodlrines  to  be  true, 
and  well-grounded  upon  this  metaphor,  this  third 
dodlrine  follows  well  enough  from  them  •,  for  it  is 
agreeable  enough,  that  that  which  is  effected  by  an 
irrefiftible  a6t  of  omnipotence,  without  any  concur- 
rence or  operation  on  our  part,  fhould  be  done  in 
an  inftant  and  all  at  once.     Not  that  this  is  necef- 
fary,  but  that  it  is  realbnable;  for  why  fliould  om- 
nipotence ufe  delays,  and  take  time  and  proceed  by 
degrees  in  the  doing  of  that,  which  with  the  fame 
eafe  it  can  do  at  once,  and  in  an  inftant ;  efpecially 
confidering  how  well  this  fuits  with  the  other  meta- 
phors of  fcripture,  as  well  as  with  this  of  "  a  new 
*'  creation,"   viz.  the  metaphor   of  "  regeneration, 
''  and  refurredlion."  A  child  is  born  at  once,  and  the 
dead  Ihall  be  raifed  "  in  a  moment,  in  the  twinkling 
*'  of  an  eye.'* 

But  notwithftanding  all  this  plaufible  appearance 
and  confpiracy  of  metaphors,  I  fliall  Ihew  that  this 
do6lrine  of  the  converfion  and  regeneration  of  a 
finner  being  effefted  in  an  inftant,  and  all  at  once,  ig 

not 


in  order  to ju/lif cation  andfahatlon.  ijyg 

not  well  grounded  either  upon  fcripture,  or  experi-  SERM. 
ence.  Not  but  that  God  can  do  lb  if  he  pleafeth,  ^^^• 
and  work  this  change  in  fome  much  fooner  and 
quicker  than  in  others ;  but  there  is  nothing  either 
in  fcripture  or  experience  to  perfuade  us  that  this  is 
the  ufual,  much  lefs  the  conilant  and  unalterable 
method  of  God's  grace  in  the  converfion  of  a  Tin- 
ner, to  bring  it  about  in  an  inflant,  without  any 
fenfible  fleps  and  degrees. 

But  for  the  full  clearing  of  this  matter,  I  fhall 
proceed  by  thefe  fteps. 

Firft,  I  fhall  fliew  upon  what  miftakcn  grounds 
and  principles  this  dodlrine  relies-,  befides  the  me- 
taphors already  mention'd,  which  I  have  fhewn  to 
be  of  no  force  to  prove  the  thing. 

Secondly,  I  fliall  plainly  fhew  what  regeneration 
is;  by  which  it  will  appear,  that  it  is  not  neccf- 
farily  efFeded  in  an  inftant,  and  at  once,  but  ad- 
mits of  degrees. 

Thirdly,  that  it  is  evidendy  fo  In  experience  of 
the  ordinary  method  of  God's  grace,  both  in  thofc 
who  are  regenerated  by  a  pious  and  religious  edu- 
cation, and  in  thofe  who  are  reclaimed  from  a  vi- 
cious courfe  of  life. 

Fourthly,  that  all  this  is  very  confonant  and 
agreeable  to  what  the  fcripture  plainly  and  conflant- 
ly  declares  concerning  it. 

Firft,  I  fhall  difcover  feveral  miftakes  upon  which 
this  dodlrine  is  grounded,  befides  the  metaphors  al- 
ready mention'd,  and  which  I  have  fhewn  to  be  of 
no  force  to  prove  the  thing,  viz.  that  regeneration  is 
in  an  inftant,  and  admits  of  no  degrees.     As 


I. 


TJiat 


^  ^  8  o     Of  the  7taiure  of  regeneratioft^  and  its  necefjity^ 
SERM.     I.  That   regeneration  and  fanflification    are   not 

^^^'     only  different  expreflions,  but  do^  fignify  two  things 
really  different.     But  this  is  a  grofs   miflake;  for 
regeneration  and  fandlification  are  but  different  ex- 
preffions  of  the  felf  fame  thing  \  for  regeneration  is 
a  metaphor  which  the  fcripture  ufeth  to  exprefs  our 
tranflation  and  change  from  one  flate  to  another, 
from  a  flatc  of  fin  and  wickednefs,    to  a  ftate  of 
grace  and  holinefs,as  if  we  were  born  over  again,  and 
"were  the  children  of  another  father,  and  from  being 
the  children  of  the  devil,  did  become  the  children 
of  God  \  and  fandification  is  our  being  made  holy, 
our  being  purified  and  cleanfed  from  fin  and  impu- 
rity. And  hence  it  is  that  regeneration  and  fandifica- 
tion  are  attributed  to  the  fame  caufes,  principal,  and 
inftrumental,  to  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  to  the 
word  of  God  ;    we  are  faid  *'  to  be  born  of  the 
''  Spirit,"  and  to  be   "  fandlified  by  the  Holy 
''  Ghost  ;  to  be  begotten  of  the  word  of  truth,  and 
«^  to  be  fadified  by  the  truth,"  which  is  the  word  of 
God.     So  that  the  fcripture  fpeaks  of  them  as  the 
fame  thing  ;  and  they  mufl  needs  be  fo  5  for  if  fandti- 
fication  be  the  making  of  us  holy,  and  regeneration 
maketh  us  holy  ;  then  regeneration  is  fandtification. 

2.  It  is  faid,  that  regeneration  only  fignifies 
our  firft  entrance  into  this  ftate,  and  fanclifica- 
tion  our  progrefs  and  continuance  in  it.  But  this 
likewife  is  a  great  miftakc.  For  tho'  it  be  true,  that 
reo-eneration  doth  fignify  our  firfl  entrance  into  this 
flate,  yet  it  is  not  true,  that  it  only  fignifies  that  \ 
•jfor  it  is  ufed  likewife  in  fcripture  to  fignify  our  con- 
tinuance in  that  ftate  ;  for  chriftians  are  faid  to  be 
the  children  of  God,  and  confequently  in  a  regene- 
rate 


in  07'der  to  jiijiification  and  fahatmi.  1781 

rate  Hate,  not  only  in  the  inftanc  of  this  change,  S  E  R  M. 
but  during  their  continuance  in  it.  Befides  that  our  ^^1 
firll  change  is  as  well  call'd  our  fandilication,  as  our 
progrefs  and  continuance  in  a  ftatc  of  holinefs.  So 
that  neither  in  this  is  there  any  difference  between 
regeneration  and  fandification.  They  do  both  of 
them  fignify  both  our  firll:  entrance  into  an  holy 
(late,  and  our  continuance  and  progrefs  in  it  ;  tho* 
regeneration  do  more  frequently  denote  the  making 
of  this  change,  and  our  firll  entrance  into  it. 

3.  It  is  faid  that  one  of  the  main  differences  be- 
tween regeneration  and  fmclification  is  this,  that  re- 
generation is  incapable  of  degrees,  and  all  that  are 
regenerate  are  equally  fo,  and  one  regenerate  perlbn 
is  not  more  or  lefs  regenerate  than  another ;  whereas 
fandlification  is  a  gradual  progrefs  from  one  dcf^ree 
of  holinefs  to  another,  and  of  them  that  are  truly 
fand:ified  and  holy,  one  may  be  more  fandlilicd  and 
more  holy  than  another.  But  this  likewifc  is  a  meer 
fancy  and  imagination,  without  any  real  ground. 
For  as  an  unregcnerate  (late  does  plainly  admit  of  de- 
grees, fo  likewife  doth  the  regenerate,  and  for  the 
fame  reafon.  That  an  un regenerate  ftate  admits  of 
degrees,  is  evident,  in  that  fbme  unregenerate  per- 
fons  are  more  wicked  than  others,  and  thereby  more 
**  the  children  of  wrath,  and  the  devil,"  than  others, 
which  are  the  fcripture  exprelTions  concerning  the 
degrees  of  mens  wickednefs  and  impiety.  In  like  man- 
ner, they  that  are  more  holy,  and  more  like  God, 
are  more  the  children  of  God  •  and  to  be  more  a 
child  of  God,  is  furely  to  be  more  regenerate,  that 
IS,  more  renewed  after  the  image  of  God,  which 

Vol.  VI.  U  D  confilh 

8. 


1 7  S  2     Of  the  nature  of  regeneration^  and  its  necejjity , 

5ERM.  confifts  "  in  righteoufneis,  and  true  holinefs."     So 

CIX 

'     that  it  is  a  meer  precarious  aflerrion,  and  evidently 

falfe  to  affirm,  that  regeneration  doth  not  admit  of 
degrees,  and  that  one  is  not  more  regenerate  than 
another. 

4thly,  and  laftly,  they  ground  this  conceit  upon 
the  doctrine  of  the  Ichools,    which  teach,    that  in 
regeneration  and  converfion  all  the  habits  of  grace 
2iVtm^uk^yJimul&  femel^  "  together,  and  at  once." 
I  confefs  I  have  no  regard,  much  lefs  a  veneration 
for   the   dodlrine  of    the  fchools,    where  it  differs 
from    that  of  the   holy    fcriptures,   which  fay  not 
one  word  of  infufed  habits,  which   yet  are    much 
talk'd  of  in  divinity  ;  and  to  fpeak  the  truth,  thefe 
words  ferve  only  to  obfcure  the  thing.     For  to  fay 
that  in  converfion  the   habits  of  all  graces  and  vir- 
tues are  infufed  together  and  at  once,  is  to  fay,  that 
in  an  inilant  men  that  were  vicious  before  in  feve, 
ral  kinds,  are  by  an  omnipotent  acl  of  God's  grace, 
and  by  a  new  principle   infufed  into  them,  endued 
with  the  habits  of  the  contrary  graces  and  virtues, 
and  are  a'b  chafte,    and   temperate,    and  juft,    and 
meek,  and   humble,  as  if  by  the  frequent  pradice 
of  thefe  virtues  they    had    become   fo.     That   this 
may  be,  and  fometimes  is,  I  am  fo  far  from  deny- 
ing, that  I  believe  it  to  be  fo.     Some  men,  by  an 
extraordinary   power    of   God's   grace   upon   their 
hearts,    are  fuddenly  changed,    and    ftrangely    re- 
claimed from  a  very  wicked  and  vicious,  to  a  very 
religious  and  virtuous  courfe  of  life,  and  that  which 
others  attain  to  by  flower  degrees,   and  great  con- 
flids  with  themfelves,   before  they  can  gain  the  up- 
per 


in  order  to  jujlijication  and  falvation,  1-83 

per  hand  of  their  lufts,  thefe  arrive  at  all  on  a  fud-S  E  R  n, 
den,  by  a  mighty  refolution  wrought  in  them  by  ^^^' 
the  power  of  God's  grace,  and  as  it  were  a  new 
bias  and  incHnation  put  upon  their  fouls,  equal  to 
an  habit  gain'd  by  long  ufe  and  cuftom.  This 
God  fometimes  does,  and  when  he  does  this,  it 
may  in  fome  fenfe  be  call'd  "  the  infufion  of  the 
"  habits  of  grace  and  virtue  together,  and  at  once  •,  " 
becaufe  the  man  is  hereby  endowed  with  a  prin- 
pie  of  equal  force  and  power  with  habits  that  are 
acquir'd  by  long  ufe  and  pradlice.  A  ftrong  and 
vigorous  faith  is  the  principle  and  root  of  all  oraces 
and  virtues,  and  may  have  fuch  a  powerful  influ- 
ence upon  the  refolutions  of  our  minds,  and  the 
government  of  our  adions,  that  from  this  princi- 
ple all  graces  and  virtues  may  fpring  and  orow 
up  by  degrees  into  habits;  but  then  this  principle 
is  not  formally  but  virtually,  in  the  power  and 
efficacy  of  it  ;  "  the  infufion  of  the  habits  of 
''  grace  and  virtue  ;  "  and  even  in  thofe  perlbns  in 
whom  this  change  is  fo  fuddenly,  and  as  it  were  at 
once,  I  doubt  not  but  that  the  habits  of  feveral 
graces  and  virtues  are  afterwards  attained  by  the 
frequent  pradice  of  them,  in  the  virtue  of  this 
powerful  principle  of  the  faith  of  the  gofpel,  as  I 
fhall  fbew  in  the  progrefs  of  this  difcourfe.  And 
this  I  doubt  not  was  very  frequent  and  vifible  in 
many  of  the  firll  converts  to  chriffianity  ;  efpecially 
of  thofe,  who  from  the  abominable  idolatry  and 
impiety  of  heathenifm  were  gained  to  the  chriftian 
religion.  The  Spirit  of  God  did  then  work  very 
miraculoufly,  as    well   in  the    cures    of  fpiriru.^l  as 

13  D  2.  af 


1 7S4  Of  the  nature  of  regeneration,  and  its  necejjity^ 
SERM.  of  bodily  difeafes.  Bat  then  to  make  this  the  rule 
f^^iLj  and  ftandard  of  God's  ordinary  proceedings  in  the 
converfion  and  regeneration  of  men,  is  equally  un- 
reafonable,  as  ftili  to  expedt  miracles  for  the  cure  of 
difeafes;  and  'tis  certain  in  experience,  that  this  is 
riot  God's  ordinary  method  in  the  converfion  of 
finnersj  as  I  ihall  fully  fhew  by  and  by. 

Secondly,  I  fhall  fhew  what  regeneration   is,   by 
which   it  will  plainly  appear,  that  there  is  no   ne- 
cefTity  that  it   Ihould  be  efFcded  in  an  inftant,  and 
at  once,  but  that  it   will  admit  of  degrees.     I  do 
not  deny    that   it  may  be    in  an  inftant,    and  at 
once.     The  power  of  God  is  able  to  do  this,  and 
fom.etimes  does  it  very   thoroughly,   and  very  fiid- 
denly.     But    the  quellion  is,    v/hether   there  be  a 
necefTity  it  ihould  be  fo,  and   always  be  fo.     Now 
reo-eneration  is  the  change  of  a  man's  fbate,    from  a 
flate  of  fin  to   a  ftate  of  holineis;  which  becaufe 
it  is  an  entrance  upon  a  new  kind  or  courfe  of  life, 
it  is  fidy  refembied  to  regeneration,  or  a  new  birth  ; 
to  a  new  creation,  the  man  being  as  it  were  quite 
chanc^'d  or  made  over  again,  fo  as  not  to  be,  as  to 
the  main   purpofe  and  defign  of  his  life,  the  fame 
man   he  was   before.     This  is   a  plain  fenfible  ac- 
count of  the  thing,  which  every  one  may  eafily  un- 
derhand.    Now  there  is  nothing  in  reafon,  why  a 
man  may  not  gradually  be  changed  and  arrive  at 
this  ftate  by  degrees ;  as  well  as  after  this  change  is 
made,  and  he  arrived  at  this  ilate  of  a  regenerate 
man,  he  may  by  degrees  grow  and  improve  in  it. 
But  the  latter   no  man  doubts  of,  but  that  a  man 
that  is  in  a  ftate  of  grace,  may  grow  and  improve 

in 


in  order  to  jujlijication  and  faloatio?!,  i  ^S  c 

in  grace;  and  there  is  as  little  rcafon  to  queftion  why  SERm, 
a  man  may  not  come  to  this  ftate  by  degrees,  as  well     ^^^* 
as  leap  into  it  at  once. 

All  the  difficulty  I  know  of  in  this  matter,  is  a 
meer  nicety,  that  there  is  an  indant ;  in  which  every 
thing  begins,  and  therefore  regeneration  is  in  an 
inftant ;  fo  that  the  inftant  before  the  man  arrived 
at  this  ftate,  it  could  not  be  faid  that  he  was  regene- 
rate; and  the  indant  after  he  is  in  this  flate,  it  can- 
not be  denied  that  he  is  fo.  Cat  this  is  idle  fubtilty, 
jufi:  as  if  a  man  fliould  prove  that  an  houfc  was  buiic 
in  an  inftant,  becaufe  it  could  not  be  faid  to  be  built, 
*cill  the  inftant  it  was  finifli'd ;  tho'  for  all  this  nothinf^ 
is  more  certain  than  that  it  was  built  by  degrees.  Or, 
fuppofethe  time  of  arriving  at  man's  eftate  be  atone 
and  twenty,  does  it  from  hence  follow,  that  a  man  docs 
not  grow  to  be  a  man  by  degrees,but  is  made  a  man  in 
an  inftant;  becaufe  juft  before  one  and  twenty  he  was 
not  at  man's  eftate,  and  juft  then  he  was  .^  not  but  that 
God,  if  he  pleafe,  can  make  a  man  in  an  inftant,  as 
he  did  Adam  ;  but  it  is  not  neceffary  from  this  ex- 
ample, that  all  men  fhould  be  made  fo,  much  lefs 
does  it  follow  from  this  vain  fubtilty.  This  is  juft 
the  cafe.  All  the  while  the  man  is  tending  towards 
a  regenerate  ftate,  and  is  ftruggling  with  his  lufts, 
'till  by  the  power  of  God's  grace,  and  his  own  refo- 
liition,  he  get  the  vidlory ;  all  the  while  he  is  under 
the  l^tn^Q.  and  convidlion  of  his  finful  and  miferabic 
ftate,  and  forrowing  for  the  folly  of  his  paft  life, 
and  coming  to  an  effedtual  purpofe  and  refolution  oF 
changing  his  courfe;  and  it  may  be  fevcral  times 
rtrown  back  by  the  temptations  of  the  devil,  and 

the 


1786      Of  the  nature  of  regeneration^  and  its  neceffty^ 
s 

iE.RM.the  power  of  evil  habits,  and  the  weaknefs  and  in- 
Itability  of  his  own  purpofe ;  'tiJl  at  laft,  by  the 
grace  of  God  following  and  aflifting  him,  he 
comes  to  a  firm  refolution  of  a  better  life,  \yhich  re- 
folution  governs  him  for  the  future;  I  fay  all  this 
while,  which  in  fomc  perfons  is  longer,  in  other 
fhorter,  according  to  the  power  of  evil  habits,  and 
the  different  degrees  of  God's  grace  afforded  to 
men  •,  all  this  time  the  work  of  regeneration  is  go- 
ing on  ;  and  tho'  a  man  cannot  be  faid  to  be  in  a 
reo-enerate  ftate,  'till  that  very  inftant  that  the 
principle  of  grace  and  his  good  refolution  have  got 
the  upper  hand  of  his  lufts,  yet  it  is  certain  for  all 
this,  that  the  work  of  regeneration  was  not  effedled 
in  an  inftant.  This  is  plainly  and  truly  the  cafe,  as 
I  fhall  fhew  in  the 

Third  particular  I  propounded,  namely,  that  it 
is  evident  from  experience  of  the  ordinary  methods 
of  God's  grace,  both  in  thofe  who  are  regenerated 
by  a  pious  and  religious  education,  and  thofe  who 
are  reclaimed  from  a  vicious  courfe  of  life. 

The  firft  fort,  namely  thofe  who  are  brought  to 
goodnefs  by  a  religious  and  virtuous  education  ;  thefe 
(at  leaft,  fo  far  as  my  obfervation  reacheth  j  make  up 
a  very  confiderable  part  of  the  number  of  the  regene- 
rate, that  is,  of  good  men.  And  tho'  it  be  cer- 
tain, confidering  the  univcrfal  corruption  and  de- 
generacy of  humane  nature,  that  there  is  a  real 
change  made  in  them,  by  the  operation  of  God's 
grace  upon  their  minds,  yet  it  is  as  certain  in  ex- 
perience, that  this  change  is  made  in  very  many, 
by  very  filent  and  infenfible  degrees,  'till  at  length 

the 


in  order  to  jujitficailon  andfahatlon,  1787 

the  feeds  of  religion,  which  were  planted  in  them  S  E  R  M. 
by  a  good  education,  do  vifibly  prevail  over  all  ^^^' 
the  evil  inclinations  of  corrupt  nature,  fo  as  to  fway 
and  govern  the  adions  of  their  lives-,  and  when 
the  principles  of  grace  and  goodnefs  do  apparently 
prevail,  we  may  conclude  them  to  be  in  a  reo-e- 
nerate  (late,  tho'  perhaps  very  few  of  thefe  can 
give  any  account  of  the  particular  time  and  occa- 
fion  of  this  change.  For  things  may  be  feen  in 
their  efFe6l,  which  were  never  very  fenfible  in  their 
caufe.  And  it  is  very  reafonable,  that  fuch  per- 
fons  who  never  lived  in  any  evil  courfe,  fhould 
efcape  thofe  pangs  and  terrors  which  unavoidably 
happen  unto  others,  from  a  courfe  of  adual  fin, 
and  the  guilt  of  a  wicked  life ;  and  if  there  be 
any  fuch  perfons  as  I  have  defcribed,  who  are  in 
this  gradual  and  infenfible  manner  regenerated, 
and  made  good,  this  "is  a  demonftration,  that  there 
is  no  neceflity  that  this  change  fhould  be  in  an  in- 
ftant,  it  being  fo  frequently  found  to  be  otherwife  m 
experience. 

And  as  for  others,who  are  vifibly  reclaimed  from  a 
notorious  wicked  courre,in  thefe  we  likewife  frequently 
fee  this  change  gradually  made,  by  (Irong  impreffions 
made  upon  their  minds, moft  irequently  by  the  word 
of  God  j  fometimes  by  his  providence,  whereby  they 
are  convinc'dof  theevil  and  danger  of  their  courfc,and 
awakened  to  confidcration,  and  melted  into  forrow 
and  repentance,  and  perhaps  exercisM  with  great 
terrors  of  confcience,  till  at  length  by  the  grace  of 
God,  they  come  to  a  fixt  purpofe  and  refolutioa 
of  forfaking  their  fins,   and  turning  to  God  ;   and 

after 


lySS     Of  I  be  itature  of  regeneration^  and  its  necejfit)\ 

S  ^^};!^'  after  many  ftrugglings  and  confli6ts  with  their 
Jufts,  and  the  flrong  bias  of  evil  habits,  this  refo- 
lution  affiiied  by  the  grace  of  God,  doth  efFedlually 
prevail,  and  make  a  real  change  both  in  the  tem- 
per of  their  minds,  and  the  courfe  of  their  Jives ; 
and  when  this  is  done,  and  not  before,  they  are 
iaid  to  be  regenerate.  But  all  the  while  this  was 
a  doing,  the  new  man  was  forming,  and  the  work 
of  regeneration  was  going  on  \  and  it  was  perhaps  a 
very  confiderable  time  from  the  firft  beginning  of 
it,  till  it  came  to  a  fixt  and  fettled  flate.  And  this 
1  doubt  not  in  experience  of  mofl  perfons  who 
are  reclaim'd  from  a  vicious  courfe  of  life,  is 
found  to  be  the  ufual  and  ordinary  method  of 
God's  grace  in  their  converfion.  And  if  fo,  it  is 
in  vain  to  pretend  that  a  thing  is  done  in  an  in- 
Itant,  which  by  fo  manifold  experience  is  found  to 
take  up  a  great  deal  of  time,  and  to  be  efFeded 
by  degrees. 

And  whereas  fome  men  are  pleafed  to  call  all 
this  the  preparatory  work  to  regeneration,  but 
not  the  regeneration  it  felf,  this  is  an  idle  contention 
about  words.  For  if  thefe  preparations  be  a  de- 
gree of  goodnefs,  and  a  gradual  tendency  towards 
it,  then  the  work  is  begun  by  them,  and  during 
the  continuance  of  them,  is  all  the  while  a  doing ; 
and  tho'  it  be  hard  to  ^^  the  point  or  inftant 
when  a  man  juit  arrives  at  this  flate,  and  not  be- 
fore, yet  it  is  very  lenfible  when  a  man  is  in  it, 
and  this  change  when  it  is  really  made,  will  foon 
difcover  itfelf  by  plain  and  fenfible  efFedls. 

Fourthly, 


it, 


in  order  to  jujlijication  mtdfa Ivation,  ^7^9 

Fourthly,  and  laftly,  all  this  is  very  agreeable  to^ER  M. 
the  plain  and  conftant  tenor  of  fcripture,  Ifa.  i.  16. 
where  the  prophet  exhorts  to  this  change,  he  fpeaks 
of  it  as  a  gradual  thing,  "  vvafli  ye,  make  you 
clean,  put  away  the  evil  of  your  doings  from  be- 
fore mine  eyes;  ceafe  to  do  evil,  learn  to  do 
well  ;"  that  is,  break  off  evil  and  vicious  habits, 
and  gain  the  contrary  habits  of  virtue  and  goodnefs 
by  the  exercife  of  it.  The  fcripture  fpeaks  of  fomc, 
as  farther  from  a  (late  of  grace  than  others,  Jcr. 
xiii.  23.  "  Can  the  ethiopian  change  his  skin,  or 
*'  the  leopard  his  fpots  ?  then  may  ye  alfo  do  good, 
*'  that  are  accuftomed  to  do  evil;"  plainly  declarino- 
the  great  difficulty,  equal  almofl  to  a  natural  impof^ 
fibihty,  of  reclamiing  thofe  to  goodnefs  vvho  have 
been  long  habituated  to  an  evil  courfe.  And  the 
fcripture  fpeaks  of  fome  as  nearer  to  a  flate  of 
grace  than  others.  Our  Saviour  tells  the  young 
man  in  the  gofpel,  who  faid  •'  he  had  kept  the 
''  commands  ot  God  from  his  youth;"  that  "  he 
**  was  not  far  from  the  kingdom  of  God."  But 
now  if  by  an  irrefidible  a6b  of  God's  power,  this 
change  be  made  in  an  inftant,  and  cannot  otherwife 
be  made,  how  is  one  man  nearer  to  a  Hate  of  grace, 
or  farther  from  it  than  another  ?  if  all  that  are 
made  good,  muft  be  made  fo  in  an  inflant  or  not  at 
all,  then  no  man  is  nearer  being  made  good  than 
another;  for  if  he  were  nearer  to  it,  he  might  fooner 
be  made  fo;  but  that  cannot  be,  if  all  muil  be  made 
good  in  an  inftant;  for  fooner  than  that  no  man  can 
be  made  fo.  If  the  fimilitude  of  our  "  being  dead 
«'  in  fins  and  trefpaffes"  be  flridlly  taken,  no  man  is 
Vol.  VI.  13  E  nearer 


179^     Of  the  nature  of  regeneration^  and  its  necefft)\ 

S  E  R  M.  nearer  a  refurredlion  to  a  new  life  than  another  ;    as 
crx 

he  that  died  but  a  v/eek  ago,    is  as  far   from   being 
raifed  to  life  again,    as  he  that  died  a  thoufand  years 
ago ;  the  rerurre6lion  of   both  requires  an   omnipo-  , 
tent  a(5l,  and  to  that  both  are  equally  eafy. 

The  two  parables  of  our  Saviour,  Matth.  xiii, 
3 1,  33.  are  by  many  interpreters  underflood  of  the 
gradual  operation  of  grace  upon  the  hearts  of  men. 
"  That  wherein  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  likened 
*'  to  a  grain  of  muftard-feed,  which  being  fown  was 
*'  the  lead  of  all  feeds,'*  but  by  degrees  "  grew  up 
«*  to  be  the  greateft  of  herbs  j'*  and  "  to  leaven, 
"  which  a  woman  took  and  hid  in  three  meafures  of 
*'  meal,  till  the  whole  was  leavened  :"  intimating 
the  progreis  of  God's  grace,  v/hich  by  degrees  dif- 
fufeth  it  felf  over  the  whole  temper  of  a  man's 
mind,  into  all  the  actions  of  his  life.  To  be  fure  the 
parable  of  "  the  feed  which  fell  upon  good  ground," 
does  reprefent  the  efficacy  of  the  word  of  God,  ac- 
companied by  his  grace  upon  the  minds  of  men,  and 
that  is  faid  "  to  fpring  up  and  increafe,  and  to 
*'  bring  forth  fruit  with  patience;'*  which  furely 
does  exprefs  to  us  the  gradual  operation  of  God's 
word  and  grace  in  the  renovation  and  change  of  a 
man's  heart  and  life. 

The  new  teftament  indeed  fpeaks  of  the  fudden 
change  of  many  upon  the  firft  preaching  of  the  gol- 
pel,  which  I  have  told  you  before  it  is  not  a  ftandard 
of  the  ordinary  method  of  God's  grace,  the  not  con- 
fidering  of  which,  hath  been  a  great  caufe  of  all  the 
miftakes  in  this  matter.  *Tis  true,  thofe  which  were 
thus  converted  to  the  belief  of  the   gofpel,    their 

faith 


in  order  to  jujlification  and  fahation.  179 1 

faith  was  a  virtual  principle  of  all  grace  and  virtue,  S  E  R  M. 
tho'  not  formally  the  habit  of  every  particular  grace.  ^^^' 
St.  Paul  himfelf,  who  was  a  prime  inltance  of  this 
kind,  fpeaks  as  if  he  acquir'd  the  grace  of  content- 
ment by  great  confideration,  and  diligent  care  of 
himfelf  in  feveral  conditions;  not  as  if  the  habit  of 
this  grace  had  been  infufed  into  him  at  once,  Philip, 
iv.  1 1,  12.  "I  havelearn'd  in  whatfoever  (late  I  am, 
"  therewith  to  be  content.  I  know  both  how  to  be 
*'  abafed,  and  I  know  how  to  abound  ;  every  where 
"  and  in  all  things  I  am  Inftrudled,  both  to  be  full, 
''  and  to  be  hungry  ;  both  to  abound,  and  to  fuffer 
"  need."  And  thus  I  have  done  with  the  hrft  thing 
I  propounded  to  confider,  namely,  the  true  and 
juft  importance  of  this  metaphor  of  "  the  new 
*'  creation."  The  two  particulars  which  remain,  I 
fhall  by  God's  afTidance  finifli  in  my  next  dif- 
courfe. 


13  El  SERMON 


[  1792  ] 

SERMON     ex. 

Of  the  nature  of  regeneration,  and  its  ' 
neceffity,  in  order  to  juftification  and 
falvation. 

G  A  L  A  T.  vi.  If. 

For  in  Christ  Jesus,    neither  circumcifion  availeth 
any  things  nor  uncircumcifion  \  hut  a  new  creature, 

S  E  RM.  ^  i"'"1  H  E  obfervation  I  am  (lill  upon  from  thefc 
^^  I       words  is  this,  viz.  that  in  the  chriftian  reli- 

gion nothing  will  avail  to  our  juftification. 
The  fifth   i^m-  ^^  renovation  of  our  hearts  and  lives,  expreft 

fermon  on  ,  ,        ,,  ,,    t  •  r       i  •   i 

this  text.  "^1*^  by  ''  a  new  creature.  In  treatmg  or  which, 
I  propos'd  the  doing  of  three  things. 

P'irft,  to  fhew  the  true  import  of  this  metaphor 
of  "  a  new  creature." 

Secondly,  to  ihew  that  this  is  the  great  condition 
of  our  juftification  ;  and. 

Thirdly,  that  it  is  highly  reafonable  that  it  fhould 
be  fo. 

In  treating  of  the  firft  of  thefe  particulars,  I 
have  confidered  fome  do6trines  as  founded  upon 
this  metaphor,  which  I  have  fhewn  at  large  not 
only  to  have  no  foundation  in  fcripture,or  realbn,  or 
experience  ;  but  alfo  to  be  very  unreafonable  in  them- 
felves,  and  contrary  to  the  plain  and  conftant  tenor  of 
fcripture,  and  to  the  ordinary  method  of  God's  grace 

in 


Of  the  nature  of  regeneration,  &c^.  j^c^^ 

in  the  regeneration  of  men,  whether  by  a  religious  SERM 
and  virtuous  education,  or  in  thofe  who  are  re- .  ^jl 
claim'd  from  a  notorious  wicked  courfe  of  hfe. 
And  that  I  have  fo  Jong  infiftcd  upon  this  ar- 
gument,  and  handled  it  in  a  more  contentious  way 
than  is  ufual  with  me,  did  not  proceed  from  any 
love  to  controverfy,  which  I  am  Jefs  fond  of  every 
day  than  other;  but  from  a  great  defire  to  put 
an  end  to  thefe  controverfies,  and  quarreJiings  in 
the  dark,  by  bringing  them  to  a  clear  (late  and 
plain  iflbe,  and  Jikewife  to  undeceive  good  men 
concerning  fome  current  notions  and  dodtrincF, 
which  I  do  really  believe  to  be  difhonourable  to 
God,  and  contrary  to  the  plain  declarations  of  fcrip- 
ture,  and  a  caufe  of  great  perplexity  and  difcom- 
fort  to  the  minds  of  men,  and  a  real  difcourage- 
ment  to  the  refolutions  and  endeavours  of  becoming 
better.  Upon  which  confiderations  I  was  ftrongly 
uraent  to  fearch  thefe  dodrines  to  the  bottom, 
and  to  contribute  what  in  me  lay,  to  the  refcuing 
of  good  men  from  the  difquiet  and  entanglement 
of  them. 

I  will  conclude  this  matter  with  a  few  cautions, 
not  unworthy  to  be  remember'd  by  us,  that  wc 
would  be  careful  fo  to  afcribe  all  good  to  God  i 
that  we  be  fure  we  afcribe  nothing  to  him  that  is  evil, 
or  any  ways  unworthy  of  him  •,  that  we  do  not  make 
him  the  fole  author  of  our  falvation,  in  fuch  a 
way,  as  will  unavoidably  charge  upon  him  the  final 
impenitency  and  ruin  of  a  great  part  of  man- 
kind ;  that  we  do  not  fo  magnify  the  grace  of 
God,   as  to  make  his   precepts    and    exhortations 

fignify 


1794     ^f  ^'^'^  nature  of  regeneration^  and  its  necejjity^ 
SERM,  fignify   nothing;    fuch  as   thefe,    "  make   ye  new 
"  hearts,  and  new  fpirits :  ftrive  to  enter  in  at  the 
"  ftrait  gate;*'  where,    if  by   the   ilrait   gate  be 
meant  the  difficulty  of  our  firft  entrance  upon  a  re- 
ligious courfe,  that  is  of  our  converfion  and  rege- 
neration,   I  cannot  imagine   how   it    is  polTible  to 
reconcile  our   being  meerJy   pafllve    in    this    work, 
and   doing  nothing  at   all   in    it,  with  our  Savi- 
our's precept  of  "  flriving  to  enter  in  at  the  ftrait 
''  gate;"  unlefs  to  be  very  adive,  and  to  be  meerly 
pafiive  about  the  fame    thing  be  all  one,  and   an 
earned  contention  and  endeavour  be  the  fame  thing 
v/ith  doing  nothing.     Again,  that  we  do  not  make 
the  utmoft  degeneracy  and  depravation  which  men 
ever  arrived  at  by  the  greateil  abufe  of  themfelves, 
and  the  moft  vile  and  wicked  pradices,   the  ilan- 
dard  of  an  unregenerate  ftatc,    and   of   the    com- 
mon condition  of  all  men  by  nature.     And  laftly, 
that  w^e  do  not  make  fome  particular  inftances  in 
fcripturc,  of  the  ftrange  and  fudden  converfion  of 
fome  perfons  (as  namely,  of  St,  Paul  and  the  jailor 
in  the  Adls^  the  common  rule  and  meafure  of  every 
man's  converfion  ;   fo  that   unlefs  a  man  be  as  it 
were  ftruck  down  by  a  light  and  power  from  hea- 
ven, and  taken  with  a  fit  of  trembling,  and  frighted 
almoft  out   of  his  wits,   or  find   in  himfelf  fome- 
thing  equal  to  this,  he  can  have  no  afiiirance  of  his 
converfion  ;    whereas    a  much  furer  judgment  may 
be  made  of  the  fincerity  of  a  man's  converfion,   by 
the  real  efFecls  of  this  change,    than  by  the  man- 
ner of  it.  "  This  our  Saviour    hath  taught  us,  by 
that    apt   refemblance  of  the  operation  of  God's 

Spirit 


in  order  tojujiification  and  fahatlon.  1795 

Spirit  to  "  the  blowing  of  the  wind,"  of  the  SERM. 
original  caufe  whereof,  and  of  the  reafon  of  us  cea-  ,  ^^ 
fing  or  continuance,  and  why  it  blows  ftroncrer  or 
gentler,  this  way  or  that  way,  we  are  altogether 
ignorant  -,  but  that  it  is,  we  are  fenfible  from  tlie 
found  of  it,  John  iii.  8.  "  The  wind  bloweth  where 
"  it  Jifteth,  and  thou  hcareft  the  found  of  it,  but 
"  canfl  not  tell  whence  it  comcth,  nor  whither  it 
"  goeth  :  fo  is  every  one  that  is  born  of  the  Spi- 
"  RiT."  The  efFedls  of  God's  Holy  Spirit  in 
the  regeneration  of  men  are  fenfible,  tho'  the  man- 
ner and  degrees  of  his  operation  upon  the  fouls  of 
men  are  fo  various,  that  we  can  give  no  account  of 
them;  by  which,  one  would  think  our  Saviour 
had  fufficiently  caution'd  us,  not  to  reduce  the  ope- 
rations of  God's  grace  and  Holy  Spirit  in  the 
regeneration  of  men,  to  any  certain  rule  or  flan- 
dard,  but  chiefly  to  regard  the  fenfible  effeds  of 
this  fecret  work  upon  the  hearts  and  hves  of 
men. 

And  after  all,  it  is  in  vain  to  contend  by  any 
arguments  againft  clear  and  certain  experience.  If 
we  plainly  fee  that  many  are  infenfibly  changed, 
and  made  good  by  pious  education,  "  in  the  nurture 
<^'  and  admonition  of  the  Lord,"  and  that  fome  who 
have  long  lived  in  a  profane  negled  and  contempt 
of  religion,  are  by  the  fecret  power  of  God's  word 
and  Holy  Spirit,  upon  calm  confideration,  with^ 
out  any  great  terrors  and  amazement,  vifibly  changed 
and  brought  to  a  better  mind  and  courie ;  \t  \%  in 
vain  in  thefe  cafes  to  pretend  that  this  change  is  not 
real,  becaufe  the  manner  of  it  is  not  anfwerable  to 

fomc 


1 7  c}  6  Of  the  nature  of  regeneration^  and  its  necejjity^ 
SERM.  fome  inftances  which  are  recorded  in  fcripture,  or 
^^;  ^  which  we  have  obferv'd  in  our  experience,  and  be- 
caufe  thefe  perfons  cannot  give  fuch  an  account  of 
the  time  and  manner  of  their  converfion,  as  is 
agreeable  to  thefe  inftances ;  which  is  juft  as  if  I 
fliould  meet  a  man  beyond  fea,  whom  I  had  known 
in  England,  and  would  not  beheve  that  he  had  croft 
the  feas,  becaufc  he  faid  he  had  a  fmooth  and  eafy 
paffage,  and  was  wafted  over  by  a  gentle  wind, 
and  could  tell  no  ftories  of  ftorms  and  tempefts. 

And  thus  I  have  fully  and  faithfully  endeavoured 
to  open  to  you  the  juft  importance  of  this  phrafe 
or  expreffion  in  the  text,  of  "  the  new  creature," 
,or  "  the  new  creation."  I  proceed  to  the 

Second  particular  I  propounded,  namely,  that  the 
real  renovation  of  our  hearts  and  lives,  is  according 
to  the  terms  of  the  gofpel,  and  the  chriftian  reli^ 
gion,  the  great  condition  of  our  juftification  and 
acceptance  with  God,  and  that  this  is  the  fame  in 
fenfe  and  fubftance  with  thofe  phrafes  in  the  parallel 
texts  to  this,  of  "  faith  perfeded  by  charity,"  and 
of  "  keeping  the  commandments  of  God." 

That  according  to  the  terms  of  the  gofpel,  the 
great  condition  of  our  juftification  and  acceptance 
with  God,  is  the  real  renovation  of  our  hearts 
and  lives,  is  plain,  not  only  from  this  text,   which 

afRrms,  that  in  the  chriftian  religion  nothing  will 
avail  us  but  *'  the  new  creature  -, "  but  likewife 
from  many  other  clear  texts  of  fcripture  j  and  this, 
whether  by  juftification  be  meant  our  firft  juftifica- 
tion upon  our  faith  and  repentance,  or  our  conti- 
nuance in  this  ftate,  or  our  final  juftification  by  our 

folemn 


in  order  to  jujlification  and  fa  hat  ten.  1797 

folemn    acquital   and   abfolution    at  tlie    great  day,  S  K  R  M. 
which  in  rcripture  is  culled  "  falvation,  and  eternal  ^^' 
"  life." 

That  this  is  the  condition  of  our  firfl  juftifica- 
tion,  that  is,  of  the  forgivcnefs  of  our  fins,  and  our 
being  received  into  the  grace  and  favour  of  God, 
is  plain  from  all  thofe  texts,  where  this  change  is 
exprcll  by  our  "  repentance  and  converfion,"  by 
our  "  regeneration  and  renovation,"  by  our  puri- 
''  fication  and  fmdtification,"  or  by  any  other  terms 
of  the  like  importance.  For  under  every  one  of 
thefe  notions,  this  change  is  made  the  condition 
of  the  forgivenefs  of  our  fins,  and  acceptance  to  the 
favour  of  God. 

Under  the  notion  of  "  repentance  and  convcr- 
fion,"  Afts  ii.  2'^.  "  Repent  and  be  baptized  t\(iYy 
•'  one  of  you  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ,  for 
*'  the  remiffion  of  fins."  A6ls  iii.  19.  "  Repent, 
*'  and  be  converted,  that  your  fins  may  be  blotted 
*•  out."  Upon  the  fame  account,  the  penitent  ac- 
knowledgment of  our  fins,  v/hich  is  an  eflcntial 
part  of  repentance,  is  made  a  condition  of  the  for- 
givenefs of  them,  I  John  i.  9.  "  li  \vc  confcb  our 
*'  fins,  he  is  faithful  and  jufl  to  forgive  us  our  fins, 
"  and  to  cleanfe  us  from  all  unrighteoufnefs."  Un- 
der the  notion  of  "  regeneration  and  renovation,  " 
2  Cor.  V.  17.  "  If  any  man  b(j  in  Christ,"  diat 
is,  become  a  true  chriftian,  which  is  all  one  with 
being  in  a  juftified  ftate  ;  "  he  is  a  new  creature  ; 
"  old  things  are  pafl:  away,  behold  all  things  are 
"  become  new."  Tit.  iii.  3,  4,  5,  6,  7.  where  the 
apoftle  declares  at  large,  what  change  is  requirM  to 
Vol.  VI.  I3  F  put 

8. 


1798     Of  the  nature  of  regeneration ^  and  its  necejjity^ 

SERM.  put  us  into  a  juftified  flatc,  and  to  entitle  us  to 
^^'_  J  '^he  inheritance  of  eternal  life.  ''  For  we  our  felves 
"  were  alfo  fometimes  foolifli,  difobedient,  deceived, 
"  ferving  divers  lulls  and  pleafures,  living  in  ma- 
*'  lice  and  envy,  hateful,  and  hating  one  another. 
**  Bjt  after  that  the  kindnefs  and  love  of  God  our 
*'  Saviour  towards  man  appeared,  not  by  works  of 
*'  righteoufnefs  which  we  have  done  \ "  that  is,  not 
for  any  precedent  righteoufnefs  of  ours,  for  we  were 
great  finners,  "  but  according  to  his  mercy  he  fa- 
"  ved  us,  by  the  wafhing  of  regeneration,  and  the 
"  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  he  fhed 
on  us  abundantly  through  Jesus  Christ  our 
Saviour,  that  being  juftified  by  his  grace,  we 
"  fhould  be  made  heirs  according  to  the  hope  of 
*'  eternal  life."  So  that  the  change  of  our  former 
temper,  and  converfion,  and  regeneration,  and 
"  the  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost,'*  is  antece- 
dently neceiTary  to  our  juftification,  that  is,  to  the 
pardon  of  our  fins,  and  our  reftitution  to  the  fa- 
vour of  God,  and  the  hope  of  eternal  life.  So 
likewife  under  the  notion  of  "  purification  and 
"  fanclification,"  i  Cor.  vi.  9,  10,  11.  where  the 
apoftle  enumerates  feveral  fins  and  vices ;  which 
will  certainly  exclude  men  from  the  favour  and 
kingdom  of  God,  from  which  we  muft  be  cleanfed, 
before  we  can  be  juftified  or  faved.  "  Know  ye 
*'  not  that  the  unrighteous  lliall  not  inherit  the 
*'  kingdom  of  God  ?  be  not  deceived  ;  neither  for- 
^'  nicators,  nor  idolaters,  nor  adulterers,  nor  thieves, 
"  nor  covetous,  nor  drunkards,  nor  revilers,  nor 
*'  extortioners  Ihall  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God. 

And 


in  order  to  jujlijication  and  falvation.  1797 

«'  And  fuch  were  fome  of  you  :  but  ye  are  waflicd,  S  E  R  M. 
*'  but  ye  are  Hmdified,  but  ye  are  juftified,  in  the  ^^' 
"  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  by  the  Spirit  of 
"  our  God.'*  2  Cor.  vi.  17,  \%,  where  the  apollle 
likewife  makes  our  purification  a  condition  of  our 
being  received  into  the  favour  of  God,  and  reckon'd 
into  the  number  of  his  children.  ''  Touch  not 
"  the  unclean  thing,  and  I  will  receive  you,  and 
*'  will  be  a  father  unto  you,  and  ye  (hall  be  my 
'^  fons  and  daughters,  faith  the  Lord  almighty." 
And  that  by  "  not  touching  the  unclean  thing,** 
is  here  certainly  meant  our  fandlification  and  puri- 
fication from  fin,  is  evident  from  what  immedi- 
ately follows  in  the  beginning  of  the  next  chapter ; 
**  having  therefore  thefe  prom iles,  dearly  beloved  \ 
"  let  us  cleanfe  our  felves  from  all  lilthinefs  of  the 
*'  flelh  and  fpirit,  perfedling  holinefs  in  the  fear  of 
'•  God  •,  "  that  is,  having  this  encouragement,  that 
upon  this  condition  we  Iliall  be  received  to  the  fa- 
vour of  God,  let  us  purify  our  felves,  that  we  may 
be  capable  of  this  great  blefHng. 

And  our  continuaftce  in  this  (late  of  grace  and 
favour  with  God,  depends  upon  our  perfcverance  in 
holinefs  \  for  "  if  any  man  draw  back,  my  foul  fliall 
*'  have  no  pleafure  in  him." 

And  laflly,  this  is  alfo  the  condition  of  our  final 
juftification,  and  abfolution  by  the  ^KLnttnzt  of  the 
great  day,  Matth.  v.  8.  "  BlelTcd  are  the  pure  in 
''  heart-,  for  they  lliall  fee  God."  John  iii.  j. 
'f  Except  a  man  be  born  agiin  he  cannot  ice  tlie 
<'  kingdom  of  God."  Heb.  xii.  14.  ""  Follow 
*^  hohnefs,    without   which,  no  man   fhall   fee  the 

ij  F  2  *'  Lord,'* 


iSoo  Of  the  nature  of  regeneration,  and  its  necejfity^ 
S£RM.  «  Lord."  i  John  iii.  3.  The  apoftle  there  fpeak- 
ing  of  the  bleflcd  fight  and  enjoyment  of  God, 
tells  us  what  wc  muft  do,  if  ever  we  hope  to  be 
partakers  of  it ;  "  every  man  that  hath  this  hope 
*'  in  him,  purifieth  himfelf,  even  as  he  is  pure." 

And  this  condition  here  mentioned  in  the  text, 
of  our  being  "  new  creatures,"  is  the  fame  in  fenfe 
and  fubilance  with  thofe  expreffions  which  we  find 
in  the  two  parallel  texts  to  this,  v;here  ''  faith 
f'  which  is  perfeded  by  charity,  and  keeping  the 
*«* commandments  of  God/*  are  made  the  condi- 
tion of  our  juftification  and  acceptance  with  God. 
Gal.  V.  6.  "  In  Christ  Jesus  neither  circumci- 
*'  fion  availeth  any  thing,  nor  uncircumcifion  5 
•'  but  fiiith,  which  is  confummate,  or  made  perfe6l 
*'  by  charity;"  and  i  Cor.  vii.  19.  ^'  Circumci- 
"  fion  is^ nothing,  and  uncircumcifion  is  nothing; 
**  but  the  keeping  of  the  commadments  of  God." 
It  is  evident  that  the  defign  and  meaning  of  thefe 
three  texts  is  the  flime,  and  therefore  thefe  three 
exprefTions  of  "  the  new  creature,"  and  of  "  fliich 
*'  perfected  by  charity,  and  of  "  keeping  the  com- 
"  mandments  of  God,"  do  certainly  fignify  the 
fame  thing.  That  *'  the  new  creature'*  fignifies 
the  change  of  our  flate,  from  a  flate  of  difobe- 
dience  and  fin,  to  a  flate  of  obedience  and  holinefs 
of  life,  I  have  (hewn  at  large ;  and  the  apoftk 
explaining  this  ''  new  creation  ;"  mod  cxprefly  tells 
us,  Eph.  ii.  10.  "  We  are  his  workmanfhip, 
"  created  in  Christ  Jesus  unto  good  works, 
«'  which  God  hath  before  ordained,  that  we  fhould 
*'  walk   in    them,"   and    ColofT.   iii.  10,  12,   13 

14.  where 


in  order  f o  jufiifi cation  and  falvatlon.  ]  80 1 

14.  where  the  apoflle  tells  them,  that  they  ought  to  SERM- 
give  teftimony  of  their  renovation,  and  having  put  .^^ 
on  "  the  new  man, "  by  all  the  fruits  of  obe- 
dience and  goodnefs  j  *'  ye  have  put  on  the  new 
"  man,  which  is  renewed  in  knowledge,  after  the 
"  image  of  him  that  created  him.  Put  on  there- 
"  fore  as  the  eled  of  God,  holy  and  beloved, 
"  bowels  of  mercy,  kindnefs,  humblenefs  of  mind, 
"  meeknefs,  long-fuiFering,  forbearing  one  another, 
"  and  forgiving  one  another ;  and  above  all  thefe 
*'  things  put  on  charity,  which  is  the  bond  of 
"  perfection,"  And  the  apoftle  St.  Peter  tells  us, 
that  our  regeneration,  which  he  calls  ^'  fandlifi- 
"  cation  of  the  Spirit,  is  unto  obedience,'*  i  Pet. 
1.  2.  So  that  our  renovation  confideth  in  the  princi- 
ple and  pradlice  of  obedience,  and  a  good  life ;  and 
what  is  this  but  "  fliith  perfedted  by  charity  ?  " 
and  charity  the  apoflle  tells  us  "  is  the  fulfilling 
<«  of  the  law  j"  and  v.'hat  is  '•  the  fulfilling  of  the 
^'  law,''  but  "  keeping  the  commandments  of 
''  God  ? "  And  "  keeping  the  commandments  of 
^'  God,"  or  at  leaft  a  fincere  refolution  of  obedi- 
ence, when  there  is  not  time  and  opportunity  for 
the  trial  of  it,  is  in  fcripture  as  cxprefly  made  a 
condition  both  of  our  prefent  and  final  juftification 
and  acceptance  with  God,  as  faith  is,  and  m  truth 
is  the  fame  with  a  living  and  operative  faith,  and 
a  faith  that  is  confummate,  and  "  made  perfc(fl 
^  by  charity."  A6ls  x.  34,  35.  ''  Of  a  truth  I 
'*  perceive  (iiiith  St.  Peter)  that  God  is  no  re- 
"  fpecler  of  perfons,  but  in  every  nation  he  that 
"  fearech   him,  and  worketh  rightcou fnefs,   is  ac- 

*^  ccptcd 


i  8  o  2      Of  the  nature  of  regeneration^  and  its  necejjtty^ 
SERM-.  ''  cepted  with  him;"  which  fpeechdoes  as  plainly, 
^^'      as  words  can  do   any   thing,    declare  to  us  upon 
what  terms  all  mankind,  of  what  condition  or  na- 
tion foever,  may  find   acceptance  with  God,  Rom. 
ii.  6,  7,  8,  9,   10.    "  Who    will  render  to  every 
*'  man  according  to  his  deeds,    to   them  who  by 
'^  patient  continuance  in  v/ell-doing,  feek  for  glory 
''  and  honour,  and  immortality,   eternal  life  :    but 
"  to  them  who   are   contentious  and  obey  not  the 
*'  truth,  but  obey  unrighteoufnefs;  indignation  and 
"  wrath  -y    tribulation  and  anguilli  upon  every  foul 
*'  of  man  that  doth  evil ;  of  the  Jew  iirft,and  alfo  of 
"  Gentile  :  but  glory,  honour,  and  peace  to  every 
"  man  that  worketh   good,    to  the  Jew  firft,  and 
*'  alfo  to  the  Gentile."     As  to  our  acceptance  with 
God,  and  the  rewards  of  another  world,  it  matters 
not  whether  Jew  or  Gentile,  circumcifed  or  uncir- 
cumcifed  ;    that    which   maketh   the  difference,  is 
*'  obeying  the  truth,  or  obeying   unrighteoufnefs ; 
*'  working  good,    or    doing  evil  j"   thefe  are  the 
things  which  will  avail  to  our  juftification,  or  con- 
demnation at  the  great  day.     To  the  fame  purpofe 
is  that  laying  of  the  apoftle  to  the  Hebrews,  chap. 
V.  9.  "  That  Christ  is  the  author  of  eternal  fal- 
"  vation  to  them  that  obey  him.'' 

I  will  conclude  this  matter  with  two  remarkable 
fayings,  the  one  tovv'ards  the  beginning,  the  other 
towards  the  end  of  the  bible,  to  fatisfy  us  that  this 
is  the  tenor  of  the  holy  fcriptures,  and  the  con- 
ftant  dodlrine  of  it  from  the  beginning  to  the 
end.  Gen.  iv.  7.  It  is  God's  fpeech  to  Cain,  "  If 
'^  thou  doft  wellj    Ihalt  thou    not  be  accepted?'* 

^  And 


in  order  to  jujlijication  and  fahation,  i  f^  03 

'^  And  Rev.  xxii.   14.  "  BlefTed  are  they  who  do  SERM. 
"  his    commandments,    that  they  may  have  right 
"  to  the  tree  of  life,  and    may  enter  in  through 
"  the  gates  into  the  city." 

And  thus  1  have  done  with  the  fecond  thinn;  I 
propounded,  which  was  to  fliew  that  according  to 
the  terms  of  the  gofpel,  and  the  chriflian  religion, 
the  real  renovation  of  our  liearts  and  lives  is  the 
great  condition  of  our  juftification  and  acceptance 
with  God,  and  that  this  in  fenfe  and  lublfance 
is  the  fame  with  "  faith  made  perfe6l  by  charity, 
*'  and  keeping  the  commandments  of  God.'* 

The  third  and  ]aft  particular  remains  to  be  fpoken 
to,  namely,    that  it    is  highly  reafonable  that   this 
fhould  be  the  condition  of  our  juftification,  and  ac-  ^ 
ceptance  to  the  favour  of  God  j  and  that  upon  theie 
two  accounts. 

Firft,  for  the  honour  of  God's  holinefs. 

Secondly,  in  order  to  the  qualifying  of  us  for  the 
favour  of  God,  and  the  enjoyment  of  him,  for  the 
pardon  of  our  fins,  and  the  reward  of  eternal 
life. 

Firfl,  for  the  honour  of  God's  holinefs.  For 
fhould  God  have  received  men  to  his  fiivour,  and 
rewarded  them  with  eternal  glory  and  happincfs, 
for  the  meer  belief  of  the  gofpel,  or  a  confident 
perfuafion  that  Christ  would  lave  them  without 
any  change  of  their  hearts  and  lives,  "  without 
"  repentance  from  dead  works,  and  fruits  meet 
''  for  repentance,  and  amendment  of  lifej"  he  had 
not  given  fufficient  teftimony-  to  the  world  of  his 
love  to  holinefs  and  righteoufncfs,  and  of  his  ha- 
tred 


1 8  0  4      Of  the  nature  ofregeneratioft,  and  its  necejjtty^ 

SERM.tred  of  lin^nd  iniquity*  The  apoflle  tells  us^  that 
God  in  the  juilification  of  a  finner  "  declares  his 
*'  righteoufnefs ;"  but  fliould  he  juftify  men  upon 
othec  terms,  this  would  not  "  declare  his  righte- 
^'  oufnefs"  and  Jove  of  holinefs,  but  rather  an  in- 
differency,  whether  men  were  good  and  righteous 
or  not.  For  a  bare  afTent  to  the  truth  of  the 
gofpel,  without  the  fruits  of  holinefs  and  obedience, 
is  not  a  living,  but  a  dead  faith,  and  fo  fir  from 
being  acceptable  to  God,  that  it  is  an  affront  to 
him  ;  and  a  confident  reliance  upon  Christ  for 
falvation,  while  we  continue  in  our  fins,  is  not  a 
juftifying  faith,  but  a  bold  and  impudent  pre- 
fumption  upon  the  mercy  of  God,  and  the  mo 
rits  of  our  Saviour  -,  who  indeed  "  juftines  the 
*'  ungodly,"  that  is,  thofe  that  have  been  fo,  but 
not  thofe  that  continue  fo.  And  if  God  fhould 
pardon  finners,  and  reward  them  with  eternal 
life,  upon  any  other  terms  than  upon  our  becoming 
''  new  creatures,"  than  upon  fuch  ^'  a  faith  as  is 
"  made  perfed  by  charity,"  that  is,  "  by  keeping 
*'  the  commands  of  God  ;"  this  would  be  fo  far 
from  declaring  his  righteoufnefs,  and  being  a  tefti- 
mony  of  his  hatred  and  difpleafure  againft  fm,  that 
it  would  give  the  greatefl:  countenance  and  encourage- 
ment to  it  imaginable. 

Secondly,  it  is  likevvife  very  reafonable,  that  fuch 
a  faith,  that  makes  us  "  new  creatures,"  and  is 
*'  perfeded  by  charity,  and  keeping  the  command- 
*'  ments  of  God,"  fhould  be  the  condition  of  jufti- 
fication,  in  order  to  the  qualifying  of  us  for  the 
pardon  of  our  fins     and  the  reward  of  eternal  life  ; 

that 


in  order  to  jufl'ification  a7id falvation.  i So C 

that  is,  for  the  favour  of  God,  and  for  the  enjoy-  S  K  R  M: 
ment  of  him.  To  forgive  men  upon  other  terms,  ^'^^ 
were  to  give  countenance  and  encouragement  to  per- 
petual rebellion  and  difobedience.  That  man  is  not 
fit  to  be  forgiven,  who  is  fo  fir  from  being  forry  for 
his  fault,  that  he  goes  on  to  offend  ;  he  is  utterly  in- 
capable  of  mercy,  who  is  not  fenfible  that  he  hath 
done  amifs,  and  refolved  to  amend.  No  prince  ever 
thought  a  rebellious  fubjedl  capable  of  pardon  upon 
lower  terms  than  thefe.  It  is  m  the  nature  of  the 
thing  unfit  that  an  obflinate  oITendtr  fhould  have  any 
mercy  or  favour  fliewn  to  him. 

And  as  without  repentance  and  refolution  of  better 
obedience,  we  are  unfit  for  forgiveneis,  fo  much 
more  for  a  reward  ;  as  we  cannot  expect  God's  fi- 
vour,  fo  we  are  incapable  of  the  enjoyment  of  him 
without  holinefs.  Holinefs  Is  the  image  of  God, 
and  makes  u:  like  to  him  ;  and  'till  we  be  like  him, 
we  cannot  fee  him,  we  can  have  no  enjoyment 
of  him.  All  delightful  communion  and  agreea- 
ble fociety  is  founded  in  a  limilitude  of  difpofu 
tion  and  manners,  and  therefore  fo  long  as  we  are 
unlike  to  God  in  the  temper  and  difpofition  of 
our  minds,  and  in  the  actions  and  courfe  of  our 
lives,  neither  can  God  take  pleafure  in  us,  nor 
we  in  him,  but  there  will  be  a  perpetual  jarring  and 
difcord  between  him  and  us ;  and  tho'  we  were  in 
heaven,  and  feated  in  x\\z  place  of  the  bleffcd,  yec 
we  fliould  not,  nay  we  could  not  be  happy  \  becaufe 
we  fliould  want  the  neccffiry  materials  and  ingredients 
of  happinefs.  For  it  is  with  the  foul  in  this  rcfpe<5l, 
as  it  is  with  the  body  ;  tho'  all  things  be  eafy  without 
us;  and  no  cruelty    be  exercis'd  upon  us,  to  give 

Vol.  VI.  13  G  torment 

8. 


1  <So6     Of  the  nature  of  regeneration^  a?2d  its  iiecejjity^ 
SE  R  M.  torment  and  vexation  to  us,  yet  if  we  be  inwardly  dif- 
eafed,  we  may  have  pain  and  anguifh  enough,  wc 
may  be  as  it  were  upon  the  rack,  and  feel  as  great 
torment  from  the  inward  diforder  of  our  humours, 
as  if  we  were  tortur'd  from  v/ithout.     So  it  is  with 
the  foul,  fin  and  vice  are  internal  difeafes,  which  do 
naturally  create  trouble  and  difcontent,  and  nothing 
but  diverfion,  and  the  variety  of  obje6l:s  and  plea- 
fures  which  entertain    men  in  this  world,  hinders  a 
wicked   man  from  being  out  of  his  wits,  whenever 
he  refledls  upon  himfelf ;  for  all   the  irregular  appe- 
tites and  pafTions,  luil",  and  malice,  and  revenge,  are 
fo  many  furies  within  us  ^  and  tho'  there  were  no 
devil  to  torment  us,  yet  the  diforder  of  our  own 
minds,  and  the  horrors  of  a  guilty  confcience  would 
be  a  hell  to   us,  and  make  us  extremely  miferable 
in  the  very  regions  of  happinels.     So  that  it  is  ne- 
ceffary  that  our  faith  fhould  be  "  made  perfedt  by 
"'  charity,"   and   that  we   fliouki    become    "  new 
*'  creatures  •, "  not  only  from  the  arbitrary  conili- 
tution  and  appointment  of  God,  but  from  the  na- 
ture and  reafon  of  the  thing ;  becaufe  nothing  but 
this  can  difpofe  us  for  that  bleflednefs,   which  God 
hath  promis'd   to  us,  and  prepared  for  us.     Faith 
confider'd  abftradledly  from  the  fruits  of  holinefs  and 
obedience,  of  goodnefs  and  charity,  will  bring  no 
man  into  the  favour,  with  God,   All  the  excellency  of 
faith  is,  that  it  is  the  principle  of  a  good  life,  and 
furniflieth   us  with  the  bed  motives  and  arguments 
thereto,  the  promifes  and  thrcatnings  of  the  gofpel ; 
and  therefore  in  heaven,  when  we  come  to  fight  and 
•  enjoyment,  faith  and  hope  fhall  ceafe,  but   "  cha- 

<6      j.jj.y 


in  order  to  jujlljication  and  fahation.  » • 


ir;o7 


*'  pity   never   faileth ; "    for   if  it    HiouM,    heaven  S  K  R  M- 
would  ceafe  to  be  heaven  to  u.%  becaufe  it  is  the  very      ^*'' 
frame  and  temper  of  happinefs  j  and  if  this  difpofi- 
tion  be  not  wrought  in  us  in  this  world,  we  fhuiJ 
be  altogether  incapable  of  the  felicity  of  the  other. 

You  fee  then  what  it  is  that  mufl:  recommend  us 
to  the  favour  of  God  ;  the  real  renovation  of  our 
hearts  and  lives,  after  the  image  of  him  that  crea- 
ted us.  This  muft  be  repaired  in  us,  before  ever 
we  can  hope  to  be  redorcd  to  the  g.race  and  favour 
of  God,  or  to  be  capable  of  the  reward  of  eternal 
life.  And  what  could  God  have  done  more  rea- 
fonable,  than  to  make  thefe  very  things  the  terms 
of  our  lalvation,  v/hich  are  the  neccfTiry  caufes  and 
means  of  it  ?  how  could  he  have  dealt  more  merci- 
fully and  kindly  with  us,  than  to  appoint  that  to  be 
the  condition  of  our  happinefs,  which  is  the  only 
qualification  that  can  make  us  capable  of  it .? 

I  will  conclude  all  with  that  excellent  pofligq 
in  the  v;ifdom  of  Solomon,  chap.  vi.  17,  18.  '"•  The 
*^  very  true  beginning  of  wifJom  is  the  defire  of 
^''  difcipline,  and  the  care  of  difcipline  is  love,  and 
'^  love  is  the  keeping  of  her  laws,  and  taking  heed 
"  to  her  laws  is  the  afTurance  of  incorruption.'* 
The  fum  of  what  I  have  faid  upon  this  argument 
amounts  to  this,  that  upon  the  terms  of  the  gofpel 
we  can  have  no  hope  of  the  forgivenefs  of  our  ^ms^ 
and  eternal  falvation,  unlefs  our  nature  be  renewed, 
and  the  image  of  God,  which  is  defaced  by  fin, 
be  repaired  in  us,  and  we  be  ''  created  in  Christ 
"  unto  good  works-,"  that  no  fliith  will  avail  to 
our  juftification  and  acceptance  with  God,  but  that 

13  G  2  which 


iSoS  Of  the  nature  of  regmeration^  Sec. 

SERM,  which  is  '^  made  perfe£t  by  charity,"  that  is,  by 
^^'  "  fulfilling  of  the  law,  and  keeping  the  command- 
'^  mentsofGoDr'  by  iincere  obedience  and  holi- 
nefs  of  life,  which  notwithftanding  the  unavoidable 
imperfedion  of  it  in  this  flate,  will  neverthelefs  be 
accepted  with  God,  through  the  merits  of  our  blef^ 
fed  Saviour,  "  who  hath  loved  us,  and  wafhed  us 
"  from  our  fins  in  his  own  blood."  To  whom 
be  glory  for  ever.     Am.en, 


A 


A  Table  of  the  Texts  of  each 

Sermon. 

SERMON    LXXXV. 

I  T  O  H  N   iv.   ^.    In  this  was  manifejled  the   love 

I    of  God  towards  us^   becanfe  that  God  fait  his 

only-begotten  Son  into  the  worlds  that  we  might 

live  through  him,  page  1351. 

SERMON    LXXXVI. 

GAL  AT.  i.  ^^g.  But  though  we^  cr  an  angel  from 
heaven  preach  any  other  gofpel  unto  you^  than  that 
which  we  have  preached  unto  you^  let  him  he  ac- 
curfed.  As  we  faid  before,  fo  fay  I  now  again^  if 
any  man  preach  any  other  gofpel  unto  you,  than  that 
ye  have  received.,  let  him  be  ace ur fed,         p.  136^. 

SERMON    LXXXVII,   LXXXVIII, 
LXXXIX. 

JOHN  vii.   17.  If  any  man  will  do  his  will,  he 
fhall  know  of  the  do5lrine^  whether  it  be  of  God, 
or  whether  I  fpeak  of  my  felf 

p.  1386,   1401,   1419. 

SERMON     XC,  XCI,  XCII,  XCIII. 

LUKE  xli.   15.  And  he  faid  unto  them,   take  heed 

and  beware  of  covetoufnefs ;  for  a  man^s  life  con- 

fifieth  not  in  the  abundance  of  the  things  which  he 

pojfeffeth.  p.  1433,  145O'  H%>  HSi. 

SER  MON 


A  Table  of  the  Texts. 

SERMON    XCIV,  XCV. 

M  AT  T  H.  iv.  33.  But  feekyefirft  the  kingdom  ofGoDy 
and  his  righteoufnefs ;  and  all  thefe  things  Jhall  he 
added  unto  you,  p.  i497>  ^S^S- 

SERMON    XCVf. 

PSAL.cxix.  96.  /  have  feen  an  end  of  all  perfe^ion ; 
hut  tlyy  commandment  is  exceeding  hroad.      p.  1533. 

SERMON    XCVII,  XCVIIL 

2  P  E  T.  i.  iv.  Whereby  are  given  unto  us  exceeding 
great  and  precious  promifes  r,  that  by  thefe  ye  might  he 
partakers  of  the  divine  nature,        p.   1553,   1568. 

SERMON    XCIX,  C. 

I  P  ET.  iv.  19.  Wherefore^  let  them  that  fiiffer  accord- 
ing- to  the  will  of  God,  commit  the  keeping  of  their 
fouls  to  him  in  well-doings  as  unto  a  faithful  creator, 

p.    1580,   1609, 

SERMON     CI. 

JOHN  ix.  4.  /  mujiwork  the  works  of  him  that fent 
mCy  while  it  is  day  \  the  night  cometh^  when  no  man 
canworL  p.  1627. 

SERMON    CII. 

MI  C  AH  vi.  6,  j^  8.  Wherewith  fiall  I  come  ^f- 
fore  the  Lord,  and  how  my  felf  before  the -high 
God/'  fhall Icome  before  him  with  hurnt-cfferings^ 

with  calves  of  a  year  old  ? 

Will 


A  Tabic  of  the  Texts. 

Will  the  Lord  be  pleafed  with  thoufands  of  rams^  or 
with  ten  thoufands  of  rivers  of  oil  ?  fhall  1  give  my 
firji-horn  for  r,iy  tranfgreffion^  the  fruit  of  my  body 
for  the  fin  of  my  foul  ? 

He  hath  floe  wed  thee^  0  7nan^  what  is  good  -,  and  what 
doth  the  Lord  require  of  thee^  but  to  dojujily^  and 
to  love  mercy^  and  to  walk  humbly  with  thy 
God.  p.  1645. 

SERMON    cm. 

M  A  T  T  H.  ix.  13.  Eat  go  ye  and  learn  what  that 
meaneth  \  I  will  have  mercy  ^  and  not  facrifice ,  p.  1 67  2. 

SERMON    CIV.  CV. 

M  ATTH.  V.  17.  Jhink  not  that  I  am  come  to 
defiroy  the  law  or  the  prophets :  I  am  not  come  to 
defiroy^  but  to  fulfil  p.    1 698,  1 7 1 5. 

SERMON   CVI.  CVII.  CVIII.  CIX.  CX. 

GALAT.  vi.  15.    ForinQwKx^T  Jesus,  neither 

cirfumcifion  availeih  any  things    nor  uncircumcifion  \ 
but  a  new  creature. 

p.  1731,   1746,  1762,  1777,  1792. 


The  End  of  the  Sixth  Volume. 


^^mi 


