LIBRARY  OF  THE  THEOLOGICAL  SEMINARY 


PRINCETON,  N.  J. 

Presented  by 


Dtvtston :...7!T.         ^***' 


Section. 


^0,  tnti^ 


SERMONS 

ON    SEVERAL 

Subjects  and  Occasions, 

By  the  moft  Reverend 

y 

Dr.  JOHN  riLLOrSON, 

LATE 
Lord  Archbifhop  of  Canterbury, 


VOLUME    the    EIGHTH. 


LONDON: 

Printed  for  J.  Wart,  A.  Ward,  J.  and  P.  Kiiaptoit,  7.  Longmen, 

R.  Httt,  C.  Hitch,  J.  Hoilgis,  S.  Aufttn,  J.  and  R.  T/it/m, 

J.  aad  H.  Pemitrtm,  and  J .  Rkiin^tn, 

MDCCXLIII. 


^289 

SERMON    CXXXI. 

Concerning  our  Imitation  of  the  di- 
vine perfedions. 


MATT.  V.  48. 

Be  ye  therefore  perfe^f^  even  as  your  Father  which 
is  in  heaven  is  perfect, 

IN  thefe  words  we  have,  firft,  the  abfolute  perfec-  s  E  R  M. 
tion  of  the  divine  nature  fuppofed,  not  only  in  cxxxl 
thofe  before-mentioned,    of  goodnefs,  and  mercy, 
and  patience  \  but  iii  all  other  excellencies  whatfo- 
cver. 

Secondly,  The  perfedion  of  God  is  propounded 
as  a  pattern  for  our  imitation. 

In  the  handling  of  thefe  two  particulars,  1  pro* 
pounded  to  proceed  in  this  method. 

I.  To  Ihew  how  we  are  to  conceive  of  the  divine 
perfedlion. 

II.  To  lay  down  fome  rules,  by  which  we  may 
redlify  and  govern  our  opinions  concerning  the  at- 
tributes and  perfedions  of  God. 

III.  To  fhew  how  far  we  are  to  imitate  the  per* 
fedions  of  God,  and  particularly  what  thofe  divine 
qualities  are  which  our  Saviour  doth  here  more 
efpccially  propound  to  our  imitation. 

IV.  To  clear  the  true  meaning  of  this  precept ; 
and  to  fhew  that  the  duty  here  intended  by  our  Sa- 
viour is  not  impoffible  to  us  *,  and  then  to  dra^ 
fome  ufeful  inferences  from  the  whole. 

VoL.VIIL  15  Y  2  The 

I. 


129^  Concerning  our  imitation 

\ix  r^'  ^^^  ^^  ^^  ^  ^^^^  already  fpoken  to,  I  now 
proceed  to  the  third  particular,  which  is,  to  (hew 
how  far  we  arc  to  imitate  the  perfedtions  of  God» 
artd  particular!/  what  thofc  divine  qualities  arc, 
which  our  Saviour  doth  here  more  cfpecially  pro- 
pound to  our  imitation.  For  though  thefc  words 
do  fuppofe  the  abfolute  perfcdion  of  the  divine  na- 
ture, yet  becaufe  there  arc  feveral  pcrfedions  of  God 
which  are  incommunicable,  and  a  creature,  as  fuch, 
is  utterly  incapable  of  them,  thefe  cannot  be  fup- 
pofed  to  be  intended  for  a  pattern  to  us.  As  the 
ncce..Tity  and  independency  of  the  divine  nature ; 
and  the  felf-fufficiency  of  it  to  his  own  happinefs  *, 
to  be  the  original  caufe  of  all  things  ^  and  confe- 
quendy  fupreme  Lord  and  Governor ;  the  immenfi- 
ty  and  eternity  of  his  being  ;  thefe,  and  perhaps 
feveral  other  perfedions,  are  incommunicable  to  a 
creature-,  and  it  would  be  an  unfufFerable  pride, 
and  a  kind  of  high  treafon  againft  the  divine  Majef- 
ty,  and  a  fottilh  ignorance  of  the  neceffary  bounds 
and  limits  of  our  own  Hate,  as  we  arc  creatures, 
to  think  to  refemble  God  in  thefe  excellencies,  of 
which  the  condition  of  a  creature  is  utterly  incapable. 
This  was  the  fin  of  Lucifer  ;  an  ambition  to  flep 
into  the  throne  of  God,  and  to  belike  the  moil 
High. 

So  that  in  our  imitation  of  the  divine  pcrfcdion, 
\YC  are  to  keep  within  the  ftation  of  creatures,  not 
affedling  an  independency  and  fovcreignty  like  the 
moft  High,  and  to  be  omnipotent  as  he  is,  "  to 
**  have  an  arm  like  God,  and  to  thunder  with  a 
*'  voice  like  him,"  as  the  exprefTion  is  in  Job  :  bxit 
to  endeavour  to  refemble  him,  pro  modulo  creatura, 
*'  according  to  the  rate  and  capacity  of  a  creature," 
in  thofc  divine  qualities,  and  in  fych .  meafurcs  and 

degrees. 


of  the  dhlne  perfeSiions,  2291 

degrees,  as  our  finite  and  dependent  nature  is  capa-  S  e  R  M. 
We  of.  '''''''''• 

More  efpecially  and  chiefly  in  the  moral  perfedi- 
ons  of  the  divine  nature,  fuch  as  are  his  goodnefs, 
and  mercy,  and  patience,  his  juftice,  and  truth, 
and  faithftilncfs  -,  thefe,  and  only  thefe,  the  fcrip- 
ture  feems  to  comprehend  under  the  name  of  holi- 
nefs  ;  not  all  the  excellencies  of  the  divine  nature 
in  general,  but  thofe  which  we  call  moral  excellen- 
cies and  perfcftions,  fuch  as  thofe  which  I  have 
named  ;  for  with  thefe,  and  hardly  with  any  other, 
is  the  holinefs  of  God  joined  in  fcripture,  as  "  holy 
*'  and  righteous,  holy  and  true,'*  &c.  And  there- 
fore when  God  lays,  *•'  be  ye  holy,  for  lam  holy,'* 
it  fignifies  that  we  are  to  imitate  God  in  his  good- 
nefs, and  mercy,  and  patience,  and  righteoufnefs, 
and  faithfulnefs,  and  truth  -,  for  thefe  are  the  holi- 
nefs of  the  divine  nature,  which  fet  him  at  the  great- 
eft  diftance  from  that  which  we  call  moral  impurity 
and  fin. 

For  that  which  our  Saviour  here  in  the  text 
more  peculiarly  recommends  to  our  imitadon,  is 
the  goodnefs  of  God,  of  which  his  mercy  and  pa- 
tience are  two  eminent  branches.  The  mercy  of 
God  is  his  goodnefs  to  thofe  that  are  in  mifery,  or 
are  liable  to  it.  The  patience  of  God  is  his  mercy 
in  fparing  thofe  who  have  deferved  punifhment,  and 
are  hable  to  it.  And  the  goodnefs  of  God  is  thea 
greateft,  v/hen  it  is  exercifed  towards  the  evil  and 
unthankful  j  thofe  who  are  fo  far  from  deferving  it, 
that  they  have  given  great  and  jufl  provocations  to 
the  contrary.  And  this  aifedionate  temper  of 
mind,  which  is  fo  remarkable  in  God  towards  the 
unworthy  and  unthankful  fons  of  men,  our  Saviour 
recommends  to  our  imitation  here  in  the  text.  "  Be 
2  *•  ye 


cxxxi 


2  2  0  2  Co?2ce?'ning  our  imitation 

S  F  M  VI   "  ye  therefore  perfect,  even  as  your  Father  which 
"  is  in  heaven  is  perfedl."     Be  ye  therefore -,  this 
particle  of  inference  therefore,  hath  a  plain  relation 
to  iomething  fpoken  before  ;  and  if  we  look  back 
to  ver.  44.  we  Ihall  find  our  Saviour  there  enjoin- 
ing his  difciples  "  to  love  their  enemies,   to  blefs 
"  them  that  curfe  them,  to  do  good  to  them  tiiat 
*'  hate  them,  and  to  pray  for  thofe  that  defpight- 
"  fully  ufe  them,    and  perfecute  diem."     And  by 
what  other  argument  doth  he  inforce  the  pra6tice. 
of  this  difficult  duty,  but  by  telling  us,  that  this  is 
to  be  hke  God,   to  be  good  to  the  evil  and  un- 
thankful, ver.  45.   "  That  ye  may  be  the  children 
*'  of  your  heavenly  Father,   who  maketh  his  fun  to 
^'  rife  on  the  evil  and  the  good  ♦,  and  his  rain  to 
"  fall  on  the  jufl,  and  on  the  unjuft."     God  is 
good  to  all,  and  exercifeth  great  mercy  and  patience 
even  towards  the  evil,  and  unjuft.     And  then  he 
concludes,  that  if  perfection  it  felf  be  fit  to  be  a  pat- 
tern,  we  fhould  labour  after  thefe  quahties,    "  Be 
*'  ye  therefore  perfed,  even  as  your  Father  which 
*'  is  in  heaven  is  perfed."     So  that  though  the  uni- 
verfal  perfection  of  the  divine  nature  be  here  fuppofed, 
yet  the  attributes  of  his  goodnefs,    and  mercy,   and 
patience,  are  here  particularly  pointed  at,  and  pro- 
pounded to  us  for  our  pattern  ;  and  the  precept  of 
imitating    the  divine   perfection  is  more  efpecially 
to  be  underftood  of  thofe  perfections  which  our  Sa- 
viour  had  been   difcourfing  of  before,    viz.  the 
goodnefs  and  mercy  of  God.     And  that  this  is  un- 
di^ubtedly  fo,  is  evident  from  St.  Luke's  rendring 
thus  precept,    Ch.  vi.  ^6.   "  Be  ye  therefore  oIkJI^' 
*'  fjLov^^  henefici^   ready  to  do  good,  full  of  kind- 
*'  acfs  and  benignity  ;  merciful,  as  your  Father  which 
*'  is  in  heaven  is  m.erciful  i"  that  is,  endeavour  you 

to 


CXXXL 


of  the  divine  perfeBions.  2293 

to  be  fuch  as  I  have  defcribed  God  to  be.  And  ^"^^^^  ^  ^• 
this  St.  Matthew  calls  perfedion  •,  becaufe  the  good- 
nefs  of  God  is  his  great  perfection,  and  the  glory 
of  the  divine  nature,  that  which  refiedls  a  luftre  and 
beauty  upon  all  his  other  attributes,  and  takes  oft  the 
terror  of  them.  From  all  which  it  is  plain,  what 
thofe  perfe'ftions  of  the  divine  nature  are,  which  our 
Saviour  doth  here  particularly  recommend  to  our 
imitation.     I  come  now,  in  the 

Fourth  and  lafl  place.  To  clear  the  true  meaning  of 
this  precept  •,  and  to  fhew,  that  the  duty  here  required, 
and  intended  by  our  Saviour,  (when  he  fays,  "  Be 
*'  ye  perfe6l,  as  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven  is 
*'  perfedl")  is  not  impofTible  to  us.  And  to  this 
purpofe,  be  pleafed  to  confider  thefe  three  or  four 
things. 

1.  That  our  imitation  of  God  is  certainly  re- 
flrained  to  the  communicable  perfe6lions  of  God, 
and  fuch  as  creatures  are  capable  of,  as  I  have  (hewn 
before.  For  it  is  fo  far  from  being  a  duty  to  af- 
fedt  or  attempt  to  be  like  God  in  his  peculiar  per- 
fections, that  it  was,  probably,  the  fin  of  the  apoftatc 
angels. 

2.  Our  imitation  of  the  divine  perfections,  which 
are  communicable  to  creatures,  is  likewifc  to  be  re- 
(trained  to  fuch  degrees  of  thefe  perfections,  as  crea- 
tures are  capable  of.  For  no  creature  can  ever  be 
fo  perfectly  good,  as  God  is  ;  nor  partake  of  any 
other  excellency,  in  that  tranfcendent  degree,  in  which 
the  divine  nature  is  pofTefied  of  it. 

3.  But  there  is  rio  manner  of  inconvenience  in 
having  a  pattern  propounded  to  us  of  fo  great  per- 
fection, as  is  above  our  reach  to  attain  to ;  and  there 
may  be  great  advantages  in  it.  The  way  to  excel 
in  aity  kind  is,  optima  qu^que  exempla  ad  imitandum 

z  fropnerey 


CXXXI. 


2294  Concerning  our  imitation 

S  J^^  M.  preponerey  **  to  propofe  the  higheft  and  moft  pcrfc(^ 
"  examples  to  our  imitation.'*  No  m.an  can  write 
after  too  perfed  and  good  a  copy  ;  and  though  he 
can  never  reach  the  perfe6tion  of  it,  yet  he  is  like  to 
learn  more,  than  by  one  lefs  perfedl.  He  that  alms 
at  the  heavens,  which  yet  he  is  fure  to  come  fhort 
of,  is  hke  to  Hioot  higher  than  he  that  aims  at  a 
mark  within  his  reach. 

Befides,  that  the  excellency  of  the  pattern,  as  it 
leaves  room  for  continual  improvement,  fo  it  kin- 
dles ambidon,  and  makes  men  drain  and  contend 
to  the  utmoft  to  do  better :  and  though  he  can  never 
hope  to  equal  the  example  before  him,  yet  he  will 
endeavour  to  come  as  near  it  as  he  can.  So  that  a 
perfecl  pattern  is  no  hindrance,  but  an  advantage 
rather  to  our  improvement  in  any  kind. 

4.  If  any  thing  can  be  fuppofed  to  be  our  duty, 
which  is  abfolutely  beyond  our  power,  a  precept  of 
this  nature  may  with  as  much  reafon  be  fuppofed 
to  be  fo,  as  any  thing  that  can  be  inflanced  in  :  be- 
caufc  in  fuch  a  cafe,  if  we  do  our  beft,  and  be  con- 
tinually prefllng  forward  towards  the  mark,  though 
we  can  never  reach  it,  yet  we  do  very  commendably ; 
and  whatever  the  law  may  require  to  try  and  raife 
our  obedience,  yet  in  all  equitable  interpretation, 
fuch  a  will  and  endeavour  will  be  acceptable  with 
God  for  the  deed.  For  if  the  perfe6tion  of  the  law 
do  really  exceed  our  ability,  and  be  beyond  the  pof- 
/ibility  of  our  performance,  the  aifurance  we  have 
of  God's  goodnefs  will  fufHciently  fecure  us  from 
any  danger  and  prejudice  upon  that  account.  And 
We  may  reafonably  prefume,  that  to  do  all  we  can 
towards  the  fulfiHing  of  this  precept,  will  be  as  ac- 
ceptable to  God,  and  as  beneficial  to  our  felv»s,  as 
if  our  power  had  been  greater,  and  we  had  perfedl- 


of  the  divine  perfeSiiom.  2295 

ly  fulfilled  it.  If  our  heavenly  Father,  to  try  the  rea-  ^^^R  M. 
dinefs  and  chearfulnefs  of  our  obedience,  bid  us  do 
that  which  he  knows  we  cannot  do,  though  we  can 
do  fomething  towards  it,  we  may  be  fure  that  he 
will  be  very  well  pleafed  when  he  fees,  that  in  obe- 
dience to  him  we  have  done  all  that  we  could.  And 
we  may  in  this  cafe  reafon  as  our  Saviour  does; 
"  If  we  that  are  evil  would  deal  thus  with  our  chil- 
"  dren,  how  more  fhall  our  heavenly  Father?'* 
The  goodnefs  of  God  fignifies  very  httle,  if  it  does 
not  fignify  this,  that  in  any  inftance  of  real  and  un- 
queftionable  goodnefs,  God  is  much  better  than  any 
father  upon  earth. 

However  at  the  worft,  that  wherein  we  fall  Ihorr 
of  the  perfedion  of  the  law,  may  be  fapplied  on  our 
part,  by  an  humble  acknowledgment  of  our  own 
weaknefs  and  imperfeftion,  and  on  God's  part,  by 
mercy  and  forgivenefs,  for  the  fake  of  the  perfed  o- 
bedience  of  our  bleffed  Redeemer.  This  is  the  leaft 
benefit  we  can  exped  in  this  cafe  from  the  grace,  and 
mercy,  and  equity  of  the  gofpel. 

5.  And  laflly,  which  will  fully  clear  this  m.atter, 
this  precept  does  not  oblige  us  to  come  up  to  a 
perfed  equality  with  the  pattern  propounded  to  us, 
but  only  imports  a  vigorous  imitation  of  it ;  that 
we  be  perpetually  afcending  and  climbing  up  higher, 
flill  advancing  from  one  degree  of  goodnefs  to  ano- 
ther, and  continually  afpiring  after  a  nearer  refem- 
blance  to  God  :  and  this  certainly  is  pbflibie  to  us, 
to  endeavour  to  be  as  like  God  as  we  can,  in  this 
weak  and  imperfe6l  (late. 

Whereas  any  equahty  with  God,  even  In  the 
communicable  attributes  of  his  goodnefs,  and  mercy, 
and  patience,  is  not  only  impclTible  to  us  in  this  flate 
of  fin  and  imperfedion,  but  above  the  condition  of 

Vol.  VIII.  15  Z  acrea- 

I. 


2296  Concerni7tg  our  imitation 

S  E  R  M.  a  creature,  even  of  "  the  fpirits  of  iuft  men  made 

CXXXI  1  J 

"  perfed,"  and  of  the  higheil  angels  in  glory  :  for 
their  perfedion  is  not  abfolute,  but  in  comparifon 
with  our  prefent  ftate.  And  I  think  there  is  no 
great  reafon  to  doubt,  but  that  the  blefled  fpirits  a- 
bove,  who  continually  behold  the  face  of  their  Fa- 
ther, are  ftill  writing  after  this  copy,  which  is  here 
propounded  to  us  •,  and  endeavouring  "  10  be  per- 
"  fed,  as  their  Father  which  is  in  heaven  is  perfedl  •," 
ftill  afpiring  after  a  nearer  and  more  perfedb  refem- 
blance  of  God,  whofe  goodnefs  and  mercy  is  fo  far 
beyond,  and  before  that  of  any  creature,  that  they 
may  be  for  ever  approaching  nearer  to  it,  and  yet 
never  overtake  it. 

And  this  feems  to  be  no  inconfiderable  ingredient, 
and  enhancement  of  the  happinefs  of  heaven,  that 
the  holinefs  of  good  men  (which  is  the  fimilitude  of 
God)  is  never  at  a  {land,  nor  at  it's  full  growth  and 
period  -,  but  that  the  glorified  faints  (yea  and  blelTed 
angels  too)  may  be  continually  growing  and  improv- 
ing, and  they  themfelves  ftill  become  better  and 
happier  to  all  eternity.  And  this  in  my  apprehenfi- 
on  is  no  undervaluing  the  happinefs  of  heaven,  that 
it  is  not  fo  perfect  at  firft,  as  it  fliall  be  afterwards ; 
becaufeit  is  granted  on  all  hands,  that  the  happinefs 
of  thofe  good  fouls,  who  are  already  in  blifs,  fhall 
be  more  perfe6l  and  complete  at  the  refurredion. 
And  why  may  it  not  then  be  continually  increafing, 
and  be  augmented  ftill  more  and  more,  without  any 
ftint  or  final  period  of  it's  perfe6lion }  In  this  world 
we  are  apt  to  faint  in  a  long  courfe  of  goodnefs, 
and  to  be  weary  of  well  doing.  But  in  the  other 
ftate,  when  men  ftiall  be  ftrongly  byafifed  to  good- 
nefs, and  have  nothing  to  pull  them  back,  it  will 
then  be  fo  far  from  being  a  trouble,  that  methinks  it 
2  fhould 


of  the  divine  perfeBiom.  2297 

ihould  be  a  mighty  pleafiire  to  the  blelTcd,  to  find  ^^^5^- 
that  there  is  no  end  of  their  doing  good  and  becom- 
ing better.  For  if  conformity  to  God  be  the  ground 
and  foundation  of  all  happinefs,  then  our  bleffednefs 
will  advance  proportionably,  as  we  grow  more  and 
more  like  to  him.  This,  I  confefs,  were  a  difmal  con- 
fideration,  to  think  that  in  heaven  we  fliould  be  liable 
to  relapfe,  to  go  backward,  or  fall  from  that  holy  and 
happy  ftate.  But  this  is  a  comfortable  confiderationjthat 
our  holinefs  and  happinefs  fhall  never  be  at  a  ftand, 
that  it  is  fecure  fo  far  as  it  goes,  and  that  we  cannot 
lofe  what  we  have  once  attained,  as  we  may  do  in 
this  world.  This,  methinks,  fhould  be  a  trouble  to 
no  man,  that  as  good  and  happy  as  he  is  at  firft,  he 
fhall  ilill  be  better  and  better,  more  and  more  hap- 
py without  end. 

But  be  that  as  it  will,  and  as  God  pieafeth  (for 
we  do  but  talk  in  the  dark  about  our  future  ftate,) 
this  is  certain,  that  an  equality  with  God  in  any  of 
his  perfc6lions  is  not  to  be  attained  by  any  creature, 
and  therefore  cannot  be  thought  to  be  the  meaning  of 
this  precept :  But  that  which  our  Saviour  requires, 
is  a  vigorous  imitation  of  this  pattern  %  that  we  have 
this  example  of  the  divine  perfedion  always  before 
us,  and  that  we  be  continually  endeavouring,  as 
much  as  in  us  Hes,  to  bring  durfelves  to  the  neareft 
refemblance  of  God,  that  poflibly  we  can.  And  if 
this  be  our  fincere  care  and  ftudy,  we  need  not  doubt 
but  that  it  will  find  acceptance  with  God,  and  that 
he  will  be  gracioufly  pleafed  to  efteem  us  for  his  chil* 
dren  •,  and  if  there  need  a  pardon  for  it,  that  God  will 
forgive  us  where  we  fall  fhortof  theperfedion  of  that 
pattern,  which  we  can  never  imitate  to  pcrfedfion. 

And  happy  were   it  for  us,  if  this  were  all  the 

ground  of  our  fear  and  trouble,  that  when  we  had 

15  Z  2  done 


229S  CoJicerning  our  imitation 

SK  R.M.  done  all  wc  could,  we  mufl  flill  fall  much  ihort  of 
the  perfection  of  God's  law,  and  the  duty  therein 
kid  upon  us.  Alas  !  which  of  us  does  near  fo  much 
as  we  can,  and  is  not  confcious  to  himfelf  that  it  is 
through  his  own  fault  and  negled,  that  he  is  fo  un- 
like his  heavenly  Father  in  goodncfs  and  mercy,  in 
righteoufnefs  and  true  holinefs  •,  and  that  he  ftill  par- 
takes in  {o  great  a  meafure  of  thofe,  not  only  unrea- 
fonable  and  brutilh,  but  even  dcvilifh  pafTions  of 
malice  and  hatred,  of  rage  and  cruelty,  of  impati- 
ence and  implacable  revenge  ;  and  that  thefe  ungod- 
like  qualities  do  fo  frequently  prevail  upon  us,  and 
have  fo  much  dominion  over  us ! 

We  are  fo  far  from  being  what  we  ought,  in  thefe 
and  many  other  relpeds,  that  we  are  far  from  what 
we  might  be,  if  we  would  mind  our  duty  with  care 
and  confcience,  and  make  it  our  fmcere  endeavour 
to  fubdue  ourfelves  to  a  conformity  to  God,  and  to 
aperfed:  hohnefs  in  his  fear. 

Would  we  but  often  fet  God  before  our  eyes,  and 
reprefcnt  to  ourfelves  thofe  excellent  and  amiable  per- 
fedions  of  the  divine  nature,  which  are  fo  comfort- 
able and  beneficial  to  us,  and  to  which  we  Hand 
^io  infinitely  obliged,  his  goodnefs  and  mercy  and 
patience,  upon  which  all  our  hopes  of  happinefs  do 
depend,  and  to  which  we  are  indebted,  that  we  are 
not  miferable  pafi:  recovery  •,  that  goodnefs  and  pa- 
tience vv^hich  he  continually  exercifeth  towards  us, 
.(for  wc  provoke  him  every  day,)  and  exercifeth  to- 
Jkvards  us, on  purpofe  to  endear  thofe  perfedlions  to  us, 
from  which  we  reapfo  much  comfort  and  advantage ; 
Xhat  by  the  pattern  of  pcrfe(5tion  it  felf,  and  the  ex- 
ample  of  him  who  is  fo  much  above  us,  fo  no  ways 
obliged  to  us,  nor  tied  by  any  interefl  to  be  concern- 
ed for  us  i  and  who  being  happy  in  himfelf,  neither 

hopes 


of  the  divine perfeBiom,  2  2.9 9 

hopes  nor  fears  any  thing  from  us  :  I  fay,  by  an  ex-  ^  F.  R  M, 
ample  that  has  all  thefe  advantages,  we  might  be 
provoked  to  be  fo  afFe6led  towards  one  another, 
(who  have  mutual  obligations  one  to  another,  and 
mutual  expectations  of  good  or  evil  one  from  another) 
as  we  have  always  found  God  to  be  towards  us,  and 
as  we  defire  he  fhould  flill  continue  \  and  miferable 
creatures  are  we,  whenever  he  ceafeth  to  be  fo  :  and 
we  have  reafon  to  fear  he  will  ceafe  to  be  fo,  if  this 
example  of  his  goodnefs  and  patience  towards  us, 
do  not  transform  us  into  the  image  of  the  divine  per- 
fections,  and  prevail  upon  us  to  imitate  thofe  excel- 
lencies, which  we  have  fo  much  reafon  to  approve 
and  admire,  and  be  in  love  withal. 

Thefe  confiderations,  taken  both  from  ingenuity 
and  intereft,  Ihould  awaken  our  floth,  and  ftir  up  our 
moil  refolute  and  vigorous  endeavours  after  that  per- 
fection which  our  Saviour  here  requires,  and  make 
us  afhamed  of  our  lazy  complaints,  that  our  duty  ijs 
fet  fo  high,that  the  endeavours  of  our  whole  life  can- 
not reach  it ;  when  yet  we  have  hardly  made  one  flep 
towards  it,  and  are  fo  remifs  and  unconcerned 
about  it,  as  if  we  could  do  it  at  any  time  with  the 
greateft  eafe,  and  at  an  hour's  warning,  before  we 
leave  the  world,  could  fulfill  this  precept  of  our 
Lord,  of  "  being  perfeCt,  as  our  Father  which  is  in 
"  heaven  is  perfeCt," 

And  yet,  let  me  tell  you,  fo  far  as  any  of  us  are 
from  refembling  our  heavenly  Father  in  fome  good 
degree  and  meafure,  fo  far  are  we  diftant  from  hea- 
ven, and  the  temper  of  the  blefled  \  fo  far  are  we  ut- 
terly unqualiiied  for  the  blifsful  fight  and  enjoyment 
of  God  :  for  unlefs  we  be  firfl  like  him,  we  cannot 
fee  him  as  he  is  :  only  "  the  pure  in  heart  Ihall  fee 
*'  God,"  and  therefore  "  every  man  that  has  this 

*'  hope 


2 000  Concerning  our  imitation 

S  E  R  M.  "  hope  in  him,"  fhould  "  purify  himfelf  even  as 

CXXXI.         ee       \  '  J  » 

'  he  IS  pure. 

And  thus  I  have,  as  briefly  as  I  could,  difpatch- 
ed  the  four  things  I  propounded  for  the  explication 
of  this  text ;  namely,  how  we  are  to  conceive  of  the 
divine  perfections,  and  to  give  fome  rules  to  regulate 
and  govern  our  opinions  concerning  the  attributes 
and  perfedions  of  God-,  to  explain  the  extent  of 
this  duty,  and  vindicate  the  pofTibility  of  it. 

All  that  now  remains,  is  to  draw  fome  ufeful  in- 
ferences from  this  difcourfe  which  I  have  made  \  and 
they  fhall  be  thefe  two. 

I.  That  the  ftrongeft  and  furefl  reafonings  in  re- 
ligion, are  grounded  upon  the  effential  perfedions 
of  God. 

II.  That  the  truefl  and  mofl  fubflantial  pradice 
of  religion,  confifl's  in  the  imitation  of  God. 

I.  That  the  ftrongeft  and  fureft  reafonings  in  re- 
ligion, are  grounded  upon  the  ellential  perfections  of 
God  \  fo  that  even  divine  revelation  it  felf  doth  fup- 
pofe  thefe  for  it's  foundation,  and  can  fignify  no- 
thing to  us,  unlefs  thefe  be  firft  known  and  believed. 
Unlefs  we  be  firft  perfuaded  of  the  providence  of 
God,  and  his  particular  care  of  mankind,  why 
fhould  we  believe  that  he  would  make  any  revelati- 
on of  himfelf  to  men?  Unlefs  it  be  naturally  known 
to  us,  that  God  is  true,  what  foundation  is  there 
for  the  belief  of  his  word.''  And  what  fignifies  the 
laws  and  promifcs  of  God,  unlefs  natural  light  do 
firft  affure  us  of  his  fovereign  authority  and  faithful- 
nefs  ?  So  that  the  principles  of  natural  religion,  are 
the  foundation  of  that  which  is  revealed  ;  and  there- 
fore, in  rcafon,  nothing  can  be  admitted  to  be  a  reve- 
lation from  God,  which  plainly  contradicts  his  effen- 
tial  perfection,  and,  confequently,  if  any  pretends  di- 
vine 


l^JuX^^ ; 


of  the  divine  perfeBiom,  3  3  o  i 

vine  revelation  for  this  doctrine,  that  God  hath  from 'S  F.  R  M. 

CXXXI- 

all  eternity  abfolutely  decreed  the  eternal  ruin  of  the  _  ^-^ 

greatefl:  part  of  mankind,  v/ithout  any  refped  to  the  .  v^  ^  ^ 
fins  and  demerits  of  men,  I  am  as  certain  that  this 
do6lrine  cannot  be  of  God,  as  I  am  fure  that  God 
is  good  and  juft :  becaufe  this  grates  upon  the  noti- 
on that  mankind  have  of  goodnefs  and  juilice.  This 
is  that  which  no  good  man  would  do,  and  therefore 
cannot  be  believed  of  infinite  goodnefs  ,  and  there- 
fore if  "  an  apoftle  or  angel  from  heaven"  teach  any 
doctrine  which  plainly  overthrows  the  goodnefs  and 
juflice  of  God,  "  let  him  be  accurfed."  For  eve- 
ry man  hath  greater  afTurance  that  God  is  good  and 
juft,  than  he  can  have  of  any  fubtle  fpeculations  a- 
bout  predeftination  and  the  decrees  of  God. 

And  for  the  fame  reafon  I  cannot  believe,  upon 
the  pretended  authority  or  infallibility  of  any  man  or 
church  in  the  world,  that  God  would  not  have  men 
underftand  their  publick  prayers,  and  the  lefTons  of 
fcripture  which  are  read  to  them.  A  leflbn  not  to 
be  underftood  is  nonfenfe :  a  lefTon  is  fometliing  to 
be  learned,  which  how  it  can  be  without  being  un- 
derilood,  is  hard  to  comprehend. 

And  as  little  can  I  believe,  upon  the  authority  of 
any  perfon  or  church  whatfoever,  that  God  Ihould 
reveal  his  will  to  men  in  the  holy  fcriptures,  with  a 
defign  to  have  it  hid,  and  locked  up  from  the  genera- 
lity of  mankind  in  an  unknown  tongue.  And  much 
lefs  can  I  believe  (which  yet  is  the  exprefs  dodrinc 
of  the  council  of  Trent)  that  the  faving  efficacy  of 
the  facrament  depends  upon  the  intention  of  the  prieft; 
Which  is  to  fay,  tliat  though  people  believe,  and 
live  never  fo  well,  they  may  be  damned  by  iholes 
^nd  whole  parifhes  together,  at  the  pleafure  of  the 
prieil,  and  for  no  other  reafon,  but  becaufe  he  is  fo 

wicked 


k. 


3302  Concerning  our  i mi  fat  ion 

S  F  R  M.  -wicked  as   not  to  intend  to  fave  them.     Can  any 

CXXXI.  .  ' 

\^  man  believe  this,  that  hath  any  tolerable  notion  of 
God's  goodnefs  ?  May  we  not  in  this  cafe  appeal, 
as  Abraham  did,  to  the  goodnefs  and  jufticeof  God, 
and  expoflulate  with  greater  reafon  than  he  did, 
much  after  the  fame  manner,  "  Wilt  thou  deftroy 
*'  the  righteous  for  the  wicked ;  that  be  far  from  thee 
*'  to  do  after  this  manner."  To  damn  the  righteous 
for  the  wicked,  and  that  righteous  people  Ihould  lye 
at  the  mercy  of  a  wicked  priell,  to  be  damned  or 
faved  at  his  pleafure,  "  that  be  far  from  thee ;  fhall 
*'  not  the  judge  of  all  the  earth  do  right  ?"  And  can 
there  be  a  greater  affront  to  the  goodnefs  and  juftice 
of  God,  than  to  imagine  he  fhould  deal  with  men 
after  this  manner  ?  If  this  be  to  do  right,  there  is 
no  poflibility  of  doing  v/rong. 

And  to  give  but  one  inflance  more  j  I  can  never 
believe,  upon  the  authority  of  any  man,  or  church 
whatfoever,  that  our  Saviour,  in  the  celebration 
of  his  laft  fupper,  did  with  his  own  hands  give  away 
his  own  natural  body  into  the  hands  of  his  difciples, 
and  give  his  blood  fhed,  before  it  was  fhed-,  that 
the  whole  do6trine  of  Chriftianity  fhould  mainly  re- 
ly upon  the  evidence  of  miracles,  the  affurance  of 
which  depends  upon  the  certainty  of  fenfe  ;  and  yet 
that  an  effential  part  of  that  dodrine  fhould  over- 
throw the  certainty  of  fenfe.  I  can  never  while  I 
live  believe  theft  two  things,  that  the  lafl  thing  our 
Saviour  did  before  his  death,  fhould  be  to  teach  his 
difciples  not  to  believe  their  own  fenfes,  as  he  mufl 
do  if  he  taught  them  tranfubflantiation  •,  and  that 
the  very  firft  thing  he  did  after  he  was  rifcn  from  the 
dead,  fhould  be  to  teach  them  the  quite  contrary, 
by  appealing  to  the  certainty  of  fenfe  for  the  proof  of 
his  refurre6tion  j  for  when  they  doubted  of  bis  refur- 

rc6lion,^ 


tyf  the  divine  perfeSii^nL  3  3  0*3 

region,  Luke  xxiv.  38.  "  He  faid  unto  them.  Why  SE  R  M. 
"  are  ye  troubled  ?  and  why  do  thoughts  arife  in 
"  your  hearts  ?  Behold  my  hands  and  my  feet,  that 
"  it  is  I  my  felf :  handle  me,  and  fee,  for  a  fpiric 
"  hath  not  fiefh  and  bones,  as  ye  fee  me  have/'  If 
this  be  a  good  argument,  that  it  was  a  real  body 
which  they  faw,  becaufe  they  faw  and  felt  fiefh  and 
bones  :  is  it  not  as  good  an  argument  on  the  other 
fide,  that  what  they  faw  in  the  facrament  was 
not  his  real  and  natural  body,  becaufe  they  could 
neither  fee  nor  handle  fiefh  and  bones  P  So  that 
I  cannot  believe  tranfubflantiation  ,  unlefs  I  can 
believe  that  truth  itfelf  can  contradid  and  deflroy 
itfelf. 

You  fee  of  what  ufe  it  is  to  have  right  and  fteady 
apprehenfions  of  the  divine  perfedlions ;  that,  thejfe 
being  laid  for  a  foundation,  we  may  upon  all  occa- 
fions  have  recourfe  to  them,  and  govern  our  opi- 
nions and  Reafonings  in  religion,  about  all  doubtful 
matters,  by  fuch  principles  as  are  clear  and  unquet 
tionable.     The 

II.  Inference  is,  that  the  truefl  and  mofl  fubflan- 
tial  pradlice  of  religion,  confifls  in  the  imitation  of 
the  divine  perfections,  efpecialiy  the  moral  perfec- 
tions of  the  divine  nature,  which  the  fcripture  is 
Wont  to  comprehend  under  the  name  of  holinefs  ^ 
and  fuch  are  the  goodnefs,  and  mercy,  and  patience 
of  God,  his  juftice,  and  truth,  and  faithfulnefs. 
To  imitate  God  in  thefe  is  true  religion  ;  or  as  St« 
James  expreffes  it,  "  pure  religion,  and  undefiled,'* 
u^iocvTogy  without  any  flaw  or  blemifli,  alluding 
to  precious  flones,  the  greatefl  commendation  of 
which  is  to  be  clear  and  without  flaw.  Religio  eft^ 
imitari  quern  colis^  "  that  is  religion,  to  imitate  him 
"  whom  we  worfhip,"     This  the  heathens,  by  the 

Vol.  VIIL  '  16  A  light 


2^04  Concerning  our  imitation 

SERM.  light  of  nature,  did  difcover  to  be  the  great  end  of 
cxxxi.    j.g|jgjQj^^  ^^^  j-j^g  l3£f^  worfhip  of  the  deity,  to  be 

like  God.  Pythagoras  was  wont  to  fay,  "  that  we 
*'  honour  God  moil,  when  we  are  moft  Uke  him  in  the 
"  temper  and  difpofition  of  our  minds  j"  and  Pla- 
to to  the  fame  purpofe,  "  that  the  height  and  per- 
*'  fedlion  of  goodnefs,  is  to  refemble  God,  as  near 
•'  as  is  pofTible  -,  and  that  we  refemble  God, 
•*  in  beingjuil,  and  holy,  and  wife.*'  So  likewife 
Hierocles,  "  that  a  good  man  imitates  God,  in  the 
*'  meafures  of  love  and  friendfhip,  who  hates  no 
**  man,  and  extends  his  benignity  to  all  mankind." 
Plutarch  hath  an  excellent  difcourfe  about  the  pa- 
tience of  God  towards  finners,  and  gives  this  as 
one  reafon  why  God  doth  not  prefently  punifh  of- 
fenders j  "  that  he  might  give  an  example  to  us  of 
*'  g^ntlenefs  and  patience,  and  check  the  fury  and 
"  violence  of  men  in  revenging  injuries  upon  one 
**  another ;  which  nothing  will  do  more  effedually, 
*'  than  to  confider  that  gentlenefs  and  forbearance 
*'  are  an  imitation  of  the  divines  perfedion."  And 
then  he  cites  an  excellent  faying  of  Plato,  "  tliat 
**  God  manifefted  himfelf,  and  difplayed  his  per- 
*^  feftions  in  the  world,  for  our  imitation ;  true  vir- 
•'  tue  being  nothing  dfe^  but  an  imitation  of  the 
*'  divine  nature.  For  there  is  no  greater  benefit 
*'  man  can  receive  from  God's  hand,  than  to  be- 
♦'  come  virtuous  by  the  imitation  and  purfuit  of 
*'  thofe  excellencies  and  perfedlions  which  are  in 
•'  God.'*  Seneca  likewife  hath  many  pafTages  to 
this  purpofe,  inler  viros  honos  dc  Deum  amicitia  efi^ 
into  etiam  necejfitudo  ^  fimilitudo^  "  between  God  and 
*'  good  men  there  is  a  friendfhip,  yea,  and  an  intima- 
*'  cy  and  likenefs ;"  and  that  a  virtuous  man  is 
difcipulus  amulatorquQ  i^  vera  progenies  Deiy  "  a  dif- 

"  ciple 


CXXXI. 


of  the  divine  perfedlions,  33^5 

•*  ciple  and  imitator,    and  the  very  genuine  off-  ^^^Jj)^* 
•^  fpring  of  God/*     So  that  the  light  of  nature  and 
the  reafon  of  mankind,  have  always  placed  the  per- 
fection of  religion  in  the  imitation  of  the  divine  ex- 
cellencies and  perfe(5lions. 

And  this  is  very  agreeable  to  the   language  and 
fenfe  of  the  holy   fcriptures,    which  every  where 
make  the  pra^ice  of  religion  to  confift  in  our  con- 
formity to  God,   and  the  laws  which  he  hath  given 
us  \  which  are  nothing  elfe  but  a  tranfcript  of  hig 
nature.     The  great  bufinefs  of  religion  is  to  do  the 
Vill  of  God,  and   "  this  is  the  will  of  God,  our 
"  fandlification  j"  and  our  fandiification  is  our  con- 
formity to  the  holinefs  of  God  ;    and  this  is  the 
fcope  of  the  general  exhortations  of  fcripture,  to  per- 
fuade  us  to  holinefs,  that  is,  to  an  imitation  of  the 
moral  perfedlions  of  the  divine  nature.     2  Cor.  vii. 
I.  "  Having  therefore  thefe  promifes,  dearly  be- 
*'  loved  ;  let  us  cleanfe  our  felves  from  all  filthinefs 
*'  of  ^t^  and  fpirit,  and  perfed  holinefs  in  the  fear 
*'  of  God."   I  Pet.  i.  15,   16.  "As  he  which  hath 
"  called  you  is  holy,  fo  be  ye  holy  in  all  manner  of 
*'  converfation,  becaufe  it  is  written,  be  ye  holy, 
"  for  lam  holy,"    2  Pet.  i.  3,  4.  fpeaking  of  the 
Chriftian  religion,  which  he  calls  "  the  knowledge 
*'  of  him  who  hath  called  us  to  glory  and  virtue, 
'*  whereby  alfo  (fays  he)  are  given  unto  us  exceed- 
**  ing  great  and  precious  promifes,  that  by  thefe 
*'  we  might  be   partakers  of  a  divine  nature,  hav- 
*'  ing  efcaped  the  corruption  that  is  in  the  world 
"  through  lufl."     So  that  the  holinefs  the  gofpel 
defigns  to  bring  us  to,  is  a  participation  of  the  di- 
vine nature,  which  we  can  no  otherwife  partake  of, 
but  by  an  imitation  of  the  divine  perfe6tions.    This 
is  tliat  which  the  fcripture  exprelTes  to  us  by  the 
\§  A  2  term? 


3306  Concerning  our  imitation 

E  R  M.  terms  of  regeneration,  the  new  man,  and  the  new 
creature.  And  therefore  thofe  who  are  converted 
from  a  wicked  and  finful  ftate,  and  reclaimed  to 
goodnefs,  are  faid  "  to  put  on  the  new  man,  which 
"  after  God  is  created  in  righteoufnefs,  and  the  ho- 
*'  linefs  of  truth."  Eph.  iv.  23.  "  To  be  renew- 
*^  ed  after  the  image  of  him  that  created  us.*'  Colof. 
iii.  10.  This  is  to  bethefons  and  children  of  God,  to 
^'  imitate  and  refemble  God  in  our  difpofitions  and 
**  manners.  Eph.  v.  i.  *'  Be  ye  therefore,  fj(,ifA,'^oci 
*^  tS  S's^,  imitators  of  God,  as  dear  children." 
Philip  ii.  15.  ''  That  ye  may  be  blamelefs  and  fin- 
*'  cere,  the  fons  of  God  without  rebuke,  in  themidft 
*'  of  a  crooked  and  perverfe  nation."  i  John  iii. 
10.  "In  tliis  the  children  of  God  are  manifeft,  and 
*^  the  children  of  the  devil  -,  whofoever  doth  not 
*'  righteoufnefs  is  not  of  God."  There  have  been 
great  enquiries  concerning  the  marks  of  a  child  of 
God  ;  this  is  the  true  charader,  and  that  which  in 
cfFe6l  comprehends  all  others,  our  imitation  and  re- 
femblance  of  God  in  thofe  perfections,  wherein  he 
is  fet  forth  for  a  pattern  to  us.  And  in  this  mainly 
confifts  the  praClice  both  of  natural  religion,  and  of 
true  Chrillianity. 

But  does  not  religion  confifl  very  much  in  the 
duties  of  God's  worihip,  in  the  exercife  of  piety 
and  devotion,  in  conflant  and  frequent  prayers  to 
God,  and  in  the  celebration  of  his  goodnefs  by  praife 
and  thankfgiving,  in  reading  and  hearing,  and  me- 
ditating upon  God's  word,  in  failing  and  abilinence, 
and  keeping  our  bodies  in  fubjedlion  to  our  fpirits, 
and  in  frequent  receiving  of  the  holy  facrament  ? 
to  this  I  anfwer,  that  religion  doth  confift  very  much 
in  the  due  performance  of  thefe  duties,  and  they  ar« 
'  unqueftionable  and  neceffary  parts  of  religion,  and 

the 


of  the  divine perfeBions.  330/ 

the  means  appointed  by  God  for  the  begetting  and  S  E  R  M, 
increafing  in  us  fuch  difpofitions  of  mind,  as  render 
us  moft  hke  to  God,  and  for  the  produdlion  of 
all  the  fruits  of  goodnefs  and  holinefs  and  righteouf- 
nefs  in  our  lives. 

But  then  it  is  to  be  confidered,  that  thefe  exerci- 
fes  of  piety  and  devotion  are  but  the  means  of  reli- 
gion, and  not  t-he  ultimate  end  and  defign  of  it.  All 
thefe  do  but  ferve  to  bring  us  to  a  nearer  refem- 
blance  of  God  ;  and  where  they  fail  of  this  end,  and 
are  performed  for  their  own  fakes  only,  and  we  reft 
in  them,  without  aiming  at  any  thing  farther,  they 
lofe  their  nature  ;  becaufe  they  are  not  ufed  as  means, 
but  refled  in,  as  if  they  were  the  end  of  religion. 
And  it  is  to  be  •  feared  there  are  many  which  fall 
into  this  fatal  miftake  about  religion,  and  think 
that  if  they  do  but  ferve  God  in  their  families,  and 
go  to  church,  and  behave  themfelves  there  with 
devotion  and  reverence,  and  at  certain  feafons  re* 
ceivc  the  facrament,  they  are  truly  religious,  and 
very  good  Chriilians  ;  when  all  this  while  they  take 
no  care  to  improve  themfelves  in  real  goodnefs,  by 
an  inward  conformity  of  their  minds  to  God,  and 
the  real  reformation  and  amendment  of  their  lives, 
by  mortifying  their  lufts,  and  fubduing  their  appetites 
and  paffions  to  the  laws  of  reafon  and  religion,  by 
"  putting  on,  as  the  ele6lof  God,  bowels  of  kind- 
"  nefs  ;"  by  being  true  and  faithful,  righteous  and 
juft,  patient  and  merciful,  "  as  their  Father  which 
"is  in  heaven  is"  fo;  and  by  "forbearing  one 
'•  another"  in  cafe  of  provocation,  and  "  forgiv- 
* '  ing  one  another,  even  as  God  for  Christ's  fake 
"  hath  forgiven  us  -,  by  purifying  themfelves  as  God 
*'  is  fjurc,"  and  endeavouring  to  "be  holy  in  all 
[\  manner  of  converfation,  as  he  who  hath  called 

"  them 


CXXXI. 


2^08  Concerning  our  vnitatlon 

SERM.  "  them  is  holy;'*  when  all  this  while  they  are  as 
covetous,  and  earthly-minded,  and,  to  ferve  their 
covetoufnefs,  will  flrain  a  point  of  truth  or  juflice, 
and  hardly  do  an  a6t  of  chanty  in  their  whole  lives, 
but  what  is  extorted  from  them  by  mere  importuni- 
ty, or  fomc  fuch  urgent  necefTity,  in  point  of  decency 
and  reputation,  that  for  fhame  of  the  world  they 
know  not  how  to  avoid  it ;  when  their  palTions  are 
as  fierce  and  ungoverned,  their  hearts  as  full  of  gall 
and  bitternefs,  their  tongues  of  (lander  and  evil- 
Ipeaking,  their  humours  as  proud,  and  furly,  and 
cenforious,  as  theirs  can  be  who  arc  openly  pro- 
phane,  and  feem  to  negled  and  defpife  all  rehgion  : 
and  yet  becaufe  they  ferve  God  (as  they  call  it)  and 
make  an  external  appearance  of  piety  and  devotion, 
are  good  church-men,  and  attend  upon  the  ordinan- 
ces of  God,  they  think  they  have  difcharged  the 
whole  bufinefs  of  religion  admirably  well,  and  are 
very  good  children  of  God,  and  in  aftateofgreat 
grace  and  favour  with  him.  Whereas  the  perfor- 
mance of  all  thefe  duties,  and  the  ufe  of  all  thefe 
means  feparated  from  that  which  is  the  great  end  of  re- 
ligion, the  conformity  of  our  felves  to  God, in  thofe  qua- 
lities and  difpofitions  which  I  have  mentioned,  is  fo  tar 
from  finding  acceptance  with  God,  that  it  is  an  abomi- 
nation to  him.  So  God  every  where  declares  in 
fcripture,  telling  us,  that  "  the  prayer  of  the  wick- 
''  ed  is  an  abomination  to  the  Lord,"  and  that  he 
difdains  to  be  praifed  by  men  of  unhallowed  lips  and 
lives  \  and  that  unlefs  with  "  the  praifes  we  offer 
*'  to  him,  we  order  our  converfation  aright,  wc 
"  fhall  not  fee  the  falvation  of  God.**  With  what 
contempt  does  he  fpeak  of  this  formal  and  external 
religion,  without  the  power  of  it  upon  our  hearts 
and  lives !  **  To  what  purpofe  is  the  multitude  of 

^^  your 


of  the  divine  perfeBions.  33^9 

''  your  facrifices  to  me  ?  Will  the  Lord  be  pleafed  SER  M. 
**  with  thoiifands  of  rams,  and  ten  thoufands  of 
*'  rivers  of  oil  ?  He  hath  fhewed  thee,  O  man, 
*'  what  is  good  ;  and  what  doth  the  Lord  require 
"  of  thee,  but  to  do  juftly,  and  to  love  mercy,  and 
"  to  walk  humbly  with  thy  God  ?  Is  not  this  the 
''  fail  which  I  have  chofen,  to  break  the  bands  of 
"  wickednefs,  and  to  let  the  opprefled  go  free ;  to 
"  deal  thy  bread  to  the  hungry,  and  that  thou  bring 
"  the  poor,  that  are  caft  out,  to  thine  houfe  ^  when 
"  thou  feeft  the  naked,  that  thou  cover  him,  and 
"  that  thou  hide  not  thy  felf  from  thine  own.flefh.'* 
Nor  is  it  hearing  of  the  word  that  will  avail  us, 
unlefs  we  be  doets  of  it.  *'  BJefied  are  they  (fays 
"  our  Saviour)  that  hear  the  word  of  God,  and 
**  keep  it.  He  that  heareth  thefe  fayings  of  mine, 
*'  and  doth  them,  fhall  be  hkened  to  a  wife  man, 
"  who  hath  built  his  houfe  upon  a  rock."  Nor  will 
bare  receiving  the  facrament  recommend  us  to 
God  'y  but  performing  the  obligation,  which  there- 
by we  take  upon  our  felves,  to  abflain  from  all  fin 
and  wickednefs ;  otherwife  "  we  tread  under  foot 
"  thcfonofGoD,  and  prophane  the  blood  of  the 
*'  covenant,  whereby  we  fhould  be  fandified,  as  if 
''  it  were  an  unholy  thing.''  Can  any  man  think 
that  to  be  religion,  which  has  no  effed:  upon  the 
lives  of  men,  which  does  not  teach  them  to  govern 
their  words  and  adions,  who  reads  thofe  plain  words 
of  St.  James  ?  *'  If  any  man  among  you  feem  to  be 
*'  religious,  and  bridleth  not  his  tongue,  but  de- 
**  ceiveth  his  own  heart,  that  man's  religion  is  vain. 
"  Pure  religion  and  undefiled  before  Got)  and  the 
*'  Father  is  this,  to  vifit  the  fatherlefs  and  widows 
*'  in  their  afflidion,  and  to  keep  himfelf  unfpotted 
*'  from  the  world.'*  When  religion  produceth 
J  thef^ 


3  3 1  o  Concerning  cur  imitation 

S  E  R  M.  thcfe  real  effedls,  then  the  means  of  relio;ion  do  tru- 

CXXXI 

Jy  ferve  the  end  of  it,  and  we  are  not  only  "  hearers 
"  of  the  word,  but  doers  of  it,"  and  "  ihall  be 
"  blefled  in  our  deed." 

So  that  as  there  is  an  obligation  upon  us  to  ufe 
the  means  of  religion,  which  God  hath  inftituted, 
with  great  care  and  confciencc  -,  fo  we  fhould  chief- 
ly mind  that,  which  is  the  end  of  all  religion,  which 
is  to  make  us  partakers  of  a  divine  nature,  and 
make  us  like  to  God,  efpecially  in  thofe  amiable  and 
excellent  qualities,  which  are  the  glory  and  beauty 
of  the  divine  nature,  his  benignity  and  goodnefs,  his 
mercy  and  patience.  Thefe,  becaufe  they  are  the 
primary  perfe6lions  of  God,  are  the  principal  du- 
ties both  of  natural  and  revealed  religion,  and  of  an 
eternal  and  indifpenfable  obligation ;  becaufe  they 
have  their  foundation  in  the  nature  of  God,  which 
is  fixt  and  unalterable.  And  all  pofitive  inftitutions, 
when  they  come  in  competition  with  thefe,  are  to 
floop  and  vail  to  them.  Natural  and  moral  duties, 
clpecially  thofe  of  goodnefs,  and  mercy,  and  chari* 
ly-,  are  fo  flrongly  bound  upon  us,  that  nothing  in 
any  revealed  religion  can  cancel  the  obligation  of 
them,  or  juftify  the  violation  of  thefe  great  and  in- 
difpenfable laws.  Our  Saviour  in  his  reUgion  has 
declared  nothing  to  the  prejudice  of  them  :  but,  on 
the  contrary,  has  ilraitned  our  obligation  to  them, 
as  much  as  is  poffibie  :  "  The  fon  of  man  came  not 
*'  to  deftroy  men's  lives,  but  to  fave  them  i"  fo 
that  they  "  know  not  what  manner  of  fpirit  they  arc 
**  of,"  who  think  to  pleafe  God  by  hating  men, 
who  are  made  after  the  image  of  God,  and  "  by  kill- 
**  ing  one  another,  to  do  him  good  fervice  •,"  who,  to 
advance  his  caufc  and  religion  in  the  world,  will  break 
through  all  the  obligations  of  nature  and  civil  focie- 

ty. 


of  the  divine  perfeElionL  3  3 1  Jt 

tyt  undermine  government j  and  diflurb  the  peace  of  S  F,  R  Mh 
mankind.  \ 

Whereas  our  Saviour  did  not  by  any  thing  in^ 
his  religion  defign  to  alter  the  civil  govef-nment  of^ 
the  world,  or  to  leflen  and  diminifh  the  rights  of 
princes,  or  to  fet  men  loofe  from  allegiance  to  them, 
or  to  make  treafon  and  rebellion,  bloody  wars  and 
barbarous  maffacres  lawful,  for  the  propagating  of 
his  faith.  He  had  (as  one  would  imagine)  a$ 
much  power  as  the  pope  •,  but  yet  he  depofed  no 
princes,  nor  excommunicated  and  difcharged  their 
fubjeds  from  their  fidelity  and  obedience  to  them^ 
for  their  oppofition  to  his  religidn  \  he  hath  aflumed 
no  fuch  power  to  himfelf.  "  By  what  authority 
"  then  doth  his  vicar  do  thefe  things?  and  who 
*'^  gave  him  this  authority  ?"  Our  Lord  tells  ui 
plainly,  "  his  kingdom  was  not  of  this  World  ;'* 
and  that  without  any  diftindtion  o^in  or  dine  ad  fpi^ 
rituaiia^  and  therefore  he  wrefted  no  prince's  king- 
dom out  of  his  hands,  nor  feized  it  as  forfeited  to 
himfelf. 

But  this  power  the  pope  claims  to  himfelf,  and 
hath  exercifed  it  many  a  time,  diilurbing  the  peace 
of  nations,  and  exercifing  the  moil  barbarous  cruel- 
ties in  the  world,  under  a  pretence  of  zeal  for  God 
and  religion  :  as  if  becaufe  religion  is  fo  very  gooS 
a  thing  in  itfelf,  it  v/ould  warrant  men  to  do  the 
very  worft  things  for  it's  fake  •,  which  is  the  ready 
way  to  render  religion  contemptible  and  odious,  and 
to  make  two  of  the  beft  things  in  the  world.  Gob 
and  religion,    good  for  nothing. 

If  we  would  preferve  in  the  rninds  of  nrten  any 
reverence  and  efteem  for  religion,  we  muil  take  heed 
how  we  deflroy  the  principles  of  natural  religion^- 
and  undermine  the  peace  and  happinefs  Cf  humai^ 

Vol.  VIIL  i6B  focictjr 

I. 


X 


Concermng  our  imitation 

fociety,  for  the  glory  of  Go d^  and  under  pretence 
of  following  divine  revelation,  and  being  led  by  a 
church  that  cannot  err  :  for  every  church  doth  cer- 
tainly err,  that  teacheth  any  thing  plainly  contrary 
to  the  principles  and  didlates  of  natural  religion,  and 
utterly  inconfiftent  with  the  cffential  perfections  of 
God,  and  with  the  peace  and  order  of  the  world  : 
for  "  God  is  not  the  God  of  confufion,  but  of  or- 
•'  der  ;"  which  St.  Paul  appealeth  to,  as  a  principle 
of  eternal  truth,  and  naturally  kHOwn  :  but  they 
that  pretend  that  religion  prompts  men  to  fedition 
and  cruelty,  do  reprefent  God  as  the  God  of  con- 
fufion,  and  not  of  order. 

Therefore  whatever  men  may  through  an  igno- 
rant zeal,  or  for  ambitious  ends,  pretend  to  be  re- 
ligion ;  let  us  place  it  in  that  which  is  unqueftion- 
ablc,  the  imitation  of  the  divine  perfedlions,  and  let 
us  (as  the  apoftle  exhorts)  "  put  on,  as  the  ele6l  of 
•*  God,  bowels  of  mercy,  kindnefs,  meeknefs, 
*^  long-fufFering,  and  above  all,  let  us  put  on  cha- 
*'  rity,  which  is  the  very  bond  of  perfedlion."  The 
great  perfeftion  of  the  divine  nature,  or  rather  the 
very  elTence  of  God  is  love.  .  So  St.  John  fpeaks, 
*'  God  is  love,  and  he  that  dwelleth  in  love, 
**  dwelleth  in  God,  and  God  in  him."  And  it  is 
very  remarkable  that  in  thefe  very  qualities  of  chari- 
ty, and  kindnefs,  and  compafTion,  which  we  pecu- 
liarly call  humanity,  we  approach  neareft  to  the 
divinity  it  felf,  and  that  the  contrary  difpofitions  do 
transform  us  into  wild  beads  and  devils. 

And  yet  as  feverely  as  I  fpeak  againft  thefe  prin- 
ciples and  practices,  I  have  an  hearty  pity  and 
companion  for  thofe  who  are  under  the  power  of  fo 
great  a  delufion,  and  upon  a  pretence  of  being  made 
,rhe  only  true  Chriftians  in  the  world,  arc  feduced 

from 


of  the  divine  perfeStionu  331 3 

from  humanity  it  felf,  and  fo  Far  from  being  made  S  E  R  M. 
good  Chriflians  by  thefe  principles,  that  they  are 
hardly  left  to  be  men  ;  ''  being  blinded,  and  led  by 
"  the  blind,  they  fall  into  the  ditch"  of  the  grofTefl 
and  fouleft  immoralities  ;  fuch  as  are  plainly  enough 
condemned  by  the  light  of  nature,  if  there  were  no 
bible  in  the  world. 

Not  but  that  we  proteftants  have  our  faults  and 
our  follies  too,  and  thofe  (God  knows)  too  many  and 
too  vifible ;  we  poITefs  more  truth,  but  there  is  little 
peace  among  us  ;  and  yet  God  is  as  well  and  as  oF 
t^"^  in  fcripture  called"  the  God  of  peace,"  as  "  the 
"  God  of  truth."  In  this  great  light  and  hberty 
of  the  reformed  religion,  we  are  apt  to  be  wanton, 
and  to  quarrel  and  fall  out  -,  we  are  full  of  heats 
and  animofities,  of  fchifms  and  divifions,  "  and  the 
"  way  of  peace  we  have  not  known."  God  grant 
that  at  laft  "  in  this  our  day"  (when  it  concerns 
us  fo  much)  we  may  "  know  the  things  that  belong 
''  to  our  peace,  before  they  be  hid  from  our  eyes/* 

You  fee  in  what  things  the  praflice  of  religion 
mainly  confiils,  inourlikenefs  to  God,  and  refem- 
blance  of  him  in  holinefs  and  goodnefs ;  and  without 
this  we  are  utterly  incapable  of  happinefs  :  we  can- 
not fee  God,  unlefs  we  be  like  him.  The  prefence 
of  God  can  adminifterno  plcafure,  no  felicity  to  us, 
till  we  be  changed  into  his  image ;  till  we  come  to 
this  temper,  to  hate  fin,  and  delight  in  purity  and 
holinefs,  we  can  have  no  delightful  communion  with 
the  holy  God  ;  till  our  pafTions  be  fubdued,  and 
our  fouls  difpolTeil  of  thofe  devilifh  and  ungodlikc 
qualities  of  hatred  and  malice,  of  revenge  and  im- 
patience, and  till  we  be  endued  with  the  fpirit  of 
univerfal  goodnefs  and  charity,  we  are  not  fit  com- 
pany for  our  heavenly  Father  \   we  are  not  qualified 

j6B3  to 


j^'--^- 


3314  ^^^  happinefs  of  G  o  d  . 

6  F.  R  M.  to  dwell  with  God,  who  is  love  and  dwells  in  love. 

CXXXI. 

So  far  as  we  are  dcfedive  in  thefe  divine  qualities 
and  perfections,  fo  far  we  fall  jfhort  of  the  temper  of 
happinefs. 

There  is  a  diredt  ^.nd  eternal  oppofition  between 
^he  holy  and  good  God,  and  the  evil  difpofitions  of 
wicked  rp^n,  and  till  this  oppofition  be  removed, 
it  is  impofTibk  we  fhould  find  any  felicity  in  the  en- 
joyment of  God.  Now  the  nature  of  God  is  fixt 
and  unchangeable,  God  cannot  recede  from  his  own 
perfedlion,  and  therefore  we  mull  quit  our  fins>: 
thou  canfl  not  change  God,  therefore  change  thy 
felf,  and  rather  think  of  putting  off  thy  corrupt  na- 
ture, which  may  be  changed,  than  of  altering  the 
divine  nature,  "  with  whom  is  no  variablenefs  nor 
**  jfhadow  of  turning."  God  condefcended  to  take 
our  nature  upon  him,  to  make  us  capable  of  happi- 
nefs ;  but  if  this  will  not  do,  he  will  not  put  off 
his  own  nature  to  rpake  us  happy. 


SERMON   CXXXII. 

The  happinefs  of  G  o  d. 

I[I.>IW  H     .  !■  "■!.■■. I.       ■■  I  I  II  ■  I.    I     ..  ■         I 

I   TIM.  i.   II.  The  hlejfed  GoT> — 
The  whole  verfe  runs  thus, 

Recording  to  the  glorious  gofpel  of  the  blejfed  God, 
which  was  committed  to  my  trujl, 

6E  R  M.  C*  INCE  all  men  naturally  defire  happinefs,  and 
CXXXII.^  |]^  thirft  after  it ;  methinks  we  fhould  all  defire  to 
know  what  it  is,  and  where  it  is  to  be  found,  ^nd 

how 


7^^  happtnefs  of  Go  jy'.  3 3 1 ^ 

how  it  is  to  be  attained  by  us,  in  that  degree  in  which  ^  F-  ^  M. 

creatures  are  capable  of  it.     What  Job  fays  of  wif- 

dom,  may  be  faid  alfo  of  happinefs,  "God  under- 

"  ftandeth  the  way  thereof,    and  he  knoweth  the 

*'  place  thereof."  He  only,  who  is  perfectly  pofTeft 

of  it  himfelf,  knows  wherein  it  confifts,  and  what  are 

the  t^ut  ingredients  of  it. 

So  that  to  diredb  us  in  our  fearch  after  happinefs, 
the  beft  way  will  be  to  contemplate  and  confider  the 
divine  nature,  which  is  the  perfed  pattern  and  idea 
of  happinefs,  the  original  fpring  and  fountain  of 
all  the  felicity  that  creatures  are  capable  of.  And  to 
that  end,  I  have  pitched  upon  thefe  words,  wherein 
the  apoftle  attributes  this  perfedion  of  bleflednefs  or 
happinefs  to  God,  "  The  bleffcd  God." 
■  •■  /  And  though  this  be  as  elTential  a  part  as  any  other 
*M  that  Notion  which  mankind  have  of  God  from 
•  the  light  of  nature,  yet  I  no  where  find  in  all  the  new 
teftament,  this  attribute  of  happinefs  given  to  God, 
but  only  twice  in  this  epiftle.  'Tis  true  indeed,  the 
title  of  bleflednefs  is  frequently  given  both  to  God 
and  Christ,  but  in  another  fenfe,  and  in  a  quite  dif- 
ferent notion :  as  Mark  xiv.  6i.  where  the  high^ 
prieft  alks  our  Saviour,  *'  Art  thou  the  Christ, 
"  the  Son  of  the  blefled,  rS  £uXoy^5,  of  him  that 
'*  is  celebrated  and  praifed  •,"  and  2  Cor.  xi. 
31.  "  The  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
*'  Christ,  who  is  blefled  for  evermore."  So  like- 
wife,  Rom.  i.  25.  "  The  Creator  blefled  for  ever- 
"  more:"  "Which  likewife  is  faid  of  Christ,  Rom. 
.  ix.  5.  *'  Of  whom  Christ  came,  who  is  over  all, 
*'  God  blefled  for  evermore;  that  is,  for  ever  to 
"  be  praifed  and  celebrated."  But  in  all  thefe  texts 
die  Greek  word  is  euXoyi^og^  which  though  we  tranf- 
latc  blefled,  yet  it  is  a  quite  different  notion  from 

the 


^2 1 6  7>^^ happinefs  of  Cod. 

-  ^  '-  the  title  of  blefTednefs  which  is  given  to  God  in  the 
text,  where  the  word  is  not  evXoy^og,  but  ^juocycdi" 
p(^,  "  the  blelTed,  or  happy  God  j"  and  this  ti- 
de is  not  any  where  in  all  the  new  teftament,  (that 
I  ki^ow  oO  given  to  God,  but  here  in  the  text,  and 
Chap.  vi.  V.  15.  where  our  Lord  Jlsus  Christ 
(who  alio  is  God)  is  called  "  the  blefled  and  the  on- 
*'  ly  potentate."  And  whether  this  title  of"  the 
"  blefled,  or  the  happy  God,"  be  herein  the  text 
given  to  God  the  Father,  or  to  his  eternal  Son,  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  ;  is  not  fo  much  material  to 
my  prefent  purpofe  to  enquire.  For,  fuppofe  it  be 
Christ  who  is  here  called  "  the  blelTed  God  ;" 
this  however  is  certain,  that  blefTednefs  or  happinefs 
is  a  title  belonging  to  God,  which  is  all  that  is  ne- 
ceiTary  for  a  foundation  of  my  prefent  difcourfe. 

In  fpeakingof  this  argument,  I  fhall  do  thefe  three 
things. 

L  Shew  what  we  are  to  underfland  by  the  happi- 
nefs of  God,  and  what  are  the  effential  ingredients 
of  it. 

II.  That  this  title  doth  belong  to  God,  and  that 
the  divine  nature  is  perfedbly  bleffed  and  happy. 

III.  How  far  creatures  are  capable  of  happinefs, 
and  by  what  ways  and  means  they  may  be  made  par- 
takers of  it :  and  Ihall  then  make  fome  inferences 
from  my  difcourfe  upon  this  argument. 

I.  I  will  confider  what  we  are  to  underfland  by  the 
blefTednefs  or  happinefs  of  God,  and  what  are  the 
effential  ingredients  of  it.  Now  the  notion  of  hap- 
pinefs taken  at  it's  highefl  pitch  (as  we  mufl  neccfTa- 
rily  do  when  we  apply  it  to  God)  is  no  other  than  a 
fixt  and  immoveable  flate  of  contentment  and  fatif- 
fadtion,  of  pleafure  and  delight,  refulting  from  the 
fccure  pofTeflion,  and  enjoyment  of  all  that  is  good 

and 


The  happinefs  of  God.  33^7 

and  defirable,  that  is,  of  all  excellency  and  perfedti-  S  E  R  M. 
on ;  fo  that  thefe  following  ingredients  muft  go  to 
make  up  a  perfedt  ilate  of  happinefs. 

1 .  Perfed:  knowledge,  to  underiland  what  it  is  that 
conftitutes  happinefs,  and  to  know  when  one  is  really 
polTefl  of  it.  For  as  he  is  not  happy,  who  is  fo  on- 
ly in  imagination  or  a  dream,  without  any  real  foun- 
dation in  the  thing  -,  for  he  may  be  pleafed  with  his 
condition,  and  yet  be  far  enough  from  being  truly 
happy :  So  on  the  other  hand,  he  that  has  all  other 
neceflary  ingredients  of  happinefs,  and  only  wants 
this,  that  he  doth  not  think  himfelf  fo,  cannot  be 
happy.  For  this  we  often  fee  in  the  imperfedl  felici- 
ty of  this  world,  ~  that  many  men  who  have  all  the 
materials  and  circumftances  of  a  worldly  happinefs  a- 
bout  them,  yet  by  the  unfkilful  m.anagement  of  the 
matter,  and  from  a  lightnefs  and  injudicioufnefs  of 
mind,  not  knowing  when  they  are  well,  they  make 
an  hard  fhift,  even  when  they  are  in  as  good  cir- 
cumftances as  it  is  almoft  pofiible  for  men  to  be  in 
this  world,  to  be  very  difcontented  and  miferable  in 
their  own  opinions.  But  God  perfedlly  knows  both 
what  makes  happinefs,  and  that  he  is  pofleft  of  it. 

2.  To  perfed:  happinefs  is  likewifc  required  a  full 
power  to  do  whatever  conduceth  to  happinefs,  and 
likewifc  to  check  and  controul  whatever  would  be  an 
hindrance  and  difturbance  to  it ;  and  therefore  no 
being  is  as  happy  as  it  can  be,  that  is  not  all-fuffici- 
ent,  and  hath  not  within  it's  power  and  reach  what- 
ever is  neceffary  to  an  happy  condition,  and  neceffa- 
ry  to  fecure  and  continue  that  happinefs  againft  all 
attempts  and  accidents  whatfoever. 

3.  There  is  wifdom  alfo  required  to  dire<5b  this 
power,  and  manage  it  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  it  may 
'effectually  conducrto  this  end  5  and  this  is  very  dif- 

3  jferent 


2 3  1 8  'The  happi?iefs  of  GoD. 

8  E  R  M.  ferent  from  mere  power,  ab(lra6ledly  confidered  i 
for  one  may  have  all  the  materials  of  happinefs,  and 
yet  want  the  wifdom  and  fkill  to  put  them  fo  toge- 
ther, as  to  frame  an  happy  condition  out  of  them  •, 
and  he  is  not  happy,  who  doth  not  thoroughly  un- 
derftand  the  proper  method  and  means  of  GompalTing 
and  fecuring  his  own  happinefs. 

4.  Another  moft  confiderable  and  efTential  ingre- 
dient of  happinefs  is  goodnefs  j  without  which,  as 
there  can  be  no  true  majefly  and  greatnefs,  fo  neither 
can  there  be  any  felicity  or  happinefs.  Now  goodnefs 
is  a  generous  difpofition  of  mind  to  communicate  and 
difFufe  itfelf,  by  making  others  partakers  of  it's  hap- 
pinefs in  fuch  degrees  as  they  are  capable  of  it,  and 
as  wifdom  fhall  dired  :  For  he  is  not  fo  happy  as  he 
may  be,  who  hath  not  the  pleafure  of  making  others 
fo,  and  of  feeing  them  put  into  an  happy  condition 
by  his  means,  which  is  the  higheft  pleafure  (I  had 
almofl  faid  pride,  but  I  may  truly  fay  glory)  of  a 
good  and  great  mind  :  For  by  fuch  communications 
of  himfelf,  an  immenfe  and  all-fufficient  being  doth 
not  lefTen  himfelf,  or  put  any  thing  out  of  his  pow- 
er, but  doth  rather  enlarge  and  magnify  himfelf; 
and  docs,  as  I  may  fay,  give  great  eafe  and  delight 
to  a  full  and  fruitful  being,  without  the  leaft  diminu;- 
tion  of  his  power  and  happinefs.  For  the  caufe  and 
original  of  all  other  beings  can  make  nothing  fo  inj- 
dependent  upon  itfelf,  as  not  flill  to  maintain  his  in^ 
tereft  in  it,  to  have  it  always  under  his  power  and 
government  •,  and  no  being  can  rebel  againft  his  ma- 
ker, without  extreme  hazard  to  himfelf. 

5.  Perfedl  happinefs  doth  imply  the  exercife  of  all 
other  virtues ,  which  are  fuitable  to  fo  perfe(5l  a 
being,  upon  all  proper  and  fitting  occafions  •,  that 
is,  thatfo  perfeft  a  being  do  nothing  that   iscoi-f 

trary 


^he  happinefs  of  Go Bs  33^9 

trary  to,  or  unbecoming  his  holinefs  and  righteouf-  S  E  R  M. 
nefs,  his  truth  and  faithfulnefs,  which  are  elTential  to 
a  perfedl  being ;  and  for  fuch  a  being  to  adl  contra- 
ry to  them  in  any  cafe,  would  be  to  create  difquiet 
and  diflurbance  to  itfelf :  For  this  is  a  certain  rule, 
aild  never  fails,  that  nothing  can  ad  contrary  to  it's 
own  nature  without  relu(^ancy  and  difpleafure,  which 
in  moral  agents  is  that  which  we  call  guilt :  for  guilt  is 
nothing  elfe  but  the  trouble  and  difquiet  which  arifeth 
in  one's  mind,  from  the  confcioufnefs  of  having  done 
Ibmething  which  is  contrary  to  the  perfedive  princi- 
ples of  his  being,  that  is,  fomething  that  doth  not 
become  him,  and  which,  being  what  he  is,  he  ought 
not  to  have  done ;  which  we  cannot  imagine  ever  to 
befal  fo  perfedl  and  immutable  a  being  as  God  is. 

6.  Perfed  happinefs  implies  in  it  the  fettled  and  fc- 
cure  poflefTion  of  all  thofe  excellencies  and  perfedti- 
ons ;  for  if  any  of  thefe  were  liable  to  fail,  or  be  di- 
rrunilhed,  fo  much  would  be  taken  off  from  perfed 
and  complete  happinefs.  If  the  Deity  were  fubjed  to 
any  change  or  impairment  of  his  condition,  fo  that 
either  his  knowledge,  or  power,  or  wifdom,  or  good- 
nefs,  or  any  other  perfedion,  could  any  ways  decline 
or  fall  off,  there  would  be  a  proponionable  abate- 
ment of  happinefs.  And  from  all  thefe  does  refult 
in  the 

7th  andlaft  place,  Infinite  contentment  and  fatis- 
fadion,  pleafure  and  delight,  which  is  the  very  ef- 
fence  of  happinefs. 

I.  Infinite  contentment  and  fatisfadion  in  this 
condition.  And  well  may  happinefs  be  contented 
with  itfelf;  that  is,  with  fuch  a  condition,  that  he 
that  is  poffeft  of  it,  can  neither  defire  it  ihould  be  bet' 
ter,  nor  have  any  caufc  to  fcar  it  Ihould  be  wprfe. 

Vol.  Vm.  26  C  2,  Plea^ 


3320  "^he  happlnefs  of  God. 

S  E  R  M.  2.  Pleafure  and  delight,  which  is  fomcthins  more 
^_^^1.^.  than  contentment :  for  one  may  be  contented  with 
an  afflicflion,  and  painful  condition,  in  which  he  is 
far  from  taking  any  pleafure  and  delight.  "  No 
''  afflidtion  is  joyous  for  the  prefent,  but  grievous," 
as  the  apoftle  fpeaks  Heb.  xii.  But  there  cannot  be 
perfect  happinefs  without  pleafure  in  our  condition. 
Full  pleafure  is  a  certain  mixture  of  love  and  joy, 
hard  to  be  exprefl  in  words,  but  certainly  known  by 
inward  fenfe  and  experience. 

And  thus  I  have  endeavoured  to  defcribe  to  you, 
as  well  as  I  could,  according  to  our  imperfed:  con- 
ceptions and  expreflions  of  God,  the  happinefs  of  the 
divine  nature,  and  wherein  it  confifls.  I  proceed 
to  the 

II.  Thing  I  propofed,  which  was  to  Ihew,  that' 
this  attribute  of  pcrfedlion  doth  belong  to  God  ;  and 
that  the  divine  nature  is  perfedly  bleffed  and  happy ; 
and  this  is  fo  univerfal  an  acknowledgment  of  natu- 
ral light,  that  it  would  be  a  very  fuperfluous  and  im- 
pertinent work,  to  trouble  you  with  particular  cita-» 
tions  of  heathen  authors  to  this  purpofe  •,  nothing  be- 
i-ng  more  frequent  in  them  than  to  call  the  Deity, 
beatijjimam  ^  perfe^ijffimam  naturam,  "  the  moft 
*'  happy  and  moft  perfect  being,"  and  therefore 
happy,  becaufe  felicity  doth  naturally  refu It  from  per- 
fedion.  It  fhall  fuffice  to  take  notice  of  thefe  two 
things  out  of  heathen  writers,  to  my  prefent  purpofe. 
I .  That  they  accounted  happinefs  fo  clTential  to 
the  notion  of  a  God,  that  this  was  one  of  the  ways 
which  they  took  to  find  out  what  properties  were  fit 
to  attribute  to  God,  and  whatnot  -,  to  confider,  what 
things  are  confiftent  with  happinefs,  or  inconfiftent 
with  it  j  and  whatever  did  fignify  happinefs,  and 
was  a  perfeftion  confiftent  with  it,  they  afcribed  to 

Gqd, 


^be  happinefs  of  Go T>1  33 2 1 

GoS,  as  a  fuitable  property  of  the  divine  nature  •,  ^^^^^' 
and  whatever  was  otherwife,  they  removed  it  from 
God,  as  unfit  to  be  faid  of  him. 

2 .  Whatever  differences  there  were  among  the 
philofophers  concerning  the  perfections  of  the  divine 
nature,  they  all  agreed  in  the  perfedb  feHcity  of  it  5 
even  Epicurus  himfelf,who  fo  boldly  attempted  to  flrip 
the  divine  nature  of  moft  of  it's  pcrfedlions,  by  de- 
nying that  God  either  made  or  governed  the  world  j 
whereby  he  took  away  at  once  his  being  the  firfl  caufe 
and  original  of  all  things,  and  his  goodnefs  likewife, 
and  wifdom,  and  power,  and  juftice ;  or  at  lead 
made  all  thefe  ufelefs,  by  taking  away  all  occafion 
and  opportunity  for  the  exercife  of  them ;  yet  this 
man  does  frequently  own,  and  profefs  to  believe  the 
happinefs  of  the  divine  nature-,  and  then  out  of  an 
ignorant  and  officious  kindnefs  to  the  Deity,  and  (as 
he  pretended)  for  the  fecurity  of  his  felicity,  did,  in 
effedl,  take  away  his  other  perfedions  j  he  would  by 
no  means  put  God  to  the  trouble  and  burden  of  mak- 
ing  the  world,  or  taking  care  of  the  affairs  of  it,  left 
this  fhould  difccmpofe  the  Deity,  or  be  an  interrup- 
tion or  difcurbance  of  his  eafe  and  felicity.  For  thus 
Lucretius,  the  great  difciple  of  Epicurus,  defcribes 
his  opinion  of  the  divine  nature : 

Omnis  eyiim  divum^  p^i^fi'>  natura  necejfe  eft^ 
Immortali  avo  fummd  cum  pace  fruatur^ 
Semota  a  nojiris  7'ebus^  fejun5laque  longh 
Nam  privata  dolore  omni^  privatapericlis^ 
Ipfa  fuis  pollens  opihiis^  nihil  indiga  nojiriy 
Nee  bene  promeritis  capitur^  nee  tangitur  ird. 

That  is,  "  It  is  necefTary  that  the  divine  nature 

*'  fhould  be  happy,    and  therefore  altogether  un* 

*'  concerned  in  our  affairs  •,  free  from  all  grief  and 

16  C  2  ^  danger. 


CXXXII. 


^h€  happinefs  of  God. 

"  danger,  fufficient  for  itfelf,  and  (landing  in  need 
"  of  no  body,  neither  pleafed  with  our  good  adlions, 
"  nor  provoked  by  our  faults."  This  was  a  very 
falfe  notion  both  of  God  and  happinefs,  to  imagine 
that  the  care  of  the  world  fhould  be  a  pain  and  dif- 
turbancc  to  infinite  knowledge,  and  power,  and 
goodnefs.  But  this  is  not  now  my  bufinefs  to  con- 
fider  y  that  which  is  to  my  prefent  purpofe,  is,  that 
the  happinefs  of  the  divine  nature  was  univerfally 
owned  ^  and  that  bleffednefs  is  fo  infeparable  from 
the  notion  of  a  Deity,  that  whoever  profefTes  to  be- 
lieve a  God,  muft  acknowledge  him  to  be  perfedly 
happy. 

As  for  the  teftimony  of  fcripturc,  I  have  already 
told  you,  that  there  are  but  two  texts  wherein 
this  title  of  f^ctKupyL(^^  the  happy  or  blefled,  is 
given  to  God  *,  but  by  confequence  the  fcripturc 
every  where  declares  the  happinefs  of  the  divine  na- 
ture, viz.  wherever  it  fpeaksofthe  excellency  and  per- 
fedlion  of  his  being,  of  his  knowledge,  and  power, 
and  wifdom,  and  goodnefs,  and  righteoufnefs,  and 
of  the  eternity  and  unchangeablenefs  of  thefe,  and  of 
the  infinite  delight  and  complacency  which  he  takes 
in  the  enjoyment  of  thefe  perfedions.  I  Ihall  now 
proceed  to  the 

III.  And  lafl  thing  which  I  propofed  to  confider, 
viz.  How  far  creatures  are  capable  of  happinefs, 
and  by  what  ways  and  means  they  may  be  made 
partakers  of  it.  They  are  not  capable  of  abfolutc 
and  perfedt  happinefs,  becaufe  that  refults  from  infi- 
nite perfedion,  which  is  no  where  to  be  found  but 
in  God  :  it  remains  then,  that  creatures  are  only  ca^ 
pable  of  being  happy  in  a  finite  and  limited  degree, 
by  the  refemblance  of  God,  and  by  the  enjoyment 
.of  him  i  by  being  like  to  him,  and  by  our  likenefs 

to 


^he  happinefs  of  Gov.  3323 

to  him,  being  qualified  for  his  favour,  and  for  the  S  E  R  M, 

r  1  •  CXXXII. 

enjoyment  of  him. 

As  we  are  creatures  of  a  finite  power,  and  limit- 
ed underftandings,  and  a  mutable  nature,  we  do  ne- 
ceflarily  want  many  of  thofe  perfedions,  which  are 
the  caufe  and  ingredients  of  a  perfedt  happinefs. 
We  are  far  from  being  fufficient  for  our  own  happi- 
nefs ;  we  are  neither  fo  of  our  fels^es,  nor  can  we 
make  our  felves  fo  by  our  own  power  j  for  neither 
are  we  wife  enough  for  our  own  direction,  nor  good 
enough  for  our  own  fatisfadlion.  All  the  happifnefs 
that  we  are  capable  of  is,  by  communication  from 
h>m,  who  is  the  original  and  fountain  of  it  •,  by  our 
being  made  "  partakers  of  the  divine  nature,"  (as  St. 
Peter  fpeaks)  by  our  refemblance  of  God  in  thofe 
perfediions  which  are  the  mofl  eiTential  ingredients 
of  happinefs,  his  goodnefs^  and  righteoufnefs,  and 
truth,  and  holinefs  ;  thefe  do  immediately  qualify 
us  for  the  favour  and  friendfhip  of  Almighty  God, 
and  for  the  blefTed  fight  and  enjoyment  of  him; 
and  the  favour  of  God,  and  the  light  of  his  coun- 
tenance lifted  up  upon  us,  and  his  friendfhip  and 
good-will  to  us,  fupplies  all  the  defedls  of  power 
and  wifdom  in  us  :  for  God  being  our  friend,  we 
have  an  intereft  in  all  his  perfeftions,  and  a  fecurity,^ 
that,  as  occafion  requires,  they  will  all  be  employed 
for  our  benefit  and  advantage  •,  fo  that  though  we 
are  "  weak  in  our  felves,"  we  are  "  flrong  in  the 
"  Lord,  and  in  the  power  of  his  might,"  and  are 
*'  able  to  do  all  things  through  him  ilrengthning 
"  us  •,"  and  though  "  we  want  wifdom,"  we  may 
Jiave  free  recourle  to  the  fountain  of  it,  and  "  afk 
**  of  God,  who  gives  to  all  liberally,  and  upbraid- 
"  eth  not."  And  it  is  next  to  having  thefe  perfec- 
tions in  our  felves,  to  know  where  to  have  them  for 
I  afking, 


3324  ^f^^  happinefs  of  GoD.' 

S  E  R  M.  afking,  whenever  we  fliand  in  need  of  them,  fo  faf 
as  is  neceflary  to  our  happinefs. 

So  that  though  our  happinefs  depend  upon  ano- 
ther, yet  if  we  be  careful  to  quahfy  our  felves  for  it, 
(and  God  is  always  ready  to  afTifl  us  by  his  grace 
to  this  purpofc)  it  is  really  and  in  effedl  in  our  own 
power  j  and  we  are  every  whit  as  fafe  and  happy  in 
God's  care  and  protection  of  us,  as  if  we  were  fuf- 
ficient  for  our  felves.  However,  this  is  the  higheft 
happinefs  that  the  condition  of  a  creature  is  capable 
of,  to  have  all  our  defedls  fupplied  in  fo  liberal  a 
manner  by  the  bounty  of  another,  and  to  have  a  free 
recourfe  to  the  fountain  of  happinefs,  and  at  lafl  to 
be  admitted  to  the  blefTed  fight  and  enjoyment  of 
him,  *'  in  whofe  prefence  is  fulnefs  of  joy,  and  at 
**  whofe  right  hand  are  pleafures  for  evermore.'* 
I  have  done  with  the  three  things  I  propofed  to 
(peak  to. 

But  to  what  purpofe,  may  fome  fay,  is  this  long 
defcription  and  difcourfe  of  happinefs  t  How  are  we 
the  wifer  and  the  better  for  it  ?  I  anfwer  \  very 
much,   in  feveral  refpedls. 

I.  This  plainly  fhews  us,  that  atheifm  is  a  very 
melancholy  and  mifchievous  thing  \  it  would  take 
away  the  fountain  of  happinefs,  and  the  only  per- 
fect pattern  of  it  •,  it  endeavours  at  once  to  extinguifh 
the  being  of  God,  and  all  the  life  and  comfort  of 
mankind,  fo  that  we  could  neither  form  any  idea 
of  happinefs,  or  be  in  any  poflibility  of  attaining  it. 
For  it  is  plain,  we  are  not  fufficient  for  it  of  our 
felves  •,  and  if  there  be  not  a  God,  there  is  nothing 
that  can  make  us  fo.  God  is  "  the  true  light  of  the 
**  world,"  and  a  thoufand  times  more  neceifary  to  the 
comfort  and  happinefs  of  mankind,  than  the  fun  it- 
fclf,  which  is  but  a  dark  fhadow  of  that  infinitely 

more 


I'hehappinefs  of  God,  33^5 

more  bright  and  glorious  being  •,  * '  the  happy  and  S  E  R  M. 
*'  only  potentate"  (as  the  apoflle  defcribes  him  in 
the  latter  end  of  this  epiftle)  ''  v/ho  only  hath  immor- 
^'  tality,  dwelling  in  that  light  which  no  man  can 
*'  approach  unto,  whom  no  man  hath  feen,  nor  can 
"  fee,"  meaning  in  this  mortal  ftate. 

So  that  the  greateil  enemies,  and  mofl  injurious 
of  all  others  to  mankind,  are  thofe  who  would 
banifh  the  belief  of  a  God  out  of  the  world;  be- 
caufe  this  is"  to  lay  the  ax  to  the  root  of  the  tree, "and 
at  one  blow  to  cut  off  ail  hopes  of  happinefs  from 
mankind.  So  that  he  is  a  fool  indeed,  that  "fays  in 
*'  his  heart,  there  is  no  God  ;"  that  is,  that  wiiheth 
there  were  none  -,  becaufe  it  is  not  poffible  for  a  man 
to  wifh  worfc  to  himfelf,  and  more  effedlually  to 
deftroy  his  own  happinefs. 

2.  If  the  divine  nature  be  fo  infinitely  and  com- 
pleatly  happy,  this  is  a  very  great  confirmation  of 
our  faith  and  hope  concerning  the  happinefs  of 
another  life,  which  the  fcripture  defcribes  to  us,  by 
the  fight  and  enjoyment  of  God.  As  we  are  crea- 
tures, we  are  not  capable  of  the  happinefs  that  is 
abfolutely  and  infinitely  perfedl,  becaufe  our  nature 
is  but  finite,  and  Hmited  •,  but  the  blefied  God,  who 
is  infinitely  happy  himfelf,  can  alfo  make  us  happy 
according  to  our  finite  meafure  and  capacity.  For, 
as  he  that  is  the  firfl  and  original  being,  can  com- 
municate being  to  other  things  •,  fo  he  that  is  the 
fountain  of  happinefs,  can  derive  and  convey  hap- 
pinefs to  his  creatures. 

And  we  Ihall  the  more  eafily  believe  this,  when 
we  confider  that  goodnefs,  as  it  is  the  prime  perfec- 
tion, fo  it  is  likewife  the  chief  felicity  of  the  divine 
nature.  It  is  his  glory  and  delight  to  communicate 
•himfelf,  and  ihed  abroad  his  goodnefs  \  and  the  high- 
eft 


3326  The  happinefs  of  Gory. 

SERM.  eft  exprefiion  of  the  divine  goodnefs,  is  to  commu- 
i^y^.^^  nicate  happinefs  to  his  creatures,  and  to  be  willing 
that  they  ihould  fhare  and  partake  with  him  in  it. 
Bafe  and  envious  natures  are  narrow  and  contra6ted, 
and  love  to  confine  their  enjoyments  and  good  things 
to  themfelves,  and  are  loth  that  others  fhould  take 
part  with  them  •,  but  the  moft  noble  and  moil  gene- 
rous minds  are  moft  free  and  enlarged,  and  cannot  be 
happy  themfelves,  unlefs  they  find  or  make  others  fo. 
This  is  the  higheft  pitch  of  goodnefs,  and  confc- 
qucntly  the  higheft  contentment,  and  the  fupreme 
delight  of  the  divine  nature.  Now  it  is  natural  to 
every  being,  to  be  moft  frequent  and  abundant  in 
thofe  ads  in  which  it  finds  the  greaceft  pleafures  ;  to 
be  good,  and  to  do  good,  is  the  fupreme  felicity  of 
God  himfelf  j  therefore  we  may  eafily  believe,  that 
he  is  very  ready  and  forward  to  make  us  happy,  by 
all  the  ways  that  are  agreeable  to  his  wifdom  and 
righteoufnefs  •,  and  that  he  is  alfo  willing  to  make  us 
abundantly  fo,  and  to  advance  us  to  the  higheft  de- 
gree of  felicity,  of  which  our  nature  is  capable,  if 
we  do  not  render  our  felves  incapable  of  fuch  a  blef- 
fing,  by  an  obftinate  refufal  of  it,  and  utter  indifpo- 
fition  for  it. 

This,  I  fay,  is  very  credible,  becaufe  the  happi- 
nefs of  God  himfelf  confifts  in  that  propenfion  and 
difpoHtion  of  nature,  which  tends  to  make  others 
happy.  And  if  there  can  be  any  accefTion  to  that 
which  is  infinite,  God  himfelf  finds  a  new  pleafure 
and  felicity  in  the  communication  of  his  goodnefs 
to  his  creatures ;  and  therefore  is  reprefentcd  in  fcrip- 
"turc,  as  glad  of  "  the  converfion  of  a  fmner,"  be- 
caufe the  finner  hereby  becomes  capable  of  the  hap- 
pinefs which  God  defigned  for  his  creatures,  and 
is  always  ready  to  cgnfer  upon  them,  whenever 

they 


T'he happinefs  of  GodI  33^7 

they  are  qualified  for  it,  and  he  can,   witli  the  ho-  S  E  R  M. 

CXXXII 

nourofhis  own  perfedlions,  beftow  it  upon  them. 

There  are  two  things  which  raife  our  hopes  and 
cxpedation  of  good  from  any  perfon  •,  if  he  be  able 
and  willing  to  beftow  upon  us  what  we  hope  for 
from  him.  Now  if  any  one  can  confer  happinefs 
upon  us,  it  is  he  who  is  infinitely  pofiTeft  of  it,  and 
hath  all  the  treafures  of  it  in  himfelf,  and  that  God 
only  is,  who,  as  he  is  able  fo  is  willing  to  make  lis 
happy,  if  we  be  quahfied  for  it ;  and  it  is  no  im- 
pairing of  his  happinefs  to  make  others  happy  ;  for 
even  that  goodnefs,which  inclines  him  to  communicate 
happinefs  to  others,  is  a  great  part  of  his  own  felicity ; 
fo  that,  as  our  Saviour  argues,  "  becaufe  Ihve,  you 
*'  fhall  live  alfo,"  we  may  reafon  in  like  manner,  that 
*'  becavife  God  is  happy,  we  fhall  be  happy  alfo," 
.  if  we  do  but  fincerely  defire  and  endeavour  to  qua- 
lify our  felves  for  it.  The  goodnefs  of  God  does 
ilrongly  incline  him  to  defire  our  happinefs,  and 
makes  him  willing  and  ready  to  beftow  it  upon  us, 
whenever  we  are  capable  to  receive  it. 

So  that  the  goodnefs  of  God  is  the  great  founda- 
tion of  all  our  hopes,  and  the  firmeft  ground  of  our 
afllirance  of  a  blefiied  immortality.  It  is  the  happi- 
nefs'  of  the  divine  nature  to  communicate  himfelf; 
and  the  communications  of  God's  goodnefs  to  us 
are  the  caufe  of  our  happinefs  ;  and  therefore,  both 
for  our  example  and  encouragement,  the  goodnefs. 
of  God  ought  always  to  be  rcprefcnted  to  the  great- 
eft  advantage,  and  we  fhould  endeavour  to  poflefs 
our  minds  with  a  firm  belief  and  perfuafion  of  it, 
and  to  remove  from  the  divine  nature  (which  we  all 
acknowledge  to  have  infinitely  more  goodnefe  than 
is  to  be  found  in  any  of  the  fons  of  men)  whatever 
we  would  not  attribute  to  a  good  man,  and  to  vin- 

VoL.VIII.  i6D  dicatc 

I. 


cxxxii 


3328  7be  happinefs  of  God. 

SERM.  dicate  God  from  all  fufpicion  of  envy  and  ill-will, 
of  cruelty  and  arbitrary  dealing  with  his  creatures. 
And  I  cannot  apprehend  why  men  fhould  be  avcrfe 
from  thefc  fo  agreeable  and  delightful  apprehenfions  of 
God  ;  or  how  it  fhould  be  any  man's  intereft  to  lef: 
fen  the  goodnefs  of  God  j  for  moil  certainly  the 
better  God  is  in  himfelf,  the  better  and  happier  it 
will  be  for  us  all,  if  it  be  not  our  own  fault. 

3.  From  what  hath  been  faid  concerning  the  hap' 
pinefs  of  the  divine  nature,  we  may  learn  wherein 
pur  happinefs  muft  confift,  namely,  in  the  image, 
and  in  the  favour  of  God  •,  in  the  favour  of  God  as 
(he  caufe  of  our  happinefs  ;  and  in  the  image  of 
God,  as  a  neceflary  inward  difpofition  and qualifica* 
tion  for  it.  Unlefs  God  love  us,  we  cannot  be  hap- 
py, for  mifcrable  are  they  whom  he  hates  ;  for  God 
to  fay  of  any  man,  that  "  his  foul  hath  no  pleafure 
♦'  in  him.,"  imports  as  great  mifery,  and  as  dread- 
ful a  curfe  as  can  be  imagined,  and  his  foul  can 
have  no  pleafure  in  a  bad  man ;  for  '*  he  Joveth 
*'  righteoufnefs  and  liateth  iniquity,  he  is  not  a  God 
*'  that  hath  pleafure  in  wickednefs,  neither  lliall 
*'  evil  dwell  with  him ;  the  wicked  fhall  not  ftand^ 
*'  in  his  fight;  he  hateth  all  the  workers  of  iniqui- 
♦'  ty."  Nay,  if  we  could  fuppofe  that  he  could 
love  and  take  pleafure  in  any  perfon  that  is  unlike 
to  him  (which  is  impoflible)  yet  that  perfon  cou|d 
not  be  happy,  becaufe  he  would  want  that  inward 
frame  and  difpofition  of  mind,  which  is  neceflary 
(o  happinefs.  For  the  very  fame  caufes  and  ingrer 
^ients  which  make  up  the  happinefs  of  God,  muft 
in  an  inferior  degree  be  found  in  us,  otherwife  we 
cannot  be  happy  •,  no,  though  a  man  were  in  heaven,, 
if  he  be  flill  a  bad  man,  ccelum  non  animum  mutavit^ 
}ie  hath  only  changed  the  climate,  and  is  gone  into 
]^  another 


^he  hdpplnefs  of  Gotl  23^9 

Another  cCuntiy,  but  he  bears  himfelf  ilill  about  him,  S  E  RM. 

CXXXII 

and  his  mind  is  not  changed  ^  which  would  fignify 
^  thoufand  times  more  to  his  happinefs,  than  any 
place  or  outward  circumilance  whatfoever.  A  bad 
man,  wherefoever  he  goes,  hath  a  root  of  gall  and 
bitternefs  within  him,  and  is  miferable  from  himfelf ; 
he  hath  a  fiend  in  his  own  breaft,  and  the  fuel  of 
bdl  in  a  guilty  confcience. 

For  there  is  a  certain  temper  and  difpofition  of 
mind,  that  is  necefiary  and  effential  to  happinefs, 
and  that  is  holinefs  and  goodnefs,  which  is  the  na- 
ture of  God  ;  and  fo  much  as  any  perfon  departs 
from  this  temper,  fo  far  he  removes  himfelf,  and 
runs  away  from  happinefs  :  and  as  fin  is  a  departure 
from  GoD^  fo  the  punifhment  of  it  is  likewife  expreft 
by  departing  from  him ;  "  depart  from  me  ye 
*'  curfed ;  depart  from  me  all  ye  that  work  iniqui- 
*'  ty,  I  know  you  not." 

And  this  is  one  great  part  of  the  mifery  of  thofe 
degenerate  and  accurfed  fpirits,  the  devils,  who  are 
for  ever  banillied  from  the  prefence  of  God,  that 
they  are  of  a  temper  quite  contrary  to  God,  wicked 
and  impure,  envious  and  malicious,  mifchievous  and 
cruel ;  and  fuch  a  temper  is  naturally  a  torment  and 
difquietto  itfelf.  And  here  the  foundation  of  hell 
is  laid  in  the  evil  difpofition  of  our  minds  •,  and  till 
this  be  cured,  and  kt  right,  it  is  as  impoflible  for 
any  of  us  to  be  happy,  as  it  is  for  a  limb  that  is  out 
of  joint  to  be  at  eafe.  And  the  external  prefence  of 
God,  and  a  local  heaven  (if  we  could  imagine  fuch 
a  perfon  to  be  admitted  into  it,  and  fee  all  the  glo- 
,  ries  of  that  place,  and  the  pleafures  and  delights  of 
that  ftate)  all  this,  I  fay,  would  fignify  no  more  to 
make  a  bad  man  happy,  than  heaps  of  gold  and 
diamonds,  and  conforts  of  the  moft  delicious  mu- 

16D2  ficky 


333^  7he  happinefs  of  Gov)] 

^  ^'  ^xn  ^^^^'  ^^^^  ^  well-fpread  table,  and  a  rich  and  coftly 
W\/— ^  bed  would  contribute  to  a  man's  eafe  in  the  paroxyfm 
of  a  fever,  or  in  a  violent  fit  of  the  ftone  •,  becaufe 
the  man  hath  that  within  which  torments  him,  and 
until  that  be  removed,  he  cannot  poflibly  be  at  eafe. 
I'he  man's  fpirits  are  out  of  order,  and  off  the  hinges, 
and  toft  from  it's  center,  and  till  they  be  fet  right, 
and  reftored  to  their  proper  place  and  ftate  by  good- 
nefs  and  holinefs,  the  man  will  be  perpetually  reft- 
lefs,  and  cannot  poflibly  have  any  eafe  or  peace  in 
his  mind  :  for  how  can  there  be  peace,  how  can  there 
be  happinefs  to  him,  who  is  of  a  temper  dire^ly 
oppofite  to  it  ?  "  The  wicked,"  faith  the  prophet, 
Ifa.  Ivii.  20,  21.  "  is  like  the  troubled  fea  when  it 
*'  cannot  reft,  whofe  waters  caft  up  mire  and  dirt.'* 
So  long  as  there  is  impurity  in  our  hearts,  and  guilt 
upon  our  confciences,  they  will  be  reftlcfly  work- 
ing-, "  there  is  no  peace,  faith  my  God,  to  the 
*'  wicked."  The  Hebrew  word  which  we  tranflatc 
peace,  fignifies  all  kind  of  happiaefs  ;  there  can  be 
no  felicity  to  a  bad  man.  The  confidcration  where- 
of fhould  put  us  upon  the  moft  ferious  and  earneft 
endeavours  to  be  like  God,  that  we  may  be  capable 
of  his  favour,  and  partakers  of  his  felicity.  The 
divine  nature  is  the  only  perfedt  idea  of  happinefs,  and 
nothing  but  our  conformity  to  it  can  make  us  happy. 
I  have  been  fo  long  upon  this  argument,  on  pur- 
pofe  to  convince  men  of  the  necefllty  of  holinefs  and 
goodnefs,  and  all  other  virtues,  to  our  prefent  and 
future  happinefs.  They  underftand  not  the  nature 
of  happinefs,  who  hope  for  it,  or  imagine  they  can 
attain  it  in  any  other  way.  The  author  and  the 
fountain  of  happinefs,  he  that  made  us,  and  alone 
can  Riake  us  happy,  cannot  make  us  fo  in  any  other 
way,  than  by  planting  in  us  fuch  a  dilpofition  of 

mind. 


T^he  happinefs  of  Go d1  333^ 

mind,  as  is  in  truth  a  participation  of  the  divine  na-  ^^  ^  ^• 
turcj  and  by  endowing  us  with  fuch  qualities  as  are 
the  neceflary  materials  and  ingredients  of  happinefs. 
There  is  no  way  to  partake  of  the  felicity  of  God 
blelTed  for  ever,  but  by  becoming  holy  and  righte- 
ous, good  and  merciful  as  he  is. 

All  men  naturally  defire  happinefs,  and  feek  after 
It,  and  are  as  they  think  travelling  towards  it,  but 
generally  they  miftake  their  way.  Many  are  eager 
in  the  purfuit  of  the  things  of  tliis  world,  and  greedi- 
ly catch  at  pleafures  and  riches  and  honour,  as  if  thefe 
could  rnake  them  happy  ;  but  when  they  come  to 
embrace  them,  they  find  that  they  are  but  clouds  and 
fhadows,  and  that  there  is  no  real  and  fubftantial  fe- 
licity in  them.  "  Many  fay,  who  will  fhew  us  any 
*'  good  ?'*  Meaning  the  good  things  of  this  world, 
corn,  and  wine,  and  oil :  but  wouldil  thou  be  happy 
indeed  ?  Endeavour  to  be  like  the  pattern  of  happi-^ 
ncfs,  and  the  fountain  of  it ;  addrefs  thy  felf  to  him 
in  the  prayer  of  the  pfalmift,  "  Lord,  lift  thou  up 
*'  upon  me  the  light  of  thy  countenance,  and  thou 
**  fhalt  put  more  joy  and  gladnefs  into  my  heart," 
than  the  men  of  the  world  can  Have,  when  their  corn 
and  their  wine  increafeth. 

Many  fay,  lo  here,  and  lo  there !  That  happinefs 
is  in  a  great  place,  or  in  a  plentiful  eflate,  or  in  the 
enjoyment  of  fenfual  pleafures  and  delights ;  but  be- 
lieve them  not :  happinefs  is  fomething  that  is  near- 
er and  more  intimate  to  us,  than  any  of  the  things 
of  this  world  •,  it  is  within  thee,  in  thine  heart,  and 
in  the  very  inward  frame  and  difpofition  of  thy  mind. 

In  a  word,  if  ever  we  would  be  happy,  we  muft. 
be  like  the  blefled  God,  we  muft  be  holy,  and  mer- 
ciful, and  good,  and  juft,  as  he  is,  and  then  we  are 
fecurc  of  his  favour  j  for  ''  the  righteous  Lord  lov- 

"  etK 


3332  ^he  happinejs  df  GodI 

SERM.  «  eth  rio-hteoufnefs.  and  his  countenance!  will  be^ 

CXXXIL  D  '  ^ 

"  hold  the  upright."  Then  wcfhall  be  qualified  foi* 
the  enjoyment  of  him,  and  take  pleafure  in  commu- 
nion with  him,  becaufe  wc  fhall  be  hke  him.  Fot 
the  fureft  foundation  of  love  and  friendfhip  is  a  fimi* 
litude  of  temper  and  difpofition  •,  every  thing  natu- 
rally aife6ls  it's  own  likenefs,  and  moves  towards  it^ 
and  greedily  catcheth  at  it  ♦,  and  gladly  runs  into  the 
embraces  of  it.  God  and  man  mull  be  like  one  ano- 
ther, before  they  can  take  pleafure  in  one  another : 
if  we  be  unlike  to  God,  it  is  in  the  nature  of  the  thing 
impofTible  that  wc  fhould  be  happy  in  one  another, 
and  therefore  there  muft  be  a  change  cither  in  God 
or  us,  to  bring  about  this  likenefs.  The  nature  of 
God  is  inflexible,  fixt,  and  unchangeable  ;  therefore 
change  thy  felf,  (inner,  and  endeavour  to  be  like 
God  ;  for  fince  he  cannot  depart  from  his  holinefs^ 
and  purity,  thou  muft  leave  thy  fins,  and  be  holy  ad 
he  is  holy,  if  ever  thou  hopeft  to  be  happy,  as  he 
IS :  "  every  man  that  hath  this  hope  in  him,"  muft 
*'  purify  himfelf,  even  as  he  is  pure." 

*'  Now  to  this  happy  and  only  Potentate,  King  of 
"  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords,  who  only  hath  im- 
mortality, and  dwelleth  in  that  light  which  no 
man  can  approach  unto,  whom  no  man  hath 
feen,  or  can  fee  ;  to  him  be  honour,  and  pow- 
er cverlafting.  Amen." 


<c 


ti 


SERMON 


3333 

S  E  R  M  O  N    CXXXIII. 

The  unchangeablenefs  of  G  o  d. 


JAMES  i.   1.7. 
TFith  whom  is  no  variableness^  nor  Jhadow  of  turning. 

The  whole  period  runs  thus. 
JDo  not  err,  my  beloved  brethren :  Every  good  gifty 
and  every  perfect  gift  is  from  above,  and  cometh 
down  from  the  Father  of  lights,  with  whom  is  no 
variablenefSy  nor  Jhadow  of  turning, 

TH  E  connexion  and  depcndancc  of  thefe  words  §  ^  R  M 
upon  the  former  is  briefly  this ;  the  apollle  cxxxiii 
had  afferted  before,  that  God  is  not  the  author  of 
fin  and  evil,  ver.  13,  14.  "  Let  no  man  fay  when 
*'  he  is  tempted,  I  am  tempted  of  God,  for  God 
**  cannot  be  tempted  with  evil,  neither  tempteth  he 
*'  any  man  :  but  every  man  is  tempted,  when  he  is 
*^*  drawn  afide  of  his  own  lull,  and  enticed  ;"  and 
here  in  the  text  he  afferts,  that  God  is  the  fountain 
and  author  of  all  good ;"  do  not  err,  my  beloved 
*'  brethren ;"  as  if  he  had  faid,  do  not  miftake  me, 
though  fm  and  evil  be  not  from  God,  but  from  our- 
felves,  and  our  own  corrupt  hearts  ;  yet  all  good  is 
from  God,  and  not  from  ourfelves:  though  we  be 
the  authors  of  the  fins  we  commit,  yet  we  are  not 
fo  of  the  good  that  we  do,  that  is  from  God  ^  "  e* 
very  good  gift,  and  every  perfe6t  gift  is  from  a* 
bove,  and  cometh  down  from  the  Father  of  lights.'* 
Sin,  which  is  nothing  but  evil  and  imperfection,  is 
not  from  God,  but  wholly  from  ourfelves ;  whate- 
ver is  good  and  perfeft,  is  ngt  from  ©urfclvcs,  but 

'from 


cc 


T'he  unchangeahlcnefi  of  God, 

from  God  ;  we  arc  neither  inclined  to  that  which  Is 
good,  nor  are  able  of  our  felves  to  perform  it  •,  both  the 
inclination  and  the  power  are  from  God,  who  is  the 
fountain  of  goodnefs  and  perfe6tion,  and  can  never 
be  other  wife,  and  can  never  change  nor  ceafe  to  be 
fo,  "  for  with  him  is  no  variablenefs,  nor  fhadow 
^  of  turning." 

.  *'  Every  good  gift,  and  every  perfect  gift  •,*'  all 
that  goodnefs,  and  all  thofe  degrees  of  perfedlion, 
which  are  in  the  creatures,  in  the  higheft  angels  or 
faints,  ill  the  beft  of  the  fons  of  men,  whatever  there  - 
is  of  excellency  and  perfection,  of  goodnefs  or  hap- 
pinefs  in  any  of  them,  ^'  is  from  above,"  that  is 
from  heaven,  it  is  "  the  gift  of  God,"  and  "  com- 
**  eth  down"  from  that  perfed,  good,  and  glorious 
being,  whom  the  apoflle  here  calls  "  the  Father  of 
*'  lights,"  in  allufion  to  the  fun,  which  is  a  kind  of 
univerfal  benefador  to  the  world,  and  liberally  dif- 
penfeth  his  light  and  heat  and  influence  upon  all  things 
here  below :  but  then  there  is  this  difference,  the  fun 
changeth  it's  habitudes  and  pofitions  in  reference  to 
us,  and  varies  it*s  fhadows  ;  it  rifeth  and  fets,  comes 
nearer  to  us,  and  goes  farther  from  us ;  but  it  is  o* 
therwife  with  this  intelledlual  and  immaterial  fun, 
**  the  Father  of  lights,  with  whom  there  is  no  varia- 
*'  b]enefs,nor  fhadow  of  turning,"  woc^ocXXocy^  tj  rpo- 
'^^g  ciTTO(TKtoc(rfJLoc^  which  are  ail  ailronomical  words  ; 
the  iirfl,  -arot^otXXocyr,^  fignifies  the  various  habitudes 
and  pofitions  wherein  the  fun  appears  to  us  every  day,, 
at  it's  rifing,  in  the  meridian,  and  when  it  fets  •,  t^o^ 
^1}  is  a  word  which  belongs  not  to  the  daily,  but  to 
the  yearly  courfe  of  the  fun,  wliich  is  nearer  to  us, 
or  farther  from  us,  as  he  approacheth  nearer  towards 
the  northern  or  fouthern  tropicks  •,  and  hence  it  is 
that  it  calls  feveral  fhadows  to  people  in  feveral  coun- 
tries i 


^he  unchangeablenefs  of  Qon.  3335 

tries  ;  and  agreeably  to  this,  the  word  Kiroa-ytioLcriici^  ^  ^vvtn' 
"  cafting  of  Ihadows,"  being  joined  with  r^oTT'^y  '^-^-^^-J 
fignilies  the  variation  of  the  fliadows  according  to 
the  courfe  and  motion  of  the  fun. 

But  God  is  an  eternal  fpring  of  light,  which  ne- 
ver rifes  or  fets,  which  hath  no  mixture  of  fhadow 
nor  darknefs,  hath  no  changes  nor  variations,  but  is 
always  the  fame  free  and  liberal  difpenfer  of  good 
things  to  his  creatures  ;  ''  the  Father  of  lights,  with 
*'  whom  there  is  no  variablenefs  nor  fhadow  of  turn- 
ing ;"  which  words  fignify  "  the  immutable  perfedion 
''  and  goodnefs  of  the  divine  nature,"which  fhall  (by 
God's  afllftance)  be  the  fubjedof  my  prefent  dif- 
courfe ;  in  which  I  fhall  proceed  in  this  i;iiethod  : 

Firft,  I  fhall  briefly  explain  what  is  meant  by  the 
immutability,  or  unchangeablenefs,  of  the  divine 
nature. 

Secondly,  I  fhall  fhew  that  this  is  a  perfedion  ef- 
fential  to  God,  to  be  immutably  what  he  is,  that  is 
good  and  perfed:. 

Thirdly,  I  fhall  anfwer  an  objection  which  lies  a- 
gainfl  it,  from  the  mention  fo  often  made  in  fcrip- 
ture  of  God's  repenting  himfelf.     And 

Fourthly,  apply  the  confideiation  of  it  to  our 
felves. 

I.  For  the  explication  of  it.  By  the  immutability 
of  God,  we  mean,  that  he  always  is,  and  was,  and 
to  all  eternity  will  be  the  fame  •,  that  he  undergoes 
no  changes  either  of  his  elfence  and  being,  or  of  his 
properties  and  perfedlions.  In  reference  to  the  un- 
changeablenefs of  his  being,  he  is  laid  to  be  "  eter-  ' 
"  nal,  incorruptible,  and  only  to  have  immortali- 
*'  ty.''  In  reference  to  his  perfe6i:ions,  he  is  always 
the  fame  infinitely  wife,  and  good,  and  powerful, 
and  holy,  and  jufl  being  ♦,  from  whence  it  follows. 

Vol.  VIIL  i6  E  thac 


2336  Ti'he  unchangeablenefs  of  God, 

E  R  M  that  he  is  conilant  and  immutable  in  all  his  decrees 

■W  V  T  T  T 

and  counfels,  his  purpofes  and  promifes.     We  are 
uncertain  and  mutable  in  our  very  nature  and  beings, 
and  in  all  thofe  qualij.es  and  pcrfe6lions  which  belong 
to  us,  in  all  our  purpofes,  relblutions,  and  adlions  •, 
we  are  continually  growing  or  decreafing  in  this  or 
that  quality,  and  do  frequently  change  from  one  ex- 
treme to  another,  from  that  which  is  more  perfe6i:, 
to  the  contrary  ;  now  knowing,  and  then  ignorant ; 
fometiraes  wife,  and  oftner  foolifli,  ftronger  and  wea- 
ker, better  or  worfe,  as  it  happens,  and  as  we  order 
our  felvcs,    continually  waxing  or  waining  in   our 
knowledge,  and  wifdom,    and  goodnefs,  and  pow- 
er ;  we  frequently  change  our  minds,  and  alter  our 
purpofes,  and  break  our  promifes,  and   contradi6l 
our  firmefl  and  moft  ferious  refolutions,  and  fpeak 
a  thing  and  do  it  not,  fay  it  and  do  not  bring  it  to 
pafs  ;  but  God  is  everlaftingly  the  fame  in  all  hisper- 
fedlions,  conilant  to  his  intentions,  ftcady  to  his  pur- 
pofes, immutably  fixed  and  perfevering  in  all  his  de- 
crees and  refolutions.     I  proceed  to  the 

II.  Thing  I  propofed,  namely,  to  fhew  that  this 
perfe<5lion  is  effential  to  God,  to  be  unchangeably 
what  he  is.  And  this  I  fliall  endeavour  to  make  ma- 
nifeft  both  from  natural  reafon,  and  from  the  divine 
revelation  of  the  holy  fcriptures. 

I.  From  the  dictates  of  natural  reafon,  which  tells 
us,  that  nothing  argues  greater  weaknefs  and  imper- 
fedlion  than  inconftancy  and  change.  This  is  the 
great  vanity  of  all  creatures,  that  they  are  uncertain, 
and  do  not  long  continue  in  one  ilate :  this  is  the  va- 
nity of  the  world  in  general,  that  "  the  faflnon  of 
*'  it  palTeth  away  ;"  and  of  man  in  particular,  that 
he  is  liable  to  fo  many  natural  changes,  by  age,  and 
difeafes,  and  death  j  for  which  reafon,  he  is  faid  by 
2  the 


7heunchangeablenefsofGoT>,  3337 

the  Pfalmifl,  to  be,  "  in  his  beileilate,  altogether  H' ^  |^- 
"  vanity  :"  and  that  he  is  liable  to  fo  many  moral 
changes,  to  be  deluded  and  deceived  in  his  under- 
Handing,  and  to  alter  his  opinion  fo  often,  to  be 
fo  fickle  in  his  will,  and  to  change  fo  often  his  pur- 
pofes  and  refolutions,  according  to  the  alteration  or 
appearance  of  things.  We  attribute  change  and  in- 
conftancy  to  perfons  of  the  weakefl  age  and  under- 
Handing  ;  as  children,  who  are  liable  ".  to  be  toft  to 
"  and  fro,  and  carried  about  with  every  wind,"  as 
the  apoftle  fpeaks,  Eph.  iv.  14. 

Now  if  the  divine  nature  were  fubjedl  to  change, 
this  would  cafl:  an  univerfal  cloud  upon  all  the  divine 
perfedlions,  and  obfcure  all  other  excellencies,  and 
make  them  "  like  the  flower  of  the  field,"  which, 
how  gay  and  glorious  foever,  is  fading  and  perifh- 
ing ;  and  the  greater  the  divine  perfeftions  are,  the 
greater  imperfedion  would  mutability  be  ;  for  as 
''  the  corruption  of  the  beft  things  is  the  worft,"  fo 
the  better  any  thing  is,  fo  much  the  worfe  it  would 
be  to  have  it  liable  to  corruption  and  change. 

And  as  mutability  in  God  would  darken  all  his 
other  perfed:ions,  fo  would  it  take  away  the  founda- 
tion and  comfort  of  all  religion  \  the  ground  of  our 
faith,  and  hope,  and  fear,  of  our  love  and  efteem 
of  God,  would  be  quite  taken  away.  We  could 
have  no  great  honour  or  efteem  for  a  being  that  is 
fickle  and  inconftant ;  if  his  power  and  juftice  were 
uncertain,  his  threatnings  would  in  a  great  meafure 
lofe  their  awe  and  force  \  if  his  truth  and  faithfulnefs 
could  fail,  no  promifes  and  declarations,  how  graci- 
ous foever,  would  be  any  fecurity  or  firm  ground  of 
truft  and  confidence. 

And  this  reafoning  is  not  the  refult  of  divine  re- 
velation, but  clearly  founded  in  the  natural  notions 

i6E2  and 


333^  7loe  undoajtgeablenes  of  God. 

S  K  p  M.  and  fuggeflions  of  our  minds,  as  will  appear  by  cit- 
ing one  or  two  teftimonics  to  this  purpofe,  of  thofe 
who  had  no  other  guide  but  natural  light.  Plato, 
in  his  phaedo,  enquires,  "  whether  the  mofl  perfe6t 
"  (that  is  God)  be  always  the  fanie,  or  fometimes 
"  thus,  and  fometimes  otherwifc  ?  that  is,  (faith 
''  he)  whether  that  which  is  equality  and  goodnefs 
*'  and  bounty  itfelf,  receives  any  the  leaft  change 
"  at  any  time,  and  be  not  confliant  and  uniform, 
*'  and  of  itfelf  always  the  fame,  Ka)  iSocfjuHi  iSot^jLco^ 
"  aXXouCiV  ^Ssf^tuv  evSex^^h  ^nd  is  never  in  any 
*'  wife,  upon  any  account,  fubjecl  to  any  change 
"  or  alteration  whatfoever?  To  which  he  anfwers, 
*'  That  it  is  necelTary  that  he  fhould  be  the  fame 
*'  and  always  alike."  And  hb.  2.  de  Repub.  where 
he  lays  down  the  fundamental  laws  and  conilitutions 
of  religion,  he  mentions  thefe  two,  (which  one 
would  almoil  think,  he  borrowed  from  St.  James, 
but  that  he  lived  fo  long  before  him)  viz.  firft, 
*'  That  God  is  thecaufe  of  all  good,  and  in  no  wife 
*'  of  any  evil  :'*  anfwerably  to  what  our  apoille 
here  afierts,  that  "God  cannot  be  tempted  with 
"  evil,  neither  tcmptcth  he  any  man  ;  but  that 
**  every  good  and  perfect  gift  is  from  him,"  Se- 
condly, "  That  God  doth  not  deceive  us,  by  mak- 
"  ing  various  rcprefentations  of  himfclf  to  us  ^ 
"  fometimes  in  one  form,  and  fometimes  in  ano- 
*'  ther  •,  for  he  is  unchangeable,  and  always  the  fame 
*'  and  cannot,  ryjg  iciuT^  lozctt;  ejt/Sct/j/^i',  pafs  out 
*'  of  liis  own  idea,  or  be  any  other  than  what  he  is  :'* 
which  he  further  confirms  by  this  excellent  rcafon- 
ing,  "  tliat  which  is  the  befl  and  moll  pcrfed  be- 
"  ing  is  not  liable  to  any  alteration  -,  but  fuch  a  be- 
*'  ing  is  God,  and  therefore  he  cannot  be  changed 
*'  by  any  thijig  that  is  weaker  and  Icfs  perfect  than 

''  him^ 


T'he  iinchangeablenefs  of  Gojy.  3339 

*'  hlmfelf,    and  he  cannot  will  to  change  hlmfelf:  SERM. 

CXXXIII 

""  for  if  he  iliould,  it  muil  either  be  for  the  better, 
*'  or  for  the  worfe :  it  cannot  be  for  the  better  •,  for 
*'  being  already  pofTeft  of  all  perfedion,  there  can 
*'  be  no  acceffion  of  any  to  him  by  any  change  -, 
*'  and  certainly  there  is  no  wife  being,  as  God  is, 
"  that  will  change  for  the  worfe  ;  and  therefore  he 
*'  concludes,  aciXXi^og  yi  (i^j.<Tog  ck)v  etg  tv  S'vvulcv 
f^iv&t  del  GLTTKooq  K.  r'j  auT^  |t6cj(p'^,  "  That  being 
"  the  goodlieil  and  bell  being  that  is  pofTible,  he 
*'  always  continues  fimply  the  fame."  Seneca  like- 
wife,  fpeaking  of  the  immutability  of  God's  coun- 
fels,  (1.  vi.  de  Benef.)  ftatuerimt  (fays  he)  <^Uc^  non 
mutarenty  neque  iinquam  primi  confilii  decs  focnitet^ 
"  The  gods  make  fuch  unchangeable  decrees,  and 
*'  never  repent  them  of  their  lirft  counfel." 

2.  This  will  yet  more  clearly  appear  from  the 
divine  revelation  of  the  holy  fcriptures,  which  tell 
us,  that  God  is  unchangeable  in  his  nature,  and  in 
his  perfedions,  in  all  his  decrees,  and  purpofes,  and 
promifes  :  in  his  effence  and  being,  Exod.  iii.  14. 
"  I  am  that  I  am  •,"  this  is  his  name,  whereby  he 
made  known  himfelf  to  the  comfort  of  his  people, 
and  to  the  terror  of  the  Egyptians  their  opprelTors  : 
Pfal.  xc.  2.  "  From  everlalling  to  everlafting  thou 
"  art  God."  Pfal.  cii.  27.  ^'  Tliou  art  the  fame, 
*'  and  thy  years  fail  not."  Mai.  iii.  6.  "  I  am  the 
"  LoPvD,  and  change  not."  Hence  it  is  that  the 
title  of  the  living  God  is  fo  frequently  attributed  to 
him ;  and  he  fvvears  by  this,  as  denoting  not  only 
his  eternity,  but  his  unchangeablenefs ;  "  as  I  live, 
"  faith  the  Lord."  Hither  likewife  we  may  refer 
thofe  texts  where  he  is  called  the  "  incorruptible 
God,"  Rom.  i.  23.  ''  The  immortal  King," 
I  Tim.  i.  17.  ^nd  is  laid  "  only  to  have  immortali- 


3  3  4 '^  ^^^  ^^^changeablenefs  of  God. 

S  E  R  M.  «  ^.y  »»   J  -pij^^  I  J 5^  ^^^  j^g  is  immutable  likewife 

CXXXIII.  . 

in  his  perfedions  -,  hence  it  is  fo  often  faid  in  the 
Pfalms,  that  "  his  goodnefs  and  his  mercy  endure 
*'  for  ever  -,  his  righteoufncfs  is  Ukewife  faid  to  en- 
*'  dure  for  ever."  Pfal.  cxi.  3.  and  Pfal.  xxxvi.  6. 
*'  To  be  hke  the  great  mountains,  not  only  vifibic 
*'  and  confpicuous,  but  firm  and  immoveable ;" 
and  the  fame  likewife  is  faid  of  his  truth  and  faith- 
fulnefs,  Pfal.  cxvii.  2.  "His  truth  endureth  for 
"  ever^"  and  of  his  power,  Efa.  xxvi.  4.  "  In  the 
**  Lord  Jehovah  is  everlafting  flrength." 

And  fo  likewife  in  his  decrees  and  purpofes,  Pfal. 
xxxiii.  II.  "  The  counfel  of  the  Lord  ftandeth  for 
^'  ever,  and  the  thoughts  of  his  heart  to  all  genera- 
*'  tions-,"  Efa.  xiv.  24.  "  Surely  as  I  have  thought, 
*'  fo  fliall  it  come  to  pafs  •,  and  as  I  have  purpofed, 
*'  fo  lliall  itftand."  Numb,  xxiii.  19.  "God  is  not 
' '  a  man  that  he  fhould  lie,  or  as  the  fon  of  m.an, 
"  that  he  fliould  repent  :  hath  he  fpoken,  and  fliall 
**  not  he  do  it  ?  hath  he  faid  it,  and  fnall  not  he 
*'  bring  it  to  pafs  ?"  If  he  hath  made  any  promife, 
or  entred  into  any  covenant  with  us,  it  is  firm  and 
immutable,  Pfal.  Ixxxix.  33.  "  He  will  not  fulFcr 
"  his  faithfulnefs  to  fail,  his  covenant  will  he  not 
*'  break,  nor  alter  the  thing  that  is  gone  out  of  his 
**  lips."  His  covenant  and  his  promife  are  in  them- 
felves  immutable  ;  but  for  our  further  afTu ranee, 
God  hath  given  us  his  oath,  the  higheft  fign  of  im- 
mutability j  fo  the  apoflle  to  the  Hebrews  tells  us, 
chap.  vi.  18.  "  That  by  two  immutable  things," 
(viz.  his  promife  and  his  oath)  "  in  which  it  is  im- 
"  polTible  for  God  to  lie,  we  might  have  flrong 
*'  confolation,  who  are  fled  for  refuge  to  the  hope 
"  which  is  fct  before  us."    I  proceed  to  the 

III.  Thing  I  promifcJ,  which  is,  to  anfwer  an 

objed:ion. 


T^he  iinchangeahlenefs  of  Cot).  334' 

obiedlion,  which  may  feem  to  lie  againft  what  hath  S  K  R  M. 

CXXXIII 

been  faid,  from  the  mention  fo  often  made  in  fcrip- 
ture  of  God's  repenting  himfelf-,  as  Gen.  vi.  6. 
where  it  is  faid  that  "  it  repented  God  that  he  had 
"  made  man."  i  Sam.  xv.  ii.  That  "  he  repent- 
^^  ed  that  he  had  made  Saul  king-,"  and  2  Sam, 
xxiv.  16.  When  "  the  angel  had  ftretched  out  his 
*'  hand  over  Jerufalem  todeftroy  it,"  it  is  faid,  that 
"  the  Lord  repented  him  of  the  evil."  and  Pfal. 
cxxxv.  14.  the  Lord  faith  there,  that  "  he  will  re- 
''  pent  himfelf  concerning  his  fervants," 

To  all  which  I  anfwer,  that  this  expreffion  of 
God's  repentance  we  are  to  iinderfland  (as  many 
others  in  icripture)  after  the  manner  of  men,  and 
as  fpoken  by  way  of  condefcention  and  accommoda- 
tion to  our  weaknefs  and  capacity,  and  not  as  call- 
ing any  imputation  of  mutability  and  inconftancy 
upon  God  ;  as  if  out  of  levity,  or  for  want  of  fore- 
fight,  he  did  aller  his  mind:  but  when  God  is  faid 
"  to  repent  that  he  made  man,  or  that  he  made 
*'  Saul  king,"  the  change  was  not  in  him,  but 
them;  and  it  fignifies,  not  that  God  was  abfolute- 
ly  deceived  in  his  expe6lation,  but  that  things  had 
fallen  out  contrary  to  all  reafonable  expectation  ;  and 
therefore  the  fcripture  clothes  God  with  the  human 
palTion  of  repenting  and  grieving  for  what  he  hath 
done,  as  men  ufe  to  do  when  they  are  greatly  dif- 
appointed  and  fall  fhort  of  their  expe6lation. 

And  as  for  the  other  inftances,  wherein  God  is 
faid  "  to  repent  him  of  the  evils  threatned,"  the 
exprelTion  only  fignifies  thus  much,  that  God  doth 
not  execute  that  v/hich  feemed  to  us  to  have  been 
his  peremptory  purpofe  and  refolution  ;  that  is,  he 
is  pleafed  to  do  otherwife  than  his  threatning  f:;emed 
openly  to  exprefs,  becaufe  of  fome  tacit  condition 

implied 


3342  Tlje  iinchangeablejtefs  of  God. 

cxxxm  ^^P^*^^^^  ^^"^  ^^'  which  he  did  not  think  lit  to  acquaint 
'us  with.  And  this  doth  not  at  all  derogate  from  the 
conftancy  and  immutabihty  of  God  :  for  when  God 
did  threaten,  he  fpake  what  he  did  really  purpofe 
and  intend,  if  fomething  did  not  intervene  to  prevent 
tht  judgment  threatned,  upon  which  he  was  refolv- 
ed  at  that  time  when  he  threatned,  to  be  taken  off, 
and  to  flay  his  hand:  and  in  thus  doing,  God 
doth  not  mutare  confilium  fed  fentenliam  \  "he  doth 
*'  not  change  his  inward  counfel  and  purpofe,  but 
^'  takes  off  the  fentence,"  which  was  pall:  with  re- 
ferved  conditions,  and  unknown  to  us,  on  purpofe 
to  urge  us  the  more  effedlually  to  repentance. 

And  that  God  ufually  referves  fuch  conditions, 
not  only  in  his  threatnings,  but  fobetimes  alfo  in  his 
promifes,  appears  from  that  remarkable  text,  Jer. 
xviii.  7,  8,  9,  10.  "  At  what  inflant  I  fhall  fpeak 
*'  concerning  a  nation,  and  concerning  a  kingdom, 
*'  to  pluck  up,  and  to  pull  down,  and  to  dcilroy 
*^  it  j  if  that  nation,  againft  whom  I  have  proiiounc- 
"  ed,  turn  from  the  evil,  I  will  repent  of  the  evil 
**  that  I  thought  to  do  unto  them  :  at  what  inftant 
**  I  fliall  fpeak  concerning  a  nation,  and  concerning 
*'  a  kingdom,  to  build  and  to  plant  it  ;  if  it  do  evil 
*'  in  my  fight,  that  it  obey  not  my  voice,  then  I 
**  will  repent  of  the  good  wherewith  I  faid  I  v/ould 
*'  benefit  them."  And  from  this  very  confi/derati- 
on,  the  fame  prophet  encourageth  the  people  to  re- 
pentance, Jer.  xxvi.  13.  "  Therefore  now  amend 
•'  your  ways,  and  your  doings,  and  obey  the  voice 
*'  of  the  Lord  your  God,  and  the  Lord  will  re- 
*'  pent  him  of  the  evil  he  hath  pronounced  againft 
*'  you."  And  we  have  a  famous  inllance  of  this  in 
the  cafe  of  Nineveh,  the  deflrudlion  whereof  within 
forty  days  after,  God  had  openly  proclaimed  by  his 

prophet 


The  unchangeablenefs  ofGoDl  3343 

prophet;  yet  he  flops  the  execution  of  the  fentence,  SERM. 
upon  their  repentance,  Jonah  iii.  lo.  "  The  men  of  ,^^j^' 
"  Nineveh  turned  from  their  evil  ways,and  the  Lord 
"  repented  of  the  evil  he  faid  he  would  do  unto 
"  them,  and  he  did  it  not." 

All  that  now  remains,  is  to  apply  this  do6lrine  of 
the  immutability  of  the  divine  nature  to  our  felves ; 
and  the  confideration  of  it  may  ferve  to  feveral  good 
purpofes,  both  in  reference  to  bad  and  good  men, 

Firll,  in  regard  to  finners  and  wicked  men. 

And,  I  ft.  The  unchangeablenefs  of  God  is  mat- 
ter of  great  terror  to  wicked  men.  Let  but  the  fmner 
confider  what  God  is,  and  the  confideration  of  his 
unchangeable  nature  muft  needs  terrify  him  :  "  He 
"  is  a  holy  God,  and  of  purer  eyes  than  to  behold 
'^  iniquity,"  Hab.  i.  12.  He  is  not  a  God,  that 
"  hath  pleafure  in  wickednefs,  neither  fhall  evil  dwell 
"  with  him  :  the  foohfh  fliall  not  ftand  in  his  fight, 
"  he  hateth  all  the  workers  of  iniquity,"  Pfal.  v.  4,5. 
"  He  is  likewife  a  juft  God,  and  will  by  no  means 
"  clear  the  guiky,  nor  let  fin  go  unpunifht,"  Exod. 
xxxiv.  7.  He  is  alfo  omnipotent,  and  is  able  to 
execute  the  vengeance  threatned  againft  finners. 
"  Who  knoweth  the  power  of  thine  anger?"  Pfal. 
xc.  II.  ''  Thou  even  thou  art  to  be  feared  ;  and  who 
"  may  ftand  in  thy  fight  when  once  thou  art  an- 
"  gry?"  pfal.  Ixxvi.  7.  "  Strong  is  the  Lord 
"  God  who  judgeth,"  Rev.  xviii.  8.  And,  which 
gives  a  fad  accent  to  all  this,  he  that  is  thus  holy, 
and  juft,  and  powerful,  continues  for  ever  the  fame, 
and  will  never  aker  or  put  off"  any  of  thefe  proper- 
ties, will  never  ceafe  to  hate  iniquity,  and  to  be  an 
implacable  enemy  to  all  impenitent  finners :  and  is 
it  not  a  "  fearful  thing  to  fall  into  the  hands  of" 
this  holy,    and  juft,  and  omnipotent  "  God  who 

Vol.  VIII.  16  F  "lives 


2. 


3344  ^^^  unchangeablenefs  of  God, 

S  E  R  M.  «  lives  for  ever,"  and  can  "  punifh  for  ever  ?'*  Let 

fCXXXIII. 

all  obflinate  finners  hear  this,  and  tremble :  you  can- 
not be  more  obftinately  bent  to  continue  in  your 
wicked  ways,  than  God  is  peremptorily  refolved  to 
jnake  you  miferable.  If  you  be  determined  upon  a 
finfulcourfe ;  God  is  alfo  determined  how  he  will  deal 
with  you,  that  "  he  will  notfparc",  but  ''  that  his 
*'  anger  and  jealoufy  fhall  make  againft  you,'*  and 
^hat  "  all  the  curfes  that  are  written  in  his  book  fhall 
**  light  upon  you,"  and  that  '*  he  will  blot  out  your 
*'  name  from  under  heaven  -,  he  hath  fworn  in  his 
•*  wrath,  that"  unbelieving  and  impenitent  finncrs 
^*  fhall  not  enter  into  his  reft ;"  and  for  the  greater  af- 
furancp  of  the  thing,  and  that  we  may  not  think, 
that  there  is  any  condition  implied  in  thefe  threat- 
nings,  he  hath  confirmed  them  by  an  oath,  that  by 
this  impiutable  fign,  "  in  which  it  is  irnpofTible  for 
^'  GpD  to  lie,"  finners  might  have  ftrong  terrors, 
and  not  be  able  to  fly  to  any  in  hopes  of  refuge. 

^dly,The  confideratipn  of  God's  unchangeablenefs, 
Ihould  likewife  be  a  very  powerful  argument  to  urge 
finners  to  repentance.  If  they  will  but  leave  their 
fins,  and  turn  to  him,  they  will  find  him  ready  to 
^•eceive  them  upon  their  repentance  and  fubmiflion  j 
for  **  he  is  a  God  gracious  and  merciflil,  flow  (q 
^'  anger,  and  ready  to  forgive  ;"  he  is  "  unchangea- 
**  bly  good,"  and"  his  mercy  endureth  for  ever  :'* 
but  if  they  will  not  come  in,  and  fubmit  to  thefe 
^erms,  there  is  nothing  before  them  but  ruin  and  der 
flTU(5lion  j  nothing  then  "  remains  but  a  fearful  look- 
^^  ing  for  of  judgment,  and  fiery  indignation  to  con- 
^-  funic  them."  God  hath  declared  to  us  the  terms 
pf  our  pardon  and  peace,  and  if  we  will  not  come  up 
to  them,  he  is  at  a  point,  he  cannot  change  his  na- 
fVire,  nor  will  he  alter  the  terms  of  his  covenant : 

there 


5^^  unchangeablenefs  of  God,  3345 

there  is  a  perfe6l  and  eternal  oppofition  between  the  ^  ^  ^  M' 
holy  nature  of  God,  and  an  impenitent  finner-,  and 
'tis  impolTible  fuch  an  one  fhould  be  happy,  till  this 
oppofition  be  removed  *,  and  to  do  that,  there  are 
but  two  ways  imaginable^  by  changing  God^  or  by 
changing  our  felves.  The  nature  of  God  is  fixed 
and  unalterable ;  God  cannot  recede  from  his  own 
pure  nature ;  therefore  we  muft  depart  from  our  fm- 
ful  and  corrupt  nature.  God  cannot  quit  his  holi- 
nefs  ',  therefore  we  muft  leave  our  fins :  we  can  have 
no  hope  to  change  God,  therefore  we  muft  change 
our  felves.  Redtify,  finner,  thine  own  corrupt  na- 
ture, and  renounce  thy  lufts  •,  do  not  venture  upon 
impoffibilities ;  rather  think  of  altering  thy  finful  na- 
ture, which  may  be  changed,  than  of  altering  the 
divine  nature^  which  is  effentially  immutable,  ^'  with 
"  whom  is  no  variablenefs,  nor  ftiadow  of  turning.'* 
God  hath  once  condefcended  fd  far,  as  "  to  take 
*'  our  nature  upon  him,"  to  make  us  capable  of  hap- 
pinefs  :  but  if  this  will  not  do,  he  can  go  no  lower, 
he  will  not,  he  cannot  put  off  his  own  nature,  to 
make  us  happy. 

Secondly,  in  reference  to  good  men,  the  tonfide- 
Tation  of  God's  unchangeablenefs  is  matter  of  great 
confolation  to  them  j  in  all  the  changes  and  vicilTi- 
tudes  of  the  world  •,  their  main  comfort  and  hope 
is  built  upon  a  rock,  ''  the  rock  of  ages,"  as  the 
expreflion  is  in  the  prophet  Ifaiah,  xxvi.  4-.  it  relics 
upon  the  unchangeable  goodnefs  and  faithfulnefs  of 
God,  "  all  whofe  promifes  are  yea,  and  amen,'* 
truth  and  certainty.  All  other  fupports  and  hopes 
may  fail  us  ;  but  "  God  will  not  fuffer  his  faithful- 
"  nefs  to  fail  -,  his  covenant  will  he  not  break,  nor 
**  alter  the  thing  which  is  gone  out  of  his  lips,"  as 
the  pfalmift  affures  us,  Pfai.  Ixxxix.  33.  Men  may 

16  F  2  break' 


CXXXIII. 


3346  "the  iinchangeablenefs  of  God. 

^K^R  M.  break  their  word,  and  be  lefs  than  their  promifes  •, 
but  "  God  is  faithful,  Who  hath  promifed  to  give 
"  grace  and  glory,  and  to  with-hold  no  good  thing 
*'  from  them  that  walk  uprightly.  He  is  not  as 
*'  man,  that  he  fhould  lie,  or  as  the  fon  of  man, 
*'  that  he  fhould  repent.  Hath  he  fpokcn,  and 
*'  fhall  he  not  do  it  ?  hath  he  faid  it,  and  Ihall  not 
*'  he  bring  it  to  pafs  ? 

If  there  be  any  thing  that  hath  the  appearance  of 
a  change  in  God,  it  is  ufually  on  the  merciful  fide  •, 
as  when  he  Hops  the  execution  of  Ms  threatnings, 
upon  the  repentance  of  a  finful  nation  i  as  in  that 
remarkable  text  which  I  mentioned  before,  Jer. 
xviii.  7,  8.  "  At  what  inflant  I  ihall  fpeak  concern- 
**  ing  a  nation,  and  concerning  a  kingdom,  to  pluck 
*'  up,  and  to  pull  down,  and  to  deftroy  it ;  if  that 
*'  nation  againfl  whom  I  have  pronounced,  turn 
*'  from  their  evil,  I  will  repent  of  the  evil  that  I 
*'  thought  to  do  unto  them  :''  and  fo  likewife  when 
his  faithful  people  and  fervants  are  in  great  diftrefs, 
and  there  is  no  vifible  help  and  means  of  relief  -, 
in  this  cafe  likewife  God  is  faid  to  repent  and  to  ap- 
pear for  their  refcue.  Deut.  xxxii.  36.  "The  Lord 
*'  fhall  judge  his  people,  and  repent  himfelf  for  his 
*•«  fervants,  when  he  feeth  that  their  power  is  gone.'^ 
Thus  we  fhould  comfort  our  felvcs  in  the  greatefl 
-extremities,  with  the  confideration  of  the  immutable 
goodnefs  and  fiithfulnefs  of  God.  The  things  of 
the  world  are  mutable,  and  the  men  of  the  world  ; 
even  thofe  things  which  feem  mofl  conflant,  as  thc' 
heavens :  and  to  be  fettled  upon  the  furefl  foundati- 
ons, as  the  eaith  ;  yet  thefe  fhall  be  changed :  Pfal. 
cii.  25,  26,  27.  "  Of  old  hail  thou  laid  the  founda- 
*'  tions  of  the  earth,  and  the  heavens  are  the  work 
*'  of  thy  hands :  they  Ihall  perifh,  but  thou  fhalt 

5  "  ^"- 


^he  unchangeablenefs  of  God.  ZZ47 

^*  endure  ;  all  of  them  fhall  wax  old  like  a  garment ;  ^  ^  ^^• 
"  as  a  vefture  ihalt  thou  change  them,  and  they 
"  lliall  be  changed :  but  thou  art  the  fame,  and  thy 
**  years  fliall  have  no  end."  From  whence  the 
pfalmift  infers  this  comfort  to  the  church  and  peor- 
ple  of  God,  v.  28.  "  The  children  of  thy  fervants 
"  fhall  continue,  and  their  feed  fliall  be  eflabliflit 
"  before  thee." 

Nothing  that  is  mutable  can  be  a  folid  foundation 
of  comfort  and  confidence.  Men  are  inconfVant, 
and  riches  are  uncertain,  and  all  other  things  which 
men  commonly  truft  to  ;  and  therefore  the  apoftle 
**  chargeth  them  that  are  rich  in  this  world,  not  to 
*'  truft  in  uncertain  riches,  but  in  the  living  God." 
He  only  that  lives  for  ever  is  a  firm  foundation  of 
hope  and  confidence. 

When  God  would  comfort  the  Ifraelites  in  Egypt 
under  their  great  oppreiTion,  he  bids  Mofes  only  to 
declare  to  them  his  immutabiUty,  Exod.  iii.  14.  Say 
unto  them,  "  I  am  that  I  am,  hath  fent  me  unto 
"  you."  And  this  is  the  great  comfort  of  Chrifti- 
ans,  that  he  who  is  their  Saviour,  and  their  hope, 
is  "  the  fame  ycfterday,  to  day,  and  for  ever :  he 
*'  that  was,  and  that  is,  and  that  is  to  come,"  in 
all  durations  the  fame. 

We  are  continually  changing,  and  are  not  the 
fame  we  were ;  fome  of  us  were  young,  and  now 
are  pld  *,  once,  perhaps,  flouriflit  in  great  profperi- 
ty,  but  now  are  poor  and  needy ;  were  once  ftrong 
and  healthful,  but  now  fickly  and  weak :  it  fliould 
comfort  us  in  all  thefe  changes,  that  "  God  is  ftill 
*'  the  lame,"  and  he  alone  is  infteadof  all  other  com- 
forts and  fupports :  when  all  other  things  fail,  we 
may  '^  rejoice  in  the  Lord,  and  joy  in  the  God  of 
;^  our  fglvation,"     Youth,  and  health,  and  riches, 

and 


334^  T!&^  unchangeablenefsdfGoi^. 

SE  R  M.  and  friends  may  forfake  us ;  but  God  hath  promifed,- 
that  "  he  will  never  leave  us  nor  forfake  us  ;'*  that 
*'  he  will  not  leave  us  when  we  are  old,  nor  forfake 
*'  US'  when  our  ftrength  faileth  •/*  when  "  our 
**  ftrength  fails,"  and  *'  our  heart  fails,"  then  is  he 
*'  the  ftrength  of  our  hearts,"  and  our  "portion  for 
•'  ever-,"  and  when  our  great  change  fhall  come^ 
and  the  terrors  of  death  ftiall  take  hold  of  us,  we 
have  ftill  the  fame  comfort,  "  the  Lord  liveth,  and 
**  bleffedbe  the  God  of  our  falvation." 

In  a  word,  the  confideration  of  God*s  immuta- 
bility ftiould  keep  us  fixed  and  unmoved  in  all  the 
changes  and  accidents  of  this  world,  and  not  apt  to 
be  ftarded  and  furprifed  at  them  -,  according  to  that 
of  the  pfalmift,  "  he  fhall  not  be  afraid  of  evil  tidings, 
*'  becaufe  his  heart  is  fixed,  trufting  in  God." 
This  fhould  make  us  conftant  to  him  and  his  truth, 
'*  ftedfaft  and  unmoveable,  and  always  abounding 
**  in  the  work  of  the  Lord,  for  as  much  as  we 
"  know,  that  our  labour  ftiall  not  be  in  vain  in  the 
•^  Lord  \'  it  ftiould  make  us  "  hold  faft  the  pro- 
"  feflion  of  our  faith  without  wavering,"  in  full 
aftlirance,  that  God  "  will  be  as  good  to  us  as  his 
*'  word,"  and  in  a  firm  hope  and  perfuafion  "  of 
"  that  eternal  life,  which  God  that  cannot  lie  hath 
«  promifed." 


$  E  R- 


3349 

SERMON  CXXXIV. 

The  knowledge  of  G  o  d. 


I 


I  SAM.  ii.  3. 
The  Lord  is  a  God  of  knowledge. 

Come  now  to  fpeak  of  thofe  properties  and  per-  SERM. 

CXXXIV. 


fedions  which  relate  to  the  divine  underftanding. 


and  will,  and  manner,  and  power  of  adling.  Know- 
ledge confiders  things  abfolutely,  and  in  themfelves ; 
wifdom  confiders  the  refpedls  and  relation  of  things 
one  to  another,  and  under  the  notion  of  means  and 
ends.  The  knowledge  of  God  is  a  perfedt  com- 
prehenfion  of  the  nature  of  all  things,  with  all  their 
powers,  and  qualities,  and  circumftances ;  the  wif- 
dom of  God  is  a  perfedb  comprehenfion  ofthere- 
fpeds  and  relation  of  things  one  to  another;  of 
their  harmony  and  oppofition  ;  of  their  fitnefs  and 
unfitnefs  to  fuch  and  fuch  ends.  The  knowledge  of 
God  only  implies  his  bare  underflanding  of  things  ; 
but  his  wifdom  implies  the  fkill  of  ordering  and  dif- 
pofing  things  to  the  beft  ends  and  purpofes,  to  make 
every  thing,  and  to  govern  and  adminifter  all  things 
in  number,  weight,  and  meafurc.  I  fhall  at  pre- 
fent  fpeak  of  the  firfl  of  thefe,  the  knowledge  of 
God  ;  which,  as  I  faid,  is  a  perfect  comprehenfion 
of  the  nature  of  all  things,  and  of  every  thing  belong- 
ing to  their  nature  :  of  the  powers,  and  qualities, 
and  circumftances  of  things. 

Thefe  words  fignify  God  to  be  the  fountain  of 
knowledge  -,  that  is,  that  he  poffeffeth  it  himfelf, 
and  communicates  it  to  others.  In  the  handling  of 
this,  I  IhalJ  Firft, 


3  3  5^cj  T^e  knowledge  of  God. 

s  E  R  M.       Flrft,  endeavour  to  prove,  that  this  attribute  be*» 
cxxxiv.  1         ,    ^  , 

longs  to  God.  ' 

Secondly,  Ihew  the  perfedlion  and  the  preroga- 
tives of  the  divine  knowledge. 

Thirdly,  draw  fome  pradical  inferences  from  the 
whole. 

Firft,  for  the  proof  of  it,  1  fhall  attempt  it  two  ways. 

1.  From  the  didates  of  natural  light  and  reafon. 

2.  From  fcripture  or  divine  revelation. 
I.  From  the  didates  of  natural  light  and  reafon. 

I  begin  with  this  firft  ;  becaufe,  unlefs  this  be  efta- 
bhfhed,  all  divine  revelation  falls  to  the  ground  •,  un- 
lefs natural  reafon  allures  us,  that  God  is  endowed 
with  knowledge  and  underftanding,  it  is  in  vain  to 
enquire  after  divine  revelation.  For  to  make  any  re- 
velation credible,  two  things  are  requifite  on  the 
part  of  the  revealer,  ability  and  integrity  ;  that  he 
have  a  perfe6t  knowledge  and  underftanding  of  the 
thing  which  he  reveals,  fo  that  he  cannot  be  de- 
ceived himfelf ;  and  fo  much  goodnefs  and  truth, 
that  he  will  not  deceive  us.  Now  unlefs  our  reafon 
alTure  us  that  God  is  endowed  with  knowledge  and 
underftanding,  the  firft  condition  is  evidently  want- 
ing, viz.  ability,  and  confequently  the  fecond,  in- 
tegrity ;  for  there  cannot  be  goodnefs  and  veracity 
without  knowledge. 

This  being  premifed,  I  proceed  to  the  proof  of  it 
from  fuch  arguments  as  our  natural  reafon  fuggefts 
to  us.  I  have  formerly  told  you,  that  the  divine 
perfedbions  are  not  to  be  proved  by  way  of  demon- 
ftration,  but  by  way  of  convidlion,  by  Ihewing  the 
abfurdities  and  inconveniencies  of  the  contrary  •,  for 
if  we  deny  knowledge  to  God,  we  muft  deny  it  to 
be  a  perfedlion  ;  we  muft  deny  it  to  be  in  any  of 
the  creatures  ;  we  muft  attribute  many  other  imper- 

fecStionS 


^he  knowledge  o/God^  '^  '^  C  i 

fedions  to  God  •,  all  which  are  abfurd  to  our  natii-  $ERM.^ 
ral  reafon  ,  for  natural  reafon  didlates  to  us,  that  [f^^lIL 
knowledge  is  a  perfection,  that  it  is  to  be  found  in 
the  creatures,  and  that  the  denial  of  it  to  God  will 
argue  many  other  imperfedlions  in  the  divine  nature ; 
now  thefe  are  fo  many  arguments  which  natural  rea- 
fon offers  to  us  to  prove,  that  "  knowledge  belongs 
"  to  God." 

1.  It  is  a  perfedion,  and  therefore  belongs  to  God. 
Natural  reafon  tells  us,  though  the  fcripture  had 
not  faid  it,  that  "  knowledge  excels  ignorance  as 
"  much  as  hght  doth  darknefs  ;"  now  whatever  is 
perfe6l  and  excellent  is  to  be  attributed  to  the  di- 
vine nature  ;  for  this  is  the  firll  notion  we  have  of 
God,  that  he  is  "  a  being  abfolutely  perfed." 

2.  Knowledge  is  to  be  found  in  fome  of  the  crea- 
tures, and  therefore  is  much  more  in  God  the  crea- 
tor, becaufe  it  is  derived  from  him.  Our  very  un- 
derllandings  whereby  we  know  God,  or  any  thing 
elfe,  are  an  argument  that  knowledge  and  underftand- 
ing  are  in  God.  If  "  he  gives  wifdom  to  the  wife,  and 
"  knowledge  to  them  that  know  underftanding," 
if  he  communicates  this  perfedion  to  the  creatures, 
he  himfelf  is  much  more  pofTefl  of  it.  The  fcripture 
indeed  ufeth  this  argument,  but  I  mention  it  as  that 
which  natural  reafon  doth  fuggefb  to  the  moll  brut- 
ilh  and  ignorant  of  men.  Pfal.  xciv.  8, 9,  10.  "  Un- 
"  derfland,  ye  brutifh  among  the  people  j  and  ye 
"  fools,  when  will  ye  be  wife  ?  he  that  planted  the 
"  ear,  fhall  he  not  hear  ?  he  that  formed  the  eye, 
"  fhall  he  not  fee  ?" 

3.  The  denial  of  this  perfedlion  to  God,  argues 
many  other  imperfedions  in  the  divine  nature.  No^ 
thing  would  more  eclipfe  the  divine  nature,  than  to 
take  away  this  perfedion  from  it  -,  this  would  bring 

Vol,  YIII,  16  G  an 


^he  knowledge  of  God, 

an  univerfal  obfcurity  upon  God's  other  perfe6lions  v 
this  would  be  to  put  out  the  light  of  heaven,  and 
to  turn  '*  the  brightnefs  of  the  morning"    into  the 
^'  fhadow  of  death."     If  we  remove  this  perfedion 
from  God,  we  deny  his  wifdom.     He  that  does 
not  know  the  nature  and  qualities  of  things,  cannot 
know  how  to  apply  means  to  ends,  to  fit  or  fuit  one 
thing  to  another  :  and  we  weaken  his  power.    What 
an  impotent  and  ineffeftual  thing  would  power  be 
without  knowledge  ?  what  irregular  things  would  it 
produce  ?    whuit  untoward  combinations  of  efFeds 
would  there  be,  if  infinite  power  were  let  loofe  to  ad 
without  the  condud  of  knowledge  and  underfland- 
ing  ?  And,  confequently,    we  take  away  his  provi- 
dence •,  for.  without  knowledge  tiicre  ca!i  be  nocoun- 
{dy  no  fore-cafe  of  events,  no  provifion  for  the  fu- 
ture, no  government  of  tlCi  world.     And  this  is  not 
all  •,  for 'Without  knowledge  there  could  be  no  fuch 
thing  as  goodnefs  ^  for  he  is  not  good  that  does 
good  out  of  ignorance,  or  from  a  blind  necefiity. 
There  could  be  no  veracity,  nor  jullice,  nor  mercy 
5n  God  ;  for  all  thefe  fuppofe  knowledge.     He  that 
Ipeal-Ls  truth  muft  know  it ;  he  that  is  juft,  muft  un- 
derfland right  from  wrong ;  he  that  fliews  mercy, 
mufl  know  who  are  miferable,  and  how  they  may 
be  relieved  ;  and  not  to  labour  in  a  thing  fo  plain 
and  eafy  :  take  away  the  knowldge  of  God,  and  you 
render  him  incapable  of  any  honour  from  his  crea- 
tures ;    for    if   we    know  not    what  honour    we 
do  him,  it  is  loft  labour  to  give  him  any.     And  that 
we  may  fee  thefe  are  the  dedu6lions  of  natural  rea- 
fon,  without  the  advantage  of  revelation,  we  Ihall 
find  the  heathens,  who  were  deftitute  of  divine  reve- 
lation, did  attribute  this  perfe6lion  to  God.     Tully 
tells  us,  that  Thales  was  wont  to  fay,  Deos  cmnm 


^he  knowledge  of  God,  3  353 

ternere ;  and  we  know  the  heathens  were  wont  to  ?,^3.^* 
fwear,  Biis  immortalihus  tefi'ihus  interpcfitts^  which 
is  an  owning  of  his  omnifcienco  :  Slv.is  enim  non  ti- 
meat  Deum  mnnia  pervidentenij  &  cogitantem^  ^ 
animadvertentem^  curiofum  ^  negotii  penum  Demjy 
de  Nat.  Deor.  1.  i. 

2.  From  fcripture  and  divine  revelation.  I  will 
not  heap  up  all  thofe  teflimonies  of  fcripture,  which 
might  be  gathered  together  upon  this  argument ; 
I  will  only  inftance  in  two  or  three  :  Job  xxxvi.  4, 
*'  He  that  is  perfe6l  in  knowledge,  is  with  thee  ;'* 
xxxvii.  16.  "  Doft  thou  know  the  wondrous  works 
*'  of  him  who  is  perfe6b  in  knowledge  ?" 

Hither  we  may  refer  thofe  texts  which  reprefent 
God  by  way  of  condefcenfion  to  our  infirmity,  as 
having  eyes  and  ears,  which  fignify  his  knowledge 
of  what  is  done  in  the  world  ;  and  thofe  which  fpeak 
of  him  as  communicating  to  us  all  the  knowledge 
which  we  have  ;  "he  giveth  wifdom  to  the  wife, 
*'  and  underftanding  to  them  that  know  underiland- 
*'  ing,"  Dan.  ii.  21.  And  thofe  which  fpeak  of 
God,  as  knowing  the  moft  fecret  things,  "  the  hid- 
*'  den  things  of  darknefs,"  the  hearts  and  the  thoughts 
of  men ;  and  thofe  things  which  are  at  the  greateft 
diftance,  as  future  things ;  and  of  the  greatefl  un- 
certainty, as  the  contingent  acts  of  free  creatures ; 
each  of  thefe  I  fhall  particularly  confider  ;  for  in 
proving  that  Gob  knows  all  thefe,  his  knowledge 
of  all,  other  things  will  be  proved  with  advantage  : 
for  if  any  thing  be  out- of  the  reach  of  the  divine  un- 
deritanding,  it  muil  in  all  probability  be  either  thofe 
things  which  are  fecret  and  hidden,  as  men's  fecret 
actions,  or  their  thoughts  -,  or  elfe  thofe  things,  which 
are  to  come,  and  depend  upon  no  certain  caufe,  as 
future  contingencies ;  and  the  proving  of  this  may 
S'         '  16  G  2  bp 


915^  kno'wledge  of  Govt] 

be  of  great  ufe  to  us,  as  having  a  great  influence  up-* 
on  pradice  •,  it  tends  very  much  to  the  advancement 
of  religion,  and  the  good  government  of  our  lives. 
I  begin  with  the 

i.Of  thefe,  viz.  That  God  takes  very  exa6t 
and  particular  notice  of  all  the  acftions  of  men,  even 
thofe  that  are  moft  fecret.  And  in  the  handling  of 
this,  I  fliall  fpeak  diftindtly  to  thefe  three  things. 

1.  That  God  takes  knowledge  of  all  our  adions  ; 
"  his  eyes  are  upon  the  ways  of  man,  and  he  feeth 
*'  all  his  goings,"  Job  xxxiv.  21. 

2.  That  he  is  a  curious  obferver  of  them  ;  "  he 
"  feeth  all  his  goings,  he  marks  all  his  ileps,'^ 
takes  very  exa6l  and  particular  notice  of  all  that 
we  do. 

3.  He  takes  notice  of  thoft  actions  which  are 
moft  fecret  and  hidden  ;  "  there  is  no  darknefs  nor 
''  fhadow  of  death,  where  the  workers  of  iniquity 
"  may  hide  themfelves,"  Job  xxxiv.  22. 

I.  That  God  takes  notice  of  all  our  adtions. 
And  that  this  notion  was  planted  in  the  mind  of 
man,  and  a  beam  of  the  light  which  comes  with  us 
into  the  world,  will  appear  by  the  general  agreement 
of  heathens  in  it.  I  will  but  produce  one  or  two 
teftimonies  to  this  purpofe.  Tully  lays  down  this 
principle,  as  that  which  makes  men  regular  and  or- 
derly, and  fit  for  fociety :  fii  igitur  hoc  perfiiafum 
civibus^  qiialis  quifqiie  fit^  quid  agat^  quid  in  fe  ad- 
mittat  deos  intueri.  Socrates,  as  Xenophon  tells  us, 
was  wont  to  fay,  -zD-otyrcfc  diiq  ei^kvcct  rd  ts  Agyo- 
fA^zvcc  >i  '^^y.rlifJLivct  K.  Tdi  cnyyj  /3&A<i6c^£i/ot.  Arrian, 
in  liis  difcourfe  upon  Epidetus,  tells  us,  it  is  necef- 
fary  tJiat  every  one  fhould  be  perfuaded  of  this,  on 

iKCt^CV  10J\>  'ST^jCrlofA.ivMP  i(pO^TOil  VTTO  T^  Ssi^,   "  that 

"  every  thing  tliat  is  done  by  men  is  ken  of  God.'* 

The 


^he  knowledge  of  God.  3355 

The  fcripture  frequently  mentions  this,  Pfal.  ^^J?,^' 
cxxxix.  I,  &:c.  Prov.  v.  21.  "  The  ways  of  man 
*'  are  before  the  eyes  of  the  Lord,  and  he  ponder- 
"  eth  all  his  goings."  Jer.  xxxii.  19.  "  Thine  eyes 
*'  are  open  upon  all  the  ways  of  the  fons  of  men,  to 
'^  give  every  one  according  to  his  ways,and  according 
''  to  the  fruit  of  his  doings." 

2.  He  is  a  curious  obferver,  one  that  takes  exa6t 

notice  of  all  that  we  do.     Job  faith,  "  he  feeth  all 

"  our  fleps-,"  and  Solomon,  that  "  he  ponder  eth 

*'  all  our  goings ;"  the  word  is,   "  he  weighs  them 

*^  in  a  balance."     So  i  Sam.  ii.  3.  "  The  Lord  ia 

"  a  God  of  knowledge,  by  him  anions  are  weigh' 

*'  ed."     Job  xxxi.  4.  "  Doth  he  not  fee  my  ways, 

"  and  count  all  my  fteps  ?"  which  doth  not  imply 

the  difficulty,  but  the  perfedion  and  exadnefs   of 

God's   knowledge  -,  he  knows  the  quahty   of  our 

adtions,  and  all  the  circumflances  of  them,  all  the 

degrees  of  good  and  evil  that  are  in  them  j  whatever 

may  commend  an  adion,  or  blemifh  it  j  whatever 

may  aggravate  a  fin,  or  excufe  it.     Ifa.  xxvi.   7. 

"  Thou  moft  upright  doth  weigh  the  path  of  the 

*'  jufl."     There's  not  a  good  word  that  we  fpeak, 

but  God  hears  it,  Mai.  iii.   16.  "And  the  Lord 

"  hearkened  and  heard,  and  a  book  of  remembrance 

*'  was  written  before  him ;"  and  all  we  do  is  "  not- 

*'  ed  in  his  book,  Pfal.  Ivi.  8. 

3.  He  takes  notice  of  thofe  adions  which  are  moft 
fecret  and  hidden,  the  good  as  well  as  bad  •,  when 
we  "  do  our  alms  in  fecret,"  when  we  "  enter  into 
"  our  clofets  and  Ihut  the  doors,  our  father  feeth 
"  in  fecret,"  Mat.  vi.  Nor  can  we  retire  our  felves 
to  any  place,  where  we  can  fin  fo  as  God  fhall  not 
fee  us,  where  we  can  hide  our  fins  from  his  fight,  or 
our  fclves  from  his  wrath.    Hear  how  fenfibly  a 

heathen 


3  3  5  6  ^^^  knowledge  of  Gojyl 

S  E  R  M.  heathen  fpeaks  of  this ;  Irctv  KAeia-yjTi  rug  3-v^ctg^ 
'  ?c  (rKoT(^  Iv^ov  'zxTci/jiTiTi,    ^£jt<ti/>jo9-g  UTj^TToje  Aiyeiv 
cTiUovGi  'i<^i'  ^  ydo  £<rf,  clX?C  0  3'iccivScv  Wi,  Jto  vui" 
ripo;    oaifyiMv   e^^,   Ttg  mroic  XQ^^-^   (p^T^g-y     «?  7? 
(iXi'Tniv  Ti  'uToieiTi',  ^Arrian  in  Ep.  1.  i.e.  14. 

The  fcripture  is  full  of  teftimonies  to  this  purpofe, 
Pfal.  xc.  8.  "  Thou  haft  fet  our  iniquities  before 
*'  thee,  and  our  fecret  fins  in  the  light  of  thy  coun- 
*'  tenance;"  thofe  fins  which  we  commit  in  the 
dark  are  in  the  light  of  the  divine  knowledge, 
'^  darkaefs  and  light  are  all  one  to  him ;"  Pfal.  cxxxix. 
II,  12.  Jer.  xvi.  17,  23,  24.  "  Can  any  hide  him- 
*'  felf  in  fecret  places,  that  I  fhall  not  fee  him  ?** 

II.  God  knows  the  hearts  and  thoughts  of  men, 
which  implies  thefe  two  things. 

ift.  His  pcrfe61:  knowledge  of  them. 

2dly.  That  this  is  his  peculiar  prerogative. 

I  ft.  God  perfeftly  knows  the  hearts  of  men,  Jer, 
xvii.  10.  "I  the  Lord  fearch  the  heart,  and  try 
*^  the  reins  ;"  where  by  heart  and  reins,  which  are 
the  moft  inward  parts  of  the  body,  and  lie  leaft  open 
to  difcovery,  are  fignified  the  moft  fecret  thoughts 
and  motions  of  the  foul  •,  thefe  God  is  faid  to  fearch 
and  try,  not  as  if  it  were  a  work  of  labour  and  dif- 
ficulty to  the  divine  knowledge  to  penetrate  the 
hearts  of  men,  and  to  dive  into  their  thoughts,  but 
to  fignify  to  us  the  perfection  and  exa6lnefs  of  the 
divine  knowledge  •,  as  when  men  would  know  a 
thing  exadly,  they  fearch  into  every  part  of  it,  and 
examine  every  thing  narrowly  •,  fo  God  is  faid  "  to 
*'  fearch  the  heart,"  to  fignify  to  us  that  he  knows 
the  hearts  of  men,  as  thoroughly  as  we  do  any  thing 
upon  the  ftridleft  fearch  and  moft  diligent  examina- 
tion ;  upon  the  fame  account  he  is  faid  elfewhere  in 
fcripture  "  to  weigh  the  fpirits  gf  men/'  Prov.  xvi. 

2.  *'A1I 


'The  knowledge  of  God.  3357 

2,  **  AH  the  ways  of  man  are  clean  in  his  own  eyes,  S  E  R  M. 
*'  but  the  Lord  weigheththe  fpirits  •,"  that  is,  he 
hath  as  perfed  a  knowledge  of  the  fecret  motions 
and  incHnations  of  mens  hearts,  as  men  have  of  thofc 
things  which  they  weigh  in  a  "balance  with  the  great- 
eft  exadinefs. 

Now  that  God  hath  this  perfed  knowledge  of 
mens  hearts,  the  fcripture  frequently  declares  to  us  ; 
that  he  knows  the  hearts  of  ail  men,  i  Kings  viii.  39. 
"  For  thou,  even  thou,  knoweft  the  hearts  of  all  the 
*'  children  of  men."  iChron.  xxviii.  9.  "The  Lord 
"  fearcheth  all  hearts,  and  underftandeth  all  the  ima- 
"  ginations  of  the  thoughts."  How  clofe  and  re- 
ferved  foever  men  may  be,  what  difguife  foever  they 
may  ufe  to  hide  their  purpofes  froni  men,  yet 
God  fees  them.  •,  the  things  which  are  moft  dark  and 
fecret  are  open  to  his  view,  Pfal.  xliv.  21.  "  He 
"  knoweth  the  fecrets  of  the  hearts,"  Prov.  xv.  11, 
*^  Hell  and  deftrudion  are  before  him,  how  much 
*'  m.Oi-e  the  hearts  of  the  children  of  men  .^"  What- 
ever pretences  men  may  make.  Got)  fees  through 
them,  and  difcovers  the  very  intentions  of  their 
hearts.  Pfal.  vii.  9.  The  righteous  Lord  trieththe 
heart  and  reins."  Heb.  iv.  13.  It  is  faid  there  of 
"  the  word  of  God,"  that  it  is  "  adifcerner  of  the 
"  thoughts  and  intentions  of  the  heart  •,  for  all 
^'  things  are  naked  and  open  to  the  eye  of  him  with 
"  whom  we  have  to  do,  and  there  is  no  creature 
*'  that  is  not  manifeft  in  his  fight  •,"  nay  he  knows 
our  thoughts  at  a  diftance,  what  they  will  be,  before 
any  adually  are,  Pfal.  cxxxix.  2.  "  Thou  knoweft 
*'  my  thoughts  afar  off."  'Tis  true  indeed  every 
man  is  confcious  to  his  own  thoughts,  and  privy  to 
the  motions  of  his  own  mind,  when  they  are  prefent, 
and  ifvhen  they  are  paft^  if  he  have  not  forgot  them ; 

but 


cxxxiv. 


52^8  'The  knowledge  of  God. 

S  E  R  M.  but  no  man  knows  what  he  fhall  think  to  morrow^ 
but  this  God  knows,  for  he  knows  us  more  inti- 
mately and  thoroughly  than  we  do  our  felves  ; 
"  God  is  greater  than  our  hearts,  and  knows  all 
*'  things,"    I  John  iii.  20. 

And  though  the  fcripturehad  not  revealed  this  fo 
plainly,  yet  we  had  not  been  wholly  ignorant  of  it ; 
it  is  a  principle  implanted  in  us,  and  born  with  us, 
as  being  part  of  that  natural  notion  which  men  have 
of  God  ;  the  reafon  of  our  minds  tells  us,  that  God 
knows  our  hearts ;  and  the  fears  and  jealoufies  of 
our  minds  are  an  evidence  of  it. 

(ifl.)  The  reafon  of  every  man's  mind  tells  him, 
that  the  fupreme  being,  whom  we  call  God,  is  en- 
dowed with  all  perfedion,  and  among  his  other  per- 
fedions,  that  "  he  excels  in  knowledge ;"  and  to 
the  perfedion  of  knowledge  it  is  required,  that  it 
extend  it  felf  to  all  obje6ls,  and  that  nothing  be  ex- 
empted from  it.  The  knowledge  of  God  in  refpe(5t 
of  all  objedls,  is  like  the  fun  in  refped  of  this  lower 
world,  "  nothing  is  hid  from  the  light  of  it.'*  We 
have  naturally  this  apprehenfion  of  God,  that  he  is 
an  immenfe  being,  every  where  prefent,  that  he  inti- 
mately penetrates  all  places  and  things,  and  confe- 
quently  that  he  is  prefent  to  our  fpirits,  and  fees  all 
the  motions  of  our  minds,  and  difcerns  the  very  fe- 
crets  of  our  hearts  •,  and  there  can  be  no  fuch  thing 
as  fecrecy  and  retirement  from  an  eye  that  is  every 
where,  and  a  knowledge  that  pierceth  into  all  things. 

And  to  convince  us  that  thefe  are  the  didates  of 
natural  reafon,  without  the  help  and  afTiftance  of  di- 
vine revelation,  we  fhall  find  that  the  heathens,  who 
had  only  the  advantage  of  natural  light,  were  firmly 
pofTeft  with  this  apprehenfion,  that  God  knows  the 
hearts  of  men.     This  may  be  fufficiently  collected 

from 


l^he  knoivledge  of  Gat).  3359 

from  the  frequent  fayings  of  the  wifer  heathens  to  ^^^xxn^ 
this  purpofe  ;  that  the  beft  and  moft  acceptable  wor- 
Ihip  of  the  Deity  is  that  which  is  inward,  that  of  the 
heart  and  mind.  To  this  fenfe  Tully  fpeaks,  cul- 
tu5  autem  deorum  eft  opiimus^  idemque  caftijfimus  at- 
que  fan^liffimiis  plenijfimufque  pietatis,  ut  eos  femper 
purdy  integrdy  atque  incorriiptd  mente  i^  voce  vene^ 
remur  \  "  The  beft  and  holieft  worfhip  of  the  gods 
'*  is  to  worfhip  them  with  a  pure,  and  upright,  and 
"  fincere  mind."  To  the  fame  purpofe  is  that 
known  faying  of  the  poet, 

Compofttum  JUS  fafque  animiy  fan5fofque  recejfus 
Mentis y  ^  ince5fum  generofo  pe5ius  honeftoy 
H<£C  cedo  lit  admoveam  templis  ^  farre  litabo, 

*'  do  but  offer  to  God  a  m.ii"id  inwardly  refolved  to 
"  be  juft  and  honeft ,  and  the  plaineft  facrifice 
"  will  pleafc  him."  Now  from  hence,  that  they 
judged  the  purity  of  our  hearts  and  thoughts,  and 
an  honeft  difpofition  of  mind,  to  be  moft  accepta- 
ble to  their  gods,  we  may  certainly  conclude,  that 
they  did  moft  firmly  beheve  that  God  knows  the  fe- 
crets  of  mens  hearts  ^  otherwife  there  had  been  no 
need  for  men  to  endeavour  to  recommend  thcmfelves 
this  way  to  the  divine  acceptance. 

But  we  need  not  argue  this  by  confequence,  there 
are  many  exprefs  pallages  in  their  writings,  which 
do  fufficiently  fignify  their  belief  of  this  principle. 
Thales,  one  of  their  moft  ancient  philofophers,  being 
aflced,  ^'  if  an  unjuft  man  could  conceal  himfelf  from 
"  God  .^"  he  anfvvered,  "  he  cannot  fo  much  as  hide 
"  from  him  the  very  thoughts  and  defign  of  it."  So- 
crates (as  Xenophon  tells  us)  was  wont  to  inculcats 
this  principle  upon  his  fcholars,  that  "  the  gods 
"  know  all  things,  what  we  fay,  and  what  we  do. 

Vol.  VIII.  i6  H  *'  and 


The  knowledge  of  God. 

**  and  what  we  think  in  filence."To  the  fame  purpofe 
Arrian  in  his  difertations  upon  Epidletus,  laying  down 
the  principles  of  a  virtuous  life,  "firft  of  all,  faith  he, 
•'  we  muft  learn  thiSj  that  there  is  a  God  who  takes 
*'  care  of  the  world,  and  that  there  is  nothing  hid 
*'  from  him,  not  only  what  we  do^  but  not  fo  much 
''  as  what  we  think  and  defign."  So  likewife  Tul- 
ly  in  his  book  of  laws,  * '  let  every  man  be  firmly 
"  perfuaded  of  this,  that  the  gods  fee  what  every 
"  man  is,  and  with  what  mind  and  devotion  they 
*'  ferve  them  :"  I  will  add  but  one  teflimony  more, 
and  that  is  of  Seneca  in  his  epiftles,  nihil  Deo  clau- 
fum  efi^  interefi  animis  nofiriSy  (^  cogitationihus  me- 
diis  intervenit^  "  we  can  keep  nothing  clofe  from 
*'  God,  for  he  is  prefent  to  our  minds,  and  intimate 
*'  to  our  thoughts  •,''  fo  that  you  fee  this  principle 
is  deeply  rooted  in  the  minds  of  men,  and  that  men 
do  naturally  reafon  themfelves  into  it. 

(2.)  The  natural  fears  of  men  are  likewife  a  fecret 
acknowledgment  of  this ;  and  I  take  this  to  be  a 
great  truth,  that  a  man's  natural  anions,  andfuchas 
happen  upon  furprizc  and  without  deliberation,  are 
a  better  argument  of  the  intimate  fenfeof  our  minds, 
and  do  more  truly  difcover  what  lies  at  the  bottom 
of  our  hearts,  and  what  notions  are  natural  to  us, 
than  our  contrived  and  deliberate  difcourfe.  If  I  fee 
a  man  upon  the  fudden  fight  of  a  ferpent  recoil  and 
flart  back,  though  he  tell  me  never  fo  often  that  he 
is  not  afraid,  yet  I  am  fufiiciently  convinced  of  the 
contrary,  becaufe  I  fee  in  his  countenance  and  carri- 
age a  natural  acknowledgment  of  fear  and  danger  ; 
fo  if  men  find  that  upon  the  defigning  of  a  fecret  wick- 
ednefs,  v/hich  never  went  further  than  their  own 
hearts,  their  confciences  do  fting  and  lalh  them,  that 
they  have  a  fenfe  of  guilt,  and  feel  inward  frights 

and 


^he  knowledge  of  God.  3361 

and  horrors,  whatever  they  may  fay  to  the  contrary ;  ^^|^j^* 
this  is  a  natural  acknowledgment  of  an  invifible  eye 
that  fees  them,  and  difallows  their  wicked   defigns. 
If  that  be  true  which  the  heathen  poet  fays,  that 

Seeks  intra  fe  taciturn  qui  cogitat  ullum^ 
Fa5fi  crimen  hahet. 

*'  He  that  meditates  any  fecret  wickednefs  in  his 
*'  heart,  is  guilty  to  himfelf,  as  if  he  had  commit- 
"  ted  it ;  this  is  a  plain  confefTion,  that  the  man 
(lands  in  awe  of  fomething  befides  himfelf,  and  is 
jealous  that  there  is  one  that  is  confcious  to  what  he 
thinks. 

2.  That  to  have  a  perfect  and  thorough  know- 
ledge of  mens  hearts,  is  the  peculiar  prerogative  of 
God.  This  is  implied  in  the  anfwerto  that  quefti- 
on,  '^  who  can  know  the  heart  of  man  ?  Jer.  xvii. 
10.  "  I  the  Lord  fearch  the  heart,  and  try  the 
''  reins  j"  this  is  the  prerogative  of  God,  and  one 
of  his  chief  titles,  that  he  is  Koc^^ioyvti^vig^  r  knower 
of  the  heart,  i  Kings  viii.  39.  "  Thou,  even  thou  only 
"  knoweft  the  hearts  of  all  the  children  of  men." 
Men  may  make  a  probable  conjedlure  at  the  thoughts 
and  defigns  of  others,  from  their  words  and  adions  ; 
but  God  only  knows  them.  Men  are  confcious  to 
their  own  thoughts  and  purpofes  ;  "  the  fpirit  of  a 
"  man  that  is  in  him,  knows  the  things  of  a  man  ;'* 
but  they  cannot  fee  into  the  fecrets  of  another  man's 
mind;  'tis  God  alone  that  knows  the  hearts  of  all 
men  ;  the  heart  of  a  man  is  a  privileged  place,  and 
the  fecret  and  inward  workings  of  it  are  not  fubjeft 
to  the  cognizance  of  any  but  God  alone.  The  h- 
mits  of  human  knowledge  are  the  outward  appearan- 
ces of  anions,  i  Sam.  xvi.  7.  "  The  Lord  feeth 
"  not  as  man  feeth ;  for  man  looketh  on  the  out- 
16  H  2  "  ward 


3362  Mlje  knowledge  of  God. 

SERM.  <«  ward  appearance,  but  the  Lord  looketh  on  the 
CXXXIV4 

"  heart  ^"  our  knowledge   is  but  fuperficial,   and 

glides  upon  the  outfide  and  furface  of  things,  but 
the  divine  knowledge  pierceth  to  the  very  center  of 
every  thing.  Now  the  darkcft  place,  the  mofl  in- 
ward retirement,  the  privatefl  clofet  in  the  whole 
world,  is  the  heart  of  man,  and  this  God  only  is 
privy  to  ;  Deus  au£fcr  cmnimn  &  /peculator  omnium^ 
a  quo  nihil  fecretum  ejfe  poteft^  ten'ebris  inter  eft  ^  inter - 
eft  ^  cogitationihus  noftris  quaft  alter  is  tenehris^  faith 
Min.  Fcelix,  "God  made  all  things,  and  fees  all 
*'  things,  and  therefore  nothing  can  be  fecret  from 
*'  him  5  he  is  prefent  in  darknefs,  and  he  is  prefent 
*'  to  the  thoughts  of  men,  which  are  as  it  were 
*'  another  and  a  thicker  darknefs." 

The  devil  indeed  pretends  to  this  knowledge  •, 
he  would  take  upon  him  to  know  the  integrity  of 
Job's  heart  better  than  God  himfelf ;  and  that  not- 
withftanding  the  teftimony  which  God  gave  of  his 
integrity,  yet  if  he  were  but  foundly  tried  by  afflic- 
tion, he  would  renounce  God,  and  curfe  him  to  his 
face :  but  the  event  proved  how  groundlefs  and 
^nalicious  this  fuggeftion  was.  But  there  is  a  far 
greater  difficulty  in  this  matter,  from  the  paflages  of 
fomc  divines  concerning  the  devil's  immediate  ac- 
rcfs  to  the  minds  of  men,  and  his  power  to  cafl 
wicked  thoughts  into  them  ;  which  fccms  by  con- 
fequence  to  grant  him  fome  knowledge  of  mens 
hearts  •,  for  by  the  fame  reafon  that  he  can  imprint 
thoughts  upon  men's  minds,  he  may  fee  thofe  that 
-are  imprinted  there. 

That  the  devil  is  a  very  fagacious  fpirit,  and  can 
make  very  flirewd  conjcdures  at  the  bent  and  incli- 
nations of  men's  minds,  and  the  probable  workings 
of  our  thouglits,  from  a  general  knowledge  and  ob- 

3  fcrvation 


T'he  knowledge  of  God,  3  3 63 

fervat'ion  of  our  tempers  and  pafTions,  of  our  inter-  S  E^R  M, 
efts  and  defigns,  and  from  the  general  teaor  of  our 
actions  in  publick  and  private,  and  from  our  prayers 
and  confeiTions  to  God  (if  he  permit  him  at  any  time 
to  be  fo  near  good  men)  I  think  there  is  no  doubt : 
but  this  is  far  from  a  knowledge  of  our  hearts  •,  all 
this  is  but  conjedure,  and  fuch  as  men  may  make 
of  one  another  in  a  lower  degree. 

But  as  to  the  bufmefs  of  cafting  blafphemous  and 
defpairing  thoughts  into  the  minds  of  men,  to  this 
I  would  fay  thefe  three  things. 

I .  That  there  are  few  of  thefe  cafes  which  may 
not  more  probably  be  refolved  into  the  wickednels 
and  infidelity  of  men's  hearts,  or  into  the  darkncft 
and  melancholy  of  our  tempers,  which  are  apt  to 
raife  and  fuggeft  ftrange  thoughts  to  men,  and  fuch 
as  we  may  be  apt  to  think  have  no  rife  from  our 
felves,  not  confidering  what  an  odd  and  ftrange  in- 
fluence the  diforder  of  our  bodily  humours  may  have 
upon  our  minds,  as  we  fee  in  violent  fevers,  and 
leveral  other  difeafes  ^  and  melancholy,  though  the 
workings  of  it  are  more  ftill  and  quiet,  is  as  tnily  a 
difeafe  as  any  other  ;  fo  that  I  chufe  rather  to  afcribe 
as  much  of  thefe  to  a  bodily  diftemper  as  may  be, 
becaufe  it  is  a  very  uncomfortable  confideration,  to 
think  that  the  devil  hath  fuch  an  immediate  power 
upon  the  minds  of  men. 

2. 1  do  not  fee  how  by  any  means  it  can  be  grant- 
ed, without  prejudice  to  this  prerogative  of  God, 
which  the  fcripture  plainly  gives  him,  of  being  '^  the 
-**  only  knower  of  the  heart,"  that  the  devil  can 
have  fo  immediate  an  accefs  to  our  minds,  as  to  put 
wicked  thoughts  into  them  ;  nor  can  I  think,  that 
when  it  is  faid,  i  Chron.  xxi.  i.  that  "  Satan  pro- 
^*  voked  David  to  number  the  people,"  and  Luke 

xxii.  3, 


23  64  The  knowledge  of  Gojy. 

SERM.  xxii.  2.    That  "  the  devil  cntred  into  Tudas '*  and 

CXXXIV  ^  5        vxiV4- 

'  Ads  V.  3.  That  "  Satan  had  filled  the  heart  of  A- 
"  nanias  to  He  unto  the  Holy  Ghoft,"  and  Eph.  ii. 
2.  That  "  the  devil  is  the  fpirit  that  worketh  in  the 
**  children  of  difobedience  :"  I  fay,  I  cannot  think 
that  any,  or  all  of  thefe  expreflions  do  amount  to 
fuch  an  immediate  power  of  putting  wicked  thoughts 
into  men's  minds  j  but  they  only  fignify,  that  the 
devil  hath  a  greater  hand  in  fome  fins  than  others, 
and  that  a  heart  wickedly  bent  and  inclined,  give 
him  a  great  advantage  to  tempt  men  more  powerful- 
ly ,  by  prefenting  the  occafions  of  fuch  wicked 
thoughts  and  adions  to  them  •,  for  it  is  ufual,  in 
fcripture-phrafe,  as  to  afcribe  all  good  motions  to 
God's  ipirit,  fo  all  evil  thoughts  and  actions  to  the 
devil,  not  that  jie  is  the  immediate  caufe  of  them, 
but  becaufe  he  is  always  ready  to  tempt  men  to  them, 
and  one  way  or  other  to  promote  them. 

3.  I  fee  no  reafon  to  grant  (as  many  have  done) 
an  immediate  power  to  the  devil  over  the  fancies  and 
imaginations  of  men,  and  that  he  may  know  the 
Workings  of  them,  though  not  the  fecret  thoughts 
of  men's  minds ;  for  this  feems  to  me  to  be  in  ef- 
fect to  grant  him  the  knowledge  of  men's  hearts, 
and  to  give  him  a  key  to  that  clofet  which  God 
hath  refer ved  to  himfelf :  for  it  is  a  very  nice  diftinc- 
tion  which  is  here  made  between  the  thoughts  of 
men's  minds,  and  the  images  of  their  fancies  •,  and 
if  thefe  fliould  happen  to  be  but  words  that  lignify 
the  fame  thing,  we  Ihall  unawares  intrench  upon  the 
prerogative  of  God.  Therefore  becaufe  the  fcrip- 
ture  is  a  ftranger  to  thefe  nice  and  fubtile  diftinftions 
between  the  imaginations  of  the  fancy,  and  the 
thougliis  of  the  heart,  I  think  it  is  much  fafer  to  af- 
fert  the  prerogative  of  God  in  that  latitude  that  the 

fcrip- 


The  knowledge  of  God.  3365 

fcripture  ufeth  the  word  heart ;  for  all  the  inward  S  E  R  M. 

1  cxxxiv, 

motions  of  the  mind,  for  the  thoughts  and  intenti- 
ons of  the  heart,  and  roundly  to  affirm  that  all  the 
inward  motions  of  our  fouls  are  totally  exempt  from 
the  immediate  cognizance  of  any  other  fpirit  but 
God's  alone  -,  and  that  neither  angel  nor  devil  hath 
any  hjrther  knowledge  of  them,  than  may  be  colledl- 
ed  and  inferred  in  a  way  of  probable  conjecture  from 
the  particular  knowledge  of  men's  tempers  and  ha- 
bits and  defigns,  and  the  courfe  of  their  aftions.  I 
proceed  to  the 

III.  Particular  •,  God's  knowledge  of  future  events. 
This  God  purpofes  as  the  way  to  difcern  the  true 
God  from  idols,  Ifaiah  xh.  21,  &c.  "  Produce 
"  your  caufe,  faith  the  Lord,  bring  forth  your 
"  ftrong  reafons,  faith  the  king  of  Jacob;"  that 
is,  let  them  bring  fome  argument  that  may  convince 
us  that  they  are  gods  -,  and  he  inftanceth  in  foretelling 
future  events,  ver.  22.  "  Let  them  Ihew  the  former 
*'  things,  what  they  be,  that  we  may  confider  them, 
**  and  know  the  latter  end  of  them  ;  or  declare  us 
*'  things  for  to  come.  Shew  the  things  that  are  to 
*'  come  hereafter,  that  we  may  know  that  ye  are 
*'  gods."  God  puts  it  upon  this  ifllie,  if  they  can 
"  foretel  future  things,"  then  they  are  gods  ;  if 
not ;  they  are  "  vanity,  and  a  v/ork  of  naught,  and 
"  he  is  an  abomination  that  chufeth  them,"  ver. 
24.  By  "  things  to  come,"  I  underiland  fuch  ef- 
fects as  do  not  depend  upon  any  neceffary  caufe, 
but  upon  the  will  of  free  agents,  and  fo  may  be, 
or  may  not  be  -,  from  whence  it  is  plain,  that  it  is 
the  prerogative  of  God,  proper  and  pecuhar  to  him, 
to  know  future  events.  And  here  I  fhall  confider 
thefe  two  things. 

I,  That  God  knows  future  events. 

2.  That 


2366  TI6^  knowledge  of  Goiy] 

s  E  R  M.       2.  That  he  only  knows  them. 

^  -^^  '1  I.  God  knows  future  events  *,  which  will  appear 
from  the  didates  of  natural  light,  and  from  fcripture. 
(i.)  From  the  dictates  of  natural  light,  as  it  is  a 
perfection,  and  that  which  among  men  is  accounted 
the  befl  part  of  wifdom ;  and  unlefs  this  did  belong 
to  God,  how  could  he  govern  the  world  ?  The  hea- 
thens, except  only  the  Epicureans,  generally  grant- 
ed this,  as  appears  in  thofe  wife  counfels,  which  we 
frequently  meet  with  in  them  to  this  purpofe,  that 
we  Ihould  not  be  anxious  for  the  future  ;  but  having 
done  our  endeavour,leave  the  events  of  things  to  God, 
who  only  knows  them  and  difpofeth  them. 

Permittes  ipjis  expendere  numinibus^  quid 
Conveniat  nobis ^  rebufque  fit  utile  nojlris,    Juv. 

And  afterward,  faith  he,  *'  We  are  importunate 
*'  with  God  for  wife  and  children  -^  At  illis  notum^ 
qui  fueri^  qualifque  futura  fit  uxor.  And  that  this 
was  their  opinion,  appears  yet  more  clearly  from 
thofe  apprehenfions  which  they  had  of  divination. 
Tully  lays  down  this  for  a  principle,  decs  pojfe  nobis 
figna  futurarum  rerum  oftendere ;  de  legibus.  And  in 
his  book  de  Divin.  he  tells  us,  "  that  there  was  fuch 
''  a  thing  as  divination,  for  it  was  an  old  opinion," 
jam  ufque  ab  heroicis  duEla  tempofibus^  eaque  Pop, 
Rom.  (^  omnium  gentium  jirmat a  confenfuy  and  after- 
ward, that  this  divination  was  not,  Jine  inftin^u 
affiatiique  divino. 

I  know  they  did  varioufly  explain  this,  according 
to  their  feveral  opinions  about  fate  and  contingency, 
and  their  apprehenfions  about  the  providence  of  God. 
Gne  {tdi  of  them,  the  Stoicks,  held  that  there  was  a 
fatal  chain  of  caufes  from  firft  to  lad,  and  things  did 
neceflarily  follow  one  another  \  and  by  this  means 

»  they 


l^he  kmiv ledge  of  GoD,  3367 

they  made  fore-knowledge  eafy  and  explicable  ;  and  S  E  R  M. 
though  in  their  difputes  they  feem  to  grant  no  fuch  ^^^^^^• 
things  as  events  and  contingencies,  yet  they  are 
agreed  in  the  thing,  that  thofe  things  which  we  call 
events,  though  they  would  not  call  them  fo,  were 
fore-known  to  God.  And  for  this  I  fhall  only  cite 
one  teflimony  of  Seneca,  fpeaking  of  God's  fore- 
knowledge  of  the  moil  contingent  things,  the  dif- 
pofitions  of  men  long  before  they  are  born  •,  he  adds, 
not  a  eft  enim  illis  operis  fuiferies^  omniumque  Hits  re- 
rum  -per  manus  fuas  iturarum  fcientia  in  aperto  fern- 
per  eft ;  nobis  ex  ahdito  fubit  \  &  qua  repentina  pu* 
tamus^  illis  provifa  veniunt  &  familiaria  \  and  how 
peremptory  foever  this  fedt  is  in  their  difputes  about 
fate,  yet  when  they  fpeak  of  the  to,  g(p'  ^\^v^  and 
generally  in  their  m.oral  difcourfes,  they  feem  plain- 
ly to  me  to  exempt  the  will  of  man  from  this  fatal 
neceffity. 

And  thofe  other  fe6ls  of  the  philofophers  that  de- 
nied fate,  did  generally  grant  "  God's  fore-know- 
"  ledge  of  contingent  things."  I  grant  indeed,  that 
they  did  rather  make  God's  fore-knowledge  an  ar- 
bitrary and  voluntary,  than  a  neceffary  perfedion, 
that  is,  that  God,  when  he  pleafed  to  apply  him- 
felf  to  it,  could  fore-know  all  future  events:  but 
their  general  opinion  was,  that  as  his  providence  did 
not  extend  to  fmall  and  inconfiderable  things,  fo 
neither  his  fore-knowledge.  But  Tully  feems  to  at- 
tribute a  very  perfeft  providence  to  him,  and  a  fore- 
knowledge of  the  lead  things,  S^uis  non  timeat  omnia 
providentem^  cogitantemy  animadvert entem^  i^  omnia 
Gd  fe  pertinere  putantem^  curio jum  ^  negotii  plenum 
Deum  ?  But  I  cannot  fay  he  is  conftant  to  himfelf : 
but  they  all  agree  in  granting  to  him  this  perfedlion 
©f  knowing  all  future  things,  if  he  pkafed  to  trouble 

Vol.  Vm.  |6 1  him- 

2. 


T'he  knowledge  of  God. 

himfelf  with  it ;  and  had  they  not  in  this  miftakeit 
the  nature  of  God,  they  might  eafily  have  appre- 
hended, that  it  is  no  trouble  nor  wearinefs  to  an  infi- 
nite underftanding,  that  is  always  in  a6b,  to  know 
the  leaft  things  how  many  foever  they  be. 

2.  From  fcripture,  which  gives  us  teftimonies  and 
arguments  of  it. 

(i.)  Teftimonies,  Ifa.  xlviii.  3,  &c.  A6ls  xv.  18. 
'*  Known  unto  God  are  all  his  works,  from  the 
**  beginning  of  the  world,  cctt  oclmog  from  everlaft- 
*^  ing  :"  which  by  the  way  I  cannot  but  compare 
with  the  forecited  place  of  Seneca.  Nota  enim  Hits 
operis  fui  feries,  &c. 

(2.)  By  arguments  from  fcripture.  I  will  men- 
tion but  one  ;  the  clear  and  particular  predidions  of 
fliture  events  long  before  they  happened.  Gen.  xv. 
13.  God  foretels  the  children  of  Ifrael's  deliverance 
after  430  years,  which  he  punctually  accomplifhed, 
Exod.  xii.  40,  41.  The  prophet  that  prophefied 
againft  the  altar  at  Bethel  named  the  man  that  lliould 
doit,  Jofias,  350  years  before-hand,  i  Kings  xiii. 
2.  The  deliverance  of  the  children  of  Ifrael  from  the 
BabyloniHi  captivity  was  foretold  100  years  before 
to  be  done  particularly  by  Cyrus  •,  which  is  fo  flrange, 
that  the  prophet  brings  it  in  with  a  preface  of  God's 
wifdom  and  power,  Ifa.  xliv.  24,  &:c.  Which  was 
afterward  precifely  fulfilled,  when  the  70  years  were 
expired.  How  are  the  life  and  death  of  the  MefTias, 
with  many  particular  circumftances  foretold !  And 
did  not  he  foretel  the  deftrudion  of  Jerufalem  40 
years  before  ? 

But  becaufe  there  may  be  no  contingency  in  good 

things,  God  himfelf  may  be  refolved  to  effe6l  them^ 

or  excite  men  to  do  them,  when  he  hath  foretold 

them  5  you  fhall  find  that  the  worft  things  have  been 

2  fore- 


Of  the  knowledge  of  God.  33^9 

told  ;  the  Apoftacy  of  the  children  of  Ifrael,  Deut.  S  E  R  M- 
xxxi.  1 6.  and  their  infidelity  in  times  of  the  gofpel, 
Ifa.  liii.  I,  5,  9,  26.  Our  Saviour  foretold  the  trea- 
chery of  Judas  and  Peter's  denial  of  him  :  now  thefe 
are  fo  evil,  that  it  were  blafphemy  to  fuppofe  the  ho- 
ly God  to  have  any  hand  in  them  ;  and  therefore  are 
foretold  by  him  merely  by  virtue  of  his  fore-know- 
ledge, and  the  infinitenefs  of  his  undcrflanding,  which 
reacheth  things  at  the  greateft  dillance,  that  are  moll 
contingent. 


SERMON    CXXXV. 

Of  the  knowledge  of  God. 


I  S  A  M.  ii.  3. 
The  ILoKD  is  a  God  of  knowledge. 

Have  confidered  this  perfe6i:ion  of  God,  in  fome  S  E  R  M. 
of  the  gfeateft  and  moil  difficult  inilances  of  it. 


I 


his  knowledge  of  the  moil  fecret  things,  the  hearts 
of  men,  and  future  events  ;  againil  the  lail  of  which 
there  are  fome  objections,  which  I  come  now  briefly 
to  confider,  and  pafs  on  to  what  remains. 

Objection  the  firil  *,  the  impoITibility  of  the  thing. 
The  certainty  of  all  knowledge  depends  upon  the 
certainty  of  the  objeCl ;  therefore  there  cannot  be  a 
certain  and  determinate  knowledge  of  any  tiling,  but 
what  is  certainly  and  determinately  true  :  but  future 
events,  which  may,  or  may  not  be,  have  no  certain 
and  determinate  truth,  that  is,  it  is  not  certain  either 
that  they  will,  or  will  not  be,  becaufe  they  have  no 
16  I  %  certain 


337^  ^f  ^^^  know}edge  ofGoT). 

S  R  R  M.  cef  tain  caufe ;  therefore  there  can  be  no  infallible 
cxxxv. 

knowledge  concerning  them. 

Anfwer,  This  I  confefs  is  the  grand  difficulty  *,  I 

fhall  not  be  fo  folicitous  to  take  it  away,  as  to  give 

fatisfa6lion  to  it. 

1.  I  might  fay,  with  a  very  fair  probability,  that 
the  certainty  of  knowledge  doth  not  depend  upon  the 
uncertainty  of  the  caufe,  but  of  the  objecl,  which 
may  be  certain,  though  the  caufe  be  contingent. 
Which  I  prove  thus  •,  whatever  event  hath  adually 
happened,  as  becaufe  now  it  is  paft,  it  is  certainly 
true,  that  it  was  j  fo  becaufe  it  once  was,  it  was  cer- 
tainly true  before  it  was,  that  it  would  be  -,  as  in 
Peter's  denying  of  Chris  t»  If  it  be  now  true,  that 
he  hath  denied  him,  it  was  true  before,  that  he  would 
deny  him  ;  and  it  being  dererminately  true,  Goi> 
faw  it  as  it  was  ^  fo  that  here  is  an  objed  of  a  certain 
knowledge. 

2.  Though  we  could  not  explain  the  pofTibility  of 
God's  knowing  future  contingencies,  much  lefs  the 
manner  how  •,  yet  we  are  fufficiently  aflured  that  God 
doth  know  them.  I  will  give  but  one  inftance  for 
the  proof  of  this.  Nothing  more  evident  than  the 
fin  of  Adam  •,  yet  God  fore-knew  this,  how  elfe  was 
Christ  "  decreed  before  the  foundation  of  the 
*'  world  ?"  Christ  was  a  remedy  upon  the  occafi- 
on  of  fm  ;  now  the  remedy  could  not  be  defigned 
before  the  fin  was  fore-feen :  and  this  being  certain, 
cum  conftat  de  re^  frufira  inquirltiir  de  modo^  "  when 
*^  we  are  certain  of  the  thing,  'tis  not  neceflary  to 
^'  know  the  manner."  We  are  fatisfied  of  many 
things,  the  manner  whereof  we  do  not  know  -,  we 
believe  the  union  of  the  foul  and  body,  though  no 
man  can  explain  how  a  fpirit  can  be  united  to  mat- 
ter i  v/e  believe  the  continuity  of  matter,  that  is,  that 

the 


Of  the  knowledge  of  God.  3  3  7  i 

the  parts  of  it  hang  together,  of  which  whofoever  S  E  R  M: 
faith  he  can  give  an  account,  doth  but  betray  his  own  ^^^^ 
ignorance.  And  fo  in  many  other  things  •,  that  man 
doth  not  know  himfelf,  nor  the  meafure  of  his  own 
underflanding,  nor  the  nature  and  obfcurity  of  things, 
that  will  not  confefs  himfelf  pofed  in  many  things, 
that  doth  not  acknowledge  that  there  are  many  d- 
(pdflct<^oc,  many  things,  the  manner  whereof  is  unima- 
ginable, and  of  which  our  beft  reafon  and  under- 
flanding can  give  n6  account. 

3.  'Tis  very  unreafonable  to  expedt  we  fhould 
know  all  the  ways  which  infinite  knowledge  hath  of 
knowing  things.  We  have  but  finite  faculties  and 
meafures,  which  bear  no  proportion  to  infinite  powers 
and  objeds.  Could  we  explain  the  manner  how  in- 
finite knowledge  knows  things,  we  fhould  be  like 
God  in  knowledge,  our  underflandings  would  be 
infinite  like  his  -,  and  in  this  cafe  efpecially  it  becomes 
us  to  put  on  the  modefly  of  creatures,  and  to  remem- 
ber that  we  are  finite  and  limited.  Some  arrogant 
fpirits  take  it  for  an  affront  to  their  underflandings, 
that  any  one  fhould  expe6l  they  fhould  beHeve  any 
thing,  though  they  have  the  higheft  afilirance  of  it, 
if  they  cannot  explain  the  particular  manner  of  it ; 
they  make  nothing  to  deny  God's  knowledge  of  fu- 
ture events,  unlefs  they  may  be  fatisfied  of  the  parti- 
cular way  how  he  knows  them. 

I  know  there  are  thofe  who  undertake  to  explain 
the  particular  manner.  Some  fay,  that  God  fees  fu- 
ture events  in  fpeculo  voluntatis ,  others  fay,  that  the 
eternity  of  God  is  a6lually  commenfurate  to  all  du- 
ration, as  his  immenfity  to  all  fpace,  and  fo  God 
doth  not  fo  properly  fore-fee  and  fore-know,  as  fee 
and  know  future  things  by  the  prefentiality  and  co- 
exiitence  of  all  things  in  aJJ  eternity  •,  for  they  fay, 

that 


Of  the  knowledge  of  God. 

that  future  things  are  afhially  prefent  and  cxifting 
to  God,  though  not  in  menfurd  propria^  yet  in  men- 
furdaliend:  the  fchool-men  have  much  more  of  this 
jargon  and  canting  language ;  and  I  envy  no  man 
the  underftanding  thefe  phrafes  ^  but  to  me  they  feem 
to  fignify  nothing,  but  to  have  been  words  invented 
by  idle  and  conceited  men,  which  a  great  many  ever 
fince,  left  they  fhould  feem  to  be  ignorant,  would 
feem  to  underftand  ;  but  I  wonder  moft,  that  men, 
when  they  have  amufed  and  puzzled  themfelves  and 
others  with  hard  words,  fhould  call  this  explaining 
things. 

The  fum  of  the  anfwer  is  this  ;  that  when  we  have 
done  all  we  can,  God's  fore-knowledge  of  future  e- 
vents  may  feem  contradidious  and  impofTible  to  us, 
much  lefs  do  I  expe6l  ever  to  be  able  to  give  a  par- 
ticular account  of  the  manner  of  it :  but  we  have  fuf- 
ficient  alTurance  of  the  thing,  and  unlefs  we  had  ia- 
finite  underftandings,  it  were  vanity  to  pretend  to  ex- 
plain all  the  ways  of  infinite  knowledge. 

Secondly,  It  is  objeded,  that  if  we  can  admit 
fuch  a  knowledge  in  God  as  feems  contradidlious 
and  impofTible  to  our  reafon,  why  may  we  not  allow 
and  frame  fuch  notions  of  his  goodnefs  and  juftice? 

To  this  I  anfwer,  there  is  a  great  difference  between 
thofe  perfeftions  of  God  which  are  imitable,  and 
thofe  which  are  not.  Knowledge  of  future  events  is 
a  perfedlion  wherein  we  are  not  bound  to  be  like 
God  \  and  if  we  are  afTured  of  the  thing,  that  he 
doth  know  them,  it  is  not  neceffary  that  we  fhould 
know  the  manner  of  it,  and  difentangle  it  from  con- 
tradidion  and  impofhbility :  but  it  is  otherwife  in 
God's  goodnefs  and  juftice,  which  are  imitable: 
he  that  imitates,  endeavours  to  be  like  fomething 
that  he  knows,  and  we  muft  have  a  clear  idea  and 

notion 


Of  the  knowledge  of  Gory.  3373 

notion  of  that  which  we  would  bring  ourfelves  to  the  ^  ^  R  M. 
likenefs  of  j  thefe  perfe6lions  of  Go  d"  we  are  capable  of 
knowing,  and  therefore  the  knowledge  of  thefe  per- 
fedions  is  chiefly  recommended  to  us  in  fcripture.,  Jer. 
ix.  24.  By  thefe  God  reveals  himfelf,  and  declares 
his  name,  and  makes  himfelf  known  to  us,  even  by 
thofe  attributes  v/hich  declare  his  goodnefs,  and  mer- 
cy, and  juftice,  Exod.  xxxiv.  6,  7.  Pfal.  Ixxxvi. 
15.  Deut.  xxxii.  3,  4,  5.  When  God  would  give 
a  defcription  of  himfelf  to  Mofes,  he  promifes  "  to 
"  caufe  his  goodnefs  to  pafs  before  him."  So  that 
it  doth  not  follow,  that  becaufe  God's  knowledge 
of  future  events  is  to  be  admitted,  notwithflanding 
thefeemingcontradidiionand  impofPibiUty  of  it,  there- 
fore we  are  to  admit  of  any  notion  of  God's  juftice 
or  goodnefs  that  feems  contradidlious  or  impofll* 
ble.     The 

Third  obje6lion  is  made  up  of  feveral  inconveni- 
encies  that  v/ould  follow  from  Go d*s  knowledge  of 
future  events. 

I .  It  would  prejudice  the  liberty  of  the  creature. 
For  if  God  have  an  infallible  knowledge  of  what  we 
will  do,  then  we  cannot  but  do  what  he  infallibly 
fore-fees  we  will  do  -,  for  otherwife  his  knowledge 
would  be  fallible. 

Anfwer,  God's  fore-knowledge  lays  no  necelTity 
upon  the  event :  in  every  event,  we  may  confider  the 
effed  in  itfelf,  or  with  relation  to  the  caufe,  and 
the  manner  how  it  comes  to  pafs  ;  confidered  in  it- 
felf, it  is  future,  with  relation  to  it's  caufes,  it  is  con- 
tingent. God  fees  it  as  both,  and  fo,  as  that  which 
wntil  it  is,  may  be,  or  not  be  -,  and  when  it  comes 
to  pafs,  he  fees  the  man  do  it  freely  ,  and  fo  before 
it  be  done,  it  hath  no  neceflity  -,  but  upon  fuppofi- 
tion  of  fore-fight;  as  when  it  is,  it  hath  upon  fup- 

pofition 


3374  Of  the  knowledge  of  God. 

SERM.  pofition  that  it  is,  as  Origen  excellently  explains 
it.  Fore-knowledge  is  not  the  caufe  of  the  things 
that  are  fore-known;  but  becaufe  the  thing  is  fu- 
ture and  fhall  be,  this  is  the  reafon  why  it  is  fore- 
known ;  for  it  doth  not,  becaufe  it  was  known,  come 
to  pafs  ;  but  becaufe  it  was  to  come  to  pafs,  there- 
fore it  was  fore-known  ♦,  and  bare  knowledge  is  no 
more  the  caufe  of  any  event,  which  becaufe  it  is 
known  muft  infallibly  be,  than  my  feeing  a  man  run, 
is  the  caufe  of  his  running,  which,  becaufe  I  do  fee, 
is  infallibly  fo. 

2dly.  If  God  infallibly  fore-knows  what  men  will 
do,  how  can  he  be  ferious  in  his  exhortations  to  re- 
pentance, in  his  expe6tation  of  it,  and  his  grieving 
for  the  impenitency  of  men  ? 

Anfwer.  All  thefe  are  founded  in  the  liberty  of 
our  a6lions.  God  exhorts  to  repentance  and  ex- 
peds  it,  becaufe,  by  his  grace,  we  may  do  it  :  he 
is  faid  to  grieve  for  our  impenitency,  becaufe  we 
may  do  otherwife,  and  will  not.  Exhortations  are 
not  in  vain  themfelves,  but  very  proper  to  their  end  ; 
though,  through  our  obftinacy  and  hardnefs,  they 
pnay  be  rendred  vain  to  us,  and  without  effedl.  If 
the  weight  of  the  objeClion  lies  upon  ferious,  and 
you  aik  how  God  can  exhort  men  ferioufly  to 
that  which  he  fore-fees  that  they  will  not  do  •,  thofe 
whom  he  fore-knows  will  be  finally  impenitent  .f*  I 
anfwer,  if  his  exhortations  were  not  ferious,  he 
could  not  fore-fee  the  final  impenitency  of  men.  To 
fore-fee  men's  final  impenitency,  is  to  fore-fee  their 
wilful  contempt  of  God's  warnings  and  exhorta- 
tions, and  rejection  of  his  grace  :  now  mens  wilful 
contempt  of  his  warnings  and  exhortations  cannot 
be  forc-feen,  unlefs  God  fore-fee  that  his  exhortati- 
ons are  ferious,  and  in  good  earneft. 

Having 


Of  the  knowledge  of  Goal  3375 

Havino;   anfwered  the  objcdions  a^ainft  God's  S  E  R  M. 

'  CXXXV" 

fore- knowing  future  events,  I  proceed  to  fhew, 

11.  That  God  only  knows  future  events.  Ifa.  xllv. 
6,  7.  *'  Thus  faith  the  Lord  the  king  of  Ifrael,  and 
*'  his  redeemer  the  Lord  of  hoils,  I  am  the  firft, 
*'  and  I  am  the  laft,  and  befides  me  there  is  no  God: 
*'  and  who,  as  I,  fliall  call,  and  fhall  declare  it, 
"  and  fet  it  in  order  for  me,  fince  I  appointed  the 
*'  ancient  people  ?  and  the  things  that  are  coming, 
"  and  fhall  come  ?  let  them  Ihew  unto  them."  Ifa. 
xlvi.  9,  10.  "  Remember  the  former  things  of  old, 
''  for  I  am  God,  and  there  is  none  cKq  -,  I  am  God 
*'  and  there  is  none  like  me.  Declaring  the  end  from 
*'  the  beginning,  and  from  ancient  times  the  things 
*'  that  are  not  yet  done,  faying,  My  counfel  Ihall 
"  ftand,  and  I  will  do  all  my  pleafure." 

The  reafon  is  evident,  becaufe  the  knowledge  of 
future  events  is  beyond  the  reach  of  any  finite  un- 
derftanding  ;  efpecially  if  we  grant  it  to  be  beyond 
our  finite  underftanding,  to  explain  the  pofiibility  of 
fuch  a  knowledge  ;  for,  to  be  fure,  that  is  out  of 
the  reach  of  our  knowledge,  which  we. cannot  fa 
much  as  underftand  how  it  is  poffible  it  fhould  be 
known  by  any  underftanding. 

But  it  may  here  be  obje6led  •,  did  not  the  oracles 
among  the  heathens  foretel  feveral  things,  which 
Chriftians  are  fatisfied  came  fl'om  the  devil  ?  I  have 
not  time  at  prefent  to  examine  the  bufinefs  of  heathen 
oracles  ;  I  could  eafily  fhew  there  was  much  impof- 
ture  in  them  :  but  grant  they  were  really  delivered 
and  given  out  by  a  fpirit  •,  yet  the  darknefs  and 
ambiguity,  the  affected  and  contrived  ambiguity,  is 
fuch,  as  fhews  that  the  devil  was  confcious  to  him- 
felf  of  the  uncertainty  of  his  knowledge  in  thofe  mat- 
ters :  and  thofc  few  that  came  to  pafs,  and  are  in 

Vol.  VIII,  16  K  any 


337^  ^f  ^^^  kno'ickdge  ef  God.' 

S  R  RM.  any  tolerable  fenfe  faid  to  be  accomplifhed,  were  la 
fuch  matters,  either  wherein  prudent  conjefture 
might  go  far  (and  I  grant  the  devil  to  be  a  fagacious 
fpirit ;)  or  elfe  in  disjiindlive  cafes,  as  when  there 
are  but  two  ways  for  a  thing  to  be,  it  muft  either  be  fo, 
or  fo,  in  which  a  bold  guefTing  may  often  hit  right : 
but  guefTing  at  future  things,  is  tar  from  a  know- 
ledge of  them,  w-liich  only  can  clearly  be  made  out 
by  pun6lual  and  particular  predictions  of  things,  with 
circumftances  of  timxC  and  perfon,  fuch  as  we  find  in 
fcripture  in  many  inflances,  to  the  prediction  of 
which,  the  greateft  fagacity,  and  the  utmoft  guefTing 
could  do  nothing,  fuch  as  thofe  predictions  of  which 
I  gave  inflances  out  of  fcripture. 

I  have  now  done  with  the  firft  general  head  I  pro- 
pofed  to  be  fpoken  to  from  thefe  words,  viz.  To 
prove  that  this  attribute  of  knowledge  belongs  to 
God.     I  proceed  to  the 

Second,  viz.  To  confider  the  perfeftion  and  pre- 
rogative of  the  divine  knowledge  •,  which  I  fliall 
fpeak  to  in  thefe  following  particulars. 

I.  God's  knowledge  is  prefent  and  a6lual,  his 
eye  is  alv/ays  open,  and  every  thing  is  in  the  view 
of  it.  The  knowledge  of  the  creature  is  more  pow- 
er than  a6t;  it  is  not  much  that  we  are  capable  of 
knowing,  but  there  is  very  little  that  we  do  a6lually 
know  :  it  is  but  one  thing  tliat  we  can  fix  our  thoughts 
upon  at  once,  and  apply  our  minds  to ;  we  can  re- 
move them  to  another  object,  but  then  we  mull  take 
off  our  minds  from  the  former,  and  quit  the  adual 
knowledge  of  it :  but  the  knowledge  of  God  is  an 
adual  and  flcady  comprehenfion  of  things  ^  he  being 
every  where  prefent,  and  all  eye,  nothing  can  efcapc 
his  fight,  but  all  the  obje6ls  are  at  once  in  the  view 
Q-f  the  divine  undcrilanding.   Heb.  iv,  13.  "Neither 


Of  the  knowledge  of  God",  3377 

*'  IS  there  any  creature  that  is  not  manifeft  in  his  S  K  R  M. 

cxxxv 
*'  fight :  but  all  things  are  naked  and  open  unto  the 

''  eyes  of  him  with  whom  we  have  to  do." 

2.  God's  knowledge  is  an  intimate  and  thorough 
knowledge,  whereby  he  knows  the  very  nature  and 
eflence  of  things.  The  knowledge  which  we  have 
of  things  is  but  in  part,  but  outward  and  fuperficial ; 
our  knowledge  glides  upon  the  foperficies  of  things, 
but  doth  not  penetrate  into  the  intimate  nature  of 
them,  it  feldom  reacheth  further  than  the  fkin  and 
outward  appearance  of  things ;  we  do  not  know 
things  in  their  realities,  but  as  they  appear  and  are 
reprefented  to  us  with  all  their  mafks  and  difguifes  : 
but  God  knows  things  as  they  are.  i  Sam.  xvi.  7. 
^'  The  Lord  feeth  not  as  man  feeth  ;  for  man 
*'  looketh  on  the  outward  appearance,  but  the  Lord 
"  looketh  on  the  heart :  God  knows  things  through- 
out, all  that  can  be  known  of  them.  The  quick  and 
piercing  eye  of  God  penetrates  into  every  thing,  the 
light  of  the  divine  underftanding  lays  all  things 
"  open  and  naked,"  Heb.  iv.  13.  In  which  ex- 
preffion  the  apoftle  alludes  to  the  facrifices  of  beafts, 
which  were  flead,  and  cleft  down  the  back  bone, 
that  the  prieft  might  look  into  them,  and  fee  whe- 
ther they  were  without  blemilh.  To  the  eye  of  our 
underilandings  moll  objeds  are  clofe,  and  have  their 
fi<ins  upon  them;  but  to  the  eyes  of  God  all  things 
are  uncovered  and  dilfed:ed,  and  lie  open  to  his 
view, 

3.  God's  knowledge  is  clear  and  diflindl.  Our 
underftandings  in  the  knowledge  of  things  are  liable 
to  great  confufion  •,  v/e  are  often  deceived  with  the 
near  likenefs  and  refemblance  of  things,  and  miftake 
one  thing  for  another  «,  our  knowledge  is  but  a 
twilight,  which  doth  not  fufficiently   feparate  and 

i6Iv2  »     dilliiiguiih. 


3 37^  Of  the  knowledge  of  God. 

S  K  R  M.  diflinguifh  things  from  one  another  ;  we  fee  things 
^^-^,^^  many  times  together,  and  in  an  heap,  and  do  but 
know  them  in  grofs  :  but  there  is  no  confufion  in 
the  divine  underflranding,  that  is  a  clear  light  which 
feparates  and  diftinguifheth  things  of  the  greateft 
nearnefs  and  refemblance  ;  God  hath  a  particular 
knowledge  of  the  leaft  things,  Luke  xii.  7.  "  even 
"  the  very  hairs  of  your  head  are  all  numbred  i" 
thofe  things  which  are  of  the  leaft  confideration,  and 
have  the  greateft  likenefs  to  one  another ;  "the  very 
*^  hairs  of  your  head"  are  feverally  and  diftindly 
known  to  God. 

4.  God's  knowledge  is  certain  and  infallible.  We 
are  fubjedb  to  doubt  and  error  in  our  underftanding 
of  things  ;  every  thing  almoft  impofeth  upon  our 
underftandings,  and  tindures  our  minds,  and  makes 
us  look  on  things  otherwife  than  they  are ;  our  tem- 
per and  complexion,  our  education  and  prejudice, 
our  intereft  and  advantage,  our  humours  and  dif- 
tempers  ;  thefe  all  mifreprefent  things,  and  darken 
oifr  minds,  and  feduce  our  judgments,  and  betray 
us  to  error  and  miftake  :  but  the  divine  underftand- 
ing is  a  clear,  fixed,  conftant,  and  undifturbed  light, 
a  pure  mirror  that  receives  no  ftain  from  affedion, 
or  intereft,  or  any  other  thing.  Men  are  many 
times  confident  and  apt  to  impofe  upon  others,  as 
itf  they  were  infallible  :  but  this  is  the  prerogative 
of  God,  the  privilege  of  the  divine  underftanding, 
that  it  is  fecure  from  dW  poffibility  of  error;  it  is.  God 
only  *^  that  cannot  he,'*  Tit.  i.  2.  becaufe  he  can- 
not be  deceived  ;  the  infallibility  of  God  is  the 
foundation  of  his  veracity. 

5.  The  knowledge  of  God  is  eafy,  and  without 
difficulty.  "We  muft  dig  deep  for  knowledge,  take 
a  great  deal  of  pains  to  know  a  httle  ^  we  do  not 

attain 


Of  the  knowledge  o/Gory,  3379 

attain  the  knowledge  of  things  without  fearch  and  S  E  R  M. 
ftudy,  and  great  intention  of  mind  ;  we  flrive  to  »^ 
comprehend  fome  things,  but  they  are  fo  vafl  that 
we  cannot :  other  things  are  at  fuch  a  diftance,  that 
our  underftanding  is  too  weak  to  difcern  them  ;  other 
things  are  fo  little,  and  fmall,  and  nice,  that  our 
underftanding  cannot  lay  hold  of  them,  we  cannot 
contra6t  our  minds  to  fuch  a  point  as  to  faflen  upon 
them  ',  but  the  underftanding  of  God  being  infinite, 
there  is  nothing  at  a  diflance  from  it,  nothing  too 
great  and  vafl  for  it's  comprehenfion ;  nor  is  there 
any  thing  fo  little  that  it  can  efcape  his  knowledge 
and  animadverfion.  The  great  wifdom  of  Solomon 
is  compared  to  "  the  fand  on  the  fea-ihore  ;"  the 
fhore  is  vafl,  but  the  fands  are  little,  (faith  one)  to 
fignify  that  the  vafl  mind  of  Solomon  did  compre- 
hend the  leafl  things.  'Tis  much  more  true  of 
God  ;  his  underflanding  is  a  vafl  comprehenfion  of 
the  leafl  things,  as  well  as  the  greatefl ;  and  all  this 
God  does  without  difficulty  or  pain  -,  he  knows  all 
things  without  fludy,  and  his  underftanding  is  in 
continual  exercife  without  wearinefs.  How  many 
things  are  there  which  we  cannot  find  out  without 
fearch,  without  looking  narrowly  into,  and  bending 
our  minds  to  underfland  them  ?  But  all  things  are 
obvious  to  God,  and  lie  open  to  his  view. 

He  is  faid  indeed  in  fcripture  "to  fearch  the  heart'* 
and  "  to  try  the  reins'*  and  "  to  weigh  the  fpirits  ,'* 
but  thefe  cxprelTions  do  not  fignify  the  painfulnefs, 
but  the  perfedlion  of  his  knowledge ;  that  he  knows 
thofe  things  as  perfedly,  as  we  can  do  any  thing 
about  which  we  ufe  the  greatefl  diligence  and  exadl- 
nefs. 

6.  The  knowledge  of  God  is  univerfal,  and  ex* 

tends  to  all  objeds.     We  know  but  a  few  things, 

2  our 


cxxxv. 


3  3  S  o  Of  the  htoivledge  of  God. 

SJ^^J^^J-  cur  Ignorance  is  greater  than  our  knowledge,  maxi- 
ma pars  eorum  qua  fcimus^  efi  minima  pars  eorum  qti^e 
nefcmus:  but  the  divine  underflanding  is  vafl  and 
comprehenfive,  and  by  an  imperious  view  commands 
all  objedts  •,  "  he  is  greater  than  our  hearts,  and 
*'  knoweth  all  things  j"  he  knows  himielf,  and  the 
excellency  and  perfedion  of  his  own  nature,  and  the 
fecrets  of  his  will,  i  Cor.  ii.  ii.  "  The  fpirit  of 
*'  God  fearcheth  the  deep  things  of  God  ;"  he 
knov/s  all  other  things  that  are  not,  and  all  things 
that  are,  in  all  differences  of  time,  their  powers  and 
qualities.  The  knowledge  of  God  is  infinite  •,  PfaL 
cxlvii.  5.  "  His  underflanding  is  infinite:"  he 
knows  himfelf,  and  his  own  perfedions,  and  all  the 
pofTibilities  of  things,  which  are  all  iniinite.  Now 
the  underflanding  of  God  being  infinite  is  incapable 
of  any  addition,  or  diminution,  or  change.  Our 
finite  underflandings  are  Hablc  to  alterations ;  they 
may  grow  or  decline  :  but  the  knowledge  of  God 
is  a  full,  conilant  light,  it  is  always  the  f^une,  not 
liable  to  any  eclipfe,  nor  capable  of  any  exaltation  or 
improvement,  but  remains  for  ever  the  fame. 

Thirdly,  I  come  now  to  draw  fome  inferences 
from  the  feveral  parts  of  this  difcourfe. 

1.  From  the  perfedion  of  God's  knowledge. 

I.  The  perfedlion  of  the  divine  knowledge  calls 
for  our  veneration.  Every  excellency  commands 
reverence,  and  raifeth  our  admiration,  and  none 
more  than  knowledge  :  there  is  nothing  that  we  va- 
lue our  felvTS  or  others  more  by,  than  this  :  the 
kighefl  knowledge  of  man,  the  moll  glorious  un- 
derflandinp;,  that  ever  any  one  of  the  fons  of  men 
were  endowed  with,  is,  compared  to  the  knowledge 
bf  God,  but  as  a  glow-worm  to  the  fun."  If  we 
admL-e  thdc  ^^  Candles  of  the  Lord,"  which  fliine 

fo 


Of  the  knowledge  of  Co  t>.  3  3  §  ^ 

&  imperfe6lly  in  the  dark  -,  if  we  reverence  a  little  S  E  R  M.' 
knowledge,  compalTed  about  with  ignorance  ^  how 
Ihall  we  admire  "  the  Father  of  lights,  in  whom  is 
"  no  darknefs  at  all,"  that  knowledge  which  hath 
nothing  of  blemilli  or  imperfedlion  in  it ! 
•  We  may  hence  learn  humility,  and  that  on  this 
double  account,  as  we  have  all  our  knowledge  from 
him  ;  "  what  have  we  that  we  have  not  received?'* 
j  And  as  our  knowledge  is  very  imperfed:,  when  com- 
pared with  the  divine  underftanding.  We  are  blind 
and  ignorant  ;  'tis  but  a  few  things  that  we  are  ca- 
pable of  knowing  ;  and  we  know  but  a  few  of  thofe 
things  which  our  natures  are  capable  of  knowing  ; 
and  of  thofe  things  we  do  know,  our  knowledge  is 
very  imperfed,  'tis  flight  and  fuperficial,  attended 
with  much  difficulty  and  uncertainty  in  the  attaining 
of  it,  and  error  and  confufion  in  the  ufe  of  it  \  the 
cleareft  reafon,  and  the  brightefl  underftanding  of 
man  hath  many  flaws  and  defedbs  in  it ;  fo  that  the 
more  we  know  of  God,  and  of  our  felves,  the  more 
humble  we  fliall  be.  It  is  "  an  empty  knowledge, 
"  and  falfely  fo  called"  that  "  puffs  up  ;"  as  the 
empty  ears  of  corn  are  pert,  and  raife  up  themfelves ; 
but  thofe  which  are  big  and  full,  droop  and  hang 
down  their  heads  ^  fo  'tis  only  ignorance  that  is  proud, 
and  lifts  men  up,  but  true  knowledge  makes  men 
humble. 

3.  This  is  matter  of  comfort  and  encouragement. 
He  knows  our  wants  and  weaknefs,  and  "  will  lay 
*'  no  more  upon  us  than  we  are  able  to  bear  ;  for 
**  he  confiders  that  we  are  but  duft  ;"  he  knows  the 
rage  and  malice  of  our  enemies,  and  can,  when  he 
pleafes,"  put  a  hook  in  their  nofe,"  and  "  his  bri- 
'*  die  in  their  lips,"  as  he  did  to  Senacherib,  2 
Kings  xix.  28. 

I.  From 


3382  Of  the  knew! edge  ^  God. 

SERM.        I.  From  God's  knowing   our   fecret  anions,  I 

CXXXV.     .     r 

inter, 

I.  If  God  fees  our  moft  fecret  adlions,  this  difco- 
vers  and  confutes  the  fecret  atheifm  of  many.  He 
that  commits  the  mofl  fecret  fin  denies  the  omnifci- 
cnce  of  God.  Thus  David  defcribes  the  atheifrrt  of 
fome  in  his  days :  "  he  hath  faid  in  his  heart,  God 
*'  hath  forgot ;  he  hidcth  his  face,  he  will  never  fee 
*^  it:  the  Lord  lliall  not  fee,  neither  fliall  the  God 
**  of  Jacob  regard  it."  And  is  not  this,  in  effed,  to 
deny  God's  being  }  for  it  is  to  deny  him  to  be  what 
he  is.  A  man  may  as  well  deny  there  is  a  fun,  as 
deny  that  it  fhines  and  enlightens  the  world. 

There  are  fome  relicks  of  this  even  in  the  beft 
men,  which  do  at  fome  times  difcover  themfelves, 
Pfal.  Ixxiii.  10,  11.  "  Therefore  his  people  return 
*^  hither  \  and  waters  of  a  full  cup  are  wrung  out 
**  to  them :"  and  they  fay,  "how  doth  God  know? 
*'  is  there  knowledge  in  the  mod  High?"  that  is, 
the  people  of  God  come  to  this,  when  they  are  come 
to  an  afflidled  ftate,  and  fee  the  profperity  of  wick- 
ed men  •,  they  come  to  this,  to  queftion  the  provi- 
dence of  God,  whether  he  takes  knowledge  of  the 
affairs  of  the  world.  But  this  atheifm  reigns  in  wick- 
ed men  ;  while  they  live  in  their  fins,  they  live  in  the 
denial  of  God's  omnifcience  :  for  did  men  really  be- 
lieve that  "God  fees  in  fecret,"  that  his  eyeper- 
ceiveth  the  darknefs,  and  lays  open  and  naked  ali 
things  before  it,  how  durft  they  lie,  and  ileal,  and 
fwear  falfely  ?  Vain  man !  why  doft  thou  feek  dark- 
nefs and  retirement  ?  How  art  thou  alone,  if  thou 
believed  that  God  is  every  where  \  How  canil  thou 
retire  from  him  •,  how  canft  thou  fhut  him  out  ?  If 
thou  believed  that  he  is  the  light,  what  fecurity  is 
darknefs  to  thee  ?  If  he  look  upon  thee,  who  is  the 

greateft 


Of  the  hiowledge  of  Go -d,  3^83 

grcateft  and  befl  perfon  in  the  world,  who  is  thy  fo-  S  E  R  M. 
vereign,  thy  judge,  thy  father,  and  thy  niafler, 
and  thy  befl  friend  (for  we  ufe  to  reverence  perfons 
under  thefe  notions  and  relations,  and  to  be  aflianv 
ed  to  do  any  thing  that  is  vile  and  unfeemly  before 
them  ;)  if  he,  who  is  all  this,  look  upon  thee,  why 
art  thou  not  afhamed  ?  why  does  not  thy  blood  rife 
in  thy  face  ?  Why  fhould  not  fliame  and  fear  work 
upon  the  apprehenfion  of  God's  feeing  us,  as  if  men 
did  behold  us  ?  For  this,  that  God  fees  thee,  is  a 
greater  furprize  and  difcovery,  and  threatens  thee 
with  more  danger,  than  if  the  whole  world  ilood 
by  thee. 

2.  Live  as  thofe  that  believe  this ;  be  continually 
under  the  power  of  this  apprehenfion,  that  God 
takes  a  particular  and  exa61:  notice  of  all  thy  adlions. 
The  firm  belief  of  this,  would  have  a  double  inliu- 
effce  upon  us,  it  would  encourage  us  in  well-doing, 
and  be  a  reilraint  upon  us  as  to  fin  ;  Jic  vivamus 
tanquam  in  confpe5fu  vivamtis.  Seneca.  It  were  well  if 
men  would  live  as  if  any  body  faw  them  j  but  to  live 
as  if  fome  worthy  and  excellent  perfon  were  always 
prefent  with  us,  and  did  obferve  us,  this  will  be  a 
far  greater  curb  upon  us. .  There  are  fome  fins  of 
that  uglinefs  and  deformity,  that  a  man  would  noD 
commit  them  in  the  prefence  of  any  one,  of  a  child, 
or  a  fool ;  and  there  are  fome  perfons  of  fuch  worth 
and  reverence,  quorum  inter ventu  perditi  quoque  ho- 
raines  vitia  fupprifnerent.  Epicurus  had  tliis  good 
conceit  of  himfelf,  that  he  could  advife  others  fo  to 
a6t  as  if  he  flood  by,  fac  omnia  tanquam  fpe5fet  Epi- 
curus •,  but  Seneca  inflanceth  much  better  in  Qato, 
or  Scipio,  or  Lselius, 

Ut  fic  tanquam  ilk  fp enfant e  vivamus. 

Vol.  VIII.  16  L  and 


33^4  ^f  ^^^  knowledge  of  Gon\ 

YJtyi'  ^^^  ^'^  ^^^  ^^  prefence  of  the  divine  majefty  be  an 
eternal  reftraint  upon  us  ? 

This  was  David's  courfe  to  keep  himfelf  from  fin, 
Pfal.  xxxix.  I.  '^  I  will  take  heed  to  my  ways,  while 
"  the  wicked  is  before  me  j"  how  much  more  in  the 
prefence  of  God  ?  "  I  have  kept  thy  precepts  and 
"  thy  teftimonies,  for  all  my  ways  are  before  thee," 
Pfal.  cxix  1 68.  And  it  was  wifely  advifed  by 
Seneca,  ''  that  we  fhould  fo  live  when  we  are  among 
*'  men,  as  believing  God  fees  us :  and  when  there 
*•  is  none  but  he  fees  us,  let  us  behave  ourfelves  be- 
**  fore  him,  as  if  men  did  flare  upon  us." 

III.  God's  knowledge  of  the  heart  teachethus, 

1 .  The  folly  of  hypocrify :  how  vain  it  is  to  make 
a  fhew  of  that  outwardly,  which  inwardly  and  in  our 
hearts  we  are  not  ^  to  put  on  a  malk  of  religion,  and 
paint  ourfelves  beautifully  without,  when  "  inward- 
**  ly  we  are  full  of  rottennefs  and  uncleannefs ;  to 
**  honour  God  with  our  lips,  when  our  hearts  are 
"  far  from  him."  If  we  were  to  deal  with  men, 
this  were  not  a  very  wife  way,  for  there  is  danger  of 
difcovery  even  from  them ;  therefore  the  beft  way 
for  a  man  to  feem  to  be  any  thing,  is  really  to  be 
what  he  would  appear ;  but  having  to  deal  with  God, 
who  *'  knows  our  thoughts  afar  off,"  to  whom  all 
our  difguifes  are  tranfparent,  and  all  our  little  arts  of 
concealment  fignify  nothing,  'tis  a  madnefs  to  hide 
our  iniquity  in  our  bofom.  With  this  argument  our 
Saviour  convinceth  the  hypocritical  Pharifees,  Luke 
XVI.  15.  "Ye  are  they  that  juftify  your  felves  before 
**  men;  but  God  knoweth  your  hearts." 

2.  If  God  know  your  hearts,  then  endeavour  to 
approve  your  hearts  to  him  ;  charge  yourfelves  with 
inward  purity  and  holinefs,  becaufe  of  the  pure  eyes 
which  behold  the  moil  intimate  and  fecrct  motions 

of 


Of  the  knowledge  of  God.  33^5 

t)f  your  fouls  ;  therefore  "  cleanfe  your  hearts  from  S  R  R  M. 
*'  wickednefs :  how  long  fhall  vain  thoughts  lodge 
"  within  you  ?"  Fear  and  fhame  from  men  lay  a 
great  reflraint  upon  our  outward  a(5lions ;  but  how 
licentious  are  we  many  times  in  our  hearts  ?  What  a 
flrange  freedom  do  we  take  within  our  own  breads  ? 
This  is  an  argument  of  the  fecret  atheifm  that  hes  at 
the  bottom  of  our  hearts.  He  that  allows  himfclf 
in  any  wicked  thoughts  and  imaginations,  which 
(out  of  regard  to  men)  he  will  not  put  in  pradlice, 
this  man  plainly  declares,  that  he  reverenceth  men 
more  than  God  ;  that  he  either  difbelieves  a  God, 
or  defpifeth  him. 

Therefore  "  keep  your  hearts  with  all  diligence,'^ 
becaufe  they  are  pecuharly  under  God's  inlpedlion  j 
and  when  you  are  ready  to  take  the  liberty  of  your 
thoughts,  becaufe  no  eye  fees  you,  afk  your  felves, 
*'  Doth  not  he  that  pondereth  the  heart  confider  it  ? 
"  And  he  that  keepeth  thy  foul,  doth  he  not  know 
^'  it?"  as  the  wife  man  fpeaks,"  Prov.  xxiv.  12. 

And  whatever  you  do  in  the  fervice  of  God  ''  do 
"  it  heartily  as  to  the  Lord."  Indeed,  if  we  did 
only  worfliip  God,  "  to  befeen  of  men,"  an  exter- 
nal worfliip  would  be  fufficient :  but  religion  is  not 
intended  to  pleafe  men,  but  God  ♦,  he  is  a  Ipirit,  and 
^tts  our  fpirits,  therefore  we  muft  "  worlhip  him 
"  in  fpirit  and  in  truth."  i  Thef  ii.  4.  Not 
"  as  pleafing  men,  but  God  ,  who  trieth  our 
"  hearts."  David  ufeth  this  argument  to  his  fon  So- 
lomon, I  Chron.  xxviii.  9.  "  And  thou,  Solomon, 
*'  my  fon,  know  thou  the  God  of  thy  father,  and 
*'  ferve  him  with  a  perfed  heart,  and  with  a  willing 
*'  mind-,  for  the  Lord  fearcheth  all  hearts,  andun- 
**  derftandeth  all  the  imaginations  of  the  thoughts.*' 
Whatever  liberty  we  may  "take  to  our  fdves  now,  and 

jl6  L  2  how 


3  3  S6  Of  the  kfioivkdge  of  God, 

S  F.  R  M.  how  carelefs  Ibever  we  are  of  our  thoudits,  and  the 

ex  XXV.  -  o        ' 

inward  frame  of  our  hearts,  yet  the  fcripture  afTures 
us,  that  he,  who  knows  our  hearts,  will  one  day 
judge  us  according  to  them.  Jer.  xvii.  lo.  "  I  the 
"  Lord  fearch  the  heart,  I  try  the  reins,  even  to 
'*  give  every  man  according  to  his  ways."  And 
the  apoftle  fpeaks  of  "  a  day  coming  wherein  God 
■*''  will  judge  the  fecrets  of  men  by  Jesus  Christ,'* 
Heb.  iv.  13.  Rev.  ii.  23. 

This  is  matter  of  encouragement  to  us  in  many 
cafes:  in  our  fecret  troubles,  Ffal.  cxlii.  3.  "  When 
"  my  fpirit  was  overwhelmed  within  me,  then  thou 
"  kneweft  my  path."  In  cafes  of  difficulty  which 
depend  upon  the  hearts  of  other  men  ;  which  though 
we  do  not  know,  yet  God  knows  them :  So  the  a- 
poflles.  Ads  i.  24.  when  they  did  not  know  whom 
to  chufe  for  an  apoftle,  they  refer  it  to  God  ;  and 
"  they  prayed  and  faid.  Thou,  Lord,  which know- 
*'  eft  the  hearts  of  all,  fhew  whether  of  thefe  two 
*^  thou  haft  chofen."  But  efpecially  this  is  matter 
of  comfort  to  us,  when  we  futfer  by  the  calumnies 
and  reproaches  of  men,  when  the  'world  chargeth  us 
with  crimes  of  hypocrify,  and  falfenefs,  and  infince- 
rity  ;  then  to  be  able  to  appeal  to  "  the  fearcher  of 
*'  hearts,"  as  to  our  innocency  and  fincerity,  and 
to  fay  with  the  prophet  Jeremiah  "  O  Lord  of  hofts, 
*'  that  trieft  the  righteous,  and  feeft  the  reins  and  the 
"  heart,  unto  thee  have  I  opened  my  caufe,"  ch. 
XX.  12.  and  widi  St.  Peter,  "  God  which  know- 
*'  eth  the  hearts,  bare  them  witnefs,"  A6ls  xv.  8. 

4.  This  renders  all  the  deep  and  profound  policies 

.of  wicked  men  a  vain  thing.     "  The  Lord  knows 

"  the  thoughts  of  men,  that  they  are  vanity,"  Pfal. 

xciv.  1 1.   They  are  vanity,,  becaufe  he  knows  them, 

and  can  defeat  theni  -,  he  can  "  bring  their  counfels 


Of  the  knowledge  of  Got)]  33^7 

*^  to  nought,  and  make  their  devices  of  none  effedl."  S  E  R  M. 
He  is  confcious  to  the  firft  motions  of  their  hearts ; 
he  fees  thofe  cobwebs  which  they  are  fpinning,  and 
can   blow  them  away  with  a  breath ;  he  can  fnare 
them  in  their  own  poUcies,  and  turn  "  their  counfels 
*'  into  fooliflinefs."     Thou  that  putteft  a  mafk  up- 
on a  wicked  delign,    and  hideft  the  malice  and  re- 
venge of  thine  heart  under  a  dilTembling  countenance, 
God  fees  thy  defign,  and  hath  a  thoufand  ways  to 
prevent  it.     When  the  politicians  of  the  world  think 
they  have  laid  their  defign  with  all  imaginable  cau- 
tion, and  that  their  counfels  cannot  mifcarry,  being 
out  of  all  pofTibility  of  human  difcovery  or  preventi- 
on;   for  all  this   "  their  counfels   may  come  to 
"  nought,"  and  though  "  they  have  refolved  it," 
yet  it  may  "  not  (land  •,  he  that  fets  in  the  heavens 
*'  laughs  at  them,  the  Lord  hath  them  indcrifion." 
As  wife   as  they  are,  they  are  guilty  of  this  over- 
fight,  that  they  did  not  take  God  into  confideration, 
by  whom  they  are  furprized  and  difcovered.     He 
that  fees  their  defign,  can  blaft  it  in  a  moment ;  he 
''  can  fpeak  the  word,"  and  "  thy  breath  ihall  go 
"  forth,  and  thou  flialt  return  to   thy  duft,  and  in 
*'  that  veiy  day  thy  thoughts  perifh,  Pfal.  cxlvi.  4. 

5,  If  God  only  knows  the  hearts  of  men,  then 
"  what  art  thou,  O  man,  that  judgeft  another's 
*'  heart?"  This  condemns  the  uncharitablenefs  of 
men,  who  take  upon  them  to  judge  and  cenfure  men's 
hearts,  which  is,  "  to  fpeak  evil  of  the  things  which 
"  they  know  not  •,"  to  meddle  with  things  which  do 
not  fall  under  their  cognizance.  What  St.  James 
faith,  ch.  iv.  12.  "  There  is  one  law-giver,  that  is 
^'  able  to  fave,  and  to  deftroy ;  who  art  thou  that 
''  judgeft  another?"  is  proportionably  true  in  this 
cafe  J  there  is  but  "  one  diat  knows  the  heart ;  who 

''  art 


3  3  S  8  Of  the  knowledge  of  God. 

cxxxv^"  ^^  ^^^  ^^^^  ^^^"  that  judgeft  another  man%  heart  ?'* 
Who  art  thou,  O  man !  that  takefl  upon  thee  to  fit 
in  judgment  upon  thy  brother,  and  to  pafs  fentencc 
upon  his  heart,  to  pronounce  him  a  hypocrite,  a  wick- 
ed man,  and  a  damned  wretch  ?  Art  thou  a  man, 
and  the  fon  of  man,  and  wilt  thou  aflume  to  thy  felf 
the  prerogative  of  God  ?  Man  can  only  look  to  the 
outward  appearance  ;  but  "  God  feeth  the  heart.'* 

There's  nothir>g  doth  more  palpably  dilcover  the 
unchriflian  fpirit  of  that  new  fed  which  is  of  late  ri- 
fen  up  amongft  us,  than  their  taking  upon  them  to 
judge  men's  hearts,  and  as  confidently  to  cenfure 
every  man  they  meet,  as  if  they  had  a  window  into 
his  breaft  :  but  they  are  not  alone  guilty  of  this  ; 
thofe  who  are  fo  ready  to  call  men  hypocrites,  they 
invade  this  prerogative  of  God.  We  may  pro- 
nounce an  adion  wicked,  if  it  be  contrary  to  the 
rule ;  or  a  man  wicked,  as  to  his  prefent  ftate,  if 
the  general  courfe  of  his  life  and  adlions  be  wicked  ; 
for  our  Saviour  tells  us,  "  by  their  fruits  ye  fliall 
*'  know  them."  This  we  may  do,  provided  we 
be  called  to  it,  and  be  fure  it  is  fo  :  but  to  call  any 
man  an  hypocrite,  who  makes  an  outward  profefllon 
of  religion,  and  whofe  external  converfation  is  un- 
blameahle ;  this  is  to  judge  a  man  in  a  matter  of 
which  thou  canfl:  have  no  evidence  ;  this  is  ''  to  af- 
*^  cend  into  heaven,"  and  Hep  into  "  the  throne  of 
"  God,  and  to  be  like  the  mofl  High  i"  for  "  he, 
"  even  he  only,  knows  the  hearts  of  the  children 
»'  of  men." 

IV,  From  God's  knowledge  of  future  evients, 
we  may  learn, 

I.  The  vanity  of  aflrology,  and  all  other  arts 
that  pretend  to  foretel  future  events,  things  that  de- 
pend on  the  will  of  i:^  agents.     The  vanity  of  thefe 

arts 


Of  the  knowledge  of  God.  33^9 

arts  hath  been  fufficiently  fhewn  by  learned  men,  SERM. 
from  the  Weaknefs  and  uncertainty  of  the  principles 
they  rely  upon  ;  I  Ihall  only  for  the  prefent  take 
notice,  that  it  contradids  this  principle  of  religion, 
that  "  God  only  knows  future  events."  From 
prudent  colledions  and  obfcrvations,  probable  con- 
jedlures  may  be  made  of  what  will  happen  in  fome 
cafes ;  but  there  are  no  certain  perfpe^Hve-glafTes, 
with  which  we  can  fee  future  events,  but  divine  re- 
velation •,  therefore  whoever  takes  upon  him  to  fore- 
tel  future  events  without  divine  revelation,  he  arro- 
gates to  himfelf  that  which  is  the  prerogative  of  the 
Deity ;  and  God  delights  to  chaftife  the  curiofity, 
and  crofs  the  predidions  of  thefe  vain  pretenders, 
Ifa.  xliv.  24,  25.  "  Thus  faith  the  Lord  that 
"  formed  thee,  I  am  the  Lord  that  maketh  all 
"  things,  that  ilretcheth  forth  the  heavens  alone, 
*'  that  fpreadeth  abroad  the  earth  by  my  felf :  that 
"  fruflrateth  the  tokens  of  the  liars,  and  maketh 
''  diviners  mad ;  that  turneth  wife  men  backward, 
"  and  maketh  their  knowledge  foolifh."  As  h^ 
alfo  in  fcripture  threatens  thofe  who  confult  them, 
and  rely  upon  them.  Thofe  who  go  to  aftrologers, 
or  wife  men,  as  they  call  them,  to  know  their  for« 
tunes,  and  enquire  of  the  events  of  their  life,  they 
"  forfake  God,"  and  "  betake  themfelves  to  lying 
"  vanities." 

2.  Refer  future  things  to  God,  who  only  knows 
them  •,  truft  him  with  all  events  ;  "  caft  your  care 
*'  upon  him."  When  you  haveufed  your  befl  pru- 
dence, and  wifdom,  and  diligence  for  your  fupply 
and  fecurity  for  the  future,  leave  the  reft  to  God, 
**  for  your  heavenly  father  knoweth"  both  your 
wants  and  your  dangers.  When  we  are  over-folici- 
tous  about  future  things,    we  take  God's  proper 

work 


339^  ^f  ^^^  ^T'Oi^^edge  of  God. 

S  E  R  M.  work  out  of  his  hands,  and  ufurp  the  government  of 
the  world.  Why  do  we  "  take  too  much  upon  us  ? 
"  We  are  but  of  yefterday,"  and  "  know  not  what 
*■*  will  be  to  morrow." 

Mind  your  prefent  duty  and  work,  and  leave 
events  to  God.  "  Secret  things  belong  to  the 
*'  Lord  our  God  \  but  thofe  things  that  are  re- 
*'  vealed  to  us,  and  our  children  for  ever,  to  do  all 
*'  the  words  of  his  law,"  Deut.  xxix.  29.  Do 
your  duty,  "  commit  the  reft  to  God  in  well-doing." 

In  this  world  we  are  in  a  mix'd  condition,  which 
is  made  up  of  good  and  evil,  of  happinefs  and  mi- 
fery  :  what  is  good  for  us  to  know,  is  revealed, 
that  is  our  duty  •,  but  in  great  wifdom  and  pity  to 
mankind,  God  hath  concealed  and  hid  the  reft  from 
us.  He  hath  hid  from  us  the  good  that  may  hap- 
pen to  us,  becaufe  the  beft  things  of  this  world  are 
but  ihallow  and  empty,  and  if  we  could  fee  them 
before-hand,  we  fhould  prevent  our  felves  in  the 
enjoyment  of  them,  and  eat  out  the  fweetnefs  which 
is  in  them  by  delightful  fore-thoughts  of  them  : 
and  he  hath  concealed  future  evils  from  us,  left  we 
fliould;  torment  our  felves  with  the  fearful  expeda - 
tionpfthem. 

.    Prudens^  futuri  temporis  exitunty   . 

Caliginofd  no£fe  premit  Deus. 

Ridetque,  fi  mor talis  ultra  fas  trepldat. 
What  a  folly  is  it  to  make  your  felves  miferable  with 
fear  of  being  fo  ;  ante  miferias  mifcr,  Ufe  all  wife 
means  to  prevent  what  you  fear,  and  then  be  fatisfied, 
^nd  be  as  happy  as  you  can  'till  mifcry  come,  go 
not  forth  to  meet  it,  "  fufficient  for  the  day  is  the 
*'  evil  thereof  j"  do  not  anticipate  the  evils  of  to 
morrow,  and  take  prefent  pofielTion  of  an  evil  to 
come  ;  "  caft  your  care  upon  hiin"  who  hath  pro- 
irjfedto  "  care  for  you."  S  E  R-^ 


339^' 

SERMON  CXXXVI. 

The  wifdom,    glory,   and  fovereignty 
of  God. 

I  -  ■■  T  i'  ■■„■-■■         ^       --        .. 

JUDE,  ven  25. 

To  the  only  wife  God  our  Saviour,  he  glory  and 
rnajejiy^  dominion  and  power,  now  and  ever* 

I  AM  treating  of  the  attributes  of  God  ^  particu-  sE  rM. 
Jarly  of  thofe  which  relate  to  the  divine  under-  cxxxvf^ 
Handing,  his  knowledge  and  wifdom.  The  know- 
ledge of  God  only  implies  his  bare  underftanding  of 
things  ;  but  his  wifdom  implies  the  fkill  of  ordering 
and  difpofing  things  to  the  beft  ends  and  purpofes, 
the  fkiU  of  making  and  governing,  and  adminiftring 
all  things  in  number,  weight,  and  meafure.  The 
knowledge  of  God  rather  confiders  things  abfolute^ 
ly,  and  in  themfelves  :  the  wifdom  of  God  confiders 
rather  the  refpedls  and  relations  of  things,  looks  upon 
things  under  the  notion  of  means,  and  ends  ;  accor- 
dingly I  defcribe  them  thus:  the  knowledge  of 
God  is  a  perfe6l  comprehenfion  of  the  nature  of  all 
things,  with  all  their  qualities,  powers,  and  circum- 
ftances.  The  wifdom  of  God  is  a  perfed  compre- 
henfion of  the  refpe61:s  and  relations  of  things  one 
to  another  -,  of  their  harmony  and  oppofit-ion,  their 
fitnefs  and  unfitnefs  to  fuch  and  fuch  ends.  I  have 
largely  fpoken  to  the  ftrft  of  thefe  :  I  come  now  to  the 

Second,  the  wifdom  of  God  in  general  -,  together 
with  his  majefty  and  fovereignty,  as  they  are  here 
joined  together.     I  begin  with  the 

VoL.VIHo  16  Mw^;  Fkft^ 


2. 


339^  ^^^  '^'ifdom^  glory y 

handling  of  this,  I  ihall  fhew, 

1.  In  what  fenfe  God  may  be  faid  to  be  the  "  on- 
"  ly  wife  God." 

2,  Prove  that  this  attribute  belongs  to  God.  s 
I.  In  what  fenfe  God  may  be  faid  to  be  "  the 

''  only  wife  God."  For  anfwer  to  this,  we  may 
take  notice,  that  there  are  fome  perfedlions  of  God 
th'at  are  incommunicable  to  the  creatures ;  as,  his 
independency  and  eternity.  Thefe  God  only  pof- 
fefTeth,  and  they  are  to  be  attributed  to  him  alone  ; 
God  only  is  independent  and  eternal :  but  there  are 
other  perfe6Hons  which  are  communicable,  that  is, 
which  the  creatures  may,  in  fome  rrkeafure  and  de- 
gree, partake  of,  as  knowledge,  and  wifdom,  and 
goodnefs,  and  juftice,  and  power,  and  the  like-, 
yet  thefe  the  fcriptures  do  peculiarly  attribute  to  God  •, 
not  that  they  are  altogether  incommunicable  to  the 
creature,  but  that  they  belong  to  God  in  fuch  a  pe- 
culiar and  divine  manner,  as  doth  fhut  out  the  crea- 
ture from  any  claim  or  title  to  them,  in  that  degree 
and  perfedlion  wherein  God  poffciTeth  them.  I  Ihall 
give  you  fome  inftances  of  this.  His  goodnefs,  this 
is  rcferved  to  God  alone,  Matth.  xix.  17.  "Why 
*'  called  thou  me  good  .^  there  is  none  good,  but 
*'  one,  that  is  God  :"  his  power  and  immortahty, 
I  Tim.  vi.  15,  16.  "  Who  is  the  bleffed  and  only 
*'  potentate  -,  who  only  hath  immortality  :*'  his  wif- 
dom, I  Tim.  i,  17.  "  The  only  wife  God  :"  Rom. 
xvi.  27.  "  To  God  only  wife  be  glory:"  his  holi- 
nefs.  Rev.  xv.  14.  "  For  thou  only  art  holy."  The 
tranfcendent  degree  and  Angularity  of  thefe  divine 
perfedions  which  are  communicable,  is  beyond  what 
we  are  able  to  conceive  :  fo  that  although  the  crea- 
tures partake  of  them,  yet  in  that  degree  and  perfec- 
3  tion 


and fovereignty  of  God.  3393 

tion  wherein  God  poflefTeth  them,  they  are  peculiar  SE  R  M. 

.  cxxxvi. 

and  proper  to  the  Deity :    (o  that,  in   this  fenfe, 

*^  there  is  none  good  but  God  -,"  he  only  is  holy, 
he  is  the  only  wife :  in  (6  inconceivable  a  manner 
doth  God  pofTefs  even  thofe  perfedions,  which  in 
ibme  degree  he  communicates  •,  and  we  can  only 
underftand  them  as  he  communicates  them,  and 
not  as  he  pofleiTeth  them  ;  fo  that  when  we  confi- 
der  any  of  thefe  divine  perfedlions,  we  muft  not 
frame  notions  of  them  contrary  to  what  they  are  in 
the  creature  :  but  we  muft  fay,  that  the  goodnefs 
and  wifdom  of  God  are  all  this  which  is  in  the  crea- 
ture, and  much  more,  which  I  am  not  able  to  com- 
prehend. 

This  being  premifed  in  general,   God  may  be 
faid  to  be  only  wife  in  thefe  two  refpedts. 

1.  As  being  originally  and  independently  wife. 

2.  As  being  eminently  and  tranfcendently  fo. 
I.  God  only  is  originally  and  independently  wife. 

He  derives  it  from  none,  and  all  derive  it  from 
him  :  Rom.  xi.  33,  34.  "  O  the  depth  of  the  riches 
"  both  of  the  wifdom  and  knowledge  of  God  !  How 
''  unfearchable  are  his  judgments,  and  his  ways 
"  paft  finding  out !  For  who  hath  known  the  mind 
*'  of  the  Lord,  or  who  hatli  been  his  counfellor? 
^'^  or  who  hath  firft  given  to  him,  and  it  fhall  be 
"  recompenfed  unto  him  again  ?  For  of  him,  and 
''  through  him,  and  to  him  are  all  things,  to  whom 
"  be  glory  for  ever.  Amen."  Fie  challengeth  any 
creature  to  come  forth  and  fay,  that  they  have  given 
wifdom,  or  any  other  perfe6Lion,  to  God  :  no,  all 
creatures  that  are  partakers  of  it,  derive  it  from  him: 
Prov.  ii.  6.  "  For  the  Lord  giveth  wifdom." 
Eccl.  ii.  26.  "  God  giveth  to  a  man  that  is  good 
"  in  his  fight,  wifdom,  and  knowledge,  and  joy." 

16  M  2  Dan. 


cxxxvi. 


3394  The   wifdonty   glory ^ 

S  F^RM.  Dan.  ii.  21.  "He  giveth  wifclom  to  the  wife,"  and 
^'  knowledge  to  them  that  know  underftanding." 

2.  He  is  eminently  and  tranfcendently  fo  :  and 
this  follows  from  the  former,  becaufe  God  is  the 
fountain  of  wifdom,  therefore  it  is  moft  eminently 
in  him:  Pfal.  xciv.  9,  10.  "He  that  planted  the 
*'  ear,  fhall  he  not  hear  ?  he  that  formed  the  eye, 
*'  fhall  he  not  fee  ?  he  that  teacheth  man  knowledge, 
"  fhall  not  he  know  ?"  In  like  manner  we  may  rea* 
fon  concerning  all  other  attributes  of  God,  that  if 
he  communicates  them,  he  is  much  more  eminently 
pofTefl  of  them  himfelf  •,  the  greatefl  wifdom  of  the 
creatures  is  nothing  in  oppofition  to  the  wifdom  of 
God,  nothing  in  comparifon  to  it. 

Nothing  in  oppofition  to  it:  Job  v.  13.  "He 
''  taketh  the  wife  in  their  own  craftinefs."  Jobix. 
4.  "  He  is  wife  in  heart,  and  mighty  in  flrength : 
"  who  hath  hardned  himfelf  againfl  him,  and  prof- 
"  pcred  ?"  Prov.  xxi.  30.  "  There  is  no  wifdom, 
"  nor  underftanding,  nor  counfel,  againfl  the  Lord," 
I  Cor.  I  19.  '^  He  will  deflroy  the  wifdom  of  the 
**  wife  -,"  V.  29.  and  by  foolifh  things  confound 
"  the  wife." 

Nothing  in  comparifon  of  it.  There  are  a  great 
many  that  pretend  to  wifdom  \  but  mofl  are  des- 
titute of  true  wifdom  -,  and  thofe  who  have  it, 
have  it  with  many  imperfe6lions  and  difadvan- 
tages.  Ufually  thofe  who  are  deflitute  of  true  wif- 
dom, pretend  mofl  to  it.  Job  xi.  12.  "  Vain  man 
^'  would  be  wife,  though  he  be  born  like  a  wild  afs's 
"  colt."  The  high  and  the  great  of  this  world  pre- 
tend to  it :  Job  xxxii.  9.  "  great  men  are  not  always 
^*  wife."  Learned  men,  they  pretend  to  it  ;  the  hea- 
then philofophers  were  great  profefTors  of  wifdom, 
Rom.  i.  22.  "  ProfefTing  themfelves  to  be  wife,  they 

"be. 


and  fovereignty  of  God.  3395 

"  became  fools,"  they  were  **  wife  to  do  evil,  but  S  E  R  M. 

CXXXVI. 

"  to  do  good  they  had  no  underflanding."  As 
the  prophet  fpeaks,  Jeremiah  iv.  22.  The  politi- 
cians of  the  world,  they  pretend  to  it ;  but  theirs  is  ra- 
ther a  craftinefs  than  a  wifdom.  Men  call  it'prudencc  ; 
but  they  are  glad  to  ufe  many  arts  to  fet  it  off,  and  make 
it  look  like  wifdom ;  by  filence,  and  fecrefy,  and  for- 
mality, and  affedled  gravity,  and  nods,  and  geflures. 
The  fcripture  calls  it  '^  the  wifdom  of  this  world,'* 
I  Cor.  ii.  6.  and  a  "  flefhly  wifdom,"  2  Cor.  i.  12.  It 
is  wifdom  mifappHed,  it  is  the  purfuitof  awrong  end. 
The  petty  plots  and  deligns  of  this  world  are  far  from 
wifdom :  i  Cor.  iii.  20.  "  The  Lord  knoweth  the 
*^  thoughts  of  the  wife,  that  they  are  vain."  Thar 
cannot  be  wifdom,  which  miftakes  it's  great  end, 
which  minds  mean  things,  and  negledls  thofe  which 
are  of  greateft  concernment  to  them:  Job  xxii.  2. 
"  He  that  is  wife,  is  profitable  to  himfelf.'^  Prov. 
ix.  12.  "  If  thou  be  wife,  thou  fhalt  be  wife  for  thy 
^'  felf."  TuUy  tells  us,  Ennius  was  wont  to  fay, 
Ne  qukquam  fapere  faplentem,  quifihi  ipjiprodejfe  non 
quiret.  The  wife  fages  of  the  world,  as  to  the  beft 
things  are  fools.  Matt.  xi.  25.  ^'  God  hath  hid  thefc 
"  things  from  the  wife  and  prudent."  There  are 
many  that  are  "  wife  in  their  own  conceits  •,  but  there 
"  is  more  hope  of  a  fool  than  of  them,"  Prov. 
XX vi.  12.  So  that  the  greateft  part  of  that  which 
paffeth  for  wifdom  among  men,  is  quite  another 
thing.  Nihil  tarn  valde  vulgar e  quam  nihil  fap ere  ; 
we  talk  much  of  prodigies,  maximum  portentum  vir 
fapiens^  Tully.  Thofe  few  in  the  world  that  arc 
"  the  children  of  true  wifdom,"  they  have  it  in  a 
very  imperfed  degree  -,  they  are  not  ufually  fo  wife 
for  their  fouls,  and  for  eternity,  as  men  of  this  world, 
Luke  xvi.   8.  "  The  children  of  this  world  are  in 

"their 


SE  i<  M. 
CXXXVI. 


3396  Tl^e  ivifdoniy  glory ^ 

''  their  generation  wifer  than  the  children  of  light.'* 
It  is  attended  with  many  inconveniencies,  Eccl.  i. 
18.  "  In  much  wifdom  there  is  much  grief  j"  he 
Ipeaks  of  the  wifdom  about  natural  things. 

But  we  need  not  inftance  in  the  folly  of  wicked 
men,  and  worldly  men,  and  in  the  imperfed  de- 
grees of  wifdom  which  are  to  be  found  in  good  men, 
in  wifdom' s  own  children  ;  the  wifdom  of  God 
needs  not  thefe  foils  to  fet  it  off :  the  wifdom  of  man 
in  innocency,  or  of  the  higheft  angel  in  hc-aven, 
bears  no  proportion  to  the  unerring  and  infinite 
wifdom  of  God.  We  mortal  men  many  times  mif- 
take  our  end  out  of  ignorance,  and  apply  unfit  and 
improper  means  for  accomplifhing  good  ends  ;  the 
angels  in  glory  have  not  a  perfed:  comprehenfion  of 
the  harmony  and  agreement  of  things,  of  the  un- 
fitnefs  and  oppofition  of  them  one  to  another  :  but 
the  divine  wifdom  propounds  to  itfelf  the  higheft 
and  beft  ends,  and  hath  a  perfed  comprehenfion  of 
the  litnefs  and  unfitnefs  of  all  things  one  to  another : 
fo  that  angels  are  but  foolifh  beings  to  God.  Job 
iv.  17.  "  His  angels  he  chargeth  with  folly."  Job, 
upon  a  full  enquiry  after  wifdom,  concludes  that  it 
only  belongs  to  God,  that  he  only  is  perfedly  pof- 
felled  of  it.  Job  xxviii.  12,  &c.  "  But  where  fhall 
*'  wifdom  be  found  ?  and  where  is  the  place  of  un- 
*'  derftanding  ?"  In  fuch  an  eminent  and  tranfcen- 
dent  degree  it  is  not  to  be  met  with  in  any  of  the 
creatures  ;  God  only  hath  it,  ver.  23.  *'  God  know- 
*'  eth  the  place  thereof." 

II.  I  ihall  prove  that  this  perfection  belongs  to 
Goci, 

1 .  From  the  didates  of  natural  reafon,  and 

2.  From  Scripture. 
I.  From  the  didlates  of  natural  reafon.     I  have 

often 


and  fovereignty  of  Gox),  3397 

often  told  you  the  perfedtions  of  God  are  not  to  ^  ^  ^  ^' 

•  CXXXVI 

be  proved  by  way  of  demonilration,  becaufe  there  is 
no  caufe  of  them ;  but  by  way  of  convi6tion,  by  Ihew- 
ing  the  abfurdity  and  inconvenience  of  the  contrary. 

The  contrary  is  an  imperfedlion,  and  argues  many 
other  imperfe6lions  ♦,  therefore  wifdom  belongs  to 
God.  Among  men  folly  is  looked  upon  as  the 
greateft  defedl  •,  it  is  accounted  a  greater  reproach 
and  difgrace,  than  vice  and  wickednefs  •,  it  is  of  foill 
a  report  in  the  world,  that  there  are  not  many  but 
had  rather  be  accounted  knaves  than  fools  ;  but  in  a 
true  efleem  and  value  of  things,  it  is,  next  to  wick- 
ednefs, the  greateft  imperfedion ;  and,  on  the  con- 
trary, wifdom  is  the  higheft  perfection  next  to  holi- 
nefs  and  goodnefs ;  it  is  ufually  more  cried  up  in  the 
world  than  any  thing  elfe.  Reafon  tells  us,  though 
the  fcripture  had  not  faid  it ;  that  "  wifdom  excels 
"  folly  as  much  as  hght  doth  darknefs,"  Eccl.  ii. 
13.  "  The  wifdom  of  a  man  maketh  his  face  to 
**  fhine,"  Eccl.  viii.  i.  "Wifdom  is  a  defence,"  vii. 
12.  andver.  19.  "  Wifdom  ftrengthneth  the  wife 
*'  more  than  ten  mighty  men  that  arc  in  the  city." 

And  the  denial  of  this  perfedlion  to  God  v/ould 
argue  many  other  imperfections  •,  it  would  be  an  uni- 
yerfal  blemilh  to  the  divine  nature,  and  would  dark- 
en all  his  other  perfedbions.  It  would  weaken  the 
power  of  God.  How  impotent  and  ineffedual  would 
power  be  without  wifdom !  what  irregular  thiiags 
would  it  produce !  what  untoward  combinations  of 
cfFeds  would  there  be,  if  infinite  power  fhould  aft 
without  the  condud  and  diredlion  of  infinite  wifdom ! 
it  would  eclipfe  the  providence  of  God,  and  put 
out  the  eyes  that  are  in  the  wheels,  as  the  prophet 
reprefents  God's  providence.  There  can  be  no  coun- 
fel,    no  fore-caft,   no  orderly   government  of  the 

world 


339^  ^^^  'Z£^//2/(?w,  glory ^ 

SK  RM.  world  without  wifdom.  The  goodnefs,  and  fnefcyj 
andjuftice,  and  truth  of  God,  could  not  Ihine  with 
that  luftre,  were  it  not  for  his  wifdom,  which  doth 
illuftrate  thefe  with  fo  much  advantage. 

I  need  not  bring  teftimonies  from  heathen  writers 
to  confirm  this ;  their  books  are  full  of  expreflions 
of  their  admiration  of  God's  wife  government  of  the 
world.  I  need  not  trouble  you  with  quotations  of 
particular  teftimonies.  Epicurus  indeed  denied  that 
God  either  made  or  governed  the  world ;  but  he 
muft  needs  acknowledge  him  to  have  been  a  very- 
wife  being,  becaufe  he  made  him  happy,  which  can- 
not be  without  wifdom,  though  he  had  taken  away 
all  other  evidence  of  his  wifdom.  Ariftotle  feems  to 
have  fuppofed  the  world  to  be  a  neceflary  refult  and 
emanation  from  God  :  but  then  the  other  fe6ts  of 
philofophers  did  fuppofe  the  world  to  be  the  free  pro- 
dudl  of  God's  goodnefsand  wifdom. 

2.  From  fcripture;  Job  ix.  4.  "  He  is  wife  in 
*'  heart  •,"  xxxvi.  5.  "  He  is  mighty  in  ftrength 
"  and  wifdom.'*  Dan.  ii.  20.  "  BlefTed  be  the  name 
*'  of  God  for  ever  and  ever,  for  wifdom  and  might 
*'  are  his."  Hither  we  may  refer  thofe  texts,  which 
attribute  wifdom  to  God  in  a  fingular  and  peculiar 
manner,  Rom.  xvi.  27.  and  thofe  which  fpeak  of 
God  as  the  fountain  of  it,  who  communicates  and 
beftows  it  upon  his  creatures,  Dan.  ii.  21.  James  i. 
5.  and  thofe  texts  which  fpeak  of  the  wifdom  of 
God  in  the  creation  of  the  world,  Pfal.  civ.  24.  "  O 
''  Lord,  how  wonderful  are  thy  works,  in  wifdom? 
*<  haft  thou  made  them  all!"  Jer.  x.  12.  "  Who 
"  hath  eftabliftied  the  w^prld  by  his  wifdom,  and 
"  ftretched  forth  the  heavens  by  his  difcretion ;"  in 
the  providence  and  government  of  the  world.  Dan. 
ii.   20.    "  Wifdom  and  ftrength  are  his,  and  he 

*'  changeth. 


and fovereignfy  of  God,  3399 

"  changeth  times  and  feafons ;  he  removeth  kings,  S  E  R  M. 

**  and  fetteth  up  kings  :"  and  in  many  other  places,  i 

in  the  redemption  of  mankind.  Therefore  Christ 

is  called  "  the  wifdom  of  God,"   i  Cor.  i.  24.  and 

the  difpenfation  of  the  gofpel,  "  the  hidden  wifdom 

"  of  God,    and  the   manifold  wifdom  of  God,'* 

Eph.  ii.  10. 

If  then  God  be  only  wife,  the  original  and  only 
fountain  of  it,  from  thence  we  learn, 

Firft,  to  go  to  him  for  it,  Jam.  i.  5.  "  If  any  man 
*'  lack  wifdom,  let  him  afk  it  of  God."  There  are 
many  conceited  men,  that  think  they  are  rich  and 
increafed,  and  (land  in  need  of  nothing.  The  apo- 
file  doth  not  fpeak,  as  if  there  were  fome  that  did 
not  want  wifdom,  but  becaufe  there  are  fome  fo 
proud  and  conceited,  that  they  think  they  lack 
nothing;  thofe  are  ftark fools,  and  God  refills  fuch 
fooliih  and  proud  men :  but  if  any  man,  fenfible  of 
his  defeft  and  imperfedion,  cometh  to  God,  "  he 
*'  gives  liberally,  and  upbraids  no  man."  Wcare 
afliamed  to  learn  wifdom  of  men,  left  they  fliould 
contemn  and  upbraid  us  with  our  folly :  men  are  en- 
vious and  unwilling  that  others  Ihould  be  as  wife  as 
themfelves ;  but  God's  goodnefs  makes  him  willing 
to  impart  Wifdom  :  "  he  gives  liberally,  and  upbraids 
"  no  man." 

This  is  the  moft  defirable  accomplilhment  and 
perfection  ^  "  happy  is  the  man  that  getteth  wifdooi ; 
*'  wifdom  is  the  principal  thing,  therefore  get  wif- 
*'  dom:"  it  is  better  than  thofe  things  that  are  of 
the  higheft  value  among  men,  as  Solomon  often 
makes  the  comparifon.  Now  becaufe  "  it  comes 
*'  down  from  above,"  we  ihould  look  up  for  it; 
it  is  by  the  revelation  of  his  will,  and  the  wife  counfels 
of  his  word,  that  we  are  made  "  wife  unto  falvati- 

VoL.VIIL  16  N  ",  onj" 

3« 


3  4  o  o  '^he  wifdom,  g^^O'y 

S  E  R  M.  «  on  :"  therefore  we  ihould  beo;  of  him,  that  "  he 

CXXXVT,  .  .    .         , 

"  would  give  us  the  fpirit  of  wifdom  and  revelation 
*'  in  the  knowledge  of  himfelf,"  Eph.  i.  17. 

2.  If  God  be  only  wife  in  fuch  an  eminent  and 
tranfcendent  degree,  then  let  us  be  humble.  There 
is  no  caufe  of  boafling,  feeing  "  we  have  nothing 
**  but  what  we  have  received."  The  lowed  inflance, 
the  lead  fpecimen  of  divine  wifdom  ont-lliines  the 
higheft  pitch  of  human  wifdom ,  "  the  foolifhnefs 
*'  of  God  is  wifer  than  men,"  i  Cor.  i.  25.  there- 
fore "  let  not  the  wife  man  glory  in  his  wifdom," 
Jer.  ix.  29.  Of  all  things  we  fhould  not  be  proud 
of  wifdom  ;  the  proud  man  throws  down  the  repu- 
tation of  his  wifdom,  by  tlie  way  that  he  would 
raife  it.  No  fuch  evidence  of  our  folly,  as  a  con- 
ceit that  we  are  wife  -,  fapientis  animus  nunquam  tur- 
^efcit^  nunquam  tumet^  Cic.  To  pride  our  felves  in 
our  wifdom,  is  the  way  to  have  our  folly  made  ma- 
nifeft.  God  threatens  ^'  to  deftroy  the  wifdom  of 
*'  the  wife  men,"  and  "  to  turn  their  wifdom  into 
''  foolifhnefs." 

3.  We  fhould  labour  to  partake  of  the  wifdom  of 
<jod,  fo  far  as  it  is  communicable.  The  greatefl 
wifdom  that  we  are  capable  of,  is  to  diftinguifli  be- 
tween good  and  evil ;  "  to  be  wife  to  that  which  is 
^-^  good,"  as  the  apoftle  fpeaks,  Rom.  xvi.  19.  that 
is,  to  provide  for  the  future  in  time,  to  make  pro- 
vifion  for  eternity,  to  think  of  our  latter  end,  to  fear 
God  and  obey  him,  to  be  pure  and  peaceable,  to 
receive  inftrudlion,  and  to  win  Ibuls  ^  thefe  are  the 
charaders  which  the  fcripture  gives  of  wifdom.  When 
Job  had  declared,  that  the  excellency  of  the  divine 
wifdom  was  not  to  be  attained  by  men ;  he  tells 
us  what  that  wifdom  is,  which  is  proper  for  us ; 
*^  and  unto  man  he  faid,  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  that 

"  is 


cxxxvl- 


and fovereignty  of  G  on,  34^1 

**  is  wifdom  ;  and  to  depart  from  evil,  that  is  un-  S  ^  R^M^ 
"  derftanding.'*  There  are  many  that  are  wife  to 
worldly  ends  and  purpofes,  as  our  Saviour  tells  us  \ 
wife  to  get  riches,  and  to  afcend  to  honours :  but 
this  is  not  the  wifdom  which  we  are  to  labour  after ; 
this  is  but  a  Ihort-witted  prudence^  to  ferve  a  prefent 
turn,  without  any  profped:  to  the  future,  without  re- 
gard to  the  next  world,  and  the  eternity  which  we 
are  to  live  in  \  this  is  to  be  wife  for  a  moment,  and 
fools  forever. 

4.  If  God  be  only  wife,  then  put  your  truft  and 
confidence  in  him.  Whom  iliould  we  truft  rather 
than  infinite  wifdom,  which  manageth  and  direds 
infinite  goodnefs  and  power  ?  In  all  cafes  of  difficul- 
ty truft  him  for  diredlion,  "  acknowledge  him  in  all 
''  thy  ways,"  that  he  may  "  dired  thy  fteps  ;  com- 
*'  mit  thy  way  unto  the  Lord,  and  lean  not  to 
*'  thine  own  underftanding.  The  race  is  not  to 
*'.  the  fwift,  nor  the  battel  to  the  ftrong,"  but  the 
providence  of  God  difpofeth  all  thefe  things.  And 
if  we  rely  upon  our  own  wifdom,  that  will  prove  a 
broken  reed.  And  as  our  own  wifdom  is  a  broken 
reed,  fo  the  wdfdom  of  other  men,  Ifa.  xxxi.  i,  ^. 
God  curfeth  them  that  "  go  down  into  Egypt,  and 
*'  truft  to  their  ftrength  and  wifdom,  but  look  not 
**  to  the  holy  one  of  Ifrael,  neither  feek  the  Lord^ 
**  yet  he  alfo  is  wife,'^  faith  the  prophet. 

5.  Let  us  adore  the  wifdom  of  God,  and  fay  with 
St.  Paul,  I  Tim.  i.  17.  "  To  the  only  wife  God, 
''  be  honour  and  glory  for  ever  and  ever,  Amen:** 
and  with  Daniel,  "  bleffed  be  the  name  of  God  for 
*'  ever  and  ever,  for  wifdom  and  might  are  his." 
Veneration  is  the  acknowledgment  of  an  infinite  ex- 
cellency and  perfedion.  We  reverence  any  extraor- 
dinary degree  of  wifdom  ija  men  \    but  the  divine 

i$  N  2  wifdom. 


340  2  T'he  wifdom^  glory ^ 

SF,  RM.  wifdom,  which  is  perfed:  and  infinite,  is  matter  of 
our  adoration,  and  blelTing,  and  praife.  Thankf- 
giving  refpeds  the  benefits  we  receive  :  but  we  blefs 
God  when  we  acknowledge  any  excellency  :  for  as 
God's  blefTing  us,  is  to  do  us  good  j  fo  our  blelTing 
him,  is  to  fpeak  good  of  him  :  as  all  God's  perfec- 
tions are  the  objedls  of  our  blefling,  fo  more  efpeci- 
ally  his  wifdom  is  of  our  praife  ♦,  for  the  praife  of 
God  is  to  take  notice  of  the  wife  defign  and  contri- 
vance of  his  goodnefs  and  mercy  towards  us. 

Before  I  pafs  on  to  the  other  particulars  contained 
in  thefe  words,  I  cannot  but  take  notice,  that  this 
wife  God,  here  fpoken  of,  is  ftiled  our  Saviour, 
which  fome  underfland  of  our  Saviour  Jesus 
Christ,  and  bring  this  place  as  an  argument  to 
prove  his  divinity  :  and  if  that  were  fo,  it  were  all 
one  to  my  purpofe,'  which  is  in  the  next  place  to  fhew, 
that  glory,  and  majefly,  and  dominion,  and  power, 
belong  to  the  divine  being.  But  although  I  would 
not  willingly  part  with  any  place  that  may  fairly  be 
brought  for  the  proof  of  the  divinity  of  Christ, 
yet  feeing  there  are  fo  many  plain  texts  in  fcripture 
for  the  proof  of  it,  we  have  the  lefs  reafon  to  ftretch 
doubtful  places ;  and  that  this  is  fo,  will  appear  to 
any  one  who  confiders  that  the  title  of  Saviour  is 
feveral  times  in  fcripture  attributed  to  God  the  fa- 
ther ;  befides  that  in  a  very  ancient  and  authentick 
copy  we  find  the  words  read  fomewhat  otherwife, 
and  fo  as  to  put  this  out  of  all  controverfy,  fjuovc^  Bea 
(Ttarvj^i  vifjicov  Stoi  *l7j(ri  Xp/^5  KV^tis  yifJLm  So^a,,   &c. 

Having  premifed  thus  much  for  the  clearing  of 
thefe  words,  I  fhall  briefly  confider,  firfl:,  God's 
glory  and  majefly,  and  then  his  dominion  and  (ovc- 
reignty. 

Firft,  God's  glory  and  majefly.     By  majefly, 

we 


and /over  eignfy  of  God.  3403 

we  may  undericand  the  greatnefs,  or  eminent  excel-  S  E  R  M. 

•    •  CXXXVI 

lency  of  the  divine  nature,  which  refults  from  his 
perfedions,  and  whereby  the  divine  nature  is  fet  and 
placed  infinitely  above  all  other  beings  ♦,  I  fay,  the 
eminent  excellency  of  the  divine  nature,  which  re- 
fults from  his  perfedlions,  more  efpecially  from  thofe 
great  perfe6lions,  his  goodnefs,  and  wifdom,  and 
power,  and  hoHnefs. 

And  his  glory  is  a  manifeftation  of  this  excellency, 
and  a  jure  acknowledgment  and  due  opinion  of  it. 
Hence  it  is,  that  in  fcripture,  God  is  faid  to  be 
''  glorious  in  power,"  and  "  glorious  in  holiaefs," 
and  his  goodnefs  is  called  "  his  glory  •/'  and  here  in 
the  text,  glory  and  majefty  are  afcribed  to  him  up- 
on the  account  of  his  wifdom  and  goodnefs. 

That  thefe  belong  to  God,  I  fhall  prove, 

1.  From  the  acknowledgment  of  natural  light. 
The  heathens  did  conftantly  afcribe  greatnefs  to 
God,  and  that  as  refuking  chiefly  from  his  good- 
nefs, as  appears  by  their  frequent  conjundion  of 
thefe  two  attributes,  goodnefs  and  greatnefs.  Opt. 
Max.  were  their  moft  familiar  titles  of  the  Deity  j 
to  which  I  will  add  that  known  place  of  Seneca,  p'i- 
mus  deorum  cultus  eft  deos  credere^  dein  redder e  illis 
majeftatem  fuam^  reddere  honitatem^  fine  qua  nulld 
majeftas. 

2.  From  fcripture.  It  were  endlefs  to  produce  all 
thofe  texts  wherein  greatnefs  and  glory  are  afcribed 
to  God.  I  fhall  mention  two  or  three.  Deut.  x. 
17.  "  the  Lord  is  a  great  God  j"  Pfal.  xxiv.  10. 
he's  called  "  the  Icing  of  glory  j"  civ.  i .  he  is  faid 
to  be  "  clothed  with  majefty  and  honour.  The 
"  whole  earth  is  full  of  his  glory."  Hither  belong 
all  tlicfe  doxologies  in  the  old  and  new  teftament, 
wherein  ^reatnels,  and  glory,  and  majefty  are  af- 
cribed to  G  o  E> .  I  From 


3404  ^^^  wifdomy  glory ^ 

S  E  R  M.       From  all  which  v/e  may  learn, 
cxxxvi, 

1 .  What  it  is  that  makes  a  perfcm  great  and  glo- 
rious, and  what  is  the  way  to  majefty,  viz.  ''  real 
*'  worth  and  excellency,'*  and  particularly,  that 
kind  of  excellency  which  creatures  are  capable  of  in 
a  very  eminent  degree,  and  that  is  goodnefs ;  this 
is  that  which  advanceth  a  perfon,  and  gives  him  a 
pre-eminency  above  all  others  ;  this  cads  a  luftre 
ijpon  fi  man,  and  "  makes  his  face  to  ihine."  Arif- 
totle  tells  us,  that  honour  is  nothing  elfe  but  the 
''  fignification  of  the  efleem  which  we  have  of  a 
*'  perfon  for  his  goodnefs  •,  for,  faith  he,  to  be  good, 
*'  and  to  do  good,  is  the  higheft  glory."  God's 
goodnefs  is  his  higheft  glory  ;  and  there  is  nothing 
fo  glorious  in  any  creature,  as  herein  to  be  like  God. 

2.  Let  us  give  God  the  glory  which  is  due  to  his 
name  ;  "  afcribe  ye  great nefs  to  our  God,"  Deut. 
xxxii.3.  "  Give  unto  the  Lord,  O  ye  mighty,  give  un- 
to the  Lord  glory  and  power,"  Pfal.  xxix.  i .  The  glo- 
ry and  majefty  of  God  calls  for  our  efteem  and  honour, 
our  fear  and  reverence  of  him.  Thus  we  ftiould  "  glori- 
*'  fy  God  in  our  fpirits,"  by  an  inward  efteem  and  re- 
verence of  his  majefty.  The  thoughts  of  earthly  majef- 
ty will  compofe  us  to  reverence:  how  much  more  fliould 
the  apprehenfions  of  the  divine  majefty  ftrike  an  awe 
upon  our  fpirits  in  all  our  addrefles  to  him  ^  His  ex- 
cellency fhould  make  us  afraid,  and  keep  us  from 
all.  liiucy  boldnefs  and  familiarity  with  him.  Reve- 
rence is  an  acknowledgment  of  the  diftance  which  is 
between  the  majefty  of  God,  and  our  meannefs. 
And  we  ftiould  "  glorify  him  in  our  bodies,"  with 
outward  worftiip  and  adoration  ^  that  is,  by  all  ex- 
ternal figniiications  of  reverence  and  refpedj  and 
we  ftiould  glorify  him  in  our  lives  and  adions.  The 
higheft  glory  a  creature  can  give  to  God,  is  to  en- 
deavour 


and  fovereignty  of  God,  34^5, 

"  deavour  to  be  like  him  ;  fatis  illes  colult^  qtiifquis  S  E  R  M, 
imitatus  eft^  Seneca.  Hereby  we  manifeft  and  ihew  '_-^-^ 
forth  his  excellency  to  the  world,  when  we  endeavour 
to  be  conformed  to  the  divine  perfedlions.  And  in  cafe 
of  fin  and  provocation,  we  are  to  give  glory  to  God 
by  repentance,  which  is  an  acknowledgment  of  his 
holinefs,  who  hates  fin  ;  and  of  his  juflice,  which 
will  punilh  it  •,  and  of  the  mercy  of  God,  which  is 
ready  to  pardon  it  •,  for  it  is  the  glory  of  God  to 
pafs  by  a  provocation. 

3.  We  fhould  take  heed  of  robbing  God  of  his 
glory,  by  giving  it  to  any  creature,  by  afcribing 
thofe  titles,  or  that  v/orfhip  to  any  creature,  which 
is  due  to  God  alone.  This  is  the  reafon  which  is 
given  of  the  fecond  commandment ;  "  I  the  Lord^ 
"  am  a  jealous  God."  God  is  jealous  of  his  ho- 
nour, *'  and  will  not  give  his  glory  to  another,  nor 
**  his  praife  to  graven  images,"  Ifa.  xlii.  8.  Upon 
this  account  v/e  find  the  apoftle  reproves  the 
idolatry  of  the  heathens,  becaufe  thereby  they  de- 
bafed  the  efteem  of  God,  and  did  Ihew  they  had 
unworthy  thoughts  of  him,  Rom.  i.  21,  23.  "  When 
*'  they  knew  God,  they  glorified  him  not  as  God, 
*'  but  became  vain  in  their  imaginations :  and  chang- 
"  ed  the  glory  of  the  incorruptible  God,  into  an 
'*  image  made  like  to  corruptible  man,  and  to  birds 
"  and  four-footed  beafts,  and  creeping  things.'* 
Hereby  they  denied  the  glorious  excellency  of  the 
divine  nature  -,  that  is,  that  he  is  a  fpirit,  and  fo 
incapable  of  being  reprefented  by  any  material  or  fen-^ 

.  fible  image. 

Secondly,  I  come  now  to  fpeak  of  the  fovereignty 
and  dominion  of  God.     In  which  I  Ihall  ihew, 

Firll,  what  we  are  to  underfland  by  the  fovereign- 
ty and  dominJQn  of  God.    By  thefe  we  mean  the 

iull 


CXXXVI. 


3406  ^he  wifdom,  glory , 

SEJ^  M.  full  and  abfolute  right,  and  title,  and  authority 
which  God  hath  to,  and  over  all  his  creatures,  as 
his  creatures,  and  made  by  him.  And  this  right  re- 
fults  from  the  effects  of  that  goodnefs,  and  power, 
and  wifdom,  whereby  all  things  are  and  were  made  ; 
from  whence  there  doth  accrue  to  God  a  fovereign 
right  and  title  to  all  his  creatures,  and  a  full  and 
abfolute  authority  over  them  •,  that  is,  fuch  a  right 
and  authority,  which  doth  not  depend  upon  any  fu- 
perior,  nor  is  fubje6l  and  accountable  to  any,  for  any 
thing  that  he  does  to  any  of  his  creatures.  And  this 
is  that  which  is  called  fiimmiim  imperiiim^  becaufe 
there  is  no  power  above  it  to  check  or  controul  it, 
and  therefore  there  can  be  none  greater  than  this. 
And  it  is  abfolute,  becaufe  all  the  creatures  have 
what  they  have  from  God,  and  all  depend  upon  his 
goodnefs,  and  therefore  they  owe  all  pofTible  duty 
and  perpetual  fubjedtion  fo  long  as  they  continue  in 
being,  becaufe  it  is  folely  by  his  power  and  goodnefs, 
that  they  continue  ;  and  therefore  whatever  right  or 
title  any  one  can  pretend  to  any  perfon  or  thing, 
that  God  hath  to  all  things,  in  Beo  omnes  tituli^  om- 
nia jura  concur  runt. 

So  that  fovereignty  and  dominion  figniBes  a  full 
right,  and  title,  and  propriety  in  all  his  creatures, 
and  an  abfolute  authority  over  them,  to  govern  them 
and  difpofe  of  them,  and  deal  with  them  in  any  way 
he  pleafeth,  that  is  not  contrary  to  his  effential  dig- 
nity and  perfection,  or  repugnant  to  the  natural  ftate 
and  condition  of  the  creature. 

And  for  our  better  underftanding  of  this,  and  the 
preventing  of  miflakes,  which  men  are  apt  to  fall 
into  about  the  fovereignty  of  God,  I  will  lliew,. 

I.  Wherein  it  doth  not  confift.     And, 

II.  Wherein  it  doth  confift. 

j.Where^ 


and fovereignty  of  Go dI  34-oy 

I.  Wherein  it  doth  not  confift.  S  E  R  M.. 

I.  Not  in  a  right  to  gratify  and  delight  himfclf 
in  the  extreme  mifery  of  innocent  and  iindeferving 
creatures  ;  I  fay,  not  in  a  right  ;  for  the  right  that 
God  hath  in  his  creatures,  is  founded  in  the  bene- 
fits he  hath  conferred  upon  them,  and  the  obhgations 
they  have  to  him  upon  that  account.  Now  there's 
none,  who  becaufe  he  hath  done  a  benefit,  can  have, 
by  virtue  of  that,  a  right  to  do  a  greats  evil  than  the 
good  which  he  hath  done  amounts  to  •,  and  I  think 
it  next  to  madnefs,  to  doubt  whether  extreme  and 
eternal  mifery  be  not  a  greater  evil,  than  fimple 
being  is  a  good.  I  know  they  call  it  phyfical  good- 
nefs  ;  but  I  do  not  underfiand  how  any  thing  is  the 
better  for  being  called  by  a  hard  name.  For  what 
can  there  be  that  is  good  or  defirable  in  being,  when 
it  only  ferves  to  be  a  foundation  of  the  greateft  and 
moft  lafling  mifery  ?  and  we  may  fafely  fay,  that 
the  jufl  God  will  never  challenge  more  than  an  equi- 
table right.  God  doth  not  claim  any  fuch  fove- 
reignty  to  himfelf,  as  to  crufh  and  opprefs  innocent 
creatures  without  a  caufe,  and  to  make  them  mife- 
rable  without  a  provocation.  And  becaufe  it  feems 
fome  have  been  very  apt  to  entertain  fuch  groundlels 
jealoufies  and  unworthy  thoughts  of  God,  he  hath 
given  us  his  oath  to  aflure  us  of  the  contrary.  "  As 
*'  I  live,  faith  the  Lord,  I  have  no  pleafure  in  the 
*'  death  of  a  finner,  but  rather  that  he  fhould  turn 
''  and  live."  So  far  is  he  from  taking  pleafure  in 
the  mifery  and  ruin  of  innocent  creatures,  that  in 
cafe  of  fin  and  provocation,  he  would  be  much  ra- 
ther pleafed,  if  finners  would,  by  repentance,  avoid 
and  efcape  his  juftice,  than  that  they  Ihould  fall  un- 
der it.  The  good  God  cannot  be  glorified  or  pleaf- 
ed  in  doing  evil  to  any,  where  juftice  doth  not  re- 
Vol,  VIII.  i6  0  quire 


4o8  .     I'be  ivifdom,  glory y 

E  R  M.  quire  it  •,  nothing  is  further  from  infinite  goodnefs, 
than  to  rejoice  in  evil.  We  account  him  a  tyrant 
and  a  moniler  of  men,  and  of  a  deviJifh  temper," 
that  can  do  fo  -,  and  wc  cannot  do  a  greater  injury  to 
the  good  God,  than  to  paint  hu'n  out  after  fuch  a 
horrid  and  deformed  manner. 

2.  The  fovereignty  of  God  doth  not  confifl  in  im- 
pofing  laws  u[>on  his  creatures,  which  areimpolTible 
either  to  be  underftocd  or  cbfcrved  by  them.  For 
this  would  not  only  be  contrary  to  the  dignity  of 
the  divine  nature,  butcontradidt  the  nature  of  a  rea- 
fonable  creature,  which,  in  reafon,  cannot  be  ob- 
liged by  any  power  to  impolTibilities. 

3.  The  fovereignty  of  God  doth  not  confift  in  a 
liberty  to  tempt  men  to  evil^^  or  by  any  inevitable 
decree  to  neceffitate  them  to  fin,  or  effedlually  to 
procure  the  fins  of  men,  and  to  punifh  them  for 
them.  For  as  this  would  be  contrary  to  theholinefs, 
^nd  juflice,  and  goodnefs  of  God  ;  fo  to  the  nature 
of  a  reafonable  creature,  who  cannot  be  guilty  or 
deferve  punifliment  for  what  it  cannot  help.  And 
men  cannot  eafily  have  a  blacker  thought  of  God, 
than  to  imagin  that  he  hath,  from  all  eternity,  car- 
ried on  a  fecret  defign  to  circumvent  the  greateft 
part  of  men  into  dedrudtion,  and  underhand  to  draw 
men  into  a  plot  againft  heaven,  that  by  this  unwor- 
thy pradtice  he  may  raife  a  revenue  of  glory  to  his 
juilice.  There's  no  generous  and  good  m.an,  but 
would  fpit  in  that  man's  face,  that  fhouid  charge 
him  v/ith  fuch  a  dchgn  •,  and  if  they  who  are  but 
very  drops  of  goodnds,  in  comparifon  of  God,  the 
infinite  ocean  of  goodnefs,  would  take  it  for  fuch  4 
reproach,  Ihall  v/e  attribute  that  to  the  befl  being 
in  the  world,  which  v/e  would  detefl  and  abominate 
\n  pur  felves  ? 

,11.  Wherein 


and  fovereignty  of  Go  j^.  34^9 

IL  Wherein  the  fovereiernty  of  God  doth  connfl:.  ^  ^  ^^  ^^'^• 

,  cxxxvi. 

1 .  In  a  right  to  difpofe  of,  and  deal  with  his  crea-  ^^..-y-^ 

tures  in  any  way  that  doth  not  contradi6l  the  efTential 
perfections  of  God,  and  the  natural  condition  of 
the  creature. 

2.  In  a  right  to  impofe  what  laws  he  pleafeth  up- 
on his  creatures,  whether  natural  and  reafonabie ; 
or  pofitive,  of  trial  of  obedience,  provided  they  con- 
tradict not  the  nature  of  God,  or  of  the  creature. 

3.  In  a  right  to  inflid  due  and  deferved  punifhment 
in  a  cafe  of  provocation. 

4.  In  a  right  to  afflid  any  of  his  creatures,  fo  the 
evil  he  inhidts  be  fhort  of  the  benefits  he  hath  con- 
ferred on  them  •,  yea,  and  farther,  in  a  right  when 
he  pleafeth  to  annihilate  the  creature,  and  turn  it  out 
of  being,  if  it  fhould  fo  feem  good  to  him,  though 
that  creature  have  not  offended  him  ;  becaufe  what 
he  gave  was  his  own,  and  Ivt  may  without  injury 
take  it  away  again  when  he  pleafeth.  In  thefe  the 
fovereignty  of  God  confifts -,  and  if  there  be  any 
thing  elfe  that  can  be  reconciled  with  the  elTential 
perfections  of  God. 

Secondly,  for  the  proof  and  confirmation  of  this. 
This  is  univerfally  acknov/iedged  by  the  heathens, 
that  God  is  "  the  LO:Rd  and  fovereign  of  the  worlds 
"  and  of  all  creatures."  Hence  Plato  calls  him 
Tm  'srivTuv  '/jysf^ovci  ;  and  Tully,  cmnium  rerum  Do- 
minuiny  Lord  of  all  ,  and  this  the  fcripture  doth 
every  where  attribute  to  him,  calling  him,  "Lord 
"  oiFali ;  King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords  \'  to 
which  we  may  refer  all  thofe  doxologies,  in  which 
power,  and  dominion,  and  authority  are  afcribed 
to  God.  I  will  only  mention  that  eminent  confef- 
fion  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  a  great  king,  who,  v/he0 
his  underftanding  came  to  him,  was  forced  to  ac 
J6O2  Joiowledge, 


knowledge^    that  "God   was    the  moil   High,'* 
Dan.  iv.  34,  35.     I  mfer, 

Firfb^  negatively,  we  cannot,  from  the  fovcreign- 
ty  of  God,  infer  a  right  to  do  any  thing  that  is 
iiniliitable  to  the  perfection  of  his  nature ;  and  con- 
fequently  that  we  are  to  reft  fatisfied  with  fuch  a 
notion  of  dominion  and  fovereignty  in  God,  as  doth 
not  plainly  and  diredly  contradidt  all  the  notions 
that  we  have  of  juftice  andgoodnefs:  nay,  it  would 
be  'httle  lefs  than  a  horrid  and  dreadful  blafphemy, 
to  fay  that  God  can,  out  of  his  fovereign  will  and 
pleafure,  do  any  thing  that  contradidls  the  nature  of 
God,  and  the  effential  perfedlions  of  the  Deity  j  or 
to  imagin  that  the  pleafure  and  will  of  the  holy,  and 
juft,  and  good  God,  is  not  always  regulated  and 
determined  by  the  effential  and  indifpenfable  laws  of 
goodnefs,  and  hohnefs,  and  righteoufnefs. 

Secondly,  pofitively ;  we  may  infer  from  the  fo- 
vereignty and  dominion  of  God, 

1.  That  we  ought  to  own  and  acknowledge  God 
for  our  Lord  and  fovereign,  who  by  creating  us, 
and  giving  us  all  that  we  have,  did  create  to  him- 
felf  a  right  in  us. 

2.  That  we  owe  to  him  the  utmoft  poflibility  of 
our  love,  "  to  love  him  with  all  our  hearts,  and 
"  fouls,  and  ftrength  ;"  becaufe  the  fouls  that  we 
have,  he  gave  us  ;  and  that  we  are  in  a  capacity  to 
love  him,  is  his  gift  ;  and  when  we  render  thefe  to 
him,  we  do  but  give  him  of  his  own. 

3.  We  owe  to  him  all  imaginable  fubje6lion,  and 
obfervance,  and  obedience ;  and  are  with  all  dili- 
gence, to  the  utmoft  of  our  endeavours,  to  conform 
our  felves  to  his  will,  and  to  thofe  laws  which  he 
hath  impofed  upon  us. 

4.  In 


and  fovereignty  of  God.  3  4  i  I 

5ER  M. 
cxxxvi. 


4.  In  cafe  of  offence  and  difobedience,  we  are,  S  E  R  M 


\vithout  murmuring,  to  fubmit  to  what  he  (hall  in- 
flict upon  us,  "  to  accept  of  the  punilhment  of  our 
"  iniquity,"  and  "  patiently  to  bear  the  indignati- 
**  on  of  the  Lord,"  becaufe  we  have  finned  againft 
him,  who  is  our  Lord  and  fovereign. 


SERMON     CXXXVIL' 

The  wifdom  of  God  in  the  creation  of 
the  world. 


PSALM  civ.   24. 

0  Lord,  bow  manifold  are  thy  'uoorks  !  in  wifdom 

hafi  thou  made  them  alL 

I  AM  treating  of  the  attributes  and  properties  of  SERM. 
God,  particularly  thofe  which  relate  to  the  di-  ^^^J^ 

1  vine  underftanding,  which  I  told  you  are  his  know- 
I  ledge  and  wifdom.     I  have  finilhed  the   firft,    the 

knowledge  of  God.  The  lafl  day  I  fpake,  concern- 
ing the  wifdom  of  God  in  general  ;  but  there  are 
three  eminent  arguments,  and  famous  inftances  of 
God's  wifdom,  which  I  have  rcferved  for  a  more 
large  and  particular  handling.  The  wifdom  of  God 
fliines  forth  in  the  creation  of  the  world,  in  the  go- 
vernment of  it,  and  in  the  redemption  of  mankind 
by  Jesus  Christ.  Of  thefe  three  I  (hall  fpeak 
feverally. 

I  begin  with  the  firft,  the  argument  of  God's 
wifdom,  which  the  creation  doth  furnifh  us  withal. 
In  this  vifible  frame  of  the  world  which  we  behold 

with 


2412  'The  'Wifdorn  ofGoT> 

S  K  R  M.  "vvith  our  eyes,  which  way  foever  we  look,  we 
'  are  encountred  with  ocular  demonftrations  of  the 
wifdom  of  God.  What  the  apoftle  faith  of  the 
power  of  God  is  true  hkewife  of  his  wifdom,  Rom. 
i.  20.  ''  The  invifible  things  of  him  from  the  crea- 
*'  tion  of  the  world  are  clearly  {^^n^  being  under- 
*'  ftood  by  the  things  that  are  made,  even  his  eter- 
*'  nal  power  and  godhead  :"  fo  the  eternal  wifdom 
of  God  is  underflood  "  by  the  things  which  are 
*'  made."  Now  the  creation  is  an  argument  of  the 
wifdom  of  God,  as  it  is  an  effe6l  of  admirable  coun- 
feland  wifdom.  As  any  curious  work,  or  rare  en- 
gine doth  argue  the  wit  of  the  artificer  ;  fo  the  va- 
riety, and  order,  and  regularity,  and  fitnefs  of  the 
^orks  of  God,  argue  the  infinite  wifdom  of  him 
who  made  them  *,  a  work  fo  beautiful  and  magnifi- 
cent, fuch  a  {lately  pile  as  heaven  and  earth  is,  fa 
curious  in  the  feveral  pieces  of  it,  fo  harmonious  in^ 
all  it's  parts,  every  part  fo  fitted  to  the  fervice  of  th 
whole,  and  each  part Jbr  the  fervice  of  another  ;  is 
not  this  a  plain  argument  that  there  was  infinite  wif- 
dom in  the  coritrivance  of  this  frame } 

Now  I  fhall  endeavour  to  prove  to  you,  that  this 
frame  of  things  which  v/e  fee  with  our  eyes,  which 
we  call  the  world,  or  the  creation,  is  contrived  af- 
ter the  beft  manner,  and  hath  upon  it  evident  im- 
prelTions  of  counfel  and  wifdom.     I  grant  the  wif- 
dom of  God  is  infinite,  and  that  many  of  the  ends 
and  defigns  of  his  wifdom  are  "  unfearchable,  an^ 
*'  paft  finding  out,"  both  in  the  works  of  creatio: 
and  providence  -f  and  that  "  though  a  wife  m.aii 
*'  feek  to  find  out  the  work  of  God  from  the  be 
*'  ginning  to  the  end,  he  fiiall  not  be  able  to  do  it;' 
and  we  fhall  never  be  able  to  exhaufl  all  the  variou 
wifdom  and  contrivance  which  is  in  the  works  o 
I  God 


in  the  creation  of  the  world.  34^3 

God  ;  though  the  oftener,  and  the  nearer  we  mcdi-  ^  ^  ^  ^• 
f  cxxxvir* 

tate  upon  them,  the  more  we  fhall  fee  to  admire  in 

them  ;  the  more  we  lludy  this  book  of  the  creation, 
the  more  we  Ihall  be  ailonillied  at  the  wifdom  of  the 
author :  but  this  doth  not  hinder,  but  that  we  may 
difcover  fomething  of  the  wifdom  of  God,  though 
it  be  infinite.  As  the  effeds  of  infinite  power  may- 
fall  under  our  fenfes,  fo  the  defigns  of  infinite  wifdom 
i  may  fall  under  our  reafon  and  underilanding  ;  and 
when  things  appear  to  our  befl  reafon  plainly  to  be 
prdered  for  the  bell,  and  the  greatefl  advantages  of 
the  world  and  mankind,  fo  far  as  we  are  able  to  judge ; 
and  if  they  had  been  otherwife,  as  they  might  have 
been  a  hundred  thoufand  ways,  they  would  not  have 
I  been  fo  well ;  we  ought  to  conclude,  tliat  things  are 
thus,  and  not  otherwife,  is  the  refult  of  wifdom. 
.  Now  the  wifdom  of  God  in  the  creation  will  ap- 
ipear  by  confidering  the  works  of  God.  Thofe  v/ho 
have  lludied  nature,  can  difcourfe  thefe  things  more 
exadly  and  particularly.  It  would  require  perfedl 
fkill  in  aflronomy,  to  declare  the  motions  and  order 
of  heavenly  bodies  ;  and  in  anatomy,  to  readledures 
of  the  rare  contrivance  of  the  bodies  of  living  crea- 
tures. But  this,  as  it  is  beyond  my  ability,  fo  it 
would  probably  be  above  moft  of  your  capacities  ; 
therefore  I  fnall  content  myfelf  with  fome  general  and 
more  obvious  inftances  of  the  divine  wifaom,  which 
Ihine  forth  fo  clear  in  his  works,  that  "  he  that  runs 
"  may  read  it." 

1.  I  fhall  take  a  fhort  fun^ey  of  the  feveral  parts  of 
the  world. 

2.  Single  out  man,  the  mailer-piece  of  the  vifible 
Creation. 

I.  If  we  furvey  the  world,  and  travel  over  thefe- 
Veral  parts  of  it  in  our  thoughts,  we  Ihall  find  that 

all 


CXXXVII. 


3414.  ^he  wifdom  of  God 

S  K^M.^  all  things  in  it  are  made  with  the  greatcft  exa(5lnefs, 
ranged  m  the  moil  beautiful  order,  and  ferve  the  wi- 
fefl  and  befl  ends. 

If  we  look  up  to  heaven,  and  take  notice  only 
there  of  what  is  mofl  vifible,  the  fun ,  you  fee 
how  by  the  wife  order  and  conftancy  of  it's  courfe 
it  makes  day  and  night,  winter  and  fummer.  This 
the  pfalmifl  takes  notice  of,  Pfal.  xix.  1,2.  "  The 
*'  heavens  declare  the  glory  of  God  ;  and  the  firma- 
•*  ment  fheweth  his  handy  work.  Day  unto  day 
•*  uttereth  fpeech  -,  and  night  unto  night  fheweth 
•'  knowledge."  It  may  eafily  be  imagined  many 
ways,  how  the  fun  might  have  had  another  courfe  in 
reference  to  the  earth  •,  but  no  man  can  devife  any 
other,  that  fhould  not  be  very  much  to  the  prejudice 
of  the  world  ^  fo  that  this  being  the  beft,  it  is  an 
argument  that  wifdom  had  the  ordering  and  difpo- 
iing  of  it. 

If  we  look  down  to  the  earth,  we  fhall  fee  god 
^cending  and  defcending ;  I  mean  clear  reprefentati- 
ons  of  divine  wifdom  in  the  treafiires  that  are  hid  in 
the  bowels  of  it,  and  thofe  fruits  that  grow  upon 
the  furface  of  it.  What  vaft  heaps,  and  wtiat  vari- 
ety of  ufeful  materials  and  minerals  are  fcattered  up 
and  down  in  the  earth,  as  one  would  think  with  a 
carelefs  hand,  but  yet  fo  wifely  difperft,  as  is  mofl 
proper  for  the  necelTities  and  ufes  of  feveral  countries ! 
Look  upon  the  furface  of  the  earth,  and  you  fhall 
find  it  clothed  and  adorned  with  plants  of  various 
and  admirable  frame,  and  beauty,  and  ufefulnefs. 
Look  upon  the  vaft  ocean,  and  there  you  may  fee 
the  wifdom  of  God  in  bridling  and  reftraining  that 
unruly  element,  I  mean,  in  finking  it  below  the  earth  5 
whereas  the  water  might  have  been  above  and  cover- 
ed the  earth,  and  then  the  earth  had  been  in  a  greaT 

meafure 


in  the  creation  of  the  world.  34^5 

meafure  ufelefs,  and   incapable  of  thofe  inhabitants  S  K  R  M. 
which  now  pollers  it. 

Look  again  upon  the  earth,  and  in  the  air,  and 
fea,  and  you  fhali  find  all  thefe  inhabited  and  furnifh- 
ed  with  great  llore  of  living  creatures  of  feveral 
kinds,  wonderfully  made  in  the  frame  of  their  bo- 
dies, endowed  with  ftrong  inclination  to  increafe  their 
kinds,  and  with  a  natural  affedion  and  care  towards 
their  young  ones  ;  and  every  kind  of  thefe  creatures 
armed  either  with  ftrength  or  wit  to  oppofe  their  c- 
nemy,  or  fwiftnefs  to  fly  from  him,  or  ftrong  holds 
to  fecure  themfelves.  But  the  creation  is  a  vaft  field, 
in  which  we  may  eafily  lofe  ourfelves.  I  fhall  there- 
fore call  home  our  wandring  thoughts  ;  for  we  need 
not  go  out  of  ourfelves  for  a  proof  of  divine  wifdom. 
I  Ihall  therefore, 

2.  Seledt  the  choiceft  piece  of  it,  man,  who  is  the 
top  and  perfedion  of  this  vifible  world.  What  is 
faid  of  the  elephant,  or  behemoth,  Job  xl.  19.  in  ref- 
ped:  of  the  vaft  bignefs  and  ftrength  of  his  body,  is 
only  abfolutely  true  of  man,  that  he  is  divini  opificii 
caputs  "  the  chief  of  the  works  of  God,  and  upon 
*'  earth  there  is  none  like  him."  Man  is  mundi  «- 
triufque  nexus ^  "  the  bond  of  both  worlds,"  as  Sca- 
liger  calls  him,  in  whom  the  world  of  bodies,  and 
the  world  of  fpirits  do  meet,  and  unite ;  for  in  ref« 
pedl  to  his  body,  he  is  related  to  this  vifible  worlds 
and  is  of  the  earth;  but  in  refpedl  of  his  foul,  he  is 
allied  to  heaven,  and  defcended  from  above.  We 
have  looked  above  us,  and  beneath  us,  and  about  us, 
upon  the  feveral  reprefentations  of  God's  wifdom, 
and  the  feveral  parts  of  the  creation  ;  but  we  have 
not  yet  confidered  the  beft  piece  of  the  vifible  world, 
which  we  may  fpeak  of,  without  flattery  of  ourfelves, 
and  to  the  praifc  of  our  Maker.    God,  when  he  had 

VoL.Vm.  j6P  made 


341 6  ^he  wifdom  of  God 

s  '•  R  M.  made  the  world,  "  he  made  man  after  his  own  i^ 

CXY'CVII 

'  '•*'■  mage."  When  he  had  finifhed  the  other  part  of 
the  creation,  he  was  pleafed  to  fet  up  this  pidlure  of 
hinifelfin  it,  as  a  memorial  of  the  workman.  Now 
vvc  ihall  a  Utile  more  particularly  confider  tliis  piece 
of  God's  workmanfhip,  being  it  is  better  known  and 
more  familiar  to  us,  as  it  is  more  excellent  than  the 
reft,  and  confequently  a  higher  inftance  of  the  divine 
wifdom.  It  is  obferved  by  fome,  that  concerning 
the  parts  of -the  creation,  God  fpeaks  the  word, 
*'  let  there  be  light,"  and  "  let  there  be  a  firma- 
^'  ment,  and  there  was  fo :"  but  when  he  comes  to 
make  man,  he  doth,  as  it  were,  deliberate,  and  en- 
t?er  into  confultation  about  him  ;  "  And  God  faid, 
*'  let  us  make  mart  in  our  image,  after  our  hkenefs ; 
'^  and  let  him  have  dominion,"  Gen.  i.  26;  as  if 
man,  above  all  the  reft,  were  the  effedt  and  refult  of 
divine  wifdom,  and  the  creature  of  his  counfel. 

Man  may  be  confider ed  either  in  himfelf,  and 
in  refpe6t  of  the  parts  of  which  he  confifts,  foul  and 
body ;  or  with  relation  to  the  univerfe,  and  other 
parts  of  the  creation. 

I.  Confider  him  in  himfelf,  as  compounded  of 
foul  and  body.  Confider  man  in  his  outward  and 
worfc  part,  and  you  fhall  find  that  to.  be  admirable, 
even  to  aftoniiliment  •,  in  refpe6t  of  which,  the  pfal- 
mift  cries  out,  Pfal.  cxxxix.  14.  "  I  am  fearfully  and 
*'  wonderfully  made;  marvellous  are  thy  works, 
^'  and  that.my  foul  knowcth  right  well."  The  frame 
cf  our  bodies  is  fo  curioudy  wrought,  and  every  part 
of  it  fo  full  of  miracle,  that  Galen,  (who  was  other- 
wife  backward  enough  to  the  belief  of  a  God)  when 
he  had  anatomi2;ed  man's  body,  and  carefully  fur- 
veyed  the  frame  of  it,  viewed  the  fitnefs  and  ufeful- 
r*efs  cf  every  part  of  it,  and  the  many  feveral  inten- 
tions 


in  the  creation  of  the  world.  3  4  ly 

tions  of  every  little  vein,  and  bone,  and  mufcle,  and  ^|:j^^^[j. 
the  beauty  of  the  whole  ^  he  fell  into  a  pang  of  de- 
votion, and  wrote  a  hymn  to  his  Creator.  And 
thofe  excellent  books  of  his,  de  ufu  partium^  "  of 
''  the  ufefulnefs  and  convenient  contrivance  of  every 
*'  part  of  the  body,"  are  a  moft  exad  demonflrati- 
on  of  the  divine  wifdom,  which  appears  in  the  make 
of  our  body ;  of  which  books,  GalTendus  faith,  the 
whole  work  is  writ  with  a  kind  of  enthufiafm.  The 
wifdom  of  God,  in  the  frame  of  our  bodies,  very  much 
appears  by  a  curious  confideration  of  the  feveral  parts 
of  it  •,  but  that  requiring  a  very  accurate  fkill  in  ana- 
tomy, I  chufe  rather  wholly  to  forbear  it,  than  by 
•my  unfkilfulnefs  to  be  injurious  to  the  divine  wifdom. 
But  this  domicilium  corporis^  "  the  houfe  of  our 
^'  body,"  though  it  be  indeed  a  curious  piece  •,  yet 
it  is  nothing  to  the  noble  inhabitant  that  dwells  in  it* 
This  cabinet,  though  it  be  exquifitely  wrought,  and 
very  rich  ;  yet  it  comes  infinitely  fhort  in  value  of 
the  jewel  that  is  hid  and  laid  up  in  it.  How  does 
the  glorious  faculty  of  reafon  and  underftanding  ex- 
alt us  above  the  reft  of  the  creatures !  Nature  hath 
not  made  that  particular  provifion  for  man,  which  it 
hath  made  for  other  creatures,  becaufe  it  hath  pro- 
vided for  him  in  general,  in  giving  him  a  mind  and 
reafon.  Man  is  not  born  clothed,  nor  armed  with 
any  confiderable  weapon  for  defence  ♦,  but  he  hath 
reafon  and  underftanding  to  provide  thefe  things  for 
himfelf ;  and  this  alone  excels  all  the  advantages  of 
other  creatures  :  he  can  keep  himfelf  warmer  and  fa- 
fer  y  he  can  forefee  dangers  and  provide  againft  them  •, 
he  can  provide  weapons  that  are  better  than  horns, 
and  teeth,  and  paws,  and  by  the  advantage  of  his 
reafon,  is  too  hard  for  all  other  creatures,  and  can  de- 
fend himfelf  againft  their  violence.  - 

16  P  2  If 


3 4 1 8  Tthe  wifdom  of  Gqd 

^^  ^v^n  ^^"^^  Confider  the  mind  of  man  yet  nearer,  how* 
*  many  arguments  of  divinity  are  there  in  it !  That 
there  fhould  be  at  ouce  in  ourunderftandings  diftindt 
comprehenfions  of  fuch  variety  of  objedls  ^  that  it 
Ihoiild  pafs  in  it's  thoughts  from  heaven  to  earth  in 
a  moment,  and  retain  the  memory  of  things  paft, 
and  take  a  profped  of  the  future,  and  look  forward 
as  far  as  eternity !  Becaufe  we  are  famihar  to  our 
felves,  we  cannot  be  ilrange  and  wonderful  to  our 
felves  ;  but  the  great  miracle  of  the  world  is  the  mind 
of  man,  and  the  contrivance  of  it  an  eminent  in- 
-ftance  of  God's  wifdom. 

-: ,  2.  Confider  man  with  relation  to  the  univerfe,  and 
you  fhall  find  the  wifdom  of  God  doth  appear,  in 
that  all  things  are  made  fo  ufeful  for  man,  who 
was  defigned  to  be  the  chief  inhabitant  of  this  vifiblc 
world,  the  guefl  whom  God  defigned  principally  ta 
entertain  in  this  houfe  which  he  built.  Not  that  wc 
are  to  think,  that  God  hath  fo  made  all  things  for 
man,  that  he  hath  not  made  them  at  all  for  himfelf, 
and  poflibly  for  many  other  ufes  than  we  can  ima- 
gine ;  for  we  much  over- value  our  felves,  if  we  think 
them  to  be  only  for  us  ♦,  and  we  diminifh  the  wif- 
dom  of  God,  in  reftraining  it  to  one  end  :  but  the 
chief  and  principal  end  of  many  things  is  the  ufe  and 
fervice  df  man  j  and  in  reference  to  this  end,  you 
/hall  find  that  God  hath  made  abundant  and  wife 
provifion. 

More  particularly  we  will  confider  man, 
1.  In  his  natural  capacity,  as  a  part  of  the  world. 
How  many  things  are  there  in  the  world  for  the  fer- 
vice and  pleafure,  for  the  ufe  and  delight  of  man, 
■which,  if  man  were  not  in  the  world,  would  be  of 
little  ufe  ?  Man  is  by  nature  a  contemplative  creature, 
9}vi  God  has  furniilied  him  with  many  objects  to  ex- 

ercifc 


in  the  creation  of  the  worlds  3419 

crcife  his  underftanding  upon,  which  would  be  fo  S  E  R  M. 
far  ufelefs  and  lofl,  if  man  were  not.  Who  fliould 
obferve  the  motions  of  the  flats,  and  the  courfes  of 
thofe  heavenly  bodies,  and  all  the  wonders  of  na- 
ture ?  Who  fhould  pry  into  the  fecret  virtues  of 
plants,  and  other  natural  things,  if  there  were  not 
in  the  world  a  creature  endowed  with  reafon  and  un- 
derftanding ?  Would  the  beads  of  the  field  fludy  af- 
tronomy,  or  turn  chymifts,  and  try  experiments  in 
nature  ? 

What  variety  of  beautiful  plants  and  flowers  is 
there !  which  can  be  imagined  to  be  of  little  other 
ufe  but  for  the  pleafure  of  man.  And  if  man  had 
not  been,  they  would  have  loft  their  grace,  and  been 
trod  down  by  the  beafls  of  the  field,  without  pity 
or  obfervation  ;  they  would  not  have  made  them 
into  garlands  and  nofe-gays.  How  many  forts  of 
fruits  are  there  which  grow  upon  high  trees,  out  of 
the  reach  of  beafls !  and  indeed  they  take  no  pleafure 
in  them.  What  would  all  the  vafl  bodies  of  trees 
have  ferved  for,  if  man  had  not  been  to  build  with 
them,  and  make  dwellings  of  them?  Of  what  ufc 
would  all  the  mines  of  metal  have  been,  and  of  coal, 
and  the  quarries  of  flone  ?  Would  the  mole  have  ad- 
mired the  fine  gold  ?  Would  the  beafls  of  the  foreft 
have  built  themfelves  palaces,  or  would  they  have 
made  fires  in  their  dens  ? 

2.  Confider  man  in  his  geographical  capacity,  as 
I  may  call  it,  in  relation  to  his  habitation  in  this  or 
that  climate  or  country.  The  wifdom  of  God  hath 
fo  ordered  things,  that  the  neceffities  of  every  coun- 
try are  fupplied  one  way  or  other.  Egypt  hath  no 
rains  :  but  the  river  Niius  overflows  it,  and  makes 
it  fruitfiii.  Under  the  line,  where  there  are  excef- 
five  heats,  every  day  there  are  conftant  gales  and 

breezes 


■2/|.20  ^b^  wifdom  of  God 

ii  E  R  M  breezes  of  cool  wind,  to  fan  and  refrefli  the  fcorch- 
*  ed  inhabitants.  The  hotter  countries  are  furnifhed 
with  materials  for  filk,  a  light  clothing  ;  we  that 
are  cooler  here  in  England,  with  materials  for  cloth, 
a  warmer  clothing;  RufTia  and  Mufcovy,  which 
are  extreme  cold,  are  provided  with  warm  furs,  and 
"lldns  of  beafts. 

3.  Confider  man  in  his  capacity  of  commerce  and 
intercourfe.  Man  is  a  fociable  creature  ;  befides  the 
advantages  of  commerce  with  remoter  nations,  for 
fupplying  every  country  with  thofe  conveniencies 
and  commodities,  which  each  doth  pecuHarly  afford. 
And  here  the  wifdom  of  God  does  plainly  appear, 
in  difpofing  the  fea  into  feveral  parts  of  the  world, 
for  the  more  fpeedy  commerce  and  intercourfe  of 
feveral  nations.  Now  if  every  country  had  brought 
forth  all  commodities,  that  had  been  needlcfs  and 
fuperiiuous,  becaufe  they  might  have  been  had  with- 
out commerce  ;  befides,  that  the  great  encourage^ 
ment  of  intercourfe  among  nations,  which  is  fo  agree- 
able to  human  nature,  would  have  been  taken  away : 
if  every  country  had  been,  as  now  it  is,  deftitute  of 
many  things  other  countries  have,  and  there  had 
been  no  fea  to  give  an  opportunity  of  traffick  •,  the 
world  had  been  very  defedive  as  to  the  ufe  of  man. 
Now  here  appears  the  wifdom  of  God,  that  the 
world,  and  all  things  in  it,  are  contrived  for  the  beft. 

Thus  I  have  endeavoured  to  do  fomething  toward 
the  difplaying  of  God's  wifdom  in  the  workmanfhip 
of  the  world  -,  although  I  am  very  fenfible  how  much 
I  have  been  maftered  and  opprefTed  by  the  greatnefs 
and  weight  of  fo  noble  an  argument.  For  "  who 
*'  can  declare  the  works  of  God  !  and  who  canfhew 
;*'  forth  all  his  praife  !" 

The  ufe  I  fhall  make  of  wh^t  has  been  faid,  fhall 
l?e  in  three  particulars,^  i .  This 


in  the  creation  of  the  worick  34^  i 

I.  This  confutes  the  Epicureans,  who  impute  the  S  E  R  M. 
world,  and  this  orderly  and  beautiful  frame  of  things 
to  chance.  Thofe  things  which  are  the  proper  ef- 
fed:s  of  counfel,  and  bear  the  plain  impreffion  of 
wifdom  upon  them,  ought  not  to  be  attributed  to 
chance.  What  a  madnefs  is  it  to  grant  all  things 
to  be  as  well  made,  as  if  the  wifeO:  agent  upon  coun- 
fel  and  defign  had  contrived  them^  and  yet  to  af- 
cribe  them  to  chance  1  Now  he  that  denies  things  to 
be  fo  wifely  framed,  muil  pick  holes  in  the  creation, 
and  fhew  fome  fault  and  irregularity  in  the  frame  of 
things,  which  no  man  ever  yet  pretended  to  do.  Did 
ever  any  anatomiil  pretend  to  fhew  how  the  body  of 
man  might  have  been  better  contrived,  and  fitter 
for  the  ufes  of  a  reafonable  creature  than  it  is  ;  or 
any  aflronomer  to  redlify  the  courfe  of  the  fun  ?  As 
fpr  the  extravagant  and  blafphemous  fpeech  of  AI- 
phonfus,  "  that  if  he  had  flood  at  God's  elbow 
"  when  he  made  the  world,  he  could  have  told  him 
^  how  to  have  made  it  better;"  befides  his  pride, 
it  fhews  nothing  but  his  ignorance  -,  that  he  built 
his  aflronomy  upon  a  falfe  hypothefis,  as  is  general- 
ly beheved  now  by  the  learned  in  that  fcience  ;  and 
no  wonder  he  found  fault  with  the  world,  when  he 
miflook  the  frame  of  it :  but  thofe  who  have  been 
mofl  verfed  in  nature,  and  have  moft  pried  into  the 
fecrets  of  it,  have  moft  admired  the  workmanfhip 
both  of  the  great  world,  and  the  lefs. 

But  if  we  muft  fuppofe  the  world  to  be  as  well 
made  as  wifdom  could  contrive  it,  which  is  general- 
ly granted  ;  it  is  a  monftrous  folly  to  impute  it  to 
chance.  A  man  might  better  fay,  Archimedes  did 
not  make  any  of  his  engines  by  Ikill,  but  by  chance  ; 
and  might  more  eafily  maintain,  that  cardinal  Rich* 
lieu  did  not  manage  affairs  by  any  arts  or  policy, 

but 


2^22  T'he  icifdom  of  God 

rvYvJu-  ^"^  ^^^y  ^^^^  ^^^  ^y  ^^^^^  chance.  What  pitiful 
fhifts  is  Epicurus  put  to,  when  the  beil  account  he 
can  give  of  the  world,  is  this  ;  "  that  matter  always 
''  was,  and  the  parts  of  it  in  motion,  and  after  a 
*'  great  many  trials,  the  parts  of  matter  at  length 
*'  hampered  themfelves  in  this  fortunate  order  where- 
*'  in  they  now  are  ;  that  men,  at  firfb,  grew  out  of 
*'  the  earth,  were  nourifhed  by  the  navel-ftring,  and 
*'  when  they  were  ftrong  enough,  broke  loofe  and 
**  weaned  themfelves  •,  that  the  noftrils  were  made 
*'  by  the  waters  making  themfelves  a  paflage  out 
"  of  the  body  -,  and  die  llomach  and  bowels  by  the 
"  waters  forcing  a  paflage  downward  ;  that  the 
••  members  of  the  body  were  not  made  for  thofe 
**  ufes  for  which  they  ferve,  but  chanced  to  be  fo, 
'*  and  the  ufes  afterwards  found  out."  Is  it  worth 
the  while  to  advance  fuch  fenfelefs  opinions  as  thefe, 
to  deny  the  wifdom  of  God  ?  Is  it  not  much  eafier," 
and  more  reafonable  to  fay,  that  the  wifdom  of  God 
made  all  thefe  things,  than  to  trouble  our  felves  to 
imagin  how  all  things  Ihould  happen  thus  conve- 
niently by  chance  ?  Did  you  ever  know  any  great 
work,  in  which  there  was  variety  of  parts,  and  an 
orderly  difpofition  of  them  required,  done  by  chance, 
and  without  the  diredlion  of  wifdom  and  counfel  ? 
How  long  time  might  a  man  take  to  jumble  a  fet  of 
four  and  twenty  letters  together,  before  they  would 
fall  out  to  be  an  exad  poem  ♦,  yea,  or  to  make  a  book 
of  tolerable  fenfe,  though  but  in  profe  ?  How  long 
might  a  man  fprinkle  oil  and  colours  upon  canvas,^ 
with  a  carelefs  hand,  before  this  would  produce 
the  exa6b  pidlure  of  a  man  ?  And  is  a  man  eafier 
made  by  chance,  than  his  pidure  ?  He  that  tells  me 
that  this  great  and  curious  frame  of  the  world  was 
inade  by  chance,  I  could  much  more  believe  him, 
J  if 


in  the  creation  of  the  world,  342  i 

if  he  Ihould  tell  me  that  Henry  the  VII. 's  chapel  SERM. 
in  Weftminfter  was  not  built  by  any  mortal  man,  ^^^^^^^• 
but  the  flones  did  grow  in  thofe  forms  into  which 
they  feem  to  us  to  be  cut  and  graven  ;  that  the 
ftones,  and  timber,  and  iron,  and  brafs,  and  all  the 
other  materials  came  thither  by  chance,  and  upon  a 
day  met  all  happily  together,  and  put  themfelves 
into  that  delicate  order,  in  which  we  fee  them  fo 
clofe  compared,  that  it  muft  be  a  great  chance  that 
parts  them  again.  Now,  is  it  not  much  eafier  toi 
imagin  how  a  fkilful  workman  Ihould  raife  a  build- 
ing, than  how  timber,  and  flones,  and  how  that 
variety  of  materials  wKich  is  required  to  a  great  and 
ftately  building,  ihould  mttt  together  all  of  a  juft 
bignefs,  and  exadlly  fitted,  and  by  chance  take  their 
places,  and  range  themfelves  into  that  order  ?  I  in- 
fifl  the  longer  upon  this,  becaufe  I  am  fenfible  how 
much  atheifm  hath  gained  in  this  age. 

2.  Let  us  admire,  and  adore,  and  praife  the  wif- 
dom  of  God,  "  who  hath  eflabUfhed  the  world  by 
"  his  wifdom,  and  flretched  out  the  heavens  by  his 
"  underflanding  ;  who  hath  made  all  things  in  num- 
"  ber,  weight,  and  meafure  •,"  that  is,  by  exad 
v/ifdom.  The  wife  works  of  God  are  the  pro- 
per objc6t  of  our  praife  ;  and  this  is  a  day  proper 
for  the  work  of  praife  and  thankfgiving.  Now  un- 
der the  gofpcl,  fince  Christ  was  clearly  revealed. 
We  have  new  matter  of  praife  and  thankfgiving  *,  but 
as  God  has  given  us  Christ,  fo  he  hath  given  Mi 
Gur  beings.  We  are  not  fo  to  remember  otir  re- 
deemer, as  to  forget  our  creator.  The  goodntfs, 
and  power,  and  wifdom  of  GaDy  which  appears  in- 
the  creation  of  the  world,  ought  flill  to  be  matter 
of  admiration  and  praife  to  chriflians.  It  is  a  great- 
fault  and  negleft  among  chriflians,  that  they  arc  not 

Vol.  VUL  j6  Q^  Hiorc^ 


cxxxvii. 


3424  The  wifdom  ofGoT> 

^^„!i™  more  taken  up  with  the  works  of  God,  and  the 
contemplation  of  the  wifdom  which  fhines  forth  in 
them.  We  are  apt  enough  to  admire  other  things, 
little  toys  ;  but  we  overlook  this  vaft  curious  en- 
gine of  the  world,  and  the  great  artificer  of  all  things. 
It  was  truly  faid  by  one,  that  mod  men  are  fo  ftu- 
pid  and  inconfiderate,  as  to  admire  the  works  of  as 
painter  or  a  carver,  more  than  the  works  of  God. 
There  are  many  that  have  bellowed  more  eloquence 
in  the  praife  of  a  curious  pidure,  or  an  exadl  build- 
ing, than  ever  they  did  upon  this  noble  and  exquifite 
frame  of  the  world,  or  any  of  the  other  works  of 
God.  We  can  admire  the  wifdom,  and  defign, 
and  fkill  of  petty  artifts,  and  little  engineers  •,  but 
here  is  wifdom  in  the  beauty  and  order  of  the  crea- 
tion. Did  we  love  God,  and  take  pleafure  in  the 
efFe6ls  of  his  wifdom  and  power,  we  fhould  be  more 
in  the  contemplation  of  them.  Pfal.  cxi.  2.  "  The 
,*'  works  of  the  Lord  are  great,  fought  out  of  all 
*'  them  that  have  pleafure  therein."  Let  us  then 
fay  with  the  Pfalmift  •,  "  O  Lord,  how  manifold 
"  are  thy  works!  in  wifdom  haft  thou  made  them 
"  all  j  the  earth  is  full  of  thy  riches.  Sec. 

More  particularly  let  us,  with  an  humble  thank- 
fulnefs,  admire  the  wifdom  which  hath  made  and 
difpofed  all  things  fo  fitly  for  our  ufe  and  fervice, 
and  with  fo  merciful  a  refped  to  us  :  the  light  and  v 
influence  of  heaven  ;  the  beafts  and  the  fruits  of  the 
earth.  We  find  the  Pfalmift  often  praifing  God 
upon  this  account,  Pfal.  cxxxvi.  4,  5,  &c.  The 
wifdom  which  Iiath  framed  thefe  bodies  of  ours.  Pfal. 
cxxxix.  14,  15,  16.  which  hath  endowed  us  with 
knowledge  and  underftanding.  Elihu  complains,  that 
men  were  apt  to  overlook  thefe  great  blelTings  of  God, 
Jobxxxv.  10, 1 1, 1 2.  "But  none  faith,  where  is  God 

"  my 


in  the  creation  of  the  world.  34^5 

*^  my  maker,  who  giveth  fongs  in  the  night?  who  S  E  R  M. 
*'  teacheth  us  more  than  the  beads  of  the  earth,  and 
"  maketh  us  wifer  than  the  fowls  of  heaven  ?  There 
"  they  cry,  but  none  giveth  anfwer,  becaufe  of  the 
"  pride  of  evil  men.'* 

3.  Ufc.  Truft  the  wifdom  of  God,  which  made 
the  world,  to  govern  it,  and  the  affairs  of  it ;  and 
the  wifdom  which  hath  framed  thy  body  in  fo  cu- 
rious and  exquifite  a  manner,  and  formed  thy  Ipirit 
within  thee,  and  hath  made  fo  many  creatures,  with 
reference  to  thy  necelTity  and  comfort,  truft  him  for 
thy  future  provifion.  Mat.  vi.  25.  ''  I  fay  unto 
"  you,  take  no  thought  for  your  lives,  what  ye 
"  fhall  eat,  &c.  Is  not  the  hfe  more  than  meat? 
"  and  the  body  than  rayment?''  He  hath  given 
us  our  fouls,  he  hath  breathed  into  us  the  breath  of 
life,  and  made  thefe  bodies  without  our  care  and 
thought  i  he  hath  done  the  greater,  will  he  not  do 
the  lefs  ?  When  thou  art  ready  anxioufly  and  foli- 
citoufly  to  fay,  what  fhall  I  do  for  the  neceflaries  of 
life  ?  Confidcr  whence  thou  didft  receive  thy  life, 
who  made  this  body  of  thine  ;  thou  mayeft  be  af- 
fured,  that  the  wifdom  which  hath  created  thefe, 
confidered  how  to  fupply  them  j  the  wifdom  of  God 
knew  that  you  would  want  all  thefe,  and  hath  ac- 
corclingly  provided  for  them,  therefore  fear  not. 


i6Q^2  SERM^ 


'^he  wifdom  of  God 

SERMON  CXXXVIII. 

The  wifdom  of  God  in  his  providence. 

'i  P  E  T  E  R    V.  7. 

Cafting  all  your  care  upon  him^  for  he  careth  for  you^ 

AM  O  N  G  S  T  the  fevcral  dudes  which,  to- 
wards the  conclufion  of  this  epiille,  the  apo- 
ftle  exhorts  chriftians  to,  this  is  one,  not  to  be  over- 
much fohcitous  and  concerned  about  what  may  befal 
us,  but  to  refer  ourfelves  to  the  providence  of  God, 
which  takes  care  of  us.  In  fpeaking  to  this  argu- 
ment, Ifhall 

I.  Conlider  the  nature  of  the  duty  here  required, 
which  is  "  to  caft  our  care  upon  God." 

II.  The  argument  ufed  to  perfuade  us  to  it :  be- 
caufe  "  he  careth  for  us." 

I.  For  the  nature  of  the  duty  here  requfred.  The 
word  fjii^ifjLvoi,  fignifies  an  anxious  care  about  events, 
a  care  that  is  accompanied  with  trouble  and  difquiet 
of  mind  about  what  may  befal  us  •,  about  the  good 
that  we  hope  for  and  defire,  or  about  the  evil  which 
we  fear  may  come  upon  us.  This  the  apoftle  ex:- 
horts  us  to  throw  off;  and  to  leave  to  the  providence 
pf  GpD,  and  his  care,  all  thofe  events  which  we  are 
apt  to  be  fo  folicitous  and  difquieted  about.  The  exr 
preffion  feems  to  be  taken  out  of  Pfal.  Iv.  22.  "  caft 
^'  thy  burthen  ypon  the  Lord,  and  he  Ihall  fwfr 
^'  tain  thee." 

Now  that  we  may  not  miftake  our  duty  in  this 
inatter,  I  Ihall  Ihew  what  is  not  here  meant  by  "  cafting 
"  all  our  care  upon  God  •,"  and  then,  whatis  meant 
bjrit,  The 


CXXXVlll. 


in  his  providence,  34^7 

The  apoftle  doth  not  here  intend  to  take  men  offS  E  R  M. 
from  a  provident  care  and  diligence  about  the  con- 
cernments of  this  life  ^  this  is  not  only  contrary  to 
reafon,  but  to  many  exprefs  precepts  and  pafTages  of 
fcripture,  wherein  diligence  is  recommended  to  us, 
and  the  blefling  of  God,  and  the  good  fuccefs  of  our 
affairs  promifed  thereto  ;  wherein  we  are  command- 
ed to  provide  for  thofe  of  our  family,  which  cannot 
be  done  without  fome  fort  of  care ;  and  wherein 
flothfulnefs  and  negligence  are  condemned,  and 
threatened  with  poverty  j  fo  that  this  is  not  "  to  call 
^'  our  care  upon  God,"  to  take  no  care  of  ourfelves, 
to  ufe  no  diligence  and  endeavour  for  the  obtaining 
of  the  good  which  we  defire,  and  the  prevention  of 
the  evil  we  fear ;  this  is  to  tempt  the  providence  of 
God,  and  to  caft  that  burthen  upon  him,  which  he 
expeds  we  fhould  bear  our  felves. 

But  by  "  cafting  our  care  upon  God,"  the  apoflle 
intends  thefe  two  things. 

1 .  That  after  all  prudent  care  and  diligence  have 
been  ufed  by  us,  we  fhould  not  be  farther  folicitous, 
nor  trouble  our  felves  about  the  event  of  things, 
which,  when  we  have  done  all  we  can,  will  be  out 
of  our  power.  And  this  certainly  is  our  Saviour's 
meaning,  when  he  bids  us  "  take  no  care  for  the 
"  morrow."  When  we  have  done  what  is  fit  for 
us  for  the  prefent  to  do,  we  fliould  not  difquiet  and 
torment  ourfelves  about  the  iffue  and  event  of  things. 

2.  "  Cafling  our  care  upon  God,"  implies,  that 
we  fhould  refer  the  ilTue  of  things  to  his  providence, 
which  is  continually  vigilant  over  us,  and  knows 
how  to  diipofe  all  things  to  the  bed  ;  entirely  ^con- 
fiding in  his  wiftiom  and  goodnefs,  that  he  will  order 
all  things  for  our  good,  and  in  that  confidence  refol- 
ving  to  reft  fatisfied  and  contented  with  the  difpofals 
of  his  providence,  what:ever  they  be.  You 


CXXXVllI, 


J428  The  wifdom  of  God 

S  E  R  M.  You  i^e  then  the  nature  of  the  duty  which  the  a- 
poflle  here  exhorts  to,  viz.  That  after  all  prudent 
care  and  diligence  have  been  ufed  on  our  parts,  we 
ihould  not  be  difquieted  in  our  minds  about  the  e- 
vent  of  things,  br:L  leave  them  to  God,  who  hath 
the  care  ot  us,  and  all  our  concernments.  Which 
is  the 

II.  Thing  I  propofed  to  fpeak  to,  and  which  I  in- 
tend chiefly  to  infiit  upon,  viz.  The  argument  which 
the  apoftle  here  ufeth  to  perfuade  us  to  this  duty, 
of"  cafling  all  our  care  upon  God,"  bccaufe  "  it  is 
*'  he  that  careth  for  us :"  and  this  impUes  in  it  thefe 
two  things. 

1.  In  general,  that  the  providence  of  God  governs 
the  world,  and  concerns  itfelf  in  the  affairs  of  men, 
and  difpofeth  of  all  events  that  happen  to  us. 

2.  More  particularly,  that  this  providence  is  pe- 
culiarly concerned  for  good  men,  and  that  he  takes 
a  fpecial  care  of  them  and  their  concerns  •,  "  He 
*'  careth  for  you."  The  apoille  fpeaks  this  to  them, 
not  only  as  men,  but  as  Chriftians.  And  thus  the 
pfalmift,  from  whom  thefe  words  feem  to  be  taken, 
does  apply  and  limit  this  promife  •,  "  Caft  thy  bur- 
*'  then  upon  the  Lord,  and  he  Ihall  fuilain  thee  ^ 
*'  he  fhall  never  fuffer  the  righteous  to  be  moved." 

I.  That  God  taketh  care  of  us,  implies  in  gene- 
ral, that  the  providence  of  God  governs  the  world, 
and  concerns  itfelf  in  the  affairs  of  men,  and  difpof- 
feth  of  all  events  that  happen  to  us.  I  fhajl  not  now 
enter  upon  a  large  proof  of  the  providence  of  GpD  ; 
that  is  too  large  and  intricate  an  argument  for  a  fhort 
difcourfe,  and  hath  a  great  deal  of  nicety  and  diffi- 
culty in  it ;  and  though  it  be  a  fundamental  principle 
of  religion,  and  hath  been  almoft  generally  entertain- 
ed and  believed  by  mankind,  and  that  upon  very  good 

reafonj 


The  ivifdom  of  GoT>  3429 

reafon ,  yet  becaufc  the  vindication  of  many  particu-  ^  E  RM. 
lar  appearances  of  providence,  does  in  a  great  mea-  xxxvui, 
fure  depend  upon  a  full  view  and  comprehenfion  of 
the  whole  defign,  therefore  we  mud  necelTarily  refer 
our  felves,  for  full  fatisfadion,  as  to  feveral  difficul- 
ties and  objedlions,  to  the  other  world,  when  we 
fhall  fee  God's  works,  together  with  the  relation  of 
every  part  to  the  whole  defign,  and  then  many  par- 
ticular pafTages,  which  may  now  feem  odd  and 
crooked,  as  we  look  upon  them  by  themfelves,  will, 
in  relation  to  the  whole,  appear  to  have  a  great 
deal  of  reafon  and  regularity  in  them. 

Therefore  I  fhall  at  prefent  only  briefly,  and  in 
the  general,  fhew  that  it  is  very  credible,  that  there 
is  a  wife  providence  that  governs  the  world,  and 
interefts  itfelf  in  the  affairs  of  men,  and  difjpofeth  of 
all  events  which  happen  to  us. 

And  I  defire  it  may  be  obferved  in  the  entrance 
upon  this  argument,  that  the  handling  of  this  quef- 
tion  concerning  providence,  doth  fuppofe  the  being 
of  God,  and  that  "  he  made  the  world,"  as  prin- 
ciples already  known  and  granted,  before  we  come 
to  difpute  of  his  providence ;  for  it  would  be  vain. 
to  argue  about  the  providence  of  God,  with  thofe 
who  queftion  his  being,  and  whether  "  the  world 
*'  was  made  by  him  :*'  But  fuppofing  thefe  two 
principles,  "  that  God  is,"  and  *■'  that  he  made  the 
"  world,"  it  is  very  credible  that  he  fhould  take 
care  of  the  government  of  it,  and  efpecially  of  one 
of  the  nobleil  parts  of  it,  the  race  of  mankind.  For 
we  cannot  believe,  that  he,  who  employed  fo  much 
power  and  wifdom  in  the  raifing  of  this  great  and 
magnificent  pile,  and  flirnifliing  every  part  of  it  with 
fuch  variety  of  creatures,  fo  exquifitely  and  fo  wife- 
ly fitted  for  the  ufe  and  fervice  of  one  another,  fliould 
3  fo 


cxxxvni. 


3430  in  his  providence^ 

^5v?,.^*  ^^  ^^^^  ^^  ^^  ^^^  perfected  it,  forfake  his  own  work- 
manfhip,  and  take  no  farther  care  of  it  •,  efpecially 
confidering  that  it  is  no  trouble  and  difquiet  to  him, 
either  to  take  notice  of  what  is  done  here  below,  or 
to  interpofe  for  the  regulating  of  any  diforders  that 
may  happen ;  for  infinite  knowledge,  and  wifdom^ 
and  power  can  do  all  things  with  all  imaginable  cafe, 
knows  all  things,  and  can  do  all  things,  without 
any  diflurbance  of  it's  own  happinefs. 

And  this  hath  always  been  the  common  appre- 
henfion  of  mankind,  that  God  knows  all  things, 
and  obferves  every  thing  that  is  done  in  the  world, 
and  when  he  pleafeth,  interpofes  in  the  affairs  of  it. 
'Tis  true  indeed,  the  Epicureans  did  deny  that  God 
either  made  the  world  or  governs  it ;  and  therefore 
wife  men  always  doubted  whether  they  did  indeed 
believe  the  being  of  God,  or  not ;  but  being  unwill- 
ing to  incur  the  danger  of  fo  odious  an  opinion, 
they  were  content,  for  fafhion  fake,  to  own  his  be- 
ing, provided  they  might  take  away  the  befl  and 
moft  fubflantial  arguments  for  the  proof  of  it.  The 
reft  of  the  philofophers  owned  a  providence,  at  leail 
a  general  providence,  that  took  care  of  great  and 
more  important  matters,  but  did  not  defcend  to  a 
conftant  and  particular  care  of  every  perfon,  and 
every  little  event  belonging  to  them,  interdum  cu- 
rio fus  fingulorum^  fays  Tully  ;  now  and  then,  when 
he  pleafes,  he  takes  care  of  particular  perlbns,  and 
their  leffer  concernments  •,  but  many  of  them  thought 
that  God  did  generally  negledl  the  fmaller  and  more 
inconfidcrable  aiTairs  of  the  world.  Bit  minora  neg- 
ligunt  7ieque  agellos  fingulorum  i^  znticulas  perfe- 
quuntur^  "  the  gods  overlook  fmaller  matters,  and 
"  do  not  mind  every  man's  little  field  and  vine." 
Such  imperfed;  apprehenfions  had  tliey  of  the  provi>- 

dencc 


CXXXV1114 


in  hisprovide?ice,  343  i 

dence  of  God.  And  though  they  would feem here-  S  ER  M. 
by  to  confult  the  dignity  and  eafe  of  the  Deity,  by 
exempting  him  from  the  care  and  trouble  of  lefTer 
matters,  yet,  in  truth  and  reality,  they  caft  a  dif- 
honourable  refledlion  upon  him,  as  if  it  were  a  bur- 
then to  infinite  knowledge,  and  power,  and  good- 
nefs,  to  take  care  of  every  thing. 

But  now  divine  revelation  hath  put  this  matter 
out  of  doubt,  by  aiTuring  us  of  God's  particular 
care  of  all  perfons  and  events.  Our  Saviour  tells 
us,  that  God's  providence  extends  to  the  lead  and 
moft  inconfiderable  creatures  ;  "  to  the  grafs  of  the 
"  field,  which  to  day  is,  and  to  morrow  is  call  in* 
''  to  the  oven,"  Mat.  vi.  30.  "  To  the  fowls  of 
"  the  air,"  and  that  to  the  leaft  of  them,  even  to 
*'  the  Iparrows,  two  of  which  are  fold  for  a  farthing, 
"  and  yet  not  one  of  them  falleth  to  the  ground 
"without  God,"  Mat.  x.  29.  Much  more  doth 
the  providence  of  God  extend  to  men,  which  are 
creatures  far  more  confiderable,  and  to  the  very 
leafl  thing  that  belongs  to  us,  "  to  the  very  hairs 
"  of  our  head,  which  are  all  numbred  ^"  the  low-* 
eft  inftance  that  can  be  thought  on. 

So  that  the  light  of  nature  owns  a  more  general 
providence ;  and  divine  revelation  hath  rectified 
thofe  imperfedl  apprehenfions  which  men  had  about 
it,  and  hath  fatisfied  us,  that  it  extends  itfelf  to  all 
particulars,  and  even  to  the  Icafb  things  and  moft 
inconfiderable.  And  this  is  no  ways  incredible, 
confidering  the  infinite  perfedion  of  the  divine  na- 
ture, in  refped;  of  which  God  can  with  as  much 
and  greater  eafe  take  care  of  every  thing,  than  we 
c^n  do  of  any  one  thing  ;  and  the  belief  of  this  is 
the  great  foundation  of  religion.  Men  tlierefore  pray 
to  God  for  the  good  they  want,  and  to  be  freed 

Vol.  VIII.  16  R  froiB 

3 


3432  ^he  wifdom  of  GoY) 

S  E  R  M.  from  the  evils  they  fear,  becaufe  they  believe  that  he 
always  regards  and  hears  them.  Men  therefore 
make  confcience  of  their  duty,  becaufe  they  believe 
God  obferves  them,  and  will  reward  and  punifli 
their  good  and  evil  deeds.  So  that  take  away  the 
providence  of  God,  and  we  pull  down  one  of  the 
main  pillars  upon  which  religion  Hands  ;  we  rob 
our  {tlvts  of  one  of  the  greatcft  comforts,  and  beft 
refuges  in  the  afflictions  and  calamities  of  this  life, 
and  of  all  our  hopes  of  happinefs  in  the  next. 

And  though  there  be  many  diforders  in  the  world, 
efpecially  in  the  affairs  of  man,  the  moft  irregular 
and  intractable  piece  of  God's  creation  •,  yet  this  is 
far  from  being  a  fufficient  objedion  againft  the  provi- 
dence of  God,  if  we  confider  that  God  made  man 
a  free  creature,  and  capable  of  abufing  his  liberty, 
and  intends  this  prefcnt  life  for  a  ftate  of  trial  in  or- 
der to  another,  where  men  fhall  receive  the  juil:  re- 
compence  of  their  adions'here  :  and  then  if  we  con- 
fider, that  many  of  the  evils  and  diforders,  which 
God  permits  to  happen,  are  capable  of  being  over- 
ruled by  him  to  a  greater  good,  and  are  made  many 
times  to  ferve  wife  and  excellent  purpofes,  and  that 
the  providence  of  God  does  fometimes  vifibly  and 
remarkably  interpofe,  for  the  prevention  and  remedy 
of  great  diforders  and  confufions  ;  I  fay  confidering 
all  this,  it  is  no  blemiili  to  the  divine  providence,  to 
permit  many  of  thofe  irregularities  which  are  in  the 
world,  and  fufFer  the  fates  of  good  and  bad  men 
to  be  fo  crofs  and  unequal  in  this  life.  For  fuppofing 
another  life  after  this,  wherein  men  iliall  come  to  an 
account,  and  every  man  fhall  receive  the  juft  re- 
compence  of  his  actions,  there  will  then  be  a  proper 
feafon  and  full  opportunity  of  fetting  all  things  ftrait, 
and  no  man  ihall  have  reafon  then,  either  to  glory 

3  in 


cxxxvin. 


in  his  providence.  3433 

in  his  wickednefs,  or  to  complain  of  his  fufFerings  in  ^^^^,^?^' 
this  world.  This  is  the  firfl,  that  God's  providence 
governs  the  world,  and  interefts  itfelf  in  the  atFairs  of 
men,  and  difpofeth  of  all  events  that  happen  to 
them ;  and  this  is  a  very  good  reafon,  why  we 
ihould  call  our  particular  cares  upon  him,  who  hath 
undertaken  the  government  of  the  whole. 

2.  The  providence  of  God  is  more  peculiarly  con- 
cerned for  good  men,  and  he  takes  a  more  particular 
and  efpecial  care  of  them.  The  apoille  fpeaks  this 
to  Chrifbians,  "  caft  all  your  care  on  him,  for  he, 
"  careth  for  you."  And  this  David  limits  in  a 
more  particular  manner  to  good  men  ;  "  caft  thy 
"  burthen  upon  the  Lord,  and  he  will  fuftain  thee  ; 
"  he  fhall  never  fuffer  the  righteous  to  be  moved." 

The  providence  of  God  many  times  preferves 
good  men  from  thofe  evils  which  happen  to  others, 
and  by  a  peculiar  and  remarkable  interpofition,  ref- 
cues  them  out  of  thofe  calamities  which  it  fuffers 
others  to  fall  into;  and  God  many  times  blelTeth 
good  men,  with  remarkable  profperity  and  fuccefs 
in  tlieir  affairs.  To  which  purpofe  there  are  in- 
numerable declarations  and  promiifes  in  the  holy 
fcriptures,  fo  well  known,  that  I  fhall  not  trouble 
you  with  the  recital  of  them. 

Notv/ithftanding  which,  it  cannot  be  denied,  that 
good  men  fall  into  many  evils,  ^nd  are  haralTed  with 
great  afflictions  in  this  world :  but  then  the  provi- 
dence of  God  ufually  ordereth  it  fo,  that  they  are 
armed  with  great  patience  to  bear  them, and  find  great 
comfort  and  fupport  under  them,  and  make  better 
ufe  and  improvement  of  them  than  others  ;  fo  that 
one  way  or  other  they  turn  to  their  advantage.  So 
the  apoftle  aiTures  us,  Rom.  viii.  28.  "  we  know 
*'  that  all  things  work  together  for  good  to  them 

16  R  2  "that 


l^he  wifdom  of  God 

*'  that  love  God.*'     All  the  evils  and  affli6tions, 
which  happen  to  good  men,  confpire  one  way  or 
other  to  the  promoting  of  their  happinefs,  many- 
times  in  this  world,  to  be  fure  they  make  a  great 
addition  to  it  in  the  other.     So  the  fame  apoille  tells 
us,    2  Cor.  iv.    17,  1 8.      "    Our  light  afflidion, 
''  which  is  but  for  a  moment,   worketh  for  us  a  far 
**  more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glory,  whilft 
*'  we  look  not,"  &:c.      And  can  wefay  God's  pro- 
vidence negledls  us,  when  he  rewards  our  temporal 
fufferings  with  eternal  glory  :  when  through  many 
hardfhips  and  tribulations,  he  at  lafl  brings  us  to  a 
kingdom  ?    Was  Jofeph  negleded  by  God,  when 
by  a  great  deal  of  hard  ufage,  and  a  long  imprifon- 
rnent,  he  was  railed  to  the  higheft  dignity  in  a  great 
kingdom  ?  Or  rather,  was   not  the   providence  of 
God  very  remarkable  towards  him,  in  making  thofe 
fufferings  fo  many  fleps  to  his  glory,  and  the  occa- 
fion  of  his  advancement?  And  is  not  God's  provi- 
dence towards  good  men  as  kind  and  as  remarkable, 
in  bringing  them  to  an  infinitely  better  and  more 
glorious  kingdom,  by  tribulations  and  fufferings  ♦, 
and  making  *-'  our  light  affli6lions,  which  are  but  for 
"  a  moment,  to  work  for  us  a  far  more  exceeding 
*'  and  eternal  weight  of  glory  .?" 

Thus  you  fee  what  is  implied  in  God's  care  of  us 
in  general ;  that  he  governs  the  world,  and  difpofeth 
all  events ;  and  particularly,  that  he  is  peculiarly 
concerned  for  good  men,  and  takes  a  more  efpecial 
care  of  them.  Let  us  now  fee  of  what  force  this 
confideration  is,  to  perfuade  to  the  duty  enjoined  in 
the  text,  "  to  caft  all  our  care  upon  God  ♦,"  that  is, 
after  all  prudent  care  and  diligence  hath  been  ufed 
on  our  part,  not  to  be  anxious  and  folicitous  about 
the  event  of  things,  but  to  leave  that  to  God.     Now 

this 


in  his  providence.  343? 

this  confideration,  that"  God  cares  for  us,"  fhould  SERM. 
be  an  argument  to  us,  "  to  caft  all  our  care  upon  <^xxxvui.^ 
"  him,"  upon  thefe  two  accounts  : 

1.  Becaufeif"  God  cares  for  us,"  our  concern- 
ments are  in  the  bell  and  fafefl  hands. 

2.  Becaufe  all  our  anxiety  and  folicitude  will  do 
us  no  good. 

I.  Becaufe  if*'  God  cares  for  us,"  our  concern- 
ments are  in  the  beft  and  fafeft  hands,  and  where  we 
fhould  defire  to  have  them ;  infinitely  fafer,  than  un- 
der any  care  and  condud:  of  our  own.  And  this 
ought  to  be  a  great  fatisfadlion  to  our  minds,  and  to 
free  us  from  all  difquieting  thoughts  ;  for  if  God  un- 
dertakes the  care  of  us,  then  we  are  fure  that  nothing 
fhall  happen  to  us,  but  by  the  difpofalorpermiffionof 
infinite  wifdom  and  goodncfs.  There  are  many  things 
indeed,  which  to  us  feem  chance  and  accident ;  but 
in  refpedl  of  God,  they  are  providence  and  defign  ; 
they  may  appear  to  happen  by  chance,  or  may  pro- 
ceed from  the  ill-will  and  malicious  intent  of  fecond 
caufes,  but  they  are  all  wifely  defigned  ;  and  as  they 
are  appointed  or  permitted  by  God,  they  are  the  re- 
fult  of  the  deepeft  counfel,  and  the  greatefl:  goodnefs. 
And  can  we  wifh  that  we  and  our  concernments  Ihould 
be  in  better  or  fafer  hands,  than  of  infinite  power  and 
wifdom,  in  conjundion  with  infinite  love  and  good- 
nefs  ?  And  if  we  be  careful  to  do  our  duty,  and  to 
demean  our  feives  towards  God  as  we  ought,  we 
may  reft  affured  of  his  love  and  care  of  us ;  and  if 
we  do  in  good  earneft  believe  the  providence  of 
God,  we  cannot  but  think  that  he  hath  a  pecuhar 
regard  to  thofe  that  love  and  ferve  him,  and  that  he 
will  take  a  peculiar  care  of  their  concernments,  and 
that  he  can,  and  will  difpofe  them  better  for  us,  than 
we  could  manage  them  our  feives,  if  we  were  left 

to 


cxxxvm. 


3436  I'he  wifdom  of  God 

S  E  R  M.  fQ  ourfelves,  and  our  affairs  were  put  into  tht  hands 
of  our  own  counfel. 

Put  the  cafe  we  had  the  entire  ordering  and  difpo- 
fal  of  our  felves,  what  were  reafonable  for  us  to  do 
in  this  cafe  ?  We  would  furely,  according  to  our 
beft  wifdom  and  judgment,  do  the  beu:  we  could  for 
ourfelves  •,  and  when  upon  experience  of  our  mani- 
fold ignorance  and  weaknefs,  we  had  found  our. 
weightieil  affairs  and  defigns  frequently  to  mifcarry, 
for  want  of  fore-fight,  or  power;  or  fkill  to  obviate 
and  prevent  the  infinite  hazards  and  difappointments 
which  human  affairs  are  liable  to,  we  fhould  then 
look  about  us  ;  and  if  we  knew  any  perfon  much  wi- 
fer,  and  more  powerful  than  ourfelves,  who,  we  be- 
lieved did  heartily  love  us,  and  wifli  well  to  us,  we 
would  out  of  kindnefs  to  ourfelves,  afl<  his  counfel 
in  our  affairs,  and  crave  his  affiflance  -,  and  if  we 
could  prevail  with  him  to  undertake  the  care  of  our 
concernments,  we  would  commit  them  allto  his  con- 
du(5l  and  government,  in  confidence  of  his  great  wif- 
dom and  good- will  to  us. 

Now  God  is  fuch  an  one,  he  loves  us  as  v.rt\\  as 
we  do  ourfelves,  and  defires  our  happinefs  as  much, 
and  knows  infinitely  better  than  we  do,  what  means 
are  moll  conducing  to  it,  and  will  mofl  effedually 
ftcure  it.  And  every  man  that  believes  thus  of  God, 
(as  every  man  muftdo,  that  believes  there  is  a  God, 
for  thefe  are  the  natural  and  effential  notions  which 
all  men  have  of  the  Deity)  I  fay,  every  man  that  be- 
lieves thus  of  God  •,  the  firft  thing  he  would  do  (if 
he  knew  not  already  that  God  had  voluntarily,  and 
of  his  own  accord,  undertaken  the  care  of  him  and 
of  his  affairs)  would  be  to  apply  himfelf  toGoD,  and 
to  befeech  him  with  all  earneftnefs  and  importunity, 
that  he  would  permit  him  to  refer  his  concernments 

to 


in  his  providence.  3437 

to  him,  and  be   pleafed  to  undertake  the   care  of  S  E  R  M- 
them  j  and  he  would,  without  any  demur  or  diffi-  ^^^^^"*' 
culty,  give  up  himfelf  wholly  to  him,  to  guide  and 
govern  him,  and  to  difpofe  of  him  as  to  him  fhould 
feem  beft. 

Now  if  God  have  prevented  us  herein,  and  with- 
out our  defire  taken  this  care  upon  himfelf,  we  ought 
to  rejoice  in  it,  as  the  greatefl  happinefs  thai  could 
poffibly  have  befallen  us ;  and  we  fhould,  without 
any  farther  care  and  anxiety,  ufmg  our  own  beft  dili- 
gence, and  fliudying  to  pleafe  him,  chearfully  leave 
our  felves  in  his  hands,  with  the  greateft  confidence 
and  fecurity,  that  he  will  do  all  that  for  us  which  is 
really  beft ;  and  with  a  firm  perfuafion,  that  that  con- 
dition, and  thofe  circumftances  of  life,  which  he 
lliall  chufe  for  us,  v/ill  be  no  other  but  the  very  fame 
which  we  would  chufe  for  ourfelves,  if  we  were  as 
wife  as  he. 

And  it  is  fo  natural  for  men  to  think  thus  of  God, 
that  the  very  heathen  poet  had  the  fame  idea  of  him, 
and  upon  that  ground,  advifeth  us  to  commit  all  our 
concernments  to  him. 

Permittes  ipjts  expendere  numinihus^  quid 
Conveniat  nobis ^  rehufque  fit  utile  noftris  ; 
Nam  pro  jucundis^  aptijfima  qu^que  dahunt  dii% 
Charior  efi  illis  homo^  quamfibi. 

Leave  it,  fays  he,  to  the  wifergods,  to  confider  and 
determine  what  is  fitteft  for  thee,  and  moft  for  thy 
advantage  ;  and  though  they  do  not  always  give  thee 
what  thou  defireft,  and  that  which  pleafeth  the  beft, 
yet  they  will  give  that  which  is  moft  fit  and  conve- 
nient for  thee  •,  for  man  is  more  dear  to  the  gods, 
than  he  is  to  himfelf.  Not  much  different  from  this, 
is  the  divine  counfel  of  Solomon,  Prov.  iii.  5,  6. 

"  Truft 


CXXXVlll, 


3438  T'he  wifdo7n  of  God 

S  E  R  M.  «  Truft  in  the  Lord  with  all  thine  heart ;  and  lean 
''  not  unto  thine  own  underflanding.  In  all  thy 
"  ways  acknowledge  him,  and  he  fhall  dired;  thy 
''  paths."  It  is  confiderable  who  it  is  that  gives  this 
advice  -,  the  "  wifeft  of  the  fons  of  men  •,'*  and  yet 
he  advifeth  "  to  truft  in  God  for  direction,  and  not 
*'  to  lean  to  our  own  underftandings." 

If  therefore  we  be  fully  perfuaded  of  God's  infi- 
nitely wife  and  good  providence,  we  ought  certainly 
to  refer  our  felvcs  to  him,  and  perfectly  to  acquiefcr 
in  his  difpofal,  and  to  reft  fatisfied  in  whatever  he 
does ;  and  whatever  condition  he  afligns  to  us, 
we  ought  to  be  contented  with  it :  if  we  be  not,  we 
find  fault  with  his  wifdom,  and  reproach  hisgoodnefs, 
and  wifh  the  government  of  the  world  in  better  hands. 
So  that  a  firm  belief  of  the  providence  of  God,  as 
it  would  take  away  all  anxiety  concerning  future  e- 
vents,  fo  would  it  likewife  filence  all  thofe  murmur- 
ings  and  difcontents,  which  are  apt  to  arife  in  us, 
when  things  fall  out  crofs  to  our  defires,  when  difaf- 
ters  and  difappointments  happen  to  us,  and  the  pro- 
vidence of  God  cafts  us  into  ficknefs,  or  poverty, 
or  difgrace.  This  quieted  David,  when  he  was  rea- 
dy to  break  out  into  murmuring  at  the  afflidions  and 
calamities  which  befel  him  •,  "I  held  my  peace, 
*'  (fays  he,)  and  fpake  not  a  word,  becaufe  thou, 
*'  Lord,  didft  it."  And  this  likewife  fhould  keep 
us  from  fretting  and  vexing  at  inftruments  and  fc- 
cond  caufes  •,  to  confider  that  the  wife  providence  of 
God  ovcr-ruleth  and  difpofeth  the  adlions  of  men, 
and  that  no  harm  can  happen  to  us  without  his  per- 
milTion.  Tliis  confideration  reftrained  David's  an- 
ger, under  that  high  provocation  of  Shimei,  when 
he  followed  him,  reproaching  him  and  curfing  him ; 
*'  let  him  alone,  the  Lord  hath  faid  unto  him,  curfe 

"  Davtd.'! 


in  his  providence.  3439 

"  David.'*  He  confidered  that  God's  pro\ddence  SERM. 
permitted  it ;  and  looking  upon  it  as  coming  from  ^^*•''^'^^^- 
an  higher  hand,  this  cahiied  his  palTion,  and  made  him 
bear  it  patiently.  If  a  man  be  walking  in  the  ftreet, 
and  one  fling  water  upon  him,  it  is  apt  to  provoke 
him  beyond  all  patience  ;  but  no  man  is  in  a  pafTion 
for  being  wet  ten  times  as  much  by  rain  from  hea- 
ven. What  calamity  foever  befalleth  us,  when  we 
confider  it  as  coming  from  heaven,  and  ordered  and 
permitted  there,  this  will  Hill  and  hufh  our  pafllon, 
and  make  us,  with  Eli,  to  hold  our  peace,  or  only 
to  lay,  "  it  is  the  Lord,  let  him  do  what  feemeth 
''  him  good." 

We  are,  indeed,  liable  to  many  things  in  this 
world,  which  have  a  great  deal  of  evil  and  afflidion 
in  them,  to  poverty,  and  pain,-  and  reproach,  and 
reflraint,  and  the  lofs  of  our  friends  and  near  relations ; 
and  thefe  are  great  afflidions ,  and  very  crofs  and 
diilafteful  to  us ;  and  therefore,  when  we  are  in  dan- 
ger of  any  of  thefe,  and  apprehend  them  to  be  mak- 
ing towards  us,  we  are  apt  to  be  anxious,  and  full 
of  trouble  ;  and  when  they  befal  us,  we  are  prone 
to  cenfure  the  providence  of  God,  andtojudge  rafh- 
ly  concerning  it,  as  if  all  things  were  not  ordered  by- 
it  for  the  beft  :  but  we  fliould  confider,  that  we  are 
very  ignorant  and  fhort  fighted  creatures,  and  fee 
but  a  little  way  before  us,  are  not  able  to  penetrate 
into  the  defigns  of  God,  and  to  look  to  the  end  of 
his  providence.  We  cannot  (as  Solomon  exprefTeth 
it)  "  fee  the  work  of  God  from  the  beginning  to  the 
*'  end  i"  whereas,  if  we  faw  the  whole  defign  of 
providence  together,  we  fhould  ftrangely  admire  the 
beauty  and  proportion  of  it,  and  fhould  fee  it  to  be 
very  wife  and  good.  And  that  which,  upon  the 
whole  matter,  and  in  the  lalt  ifllie  and  refult  of  things, 

VoL.VIIL  i6  S  is 


344*^  ^^^  '^^^^fdom  of  God 

S  E  R  M.  is  moft  for  our  good,  is  certainly  befl,  how  grievous 
^^^"*  foever  it  may  feem  for  the  prefent.  Sicknefs  Icaufed 
by  phyfick,  is,  many  times,  more  troublefom  for 
the  prefent,  than  the  difeafe  we  take  it  for  •,  but  e- 
very  wife  man  compofeth  himfelf  to  bear  it  as  well 
as  he  can,  becaufe  it  is  in  order  to  his  health  \  the 
evils  and  afuidipns  of  this  life  are  the  phyfick,  and 
means  of  cure,  which  the  providence  of  God  is  of- 
ten necefTitated  to  m^ake  ufe  of-,  and,  if  we  did  trull- 
cur  felvcs  in  the  hands  of  this  great  phyfician,  we 
fhould  quietly  fubmit  to  all  the  feverities  of  his  pro- 
vidence, in  confidence  that  they  would  *'  all  work 
'^^  together  for  our  good." 

"When  children  are  under  the  government  of  pa- 
rents, or  the  difcipline  of  their  teachers,  they  are  apt 
to  murmur  at  them,  and  think  it  very  hard  to  be  de- 
hied  fo  many  things  which  they  defire,  and  to  be 
conftrained  by  feverities  to  a  great  many  things  which 
are  grievous  and  tedious  to  them :  but  the  parent 
and  the  mafter  know  very  well,  that  it  is  their  igno- 
rance and  inconfideratenefs  which  makes  them  to 
think  fo,  and  that  v/hen  they  come  to  years,  and  to 
underfland  themfclves  better,  then  they  will  acknow- 
ledge, that  all  that  which  gave  them  fo  much  dif- 
content,  was  really  for  their  good,  and  that  it  was  their 
childiflmefs  and  folly,  which  made  them  to  think  other- 
wife,  and  that  they  had,  in  all  probability,  been  undone, 
had  they  been  indulged  in  their  humour,  and  per- 
mitted in  every  thing  to  have  their  own  will ;  they 
had  not  wit  and  confideration  enough,  to  trufl  the 
difcrction  of  their  parents  and  governors,  and  to  be- 
lieve that  even  thofe  things  which  were  fo  d'fpleafing 
to  them,  would  at  laft  tend  to  their  good. 

There  is  a  far  greater  diilance  between  the  wif- 
4prn  of  GpD  and  men,  and  we  are  infinitely  more 

ignor^np 


/;;  his  providence.  344^^ 

ignorant  and  childifh  in  refped  of  God,  than."  our  SE  R  M. 
children  are  in  refpeft  of  us  ;  and  being  perfuaded  of  ^•^'^^^"^' 
this,  v/e  ought  to  reckon,  that  while  we  are  in  this 
world,  under  God's  care  and  difcipHne,  it  is  necefla^ 
ry  for  our  good,  that  we  be  reflrained  in  nnany  things, 
which  we  eagerly  defire :  and  fuffer  many  things  that 
are  grievous  to  us  •,  and  that  when  we  come  to  hea- 
ven, and  are  grown  up  to  be  men,  and  ''  hav^e  put 
*'  away  childifli  thoughts,"  and  are  come  to  under- 
Hand  things  as  they  truly  are,  and  not  in  a  riddle, 
and  darknefs,  as  we  now  do  j  then  "  the  judgment 
"  of  God  will  break  forth  as  the  Hght,  and  the  righ- 
*'  teoufnefs"  of  all  his  dealings  "  as  the  noonday  •,'* 
then  all  the  riddles  cf  providence  will  be  clearly  ex- 
pounded to  us,  and  we  fhall  fee  a  plain  reafon  for  all 
thofe  difpenfations  which  w^ere  fo  much  ftumbled 
at,  and  acknowledge  the  great  wifdom  and  goodnefs 
of  them. 

You  fee  then  what  reafon  there  is  to  refer  ourfelve3 
to  the  providence  of  God,  and  "  to  cafl  all  our 
''  care  upon  him,"  totruft  him  with  the  adminiftra- 
tion  and  difpofil  of  all  our  concernments,  and  firm- 
ly to  believe,  that  if  we  love  God,  and  be  careful 
to  pleafe  him,  every  thing  in  the  ilTue  will  turn  to 
the  beil  for  us ;  and  therefore  we  fhould  not  anxi- 
oufly  trouble  ourfelves  about  the  events  of  things,  uut 
re  gn  up  ourfeh^s  to  the  goodpleafure  of  him,  who 
difpcfcth  all  things  "  according  to  the  counfel  of  his 
*'  will,"  entirely  trufling  in  his  goodnefs,  and  in 
his  fatherly  cure  of  us,  and  affedion  to  us  ;  that  he 
will  order  all  things  for  us,  for  the  bell,  referring 
the  fuccefs  of  all  our  concernments  to  him,  "  in 
"  whofe  hands  are  all  the  ways  of  the  children  of 
*'  men,"  chearfully  fubmittlng  to  Iiis  determination, 
and  the  declarations  of  his  providence,  in  every  cafe. 
i6  S  2  And 


cxxxvin. 


3442  ^he  wifdom  of  Gory 

S  E  R  M.  And  this  h  a  proper  expreflion  of  our  confidence 
in  God's  wifdom  and  goodnefs,  to  refer  things  to 
him  before  the  event,  and  to  fay  with  the  Chriilians, 
A6lsxxi.  14.  "  The  will  of  the  Lord  be  done;" 
becaufe  this  lliews  that  we  are  perfuaded  that  God 
will  do  better  for  us,  than  our  own  counfel  and 
choice ;  and  to  fubmit  to  his  will  after  the  event, 
is  likewife  a  great  inftance  of  our  confidence  in  him, 
and  that  We  believe  that  he  hath  done  that  which  is 
bed  :  for  when  God,  by  his  providence,  declares 
his  will  in  any  cafe,  we  iliould  look  upon  it  as  the 
fentence  of  a  wife  and  jull  judge,  in  which  all  par- 
ties concerned  ought  to  acquiefce,  and  jeft  fully  la- 
ti^fied. 

And  this  may  well  be  cxpeded  from  us  Chriftians, 
who  have  much  greater  afllirance  of  the  particular 
providence  of  God,  than  the  heathens  had  ;  and  yet 
ibme  of  them  were  able  to  free  themfelves  from  all 
trouble  and  anxiety,  from  murmuring  and  difcontent. 
Upon  this  confideration,  Epidetus,  (as  Arian  tells 
us)  would  exprefs  himfelf  thus,  *'  I  had  always  ra- 
*'  thcr  have  that  which  happens  ;  becaufe  I  efleem 
*'  that  better  which  God  wills,  than  that  which  I 
"  fliould  will.'*  And  again,  ^'  lift  up  thine  eyes 
^'  (fays  he)  with  confidence  to  God,  and  fay,  hence- 
*'  forth.  Lord,  deal  with  me  as  thou  pleafefl,  o[jl- 
*'  voyvcefxovco  aoi  ta^  slfA.  I  am  of  the  fame  opi- 
*'  nion  with  thee,  jull  of  the  fame  mind  that  thou 
*'  art;  I  refufe  nothing  that  feems  good  to  thee; 
*'  lead  me  where  thou  wilt  ;  clothe  me  with  what 
"  garments  thou  pleafefl  -,  fet  me  in  a  publick  place, 
*'  or  keep  me  in  a  private  condition;  continue  mc 
*'  in  mine  own  country,  or  banifli  me  from  it ;  be- 
*'  flow  wealth  upon  me,  or  leave  me  to  confiid:  and 
"  ftruggle  with  poverty,  which  of  thefe  thou  pleaf-- 

i  "  eft, 


cxxxvin. 


in  his  providence.  3443 

•*^  eftj  6yw  <roi  vttbo  ccttccvtuv  rirav  TS'^og  ccvBacoTrag  S  E  R  M, 

ccTToXoyria-of^ut,  Ir  men  mall  cenlure'  this  provi- 
''  dence  towards  me,  and  fay,  thou  dealeft  hardly 
'*  with  me  -,  I  will  apologife  for  thee,  I  will  under- 
"  take  and  maintain  thy  caufe,  that  what  thou  doll 
"  is  belt  for  me."  What  could  a  Chriftian  fay 
more  or  better,  by  way  of  refignation  of  himfelf  to 
the  providence  of  God  ?  It  almoft  tranfports  me  to 
read  fuch  paflages  from  an  heathen,  efpecially  if  we 
confider  in  what  condition  Epidletus  was  ;  he  had  a 
maimed  and  deformed  body,  was  in  the  extremity 
of  poverty,  a  flave,  and  very  cruelly  and  tyrannical- 
ly ufed,  fo  that  we  can  hardly  imagine  a  man  in 
v^orfe  and  more  wretched  circumftances ;  and  yet  he 
juflifies  the  providence  of  God  in  all  this,  and  not 
only  fubmits  to  his  condition,  but  is  contented  with 
it,  and  embraces  it  •,  and  fince  God  hath  thought 
it  ^ttt^  and  beft  for  him,  he  is  of  the  fame  mind, 
and  thinks  fo  too.  I  confefs,  it  doth  not  move  me 
to  hear  Seneca,  who  flowed  with  wealth,  and  lived  at 
cafe,  to  talk  magnificently,  and  to  flight  poverty 
and  pain,  as  not  worthy  the  name  of  evil  and  trou- 
ble :  but  to  fee  this  poor  man,  in  the  lowefl;  con- 
dition, and  worfl:  circumfl:ances  of  humanity,  bear 
up  fo  bravely,  and  with  fuch  a  chearfulnefs  and  fe- 
renity  of  mind  to  entertain  his  hard  fortune  ;  and 
this  not  out  of  fl;upidity,  but  from  a  wife  fenfe  of 
the  providence  of  God,  and  a  firm  perfuafion  of 
the  wifdom  and  goodnefs  of  all  his  deaUngs,  this, 
who  can  chufe  but  be  affedled  with  it,  as  an  admi- 
rable temper  for  a  Chrifl:ian,  much  more  for  a  hea- 
then !  To  which  we  may  apply  that  faying  of  our 
Lord,  concerning  the  heathen  centurion,  "  Verily 
"  I  fay  unco  you,  I  have  not  found  fo  great  faith, 
,*^  no,  not  in  Ifrad  j"  fo  wife,  fo  equal,  fo  firm  a 

temper 


CXXXVIU. 


3444  7/5^  wijdom  of  Gojy 

SERM.  temper  of  mind  is  feldom  to  be  found,  no,  not 
amongft  Chriftians.  And  this  is  a  firm  confidera- 
tion,  that  if  "  God  cares  for  us,"  we  and  our  con- 
cernments are  in  the  bell  and  fafeft  hands,  and  there- 
fore we  Tiiould  "  call  all  our  care  upon  Goo."  The 
2.  Is,  becaufe  all  our  anxiety  and  care  will  do_  us 
no  good  ;  on  the  contrary,  it  will  certainly  do  us 
hurt.  We  may  fret  and  vex  our  own  fpirits,  and 
make  them  reftlefs,  in  the  contemplation  of  the  evils 
and  difappointments  which  we  are  afraid  of,  and 
may  make  our  lives  miferable,  in  the  fad  reflexions 
of  our  own  thoughts  ;  but  we  cannot,  by  all  our 
anxiety  and  care,  controul  the  courfe  of  things,  and 
alter  the  defigns  of  providence  -,  we  cannot,  by  all 
our  vexation  and  trouble,  over-rule  events,  and 
make  things  happen  as  we  would  have  them.  And 
this  is  the  argument  our  Saviour  ufeth  to  this  very 
purpofe.  Mat.  vi.  27.  "  Which  of  you  by  taking 
'*  thought  can  add  one  cubit  to  his  ftature  ?"  So 
that  all  this  trouble  is  unreafonable,  and  to  no  pur- 
pofe, becaufe  it  hath  no  influence  on  the  event,  ei- 
ther to  promote  or  hinder  it.  Things  iire  govcrr^- 
ed  and  difpofed  by  an  higher  hand,  and  placed  out 
of  our  reach ;  we  may  deliberate,  and  contrive,  and 
life  our  befl:  endeavours  for  the  efl'eding  of  our  de- 
figns, but  vv^e  cannot  fecure  the  event  againfl:  a  thou- 
fand  interpofitions  of  divine  providence,  which  we 
can  neither  forefee,  nor  hinder ;  but  yet,  notwith- 
ftanding,  thefe  our  endeavours  are  reafonable,  be- 
caufe they  are  the  ordinary  means  which  God  hath 
appointed  for  the  procuring  of  good,  and  preven- 
tion of  evil ;  and  though  they  may  mifcarry,  yet  they 
are  all  we  can  do :  but  after  this  is  done  trouble  and 
anxiety  about  the  event  is  the  vainefl:  thing  in  the 
world,  becaufe  it  is  to  no  purpofe,  nor  doth  at  all 

conduce 


in  his  providence,  3445 

conduce  to  what  we  defire  -,  "  we  diiquiet  our  felves  S  E  R  M 
*'  in  vain,"  and  we  diftrufl  God's  providence  and 
care  of  us,  and  thereby  provoke  him  to  defeat  and 
difappoint  us. 

Let  us  then,  by  thefe  confiderations,  be  perfuad- 
ed  to  this  duty,  the  practice  whereof  is  of  continual 
and  univerfal  ufe  in  the  whole  courfe  of  our  Hves  -, 
in  all  our  affairs  and  concernments,  after  we  have 
ufed  our  bed  endeavours,  let  us  fit  down  and  be  fa- 
tisfied,  and  refer  the  reft  to  God,  whofe  providence 
governs  the  world,  and  takes  care  of  all  our  interefts,- 
and  of  the  intereft  of  his  church  and  religion,  when 
they  feem  to  be  in  greateft  danger. 

We  cannot  but  be  convinced  that  this  is  very  rea- 
fonable,  to  leave  the  management  of  things  to  him 
who  made  them,  and  therefore  underftands  beft  how 
to  order  them.  The  government  of  the  world  is  a 
very  curious  and  complicate  thing,  and  not  to  be 
tampered  with  by  every  unfkilful  hand ;  and  there- 
fore, as  an  unfkilful  man,  after  he  hath  tampered  a 
great  while  with  a  watch,  thinking  to  bring  it  into 
better  order,  and  is  at  laft  convinced  that  he  can  do 
no  good  upon  it,  carries  it  to  him  that  made  it,  to 
mend  it,  and  put  it  into  order  ;  fo  muft  we  do,  af- 
ter all  our  care  and  anxiety  about  our  own  priyate 
concernments,  or  the  publick  ftate  of  things,  we 
muft  give  over  governing  the  world,  as  a  bufinefs 
paftour  fkill,  as  a  province  too  hard,  and  "  a  know- 
''  ledge  too  wonderful  for  us,"  and  leave  it  to  him, 
who  made  the  world,  to  govern  it,  and  take  care 
of  it. 

And  if  we  be  not  thus  afFedted  and  difpofed,  we 
do  not  believe  the  providence  of  God,  whatever 
profefTion  we  make  of  it  ;  if  we  did,  it  would  have 
an  influence  upon  our  minds,  to  free  us  from  anxious 

care 


2 44 6  ^b^  wifdom  of  God 

care  and  difcontent.  Were  we  firmly  perfuaded  of 
the  wifdom  and  goodnefs  of  the  divine  providence, 
we  fhould  confide-ntly  rely  upon  it,  and,  according 
to  the  apoftle's  advice  here  in  the  text,  "  caft  all 
**  our  care  upon  him,  bccaufe  lie  careth  for  us." 


SERMON     CXXXIX. 

The  wifdom  of  God  in  the  redemption 
I  of  mankind. 


I  C  O  R,  i.  24. 

■      -C  H  R I  5  T,  the  power  ofGovy  and  the  wifdom 
of  God. 


CXXXIX. 


SKRM.  TTHave,  in  the  ordinary  courfe  of  my  preaching, 
JL  been  treating  of  the  attributes  and  perfedlions  of 
God,  more  particularly  thofe  which  relate  to  the 
divine  underftanding  ;  the  knowledge  and  wifdom 
of  God.  The  firil  ofthefe  I  have  finifhed  ;  and 
made  fome  progrefs  in  the  fecond,  the  wifdom  of 
God  :  which  I  have  fpoken  to  in  general,  and  have 
propounded  more  particularly  to  confider  thofe  fa- 
mous inftances  and  arguments  of  the  divine  wifdom, 
in  the  creation  of  the  world  ;  the  government  of  it  ; 
and  the  "redemption  of  mankind  by  Jesus  Christ.'* 
The  two  firft  of  thefe  I  have  fpoken  to,  namely  the 
wifdom  of  God,  whicli  appears  in  the  creation  and 
government  of  the  world.     I  come  now  to  the 

III.  Inftance  of  the  divine  wifdom,  "  the  redemp- 
^''  tion  gf  mankind  by  Jesus  Christ  >'\    which  I 

fhall 


in  the  redemption  of  mankind .  j  44  ? 

ihail,    by  God's  affiflance,    fpeak   to  from   tkfe  SERM. 
v/ords,    '' Christ  the  wifdom  of  God.*' 

The  apoftle,  in  the  beginning  of  this  epiflle,  upori 
occafion  of  his  mentioning  the  divifions  and  parties 
that  were  among  the  Corinthians,  where  one  faid, 
"  I  am  of  Paul  f  another,  '*  I  am  of  Apolios  ;'* 
afks  them,  whether  *'  Paul  was  crucified  for  them  ?'* 
or,  whether  *'  they  were  baptized  in  the  name  of 
*'  Paul  ?"  To  convince  them  that  they  could  not 
pretend  this,  that  they  were  baptized  into  his  name^ 
he  tells  themj  at  the  14th  and  15th  verfes,  that  "  he 
*^  had  not  fo  much  as  baptized  any  of  them,  except 
"  two  or  three  ;"  fo  far  was  he  from  having  bap- 
tized them  into  his  own-rfame  •,  and  at  the  1 7th  verfe^ 
he  fays,  that  his  work,  his  principal  work,  was  "  tci 
"  preach  the  gofpel,"  which  he  had  done,  not  with 
human  eloquence,  "  not  in  wifdom  of  words,"  but 
with  great  plainnefs  and  fimplicity,  "  left  thecrofs  of 
"  Christ  fhould  be  made  of  none  effed  ^"  left^ 
if  he  fliould  have  ufed  any  artifice,  the  gofpel  fhouldt 
have  been  lefs  powerful.  And,  indeed,  his  preach- 
ing was  unaffediedly  plain,  and  therefore  the  gofpel 
did  feem  to  very  many  to  be  a  foohfh  and  ridiculous 
thing.  The  ftory  which  they  told  of  Ch r i st  cruci- 
fied, was  "  to  \}At  Jews  a  ftumbhng  block j  and  id 
"  the  Greeks  foolifhnefs.'*  The  Jews,  who  expedb- 
ed  another  kind  of  MefTias,  that  fhould  come  iri 
great  pomp  and  glory,  to  be  a  mighty  temporal 
prince,  v/ere  angry  at  the  ftory  of,  ''  a  crucified 
"  Christ."  The  Greeks,  the  philofophers,  who? 
expe(5led  fome  curious  theories,  adorned  v/ith  elo- 
quence, and  delivered  and  laid  down  according  to? 
i^^.t  exad  rules  of  art,  derided  this  plain  ai^-  fimpfe 
relation  of  Christ,-  and  of  the  gofj^el. 

But  though  this  defign  of  the  gofpel  appeared  ^iir 
Vol.  \\V..  16  T  1/ 

h 


The  wifdom  of  God 

ly  and  foolifli  to  rafh  and  inconfiderate  and  prejudic- 
ed minds  •,  yet  "  to  them  that  are  called,"  to  them 
that  do  believe,  "  both  Jews  and  Gentiles,  Christ, 
*'  the  power  of  God,  and  the  wifdom  of  God  •," 
Christ,  that  is,  the  way  of  our  redemption  by  Je- 
sus Christ,  which  the  apoftle  preached,  "  the 
''  wifdom  of  God,"  an  eminent  inftance  of  it. 

So  that  the  "  redemption  of  man  by  J  e  s  u  s 
•*  Christ"  is  a  defign  of  admirable  wifdom.  This  I 
fhall  endeavour  to  confirm  to  you, 

I.  By  general  teftimonies  offcripture.     And, 

II.  By  a  more  particular  enquiry  into  the  nature 
of  this  defign,  and  the  means  how  it  is  accomplifhed. 

I.  By  teftimonies  from  fcripture.     You  know  I 
have  all  along,  in  my  difcourfes  of  the  attributes  of 
God,  ufed  this  method  of  proving  them,  from  the 
dictates  of  natural  light,  and  the  revelation  of  fcrip- 
ture :  but  now  I  muft  forfake  my  wonted  method, 
for  here  the  light  of  nature  leaves  me.     The  wif- 
dom of  the  creation   is  manifeft  in  "   the  things 
"  which  are  made  -,  the  heavens  declare   the  glory 
*'  of  God's  wifdom,  and  the  firmament  fhews  his 
*'  handy- work."     The  works   of  God  do  preach 
and  fet  forth  the  wifdom  of  the  creator  •,  but  the  fun, 
moon,  and  ftars,  do  not  preach  the  gofpel.    The  wif- 
dom of  redemption  is  "  wifdom  in  a  myftery,  "  hid- 
*'  den  wifdom,  which  none  of  the  princes  or  philofo- 
"  phersofthis  world  knew." The  fharpeft  wits,  and 
the  higheft  and  moft  raifed  underftandings  amongft 
the  heathens,  could  fay  nothing  of  this.     Here  "  the 
*'  wifdom  of  the  wife,"   and  the  underftanding  of 
"  the  prudent"   is  pofed,  and  we  may  make  the 
apoftle' s  challenge,  ver.  20.  of  this  chapter,"  Where 
''  is  the  wife?  where  is  the  difputer  of  this  world?" 
There  is.  no  natural  light  difcovers  Christ  j  the 

9  wife 


in  the  redemption  of  mankind.  3449 

wife  men  cannot  find  him  out,  unlefs  a  ftar  be  creat-  ^l^^^^ 

ed  on  purpofeto  le^d  anddireftto  him.     Therefore 

in  this  I  fhall  only  depend  upon  divine  revelation. 

I  Cor.  ii.  7,  8.  the  gofpel  is  called    "  the  wifdom  of 

"  God    in  a  myflery,    even  the   hidden   wifdom, 

''  which  God  ordained  before  the  world  unto  our 

"  glory  \  which  none  of  the  princes  of  this  world 

"  knew.     "  Eph.  i.  7,  8.    "  In  whom  we  have  re- 

'^  demption  through   his  blood,  the  forgivencfs  of 

"  fins,  according  to  the  riches  of  his  grace,  wherein 

"  he  hath  abounded  toward  us  in  all  wifdom  and 

"  prudence.  Eph.  iii.io,ii.  "  The  manifold  wifdom 

"  of  God,  according  to  the  eternal  purpofe  which 

*'  he  purpofed  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord.'*  This 

work  of  "  our  redemption  by  Jesus  Christ"  is 

fo  various  and  admirable,  that  it  is  not  below  the 

angels  to  know  and  underfland  it.     ''  To  the  intent, 

*'  that  unto  principalities  and  powers  in   heavenly 

*'  places,  might  be  known  the   manifold  wifdom 

"  of  God." 

II.  By  inquiring  more  particularly  into  the  nature 
of  this  defign,  and  the  means  how  it  is  accompliili- 
ed.  This  is  wifdom,  to  fit  means  to  ends  :  and  the 
more  difficult  the  end,  the  greater  wifdom  is  requir- 
ed to  find  out  fui table  and  fufficient  m.eans  for  the 
accompli fhment  of  the  end.  Now  "  the  wifdom  of 
"  redemption"  will  appear,  if  we  confider  the  cafe 
of  fallen  man  \  and  what  fit,  and  proper,  and  fuit- 
able  means  the  wifdom  of  God  hath  devifed  for  our 
recovery. 

Firft,  let  us  confider  the  cafe  of  fallen  man,  which 
was  very  fad,  both  in  refped  of  the  mifery,  and  the 
difficulty  of  it. 

1 .  In  refpedl  of  the  mifery  of  it.     Man,  who  was 

made  holy  arid  upright  by  God,  having  by  his  vo- 

16  T  2  luntary 


l^he  wifdom  of  God 

luntary  tranfgreflion,  and  wilful  difobedience,  fallen 
from  him,  did  prefently  fiiik  into  a  corrupt  and  de- 
generate, into  a  miferable  and  curfed  condition  of 
which  heaven  and  earth,  and  his  own  confciencc, 
bore  him  witnefs.  Man  being  become  a  finner,  is 
not  only  deprived  of  the  image  of  God,  but  i!s  liable 
|:0  his  juftice -,  here  was  his  mifcry. 

2.  The  difficulty  of  the  cafe  was  this  j  man  could 
not  recover  himfelf,  and  raife  himfelf  out  of  his  own 
ruin  •,  no  creature  was  able  to  do  it  -,  fo  that  our  help 
is  only  in  God  ;  and,  indeed,  he  is  a  qierciful  God, 
and  doth  not  defire  our  ruin,  nor  delight  in  our 
deflrudlion  :  but  fuppole  his  mercy  never  fo  will- 
ing to  faye  us,  will  jiot  hjs  holinefs,  and  juftice,  and 
truth  check  thofe  forward  inclinations  of  his  good- 
l^efs,  and  hinder  all  the  defigns  of  his  mercy  ?  Is 
pot  fin  contrary  to  the  holy  nature  of  Goo  ?  hath  not 
he  declared  his  infinite  hatred  of  it  ?  hadi  not  he 
^hreatned  it  with  heavy  and  dreadful  punifhment  ? 
and  faid,  that "  the  finner  fliall  die,*'  that  "  he  will 
^'  not  acquit  the  guilty/'  nor  "  let  fin  go  unpunifli- 
*^  ed?"  Should  he  now,  without  any  fatisfaftion  to 
his  offended  jullice,  pardon  the  finner,  remit  his  pi]- 
niihment,  and  receive  him  to  favour ;  would  this 
be  agreeable  to  his  holinefs,  and  juftice,  and  truth  ? 
would  this  become  the  wife  governor  of  the  world, 
wlio  loves  righteoufnefs,  and  order  •,  who  hates  fin, 
and  is  obliged,  by  the  eflential  reditude  of  his  na- 
ture, to  difcountenance  fin  ? 

So  that  here  is  a  conflid  of  the  attributes  and  per- 
fe(rtions  of  God.  The  mercy  of  God  pities  our 
mifery,  and  would  recover  us,  would  open  paradife 
%o  us  :  but  there  is  a  flaming  fword  that  keeps  us 
out-,  the  incenfed  juftice  of  God,  that  muft  be  fa- 
fipfied  i  ^nd  if  he  takes  vengeance  of  us,  we  are  ete|- 

naily 


in  the  redemption  of  mankind,  345 1 

nally  ruined  ;*  if  he  fpares  us,  how  lliall  "  mercy  SERM. 
"  and  juftice  meet  together?"    how  (hall  God  at  ^^^^^^* 
once  exprefs  his  love  to  the  Tinner,  and  his  hatred  to 
fin?  here  is  the  difficulty  of  our  cafe. 

II.  Let  us  now  enquire  what  means  the  wifdorn 
of  God  ufeth  for  our  recovery.  The  wifdom  of 
God  hath  devifed  this  expedient  to  accommo* 
date  all  thefe  difficulties,  to  reconcile  the  mercy  and 
juftice  of  God.  The  fon  of  God  fhall  undertake 
this  work,  and  fatisfy  the  offended  juftice  of  God, 
and  repair  the  ruined  nature  of  man.  He  fliall  bring 
God  and  man  together,  make  up  this  gulph,  and 
renew  the  commerce  and  correfpondence  between 
God  and  us,  which  was  broken  off  by  fin.  The 
work  that  God  defigns  is  the  redemption  of  man, 
that  is,  his  recovery  from  a  ftate  of  fin  and  eternal 
death,  to  a  ftate  of  holinefs  and  eternal  life.  The 
fon  of  God  is  to  engage  in  this  defign  of  our  redemp- 
tion,  to  fatisfy  the  offended  juftice  of  God  towards 
us,  fo  as  to  purchafe  our  deliverance  from  the  wrath  to 
come,  and  fo  as  to  reftore  us  to  the  image  and  fa- 
vour of  God,  that  we  may  be  fandified,  and  be 
made  heirs  of  eternal  Ufe. 

For  opening  of  this,  we  will  confider, 

1 .  The  fitnefs  of  the  perfon  defigned  for  this  work. 

2.  The  fitnefs  of  the  means  whereby  he  was  toac- 
complifti  it. 

1.  The  fitnefs  of  the  perfon  defigned  for  this  work, 
and  that  was  the  eternal  fon  of  God  ;  who,  in  refped: 
pf  his  infinite  wifdom  and  power,  the  dignity  and 
credit  of  his  perfon,  his  dearnefs  to  his  father,  and 
intereft  in  him,  was  very  fit  to  undertake  this  work, 
p  mediate  a  reconciliation  between  God  and  man, 

2.  The  fitnefs  of  the  means  whereby  he  was  to  ac- 
<:omplifh  it ,  and  thefe  I  fhall  refer  to  two  heads,  his 

humiliation. 


2452  ^^^  wifdofn  of  God 

S  E  R  M.  humiliation,  and  exaltation.     All  the  parts  of  thefe 
are  very  fubfervient  to  the  defign  of  our  redemption. 

I.  The  humiliation  of  Christ,  which  confifts  of 
three  principal  parts  j  his  incarnation,  his  hfe,  and 
his  death. 

I .  His  incarnation,  which  is  fet  forth  in  fcripture 
by  feveral  exprefTions  ?  his  being  "  made  flefh,  and 
*'  dwelling  among  us,"  John  i.  14.  His  being 
■*'  made  of  the  feed  of  David  according  to  the  fiefh," 
Rom.  i.  3.  His  being  "  made  of  a  woman,"  Gal. 
iv.  4.  The  "  manifeftation  of  God  in  the  flefh," 
I  Tim.  iii.  16.  His  '^  taking  part  of  flefh  and  blood," 
Heb.  ii.  14.  His  "  taking  on  him  the  feed  of  A- 
*'  braham,"  and  "  being  made  like  unto  his  bre- 
**  thren,"  Heb.  ii.  16,  17.  His  "  coming  in  the 
*'  flefn,"  I  John  ii.  2.  All  which  fignifies  his  tak- 
ing upon  him  human  nature,  and  being  really  a  man 
as  well  as  God.  The  eternal  fon  of  God,  in  the  ful-  , 
nefs  of  time,  took  our  nature  -,  that  is,  afliimed  a  real 
foul  and  body  into  union  with  the  divine  nature.  ^ 
Now  this  perfon,  who  was  really  both  God  and 
man,  was  admirably  fitted  for  the  work  of  our  re- 
demption. 

In  general,  this  made  him  a  fit  mediator,  an  equal 
and  middle  perfon  to  interpofe  in  this  difference,  and 
take  up  this  quarrel  between  Gob  and  man.  Being 
both  God  and  man,  he  was  concerned  for  both  par- 
ties, and  interefl:ed  both  in  the  honour  of  God, 
and  the  happinefs  of  man,  and  engaged  to  be  tender 
of  both  -,  and  to  procure  the  one,  by  fuch  ways  as 
might  be  confident  with  the  other. 

More  particularly,  his  incarnation  did  fit  him  for 
thofe  two  ofiices  which  he  was  to  perform  in  his  hu- 
miliation, of  prophet  and  priefl. 

I.  The  office  of  prophet,  to  teach  us  both  by  his 
dodrine,  and  his  life.  By 


in  the  redemption  of  mankind,  3453 

By  his  dodtrine.  His  being  in  the  likenefs  of  man ;  |^xxix' 
this  made  him  more  familiar  to  us.  He  was  "  a 
"  prophet  raifed  up  from  among  his  brethren,"  as 
Mofes  fpake,  and  he  makes  this  an  argument  why 
we  ihould  hear  him.  Should  God  fpeak  to  us  im- 
mediately by  himfelf,  we  "  could  not  hear  him,  and 
*'  live."  God  condefcends  to  us,  and  complies  with 
the  weaknefs  of  our  nature,  and  "  raifeth  up  a  pro- 
*'  phet  from  among  our  brethren  \'  we  fhould  hear 
him.  And  then  his  being  God,  did  add  credit  and 
authority  to  what  he  fpake  •,  he  could  confirm  the 
dodlrine  w^hich  he  taught  by  miracles.  Of  his  teach- 
ing us  by  his  life,  I  fhall  have  occafion  to  fpeak  pre- 
fently. 

2.  For  the  office  of  prieil.  He  was  fit  to  be 
our  prieil,  becaufe  "  he  was  taken  from  among 
"  men,"  as  the  Apoflle  fpeaks ;  fittofufFer,  as  be- 
ing man,  having"  a  body  prepared,"  asitisHeb. 
X.  5.  and  fit  to  fatisfy  by  his  fufferings  for  the  fins 
of  all  men,  as  being  God^  which  put  an  infinite  dig- 
nity and  value  upon  them  •,  the  fufferings  of  an  infi- 
nite perfon,  being  equal  to  the  offences  done  againfl 
an  infinite  God  :  and  thus  the  mercy  of  God  is  exalt- 
ed without  the  diminuition  of  his  juflice. 

And  as  his  incarnation  did  quahfy  him  for  fufFer- 
ing,  fo  for  compafTion,  and  fellovz-fuffering  with  us, 
Heb.  ii.  17,  iS.  "  Vv'herefore  in  all  things  it  behov- 
*'  ed  him  to  be  made  like  unto  his  brethren,  that  he 
*'  might  be  a  merciful  and  faithful  high-priefb,  in 
"  things  pertaining  to  God,  to  make  reconciliation 
*'  for  the  fins  of  the  people  j  for  in  that  he  himfelf 
"  hath  fufFered,  being  tempted,  he  is  able  to  fuccour 
"  them  that  are  tempted." 

2.  His  life  was  a  means  admirably  fitted  to  bring 
men  to  holinefs  and  goodndfs.     I  might  go  through 

an 


cxxxix. 


2454  ^he  wi/dom  of  Got> 

S  E  R^M.  all  the  parts  of  it,  but  becaufe  I  intend  to  be  very 
Ihort  upon  thefc  heads,  I  fhall  only  take  notice  of 
that  part  of  his  Hfe,  which  Was  fpent  in  his  pubhck 
miniflry  *,  "  he  went  about  doing  good  ;"  the  doc- 
trine that  he  preached  was  calculated  for  the  deftroy- 
ing  of  fin,  and  the  promoting  of  holinefs  •,  the  great 
end  and  defign  of  it  was  to   advance  righteoufnefs, 
and  goodnefs,  and  humility,  and  patience,  and  felf- 
denial ;  to  make  us  mortify  our  fenfual  defires,  and 
brutifh  pafiions,  to  contemn  and  renounce  this  pre- 
fent  world  ;  and  this  being  the  defign  of  it,it  was  a  moil 
proper  engine  todemolifh  the  works  of  the  devil :  and 
to  make  way  for  the  entertainment  of  his  do(5lrine, 
the  whole  frame  of  his  life,  and  all  the  circumftances  of 
it,  did  contribute.     His  life  was  the  pra6tice  of  his 
do(5lrine,  and  a  clear  comment  upon  it.     The  meari- 
nefs  of  his  condition  in  the  world,    that  he  had  no 
Ihareof  thepoffefTions  of  it,  were  a  great  advantage 
to  his  do6lrine  of  felf-denial,  and  contempt  of  the 
world.     "  The  captain  of  our  falvation,"  that  he 
might  draw  off  our  affeftions  from  the  world,  and 
fhew  us  how  little  the  things  of  it  are  to  be  valued, 
would  himfelf  have  no   fhare  in  it.  Mat.   viii.  20. 
"  The  foxes  have  holes,   and  the  birds  of  the  air 
"  have  nefts,  but  the  fon  of  man  hath  not  where  to 
"  lay  his  head."     The  mean  circumftances  of  his 
Condition  were  very  eminently  for  the  advantage  of 
his  defign ;  for  had  he  not  been  ftript  of  all  worldly 
accommodations,  he  could  not  have  been  fo  free  from 
fufpicion  of  a  worldly  intereft  and  defign  ;    nay  he 
could  not  have  been  {o  confiderable  •,  he  was  really 
greater  for  his  meannefs.    The  very  heathens  did  ac- 
count this  true  greatnefs,  (as  we  find  in  Ariftotle)  not 
to  admire  the  pleafures,  and   greatnefs,  and   pomp 
of  the  world.     And  that  his  meannefs  might  be  no 

difadvantage 


in  th  redemption  of  mankind.  34?  ? 

difadvantage  to  him,  thofe  evidences  that  he  gave  6f  S  E  R  M. 
his  divinity  in  the  wonderful  things  that   he  did,  ^       ^  * 
rendered  him  confiderable,    and  gained  more  reve- 
rence and  authority  to  his  dod:rine,  than  his  mean- 
nefs  could  bring  contempt  upon  it. 

Befides,  the  manner  of  his  converfation  was  a  ve- 
ry great  advantage  to  him  ;  he  was  of  a  very  fweet 
and  converfable  and  obliging  temper ;  and  by  this 
means  he  did  gain  upon  the  people,  and  was  accep- 
table to  them  ;  and  thus  he  did  apply  himfclf  to  therrl 
in  the  moft  human  ways,  to  make  way  for  the  en^ 
tertainment  of  his  doctrine.     The  miracles  that  h^ 
wrought  did  confirm  his  doctrine  beyond  all  except!-* 
on,  as  being  a  divine  teftimony,  and  fetting  a  feal  of 
God  to  the  truth  of  it ;  yet  becaufe  many  were  blind^ 
ed  with  prejudice,    and  though  they  did  fee,-    yet 
would  not  fee,  Christ  "  the  wifdom  of  God"  did 
fo  order  the  bufinefs  of  his  miracles,  as  to  make 
them  human  ways  of  winning  upon  them,  for  they 
were  generally  fuch  as  were  beneficial  j  "  he  healed 
•'  all  manner  of  difeafes"  and  maladies  by  this  mira- 
culous powef ;  and  fo  his  miracles  did  not  only  tend 
to  confirm  his  do(5lrine,  as  they  were  miracles,  but 
to  make  Way  for  entertainment  of  it,  as  they  werd 
benefits ;  this  was  a  fenfible  demonftration  to  them 
that  he  intended  them  good^  becaufe  he  did  them 
good  ;  they  would  eafily  believe,  that  he,  who  heal- 
ed their  bodies.  Would  not  harm  their  fouls.     Thiai 
for  his  life. 

III.  His  death,  which  was  the  bwefl  ftep  of  his 
humiliation,  and  the  confummation  of  his  fufferings^ 
Now  the  death  of  Christ  did  eminently  contribute 
to  this  defign  of  our  redemption.  The  death  of 
Christ  did  not  only  expiate  the  gifilt  of  fin,-  and 
pacify  confcience^  by  making  plenary  fati^fadUon  to 

Vol.  VIIL  i^  U  ^        tfor 

4 


T'he  wifdom  of  God 

tlie  divine  juftice ;  but  did  eminently  contribute  to 
the  killing  of  fin  in  us :  Ronn.  vi.  6.  "  Knowing 
"  ihis,  that  our  old  man  is  crucified  with  him,  that 
"  the  body  of  fin  might  be  deftroyed,  that  hence- 
"  forth  we  might  not  ferve  fin.'*  Rom.  viii.  3. 
*'  God  fending  his  own  fon  in  the  likenefs  of  finful 
"  flefh,  and  for  fin"  (that  is,  by  being  a  facrifice  for 
fin)"  condemned  fin  in  the  flefli."  Tiie  death  of 
Christ  convinceth  fin  to  be  a  great  evil ;  and 
doth  condemn  it ,  becaufe  the  impartial  jufi:ice  of 
God  did  fo  feverely  punifli  it  in  his  own  fon,  when 
he  appeared  in  the  perfon  of  a  finner  ;  and  this  is  the 
moft  powerful  argument  to  us  to  crucify  fin,  that  it 
crucified  our  Saviour.  That  fo  innocent  and  holy 
a  perfon  fiiould  fuffer  fo  cruel  and  ignominious  a 
death  for  our  fins,  fliould  fet  us  for  ever  againft  it, 
and  make  us  hate  it  with  a  perfedl  hatred. 

The  circumftances  of  Christ's  fufferings  are  with 
admirable  wifdom  fitted  for  the  conquering  of  fin 
and  Satan.  Sin  came  by  the  woman  :  the  feed  of 
the  woman  fuffers  for  fin  -,  and  by  fuffering,  conquers 
it.  3in  began  in  the  garden  ;  and  there  our  Savi- 
our began  his  fufferings  for  fin.  Sin  came  by  the 
tree;  and  Christ  bears  the  curfe  of  it  in  hanging 
upon  the  tree,  and  crucifies  it  by  his  crofs. 

And  as  he  conquered  fin,  fo  he  overcame  Satan 
by  his  own  arts.  The  devil  found  Christ  in  the 
likenefs  of  a  man,  he  judged  him  mortal,  and  his 
great  defign  was  to  procure  his  death,  and  get  him 
into  his  grave.  Christ  permits  him  to  bring  about 
his  defign :  he  lets  him  enter  into  Judas ;  he  lets  the 
Jews  crucify,  and  put  him  into  his  grave,  and  roll 
a  great  ft:one  upon  it :  but  here  his  divine  wifdom 
appears,  in  ruining  the  devil  by  his  own  defign,  and 
*'  fnaring  him  in  the  works  of  liis  own  hands;'* 

Heb. 


in  the  redemption  of  mankind,  3457 

Heb.ii.  14.   "  By  death  he  deftroys  him  that  had  the  ^  P-  R  M. 
"  power  of  death,  that  is,  the  devil.-' 

I  know  the  fufferings  of  Christ  were,  by  the 
"  wife  of  the  world,'*  made  the  great  objeftion  a- 
gainfl  the  wifdom  of  this  difpenfation  j  the  "  crof3 
"  of  Christ  was  to  the  Greeks  foolifhnefs  ;"  and 
yet  the  wifeft  of  them  had  determined  otherwife  in 
general,  though  not  in  this  particular  cafe.  Plato 
(in  the  fecond  book  of  his  commonwealth)  faith, 
"  That  if  a  man  may  be  a  perfed  pattern  of  juftice 
"  and  righteoufnefs,  and  be  approved  by  God  and 
"  men,  he  mull  be  ftript  of  all  the  things  of  this 
"  world  i  he  muft  be  poor  and  difgraced,  and  be 
"  accounted  a  wicked  and  unjuft  man,  he  muft  be 
*'  whipt,  and  tormented,  and  crucified  as  a  male- 
"  fador  j"  which  is,  as  it  were,  a  prophetical  de- 
fcription ofourSAViouR's  fufferings .  And  Arrian , 
in  his  epiftle,  defcribing  a  man  fit  to  reform  the 
world,  whom  he  calls  "  the  apoftle,  the  meflenger, 
"  the  preacher,  and  minifter  of  God,  faith,  he  muft 
*'  be  without  houfe  and  harbour,  and  worldly  accom- 
"  dations  ;  muft  be  armed  with  fuch  patience  for 
"  the  greateft  fufferings,  as  if  he  were  a  itone,  and 
"  devoid  of  fenfe  •,  he  muft  be  a  fpedacle  of  mifery 
' '  and  contempt  to  the  world . "  So  that  by  the  acknow- 
ledgment of  thefe  two  wife  heathens,  there  was  no- 
thing in  the  fufferings  of  Christ  that  was  unbecom- 
ing the  wifdom  of  God,  and  improper  to  the  end 
and  defign  of  Christ's  coming  into  the  world  •,  be- 
fides-jthat  they  fcrved  a  further  end,  which  they  did  not 
dream  of,   "  the  fatisfying  of  divine  juftice." 

Secondly,  His  exaltation.  The  feveral  parts  of 
which,  his  refurre6tion,  and  afcenfion,  and  "  fitting 
"  at  the  right  hand  of  God, "were  eminently  fubfervi- 
ent  to  the  perfecting  and  carrying  on  of  this  defign. 

16  U  2  The 


'fhe  wifdom  of  God 

The  rcfurrc6tion  of  Christ  is  the  gi-eat  confir- 
Hiarion  of  the  truth  of  all  that  he  delivered,  Rom. 
i.  4.  "declared  to  be  the  fon  of  God  with  power, 
*'  o^io-devTog  vl5  ©ea  iv  ^uvcc[^6i,  by  the  refurredion 
♦*  from  the  dead."  This  great  miracle  of  his  re- 
furredion  from  the  dead  did  determine  the  contro* 
verfy,  and  put  it  out  of  all  doubt  and  queftion,  that 
he  was  "  the  fon  of  God."  And  then  his  afcenfion, 
and  "  fitting  at  the  right  hand  of  God,"  this  gives 
us  the  afTurance  of  a  blelTed  immortality,  and  is  a 
demonftration  of  a  life  to  come,  and  a  pledge  of 
cverlalling  glory  and  happinefs.  And  can  any  thing 
tend  more  to  the  encouragement  of  obedience,  and 
to  make  us  dead  to  the  pleafures  and  enjoyments  of 
this  life,  than  the  afTurance  of  eternal  life  and  hap- 
pinefs ? 

And  then  the  confequents  of  his  exaltation,  they 
do  eminently  conduce  to  our  recovery.  The  fending 
of  the  Holy  Ghoft  "  to  lead  us  into  all  truth,"  to 
fan61:ify  us,  to  afTift  us,  and  to  comfort  us  under  the 
greateft  troubles  and  afflidtions  ;  and  the  powerful 
intcrcefTion  of  Christ  in  our  behalf  5  and  his  re- 
turn to  judgment ;  the  expedation  whereof  is  the 
great  argument  to  repentance,  and  holinefs  of  life  : 
A(5ls  xvii.  30,  31.  ^'  And  the  times  ofthisigno- 
"  ranee  God  winked  at,  but  now  commandeth  all 
*'  men  every  where  to  repent :  becaufe  he  hath  ap- 
*'  pointed  a  day,  in  the  which  he  will  judge  the 
*'  world  in  righteoufnefs,  by  that  man  whom  he  hath 
^'  ordained  •,  whereof  he  hath  given  afTurance  unto 
*'  all  men,  in  that  he  hath  raifed  him  from  the  dead." 
And  thus  I  have  endeavoured  to  prove  that  the 
^'  redemption  of  man  by  Jesxts  Christ"  is  a  de- 
flgn  of  admirable  wifdom. 

The  ufe  I  fhall  make  of  it,  is  to  convince  us  of 

the 


in  the  redemption  of  mankind.  3459 

the  unreafonablenefs  of  unbelief,  and  the  fofly  ahd  S  E  R  M. 

CXXXIX. 

madnefs  of  impenitency. 

Firft,  The  unreafonablenefs  of  unbelief.  The 
gofpel  reveals  to  us  the  wife  counfel  and  difpcnfation 
of  God  for  our  redemption  -,  and  thofe  who  difbe- 
lieve  the  gofpel,  "  they  rejed:  the  counfel  of  God 
'*  againft  themfelves,"  as  it  is  faid  oi  the  unbeliev- 
ing Pharifees  and  lawyers,  Luke  vii.  30.  The  gof- 
pel reveals  to  us  a  defign  fo  reafonable  and  full  of 
wifdom,  that  they  who  can  difbelieve  it  are  defpe- 
rate  pcrfons,  devoted  to  ruin,  i  Cor.  i.  18.  "  The 
"  crofs  of  Christ  is  to  them  that  perifh  foolilh- 
"  nefs."  2  Cor.  iv.  g,  4.  "But  if  our  gofpel  be 
'^  hid,  it  is  hid  to  them  that  are  loft  ;  in  whom  the 
'^  God  of  this  world  hath  blinded  the  eyes  of  them 
''  that  believe  not,  left  the  light  of  the  glorious  gof* 
'^  pel  of  Christ,  who  is  the  image  of  God,  fhould 
*'  fliine  unto  them."  The  gofpel  carries  fo  much 
light  and  evidence  in  it,  that  it  cannot  be  hid  from 
any  but  fuch  whofe  eyes  arc  blinded  by  the  devil 
and  their  lufts. 

He  th^t  will  duly  weigh  and  confider  things,  and 
look  narrowly  into  this  wife  difpenfation  of  God, 
ftiall  find  nothing  to  obje6t  againft  it;  nay,  fhall 
difcover  in  it  the  greateft  motives  and  inducements 
to  believe.  We  are  apt  to  believe  any  thing  that  is 
reafonable,  efpecially  if  it  be  for  our  advantage. 
Now  this  wife  difpenfation  of  God  is  not  only  reafo- 
nable in  itfelf,  but  beneficial  to  us  ;  it  does  at  once 
highly  gratify  our  underftandings,  and  fatisfy  our 
intereft  •,  why  fhould  we  not  then  believe  and  enter- 
tain it  ? 

I.  The  defign  of  the  gofpel  is  reafonable,  and  gra- 
tifies our  underftandings.  And  in  this  refpe6t  the 
gofpel  hath  incomparable  advaintages  above  any  other 

religion. 


3460  The  wijdom  of  God 

S  E  R  M.  relieion.  The  end  of  all  religion  is  to  advance  pie- 
ty  and  holinefs,  and  real  goodnefs  among  men :  and 
the  more  any  religion  advanceth  thefe,  the  more 
reafonable  it  is.  Now  the  great  incitements  and  ar- 
guments to  piety,  are  tiie  excellency  and  perfedion 
of  the  divine  nature  •,  fear  of  punilliment  and  hopes 
of  pardon  and  rewards.  Now  the  gofpel  reprefents 
aM  thefe  to  the  greateft  advantage. 

I.  It  reprefents  the  perfedions  of  God  to  the 
greateft  advantage,  efpecially  thofc  which  tend  moft 
to  the  promotion  of  piety,  and  the  love  of  God  in 
us  ;.  his  juftice  and  mercy. 

(i.)  His  juftice*  The  gofpel  reprefents  it  inflexi- 
ble in  its  rights,  and  inexorable,  and  that  will  not 
in  any  cafe  ht  fin  go  unpunifhed.  The  impartiality 
of  the  divine  juftice  appears  in  this  difpenfation, 
that  when  God  pardons  the  finner,  yet  he  will  punifti 
fin  fo  fever ely  in  his  own  fon,  who  was  the  furety. 
Now  what  could  more  tend  to  difcountenance  fin, 
and  convince  us  of  the  great  evil  of  it  ? 

(2.)  His  mercy.  This  difpenfation  is  a  great 
demonftration  of  the  mercy,  and  goodnefs,  and  love 
of  God,  in  fending  his  fon  to  die  for  finners,  and 
in  faving  us  by  devoting  and  facriticing  him,  John 
iii.  16.  "  For  God  fo  loved  the  world,  that  he  gave 
**  his  only  begotten  fon."  Rom.  v.  8.  ''  But  God 
*'  commendeth  his  love  towards  us,  in  that  v/hile 
*'  v;e  were  yet  finners,  Christ  died  for  us."  i  John 
iv.  9,  10.  "  In  this  was  manifefted  the  love  of  God 
**  towards  us,  becaufe  God  fent  his  only  begotten 
"  fon  into  the  world,  that  we  might  live  through 
''  him.  Herein  is  love  •,  not  that  we  loved  God, 
'*  but  that  he  loved  us,  and  fent  his  fon  to  be  the 
"  prcpiaation  for  our  fins."  Now  this  reprefentati- 
on  of  God's  mercy  and  love  which  the  gofpel  makes, 

is 


in  the  redemption  of  mankind,  ^^^\ 

is  of  great  force  and  efficacy  to  melt  our  hearts  imo  S  ER  M. 
love  to  Cjod. 

2.  The  fecond  argument  to  piety  is  fear  of  punifh- 
ment.  The  gofpel  hath  revealed  to  us  the  mifery 
of  thofe  who  continue  in  their  fin  j  it  hath  made 
clear  and  terrible  difcoveries  of  thofe  torments  which 
attend  finners  in  another  world,  and  hath  opened  to 
us  thetreafures  of  God's  wrath  ;  fo  that  now  under 
the  gofpel,  "  hell  is  naked  before  us,  and  deflrudlion 
"  hath  no  covering  j"  and  this  is  one  thing  which 
makes  the  gofpel  fo  powerful  an  engine  to  deflroy 
fin,  Rom.  i.  i6,  i8.  "  The  gofpel  is  the  power  of 
"  God  unto  falvation  *,  for  therein  is  the  wrath  of 
"  God  revealed  from  heaven  againil  all  ungodli- 
"  nefs,   and  unrighteoufnefs  of  men." 

3.  Hopes  of  pardon  and  reward.  And  this,  add- 
ed to  the  former,  renders  the  gofpel  the  moil  pow- 
erful inllrument  to  take  men  off  from  fin,  and  en- 
gage them  to  holinefs,  that  cah  be  imagined.  The 
means  to  draw  men  from  fin,  when  they  are  once 
awakened  with  the  fear  of  vengeance,  is  hopes  of 
pardon  and  mercy  ;  and  the  way  to  encourage  obe- 
dience for  the  future,  is  hope  of  reward.  Now  as 
an  argument  to  us  to  retreat  and  draw  back  from  fin, 
the  gofpel  promifes  pardon  and  indemnity  to  us  •, 
and  as  an  incitement  to  holinefs,  the  gofpel  opens 
heaven  to  us,  and  fets  before  us  everlafting  glory 
arid  happinefs,  and  gives  us  the  greatefl  affurance 
ofit. 

This  is  the  firft,  the  defign  of  the  gofpel  is  reafo- 
nable,  in  that  it  does  eminently  and  dired:ly  ferve  for- 
the  ends  of  piety  and  rehgion. 

II.  This  difpenfation  of  God  is  beneficial  to  us, 
and  fatisfies  our  interefl  •,  and  this  adds  to  the  un- 
reafonablenefs  of  our  unbelief,    this  defign  of  God 
3  t>eing 


^6a  I'he  wtfJom  of  God 

S  E  R  M.  being  not  only  reafonable  in  itfelf,  but  defirable  td 
us,  that  it  fhould  be  fo  -,  bccaufe  of  the  eminent  ad- 
vantages that  redound  to  us  by  it.  The  defign  of  the 
gofpel  is  to  deliver  us  from  the  guilt  and  dominion 
of  fin,  and  the  tyranny  of  Satan  ;  to  reftore  us  to  the 
image  and  favour  of  God  ;  and  by  making  us  par- 
takers of  a  divine  nature,  to  bring  us  to  eternal  life. 
And  is  there  any  thing  of  real  advantage  which  is 
not  comprehended  in  this  ?  Is  it  net  defirable  to  every 
man,  that  there  fhould  be  a  way  whereby  our  guilty 
confciences  may  be  quieted  and  appeafed  ;  whereby 
we  may  be  delivered  from  the  fear  of  death  and  hell  ? 
Is  it  not  defirable  to  be  freed  from  the  flavery  of 
our  lulls,   and  refcued  from  the  tyranny  and  power 
of  the  great  deftroyer  of  fouls  ?  Is  it  not  defirable  to 
be  like  God,  and  to  be  alTured  of  his  love  and  fa- 
vour, who  is  the  beft  friend,  and  the  mod  dange- 
rous enemy  •,  and  to  be  fecured,   that  when  we  leave 
this  world,  we  fhall  be  unfpeakably  happy  for  ever  ? 
Now  the  gofpel  conveys  thefe  benefits  to  us  ;   and 
if  this  be  the  cafe  of  the  gofpel,    and  there  be  no- 
thing in  this  defign  of  our  redemption,  but  what  IS 
wife  and  reafonable,  and  exceedingly  for  our  benefit 
and  advantage  •,  why  fhould  any  man  be  fo  averfe  to 
the  belief  of  it  ?  Why  fhould  unbelief  be  counted  3 
piece  of  wit  ?  Is  it  wit  to  fet  our  felves  againft  reafon, 
.and  to  oppofe  our  beft  intereft  ?    'Tis  wickednefs, 
and  prejudice,  and  inconfideratenefs  which  difbelieves 
the  gofpel.     Thofe  who  do  confider  things  welcome 
this  good  news,    and  embrace  thefe  glad  tidings. 
•'  Wifdom  is  juftified  of  her  children.'*     To  them 
who  are  truly  fenfible  of  their  own  intereft,  and  will- 
ing to  accept  of  reafonable  evidence,  this  is  not  on- 
ly "  a  true  faying,"  but  "  worthy  of  all  accepta- 
"  tion  •,  that  Christ  came  into  the  world  to  fave 
«*  fmners."  Second- 


in  the  redemption  of  mankind,  I46I 

Secondly,  this  doth  convince  men  of  the  madrtefs  SE  R  M. 
and  folly  of  impenitency.  Now  fince  the  wifdom  of 
God  hath  contrived  fuch  a  way  of  our  recovery,  and 
by  the  declaration  of  God's  wrath,  and  difpleafure 
againft  fin,  hath  given  us  fuch  arguments  to  repen- 
tance, and  by  difcovering  a  way  of  pardon  and  mer- 
cy, hath  given  us  fuch  encouragement  to  repentance, 
how  great  muft  the  folly  of  impenitency  be  ?  For 
confider, 

I.  That  impenitency  diredly  fets  itfelf  againlt 
the  "  wifdom  of  God."  If  after  all  this  we  continue 
in  our  fins,  "  we  rejed  the  counfel  of  God  againff: 
*^  our  fdves,"  we  defpife  tlie  wifdom  of  God^  and 
charge  that  with  folly :  and  we  do  it  againft  our 
felves,  to  our  own  injuiy  and  ruin.  If  we  live  iri 
our  fins,  and  cherifh  our  lufts,-  we  diredly  oppofe 
the  erid  of  our  redemption,  we  contradict  the  great 
defign  of  the  gofpel,  we  contemn  the  admirable 
contrivance  of  God's  v/ifdom,  who  fent  his  fon  into 
the  world  on  purpofe  to  deilroy  fin  •,  for  we  uphold 
that  which  he  came  to  deilroy,  i  John  iii.  5.  "  Xt 
*'  know  that  he  was  manifeiled  to  rake  away  o\xt 
"  fins."  Now  fnall  we  continue  in  fin,  when  we 
know  "  the  fon  of  God  v/as  manifeiled  to  take  away 
*'  fin?"  God  cannot  but  take  it  very  ill  at  out- 
hands,  when  he  hath  laid  cut  "  the  liches  of  hia 
"  wifdom"  in  this  defign,  for  us  to  go  about  to  de-^ 
feat  him  in  it ;  tliis  is  at  once  to  be  unthankful  to 
God,  and  injurious  to  our  felves ;  it  is  fuch  a  mad-^ 
nefs,  as  if  a  condemned  man  fhould  defpife  a  par* 
don;  as  if  a  prifoner  fiiould  be  fond  of  his  fetters^ 
and  refufe  deliverance  \  as  if  a  man  deiperateiy  fick- 
fliould  fight  with  his  phyfician,  and  put  away  health 
from  him.  If  we  do  not  comply  with  the  "  wifdoni 
**  of  GoDy"  who  hath  contrived  our   recovery  5^ 

Vol.  VIII.  16  X  '' m 

4. 


2464  ^'^^  wifdotn  of  God 

S  E  R  M.  <«  we  forfake  our  own  mercy,  and  negled  a  great 

*'  falvation  ;  we  love  death,  and  hate  our  own  fouls," 

Prov.  vih.  14,  15,  16. 

2.  Confider,  we  cannot  expc(5l  "  the  wifdom  of 
*'  God"  Ihall  do  more  for  our  recovery,  than  hath 
been  already  done  ;  ''  the  wifdom  of  God"  will  not 
try  any  further  means.  Mat.  xxi.  37.  "  lalt  of  all 
*'  he  fent  his  fon."  If  we  defpife  this  way,  if  we 
"  tread  under  foot  the  fon  of  God,  and  count  the 
*'  blood  of  the  covenant,  whereby  we  are  fandified, 
"  an  unholy  thing,  there  will  remain  no  more  facri- 
^'  fice  for  fin,"  Heb.  x.  26,  29.  What  can  expiate 
the  guilt  of  fin,  if  the  blood  of  Christ  do  not  .^ 
What  ihall  take  us  off  from  fin,  what  Ihall  fandify 
us,  if  "  the  blood  of  the  covenant"  be  inefFedual  ? 
We  refifl  our  laft  remedy,  and  make  void  the  beft 
means  the  wifdom  of  God  could  devife  for  our  re- 
covery, if,  after  the  revelation  of  the  gofpel,  we  con- 
tinue in  our  fins. 

3.  If  we  fruftratc  this  defign  of  God's  wifdom 
for  our  recovery,  our  ruin  will  be  the  more  dread- 
ful and  certain.  Impenitency  under  the  gofpel  will 
increafe  our  mifery.  "  If  Christ  had  not  come, 
"  we  had  had  no  fin,"  in  comparifon  of  what  we 
now  have  ♦,  "  but  now  our  Cm  remains:,  and  there  is 
"  no  cloak  for  our  fm,"  'w^o<poc(riv  vk  Ix^a-^v.  We 
fliall  not  be  able  at  the  day  of  judgment  to  preface 
any  thing  by  way  of  excufe  or  apology  for  our  im- 
penitency. What  Ihall  we  be  able  to  fay  to  the  juf- 
tice  of  God,  when  that  (hall  condemn  us,  who  re- 
je6led  his  wifdom,  which  would  have  faved  us  ?  We 
would  all  be  faved,  but  we  would  be  faved  without 
repentance  :  now  "the  wifdom  of  God"  hath  not 
found  out  any  other  way  to  fave  us  from  hell,  but 
by  faving  us  from  our  fins,     And  thou  that  wilt  not 

3  fubmit 


in  the  redemption  of  mankind.  34^5 

fubmit  to  this  method  of  divine  wifdom,  take  thy 
courfe,  and  let  us  fee  "  how  thou  wilt  efcape  the 
"  damnation  of  hell."  I  will  conclude  all  with 
thofe  dreadful  words  which  "  the  wifdom  of  God'* 
pronounceth  againft  thofe  that  defpife  her,  and  re- 
fufe  to  hearken  to  her  voice,  Prov.  i.  24,  25,  26. 
"  Becaufc  I  have  called,  and  ye  refufed,  I  have 
*'  ftretched  out  my  hand,  and  no  man  regarded ; 
"  but  ye  have  fet  at  naught  my  counfel,  and  would 
"  none  of  my  reproof :  I  alfo  will  laugh  at  your  cala- 
"  mity,  I  will  mock  when  your  fear  cometh.'*  They 
who  will  not  comply  with  the  counfel  of  God  for 
their  happinefs,  they  fhall  inherit  the  condition 
which  they  have  chofen  to  themfelves  •,  "  they  Ihall 
*'  eat  the  fruit  of  their  own  ways,  and  be  filled  with 
"  their  own  devices." 


SERMON     CXL. 

The  juftice  of  God  in  the  diftributlon 
of  rewards  and  punifhments. 

G  E  N.    xviii.  25. 
Shall  not  the  judge  of  all  the  earth  do  right  ? 

IN  treating  of  the  attributes  of  God,  I  have  con-  SERM. 
fidered  thofe  which  relate  to  the  divine  under-  .  ^^^' 
Handing,  viz.  knowledge  and  wifdom  ;  I  come  now 
to  confider  thofe  which  relate  to  the  divine  will,  viz. 
thefe  four,  the  juftice,  the  truth,  the  goodnefs,  and 
the  holinefs  of  God.  I  begin  with  the  firft,  namely, 
the  juftice  of  God. 

16X2  At 


T'heju/lice  of  God  in  the  diftribution 

At  the  1 7th  vcrk  of  this  chapter,  God  by  a  great 
and  wonderful  condefcention  of  his  goodnefs,  reveals 
to  Abraham  his  intention  concerning  the  dellrudlion 
of  Sodom;  upon  this  Abraham,  v.  23.  interceded 
with  God  for  faving  of  the  righteous  pcrfons  that 
were  there;  and  to  this  end,  he  pleads  v/ith  God 
his  jufticc  and  righteoufnefs,  with  which  he  appre- 
hended it  to  be  inconfiflcnt  •'  to  deftroy  the  righteous 
"  with  the  wicked,'-  which,  without  a  miracle, 
could  not  be  avoided  in  a  general  deilrudion.  "Wilt 
^'  thou  alfo  deftroy  the  righteous  with  the  wicked  ? 
*'  Peradventure  there  be  fifty  righteous  within  the 
*'  city,  wilt  thou  alfo  deftroy,  and  not  fpare  the 
^'  place  for  the  fifty  righteous  that  are  therein  ? 
^'^  that  be  far  from  thee  to  do  after  this  manner,  to 
*'  flay  the  righteous  with  the  wicked,  and  that  the 
"  righteous  lliould  be  as  the  wicked,  that  be  tar 
*'  from  thee ;  fliali  not  the  judge  of  all  the  earth 
''  do  right  ?"  This  negative  interrogation  is  equi- 
valent to  a  vehement  ailirmation,  "  ihall  not  the 
*'  judge  of  all  tlic  earth  do  right  ?"  that  is,  un- 
doubtedly he  will.  I'his  we  may  take  for  a  certain 
and  undoubted  principle,  that  in  the  diftribution  of 
rewards  and  puniftiments,  the  judge  of  the  world 
will  do  righteoudy. 

So  that  the  argument  that  lies  under  our  confide- 
ration,  is  the  juftice  of  God  in  the  diftribution  of 
rewards  and  puniftiments  :  for  the  clearing  of  which, 
we  will  confider  it, 

Firft,  in  hypothefi,  in  regard  to  the  particular 
cafe  which  is  here  put  by  Abraham  in  the  text. 

Secondly,  in  thefi,  we  will  confider  it  in  general, 
in  the  diftribution  of  rewards  and  puniftiments. 

Firft,  we  will  confider  it  in  bypothefi,  in  regard 
%o  the  particular  cafe  which  is  here  put  by  Abraham 

ia 


of  rewards  and  punijhments.  3467 

in  the  text  •,  and  the  rather,  becaule  if  we  look  well  S  E  R  M. 
into  it,  there  is  fomething  of  real  difficulty  in  it,  ^^^* 
not  eafy  to  be  cleared ;  for  Abraham's  reafoning, 
if  it  be  true,  does  plainly  conclude,  that  it  would 
have  been  unrighteous  with  God  in  the  deftrudion 
of  Sodom,  not  to  make  a  difference  between  the 
righteous  and  the  wicked,  but  to  involve  them  equal- 
ly in  the  fame  common  deilruction.  "  That  be  far 
*'  from  thee  to  do  after  this  manner,  to  (lay  the 
"  righteous  with  the  wicked,  and  that  the  righteous 
'*  fliould  be  as  the  wicked,  that  be  far  from  thee, 
''  fhall  not  the  judge  of  all  the  earth  do  right?"  as 
if  he  had  faid,  "  furely  the  judge  of  all  the  earth 
'*  will  never  do  fo  unrighteous  a  thing.*' 

And  yet  notwithilanding  this,  we  fee  it  is  very 
ufual  for  the  providence  of  G op  to  involve  good 
men  in  general  calamities,  and  to  make  no  vifible  dif- 
ference between  the  righteous  and  the  wicked.  Now 
the  difficulty  is,  how  to  reconcile  thefe  appearances 
of  providence  with  this  reafoning  of  Abraham  in  the 
text. 

And  for  doing  of  this,  I  fee  but  one  poffible  way, 
and  that  is  this,  that  Abraham  docs  not  here  fpeak 
concerning  the  judgments  of  God  which  befal  men 
in  the  ordinary  courfe  of  his  providence,  which  ma- 
ny times  happen  promifcuoufly,  and  involve  good 
and  bad  men  in  the  fame  ruin  ;  and  the  reafon  here- 
of is  plain,  becaufe  God  in  his  ordinary  providence 
does  permit  the  caufes,  which  produce  thefe  judg- 
ments, to  ad  according  to  their  own  nature,  and 
they  either  cannot  or  will  not  make  any  diilindion  ; 
for  the  calamities  which  ordinarily  happen  in  the 
world,  are  produced  by  two  forts  of  caufes,  either 
thofe  which  we  call  natural,  or  thofe  which  are  vo- 
luntary.    Natural  caufes,  li,ich  as  wind,  and  thunder, 

an4 


CXL. 


3468  72^  wifdom  of  God  in  the  dijlri button 

S  5,5r^*  ^"^  ftorms,  and  the  infedion  of  the  air,  and  the 
like ;  thefe  ading  by  a  neceffity  of  nature,  without 
any  knowledge  or  choice,  can  make  no  diftinftion 
between  the  good  and  the  bad.  And  the  voluntary 
caufes  of  calamit?ics,  as  men  are,  they  many  times 
will  make  no  difference  between  the  righteous  and 
the  wicked ;  nay,  many  times  they  are  malicioufly 
bent  againft  the  righteous,  and  the  effedls  of  their 
malice  fall  heaviefl  upon  them.  Now  we  fay  that 
things  happen  in  the  way  of  ordinary  providence, 
when  natural  caufes  are  permitted  to  a6l  according  to 
their  nature,  and  voluntary  caufes  are  left  to  their 
liberty  ^  and  therefore  in  the  courfe  of  ordinary  pro- 
vidence, it  is  not  to  be  expe(5hed  that  fuch  a  diftinc- 
tion  fhould  be  made  ;  it  is  neither  pofTiblc,  nor  does 
juftice  require  it ;  it  is  not  poffible,  fuppofing  natu- 
ral  caufes  \dt  to  a6l  according  to  their  nature,  and 
voluntary  caufes  to  be  left  to  their  liberty  •,  nor  does 
juftice  require  it,  for  every  man  is  fo  much  a  finner, 
that  no  evil  that  befals  him  in  this  world,  can  be  faid 
to  be  unjuft  in  refpedl:  of  God. 

So  that  Abraham  is  not  here  to  be  underflood,  as 
ipeaking  of  fuch  judgments  as  befal  men  in  the  ordi- 
nary courfe  of  God's  providence,  in  which,  if  the 
good  and  bad  be  involved  alike,  it  cannot  be  expe6l- 
ed  to  be  otherwife,  nor  is  there  any  injuftice  in  it  ^ 
but  Abraham  here  fpeaks  of  miraculous  and  extraor- 
dinary judgments,  which  are  immediately  infli6ted 
by  God  for  the  punilhment  of  fome  crying  fins,  and 
the  example  of  the  world,  to  deter  others  from  the 
like.  And  fuch  was  this  judgment,  which  God  in- 
tended to  bring  upon  Sodom,  and  which  Abraham 
hath  relation  to  in  this  difcourfe  of  his.  In  this  cafe 
it  may  be  expe6ted  from  the  juftice  of  God,  that  a 
difference  fhould  be  made  between  the  righteous  and 
the  wicked ;  and  that  for  thefe  reafons :  i .  Be- 


of  rewards  and  punifiments,  34^9 

1.  Becauie  this  is  a  judgment  which  God  himfelf  SE  RM, 
executes.  It  is  not  an  event  of  common  providence, 
which  always  follows  the  nature  of  it's  caufe,  but  an 
a6l  of  God,  as  a  judge.  Now  it  is  eflential  to  a 
judge  to  make  a  difcrimination  between  the  good  and 
the  bad,  fo  as  to  punilli  the  one,  and  fpare  the  other  j 
and  this  is  as  neceflary  to  all  proper  a6ts  of  judgment 
in  this  v/orld,  as  the  other  •,  there  being  no  other 
difference  between  them,  but  that  one  is  a  particular 
judgment,  and  the  other  the  generaljudgmentof  the 
whole  world. 

2.  When  God  goes  out  of  the  way  of  his  ordina- 
ry providence  in  punifhing,  it  may  reafonably  be  ex- 
pelled that  he  ftiould  make  a  difference  between 
the  good  and  the  bad  ;  for  the  reafon  why  he  does  not 
in  his  common  providence  is,  becaufe  he  will  not 
break  and  interrupt  the  eftablifhed  order  of  things 
upon  every  little  occafion :  but  when  he  does  go  be- 
fides  the  common  courfe  of  things  in  punilhing,  the 
reafon  ceafeth,  which  hindered  him  before  from  ma- 
king a  difference  -,  and  it  is  reafonable  enough  to  ex- 
ped,  that  in  the  infiiding  of  a  miraculous  judgment, 
a  miraculous  difference  Ihould  be  made.  Without 
making  this  difference,  the  end  of  thefe  miraculous 
judgments  would  not  be  attained,  which  is,  remark- 
ably to  punifh  the  crying  fins  of  men,  and  by  that 
example  to  deter  others  from  the  like  fins :  but  if 
thefe  judgments  fhould  fall  promifcuouQy  upon  the 
righteous  and  the  wicked,  it  would  not  be  evident, 
that  they  were  defigned  for  the  punifhment  of  fuch 
fins,  when  men  did  fee,  that  they  fell  likewife  upon 
thofe  who  were  not  guilty  of  thofe  fins,  and  confe- 
quently  the  example  could  not  be  fo  effedual  to  deter 
men  from  fin. 

Upon  all  thefe  accounts  you  fee  that  Abraham's 

reafoning 


347^  ^hejujiice  of  Got)  in  the  diftributiGu 

S  E  R  M.  reafoning  was  very  ftrong  and  well  grounded,  as  to 
^  _'_^  thofe  judgments  which  are  miraculous  and  extraor- 
dinary, and  immediately  inflifted  by  God,  for  the 
punifliment  of  great  and  heinous  fins,  wliich  was  the 
cafe  he  was  fpeaking  of.  And  accordingly  v/e  find, 
that  in  thofe  judgments  which  have  been  immediate- 
ly and  miraculoufly  inflicted  by  God,  he  hath  always 
made  this  difference  between  the  righteous  and  the 
wicked.  In  the  deluge  which  he  brought  upon  the 
old  world,  the  fpirit  of  God  gives  this  reafon  why 
the  judgment  was  fo  univerfal,  becaufe  "  all  flefh 
"  had  corrupted  his  way  upon  the  earth  j"  and 
the  reafon  why  he  faved  Noah  and  his  family  waSj 
becaufe  in  this  general  corruption  of  mankind  he  a- 
lone  was  righteous ;  "  thee  have  I  feen  righteous  be* 
''  fore  me  in  this  generation."  So  likev/ife  in  that 
miraculous  judgment  of  Korah  and  his  company, 
when  ''  God  made  a  new  thing,  and  the  earth  o-^ 
*'  pened  her  mouth  to  fwallow  them  up,"  none  pe- 
rifhed  but  he  and  his  complices ;  the  reft  had  warn* 
ing  given  them  by  God 'to  "  remove  from  the  tents 
"  of  thofe  wicked  men."  Thus  you  fee  that  as  to 
the  particular  cafe  in  this  text,  Abraham's  reafoning 
concerning  the  juftice  of  God  is  very  firm,  and  con- 
cluding.    I  proceed  to  the 

Second  thing,  which  was  that  which  I  principally 
intended  to  difcourfe  upon,  viz.  to  confider  the  juf- 
tice of  God  in  general,  in  the  diftribution  of  rewards 
and  puniflunents.  And  here  I  cannot  but  grant', 
that  the  beft  evidence  of  this  is  yet  wanting.  Wp 
have  clear  demonftrations  of  the  power,  and  wifdom, 
and  goodnefs  of  God  in  this  vaft  and  admirable  frame 
of  things  which  we  fee ;  but  we  muft  ilay  till  the 
day  of  judgment  for  a  clear  and  full  manifcftation  of 
the  divine  juftice  j  for  which  reafon  the  day  of  judg- 

ment 


of  rewards  and punljhmehtsl      '  3471    j 

ment  is  in  fcripture  called,  "  the  day  of  the  revelation  S  E  R  M. 
"  of  the  righteous  judgment  of  God."     But  in  tlie 
mean  time  we  may  receive  fufficierit  aiTurance  of  this, 
both  from  natural  reafon,  and  from  divine  revelation. 

I.  From  natural  reafon,  which  tells  us,  that 
"  God  loves  righteoufnefs,"  and"  hates  iniquity," 
and  confequently  that  it  muft  be  agreeable  to  his  na- 
ture, to  countenance  and  encourage  the  one,  and  to 
difcountenance  the  other  5  that  is,  to  give  fome  pub- 
Jick  teilimony  of  his  liking  and  affedlion  to  the  one, 
and  of  his  hatred  and  diflike  of  the  other ;  which 
cannot  otherwife  be  done,  but  by  rewards  and  pu- 
nilhments. 

But  however  the  heathen  reafoned  about  this  mat- 
ter, whatever  premifes  they  laid,  they  firmly  believ- 
ed the  conclufion,  that  God  is  juft,  Plato  lays  down 
this  as  a  certain  and  undoubted  principle,  "  That 
*'  God  is  in  no  wife  unjuft  ,  but  as  righteous  as  is 
"  pofliblc ;  and  that  we  cannot  refemble  God  more, 
*'  than  in  this  quality  and  difpofition."  So  likewifc 
Seneca  tells  us,  "  That  the  God's  are  neither  capa- 
*'  ble  of  receiving  an  injury,  nor  of  doing  any  thing 
"  that  is  unjufl."  Antoninus  the  great  emperor 
and  philofopher,  fpeaking  doubtfully,  whether  good 
men  are  extinguilhed  by  death,  or  remain  after- 
wards ;  "  If  it  be  juft,  fays  he,  you  may  be  fure  it 
"  is  fo  ;  if  it  be  not  juft,  you  may  certainly  conclude 
**  the  contrary  \  for  God  is  juft,  and  being  fo,  he 
*'  will  do  nothing  that  is  unjuft  orunreafonable." 
And  indeed  the  heathen  philofophers  looked  upon 
this  as  the  great  fandion  of  all  moral  precepts,  that 
God  was  the  witnefs  and  the  avenger  of  the  breach 
and  violation  of  them,  ^i  fecus  faxit^Beus  ipfe  vin- 
dex  erit ;  ."  If  any  "man  do  contrary  to  them,  God 
*'  himfelf  will  punifh  it  i"  which  Ihews,  that  there 
'   Vol,  Vm.  16  Y  is 


CLX. 


3472  Thejujlice  of  God  in  the  dijlribution 

S  E  RJ^-  is  a  natural  awe  upon  the  minds  of  men  of  the  divine 
juftice,  which  will  overtake  offenders  either  in  this 
world  or  the  other.  But  this  will  more  clearly  ap- 
pear in  the 

2.  Place,  from  fcripture,  or  divine  revelation. 
And  thofe  texts  which  I  fhall  produce  to  this  pur- 
pofe,  may  be  reduced  to  thefe  two  heads  j  either 
fuch  as  prove  the  reditude  of  the  divine  nature  and 
his  juilice  in  general ;  or  fuch  as  fpeak  more  parti- 
cularly of  the  juilice  and  equity  of  his  providence  in 
the  diilribution  of  rewards  and  punifhments.  I  be- 
gin, firff,  with  thofe  which  declare  the  reditude  of 
the  divine  nature,  and  the  juftice  of  God  in  gene- 
ral, and  that  cither  by  attributing  this  perfedion  to 
him,  or  by  removing  the  contrary,  injuftice  and  un- 
righteoufnefs,  at  the  greateft  diftance  from  him. 

I.  Thofe  which  attribute  this  perfeftion  to  God, 
I  lliall  mention  but  a  few  of  many,  Pfal.  cxxix.  4. 
*'  The  Lord  is  righteous."  Dan.  ix.  7.  "OLord! 
*'  righteoufnefs  belongeth  unto  thee."  This  good 
men  have  acknowledged,  when  they  have  lain  under 
the  hand  of  God,  Ezra  ix.  15.  "  O  Lord  God  of 
*'  Ifrael,  thou  art  righteous."  And  this  the  worft 
of  men  have  been  forced  to  own,  when  they  have 
been  in  extremity,  Ex.  ix.  27.  then  Pharaoh  faid, 
*'  the  Lord  is  righteous."  This  hath  been  likewife 
acknowledged  by  thofe  who  have  lain  under  the 
greateft  temptation  to  doubt  of  it,  Jer.  xii.  i. 
^'  righteous  art  thou,  O  Lord,  when  I  plead  with 
''  thee:  yea,  let  me  talk  with  thee  of  thy  judgment; 
**  wherefore  doth  the  way  of  the  wicked  profper?" 
The  prophet,  notwithftanding  he  faw  the  profperous 
condition  of  wicked  men,  and  the  affli6ted  ftate  of 
the  godly,  which  feemed  hard  to  be  reconciled  with 
the  juftice  of  God's  providence ;  yet  before  he  would 


ef  rewards  and piimJJjments,  3473 

io  much  as  reafon  about  it,  he  lays  down  this  as  a  S  E  R  M. 

CXL 

certain  conclufion,  "  righteous  art  thou,  O  Lord." 

To  this  head  hkewife  belong  all  thofe  texts  which 
fpeak  of  righteoufnefs,  as  God's  dwelHng  place,  and 
his  throne,  of  his  delight  in  juftice,  and  of  the  du- 
ration and  eternity  of  it,\  which  I  need  not  particu- 
larly recite. 

2.  There  are  likewife  other  texts,  which  remove 
the  contrary,  viz.  injuftice  and  unrighteoufnefs  at 
the  greateft  diftance  from  God,  as  being  moft  con- 
trary to  his  nature  and  perfedion.  Deut.  xxxii.  4. 
'^  A  God  of  truth,  and  without  iniquity."  2  Chron. 
xix.  7.  "  There  is  no  iniquity  with  the  Lord  our 
*'  God,  nor  accepting  of  perfons,  nor  taking  of 
gifts."  Job  viii.  3.  "  Doth  God  pervert  judg- 
"  ment  ?  or  doth  the  Almighty  pervert  juftice?'* 
which  is  a  vehement  negation  of  the  thing.  Job 
xxxiv.  10,  II,  12.  "  Far  be  it  from  God,  that  he 
*^  fhould  do  wickednefs,  and  from  the  Almighty, 
*'  that  he  ihould  commit  iniquity.  For  the  work 
*'  ofamanfhall  he  render  unto  him,  and  caufe  e- 
^'  very  man  to  find  according  to  his  ways.  Yea, 
"  furely  God  will  not  do  wickedly,  neither  will  the 
*'  Almighty  pervert  judgment."  Rom.  ix.  14. 
*'  What  fhall  we  fay  then.^  is  there  unrighteoufnefs 
*'  with  God  ?  God  forbid." 

Secondly,  there  are  other  texts  which  fpeak  more 
particularly  of  the  juflice  and  righteoufnefs  of  God 
in  the  diftribution  of  rewards  and  punifhments.  'Tis 
true  indeed,  the  juflice  of  God  doth  not  conflantly 
appear  in  this  world  in  the  difpenfationsof  bis  provi- 
dence, becaufc  this  is  a  time  of  patience  and  forbear- 
ance ^  to  finners,  and  of  trial  and  exercife  to  good 
men  ;  but  there  is  a  day  a  coming,  when  all  things 
Ihall  be  fet  ftrait,  and  every  man  fliall  receive  the 

16  X  z  juft 


^hejujiice  of  Go^d  in  the  dijlributton 

iuir  reward  of  his  deeds,  when  the  jiiftice  of  God 
fhall  be  evident  to  all  the  world,  and  every  eye  fliall 
fee  it,  and  fhall  acknowledge  the  righteous  judge- 
ment of  God  ;  and  this  the  fcripture  moft  clearly 
and  exprefly  declares  unto  us ;  and  hence  it  is,  that 
the  day  of  judgment  is  called  "  the  day  of  the  reve- 
*'  lation  of  the  righteous  judgment  of  God."  The 
righteoufnefs  of  God  doth  not  now  fo  clearly  appear, 
but  that  there  are  many  clouds  over  it ;  but  there 
fhall  be  a  day  of  revelation,  when  the  righteoufnefs 
of  God  fliali  be  made  manifefl  to  all  the  world. 

The  remunerative  juftice  of  God  fhall  then  appear 
in  the  rewarding  the  righteous  •,  and  the  punitive 
jufcce  of  God  inpunifhing  the  wicked  and  ungodly  ; 
*•'  fo  that  a  man  fhall  fay,  verily  there  is  a  reward 
"  for  the  righteous,  verily  there  is  a  God  that  judg- 
^■'  eth  the  world." 

Now  the  righteoufnefs  of  this  vengeance  of  God, 
which  God  wih  take  upon  finners,  is  further  fet 
forth  to  us  in  fcripture,  from  the  equity  and  impar- 
tiality of  it. 

I.  From  the  equity  of  it. 

1 .  In  that  the  fins  of  men  have  juftly  deferved  the 
punifhment,  that  fhall  come  upon  them,  Rom.  i. 
32.  ^-  Who  knowing  the  judgment  of  God,  StKUica^ 
*'  fjta,  tS  deS,  the  righteous  judgment  of  God,  that 
*'  they  which  commit  fuch  things,  are  worthy  of 
^^  death." 

2.  In  that  the  judgment  of  God  fhall  be  proporr 
tioned  to  the  degree  and  heinoufnefs  of  men's  fins, 
fo  as  the  leffer  or  greater  fins  fhall  be  punifhed  with 
more  or  lefs  feverity.  So  our  Saviour  threatens  to 
thofe  who  continue  impenitent  under  the  gofpel,  and 
the  advantages  of  it,  their  cafe  fhall  be  more  fad 
f;han  that  of  Tyre  and  Sidon,  and  ''it  ihall  be  more 

^'  olerabl? 


of  rewards  and  ptimjl^ments.  3  47  C 

•*  tolerable  for  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  at  the  day  of  S  E  R  M. 
♦•judgment,  than  for  them."  Mat.  xi.  20,  21.  and  ^^^' 
Luke  xii.  47,  48.  There  you  have  different  degrees 
of  punifhment  threatened,  proportionable  to  the  ag- 
gravations of  the  fins  which  men  have  committed ; 
*^  The  fervant  which  knew  his  lord's  will,  and  pre- 
**  pared  not  himfelf,  neither  did  according  to  his 
**  will,  fhall  be  beaten  with  many  ftripes  :  but  he 
*'  that  knew  it  not,  but  did  commit  things  wor- 
**  thy  of  ftripes,  fhall  be  beaten  with  few  ftripes  ;" 
and  fo  proportionably  of  all  other  aggravations  of 
fins,  '*  for  to  whom  much  is  given,  of  him  ftiall 
*^  much  be  required  ;  and  unto  whom  men  have 
'**  committed  much,  of  him  they  will  afk  the  more.'*, 
So  likewife  God  will  vindicate  the  contempt  of  the 
golpel  more  feverely  than  of  the  law,  becaufe  the 
confirmation  of  it  is  clearer,  and  the  falvation  offer- 
ed by  it  greater.  Heb.  ii.  2,3,  4.  "  If  the  word  fpoken 
*'  by  angels  was  ftedfaft,  and  every  tranfgreffion  and 
**  difbbedience  received  ajuft  recompence  of  reward, 
*'  how  fhall  we  efcape  ?"  &c.  And  fo,  Heb.  x.  28, 
29.  "  He  that  defpifed  Mofes  his  law,  died  with- 
*^  out  mercy  under  two  or  three  witneffes,  of  how 
*'  much  forer  punifhment,  fuppofe  ye,  ihall  he  be 
^  thought  worthy,  who  hath  trodden  under  foot 
«  thefonofGoD?"&c. 

II.  The  righteoufnefs  of  this  judgment  is  further 
fet  forth  to  us  in  fcripture  by  the  impartiality  of  it.* 
Hither  belong  all  thofe  texts,  which  remove  from 
God  that  rr^trcoTroXvi^tocy  that  refped  of  perfons, 
which  is  fo  incident  to  human  tribunals.  Now  re- 
fpcd  of  perfons  is  in  diftribution  of  juftice,  and  hath 
regard  to  fome  external  qualities  or  circumftances  of 
the  perfons,  which  do  not  appertain  to  the  merit  of 
th^  caufe,  and  upon  account  of  thQfc  cvcumftances. 


CXL. 


347^  ^hejuJiiceofGo'D  in  the  dijiribution, 

SE^RM.  to  deal  unequally  with  thofe,  whofe  cafe  is  equal  f 
as  when  two  perfons,  who  are  equally  guilty  of  a 
crime,  are  brought  to  their  trial,  and  the  one  is  con- 
demned, and  the  other  acquitted,  upon  the  account 
of  friendfhip,  or  relation,  or  fome  other  intereft, 
becaufe  one  is  poor  and  the  other  rich,  the  one  hath 
powerful  friends  to  intercede  for  him,  the  other 
not,  the  one  brings  a  gift  or  bribe,  the  other  not, 
or  upon  any  other  account,  bcfjdes  the  pure  merits 
of  the  caufe  •,  I  fay  to  deal  thus  in  the  diftribution 
of  juftice,  is  refped  of  perfons.  Otherwife  in  mat- 
ters of  mere  grace  and  favour  refped:  of  perfons 
hath  no  place,  according  to  that  common  rule  of 
divines,  7zrpo(rw7roA)74^/a  locum  non  hahet  in  gratuitis^ 
Jed  in  debitis.  Now  this  the  fcripture  every  where 
ipeaks  of,  as  a  thing  very  far  from  God,  Deut.  x. 
17.  "  The  Lord  your  God  is  the  God  of  gods,  and 
*'  Lord  of  lords,  a  great  God,  a  mighty  and  a 
*'  terrible,  which  regardeth  not  perfons,  nor  taketh 
*'  rewards."  2  Chron.  xix.  7.  "  There  is  no  ini- 
**  quity  with  the  Lord  our  God,  nor  refpedl  of 
*'  perfons,  nor  taking  of  gifts."  Job  xxxiv.  18,  19. 
Is  it  fit  to  fay  to  a  king,  thou  art  wicked  ?  or  to 
princes,ye  are  ungodly  ?  how  much  lefs  to  him  that, 
accepteth  not  the  perfon  of  princes,  nor  regard- 
*^  eth  the  rich  more  than  the  poor  ?  for  they  are  all 
*'  the  work  of  his  hands."  Rom.  ii.  6.  **  Who  will 
*'  render  to  every  man  according  to  his  deeds :  for 
*'  there  is  no  refped;  of  perfons  with  God."  A6ls  x. 
34,  35.  ''  of  a  truth  I  perceive  that  God  is  no  re- 
*'  fpedter  of  perfons :  but  in  every  nation  he  that 
*'  feareth  him,  and  worketh  righteoufnefs,  is  accept- 
**  ed  with  him."  Eph.  vi.  8,  9.  The  apoftle  there 
prefTeth  the  duties  of  fervants  to  mailers,  from  this 
confideration,  that  *^  whatfoever  good  thing  any 


«€ 


(C 


"  maa 


of  rewards  and punipmenfs,  "^^77 

^'  man  doth,  the  fame  iliall  he  receive  of  the  Lord,  S  E  R  M. 
"  whether  he  be  bond  or  free  j"  and  at  the  9th  ver.  s,J^^^ 
"  Ye  maflcrs,  do  the  fame  thing  unto  them,  for- 
"  bearing  threatening  ;  knowing  that  your  mailer 
*'  alfo  is  in  heaven,  neither  is  there  relied  of  per- 
*'  fons  with  him."  He  maketh  this  Jikewife  an  ar- 
gument, why  men  fhould  not  opprefs  and  deal  de- 
ceitfully one  with  another.  Col.  iii.  25.  "  But  he 
"  that  doth  wrong,  fhall  receive  for  the  wrong 
"  which  he  hath  done  ;  and  there  is  no  refpedl  of 
"  perfons."  And  in  general,  Su  Peter  urgeth  this 
confideration  upon  all  men  to  deter  them  from  fin  in 
any  kind,  i  Pet.  i.  17,  "  And  if  ye  call  on  the  fa- 
"  ther,  who  without  refpect  of  perfons  judgeth  ac- 
*'  cording  to  every  man's  work,  pafs  the  time  of 
*'  your  fojourning  here  in  fear. 

And  befides  that  the  fcripture  doth  remove  this  at 
Xhe  greatefl  diftance  from  God,  it  gives  us  alfo  fe- 
veral  inftances  of  the  impartiality  of  the  divine  juf- 
tice,  that  it  is  not  to  be  perverted  and  turned  afide 
by  any  of  thofe  extrinfecal  confiderations  which  com- 
monly fway  with  men  -,  it  is  not  to  be  prevailed  with 
and  overcome  by  flattery  and  entreaties.  Mat.  vii.  21, 
22.  "Noteveryone  that  faith  unto  me  Lord,  Lor  d, 
*'  fhall  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven  ;  but  he  that 
"  doth  the  will  of  my  father  which  is  in  heaven,'* 
&c.  The  divine  juftice  is  not  to  be  impofed  upon 
by  good  words,  and  external  Ihews,  and  falfe  pro- 
feffions ;  fo  neither  by  any  external  relation  to 
him  ;  "  for  many  fhall  come  from  the  call,  and  from 
*'  the  weft,  and  Ihall  fit  down  with  Abraham,  Ifaac, 
*'  and  Jacob,  in  the  kingdom  of  God,  but  tlic 
"  children  of  the  kingdom  fhall  be  calt  out  into  ut- 
"  ter  darknefs.'^ 

\And 


3 47 S  *YbejuJiice  ofGon  in  the  dijlributlon 

SERM.  And  however  men  may  bear  up  themfelves  now 
upon  their  worldly  grcatnefs  and  powerjCertainly  there 
is  a  time  coming,  when  the  greateft  perfons  in  the 
world,  thofe  who  overturn  kingdoms,  and  lay  wafle 
countries,  and  opprefs  and  ruin  millions  of  mankind 
for  the  gratifying  of  their  own  lulls  and  ambition, 
I  fay  there  is  a  day  a  coming,  when  even  thefe,  as 
much,  nay,  more  than  others,  fliall  fear  and  tremble 
before  the  impartial  juflice  of  God.  Rev.  vi.  15. 
*'  And  the  kings  of  the  earth,  and  the  great  men, 
*'  and  the  rich  men,  and  the  chief  captains,  and  the 
'*  mighty  men,  and  eveiy  bond-man  and  every  free- 
**  man  fhall  hide  themfelves  in  the  dens,  and  in  the 
**  rocks  of  the  mountains  •,  for  the  great  day  of  his 
*'  wrath  is  come,  and  who  fliall  be  able  to  fland?'* 
The  impartial  juflice  of  God  will  treat  the  greateft 
and  the  meaneft  perfons  alike.  Rev.  xx.  12.  "  I  faw 
*'  the  dead,  fmall  and  great,  ftand  before  God  ; 
*'  and  the  books  were  opened,  and  another  book 
*'  was  opened,  which  is  the  book  of  life  ;  and  the 
*'  dead  were  judged  out  of  thofe  things  which  were 
**  written  in  the  books  according  to  their  works." 
All  judged  "  according  to  their  works." 

I  fhould  next  proceed  to  vindicate  the  juflice  of 
God  in  the  diflribution  of  rewards  and  punifhments 
from  thofe  objedlions,  which  feem  to  impeach  it. 
But  before  I  enter  upon  this,  it  will  be  convenient 
to  fatisfy  one  queflion,  which  hath  occafioned  great 
difputes  in  the  world,  and  that  is,  how  far  juflice, 
efpecially  as  to  the  punifhment  of  offenders,  is  efTential 
to  God  ?  And  for  the  clearing  of  this  matter,  Ifhall 
briefly  lay  down  thefe  proportions. 

Firfl,;  I  take  this  for  a  certain  and  undoubted 
truth,  that  every  perfe(5lion  is  efTential  to  God,  and 
cannot  be  imagined  to  be  feparated  from  the  divine. 

nature^ 


of  rewards  and  piinijhmenfs.  3479 

nature,     becaufe  this    is  the  natural  notion    which  S  E  R  M. 
men  have  of  God,  that  he  is  a  being  that  hach  all     ^^^' 
perfe6lion. 

Secondly,  the  adual  conliant  exercife  of  thofe  di* 
vine  perfections,  the  effe6ls  whereof  are  without  him- 
felf,  is  not  eflential  to  God.  For  inftance,  though 
God  be  eflentially  powerful  and  good,  yet  it  is  not 
necelTary,  that  he  fhould  always  exercife  his  power 
and  goodnefs,  but  at  fuch  times,  and  in  fuch  a 
manner,  as  feems  beft  to  his  wifdom  •,  and  this  is 
likewife  true  of  his  wifdom  and  juftice,  becaufe  thefe 
are  perfections,  the  effeCts  whereof  are  terminated 
upon  fomething  without  himfelf. 

Thirdly,  it  is  elfential  to  God  to  love  goodnels, 
and  hate  fin,  wherever  he  fees  them.  It  is  not  ne- 
ceflary  there  fhould  be  a  world,  or  reafonable  crea- 
tures in  it :  but  upon  fuppofition  that  God  makes 
fuch  creatures,  it  is  agreeable  to  the  divine  nature, 
to  give  them  good  and  righteous  laws,  to  encourage 
them  in  the  doing  of  that  which  is  good,  and  to  dif- 
courage  them  frox^  doing  that  which  is  evil ;  which 
cannot  be  done,  but  by  rewards  and  punifhments  -, 
and  therefore  it  is  agreeable  to  the  perfection  of  the 
divine  nature,  to  reward  goodnefs,  and  to  punifh  fin. 

Fourthly,  as  for  thofe  rewards  which  the  gofpel 
promifeth,  and  the  punifhments  which  it  threatens, 
there  is  fome  difference  to  be  made  between  the  re- 
warding and  punifliing  juftice  of  God. 

1.  As  for  that  abundant  rev/ard  God  is  pleafed 
to  promife  to  good  men,  the  promjfe  of  it  is  found- 
ed in  his  goodnefs  •,  and  the  performance  of  that  pro- 
pife,  in  his  juftice  ;  for  it  is  juftice  to  perform  what 
he  promifes,  though  the  promife  of  fo  great  and 
abundant  a  reward  was  mere  goodnefs. 

2.  As  for  the  punilhing  juftice  of  God,  about 
Vol.  VIII,  16  Z  which. 

4- 


3480  Tloejuftice  of  God  in  the  dijlribution 

SF  R^M.  which  hath  been  the  great  queftion,  whether  that 
^g;;^.^!^  beeffential  to  God  or  not,  it  feems  very  plain,  that 
it  is  not  necefifary  that  God  fhould  inflidb  thofe  judg- 
ments which  he  threatens,  becaiife  he  hath  threatened 
ihem  ;  for  there  is  not  the  Hke  obligation  upon  per- 
fons  to  perform  their  threatniiigs,  that  there  is  to 
perform  their  promifes  ;  becaufe  God  by  his  pro- 
mife  becomes  a  debtor  to  thofe  to  whom  he  makes 
the  promife  \  but  when  he  threatens,  he  is  the  cre- 
ditor, and  we  are  debtors  to  his  juftice  •,  and  as  a 
creditor,  he  may  remit  the  punifhment  which  he 
hath  threatened  :  but  then  if  we  confider  God  as 
loving  goodnefs  and  hating  fin ;  if  we  look  upon 
him  as  governor  of  the  world,  and  concerned  to 
preferve  good  order,  to  encourage  holinefs  and  righ- 
teoufnefs,  and  to  difcountenance  fm,  under  this  con- 
fideration  it  is  effential  to  him  to  punifli  fin  at  fuch 
times,  and  in  fuch  manner  and  circumftances,  as 
feems  bell  to  his  wifdoni. 

And  I  am  not  at  all  moved  by  that,  which  is  urg- 
ed by  fome  learned  men  to  the  contrary,  that  if  pu- 
nifhing  juftice  were  elTentiil  to  God,  then  he  muft 
punifh  the  fmner  immediately,  fo  foon  as  he  hath  of- 
fended, and  to  the  utmoft  of  his  power  5  becaufe 
whatever  a6ls  naturally,  ads  neceffarily,  and  to  the 
utmoft:  for  I  do  not  fuppofe  fuch  a  juftice  eflential 
to  God  as  a6ls  neceffarily,  but  fuch  a  juftice,  which 
as  to  the  time,  and  manner,  and  circumftances  of 
it*s  a6ting,  is  regulated  and  determined  by  his  wif- 
dom  •,  and  there  is  the  fame  reafon  likewife  of  his 
goodnefs. 

I  come  now  to  the  objedbions,  which  are  taken 

partly  from  the  difpenfations  of  God  in  this  world  i 

and  partly  from  the  puniftiments  of  the  ether. 

Firft,  as  to  the  difpenfations  of  God  in  this  world, 

3  there 


of  rewards  and  punijhmenfs. 

there  are  thefe  two  things  objeded  againft  the  juftice 
of  the  divine  providenoe. 

I.  The  inequality  of  God's  dealing  with  good 
and  bad  men  in  this  world. 

II.  Thetranflationof  punifhments,  punilhing  one 
man's  fin  upon  another,  as  the  fins  of  the  fathers  up- 
on the  children,  of  the  prince  upon  the  people.  I 
begin  with  the 

I.  Obje<5tion,  the  inequality  of  God's  dealing 
with  good  and  bad  men  in  this  world.  In  this  life 
things  happen  promifcuoufly,  "  there  is  one  event  to 
"  the  righteous,  and  to  the  wicked ;"  if  the  wicked 
fuffer  and  are  afflidted^  fo  are  the  righteous  j  if  the 
righteous  fometimes  flouriih,  fo  do  the  wicked :  and 
is  not  this  unjuft,  that  thofe  who  are  fo  unequal  as 
to  their  deferts,  fhould  be  equally  dealt  withal  ?  Or 
if  there  be  any  inequality,  it  is  ufuaily  the  wrong  way; 
the  wicked  do, many  times,profper  more  in  the  world, 
and  the  righteous  are  frequently  more  afflided.  This 
was  the  great  objedlion  of  old  againft  the  providence 
of  God,  which  the  heathen  philofophers  took  fo 
much  pains  to  anfwer,  nay,  it  did  often  fhake  the 
faith  of  holy  and  good  men  in  the  old  teftament. 
Job  xii.  6.  "  The  tabernacles  of  robbers  prolper, 
"  and  they  that  provoke  God  are  fecure ;  into  whofe 
"  hand  God  bringeth  abundantly  ;"  and  chap.  xxi. 
7,  8,  9.  he  expoftulates  the  fame  matter  again  :  and 
David  fays,  this  was  a  great  ftumbling-block  to 
him,  Pfal.  Ixxiii.  2,  g.  and  the  like  we  find  in  the 
prophets,  Jer.  xii.  i,  and  Hab.  i.  13.  This  objec- 
tion I  have  elfewhere  confidered,  I  fhall  now  very 
briefly  offer  two  or  three  things,  which  I  hope  will 
be  fufHcient  to  break  the  force  of  it. 

I.  It  muft  be  granted,  that  it  is  not  necclTary  to 
juftiqe  to  fhew  itfelf  immediately,   and  to  difpenfe 

16  Z  2  rewards 


34^2  T^he  lujiice  of  Gob  in  the  dillribution 

S  E  R  M.  rewards  and  punifhments  fo  foon  as  there  are  ob- 
jects  for  them.  This  is  not  thought  necelTaiy  among 
men  ;  much  more  ought  we  to  leave  it  to  the  wif- 
dom  of  God  to  determine  the  time  and  circumftan- 
ces  of  the  exercifing  of  his  juftice-,  and  we  are  not 
to  conclude,  that  the  providence  of  God  is  unjuft, 
if  he  do  not  bellow  rewards,  and  inflid:  punifhments, 
jufl  when  we  think  he  Ihould. 

2.  If  God  intended  this  life  for  a  ftate  of  trial, 
wherein  he  would  prove  the  obedience  of  men,  and 
their  free  inclination  to  good  or  evil,  it  is  not  rea- 
fonable  to  expedl  that  he  ihould  follow  men  with 
prefent  rewards  and  punifhments ;  for  that  would 
lay  too  great  a  force  upon  men,  fo  that  there  would 
hardly  be  any  opportunity  of  trying  them  -,  but,  on 
the  conti  Liry,  there  is  all  the  reafon  in  the  world  to 
pr^lume  that  God  fhould  exercife  the  graces  and 
virtues  of  good  men  with  afflictions  and  fufFerings, 
and  fuffer  bad  men  to  take  their  courfe  for  a  while, 
and  walk  in  their  own  ways,  without  continual 
checks,  by  frequent  and  remarkable  judgments  upon 
them,  fo  often  as  they  offend. 

3.  If  there  be  another  hfc  after  this,  wherein  men 
fhall  be  judged  "  according  to  their  works,"  then 
this  objedlion  vanifheth  •,  for  that  great  day  will 
fet  all  things  ftrait,  which  feem  now  to  be  fo  crook- 
ed and  irrcgul.ir.  The  deferring  of  rewards  and  pu- 
nifhments to  the  mod  convenient  feafon,  is  fo  far 
from  being  a  refiedion  upon  the  juftice  of  God,  that 
it  is  highly  to  the  commendation  of  it.  What  Clau- 
dian  fays  of  JVifBnus,  a  very  bad  man,  whofe  long 
impunity  haa  tempted  men  to  call  in  queftion  the 
juftice  of  God,  i^:  confiderable  in  this  cafe  ; 

Ahftidit  huiic  tandem  Ruffini  fma  tumidtumj 
4hfolvitqu^  deos, 

"  The 


of  rewards  and  punijhments.  3  4  8  ^ 

"  The  punifhment  which  overtook  him  at  laft,  S  E  R  M. 
*'  did  quiet  thofe  tumultuous  thoughts  ,  andabfolv-  ^^'^' 
"  ed  the  gods  from  all  blame."  When  men  look 
but  a  little  way,  and  confider  only  the  prefent  ftate 
of  things,  they  are  ready  to  quarrel  at  the  juftice  of 
them  ;  but  if  they  would  look  at  the  end  of  things, 
and  have  patience  to  ftay  till  the  laft,  to  fee  the  con- 
clufion  and  winding  up  of  things,  they  would  then 
acquit  God  in  their  thoughts  from  all  thofe  imputa- 
tions of  injuftice  which,  from  the  inequality  of  pre- 
fent difpenfations,  rafh  and  inconfiderate  men  are 
to  charge  him  withal. 

II.  Objedion,  from  the  tranflation  of  punifhments, 
the  punifhing  of  one  man's  fin  upon  another,  as  of 
^'  the  fathers  upon  the  children,"  which  God  threat- 
ens in  the  fecond  commandment,  and  did,  in  fome 
fort,  fulfil  in  Ahab,  in  "  bringing  the  evil  he  had 
"  threatened  him  withal,  in  his  fon's  days,"  i  Kings 
xxi.  19.  The  punilhing  the  fin  of  one  perfon  upon 
a  people,  as  that  of  Achan  upon  the  whole  congre- 
gation, Jofh.  xxii.  20.  "  Did  not  Achan  the  fon  of 
*'  Zerah  commit  a  trefpafs  in  the  accurfed  thing, 
"  and  wrath  fell  on  all  the  congregation  of  Ifrael  ^ 
"  and  that  man  perifhed  not  alone  in  his  iniquity." 
And  the  fin  of  David  upon  the  people,  2  Sam.  xxi  v. 
When  feventy  thoufand  died  of  the  plague,  for  Da- 
vid's fin  in  numbering  the  people.  Now  how  is  this 
agreeable  to  juftice  ^  Is  it  not  a  known  rule,  Noxa 
caput  fequiturt  "  mifchiefpurfuesthefinner.''"  What 
can  be  more  reafonable,  ^am  iitpeccatafuos  teneant 
author es?  ^^  Than  that  mens  faults  fhould  becharg- 
"  ed  upon  the  authors,"  and  punifhment  fall  upon 
the  guilty  ? 

For  anfwer  to  this, 

I .  It  is  not  unreafonable  that  one  man  lliould  bear 

the 


3484  ^^^  wifJom  of  God  in  thi  dijirtbution 

SERM.  the  punifhmcnt  of  another's  fault,  if  he  be  willing 
•  and  content  to  bear  it,  volenti  non  fit  injuria ;  *^  There 
*^  is  no  wrong  done  to  thofe  that  are  willing  to  un* 
"  dergo  it,"  though  they  be  innocent  •,  which  was 
the  cafe  of  our  bleffed  Saviour  fuffering  for  us, 
**  the  jufl:  for  the  unjuft,'*  as  the  fcripture  expref* 
feth  it. 

2.  Where  the  perfon,  upon  whom  the  punifhment 
Is  transferred,  is  likewife  a  finner,  and  obnoxious  to 
God,  there  can  be  no  injuftice  j  becaufe  he  hath  de- 
ferved  it  upon  his  own  account,  and  God  may  take 
what  occafion  he  pleafeth  to  punifh  them  that  defervc 
to  bepunifhed. 

3.  In  punifhing  "  the  iniquity  of  the  father  upon 
**  the  children,"  the  guilty  perfon,  that  is,  the  fa- 
ther, is  punifhed  in  the  calamity  of  his  children  ; 
for  a  man's  children  are  hi mfelf  multiplied  ;  and  there- 
fore it  is  very  remarkable,  that  in  the  fecond  com- 
mandment, God  promifeth  "  to  fhew  mercy  to 
*'  thoufands  of  generations  of  them  that  love  him ; 
*'  but  he  vifits  the  iniquities  of  the  fathers  upon  the 
**  children,  but  to  the  third  and  fourth  generation,'* 
that  is,  fo  far  as  man  may  live  to  fee  them  puniflied, 
and  fuffer  in  their  puui(hment. 

4.  As  to  the  punifhment  of  the  people  for  the  fins 
of  their  princes  and  governors,  and  one  part  of  a 
community  for  another,  fuppofing  all  of  them  to  be 
finners,  which  is  the  true  cafe,  God  may  lay  the  pu- 
nifhment where  he  pleafeth  ;  and  there  is  no  more  in- 
juftice than  when  a  man  is  whipt  on  the  back  for  the 
theft  which  his  hand  committed,  a  community  being 
one  body  :  befides,  the  prince  is  puniflied  in  the  lofs 
of  his  people,  the  glory  of  a  king  confifting  in  the 
multitude  of  his  fubjedts. 

The  objedion  with  refpeft  to  the  other  world, 

the 


of  rewards  and  piinijhments^  3  48^ 

the  punifhment  of  temporal  evils  with  eternal,  is  elfe-  S  E  R  M* 
where  anfwered. 

The  ufe  we  fhoiild  make  of  this  whole  dif- 
courfe  is, 

Firfl^  If  God  be  juft  and  righteous,  let  us  acknow- 
ledge it  in  all  his  difpenfations,  even  in  thofe,  the 
reafon  whereof  is  moil  hidden  and  obfcure :  Neh.  ix. 
33.  fpeaking  of  the  great  afflidlions  that  had  befal- 
len God's  own  people,  yet  this  he  lays  down  as  a 
firm  principle,  "  howbeit,  thou  art  juft  in  all  that 
"  is  brought  upon  us." 

Secondly,  this  is  matter  of  terror  to  wicked  men, 
God  doth  now  exercife  his  milder  attributes  towards 
finners,  his  mercy,  and  patience,  and  goodnefs :  but 
if  we  defpife  thefe,  that  terrible  attribute  of  his  juf- 
tice  will  difplay  itfelf  \  and  this  the  fcripture  defcribes- 
in  a  fevere  manner  ;  "  the  I^ord  revengeth,  and  is 
*'  jealous  •,  the  Lord  will  take  vengeance  on  his  ad- 
^  verfaries,  and  referveth  wrath  for  his  enemies." 

Thirdly,  this  is  matter  of  comfort  to  good  men, 
that  the  righteous  God  governs  the  world,  and  will 
judge  it :  "  the  Lord  reigneth,  let  the  earth  re- 
"  joice,"  Pfal.  xcvii.  i.  And  he  gives  the  reafon  of 
it  in  the  next  verfe  •,  "  righteoufnefs  and  judgment 
**  are  the  habitation  of  his  throne."  Though  he  be 
omnipotent,  we  need  not  fear  *,  for  his  power  is  al- 
ways under  the  condudl  of  eternal  righteoufnefs. 

Fourthly,  let  us  imitate  this  righteoufnefs  j  let  us 
endeavour  "  to  be  righteous  as  he  is  righteous  i'* 
let  us  give  to  God  the  love,  reverence,  and  obedi- 
ence which  are  due  to  him  ;  and  in  all  our  dealings, 
what  is  juft  and  due  to  men.  This  duty  hath  an 
immutable  reafon,  founded  in  the  nature  of  God. 


S  E  R- 


CXLI. 


3486  T^he  truth  of  God.  . 

SERMON    CXLI 

The  truth  of  God. 


D  E  U  T.    xxxii.  4. 

— — yf  GoT>  of  truth, 

S  E^R  M.  X  N  fpeaking  to  this  attribute,  I  fhall 

J[^     I.  Shew  you  what  we  are  to  undcrftand  by  the 
truth  of  God. 

II.  Endeavour  to  prove  that  this  perfe6lion  be- 
longs to  God,  that  he  is  "  a  God  of  truth.'* 

III.  Anfwer  fome  objedlions  that  may  be  made  a- 
gainft  it  j  and  then  make  fome  ufe  of  it. 

I.  What  we  are  to  underitand  by  the  truth  of  God. 
I  (hall  take  it  as  the  fcripture  ufeth  it  in  a  large  fenfe, 
fo  as  to  include  not  only  the  veracity  of  God,  but 
his  faithfulnefs.  Hence  it  is  that,  in  fcripture,  truth 
and  faithfulnefs  are  fo  often  put  together,  and  fre- 
quently put  one  for  another:  Ifa.  xxv.  i.  "  Thy 
"  counfels  of  old  are  faithfulnefs  and  truth."  Rev. 
xxi.  I.  "  Thefc  words  are  true  and  faithful."  And 
the  faithfulnefs  of  God,  in  performing  hispromifes, 
is  frequently  called  his  truth.  And  becaufe  the  fcrip- 
ture ufeth  them  promifcuoufly,  we  need  not  be  very 
folicitous  to  find  out  diflind  notions  of  them :  but  if 
you  will,  they  may  be  diftinguifhed  thus :  the  truth 
or  veracity  of  God  hath  place  in  every  declaration  of 
his  mind;  the  faithfulnefs  of  God,  only  in  his  pro- 
mifes. 

For  the  firft,  the  veracity  or  truth  of  God  ;  thi$ 
hath  place  in  every  declaration  of  his  mind  ;  and 
fignifics  an  exad  correfpondence  and  conformity  be- 
tween 


.  The  truth  oj  Goti.  34^7 

tWeen  his  word  and  his  mind,  and  confequently  be-  ^^3^' 
tween  his  word  and  the  truth  and  reality  of  things. 
The  correfpondence  of  his  word  with  his  mind,  de- 
pends upon  the  reditude  of  his  will ;  the  conformity 
of  his  word  with  the  reality  of  things,  not  only  up- 
on the  reditude  of  his  will,  but  the  perfection  of  his 
knowledge,  and  the  infallibility  of  his  underflanding : 
fo  that  when  we  fay  God  is  true,  or  fpeaks  truth, 
we  mean  thus,  that  his  words  are  a  plain  declaration 
of  his  mind,  and  the  true  reprefentation  of  things,  in 
oppofition  to  fallhood,  which  is  fpeaking  otherwife 
than  the  thing  is  -,  and  hypocrify,  that  is,  fpeaking  o- 
therwife  than  we  think.  For  inftance,  when  God 
declares  any  thing  to  be  fo,  or  not  to  be  fo,  to  have; 
been  thus,  or  not  to  have  been  thus  -,  the  thing  real- 
ly is  fo,  and  he  thinks  fo ;  when  he  exprelTeth  his 
defire  of  any  thing,  he  does  really  defire  it  -,  when 
he  commands  any  thing,  or  forbids  us  any  thing,  it 
is  really  his  mind  and  will  that  we  fhould  do  what  he 
commands,  and  avoid  what  he  forbids  -,  when  he  de- 
clares and  foretels  any  thing  future,  it  really  fhall 
con^e  to  pafs,  and  he  really  intended  it  fhould ;  if 
the  declaration  be  to  be  underflood  abfolutely,  it 
Ihall  abfolutely  come  to  pafs  ^  if  the  declaration  be 
to  be  underflood  conditionally,  it  fhall  come  to  pafs, 
and  he  intends  it  (hail,  if  the  condition  be  performed. 

Secondly,  the  faithfulnefs  of  God.  This  only 
hath  place  in  his  promifes,  in  which  there  is  an  obli' 
gation  of  juflice  fuperadded  to  his  word  ;  for  God, 
by  his  promife,  doth  not  only  declare  what  he  in- 
tends, and  what  fhall  be  •,  but  confers  a  right  upon 
them  to  whom  the  promife  is  made,  fo  as  that  the 
breach  of  his  promife  would  not  only  cafb  an  impu- 
taion  upon   his  truth,  but  upon  his  juflice. 

IL  That  this  perfedion  belongs  to  God.  An4 
this  I  fhall  endeavour  tq  prove, 

Voi,.  VHL  17  A  Firft, 

4 


T'he  truth  ofGoDi 

Firft,  from  the  didates  of  natural  light. 
Secondly,  from  fcripture. 

Firft,  from  the  didlates  of  natural  light.     Natu- 
ral light  tells  us,  that  truth  and  faithfulnefs  are  per- 
fections, and  confequently  belong  to  the  divine  na- 
ture ;  and  that  falfliood  and  a  lie  are  imperfedions, 
and  to  be  removed  from  God.     There  is  nothing 
that  is  efteemed  amongft  men  a  greater  contumely 
and  reproach,  than  to  give  a  man  the  lie,  to  call  him 
a  liar,  becaufe  it  is  an  argument  of  fo  much  bafcnefs, 
and  of  a  low,  and  mean,  and  fervile  fpirit  •,  the  ufli- 
al  temptation  to  it  being  fear  of  lofmg  fome  advan- 
tage, or  incurring  fome  danger.      Hence  was  that 
faying,  that  "  it  is  the  property  of  a  flave  to  lie,  but 
*'  of  a  free  man  to  fpeak  truth:"  now,  v/hafever 
argues  bafenefs  or  imperfedlion,  our  reafon  tells  us  is 
infinitely  to  be  feparated  from  the  moft  perfed  being. 
*^  God  cannot   be  tempted  with  evil,"  the  divine 
nature  being  all-fufficient,  can  have  no  temptation  to 
be  otherwife  than  good,  and  juft,  and  true,  and  faith- 
fial.     Men  are  tempted  to  lie  by  advantage,  and  out 
of  fear  :  but  the  divine  nature  hath  the  fecurity  of  it's 
fulnefs  and  all-fufficiency,  that  it  cannot  hope  for  any 
increafe,  nor  fear  any  impairment  of  it's  eft  ate.  Men 
are  unfaithful,  and  break  their  words,  either  becaufe 
they  are  rafli  and  inconfiderate  in  pafling  of  them,  or 
forgetful  in  minding  them,  or  inconftant  in  keeping 
of  them,  or  impotent  and  unable  to  perform  them  : 
but  none  of  thefe  are  incident  to  God  3  his  infinite 
wifdom,  and  perfed  knowledge,  and  clear  forefight 
of  all  events,  fecure  him  both  from  inconfideratenefs, 
and  iiiconftancy,  and  forgetfijlnefs  •,  and  his  infinite 
power  renders  him  able  to  perform  what  he  hath  ipo- 
ken,  and  to  make  good  his  word.     And  that  thefe 
are  the  natural  didlates  and  fuggeftions  of  our  minds, 
appears  clearly  from  the  reafoning  of  the  heathens 
3  '  '^ 


The  truth  of  GoTi]  34S9 

in  this  matter  ,  who  were  deftitute^of  divine  revela-  S  E  R  M. 
tion.  Plato  de  repiib.  1.  2.  lays  down  this  as  a  cer- 
tain truth,  "  that  lying  and  falfhood  are  imperfec- 
''  tions,  and  odious  to  God  and  men;  to  fjcev 
T^evS^  S  fJt.ovov  ccTTO  QscHvy  dXXoe>  ^  vtt  dvS^UTTcov 
f^io-eiroii,^'  And  afterwards  he  tells  us,  "  that  the 
"  divine  nature  is  free  from  all  temptations  hereto, 
"'  either  from  advantage  or  fear  ;  iSjc  ocfeg')v  §  evsiccc 
ai/  Gsog  i^BvaoiTO  ;  'Jtocvryi  apa  aif/gu^s^  ro  6e7ov ;"  and 
concludes,  "  therefore  God  is  true,  and  deals  plain- 
*'  ly  with  us,  both  in  his  words  and  adlions,  and  is 
"  neither  changed  himfelf,  nor  deceives  us  ."  Porphy- 
ry, in  the  life  of  Pythagoras,  tells  us,  "  that  this 
"  was  one  of  his  precepts,  fjudixig-oc  S'  aXrjBeveiv  -,  tS- 
ro  ya,^  fjLOvov  S\ivot(rda.i  rig  dvQ^c^Trag  'ttoibTv  S'e^ 
TTcc^oiirXfia't^g 'y  and  afterwards  he  adds,  "  that 
"  truth  is  fo  great  a  perfe6tion,  that  if  God-' would 
**  render  himfelf  vifible  to  men,  he  would  chufe  light 
"  for  his  body,  and  truth  for  his  foul. 

Secondly,  from  fcripture.  The  fcripture  doth  ve- 
ry frequently  attribute  this  to  God,  2  Sam.  vii.  28. 
*'  And  now,  OLord  God,  thou  art  that  God,  and 
"  thy  words  be  true.'*  Pfal.  xxv.  10.  "  All  the 
"  paths  of  the  Lord  are  mercy  and  truth.  Pfal.  xxxi. 
5.  "  Into  thine  hand  I  commit  my  fpirit ;  thou 
"  haft  redeemed  me,  O  Lord  God  of  truth."  Rev. 
iii.  7.  "  Thefe  things  faith  he  that  is  holy,  he  that 
"  is  true."  Rev.  vi.  10.  "  How  long,  O  Lord, 
*'  holy  and  true  ?"  xv.  3."  "  Juft  and  true  are  thy 
*'  ways,  thou  king  of  faints."  xvi.  7.  "  True  and 
*'  righteous  are  thy  judgments."  Hither  we  may 
refer  thofe  texts  which  fpeak  of  the  plenty  and  abun- 
dance of  God's  truth:  Ex.  xxxiv.  6.  ''  Abundant 
*'  in  goodnefs  and  truth."  Pfal.  Ixxxvi.  15.  "  Plen- 
*'  teous  in  mercy  and  truth  j"  and  thofe  which 
17  A  2  fpeak 


249^  ^^  ^r«//:?  of  God. 

S  E  R  M.  fpeak  of  the  duration  and  eternity  of  it :  Pfal.  e. 
^■^_!^  f  5.  "  And  his  truth  endureth  to  all  generations.'* 
2.     "    And  the  truth   of  the  Lord  endur- 
eth for  ever."     cxlvi.  6.  "  Who  keepeth  truth  for 


*'  ever." 


As  the  fcripture  doth  attribute  this  perfedion  to 
God,  fo  it  removes  thexontrary  from  him  with  the 
grcatefl  abhorrence  and  deteftation :  Num.  xxiii.  ig. 
*'  God  is  not  a  man,  that  he  fhould  lie,  neither  the 
*'  fon  of  man,  that  he  ftiould  repent :  hath  he  faid, 
**  and  fhall  not  he  do  it  ?  or  hath  he  fpoken,  and 
*'  fhall  he  not  make  it  good?"  They  are  Balaam's 
words,  but  God  put  them  into  his  mouth,  i  Sam, 
XV,  29.  ''  The  ftrength  of  Ifrael  will  not  lie,  nor 
^'  repent:  for  he  is  not  a  man  that  he  fhould  re- 
*^  pent."  Rom.  iii.  4.  "  Yea  let  God  be  true,  and 
"  every  man  a  liar."  Nay,  the  fcripture  goes  fur- 
ther ;  does  not  only  remove  lying,  ^  and  fallhood, 
and  inconilancy  from  God,  but  fpeaks  of  thefe  as 
things  impolTible  to  the  divine  nature :  Tit.  i.  2.  "  In 
*'  hope  of  eternal  life,  which  God  that  cannot  lie^ 
*'  promifed  before  the  world  began."  Heb.  vi.  18. 
^'  That  by  two  immutable  things,  in  which  it  was  im- 
*'  polTible  for  God  to  lie,  we  might  have  a  flrong 
^'  confolation,  who  have  fled  for  refuge  to  lay  hold 
^'  upon  the  hope  fet  before  us." 

And  the  fcripture  doth  not  only  in  general  attri- 
bute this  perfection  to  God,  but  doth  more  particu- 
larly afTure  us  of  his  fincerity  and  truth  and  faithful- 
nefs.  Of  his  fincerity  ;  that  he  deals  plainly  with  us, 
and  fpeaks  what  he  intend§,  that  his  words  are  the 
image  of  his  thoughts,  and  a  true  reprefentation  of 
his  mind.  God  is  very  careful  to  remove  this  jealou- 
fy  out  of  the  minds  of  men,  who  are  apt  to  entertain 
unworthy  thoughts  of  God,  as  if  notwithflanding 


^he  truth  of  God  .  3 49  ' 

all  that  he  hath  declared,  he  had  a  fecret  dcfign  to  ^  ^^j^- 

niin  men  ;  therefore  he  interpofeth  his  oath  for  our 

greater  afTurance,  Ezek.  xxxiii.  1 1.  "  As  I  live,  faith 

^'  the  Lord  God,  I  have  no  pleafure  in  the  death 

"  of  the  wicked,  but  that  the  wicked  turn  from  his 

•'  way,   and  live."     When  God  fpeaks  to  us,  he 

fpeaks  his  mind,   and  hath  no  defign  to  circumven|: 

and  poffefs  us  with  error  and  delufion  :  if  he  offer 

life  and  happinefs,  w€  may  believe  he  is  real ;  and 

that  if  he  did  not  intend  to  beftow  it  upon  us,  or  if 

there  were  no  fuch  thing  as  a  future  glory,  he  would 

not  have  declared  it  to  us  ;  this  was  the  temper  of 

our  Saviour,  who  was  "  the  exprefs  image  cf  the 

^*  Father,  full  of  grace  and  truth."  John  xiv.  2, 

*'  In  my  Father's  houfe  are  many  manfions ;  if  it 

^'  were  not  fo,  I  would  have  told  you." 

And  as  the  fcripture  aflures  us  of  his  fincerity,  fo 
of  his  truth  and  faithfulnefs  in  the  accomplifhnient 
of  all  his  predidlions,  and  performances  of  all  his 
promifes.  As  for  the  truth  of  his  predidions,  and 
certain  accompHlhment  of  them,  the  fcripture  fre- 
quently ufeth  this  proverbial  fpeech,  to  aflure  us  of 
the  certainty  of  their  accomplifhment  •,  *'  Heaven 
*^  and  earth  fhall  pafs  away,  but  my  words  Ihall 
"  not  pafs  away."  Mat.  xxiv.  '^^.  For  the  faith- 
fulneli  of  God  in  his  promifes,  the  fcripture  makes 
frequent  mention  of  it :  Deut.  vii.  9.  "  Know  there- 
"  fore  that  the  Lord  thy  God,  he  is  God,  the 
*^  faithful  God,  which  keepeth  covenant  and  mer- 
cy." Pfal.  Ixxxix.  3g,  34.  ^*  I  will  not  fufFer 
my  faithfulnefs  to  fail :  my  Covenant  will  I  not 
*'  break,  nor  alter  the  thing  that  is  gone  out  of  my 
^'  lips."  The  fcripture  doth  record  God's  pun6lu- 
aland  full  performance  of  his  promifes,  particular- 
ly of  that  promifc  to  Abraham,  after  four  hundred 

years. 


fii 


J492  I'he  truth  of  GoT>. 

S  E  R  M.  years,  to  bring  the  children  of  Ifrael  out  of  Egypt, 
^'  and  to  give  them  the  Land  of  Canaan  for  an  in- 
*'  heritance,"  Gen.  xv.  13.  the  pundtual  accom- 
plifhment  you  have  recorded  Ex.  xii.  41.  "  And 
*'  it  came  to  pafs  at  the  end  of  the  four  hundred  and 
**  thirty  years,  even  the  felf  fame  day  it  came  to 
*'  pafs,  that  all  the  hofls  of  the  Lord  went  out 
"  from  the  land  of  Egypt."  See  likewife  Jof.  xxi. 
44,  45.  and  xxiii.  14.  i  Kings  viii.  c^6.  And  upon 
this  account  it  is  that  God  is  fo  frequently  in  fcrip- 
lure  fly  led  "  the  God  that  keepeth  covenant," 
I  Kings  viii.  23.  Neh.  i.  5.  ix.  32.  and  in  feveral 
other  places.  And  fo  likewife  of  predi6tions  of  evil 
to  come,  God  is  true  in  fulfilling  his  word,  i  Sam, 
XY.  29.  When  the  prophet  had  threatened  Saul  to 
rent  the  kingdom  from  him,  he  adds,  "  the  Itrength 
*'  of  Ifrael  will  not  lie,  nor  repent  j  for  he  is  not  a 
"  man  tliat  he  jfhould  repent." 

III.  I  come  to  remove  fome  objedlions  that  may 
be  made  againft  the  truth  and  faithfulnefs  of  God. 

Firfl,  It  is  objedted  againft  the  fmcerity  of  God, 
and  his  plain  deahng,  that  he  is  fometimes  reprefent- 
ed  in  fcripture,  as  infpiring  prophets  with  falfe  mef- 
fages,  I  Kings  xxii.  20,  &:c.  Jer.  iv.  10.  xx.  7. 
Ezek.  xiv.  9. 

Anf.  As  to  three  of  thefe  texts,  it  is  a  known  He- 
braifm  to  exprefs  things  in  an  imperative  and  a6live 
form,  which  are  to  be  under ftood  only  permilTively. 
So  where  "  the  devils  befought  Christ,  that  he 
^  would  fuffer  them  to  enter  into  the  herd  of  fwine, 
*'  he  faid  unto  them,  go,"  Mat.  viii.  31.  He  did 
not  command,  but  permit  them,  -  And  fo  John  xiii. 
27.  where  our  Saviour  fays  to  Judas,  *'  what  tiiou 
*'  doll,  do  quickly  ;"  we  are  not  to  underfland, 
that  he  commanded  him  to  betray  him,  though  that 

feem 


T'he  truth  of  Cod.  3493 

feem  to  be  exprefled  in  the  form.  So  likewife  here,  S  E  R  M. 
where  an  evil  fpirit  offered  himfelf  to  be  "  a  lying  ^^^^* 
*'  fpirit  in  the  mouth  of  the  prophet:"  and  God  fays, 
"  go  forth,  and  do  fo  \  this  only  fignifies  a  permif- 
fion,  not  a  command.  And  fo  Jer.  iv.  lo.  vrhere 
the  prophet  complains  that  God  had  greatly  deceiv- 
ed the  people,  "  faying,  they  fhould  have  peace, 
*'  when  the  fword  reached  to  the  foul ;"  we  are  to 
underftand  this  no  otherwife,  but  that  God  permitted 
the  falfe  prophets  to  deceive  them,  prophefying 
peace  to  them  -,  as  appears  by  the  hiilory.  Ezek. 
xiv.  9.  "  I  the  Lord  have  deceived  that  prophet,'* 
that  is,  permitted  him  to  be  deceived,  and  to  de- 
ceive the  people,"  as  a  juft  judgment  upon  them  for 
their  infidelity,  with  relped  10  his  true  prophets. 
This  he  threatens  at  the  5th  verfe  j  "  I  will  take  the 
^'  houfe  of  Ifrael  in  their  own  heart,  becaufe  they  are 
"  all  eitranged  from  me  through  their  idols  ;"  be- 
caufe they  have  chofen  to  themfelves  falfe  gods,  I  will 
fuffer  them  to  be  deceived  with  falfe  prophets  :  and 
that  this  is  the  meaning,  appears  by  the  threatening 
added,  "  and  I  will  flretch  my  hand  upon  him,  and 
*'  I  will  deftroy  him  from  the  midfl  of  the  people,* 
Now  God  will  riot  punilh  that  whereof  he  is  the 
author. 

That  text,  Jer.  xx.  7.  "  Thou  haft  deceived  me, 
*'  and  I  was  deceived,"  fignifies  no  more,  but  that 
he  had  miftaken  the  promife  of  God  to  him,  who 
when  he  gave  him  his  commilTion,  told  him  he 
would  be  with  him,  by  which  he  underftood  that 
'HO  evil  fhould  come  to  him,  and  "  now  he  was  be* 
*'  come  a  derifion,  and  the  people  mocked  him  j'* 
and  in  his  pafTion  and  weaknefs  he  breaks  forth  into 
this  expreffion,  "  thou  haft  deceived  me,  and  I  was 
^J  deceived,"  whereas  it  was  jiis  own  miftake  of  the 

meaning 


3494  '^^^  ^^^^^  ofQoi). 

S  E  R  M.  meaning  of  God's  promife,  which  was  not  that  he 
fhould  hot  meet  with  fcorn^  and  oppofition,  and  pcr- 
fecution,  but  that  they  fliould(not  prevail  againft  him, 
as  you  may  fee  at  the  latter  end  of  the  firft  chapter. 

Second  objc6hion  againft  the  faithfulnefs  of  God 
as  to  performance  of  his  promife.  It  is  objeded,  that 
God  did  not  give  the  children  of  Ifracl  all  the  land 
which  he  promifed  to  Abraham  *,  as  will  appear  by 
comparing  Gen.  xviii.  19,  20.  with  Jofh.  xiii.  i. 
&c.  and  Judg.  ii.  20,  21.  Gen.  xv.  18.  God  pro- 
mifed to  give  Abraham  and  his  feed  fuch  a  land, 
the  bounds  whereof  he  defcribes  Jofh.  xiii.  i.  'Tis 
faid  there,  that  "  there  remained  very  much  land" 
yet  unconquered,  which  they  had  not  got  the  poiTef- 
fion  of.  And  Judg.  ii.  20.  it  is  faid,  that  the  peo- 
ple having  not  performed  their  part  of  the  covenant, 
God  would  fufpend  the  farther  performance  of  his 
promife,  and  would  not  drive  out  any  more  of  the 
nations  before  them  ;  and  it  is  probable  that  the  Ifra- 
elites  never  were  pofTefTed  of  the  promifed  land  in 
the  full  latitude  and  extent  of  the  promife. 

Anf.  This  covenant  of  God  with  Abraham,  was 
upon  confideration  of  his  paft  faith  and  obedience, 
though  it  feems  the  full  performance  of  it  did  like- 
wife  depend  upon  the  future  obedience  of  his  pofteri- 
ty  ;  in  purfuance  of  this  covenant,  notwithftanding 
all  the  murmurings  and  rebellions  of  that  people, 
God  did  bring  them  into  the  promifed  land,  though 
**  they  provoked  him  to  deftroy  them  many  a  time  j 
"  becaufe  he  remembred  his  covenant  with  Abra- 
"  ham  ;"  when  they  were  poITelTed  of  it,  God  gave 
them  a  title  to  the  reft,  and  would  have  aflifted- 
them  in  the  conqueft  of  it,  if  they  had  performed 
the  condition  required  on  their  part,  that  is,  conti- 
nued faithful  and  obedient  to  him ;  but  they  did  not, 

and 


ne  truth  of  God.  3495 

and  thereby  difcharged  God  from  any  further  per-  S  ERM. 
formance  of  his  promife ;  and  God,  when  he  had 
done  this,  had  fully  performed  the  covenant  he  made 
with  Abraham,  fo  far  as  concerned  his  part,  as  ap- 
pears by  the  acknowledgment  of  Jofhua,  even  in  a 
time  when  a  great  part  of  the  land  was  unconquered, 
Jofh.  xxi.  44.  and  of  Solomon,  i  Kings  viii.  ^6, 
yea,  and  had  it  not  been  that  God  had  made  this 
covenant,  as  well  upon  conlideration  of  Abraham's 
faith  and  obedience,  as  upon  condition  of  the  future 
obedience  of  his  poflerity,  the  rebellions  and  difo- 
bedience  of  the  people  in  the  wildernefs  had  releafed 
God  wholly  from  the  promife  ^  and  he  had  not  been 
unfaithful  if  he  had  deftroyed  utterly  that  people, 
"  and  made  a  full  end  of  them,"  and  they  had  ne- 
ver entred  into  that  land  ;  becaufe  a  failure  of  the 
condition  doth  make  the  obligation  to  ceafe:  and 
that  this  condition  was  implied  in  this  covenant  with 
Abraham,  appears  by  thefe  texts,  Deut.  vii.  12,  13. 
xi.  22,  23,  32.  and  Judg.  ii.  20  ,21.  God  gives  this 
reafon  why  he  fufpended  the  complete  performance 
of  his  promife  -,  ''  The  anger  of  the  Lord  was  hot 
"  againfb  Ifrael,  and  he  faid,  Becaufe  that  this  peo- 
"  pie  hath  tranfgrefred  my  covenant  which  I  com- 
*'  manded  their  fathers,  and  have  not  hearkened  to 
*'  my  voice,  I  alfo  v/ill  not  henceforth  drive  out 
*'  any  from  before  them,  of  the  nations  which  Jo- 
*'  Ihua  left  when  he  died." 

Third  objedlion  :  God  is  not  pun6lual  in  perform^ 
ing  his  threatenings  ;  as  when  he  threatened  Adam, 
Gen.  ii.  17.  "  In  the  day  thou  eateft  thereof  thou 
"  ihak  furely  die  •,"  which  yet  was  not  accomphfh- 
ed,  for  he  lived  many  hundred  years  after.  God 
threatened  Ahab  "  to  bring  evil  upon  him  and  his 
*'  family,"   i  Kings  xxi.  21.    But,  upon  his  huanU- 

ypL.  VIII.  17  B  ation^ 

4 


2  49  6  ^b^  truth  of  God. 

S  E  KM.  ation,  he  is  pleafed  to  refpite  it,  ver.  29.  So  God 
^^_^,  threatned  Hezekiah  with  death,  but,  upon  his 
prayer,  "  adds  iifteen  years  to  his  life."  2  Kings  xx. 
Thus  Nineveh  was  threatened,  but,  upon  their  repen- 
tance, "God  repented  of  the  evil,"  Jon,  iii.  10, 
Now  how  is  this  deferring  and  turning  away  of  judg- 
ment confident  with  the  truth  of  God?  doth  not 
this  feem  to  charge  him  with  falfhood  or  levity  ? 

Anf  This  may  be  faid  in  general,  that  every  one 
that  underftands  the  nature  of  God,  cannot  but  be 
very  well  affured,  that  falfhood  and  levity  are  very 
far  from  God  ;  and  though  he  could  not  untie  fomc 
particular  knots,  and  anfwer  all  difficulties,  yet  he 
ought  to  reft  fatisfied  in  this  afTurance.  I  confefs 
this  objeftion  is  troublefom,  and  requires  a  diftindt 
confideration.  I  will  not  be  peremptory  in  nice 
matters,  but  I  fhall,  with  fubmilTion,  offer  thefc 
things  in  anfwer  to  it. 

I.  As  for  the  expreflion  of  God's  repenting,  we 
are  to  underftand  it,  as  many  others  in  fcripture> 
after  the  manner  of  men,  and  fpoken  by  way  of  cpn-  . 
defcenfion  to  our  weaknefs,  and  accommodated  to 
pur  capacities,  and  not  as  cafting  any  imputation  of 
falfhood  or  inconftancy  upon  God,  as  if  either  he  did 
not  intend  what  he  faith,  or  out  of  levity  did  alter 
his  mind.  When  God  is  faid  to  repent,  the  ex- 
preffion  only  fignifies  thus  much,  that  God  doth  not 
execute  that  which  feemed  to  us  to  have  been  his 
purpofe,  that  he  is  pleafed  to  do  otherwife  than  his 
threatenings  feemed  openly  to  exprefs,  becaufe  of 
fome  tacit  condition  implied  in  them ;  and  this  doth 
not  derogate  either  from  the  truth,  or  fincerity,  or 
conftancy  of  God,  in  his  word.  Not  from  his  truth  ; 
for  he  fpeaks  what  he  intends  really,  if  fomething 
did  not  intervene  to  prevent  the  judgment  threatened  5 

upoij 


^he  truth  ofGoryl  3497 

upon  which  he  was  refolved,  when  he  threatened,  SERM. 
to  be  taken  off,  and  Hop  his  judgments  :  nor  doth 
it  derogate  from  his  fincerity  and  plainnefs  •,  for  he 
hath  told  us  that  his  threatenings  haVe  fuch  conditions 
imphed  in  them  :  nor  doth  it  derogate  from  thd 
conftancy  and  imm.utability  of  God;  becaufe  God 
doth  not  mutare  conftlium^  fed  fententiam  ;  he  doth 
not  change  his  counfei  and  purpofe,  but  takes  off 
the  fentence,  which  he  had  paiTed  with  refer ved 
conditions. 

2.  As  to  the  inftances,  that  I  may  give  more  par- 
ticular fatisfadion  to  them,  I  fb.all  confider  the  threat- 
enings of  God  with  this  double  refpe^l,  either  with 
relation  to  a  law,  or  with  relation  to  the  event  •,  with 
relation  to  a  law,  as  they  are  the  fancflion  of  it :  or 
with  relation  to  the  event,  as  they  are  predictions  of 
fomething  to  come. 

(i.)  Some  threatenings  have  only  relation  to  a 
law,  as  they  are  the  fandion  of  it.  And  thus  con- 
fidered,  they  differ  from  promifes  •,  for  promifes  con- 
fer a  right,  omne  promijjum  cadit  in  debit um  ;  but  a 
threatening  doth  not  convey  any  right,  nor,  if  for- 
born,  can  the  party  complain  of  wrong  done  to  him  ; 
and  therefore,  in  this  cafe,  it  can  only  fignify  what 
the  offence  againft  the  law  deferves,  and  what  the 
offender  may  expedl ;  for  the  end  of  threatening  is 
not  punifhment,  but  the  avoiding  of  it.  And  this 
may  anfwer  the  firll  inftance.  God  gave  Adam  a 
law  ;  and,  by  way  of  fanClion,  not  of  predicSlion 
of  an  event,  he  threatened  the  breach  of  it  with 
death  :  now  God  did  not  execute  the  punifhment 
threatened  at  the  time  threatened,  but  deferred  it, 
;and  this  without  any  impeachment  of  his  juftice  or 
truth,  becaufe  this  threatening  was  only  the  fandlion 
©f  the  law, 

17  B  2  (2O  We 


349^  *         ^he  truth  of  G<^Vi. 

^cx^r^'      ^^'-^  We  may  confidcr  threatenings  with  relation 
to  the  event,  and  as  predidions  \  and  as  to  the  ac- 
comphfhment  of  thefe,  there  feems  to  be  a  greater 
degree  of  necelTity,  becaufe  the  honour  of  God's 
knowledge,  and  power,  and  truth  feem  to  be  con- 
cerned in  them  \  for  if  his  word  be  not  fulfilled,  it 
muft  either  be  for  want  of  kr^owledge  to  forefee 
events,  or  power  to  bring  them  to  pafs,  or  conftan- 
cy  to  his  word.     Now  if  we  confider  threatenings 
with  refpe6l  to  the  event,  as  they  are  predi6lions  of 
future  judgments,  I  think  all  the  other  inilances  may 
be  fatisfied,  by  laying  down  this  rule  for  the  under- 
ftanding  of  them,  viz.  "  That  all  prophetical  threat- 
*^  enings  or  predidions  of  judgments  are  to  be  under- 
*'  flood  with  this  tacit  condition,  if  there  do  not  in- 
^'  tervene  the  humiliation,  and  repentance,  and  prayer 
**  of  the  perfons  againft  whom  the  judgment  is 
"  threatened ;  and  if  fo,  God  may,  upon  repentance, 
*'  without  any  impeachment  of  the  honour  of  his 
"  truth,  or  knowledge,  or  power,   either  defer,  or 
"  abate,  or  remit  the  punifhment."     And  that  the 
predidtions  of  judgments  are  to  be  underllood  with 
this  condition,  appears  clearly  from  that  known  text> 
Jer.  xviii.  7,  8. 

I  come  now  to  the  laft  thing  I  propofed,  to  make 
fome  ufe  of  this  dodlrine. 

Firft,  If  God  be  a  "God  of  truth,"  then  this 
gives  us  afllirance  that  he  doth  not  deceive  us,  that 
the  faculties  which  he  hath  given  us  are  not  falfe  y 
but  when  they  have  clear  perceptions  of  things, 
they  do  not  err  and  miftake.  Were  it  not  for  the 
veracity  of  God,  we  might,  for  any  thing  we  know, 
be  under  a  conftant  delufion  ;  and  no  man  could  de- 
monflrate  the  contrary,  but  that  this  is  our  make,- 
imd  ©ur  temper,  and  the  very  frame  of  our  under- 

derftandr 


^e  truth  o/GoU,  3499 

dcrftandings,  to  be  then  moft  of  all  deceived,  wheji  S  E  R  M 
we  think  our  felves  to  be  moft  certain ;  I  fiiy,  no 
man  could  be  aflured  of  the  contrary,  but  from  hence, 
becaufe  veracity  and  truth  is  a  divine  perfedion  ;  and 
therefore  God  cannot  be  the  author  of  error  and  de- 
lufion.  Therefore  we  may  be  aiTurcd,  .that  the  frame 
of  our  underftanding  is  not  a  cJieat,  but  that  our  fa- 
culties, are  true,  and  unlefs  it  be  our  own  fault,  we 
need  not  be  deceived  in  things  that  are  neceiTary  to 
our  happinefs. 

Secondly,  If  God  be  ''  a  God  of  truth,'*  then 
there  is  reafon  why  we  fliould  believe  and  affent  to 
whatever  we  are  fatisfied  is  revealed  to  us  by  God, 
A  divine  revelation  is  a  fufficient  ground  for  the 
moft  firm  alTent  -,  for  this  very  thing,  that  any  thing 
is  revealed  by  God,  is  the  higheft  evidence,  and 
ought  to  give  us  the  moft  firm  alTurance  of  the  truth 
of  it.  Hence  it  is,  that  the  word  of  God  is  called 
'*  the  word  of  truth,"  yea,  and  ''  truth  itfelf/* 
John  xvii.   17.  "  Thy  word  is  truth." 

Therefore  whoever  entertains  the  fcriptures  as  the 
word  of  God,  and  is  fati^fied  of  the  divine  authori- 
ty of  them,  ought,  in  reafon,  to  believe  every  thing 
contained  in  them,  yea,  though  there  be  fome  things 
of  which  no  reafonable  account  can  be  given,  and 
which  our  reafon  and  underflanding  cannot  give  us 
particular  fatisfadion  in ;  yet,  becaufe  we  are  fatiP 
fied  that  they  are  revealed  by  God^  "  who  cannot 
"  lie,"  whofc  knowledge  is  infallible,  and  whofe 
word  is  true,  we  ought,  upon  this  higher  and  fupe- 
rior  reafon,  to  yield  a  firm  afient  to  the  truth  of  them  -: 
if  we  do  not,  wc  difhonour  this  perfection  of  God, 
and  rob  him  of  this  effcntial  property,  his  veracity. 
I  John  V.  10.  "he  that  believeth  on  the  fon  of  God, 
*_'  hath  the  witnefs  in  himfelf :  he  that  believeth  not 

"  God, 


3500  ne  truth  of  God. 

S  E  R  M.  «  God,  hath  made  him  a  liar,  becaufe  he  believeth 

CXLI. 

*'  not  the  record  that  God  gave  of  his  fon."  As, 
on  the  other  hand,  if  we  do  beUeve  what  God  hath 
revealed,  we  glorify  this  perfedtion  of  his,  and  fet 
our  feal  to  his  veracity.  So  it  is  faid  of  Abraham, 
Rom.  iv.  20.  That  "  he  was  ftrong  in  faith,  giving 
*'  glory  to  God."  And  St.  John  the  baptifl,  fpeak- 
ingconcerningour  SAViouR,faith,  Johniii.  33.  "He 
*'  that  hath  received  his  teftimony,  hath  fet  to  his 
"  feal,  that  God  is  true." 

Thirdly,if  God  be  "  a  God  of  truth,"and  faithful 
in  performing  his  promife,  then  here  is  a  firm  foun- 
dation for  our  hope  and  truft.  If  God  have  made 
any  promife,  we  may  fecurely  rely  upon  it,  that  it 
ihall  be  made  good ;  we  may  "  hold  faft"  our  hope 
**  without  wavering,  becaufe  he  is  faithful  who  hath 
•^  promifed,"  Heb.  x.  23.  H«nce  it  is  that  the 
bleflings  of  God's  covenant  are  called  "  fure  mer-» 
♦*  cies,"  Ifa.  Iv.  3. 

We  attribute  much  to  the  word  of  a  faithful  friend, 
and  look  upon  the  promife  of  an  honeft  man  as  very 
good  fecurity ;  but  men  may  fail  us  when  we  rely 
upon  them :  but "  God  is  true,"  though  "  all  men 
*'  fhould  prove  liars."  Men  are  fickle  and  muta- 
ble ;  but  the  nature  of  God  is  fixed,  he  cannot  fail 
thofe  that  tmft  in  him.  When  God  hath  made  any  pro- 
naifc  to  us,  we  may  plead  it  with  him,  and  urge  him 
with  his  faithfulnefs.  So  we  find  David  did,  2  Sam. 
Vii.  25,  &c. 

Only  we  Ihould  be  careful  to  perform  the  conditi- 
on which  is  required  on  our  part,  Heb.  iv.  i.  wc 
fliould  "  take  heed,  left  a  promife  being  left  us,  any 
•'  one  fhould  come  Ihort  of  it,"  by  not  performing 
the  condition ;  for  that  doth  releafe  and  difcharge 
iiim  of  the  promife  i  and  he  is  faithful,  though  he 

dgth 


^he  truth  of  God^  350  5 

doth  not  perform  what  he  promifed,  bccaufc  he  did  S  E  R  M. 
not  promife,  but  upon  condition  :  and  this  fecms  to 
be  the  meaning  of  thofe  words,  2  Tim.  ii.  13.  "  If 
*'  we  believe  not,  yet  he  abideth  faithful,  he  cannot 
*'  denyhimfelf."  He  faid  before,  that  if  we  per- 
form the  conditions  required,  God  will  beflow  the 
bleffings  promifed :  "  it  is  a  faithful  faying  ;  for  if 
*'  we  be  dead  with  him,  we  Ihall  alfo  live  with  him ; 
"  if  we  fufrer,  we  fhall  alfo  reign  with  him  :  but  if 
*'  we  deny  him,"  the  curfe  threatened  will  then  take 
place,  and  ''  he  will  deny  us/'  and  God  is  not  un- 
faithful in  doing  this,  he  does  not  deny  himfelf. 

Now  if  we  have  fach  afTurance,  we  may  truft  him 
with  our  greateft  concernments,  and  venture  our 
fouls  with  him :  Pfal.  xx::i.  5.  "  Into  thine  hand  I 
"  com.mit  my  Ipirit ;  thou  haft  redeemed  me,  O 
*'  Lord  God  of  truth.  We  fhould  rely  upon  him, 
when  there  are  the  greateft  improbabilities  of  the  ac- 
compliftiment  of  his  promifes.  Thus  did  Abraham^ 
Rom.  iv.  17,  &c. 

This  ftiould  make  us  alfo  "  patient  in  hope  :"  if 
a  promife  be  not  ipeedily  accompliftied,  we  ftiould 
not  be  dejedted  or  difquieted.  David  challengeth 
himfelf  upon  this  account,  Pfal.  xlii.  11.  "  Why 
*^  art  thou  caft  down,  O  my  foul  ?  and  why  art  thoq 
*'  difquieted  within  me  ?  Hope  thou  in  God  •,  for  I 
"  ftiall  yet  praife  him,  who  is  the  health  of  my  coun- 
*'  tenance,  and  my  God." 

Fourthly,  the  truth  of  God  is  matter  of  terror  ta 
the  wicked.  All  the  threatenings  of  temporal  evils 
may  juftly  be  expe6led,  becaufe  their  fins  deferve 
them,  and  there  is  no  condition  impHed  in  them, 
upon  which  thou  canft  reafonably  hope  for  the  avoid- 
ing or  abating  of  the  evils  threatened,  but  of  humili- 
ation and  repentance  J  and  if,  notwithftanding  thefe 
4  threatening^ 


3502  The  truth  of  God. 

S  E  R  M.  threatcnlngs,  thou  continued  in  thy  fins,  and  "  bJef- 
"  fell  thy  fclf,  laying,  I  fhall  have  peace,  though 
*'  thou  walk  in  the  imaginations  of  thy  heart  •,"  by 
this  very  thing  thou  provoked  the  juftice  of  God, 
'^  not  to  fpare  thee,"  and  makefl  "  his  wrath  and 
*'  his  jealoufy  to  fnioke  againft  thee;"  and  if  thou 
continued  impenitent,  however  he  may  defer  the  ex- 
ecution of  temporal  evils,  his  truth  and  veracity  is 
concerned  to  inflict  eternal  puniihments  upon  thee  ; 
for  "  he  hath  fworn  in  his  wrath,"  that  fuch  "  diall 
*^  not  enter  into  his  red." 

Fifthly,  let  us  propound  to  ourfelves  the  truth  of 
God  for  our  pattern  and  imitation,  would  you  be 
like  God  ?  be  true  and  taithful.  Truth  and  faith- 
fulncfs  are  divine  perfedlions  ^  but  lying  and  faldiood 
are  the  properties  of  the  devil,  and  the  predominant 
qualities  of  hell.  The  character  of  the  devil  is, 
chat  '^  he  abode  not  in  the  truth,  and  there  is  no 
**  truth  in  him  -,  when  hefpeaketh  a  lie,  it  is  of  his 
*'  own  ;  for  he  is  a  liar,  and  the  father  of  it."  John 
viii.  44. 

One  of  the  mod  natural  notions  that  we  have  of  reli- 
gionis,  that  it  is  to  imitate  God,  and  to  endeavour  to 
be  hke  him,  fo  far  as  we  are  capable  -,  and  to  con- 
tradid  any  of  the  divine  excellencies  and  perfedlions, 
is  the  highed  fin  ;  becaufe  it  is  againd  the  cleared  dic- 
tates of  our  mind,  and  contrary  to  thofe  principles 
which  are  mod  deeply  rooted  in  our  nature.  No 
man  can  be  cruel  and  unmerciful,  falfe  and  trea- 
cherous, without  a  very  high  degree  of  guilt  •,  be- 
caufe thefe  fins  are  contrary  to  the  chiefcd  and  mod 
ciTential  perfe6lions  of  God.  Lying  is  a  dn  that 
would  fly  in  the  face  of  an  heathen,  becaufe  it  diredl- 
ly  contradi6ls  thofe  natural  notions  which  every  man 
hath  of  God  and  religion  j    therefore  we  find  thae 

■^  there 


^he  truth  of  God.  35^3 

there  is  hardly  any  thing  that  men  are  more  alham-  S  E  R  M. 
ed  of,  than  to  be  taken  in  a  lie,  and  it  is  eileemed 
the  higheft  reproach  to  be  charged  with  it ;  it  argues 
fuch  a  diredl  contrariety  to  that  which  is  the  rule  of 
perfe(5lion,  "  the  nature  of  God,"  and  confequent- 
ly  fo  much  imperfedlion  and  bafenefs  ;  he  that  tells 
a  lie  out  of  fear,  is  at  once  bold  towards  God,  and 
bafe  towards  men. 

Upon  thefe  accounts  God  exprefTeth  himfelf  high- 
ly offended  with  thofe  that  pra6life  lying  and  falf- 
hoodj  and  to  have  a  deteftation  of  them  ♦,  Prov.  xii. 
2'2.  "  Lying  lips  are  an  abomination  to  the  Lord.'* 
It  renders  us  unlike  to  him  ;  Eph.  iv.  24^  25.  "  Put 
"  on  the  new  man,  which  after  God  is  created  in 
"  righteoufnefs  and  true  holinefs  (or  in  the  holinefs 
*'  of  truth.")  And  from  hence  he  infers,  *' where- 
*'  fore  putting  away  lying,  fpeak  every  man  truth 
*'  to  his  neighbour:  for  we  are  members  one  of 
*'  another,"  Col.  iii.  9,  10.  "  Lie  not  one  to  an- 
*'  other,  feeing  that  ye  have  put  off  the  old  man 
"  with  his  deeds  j  and  have  put  on  the  new  man^ 
*'  which  is  renewed  in  knowledge,  after  the  image 
"  of  him  that  created  him^"  that  is,  beeaufe  we 
profefs  to  be  conformed  to  the  image  of  God.  More 
particularly,  we  fhould  charge  our  felves  With  truth 
and  faithfuinefs  towards  God  and  men. 

I.  Towards  GoD,in  our  oaths,  and  vows,  and  cove- 
nants. In  our  oaths,  when  we  fwear  in  any  matter^ 
we  tell  God  that  what 'we  fpeak  is  truth,  and  invoke 
him  to  bear  witnefs  to  it.  To  falfify  in  an  oath  is 
one  of  the  moft  folemn  affronts  that  we  can  put 
upon  the  God  of  truth. 

And  fo  in  our  vows,  which  are  a  folemn  promife 
to  God,  of  fuch  things  in  which  we  have  no  prece- 
dent obligation  lying  upon  us.     He  that  r^gardeth 

Vol.  VIIL  17  C  truth 

4- 


CXLI. 


3  j; 04     '  ^he  truth  of  God. 

SE^M.  truth  will  neither  be  ralh  in  making  avow,  nor 
carelefs  to  perform  it.  Ecclef.  v.  4.  "  When  thou 
"  voweft  a  vow  to  God,  defer  not  to  pay  it,  for  he 
*'  hath  no  pleafure  in  fools,"  Not  to  perform  what 
we  have  vowed,  is  an  argument  of  folly  ;  either  of 
rafhnefs  in  the  making  of  it,  or  of  inconftancy  in 
not  keeping  it. 

So  hkewife  in  all  our  covenants  with  God,  to 
ferve  him  and  obey  him,  and  keep  his  command- 
ments, we  fhould  diredlly  charge  our  felves  with 
performance  of  thefe.  There  is  a  natural  obligati- 
on upon  us  to  thefe  things  from  the  very  law  of  our 
creation,  though  we  fhould  never  folemnly  make 
any  fuch  promife,  nor  enter  into  any  fuch  engage- 
ments, becaufe  it  is  a  tacit  condition  of  our  beings : 
"but  the  taking  of  this  covenant  folemnly  upon  us  in 
baptifm,  ftrengthens  the  obligation,  and  makes  our 
unfaithfulnefs  the  greater  fin.  All  our  hopes  of  hap- 
pinefs  are  founded  in  the  faithfulnefs  of  God  ;  and 
if  thou  be  falfe  to  him,  how  canft  thou  expedt  he 
fhould  be  faithful  to  thee  ?  It  is  true  indeed,  that 
*'  he  abides  faithful,  he  cannot  deny  himfelf  ;"  but 
if  thou  hall  any  ingenuity  in  thee,  this  fhould  be  an 
argument  to  thee  to  be  faithful  to  him ;  I  am  fure 
this  can  be  no  encouragement  to  thee  to  be  unfaith- 
ful :  for  if  thou  breakefh  the  covenant  thou  haft  en- 
tred  into,  and  negle6teft  the  conditions  upon  which 
God  hath  fufpended  the  performance  of  his  promife, 
thou  difchargeft  the  obligation  on  his  part. 

2.  Towards  men  :  we  fhould  charge  our  felves 
with  truth  in  all  our  words,  and  faithfulnefs  in  all 
our  promifes.  It  becomes  us  who  worfliip  "  the 
*'  God  of  truth,"  to  fpeak  truth ;  to  ufe  plainnefs 
and  fmcerity  in  all  our  words,  to  abhor  falfhood  and 
diflimulation,  and  thofe  more  refined  ways  of  lying, 

3  ^y 


The  truth  of  God.  35^5 

by  equivocation  of  words,  and  fecret  refervations  of  S  E  R  M. 
our  minds,  on  purpofe  to  deceive.  Thofe  that  plead 
for  thefe,  it  is  a  fign  they  do  not  underftand  the  na- 
ture of  God,  and  of  religion;  which  is,  to  conform 
our  felves  to  the  divine  perfections.  We  meet  with 
many  complaints  in  the  old  teftament,  of  the  want 
of  truth  and  faithfulnefs  among  men,  Pfal.  xii.  i,  2. 
Ifa.  lix.  13,  14,  15.  Jer.  vii.  2,  8,9.  ii.  4,  5,  6.  Hof. 
iv.  I .  I  am  afraid  there  is  as  much  reafon  for  this 
complaint  now ;  for  we  live  in  an  age  of  greater 
light,  which  doth  reprove  and  make  manifeft  this 
work  of  darknefs  ;  and  methinks  there  is  no  fadder 
fign  of  the  decay  of  Chriftianity,  and  of  the  little 
power  and  influence  that  the  gofpel  hath  upon  us, 
than  that  there  is  fo  little  regard  had  by  Chriftians  to 
thefe  moral  duties,  which,  becaufe  moral,  (how- 
ever men  may  flight  that  word)  are  therefore  of  eter- 
nal and  indifpenfable  obligation,  having  their  foun- 
dation in  the  nature  of  God. 

To  conclude  all :  that  man  that  can  difpenfe  with 
himfelf  as  to  moral  duties,  that  makes  no  confcience 
of  telling  a  lie,  or  breaking  his  word,  what  badge 
foever  he  may  wear,  what  title  foever  he  may  call 
himfelf  by,  it  is  as  impoflible  that  fuch  a  man  fhould 
be  a  true  Chrifl:ian,  as  it  is  to  reconcile  "  the  God  of 
"  truth,"  and  "  the  father  of  lies." 


17  C  2      '  SER- 


35o6 


CLxir. 


SERMON     CXLII, 

The  holinefs  of  God. 


I  PET.   i.  i6. 

Be  ye  holy^  for  I  am  holy, 

^r^r  Y??'  T-^  fpeaking  to  this  attribute,  I  fliall, 

X     I-  Inquire,  what  we  are  to  underfland  by   fhc 
holinefs  of  God. 

II.  Endeavour  to  fhew,  that  this  perfection  belongs, 
to  God. 

I.  What  we  are  to  underfland  by  the  holinefs  of 
God.  There  is  feme  difficulty  in  fixing  the  proper 
notion  of  it ;  for  though  there  be  no  property  more 
frequently  attributed  to  God,  in  fcripture,  than  this 
of  holinefs,  yet  there  is  none  of  all  God's  attri- 
butes, which  divines  have  fpoken  more  fparingly  of,, 
than  this. 

The  general  notion  of  holinefs  is,  that  it  is  a  fe- 
paration  from  a  common  and  ordinary,  to  a  peculiar 
^nd  excellent  ufe.     And  this  notion  of  holinefs  is  ap- 
plicable either  to  things  or  perfons.     To  things  ;, 
thus  the  vefTels  of  the  tabernacle,  and  the  veflments 
of  the  priefls,  were  faid  to  be  holy,  bccaufe  they 
were  feparated  from  common  ufe,  and  appropriated 
to  the  peculiar  and  excellent  ufe  of  the  fervice  of 
God.     Hohnefs  of  perfons  is  two-fold  \  either  rela- 
tive and  external,  which  fignifies  the  peculiar  relati- 
on of  a  perfon  to  God  ;  fuch  were  called,  tspsr^, 
priefls,  or  holy  men  :  or  elfe  habitual  and  inherent ; 
|uch  is  the  holinefs  of  good  men,  and  it  is  a  feparation 
from  moraj  imperfedion,  that  is,  from  fin  and  im^ 

purity  5 


^heholinefs  of  Govt.  ^$oy 

purity  :  and  this  is  called  oa-iorvig,  and  the  primary  ^^i^Jf' 
notion  of  it  is  negative,  and  fignifies  the  abfence  and  *^ss>^^^ 
remotion  of  fin.  And  this  appears  in  thofe  expli- 
cations which  the  fcripture  gives  of  it.  Thus  it  is 
explained  by  oppofition  to  fin  and  impurity,  2  Cor. 
vii.  I.  "  Let  us  cleanfe  our  felves  from  all  filthinefs 
**  of  the  flefh  and  fpirit,  perfeding  holinefs  ;*'  where 
holinefs  is  oppofed  to  all  filthinefs.  Sometimes  by 
the  negation  of  fin  and  defilement.  So  we  find  holy, 
and  without  blame  put  together,  Eph.  i.  4.  "holy 
"  and  without  blemifh,"  Eph.  v.  27.  "holy,  harm- 
"  lefs,  and  undefiled,"  Heb.  vii.  26.  It  is  true, 
indeed,  this  negative  notion  doth  imply  fomething 
that  is  pofitive  •,  it  doth  not  only  fignify  the  ab- 
fence of  fm,  but  a  contrariety  to  it ;  we  cannot  con- 
ceive the  abfence  of  fm,  without  the  prefence  of 
grace  ;  as,  take  away  crookednefs  from  a  thing,  and 
it  immediately  becomes  flrait.  When  ever  we  arc 
made  holy,  every  luft  and  corruption  in  us  is  fup- 
planted  by  the  contrary  grace. 

Now  this  habitual  holinefs  of  perfons,  which  con- 
fiils  in  a  feparation  from  fin,  is  a  conformity  to  the 
holinefs  of  God  ;  and  by  this  we  may  come  to  under- 
ftand  what  holinefs  in  God  is  :  and  it  fignifies  the 
peculiar  eminency  of  the  divine  nature,  whereby  it 
is  feparated  and  removed  at  an  infinite  diflance  from 
moral  imperfedion,  and  that  which  we  call  fm ; 
that  is,  there  is  no  fuch  thing  as  malice,  or  envy, 
or  hatred,  or  revenge,  or  impatience,  or  cruelty,  or 
tyranny,  or  injuflice,  or  falfhood,  or  unfaithfulnefs 
in  God  ;  or  if  there  be  any  other  thing  that  fignifies 
fin,  and  vice,  and  moral  imperfedion,  holinefs  fig- 
nifies that  the  divine  nature  is  at  an  infinite  diflance  from 
all  thefe,  and  poffeffed  of  the  contrary  perfedions. 

Therefore  all  thofe  texts  that  remove  moral  im- 
perfection 


25o3  The  holinefs  of  God. 

SERM.  perfection  from  God,  and  declare  the  repugnancy 
of  it  to  the  divine  nature,  do  fet  forth  the  holinefs 
of  God.     Jam.  i.  13.  "  God  cannot  be  tempted 
"  with  evil."  Job  viii.  3.  "  Doth  God  pervert  judg- 
**  ment,  or  doth  the  Almighty  pervert  juflice  ?"  Job 
xxxiv.  10,  12.  "  Far  be  it  from  God  that  he  Ihould 
*'  do  wickednefs,  and  from  the  Almighty,  that  h# 
*'  fhould  commit  iniquity.     Yea,  furely,  God  will 
not  do  wickedly,  neither  will  the  Almighty  pervert 
*'  judgment."  Rom.  ix.  14.  "  Is  there  unrighteouf- 
*'  nefs  with  God  ^  God  forbid."  Zeph.  iii.  5.  "  The 
*'  juft  Lord  is  in  the  midft  thereof,  he  will  not  do 
*'  iniquity."     And  fo  falfhood,  and  unfaithfulnefs, 
and  inconftancy,  Deut.  xxxii.  4.  "  A  God  of  truth, 
"  and  without  iniquity."    i  Sam.  xv.   29.    *'  The 
*'  flrength  oflfrael  will  not  lie."    Tit.  i.  2.   "  In 
*'  hope  of  eternal  life,  which  God,  that  cannot  lie, 
"  hath  promifed."    Heb.    vi.  18.   '' That  by  two 
*'  immutable  things,  in  which  it  was  impofTible  for 
*'  God  to  lie."    Therefore  you  fhall  find,    that  ho- 
linefs is  joined  with  all  the  moral  perfedions  of  the 
divine  nature,  or  put  for  them.     Hof.  xi.  9.  "  I  am 
*'  the  holy  One  in  the  midfl  of  thee  -,"  that  is,  "  the 
*'  merciful  One."  Pfal.  cxlv.   17.   "  The  Lord  is 
''  righteous  in  all  his  ways,and  holy  in  all  his  works." 
Rom.  vii.  12.  "  The  commandment  is  holy,  and 
"  juft,   and  good."   Rev.  iii.    7.   "  Thefe  things 
*'  faith  he  that  is  holy,  he  that  is  true."    Rev.  vi. 
10.  "  How  long,  O  Lord,  holy  and  true  ?"  Pfalm 
cv.  42.   "  He  jemembred  his  holy  promife,"  holy, 
that  is,  in  refpe6l  of  the  faithfulnefs  of  it.     Ifaiah 
Iv.  ^,  "  The  fure  mercies  of  David  -,  rd  ocnocy  the 
"  holy  mercies  of  David,"  which  will  not  fail. 

So  that  the  holinefs  of  God  is  not  a  particular, 
but  an  univerfal  perfedion,  and  ruas  through  all  the 

moral 


The  holinefs  of  God.  35^9 

moral  perfe6i:ions  of  the  divine  nature ;  it  is  the  beau-  S  E  P.  M. 

CXL.II 

ty  of  the  divine  nature,  and  the  perfedlion  of  all  his 
other  perfedlions  :  take  away  this,  and  you  bring 
an  univerfal  ftain  and  blemifh  upon  the  divine  nature ; 
without  holinefs,  power  would  be  an  opprefTion  •, 
and  wifdom,  fubtiky  •,  and  fovereignty,  tyranny  ; 
and  goodnefs,  malice  and  envy  -,  and  juftice,  cruel- 
ty j  and  mercy,  foolilh  pity  ;  and  truth,  fallhood. 
And  therefore  the  fcripture  fpeaks  of  this,  as  God's 
highell  excellency  and  perfection.  God  is  faid  to 
be  "  glorious  in  holinefs  :"  Exod.  xv.  ii.  Holinefs 
is  called  God's  throne.  Pfal.  xlvii.  8.  "  He  fitteth 
"  upon  the  throne  of  his  holinefs."  This  is  that 
which  makes  heaven.  Ifaiah  Ixiii.  15.  It  is  called, 
"  the  habitation  of  his  holinefs,  and  of  his  glory-," 
as  if  this  were  the  very  nature  of  God,  and  the  fum 
of  his  perfecflions.  The  knowledge  of  God  is  called 
*'  the  knowledge  of  the  holy  One."  Prov.  ix.  10. 
**  To  be  made  partakers  of  a  divine  nature,"  and 
"  to  be  made  partakers  of  God's  hohnefs,"  are 
equivalent  exprclTions.  2  Pet.  iii.  4.  Heb.  xii.  10. 
And  becaufe  there  is  no  perfedlion  of  God  greater, 
therefore  he  is  reprefented  as  fwearing  by  this  ;  Pfal. 
Ix.  6.  "  God  hath  fpoken  in  his  holinefs.  Pfal. 
Ixxxix.  35.  "  Once  have  I  fworn  by  my  holinefs.'* 
The  angels  and  glorified  fpirits  they  fum  up  the  per- 
fedlions  of  God  in  this,  Ifa.  vi.  3.  "  And  one  cried 
''  unto  another,  and  faid,  holy,  holy,  holy  is  the 
"  Lord  of  holts,  the  whole  earth  is  full  of  his  glo- 
"  ry."  Rev.  iv.  8.  "  And  they  reft  not  day  and 
"  night,  faying,  holy,  holy,  holy.  Lord  God  al- 
**  mighty,  which  was,  and  is,  and  is  to  come.'* 
There  is  no  attribute  of  God  fo  often  repeated  as 
this  J   in  fome  copies  it  is  nine  times. 

II.  I 


'^^io  TheholmefsofGoti. 

SE  R  M.       II.  I  fhall  endeavour  to  prove,  that  this  perfe6lion 
belongs  to  God  : 

Firft,  from  the  Hght  of  nature.  The  philofo- 
phers,  in  all  their  difcourfes  of  God,  agree  in  this, 
that  whatever  founds  like  vice  and  imperfedlion,  is 
to  be  feparated  from  the  divine  nature  ;  which  is  to 
acknowledge  his  holinefs.  Plato,  fpeaking  of  our 
likenefs  to  God,  faith,  ofjLOtco(rig  os  oikociov  y^  oc^ov 
fjLBToi  (p^ov7i(recjog  yevea-Qcct.  Dan.  iv.  9.  King  Ne- 
buchadnezzar calls  God  by  this  title,  "  I  know  that 
**  the  fpirit  of  the  holy  gods  is  in  thee."  In  a  word, 
whatever  hath  been  produced  to  prove  any  of  God's 
moral  perfe6lions,  proves  his  holinefs. 

Secondly,  from  fcripture.     There  is  no  title  more 
frequently  given  to  God,  in  fcripture,  and  fo  often 
ingeminated,  as  this  of  his  holinefs.     He  is  called 
holinefs  itfelf,  Ifa.  Ixiii.  15.   Where  heaven  is  called 
"  the  habitation  of  his  holinefs,"  that  is,  of  God. 
His  name  is  faid  to  be  holy,  Luke  i.   49.   "  And 
*'  holy  is  his  name."  He  is  called  "the  holy  One," 
Ifaiah  xl.  25.  "  The  holy  One  of  Ifrael,"  Ifaiah  xli. 
20.  *'  The  holy  One  of  Jacob,"  xlix.  23.     He  is 
faid   to  be   "  holy  in  all  his  works  and  promifes." 
Pfal.    cv.   42.  "  In  all  his  ways  and  works,"  PfaL 
cxiv.  17.     This  title  is   given  to  each  of  the  three 
perfons  in  th©  blelTed  Trinity  :  to  God  the  father  in 
innumerable  places:  to  God  the  fon,  Dan.  ix.  24. 
*'   To  anoint  the  mofl:  holy."     The  devil  cannot 
deny  him  this  title,  Luke  iv.  34.  "  I  know  thee  who, 
*'  thou  art,  the  holy  One  of  God  :"  and  the  Spirit 
of  God  hath  this  title  conftantly  given  it,  the  ho^ 
ly  Ghoft,  or  the  holy  Spirit,  or  the  Spirit  of  holinefs. 
The  fcripture  attributes  this  perfeftion  in  a  peculiar 
manner  to  God,  i  Sam.  ii.  2.  "  There  is  none  holy 
*^  as  the  Lord."  Rev,  xv.  4.  "  For  thou  only  art- 
''       .  '  holy.'l 


The  holmefs  of  God,  3  5  J"  i 

'^  holy/'  Holinefs  is  a  communicable  perfedion  ;  S  E  R  M* 
but  no  creature  can  partake  of  it  infuch  a  manner  and 
degree  as  the  divine  nature  poiTelTeth  it.  God  is 
eternally  holy,  the  fountain  of  holinefs  ;  the  creatures 
are  derivatively  and  by  participation  holy.  God  is 
eminently  and  tranfcendently  fo ;  the  creatures,  in  a 
finite  degree.  God  is  immutably  fo,  it  is  impoiTible 
it  fhould  be  otherwife  •,  but  no  creature  is  out  of  an 
abfolutc  pofTibiiity  of  iin.  In  this  fenfeit  is  faid,  Job 
iv.  1 8.  That  "  he  putteth  no  trufl  in  his  fervants, 
*'  and  his  angels  he  charged  with  folly."  And 
"  chap.  XV.  15.  He  putteth  no  truft  in  his  faints  ; 
"  yea,  the  heavens  are  not  clean  in  his  fight.'* 
From  all  which  I  fhall  draw  thefe  inferences. 

If  hoHnefs  be  a  perfediion  of  the  divine  nature,  and 
a  property  of  God  ;  if,  in  the  notion  of  God,  there 
be  included  an  cverlafting  feparation  and  diftance 
from  moral  imperfedion,  an  eternal  repugnance  to 
fin  and  iniquity ;  from  hence  v/e  may  infer,  that 
there  is  an  intrinfecal  good  and  evil  in  things  ;  and 
the  reafons  and  refpecSls  of  moral  good  and  evil  da 
not  depend  upon  any  mutable,  and  inconftant,  and 
arbitrary  principle,  but  aire  fixed  and  immutable,  eter- 
nal and  indifpenfable.  Therefore  they  do  not  feem 
to  me  to  fpeak  fo  fafcly,  who  make  the  divine  will, 
precifely  and  abftradtedly  confidered,  the  tule  of  mo- 
ral good  and  evil ;  as  if  there  v/ere  nothing  good  or 
evil  in  it's  own  nature  antecedently  to  the  will  of 
God^  but  that  all  things  are  therefore  good  or  evil, 
becaufe  God  wills  them  to  be  fo  :  for  if  this  were  fo, 
goodnefsj  and  rig^?teoufnefs,  and  truth,  and  faith- 
fulnefs,  would  not  be  efTential,  and  neceffary,  and 
immutable  properties  of  the  divine  nature,  but  ac- 
cidental, and  arbitrary,  and  uncertain,  and  mutable ; 
^hich  is  to  fuppofe  that  God,  if  he  pieafed,  mighc 

Vol.  Vm.  17  D        -  oe 

5 


CXLII. 


2^12  ^he  holinefs  o/*GoD. 

S^R  M.  be  otherwife  than  good,  and  juft,  and  true.  For  if 
thefe  depend  merely  upon  the  will  of  God,  and  be 
not  neceflary  or  elTential  properties  of  the  divine  na- 
ture, then  the  contrary  of  thefe,  malice,  and  envy, 
and  unrighteoufnefs,  and  falfhood  do  not  imply  any 
efiential  repugnancy  to  the  divine  nature  ;  which  is 
plainly  contrary  to  what  the  fcripture  tells  us,  that 
*'  God  cannot  be  tempted  with  evil  -,"  that  "it  is 
''  impofTible  he  fhould  lie,"  that  he  "  cannot  be  un- 
*'  righteous." 

If  any  man  fay  that  God  hath  now  declared  him- 
felf  to  be  juft,  and  good,  and  faithful,  and  now  he 
cannot  be  otherwife,  becaufe  "  he  is  a  God  of  truth, 
*'  and  he  changeth  not ;"  this  is  to  grant  the  thing : 
for  this  fuppofeth  the  veracity  and  immutability  of 
God  to  be  elTential  and  necelTary  perfections  of  the 
divine  nature  -,  and  why  not  juflice  and  goodnefs  as 
well  P  I  fay,  it  fuppofeth  veracity  and  immutability 
to  be  elTential  perfedlions,  and  not  to  depend  upon 
the  will  of  God  ;  that  is,  that  God  cannot  will  to 
be  otherwife  than  true  and  unchangeable :  for  if  he 
could,  what  afTurance  can  we  pollibly  have,  but  that 
when  he  declares  himfelf  to  be  good,  and  juft,  he  is, 
or  may  be  otherwife  ? 

But  I  need  not  infift  upon  this,  which  feems  to 
be  fo  very  clear,  and  to  carry  it's  own  evidence  along 
with  it.  I  will  only  ufe  this  argument  to  prove  it, 
and  fo  leave  it.  No  being  can  will  it's  own  nature, 
and  elTential  perfedions,  that  is,  chufe  whether  it 
will  be  thus,  or  otherwife  -,  for  that  were  to  fuppofe 
It  to  be  before  it  is,  and  before  it  hath  a  being,  to 
deliberate  about  it's  own  nature.  Therefore,  if  this 
be  the  nature  of  God,  (which,  I  think,  nobody  will 
deny)  to  be  good,  and  juft,  and  true,  and  necefTa- 
rily  to  be  what  he  is ,  then  goodnefs,  and  juftice,  and 

truth 


I'he  holinefs  of  God.  35^3' 

truth  do  not  depend  upon  the  will  of  God,  but  there  S  ER M. 
are  fuch  things,  fuch  notions  antecedently  to  any  adt 
of  the  divine  will.  And  this  does  no  way  prejudice 
the  liberty  of  God  ;  for  this  is  the  higheft  perfedli- 
on,  to  be  necefiarily  good,  andjuft,  and  true  ;  and 
a  hberty  or  poiTibility  to  be  otherwife  is  impotency 
and  imperfedion.  For  liberty  no  where  fpeaks  per- 
fection, but  where  the  things  and  adions  about 
which  it  is  converfant  are  indifferent ;  in  all  other 
things  it  is  the  higheft  perfection  not  to  be  free  and 
indifferent,  but  immutable  and  fixed,  and  neceffari- 
ly  bound  up  by  the  eternal  laws  of  goodnefs,  and 
juftice,  and  truth,  fo  that  it  fhall  not  be  poffible  to 
fwerve  from  them  •,  and  this  is  the  perfection  of  the 
divine  nature,  which  we  call  his  holinefs. 

2 .  If  holinefs  be  the  chief  excellency  and  perfefli- 
on  of  the  divine  nature,  this  fhews  us  what  account 
we  are  to  make  of  fin,  and  wickednefs,  and  vice. 
We  rriay  judge  of  every  privation  by  the  habit,  for 
they  bear  an  exadl  proportion  one  to  another.  Light 
and  darknefs  are  oppofed,  as  habit  and  privation  -,  if 
light  be  pleafant  and  comfortable,  then  darknefs  is 
difmal  and  horrid.  ,  And  fo  holinefs  and  fin  are  op- 
pofed :  if  holinefs  be  the  higheft  pcrfedlion  of  any  na- 
ture, then  fin  is  the  grand  imperfedion,  and  the  low- 
eft  debafement  of  any  being  -,  becaufe  it  is  the  moft 
oppofite  to  that,  and  at  the  furtheft  diftance  from 
that  which  is  the  lirft  excellency  and  perfedion. 

This  ihould  redify  our  judgment  and  efteern  of 
things  and  perfons.  We  admire  and  efieem  riches, 
and  povsfer,  and  greatnefs ;  and  we  fc®rn  and  con- 
temn poverty,  and  weaknefs,  and  meanntfs  ;  yea, 
grace  and  holinefs,  if  it  be  in  the  company  of  thefe. 
We  are  apt  to  reverence  and  value  the  great,  and  the 
r;ch,  and  the  mighty  of  this  world,  though  they  be. 
17  D  2  wicked. 


I'he  holme fs  of  Gon, 

wicked,  and  to  defpife  the  poor  man's  wifdom  and 
holinefs  •,  but  Y^t  make  a  falfe  judgment  of  things 
and  perfons.     There  is  nothing  that  can  be   a  foun- 
dation of  refped,  that  ought  to  command  our  reve- 
rence and  efteem,  but  real  worth,  and  excellency, 
and  perfedlion  ;  and  according  to  the  degrees  pf  this, 
we  ought  to  beflow  our  refped:,  and  raife  our  efteem. 
What  St.  James  faith  of  refped  of  perfons,  I   may- 
apply  in  this  cafe.  Jam.  ii.  4.  "  Are  ye  not  then  par- 
*'  tial  in  your  felves,  and   become  judges  of  evil 
"  thoughts  ?"  We  are  extremely  partial  j  we  make 
a  falfe  judgment,  and  reafon  ill  concerning  things, 
when  we  admire  gilded  vices,  and  wickednefs  exal- 
ted to  high  places  -,  I  mean  3  ungodly  rich  men,  and 
ungodly  great  men ;  for  wicked  men  are  properly 
ungodly,  unlike  to  God,  and  when  we  contemn  poor, 
and  mean,  and  afflided  holinefs  and  piety.  Were  but 
our  eyes  open,  and  our  judgment  clear  and  unpreju- 
diced, we  ihould  fee  a  beauty  and  refplendency  in 
goodnefs  \  even  when  it  is  under  the  greateft  difad- 
vantage,  when  it  is  clothed  with  rags,    and  fits  up- 
on a  dunghill,  it  would  fhine  through  all  thefe  mifts, 
and  we  fhould  fee  a  native  light  and  beauty  in  it, 
through  the  darknefs  of  a  poor  and  low  condition  : 
and  we  fhould  fee  wickednefs  to  be  a  mod  vile  and 
abjed  thing,  when  it  appears  in  all  it's  gallantry  and 
bravery  ;  we  fhould  look  upon  the  poor  righteous 
man,  as  "  more  excellent  than  his  neighbour  ;"  and 
the  profane  gallant,    as  the  "  off-fcouring  of  the 
*'  earth."     We   fhould  value  a  man  that  "  does 
^'  juftice,  and  loves  mercy,  and  fpeaks  the  truth  to 
^'  his  neighbour  j"  we  fhould  efteem  any  one  more 
upon  the  account  of  any  one  of  thefe  fmiple  qualities, 
than  we  fhould  another  man  deftitute  of  thefe,  up- 
on the  account  of  an  hundred  titles  of  honour,  and 

4  ^^" 


T'he  holinefs  of  God.  35^5 

:en  thoufand  acres  of  land.     A  wicked,    unholy  SERM. 
nan,  he  is  a  vile  perfon,  who  deferves  to  be  con- 
remned  ;  and  an  holy  man,  he  is  the  right  honoura- 
Die;  Pfai.  XV.  4.  "  In  whofe  eyes  a  vile  perfon  is 
•'  contemned  ;  but  he  honoureth  them  that  fear  the 
■'  Lord.'*     The  vile  perfon  is  oppofed  to  him  that 
fears  the  Lord.     He  that  is  bold  to  affront  God, 
md  fin  againft  him,  is  the  bafe  and  ignoble  perfon. 
God   himfelf,  who  is  polfeffed  of  all  excellency  and 
perfedion,  and  therefore  knows  beft  how  to  judge 
Df  thefe,  he  tells  us,  how  we  ihould  value  our  felves 
md   others,    Jer.  ix.  23,  24.    "    Let  not  the  wife 
"  man  glory  in  his  wifdom,  neither  let  the  mighty 
"  man  glory  in  his  might ;    let  not  the  rich  man 
"  glory  in  his  riches  :  but  let  him  that  glorieth,  glory 
"  in  this,  that  he  underftandeth  and  knoweth  me, 
^'  that  I  am  the  Lord  which  exercife  loving-kind- 
"  nefs,  judgmerK,    and  righteoufnefs  in  the  earth  ; 
"  for  in  thefe  things  I  delight,  faith  the  Lord.'* 
To  know  thefe  divine  quahties  and  perfections,  fig- 
nifies  here,  tounderfband  them  fo  as  to  imitate  them.. 
I  do  not  fpeak  this,  to  bring  down  the  value  of  any 
that  are  advanced  in  this  world,  or  to  leiTen  tlie  re- 
fpe6l  which  is  due  to  them ;  I  would  have  nothing 
undervakied  but  wickednefs  and  vice  :  and  I  would 
have  thofe  who  have  flore  of  worldly  advantages  to 
recommend  them,  to  add  religion  to  their  riches,  and 
holinefs  to  their  honour,   that  they  may  be  current 
for  their  intrinfick  value,  rather  than  for  the  image 
and  pidure  of  worth  which  the  world  hath  ilamped 
upon  them. 

3 .  If  holinefs  be  the  chief  excellency  and  perfedti- 
on  of  the  divine  nature,  then  what  an  abfurd  and 
unreafonable  thing  is  it,  to  fcorn  and  defpife  holi- 
nefs, to  mock  and  deride  men  under  this  very  title ! 

The 


35 1 6  The  bolinefs  of  Got). 

S  E  R  M.  The  world  is  much  Winded,  that  they  do  not  fee  the 
great  evil  of  fin,  and  the  beauty  and  excellencey  of 
hohnefs  :  but  that  men  fhould  be  fo  infatuated,    as 
to  change  the  nature  of  things,  and  to  miflake  things 
of  fo  vail  difference,  as  fin,  and  hohnefs  ;  to  "  call 
*'  good  evil,  and  evil  good;"  that  fin,  which  is  the 
vileft  thing  in  the  world,  fhould  be  efteemed  and 
cherifhed,  accounted  a  piece  of  gallantry,  and  rec- 
koned  amongft   the  excellencies    and    accompli fh- 
ments  of  human  nature ;  and  hohnefs,  which  is   fo 
great  a  perfedlion,  fhould  be  a  name  of  hatred  and 
difgrace,  to  be  contemned  and  perfecuted  ;  that  that 
which  is  the  glory  of  heaven,  and  the  moft  radiant 
perfedtion  of  the  divine  nature,  fhould  be  matter  of 
icorn  and  contempt ;  as  the  apoille  fpeaks  in  another 
cafe,  "  behold  1  ye  defpifers,  and  wonder,  and  pe- 
"  rifh."     Do  ye  think  the  holy  and  juft  God  will 
put  up   thefe  affronts  and  indignities  ?  Ye  do  not 
only  deipife  men,  but  ye  defpife  God  alfo.     You 
cannot  contemn  that  which  God  accounts  his  glory, 
without  reviling  the  divine  nature,  and  offering  de- 
Ipite  to  God  himfelf.     The  malice  reacheth  heaven, 
and  is  levelled  againft  God,  whenever  ye  flight  ho- 
linefs. 

4.  If  God  be  a  holy  God,  and  hath  fuch  a  repug- 
/lancy  in  his  nature  to  fin,  then  this  is  matter  of  ter- 
ror to  wicl<^ed  men.  The  holy  God  cannot  but  hate 
lin,  and  be  an  enemy  to  wicked nefs  ^  and  the  hatred 
of  God  is  terrible.  We  dread  the  hatred  of  a  great 
man ;  becaufe  where  hatred  is  backed  with  power, 
the  effeds  of  it  are  terrible.  But  the  hatreci  of  the 
almighty  and  eternal  God,  is  much  more  dreadful; 
becaufe  the  effeds  of  it  are  greater,  and  more  lalling, 
than  of  the  hatred  of  a  weak  mortal  man.  We  know 
the  utmofl:  they  can  do  j  '^  they  can  but  kill  the  ba^ 

"dyj 


'7 he  hoUnefs  of  God  .  3  5 1 7 

*^  dy ;  after  that,  they  have  no  more  that  they  can  S  E  R  M. 
"  do:"  they  cannot  hurt  our  fouls;  they  cannot 
follow  us  beyond  the  grave,  and  purfue  us  into  ano- 
ther world :  but  tho-elFeds  of  God's  hatred  and  dif- 
pleafure  are  mighty  and  lafting,  they  extend  them- 
felves  to  all  eternity  ;  for  who  knoweth  the  power  of 
his  anger  ?  Who  can  tell  the  utmoft  of  what  omnipo- 
tent juflice  can  do  to  finners  ?  "  It  is  a  dreadful  thing 
''  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living  God  ;"  becaufe 
he  that  lives  for  ever,  can  punifh  for  ever.  We  are 
miferable,  if  God  do  not  love  us.  Thofe  words, 
*'  my  foul  fliall  have  no  pleafure  in  him,"  fignify 
great  mifery,  and  exprefs  a  dreadful  curfe :  but  it  is 
a  more  pofitive  exprefiion  of  mifery,  for  God  to 
hate  us  -,  that  fignifies  ruin  and  deflru6lion  to  the 
utmofl: ;  Pfal.  v.  4.  "  Thou  art  not  a  God  that 
''  hath  pleafure  in  wickednefs,  neither  fhall  evil 
"  dwell  with  thee."  This  is  a  jt6g;W;f,  and  expreffeth 
lefs  than  is  intended.  God  is  far  from  being  of  an 
indifferent  negative  temper  towards  fin  and  wicked- 
nefs-, therefore  the  pfalmiil  adds,  "  thou  hatell  all 
"  the  workers  of  iniquity ;  and  then,  in  the  next 
verfe,  to  ihew  what  is  the  effed  of  God's  hatred, 
"  thou  fhalt  deilroy  them  that  fpeak  leafing.'* 
Therefore,  finner,  fear  and  tremble  at  the  thoughts 
of  God's  holinefs. 

5*  Imitate  the  holinefs  of  God  :  this  is  the  inference 
here  in  the  ttx.u  "  be  ye  holy,  for  lam  holy."  Ho- 
linefs, in  one- word,  contains  all  the  imitable  perfec-^ 
tions  of  God  :  and  when  it  is  faid,  "  be  ye  holy  ;** 
it  is  as  much  as  if  he  had  faid,  be  ye  good,  and  pa- 
tient, and  merciful,  and  true,  and  faithful ;  for  I  am 
{o.  Therefore  religion  is  called  "  the  knowledge 
"  of  the  holy  One,"  Prov.  ix.  10.  and  chap.  xxx. 
3.     And  gur  imitation  of  God  is  exprcfied  by  our 

*^  putting 


CXLII. 


3^18  ^s  holinefi  of  GoD. 

SERM.  <«  putting  on  the  new  man,  which  after  God  \% 
"  created  in  righteoufnefs  and  true  holinefs,"  Eph. 
iv.  24.  Seeing  then  this  is  the  chief  excellency  and 
perfedion  of  God,  and  the  fum  of  all  the  perfc6li- 
ons  which  we  are  to  imitate,  and  wherein  we  are  to 
endeavour  to  be  like  God,  let  us  conform  our  felves 
tO  the  holy  God  ;  endeavour  to  be  habitually  holy, 
which  is  our  conformity  to  the  nature  of  God  \  and 
adually  holy,  which  is  our  conformity  to  the  will  of 
God.  I  will  not  enlarge  upon  this,  becaufe  I  have 
prefled  the  imitation  of  thefe  particular  perfe6tions, 
goodnefs,  patience,  j^uftice,  truth,  and  faithfulnefs 
upon  other  texts.  I  fhall  only  mentidn  two  argu- 
ments, to  excite  and  quicken  oui  defires  and  endea- 
vour after  holinefs.  ^^ 

I.  Holinefs  is  an  imitation  of  the  higheft  excellen- 
cy and  perfedlion.  HoHnefs,  I  told  you,  fignifies 
a  feparation  from  fin  and  vice,  and  all  moral  imper- 
fedion,  and,  confequently,  doth  comprehend  and 
take  in  all  the  moral  perfedions  of  the  divine  nature, 
the  goodnefs,  and  mercy,  and  patience,  and  juftice, 
and  veracity,  and  faithfulnefs  of  God  ;  now  thefe 
are  the  very  beauty  and  glory  of  the  divino  nature. 
The  firft  thing  that  we  attribute  to  God,  next  to 
his  being,  is  his  goodnefs,  and  thofe  other  attributes 
which  have  a  neceffary  connexion  with  it ;  his  great- 
nefs  and  majefty  is  nothing  elfe  but  the  glory  which 
refults  from  his  united  perfedions,  efpecially  from  his 
goodnefs,  and  thofe  perfedlions  which  are  akin  to  it. 
Separate  from  God  thefe  perfe61:ions,  which  holinefs 
includes  in  it,and  what  would  be  left  but  an  omnipotent 
evil,  an  eternal  being,  infinitely  knowing,  and  in- 
finitely able  to  do  mifchief  ?  which  is  as  plain  and 
notorious  a  contradidion,'  and  as  impofTible  a  thing, 
as  can  be  imagined :  fo  that  if  we  have  any  fparks 

of 


CXLIL 


^he  hdinefs  of  God.'  3519 

of  ambition  inns,  we  cannot  but  afpire  after  hoi  i-  ^JJ^r^^* 
nefs,  which  is  ^o  great  an  excellency  and  perfedion 
<^f  God  himfelf.  There  is  a  vulgar  prejudice  againfl 
holinefs,  as  if  it  were  a  poor,  mean  thing,  and  be- 
low a  great  and  generous  fpirit-,  whereas  holinefs 
is  the  only  true  greatnefs  of  mind,  the  mod  genuine 
nobility,  and  the  higheft  gallantry  of  fpirit ;  and  how- 
ever it  be  defpifed  by  men,  it  is  of  a  heavenly  extrac- 
tion, and  divine  original.  Holinefs  is  the  firfb  part 
of  the  charader  of"  the  wifdomthatis  from  above-," 
Jam.  iii.  17.  "  the  wifdom  that  is  from  above,  is 
*'  firft  pure,  then  peaceable,  gentle,  and  eafy  to  be 
*'  entreated,  full  of  mercy  and  good  fruits,  with- 
''  out  partiality,  and  without  hypocrify." 

2.  Holinefs  is  an  elTential  and  principal  ingredient 
of  happinefs.  Hohnefs  is  a  itate  of  peace  and  tran- 
quillity, and  the  very  frame  and  temper  of  happinefs  j 
and  without  it,  the  divine  nature,  as  it  would  be  im- 
perfed,  fo  it  would  be  miferable.  If  the  divine  nature 
were  capable  of  envy,  or  malice,  or  hatred,  or  re- 
venge, or  impatience,  or  cruelty ^  or  injuftice,  or 
unfaithfulnefs,  it  would  be  liable  to  vexation  and 
difcontent,  than  which  nothing  can  be  a  greater  dif- 
turbance  of  happinefs :  fo  that  holinefs  is  neceffary  to 
our  felicity  and  contentment  -,  not  only  to  the  hap- 
pinefs of  the  next  life,  but  to  our  prefent  peace  and 
contentment.  Ifreafonable  creatures  could  be  hap- 
py, as  brute  beads  are  in  their  degree,  by  enjoying 
their  depraved  appetitess  and  following  the  dictates 
of  fenfe  and  fancy,  God  would  not  have  bound  us 
up  to  a  law  and  rule,  but  hath  left  us  as  he  hath  done 
unreafonable  creatures,  to  fatisfy  our  lufts  and  ap- 
petites, without  check  and  controul ;  but  angels  and 
men,  which  are  reafonable  creatures,  have  the  no- 
lens of  good  and  evil,  of  right  and  wrong,  of  come* 

VuL.VIIL  17  E  linefe 

s5 


The  holinefs  of  God, 

linefs  and  filthinefs,  fo  woven  and  twifted  into  theit 
very  natures,  that  they  can  never  be  wholly  defaced, 
without  the  ruin  of  their  beings ;  and  therefore  it  is 
impoflible  that  fuch  creatures  (hould  be  happy  other- 
wife,  than  by  complying  with  thefe  notions,    and 
obeying  the  natural  didatcs  and  fuggeftions  of  their 
minds  ;  which  if  they  ncgled,  and  go  againft,  they 
will  naturally  feel  remorfe  and  torment  in  their  own 
Ipirits ;  their  minds  will  be  uneafy  and  unquiet,  and 
they  will  be  inwardly  grieved  and  difpleafed  with 
themfelves  for  what  they  have  done.     So  the  apofllc 
tells  us,    Rom.   i.   that  even  the  mod  degenerate 
heathens  had  confciences,  which  did  accufe  or  excufe 
them,  according  as  they  obeyed,  or  did  contrary  to 
the  didlates  of  natural  light.     God  therefore,  who 
knows  our  frame,  hath  fo  adapted  his  law  to  us, 
which  is  the  rule  of  holinefs,  that  if  we  live  up  to  it, 
we  fhall  avoid  the  unfpeakable  torment  of  a  guilty 
confcience ;  whereas,  if  we  do  contrary  to  it,  we 
fhall  always  be  at  difcord  with  our  felves,  and  in  a 
perpetual  difquiet  of  mind  :  for  nothing  can  do  con- 
trary to  the  law  of  it's  being,  that  is,  to  it's  own  na- 
ture, without  difpleallire  and  relu6lancy  ;  the  confe- 
quence  of  which,  in  moral  a6lions,  is  guilt ;  which 
is  nothing  elfe   but  the  trouble  and  difquiet  which 
arifeth  in  one's  mind,  from  confcioufnefs  of  having 
done  fomething  that  contradids  the  perfeclive  prin- 
ciple of  his  being,  that  is,  fomething  which  did  not 
become  him,  and  v/hich,  being  what  he  is,  that  is, 
a  reafonable  creature,,  he  ought  not  to  do. 

So  that  in  all  reafonable  creatures  there  is  a  certain 
kind  of  temper  and  difpofition  tliat  is  neceffary  and 
eiTential  to  happinefs,  and  that  is  holinefs ;  which, 
J3S  it  is  the  perfedlion,  fo  it  is  the  great  felicity  of  the 
divine  nature :  andy   on  th<s  contrary,    this  is  one 

chief 


7he  hoUnefs  of  God  .  3^2  x 

chief  part  of  the  mifery  of  thofe  wicked,  accurfed  ^  E  R  M. 
Ipirits  the  devils,  and  of  unholy  men,  that  they  are 
of  a  temper  contrary  to  God,  they  are  envious,  and 
malicious,  and  wicked  ;  that  is,  of  fuch  a  temper 
as  is  naturally  a  torment  and  difquiet  to  itfelf :  and 
here  the  foundation  of  hell  is  laid  in  the  evil  difpo- 
fitions  of  our  fpirics ;  and  till  that  be  cured,  which 
can  only  be  done  by  holinefs,  it  is  as  impofllble  for 
a  wicked  man  to  be  happy  and  contented  in  himfelf, 
as  it  is  for  a  fick  man  to  be  at  eafe  -,  and  the  external 
prefence  of  God,  and  local  heaven,  would  fignify  no 
more  to  make  a  wicked  man  happy  and  contented, 
than  heaps  of  gold,  and  concerts  of  mufick,  and  a 
well-fpread  table,  and  a  rich  bed,  would  contribute 
to  a  man's  eafe  in  the  paroxyfms  of  a  fever,  or  in  a 
violent  lit  of  the  fbone.     If  a  fenfual,  or  covetous,  or 
ambitious  man  were  in  heaven,  he  would  be  lil«e 
"  the  rich  man  in  hell,"  he  would  be  tormented 
with  a  continual  thirft,  and  burnt  up  in  the  fiames 
of  his  own  ardent  defires,  and  would  not  meet  with 
the  leaft  drop  of  fuitable  pleafure  and   delight  to 
quench  and  allay  the  heat :  the  realbn  is,  becaufe 
fuch  a  man  hath  that  within  him,  which  torments 
him,  and  he  cannot  be  at  eafe  till  that  be  removed. 
Sin  is  the  violent,   and  unnatural,  and  uneafy   ftate 
of  our  foul-,  every  wicked  man's  fpirit  is  out  of  or- 
der, and  till  the  man  be  put  into  a  right  frame  by 
hohnefs,  he  will  be  perpetually  difquicted,  and  can 
have  no  reft  within  himfelf.     The  prophet  fitly  de- 
fcribes  the  condition  of  fuch  a  perfon,    Ifa.  Ivii.  20, 
12 1.  "  But  the  wicked  are  like  the  troubled  fea,  when 
*■*  it  cannot  reft,  whofe  waters  call  forth  mire  and 
*'  dirt:  There  is   no  peace,  faith  my  God,    to  the 
*^  wicked."  So  long  as  a  man  is  unholy,  fo  long  as  fil- 
diinefs  and  corruption  abound  in  his  heart,  they  will  be 

1 7  E  2  reft- 


3^22  Tihe  hoUneJs  ofGoT). 

S  E  R  M.  reftlefly  working,  like  wine  which  is  in  a  perpetual  mo- 
tion and  agitation,  till  it  have  purged  itfelf  of  it'^ 
dregs  and  foulnefs.  Nothing  is  more  turbulent  and 
unquiet  than  the  fpirit  of  a  wicked  man  •,  it  is  hke 
the  fea,  when  it  roars  and  rages  through  the  ilrength 
of  contrary  winds  •,  it  is  the  fcene  of  furious  Ipfts,  and 
wild  palTions,  which  as  they  are  contrary  to  holinefs, 
fo  they  maintain  perpetual  contefts  and  feuds  among 
themfelves. 

All  fin  feparates  us  from  God,  who  is  the  foun- 
dation of  our  happinefs.  Our  limited  nature,  and 
the  narrownefs  of  our  beings,  will  not  permit  us  to 
be  happy  in  our  felves  :  it  is  peculiar  to  God  to  be 
his  own  happinefs  ;  but  man,  becaufe  he  is  finite, 
and  therefore  cannot  be  felf-fufficient,  is  carried  forth 
by  an  innate  defire  of  happinefs,  to  feek  his  felicity 
in  God.  So  that  there  is  in  the  nature  of  man  a 
fpring  of  reftlefs  motion,  which,  with  great  impa- 
tience, forceth  him  out  of  himfclf,  and  toiTes  him 
to  and  fro,  till  he  comes  to  reft  in  fomething  that  is 
felf-fufficient.  Our  fouls,  when  they  are  feparated 
from  God,  like  the  unclean  fpirit  in  the  gofpel,  when 
it  was  caft  out,  "  wander  up  and  down  in  dry 
*'  and  defart  places,  feekingreft,  but  finding  none." 
Were  the  v/hole  world  calm  about  a  man,  and  did 
it  not  make  the  leaft  attempt  upon  him,  were  he^ 
free  from  the  fears  of  divine  vengeance,  yet  he  could 
not  be  fatisfied  with  himfelf  j  there  is  fomething  with- 
in him  that  would  not  let  him  be  at  reft,  but  would 
tear  him  from  his  own  foundation  and  confiftency  ; 
fo  that  when  we  are  once  broken  off  from  God,  the 
fenfe  of  inward  want  doth  ftimulate  and  force  us  to 
feek  our  contentment  elfewhere.  So  that  nothing 
but  holinefs,  which  re-unites  us  to  God,  andreftores- 
our  fouls  tQ  their  primitive  ^nd  original  ftate,  can 

mak^ 


*The  goodnefs  of  God  J    *  35^3 

make  us  happy,  and  give  peace  arid  reft  to  our 
fouls  :  and  this  is  the  conftant  voice  and  language  of 
l<:npture,and  the  tenor  of  the  bible  ;  "  Acquaint  now 
"  thy  felf  with  him,  and  be  at  peace,"  Job  xxii.  21. 
"  Light  is  fown  for  the  righteous,  and  gladnefs  for 
*'  the  upright  in  heart,"  Pfal.  xcvii.  11.  "  The 
"  work  of  righteoufnefs  fliall  be  peace;  and  the  ef- 
"  fecfl  of  righteoufnefs,  quietnefs  and  aiTurance  for 
*'  ever,"  Ifa.  xxxif.  17. 

Seeing  then  holinefs  is  fo  high  a  perfcflion,  and 
fo  great  a  happinefs,  let  thefe  arguments  prevail  with- 
us  to  afpire  after  this  temper,  that  ^'  as  he  who  hath 
"  called  us  is  holy-,  fo  we  may  be  holy  in  all  manner 
"  of  converfation ,  becaufe  it  is  written,  be  ye  holy, 
^*  for  I  am  holy." 


SERMON    CXUIL 

The  goodnefs  of  God. 

P  S  A  L.    cxlv.  9. 

The  Lord  is  good  to  all^  and  his  tender  mercies  are 
onjer  all  his  works, 

TH  E  fubjed  which  I  have  now  propofed  to  s  e  R  M. 
treat  of,  is  certainly  one  of  the  greateft  and  l  cxliii. 
nobleft  arguments  in  the  world,  the  goodnefs  of 
GoD^  the  higheft  and  moft  glorious  perfedion  of 
the  beft  and  moft  excellent  of  beings,  than  which  no- 
thing deftrve$  more  to  be  confidered  by  u,s,  nor 
ought  in  reafon  to  affed  us  more.    The  goodnefs  of 


l%e  goodnefs  of  GodJ 

God  is  the  caufe,  and  the  continuance  of  our  beings, 
the  foundation  of  our  hopes,  and  the  fountain  of  our 
happinefs  ;  our  greateft  comfort,  and  our  faireft  ex- 
ample, the  chief  objed  of  our  love,  and  praife,  and 
admiration,  the  joy  and  rejoicing  of  our  hearts ;  and 
therefore  the  meditation  and  difcourfe  of  it  muft 
needs  be  pleafant  and  delightful  to  us :  the  great  dif- 
ficulty will  be,  to  confine  our  felves  upon  fo  copious 
an  argument,  and  to  fet  bounds  to  that  which  is  of 
fo  vail  an  extent,  "the  Lord  is  good  to  all,  and 
^*  his  tender  mercies  are  over  all  his  works." 

Which  words  are  an  argument,  which  the  divine 
pfalmift  ufeth,  to  ftir  up  himfelf  and  others  to  the 
praife  of  God  :  at  the  3d  verfe  he  tells  us,  that 
*'  the  Lord  is  great,  and  greatly  to  be  praifed ;" 
and  he  gives  the  reafon  of  this,  verfe  8.  and  9.  from 
thofe  properties  and  perfedlions  of  the  divine  nature, 
which  declare  his  goodnefs,  "  the  Lord  is  graci- 
*'  ous,  and  full  of  compaffion,  flow  to  anger,  and 
*'  of  great  mercy :  the  Lord  is  good  to  all,  and  his 
*^  tender  mercies  are  over  all  his  works :"  where  you 
have  the  goodnefs  of  God  declared,  together  with 
the  ampUtude  and  extent  of  it,  in  refpeft  of  the 
objcdls  of  it  \  *'  the  Lord  is  good  to  all." 

In  the  handling  of  this  argument,  I  Ihall  do  thefc 
four  things : 

Firft,  confider  what  is  the  proper  notion  of  good- 
nefs, as  it  is  attributed  to  God. 

Secondly,  Ihew  that  this  p.erfedion  belongs  to  God. 

Thirdly,  confider  the  Mfedls  and  the  extent  of  it. 

Fourthly,    anfwer  fome  obje61:ions  which  may 

feem  tocontradid  and  bring  in  queftion  the  goodnefi 

of  God. 

Firft,  what  is  the  proper  notion  of  goodnefs,  as  it 
is  attributed  to  God. 

There- 


^he goodnefs  of  God.  35^5 

There  is  a  dry  metaphyfical  notion  of  goodnefs,  SE  Rl.l. 
which  only  fignifies  the  being  and  eflential  proper-   ^^^^"'' 
ties  of  a  thing  :  but  this  is  a  good  word  ill  bellow- 
ed j  for  in  this  fenfe,  every  thing  that  hath  being, 
even  the  devil  himfelf,  is  good. 

And  there  is  a  moral  notion  of  goodnefs  j  and 
that  is  twofold : 

1.  More  general,  in  oppofition  to  all  moral  evil 
and  imperfedion,  which  we  call  fin  and  vice;  and 
fo  the  juftice,  and  truth,  and  holinefs  of  God  are, 
in  this  fenfe,  his  goodnefs.     But  there  is, 

2.  Another  notion  of  moral  goodnefs,  which  is 
more  particular  and  reflrained  ;  and  then  it  denotes 
a  particular  virtue,  in  oppofition  to  a  particular  vice: 
and  this  is  the  proper  and  ufual  acceptation  of 
the  word  goodnefs  •,  and  the  beft  defcription  I  can 
give  of  it  is  this  -,  that  it  is  a  certain  propenfion  and 
diipofition  of  mind,  whereby  a  perfon  is  inclined 
to  defire  and  procure  the  happinefs  of  others ;  and 
it  is  beft  underftood  by  it's  contrary,  which  is  an  en- 
vious difpofition,  a  contraded  and  narrow  fpirit, 
which  would  confine  happinefs  to  it  itfelf,  and  grudg- 
eth  that  others  fhould  partake  of  it,  or  Ihare  in  it ; 
or  a  malicious  and  mifchievous  temper,  which  de- 
lights in  the  harms  of  others,  and  to  procure  trou- 
ble and  mifchief  to  them.  To  commiunicate  and  lay 
out  ourfelves  for  xht  good  of  others,  is  goodnefs ; 
and  fo  the  apoftle  explains  doing  good,  by  commu- 
nicating to  others,  who  are  in  mifery ,  or  in  want : 
Heb.  xiii.  i6.  "  but  to  do  good,  and  to  com.muni- 
''  Gate,  forget  not."  The  Jews  made  a  diftindion 
between  a  righteous  and  a  good  man  :  to  which  the 
apoftle  alludes,  Rom.  v.  7.  '^  fcarcely  for  a  righte- 
*'  ous  man  will  one  die:  yet  peradventure  for  a 
"  good  man  fome  would  even  dare  to  die."     The 

righteous 


CXLIII. 


3^26  ^he  goodnefs  of  God. 

SE  RM.  righteous  man  was  he  that  did  no  wrong  to  othei"s  ; 
and  the  good  man,  he  who  was  not  only  not  injurious 
to  others,  but  kind  and  beneficial  to  them.  So  that 
goodnefs  is  a  readinefs  and  difpofition  to  communi- 
cate the  good  and  happinefs  which  we  enjoy,  and  to 
be  willing  others  fhould  partake  of  it. 

This  is  the  notion  of  goodnefs  among  men  *  and 
it  is  the  fame  in  God,  only  with  this  difference, 
that  God  is  originally  and  tranfcendcntly  good  ;  but 
the  creatures  are,  the  befl  of  them,  but  imperfeftly 
good,  and  by  derivation  from  God,  who  is  the  foun- 
tain and  original  of  goodnefs ;  which  is  the  mean- 
ing of  our  Saviour,  Luke  xviii.  19.  when  he  fays, 
'^  there  is  none  good  fave  one,  that  is,  God.'*  But 
though  the  degrees  of  goodnefs  in  GoD,and  the  crea- 
tures, be  infinitely  unequal,  and  that  goodnefs  which 
is  in  us  be  fo  fmall  and  inconfiderable  that,  compar- 
ed with  the  goodnefs  of  God,  it  does  not  deferve 
that  name ;  yet  the  elTential  notion  of  goodnefs  in 
both  muft  be  the  fame;  elfe  when  the  fcripture 
ipeaks  of  the  goodnefs  of  God,  we  could  not  know 
the  meaning  of  it  -,  and  if  we  do  not  at  all  underftand 
what  it  is  for  God  to  be  good,  it  is  all  one  to  us 
(for  ought  we  know)  whether  he  be  good  or  not  j 
for  he  may  be  fo,  and  we  never  the  better  for  it,  if 
we  do  not  know  what  goodnefs  in  God  is,  and  con- 
lequently  when  he  is  fo,  and  when  not. 

Befides  that,  the  goodnefs  of  God  is  very  fre- 
quently in  fcripture  propounded  to  our  imitation  5 
but  it  is  impoffible  for  us  to  imitate  that,  which  we 
do  not  underftand  what  it  is  :  from  whence  it  is  cer- 
tain, that  the  goodnefs  which  we  are  to  endeavour 
after,  is  th,e  fame  that  is  in  God  •,  becaufe  in  this  wc 
arc  commanded  to  imitate  the  perfection  of  God, 
tjiat  is,  to  be  good  and  merciful  as  he  is,  according 

to, 


T'he  goodnefs  of  Got).  35^7 

to  the  rate  and  condition  of  creatures,  and  fo  far  as  S  E  R  M. 
we,  whofe  natures  are  imperfed,  are  capable  of  re-    ^^^^^^* 
fembling  the  divine  goodnefs. 

Thus  much  for  the  notion  of  goodnefs  in  God  j 
it  is  a  propenfion  and  difpofition  in  the  divine  nature, 
to  communicate  being  and  happinefs  to  his  creatures. 

Secondly,  I  fhall  endeavour  to  fhew,  in  the  next 
place,  that  this  perfe6lion  of  goodnefs  belongs  to 
God  ;  and  that  from  thefe  three  heads. 

I.  From  the  acknowledgment  of  natural  light. 

II.  From  the  teillmony  of  fcripture  and  divine  re- 
velation.    And, 

III.  From  the  perfection  of  the  divine  nature. 
I.  From  the  acknowledgments   of  natural  light. 

The  generality  of  the  heathens  agree  in  it,  and  there 
is  hardly  any  perfection  of  God  more  uriiverfally  ac- 
knowledged by  them.  I  always  except  the  itdi  of 
the  Epicureans,  who  attribute  nothing  but  eternity 
and  happinefs  to  the  divine  nature  ;  and  yet  if  they 
would  have  confidered  it,  happinefs  without  good- 
nefs is  impoffible.  I  do  not  find  that  they  do  expref- 
ly  deny  this  perfedion  to  God,  or  that  they  afcribe 
to  him  the  contrary ;  but  they  clearly  take  away  all 
the  evidence  and  arguments  of  the  divine  goodnefs  ; 
for  they  fuppofed  God  to  be  an  immortal  and  happy 
being,  that  erijoyed  himfelf,  and  had  no  regard  to 
any  thing  without  himfelf,  that  neither  gave  being  to 
other  things,  nor  concerned  himfelf  in  the  happinefs  or 
mifery  of  any  of  them  •,  fo  that  their  notion  of  a  dei- 
ty was,  in  truth,  the  proper  notion  of  an  idle  being, 
that  is  called  God,  and  neither  does  good  nor  evil. 

But  fetting  afide  this  atheiftical  fedt,  the  reft  of 
the  heathens  did  unanimouQy  aHirm  and  believe  the 
goodnefs  of  God  \  and  this  was  the  great  foundati- 
on of  their  religion  \  and  all  their  prayers  to  God^ 

YoL.  VIII.  J7  F  and 

if- 


3528  The  goodnefs  of  God. 

S  F.  R  M.  and  prailes  of  him,  did  neceflarily  fiippofe  a  perfua- 
fionofthe  divine  goodnefs.  Whofoever  prays  to 
God,  muft  have  a  perfuafion  or  good  hopes  of  his 
readinefs  to  do  him  good  ;  and  to  praife  God,  is  to 
acknowledge  that  he  hath  received  good  from  him. 
Seneca  hath  an  excellent  pafTage  to  this  purpofe,  "  he 
"  (fays  he)  that  denies  the  goodnefs  of  God,  does 
*'  not,  furely,  confider  the  infinite  number  of  pray- 
"  ers  that,  with  hands  lifted  up  to  heaven,  are  put 
"  up  to  God,  both  in  private  and  pubhck ;  which 
*'.  certainly  would  not  be,  nor  is  it  credible,  that  all 
"  mankind  fhouid  confpire  in  this  madnefs  of  putting 
*'  up  their  fupplicarions  to  deaf  and  impotent  deities, 
"  if  they  did  not  believe  that  the  gods  were  fo  good 
*'  as  to  confer  benefits  upon  thofe  who  prayed 
"  to  them." 

But  we  need  not  infer  their  belief  of  God's  good- 
nefs from  the  ads  of  their  devotion,  nothing  being 
more  common  among  them  than  expredy  to  attri- 
bute this  perfedion  of  goodnefs  to  him  ;  and  among 
the  divine  titles,  this  always  had  the  pre-eminence, 
both  among  the  Greeks  and  Romans  ;  lig  re  fjii^uq 
re,  Beus  optimiis  maximus^  was  their  conllant  ftile  ; 
and  in  our  language,  the  name  of  God  fcems  to 
have  been  given  him  from  his  goodnefs.  I  might 
produce  innumerable  paHages  out  of  the  heathen  au- 
thors to  this  purpofe  ♦,  but  I  fliall  only  mention  that 
remarkable  one  out  of  Seneca  ;  primus  deorum  cultus 
eft  deos  credere  ;  deinde  redder e  illis  majeftatem  fuam^ 
redder e  bonitatem.  fme  qua  nulla  majeftas :  "  The 
"  firft  acl  of  worfhip  is  to  believe  the  being  of  God  •, 
*'  and  the  next,  to  afcribe  majeily  or  greatnefs  to 
"  him  ;  and  to  afcribe  goodnefs,  without  which  there 
"  can  be  no  greatnefs." 

IL  From  the  teftimony  of  fcripture,  and  divine 
^  revelation. 


The goodnefs  of  God »  35^9 

revelation.     I  fhail  mention  but  a  few  of  thofe  many  SE  R  M. 

-    CXLIII 

texts  of  fcripture,  which  declare  to  us  the  goodnefs  of 
God,  Exod.  xxxiv.  6.  where  God  makes  his  name 
known  to  Mofes  •,  *'  The  Lord,  the  Lord  God, 
"  merciful  and  gracious,  long-fuffering,  and  abun- 
*'  dant  in  goodnefs  and  truth."  Pfal.  Ixxxvi.  5. 
"  Thou,  Lord,  art  good,  and  ready  to  forgive." 
Pfal.  cxix.  68.  "  Thou  art  good,  and  doll  good." 
And  that  which  is  fo  often  repeated  in  the  book  of 
Pfalms  •,  "  O  give  thanks  unto  the  Lord,  for  he  is 
"  good,  and  his  mercy  endure th  for  ever."  Our 
bleffed  Saviour  attributes  this  perfe6lion  to  God, 
in  fo  peculiar  and  tranfcendent  a  manner,  as  if  it  were 
incommunicable,  Luke  xviii.  19.  "  There  is  none 
"  good,  fave  one,  that  is  God."  The  meaning  is, 
that  no  creature  is  capable  of  it,  in  that  excellent  and 
tranfcendent  degree,  in  which  the  divine  nature  is 
pofTelTed  of  it. 

To  the  fame  purpofe  are  thofe  innumerable  tefli- 
monies  of  fcripture  which  declare  God  to  be  graci' 
ous,  and  merciful,  and  long-fuffering :  for  thcfe  are 
but  feveral  branches  of  his  goodnefs ;  his  grace  is  the 
freenefs  of  his  goodnefs  to  thofe  who  have  not  de- 
ferved  it :  his  mercy  is  his  goodnefs  to  thofe  who  are 
in  mifery :  his  patience  is  his  goodnefs  to  thofe  who 
are  guilty,  in  deferring  the  punifhment  due  to  them. 

III.  The  goodnefs  of  God  may  likewife  be  argu- 
ed from  the  perfedion  of  the  divine  nature,  thefe 
two  ways  : 

1.  Goodnefs  is  the  chief  of  all  perfedions,  and 
therefore  it  belongs  to  God. 

2.  There  are  fome  footfleps  of  it  in  the  creatures, 
and  therefore  it  is  much  more  eminently  in  God. 

I .  Goodnefs  is  the  higheft  perfedion,  and  there- 
fore it  muft  needs  belong  to  God,  who  is  the  moft 
17  F  2  perfed 


3^3^  ^^^*  g^^^^{f^  of  God. 

S  E  R  M.  perfc6b  of  beings.     Knowledge  and  power  are  great 
perfedions  ;  but  leparated  from  goodnefs,  they  would 
be  great  imperfedlions,  nothing  but  craft  and  vio- 
lence.    An  angel  may  have  knowledge  and  power 
in  a  great  degree ;  but  yet,  for  all  that,  be  a  devil. 
Goodnefs  is  lb  great  and  neceflary  a  perfedion,  that, 
without  it,  there  can  be  no  other  •,  it  gives  perfec- 
tion to  all  other  excellencies  :  take  av/ay  this,    and 
the  greateft  excellencies  in  any  other  kind,  would 
be  but  the  greateft  imperfeftions  :  and  therefore  our 
Saviour  fpeaks  of  the  goodnefs  and  mercy  of  God, 
as  the  fum  of  his  perfeclions  ;  what  one  evangelift 
hath,  "  be  ye  merciful,  as  your  Father  which  is  in 
**  heaven  is  merciful,"  is  rendered  in  another,  "  be 
''  ye  therefore  perfed,  as  your  Father  which  is  in 
*'  heaven  is  perfed."     Goodnefs  is  fo  effential  to  a 
perfed:  being,  that  if  we  once  ftrip  God  of  this  pro- 
perty, we  rob  him  of  the  glory  of  all  his  other  per- 
feftions  •,  and  therefore  when  Mofes  defired  to  fee 
God's  glory,  he  faid,  •  •  he  would  make  all  his  good- 
*'  nefs  topafs  before  him."  Exod.  xxxiii.  19.  This 
is  the  moft  amiable  perfection,  and,  as  it  were,  the 
beauty  of  the  divine  nature,  Zach.  ix.   17.   ^'  how 
*'  great  is  his  goodnefs,  and  how  great  is  his  beauty  ?" 
^ne  bonitate  nulla  majeftas^  ''  without  goodnefs  there 
''  can  be  no  majefty."  Other  excellencies  may  caufe 
fear  and  amazement  in  us  ;  but  nothing  but  good- 
nefs can  command  fincere  love  and  veneration. 

2.  There  are  fome  fcotfteps  of  this  perfection  in 
the  creatures,  and  therefore  it  muft  be  much  more 
eminently  in  God.  There  is  in  every  creature  fome 
reprefentation  of  fome  divine  perfection  or  other  \ 
but  God  doth  not  own  any  creature  to  be  after  his 
image,  that  is  deftitute  of  goodnefs.  The  creatures 
th^t  Wfint  reafoji  and  underftanding  are  incapable  of 

this 


^he  goodnefs  of  God.  3531 

this  moral  goodnefs  we  are  fpeaking  of;  man  is  the  S  E  R  M. 
firft  in  the  rank  of  creatures  that  is  endowed  with  i  ^^"^' 
it,  and  he  is  faid  to  be  "  made  after  the  image  of 
*'  God,  and  to  have  dominipn  given  him  over  the 
"  creatures  below  him  ;"  to  fignify  to  us,  that  if 
man  had  not  been  made  after  God's  image,  in  re- 
fpedl  of  goodnefs,  he  had  been  unfit  to  rule  over 
other  creatures ;  becaufe,  without  goodnefs,  domi- 
nion would  be  tyranny  and  opprefTion  -,  and  the  more 
any  creature  partakes  of  this  perfection  of  goodnefs, 
the  more  it  refembles  God  *,  as  the  bleffed  angels, 
who  "  behold  the  face  of  God  continually,"  and  are 
thereby  "  transformed  into  his  image,  from  glory 
"  to  glory,"  their  whole  bufmefs  and  employment 
is,  to  do  good  ;  and  the  devil,  though  he  refembles 
God  in  other  perfedions  of  knowledge  and  power, 
yet  becaufe  he  is  evil,  and  envious,  and  mifchievous, 
and  fo  contrary  to  God  in  this  perfedlion,  he  is  the 
moft  oppofite  and  hateful  to  him  of  all  creatures 
whatfoever. 

And  if  this  perfedion  be  in  fome  degree '  in  the 
creature,  it  is  much  more  in  God  ;  if  it  be  derived 
from  him,  he  is  much  more  eminently  pofTelTed  of 
it  himfelf.  All  that  goodnefs  which  is  in  the  belt 
natured  of  the  fons  of  men,  or  in  the  moft  glorious 
angels  of  heaven,  is  but  an  impcrfe6b  and  weak  repre- 
fentation  of  the  divine  goodnefs. 

The  third  thing  I  propofed  to  confider,  was,  the 
effedsof  the  divine  goodnefs,  together  with  the  large 
extent  of  it,  in  refped  of  the  objeds  of  it :  "  the 
"  Lord  is  good  to  all,  and  his  tender  mercies  are 
"  over  all  his  works  ;  thou  art  good,  and  doeft 
*'  good,"  fays  David,  Pfal.  cxix.  68.  The  great 
evidence  and  demonftrarion  of  God's  goodnefs,  is 
from  the  efFefts  of  it.    To  die  ikme  purpofe  St.  Paul 

fpeaks. 


3  53  2  ^'^^  S^odnefs  of  God. 

^^'lii^'  ^P^^^*  ^^^  ^^^-  ^7*  ''  -^^  ^^^^  not  left  himfelf 
"  without  witnefs,  in  that  he  doth  good,  and  fends 
"  us  rain  from  heaven,  and  fruitful  feafons.'V 

I  fhall  confider  the  effects  of  the  divine  goodnefs, 
under  thefe  two  heads  : 

I.  The  univerfal  extent  of  God's  goodnefs  to  all 
his  creatures. 

II.  I  fhall  confider  more  particularly  the  goodnefs 
of  God  to  men,  which  we  are  more  efpecially  con- 
cerned to  take  notice  of. 

I.  The  univerfal  extent  of  his  goodnefs  to  the 
whole  creation  ;  "the  Lord  is  good  to  all."  The 
whole  creation  furnifheth  us  with  clear  evidences  and 
demonllrations  of  the  divine  goodnefs  \  which  way 
foever  we  caft  our  eyes,  we  are  encountered  with  un- 
deniable inftances  of  the  goodnefs  of  God  •,  and  every 
thing  that  we  behold,  is  a  fenfible  demonftration  of 
it ;:  "  the  heavens  declare  the  glory  of  God,  and 
*'  the  firmament  fheweth  his  handy-work,"  fays  the 
Pfalmifl,  Pfal.  xix.  i.  And  again,  Pfal.  xxxiii.  5. 
**  The  earth  is  full  of  the  goodnefs  of  the  Lord.** 
The  whole  frame  of  this  world,  and  every  creature 
in  it,  and  all  the  feveral  degrees  of  being  and  per- 
fection, which  are  in  the  creatures,  and  the  provi- 
dence of  God  towards  them  all,  in  the  prefervation 
of  them,  and  providing  for  the  happinefs  of  all  of 
them  in  fuch  degrees  as  they  are  capable  of  it,  are  a 
plentiful  demonftration  of  the  divine  goodnefs  •,  which 
I  fhall  endeavour  to  illuftratein  thefe  four  particulars. 

1.  The  univerfal  goodnefs  of  God  appears,   in 
giving  being  to  fo  many  creatures. 

2.  In  making  them  all  fo  very  good ;  confidering 
the  variety,  and  order,  and  end  of  them. 

3.  In  his  continual  prefervation  of  them. 

4.  In  providing  fo  abundantly  for  the  welfare  and 

happinefs 


The  goodnefs  of  Gojy,  3533 

happinefs  of  all  of  them,  fo  far  as  they  are  capable  ^\^  ^- 
andfenfibleof  It.  \— ^v"0 

I.  The  extent  of  God's  goodnefs  appears,  in  giv- 
ing being  to  fo  many  creatures.  And  this  is  a  pure 
effe6i:  of  goodnefs,  to  impart  and  communicate  being 
to  any  thing.  Had  not  God  been  good,  but  of  an 
envious,  and  narrow,  and  contracted  nature,  he  would 
have  confined  all  being  to  himfelf,  and  been  unwill- 
ing that  any  thing  befides  himfelf  fhould  have  been ; 
but  his  goodnefs  prompted  him  to  fpread  and  difFufe 
himfelf,  and  fet  his  power  and  wifdom  on  work,  to 
give  being  to  all  that  variety  of  creatures  which  we 
fee  and  know  to  be  in  the  world,  and,  probably,  to 
infinite  more  than  we  have  the  knowledge  of.  Now 
it  is  not  imaginable  that  God  could  have  any  other 
motive  to  do  this,  but  purely  the  goodnefs  of  his 
nature.  All  the  motives  imaginable  befides  this> 
muft  cither  be  indigency  and  want,  or  conftraint  and 
necefTity  ;  but  neither  of  thefe  can  have  any  place  in 
God  ;  and  therefore  it  was  mere  goodnefs  that  mov- 
ed him  to  give  being  to  other  things  :  and  therefore 
all  creatures  hav-e  reafon,  with  the  four  and  twenty 
elders  in  the  revelations,  "  to  cafl  their  crowns  be- 
"  fore  the  throne  of  God,  faying.  Thou  art  worthy, 
*'  O  Lord,  to  receive  glory,  and  honour,  and 
**  power ;  for  thou  haft  created  all  things,  and  for 
**  thy  pleafure  (that  is,  of  mere  goodnefs)  they  are, 
"  and  were  created." 

( I .)  Indigency  and  want  can  have  no  place  in  God  ; 
becaufe  he  that  hath  all  poffible  perfcdion,  hath  all 
plenty  in  himfelf  ;  from  whence  refults  all-fufHciency 
and  complete  happinefs.  So  that  the  divine  nature 
need  not  look  out  of  itfelf  for  happinefs,  being  in- 
capable of  any  addition  to  the  happinefs  and  per- 
fdtion  it  is  already  poffelTcd  of,    ipfa  fuis  pollens 

cpibus^ 


3534  ^^^  goodnefs  of  God, 

S  E  R  M.  opihus^  nihil  indiga  nojiri.  \Ve  make  things  for  our 
ufe,  houfes  to  flielter  us,  and  clothes  to  keep  us 
warm ;  and  we  propagate  our  kind,  to  perpetuate 
our  felves  in  our  pofterity  :  but  all  this  fuppofeth  im- 
perfedion,  and  want,  and  mortality  -,  to  none  of 
which  the  divine  nature  is  liable  and  obnoxious. 

Nay,  it  was  not  want  of  glory  which  made  God 
to  make  the  world.  It  is  true,  indeed,  the  glory 
of  God's  goodnefs  doth  herein  appear  ;  and  crea- 
tures endowed  with  underftanding  have  reafon  to 
take  notice  of  it  with  thankfulnefs,  praife,  and  admi- 
ration :  but  there  is  no  happinefs  redounds  to  God 
from  it,  nor  does  he  feed  himfelf  with  any  imagina- 
ry content  and  fatisfadiion,  fuch  as  vain-glorious  per- 
fbns  have,  from  the  fluttering  applaufe  of  their  crea- 
tures and  beneficiaries.  God  is  really  "  above  all 
*'  blefling  and  praife."  It  is  great  condefcenfion  and 
goodnefs  in  him,  to  accept  of  our  acknowledgments 
of  his  benefits,  of  our  imperfe6l  praifes,  and  igno- 
rant admiration  of  him  •,  and  were  he  not  as  wonder- 
fully good,  as  he  is  great  and  glorious,  he  would 
not  fuffer  us  to  fully  his  great  and  glorious  name,  by 
taking  it  into  our  mouths  •,  and  were  it  not  for  our 
advantage  and  happinefs  to  own  and  acknowledge  his 
benefits,  for  any  real  happinefs  and  glory  that  comes 
to  him  by  it,  he  could  well  enough  be  without  it, 
and  difpenfe  with  us  forever  entertaining  one  thought 
of  him  ♦,  and  were  it  not  for  his  goodnefs,  might  de- 
Ipife  the  praifes  of  his  creatures,  with  infinitely  more 
reafon  than  wife  men  do  the  applaufe  of  fools.  There 
is,  indeed,  one  text  of  fcripture  which  feems  to  in- 
timate that  God  made  all  creatures  for  himfelf,  as  if 
he  had  fome  need  of  them,  Prov.  xvi.  4.  "The 
"  Lord  hath  made  all  things  for  himfelf;  yea,  even 
"  the  wicked  for  the  day  of  evil.''  Now  if  by  God's 

making 


VfToe goodfiefs  o/GodI  3535 

making  all  things  for  himfelf,  be  meant,  that  he  S  F.  R  M. 
aimed  at  and  intended  the  manifellation  of  his  wif-  w^^llL* 
dom,  and  power,  and  goodnefs  in  the  creation  of 
the  world,  it  is  moft  true  that,  in  this  fenfe,  he  made 
all  things  for  himfelf:  but  if  we  underfland  it  fo,  as 
if  the  goodnefs  of  his  nature  did  not  move  him  there- 
to, but  he  had  fome  defign  to  ferve  ends  and  necef*- 
fities  of  his  own  upon  his  creatures,  this  is  far  from 
him.  But  it  is  very  probable,  that  neither  of  thele 
are  the  meaning  of  this  text,  which  may  be  rendered ^ 
with  much  better  fenfe,  and  nearer  to  the  Hebrew, 
thus,  *'  God  hath  ordained  every  thing  to  that 
"  which  is  fit  for  it,  and  the  wicked  hath  he  ordain- 
^'  ed  for  the  day  of  evil  •,"  that  is,  the  wifdom  of 
God  hath  fitted  one  thing  to  another,  punifhment; 
to  fin,  the  evil  day  to  the  evil  doers. 

(2.)  Nor  can  necemty  and  conftraint  have  any 
place  in  God.  When  there  w^as  no  creature  yet  made, 
nothing  in  being  but  God  himfelf,  there  could  be 
nothing  to  compel  him  to  make  any  thing,  and  to 
extort  from  him  the  eiTects  of  his  bounty  :  neither 
are  the  creatures  necefiary  effeds  and  emanations  from 
the  being  of  God,  flowing  from  the  divine  efTence, 
as  water  doth  from  a  fpring,  and  as  light  flreams 
from  the  fun  :  if  fo,  this,  indeed,  would  have  been 
an  argument  of  the  fulnefs  of  the  divine  nature,  but 
not  of  the  bounty  and  goodnefs  of  it ;  and  it  would 
have  been  matter  of  joy  to  us  that  we  are,  but  not 
a  true  ground  of  thankfulnefs  from  us  to  God  ;  as 
we  rejoice  and  are  glad  that  the  fun  fhines,  but  we 
do  not  give  it  any  thanks  for  fhining,  becaufe  it  fhines 
without  any  intention  or  defign  to  do  us  good  -,  it 
doth  not  know  that  we  are  the  better  for  it's  Ho-ht, 
nor  did  intend  we  fhould  be,  and  4:herefore  we  have 
nreafon  to  acknowledge  it's  goodnefs  to  us. 

Vol.  VIII.  17  G  But 

5-  . 


^he  goodnefs  of  God. 

But  God,  who  is  a  fpirit  endowed  with  knowledge 
and  iinderflanding,  docs  not  a6b  as  natural  and  ma- 
terial caufes  do,  which  ad  necefTarily  and  ignorant- 
ly  ;  whereas  he  ads  knowingly  and  voluntarily,  with 
particular  intention  and  defign,  knowing  that  he  does 
good,  and  intending  to  do  fo  freely,  and  out  of 
choice,  and  when  he  hath  no  other  conftraint  upon 
him  but  this,  that  his  goodnefs  enclines  his  will  to 
communicate  himfelf  to  do  good  :  fo  that  the  divine 
nature  is  under  no  necelTity,  but  fuch  as  is  confident 
with  the  moil  perfed  liberty,  and  freed  choice. 

Not  but  that  goodnefs  is  effential  to  God,  and  a 
neceffary  perfedion  of  his  nature,  and  he  cannot  pof- 
fibly  be  otherwife  than  good  :  but  when  he  com- 
municates his  goodnefs,  he  knows  what  he  does, 
and  wills  and  chufeth  to  do  fo. 

And  this  kind  of  necefTity  is  fo  far  from  being  any 
impeachment  of  the  divine  goodnefs,  that  it  is  the 
great  perfedion  and  praife  of  it.  The  Stoick  philo- 
fophers  midaking  this,  do  blafphemoufly  advance 
their  wife  and  virtuous  man  above  God  himfelf  ^  for 
they  reafon  thus  ♦,  ^'  A  wife  man  is  good  out  of 
*'  choice,  when  he  may  be  otherwife  i  but  God, 
**  out  of  necefTity  of  nature,  and  when  he  cannot 
*'  poflibly  be  otherwife  than  good."  But  if  they  had 
confidered  things  aright,  they  might  have  known 
that  this  is  an  imperfedion  in  their  wife  man,  that  he 
can  be  otherwife  than  good  ;  for  a  power  to  be  evil 
is  impotency  and  weaknefs.  The  highed  charader 
that  ever  was  given  of  a  man,  is  that  which  Velleius 
Paterculus  gives  of  Cato,  that  he  was  vir  bonus ^  quia 
aliter  ejfe  non  potuit^  "  a  good  man,  becaufe  he  could 
*'  not  be  otherwife  :"  this  applied  to  a  mortal  man, 
is  a  very  extravagant  and  undue  commendation  -,  but 
it  fignifies  thus  much,  diat  it  is  the  highed  perfedion, 

not 


l^he  goodnefs  of  God.  '    S  5 3 7 

not  to  be  able  to  be  otherwife  than  good  ;  and  this 
is  the  perfcdion  of  the  divinq  nature,  that  goodnefs 
is  effential  to  it :  but  the  expreiTions  and  communi- 
cations of  his  goodnefs  are  fpontaneous  and  free, 
defigned  and  direded  by  infinite  knowledge  and 
wifdom. 

This  is  the  firft:  the  fecond  particular  is,  that 
God  hath  made  all  creatures  very  good,  confidering 
the  variety,  and  order,  and  end  of  them.  But  this 
I  ihall  referve  to  another  opportunity. 


SERMON    CXLIV. 

The  goodnefs  of  God. 

P  S  A  L.    cxlv.  9. 

The  Lord  is  good  to  all^  and  his  tender  mercies  ars 
over  all  his  works, 

IN  the  handling  of  this  argument,  I  propofed  to  s  E  R  M. 
do  thefe  four  things  :  ^  cxliv. 

Firft,  to  confider  what  is  the  proper  notion  of  good- 
nefs, as  it  is  attributed  to  God. 

Secondly,  to  fhew  that  this  perfedion  belongs 
to  God. 

Thirdly,  to  confider  the  effedls  of  the  divine  good- 
nefs, together  with  the  large  extent  of  it,  in  relped 
of  it's  objects.     And, 

Fourthly,  to  anfwer  fomc  objedions  which  may 
feem  to  contradid,  and  bring  in  qucftion  the  good- 
nefs of  God. 
I  have  confidered  the  two  firft  ;  and  in  fpeaking 
Ij  G  2  to 


T'he  goodnefi  of  God, 

to  the  third,  I  propofcd  the  confidering  thele  two 
things  : 

I.  The  univerfal  extent  of  God's  goodnefs  to  all 
his  creatures. 

II.  More  efpecially  the  goodnefs  of  God  to  man, 
which  we  are  more  efpecially  concerned  to  take  no- 
tice of,  and  be  affected  with. 

The  firll  of  thefe  appears  in  thefe  four  particulars. 

1.  In  his  giving  being  to  fo  many  creatures. 

2.  In  making  them  all  fo  very  good,  conlidering 
the  number  and  variety,  the  rank  and  order,  the  end 
and  defign  of  all  of  them. 

3.  In  his  continual  prefervation  of  them. 

4.  In  his  providing  fo  abundantly  for  the  welfare 
and  happinefs  of  all  of  them,  fo  far  as  they  are  capa- 
ble and  fenfible  of  it. 

The  firft  of  thefe  I  fpoke  largely  to  ;  I  proceed  to 
fhew  in  the 

2d  place.  That  the  univerfal  goodnefs  of  God  ap- 
pears, in  making  all  thefe  creatures  fo  very  good, 
confidering  the  number  and  variety,  the  rank  and  or- 
der, the  end  and  defign  of  all  of  them.  His  good- 
Ijefs  excited  and  fet  a-work  his  power  to  make  this 
world,  and  ^11  the  creatures  in  it  *,  and  that  they  might 
be  made  in  the  beft  manner  that  could  be,  his  wif- 
dom  diredled  his  power,  "  he  hath  made  all  things 
^'  in  number,  weight,  and  mcafure  •/'  fo  that  they 
ftre  admirably  fitted  and  proportioned  to  one  another  : 
and  that  there  is  an  excellent  contrivance  in  all  forts 
of  beings,  and  a  wonderful  beauty  and  harmony  in 
the  whole  frame  of  things,  is,  I  think,  fufhciently 
viffble  to  every  difcerning  and  unprejudiced  mind. 
The  lowefl  form  of  creatures,  I  mean  thofe  which 
are  dellitute  of  fenfe,  do  all  of  them  contribute, 
fome  v/ay  or  other,  to  the  ufe,  and  convenjency,  and 
3  ^  comfort 


CXLIV. 


'The goodnefs  of  God.  3539 

comfort  of  the  creatures  above  them,  which  beino;  en-  S  E  R  M. 

.  O  ^VT    TIT- 

dowed  with  fenfe,  are  capable  of  enjoying  the  benefit 
and  delight  of  them,  which  being  fo  palpable  in  the 
greateft  part  of  them,  may  reafonably  be  prefumed, 
though  it  be  not  fo  difcernable  concerning  all  the 
reft  i  fo  that  when  we  furvey  the  whole  creation  of 
God,  and  the  feveral  parts,  we  may  well  cry  out 
with  David,  Pfal.  civ.  24.  "  O  Lord,  how  mani- 
"  fold  are  thy  works  ?  in  wifdom  haft  thou  made 
"  them  all." 

It  is  true,  indeed,  there  are  degrees  of  perfection  in 
the  creatures,  and  God  is  not  equally  good  to  all  of 
them.  Thofe  creatures  which  are  of  more  noble  and  ex- 
cellent natures,  and  to  which  he  hath  communicated 
more  degrees  of  perfo^ion,  they  partake  more  of  his 
goodnefs,  and  are  more  glorious  inftances  of  it :  but 
every  creature  partakes  of  the  divine  goodnefs  in  a 
certain  degree,  and  according  to  the  nature  and  ca- 
pacity of  it.  God,  if  he  pleafed,  could  have  made 
nothing  but  immortal  fpirits  ;  and  he  could  have 
made  as  many  of  thefe  as  there  are  individual  crea- 
tures of  all  forts  in  the  world :  but  it  feemed  good  to 
the  wife  archite6b,  to  make  feveral  ranks  and  orders 
of  beings,  and  to  difplay  his  power,  and  goodnefs, 
and  wifdom,  in  all  imaginable  variety  of  creatures ; 
all  which  ftiould  be  good  in  their  kind,  though  far 
fhort  of  the  perfection  of  angels  and  immortal  fpirits. 

He  that  will  build  an  houfe  for  all  the  ufes  and 
purpofes  of  which  an  houfe  is  capable,  cannot  make 
it  all  foundation,  and  great  beams  and  pillars  ;  muft 
not  fo  contrive  it,  as  to  malce  it  all  rooms  of  ftate 
and  entertainment :  but  there  muft  of  necelTity  be  in 
it  meaner  materials,  rooms  and  offices  for  feveral  u- 
fes  and  purpofes,  which,  however  inferior  to  the  reft 
in  dignity  and  degree,  do  yet  contribute  to  the  beau- 
ty 


^he  goodfiefs  of  God. 

ty  and  advantage  of  the  whole :  fo  in  this  great  frame 
of  the  world,  it  was  fit  there  fhould  be  variety,  arid 
different  degrees  of  perfedlion  in  the  feveral  parts  of 
it ;  and  this  is  fo  far  from  being  an  impeachment  of 
the  wifdom  or  goodnefs  of  him  that  made  it,  that 
it  is  an  evidence  of  both :  for  the  meaneft  of  all 
God's  creatures  is  good,  confidering  the  nature  and 
rank  of  it,  and  the  end  to  which  it  was  defigned  •, 
and  we  cannot  imagine  how  it  could  have  been  order- 
ed and  framed  better,  though  wc  can  eafily  tell  how 
it  might  have  been  worfe,  and  that  if  this  or  that  had 
been  wanting,  or  had  been  otherwife,  it  had  not  been 
fo  good  ;  and  thofe  who  have  been  moft  converfant 
in  the  contemplation  of  nature,  and  of  the  works  of 
God,  have  been  moft  ready  to  make  this  acknow- 
ledgment. 

But  then  if  we  confider  the  creatures  of  God, 
with  relation  to  one  another,  and  with  regard  to  the 
whole  frame  of  things,  they  will  all  appear  to  be  ve- 
ry good  \  and  notwithftanding  this  or  that  kind  of 
creatures  be  much  lefs  perfedlthan  another,  and  there 
be  a  very  great  diftance  between  the  perfedion  of  a 
worm,  and  of  an  angel ;  yet  confidering  every  thing 
in  the  rank  and  order  which  it  hath  in  the  creation, 
it  is  as  good  as  could  be,  confidering  it's  nature  and 
ufe,  and  the  place  allotted  to  it  among  the  creatures. 

And  this  difference  in  the  works  of  God,  between 
the  goodnefs  of  the  feveral  parts  of  the  creation,  and 
the  excellent  and  perfe6l  goodnefs  of  the  whole,  the 
fcripture  is  very  careful  to  exprefs  to  us  in  the  hifto- 
ry  of  the  creation,  where  you  find  God  reprefented, 
as  firft  looking  upon,  and  confidering  every  day*6 
work  by  itfelf,  and  approving  it,  and  pronouncing 
it  to  be  good,  Gen.  i,  4,  lo,  12,  18,  21,  25. 
at  the  end  of  every  day's  work,  it  is  faid,  that  *'  God 

"  faw 


^he  gcodnefs  of  God.  354^ 

"  faw  the  lio:ht,  that  it  was  o;ood  :'*  but  then,  when  S  E  R  M. 

CXLIV. 

,all  was  finifliecl,  and  he  furveyed  the  whole  together, 
it  is  faid,  ver.  3 1 .  that  "  God  faw  every  thing  that 
"  he  had  made,  and  behold,  it  was  very  good :" 
very  good,  that  is,  the  bell  -,  the  Hebrews  having 
no  other  fuperlative.  Every  creature  of  God  by  it- 
felf  is  good  :  but  take  the  whole  together,  and  they 
are  very  good,  the  befl  that  could  be. 

"3.  The  univerfal  goodnefs  of  God  farther  appears, 
in  the  careful  and  contiiual  prefervation  of  the  things 
which  he  hath  made  i  his  upholding  and  maintaining 
the  feveral  creatures  in  being,  in  their  natural  ftatc 
and  order ;  thofe  which  have  life,  in  life,  to  the  pe- 
riod which  he  hath  determined  and  appointed  for 
them ;  in  his  preferving  the  whole  world,  his  manag- 
ing and  governing  this  vail  frame  of  things,  in  fuch 
fort,  as  to  keep  it  from  running  into  confufion  and 
diforder.  This  is  a  clear  demonilration,  no  lefs  of 
the  goodnefs  than  of  the  v/ifdom  and  power  of  God, 
that  for  fo  many  ages  all  the  parts  of  it  have  kept 
their  places,  and  perform  the  offices  and  work  for 
which  nature  deiigned  them  •,  that  the  world  is  not, 
in  the  courfe  of  fo  nmny  thoufand  years,  grown  old 
and  weak,  and  out  of  repair,  and  that  the  frame  of 
things  doth  not  diffolve  and  fall  in  pieces. 

And  the  goodnefs  of  God  doth  not  only  take  care 
of  the  main,  and  lupport  the  whole  frame  of  things, 
and  preferve  the  more  noble  and  confiderable  crea- 
tures, but  even  the  leail  and  meaneft  of  them.  The 
providence  of  God  doth  not  overlook  any  thing  that 
he  hath  made,  nor  dcfpife  any  of  the  works  of  his 
hands,  fo  as  to  let  them  relapfe,  and  fall  back  into 
nothing,  through  neglect  and  inadvertency ;  as  ma- 
ny as  there  are,  he  takes  care  of  them  all,  Pfal.  civ. 
27,  28.  where  the  pfalmift,  fpeaking  of  theinnumer 

rablc 


CXLIV. 


2^42  '       I'he goodnefs  of  God. 

SE  R  M.  rable  multitude  of  creatures  upon  the  earth,  and  ill 
the  fea, "  thefe  (faith  he)  wait  all  upon  thee,  that  thou 
"  mayeft  give  them  their  meat   in  due  feafon  ;  that 
"  thou  givell  them,  they  gather  ;  thou  openeft  thine 
■*'  hand,  and  they  are  filled  with  good."     And  to 
the  fame  purpofe,  Pfal.  cxiv.  15,  16.  "  The  eyes  of 
*'  all  wait  upon  thee,  and  thou  givefl  them  their 
**  meat  in  due  feafon ;  thou  openeft  thine  hand,  and 
*'  fatisfieft  the  defire  of  every  hving  thing."     The 
inanimate  creatures,  which  are  without  fenfej  and 
the  brute  creatures,  which  though  they  have  fenfe, 
are  without  underftanding,  and  fo  can  have  no  end 
and  defign  of  felf-prefervation,  God  preferves  them, 
no  lefs  than  men  who  are  endowed  with  reafon  and 
forefight  to  provide  for  themfelves  -,    Pfal.  xxxvi.  6. 
*'  Thou  preferveft  man  and  beaft."  And  Pfal.  cxlvii. 
9.  "  He  giveth  to  the  beaft  his  food,  and  to  the 
''  young  ravens  which  cry."     And  fo   our  Sa- 
viour declares  to  us  the  particular  providence  of 
God  towards  thofe  creatures.  Matt.  vi.  26.   "  Be- 
''  hold  the  fowls  of  the  air :  for  they  fow  not,  nei- 
*'  ther  do  they  reap,    nor  gather  into  barns ;    yet 
**  your  heavenly  Father  feedeth  them."  Ver.  28,  29. 
*'  Confider  the  lilies  of  the  field  how  they  grow.; 
**  they  toil  not,  neither  do  they  fpin  :  and  yet  I  fay 
**  unto  you,  that  even  Solomon  in  all  his  glory  wasr 
'*  not  arrayed  like  one  of  thefe." 

And  though  all  the  creatures  below  man,  being 
without  underftanding,  can  take  no  notice  of  thia 
bounty  of  God  to  them,  nor  make  any  acknowledg- 
ments to  him  for  it  •,  yet  man,  who  is  the  prieft  of 
the  vifible  creation,  and  placed  here  in  this  great 
temple  of  the  world,  to  offer  up  facrifices  of  praife 
and  thankfgiving  to  God,  for  his  univerfal  goodnefs 
to  all  his  creatures,  ought  to  blefs  God  in  their  be- 
half, 


The  gcodnefs  ofGoi5.  SS4^§ 

Kalf,  and  to  fing  praifes  to  him,  in  the  name  of  all  S  E  RM- 
the  inferior  creatures,  which  are  fubjedled  to  his  do- 
minion and  life ;  becaufe  they  are  all,  as  it  were,  his 
family,  his  fervants  and  utenfils  j  and  if  God  fhould 
negled:  any  of  them,  and  fuffer  them  to  perifh  and 
mifcarry,  it  is  we  that  fhould  find  the  inconvenience 
and  want  of  them  •,  and  therefore  we  fliould  on  their 
behalf  celebrate  the  praifes  of  God  ♦,  as  we  find  Da- 
vid often  does  in  the  Pfalms,  calling  upon  the  inani- 
mate and  the  brute  creatures  to  praife  the  Lord. 

4.  The  univcrfal  goodnefs  of  God  doth  yet  farther 
appear,  in  providing  fo  abundantly  for  the  welfare 
and  happinefs  of  all  his  creatures,  fo  far  as  they  are 
capable  and  fenfible  of  it.     He  doth  not  only  fup- 
port  and  preferve  his  creatures  in  being,  but  takes 
care  that  they  fhould  all  enjoy  that  happinefs  and 
pleafure  which  their   natures  are  capable  of     The 
creatures  endowed  with  fenfe  and  reafon,  which  on- 
ly are  capable  of  pleafure  and  happinefs,  God  hath 
taken  care  to  fatisfy  the  feveral  appetites  and  inclina- 
tions which  he  hath  planted  in  them  ^  and  accord- 
ing as  nature  hath  enlarged  their  defires  and  capaci- 
ties, fo  he  enlargeth  his  bounty  towards  them  -,   "  hs 
"  openeth  his  hand,  and  fatisfieth  the  defire  of  every 
"  living  thing."    God  doth  not  immediately  bring 
meat  to  the  creatures  when  they  are  hungry  ;    but 
it  is  near  to  them,  commonly  in  the  elements  where- 
in they  are  bred,  or  within  their  reach,  and  he  hath 
planted  inchnations  in  them  to  hunt  after  it,  and 
to  lead  and  dired  them  to  it,  and  to  encourage  felf- 
prefervation^  and  to  oblige  and  infdgate  them  tait-,- 
and  that  they  might  not  be  melancholy  and  weary 
of  life,  he  hath  fo  ordered  the  nature  of  living  crea- 
tures,   that  hunger  and  thirft  are  moil  implacable 
defires,  exceeding  painful,     and  even  intolerable  y 
VoL.VIIL  17  H  &nd 

5* 


TChe  goodnefs  of  God. 

and  likewife  that  the  fatisfa(5tion  of  thefe  appetites 
Ihould  be  a  mighty  pleafure  to  them.  And  for  thofe 
creatures  that  are  young,  and  not  able  to  provide 
for  thcmfelves,  God  hath  planted  in  all  creatures  a 
^o^yviy  a  natural  affedion  towards  their  young  ones, 
which  will  effedtually  put  them  upon  feeking  provi- 
fions  for  them,  and  cherilhing  them,  with  that  care 
and  tendernefs  which  their  weak  and  helplefs  condi- 
tion doth  require :  and  reafon  is  not  more  powerful 
and  effcdual  in  mankind  to  this  purpofe,  than  this 
natural  inftind  is  in  brute  creatures  ;  which  fhcws 
what  care  God  hath  taken,  and  what  provifion  he 
hath  made  in  the  natural  frame  of  all  his  creatures, 
for  the  fatisfadlion  of  the  inclinations  and  appetites 
which  he  hath  planted  in  them  •,  the  fatisfaftion 
whereof  is  their  pleafure  and  happinefs.  i^nd  thus  I 
have  done  with  the  firft  head  I  propofed,  the  uni- 
verfal  extent  of  God's  goodnefs  to  his  creatures  :  let 
us  now  proceed,  in  the 

lid  place,  to  confider  more  particularly  the  good- 
nefs of  God  to  men  j  which  we  are  more  efpecially 
concerned  to  take  notice  of,  and  to  be  affe6bed  with 
it.  And  we  need  go  no  farther  than  our  own  obfer- 
vation  and  experience,  to  prove  the  goodnefs  of 
God  ;  every  day  of  our  lives  "  we  fee  and  tafte  that 
**  the  Lord  is  good  ;"  all  that  we  are,  and  all  the 
good  that  we  enjoy,  and  all  that  we  exped  and  hope 
for,  is  from  the  divine  goodnefs :  "  every  good  and 
**  perfe6b  gift  is  from  above,  and  cometh  down  from 
*'  the  father  of  lights,"  Jam.  i.  17.  And  thebefland 
moll  perfed  of  his  gifts  he  beflows  on  the  fons  of  men. 
What  isfaid  of  the  wifdom  of  God,  Prov.viii.  may  be 
applied  to  his  goodnefs  y  the  goodnefs  of  God  fliines 
forth  in  all  the  works  of  the  creation,  in  the  heavens 
and  clouds  above,  and  in  the  fountains  of  the  great 
3  deep. 


^he  goodnefs  of  God.  3545 

rfeep,  in  the  earth  and  the  fields,  but  "  its  delight  S  E  R  M. 
"^is  with  the  fons  of  men."  Such  is  the  goodnefs 
of  God  to  man,  that  it  is  reprefented  to  us  in  fcrip- 
ture  under  the  notion  of  love:  God  is  good  to  all 
his  creatures,  but  he  is  only  faid  to  "  love  the  fona 
*'  of  men."  More  particularly  the  goodnefs  of  Goo 
to  man  appears, 

I.  That  he  hath  given  us  fuch  noble  and  excellent 
beings,  and  placed  us  in  fo  high  a  rank  and  order  of 
his  creatures.  We  owe  to  him  that  we  are,  and 
what  we  are  ;  we  do  not  only  partake  of  that  effe6t 
of  his  goodnefs  which  is  common  to  us  with  all  other 
creatures,  that  we  have  received  our  being  from  him ; 
but  we  are  peculiarly  obliged  to  him  for  his  more  e- 
fpecial  goodnefs,  that  he  hath  made  us  reafonable 
creatures,  of  that  kind  which  we  fhould  have  cho- 
fen  to  have  been  of,  if  we  could  fuppofe  that,  before 
we  were,  it  had  been  referred  to  us,  and  put  to  our 
choice,  what  part  we  would  be  of  this  vifible  world. 
But  we  did  not  contrive  and  chufe  this  condition  for 
our  felves,  we  are  no  ways  acceffary  to  the  dignity 
and  excellency  of  our  beings :  but  God  chofe  this 
condition  for  us,  and  made  us  what  we  are  •,  fo  that 
we  may  fay  with  David,  Pfal.  c.  3,  4,  5.  "  It  is  he 
"  that  hath  made  us,  and  not  we  our  felves.  O 
*'  enter  into  his  gates  with  thankfgiving,  and  into 
"  his  courts  with  praife  \  be  thankful  unto  him, 
"  and  fpeak  good  of  his  name :  for  the  Lord  is 
"  good."  The  goodnefs  of  God  is  the  fpring  and 
fountain  of  our  beings  •,  but  for  that,  we  had  been 
nothing ;  and  but  for  his  farther  goodnefs,  we  might 
have  been  any  thing,  of  the  lowed  and  meaneft  rank 
of  his  creatures.  But  the  goodnefs  of  God  hath  been 
pleafed  to  advance  us  to  be  the  top  and  perfection  of 
the  vifible  creation  ;  he  hath  been  pleafed  to  endow 

17  H  2  us 


3  54^  ^he  goodnefs  of  God. 

SF.RM.  i^is  with  mmd  and  undcrflandine;,  and  made  us  ca* 

CXLIV. 

pable  of  happinefs,  in  the  knowledge,  and  love, 
and  enjoyment  of  himfelf.  He  hath  curioufly  and 
wonderfully  wrought  the  frame  of  our  bodies,  fo  as 
to  make  them  fit  habitations  for  reafonable  fouls,  and 
immortal  fpirits  ,  he  hath  made  our  very  bodies  vef- 
fels  of  honour,  when  of  the  very  fame  clay  he  hath 
made  innumerable  other  creatures  of  a  much  lower 
rank  and  condition  :  fo  that  though  man,  in  relpe6l 
of  his  body,  be  akin  to  the  earth,  yet,  in  regard  of 
his  foul,  he  is  allied  to  heaven,  of  a  divine  original, 
and  defcended  from  above.  Of  all  the  creatures  in 
this  vifible  world,  man  is  the  chief;  and  what  is  faid 
of  behemoth,  or  the  elephant.  Job  xlii.  in  refpe6c 
of  his  great  ftrength,  and  the  vaft  bignefs  of  his  bo- 
dy, is  only  true  abfolutely  of  man,  that  he  is,  divini 
cpficii  caputs  "  the  chief  of  the  ways  of  God,  and 
*'  upon  earth  there  is  none  like  him.'* 

The  Pfalmift  takes  particular  notice  of  the  good- 
nefs of  God  to  man,  in  this  refpedl  of  the  excellency 
and  dignity  of  his  beinq;  ^  Pfal.  viii.  5.  *'  Thou 
*•  haft  made  him  little  lower  than  the  angels,  and 
"  haft  crowned  him  with  glory  and  honour."  And 
this  advantage  of  our  nature  above  other  creatures, 
we  ought  thankfully  to  acknov;ledge ;  though  moft 
fnen  are  fo  ftupid  as  to  overlook  it ;  as  Elihu  com- 
plains. Job  XXXV.  ic^,  II.  "  None  faith,  where  is 
**  God  my  maker,  who  teacheth  us  more  than  the 
'*^  beafts  of  the  earth,  and  maketh  us  wifer  than  the 
"  fowls  of  heaven  V 

2.  The  goodnefs  of  God  to  man  appears,  in  that 
he  hath  made  and  ordained  fo  many  things  chiefly  for 
pur  ufe.  The  beauty  and  ufefulnefs  of  the  creatures 
i^elow  us,  their  plain  fubferviency  to  our  neceffity, 
^nd  benefit,  and  delight,  are  fo  many  clear  eviden- 
ces 


^he  goodnefs  ofGoT^.  3547 

ees  of  the  divine  goodnefs  to  us,  not  only  difcernablc  S  E  R  M. 
to  our  reafon,  but  even  palpable  to  our  fenfes,  fo  that 
we  may  *'  fee  and  tafte  that  the  Lord  is  gracious." 
This  David  particularly  infills  upon  as  a  fpecial 
ground  of  praife  and  thankfgiving  to  God,  that  he 
hath  fubjeded  fo  great  a  part  of  the  creation  to  otir 
dominion  andufe;  Pfal.  viii.  6,  7,  8.  fpeaking  of 
man,  "  thou  haft  made  him  to  have  dominion  over 
"  the  works  of  thy  hands  j  thou  haft  put  all  things 
*'  under  his  feet :  all  Iheep  and  oxen,  yea,  and  the 
"  beafts  of  the  field  :  the  fowl  of  the  air,  and  the 
^'  fifli  of  the  fea,  and  whatfoever  pafleth  through  the 
''  paths  of  the  feas."  What  an  innumerable  variety 
of  creatures  are  there  in  this  inferior  world,  which 
were  either  folely  or  principally  made  for  the  ufe  and 
fervice,  pleafure  and  delight  of  man  !  How  many 
things  are  there,  which  ferve  for  the  neceffity  and 
fupport,  for  the  contentment  and  comfort  of  our 
lives  !  How  many  things  for  the  refreftiment  and  de- 
light of  our  fenfes,  and  the  exercife  and  employment 
of  our  underftandings!  That  God  hath  not  made 
man  for  the  fervice  of  other  creatures,  but  other  crea- 
tures for  the  fervice  of  man,  Epidetus  doth  very  in- 
genioufiy  argue  from  this  obfervation  -,  that  the  crea- 
tures below  man,  the  brute  beafts,  have  all  things  in 
a  readinefs,  nature  having  provided  for  them  meat, 
and  drink,  and  lodging  •,  fo  that  they  have  no  ab- 
folute  need  that  any  fhould  build  houfes,  or  make 
clothes,  or  ftore  up  provifion,  or  prepare  and  drels 
meat  for  them  :  for,  fays  he,  "  being  made  for  the 
*'  fervice  of  another,  they  ought  to  be  furnifhed 
''  with  thefe  things,  that  they  may  be  always  in  a 
*'  readinefs  to  ferve  their  lord  and  mafter  j  a  plain 
''  evidence  that  they  were  made  to  ferve  man,  and 
^'  not  man  to  ferve  them.'* 

And 


^he  goodnefs  of  God. 

And  to  raife  our  thoughts  of  God's  goodnefs  to  us** 
the  fons  of  men  yet  higher,  as  he  hath  given  us  the 
creatures  below  us  for  our  ufe  and  convenience ;  fo 
hath  he  appointed  the  creatures  above  us  for  our 
guard  and  protection,  not  to  fay  for  our  fervice : 
Pfal.  xxxiv.  7.  "  The  angel  of  the  Lord  encampeth 
*'  round  about  them  that  fear  him,  and  deliver- 
*'  eth  them  ;"  and  then  it  follows,  "  O  tafte  and 
"  fee  that  the  Lord  is  good!"  and  Plal.  xci.  11, 
12.  "  He  fhall  give  his  angels  charge  over  thee,  to 
"  keep  thee  in  all  thy  ways  ;  they  fhall  bear  thee  up 
*'  in  their  hands."  Nay,  the.apoftle  fpeaks  as  if 
their  whole  bufinefs  and  employment  were  to  attend 
upon,  and  be  ferviceable  to,  good  men  *,  Heb.  i. 
14.  "  Are  they  not  all  miniilring  fpirits,  fent  forth 
*'  to  miniiler  for  them  who  fhall  be  heirs  of  falvation?" 

3.    The  goodnefs  of  God  to  men  appears,  in  his 
tender  love,  and  peculiar  care  of  us  above  the  reft  of 
the  creatures,  being  ready  to  impart  and  difpenfe  to 
us  the  good  that  is  fuitable  to  our  capacity  and  con- 
dition, and  concerned  to  exempt  us  from  thofe  ma-r 
nifold  evils  of  want  and  pain,  to  which  we  are  ob- 
noxious :  I  do  not  mean  an  abfolute  exemption  from, 
all  forts   and  degrees  of  evil,    and   a  perpetual  te- 
nure of  temporal  happinefs,  and  enjoyment  of  all 
good  things  •,  this  is  not  fuitable  to  our  prefent  ftate, 
and  the  rank  and  order  which  we  are  in  among  the 
creatures ;  nor  would  it  be  beft  for  us,  all  things 
confidcred.     But  the  goodnefs  of  God  to  us  above 
other  creatures,  is  proportionable  to  the  dignity  and 
excellency  of  our  natures  above  them ;  for,  as  the 
apoftle  reafons  in  another  cafe,  "  doth  God  take  care 
*'  for  oxen,"  and  fhall  he  not  much  more  extend 
his  care  to  man  ?  To  this  purpofe  our  Saviour  rea- 
fons ^  Mat,  vi.  26.  "Behold  the  fowls  of  the  air  : 

"  for 


^he  goodnefs  of  God.  3  549^ 

**  for  they  fow  not,  neither  do  they  reap,  nor  ga-  S  E  R  M. 
"  ther  into  barns  ;  yet  your  heavenly  father  feedeth 
"  them  •,  are  ye  not  much  better  than  they  ?"  And 
ver.  30.  "  Wherefore  if  God  fo  clothe  the  grafs  of 
the  field,  which  to  day  is,  and  to  morrow  is  caft  in- 
*^  to  the  oven,  Ihall  he  not  much  more  clothe  you  V* 
and  chap.  x.  29,  30,  31.  "  Are  not  two  fparrows 
"  fold  for  a  farthing  ?  and  one  of  them  fhall  not  fall 
"  on  the  ground  without  your  father.  But  the  very 
"  hairs  of  your  head  are  all  numbred.  Fear  ye  not 
"  therefore,  ye  are  of  more  value  than  many  fpar- 
*'  rows."  It  is  true,  God  hath  afpecial  care  of  his 
people  and  fervants,  above  the  reft  of  mankind  ^ 
but  our  Saviour  ufeth  thefe  arguments  to  his  dif- 
ciples,  to  convince  them  of  the  providence  of  God 
towards  them,  as  men,  and  of  a  more  excellent  na- 
ture than  other  creatures. 

And  indeed  we  are  born  into  the  world  more  de- 
ftitute  and  helplefs  than  other  creatures ;  as  if  it  were 
on  purpofe  to  fhew,  that  God  had  referved  us  for 
his  more  peculiar  care  and  providence ;  which  is  fb 
great,  that  the  fcripture,  by  way  of  condefcenfion,, 
exprcfleth  it  to  us  by  the  name  of  love  ;  fo  that  what 
effedls  of  care  the  greateft  and  tendereft  affedlion  in 
men  is  apt  to  produce  towards  one  another,  that, 
and  much  more,  is  the  cffedl  of  God's  goodnefs  to 
us :  and  this  affection  of  God  is  common  to  all  men, 
(though,  of  all  creatures,  we  have  leaft  deferved  it) 
and  is  ready  to  diffufe  and  fhed  abroad  itfelf,  where- 
ever  men  are  qualified  for  it  by  duty  and  obedience, 
and  do  not  obftrud  and  ftop  the  emanations  of  it, 
by  their  fins  and  provocations. 

And  though  the  greateft  part  of  mankind  be  evil, 
yet  this  doth  not  wholly  put  a  ftop  to  his  goodiiefs, 
though  it  caufe  many  abatements  of  it,  and  hinder 

many 


3550  ^he  goodnefs  of  Got, 

S  E  R  M.  many  good  things  from  us  :  but  fuch  is  the  good^ 
nels  of  God,  notwithftanding  the  evil  and  undutiful- 
nefs  of  men,  that  he  is  pleafed  flill  to  concern  him- 
felf  in  the  government  of  the  world,  and  to  preferve 
the  focieties  of  men  from  running  into  utter  confufi- 
on  and  diforder  ;  notwithftanding  the  violence  and 
irregularities  of  men's  wills  and  pafTions,  the  commu- 
nities of  men  fubfift  upon  tolerable  terms  ;  and  not- 
withftanding the  rage  and  craft  of  evil  men,  poor 
and  unarmed  innocence  and  virtue  is  ufually  protec- 
ted, and,  fometimes,  rewarded  in  this  world,  and 
domineering  and  outragious  wickednefs  is  very  often 
remarkably  checked  and  chaftifed.  All  which  in- 
ftances  of  God's  providence,  as  they  are  greatly  for 
the  advantage  and  comfort  of  mankind,  fo  are  they 
en  effe61:ual  declaration  of  that  goodnefs  which  go- 
verns all  things,  and  of  God's  kind  care  of  the  af- 
fairs and  concernments  of  men  \  fo  that  if  we  look 
no  farther  than  this  world,  we  may  fay  with  David, 
"  Verily  there  is  a  reward  for  the  righteous,  verily 
*'  there  is  a  God  that  judgeth  the  earth." 

I  know  this  argument  hath  been  perverted  to  a 
quite  contrary  purpofe  ;  that  if  goodnefs  governed 
the  world,  and  adminiftred  the  affairs  of  it,  good 
and  evil  would  not  be  fo  carelefty  and  promifcuoufly 
difpenfed ;  good  men  would  not  be  fo  great  fuf- 
ferers,  nor  wicked  men  fo  profpcrous  as  many  times 
they  arc. 

But  this  alfo,  if  rightly  confidered,  is  an  effe6l  of 
God's  goodnefs,  and  infinite  patience  to  mankind, 
that  "  he  caufeth  his  fun  to  rife,  and  his  rain  to  fall 
'^  upon  the  juiland  unjuil-,"  that,  upon  the  provo- 
cations of  men,  he  does  not  give  over  his  care  of 
them,  and  throw  all  things  into  confufion  and  ruin: 
this  plainly  fticws,    that  he  defigns  this  life  for  the 

trial 


7he  goodnefs  of  God,  3  55  i 

trial  of  men's  virtue  and  obedience,  in  order  to  the  S  E  R  M. 
greater  reward  of  it  -,  and  therefore  ''he  fuffcrs  men  ^^^^^• 
"  to  walk  in  their  own  ways,"  without  any  great 
check  and  controul,  and  referves  the  main  bulk  of 
rewards  and  punlfhments  for  another  world  :  So  that 
all  this  is  io  far  from  being  any  objection  againft  the 
goodnefs  of  God,  that,  on  the  contrary,  it  is  an  ar- 
gument of  God's  immenfe  goodnefs,  and  infinite 
patience,  that  the  world  fubfifts  and  continues,  and 
that  he  permits  men  to  take  their  courfe,  for  the  ful- 
ler trial  of  them,  and  the  clearer  and  more  effedlual 
declaration  of  his  juflice,  in  the  rewards  and  punifh- 
ments  of  another  life. 

Fourthly  and  laftly,  the  goodnefs  of  God  to  man- 
kind moll  glorioufly  appears,  in  the  provifion  he 
hath  made  for  our  eternal  happinefs.  What  the  hap- 
pinefs  of  man  Ihould  have  been,  had  he  continued 
in  innocency,  is  not  particularly  revealed  to  us  ;  but 
this  is  certain,  that  by  wilful  tranfgreffions  we  have 
forfeited  all  that  happinefs  which  our  natures  are  ca- 
pable of  In  this  lapfed  and  ruinous  condition  of 
mankind,  the  goodnefs  and  mercy  of  God  was  pleaf- 
ed  to  employ  his  wifdom  for  our  recovery,  and  to 
reftore  us  not  only  to  a  new  but  a  greater  capacity 
of  glory  and  happinefs.  And  in  order  to  this,  the 
fon  of  God  affumes  our  nature  for  the  recovery  and 
redemption  of  man  •,  and  the  pardon  of  fin  is  purchaf- 
ed  for  us  by  his  blood  •,  eternal  life,  and  the  way  to 
it,  are  clearly  difcovered  to  us.  God  is  pleafed  to 
enter  into  a  new  and  better  covenant  with  us,  and  to 
afford  us  inward  grace  and  alTiftance,  to  enable  us  to 
perform  the  conditions  of  it ;  and  gracioufly  to  ac- 
cept of  our  faith  and  repentance,  of  our  fincere  refo- 
lutions  and  endeavours  of  holinefs  and  obedience. 

Vol,  VIII.  17 1  for 


V^^2  ^he  hoUnefs  of  God. 

SE^UM    for  perfe6l  and  complete  righteoufnefs,  for  his  fake 
'^'      '    who  "  fulfilled  all  righteoufnefs." 

This  is  the  great  and  amazing  goodnefs  of  God 
to  mankind,  that  when  we  were  in  open  rebellion 
againft  him,  he  fhould  entertain  thoughts  of  peace 
and  reconciliation  •,  and  when  he  palTed  by  the  fallen 
angels,  he  fhould  fet  his  affedion  and  love  upon  the 
finful  and  miferable  fons  of  men.  And  "  herein  is 
*'  the  love  of  God  to  men  perfected, "  that  as  he 
hath  made  all  creatures,  both  above  us,  and  below 
us,  fubfervient  and  inftrumental  to  our  fubfiftence 
and  prefervation  ;  fo,  for  the  ranfom  of  our  fouls 
from  eternal  ruin  and  mifery,  ^'  he  hath  not  fpared 
''  his  own  fon,  but  hath  given  him  up  to  death  for 
''  us  ;'*  him,  whom  "  he  hath  commanded  all  the 
*'  angels  of  God  to  worlhip,"  and  to  whom  he 
hath  made  fubjed:  all  creatures  in  heaven  and  earth  •, 
him,  "  who  made  the  world,"  and  "  who  upholds 
*^  all  things  by  the  word  of  his  power,  who  is  the 
*'  brightnefs  of  his  glory,  and  the  exprefs  image  of 
^'  his  perfon." 

And  after  fuch  a  flupendous  inflance  as  this,  what 
may  we  not  reafonably  hope  for,  aad  promife  our 
felves  from  the  divine  goodnefs }  So  the  apoftle  hath 
taught  us  to  reafon  •,  Rom.  viii.  32.  "  He  that  fpar- 
"  ed  not  his  own  fon,  but  delivered  him  up  for  us 
"  all,  how  fliall  he  m;t  with  him  ^Ifo  freely  give  us 
['  all  things  ?" 


5  E  R, 


I 


3  553 

SERMON   CXLV. 

The  goodnefs  of  God. 

P  S  A  L.    cxiv.  9. 

ne  Lord  is  good  to  all^  and  his  tender  mercies  are 

ever  all  his  works ^ 

N  handling  this  argument,  I  proceeded  in  this  S  E  R  M; 
method:  '''^^^' 

Firft,  to  confidcr  what  is  the  proper  notion  of 
goodnefs. 

Secondly,  to  fhewthat  this  perfedioii  of  goodnefs 
belongs  to  God. 

Thirdly,  I  confidered  the  effe(5ls  of  the  divine 
goodnefs,  under  thefe  heads  : 

I.  The  univerfal  extent  of  it,  in  the  number.  Va- 
riety, order,  end,  and  defign  of  the  things  created 
by  him,  and  his  prefervation,  and  providing  for  the 
Avelfare  and  happinefs  of  them* 

II.  I  confidered  more  particularly  the  goodnefs  of 
God  to  mankind,  of  which  I  gave  thefe  four  inftances* 

1.  That  he  hath  given  us  fuch  noble  beings,  and 
placed  us  in  fo  high  a  rank  and  order  of  his  creatures* 

2.  In  that  he  hath  made  and  ordained  fo  many' 
things  chiefly  for  us. 

3.  In  that  he  exercifeth  fo  peculiar  a  providence 
over  us  above  the  reft,  that  though  he  is  faid  to  be 
good  to  all,  he  is  only  faid  to  love  the  fons  of  men, 

4.  In  that  he  hath  provided  for  us  eternal  life  and 
happinefs.     There  only  now  remains  the 

Fourth  and  laft  particular  to  be  fpoken  to,  which 
was,  to  anfwer  fome  objedions  which  may  feem  to 

J7  I  2  con- 


T'he  hoUnefs  of  God^ 

contradi6t  and  bring  in  queftion  the  goodnefs  of  God  ; 
and  they  are  many,  and  have  (fome  of  them  efpeci- 
ally)  great  difficulty  in  them,  and  therefore  it  will  re- 
quire great  confideration  and  care,  to  give  a  clear  and 
fatisfadory  anfwer  to  them,  which  undoubtedly  they 
are  capable  of;  the  goodnefs  of  God  being  one  of 
the  moil  certain  and  unqueftionable  truths  in  the 
world.  I  fhall  mention  thofe  which  are  moil  confi- 
derable  and  obvious,  and  do  almoft  of  themfelves 
fpring  up  in  every  man's  mind,  and  they  are  thefe 
four;  the  firftofthem  more  general,  the  other  three 
more  particuliar. 

Firft,  If  God  be  fo  exceeding  good,  whence  comes 
it  to  pafs  that  there  is  fo  much  evil  in  the  world,  of 
feveral  kinds  -,  evil  of  imperfe6lion,  evil  of  affliction 
or  fuffering,  and  (which  is  the  greateft  of  all  others, 
and  indeed  the  caufe  of  them)  evil  of  fin  ? 

Secondly,  the  dodrine  of  abfolute  reprobation  -,  by 
which  is  meant,  the  decreeing  of  the  greatell  part  of 
mankind  to  eternal  mifery  and  torment,  without  any 
confideration  or  refpe6l  to  their  fin  or  fault  :  this 
feems  notorioufly  to  contradict,  not  only  the  notion 
of  infinite  goodnefs,  but  any  competent  meafureand 
degree  of  goodnefs. 

Thirdly,  the  eternal  mifery  and  punifhment  of 
men  for  temporal  faults,  feems  hard  to  be  reconciled 
with  that  cxcefs  of  goodneis  which  we  fuppofe  to 
be  in  God. 

Fourthly,  the  infbances  of  God's  great  feverity  to 
mankind,  upon  occafion,  in  thofe  great  calamities 
which,  by  the  providence  of  God,  hath,  in  feveral  a- 
ges,  either  befallen  mankind  in  genend,  or  particular 
nations  -,  and  here  I  iliall  confine  niyfclf  to  fcripture 
inllances,  as  being  the  moil  certain  an.d  remarkable, 
or  at  kalt    equal  to  any  that  are  to  be  met  with  in 

hiftory  j 


"The  hoUnefs  of  God.  355  5 

hiftory  ;  as  the  early  and  univerfal  degeneracy  of  S  E  R  M- 
mankind,  by  the  fm  and  tranfgrefTion  of  our  firll  pa- 
rents ;  the  deftrudtion  of  the  world  by  a  general  de- 
luge 'y  the  fudden  and  terrible  deilru6lioa  of  Sodom 
and  Gomorrha,  and  the  cities  about  them,  by  fire 
and  brimftone  from  heaven  ;  the  cruel  extirpation  of 
the  Canaanitcs,  by  the  exprefs  command  of  God  ; 
and  laflly,  the  great  calamities  which  befel  the  Jew- 
ifh  nation,  and  the  final  ruin  and  perdition  of  them 
at  the  deflrudtion  of  Jerufalem. 

Thefe  are  the  objedlions  againft  the  goodnefs  of 
God,  which  I  fhall  feverally  confider,  and,  with  all 
the  brevity  and  clearnefs  I  can,  endeavour  to  return 
a  particular  anfwcr  to  them. 

The  firft  objection,  which  I  told  you  is  more  ge- 
neral, is  this  ;  if  God  be  fo  exceeding  good,  whence 
then  comes  it  to  pafs  that  there  is  fo  much  evil  in  the 
world,  of  feveral  kinds?  It  is  evident  beyond  denial, 
that  evil  abounds  in  the  world.  "  The  whole  world 
"  lies  in  evil,"  Iv  rca  "wov/jf^ci  kbTtcci^  "  lies  in  the  wick- 
*^  ednefs,  (fo  our  tranilacion  renders  it)  is  involved 
in  fin  ;  but  by  the  article  and  oppofition,  St.  John 
feems  to  intend  the  devil :  "  We  know,  fays  he, 
''  that  we  are  of  God,  and  the  whole  world,"  Ij^ 
Tta  Tzrov^fu  ic£TTOciy  "  is  fubjed:  to  the  evil  one,"  and 
under  his  power  and  dominion.  Which  way  foever 
we  render  it,  it  fignifies,  that  evil  of  one  kind  or  o- 
ther  reigns  in  the  world.  Now,  can  evil  come  from 
a  good  God  ?  "  Out  of  the  fame  mouth  proceedeth 
*'  bkfTing  and  curfing.  Doth  a  fountain  fend  forth 
*'  at  the  fame  place  fweet  water  and  bitter  ?  This 
*'  cannot  be,"  as  St.  James  fpeak^  in  another  cafe. 
But  all  evils  that  are  in  the  world,  mull  either  be  di- 
redly  procured  by  the  divine  providence,  or  permit- 
ted to  happen  j  and  next  to  the  caufing  and  procur- 
•^  inop 


355^  ^'^^  goodnejl  of  God. 

^  cxLv^*  ^"^  ^^  ^^^^'  ^^  ^^^"^^  ^^  ^^  contrary  to  the  goodneis 
of  God,  to  permit  that  there  fhould  be  any  fuch  thing, 
when  it  is  in  his  power  to  help  and  hinder  it.    - 

Anfwer.  To  give  an  account  of  this :  it  was  an  an- 
cient dodrine  of  fome  of  the  mod  ancient  nations, 
that  there  were  two  firft  caufes  or  principles  of  all 
things,  the  one  of  good  things,  i^^  other  of  bad ; 
which,  among  the  Perfians,  were  called  Oromafdes 
and  Arirfianius  \  among  the  Egyptians,  Ofiris  and 
Typhon  ;  among  the  Chaldeans,  good  or  bad  pla- 
nets ;  among  the  Greeks  Zsi)^  and  '' K^y^q :  Plutarch 
exprefly  fays,  that  the  good  principle  was  called 
God,  and  the  bad,  demon,  or  the  devil*,  in  confor- 
mity to  which  ancient  traditions,  the  Manichees  (a 
fad  {ed:  of  Chriflians)  fet  up  two  principles,  the  one 
infinitely  good,  which  they  fuppofed  to  be  the  origi- 
nal caufe  of  all  good  that  is  in  the  world ;  the  other 
infinitely  evil,  to  which  they  afcribed  all  the  evils  that 
are  in  the  world. 

But  befidcs  that  the  notion  of  an  infinite  evil  is  a 
contradidion,  it  would  be  to  no  purpofe  to  fuppofe 
two  oppofite  principles  of  equal  power  and  force. 
That  the  very  notion  of  an  infinite  evil  is  a  contradic- 
tion, will  be  very  clear,  if  we  confider,  that  what 
is  infinitely  evil,  mufl  be  infinitely  imperfe(5l,  and 
confequently  infinitely  weak  •,  and  for  that  reafon, 
though  never  fo  mifchievous  and  malicious,  yet  be- 
ing infinitely  weak,  and  ignorant,  and  fooliih,  would 
neither  be  in  a  capacity  to  contrive  mifchief,  nor  to 
execute  it.  But  admit  that  a  being  infinitely  mifchie- 
vous were  infinitely  cunning,  and  infinitely  powerful, 
yet  it  could  do  no  evil  -,  becaufe  the  oppofite  princi- 
ple of  infinite  goodnefs,  being  alfo  infinitely  wife  and 
powerful,  they  would  tie  up  one  another's  hands  : 
fo  that,  upon  this  fuppofition,  the  notion  of  a  deity 

would 


The  goodnefs  of  God.  3557 

would  fignify  juft  nothing,  and  by  virtue  of  the  eter-  S  E  R  M. 
nal  oppolition  and  equahty  of  thefe  two  principles,  ; 
they  would  keep  one  another  at  a  perpetual  bay,  and, 
being  an  equal  match  for  one  another,  inftead  of  be- 
ing two  deities,  they  would  be  two  idols,  able  to  do 
neither  good  nor  evil. 

But  to  return  a  more  diftindl  and  fatisfa6lory  an- 
fwer  to  this  objedlion  :  there  are  three  forts  of  evil 
in  the  world  ^  the  evil  of  imperfection  •,  the  evil  of 
affli<5lion  and  fuffering  ;  and  the  evil  of  fin. 

And  I  ft,  for  the  evil  of  imperfeclion,  I  mean,  na- 
tural imperfedlions  ;  thefe  are  not  fimply  and  abfolute- 
ly,  but  only  comparatively  evil :  now  comparative 
evil  is  but  a  lefs  degree  of  goodnefs  ;  and  it  is  not  at 
all  inconfiftent  with  the  goodnefs  of  God,  thatfome 
creatures  fhould  be  lefs  good  than  others,  that  is, 
imperfed;  in  comparifon  of  them  ;  nay,  it  is  very 
agreeable  both  to  the  goodnefs  and  wifdom  of  God, 
that  there  fhould  be  this  variety  in  the  creatures,  and 
that  they  fhould  be  of  feveral  degrees  of  perfcdion, 
being  made  for  feveral  ufes  and  purpofes,  and  to  be 
fubfervient  to  one  another,  provided  they  all  contri- 
bute to  the  harmony  and  beauty  of  the  whole. 

Some  imperfe6lion  is  necelTarily  involved  in  the 
very  nature  and  condition  of  a  creature,  as  that  it 
derives  it's  being  from  another,  and  neceffarily  de- 
pends upon  it,  and  is  beholden  to  it,  and  is  likcwife 
of  necelTity  finite  and  limited  in  it's  nature  and  per- 
fections ;  and  as  for  thofe  creatures  which  are  lefs 
perfed  than  others,  this  alfo,  that  there  Hiould  be 
degrees  of  perfedion,  is  neceflary,  upon  fuppofition, 
that  the  wifdom  of  God  thinks  fit  to  difplay  itfelf  in 
variety  of  creatures  of  feveral  kinds  and  ranks.  For 
though,  comparing  the  creatures  vvith  one  another, 
the  angelical  nature  is  beft,  and  moft  perfed  j  yet  it 

is 


2S5^  ^^^ ^W/^(^  of  God. 

SE  R  M.    is  abfolutcly  beft,  that  there  fhould  be  other  creatures 

CXLIII 

befides  angels.  There  are  many  parts  of  the  creation 
which  are  rafhly  and  inconfiderately  by  us  conckided 
to  be  evil  and  imperfedt,  as  fome  noxious  and  hurt- 
ful creatures,  which  yet  in  other  refpedis,  and  to 
fome  purpofes,  may  be  very  ufeful,  and  againft  the 
harm  and  mifchief  whereof  we  are  fufficiently  arm- 
ed, by  fuch  means  of  defence,  and  fuch  antidotes, 
as  reafon  and  experience  are  able  to  find  and  furnifh 
us  withal  j  and  thofe  parts  of  the  world  which  we 
think  of  httlc  or  no  ufe,  as  rocks  and  deferts,  and 
that  vaft  wildcrnefs  of  the  fea,  if  we  confider  diings 
well,  are  of  great  ufe  to  feveral  very  confiderable  pur- 
pofes ;  or  if  we  can  difcern  no  other  ufe  of  them, 
they  ferve  at  lead  to  help  our  dulnefs,  and  to  make 
us  more  attentively  to  confider,  and  to  admire  the 
perfection  and  ufefulnefs  of  the  reft ;  at  the  worft, 
they  may  ferve  for  foils  to  fet  off  the  wife  order  and 
contrivance  of  other  things,  and  (as  one  expreffeth 
it  very  well)  they  may  be  hke  a  blackmoor's  head  in 
a  pi6h]re,  which  gives  the  greater  beauty  to  the 
whole  piece. 

2dly,  For  the  evils  of  affliAion  and  fuffering ;  and 
thefe  either  befal  brute  creatures,  or  men  endowed 
with  reafon  and  confideration. 

I  ft,  For  thofe  which  befal  the  brute  creatures; 
thofe  fufferings  which  nature  inflids  upon  them  are 
very  few  ;  the  greateft  they  meet  withal  are  from 
men,  or  upon  their  account,  for  whofe  fake  they 
were  chiefly  made,  and  to  whofe  reafonable  ufe  and 
gentle  dominion  they  are  configned. 

It  is  neceflary,  from  the  very  nature  of  thefe  crea- 
tures, that  they  fhould  be  pafTive,  and  liable  to  pain  ; 
and  yet  it  doth  in  no  wife  contradid:  either  the  wif- 
dom  or  goodnefs  of  God  to  make  fuch  creatures, 

becaufe 


^he  gooJnefs  of  Got*  3559 

becaufe  all  thefe  pains  are,  for  the  mofl  part,  fully  S  F 
recompenfed  by  the  pleafure  thd^  creatures  find  in 
life ;  and  that  they  have  fuch  a  pleafure  and  happi- 
nefs  in  life,  is  evident,  in  that  all  creatures,  notwith- 
Handing  the  miferies  they  endure,  are  ftill  fond  of 
life,  and  unwilling  to  part  with  it :  no  creature  but 
man  (who  only  hath  perverted  hi?  nature)  ever  feeks 
the  deitrudion  of  itfelf;  and  fince  all  brute  creatures 
are  fo  loth  to  go  out  of  being,  we  may  probably 
conclude,  that  if  they  could  deliberate  whether  they 
would  be,  or  not,  they  would  chufe  to  come  into 
being,  even  upon  thefe  hard  conditions. 

But  however  that  be,  this  we  are  fure  of,  that 
they  fuffcr  chiefly  from  us,  and  upon  our  account ; 
We,  who  are  their  natural  lords,  having  depraved 
our  fclves  firft,  are  become  cruel  and  tyrannical  to 
them  ;  nay,  the  fcripture  tells  us,  that  they  fuffer* 
for  our  fakes,  and  that  "  the  whole  creation  groan- 
*'  eth,  and  is  in  bondage"  for  the  fin  of  man.  And 
this  is  not  unreafonabie,  that  being  made  principally 
for  man,  they  fhould  fuffer  upon  his  account,  us  a 
part  of  his  goods  and  eftate ;  not  as  a  punifhment  to 
them  (which,  under  the  notion  of  ptinifhment,  they 
are  not  capable  of)  but  as  a  punifhment  to  him  v/ho 
is  the  lord  and  owner  of  them,  they  being  by  this 
means  become  more  weak  and  fraij,  and  Itfs  ufeful 
and  ferviceable  to  him  for  whom  they  were  made  ; 
fo  that  the  fufferings  of  the  creatures  below  lis  are, 
in  a  great  meafure,  to  be  charged  Upon  lis,  under 
whofe  dominion  God  hath  put  them. 

2dly,  As  for  the  afflKftions  aiid  fufferings  which, 
befal  men,  thefe  are  not  natural  and  of  God's  mak- 
ing, but  the  refuk  and  fruit  of  our  own  doings,  the 
effedts  and  confequences  of  the  ill  ufe  of  our  own  li- 
berty, and  free  choice  >  and  God  does  not  willingly 

Vol.  Vm.  17  K  fend 


T'he  goodnefs  of  God. 

fend  them  upon  us,  but  we  wilfully  pull  them  down 
upon  ourfelves  -,  for  "  he  doth  not  afflidl  willingly, 
''  nor  grieve  the  children  of  men,"  as  the  prophet 
tells  us.  Lam.  iii.  33.  Or,  as  it  is  in  the  Wifdom  of 
Solomon,  Chap.  i.  12,  13.  "  God  made^ not  death, 
"  neither  hath  he  pleafure  in  the  dellrudion  of  the 
"  living ;  but  men  pull  deflru6lion  upon  themfelves, 
*'  with  the  works  of  their  own  hands."  All  the  e- 
vils  that  are  in  the  world,  are  either  the  effeds  of 
our  own  fin,  as  poverty,  and  difgrace,  pains,  difea- 
fes,  and  death,  which  are  fometimes  more  immedi- 
ately inflidied  upon  men  by  a  vifible  providence  and 
hand  of  God,  but  are  ufually  brought  upon  us  by 
our  felves,  in  the  natural  courfe  and  order  of  things  •, 
or  they  are  the  effeds  of  other  men's  fins,  brought 
upon  us  by  the  ambition  and  covetoufnefs,  by  the 
malice  and  cruelty  of  others :  and  thefe  evils,  though 
they  are  procured  and  caufed  by  others,  yet  they  are 
deferved  by  ourfelves  -,  and  though  they  are  immedi- 
ately from  the  hand  of  men,  yet  we  ought  to  look 
farther,  and  confider  them  as  direded  and  difpofed 
by  the  providence  of  God  ;  as  David  did  when  Shi- 
mei  curfed  him  •,  "  God  (faith  he)  hath  bid  him 
*'  curfe  David," 'though  it  immediately  proceeded 
from  Shimei*s  infolence  and  ill-nature. 

Now  upon  the  fuppofition  of  fin,  the  evils  of  af- 
flidion  and  fuffering  are  good,  becaufe  they  are  of 
great  ufe  to  us,  and  ferve  to  very  good  ends  and 
purpofes. 

I.  As  they  are  the  proper  punifhments  of  fin.  Evil 
is  good  to  them  that  do  evil ;  that  is,  it  is  fit  and  pro- 
per, juil  and  due  :  Pfal  cvii.  17.  "  Fools,  becaufe 
"  of  their  tranfgreflion,  and  becaufe  of  their  iniqui- 
*'  ties,  are  afflided."  And  it  is  fit  they  fliould  be 
fo  5  crooked  to  crooked  is  ftrcight  and  right.  ''  A  rod 

3  "fo- 


^he  goodnefs  of  God.  3561 

"  for  the  back  of  fools,  faith  Solomon ;"  and  elfe-  ^^1^^' 
where,  "  God  hath  made  every  thing  for  that  which 
"  is  fit  for  it,  and  the  evil  day  for  the  wicked  man." 

2dly,  As  they  are  the  preventions  and  remedies  of 
greater  evils.  Evils  ofafflidion  and  fuffering  are  good 
for  wicked  men,  to  bring  them  to  a  fenfe  of  their  fm, 
and  to  reclaim  them  from  it,  and  thereby  to  pre- 
vent greater  temporal  evils,  and  preferve  them  from 
eternal  miiery ;  and  not  only  good  to  the  perfon 
that  fuffers,  but  likewife  to  others,  to  deter  and  af- 
fright them  from  the  like  fins  ;  to  prevent  the  conta- 
gion of  fin,  and  to  flop  the  progrefs  of  iniquity,  up- 
on which  greater  guilt  and  worfe  mifchiefs  might 
enfue  j  and  they  are  good  to  good  men,  to  awaken 
.and  rouze  them  out  of  their  fecurity,  to  make  them 
know  God  and  themfelves  better  ;  they  are  almofl  a 
necelTary  difcipline  for  the  befl  of  men,  much  more 
for  evil  and  depraved  difpofitions  -,  and  we  might  as 
reafonably  expedt  that  there  fhould  be  no  rod  in  a 
fchool,  as  that  there  fhould  be  no  fuffering  and  af- 
flictions in  the  world. 

3dly,  As  they  are  the  occafions  and  matter  of 
many  virtues.  God  teacheth  men  temperance  by 
want,  and  patience  by  reproach  and  fufferings,  cha- 
rity by  persecution,  and  pity  and  compaffion  to  o- 
thers  by  grievous  pains  upon  our  felves.  The  bene- 
fit of  afflidions,  to  them  that  make  a  wife  ufe  of 
them,  is  unfpeakable  ;  they  are  grievous  in  them- 
felves, "  never thelefs  (faith  the  apoflle  to  the  He- 
brews) "  they  bring  forth  the  peaceable  fruits  of 
"  righteoufnefs,  to  them  that  are  exercifed  there- 
"  with."  David  gives  a  great  teflimony  of  the 
mighty  benefit  and  advantage  of  them,  from  his  own 
experience  -,  Pfal.  cxix.  76.  "  Before  I  was  afflided, 
*'  I  went  aftray,  but  now  have  I  kept  thy  word." 

17  K  2  And 


^he  goodnefs  o/GoD, 

And  ver.    71.  '*  It  is  good  for  me  that  Ihavebecri 
"  afflided,  that  I  might  learn  thy  ftatutes." 

4thly,  The  evils  of  fuffering,  patiently  fubmitted 
to,  and  decently  borne,  do  greatly  contribute  to  the 
increafe  of  our  happinefs.  All  the  perfecutions  and 
fufferings  of  good  men  in  this  life,  "  do  work  for  us 
''  a  far  more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glo- 
"  ry."  And  if  they  contribute  to  our  greater  good 
and  happinefs  at  lafl,  they  are  good,  The  glorious 
reward  of  the  fufferings  which  we  have  met  with  in 
this  life,  will  in  the  next  clear  up  the  goodnefs  and 
juftice  of  the  divine  providence  from  all  thofe  mifls 
and  clouds  which  are  now  upon  it,  and  fully  acquit 
it  from  thofe  objeiljons  which  are  now  raifed  againft 
it,  upon  account  of  the  afflictions  and  fufferings  of 
good  men  in  this  life,  v/hich  ^*  are  not  worthy  to 
*'  be  compared  with  the  glory  which  fhall  be  reveal- 
*^  ed  in  them." 

III.  As  for  the  evil  of  fin,  which  is  the  great  dif- 
ficulty of  all.  How  is  it  confident  with  the  good- 
nefs of  God,  to  permit  fo  great  an  evil  as  this  to 
come  into  the  world  ?  For  anfwer  to  this,  I  defire 
thefe  two  things  may  be  gonfidered  : 

I .  That  it  doth  not  at  all  contradi6b  the  wifdom 
or  goodnefs  of  God,  to  make  a  creature  of  fuch  a 
frame,  as  to  be  capable  of  having  it's  obedience  tried, 
in  order  to  the  reward  of  it ;  which  could  not  be, 
unlefs  fuch  a  creature  were  made  mutable,  and,  by 
the  good  or  bad  ufe  of  it's  liberty,  capable  of  obey- 
ing or  cifobeying  the  laws  of  his  creator  :  for  where 
there  is  no  pofTibility  of  finning,  there  can  be  no  tri- 
al of  our  virtue  md  obedience  ;  and  nothing  but 
virtue  and  obedi:nce  are  capable  of  reward.  The 
goodnefs  cfGoD  towards  us  is  fuiHciently  vindicated, 
in  that  he  made  us  capable  of  happinefs,  and  gave 

us 


Ihe  goodnefs  of  God  .  3563 

us  fufficient  diredion  and  power  for  the  attaining  of  ^  ^  ^  ^• 
that  end  ;  and  it  does  in  no  wife  contradidt  his  good- 
nefs, that  he  does  not,  by  his  omnipotency,  inter- 
pofe  to  prevent  our  fin  :  for  this  had  been  to  alter 
the  nature  of  things,  and  not  to  let  man  be  the  crea- 
ture he  made  him,  capable  of  reward  or  puniihment, 
according  to  the  good  or  bad  ufe  of  his  own  free 
choice.  It  is  fufficient  that  God  made  man  good  at 
firft,  though  mutable,  and  that  he  had  a  power  to 
have  continued  fo,  though  he  wilfully  determined 
himfelf  to  evil:  this  acquits  the  goodnefs  of  God, 
that  "  he  made  man  upright,  but  he  found  out'* 
to  himfelf  "  many  inventions." 

2.  If  there  had  not  been  fuch  an  order  and  rank 
of  creatures  as  had  been  in  their  nature  mutable, 
there  had  been  no  place  for  the  manifeftation  of  God's 
goodnefs  in  a  way  of  mercy  and  patience  :  fo  that 
though  God  be  not  the  author  of  the  fins  of  men, 
yet,  in  cafe  of  their  wilful  tranfgreflion  and  difobe- 
dience,  the  goodnefs  of  God  hath  a  fair  opportuni- 
ty of  difcovering  itfelf,  in  his  patience  and  long-fuf*- 
fering  to  finners,  and  in  his  merciful  care  and  pro- 
vifion  for  their  recovery  out  of  that  miferable  ftate. 
And  this  may  fuffice  for  arifwer  to  the  firft  objedlion, 
if  God  be  fo  good,  whence  then  comes  evil.^ 

The  fecond  objedion  againft  the  goodnefs  of  God, 
is  from  the  do6lrine  of  abfolute  reprobation  :  by 
which  I  mean  the  decreeing  the  greateft  part  of  man- 
kind to  eternal  mifery  and  torment,  without  any 
confideration  or  refpeft  to  their  fin  and  fault.  This 
fcems  not  only  notorioufly  to  contradi6l  the  notion 
of  infinite  goodnefs,  but  to  be  utterly  inconfiftcnt 
with  the  leaft  meafure  and  degree  of  goodnefs.  In- 
deed, if  by  reprobation  were  only  meant,  that  God, 
in  his  own  infinite  knowledge  fcrefees  the  fins  and 

wicked- 


CXLV. 


^r64  ^he  goodnejs  ^  God. 

SE  RM.  wickednefs  of  men,  and  hath  from  all  eternity  deter- 
mined in  himfelf,  what  in  his  word  he  hath  fo  plain- 
ly declared,  that  he  will  punifh  impenitent  finners 
with  everlafting  deftrudlion  \  or  if  by  reprobation  be 
meant,  that  God  hath  not  eleded  all  mankind,  that 
is,  abfolutely  decreed  to  bring  them  infallibly  to  fal- 
vation  :  neither  of  thefe  notions  of  reprobation  is  any 
ways  inconfiilent  with  the  goodnefs  of  God  ;  for 
he  may  forefce  the  wickednefs  of  men,  and  deter- 
mine to  punifh  it,  without  any  impeachment  of  his 
goodnefs :  he  may  be  very  good  to  all,  and  yet  not 
equally  and  in  the  fame  degree :  if  God  pleafe  to 
bring  any  infallibly  to  falvation,  this  is  tranfcendent 
goodnefs  \  but  if  he  put  all  others  into  a  capacity 
of  it,  and  ufe  all  necelTary  and  fitting  means  to  make 
them  happy,  and,  after  all  this,  any  fall  fhort  of 
happinefs  through  their  own  wilful  fault  and  obilina- 
cy  \  thefe  men  are  evil  and  cruel  to  themfelves,  but 
God  hath  been  very  good  and  merciful  to  them. 

But  if  by  reprobation  be  meant,  either  that  God 
hath  decreed,  without  refped  to  the  fins  of  men, 
their  abfolute  ruin  and  mifery  ♦,  or  that  he  hath  de- 
creed that  they  fhall  inevitably  fin  and  perifh  •,  it 
cannot  be  denied,  but  that  fuch  a  reprobation  as  tliis 
doth  clearly  overthrow  all  pofTible  notion  of  good- 
nefs. I  hav^e  told  you,  that  the  true  and  only  no- 
tion of  goodnefs  in  God  is  this,,  that  it  is  a  propenfi- 
6n  and  difpofition  of  the  divine  nature,  to  commu- 
nicate being  and  happinefs  to  his  creatures  :  but  ilirc- 
ly  nothing  can  be  more  plainly  contrary  to  a  difpo- 
fition to  make  them  happy,  than  an  abfolute  decree, 
and  a  peremptory  refolution  to  m.ake  them  miferable. 
God  is  infinitely  better  than  the  beft  of  men,  and  yet 
none  can  poffibly  think  that  man  a  good  man,  who 
Biould  abfolutely  refjlve  to  difmhcrit  and  deftroy  his 

children, 


'The  goodnefs  of  God.  2S^S 

children,  without  the  forefight  and  confideration  of  S  E  R  M. 

CXLV 

any  fault  to  be  committed  by  them.  We  may  talk 
of  the  goodnefs  of  God  ;  but  it  is  not  an  eafy  mat- 
ter to  devife  to  fay  any  thing  worfe  than  this  of  the 
devil. 

But  it  is  faid,  reprobation  is  an  a61:  of  fovereignty 
in  God,  and  therefore  not  to  be  meafured  by  the 
common  rules  of  goodnefs.  But  it  is  contrary  to 
goodnefs,  and  plainly  inconfiftent  with  it  ;  and  we 
muft  not  attribute  fuch  a  fovereignty  to  God,  as  con- 
tradidls  his  goodnefs  -,  for  if  the  fovereignty  of  God 
may  break  in  at  pleafure  upon  his  other  attributes, 
then  it  fignifies  nothing  to  fay,  that  God  is  good, 
and  wife,  and  juft,  if  his  fovereignty  may  at  any 
time  ad  contrary  to  thefe  perfedlions. 

Now  if  the  dodlrine  of  abfolute  reprobation,  and 
the  goodnefs  of  God,  cannot  poflibly  ftand  together, 
the  queftion  is,  which  of  them  ought  to  give  way  to 
the  other  ?  What  St.  Paul  determines  in  another 
cafe,  concerning  the  truth  and  fidelity  of  God,  will 
equally  hold  concerning  his  goodnefs  :  "  Let  God 
*'  be  good,  and  every  man  a  liar."  The  dodlrine 
of  abfolute  reprobation  is  no  part  of  the  do6lrine  of 
the  holy  fcriptures,  that  ever  I  could  find  ;  and  there's 
the  rule  of  our  faith.  If  fome  great  divines  have 
held  this  dodrine,  not  in  oppofition  to  the  goodnefs 
of  God,  but  hoping  they  might  be  reconciled  toge- 
ther, let  them  do  it  if  they  can  ;  but  if  they  cannot, 
rather  let  the  fchools  of  the  greatefl  divines  be  called 
in  queftion,  than  the  goodnefs  of  God,  which,  next 
to  his  being,  is  the  greateft  and  cleareft  truth  in  the 
world. 

Thirdly,  it  is  farther  objedted,  that  the  eternal 
punifhment  of  men,  for  temporal  faults,  feems  hard 
to  be  reconciled  with  that  excefs  of  goodnefs,  which 
we  fuppofe  to  be  in  God.  This 


CXLV. 


3566  ^he  goodnefs  of  God, 

S  ^R  M.  Xhis  objedlion  I  have  fully  anfwered,  in  a  difcourfe 
upon  St.  Matthew,  chap.  xxv.  46.  and  therefore  fhall 
proceed  to  the 

Fourth  and  laft  objedion  againft  the  goodnefs  of 
God,  from  fundry  inftances  of  God's  feverity  to 
mankind,  in  thofe  great  calamities  which,  by  the 
providence  of  God,  have  in  feveral  ages  either  be- 
fallen mankind  in  general,  or  particular  nations. 

And  here  I  fhall  confine  my  felf  to  fcripture  in- 
ftances, as  being  mofl  known,  and  mofl  certain  and  re- 
markable, or  at  leafl  equally  remarkable  with  any  that 
are  to  be  met  with  in  any  other  hiflory ;  fuch  are  the  ear- 
ly and  univerfal  degeneracy  of  all  mankind,  by  the  fin 
and  tranfgrefTion  of  our  firfl parents;  the deflrudlion  of 
the  world  by  a  general  deluge  ^  the  fudden  and  ter- 
rible deflrudlion  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  and  the 
cities  about  them,  by  fire  and  brimftone  from  hea- 
ven ;  the  cruel  extirpation  of  the  Canaanites  by  the 
exprefs  command  of  God  •,  and,  laflly,  the  great 
calamities  which  befel  the  Jewifh  nation,  efpecially 
the  final  ruin  and  difperfion  of  them  at  the  deftruc- 
tion  of  Jerufalem.  Thefe,  and  the  like  inflances  of 
God's  feverity,  feem  to  call  in  queflion  his  good- 
nefs. 

Againfl  thefe  fevere  and  dreadful  inflances  of  God's 
feverity,  it  might  be  a  fufHcient  vindication  of  his 
goodnefs  to  fay  in  general,  that  they  were  all  upon 
great  and  high  provocations  •,  and  mofl  of  them,  af- 
ter long  patience  and  forbearance,  and  with  a  great 
mixture  of  mercy,  and  a  declared  readinef^  in  God 
to  have  prevented  or  removed  them,  upon  repen- 
tance ;  all  which  are  great  inflances  of  the  goodnefs 
of  God:  but  yet,  for  the  clearer  manifeflation  of 
the  divine  goodnefs,  I  fhall  confider  them  particu- 
larly, and  as  briefly  as  I  can. 

I.  Ab 


7he  goodnefs  of  God.  35^7 

1,  As  for  the  tranfgrefTion  of  our  firft  parents,  and  S  E  R  M. 
the  difmal  confequences  of  it  to  all  their  poUerity  : 
This  is  a  great  depth,  and  though  the  fcripture 
mentions  it,  yet  it  fpeaks  but  little  of  it  •,  and  in 
matters  of  mere  revelation,  we  muft  not  attempt 
"  to  be  wife  above  what  is  written."  Thus  much 
is  plain,  that  it  was  an  adl  of  high  and  wilful  difo- 
bedience  to  a  very  plain  and  eafy  command ;  and 
that,  in  the  puniihment  of  it,  God  mitigated  the  ex- 
tremity of  the  fentence  (which  was  prefent  death)  by 
granting  our  firft  parents  the  reprieve  of  almoft  a 
thoufand  years  :  and  as  to  the  confequences  of  it  to 
their  pofterity,  God  did  not,  upon  this  provocation, 
abandon  his  care  of  mankind  j  and  though  he  re- 
moved them  out  of  that  happy  ftate  and  place  in 
which  man  was  created,  yet  he  gave  them  a  tolera- 
ble condition  and  accommodations  upon  earth :  and, 
which  is  certainly  the  moft  glorious  inftance  of  di- 
vine goodnefs  that  ever  was,  he  was  pleafed  to  make 
the  fall  and  mifery  of  man,  the  happy  occafion  of 
fending  his  fon  in  our  nature,  for  the  recovery  and 
advancement  of  it  to  a  much  happier  and  better  con- 
dition than  that  from  which  we  fell.  So  the  apoftle 
tells  us  at  large,  Rom.  v.  that  the  grace  of  God, 
by  Jesus  Christ,  hath  redounded  much  more  to 
our  benefit  and  advantage,  than  the  fin  and  difobe- 
dience  of  our  firft  parents  did  to  our  prejudice. 

2.  For  the  general  deluge,  though  it  look  very 
fevere,  yet  if  we  confider  it  well,  we  may  plainly 
difcern  much  of  goodnefs  in  it  ;  it  was  upon  great 
provocation,  by  the  univerfal  corruption  and  depra- 
vation of  mankind  :  **  The  earth  was  filled  with  vie- 
^^  lence,  and  all  flcfh  had  corrupted  it's  ways  -,  the 
**  wickednefs  of  man  was  great  upon  the  earth,  and 

every  imagination  of  the  thoughts  of  his  heart  was 
Vol.  Vm.  17  L  ^' only 

5- 


£C 


I'he  goodnefs  of  God. 

"  only  evil  continually  ;"  which  is  not  adefcription 
of  original  fin,    but   of  the   adual  and   improved 
wickednefs  of  mankind  :  and  yet  when  the  wicked- 
nefs  of  men  was  coine  to  this  height,  God   gave 
them  fair  warning,  before  he  brought  this  calamity 
upon  them,  "  when  the  patience  of  God  waited  in 
*'  the  days  of  Noah,"  for  the  fpace  of  "  an  hundred 
"  and  twenty  years  i"  at  lall,  when  nothing  would 
reclaim  them,  and  almoft  the  whole  race  of  mankind 
were  become  fo  very  bad,  that  it  is  faid,  "  it  repent- 
"  ed  the  Lord  that  he   had  made  man  upon  the 
*'  earth,  and  it  grieved  him  at  his  heart-,"  when 
things  were  thus  extremely  bad,  and  like  to  continue 
fo,  God,  in  pity  to  mankind,  and  to  put  a  flop  to 
their  growing  wickednefs  and  guilt,    fwept   them 
away  all  at  once  from  the  face  of  the  earth,  except 
one  family,  which  he  had  preferved  from  this  con- 
tagion, to  be  a  new  feminary  of  mahkind,  and,   as 
the  heathen  poet  expreffeth  it,  mundi  melioris  origo^ 
the  fource  and  original  of  a  better  race. 

3.  For  that  terrible  defhru6lion  of  Sodom  and  Go- 
morrah by  fire  and  brimftone  from  heaven,  it  was 
not  brought  upon  them  till  ''  the  cry  of  their  fin  was 
*^  great,  and  gone  up  to  heaven ;"  till  by  their  un- 
natural lulls  they  had  provoked  fupernatural  ven- 
geance»  And  it  is  very  remarkable,  to  what  low 
terms  God  was  pleafed  to  condefcend  to  Abraham 
for  the  fparing  of  them  ;  if  in  thofe  five  cities  there 
had  been  found  "  biit  ten  righteous  perfons,  he 
^^  would  not  have  deflroyed  them  for  thofe  ten's  fake.'* 
So  that  we  may  fay  with  the  apollle,  "  Behold  the 
''  goodnefs  and  feverity  of  God!"  Here  was  won- 
derful goodnefs  mixed  with  this  great  feverity, 
•  4.  For  the  extirpation  of  the  Canaanites,  by  the 
(??cprefs  command  of  God,  which  hath  fuch  an  ap-» 

pearance 


^he  goodnefs  ofGon. 

pearance  of  feverity,  it  is  to  be  confidered,  that  this 
vengeance  was  not  executed  upon  them,  till  they 
were  grown  ripe  for  it.  God  fpared  them  for  above 
four  hundred  years,  for  fo  long  their  growing  impie- 
ty is  taken  notice  of.  Gen.  xviii.  28.  where  it  is  faid. 
That  "the  iniquity  of  the  Amorites  was  not  yet  full:" 
God  did  not  proceed  to  cut  them  off,  till  their  cafe 
was  defperate,  paft  all  hopes  of  recovery,  till  "  the 
*'  land  was  defiled  with  abominations,"  and  fur- 
charged  with  wickednefs,  to  that  degree,  as  "  to 
"  fpue  out  it's  inhabitants  ;"  as  is  exprefly  faid, 
Levit.  xviii.  28.  When  they  were  arrived  to  this 
pitch,  it  was  no  mercy  to  them  to  fpare  them  any 
longer,to  heap  up  more  guilt  and  mifery  to  themfelves* 
Fiftlily  and  laflly,  as  for  the  great  calamities  which 
God  brought  upon  the  Jews,  efpecially  in  their  final 
ruin  and  difperfion  at  the  deftru6lion  of  Jerufalem  \ 
not  to  infifl  upon  the  known  hiflory  of  their  multi- 
plied rebellions  and  provocations,  of  their  defpite- 
ful  ufage  of  God's  prophets,  whom  he  fent  to  warn 
them  of  his  judgments,  and  to  call  them  to  repen- 
tance ;  of  their  obili.-'ate  refufal  to  receive  corrediion, 
and  to  be  brought  to  aWuL.mtii'-j  by  any  means 
that  God  could  ufe  •,  for  all  \/]ych  provocations,  he 
at  lafl  delivered  them  into  their  enemies  hands,  to 
carry  them  away  captive  :  not  to  infift  upon  this,  I 
fhall  only  confider  their  final  deftru6lion  by  the  Ro- 
mans, which  though  it  be  dreadfully  fevere,  beyond 
any  example  of  hiitory,  yet  the  provocation  was  pro- 
portionable ;  for  this  vengeance  did  not  come  upon 
them,  till  they  had,  as  it  were,  extorted  it,  by  the 
mofl  obilinate  impenitency  and  unbelief,  in  "rejed:' 
*'  ing  the  counfel  of  God  againft  themfelves,"  and 
refitting  fuch  means  as  would  have  brought  Tyre 
and  Sidon,  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  to  repentance  •, 

17  L  2  till 


CXLV. 


CXLV. 


^he  goodnefs  of  God. 

till  they  had  defpiled  the  dodrine  of  life  and  falva- 
tion,  delivered  to  them  by  the  fon  of  God,  and  con- 
firmed from  heaven  by  the  cleareft  and  greateft  mi- 
racles ;  and  by  wicked  hands  had  crucified  and  flain 
the  fon  of  God,  and  the  Saviour  of  the  world.  Nay, 
even  after  this  greateft  of  fins  that  ever  was  commit- 
ted,  God  waited  for  their  repentance  forty *y ears,  to 
fee  if  in  that  time  they  would  be  brought  to  a  fenfe 
of  their  fins,  and  "  to  know  the  things  which  be- 
*'  longed  to  their  peace."  And  no  w^onder  if,  after 
fuch  provocations,  and  fo  much  patience,  and  io  ob- 
ftinate  an  impenitency,  the  goodnefs  of  God  at  laft 
gave  way  to  his  juftice,  and  "  wrath  came  upon 
*'  them  to  the  utmoft." 

So  that  all  thefe  inftances,  rightly  confidered,  are 
rather  commendations  of  the  divine  goodnefs,  than 
juft  and  reafonable  obje6tions  againft  it  •,  and  not- 
withftanding  the  feverity  of  them,  it  is  evident  that 
God  is  good,  from  the  primary  inclinations  of  his 
nature  ;  and  fevere  only  upon  necefTity,  and  in  cafe 
of  juft  provocation.  And  to  be  otherwife,  not  to 
punifh  infolent  impiety  and  incorrigible  wickednefs 
in  a  fevere  and  remarkable  manner,  would  not  be 
goodnefs,  but  a  fond  indulgence  ;  not  patience,  but 
ftupidity  ;  not  mercy  to  mankind,  but  cruelty :  be- 
caufe  it  would  be  an  encouragement  to  them  to  do 
more  mifchief,  and  to  bring  greater  mifery  upon 
themfelves. 

So  that  if  we  fuppofe  God  to  be  holy  and  juft, 
as  well  as  good,  there  is  nothing  in  any  of  thefe  in- 
ftances, but  what  is  very  confiftent  with  all  that 
goodnefs  which  we  can  fuppofe  to  be  in  a  holy,  and 
wife,  and  juft  governor,  who  is  a  declared  enemy  to 
iin,  and  is  refolved  to  give  all  fitting  difcountenance 
to  the  breach  and  violation  of  his  laws*  It  is  necef- 
"  ~    ^        firy. 


"The  goodnefs  of  God.  3  57 1 

fary,  in  kindnefs  and  compafTion  to  the  reft  of  man- 
kind, that  fome  fhould  be  made  remarkable  inftances 
of  God's  feverity ;  that  the  punifhment  of  a  few  may 
be  a  warning  to  all,  "  that  they  may  hear  and  fear,'* 
and,  by  avoiding  the  like  fins,  may  prevent  the  like 
feverity  upon  themfelvcs. 

And  now  I  have,  as  briefly  as  I  could,  explained 
and  vindicated  the  goodnefs  of  God  ;  the  confidera"*^ 
tioh  whereof  is  fruitful  of  many  excellent  and  ufeful 
inferences,  in  relation  both  to  our  comfort  and  our 
duty  :  but  thefe  I  fhall  refer  to  another  opportunity. 


SERMON    CXLVI. 

The  goodnefs  of  God. 

P  S  A  L.    cxlv.  9. 

The  Lord  is  good  to  all,  and  his  tender  mercies  are 
over  all  his  works, 

I  Have  made  feveral  difcourfes  upon  this  argument,  S  E  RM. 
of  the  goodnefs  of  God  ;  fhewing  what  it  is  ;  ^ 
on  what  accounts  we  afcribe  it  to  God  ;  what  are  the 
effeds  and  large  extent  of  it  to  the  whole  creation, 
and  more  particularly  to  mankind ;  and,  in  the  laft 
place,  confidered  the  feveral  objedions  which  feem 
to  lie  againft  it.  I  proceed  now  to  the  application  of 
this  excellent  argument,  the  confideration  whereof  is 
fo  fruitful  of  ufeful  inferences  in  relation  both  to  our 
comfort  and  duty.     And, 

I.  This  ihews  us  the  prodigious  folly  and  unrea* 
fonabienefs  of  atheifm.  Moft  of  the  atheifm  that  is 
in  the  world,  dgth  ngt  fo  much  conflft  in  a  firm  per- 

fuafioA 


T!he  goodnefs  of  God. 

fuafion  that  there  is  no  God,  as  in  vain  wifhes  and 
defires  that  there  were  none.  Bad  men  think  it  would 
be  a  happinefs  to  them,  and  that  they  fhould  be  in 
a  much  better  condition,  if  there  were  no  God,  than 
if  there  be  one.  Nemo  Deum  non  effe  credit^  nifi  cut 
Deum  non  ejfe  expedite  "  no  man  is  apt  to  difbeheve 
**  a  God,  but  he  whofe  interefb  it  is  that  there  fhould 
*'  be  none.'*  And  if  we  could  fee  into  the  hearts 
of  wicked  men  we  fhould  find  this  lying  at  the  bot- 
tom, that  if  there  be  a  God,  he  is  jufl  and  "will  pu- 
nifh  fin ;  that  he  is  infinite  in  power,  and  not  to  be 
refifled,  and  therefore  kills  them  with  his  terror  fo 
often  as  they  think  of  him :  hence  they  apprehend  it 
their  intcrefl  that  there  fhoulc'  be  no  God,  and  wifh 
there  were  none,  and  thence  are  apt  to  cherifli  in 
their  minds  a  vain  hope  that  there  is  none,  and  at 
laft  endeavour  to  impofe  upon  themfelves  by  vain 
reafonings,  and  to  fupprefs  the  belief  of  a  God,  and 
to  flifle  their  natural  apprehenfions  and  fears  of  him. 
So  that  it  is  not  prmus  in  or  he  deos  fecit  timer  ^  "fear 
*'  that  firfl  made  gods ;"  but  the  fear  which  bad 
men  have  of  divine  power  and  jullice,  that  firfl  tempt- 
ed them  to  the  difbelief  of  him. 

But  v/ere  not  thefe  men  as  foolilh  as  they  are  wick- 
ed, they  would  wifh  with  all  their  hearts  there  were 
a  God,  and  be  glad  to  believe  fo :  and  the  pfalmift 
gives  them  their  true  character,  who  can  entertain  a- 
ny  fuch  thoughts  or  wifhes-,  Pfal.  xiv.  i.  "  The 
*'  foolhath  faidin  his  heart,  there  is  no  God  :"  for 
they  are  fools  who  do  not  underfland  nor  confult  their 
true  intereft :  and  if  this  be  true  which  I  have  faid 
concerning  the  goodnefs  of  God  ;  if  this  be  his  na- 
ture, to  defire  and  procure  the  happinefs  of  his  crea- 
tures-,  whoever  underflands  the  true  nature  of  God 
and  his  own  true  intereft,  cannot  but  wifh  there  were 
I  a  God, 


Tthe  goodnefs  of  God.  3573 

a  God,  and  be  glad  of  any  argument  to  prove  it,  ^^^J^- 
and  rejoice  to  find  it  true  ;  as  children  are  glad  of  a 
kind  and  tender  father,  and  as  fubjeds  rejoice  in  a 
wife  and  good  prince. 

The  goodnefs  of  God  gives  us  a  lovely  chara6ler 
of  him,  makes  him  fo  good  a  father,  fo  gracious  a 
governor  of  men,  that  if  there  were  no  fuch  being  in 
the  world,  it  were  infinitely  defirable  to  mankind  that 
there  fhould  be  :  he  is  fuch  an  one,  qualem  omnes  cupe- 
rent^  ft  deejfet^  "  as  if  he  were  wanting,    all  men 
"  ought  to  wifli  for."     The  being   of  God  is  fo 
comfortable,  fo  convenient,  fo  neceffary  to  the  felici- 
ty of  mankind,  that   (as  Tully  admirably  fays)  T>ti 
immortales  ad  ufum  horainum  fahricati  pene  vidmntur^ 
*'  if  God  were  not  a  necelTary  being  of  himfelf,  he 
*'  might  almoil  feem  to  be  made  on  purpofe  for  the 
"  ufe  and  benefit  of  men  :"  fo  that  atheifm  is  not 
only  an  inftance  of  the  moil  horrible  impiety,  but  of 
the  greatefl;  fhupidity  \  and  for  men  to  glory  in  their 
difbelief  of  a   God  ,    is  like  the  rejoicing  and  tri- 
umph of  a  furious  and  befotted  multitude,  in  the 
murder  of  a  wife  and  good  prince,  the  greatefl  ca- 
lamity and  confufion  that  could  poffibly  have  befal- 
len them. 

If  the  evidence  of  God's  being  were  not  fo  clear  as 
it  is,  yet  the  confideration  of  his  goodnefs  ought  to 
check  all  inclination  to  atheifm  and  infidehty  \  for  if 
he  be  as  good  as  he  is  reprefented  to  us ;  both  by 
natural  light  and  divine  revelation,  (and  he  is  fo,  as 
fure  as  he  is)  if  he  tender  our  welfare,  and  defire  our 
happinefs,  as  much  as  we  ourfeives  can  do,  and  ufe 
all  wife  A\'ays  and  proper  means  to  bring  it  about, 
then  it  is  plainly  every  man's  interefl,  even  thine,  O 
Tinner !  to  whom,  after  all  thy  provocations,  he  is 
willing  to  be  reconciled,  that  there  fhould  be  fuch  a 

being 


5574  iTje  goodnef 5  of  Gov). 

6  E  R  M.  beino:  as  God  is  ;  and  whenever  thou  corned  to  thy 
feir,  thou  wilt  be  fenfible  of  thy  want  of  him,  and 
thy  "  foul  will  thirft  for  God,  even  the  living  God, 
"  and  pant  after  him  as  the  hart  pants  after  the  wa- 
*'  ter  brooks  •,"  in  the  day  of  thy  afflidlion  and  cala- 
mity, "  when  diftrefs  and  anguifli  cometh  upon 
"  thee,"  thou  wilt  flee  to  God  for  refuge,  and  fhel- 
ter  thy  felf  under  his  protection,  and  wouldefl:  not, 
for  all  the  world,-  but  tliere  were  fuch  a  being  in  it 
to  help  and  deliver  thee.  Deos  nemo  fanus  timet 
(fays  Stntcdi)  furor  eft  metuere  falutaria  \  "  no  man 
'*  in  his  wits  is  afraid  there  is  a  God  :  it  is  a  mad- 
**  nefs  to  fear  that  which  is  fo  much  for  our  benefit 
*'  and  advantage."  Human  nature  is  confcious  to 
itfelfofit's  own  weaknefs  and  infufficiency,  and  of 
it's  necelfary  dependance  upon  fomething  without 
kfelf  for  it's  happi nefs,  and  therefore,  in  great  ex- 
tremity and  diftrefs,  the  atheift  himfelf  hath  natural- 
ly recourfe  to  him  -,  and  he  who  denied  and  rejedled 
him  in  his  profperity,  clings  to  him  in  adverfity,  as 
his  "  only  fupport  and  prefent  help  in  time  of  trou- 
*'  ble."  And  this  is  a  fure  indication,  that  thefe 
men,  after  all  their  endeavours  to  impofe  upon  them- 
felves,  have  not  been  able  wholly  to  extinguifh  in 
their  minds  the  belief  of  God,  and  his  goodnefs  ^ 
nay,  it  is  a  fign,  that  at  the  bottom  of  their  hearts 
they  have  a  firm  perfuafion  of  his  goodnefs,  when, 
after  all  their  infolent  defiance  of  him,  they  have  the 
confidence  to  apply  themfelves  to  htm  for  mercy  and 
help,  in  time  of  need  ;  and  therefore  our  hearts  ought 
to  rife  with  indignation  againft  thofe  who  go  about 
to  perfuade  the  belief  of  a  thing  fo  prejudicial  to 
our  intereft,  to  take  away  "  the  light  of  our  eyes, 
^'  and  the  breath  of  our  noftrils,"  ^nd  to  rob  us  of 
%\\  the  comfort  and  fupport,  which  the  belief  of  an 

in- 


T'he goodnefs  of  God.  3575 

infinite  power,   conduced  by  infinite  wifdom  and^^^M- 
goodnefs,  is  apt  to  afford  to  mankind. 

II.  We  fhould  take  great  care  of  perverting  and  abu- 
fing  this  great  goodnefs  by  vain  confidence  and  pre- 
fumption.  This  is  a  provocation  of  an  high  nature, 
which  the  fcripture  calls,  "  turning  the  grace  of  God 
*'  into  wantonnefs  i"  making  that  an  encouragoment 
to  fin,  which  is  one  of  the  flrongeft  arguments  in  the 
world  againft  it.  God  is  infinitely  good  and  merci- 
ful :  but  we  muft  not  therefore  think,  that  he  is  fond 
and  indulgent  to  our  faults  -,  but,  on  the  contrary, 
becaufe  he  is  good,  he  cannot  but  hate  evil.  So  the 
fcripture  every  where  tells  us,  that  "  he  is  of  purer 
"  eyes  than  to  behold  iniquity  ;  that  the  face  of  the 
*'  Lord  is  againft  them  that  do  evil :  he  is  not  a 
*'  God  that  hath  pleafure  in  wickednefs,  neither  Ihall 
*'  evil  dwell  with  him  :  the  foolifh  fhall  not  ftand 
**  in  his  fight  -,  he  hateth  all  the  workers  of  iniqui- 
"  ty."  He  is  ready  to  fhew  mercy  to  thofe  who 
are  qualified  for  it  by  repentance,  and  refolution  of 
a  better  courfe :  but  as  long  as  we  continvie  irnpeni- 
tenp,  God  is  implacable,  and  will  deal  with  us  ac- 
cording to  the  tenor  of  his  laws*,  and  the  defer t  of 
our  doings.  Defpair  is  a  great  fin,  but  prefumption 
is  a  greater  -,  defpair  doubts  of  the  goodnefs  of  God, 
but  prefumption  abufeth  it ;  defpair  difbelieves,  but 
prefumption  perverts  the  beft  thing  in  the  world  to 
a  quite  contrary  purpofe  from  what  it  was  intended. 

III.  The  confideration  of  God's  goodnefs  is  a 
mighty  comfort  and  relief  to  our  minds,  under  all 
our  fears  and  troubles.  Great  are  the  fears  and  jea- 
loufies  of  many  devout  minds  concerning  God's  love 
to  them,  and  their  everlafting  condition  -,  which  are 
commonly  founded  in  one  of  thefe  two  caufes,  a  me- 
lancholy temper  or  miftaken  notions  and  apprehenfi- 

Vol.  VIII.  17  M  ons 

6. 


^he  goodnefs  of  Gory. 

ons  of  God  •,  and  very  often  thefe  two  meet  together, 
and  hinder  the  cure  and  removal  of  one  another. 

Melancholy,  as  it  is  an  cfFed  of  bodily  temper,  is 
0,  difeafe  not  to  be  cured  by  reafon  and  argument, 
but  by  phyfick  and  time:  but  the  miftakes  which 
men  have  entertained  concerning  God,  if  they  be 
hot  fet  on  and  heightened  by  melancholy,  (as  many 
times  they  are)  may  be  re6lified  by  a  true  reprefen^ 
tation  of  the  goodnefs  of  God,  confirmed  by  reafon 
and  fcripture.  Many  good  men  have  had  very  hard 
and  injurious  thoughts  of  God  inftilled  into  them, 
from  doctrines  top  commonly  taught  and  received  •, 
as  if  he  did  not  fincerely  defire  the  happinefs  of  his 
creatures,  but  had  from  all  eternity  decreed  to  make 
the  greatell  part  of  mankind,  with  a  fecret  purpofe 
and  deiign  to  make  them  miferable,  and,  confequent^ 
ly,  were  not  ferious  ^nd  in  good  earneft  in  his  invita- 
tions and  exhortations  of  finners  to  repentance ;  and 
it  is  no  wonder  if  fuch  jealoufies  as  thefe  concerning 
God,  make  men  doubtful  whether  God  love  them, 
^nd  very  fcrupuloiis  and  anxious  about  their  everlaft- 
ing  condition. 

I  have  already  told  you  that  thefe  harfh  do6brines 
have  no  manner  of  foundation,  either  in  reafon  or 
fcriptufe ;  that  God  earneftly  defires  our  happinefs, 
and  affords  us  fufficient  means  to  that  end  •,  that  he 
bears  a  more  hearty  good-will  to  us,than  any  man  does 
to  his  friend,  or  any  father  upon  earth  ever  did  to  his 
^eareft  child  y  in  comparifon  of  which,  the  greateft 
affedion  of  men  to  thofe  whom  they  love  bell,  is 
**  bfit  as  the  drop  of  the  bucket,as  the  very  fmall  dull 
**  upon  the  balance."  If  we  have  right  apprehensi- 
ons of  God's  goodnefs,  we  can  have  no  temptatibri 
to  defpair  of  his  kind  and  merciful  intentions  to  us, 
provided  we  be  but  careful  of  our  duty  to  him,  an4 

dp 


ne  goodnefs  of  GoD.  3  577 

do  firtcerely  repent  and  forfake  our  fms.     Plainer  cfe-  ^  ^lvT  ' 

clarations  no  words  can  make,  than  thofe  we  meet 

with  in  the  holy  fcriptureS)  that  "  God  hath  no  plea- 

*'  fure  in  the  death  of  the  wicked,  but  rather  that  he 

*'  Ihould  turn  from  his  wickednefs  and  Hve-,"  that 

**  he  would  have  all  men  to  be  faved,  and  to  come 

"  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth  ;"  that  "  he  is  long 

"  fufFering  to  us-ward,  not  willing  that  any  fhould 

*'  perifh,  but  that  all  fhould  come  to  repentance  j'* 

that  "  he  that  confefTeth  and  forfaketh  his  fin,  Ihall 

*'  have  mercy;"  that  "if the  wicked  forfake  his 

"  ways,    and  the  unrighteous  man  his  thoughts^ 

*'  and  return  unto  the  Lord,  he  will  have  mercy, 

*'  and  will  abundantly  pardon." 

As  for  outward  calamities  and  afflidions,  the  con- 
fideration  of  God's  goodnefs  is  a  firm  ground  of 
confolation  to  us,  giving  us  aflurance,  that  God 
will  either  prevent  them  by  his  providence,  or  fup- 
port  us  under  them,  or  refcue  us  out  of  them,  or 
turn  them  to  our  greater  good  and  happinefs  in  this 
world  or  the  next.  St.  Paul  fpeaks  of  it  as  the  firm 
belief  and  perfuafion  of  all  good  men,  that,  in  the 
ilTue,  all  afflidlions  Ihould  prove  to  their  advantage^ 
**  We  know  (fays  he)  that  all  things  fhall  work  to- 
"  gether  for  good  to  them  that  love  God."  And 
one  of  the  greatefl  evidences  of  our  love  to  God,  is  a 
firm  belief  and  perfuafion  of  his  goodnefs :  if  we  believe 
his  goodnefs,  we  cannot  but  love  him  ;  and  if  we  love 
him,  "  all  things  fhall  work  together  for  our  good.'* 

And  this  is  a  great  cordial  to  thofe  who  are  under 
grievous  perfecutions  and  fufFerings,  which  is  th^ 
cafe  of  our  brethren  in  a  neighbouring  nation,  and 
may  come  to  be  ours,  God  knows  how  foon.  Buc 
though  the  malice  of  men  be  great,  and  backed  with 
a  power  not  to  be  controlled  by  any  vifible  means, 

17  M  2  mi 


3  5 7 S  ^^^  ^oodnefs  of  God. 

S  E  R  M.  aiid  therefore  likely  to  continue  •,  yet  the  goodnefe 
of  God  is  greater  than  the  malice  of  men,  and  of  a 
longer  duration  and  continuance.  And  thus  David 
comforted  himfelf,  when  he  was  perfecuted  by  Saul, 
Pfal.  lii.  I.  "  Why  boafteth  thou  thy  fclf  in  mif- 
*'  chief,  O  mighty  man  ?  the  goodnefs  of  God  en- 
"  dureth  continually."  The  perfecution  which  Saul 
raifed  againft  him  was  very  powerful,  and  Ijdled  a 
long  time  •,  but  he  comforts  himfelf  with  this,  that 
"  the  goodnefs  of  God  endures  for  ever." 

IV.  The  confideration  of  God's  goodnefs,  is  a 
powerful  motive  and  argument  to  feveral  duties. 

I.  To  the  love  of  God.  And  this  is  the  mofl 
proper  and  natural  effed  and  operation  of  the  ojood- 
nefs  of  God  upon  our  minds.  Several  of  the  divine 
attributes  are  very  awful,  but  goodnefs  is  amiable  •, 
and  without  this  nothing  dk,  is  fo.  Power  and  wif- 
dom  may  command  dread  and  admiration  -,  but  no- 
thing but  goodnefs  can  challenge  our  love  and  affec- 
tion. Goodnefs  is  amiable  for  itfelf,  though  no  be- 
nefit and  advantage  fhould  from  thence  redound  to 
us  ;  but  when  we  find  the  comfortable  efix^ds  of  it, 
when  the  riches  of  God's  goodnefs,  and  long-fufi^er- 
ing,  and  forbearance,  are  laid  out  upon  us,  when 
we  live  upon  that  goodnefs,  and  are  indebted  to  it 
for  all  that  we  have  and  hope  for ;  this  is  a  much 
greater  endearment  to  us  of  that  excellency  and  per- 
fection, which  was  amiable  for  itfelf.  We  cannot 
but  love  him  who  is  good,  and  does  us  good  ; 
whofe  goodnefs  extends  to  all  his  creatures,  but  is 
cxercifed  in  fo  peculiar  a  manner  towards  the  fons  of 
men,  that  it  is  called  love ;  and  if  God  vouchfafe  to 
love  us,  well  may  this  be  the  "  firft  and  great  com- 
mandment. Thou  fhalt  love  the  lord  thy  God  with 
*'  all  thine  heart,  and  with  all  U^y  foul,  and  with  all 
**  thv  mind."  2.  The 


7hegood?ief5ofQov>.  3579 

2.  The  confideration  of  God's  goodnefs  is  like-  S  F.  RM. 
wife  an  argument  to  us  to  tear  him  -,  not  as  a  (lave 
does  his  mailer,  but  as  a  child  does  his  father,  who 
the  more  he  loves  him,  the  more  afraid  is  he  to  of- 
fend him.  "  There  is  forgivenefs  with  thee  (faith 
*'  the  pfalmift)  that  thou  mayeft  be  feared  :'**  becaufe 
God  is  ready  to  forgive,  we  (hould  be  afraid  to  of- 
fend. "  Men  Ihall  fear  the  Lord  and  his  good- 
*'  nefs:"  (faith  the  prophet)  Hofea  iii.  5.  And,  in- 
deed, nothing  is  more  to  be  dreaded,  than  defpifed 
goodnefs,  and  abufed  patience,  which  turns  into  fu- 
ry and  vengeance  :  "  defpifeft  thou  the  riches  of  his 
*'  goodnefs,  and  long-fuffering ,  and  forbearance, 
"  (fays  the  apoflle)  and  treafureft  up  to  thy  felf  wrath 
*'  againft  the  day  of  wrath,  and  the  revelation  of  the 
"  righteous  judgment  of  God  ?" 

3.  The  confideration  of  God's  goodnefs,  is  a 
powerful  motive  to  obedience  to  his  laws,  and  (as 
the  apoflle  expreffeth  it)  "  to  walk  worthy  of  the 
"  Lord  unto  all  well  pleafing,  being  fruitful  in 
"  every  good  work."  This  argument  Samuel  ufeth 
to  the  people  of  Ifrael,  to  perfuade  them  to  obedi- 
ence, I  Sam.  xii.  24.  "  only  fear  the  Lord,  and 
"  ferve  him  in  truth,  with  all  your  heart  •,  for  con- 
"  fider  how  great  things  he  hath  done  for  you.** 

And,  indeed,  the  laws,  which  God  hath  givea 
us,  are  none  of  the  leafl  inflances  of  his  goodnefs  to 
us,  fince  they  all  tend  to  our  good,  and  are  proper 
caufes  and  means  of  our  happinefs  :  fo  that  in  chal^ 
lenging  our  obedience  to  his  laws,  as  acknowledg- 
ments of  our  obligation  to  him  for  his  benefits,  he 
lays  a  new  obligation,  and  confers  a  greater  benefic 
upon  us.  All  that  his  laws  require  of  us,  is  to  do 
that  which  is  befl  for  our  felves,  and  does  moft  di- 
reftly  conduce  to  our  own  welfare  and  happinefs. 

Con* 


2580  ne goodfiefs  of  Coti. 

SERM.  Confiderlns;  our  infinite  obligations  to   God*     he 

CXLVI  .  . 

might  have  challenged  our  obedience  to  the  fevereft 
and  harllieft  laws  he  could  have  impofed  upon  us  j 
fo  that  as  the  fervants  faid  to  Naaman,  "  Had  the 
*'  prophet  bid  thee  do  fome  great  thing, would' ft  thou 
*'  not  have  done  it  ?  how  much  more  when  he  hath 
*^  only  faidjWafhand  be  clean  ?"  If  God  had  required 
of  us  things  very  grievous  and  burthenfom ;  in  love 
and  gratitude  to  him,  we  ought  to  have  yielded  a 
ready  and  chearful  obedience  to  fuch  commands : 
how  much  more  when  he  hath  only  faid,  do  this, 
and  be  happy  ?  In  teftimony  of  your  love  to  me, 
do  thefe  things  which  are  the  greateft  Idndnefs  and 
benefit  to  your  felves. 

4.  "  The  goodnefs  of  God"  fhould  "  lead  men 
*'  to  repentance."  One  of  the  greateft  aggravations 
of  our  fins  is,  that  we  offend  againft  fo  much  good- 
nefs, and  make  fo  bad  a  requital  for  it  \  "  Do  ye 
"  thus  requite  the  Lord,  O  foolifh  people,  and  un- 
**  wife!"  The  proper  tendency  of  God's  goodnefs 
and  patience  to  finners,  is  to  bring  them  to  a  fenfe^ 
of  their  mifcarriage,  and  to  a  refolution  of  a  better 
courfe.  "When  we  refle6l  upon  the  blelTmgs  and  fa- 
vours of  God,  and  his  continual  goodnefs  to  us,  caa 
we  chufe  but  be  afhamed  of  our  terrible  ingratitude 
and  difobedience  ?  Nothing  is  more  apt  to  make  an 
ingenuous  nature  to  relent,  than  the  fenfe  of  unde* 
ferved  kindnefs  ;  that  God  ftiould  be  fo  good  to  us, 
who  are  evil  and  unthankful  to  him  ;  that  though 
we  be  enemies  to  him,  yet  "  when  we  hunger,  he  feed^ 
*'  US;  when  we  thirft,he  gives  us  to  drink;"  heaping, 
as  it  were,  "coals  of  fire  on  our  heads/'  on  purpofe 
to  melt  us  into  repentance,  and  to  overcome  our  evil 
by  his  goodnefs. 

5,  The  confideration  cf  Goo's  goodnefs,  is  a  firm 
I  grgund 


T'he  goodnefs  of  God.  3  5^  i 

m-ound  of  truft  and  confidence.  What  may  we  not  S  E  R  M 
hope  and  alTuredly  exped  from  immenfe  and'bound- 
lefs  goodnefs  ?  If  we  have  right  apprehenfions  of  the 
goodnefs  of  God,  we  cannot  poffibly  diltrull  him, 
or  doubt  of  the  performance  of  thofe  gracious  pro- 
mifes  which  he  hath  made  to  us  •,  the  fame  goodnefs 
which  inclined  him  to  make  fuch  promifes,  will  ef- 
fedually  ingage  him  to  make  them  good.  If  God 
be  fo  good  as  he  hath  declared  himfelf,  why  fhould 
we  think  that  he  will  not  help  us  in  our  need,  and 
relieve  us  in  our  diftrefs,  and  comfort  us  in* our  afflic- 
ons  and  forrows  ?  If  v/e  may  with  confidence  rely 
upon  any  thing  to  confer  good  upon  us,  and  to  pre- 
fer ve  and  deliver  us  from  evil,  we  may  truft  infinitef 
goodnefs. 

6.  The  goodnefs  of  God  is,  likewife,  an  argu- 
ment to  us  to  patience  and  contentcdnefs  with  every 
condition.  If  the  hand  of  God  be  fevere  and  heavy 
upon  us  in  any  afBidion,  we  may  be  affured  that  it 
is  not  without  great  caufe  that  fo  much  goodnefs 
is  fo  highly  offended  and  difpleafed  with  us  ;  that 
he  deligns  our  good  in  all  the  evils  he  fends  to  us, 
and  does  not  chaften  us  for  his  pleafure  but  for  our 
profit  y  that  we  are  the  caufe  of  our  own  fufferings, 
and  our  fins  feparate  between  God  and  us,  and  with- 
hold good  things  from  us  j  that,  in  the  final  ifTue  and 
refult  of  things,  "  all  things  fhall  work  together  for 
*■  good"  to  us  ;  and  therefore  we  ought  not  to  be 
difcontented  at  any  thing  which  will  certainly  end  in 
our  happinefs. 

7.  Let  us  imitate  the  goodnefs  of  God.  The 
higheft  perfection  of  the  beft  and  moft  perfed  being 
is  worthy  to  be  our  pattern  :  This  the  fcripture  fre- 
quently propofeth  to  us-,  Math.  v.  48.  "  Be  ye 
f '  therefore  perftd,  even  as  your  father  which  h 


3582  T!he  goodnefs  ^  God* 

bERM.  <«  in  heaven  is  perfed."  How  is  that?  in  being 
good,  and  kind,  and  merciful,  as  God  is.  "  But  I 
**  fay  unto  you  (fays  our  Lord)  love  your  enemies, 
**  blefs  them  that  curfe  you,  do  good  to  them  that 
*'  hate  you,  and  pray  for  them  which  defpitefuUy 
"  ufe  you,  and  perfecute  you  -,  that  ye  may  be  the 
"  children  of  your  father  which  is  in  heaven  :  for  he 
**  maketh  his  fun  to  rife  on  the  evil,  and  on  the  good, 
*^  and  fendeth  rain  on  the  juft,  and  on  the  unjuft.'* 
And  then  it  follows,  "  Be  ye  therefore  perfe6t,  even 
*'  as  your  father  which  is  in  heaven  is  perfedl."  The 
fame  pattern  St.  Paul  propofeth  to  us,  Eph.  iv.  32. 
and  ch.  v.  i .  "  Be  ye  kind  one  to  another,  tender 
*V  hearted;  forgiving  one  another,  even  as  God  for 
**  Christ's  fake  hath  forgiven  you.  Be  ye  there- 
**  fore  followers  of  God  as  dear  children,  dnd  walk 
**  in  love."  We  cannot  in  any  thing  refemble  God 
more,  than  in  goodnefs,  and  kindnefs,  and  mercy, 
and  in  a  readinefs  to  forgive  thofe  who  have  been  in- 
jurious to  us,  and  to  be  reconciled  to  them. 

Let  us  then  often  contemplate  this  perfection  of 
God,  and  reprefent  it  to  our  minds,  that,  by  the 
frequent  contemplation  of  it,  we  may  "  be  tranf- 
'*  formed  into  the  image  of  the  divine  goodnefs.'* 
Is  God  fo  good  to  his  creatures  ?  with  how  much 
greater  reafon  fliould  webe  fo  to  our  fellow -creatures  ? 
Is  God  good  to  us  ?  let  us  imitate  his  univerfal  good- 
nefs, by  endeavouring  the  good  of  mankind  -,  and, 
as  much  as  in  us  lies,  of  the  whole  creation  of  God, 
What  God  is  to  us,  and  what  we  would  have  him 
ftill  be  to  us,  that  let  us  be  to  others.  We  are  in- 
finitely beholden  to  this  perfedion  of  God  for  all 
that  we  are,  and  for  all  i  that  we  enjoy,  and  for  all 
that  we  exped  •,  and  therefore  we  have  all  the  reafon 
in  the  world  to  admire  and  imitate  it.    Let  this  pat* 

tern 


^he  ^jodnep  of  Goi).  35^3 

tern  of  the  divine  o-oodneis  be  continually  before  us,  SER  iV. 

CXLVI. 

that  we  may  be  iliil  falliioning  our  felves  in  the  tem- 
per ot  our  minds,  and  in  the  actions  of  our  lives,  to 
a  likenefs  and  conformity  to  it. 

Laflly,  the  confideration  of  the  divine  goodnefa 
fhould  excite  our  praife  and  thankfulnefs :  Inis  is 
a  great  duty,  to  the  performance  whereof  we  fhould 
fummon  all  the  powers  and  faculties  of  our  fouls  ; 
as  the  holy  Pfalmift  does,  Pfal.  ciii.  i,  2.  "  Blefs  the 
"  Lord,  O  my  foul  ^  and  all  that  is  within  me, 
''  blefs  his  holy  name.  Blefs  the  Lord,  O  my  foul, 
"  and  forget  not  all  his  benefits.'*  And  we  Ihould 
invite  all  others  to  the  fame  work,  as  the  fame  devout 
Pfalmift  frequently  does;  Pfal.  cvi.  i.  "O  give  thanks 
"  unto  the  Lord,  for  he  is  good  •,  for  his  mercy 
"  endureth  for  ever."  And  Pfal  cvii.  8.  "  O  that 
"  men  would  praife  the  Lord  for  his  goodnefs, 
*'  and  for  his  wonderful  works  to  the  children 
"  of  men!" 

And  we  had  need  to  be  often  called  upon  to  this 
duty,  to  which  we  have  a  peculiar  backwardnefs. 
Neceffity  drives  us  to  prayer,  and  fends  us  to  God 
for  the  fupply  of  our  wants  ;  but  praife  and  thankf- 
giving  is  a  duty  v/hich  depends  upon  our  gratitude 
and  ingenuity  •,  and  nothing  fooner  wears  off,  than 
the  fenfe  of  kindnefs  and  benefits.     We  are  very  apt 
to  forget  the  bleflings  of  God,   not  fo  much  from  a 
bad  memory,  as  from  a  bad  nature  •,  to  forget  the 
greateft  bleflings,    the  continuance  whereof  fhould 
continually  put  us  in   mind  of  them,  the  blefiings 
of  our  beings.     So   God  complains  of  his  people, 
Deut.  xxxii.  18."  Of  the  God  that  formed  thee  thou 
*'  haft  been  unmindful  •,"  the  dignity  and  excellen- 
cy of  our  being  above  all  the  creatures  of  this  vifible 
world  ;  Job  XXXV.  10,  11.  "  None  faith.  Where  is 
Vol.  VIII.  17 N  "God 

6. 


CXLVI. 


3584  T'he  goodnefs  of  God. 

S  R^RM.  "  God  my  maker,  who  teacheth  us  more  than  the 
"  beads  of  the  earth,  and  maketh,us  wifer  than  the 
"  fowls  of  heaven  ?"  the  daily  comforts  and  blef- 
fings  of  our  lives,  which  we  can  continually  receive, 
without  almoft  ever  looking  up  to  the  hand  that  gives 
them.  So  God  complains  by  the  prophet  Hofea,  chap. 
ii.  8,  9.  "  She  knew  not  that  I  gave  her  corn,  and 
*'  wine,  and  oil,  and  multiplied  her  filver  and  gold." 
And  is  it  not  fhameful  to  fee  how  at  the  moll  plen- 
tiful tables,  the  giving  of  God  thanks  is  almofl 
grown  out  of  falliion  ?  as  if  men  were  afhamed  to 
own  from  whence  thefe  blelTings  came.  When  thanks 
is  all  God  expedls  from  us,  can  we  not  afford  to 
give  him  that  ?  "  Do  ye  thus  requite  the  Lord, 
^'  foolifh  people,  and  unwife  ?"  It  isjuftwith  God 
to  take  away  his  bleffings  from  us,  if  we  deny  him 
this  eafy  tribute  of  praife  and  thankfgiving^ 

It  is  a  fign  men  are  unfit  for  heaven,  when  they 
are  backward  to  that  which  is  the  proper  work  and 
imployment  of  the  blelTed  fpirits  above.  Therefore, 
as  ever  we  hope  to  come  thither,  let  us  begin  this 
work  here,  and  inure  our  felves  to  that  which  will 
be  the  great  bufinefs  of  all  eternity.  Let  us,  with  the 
four  and  twenty  eiders  in  the  Revelation,  "  fall  down 
*'  before  him  that  fits  on  the  throne,  and  worfhip 
*^  him  that  liveth  for  ever  and  ever,  and  caft  our 
*'  crowns  before  the  throne"  (that  is,  call  our  felves) 
and  afcribe  all  glory  to  God,  laying,  "  Thou  art 
"  worthy,  O  Lord,  to  receive  glory,  and  honour, 
^'  and  power ;  for  thou  haft'  made  all  things,  and 
"  for  thy  pleafure  they  are,  and  were  created." 

*^  To  hir;i  therefore,  the  infinite  and  inexhaulli- 

**  ble  fountain  of  goodnefs,  the  father  of  mercies,  and 

."'  the  God  of  all  coiifolation,  who  gave  us  fuch 

2.  **  excel- 


The goodnefs  of  God.  35^5 

'^  excellent  beings,  having  made  us  little  lower  than  SERM. 
"  the  angels,  and  crowned  us  with  glory  and  ho- 
"  nour  i  who  hath  been  pleafed  to  ftamp  upon  us 
■"  the  image  of  his  own  goodnefs,  and  thereby  made 
"  us  partakers  of  a  divine  nature,  communicating 
"  to  us  not  only  of  the  effedlsof  his  goodnefs,  bu.t 
''  in  fome  meafure  and  degree  of  the  perfedion  itfelf ; 
"  to  him  who  gives  us  all  things  richly  to  enjoy, 
''  which  pertain  to  life  and  godlincfs,  and  hath  made 
"  fuch  abundant  provifion,  not  only  for  our  comfort 
"  and  convenience  in  this  prefent  life,  but  for  our 
"  unfpeakable  happinefs  to  all  eternity  ;  Vj  him  who 
*'  defigned  this  happinefs  to  us  from  all  eternity, 
*'  and  whofe  mercy  and  goodnefs  to  us  endures  for 
*'  ever;  who  when  by  wilful  tranfgreflions  and  dif- 
"  obedience  we  had  plunged  our  felves  into  a  ftate 
*'  of  fin  and  mifery,  and  had  forfeited  that  happi- 
"  nefs  which  we  were  defigned  to,  was  pleafed  to 
"  reftore  us  to  a  new  capacity  of  it,  by  fending  his 
*'  only  fon  to  take  our  nature,  with  the  miferies  and 
*'  infirmities  of  it,  to  live  among  us,  and  to  die  for 
"  us ;  in  a  word,  to  him  who  is  infinitely  good  to 
"  us,  not  only  contrary  to  our  deferts,  but  beyond 
our  hopes,  who  renews  his  mercy  upon  us  every 
morning,  and  is  patient  though  we  provoke  him 
every  day,  who  preferves  and  provides  for  us,  and 
fpares  us  continuaUy,  v/ho  is  always  willing,  al- 
ways watchful,  and  never  weary  to  do  us  good  ; 
to  him  be  all  glory  and  honour,  adoration  and 
praife,  love  and  obedience,  now  and  for  ever.'* 


(C 


17  N2  S  E  R^ 


CXLVU. 


3586 

SERMON    CXLVII. 

The  mercy  of  God. 

NUMB.   xiv.   18. 
^he  Lord  is  long-ftiffering^  and  of  great  mercy, 

SJR^R  M.  T^Have  confidcred  God's  goodnefs  in  general.  There 
X.  ai"e  two  eminent  branches  of  it,  his  patience  and 
mercy.  The  patience  of  God  is  his  goodnefs  to 
them  that  are  guilty,  indeferrijig  or  rnoderating  their 
deferved  punifliment :  the  mercy  of  God  is  his  good- 
nefs to  them  that  are,  or  may  be  miferable.  It  is 
the  lad  of  thefe  two  I  defign  to  difcourfe  of  at  this 
time  ;  in  doing  of  which,  I  fhall  inquire, 

Firft,  what  we  are  to  underfland  by  the  mercy 
.of  God. 

Secondly,  jfhew  you,  that  this  perfe6tion  belongs 
to  God, 

Thirdly,  confider  the  degree  of  it,  that  God  is 
of  great  mercy. 

Firll,  what  we  are  to  underftand  by  the  mercy 
ofGoD. 

I  told  you,  it  is  his  goodnefs  to  them  that  are  in 
ixiifery,  or  liable  to  it ;  that  is,  that  are  in  danger  of 
it,  or  have  delerved  it.  It  is  mercy,  to  prevent 
the  niifery  that  we  are  liable  to,  and  which  may  be-' 
fal  us,  though  it  be  not  actually  vipon  us.  It  is 
mercy,  to  defer  the  mifery  that  we  deferve,  or  mi- 
tigate it  •,  and  this  is,  properly,  patience  and  for^ 
bearancc.  It  is  mercy,  to  relieve  thofe  that  are  in 
mifery,  to  fupport  or  comfort  them.     It  is  mercy, 

to 


The  mercy  of  GoT).  3587 

to  remit  the  mifery  we  deferve,  and,  by  pardon  and  S  E  R  M. 
forgivenefs,  to  remove  and  take  away  the  obligation 
to  punifhment. 

Thus  the  mercy  of  God  is  ufually,  in  fcripture,  fet 
forth  to  us  by  the  affedlion  of  pity  and  compaffion  ; 
which  is  an  affedion  that  caufeth  a  fenfible  commo- 
tion and  difturbance  in  us,  upon  the  apprehenfion  of 
fome  great  evil  that  lies  upon  another,  or  hangs 
over  him.  Hence  it  is  that  God  is  faid,  in  fcrip- 
ture,  to  be  grieved  and  afflidled  for  the  miferies  of 
men  \  his  bowels  are  faid  to  found,  and  his  heart 
to  turn  within  him.  But  though  God  is  pleafed  in 
this  manner  to  fet  forth  his  mercy  and  tendernefs  to- 
wards us,  yet  we  muft  take  heed  how  we  clothe  the 
divine  nature  with  the  infirmities  of  human  paffions. 
We  mull  not  mcafure  the  perfedtion  of  God  by  the 
exprelTions  of  his  condefcenfion ;  and  becaufe  he 
ftoops  to  our  weaknefs,  level  him  to  our  infirmities. 
When  God  is  faid  to  pity  us,  we  muft  take  away 
xht  imperfection  of  this  pailion,  the  commotion  and 
difturbance  of  it,  and  not  imagine  any  fuch  thing  in 
God  ;  but  we  are  to  conceive,  that  the  mercy  and 
companion  of  God,  without  producing  the  difquiet, 
do  produce  the  effeds  of  the  moft  fenfible  pity. 

Secondly,  that  this  perfedion  belongs  to  God. 

All  the  arguments  that  I  ufed  to  prove  the  good- 
nefs  of  God,  from  the  acknowledgment  of  natural 
light,  and  from  fcripture  and  reafon,  ferve  to  prove 
that  he  is  merciful ;  becaufe  the  mercy  of  God  is 
an  eminent  branch  of  his  goodnefs.  I  will  only  pro- 
duce fome  of  thofe  many  texts  of  fcripture  which  at- 
tribute this  perfection  to  God.  Exod.  xxxiv.  6. 
*'  The  Lord,  the  Lord  God,  merciful  and  gra- 
*'  cious.'*  Deut.  iv.  31.  "  The  Lord  thy  God  is 
**  a  merciful  God."  2Chron.  xxxiv.  9.  "the  Lord 

[^  your 


2588  iJje mercy  of  Goiy, 

S  E  R  M.  "  your  God  is  o-racious  and  merciful.   Neh.  ix.  1 7. 

CXLVII.  .  ' 

"  Ready  to  pardon,  gracious  and  merciful."  Pfal. 
XXV.  10.  "  All  the  paths  of  the  Lord  are  mercy." 
Pfal.  Ixii.  12.  *'  Unto  thee,  O  Lord,  belongeth 
"  mercy."  Pfal.  ciii.  S.  "  Merciful  and  gracious,'* 
Pfal.  cxxx.  7.  "  With  the  Lord  there  is  mercy." 
And  fo  Jer.  iii.  12.  Joel  ii.  13.  Jonah  iv.  2.  Luke 
vi.  36.  "  Be  ye  therefore  merciful,  as  your  father 
*'  alfo  is  merciful."  The  fcripture  fpeaks  of  this  as 
mofl  natural  to  him,  2  Cor.  i.  3.  he  is  called  "  the 
*'  Father  of  mercies."  But  when  he  punifheth,  he 
doth,  as  it  were,  relinquilli  his  nature,  and  do  a 
flrange  work.  "  The  Lord  will  wait  that  he  may 
"  be  gracious,"  Ifa.  xxx.  18.  God  pafTeth  by  op- 
portunities of  punifhing,  but  his  mercy  takes  oppor- 
tunity to  difplay  itfelf  i  "  he  waits  to  be  gracious." 
To  afflid:  or  punifh  is  a  work  that  God  is  unwilling 
to,  that  he  takes  no  pleafure  in-.  Lam.  iii.  33. 
*'  He  doth  not  afflidt  willingly,  nor  grieve  the  chil- 
"  dren  of  men."  But  mercy  is  a  work  that  he  de- 
lights in,  Mic.  vii.  18.  '' He  delighteth  inmercy." 
When  God  fhews  mercy,  he  does  it  with  pleafure 
and  delight  j  he  is  faid  "  to  rejoice  over  his  people 
*'  to  do  them  good."  Thofe  attributes  that  de- 
clare God's  goodnefs,  as  when  he  is  faid  to  be  gra- 
cious, or  merciful,  and  loi^g-fuflfering,  they  Ihew 
what  God  is  inhimfelf,  and  delights  to  be  :  thofe 
which  declare  his  wrath  and  fe verity,  ihew  what  he 
is  upon  provocation,  and  the  occafion  of  fin ;  not 
what  he  chufeth  to  be,  but  what  we  do,  as  it  were, 
compel  and  neceffitate  him  to  be. 

Thirdly,  for  the  degree  of  it  j  that  God  is  aGoi> 
of  great  mercy. 

The  fcripture  doth  delight  to  advance  the  mercy 
cf  God,  and  does  ufe  great  variety  of  expreffion  to 

magni' 


^he  mercy   o/Gqd.  35^9 

magnify  it.  It  fpeaks  of  the  greatnefs  of  hia  mercy ;  S  E  R  M. 
Numb.  xiv.  19.  "  According  unto  the  greatnefs 
*'  of  thy  mercy,"  2  Sam.  xxiv.  14.  "  Let  me  fall 
*'  into  the  hands  of  the  Lord,  for  his  mercies  are 
"  great."  It  is  called  an  abundant  mercy ;  i  Pet.  i. 
3.  *'  According  to  his  abundant  mercy."  Pfal.  ciii. 
8.  he  is  faid  to  be  "  plenteous  in  mercy  i"  and 
*'  rich  in  mercy."  Eph.  ii.  4.  Pfal.  v.  7.  he  fpeaks 
of  "  the  multitude  of  God's  mercies-,"  and  of  the 
variety  of  them,  Neh.  ix.  19.  "  In  thy  manifold 
"  mercies  thou  forfakeft  them  not."  So  many  are 
they,  that  we  are  faid  to  be  furrounded  and  compaf- 
fed  about  on  every  fide  with  them  -,  Pfal.  ciii.  4. 
"  Who  crowneth  thee  with  loving  kindnefs,  and 
*'  tender  mercies." 

And  yet  farther  to  fet  forth  the  greatnefs  of  them, 
the  fcripture  ufeth  all  dimeniions.  Height ;  Pfal  Ivii. 
10.  "  Thy  mercy  is  great  unto  the  heavens."  Nay, 
higher  yet  •,  Pfal.  cviii.  4.  "  Thy  mercy  is  great 
"  above  the  heavens."  For  the  latitude  and  extent 
of  it,  it  is  as  large  as  the  earth,  and  extends  to  all 
the  creatures  in  it  -,  Pfal.  cxix.  64.  "  The  earth,  O 
*'  LoRD,is  full  of  thy  mercy."  Pfal.  cxlv.  9.  "  His 
*'  tender  mercies  are  over  all  his  works."  For  the 
length,  or  duration  and  continuance  of  it;  Exod. 
xxxiv.  7.  "  Laying  up  mercy  in  ilore  for  thoufands 
"  of  generations,"  one  after  another.  Nay,  it  is 
of  a  longer  continuance  •,  Pfal.  cxviii.  it  is  feveral 
times  repeated,  that  "  his  mercy  endureth  for  ever." 

And  to  jfhew  the  intenfe  degree  of  this  affe6tion 
of  mercy  or  pity,  the  fcripture  ufeth  feveral  empha- 
tical  expreifions  to  fet  it  forth  to  us.  The  fcripture 
fpeaks  of  the  tender  mercies  of  God,  Pfal.  xxv.  6. 
*'  Remember,  OLord,  thy  tender  mercies."  Yea, 
of  the  multitude  of  thefc  j  Pfal.  li.  i.  "  According 

*'  uuto 


CXLVII. 


3^90  ^he  mercy  e/Got). 

SE  R  M.  «  unto  the  multitude  of  thy  tender  mercies  blot  ouE 
"  my  tranfgreflions."  Jam.  v.  11.  "  The  Lord  is 
"  very  pitiful,  and  of  tender  mercy."  They  are 
called  God's  bowels,  which  are  the  tendered  parts, 
and  apt  to  yern  and  flir  in  us  when  any  affedlions  of 
love  and  pity  are  excited;  If.  Ixiii.  15.  "  Where  is 
*'  the  founding  of  thy  bowels,  and  of  thy  mercies 
*'  towards  me  ?  are  they  reftrained  ?"  Luke  i.  78^ 
^^  Through  the  tender  mercy  of  our  God  ;  fo  it  is 
in  our  tranflation  :  but  if  we  render  it  from  the  ori- 
ginal, it  is  *'  through  the  bowels  of  the  mercies  of 
*'  our  God."  How  doth  God  condefcend,  in  thofe 
pathetical  expreflions  which  he  ufeth  concerning  his 
people?  Hof.  xi.  8.  ''  How  Ihall  I  give  thee  up, 
*'  Ephraim  }  how  jQiall  I  deliver  thee,  Ifrael  ?  how 
**  fhall  I  make  thee  as  Admah  ?  how  fhall  I  fet  thee 
*'  as  Zeboim?  mine  heart  is  turned  within  me,  and 
*'  my  repentings  are  kindled  together."  Nay,  to  ex- 
prefs  his  tender  fenfe  of  our  miferies  and  fufFcrings, 
he  is  reprefented  as  beifig  afflided  with  us,  and  bear- 
ing a  part  in  our  fufferings ;  Ifa.  Ixiii.  9.  "  In  all 
"  their  affli6tions  he  w^s  afflifted." 

The  companions  of  God  are  compared  to  the 
tendereft  affedions  among  men  :  to  that  of  a  father 
towards  his  children;  Pfal.  ciii.  13.  "  Like  as  afa- 
*'  ther  pitiethhis  children,  fo  the  Lord  pitieth  them 
"  that  fear  him.  Nay,  to  the  companions  of  a  mother 
towards  her  infant :  Ifa.  xlix.  p,o.  "  Can  a  woman 
*'  forget  her  fucking  child,  that  fhe  fhould  not  have 
*'  compafTion  on  the  fon  of  her  womb  ?"  Yea,  Ihc 
may,  it  is  poUible,  though  mod  unlikely  :  but  though 
a  mother  may  turn  unnatural,  yet  God  cannot  be 
unmerciful. 

In  ihort,  the  fcripture  doth  every  where  magnify 
the  mercy  of  God,  and  fpeak  of  it  with  all  pofTible 

advan- 


The  m'ercy  of  Got).  359^ 

advantage  ;  as  if  the  divine  nature,  which  doth  in  all  S  E  R  M. 
perfedions  excel  all  others,  did  in  this  excel  itfelf. 
The  fcripture  fpeaks  of  it  as  if  God  was  wholly  tak- 
en up  with  it,  as  if  it  was  his  conftant  exercife  and 
employmentj  fo  that,  in  comparifon  of  it,  he  doth 
hardly  difplay  any  other  excellency  •,  Pfal.  xxv.  lo. 
''  All  the  paths  of  the  Lord  are  mercy  ;"  as  if,  ii\ 
this  world,  God  had  a  defign  to  advance  his  mercy 
above  his  other  attributes.  The  mercy  of  God  is 
now  in  the  throne  \  this  is  the  day  of  mercy  •,  and 
God  doth  difplay  it,  many  times,  with  a  feeming 
difhonour  to  his  other  attributes,  his  juflice,  and 
holinefs,  and  truth.  His  juftice  ♦,  this  mak^  Job 
complain  of  the  long  life  and  profperity  of  the- wick- 
ed j  Job  xxi.  7.  "  Wherefore  do  the  wicked  live, 
*'  yea,  become  old?  &:c.  His  holinefs  j  thb  makes 
the  prophet  expoflulate  with  God,  Hab.  i.  13. 
"  Thou  arc  of  purer  eyes  than  to  behold  evil,  and 
*'  canft  not  look  on  iniquity :  wherefore  lookeft  thou 
*'  upon  them  that  deal  treacheroufly,  and  holdell 
*'  thy  tongue?"  &c.  And  the  truth  of  God  ; 
this  makes  Jonah  complain,  as  if  God's  mercies  were 
fuch  as  did  make  fome  reflexion  upon  his  truths 
Jon.  iv.  2. 

But  that  we  may  have  more  di(lin6l  apprehenfions 
of  the  greatnefs  and  number  of  God's  mercies,  I 
will  diftribute  them  into  kinds,  and  rank  them  under 
feveral  heads.  It  is  mercy,  to  prevenrthofe  evils 
and  miferies  that  we  are  liatle  to :  it  is  mercy,  to  de- 
fer thofe  evils  that  we  have  defervcd^  or  to  mitigate 
them  :  it  is  mercy,  to  fupport  and  comfort  us  when 
mifery  is  upon  us :  it  is  mercy,  to  deliver  us  from 
them ;  but  the  greateft  mercy  of  all  is,  to  remit  the 
evil  and  mifery  we  have  deferved>  by  pardon  and 
forgivenefs,  to  remove  and  take  away  the  obligation 

Vol.  VIII.  17  O  to 

6; 


7he  mercy  of  God, 

to  punifhment.     So  that  the  mercy  of  God  may  be 
reduced  to  thefe  five  heads. 

I.  Preventing  mercy.     Many  evils  and  miferies 
which  we  are  liable  to,  God  prevents  them  at  a  great 
diftance  ;  and  when  they  are  coming  towards  us,  he 
flops  them,  or  turns  them  another  way.     The  mer- 
ciful providence  of  God,  and  thofe  invifible  guards 
which  proted:  us,   do  divert  many  evils  from  us, 
which  fall  upon  others.     We  feldom  take  notice  of 
God's  preventing  mercy  -,  we  are  not  apt  to  be  fen- 
fible  how  great  a  mercy  it  is  to  be  freed  from  thofe 
ftraits  and  necefTities,  thofe  pains  and  difeafes  of  bo- 
dy, thofe  inward  racks  and  horrors,    which  others 
are  prefled  withal,  and  labour  under.     When  any 
evil  or  mifery  is  upon  us,  would  we  not  reckon  it  a 
mercy  to  be  refcued  and  delivered  from  it  ?  And  is 
It  not  a  greater  mercy  that  we  never  felt  it  ?  Does 
not  that  man  owe  more  to  his  phyfician,  who  pre- 
vents his  ficknefs  and  diflemper,  than  he  who,  after 
the  weakyefs  and  languifhing,  the  pains  and  tortures 
of  feveral  months,  is  at  length  cured  by  him  ^ 

II.  Forbearing  mercy.  And  this  is  the  patience 
of  God,  which  confifts  in  the  deferring  or  moderat- 
ing of  our  defer ved  punifhment.  Hence  it  is,  that 
**  .flow  to  anger,  and  of  great  mercy,"  do  fo  often 
go  together.  But  this  I  fhall  fpeak  to  hereafter  in 
fome  particular  difcourfes. 

III.  Comforting  mercy.  2  Cor.  i.  3.  "  The  father 
"  of  mercies,  and  the  God  of  all  comfort."  The 
fcripture  reprefents  God  as  very  merciful,  in  comfort- 
ing and  fupporting  thofe  that  are  afflidled  and  caft 
down :  hence  are  thofe  expreflions  of  "  putting  his 
"  arms  under  us,  bearing  us  up,  fpeaking  comfort- 
"  ably,  vifiting  us  with  his  loving  kindnefs :"  which 
fignify  God's  merciful  regard  to  thofe  who  are  in 
mifery  and  diftre^s,  IV,  His 


T*he  mercy  of  God.  359S 

IV  His  relieving  mercy,  in  fupplying  thofe  that  ^^.^^^^ 
are  in  want,  and  delivering  thofe  that  are  in  trouble. 
God  doth,  many  times,  exercife  men  with  trouble 
and  afRidions,  with  a  very  gracious  and  merciful 
defign,  to  prevent  greater  evils,  which  men  would 
otherwife  bring  upon  themfelves.  Affli6lions  are  a 
merciful  invention  of  heaven  to  do  us  that  good, 
which  nothing  elfe  can  ;  they  awaken  us  to  a  fenfe 
of  God,  and  of  our  felves,  to  a  confideration  of  the 
evil  of  our  ways  -,  they  make  us  to  take  notice  of  God, 
to  feek  him,  and  to  inquire  after  him.  God  doth, 
as  it  were,  by  afRi6Hons,  throw  men  upon  their 
backs,  to  make  them  look  up  to  heaven.  Hof.  v. 
15.  *'  In  their  affliction  they  will  feek  me  early." 
Pfal.  Ixxviii.  34.  "  When  he  flew  them,  then  they 
"  fought  him,  and  they  returned  and  inquired  early 
*'  after  God."  But  God  does  not  delight  in  this  ^ 
"  he  doth  not  afflidl  willingly, nor  grieve  the  childrea 
"  of  men."  When  afflidlions  have  accomplifhed 
their  work,  and  obtained  their  end  upon  us,  God 
is  very  ready  to  remove  them,  and  command  delive- 
rance for  us-,  Ifa.  liv.  7,  8.  "  For  a  fmall  moment 
*'  have  I  forfaken  thee,  but  with  great  mercies  will 
*'  I  gather  thee.  In  a  little  wrath  I  hid  my  face 
"  from  thee  for  a  moment,  but  with  everlafting 
*^  kindnefs  will  I  have  mercy  on  thee,  faith  the  Lord 
*'  thy  redeemer." 

V.  Pardoning  mercy.  And  here  the  greatnefs  and 
fulnefs  of  God's  mercy  appears,  becaufe  our  fins  are 
great :  Pfal.  Ixxviii.  38.  ''  Being  full  of  compaflion, 
*'  he  forgave  their  iniquity."  And  the  multitude  of 
God's  mercies,  becaufe  our  fms  are  many;  Pfal. 
li.  I.  "  Have  mercy,  upon  me,  O  God,  according 
*'  unto  thy  loving-kindnefs  ;  according  to  the  mul- 
**  titude  of  thy  tender  mercies  blot  out  my  tranfgref- 

1702  *^fions." 


^be  goodnefs  of  Gojy. 

^'  fions."  Exod.xxxiv.  7.  he  isfaid"  to  pardon ini- 
"  quity,  tranfgrefTion,  and  fin."  How  manifold  are 
his  mercies,  to  forgive  all  our  fins,  of  what  kind  foe- 
ver !  The  merq^  of  God  to  us  in  pardoning  our  fins,  is 
matter  of  aftonifhment  and  admiration  •,  Mic.  vii.  xg, 
*'  Who  is  a  God  like  unto  thee,  that  pardoneth  ini- 
*^  quity !"  But  cfpecially  if  we  confider  by  what 
meant  our  pardon  is  procured  -,  by  transferring  our 
guilt  upon  the  mod  innocent  per fon,  the  fon  of  God, 
and  making  him  "  to  bear  our  iniquities,*'  and  to 
fuffer  the  wrath  of  God  which  was  due  to  us.  The 
admirable  contrivance  of  God's  mercy  appears  in  this 
difpenfation  •,  this  fhews  the  riches  of  his  grace,  that 
he  fliould  be  at  fo  much  coft  to  purchafe  our  pardon ; 
*'  not  with  corruptible  things,  as  filver  and  gold; 
*'  but  with  the  precious  blood  of  his  own  fon  ;" 
Eph.  i.  6,  7.  "  To  the  praife  of  the  glory  of  his 
^*  grace,  wherein  he  hath  made  us  accepted  in  the 
*'  beloved  ♦,  in  whom  we  have  redemption  through 
*'  his  bloQd,  the  forgivenefs  of  fins,  according  to 
*'  the  riches  of  his  grace." 

Having  difpatched  the  three  p.irticulars  I  propof- 
.  cd  to  be  fpoken  tq,  I  ihall  fhew  y^  hat  ufe  we  ought 
to  make  of  this  divine  attribute. 

Ufe  I.  We  ought  with  thankfulnefs  to  acknow- 
ledge and  admire  the  great  mercy  of  God  to  us.  Let 
us  view  it  in  all  it's  dimenfions ;  the  height,  and 
length,  and  breadth  of  it :  in  all  the  variety  and  kinds 
of  it ;  (he  preventing  mercy  of  God  to  many  of  us. 
Thofe  miferies  that  lye  upon  others,  it  is  mercy  to 
us  that  weefcaped  them.  It  is  mercy  that  fpares  us. 
^*  It  is  of  the  Lord's  mercies  that  we  are  not  con- 
*'  fumed,  and  becaufe  his  compafTions  fail  not."  It 
is  mercy  that  mitigates  our  punifhment,  and  makes 
it  fall  below  the  dcfert  of  our  fins.     It  is  mercy  that 

comfor^Si 


^he  mercy  of  GO0.  3595 

comforts  and  fupports  us  under  any  of  thofe  evils  S  E  R  M. 
that  lye  upon  us,  and  that  refcues  and  delivers  us 
from  them.  Which  way  foever  we  look,  we  are 
encompafled  with  the  mercies  of  God  ;  they  "  com- 
**  pafs  us  about  on  every  fide ;  we  are  crowned  with 
*'  loving-kindnefs,  and  tender  mercies."  It  is  mer- 
cy that  feeds  us,  and  clothes  us,  and  that  preferves 
us.  But,  above  all,  we  fhould  thankfully  acknow- 
ledge and  admire  the  pardoning  mercy  of  God  ; 
Pfal.  ciii.  I,  2;  3.  where  David  does,  as  it  were, 
mufter  up  the  mercies  of  God,  and  make  a  cata- 
logue of  tfiem ;  he  fets  the  pardoning  mercy  in  the 
front  J  "  Blefs  the  Lord,  O  my  foul,  and  all  that 
^  is  within  me  blefs  his  holy  name.  Blcfs  the  Lord, 
**  O  my  foul,  and  forget  not  all  his  benefits ;  who 
•*  forgiveth  all  thy  inquities." 

If  we  look  into  our  felvcs,  and  confider  our  own 
temper  and  difpofition,  how  void  of  pity  and  bowels 
we  are,  how  cruel,  and  hard-hearted,  and  infolent, 
and  revengeful ;  if  we  look  abroad  in  the  world, 
and  lee  how  "  full  the  earth  is  of  the  habitations  of 
"  cruelty;"  we  fhall  admire  the  mercy  of  God 
more,  and  think  our  felves  more  beholden  to  it. 
How  many  things  muft  concur  to  make  our  hearts 
tender  and  meU  our  Ipirits,  and  ftir  our  bowels,  to 
make  us  pitiful  and  companionate  ?  We  feldom  pity 
any,  i;nlef«  they  be  aftuaUy  in  mifery  ;  nor  all  fuch 
neither,  unlefs  the  mifery  they  lye  under  be  very 
great;  nor  then  neither,  unlefs  the  perfon  that  fuf- 
fers  be  nearly  related,  and  we  be  fome  ways  concern- 
ed in  his  fufferings  ;  yea,  many  times  not  then  nei- 
ther upon  a  generous  account,  but  as  we  are  fome 
ways  obliged  by  intereft  and  felf-love,  and  a  dear  re- 
gard to  our  felves,  when  we  have  fuffered  the  like 
Dur  fclves,  and  have  kerned  to  jpity  other's  by  our 

own 


359^  TT^^  ^^fcy  of  God. 

S  E  R  M.  own  fufFerings,  or  when  in  danger  or  probability  to 
be  in  the  like  condition  our  felves  ;  fo  many  motives 
and  obligations  are  necefTary  to  awaken  and  ftir  up 
this  affeiflion  in  us.  But  God  is  merciful  and  piti- 
ful to  us  out  of  the  mere  goodnefs  of  his  nature  -, 
for  few  of  thefe  motives  and  confiderations  can  have 
any  place  in  him.  This  affedlion  of  pity  and  tender- 
nefs  is  flirred  up  in  God  by  the  mere  prefenrt;  of  the 
objc(5t,  without  any  other  inducern^jpt.  The  mer- 
cy of  God,  many  times,  doth  not  ftay.till  we  be  ac- 
tually miferable  j  but  looks  forward  a  great  way, 
and  pities  us  at  a  great  diflance,  and  prevents  our 
mifcry.  God  doth  not  only  pity  us  in  great  cala- 
mities ;  but  confidcrs  thofe  lefTer  evils  that  are  upon 
us.  God  is  merciful  to  us,  when  we  have  deferved 
all  the  evils  that  are  upon  us ;  and  far  greater,  when 
we  are  "  lefs  than  the  leafl  of  all  his  mercies,"  when 
we  deferved  all  the  mifery  that  is  upon  us,  and  have 
with  violent  hands  pulled  it  upon  our  own  heads, 
and  have  been  the  authors  and  procurers  of  it  to  our 
felves.  Though  God,  in  refped:  of  his  nature,  be 
at  Bp.  infinite  diitance  from  us  ;  yet  his  mercy  is  near 
to  us,  and  he  cannot  pofTibly  have  any  felf-intereft 
in  it.  The  divine  nature  is  not  liable  to  want,  or 
injury,  or  fuffering  ;  he  is  fecure  of  his  own  hap- 
pinefs  and  fulnefs,  and  can  neither  wifli  the  inlarge- 
ment,  nor  fear  the  impairment  of  his  eflate  ;  he  can 
never  ftand  in  need  of  pity  or  relief  from  us,  or  any 
other,  and  yet  he  pities  us. 

Now  if  we  confider  the  vaft  difference  of  this  af- 
fedlion  in  God  and  us,  how  tender  his  mercies  are, 
and  how  fenfible  his  bowels ;  and  yet  we  who  have 
fo  many  arguments  to  move  us  to  pity,  how  hard 
our  hearts  are,  and  how  unapt  to  relent,  as  if  we 
were  born  of  the  rock,  and  were  the  off-fpring  of 
4  the 


'fhe  mercy  of  God.  3  597 

the  nether  milflone;  fure,    when  we  duly  confider  ^^^^J^^' 
this,  we  cannot  but  admire  the  mercy  of  God. 

How  cruel  are  we  to  creatures  below  us !  with  how 
little  remorfe  can  we  kill  a  flea,  or  tread  upan  a  worm  ? 
partly  becaufe  we  are  fecure  that  they  cannot  hurt 
us,  nor  revenge  themlelves  upon  us ;  and  partly  be- 
caufe they  are  fo  defpicable  in  our  eyes,  and  fo  far 
below  us,  that  they  do  not  fall  under  the  confidera- 
tion  of  our  pity.     Look  upward,  p^oud  man  !   and 
take  notice  of  him  who  is  above  thee  :  thou  didft 
not  make  the  creatures  below  thee,  as  God  did  -, 
there's  but  a  finite  diftance  between  thee  and  the 
meaneft  creatures  ^  but  there's  an  infinite  diftance 
between  thee  and  God.     Man  is  a  name  of  dignity, 
when  we  compare  our  felves  with  other  creatures ; 
but  compared  to  God,  "  we  are  worms,  and  not 
"  menj"  yea,  we  are  nothing,  yea,  "  lefs  thanno- 
"  thing,  and  vanity."     How  great  then  is  the  mer- 
cy of  God,  which  regards  us,  who  are  fo  far  below 
him,  which  takes  into  confideration  fuch  inconfider- 
able  nothings  as  we  are !  We  may  fay  with  David, 
Pfal.  viii.  4.  "  Lord,  what  is  man,   that  thou  art 
*'  mindful  of  him,  or  the  fon  of  man,  that  thou 
"  vifiteft  him  ?"  and  with  Job,chap.vii.  17."  What  is 
"  man,   that  thou  fhouldeft  magnify  him,  and  that 
**  thou  fhouldeft  fet  thine  heart  upon  him  ?" 

And  then  how  hard  do  we  find  it  to  forgive  thofe 
who  have  injured  us  ?  If  any  one  have  offended,  or 
provoked  us,  how  hard  are  we  to  be  reconciled  ? 
How  mindful  of  an  injury?  How  do  anger  and  re- 
venge boil  within  us  ?  How  do  we  upbraid  men  with 
their  faults?  What  vile  and  low  fubmiffion  do  we 
require  of  them,  before  we  will  receive  them  into 
favour,  and  grant  them  peace  ?  And  if  we  forgive 
once    w^  think  that  is  much  -,  but  if  an  offence  and 

provo- 


SERM.  provocation  be  renewed  often,  wc  are  inexofablc. 

CXLVII 

Even  the  difciples  of  our  Saviour,  after  he  had 
fo  emphatically  taught  them  forgivenefs,  in  the  pe- 
tition of  the  Lord's  prayer,  yet  they  had  very  nar- 
row fpirits  25  to  this ;  Matth.  xviii.  21.  Peter  come* 
to  him,  and  afks  him,  "  How  often  fhall  my  bro- 
*'  ther  fm  againfl  me,  and  I  forgive  him  ?  till  fcvcn 
*'  times  ?"  He  thought  that  was  much :  And  yet 
we  have  great  obligations  to  pardoning  and  forgiv- 
ing others,  becaufc  we  are  obnoxious  to  God  and 
one  another  :  wc  Ihall  many  times  fVand  in  need  of 
pardon  from  God  and  men  j  and  it  may  be  our  own 
cafe  ;  and  when  it  is,  we  are  too  apt  to  be  very  in- 
dulgent to  our  felves,  and  conceive  good  hopes  of 
the  mercy  of  others ;  we  would  have  our  ignorance, 
and  inadvertencies,  and  miftakes,  and  all  occafions, 
and  temptations,  and  provocations  confidered  •,  and 
when  we  have  done  amifs,  upon  fubmiflion,  and  ac- 
knowledgment of  our  fault,  we  would  be  received  in- 
to favour  ;  but  God,  who  is  not  at  all  liable  to  us, 
how  ready  he  is  to  forgive !  If  we  confefs  our  fins  to 
him,  he  is  merciful  to  forgive  :  he  pardons  freely  ; 
and  fuch  are  the  condefcenfions  of  his  mercy,  though 
he  be  the  party  offended,  yet  he  offers  pardon  to  us, 
and  befeeches  us  to  be  reconciled :  if  we  do  but  come 
towards  him,  he  runs  to  meet  us,  as  in  the  parable 
of  the  prodigal,  Luke  xv.  20.  What  reafon  have 
wc  then  thankfully  to  acknowledge  and  admire  the 
mercy  of  God  to  us  ? 

Ufe  2.  The  great  mercy  of  God  to  us,  ihould 
Itir  up  in  us  ihame  and  forrow  for  fin.  The  judg* 
ments  of  God  may  break  us  \  but  the  confideration 
of  God's  mercy  fhould  rather  melt  and  diflblve  us 
into  tears  :  Luke  vii.  47.  the  woman  that  wafhed 
Christ's  feet  with  her  tears,  and  wiped  them  with  ^ 

her 


'  *The  mercy  cf  God.  3599 

Ji^f  hail-,   the  account  that  our  Saviour  gives  of  the  ^^.^^vii^* 
great  afFedion  thatfhc  expreffed  to  hirh,  was,  "  fhe 
*'  Joved  much,  bccaufe  much  w^s  forgiven   her-," 
and  fhe  grieved  much,  becaufe  itiuch  Was  forgiv- 
en her. 

Efpecially  We  fhould  forrow  for  thofe  fins  which 
have  been  comnlitted  by  us  after  God's  mercies  re- 
ceived. Mercies  after  fins  fhould  touch  our  hearts, 
and  make  us  relent :  it  fliOuld  grieve  us  that  we: 
fhould  offend  and  provoke  a  God  fo  gracious  and 
merciful,  flov/  to  anger,  and  fd  ready  to  forgive : 
but  fin  againft  mercies,  and  ilfter  we  have  received 
them,  is  attended  with  one  of  the  greateil  aggrava- 
tions of  fin.  And  as  mercy  raifes  the  guilt  of  our 
fins,  fo  it  Ihould  raife  our  forrow  for  them.  No 
confideration  is  more  apt  to  work  upon  human  na- 
ture, than  that  of  kindnefs  •,  and  the  greater  mercy  has 
been  fhewed  to  us,  the  greater  our  fins,  and  the 
greatet*  c^ufe  of  forrow  for  them  •,  contraries  do  illu- 
llrate,  and  fet  off  one  another  •  in  the  gfeat  good- 
nefs  and  mercy  of  God  to  us,  We  fee  the  great  evil 
of  our  fins  againft  him. 

Every  fin  has  the  nature  of  rebelliort  arid  difobe- 
dience ;  but  fins  againft  mercy  have  ingratitude  in 
them.  Whenever  we  break  the  laws  of  God,  we 
rebel  againft  our  fovereign  ;  but  as  We  fin  againft  the 
mercies  of  God,  we  injure  our  benefactor.  Thi^ 
makes  our  fin  to  be  horrid,  and  aftonifhing,  Ifa.  L 
2.  "  Hear,  O  heavens,  and  give  ear,  O  earth  :  fof 
"  the  Lord  hath  fpoken,  I  have  noittifhed  and 
"  brought  lip  children,  and  they  have  rebelkd  againft 
"  me."  All  the  mercies  of  God  are  aggravations 
of  our  fins;  2  Sam.  xii,*^,  3,  9.  '*  And  Natl\ari 
"  faid  to  David,  thou  art  the  man.  Thus  faith  th(; 
•'  Lord  God  of  Ifi-ael^  I  anointed  thee  king  over  If- 
"   Vol.  Vm.  i^  P  !*  rad^ 


3600  l^e  mercy  of  God. 

S  E  R  M.   "  rael,  and  I  delivered  thee  out  of  the  hand  of  Saul, 

CXLVII 

''  and  I  gave  thee  thy  mafter's  houfe,and  thy  mailer's 
"  wives  into  thy  bofom,  and  gave  thee  the  houfc  of 
"  Ifrael  and  of  Judah  •,  and  if  that  had  been  too  lit- 
"  tie,  I  would  moreover  have  given  unto  thee  fuch 
*'  and  fuch  things.  Wherefore  haft  thou  defpifed 
*'  the  commandment  of  the  Lord,  to  do  evil  in  his 
"  fight?"  God  reckons  up  all  his  mercies,  and  from 
them  aggravates  David's  fin  •,  i  Kings  xi.  9.  he  takes 
notice  of  all  the  unkind  returns  that  we  make  to  his 
mercy  :  and  it  is  the  worft  temper  in  the  world  not 
to  be  wrought  upon  by  kindnefs,  not  to  be  melted 
by  mercy  :  no  greater  evidence  of  a  wicked  heart, 
than  that  the  mercies  of  God  have  no  effeds  upon  it  •, 
Ifai.  xxvi.  10.  "  Let  favour  be  Ihewed  to  the  wick- 
"  ed,  yet  will  he  not  learn  righteoufnefs." 

Ufe  3.  Let  us  imitate  the  merciful  nature  of  God. 
This  branch  of  God's  goodnefs  is  very  proper  for 
our  imitation.  The  general  exhortation  of  our  Sa- 
viour, Matt.  v.  48.  "  Be  ye  therefore  perfe6l,  e- 
"  ven  as  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven  is  perfed: ;" 
is  more  particularly  expreffed  by  St.  Luke,  chap.  vi. 
36.  "  Be  ye  therefore  merciful,  as  your  Father  alfo 
*'  is  merciful."  Men  alfedt  to  make  images,  and 
impofTible  reprefentations  of  God  j  but,  as  Seneca 
faith,  Crede  deos^  cum  propitii  ejfent,  ji5iiles  fuijfe. 
We  may  draw  this  image  and  likenefs  qf  God  ;  we 
may  be  gracious  and  merciful  as  he  is.  Christ, 
who  was  "  the  exprefs  image  of  his  Father,"  his 
whole  life  and  undertaking  was  a  continued  work 
of  mercy,  "  he  went  about  doing  good"  to  the 
Ibuls  of  men,  by  preaching  the  gofpel  to  them  ; 
and  to  the  bodies  of  men,  in  healing  all  man- 
ner of  difeafes  :  there  is  nothing  that  he  recom- 
mends mor^  to  us,  in  his  gofpel,    than  this  fpi-- 

rit 


"The  mercy  of  God.  3601 

rit  and  temper ;  Mat.  v.  7.  "BlefTed  are  the  merciful,  ^^^^vn' 
*'  for  they  fhall  obtain  mercy.*'  How  many  para- 
bles doth  he  ufe,  to  fet  forth  the  mercy  of  God  to 
us,  with  a  defign  to  draw  us  to  the  imitation  of  it  ? 
The  parable  of  the  prodigal ;  of  the  good  Samari- 
tan ;  of  the  fervant  to  whom  he  forgave  ten  thoufand 
talents.  We  fhould  imitate  God  in  this,  in  being  ten- 
der and  compafTionate  to  thofe  that  arc  in  mifery. 

This  is  a  piece  of  natural,  indifpenfable  religion, 
to  which  pofitive  and  inftituted  religion  muft  give 
way.  Amos  vi,  6.  "I defired  mercy,  and  not  facri- 
"  fice-,"  which  is  twice  cited  and  ufed  by  our  Sa- 
viour. Micah  vi.  9.  "  He  hath  Ihewed  thee,  O 
"  man,  what  it  is  that  the  Lord  thy  God  requires 
"  of  thee;  to  do  juftice,  and  love  mercy,  and  to 
"  walk  humbly  with  thy  God." 

This  is  always  one  part  of  the  defcription  of  a 
good  man,  that  he  is  apt  to  pity  the  miferies  and 
necelTities  of  others-,  Pfal.  xxxvii.  26.  '^  He  is  ever 
"  merciful,  and  lendeth."  He  is  far  from  cruelty, 
not  only  to  men,  but  even  to  the  brute  creatures  j 
Prov.  xii.  10.  "A  righteous  man  regardeth  the 
"  life  of  his  bead."  There  is  nothing  more  contrary 
to  the  nature  of  God,  than  a  cruel  and  favage  difpo- 
fition,  not  to  be  affedled  with  the  miferies  and  fuf- 
ferings  of  others :  how  unlike  is  this  to  "  the  Father  of 
"mercies,  and  the  God  of  confolation!"  When  we 
can  fee  cruelty  exercifed,  and  our  bowels  not  be  ilir- 
red  within  us,  nor  our  hearts  be  pricked  ;  how  un- 
hke  is  this  to  God,  who  is  "  very  pitiful,  and  of 
"  tender  mercies  !"  But  to  rejoice  at  the  miferies 
of  others,  this  is  inhuman  and  barbarous.  Hear 
how  God  threatens  Edom  for  rejoicing  at  the  mife- 
ries of  his  brother  Jacob ;  Obadiah  ver.  10,  11,  12, 
13,  14.     But  to  delight  to  make  others  miferable, 

17  P  2  and 


CXLVII. 


3602  'The  mercy  of  God. 

fS^E  R  M.  and  to  aggravate  their  fiifFerings,  this  is  devilifh  ; 
this  is  the  temper  of  hell,  and  (he  very  fpirit  of  the 
deftroyer. 

It  becomes  man, above  all  other  creatures,to  be  merci- 
ful, who  hath  had  fuch  ample  and^  happy  experience  of 
God's  mercy  to  him,  and  doth  ilill  condnually  ftand 
in  need  of  mercy  from  God.  God  hath  been  very 
merciful  to  us.  Had  it  not  been  for  the  tender  mer^ 
cies  of  God  to  us,  we  had  all  of  us  long  fince  been 
miferable.  Now  as  we  have  received  mercy  from  God, 
we  fhopld  fliew  it  to  others.  The  apoflle  ufeth 
this  as  an  argument  why  we  fhould  relieve  thofe  that 
,are  in  mifery  and  want,  becaufe  we  have  had  fuck 
experience  of  the  mercy  and  love  of  Gqd  to  us  ; 
I  John  iii.  16,  17.  "  Hereby  perceive  we  the  love  of 
^'  God,  becaufe  he  laid  down  his  life  for  us.  But 
**  whofo  hsth  this  world's  good  and  feeth  his  bro- 
*'  ther  have  need,  &c.  how  dwelleth  the  love  of 
.^'  God  in  him  ?"  That  man  hath  no  fcnfe  of  the  mer- 
cy of  God  abiding  upon  his  heart,  that  is  not  merciful 
to  his  brother.  And  it  is  an  argument  why  v/e  fhould 
forgive  one  another  j  Eph.  iv,  32.  ''  Be  ye  kind  one 
*'  to  another,  tender  hearted,  forgiving  one  another, 
*'  even  as  God  for  Christ's  fake  hath  forgiven 
*'  you,"  Ch^p.  y.  I.  "  Be  ye  therefore  followers  of 
^'  God,  as  dear  children."  Col.  iii.  12,  13.  '^  Puc 
^^  on  therefore  (as  the  ele6l  of  God,  holy  and  belov- 
^'  ed)  bowels  of  mercies,  kindnefs,  humblenefs  of 
^'  mind,  meeknefs,  long-fuffering  •,  forbearing  one 
''  another,  and  forgiving  pne  another,  if  any  man 
^'  have  a  quarrel  againft  any  :  even  as  Christ  for- 
•  •  gave  ypu,  fo  alfo  do  ye." 

And  we  continually  fland  in  need  of  mercy  botj^ 
from  God  and  man.  We  are  liable  one  to  another, 
gnd  in  the  change  of  human  affairs,  we  may  t>e  all 

fub^ 


Hhe mercy  of  GoTi,  36ot 

^fubjed  to  one  another  by  turns,  and  fland  in  need  of  S  E  R  M. 
one  another's  pity  and  compafTion ;  and  we  muft  ex-  ^^^'^"• 
pe6l,  that  "  with  what  meafure  we  mete  to  others, 
"  with  the  fame  it  fhall  be  mcafured  to  us  again." 
To  reftrain  the  cruelties,  and  check  the  infolencies  of 
men,  God  hath  fo  ordered,  in  his  providence,  that 
very  often,  in  this  world,  mens  cruelties  return  up- 
on their  own  heads,  and  their  violent  dealings  upon 
their  own  pates.     Bajazet  meets  with  a  Tamerlane. 

But  if  men  were  not  thus  liable  to  one  another,  wc 
all  fland  in  need  of  mercy  from  God.  If  we  be  mer- 
ciful to  others  in  fuffcring,  and  forgive  them  that 
have  injured  us,  God  will  be  fo  to  us,  he  will  par- 
don our  fins  to  us :  Prov.  xvi.  6.  "By  mercy  and 
^'  truth  iniquity  is  purged.'*  2  Sam.  xxii.  26. 
"  With  the  merciful  thou  wilt  fhew  thy  felf  merci- 
"  ful."  Prov,  xiv.  21.  "  He  that  hath  mercy  on  the 
*'  poor,  happy  is  he."  Prov.  xxi.  21.  "Hethatfol- 
"  loweth  after  rightcoufnefs  and  mercy,  findeth  life.'* 
Matth.  vi.  14.  *'  If  ye  forgive  men  their  trefpafles, 
"  your  heavenly  Father  will  alfo  forgive  you."  But 
on  the  other  hand,  if  we  be  malicious  and  revenge- 
ful, and  implacable  to  thofe  that  have  offended  us, 
and  inexorable  to  thofe  who  defire  to  be  received 
to  favour,  and  cruel  to  thofe  who  lye  at  our  mercy, 
hard-hearted  to  them  that  are  in  necefTity ;  what  can 
we  expeft,  but  that  thd  aiercy  of  God  will  leave  us, 
that  he  will  '^  forget  to  be  gracic^us,  and  ihut  up  in 
"  anger  his  tender  mercy."  Matt.  vi.  15,  "  Ifyc 
*'  forgive  not  men  their  trefpaffes,  neither  will 
"  your  Father  forgive  your  trefpalTcs."  That  is 
a  dreadful  paiTage,  Sc.  James  ii.  13.  *'  He  fhall 
"  have  judgment  without  mercy,  that  hath  (hewed 
*^  no  mercy."  How  angry  is  the  Lord  with  the 
fervant  who  was  fo  inexorable  to  his  fellow-fervant, 

after 


3 6o4  ^ke  mercy  of  God. 

SERM.  after  he  had  forgiven  him  fo  great  a  debt,  as  yoii 
find  in  the  parable.  Mat.  xviii.  24.  He  owed  him  ten 
thoufand  talents,  and,  upon  his  fubmiflion  and  in- 
treaty  to  have  patience  with  him,  he  was  moved 
with  compafTion,  and  loofed  him,  and  forgave  him 
all :  but  no  fooner  had  this  favour  been  done  to  him 
by  his  Lord,  but,  going  forth,  he  meets  his  fellow- 
fervant,  who  owed  him  a  fmall,  inconfiderable  debt, 
an  hundred  pence  ^  he  lays  hands  on  him,  and  takes 
him  by  the  throat,  and  roundly  demands  payment 
of  him  :  he  falls  down  at  his  feet,  andufeth  the  fame 
form  of  fupplicatioi^i  that  he  had  ufed  to  his  Lord  ; 
but  he  rejeds  his  requeil, .  and  puts  him  in  prifon. 
Now  what  faith  the  Lord  to  him  ?  ver.  32,  33,  34. 
*'  O  thou  wicked  fervant^  I  forgave  thee  all  that 
*'  debt,  becaufe  thoudefiredft  me.  Shouldefl  not 
*^  tl^ou  alfo  have  had  compafTion  on  thy  tellow-fer- 
*'  Vant,  even  as  I  had  pity  on  thee  ?  And  his  Lord' 
*^  was  wroth,  and  deHvered  him  to  the  tormentors, 
*'  till  he.fhould  pay  all  that  was  due  unto  him." 
Now  what  application  doth  our  Saviour  make  of 
this  .'*  ver.  35.  "  So  likewife  fhall  my  heavenly  Fa- 
*'  ther  do  alfo  unto  you,  if  ye  from  your  hearts  for- 
**  give  not  every  one  his  brother  their  trefpalfes." 

God's  readinefs  to  forgive  us  ihould  be  a  pow- 
erful motive  and  argument  to  us  to  forgive  others. 
The  greateft  injuries  that  we  can  fuffer  from  men, 
if  we  compare  them  to  the  fins  that  we  commit  a- 
gainft  God,  they  bear  no  proportion  to  them,  nei- 
ther in  weight  nor  number  *,  they  are  but  as  an  hun- 
dred pence  to  ten  thoufand  talents.  If  we  would  be' 
like  God,  we  fhould  forgive  the  greateft  injuries ; 
he  pardoneth  our  fins,  though  they  be  exceeding 
great-,  many  injuries  •,  though  offences  be  renewed, 
and  provocations  multiplied:  for  fo  God  doth  to  us ;. 
3  "  He 


The  mercy  of  God.  3  605 

"  He  pardoneth  iniquity,    tranfgreffion  and  fin,'"*^^^^- 
Ex.  xxxiv.  7.  Ifa.  Iv.  7.  "  He  will  have  mercy,  he  v 
"  will  abundantly  pardon."     We  would  not  hay^. 
God  only  to  forgive  us  feven  times,    but  fevcnty 
times  feven,  as  often  as  we  offend  him  ;  fo  fhouldt 
we  forgive  our  brother. 

And  we  fhould  not  be  backward  to  this  work  ;j 
God  is  "  ready  to  forgive  us,"  Neh.  ix.  17,  And^ 
we  fliould  do  it  heartily,  not  only  in  word,  whea 
we  retain  malice  in  our  hearts,  and  while  we  fay  we 
forgive,  carry  on  a  fecret  defign  in  our  hearts  of  re- 
venging our  felves  when  we  have  opportunity  :  but 
we  fhould  from  our  hearts  forgive  ^wtx^  one  ;  for  fb  • 
God  doth  to  us,  who  when  he  forgives  us,  "  cafls- 
"  our  iniquities  behind  his  back,  and  throws  them 
**  into  the  bottom  of  the  fea,  and  blots  out  our  tranf- 
"  grefTion,  fo  as  to  remember  our  iniquity  no  more.'*- 

If  we  do  not  thus,  every  time  we  put  up  the 
petition  to  God,  "  forgive  us  our  trefpalTes,  as  we 
''  forgive  them  that  trefpafs  againfl  us,"  we  do  not 
pray  for  mercy,  but  for  judgment ;  we  invoke  his 
wrath,  and  do  not  put  up  a  prayer,  but  a  dreadful 
imprecation  againfl  our  felves  ;  we  pronounce  th^ 
fentence  of  our  own  condemnation,  and  importune 
God  not  to  forgive  us. 

Ufe.  4.  If  the  mercy  of  God  be  fo  great,  this 
may  comfort  us  againfl  defpair.  Sinners  are  apt  to 
be  dejedled,  when  they  confider  their  unworthinefs, 
the  nature  and  number  of  their  fins,  and  the  many 
heavy  aggravations  of  them  \  they  are  apt  to  fay, 
with  Cain,  that  "  their  fin  is  greater  than  can  be  for- 
"  given."  But  do  not  look  only  upon  thy  fins,  but 
upon  the  mercies  of  God.  Thou  canfl  not  be  too 
fenfible  of  the  evil  of  fin,  and  of  the  defert  of  it ; 
but  whUft  we  aggravate  our  fins,  we  muft  not  leffen  , 

th<| 


CXLVII. 


2606  T'he  mercy  of  God. 

S  E  R  M.  the  mercies  of  God.  When  we  confider  the  tnuU 
tkude  of  our  fins,  we  mufl  confider  alfo  the  multi- 
tude of  GoD*s  tender  mercies  :  we  have  been  great 
jfinners,  and  God  is  of  great  mercy  ;  we  have  mul- 
tiplied our  provocations,  and  he  multiplies  to  pardon. 

Do  but  thou  put  thy  felf  in  a  capacity  of  mercy, 
by  repenting  of  thy  fins,  and  forfaking  of  them,  and 
thou  haft  no  reafon  to  doubt  but  the  mercy  of  God 
will  receive  thee;  "  If  we  confefs  our  fins,  he  is' 
**  merciful  and  faithful  to  forgive  them."  If  we  had 
offended  man,  as  we  have  done  God,  v/e  might 
defpair  of  pardon;  but  it  is  God,  and  not  man, 
that  we  have  to  deal  with  :  and  "  his  ways  are  not 
**  as  our  ways,  nor  his  thoughts  as  our  thoughts  : 
*•  but  as  the  heavens  are  high  above  the  earth,  fo 
**  are  his  ways  above  our  ways,  and  his  thoughts 
**  above  our  thoughts." 

We  cannot  be  more  injurious  to  God,  than  by 
hard  thoughts  of  him,  as  if  fury  were  in  him,  and, 
when  we  have  provoked  him,  he  were  not  to  be  ap- 
peafed  and  reconciled  to  us.  We  difparage  the  good- 
nefs  and  truth  of  God,  when  we  diftruft  tliofe  gra- 
cious declarations  which  he  haS  made  of  his  mercy 
and  goodnefs  ;  if  we  do  not  think  that  he  doth 
heartily  pity  and  companionate  finners,  and  really  de- 
fiTe  their  happinefs.  Doth  not  he  condefcend  fo  low 
as  to  reprefent  himfelf  afflided  for  the  miferies  of 
men,  and  to  rejoice  in  the  converfion  of  a  fmner  .^ 
and  fhall  not  we  believe  that  he  is  in  good  earneft  ? 
Doth  Christ  Weep  over  impenitent  finners,  becaufe 
**  they  will  not  know  the  things  of  their  peace  ?" 
and  canft  thou  think  he  will  not  pardon  thee,  upon 
thy  repentance  ?  Is  he  grieved  that  men  will  undo 
themfelves,  and  will  not  be  faved  ?  and  canft  thou 
think  that  he  is  unwilling  to  forgive  ?  We  cannot  ho- 
nour 


T^he  mercy  of  God.  3607 

noLH"  and  glorify  God  more,  than  by  entertaining  S  E  R  M. 
great  thoughts  of  his  mercy.  As  we  are  faid  to  glo-  ^^^^^^* 
rify  God  by  our  repentance,  becaufe  thereby  we  ac- 
knowledge God's  holinefs  and  juftice  j  fo  we  glorify 
him  by  believing  his  mercy,  becaufe  we  conceive  a 
right  opinion  of  his  goodnefs  and  truth  ;  we  fet  to 
our  feal,  that  God  is  merciful  and  true  -,  Pfal.  cxlvii. 
II.  it  is  faid,  that  "  God  takes  pleafure  in  them 
"  that  hope  in  his  mercy.''  As  he  delights  in  mer- 
cy, fo  in  our  acknowledgments  of  it  ;  that  finners 
Ihould  conceive  great  hopes  of  it,  and  believe  him 
to  be  what  he  is.  Provided  thou  doll  fubmit  to 
the  terms  of  God's  mercy,  thou  haft  no  reafon  to 
defpair  of  it  :  and  he  that  thinks  that  his  fins  are 
more,  or  greater  than  the  mercy  of  God  can  pardon, 
muft  think  that  there  may  be  more  evil  in  the  crea- 
ture than  there  is  goodnefs  in  God. 

Ufe  5.  By  way  of  caution  againft  the  prefumptu- 
ous  fmner.  If  there  be  any  that  trefpafs  upon  the 
goodnefs  of  God,  and  prefume  to  encourage  them- 
felves  in  fin,  upon  the  hopes  of  his  mercy  ;  let  fuch 
know,  that  God  is  juft,  as  well  as  merciful.  A  god 
of  all  mercy  is  an  idol,  fuch  a  god  as  men  fet  up  in 
their  own  imaginations  ;  but  not  the  true  God, 
whom  the  fcriptures  defcribe.  To  fuch  perfons  the 
fcripture  defcribes  him  after  another  manner  *,  Nah. 
i.  2.  "  God  is  jealous  \  the  Lord  rcvengeth,  and  is 
"  furious  ;  the  Lord  will  take  vengeance  on  his  ad- 
*'  verfarics,  and  referveth  wrath  for  his  enemies.  If 
any  man  abufe  the  mercy  of  God,  to  "  the  ftrength- 
"  ening  of  himfelf  in  his  own  wickednefs,  and  blefs 
"  himfelf  in  his  heart,  faying,  I  Ihall  have  peace, 
*'  though  I  walk  in  the  imagination  of  mine  heart, 
*^  and  add  drunkennefs  to  thirft:  the  Lord  will 
"  not  fpare  him,  but  then  the  anger  of  the  Lord 

Vol.  Vm.  170^  "  and 

6. 


26o8  ^he  mercy  of  God, 

S  F,  R  M.  "  and  his  jealoufy  fhall  fmoke  againft  that  man,  and 
*   "  all  the  curfes  that  are  written  in  this  book  Ihall 
"  lye  upon  him,  and  the  Lord  will  blot  out  his 
*'  name  from  under  heaven,"  Deut.  xxix.  19,  20. 

Though  it  be  the  nature  of  God  to  be  merciful, 
yet  the  exercife  of  his  mercy  is  regulated  by  his  wif- 
dom  j  he  will  not  be  merciful  to  thofe  that  defpife 
his  mercy,  to  thofe  that  abufe  it,  to  thofe  that  are 
refolved  to  go  on  in  their  fins  to  tempt  his  mercy , and 
make  bold  to  fay,  "  Let  us  fin,  that  grace  may  a- 
-'  bound."  God  defigns  his  mercy  for  thofe  that 
are  prepared  to  receive  it ;  Ifa.  Iv.  7.  "  Let  the  wick- 
*'  ed  forfake  his  ways,  and  the  unrighteous  man  his 
*'  thoughts,  and  turn  unto  the  Lord,  and  he  will 
**  have  mercy,  and  to  our  God,  for  he  will  abun- 
*'  dantly  pardon."  The  mercy  of  God  is  an  enemy 
to  fin,  as  well  as  his  juftice  ;  and  it  is  no  where  of- 
fered to  countenance  fin,  but  to  convert  the  (inner ; 
and  is  not  intended  to  encourage  our  impenitency, 
but  our  repentance.  God  hath  no  where  faid  that 
he  will  be  merciful  to  thofe  who,  upon  the  fcore  of 
his  mercy,  are  bold  with  him,  and  prefume  to  offend 
him;  but  "  the  mercy  of  the  Lord  is  upon  them 
"  that  fear  him,  and  keep  his  covenant,  and  re- 
*'  member  his  commandments  to  do  them.  There 
**  is  forgivenefs  with  him,  that  he  may  be  feared  j" 
but  not  that  he  may  be  defpifed  and  affronted.  This 
is  to  contradid  thevery  end  of  God's  mercy,  which 
is,  to  lead  us  to  repentance,  to  engage  us  to  leave 
our  fins,  not  to  encourage  us  to  continue  in  them. 

Take  heed  then  of  abufing  the  mercy  of  God  : 
we  cannot  provoke  the  juftice  of  God  more,  than 
by  prefuniing  upon  his  mercy.  This  is  the  time  of 
God's  inc.  7  ;  ufe  this  opportunity:  if  thou  neg- 
Jefteft  it,  a  day  of  juftice  and  vengeance  is  coming  •, 

Rom. 


The  mercy  of  Goi5.  3609 

Rom.  ii.  4,  5.   "  Defpifeft  thou  the  riches  of  his  S  E  R  M» 

"  goodnefs,    and  forbearance,    and  long-fufFering,  \ -iW 

*'  not  knowing  that  the  goodnefs  of  God  leads  to 
"  repentance  ?  And  treafurefl  up  unto  thy  felf  wrath 
"  againll  the  day  of  wrath,  and  the  revelation  of 
"  the  righteous  judgment  of  God  ?"  Now  is  the 
manifeftation  of  God's  mercy  ;  but  there  is  a  time  a 
coming,  when  the  righteous  judgment  of  God  will 
be  revealed  againft  thofe  who  abufe  his  mercy,  "  not 
*'  knowing  that  the  goodnefs  of  God  leadeth  to  re^ 
"  pentance."  To  think  that  the  goodnefs  of  God 
was  intended  for  any  other  end  than  to  take  us  off 
from  fin,  is  a  grofs  and  affeded  ignorance  that  will 
ruin  us  ;  and  they  who  draw  any  conclufion  from  the 
mercy  of  God,  which  may  harden  them  in  their  finSj 
they  are  fuch  as  the  prophet  fpeaks  of.  If  xxvii.  11* 
*'  A  people  of  no  underflanding  \  therefore  he  that 
*'  made  them  will  not  have  mercy  on  them  j  and  he 
"  that  formed  them  will  Hiew  them  no  favour.'* 
Mercy  itfelf  will  rejoice  in  the  ruin  of  thofe  that  abufe 
it,  and  it  will  aggravate  their  condemnation.  There 
is  no  perfon  towards  whom  God  will  be  more  fevere* 
ly  juft,  than  towards  fuch.  The  juftice  of  God, 
exafperated  and  itx.  on  by  his  irijured  and  abufed  mer* 
cy,  like  a  razor  fet  in  oil,  will  have  the  keener  edge, 
and  be  the  Iharper  for  it's  fmoothnefs.  Thofe  that 
have  made  the  mercy  of  God  their  enemy,  mull  ex- 
pe6t  the  worft  his  jufbice  can  do  unto  them. 


17  Qjt  S  E  R^ 


SERMON    CXLVIII 

The  patience  of  God. 


2  P  E  T.  iii.  9. 

^he  Lord  is  notjlack  concerning  bis  promt fe^  (as  fome 
men  count  Jlacknefs)  but  is  long- fuffering  to  us- 
wardy  not  willing  that  anyjhouldperijh^  but  that  all 
Jhould  come  to  repentance. 

the  beginning  of  this  chapter  the  apoftle  puts 
the  Chriftians,  to  whom  he  writes,  in  mind  of 
the  predidlions  of  the  ancient  prophets,  and  of  the 
apoftles  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour,  concerning  the 
general  judgment  of  the  world,  which  by  many  (and, 
perhaps,  by  the  apoftles  themfelves)  had  been  thought 
to  be  very  near,  and  that  it  would  prefently  follow 
the  deftrudion  of  Jerufalem  ;  but  he  tells  them,  that 
before  that,  there  would  arife  a  certain  fe6t,  or  fort 
of  men,  that  would  deride  the  expedation  of  a  fu- 
ture judgment,  defigning,  probably,  the  Carpocra- 
tians  (a  branch  of  that  large  fe6t  of  the  Gnofticks) 
of  whom  St.  Auftin  exprefly  fays,  that  they  denied 
the  refurre6lion,  and,confequently,a  future  judgment. 
Thefe  St.  Peter  calls  fcoffers,  ver.  iii.  4.  "  Knowing 
*'  this  firft,  that  there  fhall  come  in  the  laft  days 
*'  fcoffers,  walking  after  their  own  lufts,  and  faying, 
*'  where  is  the  promife  of  his  coming  V*  The  word 
is  eTTccyreXiu,  which  fignifies  a  declaration  in  general, 
whether  it  be  by  way  of  promife  or  threatening. 
What  is  become  of  that  declaration  of  Christ  fo  fre- 
quently repeated  in  the  gofpel,  coucerning  his  com- 

3  ing 


^he  patience  of  God,  3  6  i  i 

ing  tojudgment  ?  "  For  fince  the  fathers  fell  afleep,"  S  E  RM. 
or,  "  faving  that  the  fathers  arc  fallen  adeep,"  ex-  ^^^^^"' 
cept  only  that  men  die,  and  one  generation  fucceeds 
another,  "  all  things  continue  as  they  were  f[-om  the 
^'  creation  of  the  world  ;"  that  is,  the  world  con- 
tinues dill  as  it  was  from  the  beginning,  and  there  is 
no  fign  of  any  fuch  change  and  alteration  as  is  fore- 
told.    To  this  he  anfwers  two  things  : 

I .  That  thefe  fcoffers,  though  they  took  themfelves 
to  be  wits,  did  betray  great  ignorance,  both  of  the 
condition  of  the  world,  and  of  the  nature  of  God. 
They  talked  very  ignorantly  concerning  the  world, 
when  they  faid,  "  All  things  continued  as  they  were 
"  from  the  creation  of  it,"  when  fo  remarkable  a 
change  had  already  happened,  as  the  deftrudion  of 
it  by  water  ;  and  therefore  the  predidlion  concerning 
the  deftrudion  of  it  by  fire,  before  the  great  and  ter- 
rible day  of  judgment,  was  no  ways  incredible.  And 
they  fhewed  themfelves  likewife  very  ignorant  of  the 
perfection  of  the  divine  nature  ;  to  which,  being  eter- 
nally the  fame,  a  thoufand  years,  and  one  day,  are 
all  one  :  and  if  God  make  good  his  word  fome  thou- 
fands  of  years  hence,  it  will  make  no  fenfible  diffe- 
rence concerning  his  eternal  duration ;  it  being  no 
matter   when   a  duration  begins ,    which  is  never 
to  have   an  end ;    ver.   8.   *'  Be  not  ignorant  of 
*^  this  one  thing,  that  one  day  is  with  the  Lor  d 
''  as  a  thoufand  years,  and  a  thoufand  years  as  one 
"  day."     This,    it  feem$,  was  a  common  faying 
among  the  Jews,  to  fignify,  that  to  the  eternity  of 
God,  no  finite  duration  bears  any  proportion  j  and 
therefore,  v/ith  regard  to  eternity,   it  is  all  one  whe- 
ther it  be  a  thoufand  years,  or  one  day.     The  Pfai- 
mift  hath  an  expreffion  much  to  the  fame  purpofe, 
Pfal.  xc.  4.  "  For  a  thoufand  years  in  thy  fight  are 

"but 


CXLVIII. 


o  6 1 2  The  patience  of  God, 

SF^RM.  «'  but  as  yefterday,  when  it  is  paft,  and  as  a  watch 
"  in  the  night."  And  the  Ton  of  Sirach  likewife, 
Ecclus.  xviii.  lo.  "  As  a  drop  of  water  to  the  fea, 
'*  and  as  a  grain  of  fand  to  the  fea-fhorc,  fo  are  a 
"  thoufand  years  to  the  days  of  eternity."  The  hkc 
cxprelTion  we  meet  within  heathen  writers  -,  "  to  the 
"  god's  no  time  is  long,"  faith  Pythagoras  :  And 
Plutarch,  "  the  whole  fpace  of  a  man's  life,  to  the 
*'  godsjis  as  nothing."  And  in  his  excellent  difcourfe 
of  the  flownefs  of  the  divine  vengeance,  (the  very 
argument  St.  Peter  is  here  upon)  he  hath  this  pafTage, 
"  that  a  thoufand,  or  ten  thoufand  years,  are  but  as 
**  an  indivifible  point  to  an  infinite  duration."  And 
therefore,  when  the  judgment  is  to  be  eternal,  the 
delay  of  it,  though  it  were  for  a  thoufand  years,  is 
an  obje6tion  of  no  force,  againfl  either  the  certainty, 
or  the  terror  of  it ;  for,  to  eternity,  all  time  is  equal- 
ly fhort ;  and  it  matters  not  when  the  punifhment 
of  finners  begins,  if  it  fhall  never  have  an  end. 

2.  But  becaufe  the  diftance  between  the  declaration 
of  a  future  judgment,  and  the  coming  of  it,  though 
it  be  nothing  to  God,  yet  it  feemed  long  to  them: 
therefore  he  gives  fuch  an  account  of  it,  as  doth  not 
in  theleaft  impeach  the  truth  and  faithfulncfs  of  God, 
but  is  a  clear  argument  and  demonftration  of  his 
goodnefs.  Admitting  what  they  faid  to  be  true, 
that  God  delays  judgment  for  a  great  while,  yet 
this  gives  no  ground  to  conclude  that  judgment  will 
never  be  •,  but  it  fhews  the  great  goodnefs  of  God 
to  finners,  that  he  gives  them  fo  long  a  fpace  of  re- 
pentance, that  fo  they  may  prevent  the  terror  of  that 
day,  whenever  it  comes,  and  efcape  that  dreadful 
ruin,  which  will  certainly  overtake,  fooner  or  later, 
all  impenitent  finners  :  "  The  Lord  is  not  flack 
*'  concerning  his  promife  i"  that  is,  as  to  the  de- 

cia- 


^be  patience  of  God,  3613 

daration  which  he  hath  made  of  a  future  iudgment,  S  E  R  M.- 
"  as  fome  men  account  flacknefs  ♦,"  That  is,  as  if  t  -„^_^ 
the  delay  of  judgment  were  an  argument  it  would 
never  come.  This  is  a  falfe  inference  from  the  de- 
lay of  punifhment,  and  an  ill  interpretation  of  the 
goodnefs  of  God  to  finners,  who  bears  long  with 
them,  and  delays  judgment,  on  purpofe  to  give 
men  time  to  repent,  and,  by  repentance,  to  prevent 
their  own  eternal  ruin  ;  *'  God  is  not  flack  concern- 
"  ing  his  promife,  as  fome  men  count  flacknefs  ;  but 
"  is  long-fuffering  to  us-ward,  not  willing  that  any 
*'  fliould  perifli,  but  that  all  fliould  come  to  repen- 
"  tance."  In  the  handling  of  thefe  words,  I  fliall  do 
thefe  three  things : 

Firft,  I  fliall  conflder  the  patience  and  long-fuffer- 
ing of  God,  as  it  is  an  attribute  and  perfeftion  of 
the  divine  nature*;  "  God  is  long-^fuffering  to 
"  us-ward.'* 

Secondly,  I  fliall  fliew,  that  the  patience  of  God, 
and  the  delay  of  judgment,  is  no  jufl:  ground  why 
finners  fliould  hope  for  impunity,  as  the  fcoffers, 
here  foretold  by  the  appflile,  argued,  that  becaufe 
our  Lord  delayeth  his  coming  to  judgment  fo  long, 
therefore  he  would  never  come;"  God  is  not  flack  con- 
"  cerning  his  promife,  as  fome  men  count  flacknefs." 

Thirdly,  I  will  confider  the  true  reafon  of  God's 
patience  and  long-fuffering  towards  mankind,  which 
the  apoflile  here  gives  ;  "  he  is  long-fuffering  to  us- 
*'  ward,  not  willing  that  any  fliould  perifli,  but  that 
'^  all  fliould  come  to  repentance." 

Firfl:,  I  will  confider  the  patience  and  long-fuffer- 
ing of  God  towards  mankind,  as  it  is  an  attribute 
and  perfedlion  of  the  divine  nature  ;  "  God  is  long- 
^'  fuffering  to  US-ward."  In  the  handling  of  this, 
I  fliall  do  thefe  three  things, 

I  I  fliall 


3  6 1 4  The  patience  of  God. 

^  K  R  M.      I.  I  iliall  ihew  what  is  meant  by  the  patience  iind 
'  long-fuffering  of  God. 

II.  That  this  is  a  peifedlion  of  the  divine  nature. 

III.  I  Ihall  give  feme  proof  and  demonftration  of 
the  great  patience  and  long-fuffcring  of  God  to 
mankind, 

I.  What  is  meant  by  the  patience  and  long-fufFer- 
ing  of  God. 

The  Hebrew  word  fignifies  one  that  keeps  his  an- 
ger long,  or  that  is  long  before  he  is  angry.  In  the 
new  teftament  it  is  fometimes  exprefTed  by  the  word 
VTu-ofjcovrjj  which  fignifies  God's  forbearance,  and  pa- 
tient waiting  for  our  repentance  ;  fometimes  by  the 
word  dvox^-,  which  fignifies  God's  holding  in  his 
wrath,  and  reftraining  himfelf  from  punifhing  -,  and 
fometimes  by  f>t,ocK^o9vfJitcCj  which  fignifies  the  extent 
of  his  patience,  his  long-fuffering,  and  forbearing 
for  a  long  time  the  punifhment  due  to  finners. 

So  that  the  patience  of  God  is  his  goodnefs  to  fin- 
ners, in  deferring  or  moderating  the  punifhment  due 
to  them  for  their  fins  •,  the  deferring  of  deferved  pu- 
nifhment in  whole,  or  in  part,  which,  if  it  be  ex- 
tended to  a  long  time,  it  is  properly  his  long-fuffer- 
ing 5  and  the  moderating,  as  well  as  the  deferring 
of  the  punifhment  due  to  fin,  is  an  inflance  likewife 
of  God's  patience  ;  and  not  only  the  deferring  and 
moderating  of  temporal  punifhment,  but  the  adjourn- 
ing of  the  eternal  mifery  of  finners,  is  a  principal  in- 
llance  of  God's  patience ;  fo  that  the  patience  of 
God  takes  in  all  that  fpace  of  repentance  which  God 
affords  to  finners  in  this  life  ;  nay,  all  temporal  judg- 
ments and  afiiidlions  which  befal  finners  in  this  hfe, 
and  are  fhort  of  cut-J:  g  them  off,  and  turning  them 
into  hell,  are  com>prehended  in  the  patience  of  God. 
Whenever  Goo  punifheth,  "  it  is  of  his  great  mer- 

''  cy 


The  patience  of  God.  3615 

*^  cy  and  patience  that  we  are  not  confumed,   and  SERM. 
"  becaufe  his  compaffions  fail  not.     I  proceed  to  the 

lid  Thing  I  propofed,  which  was  to  fhew,  that 
patience  is  a  perfedion  of  the  divine  nature. 

It  is  not  neceflarily  due  to  us,  but  it  is  due  to  the 
perfedion  of  the  divine  nature,  and  elTentially  belongs 
to  it.  It  is  a  principal  branch  of  God's  goodnefs, 
which  is  the  highefl  and  moft  glorious  perfedtion  of 
all  other  ;  and  therefore  we  always  find  it  in  fcripture, 
in  the  company  of  God's  milder  and  fweeter  attri- 
butes. When  God  would  give  the  moil  perfect  de- 
fcription  of  himfelf,  and,  as  he  fays,  to  Mofes, 
"  make  all  his  glory  to  pafs  before  us/'  he  ufually 
does  it  by  thofe  attributes  which  declare  his  good- 
nefs ;  and  patience  is  always  one  of  them,  Exod. 
xxxiv.  6.  "  The  Lord  paffed  by  before  Mofes,  and 
"  proclaimed.  The  Lord,  the  Lord  God,  merci^ 
*'  ful  and  gracious,  long-fuffering,  and  abundant  in 
"  goodnefs  and  truth."  Pfal.  Ixxxvi.  15.  "  But 
"  thou,  O  Lord,  art  a  God  full  of  companion,  and 
*^  gracious,  long-fufFering,  and  plenteous  in  mercy 
"  and  truth."  Pfal.  ciii,  8,  *^  The  Lord  is  merciful 
*^  and  gracious,  (low  to  anger,  and  plenteous  in  mer- 
^'  cy."  And  the  fame  you  find  Pfal.  cxlv.  8.  Jo- 
nah iv.  2.  Joel  iii.  13. 

Sometimes,  indeed,  you  find  a  feverer  attribute 
added  to  thefe,  as  that  ^'  he  will  by  no  means  clear 
"*'  the  guilty,'*  Ex.  xxxiv.  7.  But  it  is  always  put 
in  the  laft  place ;  to  declare  to  us,  that  God's  good- 
nefs, and  mercy,  and  patience  are  his  firfl  and  pri- 
mary perfe6tions :  and  it  is  only  when  thefe  fail,  and 
have  no  effed  upon  us,  but  are  abufed  by  us,'  to  the 
encouragement  of  our  felves  in  an  impenitent  courfe, 
rhat  his  juftice  takes  place. 

Nay,,  ^ven  among  men,  it  is  efteemed  a  perfedli- 

Vql.VIH.  17  R  on 

6. 


"f he  patience  of  God. 

on  to  be  able  to  forbear  and  to  reftrain  our  anger ; 
paffion  is  impotency  and  folly,  but  patience  is  power 
and  wifdom;  Prov.  xiv.  29.  "  He  that  is  flow  to 
*^  wrath,  is  of  great  underftanding ;  but  he  that  is 
*'  hafty  of  fpirit  exalteth  folly-,''  Prov.  xvi.  32. 
*'  He  that  is  flow  to  anger,  is  better  than  the  migh- 
*'  ty;  and  he  that  ruleth  his  fpirit,  than  he  that 
*'  taketh  a  city."  Rom.  xii.  21.  "Be  not  over- 
*^  come  of  evil,  but  overcome  evil  with  good."  To 
be  impatient  is  to  be  overcome,  but  to  forbear  anger 
and  revenge  is  vidlory.  Patience  is  an  argument 
of  great  power  and  command  of  our  felves  ;  and 
therefore  God  himfelf,  who  is  the  moft  powerful 
being,  is  flow  to  anger,  and  of  infinite  patience  *, 
and  nothing  doth  more  declare  the  power  of  God, 
than  his  patience ;  that  when  he  is  provoked  by  fuch 
vile  and  defpicable  creatures  as  we  are,  he  can  with- 
hold his  hand  from  deilroying  us.  This  is  the  ar- 
gument which  Mofes  ufeth.  Numb.  xiv.  17,  18. 
that  the  power  of  God  doth  fo  eminently  appear  in 
his  patience  ;  "  And  now,  I  befeech  thee,  let  the 
'^*  power  of  my  Lord  be  great,  according  as  thou 
*'  hafl:fpoken,  faying,  the  Lord  is  gracious,  and 
'^^  long-fuffering."  And  yet  power,  where  it  is  not 
refl:rained  by  wifdom  and  goodnefs^  is  a  great  tem^ 
ptation  to  anger  -,  becaufe  where  there  is  power,  there 
is  fomething  to  back  it,  and  make  it  good.  And 
therefore  the  pfalmift  doth  recommend  and  fet  off 
the  patience  of  God,  from  the  confideration  of  his 
power  i  Pfal.  vii.  11."  God  is  ftrong,  and  patient ; 
*'  God  is  provoked  everyday;"  God  is  ftrong, 
and  therefore  patient ;  or,  he  is  infinitely  patient, 
notwithftanding  his  almighty  power  to  revenge  the 
daily  provocations  of  his  creature^. 
Among  men,  anger  and  weaknefs  co^imonly  go. 

toge- 


^he patience  ofGot)l  3617 

together;  but  they  are  ill  matched,  as  Is  excellently  S  ERM. 
obferved  by  the  fon  of  Sirach,  Ecclus.  x.  18.  ''  Pride 
"  was  not  made  for  man,  nor  furious  anger  for 
"  him  that  is  born  of  a  woman."  So  that  an- 
ger  and  impatience  is  every  where  unreafonable : 
where  there  is  power,  impatience  is  below  it,  and 
a  thing  too  mean  for  omnipotency ;  and  where  there 
wants  power,  anger  is  above  it :  it  is  too  much  for  a 
weak  and  impotent  creature  to  be  angry.  Where 
there  is  power,  anger  is  needlefs,  and  of  no  ufe ; 
and  where  there  is  no  power,  it  is  vain,  and  to  no 
purpofe.  So  that  patience  is  every  where  a  perfedi- 
on,  both  in  God  and  man.     I  proceed  to  the 

Illd  Thing  I  propofed,  which  was,  to  give  fome 
proof  and  demonftration  of  the  great  patience  and 
long-fuffering  of  God  to  mankind.  And  this  will 
evidently  appear,  if  we  confider  thefe  two  things  : 

I.  How  men  deal  with  God. 

2.Hownotwithftanding  thiSjGoD  deals  with  them, 

I .  How  men  deal  with  God.  Every  day  we  high- 
ly offend  and  provoke  him,  we  grieve  and  weary  him 
with  our  iniquities,  as  the  expreflionis  in  the  prophet^ 
Ifa.  xliii.  24.  "  thou  haft  made  me  to  ferve  with  thy 
*'  fins  ;  thou  haft  wearied  me  with  thine  iniquities." 
Every  fin  that  we  commit  is  an  affront  to  the  divine 
majefty,  and  a  contempt  of  his  authority :  by  deny- 
ing fubmiffion  to  his  laws  we  queftion  his  omnipre- 
fence,  and  fay,  "  doth  God  fee  ?  and  is  there  know- 
"  ledge  in  the  moft  High  ?"  Or  if  we  acknowledge 
his  omniprefence,  and  that  he  regards  what  we  doj 
the  provocation  is  ftill  the  greater  •,  becaufe  then  we 
affront  him  to  his  face  ;  we  dare  his  juftice,  and  chal- 
lenge his  omnipotency,  and  provoke  the  Lord  to 
jealoufy,  as  if  we  were  ftronger  than  he. 

Is  not  God  patient,  when  "  the  whole  world  lies 
17  R  2  I'  in 


lihe  pnttence  of  Got)  i 

'  in  wickednefs,"  and  "  the  earth  is  overfpread 
'  with  violence,"  and  "  is  full  of  the  habitations  of 
"  cruelty?"  when  he  who  is  "of  purer  eyes  than 
"  to  behold  iniquity,'*  and  is  fo  highly  offended  at 
the  fins  of  men,  hath  yet  the  patience  to  look  upon 
"  them  that  deal  treacherouily,  and  to  hold  his 
"  peace  ?'*  when  the  "  wicked  perfecutes  and  de- 
"  vours  the  man  that  is  more  righteous  than  he?" 
when  even  that  part  of  the  world,  which  profefleth  the 
name  of  God  and  Christ,  do,  by  their  vile  and  a^- 
bominable  lives,  "  blafpheme  that  holy  and  glorious 
**  name  whereby  they  are  called?" 

Every  moment  God  hath  greater  injuries  done  to 
him,  and  more  affronts  put  upon  him,  than  were 
ever  offered  to  all  the  fons  of  men :  and,  furely,  pro- 
vocations are  trials  of  patience,  efpecially  when  they 
are  fo   numerous,  and  fo  heinous  ;  for  if  offences 
rife  according  to  the  dignity  of  the  perfon  injured, 
and  the  meannefs  of  him  that  doth   the  injury,  then 
no  offences  are  fo  great  as  thofe  that  are  committed 
by  men  againfl  God,  no  affronts  like  to  thofe  which 
are  offered  to  the  divine  majeity  by  the  continual  pro- 
vocations of  his  creatures.     And  is  not  this  an  ar- 
gument, of  God's  patience,  that  the  glorious  majef- 
tj  of  heaven  fhould  bear  fuch  multiplied  indignities 
from  fuch  vile  worms  ?  that  he  who  is  the  former  of 
all  things,  fhould  endure  his  own  creatures  to   rebel 
againll  him,  and  the  work  of  his  hands  to  flrike  at 
him  ?  that  he  who  is  our  great  benefador  fhould  put 
up  fuch  affronts  from  thofe  who  depend  upon  his 
bounty,  and  are  maintained  at  his  charge  ?  that  he, 
in  whofe  hands  our  breath  is,  fhould  fuffer  men  to 
breathe  out  oaths,  and  curfes,  and  blafphemies  againft 
him  ?  Surely  thefe  prove  the  patience  of  God  to  pur- 
pofe,  and  are  equally  trials  and  arguments  of  it. 

2.  The 


The  patience  $f  Go!>.  3  6  r  9 

^.  The  patience  of  God  will  farther  appear,  if  we  ^  ^  ^^• 
confider  how,  notwithftanding  all  this,  God  deals 
with  us.  He  is  patient  to  the  whole  world,  in  that 
he  doth  not  turn  us  out  of  being,  and  *' turn  the 
''  wicked  together  into  hell,  with  all  the  nations  that 
"  forget  God."  He  is  patient  to  the  greateft  pare 
of  mankind,  in  that  he  makes  but  a  few  terrible  ex- 
amples of  his  juflice,  "  that  others  may  hear  and 
"  fear,  and  take  warning  by  them.**  He  is  pa« 
tient  to  particular  perfons,  in  that,  notwithftanding 
our  daily  provocations,  he  prevents  us  daily  with  the 
blefling  of  his  goodnefs,  prolonging  our  lives,  and 
vouchfafing  fo  many  favours  to  us,  that,  by  this 
great  goodnefs,  we  may  be  led  to  repentance. 

But  the  patience  of  God  will  more  illuftrioufly  ap- 
pear, if  we  confider  thefe  following  particulars,  which 
are  fo  many  evidences  and  inftances  of  it. 

I.  That  God  is  not  obliged  to  fpare  and  forbear 
us  at  all.  It  Is  patience,  that  he  doth  not  furprize 
us  in  the  very  a6l  of  fin,  and  let  fly  at  us  with  a 
thunder-bolt  lb  foon  as  ever  we  have  offended ;  that 
the  wrath  of  God  doth  not  fall  upon  the  intempe- 
rate perfon,  as  it  did  upon  the  Ifraelites,  "  whiift 
"  the  meat  and  drink  is  yet  in  their  mouths  •,"  that 
a  man  is  not  ftruck  dead  or  mad  whilft  he  is  telling 
a  lie  •,  that  the  foul  of  the  profane  and  falfe  fwearer 
does  not  expire  with  his  oaths  and  perjuries. 

2.  That  God  fpares  us,  when  it  is  in  his  power 
fo  eafily  to  ruin  us  ♦,  when  he  can  with  one  word 
command  us  out  of  being,  and,  by  cutting  afunder 
one  little  thread,  let  us  drop  into  hell.  If  God  were 
difpofed  to  feverity,  he  could  deal  with  us  after  ano- 
ther manner  ;  and  as  the  expreflion  is  in  the  prophet, 
*'  eafe  himfelf  ofhis  adverfaries,  and  be  avenged  of 
l^  his  enemies.'' 

3,  That 


T'he  patience  of  God, 

g.  That  God  exercifeth  this  patience  to  Tinners, 
flagrante  hello ^  while  they  are  up  in  armsagainft  him, 
and  committing  hoftilities  upon  him  -,  he  bears  with 
us,  even  when  we  are  challenging  his  juftice  to  pu- 
nifhus,  and  provoking  his  power  to  dellroy  us. 

4.  That  he  is  fo  very  flow  and  unwilUng  to  punifli, 
and  to  inflidl  his  judgments  upon  us.  As  for  eter- 
nal punifliments,  God  defers  them  a  long  while, 
and  by  all  proper  ways  and  means  endeavours  to 
prevent  them,  and  to  bring  us  to  repentance.  And 
as  for  thofe  temporal  judgments  which  God  inflicts 
upon  finners,  he  carries  himfelf  fo,  that  we  may 
plainly  fee  all  the  figns  of  unwillingnefs  that  can  be  •, 
he  tries  to  prevent  them ;  he  is  loth  to  fet  about  this 
work ;  and  when  he  does,  it  is  with  much  reluctance; 
and  then  he  is  eafily  perfuaded  and  prevailed  withal 
not  to  do  it ;  and  when  he  does,  he  does  it  not  ri- 
goroufly,^and  to  extremity  ;  and  he  is  foon  taken  off, 
after  he  is  engaged  in  it.  All  which  are  great  inftan- 
ces  and  evidences  of  his  wonderful  patience  to  finners. 

(i.)  God's  unwilUngnefs  to  punifli  appears,  in 
that  he  labours  to  prevent  punilliment  -,  and  that  he 
may  effedually  do  this,  he  endeavours  to  prevent  fin, 
the  meritorious  caufe  of  G  o  d  '  s  j  udgments .  To  this 
end,  he  hath  threatened  it  witlv  fevere  punifliments, 
that  the  dread  of  them  may  make  us  afraid  to  of- 
fend •,  and  if  this  will  not  do,  he  dOcs  not  yet  give 
us  over,  but  gives  us  a  fpace  of  repentance,  and  in- 
vites us  earneftly  to  turn  to  him,  and  thereby  to  pre- 
vent his  judgments  ;  he  expoftulates  with  finners, 
and  reafons  the  cafe  with  them,  as  if  he  were  more 
concerned  not  to  punifli,  than  they  are  not  to  be  pu- 
niflied:  and  thus,  by  his  earnefl:  deflre  of  our  repen- 
tance, he  fliews  how  little  he  defires  our  ruin. 

(2.)  He  is  long  before  he  goes  about  this  work. 

Judg- 


The  patience  of  Gory.  3^21 

Judgment  is,  in  fcripture,  called  "  his  ftrange  workj"  S  E  R  M. 
as  if  he  were  not  acquainted  with  it,  and  hardly  ^ 
knew  how  to  go  about  it  on  the  fudden.  He  is  re- 
prefented  as  not  prepared  for  fuch  a  work,  Deut. 
xxxii.  41.  "  If  I  whet  my  glittering  fword:"  as  if 
the  inftruments  of  punifhment  were  not  ready  for  us. 
Nay  by  a  ftrange  kind  of  condefcenfion  to  our  capa- 
cities, and  to  fet  forth  to  us  the  patience  of  God, 
and  his  flownefs  to  wrath,  after  the  manner  of  men, 
he  is  reprefented  as  keeping  out  of  the  way,  that  he 
may  not  be  tempted  to  deftroy  us  ;  Exod.  xxxiii. 
2,  3.  where  he  tells  Mofes,  that  "  he  would  fend  an 
*'  angel  before  them  ;  for  I  will  not  go  up  in  the 
"  midft  of  thee,  left  I  confume  thee  in  the  way.'* 

At  works  of  mercy  he  is  very  ready  and  forward. 
When  Daniel  prayed  for  the  deliverance  of  the  peo- 
ple of  Ifrael  out  of  captivity,  the  angel  tells  him, 
that,  "  at  the  beginning  of  his  fupplication,  the  com- 
"  mandment  came  forth,"  to  bring  him  a  promife 
of  their  deliverance.  The  mercy  of  God,  many 
times,  prevents  our  prayers,  and  outruns  our  wifhes 
and  defires:  but  when  he  comes  to  afflidtion,  he 
takes  time  to  do  it ;  he  pafteth  by  many  provocati- 
ons, and  waits  long  in  expedlation,  that,  by  our  re- 
pentance, we  will  prevent  his  judgments  j  "he  heark- 
"  cned  and  heard,  (faith  God  in  the  prophet  Jeremi- 
ah) "  but  they  fpake  not  right :  no  man  repented 
*'  him  of  his  wickednefs,  faying,  what  have  I  done?'* 
He  is  reprefented  as  waiting  and  liftening,  to  hear 
if  any  penitent  word  would  drop  from  them  ;  he 
gives  the  finner  time  to  repent  and  refle<5l  upon  his 
adions,  and  to  confider  what  he  hath  done,  and 
fpace  to  reafon  himfelf  into  repentance.  For  this 
reafon  the  judgments  of  God  do  often  follow  the  fins 
0f  men  at  a  great  diftance,  otherwife  he  could  eafily 
^  make 


3622  The  patience  of  GoTi. 

S  E  R  M.  make  them  mend  their  pace,  and  "  confume  us  in  a 
cLxviir.  ^.  ,,  ^     ' 

"  moment. 

(3.)  When  he  goes  about  this  work,  he  does  it 
with  much  reludance  :  Hofea  xi.  8.  "  How  fhall 
*'  I  give  thee  up,  Ephraim?  how  fliall  I  dehver 
"  thee,  Ifrael  ?  mine  heart  is  turned  within  me,  and 
*^  my  repentings  are  kindled  together.'*  He  is  re- 
prefcnted  as  making  many  eflays  and  offers  before 
he  came  to  it:  Pfal.  cvi.  26.  "  Many  a  time  lifted 
*'  he  up  his  hand  in  the  wildernefs  to  deftroy  them." 
He  made  as  if  he  would  do  it,  and  let  fall  his  hand 
again,  as  if  he  could  not  find  in  his  heart  to  be  fo 
fevere.  God  withholds  his  judgments  till  he  is  wea- 
ry of  holding  in,  as  the  exprefTion  is  Jer.  vi.  11.  till 
he  can  forbear  no  longer  ;  Jcr,  xUv.  22.  "  So  that 
"  the  Lord  could  no  longer  bear,  bccaufe  of  the 
*'  evil  of  your  doings,  anjd  bccaufe  of  the  abomina- 
**  tions  which  ye  have  committed.'* 

(4.)  Gqd  is  eafily  prevailed  upon  not  to  punifli. 
When  he  feemcd  relblved  upo;i  it,  to  deftroy  the 
murmuring  Ifraelites,  yet  how  often,  at  the  in^er- 
ceflion  of  Mofes,  did  he  turn  away  his  wrath  ?  That 
he  will  accept  of  very  low  terms  to  fpare  a  very  wick- 
ed people,  appears  by  the  inftance  of  Sodom,  where, 
if  there  had  been  but  ten  righteous  perfons,  he  would 
not  have  deftroy ed  them  for  the  ten's  fake.  Yea, 
when  his  truth  feemed  to  have  been  pawned,  (at 
leaft  in  the  apprehenfion  of  his  prophet)  yet  even 
then  repentance  took  him  off,  as  in  the  cafe  of  Ni- 
neveh. Nay,  how  glad  is  he  to  be  thus  prevented  1 
with  what  joy  does  he  tell  the  prophet  the  news  of 
Ahab's  humiliation  !  "  Seeft  thou  how  Ahab  hum- 
**  bleth  himfelf  ?  Becaufe  he  humbleth  himfelf,  I  will 
•*  not  bring  the  evil  in  his  days." 

(5.)  When  he  punifheth,  he  does  it  very  feldpm 

rigor^ 


The  patience  of  God.  3623 

rigoroufly,  and  to  extremity,  not  fo  much  as  we  S  E  R  M. 
deferve  ;  Pfal.  ciii.  10.  "  He  hath  not  dealt  with 
"  us  after  our  fins,  nor  rewarded  us  according  to 
*'  our  iniquities,"  nor  fo  much  as  he  can.  He  doth 
not  let  loofe  the  fiercenefs  of  his  anger,  nor  pour 
forth  all  his  wrath.  Pfal.  Ixxviii.  38.  "  being  full 
*'  of  companion,  he  forgave  their  iniquity,  and  de- 
"  ftroyed  them  not ;  yea,  many  a  time  turned  he 
"  his  anger  away,  and  did  not  ftir  up  all  his  wrath." 
(6.)  After  he  hath  begun  to  punifh,  and  isingag- 
ed  in  the  work,  he  is  not  hard  to  be  taken  off.  There 
is  a  famous  inftance  of  this,  2  Sam.  xxiv.  when  God 
had  fent  three  days  peftilence  upon  Ifrael,  for  David's 
fin  in  numbering  the  people,  and,  at  the  end  of  the 
third  day,  the  angel  of  the  Lord  had  ftretched  forth 
his  hand  over  Jerufalem,  to  deftroy  it ;  upon  the 
prayer  of  David,  it  is  faid,  that  "  the  Lord  repent- 
"  ed  of  the  evil,  and  faid  to  the  angel  that  dellroy- 
"  ed.  It  is  enough  J  (lay  now  thine  hand."  Nay, 
fo  ready  is  God  to  be  taken  off  from  this  work,  that 
he  fets  a  high  value  upon  thofe  who  ftand  in  the  gap  to 
turn  away  his  wrath  ;  Numb.  xxv.  1 1,  12, 13.  "  Phi- 
' '  nehas  the  fon  of  Eleazar,  the  fon  of  Aaron  the  prieft, 
"  hath  turned  my  wrath  away  from  the  children  of 
"  Ifrael  (while  he  was  zealous  for  my  fake  among 
"  them)  that  I  confumed  not  the  children  of  Ifrael 
*'  in  myjealoufy.  Wherefore  fay,  Behold,  Igiveun- 
"  to  him  my  covenant  of  peace.  And  he  fhall  have 
"  it,  and  his  feed  after  him  even  the  covenant  of  an 
"  everlafting  priefthood  ;  becaufe  he  was  zealous  for 
*'  his  God,  and  made  an  atonement  for  the  children 
"  of  Ifrael."  That  which  God  values  in  this  adlion 
of  Phinehas,  next  to  his  zeal  for  him,  is,  that  "  he 
**  turned  away  his  wrath,  and  made  an  atonement 
"  for  the  children  of  Ifrael." 

Vol.  VIIL  17  S  5.  And 

6. 


^he  patience  of  God, 

'5.  And  laftly.  The  patience  of  God  will  yet  ap- 
pear with  farther  advantage,  if  we  confider  fomc 
eminent  and  remarkable  inftances  of  it  •,  which  are 
fo  much  the  more  confiderable,  becaufe  they  are  in- 
ftances not  only  of  God's  patience  extended  to  a  long 
time,  but  to  a  great  many  perfons.  The  long-fuf- 
fering  of  God  waited  in  the  days  of  Noah  upon  the 
whole  world,  as  is  probably  conjectured,  for  the 
Ipace  of  an  hundred  and  twenty  years.  God  bore 
with  the  people  of  Ifrael  in  the  wildernefs,  after  they 
had  tempted  him  ten  times,  for  the  fpace  of  forty 
years  -,  Ads  xiii.  18.  "  And  about  the  time  of  for- 
*'  ty  years  fuffered  he  their  manners  in  the  wilder- 
*'  nefs."  And  this  inflance  of  God's  patience  wil 
be  the  more  remarkable,  if  we  compare  it  with  the 
great  impatience  of  that  people  ;  if  they  did  but  want 
fiefh  or  water,  they  were  out  of  patience  with  God  : 
when  Mofes  was  in  the  mount  with  God  but  forty 
days,  they  prefently  fall  to  make  new  gods ;  they 
had  not  the  patieixe  of  forty  days,  and  yet  God 
bore  their  manners  forty  years.  God  had  fpared 
Nineveh  for  fome  ages  j  and  when  his  patience  was 
even  expired ,  and  he  feems  to  have  paft  a  final  fen- 
tence  upon  it,  yet  he  grants  a  reprieve  for  forty  days, 
that  they  might  fue  out  their  pardon  in  that  time  ♦, 
and  they  did  fo  ;  "  they  turned  from  their  evil  ways, 
*'  and  God  turned  from  the  evil  he  faid  he  would  do 
"  them,  andhedidit  not." 

But  the  moft  remarkable  inftance  of  God's  long- 
fuffering  is  to  the  Jews,  if  we  confider  it  with  all  the 
circumflances  of  it  i  after  they  had  rejeded  the  Son 
of  God,  notwithftanding  the  purity  of  his  dodrine, 
and  the  power  of  his  miracles  *,  after  they  had  unjufl- 
]y  condemned,  and  cruelly  "  murdered  the  Lord  of 
"-^  life,"  yet  the  patience  of  G(?d  refpited  the  ruin  of 
that  people  forty  yearj.       '         -  Befides 


V  The  patience  of  Got),  3625 

Befides  all  thefe,  there  are  many  inflances  of  God*s  S  ER  M. 

CXLVIII. 

patience  to  particular  perfons  :  but  it  were  endlefs 
to  enumerate  thefe ;  every  one  of  us  may  be  an 
inflance  to  our  felves  of  God's  long-fufFering. 

I  fhall  only  add,  as  a  farther  advantage  to  fet  off 
the  patience  of  God  to  finners,  that  his  forbearance 
is  fo  great,  that  he  hath  been  complained  of  for  it 
by  his  own  fervants.  Job,  who  was  fo  patient  a  man 
himfelf,  thought  much  at  it ;  Job  xxi.  7,  8.  "  Where- 
*'  fore  do  the  wicked  live,  become  old,  yea,are  mighty 
"  in  power  ?  Their  feed  is  eftablifhed  in  their  fight 
"  with  them,  and  their  offspring  before  their  eyes.'* 
Jonah  ch:^lengeth  God  for  it,  chap.  iv.  2.  "  Was 
"  not  this  my  faying,  when  I  was  yet  in  my  coun- 
"  try .?  and  therefore  I  fled  before  unto  Tarfhifh  ; 
*'  for  I  know  that  thou  art  a  gracious  God,  and  mer- 
"  ciful,  flow  to  anger,  &c."  Joi^iah  had  obferved 
God  to  be  fo  prone  to  this,  that  he  was  loth  to  bs 
fent  upon  his  meflage,  left  God  fhould  difcredit  his 
prophet,  in  not  being  fo  good  (fhall  I  fay)  (o  fevere 
as  his  word. 

I  have  done  with  the  firfl  thing  Ipropofed  to  fpeak 
to,  viz.  The  great  patience  and  long-fuffcring  of 
God  to  mankind* 


17  §  ^  S  E  R: 


3626 


r 

SERMON    CXLIX 

The  patience  of  God. 


2  P  E  T.    iii.  9. 

7'be  Lord  is  not  flack  concerning  his  promife^  (as 
fome  men  count  flacknefs)  but  is  long-fuffering  to  us- 
ward,  not  willing  that  any  floould  perijhy  but  that 
clljhould  come  to  repentance. 


CXLIX. 


SERM.  X  Have  made  entrance  into  thefe  words  -,  in  the 
X  handling  of  which,  I  propofed  to  do  thefe  three 
things. 

Firft,  to  confider  the  patience  and  long-fuffering 
of  God,  as  it  is  an  attribute  and  perfection  of  the  di- 
vine nature  ;  "God  is  long-fuffering  to  us-ward." 

Secondly,  to  fhew,  that  the  patience  of  God,  and 
the  delay  of  his  judgment,  is  no  jufl  ground  why 
finners  Hiould  hope  for  impunity  -,  "  God  is  not 
^^  flack  concerning  his  promife,  as  fome  men  count 
<*  flacknefs." 

Thirdly,  to  confider  the  true  reafon  of  God's  pa- 
tience and  long-fuffering  towards  mankind ;  "  He 
•'  is  long-fuffering  to  us-ward  •,  not  willing  that  any 
**  fliould  perifh,  but  that  all  fhould  come  to  repen- 
*^  tance."  I  have  already  fpoken  to  the 

Firft  of  thefe,  namely,  the  patience  and  long-fuf- 
fering of  God,  as  it  is  an  attribute  and  perfedion  of 
the  divine  nature.     I  proceed  now  to  the 

Second  thing  I  propofed,  namely,  to  fliew,  that 
■the  patience  of  God,  and-the  delay  of  judgment,  is 

np 


^he  patience  of  God.  3627 

no  juft  ground  why  Tinners  ihould  hope  for  impuni-  S  E  R  M. 
ty  ',  "  God  is  not  flack  concerning  his  promife,  as 
"  fome  men  count  flacknefs  i"  that  is,  as  the  fcof- 
fers,  here  mentioned  by  the  apoftle,  did  ignorantly 
and  malicioufly  reafon,  that  becaufe  our  Lord  de- 
layed his  coming  to  judgment  fo  long,  therefore  he 
would  never  come. 

There  was,  indeed,fome  pretence  for  this  objedlion, 
becaufe  the  Chriilians  did  generally  apprehend  that 
the  day  of  judgment  was  very  near,  and  that  it  would 
immediately  follow   the  deilrudion   of  Jerufalem  ; 
and  it  feems,  the  difciples   themfelves  were   of  that 
perfuafion  before  our  Saviour's  death  ;  when  our 
Saviour  difcourfmg  to  them  of  the  deflru6lion  of 
the  temple,  they  put   thefe  two   queflions  to  him, 
Matt.  xxiv.  3.  "  And  as  he  fat  upon  the  mount  of 
*'  Olives,  the  difciples  came  unto  him  privately,  fay- 
*'  ing,  Tell  us  when  ihall  thefe  things  be  ?  and  what 
"  fliall  be  the  fign  of  thy  coming,  and  of  the  end  of 
"  the  world?  When  fhall  thefe  things  be  ?"  that  is, 
the  things  he  had  been  fpeaking  of  immediately  be- 
fore, viz.  the  deftrudlion  of  Jerufalem,  and  the  dif- 
folution  of  the  temple  ;  that  is  plainly  the  meaning 
of  the  firfl  quellion  -,  to  which  they  fubjoined  ano- 
ther, "  And  v/hat  ihall  be  the  fign  of  thy  coming?" 
that  is,  to  judgment,  "and  of  the  end  of  the  world?" 
which,  in  all  probability,  was  added  to  the  former, 
becaufe  they  fuppofed  that  the  one  was  prefently  to 
follow  the  other,  and  therefore  the  fame  anfwer  would 
ferve  them  both  :  and  it  appears  by  our  Saviour's 
anfwer,  that  he  was  not  concerned  to  reftify  them  in 
this  miftake,  which  might  be  of  good  ufe  to  them, 
both  to  make  them,  morts^  zealous  to  propagate  the 
gofpel,  fince  there  was  like  to  be  fo  little  time  for  it  -, 

and. 


CXLIX. 


0628  The  patience  of  God. 

SE  R  M.  and  likewife  to  wean  their  afFedions  from  this  world, 
which  they  thought  to  be  fo  near  an  end. 

Ohe  thing,    indeed,    our  Saviour  fays,   which 
(had  they  not  been  prepoflefTed  with  another  opini- 
on) does  fufHciently  intimate,  that  there  might  be  a 
confiderable  fpace  of  time  betwixt  the  deftrudion  of 
Jerufalem  and  the  day  of  judgment ;  and  this  we 
find  only  in  St.  Luke,  chap.  xxi.  24.  where,  fpeaking 
of  the  miferies  and  calamities  that  fhould  come  upon 
the  Jews,  he  fays,  "  They  fhall  fall  by  the  edge  of 
"  the  fword,  and  be  carried  into  captivity  into  all 
*'  nations  \  and  Jerufalem  Ihall  be  trodden  down  of 
*'  the  Gentiles,  until  the  time  of  the  Gentiles  beful- 
*'  filled."     So  that  here  were  a  great  many  events 
foretold,  betwixt  the  deftru6lion  of  Jerufalem  and 
the  end  of  the  world,  the  accomplifliment  whereof 
might  take  up  a  great  deal  of  time,  as  appears  by 
the  event  of  things  \  Jerufalem  being  at  this  day  ftill 
trodden  down  by  the  Gentiles,  and  the  Jews  dill  con- 
tinuing difperfed  over  the  world  :  but  the  difciples, 
it  feems,  did  not  much  mind  this,  being   carried  a- 
way  with  a  prejudicate  conceit,  that  the  end  of  the 
world  would  happen  before  the  end  of  that  age ;  in 
which  they  were  much  confirmed  by  what  our  Sa- 
viour, after  his  refurredion,  faidofSt.  John,  up- 
on occafion  of  Peter's  quellion  concerning  him  •,  John 
xxi.  21,    22.    ''Lord,  what  fhall  this  man  do? 
"  Jesus  faith  unto  him,  if  I  will  that  he  tarry  till  I 
"  come,  what  i»  that  to  thee  ?*'  Upon  which  words 
of  our  Saviour  concerning  him,   St.  John  himfelf 
adds,  ver.  23.  "  Then  went  this  faying  abroad  a- 
"  mong  the  brethren,   that  that  difciple  fhould  not 
"  die;"  that  is,  that  he  fliould  live  till  the  coming 
of  our  Lord,  and  then  be  taken  up  with  him  into 
heavejn,    from  all  which    they  probably  (a-  they 

thouj,ht) 


T^'he patience  of  God »  3629 

thought)  conckided,  that  the  day  of  judgment  would  S  E  R  M. 
happen  before  the  end  of  that  age,  whilft  St.  John 
was  ahve  :  but  St,  John,  who  writ  laft  of  all  the  e- 
Vangelifts  (as  Eufebius  tells  us)  and  lived  till  after  the 
deftrudion  of  Jerufalem,  as  he  acquaints  us  with  this 
miftake,  which  was  current  among  the  Chriftians, 
fo  he  takes  care  to  rectify  it,  telling  us,  that  "Jesus 
"  faid  not,  he  fhould  not  die  -,  but  if  I  will  that  he 
"  tarry  till  I  come,  what  is  that  to  thee?"  He  tells 
us,  that  our  Saviour  did  not  affirm  that  he  fhould 
not  die;  but,  toreprefs  St.  Peter's  curiofity,  he  fays, 
"  If  it  were  my  pleafure  that  he  Ihould  not  die  at 
"  all,  but  live  till  I  come  to  judgment,  what  is  that 
"  to  thee  ?"  And  St.  Peter  likewife  (or  whoever 
was  the  author  of  this  fecond  epiftle,  or  at  leall  of 
this  third  chapter,  which  feems  to  be  a  new  epiftlc 
by  itfelf)  takes  notice  of  this  miftake,  about  the  near- 
nefs  of  the  day  of  judgment,  as  that  which  gave  oc- 
cafion  to  thefe  fcoffers  to  deride  the  expectation  of  a 
future  judgment  among  the  Chriftians,  becaufe  they 
had  been  already  deceived  about  the  time  of  it ;  and 
this  the  fcoffers  twitted  them  with  in  that  queftion, 
"  Where  is  the  promife  of  his  coming?"  Therefore 
the  learned  Grotius  conjectures  very  probably,  that 
this  laft  epiftle  (contained  in  the  third  chapter)  was 
written  after  the  deftrudlion  of  Jerufalem,  which  was 
the  time  fixed  for  Christ's  coming  to  judgment, 
and  therefore  there  could  be  no  ground  for  this  feoff 
till  after  that  time.  St.  Peter,  indeed,  did  not  live 
fo  long ;  and  therefore  Grotius  thinks  that  this  epi- 
ftle was  writ  by  Simeon,  or  Simon,  who  was  fuccef- 
for  of  St.  James  in  the  bifhoprick  of  Jerufalem,  and 
lived  to  the  time  of  Trajan. 

I  have  been  the  longer  in  giving  an  account  of  this, 
that  we   might  underftand  where  the  ground  and 

force 


^630  ^^^  patience  of  Gory. 

S  K  R  M.  force  of  this  feoff  lay  •,  namely  in  this,  that  becaufc 

cxLix.  ^j^g  Chriflians  had  generally  been  very  confident,  that 
the  coming  of  Christ  to  judgment  would  be  pre- 
fently  after  the  dellru6lion  of  Jerufalem,  and  were 
now  found  to  be  deceived  in  that,  therefore  there 
was  no  regard  to  be  had  at  all  to  their  expedation 
of  a  future  judgment  -jbecaufe  they  might  be  deceiv- 
ed in  that,  as  well  as  in  the  other. 

But  herein  they  argued  very  fallly,  becaufe  our 
Saviour  had  pofitively  and  peremptorily  foretold 
his  coming  to  judgment,  but  had  never  fixed  and 
determined  the  time  of  it :  nay,  fo  far  was  he  from 
that,  that  he  had  plainly  told  his  difciples  that  the 
precife  time  of  the  day  of  judgment  God  had  referv- 
ed  as  a  fecret  to  himfelf,  which  he  had  not.  imparted 
to  any,  no,  not  to  the  angels  in  heaven,  nor  to  the 
Son  himfelf ;  Mark  xiii.  32,  33.  "  But  of  that  day 
*'  and  hour  knoweth  no  man,  no,  not  the  angels 
"  which  are  in  heaven,  neither  the  Son,  but  the  Fa- 
''  ther.  Take  ye  heed,  watch  and  pray  \  for  ye  know 
*'  not  when  the  time  is."  So  that  if  they  prefumed 
to  make  any  conjedures  about  the  time  when  the 
day  of  judgment  would  be,  they  did  it  without  any 
warrant  from  our  Lord  :  it  was  great  prefumption 
in  them  to  determine  the  time  of  it,  when  our  Sa- 
viour had  fo  exprefly  told  them  that  the  Father 
had  referved  this  as  a  fecret,  which  he  had  never 
communicated  to  any,  ;  and  therefore  if  they  were 
mifbaken  about  it,  it  was  no  wonder.  But  their 
miftake  in  this,  was  no  prejudice  to  the  truth  of  our 
Saviour's  clear  prediction  of  a  future  judgment, 
without  any  determination  of  the  time  of  it,  for  that 
might  be  at  fome  thoufands  of  y^ars  dillance,  and 
yet  be  certain  for  A\  that  -,  and  the  delay  of  it  was 
no  fign  of  the  uncertainty  of  our  Saviour's  predic- 
3  tion 


"The patience  ofGdD.  3631 

tion  concerning  it,  but  only  of  God's  great  patience  SE  R  M. 
and  long-fuffering  to  finners,  in  expedlation  of  their 
repentance  ;  ''God  is  not  flack  concerning  his  pro- 
"  mife,  as  fome  men  count  flacknefs,  but  is  long- 
"  fufFering  tous-ward."  And  this  brings  me  to  the 

Third  and  lafl  particular  in  the  text,  namely,  the 
true  reafon  of  God's  patience  and  long-fuffering  to 
mankind-,  "he  is  long-fuffering  to  us-ward,  not 
"  willing  that  any  fhould  perifh,  but  that  all  fhould 
"  come  to  repentance."  And  for  this  St.  Peter  cites 
St.  Paul,  ver.  15th  of  this  chapter-,  "  And  account 
"  that  the  long-fuffering  of  the  Lord  is  falvation  ;'* 
that  is,  that  the  great  end  and  defign  of  God's 
goodnefs  and  long-fuffering  to  finners,  is,  that 
they  may  repent,  and  be  faved :  "  Account  that  the 
long-fuffering  of  our  Lord  is  falvarion,  "  even  as 
*'  our  beloved  brother  Paul  alfo,  according  to  the 
"  wifdom  given  unto  him,  hath  written  unto  you.'* 
Now  the  words  are  not  exprefly  found  in  St.  Paul's 
writings :  but  the  fenfe  and  effed  of  them  is,  viz. 
in  Rom.  ii.  4.  "  Defpifeft  thou  the  riches  of  his 
^'  goodnefs,  and  forbearance,  and  long-fuffering, 
"  not  knowing  that  the  goodnefs  of  God  leadeth 
"  thee  to  repentance?"  God  hath  a  very  gracious 
and  merciful  defign  in  his  patience  to  finners :  he  is 
good,that  he  may  make  us  fo,  and  that "  his  good- 
*'  nefs  may  lead  us  to  repentance."  He  defers  punifh- 
ment  on  purpofe,  that  he  may  give  men  time  to 
bethink  themfelves,  and  to  return  to  a  better  mind : 
"  he  winks  at  the  fins  of  men,  that  they  may  re- 
*'  pent,"  fays  the  fon  of  Sirach.  The  paricnce  of 
God  aims  at  the  cure  and  recovery  of  thofe  who  arc 
not  defperately  and  refolutely  wicked. 

This  is  the  primary  end  and  intention  of  God's 
patience  to  (inners  ^  and  if  he  fail  of  this  end,  through 

Vol,  VIII,  17  T  ouf 

6. 


The  patience  of  Gor^. 

our  hardnefs  and  impenitency,  he  hath  other  ends, 
which  he  will  infallibly  attain :  he  will  hereby  glorify 
the  riches  of  his  mercy,  and  vindicate  the  righteoiif- 
nefs  of  his  juftice  :  the  damned  in  hell  fhall  acknow- 
ledge, that  the  patience  of  God  was  great  mercy  and 
goodnefs  to  them,  though  they  abufed  it  ;  for  God 
does  not  lofe  the  glory  of  his  patience,  though  we 
lofe  the  benefit  of  it,  and  he  will  make  it  fubfervient 
to  his  juftice  one  way  or  other.  Thofe  great  offen- 
ders whom  he  fpares,  after  there  are  no  hopes  of 
their  amendment,  he,  many  times,  makes  ufe  of,  as 
inftruments  for  the  puniftiing  of  others,  as  "  rods  of 
•'  his  wrath,  for  the  difcipline  of  the  world  ;"  and 
he  often  referves  thofe  who  are  incorrigibly  bad  for  a 
more  remarkable  ruin.  But,  however,  they  are  re- 
ferved  to  the  judgment  of  the  great  day;"  and  if, 
after  God  hath  exercifed  much  patience  towards  fin- 
ners  in  this  world,  he  infiifts  punifhment  on  them  in 
the  next,  it  muft  be  acknowledged  to  be  moft  juft ; 
for  what  can  he  do  lefs,  'than  to  condemn  thofe  who 
would  not  be  faved,  and  to  make  them  miferable 
who  fo  obftinately  refufed  to  be  happy  ^ 

Before  I  come  to  apply  this  difcourfe  concerning  the 
patience  and  long-fuffering  of  God  to  finners,  I  mufl 
remove  an  objection  or  two : 

I.  The  feverity  of  God  to  Tome  Tinners  in  this  life, 
and  to  all  impenitent  finners  in  the  next,  feems  to 
contradidl  what  hath  been  faid  concerning  God's  pa- 
tience and  long-iiiffcring. 

As  for  the  feverity  of  God  towards  impenitent  fin- 
ners in  the  next  life,  this  doth  not  at  all  contradid 
the  patience  of  God  •,  becaufe  the  very  nature  of  pa- 
jience^  and  forbearance,  and  long-fuffering,  does 
fuppofe  a  determinate  time,  and  that  they  will  not 
hk  always:  this  life  is  the  day  of  God's  patience, 

and 


"The  patience  of  God.  3633 

and  in  the  next  world  his  luftice  and  feverity  will  S  E  R  M- 

.  CXLIX. 

take  place :  and  therefore  the  punifhment  of  finners 
in  another  world,  after  God  hath  tried  them  in  this, 
and  expedled  their  repentance,  is  no  ways  contrary 
to  his  patience  and  goodnefs,  and  very  agreeable  to 
his  wifdom  and  juilice  ;  for  it  is  no  part  of  goodnefs, 
to  fee  itfelf  perpetually  abufed  ;  it  Is  not  patience, 
but  ftupidity  and  infenfiblenefs,  to  endure  to  be  al- 
ways trampled  upon,  and  to  bear  to  have  his  holy 
and  jufl  laws  for  ever  defpifed  and  contemned. 

And  as  for  his  feverity  to  fome  finners  in  this  life  5, 
as  to  Lot's  wife,  to  the  Ifraehte  that  gathered  flicks 
on  the  fabbath-day,  to  Nadab  and  Abihu,  to  Uzzah, 
to  Ananias  and  Sapphira,  and  to  Herod  Agrippa ; 
in  all  which  inflances  God  feems  to  have  made  quick 
work,  and  to  have  executed  judgment  fpeedily  :  to 
thefe  I  anfwer.  That  this  feverity  of  God  to  fome 
few,  doth  rather  magnify  his  patience  to  the  refl  of 
mankind  ^  he  may  be  fevere  to  fome  few,  for  exam- 
ple and  warning  to  many,  that  they  may  learn  to 
make  better  ufe  of  his  patience,  and  not  to  trefpafs 
fo  boldly  upon  it ;  and,  perhaps,  he  hath  exercifed 
much  patience  already  towaids  thofe  to  whom  at  lafl 
he  is  fo  fevere  j  as  is  plain  in  the  cafe  of  Herod,  and 
it  may  well  be  fuppofed  in  m«oft  of  the  other  inflan- 
ces j  or  dk  the  fin  fo  fuddenly  and  feverely  punifhed, 
was  very  heinous  and  prefumptuous,  of  a  contagious 
and  fpreading  nature,  and  of  dangerous  example. 
LxDt's  wife  finned  molt  prefumptuoufly  againfl  an 
exprefs  and  an  eafy  command,  and  whilfl  God  was 
faking  care  of  her  deliverance  in  a  very  extraordinary 
manner.  That  of  Nadab  and  Abihu,  and  of  the 
man  that  gathered  fticks  on  the  fabbath-day,  were 
prcfently  after  the  giving  of  the  law,  in  which  cafe 
grc^t  feverity  is  neceflary ;  and  that  of  Ananias  and 

J7  T  2  Sap- 


3634  ^b^  patience  of  God. 

SE  R  M.  Sapphira,  at  the  firft  publifhing  of  the  gofpel,  that 
the  majefty  of  the  divine  Spirit,  and  the  authority  of 
the  firft  pubUftiers  of  it,  might  not  be  contemned  : 
That  ofUzzahwas  upon  the  return  of  the  ark  of 
God  from  among  the  Philiftincs,  that  the  people 
might  not  lofe  their  reverence  for  it,  after  it  had  been 
taken  captive.  So  that  thcfe  neceffary  feverities  to  a 
few,  in  comparifon  of  thofe  many  that  are  warned 
by  them,  are  rather  arguments  of  God's  patience, 
than  obje^lions  againft  it. 

11.^  It  is  obje6ted.  That  if  God  do  not  defire 
the  ruin  of  finners,  but  their  repentance,  whence 
comes  it  to  pafs  that  all  are  not  brought  to  repentance  ^ 
for  who  hath  refifted  his  will  ?  To  this  I  anfwer, 

1.  That  there  is  no  doubt  but  God  is  able  to  do 
this.  He  can,  if  he  pleafeth,  conquer  and  reclaim 
the  moft  obftinate  fpirits  -,  he  is  able  out  of  ^'  ftones 
*'  to  raife  up  children  unto  Abraham."  And  fome- 
times  he  exerts  his  omnipotence  herein,  as  in  the  con- 
verfion  of  St.  Paul,  in  a  kind  of  violent  and  irrefifti- 
ble  manner  :  but  he  hath  no  where  declared  that  he 
will  do  this  to  all ;  and  we  fee  plainly,  in  experience, 
that  he  does  not  do  it. 

2.  God  may  very  well  be  faid,  *'  not  to  be  will- 
*'  ing  that  any  fhould  perifh,  but  that  all  fhould 
'^'  come  to  repentance,"  when  he  does,  on  his  part, 
what  is  fufficient  to  that  end ;  and  upon  this  ground 
the  fcripture  every  where  reprefents  God  as  defiring 
the  repentance  of  finners,  and  their  obedience  to  his 
Jaws :  Deut.  v.  29,  *'  O  that  there  were  fuch  an 
**  heart  in  them,  that  they  would  fear  me,  and  keep 
*•  all  my  commandments  always,  that  it  might  be 
*f  well  with  them!"  So  Jer.  xiii.  27.  "  OJerufalemj 
•'  wilt  thou  not  be  made  clean  ?  when  Ihall  it  once 
^^  be?"  If.  V.  3,  4,  we  find  God  there  folemnly 

appeal- 


T'he patience  of  God,  363, 

appealing  to  the  people  of  Ifrael,  whether  there  had  ^  E  R  M. 

been  any  thing  wanting  on  his  part  that  was  fit  to  be 

done  ;    "  And  now,   O  inhabitants  of  Jerufalem, 

*'  and  men  of  Judah,  judge,  I  pray  you,  betwixt  me 

"  and  my  vineyard :    what  could  have  been  done 

"  more  to  my  vineyard,  that  I  have  not  done  to  it? 

"  wherefore  when  I  looked  that  it  fhould  bring  forth 

"  grapes,  brought  it  forth  wild  grapes  ?'*  God  may 

juftly  look  for  the  fruits  of  repentance  and  obedience 

from  thofc  to  whom  he  affords  a  fufficiency  of  means 

to  that  end.     And  if  fo,  then, 

3.  The  true  reafon  why  men  do  not  repent,  but 
perifh,  is  becaufe  they  are  obftinate,  and  will  not  re- 
pent: and  this  account  the  icripture  every  where 
gives  of  the  impenitency  of  men,  and  the  ruin  con- 
fequcnt  upon  it.  Pfal.  Ixxxi.  13.  "  O  that  my  peo- 
*'  pie  had  hearkened  unto  me,  and  Ifrael  had  walk- 
**  ed  in  my  ways  !  But  my  people  would  not  heark- 
*'  en  to  my  voice,  and  Ifrael  would  none  of  me.'* 
Ezek.  xxxiii.  11.  "  Why  v/ill  ye  die,  Ohoufe  of  Ifra- 
*'  el  ?"  Prov.  i.  29,  30,3 1 .  *'  That  they  hated  know- 
*'  ledge,  and  did  not  chufe  the  fear  of  the  Lord. 
"  They  would  none  of  my  counfel  ;  they  de- 
"  fpifed  all  my  reproof.  Therefore  they  fhall  eat  of 
"  the  fruit  of  their  own  ways,  and  be  filled  with 
*^  their  own  devices."  The  ruin  of  finners  doth 
not  proceed  from  the  counfel  of  God,  but  from  their 
own  choice.  And  fo  likewife  our  Saviour  every 
where  chargeth  the  ruin  and  dellrudlion  of  the  Jews 
upon  their  own  wilful  obllinacy. 

The  inferences  from  this  difcourfe,  concerning  the 
patience  and  long-fuffering  of  God  towards  mankind, 
fhall  be  thefe  three. 

L  To  ftir  us  up  to  a  thankful  acknowledgment  of 

the  great  patience  of  God  towards  us,  notwithftand- 

4  ing 


3636  T^he  patience  of  God. 

S  E  R  M.  ing  our  manifold  and  heinous  provocations.  We 
may  every  one  of  us  take  to  our  lelves  thofe  words. 
Lam.  iii.  22.  *^  It  is  of  the  Lord's  mercy  that  we 
*'  are  notconfumed,  becaufe  his  compaflions  fail  not." 
They  are  "  renewed  every  morning."  Whenever 
we  fin  (and  "  we  provoke  God  every  day")  it  is 
of  his  "  patience  that  we  are  not  deftroyed:"  and 
when  we  fin  again,  this  is  a  new  and  greater  inftance 
of  God's  patience.  The  mercies  of  God's  patience 
are  no  more  to  be  numbered  than,  our  fms  :  we  may 
fay  with  David,  "  Plow  great  is  the  fum  of  them  ?" 
The  goodnefs  of  God  in  fparing  us,  is,  in  fome  re- 
Iped,  greater  than  his  goodnefs  in  creating  us  •,  be- 
caufe he  had  no  provocation  not  to  make  us,  but  we 
provoke  him  daily  to  deftroy  us. 

II.  Let  us  propound  the  patience  of  God  for  4 
pattern  to  our  felves.  Plutarch  fays,  *'  That  God 
*'  fets  forth  himfelf  in  the  midll  of  the  world  for  our 
**  imitation,  and  propounds  to  us  the  example  of 
*'  his  patience,  to  teach  us  not  to  revenge  injuries 
*'  haftily  upon  one  another. 

III.  Let  us  comply  with  the  defign  of  God's  pa* 
tience  and  long-fuffering  towards  us,  which  is  "  to 
"  bring  us  to  repentance."  Men  are  very  apt  to 
abufe  it  to  a  quite  contrary  purpofe^  to  the  encou- 
raging themfelves  in  their  evil  ways.  So  Solomon 
obferves,  Eccl.  viii.  ii.  "  Becaufe  fentence  againft 
*'  an  evil  work  is  not  executed  fpeedily,  therefore 
*'  the  heart  of  the  fons  of  men  is  fully  fet  in  them  to 
**  do  evil :"  But  this  is  very  falfe  reafoning ;  for  the 
patience  of  God  is  an  enemy  to  fm,  as  well  as  his 
juftice ;  and  the  defign  of  it  is  not  to  countenance 
fin,  but  to  convert  the  finner :  Rom.  ii.  4.  "  De- 
*'  fpifeft  thou  the  riches  of  his  goodnefs,  and  for- 
^  bearance^  and  long-fuiFering  ?  not  knowing  tha^ 

*'the 


'The  patience  of  Got).  3637 

**  the  ffoodnefs  of  God  leadeth  thee  to  repentance  ?"  S  E  R  M. 

CXLIX 

Patience  in  God  fhould  produce  repentance  in  us ; 
and  we  fhould  Jook  upon  it  as  an  opportunity  given 
us  by  God  to  repent  and  be  faved ;  2  Pet.  iii.  15. 
"  Account  that  the  long-fuffering  of  God  is  falva- 
*^  tion."  They  that  do  not  improve  the  patience 
of  God  to  their  own  falvation,  miftake  the  true 
meaning  and  intent  of  it.  But  many  are  fo  far  from 
making  this  ufe  of  it,  that  they  prefume  upon  it, 
and  fin  with  more  courage  and  confidence  becaufe 
of  it :  but  that  we  may  be  fenfible  of  the  danger  of 
this,  I  will  offer  thefe  two  or  three  confiderations  \ 

1 .  That  nothing  is  more  provoking  to  God,  than 
the  abufe  of  his  patience.  God's  patience  waits  for 
our  repentance ;  and  all  long  attendance,  even  of 
inferiors  upon  their  fuperiors,  hath  fomething  in  it 
that  is  grievous  :  how  much  more  grievous  and  pro- 
yoking  muft  it  be  to  the  great  God,  after  he  hath 
laid  out  upon  us  all  the  riches  of  his  goodnels  and 
long-fuffering,  to  have  that  defpifed .?  after  his  pa- 
tience hath  waited  a  long  time  upon  us,  not  only 
to  be  thrufl  away  with  contempt,  but  to  have  that 
which  fhould  be  an  argument  to  us  to  leave  our  fins, 
abufed  into  an  encouragement  to  continue  in  them  ? 
God  takes  an  account  of  all  the  days  of  his  patience 
and  forbearance  3  Luke  xiii.  7.  "  Behold,  thefe  three 
"  years  I  come  feeking  fruit  on  this  fig-tree,and  find 
"  none :  cut  it  down  ;  why  cumbereth  it  the  ground?'* 

2.  Confider  that  the  patience  of  God  will  have  an 
end.  Though  God  fufters  long,  he  will  not  fuffer 
always  ;  we  may  provoke  God  fo  long,  till  he  can 
forbear  no  longer  without  injury  and  difhonour  to 
his  wifdom,  and  juflice,  and  holincfs  -,  and  God  will 
iiot  fuffer  one  atttribute  to  wrong  the  reft :  his  wif- 
dom will  determine  the  length  of  his  patience  j  and 

when 


363  8  Th^ patience  of  Got). 

SE  RM.  when  his  patience  is  to  no  purpofe,  when  there  is  nO 
hopes  of  our  amendment,  his  wifdom  will  then  put 
a  period  to  it ;  then  the  patience  of  his  mercy  will 
determine.  "  How  often  would  I  have  gathered 
*'  you,  and  you  would  not  ^  therefore  your  houfe  is 
*'  left  unto  you  defolate."  And  the  patience  of 
God's  judgments  will  then  determine  ;  "  Why 
*'  Ihould  they  be  fmitten  any  more  ?  they  will  revolt 
^^  more  and  more."  Yea,  patience  itfelf,  after  a 
long  and  fruitlefs  expedlation,  will  expire.  A  finner 
may  continue  fo  long  impenitent,  till  the  patience  of 
God,  as  I  may  fay,  grows  impenitent,  and  then 
our  ruin  will  make  hafte,  and  deftrudion  ''  will 
*'  come  upon  us  in  a  moment."  If  men  will  not 
come  to  repentance,  "  the  day  of  the  Lord  will 
"  come  as  a  thief  in  the  night,"  as  it  follows  in  the 
next  verfe  after  the  text ;  the  judgment  of  God  will 
fuddenly  furprize  thofe  who  will  not  be  gained  by  his 
patience. 

3.  Confider  that  nothing  will  more  haften  and  ag- 
gravate our  ruin,  than  the  abufe  of  God's  patience. 
All  this  time  of  God's  patience,  his  wrath  is  com- 
ing towards  us  •,  and  the  more  we  prefume  upon  it, 
the  fooner  it  will  overtake  us ;  Luke  xii.  46.  The 
wicked  fervant,  who  faid  his  Lord  delayed  his  com- 
ing, and  fell  to  rioting  and  drunkcnnefs,  our  Savi- 
our tells  us,"  that  the  lord  of  that  fervant  will  come 
*'  in  a  day  when  he  looks  not  for  him." 

And  it  will  aggravate  our  ruin  ♦,  the  longer  pu- 
nifhment  is  a  coming,  the  heavier  it  will  be  :  thofe 
things  which  are  long  in  preparation,  are  terrible  in 
execution  ;  the  weight  of  God's  wrath  will  make  a- 
mends  for  the  flownefs  of  it  •,  and  the  delay  of  judg- 
ment  will  be  fully  recompenfed  in  the  dreadfulnefsof 
it  when  it  comes. 

Let 


The  patience  of  God.  363  a 

Let  all  thofe  confider  this  who  go  on  in  their  fin,,S  E  R  M. 
and  are  deaf  to  the  voice  of  God's  patience,  which 
calls  upon  them  every  moment  of  their  lives.  There 
is  a  day  of  vengeance  a  coming  upon  thofe  who  tri- 
fle away  this  day  of  God's  patience;  ^iOthing  will 
fooner  and  more  inflame  the  wrath  and  difpleafure 
of  God  againil  us,  than  his  abufed  patience,  and  the 
defpifed  riches  of  his  goodnefs.  As  oil,  though  it 
be  foft  and  fmooth,  yet,  when  it  is  once  inflamed, 
burns  mofl  fiercely;  fo  the  patience  of  God,  when 
it  is  abufed,  turns  into  fury ;  and  his  mildefl:  attri- 
butes into  the  greateft  fevcrities. 

And  if  the  patience  of  God  do  not  bring  us  to  re- 
pentance, it  will  but  prepare  us  for  a  more  intolera- 
ble ruin :  after  God  hath  kept  a  long  indignation  in 
his  breafl:,   it  will,  at  length,  break  forth  with  the 
gi-eater  violence.     The  patience  of  God  encreafeth 
his  judgments  by  an  incredible  kind  of  proportion  ; 
Levit.  xxvi.  18.  "  And  if  you  will  fl:ill  (fays  God  to 
the  people  of  Ifrael)  "  walk  contrary  to  me,  and  if 
"  ye  will  not  be  reformed  by  all  thefe  things,  I  will 
"  punifli  you  yet  feven  times  more."    And  ver.  28". 
*'  I  will  bring  feven  times  more  plagues  upon  you, 
"  according  to  your  fins."     At  firfl:  God's  jufl:ice 
accufeth  finners  •,  but,  after  a  long  time  of  patience, 
his  mercy  comes  in  againfl;  us,  and,  infl:ead  of  fl:ay- 
ing  his  liand,  adds  weight  to  his  blows ;  Rom.  ix. 
22.  "  What  if  God,  willing  tofliew  his  wrath,  and 
"  to  make  his  power  known,  endured  with  much 
*'  long-fuffering  the  veflTels  of  wrath  fitted  for  de- 
*'  ftrudtion?"    They  upon  whom  the    patience  of 
God  hath  no  good  effedl,  are"  veflTels  of  wrath,  pre- 
*'  pared  and  fitted  for  defl:ru6Lion."     If  ever  God 
difplay  his  wrath,  and  make  his  anger  known,    he 
will  do  it  in  the  mofl:  fevere  manner  upon  thofe  who 
Vol.  VIII.  17  U  have 

6. 


3  640  ^he  patience  of  God. 

S  E  R  M.  jiave  defpifed  and  abufed  his  patience  ;  for  thefe,  iii 
a  more  peculiar  manner,  "  do  treafure  up  for  them^ 
"  felves  wrath  againft  the  day  of  wrath,  and  the 
*'  revelation  of  the  righteous  judgment  of  God." 

To  conclude :  let  us  all  take  a  review  of  our  lives, 
and  confider  how  long  the  patience  of  God  hath 
waited  upon  us,  and  borne  with  us  -,  with   fome, 
twenty,  forty,  perhaps  fixty  years,  and  longer.   Do 
we  not  remember  how  God  fpared  i?s  in  fuch  a 
danger,  when  we  gave  oiirfelves  for  loft  ?  And  how 
he  recovered  us  in  fuch  a  ficknefs,  when  the  phyfici- 
an  gave  us  up  for  gone  ?  And  what  iife  have  wc 
made  of  this  patience  and  long-fuffering  of  God  to- 
wards us  ?  It  is  the  worft  temper  in  the  world,  not 
to  be  melted  by  kindnefs,  not  to  be  obliged  by  be- 
nefits, not  to  be  tarped  by  gentle  ufage.     He  that  is 
not  wrought  upon,  neither  by  the  patience  of  his 
mercy,  nor  by  the  patience  of  his  judgments,  his 
cafe  is  defperate,  and  paft  remedy.     ' '  Confider  this, 
*'  all  ye  that  forget  God,"  left  his  patience  turn  in- 
to fury ;  for  "  God  is  not  Qack,  as  fome  men  count 
*'  flacknefs ;  but  long-fuffering  to  finners,  not  wil^- 
"  ling  that  any  fliould  perifli,  but  that  all  ftiQuId 
f'    come  to  repentance," 


SER' 


3641 


SERMON    CL. 

The  long-fuffering  of  God. 

.  —  '   '  ■« 

E  C  C  L  E  S.    viii.  li. 

Becaufe  fentence  againft  an  evil  work  is  not  executed 
fpeedily^  therefore  the  hart  of  the  fons  of  men  is  fuU 
ly  fet  in  them  to  do  evil. 


N 


S  E  R  M 
O  T  H I N  G  is  more  evident,  than  that  the       cl. 


world  lies  in  wickednefs,  and  that  iniquity 
every  where  abounds ;  and  yet  nothdng  is  more  cer- 
tain, than  that  God  will  not  acquit  the  guilty,  and 
let  fin  go  unpunifhed.  All  men,  excepting  thofe  who 
have  offered  notorious  violence  to  the  light  of  their 
own  minds,  and  have  put  the  candle  of  the  Lord, 
which  is  in  them,  under  a  bufhel,  do  believe  that 
there  is  a  God  in  the  world,  to  whofe  holy  nature  and 
will  fin  is  perfe6i:ly  contrary,  "  who  loves  righteouf- 
**  nefs  and  hates  iniquity,"  that  "  his  eyes  are  upon 
"  the  ways  of  man,  and  he  feeth  all  his  goings  ;'* 
that  "  there  is  no  darknefs,  nor  fhadow  of  death,- 
"  where  the  -workers  of  iniquity  may  hide  them- 
"  felves."  All  men,  except  thofe  whofe  confcien- 
cies  are  feared,  as  it  were,  with  an  hot  iron,  are  con- 
vinced of  the  difference  of  good  and  evil,  and  that 
it  is  not  all  one  whether  men  ferve  God  or  ferve  him 
not,  do  well,  or  live  wickedly.  Every  man,  from 
his  inward  fenfe  and  experience,  is  fatisfied  of  his 
own  liberty,  and  that  God  lays  upon  men  no  necef- 
fity  of  finning,  but  that  whenever  we  do  amifs,  it  is 
OUr  own  a6b,  and  we  chufe  to  do  fo ;  and  fo  far  is 
17  U  2  he 


3642  T'he  long-fuffering  of  Got). 

S  E  R  M.  he  from  giving  the  leaft  countenance  to  fin,  that  he 
hath  given  all  imaginable  difcouragement  to  it,  by 
the  mofl  fevere  and  terrible  threatenings,  fuch  as  one 
would  think  fufficient  to  deter  men  for  ever  from  it, 
and  to  drive  it  out  of  the  world  •,  and  to  make  his 
threatenings  the  more  awful  and  effedtual,  his  pro- 
vidence hath  not  been  wanting  to  give  remarkable  in- 
flances  of  his  juilice  and  feverity  upon  notorious  of- 
fenders, even  in  this  life  -,  and  yet,  for  all  this,  men 
do,  and  will  fin  j  nay,  they  are  zealoufly  fet  and 
bent  upon  it. 

Now  here  is  the  wonder  •,  what  it  is  that  gives  fin- 
ners  fuch  heart,  and  makes  them  fo  refolute  and  un- 
daunted in  fo  dangerous  a  courfe.  Solomon  gives 
us  this  account  of  it  •,  becaufe  the  puniihments  and 
judgments  of  God  follow  the  fins  of  men  fo  flowly, 
and  are  long  before  they  overtake  the  finner.  "  Be- 
"  caufe  fentence  againfl;  an  evil  work  is  not  execut- 
"  ed  fpeedily,  therefore  the  hearts  of  thefons  of  men 
"  are  fully  fet  in  them  to  do  evil." 
^  The  fcope  of  the  wife  man's  difcourfe  is  this  •, 
that  by  reafon  of  God's  forbearance  and  long-fuffer- 
ing  towards  finners  in  this  life,  it  is  not  fo  eafy  to 
difcern  the  difference  between  them  and  other  men  ; 
this  life  is  the  day  of  God's  patience,  but  the  next 
will  be  a  day  of  retribution  and  recompence.  Now 
becaufe  God  doth  defer  and  moderate  the  punifh- 
ment  offmners  in  this  world,  and  referve  the  weight 
of  his  judgments  to  the  next^  becaufe,  through  the 
long-fuffering  of  God,  many  great  finners  live  and 
die  without  any  remarkable  teflimony  of  God's 
wrath  and  difpleafure  againft  them,  "  therefore  the 
*'  hearts  of  the  children  of  men  are  fully  fet  in  them 
"  to  do  evil.'* 

If  we  render  the  text  word  for  word  from  the  ori- 
ginal. 


I'he  long'fuffering  of  God.  3643 

ginal,  it  nins  thus ;  "  Becaufe  nothing  is  done  as  a  S  E  R  M. 
"  recompence  to  an  evil  work,  therefore  the  hearts 
"'  of  the  fons  of  men  are  full  in  them  to  do  evil ;" 
that  is,  becaufe  men  are  not  oppofed,  and  contra- 
dicted in  their  evil  ways,  becaufe  divine  juflice  doth 
not  prefently  check  and  control  fmners,  becaufe 
fentence  is  not  immediately  paft  upon  them,  and 
judgment  executed,  therefore  the  heart  of  the  fons 
of  men  is  full  in  them  to  do  evil  -,  that  is,  therefore 
men  grow  bold  and  prefumptuous  in  fin  •,  for  the 
Hebrew  word  which  we  render,  "  is  fully  fet  ii> 
"  them,"  v/e  find  Efth.  vii.  5.  where  Ahafuerus 
fays  concerning  Haman,  "  Who  is  he  ?  and  where 
"  is  he  that  durft  prefume  in  his  heart  to  do  fo  ? 
*'  whofe  heart  was  full  to  do  fo,"  Fervet  in  Us  cor 
filiorum  hominum  \  fo  fome  render  it,  "  the  hearts 
"  of  men  boil  with  wickednefs,"  are  fo  full  of  it, 
that  it  works  over.  Men  are  refolute  in  an  evil 
courfe,  "  their  hearts  are  flrengthened  and  hardened 
"  in  them  to  do  evil,"  fo  others  tranflate  the  words. 
The  tranflation  of  the  LXX  is  very  emphatical,  g- 
ttXtj^o^Po^yiBt}  Tcoc^Sioc,  "  the  heart  of  the  fons  of  men 
"  is  fully  perfuaded  and  alTured  to  do  evil."  All 
thefe  tranflations  agree  in  the  main  fcope  and  fenfe, 
viz.  That  finners  are  very  apt  to  prefume  upon  the 
long-fufFering  of  God,  and  to  abufe  it,  to  the  har- 
dening and  encouraging  of  themfelves  in  their  evil 
ways.     In  the  handling  of  this,  I  fhall 

Firfl,  briefly  fhew  that  it  is  fo. 
,  Secondly,  whence  this  comes  to  pafs,  and  upori 
what  pretences  and  colours  of  reafon,  men  encourage 
themfelves  in  fin,  from  the  patience  of  God. 

Thirdly,  I  fhall  endeavour  to  anfwer  an  objedlion 
about  this  matter. 

Firft,  that  men  are  very  apt  to  abufe  the  long- 

fuiTering 


TX^  long-fuffering  of  Qot> , 

fufferirig  of  God,  to  the  encouraging  and  hardening 
of  themfelves  in  an  evil  courfe,  the  experience  of  the 
world,  in  all  ages,  does  give  abundant  teftimony. 
Thus  it  was  with  the  old  world,  ' '  when  the  long-fuf- 
•^  feringofGoD  waited  in  the  days  of  Noah, while  he 
*'  was  preparing  an  ark,  for  the  fpace  of  an  hundred  and 
**  twenty  years,"  i  Pet.  iii.  20.  For  the  wickednefs  of 
man,  which  was  great  upon  the  earth,  a  general  deluge 
was  threatened;  but  God  was  patient,  and  delayed  his 
judgment  a  great  while :  hereupon  they  grew  fecure 
in  their  impenitency,  and  went  on  in  their  courfe,  as 
if  they  had  no  apprehenfion  of  danger,  no  fear  of  the 
judgment  threatened.     So   our  Saviour  tells  us, 
Matth.  xxiv,  38,  39.  "  As  in  the  days  that  were  be- 
*'  fore  the  flood,   they  were  eating  and  drinking, 
*'  marrying  and  giving  in  marriage,  until  the  day 
"  that  Noah  entred  into  the  ark,  and  knew  not  Un- 
*'  til  the  flood  came,  and  took  them  all  away.'* 
And  fo  it  was  with  Sodom,  Luke  xvii.  28.   And 
*'  likewife  alfo  as  it  was  in  the  days  of  Lot,  they  eat, 
*'  they  drank,  they  bought,  they  fold,  they  plant- 
"  ed,  they  built."     And  fo,  our  Saviour    tells 
us,  it  will  be  in  the  end  of  the  world  ^  "  Even  thus 
*'  fhall  it  be  in  the  day  when  the  fon  of  man  is  re- 
*'  vealed."     So  likewife  the  apoftle  St.  Paul,  Rom. 
ii.  4,  5.  "  Defpifefl:  thou  the  riches  of  his  goodnefs, 
*'  'and  forbearance,  and  long-fuff'ering,  not  knowing 
*'  that  the  goodnefs  of  God  leadeth  thee  to  repen* 
*'  tance  ?    But  after  thy   hardnefs  and  impenitent 
*'  heart,  treafureft:  up  to  thy  felf  wrath  againfl;  the 
*'  day  of  wrath,  and  the  revelation  of  the  righteous 
*'  judgment  of  God."     The  goodnefs  and  long- 
fuflering  of  God,  which  ought  in  all  reafon  to  lead 
men  to  repentance,  is  to  many  an  occafion  of  great- 
er harSnefs  and  impenitency.     So  alfo  St.  Peter  fore- 
3  tels. 


The  long-fuffering  of  God,  '3645 

tels,  2  Pet.  iii.  3.  "  that  in  the  laft  days  there  fhould  S  E  R  M, 
"  come  fcofFers,  who  fhould  walk  after  their  own 
*'  hearts  bfts,  faying,  where  is  the  promife  of  his 
"  coming  ?"  And  we  fee,  in  daily  experience,  that 
the  greateft  part  of  finners  grow  more  obftinate  and 
confirmed  in  their  wicked  ways,  upon  account  of 
God's  patience,  and  becaufe  he  delays  the  punifh- 
ment  dye  to  thern  for  their  fins.  Let  us  confider, 
in  the 

Second  place,  whence  this  comes  to  pafs,  and  up- 
on what  pretence  and  colour  of  reafon  men  encou- 
rage themfelves  in  fin,  from  the  long-fuffering  of 
God.  And  there  is  no  doubt  but  this  proceeds 
from  our  ignorance  and  inconfideratenefs,  and  from 
an  evil  heart  of  unbelief,  from  the  temptation  and 
fuggeftion  of  the  devil,  one  of  whofe  great  arts  it  is, 
to  make  men  queftion  the  threatenings  of  God,  and 
to  infinuate,  as  he  did  to  our  firft  parents,  either 
that  he  hath  not  denounced  fuch  threatenings,  or 
that  he  will  not  execute  them  fo  feverely.  All  thefe 
caufes  do  concur  to  the  producing  this  monflrous 
efFed  ;  but  that  which  I  defign  to  inquire  into,  is 
from  what  pretence  of  reafon,  grounded  upon  the 
long-fuffering  of  God,  finners  argue  themfelves  in- 
to this  confidence  and  prefumption.  For  when  the 
wife  man  faith,  that  "  becaufe  fentence  againft  an 
"  evil  work  is  not  executed  fpeedily,  therefore  the 
"  heart  of  the  fons  of  men  is  fully  fet  in  them  to  do 
"  evil,"  he  does  not  intend  to  infinuate,  that  God's 
long-fuffering  fills  the  hearts  of  men  with  wicked  de- 
figns  and  refolutions,  and  does,  by  a  proper  and  di- 
re6l  efficacy,  harden  finners  in  their  courfe  ;  but  that 
wicked  men,  upon  fcjne  account  or  other,  do  take 
occafion,  from  the  long-fuffering  of  God,  to  harden 
themfelves  in  fin  j  they  draw  falfe  conclufions  from  it 

to 


3646  ^he  long'fuffering  of  God. 

S  E  R  M.  to  impofe  upon  themfelvcs,  as  if  it  were  really  a 
ground  of  encouragement ;  they  think  they  fee  fome- 
thing  in  the  forbearance  of  God,  and  his  delay  of 
punilhment,  which  makes  them  hope  for  impunity 
in  an  evil  courfe,  notwithflanding  the  threatenings  of 
God. 

And  therefore  I  Ihall  endeavour  to  fliew,  what 
thofe  falfc  conclufions  are,  which  wicked  men  draw 
from  the  delay  of  punifhment,  and  to  difcover  the 
fophiftry  and  fallacy  of  them  :  and  I  fhall  rank  them 
under  two  heads  ;  thofe  which  are  more  grofs  and 
atheiflical,  and  thofe  which  are  not  fo  grofs,  but 
yet  more  common  and  frequent. 

I.  Thofe  conclufions  which  are  more  grofs  and 
atheiflical,  which  bad  men  draw  to  the  hardening 
and  encouraging  of  themfelves  in  fin,  from  the  de- 
lay of  punifhment,  (which  we,  who  believe  a  God, 
call  the  patience  or  long-fuffering  of  God)  are  thefe 
three  ;  either  that  there  is  no  God  -,  or  if  there  be, 
that  there  is  no  providence  ;  or  that  there  is  no  dif- 
ference between  good  and  evil. 

I  fhall  fpeak  more  briefly  of  thefe,  becaufe  I  hope 
there  are  but  few  in  the  world  of  fuch  irregular  and 
befotted  underftandings,  as  to  make  fuch  inferences 
as  thefe  from  the  delay  of  punifnment. 

I  ft.  From  hence  fome  would  fain  conclude,  that 
there  is  no  God.  That  fome  are  fo  abfurd  as  to  rea- 
fon  in  this  manner,  the  fcripture  tells  us,  Pfal.  xiv. 
I.  "  The  fool  hath faidinhis  hearts,  there  is  no  God: 
*'  they  are  corrupt,  and  have  done  abominable 
*'  works."  Now  the  argument  that  thefe  men  frame 
to  themfelves,  is  this  ;  God  doth  not  take  a  fpeedy 
courfe  with  finners,  and  revenge  himfelf  immediate- 
ly upon  the  workers  of  iniquity,  therefpre  there  is 
no  God  5  for  if  there  were,  he  would  ihev/  himfelf, 

and 


Tthe  long-fufferifig  of  Gob.  3^47 

aiid  hot  bear  the  affronts  of  finners,  when  it  isfo  ea-  ^  ^^^'^• 
fy  for  him  to  vindicate  himfelf  by  a  fwift  and  fpeedy 
vengeance.  Thus  the  poet  reprefents  the  atheifl  ar- 
guing •,  Nullos  effe  deosy  inane  ccelum^  affirmat  Selius, 
probatque^  quod  fe  faffum^  dum  negat  hoc,  videt 
beatum,  "  Selius  affirms,  there  are  no  gods,  and 
"  that  heaven  is  an  empty  place,  and  proves  it, 
''  becaufe,  whilft  he  denies  God,  he  fees  himfelf  in  a 
"  very  happy  and  profperous  condition." 

And  here  it  is  worthy  our  notice,  at  what  a  con- 
tradi6lious  rate  thefe  men  reafon.  Firft,  they  would! 
have  no  God,  left  he  fhouldbe  juft,  and  punifh  them 
as  they  deferved  -,  and  then,  in  another  mood,  they 
would  have  him  to  be  nothing  but  juftice  and  feve- 
rity,  left  there  fhould  be  a  God  •,  as  if  no  other  no- 
tion could  be  framed  of  the  divine  nature,  but  of  a 
rafli  fury,  and  impetuous  revenge,  and  an  impotent 
paflion,  which  when  it  is  offended  and  provoked, 
cannot  contain  itfelf,  and  forbear  punifhment  for  a 
moment.  Juftice  is  not  fuch  a  perfection  as  doth 
neceflarily  exclude  wifdom,  and  goodnefs,  and  pa- 
tience j  it  doth  in  no  wife  contradicl  the  perfeclion 
of  the  divine  nature  to  bear  with  finners,  in  expeda- 
tion  of  their  repentance  and  amendment ;  or  if  God 
forefees  their  final  impenitency,to  reipite  their  punifh- 
ment to  the  moft  fit  and  convenient  feafon.  God 
may  fuffer  long,  and  yet  be  refolved,  if  finners  perfill 
in  the  abufc  of  his  goodnefs  and  patience^  to  execute 
vengeance  upon  them  in  due  time.  It  is  a  pitiful 
ground  of  atheifm,  that  becaufe  God  is  fo  much  bet^ 
ter  than  wicked  men  deferve,  they  will  aot  allov; 
him  to  be  at  all. 

zdly.  Others  infer  from  the  delay  of  punifhment, 
that  there  is  no  providence  that  adminillers  the  affairs 
of  the  world,  and  regards  the  good  and  bad:  adions 

Vol,  VIIL  17  X  of 


CL. 


3648  'the  Ivng'fufering  of  God. 

SEJ<.  M.  of  men.  For  though  the  being  of  God  be  acknow- 
ledged, yet  if  he  do  not  regard  what  is  done  here 
below,  nor  concern  himfelf  in  human  affairs,  Tinners 
are  as  fafe  and  free  to  do  what  they  pleafe,  as  if  there 
were  no  God  ;  and  upon  this  ground,  the  fcripture 
tells  us,  many  encourage  themfelves  in  their  wick- 
ednefs  -,  Pfal.  Ixiv.  5.  "  They  encourage  themfelves 
*'  in  an  evil  matter,  they  commune  of  laying  fnares 
"  privily,  they  fay,  Who  Ihall  fee  them?"  And 
more  exprefly,  Pfal.  xciv.  4,  ^^6,  7.  "  How  long 
*'  fhall  they  utter  and  fpeak  hard  things,  and  all 
*'  the  workers  of  iniquity  boaft  themfelves?  They 
*'  break  in  pieces  thy  people,  O  Lord,  and  af- 
*'  fli6t  thine  heritage.  They  flay  the  widow  and 
*'  the  flranger,  and  murder  the  fatherlefs.  Yet 
*'  they  fay,  The  Lord  fhall  not  fee,  neither  fliall 
*'  the  God  of  Jacob  regard  it."  And  if  this  vfere 
fo,  well  might  they  encourage  themfelves.  If  it 
were  true  which  Epicurus  faith,  "  That  God  takes 
"  no  knowledge  of  the  adions  of  men,  that  he  is 
*'  far  removed  from  us ;  and  contented  with  him- 
*'  felf,  and  not  at  all  concerned  in  what  we  do  j" 
if  this  were  true,  the  inference  which  Lucretius  makes, 
were  very  jufl ;  ^are  religio  pedibus  fuhje5fa  vicijfim 
chteritur  -,  "  Men  might  trample  religion  under  their 
*'  feet,  and  live  without  any  regard  to  the  laws  of  it. 
But  let  us  fee  how  they  infer  this  from  the  long- 
fufferingof  God,  that  he  negleds  the  affairs  of  the 
world,  and  hath  no  confideration  of  the  actions  of 
men,  becaufe  they  fee  the  ungodly  to  profper  in  the 
v/orld,  equally  with  others  that  are  llridly  devout 
and  virtuous,  yea,  many  times,  to  be  in  a  more  prof- 
perous  and  flourifhing  condition  •,  '^  they  are  not  in 
"  trouble  like  other  men,  neither  are  they  plagued 
**  like  other  men."  .So  that  if  there  be  a  God,  it  feems 


CL. 


The  long-fuffering  of  GodJ  3^49 

(fay  they)  that  he  connives  at  the  crimes  of  men,  ^  E^R  M. 
and  '^  looks  on  upon  them  that  deal  treacheroufly, 
"  and  holds  his  peace,  whilft  the  wicked  devoureth 
"  the   man  that  is  more  righteous  than  himfelf  :'* 
as  the  prophet  expreffeth  it,  Hab.  i.  13. 

For  anfwer  to  this,  I  lliall  only  give  this  rea- 
fonable  and  credible  account  of  the  long-fuffering  of 
God,  and  the  impunity  of  wicked  men  in  tliis  life, 
which  not  only  the  fcripture  gives  us,  but  the  hea- 
then were  able  to  give  from  the  light  of  nature,  and 
is  agreeable  to  the  common  fenfe  of  mankind  •,  name- 
ly, that  this  life  is  a  ftate  of  probation  and  trial, 
wherein  God  "  fuffers  men  to  walk  in  their  own 
ways"  without  any  vifible  check  and  reflraint,  and 
does  not  ufually  inflid  prefent  and  remarkable  pu- 
nilhments  upon  them  for  their  evil  deeds ;  becaufe 
this  being  a  ftate  of  trial  of  the  difpofitions  and 
manners  of  men,  is  rather  the  proper  feafon  of  pa- 
tience, than  of  punifhments  and  rewards  j  and 
therefore  it  is  very  reafonable  to  fuppofe,  that  God 
referves  linners  for  a  folemn  and  publiok  trial  at 
the  great  afTizes  of  the  world,  when  he  will  openly 
vindicate  the  honour  of  his  juftice  upon  the  defpi- 
fers  of  his  patience  and  long-fuffering,  when  he  will 
make  "  his  jitdgment  to  break  forth  as  the  light, 
•'  and  his  righteoufnefs  as  the  noon-day.'^  In  the 
mean  time  the  providence  of  God,  when  he  fees  it 
fit,  gives  feme  remarkable  inftances  of  his  juftice 
upon  great  and  notorious  offenders  in  this  life,  as  a 
pledge  and  earneft  of  a  future  judgment  ;  and  thefe 
fometimes  more  general,  as  in  the  deftru(5lion  of  the 
old  world  by  an  univerfal  deluge,  when  "  he  faw 
*'  the  wickednefs  of  men  to  be  great  upon  the  earth.'  * 
And  fuch  was  that  terrible  vengeance  which  was 
poured  down  upon  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  and  the 
17  X  2  cities 


3650  7"^^  hng'fuffering  ef  God. 

S  E  R  M.  cities  about  them  ;  which,  as  St.  Jude  tells  us,  ^'  arc 
"  fet  forth  for  an  examplejfuffering  the  vengeance  of  e^ 
"  ternal  fire,"that  is,of  aperpeaial  deftrudtion  by  fire. 

3dly,  Another  grofs  and  atheiftical  inference,  which 
men  are  apt  to  make  from  the  delay  of  punifliment, 
is,  that  there  is  no  fuch  difference  of  good  and  evil 
as  is  pretended  -,  becaufe  they  do  not  fee  the  good 
and  bad  adlions  of  men  differenced  in  their  rewards, 
becaufe  divine  juftice  doth  not  prefently  manifeft  it- 
felf  ;  and  *^  every  tranfgreffion  and  difobedience'* 
doth  not  immediately  "  receive  a  jufl  recompence 
*'  of  reward,"  therefore  they  cannot  believe,  that 
the  difference  between  good  and  evil  is  fp  great 
and  evident. 

For  anfwer  to  this  •  Not  to  infifl  upon  the  dif- 
ference which  the  providence  of  God  fometime? 
makes  between  them  in  this  life,  I  appeal  to  the 
confciences  of  men,  whether  they  do  not  fecretly 
and  inwardly  acknowledge  a  clear  difference  between 
good  and  evil.  Are  not  the  worft  of  men  apt  to 
conceive  better  hopes  of  fuccefs,  when  they  are  a- 
boutajuft  and  honeft  undertaking,  than  when  they 
are  ingaged  in  a  wicked  defign  ?  Do  not  bad  men 
feel  a  fecret  fhame  and  horror,  when  no  eye  fees 
them,  and  the  wickednefs  they  are  about  to  commit 
doth  not  fall  under  the  cognizance  and  cenfure  of  any 
human  court  or  tribunal  ?  Have  they  not  many 
checks  and  rebukes  in  their  own  fpiritSj  much  diftur- 
bance  and  confufion  of  mind,  when  they  are  entetr 
prifing  a  wicked  thing  ?  And  does  not  this  plainly 
argue,  that  they  are  guilty  to  themfelvcs  that  they 
are  about  fomething  which  they  ought  not  to  do  ? 

It  is  very  true,  that  moll  men  are  more  fenfible  of 
the  evil  of  an  a6lion,  when  they  feel  the  ill  effet5ts 
;^nd  confequences  of  it,  and  iliffer  the  puniihment 

4  that 


^he  kng-fiiffering  of  God,  3651 

that  is  due  to  it:  but  yet  the  fenfe  of  good  and  evil  SERWT. 
is  fo  deeply  impreft  upon  human  nature,  that  I  think 
no  man,  remaining  a  man,  can  quite  deface  and 
blot  out  the  difference  of  good  and  evil.  So  that 
if  men  will  but  attend  to  the  natural  didlates  and 
fuggeftions  of  their  own  minds,  they  cannot  pofTi- 
bly  infer,  from  the  delay  of  punilhment,  that  there 
is  no  difference  of  good  and  evil. 

But  becaufe  thofe  who  argue  thus  are  but  few,  in 
comparifon,  there  being  not  many  in  the  world  ar- 
rived to  that  degree  of  blindnefs,  and  height  of  im- 
piety, as  to  difbelieve  a  God,  and  a  providence ;  and 
I  think  none  have  attained  to  that  perfed  conquell 
pf  confcience,  as  to  have  loft  all  fenfe  of  good  and 
evil ;  therefore  I  fhall  rather  infift, 

IL  Upon  thofe  kind  of  reafonings  which  are  more 
ordinary  and  common  among  bad  men,  and  where- 
by they  cheat  themfelves  into  everlafting  perdition  ; 
and  they  are  fuch  as  thefe  : 

1 .  Becaufe  fentence  againfl  an  evil  work  is  not  fpec- 
dily  executed,  therefore  fin  is  not  fo  great  an  evih 

2.  Therefore  God  is  not  fo  highly  offended  and 
provoked  by  it.     Or, 

3.  God  is  not  fo  fevere  in  his  own  nature,  as  he 
is  commonly  reprefented. 

4.  Therefore  the  punifhment  of  fin  is  not  fo 
<:ertairk.     Or,  however, 

5.  It  is  at  a  diftance,  and  may  be  prevented  time 
enough,  by  a  future  repentance,  in  our  old  age,  or 
at  the  hour  of  death ;  by  fome  fuch  falfe  reafonings 
as  'thefe,  which  men  think  may  probably  be  colleded 
from  the  patience  and  long-fuffering  of  God,  they 
fiarden  and  encourage  themfelves  in  an  evil  courfe* 

I.  Becaufe  the  punifhment  of  fin  is  deferredj 
therefor^  they  conclude  it  is  npt  fo  great  an  evil  i 

they 


3652  7he  tong'fuffering  of  God.' 

SE  R  M.  they  do  not  feel  the  ill  effeds  of  it  at  prefent;  all 
things  go  well  and  profperoufly  with  them,  no  lefs 
than  with  thofe  who  are  fo  ftri6b  and  confcientious  ; 
and  therefore  they  hope  there  is  no  fuch  great  evil 
in  fin,  as  melancholy  people  are  apt  to  fancy  to 
themfelves.     For  anfwer  to  this, 

(i.)  Confider  ferioufly  what  fin  is,  and  then  thou 
wilt  fee  reafon  enough  to  call  it  a  great  evil.  To  fin 
againft  God,  is  to  contemn  the  greateft  authority  in 
the  world,  to  contradict  the  greateft  holinefs  and 
purity,  to  abufe  the  greateft  goodnefs,  and  to  pro- 
voke almighty  juftice  to  take  vengeance  upon  thee, 
and  to  make  thee  as  miferable  as  thou  art  capable  of 
being.  To  fin  againft  God,  is  to  be  difobedient  to 
thy  fovereign,  and  unthankful  to  thy  beft  benefac- 
tor, and  to  a<5l  contrary  to  the  greateft  obligations, 
againft  thy  beft  reafon  and  trueft  intereft ;  to  dif- 
oblige  thy  kindeft  friend,  and  to  gratify  thy  worft 
and  bittereft  enemy,  it  is  to  diforder  thyfelf,  to 
create  perpetual  difquiet  to  thy  own  mind,  and  to 
do  the  greateft  mifchief  poflible  to  thyfelf  •,  to  de- 
prive thyfeif  of  the  greateft  happinefs,  and  to  draw 
down  upon  thyfelf  extreme  and  eternal  mifery.  And 
what  do  we  call  a  great  evil,  if  this  be  not,  which 
contains  in  it  all  the  kinds,  and  all  the  aggravations 
of  evil  that  can  be,  and  hath  all  the  circumftances  of 
uglinefs  and  deformity  in  it  that  can  be  imagined  ? 

(2.)  Whatever  fin  be  in  itfelf,  yet  from  hence 
we  can  in  no  wife  conclude,  that  it  is  not  a  great  evil, 
becaufe  the  punifhment  of  it  is  deferred  for  a  while ; 
from  hence  indeed  it  follows,  that  God  is  very  good  in 
deferring  the  puniftiment  which  is  due  to  thee  for  thy 
fins,  but  by  no  means  that  fin  is  not  very  evil.  The. 
reprieve  of  a  traitor  does  indeed  argue  the  goodnefs 
and  clemency  of  the  prince,  but  doth  not  sx  aU  a- 

bate 


^he  hng-fuffering  of  God.  3653 

bate  of  the  heinoufnefs  of  the  crime  for  which  he  is  S  E  R  M. 

CL. 

fentenced.  The  great  evil  of  fin  is  evident,  be- 
caufe  the  holy  and  juft  God  hath  forbidden  it,  arfd 
declared  his  hatred  and  deteftation  of  it,  and  threat- 
ened it  with  moft  fevere  and  direful  punifhment  9 
but  that  God  refpites  the  punifhment  which  is  due 
to  fin,  and  does  not  immediately  take  vengeance  up- 
on finners,  but  affords  them  a  fpace,  and  means, 
and  opportunity  of  repentance  :  this  doth  not  at  all 
lefTen  the  evil  of  fin,  but  is  rather  an  aggravation  of 
it ;  that  we  fhould  offend  and  provoke  that  God, 
who  is  fo  patient  and  long-fuffering  towards  us,  fo 
very  loth  to  bring  thofe  evils  upon  us,  which  we 
are  fo  rafli  and  forward  to  pull  down  upon  ourfelves. 

2.  If  God  doth  not  immediately  punifh  fin  upon 
the  commiflion  of  it,  and  inftantly  let  fly  at  the 
finner,  this  they  would  conftrue  to  be  a  fign  that  he 
is  not  fo  highly  offended  and  provoked  by  it  ;  if 
he  were,  he  would  manifefl  his  difpleafure  againfl 
it,  by  the  fudden  and  violent  effufions  of  his  wrath. 
For  anfwer  to  this,  I  defire  thefe  two  things  may 
be  confidered  ; 

(i.)  That  God  himfelf,  in  his  word,  everywhere 
plainly  declares  to  us  his  great  difpleafure  againft 
fin  •,  Pfal.  V.  4,  5.  "  Thou  art  not  a  God  that 
*'  haft  pleafure  in  wickednefs,  neither  fhallevil  dwell 
"  with  thee.  The  foolifh  fhall  not  ftand  in  thy 
"  fight ',  thou  hateft  all  the  workers  of  iniquity,. 
*'  Thou  art  not  a  Gon  that  haft  pleafure  in  wicked- 
"  nefs."  The  words  are  a  jtcg/oio-;^,  and  lefs  is  fpo- 
ken  than  is  meant  and  intended,  viz.  That  God  is 
fo  far  from  taking  pleafure  in  the  fins  of  men,  that, 
he  is  highly  difpleafed  at  them,  and  bears  an  im* 
placable  hatred  againft  them. 

And  do  not  the  terrible  threatening?  of  God  againft, 

fin 


3654  ^^  ^^^S'fiif^^^^^S   ?/*Goi5. 

S  ER  M.  fin  declare  him  to  be  highly  offended  at  it  ?  Wheri  htf 
fays,  that  "  he  will  come  in  flaming  fire,  to  render 
"  vengeance  to  all  them  that  know  not  the  gofpel  of 
"  his  Son  j"  and  that  they  "  fhall  be  punifhed  with 
*'  everlafling  deflru6i:ion,  from  the  prefence  of  the 
*^  Lord,  and  from  the  glory  of  his  power."  Can  we 
think  that  all  the  threatenings  of  God's  word,  and  all 
thofe  direful  curfes  which  are  written  in  his  book, 
fhall  return  empty,  without  doing  any  execution  ? 
thou  that  now  flatterefl  thyfelf  in  vain  and  groundlefs 
hopes,  that  none  of  thefe  evils  Hiall  come  upon  thee, 
when  thou  comeft  to  ftand  before  the  f^reat  Judge  of 
the  world,  and  to  behold  the  killing  frowns  of  his 
countenance,  and  to  hear  thofe  bitter  words  of  eter- 
nal difpleafure  from  the  mouth  of  God  himfelf, 
*'  Depart,  ye  curfed,  into  everlafling  fire,  prepared 
*'  for  the  devil  and  his  angels  i"  thou  wilt  then  be- 
lieve that  God  is  heartily  angry  and  offended  with 
thee  for  thy  fins.  We  fliall  find  in  that  day,  that 
the  threatenings  of  God's  word,  which  we  now 
hear  fo  fecurely,  and  without  terror,  had  a  full  fig- 
nification  ;  or  rather,  that  no  words  could  convey 
to  us  the  terror  of  them.  What  the  fcripture  fays 
of  the  happinefs  and  glory  of  the  next  life,  is  true 
alfo  of  the  mifery  and  punifhments  of  the  other 
world,  that  "  eye  hath  not  feen,  nor  ear  heard, 
"  neither  have  entred  into  the  heart  of  man,  thofe 
*'  terrible  things  which  God  hath  referved  for  the 
*'  workers  of  iniquity." 

But,  above  all,  the  direful  fufferings  of  the  Son 
of  God,  when  fin  was  but  imputed  to  him,  are  a 
demonftration  of  God's  implacable  hatred  of  fin-, 
for  that  rather  than  fin  Ihould  go  unpunifhed,  God 
was  pleafed  to  fubjed  his  own  Son  to  the  fufferings 
due  to  it  :  this  plainly  (hews,  that  he  hated  fin  as 
n)uch  as  he  loved  his  own  Son.  But, 


I'he  long'fiifferijig  of  God.  3555 

But,  (2dl)r,)  God  may  conceive  a  very  great  dif-  S  ERM. 
pleafure  againfl  fin,  and  be  highly  incenfed  and  pro- 
voked by  it,  and  yet  fufpend  the  effeds  of  his  dif- 
pleafure,  and  defer  the  punifhnient  of  it  for  a  great 
while  :  and  to  imagine  otherwifz,  argues  a  grofs  mif- 
take  of  the  nature  of  God,  arifmg  from  cur  not 
confidering  the  attributes  and  perfections  of  God 
in  conjunction  and  confiftency  with  one  another. 
When  we  confider  one  attribute  of  God  iingly,  and 
feparate  it  from  the  reft,  and  frame  fuch  wide  and 
large  apprehenfions  of  it,  as  to  exclude  his  other 
perfedions,  we  have  a  falfe  notion  of  God  ;  and  the 
teafon  of  this  mifhake  is,  becaufe,  among  men,  an 
eminent  degree  of  any  one  excellency  doth  common- 
ly fhut  out  others  ;  becaufe  in  our  narrow  and  finite 
nature,  many  perfe61ions  cannot  ftand  together  ;  but 
it  is  quite  otherwife  in  the  divine  nature.  In  infinite 
perfe6lion,  all  perfe6lions  do  meet  and  confift  toge- 
ther ;  one  perfedion  doth  not  hinder  and  exclude 
another,  and  therefore  in  our  conceptions  of  God, 
we  are  to  take  great  heed  that  v/e  do  not  raife  any* 
one  attribute  or  perfedion  of  God  upon  the  ruin  of 
the  reft. 

So  that  it  is  a  falfe  imagination  of  God,  v/hen  we 
fo  attribute  juftice  or  anger  to  him,  as  to  exclude 
his  patience  and  long-fuffering :  for  God  is  not  im- 
potent in  his  anger,  as  we  are  ;  every  thing  that 
provokes  him,  doth  not  prefently  put  him  out  of  pa- 
tience, fo  that  he  cannot  contain  his  wrath,  and  for- 
bear immediately  to  revenge  himfelf  upon  fmners. 
In  this  fenfe  God  fays  of  himfelf,  Ifa.  xxvii.  4.  "  Fury 
*^  is  not  in  m&.''  There  is  nothing  of  a  rafti  and 
ungoverned  palTion  in  the  wife  and  juft  God.  Every 
fin  indeed  kindles  his  anger,  and  provokes  his  dif* 
pleafure  againft  us,  and  by  our  repeated  and  conti- 
VoL.  VIII.  17  Y  nued 

7' 


3656  ^hc  long-fiiffcring  oj  Gov>. 

S  E  R  iM.  nued  offences,  we  Hill  add  fuel  to  his  wrath  :  but  it 

CL  - 

doth  not  of  necelTity  inftantly  break  forth  hke  "  a 
"  confuming  lire,  and  a  devouring  flame."  The 
holy  and  righteous  nature  of  God  malceshim  nccef- 
farily  offended  and  difpleafed  with  the  fins  of  men  i 
but  as  to  the  manifeftation  of  his  wrath,  and  the  ef- 
fects of  his  anger,  his  wifdom  and  goodnefs  do  re- 
gulate and  determine  the  proper  time  and  circumftan- 
ces  of  puniihment. 

3.  From  the  patience  of  God,  and  the  delay  of 
punilliment,  men  are  apt  to  conclude,  that  God  is 
not  fo  fevere  in  his  nature  as  he  is  commonly  repre- 
fented.  It  is  true,  he  hath  declared  his  difpleafure 
againft  fin,  and  threatened  it  with  dreadful  punifh- 
ments-5  which  he  may  do,  in  great  wifdom,  to  keep 
the  world  in  awe  and  order.:  but  great  things  are 
likewife  fpoken  of  his  mercy,  and  of  the  wonderful 
delight  he  takes  in  the  exercifc  of  his  mercy  :  fo  that 
notwithilanding  all  the  threatcnings  which  are  de- 
nounced againil  fin,  it  is  to  be  hoped,  that  when 
fentence  comes  to  be  pad,  and  judgment  to  be  exe- 
cuted, God  will  "  remember  mercy  in  the  midft  of 
*'  judgment,"  and  that  "  mercy  will  triumph  over 
*'  judgment  ;"  and  that  as  nov/  his  patience  fhays 
his  hand,  and  turns  away  his  wrath,  fo  at  the  lafl:, 
the  milder  attributes  of  his  goodnefs  and  mercy  will 
interpofe  and  m.oderate  the  rigour  and  fcverity  of  his 
juftice  ;  and  of  this  his  great  patience  and  long-fuf- 
fering  towards  fmners  for  the  prefent  feems  to  be 
fome  kind  of  pledge  and  earnelt  :  he  that  is  fo  flow 
to  anger,  and  fo  loth  to  execute  punifliment,  may 
probably  be  prevailed  upon  by  his  own  pity  and  good- 
nefs to  remit  it  at  the  laft  :  and  tins  is  the  more  cre- 
dible, becaufe  it  is  granted  on  all  hands,  that  no^per- 
ibn  iis  obliged  to  execute-  his  threatenicgs,  as  he  is  to 

make 


The  long'fiiffertng  of  God,  3^57 

make  good  his  promifes  ;  he  that  promifeth  paiTeth  S  E  R  M. 
a  right  to  another  -,  but  he  that  threatencth   keeps 
the  right  and  power  of  doing  what  he  pleafeth  in 
his  own  hands. 

I  (liali  fpeak  a  little  more  fully  to  this,  becaufe  it 
is  almoil  incredible  how  much  men  bear  up  themi- 
felvcs  upon  vain  and  groundlefs  hopes  of  the  bound- 
lefs  mercy  of  God,  and  "  blefs  themfclves  in  their 
''  hearts,  faying.  They  lliall  have  peace,  though 
''  they  walk  in  the  imagination  of  their  hearts, 
*'  to  add  drunkennefs  to  thiril  ;"  that  is,  though 
they  ilill  perfiil  in  their  vices,  and  add  one  degree  of 
fin  to  another. 

Now,  for  anfwer  to  this, 

( I .)  Let  it  be  granted,  that  a  bare  threatening  does 
not  neceiTarily  infer  the  certainty  of  the  event  ;  and 
that  the  thing  threatened  fhall  infallibly  come  to  pafs ; 
no  perfon  is  obliged  to  perform  his  threatenings,  as 
he  is  his  promifes  -,  the  threatenings  of  God  declare 
what  fin  defer ves,  and  v/hat  the  fmner  may  juftly  ex- 
pcd:  if  he  continue  impenitent  and  incorrigible.  But 
then  we  are  to  take  notice,  that  repentance  is  the  on- 
ly condition  that  is  implied  in  the  threatenings  of 
God,  and  will  effeduaily  hinder  the  execution  of 
them  :  Jer.  xviii.   7,  8,  9,   10,  ''  At  what  inilant 
''  I  fpeak  (fays  God)  concerning  a  nation,  and  con- 
""  cerning   a  kingdom,  to  pluck  up,  and  to   pull 
''  down,  and  to  dellroy  it ;  if  that  nation  againil 
"  whom  I  have  pronounced,  turn  from  their  evil,  I 
''  will  repent  of  the  evil  that  I  thought  to  do  unto 
*'  them.    And  at  v/hat  inftant  I  fhall  fpeak  con- 
"  cerning  a  nation  and  concerning  a  kingdom,  to 
*'  build  and  to  plaht  it  ;  if  it  do  evil  in  my  fight, 
"  and  obey  not  my  voice,  then  will  I  repent  of  the 
*'  good   wherewith  I  laid  I  would  benefit  them.'* 
ly  Y  z  Now 


3658  The  long-fuffering  of  GoT>. 

S  E  RM.  Now  if  when  God  hath  promifed  to  do  good  to  a 
p:jopIe,  fin  will  hinder  the  bleffing  promifed,  and 
bring  down  judgments  upon  them,  much  more  when 
it  is  particularly  threatened. 

But  as  to  the  cafe  of  final  impcnitency  and  unbe- 
lief, God,  that  he  might  (Irengthen  his  threatenings, 
hath  added  a  fign  of  immutability  to  them,  having 
confirmed  them  with  an  oath  ;  "I  have  fworn  (faith 
"  the  Lord  )  that  they  Hiall  not  enter  into  my 
*'  refl":  which,though  it  was  fpoken  to  the  unbeliev- 
ing Jews,  the  apoflie  to  the  Hebrews  applies  it  to  a 
final  unbelief  and  impenitency  under  the  gofpel,  of 
which  the  inhdeUty  of  the  Ifraelites  was  a  type  and 
figure.  Now  though  God  may  remit  of  his  threaten- 
ings :  yet  his  oath  is  a  plain  declaration  that  he  will 
not  •,  becaufe  it  fignifies  the  firm  and  immutable  de- 
termination of  his  will,  and  thereby  puts  an  end  to 
all  doubts  and  controvcrfics  concerning  the  fulfilling 
of  his  threatenings. 

(2.)  It  is  certainly  much  the  wifefl  and  fafeft  way, 
to  believe  the  threatenings  of  God,  in  the  ftriclnefs 
and  rigour  of  them,  unlefs  there  be  fome  tacit  con- 
dition evidently  implied  in  them  -,  becaufe  if  we  do 
not  believe  them,  and  the  thing  prove  otherwife,  the 
confequence  of  our  miftake  is  fatal  and  dreadful.  It 
is  true  indeed,  that  God  by  his  threatenings  did  in- 
tend to  keep  finners  in  awe,  and  to  deter  them 
from  fin  :  but  if  he  had  any  wliere  revealed,  that 
he  would  not  be  rigorous  in  the  execution  of  thefe 
threatenings,  fuch  arevel-ition  would  quite  take  oflP 
the  edge  and  terror  of  them,  and  contradid:  the  end 
and  defign  of  them  \  for  threatenings  fignify  very 
little,  but  upcn  this  fuppofition,  that  in  all  probabi- 
lity they  will  be  executed  :  and  if  this  be  true,  it  is 
the  greatefi:  madnefs  and  folly  in  the  world  to  run  the 
hazard  of  it.  (3.)  As 


I'he  long'fiiffering  of  God,  3659 

(3.)  As  for  thofe  large  declarations  which  theSERM. 
fcripture  makes  of  the  boundlefs  mercy  of  God  to  ^^' 
finners,  we  are  to  limit  them,  as  the  fcripture  hath 
done,  to  the  time  and  feafon  of  mercy,  which  is  this 
life,  and  while  we  are  in  the  way.  This  is  the  day 
of  mercy  and  falvation  -,  and  when  this  life  is  ended, 
the  opportunities  of  grace  and  mercy  are  pad,  and 
the  day  of  recompence  and  vengeance  will  begin. 
Now  God  tries  us,  and  offers  mercy  to  us  -,  but  if 
we  obftinately  refufeit,  judgment  will  take  hold  of  us. 

And  then  we  mufb  Hmit  the  mercy  of  God  to  the 
conditions  upon  which  he  offers  it,  which  arc,  re- 
pentance for  fins  paft,  and  fincere  obedience  for  the 
future  :  but  if  men  continue  obflinate  and  impeni- 
tent, and  encourage  themfelves  in  fin  from  the  mercy 
and  patience  of  God  ;  this  is  not  a  cafe  that  admits 
of  mercy,  but,  on  the  contrary,  his  juftice  will  tri- 
umph in  the  ruin  and  defbruftion  of  thofe  who,  in- 
fliead  of  embracing  the  offers  of  his  mercy,  do  de- 
fpife  and  abufe  them  :  "  He  v/ill  laugh  at  their  ca- 
"  lamity,  and  m.ock  when  their  fear  comes  ;  v/hen 
''  their  fear  comes  as  defolation,  and  their  deftruc- 
*'  tion  as  a  whirl- wind;  v/hen  diftrefs  and  anguifh 
*'  com^eth  upon  them,  then  they  may  call  upon  him, 
*'  but  he  will  not  anfwer  ;  they  may  feek  him  ear- 
"  ly,  but  they  fnall  not  find  him.  If  we  defpife 
"  the  riches  of  God's  goodnefs,  and  long-fuffering, 
"  and  forbearance,"  he  knows  how  to  handle  us, 
and  will  do  it  to  purpofe  -,  "  with  the  froward  he 
''  will  fhew  hi mfelf  froward,"  and  will  be  in  a  more 
cfpecial  manner  fevere  towards  thofe  who  take  en- 
couragement from  his  mercy,  to  difbelieve  and  de- 
fpife his  threatenings.  And  this  God  hath  as  plainly 
told  us,  as  words  can  exprefs  any  thing,  Deut.  xxix. 
^9?  20.     "  And  if  it  come  to  pafs  that  when  he 

*'  heareth 


CL. 


3660  T'be  long-fuffering  of  Gox). 

SE^^  ^I-  "  hcareth  the  words  of  this  curfe,  he  blefs  himlelf 
"  in  his  heart,  faying,  I  fiiall  have  peace,  though  I 
"  walk  in  the  imagination  of  my  heart,  to  add  drun- 
*'  kennefs  to  thiril :  the  Lord  will  not  fpare  him, 
"  but  then  the  anger  of  the  Lord,  and  his  jcaloiify, 
*'  fhall  fmoke  againil  that  man,  and  all  the  curfes 
"  that  are  written  in  this  book,  lliall  lye  upon  him, 
*'  and  the  Lord  fliali  blot  out  his  name  from  under 
''  heaven."  Whatever  right  and  power  God  hath 
referved  to  himfelf  about  the  execution  of  his  threat- 
enings,  he  hath  plainly  declared,  that,  of  all  others, 
thofe  who  encourage  themfelves  in  a  finful  courfe, 
from  the  hopes  of  God's  mercy,  notvvithftanding  his 
threatenings,  fhall  find  no  favour  and  mercy  at  his 
hand  :  whatever  he  may  remit  of  his  threatenings  to 
others,  he  will  certainly  not  fpare  thole  who  believe 
fo  largely  concerning  the  mercy  of  God,  not  with  a 
mind  to  fubmit  to  the  terms  of  it,  but  to  prefume 
fo  much  the  more  upon  it. 

(4.)  God  hath  not  been  wanting  to  fiicv/  fome  re- 
markable infcances  of  his  feverity  towards  finners  in 
this  world.  As  he  is  p leafed  fometimes  to  give  good 
ipenfome  fore-taftes  of  heaven,  and  earnefts  of  their 
future  happinefs ;  fo  likewife  by  fome  prefcnt  ftroke, 
to  let  finners  feel  what  they  are  to  expecl  hereafter, 
fom.^  fparks  of  hell  do  now  and  then  fall  upon  the 
confciences  of  finners.  That  fear  which  is  fome- 
times kindled  in  men's  confciences  in  this  life,  that 
horrible  anguiPn,  and  thofe  unfpeakable  terrors  which 
fom^e  finners  have  had  experience  of  in  this  world, 
may  ferve  toforev/arn  us  of  '^  the  wrath  which  is  to 
''  come,"  and  to  convince  us  of  the  reality  of  thofe 
cxpreinons  of  the  torments  of  hell,  by  "  the  worm 
*'  that  dies  not,  and  the  fire  that  is  not  quenched." 
Th^t  miraculous  deluge,  which  fwallowetl  up  the  old 

world. 


^be  long-fiifferlng  of  God.  3661 

world,  that  hell  which  was  rained  clown  from  hea-  S  E  R  M, 

.  '    ->  .  CL 

ven,  in  thofe  terrible  fhowers  ot  hre  and  brimflone, 
to  confume  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  ;  the  earth  open- 
ing her  mouth  upon  Corah  and  his  ieditious  company, 
to  let  them  down,  as  it  were,  quick  into  hell :  thefe 
and  many  other  remarkable  judgments  of  God,  in 
feveral  ages,  upon  particular  perfons,  and  upon  ci- 
ties and  nations,  may  latisfy  us,  in  fome  meafure,  of 
the  feverity  of  God  againft  fin,  and  be,  as  it  were, 
pledges  to  affure  Tinners  of  the  infupportable  mifery 
and  tormiCnts  of  the  next  life. 

(5.)  The  argument  is  much  flronger  the  other 
way,  that  becaufe  the  punifhment  of  finners  is  de- 
layed fo  long,  therefore  it  will  be  much  heavier  and 
feverer  when  it  comes  ;  that  the  wrath  of  God  is 
growing  all  this  while,  and  as  we  "  fill  up  the 
"  meafures  of  our  f^ns,"  he  fills  the  "  vials  of 
"  his  wrath  :  Rom.  ii.  5.  and  according  to  thy  hard 
"  and  impenitent  heart,  treafurefl  up  to  thyfelf  wrath, 
"  againil  the  day  of  wrath,  and  the  revelation  of 
"  the  righteous  judgment  of  God."  God  now 
keeps  in  his  difpleafure :  but  all  the  while  v/e  go  on 
in  an  impenitent  courfe,  the  wrath  of  God  is  conti- 
nually increafmg,  and  v/ill  at  lall  be  manifefled  by 
the  righteous  judgment  of  God  upon  finners.  God 
now  exercifeth  and  difpkyeth  his  milder  attributes, 
his  goodnefs,  and  mercy,  and  patience  :  but  thefe 
will  not  always  hold  out,  there  is  a  dreadful  day  a 
coming,  wherein  (as  the  apoftle  fpeaks)  God  will 
*'  n^iew  his  wrath,  and  make  his  power  known," 
after  he  hath  "  endured  with  much  long-ftiffering 
''  the  veffels  of  wrath  fitted  for  deftrudion."  All 
this  long  time  of  God's  patience  and  forbearance 
*'  his  wrath  is  kindled,  and  he  is  whetting  his  glit- 
''  tering  fword,  and  making  iharp  liis  arrows  j"  and 
Z  this 


3662  ^^^  long'fuffeymg  ofGoT). 

S  E  R  M.  this  long  preparation  doth  portend  a  much  more 
dreadful  execution  :  fo  that  we  fliould  reafon  thus 
from  the  long-fuffering  of  God;  God  bears  with 
us,  and  ipares  us  at  prefent,  and  keeps  in  his  anger ; 
therefore  if  we  goon  to  provoke  him,  time  will  come 
when  he  will  not  fpare,  but  his  anger  will  flame 
forth,  and  his  jealoufy  fmoke  againft  us.  This  is 
but  reafonable  to  expedl,  that  they  v/ho  in  this  world 
forfake  their  own  mercies,  the  mercy  of  God  in  the 
next  fhould  forfake  them. 

4.  Another  falfe  conciufion  which  men  draw  from 
the  delay  of  punifhment,  is,  that  becaufc  it  is  delay- 
ed, therefore  it  is  not  fo  certain  :  the  finner  efcapes 
for  the  prefent,  and  though  he  have  fome  mifgivings 
and  fearful  apprehenfions  of  the  future,  yet  he  hopes 
his  fears  may  be  greater  than  his  danger. 

It  is  true,  indeed,  we  are  not  fo  certain  of  the 
mifery  of  wicked  men  in  another  v/orld,  as  if  it  were 
prefent,  and  we  lay  groaning  under  the  v/eight  of  it : 
fuch  a  certainty  as  this  would  not  only  leave  no  place 
for  doubting,  but  even  for  that  which  we  properly 
and  ftridly  call  faith  j  for  "  faith  is  the  evidence  of 
*'  things  not  feen.'*  But  fare  we  have  other  facul- 
ties bef.des  fenfe  to  judge  of  things  by  ;  we  may  be 
fufficiently  certain  of  many  things  which  are  neither 
prefent  nor  fenfible,  of  many  things  pad  and  future, 
upon  good  ground  and  tellimony  :  we  are  fure  that 
we  were  born,  and  yet  we  have  no  remembrance  of 
it ;  we  are  certain  that  we  fliall  die  though  we  nev^er 
had  the  experience  of  it.  Things  may  be  certain  in 
their  caufes,  as  well  as  in  their  prefent  exiftencc,  if 
the  caufes  be  certain.  The  truth  of  God,  who  hath 
declared  thefe  things  to  us,  is  an  abundant  ground  of 
affurance  to  us,  though  they  be  at  a  great  diitance : 
the  certainty  of  things  is  not  fliaken  by  our  wavering 
belief  concerning  them.  But, 


CL. 


^he  Jong'fuffenng  of  Qon]  3663 

Befides,  the  very  light  of  nature,  and  the  com-  SE^RM. 
mon  reafon  of  mankind,  hath  always  made  a  con- 
trary inference  from  the  long-fuffcring  of  God,  and 
the  delay  of  prefent  punifhment.  Though  men  are 
apt  to  think,  that  becaufe  judgment  is  deferred,  there- 
fore it  is  not  certain  -,  yet  the  very  light  of  nature 
hath  taught  men  to  reafon  otherwife  -,  that  becaufe 
God  is  fo  patient  to  finners  in  this  life,  therefore 
there  will  a  time  come  when  they  fhall  be  puniflied  ; 
that  becaufe  this  life  is  a  time  of  trial  and  forbear- 
ance, therefore  there  fhall  be  another  ftate  after  this 
life,  which  fhall  be  a  feafon  of  recompence.  And 
by  this  argument  chiefly  it  was  that  the  wifell  of  the 
heathen  fatisficd  themlelves  concerning  another  flate 
after  this  life,  and  anfwered  the  troublefom  obje6li- 
on  againfl  the  providence  of  God,  from  the  unequal 
adminiflration  of  things  in  this  world,  fo  vifible  in 
the  afflidions  and  fufferings  of  good  men,  and  the 
profperity  of  the  wicked  -,  viz.  That  there  would  be 
another  flate  that  would  adjuft  all  thefe  matters,  and 
fet  them  flreight,  when  good  and  bad  mtn  ihould 
receive  the  full  recompence  of  their  deeds. 

The  5th  and  laft  falfe  conclufion,  wliich  men 
draw  from  the  long-fuffering  of  God  and  the  delay 
of  punifhment  is  this  ;  that  it  is,  however,  proba-^ 
bly  at  fome  diflance,  and  therefore  they  may  fin  yee 
a  while  longer,  and  all  this  danger  may  be  prevented 
time  enough,  by  a  future  repentance  in  our  old  age, 
or  at  the  hour  of  death  •,  and  they  are  confirmed  very 
much  in  this  hope,  becaufe  they  fee  men  much  worfe 
than  themfelves,  great  criminals  and  malefadors, 
upon  two  or  thee  days  warning,  to  perform  this 
work  of  repentance  very  fubflantially,  and  to  die 
with  great  comfort  and  afTurance  of  their  falvation. 
This  is  the  moil  common  delufion  of  all  the  reft,  and 
Vol.  VIIL  i?  Z  hath 


3664  ^be  long-fu^ering  of  God. 

SE  R  M.  hath  been,  I  am  afraid,  the  ruin  of  more  fouls  than 

CL 

all  the  other  which  I  have  mentioned  ;  they  may  have 
"  flain  their  thoufands,"  but  this  "  it's  ten  thoufands." 

For  anfwer  to  this,  be  pleafed  ferioufly  to  lay  to 
heart  thefe  following  confiderations,  mofl  of  which  I 
fhall  fpeak  but  briefly  to,  becaufe  I  have,  upon  other 
occafions,  fpoken  largely  to  them. 

(i.)  If  there  be  a  future  judgment,  then  it  is  cer- 
tain, at  how  great  a  diftance  foever  it  may  be.  That 
which  Ihall  be  a  thoufand  years  hence,  will  certainly 
be ;  and  it  is  but  very  fmall  comfort  and  encourage- 
ment, confidering  the  vaft  difproportion  between 
time  and  eternity,  to  think,  that  after  twenty  or  forty 
years  fhall  be  pad  and  gone,  then  muft  I  enter  upon 
eternal  mifery  ;  then  will  thofe  intolerable  torments 
begin  which  fhall  never  have  an  end. 

(2.)  But  it  is  not  certain  that  it  is  at  fuch  a  diflance : 
when  we  "  put  from  us  the  evil  day,"  it  is  many 
times  nearer  to  us  than  we  are  aware,  and  when  we 
think  the  judgment  of  God  is  at  a  great  diflance, 
*'  the  judge"  may  be  "  near,  even  at  the  door." 
Our  times  are  not  in  our  own  hands,  but  we  arc  per- 
fedly  at  the  difpofal  of  another,  who  when  he  plea- 
feth  can  put  a  period  to  them,  and  caufe  our  breath 
to  ccafe  from  our  noftrils,  and  we  fliall  not  be-, 
**  There  is  no  man  hath  power  over  the  fpirit,  to 
'*  retaia  the  fpirit  •,  neither  hath  he  power  in  the  day 
"  of  death,"  faith  the  wife  man  a  little  before  the 
text.  Thou  dreameil,  perhaps,  of  many  years  conti' 
nuance  in  this  world,  and,  perhaps,  in  the  height  of 
this  vain  imagination,  "  the  decree  is  fealed,  and  the 
*'  commandment  come  forth"  to  fummon  thee  out 
of  tJiis  world,  and  thou  art  jufl  dropping  into  that 
mifery,  which  thou  fanciefl  to  be  at  fuch  a  diflance  ; 
whilfl  thou  art  vainly  promifing  thyfelf  "  the  eafc 

"  C)f, 


The  Iong-fufferi?2g  of  God.  3665 

*^  of  many  years,"  God  may  fay  to  thee,  "  ThouS  E  R  M* 
"  fool,  this  night  fhall  thy  foul  be  required  of  thee,"       ^^' 
and  then,  where  are  all  thy  hopes  ? 

(3.)  Suppofing  the  evil  day  were  at  a  confiderable 
diftance,  yet  men  run  an  infinite  hazard  in  venturing 
all  the  hopes  of  their  falvation  upon  a  future  repen- 
tance ;  for  Vv^hat  knowell  thou,  O  man  !  but  thou 
mayft  be  furprized  by  a  fudden  ftroke,  which  may 
give  thee  no  warning,  leave  thee  no  fpace  of  repen- 
tance ?  a  violent  difeafe  may  feize  upon  thee,  which 
may  diforder  thy  underflanding,  and  fo  weaken  all 
thy  faculties,  as  to  render  thee  unfit  for  all  reafonable 
operations :  at  the  beft,  how  unfit  are  we  for  the  moil 
ferious  work  of  our  lives,  when  we  are  hardly  fit  to 
do  any  thing  ?  Old  age  is  a  very  unfeafonable  time  for 
repentance,  when  we  are  full  of  weaknefs  and  infir- 
mity, and  our  minds  are  crooked  and  bowed  down 
by  vice,  as  our  bodies  are  by  age,  and  as  hard  to  be 
recovered  to  their  firfb  ftreightnefs  ;  much  more  is  it 
an  improper  time  for  this  work,  when  licknefs  and 
old  age  meet  together.  There  are  two  things  in 
which  men,  in  other  things  wife  enough,  do  ufually 
mifcarry  ;  in  putting  off  the  making  of  their  wills, 
and  their  repentance,  till  it  be  too  late.  Men  had 
need  then  be  of  found  underflanding  and  perfect 
memory,  when  they  fet  about  matters  of  fo  great 
confequence  in  refpedl  to  their  temporal  and  eternal 
concernments  :  efpecially  when  men  have  the  happinefs 
of  all  eternity  to  take  care  of  and  provide  for,  they 
had  need  have  their  underilandings  about  them,  and 
all  the  advantages  of  leifure  and  confideration,  to 
make  a  fober  refledlion  upon  their  pail  lives,  and 
make  up  their  accounts  with  God,  and  to  ftt  all 
things  right  between  him  and  them  •,  and  it  is  well, 
if,  after  all,  a  repentance  wilfully  deferred  fo  long» 
17  Z  2  fo 


3666  ^'he  long'fuffering of  GoT>. 

^cL  ^'  ^^  ^^^^  ^"^  imperfed:,  fo  confufed  and  huddled  up, 
will  at  laft  be  accepted  as  a  tolerable  atonement  'for 
the  crimes  and  mifcarriages  of  a  long  life. 

(4.)  Suppofe  thou  wert  fure  to  repent  before  thou 
leaveft  the  world,  and  to  do  this  work  throughly, 
which  no  man  can  promife  to  himfelf  that  dehberate- 
ly  delays  it ;  yet  diis  can  be  no  reafonable  encourage- 
ment to  go  on  in  an  evil  courfe,  becaufe  we  do  but 
hereby  aggravate  our  own  trouble,  and  treafure  up 
much  more  forrow  and  afflidion  to  ourfelves  againft 
the  day  of  repentance,  and  confequently  fin  on,  in 
hopes  of  being  hereafter  fo  much  the  more  troubled 
and  grieved  for  what  we  have  done  -,  as  if  a  man 
fhould  go  on  to  break  the  laws,  in  hopes  of  a  more 
fevere  and  exemplary  punifhment :  fure  this  can  be, 
no  encouragement  or  ground  of  hope  to  any  reafon- 
able and  confiderate  man. 

Laflly,  As  to  the  encouragement  which  men  take 
from  the  fudden  repentance  of  great  criminals  and 
malefadtors,  and  their  dying  with  fo  much  comfort 
and  afTurance  ;  if  this  be  well  confidered,  there  is 
little  comfort  to  be  fetched  from  fuch  examples.  For, 

I  ft.  Thoiigh  a  fincere  repentance  in  fuch  circum- 
fiances  be  poffible  ;  yet  it  is  almoft  impoflible  for 
the  party  himfelf  concerned,  much  more  for  others, 
iipon  any  good  ground,  to  judge  when  it  is  fincere. 
God  who  knows  the  hearts  of  men,  and  whether,  if 
they  had  lived  longer,  they  would  in  the  future 
courfe  of  their  lives  have  juftified  and  made  good 
their  repentance  and  good  refolutions,  only  knows 
^he  fincerity  of  it. 

But,  2dly,  no  certain  judgment  is  to  be  made 
from  the  comfort  and  confidence  of  the  party  con- 
cerned ;  for  the  bufinefs  is  not,  what  comfort  and 
CQnfidence  men  have,  but  what  ground  they  have 

for 


^'he  long'fiiffering  of  God.  3667 

for  It :  and  whereas  men  are  apt  pioufly  to  fuppofe, 
that  fo  extraordinary  a  comfort  and  afllirance  is 
wrought  in  them  by  the  fpirit  of  God,  nothing  is 
more  uncertain  -,  becaufe  we  fom.etimes  fee  thofe  who 
give  no  fuch  teftimony  of  their  repentance,  to  die 
with  every  whit  as  much  courage,  and  comfort,  and 
confident  perfuafion  of  their  falvation,  as  thofe  that 
do.  But  this,  certainly,  is  not  from  the  fpirit  of 
God,  a  natural  obilinacy  and  courage  may  carry 
men  a  great  way  *,  and  falfe  and  miftaken  principles 
may  fill  men  for  the  prefent  with  as  much  comfort 
and  confidence,as  well  grounded  hopes.  In  the  church 
of  Rome,  great  numbers  of  thofe  who  have  led  very 
wicked  lives,  after  a  formal  confeilion  and  abfolution, 
and  fome  good  words  of  encouragement  from  the 
prieft,  die  as  full  of  peace  and  comfort,  to  all  ap- 
pearance, as  the  befl  of  men. 

Indeed  it  is  very  natural  to  men,  who  find  them- 
felves  in  a  delperate  condition,  to  be  ftrangely  eleva- 
ted and  raifed,  upon  any  hopes  given  of  efcaping  fa 
great  a  danger  as  they  apprehend  themfelves  to  be  in ; 
efpecially  if  thefe  hopes  be  given  them  by  a  grave 
man,  of  whofe  piety  and  judgment  they  have  a  ve- 
nerable opinion.  When  men  have  the  fentence  of 
death  in  themfelves,  as  all  wicked  livers  muft  have, 
they  are  naturally  apt  to  be  overjoyed  at  the  unex- 
pedted  news  of  a  pardon. 

To  ipeak  my  mind  freely  in  this  matter,  I  have 
no  great  opinion  of  that  extraordinary  comfort  and 
confidence  which  fome  have,  upon  a  fudden  reperv- 
tance  for  great  and  flagrant  crimes,  becaufe  I  cannot 
difcern  any  fufficient  ground  for  it.  I  think  great 
humility  and  dejedlion  of  mind,  and  a  doubtful  ap- 
prehenfion  of  their  condition,  next  almofl  to  defpair 
of  it,  would  much  better  become  themj  beoaufe 

theii' 


3  6 6  3  ^he  loiig-fuffering  of  God. 

S  E  R  M.  their  cafe  is  really  fo  very  doubtful  in  itfelf.  There  is 
great  reafon  for  the  repentance  of  fuch  perfons,  and 
it  becomes  tliem  well  •,  but  I  fee  veiy  little  reafon  for 
their  great  comfort  and  confidence,  nor  does  it  be- 
come their  circumftances  and  condition.  Let  them 
cxercife  as  deep  a  repentance  as  is  poflible,  and  "  bring 
*'  forth  all  the  fruits  meet  for  it"  that  are  pofTible 
in  fo  fhort  a  time  \  let  them  humble  themfelves  be- 
fore God,  and  pray  inceffantly  to  him  day  and  night 
for  mercy  ;  make  all  the  reparation  they  can  for  the 
injuries  they  have  done,  by  confeffion  and  acknow- 
ledgment, and  by  making  fatisfadion  to  the  parties 
injured,  if  it  be  in  their  power,  by  giving  alms  to 
the  poor,  by  warning  others,  and  endeavouring  to 
reclaim  them  to  abetter  mind  and  courfe  of  life; 
and  for  the  reft  humbly  commit  themfclves  to  the 
mercy  of  God  in  Jesus  Christ  ;  let  them  imitate, 
as  near  as  they  can,  the  behaviour  of  the  penitent 
thief,  the  only  example  the  fcripture  has  left  us  of  a 
late  repentance  that  proved  effedlual,  who  gave  the 
greateft  tellimony  that  could  be  of  a  penitent  forrow 
fbr  his  fins,  and  of  his  faith  in  the  Saviour  of  the 
world,  by  a  generous  and  couragious  owning  of 
him  in  the  midft  of  his  difgrace  and  fufFering,  when 
even  his  own  difciples  had  denied  and  forfaken  him : 
but  we  do  not  find  in  him  any  figns  of  extraordinary 
comfort,  much  lefs  of  confidence  ;  but  he  humbly 
commended  himfelf  to  the  mercy  and  goodnefs  of 
his  Saviour,  faying,  "  Lord,  remember  me,  when 
^*  thou  comeft  into  thy  kingdom." 


SE  R- 


3669 


SERMON    CLI. 

The  long-fuffering  of  God, 

E  C  C  L  E  S.    viii.  II, 

Becaufe  fentence  againft  an  evil  work  is  not  executed 
fpeedily^  therefore  the  heart  of  the  fons  of  meyi  is  ful- 
ly fet  in  them  to  do  evil. 


I 


HAVE  confidered  how  apt  men  are  to  abufe  S  E  R  M, 

CLI 

thelong-fufFeringof  God,  to  the  hardening  and 


encouraging  of  themfelves  in  fin,  and  whence  this 
comes  to  pafs  ;  where  I  confidered  the  feveral  falfe 
conclufions  which  finners  draw  from  the  delay  of 
punifliment,  as  if  there  were  no  God,  or  providence, 
or  difference  of  good  and  evil ;  or  elfe,  as  is  more 
commonly  pretended,  that  fin  is  not  fo  great  an  evil, 
and  that  God  is  not  fo  highly  offended  at  it,  or  that 
God  is  not  fo  fevere  as  he  is  reprefented  ;  that  the 
punifhment  of  fm  is  not  fo  certain,  or  however,  it  is 
at  a  diilance,  and  may  be  prevented  by  a  future  re- 
pentance :  all  which  I  have  fpoken  fully  to,  and  en- 
deavoured to  Ihew  the  fallacy  and  unreafonablenels 
of  them.     I  fliall  now  proceed  to  the 

Third  and  lall  thing  I  propounded,  which  was, 
to  anfwer  an  objedlion  to  which  this  difcourfe  may 
feem  Hable  j  and  that  is  this.  If  the  long-fuffering 
of  God  be  the  occafion  of  men's  hardnefs  and  im- 
penitency,  then  why  is  God  fo  patient  to  finners, 
when  they  are  fo  prone  to  abufe  his  goodnefs  and  pa- 
tience ?  and  how  is  it  goodnefs  in  God  to  forbear 
finners  fo  long,  when  this  forbearance  of  his  is  fo  apt 
4  t^ 


CLI. 


0670  ^he  long'fuffering  of  God. 

S  E  R  M.  to  minifter  to  them  an  occafion  of  their  farther  mif- 
chief  and  greater  ruin  ?  It  fhould  feem  according  to 
this,  that  it  would  be  much  greater  mercy  to  the 
greateft  part  of  finners,  not  to  be  patient  toward 
them  at  all ;  but  inftantly  upon  the  firfl  occafion  and 
provocation,  to  cut  them  off,  and  fo  to  put  a  Hop  to 
their  wickednefs,  and  to  hinder  them  from  making 
themfelves  more  miferable,  by  increafing  their  guik, 
and  "  treafuring  up  wrath  to  themfelves  againft  the 
"  day  of  wrath." 

This  is  the  obje6lion,  and  becaufe  it  feems  to  be 
of  fome  weight,  I  fhall  endeavour  to  return  a  fatif- 
fadory  anfwer  to  it  in  thefe  following  particulars,  And, 

I.  I  aflc  the  finner  if  he  will  ftand  to  this  ?  art 
thou  ferious,  and  wouldeft  thou  in  good  earneft  have 
God  to  deal  thus  with  thee,  to  take  the  very  firfl  ad- 
vantage to  deflroy  thee  or  turn  thee  into  hell,  and 
to  make  thee  miferable  beyond  all  hopes  of  recovery  ? 
Confider  of  it  again.  Dofl  thou  think  it  defirable,  that 
God  fhould  deal  thus  with  thee,  and  let  fly  his  judg- 
ments upon  thee  fo  foon  as  ever  thou  hafl  finned  ? 
If  not,  why  do  men  trifle,  and  make  an  objedion 
againfl  the  long-fufFering  of  God,  which  they  would 
be  very  loth  fhould  be  made  good  upon  them  .? 

II.  It  is  likewife  to  be  confidered,  that  the  long- 
fuffering  of  God  toward  finners  is  not  a  total  for- 
bearance :  it  is  ufually  fo  mixt  with  afflidions  and 
judgments  of  one  kind  or  other,  upon  ourfelves  or 
others,  as  to  be  a  fufiicient  warning  to  us,  if  we 
would  confider  and  lay  it  to  heart,  to  "  fin  no  more, 
*'  lefla  worfe  thing  come  upon  us  i"  left  that  judg- 
ment, which  we  faw  inflided  upon  others,  come 
home  to  us.  And  is  not  this  great  goodnefs,  to 
warn  us  when  he  might  deftroy  us,  to  leave  room 
for  a  retreat,  when  he  might  put  our  cafe  paft  re- 
medy ?  All 


T'-be  hng-fuffering  of  God. 

AH  this  time  of  God's  patience,  he  threatens  fin- 
ners,  to  awaken  them  out  of  their  fecurity,  he  pu-  > 
niilieth  them  gently,  that  we  may  have  no  ground 
to  hope  for  impunity  ;  he  makes  examples  of  fome 
in  a  more  fevere  and  remarkable  manner,  that  others 
may  hear,  and  fear,  and  be  afraid  to  commit  the 
like  fins,  left  the  like  punifiiment  overtakes  them  ; 
he  whips  fome  offenders  before  our  eyes,  to  flicw  us 
what  fin  deferves,  and  what  we  alfo  may  juftly  ex- 
ped,  if  we  do  the  fame  thing  •,  and  will  nothing  be 
a  warning  to  us  but  our  own  fufferings  ! 

Nay,  God  doth  ufually  fend  fome  judgment  or 
other  upon  every  finner  in  this  life  ;  he  lets  him  feel 
the  rod,  that  he  may  know  that  it  is  ''  an  evil  and 
"  bitter  thing  to  fin  againft  him."  He  exercifeth 
men  with  many  afflidions  and  crofies,  and  difap- 
pointments,  which  their  own  confciences  tell  them 
are  thejuft  recompences  of  their  deeds  •,  and  by  thefe 
lighter  ftrokes,  he  gives  us  a  merciful  warning  to 
avoid  his  heavier  blows  ;  when  mercy  alone  will 
not  work  upon  us  and  win  us,  but  being  fed  to  the 
full,  we  grow  wanton  and  foolifli,  he  adminifters 
phyfick  to  us  by  afRidion,  and  by  adverfity  endea- 
vours to  bring  us  to  confideration  and  a  fober  mind  ; 
and  many  have  been  cured  this  way,  and  the  judg- 
ments of  God  have  done  them  that  good,  which 
his  mercies  and  bleffings  could  not  -,  for  God  would 
fave  us  any  way,  by  his  mercy  or  by  his  judgment, 
by  ficknefs  or  by  health,  by  plenty  or  by  want,  by 
what  we  defire,  or  by  what  we  dread  •,  fo  defi- 
rous  is  he  of  our  repentance  and  happinefs,  that  he 
•leaves  no  method  unattempted  that  may  probably 
do  us  good  •,  he  ftrikes  upon  every  pafTion  in  the 
heart  of  man  •,  he  works  upon  our  love  by  his  good- 
nefs,  upon  our  hopes  by  his  promifes,  and  upon  our 

Vol.  VIIL       '  i     A  fears. 


3672  ^he  long-fuffering  of  God. 

SERM.  fears,  firft  by  his  threatnings,  and  if  they  be  not 
efFedual,  then  by  his  judgments  •,  he  tries  every  af- 
fedlion  and  takes  hold  of  it,  if  by  any  means  he  may 
draw  us  to  himfelf ;  and  will  nothing  warn  us,  but 
what  will  ruin  us,  and  render  our  cafe  defperate  and 
pad  hope  ? 

And  if  any  finner  be  free  from  outward  affli6lions 
and  fufferings,  yet  fin  never  fails  to  carry  it's  own 
punifliment  along  with  it  *,  there  is  a  fecret  fling  and 
worm,  a  divine  Nemefis  and  revenge,  that  is  bred  in 
the  bowels  of  every  fin,  and  makes  it  a  heavy  pu* 
nifhment  to  itfelf  •,  the  confcience  of  a  firmer  doth 
frequently  torment  him,  and  his  guilt  haunts  and 
dogs  him  wherever  he  goes  •,  for  whenever  a  man 
commits  a  known  and  wilful  fin,  he  drinks  down 
poifon,  which  though  it  may  work  (lowly,  yet  it 
will  give  him  many  a  gripe,  and  if  no  means  be 
vfed  to  expel  it,  will  deftroy  him  at  laft. 

So  that  the  long-fufFering  of  God  is  wifely  order- 
ed, and  there  is  fuch  a  mixture  of  judgments  in  it, 
as  is  fuHicient  to  awaken  finners,  and  much  more  apt 
to  deter  them  from  fin,  than  to  encourage  them  to 
go  on  and  continue  in  it. 

m.  Nothing  is  farther  from  the  intention  of  God, 
than  to  harden  men  by  his  long-fuffering.  This  the 
fcripture  mod  cxprefly  declares,  2  Pet.  iii.  9.  "  He 
^'  is  long-fuffering  to  us- ward,  not  willing  that  any 
**  fhould  perifn,  but  that  all  Ihould  come  to  repent- 
^^  ance."  He  hath  a  very  gracious  and  merciful 
defign  in  his  patience  towards  finners,  and  is  there- 
fore good,  that  he  may  make  us  fo,  and  that  we 
rnay  ceafe  to  do  evil.  The  event  of  God's  long" 
fuffering  may,  by  our  own  fault  and  abufe  of  it, 
prove  our  ruin  ,  but  the  defign  and  intention  of 
It,  is  our  rep?nt^ncc,    ^'  He  wipk§  at  the  fins  of 

^'  men'* 


^he  tong'fufferhig  of  GoD.  S673 

**  men"  (faith  the  fon  of  Syrach)  ''  that  they  may  S  E^R  ivi' 
"  repent."  He  paffeth  them  by,  and  does  not  ,, 
take  fpeedy  vengeance  upon  fiiiners  for  them,  that 
they  may  have  time  to  repent  of  them^  and  to  make 
their  peace  with  him,  while  they  are  yet  in  the  way. 
Nay,  his  long-fuffering  doth  not  only  give  fpace 
for  repentance,  but  is  a  great  argument  and  encou- 
ragement to  it.  That  he  is  fo  loth  to  furpri^e  fin* 
ners,  that  he  gives  them  the  hberty  of  fecond 
thoughts,  time  to  refleft  upon  themfelves,  to  confi- 
der  what  they  have  done,  and  to  tetrad  it  by  re- 
pentance, is  a  fufficient  intimation  that  he  hath  no 
mind  to  rUin  us,  that  "  he  defires  not  the  death  of 
*'  a  finner,  but  rather  that  he  ihould  turn  from  his 
"  wickednefs  and  live."  And  fhould  not  this  good- 
nefs  of  his  make  us  forry  that  we  have  offended  him  ? 
doth  it  not  naturally  lead  and  invite  us  to  repent- 
ance.? what  other  interpretation  can  we  make  of 
his  patience^  what  other  ufe  in  reafon  fhould  we 
make  of  it,  but  to  repent  and  return,  that  we  may 
be  faved } 

IV.  There  is  nothing  in  the  long-fufFering  of 
God,  that  is  in  truth  any  ground  of  encouragement 
to  men  in  any  evil  courfe  ;  the  proper  and  riatural 
tendency  of  God's  goodnefs  is  to  lead  men  to  re- 
pentance, and  by  repentance  to  bring  them  to  hap- 
pinefs  •,  Rom.  ii.  4.  '**  Defpifefl  thou  the  riches  of 
"  his  goodnefs  and  patience,  and  long-fafFering,  nov 
*'  knowing  th?.t  the  goodnefs  of  God  leadeth  thee 
**  to  repentance  ?'*  This  St.  Peter^  with  relation 
to  thefe  very  words  of  St.  Paul,  interprets,-  leading 
to  falvation  ;  2  Vtt.  iii.  15.  ''  And  account  that: 
*'  the  long-fuiTering  of  our  Lcp.d  is  falvation,  45 
*'  our  beloved  brother  Paul  alfo  hath  written  un-^ 
"  to  you.''  Now  v/here  did  St.  Paul  Write  fOj  un- 
17  A  2  k& 


3674  T*he  long-fuffering   of  God. 

E^R^M.  lefs  in  this  text  ;  "  not  knowing  that  the  goodnefs 
"  of  God  leads  to  repentance  ?"  It  is  not  only 
great  ignorance,  and  a  very  grofs  miflake,  to  think 
that  it  is  the  defign  and  intention  of  God's  patience 
and  long-fufFering  to  encourage  men  in  fin;  but 
likewife  to  think,  that  in  the  nature  of  the  thing, 
goodnefs  can  have  any  tendency  to  make  men  evil  ; 
"  not  knowing  that  the  goodnefs  of  God  leads  to 
*'  repentance." 

V.  That  through  the  long-fufFering  of  God, 
finners  are  hardened  in  their  evil  ways,  is  wholly  to 
be  afcribed  to  their  abufe  of  God's  goodnefs  ;  it  is 
neither  the  end  and  intention,  nor  the  proper  and 
natural  effedl  of  the  thing,  but  the  accidental  event 
of  it,  through  our  own  fault.  And  is  this  any  real 
objedlion  againil  the  long-fufFering  of  God  ?  May 
not  God  be  patient,  though  finners  be  impenitent  ? 
May  not  he  be  good,  though  we  be  fo  foolilli  as  to 
make  an  ill  ufe  of  his  goodnefs  ?  Becaufe  men  are 
apt  to  abufe  the  mercies  and  favours  of  God,  is  it 
therefore  a  fault  in  him  to  bellow  them  upon  us  ?  Is 
it  not  enough  for  us  to  abufe  them,  but  will  we  chal- 
lenge God  alfo  of  unkindnefs  in  givic^  them  ?  May 
not  God  ufe  wife  and  fitting  means  for  our  recovery, 
becaufe  we  are  fo  foolifh  as  not  to  make  a  wife  ufe  of 
them  ?  And  muft  he  be  charged  with  our  ruin,  be- 
caufe he  fecks  by  all  means  to  prevent  it  ?  Is  it  not 
enough  to  be  injurious  to  ourfelves,  but  will  we  be 
unthankful  to  God  alfo  ?  When  God  hath  laid  out 
the  riches  of  his  goodnefs  and  patience  upon  finners, 
will  they  challenge  him  as  accefibry  to  their  ruin  ? 
As  if  a  foolifh  heir,that  hath  prodigally  wafted  the  fair 
eftate  that  was  left  him,  ihould  be  fo  far  from  blam- 
ing himfelf  as  to  charge  his  father  with  undoing  him. 
Are  thefe  the  beft  returns  which  the  infinite  mercy 

and 


"The  long'fuffering  of  God.  3675 

and  patience  of  God  hath  defer ved  from  us  ?  Do  ^^  R  M. 
we  thus  requite  the  Lord,  foohlh  people  and  unwife ! 

God's  patience  would  fave  finners,  but  they  ruin 
themfelves  by  their  abufe  of  it  ^  let  the  blame  then 
lye  where  it  is  due,  and  let  God  have  the  glory  of 
his  goodnefs,  though  men  refufe  the  benefit  and  ad- 
vantage  of  it. 

VI.  And  laflly,  but  becaufe  this  objedion  pinch- 
cth  hardefb  in  one  point  -,  viz.  That  God  certainly 
forefees  that  a  great  many  will  abufe  his  long-fufFer- 
ing,  to  the  encreafing  of  their  guilt,  and  the  aggra- 
vating of  their  condemnation  ;  and  how  is  his  long- 
fuffering  any  mercy  and  goodnefs  to  thofe,  who  he 
certainly  fore-knows  will  in  the  event  be  fo  much  the 
more  miferable,  for  having  had  fo  much  patience 
extended  to  them  ?  Therefore  for  a  full  anfwer,  I 
defire  thefe  fix  things  may  be  confidered. 

1.  Tliat  God  defigns  this  life  for  the  trial  of  our 
obedience,  that  according  as  we  behave  ourfelves  he 
may  reward  or  punifh  us  in  another  world. 

2.  That  there  could  be  no  trial  of  obedience,  nor 
any  capacity  of  rewards  and  punifhments,  but  up- 
on the  fuppofition  of  freedom  and  liberty  ♦,  that  is, 
that  we  do  not  do  what  we  do  upon  force  and  ne« 
ceiTity,  but  upon  free  choice. 

3.  That  God,  by  virtue  of  the  infinite  perfe6lion 
of  his  knowledge,  does  clearly  and  certainly  forefec 
all  future  events,  even  thofe  which  are  moll  contin- 
gent, fuch  as  are  the  arbritrary  adions  of  free  and 
vpluntary  agents.  This  I  know  hath  been  denied, 
but  without  reafon  ;  fmce  it  is  not  only  contrary  to 
the  common  apprehenfions  of  mankind  from  the  ve- 
ry light  of  nature,  that  God  fhould  not  fore-know 
future  events,  but  to  clear  and  exprefs  fcripture  ; 
and  that  in  fuch  inftances,  for  the  fake  of  which  they 

deny 


CLI. 


3676  ^he  long'fufermg  of  Gor). 

SER  M.  deny  God's  foreknowledge  in  general  of  the  future 
adlions  of  free  and  voluntaiy  agents,  I  mean,  that 
the  fcripture  exprefly  declares  God's  determinate  fore- 
knowledge of  the  moft  wicked  adtions  ;  as  the  cru- 
cifying of  Christ,  who  is  faid,  according  to  the 
determinate  counfel  and  fore-knowledge  of  God,  to- 
have  been  by  wicked  hands  crucified  and  (lain. 

4,  That  the  bare  fore-knowledge  of  things  future 
hath  no  more  influence  upon  them  to  make  them  tci 
be,  than  the  fight  and  knowledge  of  things  prefent 
hath  upon  them  to  make  them  to  be  prefent.  I  may 
fee  or  know  that  the  fun  is  rifen,  without  feeing  the 
caufe  of  it's  rifing  j  and  no  more  is  bare  knowledge 
of  future  events  the  caufe  that  they  are,  when  they 
are.     And  if  any  man  aik,  how  God  can  certainly 
fore-know  things,  which  depend  upon  free  and  ar- 
bitrary caufes,  unlefs  he  do  fome  way  decree  and  de- 
termine them  ?  I  anfwer,  that  this  is  not  a  iair  and 
reafonable  demand,  to  afk  of  men,  who  have  but 
finite  underftandings,   to  make  out  and  declare  all 
the  ways  that  infinite  knowledge  hath  of  knowing 
and  of  fore-feeing  the  a6lions  of  free  creatures,  with- 
out prejudice  to  their  Hberty  and  freedom  of  adt- 
ing.     However,  it  is  of  the  two  much  more  ere* 
dible  to  reafon,  that  infinite  knowledge  fhould  cer- 
tainly fore-know  things,   which  our  underftandings 
cannot  imagine  how  they  Ihouldbe  fore-known,  than 
that  God  Ihould  any  ways  be  the  author  of  fm,  by 
determining  and   decreeing  the  wicked  adlions  of 
men.     The  firft  only  argues  the  imperfcdlion  of  our 
underftandings  •,  but  the  other  lays  the  greateft  ble- 
mifh  and  imperfedion  that  can  be  upon  the  divine 
nature. 

So  that  this  difficult  controverfy  about  the  fore- 
Jojowledge  of  God  is  brought  to  this  point,  whether 
2  ^  marv 


^e  long'Juffering  of  God.  3^77 

a  man  had  better  believe,  that  infinite  knowledge  SERM. 
may  be  able  to  fore-know  things   in  a  way  which 
our  finite  underflanding  cannot  comprehend  :  or  to 
afcribe  fomething  to  God,  from  whence  it  would 
unavoidably  follow,  that  he  is  the   author  of  fin. 
The  firft  is  only  a  modefr  and  juft  acknowledgment  of 
our  own  ignorance  •,  the  laft  is  the  utmoft  and  great- 
eft  abfurdity  that  a  man  can  be  brought  to  ;  and  to 
fay  that  we  cannot  believe   the  fore-knowledge  of 
God,  unlefs  we  can  make  out  the  particular  manner 
of  it,  is  more  unreafonable,  than  if  an  ignorant  man 
fhould  deny  a  diiHcult  proportion  in  Euclid  or  Archi- 
medes to  be  "demonftrated,  becaufe  he  knows  not 
how  to  demonftrate  it. 

5.  And  confequently  fore-knowledge  and  liberty 
may  very  well  confift  ;  and  notwithftanding  God's 
fore-knowledge  of  what  men  will  do,  they  may  be 
as  free  as  if  he  did  not  fore-know  it.     And, 

Laftly,  That  God  doth  not  deal  with  men  ac- 
cording to  his  fore-knowledge  of  the  good  or  bad 
ufe  of  their  hberty,  but  according  to  the  nature  and 
reafon  of  things  ;  and  therefore  if  he  be  long-fuf- 
fering  toward  finners,  and  do  not  cut  them  off  up- 
pn  the  firft  provocation,  but  give  them  a  fpace  and 
opportunity  of  repentance,  and  ufe  all  proper  means 
and  arguments  to  bring  them  to  repentance,  and  be 
ready  to  afford  his  g2*ace  to  excite  good  refolutions 
in  them,  and  to  fecond  and  alTift  them,  and  they 
refufe  and  refift  all  this  ;  their  wilful  obftinacy  and 
impenitency  is  as  culpable,  and  God's  gofednefs  and 
patience  as  much  to  be  acknowledged,  as  if  God 
did  not  forefee  the  abufe  of  it ;  becaufe  his  fore^ 
fight  and  knowledge  of  what  they  would  do,  laid 
no  necefTity  upon  them  to  do  wliat  they  did. 

Jf  a  prince  had  the  privilege  of  fore-knowledge  as 

God 


3678  T^be  lojtg'fuffering  of  Gory. 

SERM.  God  hath,  and  did  certainly  forefee,  that  a  great 
many  of  his  fubjedls  would  certainly  incur  the  penal- 
ty of  his  laws,  and  that  others  would  abufe  his  good- 
nefs  and  clemency  to  them  ;  yet  if  he  would  govern 
them  like  free  and  reafonable  creatures,  he  ought  to 
make  the  fame  wife  laws  to  reftrain  their  exorbitancy, 
and  to  ufe  the  fame  clemency  in  all  cafes  that  did 
fairly  admit  of  it,  as  if  he  did  not  at  all  forefee  what 
tliey  would  do,  nor  how  they  would  abufe  his  cle- 
mency ;  for  it  is  neverthelefs  fit  to  make  wife  and 
reafonable  laws,  and  to  govern  with  equity  and  cle- 
mency, though  it  were  certainly  forefeen  that  they 
that  are  governed  would  a6b  very  foolifhly  and  un- 
reafonably  in  the  ufe  of  their  liberty.  It  is  great  good- 
nefs  in  God  to  give  men  the  rheans  and  opportunity 
of  being  faved,  though  they  abufe  this  goodnefs  to 
their  farther  ruin  -,  and  he  may  be  heartily  grieved 
for  that  folly  and  obftinacy  in  men,  which  he  cer- 
tainly forefees  will  end  in  their  ruin  ;  and  may  with 
great  ferioufnefs  and  fincerity  wifh  they  would  do  o- 
therwife,  and  were  as  wife  to  do  good,  as  they  are 
wilful  to  do  evil.  And  thus  he  is  reprefented  in 
fcripture,  as  regretting  the  mifchief  which  men  wil- 
fully bring  upon  themfelves  ;  "  O  that  they  were 
*'  wife,  O  that  they  would  underftand,  and  confi- 
*'   der  their  latter  end!'' 

And  this  is  fui^cient  to  vindicate  the  goodnefs  of 
God  in  his  patience  and  long-fufFering  to  finners, 
and  t6  make  them  wholly  guilty  of  all  that  befals 
them  for  "their  wilful  contempt  and  abufe  of  it. 

I  Ihall  draw  fome  inferences  from  this  whole  dif- 
courfe  upon  this  argument. 

I.  This  fhews  the  unreafonablenefs  and  perverie 
difingenuity  of  men,  who  take  occafion  to  harden 
and  encourage  themfelves  in  fin  from  the  long-fuffer- 


\nz 


The  long'fuffering  of  GoD.'  3  679 

ing  of  God,  which  above  alJ  things  iji  the  world SERM- 
fhould  melt  and  foften  them.  Thou  haft  finned,  ^^^' 
and  art  hable  to  the  juftice  of  God,  fentence  is  gone 
forth,  but  God  refpites  the  execution  of  it,  and  hath 
granted  thee  a  reprieve,  and  time  and  opportunity 
to  fue  out  thy  pardon.  Now  what  ufe  ought  we  in 
reafon  to  make  of  this  patience  of  God  towards  us  ? 
We  ought  certainly  *'  to  break  off  our  fins  by  a  fpeedy 
"  repentance,  left  iniquity  be  our  ruin  ;"  immediately 
to  fue  out  our  pardon,  and  "  to  make  our  peace 
"  with  God,  while  we  are  yet  in  the  way,"  and  to 
refolve,  never  any  more  willingly  to  offend  that  God 
who  is  io  gracious  and  merciful,  fo  long-fuffering  and 
full  of  compaffion.  But  what  ufe  do  men  common- 
ly make  of  it  '^.  They  take  occafion  to  confirm  and 
ftrengthen  themfelves  in  their  wickednefs,  and  to 
reafon  themfelves  into  vain  and  groundlefs  hopes  of 
impunity.  Now  what  a  folly  is  this,  becaufe  pu- 
nilhment  doth  not  come,  therefore  to  haften  it,  and 
to  draw  it  down  upon  ourfclves  ?  Becaufe  it  hath  not 
yet  overtaken  us,  therefore  to  go  forth  and  meet  it  ? 
Becaufe  there  is  yet  apoffibihty  of  efcapingit,  there- 
fore to  take  a  certain  courfe  to  make  it  unavoidable  ? 
Becaufe  there  is  yet  hope  concerning  us,  therefore  to 
make  our  cafe  defperate  and  paft  remedy  ?  See  how 
unreafonably  men  bring  ruin  upon  themfelves  ;  fo 
that  well  might  the  Pfalmift  afk  that  queftion,  "  Have 
"  all  the  workers  of  iniquity  no  knowledge?" 

But  their  folly  and  unreafonablenefs  is  not  fo  great, 
tait  their  perverfenefs  and  difingenuity  is  greater.  To 
fin,  becaufe  God  is  long-fuffering,  is  to  be  evil,  be- 
caufe he  is  good,  and  to  provoke  him,  becaufe  he 
fpares  us  ;  it  is  to  ftrive  with  God,  and  to  contend 
with  his  goodnefs,  as  if  we  were  refolved  to  try  the 
utmoft  length  of  his  patience  ;  and  becaufe  God  is 

Vol.  VIII.  17  B  loth 

7- 


6  8 o  The  long-fuffering  of  Gob. 

loth  to  punifh,  therefore  to  urge, and  importune  him 
to  that  which  is  fo  contrary  to  his  incUnation. 

II.  This  may  ferve  to  convince  men  of  the  great 
evil  and  danger  of  thus  abufing  the  long-fufFering  of 
God.  It  is  a  provocation  of  the  higheil  nature,  be- 
caufe  it  is  to  trample  upon  his  deareft  attributes,  thofe 
which  he  moft  delights  and  glories  in,  his  goodnefs 
and  mercy  *,  for  the  long-fufFering  of  God  is  his 
,e:oodnefs  to  the  guilty,  and  his  mercy  to  thofe  who 
deferve  to  be  miferable. 

Nothing  makes  our  ruin  more  certain,  more  fpee- 
dy,  and  more  intolerable,  than  the  abufe  of  God's 
goodnefs  and  patience.  After  God  had  born  long 
with  that  rebellious  people,  the  children  of  Ifrael, 
and  notwithftanding  all  their  murmurings,  all  their 
infidelity  and  impenitency,  had  fpared  them  ten 
times,  at  lad  he  fets  his  feal  to  their  ruin,  Heb.  iii. 
8,  9.  "  Harden  not  your  hearts,  as  in  the  provo- 
*'  cation,  in  the  day  of  temptation  in  the  wildernefs  : 
*'  when  your  fathers  proved  me,  and  faw  my  works 
*'  forty  years."  This  was  a  high  provocation  in- 
deed, to  harden  their  hearts  under  the  patience  and 
long-fuffering  of  God,  after  forty  years  trial  and  ex- 
perience of  it -,  V.  10.  "  Wherefore  I  was  grieved 
"  with  that  generation, and  faid.  They  are  a  people 
*'  that  do  err  in  their  hearts, for  they  have  not  known 
^'  my  ways."  And  what  was  the  ifTue  of  all  this  }. 
Upon  this  God  takes  up  a  fixed  refolution  to  bear  no 
longer  with  them,  but  to  cut  them  off  from  the  blef- 
fxngs  he  had  promifed  to  beftow  upon  them  *,  ^'  He 
*'  fware  in  his  wrath,  that  they  Ihould  not  enter  in* 
^^  to  his  reft.  To  whom  fware  he,  that  they  ihould 
*^  not  enter  into  his  reft,  but  to  them  that  believed 
*•  not  ?"  Or,as  the  word  may  be  rendered, "  to  them 
l^  that  were  difobedient  f "  that  is,  to  them  who 

went 


^he  hng'fuffering  of  God  ■  3  6  S  i' 

wfent  oji  in  their  rebellion  againft  him,  after  he  had  S  E  r  M. 
fufFered  their  manners  forty  years. 

And  as  the  abufe  of  God's  patience  renders  our 
deftrudlion  more  certain,  fo  more  fpeedy  and  more 
intolerable.  We  think  that  b^aiife  God  fuffers  long, 
he  will  fufFer  always  -,  and  becaufe  punifhment  is  de- 
layed, therefore  it  will  never  come  \  but  it  will  come 
the  fooner  for  this :  fo  our  Lord  tells  us,  Luke  xii. 
When  "  the  fervant  faid.  His  Lord  delayed  his 
*'  coming  ;  the  Lord  of  that  ferVant  fliall  come 
*'  in  a  day  that  he  looks  not  for  him,  and  at  an  hour 
*'  when  he  is  not  aware,  and  Ihallcut  him  in  funder, 
*'  and  appoint  him  his  portion  with  the  hypocrites.'* 
None  fo  like  to  befurprifed  by  the  judgment  of  God, 
as  thofe  who  trefpafs  fo  boldly  upon  his  patience. 

III.  To  perfuade  us  to  make  a  right  ufe  of  the 
patience  and  long-fuffering  of  God,  and  to  comply 
with  the  merciful  end  and  defign  of  God  therein. 

I.  It  is  the  defign  of  God's  long-fufFering,  to 
give  us  a  Ipace  of  repentance.  Were  it  not  that  God 
had  this  defign  and  reafonable  expe6lation  from  us, 
he  would  not  reprieve  a  finner  for  one  moment,  but 
would  execute  hisjudgments  upon  him  fo  foonas  ever 
he  had  offended :  this  our  Saviour  declares  to  us 
by  the  parable  of  the  fig-tree,  Luke  xiii.  6.  Were 
it  not  that  God  expeds  from  us  the  fruit  of  repen- 
tance, he  would  "  cut  us  down",  and  not  fuffer  us^ 
**  to  cumber  the  ground"  ;  after  he  had  "  waited 
*'  three  years,  feeking  fruit  and  finding  none,  he 
*'  Ipares  it  one  year  more,  to  fee  if  it  v/ould  bear  fruit.'* 

2.  The  long-fuffering  of  God  is  a  great  encou- 
ragement to  repentance.  We  fee  by  his  patience 
that  he  is  not  ready  to  take  advantage  againft  us  ; 
that  he  fpares  us  when  we  offend,  is  a  very  good  fign 
that  he  will  forgive  us  if  we  repent*  Thus  natural 
"  ^  J7  B2  light 


3682  'The  long-fuffering  ofGo'D, 

SE  RM.  light  would  reafon,  and  fo  the  kino;  of  Nineveh,  a 

CLI.  . 

heathen,  reafons,  "  Who  can  tell  if  God  will  turn  and 
"  repent  ?"  But  we  are  fully  afiured  of  this  by  the  gra- 
cious declarations  of  the  gofpel,  and  the  way  of  pardon 
and  forgivenefs  which  is  therein  eftabliflied  through 
faith  in  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  who  was  made 
"  a  propitiation  for  the  fins  of  the  whole  world." 

Therefore  the  long-fuffering  of  God  fhould  be  a 
powerful  argument  to  us  "  to  break  off  our  fins  by 
"  repentance  :"  for  th\s  is  the  end  of  God's  pati- 
ence 'y  "  He  is  long-fufferingtous-ward,  not  wiUing 
*^  that  any  fhould  perifli,  but  that  all  fhould  come 
*'  to  repentance.  He  hath  no  pleafure  in  the  death 
•'  of  the  wicked,  but  that  the  wicked  Ihould  turn 
**  from  his  way  and  live.'*  God  everywhere  ex- 
prefleth  a  vehement  defire  and  earned  expedlation  of 
our  repentance  and  converfion  ;  Jer.  iv.  14.  ''  O 
"  Jerufalem  !  wafh  thy  heart  from  wickednefs,  that 
*'  thou  may  eft  be  faved."  And  chap.  13.  27. 
*'  Wo  unto  thee  Jerufalem  !  wilt  thou  not  be  made 
"  clean  ?  when  fhall  it  once  be  ?"  He  who  is  fo  pa- 
tient as  to  the  punifhitient  of  our  fins,  is  almoft  im- 
patient of  our  repentance  for  them  -,  "  Wilt  thou 
*'  not  be  made  clean?  when  fhall  it  once  be?"  And 
can  we  ftand  out  againft  his  earneft  defire  of  our 
happinefs,  whom  we  have  fo  often  and  fo  long  pro- 
voked to  make  us  miferable  ? 

Let  us  then  return  into  ourfelves,  and  think  fe- 
rioufly  what  our  cafe  and  condition  is  j  how  we 
have  lived,  and  how  long  the  patience  of  God  hath 
fuffered  our  manners,  and  waited  for  our  repentance, 
and  how  inevitable  and  intolerable  the  mifery  of  thofe 
muft  be  who  live  and  die  in  the  contempt  and  abufe 
of  it ;  let  us  heartily  repent  of  our  wicked  lives,  and 
fay,  "  What  have  we  done  ?''  How  carelefs  have 
I  '  we 


^he  long-fuffering  of  God.  3683 

We  been  of  our  own  happinefs,  and  what  pains  have  S  E  R  M; 
we  taken  to  undo  ourfelves  ? 

Let  us  fpeedily  fet  about  this  work,  becaufe  we  do 
not  know  how  long  the  patience  of  God  may  laft, 
and  the  opportunities  of  our  falvation  be  continued  to 
us.  This  day  of  God's  grace  and  patience  will  have 
an  end,  therefore,  as  the  prophet  exhorts,  Ifa.  Iv.  6. 
"  Seek  the  Lord  while  he  maybe  found,  and  call 
"  upon  him  while  he  is  near."  Now  God  graci- 
oufly  invites  finners  to  come  to  him,  and  is  ready  to 
receive  them  ;  nay,  if  they  do  but  move  towards 
him,  he  is  ready  to  go  forth  and  meet  them  half 
way  ;  but  the  time  will  come,  when  he  will  bid  them 
depart  from  him,  when  they  fhall  cry,  "  Lord, 
"  Lord,  open  unto  us,"  and  the  door  of  mercy 
Ihall  be  fhut  againft  them. 

All  the  while  thou  delayed  this  necefTary  work, 
thou  ventured  thy  immortal  foul,  and  putted  thy  e- 
ternal  falvation  upon  a  delperate  hazard  ;  and  fliould 
God  fnatch  thee  fuddenly  away  in  an  impenitent 
date,  what  would  become  of  thee  ?  Thou  art  yet 
in  the  way,  and  God  is  yet  reconcileable,  but  death 
is  not  far  off,  ^nd  perhaps  much  nearer  to  thee  than 
thou  art  aware  ;  at  the  bed  thy  life  is  uncertain,  and 
death  will  infallibly  put  a  period  to  this  day  of  God's 
grace  and  patience. 

Repentance  is  a  work  fo  necefTary,  that  methinks 
no  man  fhould  lofe  fo  much  time  as  to  deliberate, 
whether  he  diould  fet  about  it  or  not  ;  de  necejfariis 
nulla  eft  deliberatio  j  "  no  man  deliberates  about  what 
*'  he  mud  do,  or  be  undone  if  he  do  it  not."  It  is  a 
work  of  fo  great  confequence  and  concernment,  and 
the  delay  of  it  fo  infinitely  dangerous,  that  one  would 
think  no  wife  man  could  entertain  a  thought  of  de* 
fcrring  it.  What  greater  fglly  and  dupidity  can  there 


3  684  ^^^  htg-fuffering  of  God. 

S  E  R  M.  be,  than  for  men  to  venture  their  immortal  fod&s 
and  to  run  an  apparent  hazard  in  matters  of  ever- 
Jailing  confequence  ? 

This  day  of  God's  patience  is  the  great  opportu- 
nity of  our  falvation,  and  if  we  let  it  flip,  it  is  never 
to  be  recovered :  if  we  mif-improve  this  time  of  our 
life,  we  fliall  not  be  permitted  to  live  it  over  again 
to  improve  it  better.  Our  flate  of  trial  ends  with 
this  life,  after  that  God  will  prove  us  no  more  \  then 
we  fhali  wifli,  "  O  that  I  had  known  in  that  my  day, 
'*  the  things  which  belonged  to  my  peace,  but  now 
*'  they  are  hid  from  mine  eyes  ;  therefore  to  day, 
*'  whilfl  it  is  called  to  day,  harden  not  your  hearts, 
*'  make  no  tarrying  to  turn  to  the  Lord,  and  put 
**  not  off  from  day  to  day  ;  for  fuddenly  fhall  the 
*'  wrath  of  the  Lord  break  forth,  and  in  thy  fe- 
'*  curity  thou  fhalt  be  defbroyed  •,  exercife  repent- 
*'  ance  in  the  time  of  health,  and  defer  not  till  death 
to  be  jullified." 


cc 


SERMON    CLII. 

The  power  of  God. 

PS  AL.  LXII.  II. 

God  hath  fpoken  once  ;  twice  have  I  heard  thiSy  that 
power  helongeth  unto  God. 

IN  treating  of  the  attributes  of  God,  I  have  con- 
fidered  thofe  which  relate  to  the  divine  under- 
(landing,  to  which  I  referred  his  knowledge  and  wif- 
dom  i  thofe  alfo  which  relate  to  the  divine  will  ^ 

viz. 


^he power  of  GoD.  36^5 

viz.  God's  juftice,  truth,  holinefs,  and  goodnefs  :  S  E  R  M.- 
I  come  now  to  confider  his  power  of  adling,  which  vJ-v* 
is  his  omnipotency  j  this  I  fhall  fpeak  to  from  thefe 
words. 

In  the  beginning  ofthis  Pfalm,  David  declares  that 
God  was  the  great  objedlof  his  truftand  confidence, 
and  that  all  his  hopes  and  expe61:ation  of  fafety  and 
deliverance  were  from  him,  v.  i,  2.  And  this  makes 
him  challenge  his  enemies  for  all  their  mifchievous 
qualities  and  devices  againft  him,  as  vain  attempts, 
V.  3,  4.  Hereupon  he  chargeth  himfelf  to  continue 
his  truft  and  confidence  in  God,  from  whom  was  all 
his  expedation,  and  who  was  able  to  fave  and  deli- 
ver him  ;  V.  5,  6,  7.  And  from  his  example  and 
experience,  he  encourageth  and  exhorts  all  others  to 
truft  in  God,  v.  S.  and  that  from  two  arguments. 

I.  Becaufe  all  other  obje<5ls  of  our  truft  and  con- 
fidence are  vain  and  infufficient,  and  will  fail  thofe 
that  rely  upon  them.  If  we  rely  upon  any  thing 
in  this  world,  it  muft  either  be  perfons  or  things  ; 
but  we  cannot  fafely  repofe  our  truft  in  either  of  thefe. 
Not  in  perfons  :  they  may  be  reduced  to  one  of  thefe 
two  heads,  either  high  or  low  :  Thofe  that  are  of  a 
mean  condition,  it  would  be  in  vain  to  truft  them  ; 
they  that  cannot  fecure  themfelves  from  meannefs,can- 
not  fecure  others  from  mifchief,  "  men  of  low  degree 
"  are  vanity :"  But  the  great  ones  of  the  world,  they 
would  feem  topromifefomethingof  afliftance  andfe- 
curity  to  us ;  but  if  we  depend  upon  them,  they  will 
fruftrate  us,  "men  of  high  degree  are  a  lie.*'  As  for 
the  things  of  the  world,  that  which  men  ufually  place 
their  confidence  in,  is  riches  ;  thefe  are  either  got  by 
unlawfiil,  or  lawful  means  ;  if  they  be  ill  gotten,  by 
opprefllon  or  robbery,  they  will  be  fo  far  from  fecur- 
ing  us  from  evil,  that  they  wilj  bring  it  upon  ys ;  if 


3^86-  The  power  of  God. 

S  E  R  M.  they  be  well  gotten,  they  are  of  an  uncertain  nature, 
that  we  have  little  reafon  to  place  our  hopes  in  them  j 
"  if  riches  increafe,  fet  not  your  hearts  upon  them,'* 
*^  that  is,  your  hope  ;  for  heart  in  fcripture  figniiies 
any  of  the  affeclions. 

2.  Becaufe  God  is  the  proper  obje6l  of  our  truft 
and  confidence.  We  may  fafely  rely  upon  any  one, 
in  whom  thefe  two  things  concur,  a  power  to  help 
us,  and  goodnefs  to  incline  him  fo  to  do.  Now 
David  tells  us,  that  both  thefe  are  eminently  in  God, 
and  do  in  a  peculiar  manner  belong  to  him  \  power, 
V,  II.  and  goodnefs,  v.  12. 

I  fhall  fpeak  to  that  which  David  makes  the  firft 
ground  of  our  confidence,  the  power  of  God  ;  pow- 
er  belongs  to  God  :  For  which  he  brings  the  tefti- 
mony  of  God  himfelf,  "  once  hath  God  fpoken, 
*'  yea  twice  have  I  heard  this.'*  Some  interpre- 
ters trouble  thcmfelves  about  the  meaning  of  this 
exprefTion,  as  if  it  did  refer  to  fome  particular  re- 
velation of  God  -,  and  then  again  they  are  troubled 
how  to  reconcile  God's  fpeaking  this  but  once,  with 
David's  hearing  it  twice  :  but  I  do  not  love  to  fpy 
myfteries  in  thefe  expreffions  which  are  capable  of  a 
plain  fenfe  ;  for  I  underftand  no  more  by  it  but  this, 
that  God  hath  feveral  times  revealed  this  ;  he  fre- 
quently declared  himfelf  by  this  attribute,  "  once, 
*'  yea  twice,"  that  is,  he  hath  fpoken  it  often  and 
David  heard  it  often.  This  is  anfwerable  to  that 
phrafe  of  the  Latins,  Semel  atque  iterum  •,  and  it  is 
ufual  in  all  writers,  to  ufe  a  certain  number  for  an  un- 
certain, and  particularly  among  the  poets,  Felices  ter 
6?  amplius^  Hor.  And  fo  in  the  poetical  writers  of 
fcripture.  Job  v.  19.  he  hath  "  delivered  thee  in 
'^  fix  troubles,  yea,  in  feven  there  fhall  no  evil 
*'  touch  thee  j"  thatis<>  in  feverai  and  various  trou-^ 

bles. 


7he  Power  of  God,  3687 

blcs.     Ecdef.  xi.  2.  *'  Give  a  portion  to  feven,  and  S  E  R  M. 
"  alfo  to  eight  •/'   that  is,  diftributethy  charity  to 
many  ;   and    which  is  neareil  to  this,  Job  xl.   5, 
*'  Once  have  I  ipoken,  but  I  v/ill  not  anfwer  ;  yea 
**  twice,  but  I  will  proceed  no  farther  :*'  that  is,  I 
have  had  feveral  difcourfcs  with  my  friends ;  and  xxxiii. 
14.  "God  fpeaketh  once,  yea  twice,  in  a  dream,  in 
*'  a  vifion  of  the  night;**  that  is,   God  reveals  him- 
felf  in  feveral  ways  and  manners  to  men  -,  fo  here 
*'  God  hath  fpoken  once,  yea  twice,"  that  is,  God 
hath  often  declared  this.     And  if  I  would  be  fo  cu- 
rious to  refer  to  a  particular  declaration  of  God,  I 
fhould  think,  that  it  related  either  to  the  preface  to 
the  law,    "  I  am  the  Lord  thy  God,"  that  is,  the 
great  and  powerful  God,   "  that  brought  thee  out  of 
*'  the  land  of  Egypt  ;**  or  rather  to  the  declaration 
which  God  made  of  himfelf  to  Abraham,  Ifaac,  and 
Jacob,  by  the  name  of  the  Almighty  God,  Gen.  xvii. 
I.  Concerning  which  revelation  of  God,   it  is  faid 
exprefly,  Exod.  vi.  3.  *'  I  appeared  unto  Abraham, 
**  and  Ifaac,  and  Jacob,  by  the  name  of  God  A1- 
**  mighty,  but  by  my  name  Jehovah,    was  I  not 
"  known  to  them.'* 

But  that  which  I  defign  to  fpeak  to,  is  the  propo- 
fition  itfelf,  that  power  belongs  to  God  ;"  that  is, 
that  the  excellency  of  power,  power  in  it's  higheft 
degree  and  perfection  j  **  all  power  belongs  to  God,'* 
that  is,  that  omnipotence  is  a  property  or  perfedion 
of  the  divine  nature. 

In  the  handling  of  this,  I  Ihall  fhew, 

Firft,  What  we  are  to  underftand  by  the  omnipo* 
tcnce  of  God. 

Secondly,  That  this  perfecElion  belongs  to  God. 

Firft,  What  we  are  to  underftand  by  the  omnipo- 
tence of  God.     And  this  I  ftiall  confider. 

Vol.  VIII,  18  C  I.  As 

7 


3688  The  power  of  God. 

ERM.       I.  As  to  the  principle.     And, 

II.  As  to  the  exercife  of  it. 

I.  As  to  the  principle,  it  is  an  ability  to  do  all 
things,  the  doing  of  which  fpeaks  power  and  per- 
fedlion  ;  that  is,  whatever  is  not  repugnant  either  to 
the  nature  of  things,  or  of  God  •,  whatever  does  not 
imply  a  contradidlion  in  the  thing,  or  an  imperfedi- 
on  in  the  doer  -,  an  ability  to  do  all  things  which  are 
eonfiitent  with  itfelf,  and  with  the  divine  nature  and 
perfecflion  \  by  which  we  muft  mean  an  executive 
power,  the  effcd  whereof  is  without  himfelf,  for 
what  he  is  faid  to  do  within  himfelf,  the  ads  of  his 
underftanding  and  will,  as  we  conceive  his  will  to  be 
diftindl  from  his  power,  are  not  to  be  referred  to  his 
omnipotence.  To  have  a  right  conception  of  omni- 
potence we  muft  imagine  the  moft  perfedl  adtive  prin- 
ciple that  we  can,  and  it  is  ftill  fomething  more  per- 
fed  than  that,  or  any  thing  we  can  imagine.  To 
help  our  conception, 

1.  Let  us  imagine  a  principle  from  which  all  other 
power  is  derived,  and  upon  which  it  depends,  and 
to  which  it  is  perfectly  fubjed  and  fubordinate. 

2.  A  perfedl  adlive  principle,  which  can  do,  not 
only  what  any  finite  being  or  creature  can  do,'  but 
what  all  beings  joined  together  can  do  ;  nay,  more 
and  greater  things  than  they  all  can  do. 

3.  A  perfed  adive  principle,  to  which  nothing 
can  make  any  confiderable,  much  lefs  effedual  refi- 
ftance,  which  can  check  and  countermand  at  plea- 
fure,  and  carry  down  before  it,  and  annihilate  all  o- 
ther  powers  that  we  can  imagine  befides  this  ;  be- 
caufe  we  cannot  imagine  any  other  power,  that  is 
not  derived  from  this,  and  does  not  depend  upon  it. 

4.  A  perfed  adive  principle,  which  can  do  all 
things  in  a  fnoft  perfed  manner,  and  can  dp  all  things 

at 


T'he  Power  of  God.  3 6 ^9 

at  once  and  in  an  inftant,  and  that  with  eafe.  We  can  ^^^M* 
but  do  one  thing  at  once,  and  the  greater  and  more 
confiderable  it  is,  the  more  time  it  will  take  us  to  do 
it,  and  we  find  it  the  harder  and  more  difFxult  to  be 
done  ;  but  God,  to  whofe  knowledge  all  things  are 
prefent  at  once,  and  together,  and  the  ads  of  whofe 
will  are  as  quick  and  perfed  as  of  his  underflanding, 
hath  a  power  anfwerable  to  the  perfedtion  of  both  ; 
and  therefore  it  is  as  eafy  to  him  to  do  all  things,  as 
one  thing  ;  at  once,  as  fucceflively,  and  in  time.  For 
this  is  the  privilege  of  an  infinite  fpirit,  that  it  does 
not  only  a6l  without  hands  and  material  engines  or 
inftruments,  as  every  fpirit  doth,  but  without  moti- 
on from  one  place  to  another,  bccaufe  he  is  every 
where,  and  fills  all  places ;  he  a6ls  per  modttm  volun- 
tatis^ as  if  his  adlings  were  nothing  elfe  but  a  willing 
that  fuch  a  thing  be  done,  and  iffo  fa5fo  every  thing 
is  fo,  as  he  wills  it  fliould  be,  and  when  he  wills  it 
fhould  be  ;  as  if  things  did  flart  up  into  being,  or 
vanifh  out  of  being,  as  if  they  did  break  forth  into 
being,  and  fculk  again  into  nothing,  and  undergo 
fuch  and  fuch  changes,  ad  nutum  voluntatis^  "  at 
*'  the  beck  of  his  will."  And  this  is  the  mod  per- 
fed  way  of  ading  that  can  be  imagined,  which  the 
fcripturefeems  to  exprefs  to  us  when  it  reprefents  God 
as  "  making  things  by  his  word,  upholding  all  things 
"  bythe  word  of  his  power,*'  asifhedidbut  "fpeak 
"  the  word,"  and  fay,  "  Let  fuch  a  thing  be,  and 
**  it  was  fo  ,'*  as  if  there  were  nothing  more  requi- 
red to  the  doing  of  any  thing,  but  an  exprefs  ad  of 
the  divine  will,  which  is  all  we  can  underfland  by 
God's  Ipeaking,  by  his  word,  and  voice,  and  fay- 
ing, *'  Let  things  be"  ♦,  but  theleaft  that  it  can  fig- 
nify,  is  the  quick  and  fpeedy  manner  q^  working, 
i8  C  2  wh^c- 


3690  The  Power  of  God, 

SE  R  M  whereby  God  is  able  to  do  things  in  an  inftant,  as 
foon  as  a  word  can  be  fpoken. 

And  as  he  can  do  all  things  at  once,  and  in  an 
inflant ;  fo  with  eafe,  without  any  pain  or  laborious 
endeavour ;  for  what  is  it  that  can  objedl  any  difficulty 
to  him  ?  At  the  firfl  ceation  of  things  there  was 
nothing  to  refill  him  -,  and  fince  the  creation,  there  is 
nothing  but  what  was  made  by  him,  and  confequent- 
]y  all  whofe  power  is  derived  from  him,  and  depends 
upon  him,  and  is  fubjedt  to  him,  and  being  finite 
and  limited,  is  infinitely  unequal  to  the  infinite  pow- 
er of  God  ;  fo  that  we  may  imagine  the  divine  pow- 
er would  pafs  through  all  the  refiftance  that  all  creat- 
ed power  can  naake,  and  all  the  difficulties  it  can 
objed:  to  it,  with  more  eafe  than  a  bullet  paffeth 
through  the  thin  air  j  or  a  man  would  pafs  through 
a  net  of  cobweb. 

5.  The  moft  perfed  adlive  principle  we  can  ima^ 
gine,  the  utmoft  bounds  and  limits  of  whofe  perfec- 
tion we  cannot  imagine,  that  is,  when  we  have  ima- 
gined it  to  be  as  perfedt,  and  toadl  in  as  perfedb  a 
manner  as  we  can  imagine,^  yet  we  have  not  reached 
the  perfedion  of  it  ;  but  after  all  this,  that  it  can 
do  many  things  more  than  we  can  imagine,  and  in  a 
manner  much  more  perfed  than  we  can  imagine. 
This  is  die  omnipotence  of  God  as  to  the  principle, 
%vhich  hath  no  bounds  and  limits.     And, 

II.  As  to  the  excrcife  of  it,  it  is  only  limited  by 
the  divine  will  and  wifdom.  The  divine  will  deter- 
mines it  to  it's  exercife,  die  divine  wifdom  direds, 
and  regulates  the  exercife  of  it  ;  that  is,  God  exer- 
cifcth  his  power  willingly,  and  not  by  necefiky,  and 
in  fuch  manner,  for  the  producing  fuch  eff'eds,  and 
in  order  to  fuch  ends  and  purpofes,  as  feem  beft  to 
his  wifdom.  Hence  he  is  faid  "  to  a6t  all  things 
I  ^^  according 


T*he  Power  of  God.  369 f 

^  according  to  his  good  pleafure,"  and  ^^  accord-  S  E  R  M. 
"  ing  to  the  counfel  of  his  will,'*  that  is,  freely  and    ^^^^' 
wifely. 

As  to  the  extent  of  this  power,  I  faid  it  was  an 
ability  to  do  all  things  that  are  confident  with  itfelf, 
and  with  the  nature  and  perfedlion  of  God. 

Firfl,  that  are  confident  with  itfelf,  that  is,  with 
a  power  to  do  all  things.  It  is  a  contradiftion  to 
imagine,  that  omnipotence  can  do  that,  which,  if  it 
could  be  done,  would  render  all  power  infignificant. 
Upon  this  account,  the  divine  power  is  not  faid  to 
extend  to  the  working  of  any  thing  which  implies  a 
contradiction,  and  the  terms  whereof  fpeak  a  repug- 
nancy to  one  another,  and  mutually  deflroy  one  ano- 
ther, and  the  doing  whereof  is  contrary  to  the  na- 
ture of  the  thing  which  is  fuppofed  to  be  done,  that 
is,  is  nonfenfe,  and  cannot  be  imagined  to  be.  For 
example,  that  a  thing  fhould  be,  and  not  be  at  the 
fame  time.  For  a  power  to  make  a  thing  to  be,  fo 
as  it  fhould  not  be  while  it  is,  gnifies  nothing  ;  be- 
caufe  fuch  a  being  as  is  not,  is  nothing ;  and  to 
make  fuch  a  being,  would  be  to  do  nothing,  and 
confequently  fuch  a  power  would  fignify  nothing. 
So  likewife  we  cannot  fay,  that  the  divine  power  can 
caufe,  that  the  fame  thing  fhould  be  made  and  not 
be  made,  that  that  which  hath  been,  lliould  not 
have  been  •,  for  the  power  which  makes  a  thing  fo 
as  that  it  was  not  made,  and  caufeth  a  thing  to  have 
been,  fo  as  that  it  hath  not  been^  does  nothing  •,  and 
confequently  is  no  power.  Nor  can  we  fay,  that 
the  divine  power  can  effed  that  any  thing  fhould  be 
made  by  itfelf,  that  is,  be  the  caufe  of  it's  own  be- 
ing -,  for  that  would  be  to  caufe  that  a  thing  Ihould 
be  before  it  is,  that  is,  be,  when  it  is  not,  which 
fignifies  nothing.     We  cannot  fay  that  the  divine 

power 


CLII. 


3692  T^e power  of  God. 

^  ^ir^^r^^*  power  can  effcd,  that  twice  two  (hould  not  makt 
four  ;  for  that  would  be  to  caufe  that  things  fhould 
not  be  what  they  are,  if  they  be  at  all,  which  is  to 
caufe  that  things  fliould  be  and  not  be  at  all,  when 
they  are,  which  amounts  to  nothing. 

We  cannot  fay,  the  divine  power  can  make  a 
found  to  be  feen,  and  colour  to  be  heard  ;  for  that 
would  be  to  make  colour  and  found  all  one,  that  is, 
things  that  differ,  to  be  the  lame  while  they  differ, 
which  is  to  make  colour  and  found  not  to  be  colour 
and  found  while  they  are  fo,  which  is  to  do  nothing, 
and  confequently  argues  no  power. 

We  cannot  fay,  the  divine  power  can  make  that 
which  is  intrinfically  and  effentially  good  to  be  evil  •, 
and  on  the  contrary  :  or  that  which  is  neceffarily 
true  to  be  falfe  y  and  on  the  contrary.  For  to  make 
that  which  is  intrinfically  and  effentially  good  to  be 
evil,  is  to  make  that  which  is  always  good  to  be 
fometimes  evil,  that  is,  to  be  evil  whilft  it  is  good, 
that  is  to  make  good  and  evil  all  one ;  which  is  to 
bring  two  things  together,  which  fo  foon  as  they 
do  exifl,  deflroy  one  another,  which  is  to  no  pur- 
pofe,  becaufe  it  is  to  do  juft  nothing;  and  there  is 
the  fame  reafon  of  true  and  falfe. 

We  cannot  fay,  that  the  power  of  God  can  caufe 
that  the  fame  thing  fhould  be  hot  and  cold,  dead 
and  alive  at  the  fame  time  •,  becaufe  thefe  deflroy 
one  another,  and  if  they  were  both,  neither  of 
them  would  be,  and  fo  the  effed  we  attribute  to  this 
power  would  be  nothing. 

We  cannot  fay,  that  the  divine  power  can  effe(5l, 
that  the  fame  impreffion  fhould  give  a  thing  two 
contrary  motions,  upward  and  downward  at  the 
fame  time  •,  that  the  fame  body  fhould  be  in  two 
contrary  poftures,  in  motion  and  at  reft,  and  in  fe- 

verai 


T*he  power  cf  God,  3693 

vcral  places,  which  are  the  contradididns  of  tran-  S  E  R  M. 
fubflantiation  -,  for,  for  the  fame  body  to  be  at  the 
fame  time  in  two  feveral  places,  is  to  be  limited  and 
circumfcribed  by  each  of  thefe,  that  is,  fo  to  be  in 
each  of  them,  as  not  to  be  in  the  other,  or  in  any 
other  ;  fo  that  if  it  be  in  this  place,  it  is  not  in  that, 
nor  in  any  other  befides  this  •,  if  it  be  in  that  place,  it 
is  not  in  this,  nor  any  other  befides  that  •,  but  if  it 
be  in  two,  it  is  both  in  this  and  in  that,  and  there- 
fore in  neither  of  them,  nor  any  where  elfe  ;  fo 
that  a  power  to  make  a  body  to  be  in  two  places  at 
once,  is  a  power  to  make  it  to  be  no  where,  that  is, 
not  to  be  at  all,  which  is  no  power  ;  and  there  is 
the  fame  reafon  of  the  fame  body's  being  in  contrary 
motion,  or  in  motion  and  at  reft,  or  in  two  contrary 
poftures  at  the  fame  time. 

So  that  by  all  thefe  inftances  it  appears,  that  a 
power  to  do  any  thing  which  implies  a  contradidlion, 
and  is  repugnant  to  the  nature  of  things,  fignifies 
nothing,  and  the  fuppofed  effedl  of  it  is  only  to 
bring  terms  together,  which  if  they  could  be  brought 
together,  fo  foon  as  they  meet,  will  mutually  take 
away  and  deftroy  one  another,  which  would  be  vain 
and  to  no  purpofe. 

I  have  the  more  explicitly  laid  open  thefe  contra- 
dictions, with  relation  to  the  grofs  dodlrine  of  tran- 
fubftantiation,  in  which  all,  or  moft  of  the  contra- 
didlions  which  I  have  mentioned  are  involved.  I 
know  they  lliffly  deny,  that  thefe  contradidions  foU 
low  from  that  dodrine,  and  ufe  pitiful  fhifts  to  avoid 
them  •,  but  being  not  able  to  fatisfy  themfelves  that 
way,  if  the  worft  fhould  come  to  the  worft,  they 
can  grant  thefe  contradictions,  but  then  they  fly 
to  the  power  of  God,  which  can  do  things  which 
we  call  eontradidions  ,  or  elfe  they  fay,  there  are 


^ 


'^694-  The  power  of  God. 

S  E  R  M.  as  many  contradidions  in  the  dodrine  of  the  Tri- 

CLII 

nity,  which  all  Chriflians  believe.  And  thus  they 
reproach  chriilianity  to  defend  popery  •,  and  if  they 
cannot  perfuade  men  to  be  papifts,  do  what  they 
can  to  make  them  atheifts,  or  at  leall:,  to  hinder 
them  from  being  Chriflians :  but  there  is  not  fo 
much  malice  in  this  objedtion,  but  there  is  as  little 
llrength.  Is  it  any  contradi6tion,  that  the  fame 
thing  fhould  be  three  and  one  in  feveral  refpedts  ? 
which  is  all  that  the  fcripture  teacheth  concerning 
the  Trinity :  but  if  men  will  undertake  to  explain 
this  more  particularly  than  God  thought  fit  to  do, 
and  do  it  in  fuch  a  manner  as  that  they  cannot  free 
themfelves  from  contradidion,  let  them  look  to  it, 
the  chriftian  religion  is  not  at  all  concerned  in  this, 
farther  than  to  cenfure  fuch  mens  boldnefs  and  cu- 
riofity. 

But  againft  this  exemption  of  things  that  imply  a 
contradi6tion  from  the  compafs  and  extent  of  the 
divine  power,  there  are  two  objections  which  are 
more  confiderable,  and  deferve  to  be  taken  notice  of. 

I.  We  grant  God*s  fore-knowledge  of  future 
events,  which  feem  to  us  to  be  impofTible  to  be  fore- 
known J  now  why  may  we  not  as  well  grant  that 
God  can  do  things  which  feem  to  usimpoflible  to  be 
done  by  any  other  power,  as  fore-know  things  which 
it  is  impoffible  for  any  underftanding  to  know  ?  For 
why  fhould  we  pretend  to  know  the  utmoft  of  what 
infinite  power  can  do,  any  more  than  the  utmofl  of 
what  infinite  underflanding  can  know  ? 

Anf.  I  know  no  reafon  but  that  the  argument  fhould 
be  granted,  if  there  were  an  equal  necefTity  of 
granting  the  pofTibility  of  thofe  things,  which  feem 
to  us  impoffible  to  be  done,  that  there  is  of  grant- 
ing the  poffibjlity  of  forc-knowjng  future  contingen- 


CICS^ 


^he  power  of  God,  369c 

cies,  though  they  feem  to  us  impoffible  to  be  known.  S  E  R  M. 
We  muft  grant  the  pofiibiHty  of  fore-knowing  fu- 
ture contingencies,  becaufe  the  fcripture,  v/hich  we 
beheve  to  be  a  divine  revelation,  exprcfly  tells  us, 
that  God  doth  foreknow  them,  and  gives  us  inftances 
of  it  in  feveral  prophecies  and  predidions.  Now  if 
any  man  can  fhew  me  as  exprefs  texts  which  fay, 
that  God  can  make  a  body  to  be  in  two  places  at 
once,  I  will  believe  it,  though  I  do  not  fee  how 
it  is  polTible  ;  becaufe  it  is  reafonable  I  fhould  believe 
that  infinite  power  can  do  many  things,  the  poflibi- 
lity  of  which  my  finite  underftanding  cannot  reach. 
Now  whereas  the  papiils  fay,  the  fcripture  hath  faid 
that  from  which  this  neceflarily  follows,  viz.  "  This 
^'  is  my  body  ;"  this  is  not  enough,  unlefs  they  could 
either  prove,  that  it  is  neceiiary  to  underftand  all 
texts  of  fcripture  in  a  rigorous  and  ftrid  propriety  of 
the  letter,  without  admitting  of  any  trope  or  figure 
in  the  words  ;  which  they  do  not  pretend  :  or  elfe 
fhew  a  clear  reafon,  why  this  iliould  be  underilood 
fo,  more  than  a  thoufand  others  ;  which  they  have 
not  done,  and  I  think  never  can  do. 

But  if  it  be  farther  argued  ^  if  we  grant  in  one 
cafe,  that  thofe  things  which  feem  to  be  contradicti- 
ons to  us  may  be  poflible,  why  not  in  all  cafes  ? 
Unlefs  we  had  fome  certain  way  of  diilinguilliing 
between  feeming  contradit5lions  and  real  ones.  And 
if  we  grant  all  contradidions  poiTible,  then  there  is 
no  reafon  to  exempt  thefe  from  the  extent  of  the 
divine  power  ;  but  we  may  lafely  fay,  that  the  di- 
vine power  can  make  a  thing  to  be,  and  not  to  be 
at  the  fame  time.     To  this  I  anfwer, 

I.  I  do  not  grant,  that  any  thirg,  which  feems  to 
me  to  be  a  contradiction,  ought  to  be  granted  by 
me  to  be  poffible,  unlefs  I  have  higher  affurance  and 

Vol.  VIII.  18  D  greater 


3696  7'he  power  of  God, 

^  cui^^*  g^^^^^^  reafon  to  believe  it  to  be  pofTible,    than  I 
have  to  believe  it  to  be  a  contradidlion  ;  for  ex- 
ample,   fuppofe   it   were  clearly  revealed-  in  fcrip- 
ture,  that  two  bodies  may  be  in  the  fame  place  and 
at  the  fame  time  (which  is  not,  nor  any  thing  like 
it)  then  having  a  revelation  for  this,  and  no  revelati- 
on that  it  is  not  a  contradidion,  I  have  higher  affur- 
ance  and  greater  reafon  to  believe  it  poffible,  than  that 
it  is  a  contradidlion  -,  and  confequently  I  have  reafon 
to  believe  it  is  no  contradidion,  and  that  from  thence 
it  would  not  follow,  that  the  fame  thing  may  be, 
and  not  be  at  the  fame  time  :  but  though  in  cafe  of 
divine  revelation,  I  may  believe  that  to  be  no  con- 
tradidion, which  feems  to  me  to  be  a  contradidion  j 
yet  I  am  not  without  great  necelTity  and  clear  evi- 
dence to  offer  violence  to  reafon,  and  affront   the 
faculty  of  underflanding  which  God  hath  endowed 
me  withal,  by  entertaining  any  thing  which  feems  to 
me  to  be  a  contradidion  ;  which  the  papifts  do  in  the 
bufinefs  of  tranfubftantiation,  without  any  evidence 
of  revelation,  and  confequently  without  nccefTity. 

2.  But  if  this  were  revealed  in  fcripture,  that  the 
fame  thing  may  be  and  not  be  at  the  fame  time,  I 
could  have  no  reafon  to  believe  that,  becaufe  I  could 
have  no  afTurance,  if  that  were  true,  that  the  fcrip- 
tures  were  a  divine  revelation,  or  that  it  were  to  be 
believed  if  it  were  ;  for  if  it  were  true,  that  the  fame 
thing  may  be  and  not  be,  then  a  divine  revelation 
may  be  no  divine  revelation,  and  when  I  am  bound 
to  believe  a  thing,  I  may  be  bound  at  the  fame  time 
not  to  believe  it,  and  fo  all  things  would  fall  into  un- 
certainty, and  the  foundation  of  all  affurance,  and 
of  all  duty  and  obedience,  both  of  faith  and  pradice, 
would  be  taken  av/ay. 

The  2d  objedion  is  from   tlie  power  of  creation, 
2  which 


'The  power  of  GoTi,  •  ^^697 

vrkich  is  generally  acknowledged  to  be  a  making  of  ^^/^M. 
fomething  out  of  nothing  •,  now  fay  the  objedors, 
this  feems  as  palpable  a  contradidion  as  any  thing  elfe. 
Anfw.  To  us  indeed,  whoconverfe  with  material 
things,  and  never  faw  any  thing  made,  but  out  of 
pre-exifbent  matter,  it  is  very  hard  to  conceive  how 
.any  thing  fhould  be  created,  that  is  produced  out  of 
nothing :  but  every  thing  that  is  flrange  is  not  a  con- 
tradidion.  It  is  flrange  to  us,  and  hard  to  conceive, 
that  there  fhould  be  fuch  a  thing  as  a  fpirit,  who 
never  faw,  nor  can  fee  any  thing  but  matter  j  and 
yet  we  grant  there  are  fpirits.  It  is  hard  to  us  to 
conceive  how  any  thing  fhould  be  made,  but  out  of 
matter  ;  and  yet  fpirit,  if  it  were  made  of  any  thing 
pre-exiflent,  cannot  be  made  of  matter:  but  if  we 
will  attend  to  thofe  common  didates  of  reafon,  which 
every  man,  whether  he  will  or  no,  muft  afTent  to, 
we  may  eafily  underfiand  creation  to  be  polTible,  and 
free  from  contradiction.  For  the  clearing  of  this, 
I  will  proceed  by  thefe  fleps. 

1.  The  true  notion  of  creation  is  the  bringing  of 
fomething  into  being,  which  before  had  no  being  at 
all  ;  for  the  phrafe  of  making  fomething  out  of  no- 
thing, or  outof  nopre-exiftent  matter,  docs  miilead 
our  underflanding  into  odd  conceits,  as  if  nothing 
could  be  the  material  caufe  of  fomething,  or  as  if 
nothing  could  be  what  is  material. 

2.  Every  one  mufl  grant,  that  fomething  is  •,  for 
we  fee  that  things  are,  hovv^ever  they  came  to  be. 

3.  Every  one  muft  grant,  that  fomething  is  .of 
itfelf,  whether  matter,  or  that  being  which  we  call 
God. 

4.  Every  one  muft  grant,  that  that  which  was  of 
itfelf  was  always  j  for  nothing  can  begin  to  be  of 
itfelf, 

18  D  2  5.   It 


3698  ^he  fO'wcr  of  GodI 

S  E  R  M.  ^.  It  IS  much  more  eafy  to  conceive  how  a  thing, 
that  once  was  not,  might  fometimes  be  brought  into 
being  by  another,  than  how  a  thing  fhouid  be  al- 
ways of  itfeJf ;  for  that  which  once  was  not  is  fup- 
pofed  to  have  fomething  before  it,  by  which  it 
might  be  made,  though  not  out  of  which  it  was 
made  •,  but  that  which  was  always  neither  had  nor 
could  have  any  thing  by  which,  or  out  of  which  it 
could  be  made.  And  why  cannot  a  thing  come 
into  being,  when  there  was  nothing  before  it,  out 
of  which  it  was  made,  as  v/ell  as  a  thing  be  always, 
when  there  could  not  be  any  thing  before  it,  out  of 
which  it  fhouid  be  ? 

Secondly,  I  exempt  thofe  things  from  the  extent 
of  omnipotence,  which  imply  imperfedion,  which 
are  contrary  to  the  nature  and  perfedlion  of  God, 
both  natural  and  moral  imperfedions  ;  for  thefe  alfo 
deftroy  power,  becaufe  they  are  not  arguments  of 
power,  but  of  impotence.  Natural  imperfedlions  ; 
as  to  die,  to  be  fick,  to  be  in  want,  to  eat,  to  fleep, 
to  forget,  &c.  Moral  imperfed:ions,  thofe  which 
contradid  the  holinefs  of  God,  as  fin  and  vice,  or 
to  compel  any  to  fin  •,  which  contradid  his  goodnefs, 
as  to  be  cruel ;  which  contradid  his  truth,  as  to  lie, 
to  deceive,  to  break  his  promife,  to  deny  himfelf  ; 
Tit.  i.  2.  2  Tim.  ii.  13.  Jam.  i.  13.  he  is  faid  to 
be  aVsip^r©^  KocKuv  -,  contrary  to  the  conftancy 
and  immutability  of  his  nature,  as  to  change  his 
decree,  to  repent  -,  contrary  to  juftice  and  equity,  as 
for  ever  to  fpare  and  to  pardon  obilinate  finners, 
eternally  to  punifh  innocent  and  good  men  •,  for  thefe 
are  moral  imperfedions,  and  contradi6l  the  holinefs, 
and  truth,  and  goodnefs,  and  juftice,  and  immuta- 
bility of  the  divine  nature  -,  and  that  diftin6tion  be- 
tween God's  abfolute  and  ordinate  power,  that  is, 

that 


The  power  of  God.  3  6 00 

that  God  hath  an  ablblute  power  of  doing  fomeSERM. 
things,  which  yet  upon  fuppofition  of  his  decree,  ^^"' 
or  promife,  or  goodnefs,  or  juilice,  he  cannot  do, 
is  vain  and  frivolous,  unlefs  men  mean  by  it  only 
this,  that  fome  things,  which  argue  an  imperfedlion, 
do  not  imply  a  contradidion,  which  is  moll  true,  but 
both  thefe  are  abfolutely  and  equally  impoffible  to 
Ggd.     I  proceed  to  the 

Second  thing  I  propofed,  that  this  perfedion  be- 
longs  to  God  ;  and  this  I  fhall  Ihew, 

I.  From  the  didlates  of  natural  light. 

II.  From  the  fcripture,  or  divine  revelation. 
I.  From  the  dilates  of  natural  light.     This  was 

one  of  the  mofl  ufual  titles  which  the  heathens  gave 
to  their  fupreme  deity,  eptmtis  maximus  ;  next  to 
his  goodnefs  they  placed  his  greatnefs,  which  does 
chiefly  appear  in  his  power  ;  and  they  did  not  only 
attribute  a  great  power  to  him  but  an  omnipotence. 
Nihil  eft  quod  Beus  efficere  non  poteft^  faith  Tully  de 
Div.  Now  their  natural  reafon  did  convince  them, 
that  this  perfedion  did  belong  to  God  by  thefe  three 


arguments. 


I .  From  thofe  two  great  inftances  and  expreflions 
of  his  power,  creation  and  providence  ;  for  the 
heathens  did  generally  acknowledge  the  making  of 
the  v/orld,  and  the  prefervation  and  government  of 
it,  to  be  the  effecls  of  power,  determined  by  good- 
nefs, and  regulated  by  wifdom.  Hence  they  gave 
thofe  titles  to  God  of  opifex  rerimi  and  re^or  miindi. 
I  fay  generally,  I  except  Ariflotle,  v/ho  fuppofed 
the  world  not  to  have  been  made,  but  to  have  been 
from  eternity  j  and  Epicurus  with  his  followers,  who 
afcribed  the  regular  and  orderly  frame  of  nature  to  a 
happy  cafualty  and  fortunate  concourfe  of  atoms : 
but  generally  the  wifer  did  look  upon  the  vail  frame 

of 


V^he  Power  of  God. 

of  nature,  this  (lately  fabrick  of  the  world,  and  the 
upholding  and  preferving  of  it,  as  an  argument  of 
a  divine  and  invifible  power.  And  fo  the  apoftle 
tells  us,  Rom.  i.  20.  that  by  the  light  of  nature, 
''  the  invifible  things  of  God  were  clearly  fcen  by 
*'  the  things  that  were  made,  even  his  eternal  power 
"  and  godhead." 

2.  Becaufe  all  other  perfections  without  this  would 
be  iniignificant  and  ineffe6tual,  or  elfe  could  not  be 
at  all.  Without  this  goodnefs  would  be  an  empty 
piece  of  good  meaning,  and  not  able  to  give  any 
demonftration  of  itfelf ;  knowledge  would  be  an 
idle  fpeculation  ;  and  wifdom  to  contrive  things, 
without  power  to  effe6l  them,  would  be  an  ufelefs 
thing.  There  would  be  no  fuch  thing  as  juftice,  if 
the  divine  nature  were  without  a  power  to  reward 
and  punifli  -,  no  fuch  thing  as  faithfulnefs,  if  he  had 
not  a  power  to  perform  what  he  promifes  ;  no  pro- 
vidence,  for  it  would  be  in  vain  for  him  that  hath  no 
power  to  take  upon  him  to  govern  and  intermeddle 
in  the  affairs  of  the  world. 

3.  Without  this  there  could  be  no  religion.  Take 
away  the  power  of  God,  and  there  can  be  no  foun- 
dation of  faith  and  truft,  no  reafon  for  fear ;  all  ar- 
guments from  hope  and  fear  would  be  taken  away  ; 
we  could  not  expe6t  any  good,  nor  fear  any  harm 
from  an  impotent  being  that  could  do  nothing. 
The  fan6lion  of  God's  laws  would  be  taken  away. 
To  give  authority  to  laws,  there  mufh  not  only  be  a 
right  to  command,  but  power  to  back  thofe  com- 
mands ;  the  grand  fecurity  and  laft  refort  of  all  go- 
vernment and  authority  is  power ;  James  iv.  12. 
*'  There  is  one  law-giver,  who  is  able  to  fave,  and 
'*  to  deflroy."  None  can  be  a  law-giver,  but  he 
that  hath  this  power,   to  rewaixi   and  punifh,  to 


make 


^he  power  of  God.'  3  701 

make  men  happy  or  miferable,"  to  favcjor  to  deflroy."  S  E  R  M. 
Men  would  not  pray  to  God,  nor  make  any  addrefs 
to  him,  if  they  did  not  beheve  he  were  able  to  fup- 
ply  their  wants,  and  relieve  them  in  their  flraits  •,  Nee 
in  hunc  fur  or  em  omnes  mor  tales  confenftjfent  alloquendi 
fur  da  numina  ^  inefficaces  deos^  Stn,  There  would 
be  no  encouragement  for  men  to  ferve  God,  if  they 
did  not  beheve  that  he  were  able  to  reward  them, 
and  bring  them  to  happinefs,  and  to  defend  them 
againft  all  the  enemies  of  their  welfare,  fo  that  it 
Hiould  not  be  in  the  power  of  the  moft  malicious 
fpirits  to  hinder  them  of  their  happinefs. 

II.  From  fcripture  or  divine  revelation.  In  pro- 
ducing texts  to  this  purpofe,  I  will  proceed  by  thefe 
Heps. 

1.  Take  notice  of  thofe  which  in  general  afcribc 
power,  and  might,  and  flrength  to  God.  Pfal.  xxiv. 
8.  "  The  Lord  flrong  and  mighty.  So  girt  with 
**  power ;  the  mighty  God  -,  thine  is  the  greatnefs 
"  and  the  power  -,  thine  is  the  kingdom,  and  the 
"  power,  and  the  glory."  Of  the  fame  nature  are 
thofe  places  which  call  upon  all  creatures  to  afcribe 
this  to  God  -,  "  Give  unto  the  Lord,  ye  mighty, 
^'  give  unto  the  Lord  glory  and  flrength." 

2.  Thofe  which  afcribe  this  to  God  in  an  eminent 
degree.  Job  ix.  4.  "  He  is  mighty  in  ftrength  ; 
*'  excellent  in  power,  who  is  hke  unto  him  ?  The 
*'  Lord  Jehovah  is  everlafling  ftrength." 

3.  Thofe  texts  which  afcribe  fuch  a  power  as 
tranfcends  any  human  or  created  power.  Such  as 
thofe  which  exprefs  all  the  power  which  men  have 
to  be  derived  from  God  ;  John  xix.  11,  "  Thou 
*^  couldefl  have  no  power  at  all,  except  it  were 
*'  given  thee  from  above."  And  thofe  which  ad- 
vance the  power  of  God  above  the  power  of  men  j 

Luke 


^yoz  ^ie power  of  God i 

SERM.  Lukexvili.  27.  ''  The  things  which  are  impofTible 
"  with  men,  are  pofTible  with  God  ;  he  is  able  to 
"  do  exceeding  abundantly  above  all  that  we  can 
"  afk  or  think."  Eph.  iii.  20.  2Chron.  xx.  6. 
Job  ix.  4.  "  According  to  his  mighty  power, 
"  whereby  he  is  able  tofubdueall  things  to  himfelf," 
Phil.  iii.  21.  Dan.  iv.  ^^.  Thofe  which  declare  all 
things  to  be  equally  eafy  to  him,  and  nothing  diffi- 
cult;  "  There  is  nothing  too  hard  for  thee,"  Jer. 
xxxii.   17.   2  Chron.  xiv.   11.   i  Sam.  xiv.  6. 

4.  Thofe  which  afcribe  all  power  to  him,  by 
the  titles  of  almighty,  all-fufficient.  Gen.  xvii.  i. 
Rev.  iv.  8,  II.  XV.  3.  xvi.  7.  xix.  26.  Job  xhi.  2. 
"  Thou  canft  do  all  things,"  Matth.  xix.  6.  Mark 
XX.   27.  Lukei.  ^y. 

I  have  difpatched  what  I  propofed  upon  this  ar- 
gument, give  me  leave  to  apply  all  in  the  following 
particulars. 

Ufe.  Firft,  the  confideration  of  God's  omnipo- 
tence may  caufe  terror  to  wicked  men.  All  this 
power  which  I  have  defcribed,  or  rather,  which  is  fo 
great  that  I  cannot  defcribe  it,  is  engaged  againft 
finners  -,  "  His  power  and  his  wrath  is  againft  all 
^^  that  forfake  him,"  Ezra  viii.  22.  And  who 
knows  what  thofe  words  fignify,  Pfal.  xc,  11. 
"  Who  knoweth  the  power  of  thine  anger  ?  As  is 
"  thy  fear,  fo  is  thy  wrath."  There  is  no  palTion 
in  the  heart  of  man  more  infinite  than  our  fear,  it 
troubles  us  with  jealoufy  and  fufpicion  of  the  utmoft 
that  may  happen  •,  but  when  we  have  extended  our 
fears  to  the  utmoft,  the  power  of  God's  wrath 
reachcth  farther.  Whenever  we  fm,  we  challenge 
the  Almighty,  and  dare  infinite  power  to  do  it's  worft 
to  us ;  Job  XV.  25.  fpeaking  of  the  wicked  man, 
*'  He   ftretchcth  out  his  hand  againft   God,  and 

**  ftrengthcncth 


7^^ power  of  Go'o'i  3 7 '^ '5 

"  ftrengtheneth  himfclf  againft  the  Almighty."  SERlVf^ 
Whom  wilt  thou  fear,  if  not  him  who  can  make  thee 
extremely  happy  or  miferable  for  ever  ?"  Will  ye  pro- 
"  voke  the  Lord  to  jealoufy  ?  are  ye  ftronger  than 
"  he  ?"  Becaufe  he  doth  nothing  againfc  thee  for  the 
prefent,  thinkeft  thou  he  can  do  nothing?  Nah.  i.  3. 
"  He  is  flow  to  anger,  and  great  in  power,  and  will 
"  not  acquit  the  wicked/'  Tliere  is  a  day  coming, 
v/hen  "  the  Son  of  man  fliall  come  in  the  clouds  of 
''  heaven,  with  power  and  great  glory." 

Secondly,  The  conlideration  of  God's  cmnipd- 
tence  fhould  check  the  pride  and  vain  confidence  of 
men.  What  have  we  to  be  proud  of  .^  "  What  have 
"  w^e  that  we  have  not  received  ?  Where  then  is 
'^  caufe  of  boafting  ?  Who  may  glory  in  his  fight  ?'* 
Thofe  that  have  the  greateft  power  fhould  remem- 
ber whence  it  is  derived,  and.  render  back  the  glory 
of  it  to  the  fountain  of  it.  Pfal.  xxix.  i*.  '"  Give 
"  unto  the  Lord,  O  ye  mighty,  give  unto  the 
"  Lord  glory  and  fi:rength."  So  hkcwife  it  fhould 
take  men  oft  from  relying  upon  their  own  ftrength, 
which  at  the  beft  is  but  "  an  arm  of  flefh,"  as  thd 
fcripture  calls  it,  for  the  weaknefs  of  it.  Do  we  not 
fee,  that  many  times  "  the  battle  is  not  to  the  ilrong  ?" 
That  things  are  not  done  "  by  might  and  by  power^ 
"  butby  thefpiritof  theLoRD."  When  he  appears 
againft  the  mofl  potent,  "  their  hearts  melt  within 
^'  them,  and  there  is  no  more  fpirit  left  in  them,"  as 
it  is  faid  of  the  mighty  inhabitants  of  Canaan,  Jofh.  v.  i . 

Thirdly,  We  fhould  make  this  om^nipotence  of 
God  the  objedl  of  our  truil  and  confidence.  This  is 
the  moft  proper  ufe  we  can  make  of  this  dodlrine,  as 
David  does  in  this  Pfahii  ^  and  this  was  ufed  for  a- 
form  of  blefling  the  people  in  the  name  of  God  ;• 
Pfal.  ocxxyi.  3.  "  The  Lord  that  made  heaven  and 

Vol,  VIIL  j8  E  ''  earth. 


^he  power  of  God.' 

earth,  blefs  thee.'*  And  David,  when  he  mag- 
nifies God's  deliverance  of  his  people  from  the  mul- 
titude of  their  enemies,  refolves  it  into  this,  "  our 
*'  help  flandeth  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  who  made 
"  heaven  and  earth."  Thus  did  the  great  pattern 
and  example  of  faith  encourage  and  fupport  his  con- 
fidence in  God  in  a  very  difficult  trial  ;  he  daggered 
not  at  it,  becaufe  "  he  believed  God,  who  quicken- 
"  eth  the  dead,  and  calleth  thofe  things  that  be  not, 
"  as  though  they  were :  therefore  againft  hope  he 
"  believed  in  hope,  &c."  Rom.  iv.  17,  &c.  This 
gives  life  to  all  our  devotion,  to  be  perfuaded  that 
<*  God  is  able  to  do  for  us  exceedingly  above  what 
"  we  can  afk  or  think,"  and  that  "  his  is  the  king- 
<'  dom,  the  power  and  the  glory." 

I  fhall  only  caution  two  things,  as  to  our  reliance 
on  the  power  of  God. 

I.  Labour  to  be  fuch  perfons,  to  whom  God  hath 
promifed  that  he  will  engage  and  employ  his  omni- 
potence for  their  good.  If  we  hope  for  any  good 
jfrom  the  Almighty,  we  muil  *'  walk  before  him, 
"  and  be  perfed,"  as  he  faid  to  Abraham.  Good 
men  hav^fa  peculiar  intereft  in  God's  power  ;  hence 
he  is  called  "  the  ftrength  of  Ifrael,"  and  "  the 
''  mighty  one  of  Jfrael."  If  we  do  what  God  re- 
quires of  us,  we  may  expeft  that  he  will  put  forth 
his  power,  and  exert  his  arm  for  us  ;  but  if  we  dii- 
obey,  we  muft  expert  he  will  manifeft  his  power  a- 
gainft:  us,  Ez.  viii.  22.  When  we  "  do  well,"  wc 
may  ''  commit  the  keeping  of  our  fouls  to  him," 
I  Pet.  iv.  19. 

II.  Our  expedlations  from  the  omnipotence  of 
Gov>  muft  be  with  fubmiffion  to  his  pleafure,  and 
goodnefs,  and  wifdom  ;  we  muft  not  exped  that 
God  will  manifeft  his  power,  when  wc  think  tl^iCrc  is 

occafion 


TJje  fpirituality  of  the  divine  nature.  3705 

occafion  for  it  ;  but  when  it  feems  beft  to  him,  he 
will  fo  employ  his  omnipotence,  as  to  manifeft  his 
goodnefs  and  wifdom. 

And  with  thefe  two  cautions,  we  may  rely  upon 
him  in  all  our  wants,  both  fpiritual  and  temporal  j 
for  his  divine  power  can  *'  give  us  all  things  that 
"  pertain  to  life  and  godlinefs  j"  2  Pet.  i.  3.  We 
may  truft  him  at  all  times,  for  the  omnipotent  God 
"  neither  flumbereth  nor  fleepeth  ;  the  Almighty 
"  fainteth  not,  neither  is  he  weary  :  truft  ye  in  the 
"  Lord  for  ever,  for  in  the  Lord  Jehovah  is  ever- 
"  laft-ing  ftrength." 


SERMON     CLIIL 

The  fpirltuality  of  the  divine  nature. 


JOHN  iv.  24. 

God  is  a  fpirit^  and  they  that  worfiip  hiin^  muft 
worjhip  him  in  fpirit  and  in  truth, 

THESE  are  the  words  of  our  Saviour  to  SERM. 
the  woman  of  Samaria,  who  was  fpeaking  ^^^'^" 
to  him  of  the  difference  between  the  Samaritans  and 
the  Jews  concerning  religion  ;  ver.  20.  "  Our  fa- 
"  thers  worlhipped  in  this  mountain  \  but  ye  fay, 
-*'  that  in  Jerufalem  is  the  place  where  men  ought  to 
"  worfhip."  Christ  tells  her,  ^'  the  time  was 
"  coming,  when  the  worfhippers  of  God  lliould 
"  neither  be  confined  to  that  mountain,  nor  to 
*'  Jerufalem  •,  but  men  ihould  worfhip  the  father  in 
*'  fpirit  and  in  truth  i"  when  this  carnal,  and  cere- 
18  E  2.  .  monialj^ 


3706  'The  fpirituality  of  the  divtjte  nature. 

,S  K  R  M.   monial,  and  typical  worfhip  of  God  fhould  be  exalt- 
■^^1^-1^  ed  into  a  more  fpiritual,  a  more  real,  and  true,  and 
fubilantial  religion,  which  fhould  not  be  confined  to 
one  temple,  but  fhould  be  univerfally  diffufed  through 
the  world.     Now  fuch  a  worfnip  as  this  is  mofl  a- 
greeable  to  the  nature  of  God  ;  for  he  is  a  fpirit,  and 
*'  thofe  who   worlliip  him^,  mufl  worfhip   him   in 
'•   fpirit  and  in  truth."     In  the  words  we  have, 
Firfl,  A  propofition  laid  down,  "  God  is  a  fpirit." 
Secondly,  A  corollary,  or  inference,  deduced  from 
it,  "  they  that  worlhip  him,  mufl  worfhip  him  in 
"  fpirit  and  in  truth."    I  fhall  fpeak  of  the  propofiti- 
on, as  that  which  concerns  my  prefent  defign  •,    and 
afterward  fpeak  fomething  to  the  corollary,  or  infe- 
rence, deduced  from  it,  together  with  fome  other  in- 
ferences drawn  from,  this  truth,  by  way  of  application. 
Firfl,  "  That  God  is  a  fpirit."     This  exprefTion 
is  finguiar,  and  not  to  be  parallelled  again  in  the 
fcripture  ^  indeed  we  have  often  mention  made  in 
the  fcripture  of  "  the  fpirit  of  God,"  and  "  the 
*'  fpirit  of  the  Lord,"  which  figniiies  a  divine  pow- 
er and  energy ;  and  of  "  the  holy  fpirit,"  fignifying 
the  third  peribn  in  the  Trinity  ;  God  is  called  "  the 
^'  God  of  the  fpirits  of  ail  flefh  ;"  Num.  xvi.  22. 
xxvii.  16.  mjuch  in  the  fame  fenfe,    as  he  is  called 
^-  the  father  of  fpirits,"  Heb.  xii.   9.  that  is,  the 
creator  of  the  fouls  of  men  ;  but  we  no  where  meet 
with  this  exprelTion,  or  any  other  equivalent  to  it, 
that  '^  God  is  a  fpirit,"  but  only  in  this  place  •,  nor 
had  it  been  ufed  here,  but  to  prove,  that  the  befl 
worfhip  of  God,  that  which  is  mofl  proper  to  him, 
is  fpiritijal :  fo  that  the  thing  which  our  Saviour 
here  intends,  is  not  to  prove  the  fpiritual  nature   of 
God,   but  that  his  v/orfhip  ought  to  be  fpiritual  ; 
nor  indeed  is  there  any  neceffity  tliat  it  fliould  have 
2  been 


T'he  fpirittialify  of  the  divine  nature.  Z7^7 

been  any  'where  faid  in  fcripture,  that  ''God  is  a^  R  R  M. 
*'  fpirit,"  it  being  the  natural  notion  of  a  God  ;  no  " 
more  than  it  is  neceffary  that  it  fhould  be  told  us, 
that  God  is  good,  or  that  he  is  infinite,  and  eternal, 
and  the  like  ;  or  that  the  fcripture  ihould  prove  to  us 
the  being  of  a  God.  All  thefe  are  manifeft  by  the 
light  of  nature,  and  if  the  fcripture  mentions  them, 
it  is  ex  abundantly  and  it  is  ufuaily  in  order  to  fome 
farther  purpofe. 

For  we  are  to  know,  that  the  fcripture  fuppofeth 
us  to  be  men,  and  to  partake  of  the  common  noti- 
ons of  human  nature,   and  therefore  doth  not  teach 
us  philofophy,  nor  folicitoufly  inftru6l  us  in  thole 
things  which  are  born  with  us  ;  but  fuppofeth  the 
knowledge  of  thefe,  and  makes  ufe  of  thefe  com- 
mon principles  and  notions  which  are  in  us  concern- 
ing God,  and  the  immortality  of  our  fouls,  and  the 
life  to  come,  to  excite  us  to  our  duty,  and  quicken 
our  endeavours  after  happinefs.     For  I  do  not  find 
that  the  dodrine  of  the  immortality  of  the  foul,  is 
any  where  exprefly  delivered  in  fcripture,  but  taken 
for  granted  ;  in  like  manner,  that  the  fcripture  doth 
not  folicitoufly  inftrucl  us  in  the  natural  notions  which 
we  have  of  God,  but  fuppofeth  them  known  to  us  ; 
and  if  it  mention  them,  it  is  not  fo  much  in  order  to 
knowledge  as  to  pra6lice  ;    and  therefore  we  need 
not  w^onder  that  this  expreffion,  which  doth  fet  forth 
to  us  the  nature  of  God,  is  but  once  ufed  in  fcripture, 
and  that  brought  in  upon  occafion,  and  for  another 
purpofe,  becaufe  it  is  a  thing  naturally  known.  Plato 
fays,  that  God  is  ao-^j^o]©-,  without  body.    In  like 
manner  Tully,  Nee  enim  Deus  ipfe  qtii  intelligitur  a 
nobis  alio  mo  do  inteUigi  poteft^  niji  mens  qu^dam  foluta 
i^  libera^   fegregata  ab  omni   concretione   mortali  y 
■  ■  we  cannot  conceive  of  God,  but  as  of  a  pure 

^'  mindj^ 


708  The fpiritnaliiy  of  the  divme  nature. 

mind,  intirely  free  from  all  mortal  compofition  or 
mixture."  And  Plutarch  after  him,  v5^  ?i/ 0  SsoV, 
yjixi^ig-ov  £ti5(^,  TifJ£g-i  ro  cifjiiylg  'zircca'Tjg  vKTjg,  fJivj^evl 
Ts-didfjco  crvfjuTTBTrXsl'i/tvoVy  "  God  is  a  mind,  an  ab- 
"  ftrad  being,  pure  from  all  matter,  and  difintangled 
"  from  whatever  is  paflible  or  capable  of  fuffering." 
So  that  natural  hght  informing  us  that  God  is  a 
fpirit,  there  was  no  need  why  the  fcripture  fhould 
inculcate  this  :  it  is  an  excellent  medium  or  argu- 
ment to  prove  that  the  worfhip  of  God  Ihould  chief- 
ly be  fpiritual ;  and  although  it  was  not  necefiary 
that  it  fhould  have  been  mentioned  for  itfelf,  that 
is,  to  inform  us  of  a  thing  which  we  could  not  o- 
therwife  know,  yet  the  wifdom  of  God,  by  the  ex- 
prefs  mention  of  this,  feems  to  have  provided  a- 
gainfl  an  error,  which  fome  weaker  and  grofler  fpi- 
rits  might  be  fubje6l  to.  You  know  God  is  pleafed, 
by  way  of  condefcenfion  and  accommodation  of  him- 
felf  to  our  capacity,  to  reprefent  himfelf  to  us  in  fcrip- 
ture by  human  imperfe6lions,  and  gives  fuch  defcrip- 
tions  of  himfelf  as  if  he  had  a  body,  and  bodily 
members  5  now  to  prevent  any  error  or  miftake  that 
might  be  occafioned  hereby,  it  feems  very  becoming 
the  wifdom  of  God,  fomewhere  in  fcripture  exprefly 
to  declare  the  fpiritual  nature  of  God,  that  none 
through  weaknefs  or  wilfulncfs  might  entertain  grofs 
apprehenfions  of  him.  In  fpeaking  to  this  propofi- 
tion,  I  fliall, 

I.  Explain  what  is  meant  by  a  fpirit. 

II.  Endeavour  to  prove  to  you,  that  God  is  afpiric. 

III.  Anfwer  an  objedion  or  two. 

IV.  Draw  fome  inferences  or  corollaries  from  the 
whole. 

I.  For  the  explication  of  the  notion  of  a  fpirit.     I 
ijiall  not  trouble  you  with  the  ftri6l  philofophical  no- 
tion 


The  fpirifuality  of  the  divine  nature.  3700 

tion  of  it,  as  that  it  is  fuch  a  ilibftance  as  is  penetra-  S  E  R  M. 

f  T  ITT 

ble,  that  is,  may  be  in  the  fame  place  with  a  body, 
and  neither  keep  out  the  body,  nor  be  kept  out  by  it  ; 
and  that  the  parts  which  we  imagine  in  it  cannot  be 
divided,  that  is,  really  feparated  and  torn  from  one 
another,  as  the  parts  of  a  body ;  but  I  will  give  you 
a  negative  defcription  of  it.  A  fpirit  is  not  matter, 
it  doth  not  fall  under  any  of  our  fenfes,  it  is  that 
which  we  cannot  fee  nor  touch  •,  it  is  not  a  body,  not 
flefh,  and  blood,  and  bones  ;  for  fo  we  lind  fpirit  in 
fcripture  oppofed  to  flefh  and  body  \  Ifa.  xxxi.  3. 
"  Their  horfes  are  flefh,  and  not  fpirit."  So  Luke 
xxiv.  when  Christ  appeared  to  his  difciples  after 
his  refurreclion,  they  were  terrified,  and  ^'  fuppofed 
*'  it  had  been  a  fpirit,"  v.  39.  But  he  faid,  "  Be- 
"  hold  m.y  hands  and  my  feet,  that  it  is  I  myfelf ; 
"  handle  me,  and  fee,  for  a  fpirit  hath  not  fieili  and 
"  bones,  as  ye  fee  me  have."  The  mofl:  ufual  de- 
fcription of  a  fpirit  is  by  thefe  negatives,  it  is  not  a 
body,  hath  not  flefh  and  bones,  doth  not  confifl  of 
matter,  or  of  any  thing  that  falls  under  our  fenfes, 
that  we  can  fee  or  touch. 

II.  For  tlie  proof  of  this  propofition,  that  "  God 
*'  is  a  fpirit."  This  is  not  to  be  proved  by  way  of 
demonfcration  ;  for  there  is  nothing  before  God,  or 
which  can  be  a  caufe  of  him  ;  but  by  way  of  convic- 
tion, by  fhewing  the  abfurdity  of  the  contrary.  The 
iirfl  and  mofl  natural  notion  that  we  have  of  God,  is, 
that  he  is  a  being  every  way  perfed: ;  and  from  this 
notion  we  mufl  argue  concerning  the  properties 
which  are  attributed  to  God,  and  govern  all  our 
reafonings  concerning  God  by  this  •,  fo  that  when 
any  thing  is  faid  of  God,  the  beft  way  to  know 
whether  it  be  to  be  attributed  to  him,  is  to  inquire 
whether  it  be  a  perfe(!ilion  or  not  3  if  it  be,  it  belongs 

t9 


27 1 o  The  fpirituality  of  the  divine  nature, 

S  E  R  M.  to  him  \  if  it  be  not,  it  is  to  be  removed  from  him  5 
^_^  '_^  and  if  any  man  afk,  why  I  fay  God  is  fo,  or  fo,  a 
fpirit,  or  good,  or  jufl  ?  the  beil  reafon  that  can  be 
given  is,  becaufe  thefe  arc  perfedlions,  and  the  con- 
trary to  thefe  are  imperfedlions.  So  that  if  I  fhew 
that  it  would  be  an  imperfe6lion  for  God  to  be  ima- 
gined to  be  a  body,  or  matter,  I  prove  that  he  is  a 
fpirit,  becaufe  it  is  an  imperfcdion,  that  is,  an  ab- 
furdity  to  imagine  him  any  thing  elfe.  To  imagine 
God  to  be  a  body,  or  matter,  doth  evidently  con- 
tradi(5l  four  great  pcrfe6lions  of  God. 

1 .  His  infinitenefs,  or  the  immenlity  of  his  being. 
Grant  me  but  thefe  two  things,  that  there  is  fome- 
thing  in  the  world  befides  God,  fome  other  matter, 
as  the  heavens,  the  air,  the  earth,  and  all  thofe  things 
which  we  fee  -,  and  grant  me  that  two  bodies  cannot 
be  in  the  fame  place  at  once,  and  then  it  will  evi* 
dently  follow,  that  where-ever  thefe  are,  God  is 
lliut  out  \  and  confequently  God  ihould  not  be  in- 
finite, nor  in  all  places  ;  and  fo  much  as  there  is  of 
another  matter  in  the  world  befides  God,  fo  many 
breaches  there  would  be  inxhe  divine  nature,  fo  many 
Hiatus' s, 

2.  The  knowledge  and  wifdom  of  God.  It  can- 
not be  imagined  how  mere  matter  can  underfland, 
how  it  can  di{lin6lly  comprehend  fuch  variety  of  ob- 
jects, and  at  one  view  take  in  pafb,  prefent,  and  to 
come.  Tully,  fpeaking  of  fpirits,  faith,  Animorum 
nulla  in  t  err  is  origo  inveftiri  poteft  -,  *'  their  original 
*'  cannot  be  found  upon  earth  •/'  for,  faith  he, 
*'  there  is  no  material  or  bodily  thing,"  ^od  vim 
memori^e^  mentis^  cogitationis  haheat^  qucd  &  prate- 
vita  teneat^  i£  futura  provideaty  (^  comple^li  pcffit 
prafentia  ;  qua  fola  dvvina  funt  ;  "  which  hath  the 
*'  power  of  memory,  of  underflanding,  of  thought  ; 

^'  which 


The  fpirituality  of  the  divine  nature^  37^1 

^^  which  can  retain  things  paft,  forefce  things  fu-  S  E  R  M. 
*'  ture,  and  comprehend  things  prefent  \  all  which  _  -^  ^ 
*'  powers  are  purely  divine.'* 

3.  Freedom  and  liberty.  For  the  laws  of  mat- 
ter are  necelTary,  nor  can  we  imagine  any  0L\jTZ^i(TL0Vy 
any  arbitrary  principle  in  it.  This  puzzled  the  Epi- 
cureans, as  we  fee  in  Lucretius,  ''  for  if  (fays  he) 
^'  all  things  move  by  certain  and  neceflary  laws,  and 
^'  there  be  a  connexion  of  the  parts  of  matter  unto 
"  each  other,  fo  that  if  you  move  this,  that  muft 
"  necefTarily  be  moved  ;  whence,  faith  he,  is  li- 
"  berty  ?"  Unde  efi  hac  iHqiiam  fdtis  avulfa  vohau 
tas  ;  ^'  whence  is  this  principle  of  Will,  whofe  mo- 
^'  tions  are  not  under  any  lav/  of  necefTity." 

4.  Goodnefs.  This  follows  from  the  forrrier  ; 
for  he  is  not  good  who  docs  not  know  what  he  does, 
nor  does  it  freely  ;  fo  that  take  away  underftanding 
and  liberty,  and  you  take  away  goodnefs  •,  now  take 
away  from  God  infinitenefs,  and  knowledge,  and 
liberty,  and  goodnefs,  and  you  diveft  him  of  his 
glory  \  you  take  away  his  mofl  elTential  perfections . 
So  that  thefe  great  abfurdities  following  from  the 
fuppofing  of  God  to  be  mere  matter  or  body,  we 
are  to  conceive  of  him  as  another  kind  of  fubftance, 
that  is,  a  fpirit.  So  that  I  wonder  that  the  author 
of  x}At  Leviathan,  who  doth  more  than  once  exprefly 
affirm,  that  there  can  be  nothing  in  the'  world,  but 
what  is  material  and  Corporeal,  did  not  fee  that  the 
neceflary  confequence  of  this  pofition  is  to  banifh 
God  out  of  the  world.  I  v/ould  not  be  uncharita- 
ble, but  I  doubt,  he  did  fee  it,  and  was  content 
with  the  confequence,  and  willing  the  world  fliould 
entertain  it  ;  for  it  is  fo  evident,  that  by  fuppofing 
the  divine  efience  to  confift  of  matter  the  immen- 
fity  of  the  divine  nature  is  ta'ken  avvay  \  and  it  is  alfo 

Vol.  VIII,  iS  F  & 


3712         The  fpiritnality  of  the  divine  nature. 

SE  R  M.  fo  utterly  unimaginable  how  mere  matter  fhould  nn- 
derfland,  and  be  endowed  with  liberty,  and  confe- 
quently  with  goodnefs,  that  I  cannot  but  vehemently 
fufpedl  the  man  who  denies  God  to  be  a  fpirit,  either 
to  have  a  grofs  and  faulty  underftanding,  or  a  very 
ill-will  againil  God,  and  an  evil  defign  to  root  out 
of  the  minds  of  men  the  belief  of  a  God.  I  come 
in  the 

III.  Place,  to  confider  the  objections. 

1.  Cbj.  V\'hy  then  is  God  reprefented  to  us  fo 
often  in  fcripture  by  the  parts  and  members  of  mens 
bodies  ?  Anf.  I  fhall  only  fay  at  prefent,  that  all 
thefe  defcriptions  and  reprefentations  of  God  are 
plainly  made  to  comply  with  our  weaknefs,  by  way 
of  condefcenfion  and  accommodation  to  our  capa- 
cities. 

2.  Cbj.  How  is  it  faid'that  "  man  was  made  af- 
"ter  the  image  of  God, "if  God  beafpirit,  of  which 
there  can  be  no  likenefs  nor  refemblance  ?  Anf.  Man 
is  not  faid  to  be  "  made  after  the  image  of  God," 
in  refpe6l  of  the  outward  fhape  and  features  of  his 
body  ;  but  in  refped  of  the  qualities  of  his  mind, 
as  holinefs  and  righteoufnefs,  or  of  his  faculties,  as 
underftanding  and  will  •,  or.  which  the  text  feems 
moft  to  favour,  in  refpe6t  of  his  dominion  and  fove- 
reignty  over  the  creatures  j  for  in  the  two  former 
refpefls  the  angels  are  made  after  the  image  of  God. 
Now  this  feems  to  be  fpoken  peculiarly  of  men  •, 
Gen.  i.  26.  "  Let  us  make  man  in  our  own  imiige, 
"  after  our  own  likenefs,  and  let  them  have  domi- 
*'  nion  over  the  fifli  of  the  fea,  and  the  fowls  of  the 
"  air,  &c." 

IV.  I  come  now  to  draw  fome  inferences  or  corol- 
laries from  hence,  and  they  fhall  be  partly  fpecula- 
live,  partly  practical. 

Firft, 


The  fpirifuality  of  the  divine  nature,  37 13 

Firft,  fpeculative  inferences.  S  E  R  M. 

I.  That  God  is  invifible.  The  proper  obj eel  of 
fight  is  colour,  and  that  arifeth  from  the  various  dif- 
pofition  of  the  parts  of  matter  which  caufe  fcveral 
refiedlions  of  light ;  now  a  fpirit  hath  no  parts  nor 
matter,  and  therefore  is  invifible  ;  i  Tim.  i.  17. 
"  Unto  the  eternal,  immortal,  invifible,  the  only 
"  wife  God."  Heb.  xi.  27.  ''He  endured,  as  fee- 
"  ing  him  who  is  invifible  •/*  as  feeing  him  by  an 
eye  of  faith,  who  is  invifible  by  an  eye  of  fenfe. 
I  Tim.  vi.  1 5.  "  Whom  no  man  hath  feen,  nor 
"  can  fee." 

When  Mofes  and  the  elders  of  Ifrael  are  faid  to 
have  feen  God,  and  Jacob  to  have  "feen  him  face 
"  to  face,"  Exod.  ii.  9.  Gen.  xxxii.  30.  it  is  meant 
of  an  angel  covered  with  divine  glory  and  majefty, 
as  we  fhall  fee  if  we  compare  thefe  with  other  texts. 
When  Mofes  is  faid  to  have  "  fpoken  to  him  face  to 
*'  face,"  that  is  familiarly  ;  and  fo  Micaiah,  i  Kings 
xxii.  19.  is  faid  to  have  "feen  God  upon  his  throne, 
"  and  all  Ifrael  fcattered  up  and  down  ;"  this  was  in. 
a  vifion.  And  it  is  promifed,  that  in  heaven  v/e 
fhall  fee  God,  that  is,  have  a  more  perfect  knowledge 
of  him  and  full  enjoyment;  as  to  "  fee  good  days," 
is  to  enjoy  them.  Thofe  texts  v/here  it  is  faid, 
"  No  man  can  fee  God  and  live,"  Exod.  xxxiii. 
20.  and  John  i.  18.  "  No  man  hath  feen  God  at 
"  any  time,"  do  not  intimate  thai*  God  is  vifible, 
though  we  cannot  fee  him  -,  but  feeing  is  metapho- 
rically ufed  for  knowing,  and  the  meaning  is,  that 
in  this  life  we  are  not  capable  of  a  perfed  knowledge 
of  God.  a  clear  difcovery  of  God  to  our  under- 
ftanding  would  let  in  joys  into  our  fouls,  and  create 
(Jefires  in  us  too  great  for  frail  mortality  to  bear. 

18  F.^  2.  That 


T'be  fpirittiality  of  the  divine  nature, 

2,  That  he  is  "  the  living  God."  Spirit  and 
life  are  often  put  together  in  fcripture. 

3.  That  God  is  immortal.  This  the  fcripture 
attributes  to  him,  i  Tim.  i.  17.  '^  To  the  king 
"  immortal,  invifible."  i  Tim.  vi.  16.  "  Who  only 
"  hath  immortality."  This  alfo  flows  from  God's 
fpirituality  ;  a  fpiritual  nature  hath  no  principles  of 
corruption  in  it,  nothing  that  is  liable  to  perilli,or 
decay,  or  die.  Now  this  doth  fo  eminently  agree 
to  God,  either  becaufe  he  is  purely  fpiritual,  and 
immaterial,  as  poflibly  no  creature  is ;  or  elfe  becaufe 
he  is  not  only  immortal  in  his  own  nature,  but  is 
not  liable  to  be  reduced  to  nothing  by  any  other,  be- 
caufe iie  hath  an  original  and  independent  immorta- 
lity, and  therefore  the  apoflle  doth  attribute  it  to  him 
in  fuch  a  Angular  and  peculiar  manner  j  "  Who  only 
*'  hath  immortality." 

Secondly,  pradical  inferences. 

1.  We  are  not  to  conceive  of  God  as  having  a 
body,  or  any  corporeal  fhape  or  members.  This 
was  the  grofs  conceit  of  the  Anthropomorphites  of 
old,  and  of  fome  Socinians  of  late,  which  they 
ground  upon  the  grofs  and  literal  interpretation  of 
many  figurative  fpeeches  in  fcripture  concerning 
God,  as  where  it  fpeaks  of  his  face,  and  hand,  and 
^rm,  ^c.  But  we  are  very  unthankful  to  God,  who 
condefcends  to  reprefent  himfelf  to  us  according  to 
our  capacities,  if  we  abufe  this  condefcenfion  to  the 
blemifli  and  reproach  of  the  divine  nature.  If  God 
be  pleafed  to  fioop  to  our  weaknefs,  we  muft  not 
therefore  level  him  to  our  infirmities. 

2.  If  God  be  a  fpirit,  we  are  not  to  worfhip 
God  by  any  image  or  fenfible  reprelentation.  Be- 
caufe "  God  is  a  fpirit,"  we  are  not  to  liken  him  to 
any  tiling  that  is  corporeal  j  we  are  not  to  reprefent 

2  hiiri 


'the fpirituality  of  the  divine  nature.  37^ 5 

him  by  "  the  likenefs  of  any  thing  that  is  in  heaven  i>  E  R  M. 
**  above,"  that  is,  of  any  birds  ;  "  or  in  the  earth 
"  beneath,"  that  is,  of  any  bead  ;  "  or  in  the  wa- 
"  ters  under  the  earth,"  that  is,   of  any  fifh  ;  as  it 
is  in  the  fecond  commandment.  For,  as  the  prophet 
tells  us,  there  is  nothing  that  we  can  liken  God  to  j 
Ifa.  xl.  1 8.  "  To  whom   will  ye  liken  God  ?  or 
"  what  likenefs  will  ye  compare  to  him  ?"  We  de- 
bafe  his  fpiritual  and  incorruptible  nature,  when  we 
compare  him  to  corruptible  creatures  ;  Rom.  i.  22, 
23.  Speaking  of  the  heathen  idolatry,  "  Who  pro- 
"  feffing  themfelves  wife,  became  fools,  and  chang- 
"  ed  the  glory  of  the  incorruptible  God  into  an 
"  image  made  like  to  corruptible  man,  and  to  birds, 
*^  and  to  four-footed  beafts,    and  creeping  things. 
'^  They  became  fools  ;"  this  is  the  folly  of  idolatry, 
to  liken  afpirit,  which  hath  no  bodily   Ihape,  to 
things  that  are  corporeal  and  corruptible.     So  that 
however  fome  are  pleafed  to   mince  the  matter,  I 
cannot  fee  how  the  church  of  Rome,  which  worlhips 
God  by  or  towards  fome  image  or  fenfible  reprefen- 
tation,  can  be  excufed  from  idolatry  •,  and  the  church 
ef  England  doth  not  without  very  juft  caufe  chal- 
lenge the  Romifh  church  with  it,  and  make  it  a 
ground  of  feparation  from  her. 

3.  If  "  God  be  a  fpirit,"  then  we  fhould  wor- 
*'  fhip  him  in  fpirit  and  in  truth."  This  is  the  in- 
ference of  the  text,  and  therefore  I  fhall  fpeak  a  lit- 
tle more  largely  of  it  ;  only  I  mufl  explain  what  is 
meant  by  '^  worlhipping  in  fpirit  and  in  truth,"  and 
5iew  you  the  force  of  this  confequence,  how  it  fol- 
lows, that  becaufe  "  God  is  a  fpirit,"  therefore  he 
mufl  be  "  worfhipped  in  fpirit  and  in  truth." 

I .  For  the  explication  of  it.  This  word  fpirit  is 
fometirnes  applied  to  the  doftrine  of  the  gofpel,  and 


'The  fpirltuality  of  the  divine  nature, 

fo  It  is  oppofed  to  letter,  by  which  name  the  doc- 
trine of  Mofes  is  called  ;  2  Cor.  iii.  6.  "  Who  hath 
"  made  us  able  minifters  of  the  new  teflament,  not 
*'  of  the  letter,  but  of  the  fpirit;"  not  of  the  law 
which  was  written  on  tables  of  flone,  but  which 
Christ  by  his  fpirit  writes  in  the  hearts  of  behevers. 
Sometimes  to  the  worfhip  of  the  gofpel ;  and  fo  it 
is  oppofed  to  the  flelli.  Gal.  iii.  3.  "  Having  be- 
*'  gun  in  the  fpirit,  are  ye  now  made  perfect  by  the 
"  fiefli  ?"  that  is  by  the  works  of  the  ceremonial 
law,  which  is  therefore  called  flefh,  becaufe  the  prin- 
cipal ceremony  of  it,  circumcifion,  was  made  in  the 
Hcfh,  and  becaufe  their  facrifices,  a  chief  part  of  their 
woriliip,  were  of  the  flefii  of  beads  •,  and  becaufe 
the  greatefl  part  of  tlieir  ordinances,  as  wafhing, 
and  the  like,  related  to  the  body.  Hence  it  is  the 
apoftle  calls  the  worHiip  of  the  Jews,  "  the  law  of 
"  a  carnal  commandment,  Fleb.  yii.  16.  and  PJeb. 
ix.  10.  Carnal  ordinances,  fpeaking  of  the  fervice 
of  the  law,  "  which,"  fliiih  he,  itood  in  meats, 
*'  and  drinlcs,  and  divers  wafliings,  and  carnal  ordi- 
*^  nances."  Now  in  oppofition  to  this  carnal  and 
ceremonial  worfhip,  we  are  to  "  v/orfhipGoD  in  the 
"  fpirit."  The  worfliip  of  the  Jews  was  moil  a 
bodily  fervice  ;  but  we  are  to  give  God  a  reafonable 
fervice,  to  ferve  him  with  the  "  fpirit  of  our  m.inds," 
as  the  apoftle  fpeaks  ;  inftead  of  "  offering  the  fiefh 
"  of  bulls  and  goats,"  we  are  to  "confecrate  our- 
"  felves"  to  the  fervice  of  God  :  "  this  is  a  holy 
*'  and  acceptable facrifice,"  or  "reafonable  fervice." 
*'  And  in  truth."  Either  inoppofition  to  the  falfc 
worfliip  of  the  Samaritans  (as  in  fpirit  is  oppofed  to 
the  worfhip  of  the  Jews)  as  our  Saviour  tells  the 
woinan,  that  "  they  worfhippcd  they  knew  not 
•'  Wxhat  i"  or  (which  I  rather  think)  in  oppofition  to 

the 


T*he  fpirituality  of  the  divifte  nature,  Z7^7 

the  fhadows  of  the  law  ;  and  fo  it  is  oppofed,  John  S  E  R  M. 
i.  17.  "  The  law  was  given  by  Mofes  :  but  grace 
*'  and  truth  came  by  Jesus  Christ." 

Not  that  the  external  fervice  of  God  is  here  ex- 
cluded, not  that  v/e  are  to  fhew  no  outward  reve- 
rence to  him  :  but  that  as  under  the  law,  the  fervice 
of  God  was  chiefly  external  and  corporeal,  fo  now^ 
it  fhould  chiefly  be  inward  and  fpiritual  •,  the  wor- 
fhip  of  God  under  the  gofpel  fhould  chiefly  be  fpiri- 
tual and  fubftantial,  not  a  carnal,  and  bodily,  and 
ceremonious  devotion. 

2dly.  For  the  force  of  the  confequence,  it  doth 
not  lie  in  this,  that  jufl:  fuch  as  God   is,  fuch  mull 
our  worlhip  of  him  be  ;  for  this  would  exclude  all 
bodily  and  outward  worlliip  -,  our  woriliip  of  God 
mud  therefore  be  invifible,  eternal,  &c.  for  fo  is  he  ; 
and  befides,  the  will  of  God  fcems  rather  to  be  the 
rule  of  his  worfhip,    than  his  nature  :  but  the  force 
of  it  is  this,  God  is  of  a  fpiritual  nature,  and  this 
is  to  be  fuppofed  to  be  his  v/ill,  that  our  worfliip 
fhould  be  as  agreeable  to  the  objedl  of  it,  as  the  na- 
ture of  the  creature  who  is  to  give  it  will  bear; 
now  faith  Christ  to   the  woman,  the  Jev/s  and 
the  Samaritans  limit  their  worfhip  to  a  certain  place, 
and  it  confifts  chiefly  in  certain  carnal  rites  and  ordi- 
nances;  but,  fiith  he,  though  God  hath  permitted 
this  for  a  time,   becaufe  of  the  carnality  and  "  hard-x 
"*'  nefs  of  their  hearts,"  yet  the  time  is  coming,when  ' 
a  more  fpiritual,  and  folid,  and  fubftantial  worfhip 
of  God  is  to  be  introduced,  which  will  be  free  from  \ 
all  particular  places  and  rites,  not  tied  to  the  temple, 
or  to  fuch  external  ceremonies,  but  conflflingin  the 
devotion  of  our  fpirits,  even  the  inward  frame  and 
temper  of  our  hearts  -,    all  outward  circumftances  / 
(excepting  thofe  of  the  two  facraments  which  are  ' 

pofitive) 


3718  T*he  fpirittiality  of  the  divine  nature, 

5  E  R  M.  pofitlve)  being  left  by  the  gofpel  to  as  great  a  liberty, 
as  natural  neceflity  and  decency  will  permit. 

Wemuft  worfhip  God,  and  therefore  it  is  natu- 
rally neceflary  that  we  fhould  do  it  fomewherc,  in 
fome  place  •,  now  feeing  fomebody  muft  determine 
this,  it  is  mofl  convenient  that  authority  fhould  de- 
termine it  according  to  the  conveniency  of  cohabita- 
tion. We  muft  not  be  rude,  nor  do  any  thing  that 
is  naturally  undecent  in  the  worfhip  of  God  ;  this 
authority  fhould  reftrain  ;  but  farther  than  this,  I 
doubt  not  but  the  gofpel  hath  left  us  free  ;  and  to 
this  end,  that  the  lefs  we  are  tied  to  external  obfer- 
vances,  the  more  intent  we  fliould  be  upon  the  fpi- 
ritual  and  fubftantial  parts  of  religion,  the  conform- 
ing of  ourfelves  to  the  mind  and  will  of  God,  en- 
deavouring to  belike  unto  God,  and  to  have  our  fouls 
and  fpirits  engaged  in  thofe  duties  we  perform  to 
him.  So  that  our  Saviour's  argument  is  this  ; 
*'  God  is  a  fpirit,"  that  is,  "  the  moft  excellent 
"  nature  and  being,"  and  therefore  muft  be  ferved 
with  the  beft.  We  confift  of  body  and  foul,  it  is 
true,  and  we  muft  ferve  him  with  our  whole  man  ^ 
but  principally  with  our  fouls,  which  are  the  moft 
excellent  part  of  ourfelves  ;  the  fervice  of  our  mind 
and  fpirit  is  the  beft  we  can  perform,  and  therefore 
moft  agreeable  to  God,  who  is  a  fpirit,  and  the  beft 
and  moft  perfe(5l  being. 

So  that  the  inference  is  this,  that  if  *'  God  be 
*'  a  fpirit,  we  muft  worfhip  him  in  fpirit,  and  ia 
*^  truth  ;"  our  religion  muft  be  real,  and  inward^ 
and  fincere,  and  fubftantial ;  we  muft  not  think  to 
put  off*  God  with  external  obfervances,  and  with 
bodily  reverence  and  attendance ;  this  we  muft  give 
him,  but  we  muft  principally  regard  that  our  fervice 
of  him  be  reafojiable,  that  is,   dircftcd  by  our  under- 

ftandings. 


CLIII. 


^be  fpirituality  of  the  divine  nature,  3719 

ilrandings,  and  accompanied  with  ouraffedions.  Our  S  E  R  M; 
religion  mull  confifl  principally  in  a  fincere  love  and 
affedion  to  God,  which  exprefleth  itfelf  in  a  real 
conformity  of  our  lives  and  actions  to  his  will  ;  and 
when  we  make  our  folemn  approaches  to  him,  in  the 
duties  of  his  worfhip  and  fervice,  we  muft  perform 
all  a(5ls  of  outward  worfhip  to  God  with  a  pure  and 
fincerc  mind  \  whatever  we  do  in  the  fervice  of  God, 
we  muft  "  do  it  heartily  as  to  the  Lord."  God 
is  a  pure  fpirit,  prefent  to  our  fpirits,  intimate  to 
our  fouls,  and  confcious  to  the  moft  fecret  and  re- 
tired motions  of  our  hearts  :  now  becaufe  we  ferve 
the  fearcher  jof  hearts,  we  muft  ferve  him  with  our 
hearts. 

Indeed  if  we  did  worftiip  God  only  to  be  feen  of 
men,  a  pompous  and  external  worftiip  would  be  very 
fuitable  to  fuch  an  end  \  but  religion  is  not  intended 
to  pleafe  men,  but  God  -^  and  therefore  it  muft  be 
fpiritual,  ^nd  inward,  and  real. 

And  where-ever  xk^  external  part  of  religion  is 
principally  regarded,  and  men  are  more  careful  to 
worftiip  God  with  outward  pomp  and  ceremony, 
than  "  in  fpirit  and  in  truth,"  religion  degenerates 
into  fuperftition,  and  men  ernbrace  the  fiiadow  of  re- 
ligion, and  let  go  the  fubftance.  And  this  the  church  ^ 
of  Rome  hath  done  ^Imoft  to  the  utter  ruin  of  chri- 
ftianity  j  ftie  hath  clogged  religion,  and  the  wor- 
fhip of  God,  with  fo  many  rites  and  ceremonies,  un- 
der one  pretence  or  other,  that  the  yoke  of  Christ 
is  become  heavier  than  that  of  Mofes ;  and  they  have 
made  the  gofpel  a  more  carnal  commandment  than 
the  law  •,  and  whatever  Chriftians  or  churches  are  in- 
tent upon  external  rites  and  obfervances,  to  the  neg- 
ledt  of  the  weightier  parts  of  religion,  regarding 
xneats  and  drinks,  &c.  to  the  prejudice  of  righte-?' 

Vol,  VIII.  18  G  oufnefs 

^    '  8.  " 


The  fpiriticality  of  the  divine  nature. 

oufncfs  and  peace,  wherein  the  kingdom  of  God 
confifts,  they  advance  a  religion  as  contrary  to  the 
nature  of  God,  and  as  unfuitable  to  the  genius  and 
temper  of  the  gofpel  as  can  be  imagined. 

Jt  is  an  obfervation  of  Sir  Edwin  Sands,  that  as 
children  are  pleafed  with  toys,  fo,  faith  he,  it  is  a 
pitiful  and  childifh  fpirit  that  is  predominant  in  the 
contrivers  and  zealots  of  a  ceremonious  religion.  I 
deny  not,  but  that  very  honeft  and  devout  men  may 
be  this  way  addicted  ;  but  the  wifer  any  man  is,  the 
better  he  underilands  the  nature  of  God  and  of  reli- 
gion, the  farther  he  will  be  from  this  temper. 

A  religion  that  confifts  in  external  and  little  things, 
doth  moft  eafily  gain  upon  and  pofTefs  the  weakeft 
minds,  and  whoever  entertain  it,  it  will  enfeeble 
their  fpirits,  and  unfit  them  for  the  more  generous 
and  excellent  duties  of  chriftianity.  We  have  but  a 
finite  heat,  and  zeal,  and  aiSlivity  j  and  if  we  let  out 
much  of  it  upon  fmall  things,  there  will  be  too  little 
left  for  thofe  parts  of  religion  which  are  of  greateft 
moment  and  concernment  ;  if  our  heat  evaporate  in 
externals,  the  heart  and  vitals  of  religion  will  infeiv 
fibly  cool  and  decline. 

How  fliould  we  blulh,  who  areChriftians,  that  we 
have  not  learnt  this  eafy  truth  from  the  gofpel,  which 
even  the  light  of  nature  taught  the  heathen ;  Cultus 
f  lit  em  deorum  eft  optimus  itemque  fan^ijfimus  at  que 
caftijfimus^  plenijfimufque  pietatis^  ut  eos  femper  purd^ 
integrd  ^  incorruptd  mente  iS  voce  veneremiiry  Tully, 
*'  The  beft,  the  fureft,  the  moft  chafte,  and  moft 
^^  devout  worlhip  of  the  gods,  is  that  which  is  paid 
*^  them  with  a  pure,  fincere,  and  uncorrupt  mind, 
^'  and  words  truly  reprefenting  the  thoughts  of  the 
*^  heart.  "  Compqfitum  jus  fafque  animi^  &c.'* 
"^^  S^rve  God  with  d,  purcj  honeft,  holy  frame  of 

^^  Ipirit, 


The  fpirituality  of  the  divhie  7iature,  372  1 

*^  fpirit,  bring  a  heart  that  is  but  generoully  honeft,  ^  *^^  ^  '^^' 
*^  and  he  will  accept  of  the  plained  facrifice." 

And  let  me  tell  you,  that  the  ceremonious  worfhip 
of  the  Jews  was  never  a  thing  in  itfelf  acceptable  to 
God,  or  which  he  did  delight  in  ;  and  though  God 
was  pleafed  with  their  obedience  to  the  ceremonial 
law  after  it  was  commanded,  yet  antecedently  he  did 
not  defire  it  j  but  that  which  our  Saviour  faith 
concerning  the  law  of  divorce,  is  true  likewife  of 
the  ceremonial,  that  it  was  permitted  to  the  Jews 
*'  for  the  hardnefs  of  their  hearts,"  and  for  their  prone- 
nefs  to  idolatry.  God  did  not  command  it  fo  much 
by  way  of  approbation,  as  by  way  of  condefcenfion 
to  their  weaknefs  ;  it  was  becaufe  of  "  the  hardnefs 
*'  oftheir  carnal  hearts"  that  God  brought  them  under 
*^  the  law  of  a  carnal  commandment,"  as  the  apo- 
file  calls  it.     See  Pfal.  li.  i6,   17.  Jer.  vii.  21. 

The  reafon  why  I  have  infifted  fo  long  upon  this 
is,  to  let  you  underfland  what  is  the  true  nature  of 
Christ's  religion,  and  to  abate  the  intemperate 
heat  and  zeal  which  men  are  apt  to  have  for  external 
and  indifferent  things  in  religion.  .  The  facrifices 
and  rites  of  the  Jews  were  very  unagreeable  and  un- 
fuitable  to  the  nature  of  God,  Pfal.  1.  13.  "  will  I 
"  eat  the  flefli  of  bulls,  or  drink  the  blood  of  goats  ?'* 
Spirits  neither  eat  nor  drink  \  it  was  a  very  unfuita- 
ble  way  of  fervice  to  kill  oxen  and  fheep  for  God  j 
and  there  is  the  fame  reafon  for  all  other  rites,  which 
either  natural  neceffity  or  decency  doth  not  require. 
Can  any  man  in  earnefl  think,  that  God,  who  is  a 
ipirit,  is  pleafed  with  the  pompous  bravery  and  pa- 
geantry which  affefts  our  fenfes  ?  So  little  doth  God  1 
value  indifferent  rites,  that  even  the  neceflary  exter- 
nal fervice  of  God,  and  outward  reverence,  where 
they  are  feparated  from   "  fpirit  and  truth,"  from 

1 8  G  2  real 


372  2  7^^  fpirituallty  of  the  divine  nature. 

\  real  holinefs  and  obedience  to  the  indifpenfable  lawS 
of  Christ,  are  fo  far  from  being  acceptable  to  God, 
that  they  are  abominable  •,  nay,  if  they  be  ufed  for 
a  cloak  of  fin,  or  in  oppofition  to  real  religion,  and 
with  a  defign  to  undermine  it,  God  accounts  fuch 
fervice  in  the  number  of  the  moft  heinous  fins. 

You,  who  fpend  the  flrength  and  vigour  of  your 
fpirits  about  external  things,  whofe  zeal  for  or  a- 
gainil  ceremonies  is  ready  to  eat  you  up  ;  you,  who 
hate  and  perfecutc  one  another  becaufe  of  thefe  things, 
and  break  the  neceflary  and  indifpenfable  commands 
of  love,  as  an  indifferent  and  unnecefTary  ceremony, 
'^  go  and  learn  what  that  means,  I  will  have  mercy, 
*'  and  not  facrifice,"  which  our  Saviour  doth  fo 
often  inculcate,  and  that  Rom.  xiv.  17.  "  The 
*'  kingdom  of  God  is  not  meat  and  drink,  &c.'* 
And  lludy  the  meaning  of  this,  "  God  is  a  fpirir, 
"  and  they  that  worihip  hnn,  mull  worfhip  him  in 
"  fpirit  and  in  truth." 

SERMON     CLIV. 

The  immenfity  of  the  divine  nature. 

PSAL.  cxxxix.  7,  8,  9,  10. 

Whither  jimll  I  go  from  thy  fpirit  ?  or  whither  fhaU 
I  flee  from  thy  pre  fence  ?  If  I  afcend  up  into  heaven^ 
thou  art  there  \  if  I  make  my  bed  in  hell^  behold^ 
thou  art  there.  If  I  take  the  wings  of  the  mornings 
and  dwell  in  the  uttermoft  parts  of  the  fea^  even 
there  fhall  thy  hand  lead  me^  and  thy  right-hand 
fhall  hold  me, 
;  E  R  M.  ry-^  HAT  attribute  of  God  which  I  laft  difcour- 
\_      fed  of  is  moft  abfolute,  and  declares  his  ef- 

fence  moft  imm.ediately  \  *''  the  fpirituality  of  the  di-- 
I  "  vine 


^he  immenjity  of  the  dhine  nature]  3  72  f 

*'  vine  nature."     I  fhall  in  the  next  place  fpeak  of  ^  E  R  M. 

CI  TV 

thofe  which  relate  to  the  manner  of  his  being,  im- 
menfity  and  eternity,  that  is,  the  infinitenefs  of 
his  eflence,  both  in  refpedl  of  fpace  and  duration  ; 
that  the  divine  nature  hath  no  limits  of  it's  being,  nor 
bounds  of  it's  duration.  I  fliall  at  the  prefent  fpeak 
to  the  firft  of  thefe,  his  immenfity,  and  that  from 
thefe  words  which  I  here  read  to  you,  "  Whither 
*'  fhall  I  go  from  thyfpirit,  &c."  The  meaning  of 
which  is  this,  that  God  is  a  fpirit,  infinitely  diff\ifing 
himfelf,  prefent  in  all  places,  fo  that  wherever  I  go, 
God  is  there  •,  we  cannot  flee  from  his  prefence.  "  If 
"  I  afcend  into  heaven,  he  is  there  •,  if  I  go  down 
*'  into  the  grave,"  the  place  of  filence  and  obfcurity, 
'*  he  is  there  ;"  (for  that  is  the  meaning  of  the  ex- 
preffion)  "  if  I  make  my  bed  in  hell,  if  I  take  the 
*'  wings  of  the  morning,  and  dwell  in  the  uttermoft 
"  parts  of  the  fea,  even  there  fhall  thy  hand  lead 
*'  me,  and  thy  right  hand  fhall  hold  me;"  that  is, 
if  my  motion  fhould  be  as  fwift  as  that  of  the  light, 
which  when  the  fun  rifeth  darts  itfelf  in  an  inftant 
from  one  part  of  the  world  to  another,  over  the  earth 
and  the  fea,  the  remotefl  parts  of  the  world  which 
are  unknown  to  us,  yet  would  God  be  prefent  to 
me  in  the  motion,  and  all  along  as  I  go  muft  I  be 
led  and  uphold  en  by  him  ;  fo  that  all  thefe  expref- 
fions  do  but  fignify  to  us  the  immenfity  of  God's 
cfTence,  that  his  being  is  infinitely  difFufed  and  pre- 
fent in  all  places. 

Infpeaking  to  this  attribute  of  God's  immenfity, 
I  fhall  firll  explain  it  to  you  a  little. 

Secondly,  prove  that  it  doth  belong  to  him. 

Thirdly,  anfwer  an  objedion  or  two  that  may  be 
made  againft  it. 

Fourthly,  4rOT  foixie  doSrinal  inferer>ces  from  it. 

Fifthly, 


CLIV. 


3724  7he  immenfity  of  the  divine  nature. 

S  ^^^^M.  Fifthly,  make  fome  ufe  and  improvement  of  It.' 
Firft,  for  the  explication  of  it.  By  the  immen- 
fity of  God,  I  mean,  that  his  being  hath  no  bounds 
or  limits,  but  doth  every  way  fpread  and  diffufe  it- 
felf  beyond  what  we  can  imagine  ;  fo  that  you  can- 
not define  the  prefence  of  God  by  any  certain  place ; 
fo  as  to  fay,  here  he  is,  but  not  there  *,  nor  by  any 
limits,  fo  as  to  fay,  thus  far  his  being  reacheth,  and 
no  farther ;  but  he  is  every  where  prefent  after  a 
mod  infinite  manner,  in  the  darkeft  corners  and  moft 
private  recefifes  ;  the  moft  fecret  clofet  that  is  in  the 
whole  world,  the  heart  of  man,  darknefs  and  pri- 
vacy cannot  keep  him  out ;  the  prefence  of  another 
being,  even  of  a  body,  which  is  the  groifeft  fub- 
fiance,  doth  not  exclude  him  ;  the  whole  world 
doth  not  confine  him  ;  but  he  fills  all  the  fpace 
which  we  can  imagine  beyond  this  vifible  world,  and 
infinitely  more  than  we  can  imagine. 

Secondly,   for  the  proof  of  it,  I  fhall  attempt  it, 

I.  From  the  natural  notions,  and  didates  of  our 
minds. 

II.  From  fcripture  and  divine  revelation. 

III.  From  the  inconvenience  of  the  contrary. 
I .   From  the  natural  notions  and  didlates  of  our 

minds.  We  find  that  the  heathen,  by  the  light  of 
nature,  did  attribute  this  perfedion  to  God.  TuUy 
tells  us,  De  Nat.  deor.  that  Pythagoras  thought, 
Deum  ejje  animam  per  natiiram  rerum  omnem  intentum 
y  commeantem^  "  That  God  is  as  it  were  a  foul 
''  pafling  through  and  infpiring  all  nature."  And 
in  1.  2.  de  leg.  that  this  was  Thales  his  opinion 
which  he  commends,  Hoynines  exijiimare  oportere- 
deos  omnia  cernere,  deorum  omnia  effe  plena ^  "  That 
*'  men  ought  to  believe,  that  the  gods  fee  all  things, 
^'  that  all  things  are  full  of  them."     So  Sen.  epift. 

55- 


^he  immenjity  of  the  divine  nature,  37 ^S 

55.  Ubiqiie  ^  omnibus  pr^efto  eft.  *'  He  is  every  SE  RM- 
**  where  prefent  and  at  hand,"  &  de  Benef.  1.  4.  u— -^^-^ 
^locunqiie  te  flexeris^  ibi  ilium  videbis  occurrentem 
tibi^  nihil  ab  illo  vacate  opus  yiium  ipfe  implet ; 
*'  Which  way  foever  thou  turnefl:  thyfelf,  thou  fhalt 
*'  find  him  meeting  thee,  nothing  is  without  him, 
*^  he  fills  his  own  work."  Not  much  difFerino- 
from  the  expreffion  of  the  Pfalmift  here. 

11.  From  fcripture  and  divine  revelation^  I  fhali 
inllance  in  fome  remarkable  places  ;  i  Kings  viii. 
27.  "  Behold,  the  heaven,  and  heaven  of  hea- 
''  vens  cannot  contain  thee."  Job  xi.  7,  8,  9. 
"  Canfl  thou  by  fearching  find  out  God  .^  canft 
"  thou  find  out  the  Almighty  unto  perfe6lion  ?'* 
Ifa.  Ixvi.  I.  "  Thus  faith  the  Lord,  behold,  hea- 
*^  ven  is  my  throne,  and  the  earth  is  my  foot-llool : 
"  where  is  the  houfe  that  ye  build  unto  me  ?  and 
*'  where  is  the  place  of  my  reft  ?"  Jer.  xxiii.  23, 
24.  "  Am  I  a  God  at  hand,  faith  the  Lord,  and 
"  not  a  God  afar  off  ?  Can  any  hide  himfelf  in  fe- 
*^  cret  places  that  I  Ihall  not  fee  him,  faith  the  Lord  ? 
"  do  not  I  fill  heaven  and  earth,  faith  the  Lord  ?'* 
Amos  ix.  2,  3.  *'  Though  they  dig  into  hell,  thence 
Ihall  mine  hand  take  them  ;  though  they  climb 
up  to  heaven,  thence  will  I  bring  them  down. 
*^  And  though  they  hide  themfelves  in  the  top  of 
*^  Carmel,  I  will  fearch  and  take  them  out  thence  : 
^^  and  though  they  be  hid  from  my  fight  in  the  bot- 
"  tom  of  the  fea,  thence  will  I  command  the  ferpent 
*'  and  he  ihall  bite  them."  Ads  xvii.  27,  28, 
*^  Though  he  be  not  far  from  every  one  of  us.  For 
*^  in  him  we  live,  and  move,  and  have  our  being  5 
^*  as  certain  alfo  of  your  own  poets  have  faid,  for 
if  we  ^re  alfo  his  off-fpring." 

HI,  Froni 


<c 


I'he  immenjlty  of  the  divine  nature, 

III.  From  the  inconveniencies  of  the  contrary* 
And  this  is  the  moft  proper  way  of  proving  any  of 
God's  perfedlions  •,  for  as  I  have  told  you  formerly, 
there  being  nothing  before  God,  nor  any  caufe  of 
his  being,  his  perfections  cannot  be  proved  by  way 
of  demonflration,  but  of  convicflion,  by  fliewing  the 
abfurdity  of  the  contrary.  The  firfl  and  mofl  eafy 
notion  that  v/e  have  of  God,  is,  that  he  is  a  being  . 
that  hath  all  pcrfedlion,  and  is  free  from  all  imper- 
fections ;  novv'  if  I  prove  that  the  immenfity  of  God's 
cffence  is  a  perfedlion,  or  which  is  the  fame,  that 
the  contrary  is  an  imperfedion,  I  do  fufficiently  prove 
the  thing  intended. 

Now  to  fuppofe  the  divine  elTence  to  be  limited, 
or  confined,  and  his  prefence  to  be  any  where  ex- 
cluded, doth  contradid  both  this  necefTary  perfe6lion 
of  God,  his  univerfal  providence ;  and  the  necefTary 
duty  of  creatures,  to  worihip  and  truft  in  him; 
and  the  voluntary  manifeftatipn  and  appearance  of 
God,  in  the  incarnation  of  Jesus  Christ. 

I.  It  contradicts  the  univerfal  providence  of  God r 
The  univerfal  providence  of  God  fuppofeth  many 
perfe(5i;ions,  viz.  infinite  knowledge,  and  infinite 
power,  his  omnifcience  and  omnipotence,  neither  of 
which  can  be  imagined  without  omniprefence.  Wc 
find  that  all  finite  beings  have  a  finite  knowledge, 
and  a  finite  power  ;  and  it  cannot  be  conceived  how 
infinite  underftanding  and  power  can  be  founded  any 
where  elfe,  than  in  an  infinite  eflence.  To  have  aa 
infinite  knowledge  of  all  things,  even  thofe  thing$ 
which  are  mofl  fecret  and  hidden,  to  be  able  to  dp 
all  things,  to  fleer  and  govern  the  aCtions  of  all 
creatures,  and  to  have  a  perfeCl  care  of  them,  feemj 
to  all  the  reafon  of  mankind  to  require  immediat;p 
prefence, 

2.  It 


The  immeyifity  of  the  divine  nature,  Z7^7 

2 .  It  contradicls  the  necefTary  duty  of  the  crea-  S  E  R  M 
ture,  which  is  to  worfhip  God,  to  depend  upon 
him  for  every  thing,  and  \x\  every  thing  to  acknow- 
ledge him.  Now  all  worfliip  of  God  is  rendered 
vain,  or  at  leaft  uncertain,  if  God  be  not  prefent  to 
us  to  hear  our  prayers,  to  take  notice  of  our  wants, 
and  receive  our  acknowledgments  :  it  will  much 
abate  our  confidence  in  God,  and  our  fear  to  offend 
him,  if  we  be  uncertain  whether  he  be  prefent  to  us 
or  not,  whether  he  fees  our  adions  or  not. 

3.  It  contradids  a  voluntary  manifeflation  and  ap- 
pearance of  God  in  the  incarnation  of  Christ.  He 
that  fuppofeth  God  not  to  be  every  where  prefent 
by  his  eiTence,  muft  in  all  reafon  confine  his  prefence 
to  heaven,  and  fuppofe  him  to  be  prefent  elfe where 
only  by  his  vertue  and  power  :  but  if  this  were  fo, 
how  could  the  divinity  be  efientially  united  to  the 
human  nature  of  Christ,  which  was  here  upon 
earth  ?  How  "  is  God  with  us  ;"  how  does  *'  he 
"  pitch  his  tabernacle  amongft  men  j"  if  hiseflential 
prefence  be  confined  to  heaven  ? 

Thirdly,  I  come  to  anfwer  objedions  againfl  thi§ 
dodrine. 

There  are  two  objeclions  againfl  this. 

1.  From  reafon. 

2.  From  fcripture. 
I.  Obj,  Reafon  will  be  ready  to  fuggefl,  that  this 

is  a  diiparagement  to  the  divine  nature,  to  tie  his 
prefence  to  this  vile  dunghil  of  the  earth,  and  fordid 
link  of  hell.  This  is  a  grofs  apprehenfion  of  God, 
and  a  meafuring  of  him  by  ourfelves.  Indeed  if  we 
look  upon  God  as  capable  of  injury,  and  fufFer- 
ing,  and  offence,  from  the  contagion  of  any  thing 
here  below,  as  we  are,  then  indeed  there  were  fomc 
ftrength  in  this  objeftion  :  but  he  is  a  blefled  and  pure 
Vol.  VIII.  18  H  being, 

8. 


37^3  ^he  immenfity  of  the  divine  nature, 

ERM.  being,  Mens  fegregata  ah  omn'i  concretione  mortalu 
"  A  mind  free  from  all  mortal  compofition  or  mix- 
''  ture  ;"  TuUy.  M.Yihv\  ura.QvH!^  cvf^TrSTrXeffjtevoVy 
*'  difentangled  from  every  thing  pafTible-,"  as  Plut. 
Thofe  things  that  are  naufeous  to  our  fenfes,  do  not 
afftcl  him :  darknefs  is  uncomfortable  to  us,  but 
^'  the  darknefs  and  the  light  are  all  one  to  him.'* 
"Wickednefs  may  "  hurt  a  man,"  or  "  the  fon  of 
"  man  i"  but  "  if  we  multiply  our  tranfgreflions, 
^'  we  do  nothing  to  God,"  as  Elihu  fpeaks.  Job 
XXXV.  6.  Nothing  can  difquiet  or  difcompofe  his 
happy  and  bleffed  nature,  but  he  converfeth  here  in 
this  dark  and  troubled  world  with  lefs  danger  or 
difturbance,  or  any  impure  pontagion,  than  the  fun- 
beams. 

2.  Obje6t.  Does  hot  the  fcripture  tell  us,  that 
*'  God  fits  in  the  heavens,  and  "  dwells  on  high,'* 
that  "  heaven  is  his  throne,"  and  that  "it  is  the  city 
*'  of  the  great  God  ?"  Doth  not  the  Lord's  prayer 
teach  us  to  fay,  "  Our  father  v/hich  art  in  heaven  r* 
is  he  not  faid  to  "  look  down  from  heaven,"  and 
^'  to  hear  in  heaven  his  dwelHng-place  .^"  Is  it  not 
faid,  that  "  he  doth  not  dwell  in  temples  made  with 
*'  hands  .^"  And  does  net  Solomon,  i  Kings  viii. 
27.  put  it  as  a  ftrange  queftion,  "  will  God  indeed 
•'  dwell  on  the  earth  .^"  Is  he  not  faid  to  come 
down  and  draw  near  to  us,  and  to  be  afar  off  from 
us  ?  Now  how  does  this  agree  with  immenfity  and 
omniprefcnce  ? 

For  anfwerto  this,  I  muftdiflinguifh  the  prefence 
of  God.  There  is,  ifl,  his  glorious  prefence,  that 
•is,  fuch  a  prefence  of  God  as  is  accompanied  with 
^n  extraordinary  manifeftation  of  his  glory,  and 
that  is  efpecialJy  and  chiefly  confined  to  heaven, 
in  refpeft  of  which  it  is  called  his  feat,  and  throne, 

an4 


^he  immenjity  of  the  divine  nature,  5/^9 

and  "  the  habitation  of  his  glory/'     Some  de2:ree  SERM. 
of  this  was  in  the  temple,  which  is  the  reafon  of  So- 
lomon's admiration,  ■'  will  God  indeed  dwell   on 
"  earth?" 

2dly,  There  is  his  gracious  prefence,  which  difco- 
vers  itfelf  by  miraculoiis  effeds  of  his  favour,  and 
goodnefs,  and  alTiftance,  and  thereby  he  is  faid  to 
"  dwell  in  the  hearts"  of  good  men,  and  "  with 
"  them  that  are  of  an  humble  and  contrite  fpirit," 
Ifa.  Ivii.  15.  and  in  refpedl  of  this  he  is  faid  to 
*^  draw  near  to  us,"  to  '*^  look  down  upon  us  ;" 
and  in  refped  of  the  abfence  of  this  to  be  "  farvfrom. 


*'  us." 


3d]y,  There  is  his  effential  prefence,  which  is 
equally  and  alike  in  all  places  ;  and  this  is  not  ex- 
cluded by  thofe  former  expreffions  which  the  fcrip-* 
ture  ufeth  to  denote  to  us  the  glorious  and  gracious 
prefence  of  God. 

Fourthly,  co  make  fome  inferences.  I  will  men- 
tion only  fuch  as  the  fcripture  here  takes  notice  of^ 
fpeaking  of  God's  immenfity. 

I.  Inf.  That  God  is  a  fpirit.  This  necelTarily 
flows  from  his  immenfity  ;  for  if  the  efTence  of  God 
be  every  where  diffufed,  the  divine  nature  muft  be 
Ipiritual,  otherwife  it  could  not  be  in  the  fame  place 
where  body  and  matter  is,  but  muft  be  fhut  out  of 
the  world.  But  this  I  fpoke  more  largely  to,  in  my 
difcourfe  of  God's  being  a  fpirit.  This  the  Pfalmift 
obferves  here,  "  Where  (hall  I  go  from  thy  fpirit  ?" 
If  he  were  not  a  fpirit,  we  might  "  go  from  him," 
and  "  hide  ourfelves  from  his  prefence." 

II.  Inf.  That  God  is  incomprehenfible,  that  which 
IS  infinite  cannot  be  meafured  and  comprehended  by 
that  which  is  finite  ;  and  this  alfo  the  Pfalmift  takes 
notice  of,  in  the  verfe  before  my  text,   "  Such 

18  H  3        '  "'know-. 


7'he  immenfity  of  the  divine  nature. 

'  knowledge  is  too  wonderful  for  me,  it  is  high,  I 
''  cannot  attain  it." 

IH.  Inf.  That  God  is  omnifcient,  if  God  be  every- 
where, then  he  knows  all  things,  yea  even  the  hidden 
things  of  darknefs,  the  fecrets  of  our  hearts  -,  nothing 
can  be  hidden  from  an  infinite  eye  \  he  is  prefent  to  our 
thoughts,  intimate  to  our  hearts  and  reins  ;  this  the 
Pfalmift  takes  notice  of,   i,  2,  3,  4,   and  i2verfes. 

IV.  Inf.  That  God  is  omnipotent.  ''  He  can  do 
"  all  things."  Diflance  limits  the  power  of  crea- 
tures, and  makes  "  their  hands  fhort;"  but  God  is 
every  where,  nothing  is  out  of  his  reach  ;  and  this 
alfo  the  Pfalmiil  intimates  in  the  text,  v.  10.  "  Even 
"  there  fhall  thy  hand  lead  me,  and  thy  right  hand 
"hold  me." 

Fifthly,  the  ufe  and  improvement  I  fhall  make  of 
this,  fhall  be, 

1.  To  av/aken  our  fear  of  him. 

2.  To  encourage  our  faith  and  confidence-in  him. 
I.  To  awaken  our  fear  of  him.     The  confidera- 

tion  of  God's  prefence  fliould  awaken  in  us  a  fear  of 
reverence.  I'he  prefence  of  an  earthly  majefty  will 
awe  our  fpirits,  and  compofe  us  to  reverence  ;  yea 
x\\t  preience  of  a  wife  and  good  man  •,  how  much 
more  fhould  the  prefence  of  the  great,  glorious,  the 
wife,  and  the  holy,  and  the  jufl  God  ilrike  an  awe 
upon  our  fpirits.^  Where-everwe  are  God  is  with  us, 
we  always  converfe  with  him,  and  live  continually  in 
his  prefence  \  now  a  heathen  could  fay,  cum  hits 
verecunde  agendum^  "  We  mufl  behave  ourfelves 
*'  modeflly  becaufe  we  are  in  the  prefence  of  God.'* 
And  it  fhould  awaken  in  us  a  fear  to  offend  God, 
and  a  fear  of  the  divine  difpleafure  for  having  offend- 
ed him.  Fear  is  the  mofl  wakeful  pafTion  in  the 
foul  of  man,  and  is  the  firit  principle  that  is  wrought 

upoa 


The  immenjity  of  the  divine  nature.  373  ^ 

upon  in  us  from  the  apprehenfions  of  a  deity  \  it  S  E  R  M. 
flows  immediately  from  the  principle  of  felf-prefer- 
vation  wh^ch  God  hath  planted  in  every  man's  na- 
ture \  we  have  a  natural  dread  and  horror  for  every 
thing  that  can  hurt  us,  and  endanger  our  being  or 
happinefs  \  now  the  grcateft  danger  is  from  the 
greateft  power,  for  where  we  are  clearly  over-match- 
ed, we  cannot  hope  to  make  oppofition  nor  refif- 
tance  with  fecurity  and  fuccefs,  to  rebel  with  fafety ; 
now  he  that  apprehends  God  to  be  near  him,  and 
prefent  to  him,  believes  fuch  a  being  to  iland  by 
him  as  is  pofleft  of  an  infinite  and  irrefiftible  power, 
and  will  vindicate  all  contempt  of  the  divine  majefly, 
and  violation  of  his  laws.     If  we  believe  God  to  be 
always  prefent  with  us,  "  Fear  will  continually  take 
"  hold  of  us,*'  and  we  fhall  fay  of  every  place,  as 
Jacob  did  of  Bethel,  "  Surely  God  is  in  this  place, 
"  how  dreadful  is  this  place  ?"  When  we  have  at 
any  time  provoked  God,  if  we  beHeve  the  juftGoD 
is  at  hand  to  revenge  himfelf,  and  if  we  believe 
"  the  power  of  his  anger,"  we  fhall  fay  with  David, 
Pfal.  Ixxvi.  7.  "  Thou  even  thou  art  to  be  feared, 
"  and  who  may  ftand  before  thee  when  thou  art 
"  angry  ?"  Pfal.  cxix,  120.  "  My  flefh  trembleth 
"  becaufe  of  thee,  and  I  am  afraid  of  thy  judgments." 
Sinners  confide  r  this,  "It  is  a  fearful  thing  to 
"  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living  God,"  and  every 
time  you  fin,  you  are  within  his  reach.     Let  then 
the  confideration  of  God's  prcfence  deter  us  from 
fin,  and  quicken  us  to  our  duty.     The  eye  and  pre- 
fence  of  a  fuperior  will  lay  a  great  reftraint  up6n 
men  ;    the  eye  of  our  prince,  our  mailer,  or  our 
father,  will  make  us  afraid  or  alhamed  to  do  any 
thing  that  is  foolifh  or  unfeemly :  And  will  we  do 
that  under  th«  §y^  of  God,  which  we  ihould  blufh 

?2 


373^  7^/6^  immenjity  of  the  divine  nature. 

S  E  R  M.  to  do  before  a  grave  or  wife  perfon,  yea  before  a 
child  or  a  fool  ?  Did  but  men  live  under  this  appre- 
henfion,  that  God  is  prefent  to  them,  that  an  holy 
and  all-feeing  eye  beholds  them,  they  would  be  afraid 
to  do  any  thing  that  is  vile  and  wicked,  to  profane 
and  pollute  God's  glorious  name,  by  a  trifling  ufe  of 
it  in  cuftomary  fwearing  and  curfing.  Whenever 
you  fin,  you  affront  God  to  his  fice  \  and  provoke 
omnipotent  juftice,  which  is  at  the  door,  and  ready 
to  break  in  upon  you. 

And  the  confideration  of  this  fliould  efpecially  de- 
ter us  from  fecret  fins.  This  is  the  ufe  the  Pfalmift  here 
makes  of  it.  If  we  believe  that  "God  fearcheth 
*'  us  and  knows  us,  that  he  knows  our  down-fitting, 
*'  and  our  up-rifing,  and  underftands  our  thoughts 
*'  afar  off,  that  he  compaffeth  our  path,  and  our 
*^  lying  down,  and  is  acquainted  with  all  our  ways, 
**  that  there  is  not  a  word  in  our  tongue,  but  he 
*'  knows  it  altogether,  that  he  hath  befet  us  behind 
*^  and  before,  that  the  darknefs  hideth  not  from  him, 
*'  but  the  night  fhineth  as  the  day,  and  the  dark- 
**  nefs  and  light  are  both  alike  -,"  I  fay,  if  we  be- 
lieve this,  how  fliould  we  live  in  an  awful  fenfe  of 
the  majefty  which  is  always  above  us,  and  before  us, 
and  about  us,  and  within  us,  and  is  as  infeparable 
from  us,  as  we  are  from  ourfelves,  whofe  eye  is  up- 
on us  from  the  beginning  of  our  lives  to  the  end  of 
our  days  !  did  men  believe  that  God  is  always  with 
them,  tliat  his  eye  pierceth  the  darknefs,  and  fees 
through  all  thofe  clouds  with  which  they  hide  and 
mufHe  themfelves,  and  pries  into  the  moil  fecret  re- 
celTes  of  their  hearts,  how  would  this  check  and  re- 
flrain  them  from  "  devifing  mifchief  in  their  hearts, 
*'  or  in  their  bed-chamber  ?"  The  holy  prefence, 
and  the  pure  eye  of  God  would  be  to  us  a  thoufand 
I  times 


I'he  inimenfity  of  the  divine  nature.  3733 

times  more  than  to  have  our  father,  or  our  mafter,  S  e  R  M. 

CLIV. 

or  our  prince,  or  him  whom  we  moll  revere,  to  Hand 
by  us.  Did  but  men  reprefentarefthi  Beum^  "  make 
^  God  prefent  to  them,"  by  hving  under  a  continual 
fenfe  of  his  prefence,  they  would,  as  the  expreflion 
of  the  wife  man  is,  "  be  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord  all 
*'  day."  Magna  fpes  peccatorum  tollitiir^  fi  pecca- 
turis  teflis  adftftat :  aliquem  habeat  animus  qtiem  ve-' 
reatur^  eujus  author  it  ate  etiam  fecretum  fuum  fan^fius 
facit  5  "  The  m^ain  hope  of  finners  is  to  remain  un- 
"  difcovered,  let  but  fomebody  be  privy  to  their 
*'  defigns,  and  they  are  utterly  difappointed  ;  it  is 
^*  fit  for  the  mind  of  a  man  to  have  an  awe  of  fomc 
"  being,  .whofe  authority  m.ay  render  even  it's  pri- 
"  vacy  more  folemn."  This  is  the  charader  of 
wicked  men,  Pfal.  Ixxxvi.  14.  "  that  they  have  noc 
"  God  before  their  eyes."  One  great  caufe  of  all 
the  wickednefs,  and  violence,  and  loofenefs  that  is 
upon  the  earth,  is,  they  do  not  believe  that  God  is 
near  them,  and  Hands  by  them. 

And  as  the  confideration  of  God's  prefence  fhould 
deter  us  from  fm,  fo  it  fhould  quicken  and  animate 
us  to  our  duty.  It  is  ordinarily  a  great  encourage- 
ment to  men  to  acquit  themlclves  handfomly,  to  have 
the  eyes  of  men  upon  them,  efpecially  of  thofe  whofe 
applaufe  and  approbation  they  value.  God  alone  is 
mnplum  theatrum^  he  is  a  greater  theatre  than  the  world, 
and  it  fhould  be  more  to  us  that  he  flands  by  us, 
than  if  the  eyes  of  all  the  world  v/ere  fixed  upon  us, 
Seneca  advifeth  it  as  an  excellent  means  to  promote 
virtue,  to  propound  to  ourfelves,  and  fet  before  our 
eyes  fome  eminently  virtuous  perfon,  as  Cato  or 
L^lius,  ut  fic  tanquam  illo  fpeBante  vivamus,  t? 
omnia  tanquam  illo  vidente  jaciamus :  "  That  we 
*^  may  live  juft  a^  if  he  were  looking  upon  i^s,  and 

"  do 


CLIV. 


373+  ^'^^  immenjity  of  the  divine  nature, 

S  E  R  M.  «  do  all  things  juft  as  if  he  beheld  us."  How 
much  greater  incitement  will  it  be  to  us,  to  think 
that  God  looks  upon  us,  and  {tt%  us,  and  really 
ftands  by  us,  than  faintly  to  imagine  the  prefence  of 
Laslius  or  Cato  ? 

.  This  fhould  have  an  influence  upon  all  the  duties 
we  perform,  and  the  manner  of  performing  them, 
that  we  do  it  to  him  who  ftands  by  us,  and  is  fami- 
liarly acquainted  with  us,  and  is  more  intimate  to  us 
than  we  are  to  ourfelves.  This  Cic.  in  1.  2.  de  leg. 
looks  upon  as  a  great  principle  of  religion,  fit  igitur 
hoc  perfuafum  civibus^  £s?  qualis  qutfquefit^  quid  agat, 
quid  in  fe  admit  tat  ^  qua  mente^  qua  pietate  religiones 
coiat^  deos  intueri^  ^  piorum  impiorumque  fationem 
habere :  "  Let  men  be  thoroughly  perfuaded  of  this, 
"  that  the  gods  obferve,  both  the  difpofition  and 
"  the  adlions  of  every  particular  man,  what  he  con- 
^'  fents  to,  what  he  allows  himfelf  in,  particularly 
**  with  what  meaning,  with  what  degree  of  inward 
"  devotion  he  performs  his  religious  worlliip  ;  and 
"  that  they  diftinguifh  between  the  pious  and  the 
"  impious." 

2.  To  encourage  our  faith  and  confidence  in  him. 
When  we  are  in  ftraits,  and  difficulties,  and  dangers, 
God  is  with  us  ^  when  trouble  is  near  to  us,  God  is 
not  far  from  us ;  where- ever  we  are,  how  remote 
foever  from  friends  and  companions,  we  cannot  be 
banifhed  from  God's  prefence  ;  if  we  dwell  "  be- 
*^  yond  the  utmoft  parts  of  the  fea,  there  his  hand 
"  leads  us,  and  his  right-hand  holds  us.  Pfal.  xvi. 
"8.  I  have  fet  the  Lord  always  before  me  •,  be- 
"  caufe  he  is  at  my  right-hand,  I  fhall  not  be  mov- 
"  edi"  The  confidcration  of  God's  prefence  is  the 
great  ftay  and  fupport  of  our  faith,  Pfal.  xlvi.  1,2. 
^  God  is  our  refuge  and  ftrength,  a  very  prefenc 

!!  help 


^he  eternity  of  God.  3735 

"  help  in  trouble  •,  therefore  will  not  we  fear  though 
"  the  earth  be  removed,  and  though  the  mountains 
**  be  carried  into  the  midft  of  the  fea."  In  the 
greateft  commotions,  and  the  mod  eminent  and 
threatening  dangers,  this  fhould  charm  and  allay  our 
fears,  that  "  God  is  a  prefent  help." 

This  was  the  fupport  of  Mofcs  his  faith  in  his  fuf- 
ferings,  as  the  apoftle  tells  us,  Heb.  xi.  27.  "  He 
*'  endured,  as  feeing  him  who  is  invifible.*' 

To  conclude  all,  whenever  we  are  under  any  pref- 
fure  or  trouble,  we  Ihould  rebuke  our  own  fears,  and 
challenge  our  anxious  thoughts,  with  David,  Pfal. 
xlii.  II.  "  Why  art  thou  call  down,  O  my  foul  ? 
*'  and  why  art  thou  fo  difquieted  within  me  .'*  truft 
"  ftill  in  God  •,"  beheve  that  God  is  with  thee,  and 
that  omnipotent  goodnefs  ftands  by  thee,  who  can  ' 

and  will  fupport  thee,  and  relieve  thee,  and  deliver 
thee  when  it  feems  beft  to  his  wifdom. 


SERMON     CLV. 

The  eternity  of  God. 


PSAL.  xc.  2. 

Before  the  mountains  were  brought  forth^  or  ever  thou 
hadft  formed  the  earth  and  the  worldy  even  from 
everlajiing  to  everlafiing  thou  art  God. 

THE  immenfity  and    eternity  of  God   areSERM. 
thofe  attributes  which  relate  to  his  nature,  or     ^^^' 
manner  of  being.     Having  fpoken  of  the  former,  I 
proceed  to  confider  the  latter,  from  thcfe  words. 
The  title  of  this  Pfalm  is  the  "  prayer  of  Mofes, 
VoL.VIIL  18 1  *'thc 


The  eternity  of  God, 

^'  the  man  of  God."  He  begins  his  prayer  with  the 
acknowledgment  of  God's  providence  to  his  people 
from  the  beginning  of  the  world  ;  I^ord,  thou 
"  haft  been  our  dwelling  place  from  all  generations  ; 
^*  in  generation  and  generation  ;"  fo  the  Hebrew. 
He  was  well  acquainted  with  the  hiftory  of  the  world, 
and  the  providence  of  God  from  the  beginning  of 
it,  and  as  if  he  had  fpoken  too  little  of  God,  in  fay- 
ing, that  his  providence  had  been  exercifed  in  all  the 
ages  of  the  world,  he  tells  us  here  in  the  text,  that 
.he  was  before  the  world,  and  he  made  it,  he  was 
from  all  eternity,  and  fhould  continue  to  all  eternity 
the  fame.  "  Before  the  mountains  were  brought 
"  forth  ;"  the  moft  firm  and  durable  parts  of  the 
world  ;  the  moft  eminent  and  confpicuous  ;  "  or 
"  ever  thou  had'ft  formed  the  earth  and  the  world  j'* 
before  any  thing  was  created  ;  "  from  everlafting  to 
^'  everlafting  thou  art  God."  In  fpeaking  of  this 
attribute,  I  fhall 

Firft,  give  you  the  exphcation  of  it. 

Secondly,  endeavour  to  prove  that  it  doth  belong 
to  God,  and  ought  to  be  attributed  to  the  divine 
nature. 

Thirdly,  Draw  fome  corollaries  from  the  whole. 

Firft,  For  the  explication  of  it.  Eternity  is  a 
duration  without  bounds  or  limits :  now  there  are 
two  limits  of  duration,  beginning  and  ending  ;  that 
which  hath  always  been  is  without  beginning  ;  that 
which  always  ftiall  be  is  without  ending.  Now  we 
may  conc^^ive  of  a  thing  alv/ays  to  have  been,  and 
the  continuance  of  it's  being  now  to  ceafe,  though 
there  be  no  fuch  thing  in  the  world :  and  there  are 
fome  things  which  have  had  a  beginning  of  their  being, 
but  ftiall  have  no  end,  fhall  always  continue,  as  the 
gngels,  and  fpirits  of  men.  The  firft  of  thefe  the 
I  *'  fchool-= 


^he  efer?2ify  of  God.  3727 

fchoolmen  call  eternity  a  parte  ante^  that  is^  dura-  S  E  R  M. 

•    1  1         .       •  1  •      1  •  V  CLV. 

tion  without  beginning  •,  this  latter  eternity  a  parte 
foft^  a  duration  without  ending  :  But  eternity  abfo- 
Jutely  taken  comprehends  both  thefe,  and  fignifies  an 
infinite  duration  which  had  no  beginning,  nor  fhall 
have  any  end  ;  fo  that  when  we  fay  God  is  eternal, 
we  mean,  that  he  always  was  and  Ihall  be  for  ever  5 
that  he  had  no  beginning  of  life,  nor  fhall  have  any 
end  of  days  ;  but  that,  "  he  is  from  everlalling  to 
"  everlafting,"  as  it  is  here  in  the  text. 

It  is  true  indeed,  that  as  to  God's  eternity  a  parte 
antCy  as  to  his  having  always  been,  the  fcripturc 
doth  not  give  us  any  folicitous  account  of  it  •,  it  only 
tells  us  in  general,  that  God  was  "  before  the  world 
"  was,'^  and  that  "  he  created  it  ;"  it  doth  not 
defcend  to  gratify  our  curiofity,  in  giving  us  any 
account  of  what  God  did  before  he  made  the  worlds 
or  how  he  entertained  himfelf  from  all  eternity  ;  ic 
doth  not  give  us  any  diftindl  account  of  his  infinite 
duration  •,  for  that  had  been  impoffible  for  our  finite 
underftandings  to  comprehend  •,  if  we  lliould  have 
afcended  upward  millions  of  ages,  yet  we  fhould 
never  have  afcended  to  the  top,  never  have  arrived 
at  the  beginning  of  infinity  -,  therefore  the  fcrip- 
ture,  which  was  wrote  to  inftrud  us  in  what  was 
neceflary,  and  not  to  fatisfy  our  curiofity,  tells  us 
this,  that  God  was  "  from  everlafting,  before  the 
"  world  was  made,  and  that  he  laid  the  foundations 
"  of  it." 

So  that  by  the  eternity  of  God  you  are  to  under- 
ftand  "  the  perpetual  continuance  of  his  beings 
"  without  beginning  or  ending." 

I  fhall  not  trouble  you  with  the  inconfiftent  and 
unintelligible  notions  of  the  fchoolmen  ;  tiiat  it  is 
duratio  totafmuly  in  v/hich  we  are  not  to  conceive 

1%  I  %  any 


l^he  eternity  of  God. 

any  fucccefllon,  but  to  imagine  it  an  inflant.  We 
may  as  well  conceive  the  immenfity  of  God  to  be 
a  point,  as  his  eternity  to  be  an  inflant  ;  and  as  ac- 
cording to  our  manner  of  conceiving,  we  muft  necef- 
farily  fuppofe  the  immenfity  of  God  to  be  an  infinite 
expanfion  of  his  eflence,  a  prefence  of  it  to  all  places, 
and  imaginable  fpace  •,  fo  muft  we  fuppofe  the  eter- 
nity of  God  to  be  a  perpetual  continuance,  co-ex- 
iftent  to  all  imaginable  fucceffion  of  ages.  Now  how 
can  that  be  together,  which  muft  neceflarily  be  ima- 
gined to  be  co~exiftent  to  fuccefTions,  let  them  that 
can  conceive. 

Secondly,  For  the  proof  of  this,  I  fliall  attempt 
it  two  ways. 

I.  From  the  didlatcs  of  natural  light  and  reafon. 

II.  From  fcripture  and  divine  revelation. 

I.  From  the  didates  of  natural  reafon.  This  at- 
tribute of  God  is  of  all  other  leaft  difputed  among 
the  philofophers  ;  indeed  all  agree  that  God  is  a 
perfed  and  happy  being,  but  wherein  that  happinefs 
and  perfection  confifts,  they  differ  exceedingly  •,  but 
all  agree  that  God  is  eternal,  and  are  agreed  what  eter- 
nity is,  viz.  "  a  boundlefs  duration  :"  and  how- 
ever they  did  attribute  a  beginning  to  their  heroes 
and  demons,  whence  come  the  genealogies  of  their 
gods  ;  yet  the  fupremc  God,  they  looked  upon  as 
without  beginning  ;  and  it  is  a  good  evidence,  that 
this  perfc6lion  doth  clearly  belong  to  God,  that  Epi- 
curus, who  had  the  lowcft  and  meaneft  conceptions 
of  God,  and  robbed  him  of  as  many  perfedlions,  as 
his  imperfed  reafon  would  let  him,  yet  is  forced  to 
attribute  this  to  him.  Tully  de  Nat.  Deor.  lib.  i. 
faith  to  the  Epicureans,  ui^i  igitur  veftrum  beatum 
i^  ieternum  quibus  dtiobus  verbis  fignificatis  Deum  ? 
"  where  then  is  your  happy  and  eternal  being,  by 

**  which 


CLV. 


Tthe  eternity  of  God.'  3739 

"  which  two  epithets   you  expiefs  God?'*   AndSE^RM. 
Lucretius,  who  hath  undertaken  to  reprefent  to  the 
world  the  do6lrine  of  Epicurus,  gives  this  account 
of  the  divine  nature. 

Omnis  enim  fer  fe  divum  natura  necejje  efty 
Immortali  ^vo  fumma  cum  pace  fruatur, 

"  It  is  abfolutely  neceflary  to  the  nature  of  the  gods, 
*'  to  pafs  an  eternity  in  profound  peace  and  quiet/* 

The  poets  who  had  the  wildeft  notions  of  God, 
yet  they  conftantly  give  them  the  title  of  oiddvocloi  ; 
the  heathen  never  mention  the  name  of  God,  with- 
out this  attribute,  dii  immortaks  !  immortal  gods  ! 
was  their  ordinary  exclamation  •,  and  they  fwear  con-^ 
ftantly  by  this  attribute,  deos  teftor  mmor tales  ; 
and  to  mention  no  more,  Tully  faith  exprefly,  Nos 
Beum  niji  fempternum  intelligere  qui  pojfumus  ? 
"  How  can  we  conceive  of  God,  but  as  an  eternal 
"  being?" 

Now  the  reafon  of  this  is  evident,  bccauie  it 
would  be  the  greateft  imperfedlion  we  could  attribute 
to  his  being  •,  and  the  more  perfed  his  being  were 
otherwife,  the  greater  imperfedlion  would  it  be  for 
fuch  a  being  to  die  •,  fo  excellent  a  nature  to  ceafe 
to  be  j  it  would  be  an  infinite  abafement  to  all  his 
other  perfedions  ;  his  power,  and  wifdom,  and 
goodnels,  that  thefe  fhould  all  be  perifhihg.  Nay 
it  would  hmder  feveral  of  his  perfections,  and 
contradid  their  very  being :  his  felf-exiftence  ; 
had  he  not  always  been,  he  had  not  been  of  him- 
felf ;  his  necefTary  exiftence  ♦,  for  that  is  not  necef- 
farily,  which  may  at  any  tim,e  not  be,  or  ceafe  to 
be  what  it  is  ;  and  it  would  much  abate  the  duty 
of  the  creature ;  v/e  could  not  have  that  aflurancc 
of  his  promife,  and  that  fecurity  of  the  recom- 
pence  of  the  next  life,    if  the  continuance   of  his 

being, 


^74^  ^^^^  d'/e'r;///)'  of  God. 

S  E  R  M.  being,  who  fhould  be  the  difpenfer  of  them,  were 


CLV. 

uncertain. 


Now  thefe  abfurdities  and  inconveniencies  follow- 
ing from  the  denial  of  this  perfection  to  God,  is  fuf- 
ficient  evidence  that  it  belongs  to  him ;  for  I  told 
you  the  perfedions  of  God  cannot  be  proved  byway 
of  demonftration,  but  only  by  way  of  convidiiion, 
by  fhewing  the  abfurdity  of  the  contrary. 

11.  From  fcripture  and  divine  revelation.  There 
are  innumerable  places  to  this  purpofe  which  fpeak 
of  the  eternity  of  God  dircdly,  and  by  confequence  : 
by  confequence  thofe  words,  2  Pet.  iii.  8.  ''  One 
*'  day  with  the  Lord  is  as  a  thoufand  years,  and 
*^  a  thoufand  years  as  one  day  ;"  which,  words, 
however  interpreters  have  troubled  themfelves  about 
them,  being  afraid  of  a  contradi6lion  in  them,  yet 
the  plain  meaning  of  them  is  this,  that  fuch  is  the 
infinite  duration  of  God,  that  all  meafures  of  time 
bear  no  proportion  to  it  ;  for  that  this  is  the  plain 
meaning,  appears  by  this  xcth  Pfahn,  out  of  which 
they  are  cited,  "  for  a  thoufand  years  in  thy  fight 
"  are  but  as  yefterday,  when  it  is  pad,  and  as  a 
**  watch  in  the  night,"  that  is  as  the  time  pall,  as 
a  few  hours  flept  away,  for  that  is  the  meaning  of 
"  a  watch  in  the  night,"  that  is  as  nothing-,  now 
St.  Peter's  converfion  of  the  words,  "  one  day  is 
"  as  a  thoufand  years',  and  a  thoufand  years  as  one 
*'  day"  only  fignifies  this,  that  the  longeft  dura- 
tion of  time  is  fo  inconfiderable  to  God,  that  it  is  as 
the  fhorteil,  that  is,  bears  no  proportion  to  the  eter- 
nity of  God. 

But  dire6lly,  the  fcripture  frequently  mentions 
this  attribute,  he  is  called  the  "  everlafting  God," 
Gen.  xxi.  33.  "  The  eternal  God,"  Deut.  xxxiii. 
27,  and  which  is  to  the  fame  purpofe,  "  he  that 

*^  inhabiteth 


The  eternity  of  God.  374^ 

*^  inhabiteth  eternity,"  Ifa.  Ivii.  15.  And  this  as^ER  IvI. 
it  is  attributed  to  him  in  refpe6l  of  his  being,  fo  in 
refped  of  all  his  other  perfections,  Pfal.  ciii.  17. 
"  The  mercy  of  the  Lord  is  from  everlafting  to 
"  everlafting.  Rom.  i.  20.''  "  his  eternal  power.'* 
I  Tim.  i.  17.  ''  The  king  eternal. '*  Thofe  doxo- 
logies  which  the  fcripture  ufeth  are  but  acknow- 
ledgments of  this  attribute.  "  BJefTed  be  the  Lord 
"  for  ever  and  ever,"  Neh.  ix.  5.  "  To  whom  be 
"  glory,  and  honour,  and  dominion,  for  ever  and 
"  ever.   Gal.  i.  5.  and  in  many  other  places. 

Hither  we  may  refer  all  thofe  places  which  fpeak 
of  him  as  without  beginning,  Pfal.  xciii.  2.  "  Thou 
"  art  from  everlafting."  Mich.  v.  2.  "  Whofe  go- 
"  ings  forth  have  been  from  everlafting."  Hab.  i. 
12.  "  Art  not  thou  from  everlafting  !  O  Lord  !" 
And  thofe  which  fpeak  of  the  perpetual  continuance 
of  his  duration  ;  Pfal.  cii.  24,  25,  26,  27.  "Thy 
*'  years  are  throughout  all  generations,  of  old  thou 
"  haft  laid  the  foundations  of  the  earth,  and  the 
"  heavens  are  the  work  of  thy  hands  •,  they  ftiall 
"  perifh,  but  thou  fhalt  endure  ;  yea  all  of  them 
"  riiall  wax  old  like  a  garment,  and  as  a  vefture 
"  fhalt  thou  change  them,  and  they  ftiall  be  chang- 
"  ed  ;  but  thou  art  the  fame,  and  thy  years  fhall 
"  have  no  end." 

And  thofe  which  fpeak  of  him  as  the  firft  and 
the  laft  ;  Ifa.  xliii.  10.  "  Before  me  there  was  no 
"  God  formed,  neither  Ihall  there  be  any  after  me. 
*'  I  am  the  firft,  and  I  am  the  laft,  and  befides  me 
"  there  is  no  God."  And  to  mention  no  more,  thofe 
which  fpeak  of  his  being,  as  co-exiftent  to  all  dif- 
ference of  time,  paft,  prefent,  and  to  come,  Rev.  i. 
8.  "  I  am  alpha,  and  omega,  the  beginning,  and 
^*  the  ending,  faith  the  Lord,  which  is,  and  which 
[[  was,  and  which  is  to  come,^  Thirdlyj 


3742  TX^  eternity  of  Gov>. 

6  E  R  M.       Thirdly,  I  Ihall  from  hence  draw, 

I.  Some  do6lrinal  corollaries. 

II.  Some  pradical  inferences. 
I.  Doiftrinal  corollaries,  that  you  may  fee  how 

the  perfedions  of  God   depend  one  upon  another, 
and  may  be  deduced  one  from  another. 

1.  Corol.  From  the  eternity  of  God  we  may  in* 
fer  that  he  is  of  himfelf.  That  which  always  is,  can 
have  nothing  before  it  to  be  a  caufe  of  it's  being. 

2.  Corol.  We  may  hence  infer  the  necefTity  of  his 
being.  It  is  neceflfary  every  thin^  fliould  be,  when 
it  is  ;  now  that  which  is  always  is  abfolutely  necef- 
fary,  becaufe  always  fo. 

3.  Corol.  The  immutability  of  the  divine  nature; 
for  being  always,  he  is  neceflarily,  and  being  necef- 
farily,  he  cannot  but  be  what  he  is ;  a  change  of  his 
being  is  asimpoflible  as  a  cefifation.  Therefore  the 
Pfalmift  puts  his  immutability  and  eternity  together. 
Pfal.  cii.  27.  "  But  thou  art  the  fame,  and  thy 
*'  years  fliall  have  no  end." 

II.  By  way  of  pradical  inference  or  application. 

I.  The  confideration  of  God's  eternity  may  ferve 
for  the  fupport  of  our  faith.  This  Mofes  here  ufeth 
as  aground  of  his  faith  ;  "  Lord,  thou  haft  been 
*'  our  dwelling-place,  in  all  generations,  before  the 
*'  mountains  were  brought  forth,  &c."  Pfal.  Ixii, 
8.  "  Truft  in  him  at  all  times,  ye  people."  His 
immenfity  is  an  argument  why  all  fhould  truft  in 
him,  he  is  a  prefent  help  to  all  •,  and  why  they 
fhould  truft  in  him  at  all  times,  his  eternity  is  an 
argument,  Deut.  xxxiii.  27.  "  The  eternal  God 
"  is  thy  refuge,  and  underneath  are  the  everlafting 
*'  arms."  There  are  two  attributes  which  are  the 
proper  objcfls  of  our  faith  and  confidence,  God's 
goodnefsj  and  his  power,  both  thefe  are  eternal ; 

"  The 


^he  eternity  of  K^OT).  3743 

^^  The  2:oodnefs  of  the  Lord  enduretli  for  ever,"  SERM. 

.  CLV. 

as  it  is  frequently  in  the  Pfahns  :  and  his  power  is 
eternal ;  the  apoille  fpeaks  of  his  eternal  power, 
as  well  as  godhead  \  Rom.  i.  20.  Ifa.  xxvi.  4. 
^'  Truil  ye  in  the  Lord  for  ever,  for  in  the  Lord 
*'  Jehovah  is  everlafting  llrength/'  Ifa.  xl.  28. 
**  The  everlafting  God,  the  Lord,  the  Creator  of 
*^  the  ends  of  the  earth  fainteth  not,  neither  is 
"  weary." 

We  cannot  truft  in  men,  becaufe  there  is  nothinor; 
in  man  to  be  a  foundation  of  our  confidence  •,  his 
good  will  towards  us  may  change,  his  power  may 
faint,  and  he  may  grow  weary  ;  or  if  thefe  con- 
tinue, yet  they  that  have  a  mind  and  a  power  to 
help  us,  themfelves  may  fail  ;  therefore  thePfalmift: 
ufeth  this  confideration  of  mens  mortality,  to  take 
us  off  from  confidence  in  man,  Pfal.  cxlvi.  3,  ^-^ 
*^  Put  not  your  truft  in  princes,  nor  in  the  fon  of 
"  man,  in  whom  there  is  no  help  ;  his  breath  go- 

eth  forth,  he  returneth  to  his  earth,  in  that  very 

day  his  thoughts  perifh."  Ifa.  ii.  22.  *'  Ceafe  ye 
^'  from  man,  whofe  breath  is  in  his  noftrils  ;  for 
^^  wherein  is  he  to  be  accounted  of.^"  The  greateft 
of  the  fons  of  men  are  but  *'  lying  refuges  to  the 
"  everlafting  God  j"  they  are  but  *'  broken  reeds 
*'  to  the  rock  of  ages." 

And  this  m^ay  fupport  our  faith,  not  only  in  refe- 
rence to  our  own  condition  for  the  future,  but  in  re- 
ference to  ourpofterity,  and  the  condition  of  God's 
church  to  the  end  of  the  world.  When  we  die  we 
may  leave  ours  and  the  church  in  his  hands,  whd 
lives  for  ever,  and  reigns  for  ever.  The  enemies 
of  God's  church,  and  thofe  who  have  the  moft  ma- 
licious deligns  againft  it,  whatever  fliare  they  may 
have  in  the  affairs  of  the  world,  they  can  but  do- 

Vol.  VIIL  18  K  mineel-' 


(C 


I'he  eternity  of  God, 

mlnecr  for  a  v/hile,  they  muft  "  die,  and  that  very 
"  day  their  thoughts  perifh  :  but  thy  throne,  O 
"  God,   is  forever  and  ever." 

2.  For  the  encouragement  of  our  obedience.    We 
ferve  the  God  who  can  give  us  an  everlafling  reward. 
The  reward  of  the  next  hfe  is  called  "  eternal  life, 
"  an   eternal   weight   of   glory,"    2  Cor.   iv.   17. 
*'  Eternal  falvation,"  Heb.  v.  9.  "  An  eternal  in- 
*'  heritance,"  Heb.  ix.  15.    That  place  where  good 
men  fliall  be  rewarded  is  called,  "  Everlafling  habi- 
"  tationSj,"  Luke  xvi.  9.    "A  houfe  eternal  in  the 
"  heavens,"    2  Cor.  v.  i.     As  the  proniife  of  our 
future  reward  is  founded  in  the  goodnefs  of  God, 
and  the  greatnefs  of  it  in  his  power,  fo  the  duration 
of  it  in  his  eternity.     Now  what  an  encouragement 
is  this  to  us,  that  we  ferve  him  and  fuffer  for  him 
who  lives  for  ever,  and  will  make  us  happy  for 
ever }    When    we    ferve    the    great    men  of  this 
w^orld,  though  we  be  fecure  of  their  affedion,  yet 
we  are  uncertain  of  their  lives  ;    and  this   difcou- 
rageth  many,  and  makes  men  worfhip  the  rifing 
fun,  and  many  times  takes  off  mens  eyes  from  the 
king,  to  his  fuccefTor :  but  he  that  ferves  God,  ferves 
*'  the  king  everlafling,"  as  the   apoflle  calls  him, 
who  Vv^ill  live  to  difpcnfe  rewards  to  all  thofe  who  are 
faithful  to  him. 

3.  For  the  terror  of  wicked  men.  The  fentencc 
which  fhall  be  pall  upon  men  at  the  day  of  judg- 
ment, is  called  "  Eternal  judgment,"  Heb.  vi.  2. 
becaufe  it  decides  mens  eternal  flate ;  the  punifhmcnt 
that  fliall  follow  this  fcntence,  which  fliall  pafs  upon 
the  wicked,  is  called,  "  Everlafliing  punilhment," 
Matth.  XXV.  36.  "  Everlafl:ing  fire,"  Matth.  xxv. 
41.  ''  Everlafling  deftrucSl  on,"  2  TheflT.  ii.  9. 
"  The  vengeance  of  eternal  fire,"  Jude  7.  "  The 

"  fmoke 


^he  eterjiity  of  God.  1 74  C 

"  fmoke  of  the  bottomlefs  pit,"  is  faid,  "  to  a-  S  K  R  M 
*'  fcend  for  ever  and  ever,"  Rev.  xiv.  ii.  and  the  ^^^' 
wicked  "  to  be  tormented  day  and  night,  for  ever 
"  and  ever,  Rev.  xx.  lo.  Now  as  the  punifhment 
of  wicked  men  is  founded  in  the  juflice  of  God  ; 
and  the  greatnefs  of  it  in  his  power  ;  fo  the  peroe- 
tuity  and  continuance  of  it  in  his  eternity.  The 
apoftle  faith,  Heb.  x.  3:.  "  It  is  a  fearful  thing  to 
"  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living  God  j"  becaufe 
he  that  "  lives  for  ever  can  punilli  for  ever  ;"  as 
the  eternal  demerit  of  fin  feeds,  and  animates,  and 
keeps  alive  the  never  dying  worm,  fo  the  v/rath  of 
the  eternal  God  blows  up  the  eternal  flame. 

How  fhould  this  awaken  in  us  a  fear  of  the  eter- 
nal God  !  Sinners,  what  a  folly  is  it,  for  "  the 
*'  pleafures  of  fin,  which  are  but  for  a  feafon,"  to 
incenfe  that  juftice  which  will  punifh  and  torment 
you  for  ever  !  As  good  men  ihall  have  the  everlail- 
ing  God  for  their  reward,  and  their  happinefs  ; 
fo  wicked  men  ihall  have  him  for  their  judge  and 
avenger. 

We  fear  the  wrath  of  men,  whofe  power  is  fhort, 
and  "  whofe  breath  is  in  their  noftrils,"  who  can 
afflidl  but  a  little,  and  for  a  little  while.  Doll  thou 
fear  "  man  that  fhall  die,  and  the  fon  of  man  that 
"  fhall  be  made  as  grafs  ?"  and  is  not  the  wrath  of 
the  eternal  God  much  more  terrible  .^  Luke  xii. 
4,  5.  And  I  fay  unto  you,  my  friends,  be  not  afraid 
"  of  them  that  kill  the  body,  and  after  that  have 
"  no  more  that  they  can  do  :  but  I  will  forewarn 
*^  you  whom  ye  Ihall  fear  ^  fear  him,  who  after  he 
"  ha'th  killed,  hath  power  to  cafl  into  hell,  yea,  I 
"  fay  unto  you,  fear  him."  The  v/rath  of  man  is 
deipicable,  becaufe  it  hath  bounds  and  limits  ;  the 
fury  of  man  can  but  reach  to  the  body,  it  can  go 

iS  K  2  no 


374^  ^^^^  i^^cofnprehenjiblenefs  of  God: 

no  farther  ;  it  expires  with  this  life  ;  it  cannot  fol^ 
low  us  beyond  the  grave  :  but  the  wrath  of  the 
eternal  God  doth  not  only  reach  the  body^  but  the 
foul  ',  it  is  not  confined  to  this  life,  but  purfues  us 
to  the  other  world,  and  extends  itfelf  to  all  eternity, 
"  Fear  liim,  who  after  he  hath  killed,  hath  pow-r 
*^  er  to  call  into  hell/'  that  is,  to  inflidt  eternal 
torments  >  '*'  yea,  I  fay  unto  you,   fear  him." 


SERMON     CLVI, 

The  incomprehenfiblenefs  of  God, 


JOB  xi.  7. 

C^nfi  thou  hy  fe arching  find  out  God  ?  Canp;  thou 
find  out  the  Almighty  unto  perfeciion  ? 

CLVI. '   "T  ^  treating  of  the  properties  and  perfeftions  of 


God,  I  fliall  at  prefent  confider  that  which  re- 
fults  from  the  infinite  excellency  of  his  nature  and 
perfedion,  compared  with  the  im.perfedlion  of  our 
underfcandings,  which  is  commonly  called,  the  in- 
comprehenfiblenefs of  God.  This  you  have  ex- 
prefied  here  in  the  words  of  Zophar,  *'■  Canfl  thou 
^'  by  fearching  find  out  God  ?"   &c. 

There  is  no  great  difficulty  in  the  words  ;  "  Canfb 

*'  thou  by  fearching  find  out  God,"  potefne  pervef- 

tigare  intima  Bei^  fo  Caftalio  tranilatts  it  -,  doft  thou 

know  God   intimately,  and  thoroughly  v»ithin   and 

y/ithout  ?  Canft  thou  pierce  into  the  centre  of  his 

perfecStions, 


'^he  incomprehenfibleriefs  of  God,  3747 

perfeftlons,  and  dive  into  the  bottom  of  them  ?  And,  S  E  R  M. 
^'  Canft  thou  find  out  the  Almighty  to  perfedlion  ?" 
Canft  thou  find  out  the  Almighty,  ufque  ad  tiltimay 
to  the  very  laft  and  utmoft  of  him  ?  fo  as  thou 
canft  fay  after  a  thorough  fearch  and  enquiry,  there 
is  no  perfedion  in  God  beyond  this,  there  is  nothing 
of  him  now  that  remains  to  be  known ;  this  he  is, 
and  no  other  ;  that  he  is,  and  no  otherwife ;  this  he 
can  do,  and  no  more  •,  hither  doth  his  knowledge, 
and  power,  and  wifdom  reach,  and  no  farther. 

"  Canft  thou  do  this  ?"  Thefe  interrogations  have 
the  force  of  a  vehement  negation  ;  as  if  he  had  faid, 
"  No,  thou  canft  not  -,  God  is  unfearchable,  he  is 
"  incomprehenfible." 

The  two  queftions  in  the  text  feem  to  be  only 
two  feveral  expreflions  of  the  fame  thing.  The  firft 
queftion  is  undoubtedly  general,  concerning  the  na- 
ture and  perfections  of  God  in  general  •,  "  Canft 
"  thou  by  fearching  find  out.  God  ?"  Canft  thou 
by  the  moft  diligent  fearch  and  enquiry  come  to  a 
perfect  knowledge  and  j^inderftanding  of  him  ? 

The  fecond  queftion  may  feem  to  be  a  particular 
jnftance  to  the  general  truth  implied  in  the  firft  ques- 
tion ;  he  feems  to  inftance  in  his  power  ;  as  if  he 
had  faid,  "  God  is  unfearchable,"  and  then  had  in- 
ftanced  in  a  particular  perfe6lion,  *•  the  power  of 
•'  God,  canft  thou  by  fearching  find  out  God?" 
Thou  canft  not  comprehend  the  divine  nature  and 
pcrfedions  in  general ;  "  Canft  thou  find  out  the 
Almighty  unto  perfedion  ;"  Confider  particularly 
his  power,  and  fee  if  thou  canft  know  the  utmoft  of 
that.  But  I  rather  think,  that  the  latter  queftion  is 
altogether  the  fame  in  fenfe  with  the  former  ;  and 
that  the  attribute  of  Almighty,  which  is  here  given 
to  God,  is  ufed  by  way  of  defcription,  and  not  in- 
tended 


-5748  ^^^  iJicomprehenfibleitep  of  God. 

SE  R  M.  tended  by  way  of  inftance.  ''  Canftthou  find  out 
^^^^'  "  the  Almighty,"  thatis,  God,  "  unto  perfeaion?'* 
Which  way  foever  we  take  the  words,  it  is  not  much 
,  material  ;  we  may  ground  this  obfervation  upon 
them  : 

That  God  is  incomprehenfible. 

This  term  or  attribute  is  a  relative  term,  and  fpeaks 
a  relation  between  an  objed  and  a  faculty,  between 
God  and  a  created  underftanding  •,  fo  that  the  mean- 
ing of  it  is  plainly  this,  that  no  created  underftand- 
ing can  comprehend  God,  that  is,  have  a  perfed:  and 
exadl  knowledge  of  him,  fuch  a  knowledge  as  is 
adequate  to  the  perfedion  of  the  objed.  Or  thus, 
the  nature  and  perfections  of  God  are  above  the  un- 
derftanding of  any  of  his  creatures  ;  it  is  only  his 
own  infinite  underftanding  that  can  frame  a  perfedt 
idea  of  his  own  perfedlion.  God  knows  himfelf,  his 
own  underftanding  comprehends  his  own  perfe6lions : 
but  he  is  "  incomprehenfible  to  his  creatures." 

Indeed,  there  is  nothing  more  obvious  than  God  ;f 
for  "  he  is  not  far  from  every  one  of  us,  in  him  we 
"  live,  and  move,  and  have  our  being  ;"  there 
needs  no  great  fearch  to  find  out  there  is  a  God  ; 
''  an  eternal  power  and  deity  are  clearly  feen  in  the 
*'  things  which  are  made,"  as  the  apoftle  tells  us  ; 
but  the  manner  of  the  being,  and  properties,  and 
perfedlions  of  this  God,  thefe  cannot  be  compre- 
hended by  a  ^vi\XJt  underftanding.  I  ftiall  prove  the 
doftrine,  and  then  apply  it. 

Plrft,  For  the  proof  it.  I  will  attempt  it  thefe 
three  ways. 

I.  By  way  of  inftance,  or  indu6lion  of  particulars. 

II.  By  way  of  convi6tion. 

III.  By  giving  the  clear  reafon  of  it. 
I.  By  way  of  inftance.     And  I  Ihall  give  you  in- 

ftances 


^he  incomprehenfiblenefs  of  Got).  3749 

(lances  both  on  the  part  of  the  obje6t,  and  of  the  S  E  R  M. 
fubjedl ',  or  the  perfons  who  are  capable  of  knowing 
God  in  any  degree. 

I.  On  the  part  of  the  object.  The  nature  of  God, 
the  excellency  and  perfedlion  of  God,  the  works  and 
ways  of  God  are  above  our  thoughts  and  apprehen- 
fions.  The  nature  of  God  ;  it  is  vafl  and  infinite. 
Job  xxxvi.  26.  "  God  is  great,  and  we  know  him 
"  not."  Job  xxxvii.  23.  "  Touching  the  Almigh- 
"  ty,  we  cannot  find  him  out.'*  Pfal.  cxlv.  3.  "  His 
"  greatnefs  is  unfearchable." 

The  excellencies  and  perfedions  of  God  •,  his  im- 
menfity,  2  Chron.  ii.  6,  "  The  heaven  of  heavens 
*'  cannot  contain  him  :"  The  eternity  of  his  durati- 
on, "  from  evcrlafting  to  everlafting  he  is  God.'* 
We  cannot  imagine  any  limits  of  his  prefence,  nor 
bounds  of  his  duration :  the  infinitenefs  of  his  know- 
ledge, Pfal.  cxlvii.  5.  "  His  underftanding  is  infi- 
"  nite."  When  we  think  of  the  wifdom  and  know- 
ledge of  God,  our  beft  way  is  to  fall  into  admirati- 
on, Rom.xi.  35.  "  O  the  depth  of  the  riches  both 
*'  of  the  wifdom  and  knowledge  of  God  !" 

Whereas  the  fcripture  fpeaks  of  thofe  perfedions 

of  God,  which  the  creatures  do  in  fome  meafure  and 

degree  partake  of,  as  his  goodnefs,  and  power,  and 

wifdom,  and  holinefs,  and  immortality,  it  attributes 

them  in  fuch  a  peculiar  and  divine  manner  to  God, 

as  doth  exclude  and  fhut  out  the  creature  from  any 

claim  or  ihare  or  title  to  them,  Matt.  xix.   16,  17. 

•'  Why  called  thou  me  good  ;  there  is  none  good 

*'  but  one,    that  is  God."     1  Tim.  vi.  15,    16. 

.**  Who  is  the  blefTed  and  only  potentate,  who  only 

*'  hath  immortality."   i  Tim,  i.   17.     "  The  only 

*'  wife  God,"  Rev.  xv.  4.  "  For  thou  only  art 

**  holy."     In  fo  inconceiyeable  a  manner  doth  God 

3  poliefs 


375^  TI6^  iticomprehenfiblenefs  ^  Go©. 

S  E  R  M.  poflefs  thefe  perfedlions  which  he  communicates,  and 
we  can  only  underfband  them  as  he  communicates 
them,  and  not  as  he  pofTefTes  them  -,  fo  that  when 
we  confider  any  of  thefe  divine  perfedionSj  we  muft 
not  frame  notions  of  them  contrary  to  what  they  are 
in  the  creature,  nor  muft  we  Hmit  them  by  what 
they  are  in  the  creature,  but  fay,  the  goodnefs  and 
the  wifdom  of  God  are  all  this  which  is  in  the  crea^ 
ture,  and  much  more  which  I  am  not  able  to  com- 
prehend ;  the  tranfcendent  degree,  and  the  fingulari- 
ty  of  thefe  divine  perfe6lions,  which  are  communis 
cable,  is  beyond  what  we  are  able  to  conceive. 

The  works  of  God,  they  are  likewife  unfearch- 
able  ;   the  works   of  creation  and  of  redemption. 
Job  V.  9.     "  Which  doth  great  things,  and  un- 
*'  fearchable,  marvellous  things,  paft  finding  out :" 
and  then  he  inftanceth  in   the  works  of  God,  Job 
xxvi.   14.     "  Lo,  thefe  are  part  of  his  ways  :  But 
*'  how  little  a  portion  is  heard  of  him  ?    and  the 
*'  thunder  of  his  voice  who  can  underftand  ?"  So 
that  he  tells  us  exprefly,   we  cannot  find   out  the 
works  of  God,  we  do  but  know  part  of  them.  The 
queftion  which  he  puts.  Job  xxxvii.   16.     "  Doft 
'*  thou  know  the  wondrous  works  of  him  that  is 
*'  perfe6]:  in  knowledge  ?"  can  only  be  anfwered  by 
the  words  of  the   Pfalmift,    Pfal.  civ.  24.     "  O 
*'  Lord,  how  wonderful  are  thy  works  !  in  wif- 
*'  dom  haft  thou  made  them  all."     The  work  of 
redemption  ;  in  this  there  fhines  forth  fuch  wifdom^ 
mercy,  and  love,  as  our  underftandings  cannot  reach  ; 
this  work  is  called  "  the  wifdom  of  God  in  a  my- 
*'ftery,"  hidden  wifdom,  <ro(pio(,  dTfozsK^vf^vji^fiyi  Con 
ii.   y.  The  mercy,  and  grace,  and  love  of  it  is  call- 
ed, "  The  riches  of  God's  mercy,  and  the  exceed- 
"  ing  riches  of  his  grace>"  Eph.  ii.-  4,  7.     Now 

riches 


^he  incomprehenftbleriefs  of  God.  375^ 

riches  is  when  you  cannot  teli  the  utmofl  of  them,  S  R  R  M 
pauperis  eji  niimerare.  Eph.  iii.  i8,  19.  "  That  v 
*'  yc  may  be  able  to  comprehend  with  all  faints,  what 
*'  is  the  breadth,  and  length,  and  depth,  and  height, 
"  and  to  know  the  love  of  Christ,  which  palTcth 
*'  knowledge."  When  we  have  the  largeft  appre- 
henfions  of  this  love,  fo  that  we  think  we  compre- 
hend it  and  know  it,  "  it  pafleth  knowledge  j"  yea, 
the  effeds  of  God's  power  and  love,  which  he  mani- 
fefts  in  believers,  are  unfpeakable  \  for  "  he  is  ablctp 
**  do  for  us  exceeding  abundantly  above  what  we 
*'  can  afk  or  think,  according  to  the  power  which 
*'  worketh  in  us,"  Eph.  iii.  20.  The  peace  which 
guards  their  fouls  "  pafleth  all  underftanding,"  Phil, 
iv.  7.  Thofe  joys  which  fill  their  hearts  are  not 
to  be  exprefled  ;  i  Pet.  i.  8.  we  read  of  *'  joy 
*'  unfpeakable  and  full  of  glory."  The  happinefs 
which  they  hope  for  is  inconceiveable  \  it  is  that 
which  *'  eye  hath  not  feen,  nor  ear  heard,  nor  hath 
**  entered  into  the  heart  of  man,  which  God  hath 
*'  laid  up  for  us." 

The  ways  of  God's  providence  are  not  to  be 
traced,  Pfal.  Ixxvii.  19.  "  Thy  way  is  in  the  fea,  and 
*'  thy  paths  in  the  great  waters,  and  thy  footfteps 
**  are  not  known."  Ecclef.  iii.  11.  "  No  man 
*'  can  find  out  the  work  that  God  maketh  from 
"  the  beginning  to  the  end."  We  are  but  of  yefter- 
day,  and  know  nothing.  When  we  look  upon 
God's  providence,  we  take  a  part  from  the  whole, 
and  confider  it  by  itfelf,  without  relation  to  the  whole 
fcries  of  his  difpenfation  •,  we  cannot  fee  the  whole 
of  God's  providence  at  one  view,  and  never  fee 
from  the  beginning  of  the  works  of  God  to  the  end  ; 
therefore  our  knowledge  of  them  muil  needs  be  very 
imperfed,  and  full  of  miftakes,  and  falfe  judgments 
'Vol.  VIII.  18  L  of 


CLVJ. 


3752  7 he  i?icomprche?7fiblen€fs  &f  God, 

B  ^^^^^^-  of  things  ;  we  cannot,  by  our  petty  and  fhort-fight- 
dciigns,  judge  of  the  works  of  God,  and  the 
defigns  of  providence  •,  for  *'  our  ways  are  not  as 
''  his  ways,  nor  our  thoughts  as  his  thoughts  -,  but 
*'  as  the  heavens  are  high  above  the  earth,  fo  are  his 
*'  ways  above  pur  ways,  and  his  thoughts  above  our 
"  thoughts,"  Ifa.  Iv.  8,  9.  The  ways  of  God's 
mercy,  Pfal.  ciii.  '^  As  the  heavens  are  high  above 
♦'  the  earth,  fo  great  is  God's  mercy."  Pfal.  cxxxix, 
17,  18.  "  How  precious  are  thy  thoughts  unto  me  ? 
"  how  great  is  the  fum  of  them  ?  If  I  fhould  count 
*'  them,  they  are  more  in  number  than  the  fand.'* 
And  the  ways  of  God's  judgments ;  thefeverity  and 
grcatnefs  of  his  judgment  is  not  known,  Pfal.  xc. 
*'  Who  knoweth  the  power  of  thine  anger  ?  And 
^'  who  piay  {land  before  thee  when  thou  art  angry  ?'* 
And  the  reafons  of  his  judgments  are  unfearchable, 
Pfal.xxxvi.  6.  "  Thy  judgments  are  a  great  deep.'* 
Rom.  xi.  25^  ■'  How  unfearchable  are  his  judg- 
*'  ments,  and  his  ways  pafl  finding  out  1"  Thefe  arq 
the  inflances  on  the  part  of  the  objed:. 

2.  On  the  part  of  the  fubjed,  or  the  perfons  ca- 
pable of  knowing  God  in  any  meafure.  The  per- 
fed:  knowledge  of  God  is  above  a  finite  creature's 
underftanding.  Wicked  men  are  ignorant  of  God, 
^d  full  of  falfe  apprehenfions  of  him  j  the  fcfip- 
ture  gives  this  defcription  of  them  *,  they  are  thofe 
that  "know  not  God,"  2  Thell'.  i.  7.  Wicked  men 
are  fo  far  from  knowing  God  to  perfection,  that 
they  have  hardly  any  true  knowledge  of  him  j  for 
^s  the  man  himfelf  is,  fo  will  God  feem  to  be  to 
him  i  the  idea  and  notions  which  men  have  of  God, 
|s  but  the  pidure  of  their  own  complexion.  To  a 
true  knowledge  there  is  required  likenefs  ♦,  a  man'5 
jpnind  muft  be  like  the  thing  he  would  underftand  ; 

?hcre^ 


^he  incothp7'ehe7iJiblenefs  of  GoX)  375. 1 

therefore  the  apoflle  tells  us,  "the  natural,"  or  S  E  R  M. 
*'  animal  man,  doth  not  receive  the  things  of  God/' 
he  is  not  capable  of  them,  becaufe  his  mind  is  unfuit- 
able  to  them,  he  is  ntXyj^vi^  to\>  ccofj.a]^^  full  of  body, 
and  he  cannot  reUfh  fpiritual  things  •,  even  thofe  na- 
tural notions  which  wicked  men  have  of  God,  are 
ftrangeJy  tindured  and  obfcured  by  the  temper  of 
the  hian  ;  they  are  lux  feptiUa  in  opacd  materia^  light 
buried  and  hid  in  matter  and  darknefs,  in  the  blacknefa 
of  a  foul  and  impure  heart ;  fo  that  there  is  no  queili- 
on  of  them,  whether  they  comprehend  God  or  not. 

But  good  men  "  cannot  find  out  God,"  they 
have  fome  falfe  apprehenfions  of  him  ;  all  their  ap- 
prehenfions  are  dark,  have  much  of  obfcurity  in 
them  ;  they  know  God  to  falvation,  but  not  to  per- 
fedlion  ;  in  this  Hfe  we  do  but  know  God  in  part, 
that  is,  in  comparifon  of  the  knowledge  which  oui* 
natures  are  capable  of. 

But  I  will  inftance  yet  higher  •,  the  angels  and  the 
Ipirits  of  juft  men  made  perfedj  though  they  have 
true  apprehenfions  of  God,  yet  they  do  not  arrive  to 
perfect  knowledge  of  him,  they  cannot  perveftigare 
ultima^  know  the  utmoft  of  God  ^  the  cherubims 
themfelves  are  continually  looking  at  the  mercy  feat. 
To  which  the  apoftle  alludes,  i  Pet.  i.  12.  when  ha 
tells  us^  the  myftery  of  God's  mercy  in  the  gofpel  was 
a  thing  which  the  angels  defired  to  pry  into.  In  hea- 
ven "that  whichls  in  part  fhall be  done  away,"  that 
is,  our  knowledge  fhall  be  as  perfcdlas  o\ir  natures  are 
capable  \  but  it  ihall  be  finite.  When  v/e  fliall  "  fee 
*'  God  face  to  face/'  that  is,  have  an  immediate  vi- 
fion  of  him,  "  and  fee  him  as  he  is,"  that  is,  not  hav- 
ing our  underilandings  tindlured  by  any  luft  or  paf- 
fion  that  may  darken  our  mind,  or  mifreprefent  the 
Qbjed  j  for  the  apoflle  tells  us,  ''  w€  fhall  fee,him,  be- 
18  L  2  "  cauf^ 


o 


754  The  Incomprehenfiblenefs  of  God, 


S  E  RM.  ''  cciufc  we  fhall  be  like  him  •,"  yet  then  we  Ihall  have 
ihort  and  undcquate  apprehenfions  of  him,we  fhall  flill 
retain  our  limited  natures  and  finite  underflandings. 

II.  By  way  of  convidion.  Doft  thou  know  per- 
ieclly  the  nature  of  a  finite  fpirit,  the  perfection  and  the 
power  of  an  angel,  how  being  immaterial  they  can 
acl  upon  matter,  and  move  that  which  can  make  no 
rcfiflance  to  a  fpirit  ?  Doft  thou  know  how  they  can 
move  themfclves  to  a  great  diftance  in  a  moment, 
and  dart  themfelves  from  one  part  of  the  world  to 
another  ?  Doft  thou  know  how  man  is  "  formed  in 
*'  the  loweft  parts  of  the  earth,'*  as  the  Pfalmift  ex- 
preffeth  it  •,  and  the  curious  frame  of  our  bodies  is 
wrought  from  fuch  rude  principles  in  fo  dark  a  fhop  ? 
Canft  thou  give  an  account  how  the  foul  is  united  to 
the  body,  by  what  bands  or  holds  a  fpirit  is  fo  clofely 
and  intimately  conjoined  to  matter  ?  Doft  thou  know 
how  thy  felf  underftandeft  any  thing,  and  canft  retain 
the  diftind  ideas  and  notions  of  fo  many  objects  with- 
out confiifion  ?  Doft  thou  know  the  leaft  parts  of 
matter,  how  they  are  knit  together  ;  and  by  what 
cement  tHey  cleave  fo  faft  to  one  another,  that  they 
can  hardly  be  feparated  ? 

Now  if  the  creatures  be  fo  unfearchable,  and  the 
knowledge  of  thefe  be  too  hard  for  thee  j  *is  not  the 
creator  of  them  much  more  incomprehenfible,  who 
pofTefTeth  all  thefe  perfedbions  which  he  communi- 
cates, and  many  which  cannot  be  communicated  to  a 
creature  ?  If  in  natural  and  fenfible  things,  maxma 
pars  eorum  qiia  fcimus^  eft  minima  pars  eorum  qua 
7iefcivms  •,  how  much  more  is  it  true  of  God,  that 
our  ignorance  is  more  than  our  knowledge  ;  when 
the  whole  earth  and  all  the  creatures  bear  no  propor- 
tion to  him?  Ifa.  xl.  15,  17.  "Behold  all  the  nations 
*'  of  the  earth  are  as  the  drop  of  the  bucket,  and  as 
I  "  the 


^he  tncomfrehenfibUnefs  o/GodI  3755 

**  the  fmall  duft  of  the  balance ;  all  nations  before  S  E  R  M. 
**  him  are  nothing,  and  are  accounted  to  him  lefs 
"  than  nothing." 

III.  By  fhewing  you  the  clear  reafon  of  it,  which 
is  this,  the  difproportion  between  the  faculty  and  thq 
objedt,  the  finitenefs  of  our  underftandings,  and  the 
infinitenefs  of  the  divine  nature  and  perfedlions. 
*'  God  is  greater  than  our  hearts,"  and  therefore  as 
he  knows  more  than  we  do,  as  the  apoflle  reafons, 
I  John  iii.  20.  fo  he  is  more  than  can  be  known  by 
lis  ',  he  is  too  vaft  an  objedl  for  our  underftanding  to 
entertain,  for  our  minds  to  receive.  Thou  may'fl:  as 
well  mete  out  the  heaven  with  afpan,and  meafure  the 
waters  in  the  hollow  of  thy  hand,  and  comprehend 
the  duft  of  the  earth  in  a  little  urn,  and  weigh  the 
mountains  in  fcales,  and  the  hills  in  a  httle  balance, 
as  think  to  circumfcribe  God  in  the  narrow  limits  of 
diy  thoughts,  or  to  bring  that  which  is  infinite  with- 
in the  compafs  of  that  which  is  finite. 

And  there  is  not  only  the  vaftnefs  and  greatnefs  of 
the  objed  5  but  the  glory  and  refplendency  of  it,  does 
fo  dazzle  our  fight,  that  we  cannot  perfedly  fee  it» 
2  Tim.  vi.  16.  ''  He  dwelleth  in  light  which  no  man 
*'  can  approach  unto,  whom  no  man  hath  feen,  nor 
*'  can  fee."  As  God  is  too  big,  fo  he  is  too  bright 
an  objed:  for  our  underftandings  •,  the  prefence  of  his 
glory  over-powers  our  minds,  and  bears  down  our 
faculties,  and  conquers  our  underftandings. 

I  come  now  to  apply  this  dodrine  of  the  incom- 
prehenfiblenefs  of  the  divine  nature.  If  the  nature^ 
and  perfections,  and  ways,  and  works  of  God  be 
incomprehenfible,  and  paft  finding  out ; 

I.  It  calls  for  our  admiration,  and  veneration,  an(J 
reverence.    Thefe  are  the  beft  apprehenfions  of  him  , 
that  is  incomprehenfible i  afJent  veneration  of  bis. 

excel,- 


375^  Ty&^  incomprebenjiblenefs  of  God '^ 

ERM.  excellencies,  is  the  befl:  acknowledgment  of  them* 
We  miift  admire  what  we  cannot  apprehend  or  ex- 
prefs,  Zach.  ix.  1 7.  "  How  great  is  his  goodnefs, 
*'  and  how  great  is  his  beauty  ?"  The  befl  way  to 
celebrate  the  praifes  of  God,  is  that  which  Nehe- 
miah  ufeth,  Nehem.  ix.  5.  "  And  blefled  be  thy 
*'  glorious  name,  which  is  exalted  above  all  blefTing 
*'  and  praife.'*  Whenever  we  fpeak  or  think  of 
God,  we  necefiarily  detradl  from  his  perfedlions  ^ 
but  even  this  necefTity  is  glorious  to  him,  and  this 
fpeaks  his  perfe6lion,  that  the  higheft  finite  under- 
ftanding  muft  have  imperfedb  thoughts  of  him. 

We  fhould  make  up  in  reverence  and  veneration 
what  we  fall  fhort  of  in  knowledge.  Reverence  is 
an  acknowledgment  of  diflance ;  by  our  reverence 
of  the  divine  majefty,  we  fhould  befl  awe  our  hearts, 
in  a  fenfe  of  the  diflance  which  is  between  his  infinite 
nature  and  perfedlion,  and  our  finite  apprehenfions. 
Worldly  greatnefs  will  caufe  wonder,  the  thoughtat 
of  earthly  majefly  will  compofe  us  to  reverence  5 
bow  much  more  fhould  thofe  excellencies  which  are 
beyond  what  we  can  imagine  !  Ifa.  vi.  you  have 
there  God  reprefented  "  fitting  upon  his  throne/' 
and  the  "  feraphims  about  him,"  which  aredefcribed 
to  us  as  "  having  each  fix  wings,  and  with  twain 
*^  they  cover  their  faces."  Creatures  of  the  bright- 
efl  underflanding,  and  the  mofl  exalted  purity  and 
holinefs,  "  cover  their  faces"  in  theprefence  of  God's 
glory,  they  choofe  rather  to  venerate  God  than  look 
upon  him. 

11.  This  calls  for  humility  and  modefly.  The 
confidcration  of  God's  unfcarchable  perfed:ions  fhould 
make  "  the  haughtinefs  of  man  to  floop,  and  bring 
*'  down  his  proud  looks,  and  God  alone  fhould  be 
^  exalted."  The  thought  of  God's  excellency 
^        •  fhQuld 


^he  tncomprehenjiblenefs  of  GoD.^  3757 

lliould  abafc  us,  and  make  us  "  vile  in  our  own  ^  ^  -^  ^- 

CLVI. 

*'  eyes,"  it  Ihould  make  all  thofe  petty  excellencies 
that  wc  pride  ourfelves  in,  to  vanifh  and  difappear, 
*'  Thofe  treafurcs  of  wifdom  and  knowledge"  which 
are  in  God,  fhould  "  hide  pride  from  man."     It 
fliould  hide  thofe  little  parts  and  gifts  which  we  arc 
fo  apt  to  glory  in,  as  the  fun  hides  the  ftars.    When 
we  confider  God,  we  Ihould  be  fo  far  from  admiring 
ourfelves,  that  we  Ihould  with  an  humble  thankful- 
nefs  wonder  that  God  fhould  regard  fuch  inconfider- 
able  nothings  as  we  are,  Pfal.  viii.   i,  3,  4.     "O 
*'  Lord  our  God,  how  excellent  is  thy  name  in  all 
*'  the  earth,  who  hail  fet  thy  glory  above  the  hea- 
*^  vens  !  When  I  confider  the  heavens,  the  work  of 
**  thy  fingers,  the  moon  and  the  flars  which  thou 
**  haft  ordained  ;  what  is  man,  that  thou  art  mind- 
*/  ful  of  him  ?  or  the  fon  of  man,  that  thou  vifitefl 
"  him?  He  that  confiders  the  glory  of  God,  and 
the  greatnefs  of  his  works,  will  think  fo  meanly  of 
himfelf,  that  he  will  be  aftonifhed  that  God  Ihould 
mind  him  or  vifit  him.     This   is  a  noble  ftrain  of 
humility  in  David,  by  which  he  acknowledgeth  that 
the  greateft  king  of  the  earth,  how  confiderable 
foever  he  may  be  in  refped  of  men,  is  but  a  pitiful 
thing  to  God. 

When  we  fpeak  to  God,  we  Ihould  do  it  with 
great  humility,  Ecclef.  v.  2,  3.  "  Let  thy  words  be 
"  few,  for  God  is  in  heaven,  and  thou  upon  earth.'* 
Wc  fhould  fay  to  God,  Job  xxxvii.  19.  "  Teach 
"  us  what  we  Ihall  fay  unto  thee,  for  we  cannot 
*'  order  our  fpeech  by  reafon  of  darknefs.'*  And 
when  we  think  or  fpeak  of  him,  we  fhould  do  it 
with  great  modefty,  we  fhould  not  ralhly  pronounce 
or  determine  any  thing  concerning  God.  Simonides 
being  afked,  what  God  was  ?  defired  one  day's  time 

J9 


375^  T'/^^  incomprehenjiblenefs  of  G6D^ 

E  R  M.  to  confider,  then  he  defired  two,  and  then  four,' 
The  more  we  think  of  God,  the  lefs  peremptory 
ihall  we  be  in  defining  him.  He  that  confiders  that 
God  is  incomprehenfible,  will  not  pretend  to  know 
all  the  ways  of  infinite  knowledge,  and  the  utmoft 
of  infinite  power,  and  all  the  reafons  of  God's  ways 
and  providences.  He  that  rightly  values  his  own 
fhort  underflanding,  and  the  unlimited  perfedions 
of  God,  will  not  be  apt  to  fay,  this  God  cannot 
do,  this  he  cannot  know,  fuch  ways  are  not  agree- 
able to  his  wifdom.  He  that  knows  God  and  him- 
felf,  will  be  modeft  in  thefe  cafes,  he  will  67r6%e/ir, 
abftain  from  all  peremptory  pronouncing  in  thefe 
matters  ;  he  confiders  that  one  man  many  times  dif- 
fers fo  much  from  another  in  knowledge  and  fkill  of 
working,  that  he  can  do  thofe  things  which  another 
believes  impoflible  :  but  we  have  pitiflil  thoughts 
of  God,  if  we  think  the  difference  between  one  man 
and  another  is  any  thing  to  the  vafl  drftance  that  is 
between  the  divine  underflanding  and  our  ignorance, 
the  divine  power  and  our  weaknefs,  the  wifdom  of 
God  and  the  folly  of  men. 

III.  The  incomprehenfiblenefs  of  God's  perfec- 
tions calls  for  the  higheft  degree  of  our  affedlion. 
How  fhould  we  fear  this  great  glorious  God  !  Pfal. 
xc.  II.  "  Who  knoweth  the  power  of  thine  anger  ? 
"  even  according  to  thy  fear,  fo  is  thy  wrath.'* 
Fear  is  the  moft  infinite  of  all  our  pafTions,  and  fills 
us  with  the  mofl  endlefs  jealoufy  and  fufpicions  ; 
God's  wrath  is  greater  than  our  fear,  "  according 
**  to  thy  fear,  fo  is  thy  wrath." 

How  fhould  we  love  him,  when  we  are  aflonifhed 
with  admiration  of  God's  goodnefs,  and  fay,  "  how 
*^  great  is  thy  goodnefs,  and  how  great  is  thy  beau- 
•-  ty  ?  Behold,  what  manner  of  love  the  father  hath' 

"  beftowed 


ne  incomprehenfibknefi  of  God.  3759 

*^  beftowed  upon  us  !*'  How  great  fliould  our  love  S  E  R  M. 
be  to  him  !  What  manner  of  love  fhould  we  return 
to  him  ! 

This  calls  for  the  higheft  degree  of  our  faith. 
With  what  confidence  ihould  we  rely  upon  him, 
"  who  is  able  to  do  for  us  exceeding  abundantly 
"  above  what  we  can  afk  or  think  !*' 

To  conclude.  This  requires  the  higheft  degree  of 
our  fervice  :  how  Ihould  our  hearts  be  "  enlarged  to 
"  run  the  ways  of  his  commandments,"  who  hath 
"  laid  up  for  us'*  fuch  things,  "  that  eye  hath 
"  not  feen,  nor  ear  heard,  nor  have  entered  into  the 
"  heart  of  man  ?" 


VoL.VIIL  x8M  THE 

8. 


CONTENTS. 

SERMON  CXXXI. 

Concerning  our  imitation  of  the  divine  perfedions. 

MATT.     V.  48. 

JJE  ye  therefore  perfe£l^  even  as  your  father  which  is  in  hea* 

'*-^  ven  is  perfect.  p.  2289. 

s  E  R  M.  cxxxn. 

The  happinefs  of  God. 
I  TIM.  i.  II. 

The  hleffed  GoD. 

The  whole  verfe  runs  thus, 
According  to  the  glorious  gofpel  of  the  blejf,d  GoD,  which  was 
committed  to  my  truft,  p.  3314. 

S  E  R  M.   CXXXIII. 

The  unchangeablenefs  of  God. 

J  AMES  i.   17. 

With  whom  is  no  variabknefs^  nor  Jhadow  of  turning. 

The  whole  period  runs  thus, 

J)o  not  err,  my  beloved  brethren,  every  good  gift^  and  every 

perfeSi  gift  IS  from  above,  and  cometh  down  fro?n  the  father 

of  lights,  with  whom  there  is  novariahlenefs^  nor  Jhadow  of 

turning,  P- 3333« 

S  E  R  M.  CXXXIV,  CXXXV. 
The  knowledge  of  God. 

I  S  A  M.  ii.  3. 

The  Lord  /i  ^  God  ^  knowledge.  p.  3349,  3369. 

S  E  R  M.  CXXXVI. 

The  wifdom,  glory,  and  fovereignty  of  GoD, 

J  UDE  ver.25. 

To  the  only  wife  GoD  our  SavtoUR,  be  glory  and  majefly, 

dominion  and  power,  noiu  and  ever.  p.  3391. 

S  E  R  M.  C XXXVII. 

The  wifdom  of  God,  in  the  creation  of  the  world. 

P  S  A  L.  civ.  24. 
0  Lord,  how  manifold  are  thy  works  /  in  wifdom  hajl  thou 
mads  them  ^^^^  .  P-  34-^  i- 


TheC  O  N  T  E  N  T  S. 

S  E  R  M.  CXXXVIII. 

The  wifdom  of  God  in  his  providence. 
Preached  at  Kenfington. 

I  P  E  T.  V.  7. 

Cajilng  all  your  care  upon  him,  for  he  car  eth  for  you.  p.  342!^. 

S  E  R  M.  CXXXIX. 

The  wifdom  of  God,  in  the  redemption  of  mankind. 

I  C  O  R.  i.   24. 

Christ,  the  power  of  Gou^  and  the  wifdom  of  God.  p.344<>. 

S  E  R  M.    CXL. 

Thejuftice  of  God,  in  the  diftribution  of  rewards  and  pu- 
nifhments. 

GEN.  xviii.  25. 

Shall  not  the  judge  of  all  the  earth  do  right  P  p.  34<J5« 

S  E  R  M.   CXLI. 

The  truth  of  God. 

D  E  U  T.  xxxii.  4. 

. J  God  of  Truth.  p.  348^. 

S  E  R  M.  CXLII. 
The  holinefs  of  God, 

1  P  E  T.  i.  16. 

Be  ye  holy ^  for  1  am  holy,  350^* 

S  E  R  M.  CXLIir,  CXLIV,  CXLV,  CXLVI. 
The  goodnefs  of  God. 
P  S  A  L.  cxlv.  9. 
The  Lord  is  good  to  alii  ^"^  ^■'^^  tender  mercies  are  over  all 
hisworks.  3523,  3537,  3553,  3571. 

S  E  R  M.  CXLVII. 

The  mercy  of  God. 

NUMB.  xiv.  18. 

T7j^LoRD  is  long-fuffering  and  of  great  mercy.  p.  358^. 

S  E  R  M.  CXLVirr,  CXLIX. 
The  patience  of  God. 

2  P  E  T.  iii,  9. 

T/^^  Lord  is  not  flack  concerning  his  promife^  as  feme  mm 

count 


The  C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S. 

count  JIacknefs ;  but  is  long-fuffertng^  not  willing  that  any 
jhould  perijhy  hut  that  alljhould  come  to  repentance,  p.  3<^io, 

3626, 
S  E  R  M.  CL,  CLI. 
The  Long-fufFcring  of  God. 

ECCL  ES.  viii.  11. 
Becaufe  fentence  again/}  an  evil  work  is  not  executed  fpeedily^ 
therefore  the  heart  of  the  fons  of  men  is  fully  fet  in  them  to 
do  evil.  p.  364^9  166^. 

S  E  R  M.  CLII. 
The  power  of  God. 
P  S  A  L.  Ixii.   II. 
God  hath  fpohen  once  j  twice  have  I  heard  this^  that  power 
behngeth  unto  God.  p.  3684, 

S  E  R  M.  CLIIL 

The  fpirituality  of  the  divine  nature. 

J  O  H  N  iv.  2. 

God  is  a  fpirit^  and  they  that  worjhip  him^  muji  worjhip  him 
in  fpirit  and  in  truth,  p.  3705. 

S  E  R  M.  CLIV. 
The  immenfity  of  the  divine  nature. 
P  S  A  L.  cxxxix.  7,  8,  9,   10. 
Whither  Jhall  I  go  from  thy  fpirit  f  or  whither  Jha II  1  fiet 
from  thy  prefence  F  If  1  afcend  up  into  heaven^  thou  art 
there  '-y   if  I  make  my  bed  in  hell^  behold^  thou  art  there. 
If  I  take  the  wings  of  the  morning^  and  dwell  in  the  uttermoft 
parts  of  the  fea^  even  there  Jhall  thy  hand  lead  me^  and  tlyy 
right  hand  fiall  hold  me.  p.  3722. 

S  E  R  M.  CLV. 
The  eternity  of  God. 
PSALM,  xc.  2. 

Before  the  mountains  were  brought  forth^  or  ever  thou  hadji 

formed  the  earth  and  the  worldy  even  from   everlafiing  to 

everlafling  thou  art  GoD.  p.  3735/ 

S  E  R  M.  CLVI. 
The  incomprehenfiblcnefs  of  God. 
JOB  xi.  7. 

Can  ft  then  by  fearching  find  out  GoD  ?  Canjl  thou  find  out 
the  Almighty  unto  p erf e^ ion  ?  p.  374^* 


The  end  of  the  eighth  Volume, 


4  • 


vff^ 


