tffs: 


LIBRARY  OF  THE  THEOLOGICAL  SEMINARY 

PRINCETON,  N.  J. 

Presented  by 


.sec  . 

Section J 


Divisiohi. 


tat.  ty4- 


Lord  Arch  Bishop  <yf 
,   CAKTERBURY 


^no.  /0]^4' 


C</^' 


THE 


W  O  R  K  S 

Of  the  Moft  Reverend 

Dr,  JO  UN  TI LLOT  S  0  !sr, 

Lord  Archbijhop  of  Canterbury. 
IN    TWELVE    VOLUMES. 

CONTAINING 

Two  Hundred  and  Fifty  Four  Sermons  and 
Discourses  on,  Several  Occafions : 

Together  with  the  R  u  l  e  of  Faith; 
Prayers  Compofed  by  him  for  his  own  Uie ; 
A  Discourse  to  his  Servants  before  the  Sacrament*, 
And  a  Form  of  Prayer,  Compofed  by  him,  for  the 
Ufe  of  King  William. 

LONDON: 

frinted  for  R.  Ware,  A.  Ward,  J.  and  P.  Knapton,  T.  Longman, 

R.  Hett,  C.  Hitch,  J.  Hodges,  S,  Auilen,  J.  and  R.  Tonfoii^ 

J.  and  H.  Pemberton,  and  J.  Rivington,     Mdccxliii. 


SERMONS 

ON    SEVERAL 

Subjects  and  Occasions, 

By  the  moft  Reverend 

Dr.  John  tillotson, 

LATE 

Lord  Archbifliop  of  Canterbury. 


/ 


V  O  L  U  xM  E    the    FIRST. 


LONDON: 

Printed  for  R.  JVare^  A.  Ward^  J.  and  P.  Knapton^  T,  Lori^^^ 

man^  R.  Hett,  C.  Hitch^  S.  Aujlen^  J.  and  R.  Tonforiy 

y,  Wood^  y.  and  H.  Pe?nberton^  and  y.  Rlvin^tin, 

MDCCXLII. 


-     To  the  Worfhipful 

7/;^  Masters  oftheBENCBy 

And  the  Reft  of  the 

MEMBERS 

O  F    T  H  E 

Honourable  Society  ot  Lincolns  -  Inn. 


G  E  N  T  L  E  A'l  E  N, 

WHEN  I  refolved  to  publl/li 
thefe  fcrmons,  there  could  be 
no  dilpute  to  whom  I  fhould  dedicate 
them.  They  do  of  right  belong  to  you, 
being  moft  of  them  firft  preach'd 
among  you ;  befides  my  great  obliga- 
tion to  you  for  your  conflant  refped:s 
to  me,  both  in  the  favourable  accep- 
tance, and  in  the  generous  encourage- 
ment of  my  labours,  ever  fince  I  had 
the  honour  and  happinefs  to  be  related 

Vol.  L  a  to 

I. 


to  you.  In  a  thankful  acknowledg- 
ment whereof  I  humbly  prefent  this 
fmall  part  of  them  to  you,  hopmg  that 
by  the  bleffing  of  God  they  may  be 
of  fome  ufe  for  the  promoting  of  true 
piety  and  virtue,  which  is  the  fincere 
wifh  and  aim  of 


Your  moji  obliged 


and  faithful fervant. 


John  TiLj^oTsoKe 


THE 

PREFACE. 


I  Shall  neither  trouble  the  reader,  nor  my  felf^ 
with  any  apology  for  the  publifiing  of  thefe  fer- 
mons.  For  if  they  he  in  any  meafure  truly  fervi^ 
ceable  to  the  end  for  which  they  are  defign'd^  to  eflahlifh 
men  in  the  principles  of  religion^  and  to  recommend  to 
them  the  pra5lice  of  it  with  any  conjiderahle  advantage^ 
I  do  not  fee  what  apology  is  necejfary  -,  and  if  they  he 
not  fo^  I  am  fare  none  can  be  fa.fficient.  However^  if 
there  need  any^  the  common  heads  of  excufe  in  thefe 
cafes  are  very  well  known ;  and  I  hope  I  have  an  equal 
right  to  them  with  other  men. 

Ifhall  choofe  rather  in  this  preface,  to  give  a  fhort 
Account  of  the  following  difcourfes,  and  as  briefly  as  I 
€an  to  vindicate  a  Jingle  pafTage  in  the  firfi:  of  them 
from  the  exceptions  of  a  gentleman  who  hath  been 
pleafed  to  honour  it  fo  far  as  to  write  a  whole  hook 
againft  it. 

The  deftgn  of  thefe  difcourfes  is  fourfold, 

Firft,  To  fhew  the  unreafonablenefs  of  atheifm, 
and  of  fcoffing  at  religion  ;  which  I  am  firry  is  fo 
necejfary  to  be  done  in  this  age.  This  I  have  endeavoured 
in  the  two  firft  of  thefe  difcourfes. 

Secondly,  To  recommend  religion  to  men  from  the 
great  and  manifold  advantages  which  it  brings  both  to 
pubilck  fociety  and  to  particular  perfons.  And  this 
is  the  argument  of  the  third  and  fourth. 


i^'  2  Thirdly, 


The    PREFACE. 

Thirdly,  To  reprefent  the  excellency,  7nore  parti* 
cularly  of  the  chriftian  religion  ;  and  to  vindicate 
the  practice  of  \tfrom  the  fufpkion  of  thofe  grievous 
troubles  and  difficulties  which  many  imagine  it  to  he 
attended  withaL  And  this  is  the  Jiibje^  of  the  fifth 
and  fixth. 

Fourthly,  To  perfuade  men  to  the  praBice  of  this 
holy  religion^  from  the  great  obligation  which  the 
profeflion  of  chriftianity  lays  upon  men  to  that  pur- 
pofe  *,  and  more  particularly^  from  the  glorious  rewards 
of  another  life ;  which  is  the  defign  of  the  two  next 
difcourfes. 

Having  given   this  floort  account  of  the  following 

difcourfes,  I  crave  leave  of  the  reader  to  detain  him  a 

little  longer y  whiljl  I  vindicate  a  palTage  in  thefirjl  of 

thefe  fermons,  from  the  ajfaidts  of  a  whole  book  pur- 

pofely  writ  againfi  it,      The  title  of  the  book  is  faith 

vindicated  from  the  pofTibility  of   falfhood.      The 

author  Mr.  J.  S.  the  famous  dMthov  <?/"  fu re- footing. 

He  hath  indeed  in  this  laft  book  of  his,  to  my  great 

amazement,  quitted  that  glorious   title.      Not  that  I 

dare  afjume  to  my  felf  to  have  put  him  out  of  conceit 

with  it,  by  having  convinced  him  of  the  fantajlicalnefs 

of  it :   no  i     /  defpair  to  convince  that  man  of   any 

things  who  after  fo  fair  an  admonition  does  ji ill  perfifi 

to  maintain,    *  that  firft  and  felf-evident  principles, 

mt  only  "may,  but  are  fit  to  be  demonjlrated-,  and  -f  that 

thofe  ridiculous  identical propofitions,  that  faith  is  faith, 

and  a  rule  is  a  rule,    are  firft  principles  in  this  con- 

troverfy  of  the  rule  of  faith,    without  which  nothing 

can  be  folidly  concluded  cither  about  rule  or  faith. 

Bill  there  was  another  reafon  for  his  quitting  of  that 

*  Letttr  of  tUmks,  p    24,  hz.         f  Ibid    p     ll. 

title 


The    PREFACE.  lu 

title,  and  a  prudent  one  indeed :  he  had  forfaken  the 
defence  of  llire-footing,  and.  then  it  became  convenient 
to  lay  afide  that  tide,  for  fear  of  putting  people  any 
more  in  mind  of  that  book, 

I  expe5ied  indeed  after  his  letter  of  thanks,  in  which 
he  *  tells  uSy  he  intended  to  throw  afide  the  rub- 
bifli  of  my  book,  that  in  his  anfwer  he  might  the 
better  lay  open  the  fabrick  of  my  difcourfe,  and 
have  nothing  there  to  do,  but  to  fpeak  to  folid 
points ;  1  fa)\  after  this^  I  expelled  a  full  anfwer 
to  the  foHd  points  (^as  he  is  pleafed  to  call  them) 
of  my  book  ;  and  that^  {according  to  his  excellent 
method  ^removing  the  rubbifh,  in  order  to  the puU 
ling  down  of  a  building)  the  fabrick  of  my  book 
would  long  fince  have  been  demolifh^d  and  laid  even 
with  the  ground.  But  efpecially^  when  in  the  con- 
clufion  of  that  moft  civil  and  obliging  letter^  he 
threatened  never  to  leave  following  on  hi^s  blow, 
till  he  had  either  brought  Dr.  Still,  and  me  to 
lay  principles  that  wou'd  bear  the  teft,  or  it  was 
made  evident  to  all  the  world  that  we  had  none : 
/  began  (as  I  had  reafon)  to  be  in  a  terrible  fear 
of  him^  and  to  look  upon  m.yfelf  as  a  dead  man.  And 
indeed  who  can  think  himfelf  fo  confiderable  as  not 
to  dread  this  mighty  man  of  demonftration,  this  prince 
of  controvert  ids,  this  great  lord  and  pfofeffor  of 
firft  principles  ?  But  I  perceive  that  great  minds 
are  merciful^  and  do  fometimes  content  themfelves  to 
threaten  when  they  could  defiroy. 
^  For  infiead  of  returning  a  full  anfwer  to  my  booky 
he  (according  to  their  new  mode  of  confuting  books) 
manfully  falls  a  nibbling  at  one  fingle  pafTage  in  it, 
pag.  1 1 8.  wherein  he  makes  me   to  fay  (for  I  fay  no 


*  Ibid 


P  H' 

fuc^ 


IV 


The    PREFACE. 

fuch  thing)  that  the  rule  of  chriftian  faith,  and 
confeqirently  faith  itfclF,  is  pofTible  to  be  falfe  : 
nay  in  his  letter  of  thanks,  f  he  fays  it  is  an 
avow'd  pofition,  in  that  place ^  that  faith  is  poflible 
to  be  falfe.  j^nd  to  give  the  more  countenance  to 
this  calumny y  he  chargeth  the  fame  pofition  (in 
equivalent  terms)  of  the  poffible  falfhood  of  faith, 
and  that  as  to  the  chiefeft  and  mod  fundamental 
point,  the  tenet  of  a  deity,  upon  the  forementioned 
fermon.  But  becaufe  he  knew  in  his  confcience,  that 
I  had  avow'd  7to  fuch  pofition,  he  durji  not  cite  the 
words  either  of  my  book  or  fermon,  left  the  reader 
fhould  have  difcovefd  the  notorious  falfhood  andground- 
lefnefs  of  this  calumny  :  nay,  he  durft  not  fo  much  as 
refer  to  any  particular  place  in  my  fermon,  where 
fuch  a  pafTage  might  he  found.  And  yet  this  is 
the  man  that  has  the  face  to  charge  others  with 
falfe  citations ;  to  which  charge,  before  I  have  done^ 
I  fhall  fay  fomething,  which  (what  effcSi  foever  it 
may  have  upon  him)  would  make  any  other  man  fuf- 
ficiently  afham'd. 

But  yet  I  muft  acknowledge,  that  in  this  pofition 
which  he  faftens  upon  me,  he  honours  me  with  ex- 
cellent company,  my  Lord  Falkland,  Mr.  Chilling- 
worth,  and  Br.  Stillingfleet  ;  perfons  of  that  admi- 
rable ftrength  and  clear nefs  in  their  writings,  that 
Mr.  S.  when  he  reflects  upon  his  own  ftyle  and  way 
of  reafoning,  may  blujlo  to  acknowledge  that  ever  he 
has  read  them.  And  as  to  this  pofition  which  he 
charges  them  withal,  I  do  7iot  know  (nor  have  thf 
leaft  reafon  upon  Mr.  S'i  word  to  believe)  any  fuch 
thing  is  maintained  by   them. 

As  for  my  felf,  whom  I  am  now  only  conc^rn^d  te 

\  Ibid.  p.  13. 

vin- 


The    P  R  E  F  A  C  E. 

vindicate^  IJhall  fet  down  the  two  PafTages,  to  which  I 
fuppofe  he  refers. 

In  my  fermon,  /  endeavour  {among  other  things)  to 
Jhew  the  unreafonablenefs  of  atheifm  upon  this  account ' 
becaufe  it  requires  more  evidence  for  things  than 
they  are  capable  of.  To  make  this  goody  I  difcourfe 
thus :  Ariftotle  hath  long  fince  obferved,  how  unrea- 
fonable  it  is  to  exped  the  fame  kind  of  proof  for 
every  thing,  which  we  have  for  fome  things.  Ma^ 
thematical  things  being  of  an  abftraded  nature,  arc 
only  capable  of  clear  demonftration.  But  conclufi- 
ons  in  natural  philofophy  are  to  be  prov'd  by  a 
fufficient  induction  of  experiments ;  things  of  a  mo- 
ral nature  by  moral  arguments,  and  matters  of 
fad  by  credible  teftimony.  '  And  though  none  of 
thefe  be  flridl  demonftration,  yet  have  we  an  un- 
doubted affurance  of  them,  v/hen  they  are  prov'd  by 
the  beft  arguments  that  the  nature  and  quality  of 
the  thing  will  bear.  None  can  demonftrate  to  me, 
that  there  is  fuch  an  ifland  in  America  as  Jamaica  ; 
yet  upon  the  teftimony  of  credible  perfons,  and  au- 
thors who  have  written  of  it,  I  am  as  free  from  all 
doubt  concerning  it,  as  from  doubting  of  the  cleared 
mathematical  demonftration.  So  that  this  is  to  be 
entertained  as  a  firm  principle,  by  all  thofe  who 
pretend  to  be  certain  of  any  thing  at  all,  that  when 
any  thing  is  prov'd  by  as  good  arguments  as  that 
thing  is  capable  of,  and  we  have  as  great  afilirancc 
that  it  is,  as  we  could  pofTibly  have  fuppofmg  it 
were,  we  ought  not  in  reafon  to  make  any  doubt  of 
the  exiftence  of  that  thing.  Now  to  apply  this  to 
the  prefent  cafe.  The  being  of  a  God  is  not  mathe- 
matically demonftrable,  nor  can  it  be  expected  it 
fliQuld  3  becaufe  only  mathematical  matters  admit  of 

this 


vi  The    PREFACE. 

this  kind  of  evidence.  Nor  can  it  be  prov'd  im- 
mediately by  fenfe,  becaufe  God  being  fupposM  to 
be  a  pure  fpirit,  cannot  be  the  objed  of  any 
corporeal  fenfe.  But  yet  we  have  as  great  afifurance 
that  there  is  a  Go  d,  as  the  nature  of  the  thing  to 
be  prov'd  is  capable  of,  and  as  we  could  in  reafon 
€xpedt  to  have,  fuppofing  that  he  were. 

Upon  this  pajfage  it  mufi  he  (if  any  thing  in  the 
fermon)  that  Mr.  S.  chargeth  this  pofition  (in  equi- 
valent terms)  of  the  polFible  falfhood  of  faith,  and 
that  as  to  the  chiefeft  and  mod  fundamental  point, 
the  tenet  of  a  deity.  And  now  I  appeal  to  the  reader^ s 
eyes  and  judgment^  whether  the  fum  of  what  I  have 
faid^  he  not  this^  that  though  the  exijience  of  God  be 
not  capable  of  that  ftri5l  kind  of  demonftration  which 
mathematical  matters  are^  yet  that  we  have  an  un- 
doubted affurance  of  it.  One  would  think  that  no  tnan 
could  he  fo  ridiculous  as  from  hence  to  infer ^  that  I  be- 
lieve it  poffibl'e^  notwithflanding  this  affurance^  that 
there  fhould  be  no  God.  For  however  in  many  other 
cafes  an  undoubted  affurance  that  a  thing  is^  may  not 
exclude  all  fufpicion  of  a  poffibility  of  its  being  other- 
wife  s  yet  in  this  tenet  of  a  deity  it  mofi  certainly 
does,  Becaufe  whoever  is  ajfur'd  that  there  is  a  Go  d, 
is  qffiir^d  there  is  a  being  whofe  exifience  is  and  always 
was  neceflaryy  and  confequently  is  affiired  that  it  is  im- 
prffible  he  fhoidd  not  be,  and  involves  in  it  a  contradic- 
tion. So  that  my  difcourfe  is  fo  far  from  being  equi- 
valent to  the  pofuion  he  mentions^  that  it  is  a  per- 
fect con'radUJion  to  it.  And  he  might  with  as  much 
truth  have  affirmed.,  that  I  had  exprefly  and  in  fo 
many  words  f aid  that  there  is  no  God. 

the  other  pajfage  is  /«  pag.  ii8.  of  my  book,   con-^ 
cerning  the  rule  o[  faith.     /  was  difcourfing  that  no 

man 


The    PREFACE. 

man  can  fliew  by  any  neceflfary  argument,  that  it  h 
naturally   impoffible  that  all  the  relations  concern- 
ing America  fhould  be  falfc.     But  yet  {fay  I)  I  fup- 
pofe,  that  notwithdanding  this,  no  man  in  his  wits 
is  now   pofleft   with  fo    incredible   a  folly,    as   to 
doubt  whether  there  be  fuch  a  place.     The  cafe  is 
the  very  fame  as  to  the  certainty  of  an  ancient  book 
and  of  the  fenfe  of  plain  expreiHons :  we  ha^^e  no 
demonftration  for  thefe  things,  and  we  exped  none ; 
becaufe  we  know  the  things  are  not  capable  of  it. 
We  are  not  infallibly  certain,  that  any  book  is  fo 
ancient  as  it  pretends  to  be ;  or  that  it  was  written 
by  him  whofe  name  it  bears  •,  or   that   this  is  the 
fenfe  of  fuch  and  fuch  pafifages  in  it ;  it  is  pofTible  all 
this  may  be  otherwife :  but  we  are  very  well  aflur'd 
that   it  is  not,  nor  hath  any  prudent  man  any  jud 
caufe  to  make  the  lead  doubt  of  it :  for  a  bare  poll, 
fibility  that  a  thing  may  be,  or  not  be,    is  no  juft 
caufe  of  doubting  whether  a  thing  be  or  not.     It  is 
poflible    all    the   people   in   France     may  die  this 
night,  but  I  hope  the   poflibility  of  this  doth  not 
incline  any  man  in  the  lead  to  think  that  it  will  be  fo. 
It  is  poflible  that  the  fun  may  not  rife  to  morrow 
morning ;  yet  for  all   this  I  fuppofe  that  no  man 
hath  the  lead  doubt  but  that  it  will. 

*To  avoid  the  cavils  of  this  i^ipertinent  man^  I  have 
tranfcrib^d  the  whole  page  to  which  he  refers.  And 
now  where  is  this  avow'd  pofition  of  the  pollible 
faldiood  of  faith  ?  All  that  J  fay  is  this,  that 
we  are  not  infallible  either  in  judging  of  the  antiquity 
cf  a  book,  or  of  the  fenfe  of  it  \  by  which  I  mean  {as 
my  man  of  fenfe  and  ingenuity  would  eafily  perceive  I 
do)  that  we  cannot  demonftrate  thefe  things  fo,  as  t& 
fiewthat  the  contrary  necejjarily  invokes  a  cmradi^ion ; 
Vol.  I,  a  J^ut 

J* 


Vlll 


The    PREFACE. 

hut  yet  that  we  may  have  a  firm  ojfurance  concerning 
thefe  matters,  fo  as  not  to  make  the  leaft  doubt  of 
them. 

And  is  this  to  avow  the  poflible  fallhood  of  faith  ? 
and  yet  this  pofition  Mr.  S.  charges  upon  thefe  words  • 
howjuftly  1  fhall  now  examine. 

Either  by  faith  Mr,  S.  means  the  dodlrine  revealed 
^  God,  and  then  the  meaning  of  the  pofition  mufb 
be,  that  what  God  fays,  is  poflible  to  be  falfe ; 
which  is  fo  ahfurd  a  pofition  as  can  hardly  enter  into 
any  man^s  mind;  and  yet  Mr,  S.  hath  the  modefty  all 
along  in  his  book  to  infinuate  that  in  the  forecited 
paffage  I  fay  as  much  as  this  comes  to. 

Or  elfe  Mr,  S.  means  by  faith,  the  aflfent  which  we 
mve  to  do^lrines  as  revealed  by  God  ;  and  then  his 
fenfe  of  infallibility  mufi  be  either^  that  whoever  affents 
to  any  thing  as  revealed  by  God,  cannot  be  deceived j 
upon  fuppofition  that  it  is  fo  reveal'* d-,  or  elfe  abfolutely^ 
that  whoever  affents  to  any  thing  as  reveaVd  ^j  G  o  d, 
cannot  be  deceived.  Now  although  I  do  not,  in  the 
paflagc  forecited,  fpeak  one  fyllable  concerning  do^rines 
reveal' d  by  God,  yet  I  affirm  {and  fo  will  any  man 
tlfe)  that  an  affent  to  any  doctrine  as  revealed  ^  G  o  d, 
if  it  he  reveaVd  by  him,  is  impoffible  to  be  falfe.  But 
this  is  only  an  infallibility  upon  fuppofition,  which 
amounts  to  no  more  than  this,  that  if  a  thing  be 
true,  it  is  impofilble  to  be  falfe.  And  yet  the  prin- 
cipal deftgn  of  Mr,  S's  book  is  to  prove  this,  which 
I  believe  no  man  in  the  world  was  ever  fo  fenfelefs  as  to 
deny.  But  if  he  mean  abfolutely,  that  whoever  affents 
to  any  do5irtne  as  revealed  by  God,  cannot  be  deceiv''d, 
that  isj  that  no  man  can  be  miftaken  about  matters  of 
faith  (as  he  muft  mean,  if  he  pretend  to  have  any  ad- 
Virfary^  and  do  not  fighf  07ily  with  bis  own  fhadow) 

this 


The   PREFACE.  Ix 

this  I  confefs  is  a  very  comfortable  aJJertioUy   but  I  am 
much  afraid  it  is  not  true. 

Or  elfe,  lajily^  by  faith  he  underftands  the  means  and 
motives  of  faith.  And  then  the  plain  ftate  of  the 
iontroverfy  between  us  is  this^  whether  it  be  ne- 
ceflary  to  a  chriftian  belief  to  be  infaUibly  fecur'd  of 
the  means  whereby  the  chriftian  dodlrinc  is  convey'd 
to  us,  and  of  the  firmnefs  of  the  motives  upon 
which  our  beJief  of  it  is  grounded,  ^his  indeed  is 
fomething  to  the  purpofe ;  for  though  in  the  paffagc 
before- cited  I  fay  not  one  word  concerning  the  motives 
of  our  belief  of  the  chriftian  do5lrine,  yet  my  difcourfe 
there  was  intended  to  be  apply^d  to  the  means  whereby 
the  knowledge  of  this  do£irine  is  conveyed  to  us,  How^ 
every  I  am  contented  to  join  ijjue  with  Mr,  S.  upon 
both  thefe  points, 

I.  fhat  it  is  not  neceffary  to  the  true  nature  of 
faith,  that  the  motives  upon  which  any  man  believes 
the  chriftian  do5irine  fhould  be  abfolutely  conclufive,  and 
impojfible  to  be  falfe,  That  it  is  neceffary^  Mr,  S, 
fever al  times  affirms  in  his  book  ;  but  how  unreafona^ 
bly  appears  from  certain  and  daily  experience.  Very 
many  chriftians  {fuch  as  St,  A.\Ainfpeaks  of  as  arefav*d 
not  by  the  quicknefs  of  their  underftandings,  but 
the  fimplicity  of  their  belief)  do  believe  the  chriftian 
do5lrine  upon  incompetent  grounds ^  and  their  belief  is 
true^  though  the  argument  upon  which  they  ground  it  be 
not  {as  Mr,  S.  fays)  abfolutely  conclufive  of  the 
thing :  and  he  that  thus  believes  the  chriftian  do£frine^ 
if  he  adhere  to  it^  and  live  accordingly ^  fhdl  undoubted- 
fybefav'd',  and  yet  I  hope  Mr,  S.  will  not  fa^  that 
any  man  ftoall  be  faved  without  true  faith,  I  might  addy 
that  in  this  afiertion  Mr.  S.  isplaifily  contradi^ed  by 
thofe  of  his  own  church, 

a  2  For 


The    P  R  E  F  A  C  E. 

For  they  generally  grant  that  general  counciUl- 
though  they  be  infallible  in  their  definitions  and 
conclufions^  yet  are  not  always  fo  in  their  arguments 
and  rcafonings  about  them.  And  the  guide  of  con- 
troverfies  *  exprejly  fays^  that  it  is  not  neceiTary  that 
a  divine  faith  fhould  always  have  an  external  ra- 
tionally infallible  ground  or  motive  thereto  (whe- 
ther church-authority,  or  any  other)  on  his  part, 
that  fo  believes.  Here  is  a  man  of  their  own  church 
avowing  this  pofition,  that  faith  is  poflible  to  be 
falfe.  /  deftre  Mr,  S.  who  is  the  very  rule  of  contro- 
verfyy  to  dojujiice  upon  this  falfe  guide. 

1  mufl  acknowledge  that  Mr,  S.  attempts  to  provs 
this  affertion,  and  that  by  a  very  pleafant  and  fur - 
frifing  argument^  which  is  this.  The  profound  my- 
fteries  of  faith  (he  tells  us  ^  )  mud  needs  feem  to 
fome,  {viz,  thofe  who  have  no  light  but  their 
pure  natural  reafon,  |1  as  he  faid  before)  impoffiblc 
to  be  true  ^  which  therefore  nothing  but  a  motive 
of  its  own  nature  feemingly  impoffible  to  be  falfe  can 
conquer  fo  as  to  make  them  conceit  them  really 
true.  JVhat  Mr.  S.  here  means  J^y  a  motive  of  its 
own  nature  feeming  impoffible  to  he  falfe ^  I  cannot 
divine^  unlefs  he  means  a  real  feeming  impoffbility. 
But  be  that  as  it  wills  does  Mr,  S.  in  good  earnefi 
believe  that  a  motive  of  its  own  nature  feeming 
impoffible  to  be  falfe,  is  fufficient  to  convince  any 
many  that  has  and  ufes  the  light  of  natural  reafon, 
of  the  truth  of  a  thing  which  muft  needs  feem  to 
him  impoiTible  to  be  true?  In  my  opinion  ihefc 
two  feeming  impoffibilities  are  fo  equally  matched^  that 
it  muft  needs  be  a  drawn  battle  between  them.  Sup' 
pofe  the  thing  to  be  believed  be  tranfubftantiation  j 
f  Ibid.  p.  35-         +  ^'^^^b  find  p  f)0.         Ij  P.  89. 


The    P  R  E  F  A  C    E.  xi 

$ifis  indeed  is  a  very  profound  tnyftery^  and  is  (to 
[peak  in  Mr,  SV  fhrafe)  of  its  own  nature  To 
feemingly  impofTible,  that  I  know  no  argument  in 
the  world  ftrong  enough  to  cope  with  it.  And  I  chal- 
lenge Mr.  S.  to  infiance  in  any  motive  of  faith  which 
is,  both  to  our  underftanding  and  our  fenfes,  mors 
plainly  impojjible  to  be  falfe  than  their  do5irine  of 
tranfubftantiation  is  evidently  impojfible  to  he  true. 
And  if  he  cannot^  how  can  he  reafonahly  expe^  that 
any  man  in  the  world  Jhould  believe  it  P 

2 .  That  it  is  not  neceffary  to  the  true  nature  of 
faith,  that  we  Jhould  be  infallibly  fecur*d  of  the 
means  whereby  the  chrijlian  doEirine  is  convey'* d  to  us  \ 
particularly  of  the  antiquity  and  authority  of  the  hooks 
of  fcripture^  and  that  the  exprejfions  in  it  cannot  pof 
fibly  bear  any  other  fenfe.  And  thefe  are  the  very  things 
I  infiance  in,  in  the  pafiagey^  often  mentioned.  A?id  to 
thefe  Mr,  S.  ought  to  have  fpoken,  if  he  intended  to 
have  confuted  that  paflage.  But  he  was  rejolv^d  not  to 
fpeak  diftin5lly,  knowing  his  befi  play  to  be  id  the  dark^ 
and  that  all  his  fafety  lay  in  the  confufion  and  obfcU" 
rity  of  his  talk. 

Now  that  to  have  an  infallible  fecurity  in  thefe 
particulars  is  not  neceffary  to  the  true  nature  of  faith 
is  evident  upon  thefe  two  accounts  %  becaufe  faith  may 
be  without  this  infallible  fecurity,  and  becaufe  in  the 
particulars  mentioned  it  is  impojfible  to  be  had, 

I .  Becaufe  faith  may  be  without  this  infallible  fe^ 
curity.  He  that  is  fo  affur'd  of  the  antiquity  and  au- 
thority of  the  books  of  fcripture,  and  of  the  fenfe  of  thofe 
texts  wherein  the  doSfrines  of  chrijiianity  are  plainly 
delivered,  as  to  fee  nojuji  caufe  to  doubt  thereof,  may 
really  ajfent  to  thofe  do^rines  though  he  have  no  infaU 
Uble  fecurity,  4^dan  a(fent  fo  grounded  J  affirm  to  have 


The    PREFACE. 

the  true  nature  of  faith.    For  what  degree  of  affent, 
and  what  fecurity  of  the  means,  which  convey  to  us 
the  knowledge  of  chrifiianity^  are  necejfary  to    the  true 
nature  of  faith^   is  to  he  ejlimated  from  the  end  of 
faith  ^  which  is  the  fahation  of  mens  fouls ,  And  who^ 
ever  is  fo  affur^d  of  the  authority  and  knCc  of  fcrip^ 
ture,  as  to  believe  the  doUrine  of  it^  and  to  live  ac- 
cordingly^ fJoall  he  faved.    And  furely  fuch  a  belief  as 
willfave  a  man  hath  the  true  nature  of  faith^  though 
it  be   not  infallible.    And  if  God  have  fufficiently 
frovidedfor  the  falvation  of  men  of  all  capacities^  it 
is  no  fuch  reflexion  upon  the  goodnefs  and  wifdom  of 
providence,  as  Mr.  S.   imagines^  that   he  hath  not 
taken  care  that  every  man'*s  faith  Jhould  arrive  to  the 
degree  of  infallibility  ;  nor  does  our  hleffed  Saviour, 
for   not    having  made  this  provifton^  deferve   to  be 
efleemed  by  all  the  world  not  a  wife  lawgiver,  but 
a  mere  ignoramus  and  impoftor,  as  *  one  of  his  fel- 
low controvertifts  fpeaks  with  reverence, 

Befides^  this  affertion  that  infallibility  is  neceflary  to 
the  true  nature  of  that  affent  which  we  call  faith,  is 
plainly  falfe  upon  another  account  alfo ;  becaufe  faith  ad- 
mits of  degrees.  But  infallibility  has  none,  'The  fcripture 
fpeaks  of  a  weak  and  a  Jirong  faith ,  and  of  the  increafe  of 
faith  ;  but  I  never  heard  of  a  weak  and  fir  07tg  infallibility. 
Infallibility  is  the  highefi  pcrfeBion  of  the  knowing  fa- 
culty^  and  confequently  the  firmeft  degree  of  affent  upon 
thcfirmeji  grounds^  and  which  are  known  to  be  fo.  But 
will  Mr.  S.  fay^  that  the  highefi  degree  of  affent  ad" 
mits  of  degrees^  and  is  capable  of  increafe  ?  Infallibi- 
lity is  an  abfolute  impoffibility  of  being  deceived  ;  now 
I  defire  Mr,  S.  to  fJoew  me  the  degrees  of  abfolute  im^ 
poffibility  \    and  if  he  could  do   thaty  and  confequently 

*  hdlyinthus  CantuarzenJiSy  p.  77, 

there 


The    PREFACE. 

there  might  he  degrees  of  infallibility^  yet  I  cannot  be- 
lieve that  Mr.  S.  would  think  fit  to  call  any  degrees  of 
infallibility  a  weak  faith  or  ajfent. 

2.  Becaiife  an  infallible  fecurity^  in  the  particular 
mention' dy  is  impoffible  to  be  had  \  I  mean  in  an  ordinary 
way^  and  without  miracle  and  particular  revelation ; 
hecaufe  the  nature  of  the  thing  is  incapable  of  it.  'The 
utmoft  fecurity  we  have  of  the  antiquity  of  any  book  is 
humane  tefiimony^  and  all  humane  tejiimcny  is  fallible 
for  this  plain  reafon,  hecaufe  all  men  are  fallible.  And 
though  Mr.  S.  in  defence  of  his  beloved  tradition  is 
pleased  to  fay  that  humane  tefiimony  in  fome  cafes  is  in* 
fallible.^  yet  I  think  no  man  before  him  was  ever  fa 
hardy  as  to  maintain  that  the  tefiimony  of  fallible  men  is 
infallible,  I  grant  it  to  be  in  mafty  cafes  certain  ;  that 
isy  fuch  as  a  confiderate  man  may  prudently  rely  and 
proceed  upon^  and  hath  no  jujl  caufe  to  doubt  of ;  and 
fuch  as  none  but  an  cbfiinate  7nan  or  a  fool  can  deny^ 
And  that  thus  the  learned  men  of  his  own  church  de- 
fine certainty,  Mr.  S.  {if  he  would  but  vouchfafe  ta 
read  fuch  hooks)  7night  have  learnt  from  *  Melchior 
Canus,  who  Jpeaking  of  the  firmnefs  of  humane  tefii- 
mony in  fome  cafes'  {which  yet  he  did  not  believe  to  be 
infallible)  defines  it  thus,  thofe  things  are  certain 
among  men,  which  cannot  be  deny'd  without  obfti- 
nacy  and  folly.  /  know  Mr.  S.  is  pleased  to  fay^ 
that  certainty  and  infallibility  are  all  one.  And  he  is 
the  firfi  man  that  I  know  of  that  ever  faid  it.  And 
yet  perhaps  fome  body  may  have  been  before  him  in  it, 
for  I  remember  Tully  fays,  that  there  is  nothing  fo 
foolilh  but  fome  philofopher  or  other  has  faid  it.  / 
am  fur e  Mr,  S'j  own  philofopher  Mr.  Wh.  contradiSs 

*  De  loc  theol.  lib.  ii.  c.  4.  Certa  apud  homines  ea  funt, 
^uag  negari  fine  pervicacia,  &  ftultitia,  non  pofTunt. 

him 


^Iv  The   PREFACE. 

him  In  this  moft  clearly^  in  his  preface  to  Rufliworth'/ 
dialogues  *,  where  explicating  the  term  moral  certainty 
he  tells  us,  that  fome  underftood  by  it  fuch  a  cer- 
tainty as  makes  the  caufe  always  work  the  fame  ef- 
fetfl,  though  it  take  not  away  the  abfolute  poflibi- 
lity  of  working  other  ways  j  and  this  prefently  after 
he  tells  lis,  ought  abfolutely  to  be  reckoned  in  the 
deoree  of  true  certainty,  and  the  authors  confider'd 
as  miftaken  in  undervaluing  it.  So  that,  according 
/£?  Mr.  White,  true  certainty  may  conjift  with  apojjlhility 
of  the  contrary,  and  confequently  Mr.  S.  is  mifiaken  in 
thinking  certainty  and  infallibility  to  be  all  one.  Nay 
I  do  not  find  any  two  of  them  agreeing  among  them- 
felves,  about  the  7iotions  of  infallibility  and  certainty, 
Mr.  White  y^^j,  that  what  fome  call  moral  certainty 
is  true  certainty,  though  it  do  not  take  away  a  pojfibi- 
lity  of  the  contrary.  Mr,  S.  afferts  the  dire5i  contrary., 
that  moral  certainty  is  only  probability,  hecaufe  it  does 
not  take  away  the  poffibility  of  the  contrary.  The  guide 
in  controverfies  *  differs  from  them  both,  and  makes 
moral,  certain  and  infallible  all  one,  I  defire  that 
they  would  agree  thefe  matters  among  themfelves  before 
they  quarrel  with  us  about  them. 

In  brief  then,  though  moral  certainty  be  fometimes 

'  taken  for  a  high  degree  of  probability  which  can  only 

produce  a  doubtful  affcnt-,  yet  it  is  alfo  frequently  us'd 

for  a  firm  and  undoubted  affent   tQ  a  thing  upon  fuch 

grounds  as  are  fit  fully  to  fatisfy  a  prudent  man  -,  and 

in  this  fenfe  I  have  always  us^d  this  term.     Eut  now 

infallibility  7J  an  abfolute  fe cur ity  of  the  underfianding 

from  all  pfffibility  of  miftake  in  what  it  believes.     And 

there  are  but  two  ways  for  the  underfianding  to  be  thus 

ficur^d'j  either  by  the  perfeSlign  of  its  own  nature,  or 

*P.g,  135. 

b 


The    P   R  E  F  A  C  E.  xv 

^  fupernatural  ajjiftance.  But  no  humane  underftand- 
ing  being  ahfolutely  fecur'd  from  pojjihility  of  mijiake  by 
the  perfeSfion  of  its  own  nature  {which  1  think  all  man- 
kind  except  Mr,  S.  have  hitherto  granted)  it  follows^ 
that  no  man  can  he  infallible  in  any  things  but  by  fu- 
pernatural ajjifiance.  Nor  did  ever  the  church  of  Rome 
pretend  to  infallibility  upon  any  other  account^  as  every 
one  knows  that  hath  been  converfant  in  the  writings  of 
their  learned  men.  And  Air,  Crefly  in  his  *  anfwer 
to  Dr,  Pierce  hath  not  the  face  to  contend  for  any 
other  infallibility  but  this^  that  the  immutable  God 
can  adually  preferve  a  mutable  creature  from  adtual 
mutation  :  but  I  can  by  no  means  agree  with  him  in 
what  imtnediately  follows^  concerning  the  omnifcience 
of  a  creature  %  that  God,  who  is  abfolutely  omni- 
icient,  can  teach  a  rational  creature  all  truths  necef- 
fary  or  expedient  to  be  known  ;  fo  that  though  a 
man  may  have  much  ignorance,  yet  he  may  be  in 
a  fort  omnifcient  within  a  determinate  fphere.  Om- 
nifcient  within  a  determinate  fphere^  is  an  infinite 
within  a  finite  fphere  \  and  is  not  that  a  very  pretty  fort 
of  knowing  all  things^  which  may  confifl  with  an  igno- 
rance of  many  things  ?  Of  all  the  controvertifts  /  have 
met  with  {except  Mr,  S.)  Mr,  CreiTy  is  the  happiefl 
at  thefe  fmart  and  ingenious  kind  of  reafonings. 

As  to  the  other  particular  of  the  fenfe  of  books;  it  is 
likewife  plainly  impoffible  that  any  thing  fhould  be  de- 
livered in  fuch  clear  and  certain  words  as  are  ahfolutely 
incapable  of  any  other  fenfe  \  and  yet  notwithfianding 
this,  the  meaning  of  them  may  be  fo  plain  as  that  any 
unprejudiced  and  reafonable  man  may  certainly  underftand 
them.  How  many  definitions  and  axioms,  ^c,  are 
there  in  Euclid,    in  the  fenfe  of  which  men  are  univcr'= 


*  P.  88,  89, 


Vol.  I.  b  faliy 

1. 


The    PREFACE. 

fally  agreed^  and  think  themfelves  undoubtedly  certain 
of  it  f  and  yet  the  words  in  which  they  are  exprefs^d^ 
may  pojftbly  bear  another  fenfe,  *The  fame  may  be  faid 
concerning  the  do^rines  and  precepts  of  the  holy  fcrip- 
tures ;  and  one  great  reafon  why  men  do  not  fo  generally 
agree  in  the  fenfe  of  thefe  as  of  the  other  is  becaufe  the 
interejis^  and  lujls^  and  pafjions  of  men  are  more  con- 
cerned in  the  one  than  the  other.  But  whatever  un- 
certainty there  may  he  in  the  fenfe  of  any  texts  of 
fcripture,  oral  tradition  is  fo  far  from  affording  us  any 
help  in  this  cafe,,  that  it  is  a  thoufand  times  more  un- 
certain and  lefs  to  be  trifled  to ;  efpecially  if  we  may 
take  that  to  he  the  traditionary  fenfe  of  texts  of  fcrip- 
ture^  which  we  meet  with  in  the  decretals  of  their 
popes,  and  the  ads  of  fome  of  their  councils ;  than 
which  never  was  any  thing  in  the  whole  world  more 
ahfurd  and  ridiculous :  and  whence  may  we  expert  to 
have  the  infallible  traditional  fenfe  of  fcripture^  if  not 
from  the  heads  and  reprefentatives  of  their  church  ? 

ms  may  abundantly  fufficefor  the  vindication  of  that 
pafTage  which  Mr,  S.  makes  fuch  a  rude  clamour  about,, 
as  if  I  had  therein  denfd  the  truth  and  certainty  of  all 
religion  \  but  durft  never  truji  the  reader  with  a  view 
ofthofe  words  of  mine  upon  which  he  pretended  to  ground 
this  calumny.  But  the  world  under ftands  well  enough,,that 
all  this  was  but  afhift  of  Mr,  S'sfor  the  fatis faction  of 
his  own  "party,,  and  a  pitiful  art  to  avoid  the  vindication 
cf  fure- footing,  a  task  he  had  no  mind  to  undertake. 

And  yet  the  main  defgn  of  this  book  which  he  calls 
faith  vindicated,  ISc.  is  to  -prove  that  which  I  do  not 
believe  any  man  living  ever  dsnied^  viz.  "That  what  is 
true  is  not  poffihle  to  be  falfe  :  which,  though  it  be  one 
tf  the  plaineft  truths  in  the  world,,  yet  he  proves  it  fa 
foolifhh^  as  would  make  any  man  {if  it  were  not  evident 

of 


The    PREFACE. 

6f  it  felf)  to  doubt  of  it.     He  proves  it  from  loglck, 

and  nature,   and  metaphyficks,   and  ethicks,   i^c.  I 

wonder  he  did  not  do  it  likezvife  from  arithmetick  and 

geometry,  the  principles  whereof^  he  *  tells  us^  are 

concerned  in   demon (Irating   the  certainty   of  oral 

tradition.  He  might  alfo  have  proceeded  to  aflrology, 

and  palmiftry,  and  chymiftry,   and  have  fhewn  how 

each  of  thefe  lend  their  afjifia?tce  to  the  evidencing  of 

this  truth.  For  that  could  not  have  been  more  ridiculous^ 

than  his  -f  argument  from   the  nature  of  fubjed,  and 

predicate,  and  copuh  in  faith-propofitions ;  becaufefor* 

footh  whoever  affirms  any  propojition  of  faith  to  be  true^ 

affirms  it  impoffihle  to  he  falfe.  Very  true.  But  would  any 

man  argue ^  that  what  is  true  is  impoffible  to  be  falfe^from 

the  nature  of  fubje6b,  predicate  and  copula/*  for  be  the 

prop  oft  t  ion  true  or  falfe^  thefe  are  of  the  fame  nature  in 

both^  that  is^  they  are  fubjed,  predicate,  and  copula. 

But  that  the  reader  may  have  a  tafle  of  his  clear 

flile  andway  of  reafoning^    I  fhall  for  his  fatisf action 

tranfcrib'e  Mr,  S'j  whole  argument  from  the  nature  of 

the  predicate.    His  words  are  thefe,    §  Our  argument 

from  the  copula.,  is  particularly  llrcngthned  from  the 

nature  of  the  predicate  in  the  propofitions  we  fpeak 

of  5  I  mean  in  fuch  fpeeches  as  affirm  fuch  and  fuch 

points  of  faith  to  be  true.   For  true  means  exiflent  in 

propofitions  which  exprels  only  the  an  efio^d.  thing, 

as  mod  points  of  faith  do ;  which  fpeak  abftradedly, 

and  tell  not    wherein  the  nature  of  the  fubjed:  ic 

fpeaks  of  confifts,  or  the  quidefl.  So  that  mod  of  the 

propofidons  chriftians  are  bound  to  profels  are  fully 

exprefs'd  thus,  a  trinity  is  exifient^  6cc.  and  the  like 

may  be  faid  of  thofe  points  which  belong  to  a  thing 

or  adlion  pad  j  as,  creation  was^  &c.  For,  exiflent  is 

*  Surefootini^  F'  93-      t  ^^ith  vinMc,  p.  6,  7,  &c,      §  P.  9, 
ic,  11,  12, 

b  ^  the 


The    PREFACE. 

the  predicate  in  thefe  two,  only  affixt  to  another  dif- 
ference of  time ;  and  'tis  equally  impoflible  fuch  fub- 
jedls  ihould  neither  have  been  nor  not  have  been,  or 
have  been  and  have  not  been  at  once,  as  it  is  that  a 
thing  fhould  neither  be  or  not  be  at  prcfent,  or  both 
be  and  not  be  at  prefent.  Regarding  then  ftedfaflly 
the  nature  of  our  predicate  [exijient']  we  fhall  find 
that  it  exprcfics  the  utmoft  adtuality  of  a  thing ,  and 
as  taken  in  the  pofture  it  bears  in  thofe  propofitions, 
that  adually  exercis*d^  that  is,  the  utmoft  actuality  in 
its  moft  adlual  (late  ;  that  is,  as  abfolutely  excluding 
all  manner  or  lead  degree  of  potentiality,  and  con- 
fequently  all  poffibility  of  being  otherwife ;  which  is 
radically  deftroyed  when  all  potentiality  is  taken 
away.  This  difcourfe  holding,  which  in  right  to 
truth  I  fhall  not  fear  to  affirm  (unconcern'd  in  the 
drollery  of  any  oppofer)  to  be  more  than  mathema- 
tically demonfirative^  it  follows  inevitably  that  whofo 
is  bound  to  profefs  a  trinity^  incarnation^  &c.  is  or 
was  exijient^  is  alfo  bound  to  profefs  that  'tis  impoffible 
they  Jhouldbe  not  exiftent  •,  or  which  is  all  one,  that  'tis 
impolTible  thefc  points  of  faith  fhould  be  falfe. 

The  fame  appears  out  of  the  nature  of  difiin5lion 
or  divifion  applied  to  our  predicate  exiftent^  as  found 
in  thefe  propofitions  j  for  could  that  predicate  bear 
a  pertinent  diilindtion  exprefiing  this  and  the  other 
refped,  or  thus  and  thus^  it  might  poflibly  be  ac- 
cording to  one  of  thefe  refpeds,  or  thus  confidered^ 
and  not  be  according  to  another,  that  is  another 
way  confidered  :  but  this  evafion  is  here  impoffible ; 
for  either  thofe  diilinguiffiing  notions  muft  be  more 
potential  or  antecedent  to  the  notion  of  exiftent^  and 
then  they  neither  reach  exiflejit^  nor  fupervene  to 
it  as  its  determinations  or  aquations,  which  diffe- 
rences ought  to  do  i  nor  can  any  notion  be  more 

a^ual 


The    PREFACE.  %iX: 

n^ual  or  determinative  in  the  line  of  fubftance  or 
being,  than  exiftent  is  ;  and,  fo  fit  to  diftinguifli  it 
in  that  line ;  nor,  laftly,  can  any  determination  in  the 
line  of  accidents  fervc  the  turn ;  for,  thofc  fuppofe 
exiftence  already  put,  and  fo  the  whole  truth  of 
the  propofition  entire  and  complete  antecedently 
to  them  :  'Tis  impofTible  therefore  that  what  is  thus 
affirmed  to  be  true^  Ihould  in  any  regard  be 
zfhrmcd  pcJfM  to  he  falfe :  the  impolTibihty  of  di- 
ftinguifhing  the  predicate  pertinently,  excluding 
here  all  polTibility  of  divers  refpeds. 

The  fame  is  demonflrated  from  the  impolTibility 
of  diftinguifhing  the  fubjedls  of  thofe  faith-propo- 
fitions  'y  for  thole  fubjedls  being  propofitions  them- 
felves,  and  accepted  for  truths^  as  is.  fuppofed, 
they  are  incapable  of  diftindion,  as  fhall  be  parti- 
cularly fhewn  hereafter.  Befides,  thofe  fubjecls  be- 
ing points  of  faith,  and  fo  {landing  in  the  abftrad, 
that  is,  not  defcending  to  fubfuming  refpedls,  even 
in  that  regard  too  they  are  freed  from  all  perti- 
nent diflinguifhablenefs. 

The  fame  is  demonflrated  from  the  nature  of 
truths  which  confifls  in  an  indivifible  -,  whence 
there  is  nothing  of  truth  had,  how  great  foever 
the  conceived  approaches  towards  it  may  be,  till  all 
may-not-hees^  or  potentiality  to  be  otherwife,  be  utterly 
excluded  by  the  aduality  of  is  or  exiflence ;  which 
put  or  difcover'd,  the  light  o^  truth  breaks  forth,  and 
the  dim  twilights  o^may-not-hees  vaniftiand  difappear. 

/  have  here  (reader)  frefented  thee  with  a  dif- 
courfe  which  (if  we  may  believe  Mr.  S.)  is  more 
than  mathematically  demonftrative.  A  rare  fight  in- 
deed! And  is  not  this  a  pleafant  man,  and  of  good 
affiirance  ?  I  now  find  it  true,  which  he  *  fays  elfe- 
*  Uturofthanh,  p   i.  whre^ 


XX  The    P  R  E  F  A  C  E. 

where^  that  principles  are  of  an  inflexible  genm^ 
and  felf-confident  too,  and  that  they  Jove  natu- 
rally to  exprefs  themfelvcs  with  an  affurednefs.  But 
certainly  the f acred  names  ^principles  and  demon- 
flration  were  never  fo  profaned  by  any  man  before. 
Might  not  a7iy  one  write  a  book  of  fuch  jargon,  and  call 
it  demcnjlralion  ?  And  would  it  not  equally  ferve  t4) 
prove  or  confute?  If  he  intended  this  fluff /?r  the  fa- 
tisfa^ion  of  the  people^  he  might  as  well  have  writ  in 
the  coptick  or  fclavonian  language :  yet  I  cannot  deny^ 
but  that  it  is  very  fuit able  to  the  principles  of  the  Ro- 
man church  ;  for  why  [hould  not  their  fcience  a^  well  as 
their  fervice  be  in  an  unknown  tongue  ?  and  that  the  one 
may  be  as  fit  to  improve  their  knowledge^  as  the  other  is 
to  raife  their  devotion.  But  if  he  defigned  this  for  the 
learned^  nothing  could  be  more  improper  ;  for  they  are 
far  lefs  apt  to  admire  nonfenfe  than  the  common  people : 
and  I  defire  that  no  man  (how  learned  foever  he  may 
think  himf elf )  would  be  over-confident^  that  this  is  fen fe, 
I  do  verily  believe^  that  neither  Harphius,  nor  Rusbro- 
'  chius,  nor  the  profound  mother  Juliana,  have  any  thing 
in  their  writings  more  fenfelefs  and  obfcure  than  this 
difcourfe  of  his^  which  he  affirms  to  be  more  than 
mathematically  demonftrative.  So  that  if  I  were  wor- 
thy to  advife  Mr,  S.  hefhouldgive  over  this  pretence  to 
fcience  ;  for  whatever  he  may  think^  his  talent  certainly 
does  not  lie  that  way  j  but  he  feems  to  be  as  well  made 
for  a  myftical  divine,  as  any  man  I  know  \  and  me- 
thinks  his  {up^nors  Jhould  be  fenfihle  of  this ^  and  employ 
him  to  write  about  the  deiform  fund  of  the  foul,  the 
fuper-effential  life,  the  method  of  felf-annihilation, 
and  the  palTive  unions  of  nothing  with  nothing  : 
thefe  are  profound  fubjedts,  and  he  hath  a  ftyle  pecu- 
liarly fitted  for  them.  For  ivm  in  this  parcel  of  fluff 

which 


The    PREFACE.  -xl 

which  I  have  now  cited ^  there  are  jive  or  fix  words, 
fuch  as  may-not-bces,  potentiality,  adluality,  adua- 
tion,  determinative,  fupervene  and  fubfume,  which 
{if  they  were  hut  well  mingled  and  difcreetly  ordered^  and 
brought  in  now  and  then  with  a  that  is,  to  explain 
one  another)  would  half  fet  up  a  man  in  that  way^  and 
enable  him  to  write  as  wyjiical  a  difcourfe  as  a  man 
would  wifh.  But  enough  of  this.  And  I  have  trefpafs^d 
not  a  little  upon  mine  own  difpofition  in  faying  thus 
much^  though  out  of  a  jufi  indignation  at  confident 
nonfenfe. 

It  is  time  now  to  draw  toward  a  conclufon  of  this 
delate,  I  fhall  only  leave  with  the  reader  a  few  ohfer- 
vat  ions  concerning  this  book  cf  Mr,  SV  and  his  doc- 
trine of  infallibility, 

Firfl,  nat  the  main  drift  of  his  book  being  to 
prove^  that  what  is  true  is  impoffible  to  befalfe^  he  op- 
pofes  no  body  that  I  know  of  in  this  matter. 

Secondly,  That  in  afferting  infallibility  to  be  neceffa- 
ry  to  the  true  nature  of  faith  he  hath  the  generality  of 
his  own  church  his  profefjed  adverfaries.  The  church  of 
Rome  never  arrogated  to  her  f elf  any  other  infallibility 
but  what  fhe  pretends  to  be  founded  upon  Ch  r  i  s  t  V 
promife  to  fecure  his  church  always  from  error  by  a  fu- 
per natural  afTiftance,  which  is  widely  different  from 
Mr.  S'j  rational  infallibility  of  oral  tradition.  Mr,  S. 
furely  cannot  be  ignorant^  that  the  divines  of  their 
church  {till  Mr,  Rufhworth  and  Mr.  White  found  out 
this  new  way)  did  generally  refolve  faith  into  the  infaU 
lible  teflimony  of  the  churchy  and  the  infallibility  of  their 
church  into  our  Saviour  V  -promife  •,  and  the  evi^ 
dence  of  the  true  church  into  the  marks  of  the  church, 
or  the  motives  of  credibility,  which  motives  are  ac^ 
knowledge d  to  be  only  prudential,  and  not  demonflra- 

tive. 


xxii  The    PREFACE. 

tivc.  *  Bel lar mine  y^_y J",  that  the  marks  of  the  church 
do  not  make  it  evidently  true,  which  is  the  true  church, 
but  only  evidently  credible ;  and  that  {fays  he)  is  faid 
to  be  evidently  credible  which  is  neither  feen  in  ic 
felf,  nor  in  its  principles  ;  but  yet  hath  fo  many  and 
jio  weighty  teftimonies,  that  every  wife  man  hath 
reafon  to  believe  it.  Becanus  f  to  the  fame  pitrpofe^ 
that  the  motives  of  credibility  are  only  the  founda- 
tion of  a  prudent,  but  not  of  an  infallible  alTent. 
I  know  very  well  that  Mr.  Knott  andfome  others  would 
faiyi  perfuade  us,  that  an  affent  in  fome  fort  infallible 
may  be  built  upon  prudential  motives,  which  is  as  ab- 
furd  as  it's  poffible ;  but  if  it  were  true,  yet  Mr.  S. 
wotdd  not  accept  of  this  fort  of  infallibility  \  nothing 
lefs  will  ferve  him  than  demonftrative  motives,  and 
fuch  as  are  a,bCohtQ\y  conclufive  of  the  thing.  Sta- 
pleton  (as  Mr,  Crefly  tells  us)  ey^prefly  fays,  that  fuch 
.  an  infallible  certitude  of  means  is  not  now  neceffary 
to  the  paftors  of  the  church,  as  was  neceffary  to  the 
apoitles,  who  were  the  firfi  founders  of  the  church. 
So  that,  according  to  thefe  authors,  there  may  be  true 
faith  where  neither  the  means  nor  the  motives  of  it  are 
fuch  as  to  raife  our  affent  to  the  degree  of  infallibility. 
And  this  is  as  much  to  the  full  as  any  proteftant  [that 
I  know  of)  ever  faid.  Nay,  even  his  friends  of  the 
tradition,  Mr.  Rufh worth,  Mr.  White  and  Mr. 
Crefiy,  are  guilty  of  the  fame  damnable  and  funda- 
mental error,  as  Mr,  S.  calls  it  \\.  For  they  grant 
Icfs  affurance  than  that  which  is  infallible  to  be  fufficient 
to  chriftian  faith,  and  that  we  are  juflly  cendeynn'd  if 
we  refufc  to  believe  upon  fuch  evidence  as  does  ordina- 
rily fat  isfy  prudent  men  in  human  affairs.  And  particu- 

■'*  L.  4.  de  Ecclef.  f  Sam.  Tom,  2.  partic.  de  fide,  c   i. 

I  Lct/er  to  his  Anf-,::f.rn-,  p.  c. 

larly^ 


The    PREFACE.  xxiii 

larly^  Mr,  Wh.  jjiakes  a  queftion  whether  human  na- 
ture be  capable  of  infallibility',  as  I havejhewnat  large 
by  a  clear  and  full  tefiimony  out  of  each  of  thefe  authors, 
in  the  anfwer  to  fure-footing  -f.  Of  which  teftimo- 
nies,  though  Mr.  S.  hath  not  thought  fit  to  take  the 
leaf  notice  throughout  his  book  ;  yet  I  cannot  but  think 
it  a  reafonable  requeft^  to  defire  him  to  njindicate  the 
divines  of  his  own  church  {efpeclally  thofe  of  his  own 
way)  from  thefe  things^  before  he  charge  us  any  farther 
with  them. 

Thirdly,  that  Mr,  S.  by  this  principle,  that  infal- 
libility is  neceffary  to  the  true  nature  of  faith.,  makes 
every  true  believer  infallible  in  matters  of  jaith  ;  which 
is  fuch  a  paradox,  as  I  doubt  whether  ever  it  enter' d 
into  any  ether  maifs  mind.  But  if  it  be  true.,  what 
need  then  of  any  infallibility  in  pope  or  council  ?  and  if 
this  infallibility  be  grounded  upon  the  nature  of  oral 
tradition.,  what  need  of  fupernatural  affifiance  ?  1  doubt 
Mr.  S.  vjould  be  loth  to  preach  this  do5lrine  at  Rome  ; 
/  have  often  heard.,  that  there  is  an  old  tejly  gentle- 
man lives  there^  who  would  take  it  very  ill  that  any 
one  beftdes  hi?nfelf  fbould  pretend  to  be  infallible. 

Fourthly,  that  Mr.  S.  by  his  principles  does  plainly 
exclude  from  falvation  the  generality  of  his  own  churchy 
that  is,  all  that  do  not  believe  ikpon  his  grounds.  And 
this  is  the  neceffary  confequence  of  his  reafoning  in  a 
late  treatife,  intituled.^  the  method  to  arrive  at  fatif- 
fad:ion  in  religion  :  the  principles  whereof  are  thefe  \ 
that  the  church  is  a  congregation  of  faithful  ;  thp 
faithful  are  thofe  v/ho  have  true  faith  \  that.,  till  it  be 
known  which  is  the  true  faith,  it  cannot  be  knov/n 
-which  is  the  true  church  ;  that  which  is  the  true  faith^ 
can  only  be  known  by  the  true  rule  of  faith,  which  is 

t  P.    I  20,   &c. 

Vol.  1  c  oral 

I. 


XXIV  The    PREFACE. 

oral  tradition  >  and  that  the  infallibility  of  this  rule 
is  evident  to  common  fenfe.  Jnd  from  thefe  -prin- 
ciples he  concludes  *,  that  thofe  who  follow  not  this 
rule,  and  fo  are  out  of  this  church,  can  have  no 
true  faith  *,  and  that  though  many  of  the  points  to 
which  they  aflent  are  true,  yet  their  afTcnt  is  not 
faith  \  for  faith  (fpeaking  of  chriftian  faith)  is  an  af- 
fent  which  cannot  poflibly  be  falfe.  So  that  the 
foundation  of  this  method  is  the  felf  evident  infallibility 
of  oral  tradition <i  which  hath  been  fufficiently  conftdcr^d 
in  the  anfwcr  to  fure- footing,  which  yet  remains  un- 
anfwer'd,  7'hat  which  I  am  now  concerned  to  take 
notice  of  is  the  confequence  of  this  method,  which  does 
at  one  blow  exco7?imunicate  and  un-chrijlian  the  far 
greateft  part  of  his  own  church.  For  if  all  who  do 
mi  follow  oral  tradition  as  their  only  rule  of  faith  are 
out  of  the  churchy  and  can  have  7io  true  faith ^  then  all 
who  follow  the  council  of  Trent  are  ipfo  fafto  no 
chriftians.  For  nothing  is  plainer^  than  that  council 
did  not  make  oral  tradition  the  fole  ride  of  their  faith ^ 
nor  rely  upon  it  as  fuch  •,  which  hath  been  prov'd  at 
large  in  the  anfvver  to  fure- footing. 

But  why  is  Mr.  S.  fo  zealous  in  this  matter  of  in- 
fallihiliiy  ?  'There  is  a  plain  reafon  for  it.  He  finds  that 
confidence^  how  weakly  foever  it  be  grounded^  hath  fome 
effe5l  upon  the  common  and  ignorant  people  ;  who  are 
apt  to  think  there  is  fomethlng  more  than  ordinary  in  a 
fwaggering  man^  that  talks  of  nothing  but  principle^ 
^/^ti  dernonftration.  And  fo  we  fee  it  in  fome  other  pro- 
feffions.  There  are  a  fort  of  people  very  well  known^ 
■who  find  that  the  moft  effe5lual  way  to  cheat  the  people 
is  always  to  pretend  to  infallible  cures. 

-*  Sea.  21. 


The    PREFACE.  xxv 

I  have  now  done  with  his  infallibility.  But  I  muft 
not  forget  this  letter  of  thanks.  I fhall  wholly  jpafs  hy 
the  paffion  and  ill  language  of  it^  which  a  man  may 

•plainly  fee  to  have  proceeded  from  a  gall'd  and  uneafy 
mind.  He  would  fain  put  on  fojne  pleafantnefs^  hut  was 
not  able  to  conceal  his  vexation.  Nor  floall  I infift  upon  his 
palpable  fouffling  about  the  explication  of  the  terms  rule 
and  faith.  He  was  convinced  that  he  had  explained 
them  very  untowardly^  and  therefore  would  gladly  come 
^ffhf^O'^^^S  II  ^^^^  he  did  not  intend  explication,  but  only 
to  predicate  or  afErm  fomething  of  them.    And  yet  the 

'  whole  defign  of  the  fir ji  page  ^/fare-footing  is  to  fhew 
the  neceffity  of  beginning  with  the  meaning  of  thole 
words  which  exprefs  the  thing  under  debate.  And 
this  method  he  tells  us  he  will  apply  to  his  prefenc 
•purpofe,  and  will  examine  well  what  is  meant  by  thofe 
words  v:hich  exprefs  the  thing  he  was  to  difcufs^  namely y 
the  rule  of  faith.  JSlow  if  to  examine  well  what 
is  meant  by  words,  be  not  to  go  about  to  explain 
the?n^  I  fnuft  confefs  my f elf  to  be  in  a  great  error.  Of 
the  fame  kind  is  his  apology  for  his  teftimonies,  as  if 
they  were  *  not  intended  againft  the  proteftants  % 
whereas  his  book  was  writ  againft  the  proteftants, 
and  when  he  comes  to  his  teftimonies,  he  '\  declares  the 
defign  of  them  to  be^  to  fecond  by  authority  what  he 
had  before  eftabli/hed  by  reafon.  So  that  if  the  rational 
part  of  his  book  was  intended  againft  the  f  rot  eft  ants  9 
and  the  teftimonies  were  defign ed  to  fecond  it^  I  cannot 
underftand  why  he  fhould  fay  one  was  lefs  intended 
againft  them  than  the  other.  But  it  feems  he  is  fo 
confcious  of  the  weaknefs  of  thofe  teftimonies,  that  he 
does  not  think  them  fit  to  fatisfy  any  hut  thofe  who  he- 
lieve  him  already, 

II  P.  7.  *P.  105.  \  Sure-fiQiingi   p.    126, 

C    2  J^ 


xxvi  The    PREFACE. 

Jb  td  his  charge  of  falfe  citations,  it  is  but  the 
common  artifice  of  the  Roman  controvertijls  when  they 
have  ?w thing  eJfc  to  fay.  However  that  the  world  may 
fee  how  Utile  he  is  to  be  trufted^  I fljall  inftance  in  two 
or  three  about  which  he  makes  the  loudefi  clamour^  and 
leave  it  to  the  reader  to  judge  by  thefe  of  hisfincerity  in 
the  refl. 

*  He  fays^  I  notorioufly  abufe  the  preface  to  Rufli- 
worth'j  dialogues  in  citing  the  author  of  it  to  fay  that 
fuch  certainty  as  makes  the  caufe  always  to  work 
the  fame  efFed  though  it  take  not  away  the  abfolute 
pofTibiHty  of  working  otherwife,  ought  abfolutely  to  be 
reckon'd  in  the  degree  of  true  certainty  ;  whereas  {fays 
Mr.  S.)  he  07ily  tells  us  there^  p.  7.  that  by  moral  cer- 
tainty [fome  underflood]  fuch  a  certainty  as  makes 
the  caufe,  i^c.  To  vindicate  my  f elf  in  this^  Ifloall  only 
fet  the  author' J  words  before  the  reader'^  eyes.  They 
,  are  thefe.  This  term  moral  certainty^  every  one  cxph- 
cated  not  ahke ;  but  fome  underftood  by  it  fuch  a 
certainty  as  makes  the  caufe  always  work  the  fame  ef- 
fe£l,  though  it  take  not  away  the  abfolute  polTibility 
of  working  otherwife.  Others  call'd  that  a  moral  cer- 
tainty which  proceeds  from,  &c,  A  third  explication 
of  this  word  is,  ^c.  Of  thefe  three  the  firft  ought 
abfolutely  to  be  reckon'd  in  the  degree  of  true  certain- 
ty, and  the  authors  confider'd  as  miftaken  in  underva- 
luing- ir.  Is  this  only  to  tell  us  that  by  moral  certainty 
fome  underftood,  (^c.  Does  not  /^^prefacer  alfo  exprcf 
ly  affirm^  that  what  thefe  fome  underftood  by  moral  cer- 
tainty, ought  abfolutely  to  be  reckon'd  in  the  degree  of 
true  certainty  ?  which  is  the  very  thing  I  cited  him  for. 

-j-  Another  heavy  charge  iSy  that  according  to   my 
Sifual  fincerity,   /  quote  Rufliworth'i  nephew    to  fay^ 


* 


P.    (^2.  I    P      6y 


ihat 


The    PREFACE.  xxvii 

that  a  few  good  words  are  to  be  caft  hi  concerning  f crip- 
ture^  [for  the  fatisf^6lion  of  indifferent  men  who 
have  been  brought  up  in  this  verbal  and  apparent 
refped  of  the  fcripture,]  whereas  [fays  Mr.  S.)  in 
the  place  you  cite,  he  only  expreffes,  it  v/ould  be  a 
fatishccion  to  indifferent  men  to  fee  the  pofuions  one 
would  induce  them  to  embrace,  maintainable  by 
fcripture.  Does  he  only  fay  fo  ?  let  the  reader  judge, 
The  zvords  in  Mr.  Rufhworth  *  are  thefe :  yet  this  I 
muft  teil  ye,  that  it  were  a  great  fatisfadion  for  in- 
different  men,  that  have  been  brought  up  in  this 
verbal  and  apparent  refpefl  of  the  fcripture,  to  fee 
that  the  pofitions  you  would  induce  them  unto,  can 
be  and  are  maintain'd  by  fcripture,  and  that  thty 
are  grounded  therein.  Certainly  one  would  think  that 
either  this  man  has  no  eyes  or  7io  forehead. 

But  the  greateft  cut-cry  of  all  is^  that  I  ahife 
his  firft  demonftration  by  virtue  of  a  dire^i  faljifi' 
cation  both  of  his  words  and  fenfe^  by  cogging  in  the 
word  [  all  ]  making  his  prin'siple  run  thus^  that  the 
greateft  hopes  and  fears  are  applied  to  the  minds  of 
[  all  ]  chriftians.  This  indeed  I  make  to  be  his  prin- 
ciple grounded  upon  his  words  which  I  had  cited  a 
little  before ;  and  they  are  thefc,  firft  •,  that  chri- 
ftian  dodlrine  was  at  lirll:  unanimouQy  fettled  by  the 
apoftles  in  the  hearts  of  the  faithful  difpers'd  in 
great  multitudes  over  feveral  parts  of  the  world. 
2/y',  that  this  dodtrine  was  firmly  believed  by  [all] 
thofe  faithful  to  be  the  way  to  heaven,  and  the  con- 
tradidling  or  deferting  or  it  to  be  the  way  to  damna- 
tion i  fo  that  the  greateft  hopes  and  fears  imaginable 
were,  by  engaging  the  divine  authority,  ftrongly 
apply *d  to  the  minds  of    the  firft    believers,    ^c. 

Now 


xxviii  The    PREFACE. 

Now  if  thefe  firft  believers,  to  whom  he  fays^  thcfe 
hopes  and  fears  were  ftrongly  apply'd,  he  all  thofe 
faichful  he  /poke  of  before^  which  were  difpers'd  over 
feveral  parts  of  the  world,  (as  the  tenor  of  his 
words  plainly  fhews)  what  are  thefe  lefs  than  all  the 
chrifiians  of  that  age  ?  and  he  himfelf  a  little  after 
tells  us^  there  is  the  fame  reafon  of  the  following  ages. 
So  that  I  made  his  principle  run  no  otherwife  than  he 
himfelf  had  laid  it.  Jlnd  if  it  contradi5l  what  he  fays 
elfewhere^  it  is  no  new  orfirange  thing.  I  wonder  more 
at  his' confidence  in  charging  fuch  falfifications  upon  me 
as  every  inan*s  eyes  will  prefently  confute  him  in.  Me^ 
thinks  though  a  man  had  all  fcience,  and  all  principle?^, 
yet  it  might  not  he  amifs  to  have  fome  confcience. 

I  fhall  only  fpeak  a  few  words  to  the  two  folid 
points,  {as  I  may  call  them)  of  his  letter,  and  I  have 
done. 

I  had  charged  him  that  he  makes  traditions  certainty 
a  firft  and  felf-evidenc  principle,  and  yet  that  he  goes 
about  to  demonftrate  it ;  which  I  faid  was  inipoffihle  to 
he  done^  and  if  it  could  be  done  was  need/efs.  To  avoid 
this  inconvenience  which  he  found  himfelf  for  ely  prefs'd 
withal^  he  difiinguifhes  between  fpeculative  and  prac- 
tical felf -evidence .^  and  fays  that  things  which  are  prac- 
tically felf-evident  may  be  demonftrated,  but  thofe  that 
are  fpeculatively  fo^  cannot.  But  he  mufi  not  think 
to  fhelter  himfelf  from  fo  palpable  an  abfurdity  by  this 
impertinent  diftin5lion.  For  let  things  be  evident  how 
they  willy  fpeculatively  or  pradlically,  'tis  plain  that 
if  they  be  principles  evident  of  themfelvcs  they  need 
nothing  to  evidence  them  ;  and  if  they  be  ^v^  principles 
there  can  be  nothing  to  make  them  more  evident ^  hecaufe 
there  is  nothing  before  them  to  demonjlrate  them  by. 
Now  if  Mr,  S.  had  in  truth  believed  that  the  certainty 

of 


The    PREFACE. 

of  tradition  was  a  firft  <2;;J  felf-evident  principle,  he 
fbould  by  all  means  have  let  it  alone^  for  it  was  in  a 
njery  good  condition  to  Jhift  for  it  felf ;  but  his  blind  way 
of  demonflr  ation  is  enough  to  caft  a  mifl  about  the  clear  eft 
truth  in  the  world.  But  perhaps  by  the  felt-evident 
certainty  of  tradition^  Mr,  S.  only  means  that  it  is 
evident  to  himfelf ;  /^r  /  dare  fay  it  is  fo  to  no  body  elfe. 
And  if  that  be  his  meanings  he  did  well  enough  to  en- 
deavour to  dernonflrate  it  •,  it  was  no  more  than  needed. 
'The  other  point  is  about  his  firft  principles,  fuch  as 
thefe,  a  rule  is  a  rule,  faith  is  faith,  i^c.  which  he 
fays  *  muft  principle  all  that  can  be  folidly  conclu- 
ded either  about  rule  or  faith.  Of  thefe  he  hath 
7nighty  fiore^  and  bleffeth  himfelf  in  it^  as  the  rich  man 
in  the  gofpel  did  in  his  full  barns,  foul,  take  thine 
eafe,  thou  haft  principles  laid  up  for  many  years  ; 
and  out  of  an  excefs  of  good-nature  pities  my  cafe,  who 
did  f  undertake  to  write  a  difcourfe  about  the  ground 
of  faith,  without  fo  much  as  one  principle  to  blefs 
my  felf  with.  But  the  mtfchief  is,  that  after  all  this 
flir  about  theni  they  are  good  for  nothing,  and  of  the 
very  fame  flarnp  with  that  frivolous  07ie  An^olt  \\fpeaks 
of  [j^  3.  thing  be,  it  is,]  which  he  rejects  as  a  vain 
and  ridiculous  propofition.  Such  are  Mr,  S'j  firfi 
principles,  furfeited  of  too  much  truth  {as  an  mgeni- 
ous  writer  of  his  own  church  fays  of  them)  and  ready 
to  burfl  with  felf- evidence,  and  yet  by  ten  thoufand  of 
them  a  man  floall  not  be  able  to  advance  one  flep  in 
knowledge,  becaufe  they  produce  no  conclufion  but  them- 
felves  \  whereas  it  is  of  the  nature  of  principles  to  yield 
a  conclufion  different  from  themfelves.  And  to  convince 
Mr,  S.  fully  of  the  foolery  of  thefe  principles,  I  will 
try  what  can  be  done  with  them,  either  in  a  catago- 

*  P.   II.        t  P.  74.       [j  Analyt.  Poller.  1.  7. 

ric4l 


The    PREFACE, 

rical  or  hypothetical  fyllogifm^  e.  g.  A  rule  is  a  rule, 
tradition  is  a  rule,  ergo,  tradition  is  a  rule.  Jgain, 
if  a  rule  be  a  rule,  then  a  rule  is  a  rule  ;  but  a  rule 
is  a  rule,  ergo.  How  is  any  man  the  wifer  for  all 
this  ?  hut  it  may  he  Mr,  S.  can  make  heller  work  with 
them,  and  manage  them  viore  dextroujiy,  fo  as  to  prin- 
ciple any  thing  that  can  be  folidly  concluded  in  any 
controverfy. 

And  now  I  hope  at  laft  to  have  given  Mr.  S.  full 
fatisfaElion  ;  fince  he  has  brought  me  to  the  very  pint 
he  defir'd.,  to  acknowledge  that  I  have  no  principles. 
And  indeed  if  there  he  no  other  to  he  had  hut  fuch  as 
thefe,  I  do  declare  to  all  the  worlds  that  I  neither  have 
any  principles,  nor  will  have  any. 


S  E  R- 


[  1  ] 

SERMON     I. 

The  wifdom  of  being  religious. 

JOB   xxviii.  28. 

And  unto  man  he  faid^  behold^  the  fear  of  the  Lor  d,  that 

is  wifdom  ^  and  to  depart  from  evil  is  tinderflanding. 

IN  this  chapter  Job  difcourfeth  of  the  fecrets  of  §  e  R  M. 
nature,  and  the  unfearchable  perfedions  of  the  ^• 
works  of  God.  And  the  refult  of  his  difcourfe 
is  this,  that  a  perfect  knowledge  of  nature  is  no 
where  to  be  found  but  in  the  author  of  it ;  no  Jefs 
wifdom  and  underftanding  than  that  which  made  the 
world,,  and  contrived  this  vafi:  and  regular  frame  of 
nature,  can  thoroughly  underftand  the  phllofophy  of 
it,  and  comprehend  fo  vaft  a  defign :  but  yet  there 
is  a  knowledge  which  is  very  proper  to  man,  and  lies 
level  to  human  underflanding  \  and  that  is  the  know- 
ledge of  our  creator,  and  of  the  duty  we  owe  to  him ; 
the  wifdom  of  pleafingGoD,  by  doing  what  he  com- 
mands, and  avoiding  what  he  forbids :  this  know- 
ledge and  wifdom  may  be  attained  by  man,  and  is  fuf- 
ficient  to  make  him  happy.  "  And  unto  man  he  faid, 
*'  behold,  the  fear  of  the  Lord  that  is  wifdom,  and 
"  to  depart  from  evil  is  underflanding." 

Thefe  words  confift  of  two  propofitions,  which  are 
not  diftindl  in  fenfe,  but  one  and  the  fame  thing  va- 
rioufly  cxprefs'd  -,  for  wifdom  and  underflanding  are 
fynonymous  words  here;  and  though  fometimes  they 
have  different  notions,  yet  in   the  poetical  books  of 

Vol.  I,  B  fcripturc 


2  The  wifdom  of  bemg  religious. 

S  E  R  M.  fcripture  they  are  moft  frequently  ufed  as  words  equi- 

^^^^_^  valent,  and   do  both  of  them    indifferently  fignify 

either  a  fpeculative  knowledge  of  things,  or  apradlical 

fkill  about  them,  according  to  the  exigency  of  the 

matter  or  thing  fpoken  of     And  fo  likewife  the  fear 

of  the  Lord,  and  departure  from  evil,  are  phrafesof  a 

very  near  fenfe,  and  like  importance ;  and  therefore 

we  find  them  feveral  times  put  together  in  fcripture : 

Prov.ili.7. "  fear  the  Lord, and  depart  from  evil :"  "  by  the  fear 

Prov.  XVI.  «  q£  j.j^g  Lqj^  ^  ^^^  depart  from  evil."    So  that  they 

differ  only  as  caufe  and  effedb,  which  by  a  metonymy 
nfual  in  all  forts  of  authors,  are  frequently  put  one 
for  another. 

Now,  to  fear  the  Lord  and  to  depart  from  evil 
are  phrafes,  which  the  fcripture  ufeth  in  a  very  great 
latitude,  to  exprefs  to  us  the  fum  of  religion,  and  the 
whole  of  our  duty.  And  becaufe  the  large  ufage  of 
thefe  phrafes  is  to  be  the  foundation  of  my  following 
difcourfe,  I  fhall  for  the  farther  clearing  of  this  mat- 
ter endeavour  to  fhew  thefe  two  things  : 

1.  That  'tis  very  ufual  in  the  language  of  fcrip- 
ture to  exprefs  the  whole  of  religion  by  thefe  and  fuch 
like  phrafes. 

2.  The  particular  fitnefs  of  tliefe  two  phrafes  to 
defcribe  religion. 

I.  It  is  very  ufual  in  the  language  of  fcripture  to 
exprefs  the  whole  of  religion  by  fome  eminent  prin- 
ciple or  part  of  religion. 

The  great  principles  of  religion  are  knowledge, 

faith,  remembrance,  love,  and  fear ;  by  all  which  the 

fcripture  ufeth  to  exprefs  the  whole  duty  of  man. 

In  the  old  teflament,  by  the  knowledge,   remem- 

Pro.xxx.3.  brance  and  fear  of  God.  Religion  is  called  "  the  know- 

*'\  ledge 


The  wifdom  of  being  religious.  3 

"  ledge  of  the  holy.'*     And  wicked  men  are  defcrib-  S  E  R  M. 
edto  be  ftich  as  "  know  not  God."  So  likewife,  by  the       ^  _, 
fear  of  the  Lord,  frequently  in  this  book  of  Job,  Jer.x.  25. 
and  in  the  Pfalms  and  Proverbs.  And,  "  then  they  that  Mai.  iii. 
"  feared  the  Lord  fpake  often  one  to  another."     And  ^ 
the  fear  of  God  is  exprefly  faid  to  be  the  fum  of  re- 
ligion, "  fear  God  and  keep  his  commandments,  for  Eccl.  xii- 
"  this  is  the  whole  of  man :"  and   on  the  contrary,  ^^' 
the  wicked  are  defcribed  to  be  fuch  as  "  have  not  the  Pfa.xxxvi. 
"  fear  of  God  before  their  eyes."     And  fo  likewife  '* 
by  the  remembrance  of  God,  "  remember  thy  crea- Eccl.xii. 
"  tor  in  the  days  of  thy  youth  ;"  that  is,  enter  upon  '* 
a  religious  courfe  betimes :  and  on  the  contrary,  the 
charadler  of  the  wicked  is,  that  they  forget  God  ; 
"  the  wicked  Ihall  be  turned  into  hell ;  and  all  the  Pfal.  ix. 
"  nations  that  forget  God."     In  the  new  teflament,  ^'^' 
religion  is  ufually  exprefTed  by  faith  in  God  and 
Christ,    and  the  love  of  them.     Hence  it  is,  that 
true  Chriftians  are  fo  frequently  called  believers,  and 
wicked  and  ungodly  men  unbelievers :  and  that  good 
men  are  defcribed  to  be  fuch  as  love  God.  "  All  things  Rom.  viii. 
"  fhall  work   together  for  good  to  them  that  love  ^^' 
"  God  -,"  and"fuchaslovetheLoRD  JesusChrist."  Eph.vi. 
Now  the  reafon  why  thefe  are  put  for  the  whole  of  ^'^' 
religion,  is,  becaufe  the  belief,  and  knowledge,  and 
remembrance,  and  love,  and  fear  of  God,  are  fuch 
powerful  principles,  and  have  fo  great  an  influence  up- 
on men  to  make  them  religious,tliat  where  any  one  of 
thefe  really  is,  all  the  reft,  togethf  r 'wi^^  the  true  and 
genuine  effeds  of  them,  are  fuppofed^t^Tfee. 

And  fo  likewife  the  fum  of  all  religion  is  often  ex- 
prefTed by  fome  eminent  part  of  it ;  which  will  ex- 
plain the  fecond  phrafe  here  in  the  text,  departing 

B  2  from 


T^he  wifdom  of  being  religious. 
from  evil.  The  woriliip  of  God  is  an  eminent  part 
of  religion  -,  and  prayer,  which  is  often  in  fcripture 
exprefled  by  feekingGoD,  and  calling  upon  his  name, 
is  a  chief  part  of  religious  worfliip.  Hence  religion 
is  defcribed  by  feeking  God,  "  he  is  a  rewarder  of 
"  them  that  diligently  feek  him  :"  and  by  calling 
upon  his  name,  "  whofoever  caiieth  upon  the  name 
"  of  the  Lord,  (hall  be  faved."  And  fo  by  coming 
to  God,  and  by  departing  from  evil.  In  this  fallen 
ftate  of  man,  religion  begins  with  repentance  and 
converfion,  the  two  oppofite  terms  of  which,  are  God 
and  fm  :  hence  it  is  that  religion  is  defcribed  fome- 
times  by  coming  to  God,  "  he  that  cometh  to  God, 
"  muft  believe  that  he  is  j"  that  is,  no  man  can  be 
religious,  unlefs  he  believe  there  is  a  God  ;  fome- 
times  by  departing  from  fm,  "  and  he  that  departeth 
"  from  evil,  maketh  himfelf  a  prey  :'*  that  is,  fuch 
was  the  bad  ftate  of  thofe  times  of  which  the  prophet 
there  complains  that  no  man  could  be  religious  but 
he  was  in  danger  of  being  perfecuted. 

II.  Vox  the  fitnefs  of  thefe  two  phrafes  to  defcribe 
religion. 

I.  For  the  firft,  (the  fear  of  the  Lord)  the  fitnefs 
cf  this  phrafe  will  appear,  if  we  confider  how  great 
an  influence  the  fear  of  God  hath  upon  men  to  make 
them  religious.  Fear  is  a  pafTion  that  is  moft  deep- 
ly rooted  in  our  natures,  and  flows  immediately  from 
that  principle  of  felf-prefervation  which  God  hath 
planted  in  every  man.  Every  one  deflres  his  own 
prefervation  and  happinefs,  and  therefore  hath  a  na- 
tural dread  and  horror  of  every  thing  that  can  deftroy 
his  being,  or  endanger  his  happinefs.  And  the  great- 
eil  danger  is  from  the  greatcft  power,   and  that  is 

omni- 


I, 


^he  wifdom  of  being  religious,  ^ 

omnipotency*  So  that  the  fear  of  God  is  an  inward  SERM. 
acknowledgment  of  a  holy  and  jull  being,  which  is 
armed  with  an  almighty  and  irrefiftible  power  ;  God 
having  hid  in  every  man's  confcience  a  fecret  awe 
and  dread  of  his  infinite  power,  and  eternal  juftice. 
Now  fear  being  fo  intimate  to  our  natures,  it  is  the 
ftrongeft  bond  of  laws,  and  the  great  fecurity  of  our 
duty. 

There  are  two  bridles  or  rellraints  which  God  hath 
put  upon  human  nature,  fhame  and  fear.  Shame  is 
the  weaker,  and  hath  place  only  in  thofe  in  whom 
there  are  fome  remainders  of  virtue.  Fear  is  the  ftrong- 
er,  and  works  upon  all  who  love  themfelves  and  de- 
fire  their  own  prefervation.  Therefore  in  this  de- 
generate flate  of  mankind,  fear  is  that  paffion  which 
hath  the  greatefl  power  over  us,  and  by  which  God 
and  his  laws  take  the  fureft  hold  of  us:  our  defire,  and 
love,  and  hope,  are  not  fo  apt  to  be  wrought  upon 
by  the  reprefentation  of  virtue,  and  the  promifes  of 
reward  and  happinefs,  as  our  fear  is  from  the  appre- 
henfions  of  divine  difpleafure.  For  though  we  have 
loft  in  a  great  meafure  the  guft  and  relilli  of  true 
happinefs,  yet  we  flill  retain  a  quick  fenfe  of  pain 
and  mifery.  So  that  fear  relies  upon  a  natural  love 
of  our  felves,  and  is  complicated  with  a  neceffary  de- 
fire  of  our  own  prefervation.  And  therefore  religion 
ufually  makes  it's  firft  entrance  into  us  by  this  pafTion; 
hence  perhaps  it  is  that  Solomon  more  than  once 
calls  "  the  fear  of  the  Lord  the  beginning  of  wif- 
V  dom." 

'  2.  As  for  the  fecond  phrafe  [departing  from  evil] 
the  fitnefs  of  it  to  exprefs  the  whole  duty  of  man,  will 
appear,  if  we  confider  the  neceifary  connexion  that  is 

between 


6  T^e  wifdom  of  being  religious* 

S  E  R  M.  between  the  negative  and  the  pofitive  part  of  our  du  • 
^_^'__^  ty.  He  that  is  careful  to  avoid  all  fin  willfincerely  en- 
deavour to  perform  his  duty.  For  the  foul  of  man 
is  an  adive  principle,  and  will  be  employed  one  way 
or  other,  it  will  be  doing  fomething  •,  if  a  man  abilain 
from  evil,he  will  do  good.  Now  there  beingfuchaiirait 
connexion  between  thefe,  the  whole  of  our  duty  may 
be  exprefled  by  either  of  them  ;  but  mod  fitly  by  de- 
parting from  evil,  becaufe  that  is  the  firil  part  of  our 
duty.     Religion  begins  in  the  forfaking  of  fin  : 

Virtus  eji  vitiiwi  fugere^  ^  fapentia  pima 
Stuhitia  caruijfe 

^^  Virtue  begins  in  the  forfaking  of  vice  ;  and  the  firft 
"  part  of  wifdom  is  not  to  be  a  fool."    And  there- 
fore the  fcripture,  which  mentions  thefe  parts  of  our 
duty,  doth  conflantly  put  departing  from  evilfirft-, 
Pf.  xxxiv.  "  depart  from  evil  and  do  good.     Ceafe  to  do  evil, 
xxxvH.27.  "  ^^^^'^  ^^  ^^  well."     ^'  Let  the  wicked  forfake  his 
Ifa.  i.  16,  "  way,  and  the  unrighteous  man  his  thoughts,  and 
1^  and     «  Ytt  him  return  unto  the  Lord."     We  are  firit  to 
Eph.  iv.    "  put  off  the  old  man  which  is  corrupt  according  to 
22,23, 24.  cc  deceitful  lufts,"  and  then  "  to  be  renewed  in  the 
"  fpirit  of  our  minds,  and  to  put  on  the  new  man, 
iPet.  iii.   "  &c."  "  let  him  efchew  evil  and  do  good."     To 
»^-  all  which  I  may  add  this  farther  confideration,  that 

the  law  of  God  contained  in  the  ttn  commandments 
confiding  moftly  of  prohibitions,  (thou  fhalt  not  do 
fuch  or  fuch  a  thing)  our  obfervance  of  it  is  mod  fit. 
ly  exprefied  by  departing  from  evil,  which  yet  in- 
cludes obedience  likewife  to  the  pofitive  precepts  im- 
plied in  thofc  prohibitions. 

Having 


The  wifdom  of  being  religious,  y 

Having  thus  explained  the  words,  I  come  now  to  S  E  R  M. 
confider  the  propolition  contained  in  them,  which  is 
this: 

That  religion  is  the  befl  knowledge  and  wifdom. 

This  I  Ihall  endeavour  to  make  good  thefe  three 
ways. 

I  By  a  dire(5l  proof  of  it. 

2.  By  fhewing  on  the  contrary  the  folly  and  igno- 
rance of  irreligion  and  wickednefs. 

3.  By  vindicating  religion  from  thofe  common  im- 
putations which  feem  to  charge  it  with  ignorance  or 
imprudence. 

I  begin  with  the  diredl  proof  of  this  :  and  becaufe 
religion  comprehends  two  things,  the  knowledge  of 
the  principles  of  it,  and  a  fuitable  life  and  pradice  ; 
(the  firfl:  of  which  being  fpeculative,  may  more  pro-^ 
perly  be  called  knowledge  ;  and  the  latter,  becaufe 
'tis  pradical,  may  be  called  wifdom  or  prudence) 
therefore  I  fhall  endeavour  diflind:ly  to  prove  thefe 
two  things. 

1.  That  religion  is  the  bed  knowledge. 

2.  That  'tis  the  trueft  wifdom. 
I .  Firft,  that  it  is  the  befl  knowledge. 
The  knowledge  of  religion  commends  itfelf  to  us 

upon  thefe  two  accounts. 

1.  'Tis  the  knowledge  of  thofe  things  which  are 
in  themfelves  moil  excellent. 

2.  Of  thofe  things  which  are  mod  ufeful  and  ne- 
ceflary  for  us  to  know. 

Firfl,  it  is  the  befl  knowledge,  becaufe  it  is  the 

knowledge  of  thofe  things  which  are  in  themfelves 

mofl  excellent  and  defirable  to  be  known  •,  and  thofe 

are  God,  and  our  duty.     God  is  the  fum  and  com- 

3  prehen- 


8  ^he  wifdom  of  being  religious. 

S  E  R  M.  prehenfion  of  all  perfedlion.  It  is  delightful  to  know 
the  creatures,  becaufe  there  are  particular  excellen- 
cies fcattered  and  difperfed  among  them,  which  are 
fome  fhadows  of  the  divine  pcrfediions  :  but  in  God 
all  perfections  in  their  highefl  degree  and  exaltation 
meet  together  and  are  united.  How  much  more 
delightful  then  muft  it  needs  be  to  fix  our  minds  up- 
on fuch  anobjed:  in  which  there  is  nothing  but  beauty 
and  brightnefs,  what  is  amiable,  and  what  is  excel- 
lent ;  what  will  ravifli  our  affedions  and  raife  our 
wonder,  pleafe  us  and  aftonifh  us  at  once  -,  and  that 
the  finite  meafure  and  capacity  of  our  underflandings 
is  not  able  to  take  in  and  comprehend  the  infinite  per- 
fedions  of  God,  this  indeed  fhews  the  excellency  of 
the  objedl,  but  doth  not  altogether  take  away  the  de- 
Jightfulnefs  of  the  knowledge.  For  as  it  is  pleafant 
to  the  eye  to  have  an  endlefs  profpedl,  fo  is  it  fome 

^'  pleafure  to  a  finite  underflanding  to  view  unlimited 

excellencies  which  have  no  fhore  or  bounds,  though 
it  cannot  comprehend  them.  There  is  a  pleafure  in 
admiration  ^  and  this  is  that  which  properly  caufeth 
admiration,  when  we  difcover  a  great  deal  in  an  ob- 
je6l  which  we  underftand  to  be  excellent,  and  yet  we 
fee  we  know  not  how  much  more  beyond  that,  which 
ourunderflandings  cannot  fully  reach  and  comprehend. 
And  as  the  knowledge  of  God  in  his  nature  and 
perfedions  is  excellent  and  defirable,  fo  likewife  to 
know  him  in  thofe  glorious  manifeflations  of  himfelf 
in  the  works  of  creation  and  providence  ;  and  above 
all,  in  that  ftupendious  work  of  the  redemption  of 
the  world  by  Jesus  Christ,  which  was  fuch  a  my- 
fiery,  and  fo  excellent  a  piece  of  knowledge  that  the 

iPet.  112."  the  angels"  are  faid  to  "  defire  to  pry  into  it." 

And 


The  wifdom  of  heiiig  religiotis,  9 

And  as  the  knowledge  of  God  is  excellent,  fo  like-  ^  E  R  M. 
wife  of  our  duty,  which  is  nothing  elfe  but  virtue  and  ._.-^'-,^ 
goodnefs  and  holinefs,  which  are  the  image  of  God, 
a  conformity  to  the  nature  and  will  of  God,  and  an 
imitation  of  the  divine  excellencies  and  perfe6lions, 
fo  far  as  we  are  capable  :  for  to  know  our  duty  is  to 
know  what  it  is  to  be  like  God  in  goodnefs,  and  pie- 
ty, and  patience,  and  clemency,  in  pardoning  inju- 
ries,   and  palTing  by  provocations  5    in  juftice  and 
righteoufnefs,  in  truth  and  faithfulnefs,  and  in  a  hatred 
and  deteftation  of  the  contrary  of  thefe :  in  a  word, 
it  is  to  know  what  is  the  good  and  acceptable  will  of 
God,  what  it  is  that  he  loves  and  delights  in,  and  is 
pleafed  withal,  and  would  have  us  to  do  in  order  to 
our  perfedlion  and  our  happinefs.     It  is  defervedly 
accounted  a  piece  of  excellent  knowledge  to  know 
the  laws  of  the  land,  and  the  cuflroms  of  the  country 
we  live  in,  and  the  will  of  the  prince  we  live  under  : 
how  much  more,  to  know  the  ftatutes  of  heaven,  and 
the  laws  of  eternity,   thofe  immutable  and  eternal 
rules  of  juftice  and  righteoufnefs;  to  know  the  will 
and  pleafure  of  the  great  monarch  and  univerfal  king 
of  the  world,  and  the  cuftoms  of  that  country  where 
we  muft  live  for  ever  ?  This  made  David  to  admire 
the  law  of  God  at  that  ftrange  rate,  and  to  advance 
the  knowledge  of  it  above  all  other  knowledge,  "  I  pfal.  cxix, 
"  have  feen  an  end  of  all  perfedlion,  but  thy  com-  9^- 
"  mandment  is  exceeding  broad." 

Secondly,  it  is  the  knowledge  of  thofe  things  which 
are  moft  ufeful  and  necefifary  for  us  to  know.  The 
goodnefs  of  every  thing  is  meafured  by  it's  end  and 
ufe,  and  that  is  the  beft  thing  which  ferves  the  bell: 
end  and  purpofe  ;  and  the  more  necefiary  any  thing 
Vol.  L  .  C  is 


7he  wifdom  of  being  religious. 
is  to  fuch  an  end,  the  better  it  is  :  fo  that  the  belt 
knowledge  is  that  which  is  of  greatefl  ufe  and  necef^ 
fity  to  us  in  order  to  our  great  end,  which  is  eternal 
happinefs,  and  the  falvation  of  our  fouls.  Curious 
fpeculations,  and  the  contemplation  of  things  that 
are  impertinent  to  us,  and  do  not  concern  us,  nor  ferve 
to  promote  our  happinefs,  are  but  a  more  fpecious 
and  ingenious  fort  of  idlenefs,  a  more  pardonable  and 
creditable  kind  of  ignorance.  That  man  that  doth 
not  know  thofe  things  which  are  of  ufe  and  nccelTity 
for  him  to  know  is  but  an  ignorant  man,  whatever 
he  may  know  befides.  Now  the  knowledge  of  God > 
and  of  Christ,  and  of  our  duty,  is  of  the  greateft 
iifefulnefs  and  neceffity  to  us  in  order  to  our  happi- 
nefs. It  is  of  abfolute  neceffity  that  we  fhould  know 
God  and  Christ,  in  order  to  our  being  happy; 
Joh.xvii.  «  this  is  life  eternal  (that  is,  the  only  way  to  it) 
^*  "to  knov/  thee  the  only  true  God,  and  him  whom 

"  thou  haft  fent,  Jesus  Christ."  It  is  neceffary 
alfo  in  order  to  our  happinefs  to  know  our  duty ;  be- 
caufe  it  is  neceflary  for  us  to  do  it,  and  it  is  impof- 
fible  to  do  it  except  we  know  it. 

So  that  whatfoever  other  knowledge  a  man  maybe 
endued  withal,  he  is  but  an  ignorant  perfon  who 
doth  not  know  God,  the  author  of  his  being,  the 
preferver  and  protestor  of  his  life,  his  fovereign  and 
his  judge,  the  giver  of  every  good  and  perfed  gift, 
his  fureft  refuge  in  trouble,  his  beft  friend  or  worft 
enemy,  the  prefent  fupport  of  his  life,  his  hopes  in 
death,  his  future  happinefs,  and  his  portion  for  ever : 
who  does  not  know  his  relation  to  God,  the  duty  that 
he  owes  him,  and  the  way  to  pleafe  him  who  can 
make  him  happy  or  miferable  for  ever :  who  doth 

t  J20t 


T^he  wifdom  of  beirig  religious.  X  i 

not  know  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  is  the  way,  S  ER  M. 
the  truth,  and  the  life. 

If  a  man  by  a  vaft  and  imperious  mind,  and  a 
heart  large  as  the  fand  upon  the  fea-fnore,  (as  it  is 
faid  of  Solomon)  could  command  all  the  knowledge 
of  nature  and  art,  of  words  and  things ;  could  attain 
to  a  maftery  in  all  languages,  and  found  the  depths 
of  all  arts  and  fciences,  meafure  the  earth  and  the 
heaven,  and  tell  the  ftars,  and  declare  their  orders 
and  motions  \  could  difcourfe  of  the  interefts  of  all 
ftates,  the  intrigues  of  all  courts,  the  reafon  of  all 
civil  laws  and  conditutions,  and  give  an  account  of 
the  hiftory  of  all  ages  •,  could  fpeak  of  trees,  "  from 
"  the  cedar-tree  that  is  in  Lebanon,  even  unto  the 
"  hyffop  that  fprings  out  of  the  wall;  and  ofbealls 
"  alfo  and  of  fowls,  and  of  creeping  things,  and  of 
"  lifhes :"  and  yet  fhould,  in  the  mean  time,  be  de- 
ftitute  of  the  knowledge  of  God  and  Christ,  and 
his  duty  ;  all  this  would  be  but  an  impertinent  vani- 
ty, and  a  more  glittering  kind  of  ignorance  ;  and 
fuch  a  man  (like  the  philofopher,  who  whilfl  he  was 
gazing  upon  the  liars,  fell  into  the  ditch)  would 
hut  fapienter  defcendere  in  infernum^  be  undone  with  all 
this  knowledge,  and  with  a  great  deal  of  wifdom  go 
down  to  hell. 

2.  Secondly,  that  to  be  religious  is  the  truefl  wif- 
dom, and  that  likewife  upon  two  accounts. 

1.  Becaufe  it  is  to  be  wife  for  our  felves. 

2.  It  is  to  be  wife  as  to  our  main  intereft  and  con- 
cernment. 

I .  'Tis  to  be  wife  for  ourfelves.  There  is  an  ex- 
preffion,  Job  xxii.  21.  "  he  that  is  wife  is  profitable 
J^  to  himfelf  j"  and  Prov.  ix.  12.  "  if  thou  be  wife, 

C  2  «  thou 


7he  wifdojn  of  being  religious. 
"  thou  fhalt  be  wife  for  thy  felf :"  intimating  that 
wifdom  regards  a  man's  own  interefl  and  advantage, 
and  that  he  is  not  a  wife  man  that  doth  not  take  care 
of  himfelf  and  his  own  concernments,  according  to 
that  of  old  Ennius,  nequicquam  fapere  fapienlem,  qui 
fibi  iffi  p'odejfe  nm  quiret,  that  man  hath  but  an 
empty  title  of  wifdom,  and  is  not  really  wife,  who  is 
not  wife  for  hinifelf.  As  felf-prefervation  is  the  firft 
principle  of  nature,  fo  care  of  our  felves  and  our  own 
interefl  is  the  firfl:  part  of  wifdom.  He  that  is  wife 
in  the  affairs  and  concernments  of  other  men,  but 
carelefs  and  negligent  of  his  own,  that  man  may  be 
faid  to  be  bufy,  but  he  is  not  wife  :  he  is  employed 
indeed,  but  not  ib  as  a  wife  man  fhould  be  :  now  this 
is  the  wifdom  of  religion,  that  it  directs  a  man  to  a 
care  of  his  own  proper  intereft  and  concernment. 

2.  It  is  to  be  wife  as  to  our  main  intereft.  Our 
chief  end  andhigheft  intereft  is  happinefs  :  and  this  is 
happinefs  to  be  freed  from  all,  (if  it  may)  however 
from  the  greateft  evils ;  and  to  enjoy  (if  it  may  be) 
all  good,  however  the  chiefeft.  To  be  happy  is  not 
only  to  be  freed  from  the  pains  and  difeafes  of  the 
body,  but  from  anxiety  and  vexation  of  fpirit  :  not 
only  to  enjoy  the  pleafures  of  fenfe,  but  peace  of  con- 
fcience,  and  tranquillity  of  mind.  To  be  happy,  is 
not  only  to  be  fo  for  a  little  while,  but  as  long  as  may 
be  ;  and  if  it  be  polTible,  for  ever.  Now  religion 
defigns  our  greateft  and  longeft  happinefs  •,  it  aims  at 
a  freedom  from  the  greateft  evils,  and  to  bring  us 
to  the  pofTeflion  and  enjoyment  of  the  greateft  good* 
For  religion  wifely  confiders  that  men  have  immortal 
fpirits,  which  as  they  are  fpirits  are  capable  of  a  plea- 
ilire  and  happinefs  diftind  from  that  of  our  bodies 

and 


^ke  wifdom  of  beiftg  religious,  13 

.and  our  fenfesj  and  becaufe  they  are  immortal,  areSERM. 
capable  of  an  everlafting  happinefs.  Now  our  fouls  , 
being  the  beft  part  of  our  felves,  and  eternity  being 
infinitely  the  mod  confiderable  duration,  the  great- 
eft  wifdom  is  to  fecure  the  intereft  of  our  fouls  and 
of  eternity,  though  it  be  with  lofs  and  to  the  preju- 
dice of  our  temporal  and  inferior  interefts.  There- 
fore religion  directs  us  rather  to  fecure  inward  peace 
than  outward  eafe,  to  be  more  careful  to  avoid  ever- 
lafting and  intolerable  torment  than  ftiort  and  light 
affli(5lions  which  are  but  for  a  moment ;  to  court  the 
favour  of  God  more  than  the  friendftiip  of  the  world, 
and  not  fo  much  "  to  fear  them  that  can  kill  the  body, 
"  and  after  that  have  no  more  that  they  can  do,  as 
"  him  who  after  he  hath  killed,  can  deftroy  both  body 
"  and  foul  in  hell :"  in  a  word,  our  main  intereft  is  to 
be  as  happy  as  we  can,  and  as  long  as  is  pofTible ; 
and  if  we  be  caft  into  fuch  circumftances,  that  we 
muft  be  either  in  part  and  for  a  time,  or  elfe  wholly 
and  always  miferable,  the  beft  wifdom  is  to  chufe  the 
greateft  and  moft  lafting  happinefs,  but  the  leaft  and 
iliorteft  miifery.  Upon  this  account  religion  prefers 
thofe  pleafures  which  flow  from  the  prefenceof  God 
for  evermore,  infinitely  before  the  tranfitory  plea- 
fures of  this  world,  and  is  much  more  careful  tq  avoid 
eternal  mifery  than  prefent  fufferings.  This  is  the 
wifdom  of  religion,  that  upon  confideration  of  the 
whole,  and  cafting  up  all  things  together,  it  does  ad- 
vife  and  lead  us  to  our  beft  intereft. 

11.  The  fecond  way  of  confirmation  fhall  be  by 
endeavouring  to  lliew  the  ignorance  and  folly  of  ir- 
religion.  Now  all  that  are  irreligious  are  fo  upon 
One  of  thefe  two  accounts:  either,  firft,  becaufe  they 

do 


14  ^he  wlfdom  of  being  religious, 

S  E  R  M.  do  not  believe  the  foundations  and  principles  of  reli- 
gion, as  the  exiftence  of  God,  the  immortality  of 
the  foul,  and  future  rewards  :  or  t\{t^  fecondly,  be- 
caufe  though  they  do  in  fome  fort  believe  thefe  things, 
yet  they  live  contrary  to  this  their  belief  j  and  of 
this  kind  are  the  far  greateft  part  of  wicked  men. 
The  firfl  fort  are  guilty  of  that  which  we  call  fpecu- 
lative,  the  other  of  pradical  atheifm.  I  fhall  endea- 
vour to  fnew  t\\Q  ignorance  and  folly  of  both  thefe. 

Firfl,  fpeculative  atheifm  is  unreafonable,  and  that 
upon  thefe  five  accounts,  i.  Becaufe  it  gives  no  to- 
lerable account  of  the  exiflence  of  the  world.  2.  Nor 
does  it  give  any  reafonable  account  of  the  univerfal 
confent  of  mankind  in  this  appreheniion,  that  there 
is  a  God.  3.  It  requires  more  evidence  for  things 
than  they  are  capable  of  4.  The  atheifl  pretends 
to  know  that  which  no  man  can  know.  5.  Atheifm 
contradids  itfelf 

I.  Becaufe  it  gives  no  tolerable  account  of  the  ex- 
iftence of  the  world.  One  of  the  greateft  difHculties 
that  lies  in  the  atheift's  way  is,  upon  his  own  fup- 
pofition  that  there  is  no  God,  to  give  a  likely  ac- 
count of  the  exiftence  of  the  world.  We  fee  this 
vaft  frame  of  the  world,  and  an  innumerable  multi- 
tude of  creatures  in  it,  all  which  we  who  believe  a 
God  attribute  to  him  as  the  author  of  them.  For  a 
being  fuppofed  of  infinite  goodnefs  and  wifdom  and 
power  is  a  very  likely  caufe  of  thefe  things.  What 
more  likely  to  make  this  vaft  world,  to  ftretch  forth 
the  heavens  and  lay  the  foundations  of  the  earth,  and 
to  form  thefe  and  all  things  in  them  of  nothing,  than 
infinite  power  ?  what  more  likely  to  communicate 
teing  and  fo  many  degrees  of  happinefs  to  fo  many 

feveral 


^he  wifdom  of  being  religious.  15 

feveral  forts  of  creatures,  than  infinite  goodnefs  ?  what  SERM, 
more  likely  to  contrive  this  admirable  frame  of  the 
univerfe  and  all  the  creatures  in  it,  each  of  them  fo 
perfeft  in  their  kind,  and  all  of  them  fo  fitted  to  each 
other  and  to  the  whole,  than  infinite  counfel  and 
wifdom  ?  This  feems  to  be  no  unreafonable  account. 

But  let  us  fee  now  what  account  the  atheift  gives 
of  thefe  things.  If  there  be  no  God  there  are  but 
thefe  two  ways  im.aginable  for  the  world  to  be.  Ei- 
ther it  mi;ll  be  faid,  that  not  only  the  matter  but  alfo 
the  frame  of  this  world  is  eternal  •,  and  that,  ^  to 
the  main,  things  always  were  as  they  are,  without  any 
lirft  caufe  of  their  being  %  which  is  the  way  of  the 
Ariflotelian  atheift  %  (thofe  I  mean,  who  proceed  up- 
on Ariilotle's  fuppofition  of  the  eterni  ty  of  the  world, 
but  yet  deny  it  to  be  from  God,  which  heexprefly 
afferts :)  or  elfe  the  matter  of  the  world  being  flip- 
pofed  to  be  eternal  and  of  it  felf,  the  original  of  this 
Vafl  and  beautiful  frame  mufh  be  afcribed  merely  to 
chance,  and  the  cafual  concourfe  of  the  parts  of  mat- 
ter •,  which  is  the  way  of  the  Epicurean  atheift.  But 
neither  of  thefe  ways  gives  a  tolerable  account  of  the 
exiftence  of  the  world. 

I.  I  fhall  firft  confider  the  hypothecs  of  thofe  whom 
for  diftindion  fake  I  call  the  Ariflotelian  atheifts, 
which  is  this  -,  that  not  only  the  matter  but  alfo  the 
frame  of  the  world  is  eternal ;  and  that,  as  to  the  main, 
it  was  always  as  it  is,  of  it  felf ,  and  that  there  hath 
been  from  all  eternity  a  fuccefTion  of  men  and  other 
creatures  without  any  firft  caufe  of  their  being,  . 

It  feems  to  be  very  hard,  and  if  that  would  do 
any  good  might  bejuft  matter  of  complaint,  that  we 
are  fallen  into  fo  prophane  and  fceptical  an  age,  which 

takes 


1 6  7be  wifdom  of  behtg  religious. 

SERM.  takes  a  pleafure  and  a  pride  in  unravelling  almofl:  all 
_J_  .  the  received  principles  both  of  religion  and  reafon  : 
fo  that  we  are  put  many  times  to  prove  thofe  things 
which  can  hardly  be  made  plainer  than  they  are  of 
themfclvcs.  And  fuch  almoft  are  thefe  principles, 
that  God  is,  and  that  all  things  are  made  by  him  v 
which  by  reafon  of  the  bold  cavils  of  perverfe  and 
unreafonable  men  we  are  now  a-days  put  to  defend. 

That  fomething  is  of  itfelf  is  evident,  becaufe  we 
fee  things  are.  And  the  things  that  we  fee  muft  ei- 
ther have  had  fome  firft  caufe  of  their  being,  or  have 
been  always  and  of  themfelves.  One  of  thefe  two  is 
unavoidable. 

So  that  the  controverfy  between  us  and  this  fort  of 
atlaeifts  comes  to  this ;  which  is  the  more  credible 
opinion,  that  the  world  was  never  made,  nor  had  a 
beginning,  but  always  was  as  it  is,  and  that  there  hath 
been  from  all  eternity  a  fuccelTion  of  men  and  other 
creatures  without  any  firft  caufe  of  their  being ;  or, 
that  there  was  from  all  eternity  fuch  a  being  as  we 
conceive  God  to  be,  infinite  in  power,  goodnefs  and 
wifdom,  which  made  us  and  all  other  things :  the 
firil:  of  thefe  opinions  I  fhall  lliew  to  be  altogether 
incredible,  and  the  latter  to  have  all  the  credibility 
and  evidence  of  which  a  thing  of  that  nature  is  capa- 
ble, and  fuch  evidence  as  is  fufficient  to  convince  any 
impartial  and  confiderate  man. 

Now  in  comparing  the  probabilities  of  things,  that 
we  may  know  on  which  fide  the  advantage  lies, 
thefe  two  confiderations  are  of  great  moment,  what 
the  arguments  are  on  each  fide,  and  what  the  difE-. 
culties.  For  if  there  be  fair  proofs  on  the  one  fide, 
and  pone  at  all  pn  the  other,  and  if  the  moft  prefTing 

difficulties 


T%e  nJoifdom  of  being  religious]  1 7 

difficulties  be  on  that  fide  on  which  there  arc  no  proofs :  S  E  R  M. 
this  is  fufficient  to  render  one  opinion  very  credible,       ^' 
and  the  other  altogether  incredible. 

Thefe  two  things  therefore  I  fhall  endeavour  to 
make  good,  in  the  matter  that  is  now  under  our  con- 
fideration.  Firft,  that  there  are  fair  proofs  on  our 
fide,  and  as  convincing  as  the  nature  of  the  thing  is 
capable  of;  but  that  there  is  no  pretence  of  proof  on 
the  other.  And  fecondly,  that  the  fide  on  which 
there  is  no  proof  is  incumbred  with  the  greateft  dif- 
ficulties. 

Firfl,  that  there  are  fair  proofs  on  our  fide,  and  as 
convincing  as  the  nature  of  the  thing  is  capable  of ; 
but  that  there  is  no  pretence  of  proof  on  the  other. 

This  queftion, "  whether  the  world  was  created  and 
''  had  a  beginning,  or  not  ?"  is  a  queilion  concerning 
an  ancient  matter  of  fad,  which  can  only  be  decided 
thefe  two  ways ;  by  teftimony,  and  by  probabilities 
of  reafon.  Teftimony,  is  the  principal  argument  in 
a  matter  of  this  nature,  and  if  fair  probabilities  of 
reafon  concur  with  it  this  argument  hath  all  the 
flrength  it  can  have  :  now  both  thefe  are  clearly  on 
the  affirmative  fide  of  the  quefiion,  viz.  that  the 
world  was  created,  and  had  a  beginning. 

I.  Teflimony  ^   of  which  there  be  two  kinds,  di- 
vine, and  human. 

Divine  teftimony,  as  fuch,  is  not  proper  to  be 
ufed  in  this  caufe,  confidering  the  occafion  of  tht  pre- 
fent  debate :  for  that  would  be  to  beg  the  firil  and  main 
queftion  now  in  controverfy,  which  is,  whether  there 
be  a  God  or  not  ?  which  a  teftimony  from  God  does 
fuppofe,  and  therefore  ought  not  to  be  brought  for 
the  proof  of  it.  'Tis  true  indeed  that  thofe  effedh 
Vol.  I.  D  of 


i8  The  wifdom  of  beiJtg  religious', 

SERM.  of  divine  power,  I  mean  miracles,  which  will  prove  a 
divine  teftimony  to  an  infidel,  will  as  well  prove  the 
being  of  a  God  to  an  atheift  ;  but  when  we  difpute 
againft  thofe  who  deny  a  God,  no  teftimony  ought 
to  be  prefumed  to  be  from  God,  but  muft  be  proved 
to  be  fo.  And  whatever  argument  proves  that  will 
alfo  prove  that  there  is  a  God. 

Human  teftimonies  are  of  two  forts  •,  univerfal  tra- 
dition, and  written  hiftory.  Both  thefe  are  plainly 
and  beyond  difpute  on  our  fide. 

Firft,  there  is  an  univerfal  tradition  concerning 
the  beginning  of  the  world,  and  that  it  was  made  by 
God.  And  for  the  evidence  of  this  we  have  the  con- 
curring tradition  of  the  moft  ancient  nations,  the  E- 
gyptians  and  Phoenicians  *  ;  and  of  the  moft  barba- 
rous the  Indians ;  who,  as  Strabo  f  tells  us, "  did  in  ma- 
*'  ny  things  agree  with  the  Grecians,"  particularly  in 
this, "  that  tlie  world  did  begin,  and  fhould  have  an 
*'  end;  and  that  God,  the  maker  and  governor  ofit> 
"  is  prefentin  all  parts  of  it."  And  Acofta  tells  us,  that 
at  the  firft  difcovery  of  America,  the  inhabitants  of 
Peru  did  worfhip  one  chief  God,  under  the  name  or 
title  of  the  maker  of  the  univerfe :  and  yet  thefe  peo- 
ple had  not  had  any  commerce  with  the  other  known 
parts  of  the  world,  for  God  knows  how  many  ages. 

To  which  may  be  added,  that  the  moft  ancient  of 
the  philofophers,  and  thofe  that  were  the  heads  of 
the  chiefs  Sed:s  of  philofophy,  as  Thales,  Anaxago- 
ras  and  Pythagoras,  did  likewife  confent  to  this  tradi- 
tion.    Particularly  concerning  Thales,  l\illy  §  tells 

*  Vid.  Grot,  de  verlt.  chr.  relig.  1.  i .         f  Geograph.  1,  15. 
J  De  nat.  deorum  1.  i. 

2  ,.  .  WS, 


I'he  wifdom  of  being  religious,  19 

us,  that  he  was  "  the  firft"  of  all  thephilofophers  "that  S  E  R  M. 
"  enquired  into  thefe  things,  and  he  faid,  that  water  ^^U^ 
"  was  the  beginning  of  all  things,  and  that  God  was 
"  that  mind,  (or  intelligent  principle)  which  fafhioned 
*'  all  things  out  of  water."So  likevvife  Strabo  *  informs 
us  that  the  Brachmans,  the  chief  fed  of  philofophers 
among  the  Indians,  agreed  with  the  Grecians  in  this, 
"  that  the  world  was  made  of  water."  Which  agrees 
exadly  with  Mofes's  account  of  the  creation,  viz. 
"  that  the  fpirit  of  God  moved  upon   the  face  of 
"  the  waters  j"  which  ^t,  Peter  exprefles  thus,  "  that  2  Pet.  ili. 
"  by  the  word  of  God  the  heavens  and  the  earth  ?• 
(for  fo  the  Hebrews  call  the  world)  "  were  of  old  l| 
"  vVflCT(^  cuvsj-wcrflt  conflituted  or  m^ade  of  water  \  not 
"  ftanding  out  of  the  water,"  as  our  tranflation  ren- 
ders it. 

Nay  Ariftole  \  himfelf,  who  was  the  great  alTer- 
ter  of  the  eternity  of  the  v/orld,  gives  this  account 
why  the  gods  were  anciently  reprefented  by  the  hea- 
thens as  fwearing  by  the  lake  Styx,  becaufe  "  water" 
was  fuppofed  to  be  the  "principle  of  all  things."  And 
thisj  he  tells  us,  was  the  "  mod  ancient  opinion"  con- 
cerning the  original  of  the  world  ;  and  that  the  "  very 
"  oldeft  writers  of  theology,"  and  thofe  who  lived  "  at 
"  the  greateft  diftance  from  his  time,"  were  of  this  mind. 
And  in  the  book  de  Mundo  |j  it  is  freely  acknowledged 
to  have  been  an  ancient  faying,  and  a  general  tra- 
dition among  all  men,  "  that  all  things  are  of  God, 
"  and  were  made  by  him."  I  will  conclude  this  with 
that  full  teftimony  of  Maximus  Tyrius  §  to  this  pur- 

.  *Geogr.  1.  15.        f  Metaph.  1. 1.  c.  3.       |j  Cap.  6. 
§  DilTertat.  i. 

D  2  pofe 


20  ^he  ivifdom  cf  being  reltgiom. 

Se  RM.  pofe  :  "  However  (fays  he)  men  may  differ  in  other 
things,  yet  they  all  agree  in  this  law  or  principle, 
that  there  is  one  God,  king  and  father  of  all  things, 
&c.  This  the  Greeks  fay,  this  the  Barbarians  -,  this 
thofe  that  live  upon  the  continent,  and  thofe  that 
dwell  by  the  fea  \  the  wife  and  the  unwife." 
Secondly,  we  have  likewife  a  moft   ancient  and 
credible   hiftory  of  the  beginning  of  the  world  -,  I 
mean  the  hiftory  of  Mofes,  with  which  no  book  in 
the  world  in  point  of  antiquity  can  contend.     I  fhall 
not  now  go  about  to  ftrengthen  my  argument,  by 
pleading  the  divine  authority  of  this  book  -,  for  which 
yet  I  could  offer  good  evidence,  if  that  were  proper 
to  the  matter  in  hand.     It  is  fufficient  to  my  prefent 
purpofe  that  Mofes  have  the  ordinary  credit  of  an 
hiilorian  given  him,  which  none  in  reafon  can  deny 
him,  he  being  cited  by  the  moil  ancient  of  the  heathen 
hiftorians,    and  the  antiquity  of  his  writings  never 
queftioned  by  any  of  them,  as  Jofephus  *  affures  us. 
Now  this  hiftory  of  Mofes   gives  us  a  particular 
account  of  the  beginning  of  the  world,  and  of  the 
creation  of  it  by  God.     Which  affcrtion   of  his  is 
agreeable  to  the  m.oft  ancient  writers  among  the  hea- 
then, whether  poets  or  hiftorians.     And  feveral  of 
the  main  parts  of  Mofes's  hiffory,  as  concerning  the 
flood,  and   the  firil  fathers  of  the  feveral  nations  of 
the  world  (o/  which  he  gives  a  particular  account. 
Gen.   X.)  do  very  well  accord  with  the  mod  ancient 
accounts  of  prophane  hiRory.     And  I  do  not  know, 
whether  any  thing  ought  more  to  recommend  the^ 
writings  of  Mofes  to  a  human  belief,  than  the  eafy 

*L.  !.  contri  Appion. 

o.  and 


T'he  wifdom  of  being  religious.  2 1 

and  credible  account  which  he  gives  of  the  original  S  E  R  M. 
of  the  world,  and  of  the  firft  peopling  of  it. 

As  to  the  account  of  ancient  times,  both  the  Egyp- 
tian and  Chaldean  accounts,  which  are  pretended  by 
fome  to  be  fo  vaftly  different  from  that  of  the  fcrip- 
tures,  may  for  all  that  be,  near  the  matter,  eafily  re- 
conciled with  it  *;  if  we  do  but  admit  what  Diodo- 
rus  Siculus,  and  Plutarch,  very  credible  perfons,  and 
diligent  fearchers  into  ancient  books,  do  moft  ex- 
prefly  afllirc  us,  viz.  that  both  thofe  nations  did  an- 
ciently reckon  months  for  years.  And  the  account 
of  the  Chinefes  is  not  hard  to  be  reconciled  with  that 
of  the  Septuagint.  Now  in  fo  nice  and  obfcure  a 
matter,  as  the  account  of  ancient  times  is,  it  ought 
to  fatisfy  any  fair  and  reafonable  enquirer  if  they  can 
be  brought  any  whit  near  one  another. 

So  that  unlverfal  tradition  and  the  moft  ancient 
hiftory  in  the  world  are  clearly  on  our  fide.  And  if 
they  be,  one  can  hardly  wifh  a  more  cpnvincing  ar- 
gument. For  if  the  world  and  confequently  mankind 
had  a  beginning,  there  is  all  the  reafon  in  the  world 
to  expeft  thefe  two  things :  firft,  that  there  Ihould 
be  an  univerfal  tradition,  concerning  this  matter ; 
becaufe  it  was  the  moft  memorable  thing  that  could 
be  tranfmitted  to  pofterity.  And  this  was  eafy  to 
be  done,  if  mankind  fprang  from  one  common  root 
and  original,  from  whence  this  tradition  would  natu- 
rally be  univerfaily  difFufed.  Secondly,  it  may  with 
the  fame  reafon  be  expeded,  that  fo  remarkable  a 
thing  fhould  be  recorded  in  the  moft  ancient  hiftory. 
Now  both  thefe  have  accordingly  happened.     But 

*  Yid.  Hr.  Still ingfl^efs  Orig.  Sac.  where  this  is  fully  made  out. 

then 


22  ^he  wifdom  of  being  religions, 

E  R  M.  then  on  the  other  hand,  if  the  world  was  eternal  and 
had  no  beginning,  there  could  be  no  real  ground  for 
fuch  a  tradition  or  hiftory.  And  if  fuch  a  tradition 
were  at  any  time  endeavoured  to  be  fet  on  foot,  it 
is  not  eafy  to  imagine  how  it  fhould  at  firft  gain  en- 
tertainment, but  much  more  difficult  to  conceive 
how  ever  it  fhould  come  to  be  univerfally  propagated. 
For  upon  the.fuppofition  of  thofe  who  hold  the  eter- 
nity of  the  world,  the  world  was  always  peopled  ;  and  if 
fo,  there  could  be  no  common  head  or  fpring  from 
whence  fuch  a  tradition  would  naturally  derive  itfelf 
into  all  parts  of  the  world.  So  that  unlefs  all  the 
world  was  fometime  of  one  language,  and  under  one 
government  (which  it  never  was  that  we  know  of 
fmce  it  was  peopled)  no  endeavour  and  induilry  could 
make  fuch  a  tradition  common. 

If  it  be  faid,  that  this  tradition  began  after  fome 
univerfal  deluge,  out  of  which  polTil^jly  but  one  fa- 
mily might  efcape,  and  that  podibly  too  of  barba- 
rous people  ;  from  whom  any  fond  and  groundlefs 
conceit  might  fpring,  and  afterwards  fpread  it  felfas 
mankind  encreafed.  This  I  fliall  have  occafion  to 
confider  in  a  more  proper  place.  In  the  mean  time 
I  have  fiiewn,  even  from  the  acknowledgment  of  A- 
riftotle  himfelf,  that  there  was  anciently  fuch  a  tra- 
dition concerning  the  beginning  of  the  world.  Nay, 
if  we  may  believe  him,  he  himfelf  was  the  very  iirft 
ancrter  of  the  eternity  of  the  world.  For  he  *  fays 
exprefly,  "  that  all  the  philofophers  that  were  before 
"  him,  did  hold  that  the  world  was  made."  Thus 
much  for  the  firft  kind  of  proof  this  matter  iscapable 
of,  namely,  teftimony. 

*  De  ccelo.  1.  i.e.  lo. 

2dly, 


The  wifdom  of  being  religious.  23 

sdly,  The  probabilities  of  reafon  do  all  likewife  SERM. 
favour  the  beginning  of  the  world :  as 

I.  The  want  of  any  hiilory  or  tradition  ancienter 
than  what  is  confiflent  with  the  received  opinion  of 
the  time  of  the  world's  beginning ;  nay,  the  moft 
ancient  hiflories  were  written  long  after  that  time. 
This  Lucretius,  the  famous  Epicurean,  urgeth  as  a 
flrong  prefumption  that  the  world  had  a  beginning 

Si  nulla  fuit  genitalis  origo 
^errarum  ^  cceli^  femperque  teterna  fuere : 
Cur  Jtvpra  helium  Thebanum^  l£' funera  'Troj^^ 
Non  alias  alii  quoque  res  cecinere  Poetie  ? 

i.  e.  "If  the  world  had  no  beginning,how  is  it  that  the 
"  Greek  poets  (the  moft  ancient  of  their  writers)  men- 
"  tion  nothing  higher  than  the  Theban  war,  and  the 
"  deftrudlion  of  Troy  ?"  Were  there  from  all  eternity 
no  memorable  actions  done  till  about  that  time  ?  Or  had 
mankind  no  way  till  of  late  to  record  them  and  pro- 
pagate the  memory  of  them  to  pofterity  ?  It  is  much, 
if  men  were  from  eternity,  that  they  fhould  not  find 
out  the  way  of  writing  in  all  that  long  duration, 
which  had  paft  before  that  time.  Sure  he  was  a  for- 
tunate man  indeed,  who  after  men  had  been  eternal- 
ly fo  dull  as  not  to  find  it  out,  had  the  luck  at  laft  to 
hit  upon  it. 

But  it  may  be,  the  famous  anions  of  former  times 
were  always  recorded,  but  that  the  memorials  of 
them  have  been  feveral  times  loft  by  univerfal  deluges, 
which  have  now  and  then  happened  and  fwept  all  * 
away,  except  (it  may  be)  two  or  three  perfons,  that 
have  efcaped  and  begun  the  v/orld  again  upon  a  new 
fcore.    This  is  the  only  refuge  that  the  atheift  hath 

to 


I'he  wifdom  of  being  religious. 
to  fly  to,  when  he  is  preft  with  this  and  the  like  ar- 
guments.    But  he  cannot  poffibly  efcape  this  way. 
For  thefe  univerfal  inundations  mud  either  be  natu- 
ral or  fupernatural.     If  they  be  fupernatural,  as  (any 
man  that  confiders  well  the  frame  of  the  world,  and 
how  hard  it  is  to  give  a  natural  reafon  of  them,  would 
be  inclined  to  think)  then  indeed  it  is  eafy  to  con- 
ceive how  a  few  of  mankind,  and  no  more,  fhould 
efcape :  becaufe  this  will  depend  upon  the  pleafure 
of  that  fuperior  being  which  is  fuppofcd  fupernatural- 
ly  to  order  thefe  things.     But  this  is  to  yield  what 
we  have  all  this  while  contended  for,  viz.  That  there 
is  a  God.     But  if  they  be  natural,  which  the  atheift 
muft  fay,  then  there  is  nothing  to  reftrain  them  from 
a  total  deftrudlion,  not  only  of  mankind,  but  of  all 
the  beads  of  the  earth.  This  the  atheift  cannot  deny, 
not  only  to  be  very  pofTible,  but  exceeding  probable ; 
becaufe  he  grants  it  to  have  come  fo  near  the  matter 
that  but  very  few  efcaped,  and  no  doubt  with  great 
difficulty.     Now  it  is  the  greated  wonder  in    the 
world,  that  a  thing  (according  to  their  own  fuppofiti- 
on)  fo  likely  to  happen,  fhould  never  have  fallen  out 
in  an  infinite  duration.     Will  any  man  have  the  face 
to  fay  that  a  thing  is  likely  which  did  never  yet  hap- 
pen from  all  eternity  ?  One  v/ould  think  that  not  on- 
ly whatever  is  probable,    but  whatever  can  poflibly 
happen,  fhould  be  brought  about  in  that  fpace  :    fo 
that  if  mankind  had  been  from  eternity  it  had  in  all 
probability,  I  had  almoft  faid,  been  deftroyed  from  all 
eternity,  but  I  may  confidently  fay,  long  fince  ruined. 
2.  Another  probability  of  the  world's  beginning  is, 
the  account  which  wc  have  of  the  original  of  learning 
and  the  moil  ufeful  arts  in  fevcral  parts  of  the  world. 

Nov/ 


The  wifdom  ofpelng  religions.  2^ 

Now  if  the  world  had  been  eternal,  thefe  in  all  Jike-^ERM. 
lihood  would  have  been  found  out,  and  generally 
fpread  long  ago  and  beyond  the  memory  of  all  ages. 
There  are  fome  arts  indeed  that  are  peculiarly  con- 
venient to  fome  particular  nations  ;  and  others  that 
are  only  ferviceablc  to  the  humour  and  fafliion  of  one 
or  more  ages.  Thefe  are  not  likely  to  fpread,  and 
they  may  come  in,  and  go  out,  and  return  again  as 
often  as  there  is  occafion.  But  thofe  which  are  ge- 
nerally ufeful  to  mankind  in  all  times  and  places,  if 
they  were  once  found  out  (and  who  would  not  think 
they  fliould  in  an  eternal  duration  ?)  it  is  not  imagi- 
nable but  that  they  fliould  have  been  fpread  innume- 
rable ages  fince  :  nor  can  any  man  give  a  good  rea- 
fon  how  they  fhould  ever  be  loft,  but  by  fome  fuch 
accident  as  an  univerfal  deluge,  which  has  been  fpok- 
en  to  already.  But  now  on  the  contrary,  the  begin- 
nings of  learning  and  of  the  moft  ufeful  arts  in  feveral 
nations,  is  very  well  known.  And  I  add  farther, 
that  where-ever  learning  and  civil  arts  have  come, 
this  tradition  concerning  the  beginning  of  the  world 
hath  been  moft  vigorous,  and  aiferted  with  the  great- 
eft  clearnefs  and  confidence. 

3.  The  feveral  parts  of  which  the  world  confifts, 
being  (fo  far  as  by  thofe  parts  of  it  which  we  know, 
we  can  pofTibly  judge  of  the  reft)  in  their  nature  cor- 
ruptible 5  it  is  more  than  probable,  that  in  an  infinite 
duration  this  frame  of  things  would  long  fince  have 
been  difTolved  ;  efpecially,  if  (as  the  atheift  afSrm.s) 
there  be  no  fuperior  being,  no  wife  and  intelligent 
principle  to  repair  and  regulate  it,  and  to  prevent 
thofe  innumerable  diforders  and  calamitous  accidents, 
which  muft  in  fo  long  a  fpace  in  all  probability  have 

Vol,.  L  E  happened 


z6  T'/je  wifdom  of  being  religious. 

ERM.   happened  to  it.     This  Lucretius  *  alfo  urges  as  a 
convincing  proof  that  the  world  was  not  eternal. 

^are  etiam  nativa  necejfe  eft  confiteare 
Hac  eadem  •,  neqiie  enim  mortali  corpore  qua  junt 
Ex  infinitojam  tempore  adhuc  potuijfent 
Immenfi  vdlidas  a:vi  contemner e  vires. 

"  It  mufl  neceflarily  (fays  he)  be  acknowledged 
"  that  the  world  had  a  beginning  ^  otherwife  thofe 
"  things  which  are  in  their  own  nature  corruptible 
"  had  never  been  able,  from  all  eternity,  to  have  held 
^'  out  againft  thofe  forcible  and  violent  aflaults  which 
"  in  an  infinite  duration  mufl  have  happened."  Nay 
thus  much  Ariftotle  himfelf  every  where  grants,  that 
if  the  frame  of  the  world  be  liable  to  difTolution,  it 
mufl  of  neceflity  be  acknowledged  to  have  had  a  be- 
ginning. 

Thefe  are  fome  of  the  chief  probabilities  on  our 
fide  *,  which  being  taken  together,  and  in  their  unit- 
ed force,  have  a  great  deal  of  convidion  in  them. 
Efpecially  if  this  be  added,  that  there  is  no  kind  of 
pofitive  proof  fo  much  as  pretended  on  the  other  fide. 
The  utmoft  that  Ariflotle  pretends  to  prove,  is  that 
the  world  proceeded  from  God  by  the  way  of  a  na- 
tural and  neceflary  effeft,  as  light  does  from  the  fun. 
Wlxich  if  it  be  true  (as  there  is  no  tolerable  ground 
for  it)  the  world  indeed  would  be  without  beginning, 
but  not  of  it  felf  And  thus  I  have  done  with  the 
firft  confideration  I  propounded  to  fpeak  to,  viz. 
"  That  there  are  fair  proofs  on  our  fide,  and  as  con- 
*'  vincing  as  the  nature  of  the  thing  is  capable  of;  but 
''  that  there  is  no  pretence  or  proof  on  the  other."  I 
proceed  therefore  to  the 

*  L.  5.  Second 


The  unfdom  of  being  religious,  ^7 

Second  confideration,  "  that  the  moil:  prefTing  dif-  SE  R M. 
"  ficulties  are  on  that  fide  on  which  jthere  is  no  proof." 
Thofe  who  deny  a  God,  and  hold  iht  world  to 
have  been  eternal  and  of  it  felf,  have  only  two  things 
to  objedl  againft  us  :  the  difHculties  that  there  are  in 
the  "  notion  of  a  God,  and  in  making  the  world  of 
"  nothing."  To  the  firft  I  anfwer  :  that  we  attribute 
nothing  to  God  that  hath  any  repugnancy  or  con- 
tradiction in  it.  Power,  wifdom,  goodnefs,  juflice 
and  truth,  have  no  repugnancy  in  them  to  our  rea- 
fon  5  becaufe  we  own  thefe  Perfections  to  be  in  fome 
degree  in  our  felves ;  and  therefore  they  may  be  in 
the  highefl  degree  that  is  pofTible  in  another.  The 
eternity  of  God  and  his  immenfity,  and  his  being  of 
himfelf , how  difficult  foever  they  maybe  to  be  conceiv- 
ed, yet  thefe  perfections  muft  be  granted  to  be  fome- 
where  -,  and  therefore  they  may  as  well,  nay  much 
better,  be  afcribed  to  God,  in  whom  we  fuppofe 
all  other  perfections  to  meet,  than  to  any  thing  elfe. 
And  as  for  God's  being  a  fpirit,  whatever  difficulty 
there  may  be  in  conceiving  the  notion  of  a  fpirit, 
yet  the  atheift  muft  grant  the  thing,  that  there  is  a 
being  or  principle  really  diftinCt  from  matter ;  or  ^\{q 
fhew  how  mere  matter,  which  is  confefTed  by  them- 
felves  to  be  void  of  fenfe  and  underftanding,  and  to 
move  necefTarily,  can  produce  any  thing  that  has 
fenfe,  underftanding  and  liberty.  As  to  the  other 
difficulty,  "  of  making  the  world  of  nothing,"  I  fhall 
only  fay  this :  that  though  it  fignify  an  inconceivable 
excefs  of  power,  yet  there  can  no  contradiction  be 
fhewn  in  it.  And  it  is  every  whit  as  eafy  to  con- 
ceive that  fomething  fhould  be  caufed  to  be  that  was 
not  before,  as  that  any  thing  ftiould  be  of  it  felf; 

E  2  which 


2  8  7he  wifdom  of  being  religious. 

S  E  R  M.  which  yet-mufl:  be  granted  on  both  fides  •,  and  there- 
fore this  difficulty  ought  not  to  be  obje6led  by  either. 
But  then  on  the  other'  fide  there  are  thefe  two  great 
and  real  difficulties.  Firft,  that  men  generally  have 
always  believed  the  contrary,  viz.  That  the  world 
had  a  beginning,  and  was  made  by  God.  Which 
is  a  flrong  evidence  that  this  account  of  the  exiftence 
of  the  world  is  more  natural,  and  of  a  more  eafy  con- 
ception to  human  underftanding.  And  indeed  it  is 
very  natural  to  conceive  that  every  thing  which  is 
imperfed  (as  the  world  and  all  the  creatures  in  it 
muft  be  acknowledged  in  many  refpeds  to  be)  had 
feme  caufe  which  produced  it,  fuch  as  it  is,  and 
determined  the  bounds  and  limits  of  it's  perfedli- 
on  :  but  that  which  is  of  it  felf  and  without  a  caufe, 
may  be  any  thing,  and  have  any  perfection  which 
does  not  imply  a  contradidion.  Secondly,  to  afiert 
mankind  to  have  been  of  it  felf,  and  without  a  caufe, 
hath  this  invincible  objedion  againft  it;  that  we 
plainly  fee  every  man  to  be  from  another*  So  that 
mankind  is  alferted  to  have  no  caufe  of  it's  being^ 
and  yet  every  particular  man  muft  be  acknowledged 
to  have  a  father  ;  which  is  every  whit  as  abfurd  in 
an  infinite  fucceffion  of  men,  as  in  any  finite  number 
of  generations.  It  is  more  eafy  indeed  to  conceive 
how  a  conftant  and  permanent  being,  fuppofe  mat- 
ter, Ihould  always  have  been  of  it  felf ;  and  then  that 
that  fhould  be  the  foundation  of  infinite  fucceflive 
changes  and  alterations  :  but  an  infinite  fucceffion  of 
the  generations  of  men  without  any  permanent  foun- 
dation, is  utterly  unimaginable.  If  it  be  faid  that  the 
earth  was  always,  and  in  time  did  produce  men,  and 
that  they  ever  fijice  have  produced  one  another; 

this 


^he  ivifdom  of  being  religious,  29 

this  is  to  run  into  one  great  abfurdity  of  the  Epicii-  S  E  R  M, 
rean  way,  which  fnall  be  confidered  in  it's  proper 
place. 

And  thus  I  have  endeavoured,  as  plainly  and  brief- 
ly as  the  nature  of  the  argument  would  admit,  to 
prove  that  the  account  which  the  fcripture  gives  of 
the  exiftence  of  the  world,  is  rnofl:  credible,  and  a- 
greeable  to  the  reafon  of  mankind  ;  and  that  this 
firft  account  which  the  atheift  gives  of  it,  is  alto- 
gether incredible.  And  now  I  expe(5l  after  all  this 
the  atheiil  will  complain,  that  all  that  hath  been 
faid  does  not  amount  to  a  ftrid:  demonflration  of  the 
thing.  It  may  be  fo.  And  if  the  atheift  would  un- 
dertake to  demonftrate  the  contrary,  there  might  be 
fome  reafon  for  this  complaint.  In  the  mean  time 
I  defire  to  know  whether  when  both  fides  are  agreed 
that  the  world  is,  and  that  it  muft  either  have  it's 
original  from  God,  or  have  been  always  of  it  felf  | 
and  if  it  have  been  made  evident,  that  on  one  fide 
there  are  fair  proofs  both  from  teftimony  and  reafon, 
and  as  convincing  as  the  nature  of  the  thing  is  capa- 
ble of,  and  no  pretence  of  proof  on  the  other  ;  and 
that  the  difficulties  are  moft  preiTing  on  that  fide  which 
is  deftitute  of  proof  -,  I  fay,  if  this  have  been  naade 
evident,  I  defire  to  know  whether  this  be  not  upon 
the  matter  as  fatisfadory  to  a  wife  man  as  a  demon- 
ftration  ?  For  in  this  cafe  there  can  be  no  doubt  on 
which  fide  the  clear  advantage  of  evidence  lies,  and 
confequently  which  way  a  prudent  man  ought  to  de- 
termine afTent. 

I  come  now  in  the  fecond  place,  to  conlider  the 
other  account  which  another  fort  of  atheifts,  thofe 
whom  I  call  the  Epicurean,  do  give  of  the  exiftence 
3  of 


JO  5^^  wifdom  ofiezng  religious. 

S  E  R  M.  of  the  world.  And  'tis  this.  They  fiippofe  the  mat- 
'*_  ,  ter  of  which  the  world  is  conitituted  to  be  eternal 
and  of  it  felf,  and  then  an  infinite  empty  fpacefor  the 
infinite  little  parts  of  this  matter  (which  they  call 
atoms)  to  move  and  play  in  •,  and  that  thefe  being  al- 
ways in  motion  did  after  infinite  trials  and  encoun- 
ters,  without  any  counfel  or  defign,  and  without  the 
difpofal  and  contrivance  of  any  wife  and  intelligent 
being,  at  laft  by  a  lucky  cafualty  entangle  and  fettle 
themfelves  in  this  beautiful  and  regular  frame  of  the 
world  which  wt  now  fee.  And  that  the  earth,  be- 
ing at  firfl  in  it's  full  vigour  and  fruitfulnefs,  did  then 
bring  forth  men  and  all  other  forts  of  living  creatures 
as  it  does  plants  now. 

This  is  in  fliort  the  Epicurean  account  of  the  ori- 
ginal of  the  world,  which,  as  abfurd  as  it  is,  Lucreti- 
us *  hath  very  elegantly  exprefled  in  thefe  verfes. 

Sedquihus  ilk  modis  conjeElus  materiaz, 
Funddrit  ccelum  ac  terram^  f  antique  profunda^ 
Solifque  &  lun^  curfus^  ex  ordineponam, 
'Nam  certe  neque  confiUo  primordia  rerum 
Or  dine  fe  qu^eque^  at  que  fagaci  mente  locdrunt ; 
l>lec  quos  qu^que  darent  motus,  pepigere  profeElo : 
Sed  quia  multa  modis  multis  primordia  rerum 
Ex  infinite  jam  tempore  percita  plagis 
ponder ibufque  fuis  confuerunt  concita  ferri^ 
Omnimodifque  coire^  alque  omnia  pertentare^ 
Qu^cunque  inter  fe  pojfent  congrejfa  creare : 
Propter ea fit  ^  uti  magnum  vulgataper  avum 
Omnigenos  costus^  ^  motus  experiundo^ 
tandem  ea  convcniant^  qua  ut  convenere^  repente 

M^gnarum 


The  w'lfdom  of  being  religious. 
Magnarum  rerumfiunt  exordia  fafe^ 
Terrain  maris  £5?  ccsli^  generifque  animantim. 

Thus  he  like  a  good  poet,  but  a  very  bad  maker 
and  contriver  of  the  world.  For  I  appeal  to  any  man 
of  reafon  whether  any  thing  can  be  more  unreafona- 
ble,  than  obflinately  to  impute  an  efFed  to  chance 
which  carries,  in  the  very  face  of  it,  all  the  arguments 
and  charadlers  of  a  wife  defign,  and  contrivance? 
Was  ever  any  confiderable  work,  in  which  tliere  was 
required  a  great  variety  of  parts,  and  a  regular  and 
orderly  difpofition  of  thofe  parts,  done  by  chance  t 
Will  chance  fit  means  to  ends,  and  that  in  ten 
thoufand  inflances,  and  not  fail  in  any  one  ?  How 
often  might  a  man  after  he  had  jumbled  a  {tt 
of  letters  in  a  bag,  fling  them  out  upon  the  ground 
before  they  would  fall  into  an  exad  poem,  yea  or  fo 
much  as  make  a  good  difcourfe  in  profe  ?  And  may 
not  a  little  book  be  as  eafily  made  by  chance,  as  this 
great  volume  of  the  world  ?  How  long  might  a  man 
be  in  fprinkling  colours  upon  canvas  with  a  carelels 
hand,  before  they  would  happen  to  make  the  exad: 
pidture  of  a  man  ?  And  is  a  man  ealier  made  by 
chance  than  his  piflure  ?  How  long  might  twenty 
thoufand  blind  men,  which  fhould  be  fent  out  from 
the  feveral  remote  parts  of  England,  wander  up  and 
down  before  they  would  all  meet  upon  Salifbury 
plains  and  fall  into  rank  and  file  in  the  exa6l  order 
of  an  army  ?  And  yet  this  is  much  more  eafy  to  be 
imagined,  than  how  the  innumerable  blind  parts  of 
matter  fhould  rendezvous  themfelves  into  a  world. 
A  man  that  fees  Henry  the  feventh's  chapel  at  Wefl- 
minfler  might  with  as  good  reafon  maintain  (j^ea  with 

much 


32  T^he  wifdom  of  bei?7g  religion u 

S.E  R  M.  much  better,  confidering  the.vall:  diffei-ence  betwixt 
that  little  ftrudure  and  the  huge  fabrick  of  the  world) 
that  it  was  never  contrived  or  built  by  any  man,  but 
that  the  ftones  did  by  chance  grow  into  thofe  curi- 
ous figures  into  which  they  feem  to  have  been  cut 
and  graven  \  and  that  upon  a  time  (as  tales  ufually 
begin)  the  materials  of  that  building,  the  (lone,  mor- 
tar, timber,  iron,  lead  and  glafs,  happily  met  toge- 
ther and  very  fortunately  ranged  themfelves  into  that 
delicate  order  in  which  we  fee  them  now,  fo  clofe 
compared  that  it  mufl  be  a  very  great  chance  that 
parts  them  again.  What  would  the  world  think  of 
a  man  that  fliould  advance  fuch  an  opinion  as  this, 
and  write  a  book  for  it  ?  If  they  would  do  him  right, 
they  ought  to  look  upon  him  as  mad :  but  yet  with  a 
little  more  reafon  than  any  man  can  have  to  fay  that 
the  world  was  made  by  chance :  or  that  the  firfl  men 
grew  up  cut  of  the  earth  as  plants  do  now.  For  can 
any  thing  be  more  ridiculous  and  againft  all  reafon, 
than  to  afcribe  the  production  of  men  to  the  firfl: 
fruitfulnefs  of  the  earth,  without  fo  much  as  one  in- 
ftance  and  experiment  in  any  age  or  hiftory  to  coun- 
tenance fo  monfi:rous  a  fuppofition  ?  The  thing  is  at 
firfl:-fight  fo  grofs  and  palpable,  that  no  difcourfe 
about  it  can  make  it  more  apparent.  And  yet  thefe 
fhameful  beggars  of  principles,  who  give  this  pre- 
carious account  of  the  original  of  things,  afifume  to 
themfelves  to  be  the  men  of  reafon,  the  great  wijCs 
of  the  world,  the  only  cautious  and  wary  perfons  that 
hate  to  be  impofed  upon,  that  mufl:  have  convincing 
evidence  for  every  thing,  and  can  admit  of  nothing 
without  a  clear  demonftration  for  it. 

II.  Specu- 


The  wifdo^n  of  being  religious,  33 

II.  Speculative  atheifm  is  unreafonable,  becaufe  it  S  E  R  M. 
gives  no  reafonable  account  of  the  univerfal  confcnt 
of  mankind  in  this  apprehenfion,  that  there  is  a  God. 
That  men  do  generally  believe  a  God,   and  have 
done  in  all  ages,  the  prefent  experience  of  the  world, 
and  the  records  of  former  times  do  abundantly  teftify. 
Now  how  comes  this  perfuafion  to  have  gained  fo 
univerfal  a  pofTelTion  of  the  mind  of  man,  and  to  have 
found  fuch  general  entertainment  in  all  nations,  even 
thofe  that  are  mod  barbarous  ?  If  there  be  no  fuch 
thing  as  God  in  the  world,  how  comes  it  to  pafs  that 
this  objeft  doth  continually  encounter  our  underftand- 
ings  ?  Whence  is  it  that  we  are  fo  perpetually  haunt- 
ed with  the  apparition  of  a  deity,  and  followed  with 
it  wherevef  we  go?  If  it  be  not  natural  to  the  mind 
of  man,   but  proceeds  from  fome  accidental  diftem- 
per  of  our  underftandings,  how  comes  it   to  be  fo 
univerfal  that  no  differences  of  age,    or  temper,   or 
education  can  wear  it  out,  and  fet  any  confiderable 
number  of  men  free  from  it  ?  Into  what  can  we  re- 
folve  this  ftrong  inclination  of  mankind  to  this  er- 
ror and  miftake  ?    How  come  all  nations  to  be  thus 
feduced  ?  It  is  altogether  unimaginable  but  that  the 
reafon  of  fo  univerfal  a  confent  in  all  places  and  ages 
of  the  world,  and  among  all  differences  of  perfons, 
fhould  be  one  and  conilant.     But  no  one  and  con- 
ftant  reafon  of  this  can  be  given,  but  from  the  nature 
of  man's  mind  and  underftanding,  which  hath  this  no- 
tion  of  a  deity  born  with  it  and  ilamped  upon  it  ^ 
or  which  is  all  one,  is  of  fuch  a  frame  that  in  the 
free  ufe  and  exercife  of  itfelf  it  will  find  out  God  :  and 
what  more  reafonable  than  to  think,  that  if  we  be 
God's  workmanlhip  he  fliould  fet  this  markofhim- 

VoL.  I.  F  felf 

1. 


5^  7l:}e  wtfdom  of  behig  religious, 

S  E  R  M.  felf  upon  all  reafonable  creatures,  that  they  may  know 
to  whom  they  belong,  and  may  acknowledge  the  au- 
thor of  their  beings  ?  This  feems  to  be  a  credible  and 
fatisfa6lory  account  of  fo  univerfal  a  confent  in  this 
matter.  But  now  what  doth  the  atheifl  refolve  this 
into  ?  He  is  not  at  one  with  himfelf  what  account  to  give 
of  it,  nor  can  it  be  expedled  he  fliould.  For  he  that  will 
over-look  the  true  reafon  of  a  thing,  which  ufually  is 
but  one,  may  eafily  find  many  falfe  ones,  error  being 
infinite.  But  there  are  three  which  he  principally 
relies  upon,  fear,  tradition,  and  policy  of  ftate.  I 
lliall  briefly  confider  thefe. 

Firfl,  he  would  make  us  believe  that  this  appre- 
henfion  of  a  God  doth  fpring  from  an  infinite  jealoufy 
in  the  mind  of  man,  and  an  endlefs  fear  of  the  worfl 
that  may  happen  ;  according  to  that  divine  faying 
of  the  poet,  which  he  can  never  fulBciently  admire, 

Primum  in  or  he  decs  fecit  timor^  ■ 

"  Fear  firft  made  gods."  So  that  it  is  granted  on 
both  fides  that  the  fear  of  a  deity  doth  univerfally 
pofTefs  the  minds  of  men.  Now  the  queftion  is, 
whether  it  be  more  likely  that  the  exiilence  of  a  God 
fliould  be  the  caufe  of  this  fear,  or  that  this  fear  fhould 
be  the  caufe  why  men  imagine  there  is  a  God  ?  If 
there  be  a  God,  who  hath  impreiTed  this  image  of 
himfelf  upon  the  mind  of  man,  there's  great  reafon 
why  all  men  fhould  ftand  in  awe  of  him  :  but  if  there 
be  no  God,  it  is  noteafy  to  conceive  how  fear  fhould 
create  an  univerfal  confidence  and  affurance  in  men 
that  there  is  one.  For,  whence  fhould  this  fear  come  ? 
It  mufl  be  either  from  without,  from  the  fuggeflion 
of  others  who  firil  tell  us  there  is  fuchabeing,  and  then 
2  our 


I'he  wifdom  of  being  religious,  3  5 

our  fear  believes  it ;  or  t\k  it  muft  arife  from  with-  S  E  R  M. 
in,  from  the  nature  of  man  which  is  apt  to  fancy 
dreadful  and  terrible  things.  If  from  the  fuggeftion 
of  others  who  tell  us  fo,  the  queftion  returns,  who 
told  them  fo  ?  and  will  never  be  fatisfied  till  the  firf^ 
author  of  this  report  be  found  out.  So  that  this  ac- 
count of  fear  reiolves  it  felf  into  tradition,  which  fhall 
be  fpoken  to  in  it's  proper  place.  But  if  it  be  faid 
that  this  fear  arifeth  from  within,  from  the  nature  of 
man  which  is  apt  to  imagine  dreadful  things,  this 
likewife  is  liable  to  inexplicable  difficulties.  For,firft, 
the  proper  objed  of  fear  is  fomething  that  is  dread- 
ful, that  is,  fomething  that  threatens  men  with  harm  or 
danger-,  and  that  in  God  muft  either  be  power  or  juf- 
tice  ;  and  fuch  an  obje6l  as  this  fear  indeed  may  cre- 
ate :  but  goodnefs  and  mercy  are  effential  to  the 
notion  of  a  God  as  well  as  power  and  juflice :  now 
how  fliould  fear  put  men  upon  fancying  a  being  that 
is  infinitely  good  and  merciful  ?  No  man  hath  reafon 
to  be  afraid  of  fuch  a  being,  as  fuch.  So  that  the 
atheift  muft  join  another  caufe  to  fear,  viz.  hope,  to 
enable  men  to  create  this  imagination  of  a  God.  And 
what  would  the  produdl  of  thefe  two  contrary  pafTions 
be  irThe  imagination  of  a  being  which  we  lliould  fear 
would  do  us  as  much  harm  as  we  could  hope  it  would 
do  us  good  ;  which  would  be  quid  fro  qiio^  and  which 
our  reafon  would  oblige  us  to  lay  afide  fo  foon  as  we 
have  fancied  it,  becaufe  it  would  fignify  juft  nothing. 
But,  fecondly,  fuppofe  fear  alone  could  do  it  ;  how 
comes  the  mind  of  man  to  be  fubje6l  to  fuch  ground- 
lefs  and  unreafonable  fears  ?  The  Ariftotelian  atheift 
will  fay,  it  always  was  fo ;  but  this  is  to  affirm,  and 
not  to  give  any  account  of  a  thing.     The  Epicurean 

F  2  atheift. 


2  6  The  wtfdom  of  being  religious, 

S  E  R  M.  athcift,  if  he  will  fpeak  confonantly  to  himfelf,  muft 
fay  that  there  happened  in  the  original  conftitution 
of  the  firfl  men  fuch  a  contexture  of  atoms  as  do 
naturally  difpofe  men  to  thefe  panick  fears ;  unlefs 
he  will  fay  that  the  firfl  men,  when  they  grew  out 
of  the  earth  and  afterwards  broke  loofe  from  their 
root,  finding  themfelves  weak  and  naked  and  unarm- 
ed, and  meeting  with  feveral  fierce  creatures  itrong- 
er  than  themfelves,  they  were  put  in  fuch  a  fright 
as  did  a  little  diftemper  their  underflandings,  and  let 
joofe  their  imaginations  to  endlefs  fufpicions  and  un- 
bounded jealoufies,  which  did  atlaft  fettle  in  the  con- 
ceit of  an  invifible  being  infinitely  powerful  and  able 
to  do  them  harm  •,  and  being  fully  pofielt  with  this 
apprehenfion  (nothing  being  more  ordinary  than  for 
crazed  perfons  to  believe  their  own  fancies)  they  be- 
came religious  ;  and  afterwards  when  mankind  began 
to  be  propagated  in  the  way  of  generation,  then  re- 
ligion obliged  them  to  inftil  thefe  principles  into  their 
children  in  their  tender  years,that  fo  they  might  make 
the  greater  imprelTion  upon  them  -,  and  this  courfe 
having  been  continued  everfince  the  notion  of  a  God 
hath  been  kept  up  in  the  world.  This  is  very  fu it- 
able  to  Epicurus  his  hypothefis  of  the  origin^  of 
men  ;  but  if  any  man  think  fit  to  fay  thus  I  cannot 
think  it  fit  to  confute  him.  Thirdly,  whether  men  were 
from  all  eternity  fuch  timorous  and  fanciful  creatures, 
or  happened  to  be  made  fo  in  the  firft  conftitution 
of  things,  it  feems  however  that  this  fear  of  a  deity 
hath  a  foundation  in  nature.  And  if  it  be  natural, 
ought  we  not  rather  to  conclude  that  there  is  fome 
ground  and  rcafon  for  thefe  fears,  and  that  nature 
hath  not  planted  them  in  us  to  no  purpofe,  than  that 

they 


The  wifdom  of  bein^  religious,  37- 

they  are  vain  and  groundlefs  ?  There  is  no  principle  S  E  R  M. 
that  Ar.iftotle  (the  great  aflertor  of  the  eternity  of  the 
world)  doth  more  frequently  inculcate  than  this, 
"  that  nature  doth  nothing  in  vain  •,"  and  the  atheiil 
himfelf  is  forced  to  acknowledge  (and  fo  every  man 
muft  who  attentively  confiders  the  frame  of  the  world) 
that  although  things  were  made  by  chance,  yet  they 
have  happened  as  well  as  if  the  greatefl  wifdom  had 
the  ordering  and  contriving  of  them.  And  furely 
wifdom  would  never  have  planted  fuch  a  vain  princi- 
ple as  the  fear  of  a  deity  in  the  nature  of  man,  if  there 
had  not  been  a  God  in  the  world. 

Secondly,  if  fear  be  not  a  fufficient  account  of  this 
univerfal  confent,  the  atheift  thinks  it  may  very  pro- 
bably be  refolved  into  univerfal  tradition.  But  this 
likewife  is  liable  to  great  exception.  For,  whence 
came  this  tradition  ?  It  muft  begin  fome  time,  it 
muft  have  it's  original  from  fom?  body  ;  and  it  were 
very  well  worth  our  knowing  who  that  man  was  that 
iirft  raifed  this  fpirit  which  all  the  reafon  of  mankind 
could  never  conjure  down  fmce.  Where  did  he  live, 
and  when  ?  In  what  country,  and  in  what  age  of  the 
world  ?  What  was  his  name,  or  his  fon's  name,  that 
we  may  know  him  ?  This  the  atheift  can  give  no 
pundual  account  of :  only  he  imagines  it  not  impro- 
bable that  fome  body  long  ago  (no  body  knows  when) 
beyond  the  memory  of  all  ages  did  ftart  fuch  a  no- 
tion in  the  world,  and  that  it  hath  paft  for  current 
ever  fincq..  But  if  this  tradition  be  granted  fo  very 
ancient  as  to  have  been  before  all  books,  and  to  be  el- 
der than  any  hiftory,  it  may  for  any  thing  any  body 
can  tefl  have  been  from  the  beginning  ;  and  then  it  is 
much  more  likely  to  be  a  notion  which  was  bred  in 

the 


^he  wifdoffi  of  being  reUgiotis. 
the  mind  of  man  and  bom  with  him,  than  a  tradi- 
tion tranfmitted  from  hand  to"  liand  through  all  ge- 
nerations ;  efpecially  if  we  confider  how  many  rude 
and  barbarous  nations  there  are  in  the  world  which 
confent  in  the  opinion  of  a  God,  and  yet  have  fcarce 
any  certain  tradition  of  any  thing  that  was  done  a- 
mong  them  but  two  or  three  ages  before. 

Thirdly,  but  if  neither  of  thefe  be  fatisfadlory,  he 
hath  one  way  more  ;  which  although  it  fignify  little 
to  men  of  fober  and  fevere  reafon,  yet  it  very  unhap- 
pily hits  the  jealous  and  fufpicious  humour  of  the 
generality  of  men,  who  from  the  experience  they  have 
had  of  themfelves  and  others  are  very  apt  to  fufpe(5l 
that  every  body,  but  efpecially  their  fuperiors  and 
governors,  have  a  defign  to  impofe  upon  them  for 
their  own  ends.  In  fhort,  it  is  this  :  that  this  noife 
about  a  God  is  a  mere  ftate-engine  and  a  politick  de- 
vice, invented  at  firft  by  fome  great  prince  or  mi- 
nifter  of  Hate,  to  keep  people  in  awe  and  order.  And 
if  fo,  from  hence  (faith  the  atheiil)  we  may  eafily  ap- 
prehend how  from  fuch  an  original  it  might  be  ge- 
nerally propagated  and  become  univerfally  current, 
having  the  llamp  of  publick  authority  upon  it.  Be-. 
fides,  that  people  have  always  been  found  eafy  to 
comply  with  the  inclinations  of  their  prince.  And 
from  hence  likewife  we  may  fee  the  reafon  why  this 
notion  hath  continued  fo  long.  For  being  found  by 
experience  to  be  fo  excellent  an  inflrument  of  govern- 
ment we  may  be  fure  it  would  always  be  cherifhed 
and  kept  up. 

And  now  he  triumphs,  and  thinks  the  bufinefs  Is 
very  clear :  thus  it  was,  fome  time  or  other,  (moft 
probably  towards  the  beginning  of  the  world,  if  it 

had 


7he  wifdom  of  being  religious,  39 

had  a  beginning,  when  all  mankind  was  under  one  S  E  R  M. 
univerfal  monarch)  fome  great  Nebuchadnezzar  fet 
up  this  image  of  a  deity,  and  commanded  "  all  peo- 
"  pie  and  nations  to  fall  down  and  worfhip  it:'*  and 
this  being  found  a  fuccefsful  device  to  awe  people 
into  obedience  to  government  it  hath  been  continued 
to  this  day,  and  is  like  to  laft  to  the  end  of  the  world. 
To  this  fine  conjedure  I  have  thefe  four  things  to  fay  : 
I. That  all  this  is  mere  conjedure  and  fuppofition  ; 
he  cannot  bring  the  lead  fhadow  of  proof  or  evidence 
for  any  one  tittle  of  it. 

2.  This  fuppofition  grants  the  opinion  of  a  God  to 
conduce  very  much  to  the  fupport  of  government 
and  order  in  the  world ,  and  confequently  to  be  very 
beneficial  to  mankind.  So  that  the  atheift  cannot 
but  acknowledge  that  it  is  great  pity  that  it  fhould 
not  be  true,  and  that  it  is  the  common  intereft  of 
mankind,  if  there  were  but  probable  arguments  for 
it,  not  to  admit  of  any  flight  reafons  againfl  it ;  and 
to  punifh  all  thofe  who  would  feduce  men  to  atheifm, 
as  the  great  difturbers  of  the  world  and  peils  of  hu- 
man fociety. 

3.  This  fuppofition  can  have  nothing  of  certainty 
in  it  unlefs  this  be  true,  "  that  whoever  makes  a 
"  pohtick  advantage  of  other  mens  principles  ought, 
"  to  be  prefumed  to  contrive  thofe  principles  into 
"  them."  Whereas  it  is  much  more  common  (be- 
caufe  more  eafy)  for  men  to  ferve  their  own  ends  of 
thofe  principles  or  opinions  which  they  do  not  put 
into  men,  but  find  there.  So  that  if  the  queftion  of 
a  God  were  to  be  decided  by  the  probability  of  this 
conjedture,  (which  the  atheifl  af>plauds  himfelf  mofl 
in)  it  would  be  concluded  in  the  affirmative  j  it  be- 
ing 


T^he  wifdom  of  being  religious, 
ing  much  more  likeJy,  fince  politicians  reap  the  ad- 
vantages of  obedience  and  a  more  ready  fubmilTion 
to  government  from  men's  believing  that  there  is  a 
God,  that  they  found  the  minds  of  men  prepofTefTed 
to  their  hands  with  the  notion  of  a  God,  than  that 
they  planted  it  there. 

4.  We  have  as  much  evidence  of  the  contrary  to 
this  fuppofition  as  fuch  a  thing  is  capable  of,  viz. 
that  it  was  not  an  arcanum  imperii^  a  "  fecret  of  go- 
"  vernment"  to  propagate  the  belief  of  a  God  among 
the  people  when  the  governors  themfelves  knew  it 
to  be  a  cheat.  For  we  find  in  the  hiftories  of  all 
ages  of  which  we  have  any  records,  (and  of  other 
ages  we  cannot  pofTibly  judge)  that  princes  have  not 
been  more  fecure  from  troubles  ofconfcicnce  and  the 
fears  of  religion  and  the  terrors  of  another  world, 
(nay  many  of  them  more  fubjed  to  thefe)  than  other 
men,  as  I  could  give  many  inflances,  and  thofe  no 
mean  ones :  wj-tat  made  Caligula  creep  under  the  bed 
when  it  thunder'd  ?  What  made  Tiberius,  that  great 
iHafter  of  the  crafts  of  government,  complain  fo  much 
of  the  grievous  ftings  and  ladies  he  felt  in  his  con- 
fcience?  What  made  cardinal  Wolfey  (that  great 
minifter  of  Hate  in  our  own  nation)  to  pour  forth 
his  foul  in  thofe  fad  words,  "  had  I  been  as  diligent 
"  to  pleafe  my  God  as  I  have  been  to  pleafe  my  king, 
''  he  would  not  have  forfaken  me  now  in  my  gray 
*'  hairs  ?"  What  reafon  for  fuch  adions  and  fpeeches, 
if  thefe  great  men  had  known  that  religion  was  but 
a  cheat  ?  But  if  they  knew  nothing  of  this  fecret,  I 
think  we  may  fafely  conclude  that  the  notion  of  a 
God  did  not  come  from  the  court,  that  it  was  not  the 
invention  of  politicians  and  a  juggle  of  ftate  to  cozen 
the  people  into  obedience.  And 


The  ivifdom  of  being  religious.  4 1 

And  now  from  all  this  that  hath  been  faid  it  Teems  S  E  R  M. 
to  be  very  evident,  that  the  general  confent  of  man- 
kind in  this  apprehenfion  that  there  is  a  God  mull  in 
all  reafon  be  afcribed  to  fome  more  certain  and  uni- 
verfal  caufe  than  fear,  or  tradition,  or  flate-policy,  viz. 
to  this,  that  God  himfelf  hath  wrought  this  image  of 
himfelf  upon  the  mind  of  man,  and  fo  woven  it  into 
the  very  frame  of  his  being,  that  (like  Phidias  his  pic- 
ture in  Minerva's  fhield)  it  can  never  totally  be  de- 
faced without  the  ruin  of  human  nature. 

I  know  but  one  ob)e<Slion  that  this  difcourfe  is 
liable  to,  which  is  this  \  that  the  univerfal  confent 
of  mankind  in  the  apprehenfion  of  a  God  is  no  more 
an  argument  that  he  really  is,  than  the  general  agree- 
ment of  fo  many  nations  for  fo  many  ages  in  the  wor- 
Ihip  of  many  gods  is  an  argument  that  there  are 
many. 

To  this  I  anfwer,  i.  That  the  generality  of  the 
philofophers  and  wife  men  of  all  nations  and  ages, 
did  diffent  from  the  multitude  in  thefe  things.  They 
believed  but  one  fupreme  deity,  which  with  refpedt 
to  the  various  benefits  men  received  from  him  had 
feveral  titles  beftowed  upon  him.  And  although 
they  did  fervilely  comply  with  the  people  in  wor- 
fhipping  God,  by  fenfible  images  and  reprefentati- 
ons,  yet  it  appears  by  their  writings  that  they  de- 
Ipifed  this  way  of  worfhip  as  fuperflitiou?,  and  unfuit-^ 
able  to  the  nature  of  God.  So  that  Polytheifm  and 
idolatry  are  far  from  being  able  to  pretend  to  univer- 
fal confent,  from  their  having  had  the  vote  of  the  mul- 
tude  in  moft  nations  for  feveral  ages  together.  Be- 
caufe  the  opinion  of  the  vulgar,  feparated  from  the 
confent  and  approbation  of  the  wife,  figniiies  no  more 

Vol.  I.  G  than 

I. 


7he  wifdom  of  being  religious. 
than  a  great  many  cyphers  would  do  without  figures. 

2.  The  grofs  ignorance  and  miflakes  of  the  heathen 
about  God  and  his  worfhip  are  a  good  argument  that 
there  is  a  God  -,  becaufe  they  fliew  that  men  funk  in- 
to the  mod  degenerate  condition,  into  the  greateft 
blindncls  and  darknets  imaginabk-*,  do  yet  retain  fome 
lenle  andavveof  adeity,  that  religion  is  a  property  of 
our  natures,  and  that  the  notion  of  adeity  is  intimate 
to  our  underftandings  and  fticks  clofe  to  them,  fee- 
ing men  will  rather  have  any  God  than  none;  and 
rather  than  want  a  deity  they  will  worfliip  any  thing. 

3.  That  there  have  been  fo  many  falfe  gods  de- 
vifed,  is  rather  an  argument  that  there  is  a  true  one 
than  that  there  is  none.  There  would  be  no  counter- 
feits but  for  the  fake  offomething  that  is  real.  For 
though  all  pretenders  feem  to  be  what  they  really 
are  not,  yet  they  pretend  to  be  fomething  that  real- 
ly is.  For  to  counterfeit  is  to  put  on  the  likenefs 
and  appearance  of  fome  real  excellence.  There  would 
be  no  brafs-money  if  there  were  not  good  and  lawful 
money.  Briftol-ftones  would  not  pretend  to  be  dia- 
monds, if  there  never  had  been  any  diamonds.  Thofe 
idols  in  Henry  the  feventh's  time,  (as  Sir  Francis  Ba- 
con calls  them)  Lambert  Simnell  and  Perkin  War- 
beck,  had  never  been  kt  up,  if  there  had  not  once 
been  a  real  Plantagenet  and  duke  of  York.  So  the 
idols  of  the  I>eathen,  though  they  be  fet  up  in  affront 
to  the  true  God,  yet  they  rather  prove  that  there  is 
one  than  the  contrary. 

III.  Speculative  atheifm  is  abfurd,  becaufe  it  re- 
quires more  evidence  for  things  than  they  are  capable 
of.  Ariflotle  hath  long  fince  well  obferved,  how  un- 
rcafonablc  it  is  to  expedl  the  fame  kind  of  proof  and 

evidence 


The  wifdom  of  being  religious.  43 

evidence  for  every  thing,  which  we  have  for  fome  SERM. 
things.  Mathematical  things,  being  of  an  abftraft- ,,^..^]«,^ 
ed  nature,  are  capable  of  the  cleared  and  ftrideft  de- 
monftration :  but  conclufions  in  natural  philofophy 
are  capable  of  proof  by  an  indudlion  of  experiments  ; 
things  of  a  moral  nature  by  moral  arguments  •,  and 
matters  of  fadl  by  credible  teftimony.  And  though 
none  of  thefc  be  capable  of  that  ftrid:  kind  of  demon- 
ftration,  which  mathematical  matters  are  ;  yet  have 
we  an  undoubted  afTu ranee  of  them,  when  they  are 
proved  by  the  beft  arguments  that  things  of  that  kind 
will  bear.  No  man  can  demon  (irate  to  me  (unlefs 
we  will  call  every  argument  that  is  fit  to  convince  a 
wife  man  a  demonftration)  that  there  is  fuch  an  illand 
in  America  as  Jamaica.  Yet  upon  the  teflimony  of 
credible  perfons  wlx)  have  feen  it,  and  authors  who 
have  written  of  it,  I  am  as  free  from  all  doubt  con- 
cerning it,  as  I  am  from  doubting  of  the  cleared  m.a- 
thematical  demonfcration.  So  that  this  is  to  be  en- 
tertained as  a  firm  principle  by  all  thofe  who  pretend 
to  be  certain  of  any  thing  at  all :  "  that  when  any 
*'  thing  in  any  of  thefe  kinds,  is  proved  by  as  good 
"  arguments  as  a  thing  of  that  kind  is  capable  of,  and 
"  we  have  as  great affu ranee  that  it  is,  as  we  could  pof- 
*'  fibly  have  fuppofing  it  were,  we  ought  not  in  rea- 
"  fon  to  make  any  doubt  of  the  exiftence  of  that 
"  thing." 

Now  to  apply  this  to  the  prefent  cafe.  The  be- 
ing of  a  God  is  not  mathematically  demonftrable, 
nor  can  it  be  expedted  it  fhould,  becaufe  only  mathe- 
matical matters  admit  of  this  kind  of  evidence.  Nor 
can  it  be  proved  immediately  by  fcnfe,  becaufe  God 
being  fuppofed  to  be  a  pure  fpirit  cannot  be  the  ob- 

G2  jeft 


44  ^he  mfdom  of  being  religious, 

S  E  R  M.  jefl:  of  any  corporeal  fenfe.     But  yet  we  have  as  great 
^-      .  afliirance  that  there  is  a  God  as  the  nature  of  the  thing 
to  be  proved  is  capable  of  •,  and  as  we  could  in  rea- 
fon  expe6l  to  have,  fuppofing  that  he  were.     For  let 
us  fuppofe  there  were  fuch  a  being  as  an  infinite  fpi- 
rit,  clothed  with  all  poflible  perfeftion,  that  is,  as 
good  and  wife  and  powerful,  &c.   as  can  be  imagin- 
ed :  what  conceivable  ways  are  there  v/hereby  we 
fhould  come  to  be  alTured  that  there  is  fuch  a  being  ? 
but  either  by  an  internal  imprelTion  of  the  notion  of 
a  God  upon  our  minds  •,  or  elfe  by  fuch  external  and 
vifible  effedls  as  our  reafon  tells  us  mufl  be  attributed 
to  fome  caufe,  and  which  we  cannot  without  great 
violence  to  our  underftandings  attribute  to  any  other 
caufe  but  fuch  a  being  as  we  conceive  God  to  be,  that 
is,  one  that  is  infinitely  good,  and  wife,  and  power- 
ful ?   Now  we  have  this  double  affurance  that  there 
is  a  God,  and  greater  or  other  than  this  the  thing  is 
not  capable  of:    if  God  Iliould  alTume  a  body  and 
prefent  himfelf  before  our  eyes,  this  might  amaze  us 
but  could  not  give  us  any  rational  affurance  that  there 
is  an  infinite  fpirit.     If  he  Ihould  work  a  miracle; 
this  could  not  in  reafon  convince  an  atheift  more  than 
the  arguments  he  already  hath  for  it.     If  the  athe- 
ift then  were  to  '*  afk  a  fign  in  the  heaven  above,  or 
"  in  the  earth  beneath,"  what  could  he  defire  God 
to  do  for  his  convidion  more  than  he  hath  already 
done?  Could  he  defire  him  to  work  a  greater  miracle 
than  to  make  a  world  ?  Why,   if  God  fhould  carry 
this  perverfe  man  out  of  the  hmits  of  this  world,  and 
fhew  him  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth,  fpringing 
out  of  nothing,  he  might  fay  that  innumerable  parts 
of  matter  chanced  juft  then  to  rally  together  and  to 

form 


TTje  wifdom  of  being  religious.  45 

form  themfelves  into  this  new  world,  and  that  God  S  E  R  m. 
did  not  make  it.     Thus  you  fee  that  we  have  aJI  the  ,_Jl, 
rational  affurance  of  a  God  that  the  thing  is  capable 
of,  and  that  atheifm  is  abfurd  and  unreafonable  in 
requiring  more. 

IV.  The  atheift  is  unreafonable,  becaufe  he  pretends 
to  know  that  which  no  man  can  know,  and  to  be 
certain  of  that  which  no  body  can  be  certain  of  j  that 
is,  that  there  is  no  God,  and  which  is  confequent 
upon  this  (as  I  fhall  (hew  afterwards)  that  it  is  not 
pofTible  there  Ihould  be  one.     And  the  atheift  muft 
pretend  to  know  this  certainly.  For  it  were  the  great- 
eft  folly  in  the  world  for  a  man  to  deny  and  defpifc 
a  God,  if  he  be  not  certain  that  he  is  not.  Now  who- 
ever pretends  to  be  certain  that  there  is  no  God  hath 
this  great  difadvantage,  he  pretends  to  be  certain  of  4 
pure  negative.    But  of  negatives  we  have  far  the  leaft 
certainty,  and  they  are  ufually  hardeft,   and  many 
times  impofTible  to  be  proved.  Indeed  fuch  negatives 
as  only  deny  fome  particular  mode  or  manner  of  a 
thing's  exiftence,  a  man  may  have  a  certainty  of  them  ; 
becaufe  when  we  fee  things  to  be,  we  may  fee  what 
they  are,  and  in  what  manner  they  do  or  do  not  exift. 
For  inftance,  we  may  be  certain  that  man  is  not  a 
creature  that  hath  wings,  becaufe  this  only  concerns 
the  manner  of  his  exiftence  -,  and  we  feeing  what  he 
is,  may  certainly  know  that  he  is  not  fo,  or  fo.  But 
pure  negatives,  that  is,  fucfi  as  abfolutely  deny  the 
exiftence  of  things,  or  the  pofllbility  of  their  exiftence, 
can  never  be  proved  -,   for  after  all  that  can  be  faid 
againft  a  thing,  this  will  ftili  be  true,  that  many  things 
pofTibly  are  which  we  know  not  of,  and  that  many 
more  things  njay  be  than  are  5  and  if  fo,  after  all  our 

argu- 


46  *The  wifdom  of  being  religious, 

L  R  M.  arguments  againft  a  thing  it  will  be  uncertain  whether 
it  be  or  not.  And  this  is  univerfally  true,  unlcfs  the 
thing  denied  to  be  do  plainly  imply  a  contradidlion  •, 
from  which  I  haveah'eady  fhcwn  the  notion  of  a  God 
to  be  free.  Now  the  atheift  pretends  to  be  certain 
of  a  pure  negative,  that  there  is  no  fuch  being  as 
God,  and  that  it  is  not  pofflble  there  Hiould  be:  but 
no  man  can  reafonably  pretend  to  know  thus  much, 
but  he  muft  pretend  to  know  all  things  that  are  or 
can  be  ;  which  if  any  man  fliould  be  lb  vain  as  to 
pretend  to,  yet  it  is  to  be  hoped  that  no  body  v/ould 
be  fo  v/eak  as  to  believe  him. 

V.  Speculative  atheifm  is  unreafonable,  becaufe  it 
contradidls  it  felf  There  is  this  great  contradidlion 
in  the  denial  of  a  God  :  He  that  denies  a  God,  fays 
that  that  is  impolTible  which  yet  mull:  be  granted  to 
be  polTible.  He  fays  it  is  impofllble  that  there  fhould 
be  fuch  a  being  as  God,  in  faying  that  de  fa5fo  there 
is  no  fuch  being.  For  eternity  being  efTential  to  the 
notion  of  a  God,  if  thete  be  not  a  God  already  it  is 
impolTible  now  that  there  fhould  be  one  \  becaufe 
fuch  a  being  as  is  fuppofed  to  be  cffentially  eternal 
and  without  beginning  cannot  now  begin  to  be.  And 
yet  he  muft  grant  it  pofllble  that  there  fhould  be  fuch 
a  being,  becaufe  it  is  pofTible  there  ihould  be  fuch  a 
being  as  hath  all  polTible  perfedion  :  and  fuch  a  be- 
ing as  this  is  that  which  we  call  God,  and  is  that  ve- 
ry thing  which  the  atheift  denies  and  others  affirm  to 
be.  For  he  that  denies  a  God,  muft  deny  fuch  a  be- 
ing as  all  the  world  defcribe  God  to  be  •,  and  this  is 
the  general  notion  which  all  men  have  of  God,  "  that 
"  he  is  a  being  asperfedl  as  is  poftibie  i"  that  is,  en- 
dued with  all  fuch  perfedions  as  do  not  imply  a  con- 
^  tradidion, 


The  wifdom  of  being  religious,  47 

tradition,  which  none  of  thofe  perfeftions  which  S  E  R  M. 
we  attribute  to  God  do,  as  I  have  already  proved. 

11.  Speculative  atheifm  as  it  is  unreafonable,  fo  is 
it  a  moft  imprudent  and  uncomfortable  opinion :  and 
that  upon  thefe  two  accounts.  Firft,  becaufe  it  is 
againft  the  prefent  interefl  andhappinefs  of  mankind. 
Secondly,  becaufe  it  is  infinitely  hazardous  and  unfafe 
in  the  ifllie. 

I.  It  is  againft  the  prefent  intereft  and  happinefs 
of  mankind.  If  atheifm  we're  the  general  opinion 
of  the  world,  it  would  be  infinitely  prejudicial  to  the 
peace  and  happinefs  of  human  fociety,  and  would  o- 
pen  a  wide  door  to  all  manner  of  confufion  and  difor- 
der.  But  this  I  fnall  not  now  infift  upon,  becaufe  I 
defign  a  particular  difcourfe  of  that  by  it  ML 

I  Ihall  at  prefent  content  my  felf  to  fhew  how  un- 
comfortable an  opinion  this  would  be  to  particular 
perfons.  For  nothing  can  be  more  evident  than  that 
man  is  not  fufficient  of  himielf  to  his  own  happinefs. 
He  is  liable  to  many  evils  and  miferies  which  he  can 
neither  prevent  nor  redrefs.  He  is  full  of  wants  which 
he  cannot  fupply,  and  compafied  about  v/ith  infirmi- 
ties which  he  cannot  remove,  and  obnoxious  to  dan- 
gers which  he  can  never  fufficiently  provide  againft. 
Confider  man  without  the  protedion  and  condudl  of 
a  fuperior  being,  and  he  is  fecure  of  nothing  that  he 
enjoys  in  this  world,  and  uncertain  of  every  thing 
that  he  hopes  for.  He  is  apt  to  grieve  for  what  he 
cannot  help,  and  eagerly  to  defire  what  he  is  never 
likely  to  obtain.  "  Man  walketh  in  a  vain  x'hev/,  and 
"  difquieteth  himfelf  in  vain."  He  courts  happinefs 
in  a  thoufand  fnapes,  and  the  fafter  he  purfues  it  the 
fafter  it  flies  from  him.     His  hopes  and  expectations 

are 


The  wifdom  of  being  religious, 
are  bigger  than  his  enjoyments,and  his  fears  andjealou- 
lies  more  troublefom  than  the  evils  themfelves  which 
he  is  fo  much  afraid  of.  He  is  liable  to  a  great  many 
inconveniencies  every  moment  of  his  life,  and  is  con- 
tinually infecure  not  only  of  the  good  things  of  this 
life,  but  even  of  life  it  felf  And  befides  all  this,  af- 
ter all  his  endeavours  to  the  contrary,  he  finds  himfelf 
naturally  to  dread  a  fuperior  being,  that  can  defeat  all 
his  defigns,  and  difappoint  all  his  hopes,  and  make 
him  miferable  beyond  all  his  fears.  He  has  oftentimes 
lecret  mifgivings  concerning  another  life  after  this, 
and  fearful  apprehenfions  of  an  invifible  judge  ;  and 
thereupon  he  is  full  of  anxiety  concerning  his  condi- 
tion in  another  world,  and  fometimes  plunged  into 
that  anguifh  and  defpair  that  he  grows  weary  of  him- 
felf. So  that  the  atheifl:  deprives  himfelf  of  all  the 
comfort  that  the  apprehenfions  of  a  God  can  give  a 
man,  and  yet  is  liable  to  all  the  trouble  and  difqulet 
of  thofe  apprehenfions. 

I  do  not  fay  that  thefe  inconveniencies  do  happen 
to  all  5  but  every  one  is  in  danger  of  them.  For 
man's  nature  is  evidently  fo  contrived  as  does  plainly 
difcover  how  unable  he  is  to  make  himfelf  happy.  So 
that  he  muft  necelTaiily  look  abroad  and  feek  for  hap- 
pinefs  fomewhere  elfe.  And  if  there  be  no  fuperior 
being,  in  whofe  care  of  him  he  may  repofe  his  con- 
fidence and  quiet  his  mind  ♦,  if  he  have  no  comforta- 
ble expeflations  of  another  life  to  fuftain  him  under 
the  evils  and  calamities  he  is  liable  to  in  this  world, 
he  is  certainly  "  of  all  creatures  the  mod  miferable.'* 
There  are  none  of  us  but  may  happen  to  fall  into  thofe 
circumftances  of  danger,  or  want,  or  pain,  or  fome 
other  fort  of  calamity,  that  we  can  have  no  hopes  of 

relief 


^he  wifdom  of  being  religious.  49 

reliefer  comfort  but  from  God  alone:  none  inallSERM* 
the  world  to  fly  to,  but  him.  And  what  would  men 
do  in  fuch  a  cafe  if  it  were  not  for  God  ?  Human  na* 
ture  is  mofl  certainly  liable  to  defperate  exigencies^ 
and  he  is  not  happy  that  is  not  provided  againft  the 
worft  that  may  happen.  It  is  bad  to  be  reduced  to 
fuch  a  condition  as  to  be  deftitute  of  all  comfort. 
And  yet  men  are  many  times  brought  to  that  extre- 
mity, that  if  it  were  not  for  God  they  would  not 
know  what  to  do  with  themfelves,  of  how  to  enjoy 
themfelves  for  one  hour,  or  to  entertain  their  thoughts 
with  any  comfortable  confiderations  under  their  pre- 
fent  anguifli  and  fufferings.  All  men  naturally  fly 
to  God  in  extremity,  and  the  mod  atheifliical  perfon 
in  the  world,  when  he  is  forfaken  of  all  hopes  of  any 
other  relief,  is  forced  to  acknowledge  him,  and  Would 
be  glad  to  have  fuch  a  friend. 

Can  it  then  be  a  wife  and  reafonable  defign  to  eh^ 
dcavour  to  banilh  the  belief  of  a  God  out  of  the 
world  ?  Not  to  fay  how  impious  it  is  in  fefpedl  of 
God,  nothing  can  be  more  malicious  to  men,  and 
more  eff^edtually  undermine  the  only  foundation  of 
our  happinefs.  For  if  there  were  no  God  in  the 
world  man  would  be  in  a  much  more  wretched  and 
difconfolate  condition,  than  the  creatures  beloW  him. 
For  they  are  only  fenflble  of  prefent  pain,  and  when 
it  is  upon  them  they  bear  it  as  they  can.  But  they 
are  not  at  all  apprehenfive  of  evils  at  a  difl:ance^  nor 
tormented  with  the  fearful  profped  of  what  may  be- 
fal  them  hereafter :  nor  are  they  plunged  into  defpair 
upon  the  confideration  that  the  evils  they  lie  under 
are  like  to  continue,  and  are  incapable  of  a  remedy. 
And  as  they  have  no  apprehenfion  of  thefe  things^ 

Vol.  L  H  f^ 

I. 


The  wifdom  of  king  religious. 
fo  they  need  no  comfort  againft  them.  But  mankind 
is  liable  to  all  the  fame  evils,  and  many  others  •,  which 
are  fo  much  the  greater,  becaufe  they  arc  aggravated 
and  fet  on  by  the  reftlefs  workings  of  our  minds,  and 
exafperated  by  the  fmart  reflections  and  frettings  of 
our  own  thoughts :  and  if  there  be  no  God  we  are 
wholly  without  comfort  under  all  thefe,  and  without 
any  other  remedy  than  what  time  will  give.     For 
if  the  providence  of  God  be  taken  away,  what  fecu- 
rity  have  we  againft  thofe  innumerable  dangers  and 
mifchiefs  to  which  human  nature  is  continually  ex- 
pofed  ?  What  confolation  under  them,  when  we  are 
reduced  to  that  condition  that  no  creature  can  give 
us  any  hopes  of  relief?  But  if  we  believe  that  there 
is  a  God  that  takes  care  of  us,  and  we  be  careful  to 
pleafe  him,  this  cannot  but  be  a  mighty  comfort  to 
us,  both  under  the  prefent  fenfe  of  afflidtion,  and  the 
apprehenfion  of  evils  at  a  diftance.     For  in  that  cafe, 
we  are  fecure  of  one  of  thefe  three  things.     Either 
that  God  by  his  providence  will  prevent  the  evils 
we  fear,  if  that  be  beft  for  us  :  or  that  he  will  fup- 
port  us  under  them  when  they  are  prefent,  and  add 
to  our  flrength  as  he  encreafeth  our  burthen  :  or  that 
he  will  make  them  the  occafion  of  a  greater  good  to 
us,  by  turning  them  either  to  our  advantage  in  this 
world,  or  the  increafe  of  our  happinefs  in  the  next. 
Now  every  one  of  thefe  confiderations  has  a  great 
deal  of  comfort  in  it,  for  which  if  there  were  no  God 
there  could  be  no  ground.     Nay,  on  the  contrary, 
the  moft  real  foundation  of  our  unhappinefs  would 
be  laid  in  our  rcafon  ;  and  we  fhould  be  fo  much 
more  miferable  than  the  beafts,  by  how  much  we  have 
a  quicker  apprehenfion  and  a  deeper  confideration  of 
things.  So 


^he  wifdom  of  being  religious,  5 1 

So  that  if  a  man  had  arguments  fufficient  to  per-  S  E  R  M. 
fuade  him  that  there  is  no  God  (as  there  is  infinite 
reafon  to  the  contrary)  yet  the  belief  of  a  God  is  fo 
neceffary  to  the  comfort  and  happinefs  of  our  lives, 
that  a  wife  man  could  not  but  be  heartily  troubled  to 
quit  fo  pleafant  an  error,  and  to  part  with  a  delufion 
which  is  apt  to  yield  fuch  unfpeakable  fatisfadtion  to 
the  mind  of  man.     Did  but  men  confider  the  true 
notion  of  God,  he  would  appear  to  be  fo  lovely  a 
being,  and  fo  full  of  goodnefs  and  of  all  defirable  per- 
fedions,  that  even  thofe  very  perfons  who  are  of  fuch 
irregular  underftandings  as  not  to  believe  that  there 
is  a  God,  yet  could  not  (if  they  underftood  them- 
felves)  refrain  from  wifhing  with  all  their  hearts  that 
there  were  one.  For  is  it  not  really  defirable  to  every 
man,  that  there  Ihould  be  fuch  a  being  in  the  world 
as  takes  care  of  the  frame  of  it,  that  it  do  not  run  in- 
to confufion,  and   in  that  diforder  ruin   mankind? 
That  there  fhould  be  fuch  a  being,  as  takes  particular 
care  of  every  one  of  us,  and  loves  us,  and  delights 
to  do  us  good  •,  as  underftands  all  our  wants,  and  is 
able  and  willing  to  relieve  us  in  our  greateft  llraits, 
when  nothing  elfe  can ;  to  preferve  us  in  our  greatefl 
dangers,  to  afTift  us  againft  our  word  enemies,  and 
to  comfort  us  under   our  fharpeft  fufferings,  when 
all  other  things   fet   themfelves  againft  us  ?  Is  it  not 
every  man's  intereft,  that  there  fhould  be  fuch  a  go- 
vernor of  the   world  as  really  defigns  our  happinefs, 
and  hath  omitted  nothing  that  is  necefiary  to  it ;  as 
would  govern  us  for  our  advantage,  and  will  require 
nothing  of  us  but  what  is  for  our  good,  and  yet  will 
infinitely  reward  us  for  the  doing  of  that  which  is 
beft  for  our  felves  ?  that  will  punifh  any  man  that 

H  2  Ihould 


^}ie  wifdom  of  being  religious. 
lliould  go  about  to  injure  us,  or  to  deal  otherwife 
with  us  than  himfelf  in  the  like  cafe  would  be  dealt 
withall  by  us  ?  In  a  word,  fuch  a  one  as  is  ready  to 
be  reconcil'd  to  us  when  we  have  offended  him,  and 
is  lb  far  from  taking  little  advantages  againft  us  for 
every  failing,  that  he  is  willing  to  pardon  our  moft 
wilful  mifcarriages  upon  our  repentance  and  amend- 
ment ?  And  we  have  reafon  to  believe  God  to  be  fuch 
^  being,  if  he  be  at  all. 

Why  then  fhould  any  man  be  troubled  that  there 
is  fuch  a  being  as  this,  or  think  himfelf  concern'd  to 
fhut  him  out  of  the  world  ?  How  could  fuch  a  gover- 
nor as  this  be  wanting  in  the  world,  that  is  fo  great 
g  comfort  and  fecurity  to  mankind,  and  "  the  conli- 
*^  dence  of  all  the  ends  of  the  earth  ?"  If  God  be  fuch 
a  being  as  I  have  defcrib'd,  wo  to  the  world  if  it  were 
without  him.  This  would  be  a  thoufand  times  great- 
er lofs  to  mankind  and  of  more  difmal  confequence, 
and,  if  it  were  true,  ought  to  affed  us  with  more  grief 
and  horror  than  the  e^tinguifliing  of  the  fun. 

Let  but  all  things  be  well  confidered,  and  I  am 
very  confident  that  if  a  wife  and  confiderate  man  were 
left  to  himfelf  and  his  own  choice,  to  wifh  the  great- 
eft  good  to  himfelf  he  could  devife ;  after  he  had 
fearched  heaven  and  earth,  the  fum  of  all  his  wifhes 
would  be  this,  "  that  there  were  juft  fuch  a  being  as 
•*  God  is ;"  nor  would  he  chufe  any  other  benefac- 
tor, or  friend,  or  protector  for  himfelf,  or  governor 
for  the  whole  world,  than  infinite  power  conduced 
and  managed  by  infinite  wifdom  and  goodnefs  and 
juftice,  which  is  the  true  notion  of  a  God. 

Nay,  fo  neceffary  is  God  to  thehappinefs  of  man- 
kind^ tha;  though  there  were  no  God,  yet  theatheift 

himfelf^ 


The  wifdom  of  being  religions.  53 

himfelf,  uponfecond  thoughts,  would  judge  It  conve-  SE  RM. 
nient  that  the  generahty  of  men  Ihould  believe  that  .__' 
there  is  one.  For  when  the  atheift  had  attained  his 
end,  and  (if  it  were  a  thing  pofTible)  had  blotted  the 
notion  of  a  God  out  of  the  minds  of  men,  mankind 
would  in  all  probability  grow  fo  melancholy  and  fo 
unruly  a  thing,  that  he  himfelf  would  think  it  fit  in. 
policy  to  contribute  his  beft  endeavours  to  the  reflor* 
ing  of  men  to  their  former  belief.  Thus  hath  God 
fecured  the  belief  of  himfelf  in  the  world,  againfl  all 
attempts  to  the  contrary  ;  not  only  by  riveting  the 
notion  of  himfelf  into  our  natures,  but  likewife  by 
making  the  belief  of  his  being  neceflary  to  the  peace 
and  tranquillity  of  our  minds,  and  to  the  quiet  and 
happinefs  of  human  fociety. 

So  that  if  we  confult  our  reafon,  we  cannot  but  be^ 
lieve  that  there  is,  if  our  interefl,  we  cannot  but 
heartily  wifli  that  there  were  fuch  a  being  as  God  in 
the  world.  Every  thing  within  us  ^nd  without  us 
gives  notice  of  him.  His  name  is  written  upon  our 
hearts ;  and  in  every  creature  there  are  fome  prints 
and  footfleps  of  him.  Every  moment  we  feel  our  de- 
pendance  upon  him,  and  do  by  daily  experience  find 
that  we  can  neither  be  happy  without  him,  nor  think 
our  felves  fo, 

I  confefs,  it  is  not  a  wicked  man's  intereft,  if  he 
refolve  to  continue  fuch,  that  there  (hould  be  a  God  ; 
but  then  it  is  not  mens  interefl  to  be  wicked.  It  is 
for  the  general  good  of  human  fociety,  and  confe- 
quently  of  particular  perfons,  to  be  true  and  jufl  -,  it 
is  for  men's  health  to  be  temperate  j  and  fo  I  could 
inflance  in  all  other  virtues.  But  this  is  the  myflery 
of  atheifm,  men  are  wedded  to  their  lufts  and  refolved 

upon 


*tbe  wifdom  of  being  religious. 
upon  a  wicked  courfe ;  and  fo  it  becomes  their  inte- 
reft  to  wilh  there  were  no  God,  and  to  believe  fo  if 
they  can.  Whereas  if  men  were  minded  to  live  righte- 
oufly  and  foberly  and  virtuoufly  in  the  world,  "  to 
**  believe  a  God'*  would  be  no  hindrance  or  pre. 
judice  to  any  fuch  defign  ;  but  very  much  for  the  ad- 
vancement and  furtherance  of  it.  Men  that  are  good 
and  virtuous  do  eafily  believe  a  God  •,  fo  that  it  is 
vehemently  to  be  fufpedled,  that  nothing  but  the 
ftrength  of  men's  lufts,  and  the  power  of  vicious  in" 
elinations  do  fway  their  minds  and  i^tt  a  biafs  upon 
their  underllandings  towards  atheifm. 

2.  Atheifm  is  imprudent,  becaufe  it  is  unfafe  in 
the  iffue.  The  atheift  contends  againft  the  religious 
man  that  there  is  no  God  ,  but  upon  ftrange  inequa- 
lity and  odds,  for  he  ventures  his  eternal  intereft ; 
whereas  the  religious  man  ventures  only  the  lofs  of 
his  lufts,  (which  it  is  much  better  for  him  to  be  with- 
out) or  at  the  utmoft  of  fome  temporal  convenience  > 
and  all  this  while  is  inwardly  more  contented  and  hap- 
py, and  ufually  more  healthful,  and  perhaps  meets 
with  more  refpedl  and  faithfuller  friends,  and  lives  in 
a  more  fecure  and  flourifhing  condition,  and  more 
free  from  the  evils  and  punilhments  of  this  world, 
than  the  atheiftical  perfon  does  ;  however,  it  is  not 
much  that  he  ventures  :  and  after  this  life,  if  there 
be  no  God,  is  as  well  as  he;  but  if  there  be  a  God, 
is  infinitely  better,  even  as  much  as  unfpeakable  and 
eternal  happinefs  is  better  than  extreme  and  endlefs 
mifery.  So  that  if  the  arguments  for  and  againft  a 
God  were  equal,  and  it  were  an  even  queftion  whe- 
ther there  were  one  or  not ;  yet  the  hazard  and  dan- 
ger is  fo  infinitely  unequal,  that  in  point  of  pru- 
dence 


T'he  wifdojn  of  being  religious.  ^^ 

dencc  and  interefl  every  man  were  obliged  to  incline  S  E  R  M, 
to  the  affirmative :  and,  whatever  doubts  he  might  > 
have  about  it,  to  chufe  the  fafeft  fide  of  the  queftion, 
and  to  make  that  the  principle  to  live  by.  For,  he 
that  afts  wifely  and  is  a  thoroughly  prudent  man,  will 
be  provided  againft  all  events,  and  will  take  care  to 
fecure  the  main  chance  whatever  happens ;  but  the 
atheift,  in  cafe  things  fhould  fall  out  contrary  to  his 
belief  and  expedation ,  hath  made  no  provifion 
for  this  cafe.  If  contrary  to  his  confidence  it  fhould 
prove  in  the  ilTue  that  there  is  a  God,  the  man  is  loft 
and  undone  for  ever.  If  the  atheift  when  he  dies 
fiiould  find  that  his  foul  remains  after  his  body,  and  has 
only  quitted  it's  lodging,  how  will  this  man  be  amazed 
and  blank'd,  when,  contrary  to  hisexpedlation,  he  fnall 
find  himfelf  in  a  new  and  ftrange  place,  amid  ft  a 
world  of  fpirits,  entred  upon  an  everlafting  and  un- 
changeable ftate  ?  How  fadly  will  the  man  be  dif- 
appointed  when  he  finds  all  things  otherwife  than  he 
had  ftated  and  determined  them  in  this  world  ?  When 
he  comes  to  appear  before  that  God  whom  he  hath 
denied,  and  againft  whom  he  hath  fpoken  as  defpite* 
ful  things  as  he  could,  who  can  imagine  the  pale 
and  guilty  looks  of  this  man,  and  how  he  will  fhiver 
and  tremble  "  for  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  and  for  the 
"  glory  of  his  majefty  ?"  How  will  he  be  furprifed 
with  terrors  on  every  fide,  to  find  himfelf  thus  unex- 
pectedly and  irrecoverably  plunged  into  a  ftate  of 
ruin  and  defperation  ?  And  thus  things  may  happen, 
for  all  this  man's  confidence  now.  For  ourbehef  or 
dift)elief  of  a  thing  does  not  alter  the  nature  of  the 
thing.  We  cannot  fancy  things  into  being,  or  make 
them  vanilh  into  nothing  by  the  ftubborn  confidence 

2  of 


l^e  wifdom  of  being  religious, 
of  bur  imaginations.  Things  areas  fallen  as  we  are, 
and  will  be  what  they  are  whatever  we  think  of  them. 
And  if  there  be  a  God,  a  man  cannot  by  an  obftinate 
difbelief  of  him  make  him  ceafe  to  be,  any  more 
than  a  man  can  put  out  the  fun  by  winking. 

And  thus  I  have,  as  briefly  and  clearly  as  I  could, 
endeavoured  to  fhew  the  ignorance  and  folly  of  fpe- 
culative  atheifm  in  denying  the  exiftence  of  God. 
And  now  it  will  be  lefs  needful  to  fpeak  of  the  other 
two  principles  of  religion,  the  immortality  of  the 
foul,  and  future  rewards.     For  no  man  can  have  any 
reafonable  fcruple   about  thefe,  who  believes   that 
there  is  a  God.     Becaufe  no  man  that  owns  the  exif- 
tence of  an  infinite  fpirit  can  doubt  of  the  pofTibility 
of  a  finite  fpirit,  that  is,  fuch  a  thing  as  is  immateri- 
al and  does  not  contain  any  principle  of  corruptiotJ 
in  it  felf.     And  there  is  no  man  that  believes  the 
goodnefs  of  God,  but  muft  be  inclin'd  to  think  that 
he  hath  made  fome  things  for  as  long  a  duration  as 
they  are  capable  of  Nor  can  any  man,  that  acknow^ 
ledgeth  the  holy  and  juft  providence  of  God,  and 
that  he  loves  righteoufnefs  and  hates  iniquity,  and 
that  he   is  a  magiflrate  and  governor  of  the  worlds 
and  confequently  concerned  to  countenance  the  obe- 
dience, and  to  punilh  the  violation  of  his  laws ;  and 
that  does  withal  confider  the  promifcuous  difpenfa- 
tions  many  times  of  God's  providence  in  this  world  % 
I  fay,  no  man  that  acknowledges  all  this,  can  think 
it  unreafonable  to  conclude,  that  after  this  life  good 
men  fhall  be  rewarded,  and  finners  punifhed.     I  have 
done  with  the  firft  fort  of  irreligious  perfons,  the  fpe- 
culative  atheift.      I  fhall  fpeak  but    briefly  of  the 
ether. 

Secondly, 


^he  wifdom  of  being  religious,  57 

Secondly,  thepradlical  Atheifl,  who  is  wicked  and  S  E  R  M, 
irreligious,  notwithftanding  he  does  in  fome  fort  be- 
lieve that  there  is  a  God,  and  a  future  ftatc  -,  he  is 
iikewife  guilty  of  prodigious   foliy.     The  principle 
of  the  fpeculative  Atheift  argues  more  ignorance,  but 
the  pradice  of  the  other  argues  greater  folly.     Not 
to  believe  a  God,  and  another  life,  for  which  there 
is  fo  much  evidence  of  reafon  is  great  ignorance  and 
folly  ;  but  'tis  the  highefl  madnefs,  when  a  man  does 
believe  thefe  things,  to  live  as  if  he  did  not  believe 
them  :  when  a  man  does  not  doubt  but  that  there  is 
a  God,  and  that  according  as  he   demeans  himfelf 
towards  him  he   will  make  him  happy  or  miferable 
for  ever,  yet  to  live  fo  as  if  he  were  certain  of  the 
contrary,  and  as  no  man  in  reafon  can  live  but  he 
that  is  well  affured  that  there  is  no  God.     It  was  a 
fhrewd  faying  of  the  old  monk,  that  two  kind  of  pri- 
fons  would  ferve  for  all  offenders  in  the  world,  an 
inquifition   and  a   bedlam  :  if  any  man  fhould  deny 
the  being  of  a  God,  and  the  immortality  of  the  foul, 
fuch  a  one  fhould  be  put  into  the  firfh  of  thefe,  the 
inquifition,  as  beijig  a  defperate  heretick  ;  but  if  any 
man  fliould  profefs  to  believe  thefe  things,  and  yet 
allow  himfelf  in  any  known  wickednefs,  fuch  a  one 
fhould  be  put  iato  bedlam  ;  becaufe  there  cannot  be 
a  greater  folly  and  madnefs,  than  for  a  man  in  matters 
of  greateft  moment  and  concernment  to  acH:  againfl 
his  befi  reafon  and  underfianding,  and  by  his  life  to 
contradid  his  belief     Such  a  man  does  perifh  with 
his  eyes   open,  and   knowingly  undoes  himfelf ;  he 
runs  upon  the  greatefl  dangers,  w\hich  he  clearly  fees 
to  be  before  him,  and  precipitates  himfelf  into  thofe 
e\^ils,  which  he  profefles  to  believe  to  be  real  and  into- 
VoL.  I.  I  lerable  ^ 


^g  ne  wifdom  of  bemg  religious. 

ERM.  lerable-,  and  wilfully  neglefts  the  obtaining  of  that 
unfpeakable  good  and  happinefs,  which  he  is  perfuad- 
ed  is  certain  and  attainable.  Thus  much  for  the  fe- 
cond  way  of  confirmation. 

III.  The  third  way  of  confirmation  fhall  be,  by 
endeavouring  to  vindicate  religion  from  thofe  com- 
mon imputations,  which  feem  to  charge  it  with  ig- 
norance or  imprudence.  And  they  are  chiefly  thefe 
three  : 

1.  Credulity. 

2.  Singularity. 

3.  Making  a  foolifli  bargain. 
Firll,  credulity  :  Say  they,  the  foundation  of  re- 
ligion is  the  belief  of  thofe  things  for  which  we  have 
no  fufficient  reafon,  and  confequently  of  which  we 
can  have  no  good  aflfurance;  as  thebehefof  a  God, 
and  of  a  future  (late  after  this  life ;  things  which  we 
never  faw,  nor  did  experience,  nor  ever  fpoke  with 
any  body  that  did.  Now  it  feems  to  argue  too  great 
a  forwardnefs  and  eafinefs  of  belief,  to  afTent  to  any 
thing  upon  infufficient  grounds. 

To  this.Ianfwer, 

I.  That  if  there  be  fuch  a  being  as  a  God,  and 
fuch  a  thing  as  a  future  flate  after  this  life,  it  cannot 
(as  I  faid  before)  in  reafon  be  expected,  that  we  fliould 
have  the  evidence  of  fenfe  for  fuch  things:  for  he 
that  believes  a  God,  believes  fuch  a  being  as  hath  all 
perfections,  among  which  this  is  one,  that  he  is  a 
Ipirit ;  and  confequently  that  he  is  invifible,  and  can- 
not be  feen.  He  likewife  that  believes  another  life 
after  this,  profefTeth  to  believe  a  Rate  of  which  in  this 
life  we  have  no  trial  and  experience.  Bcfides,  if  this 
were  a  good  objedion,  that  no  man  ever  faw  thefc 

things. 


^he  wifdoni  of  being  religious,  ^g 

things,  it  ftrikes  at  the  atheift  as  well  as  us.     For  no  S  E  R  M. 
man  ever  faw  the  world  to   be   from  eternity,  nor  ^^^^^ 
Epicurus  his  atoms,  of  which  notwithilanding  he  be- 
lieves the  world  was  made. 

2.  We  have  the  bell  evidence  for  thefe  things 
which  they  are  capable  of  at  prefent,  fuppofing  they 
were. 

g.  Thofe  who  deny  thefe  principles,  muft  be  much 
more  credulous,  that  is,  believe  things  upon  incom- 
parably lefs  evidence  of  reafon.  The  atheift  looks 
upon  all  that  are  religious  as  a  company  of  credulous 
fools.  But  he,  for  his  part,  pretends  to  be  wifer  than 
to  believe  any  thing  for  company  ;  he  cannot  enter- 
tain things  upon  thofe  flight  grounds  which  move  o- 
ther  men  ;  if  you  would  win  his  afifent  to  any  thing, 
you  muft  give  him  a  clear  demonftration  for  it.  Now 
there's  no  way  to  deal  with  this  man  of  reafon,  this 
rigid  exa6lor  of  ftrid  demonftration  for  things  which 
are  not  capable  of  it,  but  by  fliewing  him  that  he  is 
an  hundred  times  more  credulous,  that  he  begs  more 
principles,  takes  more  things  for  granted  without  of- 
fering to  prove  them,  and  afients  to  more  ftrange 
conclufions  upon  weaker  grounds,  than  thofe  whom 
he  fo  much  accufeth  of  credulity. 

And  to  evidence  this,  I  fhall  briefly  give  you  an 
account  of  the  atheift's  creed,  and  prefent  you  with  a 
catalogue  of  the  fundamental  articles  of  his  faith.  He 
believes  that  there  is  no  God,  nor  polTibly  can  be, 
and  confequently  that  the  wife  as  well  as  unwife  of 
all  ages  have  been  miftaken,  except  himfelf  and  a  few 
more.  He  believes,  that  either  all  the  world  have 
been  frighted  with  an  apparition  of  their  own  fancy, 
or  that  they  have  moft  unnaturally  confpired  together 

.12  ta 


6o  The  wifdom  of  being  religious. 

IKU.  to  cozen  themfelves ;  or  that  this  notion  of  a  God 
is  a  trick  of  policy,  though  the  greateft  princes  and 
politicians  do  not  at  this  day  know  fo  much,  nor 
have  done  time  out  of  mind.  He  believes,  either 
that  the  heavens  and  the  earth  and  all  things  in  them 
had  no  original  caufe  of  their  being,  or  elfe  that  they 
were  made  by  chance  and  happened  he  knows  not 
how  to  be  as  they  are;  and  that  in  this  laft  fhuffling 
of  matter  all  things  have,  by  great  good  fortune,  fallen 
out  as  happily  and  as  regularly,  as  if  the  greateft  wif- 
dom had  contrived  them  •,  but  yet  he  is  refolved  to 
believe  that  there  was  no  wifdom  in  the  contrivance 
of  them.  He  believes,  that  matter  of  it  felf  is  utter- 
ly void  of  all  fenfe,  underftanding  and  liberty  •,  but 
for  all  that  he  is  of  opinion  that  the  parts  of  matter 
may  now  and  then  happen  to  be  fo  conveniently 
dilpcfed  as  to  have  all  thefe  qualities,  and  moft  dex- 
troudy  to  perform  all  thofe  fine  and  free  operations 
which  the  ignorant  attribute  to  fpirits. 

This  is  the  flini  of  his  belief.  And  it  is  a  wonder, 
that  there  fhould  be  found  any  perfon  pretending  to 
reafon  or  v/it  that  can  affent  to  fuch  a  heap  of  abfur- 
dities,  which  are  fo  grofs  and  palpable  that  they  may 
be  felt.  So  that  if  every  man  had  his  due  it  will  cer- 
tainly fall  to  the  atheift's  Hiare  to  be  the  moil  credu- 
lous perfon,  that  is,  to  believe  things  upon  the  fnght- 
efl:  rcafons.  For  he  does  not  pretend  to  prove  any 
thing  of  all  this,  only  he  finds  himfelf,  he  knows  not 
why,  inclined  to  believe  fo,  and  to  laugh  at  thofe 
that  do  not. 

II.  The  fecond  imputation  is  fingularity  ;  the  af- 
fectation whereof  is  unb(fcoming  a  wife  man.  To 
this  charge  I  anfwer, 

I.  If 


T^he  wifdom  of  being  religious.  6 1 

1 .  If  by  religion  be  meant  the  belief  of  the  prin-  S  E  R  M. 
ciples  of  religion,  that  there  is  a  God,  and  a  provi-  ^5' 
dence,  that  our  fouls  are  immortal,  and  that  there 
are  rewards  to  be  expedled  after  this  life  ;  thefe  are 
fo  far  from  being  fingular  opinions,  that  they  are  and 
always  have  been  the  general  opinion  of  mankind, 
even  of  the  molt  barbarous  nations.  Infomuch,  that 
the  hiftories  of  ancient  times  do  hardly  furnifh  us 
with  the  names  of  above  five  or  fix  perfons  who  de- 
nied a  God.  And  lAicretius  acknowledgeth  that 
Epicurus  was  the  firft  who  did  oppofe  thofe  great 
foundations  of  religion,  the  providence  of  God,  and 
the  immortality  of  the  foul.  Primum  Grajus  homoy 
&c.  meaning  Epicurus. 

2.  If  by  religion  be  meant  a  living  up  to  thofe 
principles,  that  is,  to  act  conformably  to  our  bell  rea- 
fon  and  underllanding,  and  to  live  as  it  does  become 
thofe  who  do  believe  a  God  and  a  future  Hate  ;  this 
is  acknowledged,  even  by  thofe  who  live  otherwiie, 
to  be  the  part  of  every  wife  man  ;  and  the  contrary 
to  be  the  very  madnefs  of  folly,  and  height  of  dif- 
traclion  :  nothing  being  more  ordinary  than  for  men 
who  live  wickedly  to  acknowledge  that  they  ought 
to  do  otherwife. 

3.  Though  according  to  the  common  courfe  and 
praftice  of  the  world  it  be  fomewhat  lingular  for  men 
truly  and  thoroughly  to  live  up  to  the  principles  of 
t]|cir'  religion,  yet  Angularity  in  this  matter  is  fo  far 
from  being  a  refieclion  upon  any  man's  prudence,  that 
it  is  a  fingular  commendation  of  it.  In  two  cafes 
fingularity  is  very  commendable. 

I.  When  there  is  a  netefiity  of  it  in  order  to  a 
man's  greateft  interell  and  happinefs.     I  think  it  to 

be 


62  ^he  wifdom  of  being  religious, 

E  R  M.  be  a  reafonable  account  for  any  man  to  give  why  he 
does  not  live  as  the  greateft  part  of  the  world  do,  that 
he  has  no  mind  to  die  as  they  do  and  to  perifli  with 
them  ;  he  is  not  difpofed  to  be  a  fool,  and  to  be  mi- 
ferable  for  company ;  he  has  no  inclination  to  have 
his  lail  end  like  theirs  "  who  know  not  God,  and 
*'  obey  not  the  gofpel  of  his  fon,  and  fliall  be  punifh- 
«'  ed  with  everlailing  deftrii<5lion  from  the  prefence 
"  of  the  Lord,  and  from  the  glory  of  his  power." 

2.  It  is  very  commendable  to  be  fmgular  in  any 
excellency,  and  I  have  Ihewn  that  religion  is  the 
greateft  excellency  :  to  be  fmgular  in  any  thing  that 
is  wife,  and  worthy,  and  excellent,  is  not  a  difparage- 
ment  but  a  praife :  every  man  would  chufe  to  be 
thus  fmgular. 

III.  The  third  imputation  is,  that  religion  is  a 
foolifh  bargain  •,  becaufe  they  who  are  religious  ha- 
zard the  parting  with  a  prefent  and  certain  happinefs 
for  that  which  is  future  and  uncertain.  To  this  I 
anfwer, 

I.  Let  it  be  granted,  that  the  aiTurance  which  we 
have  of  future  rewards  tails  fhort  of  the  evidence  of 
fenfe.  For  I  doubt  not,  but  that  laying  of  our  Sa- 
viour, "  bleffed  is  he  who  hath  believed,  and  not 
"  feen  •,"  and  thofe  exprefiions  of  the  apoftle,  "  we 
^'  walk  by  faith  and  not  by  fight,"  and  "  faith  is  the 
*'  evidence  of  things  not  feen,"  are  intended  by  way 
of  abatement  and  diminution  to  the  evidence  of  faiiji, 
and  do  fignify  that  the  report  and  tefbimony  of  others 
is  not  fo  great  evidence  as  that  of  our  own  fenfes » 
and  tliougii  we  have  fufncient  aiTurance  of  another 
ftate,  yet  no  man  can  think  we  have  fo  great  evi- 
dence as  if  we  our  felves  iiad  been  in  t'^Q  other  world 
and  ktn  how  all  things  are  there.  2.  Vv'e 


The  wifdom  of  being  religious^  63 

2.  We  have  fufficient  affurance  of  thefe  things,  SERM. 
and  fuch  as  may  beget  in  us  a  well  grounded  confi- 
dence, and  free  us  from  all  doubts  of  the  contrary,  and 
perfuade  a  reafonable  man  to  venture  his  greatefl  in- 
terefts  in  this  world  upon  the  fecurity  that  he  hath  of 
another  :  for, 

1.  We  have  as  much  alTurance  of  thefe  things  as 
things  future  and  at  a  difbance  are  capable  of,  and  he 
is  a  very  unreafonable  man  that  would  defire  more  : 
future  and  invifible  things  are  not  capable  of  the  evi- 
dence of  fenfe  :  but  v/e  have  the  greateft  rational  evi- 
dence for  them,  and  in  this  every  reafonable  man 
ought  to  reft  fatisfied. 

2.  "We  have  as  much  as  is  abundantly  fufficient  to 
juftify  every  man's  difcretion,  w^ho,  for  the  great  and 
eternal  things  of  another  world,  hazards  or  parts  with 
the  poor  and  tranfitory  things  of  this  life.  And  for 
the  clearing  of  this  it  will  be  worth  our  confidering, 
that  the  greateft  affairs  of  this  world,  and  the  moft 
im.portant  concernments  of  this  life,  are  all  conducted 
only  by  moral  demonftradons.  Men  every  day  vcn- 
ture  their  lives  and  eftates  only  upon  moral  aflurance. 
For  inftance,  men  who  never  were  at  the  eaft  or  weft 
Indies,  or  in  Turkey  or  Spain,  yet  do  venture  their 
whole  eftate  in  traffick  thither,  though  they  have  no 
mathematical  demonftration  but  only  moral  affurance 
that  there  are  fuch  places.  Nay  which  is  more,  men 
e^ry  day  eat  and  drink,  though  I  think  no  man  can 
demonftrate  out  of  Euclid  or  Apollonius,  that  his 
baker,  or  brewer,  or  cook  have  not  conveyed  poifon 
into  his  meat  or  drink.  And  that  man  that  would 
be  fo  wife  and  cautious,  as  not  to  eat  or  drink  till  he 
could  dcmonftrate  this  to  himfelf,  I  know  no  other 

remedy 


64  ^he  wifdom  of  being  religious. 

SE  R  M.  remedy  for  him  but  that  in  great  gravity  and  wifdom 
he  muft  die  for  fear  of  death.  And  for  any  man  to 
urge,  that  though  men  in  temporal  affairs  proceed 
upon  moral  afliirance,  yet  there  is  greater  affurance 
required  to  make  men  feek  heaven  and  avoid  hell, 
feems  to  me  to  be  highly  unreafonable.  For  fuch  an 
affurance  of  things,  as  will  make  men  circumfpedl  and 
careful  to  avoid  a  leffer  danger,  ought  in  all  reafon 
to  awaken  men  much  more  to  the  avoiding  of  a  great- 
er *,  fuch  an  affurance,  as  will  fharpen  mens  defires  and 
quicken  their  endeavours  for  the  obtaining  of  a  lelfer 
good,  ought  in  all  reafon  to  animate  men  more  pow- 
erfully, and  to  infpire  them  with  a  greater  vigour 
and  induftry  in  the  purfuit  of  that  which  is  infinitely 
o-reater.  For  why  the  fame  affurance  fhould  not  ope- 
rate as  well  in  a  great  danger  as  in  a  lefs,  in  a  great  good 
as  in  a  fmall  and  inconfiderable  one,  I  can  fee  no 
reafon  \  unlefs  men  will  fay,  that  the  greatnefs  of  an 
evil  and  danger  is  an  encouragement  to  men  to  run  up- 
on it,  and  that  the  greatnefs  of  any  good  and  happi- 
nefs  ought  in  reafon  to  difhearten  men  from  the  pur- 
fuit of  it. 

And  now  I  think  I  may  with  reafon  entreat  fuch  as 
are  atheiftically  inclined  to  confider  thefe  things  fe- 
rioufly  and  impartially  ;  and  if  there  be  weight  in 
thefe  confiderations  which  I  have  offered  to  them  to 
fway  with  reafonable  men,  I  would  beg  of  fuch  that 
they  would  not  fuifer  themfelves  to  be  biaffed  by  m^- 
judice  or  paffion,  or  the  interefl  of  any  luft  or 
worldly  advantage,  to  a  contrary  perfuafion. 

Firfl,  I  would  entreat  them,  ferioufly  and  diligent- 
ly to  confider  thefe  things,  bccaufe  they  are  of  fo 
great  moment  and  cpncernment  to  every   man.     If 

any 


The  nioifdom  vf  being  religioiu.  65 

any  thing  in  the  world  deferve  our  ferious  ftudy  and  S  E  R  M,/ 
confideration,  thefe  principles  of  religion  do.  For  i_  -- -Jj 
what  can  import  us  more  to  be  fatisfied  in  than  whe- 
ther there  be  a  God,  or  not  ?  whether  our  fouls  fhali 
perifh  with  our  bodies,  or  be  immortal  and  fliall  con- 
tinue for  ever  ?  And  if  fo,  whether  in  that  eternal 
ftate,  which  remains  for  men  after  this  life,  they  fhall 
not  be  happy  or  miferable  for  ever  according  as  they 
have  demeaned  themfelves  in  this  v/orld  ?  If  thefe 
things  be  fo,  they  are  of  inlinite  confequence  to 
us  \  and  therefore  it  highly  concerns  us  to  enquire 
diligently  about  them,  and  to  fatisfy  our  minds 
concerning  them  one  way  or  other.  For  thefe  are 
not  matters  to  be  (lightly  and  fuperiicially  thought 
upon,  much  lefs  (as  the  way  of  atheiftical  men  is)  to 
be  played  and  jefted  withal.  There  is  no  greater 
argument  of  a  light  and  inconfiderate  perfon,  than 
prophanely  to  feoff  at  religion.  It  is  a  Cgn  that  that 
man  hath  no  regard  to  himfelf,  and  that  he  is  not 
touched  with  a  fenfe  of  his  own  interefl,  who  loves 
to  be  jefling  with  edg'd  tools  and  to  play  with  life  and 
death.  This  is  the  very  maclman  that  Solomon 
fpeaks  of,  "  who  cafteth  lire-brands,  arrov/s  and  P'Ov.xxvL 
"  death,  and  faith,  am  I  not  in  fport.^"  To  exa- 
mine feverely  and  debate  ferioufly  the  principles  of 
religion,  is  a  thing  worthy  of  a  wife  man ;  but  if  a- 
ny  man  fhall  turn  religion  into  raillery,  and  think 
to  confute  it  by  two  or  three  bold  jefts,  this  man  doth 
not  render  religion  but  himfelf  ridiculous,  in  the  opi- 
nion of  all  confiderate  men  •,  becaufe  he  fports  with 
his  own  life.  If  the  principles  of  religion  were  doubt- 
ful and  uncertain,  yet  they  concern  us  fo  nearly  that 
we  ought  to  be  ferious  in   the  examination  of  them^ 

Vol.  L  K  And 

2. 


66  ^he  wifdom  ofhetng  religious. 

S  E  K  M.  And  though  they  were  never  fo  clear  and  evident, 
yet  they  may  be  made  ridiculous  by  vain  and  frothy 
men  -,  as  the  graveft  and  wifeft  perfon  in  the  world 
may  be  abufed  by  being  put  into  a  fool's  coat,  and 
the  moft  noble  and  excellent  poem  may  be  debafed 
and  made  vile  by  being  turned  into  burlefque.  But  of 
this  I  Ihall  have  occafion  to  fpeak  more  largely  in 
my  next  difcourfe. 

So  that  it  concerns  every  man,  that  would  not  tri- 
fle away  his  foul  and  fool  himfelf  into  irrecoverable 
mifery,  with  the  greatefl  ferioufnefs  to  enquire  into 
thefe  matters  whether  they  be  fo  or  not,  and  patient- 
ly to  confider  the  arguments  which  are  brought  for 
them.  For  many  have  mifcarried  about  thefe  things, 
not  becaufe  there  is  not  reafon  and  evidence  enough 
for  them,  but  becaufe  they  have  not  had  patience 
enough  to  confider  them. 

Secondly,  confider  thefe  things  impartially.  All 
wicked  men  are  of  a  party  againft  religion.  Some 
luft  or  intereft  ingageth  them  againft  it.  Hence  it 
comes  to  pafs  that  they  are  apt  to  flight  the  ftrong- 
eft  arguments  that  can  be  brought  for  it,  and  to  cry 
up  very  weak  ones  againft  it.  Men  do  generally  and 
without  difficulty  aflTent  to  mathematical  truths,  be- 
caufe it  is  no  body's  intereft  to  deny  them  *,  but  men 
are  flow  to  believe  moral  and  divine  truths,  becaufe 
by  their  lufts  and  intereft  they  are  prejudiced  againft 
them.  And  therefore  you  may  obferve  that  the  more 
virtuoufly  any  man  lives,  and  the  lefs  he  is  enflaved 
to  any  luft,  the  more  ready  he  is  to  entertain  the  prin- 
ciples of  rehgion. 

Therefore  when  you  are  examining  thefe  matters, 
do  not  take  into  confideration  any  fenfual  or  worldly 

intereft. 


^he  wifdom  of  being  religious.  6y 

interefl,  but  deal  clearly  and  impartially  with  your  S  E  R  M- 
felves.  Ixt  not  temporal  and  little  advantages  fway  , 
you  againft  a  greater  and  more  durable  intereft.  Think 
thus  with  your  felves,  that  you  have  not  the  making 
of  things  true  or  falfe,  but  that  the  truth  and  exiftence 
of  things  is  already  fixed  and  fettled,  and  that  the 
principles  of  religion  are  already  either  determinate- 
ly  true  or  falfe  before  you  think  of  them,  either  there 
is  a  God,  or  there  is  not ;  either  your  fouls  are  im- 
mortal, or  they  are  not  -,  one  of  thefe  is  certain  and 
neceffary,  and  is  not  now  to  be  altered ;  the  truth  of 
things  will  not  comply  with  our  conceits,  and  bend 
it  felf  to  our  interefls.  Therefore  do  not  think  what 
you  would  have  to  be,  but  confider  impartially  what 
is,  and  (if  it  be)  will  be  whether  you  will  or  no.  Do 
not  reafon  thus  ;  I  would  fain  be  wicked,  and  there- 
fore it  is  my  intereft  that  there  Ihould  be  no  God, 
nor  no  life  after  this ;  and  therefore  I  will  endeavour 
to  prove  that  there  is  no  fuch  thing,  and  will  fhew 
all  the  favour  I  can  to  that  fide  of  the  queftion  i  t 
will  bend  my  underftanding  and  wit  to  flrengthen 
the  negative,  and  will  ftudy  to  make  it  as  true  as  I 
can.  This  is  fond,  becaufe  it  is  the  way  to  cheat  thy 
felf;  and  that  we  may  do  as  often  as  we  pleafe,  but 
the  nature  of  things  will  not  be  impofed  upon.  If 
then  thou  be  as  wife  as  thou  oughteft  to  be,  thou  wilt 
reafon  thus  with  thy  felf;  my  higheft  intereft  is  not 
to  be  deceived  about  thefe  matters,  therefore  fettihg 
afide  all  other  confiderations  I  will  endeavour  to  know 
the  truth  and  yield  to  that. 

And  now  it  is  time  to  draw  towards  a  conclufion 
of  this  long  difcourfe.  And  that  which  I  have  all 
this  while  been  endeavouring  to  convince  men  of  and 

K2  to 


63  The  wifdom  of  being  religious, 

S  E  R  M.  to  perfuade  them  to,  is  no  other  but  what  God  hlm- 
s^^^,^^^..^^  felf  cloth  particularly  recommend  to  us  as  proper  for 
human  confideration,  "  unto  man  he  faid,  behold 
"  the  fear  of  the  Lord  that  is  wifdom,  and  to  depart 
"  from  evil  is  underftanding."  Whoever  pretends 
to  reafon,  and  calls  himfelf  a  man,  is  obliged  to  ac- 
knowledge God  and  to  demean  himfelf  religioufly 
towards  him.  For  God  is  to  the  underltanding  of 
man  as  the  light  of  the  fun  is  to  our  eyes,  the  firft 
and  the  plainefh  and  the  mod  glorious  objeft  of  it. 
He  fills  heaven  and  earth,  and  every  thing  in  them 
does  reprefent  him  to  us.  Which  way  foever  we 
turn  our  felves,  we  are  encountered  v/ith  clear  evi- 
dences and  fenfible  demonftrations  of  a  deity.  For  (as 
JlomJ.  i^t  apofUe  reafons)  "  the  invifible  things  of  him  from 
*°*  "  the  creation  of  the  world  are  clearly  feen,  being 

"  underftood  by  the  things  that  are  made,  even  his 
"  eternal  power  and  godhead  :"  «V  're  wax  avr^V  av<x- 
*/  TroAoj/vjTi^f,  fo  that  they  are  without  excufe  -,"  that 
is,  thofe  men  that  know  not  God  have  no  apology 
to  make  for  themfelves.  Or  if  men  do  know  and 
believe  that  there  is  fuch  a  being  as  God,  not  to  con- 
fider  the  proper  confequences  of  fuch  a  principle,  not 
to  demean  our  felves  towards  him  as  becomes  our  re- 
lation to  him  and  dcpendance  upon  him  and  the  duty 
\^hich  we  naturally  owe  him,  this  is  great  ftupidity 
and  inconfideratenefs. 

And  yet  he  that  confiders  the  lives  and  adlions  of 

the  greateft  part  of  men  v/ould  verily  think,  that  they 

underftood  nothing  of  all  this.     Therefore  the  fcrip^ 

ture  reprefents  wicked  men  as  without  underftanding. 

JDeut.        *'  It  is  a  nation  void  of  counfcl,  neither  is  there  any 

xxxii.2^  c«  ynderftanding  in  them:"    and  elfewhere,  "have 

^  *^  all 


^he  wifdom  of  being  religious,  69 

"  all  the  workers  of  iniquity  no  knowledge  ?"  not  S  E  R  M. 
that  they  are  deflitute  of  tht  natural  faculty  of  un- 
derftanding,  but  they  do  not  ufe  it  as  they  ought ; 
they  are  not  blind,  but  they  wink,  "  they  detain  the 
"  truth  of  God  in  unrighteoufnefs,  and  though  they 
"  know  God,  yet  they  do  not  glorify  him  as  God,'* 
nor  fuffer  the  apprehenfions  of  him  to  have  a  due  in- 
fluence upon  their  hearts  and  lives. 

Men  generally  fland  very  much  upon  the  credit 
and  reputation  of  their  underflandings,  and  of  all 
things  in  the  world  hate  to  be  accounted  fools,  be- 
caufe  it  is  fo  great  a  reproach.     The  beft  way  to  a- 
void  this  imputation,  and  to  bring  off  the  credit  of 
our  underflandings,  is  to  be  truly  religious,  "  to  fear 
"  the  Lord  and  to  depart  from  evil."     For  certain- 
ly there  is  no  fuch  imprudent  perfon  as  he  that  ne- 
glecfls  God  and  his  foul,  and  is  carelefs  and  flothful  a- 
bout  his  everlafting  concernments;  becaufe  this  man 
a6ls  contrary  to  his  truefl  reafon  and  befl  interefl: ; 
he  negleds  his  own  fafety,  and  is  adlive  to  procure 
his  own  ruin ;  he  flies  from  happinefs  and  runs  away 
from  it  as  fall  as  he  can,  butpurfues  miferyand  makes 
hafte  to  be  undone.     Hence  it  is  that  Solomon  does 
all  along  in  the  Proverbs  give  the  title  of  fool  to  a 
wicked  man,  as  if  it  were  his  proper  name  and  the 
fittefl:  charadler  of  him,  becaufe  he  is  fo  eminently 
fuch :  there  is  no  fool  to  the  fmner,  who  every  mo- 
ment ventures  his  foul  and  lays  his  everlafting  inter- 
efl: at  the  flake.     Every  time  a  man  provokes  God 
he  does  the  greateft  mischief  to  himfelf  that  can  be 
imagined.     A  madman,  that  cuts  himfelf  and  tears 
his  own  flefli,  and  daflies  his  head  againft  the  ftones, 
does  not  ad  fo  unreafonably  as  he,  becaufe  he  is  not 

fo 


yo  ^he  ivifdom  of  being  religious. 

S  E  R  M.  fo  lenfible  of  what  he  does.  Wickednefs  is  a  kind  of 
voluntary  frenzy  and  a  chofen  diftra6tion,  and  every 
finncr  does  wilder  and  more  extravagant  things  than 
any  man  can  do  that  is  craz'd  and  out  of  his  wits,  on- 
ly with  this  fad  difference  that  he  knows  better  what 
he  does.  For  to  them  who  believe  another  life  after 
this,  an  eternal  flate  ofhappinefs  or  mifery  in  another 
world,  (which  is  but  a  reafonable  poftulatum  or  de- 
mand among  Chriftians)  there  is  nothing  in  mathe- 
maticlcs  more  demonflrable  than  the  folly  of  wicked 
men  ;  for  it  is  not  a  clearer  and  more  evident  princi- 
ple that  the  whole  is  greater  than  a  part,  than  that 
eternity  and  the  concernments  of  it  are  to  be  prefer- 
red before  time. 

I  will  therefore  put  the  matter  into  a  temporal 
cafe,  that  wicked  men  who  underfland  any  thing  of 
the  rules  and  principles  of  worldly  wifdom  may  fee 
the  imprudence  of  an  irreligious  and  finful  courfe, 
and  be  convinced  "  that  this  their  way  is  their  folly, 
**  even  themfelves  being  judges. 

Is  that  man  wife,  as  to  his  body  and  his  healthy 
who  only  clothes  his  hands  but  leaves  his  whole  body 
naked  }  who  provides  only  againft  the  tooth-ach,  and 
neglects  whole  troops  of  mortal  difeafes,  that  are 
ready  to  rufh  in  upon  him  ?  Juft  thus  does  he  who 
takes  care  only  for  this  vile  body,  but  negledls  his 
precious  and  immortal  foul  -,  who  is  very  folicitous 
to  prevent  fmall  and  temporal  inconveniencies,  but 
takes  no  care  to  "  efcape  the  damnation  of  hell." 

Is  he  a  prudent  man,  as  to  his  temporal  eftate,  tha|^ 
lays  defigns  only  for  a  day,  without  any  profpedl  to^ 
or  provifion  for  the  remaining  part  of  his  life?  even 
fo  does  he  that  provides  for  the  jfliort  time  of  this  life, 

but 


^e  wifdom  of  being  religious,  71 

but  takes  no  care  for  all  eternity,  which  is  to  be  wife  SERM. 
for  a  moment  but  a  fool  for  ever,  and  to  adt  as  un-  {^^^-.^^-.^ 
towardly  and  as  crofly  to  the  reafon  of  things  as  can 
be  imagined  ;  to  regard  time  as  if  it  were  eternity, 
and  to  negled  eternity  as  if  it  were  but  a  fliort  time. 

Do  we  count  him  a  wife  man,  who  is  wife  in  any 
thing  but  in  his  own  proper  profefTion  and  employ- 
ment, wife  for  every  body  but  himfelf ;  who  is  inge- 
nious to  contrive  his  own  mifery  and  to  do  himfelf  a 
mifchief,  but  is  dull  and  ftupid  as  to  the  defigning 
of  any  real  benefit  and  advantage  to  himfelf?  Such 
a  one  is  he,  who  is  ingenious  in  his  calling  but  a  bad 
Chriflian  \  for  Chriftianity  is  more  our  proper  calling 
and  profefTion  than  the  very  trades  we  live  upon : 
and  fuch  is  every  fmner,  who  is  "  wife  to  do  evil, 
"  but  to  do  good  hath  no  underflanding. 

Is  it  wifdom  in  any  man  to  negledl  and  difoblige 
him  who  is  his  beft  friend,  and  can  be  his  forefl:  ene- 
my ?  or  with  one  weak  troop  to  go  out  to  meet  him 
that  comes  againft  him  with  thoufands  of  thoufands, 
to  fly  a  fmall  danger  and  run  upon  a  greater  ?  Thus 
docs  every  wicked  man  that  negledls  and  contemns 
God,  "  who  can  fave  or  deftroy  him  ,*'  who  drives 
with  his  "  maker  and  provoketh  the  Lord  to  jeaiou- 
"  fy,"  and  with  the  fmall  and  inconfiderable  forces 
of  a  man  takes  the  field  againft  the  "  mighty  God, 
*'  the  Lord  of  hofts  j"  who  "  fears  them  that  can 
''  kill  the  body,  but  after  that  have  no  more  that 
"  they  can  do ;  but  fears  not  him,  who  after  he  hath 
«  kill'd,  can  deftroy  both  body  and  foul  in  hell ;" 
and  thus  does  he  who  for  fear  of  any  thing  in  this 
world  ventures  to  difpleafe  God,  for  in  fo  doing  he 
runs  away  from  men,  and  "  f^lls  into  the  hands  of 

2  «  the 


^he  wifdom  of  being  religiom, 
"  the  living  God,"  he  flics  from  a  temporal  danger 
and  leaps  into  hell. 

Is  not  he  an  imprudent  man,  who  in  matters  of 
greateft  moment  and  concernment  negledts  opportu- 
nities never  to  be  retriev'd,  who  Handing  upon  the 
Ihore,  and  feeing  the  tide  making  hafte  towards  him 
apace,  and  that  he  hath  but  a  few  minutes  to  fave 
himfelf,  yet  will  lay  himfelf  to  fleep  there  till  the  cruel 
fea  rufli  in  upon  him  and  overwhelm  him  ?  And  is 
he  any  better  who  trifles  away  this  day  of  God's 
grace  and  patience,  and  foolilhly  adjourns  the  necef- 
fary  work  of  repentance  and  the  weighty  bufinefs  of 
religion  to  a  dylmg  hour  ? 

And  to  put  an  end  to  thefe  queflions,  is  he  wife 
who  hopes  to  attain  the  end  without  the  means,  nay, 
by  means  that  are  quite  contrary  to  it  ?  fuch  is  every 
wicked  man  who  hopes  to  be  blefled  hereafter  with- 
out being  holy  here,  and  to  be  happy,  that  is,  to  find 
a  pleafure  in  the  enjoyment  of  God,  and  in  the  com- 
pany ofholyfpirits,  by  rendring  himfelf  as  unfuitable 
and  unlike  to  them  as  he  can. 

Wouldfl  thou  then  be  truly  wife  ?  be  wife  for  thy 
felf,  wife  for  thy^fbul,  wife  for  eternity.  Refolve 
upon  a  religious  courfe  of  hfe.  "  Fear  God  and  de- 
"  part  from  evil."  Look  beyond  things  prefent 
and  fenfible  unto  things  which  are  not  feen  and 
are  eternal,  labour  to  fecure  the  great  interefts  of  ano- 
ther world,  and  refer  all  the  a6lions  of  this  fhort  and 
dying  life  to  that  flate  which  will  fhortly  begin  but 
never  have  an  end :  and  this  will  approve  it  felf  to  be 
wifdom  at  the  lafl,  whatever  the  world  judge  of  it 
now.  For  not  that  which  is  approved  of  men  now, 
but  what  ihall  finally  be  approved  by  God  is  true 

wifdom  i 


The  mfdom  of  being  religious,  73 

wifdom ;  that  which  is  efteemed   fo  by  him  who  isSERM. 
the  fountain  and  original  of  all  wifdom,  the  firftrule 
and  meafure,  the  bed  and  moll  competent  judge  of  it. 

I  deny  not  but  that  thofe  that  are  wicked  and  ne- 
gle(5l  religion  may  think  themfelves  wife,  and  may  en- 
joy this  their  delufion  for  a  while  :  but  there  is  a  time 
a  coming  when  the  moft  prophane  and  atheiftical, 
who'now  account  it  a  piece  of  gallantry,  and  an  argu- 
ment of  a  great  fpirit,  and  of  a  more  than  commoii 
wit  and  underftanding,  to  flight  God  and  to  baffie  re- 
ligion, and  to  level  all  the  difcourfes  of  another  world 
with  the  poetical  defcriptions  of  the  fairy-land  %  I  lay, 
there  is  a  day  a  coming,  when  all  thefe  witty  fools 
fhall  be  unhappily  undeceived,  and  not  being  able  to 
enjoy  their  delufion  any  longer  fliall  call  themfelves 
fools  for  ever. 

But  why  fhould  I  ufe  fo  much  importunity  to  pcr- 
fuade  men  to  that  which  is  fo  excellent,  fo  ufeful, 
and  fo  neceffary  ?  The  thing  it  felf  hath  allurements 
in  it  beyond  all  arguments :  for  if  religion  be  the  belt 
knowledge  and  wifdom,  I  cannot  offer  any  thing  be- 
yond this  to  your  underftandings  to  raife  your  efteem 
of  it  j  I  can  prefent  nothing  beyond  this  to  your  af- 
fections to  excite  your  love  and  defire.  Ail  that  can 
be  done  is  to  fet  the  thing  before  men,  and  to  offer 
it  to  their  choice  -,  and  if  men's  natural  defire  of  wif- 
dom and  knowledge  and  happinefs  will  not  perfuade 
them  to  be  religious,  it  is  in  vain  to  ufe  arguments : 
if  the  fight  of  thefe  beauties  will  not  charm  men*s 
affections,  it  is  to  no  purpofe  to  go  about  to  compel 
a  liking,  and  to  urge  and  pufh  forward  a  match  to 
the  making  whereof  confent  is  neceffary.  Religion 
is  matter  of  our  freeft  choice,  and  if  men  will  obfti- 

voL.  \,  h  ^ate^y 


y  4  'I'he  wifdom  of  being  religious, 

S  E  R  M.  natcly  and  wilfully  fet  themfelves  againll  it  there  is 
no  remedy.  Pertinacids  nullum  remedium  pofuit  Deus, 
"  God  has  provided  no  remedy  for  the  obftinacy  of 
"  men  •,"  but  if  they  will  chufe  to  be  fools  and  to  be 
miferable,  he  will  leave  them  to  inherit  their  own 
choice,  and  to  enjoy  the  portion  of  fmners. 


SERMON     II. 

The  folly  of  fcoffing  at  religion. 

2  P  E  T.  iii.  3. 

Knowing  this  frfi,  that  there  Jhall  come  in  the  laft  days 

[coffers^  walking  after  their  own  lujis. 

'Nowing  this  firfl.  In  the  verfe  before,  the 
apoftle  was  fpeaking  of  a  famous  prophecy 
before  the  accomplifliment  of  which  this  fort 
of  men  whom  he  calls  fcoffers  fhould  come.  "  That 
*'  ye  may  be  mindful  of  the  words  which  were  Ipok-' 
**  en  before  by  the  holy  prophets,  and  of  the  com- 
"  mandment  of  us  the  apoftles  of  our  Lord  and  Sa- 
'*  viouR  ;  knowing  this  firfl,  that  there  fhall  come 
^'  in  the  lafl  days  fcoffers,"  &c. 

The  prophecy  here  fpoken  of  is  probably  that  fa^ 

rnous  prediction  of  the  deflrudlion  of  Jerufalem  which 

is  in  the  prophet  Daniel,  and  before  the  fulfilling 

Mat  xxiv.  whereof  our  Saviour  exprefly  tells  us  "  falfe  pro- 

I ?.  "  phets  fhould  arife  and  deceive  many.'' 


^be  folly  offcoffing  at  religion.  y^ 

Now  the  fcoffers  here  fpoken  of  are  the  falfe  teach-  S  E  R  M. 
ers  whom  the  apoftle  had  been  defcribing  all  along  y^,.,,,,!^ 
in  the  foregoing  chapter,  "  there  were  falfe  prophets 
"  alfo  among  the  people,  even  as  there  iliall  be  falfe 
*'  teachers  among  you.*'  Thefe,  he  tells  us,  fhould 
proceed  to  that  height  of  impiety  as  to  feoff  at  the 
principles  of  religion,  and  to  deride  the  expedbations 
of  a  future  judgment,  "  in  the  laft  days  ihall  come 
**  fcoffers  walking  after  their  own  lufts,  and  faying 
"  where  is  the  promife  of  his  coming  ? 
In  fpeaking  to  thefe  words,I  ihall  do  thefe  three  things. 

1.  Confider  the  nature  of  the  fin  here  mentioned, 
which  is  fcofHng  at  religion. 

2.  The  charafler  of  the  perfons  that  are  charged 
with  the  guilt  of  this  fin,  they  are  faid  "  to  walk  af- 
"  ter  their  own  lufts." 

3.  I  lliall  reprefent  to  you  the  heinoufnefs  and  the 
aggravations  of  this  vice. 

I.  Firft,  we  will  confider  the  nature  of  the  fin  here, 
mentioned,  which  is  fcoffing  at  religion,  "  there 
"  Ihall  come  fcoffers  :'*  thefe,  it  feems,  were  a  fort  of 
people  that  derided  our  Saviour's  predidlion  of  his 
coming  to  judge  the  world.  So  the  apoftle  tells  us 
in  the  next  words,  that  they  faid  "  where  is  thepro- 
"  mife  of  his  coming  ?" 

In  thofe  times  there  was  a  common  perfuafion  a- 
mong  Chriftians  "  that  the  day  of  the  Lord  was  at^Thef.ui, 
"  hand,"  as  the  apoftle  elfewherc  tells  us.  Now  this,  2* 
it  is  probable,  thefe  fcoffers  twitted  the  Chriftians 
withal;  and  becaufe  Christ  did  not  come  when 
fome  looked  for  him  they  concluded  he  would  not 
come  at  all.  Upon  this  they  derided  the  Chriftians 
as  enduring  perfecution  in  a  vain  expeftation  of  that 

L  2  which 


76  Tthe  folly  of  fcoffing  at  religion. 

S  E  R  M.  which  was  never  likely  to  happen.     They  faw  all 
things  continue  "  as  they  were  from  the  beginning 
"  of  the  world,"  notwithftanding  the  apprehenfions 
of  Chriftians  concerning  the  approaching  end  of  it ; 
"  for  fince  the  fathers  fell  afleep  all  things  continue 
"  as  they  were,  from  the  beginning  of  the  world.'* 
Since   the   fathers  fell  a-fleep,  a<f)*  ?<■,    which  may 
either  be  rendered  from  the  time,  orelfe  (which  feems 
more  agreeable  to  the  atheiflical  difcourfe  of  thefe 
men)  faving  or  except  that  the  fathers  are  fallen  aileep, 
all  things  continue  as  they  were  j  faving  that  men 
die  and  one  generation  fucceeds  another,  they  faw 
no  change  or  alteration.  They  looked  upon  all  things 
as  going  on  in  a  conftant  courfe  •,  one  generation  of 
men  pafTed  away  and  another  came  in  the  room  of  it, 
but  the  world  remained  flill  as  it  was.     And  thus  for 
ought  they  knew  things  might  hold  on  for  ever.    So 
that  the  principles  of  thefe  men  feem  to  be  much  the 
fame  with  thofe  of  the  Epicureans,  who  denied  the 
providence  of  God  and  the  immortahty  of  men's 
fouls ;   and  confequently  a  future  judgment  which 
Ihould  fentence  men  to  rewards  and  puniihments  in 
another  world.     Thefe  great  and  fundamental  prin- 
ciples of  all  religion  they  derided  as  the  fancies  and 
dreams  of  a  company  of  melancholy  men,  who  were 
weary  of  the  world  and  pleafed  themfelves  with  vain 
conceits  of  happinefs  and  eafe  in  another  life.     But  as 
for  them,  they  believed  none  of  thofe  things  -,   and 
therefore  gave  all  manner  of  licence  and  indulgence 
to  their  lufts. 

But  this  belongs  to  t!ie  fecond  thing  I  propounded 
to  fpeak  to,  namelyt 

II.  The 


1 


I'he  folly  offcoffing  at  religion,  77 

11.  The  charadler  which  is  here  given  of  thefe  fcof-  SE  R  M, 
fers  ;  they  are  faid  "  to  walk  after  their  own  lulls."  ^,,^1^ 
And  no  wonder  if  when  they  denied  a  future  judgment 
they  gave  up  themfelvesto  all  manner  offenfuality. 

St.  Jude  in  his  epiftle  gives  much  the  fame  charac- 
ter of  them  that  St.  Peter  here  does,  ver.  18,  19. 
"  there  (hall  come  in  the  laft  days  mockers,  walking 
"  after  their  own  ungodly  lulls,  fenfual,  not  having 
"  the  fpirit."  So  that  we  fee  what  kind  of  perfons 
they  are  who  prophanely  fcofF  at  religion,  men  of 
fenfual  fpirits  and  of  licentious  lives.  For  this  cha- 
rader,  which  the  apoftle  here  gives  of  the  fcoffers  of 
that  age,  was  not  an  accidental  thing  which  happened 
to  thofe  perfons,  but  is  the  conflant  charader  of  them 
who  deride  religion,  and  flows  from  the  very  temper 
and  difpofition  of  thofe  who  are  guilty  of  this  impie- 
ty ;  it  is  both  the  ufual  preparation  to  it,  and  the 
natural  confequent  of  it. 

To  deride  God  and  religion  is  the  higheft  kind  of 
impiety.  And  men  do  not  ufually  arrive  to  this  de- 
gree of  wickednefs  at  firft,  but  they  come  to  it  by 
feveral  fteps.  The  Pfalmift  very  elegantly  exprelT- 
eth  to  us  the  feveral  gradations  by  which  men  at  laft 
come  to  this  horrid  degree  of  impiety  ;  "  bleflfed  is  pfa.  i.  i 
"  the  man,  that  walketh  not  in  the  counfel  of  the 
"  ungodly,  nor  flandeth  in  the  way  of  Tinners,  nor 
"  fitteth  in  the  feat  of  the  fcomful."  Men  are  ufu- 
ally firft  corrupted  by  bad  counfel  and  company^ 
which  is  called  "  walking  in  the  counfel  of  the  un- 
^'  godly ;"  next  they  habituate  themfelves  to  their 
vicious  pradlices,  which  is  "  ftanding  in  the  way  of 
*«  finners ;"  and  then  at  laft  they  take  up  and  fettle 
in  a  contempt  of  all  religion,  which  is  called  "  fitting 
^  iiuthe  feat  of  the  fcornful."  For 


yS  The  folly  offcoffing  at  religion, 

.  E  R  M.  For  when  men  once  indulge  themfelves  in  wicked 
courfes,  the  vicious  inclinations  of  their  minds  fway 
their  underflandings,  and  make  them  apt  to  di (believe 
thofe  truths  which  contradid  their  lufts.  Every  in- 
ordinate luft  and  paflion  is  a  faife  biafs  upon  men's 
underflandings  which  naturally  draws  toward  atheifm. 
And  when  men's  judgments  are  once  biafTed  they  do 
not  believe  according  to  the  evidence  of  things,  but 
according  to  their  humour  and  their  intereft.  For 
when  men  live  as  if  there  were  no  God  it  becomes 
expedient  for  them  that  there  fiiould  be  none :  and 
then  they  endeavour  to  perfuade  themfelves  fo,  and 
will  be  glad  to  find  arguments  to  fortify  themfelves 
in  this  perfuafion.  Men  of  diffolute  lives  cry  down 
religion,  becaufe  they  wpuld  not  be  under  the  re- 
ftraints  of  it  \  they  are  loth  to  be  tied  up  by  the  ftri6l 
laws  and  rules  of  it :  it  is  their  intereft  more  than  any 
reafon  they  have  againfl  it  which  makes  them  dcfpife 
it,  they  hate  it  becaufe  they  are  reproved  by  it.  So 
our  Saviour  tells  us,  that  "  men  love  darknefs  ra- 
"  ther  than  light,  becaufe  their  deeds  are  evil  ;  for 
"  every  one  that  doth  evil  hateth  the  light,  neither 
«'  cometh  to  the  light,  left  his  deeds  fhould  be  rc- 
*'  proved." 

I  remember  it  is  the  faying  of  one,  who  hath  done 
more  by  his  writings  to  debauch  the  age  with  atheilti- 
cal  principles  than  any  man  that  lives  in  it,  "  that 
"  when  reafon  is  againft  a  man,  then  a  man  will  be 
"  againft  reafon."  I  am  fure  this  is  the  true  account 
of  fuch  mens  enmity  to  religion,  religion  is  againft 
them,  and  therefore  they  fet  themfelves  againfl  religi- 
on. The  principles  of  religion  and  the  doflrines  of 
the  holy  fcriptures  are  terrible  enemies  to  wicked 

men. 


Hoe  folly  of  fcoffing  at  religion.  79 

men,  they  are  continually  flying  in  their  faces  and  S  E  R  M. 
galling  their  cpnfciences:  And  this  is  that  which 
makes  them  kick  againft  religion,  and  fpiirn  at  the 
dodrines  of  that  holy  book.  And  this  may  probably 
be  one  reafon  why  many  men,  who  are  obferved  to 
be  fufficiently  dull  in  other  matters,  yet  can  talk  pro- 
phanely  and  fpeak  againft  religion  with  fomc  kind 
of  fait  and  fmartnefs,  becaufe  religion  is  the  thing 
that  frets  them  ;  and  as  in  other  things  fo  in  this 
vexatio  dat  intelle^lum^  the  inward  trouble  and  vexa- 
tion of  their  minds  gives  them  fome  kind  of  wit  and 
fharpnefs  in  rallying  upon  religion.  Their  confcien- 
ces  are  galled  by  it,  and  this  makes  them  winch  and 
fling  as  if  they  had  fome  metal.  For,  let  men  pre- 
tend what  they  will,  there  is  no  eafe  and  comfort  of 
mind  to  be  had  from  atheiftical  principles.  *Tis 
found  by  experience,  that  none  are  more  apprehenfive 
of  danger  or  more  fearful  of  death  than  this  fort  of 
men  :  even  when  they  are  in  profperity  they  ever  and 
anon  feel  many  inward  flings  and  laflies,  but  when 
any  great  afflidion  or  calamity  overtakes  them  they 
are  the  moft  poor-fpirited  creatures  in  the  whole 
world. 

The  fum  is,  the  true  reafon  why  any  man  Is  an  a- 
theifl:  is  becaufe  he  is  a  wicked  man.  Religion  would 
curb  him  in  his  lufts,  and  therefore  he  cafts  itofFand 
puts  all  the  fcorn  upon  it  he  can.  Befides,  that  men 
think  it  fome  kind  of  apology  for  their  vices  that  they 
do  not  a6t  contrary  to  any  principle  they  profefs : 
their  pradtice  is  agreeable  to  what  they  pretend  to  be- 
lieve, and  fo  they  think  to  vindicate  themfelves,  and 
their  own  pradices,  by  laughing  at  thofe  for  fools 
who  believe  any  thing  to  the  contrary. 

III.  The 


8o  Tfje  Jolly  offcoffing  at  religion,  \ 

ERM.  III.  The  third  thing  I  propounded  was,  to  repre- 
fent  to  you  the  heinoufnefs  and  the  aggravations  of 
this  vice.  And  to  make  this  out  we  will  make  thefe 
three  fuppofitions,  which  are  as  many  as  the  thing 
will  bear. 

1.  Suppofe  there  were  no  God,  and  that  the  prin- 
ciples of  religion  Avere  falfe. 

2.  Suppofe  the  matter  were  doubtful,  and  the  ar- 
guments equal  on  both  fides. 

3.  Suppofe  it  certain  that  there  is  a  God,  and  that 
the  principles  of  religion  are  tme.  Put  the  cafe  how 
we  will,  I  fhall  fliew  that  the  humour  is  intolerable. 

I.  Suppofe  there  were  no  God,  and  that  the  prin- 
ciples of  religion  were  falfe.  Not-  that  there  is  any 
reafon  for  fuch  a  fuppofition,  but  onely  to  fhew  the 
unreafonablenefs  of  this  humour  •,  Put  the  cafe  that 
thefe  men  were  in  the  right,  in  denying  the  princi- 
ples of  religion,  and  that  all  that  they  pretend  were 
true  •,  yet  fo  long  as  the  generality  of  mankind  be- 
lieves the  contrary,  it  is  certainly  a  great  rudenefs, 
or  incivility  at  leafl,  to  deride  and  feoff  at  thefe 
things.  Indeed  upon  this  fuppofition  there  could  be 
no  fuch  thing  as  fin,  but  yet  it  would  be  a  great  of- 
fence againfl  the  laws  of  civil  converfation.  Suppofe 
then,  the  atheifl  were  wifer  than  alf  the  world,  and 
that  he  did  upon  good  grounds  know  that  all  man- 
kind, befides  himfelf  and  two  or  three  more,  were 
miftaken  about  the  matters  of  religion ;  yet  if  he  were 
cither  fo  wife,  or  fo  civil  as  he  fhould  be,  he  would 
keep  all  this  to  himfelf,  and  not  affront  other  men  a- 
bout  thefe  things. 

I  remember  that  that  law  which  God  gave  to  the 
people  of  ifrael,  "  thou  fhalt  not  fpeak  evil  of  the 

*•  rulers 


^e  folly  offcuffijzg  at  religion.  8  r 

"  rulers  of  thy  people  j"  is  rendered  by  Jofephus  in  a  SERM. 
very  different  fenfe  :  "  what  other  nations  account 
'^  gods,  let  no  man  blafpheme."  And  this  is  not  fo 
different  from  the  Hebrew  as  at  firft  fight  one  would 
imagine,  for  the  fame  Hebrew  word  fignifies  both 
gods  and  rulers.  But  whether  this  be  the  meaning 
of  that  law  or  not  there  is  a  great  deal  of  reafon  in  the 
thing.  For  though  every  man  have  a  right  to  dis- 
pute againft  a  falfe  religion,  and  to  urge  it  with  all 
it's  abfurd  and  ridiculous  confequences,  as  the  ancient 
fathers  did  in  their  difputes  with  the  heathen  ;  yet 
it  is  a  barbarous  incivility  for  any  man  fcurriloufly 
to  make  fport  with  that  which  others  account  religi- 
on, not  with  any  defign  to  convince  their  reafon  but 
only  to  provoke  their  rage. 

But  now  the  atheift  can  pretend  no  obligation  of 
confcience  why  he  fhould  fo  much  as  difpute  againft 
the  principles  of  religion,  much  lefs  deride  them. 
He  that  pretends  to  any  religion  may  pretend  con- 
fcience for  oppofing  a  contrary  religion  :  but  he  that 
denies  all  religion,  can  pretend  no  confcience  for  any 
thing.  A  man  may  be  obliged  indeed  in  reafon  and 
common  humanity  to  free  his  neighbour  from  a  hurt- 
ful error  -,  but  fuppofing  there  were  no  God,  this  no- 
tion of  a  deity  and  the  principles  of  religion  have  ta- 
ken fuch  a  deep  root  in  the  mind  of  man,  that  either 
they  are  not  to  be  extinguifhed,or  if  they  be  it  would  be 
nokindnefs  to  any  man  to  endeavour  itforhim,  becaufe 
it  is  not  to  be  done  but  with  fo  much  trouble  and  vio- 
lence, that  the  remedy  would  be  worfe  than  the  difeafe. 

For  if  this  notion  of  a  deity  be  founded  in  a  natu- 
ral fear,  it  is  in  vain  to  attempt  to  expel  it ;  for 
whatever  violence  may  be  offer'd  to  nature  by  endea- 

VoL.  I.  M  vouring 


82  ^he  folly  offcoffiitg  at  religion, 

S  E  R  M.  vonring  to  reafon  men  into  a  contrary  perfuafion, 
_ ;_  ,  nature  will  ftill  recoil  and  at  laft  return  to  itfelf,  and 
then  the  fear  will  be  augmented  from  the  apprehen- 
fion  of  the  dangerous  confequences  of  fuch  an  impiety. 
So  that  nothing  can  create  more  trouble  to  a  man 
than  to  endeavour  to  difpofTefs  him  of  this  conceit, 
becaufe  nature  is  but  irritated  by  the  conteft,  and  the 
man's  fears  will  be  doubled  upon  him. 

But  if  we  fuppofe  this  apprehenfion  of  a  deity  to 
have  no  foundation  in  nature,  but  to  have  had  it's 
rife  from  tradition  which  hath  been  confirmed  in  the 
world  by  the  prejudice  of  education,  the  difficulty  of 
removing  it  will  almoft  be  as  great  as  if  it  were  natu- 
ral, that  which  men  take  in  by  education  being  next  to 
that  which  is  natural.  And  if  it  could  be  extinguifhed, 
yet  the  advantage  of  it  will  not  reconipence  the  trouble 
of  the  cure.  For,  except  the  avoiding  ofperfecution  for 
religion,  there  is  no  advantage  that  the  principles  of 
atheifm,iftheycould  be  quietly  fettled  in  a  man's  mind, 
can  give  him.  The  advantage  indeed  that  men 
make  of  them  is  to  give  themfelves  the  liberty  to  do 
what  they  pleafe,  to  be  more  fenfual  and  more  unjuft 
than  other  men  \  that  is,  they  have  the  privilege  to 
furfeit  themfelves  and  to  be  fick  oftner  than  other  men, 
and  to  make  mankind  their  enen>y  by  their  unjufl:  and 
difhoneft  a6tions,  and  confequently  to  live  more  un- 
eafily  in  the  world  than  other  men. 

So  that  the  principles  of  religion,  the  belief  of  a 
God,  and  another  life,  by  obliging  mtn  to  be  virtu- 
ous do  really  promote  their  temporal  happinefs.  And 
all  the  privilege  that  atheifm  pretends  to  is  to  Vx. 
men  loofe  to  vice,  which  is  naturally  attended  with 
temporal  inconveniencies.     And  if  this  be  true,  then 

the 


Tloe  folly  of  fc offing  at  religion,  83 

the  atheift  cannnot  pretend  this  realon  of  chanty  to  S  ERM. 
mankind  (which  is  the  only  one  I  can  think  ofj  to 
difpute  againfl  religion,  much  lefs  to  rally  upon  it. 
For  it  is  plain,  that  it  would  be  no  kindnefs  to  any 
man  to  be  undeceived  in  thefe  principles  of  religion, 
fuppofmg  they  were  falfe.  Becaufe  the  principles  of 
religion  are  fo  far  from  hindring,  that  they  promote  a 
man's  happinefs  even  in  this  world,  and  as  to  the 
other  world  there  can  be  no  inconvenience  in  the  mif- 
take,  for  when  a  man  is  not  it  will  be  no  trouble  to 
him  that  he  was  once  deceived  about  thefe  matters. 

And  where  no  obligation  of  confcience  nor  of  rea- 
fon  can  be  pretended,  there  certainly  the  law?  of  ci- 
vility ought  to  take  place.  Now  men  do  profefs  to 
believe  that  there  is  a  God,  and  that  the  common 
principles  of  religion  are  true,  and  to  have  a  great 
veneration  for  thefe  things.  Can  there  then  be  a 
greater  infolence,  than  for  a  man  when  he  comes  in- 
to company  to  rally  and  fall  foul  upon  thofe  things, 
for  which  he  knows  the  company  have  a  reverence  ? 
Can  'one  man  offer  a  greater  affront  to  another,  than 
to  expofe  to  Icorn  him  whom  he  owns  and  declares  to 
be  his  bed  friend,  the  patron  of  his  life,  and  the 
greateft  benefador  he  hath  in  the  world  ?  And  doth 
not  every  man  that  owns  a  God  i^y  this  of  him  ? 

But  when  the  generality  of  mankind  are  of  the  fame 
opinion  the  rudenefs  is  dill  the  greater.  So  that  who- 
ever doth  openly  contemn  God  and  religion  does 
delinquere  in  majeftatem  populi  i^  humani  generis^  he 
does  offend  againft  the  majefty  of  the  people,  and 
that  reverence  which  is  due  to  the  common  appre« 
henfions  of  mankind,  whether  they  be  true  or  not ; 
which  is  the  greatell  incivility  that  can  be  imagined. 

M  2  This 


$4  ^^^fo^b^f  f^^ffi^^S,  ^^  religion, 

SERM.       This  is  the  firft^confideration,  and  it  is  the  Icaft 
II.  .        . 

that  I  have  to  urge  in  this  matter.     But  yet  I  have 

infifled  the  longer  upon  it,  becaufe  it  is  fuch  a  one  as 

ought  efpecially  to  prevail  upon  thofe  who  I  am  afraid 

are  too  often  guilty  of  this  vice,  I  mean  thofe  who 

are  of  better  breeding,  becaufe  they  pretend  to  un- 

derfland  the  laws  of  behaviour  and  the  decencies  of 

converfation  better  than  other  men. 

2.  Suppofing  it  were  doubtful  whether  there  be  a 
God  or  not,  and  whether  the  principles  of  religion 
were  true  or  not,  and  that  the  arguments  were  equal 
on  both  fides  j  yet  it  would  be  a  great  folly  to  deride 
^  thefe  things.  And  here  I  fuppofe  as  much  as  the  a- 
theift  can  with  any  colour  of  reafon  pretend  to.  For 
no  man  ever  yet  pretended  to  demonflrate  that  there 
is  no  God,  nor  no  hfe  after  this.  For  thefe  being  pure 
negatives  are  capable  of  no  proof,  unlefs  a  man  could 
fhew  them  to  be  plainly  impofTible.  The  utmoft  that 
is  pretended  is  that  the  arguments  that  are  brought 
for  thefe  things  are  not  fufficient  to  convince.  But 
if  they  were  only  probable,  fo  long  as  no  arguments 
are  produced  to  the  contrary,  that  cannot  in  reafon  be 
denied  to  be  a  great  advantage. 

But  I  will  for  the  prefent  fuppofe  the  probabili- 
ties equal  on  both  fides.  And  upon  this  fuppofition 
I  doubt  not  to  make  it  appear  to  be  a  monftrous  fol- 
ly to  deride  thefe  things.  Becaufe  though  the  argu- 
ments on  both  fides  were  equal,  yet  the  danger  and 
hazard  is  infinitely  unequal. 

If  it  prove  true  that  there  is  no  God  the  religious 
man  may  be  as  happy  in  this  world  as  the  atheift, 
nay  the  principles  of  religion  and  virtue  do  in  their 
own  nature  tend  to  make  him  happier.   Becaufe  they 

give 


7he  folly  of  fcoffing  at  religion.  85 

give  fatisfaflion  to  his  mind,  and  his  confcience  by  S  E  R  M. 

this  means  is  freed  from  many   fearful   girds  and  , ^^ 

twinges  which  the  atheifl  feels.  Befides,  that  the 
pradtice  of  religion  and  virtue  doth  naturally  promote 
our  temporal  felicity.  It  is  more  for  a  man's  health, 
and  more  for  his  reputation,  and  more  for  his  advan- 
tage in  all  other  worldly  refpeds  to  lead  a  virtuous 
than  a  vicious  courfe  of  life.  And  for  the  other  world, 
if  there  be  no  God  the  cafe  of  the  religious  man  and 
the  atheifl:  will  be  alike,  becaufe  they  will  both  be 
extinguifhed  by  death  and  infenfible  of  any  farther 
happinefs  or  mifery. 

But  then  if  the  contrary  opinion  Ihould  prove  true, 
that  there  is  a  God  •,  and  that  the  fouls  of  men  are 
tranfmitted  out  of  this  world  into  the  other,  there  to 
receive  the  jufl:  reward  of  their  actions :    then  it  is 
plain  to  every  man  at  firfl:  fight,  that  the  cafe  of  the 
religious  man  and  the  atheifl;  mufl:  be  vaftly  different : 
then,  where  fliall  the  wicked,  and  the  ungodly  appear  ? 
And  what  think  we  fhall  be  the  portion  of  thofe  who 
have  affronted  God,    and  derided   his  word,    and 
made  a  mock  of  every  thing  that  is  facred  and  religi- 
ous }  What  can  they  exped  but  to  be  rejeded  by  him 
whom  they  have  renounced,   and  to  feel  the  terrible 
effecls  of  that  power  and  jufl:ice  which  they  have  de- 
fpifed  ?  So  that  though  the  arguments  on  both  fides 
were  equal,  yet  the  danger  is  not  fo.    On  the  one  fide 
there  is  none  at  all,   but  it  is  infinite  on  the  other. 
And  confequently,   it  mufl:  be  a  monfl:rous  folly  for 
any  man  to  make  a  mock  of  thofe  things,  which  he 
knows  not  whether  they  be  or  not  -,  and  if  they  be, 
of  all  things  in  the  world  they  are  no  jefl:ing  mat^ 

3.Sup^ 


86  The  folly  offcoffing  at  religion. 

E  R  M.  3.  Siippofe  there  be  a  God,  and  that  the  principles 
of  religion  are  true,  then  is  it  not  only  a  heinous  im- 
piety, but  a  perfetfl  madnefs  to  feoff  at  thefe  things. 
And  that  there  is  a  God,  and  that  the  principles  of 
religion  are  true,  I  have  already  in  my  former  dif- 
courfe  endeavoured  to  prove  ;  both  from  the  things 
which  are  made,  and  from  the  general  confent  of  man- 
kind in  thefe  principles  ;  of  which  univerfal  confent 
po  fufficient  reafon  can  be  given  unlefs  they  were  true* 
And  fuppofmg  they  are  fo,  it  is  not  only  the  utmoft 
pitch  of  impiety  but  the  higheft  flight  of  folly  that 
can  be  imagined  to  deride  thefe  things.  To  be  dif* 
obedient  to  the  commands  of  God  is  a  great  contempt, 
but  to  deny  his  being,  and  to  make  fport  with  his 
word,  and  to  endeavour  to  render  it  ridiculous  by 
turning  the  wife  and  weighty  fayings  of  that  holy 
book  into  raillery,  is  a  moft  direfl  affront  to  the  God 
that  is  above.  Thus  the  Pfalmift  defcribes  thefe 
atheiftical  perfons  as  levelling  their  blafphemies  im- 
mediately againfl  the  majefty  of  heaven.  "  They 
*'  fet  their  mouth  againfl:  the  heavens,  and  their 
"  tongue  walketh  through  the  earth  ?"  they  do  mif- 
chief  among  men,  but  the  affront  is  immediately  to 
God. 

Befides,  that  this  prophane  fpirit  is  an  argument 
of  a  moft  incorrigible  temper..  The  wife  man  every 
where  fpeaks  of  the  fcorner  as  one  of  the  worft  fort  of 
fmners  and  hardeft  to  be  reclaimed,  becaufe  he  de- 
fpifeth  inftru6lion  and  mocl<:s  at  all  the  means  where- 
by he  fliould  be  reformed. 

And  then,  is  it  not  a  moft  black  and  horrid  ingra- 
titude thus  to  ufe  the  author  of  our  beings  and  the 
patron  of  our  lives ,  to  make  a  fcorn  of  him  that  made 

us, 


The  folly  offcoffing  at  religion,  87 

us,  and  to  live  in  an  open  deriance  of  him  "  in  whom  S  ER  M. 
"  we  live,  move,  and  have  our  b-ings  ?"  But  this  is 
not  all.  As  it  is  a  mod  heinous  io  it  is  a  mod  dan- 
gerous impiety,  to  defplfe  him  that  can  deflroy  us, 
and  to  oppofe  him  who  is  infinitely  more  powerful 
than  we  are.  "  Will  ye  (fays  the  apoftle)  provoke 
"  the  Lord  tojealoufy  ?  are  ye  ftronger  than  he  ?" 
"What  Gamaliel  faid  to  the  jews,  in  another  cafe, 
may  with  a  little  change  be  applied  to  this  fort  of  men; 
if  there  be  a  God,  and' the  prmcipks  of  religion  be 
true  "  ye  cannot  overthrow  them,  therefore  refrain 
"  from  fpeaking  againil  thefe  things  left  ye  be  found 
*'  fighters  again  ft  God." 

I  will  but  add  one  thing  more  to  fhew  the  folly  of 
this  prophane  temper.  And  that  is  this,  that  as  it  is 
the  greateft  of  all  other  fins,  fo  there  is  in  truth  the 
leaft  temptation  to  it.  When  the  devil  tempts  men 
with  riches  or  honour  to  ruin  themfelves,he  offers  them 
fome  kind  of  confideration,  but  the  prophane  perfon 
ferves  the  devil  for  naught,  and  fins  only  for  fin's  fake, 
fuffers  himf^^lf  to  be  tempted  to  the  greatefl  fins,  and 
into  the  greateft  dangers,  for  no  other  reward  but  the 
flender  reputation  of  feeming  to  fay  that  wittily,which 
no  wife  man  would  fay.  And  what  a  folly  is  this, 
for  a  man  to  offend  his  confcience  to  pleafe  his  hu- 
mour, and  only  f)r  his  jeft  to  lofe  two  of  the  befl 
friends  he  hath  in  the  world,  God  and  his  own  foul? 

I  have  done  with  the  three  things  I  propounded  to 
fpeA  to  upon  this  argument,  and  now  I  beg  your 
pcicience  to  apply  what  I  have  faid  to  thefe  three  pur- 
pofes. 

I.  To  take  men  off  from  this  Impious  and  dangerous 

folly  of  prophanenefs,  which  by  fome  is  mifcalled  wit. 

I  2.  To 


88  ^he  folly  of  fcoffing  at  religion, 

E  RM.       2.  To  caution  men  not  to  think  the  worfe  of  reli- 

TT  ^  _ 

glon,  bccaufe  Ibme  are  fo  bold  as  to  defpife  and  de^ 
ride  it. 

3.  To  perfuade  men  to  employ  thatreafon  and  wit, 
which  God  hath  given  them,  to  better  and  nobler 
purpofes  in  the  fcrvice  and  to  the  glory  of  that  God 
who  hath  beftowed  thefe  gifts  on  men. 

I.  To  take  men  off  from  this  impious  and  dange- 
rous folly.  I  know  not  how  it  comes  to  pafs  that 
fome  men  have  the  fortune  to  be  efleemed  wits  only 
for  jefting  out  of  the  common  road,  and  for  making 
bold  to  fcofF  at  thofe  things  which  the  greateft  part 
of  mankind  reverence.  As  if  a  man  fhould  be  account- 
ed a  wit  for  reviling  thofe  in  authority,  which  is  no 
more  an  argument  of  any  man's  wit  than  it  is  of  his 
difcretion.  A  wife  man  would  not  fpeak  contemp- 
tuoufly  of  a  great  prince  though  he  were  out  of  his 
dominions,  becaufe  he  remembers  that  kings  have 
long  hancis,  and  that  their  power  and  influence  does 
many  times  reach  a  great  way  farther  than  their  di- 
re6l  authority.  But  "  God  is  a  great  king,  and  in 
*'  his  hands  are  all  the  corners  of  the  earth  *,  we  can 
"  go  no  whither  from  his  fpirit,  nor  can  we  fly  from 
*'  his  prefence  j"  wherever  we  are  his  eyes  fee  us, 
and  his  right  hand  can  reach  us.  If  men  did  truly 
confult  the  interefl:  either  of  their  fafety  or  reputation, 
they  would  never  exercife  their  wit  in  dangerous  mat- 
ters. Wit  is  a  very  commendable  quality,  but  then 
a  wife  man  fhould  always  have  the  keeping  of  it.  It 
is  a  fharp  weapon,  as  apt  for  mifchief  as  for  good 
purpofes  if  it  be  not  well  managed.  The  proper  ufe 
of  it  is  to  feafon  converfation,  to  reprefent  what  is 
praife-worthy  to  the  greateft  advantage,  and  to  expofe 

the 


'i:he  folly  of  fcoffing  at  religion.  ^ 

the  vices  and  follies  of  men,  fuch  things  as  are  in 
themfelves  truly  ridiculous  :  but  if  it  be  applied  to 
the  abufe  of  the  graved  and  moft  fcrious  matters  it 
then  lofes  it's  commendation.  If  any  man  think  he 
abounds  in  this  quality  and  hath  wit  to  fpare,  there  is 
fcope  enough  for  it  within  the  bounds  of  religion 
and  decency,  and  when  it  tranfgrelTeth  thefe  it  dege- 
nerates into  infolence  and  impiety.  All  wit  which, 
borders  upon  prophanenefs,  and  makes  bold  with  thofe 
things  to  which  the  greateft  reverence  is  due,  deferves 
to  be  branded  for  folly. 

And  if  we  would  preferve  ourfelves  from  the  infec- 
tion of  this  vice  we  muft  take  heed  how  we  fcoffat  re- 
ligion, under  any  form,  left  infenfibly  we  derive  fome 
contempt  upon  religion  it   felf     And  we  muft  like- 
wife  take  heed  how  we  accuftom  ourfelves  to  a  flight 
and  irreverent  ufe  of  the  Name   of  God,  and  of  the 
phrafes  and  exprelTions  of  the  holy  bible,  which  ought 
not  to  be   applied  upon  every  light  occafion.     Mert 
will  eafily  Aide  into  the  higheft  degree  of  prophane- 
nefs, who  are  not  careful  to  preferve  a  due  reverence 
for  the  great  and  glorious  name  of  God,  and  an  aw- 
ful regard  to  the  holy  fcriptures.     None  fo  nearly 
difpofed  to  fcoffing  at  religion  as  thofe  who  have  ac- 
cuftomed  themfelves  to  fwear  upon  trifling  occafions. 
For  it  is  juft  with  God  to  permit  thofe,  who  allow 
themfelves  in  one  degree  of  prophanenefs,  to  proceed  ■ 
to  another,  till  at  laft  they  come  to  that  height  of 
impiety  as  to  contemn  all  religion. 

2.  Let  no  man  think  the  worfe  of  religion,  becaufe 

fome  are  fo  bold  as  to  defpife   and  deride  it.     For 

'tis  no  difparagement  to   any  perfon  or  thing  to  be 

laught  at,  but  to  deferve  to  be  fo.     The  moft  grave 

Vol.  L  N  a.^d 


90  Hhe  folly  of  fcoffing  at  religion. 

8  E  R  M.  and  fcrlous  matters  in  the  whole  world  are  liable  to  be 
abus'd.  It  is  a  known  faying  of  Epidetus,  "  that 
•*  every  thing  hath  two  handles  •,"  by  which  he 
means,  that  there  is  nothing  fo  bad  but  a  man  may 
lay  hold  of  fomething  or  other  about  it  that  will  af- 
ford matter  of  excufe  and  extenuation,  nor  nothing  fb 
excellent  but  a  man  may  fallen  upon  fomething  or 
other  belonging  to  it  whereby  to  traduce  it.  A  iharp 
wit  may  find  fomething  in  the  wifeft  man  whereby  to 
expofe  him  to  the  contempt  of  injudicious  people. 
The  graved  book  that  ever  was  written  may  be  made 
ridiculous,  by  applying  the  fayings  of  it  to  a  foolifh 
purpofe.  For  a  jeft  may  be  obtruded  upon  any  thing. 
And  therefore  no  man  ought  to  have  the  lefs  reve- 
rence for  the  principles  of  religion,  or  for  the  holy 
fcriptures,  becaufe  idle  and  prophane  wits  can  break 
jefts  upon  them.  Nothing  is  fo  eafy  as  to  take  parti- 
cular phrafes  and  exprelTions  out  of  the  beft  book  in 
the  world,  and  to  abufe  them  by  forcing  an  odd  and 
ridiculous  fenfe  upon  them.  But  no  wife  man  will 
think  a  good  book  foolifh  for  this  reafon,  but  the 
man  that  abufes  it ;  nor  will  he  efteem  that  to  which 
every  thing  is  liable  to  be  a  juft  exception  againft  any 
thing.  At  this  rate  we  muft  defpife  all  things,  but 
furely  the  better  and  the  fhorter  way  is  to  contemn 
thofe  who  would  bring  any  thing  that  is  worthy  into 
contempt. 

3.  And  laflly,  to  perfuade  men  to  employ  that 
reafon  and  wit,  which  God  hath  given  them,  to  better 
and  nobler  purpofes,  in  the  fervice  and  to  the  glory 
of  that  God  who  hath  beftowed  thefe  gifts  on  men, 
as  AhoJiab  and  Bezaleel  did  their  mechanical  fkill  in 
the  adorning  and  beautifying  of  God's  tabernacle, 

3  FdT 


^he  folly  offcoffing  at  religion.  9  r 

For  this  is  the  perfedlion  of  everything,  to  attain  SERM. 
it's  true  and  proper  end ;  and  the  end  of  all   thpfe  i-.,!  . 
gifts  and  endowments  which  God  hath  given  us  is  to 
glorify  the  giver. 

Here  is  fubjed  enough  to  exercife  the  wit  of  men 
and  angels :  to  praife  that  infinite   goodnefs,  and  al- 
mighty power,  and  exquifite  wifdom  which  made  us 
and  all  things ;  and  to  admire  what  we  can  never  fuf- 
ficiently  praife ;  to  vindicate  the  wife  and  juft  provi- 
dence of  God,  in  the  government  of  the  world  -,  and 
to  endeavour,  as  well  as  we  can,  upon  an  imperfect 
view  of  things,  tp  make  out  the  beauty  and  harmo- 
ny of  all  the  feeming  difcords  and  irregularities  of 
the  divine  adminiftrations ;  to  explain  the  oracles  of 
the  holy  fcriptures,  and  to  adore  that  great  myftery 
pf  divine  love  (which  the  angels,  better  and  nobler 
creatures  than  we  are,  defire  to  pry  into)  God's  fend- 
ing his  only  fon  into  the  world  to  fave  finners,  and 
to  give  his  life  a  ranfom  for  them.     Thefe  would  be 
noble  exercifes  indeed  for  the  tongues  and  pens  of  the 
greatefl  wits.     And  fubje6ts  of  this  nature  are  the  bed 
trials  of  our  ability  in  this  kind.     Satyr  and  invec- 
tive are  the  eafieil  kind  of  wit.     Almoft  any  degree 
of  it  will  ferve  to  abufe  and  find  fault.     For  wit  is  a 
keen  inftrument,  and  every  one  can  cut  an  dgafh  with 
it,  but  to  carve  a  beautiful  image  and   to  polifh  it  re- 
quires great  art  and  dexterity.     To  praife  any  thing 
well  is  an  argument  of  much  more  wit,  than  to  abufe. 
A  little  wit  and  a  great  deal  of  ill  nature  will  furnilli 
a  man  for  fatyr,  but  the  greatefl  in  (lance  of  wit  is 
to  commend  well.     And  perhaps  the  bed  things  are 
the  hardefl   to  be  duly  commended.     For  though 
there  be  a  great  deal  of  matter  to  work  upon,  yet  there 

N  2  is  ^ 


9  2  ^he  folly  of  fc offing  at  religion, 

E  R  M.  is  great  judgment  required  to  make  choice,  and  where 
the  fubjc6t  is  great  and  excellent  it  is  hard  not  to 
fink  below  the  dignity  of  it.  -a 

This  I  fay  on  purpofe  to  recommend  to  men  a  no* 
bier  exercife  for  their  wits,  and  if  it  be  polTible,  to 
put  them  out  of  conceit  with  that  fcoffing  humour 
which  is  fo  eafy,  and  fo  ill  natured,  and  is  not  only 
an  enemy  to  religion,  but  to  every  thing  elfe  that  is 
wife  and  worthy.  And  I  am  very  much  miftaken,  if 
the  ftate  as  well  as  the  church,  the  civil  government 
as  well  as  religion,  do  nqt  in  a  fhort  fpace  find  the  in- 
tolerable inconvenience  of  this  humour. 

But  I  confine  my  felf  to  the  confideration  of  religi- 
on. And  it  is  fad  indeed,  that  in  a  nation  profefling 
Chriftianity  fo  horrid  an  impiety  fhould  dare  to  ap- 
pear. But  the  fcripture  hath  foretold  us  that  this 
fort  of  men  fliould  arife  in  the  gofpel-age,  and  they 
did  appear  even  in  ^he  apoftle 's  days.  That  which 
is  more  fad  and  fhrange  is,  that  we  fhould  perfift  in 
this  prophanenefs  notwithfl:anding  the  terrible  judg- 
ments of  God,  which  have  been  abroad  in  this  nation, 
God  hath  of  late  years  manifefl:ed  himfelf  in  a  very 
dreadful  manner,  as  if  it  were  on  purpofe  to  give  a 
check  to  this  infolent  impiety.  And  now  that  thofe 
judgments  have  done  no  good  upon  us  we  mayjuftr 
ly  fear  that  he  will  appear  once  for  all.  And  it  is  time 
for  him  to  fhew  himfelf  when  his  very  being  is  called 
in  queftion,  and  to  come  and  judge  the  world  when 
men  begin  to  doubt  whether  he  made  it. 

The  fcripture  mentions  two  things  as  the  fore-run- 
ners gnd  reafons  of  his  coming  to  judgment,  infideli- 
ty, and  prophane  fcoffing  at  religion.     "  When  the 
vv^r  s     *'  fon  of  man  comes,  fhall  he  find  faith  on  the  earth  ?' • 

And 


^e  folly  offcoffingat  religion.  93 

And  St.  Jude  out  of  an  ancient  prophecy  of  Enoch  S  E  R  M. 
cxprefly  mentions  this  as  one  reafon  of  the  cotning  ^_^_J^ 
of  the  Lord,  "  to  convince  ungodly  finners  of  all  Jude  15. 
"  their  hard  fpeeches  which  they  had  fpoken  againft  ^^^* 
^'  him." 

And  if  thefe  things  be  a  fign  and  reafon  of  his  com- 
ing, I  wifh  that  we  in  this  age  had  not  too  much 
caufe  to  apprehend  "  the  judge  to  be  at  the  door." 
This  impiety  did  forerun  the  deftruftion  of  Jerufa- 
lem  and  the  utter  ruin  of  the  jewifh  nation.  And  if 
it  hold  on  amongft  us  may  not  we  have  reafon  to  fear 
that  either  "  the  end  of  all  things  is  at  hand,"  or  that 
fome  very  difmal  calamity  greater  than  any  our  eyes 
have  yet  feen  docs  hang  over  us  ?  But  I  would  fain 
hope  that  God  hath  mercy  ffcill  for  us,  and  that  men 
will  pity  themfelves,  and  repent,  "  and  give  glory  to 
^^  God,"  and  "  know  in  this  their  day  the  things  that 
*'  belong  to  their  peace."  Which  God  of  his  infinite 
mercy  grant  for  the  fake  of  Christ,  to  whom  with 
the  father,  &c. 


SERMON 


S    E    R    M    O    N     III. 

The  advantages  of  religion  to  focieties. 


P  R  O  V.   xiv.  34. 

Rigbteoufnefs  exalteth  a  nation  •,  hut  Jin  is  the  reproach 

of  any  people, 

N  E  of  the  iirll  principles  that  is  planted  in 
the  nature  of  man,  and  which  lies  at  the 
very  root  and  foundation  of  his  being,  is  the 
defire  of  his  own  prefervation  and  happinefs.  Hence 
it  is  that  every  man  is  led  by  interell,  and  does  love 
or  hate,  chufe  or  refufe  things,  according  as  he  ap- 
prehends them  to  conduce  to  this  end,  or  to  contra- 
didl  it.  And  becaufe  the  happinefs  of  this  life  is  moft 
prefent  and  fenfible,  therefore  human  nature  (which 
in  this  degenerate  ftate  is  extremely  funk  down  into 
fenfe)  is  mod  powerfully  affeded  with  fenfible  and 
temporal  things.  And  confequently,  there  cannot  be 
a  greater  prejudice  raifed  againft  any  thing  than  to 
have  it  reprefented  as  inconvenient  and  hurtful  to  our 
temporal  interefls. 

Upon  this  account  it  is,  that  religion  hath  extreme- 
ly fuffered  in  the  opinion  of  many,  as  if  it  were  op- 
pofite  to  our  prefent  welfare,  and  did  rob  men  of  the 
greatefl:  advantages  and  conveniencies  of  life.  So  that 
he  that  would  do  right  to  religion,  and  make  a  ready 
way  for  the  entertainment  of  it  among  men,  cannot 
take  a  more  effed:ual  courfe  than  by  reconciling  it 

with 


4 

T'be  advantages  of  religion  to /octet  ks*  9^ 

with  the  happinefs  of  mankind,  and  by  giving  fatif-  S  E  R  Al 
fadlion  to  our  reafon,  that  it  is  fo  far  from  being  an  ^  _  _' 
enemy,  that;  it  is  the  greateft  friend  to  our  temporal 
interefts ;  and  that  it  doth  not  only  tend  to  make  eve- 
ry man  happy  confidered  fingly  and  in  a  private  ca- 
pacity, but  is  excellently  fitted  for  the  benefit  of  hu- 
man fociety. 

How  much  religion  tends  even  to  the  temporal  ad- 
vantage of  private  perfons  I  fhall  not  now  confider, 
becaufe  my  text  leads  me  to  difcourfe  of  the  other, 
namely,  to  fhew  how  advantageous  religion  and  vir- 
tue are  to  the  publick  profperity  of  a  nation,  which 
I  take  to  be  the  meaning  of  this  aphorifm  of  Solomon, 
"  righteoufnefs  exalteth  a  nation,"  &c. 

And  here  I  fnall  not  reftrain  righteoufnefs  to  the 
particular  virtue  of  juftice  (though  in  this  fenfe  alfo 
this  faying  is  molt  true)  but  enlarge  it  according  to 
the  genius  and  drain  of  the  book  of  the  Proverbs,  in 
which  the  words  wifdom  and  righteoufnefs  are  com- 
monly ufed  very  comprehenfively  fo  as  to  fignify  all 
religion  and  virtue.  And  that  this  word  is  fo  to  be 
taken  in  the  tcxty  may  appear  farther  from  the  oppo- 
fition  of  it  to  fin  or  vice  in  general ;  righteoufnefs  ex- 
alteth a  nation,  but  fin  is  the  reproach  of  any  people. 

You  fee  then  what  will  be  the  fubjedt  of  my  pre- 
fent  difcourfe  j  namely,  that  "  religion  and  virtue 
**  are  the  great  caufcs  of  publick  happinefs  and  pro- 
*'  fperity. 

And  though  the  truth  of  this  hath  been  univerfally 
acknowledged  and  long  enough  experienced  in  the 
world,  yet  becaufe  the  falhion  of  the  age  is  to  call  eve- 
ry thing  into  queftion,  it  will  be  requifite  to  fatisfy 
mens  reafon  about  it.  To  which  end  I  fhall  do  thefs 
two  things.  I.  Endeavour 


96  T!he  adfdantages  of  religion  tofocietieL 

S  E  R  M*      I.  Endeavour  to  give  an  account  of  this  truth. 
^^  ^      2.  To  vindicate  it  from  the  pretences  and  Infinua^ 
tions  of  atheiftical  perfons. 
I.  I  fhall  give  you  this  two-fold  account  of  it. 

1.  From  the  juftice  of  the  divine  providence. 

2.  From  the  natural  tendency  of  the  thing. 
I .  From  the  juftice  of  the  divine  providence.    In« 

deed  as  to  particular  perfons,  the  providences  of  God 
are  many  times  promifcuoufly  adminiftred  in  this 
world  ;  fo  that  no  man  can  certainly  conclude  God's 
love  or  hatred  to  any  perfon,  by  any  thing  that  befals 
him  in  this  life.    But  God  does  not  deal  thus  with 
nations.     Becaufe  publick  bodies  and  communities  of 
men,  as  fuch,  can  only  be  rewarded  and  punillied  in 
this  world.     For  in  the  next,  all  thofe  publick  focie- 
ties  and  combinations  wherein  men  are  now  linked 
together  under  feveral  govern  men  ts^  fhall  be  dilTolved. 
God  will  not  then  reward  or  punifh  nations,  as  nati- 
ons; but  every  man  fhall  then  give  an  account  of  him- 
felf  to  God,  and  receive  his  own  reward,  and  bear  his 
own  burthen.     For  although  God  account  it  no  dif- 
paragement  to  his  juftice  to  let  particular  good  men 
fufFer  in  this  world,  and  pafs  "  through  many  tribu-- 
"  lations  into  the  kingdom  of  God,"  becaufe  there  is 
another  day  a  coming  which  will  be  a  more  proper 
feafon  of  reward  ;  yet  in  the  ufual  courfe  of  his  pro- 
vidence he  recompenfeth  religious  and  virtuous  nati- 
ons with  temporal  bleflings  and  profperity.  For  which 
reafon  St.  Auftin  tells  us,  that  the  mighty  fuccefs  and 
long  profperity  of  the  Romans  was  a  reward  given 
them  by  God  for  their  eminent  juftice  and  temperance, 
and  other  virtues.    And  on  the  other  hand,  God  ma- 
ny times  fuffers  the  moft  grievous  fins  of  particular 

perfons 


T'he  advantage  of  religion  tb/Qcietiet.  97 

perfons  to  go  unpunifhed  in  this  world,  becaufe  he  S  E  R  M* 
knows  that  his  juftice  will  have  another  and  better  op- , 
portunity  to  meet  and  reckon  with  them.  But  the 
general  and  crying  fins  of  a  nation  cannot  hope  to  e- 
fcape  publick  judgments,  unlefs  they  be  prevented  by 
a  general  repentance.  God  may  defer  his  judgments 
for  a  time,  and  give  a  people  a  longer  fpace  of  repen- 
tance, he  may  ftay  till  the  iniquities  of  a  nation  be 
ful],  but  fooner  or  later  they  have  reafon  to  expe6l  his 
vengeance.  And  ufually  the  longer  puniQiment  is 
delayed  it  is  the  heavier  when  it  comes. 

Now  all  this  is  very  reafonable^  becaufe  this  world 
is  the  only  feafon  for  national  putiifliments.  And 
indeed  they  are  in  a  great  degree  neceflary  for  the 
prefent  vindication  of  the  honour  and  majefly  of  the 
divine  laws,  and  to  give  fome  check  to  the  over- 
flowing of  wickednefs.  Publick  judgments  are  the 
banks  and  fhores  upon  which  God  breaks  the  infolen- 
cy  of  finners,  and  flays  their  proud  waves.  And 
though  among  men  the  multitude  of  offenders  be  ma- 
ny times  a  caufe  of  impunity,  becaufe  of  the  weak- 
nefs  of  human  governments,  which  are  glad  to  fpare 
where  they  are  not  ftrong  enough  to  punifh,  yet  in 
the  government  of  God,  things  are  quite  otherwife. 
No  combination  of  finners  is  too  hard  for  him,  and 
the  greater  and  more  numerous  the  offenders  are,  the 
more  his  juftice  is  concern'd  to  vindicate  the  affront. 
However  God  may  pafs  by  fingJe  finners  in  this 
world,  yet  when  a  nation  combines  againft  him^ 
*'  when  hand  joins  in  hand  the  wicked  fhall  not  go 
"  unpunifhed. 

This  the  fcripture  declares  to  be  the  fettled  courfe 
of  God's  providence  \  That  a  rigHteous  nation  fhall 

Vol.  I.  O  b^ 


98  5^^  advantage  of  religion  to  fcocieties. 

E  R  M.  be  happy  -,  "  the  work  of  righteoufnefs  fhall  be  peace ; 
"  and  the  effedls  of  righteoufnefs,  quietnefs  and  af- 
"  furance  for  ever."  And  on  the  other  hand,  that 
he  ufeth  to  fhower  down  his  judgments  upon  a  wick- 
ed people,  "  he  turneth  a  fruitful  land  into  barrennefs 
"  for  the  wickednefs  of  them  that  dwell  therein." 

And  the  experience  of  all  ages  hath  made  this  good. 
All  along  the  hiflory  of  the  old  teftament,  we  find 
the  interchangeable  providences  of  God  towards  the 
people  of  Ifrael  always  fuited  to  their  manners.  They 
were  conftantly  profperous  or  afflidled,  according  as 
piety  and  virtue  fiourifhed  or  declined  amongft  them. 
And  God  did  not  only  exercife  this  providence  to- 
wards his  own  people,  but  he  dealt  thus  alfo  with  q- 
ther  nations.  The  Roman  empire  whilft  the  virtue  of 
that  people  remained  firm  was  flrong  as  iron,  as  it  is 
reprefented  in  the  prophecy  of  Daniel :  but  upon  the 
diflblution  of  their  manners  the  iron  began  to  be  mixt 
with  miry  clay,  and  the  feet,  upon  which  that  empire 
ftood,  to  be  broken.  And  though  God  in  the  admi- 
niflration  of  hisjuflice  be  not  tied  to  precedents,  and 
we  cannot  argue  from  fcriptu re-examples  that  the 
providences  of  God  towards  other  nations  ihall  in  all 
circumftances  be  conformable  to  his  dealings  with  the 
people  of  Ifrael  -,  yet  thus  much  may  with  great  pro- 
babihty  be  colleded  from  them,  that  as  God  always 
bleffed  that  people  while  they  were  obedient  to  him, 
and  followed  them  with  his  judgments  when  they  re- 
belled againft  him,  fo  he  will  alfo  deal  with  other  na- 
tions. Becaufe  the  reafon  of  thofe  difpenfations  as  to 
the  main  and  fubftance  of  them  feems  to  be  perpetual, 
and  founded  in  that  which  can  never  change,  the  ju- 
ftice  of  the  divine  providence, 

2dly,  The 


7he  advantage  of  religion  tofocietics.  99 

2dly.  The  truth  of  this  farther  appears,  from  theSERM. 
natural  tendency  of  the   thing.     For  religion  in  ge-  x^^^^J..^ 
neral,  and  every   particular  virtue,  doth  in  it's  own 
nature  conduce  to  the  publick  intereft. 

Religion,  wherever  it  is  truly  planted,  is  certainly 
the  greateft  obligation  upon  confcience  to  all  civil 
offices  and  moral  duties.  Chaftity  and  temperance 
and  induftry  do  in  their  own  nature  tend  to  health 
and  plenty.  Truth  and  fidelity  in  all  our  dealings  do 
create  mutual  love  and  good-will  and  confidence  a- 
mong  men,  which  are  the  great  bands  of  peace.  And 
on  the  contrary,  wickednefs  doth  in  it's  own  nature 
produce  many  publick  mifchiefs.  For  as  fins  are 
link'd  together,  and  draw  on  one  another,  fo  almoft 
every  vice  hath  fome  temporal  inconvenience  annex- 
ed to  it  and  naturally  following  it.  Intemperance 
and  lull  breed  infirmities  and  difeafes,  which  being 
propagated  fpoil  the  drain  of  a  nation.  Idleneis  and 
luxury  bring  forth  poverty  and  want ;  and  this  tempts 
men  to  injuftice,  and  that  caufeth  enmity  and  animo- 
fities,  and  thefe  bring  on  "  ftrife  and  confufion  and 
"  every  evil  work."  This  philofophical  account  of 
publick  troubles  and  confufions  St.  James  gives  us 
"  whence  come  wars  and  fightings  among  you.?  are  Jam.  4.1; 
"  they  not  hence,  even  from  your  lufts  that  war  in 
"  your  members  ? 

But  I  (hall  lliew  more  particularly,  that  religion 
and  virtue  do  naturally  tend  to  the  good  order  and 
jnore  eafy  government  of  human  fociety,  becaufe 
they  have  a  good  influence  both  upon  magiftrates  and 
fubjedts. 

I.  Upon  magiftrates.  Religion  teacheth  them  to 
rule  over  men  in  the  fear  of  God,  becaufe  though 

O  2  they 


Tlje  advantage  of  religion  tofocieties. 
they  be  gods  on  earth,  yet  they  are  fubjeds  of  heaven, 
and  accountable  to  him  who  is  higher  than  the  higheft 
in  this  world.  Religion  in  a  magiftrate  ftrengthens 
his  authority,  becaufe  it  procures  veneration  and  gains 
a  reputation  to  it.  And  in  all  the  affairs  of  this 
v/orld  fo  much  reputation  is  really  fo  much  power. 
We  fee  that  piety  and  virtue,  where  they  are  found 
among  men  of  lower  degree,  will  command  fome  re- 
verence and  refpedt:  But  in  perfons  of  eminent  place 
and  dignity  they  are  feated  to  a  great  advantage,  fo 
as  to  caft  a  luftre  upon  their  very  place,  and  by  a 
ftrong  reflcdion  to  double  the  beams  of  majefly. 
Whereas  impiety  and  vice  do  flrangely  leffen  greats 
nefs,  and  do  fecretly  and  unavoidably  derive  feme 
■  weaknefs  upon  authority  itfelf  Of  this  the  fcripture 
gives  us  a  remarkable  inftance  in  David.  For  among 
other  things  which  made  "  the  fons  of  Zeruiah  too 
"  hard  for  him,"  this  probably  was  none  of  the  leaft, 
that  they  were  particularly  confcious  to  his  crimes. 

Z.  Religion  hath  a  good  influence  upon  the  peo- 
ple ;  to  make  them  obedient  to  government,  and 
peaceable  one  towards  another. 

I.  To  make  them  obedient  to  government,  and 
conformable  to  laws  •,  and  that  not  only  for  wrath 
and  out  of  fear  of  the  magiftrates  power,  which  is 
but  a  weak  and  loofe  principle  of  obedience,  and 
will  ceafe  whenever  men  can  rebel  with  fafety,  and 
to  advantage;  but  out  of  confcience,  which  is  a  firm, 
^nd  conftant  and  lafting  principle,  and  will  hold  a 
man  faft  when  all  other  obligations  will  break.  He 
that  hath  entertain'd  the  true  principles  of  Chrifliani- 
ty  is  not  to  be  tempted  from  his  obedience  and  fub- 
jeftion  by  any  worldly  confideratipns,    becaufe  he  be- 

3  lieves 


TToe  advantage  of  religion  to  focieties.  1  o  i 

lieves  that  "  whofoever  refifleth  authority  rcfiftcth  S  E  R  M 
^'  the  ordinance  of  God,"  and  that "  they  who  refiil  y_^  ~  j 
"  fliall  receive  to  themfelves  damnation/' 

2 .  Religion  tends  to  make  men  peaceable  one  to- 
wards another.  For  it  endeavours  to  plant  all  thofe 
qualities  and  difpofitions  in  men  which  tend  to  peace 
and  unity,  and  to  fill  men  with  a  fpirit  of  univerfal 
love  and  good  will.  It  endeavours  likewife  to  fecure 
every  man's  intereft,  by  commanding  the  obfervation 
of  that  great  rule  of  equity,  "  whatfoever  ye  would 
*'  that  men  fhould  do  unto  you,  do  ye  even  fo  to 
"  them  •,"  by  enjoining  that  truth  and  fidelity  be 
inviolably  obferved  in  all  our  words,  promifes  and 
contradls.  And  in  order  hereunto  it  requires  the  ex- 
tirpation of  all  thofe  pafTions  and  vices  which  render 
men  unfociable  and  troublefom  to  one  another,  as 
pride,  covetoufnefs,  and  injuflice,  hatred  and  revenge 
and  cruelty  ;  and  thofe  likewife  which  are  not  fo 
commonly  reputed  vices,  as  felf-conceit  and  peremp- 
torinefs  in  a  man's  own  opinion,  and  all  peeviflmefs, 
and  incompliance  of  humour  in  things  lawful  and 
indifferent. 

And  that  thefe  are  the  proper  effe6ls  of  true  piety 
the  do6trine  of  our  Saviour  and  his  apoflles  every 
where  teacheth  us.  Now  if  this  be  the  defign  of 
religion  to  bring  us  to  this  temper,  thus  to  heal  the 
natures  of  men  and  to  fweeten  their  fplrits,  to  corre6l 
their  paflions,  and  to  mortify  all  thofe  lulls  which  arc 
the  caufes  of  enmity  and  divifion,  then  it  is  evident 
that  in  it's  own  nature  it  tends  to  the  peace  and  hap^ 
pinefs  of  human  fociety ;  and  that  if  men  would  but 
live  as  religion  requires  they  fhould  do,  the  world 
would  be  a  quiet  habitation,  a  moft  lovely  and  defi- 

rable 


^e  advantage  of  religion  tofocieties. 
rable  place  in  comparilbn  of  what  now  it  is.  And 
indeed  the  true  reaibn  why  the  focieties  of  men  are 
fo  full  of  tumult  and  diforder,  fo  troublefom  and 
tempeftuous,  is  becaufe  there  is  fo  little  of  true  reli- 
gion among  men  ♦,  fo  that  were  it  not  for  fome  fmall 
remainders  of  piety  and  virtue  which  are  yet  left  feat- 
ter'd  among  mankind,  human  fociety  would  in  a 
fhort  fpace  dif[:)and  and  run  into  confufion,  the  earth 
would  grow  wild  and  become  a  great  foreft,  and  man- 
kind would  become  beads  of  prey  one  towards  ano- 
ther. And  if  this  difcourfe  hold  rrue,  furely  then 
one  would  think  that  virtue  fhould  find  it  feilf  a  feat 
wherever  human  focieties  are,  and  that  religion  fhould 
be  owned  and  encouraged  in  the  world  until  men  ccafe 
to  be  governed  by  reafon. 

II.  I  come  to  vindicate  this  truth  from  the  infinu- 
ations  and  pretences  of  atheiftical  perfons.  I  fhall 
mention  two. 

1.  That  governmient may  fubfifb  well  enough  with- 
out the  belief  of  a  God  and  a  ftate  of  rewards  and 
punifhments  after  this  life. 

2.  That  as  for  virtue  and  vice  they  are  arbitrary 
things. 

I.  That  government  may  fubfift  well  enough  with- 
out the  belief  of  a  God  or  a  ftate  of  rewards  and  pu- 
nifliments  after  this  life.  And  this  the  atheift  does 
and  muft  afiert,  otherwife  he  is  by  his  own  confeffion 
a  declared  enemy  to  government,  and  unfit  to  live  in 
human  fociety. 

For  anfwer  to  this,  I  will  not  deny  but  that  though 
the  generality  of  men  did  not  believe  any  fuperior 
being,  nor  any  rewards  and  punifhments  after  this  life, 
yet  notwithftanding  this  there  might  be  fome  kind 

of 


^he  advantage  of  religion  to  focieiies,  103 

of  government  kept  up  in  the  world.  For  fuppoflng  ^■^^'  ^^- 
men  to  have  reafon,  the  neceuities  of  human  nature 
and  the  mifchiefs  of  confufion  would  probably  com- 
pel them  into  fome  kind  of  order.  But  then  I  fay 
withal,  that  if  thefe  principles  were  baniflied  out  of 
the  world  government  wouid  be  far  more  difficult 
than  now  it  is,  becaufe  it  v/ould  want  it's  firmeft  ba- 
fis  and  foundation  •,  there  would  be  infinitely  more 
diforders  in  the  vv^orld  if  men  were  reflrained  from 
injuftice  and  violence  only  by  human  laws,  and  not 
by  principles  of  confcience  and  the  dread  of  another 
world.  Therefore  magiiirates  have  always  thought 
themfelves  concerned  to  cherifh  religion,  and  to  main- 
tain  in  the  minds  of  men  the  belief  of  a  Got>  and 
another  life.  Nay  that  common  faggellion  of  atheifli* 
cal  perfons,  that  religion  v^^as  at  firft  a  politick  device 
and  is  ftill  kept  up  in  the  world  as  a  ftate-engine  to 
awe  men  into  obedience,  is  a  clear  acknowledgment 
of  the  ufefulnefs  of  it  to  the  ends  of  government,  and 
does  as  fully  contradid  chat  pretence  ^f  theirs  wliicli 
1  am  now  confuting  as  any  thing  that  can  be  faid. 

2.  That  virtue  and  vice  are  arbitrary  things,  found- 
ed only  in  the  imaginations  of  men  and  in  the  con- 
ftit'utions  and  cuftoms  of  the  world,  but  not  in  the 
nature  of  the  things  themfelves  •,  and  that  that  is  vir- 
tue or  vice,  good  or  evil,  which  the  fupreme  autho- 
rity of  a  nation  declares  to  be  fo.  And  this  is  fre- 
quently and  confidently  afferted  by  the  ingenious  au- 
thor of  a  very  bad  book,  I  mean  the  Leviathan, 

Now  the  proper  way  of  anfwering  any  thing  that  is 
confidently  afferted  is  to  fhew  the  contrary,  namely, 
that  there  are  fome  things  that  have  a  natural  evil 
and  deformity  in  them,  as  perjury,  perndioufnefs, 

UD  right- 


104  ^^  advantages  of  religion  tofocieties. 

SERM.  unrighteoufnefs  and  ingratitude,  which  are  things  not 
only  condemned  by  the  pofitive  laws  and  conflituti- 
ons  of  particular  nations  and  governments,  but  by  the 
general  verdid:  of  human  nature  :  and  that  the  vir- 
tues contrary  to  thefe  have  a  natural  goodnefs  and 
comelinefs  in  them,  and  are  fuitable  to  the  common 
principles  and  fentiments  of  humanity. 

And  this  will  mod  evidently  appear  by  putting  this 
fuppofition.  Suppofe  the  reverfe  of  all  that  which 
we  now  call  virtue  were  folemnly  enacted,  and  the 
pradlice  of  fraud,  and  rapine,  and  perjury,  and  falfe- 
nefs  to  a  man's  word,  and  all  manner  of  vice  and 
wickednefs  were  eftablifhed  by  a  law.  I  afk  now^  if 
the  cafe  between  virtue  and  vice  were  thus  altered, 
would  that  which  we  now  call  vice  in  procefs  of  time 
gain  the  reputation  of  virtue,  and  that  which  we  now 
call  virtue  grow  odious  and  contemptible  to  human 
nature  ?  If  it  would  not,  then  is  there  fomething  in 
the  nature  of  good  and  evil,  of  virtue  and  vice,  which 
does  not  depend  upon  the  pleafure  of  authority,  nor 
is  fubjed;  to  any  arbitrary  conftitution.  But  that  it 
would  not  be  thus  I  am  very  certain,  becaufe  no  go- 
vernment could  fubfiil  upon  thefe  terms.  For  the  very 
enjoining  of  fraud  and  rapine  and  perjury  and  breach 
of  truft  doth  apparently  deflroy  the  greateft  end  of 
government,  which  is  to  preferve  men  in  their  rights 
againft  the  encroachments  of  fraud  and  violence.  And 
this  end  being  dellroyed,  human  focieties  would 
prefently  fly  in  pieces  and  men  would  neceflarily  fall 
into  a  ftate  of  war.  Which  plainly  fhews  that  virtue 
and  vice  arc  not  arbitrary  things,  but  that  there  is  a 
natural  and  immutable  and  eternal  reafon  for  that 
which  we  call  goodnefs  and  virtue,  and  againft  that 
which  we  call  vice  and  wickednefs.  Thus 


T!he  advantages  ofreligioJi  to  Jocieties,  105 

Thus  I  have  endeavoured  to  evidence  and  vindi-  SERM. 

cate  this  truth.  I  fliall  only  draw  an  inference  or  two 

from  this  difcourfe,  and  fo  conclude. 

1.  If  this  difcoui-fe  be  true,  then  thofe  who  are  in 
place  of  power  and  authority  are  peculiarly  concerned 
to  maintain  the  honour  of  religion. 

2.  It  concerns  every  one  to  live  in  the  pradlice 
of  it. 

I.  Magiftrates  are  concerned  to  maintain  the  ho- 
nour of  religion,  which  doth  not  only  tend  to  every 
man's  future  happinefs,  but  is  the  beft  inftrument  of 
civil  government  and  of  the  temporal  profperity  of  a 
nation.  For  the  whole  defign  of  it  is  to  procure  the 
private  and  publick  happinefs  of  mankind  j  and  to  re- 
flrain  men  from  all  thofe  things  which  would  make 
them  miferable  and  guilty  to  themfelves,  unpeaceable 
and  troublefom  to  the  world.  Religion  hath  fo  great 
an  influence  upon  the  felicity  of  men  that  it  ought  to 
be  upheld,  and  the  veneration  of  it  maintained,  not 
only  out  of  a  juil  dread  of  the  divine  vengeance  in 
another  world,  but  out  of  regard  to  the  temporal 
peace  and  profperity  of  men.  It  will  requite  all  the 
kindnefs  and  honour  we  can  do  it  by  the  advantages 
it  will  bring  to  civil  government,  and  by  the  blef- 
fings  it  will  draw  down  upon  it.  God  hath  promif- 
ed  that  "  thofe  that  honour  him,  he  will  honour," 
and  in  the  common  courfe  of  his  providence  he, 
ufually  makes  this  good,  fo  that  the  civil  authori- 
ty ought  to  be  very  tender  of  the  honour  of  God 
and  religion,  if  for  no  other  reafon  yet  out  of  reafon 
of  (late. 

It  were  to  be  wifht  that  all  men  were  To  pioufly 
difpofed,  that  religion  by  it's  gwn  authority  and  the 

Vol.  L  P  reafon- 

2. 


III. 


ne  advantages  of  religion  to  focieties. 
reafonable  force  of  it  might  be  fufficient  to  eflablifh 
it's  empire  in  the  minds  of  men.     But  the  corruptions 
of  men  will  always  make  a  flrong  oppofition  againfl 
it.     And  thei^efore  at  the  firfl  planting  of  the  Chrifli- 
an  religion  in  the  world,  God  was  pleafed  to  accom- 
pany it  with  a  miraculous  power :  but  after  it  was 
planted   this  extraordinary  power  ceafed,  and  God 
hath  now  left  it  to  be  maintained  and  fupported  by 
more  ordinary  and  human  ways,  by  the  countenance 
of  authority,  and    afliftance  of  laws ;    which    were 
never  more  neceffary  than  in  this  degenerate  age> 
which  is  prodigioufly  funk  into  atheifm  andprophane- 
nefs,  and  is  running  head-long  into  an   humour  of 
fcoffing  at  God  and  religion  and  every  thing  that  is 
facred.     For  fome  ages  before  the  reformation  athe- 
ifm was  confined  to  Italy,  and  had  it's  chief  refidence 
at  Rome.     All  the  mention  that  is  of  it  in  the  hi- 
llory  of  thofe  times  the  papifts  themfelves  give  us  in 
the  lives  of  their  own  popes  and  cardinals,  excepting 
two  or  three  fmall  philofophers,  that  were  retainers 
to  that  court.     So  that  this  atheiftical  humour  among 
Chriftians  was  the  fpawn  of  the  grofs  fuperflitions 
and  corrupt  manners  of  the  romifh  church  and  court. 
And  indeed  nothing  is  more  natural  than  for  extremes 
in  religion  to  beget  one  another,  like  the  vibrations 
of  a  pendulum,  which  the  more  violently  you  fwing 
it  one  way   the  farther  it  will  return  the  other.     But 
in  the  laft  age,  atheifm  travel'd  over  the  Alpes  and 
infeded   France,  and  now  of  late  it  hath  crofled  the 
feas  and  invaded  our  nation  and  hath  prevailed  to 
amazement:  for  I  do  not  think  that  there  are  any 
people  in  the  world  that  are  generally  more  indif- 
pofed  to  it  and  can  worfe  brook  it  j  ferioufnefs  and 


^he  advantages  of  religion  fofocieties,  107 

zeal  in  religion  being  almoft  the  natural  temper  of  S  ERM. 
the  Englilh.     So  that  nothing  is   to  me  matter  of,    ^^^' 
greater  wonder,  than  that  in  a  grave  and  fober  na- 
tion prophanencfs  fhould  ever  come  to  gain  fo  much 
ground,  and  the  bed  and  the  wifeft  religion  in  the 
world  to  be  made  the  fcorn  of  fools.     For  befides  the 
prophane  and  atheiftical  difcourfes  about  God  and  re- 
ligion, and  the  bold  and  fenOefs  abufes  of  this  facred 
book  the  great  inftruments  of  our   falvation,  which 
are  fo  frequent  in  the  public  places  of  refort;  I  fay, 
befides  thefe  (I  fpeak  it  knowingly)  a  man  can  hard- 
ly pafs  the  ftreets  without  having  his  ears  grated  and 
pierced  with  fuch  horrid  and  blafphemous  oaths  and 
curfes  as  are  enough,  if  we  were  guilty  of  no  other 
fin,  to  fink  a  nation.     And  this  not  only  from  the 
tribe  that  wear  liveries,  but  from  thofe  that  go  be- 
fore them  and  fhould  give  better  example.     Is  it  not 
then  high  time  that  the  laws  fhould  provide  by  the 
moft  prudent  and  effedual  means  to  curb  thefe  bold 
and  infolent  defiers  of  heaven,  who  take  a  pride  in 
being   monfters,  and  boaft  themfelves  in  the  follies 
and  deformities  of  human  nature  .^^The  heathens  would 
never  fuffer  their  gods  to  be  reviled,  which  yet  were 
no  gods.     And  (hall  it  among  the  profeffors  of  the 
true  religion,  be  allowed  to  any  man  to  make  a  mock 
of  him  that  made  heaven  and  earth,  and  to  breathe 
out  biafphemies  againft  him  who  gives  us  life  and 
breath  and  all  things  ?  I  doubt  not  but  hypocrify  is  a 
great  wickednefs  and  very  odious  to  God,  but  by 
no  means  of  fo  pernicious  example  as    open   pro- 
phanencfs.    Hypocrify  is  a  more  modell  way  of  fin- 
ning, it  ihews  fome  reverence  to  religion,  and  does  fo 
far  own  the  worth  and  excellency  of  it  as  to  acknow- 

P  2  ledge 


io8  The  advantages  of  religion  io /octet  les, 

E  R  M.  ledffe  that  it  deferves  to  be  counterfeited  :  whereas 
prophanenefs  declares  openly  againft  it,  and  endear 
vours  to  make  a  party  to  drive  it  out  of  the  world. 

2.  It  concerns  every  one  to  live  in  the  pradlice  of 

religion  and  virtue,    becaufe  the  publick  happinefs 

and  profperity  depends  upon  it.     It  is  moft  apparent 

that  of  late  years  religion  is  very  fenfibly  declined  a- 

mong  us.     The  manners  of  men  have  almoft  been 

univerfally  corrupted  by  a  civil  war.     We  fhould 

therefore  all  jointly  endeavour  to  retrieve  the  ancient 

virtue  of  the  nation,  and  to  bring  into  falhion  again 

that  folid  and  fubftantial,  that  plain  and  unafFeded 

piety,  (free  from  the  extremes  both  of  fuperftition 

and  enthufiafm)  which  flourlfhed  in  the  age  of  our 

immediate  forefathers.    Which  did  not  confifl  in  idle 

talk  but  in  real  eiFeds,  in  a  fincere  love  of  God  and 

of  our  neighbour,  in  a  pious  devotion  and  reverence 

towards  the  divine  majefty,  and  in  the  virtuous  adlions 

of  a  good  life  j  in   the  denial  of  "  ungodlinefs  and 

''  worldly  lufts,  and  in  living  foberly  and  righteoufly 

"  and  godly  in  this  prefent  world.'*     This  were  the 

true  way  to  reconcile  God  to  us,  to  flop  the  courfe 

of  his  judgments,    and  to  bring  down  the  bleflings 

of  heaven  upon  us. 

God  hath  now  been  pleafed  to  fettle  us  again  in 
peace  both  at  home  and  abroad,  and  he  hath  put  us 
once  more  into  the  hands  of  our  own  counfel.  Life 
and  death,  bleffing  and  curfing,  profperity  and  de- 
flru6lion  are  before  us.  We  may  chufe  our  own  for- 
tune, and  if  we  be  not  wanting  to  pur  felves  we  may 
under  the  influence  of  Goo's  grace  and  alTiftance, 
which  are  never  wanting  to  our  fmcere  endeavours, 
become  a  happy  and  a  profperous  people. 

"  «  The 


The  advantages  of  religion  to  particular  perfons.  jQg 
"  The  good  God  make  ns  all  wife  to  know  andSERM. 
"  to  do  the  things  that  belong  to  the  temporal  peace 
:"  and  profperity  of  the  nation,  and  to  the  eternal 
"  happinefs  and  falvation  of  every  one  of  our  fouls  ; 
^'  which  we  humibly  beg  for  the  fake  of  Jesus 
^'  Christ,  to  whom,  &c." 


S    E    R    M    O    N     IV. 

The  advantages  of  religion  to  particular 
perfons. 


PSALM  xix.  II. 
y^fid  in  keeping  of  them  there  is  great  reward. 

IN  this  pfalm  David  celebrates  the  glory  of  God  SERM. 
from  the  confideration  of  the  greatnefs  of  his  ^'_ 
Works,  and  the  perfeftion  of  his  laws.  From 
the  greatnefs  of  his  works,  verfe  i.  "  the  heavens 
'^  declare  the  glory  of  God,  and  the  firmament  fliew- 
^'  eth  his  handy-work,"  &c.  From  the  perfedlion  of 
his  laws,  verfe  7.  "  the  law  of  the  Lord  is  perfed, 
*'  converting  the  foul,"  &c.  And  among  many  0- 
ther  excellencies  of  the  divine  laws,  he  mentions  in 
the  lafl  place  the  benefits  and  advantages  which  come 
from  the  obfervance  of  them,  verfe  11."  and  in  keep- 
*^  ing  of  them  there  is  great  reward." 

I  have  already  Ihown  how  much  religion  tends  to 

the 


110  T'he  advantages  of  religion  to  particular  perfom. 
S  E  R  M.  the  publick  welfare  of  mankind  ;  to  the  fupport  of  go- 
vernment,  and  to  the  peace  and  happinefs  of  human 
focieties.  My  work  at  this  time  fhall  be  to  fhew  that 
religion  and  obedience  to  the  laws  of  God  do  likewife 
conduce  to  the  happinefs  of  particular  perfons,  both 
in  refpedl  of  this  world  and  the  other.  For  though 
there  be  but  little  exprefs  nnention  made  in  the  Old 
teftament  of  the  immortality  of  the  foul  and  the  re- 
wards of  another  life,  yet  all  religion  does  fuppofe 
thefe  principles,  and  is  built  upon  them. 

I.  And  firft,  I  fliall  endeavour  to  fhew  how  religi- 
on conduceth  to  the  happinefs  of  this  life ;  and  that 
both  in  refpe(5l  of  the  inward  and  outward  man. 

Firft,  as  to  the  mind ;  to  be  pious  and  religious 
brings  a  double  advantage  to  the  mind  of  man.  i.  It 
tends  to  the  improvement  of  our  underftandings. 
2.  It  brings  peace  and  pleafure  to  our  minds. 

I.  It  tends  to  the  improvement  of  our  underftand- 
ings. I  do  not  mean  only  that  it  inftruds  us  in  the 
knowledge  of  divine  and  fpiritual  things,  and  makes 
us  to  underftand  the  great  intereft  of  our  fouls  and  the 
concernments  of  eternity  better,  but  that  in  general 
it  does  raife  and  enlarge  the  minds  of  men  and  make 
them  more  capable  of  true  knowledge.  And  in  this 
fenfe  I  underftand  the  following  texts  ;  "  the  com- 
"  mandment  of  the  Lord  is  pure,  enlightning  the 
"  eyes;  the  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  beginning  of 
*'  wifdom,  a  good  underftanding  have  all  they  that 
"  keep  his  commandments  j  thou  through  thy  com- 
«  mandments  haft  made  me  wifer  than  mine  ene. 
**  mies,"  which  plainly  refers  to  political  prudence; 
"  I  have  more  underftanding  than  all  my  teachers, 
*'  for  thy  teftimonies  are  my  meditation ;  I   under- 

«  ftand 


T'he  advantages  of  religion  to  particular  per fons,       1 1 1 
<'  fland  more  than  the  ancients,  becaufe  I  keep  thy  S  E  R  M. 
"  precepts ;  through  thy  precepts  I  get   underftand-  ^_^_^^ 
"  ingj  the  entrance  of  thy  word  giveth  light,  it  giv- ver-  104, 
"  eth  underftanding  to  the  fimple." 

Now  religion  doth  improve  the  underftandings  of 
men  by  fubduing  their  lufts,  and  moderating  their 
paflions.  The  lufts  and  pafTions  of  men  do  fully  and 
darken  their  minds,  even  by  a  natural  influence.  In- 
temperance and  fenfuality  and  flefhly  lufts  do  debafe 
mens  minds,  and  clog  their  fpirits,  make  them  grols 
and*  foul,  liftlefs  and  unadive  ;  they  fink  us  down  in- 
to fenfe,  and  glew  us  to  thefe  low  and  inferior  things ; 
like  birdlime  they  hamper  and  entangle  our  fouls, 
and  hinder  their  flight  upwards ;  they  indifpofe  and 
unfit  our  minds  for  the  moft  noble  and  intelledual 
confiderations.  So  likewife  the  exorbitant  paflions 
of  wrath  and  malice,  envy  and  reVenge,  do  darken 
and  diftort  the  underftandings  of  men,  do  tindure 
the  mind  with  falfe  colours,  and  fill  it  with  prejudice 
and  undue  apprehenfions  of  things. 

Ther€  is  no  man  that  is  intemperate  or  luftful,  or 
paflionate,  but  befides  the  guilt  he  contrads  which  is 
continually  fretting  and  difquieting  his  mind,  befides 
the  inconveniencies  he  brings  upon  himfelf  as  to  his 
health,  he  does  likewife  ftain  and  obfcure  the  bright- 
nefs  of  his  foul  and  the  clearnefs  of  his  difcerning 
faculty.  Such  perfons  have  not  that  free  ufe  of  their 
reafon  that  they  might  have  ♦,  their  underftandings 
are  not  bright  enough,  nor  their  fpirits  pure  and  fine 
enough  for  the  exercife  of  thehigheft  and  nobieft  ads 
of  reafon.  What  clearnefs  is  to  the  eye,  that  purity 
is  to  our  mind  and  underftanding,  and  as  the  clear- 
nefs of  the  bodily  eye  doth  difpofe  it  for  a  quicker 

fight 


112         l^he  advantages  of  religion  to  particular  perfons, 
SERM.  fight  of  material  objeds,  (o   doth  the  purity  of  oui* 
minds,  that  is,  freedom  from   luft  and  pafTion,  dif- 
pofe  us  for  the  cleareft  and  mod  perfed  ads  of  rea- 
fon  and  underflanding. 

Now  religion  doth  purify  our  minds  and  refine  ouf 
fpirits  by  quenching  the  fire  of  luft  and  fupprefling 
the  fumes  and  vapours  of  it,  and  by  fcattering  the 
clouds  and  mifts  of  paflion.  And  the  more  any 
man's  foul  is  cleanfed  from  the  filth  and  dregs  of  fen- 
fual  lufts  the  more  nimble  and  expedite  it  will  be  in 
it's  operations.  The  more  any  man  conquers  his  paf- 
fions,  the  more  calm  and  fedate  his  fpirit  is,  and  the 
greater  equality  he  maintains  in  his  temper,  his  ap^ 
prehenfions  of  things  will  be  the  more  clear  and  un- 
prejudic'd,  and  his  judgment  more  firm  and  fteddy^ 
And  this  is  the  meaning  of  that  faying  of  Solo- 
mon, "  he  that  is  flow  to  wrath  is  of  great  under- 
«*  {landing,  but  he  that  is  hafty  of  fpirit  exalteth  fol- 

''  ]y."     Ira  furor  brevis   eji Anger  is  a  fhort 

fit  of  madnefs,  and  he  that  is  palTionate  and  furious 
deprives  himfelf  of  his  reafon,  fpoils  his  underfland- 
ing, and  helps  to  make  himfelf  a  fool :  whereas  he 
that  conquers  his  palTions  and  keeps  them  under,  doth 
thereby  preferve  and  improve  his  underflanding. 
Freedom  from  irregular  paflions  doth  not  only  figni- 
fy  that  a  man  is  wife,  but  really  contributes  to  the 
making  of  him  fuch. 

2.  Religion  tends  to  the  eafe  and  pleafure,  the  peace 
and  tranquillity  of  cur  minds;  wherein  happinefs 
chiefly  confifls,  and  which  all  the  wifdom  and  philo- 
fophy  of  the  world  did  always  aim  at,  as  the  utmofl 
felicity  of  this  life.  And  that  this  is  the  natural  fruit 
of  a  religigus  and  virtuous  courfe  of  life,  the  fcrip- 

turc 


^he  advantages  of  religion  to  particular  perfom,        ii% 
ture  declares  to  us  in  thefe  texts  \  "  light  is  fown  for  S  E  R  M. 
''  the   righteous,  and    gladnefs    for  the  upright    in  ,,^,-^,«l^ 
"  heart ;  great  peace  have  all  they  that  love  thy  law,  Pfal.xcvii. 
"  and  nothing  fhall  offend  them  ;  her  ways  arc  ways  pfal.cxix. 
"  ofpleafantnefs,  and   all   her  paths  are  peace;  the  165. 
"  fruit  of  the  righteoufnefs  is  peace,  and  the   efFeft  ^^^'  ^"* 
*'  of  righteoufnefs  quietnefs  and  afllirance  for  ever  ;"  Ila.  xxxii» 
the  plain  fenfe    of  which  texts  is,  tliat  pleafure  and  '^* 
peace  do  naturally  refult  from  a  holy  and  good  life. 
When  a  man  hath  once  engaged  himfelf  in  a  religi- 
ous courfe,  and  is  habituated  to  piety  and  holinefs,  all 
the  exercifes  of  rehgion  and  devotion,    all  a6ts   of 
goodnefs  and  virtue  are  delightful  to  him.     To  ho- 
nour and  worfhip  God,  to  pray  to  him,  and  to  praif^ 
him,  to  ftudy  his  will,  to  meditate  upon  him  and  to 
love  him,  all  thefe  bring  great  pleafure  and  peace  a- 
long  with  them.     What  greater  contentment  and  fa- 
tisfadtion  can  there  be  to  the  mind  of  n:ian,  when  it 
is  once  purify'd  and  refin'd  from  the  dregs  of  fenfual 
pleafurcs  and  delights,  and  rais'd  to  it's  true  height  and 
pitch,  than  to  contemplate  and  admire  the  infinite 
excellencies  and  perfections   of  God,  to   adore  his 
greatnefs  and  to   love   his   goodnefs.'^  How  can  the 
thoughts  of  God  be  troublefom  to  any  one  who  lives 
foberly  and  righteoufly  and  godly  in  the  world  ?  No 
man  that  loves  goodnefs  and  righteoufnefs  hath  any 
reafon  to  be  afraid  of  God,  or  to  be  difquieted  with 
the  thoughts  of  him.     There  is  nothing  in  God  that 
is  terrible  to  a  good  man,  but  all    the  apprehenfions 
which  we  naturally  have  of  him  fpeak  comfort  and 
promife  happinefs  to  fuch  a  one.     The  confideration 
of  his  attributes  is  fofar  from  being  a  trouble  to  him 
that  it  is  his  recreation  and  delight.     It  is  for  wicked 
Vol.  L  Ci.  mejft 

3- 


1 14     The  advantages  of  religion  to  particular  per fom, 
S  E  RM.  men  to  dread  God,  and  to  endeavour  to  banifh  the 
thoughts  of  him  out  of  their  minds  •,  but  a  holy  and 
virtuous  man  may  have  quiet  and  undifturbed  thoughts . 
even  of  the  juflice  of  God,  becaufe  the  terror  of  it 
doth  not  concern  him. 

Now  religion  doth  contribute  to  the  peace  and  quiet 
of  our  minds  thefe  two  ways.  Firft,  by  allaying  thofe 
pafTions  which  are  apt  to  ruffle  and  difcompofe  our 
fpirits.  Malice  and  hatred,  wrath  and  revenge  are 
very  fretting  and  vexatious  and  apt  to  make  our  minds 
fore  and  uneafy  •,  but  he  that  can  moderate  thefe  af- 
fedions  will  find  a  ftrange  eafe  and  pleafure  in  his 
own  fpirit.  Secondly,  by  freeing  us  from  the  anxie- 
ties of  guilt,  and  the  fears  of  divine  wrath  and  dif- 
pleafure  •,  than  which,  nothing  is  more  flinging  and 
tormenting,  and  renders  the  life  of  man  more  mife- 
rable  and  unquiet.  Andwhat  a  fpring  of  peace  and 
joy  mufl  it  needs  be  to  apprehend  upon  good  grounds 
that  God  is  reconciled  to  us  and  become  our  friend ; 
that  all  our  fins  are  perfedlly  forgiven,  and  fhall  ne- 
ver more  be  remembred  againfl  us !  What  unexprefTi- 
ble  comfort  does  overflow  the  pious  and  devout  foul, 
from  the  remembrance  of  a  holy  and  well-fpent  life, 
and  a  confcience  of  it's  own  innocency  and  integrity! 
And  nothing  but  the  pradice  of  religion  and  virtue 
can  give  this  eafe  and  fatisfadion  to  the  mind  of  man. 
For  there  is  a  certain  kind  of  temper  and  difpofition 
which  is  neceffary  to  the  pleafure  and  quiet  of  our 
minds,  and  confequently  to  our  happinefs :  and  that 
is  holinefs  and  goodnefs,  which  as  it  is  the  perfedion 
fo  is  it  likewife  the  happinefs  of  the  divine  nature : 
and  on  the  contrary  the  chief  part  of  the  mifery  of 
wicked  men,  and  of  thofe  accurfed  fpirits  the  devils 

is 


The  advantage^  of  rellgwi  to  particular  ferfons,      115 
is  this,  that  they  are  of  a  dilpofition  contrary  to  God  -,  SERM. 
they  are  envious  and  mahciousand  cruel,  and  of  fuch  ,__ -^ 
a  temper  as  is  naturally  a  torment  and  difquiet  to  it 
felf.     And  here  the  foundation  of  hell  is  laid,  in  the 
evil  difpofition  of  men's  minds  -,  and  till  this  be  cu- 
red, which  can  only  be  done  by  religion,  it  is  as  im- 
pofTible  for  a  man  to  be  happy,  that  is,  pleafed  and 
contented  within  himfelf,  as  it  is  for  a  Tick  man  to  be 
eafe.     Becaufe  fuch  a  man  hath  that  within  him  that 
torments  him,  and  he  cannot  be  at  eafe  till  that  be 
removed, .   The  man's  fpirit  is  out  of  order  and  off 
the  hinges,  and  till  that  be  put  into  it's  right  frame 
he  will  be  perpetually  difquieted  and  can  find  no  refl 
within  himfelf     The  prophet  very  fitly  defcribes  to 
us  the  unquiet  condition  of  wicked  men,  "  the  wick-  ifa.  ivii. 
"  ed  is  like  the  troubled  fea  when  it  cannot  reft,  2o>  21. 
"  whofe  waters  caft  up  mire  and  dirt ;  there  is  no 
"  peace  (faith  my  God)  to  the  wicked."     So  long  as 
fin  and  corruption  abound  in  our  hearts  they  will  be 
reftleily  working,    like  wine  which  will  be  in  a  per- 
petual motion  and  agitation  till  it  have  purged  itfelf 
of  it's  dregs  and  foulnefs. 

Secondly,  religion  does  likewife  tend  to  the  hap- 
pinefs  of  the  outward  man.  Now  the  blefiings  of  this 
kind  are  fuch  as  either  refpeft  our  health,  or  eftate, 
or  reputation,  or  relations ;  and  in  refpedt  of  all  thefe 
religion  is  highly  advantageous  to  us. 

1.  As  to  our  health,  a  religious  and  virtuous  life 
doth  eminently  conduce  to  that,  and  to  long  life  as  a 
confequent  of  it.     And  in  this  fenfe  I  underftand  thefe 
following  texts ;   "  my  fon  forget  not  my  law,  but  Prov.  iii. 
"  let  thy  heart  keep  my  commandments  \  for  length  ^»^' 
"  of  days,  and  long  life,  fhall  they  add  to  thee  i"  and 

0^2  V.  7. 


1 1 6       Tloe  advantages  of  religion  to  particular  perfom, 
SERM.  V.  7,  and  8.  "  fear  the  Lord  and  depart  from  evil, 
^  _  ^1^^  "  it  fhall  be  health  to  thy  naveJ,  and  marrow  to  thy 
^'  bones  i"  and  v,  16.  among  the  temporal  advanta- 
ges of  wifdom  or  religion  this  is  mentioned  as  the  firft 
and  principal,  "  length  of  days  is  in  her  right  hand  ;" 
and  V.  18.  "  fhe  is  a  tree  of  life  to  them  that  lay  hold 
Prov.  vili.  "  opon  her  •/'  and  again,  "  whofo  findcth  me,  find- 
35,  j6.      cc  ^^  jif(.^  I^^^j-  |-j(.  |-|^^j-  finneth  againft  me  wrongeth 

"  his  ov/n  foul  •/'  (that  is,  is  injurious  to  his  own  life) 
"  all  they  that  hate  me  love  death  \'  all  which  is 
undoubtedly  true  in  a  fpiritual  fenfe,  but  Is  certainly 
meant  by  Solomon  in  the  natural  fenfe.  And  thefe 
promifes,  of  the  bleOings  of  health  and  long  life  to 
good  men,  are  not  only  declaratory  of  the  good  plea- 
fure  and  intention  of  God  towards  them,  but  like- 
wife  of  the  natural  tendency  of  the  thing.  For  reli- 
gion doth  oblige  men  to  the  pradice  of  thofe  virtues 
which  do  in  their  own  nature  conduce  to  the  prefer- 
vation  of  our  health,  and  the  lengthning  of  our  days  ; 
fuch  as  temperance  and  chaftity  and  moderation  of 
our  palTions,  And  the  contrary  vices  to  thefe  do  ap- 
parently tend  to  the  impairing  of  men's  health  and 
the  fhortning  of  their  days.  How  many  have  waft- 
ed and  confumed  their  bodies  by  luft,  and  brought 
grievous  pains  and  mortal  difeafes  upon  tkemfelves. 
See  how  the  wife  man  defcribes  the  fad  confequences 
of  this  fin,  "  he  goes  as  an  ox  to  the  flaughter,  till 
^'  a  dart  ftrike  through  his  liver  •,  as  a  bird  hafteneth 
*'  to  the  fnare,  and  knoweth  not  that  it  is  for  his 
'*  life  •,■'  and  v.  25,  26,  27.  *'  \^x.  not  thy  heart  de- 
*'  cline  to  her  ways,  go  not  aftray  in  her  paths;  for 
^*  fhe  hath  caft:  down  many  wounded  ;  yea  many 
^'  ftrong  men  have  becnflainby  her;  herhoufe  \%  the 
\  "  way 


The  advantages  of  religion  to  particular  perfons,        1 17 
"  way  to   hell,  (that  is,  to   the  grave)    going  down  SERM. 
^'  to   the  chambers  of  death."      How  many   have  .__  '  ^ 
been  ruined  by  intemperance  and  excels,  and   mod 
unnaturally  have  perverted  thofe  bleffings  which  God 
hath  given  for  the  fupport  of  nature  to  the  overthrow 
and  deftru6lion  of  it  ?  How  often  hath  men's  malice 
and  envy  and  difcontent  againlt  others  terminated  in 
a  cruel  revenge  upon  themfelves  ?  How  many,  by  the 
wild  fury  and  extravagancy  of  their  own  paiTions,  have 
put   their  bodies  into  a  combuftion,  and  fired  their 
fpirits ;  and,   by  ftirring  up  their  rage  and  choler  a- 
gainfl  others,  have  armed  that  fierce  humour  againfi: 
themfelves  ? 

2.  As  to  our  edates,  religion  is  likewife  a  mighty 
advantage  to  men  in  that  refped.     Not  only  ift  re- 
gard of  God's  more  efpecial  providence  and  peculiar 
blelfing  which  ufually  attends  good  men  in  their  un- 
dertakings, and  crowns  them  with  good  fuccefs,  but 
alfofrom  the  nature  of  the  thing.    And  this,  I  doubt 
not,  is  the  meaning  of  thofe  exprefilons  of  the  wife 
man  concerning  the  temporal  benefits  and  advantages 
of  wqfdom  or  religion  ;  "  in  her  left  hand  are  riches  Prov.ili. 
"  and  honour-,"    "  they  that  love  me  fhall  inherit  ^^• 
''  fubftance,  and  I  will  fill  their  treafures."  And  thig  21?^*  ^"^' 
religion  principally  does,  by  charginig  men  with  truth 
and  fidelity  and  juftice  in  their  dealings,    which  are  a 
fure  way  of  thriving,  and  will  hold  out  when  all  frau- 
dulent arts  and  devices  will  fail.     And  this  alfo  Solo- 
mon obferves  to  us ;  "  he  that  walketh   uprightly  Prov.  x. 
"  walketh  furely,  but  he  that  pervertetii  his  way  fhall  6- 
"  be  known;"  his  indired  dealing  will  be  difcovered 
one  time  or  other,  and  then  he  lofes  his  reputation,  and 
his  intereft  finks.     Faifliood  and  deceit  only  ferve  a 

prefent; 


1 1 8       T'he  advantages  of  religion  to  particular  perfons. 
SERM.  prefent  turn,  and  the  confequence  of  them  is  perni- 
cions  -,   but  truth  and  fidelity  are  a  lafting  advantage ; 
"  the  righteous  hath  an   everlafting  foundation  ,'* 
"  the  lip  of  ti;uth  is  eftablifhed  for  ever,  but  a  lying 
"  tongue  is  but  for  a  moment."     And  religion  does 
likewife  engage  men  to  diligence  and  induftry  in  their 
callings,  and  how  much  this  conduces  to  the  advance- 
ment of  men's  fortunes  daily  experience  teaches,  and 
Prov.x.4.  the  wife  man  hath  told  us,  "  the  diligent  hand  makes 
Pro.  xxii.  "  rich  •,"  and  again,  "  feeft  thou  a  man  diligent  in 
^9-  «  bulinefs,  he  fhall  fland  before  princes,  he  (hall  not 

"  ftand  before  mean  perfons. 

And  where  men,  by  reafon  of  the  difficult  circum- 
ftances  of  their  condition,  cannot  arrive  to  any  emi- 
nency  of  eflate,  yet  religion  makes  a  compenfation 
for  this  by  teaching  men  to  be  contented  with  that 
moderate  and  competent  fortune  which  God  hath 
given  them.  For  the  Ihortefl  way  to  be  rich  is  not 
by  enlarging  our  eflates,  but  by  contradling  our  de- 
lires.  What  Seneca  fays  of  philofophy,  is  much 
more  true  of  religion,  pr^ftat  opes  fapientia^  quas  cui- 
cunque  fecit  fupervacuas  dedit^  it  m^kes  all  thofe  rich 
to  whom  it  makes  riches  fuperfluous,  and  they  are  fo 
to  thofe  who  are  taught  by  religion  to  be  contented 
with  fuch  a  portion  of  them  as  God's  providence  hath 
thought  fit  to  allot  to  them. 

3.  As  to  our  reputation.  There  is  nothing  gives 
a  man  a  more  firm  and  eflablifli'd  reputation  among 
wife  and  ferious  perfons  (whofe  judgment  is  only  valu- 
able) than  a  prudent  and  fubftantial  piety.  This 
doth  many  times  command  reverence  and  efteem  from 
the  worfer  fort  of  men,  and  fuch  as  are  no  great  friends 
to  religion  j  and  fometimes  the  force  of  truth  will  ex- 
tort 


^he  advantages  of  religion  to  particular  per fom.  1 19 
tort  an  acknowledgment  of  it's  excellency,  even  from  S  E  R  M. 
it's  greateft  enemies.  I  know  very  well  that  good 
men  may,  and  often  do,  blemifh  the  reputation  of 
their  piety  by  over-a6ling  fome  things  in  religion  ; 
by  an  indifcreet  zeal  about  things  wherein  religion  is 
not  concerned,  by  an  ungrateful  aufterity  and  fou- 
nefs  which  religion  doth  not  require  ;  by  little  affec- 
tations, and  an  imprudent  oftentation  of  devotion  ; 
but  a  fubftantial  and  folid,  a  difcreet  and  unaffedled 
piety,  which  makes  no  great  noife  and  fhow,  but  ex- 
prefTes  it  felf  in  a  conflant  and  ferious  devotion,  and 
is  accompained  with  the  fruits  of  goodnefs  and  kind- 
nefs  and  righteoufnefs  towards  men,  will  not  only 
give  a  man  a  credit  and  value  among  the  fober  and 
the  virtuous,  but  even  among  the  vicious  and  more 
degenerate  fort  of  men.  Upon  this  account  it  is  that 
the  apoftle  advifeth  Chriftians,  if  they  would  recom- 
mend themfelves  to  the  efleemofGoD  and  men,  ear- 
eftly  to  mind  the  weighty  and  fubftantial  parts  of  re- 
ligion ;  "  \tt.  not  then  your  good  be  evil  fpoken  of; 
*'  for  the  kingdom  of  God  is  not  meats  and  drinks, 
"  but  righteoufnefs  and  peacb,  and  joy  in  the  Holy 
"  Ghoft ;  for  he  that  in  thefe  things  ferveth  Christ, 
*'  is  acceptable  to  God,  and  approved  of  men. 

It  is  true  indeed,  there  are  fome  perfons  of  fo  pro- 
fligate a  temper,  and  of  fuch  an  inveterate  enmity  to 
all  goodnefs,  as  to  fcorn  and  reproach  even  religion 
and  virtue  it  {d{.  But  the  reproach  of  fuch  perfons 
does  not  really  wound  a  man's  reputation.  For  why 
lliould  any  man  be  troubled  at  the  contumelies  of 
thofe  whofe  judgment  defer ves  not  to  be  valued,  who 
defpife  goodnefs  and  good  men  out  of  malice  and  ig- 
norance ?    If  thefe  reproaches  which  they  cafl  upon 

them 


'The  advantages  of  religion  to  particular  perfonu 
them  were  the  cenfures  of  wife  and  fober  men,  a 
man's  reputation  might  be  concern'd  in  them  ;  but 
they  are  therafli  words  of  inconfiderate  and  injudicious 
men,  the  extravagant  fpeeches  of  thofe  who  are  unex- 
perienc*d  in  the  things  they  fpeak  againft  •,  and  there^ 
fore  no  wife  man  v/ill  be  troubled  at  them,  01*  think 
either  religion  or  himfclf  difparaged  by  them. 

4.  As  to  our  relations.  Religion  alfo  conduceth 
to  the  happinefs  of  thefe,  as  it  derives  a  large  and  ex- 
tenfive  blefllng  upon  all  that  belongs  to  us  -,  the 
goodnefsof  God  being  fo  diffufive  as  to  fcatter  hig 
blefTmgs  "  round  about  the  habitations  of  thejuft, 
"  and  to  (hew  mercy  unto  thoufands  of  them  that  love 
*'  himjand  keep  his  commandments.  So  David  tellsus,'' 
Pfal.  cxii.  ct  bleffed  is  the  man  that  feareth  the  Lord,  and  de- 

12'?. 

"  lighteth  greatly  in  his   commandments ;  his  feed 

"  iliall  be  mighty  upon  earth,  the  generation  of  the 

"  upright  fhall  be   blefled ;  wealth  and  riches  are  in 

*'  his  houfe,  and  his  righteoufnefsendureth  for  ever.'* 

Prov.xlii.  Andfo  Solomon;  "  a  good  man  leaveth  an  inherit 

22-  «  tance  to  his  chiidrens  children  ;  "  and  again,"  in 

^rov.  XIV.  ^^  ^^  fear  of  the  Lord  is  ftrong  confidence,  and  his 

«  children  (hall  have   a  place  of  refuge."     But   the 

wicked  derives  a  curfe  upon  all  that  is  related  to  him^ 

he  is  faid  "  to  trouble  his   own   houfe  \  and  again, 

Prov.  xi.    "  the  wicked  are  overthrown  and  are  not,  but  the 

29-  "  righteous  fhall  (land. 

Prov.  xii.  g^j.  fetting  afide  the  confideration  of  God's  provi- 
dence, religion  doth  likewife  in  it's  own  nature  tend 
to  the  welfare  of  thofe  who  are  related  to  us ;  becaufe 
it  lays  the  ftrideft  obligations  upon  men  to  take  care 
of  their  famihes  and  relations,  and  to  make  the  beil 
provifion   both  for  their  comfortable  fubfiflence  here 

in 


^he  advantages  of  religion  to  particular  per/on f»       itt 
in  this  world  and  their  falvation  in  the  next.     And  S  E  R  M. 
thofe  who  neg^edt  thefe  duties,  the  fcripture  is  fo  far  v^,,,.^^^,^ 
from  efleeming  them  Chriftians  that  it  accounts  them 
worfe  than  heathens  and  infidels,  "  he  that  provideth  i  Tim. 
*'  not  for  his  own,  efpecially  thofe  of  his  own  houfe,  ^-  ^• 
"  is  worfe  than  an  infidel,  and  hath  deny'd  the  faith." 
This  I  know  is  fpoken  in  refpedl  of  temporal  pro- 
vifion,  but  it  holds  a  fortiori  as  to  the  care  of  their 
fouls. 

Befides,  it  is  many  times  feen  that  the  poflerlty  of 
holy  and  good  men,  efpecially  of  fuch  as  have  evi- 
denced their  piety  towards  Gop  by  bounty  and  cha- 
rity to  men,  have  met  with  unufual  kindnefs  and  re- 
fpe6t  from  others,  and  have  by  a  flrange  and  fecret 
difpofition  of  divine  providence  been  unexpededly 
car'd  and  provided  for ;  and  that,  as  they  have  all 
the  reafon  in  the  world  to  believe,  upon  the  account 
and  for  the  fake  of  the  piety  and  charity  of  their  pa- 
rents.    This  David  tells  us  from  his  own  particular 
obfervation ;  "  I  have   been   young,  and  now   am  Pfalm. 
"  old,  yet   have  I  not  feen  the  righteous   forfaken, ''^^^"•^5^ 
"  nor  his  feed  begging  bread."     And  that   by  the 
righteous  is  here  meant  the  good  and  merciful  man, 
appears  from  the  defcription  of  him  in  the  next  words^ 
«'  he  is  ever  merciful  and  lendeth,  and  his  feed  is  blef.  Vsr,  26, 
«  fed."     And  on  the  contrary,  the  pofterity  of  the 
wicked  do  many  times  inherit  the  fruit  of  their  fathers 
fins  and  vices ;  and  that  not  only  by  a  juft  judgment 
of  God,  but  from  the  natural  courfeand  confequence 
of  things.     And  in  this  fenfe  that  exprefTion  in  Job 
is  often  verify'd,  that  "  God  lays  up  the  iniquity  of  Job.  ^L 
«  wicked  men  for  their  children."     And  doth  not  ^^" 
experience  teftify  that  the  intemperate  and  unjiift  do 

Vol.  L  R  niany 

3- 


^e  advantages  of  religion  to  particular  perfons, 
many  times  tranfmit  their  bodily  infirmities  and  dif- 
eafes  to  their  children,  and  entail  a  feret  curie  upon 
their  eflates,  which  does  either  infenfibly  wafte  and 
confume  it,  or  eat  out  the  heart  and  comfort  of  it? 
Thus  you  fee  how  religion  in  ail  refpefts  conduces  to 
the  happinefs  of  this  life. 

II.  Religion  and  virtue  do  likewife  moft  certainly 
and  diredly  tend  to  the  eternal  happinefs  and  falva- 
tion  of  men  in  the  other  world.     And  this  is  incom- 
parably the  greateft  advantage  that  redounds  to  men 
by  being  religious,  in  comparifon  of  which  all   tem-^ 
poral  confiderations  are  lefs  than  nothing  and  vanity. 
The  worldly  advantages  that  religion  brings  to  men 
in  this  prefent  life  are  a  fenfible  recommendation  of 
religion,  even  to  the  loweft  and  meaneft  fpirits  :  But 
to  thofe  who  are  rais'd  above  fenfe  and  afpire  after 
immortality,  who  believe  the  perpetual  duration  of 
their  fouls  and  the  refurredion  of  their  bodies ;  to 
thofe  who  are  throughly  convinc'd  of  the  inconfide- 
rablenefs  of  this  Ihort  dying  life,  and  of  all  the  con- 
cernments of  it,  in  comparifon  of  that  eternal  (late 
which  remains  for  us  in  another  life  ;  to  thefe,  I  fay, 
the  confideration  of  a  future  happinefs,  and  of  thofe 
unfpeakable  and  everlafting  rewards  which  fhall  then 
be  given  to  holinefs  and  virtue,  is  certainly  the  moft 
powerful  motive  and  the  moft  likely  to  prevail  upon 
them.     For  thofe,  who  are  perfuaded  that  they  ftiall 
continue  for  ever,  cannot  chufe  but  afpire  after  a  hap- 
pinefs commenfurate  to  their  duration,  nor  can  any 
thing  that  is  confcious  to  it's  felf  of  it's  own  immor- 
tality be  fatibiied  and  contented  with  any  thing  lefs 
than  the  hopes  of  an  endlefs  felicity.     And  this  hope 
religion  alone  gives  men,  and  the  Chriftian  religion 

only 


T!he  advantages  of  religion  to  particular  perfons,       123 
only  can  fettle  men  in  a  firm  and  unfhaken  afliirance  S  E  R  M. 

TV/- 

of  it.  But  becaufe  all  men  who  have  entertain'd  any  .  ^  '^ 
religion  have  confented  to  thefe  principles,  of  the 
*'  immortality  of  the  foul"  and  the  "  recompences 
"  of  another  world,"  and  have  always  promis'd  to 
themfelves  fome  rewards  of  piety  and  virtue  after  this 
life ;  and  becaufe  I  did  more  particularly  defign  from 
this  text  to  fpeak  of  the  temporal  benefits  and  advan- 
tages which  redound  to  men  from  religion,  therefore 
I  fhall  content  myfelf  to  fhew  very  briefly  how  a  re- 
ligious and  virtuous  life  doth  conduce  to  our  future 
happinefs.  And  that  upon  thefe  two  accounts ;  from 
the  promife  of  God,  and  from  tht  nature  of  the 
thing. 

I.  From  the  promife  of  God.  "  Godlinefs  (faith  i  Tim.iv, 
the  apoflle)  "  hath  the  promife  of  the  life  that  is  to  ^' 
"  come."  God  hath  all  along  in  the  fcripture  fuf- 
pended  the  promife  of  eternal  life  upon  this  condition. 
He  hath  peremptorily  declared  that  without  obedi- 
ence and  holinefs  of  life  no  man  fhall  ever  fee  the 
Lord.  And  this  very  thing,  that  it  is  the confti- 
tutior  and  appointment  of  God,  might  be  argument 
enoigh  to  us  (if  there  were  no  other)  to  convince  us 
of  t\t  neceffity  of  obeying  the  laws  of  God  in  order 
to  our  happinefs,  and  to  perfuade  us  thereunto.  For 
eternal  life  is  the  gift  of  God,  and  he  may  do  what 
he  will  with  his  own.  He  is  mafter  of  his  own  fa- 
vours and  may  difpenfe  them  upon  what  terms  and 
conditions  he  pleafes.  But  it  is  no  hard  condition 
that  he  hath  impofed  upon  us.  If  religion  brought 
no  advantages  to  us  in  this  world,  yet  the  happinefs 
of  heaven  is  fo  great  as  will  abundantly  recompence 
all  our  pains  and  endeavours  •,  there  is  temptation  e» 

R  3  nough 


I'he  advantages  of  religion  to  particular  perfons. 
enough  in  the  reward  to  engage  any  man  in  the  work. 
Had  God  thought  fit  to  have  impofed  the  mofl  grie- 
vous and  difficult  things  upon  us,  ought  we  not  to 
have  fubmitted  to  them  and  to  have  undertaken  them 
with  cheerfiilnels  upon  fuch  great  and  glorious  en- 
couragements ?  As  Naaman's  fervants  faid  to  him 
in  another  cafe,  "  had  he  bid  thee  do  fome  great 
"  thing  wouldeft  thou  not  have  done  it  ?  So  if  God 
had  faid  that  without  poverty  and  adual  martyrdom 
^'  no  man  fhall  fee  the  Lord,"  would  not  any  man 
that  believes  heaven  and  hell  and  underftands  what 
thefe  words  fignify,  and  what  it  is  to  efcape  extreme 
and  eternal  mifery,  and  to  enjoy  unfpeakable  and 
endlefs  glory,  have  been  willing  to  accept  thefe 
conditions  ?  ^'  how  much  more,  when  he  hath  on- 
«  ]y  laid,  wafli  and  be  clean  •,"  and  "  let  every  man 
*'  that  hath  this  hope  in  him,  purify  himfelf  as  he 
«  is  pure  V  But  God  hath  not  dealt  thus  with  us, 
nor  is  the  impofing  of  this  condition  of  eternal  life 
a  mere  arbitrary  conftitution  j  therefore  I  fhal!  endea- 
vour to  fhew, 

2dly,  That  a  religious  and  holy  life  doth,  from  the 
very  nature  and  reafon  of  the  thing,  conduce  to  our 
future  happinefs,  by  way  of  neceffary  difpofition  and 
preparation  of  us  for  it.  We  cannot  be  otherwife 
happy,  but  by  our  conformity  to  God,  without  this 
we  cannot  pofiibly  \ow^  him  nor  find  any  pleafure  or 
happinefs  in  communion  with  him.  For  we  cannot 
love  a  nature  contrary  to  our  own,  nor  delight  to  con- 
verfe  with  it.  Therefore  religion,  in  order  to  the 
fitting  of  us  for  the  happinefs  of  the  next  life,  does 
defign  to  mortify  our  lulls  and  paflions,  and  to  reflrain 
US  from  the  inordinate  love  of  the  grofs  and  fenfual 
J  delight* 


^e  advantages  of  religion  to  particular  perfons.      125 
delights  cf  this  world  -,  to  call  off  our  minds  from  S  E  R  m, 

thefe  inferior  things  and  to  raife  them  to  higher  and  ^ ^^ 

more  fpiritual  obje6ls,  that  we  may  be  difpofed  for 
the  happinefs  of  the  other  world,  and  taught  to 
relifh  the  delights  of  it :  whereas  (hould  we  fet  our 
hearts  only  upon  thefe  things,  and  be  able  to  tafte  no 
ff  pkafure  in  any  thing  but  what  is  fenfual  and  earthly, 
we  muft  needs  be  extremely  miferable  when  we  come 
into  the  other  world  ;  becaufe  we  fhould  meet  with 
nothing  to  entertain  our  felves  withal,  no  employment 
fuitable  to  our  difpofition,  no  pleafure  that  would 
agree  with  our  depraved  appetites  and  vicious  incli- 
nations. All  that  heaven  and  happinefs  fignifies  is 
unfuitablc  to  a  wicked  man,  and  therefore  could  be 
no  felicity  to  him.  But  this  I  fhall  have  occafion  to 
fpeak  more  fully  to  in  my  next  difcourfe. 

From  all  that  hath  been  faid,  the  reafonablenefs  of 
religion  clearly  appears,  which  tends  fo  direcftly  to 
the  happinefs  of  men,  and  is  upon  all  accounts  calcu- 
lated for  our  benefit.  Let  but  all  things  be  truly  con- 
fidered  and  caft  up  and  it  will  be  founS  that  there  is 
no  advantage  to  any  man  from  an  irreligious  and  vi- 
cious courfe  of  life.  I  challenge  any  one  to  inflance 
in  any  real  benefit  that  ever  came  to  him  this  way. 
Let  the  finner  declare  what  he  hath  found  by  experi- 
ence. Hath  lewdnefs  and  intemperance  been  more 
for  his  health  than  if  he  had  liv'd  chaftly  and  fober- 
ly  ?  Hath  falfliood  and  injuftice  proved  at  the  long 
run  more  for  the  advancement  and  fecurity  of  his 
citate,  than  truth  and  honefty  would  have  done?  Hath 
any  vice  that  hs  hath  lived  in  made  him  more  true 
friends,  and  gained  him  a  better  reputation  in  the 
world  than  the  practice  of  holinefs  and  virtue  would 

ha¥C 


126  TTje  advantages  ofrellgmi  to  particular  perfons. 
S  E  R  M.  have  done  ?Hath  he  found  that  peace  and  fatisfadion  of 
mind  in  an  evil  courfe,  and  that  quiet  enjoyment  of 
himfelf,  and  comfortable  aflurance  of  God's  favour, 
and  good  hopes  of  his  future  condition,  which  a  reli- 
giotis  and  virtuous  hfe  would  have  given  him  ?  Nay 
on  the  contrary,  have  not  fome  of  his  vices  weaken- 
ed his  body  and  broken  his  health,  have  not  others 
difilpated  hiseftate,  and  reduced  him  to  want  ?  What 
notorious  vice  is  there  that  doth  not  blemifh  a  man's 
reputation,  and  make  him  either  hated  or  defpifed, 
and  that  not  only  by  the  wife  and  the  virtuous,  but 
even  by  the  generality  of  men  ?  But  was  ever  any 
wicked  man  free  from  the  (lings  of  a  guilty  confcience 
and  the  torment  of  a  relllefs  and  uneafy  mind,  from 
the  fecret  dread  of  divine  difpleafure,  and  of  the  ven- 
geance of  another  world?  Let  the  finner  freely  fpeak 
die  very  inward  fenfe  of  his  foul  in  this  matter,  and 
fpare  not  v  and  I  doubt  not,  if  he  will  deal  clearly  and 
impartially,  but  that  he  w'ill  acknowledge  all  this  to 
be  true,  and  is  able  to  confirm  it  from  his  own  fad  ex- 
perience. For  this  is  the  natural  fruit  of  fin  and  the 
preient  revenge  which  it  takes  upon  fmners,  befides 
that  fearful  puniihment  which  fliall  be  infli(5led  on 
them  in  another  life. 

What  realbn  then  can  any  man  pretend  againft 
religion,  when  it  is  fo  apparently  for  the  benefit  not 
only  of  human  fociety,  but  of  every  particular  perfon  ^ 
when  there  is  no  real  interefl  of  this  world  but  may 
ordinarily  be  as  effedually  promoted  and  purfued  to 
as  great  advantage,  nay  ufually  to  far  greater,  by  a 
man  that  "  lives  foberly  and  righteoufly  and  godly 
^  in  the  world,"  than  by  any  one  that  leads  the  con- 
trary courfe  of  life?  Let  no  man  then  fay,,  withthofe 

prophanc 


^e  advantages  of  religion  to  particular  perfons,  127 
prophane  perfons  whom  the  prophet  fpeaks  of,  "  It  SERM, 
"  is  in  vain  to  ferve  the  Lord,  and  what  profit  is  it  ,^^^^_^^  ' 
"  that  we  have  kept  his  Commandments  ?"  God  MaL  iiL 
has  not  been  fo  hard  a  mailer  to  us  that  we  have  rea-  '^ 
fon  thus  to  complain  of  him.  He  hath  given  us  no 
laws  but  what  are  for  our  good,  nay  fo  gracious  hath 
he  been  to  us  as  to  Jink  together  our  duty  and  our  in- 
terefl:,  and  to  make  thofe  very  things  the  inftances  of 
our  obedience  which  are  the  natural  means  and  caufes 
of  our  happinefs.  The  devil  was  fo  far  in  the  right, 
when  he  charged  Job  that  he  did  not  "  ferve  God 
"  for  nought."  *Tis  he  himfelf  that  is  the  hard 
mafter  and  makes  men  ferve  him  for  nought,  whore- 
wards  his  drudges  and  Haves  with  nothing  but  fhame 
and  forrow  and  mifery.  But  God  requires  no  man's 
fervice  upon  hard  and  unreafonable  terms.  The 
greatefl  part  of  our  work  is  a  prefent  reward  to  it  felf, 
and  for  whatever  elfe  we  do  or  fuffer  for  him,  he  of- 
fers us  abundant  confideration.  And  if  men  did  but 
truly  and  wifely  love  themfelves  they  v/ould  upon  this 
very  ground,  if  there  were  no  other,  become  religi-  . 
ous.  For  when  all  is  done  there  is  no  man  can  ferve 
his  own  interefl  better  than  by  ferving  God.  Religi- 
on conduceth  both  to  our  prefent  and  future  happi- 
nefs, and  when  thegofpel  chargeth  us  with  piety  to- 
wards God,  and  juftice  and  charity  towards  men,  and 
temperance  and  chaftity  in  reference  to  our  felves, 
the  true  interpretation  of  thefe  la^^'s  is  this,  God  re- 
quires of  men  in  order  to  their  eternal  happinefs  that 
they  fliould  do  thofe  things  which  tend  to  their  tem- 
poral welfare,  that  15,  in  plainer  w^ords,  he  promifes 
to  make  us  happy  for  ever  upon  condition  that  we 
will  but  do  that  which  is  belt  for  our  felves  in  this 

2  world. 


128  ^e  excellency  of  the  Chrijllan  religkn. 

S  ER M.  world.  To  conclude,  religion  is  founded  in  the  in- 
terefl  of  men  rightly  apprehended.  So  that  if  the 
god  of  this  world  and  the  lulls  of  men  did  not  blind 
their  eyes,  fo  as  to  render  them  unfit  to  difcern  their 
true  intereft,  it  would  be  impofTible,  fo  long  as  men 
love  themfelves,  and  defire  their  own  happinefs,  to  keep 
them  from  being  religious ;  for  they  could  not  but 
conclude  that  to  be  their  intereft,  and  being  fo  con- 
vinced they  would  refolve  to  purfue  it  and  ftick  to  it. 


SERMON      V. 

The  excellency  of  the  Chriftian  religion, 


PHIL.    iii.  8. 
Tea  doubtkfs^  and  I  count  all  things  hut  lofsfor  the  excel- 
lency of  the  knmjoledge  of  Chrifi  Jefus  my  Lord, 

N  the  beginning  of  this  chapter  the  apoftle  makes 
a  comparifon  between  the  Jewifh  and  the  Chri- 
ftian religion,  and  ftiews  the  Chriftian  to  be  in 
truth  and  fubftance  what  the  Jewifti  was  only  in 
type  and  fhadow,  v.  3.  "  We  are  the  circumcifion 
**  which  worfliip  God  in  the  fpirit."  And  then  he 
enumerates  the  feveral  privileges  he  was  partaker  of 
by  virtue  of  his  being  born  in  the  Jewifti  church,  v. 
4,  5,  6.  "  Though  I-might  alfo  have  confidence  in  the 
**  fiefti,  if  any  other  man  thinketh  that  he  hath  where- 

«  of 


^e  excellency  of  the  ChriJiiaH  religion*  t59 

**  of  he  might  triift  in  the  flefli,  I  more  •,  circiimcif-  SERM. 
*'  ed  the  eighth  day,  of  the  (lock  of  Ifrael,  &c."  And  ^* 
yet  he  tells  us  he  was  contented  to  forego  all  thefe 
advantages  for  Christ  and  the  Chriftian  religion,  V. 
7.  "  but  what  things  were  gain  to  me  thofe  I  count* 
"  ed  lofs  for  Christ."  And  not  only  thefe,  but  if 
there  were  any  thing  elfe  that  men  value  in  this  world 
he  was  willing  to  ha^^ard  that  alfo  upon  the  fame  ac- 
count, V*  8.  "  yea  doubtlefs,  and  I  count  all  things 
"  but  lofs  for  the  excellency  of  the  knowledge  of 
"  Christ  Jesus  my  Lord* 

In  which  words  the  apoftle  declares  the  high  efleem 
he  had  for  the  Chriftian  religion,  which  he  calls  the 
knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus  his  Lord;  the  ex- 
cellency whereof  appeared  fo  great  to  him,  that  he 
valued  nothing  in  comparifonof  the  advantages  which 
he  had  by  the  knowledge  of  it. 

My  defign  at  this  time  from  this  text  is^  to  repre- 
fent  the  excellency  of  this  knowledge  of  the  Chriftian 
religion  above  that  of  any  other  religion  or  inftitution 
in  the  world.  And  here  I  fhall  not  confider  the  ex- 
ternal evidence  which  we  have  of  the  truth  of  Chrifti- 
anity,  and  of  the  divinity  of  it's  dodrine,  in  which 
refpedl  it  hath  incomparably  the  advantage  of  any 
other  religion  ;  but  only  the  internal  excellency  of 
the  dodlrine  it  felf,  abftradling  from  the  divine  au* 
thority  of  it :  and  that  in  thefe  four  refpefe: 

Firft,  as  it  does  more  clearly  reveal  to  us  the  na- 
ture of  God,  which  is  the  great  foundation  of  all  re- 
hgion. 

Secondly,  as  it  gives  us  a  more  certain  an(J  perfedl 
law  for  the  government  of  our  lives. 

Vol.  I.  S  Thirdly^ 

3- 


TTje  excellency  of  the  Chriftian  religion. 

Thirdly,  as  it  propounds  to  us  more  powerful  ar- 
guments to  perfuade  men  to  the  obedience  of  this  law. 

Fourthly,  as  it  furnilhes  us  with  better  motives  and 
confiderations  to  patience  and  contcntednefs  under  the 
evils  and  afflidlions  of  this  life.  Now  thefe  are  the 
greatefl:  advantages  that  any  religion  can  have,  to  give 
men  right  apprehenfions  of  God,  a  perfedt  rule  of 
good  life,  and  efficacious  arguments  to  perfuade  men 
to  be  good,  and  patiently  to  bear  the  evils  and  fuffer- 
ings  of  this  life.  And  thefe  ihali  be  the  heads  of  my 
following  difcourfe. 

I.  The  Chriftian  religion  doth  more  clearly  reveal 
to  us  the  nature  of  God,  than  any  religion  ever  did. 
And  to  have  right  apprehenfions  of  God  is  the  great 
foundation  of  all  rehgion.  For  according  as  men's 
notions  of  God  are,  fuch  will  their  religion  be.  If 
men  have  grofs  and  falfc  conceptions  of  God  their 
religion  will  be  abfurd  and  fuperftitious.  If  men  fan- 
cy God  to  be  an  ill-natured  being  armed  with  infinite 
power,  one  that  delights  in  the  mifery  and  ruin  of 
his  creatures  and  is  ready  to  take  all  advantages  again  ft 
them,  they  may  fear  him  but  they  will  hate  him  ;  and 
they  will  be  apt  to  be  fuch  towards  one  another  as 
they  fancy  God  to  be  towards  them,  for  all  religion 
doth  naturally  incline  men  to  imitate  him  whom  they 
worlhip. 

Now  the  Chriftian  religion  gives  us  a  more  perfed, 
and  a  more  lovely  chara6ler  of  God,  than  any  reli- 
gion ever  did.  It  reprefents  him  to  us  as  a  pure  fpi- 
rit,  (which  the  heathens  did  not  generally  believe) 
and  that  he  is  to  be  worfhip'd  in  fuch  a  manner  ai 
is  moft  fuitable  to  his  fpiritual  nature,  (which  not  on- 
ly the  heatheils  but  even  the  Jews  th^mfelves  were 

extremely 


The  excellency  of  the  Chrijllan  religion,  1 3 1 

extremely  miftaken  about)  "  God  is  a  fpirit  (fays  our  SE  R  M. 
"'  Saviour)  and  they  that  worfhip  him,  mud  vvnr>  ._^\^^ 
"  ihip  him  in  fpirit  and  in  truth."     It  is  true  indeed 
God  himfelf  did  command  facrilices  to  the  Jews,  and 
all  thpfe  external  and  troublefomobfervances  of  which 
their  religion  did  confift  :  but  then  it  is  to  be  confider- 
ed,  that  he  did  not  inftitute  this  way  of  worfhip  be- 
caufe  it  was  moft  fuitable  to  his  own  nature,  but  bc- 
caufe  of  the  carnality  of  their  hearts  and  the  proneneis 
of  that  people  to  idolatry.     God  did  not  prefcribe 
thefe  things  becaufe  they  were  befl,  but  becaufe  the 
temper  of  that  people  would  then  admit  of  nothing 
better.     And  this  the  fcripture  gives  us  feveral  inti- 
mations of,  "  thou  defireft  not  facrifice,  thou  delight-  Pfa .li,  16, 
"  eft  not  in  burnt-offerings,"  faith  David  :  and  elfe- 
where  more  exprefly  to  this  purpofe  ;  ''  I  fpake  not  Jer.  vii. 
"  unto  your  fathers  (fays  God  by  the  prophet  Jere-  ^^• 
miah)  "  nor  commanded  them,  in  the  day  that  I 
"  brought  them  forth  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  con- 
"  cerning  burnt-offerings  and   facrifices;    but  this 
"  thing  commanded  I  them,  faying,  obey  my  voice  :** 
A  fufficient  intimation  that  God   did  not  primarily 
intend  to  appoint  this  way  of  worfhip,  and  to  impofe 
it  upon  them  as  that  which  was  mofl  proper  and 
agreeable  to  him,  but  that  he  condefcended  to  it  as 
moft  accommodate  to  their  prefent  ftate  and  inclina- 
tion.    And  in  this  fenfc  alfo  fome  underftand  what 
God  fays  to  the  fame  people  by  the  prophet  Ezekiel, 
that  he  "  gave  them  ftatutes  that  were  not  good."     Esek.  xx. 

And  as  the  Chriftian  religion  gives  a  more  perfedt,  ^5- 
fo  a  more  amiable  and  lovely  character  of  the  divine 
nature.     No  religion  that  ever  was  in  the  world  does 
fo  fully  reprefent  the  goodnefs  of  God  and  his  ten- 

S2  der  ' 


T%e  excellency  of  the  Chrijlian  religion. 
der  love  to  mankind,  which  is  the  bcft  and  moft 
powerful  argument  to  the  love  of  God.  The  hea- 
thens did  generally  dread  God,  and  looked  upon 
him  as  fierce  and  cruel  and  revengeful ;  and  therefore 
they  endeavoured  to  appeafe  him  by  the  horrid  and 
barbarous  facrifices  of  men,  and  of  their  own  children. 
And  all  along  in  the  old  teftament  God  is  generally 
reprefented  as  very  ftrid  and  fevere.  But  there  are 
no  where  fo  plain  and  full  declarations  of  his  mercy 
and  love  to  the  fons  of  men  as  are  made  in  the  gof- 
pel.  In  the  old  teftament  God  is  ufually  ftyled  "  th-e 
"  Lord  of  Hofts,  the  great  and  the  terrible  God  :" 
but  in  the  new  teftament  he  is  reprefented  to  us  by 
milder  titles,  "  the  God  and  father  of  our  Lord  Je- 
"  sus  Christ,  the  father  of  mercies,  and  the  God 
**  of  all  confolations ;  the  God  of  all  patience,  the 
**  God  of  love  and  peace  i"  nay  he  is  faid  to  be  love 
♦*  and  peace  j"  nay  he  is  faid  to  be  love  it  felf  and  to 
dwell  in  love.  And  this  difference  between  the  ftyle 
of  the  old  and  new  teftament  is  fo  remarkable,  that 
one  of  the  greateft  feds  in  the  primitive  church  (I 
mean  that  of  the  Gnofticks)  did  upon  this  very  ground 
found  their  herefy  of  two  Gods  ;  the  one  evil  and 
fierce  and  cruel,  whom  they  called  the  God  of  the 
old  teftament ;  the  other  good  and  kind  and  merci- 
ful, whom  they  called  the  God  of  the  ncAv.  So 
great  a  difference  is  there  between  the  reprefenta, 
tions  which  are  made  of  God  in  the  books  of  the 
Jewilh  and  the  Chriftian  religion,  as  to  give  at  leaft 
fome  colour  and  pretencs  for  an  imagination  of  two 
Gods. 

II.  Chriftian  religion  hath  given  us  a  more  certain 
and  perfed  law  for  the  government  of  our  lives.     It 

hath 


^he  excellency  of  the  Chrijlian  religion.  133 

hath  made  our  duty  more  plain  and  certain  in  many  S  E  R  M. 
inllances,  than  either  the  philofophy  of  the  heathen, 
or  the  precepts  of  Mofes  had  done.  It  commands 
univerfal  love  and  kindnefs  and  good  will  among  men, 
a  readinefs  to  forgive  our  greateft  enemies,  "  to  do 
'^  good  to  them  that  hate  us,  to  blefs  them  that  curfe 
"  us,  and  to  pray  for  them  that  defpitefully  ufe  us 
"  and  perfecute  us."  And  does  inculcate  thefe  pre- 
cepts more  vehemently,  and  forbid  malice  and  hatred 
and  revenge  and  contention  more  flridlly  and  pe- 
remptorily than  any  religion  ever  did  before  ;  as  will 
appear  to  any  one  that  does  but  attentively  read  our 
Saviour's  fermon  upon  the  mount. 

And  as  Chriftianity  hath  given  us  a  more  certain 
fo  likewife  a  more  perfedt  law  for  the  government  of 
our  lives.  All  the  precepts  of  it  are  reafonable  and 
wife,  requiring  fuch  duties  of  us  as  arc  fuitable  to  the 
light  of  nature  and  do  approve  themfelves  to  the  beft 
reafon  of  mankind  •,  fuch  as  have  their  foundation  in 
the  nature  of  God,  and  are  an  imitation  of  the  divine 
excellencies ;  fuch  as  tend  to  the  perfection  of  human 
nature  and  to  raife  the  minds  of  men  to  the  higheft 
pitch  of  goodnefs  and  virtue.  The  laws  of  our  reli- 
gion are  fuch  as  are  generally  ufeful  and  beneficial  to 
tiic  world,  as  do  tend  to  the  outward  peace  and  the 
health,  to  the  inward  comfort  and  contentment,  and 
to  the  univerfal  happinefs  of  mankind.  They  com- 
mand nothing  that  is  unnecefTary  and  burthenfom,  as 
were  the  numerous  rites  and  ceremonies  of  the  Jewilh 
religion,  but  what  is  reafonable,  and  ufeful,  and  fub- 
llantial :  and  they  omit  nothing  that  may  tend  to 
the  glory  of  God  or  the  welfare  of  men,  nor  do  they 
reftrain  us  in  any  thing  but  what  is  contrary  either  to 

the 


^be  excellency  of  the  Chnjiian  religon. 
the  regular  inclinations  of  nature  or  to  our  reafon  and 
true  intereft.  They  forbid  us  nothing  but  what  is 
bafe  and  unworthy,  to  ferve  our  humours  and  paf-* 
fions,  to  reproach  our  underftandings  and  to  make 
our  felves  fools  and  beads ;  in  a  word,  nothing  but 
what  tends  either  to  our  private  harm  and  prejudice, 
or  to  publick  diforder  and  confufion. 

And  that  this  is  the  tenor  of  the  laws  of  the  gof- 
pel  will  appear  to  any  one  from  our  Saviour's  fer- 
mons  and  difcourfes :  particularly  that  upon  the 
mount  •,  wherein  he  charges  his  difciples  and  follow- 
ers to  be  humble,  and  meek,  and  righteous,  and  mer- 
ciful, and  pure,  and  peaceable,  and  patient  under  fuf- 
ferings  and  perfecutions,  and  good  and  kind  to  all 
even  to  thofe  that  are  evil  and  injurious  to  us,  and  to 
endeavour  to  excel  in  all  goodnefs  and  virtue.  This 
will  appear  likewife  from  the  writings  of  the  holy  A- 
poftles  ;  I  will  inftance  but  in  fome  few  pafTages  in 
them.  St.  Paul  reprefents  to  us  the  defign  of  the 
Chriftian  do6lrine  in  a  very  few  words,  but  of  ad  mi- 
Tit.  H.n.  rable  fenfe  and  weight-,  "  The  grace  of  God,  that 
'**  *^  bringeth  falvation  hath  appeared  to  all  men,  teach- 

*'  ing  us  that  denying  ungodhnefs  and  worldly  lufbs 
*'  we  fhould  live  foberly,  and  righteoufly,  and  godly 
*^  in  this  prefent  world."  'f  he  fame  apoftle  make^ 
this  the  main  and  fundamental  condition  of  the  co- 
jTim.  ii.  venant  of  the  gofpel  on  our  part,  "  let  everyone 
^9'  "  that  names  the  name  of  Christ  depart  from  ini- 

"  quity."     St.  James  defcribes  the  chriftian  dodrine 
(which  he  calls  *'  the  wifdom  that  is  from  above'*) 
J.imes  jii.  ^7  ^^^^^^  charaders,  "  It  is  firft  pure,  then  peaceable* 
«7-  "  gentle  and  eafy  to  be  entreated,  fiill  of  mercy  and 

''  good  fruits,  without  partiality,  and  without  hy- 
3  pocrify." 


The  excellency  of  the  Chriftlan  religion.  135 

**  pocrify."     St.  Peter  calls  the  gofpel,  **  the  know-  S  E  R  M. 
*'  ledge  of  him  that  hath  called  us  to  glory  and  vir-  K^Jfl,^ 
**  tue ;  whereby  (faith   he)  are  given  unto   us  ex- 2  Pet,  i. 3, 
**  ceeding  great  and  precious  promifes,  that  by  thefe  '^' 
*'  you  might  be  partakers  of  a  divine  nature,  having 
*'  efcap'd  the  corruption  that  is  in  the  world  through 
*'  luft  j"  and  upon  this  confideration  he  exhorts  them 
"  to  give  all  diligence  to  add  to  their  faith"  the  fe-  v.  5, 6,  7* 
vera]  virtues  of  a  good  life,  without  which  he  tells 
them  "  they  are  barren  and  unfruitful  in  the  know- 
*'  ledge  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."     I  will  con- 
clude with  that  full  and  comprehenfive  paflage  of  St« 
Paul  to  the  Philippians,  *'  whatfoever  things  are  true,  Pliil.iv,8. 
"  whatfoever   things  are  honed,  (oV<3c  o-g^/*,  whatr 
foever  things  are  of  venerable  eileem)  "  whatfoever 
"  things  are  juft,    whatfoever  things  are  pure,  (or 
chad)   "  whatfoever  things  are  lovely,    whatfoever 
"  things  are  of  good  report,  if  there  be  any  virtue^ 
*'  if  there  be  any  praife,  think  on  thefe  things.'* 

But  the  perfe6tion  and  the  reafonablenels  of  the 
laws  of  Chriftianity  will  mod  plainly  appear  by  talc- 
ing a  brief  furvey  of  them.  And  they  may  all  be  re- 
ferr'd  to  thefe  two  general  heads.  They  arc  either 
fuch  as  tend  to  the  perfe6lion  of  human  nature  and 
to  make  men  fingly  and  perfonally  good,  or  fuch  as 
tend  to  the  peace  and  happinefs  of  human  fociety. 

Firft,  fuch  as  tend  to  the  perfection  of  human  na- 
ture and  to  make  men  good  fmgly  and  perfonally 
confider'd.  And  the  precepts  of  this  kind  may  be 
diftributed  likewife  into  two  forts,  fuch  as  enjoin  pi. 
ety  towards  God,  or  fuch  as  require  the  good  order 
and  government  of  our  felves  in  refped  of  the  enjoy- 
ments and  pkafures  of  this  life. 

X.  Such 


V. 


136  ^e  excellency  of  the  Chrijlian  religion, 

SE  R  M.  I.  Such  as  enjoin  piety  towards  God  .  AJJ  the  du- 
ties of  Chriftian  religion  which  refped  God  are  no 
other  but  what  natural  light  prompts  men  to,  except- 
ing the  two  facraments  (which  are  of  great  ufe  and 
fignificancy  in  the  Chriftian  religion)  and  praying  to 
God  in  the  name  and  by  the  mediation  of  Jesus 
Christ.  For  the  fum  of  natural  religion  as  it  refers 
more  immediately  to  God  is  this,  that  we  Ihould  in- 
wardly reverence  and  love  God,  and  that  we  ihould 
cxprefs  our  inward  reverence  and  love  to  him  by  ex- 
ternal worfhip  and  adoration,  and  by  our  readinefs  to 
receive  and  obey  all  the  revelations  of  his  will :  And 
that  we  fhould  teftify  our  dependance  upon  him,  and 
our  confidence  of  his  goodnefs,  by  conftant  prayers 
and  fupplications  to  him  for  mercy  and  help  for  our 
felves  and  others  \  and  that  we  fhould  acknowledge 
our  obligations  to  him  for  the  many  favours  and  be- 
nefits, which  every  day  and  every  minute  we  receive 
from  him,  by  continual  praifes  and  thankfgivings  j 
And  that  on  the  contrary  we  fhould  not  entertain  a- 
ny  unworthy  thoughts  of  God,  nor  give  that  honour 
and  reverence  which  is  due  to  him,  to  any  other  5 
that  we  fhould  not  worfhip  him  in  any  manner  that 
is  either  unfuitable  to  the  excellency  and  perfe6lion 
of  his  nature,  or  contrary  to  his  revealed  will ;  that 
we  fhould  carefully  avoid  the  prophane  and  irreverent 
ufe  of  his  name,  by  curfing,  or  cuftomary  fwearing, 
and  take  heed  of  the  negleft  or  contempt  of  his  wor- 
fhip or  any  thing  belonging  to  it.  This  is  the  fum 
of  the  firft  part  of  natural  religion,  and  thefe  are  the 
general  heads  of  thofe  duties  which  every  man's  rea- 
fbn  tells  him  he  owes  to  God  :  And  thefe  are  the  ve, 
ry  things  which  the  Chriftian  religion  does  exprelly 

require 


^he  excellency  of  the  Chriftian  religion.  I37 

require  of  us,  as  might  b-e  evidenced  from  particular  S  E  RM. 
texts  in  the  new  teilament.     So  that  there  is  nothing 
in  this  part  of  Chriftianiry  but  what  agrees  very  well 
with  the  reafon  of  mankind. 

2.  Such   precepts  as  require  the  good  order  and 
government  of  our  felves  in  refpe6l  of  the  pleafures    " 
and  enjoyments  of  this  life.     Chriftian  religion  com- 
mands whatfoever  things  are  pure  and  chaite,  all  man- 
ner of  fobriety  and  temperance  and  moderation   in 
reference  to   our  appetites   and  pafTions ;    and  for* 
bids  whatever  is  unnatural,    and  unreafonable,  and 
unhealthful,  in  the  ufe  of  pleafures  and  of  any  of 
God's  creatures.     Hither  belong  all  thofe  texts  which 
require  of  us  that  we   fhould  "  not  walk  after  the  Rom.vlii. 
"  flefh  but  after  the  fpirit,"  that  we  fhould  "  cleanfe  '' 
"  our  felves  from  all  filthinefs  of  fiefh  and  fpirit,"  i. 
that  we  fhould  "  be  holy  in  all  manner  of  converfa-  ^  ^^^'  ^*  > 
"  tion.     St.  John  diftributes  the  lufts  and  irregular 
appetites  of  men  into  three  kinds,  voluptuoufnefs^ 
covetoufnefs,  and  ambition,  anfwerable  to  the  three 
forts  of  tempting  obje6ls  that  are  in  the  world,  plea- 
fures, riches,  and  honours,  "  All  that  is  in  the  world,  i  JoH.  iL 
"  the  luft  of  the  flefh,  the  lull  of  the  eyes,  and  the  ^  * 
"  pride  of  life,  &c."     And  Ch;iflianity  doth  flriftly 
forbid  all  thefe,"  "  take  heed  and  beware  of  cove^  j^^i^g  ^y^^ 
"  toufnefs  (fays  our  Saviour,  and  he  adds  this  ex-  15. 
cellent  reafon)  "  for  a  man's  life  confifleth  not  in  the 
"  abundance  of  the  things  which  he  poflelTeth.'*     It 
forbids   pride   and  ambition    and  vain  glory,    and 
commands  humility  and  modefty  and  condefcenfion 
toothers;  "  learn   of  me  (fays  our  Saviour)  "  for  Mat.  xl. 
''  I  am  meek  and  lowly  in  fpirit ;  mind  not  high  r^'j^,  xu. 
^^  things,  but  condefcend  to  them  that  are  of  low  i^- 

Vol.  I.  T  "  degree  % 

3- 


The  excellency  of  the  Chrijlian  religion, 

degree;  letnothingbedone  through  vain  glory,butin 
lowlincfs  of  mind  kteach  efteem  other  better  than 
"  themfeJves."     And  in  reference  to  fenfual  pleafures 
it  forbids  all  irregularity  and  excefs,  and   ftridly  en- 
Luke  xxi.  joins  purity  and  temperance  ;  cautioning  us  "  to  take 
36.  u  \itt^  left  we  be   overcharged  with  furfeiting  and 

Rom.xiii.  «  drunkennefs  i"  charging  us "  to  v/alk  decently  as  in 
"  the  day,  not  in  rioting  and  drunkennefs,  not  in 
I  Pet.  ii.  "  chambering  and  wantonnefs  •,  to  abftain  from  flefh- 
"  ly  lufts  which  war  againft  the  foul."  Now  all 
thefe  precepts  do  not  only  tend  to  beget  in  us  fuch 
virtues  and  difpofitions  as  are  reafonable  and  fuitable 
to  our  nature  and  every  way  for  our  temporal  conve- 
nience and  advantage,  but  fuch  as  do  likewife  exceed- 
ingly difpofe  us  to  piety  and  religion  by  purifying 
our  fouls  from  the  drofs  and  filth  of  fenfual  delights. 
For  covetoufnefs  debafeth  a  man's  fpirit,  and  finks  it 
into  the  earth  ;  intemperance  and  luft  cloud  a  man's 
underftanding,  and  indifpofe  it  for  the  contemplati- 
on of  things  fpiritual  and  divine.  Thus  you  fee  how 
the  precepts  of  Chriftianity  do  tend  to  the  perfedion 
of  human  nature,  confidering  men  fingly  and  perfo- 
nally. 

Secondly,  the  other  fort  of  precepts  are  fuch  as  tend 
to  the  peace  and  happinefs  of  human  fociety.  And 
the  reafon  of  mankind  can  devife  nothing  more  pro- 
per to  this  end  than  the  laws  of  Chriftianity  are.  For 
they  command  all  thofe  virtues  which  are  apt  to 
fweeten  the  fpirits  and  allay  the  pafllons  and  animo- 
fities  of  men  one  towards  another.  They  require  us 
'*  to  love  our  neighbour  (that  is  every  man  in  the 
world,  even  our  greateft  enemies)  "  as  our  felves." 
And  for  this  end  among  others  was  the  facrament  of 

the 


The  excellency  of  the  Chrlftian  religion,  139 

the  Lord's  fupper,  the  feafl  of  love,  inftituted :  that  S  E  RM. 
by  commemorating  the  love  of  our  dying  Saviour, 
who  laid  down  his  life  for  his  enemies,  we  might  be 
put  in  mind  how  we  ought  to  love  one  another. 

And  by  this  law  of  loving  all  men,  even  our  ene- 
mies, the  Chriftian  religion  difcovers  it  felt  not  only  to 
be  the  mod  innoce.it  and  harmlefs,  but  the  mod  ge- 
nerous and  befl-natured  inftitution  that  ever  was  in 
the  world.  For  in  purfuance  of  this  general  precept 
it  commands  us,  "  to  do  good  to  ^1  men ;  if  it  be 
"  pofTible,  and  as  much  as  in  us  lies  to  live  peaceably 
"  with  all  men  •,"  to  be  "  kind  one  to  another,"  ready 
to  gratify  and  oblige  men  ;  to  be  tender-hearted  and 
companionate  towards  thofe  that  are  in  want  or  mife- 
ry,  and  ready  to  fupply  and  relieve  them  \  to  fym- 
pathize  with  one  another  in  our  joys  and  forrows,  "  to 
"  mourn  with  thofe  that  mourn,  and  to  rejoice  with 
"  them  that  rejoice  \  to  bear  one  another^s  burdens, 
"  and  to  forbear  one  another  in  love  ;"  to  be  eafily 
reconciled  to  them  that  have  offended  us,  and  to  be 
ready  to  forgive  from  our  hearts  the  greatefl:  injuries 
that  can  be  done  to  us,  and  that  without  bounds  and 
limits  even  to  feventy  times  feven  ;  as  our  Saviour 
exprefieth  it. 

The  laws  of  Chriftianity  do  likewife  fecure  both 
the  private  interefts  of  men  and  the  publick  peace,  by 
confirming  and  enforcing  all  the  didates  of  nature 
concerning  juftice  and  equity,  and  our  doing  to  others 
as  we  would  have  them  to  do  to  us";  and  by  command- 
ing obedience  to  human  laws  which  decide  men's 
rights  and  fubmiflion  to  government  under  pain  of 
damnation  :  and  by  forbiding  whatever  is  contrary  to 
thefe,  violence  and  oppreffion,  defrauding  and  over- 

T  2  reaching 


The  excellency  of  the  Chriftian  religion, 
reaching  one  another,  perfidioufnefs  and  treachery, 
breach  of  trufts,  oaths,  or  promifes,  undutifulnefs  tp 
fuperiors,  fedition  and  rebeUion  againft  magillracy 
and  authority  :  and  if  there  be  any  thing  elfe  that  is 
apt  to  difturb  the  peace  of  the  world,  and  tx)  alienate 
the  affedions  of  men  from  one  another,  as  foumefs 
of  difpofition,  and  rudenefs  of  behaviour,  cenforiouf- 
nefs  and  finifter  interpretation  of  things,  all  crofs  and 
diftadful  humours,  and  whatever  t\^t  may  render  the 
converfation  of?men  grievous,  and  uneafy  to  one  an- 
other: all  thefe  are  either  exprelly,  or  by  clear  con- 
fequence  and  dedu6tion,  forbidden  in  the  new  tefla- 
menL 

And  nov/  what  could  any  religion  do  more  towards 
the  reforming  of  th-  difpofitions  and  manners  of  men  ? 
what  laws  can  be  devifed  more  proper  and  e£re(5tual 
to  advance  the  nature  of  man  to  it's  highefl:  perfec- 
tion, to  procure  the  tranquillity  of  men's  minds,  and 
the  peace  and  happinefs  of  the  world,  than  thefe  pre- 
cepts of  Chriftian  ity  are?  fjveral  of  which  (as  thofe 
of  loving  our  enemies,  of  not  revenging  injuries,  of 
j-endring  good  for  evil,  &c.)  though  they  have  been 
efteemed  reafonable  by  fome  of  the  wifeft  among 
the  heathen,  yet  by  reafon  of  the  degeneracy  of  the 
world,  and  of  the  obfcurity  and  uncertainty  of  human 
reafon,  they  never  obtained  to  have  the  eftimation 
and  force  of  natural  laws.  So  that  we  owe  to  Chrifti- 
anity  the  difcovery  of  the  moft  certain  and  perfedl 
j-ule  of  life  that  ever  the  world  was  acquainted  with' 
all. 

III.  Chriftian  religion  propounds  the  moft  power- 
ful arguments  to  perfuade  men  to  the  obedience  of 
^hefe  laws.     The  gofpel  offers  fych  confiderations  to 

us. 


T!he  excellency  of  the  Chriflian  religion,  141 

us,  as  are  fit  to  work  very  forcibly  upon  two  of  the  S  E  R  M. 
moft  fwaying  and  governing  paflions  in  the  mind  of  ^^' 
man,  our  hopes  and  our  fears.     To  encourage  our 
hopes  it  gives  us  the  highefl:  alTurance  of  the  greateft 
and  moil  iafting  happinefs,    in  cafe  of  obedience  ; 
and  to  awaken  our  fear  it  threatens  finners  with  the 
moft  dreadful  and  durable  torments,  in  cafe  of  dif- 
obedience.     "  To  them  who  hy  patient  continuance  Rom.  Ji. 
"  in  well  doing  feek  for  glory  and  honour  and  im-  7>  ^• 
"  mortality,"  it  promifeth  "  eternal   life:  but  unto 
''  them  that  obey  not  the  truth,  but  obey  unrighte- 
"  oufnefs,"  it  threatens  "  indignation  and  wrath,  tri- 
"  bulation   and  anguifb."     And  this  is  that  which 
makes  the  dodrine  of  the  gofpel  fo  powerful  an  in- 
ftrument  for  the  reforming  of  the  world,  that  it  pro- 
pofes  to  men  fuch  glorious  rewards  and  fuch  terrible 
punifhments  as  no  religion  ever  did  ;    and  to  make 
the  confideration  of  them  more  effeflual,  it  gives  us 
far  greater  afTurance  of  the  reality,  and  certainty  of 
thefe  things  than  ever  the  world  had  before.     This 
account  the  apoftle  gives  us  of  the  fuccefs  and  effica- 
cy, of  the  gofpel  upon  the  minds  of  men,  and  for  this 
reafon  he  calls  it  "  the  power  of  God  unto  falvation,"  ^^^  . 
becaufe  therein  "  the  wrath  of  God  is  revealed  from  16,  jg. 
"  heaven  againft  all  ungodlinefs  and  unrighteoufnefs 
*'  of  men."     Before  the  revelation  of  the  gofpel  the 
wickednefs  and  impenitency  of  the  heathen  world 
was  a  much  more  excufable  thing,  becaufe  they  were 
in  a  great  meafure  ignorant  of  the  rewards  of  another 
life,  and  had  generally  but  very  uncertain  and  obfcure 
apprehenfions  of  thofe  things  which  urge  men  mod 
powerfully  to  forfake  their  fins,  and  are  the  moft  pre- 
valent arguments  to  a  good  life.    So  St.  Paul  tells 

the 


The  excellency  of  the  Chrtjlian  religion. 
the  Athenians,  the  moft  knowing  among  the  heathen, 
"  the  times  of  this  ignorance  God  winked  at,  but 
"  now  commandeth  all  men  every  where  to  repent ; 
"  becaufe  he  hath  appointed  a  day  in  the  which  he 
"  will  judge  the  world  in  righteoufnefs  by  that  man 
"  whom  he  hath  ordained,  whereof  he  hath  given 
*'  aflurance  unto  all  men,  in  that  he  hath  raifed  him 
"  from  the  dead."  The  refurredion  of  Jesus  Christ 
from  the  dead  hath  given  the  world  that  full  afTu- 
rance  of  another  life  after  this  and  of  a  future  judg- 
ment, which  it  never  had  before,  for  he  whom  God 
raifed  from  the  dead  did  declare  and  teftify  that  "  it 
"  was  he  who  was  ordained  of  God  to  be  the  judge 
"  of  quick  and-  dead."  And  the  firm  belief  of  a  fu- 
ture judgment,  which  fhall  "  render  to  every  man 
*'  according  to  his  deeds,"  ifit  be  well  confidered,  h 
to  a  reafonable  nature  the  moft  forcible  motive  of  all 
other  to  a  good  life ;  becaufe  it  is  taken  from  the  con- 
fideration  of  the  greateft  and  moft  lafting  happinefs 
and  mifery  that  human  nature  is  capable  of  So  that 
the  laws  of  Chriftianity  have  the  firmeft  fandlion  of 
any  laws  in  the  world  to  fecure  the  obedience  and  ob- 
fervance  of  them  :  for  what  can  reftrain  men  from 
fin  if  the  terrors  of  the  Lord  and  the  evident  dan- 
ger of  eternal  deftrudion  will  not.?  What  encourage- 
ment can  be  given  to  goodnefs  beyond  the  hopes  of 
heaven  and  the  afiTurance  of  an  endlefs  felicity  .? 

IV.  The  Chriftlan  religion  furniflieth  us  with  the 
beft  motives  and  confiderations  to  patience  and  con- 
tentednefs  under  the  evils  and  afflidlions  of  this  life. 
This  was  one  great  defign  of  philofophy,  to  fupport 
men  under  the  evils  and  calamities  which  this  life  is 
incident  to,  and  to  fortify  their  fpirits  againft  fuffer- 

ings. 


^e  excellency  of  the  Chriftian  religion.  143 

ings.  And  to  this  end  the  wifeft  among  the  heathens  S  E  R  M- 
rack'd  their  wits  and  caft  about  every  way,  they  ad- 
vanced all  forts  of  principles  and  managed  every  lit- 
tle argument  and  confideration  to  the  utmoft  advan- 
tage. And  yet  after  all  thefe  attempts  they  have  not 
been  able  to  give  any  confiderable  comfort  and  cafe 
to  the  mind  of  man  under  any  of  the  great  evils  and 
preiTures  of  this  life.  *'  The  bed  is  fhorter  than  that 
*'  a  man  can  ftretch  himfelf  upon  it,  and  the  cover- 
"  ing  narrower  than  that  a  man  can  wrap  himfelf  ia 
"  it."  All  the  wife  fayings  an^  advices  which  phi- 
lofophers  could  muiler  up  to  this  purpofe  have  proved 
ineffedual  to  the  common  people  and  the  generality 
of  mankind,  "and  have  help'd  only  to  fupport  fome 
few  itout  and  obftinate  minds,  which  without  the  af' 
(iftance  of  philofophy  would  have  held  up  pretty  well 
of  themfelyes. 

Some  of  the  philofophers  have  run  fo  far  back  for 
arguments  of  comfort  againfl  pain  as  to  call  every 
thing  into  queftion,  and  to  doubt  whether  there  were 
any  fuch  thing  as  fenfe  or  pain.  And  yet  for  all  that 
when  any  great  evil  has  been  upon  them,  they  would 
certainly  figh  and  groan  as  pitifully  and  cry  out  as 
loud  as  other  men. 

Others  have  fought  to  eafe  themfelves  of  all  the 
evil  of  afflidion  by  difputing  fubtilly  againfl  it,  and 
pertinacioufly  maintaining  that  afflictions  are  no  real 
evils,  but  only  in  opinion  and  imagination,  and  there- 
fore a  wife  man  ought  not  to  be  troubled  at  them. 
But  he  muft  be  a  very  wife  man  that  can  forbear  be- 
ing troubled  at  things  that  are  very,  troublefom.  And 
yet  thus  PofTidonius  (as  Tully  tells  us)  diftinguiflied, 
he  could  not  deny  pain  to  be  very  troublefom,  but  for 

all 


The  excellency  of  the  Chrijlian  religion, 
all  that  he  was  refolved  never  to  acknowledge  it  to 
be  an  evil.  But  fure  it  is  a  very  (lender  comfort  that 
relies  upon  this  nice  diilindion  between  things  being 
troublelbm  and  being  evils,  when  all  the  evil  of  af- 
flidlion  lies  in  the  trouble  it  creates  to  us.  But  when 
the  beft  that  can  be  is  made  of  this  argument,  it  is 
good  for  nothing  but  to  be  thrown  away  as  a  ftupid 
paradox  and  againft  the  common  fenfe  of  mankind. 

Others  have  endeavoured  to  delude  their  trouble 
by  a  graver  way  of  reafoning,  that  thefe  things  are 
fatal  and  necefifary  and  therefore  no  body  ought  to  be 
troubled  at  them,  it  being  in  vain  to  be  troubled  at 
that  which  we  cannot  help.  And  yet  perhaps  it  might 
as  reafonably  be  faid  on  the  other  fide  that  this  very 
confideration,  that  a  thing  cannot  be  help'd,  is  one 
of  the  jufteft  caufes  of  trouble  to  a  wife  man.  For 
it  were  fome  kind  of  comfort  if  thefe  evils  were  to 
be  avoided,  becaufe  then  we  might  be  careful  to  pre- 
vent them  another  time;  but  if  they  be  neceflary 
then  my  trouble  is  as  fatal  as  the  calamity  that  occa- 
fions  it ;  and  though  I  know  it  in  vain  to  be  troubled 
for  that  which  I  cannot  help,  yet  I  cannot  chufe  but 
be  afflided.  It  was  a  fmart  reply  that  Auguftus  made 
to  one  that  miniftred  this  comfort  to  him  of  the  fata- 
lity of  things.  Hoc  ipfum  eft  (fays  he)  quod  me  male  ha- 
het^  this  was  fo  far  from  giving  any  eafe  to  his  mind 
that "  this  was  the  very  thing  that  troubled  him." 

Others  have  try'd  to  divert  and  entertain  the  trou- 
bles of  other  men  by  pretty  and  plaufible  fayings,  fuch 
as  this,  "  that  if  evils  are  long  they  are  but  light,  if 
''  (harp  but  fhort,"  and  a  hundred  fuch  like.  Now 
I  am  apt  to  imagine  that  it  is  but  very  fmall  comfort 
that  a  plain  and  ordinary  man,  lying  under  a  fharp 
I  fit 


The  excellency  of  the  Chrijlian  religion,  145 

fit  of  the  Hone,    for  a  w.^ek  to^eth?r,  receives  from  SERM. 
this  fine  fentence.     For  what  pleafure   foever  men  y_^'^_^ 
that  are  at  eafe  and  leifure  may  take  in  being  the  au- 
thors of  witty  fayings,  I  doubt  it  is  but  poor  confo- 
lation,  that  a  man  under  great  and  flinging  afflidions 
finds  from  them. 

The  befl  moral  argument  to  patience,  in  my  opi- 
nion, is  the  advantage  of  patience  it  felf  To  bear 
evils  as  quietly  as  we  can  is  the  way  to  make  them 
lighter  and  eafier.  But  to  tofs  and  fling  and  to  be 
reftlefs  is  good  for  nothing  but  to  fret  and  enrage  our 
pain,  to  gall  our  fores  and  to  make  the  burthen  that 
is  upon  us  fit  more  uneafy.  But  this  is  properly  no 
confideration  of  comfort,  but  an  art  of  managing  our 
feives  under  affiidions  fo  as  not  to  make  them  more 
grievous  than  indeed  they  are. 

But  now  the  arguments  which  Chriflianity  pro- 
pounds to  us  are  fuch  as  are  a  juft  and  reafonable  encou- 
ragement to  men  to  bear  fufferings  patiently  Our  reli- 
gion fets  before  us  not  the  example  of  a  ftupid  Stoick, 
who  had  by  obflinate  principles  hardened  himfelf ' 
againfl  all  fenfe  of  pain  beyond  the  common  meafures 
of  humanity,  but  an  example  that  lies  level  to  all 
mankind,  of  a  man  like  our  feives,  that  had  a  tender 
fenfe  of  the  lead  fuffering,  and  yet  patiently  endured 
the  greateftj  of  "Jesus  the  author  and  finilher  of  Heb.i,22. 
"  our  faith,  who  for  the  joy  that  was  fet  before  him 
*'  endured  the  crofs,  defpifing  the  fharae,  and  is  fet 
"  down  at  the  right  hand  of  the  throne  of  God." 
God  thought  it  expedient  that  the  firfl  Chriflians 
fliould  by  great  hardfhips  and  perfecutions  be  trained 
up  for  glory,  and  to  animate  and  encourage  them 
hereto  the  "  captain  of  our  falvation  was  crov/n'd  by  Heb  ii. 

Vol.  I.  U  «  fufFer-  '''' 

3- 


The  excellency  of  the  Chrijlian  religion, 
"  fufferings."     Much  more  fliould  the  confideration 
of  this  pattern  arm  us  with  patience,  againft  the  com- 
mon and   ordinary  calamities  ^of  this  Hfe,  efpecially 
if  we  confider  his  example  with  this  advantage,  that 
though  his  fufFerings  were  wholly  undeferved,    and 
not  for  himfelf  but  for  us,  yet  he  bore  them  patiently. 
But  the  main  confideration  of  all  is,  the  glory  which 
fhall  follow  our  fufferings  as  the  reward  of  them,  if 
they  be  for  God  and  hiscaufe  ;  and  if  upon  any  other 
2  Cor.  iv.  innocent  account,  as  a  reward  of  our  patience.  "  Our 
17-  "  light  afflidion,  which  is  but  for  a  moment,  work- 

"  eth  for  us  a  far  more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight 
"  of  glory."  Chriftian  religion  hath  fecured  us  that 
we  fh'all  be  infinite  gainers  by  our  fufferings.  And 
who  would  not  be  content  to  fuffer  upon  terms  of 
fuch  advantage  }  to  "  pafs  through  many  tribulations 
"  into  the  kingdom  of  God,"  and  to  endure  a  fhort 
afflidlion  for  an  endlefs  happinefs  ?  The  affurance  of 
a  future  bleffednefs  is  a  cordial  that  will  revive  our 
fpirits  more  in  the  day  of  adverfity,  than  all  the  wife 
fayings  and  confiderations  of  philofophy. 

Thefe  are  the  arguments  which  Chriftianity  pro- 
pounds to  us,  and  they  are  firm  and  found  at  the 
bottom;  they  have  ftrength  and  fubflance  in  them, 
and  are  apt  to  work  upon  human  nature,  and  the 
mod  ordinary  underftanding  is  capable  of  the  force 
of  them.  In  the  ftrength  and  virtue  of  this  great  ex- 
ample, and  in  contemplation  of  this  glorious  reward, 
with  what  refolution  and  chearfulnefs,  with  what 
courage  and  patience,  did  vaft  numbers  of  all  forts  of 
people  in  the  firft  ages  of  Chriftianity,  not  only  men 
but  women,  not  only  thofe  of  greater  fpirit  and  more 
generous  education:  but  thofe  of  the  poorell  and  low- 


Tl:e  excellency  of  the  Chrijlian  religwt.  147 

cll  condition,  not  only  the  learned  and  the  wife,  but  SERxVf- 
the  ignorant  and  illiterate,  encounter  all  the  rage  and 
malice  of  the  world,  and  embrace  torments  and  death  ? 
Had  the  precepts  and  counfels  of  philofophy  ever  any 
fuch  effefl  upon  the  minds  of  men  ?  I  will  conclude 
this  with  a  paffage  in  the  life  of  Lipfius,  who  was  a 
great  ftudier  and  admirer  of  the  Stoical  philofophy. 
When  he  lay  upon  his  death-bed,  and  one  of  his  friends 
who  came  to  vifit  him  told  him,  that  he  needed  not 
ufe  arguments  to  perfuade  him  to  patience  under  his 
pains,  the  philofophy  which  he  had  fludied  fo  much 
would  furnifh  him  with  motives  enough  to  that  pur- 
pofe,  he  anfwers  him  with  this  ejaculation,  Bomine 
Jefu^  da  mihi patientiam  Cbriftianam,  "  Lord  Jesus, 
"  give  me  Chriftian  patience."  No  patience  like  to 
that  which  the  confiderations  of  Chriftianity  are  apt 
to  work  in  us. 

And  now  I  have  as  briefly  and  plainly  as  I  could 
endeavoured  to  reprefent  to  you  the  excellency  of  the 
Chriftian  religion,  both  in  refpedl  of  the  clear  difco- 
veries  which  it  makes  to  us  of  the  nature  of  God, 
which  is  the  great  foundation  of  all  religion,  and  like- 
wife  in  refped  of  the  perfedion  of  it's  laws,  and  the 
power  of  it's  arguments  to  perfuade  men  both  to 
obey  and  fuffer  the  will  of  God.  By  which  you  may- 
fee,  what  the  proper  tendency  aiid  defign  of  this  re- 
ligion is,  and  what  the  laws  and  precepts  of  it  would 
make  men  if  they  would  truly  obferve  them  and  live 
according  to  them,  fubftantially  religious  towards 
God,  chafle  and  temperate,  patient  and  contented  in 
reference  to  themfelves  and  the  difpenfations  of  God's 
providence  towards  them,  juft  and  honed,  kind  and 
peaceable  and  good  natured  towards  all  men.     In  a 

U  2  Word, 


1 48  l%e  excellency  of  the  Chrtjltan  religion, 

SERM.  word,  the  gofpel  defcribes  God  to  us  in  all  refpeft^ 
fiich  a  one  as  we  would  wifh  him  to  be,  gives  us  fuch 
laws  as  every  man  that  underftands  himfelf  would 
chufe  to  live  by,  propounds  fuch  arguments  to  per- 
fuade  to  the  obedience  of  thefe  laws  as  no  man  that 
wifely  loves  himfelf  and  hath  any  tendernefs  for  his 
own  intereft  and  happinefs,  either  in  this  world  or  the 
other,  can  refufe  to  be  mov'd  withaL 

And  now  methinks  I  may  with  fome  confidence 
challenge  any  religion  in  the  world  to  fhew  fuch  a 
complete  body  and  collection  of  holy  and  reafonable 
laws  eftablifh'd  upon  fuch  promifes  and  threatnings 
as  the  gofpel  contains.  And  if  any  man  can  produce 
a  religion  that  can  reafonably  pretend  to  an  equal  or 
a  greater  confirmation  than  the  gofpel  hath,  a  religi- 
on the  precepts  and  promifes  and  threatnings  whereof 
are  calculated  to  make  men  wifer  and  better,  more 
temperate  and  more  chafte,  more  meek  and  more  pa- 
tient, more  kind  and  more  juft,  than  the  laws  and 
motives  of  Chriftianity  are  apt  to  make  men  •,  if  any 
man  can  produce  fuch  a  religion,  I  am  ready  to  be  of 
it.  Let  but  any  man  fhew  me  any  book  in  the 
world,  the  dodlrines  whereof  have  the  feal  of  fuch 
miracles  as  the  dodrine  of  the  fcriptures  hath  \  a  book 
which  contains  the  heads  of  our  duty  fo  perfedly, 
and  without  the  mixture  of  any  thing  that  is  un  rea- 
fonable, or  vicious,  or  any  ways  unworthy  of  God  ; 
that  commands  us  every  thing  in  reafon  neceffary  to 
to  be  done,  and  abridgeth  us  of  no  lawful  pleafure 
without  offering  us  abundant  recompence  for  our 
prefent  felf-denial ;  a  book  the  rules  whereof,  if  they 
were  praclifed,  would  make  men  more  pious  and  de- 
vout, more  holy  and  fobcT,  more  jufl  and  fair  in 

their 


The  excellency  of  the  Chrijiian  religion,  149 

their  dealings,  better  friends  and  better  neighbours,  SER  M. 
better  magiftrates  and  better  fubjedls,  and  better  in 
all  relations,  and  which  does  offer  to  the  underfland- 
ing  of  men  more  powerful  arguments  to  perfuade 
them  to  be  all  this  •,  let  any  man,  I  fay,  fhew  me 
fuch  a  book,  and  I  will  lay  afide  the  fcripture  and 
preach  out  of  that. 

And  do  we  not  all  profefs  to  be  of  this  excellent 
religion,  and  to  ftudy  and  believe  this  holy  book  of 
the  fcriptures  ?  But  alas !  who  will  believe  that  we  do 
fo,  that  Ihall  look  upon  the  adlions  and  confider  the 
lives  of  the  greateft  part  of  Chriftians  ?  How  grofly 
and  openly  do  many  of  us  contradid  the  plain  pre- 
cepts of  the  gofpel,  by  our  ungodlinefs  and  worldly 
lulls  ;  by  living  intemperately  or  unjuftly,  or  pro- 
phanely  in  this  prefent  world  ?  As  if  "  the  grace  of 
God  which  brings  falvation,"  had  never  appear'd  to 
us,  as  if  we  had  never  heard  of  heaven  or  hell,  or  be- 
liev'd  not  one  word  that  the  fcripture  fays  concerning 
them,  as  if  we  were  in  no  expedlation  "  of  the  blef- 
"  fed  hope  and  the  glorious  appearance  of  the  great 
"  God  and  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  whom 
"  God  hath  appointed  to  judge  the  world  in  righte- 
"  oufnefs,"  and  who  will  bellow  mighty  rewards 
upon  thofe  who  faithfully  ferve  him,  but  will  come 
"  in  flaming  fire  to  take  vengeance  on  them  that 
"  know  not  God  and  that  obey  not  the  gofpel  of  our 
"  Lord  Jesus  Christ." 

Let  us  not  then  deceive  ourfelves  by  pretending  to 
this  "  excellent  knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus  our 
*'  Lord,"  if  we  do  not  frame  our  lives  according  to 
it.  For  though  we  know  thofe  things  never  fo  well, 
yet  we  are  not  happy  unlefs  we  do  them  :  nay,  we 


'l'50  '  T&  excellency  of  the  Chrijiia?t  religion. 

SERM.  are  but  the  more  mil'erable  for  knowino:  them  if  wc 
.^_'._i  do  them  not  \  therefore  it  concerns  every  one  of  us  to 
confider  ferioufly  what  we  beheve  ;  and  whether  our 
belief  of  the  Chriftian  religion  have  it's  due  effcdl  up- 
on our  lives.  If  not,  all  the  precepts  and  promifes 
and  threatnings  of  the  gofpel  will  rife  up  in  judg- 
ment againft  us,  and  the  articles  of  our  faith  will  be 
fo  many  articles  of  accufation,  and  the  great  weight 
of  our  charge  will  be  this,  that  we  did  not  obey  that 
gofpel  which  we  profefs'd  to  believe,  that  we  made 
confelFion  of  the  Chriftian  faith,  but  liv'd  like  hea- 
thens. Not  to  believe  the  Chrifliaia  religion,  after 
fo  great  evidence  and  confirmation  as  God  hath  gi- 
ven to  it,  is  very  unreafonable  •,  but  to  believe  it  to 
be  true,  and  yet  to  live  as  if  it  were  falfe,  is  the  great- 
eft  repugnancy  and  contradiction  that  can  be.  He 
that  does  not  beheve  Chriftianity,  either  hath,  or 
thinks  he  hath  fome  reafon  for  withholding  his  affent 
from  it.  But  he  that  believes  it,  and  yet  lives  con- 
trary to  it,  knows  that  he.hath  no  reafon  for  what  he 
does,  and  is  convinced  that  he  ought  to  do  otherwife : 
And  he  is  a  miferable  man  indeed  that  does  thofe 
things,  for  the  doing  of  which  he  continually  ftands 
condemn'd  by  his  own  mind,  and  accordingly  God 
will  deal'  more  feverely  with  fuch  perfons.  He  will 
pardon  a  thoufand  defe6ls  in  our  underftandings,  if 
they  do  not  proceed  from  grofs  carelefnefs  and  ne- 
gle6l  of  our  felves  •,  but  the  faults  of  our  wills  have  no 
excufe,  becaufe  we  knew  to  do  better  and  were  con- 
vinced in  our  minds  that  we  ought  not  to  have  done  fo. 
Doft  thou  believe  that  "  the  wrath  of  God  is  re- 
*'  veal'd  from  heaven  againft  all  ungodlinefs  and  un- 
^l  righteoufnefsofmen,"  and  doft  thou  ftill  allow  thy 
I  felf 


The  excellency  of  the  Chri/iia?i  religion.  151 

felf "  in  ungodlinefs  and  worldly  lufts  ?"  Art  thou 
convinced  that  "  without  holinefs  no  man  fhall  fee 
*'  the  Lord,"  and  doft  thou  ftill  perfift  in  a  wicked 
courfe  ?  Art  thou  fully  perfujjded  that  "  no  whore- 
*^  monger,  nor  aduherer,  nor  covetous,  nor  un- 
"  righteous  perfon  fhall  have  any  inheritance  in  the 
"  kingdom  of  God  and  Christ,"  and  dofc  thou  for 
all  that  continue  to  pradife  thefe  vices  ?  What  canft 
thou  fay  (man)  why  it  fiiould  not  be  to  thee  ac- 
cording to  thy  faith?  If  it  fo  fall  out  that  thou  art 
miferable  and  undone  for  ever,  thou  haft  no  reafon  to 
be  furprifed  as  if  fome  unexpected  thing  had  happen'd 
to  thefe  It  is  but  with  thee  juft  as  thou  believedft  it 
would  be  when  thou  didft  thefe  things.  For  how 
couldft  thou  exped  that  God  ihould  accept  of  thy 
good  belief,  when  thou  didft  fo  notoriouily  contradid: 
it  by  a  bad  lite  ?  How  couldft  thou  look  for  other 
but  that  God  ftiould  condemn  thee  for  the  doing  of 
thofe  things,  for  which  thine  own  confcience  did  con- 
demn thee  all  the  while  thou  waft  doing  of  them; 
when  we  come  into  the  other  world  there  is  no 
confideration  that  will  fting  our  confciences  more  cru- 
elly than  this,  that  we  did  wickedly  when  we  knew 
to  have  done  better,  and  chofe  to  make  our  felves 
miferable  when  we  underftood  the  way  to  have  been 
happy.  To  conclude,  we  Chriftians  have  certainly 
the  beft  and  the  holieft,  the  wifeft  and  moft  reafona- 
ble  religion  in  the  world ;  but  then  we  are  in  the 
worft  condition  of  all  mankind,  if  the  beft  religion, 
in  the  world  do  not  make  us  good. 


SER- 


^52 


S    E    R    M    O    N     VI. 

The  precepts  of  Chriftianity  not  grievous. 

I  J  O  H  N  V.  3. 

■        And  bis  commandments  are  not  grievous, 

ON  E  of  the  great  prejudices  which  men  have 
entertained  againft  the  Chriftian  religion  is 
this,  that  it  lays  upon  men"  heavy  burdens 
''  and  grievous  to  be  born/'  that  the  laws  of  it  are  very 
flrid  and  fevere,  difficult  to  be  kept,  and  yet  dange- 
rous to  be  broken  j  that  it  requires  us  to  govern  and 
keep  under  our  pafllons,  and  to  contradi6t  many  times 
©ur  flrongeft  inclinations  and  defires,  "  to  cut  off 
"  our  right  hand  and  to  pluck  out  our  right  eye,  to 
"  love  our  enemies,  to  blefs  them  that  curfe  us,  to 
*'  do  good  to  them  that  hate  us,  and  to  pray  for  them 
"  that  defpitefully  ufe  us  and  perfecute  us ;"  to  for- 
give the  greateft  injuries  that  are  done  to  us,  and  to 
make  reparation  for  the  leaft  that  we  do  to  others ; 
to  be  contented  with  our  condition,  patient  under 
fufferings,  and  ready  to  facrifice  our  deareft  interefts 
in  this  world,  and  even  our  very  lives,  in  the  caufe 
of  God  and  religion:  all  thefe  feem  to  be  hard  fay- 
ings  and  grievous  commandments. 

For  the  removal  of  this  prejudice  I  have  chofen 
thefe  words  of  the  apoftle,  which  exprefly  tell  us  the 
contrary,  that  "  the  commandments  of  God  are  not 
**  grievous. 

And 


VI. 


7he precepts  of  Chriftianity  not  grievous.  153 

And  though  this  be  a  great  truth  if  it  be  impar-  SERM. 
tialiy  confidered,  yet  it  is  alfo  a  great  paradox  to  men 
of  corrupt  minds  and  vicious  pradices,  who  are  pre- 
judiced againft  religion  and  the  holy  Jaws  of  God  by 
their  interefl  and  their  lufts.  This  feems  a  ftrange 
propofition  to  thofe,  v/ho  look  upon  rehgionat  a  dif- 
tance  and  never  try'd  the  experiment  of  a  holy  life, 
who  meafure  the  laws  of  God,  not  by  the  intrinfical 
goodnefs  and  equity  of  them,  but  by  the  reludancy 
and  oppofition  which  they  find  in  their  own  hearts 
againft  them. 

Upon  this  account  it  will  be  requifite  to  take  fome 
pains  to  fatisfy  the  reafon  of  men  concerning  this 
truth,  and,  if  it  be  poirible,to  make  itfo  evident  that 
thofe  who  are  unwilling  to  own  it  may  yet  be  aiham- 
ed  to  deny  it.  And  methinks  I  have  this  peculiar  ad- 
vantage in  the  argument  I  have  now  undertaken,  that 
every  reafonable  man  cannot  chufe  but  v/ifh  me  fuc- 
cefs  in  this  attempt,  becaufe  I  undertake  the  proof 
of  that  which  it  is  every  man's  intereft  that  it  fhould 
be  true  :  and  if  I  can  make  it  out,  this  pretence  againft 
religion  will  not  only  be  baffled,  but  we  fhall  gain  a 
new  and  forcible  argument  to  perfuade  men  over  to  it. 

Now  the  eafinefs  or  difficulty  of  the  obfervation 
of  any  laws  or  commands  depends  chiefly  upon  thefe 
three  things. 

Firft,  upon  the  nature  of  the  laws  themfelves  and 
their  fuitablenefs  or  unfuitablenefs  to  thofe  to  whom 
they  are  given. 

Secondly,  upon  the  ability  or  weaknefs  of  thofe 
on  whom  thefe  laws  are  impofed  for  the  keeping  of 
them.  For  eafinefs  and  difficulty  are  relative  terms 
and  refer  to  fome  power,  and  a  thing  may  be  difficult 

Vol.  L  X  to 


The  precepts  of  Chrijiiajiity  not  grievous. 
to  a  weak  man  which  yet  may   be  eafy  to  the  fame 
perfon  when  alTiiled  with  a  greater  ftrength. 

Thirdly,  upon  the  encouragement  that  is  given  to 
the  obfervation  of  them.  For  the  propoial  of  great 
rewards  does  very  much  qualify  and  allay  the  difficul- 
ty of  any  undertaking. 

Now  if  I  can  make  thefe  three  things  evident: 

1.  that  the  laws  of  God  are  reafonable,  that  is,  fuit- 
able  to  our  nature  and 'advantageous  to  our  intereft  : 

2.  that  we  are  not  deftitute  of  fufficient  power  and 
ability  for  the  performance  of  them  :  and,  3.  that 
we  have  the  greateil  encouragements  to  this  purpofe : 
then  have  we  all  imaginable  reafon  to  afTent  to  the 
truth  of  this  proportion  that  "  the  commandments  of 
*'  God  are  not  grievous." 

L  The  laws  of  God  are  reafonable,  that  is,  fuitable 
to  our  nature  and  advantageous  to  our  intereft.  'Tis 
true  God  hath  a  fovereign  right  over  us  as  we  are  his 
creatures,  and  by  virtue  of  this  right  he  might  with- 
out injuftice  have  impos'd  difficult  tafks  upon  us,  and 
have  required  hard  things  at  our  hands.  But  in  mak- 
ing laws  for  us  he  hath  not  made  ufe  of  this  right. 
He  hath  commanded  us  nothing  in  the  gofpel  that 
is  either  unfuitable  to  our  reafon,  or  prejudicial  to 
our  intereft  -,  nay,  nothing  that  is  fevere  and  againft 
the  grain  of  our  nature,  but  when  either  the  apparent 
neceffity  of  our  intereft  does  require  it,  or  an  extraor- 
dinary reward  is  promifed  to  our  obedience.  "  He 
*'  hath  fhewed  thee,  O  man,  what  is  good,  and  what 
*'  doth  the  Lord  thy  God  require  of  thee,  but  to  do 
«  juftly,  and  to  love  mercy,  and  to  walk  humbly 
"  with  thy  God.?'*  This  is  t\\Q  fum  of  the  natural 
law,  that  wefhould  behave  our  felves  reverently  and 
'>  obedient- 


7he  precepts  of  Chrijiianity  not  grievous.  155 

obediently  towards  the  divine  majefty,  and  juftly  and  S  E  R  M- 
charitably  towards  men  ;  and  that  in  order  to  the  fit-  ,_J^L 
ting  of  us  for  the  better  difcharge  of  thefe  duties,  we 
Ihould  govern  our  felves  in  the  ufe  of  fenfual  delights 
w^ith  temperance  and  moderation.  And  if  we  go  over 
the  laws  of  Chriftianity,  we  Ihall  find  that,  except- 
ing a  very  few  particulars,  they  enjoin  the  very  fame 
things  ',  only  they  have  made  our  duty  more  clear 
and  certain.  But  this  I  have  had  occafion  to  make 
out  largely  in  the  foregoing  difcourfe,  and  therefore 
I  fhall  fay  the  lefs  to  it  now. 

As  to  the  feveral  parts  of  God's  worlhip  and  fer- 
vice,  prayer  and  thankfgiving,  hearing  and  reading 
the  word  of  God,  and  receiving  of  the  facrament  ; 
thefe  are  all  no  lefs  for  our  own  comfort  and  advan- 
tage than  for  the  honour  of  God  and  religion.  And 
there  is  nothing  of  difficulty  or  trouble  in  the  exter- 
nal performance  of  them,  but  what  hypocrify  can 
make  tolerable  to  it  felf :  and  certainly  they  muftbe 
not  only  much  more  eafy,  but  even  delightful,  when 
they  are  direded  by  our  underftandings,  and  accom- 
panied with  our  hearts  and  atfedlions. 

As  for  thofe  laws  of  religion  which  concern  our 
duty  to  our  felves,  as  temperance  and  chaftity  ;  or  to 
others,  as  the  feveral  branches  of  juflice  and  charity, 
comprehended  in  thofe  general  rules,  "  of  loving  our 
"  neighbour  as  our  felves,  and  of  doing  to  others 
''  as  we  would  have  them  to  do  to  us :"  there  is 
nothing  in  all  thefe  laws  but  what  is  moft  reafonable 
and  fit  to  be  done  by  us,  nothing  but  what  if  we 
were  to  confult  our  own  interefl  and  happmefs,  and 
did  rightly  underftand  our  felves,  we  would  chufe  for 
our  felves ,  nothing  but  what  is  eafy  to  be  underftood, 

X  2  and 


T'he  precepts  of  Chrijlimity  not  grievous. 
and  as  eafy  to  be  pradtifed  by  an  honell  and  a  willing 
mird. 

Now  the  pra6lice  of  all  thefe  is  fuitable  to  our  na- 
ture and  agreeable  to  the  frame  of  our  underfland- 
ings-,  proper  to  our  condition  and  circumftances  in 
this  world,  and  preparatory  to  our  happinefs  in  the 
next.  And  no  man's  reafon  did  everdidate  to  him  the 
contrary  of  any  of  thefe;  that  it  is  fit  for  a  creature 
not  to  love  God,  to  be  undutiful  to  his  great  fove- 
reign,  and  ungrateful  to  his  beft  benefador ;  that  it 
is  reafonable  for  a  man  to  debauch  himfelf  by  intem- 
perance and  brutif^i  fenfuality  -,  to  hate,  defraud  and 
opprefs  other  men.  Our  very  natural  reafon,  if  we 
will  but  liften  to  the  di(ftates  of  it,  is  an  enemy  to 
all  thefe  fins  and  a  law  again  ft  all  thefe  vices. 

And  as  the  pradice  of  all  piety  and  virtue  is  agree- 
able to  our  reafon,  fo  is  it  likewife  for  the  intereft  of 
mankind ;  both  of  private  perfons,  and  of  publick 
focieties,  as  I  have  already  fhewn.  Some  virtues 
plainly  tend  to  the  prefervation  of  our  health,  others 
to  the  improvement  and  fecurity  of  our  eftates,  all  to 
the  peace  and  quiet  of  our  minds ;  and  which  is  fome- 
whatmore  ftrange,  to  the  advancement  of  our  efteem 
and  reputation  •,  for  though  the  world  be  generally 
bad,  and  men  are  apt  to  approve  nothing  fo  much 
as  what  they  do  themfelves  j  yet,  I  know  not  how 
it  comes  to  pafs,  men  are  commonly  fo  juft  to  virtue 
and  goodnefs,  as  to  praife  it  in  others  even  when  they 
do  not  pradife  it  themfelves. 

And  as  for  thofe  precepts  of  Chriftianity  which 
feem  to  be  moft  harfh  and  difficult  at  firft  appearance, 
(as  repentance  and  rcftitution,  mortification  of  our 
lufts  and  palTions,  humility,  patience  and  contented- 

nefs 


^e  precepts  of  Chrijlianify  not  grievous.  157 

nefs  with  our  condition,  and  rcfignation  of  our  felves  SER  M. 
to  the  will  of  God  ;  forgiving  and  loving  our  ene- 
mies, and  felf-denial  for  the  caufe  of  God  and  reli- 
gion) if  we  look  well  into  them  and  confider  through- 
ly the  nature  and  tendency  of  them,  even  thefe  will 
appear  to  be  both  reafonable  in  thcmfelves,  and  up- 
on one  account  or  other  really  for  our  advantage. 

What  more  reafonable  than  repentance,  than  that 
a  man  when  he  hath  done  amifs  and  contrary  to  his 
duty  fhould  be  heartily  forry  for  it,  and  refolve  to 
do  fo  no  more  ?  And  how  grievous  foever  it  be,  it 
is  neceflary,  being  the  only  way  to  pardon  and  peace. 
And  in  cafe  our  offence  againft  God  hath  been  com- 
plicated with  injury  to  men,  it  is  but  reafonable  we 
fhould  make  reftitution  as  far  as  we  are  able,  accord- 
ing to  the  nature  of  the  injury.  For  without  this 
our  repentance  is  not  real,  becaufe  we  have  not  done 
Vv^hat  we  can  to  undo  our  fault  as  much  as  we  can, 
or  at  lead  to  hinder  the  injurious  confequences  of  it 
from  proceeding  any  farther :  nor  can  any  man  be 
judg'd  to  be  truly  forry  for  his  fin  that  retains  the  pro- 
fit and  advantages  of  it  to  himfelf.  Befides,  that  till 
reparation  be  made  to  the  utmofi:  of  our  power  we  can 
have  no  peace  in  our  own  confciences,  nor  any  well- 
grounded  hopes  of  forgivenefs  from  God. 

Mortification  of  our  luits  and  paiTions,  though,  like 
repentance,  it  have  fomething  in  it  that  is  trouble- 
fom,  yet  nothing  that  is  unreafonable,  or  really  to 
our  prejudice.  If  v/e  give  way  to  our  pafiions,  we 
do  but  gratify  our  felves  for  the  prefent  in  order  to 
our  future  difquiet  •,  but  if  we  refift  and  conquer  them, 
we  Jay  the  foundation  of  perpetual  peace  and  tran- 
quillity in  our  minds.    If  we  govern  our  felves  in  the 

ufe 


158  The  precepts  of  Chrijlianity  not  grievous, 

E  R  M.  ufe  of  fenfual  delights  by  the  Jaws  of  God  and  reafon? 
we  fhall  find  our  felves  more  at  eafe  than  if  we  fhould 
let  loofe  the  reins  to  our  appetites  and  lufts.  For  the 
more  we  gratify  our  lufts  the  more  craving  they  will 
be,  and  the  more  impatient  of  denial.  Crefcit  indulgens 
ftbi  dims  hydrops^  every  luU  is  a  kind  of  hydropick 
diftemper,  and  the  more  we  drink  the  more  we  fhall 
thirft.  So  that  by  retrenching  our  inordinate  defires 
we  do  not  rob  our  felves  of  any  true  pleafure,  but  on- 
ly prevent  the  pain  and  trouble  of  farther  diflatis- 
fa6lion. 

Humility,  though  it  may  feem  to  expofe  a  man  to 
fome  contempt,  yet  it  is  truly  the  readieft  way  to 
honour :  as  on  the  contrary,  pride  is  a  mofl  impro- 
per and  abfiird  means  for  the  accomplilliingof  the  end 
it  ainn  at.  Ail  other  vices  do  in  fome  meafure  at- 
tain their  end  ;  covetoufnefs  does  ufually  raife  an  ^ftate, 
and  ambitious  endeavours  do  often  advance  men  to 
high  places  \  but  pride  and  infolence  and  contempt  of 
others  do  infallibly  defeat  their  own  defign.  They 
aim  at  refpe6l  and  efteem  but  never  attain  it,  for  all 
mankind  do  naturally  hate  and  flight  a  proud  man. 

What  more  reafonable  than  patience  and  content- 
cdnefs,  and  that  we  fliould  in  all  things  refign  up 
O'jr  felves  to  the  will  of  God,  who  loves  us  as  well 
as  we  do  our  felves,  and  knows  what  is  good  for  us 
better  than  we  do  our  felves  ^  this  certainly  is  the  beft 
way  to  prevent  anxiety  and  perplexity  of  mind,  and 
to  make  the  word  condition  as  tolerable  as  it  can  be, 
and  much  more  eafy  than  it  would  be  otherwife. 

As  for  that  peculiar  law  of  ChrifLianity  which  for- 
bids revenge,    and  commands  us  to  forgive  iojuries 
and  to  love  our  enemies,  no  man  can  think  it  griev- 
ous 


T'he  precepts  of  Chrtjlianity  not  grievous,  159 

vous  who  confiders  the  pleafure  and  fweetnefs  of  love  S  E  R  M. 
and  the  glorious   vidory  of  overcoming    evil  with 
good,  and  then  compares  thefe  with  the  reftlefs  tor- 
ment and  perpetual  tumults  of  a  malicious  and  re- 
vengeful fpirit. 

And  Mly,  felf-denial  for  the  caufe  of  God  and  re- 
ligion ;  this  is  neither  unreafonable  nor  to  our  difad- 
vantage.  If  we  coniider  our  infinite  obligations  to 
God,  we  have  no  reafon  to  think  much  to  facrifice 
to  him  our  dearefl  interefts  in  this  world  \  efpecial- 
X'j  if  we  confider  withal,  how  dilproportionably  great 
the  rewar-d  of  our  fufferings  fhall  be  in  another  world. 
Befides  that  the  interefl  of  religion  is  of  fo  great  con- 
cernment to  the  happinefs  of  mankind,  that  every 
man  is  bound  for  that  reafon  to  aifert  the  truth  of  it 
with  the  hazard  of  any  thing  that  is  moll  valuable  to 
him  in  this  world. 

II.  We  are  not  deflitute  of  fufHcient  power  and 
ftrength  for  the  performing  of  God's  commands. 
Had  God  given  us  laws  but  no  power  to  keep  them, 
his  commandments  would  then  indeed  have  been 
grievous.  'Tis  true  we- have  contraded  a  great  deal 
of  weaknefs  and  impotency  by  our  wilful  degeneracy 
from  goodnefs,  but  that  grace  which  the  gofpel  of- 
fers to  us  for  our  aiTiilance  is  fufficient  for  us.  And 
this  feems  to  be  the  particular  reafon  why  the  apoftle 
fays  here  in  the  text,  that  his  "  commandments  are 
"  not  grievous,'*  becaufe  he  offers  us  an  alTiftance  pro- 
portionable to  the  difficulty  of  his  commands,  and 
the  neceffity  of  our  condition  :  for  it  follows  imme- 
diately after  the  text,  "  for  whofoever  is  born  of  God, 
"  overcometh  the  world."  Therefore  the  "  comi- 
"  mandments  of  God  are  not  grievous,"  becaufe  every 

child 


i6o  'T'he  precepts  of  Chrijli unity  not  grievous, 

SERM.  child  of  God,  that  is,  every  Chriftian  is  endued  with 
1  ,  a  power  whereby  he  is  enabled  to  refift  and  conquer 
the  temptations  of  the  world.  The  fame  apoflle  elfe- 
where  encourages  Chriftians  upon  the  fame  confide- 
ration,  ''  greater  is  he  that  is  in  you,  than  he  that  is 
"  in  the  world."  Though  we  be  encompafled  with 
many  and  potent  enemies  who  make  it  their  bufinefs 
to  tempt  and  to  deter  us  from  our  duty,  yet  our  cafe 
is  not  hard  fo  long  as  we  have  a  greater  flrength  on 
our  fide :  and  this  the  apoflle  tells  us  is  the  cafe  of 
t  Joh.  IV.  every  Chriftian,  "  greater  is  he  that  is  in  you,  than 
*'  he  that  is  in  the  world."  Are  there  legions  of 
devils  who  are  continually  defigning  and  working 
our  ruin  .?  there  are  alfo  myriads  of  good  angels  who 
are  more  chearful  and  officious  to  do  us  good.  For 
I  doubt  not,  but  as  thofe  who  are  bent  to  do  wick- 
edly will  never  want  tempters  to  urge  them  on  and 
to  pufh  them  forward  in  an  evil  courfe  ;  fo  on  the 
other  hand,  thofe  who  apply  themfelves  ferioufly  to 
the  bufinefs  of  religion,  and  yield  themfelves  tradable 
to  good  motions,  will  find  the  good  fpirit  of  God 
more  ready  and  a6live  to  encourage  them  than  the 
devil  can  be  to  pull  them  back  ;  unlefs  we  think  that 
God  hath  given  a  greater  power  and  a  larger  com- 
milTion  to  the  devil  to  do  men  mifchief,  than  to  his 
holy  fpirit  and  his  holy  angels  for  our  afTiftance  and 
encouragement.  But  then  we  are  to  underftand  that 
this  afTiflance  is  only  offered  to  men,  and  not  forced 
upon  them  whether  they  will  or  no.  For  if  we  beg 
God's  grace  but  negled  to  make  ufe  of  it,  if  we  im- 
plore his  afTiftance  for  the  mortifying  of  our  lufts  but 
will  not  contribute  our  own  endeavours,  God  will 
withdraw  his  grace  and  take  away  his  holy  fpirit  from 

us 


I' he  precepts  of  Chrifliajtity  not  grievous,  1 6 1 

us.  Nay,  if  after  we  have  begun  well  we  do  notorl-  SER  M. 
oufly  flacken  our  endeavoui"S,  v/e  forfeit  the  divine 
afliftance:  if  when  by  God's  grace  we  have  in  a  good 
meafure  conquer'd  the  firft  difficulties  of  religion, 
and  gain'd  fome  habitual  ftrength  againft  fin  ;  if  af- 
ter this  we  grow  carelefs  and  remifs,  and  negled  our 
guard,  and  lay  our  felvesopen  to  temptations,  God's 
fpirit  will  not  always  ftrive  with  us :  notwithflanding 
all  the  promifes  of  the  gofpel  and  the  mighty  afliftan- 
ces  there  offered  to  us,  if  we  love  any  luft,  and  will 
with  Sampfon  lay  our  head  in  Dalilah's  lap,  we  fhall 
be  infenfibly  rob'd  "  of  our  ftrength  and  become 
"  like  other  men/' 

III.  We  have  the  greatefl  encouragement  to  the  ob- 
fervanceof  God's  commands.  Two  things  make  a- 
ny  courfe  of  life  eafy  \  prefent  pleafure;  and  the  af- 
furance  of  a  future  reward.  Religion  gives  part  of 
it's  reward  in  hand,  the  prefent  comfort  and  fatisfac- 
tionof  having  done  our  duty,  and  for  the  refl,  it 
offers  us  the  befl  fecurity  that  heaven  can  give.  Now 
thefe  two  mufl  needs  make  our  duty  very  eafy ;  a 
confiderable  reward  in  hand,  and  not  only  the  hopes 
but  the  affurance  of  a  far  greater  recompence  here- 
after. 

I.  Prefent  peace  and  fatisfa(5tion  of  mind,  and  un- 
exprelTible  joy  and  pleafure  flowing  from  the  teflimo- 
ny  of  a  good  confcience.  This  is  prefent  payment, 
befides  that  it  is  thfC  earneft  of  a  future  and  greater 
happinefs.  And  this  does  naturally  fpring  up  in  the 
mind  of  a  good  man  \  "  great  peace  have  they  that 
"  love  thy  law,  and  nothing  fhall  offend  them.'* 
All  ads  of  piety  and  virtue  are  not  only  delightful 
for  the  prefent,  but  they  leave  peace   and   cpntent- 

Vol.  L  Y  ment 

♦      3- 


i62  7he  precepts  of  Chriflianity  not  grievous, 

ERM.  ment  behind  them:  a  peace  that  no  outward  violence 
can  interrupt  or  take  from  us.  The  pleafures  of  a 
hoJy  life  have  moreover  this  peculiar  advantage  of 
worldly  joys,  that  we  fhall  never  be  weary  of  them  ; 
we  cannot  be  cloy'd  by  the  frequent  repetition  of 
thefe  pleafures,  nor  by  the  long  enjoyment  of  them. 
I  know  that  fome  vices  pretend  to  bring  great  plea- 
fure  along  with  them,  and  that  the  delights  of  a  fen- 
fual  and  voluptuous  life  make  a  glorious  fhow  and  are 
attended  with  much  pomp  and  noife,  like  the  fports 
of  children  and  fools  which  are  loud  and  clamorous ; 
or,  as  Solomon  elegantly  compares  them,  "  like  the 
*'  crackling  of  thorns  under  a  pot,"  which  makes  a 
little  noife  and  a  fudden  blaze  that  is  prefently  over. 
But  the  ferious  and  the  manly  pleafures,  the  folid  and 
fubflantial  joys,  are  only  to  be  found  in  the  ways  of 
religion  and  virtue.  The  mofl  fenfual  man  that  e- 
ver  was  in  the  world  never  felt  his  heart  touch'd  with 
fo  delicious  and  lading  a  pleafure  as  that  is  which 
fprings  from  a  clear  confcience,  and  a  mind  fully  fa- 
tisfied  with  it's  own  adions. 

2.  But  the  great  encouragement  of  all  is  the  aflb- 
rance  of  a  future  reward.  The  firm  perfuafion  where- 
of is  enough  to  raife  us  above  any  thing  in  this 
world,  and  to  animate  us  with  courage  and  rcfoluti- 
on  againft  the  greateft  difficulties.  So  the  apoftic 
reafons ;  "  his  commandments  are  not  grievous ; 
*'  for  whatfoever  is  born  of  God  overcometh  the 
*'  world,  and  this  is  the  vidory  that  overcometh  the 
*'  world  even  our  faith."  The  belief  of  a  future  hap- 
pinefs  and  glory  was  that  which  made  the  primitive 
Chriilians  fo  vidorious  over  the  world,  and  gave 
them  the  courage  to  refill  all  the  pleafures  and  terrors 

of 


ne  precepts  of  Chrijlianlty  not  grievous,  163 

offenfe.  It  cannot  be  deny'd,  but  that  a  religious  S  E  R  M. 
courfe  of  life  is  liable  to  be  incunibred  with  many 
difficulties  which  are  naturally  grievous  to  flefh  and 
blood.  But  a  Chriflian  is  able  to  comfort  himfelf 
under  all  thefe  with  the  thoughts  of  his  end,  which 
is  evcrlafting  life.  He  confiders  the  goodnefs  of  God, 
which  he  believes  would  not  deny  him  the  free  enjoy- 
ment of  the  things  of  this  world,  were  it  not  that  he 
hath  fuch  joys  and  pleafures  in  ftore  for  him  as  will 
abundantly  recompenfe  his  prefent  felf-denial  and  fuf- 
ferings. 

Let  us  now  put  both  thefe  together,  the  pleafures 
of  religion  and  the  rewards  of  it,  and  they  cannot 
but  appear  to  be  a  mighty  encouragement.  With 
what  pleafure  does  a  man  that  lives  a  holy  and  a  vir- 
tuous life  defpife  the  pleafures  of  fin,  and  notwith- 
flanding  all  the  allurements  of  fenfe  perfift  refolutely 
in  his  courfe  ?  And  how  is  fuch  a  man  confirm'd  in 
his  purpofe  and  animated  in  his  holy  refolution,  when 
he  finds  that  God  and  his  own  confciencedo  applaud 
his  choice  \  when  all  along  in  the  courfe  of  religion 
and  a  virtuous  life,  in  his  conflidts  with  fin  and  refi- 
ftance  of  temptations,  he  hath  for  his  prefent  reward 
the  two  great  pleafures  of  innocence  and  of  vidlory, 
and  for  his  future  encouragement  the  joyful  hopes  of 
a  crown  and  a  kingdom  ?  A  recompence  fo  great,  as 
is  fufficient  to  make  a  lame  man  walk,  enough  to 
make  any  one  willing  to  offer  violence  to  his  ftrong- 
eft  paffions  and  inclinations.  A  man  would  be  con- 
tent to  drive  with  himfelf  and  to  conflid  with  great 
difficulties,  in  hopes  of  a  mighty  reward.  What 
poor  man  would  not  chearfully  carry  a  great  burthea 
of  gold  and  filver,  that  were  afTured  to  have  the  great- 

Y  2  eft 


1 64  ^he  precepts  of  Chriftianity  not  grievous. 

S  E  R  M.  efl:  fhare  of  it  for  his  pains,  and  thereby  to  be   made 
s_^  ~  J  a  man  for  ever  ?  Whatever  difficulties  rehgion  is  at- 
tended withal,  they  are  all   fweetned  and  made  eafy 
by  the  propofal  of  a  great  and  eternal  reward. 

But  are  there  no  difficulties  then  in  religion  ?  Is  e- 
very  thing  then  fo  plain  and  eafy  ?  Are  all  the  ways 
of  virtue  fo  fmooth  and  even  as  we  have  here  repre- 
fented  them?  Hath  not  our   Saviour  told  us,  that 
Mat.  vii.  "  ftrait  is  the  gate  and  narrow  is  the  way  that  leads 
H-  «  to  hfe,  and  few  there  be  that  find  it?"  Does  not 

A€t.  xiv.  the  apoftle  fay,  "  that  through  much  tribulation  we 
2Tim  'ii  "  "^"^  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God  ?"  And,  "  that 
12.  "  all  that  will  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus  fhall  fuffer 

"  perfecution  ?"  And  does  not  the  fcripture  every 
where  fpeak  of  driving,  and  wreftling,  and  running 
and  fighting ;  of  labouring,  and  watching,  and  giv- 
ing all  diligence  ?  And  is  there  nothing  grievous  in 
all  this? 

This  is  a  very  material  objedlion,  and  therefore  I 
fhall  be  the  more  careful  to  give  a  fatisfadory  anfwer 
to  it.  And  that  I  may  do  it  the  more  diftindly  be 
pleas'd  to  confider  thefe  fix  things,  i.  That  the 
fuffering  of  perfecution  for  religion  is  an  exttaordina- 
ry  cafe,  which  did  chiefly  concern  the  firfl  ages  of 
Chriflianity.  2.  That  this  difcourfe  concerning  the 
eafinefs  of  God's  commands  does  all  along  fuppofe 
and  acknowledge  the  difficulties  of  the  entrance  upon 
a  religious  courfe.  3.  Nor  is  there  any  reafon  it 
fliould  exclude  our  after  care  and  diligence.  4.  All 
the  difficulties  of  religion  are  very  much  mitigated 
and  allayed  by  hope  and  by  love.  5.  There  is  in- 
comparably more  difficulty  and  trouble  in  the  ways 
of  fin  and  vice,  than  in  the  ways  of  religion  and  vir- 
I  tue« 


I'he  precepts  of  Chrijlianity  not  grievous,  165 

tue.  6.  If  we  do  but  put  virtue  and  vice,  a  religious  S  E  R  M. 
and  a  wicked  courfe  of  life  in  equal  circumftances ;  if 
we  will  but  fuppofe  a  man  as  much  accuftom'd  and 
inur'd  to  the  one  as  he  has  been  to  the  other,  then  I 
Ihall  not  doubt  to  pronounce  that  the  advantages  of 
cafe  and  pleafure  will  be  found  to  be  on  the  fide  of 
religion. 

I.  The  fuffering  of  perfecution  for  religion  is  an 
extraordinary  cafe,  and  did  chiefly  concern  the  firfl: 
ages  of  Chriftianity.  And  therefore  the  general  fay- 
ings  of  our  Saviour  and  hisapoftles  concerning  the 
perfecuted  ftate  of  Chriftians  are  to  be  limited,  as 
doubtlefs  they  were  intended,  principally  to  thofe  firft 
times,  and  by  no  means  to  be  equally  extended  to  all 
ages  of  the  church.  At  firft  indeed,  whoever  em- 
braced the  profefTion  of  Chriftianity  did  thereby  ex- 
pofe  themfelves  to  all  the  fufferings  which  the  power 
and  malice  of  the  world  could  affiidt  them  withal : 
But  fince  "  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth  became  the 
"  kingdoms  of  the  Lord  and  of  his  Christ,"  and 
the  governors  of  the  world  began  to  be  patrons  of 
the  church,  'tis  fo  far  from  being  univerfally  true, 
that  every  Chriftian  hath  fuffer'd  the  violence  of  per- 
fecution, that  it  hath  been  a  rare  cafe  and  happened 
only  in  fome  few  ages,  and  to  fome  perfons.  So 
that  this  is  accidental  to  a  ftate  of  rehgion,  and  there- 
fore ought  not  to  be  reckoned  among  the  ordinary 
difficulties  of  it.  And  when  it  happens  God  gives 
extraordinary  fupports,  and  promifes,  mighty  re- 
wards to  make  it  tolerable. 

II.  This  difcourfe  concerning  the  eafinefs  of  God's 
commands  does  all  along  fuppofe  and  acknowledge 
the  difficulties  of  the  firft  entrance  upon  a  religious 

courfe. 


1 66  The  precepts  of  Chrtflianify  not  grievous, 

SERM.  courfe,  except  only  in  thofe  perfons  who  have  had 
the  happinefs  to  be  trained  up  to  religion  by  the  eafy 
and  infenfible  degrees  of  a  pious  and  virtuous  educa- 
tion. Thefe  indeed  are  freed  from  a  great  deal  of 
pains  and  difBculty,  which  others  who  are  reclaimed 
from  a  bad  courfe  of  life  mud  expe<5t  to  undergo. 
They  are  in  a  great  meafure  excufed  from  the  pangs 
of  the  new  birth,  from  the  pains  of  a  fudden  and  vio- 
lent change,  from  the  terrors  of  an  affrighted  mind, 
and  from  the  deep  and  piercing  forrows  of  a  more 
folemn  repentance.  Whereas  thofe  who  have  lived 
wickedly  before,  mud  look  to  meet  with  a  great  deal 
more  trouble,  becaufe  they  are  put  upon  changing 
the  whole  courfe  of  their  life  at  once,  and  mufl  con- 
tend with  inveterate  habits,  and  offer  no  fmall  vio- 
lence to  themfelves  in  plucking  up  thofe  vices  which 
have  been  rooted  in  them  by  long  cuilom  and  conti- 
nuance. This  indeed  is  grievous,  and  mufl  needs 
be  fenfibly  painful,  like  the  "  plucking  out  of  a 
"  right  eye,  or  the  "  cutting  off  a  right  hand  :"  for 
in  this  cafe  a  man  muff  ftrive  againft  the  very  bent 
and  inchnation  of  his  ftrongefl  appetites,  againft  the 
tyranny  of  cuftom  and  the  mighty  power  of  a  fecond 
nature.  But  this  is  no  juft  refledlion  upon  religion^ 
becaufe  this  does  not  proceed  from  the  nature  of  God's 
laws,  but  from  an  accidental  indifpofition  in  our  felves, 
which  religion  is  apt  to  remove  :  and  if  we  will  but 
allow  fome  time  of  trouble  and  uneafinefs  for  the  cure, 
when  that  is  once  wrought  the  commands  of  God 
will  be  more  eafy  and  delightful  to  us  than  ever  our 
fins  and  lufts  were. 

III.  Nor  does  this  exclude  our  after  care  and  diligence. 
For  when  the  apoftk  fays  that "  the  commandments 

"  of 


T!he precepts  of  Chriflianify  not  grievous.  167 

"  of  God  are  not  grievous,"  he  does  by  no  means  SERM. 
intend  to  infinuate  that  they  ^re  calculated  for  lloth- 
ful  and  lazy  perfons,  that  they  are  fo  cafy  as  to  require 
no  induftry  and  endeavour  on  our  part  •,  he  only  aims 
to  prevent  a  tacit  objedlion  which  lies  at  the  bottom 
of  many  men's  hearts,  as  if  religion  were  a  moft 
grievous  and  intolerable  burthen,  and  there  were 
more  trouble  and  lefs  pleafure  in  it  than  in  any  other 
adion  of  human  life.  This  he  utterly  denies,  but 
does  not  hereby  intend  to  exclude  fuch  diligence  and 
induftry  as  men  ufe  about  other  matters.  And  if  I 
fliouid  tell  you,  that  the  bufinefs  of  religion  does  not 
require  a  very  vigorous  profecution  and  great  earneft- 
nefs  of  endeavour,  I  fhould  fpeak  quite  befides  the 
holy  fcriptures,  which  fo  frequently  command  feeking 
and  ftriving  and  labouring,  befides  many  other  fuch 
phrafes  that  import  diligence  and  earneftnefs.  And 
indeed  it  were  unfit  that  fo  excellent  and  glorious  a 
reward  as  the  gofpel  promifes  fhould  ftoop  down  like 
fruit  upon  a  full-laden  bough  to  be  plucked  by  every 
idle  and  wanton  hand  -,  that  heaven  fhould  be  profti- 
tuted  to  the  lazy  defires  and  faint  wilhes,  to  the  cheap 
and  ordinary  endeavours  of  flothful  men.  God  will 
not  fo  much  difparage  eternal  life  and  happinefs,  as 
to  beftow  it  upon  thofe  who  have  conceived  fo  low 
an  opinion  of  it  as  not  to  think  it  worth  the  labour- 
ing for.  And  furely  this  is  fufficient  to  recommend 
religion  to  any  confiderate  man,  if  the  advantages 
of  it  be  much  greater  than  of  any  worldly  defign  that 
we  can  propound  to  our  felves,  and  the  difficulties  of 
it  not  greater.  If  the  fame  ferioufnefs  and  induftry 
of  endeavour,  which  men  commonly  ufe  to  raife  a 
fortune,  and  advance  themfelves  in  the  world,  will 

fervc 


1 68  7he precepts  of  Chrijllanify  not  grievous. 

S  E  R  M,  ferve  to  make  a  man  a  good  man,  and  to  bring  him 
to  heaven,  what  reafon  hath  any  man  to  complain 
of  the  hard  terms  of  religion  ?  and  I  think  I  may 
truly  fay,  that  ufually  lefs  than  this  does  it.  For  God 
confiders  our  condition  in  this  world,  and  the  prefling 
neceflities  of  this  life,  that  we  are  flefh  as  well  as  fpi- 
rit,  and  that  we  have  great  need  of  thefe  things,  and 
therefore  he  allows  us  to  be  very  fedulous  and  induf- 
trious  about  them.  However  this  I  am  fure  of,  that 
if  men  would  be  as  ferious  to  fave  their  immortal 
fouls,  as  they  are  to  fupport  thefe  dying  bodies ;  if 
they  would  but  provide  for  eternity  with  the  fame 
folicitude  and  real  care  as  they  do  for  this  life  ;  if 
they  would  but  feek  heaven  with  the  fame  ardour  of 
affeflion  and  vigour  of  profecution  as  they  feek  earth- 
ly things  •,  if  they  would  but  love  God  as  much  as 
many  men  do  the  world,  and  mind  godlinefs  as  much 
as  men  ufually  do  gain  •,  if  they  would  but  go  to 
church  with  as  good  a  will  as  men  ordinarily  do  to 
their  markets  and  fairs,  and  be  in  as  good  earned  at 
their  devotions  as  men  commonly  are  in  driving  a 
bargain  -,  if  they  would  but  endure  fome  troubles  and 
inconveniencies  in  the  ways  of  religion  with  the  fame 
patience  and  conftancy  as  they  can  do  ftorms,  and 
foul  ways,  and  mifchances,  when  they  are  travelling 
about  their  worldly  occafions ;  if  they  would  but  a- 
void  bad  company  as  men  ufe  to  do  cheaters,  and  re- 
jedl  the  temptations  of  thedevil  and  the  world,  as  they 
would  do  the  kind  words  and  infmuations  of  a  man 
whom  they  verily  believe  to  have  a  defign  to  over- 
reach them  ;  1  am  confident  that  fuch  a  one  could 
not  fail  of  heaven,  and  would  be  much  furer  of  it 
upon  thefe  terms,  than  any  man  that  doth  all  th? 

other 


T^je  precepts  of  Chrijlianity  not  grievous,  169 

other  things  could  be  of  getting  an  eftate  or  of  at-SERM. 
taining  any  thing  in  this  world. 

And  cannot  every  man  do  thus  much  ?  All  that  I 
have  faid  fignifies  no  more  but  that  men  fhould  ufe 
their  fincere  endeavours,  and  this  furely  every  man 
can  do.  For  to  ufe  our  fincere  endeavours  is  nothing 
c\k  but  to  do  as  much  as  we  can,  and  it  is  non-fenfe 
for  any  man  to  deny  that  he  can  do  as  much  as  he 
can.  And  if  we  would  do  thus  much  we  are  fure  of 
God's  grace  and  affiftance,  which  is  never  wanting 
to  the  fincere  endeavours  of  men.  But  men  exped: 
that  religion  fhould  coft  them  no  pains,  that  happi- 
nefs  fhould  drop  into  their  laps  without  any  defign 
and  endeavour  on  their  part,  and  that  after  they  have 
done  what  they  pleafe  while  they  hve,  God  fhould 
fnatch  them  up  to  heaven  when  they  die.  But  though 
"  the  commandments  of  God  be  not  grievous,"  yet 
it  is  fit  to  let  men  know  that  they  are  not  thus  eafy. 

IV.  All  the  difficulties  of  religion  are  very  much 
allayed  and  fweetened  by  hope  and  love.  By  the 
hopes  of  a  mighty  reward  ;  fo  great,  as  is  enough  to 
raife  us  above  our  felves,  and  to  make  us  break 
through  all  difficulties  and  difcouragements :  and  by 
the  love  of  God,  who  hath  taken  all  imaginable  ways 
to  endear  himfelf  to  us.  He  gave  us  our  beings,  and 
when  we  were  fallen  from  that  happinefs  to  which  at 
firft  we  were  defigned,  he  was  pleafed  to  reftore  us  to 
a  new  capacity  of  it  by  fending  his  only  fon  into  the 
world  to  die  for  us.  So  that  if  we  have  any  fenfe 
of  kindnefs  we  cannot  but  love  him  who  hath  done 
fo  much  to  oblige  us,  and  if  we  love  him  entirely 
nothing  that  he  commands  will  be  grievous  to  us  ; 
nay,   fo  far  from  that,  that  the-  greateft  pleafure  wc 

Vol.  I.  Z  are 

4- 


^he  precepts  of  Chri/ltanify  not  grieijOiis. 
are  capable  of  will  be  to  pleafe  him.  For  nothing  is 
difficult  to  love.  It  will  make  a  man  deny  himfelf, 
and  crofs  his  own  inclinations  to  pleafure  them  whom 
he  loves.  It  is  a  pafTion  of  a  (Irange  power  where  it 
reigns,  and  will  caufe  a  man  to  fubmit  to  thofe  things 
with  delight,  which  in  other  circumftances  would  feem 
grievous  to  him.  "  Jacob  ferved  for  "Rachel  feven 
"  years,"  and  after  that  "  feven  years  more ;  and  they 
*'  feemed  unto  him  but  a  few  days,  for  the  love  he 
"  had  to  her."  Did. but  the  love  of  God  rule  in  our 
hearts,  and  had  we  as  real  an  affedion  for  him  as  fome 
men  have  for  their  friends,  there  are  no  fuch  difficul- 
ties in  religion  but  what  love  would  conquer,  and  the 
fevereft  parts  of  it  would  become  eafy  when  they 
were  once  undertaken  by  a  willing  mind. 

V.  There  is  incomparably  more  trouble  in  the  ways 
of  fin  and  vice  than  in  thofe  of  religion  and  virtue. 
Every  notorious  fin  is  naturally  attended  Wich  fome 
inconvenience  of  harm,  or  danger,  or  difgrace  \  which 
the  finner  feldom  confiders  till  the  fin  be  committed, 
and  then  he  is  in  a  labyrinth,  and  in  feeking  the  way 
out  ofaprefent  inconvenience  he  intangles  himfelf 
in  more-  Pie  is  glad  to  make  ufe  of  indired  arts, 
and  laborious  crafts,  to  avoid  the  confquence  of  his 
faults;,,  and  many  times  is  fain  to  cover  one  fin  with 
another,  and  the  more  he  drives  to  difentangle  him- 
felf the  more  is  he  "  fnared  in  the  work  of  his  own 
*'  hands."  Into  what  perplexities  did  David's  fin 
bring  him  }  fuch  as  by  all  his  power  and  arts  he 
could  not  free  himfelf  from  :  he  was  glad  to  commit 
a  greater  crime  to  avoid  the  fhame  of  a  lefs,  and  could 
find  no  other  way  to  conceal  his  adultery  but  by  plung- 
ing himjelf  into  the  guilt  of  murther.     And  thus  it 

is 


^k^  precepts  of  Chriftianity  not  grievous,  17 1 

Is  proportionabiy  in  all  other  vices.  The  ways  of  S  E  R  M. 
fin  are  crooked  paths,  full  of  windings  aud  turnings ; 
but  the  way  of  holinefs  and  virtue  is  a  high  way,  and 
lies  fo  plain  before  us  that  "  way-faring  men,  though 
"  fools,  fhall  not  err  therein.*'  There  needs  no  fkiij 
to  keep  a  man's  felf  true  and  honed,  if  we  will  but 
refolve  to  deal  juftly,  and  to  "  fpeak  the  truth  to  our 
"  neighbour,"  nothing  in  the  whole  world  is  eafier : 
for  there  is  nothing  of  artifice  and  reach  required  to 
enable  a  man  to  fpeak  as  he  thinks,  and  to  do  to 
others  as  as  he  would  be  dealt  withal  himfelf. 

And  as  the  ways  of  fin  are  full  of  intricacy  and  per- 
plexities, fo  likewife  of  trouble  and  difquiet.  There 
is  no  man  that  wilfully  commits  any  fin,  but  his  con- 
fcience  fmites  him  for  it,  and  his  guilty  mind  is  fre- 
quently galled  with  the  remembrance  of  it  ;  but  the 
reflexion  upon  honeft  and  virtuous  adions  hath  no- 
thing of  regret  and  difquiet  in  it.  No  man's  con- 
fcience  ever  troubled  him  for  not  being  difhoneft,  no 
man's  reafon  ever  challenged  him  for  not  being 
drunk,  no  man  ever  broke  his  fleep  or  was  haunted 
with  fears  of  divine  vengeance  becaufe  he  was  con- 
fcious  to  himfelf  that  he  had  "  lived  foberly,  and 
"  righteouily,  and  godly  in  the  world."  But  with 
the  ungodly  it  is  not  fo.  There  is  no  man  that  is 
knowingly  wicked  but  he  is  guilty  to  himfelf,  and 
there  is  no  man  that  carries  guilt  about  him  but  he 
hath  received  a  Ring  into  his  foul  which  m.akes  him 
reftlefs,  fo  that  he  can  never  have  any  perfect  eafe  and 
pleafure  in  his  mind. 

I  might  have  defcended  to  particular  infiances,  and 
have  fliewn  how  much  more  croubiciom  the  pra6lice 
of  every  fin  and  vice  is  than  the  cxercife  of  the  con- 

Z  2  trary 


7he  precepts  ofChriJlianify  not  grievous. 
trary  grace  and  virtue  ;  but  that  would  be  too  large 
a  fubjed  to  be  brought  within  the  limits  of  a  fingle 
difcourfe. 

VI.  Let  but  virtue  and  vice,  a  religious  and  wick- 
ed courfe  of  life  be  put  in  equal  circum (lances,  do 
but  fuppofe  a  man  to  be  as  much  accuftomed  and 
inured  to  the  one  as  he  has  been  to  the  other,  and 
then  I  doubt  not  but  the  advantages  of  eafe  and  plea- 
fure,  will  be  found  to  be  on  the  fide  of  religion  : 
and  if  we  do  not  put  the  cafe  thus,  we  make  an  un- 
equal comparifon.  For  there  is  no  man  but  when  he 
firft  begins  a  wicked  courfe  feels  a  great  deal  of  re- 
gret in  his  mind,  the  terrors  of  his  confcience  and  the 
fears  of  damnation  are  very  troublefom  to  him.  It  is 
polTible  that  by  degrees  a  man  may  harden  his  con- 
fcience, and  by  a  long  cuftom  of  finning  may  in  a 
great  meafure  wear  off  that  tender  fenle  of  good  and 
evil  which  makes  fin  fo  uneafy  :  but  then  if  in  the 
pradice  of  a  holy  life  a  man  may  by  the  fame  degrees 
arrive  to  far  greater  peace  and  tranquillity  of  mind 
than  ever  any  wicked  man  found  in  a  finful  courfe 
if  by  cuflom  virtue  will  come  to  be  more  pleafant  than 
ever  vice  was,  then  the  advantage  is  plainly  on  the 
fide  of  rehgion.  And' this  is  taily  the  cafe.  It  is 
troublefom  at  firft  for  a  man  to  begin  any  new  courfe, 
and  to  do  contrary  to  what  he  hath  been  accuftom'd 
to  \  but  let  a  man  but  habituate  himfelf  to  a  religi- 
ous and  virtuous  life,  and  the  trouble  will  go  off  by 
degrees,  andunfpeakablepleafure  fucceed  in  the  room 
of  it.  It  is  an  excellent  rule  which  Pythagoras  gave 
to  his  fcholars,  optimum  vita  genus  eligito^  nam  confue- 
tudo  faciei  jucundiffimum :,  "pitch  upon  the  beft 
"  courfe  of  life,"  refolve  always  to  do  that  which  is 

moft 


T^he  precepts  of  Chrijltanity  not  grievous,  173 

mod  reafonable  and  virtuous,  "  and  cuftom  will  foon  S  E  R  M. 
*'  render  it  the  mod  eafy."  There  is  nothing  of  diffi- 
culty in  a  good  life,  but  what  may  be  conquered  by 
cuftom  as  well  as  the  difficulties  of  any  other  courfe, 
and  when  a  man  is  once  ufed  to  it  the  pleafure  of  it 
will  be  greater  than  of  any  other  courfe. 

Let  no  man  then  decline  or  forfake  religion  for  the 
pretended  difficulties  of  it,  and  lay  afide  all  care  of 
God's  commandments  upon  this fuggeftion,  that  they 
are  impoffible  to  be  kept.  For  you  fee  they  are  not 
only  poffible  but  eafy.  And  thofe  who  upon  pretence 
of  the  trouble  and  difficulties  of  religion  abandon 
themfelves  to  a  wicked  courfe  of  life,  may  eafily  be 
convinced  that  they  take  more  pains  to  make  them- 
felves miferable  than  would  ferve  to  bring  them  to 
happinefs.  There  is  no  man  that  is  a  fervant  to  fin, 
and  a  Have  to  any  bafe  luft,  but  might,  if  he  pleafed, 
get  to  heaven  with  lefs  trouble  than  he  goes  to  hell. 

So  that  upon  confideration  of  the  whole  matter, 
there  is  no  reafon  why  any  man  fhould  be  deterred 
from  a  holy  and  virtuous  life  for  fear  of  the  labour  and 
pains  of  it.  Becaufe  every  one  that  is  wicked  takes 
more  pains  in  another  way,  and  is  more  induftrious 
only  to  a  worfe  purpofe.  Now  he  that  can  travel  in 
deep  and  foul  ways  ought  not  to  fay  that  he  cannot 
walk  in  fair.  He  that  ventures  to  run  upon  a  preci- 
pice, when  every  ftep  he  takes  is  with  danger  of  his 
life  and  his  foul,  ought  not  to  pretend  any  thing 
againft  the  plain  and  fafe  paths  of  religion,  which 
will  entertain  us  with  pleafure  all  along  in  the  way, 
and  crown  us  with  happinefs  at  the  end. 

S  ER- 


174  Of  the  obligation  of  Chrijiiam 

SERMON    VII. 

of  the  obligation  of  Chriftians  to  a  holy- 
life. 


2  T  I  M.    ii.   19. 

Let  every  one  that  nameth  the  name  of  Chrijly  deport 
from  iniquity, 

5E  R  M.'  ii>"jy  "^  H  E  whole  verfe  runs  thus :  "  neverthelefs 
VII.  ■         cc  |.|^g  foundation   of  God  flandeth  fure, 

-^^^  ^        «  having   this   feal,  the  Lord   knoweth 

<'  them  that  are  his  :  and,  let  every  one  that  nameth 
«  the  name  of  Christ  depart  from  iniquity. 

In  which  words  the  apoftle  declares  to  us  the  terms 
of  the  covenant  between  God  and  man.  For  the 
word  ^€]MeAi(^,  which  is  tranflated  foundation,  accor- 
ding to  the  ufual  fignification  of  it,  is  likewife  (as 
learned  men  have  obferv'd)  fometimes  ufed  for  an 
inftrument  of  contra6t  whereby  two  parties  do  oblige 
themfelves  mutually  to  each  other.  And  this  notion 
of  the  word  agrees  very  well  with  what  follows  con- 
cerning the  feal  affix'd  to  it,  which  is  very  fuitable 
to  a  covenant,  but  not  at  all  to  a  foundation.  ^Tis 
true  indeed,  as  the  learned  Grotius  hath  obferved, 
there  ufed  anciently  to  be  infcriptions  on  foundation- 
flones,  and  the  word  <r(pfuyk,  which  we  render  feal, 
may  likewife  fignify  an  infcription ;  and  then  the 
fenfe  will  be  very  current  thus,  the  foundation  of  God 
ftandeth  fure,  having  this  infcription,  But  it  is  to 
I  be 


to  a  holy  life.  jy^ 

be  confidered,  that  though  ff(p^ay']g  may  fignify  ^ir^  E  R  M; 
infcription,  yet  it  is  only  an  infcription  upon  a  feal  ._^  J^ 
which  hath  no  relation  to  a  foundation,  but  is  very 
proper  to  a  covenant  or  mutual  obligation.  And 
accordingly  the  feal  aflix'd  to  this  inftrument,  or  co- 
venant between  God  and  man,  is  in  allufion  to  the  cuf- 
tom  of  thofe  countries  faid  to  have  an  infcription  on 
both  fides  agreeable  to  the  condition  of  the  perfons 
contra6ling.  On  God's  part  there  is  this  imprefs  or 
infcription,  "  the  Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  his,'* 
that  is,  God  will  own  and  reward  thofe  that  are  faith- 
ful to  him :  and  on  our  part,  "  let  every  one  that 
"  nameth  the  name  of  Christ,  depart  from  ini- 
«  quity." 

"  Let  every  one  that  nameth  the  name  of  Christ,'* 
that  is,  that  calls  himfelf  a  Chriftian.     For  to  name 
the  name  of  any  one,  or  to  have  his  name  call'd  upon 
by  us  does,  according  to  the  ufe  of -this  phrafe  among 
the  Hebrews,  fignify  nothing  elfe  but  to  be  denomina- 
ted from  him.     Thus  'tis  frequently  ufed  in  the  old 
teflament,  and  fometimes  in  the  new,  "  do  they  not  Jam.  ii  7. 
"  blafpheme  that  worthy  name  by  the  which  ye  are 
"  called  ?"  that  is,  the  name  or  title  of  Chriflians ; 
and  that  exprefTion,  "  if  ye  be  reproached   for  the  i  Pet.  ivJ 
"  name  of  Christ,"  is  at  the  fixteenth  verfe  varied,  ^^' 
"  if  any  man   fufFer  as  a  Chriftian."     So  that   to 
name  the  name  of  Christ  is  to  call  ourfelves  Chri- 
ftians. 

"  Let  every  one  that  nameth  the  name  of  Christ 
*'  depart  from  iniquity/'  The  word  d^iKia  is  often 
taken  ftri(5lly  for  injuftice  or  unrighteoufnefs,  but 
fometimes  ufed  more  largely  for  fm  and  wickednefs 
in  the  general.    And  fo  it  fcems  to  be  ufed  here  in 

the 


Of  the  obligation  of  Chrijliam 
the  text,  becaufe  there  is  no  reafon  from  the  context 
to  reftrain  it  to  any  particular  kind  of  fin  or  vice, 
and  becaufe  Chriftianity  lays  an  equal  obligation  up- 
on men  to  abftain  from  all  fin.  "  Let  every  one  that 
"  nameth  the  name  of  Christ  depart  from  iniqui- 
*'  ty,"  that  is,  every  Chriftian  obligeth  himfelf  by 
his  profefllon  to  renounce  all  fin  and  to  live  a  holy 
life. 

In  fpeaking  to  this  argument  I  lliall  do  thefe  two 
things. 

1.  Shew  what  obligation  the  profefllon  of  Chrifti- 
anity lays  upon  men  to  live  holy  lives. 

2.  Endeavour  to  perfuade  thofe  who  call  themfelves 
Chriftians  to  anfwer  this  obligation. 

I.  What  obligation  the  profefllon  of  Chriftianity 
lays  upon  men  to  live  holy  lives.  He  that  calls  him- 
felf a  Chriftian  profeflfeth  to  entertain  the  dodrine  of 
Christ,  to  live  in  the  imitation  of  his  holy  example^ 
and  to  have  folemnly  engaged  himfelf  to  all  this. 
I  fliall  fpeak  briefly  to  thefe,  and  then  come  to  that 
which  I  principally  intend,  to  perfuade  men  to  live 
accordingly. 

I .  He  that  profeflfeth  himfelf  a  Chriftian  profeflP- 
cth  to  entertain  the  dodlrine  of  Christ,  to  believe 
the  whole  gofpel,  to  aflfent  to  all  the  articles  of  the 
Chriftian  faith,  to  all  the  precepts  and  promifes  and 
threatnings  of  the  gofpel.  Now  the  great  dcfign, 
the  proper  intention  of  this  do61:rine  is  to  take  men  oflF 
from  fin,  and  to  dire6l  and  encourage  them  to  a  holy 
life.  It  teacheth  us  what  we  are  to  believe  concern- 
ing God  and  Christ,  not  with  any  defign  to  enter- 
tain our  minds  with  the  bare  fpeculation  of  thofe 
truths,  but  to  better  our  lives.    For  every  article  of 

ojur 


to  a  holy  lifd        '  177 

©ur  Faith  is  a  proper  argument  againft  fin,  and  a  pow-  SE  R  M* 
erful  motive  to  obedience.     The  whole  hiftory  of ._.    _^ 
Christ's  appearance  in  the  world,  all  the  difcourfes 
and  adions  of  his  life,  and  the  fufferings  of  his  death 
do  all    tend   to   this  ;  the  ultimate   ifTue  of  all  is  the 
deflroying  of  fin ;  fo   St.  John   tells  us,  "  for  this  i  ]^^'  iii* 
"  purpofe  was  the  fon  of  God   manifefied  that  he    * 
"  might  deftroy  the  works  of  the  devil."     But  this 
is  moftexprefly  and  fully  declar'd  to  us.  Tit.  ii.  n^ 
12,  13,  14.     "  The  grace  of  God  that  bringeth  fal- 
"  vation  hath  appeared  to  all  men,  teaching  us  that 
"  denying  ungodlinefs  and  worldly  lufcs  v/e   Ihould 
*'  live  foberly,  righteouQy,  and  godly,  in  this  pre- 
^^  fent  v/orld  •,  looking  for  that  bleiTed  hope,  and  the 
"  glorious  appearing  of  the  great  God   and  our  Sa- 
*'  viouR   Jesus  Christ  ;  v/ho  gave  himfelf  for  us 
*'  that  he  might  redeem  us  from  all  iniquity,  and 
"  purify  unto  himfelf  a  peculiar  people  zealous  of 
*'  good  works." 

The  precepts  of  the   gofpel  do  (Iriftly  command 
holinefs,  and  that  univerfal ;  the  purity  of  our  fouls? 
and  the  chaftity  of  our  bodies  ;  "  to  cleanfe  our  felves  ^  Cor.  vll 
"  from  all   fijthinefs  offlefh  and  fpirit  ?  to  abftain  iThef.v* 
"  from  all  kind  of  evil ;  to  be  holy  in  all  manner  of  ^^* 
*'  converfation."     They  require  us  to  endeavour  af- 
ter the  higheft  degrees  of  holinefs  that  are  attainable 
by  us  in  this  imperfefl;  ftate,  "  to  be  holy  as  he  that  i  Pet.  i, 
"  hath  called  us  is  holy  ;  to  be  perfedas  our  father  ^5- 
*'  which  is  in  heaven  is  perfed."  j^^^  ^^ 

And  all  the  promifes  of  the  gofpel  are  fo  m.ahy  en-  48. 
couragements  to  obedience  and  a  holy  life  ;  "  having  ^  ^     ,..: 
"  therefore  thefe  promifes,  let  us  cleanfe  ourfelves  i. 
t'  from  all  filthinefs  of  fiefli  and  fpirit,  and  perfect  ho- 

Vol.  L  A  a  "  linefs 

►   -4' 


tyS  Oj  the  obligation  of  Chrijlians 

SERM.  «  lincls  in  the  fear  of  God."  jWe  arc  told  by  St. 

v_.^^^  Peter  that  thefe  exceeding  great  and  precious  promifes 

*Pet.i.4.  a^^  given  to  us  that  by  thefe  "  w€  might  be  partak- 

"  ers  of  a  divine  nature,  having  efcaped  the  pollu- 

"  tion  "that  is  in  the  world  through  luft-,  and  that 

^       we  might  "  give  all  diligence  to  add  to  our  fai-th 

"  virtue,  and  to  virtue  knowledge,  and  to  knowledge 

"  temperance  and  patience  and  brotherly-kindnefs 

*^  and  charity." 

And  the  threatnings  of  the  gofpel  are  fo  many 
powerful  arguments  againfl  fin. 
Rom.  i.  Therefore  the  apoftle  calls  the  gofpel  "  the  power 
36.  18.  cc  of  God  unto  falvation,"  becaufe  therein  the  "wrath 
"  of  God  is  revealed  from  heaven  againft  all  ungod- 
*'  linefs  and  unrighteoufnefsof  men."  So  that  if  we 
call  our  felves  Chriftians  we  profefs  to  embrace  the 
holy  doftrine  of  the  Chriftian  religion  which  is  per- 
fe6lly  oppofite  to  all  impiety  and  wickednefs  of  life* 
We  profefs  to  be  governed  by  thofe  laws  which  do 
flriully  enjoin  holinefs  and  virtue.  We  profefs  to  be 
perfuaded  that  all  the  promifes  and  threatnings  of  the 
gofpel  are  true,  which  offer  fuch  great  and  glorious 
rewards  to  obedience,  and  threaten  tranfgreffion  and 
difobedience  with  fuch  dreadful  punilhments.  And 
if  fo,  we  are  obliged  both  by  our  reafon  and  our  in- 
tereft  to  live  accordingly. 

2.  He  that  profefTeth  himfelf  a  Chriftian  profef^ 
feth  to  live  in  the  imitation  of  Christ's  example 
and  to  follow  his  fteps  "  who  did  no  fin,  neither  wa^ 
«'  guile  found  in  his  mouth."  Thefon  of  God  came 
into  the  world  not  only  by  his  do(5lrine  to  inftrudl  us 
in  the  way  to  happinefs,  and  by  his  death  to  make  ex- 
piation of  fin,  but  by  his  life  to  be  an  example  to  us 
a  ■    of 


fo  a  holy  life.  jyg 

of  hollnefs  and  virtue.     Therefore  in  fcripture  we  S  E  R  M. 

-t  7  T  T 

find  feveral  titles  given  him  which  import  his  exem- 
plarinefs,  as  of  a  prince  and  a  captain,  a  mafter  and 
a  guide.  Now  if  he  be  our  pattern  we  fhould  endea- 
vour to  be  like  him,  "  to  have  the  fame  mind  that 
"  was  in  Christ  Jesus;  to  walk  in  love  as  he 
*'  alfo  hath  loved  us  and  given  himfelf  for  us."  We 
fliould  afpire  after  the  highefb  degree  of  holinefs, 
make  it  our  conftant  and  fincere  endeavour  to  pleafe 
God  and  do  his  will  and  "  to  fulfil  all  righteoufnefs'* 
as  he  did.  Does  any  man  profefs  himfelf  a  Chriftian 
and  yet  abandons  himfelf  to  intemperance  and  filthy 
lufts  ?  is  this  like  our  Saviour  ?  Are  we  cruel  and 
iinmercifijl  ?  is  this  like  the  high  prieft  of  our  pro- 
feiTion  ?  Are  we  proud  and  palTionate,  malicious  and 
revengeful?  is  this  to  be  like-minded  with  Christ 
who  was  meek  and  lowly  in  fpirit,  who  prayed  for  his 
enemies  and  off'ered  up  his  blood  to  God  on  the  be- 
half of  them  that  fhed  it  ?  If  we  call  our  felves  Chrifti- 
ans  we  profefs  to  have  the  life  of  Christ  continually 
before  us,  and  to  be  always  correding  and  reforming 
our  lives  by  that  pattern. 

3.  He  that  calls  himfelf  a  Chriftian  hath  folemnly 
engaged  himfelf  to  renounce  all  fin  and  to  live  a  holy 
life.  By  baptifm  we  have  folemnly  taken  upon  us 
the  profelTion  of  Chriftianity,  and  engaged  our  felves 
4:0  renounce  the  devil  and  all  his  works,  and  obedient- 
%  to  keep  God's  commandments.  Anciently  thofe 
who  were  baptized  put  off  their  garments,  which 
fignified  the  putting  off  the  body  of  fin ;  and  were 
immerfed  and  buried  in  the  water,  to  reprefent  their 
death  to  fin :  and  then  did  rife  up  again  out  of  the 
water,  to  fignify  their  entrance  upon  a  new  life.  And 

Aa  2  ta 


I  So  Of  the  ohligation  of  Chrifllam 

S  E  K  M.  to  thefe  cufloms  tlic  apoftle  alludes  when  he  fays, 
t^^  _  ^  "  How  fhall  we  that  are  dead  to  fin  live  any  longer 
Roui.  vi.  "'therein  \  know  ye  not,  that  fo  many  of  us  as  were 
5'  3'  4^  5,  cc  baptized  into  Jesi>s  Christ  were  baptized  into  his 
^'  death  ?  Therefore  we  are  buried  with  him  by  bap- 
"  tifm  into  death,  that  like  as  Christ  was  raifed  up 
"  from  the  dead  by  the  glory  of  the  father,  even  fo 
"  we  alfo  fhould  walk  in  newnefs  of  life :  for  if  wc 
''  have  been  planted  together  in  the  likenefs  of  his 
*'  death  we  fliall  be  alfo  in  the  likenefs  of  his  refur- 
^'  re6lion,  knowing  this,  that  our  old  man  is  crucifi- 
*'  ed  with  him,  that  the  body  of  fin  might  be  deftroy- 
^'  ed,  that  henceforth  we  fhould  not  {txvt  fin.  So 
that  by  baptifm  we  profefs  to  be  entred  into  a  new 
•Rate,  and  to  be  endued  with  a  new  nature  ;  "  to  have 
*"  put  off  the  old  man  with  his  deeds  •,"  to  have  quit- 
cd  "  our  former  converfation,  which  is  corrupt  accor- 
*'  ding  to  the  deceitful  lufi:s,'*  and  to  be"  renewed  in 
^'  the  fpirit  of  our  minds,"  and  to  have  "  put  on  the 
^'  new  man  which  after  God  Is  created  in  righteouf- 
^'  nefs  and  true  holinefs"  And  therefore  baptifm 
is  called  the  "  putting  on  of  Christ  \  as  many  of 
"  you  as  have  been  baptized  into  Christ,  have  put 
"  on  Christ."  Now  if  we  profefs  to  have  put  on 
Christ  we  muil  quit  and  renounce  our  lufts,  be- 
caufe  thefe  are  inconfifi:ent,  as  appears  by  the  oppo- 
fition  which  the  apofi:le  makes  between  them  ^ 
Kom.xlii. "  put  ye  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  make 
14.  "  not  provifion  for  the  fiefli  to  fulfil  the  lufts  there- 

f'  of" 

And  as  we  did  folcmnly  covenant  with  God  to 
this  purpofe  in  baptifm,  fo  we  do  folemnly  renew  this 
jBbiigJ^tion  fo  often  as  we  receive  the  blefiedfacrarnent 

of 


to  a  holy  life.  l8t 

of  Christ's  body  and  blood.     Therefore  the  cup  In  SE  R M. 
the  facrament  is  called  the  "  new  covenant  in  his  blood," 
that  is,    this  reprefents  the   (liedding  of  Christ's 
blood  by  which  rite  the  covenant  between  God  and 
man  is  ratified.     And  as  by  this  God   doth  confirm 
his  promifes  to  us,  fo  we  do  oblige  our  feives  to  be 
faithful  and  obedient  to  him,  "  and  if  we  fin  wilfully 
*'  after  we  have  received  the  knowledge  of  the  truth," 
that  is,  after  we  are  become  Chriftians,  "  we  account 
"  the  blood  of  the  covenant  a  common  thing,"  that 
is,  we  make  nothing  of  the  folcmneft  rite  that  ever 
was  ufed  in  the  world  for  confirmation  of  any  cove- 
nant, the  fnedding  of  the  blood  of  the  fon  of  God. 
And  that  this  v/as  always  underilood  to  be  the  mean- 
ing of  this  holy  facrament  to  renew  our  covenant  with 
God,  and  folemnly  to  confirm  our  refolutions  of  a 
holy  life  is  very  plain  from  that  account  which  Pli- 
ny ^  gives  us  of  the  worfhip  of  the  Chriftians  in  a  let- 
ter to  Trajan  the  Emperor  -,    in  which  he  tells  him 
"  that  they   afiembled  early  in  the  morning  before 
*•  day,    to  fing  a  hymn  to  Christ  as  God  j"    and 
then  (faith  he)  they  do  facrament o  fe  ohftringere^  "  bind 
"  themfelves  by  a  facrament  or  oath  not  to  rob  or 
"  ileal  or  commit  adultery,  not  to  break  their  word 
*'  or  falfify  their  truil,  and  after  they  have  eaten  to- 
^'  gether  they  depart  home."     Which  is  plainly  an 
account  of  the  Chriftians  celebrating  of  the  holy  fa- 
crament, which  it  feems  was  then  looked  upon  as  an 
oath,  whereby  Chriflians  did  folemnly  covenant  and 
engage  themfelves  againfl  all  wickednefs  and  vice. 

Thus  you  fee  what  obligation  the  profeffion  of 
Chrif^ianity  lays  upon  us  to  holinefs  of  life.     From 
*■  Plin.  epift.  1,  lo.  epift.  97. 


1 82  Of  the  obligation  oj  Chrijliam 

E  R  M.  ^\\  which  it  is  evident  that  the  gofpel  requires  fome- 
diing  on  our  part.  For  the  covenant  between  God 
and  us  is  a  mutual  engagement,  and  as  there  are  blef- 
fings  promifed  on  his  part  fo  there  are  conditions  to 
be  performed  on  ours.  And  if  we  live  wicked  and 
unhojy  lives,  if  we  neglecl  our  duty  towards  God  wc 
have  no  title  at  all  to  the  bleflings  of  this  covenant. 
The  contrary  do6lrine  to  this  hath  been  greedily  en- 
tertained to  the  vaft  prejudice  of  Chriflianity,  as  if 
in  this  new  covenant  of  the  gofpel  God  took  all  upon 
himfelf,  and  required  nothing  or  as  good  as  nothing, 
of  us,  that  it  would  be  a  difparagement  to  the  free- 
dom of  God's  grace  to  think  he  expe6ls  any  thing 
from  us.  That  the  gofpel  is  all  promifes  and  our 
part  is  only  to  believe  and  embrace  them,  that  is,  to 
be  confident  that  God  will  perform  them  if  we  can 
but  think  fo,  though  we  do  nothing  elfe  ;  which  is 
an  eafy  condition  to  fools  but  the  hardeft  in  the 
world  to  a  wife  man,  who  if  his  falvation  depended 
upon  it  could  never  perfuade  himfelf  to  believe,  that 
the  holy  God  without  any  refped  at  all  to  his  re- 
pentance and  amendment  would  beftow  upon  him 
forgivenefs  of  fins  and  eternal  life,  only  becaufe  he 
was  confident  that  God,  would  do  fo.  As  if  any  man 
could  think  that  it  were  a  thing  fo  highly  acceptable 
to  God  that  men  fiiould  believe  of  him  that  he  loves 
to  difpenfe  his  grace  and  mercy  upon  the  moft  unfit 
and  unreafonable  terms.  A  covenant  does  neceffari- 
ly  imply  a  mutual  obligation,  and  the  fcripture  plain- 
ly tells  us  what  are  the  terms  and  conditions  of  this 
covenant  both  on  God's  part  and  ours,  namely,  that 
he  "  will  be  our  God"  and  we  "  fhall  be  his  people." 
But  he  hath  no-where  faid  thgt  though  we  be  not  his 

people 


to  a  holy  life.  ifg 

people  yet  he  will  be  our  God  .  The  feal  of  this  cove-  S  E  R  M 
nant  hath  two  infcriptions  upon  it  ;  one  on  God's 
part,  that  he  will  know  them  that  are  his ;  and  ano- 
ther on  our  part,  that  we  fhall  depart  from  iniquity. 
But  if  we  will  not  fubmit  to  this  condition  God  will 
not  know  us,  but  will  bid  us  depart  from  him.  So 
our  Saviour  tells  us,  "  I  will  fay  unto  them  de-  y^^^ 
*'  part  from  me  ye  workers  of  iniquity,  I  know  you  23. 
*'  not."  If  we  deal  falfly  in  covenant  with  God  and 
break  loofe  from  all  our  engagements  to  him,  we  re- 
leafe  God  from  all  the  promifes  that  he  hath  made 
to  us.  If  we  negled  to  perform  thofe  conditions  upon 
which  he  hath  fufpended  the  performance  of  his  pro- 
mifes, we  difcharge  the  obligation  on  God's  part, 
and  he  remains  faithful  though  he  deny  us  that  hap- 
pinefs  which  he  promifed  under  thofe  conditions  which 
we  have  negledled. 

11.  I  come  now  to  the  fecond  thing  propounded, 
and  that  is  to  perfuade  thofe  who  profefs  Chriflianity 
to  anfwer  thofe  obligations  to  a  holy  life,  which  their 
religion  lays  upon  them.  We  all  call  our  felves 
Chriflians,  and  would  be  very  much  offended  at  any 
man  that  fhould  deny  us  this  title.  But  let  us  not 
cheat  our  felves  with  an  empty  and  infignificant  name, 
but  if  we  will  call  our  felves  Chriflians  let  us  fill  up  this 
great  title,  and  make  good  our  profefTion  by  a  fuit- 
able  life  and  pradlice.  And  to  perfuade  us  hereto, 
I  will  urge  thefe  three  confiderations. 

1 .  The  indecency  of  the  contrary. 

2.  The  great  fcandal  of  it  to  our  blefTed  Saviour 
and  his  holy  religion,  and 

3.  The  infinite  danger  of  it  tg  our  own  fouls, 

I.  Confider 


184  Of  the  obligation  of  Chrifians 

ERM.  I.  Confider  how  unbecoming  it  is  for  a  man  to 
live  unfuitab]y  to  his  profefllon.  If  we  call  our  felves 
Chriftians  we  profefs  to  entertain  the  doflrine  of  the 
gofpel,  to  be  taught  and  inftrucled  by  the  befl  mas- 
ter, to  be  the  difciples  of  the  higheft  and  mofl  per- 
fed  inftitution  that  ever  was  in  the  world,  to  have 
embraced  a  religion  which  contains  the  molt  exad 
rules  for  the  condu6t  and  government  of  our  lives, 
which  lays  down  the  plained  precepts,  fets  before  us 
the  beft  patterns  and  examples  of  a  holy  life,  and  of- 
fers us  the  greateil  afTiftances  and  encouragements  to 
this  purpofe.  We  profefs  to  be  furnilhed  with  the 
l^ell  arguments  to  excite  us  to  holinefs  and  virtue,  to 
be  awed  with  the  greatefl  fears  and  animated  with 
the  beft  hopes  of  any  men  in  the  world. 

Now  whoever  makes  fuch  a  profeflion  as  this 
obligeth  himfelf  to  live  anfwerably,  to  do  nothing 
that  fliall  grody  contradict  it.  Nothing  is  more  al> 
furd  than  for  a  man  to  adl  contrary  to  his  profeflion, 
to  pretend  to  great  matters  and  perform  nothing  of 
tvhat  he  pretends  to.  Wife  men  will  not  be  caught 
with  pretences  nor  be  impofed  upon  with  an  empty 
profeflion,  but  they  will  enquire  into  our  lives  and 
adtions,  and  by  thefe  they  will  make  a  judgment  of 
us.  They  cannot  fee  into  our  hearts  nor  pry  into 
our  underftandings  to  difcover  what  it  is  that  we  in- 
wardly believe,  they  cannot  difcern  thofe  fecret  and 
fupernatural  principles  that  we  pretend  to  be  afled 
by  :  but  this  they  can  do,  they  can  examine  our  ac- 
tions and  behold  our  good  or  bad  works,  and  try 
whether  our  lives  be  indeed  anfwerable  to  our  pro- 
feflion, and  do  really  excel  the  lives  of  other  men  v/ho 
do  not  pretend  to  fuch  great  things.    There  are  a 

great 


tfi  a  holy  lifes  x%'^ 

many  fagacious  perfbns  who  will  eafily  find  us  out, 
will  look  under  our  mafic,  and  fee  through  all  our 
fine  pretenfions,  and  will  quickly  difcern  the  abfurdi- 
ty  of  telling  the  world  that  we  believe  one  thing  when 
we  do  the  contrary. 

If  we  profefs  to  believe  the  Chriftian  religion,  we 
expofe  our  felves  to  the  fcorn  and  contempt  of  every 
difcerning  man  if  we  do  not  live  up  to  it.  With  what 
face  can  any  man  continue  in  the  pra6lice  of  any  knowii 
fin,  that  profeffeth  to  believe  the  holy  dodtrine  of  the 
gofpel,  which  forbids  all  fm  under  the  higheft  and  fe- 
vereft  penalties }   If  we  did  but  believe  the  hiftory  of 
the  gofpel  as  we  do  any  ordinary  credible  ftory,  and 
did  we  but  regard  the  laws  of  Chriflianity  as  we  do 
the  laws  of  the  land  ;    were  we  but  perfuaded,  that 
fraud  and  opprefiion,  lying  and  perjury,  intemperance 
and  uncleannefs,  covetoufnefs  and  pride,  malice  and 
revenge,  the  neglect  of  God  and  religion  will  bring 
men  to  hell  as  certainly  as  treaibn  and  felony  will  bring 
a  man  under  the  fentence  of  the  law:  had  we  but  the    •  \ 
fame  awe  and  regard  for  the  threathings  and  promifes 
of  the  gofpel  that  we  have  for  the  frowns  and  fmiles 
of  thofe  who  are  in  power  and  authority,    even  this 
would  be  effedual  to  keep  us  from  fm.     And  if  the 
gofpel  have  not  this  effecft  upon  iis  it  is  afi  argument 
that  we  do  not  believe  it. 

It  is  to  no  purpofe  to  go  about  to  perfuaJde  mea 
that  we  do  heartily  entertain  the  do6lrine  of  ChrisTs 
that  do6trine  which  hath  all  the  charadlers  of  piety 
and  juftice,  of  holinefs  and  virtue  upon  it ;  which! 
oblige th  men  to  "  whatfoever  things  are  true,  what- 
*^  foever  things  are  honefl,  whatfoever  things  are 
*'  chafte,  whatfoever  things  are  lovely,  and  of  goodf 
Vol.  1  B  b  f_^  report/^ 


1 86  Of  the  ohllgation  of  Chrijliam 

^^vn^^'  "'  ^^P^^^''*  ^^  w^  ^^"^^  "o  regard  to  thefe  things  In  ou^' 
lives.  He  that  would  know  what  a  man  believes,  let 
him  attend  rather  to  what  he  does  than  to  what  he 
talks.  He  that  leads  a  wicked  life  makes  a  more  cre- 
dible and  effe^lual  profefTion  of  infidelity  than  he  who 
in  words  only  denies  the  gofpel.  It  is  the  hardeft 
thing  in  the  world  to  imagine  that  that  man  believes 
Chriflianity,  who  by  ungodlinefs  and  worldly  lulls  does 
deny  and  renounce  it.  If  we  profefs  our  felves  Chri- 
flians,  it  may  juftly  be  expeded  from  us  that  we 
fhould  evidence  this  by  our  adions,  that  we  fhould 
live  at  another  rate  than  the  heathens  did  •,  that  we, 
who  worfliip  a  holy  and  jufl  God,  fliould  not  allow 
our  felves  the  liberty  to  fin,  as  thofe  did  who  worfhip- 
ed  fuch  gods  as  were  examples  of  fin  and  patrons  of 
their  vices.  Thou  who  profefTeft  thy  felf  a  Chriflian 
hiayell  not  walk  in  the  lufls  of  the  flelli  and  of  un* 
cleannefs,  as  thofe  did  who  worfhipped  a  luftful  Ju- 
piter and  a  wanton  Venus.  Thou  mayeft  not  be  in- 
temperate^  as  thofe  were  who  wordiipped  a  drunken 
Bacchus.  Thou  mayeft  not  be  cruel  and  unmerciful, 
as  thofe  were  who  worlliipped  a  fierce  Saturn  :  nor 
mayeft  thou  fteal,  as  thofe  did  who  worfliipped  a  thiev- 
ifh  Mercury.  Thou  muft  remember  that  thou  art  a 
Chriftian,  and  when  thou  art  ready  to  debafe  thy  felf 
to  any  vile  luft  confider  what  title  thou  beareft,  by 
what  name  thou  art  called,  whofe  difciple  thou  art ; 
and  then  fay  to  thy  felf,  fhall  I  allow  my  felf  in  any 
impiety  or  wickednefs  of  life^  who  pretend  to  be  in- 
•flru6led  by  that  grace  of  God  which  teaches  men  to 
denyungodlinefs and  worldly  lufts?  Shall!  cherifh  any 
finful  paflion  who  pretend  to  have  mortified  all  thefe, 
and  to  have  "  put  off  the  old  man  with  his  deeds  ?" 
4  It 


to  a  holy  life.  1 87 

It  is  not  being  gilded  over  with  the  external  pro-  S  E  R  M* 
fefTion  of  Chriftianity  that  will  avail  us  \  our  religion  \„^^^^1^^ 
muft  be  a  vital  principle  inwardly  to  change  and  tranf- 
form  us.     What  the  apoftle  fays  concerning  circum- 
cifion,  we  may  apply  to  them  that  are  baptized  and  Rom.  ii. 
make  an  outward  profeffion  of  Chriftianity  ;  baptifm  ^5- 
verily  profiteth  if  we  obey  the  gofpel,  but  if  we  walk 
contrary  to  the  precepts  of  it  our  baptifm  is  no  bap-  ' 
tifm,  and  our  Chriftianity  is  heatlienifm.     If  by  our 
lives  and  adlions  we  do  contradid  that  religion  which 
we  profefs,  we  do  by  this  very  thing  prove  pur  felves 
to  be  counterfeits  and  hypocrites  \  and  that  we  have 
only  taken  up  our  religion  for  a  faftiion,  and  receiv- 
ed it  according  to  cuftom  ;  we  were  born  in  a  coun- 
try where  it  is  reverenced,  and  therefore  we  are  of  it. 
And   the  reafon  why  we  are  Chriftians  rather  than 
Jews,   or  Turks,  or  Heathens,  is   becaufe  Chriftian 
religion  had  the  fortune  to  come  firft  in  our  way  and 
to  befpcak  us  at  our  entrance  into  the  world. 

Are  we  not  alhamed  to  take  up  a  profeffion  upoa 
fuch  flight  grounds,  and  to  wear  about  us  fuch  ari. 
empty  title  ?  It  fhould  make  our  blood  to  rife  in  our 
faces  to  confider  what  a  diftance  there  is  between  our 
religion  and  our  lives.  I  remember  Tully  upbraids 
the  philofophers  very  fmartly  for  living  unfuitably 
to  their  dodlrines.  A  philofopher  (faith  he)  is  un- 
pardonable if  he  mifcarry  in  his  life,  (^uod  in  ofida 
cujus  magijier  effe  vult  lahitur  -,  artemfte  vit^e  prsfejfus^ 
delinquii  in  vita ;  "  becaufe  he  is  faulty  in  that  where* 
**  in  he  pretends  to  be  a  mafter,  and  whiifl  he  pro- 
«  fefleth  an  art  of  living  better  than  other  men  hemif- 
"  cai'ries  in  this  life."  With  how  much  greater 
reafon  may  we  challenge  Chriftians  for  the  mifcarria- 

B-  3;>  a  gea 


J  88  Of  the  obligation  of  Chriftians 

ERM.  ges  of  their  lives,  which  are  fo  diredly  contrary  tc> 
their  profeffion  ?  It  may  be  juftly  fufpedied   that  fo 
perfect  an  inftitution  as  the  gofpeJ  is,  which  the  fon 
of  God  came  from  heaven  on  purpofe  to  propagate 
in  the  world,   fhould  make  men  more  flridly  holy 
and  virtuous,  and  fct  the  profefTors  of  it   at  a  great- 
er diftance  from  all  impurity  and  vice  than  ever  any 
inftitution  in  the  world  did.     If  a  man  profefs  any 
other  art  or  calling  it  is  expedled  that  he  fhoukl  be 
iTiiird  in    it  and  excel   thofe  who  do  not  pretend  to 
it.     'Tis  the  greateft  difparagement  to  a  phyfician 
l-hat  can  be,  to  fay  of  him,  that  he  is  in  other  ref- 
pe6ls  an  excellent  man,  only  he  hath  no  great  fki  11 
in  difeafes,  and  the  methods  of  cure,  becaufe  this  is 
his  profeflion :  he  might  be  pardon'd  for  other  de- 
feds,  but  the  proper  flcill  of  his  art  may  juftly  be  ex- 
pefted  from  him.     So  for  a  Chriftian  ^  to  fay  of  him, 
the  worft  thing  in  him  is  his  life ;  he  is  very  ortho- 
dox in  his  opinions,  but  he's  an  ill-natur'd  man,  one 
of  very  violent  pafTions,  he  will  be  very  frequently 
drunk,  he  makes  no  confcience  of  his  dealings,  he  is 
very  uncharitable  to  all  that  differ  from  him  :  This 
man  is  faulty  in  his  profeflion,  he  is  defe(n:ive  in  that 
-which  fhould  be  his  excellency  ;  he  may  have  ortho- 
dox opinions  in  religion,  but  when   all  is  done  there 
is  no  fuch  error  and  herefy,  nothing  fo  fundamental- 
ly oppofite  to  religion  as  a  wicked  life.     A  Chriftian 
does  not  pretend  to  have  a  better  wit  or  a  more  pier- 
cing underftanding  than  a  Turk  or  Heathen,  but  ,he 
profefleth  to  live  better  than  they,  to  be  more  chafte 
^nd  rnore  temperate,  more  juft  and  charitable,  more 
meek  and  gentle,  more  loving  and  peaceable  than  o- 
iher  men  :  if  he  fail  in  this,  where  is  the  art  the  man 

boafts. 


to  a  holy  life  1 89 

boafts  of?  To  whatpurpofe  is  ali  this  noife  and  ftir  a-  SE  R  M. 
bout  the  gofpel  and  the  holy  dodrine  of  Christ?  ^^^' 
If  any  man  profefs  himfelf  a  Chriftian  and  do  not  Hve 
better  than  others,  he  is  a  mere  pretender  and  moun- 
tebank in  rehgion,  he  is  a  bungler  in  his  own  art,  and 
unfkill'd  in  his  proper  profeflion.  This  is  the  firfl-, 
the  indecency  of  the  thing. 

2.  Confider  how  great  a  fcandal  this  mud  needs  be 
to  our  bJefled  Saviour  and  his  holy  religion.     The 
Chriftian  religion  hath  undergone  many  a  hard  cen- 
fure  for  the  mifcarriages  of  the  profeiTors  of  it.     The 
impieties  and  vices  of  thofe  who  call  themfelves  Chris- 
tians have  caufed  many  fharp  refledions  upon  Chrl- 
ftianity,  and  made  the  Son   of  God  and  the  blefled 
Saviour  of  the  world  to  wear  the  odious  names  of 
deceiver  and  impoftor.     If  a  man  did  defign  to  do 
the  greateft  fpite  to  religion  he  could  not  give   it  a 
deeper  wound,  he  could   not  take  a  more  effedual 
courfe  to  difparage  it  than  by  a  lewd  and  debauched 
life.     For  this  will  ftill  be  an  objedlibn  in  the  minds 
of  thofe  who  are  ftrangers  and  enemies  to  our  religi- 
on.    If  the  gofpel  were  fo  excellent  an  inflitution  as 
it  is  reported  to  be,  furely  we  fhould  fee  better  ef- 
fedls  of  it  in  the  lives  of  thofe  who  profefs  it.     When 
we  would  perfuade  a  heathen  to  our  religion,  and  tell 
him  how  holy  a  God  we  ferve,  what  excellent  pat- 
terns we  imitate,  what  fpiritual  and  divine  precepts 
of  holinefs  and  virtue  our  religion  does  contain  \  may 
not  he  reply,  would  you  have  me  to  believe  you  when 
I  fee  you  do  not  believe  your  felves  ?  If  you  believed 
■your  religion  you   would  live  according  to  it.     For 
if  the  gofpel  were  every  word  of  it  falfe^  if  there  were 
neither  a  heaven  to  be  hoped  for,  nor  a  hell  to  be  fear- 
ed 


igo  Tie  obligation  of  Chrijlians 

S  E  R  M.  ed  after  this  life,  how  could   many  Chriftians  live 
VII 

'     worfe  than  they  do  ? 

As  we  would  not  proclaim  to  the  world  that  the 
gofpel  is  an  unholy  and  vicious  Inflitution,  let  us 
take  heed  that  we  bring  no  fcandal  upon  it  by  our 
lives,  left  the  enemies  of  our  religion  fay  as  Salvian 
tells  us  they  did  in  his  time.  Si  Chriftus  fan5ia  docuijfet 
Chriftiani  fan5fe  vixijfenty  furely  "  if  Christ  had 
"  taught  fo  holy  a  do6lrine  Chriftians  would  have  liv- 
*'  ed  holier  lives.'*  Tully  tells  us  that  one  of  the 
Ihrewdeft  arguments  that  ever  was  brought  againft 
philofophy  was  this,  quofdam  perfeBos  philofophos  ttir- 
piter  vivere^  "  that  fo'me  great  philofophers  led  very 
*^  filthy  lives.'*  Celfus  and  Porphyry,  Hierocles  and 
Julian,  among  all  their  witty  invedives  againft  Chri- 
ftian  religion;,  have  nothing  againft  it  that  refledls  fb 
much  upon  it  as  do  the  wicked  lives  of  io  many  Chri- 
ftians. The  greateft  enmity  to  religion  is  to  profeis 
it  and  to  live  unanfwerably  to  it. 

This  confideration  ought  greatly  to  affed  us.  1 
am  fure  the  apoftle  fpeaks  of  it  Vv^ith  great  paffion 
and  vehem.ency,  "  for  many  walk  of  whom  I  iiave 
"  told  you  often,  and  now  tell  you  even  weeping, 
"  that  they  are  enemies  of  the  crofs  of  Christ> 
*'  whofe  end  is  deftru<5lion,  whofe  God  is  their  bel- 
"  ly,  whofe  glory  is  in  their  fhame,  who  mind  earth- 
^'  \y  things.*'  A  Jew  or  a  Turk  is  not  fa  great 
an  enemy  to  Chriftianity  as  a  leud  and  vicious  Chri- 
ftian.  Therefore  let  me  befeech  Chriftians,  as  they 
tender  the  honour  of  their  Saviour  and  the  credit  of 
their  religion,  that  they  would  conform  their  lives  to 
the  holy  precepts  of  Chriftianity.  And  if  there  be. 
-any  who  are  refolved  to  continue  in  a  vicious  courfe» 

to 


f^  a  holy  life,  I91 

to  the  injury  and  difparagement  of  Chriftianity,  ISERM. 
could  almoft  entreat  of  them  that  they  would  quit  v,.,,.,^^...^ 
their  profefTion  and  renounce  their  baptifm,  that  they 
would  lay  afide  their  title  of  Chriftians,  and  initiate 
themfelvcs  in  heathenifh  rites  and  fuperftitions,  or  be 
circumcifed  for  Jews  or  Turks :  For  it  were  really 
better,  upon  fome  accounts,  that  fuch  men  fhould  a- 
bandon  their  profelTion,  than  keep  on  a  vizard  which 
ferves  to  no  other  purpofe  but  to  fcare  others  from 
religion. 

3.  And  laftly,  let  us  confider  the  danger  we  ex- 
pofe  our  felves  to  by  not  living  anfwerably  to  our  re- 
ligion. And  this,  I  hope,  may  prevail  upon  fuch  as 
are  not  moved  by  the  former  confiderations.  Hypo- 
crites are  inftanced  in  fcripture,  as  a  fort  of  fmners 
that  fhall  have  the  Iharpeft  torments  and  the  fiercefl 
damnation.  When  our  Saviour  would  fet  forth 
the  great  feverity  of  the  Lord  towards  the  evil  fer- 
vant  he  exprefleth  it  thus,  '*  he  fhall  cut  him  in  Mat.xxlr. 
*'  funder  and  appoint  him  his  portion  with  hypo-  S»« 
*'  crites."  So  that  the  punifliment  of  hypocrites 
feems  to  be  made  the  meafure  and  ilandard  of  the 
highefl  punifhment.  Thou  profeilell  to  believe  in 
Christ  and  to  hope  in  him  for  falvation,  but  in  the 
rfiean  time  thou  liveft  a  wicked  and  unholy  life,  thou 
doft  not  believe  but  prefume  on  him,  and  wilt  find 
at  the  great  day  that  this  thy  confidence  will  be  thy 
confufion,  and  he  whom  thou  hoped  will  be  thy  ad- 
vocate and  Saviour  will  prove  thy  accufer  and  thy 
judge.  What  our  Saviour  fays  to  the  Jews,  "  there  Jo1i.v.45: 
"  is  one  that  accufeth  you,  even  Mofcs,  in  whom  ye 
*'  truft,"  may  very  well  be  applied  to  falfe  Chriftians, 
there  is  one  that  accufeth  you  and  will  condemn  you, 
even  Jesx^s  in  whom  you  truft,  -The 


Of  the  obligation  of  Chrijliam 

The  profelTion  of  Chriftianity  and  men's  having 
the  name  of  Christ  named  upon  them  will  be  io 
far  from  fecuring  them  from  hell,  that  it  will  fink 
them  the  deeper  into  it.  Many  are  apt  to  pity  the 
poor  heathens  who  never  heard  of  the  name  of 
Christ,  and  fadly  to  condole  their  cafe,  but  as  our 
Saviour  faid  upon  another  occafion,  "  weep  not  for 
"  them,  weep  for  your  felves."  There's  no  fuch 
miferable  perfon  in  the  world  as  a  degenerate  Chri- 
itian,  bccaufe  he  falls  into  the  greateft  mifery  from 
the  greateft  advantages  and  opportunities  of  being 
happy.  DofI:  thou  lament  the  condition  of  Socrates^ 
and  Cato,  and  Ariftides,  and  doubt  what  fhall  be- 
come of  them  at  the  day  of  judgment  ?  and  canft 
thou,  who  art  an  impious  and  prophane  Chriflian, 
think  that  thou  Ihalt  efcape  the  damnation  of  hell  ? 

Doft  thou  believe  that  the  moral  heathen  fhall  be 
cad  out  ?  and  canft  thou  v/ho  haft  led  a  wicked  life 
under  the  profefTion  of  Chriftianity  have  ^^it  impu- 
dence to  hope,  that  thou  fhalt  fit  down  with  Abra- 
ham, Ifaac  and  Jacob  in  the  kingdom  of  God  ?  No, 
thofe  fins,  which  are  committed  by  Chriftians  under 
the  enjoyment  of  the  Gofpel,  arc  of  deeper  dye  and 
clothed  with  blacker  aggravations  than  the  fins  of 
heathens  are  capable  of.  A  pagan  may  live  without 
God  in  the  world,  and  be  unjuft  towards  men,  at  a 
cheaper  rate  and  upon  eafier  terms  than  thou  who  art 
a  Chriftian.  Better  had  it  been  thou  hadft  never 
known  one  fy liable  of  the  gofpel,  ntjver  heard  of  the 
name  of  Chrift,  than  that  having  taken  it  upon  thee 
thou  fhouldeft  not  depart  from  iniquity.  Happy  had 
it  been  for  thee,  that  thou  hadft  been  born  a  Jew,  or  a 
Turk,  or  a  poor  Indian,  rather  than  that  being  bred 

among. 


to  a  holy  life, 
among  Chriftians  and  profclTing  thy  felf  of  that  nunii- 
htv^   thou  fhouldil  lead  a  vicious  and  unholy  life. 

1  have  infilled  the  longer  upon  thefe  arguments, 
that  I  might,  if  poflible,  awaken  men  to  a  ferious 
■confideration  of  their  lives,  and  perfuade  them  to  a 
real  reformation  of  them  \  that  I  may  oblige  all  thofe 
who  call  themfelves  Cferiftians  to  live  up  to  the  ef- 
fential  and  fundamental  laws  of  our  religion  ;  to  love 
God,  and  to  love  our  neighbour ;  to  do  to  every 
man  as  we  would  have  him  to  do  to  us;  to  mortify 
our  lulls,  and  fubdue  our  palTions,  and  fmcerely  to 
endeavour  to  grow  in  every  grace  and  virtue,  and 
to  abound  in  all  the  fruits  of  righteoufnefs,  which  arc 
by  Jesus  Christ  to  the  praife  and  glory  of  God. 

This  indeed  would  become  our  profelTion  and  be 
honourable  to  our  religion,  and  would  remove  one  of 
the  greatefl  obftacles  to  the  progrefs  of  the  gofpel. 
For  how  can  we  expe6l  that  the  dodlrine  of  God  our 
Saviour  fhould  gain  any  confiderable  ground  in  the 
world,  fo  long  as  by  the  unworthy  lives  of  fo  many 
Chriftians  'tis  reprefented  to  the  world  at  fo  great 
difadvantage  ?  If  ever  we  would  have  Chriftian  re- 
ligion effe6lually  recommended,  it  muft  be  by  the 
holy  and  unblameable  lives  of  thofe  who  make  pro- 
fefTion  of  it.  Then  indeed  it  would  look  with  fo  a- 
miable  a  countenance  as  to  invite  many  to  it,  and 
carry  fo  much  majefty  and  authority  in  it  as  to  com- 
mand reverence  from  it's  greatefl:  enemies,  and  make 
men  to  acknowledge  that  God  is  in  us  of  a  truth,  and 
to  glorify  our  Father  which  is  in  heaven. 

*'  The  good  God  grant  that  as  we  have  taken  up- 
^'  on  us  the  profefTion  of  Chriftianity,  fo  we  may 
*'  be  careful  fo  to  live  that  we  may  adorn  the 

VoL.L  Cc   .  J!doiftriri$^ 

4» 


194  Of  the  happhtefi  of 

"  doftrine  of  God  oar  Saviour  In  all  things; 
"  that  the  grace  of  God  which  bringeth  falva- 
"  tion  rnay  teach  us  to  deny  iingodlinefs  and 
"  worldly  lulls,  and  to  live  foberly,  righteoudy 
"  and  godly  in  this  prefent  world  •,  looking  for 
"  that  blefled  hope,  and  the  glorious  appearing 
"  of  the  great  God  afld  our  Saviour  Jesus 
"  Christ  :  to  whom  with  the  Father  and  the 
"  HolyGhoft,  &c. 


SERMON     VIIL 

Of  the  happlnefs  of  a  heavenly  con- 
verfation. 


PHIL.     iii.  20, 
For  our  converfation  is  in  heaven, 

SFRM     ■     i^^the  underllanding  of  which  words  we 
vnr.       mrA     need  to  look  back  no  farther  than  the  i8th 


verfe  of  this  chapter,  where  the  apoftle  with 
great  vehemency  and  pafTion  fpeaks  of  fome  among 
the  Philippians,  who  indeed  profefs'd  Chriftianity 
but  yet  would  do  any  thing  to  decline  fuffering  for 
that  profeflion  j  "  there  are  many  that  walk,  of  whom 
*'  I  have  told  you  often,  and  now  tell  you  even 
*'  weeping,   that  they  are  enemies  to  the  crofs  of 

Christ  i 


a  heavenly  converfation.  ^95 

*'  Christ  ;"  they  cannot  endure  to  fuffer  with  him  ^  ^^^^" 
and  for  him,  they  are  fo  fenfual  and  wedded  to  this  y,^^,.^^,^ 
world  that  they  will  do  any  thing  to  avoid  perfecu- 
tion  ;  fo  he  defcribes  them  in  the  next  verfe,  ''  whole 
"  end  is  deftrudion,  whofe  God  is  their  belly,  whofe 
"  glory  is  in  their  fhamc,  who  mind  earthly  things.'* 
Now  in  oppofition  to  thefe  fenfual  and  earthly-mind- 
ed men  the  apoftle  gives  us  the  characfter  of  the  true 
Chriftians,  they  are  fuch  as  mind  heaven  and  another 
world,  and  prefer  the  hopes  of  that  to  all  the  interefts 
of  this  life,  "  our  converfation  is  in  heaven." 

For  the  right  underftanding  of  which  phrafe  be 
pleafed  to  obferve,  that  it  is  an  allufion  to  a  city  or 
corporation,  and  to  the  privileges  and  manners  of 
thofe  who  are  free  of  it.    And  heaven  is  feveral  times 
in  fcripture  reprefented  to  us  under  this  notion  of  a 
city.     It  is  faid  of  Abraham  that  "  he  looked  for  a  Hcb.  xi. 
"  city  which  hath  foundations,   whofe  builder  and '^• 
"  maker  is  God."     It  is  called  hkewife  "  the  city  Heb.  xiii. 
*'  of  the  living  God,  the  heavenly  Jerufalcm."  And  ^^• 
the  fame  apoftle  fpeaking  of  the  uncertain  condition 
of  Chriftians  in  this  world  fays  of  them,  that  "  here  Heb.  xiv, 
"  they  have  no  continuing  city,  but  look  for  one  that  ^^' 
"  is  to  come. 

Now  to  this  city  the  apoftle  alludes  here  in  the 
ttxx.^  when  he  fays  "  our  converfation  is  in  heaven." 
For  the  word  nsohinv^^u^  which  is  rendred  converfati- 
on, may  either  fignify  the  privilege  of  citizens, ,  or 
their  converfation  and  manners,  or  may  take  in  both 

thefe. 

In  the  firft  fenfe  of  the  privilege  of  citizens,    we 

find  wohneici  a  word  of  near  affinity  with  this  foine- 

times  ufed  >    *'  with  a  great   fum   (fays  the  Cap-  Aa.  xxii, 

Cc2  taia'^ 


Of  the  happlnefs  of 
tain  to  Paul)  "  obtained  I  iltv  z^oXneio^v  tocvxIuj,  this 
"  freedom."  According  to  this  fenfe,  j^'juwy  ^  wohi- 
Tiv^ci  may  very  well  be  rendred,  as  Tertullian  often 
does  this  text,  municipatus  nofter^  "  our  citizenfliip 
''  is  in  heaven  ;"  an  allufion  perhaps,  (as  the  learned 
Dr.  Hammond  obferves)  to  thofe  who  though  they 
were  not  born  at  Rome,  and  it  m>ay  be  lived  at  a 
great  di fiance  from  it,  hadyetj/^j  civitatis  Romans y 
the  privilege  of  Roman  citizens.  In  like  manner  the 
apoftle  here  defcribes  the  condition  of  Chriftians.  'Tis 
true,  we  are  born  here  in  this  world  and  live  in  it, 
but  we  belong  to  another  corporation  ;  we  are  deni- 
zens of  another  country  and  free  of  that  city  which 
is  above. 

In  the  other  fenfe  of  the  converfation  of  citizens 
we  find  the  verb  ziroXmviS-i  ufed  towards  the  begin- 
ning of  this  epiflle,  "  let  your  converfation  be  as  it 
"  becometh  the  gofpel  of  Christ."  And  why 
may  not  the  word  mohhiv^uoc  in  the  text^  without  any 
inconvenience,  include  both  thefe  ^  As  if  the  apoftle 
had  faid,  there  are  fome  that  mind  earthly  things, 
and  are  fo  addided  to  them  that  rather  than  part  with 
j:liem  they  w^ill  forfake  their  religion  -,  but  as  for  us 
we  confider  that  we  are  citizens  of  heaven,  and  accor- 
dingly we  converfe  and  demean  our  felves  in  this 
world,  as  thofe  that  are  free  of  another  city  and  do 
belong  to  it. 

So  that  to  have  our  converfation  in  heaven  does 
imply  thefe  two  things. 

Firft,  the  ferious  thoughts  and  confiderations  of 
heaven. 

Secondly,  the  efFedl  which  thofe  thoughts  ought 
€0  have  upon  our  lives* 
'  '  ^  Thcf(? 


a  heavenly  converfation.  197 

Thefe  two  things  take  up  the  meaning  of  my  text,  S  E  R  M- 
and  fliall  be  the  fubjed:  of  the  following  difcourfe. 

I.  The  ferious  thoughts  and  confiderations  of  hea- 
ven, that  is,  of  the  happy  and  glorious  ftate  of  good 
men  in  another  Hfe.  And  concerning  this,  there  are 
two  things  principally  which  offer  themfelv^s  to  our 
confideration.  Firft,  the  happinefs  of  this  ftate.  Se- 
condly, the  way  and  means  whereby  we  may  come 
to  partake  of  this  happinefs. 

Firft,  we  will  confider  the  happinefs  of  this  ftate. 
But  what,  and  how  great  this  happinefs  is,  I  am  not 
able  to  reprefent  to  you.  Thefe  things  are  yet  in  a 
great  meafure  within  the  veil,  and  it  does  not  now 
fully  appear  what  we  ftiall  be.  The  fcriptures  have 
revealed  fo  much  in  general  j  concerning  the  reality 
and  unfpeakable  felicities  of  this  ftate  as  may  fatisfy 
us  for  the  prefent,  and  ferve  to  enflame  our  defires 
after  it,  and  to  quicken  our  endeavours  for  the  ob- 
taining of  it;  as  namely,  that  it  is  incomparably  be- 
yond any  happinefs  of  this  world  -,  that  it  is  very 
great  ;  and  that  it  is  eternal  ;  in  a  word,  that  it  is 
far  above  any  thing  that  we  can  now  conceive  or 
imagine. 

I .  It  is  incomparably  beyond  any  happinefs  in  this 
world.  It  is  free  from  all  thofe  ftiarp  and  bitter  in- 
gredients, which  do  abate  and  allay  the  felicities  of 
this  life.  All  the  enjoyments  of  this  world  are  mix- 
ed, and  uncertain,  and  unfatisfying ;  nay  fo  far  are 
they  from  giving  us  fatisfa6lion,  that  the  very  fweet- 
eft  of  them  are  fatiating  and  cloying. 

None  of  the  comforts  of  this  life  are  pure  and  un- 
mixt.  There  is  fomething  of  vanity  mingled  with 
all  our  earthly  enjoyments,  and  that  eaufeth  vexation 

■-■H  4  of 


198  Of  the  happinefs  of 

S  E  RM.  of  fpirit.     There  is  no  fenfual  pleafure  but  Is  either  P 
^^^.^.^^^  purchafed  by  fome  pain,  or  attended  with  it,  or  ends 
in  it.    A  gr^at  eftate  is  neither  to  be  got  without  care, 
nor  kept  without  fear,  nor  loft  without  trouble.    Dig- 
nity and  greatnefs  is  troublefom  almoft  to  all  man- 
kind,  it  is  commonly  uneafy  to  them  that  have  it, 
and  it  is  ufually  hated  and  envied  by  thofe  that  have 
it  not.   Knowledge,  that  is  one  of  the  bed  and  fweet- 
cft  pleafures  of  human  life  \   and  yet  if  v/e  may  be- 
lieve the  experience  of  one,  who  had  as  great  a  fhare 
of  it  as  any  of  the  fons  of  men  ever  had,  he  will  tell 
Ecclef.  1.  us,  that  "  this  alfo  is  vexation  of  fpirit ;  for  in  much 
*7>  *  •     ct  wifdom  there  is  much  grief,  and  he  that  encreafeth 
"  knowledge,  encreafeth  forrow.*' 

Thus  it  is  with  all  the  things  of  this  world  ;  the 
belt  of  them  have  a  mixture  of  good  and  evil,  of  joy 
and  forrow  in  them  :  but  the  happinefs  of  the  next 
life  is  free  from  allay  and  mixture.  In  the  defcription 
Jtev.  xxii.  of  the  new  Jerufalem  it  is  faid,  that  "  there  ihall  be 
5*^  ^*  *'  no  more  curie,  and  there  fhall  be  no  night  there," 
nothing  to  imbitter  our  bleffings,  or  obfcure  our  glo- 
ry. Heaven  is  the  proper  region  of  happinefs^  there 
only  are  pure  joys  and  an  unmingled  felicity. 

But  the  enjoyments  of  this  world,  as  they  are  mix- 
ed, fo  they  arc  uncertain.  So  wavering  and  incon- 
Hant  are  they,  that  we  can  have  no  fecurity  of  them> 
when  we  think  our  ielves  to  have  the  faftefk  hold  of 
them,  they  flip  out  of  our  hands  we  know  not  how* 
For  this  reafon  Solomon  very  elegantly  calls  them 
things  "  that  are  not.  Why  wilt  thou  itt  thine  eyes 
"  upon  that  which  is  not  ?  for  riches  certainly  make 
**  to  themfelves  wings  and  fly  like  an  eagle  towards 
**  heavcxi."     So  fugitive  are  thcy^  that  after  ail  ©or 

cndcavoun 


a  heavenly  converfation.  199 

endeavours  to  fccure  them  they  may  break  loofe  from  S  E  R  M. 
us,  and  in  an  inftant  vanifh  out  of  our  fight,  "  riches 
"  make  to  themfelves  wings  and  fiy  Hke  an  eagle,"  in- 
timating to  us  that  riches  are  often  accefiary  to  their 
own  ruin.  Many  times  the  greatnefs  of  a  man's  e- 
ftate,  and  nothing  elfe,  hath  been  the  caufe  of  the  lols 
of  it,  and  of  taking  away  the  life  of  the  owner  there- 
of The  fairnefs  of  fome  mens  fortune  hath  been  a' 
temptation  to  thofe  who  have  been  more  powerful  to 
raviih  it  from  them,  thus  "  riches  make  to  themfelves 
"  wings."  So  that  he  that  enjoys  the  greatefl  hap- 
pinefs  of  this  world  does  ftill  want  one  happinefs  more, 
to  fecure  to  him  for  the  future  what  he  pofifefTes  for 
the  prefent.  But  the  happinefs  of  heaven  is  a  fteady 
and  conftant  light,  fixt  and  unchangeable  as  the  foun- 
tain from  whence  it  fprings,  "  the  father  of  hghts, 
"  with  whom  is  no  variablenefs  nor  fhadow  of  turn- 
"  Ing." 

And  if  the  enjoyments  of  this  life  were  certain,  yet 
they  are  unfatisfying,  This  is  the  vanity  of  vanities, 
that  every  thing  in  this  world  can  trouble  us,  but  no- 
thing can  give  us  fatlsfadion.  I  know  not  how  it  is> 
but  either  we,  or  the  things  of  this  world,  or  both, 
are  fo  phantaftical,  that  we  can  neither  be  weH  with 
thefe  things,  nor  well  without  them.  If  we  be  hun- 
gry, we  are  in  pain  \  and  if  we  eat  to  the  full,  we  are 
uneafy.  If  we  be  poor  we  think  our  felves  miferable, 
and  when  we  come  to  be  rich  we  commonly  really 
are  fo.  If  we  are  in  a  low  condition  we  fret  and  mur- 
mur, and  if  we  chance  to  get  up  and  to  be  raifed  to 
greatnefs  we  are  many  times  farther  from  contentment 
than  we  were  before.  So  that  we  purfue  the  happi- 
nefs of  this  world  juft  as  little  children  chafe  birds, 

when 


Of  the  happinefs  of 
when  we  think  we  are  come  very  near  it,  and  have  It 
^j^^^  ^  ahiioft  in  our  hands,   it  flies  farther  from  us  than  it 
was  at  iirft. 

Nay,  fo  far  are  the  enjoyments  of  this  world  from  af- 
fording us  fatisfadtion,  that  the  fweetcfl  of  them  are 
mofl  apt  to  fatiate  and  cloy  us.  All  the  pleafures  of 
this  world  are  -fo  contrived  as  to  yield  us  very  little 
happinefs.  If  they  go  oft  quickly  they  fignify  no- 
thing, and  if  they  ftay  long  we  are  fick  of  them. 
After  a  full  draught  of  any  fenfual  pleafure  we  pre- 
fently  loath  it,  and  hate  it  as  much  after  the  enjoy- 
ment, as  we  courted  it  and  longed  for  it  in  the  ex- 
pe6lation.  But  the  delights  of  the  other  world,  as 
they  will  give  us  full  fatisfadion  fo  we  Ihall  never  be 
weary  of  them.  Every  repetition  of  them  will  be  ac- 
companied with  a  new  pleafure  and  contentment. 
In  the  felicities  of  heaven  thefe  two  things  fhall  be  re- 
conciled, which  never  met  together  in  any  fenfual 
delight,  long  and  full  enjoyment,  and  yet  a  frefh  and 
perpetual  pleafure.  As  in  God's  ''  prefence" there  is 
*'  fulneft  of  joy,  fo  at  his  right  hand  there  Ihall  be 
•'  pleafures  for  evermore." 

The  happinefs  of  the  other  life  is  not  only  incom- 
parably beyond  any  happinefs  of  this  world  (that,  it 
may  be,  is  no  great  commendation  of  it)  but  it  is  ve- 
ry great  in  it  felf.  The  happinefs  of  heaven  is  ufii- 
ally  in  fcripture  defcribed  to  us  by  fuch  pleafures  as 
are  n^anly  and  excellent,  chafte  and  intelledual,  infi- 
nitely more  pure  and  refin'd  than  thofe  of  fenfe  -,  and 
if  the  fcripture  at  any  time  defcend  to  the  metaphor* 
of  a  feaft,  and  a  banquet,  and  a  marriage,  it  is  plain- 
ly by  way  of  accommodation  to  our  weaknefs  and 
condefcenfion  to  our  capacitie«. 


a  heavenly  converfation,  2.0 1 

But  the  chief  ingredients  of  this  happinefs,  fo  far  SERM- 
as  the  fcripture  has  thought  fit  to  reveal  it  to  us,  are 
the  perfedion  of  our  knowledge,  and  the  height  of 
our  love,  and  the  perpetual  fociety  and  friendHiip  of 
all  the  blefled  inhabitants  of  thofe  glorious  manfions  ; 
and  the  joyful  concurrence  of  all  thefe  in  chearful  ex- 
preflions  of  gratitude,  in  the  inceflant  praifes  and  ad- 
miration of  the  fountain  and  author  of  all  this  happi- 
nefs. And  what  can  be  more  delightful  than  to  have 
our  underftandings  entertain'd  v/ith  a  clear  fight  of 
the  befb  and  molt  perfed;  being,  with  the  knowledge 
of  all  his  works  and  of  the  wife  defigns  of  his  provi- 
dence here  in  the  world  ?  than  to  live  in  the  reviving 
prefence  of  God,  and  to  be  continually  attending  up- 
on him  whofe  favour  is  life,  and  whofe  glory  is 
much  more  above  that  of  any  of  the  princes  of  this 
world,  than  the  greateft  of  them  is  above  the  pooreit 
worm  ?  The  queen  of  Sheba  thought  Solomon's  fer- 
vants  happy  in  having  the  opportunity,  by  {landing 
continually  before  him,  to  hear  his  wifdom  \  but  in 
the  other  world  it  fhail  be  a  happinefs  to  Solomon 
himfelf,  and  to  the  wifeft  and  greateft  perfons  that  e- 
ver  were  in  this  world,  to  fiand  before  this  great 
king  to  admire  his  wifdom  and  to  behold  his  glory. 
Not  that  I  imagine  the  happinefs  of  heaven  to  con- 
fift  in  a  perpetual  gazing  upon  God,  and  in  an  idle 
contemplation  of  the  glories  of  that  place.  For  as  by 
that  blefled  fight  we  fhall  be  infinitely  tranfported> 
fo  the  fcripture  tells  us  we  fhall  be  alfo  transformed 
into  the  image  of  the  divine  perfedions  \  we  "  fhall 
"  fee  God  and  we  fhall  be  like  him,"  and  what 
greater  happinefs  can  there  be  than  to  be  like  the  hap- 
pieft  and  moft  perfe6l  being  in  the  world  ?  Befides, 
Vol.  L  Dd  who 

4' 


202  Oj  the  happpinefs  of 

8ERM.  who  can  tell  what  employment  God  may  have  fof 
us  in  the  next  life  ?  We  need  not  doubt  but  that  he 
who  is  happinefs  it  (t\^^  and  hath  promifed  to  mak6 
us  happy,  can  eafily  find  out  fuch  employments  and 
delights  for  us  in  the  other  world  as  will  be  proper 
and  fuitable  to  that  ftate. 

But  then  befides  the  improvement  of  our  know* 
ledge  there  fhall  be  the  moft  delightful  exercife  of 
love.  When  we  come  to  heaven  we  fhall  enter  into 
the  fociety  of  the  bleffed  angels  and  of  "  the  fpirits 
"  of  jufl  men  made  perfeft,"  that  is  freed  from  all 
thofe  pafTions  and  infirmities  which  do  now  render 
the  converfation,  even  of  the  beft  men,  fometimes- 
troublefom  to  one  another.  We  fhall  then  meet 
with  all  thofe  ex-cellent  perfons,  thofe  brave  minds, 
thofe  innocent  and  charitable  fouls  whom  we  have 
feen,  and  heard,  and  read  of  in  this  world.  There 
we  fhall  meet  with  many  of  our  dear  relations  and  in- 
timate friends,  and  perhaps  with  many  of  our  ene- 
mies, to  whom  we  fhall  then  be  perfe6lly  reconcil'd 
notwithftanding  all  the  warm  contefls  and  peevifli 
differences  which  we  had  with  them  in  this  world, 
even  about  matters  of  religion.  For  heaven  is  a  ftate 
of  perfeft  love  and  friendfhip,  there  will  be  nothing 
but  kindnefs  and  good  nature  there,  and  all  the  pru- 
dent arts  of  endearment  and  wife  ways  of  rendring 
converfation  mutually  pleafant  to  one  another.  And 
what  greater  happinefs  can  be  imagined  than  to  con- 
••/erfe  freely  with  fo  many  excellent  perfons,  without 
any  thing  of  folly  or  difguife,  of  jealoufy  or  defign 
upon  one  another  P  For  then  there  will  be  none  of 
thofe  vices  and  paffions,  of  covetoufnefs  and  ambitir 
©n,  of  envy  and  hatred,  of  wrath  and  peevifhnefs, 

whicl] 


a  heavenly  converf at  ton.  203 

which  do  now  fo  much  fpoil  the  pleafure  and  difturb  S  E  R  M. 
the  quiet  of  mankind.  All  quarrels  and  contentions, 
fchifms  and  divifions  will  then  be  effedually  hinder'd, 
not  by  force  but  by  love,  not  by  compulfion  but  by 
that  charity  which  never  fails  ;  and  all  thofe  contro- 
verfies  in  religion,  which  are  ncTw  fo  hotly  agitated, 
will  then  be  finally  determin'd,  not  as  we  (^deavour 
to  end  them  now  by  canons  and  decrees,  but  by  a 
perfe6l  knowledge  and  convincing  light. 

And  when  this  bleffed  fociety  is  met  together  and 
thus  united  by  love,  they  fhall  all  join  in  gratitude  to 
their  great  patrons  and  benefadors,  "  to  him  that 
"  fits  upon  the  throne,  and  to  the  Lamb  that  was 
*'  flain,  to  God  even  our  father,  and  to  our  Lord 
"  Jesus  Christ,  who  hath  lov'd  us  and  wafh'd  us 
*'  from  our  fins  in  his  own  blood."  And  they  fhall 
fing  everlafting  fongs  of  praife  to  God  for  all  his 
works  of  wonder,  for  the  effeds  of  that  infinite  good- 
nefs,  and  admirable  wifdom,  and  almighty  power? 
which  are  clearly  feen  in  the  creation  and  government 
of  the  world  and  all  the  creatures  in  it ;  particu- 
larly for  his  favours  to  mankind,  for  the  benefit  of 
their  beings,  for  the  comfort  of  their  lives,  and 
for  all  his  merciful  providences  towards  them  in  this 
world :  but  above  all  for  the  redemption  of  their  fouls 
by  the  death  of  his  Ion,  for  the  free  forgivenefs  of  their 
fins,  for  the  gracious  afTiftance  of  his  holy  Spirit,  and 
for  conducing  them  fafely  through  all  the  fnares  and 
dangers,  the  troubles  and  temptations  of  this  world 
to  the  fecure  pofTefTion  of  that  glory  and  happinefs 
which  then  they  fhall  be  partakers  of,  and  are  bound 
to  praife  God  for  to  all  eternity.     This,  this  fhall  be 

the  employment  of  the  blcfTedfpiritf^  above,  and  thefe 

D  d  2  2^t 


of  the  happincfs  of 
are  the  chief  ingredients  of  our  happinefs  which  the 
fcripture  mentions.  And  if  there  were  no  other,  as 
there  may  be  ten  thoufand  more  for  any  thing  I  can 
tell,  yet  generous  and  virtuous  minds  will  eafily  un- 
derfland  how  great  a  pleafure  there  is  in  the  improve- 
ment of  our  knowledge,  and  the  exercife  of  love,  and 
in  a  gra^ful  and  perpetual  acknowledgment  of  the 
greateft  benefits  that  creatures  are  capable  of  receiv- 
ing. 

3.  This  happinefs  fliall  be  eternal.  And  though 
this  be  but  a  circiimftance  and  do  »not  enter  into  the 
nature  of  our  happinefs,  yet  it  is  fo  material  a  one 
that  all  the  felicities  which  heaven  affords  would  be 
imperfed  without  it.  It  would  ftrangely  damp  and 
allay  all  our  joys  to  think  that  theyfhould  fome  time 
have  an  end.  And  the  greater  our  happinefs  were, 
the  greater  trouble  it  would  be  to  us  to  confider  that 
it  muft  have  a  period.  It  would  make  a  man  forrow- 
ful  indeed  to  think  of  leaving  fuch  vaft  poffeflions. 
Indeed  if  the  happinefs  of  heaven  were  fuch  as  the 
joys  of  this  world  are,  it  were  fit  they  fhould  be  as 
fhort ;  for  after  a  little  enjoyment  it  would  cloy  us, 
and  we  fhould  foon  grow  weary  of  it :  but  being  fo 
excellent,  it  would  fcarce  be  a  happinefs  if  it  were 
not  eternal.  It  would  imbitter  the  pleafurcs  of  hea- 
ven, as  great  as  they  are,  to  fee  to  an  end  of  them, 
though  it  were  at  never  fo  great  a  diftance  ;  to  con- 
fider that  all  this  vaft  treafure  of  happinefs  would  one 
day  be  exhaufted,  and  that  after  fo  many  years  were 
pad  we  fhould  be  as  poor  and  miferable  again  as  we 
were  once  in  this  world.  God  hath  fo  ordered 
things,  that  the  vain  and  empty  delights  of  this 
world  Ihould  be  temporary  and  tranfient,  but  that 

thq 


a  heavenly  converfatlon.  205 

the  great  and  fubftantial  pleafures  of  the  other  world  S  E  R  M. 
Ihould  be  as  lading  as  they  are  excellent.  For  hea- 
ven as  it  is  an  exceeding,  fo  it  ic  an  eternal  weight  of 
glory.  And  this  is  that  which  crowns  the  joy  of 
heaven  and  banifhcs  all  fear  and  trouble  from  the 
minds  of  the  blefTed.  And  thus  to  be  fecured  in  the 
poiTefTion  of  our  happinefs  is  an  unfpeakable  addition 
to  it.  For  that  which  is  eternal  as  it  fhall  never  de- 
termine, fo  it  can  never  be  diminifhed ;  for  to  i)e 
diminifhed  and  to  decay  is  to  draw  nearer  to  an  end, 
but  that  which  fhall  never  have  an  end  can  never  come 
nearer  to  it. 

O  vaft  eternity !  how  doft  thou  fwallow  up  our 
thoughts  and  entertain  us  at  once  with  delight  and 
amazement  ?  This  is  the  very  top  and  higheft  pitch 
of  our  happinefs,  upon  which  we  may  fland  fecure 
and  look  down  with  fcorn  upon  all  things  here  below ; 
and  how  fmall  and  inconfiderable  do  they  appear  to 
us,  compared  with  the  vaft  and  endlefs  enjoyments 
of  our  future  ftate  }  But  oh  vain  and  foolifh  fouls! 
that  are  fo  little  concern'd  for  eternity  ;  that  for  the 
trifles  of  time,  and  "  the  pleafures  of  fin  which  are 
"  but  for  a  feafon,"  can  find  in  our  hearts  to  forfeit  an 
everlafting  felicity.  BlefTed  God  !  why  haft  thou 
prepared  fuch  a  happinefs  for  thofe  who  neither  con- 
fider  it,  nor  feek  after  it  ?  "  Why  is  fuch  a  price  put 
"  into  the  hands  of  fools, who  have  no  heart  to  make  ufe 
'  of  it  j"  who  fondly  chufe  to  gratify  their  lufts  rather 
than  to  fave  their  fouls,  and  fottifhly  prefer  the  tempo- 
rary enjoyments  of  fin  before  a  blefled  immortality. 

4.  And  laftly,  this  happinefs  is  far  above  any  thing 
that  we  can  now  conceive  or  imagine.  It  is  fo  great 
that  it  cannot  now  enter  into  the  heart  of  man.    We 

cannot 


2o6  Of  the  happlnefi  of 

E  R  M.  cannot  from  the  experience  of  any  of  thofe  pleafures 
and  delights  which  we  have  been  acquainted  withal 
in  this  world,  frame  an  equal  idea  and  conception  of 
it.  So  that  when  we  come  to  heaven  we  fliall  be  ready 
to  fay  of  it  as  the  queen  of  Sheba  did  of  Solomon's 
wifdom  and  profperity,  that "  half  of  it  hath  not  been 
*'  told  us ;"  that  the  felicities  and  glories  of  that  ftate 
do  far  exceed  all  the  fame  which  we  have  heard  of 
them  in  this  world.  For  who  can  fay  how  great  a  good 
God  is?  and  how  happy  he  who  is  the  fountain  of 
happinefs  can  make  thofe  fouls  that  love  him,  and 
thofe  whom  he  loves  ? 

In  this  imperfsd  ftate  we  are  not  capable  of  a  full 
reprefentation  of  thofe  glories.  We  cannot  now  fee 
God  and  live.  A  full  defcription  of  heaven  and  of 
the  pleafures  of  that  ftate  would  let  in  joys  upon  us 
too  big  for  our  narrow  capacities,  and  too  ftrong  for 
weak  mortality  to  bear.  "  We  are  now  but  children, 
''  and  we  fpeak  as  children,  and  underftand  and  think ' 
*'  as  children"  concerning  thefe  things  \  but  in  the 
other  ftate  we  fliall  grow  up  to  be  men,  and  then  we 
iCor.xiii.  ^^^^  put  away  thefe  childifh  thoughts;  "  now  we 
9>  io>  II-  "  know  but  in  part,  but  when  that  which  is  perfect 
"  is  come,  that  which  is  imperfed  fliall  be  done  away; 
"  now  we  fee  through  a  glafs  darkly  {bf  cf.Uly^oi.'Xi^m 
«'  a  riddle)  but  then  we  fliall  fee  face  to  face  ♦,  now 
«  we  know  in  part,  but  then  we  fliall  know  even  as 
*'  alfo  we  are  known,"  as  the  apoftle  difcourfeth  ex- 
cellently concerning  this  very  matter. 

No  fooner  fliall  we  enter  upon  the  joys  of  the  other 
world,  but  our  minds  fliall  be  raifed  to  a  ftrength  and 
aflivity  as  much  above  that  of  the  mofl:  knowing 
perfons  in  this  world,  as  the  thoughts  of  the  greatefl: 

philo^ 


a  heavenly  conv.erfafion.  20J 

philofopher  and  wifeft  man  upon  earth  are  above  the  S  E  R  Mv 
thoughts  of  a  child  or  a  fool.  No  man's  mind  is  now  ^__1^ 
fo  well  framed  to  underftand  any  thing  in  this  world, 
asourunderftandings  fhall  then  be  fitted  for  the  know- 
ledge of  God  and  of  the  things  that  belong  to  that 
ftate.  In  the  mean  time  let  us  blefs  God  that  he  hath 
revealed  fo  much  of  this  happinefs  to  us  as  is  necef- 
fary  to  excite  and  encourage  us  to  feek  after  it. 

The  fecond  thing  to  be  confidered  concerning  our 
future  happinefs,  is  the  way  and  means  whereby  we 
may  come  to  be  made  partakers  of  it.     And  that  in 
fhort  is  by  the  conftant  and  fincere  endeavours  of  a 
holy  life,  in  and  through  the  mercies  of  God  in  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.     Christ  indeed  is  the  author 
of  our  falvation,  but  obedience  is  the  condition  of  it ; 
fo  the  apoftle  tells  us,  that  Christ  "  is  the  author  Heb.v.  i. 
''  of  eternal  falvation  to  them  that  obey  him."     It  is 
the  grace  of  God  in  the  gofpel  which  brings  or  offers 
this  falvation  to  us,  but  then  it  is  by  the  "  denying  Tit.ii.ii, 
"  of  ungodlinefs  and  worldly  lulls,  and  by  living  fo-  '^' 
*'  berly,   and  righteoudy,  and  godly  in  this  prefent 
'  world"  that  we  are  "  to  wait  for  the  blelTed  hope.'* 
Our  Saviour  promifes  this  happinefs  to  the  pure  in 
heart,  "  blelTed  are  the  pure  in  heart,  for  they  Ihall 
"  fee  God  ;"  and  elfewhere  the  fcripture  doth  ex- 
clude all  others  from  any  ihare  or  portion  in  this  blel^ 
fednefs  -,  fo  the  apoftle  afTures  us  "  that  without  holi-  Heb.  xiiu 
"  nefs  no  man  iliall  fee  the  Lord."  H- 

And  holinefs  is  not  only  a  condition  but  a  neceffary 
qualification  for  the  happinefs  of  the  next  life.  This 
is  the  force  of  St.  John's  reafoning,  "  we  fhall  be  like 
"  him,  for  we  fhall  fee  him."  To  fee  God  is  to  be 
h^ppy,  but  unlefs  we  be  like  him  we  cannot  fee  him. 
J  The 


2o8  Of  the  happinefs  of 

E  R  M.  The  fight  and  prefence  of  God  himfelf  would  be  no 
happinefs  to  that  man  who  is  not  like  to  God  in  the 
temper  and  difpofition  of  his  mind.  And  from  hence 
the  apoftle  infers  in  the  next  verfe,  "  every  man 
"  that  hath  this  hope  in  him  purifieth  himfelf  even 
"  as  he  is  pure."  So  that  if  we  live  wicked  lives,  if 
we  allow  our  felves  in  the  pradlice  of  any  known  fin, 
we  interrupt  our  hopes  of  heaven  and  render  our  felves 
unfit  for  eternal  life.  By  this  means  we  defeat  all  the 
defigns  of  God's  grace  and  mercy  towards  us,  and 
falvation  it  felf  cannot  fave  us  if  we  make  our  felves 
incapable  of  that  happinefs  which  God  offers.  Hea- 
ven is  in  fcripture  called  "  an  inheritance  among  them 
"  that  are  fandtified,  and  the  inheritance  of  the  faints 
"  in  light  i"  fo  that  it  is  not  enough  that  this  inheri- 
tance is  promifed  to  us,  but  we  mull  be  qualified  and 
prepared  for  it,  and  "  be  made  meet  to  be  made  par- 
"  takers  of  it." 

And  this  life  is  the  time  of  our  preparation  for  our 
future  ftate.  Our  fouls  will  continue  for  ever  what 
we  make  them  in  this  world.  Such  a  temper  and  difpo- 
fition of  mind  as  a  man  carries  with  him  out  of  this 
life  he  fhall  retain  in  the  next.  'Tis  true  indeed,  hea- 
ven perfeds  thofe  holy  and  virtuous  difpofitions  which 
are  begun  here  •,  but  the  other  world  alters  no  man 
as  to  his  main  fiate,  "  he  that  is  filthy  will  be  filthy 
"  flill,  and  he  that  is  unrighteous  will  be  unrighteous 
"  ftill."  If  we  do  not  in  a  good  degree  mortify  our 
lufts  and  pafiions  here,  death  will  not  kill  them  for  us, 
but  we  ihall  carry  them  with  us  into  the  other  world. 
And  if  God  fliould  admit  us  fo  qualified  into  the 
place  of  happinefs,  yet  we  fhall  bring  that  along  with 
us  which  would  infallibly  hinder  us  from  being  hap- 

py 


a  heavenly  converfation.'  20 q 

py.     Our  fenfual  inclinations  and  defires  would  meet  S  E  R  M. 
with  nothing  there  that  would  be  fuitable  to  them,     ^^^^• 
and  we  fhould  be  perpetually  tormented  with  thofe 
appetites  which  we  brought  with  us  out  of  this  world, 
becaufe  we  fhould  find  nothing  there  to  gratify  them 
withal.      For   as  the  apoftle  fays  in  another  fenfe, 
"  the  kingdom  of  God  is  not  meats  and  drinks,  but 
''  righteoufnefs,  and  peace,    and  joy  in   the  Holy 
"  Gholt.*'     The  happinefs  of  heaven  confifls  in  fuch 
things  as  a  wicked  man  hath  no  guft  and  relilli  for. 
So  that  if  a  covetous,  or  ambitious,  or  voluptuous 
man  were  in  heaven,  he  would  be  juft  like  the  rich  man 
in  hell,  tormented  with  a  continual  thirfl,  and  burnt 
up  in  the  flames  of  his  own  ardent  defires ;  and  would 
not  be  able,  amidft  all  the  plenty  and  treafures  of  that 
place,  to  find  fo  much  as  one  drop  of  fuitable  plea- 
fure  and  delight  to  quench  and  allay  that  heat.     So 
likewife  our  fierce  and  unruly  palfions  ;    if  we  fhould 
carry  them  with  us  into  the  other  world,  how  incon- 
fiflent  would  they  be  with  happinefs .?  They  would 
not  only  make  us  miferable  our  felves,  but  be  a  trou- 
ble to  all  thofe  with  whom  we  fhould  converfe.     If 
a  man  of  an  envious  and  malicious,  of  a  peevifh  and 
palTionate    temper,    were  admitted  into  the   man- 
fions  of  the  blefTed,  he  would  not  only  be  unhappy 
himfelf,  but  would  diflurb  the  quiet  of  others,  and 
raife  ftorms  even  in  thofe  calm  regions.     Vain  man ! 
that  dreamefl  of  being  happy  without  any  difpofiti- 
on  or  preparation  for  it.     To  be  happy,  is  to  enjoy 
what  we  defire,  and  to  live  with  thofe  whom  we  love. 
But  there  is  nothing  in  heaven  fuitable  to  the  defires  and 
appetites  of  a  wicked  man.  All  the  joys  of  that  place,, 
and  the  delights  of  that  ftate  are  purely  fpiritual,  and 
Vol.  I.  E  e  arc 

4t 


2  I  o  Of  the  kappinefs  of 

SER  M.  are  only  to  be  relifhed  by  thofe  who  have  "  purified 

'  , "  themfelves  as  God  is  pure."   But  if  thou  be  carnal 

and  fenfual,  what  are  thefe  things  to  thee?  What 
happinefs  would  it  be  to  thee  to  fee  God,  and  to  have 
him  always  in  thy  view  who  was  never  in  all  thy 
thoughts ;  to  be  tied  to  live  for  ever  in  his  compa- 
ny who  is  of  a  quite  contrary  temper  and  difpofition 
to  thy  felf,  whofe  prefence  thou  dreaded,  and  whom 
whilft  thou  waft  in  this  world  thou  couldft  never  en- 
dure to  think  upon  ?  So  that  the  pleafures  of  heaven 
it  felf  could  fignify  no  good  or  happinefs  to  that  man 
who  is  not  fo  difpofed  as  to  take  pleafure  in  them. 
Heaven  is  too  pure  an  air  for  corrupt  fouls  to  live  and 
breathe  in,  and  the  whole  employment  and  converfa- 
tion  of  that  place,  as  it  would  be  unfui table,  fo 
would  it  alfo  be  unacceptable  to  a  fenfual  and  vicious 
perfon. 

From  all  this  it  appears  how  necefiary  it  is  for  us 
to  prepare  our  felves  for  this  blefled  ftate,by  the  con- 
ftant  and  fmcere  endeavours  of  a  holy  life,  and  by 
mortifying  every  luft  and  inordinate  paflion  in  our 
fouls.  For  till  this  be  done  we  are  not  meet  to  be 
made  partakers  of  the  felicities  of  the  other  world. 
And  thus  1  have  done  with  the  firft  thing  implied  in 
this  phrafe,  "  of  having  our  converfation  in  hea- 
«'  ven,"  viz.  the  ferious  thoughts  and  confiderati- 
ons  of  heaven ;  or  the  happinefs  of  that  ftate,  and 
of  the  w^ay  and  means  whereby  that  happinefs  is  to 
be  attained, 

II.  The"  having  our  converfation  in  heaven'*  does 
imply  llkewife  the  effed  which  thofe  confiderations 
ought  to  have  upon  our  hearts  and  lives :  As, 

I  Ta 


a  heavenly  converfation.  2 1 1 

1.  To  convince  us  of  the  vanity  of  this  world.  ^^^^^'^* 
God  hath  on  purpofe  made  this  world  troublefom 
and  uneafy  to  us,  that  there  might  be  no  fufiicient 
temptation  to  reafonable  and  confiderate  men  to  take 
them  off  from  the  care  and  thought  of  their  future 
happinefs  \  that  God  and  heaven  might  have  no  ri- 
val here  below  \  that  there  might  be  nothing  in  this 
world  that  might  pretend  to  our  affedion  or  court  us 
with  any  advantage  in  comparifon  of  everlafting  life 
and  glory. 

When  we  come  to  die,  and  eternity  fhall  prefent  it 
felf  to  our  ferious  and  waking  thoughts,  then  things 
will  put  on  another  face,  and  thofe  things  which  we 
valued  fo  much  in  this  life  will  then  appear  to  be  no- 
thing worth  \  but  thofe  things  which  we  negle^led, 
to  be  of  infinite  concernment  to  us,  and  worthy  to 
have  been  the  care  and  endeavour  of  our  whole  lives* 
And  if  we  would  confider  thefe  things  in  time,  while 
the  opportunities  of  life  and  health  are  before  us,  we 
might  be  convinced  at  a  cheaper  rate,  and  come  to 
be  fatisfied  of  the  vanity  of  this  world  before  we  def- 
paired  of  the  happinefs  of  the  other. 

2.  To  make  us  very  adive  c:nd  induftrious  to  be  as 
good,  and  to  do  as  much  good  as  we  can  in  this  life, 
that  fo  we  may  be  qualified  and  difpofed  for  the  hap- 
pinefs of  the  next.  Men  are  ufually  very  induftrious 
for  the  things  of  this  life,  to  be  rich  and  great  in  the 
world  •,  did  we  but  value  heaven  half  as  much  as  it 
deferves  we  fhould  take  infinitely  more  pains  for  that* 
So  often  as  we  confider  the  glories  that  are  above, 
how  does  it  acTcufe  our  floth  and  condemn  our  folly, 
that  we  are  lefs  concerned  for  our  fouls  than  moft  men 
are  for  their  bodies,  that  we  will  not  labour  half  fo 

E  e  ^  much 


2  i2t  Of  the  happlnefs  of 

;erM.  much  for  an  eternal  inheritance  as  men  ordinarily  do 

_,.     *;  for  thefe  corruptible  things  ? 

Let  us  remember  that  we  are  hafling  apace  to  ano- 
ther world,  and  that  our  eternal  happinefs  now  lies 
at  the  flake.  And  how  fliould  it  quicken  our  endea- 
vours to  have  fuch  a  reward  fet  before  us,  to  have 
crowns  and  fcepters  in  our  eyes  ?  would  we  but  often 
reprefent  to  our  minds  the  glorious  things  of  another 
world,  what  fervors  fliould  we  feel  in  our  hearts  ? 
we  fhould  be  all  life,  and  fpirit,  and  wing  •,  and 
fhould  do  God's  will,  almoft  with  the  fame  reafon 
and  delight,  as  the  angels  do  "  who  continually  bc- 
*'  hold  the  face  of  their  father."  The  confideration 
of  heaven  and  the  firm  perfuafion  of  our  future  hap- 
pinefs fhould  aduate  all  the  powers  of  our  fouls,  and 
be  continually  infpiring  us  with  new  vigour  in  the 
ways  of  holinefs  and  virtue.  How  fhould  this  thought 
fwell  our  refolutions  and  confirm  our  purpofes  of  obe- 
dience, that  if  v/e  have  our  "  fruit  unto  holinefs  our 
"  end  will  be  everlafling  life  ? 

3.  To  mitigate  and  lighten  the  evils  and  afBidli- 
ons  of  this  life.  It  is  no  great  matter  how  rough  the 
way  be,  provided  we  be  fure  that  it  leads  to  happi- 
nefs. The  incomparably  greater  good  of  the  next 
life  will  to  a  wife  and  confiderate  man  weigh  down 
all  the  evils  of  this.     And  the  fcripture  tells  us  that 

Rom.  viii.  ^^^^^  ^^  "^  comparifon  between  them.      "  The  fuf- 

18.  "  ferings  of  this  prefent  time  are  not  worthy  to  be 

"  compared  with  the  glory  which  fhall  be  revealed 
"  in  us."  The  evils  of  this  life  afBid  men  more  or 
lefs  according  as  the  foul  is  fortified  with  confiderati- 
ons  proper  to  fupport  us  under  them.  When  we 
confider  that  we  have  but  a  little  while  to  be  here, 

that 


a  heavenly  converjation,  213 

that  we  are  upon  our  journey  travelling  towards  our  ^^^jj^' 
heavenly  country  where  we  fhall  meet  will  all  the  de- 
lights we  can  defire,  it  ought  not  to  trouble  us  much 
to  endure  ftorms  and  foul  ways,  and  to  want  many 
of  thofe  accommodations  we  might  expe6l  at  home. 
This  is  the  common  fate  of  travellers,  and  we  muft 
take  things  as  we  find  them,  and  not  look  to  have  e- 
very  thing  juft  to  our  mind.  Thefe  difficulties  and 
inconveniencies  will  lliortly  be  over,  and  after  a  few 
days  will  be  quite  forgotten,  and  be  to  us  as  if  they 
had  never  been.  And  when  we  are  fafely  landed  in 
our  own  country,  with  what  pleafure  (hall  we  look 
back  upon  thofe  rough  and  boifterous  feas  which  we 
have  efcaped  ?  The  more  troubles  we  have  pad 
through,  the  kinder  ufage  we  fhall  find  when  we 
come  to  our  father's  houfe.  So  the  apoflle  tells  us, 
that  "  our  light  afflidion  which  is  but  for  a  moment, 
**  worketh  for  us  a  far  more  exceeding  and  eternal 
"  weight  of  glory."  When  we  come  to  heaven  our 
happinefs  fhall  then  be  as  real  as  our  miferies  were 
here  upon  earth,  and  far  greater  and  more  lafling. 
And  what  great  matter  is  it  though  we  fuffer  a  while 
in  this  world,  provided  we  efcape  the  endlefs  unfufFe- 
rable  torments  of  the  next  •,  though  we  have  not  our 
good  things  in  this  life,  if  infinitely  greater  be  referv- 
cd  for  us,  and  we  fhall  receive  them  with  interefl  in 
the  other  ? 

Several  of  the  evils  and  calamities  of  this  life  would 
be  infufFerable  indeed,  if  there  were  nothing  better 
to  be  hoped  for  hereafter.  If  this  were  true,  Chrifli- 
ans  would  not  only  be  of  all  men  but  of  all  creatures 
the  moft  miferable.  But  our  religion  hath  abundant- 
ly afTured  us  to  the  contrary.  And  the  afTurance  of  this 

was 


214  Of  the  happinefi  of 

SERM.  was  that  which  made  the  primitive  Chriftians  to  em- 
*  brace  fuflferings  with  fo  much  cheerfulnefs,  "  to  glory 
*'  in  tribulation,  and  to  take  joyfully  the  fpoiling 
"  of  their  goods,  knowing  that  in  heaven  they  had  a 
"  better  and  more  enduring  fubftance."  The  i^vtvi 
brethren  in  the  hiftory  of  the  Maccabees  upon  this 
perfuafion  would  "  not  accept  deliverance,  that  they 
*'  might  obtain  a  better  refurredlion.'*  The  florm 
of  ftones  which  was  poured  upon  St.  Stephen  was  no 
more  to  him  than  a  common  fhower  when  "  he  faw 
"  the  heavens  opened,  and  Jesus  (in  whofe  caufe  he 
fufFered)  "  {landing  on  the  right  hand  of  God." 

4.  To  make  iis  fmcere  in  all  our  profefTions,  words 
and  adlions.  Did  men  firmly  believe  the  rewards  of 
another  world  their  religion  would  not  be  only  in 
fhew  and  pretence,  but  in  life  and  reality,  no  man 
would  put  on  a  form  of  godlinefs  that  were  deftitute 
of  the  power  of  it ;  we  fhould  do  nothing  for  the 
opinion  of  others,  but  all  with  regard  to  God  and  our 
own  confciences  .^  and  be  as  curious  of  our  thoughts, 
and  moft  retired  adions,  as  if  we  were  in  an  open 
theatre  and  in  the  prefence  of  the  greateft  aflembly. 
For  in  the  next  life  men  fhall  not  be  rewarded  for 
what  they  feemcd  to  be,  but  for  what  they  really 
were  in  this  world.  Therefore  whatever  we  think, 
or  fpeak,  or  do,  we  fhould  always  remember  that 
the  day  of  revelation  is  coming,  when  the  fecrets  of 
all  hearts  fhall  be  difclofed,  when  all  difguifes  lliall 
be  laid  afide,  and  every  ones  mafk  fhall  be  taken  off, 
and  all  our  aftions  and  defigns  fhall  be  brought  upon , 
the  publick  flage  and  expofed  to  the  view  of  men 
and  angels.  ''  There  is  nothing  now  hidden  which 
"  fhall  not  then  be  revealed,  nor  fecret  which  fliall 
^  not  be  made  known.  5.  To 


a  heavenly  converfatton.  21^ 

c   To  arm  us  againft  the  fears  of  death.     Death  is  S  E  R  M. 
->•  °  ....  VIII 

terrible  to  nature,  and  the  terror  of  it  is  infinitely 

encreafed  by  the  fearful  apprehenfions  of  what  may 
follow  it.  But  the  comfortable  hopes  of  a  blefTed 
immortality  do  flrangely  relieve  the  fainting  fpirits 
of  dying  men,  and  are  able  to  reconcile  us  to  death, 
and  in  a  great  meafure  to  take  away  the  terror  of  it. 
I  know  that  the  thoughts  of  death  are  difmal  even  to 
good  men,  and  we  have  never  more  need  of  comfort 
and  encouragement  than  when  we  are  conflicling  with 
this  laft  enemy,  and  there  is  no  fuch  comfortable 
confideration  to  a  dying  man  as  the  hopes  of  a  happy 
eternity.  He  that  looks  upon  death  only  as  a  paflage 
to  glory,  may  welcome  the  meflengers  of  it  as  bring- 
ing him  the  befl  and  moft  joyful  news  that  ever  came 
to  him  in  his  whole  life,  and  no  man  can  ftay  behind 
in  this  world  with  half  the  comfort  that  this  man 
leaves  it. 

And  now  I  have  done  with  the  two  things  implied 
in  this  phrafe,  of"  having  our  converfation  in  heaven,'* 
viz.  the  ferious  thoughts  and  confiderations  of  heaven, 
and  the  effed  of  thefe  thoughts  and  confiderations  up- 
on our  hearts  and  lives. 

I  crave  your  patience  but  a  little  longer,  till  I  make 
fome  refledlion  upon  what  hath  been  delivered  concern- 
ing the  happinefs  of  good  men  after  this  life.  I  have 
told  you  that  it  is  incomparably  beyond  any  happi- 
nefs of  this  world,  that  it  is  great  in  it  felf,  and  eter- 
nal in  it's  duration,  and  far  above  any  thing  that  we 
can  now  conceive  or  imagine.  And  now  after  all 
this,  I  am  very  fenfible  how  much  all  that  I  have  faid 
comes  Ihort  of  the  greatnefs  and  dignity  of  the  thing. 
So  that  I  could  almoft  begin  again  and  make  a  new 
I  attempt 


VIII. 


2 1 6  Of  the  happfnefs  of 

SEKM.  attempt  upon  this  fubjed.  And  indeed  who  would 
not  be  loth  to  be  taken  off  from  fo  delightful  an  ar- 
gument ?  Methinks  'tis  good  for  us  to  be  here,  and 
to  let  our  minds  dwell  upon  thefe  confiderations.  We 
are  unworthy  of  heaven,  and  unfit  to  partake  of  fo 
great  a  glory,  if  we  cannot  take  pleafure  in  the  con- 
templation of  thofe  things  now,  the  poifeffion  where- 
of fhall  be  our  happinefs  for  ever. 

With  what  joy  then  fhould  we  think  of  thofe"  great 
*'  and  glorious  things  which  God  hath  prepared  for 
"  them  that  love  him,  of  that  inheritance  incorrup- 
*'  tible,  undefiled,  which  fadeth  not  away,  referved 
"  for  us  in  the  heavens  ?"  How  fhould  we  welcome 
the  thoughts  of  that  happy  hour,  when  we  fhall  make 
our  efcape  out  of  thefe  prifons,  when  wefhall  pafs  out 
*^  of  this  howling  wildernefs  into  the  promifed  land,'* 
when  we  fhall  be  removed  from  all  the  troubles  and 
temptations  of  a  wicked  and  ill-natured  world ;  when 
we  fliall  be  pail  all  ftorms,  and  fecured  from  all  far- 
ther danger  of  fhipwreck,  and  fhall  be  fafely  landed 
in  the  regions  of  blifs  and  immortality  ? 

O  bleffed  time  !  "  when  all  tears  fhall  be  wiped 
"  from  our  eyes,  and  death  and  forrow  fhall  be  no 
^*  more  •,  when  mortality  fhall  be  fwallowed  up  of 
«'  life,"  and  we  (hall  enter  upon  the  pofTefTion  of  all 
that  happinefs  and  glory  which  God  hath  promifed, 
and  our  faith  hath  believed,  and  our  hopes  have  raif- 
cd  us  to  the  expedation  of-,  when  we  fhall  be  eafed 
of  all  our  pains,  and  refolved  of  all  our  doubts,  and 
be  purged  from  all  our  fins,  and  be  freed  from  all  our 
-fears,  and  be  happy  beyond  all  our  hopes,  and  have 
all  this  happinefs  fecured  to  us  beyond  the  power  of 
time  and  change  j  when  we  Ihall  know  God  and  o^ 

ther 


a  heavenly  converfdttoti.  2 1  y 

ttier  things  without  ftiidy,  and  love  him  and  one  SERM. 
another  without  meafure,  and  ferve  and  praife  him 
without  wearinefs,  and  obey  his  will  without  the  lead 
relu6lancy ;  and  fhall  (till  be  more  and  more  delight- 
ed in  the  knowing,  and  loving,  and  praifing,  and 
obeying  of  God  to  all  eternity. 

How  fnould  thefe  thoughts  affecfi:  our  hearts,  and 
what  a  mighty  influence  ought  they  to  have  upon 
our  lives  ?  The  great  difadvantage  of  the  arguments 
fetched  from  another  world  is  this,  that  thofe  things 
are  at  a  great  diftance  from  us,  and  not  fenfible  to  us  5 
and  therefore  are  not  apt  to  affed  us  fo  ftrongly,  and 
to  work  fo  powerfully  upon  us.  Now  to  make  amends 
for  this  difadvantage  we  Ihould  often  revive  thefe  con- 
fiderations  upon  our  minds,  and  inculcate  upon  our 
felves  the  reality  and  certainty  of  thefe  things  together 
with  the  infinite  weight  and  importance  of  them* 
"We  fhould  reafon  thus  with  our  felves  •,  if  good  men 
fnall  be  fo  unfpeakably  happy,  and  confequently  wick- 
ed men  fo  extremely  miferable  in  another  world :  if 
thefe  things  be  true  and  will  one  day  be  found  to  be 
fo,  why  fhould  they  not  be  to  me  as  if  they  were  al- 
ready prefent  ?  Why  fhould  not  I  be  as  much  afraid 
to  commit  any  fin  as  if  hell  were  naked  before  me^ 
and  I  faw  the  aflonifhing  miferies  of  the  damned  H 
And  why  fhould  I  not  be  as  careful  to  ferve  God  and 
keep  his  commandments,  as  if  heaven  were  open  ta 
my  view,  and  I  faw  Jesus  ftanding  at  the  right  hand 
of  God  with  crowns  of  glory  in  his  hand  ready  to  be 
fet  upon  the  heads  of  all  thofe  who  continue  faithful 
to  him? 

The  lively  apprehenfions  of  the  nearnefs  of  death 
and  eternity  are  apt  to  make  men's  thoughts  more 

Vol.  I.  F  f  quick 

4^ 


2 1 8  Of  the  happinefs  of  &c. 

SERM.  quick  and  piercing,  and  according  as  we  think  our 
felves  prepared  for  our  future  ilate  to  tranfport  us  with 
joy,  or  to  amaze  us  with  horror.  For  the  foul  that 
is  fully  fatisfied  of  his  future  blifs  is  already  entred  in- 
to heaven,  has  begun  to  take  pofleffion  of  glory,  and 
has  (as  it  were)  his  bleffed  Saviour  in  his  arms,  and 
may  fay  with  old  Simeon,  "  Lord,  now  letteft  thou 
"  thy  fervant  depart  in  peace,  for  mine  eyes  have 
"  feen  thy  falvation."  But  the  thoughts  of  death 
muft  needs  be  very  terrible  to  that  man  who  is  doubt- 
ful or  defpairing  of  his  future  condition.  It  would 
daunt  the  ilouteft  man  that  ever  breathed,  to  look 
upon  death  when  he  can  fee  nothing  but  hell  beyond 
it.  When  the  apparition  at  Endor  told  Saul,  "  to 
*'  morrow  thou  and  thy  fons  Ihall  be  with  me," 
thefe  words  ftruck  him  to  the  heart,  fo  that  "  he  fell 
"  down  to  the  ground,  and  there  was  no  more 
"  flrength  left  in  him."  It  is  as  certain  that  we  fhall 
die  as  if  an  exprefs  melTenger  fhould  come  to  every 
one  of  us  frorfi  the  otiier  world  and  tell  us  fo.  Why 
Hiould  we  not  then  always  live  as  thofe  that  muft  die, 
and  as  thofe  that  hope  to  be  happy  after  death  ?  To 
have  thefe  apprshenfions  vigorous  and  lively  upon 
our  minds,  this  is  "  to  have  our  converfation  in  hea- 
''  ven,  from  whencealfo  we  look  for  our  Saviour, 
*'  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  fhall  change  our 
*'  vile  body  that  it  may  be  fafhioned  like  unto  his 
*'  glorious  body,  according  to  the  working  of  that 
*'  mighty  power  whereby  he  is  able  even  to  fubdue 
«'  all  things  to  himfelf." 


^S  E  R- 


219 


S    E   R    M    O    N    IX. 

Of  the  end  of  judgments,  and  the  rea- 
fon  of  their  continuance. 


ISA.  ix.   12,  13. 

For  all  this  his  anger  is  not  turned  away^  hut  his  hand 
is  fir  etched  out  ft  ill :  for  the  people  turneth  not  unto 
him  that  fmiteth  them^  neither  do  they  feek  the  Lord 
of  hofis, 

IN  the  former  part  of  the  1 2  th  verfe,  the  prophet  s  E  R  M. 
threatens  that  Ifrael  fhould  be  brought  into  great  I^- 
diilrefs  and  be  fet  upon  by  enemies  on  every  fide, 
the  Syrians  before  and  the  Phihftines  behind,  and  that 
they  fhould  devour  Ifrael  with  open  mouth  :  and 
though  this  was  like  to  be  a  very  fore  and  dreadful 
judgment,  yet  he  foretels  that  this  would  not  flay 
God's  hand  nor  fatisfy  his  anger,  becaufe  he  forefaw 
that  they  would  flill  grow  worfe  and  continue  impeni- 
tent. "  For  all  this  his  anger  is  not  turned  away, 
"  but  his  hand  is  flretched  out  ftili :  for  the  people 
"  turneth  not  unto  him  that  fmiteth  them,  neither 
"  do  they  feek  the  Lord  of  hofts. 

In  which  words  there  are  thefe  two  things  very 
ufeful  at  all  times,  but  at  this  time  efpecially  moft 
proper  and  feafonable  for  our  confideration. 

I.  The  defign  and  intention  of  God  in  fending 
judgments  upon  a  people  ;  and  that  is  to  reclaim  them 

F  f  2  from 


220  Of  the  end  of  judgments^  and 

E  R  i\l.  from  their  fins.  Implied  in  thefe  v/ords,  "  for  the 
"  people  turneth  not  to  him  that  fmiteth  them  ;'* 
which  intimate  to  us  that  this  is  the  end  which  God 
aims  at  in  his  judgments,  to  take  us  off  from  our  fins 
and  to  bring  us  to  himfeif. 

2.  The  reafon  of  the  continuance  of  God's  judg- 
ments, becaufe  the  people  were  not  reclaimed  by  them. 
And  this  is  fully  expreft  in  the  text,  that  therefore 
"  God's  anger  is  not  turned  away,  but  his  hand  is 
*'  ftretched  out  fliil,  becaufe  the  people  turneth  not 
^'  unto  him  that  fmiteth  them,"  &c. 

Of  thefe  two  I  crave  leave  to  fpeak,  as  plainly  and 
briefly  as  I  can. 

I.  The  defign  and  intention  of  God  in  fending 
judgments  upon  a  people  -,  and  that  is  to  reclaim  them 
from  their  fins.  This  indeed  is  the  intention  of  all 
God's  difpenfations  towards  us  in  this  world.  The 
end  of  all  his  mercies  and  benefits  is  to  take  us  off 
from  fin,  and  to  oblige  and  win  us  to  our  duty  :  So 
the  apoftle  tells  us  Rom.  ii.  4.  that  the  defign  of 
God's  goodnefs  and  long  fuffering  and  forbearance 
towards  us,  is,  to  lead  us  to  repentance. 

And  this  is  the  way  wherein  God  delights  to  deal 
with  us.  The  way  of  judgment  and  feverity  is  that 
which  he  is  more  averfe  from,  a  courfe  which  he  un- 
willingly takes  Vv^ith  us  and  not  without  fome  diffi- 
culty and  reluflancy.  "  He  doth  not  afflid  willing- 
"  ly,  nor  grieve  the  children  of  men  :"  and  were  it 
not  th:.it  wc  are  fuch  perverfe  creatures  as  not  to  be 
wrought  upon  by  kindnefs,  fo  wild  as  not  to  be  tam- 
ed by  gentle  ufage,  God  would  not  handle  us  in  any 
other  way.  It  is  our  obftinacy  and  intradablenefs 
to  the  methods  of  his  goodnefs  which  conftraineth, 

and 


the  reafon  of  their  continuance,  221 

and  almoft  forceth  him  ap^ainft  his  Inclination,  to  take  S  ERM. 

.      .  IX. 

the  rod  into  his  hand  and  to  chaftife  us  with  It.     He 

would  draw  us  with  ''  the  cords  of  love  and  the  bands 
"  of  a  man,"  (as  he  exprefleth  himfelf  in  the  prophet) 
but  we  will  not  follow  him :  and  therefore  we  pro- 
voke him  to  turn  thole  cords  into  whips,  and  to 
change  the  gentle  methods  of  his  kindnefs  into  ways 
of  hardmefs  and  feverity. 

And  yet  when  he  comes  to  take  this  courfe  with  us, 
he  fllll  like  a  kind  and  tender-hearted  Father  aims 
at  our  benefit  and  advantage.  He  defigns  kindngfs 
to  the  fons  of  men  by  all  thofe  judgments,  which  do 
not  kill  them  and  cut  them  off  from  the  opportunity 
and  poffibility  of  improving  them.  If  he  fends  evils 
upon  us,  it  is  that  thereby  he  may  do  us  fome  great- 
er good :  if  he  afflids  us,  it  is  not  becaufe  it  is  pleafant 
to  him  to  deal  harlhly  with  us,  but  becaufe  it  is  pro- 
fitable and  neceffary  for  us  to  be  fo  dealt  with  :  and 
if  at  any  time  he  imbitter  our  lives  by  miferies  and 
fufFerings,  it  is  becaufe  he  is  loth  to  fee  us  perifh  in 
pleafant  ways,  and  chufeth  rather  to  be  fomewhat 
fevere  towards  us  than  fuffer  us  to  be  utterly  undone. 

This  Mofes  declares  to  have  been  the  great  end  of 
all  the  fevere  providences  of  God  towards  the  people 
of  Ifrael  in  their  long  wandring  in  the  Wildernefs, 
and  all  the  difficulties  and  hardlliips  they  were  there 
exercifed  withal  for  the  fpace  of  forty  years,  Deut. 
viii.  15,  16.  "  Who  led  thee  through  that  great  and 
"  terrible  wildernefs,  wherein  were  fiery  ferpents  and 
^'  fcorpions,"  &c.  "  that  he  might  humble  thee, 
"  and  that  he  might  prove  thee,  to  do  thee  good  at 
^'  thy  latter  eiAd." 


So 


222  Of  the  end  of  judgments^  and 

ERM.  So  that  the  afflidling  providences  of  God  are  not 
only  apt  in  their  own  nature  to  do  us  good,  but 
which  is  a  more  cxprefs  argument  of  the  divine  good- 
nefsGoD  intends  and  aims  at  this  end  by  them:  he 
does  not  fend  Judgments  upon  this  theatre  of  the 
world  for  his  fport  and  paftime,  nor  fet  on  one  part 
of  his  creation  to  bait  another  for  his  own  diverfion: 
he  does  not,  hke  fome  of  the  cruel  Roman  emperors 
take  pieafure  to  exercife  men  with  dangers  and  to  fee 
them  play  bloody  prizes  before  him. 
^Nay,  he  does  nothing  that  is  fevere  out  of  humour 
^d  pafilon  •,  as  our  earthly  parents  many  times  do. 
Indeed  he  is  angry  with  us  for  our  fins,  but  yet  fo  as 
ftill  to  pity  our  perfons :  and  when  his  providence 
makes  ufe  of  any  fliarp  and  cutting  inftruments,  it  is 
with  this  merciful  defign,  to  let  out  our  corruption  : 
if  he  caft  us  into  the  furnace  of  afflidion,  it  is  that 
he  may  refine  and  purify  us  from  our  drofs. 

So  that  though  the  judgments  of  God  be  evils  in 
themfelves,  yet  confidering  the  intentions  of  God 
in  them  they  are.  no  real  obje6lions  again  ft  his  good- 
nefs,  but  rather  arguments  for  it ;  as  will  appear  if 
we  confider  thefe  three  things. 

1.  That  the  judgments  of  God  are  proper  for  the 
cure  of  a  far  greater  evil  of  another  kind. 

2.  They  are  proper  for  the  prevention  of  far  great- 
er evils  of  the  fame  kind. 

3.  They  are  not  only  proper  to  thefe  ends,  but  in 
many  cafes  very  necejffary. 

Firft,  "  the  judgments  of  God  are  very  proper  for 
"  the  cure  of  a  far  greater  evil  of  another  kind  /'  I  mean 
the  evil  of  fin.  We  take  wrong  meafures  of  things, 
when  wejudge  thofe  to  be  the  greateft  evils  which  afflid 

our 


the  reafon  of  their  continuance.  223 

our  bodies,  wound  our  reputation,  and  impoverifh  S  E  R  M, 
our  eftates.  For  thofe  certainly  are  far  the  greatefl 
which  afFedl  our  nobleft  part  •,  which  vitiate  our  un- 
derftandings,  and  deprave  our  wills,  and  wound  and 
defile  our  fouls.  What  corrupt  humours  are  to  the 
body,  that  fin  is  to  the  fouls  of  men,  their  difeafe  and 
their  death. 

Now  it  is  very  agreeable  with  the  goodnefs  and 
mercy  of  the  divine  providence,  to  adminifter  to  us 
whatever  is  proper  for  the  cure  of  fo  great  an  evil. 
If  we  make  our  felves  fick,  that  is  our  own  folly,  aftd 
no  fault  of  the  phyfician  •,  but  we  are  beholden  to 
him  if  he  recover  us,  though  it  be  by  very  bitter  and 
unpleafmg  means.  All  temporal  judgments  which 
are  fhort  of  death,  are  properly  medicinal  ^  and  if  we 
will  but  fuifer  them  to  have  their  kindly  operation 
upon  us,  they  will  work  a  cure-,  and  how  grievous 
and  diftaftful  foever  they  may  be  for  the  prefent, 
they  will  prove  mercies  and  blefllngs  in  the  ilTue. 
Upon  this  account  David  reckons  affliclions  among 
the  happy  bleffings  of  his  life,  Pfalm.  cxix.  71.  "  It 
is  good  for  me  (fays  he)  "  that  I  have  been  afflict- 
''  ed-,"  and  he  gives  the  reafon  of  it  in  the  fame 
Pfalm,  ver.  6j.  "  before  I  was  afiiifled  I  went  ailray, 
"  but  now  I  have  learnt  thy  precepts.'^ 

So  that  though  all  afflidlions  are  evils  in  themfelves 
yet  they  are  good  for  us,  becaufe  they  difcover  to  us 
our  difeafe  and  tend  to  our  cure.  They  are  a  fenftble 
argument  and  convidlion  to  us  of  the  evil  and  danger 
of  fin.  We  are  commonly  fuch  fools  as  Solomon 
fpeaks  of,  who  make  a  mock  of  fin  •,  and  like  chil- 
dren will  be  playing  with  the  edge  of  it  till  it  cut  and 
wound  us :  we  are  not  fufficiently  fenfible  how  great 

an 


224  Of  the  end  of  judgments^  and 

SER  M.  an  evil  it  is  till  we  come  to  feel  the  difmal  effe6i:s  and 
confequences  of  it.  And  therefore  to  redlify  our  ap- 
prehenfions  concerning  it  God  makes  us  to  fuffer  by 
it.  Thus  Elihu  defcribes  to  us  the  happy  effe6l  of 
afflidions  upon  Tinners,  Job  xxxvi.  8,  9,  10.  ''  If  they 
"  be  bound  in  fetters  and  held  in  cords  of  afflidion^ 
•'  then  God  fheweth  them  their  work  and  their  tranf- 
"  grelTion  that  they  have  exceeded.  He  openeth  al- 
"  fo  their  ear  to  difcipline  and  commandeth  that 
*'  they  return  from  their  iniquity."  God  doth  but 
invite  and  intreat  us  by  his  mercies,  but  his  judg- 
ments have  a  more  powerful  and  commanding  voice. 
"  When  he  holds  men  in  cords  of  affii6lion,  then  he 
*'  openeth  their  ear  to  difcipline."  In  profperity 
we  are  many  times  incapable  of  council  and  infl:ru(51:i- 
on  ♦,  but  when  we  are  under  God's  correding  haad 
then  we  are  fit  to  be  fpoken  withal. 

Secondly,  the  judgments  of  God  are  likewife 
proper  for  the  preventing  of  far  greater  evils  of  the 
fame  kind  -,  I  mean  farther  punifhments.  In  fending 
of  temporal  judgments  upon  finners,  God  ufually  pro- 
ceeds with  them  by  degrees  :  firft  he  lets  fiy  feveral 
fingle  fhots  at  them,  and  if  upon  thefe  they  will 
take  warning  and  come  in,  they  may  prevent  the 
broad-fides  and  volleys  of  his  wrath. 

But  the  great  advantage  of  all  this  is,  that  tempo- 
ral judgments  may  prove  to  us  the  opportunities  of 
preventing  the  miferable  and  unfpeakable  torments 
of  a  long  eternity.  For  all  judgments  which  are  not 
final,  leaving  men  a  fpace  for  repentance,  have  in 
them  the  mercy  of  a  reprieve,  which  by  a  ferious  and 
timely  return  to  God  may  be  improved  into  a  pardon. . 

Befidcs,  that  adverfity  and  afflidions  do  ufually  dif- 
3  P^^^ 


the  reafon  of  their  continuance.  225 

pofe  men,  and  put  them  into  a  fit  temper  for  repen-  S  E  R  M. 
tance ;  they  fix  our  minds  and  make  us  ferlous,  and 
are  apt  to  awaken  us  to  confideration,  and  fugged  to 
us  fuch  thoughts  and  meditations  as  thefe  ;  if  tempo- 
ral evils  be  fo  grievous,  how  infupportable  then  will 
be  the  extreme  and  endlefs  torments  of  the  next  life  ? 
If  in  this  day  of  God's  grace  and  patience  we  fome- 
times  meet  with  fuch  feverity,  what  may  we  not 
lock  for  in  the  day  of  vengeance  ?  If  thefe  drops  of 
God's  wrath,  which  now  and  then  fall  upon  finners  in 
this  world,  fill  them  with  fo  much  anguith  and  afflic- 
tion, how  deplorably  miferable  will  thofe  wretches  be 
upon  whom  the  florms  of  his  fury  (hall  fall  ?  Who 
would  venture  to  continue  in  fin,  when  the  greatefb 
miferies  and  calamities  which  we  feel  in  this  life  are 
but  a  fmall  and  inconfiderable  earned  of  thofe  wofui 
wages,  which  finners  fhall  receive  in  the  day  of  recom- 
pence  ? 

Thirdly,  the  judgments  of  God  are  not  only  pro- 
per to  thefe  ends,  but  in  m.any  cafes  very  necefiary. 
Our  condition  many  times  is  fuch  as  to  require  this 
fevere  way  of  proceeding,  becaufe  no  other  courfe 
that  God  hath  taken,  or  can  take  with  us,  wiil  pro- 
bably do  us  good.  God  does  not  delight  in  the  mi- 
feries and  calamities  of  his  creatures?  but  we  put  him 
upon  thefe  extremities,  or  rather  his  own  goodnefs 
and  wifdom  together  do  prompt  and  dired  him  to 
thefe  harfn  and  rigorous  ways.  May  be  we  have 
brought  our  felves  into  that  dangerous  date,  an^  the 
malignity  of  our  didemper  is  fuch  that  it  is  x\cA  to  be 
removed  without  violent  phyfick,  and  that  cannot 
be  admindred  to  us  without  making  us  deadly  fick. 

Vol.  I.  G  g  So 

5- 


226  Of  the  end  of  judgment  Sy  and 

ERM.  So  that  the  jadgments  of  God,  which  are  many 
times  abroad  in  the  earth,  are  nothing  clfe  but  the 
wife  methods  which  the  great  phyfician  of  the  world 
ufes  for  the  cure  of  mankind  ;  they  are  the  rods  of 
his  fchool  and  the  difcipline  of  his  providence,  that 
^'  the  inhabitants  of  the  world  may  learn  rightcoufnefs-,** 
They  are  a  merciful  invention  of  heaven  to  do  men 
that  good  which  many  times  nothing  elfe  will,  and 
to  work  that  blefTed  effed  upon  us,  which  neither  ^he 
wife  counlels  and  admonitions  of  God's  word,  nor 
his  milder  and  gentler  dealings  with  us  can  ufually 
attain. 

Thus  we  find  in  the  parable,  Luke  xv.  that  the 
providence  of  God  makes  ufe  of  hunger  and  extreme 
neceflity  to  bring  home  the  prodigal  \  and  by  him 
our  Saviour  reprefents  to  us  the  temper  of  moft  fm- 
ners:  For  till  we  have  ipent  tliat  flock  of  mercies 
which  God  hath  given  us,  till  we  come  to  be  pinch- 
ed with  want  and  are  ready  to  perifli,  we  are  not  ap^ 
to  entertain  thoughts  of  returning  to  our  father. 

It  may  be  there  are  fome  finners  which  are  more 
tradable  and  eafy  to  be  reduced  to  goodnefs,  that 
are  not  fo  headflrong  and  obflinate  in  their  way  but 
that  they  may  be  reclaimed  by  milder  and  Ibftcr 
means  :  but  there  are  likewife  a  great  many  fenfelefs 
^nd  outragious  fmners,  who  are  madly  and  furioufly 
bent  upon  their  own  ruin :  Now  to  treat  thefe  fairly, 
with  the  allurements  of  kindnefs  and  the  gentle  arts 
of  perfuafion,  Vv'culd  be  to  no  purpofe:  The  only 
v/ay  that  is  left  of  dealing  with  them,  is  rigour  and 
feverity.  When  finners  are  thus  befides  themfelves, 
fomething  that  looks  like  cruelty  is  perhaps  the  great, 
eft  p^.ercy  that  can  be  ihown  to  them  j  nothing  fo 

proper 


the  reafon  of  their  continuance, 
proper  for  fuch  perfons  as  a  dark  room,  and  a  fpar 
diet,  and  fevereufage  •,  "  a  rod  for  the  back  of  fools, 
as  the  wife-man  fpeaks. 

Thus  I  have  done  with  the  firft  thing  I  propound- 
ed to  fpeak  to,  namely,  the  merciful  dcfign  and  in- 
tention of  God  in  fending  judgments  upon  a  people, 
which  is  to  bring  them  to  repentance,  and  by  repen- 
tance to  prevent  their  ruin.     1  proceed  to  the 

II.  The  Reafon  of  the  continuance  of  God's  judg^ 
mcnts,  becaufe  the  people  were  not  reclaimed  by  them^ 
therefore  "  his  anger  is  not  turned  away,  but  his  hand 
"  is  flretched  out  ftill,"  becaufe  "  the  people  turneth 
*'  not  to  him  that  fmiteth  them,  neither  do  they  feek 
"  the  Lord  of  hofts. 

And  how  can  it  be  expend  it  fhould  be  otherwife, 
when  incorrigiblenefs  under  the  judgments  of  God  is 
a  provocation  of  fo  high  a  nature,  a  fign  of  a  moft 
depraved  and  incorrigible  temper,  and  an  argument 
of  the  greateft  obftinacy  in  evil  ?  Upon  this  account 
we  find  that  the  holy  fpirit  of  God  in  fcripture  brands 
Ahaz  as  a  fmgular  and  remarkable  fort  of  finner, 
(2  Chron.  xxviii.  22,)  becaufe  "  in  the  time  of  his 
"  diftrefs  he  finned  yet  more  againft  the  Lord." 
The  longer  Pharaoh  and  the  Egyptians  refifted  the 
judgments  of  God  the  more  ftill  they  were  harden- 
ed, and  the  more  they  were  plagued  :  Tevit.  xxvi. 
22.  after  God  had  there  threatned  his  people  with 
feverai  fore  judgments  for  their  fins,  he  tells  them, 
that  if  they  "  will  not  be  reformed  by  all  thefe  things" 
he  will  "  punifh  them  feven  times  more,"  and  after 
that  "  feven  times  more  for  their  fins :"  and  if  ia 
fuch  a  cafe  thejuft  God  will  punilh  feven  times  more, 
we  may  fafely  conclude  that  fins  after  judgments  are 
feven  times  greater,  G  g  2  So 


228  Of  the  €fid  of  judgment  Sy  and 

S  ER  M.       So  likewife  Deut.  xxviii.  after  a  Ions;  and  dreadful 
XI  . 

catalogue  of  curfes  there  denounced  againft  the  peo- 
ple of  Ifrael  in  cafe  of  their  difobedience,  God  at  laft 
threatens  them  with  a  foreign  enemy  that  (hould 
"  diftrefs  them  in  their  gates  •,"  and  if  they  would 
not  be  reclaimed  by  all  this  he  tells  them,  that  he  hath 
ftill  more  and  greater  judgments  for  them  in  ftore, 
V.  c^^^  and  59.  "  if  thou  wilt  notobferve  to  do  all  the 
*'  words  of  this  law,  that  thou  mayefl:  fear  this  great 
"  and  glorious  name,  the  Lord  thy  God,  then 
"  the  Lord  will  make  thy  plagues  wonderful."  If 
we  be  of  fo  ilrange  and  monfirous  a  difpofition  as  to 
grow  worfe  under  judgments,  God  will  deal  with  us 
after  an  unufual  and  prodigious  manner,  he  will  make 
our  plagues  wonderful. 

This  incorrigible  temper  the  prophets  of  old  every 
where  make  the  great  aggravation  of  the  fin  of  Ifrael, 
Ifa.  i.  4,  5.  "  ah  finful  nation,  a  people  laden  with  ini- 
^*'  quity  j"  and  after  a  great  many  other  exprefTions 
to  fet  forth  what  heinous  finners  they  were,  he  fums 
up  all  in  this,  that  they  were  fo  far  from  being  re- 
formed by  the  feveral  judgments  of  God  which  had 
been  inflifted  upon  them,  that  they  were  the  worfe 
for  correction  ;  "  why  fliould  they  be^  flricken  any 
*'  more  ?  they  will  revolt  more  and  more."  So  like- 
wife,  Hof.  vii.  9,  10,  Ephraim,  though  brought  very 
low,  is  reprefented  as  of  the  fame  refradtory  temper, 
"  flrangers  have  devoured  his  ftrength,  &c.  but 
"  they  do  not  return  to  the  Lord,  nor  feek  him  for 
"  all  this."  I  will  mention  but  one  text  more  (and  me- 
thinks  it  bears  but  too  near  a  refemblance  with  our 
own  condition,  both  in  refpe6l  of  the  judgments 
which  have  been  upon  us,  and  our  carriage  under 

them) 


the  reafon  of  their  continuance,  229 

them)  Amos  Iv.  where  God  upbraids  his  people  fe-  SER  M. 
veral  times  with  this  as  the  great  aggravation  of  their       ^^* 
fins.  That  they  continued  impenitent  under  all  thofe 
terrible  judgments  of  God   which  had  been  upon 
them-,     ";!  have  fent  among   you    (fays  he)    fa- 
"mine,"  and  then  "peftilence,"  and  then  the  "fword,'^ 
and  Jaft  of  all  a  terrible  "  fire"  which  had  almoft  ut- 
terly confjmed  them,  verf  1 1.  "  I  have  overthrown 
''  fome  of  you  as  I  overthrew  Sodom  and  Gomorrah, 
*'  and  ye  were  as  a  firebrand  pluckt  out  of  the  burn- 
"  ing  j  yet  have  ye  not  returned  unto  me/'     And 
becaufe  all  thefe  judgments  had  not  been  effedual  to 
reclaim  them,   he  tells  them  that  he  was  refolved  to 
go  on  in  punifhmg ;  and  therefore  he  bids  them  to 
expe6l  it  and  prepare  themfelves  for   it,    verf  12 
"  therefore  thus  will  I  do  unto  thee,  O  Ifrael  ;  and 
"  becaufe  I  will  do  this  unto  thee,    prepare  to  meet 
"  thy  God,  O  Ifrael."    When  God  hath  begun  to 
punifh  a  people  and  they  are  not  amended  by  it,   the 
honour  of  his  juftice  is  concerned  to  proceed,  and  not 
to  give  over.     By  every  fm  that  we  comm.it  we  of- 
fend God,  but  if  he  fmite  us,  and  v/e  itand  out  againfl 
him,    then  do  we  contend  with  him  and  ftrive  for 
inaftery.     And  when  the  fmner  is  upon  thefe  ftub- 
born  and  infolent   terms,  then  prepare  to  m.eet  thy 
God  ;  a  bitter  farcafm,  as  if  man  could  be  a  match 
for  God,  and  a  poor  weak  creature  in  any  wife  able 
to  encounter  him  to  whom  power  belongs.     There's 
a  fevere  expreffion   concerning  God's  dealing  with 
fuch  perverfe  and  obftinate  finnerSj  Pfal.  xviii.  26, 
^^  with  the  froward  thou  wilt  fhew  thy  felf  froward,'* 
or,  as  the  words  may  more  properly  and  convenient- 
ly be  rendred,  "  with  the  froward  thou  wilt  wreftle."" 

3  God 


Of  the  end  of  judgments  y  a?id 
God  wHl  not  be  out-braved  by  the  fins  of  men,  and 
therefore  if  we  continue   impenitent  we  have  all  the 
reafon  in  the  world  to  expe<ft  that  God  fhould  go  on 
to  punifh. 

But  to  come  nearer  to  our  felves  and  to  confider 
our  own  cafe,  which  is  in  truth  fo  very  bad  that  v/e 
may  almoft  be  afraid  to  confider  it.  The  wife  and 
good  God,  like  a  prudent  and  indulgent  father,  hath 
ufed  all  the  arts  of  his  providence  towards  this  nation 
to  reclaim  us.  He  hath  invited  us  to  him  by  many 
blefTings,  but  we  would  not  come ;  fo  (to  borrow  an 
apt  iliuftration  from  a  great  *  divine  of  our  own)  we 
have  forced  him  to  deal  with  us  as  Abfalom  did  with 
Joab  ',  he  fent  one  civil  meflage  to  him  after  another j 
but  he  would  not  come  j  at  lafl:  he  fets  on  fire  his 
corn-field  to  try  whether  that  would  bring  him  :  this 
courfe  God  hath  taken  with  us,  we  would  not  be 
perfuaded  by  mefiages  of  kindnefs  (by  his  many  blef- 
fings  and  favours)  to  return  to  him,  and  therefore 
hath  he  fent  amongft  us  the  terrible  meffengers  of  his 
wrath.  Firft  we  v/ere  engaged  in  a  foreign  war,  and 
though  God  was  pleafed  to  give  us  fome  confidera- 
ble  fuccefs  in  it,  yet  it  feems  our  provocations  were 
fo  great  that  he  was  refolved  to  punifh  us.  He  was 
loth  to  let  us  fall  into  the  hands  of  men,  and  there- 
fore he  took  the  work  into  his  own  hand,  and  pu- 
nifhed  us  himfelf,  by  fending  a  peftilence  amongft  us, 
the  foreft  and  moft  deftrudive That  hath  befallen  this 
nation  for  many  ages.  But  we  did  not  upon  this,  re- 
turn to  him,  and  therefore  his  fierce  anger  kindled  a 
fearful  fire  amongft  uSj  which  hath  laid  the  honour  of 
our  nation,  one  of  the  greateft  and  richeft  cities  in 
*  Bifhop  Sandexfon. 

the 


the  reafon  of  their  continuance,  231 

ihc  world  in  the  duft  ;  and  that  by  fo  fudden  and  ir-  S  E  R  M. 

•  IX 

refiflible,  fo  difmal  and  amazing  a  devaftation,  as  in 

all  the  circumftances  of  it  is  fcarce  to  be  parallel'd  in 

any  hiilory. 

I  doubt  not  but  moil  of  us  were  mightily  affeded 
with  this  judgment  whilft  it  was  upon  us.  So  af- 
ton idling  a  calamity  could  not  but  make  us  open  our 
eyes  a  little,  and  awaken  us  to  confidcration ;  even 
the  rich  man  in  the  gofpel,  though  he  had  all  his  life- 
time been  immerfed  in  fenfuality,  yet  could  not  but 
"  lift  up  his  eyes  when  he  was  in  flames." 

And  furely  God  expeds  that  fuch  judgments  as 
thefe  fhould  not  only  rouze  us  a  little  for  the  prefent, 
but  that  they  fhould  have  a  permanent  operation  and 
effed:  upon  us,  and  work  a  thorough  and  lading  re- 
formation amongft  us  ;  but  yet  I  am  afraid  that  this 
dreadful  fire  hath  had  no  other  influence  upon  us  but 
what  it  ufes  to  have  upon  metals,  which  are  only 
melted  by  it  for  the  prefent,  but  when  the  fire  is  re- 
moved they  fuddenly  cool  and  return  to  their  former 
hardnefs. 

One  would  have  thought  that  the  fenfe  of  fuch  a 
calamity  as  this  fhould  have  remained  longer  upon 
us.  Methinks  God  feemed  to  fay  to  us  after  this 
judgment  as  he  did  once  to  Jerufalem,  Zeph.  iii.  7. 
"  furely  thou  wilt  fear  me,  thou  wilt  receive  inflruc- 
"  tion  ;"  but  we  (like  them)  have  been  but  the  more 
forward  to  provoke  him,  "  (they  rofe  early  and  cor- 
"  rupted  their  doings)"  we  have  after  all  this,  "  har- 
*'  dened  our  hearts  from  his  fear  and  refufed  to  return." 
And  therefore  God  is  now  come  to  one  of  his  lafl 
judgments,  "  our  enemy  diftreffeth  us  in  our  gates.'' 
Gop  hath  begun  to"  let  us  fall  into  the  hands  of  men," 

and 


Of  the  e?id  of  judgment  s^  and 
and  by  giving  our  enemies  a  fudden  and  fatal  advan- 
tage upon  us  hath  fmitten  us  with  a  breach  great   as 
the  fea. 

Thcfe  were  terrible  calamities  indeed  to  come  To 
thick  and  fo  fwiftly  upon  us,  "  like  defolation,  and 
*'  as  a  whirlwind."  Such  a  quick  fucceftion  of  judg- 
ments, treading  almoft  upon  one  another's  Heels,  docs 
but  too  plainly  declare  that  God  is  highly  incenfed 
againft  us.  For  furely  thefe  are  not  the  wounds  of  a 
friend,  but  the  terrible  affaults  of  an  enemy.  They 
do  not  look  like  the  difpleafure  of  a  father,  but  the 
feverity  of  a  judge,  not  like  vifitation,  but  like  ven- 
geance. 

And  befides  thefe  more  vifible  judgments  upon 
the  nation,  we  are  by  a  fecret  curfe  of  God  infenfi- 
bly  decayed  in  our  riches  and  ftrength.  We  are,  I 
know  not  how,  ftrangely  impoverifht  in  the  midfl 
of  plenty,  and  almoft  undone  by  vidlories.  And  v/hich 
adds  to  our  mifery,  few  among  us  feem  to  be  fuffi- 
ciently  fenfible  of  it,  or  to  take  any  notice  by  what 
filent  fteps  and  imperceptible  degrees  (like  gray  hairs 
and  the  infirmities  of  old  age)  poverty  and  weaknefs 
are  ftealing  in  upon  us :  fo  that  we  may  fitly  apply  to 
cur  felves  what  the  prophet  fays  of  Ephraim.  Hof. 
vii.  9.  "  ftrangers  have  devoured  his  ftrength,  and 
*'  he  knoweth  it  not ;  yea  gray  hairs  are  htit  and 
*'  there  upon  him,  and  yet  he  knoweth  it  not." 

And  our  condition,  as  we  are  a  church,  is  not  much 
better.  How  is  this  farnous  proteilant  church  of 
ours,  which  was  once  the  admiration  of  her  friends 
and  the  envy  of  her  enemies,  funk  and  declined  in 
her  glory,  and  reduced  into  a  very  narrow  compafs  ? 
So  that  fhe  is  left  like  the  daughter  of  Sion,  (Ifa.  i.  8.) 

"  as 


the  reafon  of  their  continuance 6  233' 

*'  as  a  cottage  in  a  vineyard,  as  a  lodge  in  a  garden  SE  RM. 
**  of  cucumbers,  as  a  befieged  city :"  flraitned  and 
hemmed  in  on  all  parts,  by  the  impudence  of  atheifm^ 
the  infolencies  of  popery,  and  the  turbulency  of  fac- 
tion ;  all  which  do  every  day  vifibly  and  apace  gain 
ground  upon  her,  and  diftrefs  her  on  every  fide  ;  juft 
as  the  condition  of  the  Jewifh  church  is  defcribed  be- 
fore my  text,  "  the  Syrians  before,  and  the  Philif- 
"  tines  behind,  both  ready  to  devour  Ifrael  with  o-^ 
"  pen  mouth." 

And  furely  it  is  not  for  nothing  that  God  hath 
brought  us  thus  low,  that  he  hath  fent  all  thefe  judg- 
ments upon  us,  and  that  he  doth  dill  threaten  us  with 
more :  the  reafon  is  plain,  becaufe  we  are  flill  impe- 
nitent ;  "  the  people  turneth  not  to  him  that  fmit-* 
*'  eth  them."  There  hath  been  almoft  an  univerfal 
deg-eneracy  amongft  us,  and  there  is  flill,  I  fear,  a 
general  impenitency,  "  the  people  turneth  not,"  &Co' 
Notwithftanding  all  thofe  difmal  calamities  which 
our  eyes  have  feen,  wickednefs  doth  flill  prevail  in 
the  nation  and  overflows  it  like  a  mighty  deluge,  fo 
as  to  overfpread  all  ranks  and  orders  of  men :  and  not 
only  fo,  but  is  grown  impudent  and  appears  with  a 
whore's  forehead  •,  all  kind  of  modefly  feems  to  have 
forfaken  the  Tinners  of  this  age. 

And  is  this  repentance  ?  to  live  in  filthy  and  abo- 
minable lufls,  to  tear  the  name  of  God  by  horrid 
oaths  and  imprecations  \  to  be  atheiftical  and  pro- 
phane,  and  by  an  unexampled  boldnefs  to  turn  the 
word  of  God  it  felf,  and  the  graved  and  mofl  ferious 
matters  of  religion  into  raillery  ?  This  is  not"  to  turn 
«  to  him  that  fmiteth  us,"  but  to  turn  upon  him  and 
fmite  him  again.     And  yet  fuch  crying  and  clamo- 

Vol.  I.  H  h  reus 

5' 


Of  the  end  of  judgments^  and 
rous  fins  as  thefe  arc  almoft  come  to  be  the  garb  and 
fafhion  of  the  nation,  and  to  be  accounted  the  wit 
and  gallantry  of  the  age. 

And  "  fhall  not  God  vifit  for  thefe  things  ? 
*'  fhall  not  his  foul  be  avenged  on  fuch  a  nation  as 
*'  this?"  Yes,  he  hath  vifited ;  and  it  is  for  thefe 
things  that  the  wrath  of  God  hath  been  fo  manifeftly 
revealed  from  heaven  againft  us.  For  this  caufe 
"  mifery  and  deftrudion  have  been  in  our  way,  and 
*'  the  way  of  peace  have  we  not  known,"  becaufe 
there  hath  been  "  no.  fear  of  God  before  our  eyes/* 
Hence  it  is  that  "  God's  anger  is  not  turned  away, 
"  but  his  hand  is  flretched  out  flill,  becaufe  the  peo- 
*«  pic  turneth  not  to  him  that  fmiteth  them,  neither 
"  do  they  feek  the  Lord  of  hofts." 

But  do  not  we  feek  God  ?  Do  we  not  every  day 
acknowledge  our  fins  to  him,  and  pray  that  he  would 
"  have  mercy  upon  us  miferable  offenders,  and  grant 
"  that  we  may  hereafter  live  godly,  righteous  and  fo- 
"  bcr  lives  ?"  Do  not  we  "  feek  the  I^rd  of  hofts,** 
when  we  continually  beg  of  him  to  fave  and  "  deli- 
"  ver  us  from  the  hand  of  our  enemies  V  Indeed  we 
do  thus  feek  him,  but  we  fhould  firft  turn  to  him  ; 
otherwife  if  we  hope  our  prayers  will  prevail  with 
God  to  do  us  good  we  do  but  truft  in  lying  words- 
If  we  go  on  in  our  fins  our  very  prayers  will  become 
fin,  and  increafe  our  guilt :  For  "  the  prayer  of  the 
<'  wicked  (that  is,  of  one  that  is  relblved  to  conti- 
nue fo)  "  is  an  abomination  to  the  Lord."  Can  we 
think  it  reafonablc  for  men  to  addrefs  themfelves  to 
God  after  this  majiner  ?  "  Lord,  though  we  have 
"  no  mind  to  turn  to  thee,  yet  we  pray  thee  turn  a- 
"  way  thine  anger  from  us ;  though  we  are  refolved 

*'  not 


the  reafon  of  their  continuance*  ^35 

"  not  to  forfakeour  fins,  yet  we   make  no  doubt  SERM. 

•  IX 

"  but  thy  mercy  will  forgive  them  ;  Give  peace  in 

"  our  time,  O  Lord,  that  we  may  purfue  our  lufls 
i'  fecurely  and  without  difturbance  :  deliver  us  we 
*'  pray  thee  from  the  hands  of  our  enemies,  that  we 
"  may  fm  againft  thee  without  fear  all  the  days  of 
*'  our  lives."  Would  it  not  be  horrible  impudence 
and  impiety  to  put  up  any  fuch  petitions  to  God  ? 
and  yet  this,  I  fear,  is  the  moft  genuine  interpre- 
tation of  our  prayers  and  lives   compared  together. 

And  if  this  be  our  cafe,  what  can  we  expedl  ? 
God  may  give  us  peace  with  our  enemies,  but  then 
he  will  find  out  fome  other  way  to  punifh  us :  For 
if  we  ftill  perfift  in  our  atheifm  and  prophanenefs, 
in  our  contempt  of  God  and  of  his  holy  worfhip,  in 
our  fcorn  and  derifion  of  religion,  in  our  abominable 
lufts  and  horrid  impieties,  what  can  we  look  for  but 
that  God  fhould  "  be  angry  with  us  until  he  have 
«*^  confumed  us  and  there  be  no  efcaping?"  Nothing 
can  be  a  fadder  prefage  of  our  ruin,  than  not  to  be  re- 
formed by  thofe  dreadful  judgments  of  God  which 
have  been  upon  us.  This  was  that  which  brought 
final  deflru6lion  upon  the  Egyptians  in  the  Red  Sea, 
that  they  had  held  out  fo  obftinately  againft  fo  many 
judgments,  and  had  been  hardened  under  ten  plagues. 
To  be  impenitent  after  fuch  fevere  corredions,  is  to 
poifon  our  felves  with  that  which  is  intended  for 
our  phyfick,  and  by  a  miraculous  kind  of  obftina- 
cy  to  turn  the  rods  of  God  into  ferpents. 

And  now  perhaps  fome  will  be  apt  to  fay,  that 

thefe  are  things  fit  for  men  of  our  profelTion,  becaufe 

it  is  our  trade  and  we  live  by  it.     Indeed  they  are  fo» 

things  very  fit  to  be  faid,  and  withal  very  fit  for 

H  h  2  every 


236  Of  the  end  of  judgment  Sy  and 

^  ^Tv^^'  ^^^^y  ^^^  to  confider,   who  profefleth  himfelf  a  Chri- 
ftian,  and  who  owns  the  belief  of  a  God,  and  a  provL 
dence,  and  another  world.     And  if  they  be  fo,  where 
is  the  fault?  Is  it,    that  there  is  a  peculiar  profefTion 
of  men  whofe  proper  work  it  is  to  tell  men  of  their 
faults,  and  to  perfuade  them  to  reform  ?  No,  there 
is  no  harm  in  that  neither.     Is  it  then  that  they  live 
by  their  profefTion,  and  yet  would  be  believed  ?  Yes, 
there  lies  tlie  force  of  the  objedlion.     To  which  I 
fhall  only  at  prefent  return  this  anfwer,  that  men  do 
not  argue  thus  in  other  cafes,  when  yet  the  reafon 
feems  to  be  the  very  fame.     In  matters  that  concern 
their  bodies  and  eftates,  the  phyfician  and  the  lav/yer 
are  believed,  though  it  is  verily  thought  that  they 
live  by  their  profeflions  as  well  as  we  •,    why  then 
Ihould  men  deal  fo  partially  and  unequally  only  with 
their  fouls  ?  Were  we  not  moved  by  better  principles, 
and  fwayed  by  the  arguments  and  confiderations  of 
another  world,  we  might,  for  ought  we  know,  with 
every  whit  as  much  advantage  to  our  felves,  fuffer 
men  to  be  quiet  and  to  lleep  on  fecurely  in  their  lins  ; 
if  we  did  not  believe  our  felves  in  thefe  matters,  what 
fhould  hinder  but  that  we  might  with  as  much  gra- 
vity and  confidence  cry  peace,  peace,  when  there  is 
no  peace  •,  and  flatter  men  with  as  much  art  and  with 
as  good  a  grace,  as  any  of  thofe  can  do  who  "  live 
<^  delicately  and  wear  foft  clothing?" 

But  "  we  believe"  the  threatnings  of  God,  and 
^^  therefore  do  we  fpeak :  we  know  the  terrors  of 
*'  the  Lord,"  and  therefore  we  endeavour"  to  per- 
"  fuademen."  And  oh  I  that  we  could  perfuade  them 
to  "  break  off  their  Tins  by  righteoufnefs,  and  to 
'^  turn  every  one  from  the  evil  of  his  way,  and  from 

«  the 


the  reafon  of  their  cmtinuance.  237 

**  the  violence  that  is  in  his  hands :  and  then  who 
*'  can  tell  but  God  may  turn  and  repent,  and  turn 
"  away  from  his  fierce  anger  that  we  perifh  not  ? 

"  The  good  God  make  us  all  wife  to  know  in  this 
*'  our  day  the  things  that  belong  to  our  peace,  be- 
**  fore  they  be  hid  from  our  eyes  ;  and  grant  that  we 
"  may  all  turn  to  him  that  hath  fmitten  us,  by  repen- 
*'  tance  and  real  reformation  of  our  lives  j  that  God 
'^  may  be  pleafed  to  turn  away  his  anger  from  us, 
*'  and  to  flretch  out  his  hand  for  our  deliverance  ; 
''  which  we  humbly  beg  of  him  for  the  fake  of 
"'  Christ.     To  whom  with  the  Father,  &c.'* 


S     E    R    M    O    N     X. 

Of  the  deceitfulnefs  and  danger  of  fin. 


H  E  B.  iii.  13. 

Exhort  one  another  daily ^  while  it  is  called  to  day^  lejl 

any  of  you  be  hardened  through  the  deceitfulnefs  of  Jin, 

AMong  the  many  confiderations  which  the  SERM. 
word  of  God  and  our  own  reafon  offer  to  .  ^* 
us  to  difcourage  us  from  fin  this  is  none  of 
the  lead  confiderable,  that  he  that  once  engages  in  a 
vicious  courfe  is  in  danger  to  proceed  in  it,  being  in- 
fenfibly  trained  on  from  one  degree  of  wickednefs  to 
another  :  fo  that  the  farther  he  advances,  his  retreat 
grows  more  difficult,  becaufe  he  is  ftill  pufhed  on 

with 


238  Of  the  deceitfulnefi  and  danger  of  fin, 

ERM.  with  a  greater  violence.  All  error,  as  well  of  prac- 
tice as  of  judgment,  is  endlefs ;  and  when  a  man  is 
once  out  of  the  way,  the  farther  he  Ihall  go  on  the 
harder  he  will  find  it  to  return  into  the  right  way. 
Therefore  there  is  great  reafon  why  men  fhould  be  fo 
often  cautioned  againft  the  beginnings  of  fin ;  or  if 
they  have  been  fo  unhappy  as  to  be  ingaged  in  a  bad 
courfe,  why  they  fhould  be  warned  to  break  it  off 
prefently  and  without  delay,  left  by  degrees  they  be 
hardened  in  their  wickednefs,  till  their  cafe  grow  de- 
fperate  and  paft  remedy.  And  to  this  purpofe  is  the 
apoftle's  advice  here  in  the  text  \  "  exhort  one  ano- 
**  ther  daily,  while  it  is  called  to  day,  left  any  of  you 
**"  be  hardened  through  the  deceitfulnefs  of  fin." 
From  which  words  I  fhall 

1.  Endeavour  to  reprefent  to  you  the  growing 
danger  of  fin,  and  by  what  fteps  and  degrees  bad  habits 
do  infenfibly  gain  upon  men  and  harden  them  in 
an  evil  courfe. 

2.  I  fhall  from  this  confideration  take  occafion  to 
Ihcw  what  great  reafon  and  need  there  is  to  warn 
men  of  this  danger,  and  to  endeavour  to  refcue  tliem 
out  of  it.     And  then 

3.  I  ftiall  apply  my  felf  to  the  duty  here  in  the 
text,  of  exhorting  men  with  all  earneftnefs  and  im- 
portunity to  refift  the  beginnings  of  fin ;  or  if  they 
be  already  entred  upon  a  wicked  courfe,  to  make  hafte 
out  of  this  dangerous  ftate  \  "  left  any  of  you  be  hard- 
'*  ened  through  the  deceitfulnefs  of  fin  ; 

I.  Firft,  I  fhall  endeavour  to  reprefent  to  you  the 
growing  danger  of  fin,  and  by  what  fteps  and  degrees 
bad  habits  do  infenfibly  gain  upon  men  and  harden 
them  in  an  evil  courfe.  All  the  adions  of  men  which 

are 


Of  the  deceit fulnefs  and  danger  of  Jin,  239 

are  not  natural,  but  proceed  from  deliberation  and  S  E  R  M. 
choice,  have  fomething  of  difficulty  in  them  when  we 
begin  to  pradlife  them,  becaufe  at  firft  we  are  rude 
and  unexercifed  in  that  way  :  but  after  we  have  prac- 
tifed  them  awhile  they  become  more  eafy  :  and  when 
they  are  eafy,  we  begin  to  take  pleafure  in  them :  and 
when  they  pleafe  us  we  do  them  frequently,  and 
think  we  cannot  repeat  them  too  often  -,  and  by  fre- 
quency of  a(5ls  a  thing  grows  into  a  habit;  and  a 
confirmed  habit  is  a  fecond  kind  of  nature ;  and  fb 
far  as  any  thing  is  natural  fo  far  it  is  neceflary,  and 
we  can  hardly  do  otherwife  -,  nay,  we  do  it  many 
times  when  we  do  not  think  of  it.  For  by  virtue  of 
a  habit  a  man's  mind  or  body  becomes  pliable  and 
inclined  to  fuch  kind  of  adions  as  it  is  accuftomed  to, 
and  does  as  it  were  fland  bent  and  charged  fuch  a 
way  ;  fo  that  being  touched  and  a^yakened  by  the 
lead  occafion,  it  breaks  forth  into  fuch  or  fuch  ac- 
tions. And  this  is  the  patural  progrefs  of  all  habits 
indifferently  confide  red,  whether  they  be  good  or  bad. 
But  vicious  habits  have  a  greater  advantage,  and 
are  of  a  quicker  growth.  For  the  corrupt  nature  of 
man  is  a  rank  foil  to  which  vice  takes  eafiiy,  and 
wherein  it  thrives  apace.  The  mind  of  man  hath 
need  to  be  prepared  for  piety  and  virtue-,  it  mull 
be  cultivated  to  that  end,  and  ordered  with  great 
care  and  pains :  but  vices  are  weeds  that  grow  wild 
and  fpring  up  of  themfelves.  They  are  in  fome  fort 
natural  to  the  foil,  and  therefore  they  need  not  to  be 
planted  and  watered,  it  is  fufHcient  if  they  be  negled- 
ed  and  let  alone.  So  that  vice  having  this  advan* 
tage  from  our  nature,  it  is  no  wonder  if  occasfion  and 
temptation  eafily  draw  it  forth. 

But 


Of  the  deceitfulnejs  and  danger  efjln. 
But  that  we  may  take  a  more  diflind:  account  of 
the  progrefs  of  fin  and  by  what  fteps  vice  gains  upon 
men,  I  fhall  mark  out  to  you  fome  of  the  chief  and 
more  obfervable  gradations  of  it. 

1 .  Men  begin  with  leffer  fins.  No  man  is  perfed- 
Juven.  ly  wicked  on  the  fudden.  Sunt  qu^edam  vitiorum  ele- 
mental "  there  are  certain  rudiments  of  vice,"  in 
which  men  are  firft  entered,  and  then  they  proceed 
by  degrees  to  greater  and  fouler  crimes.  For  vice 
hath  it's  infancy  and  tender  age,  and  it's  feveral  dates 
of  growth.  Men  are  not  fo  totally  degenerate  but 
at  firft  they  are  afliamed  when  they  venture  upon  a 
known  fin,  though  it  be  but  fmall  in  coraparifon. 
Hence  it  is  that  at  firft  men  are  very  folicitous  to 
palliate  and  hide  their  faults  by  excufes,  but  after  they 
have  frequently  committed  them,  and  they  grow  too 
vifible  to  be  concealed,  then  they  will  attempt  to  de- 
fend and  maintain  them ;  and  from  thence  they  come 
by  degrees  to  take  pleafure  in  them,  and  in  thofe  that 
do  the  fame  things. 

2.  After  men  have  been  fome  time  Initiated  in  thefe 
lefTer  fins,  by  the  commiflion  of  thefe  they  are  pre- 
pared and  dilpofed  for  greater  ;  fuch  as  lay  wafte  the 
confcience,  and  offer  more  violence  to  the  light  and 
reafon  of  their  minds.  By  degrees  a  finner  may  grow 
to  be  fo  hardy  as  to  attempt  thofe  crimes  which  at 
firft  he  could  not  have  had  the  thought  of  commit- 
ing  without  horror.  Like  Hazael,  who  when  he 
was  told  by  the  prophet  Eliftia  what  barbarous  cruel- 
ties he  fhould  one  day  be  guilty  of  towards  the  people 
of  Ifrael  when  he  fliould  come  to  be  king  of  Syria, 
he  abominated  the  very  thought  and  mention  of  them; 
"  Is  thy  fervant  a  dog  that  he  ftiould  do  this  great 

3  "  thing?'* 


Of  the  deceit fulnefs  and  danger  of fin\  24  r 

*'  thing  ?"  and  yet  for  all  this  we  know  he  did  it  after-  S  E  R  M,. 
wards.  'Tis  true  indeed  when  a  iinner  is  firft  temp- 
ted to  the  commiffion  of  a  more  grofs  and  notorious 
fin,  his  confcience  is  apt  to  boggle  and  dart  ^x.  it^  hei 
doth  it  with  great  dilnculty  and  regret ;  the  terrors 
of  his  own  mind  and  the  fears  of  damnation  are  very 
troublefom  to  him  ;  but  this  trouble  wears  off  by  de- 
grees, and  that  which  was  at  firfh  difticult  does  by 
frequent  pradice  and  long  cuflom  become  tolerable* 

3.  When  a  man  hath  proceeded  thus  far  he  begins 
to  put  off  fhame,  one  of  the  greateft  reftraints  fromt 
fin  which  God  hath  laid  upon  human  nature.  And 
when  this  curb  once  falls  off,  there  is  then  but  little 
left  to  reftrain  and  hold  us  in.  At  firft  fetting  out 
upon  a  vicious  courfe  men  are  a  little  nice  and  deli- 
cate, like  young  travellers,  who  at  firft  are  offended 
at  every  fpeck  of  dirt  that  lights  upon  them ;  but 
after  they  have  been  accuftomed  to  it,  and  have  tra- 
velled a  good  while  in  foul  ways,  it  ceafeth  to  b^ 
troublefom  to  them  to  be  daftied  and  befpattered. 

4.  After  thisj  it  is  poffible,  men  may  come  to  ap- 
prove tlieir  vices.  For  if  men's  judgments  do  not 
command  their  wills  and  reftrain  theirlufts,  it  is  great 
odds  in  procefs  of  time  the  vicious  inclinations  of 
their  wills  will  put  a  falfe  biafs  upon  their  judgments;' 
and  then  it  is  no  wonder  if  men  come  to  boaft  of  their 
fins  and  to  glory  in  their  vices,  when  they  are  half 
perfuaded  that  they  are  generous  and  commendable 
qualities.  Thus  much  is  certain  in  experience,  that- 
fome  men  have  gotten  fo  perfedl  a  habit  of  fome  fins 
as  not  to  know  and  take  notice  many  times  when  they 
commit  them.  As  in  the  cafe  of  fwearing,  which 
fome  men   have  fo  accuftomed  themfelves  to  that 

Vol,  I.  li       .  withou-t 

5' 


242  Of  the  deceit f nine fs  and  danger  of  Jin, 

S  E  R  M.  without  any  confideration  they  do  of  courfe  put  an 
oath  or  two  into  every  fentence  that  comes  from  them. 
And  it  hath  been  obferved  of  fome  perfons  that  they 
have  told  an  untruth  fo  often,  and  averred  it  with  fo 
much  confidence,  till  at  laft,  forgetting  that  it  was 
a  lie  at  firft,  they  themfelves  have  in  procefs  of  time 
believed  it  to  be  true. 

5.  From  this  pitch  of  wickednefs  men  commonly 
proceed  to  draw  in  others  and  to  make  profelytes  to 
their  vices.  Now  this  fignifies  not  only  a  great  ap- 
probation of  fin  but  even  a  fondnefs  for  it,  when 
men  are  not  content  to  fin  upon  their  own  fingle  ac- 
counts, but  they  muft  turn  zealous  agents  and  fadors 
for  the  devil  -,  become  teachers  of  fin  and  minifters 
of  unrighteoufnefs,  and  are  fadlioufly  concerned  to 
propagate  together  with  their  atheiftical  principles 
their  lewd  pradices,  and  to  draw  followers  and  dif- 
ciples  after  them. 

And  when  they  are  arrived  to  this  height  it  is  natural 
for  them  to  hate  reproof,  and  to  refiil  the  means  of 
their  recovery;  to  quarrel  againft  all  the  remedies 
that  (hall  be  offered  to  them,  and  to  count  thofe  their 
greateft  enemies  who  have  fo  much  courage  and  kind- 
nefs  as  to  deal  plainly  with  them,  and  to  tell  them 
the  tRith.  And  then  all  the  wife  counfels  of  God's 
word,  and  the  moft  gentle  and  prudent  admonitions 
in  the  world,  when  they  are  tendered  to  fuch  perfons, 
ferve  only  to  provoke  their  fcorn  or  their  pafiion. 
And  furely  that  man  is  in  a  fad  cafe  that  is  fo  difpo- 
fed,  that  in  all  probability  he  will  turn  the  moft  ef- 
fe^ual  means  of  his  amendment  into  the  occafion  of 
new  and  greater  fins. 

But 


Of  the  deceitfulnefs  and  danger  of  Jin.  243 

But  that  which  renders  the  condition  of  fuch  per-  SE  R  M 
fens  much  more  fad  and  deplorable  is,  that  alJ  this 
while  God  is  withdrawing  his  grace  from  them.  For 
every  degree  of  fm  caufeth  the  holy  fpirit  of  God 
with  all  his  blelTed  motions  and  affiflances  to  retire 
farther  from  them  :  and  not  only  fo,  but  the  devil 
(that  evil  fpirit  which  the  fcripture  tells  us,  "  works 
"  effedually  in  the  children  of  difobedience")  does, 
according  as  men  improve  in  wickednefs,  get  a  great- 
er and  a  more  eftablifhed  dominion  over  them.  For 
as  they  who  are  reclaimed  from  an  evil  courfe  are 
faid  in  fcripture  to  be  "  refcued  out  of  the  fnare 
"  of  the  devil,"  and  to  be  "  turned  from  the  power 
"  of  Satan  unto  GoD~i"  fo  on  the  other  hand,  the 
farther  men  advance  in  the  ways  of  fm,  fo  much  ihiz 
farther  they  depart  from  God,  from  under  the  influ- 
ence of  his  grace,  and  the  care  of  his  protedion  and 
providence  \  and  they  give  the  devil  (who  is  not  apt 
to  negled  his  advantages  upon  them)  greater  oppor- 
tunities every  day  to  gain  the  firmer  poiTefllon  of 
them. 

And  thus  by  pafTing  from  one  degree  of  fm  to  ano- 
ther, the  finner  becomes  hardened  in  his  wickednefs 
and  does  infenfibly  Aide  into  that  in  which  without 
a  miraculous  grace  of  God  he  is  like  for  ever  to  con- 
tinue. For  the  mind  of  man,  after  it  hath  been  long 
accuftomed  to  evil,  and  is  once  grown  old  in  vice,  is 
aimofl:  as  hard  to  be  redilied  as  it  is  to  recover  a  bo- 
dy bowed  down  with  age  to  it's  firit  flreightnefs. 
The  fcripture  fpeaks  of  fome  that  "  commit  fin  with 
*'  greedinefs,  and  that  drink  up  iniquity  as  the  ox 
"  drinketh  up  water,"  with  a  mighty  appetite  and 
thirft,  as  if  they  were  not  able  to  refrain  from  it.    And 

I  i  2  to 


Oj  the  deceitfulnefs  and  danger  offing 
to  exprels  to  us  the  miferable  condition  of  fuch  per- 
fons  it  reprefenteth  them  as  perfedt  flavcs  to  their  vi- 
ces, that  have  fold  themfelves  to  do  wickednefs  and 
'^  are  led  captive  by   Satan  at  his  pleafure."     And 
when  men  have  brought  themfelves  to  this  pafs,  they 
are  almoft  under  a  fatal  necefTity  of  finning  on.     I  do 
not  believe  that  God  hath  abfolutely  predeflinated  a- 
ny  man  to  ruin,  but  by  a  long  courfe   of  wilful   fin 
men  may  in  a  fort  predeftinate  themfelves  to  it,  and 
chufe  wickednefs  fo  long  till  it  almoft  becomes  necef- 
fary,  and  till  they  have  brought  themfelves  under  all 
imaginable  difadvantage  of  contributing  any  thing 
towards  their   own  recovery  \   being  bound  in  the 
chains  of  their  own  wickednefs  and  held  in  the  cords  of 
their  fins:  Nay,  like  Sampfon,  not  only  bound  by 
thofe  lufts  which   they  have  embraced,  but  hkewife 
robbed  of  all    their   ftrength  whereby  they  fhould 
break  loofe  from  thofe  bonds.     God  grant  that  none 
cf  us  may  ever  have  the  woful  experience  of  it  :  But 
\  am  horribly  afraid  it  is  too  true,  that  a  finner  may 
arrive  to  that  confirmed  ftate  of  impiety  as  almoft  to- 
tally to  lofe  his  liberty  to  do  better :  he  may  attain 
to  that  perfection  in  vice,  as  to  continue  to  be  a  bad 
man  upon  the  fame  account  that  the  Hiftorian  extra- 
Veil -Pa-    vagantly  fays  Cato  was  virtuous,  i^//^  aliter  ejfe  non 
?''C-         'potidt  \  becaufe  he  could  not  be  otherwife.     "  Can 
^'  the  Ethiopian  change  his  flcin,  or  the  Leopard  his 
c'  fpots?"  It  is  the  fcripture  comparifon,  to  fet  forth 
to  us  how  hard  a  thing  it  is  for  a  man  to  be  brought 
to  goodnefs  that  hath  been  long  accuftomed  to  do  e- 
vil.     He  that  is  thus  deeply  engaged  and  entangled 
\\\  a  bad   courfe  will  fcarce  ever  have  the  heart  and 
refblution  to  break  iouie  from  k,  unlefs  he  be  for- 
ced 


Of  the  deceitfidnefs  and  danger  of  Jin,  245 

ced  violently  out  of  it  by  fome  fevere  afflidlion,  by  a  S  E  RM. 
Iharp  ficknefs,  or  by  a  terrible  calamity,  or  by  the 
prefent  apprehenfions  of  death  and  the  terrors  of  a  fu- 
ture judgment.  Nor  will  thefe  be  effedual  neither 
to  change  fuch  a  perfon  without  an  extraordinary  de- 
gree of  God's  grace ;  which  confidering  the  great- 
nefsand  the  continuance  of  his  provocations,  he  hath 
very  little  reafon  to  exped  or  hope  God  fhould  ever 
bellow  upon  him.  Wretched  man  !  that  haft  brought 
thy  felf  into  this  miferable  ftate,  out  of  which  there 
is  butjuft  a  pofTibility  left  of  thy  being  refcucd  ;  that 
hall  negleded  thy  difeafe  fo  long  till  it  is  almoft  too 
late  to  apply  remedies ;  that  haft  provoked  God  fo 
far  and  finned  to  fuch  a  prodigious  height,  that  thou 
haft  reafon  almoft  to  defpair  both  of  his  grace  and 
afTiftance  for  thy  repentance,  and  of  his  mercy  for 
thy  pardon.  I  fpeak  not  this  to  difcourage  even  the 
greateft  of  finners  from  repentance.  Though  their 
cafe  be  extremejy  difficult,  yet  it  is  not  quite  defpe- 
rate.  For  "  thofe  things  which  feem  impolTible 
'•  with  men,  are  poffible  with  God."  But  I  fpeak 
it  on  purpofe  to  ftop  finners  in  their  courfe  and  to 
difcourage  men  from  going  on  in  fin  till  they  be  hard- 
ened through  the  deceitfulnefs  of  it,  and  have 
brought  themfelves  by  infenfible  degrees  into  tha^ 
dangerous  and  difficult  ftate  which  I  have  all  this 
while  been  reprefenting  to  you.     I  come  now  to  tho, 

II.  Second  thing  I  pi-opounded,  which  was  from 
this  confideration  to  ffiew  what  great  reafon  and  need 
there  is  to  warn  men  of  this  danger,  and  to  endea- 
vour to  refcue  them  out  of  it.  The  apoftle  direds 
this  precept  to  ail  Chriftians.    ^  Exhort  on^  another 

daily. 


246  Of  the  deceitfulnefs  and  danger  of  Jin. 

S  E  R  M.  «  daily,  left  any  of  you  be  hardened  through  the  de- 
'^  ccitfulnefs  of  fin."  That  is,  left  you  be  hardened 
by  degrees  and  finally  ruined.  And  furely  every  man 
is  concerned  to  do  what  in  him  lies  to  refcue  his  bro- 
ther from  fo  imminent  a  danger-,  it  is  every  one's  place 
and  duty  to  endeavour  to  fave  thofe  whom  he  fees 
ready  to  perilh,  much  more  does  it  concern  thofe 
who  are  peculiarly  fet  apart  for  this  work,  I  mean 
the  minifters  of  God's  holy  word,  whofe  proper  of- 
fice and  bufinefs  it  is  to  "  exhort  and  warn  every  man 
<^  day  and  night,"  who  are  "  fet  as  watchmen  to  the 
*'  houfe  of  Ifrael,"  and  whofe  blood  in  cafe  any  of 
them  mifcarry  through  our  negledl  ftiail  be  required 
at  our  hands.  So  that  if  we  believe  the  threatnings 
of  God  which  we  declare  toothers,  if  we  have  any 
apprehenfion  of  the  dreadful  mifery  of  another  world, 
if  we  have  any  fenfe  of  our  own  duty  and  fafety,  if 
we  have  any  pity  for  periftiing  fouls,  we  cannot  but 
be  very  importunate  with  finners  to  look  about  them, 
and  to  confider  their  danger,  and  to  bethink  them- 
felves  ferioufly  of  the  miferable  event  and  ifuie  of  a 
wicked  life  :  we  cannot  but  be  earneft  with  them  to 
"  break  off  their  fins,  and  to  give  glory  to  God  by 
"  repentance,  before  darknefs  come  and  their  feet 
*'  ftumbleupon  the  dark  mountains."  When  we  are 
convinced  more  fully  than  we  can  defire  that  "  mi- 
*'  fery  and  deftrudion  are  in  their  ways,"  when  we 
plainly  fee  the  evil  day  hafting  towurds  them  apace 
and  "  deftru6lion  coming  upon  them  like  a  whirl- 
*^  wind  i"  heaven  above  threatning  them,  and  "  hell 
*'  beneath  moving  her  fclf  to  meet  them  at  their 
"  coming,"  can  we  pofiibly  do  lefs  than  to  warn  fuch 
perfons  "  to  flee  from  the  wrath  which  is  to  come,'* 
3  and 


Of  the  deceitfulnefs  and  danger  of  Jin.  2^y 

and  out  of  a  fad  apprehenfion  of  the  danger  that  hangs  S  E  R  M. 
over  them,  to  caution  them  agai  nil  it,  and  endea- 
vour with  all  our  might  to  refcue  them  from  the  mi- 
fery  which  is  ready  to  fwallow  them  up?  Indeed  one 
would  be  apt  to  think  it  a  very  vain  thing  to  difTuade 
men  from  being  miferable,  to  ufe  great  vehemency 
of  argument  to  hinder  a  man  from  leaping  into  a  pit, 
or  from  running  into  the  fire ;  to  take  great  pains  to 
argue  a  fick  man  into  a  defire  of  health,  and  to  make 
a  prifoner  contented  to  have  his  fnackles  knocked  off, 
and  to  be  fet  at  liberty :  one  would  think  all  this  were 
perfedly  needlefs  :  but  yet  we  fee  in  experience  fin  is 
a  thing  of  fo  Impifying  a  nature  as  to  make  men  in- 
fenfible  of  their  danger,  although  it  be  fo  near,  and 
fo  terrible.  It  is  not  fo  with  men  in  other  cafes : 
When  we  labour  of  any  bodily  diilemper,  it  is  much 
to  find  a  man  that  is  patient  of  his  difeafe  ;  but  when 
our  fouls  are  mortally  fick,  that  we  fhould  be  con- 
tented with  our  condition,  and  fond  of  our  difeafe, 
that  we  fhould  fight  with  our  phyfician,  and  fpurn  at 
our  remedy  •,  this  furely  is  the  height  of  diftraclion, 
for  men  to  be  thus  abfolutely  bent  upon  their  own 
ruin,  and  to  refolve  to  make  away  themfeives  forever. 
And  we  who  are  the  meffengers  of  God  to  men  muft 
be  born  of  the  rocks,  and  have  hearts  harder  than 
the  nether  milftone,  if  we  can  patiently  look  on  and 
endure  to  fee  men  periih  without  ufing  our  utmoft 
endeavour  to  fave  them.     Therefore  I  iliaii  in  the 

III.  Third  and  laft  place  apply  my  fcif  to  this 
work  of  exhortation,  the  duty  commanded  here  in 
the  text.  And  here  I  (hall  addrefs  my  Mf  to  two 
forts  of  perfons : 

I.  To 


Of  the  deceit fulnefs  and  danger  of  Jin. 

1.  To  perfuade  thofe  who  are  yet  innocent  of  great 
crimes  to  refift  the  beginnings  of  fin,  left  it  gain  up- 
on them  by  degrees. 

2.  To  prefs  and  urge  thofe  that  are  already  cntred 
upon  a  wicked  courfe,  that  they  would  make  hafte 
out  of  this  dangerous  ftate ;  left  at  laft  "  they  be 
"  hardened  through  the  deceitfulnefs  of  fin." 

I.  To  perfuade  thofe  who  are  yet  infome  meafure 
innocent  to  refift  the  beginnings  of  fin,  left  it  gain 
upon  them  by  degrees.  Vice  may  eafily  be  difcou- 
raged  at  firft.  It  is  like  a  (light  difeafe,  which  is 
eafy  to  be  cured,  but  dangerous  to  be  negledled.  The 
firft  approaches  of  fin  and  temptation  are  ufually  ve- 
ry modeft,  but  if  they  be  not  difcountenanced  they 
will  foon  grow  upon  us  and  make  bolder  attempts. 
Every  inclination  to  fin,  every  compliance  with  temp- 
tation is  a  going  down  the  hill :  while  we  keep  our 
Handing  we  may  eomm.and  our  felves,  but  if  we  once 
put  our  felves  into  violent  motion  downward  we  can- 
not ftop  when  we  pleafe. 

Omne  inpr^cipiti  vitiumftetit ^ 

"  all  vice  ftands  upon  a  precipice,"  and  to  engage  in 
any  finful  courfe  is  to  run  down  the  hill.  And  if  we 
once  let  loofe  the  propenfions  of  our  nature  we  cannot 
gather  in  the  reins  and  govern  them  as  we  pleafe : 
If  we  give  way  to  prefumptuous  fins  they  will  quick- 
ly get  dominion  over  us.  It  is  much  eafier  not  to  be- 
gin a  bad  courfe  than  to  put  a  ftop  to  our  felves  af- 
Scneca.  ter  we  have  begun  it.  Stulta  res  eft  nequitia  modus ^ 
it  is  a  fond  thing  for  a  man  to  think  to  fet  bounds  to 
himfelf  in  any  thing  that  is  bad,  to  refolve  to  fin  in 
number,  weight  and  meafure,  with  great  temperance 

and 


Of  the  deceitfulnefs  and  danger  of  Jin.  249 

and  meafure,  with  great  temperance  and  difcretion,  SERM. 
and  government  of  himfelf :  that  he  will  commit  this 
fin  and  then  give  over,  entertain  but  this  one  temp- 
tation, and  after  that  he  will  fhnt  the  door  and  ad- 
mit of  no  more.  Our  corrupt  hearts  when  they  are 
once  in  motion,  they  are  like  the  raging  fea,  to 
which  we  can  fet  no  bounds,  nor  fay  to  it  "  hither- 
"  to  fhalt  thou  go  and  no  further."  Sin  is  very  cun- 
ning and  deceitful,  and  does  flrangely  gain  upon 
men  when  they  once  give  way  to  it.  It  is  of  a  very 
bewitching  nature,  and  hath  ftrange  arts  of  addrefs 
and  infinuation  :  the  giving  way  to  a  fmall  fin  does 
marvelloufly  prepare  and  difpofe  a  man  for  a  great- 
er :  by  giving  way  to  one  little  vice  after  another  the 
ftrongeft  refolution  may  be  broken.  For  though  it 
be  not  to  be  fiiapt  in  fijnder  at  once,  yet  by  this 
means  it  is  untwifted  by  degrees,  and  then  it  is  eafy 
to  break  it  one  thread  after  another.  It  is  fcarce 
imaginable  of  what  force  one  finful  adlion  is  to  pro- 
duce more :  for  fin  is  very  teeming  and  fruitful ;  and 
though  there  be  no  blefling  annext  to  it,  yet  it  does 
flrangely  encreafe  and  multiply.  As  there  is  a  con- 
nexion of  one  virtue  with  another,  fo  vices  are  linkt 
together,  and  one  fin  draws  many  after  it.  When 
the  devil  tempts  a  man  to  commit  any  wickednefs, 
he  does  as  it  were  lay  a  long  train  of  fins,  and  if  the 
firft  temptation  take,  they  give  fire  to  one  another. 
Let  us  then  refift  the  beginnings  of  fin,  becaufe  then  we 
have  mod  power,  and  fin  hath  lead.  This  is  the  firft. 

2.  To  perfuade  thofe  who  are  already  engaged  in 
a  wicked  courfe,  to  make  hafte  out  of  this  dangerous 
ftate.  And  there  is  no  other  way  to  get  out  of  it  but 
by  repentance,  that  is,  by  a  real  change  and  refprma- 

Vol.  I.  Kk  tion 


^5^  Of  the  deceit fulnefi  and  danger  of  Jin. 

E  R  M.  tion  of  our  lives  •,  for  herein  the  nature  of  true  repen- 
tance does  confift.  And  without  this  all  the  devices, 
which  men  ufe  to  get  rid  of  the  guilt  of  their  fins,  are 
vain  and  to  no  purpofe.  'Tis  not  to  be  done  by  a 
formal  confefTion  and  abfolution,  nor  by  a  long  pil- 
grimage, nor  by  one  of  thofe  little  tickets  from  Rome 
which  they  call  indulgences.  A  wife  man  would 
much  fooner  perfuade  himfelf  that  God  will  not  a^ 
all  punifh  the  fins  of  men,  than  that  he  would  for- 
give them  fo  eafily,  and  receive  great  offenders  to  fa- . 
vour  upon  fuch  (light  terms.  Let  us  not  deceive  our 
felves,  there  is  one  plain  way  to  heaven,  by  fincere 
repentance  and  a  holy  life,  and  there  is  no  getting 
thither  by  tricks.  And  without  this  change  of  our 
lives  all  our  forrow  and  fading  and  humiliation  for 
fin,  which  at  this  feafon  we  make  profefTion  of,  will 
fignify  nothing.  There  is  an  excellent  paflage  of 
the  fon  of  Sirach  to  this  purpofe,  Ecclef.  xxxiv.  25, 
26.  "  He  that  wafneth  himfelf  after  the  touching 
*'  of  a  dead  body,  if  he  touch  it  again  what  availeth 
^  his  wafhing?  So  is  it  with  a  man  that  fafteth 
c«  for  his  fins,  and  goeth  again  and  doth  the  fame 
^'  things,  who  v/ill  hear  his  prayer,  or  what  doth  his 
"  humbling  profit  him  ?"  There  is  this  plain  diffe- 
rence  between  trouble  for  ^m  and  repentance ;  forrow 
only  refpecfls  fins  pad,  but  repentance  is  chiefly  pre- 
ventive of  fins  for  the  future:  and  God  therefore  re- 
quires that  we  fhould  be  troubled  for  our  fins,  that 
we  may  refolve  to  leave  them, 

And  to  oblige  us  to  a  vigorous  and  fpeedy  refolu- 
tion  in  this  matter,  let  us  confider  that  we  have  enga- 
ged too  far  already  in  a  bad  courfe  ;  and  that  every 
day  our  retreat  will  grow  more  dangerous  and  diffi- 
cult ; 


of  the  dec  eitf nine fs  and  danger  of  Jin.  251 

cult ;  that  by  our  delays  we  make  work  for  a  fadder  S  E  R  M- 
and  longer  repentance  than  that  which  we  do  now  fo 
fludioufly  decline :  let  us  confider  likewife,  that  our 
life  is  concerned  in  the  cafe  •,  that  "  except  we  repent 
"  and  turn,  we  fhall  die  :*'  and  that  the  evil  day  may 
overtake  us  while  we  are  deliberating  whether  we 
fhould  avoid  it  or  not  \  that  vice  is  fo  far  from  being 
mortified  by  age,  that  by  every  day's  continuance  in 
it  we  increafe  the  power  of  it  \  and  fo  much  ftrength 
as  we  add  to  our  difeafe  we  certainly  take  from  our 
felves  •,  and  this  is  a  double  weakning  of  us,  when 
we  do  not  only  lofe  our  own  flrength,  but  the  enemy 
gets  it  and  employs  it  againft  us.  The  deceitfulnefs 
of  fin  appears  in  nothing  more  than  in  keeping  men 
off  from  this  necefifary  work,  and  perfuading  them  to 
hazard  all  upon  the  unreafonable  hopes  of  the  mercy 
of  God,  and  the  uncertain  refolution  of  a  future  re- 
pentance. I  do  not  think  there  are  any  here  but  ^o 
either  believe,  or  at  leaft  are  vehemently  afraid  that 
there  is  another  life  after  this  ;  and  that  a  wicked  life, 
without  repentance,  muft  unavoidably  make  them 
miferable  in  another  world  ;  and  that  to  call  off  all 
to  a  death-bed  repentance,  puts  things  upon  a  migh- 
ty hazard.  And  they  have  a  great  deal  of  reafon  to 
think  fo  :  for  alas,  how  unfit  are  mod  men  at  fuch  a 
time  for  fo  great  and  ferious  a  work  as  repentance  is, 
when  they  are  unfit  for  the  fmalleft  matters  ?  and  how 
hard  is  it  for  any  man,  then  to  be  alTured  of  the  truth 
and  reality  of  his  repentance,  when  there  is  no  fufS- 
cient opportunity  to  make  trial  of  the  fincerity  of  it? 
I  deny  not  the  pofTibility  of  the  thing  5  but  it  is 
much  to  be  feared  that  the  repentance  of  a  dying  fin- 
jier  is  ufually  but  like  the  forrow  of  a  malefador, 

K  k  2  when 


Of  the  deceitfulnefs  and  danger  offtn. 
when  he  is  ready  to  be  turned  off;  he  is  not  troubled 
that  he  hath  offended  the  law,  but  he  is  troubled  that 
he  mud  die.  For  when  death  is  ready  to  feize  up- 
on the  finner,  and  he  feels  himfelf  dropping  into  de- 
flrudion,  no  wonder  if  then  the  man's  ftomach  come 
down,  and  he  be  contented  to  be  faved  ;  and  feeing 
he  muft  flay  no  longer  in  this  world,  be  defirous  to 
go  to  heaven  rather  than  hell  ;  and  in  order  to  that, 
be  ready  to  give  fome  tefti monies  of  his  repentance : 
no  wonder  if  when  the  rack  is  before  him  this  extort 
confeffion  from  him,  and  if  in  hopes  of  a  pardon  he 
make  many  large  promifes  of  amendment,  and  freely 
declare  his  refolution  of  a  new  and  better  life.  But 
then  it  is  the  hardeft  thing  in  the  world  to  judge 
whether  any  thing  of  all  this  that  is  done  under  fo 
great  a  fsar  and  force  be  real.  For  a  fick  man  as  he 
hath  loft  an  appetite  to  the  moft  pleafant  meats  and 
drinks,  fo  like  wife  his  finful  pleafures  and  flefhly  lufts 
are  at  the  fame  time  naufeous  to  him,  and  for  the 
very  fame  reafon  :  for  ficknefs  having  altered  the 
temper  of  his  body,  he  hath  not  at  that  time  any  guft 
or  relifh  for  thefe  things.  And  now  he  is  refolved 
againft  fin,  juft  as  a  man  that  hath  no  ftomach  is  re- 
folved againft  meat.  But  if  the  fit  were  over,  and 
death  would  but  raife  his  fiege  and  remove  his  quar- 
ters a  little  farther  from  him,  it  is  to  be  feared  that 
his  former  appetite  would  foon  return  to  him,  and 
that  he  would  fin  with  the  fame  eagernefs  he  did 
before.  Befides,  how  can  we  expert  that  God  Ihould 
accept  of  our  repentance  at  fuch  a  time,  when  we 
are  confcious  to  our  felves  that  we  did  refolve  to 
put  off  our  repentance  till  we  could  fin  no  longer  ? 
Can  we  think  it  fit  for  any  man  to  fay  thus  to  God 

in 


Of  the  deceitfulnefs  and  danger  of  fin,  253 

in  a  dying  hour;  "  Lord,  now  the  world  leaves  SERM. 
"  me,  I  come  to  thee.  I  pray  thee  give  me  eternal 
"  life,  who  could  never  afford  to  give  thee  one  good 
*'  day  of  my  life:  grant  that  I  may  live  with  thee 
"  and  enjoy  thee  for  ever,  who  could  never  endure 
*'  to  think  upon  thee.  I  mufl  confefs  that  I  could 
"  never  be  perfuaded  to  leave  my  fins  out  of  love  to 
"  thee,  but  now  I  repent  of  them  for  fear  of  thee  : 
*'  I  am  confcious  to  my  felf  that  I  would  never  do 
"  any  thing  for  thy  fake,  but  yet  I  hope  thy  good- 
"  nefs  is  fuch  that  thou  wilt  forgive  all  the  ungod- 
"  linefs  and  unrighteoufnefs  of  my  life,  and  accept 
"  of  this  forced  fubmifTion  which  I  now  make  to  thee.  • 
''  I  pray  thee  do  not  at  lad  fruftrate  and  difappoint 
"  me  in  this  defign  which  I  have  laid,  of  finning 
*'  while  I  live  and  getting  to  heaven  when  I  die.'* 
Surely  no  man  can  think  it  fit  to  fay  thus  to  God  ; 
and  yet  I  am  afraid  this  is  the  true  interpretation  of 
many  a  man's  repentance  who  hath  deferred  it  till  he 
comes  to  die.  I  do  not  fpeak  this  to  difcourage 
repentance,  even  at  that  time.  It  is  always  the 
beft  thing  we  can  do.  But  I  would  by  all  means 
difcourage  men  from  putting  off  fo  neceflary  a  work 
till  then.  It  is  true  indeed  when  it  is  come  to 
this,  and  a  finner  finds  himfelf  going  out  of  the 
world,  if  he  have  been  fo  foolifii  and  fo  cruel  to  him- 
felf as  to  put  things  upon  this  laft  hazard,  repentance 
is  now  the  only  thing  that  is  left  for  him  to  do  ;  this 
is  his  laft  remedy  and  the  only  refuge  he  has  to  fly 
to :  and  this  is  that  which  the  minifter  in  this  cafe 
ought  by  all  means  to  put  the  man  upon,  and  ear- 
neftly  to  perfuade  him  to.  But  when  we  fpeak  to 
men  in  other  circumftances,  that  are  well  and  in  heaJth, 
I  we 


Of  the  deceitfulnefs  and  danger  of  fin, 
we  dare  not  for  all  the  world  encourage  them  to  ven- 
ture their  fouls  upon  fuch  an  uncertainty.  For  to 
fpeak  the  bell  of  it,  it  is  a  very  dangerous  remedy, 
efpecially  when  men  have  defignedly  contrived  to  rob 
God  of  the  fervice  of  their  beft  days,  and  to  put  him 
off  with  a  few  unprofitable  fighs  and  tears  at  the  hour 
of  death.  I  defire  to  have  as  large  apprehenfions  of 
the  mercy  of  God  as  any  man,  but  withal,  I  am 
very  fure  that  he  is  the  hardefl:  to  be  impofed  upon 
of  any  one  in  the  world.  And  no  man  that  hath 
any  worthy  apprehenfions  of  the  deity  can  imagine  him 
to  be  fo  eafy,  as  to  forgive  men  upon  the  lead  word 
and  intimation  of  their  minds,  and  to  have  fuch  a 
fondnefs  for  offenders  as  would  refled  upon  the  pru- 
dence of  any  magiftrate  and  governor  upon  earth. 
God  grant  that  I  may  fincerely  endeavour  to  live  a 
holy  and  virtuous  life,  and  may  have  the  comfort  of 
that  when  I  come  to  die  :  artd  that  I  may  never  be 
fo  unwife  as  to  venture  all  my  hopes  of  a  bleffed  eter- 
nity upon  a  death-bed  repentance. 

I  will  conclude  all  with  thpfe  excellent  fayings  of 
the  fon  of  Sirach  (Ecclef.  v.  6,  7.  xvi.  11,  12.  xviii. 
21,  22.  "  Say  not,  God's  mercy  is  great,  and  he 
"  will  be  pacified  for  the  multitude  of  my  fins.  For 
*'  mercy  and  wrath  is  with  him  ;  he  is  mighty  to  for- 
*'  give,  and  to  pour  out  difpleafure :  and  as  his  mer* 
"  cy  is  great,  fo  are  his  correftions  alfo.  Therefore 
*'  make  no  tarrying  to  turn  to  the  Lord,  and  puC 
"  not  off  from  day  to  day  :  for  fuddenly  fhall  the 
*'  wrath  of  the  Lord  come  forth,  and  in  thy  fecuri- 
"  ty  thou  fhait  be  deftroyed.  Humble  thy  felf  before 
*'  thou  be  fick,  and  in  the  time  of  fins  fhew  repentance. 
*'  Let  nothing  hinder  thee  to  pay  thy  vows  in  due  time^ 
"  and  defer  not  till  death  to  be  juftified.  S  E  R- 


255 


S    E   R    M    O    N    XI. 

The  hazard  of  being  faved  in  the  church 
of  Rome. 


I  C  O  R.   iii.  15. 
Bu  t  he  himfelf  [hall  he  faved^  yet  fo  as  by  fire, 

TH  E  context  is  thus.  "  According  to  the  s  E  R  Ml- 
"  grace  of  God  which  is  given  unto  me,  ^  J^^ 
"  as  a  wife  mafter-buiJder,  I  have  laid  the 
"  foundation,  and  another  buildeth  thereon  :  but  let 
"  every  man  take  heed  how  he  buiJdeth  thereupon. 
*'  For  other  foundation  can  no  man  lay,  than  that 
"  which  is  laid,  Jesus  Christ.  Now  if  any  man 
"  build  upon  this  foundation,  gold,  filver,  precious 
"  ftones,  v/ood,  hay,  flubble,  every  man's  work  fhall 
>'  be  made  manifeft,  for  the  day  fhall  declare  it;  be- 
"  caufe  it  fnail  be  revealed  by  fire,  and  the  fire  fhall 
"  try  every  man's  work  of  what  fort  it  is.  If  any 
"  man's  work  abide  which  he  hath  built  thereupon, 
*'  he  fhall  receive  a  rev/ard.  If  any  man's  work  fhall 
*'  be  burnt,  he  fhall  fuffer  lofs  ;  but  he  himfelf  fhall 
"  be  faved,  yet  fo  as  by  fire. 

In  thefe  words  the  apoflle  fpeaks  of  a  fort  of  per- 
fons,  who  held  indeed  the  foundation  of  Chriflianity 
but  built  upon  it  fuch  doctrines  orpradices  as  would 
not  bear  tht  trial ;  which  he  expreffes  to  us  by  wood, 
hay  and  flubble j  which  are  not  proof  againfl  the  fire. 

Such 


256  The  hazard  of  being  faved 

SERM.  Such  a  pcrfon,  the  apoftle  tells  us,  hath  brought 
himfelf  into  a  very  dangerous  flate,  though  he  would 
not  detiy  the  pofTibility  of  his  falvation  ;  "  he  himfelf 
*'  fhall  be  faved,  yet  fo  as  by  lire." 

That  by  fire  here  is  not  meant  the  fire  of  purgato- 
ry, as  fome  pretend  (who  would  be  glad  of  any  fha- 
dow  of  a  text  of  fcripture  to  countenance  their  own 
dreams)  I  fhall  neither  trouble  you  nor  my  felf  to 
manifefl  \  fincc  the  particle  of  fimilitude  [«?]  plainly 
fhews  that  the  apoflle  did  not  intend  an  efcape  out 
of  the  fire  literally,  but  like  to  that  which  men  make 
out  of  a  houfe  or  town  that  is  on  fire.  Efpecially 
fince  very  learned  perfons  of  the  church  of  Rome  do 
acknowledge  that  purgatory  cannot  be  concluded  from 
this  t^xty  nay  all  that  Eflius  contends  for  from  this 
place  is,  that  it  cannot  be  concluded  from  hence  that 
rfiere  is  no  purgatory ;  which  we  never  pretended, 
but  only  that  this  text  doth  not  prove  it. 

It  is  very  well  known  that  this  is  a  proverbial 
phrafe  ufed  not  only  in  fcripture,  but  in  prophane  au- 
thors, to  fignify  a  narrow  efcape  out  of  a  great  danger. 
He  fhall  be  faved,  yet  fo  as  by  fire,  i^x  mv^og^ "  out 
«  of  the  fire."  Juft  as  eT/  C^uioi  is  ufed  2  Pet.  ili. 
20.  where  the  apoflle  fpeaking  of  the  eight  perfons 
of  Noah's  family  who  efcaped  the  flood,  ^ii(rai^y}<rav 
fi  v^»log^  they  efcaped  "  out  of  the  water."  So  here 
this  phrafe  is  to  be  rendred  in  the  text,  "  he  himfelf 
«  fhall  efcape,  yet  fo  as  out  of  the  fire."  The  like 
exprefTion  you  have,  Amos  iv.  1 1.  "I  have  pluckt 
**  them  as  a  firebrand  out  of  the  fire."  And  Jude 
23.  "Others  fave  with  fear,  plucking  them  out  of 
«  the  fire."  All  which  expreffions  fignify  the  great- 
xiefs  of  the  clanger  and  the  difficulty  of  cfcaping  it ; 

"  as 


m  the  church  of  Rome.  257 

"  as  one  who  when  his  houfe  at  midnight  is  fct  on  SERM. 

XI 
"  fire,  and  being   fuddenly  waked  leaps  out  of  his  ■__   '^ 

*'  bed,  and  runs  naked  out  of  the  doors,  taking  no- 

*'  thing  that  is  within  along  with  him,  but  imploy- 

"  ing  his  whole  care  to  fave  his  body  from  the  flames,'* 

as  St.  Chryfoflom  upon  another  occafion  exprefleth 

it.     And  fo  the  Roman  orator  (who,  it  is  likely  did  Tully. 

not  think  of  purgatory)  ufeth  this  phrafe  •,  quo  ex  ju- 

dicio^  velut  ex  incendio^   nudus  effugit  -,   from  which 

judgment  or  fentence  he  efcaped  naked,  as  it  were 

out  of  a  burning.    And  one  of  the  Greek  orators  tells  Ariftides. 

us,  that  "  to  fave  a  man  out  of  the  fire,  was  a  com- 

"  mon  proverbial  fpeech. 

From  the  words  thus  explained,  the  obfervation 
that  naturally  arifeth  is  this,  "  that  men  may  hold 
"  all  the  fundamentals  of  Chriftian  religion,  and  yet 
*'  may  fuperadd  other  things  whereby  they  may  great- 
"  ly  endanger  their  falvation."  What  thofe  things 
were  which  fome  among  the  Corinthians  built  upon 
the  foundation  of  Chriflianity,  whereby  they  endan- 
gered their  falvation,  we  may  probably  conjedure 
by  what  the  apoflle  reproves  in  this  epiftle,  as  the  to. 
lerating  of  incefluous  marriages,  communicating  in 
idol  feafts,  &c.  And  efpecially  by  the  dodlrine  of 
the  falfe  apoftles,  who  at  that  time  did  fo  much  dif- 
turb  the  peace  of  mod  Chriftian  churches,  and  who 
are  fo  often  and  fo  feverely  refledled  upon  in  this 
epiftle.  And  what  their  dodlrine  was,  we  have  an 
account  A6ls  xv.  viz.  that  they  impofed  upon  the 
gentile  Chriftians  circumcifion,  and  the  obfervation 
of  the  Jewifh  law,  teaching  that  "  unlefs  they  were 
*'  circumcifed,  and  kept  the  law  of  Mofes,  they  could 
<'  not  be  faved."  So  that  they  did  not  only  build 
^  Vol.  I.  LI  thefe 


258  The  hazard  of  being  faved 

ERM.  thefe  (do6lrines  upon  Chriftianity,  but  they  made 
them  equal  with  the  foundation,  faying,  that  "  unlefs 
"  men  believed  and  pra^bifed  fuch  things  they  could 
"  not  be  faved. 

In  fpeaking  to  this  obfervation,  I  ftiall  reduce  my 
difcourfe  to  thefe  two  heads. 

1. 1  fhall  prefent  to  you  fome  dodlrines  and  pradli- 
ces  which  have  been  built  upon  the  foundation  of 
Chriftianity,  to  the  great  hazard  and  danger  of  mens 
falvation.  And  to  be  plain,  I  rnean  particularly  the 
church  of  Rome. 

2.  I  fhall  inquire,  whether  our  granting  a  pofTibi^ 
lity  of  falvation  (though  with  great  hazard)  to  thofe 
in  the  communion  of  the  Roman  church,  and  their 
denying  it  to  us,  be  a  reafonable  argument  and  en- 
couragement to  any  man  to  betake  hirpfelf  to  tha| 
church. 

And  there  is  the  more  reafon  to  confider  thefe 
things,  when  fo  many  feducing  fpirits  are  fo  adlive 
and  bufy  to  pervert  men  from  the  truth ;  and  when 
we  fee  every  day  fo  many  men  and  their  religion  fo 
eafily  parted.  For  this  reafon  thefe  two  confiderati- 
ons  fhall  be  the  fubje6l  of  the  following  difcourfe. 

I.  Firfl.  We  will  confider  fome  dodlrines  and 
practices  which  the  church  of  Rome  hath  built  upon 
the  foundation  of  Chriftianity,  to  the  great  hazard 
and  danger  of  mens  falvation.  It  is  not  denied  by 
the  moft  judicious  proteftants,  but  that  the  church 
of  Rome  do  hold  all  the  articles  of  the  Chriftian  faith 
which  are  necefifary  to  falvation.  But  that  which  we 
charge  upon  them,  as  a  juft  ground  of  our  feparation 
from  them,  is,  tiie  impofing  of  new  doctrines  and 
pradices  upon  Chriftians  as  neceffary  to  falvation. 


in  the  church  of  Rome.  259 

which  were  never  taught  by  our  Saviour,  or  his  SERlvf. 
apoftles ;  and  which  are  either  diredlly  contrary  to 
the  dodrine  of  Chriftianity,  or  too  apparently  deflruc- 
tive  of  a  good  life.     And  1  begin, 

I.  With  their  do6lrines.  And  becaufe  I  have  no 
mind  to  aggravate  Jefler  matters,  I  will  fingle  out 
four  or  five  points  of  dodrine,  which  they  have  add- 
ed to  the  Chriftian  religion,  and  which  were  neither 
taught  by  our  Saviour  and  his  apoftles,  nor  owned 
in  the  firft  ages  of  Chriftianity.     And  the 

Firft  which  I  fhall  mention,  and  which  being  once 
admitted  makes  way  for  as  many  errors  as  they  pleafe 
to  bring  in,  is  their  dodrine  of  infallibility.  And 
this  they  are  very  ftiff  and  peremptory  in,  though 
they  are  not  agreed  among  themfelves  where  this  in- 
fallibility is  feated ;  whether  in  the  pope  alone,  or  a 
council  alone,  or  in  both  together,  or  in  the  diffufive 
body  of  Chriftians.  But  they  are  fure  they  have  it^ 
though  they  know  not  where  it  is. 

And  is  this  no  prejudice  againft  it  ?  Can  any  man 
think  that  this  privilege  was  at  firft  conferred ,  upon 
the  church  of  Rome,  and  that  Chriftians  in  all  ages 
did  believe  it,  and  had  conftant  recourfe  to  it  for  de- 
termining their  differences,  and  yet  that  that  very 
church  which  hath  enjoyed  and  ufed  it  fo  long  fhould 
now  be  at  a  lofs  where  to  find  it?  Nothing  could 
have  fallen  out  more  unluckily,  than  that  there  fhould 
be  fuch  differences  among  them  about  that  which 
they  pretend  to  be  the  only  means  of  ending  all  dif- 
ferences. 

There  is  not  the  leaft  intimation  in  fcripture  of 
this  privilege  conferred  upon  the  Roman  church,  nor 
do  the  apoftles,  in  all  their  epiftks,  ever  fo  much  as 

L  1  2  give 


26o  ^he  hazard  of  being  faved 

E  R  M.  give  the  leaft  dirc6lion  to  Chriftians  to  appeal  to  the 
bifhop  of  Rome  for  a  determination  of  the  many  dif- 
ferences which  even  in  thofe  times  happened  among 
them.  And  it  is  ftrange  they  fhould  be  fo  filent  in 
this  matter,  when  there  were  fo  many  occafions  to 
fpeak  of  it,  if  our  Saviour  had  plainly  appointed 
fuch  an  infallible  judge  of  controverfies  for  this  very 
end  to  decide  the  differences  that  Ihould  happen  among 
Chriftians.  It  is  ftrange  that  the  ancient  fathers  in 
their  difputes  with  hereticks  fhould  never  appeal  to 
this  judge  -,  nay,  it  is  ftrange  they  ftioulcl  not  con- 
ftantly  do  it  in  all  cafes,  it  being  fo  fhort  and  expe- 
dite a  way  for  the  ending  of  controverfies.  And  this 
very  confideration  to  a  wife  man  is  inftead  of  a  thou- 
fand  arguments  to  fatisfy  him  that  in  thofe  times  no 
fuch  thing  was  believed  in  the  world. 

Now  this  dodrine  of  infallibility,  if  it  be  not  true, 
is  of  fo  much  the  more  pernicious  confequence  to 
Chriftianity,  becaufe  the  conceit  of  it  does  confirm 
them  that  think  they  have  it  in  all  their  other  errors ; 
and  gives  them  a  pretence  of  affuming  an  authority 
to  themfelves  to  impofe  their  own  fancies  and  mif- 
takes  upon  the  whole  Chriftian  world. 

2.  Their  docftrine  about  repentance,  which  confifts 
in  confefTing  their  fins  to  the  prieft ;  which  if  it  be 
but  accompanied  with  any  degree  of  contrition  does 
upon  abfolution  received  from  the  prieft  put  them  in- 
to a  ftate  of  falvation,  though  they  have  lived  the 
moft  lewd  and  debauched  lives  that  can  be  imagined ; 
than  which  nothing  can  be  more  plainly  deftrud:ive 
of  a  good  life.  For  if  this  be  true,  all  the  hazard 
that  the  moft  wicked  man  runs  of  his  falvation  is  on- 
ly the  danger  of  fo  fudden  a  death  as  gives  him  no 
I  fpace 


in  the  church  Rome,  26 1 

Ipace  for  confeffion  and  abfolution.  A  cafe  that  hap-  S  E  R  M. 
pens  fo  rarely,  that  any  man  that  is  ftrongly  addidted 
to  his  lufts  will  be  content  to  venture  his  falvation 
upon  this  hazard  ;  and  all  the  arguments  to  a  good 
life  will  be  very  infignificant  to  a  man  that  hath  a 
mind  to  be  wicked,  when  remiffion  of  fins  may  be 
had  upon  fuch  cheap  terms. 

3.  The  dodrine  of  purgatory ;  by  which  they 
mean  an  eftate  of  temporary  punifhments  after  this 
life,  from  which  men  may  be  releafed  and  tranflated 
into  heaven  by  the  prayers  of  the  living,  and  the  fa- 
crifice  of  the  mafs.  That  this  dodlrine  was  not  known 
in  the  primitive  church,  nor  can  be  proved  from 
fcripture,  we  have  the  free  acknowledgment  of  as 
learned  and  eminent  men  as  any  of  that  church ; 
which  is  to  acknowledge  that  it  is  a  fuperftrudure 
upon  the  Chriflian  religion.  And  though  in  one 
fenfe  it  be  indeed  a  building  of  gold  and  filver  upon 
the  foundation  of  Chriftianity,  confidering  the  vaft 
revenues  which  this  dodrine  (and  that  of  indulgences, 
which  depends  upon  it)  brings  into  that  church ;  yet 
I  doubt  not,  but  in  the  apoftle's  fenfe,  it  will  be  found 
to  be  hay  and  ilubble.  But  how  groundlefs  foever  it 
be,  it  is  too  gainful  a  dodrlne  to  be  eafily  parted 
withal. 

4.  The  do6lrine  of  tranfubflantiation.  A  hard 
word,  but  I  would  to  God  that  were  the  worft  of  it ; 
the  thing  is  much  more  difficult.  I  have  taken  fome 
pains  to  confider  other  religions  that  have  been  in  the 
world,  and  I  muft  freely  declare,  that  I  never  yet  in, 
any  of  them  met  with  any  article  or  proportion,  im- 
pofed  upon  the  belief  of  men,  half  fo  unreafonable 
and  hard  to  be  believed  as  this  is ;  and  yet  this  in  the 

RomiOi 


262  ^e  hazard  of  being  faved 

S  E  R  M.  Romifh  church  is  efteemed  one  of  the  mofl:  principal 
articles  of  the  Chriftian  faith ;  though  there  is  no 
more  certain  foundation  for  it  in  fcripture,  than  for 
our  Saviour's  being  fubflantially  changed  into  all 
thofe  things  which  are  faid  of  him,  as  that  he  is  a  rock, 
a  vine,  a  door,  and  a  hundred  other  things. 

But  this  is  not  all.  This  dodlrine  hath  not  only- 
no  certain  foundation  in  fcripture,  but  I  have  a  far 
heavier  charge  againft  it,  namely,  that  it  undermines 
the.  very  foundation  of  Chriftianity  it  felf  And  fure- 
ly  nothing  ought  to  be  admitted  to  be  a  part  of  the 
Chriftian  do6lrine  which  deftroys  the  reafon  of  our  be- 
lief of  the  whole.  And  that  this  dodlrine  does  fo,  will 
appear  evidently,  if  we  confider  what  was  the  main 
argument  which  the  apoftles  ufed  to  convince  the 
world  of  the  truth  of  Chriftianity ;  and  that  was  this  > 
*'  that  our  blefled  Saviour,  the  author  of  this  doc- 
*'  trine,  wrought  fuch  and  fuch  miracles,  and  par- 
*'  ticularly  that  he  rofe  again  from  the  dead  ?"  And 
this  they  proved  becaufe  they  were  eye-witneffes  of 
his  miracles,  and  had  feen  him  and  converfed  with 
him  after  he  was  rifen  from  the  dead.  But  what  if 
their  fenfes  did  deceive  them  in  this  matter  ?  then  it 
cannot  be  denied  but  that  the  main  proof  of  Chrifti- 
anity falls  to  the  ground. 

Well !  we  will  now  fuppofe  (as  the  church  of 
Rome  does)  tranfubftantiation  to  have  been  one  prin- 
cipal part  of  the  Chriftian  dodlrine  which  the  apoftles 
preached.  But  if  this  dodtrine  be  true,  then  all 
mens  fenfes  are  deceived  in  a  plain  fenfible  matter, 
wherein  it  is  as  hard  for  them  to  be  deceived  as  in 
any  thing  in  the  world  :  for  two  things  can  hardly  be 
imagined  more  different,  than  a  little  bit  of  wafer 
and  the  whole  body  of  a  man.  So 


in  the  church  of  Rome,  263 

So  that  the  apoftles  perfuading  men  to  believe  this  S  E  RM, 
do6lrine  perfuaded  them  not  to  truft  their  fenfes,  and 
yet  the  argument  which  they  ufed  to  perfuade  them 
to  this  was  built  upon  the  direct  contrary  principle, 
that  mens  fenfes  are  to  be  trufted.  For  if  they  be 
not,  then  notwithftanding  all  the  evidence  the  apoftles 
offered  for  the  refurredlion  of  our  Saviour  he  might 
not  be  rifen,  and  fo  the  faith  of  Chriftians  was  vain. 
So  that  they  reprefent  the  apoftks  as  abfurd  as  is  pof- 
fible,  viz.  going  about  to  perfuade  men  out  of  their 
fenfes  by  virtue  of  an  argument,  the  whole  ftrength 
whereof  depends  upon  the  certainty  of  fenfe. 

And  now  the  matter  is  brought  to  a  fair  ifTue ; 
if  the  teftimony  of  fenfe  be  to  be  rehed  upon,  then 
tranfubftantiation  is  falfe ;  if  it  be  not,  then  no  man 
is  fure  that  Chriftianity  is  true.  For  the  utmoft  af- 
furance  that  the  apoftles  had  of  the  truth  of  Chrifti- 
anity was  the  teftimony  of  their  own  fenfes  concern- 
ing our  Saviour's  miracles,  and  this  teftimony  every 
man  hath  againft  tranfubftantiation.  From  whence 
it  plainly  follows,  that  no  man  (no  not  the  apoftles 
themfelves)  had  more  reafon  to  believe  Chriftianity 
to  be  true,  than  every  man  hath  to  believe  tranfub- 
ftantiation to  be  falfe.  And  we  who  did  not  fee  our 
Saviour's  miracles  (as  the  apoftles  did)  and  have  on- 
ly a  credible  relation  of  them,  but  do  fee  the  facra- 
ment,  have  lefs  evidence  of  the  truth  of  Chriftianity 
than  of  the  falftiood  of  tranfubftantiation. 

But  cannot  God  impofe  upon  the  fenfes  of  men, 
^nd  reprefent  things  to  them  otherwife  than  they  are  ? 
yes,  undoubtedly.  And  if  he  hath  revealed  that  he 
doth  this,  are  we  not  to  believe  him  ^  moft  certainly, 
Sut  then  we  ought  to  be  affured  that  he  hath  made 

fuch 


2  64  ^^  hazard  ofbemg  failed 

E  R  M.   fuch  a  revelation  ;  which  afifu ranee  no  man  can  have, 
the  certainty  of  fenfe  being  taken  away. 

I  fliall  prefs  the  bufinefs  a  little  farther,  fuppofing 
the  fcripture  to  be  a  divine  revelation,  and  that  thefe 
•words  (this  is  my  body)  if  they  be  in  fcripture,  mufl 
necelTarily  be  taken  in  the  flrid:  and  literal  fenfe  •,  I 
afk  now,  what  greater  evidence  any  man  has  that 
thefe  words  (this  is  my  body)  are  in  the  bible,  than 
every  man  has  that  the  bread  is  not  changed  in  the 
facrament  ?  Nay  no  man  has  fo  much  ;  for  we  have 
only  the  evidence  of  one  fenfe  that  thefe  words  are  in 
the  bible,  but  that  the  bread  is  not  changed  we  have 
the  concurring  teftimony  of  feveral  of  our  fenfes.  In  a 
word,  if  this  be  once  admitted  that  the  fenfes  of  all 
men  are  deceived  in  one  of  the  mod  plain  fenfible 
matters  that  can  be,  there  is  no  certain  means  left  ei- 
ther to  convey  or  prove  a  divine  revelation  to  men  ; 
nor  is  there  any  way  to  confute  the  grofleft  impoftures 
in  the  world  :  for  if  the  clear  evidence  of  all  men's 
fenfes  be  not  fufficient  for  this  purpofe,  let  any  man, 
if  he  can,  find  a  better  and  more  convincing  argu- 
ment. 

5.  I  will  inftance  but  in  one  do6lrine  more  •,  and 
that  (hall  be,  their  dodrine  of  depofing  kings  in  cafe 
of  herefy,  and  ablblving  their  fubjecfls  from  their  al- 
legiance to  them.  And  this  is  not  a  meer  fpeculative 
do6trine,  but  hath  been  put  in  pra6lice  many  a  time 
by  the  bifhops  of  Rome,  as  every  one  knows  that  is 
verfed  in  hiftory.  For  the  troubles  and  confufions 
which  were  occafioned  by  this  very  thing  make  up  a 
good  part  of  the  hiftory  of  feveral  ages. 

I  hope  no  body  expedls  that  I  fhould  take  the  pains 
to  fhew  that  this  was  not  the  do<5lrine  of  our  Saviour 

and 


'in  the  church  of  Rome  i  ^6^ 

and  fiis  apoftles,  nor  of  the  primitive  Chriflians.  SERM. 
The  papifts  are  many  of  them  fo  far  from  pretending 
this,  that  in  fome  times  and  places,  when  it  is  not  fea- 
fonable  and  for  their  purpofe,  we  liave  much  ado 
to  perfuade  them  that  ever  it  was  their  do6crin:.  But 
if  tranfubftantiation  be  their  dodrine,  this  is;  for 
they  came  both  out  of  the  fame  forge,  I  mean  the 
council  of  Lateran  under  pope  Innocent  the  third* 
And  if  (as  they  tell  us)  tranfubftantiation  was  then  e- 
ftablifhed,  fo  was  this.  And  indeed  one  would  think 
they  were  twins  and  brought  forth  at  the  fame  time, 
they  are  fo  like  one  another,  both  of  them  fo  mon- 
ftrouily  unreafonable. 

II.  I  come  now  in  the  fecond  place  to  confider 
fome  pradlices  of  the  church  of  Rome,  which  I  am 
afraid  will  prove  as  bad  as  her  doctrines.  I  fhall  in- 
ilance  in  thefe  five. 

I.  Their  celebrating  of  their  divine  fervice  in  an 
unknown  tongue.  And  that  not  only  contrary  to  the 
pra6lice  of  the  primitive  church,  and  to  the  great 
end  and  defign  of  religious  worfhip,  which  is  the  edi- 
fication of  thofe  who  are  concerned  in  it,  (and  it  is 
hard  to  imagine  how  men  can  be  edified  by  what 
they  do  not  underfiand)  but  Hkewife  in  dire61:  contra- 
didtioa  to  St.  Paul,  who  hath  no  iefs  than  a  whole 
chapter  v/herein  he  confutes  this  praftice  as  fully,  and 
condemns  it  as  plainly  as  any  thing  is  condemned  in 
the  whole  bible.  And  they  that  can  have  the  face  tQ 
maintain  that  this  pradtice  was  not  condemned  by  St. 
Paul,  or  that  it  was  allowed  and  ufed  in  the  firft  ages 
of  Chriftianity,  need  not  be  afhamed  to  fet  up  for  the 
defence  of  any  paradox  in  the  world. 

Yql.  I,  M  m  2.  The 

5- 


266  'i'he  hazard  of  being  faved 

ERM.  2.  The  communion  in  one  kind.  And  that  not- 
withftanding  that  even  by  their  own  acknowledg- 
ment our  Saviour  inftituted  it  in  both  kinds,  and 
the  primitive  church  adminiftred  it  in  both  kinds. 
This  I  muft  acknowledge  is  no  addition  to  Chriftiani- 
ty,  but  a  facrilegious  taking  away  of  an  cfTential  part 
of  the  facrament.  For  the  cup  is  as  eflential  a  part 
of  the  inftitution  as  the  bread  •,  and  they  might  as 
well,  and  by  the  fame  authority,  take  away  the  on« 
as  the  other,  and  both  as  well  as  either. 

3.  Their  worfhipping  of  images.  Which  pradlice 
(notwithftanding  all  their  diftinftions  about  it,  which 
are  no  other  but  what  the  heathens  ufed  in  the  fame 
cafe)  is  as  point  blank  againft  the  fecond  command- 
ment, as  a  deliberate  and  malicious  killing  of  a  man 
is  againft  the  fixth.  But  if  the  cafe  be  fo  plain,  a 
man  would  think  that  at  leaft  the  teachers  and  guides 
of  that  church  fhould  be  fenfible  of  it.  Why,  they 
are  fo,  and  afraid  the  people  fhould  be  fo  too,  and 
therefore  in  their  ordinary  catechifms  and  manuals  of 
devotion  they  leave  out  the  fecond  commandment, 
and  divide  the  tenth  into  two  to  make  up  the  num- 
ber; left  if  the  common  people  fhould  know  it  their 
confciences  fhould  ftart  at  the  doing  of  a  thing  fo  di- 
rcftly  contrary  to  the  plain  command  of  God. 

4.  The  worfliipping  of  the  bread  and  wine  in  th^. 
eucharift,  out  of  a  falfe  and  groundlefs  perfuafion, 
that  they  are  fubftantially  changed  into  the  body  and 
blood  of  Christ.  Which  if  it  be  not  true  (and  it 
hath  good  fortune  if  it  be,  for  certainly  it  is  one  of 
the  moft  incredible  things  in  the  whole  world)  then 
by  the  confelTion  of  feveral  of  their  own  learned  wri- 
ters^ they  are  guilty  gf  grgft  idolatry, 

5.  The 


XI. 


in  the  church  ofRome\  267 

5.  The  worfhip  and  invocation  of  fiints  and  an-  SERM. 
gels;  and   particularly  of  the  virgin  Mary,  which 
hath  now  for  fome  ages  been  a  principal  part  of  their 
religion.     Now  a  man  may  juflly  wonder  that  fo  con- 
fiderable  a  part  of  religion,  as  they  make  this  to  be> 
fliould  have  no  manner  of  foundation  in  the  fcripture. 
Does  our  Saviour  any  where  fpeak  one  word  concern- 
ing  the  worfhipping  of  her  ?  Nay,  does  he  not  take 
all  occafions  to  reftrain  all  extravagant  apprehenfions 
and  imaginations  concerning  honour  due  to  her,  as 
forefceing  the  degeneracy  of  the  church  in  this  thing  ? 
When  he  was  told  that  his  mother  and  brethren  were 
without  \ "  who  (fays  he)  are  my  mother  and  my  bre- 
*'  thren  ?  He  that  doth  the  will  of  my  father,  the  fame 
*'  is  my  mother,  and  my  filter,  and  brother."    And 
when  the  woman  brake  forth  into  that  rapture  con* 
cerning  the  blefied  mother  of  our  Lord,  "  bleffcd  is 
.*'  the  womb  that  bare  thee,  and  the  paps  that  gave 
"  thee  fuck  1"    our   Saviour  diverts   to   another 
thing,  "  yea  rather,  blefied  are  they  that   hear  the 
*'  word  of  God  and  keep  it."     Does  either  our  Sa- 
viour or  his  apoflles,  in  all  their  particular  precepts 
and  direi5lions  concerning  prayer  and  the  manner  of 
it,  and  by  whom  we  are  to  addrefs  our  fclves  to  God, 
give  the  Icaft  intimation  of  praying   to    the  virgin 
Mary,  or  making  ufe  of  her  mediation  ?  And  can  a- 
ny  man  believe,  that  if  this  had  been  the  pradice  of 
the  church  from   the  beginning,  our  Saviour   and 
his  apoflles  would  have  been  fo  fiient  about  fo  confi- 
derable  a  part  of  rehgion  •,  infomuch  that  in  all  the 
cpiftles  of  the  apoflles  I  do  not  remember  that  her 
name  is  fo  much  as  once  mentioned  ?  And  yet  the 
worfhip  of  her  is  at  this  day  in  the  church  of  Rome, 

M  m  12  zsA 


XI. 


.  J  6  S  7^^  hazard  of  5eing  faved 

S  E  R  M.  and  hath  been  fo  for  feveral  ages,  a  main  part  of  their 
publick  worlliip,  yea  and  of  tK?ir  private  devotions 
too  ;  in  which  it  is  ufual  with  them  to  fay  ten  ave 
inaries  for  one  pater  nofter  *,  that  is,  for  one  prayer 
they  make  to  almighty  God,  they  make  ten  addref- 
fes  to  the  blelTed  virgin  •,  for  that  is  the  proportion 
obferved  in  their  rofaries.  He  that  confiders  this, 
and  had  never  feen  the  bible,  would  have  been  apt 
to  think  that  there  had  been  more  faid  concerning 
her  in  fcriptnre,  than  either  concerning  God,  or 
our  bleffed  Saviour  j  and  that  the  new  teftament 
were  full  from  one  end  to  the  other  of  precepts  and 
exhortations  to  the  worfhipping  of  her  •,  and  yet  when 
ail  's  done,  I  challenge  any  man  to  fliew  me  fo  much 
as  one  fentence  in  the  whole  bible  that  founds  that 
way.  And  there  is  as  little  in  the  Chriftian  writers  of 
the  firft  three  hundred  years.  The  truth  is,  this  prac- 
tice began  to  creep  in  among  fome  fuperflitious  peo- 
ple about  the  middle  of  the  fourth  century  :  and  I  re- 
member particularly,  that  Epiphanius  who  lived  a- 
bout  that  time  calls  it  the  herefy  of  the  women. 

And  thus  J  have  given  you  fome  inftances  of  feve- 
ral doctrines  and  practices,  which  the  church  of  Rome 
have  built  upon  the  foundation  of  Chriftianity.  Much 
more  might  have  been  faid  of  them,  but  from  what 
hath  been  faid  any  man  may  eafily  difcern,  how  dan- 
gerous they  are  to  the  falvation  of  men. 

I  proceed  now,  in  the  fecond  place, 

11.  To  confider,  whether  our  granting  a  pofTibili- 

'ty  of  falvation,  though  with  great  hazard,  to  thofe  in 

the  communion  of  the  Roman  church,  and  their  de, 

nying  it  to  us,   be  a  fufficient  argument  and  encou- 

r^gemen^  to  any  man  to  quit  our  church  and  go  to 

'theirs, 


in  the  church  ofRmne,  269 

theirs.  And  there  is  the  more  need  to  confider  this.  S  E  R  M. 
becaufe  this  is  the  great  popular  argument  wherewith 
the  emiflarles  and  agents  of  that  church  are  wont  to 
aflauJt  our  people.  "  Your  church  (fay  they)  grants 
'^  that  a  papift  may  be  faved  -,  ours  denies  that  a  pro- 
^'  teftant  can  be  faved :  therefore  it  is  fafeft  to  be  of 
*'  our  church,  in  which  falvation  by  the  acknowledg-v 
^'  ment  of  both  fides  is  pofiible. 

For  anfwer  to  this  I  fhall  endeavour  to  fhew,  that 
this  is  fo  far  from  being  a  good  argument  that  it  is  fo 
intolerably  weak  and  fophiftical,  that  any  confiderate 
man  ought  to  be  afhamed  to  be  catched  by  it.  For 
either  it  is  good  of  it  felf  and  fufficient  to  perfuadd 
a  man  to  relinquifh  our  church,  and  to  pafs  over  to 
theirs,  without  entring  into  the  merits  of  the  caufe 
on  either  fide,  and  without  comparing  the  dodcrines 
and  pradlices  of  boch  the  churches  together,  or  it  ii 
not.  If  it  be  not  fufficient  of  it  M^  to  perfdade  z 
-man  to  leave  our  church,  without  comparing  the 
do(5lrines  on  both  fides,  then  it  is  to  no  purpofe,  and 
there  is  nothing  got  by  it.  For  if  upon  examination 
and  comparing  of  do6lrines  the  one  appear  to  be  true 
and  the  other  falfe,  this  alone  is  a  fufficient  induce- 
ment to  any  man  to  cleave  to  that  church  where  the 
true  do6lrine  is  found ;  and  then  there  is  no  need  of 
this  argument. 

If  it  be  faid  that  this  argument  is  good  in  it  felf 
without  the  examination  of  the  dodrines  of  both 
churches  ;  this  feems  a  very  ftrange  thing  for  any  man 
to  affirm,  *'  that  it  is  reafon  enough  to  a  man  to  be 
:"  of  any  church,  whatever  her  dodrines  and  prac- 
^'  tices  be,  \i  fhe  do  but  damn  thofe  that  differ  from 
^'  her,  and  if  the  church  that  differs  from  her  do  but 

*^  allow 


^e  hazard  of  being  faved 
"  allow  a  poffibility  of  falvation  in  her  communion." 
But  they  who  ufe  this  argument,  pretend  that  it 
is  fufficient  of  it  felf ;  and  therefore  I  fhall  apply  my 
felf  to  fliev/,  as  briefly  and  plainly,  as  I  can,  the  mi- 
ferable  weaknefs  and  infufficiency  of  it  to  fatisfy  any 
man's  confciencc  or  prudence  to  change  his  religion. 
And  to  this  end  I  Ihall, 

1.  Shew  the  weaknefs  of  the  principle  Upon  which 
this  argument  relies. 

2.  Give  fome  parallel  inftances  by  which  it  will 
clearly  appear  that  it  concludes  falfe. 

3.  I  fhall  take  notice  of  fomegrofs  abfurdities  that 
follow  from  it. 

4.  Shew  how  unfit  it  is  to  work  upon  thofe  to 
whom  it  is  propounded.     And 

5.  How  improper  it  is  to  be  urged  by  thofe  that 
make  ufe  of  it. 

I.  I  fhall  fhew  the  weaknefs  of  the  principle  upon 
which  this  argument  relies ;  and  that  is  this,  "  that 
•'  whatever  different  parties  in  religion  agree  in,  is 
*'  fafefl:  to  be  chofen."  The  true  confequence  of  which 
principle,  if  it  be  driven  to  the  head,  is  to  perfuade 
men  to  forfake  Chriilianity,  and  to  make  them  take 
up  in  the  principles  of  natural  religion,  for  in  thefe 
all  religions  do  agree.  For  if  this  principle  be  true, 
and  fignify  any  thing,  it  is  dangerous  to  imbrace  any 
thing  wherein  the  feveral  parties  in  religion  differ . 
becaufe  that  only  is  fafe  and  prudent  to  be  chofen 
wherein  all  agree.  So  that  this  argument,  if  the 
foundation  of  it  be  good,  will  perfuade  further  than 
thofe  who  make  ufe  of  it  defire  it  fhould  do  i  for  it 
will  not  only  make  men  forfake  the  proteftant  religi- 
on, but  popery  too  ;  and  which  is  much  more  confi- 
derable,  Chriilianity  it  felf.  II  I  will 


in  the  church  of  Rome.  2  7  B 

II.  I  will  give  fome  parallel  inftances  by  which  it^ER  M. 
will  clearly  be  feen  that  this  argument  concludes  falfe.  ■^^* 
The  Donatifts  denied  the  baptifm  of  the  catholicks  to 
be  good,  but  the  cathoHcks  acknowledged  the  bap- 
tifm  of  the  Donatifts  to  be  valid.  So  that  both  fides 
were  agreed  that  the  baptifm  of  the  Donatifts  was 
good,  therefore  the  fafeft  way  for  St.  Auftin  and  other 
catholicks  (according  to  this  argument)  was  to  bo 
baptized  again  by  the  Donatifts,  becaufe  by  the  ac- 
knowledgment of  both  fides  baptifm  among  them  was 
valid.  ' 

But  to  come  nearer  to  the  church  of  Rome.  Se^ 
veral  in  that  church  hold  "  the  perfonal  infallibility 
"  of  the  pope  and  the  lawfulnefs  of  depofing  and 
*'  killing  kings  for  herefy"  toht defide^,  that  is,  ne- 
celTary  articles  of  faith,  and  confequently,  that -whoever 
does  not  believe  them  cannot  be  faved.  But  a  great; 
many  papifts,  though  they  believe  thefe  things  to  be; 
no  matters  of  faith,  yet  they  think  thofe  that  hold 
them  may  be  faved,  and  they  are  generally  very  fa- 
vourable towards  them.  But  now,  according  to  this  ar- 
gument, they  ought  all  to  be  of  their  opinion  in  thda 
points,  becaufe  both  fides  are  agreed  that  they  that 
hold  them  may  be  faved  ;  but  one  fide  pofitively  fays 
that  men  cannot  be  faved  if  they  do  not  hold  them. 
But  my  text  furnifhes  me  with  as  good  an  inftancc 
to  this  purpofe  as  can  be  defired.  St.  Paul  here  irt 
the  text  acknowledgeth  the  poflibility  of  the  felvatioa 
of  thofe  "t7ho  built  hay  and  ftubble  upon  the  foun- 
«'  dation  of  Gbriftianity  •,  that  they  might  be  faved,** 
though  with  great  difficulty,  and  as  it  were  out  of  the 
''fire.  But  now  among  thofe  builders  with  hay  and 
ftubble  thcrq  were  thgft  who  denied  the  poflibility  of 

St. 


^he  hazard  of  being  faved 
St.  Paul's  falvation ,  and  of  thofe  who  were  of  his 
mind.  We  are  told  of  fome  who  built  the  Jewifh 
ceremonies  and  obfervances  upon  the  foundation  of 
Chriilianity,  and  faid  that  unlefs  men  were  circumcif- 
ed  and  kept  the  law  of  Mofes  they  could  not  be  fav- 
ed.  So  that  by  this  argument  St.  Paul  and  his  fol- 
lowers ought  to  have  gone  over  to  thofe  judaizing 
Chriflians,  becaufe  it  was  acknowledged  on  both  fides 
that  they  might  be  faved.  But  thefe  judaizing  Chri- 
flians were  as  uncharitable  to  St.  Paul  and  other  Chri- 
flians as  the  church  of  Rome  is  now  to  us,  for  they 
faid  pofitively  that  they  could  not  be  faved.  But 
can  any  man  think  that  St.  Paul  would  have  been 
moved  by  this  argument,  to  leave  a  fafe  and  certain 
way  of  falvation  for  that  which  was  only  poffible, 
and  that  with  great  difficulty  and  hazard  ?  The  argu- 
ment you  fee  is  the  very  fame,  and  yet  it  concludes 
the  wrong  way  j  which  plainly  fhews  that  it  is  a  coa. 
tingent  argument,  and  concludes  uncertainly  and  by 
chance,  and  therefore  no  man  ought  to  be  moved 
by  it. 

III^  J  fliall  take  notice  of  fome  grofs  abfurdities 
that  follow  from  it.     I  iliall  mention  but  thefe  two. 

I.  According  to  this  principle  it  is  always  fafefl  tp 
be  on  the  uncharitable  fide.  And  yet  uncharitable^ 
nefs  is  as  bad  an  evidence,  either  of  a  true  Chriflian, 
or  a  true  church,  as  a  man  would  wifh.  Charity  is 
one  of  the  moil  effential  marks  of  Chriilianity,  and 
what  the  apoflle  faith  of  particular  Chriflians  is  ^s 
true  of  whole  Churches,  "  that  though  they  have  aU 
»'  faith,  yet  if  they  have  not  charity  they  are  nothing.'^* 

I  grant  that  no  charity  teacheth  men  to  fee  otherjs 
damned,  and  ngt  tg  tell  them  the  danger  of  their  con- 

4  ditipn* 


irithe  church  of  Rome,  273 

dition.  But  it  is  to  be  confidcred  that  the  damning  S  E  R  ivf - 
of  men  is  a  very  hard  thing,  and  therefore  whenever 
we  do  it  the  cafe  muft  be  wonderfully  plain.  And  is 
it  fo  in  this  matter  ?  They  of  the  church  of  Rome 
cannot  deny  but  that  we  imbrace  all  the  doftrines  of 
our  Saviour,  contained  in  the  apoftles  creed  and 
determined  by  the  four  firil  general  councils:  and 
yet  they  will  not  allow  this  and  a  good  life  to  put  us 
within  a  pofllbility  of  falvation,  becaufe  we  will  not 
fubmit  to  all  the  innovations  they  would  impole 
upon  us.  And  yet  I  think  there  is  fcarce  any  doc^ 
trine  or  pradice  in  difference  between  them  and  us^ 
which  fome  or  other  of  their  mod  learned  writers 
have  not  acknowledged  either  not  to  be  fufficiently 
contained  in  fcripture,  or  not  to  have  been  held  and 
pradtifed  by  the  primitive  church ;  fo  that  nothing 
can  excufe  their  uncharitablenefs  towards  us.  And 
they  pay  dear  for  the  little  advantage  they  get  by 
this  argument,  for  they  do  what  in  them  lies  to  make 
themfelves  no  Chriftians,  that  they  may  prove  them- 
feives  the  truer  and  more  Chrifliian  church  \  a  medi-^ 
i]m  which  we  do  not  deHre  to  make  ufe  of. 

2.  If  this  argument  were  good,  then  by  this  trick 
a  man  may  bring  over  all  the  world  to  agree  with 
him  in  an  error  which  another  does  not  account  dam,, 
nable,  whatever  it  be,  provided  he  do  but  damn  all 
thofe  that  do  not  hold  it  y  and  there  wants  nothing 
but  confidence  and  uncharitablenefs  to  do  this.  But 
is  there  any  fenfe,  that  another  man's  boldnefs  and 
want  of  charity  fhould  be  an  argument  to  move  me- 
to  be  of  his  opinion  ?  I  cannot  illuftrate  this  bet- 
ter, than  by  the  difference  between  a  fkilful  phyficiar! 
and  a  mountebank.  A  learned  and  a  fkilful  phyfici- 
Vol.  I.  N  n  »n 

5- 


2  74  ^1^^  hazard  of  being  faved 

S  E  R  M.  an  is  modeft,  and  fpeaks  juftly  of  things :  he  fays, 
that  fuch  a  method  of  cure  which  he  hath  diredted  is 
fafe,  and  withal,  that  that  which  the  mountebank 
prefcribes  may  poflibly  do  the  work,  but  there  is 
great  hazard  and  danger  in  it:  but  the  mountebank, 
who  never  talks  of  any  thing  lefs  than  infallible  cures, 
(and  always  the  more  mountebank  the  llronger  pre- 
tence to  infallibility)  he  is  pofitive  that  that  method 
which  the  phyfician  prefcribes  will  deflroy  the  pati- 
ent, but  his  receipt  is  infallible  and  never  fails.  Is 
there  any  reafon  in  this  cafe,  that  this  man  (hould 
carry  it  meerly  by  his  confidence  ?  And  yet  if  this 
argument  be  good,  the  fafeft  way  is  to  rejedl  the  phyj 
fician's  advice  and  to  flick  to  the  mountebank's.  For 
both  fides  are  agreed,  that  there  is  a  pofTibility  of 
cure  in  the  mountebank's  method,  but  not  in  the 
phyfician's ;  and  fo  the  whole  force  of  the  argument 
lies  in  the  confidence  of  an  ignorant  mari. 

IV.  This  argument  is  very  unfit  to  work  upon 
thofe  to  whom  it  is  propounded :  for  either  they  be- 
lieve we  fay  true  in  this,  or  not.  If  they  think  v/c 
do  not,  they  have  no  reafon  to  be  moved  by  what 
we  fay.  If  they  think  we  do,  why  do  they  not  take 
in  all  that  we  fay  in  this  matter  ^  Namely,  that 
though  it  be  poffible  for  fome  in  the  communion  of 
the  Roman  church  to  be  faved,  yet  it  is  very  hazard- 
ous ;  and  that  they  are  in  a  fafe  condition  already 
in  our  church.  And  why  then  fhould  a  bare  pofTibi- 
lity, accompanied  with  infinite  and  apparent  hazard, 
be  an  argument  to  any  man  to  run  into  that  danger  ? 
Laftly,  this  argument  is  very  improper  to  be  urg- 
ed by  thofe  who  make  ufe  of  it.  Half  of  the  ftrength 
of  it  lies  in  this,  that  we  proteflants  acknowledge  that 

it 


in  the  church  of  Rome.  2yg 

it  is  pofTible  a  papift  may  be  faved.  But  why  fhouJd  S  E  R  M. 
they  Jay  any  ftrefs  upon  this  ?  What  matter  is  it  ^^' 
what  we  hereticks  fay,  who  are  fo  damnably  mifla- 
Jcen  in  all  others  things?  Methinks,  if  there  were  no 
other  reafon,  yet  becaufe  we  fay  it,  it  (hould  feem 
to  them  to  be  unlikely  to  be  true.  But  I  perceive 
when  it  ferves  for  their  purpofe  we  have  fome  little 
credit  and  authority  among  them. 

By  this  time  I  hope  every  one  is  in  fome  meafure 
fatisfied  of  the  weaknefs  of  this  argument,  which  is 
fo  tranfparent  that  no  wife  man  can  honeftly  ufe  it, 
and  he  muft  have  a  very  odd  underftanding  that  can 
be  cheated  by  it.  The  truth  is,  it  is  a  cafual  and 
contingent  argument,  and  fometimes  it  concludes 
right,  and  oftener  wrong;  and  therefore  no  prudent 
man  can  be  moved  by  it,  except  only  in  one  cafe, 
when  all  things  are  fo  equal  on  both  fides  that  there 
is  nothing  elfe  in  the  whole  world  to  determine  him; 
which  furely  can  never  happen  in  matters  of  religion, 
neceflary  to  be  believed.  No  man  is  fo  weak,  as  not 
to  confider  in  the  change  of  his  religion  the  merits  of 
the  caufe  it  felf ;  as  not  to  examine  the  dodlrines  and 
pradices  of  the  churches  on  both  fides  •,  as  not  to  take 
notice  of  the  confidence  and  charity  of  both  parties, 
together  with  all  other  things  which  ought  to  move  a 
confcientious  and  a  prudent  man  :  and  if  upon  enqui- 
ry there  appear  to  bea  clear  advantage  on  either  fide, 
then  this  argument  is  needlefs  and  comes  too  late,  be- 
caufe the  work  is  already  done  without  it. 

Befides,  that  the  great  hazard  of  falvation  in  the 
Roman  church  (which  we  declare  upon  account  of  the 
dodrines  and  pradices  which  I  have  mentioned) 
ought    to  deter   any  man  much  more   from   that 

N  n  2  religion. 


The  hazard  of  being  Javed 
religion,  than  the  acknowledged  poflibility  of  falvati- 
on  in  it  ought  to  encourage  any  man  to  the  embra- 
cing of  it  ;  never  did  any  Chriflian  church  build  fo 
much  hay  and  frubble  upon  the  foundation  of  Chri- 
flianity,  and  therefore  "  thofe  that  are  faved  in  it 
*"  mufi:  be  faved,"  as  it  were  *'  out  of  the  fire."  And 
though  purgatory  be  not  meant  in  the  text,  yet  it  is 
a  dodlrine  very  well  fuited  to  their  manner  of  build- 
ing •,  for  there  is  need  of  an  ignis  purgatorius^  of  a 
fire  to  try  their  work  what  it  is,  and  to  burn  up  their 
hay  and  ftubble.  And  I  have  fo  much  charity  (and 
I  defire  always  to  have  it)  as  to  hope,  that  a  great  ma- 
ny among  them  who  live  pioully,  and  have  been  almoft 
inevitably  detained  in  that  church  by  the  prejudice  of 
education  and  an  invincible  ignorance,  will  upon  a  ge- 
neral repentance  find  mercy  with  God  ;  and  "  though 
^'  their  works  fuffer  lofs  and  be  burnt,  yet  themfelves 
^'  may  efcape,  as  out  of  the  fire."  But  as  for  thofe 
who  had  the  opportunities  of  coming  to  the  know- 
ledge •  of  the  truth,  if  they  continue  in  the  errors  of 
that  church,  or  apoftatize  from  the  truth,  I  think 
their  condition  fo  far  from  being  fafe  that  there  mufh 
be  extraordinary  favourable  circumftances  in  their  cafe 
to  give  a  man  hopes  of  their  falvation. 

I  have  now  done  ^Nith  the  two  things  I  pro- 
pounded to  fpeak  to.  And  I  am  forry  that  the  ne- 
ceflfary  defence  of  our  religion,  againft  the  refllefs  im- 
portunities and  attempts  of  our  adverfaries  upon  all 
forts  of  perfons,  hath  engaged  me  to  fpend  fo  much 
time  in  matters  of  difpute,  which  I  had  much  rather 
have  empk)ycJ  in  another  way.  Many  of  you  can 
)3e  my  wiiiieires  that  I  have  conftantly  made  it  my 
.^ufinefs,  in  this  great  prefence  and  ailembly  to  plead 

againft 


in  the  church  of  Rome.  277 

againft  the  impieties  and  wickednefs  of  men,  and  S  E  R  M. 
have  endeavoured  by  the  beft  arguments  I  could  think 
of  to  gain  men  over  to  a  firm  belief  and  ferious  prac- 
tice of  the  main  things  of  religion.  And,  I  do  afTure 
you,  I  had  much  rather  perfuade  any  one  to  be  a  good 
man,  than  to  be  of  any  party  or  denomination  of 
Chriftians  whatfoever.  For  I  doubt  not  but  the  be- 
lief of  tht  ancient  creed,  provided  we  entertain  no- 
thing that  is  deftrudive  of  it,  "  together  with  a  good 
^'  life,  will  certainly  fave  a  man  ;'*  and  without  this 
no  man  can  have  reafonable  hopes  of  falvation,  no 
not  in  an  infallible  church,  if  there  were  any  fuch  to 
be  found  in  the  world. 

I  have  been,  according  to  my  opportunities,  not 
a  negligent  obferver  of  the  genius  and  humour  of  the 
feveral  fed:s  and  profefTions  in  religion.  And  upon 
the  whole  matter,  I  do  in  my  confcience  believe  the 
church  of  England  to  be  the  befl  conftituted  church 
this  day  in  the  world  ;  and  that,  as  to  the  main,  the 
dodrine,  and  government,  and  worlhip  of  it,  are 
excellently  framed  to  make  men  foberly  religious : 
fecuring  men  on  the  one  hand,  from  the  wild  freaks 
of  enthufiafm  •,  and  on  the  other,  from  the  grofs 
follies  of  fuperftition.  And  our  church  hath  this  pe- 
culiar advantage  above  feveral  profefTions  that  we 
know  in  the  world,  that  it  acknowledgeth  a  due  and 
juft  fubordination  to  the  civil  authority,  and  hath 
always  been  untainted  in  it's  loyalty. 

And  now  fhall  every  trifling  confideration  be  fuf- 
ficient  to  move  a  man  to  rehnquifli  fuch  a  church  ? 
There  is  no  greater  difparagement  to  a  man's  under- 
ftanding,  no  greater  argument  of  a  light  and  unge- 
nerous mind,  than  rafhly  to  change  one's  religion. 

Religion 


2y5  77je  hazard  of  being  faved 

S  E  R  M.  Religion  is  our  greateft  concernment  of  all  other,  and 
it  is  not  every  little  argument,  no  nor  a  great  noife 
about  infallibility,  nothing  but  very  plain  and  con- 
vincing evidence,  that  fhould  fway  a  man  in  this 
cafe.  But  they  are  utterly  inexcufable  who  make  a 
change  of  fuch  concernment  upon  the  infinuations  of 
one  fide  only,  without  ever  hearing  what  can  be  faid 
for  the  church  they  were  baptized  and  brought  up  in 
before  they  leave  it.  They  that  can  yield  thus  eafi- 
]y  to  the  imprefTions  of  every  one  that  hath  a  defign 
and  intereil  to  make  profelytes  may  at  this  rate  of 
difcretion  change  their  religion  twice  a  day,  and  in- 
ftead  of  morning  and  evening  prayer,  they  may  have 
a  morning  and  evening  religion. 

Therefore  for  God's  fake,  and  for  our  own  fouls 
fake,  and  for  the  fake  of  our  reputation,  let  us  confi- 
der  and  fliew  our  felves  men  j  let  us  not  fuffer  our 
felves  to  be  Jfhaken  and  carried  away  with  every  wind. 
Ijtt  us  not  run  our  felves  into  danger  when  we  may 
be  fafe.  Let  us  flick  to  the  foundation  of  religion 
the  articles  of  our  common  belief,  and  build  upon 
them  gold,  and  filver,  and  precious  ftones,  I  mean, 
the  virtues  and  adions  of  a  good  life  j  and  if  we 
would  do  this,  we  (hould  not  be  apt  to  fet  fuch  a  va- 
lue upon  hayandftubble.  If  we  would  fincerelyendea- 
vour  to  live  holy  and  virtuous  lives,  we  (hould  not 
need  to  caft  about  for  a  religion  which  may  furnifh 
us  with  eafy  and  indirect  ways  to  get  to  heaven. 

I  will  conclude  all  with  the  apoftle's  exhortation, 
**  wherefore  my  beloved  brethren  be  ye  fledfaft  and 
"  unmoveable,  always  abounding  in  the  work  of  the 
**  Lord. 


Now 


in  the  church  of  Rome*  279 

**  Now  the  God  of  peace  which  brought  again 
"  from  the  dead  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  great 
"  fhepherd  of  the  fheep,by  the  blood  of  the  everlaft-^ 
"  ing  covenant,  make  you  perfedt  in  every  good 
"  work,  to  do  his  will  ;  working  in  you  that  which 
"  is  well  pleafinp:in  his  fight,  through  Jesus  Christ, 
to  whom  be  glory  for  ever  and  ever.     Amen. 


<( 


SERMON     XII. 

Of  the  inward  peace  and  pleafure  which 
attends  religion. 


PS  A  Iv.   cxix.    165. 

Great  peace  have  they  that  love  thy  law,   aftd  nothing 

Jhall  offend  them. 


I 


N  thefe  words  there  are  two  things  contained^  S  E  R  St 

XII 
the  defcription  of  a  good  man,  and  the  reward 


of  his  goodnefs. 

1.  The  defcription  of  a  good  man,  he  is  faid  ta 
be  one  that  loves  the  law  of  God,  that  is,  that  loves 
to  meditate  upon  it,  and  to  pradife  it. 

2.  The  reward  of  his  goodnefs ;  ''  great  peace  have 
«  they  that  love  thy  law.  The  v/ord  peace  is  many 
times  ufed  in  fcripture  in  a  very  large  fenfe,  fg  as  to 
comprehend  all  kind  of  happinefs :  fometimes  it  fig- 
nifies  outward  peace  and  quiet,  in  oppofition  to  war 

o        '  and 


XII. 


sSo  Of  the  inward  peace  and  pie  a  fur e 

SERM.  and  contention;  and  Ibmetimes  inward  peace  and 
contentment  in  oppofition  to  inward  trouble  and  an-- 
guifh.  lunderfland  the  text  chiefly  in  this  Jaftfenfe^ 
not  wholly  excluding  either  of  the  other. 

My  defign  at  prefent  from  thefe  words  is,  to  re- 
commend religion  to  men  from  the  confideration  of 
that  inward  peace  and  pleafure  which  attends  it.  And 
furely  nothing  can  be  faid  more  to  the  advantage  of 
religion  in  the  opinion  of  confiderate  men  than  this. 
For  the  aim  of  all  philofophy,  and  the  great  fearch  of 
wife  men,  hath  been  how  to  attain  peace  and  tran- 
quillity of  mind.  And  if  religion  be  abk  to  give 
this,  a  greater  commendation  need  not  be  given  to 
religion. 

But  before  I  enter  upon  this  argument  I  fhall  pre- 
mife  two  things  by  way  of  caution  : 

Firll,  that  thefe  kind  of  obfervatlons  are  not  to 
be  taken  too  fl:ri(5lly  and  rigoroufly,  as  if  they  never 
failed  in  any  one  inftance.  Ariftotle  obferved  long 
fince,  that  mofal  and  proverbial  fayings  are  under-^ 
flood  to  be  true  generally  and  for  the  moft  part ;  and 
that  is  all  the  truth  that  is  to  be  expedled  in  them  ; 
as,  when  Solomon  fays,  "  train  up  a  child  in  the 
"  way  wherein  he  fhall  go,  and  when  he  is  old  he 
"  will  not  depart  from  it :"  This  is  not  to  be  fo. 
taken  as  if  no  child  that  is  pioufly  educated  did  ever 
mifcarry  afterwards,  but  that  the  good  education  of 
children  is  the  beft  way  to  make  good  men,  and  com- 
monly approved  to  be  fo  by  experience.  So  here, 
when  it  is  faid  that  "  great  peace  have  they  that  love 
God's  law  ;"  the  meaning  is,  that  religion  hath  ge- 
nerally this  effefl,  though  in  fome  cafes,  and  as  to 
fome  perfons,  it  may  be  accidentally  hindred. 

»  Secondly, 


*which  attends  religion,  281 

Secondly,  when  I  fay  that  religion  gives  peace  and  SE  RM. 
tranquillity  to  our  minds,  this  is  chiefly  to  be  under- 
ftood  of  a  religious  ftate  in  which  a  man  is  well  fettled 
and  confirmed,  and  not  of  our  firft  entrance  into  it, 
for  that  is  more  or  lefs  troublefom  according  as  we 
make  it.  If  we  begin  a  religious  courfe  betimes, 
before  we  have  contraded  any  great  guilt,  and  before 
the  habits  of  fin  be  grown  ftrong  in  us,  the  work 
goes  on  cafily  without  any  great  conflidl  or  refiflance. 
But  the  cafe  is  otherwife  when  a  man  breaks  off  from 
a  wicked  life,  and  becomes  religious  from  the  direcb 
contrary  courfe  in  which  he  hath  been  long  and 
deeply  engaged.  In  this  cafe  no  man  is  fo  unreafon- 
able  as  to  deny,  that  there  is  a  great  deal  of  fenfi- 
ble  trouble  and  difficulty  in  the  making  of  this  change ; 
but  when  it  is  once  made,  peace  and  comfort  will 
fpring  up  by  degrees,  and  daily  encreafe  as  we  grow 
more  confirmed  and  eflablifhed  in  a  good  courfe. 

Thefe  two  things  being  premifed,  I  Ihall  now  en- 
deavour to  fhew  that  religion  gives  a  man  the  greateft 
pleafure  and  fatisfadlion  of  mind,  and  that  there  is 
no  true  peace,  nor  any  comparable  pleafure  to  be  had 
in  a  contrary  courfe.  And  that  from  thefe  two  heads. 
From  teftimony  of  fcripture  ;  and  from  the  nature  of 
religion  which  is  apt  to  produce  peace  and  tranquilli- 
ty of  mind. 

I.  Firft,  from  teftimony  of  fcripture.  I  fhall  fe- 
le6t  fome  of  thofe  texts  which  are  more  full  and  ex- 
prefs  to  this  purpofe.  Job  xxii.  21.  fpeaking  of  God, 
"  acquaint  thy  felf  now  with  him  and  be  at  peace." 
To  acquaint  our  felves  with  God  is  a  phrafe  of  the 
fame  importance  with  coming  to  God,  and  feeking 
of  him,  and  many  other  like  expreflions  in  fcripture 

Vol.  I.  O  o  which 

6. 


282  Oj  the  inward  peace  andpleafure 

SE  R  M.  which  fignify  nothing  elfe  but  to  become  religious, 
PfaJ.  xxxvii.  38.  "  mark  the  perfed  man,  and  behold 
"  the  upright,  for  the  end  of  that  man  is  peace  :" 
or,  as  thefe  words  are  rendred  according  to  the  LXX. 
in  our  old  trandation,  "  keep  innocency,  take  heed 
"  to  the  thing  that  is  right,  for  that  (hall  bring  thee 
"  peace  at  the  laft."  Prov.  iii.  1 7.  Where  Solomon 
fpeaking  of  wifdom,  which  with  him  is  but  another 
name  for  religion,  fays,  "  her  ways  are  ways  of  plea- 
"  fantncfs,  and  all  her  paths  are  peace."  Ifa.  xxxii. 
17.  "  the  work  of  righteoufnefs  Ihall  be  peace,  and 
*'  the  effe6t  of  righteoufnefs  quietnefs  and  affurance 
"  for  ever."  Mat.  xi.  28,  29.  "  come  unto  me  all 
«  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will 
"  give  you  reft."  Now  to  come  to  Christ  is  to 
become  his  difciples,  to  believe  and  pradlife  his  doc- 
trine ;  for  fo  our  Saviour  explains  himfelfinthe 
next  words,  "  take  my  yoke  upon  you,  and  learn 
«  of  me,  and  ye  fliall  find  reft  for  your  fouls."  Rom. 
ii.  10.  "  glory,  and  honour  and  peace  to  every  man 
"  that  worketh  good." 

And  on  the  contrary  the  fcripture  reprefents  the 
condition  of  a  finner  to  be  full  of  trouble  and  difquiet. 
David  though  he  was  a  very  good  man,  yet  when  he 
had  grievoufly  offended  God  the  anguifli  of  his  mind 
was  fuch,  as  even  to  diforder  and  diftemper  his  bo- 
dy, Pfal.  xxxviii.  2,  3,  4.  "  thine  arrows  ftick  faft  in 
*'  me,  and  thy  hand  prefifeth  me  fore  ;  there  is  no 
*'  foundnefs  in  my  flefh  becaufe  of  thine  anger,  nei- 
*^  ther  is  there  any  reft  in  my  bones  becaufe  of  my 
^'  fin  *,  for  mine  iniquities  are  gone  over  mine  head, 
"  and  as  an  heavy  burthen  they  are  too  heavy  for 
^^  mc."    Ifa.  Ivii.  20,  21.  *«  the  wicked  are  like  the 

troubled 


which  attends  religion,  283 

*'  troubled  fea  when  it  cannot  reft,  whofe  waters  caftSE  R  M. 
"  up  mire  and  dirt  j  there  is  no  peace,  faith  my  God, 
"  to  the  wicked."  And  Ifa.  lix.  7,  8.  "  mifery  and 
*'  deftru6lion  are  in  their  paths,  and  the  way  of  peace 
*'  they  know  not ;  they  have  made  themfelves  crook- 
"  ed  paths,  whofoever  goeth  therein  Ihall  not  know 
"  peace."  Rom.  ii.  9. "  tribulation  and  anguifh"  upon 
*'  every  foul  of  man  that  doth  evil." 

You  fee  how  full  and  exprefs  the  fcripture  is  in  this 
matter.     I  come  now  in  the 

II.  Second  place,  to  give  you  a  more  particular 
account  of  this  from  the  nature  of  religion,  which  is 
apt  to  produce  peace  and  tranquillity  of  mind.  And 
that  I  fhall  do  in  thefe  three  particulars. 

1 .  Religion  is  apt  to  remove  the  chief  caufes  of 
inward  trouble  and  difquiet. 

2.  It  furnifhes  us  with  all  the  true  caufes  of  peace 
and  tranquillity  of  mind. 

3.  The  refledtion  upon  a  religious  courfe  of  life 
and  all  the  adions  of  it,  doth  afterwards  yield  great 
plcafure  and  fatisfadlion. 

Firft,  religion  is  apt  to  remove  the  chief  caufes  of 
inward  trouble  and  difquiet.  The  chief  caufes  of  in- 
ward trouble  and  difcontent  are  thefe  two,  doubting 
and  anxiety  of  mind,  and  guilt  of  confcience.  Now 
religion  is  apt  to  free  us  from  both  thefe. 

I.  From  doubting  and  anxiety  of  mind.  Irreligi- 
on  and  atheifm  makes  a  man  full  of  doubts  and  jea- 
loufies  whether  he  be  in  the  right,  and  whether  at 
laft  things  will  not  prove  quite  otherwife  than  he 
hath  rafhly  determined.  For  though  a  man  endea- 
vour never  fo  much  to  fettle  himfelf  in  the  principles 
of  infidelity,  and  to  perfuade  his  mind  that  there  is 

O  0  2  no 


Of  the  mward peace  and  pleafure 
no  God,  and  confequently  that  there  are  no  rewarda 
to  be  hoped  for,  nor  punifhments  to  be  feared  in  an- 
other life  •,  yet  he  can  never  attain  to  a  fleady  and 
unfhaken  perfuafion  of  thefe  things  :  and  however  he 
may  pleafe  himfelf  with  witty  reafons  againft  the  com- 
mon belief  of  mankind,  and  fmart  repartees  to  their 
arguments,  and  bold  and  pleafant  raillery  about  thefe 
matters  \  yet  I  dare  fay,  no  man  ever  fat  down  in 
a  clear  and  full  fatisfadion  concerning  them.  For 
when  he  hath  done  all  that  he  can  to  reafon  himfelf 
out  of  religion,  his  confcience  ever  and  anon  recoils 
upon  him,  and  his  natural  thoughts  and  apprehenfi- 
ons  rife  up  againft  his  reafonings,  and  all  his  wit  and 
fubtilty  is  confuted  and  born  down  by  a  fecret  and 
llrong  fufpicion,  which  he  can  by  no  means  get  out 
of  his  mind,  that  things  may  be  otherwife. 

And  the  reafon  hereof  is  plain,  becaufe  all  this  is 
an  endeavour  againft  nature  and  thofe  vigorous  in- 
ftindls  which  God  hath  planted  in  the  minds  of  men 
to  the  contrary.  For  whenever  our  minds  are  free 
and  not  violently  hurried  away  by  paflion,  nor  blind- 
ed by  prejudice,  they  do  of  themfelves  return  to  their 
firft  and  moft  natural  apprehenfion  of  things.  And 
this  is  the  reafon  why  when  the  atheift  falls  into  any 
great  calamity,  and  is  awakened  to  an  impartial  con- 
fideration  of  things  by  the  apprehenfion  of  death  and 
judgment,  and  defpairs  of  enjoying  any  longer  thofe 
pleafures  for  the  fake  of  which  he  hath  all  this  while 
rebelled  againft  religion,  his  courage  prefently  finks, 
and  all  his  arguments  fail  him,  and  his  cafe  is  now 
too  ferious  to  admit  of  jefting,  and  at  the  bottom  of 
his  foul  he  doubts  of  all  that  which  he  afTerted  with 
fo  much  confidence  and  fet  fo  good  a  face  upon  before, 

and 


tjuhich  attends  religion.  2%^ 

and  can  find  no  eafe  to  his  mind  but  in  retreatino;  S  E  R  M. 

XII 
from  his  former  principles,  nor  no  hopes  of  confola- 

tion  for  himfelf  but  in   acknowledging   that  God 

whom  he  hath  denied,  and  imploring  his  mercy  whom 

he  hath  affronted. 

This  is  always  the  cafe  of  thefe  perfons  when  they 
come  to  extremity,  not  to  mention  the  infinite  checks 
and  rebukes  which  their  own  minds  give  them  upon 
other  occafions ;  fo  that  'tis  very  feldom  that  thefe 
men  have  any  tolerable  enjoyment  of  themfelves,  but 
are  forced  to  run  away  from  themfelves  into  compa- 
ny, and  to  flupify  themfelves  by  intemperance,  that 
they  may  not  feel  the  fearful  twitches  and  gripings  of 
their  own  minds. 

Whereas  he  who  entertains  the  principles  of  religi- 
on, and  therein  follows  his  own  natural  apprehenfi- 
ons  and  the  general  voice  of  mankind,  and  is  not  confci- 
ous  to  himfelf  that  he  knowingly  and  wilfully  lives 
contrary  to  thefe  principles,  hath  no  anxiety  in  his 
mind  about  thefe  things ;  being  verily  perfuaded  they 
are  true,  and  that  he  hath  all  the  reafon  in  the  world 
to  think  fo ;  and  if  they  fhould  prove  otherwife 
(which  he  hath  no  other  caufe  to  fufped)  yet  he  hath 
this  fatisfadtion,  that  he  hath  taken  the  wifeft  courfe 
and  hath  confulted  his  own  prefent  peace  and  future 
fecurity  infinitely  better  than  the  atheift  hath  done, 
in  cafe  he  fhould  prove  to  be  miflaken.  For  it  is  a 
fatal  miflake  to  think  there  is  no  God,  if  there  be 
one  •,  but  a  miftake  on  the  other  hand  hath  no  future 
bad  confequences  depending  upon  it,  nor  indeed  any 
great  prefent  inconvenience,  religion  only  reftraining 
a  man  from  doing  fome  things,  from  mofl  of  which 
it  is  good  he  iliould  be  reftrained  however  -,  fo  that 

at 


286  Of  the  inward  peace  and  pleafure 

1 E  R  M.  at  the  word  the  religious  man  is  only  miftaken ;  but 
xht  atheifl  is  miferable  if  he  be  miftaken  •,  miferable 
beyond  all  imagination,  and  pad  all  remedy. 

2.  Another,  and  indeed  a  principal  caufe  of  trou- 
ble and  difcontent  to  the  minds  of  men  is  guilt.  Now 
guilt  is  a  confcioufnefs  to  our  felves  that  we  have  done 
amifs,  and  the  very  thought  that  we  have  done  amifs  is 
apt  to  lie  very  crofs  in  our  minds  and  to  caufe  great  an- 
guifh  and  confufion.  Befides  that  Guilt  is  always  at- 
tended with  fear,  which  naturally  fprings  up  in  the 
mind  of  man  from  a  fecret  apprehenfion  of  the  mif- 
chief  and  inconvenience  that  his  fin  will  bring  upon 
him,  and  of  the  vengeance  that  hangs  over  him  from 
God,  and  will  overtake  him  either  in  this  world,  or 
in  the  other. 

And  though  the  fmner,  while  he  is  in  full  health 
and  profperity,  may  make  a  fhift  to  divert  and 
Ihake  off  thefe  fears ;  yet  they  frequently  return  upon 
him,  and  upon  every  little  noife  of  danger,  upon  the 
apprehenfion  of  any  calamity  that  comes  near  him, 
his  guilty  mind  is  prefently  jealous  that  it  is  making 
towards  him  and  is  particularly  levelled  againfl  him. 
For  he  is  fenfible  that  there  is  a  juft  power  above  him 
to  whofe  indignation  he  is  continually  liable,  and 
therefore  he  is  always  in  fear  of  him,  and  how  long 
foever  he  may  have  efcaped  punifhment  in  this  world 
he  cannot  but  dread  the  vengeance  of  the  other  ;  and 
thefe  thoughts  are- a  continual  difturbance  to  his  mind 
and  in  the  midft  of  laughter  make  his  heart  heavy, 
and  the  longer  he  continues  in  a  wicked  courfe  the 
more  he  multiplies  the  grounds  and  caufes  of  his  fears. 

But  now  religion  frees  a  man  from  all  this  torment, 

cither  by  preventing  the  caufe  of  it,  or  directing  to  the 

I  cure  ; 


which  attends  religion.  287 

cure  ;  either  by  preferving  us  from  guilt,  or  clearing  S  ER  M. 
us  of  it  in  cafe  we  have  contraded  it.  It  preferves  ]^^' 
us  from  guilt  by  keeping  us  innocent ;  and  in  cafe 
we  have  offended,  it  clears  us  of  it  by  leading  us  to 
repentance  and  the  amendment  of  our  lives  •,  which 
is  the  only  way  to  recover  the  favour  of  God  and 
the  peace  of  our  own  confciences,  and  to  fecure  us 
againft  all  apprehenfion  of  danger  from  the  divide 
juilice  j  though  not  abfolutely  from  all  fear  of  pu- 
nilliment  in  this  world,  yet  from  that  which  is  the 
greateft  danger  of  all,  the  condemnation  and  torment 
of  the  world  to  come.  And  by  this  means  a  man's 
mind  is  fettled  in  perfed  peace,  religion  freeing  him 
from  thofe  tormenting  fears  of  the  divine  difpleafure, 
which  he  can  upon  no  other  terms  rid  himfelf  of ; 
whereas  the  fmner  is  always  fowing  the  feeds  of  trou- 
ble in  his  own  mind,  and  laying  the  foundation  of  con- 
tinual difcontent  to  himfelf. 

Secondly,  as  religion  removes  the  chief  grounds  of 
trouble  and  difquiet,  fo  it  miniflers  to  us  all  the  true 
caufes  of  peace  and  tranquillity  of  mind.  Whoever 
lives  according  to  the  rules  of  religion  lays  thefe  three 
great  foundations  of  peace  and  comfort  to  himfelf. 

1.  He  is  fatlsfied  that  in  being  religious  he  doth 
that  which  is  mofl  reafonable. 

2.  That  he  fecures  himfelf  againft  the  greateft  mif- 
chiefs  and  dangers  by  making  God  his  friend. 

3.  That  upon  the  whole  matter  he  does  in  all  ref- 
peds  moft  effedlually  confult  and  promote  his  own 
intereft  and  happinefs. 

I.  He  is  fatlsfied  that  he  does  that  which  is  moft 
reafonable.  And  it  is  no  fmall  pleafure  to  be  juftified 
to  our  felves,  to  be  fatlsfied  that  w«  are  what  we 

ought 


288  Of  the  inward  peace  and  pleafure 

S  E  R  M.  ou«:ht  to  be,  and  do  what  in  reafon  we  oueht  to  do  ; 
'  that  which  beft  becomes  us,  and  which  according  to 
the  primitive  intention  of  our  being  is  moft  natural  ■ 
for  whatever  is  natural  is  pleafant.  Now  the  pra6lice 
of  piety  towards  God,  and  of  every  other  grace  and 
virtue  which  religion  teaches  us,  are  things  reafona- 
able  in  themfelves,  and  what  God  when  he  made  us 
intended  we  fhould  do.  And  a  man  is  then  pleaied 
with  himfelf  and  his  own  a6lions,  when  he  doth  what 
he  is  convinced  he  ought  to  do  •,  and  is  then  offend- 
ed with  himfelf,  when  he  goes  againft  the  light  of 
his  own  mind  by  neglecting  his  duty  or  doing  con- 
trary to  it ;  for  then  his  confcience  checks  him,  and 
there  is  fomething  within  him  that  is  uneafy  and  puts 
him  into  diforder.  As  when  a  man  eats  or  drinks  any- 
thing that  is  unwholefom  it  offends  his  ftomach,  and 
puts  his  body  into  an  unnatural  and  a  reftlefs  ftate. 

For  every  thing  is  then  at  refl  and  peace  when  it 
is  in  that  ftate  in  which  nature  intended  it  to  be,  and 
being  violently  forced  out  of  it,  it  is  never  quiet  till 
it  recover  again.  Now  religion  and  the  praClice  of 
it's  virtues  is  the  natural  ftate  of  the  foul,  the  condi- 
tion to  which  God  defigned  it.  As  God  made  man 
a  reafonable  creature,  fo  all  the  a6ls  of  religion  are 
rcafonable  and  fuitabie  to  our  nature  :  and  our  fouls 
arc  then  in  health  when  we  are  what  the  laws  of  re- 
ligion require  us  to  be,  and  do  what  they  command 
us  to  do.  And  as  we  find  an  unexprefTible  eafe  and 
pleafure  when  our  body  is  in  it's  perfect  ftate  of  health, 
and  on  the  contrary  every  diftemper  caufeth  pain  and 
uneafinefs;  fo  is  it  with  the  foul.  When  religion 
governs  all  our  inclinations  and  a6lions,  and  the  tem- 
per of  our  minds  and  the  courfe  of  our  lives  is  con- 
formable 


'Which  attends  religion,  ^89 

formable  to  the  precepts  of  it,  all  is  at  peace.  But-  SERM; 
when  we  are  otherwife,  and  live  in  any  vicious  prac-  ,^  ^^' 
tice,  how  can  there  be  peace  \  {o  long  as  we  act  un- 
reafonably,  and  do  thofe  things  whereby  we  necefla- 
raily  create  trouble  and  difturbance  to  our  felves  ? 
How  can  we  hope  to  be  at  eafe  fo  long  as  we  are  in  a 
fick  and  difeafed  condition  ?  Till  the  corruption  that 
is  in  us  be  wrought  out,  our  fpirits  will  be  in  a  per- 
petual tumult  and  fermentation  ;  and  it  is  as  impof- 
fible  for  us  to  enjoy  the  peace  and  ferenity  of  our 
minds  as  it  is  for  a  nek  man  to  be  at  eafe :  the  man 
may  ufe  what  arts  ofdiverfion  he  Vv^ill,  and  change' 
from  one  place  and  poflure  to  another  :  but  ftill  he 
is  reftlefs,  becaufe  there  is  that  within  him  which  gives 
him  pain  and  difturbance,  "  there  is  no  peace,  faith  my 
"  God,  to  the  wicked/'  Such  men  may  diffemble 
their  condition,  and  put  on  the  face  and  appearance 
of  pleafantnefs  and  contentment  \  but  God,  who  fees 
all  the  fecrets  of  mens  hearts,  knows  it  is  far  other- 
wife  with  them,  "  there  is  no  peace,  faith  my  God,' 
"  to  the  wicked." 

2.  Another  ground  of  peace  which  the  religious 
man  hath  is,  that  he  hath  made  God  his  friend.  Now* 
friendHiip  is  peace  and  pleafure  both  \  it  is  mutual 
love,  and  that  is  a  double  pleafure  ;  and  it  is  hard 
to  fay  which  is  the  greateii,  the  pleafure  of  loving 
God,  or  of  knowing  that  he  loves  us.  Now  whoever 
fincerely  endeavours  to  pleafe  God  may  reft  perfedly" 
affured  that  God  hath  no  difpleafure  again  ft  him  j 
for  "  the  righteous  Lord  loveth  righteoufnefs,  and 
"  his  countenance  fhall  behold  the  upright  •,'*  that  isj- 
he  will  be  favourable  to  fuch  perfons.  As  "  he  hates 
"  the  workers  of  inquity,  fo  he  takes  pleafure  inf 

Vol.  I.  Pp  « them 


Of  the  inward  peace  andpkafm^e 
"  them  that  fear  him,  in  fuch  as  keep  his  covenant, 
"  and  remember  his  commandments  to  do  them. 

And  being  afifured  of  his  favour,  we  are  fecured 
againfb  the  greateft  dangers  and  the  greatefl  fears-, 
and  may  fay  with  David,  "  return  then  unto  thy 
"  reii,  O  my  foul,  for  the  Lord  hath  dealt  bounti- 
"  fully  with  thee  :  the  Lord  is  my  light  and  my  fal- 
*'  vation,  whom  fhail  I  fear  ?  the  Lord  is  the  flrength 
"  of  my  life,  of  whom  fhall  I  be  afraid?"  What  can 
reafonably  trouble  or  difcontent  that  man  who  hath 
made  his  peace  with  God  and  is  reflored  to  his  favour, 
who  is  the  bell:  and  moft  powerful  friend,  and  can  be  the 
forefl  and  moft  dangerous  enemy  in  the  whole  world  ? 

3.  By  being  religious  we  do  moft  effedlually  con- 
fult  our  own  intereft  and  happinefs.  A  great  part  of 
religion  confifts  in  moderating  our  appetites  and  paf- 
fions,  and  this  naturally  tends  to  the  compofure  of 
our  minds.  He  that  lives  pioufly  and  virtuoufly  adls 
according  to  reafon,  and  in  fo  doing  maintains  the 
prefent  peace  of  his  own  mind  -,  and  not  only  fo,  but 
he  lays  the  foundation  of  his  future  happinefs  to  all 
eternity.  For  religion  gives  a  man  the  hopes  of  eter- 
nal life  :  and  all  pleafure  does  not  confift  in  prefent 
enjoyment  •,  there  is  a  mighty  pleafure  alfo,  in  the 
firm  belief  and  expe6lation  of  a  future  good  ;  and  if 
it  be  a  great  and  lafting  good,  it  will  fupport  a  man 
under  a  great  many  prefent  evils.  If  religion  be 
certainly  the  way  to  avoid  the  greateft  evils,  and  to 
bring  us  to  happinefs  at  laft,  we  may  contentedly 
bear  a  great  many  affli6lions  for  it's  fake.  For  though 
all  fuffering  be  grievous,  yet  it  is  pleafant  to  efcape 
great  dangers,  and  to  come  to  the  pofleffion  of  a 
mighty  good,  though  it  be  with  great  difficulty  and 
3  inconvenience 


which  attends  religion,  291 

inconvenience  to  our  felves.     And  when  we  come  to  ^  ^^^' 
heaven  (if  ever  we  be  {o  happy  as  to  get  thither)  it 
will  be  a  new  and  a  greater  pleafure  to  us  to  remem- 
ber the  pains  and  troubles  whereby  we  were  faved  and 
made  happy. 

So  that  all  thefe  put  together  are  a  firm  foundation 
of  peace  and  comfort  to  a  good  man.  There  is  a 
great  fatisfaflion  in  the  very  doing  of  our  duty  and 
afting  reafonably,  though  there  may  happen  to  be 
fome  prefent  trouble  and  inconvenience  in  it.  But 
when  we  do  not  only  fatisfy  our  felves  in  fo  doing, 
but  likewife  pleafe  him  whofe  favour  is  better  than 
life,  and  whofe  frowns  are  more  terrible  than  death  j 
when  in  doing  our  duty  we  diredlly  promote  our  own 
happinefs,  and  in  ferving  God  do  moft  effe6lually 
ferve  our  own  intereft,  what  can  be  imagined  to  mi- 
nifler  more  peace  and  pleafure  to  the  mind  of  man  ? 

This  is  the  fecond  thing.  Religion  furnifhes  us 
with  all  the  true  caufes  of  peace  and  tranquillity  of 
mind. 

Thirdly,  the  reflcdllon  upon  a  religious  and  vir- 
tuous courfe  of  life  doth  afterwards  yield  a  mighty 
pleafure  and  fatisfadion.  And  what  can  commend 
religion  more  to  us,  than  that  the  remembrance  of 
any  pious  and  virtuous  a6lion  gives  us  fo  much  con- 
tentment and  delight  ?  So  that  whatever  difficulty 
and  reludancy  we  may  find  in  the  doing  of  it,  to  be 
fure  there  is  peace  and  fatisfa6lion  in  the  looking 
back  upon  it.  No  man  ever  refleded  upon  himfelf 
with  regret  for  having  done  his  duty  to  God  or  man  ; 
for  having  lived  foberly,  or  righteoufly,  or  godly  in 
this  prefent  world.  Nay,  on  the  contrary,  the  con- 
fcience  of  any  duty  faithfully  difcharged,  the  memory 
Pp  2  of 


Of  the  inward  peace  and  pie  a  fur  e 
ef  any  good  we  have  done,  does  refrelh  the  foul  with 
a  ftrange  kind  of  pleafure  and  joy,  "  our  rejoicing  is 
^'  this  (faith  St.  Paul)  the  teflimony  of  our  confci- 
*'  ences,  that  in  all  fimphcity  and  godly  fincerity  we 
*'  have  had  our  converfation  in  the  world. 

But  on  the  other  fide,  the  courfe  of  a  vicious  life, 
jail  adls  of  impiety  to  God,  of  malice  and  injuftice  to 
men,  of  intemperance  and  excefs  in  reference  to  our 
felves,  do  certainly  leave  a  lling  behind  them.  And 
whatever  pleafure  there  may  be  in  the  prefent  a6t  of 
them,  the  memory  of  them  is  fo  tormenting,  that 
men  are  glad  to  ufe  all  z\\t  arts  of  diverfion  to  fence 
off  the  thoughts  of  them.  One  of  the  greateft  trou- 
bles in  the  world  to  a  bad  man  is  to  look  into  him- 
felf,  and  to  remember  how  he  hath  lived.  I  appeal 
to  the  confcienccs  of  men  whether  this  be  not  true. 

And  is  not  here  now  a  mighty  difference  between 
thefe  two  courfes  of  life  ^  that  when  we  do  any  thing 
that  is  good,  if  there  be  any  trouble  in  it  it  is  foon 
over,  but  the  pleafure  of  it  is  perpetual :  when  we 
do  a  wicked  adion  the  pleafure  of  it  is  fhort  and 
tranfient,  but  the  trouble  and  fting  of  it  remains  for 
ever  ?  The  refiedlion  upon  the  good  we  have  done 
gives  a  laibing  fatisfacTtion  to  our  minds,  but  the  rcr 
membrance  of  any  evil  committed  by  us  leaves  a  per- 
petual difcontent. 

And,  which  is  yet  more  confiderable,  a  religious 
^nd  virtuous  courfe  of  life  does  then  yield  molt  peace 
3,nd  comfort  when  we  moil  (land  in  need  of  it  \  in 
times  of  affliction,  and  at  the  hour  of  death.  When 
a  man  falls  into  any  great  calamity  there  is  no  com- 
fort in  the  world  like  to  that  of  a  good  confcience  ; 
thib  iiiukc^  all  c^lm  and  ferene  within  when  there  is 

nothing 


which  attends  religion.  293 

nothing  but  clouds  and  darknefs  about  him.  So  Da-  S  E  RM, 
vid  obferves  of  the  good  man,  Pfa.  cxii.  4.  "  unto 
"  the  upright  there  arifeth  Hght  in  darknefs."  All 
the  pious  and  virtuous  a6lions  that  we  do  are  fo  many 
feeds  of  peace  and  comfort,  fown  in  our  confciences, 
which  will  fpring  up  and  fiourifh  moft  in  times  of 
outward  trouble  and  diftrefs,  "  light  is  fown  for  the 
^'  righteous,  and  gladnefs  for  the  upright  in  heart.'* 
And  at  the  hour  of  death  •,  "  the  righteous  hath  hopes 
"  in  his  death,"  faith  Solomon.  And  what  a  fea- 
fonable  refrefhment  is  it  to  the  mind  of  man  when 
the  pangs  of  death  are  ready  to  take  hold  of  him,  and 
he  is  juft  ftepping  into  the  other  world,  to  be  able  to 
look  back  with  fatisfa6lion  upon  a  religious  and  well- 
fpent  life  ?  Then,  if  ever,  the  comforts  of  a  good 
man  do  oversow,  and  a  kind  of  heaven  fprings  up 
in  his  mind,  and  he  rejoiceth  in  the  hopes  of  the  glo- 
ry of  God.  And  that  is  a  true  and  folid  comfort  in- 
deed, which  will  ftand  by  us  in  the  day  of  advcrfity, 
and  flick  clofe  to  us  when  we  have  moft  need  of  it, 

"  But  with  the  ungodly  it  is  not  fo  :"  his  guilt  lies 
in  wait  for  him,  efpecially  againft  fuch  times ;  and 
is  never  more  fierce  and  raging  than  in  the  day  of 
diftrefs ;  fo  that  according  as  his  troubles  without  are 
multiplied,  fo  are  his  ftings  within.  And  furely  af- 
fliction is  then  grievous  indeed,  when  it  falls  upon  a 
galled  and  uneafy  mind.  Were  it  not  for  this,  out- 
ward afBidlions  might  be  tolerable-,  the  "  fpiritofa 
*'  man  might  bear  his  infirmities,  but  a  wounded 
^'  fpirit  who  can  bear  ?"  But  efpecially  at  the  hour 
of  death.  How  does  the  guilt  of  his  wicked  life 
then  ftare  him  in  the  face  ?  What  ftorms  and  tempefts 
are  raifed  in  his  foul  ?  which  make  it  like  the  trou- 
bled 


Of  the  inward  peace  andpleafure 
bled  fea  when  it  cannot  reft.  When  eternity,  that 
fearful  and  amazing  fight,  prefents  it's  felf  to  his  mind, 
and  he  feels  himfelf  finking  into  the  regions  of  dark- 
nefs,  and  is  every  moment  in  a  fearful  expedation  of 
meeting  with  the  juft  reward  of  his  deeds  •,  with  what 
regret  does  he  then  remember  the  fins  of  his  life  ? 
and  how  full  of  rage  and  indignation  is  he  againil 
himfelf  for  having  negleded  to  know,  when  he  had 
fo  many  opportunities  of  knowing  them,  the  things 
that  belong  to  his  peace  ;  and  which,  becaufe  he  hath 
negle6led  them,  are  now  and  Hkely  to  be  for  ever  hid 
from  his  eyes  ? 

And  if  this  be  the  true  cafe  of  the  righteous  and 
wicked  man  I  need  not  multiply  words,  but  may 
leave  it  to  any  man's  thoughts  in  which  of  thefe  con- 
ditions he  would  be.  And  furely  the  difference  be- 
tv/een  them  is  fo  very  plain,  that  there  can  be  no  dif- 
ficulty in  the  choice. 

But  now  though  this  difcourfe  be  very  true,  yet 
for  the  full  clearing  of  this  matter,  it  will  be  but  fair 
to  confider  what  may  be  faid  on  the  other  fide  ;  and 
the  rather,  becaufe  there  are  feveral  objections  which 
feem  to  be  countenanced  from  experience^  which  is 
enough  to  overthrow  the  moft  plaufible  fpeculation.  As, 

1 .  That  wicked  men  feem  to  have  a  great  deal  of 
pleafure  and  contentment  in  their  vices. 

2.  That  religion  impofeth  many  harlh  and  grievous 
things,  which  feem  to  be  inconfiftent  with  that  plea- 
fure and  fatisfaftion  I  have  fpoken  of. 

3.  That  thofe  who  are  religious  are  many  times 
very  difconfolate  and  full  of  trouble. 

To  the  firft,  I  deny  not  that  wicked  men  have 
fome  pleafure  in  their  vices  j  but  when  all  things  arc 

rightly 


which  attends  religion.  2g^ 

rightly  computed,  and  ju ft  abatements  made.  It  will  SERM. 
amount  to  very  little.  For  it  is  the  loweft  and  mean- 
eft  kind  of  pleafure,  it  is  chiefly  the  pleafure  of  our 
bodies  and  our  fenfes,  of  our  worft  part  ♦,  the  pleafure 
of  the  beaft,  and  not  of  the  man  ;  that  which  leaft 
becomes  us,  and  which  we  were  leafl:  of  all  made  for. 
Thofe  fenfual  pleafures  which  are  lawful  are  much  in- 
ferior to  the  leaft  fatisfa6lion  of  the  mind,  and  when 
they  are  unlawful  they  are  always  inconfiftent  with 
it«  And  what  is  a  man  profited,  if  to  gain  a  little 
fenfual  pleafure  he  lofe  the  peace  of  his  foul  ?  Can  we 
find  in  our  hearts  to  call  that  pleafure  which  robs  us 
of  a  far  greater  and  higher  fatisfa61:iQn  than  it  brings  ? 
The  delights  of  fenfe  are  fo  far  from  being  the  chief 
pleafure  which  God  defigned  us,  that  on  the  contra- 
ry he  intended  we  fhould  take  our  chief  pleafure  in  the 
reftraining  and  moderating  of  our  fenfual  appetites 
and  defires,  and  in  keeping  them  within  the  bounds 
of  reafon  and  religion. 

And  then,  it  is  not  a  lafting  pleafure.  Thofe  fits 
of  mirth  which  wicked  men  have,  how  foon  are  they 
over?  Like  a  fudden  blaze  which  after  a  little  fiafh 
and  noife  is  prefently  gone.  It  is  the  comparifon  of 
a  very  great  and  experienced  man  in  thefe  matters ; 
"  like  the  crackling  of  thorns  under  a  pot  (faith  So- 
"  lomon)  fo  is  the  laughter  of  the  fool,"  that  is,  the 
mirth  of  the  wicked  man ;  it  may  be  loud,  but  it 
lafts  not. 

But,  which  is  moft  confiderable  of  all,  the  pleafures 
of  lin  bear  no  proportion  to  that  long  and  black  train 
of  miferies  and  inconveniencies  which  they  draw  after 
them.  Many  times  poverty  and  reproach,  pains  and 
difeafes  upon  our  bodies,  "  indignation  and  wrath, 

"  tribulation 


296  Of  the  inward  peace  and  pie  of  are 

E  R  M.  "  tribulation  and  anguilh  upon  every  foul  of  mar> 
"  that  doth  evil."  So  that  if  thefe  pleafures  were 
greater  than  they  are,  a  man  had  better  be  without 
them  than  purchafe  them  at  fuch  dear  rates. 

To  the  fecond.  That  religion  impofeth  many 
harfh  and  gri  evous  things,  which  feem  to  be  incon- 
fiftent  with  that  pleafure  and  fatisfa6lion  I  have  fpo- 
ken  of:  as,  the  bearing  of  perfecution,  repentance 
and  mortification,  fading  and  abftinence,  and  many 
other  rigours  and  feverities.  As  to  perfecution  ;  this 
difcourfe  doth  not  pretend  that  religion  exempts  men 
from  outward  troubles,  but  that,  when  they  happen, 
it  fupports  men  under  them  better  than  any  thing  elfe. 
As  for  repentance  and  mortification  ;  this  chiefly  con- 
cerns our  firfl:  entrance  into  religion  after  a  wicked 
life,  which  I  acknowledged  in  the  beginning  of  this 
difcourfe  to  be  very  grievous  v  but  this  does  not  hin- 
der but  that  though  religion  may  be  troublefom  at 
firft  to  fome  perfons  whofe  former  fins  and  crimes  have 
made  it  fo,  it  may  be  pleafant  afterwards  when  we 
are  accuftomed  to  it.  And  whatever  the  trouble  of 
repentance  be,  it  is  unavoidable,  unlefs  we  refolve  to 
be  miferable  ;  for  "  except  we  repent  we  muftperifh." 
Now  there  is  always  a  rational  fatisfadlion  in  fubmit- . 
ting  to  a  lefs  inconvenience  to  remedy  and  prevent 
a  greater.  As  for  fading  and  abftinence,  which  is 
many  times  very  helpful  and  fubfervient  to  the  ends 
of  religion,  there  is  no  fuch  extraordinary  trouble  in 
it,  if  it  be  difcreetly  managed,  as  is  worth  the  fpeaking 
of  And  as  for  other  rigours  and  feverities  which 
fome  pretend  religion  does  impofe,  I  have  only  this 
to  fay,  that  if  men  will  play  the  fool,  and  make  re- 
ligion more  troublefom  than  God  hath   made  it,  I 

eannot 


*which  attends  religion,  597 

tahnot  help  that :  and,  that  this  is  a  falfe  reprefenta-  SE  R  U, 
tion  of  rehgion  which  fome  in  the  world  have  made, 
as  if  it  did  chiefly  confift  not  in  pleafing  God,  but 
in  difpleafing  and  tormenting  our  felves.  This  is  not  to 
paint  religion  like  her  felf,  but  rather  like  one  of  the  fu- 
ries, with  nothing  but  whips  and  fnakes  about  her. 

To  the  thirds  That  thofe  who  are  religious  are 
many  times  very  difconfolate  and  full  of  trouble. 
This,  I  confefs,  is  a  great  objedion  indeed^  if  religi- 
on were  the  caufe  of  this  trouble  5  but  there  are  othei' 
plain  caufes  of  it,  to  which  religion  rightly  under- 
flood  is  not  acceflbry.  As,  falfe  and  miflaken  prin- 
ciples in  reJigion  ;  the  imperfedlion  of  our  religion 
and  obedience  to  God  -,  and  a  melancholy  temper  and 
difpofition.  Falfe  and  miflaken  principles  in  religi- 
on. As  this  for  one  ;  that  God  does  not  fmcerely 
defire  the  falvation  of  men,  but  hath  from  all  eterni- 
ty effedually  barr'd  the  greated  part  of  mankind  from 
all  polTibility  of  attaining  that  happinefs  which  he  of- 
fers to  them ',  and  every  one  hath  caufe  to  fear  that 
he  may  be  in  that  number.  This  were  a  melancholy 
confideration  indeed,  if  it  were  true  •,  but  there  is  no 
ground  either  from  reafon  or  fcripture  to  entertain 
any  fuch  thought  of  God.  Our  deflrudion  is  of  our 
felves ;  and  no  man  fhall  be  ruined  by  any  decree  of 
God  who  does  not  ruin  himfelf  by  his  own  fault. 

Or  t\k^  the  imperfecflion  of  our  religion  and  obe. 
dience  to  God.  Some  perhaps  are  very  devout  in 
ferving  God,  but  not  fo  kind  and  charitable,  fo  juft 
and  honefl  in  their  dealings  with  men.  No  wonder 
if  fuch  perfons  be  difquieted  -,  the  natural  confcien- 
ces  of  men  being  not  more  apt  to  difquiet  them  for 
any  thing,  than  for  xht  negledl  of  thofe  moral  duties^ 

Vol.  L  Q^q  which 

V. 


298  Of  the  inward  peace  and  pleafure 

E  R  M.  which  natural  light  teacheth  them.  Peace  of  confci- 
ence  is  the  efFedl  of  an  impartial  and  univerfal  obedi- 
ence to  the  laws  of  God  ;  and  I  hope  no  man  will 
blame  religion  for  that  which  plainly  proceeds  from 
the  want  of  religion. 

Or  laftly,  a  melancholy  temper  and  difpofition ; 
which  is  not  from  religion,  but  from  our  nature  and 
conrtitution ;  and  therefore  religion  ought  not  to  be 
charged  with  it. 

And  thus  I  have  endeavoured,  as  briefly  and  plain- 
ly as  I  could,  to  reprefent  to  you  what  peace  and  plea- 
fure, what  comfort  and  fatisfadlion,  religion  rightly 
underftood  and  fincerely  pradifed  is  apt  to  bring  to 
the  minds  of  men.  And  I  do  not  know  by  what 
fort  of  argument  religion  can  be  more  effedtually  re- 
commended to  wife  and  confiderate  men.  For  in 
perfuading  men  to  be  religious  I  do  not  go  about  to 
rob  them  of  any  true  pleafure  and  contentment,  but 
to  dired  them  to  the  very  beft,  nay  indeed  the  only 
way  of  attaining  and  fecuring  it. 

I  fpeak  this  in  great  pity  and  companion  to  thofe 
who  make  it  their  great  defign  to  pleafe  themfelves, 
but  do  grievoufly  miftake  the  way  to  it.  The  dired 
way  is  that  which  I  have  fet  before  you,  a  holy  and 
virtuous  life,  "  to  deny  ungodlinefs  and  worldly  lulls, 
«  and  to  live  foberly  and  righteoufly  and  godly  in 
t*  this  prefent  world."  "  A  good  man  (faith  Solomon) 
*'  is  fatisfied  from  himfelf :"  he  hath  the  pleafure  of  be- 
ing wife,  and  ading  reafonably ;  the  pleafure  of  be- 
ing juflified  to  himfelf  in  what  he  doth,  and  of  being 
acquitted  by  the  fentence  of  his  own  mind.  There 
is  a  great  pleafure  in  being  innocent,  becaufe  that 
prevents  guilt  and  trouble  s  it  is  pleafant  to  be  virtu- 
ous 


which  attends  religion.  299 

ous  and  good,  becaufe  that  is  to  excel  many  others ;  S  E  R  M. 
and  it  is  pleafant  to  grow  better,  becaufe  that  is  to 
excel  our  felves  :  nay  it  is  pleafant  even  to  mortify 
and  fubdue  our  lufts,  becaufe  that  is  victory  :  it  is 
pleafant  to  command  our  appetites  and  paffions,  and 
to  keep  them  in  due  order,  within  the  bounds  of  rea- 
fon  and  religion  •,  becaufe  this  is  a  kind  of  empire^ 
this  is  to  govern.     It  is  naturally  pleafant  to  rule  and 
have  power  over  others,  but  he  is  the  great  and  the 
abfolute  prince  who  commands   himfelf      This   is 
"  the  kingdom  of  God  within  us,"  a  dominion  in- 
finitely to  be  preferred  before  all  *'  the  kingdoms  of 
"  this  world,  and  the  glory  of  them."     It   is  the 
"  kingdom  of  God"  defcribed  by  the  apoftle,  which 
confifts  "  in  righteoufnefs  and  peace,  and  joy  in  the  Ho- 
*'  ly  Ghoft."  In  a  word,  the  pleafure  of  being  good  and 
of  doing  good  is  the  chief  happinefs  of  God  himfelf. 
But  now  the  wicked  man  deprives  himfelf  of  all 
this  pleafure,  and  creates  perpetual  difcontent  to  his 
own  mind.     O  the  torments  of  a  guilty  confcience  ! 
which  the  finner  feels  more  or  lefs  all  his  life  long. 
But,  alas !  thou  doft  not  yet  know  the  worft  of  it,  no 
not  in  this  world.     What  wilt  thou  do  when  thou 
comeft  to  die  ?  What  comfort  wilt  thou  then  be  able 
to  give  thy  felf  ?  or  what  comfort  can  any  one  elfe 
give  thee,  when  thy  confcience  is  miferably  rent  and 
torn  by  thofe  waking  furies  which  will  then  rage  in 
thy  bread,  and  thou  knoweft  not  which  way  to  turn 
thy  felf  for  eafe  *,  then,  perhaps  at  laft,  the  prieft  is 
unwillingly  fent  for,    to  patch  up  thy  confcience  as 
well  as  he  can,  and  to  appeafe  the  cries  of  it ;  and  to 
force  himfelf  out  of  very  pity  and  good  nature  "  to 
"  fay  peace,  peace,   when  there  is  no  peace."     But 

Q^q  2  alas 


Of  the  inward  peace  and  fie  a  jure 
alas  man !  what  can  \vc  do  ?  what  comfort  can  wc 
give  thee,  when  thine  iniquities  teftify  againft  thee 
to  thy  very  face  ?  How  can  there  be  peace,  when  thy 
lufts  and  debaucheries,  thy  impieties  to  God  and  thy 
injuries  to  men  have  been  fo  many  ?  How  can  there 
be  peace,  when  thy  whole  \\{t  hath  been  a  continued 
contempt  and  provocation  of  Almighty  God,  and  a 
perpetual  violence  and  affront  to  the  light  and  reafon 
of  thy  own  mind  ? 

Therefore  whatever  temptation  there  may  be  in 
fin  at  a  diftance,  whatever  pleafure  in  the  a6t  and 
commilTion  of  it,  yet  remember  that  it  always  goes 
off  with  trouble,  and  will  be  bitternefs  in  the  end. 
Thofe  words  of  Solomon  have  a  terrible  fling  in  the 
conclufion  of  them,  "  rejoice,  O  young  man,  in  thy 
*'  youth,  and  let  thy  heart  cheer  thee  in  the  days  of  thy 
^'  youth,  and  walk  in  the  ways  of  thine  heart,  and 
''  in  the  fight  of  thine  eyes ;  but  know  thou,  that  for 
^'  allthefe  things  God  will  bring  thee  into  judgment." 

This  one  thought,  which  will  very  often  unavoid, 
^bly  break  into  our  minds  (that  '^  God  will  bring  us 
^'  into  judgment")  is  enough  t6  dafh  all  our  content- 
ment, and  to  fpoil  all  the  pleafure  of  a  finful  life.  Ne- 
ver expedt  to  be  quiet  in  thine  own  mind,  and  to  have 
the  true  enjoyment  of  thy  felf,  till  thou  liveft  a  virtu- 
ous and  religious  life. 

And  if  this  difcourfe  be  true  (as  I  am  confident  I 
have  every  man's  confcience  on  my  fide)  I  fay,  if 
this  be  true,  let  us  venture  to  be  wife  and  happy, 
that  is,  to  be  religious.  Let  us  refolre  to  "  break 
*'  off  our  fins  by  repentance,  to  fear  God  and  keep 
*'  his  commandments,"  as  ever  we  defire  to  avoid 
the  unfpeakable  torments  of  a  guilty  mind,  and  would 
not  be  perpetually  uneafy  to  ourfelves.         "  Granr,^ 


which  attends  religion.  301 

"Grant, we  befeech  thee.  Almighty  God,  thatwc 
"  may  every  one  of  us  know  and  do  in  this  our  day 
**  the  things  that  belong  to  our  peace,  before  they  be 
*'  hid  from  our  eyes.  And  the  God  of  peace  which 
*'  brought  again  from  the  dead  our  Lord  Jesus 
^'  Christ,  the  great  fhepherd  of  the  fheep,  by  the 
"  blood  of  the  everlafting  covenant,  make  us  perfed: 
*'  in  every  good  work,  to  do  his  will,  working  in 
*'  us  always  that  which  is  well-pleafing  in  his  fight, 
''  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  to  whom  be 
"  glory  for  ever  and  ever.     Amen. 


SERMON    XIII. 

The  nature  and  benefit  of  confideratioa 


P  S  A  L.  cxix.  sg, 

I  thought  on  my  ways^  and  turned  my  feet  unto  thy 
tejlimonies. 

TH  E  two  great  caufes  of  the  ruin  of  men  s  E  R  M. 
are  infidelity,  and  want  of  confideration.  ^  X^^^- 
Some  do  not  believe  the  principles  of  re- 
ligion, or  at  baft  have  by  arguing  againft  them  ren- 
dred  them  fo  doubtful  to  themfelves  as  to  take  away 
the  force  and  efficacy  of  them:  but  thefe  are  but  a 
very  fmall  part  of  mankind,  in  comparifon  of  thofe 
who  perifh  for  want  of  confidering  thefe  things. 
For  moft  men  taka  the  principles  of  religion  for 

granted. 


302  T^he  7iature  and  benefit  of  conjideratton. 

SERM.  granted,  that  there  is  a  God,  and  a  providence,  and 
"  a  flate  of  rewards  and  punifhments  after  this  life,  and 
never  entertained  any  confiderable  doubt  in  their 
minds  to  the  contrary  :  but  for  all  this  they  never 
attended  to  the  proper  and  natural  confequences  of 
thefe  principles,  nor  applied  them  to  their  own  cafe ; 
they  never  ferioufly  confidered  jthe  notorious  inconfi- 
ftency  of  their  lives  with  this  belief,  and  what  man- 
ner of  perfons  they  ought  to  be  who  are  verily  per- 
fuadcd  of  the  truth  of  thefe  things. 

For  no  man  that  is  convinced  that  there  is  a  God, 
and  confiders  the  neceflary  and  immediate  confequen- 
ces of  fuch  a  perfuafion,  can  think  it  fafe  to  affront 
him  by  a  wicked  life :  no  man  that  believes  the  in- 
finite happinefs  and  mifery  of  another  world,  and 
confiders  withal  that  6ne  of  thefe  ihall  certainly  be 
his  portion  according  as  he  demeans  himfelf  in  this 
prefent  life,  can  think  it  indifferent  what  courfe  he 
takes.  Men  may  thruft  away  thefe  thoughts  and 
k«cp  them  out  of  their  minds  for  a  long  time,  but 
no  man  that  enters  into  the  ferious  confideration  of 
thefe  matters  can  poflibly  think  it  a  thing  indifferent 
to  him  whether  he  be  happy  or  miferable  for  ever. 

So  that  a  great  part  of  the  evils  of  mens  lives 
would  be  cured,  if  they  would  but  once  lay  them  to 
heart  -,  would  they  but  ferioufly  confider  the  confe- 
quences of  a  wicked  life,  they  would  fee  fo  plain 
reafon  and  fo  urgent  a  neceffity  for  the  reforming  of 
it,  that  they  would  not  venture  to  continue  any  long- 
er in  it.  This  courfe  David  took  here  in  the  text, 
and  he  found  the  happy  fuccefs  of  it  •,  "  I  thought 
"  on  my  ways,  and  turned  my  feet  unto  thy  tefti- 

In 


TT}€  nature  and  benefit  of  confideratiori.  303 

In  which  words  there  are  thefe  two  things  confi-  S  E  R  M. 
derable. 

I.  The  courfe  which  David  here  took  for  the  re- 
forming of  his  hfe  \  "  I  thought  on  my  ways." 

II.  The  fuccefs  of  this  courfe.  It  produced  acftual 
and  fpeedy  reformation ;  "  I  thought  on  my  ways, 
*'  and  turned  my  feet  unto  thy  teftimonies  •,  I  made 
*'  hafte  and  delayed  not  to  keep  thy  commandments. 

Thefe  are  the  two  heads  of  my  following  difcourfe, 
which  when  I  have  fpokcn  to  I  fhall  endeavour  to 
perfuade  my  felf  and  you  to  take  the  fame  courfe 
which  David  here  did,  and  God  grant  that  I  may 
have  the  fame  effedt. 

I.  We  will  confider  the  courfe  which  David  here 
took  for  the  reforming  of  his  life  ;  "  I  thought  on  my 
"  ways,"  or,  as  the  words  are  rendered  in  our  old 
tranflation, "  I  called  my  own  ways  to  remembrance.'* 
And  this  may  either  fignify  a  general  furvey  and  ex- 
amination of  his  life,  refpedling  indifferently  the 
good  or  bad  adtions  of  it :  or  elfe,  which  is  more  pro^ 
bable,  it  may  fpecially  refer  to  the  fins  and  mifcar- 
riages  of  his  life  *,  "  I  thought  on  my  ways,"  that 
is,  I  called  my  fins  to  remembrance.  Neither  of 
thefe  fenfes  can  be  much  amifs  in  order  to  the  effeft 
mentioned  in  the  text,  the  reformation  and  amend- 
ment of  our  lives  ♦,  and  therefore  neither  of  them 
can  reafonably  be  excluded,  though  I  Ihall  principal- 
ly infift  upon  the  latter. 

I.  This  thinking  on  our  ways  may  fignify  a  gene- 
ral furvey  and  examination  of  our  lives,  refpedting 
indifferently  our  good  and  bad  adlions.  For  way  is 
a  metaphorical  word,  denoting  the  courfe  of  a  man's 
life  and  aftions.    ^'  I  thought  on  my  ways,"  that  is, 

lex^ 


304  72'^  nature  and  benefit  of  confiderattbn. 

S  E  R  M.  I  examined  my  life,  and  called  my  felf  to  a  ftri6l  ac- 
count for  the  adlions  of  it  ;  I  compared  them  with 
the  law  of  God,  the  rule  and  meafure  of  my  duty, 
and  confidered  how  far  I  had  obeyed  that  law,  or  of^ 
fended  againft  it ;  how  much  evil  I  had  been  guilty 
of,  and  how  little  good  I  had  done,  in  comparifon  of 
what  I  might  and  ought  to  have  done :  that  by  this 
means  I  might  come  to  underftand  the  true  flate  and 
condition  of  my  foul,  and  difcerning  how  many  and 
great  my  faults  and  defedls  were,I  might  amend  what- 
ever was  amifs,  and  be  more  careful  of  my  duty  for 
the  future. 

And  it  muft  needs  be  a  thing  of  excellent  ufe  for 
men  to  fet  apart  fome  particular  times  for  the  exami- 
nation of  themfelves,  that  they  may  know  how  ac- 
counts ftand  between  God  and  them.  Pythagoras 
(or  whoever  was  the  author  of  thofe  golden  verfes 
which  pafs  under  his  name)  doth  efpecialfy  recom- 
mend this  pradlice  to  his  fcholars,  every  night  before 
they  flept  to  call  themfelves  to  account  for  the  ac- 
d:ions  of  the  day  paft  \  enquiring  wherein  they  had 
tranfgrefled,  what  good  they  had  done  that  day,  or 
omitted  to  do.  And  this,  no  doubt,  is  an  admirable 
means  to  improve  men  in  virtue,  a  moft  effeduai 
way  to  keep  our  confciences  continually  waking  and 
tender,  and  to  make  us  ftand  in  awe  of  our  felves,  and 
afraid  to  fin,  when  we  know  before-hand  that  we  muft* 
givefo  fevere  an  account  to  our  felves  of  every  adion.- 
And  certainly  it  is  a  great  piece  of  wifdom  to  make 
up  our  accounts  as  frequently  as  we  can,  that  our  re- 
pentance may  in  fome  meafure  keep  pace  with  the 
errors  and  failings  of  our  lives,  and  that  we  may  not 
be  opprefled  and  confounded  by  the  infupportabk 
3  weigh! 


Tte  nature  and  benefit  of  cvnfiderdtioh.  365 

weight  of  the  fins  of  a  whole  life  falling;  udon  us  at  S  R  Rivr. 
once  i  and  that  perhaps  at  the  very  worft  time,  when 
we  are  fick  and  weak,  and  have  neither  undcrftand- 
ing  nor  leifure  to  recolledl  our  felves,  and  to  call  our 
fins  diftindlly  to  remeriibrance,  much  lefs  to  exercife 
any  fit  and  proper  adls  of  repentance  for  them.  For 
there  is  nothing  to  be  done  in  religion  when  our 
reafon  is  once  departed  from  us  \  then  dkrknefs  hafii 
overtaken  us  indeed,  and  "  the  night  is  come  when 
"  no  m.an  can  work."  But  though  we  were  never 
fo  fenfible  and  fliould  do  all  we  can  at  that  time,  yet 
after  all  this  how  it  will  go  with  us  God  alone  knows,' 
I  am  fure  it  is  too  much  prefumption  for  any  man  to 
be  confident  that  one  general  and  confufed  ad  of  re- 
pentance will  ferve  his  turn  for  the  fins  of  his  whole 
life.  Therefore  there  is  great  reafon  why  we  fhould 
often  examine  our  felves,  both  in  order  to  the  am.end- 
ment  of  our  lives,  and  the  eafe  of  our  confciences  when 
we  come  to  die. 

2.  This  thinking  of  our  ways  may  particularly  and 
fpecially  refer  to  the  fins  and  mifcarriages  of  our  lives : 
*^  i  thought  on  my  ways,"  that  is,  I  called  my  fins 
to  remembrance  \  I  took  a  particular  account  of  the 
errors  cf  my  life,  and  laid  them  ferioudy  to  heart  -,  I 
confidered  all  the  circumftances  and  confequences  of 
them,  and  all  other  things  belonging  to  them  ;  and 
reafoning  the  matter  throughly  with  my  felf,  came 
to  a  peremptory  and  fixed  refolution  of  breaking  off 
this  wicked  courfe  cf  life,  and  betaking  my  feJf  to 
the  dbedience  of  God's  laws.  And  the  confideration 
of  our  ways  taken  in  this  fenfe  (which  fesms  to  be 
the  more  probable  meaning  of  the  words)  may  rea- 
fonal^Iy  imply  in  it  thefe  following  particulars. 

Vot,I.  Rr  ^  i.Th£ 

6.  ^ 


^he  nature  and  benefit  ofconfideration. 

1.  The  taking  of  a  particular  account  of  our  fins 
together  with  the  feveral  circumftances  and  aggrava* 
tions  of  them. 

2.  A  hearty  trouble  and  forrow  for  them;  "  I 
"  thought  on  my  ways,"  that  is,  I  laid  them  fadly 
to  heart. 

3.  A  ferlous  confideratlon  of  the  evil  and  unreafo- 
nablenefs  of  a  finful  courfe. 

4.  A  due  fenfe  of  the  fearful  and  fatal  confequcn- 
ces  of  a  wicked  life. 

5.  A  full  convi(5tion  of  the  neceflity  of  quitting  this 
courfe. 

6.  An  apprehenfion  of  the  poflibility  of  doing  this. 
I.  The  taking  of  a  particular  account  of  our  fins, 

together  with  the  feveral  circumllances  and  aggrava- 
tions of  them.  And  to  this  end  we  may  do  well  to 
refle6l  particularly  upon  the  feveral  ftages  and  periods 
of  our  lives,  and  to  recoiled  at  lead  the  principal 
mifcarriages  belonging  to  each  of  them.  And  the 
better  to  enable  us  hereto  it  will  be  ufeful  to  have  be, 
fore  our  eyes  fome  abridgment  or  fummary  of  the 
laws  of  God,  containing  the  chief  heads  of  our  duties 
and  fins,  of  virtues  and  vices ;  for  this  will  help  to 
bring  many  of  our  faults  and  negledls  to  our  remem- 
brance, which  otherwife  perhaps  would  have  been 
forgotten  by  us.  We  fhould  likewife  confider  the  fe- 
veral relations  wherein  we  have  flood  to  others,  and 
how  far  we  have  tranfgrefled  or  failed  of  our  duty 
in  any  of  thefe  refpedls. 

And  having  thus  far  made  up  our  fad  account, 
we  may  in  a  great  meafure  underftand  the  number  and 
grcatnefs  of  our  fins ;  abating  for  fome  particulars 
which  arc  flipped  out  of  our  memory,  and  for  fins  of 

ignorance. 


7he  nature  ajidbeiiejit  of  confideration.  307 

ignorance,  and  daily  infirmities  which  are  innumcra-  S  E  R  IVT. 
ble.  By  all  which  we  may  fee  what  vile  wretches 
and  grievous  offenders  we  have  been  ;  efpecially  if 
we  take  into  confideration  the  feveral  heavy  circum- 
fiances  of  our  fins,  which  do  above  meafure  aggra- 
vate them  ;  the  heinoufnefs  of  many  of  them  as  to 
their  nature,  and  the  injurious  confequences  of  them 
to  the  perfon,  or  eftate,  or  reputation  of  our  neigh- 
bour ;  their  having  been  committed  againft  the  clear 
knowledge  of  our  duty,  againft  the  frequent  checks 
and  convidlions  of  our  confciences,  telling  us  when  we 
did  them  that  we  did  amifs ;  againft  fo  many  motions 
and  fuggcftions  of  God's  holy  Spirit,  fo  many  admo- 
nitions and  reproofs  from  others  ^  and  contrary  to  our 
own  moft  ferious  vows  and  refolutions,  renewed  at 
feveral  times,  efpecially  upon  the  receiving  of  the 
blelTed  facrament,  and  in  times  of  ficknefs  and  dif- 
trefs :  and  all  this  notwithftanding  the  plaineft  decla- 
rations of  God's  will  to  the  contrary,  notwithftand- 
ing the  terrors  of  the  Lord  and  the  wrath  of  God 
.revealed  from  heaven  againft  all  ungodlinefs  and  un- 
rightcoufnefs  of  men  •,  notwithftanding  the  cruel  fuf- 
ferings  of  the  fon  of  God  for  our  fms,  and  the  moft 
merciful  offers  of  pardon  and  reconciliation  in  his 
blood.  Add  to  this  the  fcandal  of  our  wicked  lives 
to  our  holy  religion,  the  ill  example  of  them  to  the 
corrupting  and  debauching  of  others,  the  affront  ot 
them  to  the  divine  authority,  and  the  horrible  ingra- 
titude of  them  to  the  mercy  and  goodnefs  and  pati- 
ence of  God  to  which  we  have  fuch  infinite  obligati- 
on?. Thus  we  (liould  fet  our  fins  in  order  before  our 
eye^with  the  fevera  1  aggravations  of  them 

Rr2  2.  A 


^he  nature  and  henejit  of  ccnfideration' 

2.  A  hearty  trouble  and  forrow  for  fin  •,  "  I  thought 
*'  on  my  ways,"  that  is,  I  laid  my  finsfadly  to  heart. 
And  furely  whenever  we  remember  the  faults  and  fol- 
lies of  our  lives,  we  cannot  but  be  inwardly  touched 
and  fenfibly  grieved  at  the  thoughts  of  them  ♦,  wecan- 
iiot  but  hang  down  our  heads,  and  fmite  upon  our 
.breads,  and  be  in  pain  and  heavinefs  at  our  very- 
hearts.  I  know  that  the  tempers  of  men  are  very  dif- 
ferent, and  therefore  I  do  not  fay  that  tears  are  abfo- 
lutely  neceffary  to  repentance,  but  they  do  very  well 
become  it ;  and  a  thorough  fenfe  of  fin  will  almoft 
melt  the  mod  hard  and  obdurate  difpofition,  and 
fetch  water  out  of  a  very  rock.  To  be  fure  the  con- 
fideration  of  our  ways  fhould  caufe  inward  trouble 
and  confufion  in  our  minds.  The  leaft  we  can  do 
when  we  have  done  amifs  is  to  be  forry  for  it,  to  con- 
demn our  ov/n  folly,  and  to  be  full  of  indignation 
and  difpleafure  againft  our  felves  for  what  we  have 
done,  and  to  refolve  never  to  do  the  like  again. 
And  let  us  make  fure  that  our  trouble  and  forrow  for 
fin  have  this  effed,  to  make  us  leave  our  fins ;  and 
then  we  (liall  need  to  be  the  lefs  folicitous  about  the 
degrees  and  outward  (-xpreffions  of  it. 

3.  A  ferious  confideration  of  the  evil  and  unreafon- 
ablenefs  of  a  finful  courfe.  That  fin  is  the  {lain  and 
blemifli  of  our  natures,  the  reproach  of  our  reafon 
anc^  underftanding,  the  difeafe  and  the  deformity  of 
our  fouis,  the  great  enemy  of  our  peace,  the  caufe 
of  all  our  fears  and  troubles  :  that  whenever  we  do  a 
wicked  a6lion  we  go  contrary  to  the  cleareft  dictates 
of  our  reafon  and  confcience,  to  our  plain  and  true 
interefl,  and  to  the  fi:rongeft  ties  and  obligations  of 
duty  and  gratitude.     And  which  renders  it  yet  more 

4.  unreafonablcj 


The  nature  and  be?tejit  of  conjtderation.  309 

unreafonable,  fin  is  a  voluntary  evil  which  men  wil-  S  E^R  M. 
fully  bring  upon  themfelves.  Other  evils  may  be 
forced  upon  us,  whether  we  will  or  no  ;  a  man  may 
be  poor  or  fick  by  misfortune,  but  no  man  is  wicked 
and  vicious  but  by  his  own  choice.  How  do  we  be- 
tray our  folly  and  weaknefs  by  fuffering  our  fclves  to 
be  hurried  away  by  every  foolifh  luft  and  palTion  to 
do  things  which  we  know  to  be  prejudicial  and  hurt- 
ful to  our  felves  ?  And  fo  bafe  and  unworthy  in  them- 
felves that  we  are  afhamed  to  do  them,  not  only  in 
the  prefence  of  a  wife  man,  but  even  of  a  child  or  a 
fool.  So  that  if  fin  were  follov/ed  with  no  other  pu- 
cifhrnent  befides  the  guilt  of  having  done  a  fhameful 
thing,  a  man  would  not  by  intemperance  make  hi m- 
{t\\  a  fool  and  a  bead  •,  one  would  not  be  falfe  and 
unjuft,  treacherous  or  unthankful,  if  for  no  other 
reafon,  yet  out  of  meer  greatnefs  and  generofity  of 
mind,  out  of  refped  to  the  dignity  of  his  nature,  and 
out  of  very  reverence  to  his  own  reafon  and  under- 
flanding.  For  let  witty  men  fay  what  they  will  in 
defence  of  their  vices,  there  are  fo  many  natural  ac- 
knowledgments of  the  evil  and  unreafonablenefs  of 
fin  that  the  matter  is  paft  all  denial :  men  are  gene- 
rally galled  and  uneafy  at  the  thoughts  of  an  evil  ac- 
tion, both  before  and  after  they  have  committed  it ; 
they  are  afhamed  to  be  takea  in  a  crime,  and  hear- 
tily vexed  and  provoked  whenever  they  are  upbraid- 
ed with  it  \  and  it  is  very  obfervable,  that  though  the 
greater  part  of  the  world  always  was  bad,  and  vice 
hath  ever  had  more  fervants  and  followers  to  cry  it 
up,  yet  never  was  there  any  age  fo  degenerate,  in 
which  vice  could  get  the  better  of  virtue  in  point  of 
general  efteem  and  reputation :  even  they  whofe  wills 
•  have 


'The  nature  and  benefit  of  confideraiion. 
have  been  moll:  enflaved  to  fin,  could  never  yet  fo  far 
bribe  and  corrupt   their   underftandings  as  to  make 
them  give  full  approbation  to  it. 

4.  A  due  fenfe  of  the  fearful  and  fatal  confequen- 
ces  of  a  wicked  life.  And  thefe  are  fo  fad  and  dread- 
ful, and  the  danger  of  them  fo  evident  and  fo  perpe- 
tually threatning  us,  that  no  temptation  can  be  fufH- 
cient  to  'excufe  a  man  to  himfclf  and  his  own  reafon 
for  venturing  upon  them.  A  principal  point  of  wif- 
dom  is  to  look  to  the  end  of  things  ^  not  only  to 
confider  the  prefent  pleafure  and  advantage  of  any 
thing,  but  alfo  the  ill  confequences  of  it  for  the  fu- 
ture, and  to  balance  them  one  againft  the  other. 

Now  fin  in  it's  own  nature  tends  to  make  men  ml- 
ferable.  It  certainly  caufes  trouble  and  difquiet  of 
mind :  and  to  a  confiderate  man,  that  knows  how  to 
value  the  eafe  and  fatisfadlion  of  his  own  mind,  there 
cannot  be  a  greater  argument  againft  fm  than  to  con- 
fider that  the  forfaking  of  it  is  the  only  way  to  find 
reft  to  our  fouls. 

Befides  this,  every  vice  is  naturally  attended  with 
fome  particular  mifchief  and  inconvenience,  which 
makes  it  even  in  this  life  a  punifliment  to  it  felf; 
and  commonly  the  providence  of  God  and  his  juft 
judgment  upon  finners  ftrikes  in  to  heighten  the  mif- 
chievous  confequences  of  a  finful  courfe.  This  we 
have  reprefented  in  the  parable  of  the  prodigal  \  his 
riotous  courfe  of  life  did  naturally  and  of  it  felf  bring 
him  to  want,  but  the  providence  of  God  likewife 
concurred  to  render  his  condition  more  miferable^ 
♦*  at  the  fame  time  there  arofe  a  mighty  famine  in 
"  the  land  •,"  fo  that  he  did  not  only  want  where- 
withal to  fupply  himfelf,  but  was  cut  off  from  all 

hopes 


TTjc  'nature  and  benefit  of  confideration.  3 1 1 

hopes  of  relief  from  the  abundance  and  fuperfluity  of  S  E  R  M. 
others.  Sin  brings  many  miferies  upon  us,  and  God 
many  times  fends  more  and  greater  than  fin  brings  ; 
and  the  further  we  go  on  in  a  finful  courfe,  the  more 
miferies  and  v:the  greater  difficulties  we  involve  our 
felves  in. 

But  all  thefe  are  but  light  and  inconfiderable  in 
comparifon  of  the  dreadful  miferies  of  another  world  ; 
to  the  danger  whereof  every  man  that  lives  a  wicked 
Jife  doth  every  moment  expofe  himfelf :  fo  that  if 
we  could  conquer  fhame,  and  had  ftupidity  enough 
to  bear  the  infamiy  and  reproach  of  our  vices,  and  the 
upbraidings  of  our  confciences  for  them,  and  the  tem- 
poral mifchiefs  and  inconveniencies  of  them  •,  though 
for  the  prefent  gratifying  of  our  lufts  we  could  brook 
and  difpenfe  with  all  thefe,  yet  the  confideration  of 
the  end  and  ifliie  of  a  finful  courfe  is  an  invincible 
obje6lion  againft  it  and  never  to  be  anfwered ;  though 
the  violence  of  our  fenfual  appetites  and  inclinations 
fhould  be  able  to  bear  down  all  temporal  confidera- 
tions  whatfoever,  yet  methinks  the  interefl  of  our 
everlafting  happinefs  Ihould  lie  near  cur  hearts  ;  the 
confideration  of  another  world  fhould  mightily  amaze 
and  flartle  us  \  the  horrors  of  eternal  darknefs  and 
the  difmd thoughts  of  being  miferable  forever  iliould 
effe(5lually  difcourage  any  man  from  a  wicked  life. 
And  this  danger  continually  threatens  the  finner,  and 
may,  if  God  be  not  merciful  to  him,  happen  to  fur- 
prize  him  the  next  moment.  And  can  we  make  {00 
much  hafte  to  fly  from  fo  great  and  apparent  a  dan- 
ger ?  When  will  we  think  of  faving  our  felves,  if 
not  when  (for  ought  we  know)  we  are  upon  tut  very 
brink  of  ruin  and  juft  ready  to  drop  into  deftrudtion  ? 

5.  Upon 


^je  nature  and  benefit  ofco?2/ide7'ation, 
5.  Upon  this  naturally  foJJows  a  full  convidtion  of 
the  neceffity  of  quitting  this  wicked  courfe.  And  ne- 
ceffity  is  always  a  powerful  and  over-ruling  argument, 
and  doth  rather  compel  than  perfuade :  and  after  it 
is  once  evident  leaves  no  place  for  furthicr  deliberati- 
on. And  the  greater  the  neceffity  is,  it  is  ftill  the 
more  cogent  argument.  *  For  whatever  is  neceflary 
is  fo  in  order  to  fome  end,  and  the  greater  the  end 
the  greater  is  the  necefiity  of  the  means  without  which 
that  end  cannot  be  obtained.  Now  the  chief  and  lail 
end  of  all  reafonable  creatures  is  happinefs,  and  there- 
fore whatever  is  neceffary  in  order  to  that  hath 
the  highefl  degree  of  rational  and  moral  neceffity. 
We  are  not  capable  of  happinefs  till  we  have  left  our 
fins,  for  "  without  holinefs  no  man  fhall  fee  the 
"  Lord/* 

But  though  men  are  convinced  of  this  neceffity, 
yet  this  doth  not  always  enforce  a  prefent  change ; 
becaufe  men  hope  they  rpay  continue  in  their  fms, 
and  remedy  all  at  lad  by  repentance.  But  this  is  fo 
great  a  hazard  in  all  refpe(n:s  that  there  is  no  ventur- 
ing upon  it.  And  in  matters  of  greateft  concern- 
ment wife  men  wall  run  no  hazards  if  they  can  help 
it.  David  was  fo  fenfible  of  this  danger,  that  he 
would  not  defer  his  repentance  and  the  change  of  his 
life  for  one  moment  j  "  I  thought  on  my  ways,  and 
"  turned  my  feet  unto  thy  teftimonies :  I  made  hafle 
"  and  delayed  not  to  keep  thy  commandments.'* 
This  day,  this  hour  for  ought  we  know  may  be  the 
lafl:  opportunity  of  making  our  peace  with  God. 
Therefore  we  Ihould  make  hafte  out  of  this  dange- 
rous (late  as  Lot  did  out  of  Sodom,  left  fire  and  brim- 
ftone  overtake  us.     He  that  cannot  promifc  himfelf 

the 


^  The  ?jature  and  benefit  ofconfideration,  313 

the  next  moment  hath  a  great  deal  of  reafon  to  fcize  S^J^J'^* 
upon  the  prefent  opportunity.     While  we  are  linger- 
ing in  ourfms,  if  God  be  not  merciful  to  us  we  Ihali 
be  confumed.     Therefore  "  make  hafte,"  finner,  and 
"  efcape  for  thy  life,  left  evil  overtake  thee."" 

6.  Laftly,  an  apprehenfion  of  the   poffibility  of 
making  this  change.     God  who  defigned  us  for  hap- 
pinefs  at  iirfl,  and  after  we  had  made  a  forfeiture  of 
it  by  fin,  was  pleafed  to  reftore  us  again  to  the  capaci- 
ty of  it  by  the  redemption  of  our  blelTed  Lord  and 
Saviour,  hath  made  nothing  neceffary   to  our  hap- 
pinefs  that  is  impoflible  for  us  to  do,  either  of  our 
felves,  or  by  the  afTiftance  of  that  grace  which  he  is 
ready  to  afford  us  if  we  heartily  beg  it  of  him.     For 
that  is  poffible  to  us  which  we  may  do  by  the  afTif- 
tance of  another,  if  we  may  have  that  affi (lance  for 
afking :  and  God  hath  promifed  to  "  .give  his  holy 
"  fpirit  to  them  that  afk  him/'     So  that  notwith^ 
(landing  the  great  corruption  and  weakncfs   of  our 
natures,  fince  the  grace  of  God  which  brings  falva- 
tion   hath  appeared,  it   is  not  abfoiutely  out  of  our 
power  to  leave  our  fins   and    turn  to  God  :  for  that 
may  truly  be  faid  to  be  in  our  power  which  God  hath 
promifed  to  enable  us  to  do,  if  we  be  not  wanting 
to  our  felves. 

So  that  there  is  nothing  on  God's  part  to  hinder 
this  change.  He  hath  folemnly  declared  that  he  fin- 
cerely  defires  it,  and  that  he  is  ready  to  aflift  our 
good  refolutions  to  this  purpofe.  And  moft  certain- 
ly when  he  tells  us,  that  *'  he  hath  no  pleafure  ia 
"  the  death  of  a  finner,  but  rather  that  he  fliould 
«'  turn  from  his  wickednefs  and  live  •,  that  he  would 
**  have  all  men  to  be  faved,  and  to  come  to  the 
Vol.  L  ^i  ''  X^^am^ 


3  H  ^he  nature  andhcnejit  of  confideration. 

ERM.  «'  knowledge  of  the  truth  ;  that  he  would  not  that 
"  any  fhould  perifh,  but  that  all  fliould  come  to  re- 
*'  pentancci"  he  means  plainly  as  he  faith,  and  doth 
not  fpeak  to  us  with  any  private  referve  or  nice  di- 
ilin6lion  between  his  fecret  and  revealed  will,  that  is, 
he  doth  not  decree  one  thing  and  declare  the  contra- 
ry. So  far  is  it  from  this,  that  if  a  finner  entertain 
ferious  thoughts  of  returning  to  God,  and  do  but  once 
move  towards  him,  how  ready  is  he  to  receive  him ! 
This  is  in  a  very  lively  manner  defcribed  to  us  in  the 
parable  of  the  prodigal  fon,  who  when  he  was  return- 
ing home,  and  "  was  yet  a  great  way  off,"  what 
hafte  doth  his  father  make  to  meet  him  ?  "  he  faw 
*'  him,  and  had  companion,  and  ran."  And  if  there 
be  no  impediment  on  God's  part,  why  Ihould  there 
be  any  on  ours  ?  One  would  think  all  the  doubt  and 
difficulty  Ihould  be  on  the  other  fide,  whether  God 
Ivould  be  pleafed  to  fhew  mercy  to  fuch  great  offend- 
ers as  we  have  been.  But  the  bufinefs  doth  not  Hick 
there.  And  will  we  be  miferable  by  our  own  choice, 
when  the  grace  of  God  hath  put  it  into  our  power 
to  be  happy  ?  I  have  done  with  the  firfl  thing,  the 
courfe  which  David  here  took  for  the  reforming  of 
his  life  ;  "  I  thought  on  my  ways."  I  proceed  to  the 

II.  The  fuccefs  of  this  courfe.  It  produced  a6lual 
and  fpeedy  reformation.  "  I  turned  my  feet  unto 
*'  thy  teftimonies  ;  I  made  hafte,  and  delayed  not  to 
<'  keep  thy  commandments."  And  if  we  confider 
the  matter  thoroughly,  and  have  but  patience  to  rea- 
fon  out  the  cafe  with  our  felves,  and  to  bring  our 
thoughts  and  deliberations  to  fome  iffue,  the  conclu- 
fion  muft  naturally  be  the  quitting  of  that  evil  and 
daagcrous  courfe  in  which  we  have  lived.  For  fin 
^:  and 


7he  nature  and  benefit  ofconfideration,  3  Jg 

and  confideration  cannot  long  dwell  together.  Did  ^S.^r^' 
but  men  confider  what  fin  is,  they  would  have  fo 
many  unanfwerable  objedlions  againll  it,  fuch  ftrong 
fears  andjealoufies  of  the  miferable  ilFue  and  event  of 
a  wicked  life,  that  they  would  not  dare  to  continue 
any  longer  in  it. 

I  do  not  fay,  that  this  change  Is  perfedlly  made 
at  once.  A  ilate  of  fin  and  holinefs  are  not  like  two 
ways  that  are  juft  parted  by  a  line,  fo  as  a  man  may 
ftep  out  of  the  one  full  into  the  other  \  but  they  are 
like  two  ways  that  lead  to  two  very  diilant  places, 
and  confequently  are  at  a  good  di fiance  from  one  an* 
other,  and  the  farther  any  man  hath  travelled  in  the 
one  the  farther  he  is  from  the  other  -,  fo  that  it  re-^ 
quires  time  and  pains  to  pafs  from  the  one  to  the 
other.  It  fometimes  fo  happens,  that  fome  perfons 
are  by  a  mighty  convidlion  and  refolution,  and  by  4 
very  extraordinary  and  overpowering  degree  of  God's 
grace,  almoft  perfedly  reclaimed  frorn  their  fins  at 
once,  and  all  of  a  fudden  "  tranflated  out  of  the  king^ 
*'  dom  of  darknefs  into  the  kingdom  of  his  dear  fon.*^ 
And  thus  it  v/as  with  many  of  the  firft  converts  tq 
Chriftianity  j  as  their  prejudices  againfl  the  Chriftia^ 
religion  were  ftrong  and  violent,  fo  the  holy  fpirit 
of  God  was  pleafed  to  work  mightily  in  them  that 
believed.  But  in  the  ufual  and  fettled  methods  of 
God's  grace  evil  habits  are  maftered  and  fubdued  by 
degrees,  and  with  a  great  deal  of  confiid,  and  many 
times  after  they  are  routed  they  rally  and  make  head 
again  -,  and  it  is  a  great  while  before  the  contrary 
habits  of  grace  and  virtue  are  grown  up  to  any  con- 
fiderable  degree  of  ftrength  and  maturity,  and  before 
^  man  comes  to  th^t  confirnaed  ftate  of  gopdnefs  tha^ 

Sf2  hq 


^he  nature  and  benefit  ofconfideratton. 
he  may  be  iaid  to  have  conquered  and  mortified  his 
lufts.  But  yet  this  ought  not  to  difcourage  us.  For 
fo  foon  as  we  have  ferioufly  begun  this  change,  we  are 
in  a  good  way,  and  all  our  endeavours  will  have  the 
acceptance  of  good  beginnings,  and  God  will  be 
ready  to  help  us  i  and  if  we  purfue  our  advantages 
we  lliall  every  day  gain  ground,  and  the  work  will 
grow  eafier  upon  our  hands ;  and  we  who  moved  at 
firfl  with  fo  much  flownefs  and  difficulty  fliall  after 
a  while  be  enabled  to  run  the  ways  of  God's  com- 
mandments with  pleafure  and  delight. 

I  have  done  with  the  two  things  I  propounded  to 
fpeak  to  from  thefe  words,  the  courfe  here  prefcribed* 
?ind  the  fuccefs  of  it.  And  now  to  perfuade  men  to 
take  this  courfe,  I  fhall  offer  two  or  three  arguments. 

I.  That  confideration  is  the  proper  a6t  of  reafon- 
able  creatures.  This  argument  God  himfelf  ufes,  to 
bring  men  to  a  confideration  of  their  evil  ways,  Ifa. 
xlvi.  8.  "  remember,  and  fhew  your  felves  men  •,  bring 
^'  it  again  to  mind,  O  ye  tranfgrelTors."  To  con- 
fider  our  ways  and  to  call  our  fins  to  remembrance, 
is  to  fhew  our  felves  men.  'Tis  the  great  fault  and 
infelicity  of  a  great  many,  that  they  generally  live 
without  thinking,  and  are  a6led  by  their  prefent  in- 
clinations and  appetites  without  any  confideration  of 
the  future  confequences  of  things,  and  without  fear 
of  any  thing  but  of  a  prefent  and  fenfible  danger; 
like  brute  creatures,  who  fear  no  evils  but  what  are 
in  view  and  juft  ready  to  fall  upon  them :  whereas  to 
^  prudent  and  confiderate  man  a  good  or  evil  in  re^ 
verfion  is  capable  of  as  true  an  eftimation,  propor- 
tionably  to  the  greatnefs  and  diflance  of  it,  as  if  it 
Vrere  really  prefent,     And  what  do  we  think  God 

ha§ 


The  nature  and  benefit  of  confideration.  3 17 

has  given  us  our  reafon  and  underftandings  for,  but  SE  R  M. 
to  forefee  evils  at  a  diflance,  and  to  prevent  them  ; 
to  provide  for  our  future  fecurity  and  happinefs,  to 
look  up  "  to  God  our  maker,  who  hath  taught  us 
"  more  than  the  beafls  of  the  earth,  and  made  us  wi^ 
*'  fer  than  the  fov/ls  of  heaven  •,"  but  to  confider  what 
we  do,  and  what  we  ought  to  do,  and  what  makes 
mod  for  our  future  and  lading  interefb,  and  what 
againft  it  ?  What  can  a  bead  do  worfe  than  to  aft 
without  any  confideration  and  defign,  than  to  pur- 
fue  his  prefent  inchnation  without  any  apprehenfion 
of  true  danger  ?  The  mod  dull  and  dupid  of  all  the 
brute  creatures  can  hardly  exercife  lefs  reafon  than 
this  comes  to.  So  that  for  a  man  not  to  confider  his 
ways  is  to  the  very  bed  intents  and  purpofes  to  be 
without  underdanding,  and  like  the  beads  thatperifli^ 

2.  This  is  the  end  of  God's  patience  and  long  dif- 
fering towards  us,  to  bring  us  to  confideration.  The 
great  defign  of  God's  goodnefs  is  to  "  lead  men  to 
"  repentance.  He  winks  at  the  fins  of  men,  that  they 
"  may  repent."  He  bears  long  with  us,  and  delays 
the  punifhment  of  our  fins,  and  doth  not  execute 
judgment  fpeedily,  becaufe  he  is  loth  to  furprife  men 
into  dedrudion  \  becaufe  he  would  give  them  the 
liberty  of  fecond  thoughts,  time  to  refiedl  upon  them- 
felves,  and  to  confider  v/hat  they  have  done,  and  to 
reafon  themfelves  into  repentance.  "  Confider  this 
^'  all  ye  that  forget  God,"  \t^  his  patience  turn  in- 
to  fury,  and  "  he  tear  you  in  pieces,  and  there  be 

'*'  none  to  deliver  you." 

3.  Confideration  is  that  which  we  mud  all  come 
to  one  time  or  other.  Time  will  come  when  we  fhall 
confider  and  cannot  help  itj^  when  we  fhalJ  not  be 

able 


T'he  nature  and  benefit  of  conjlderatkn. 
able  to  divert  our  thoughts  from   thofe  things  which 
we  are  now  fo  loth  to  think  upon.  Our  confciences  will 
take  "their  opportunity  to  bring  our  ways  to  remem- 
brance, when  fome  great  calamity  or  afflidion  is  up- 
on us.     Thus  it  was  with  the  prodigal  when  he  was 
brought  to  the  very  laft  extremity  and  "  was  ready 
*'  to  perifh  with  hunger,   then  he  came  to  himfelf." 
When  we  come  to  die,  then  we  fhall  think  of  our 
ways  with  trouble  and  vexation  enough  \  and  how 
glad  would  we  then  be  that  we  had  time  to  confider 
them?  And  perhaps  while  we  are  wifliing  for  more 
time  eternity  will  fwallow  us  up.     To  be  fure  in  the 
other  world,  a  great  part  of  the  mifery  of  wicked 
men  will  confift  in  furious  refledlions  upon  themfelves 
and  the  evil  a(5lions  of  their  lives.     'Tis  faid  of  the 
rich  voluptuous  man  in  the  parable,  that  "  in  hell 
*'  he  lift  up  his  eyes  being  in  torment  •,"  as  if  he  had 
never  confidered  and  bethought  himfelf  till  that  time. 
But  alas!  it  will  then  be  too  late  to  confider:  for  then 
confideration  will  do  us  no  good  •,  it  will  ferve  to  no 
other  purpofe  but  to  aggravate  our  mifery,  and  to" 
multiply  our  flings,  and  to  give  new  life  and  rage  to 
thofe  vultures  which  will  perpetually  prey  upon  our 
hearts.     But  how  much  a  wifer  courfe  would  it  be 
to  confider  thefe  things  in   time,    in  order  to  our 
eternal  peace  and  comfort  j  to  think  of  them  while 
we  may  redrcfs  them  and  avoid  the  difmal  confequen- 
ces  of  them,  than  when  our  cafe  is  defperate  and  paft 
remedy  ? 

And  now  what  can  I  fay  more  to  perfuade  every 
one  of  us  to  a  confideration  of  our  own  ways  ?  We 
are  generally  apt  to  bufy  our  felves  in  obferving  the 
errors  and  mifcarriages  of  our  neighbours,  and  are 

forward 


"He  nature  and  benefit  of  confideration.  3  r  9 

forward  to  mark  and  cenfure  the  faults  and  follies  of  SERM. 
other  men  ;  but  how  few  defcend  into  themfelves,  vj^^i^ 
and  turn  their  eyes  inward,  and  fay  what  have  I 
done  ?  'Tis  an  excellent  faying  of  Antoninus  the  great 
emperor  and  philofopher,  "  no  man  was  ever  unhap- 
"  py  for  not  prying  into  the  adions  and  conditions  of 
"  other  men,  but  that  man  is  neceflarily  unhappy 
"  who  doth  not  obferve  himfelf  and  confider  the  jilate 
''  of  his  own  foul.'* 

This  is  our  proper  work ;  and  now  is  a  proper  fea- 
fon  for  it,  when  we  pretend  to  God  and  men  to  fet 
apart  a  folemn  time  for  the  examination  of  our  felves, 
and  for  a  ferious  review  of  our  lives  in  order  to  humi- 
liation and  repentance,  to  the  reforming  and  amend- 
ment of  what  is  amifs.  And  though  we  would  ven- 
ture to  diflemble  with  men,  yet  let  us  not  diflemble 
with  God  alfo  \  *'  for  fliall  not  he  that  pondereth  the 
"  heart  confider  it ;  and  he  that  keepeth  the  foul 
"  fhall  he  not  know  it  \  and  fhall  not  he  render  to  c- 
*'  very  man  according  to  his  ways?" 

I  know  it  is  a  very  unpleafant  work  which  I  am 
now  putting  you  upon,  and  therefore  no  wonder  that 
men  are  generally  fo  backward  to  it ;  becaufe  it  will 
of  necefTity  give  fome  prefent  difturbance  to  their 
minds.  They  whofe  lives  have  been  very  vicious  are 
fo  odious  a  fight,  fo  horrid  a  fpedacle  to  themfelves, 
that  they  cannot  endure  to  refledl  upon  their  own 
ways;  of  all  things  in  the  world  they  hate  confidera- 
tion, and  are  ready  to  fay  to  it  as  the  evil  fpirit  did 
in  the  gofpel  to  our  Savioitr,  "  What  have  I  to  do 
*'  with  thee  ?  Art  thou  come  to  torment  me  before  the 
time?"  But  let  not  this  affright  us  from  it;  for 
whatever  trouble  it  may  caufe  at  prefent,  it  is  the 

only 


320  ne  nature  and  benefit  of  conjideration, 

SERM.  only  way  to  prevent  the  anguifh  and  the   torments 
^^^'*    of  eternity. 

The  things  which  I  have  offered  to  your  confide- 
ration  are  of  huge  moment  and  importance*  They 
do  not  concern  your  bodies  and  eftates^  but  that 
which  is  more  truly  your  felves,  your  immortal  fouls> 
the  deareft  and  mod  durable  part  of  our  felves :  and 
they  do  not  concern  us  for  a  little  while,  but  for  ever. 
Let  me  therefore  befpeak  your  mod  ferious  regard  to 
them  in  the  words  of  Mofes  to  the  people  of  Ifr^el, 
after  he  had  fet  the  law  of  God  before  them,  together 
with  the  blelTings  promifed  to  obedience,  and  the  ter- 
rible curfe  threatned  to  the  tranfgrelTion  of  it,  Dcut. 
xxxii.  46,  '^  Set  your  hearts  to  the  words  which  I 
*'  teflify  to  you  this  day,  for  it  is  not  a  vain  thing, 
t«  becaufe  it  is  your  life."  Your  life,  your  eternal 
Jife  and  happinefs  depends  upon  it. 

And  befides  a  tender  regard  to  your  felves  and 
your  own  interelts,  which  methinks  every  man  out 
of  a  natural  defire  of  being  happy  and  dread  of  be- 
ing miferable  lliould  be  forward  enough  to  confider  : 
be  pleafed  likewife  to  lay  to  heart  the  influence  of 
your  example  upon  others.  I  fpeak  now  to  a  grea^ 
many  perfons,  the  eminence  of  whofe  rank  and  qua- 
lity renders  their  examples  fo  powerful  as  to  be  able 
almofl  to  give  authority  either  to  virtue  or  vice.  Peo- 
ple take  their  fafliions  from  you,  as  to  the  habits  of 
their  minds  as  well  as  their  bodies.  So  that  upon  you 
chiefly  depends  the  ruin  or  reformation  of  manners, 
our  hopes  or  defpair  of  a  better  world.  What  way 
foever  you  go  you  are  followed  by  troops.  If  you 
run  any  finful  or  dangerous  courfe,  you  cannot  "  pe- 
*'  rifh  alone  in  your  iniquity,  but  thoufands  will  fall 

4  '!by 


The  nature  and  benefit  of  consideration,  3  2 1 

"  by  your  fide,  and  ten  thoufands  at  your  right  S  E  R  M. 
"  hand :"  and  on  the  contrary,  it  is  very  much  in 
your  power,  and  I  hope  in  your  wills  and  deflgns^ 
to  be  the  fovereign  reftorers  of  piety  and  virtue  to  a 
degenerate  age.  It  is  our  part  indeed  to  exhort  men 
to  their  duty,  but  it  is  you  that  would  be  the  power- 
ful and  effedtual  preachers  of  rightcoufnefs.  We  may 
endeavour  to  make  men  profelytes  to  virtue,  but  you 
would  infallibly  draw  difciples  after  you  :  we  may 
try  to  perfuade,  but  you  could  certainly  prevail,  ei- 
ther to  make  men  good,  or  to  reftrain  them  from  be- 
ing fo  bad. 

Therefore  confider  your  ways,  for  the  fake  of  o- 
thers  as  well  as  your  felves.  Confider  what  you  have 
done,  and  then  confider  what  is  fit  for  you  to  do, 
and  if  you  do  it  not,  what  will  be  the  end  of  thefe 
things  ?  And  to  help  you  fro  ward  in  this  work  it  is 
not  neceffary  that  I  fhould  rip  up  the  vices  of  the 
age,  and  fet  mens  fins  in  order  before  them.  It  is 
much  better  that  you  your  felves  Ihould  call  your 
own  ways  to  remembrance.  We  have  evefy  one  a 
faithful  monitor  and  witnefs  in  our  own  breads,  who> 
if  we  will  but  hearken  to  him,  will  deal  impartially 
with  us,  and  privately  tell  us  the  errors  of  our  lives. 
To  this  monitor  I  refer  you,  and  to  the  grace  of  God 
to  make  thefe  admonitions  effedual. 

Let  us  then  every  one  of  us,  in  the  fear  of  God, 

*'  fearch  and  try  our  ways,  and  turn  unto  the  Lord." 

Let  us  "  take  to  our  felves  words,  and  fay"  to  God  with.- 

thofe  true  penitents  in  fcripture,  ''•  J   have  firined, 

*'  what  fhall  be  done  unto  thee,  O  thou  preferver 

*•  of  men  ?  Behold,  I  am  vile,  what  (hall  I  anfwer 

«  thee?  I  will  lay  my  hand  upon  my  mouth,  J  will 

Vol.  I.  T  5  "  abhor 

6, 


322  7he folly  and  danger 

"  abhor  my  felf,  and  repent  in  duft  and  allies.  "  For 
*'  furely  it  is  meet  to  be  faid  unto  God,  I  will  not 
*'  offend  any  more ;  that  which  I  know  not  teach  thou 
"  me,  and  if  I  have  done  any  iniquity  I  will  do  no 
"  more.  O  that  there  were  fuch  an  heart  in  us !  O 
"  that  we  were  wife,  that  we  underftood  this,  that 
*'  we  would  confider  our  latter  end !"  and  God  of  his 
infinite  mercy  infpire  into  every  one  of  our  hearts  this 
holy  and  happy  refolution,  for  the  fake  of  our  blef- 
fed  Saviour  and  redeemer,  to  whom  with  the  fa- 
ther and  the  holy  Ghoft  be  all  honour  and  glory  now 
and  for  ever.     Amen. 


SERMON    XIV. 

The  folly  and  danger  of  irrefolutionand 
delaying. 


PSAL.  cxix.    60. 
/  made  hafte^  and  delayed  not  to  keep  thy  commandments. 

IN  the  words  immediately  going  before  you  have 
the  courfe  which  David  took  for  the  reforming 
of  his  life,  and  the  fuccefs  of  that  courfe;  "  I 
*'  thought  on  my  ways,  and  turned  my  feet  unto  thy 
«  teftimonies."  A  ferious  refledhion  upon  the  paft  er- 
rors and  mifcarriages  of  his  life  produced  the  refor- 
mation of  it.  And  you  have  a  confiderable  circum- 
ftancc  added  in  thefc  words  that  I  have  now  read 

to 


t)f  trrefolutton  and  delaying.  323 

to  you,  that  this  reformation  was  fpeedy  and  without  S  E  R  M. 
delay,  "  I  made  hafte,  and  delayed  not  to  keep  thy 
"  commandments."  Upon  due  confideration  of  his 
former  life,  and  a  full  convidion  of  the  neceffity  of  a 
change,  he  came  to  a  refolution  of  a  better  life,  and 
immediately  put  this  refolution  in  execution  ;  and  to 
declare  how  prefently  and  quickly  he  did  it,  he  ex- 
prefTes  it  both  affirmatively  and  negatively,  after  th^ 
manner  of  the  Hebrews,  who  when  they  would  fay 
a  thing  with  great  certainty  and  emphafis,  are  wont  to 
exprefs  it  both  ways,"  I  made  hafte,  and  delayed  not;" 
that  is,  I  did  with  all  imaginable  fpeed  betake  my 
fclf  to  a  better  courfe. 

And  this  is  the  natural  efFc6l  of  confideration,  and 
the  true  caufe  why  men  delay  fo  neceffary  a  work  is> 
becaufe  they  ftifle  their  reafon,  and  fuffer  themfelves 
to  be  hurried  into  the  embraces  of  prefent  objeds, 
and  do  not  confider  their  latter  end,  and  what  will 
be  the  fad  ifTue  and  event  of  a  wicked  life.  For  if 
men  would  take  an  impartial  view  of  their  lives,  and 
but  now  and  then  refledl  upon  themfelves,  and  lay  to 
heart  the  miferable  and  fatal  confequences  of  a  fmful 
courfe,  and  think  whither  it  will  bring  them  at  Jail, 
and  that  the  end  of  thefe  things  will  be  death  and  mi- 
fery  :  if  the  carnal  and  fenfual  perfon  would  but  look 
about  him,  and  confider  how  many  have  been  ruined 
in  the  way  that  he  is  in,  how  many  lie  '^  flain  and 
"  wounded  in  it,  that  it  is  the  way  to  hell,  and  leads 
«'  down  to  the  chambers  of  death,"  this  would  cer- 
tainly give  a  check  to  him  3^  and  (lop  him  in  his 
courfe. 

For  it  is  not  to  be  imagined  but  that  that  man  who 
tath  duly  confidered  what  fin  is,  th^  Ihorcnefs  of  Ws 

T  X  2  plea- 


2 2^^  "The  folly  a?td  danger 

SE  R  M.  pleafures,  and  the  eternity  of  it's  punilliment,  fhould 
'     refolvc  immediately  to  break  off"  his  fins  and  to  live 
another  kind  of  life.  Would  any  man  be  intemperate 
and  walk  after  the  flefli,  would  any  man  be  unjuft 
and  defraud  or  opprefs  his  neighbour,  be  profane  and 
live  in  the  contempt  of  God  and  religion,   or  allow 
himfelf  in  any  wicked  courfe  whatfoever,   that  con- 
•fiders  and  believes  a  judgment  to  come,  and  that  be- 
caufe  of  thefe  things  the  terrible  vengeance  of  God 
will  one  day  fall  upon  the  children  of  difobedience  ? 
It  is  not  credible  that  men  who  apply  themfelves  feri- 
oufly  to  the  meditation  of  thefe  matters  fhould  ven- 
ture to  continue  in  fo  imprudent  and  dangerous  a 
courfe,  or  could  by  any  temptation  whatfoever  be 
trained  on  one  ftep  farther  in  a  way  that  does  fo  cer- 
tainly and  vifibly  lead  to  ruin  and  deftrudion. 

So  that  my  w^ork  at  this  time  (hall  be,  to  endeavour 
to  convince  men  of  the  monftrous  folly  and  unreafo- 
nablenefs  of  delaying  the  reformation  and  amendment 
of  their  lives ;  and  to  perfuade  us  to  refolve  upon  it, 
and  having  refolved,  to  fet  about  it  immediately  and 
without  delay  -,  in  imitation  of  the  good  man  here  in 
the  text,  "  I  made  hafte,  and  delayed  not  to  keep 
*'  thy  commandments."     And  to  this  end,  I  fliall 

Firft,  confider  the  reafons  and  excufes  which  men 
pretend  for  delaying  this  necejGTary  work,  and  fhew  the 
unreafonablenefs  of  them. 

Seco.ndly,  I  fhall  add  fome  farther  confiderations  to 
•engage  us  effedually  to  fet  about  this  work  fpeedily 
and  without  delay. 

I.  We  will  confider  a  little  the  reafons  and  excufes 
which  men  pretend  for  delaying  this  necefifary  work ; 
and  ix)t  only  fhew  the  unreafonablenefs  of  them,  but 

that 


of  irrefohitton  and  delaying,  325 

that  they  are  each  of  them  a  ftrong  reafon  and  power-  S  E  R  M. 
ful  argument  to  the  contrary. 

I.  Many  pretend  that  they  are  abundantly  convin- 
|:ed  of  the  great  neceflity  of  leaving  their  fins  and  be- 
taking themfelves  to  a  better  courfe,  and  they  fully 
intend  to  do  fo  ;  only  they  cannot  at  prefent  bring 
themfelves  to  it,  but  they  hope  hereafter  to  be  in  a 
better  temper  and  difpofition,  and  then  they  refolve 
by  God's  grace  to  fet  about  this  work  in  good  earnefl, 
and  to  go  through  with  it. 

I  know  not  whether  it  be  fit  to  call  this  a  reafon  } 
I  am  fure  it  is  the  greateft  cheat  and  delufion  that  any 
man  can  put  upon  himfelf.  For  this  plainly  fhews 
that  thou  doft  not  intend  to  do  this  which  thou  art 
convinced  is  fo  neceflary,  but  to  put  it  off  from  day 
to  day.  For  there  is  no  greater  evidence  that  a  man 
doth  not  really  intend  to  do  a  thing,  than  when  not- 
withftanding  he  ought  upon  all  accounts,  and  may  in 
all  refpedts  better  do  it  at  prefent  than  hereafter,  yet 
he  ftill  puts  it  off.  Whatever  thou  pretendefl,  this 
is  a  meer  Ihift  to  get  rid  of  a  prefent  trouble.  It  is 
like  giving  good  words,  and  making  fair  promifes  to 
a  clamorous  and  importunate  creditor,  and  appoint- 
ing him  to  come  another  day,  when  the  man  knows 
in  his  confcience  that  he  intends  not  to  pay  him,  and 
that  he  fhall  be  lefs  able  to  difcharge  the  debt  then, 
than  he  is  at  prefent.  Whatever  reafons  thou  hafl: 
againft  reforming  thy  life  now,  will  ftill  remain  and 
be  in  as  full  force  hereafter,  nay  probably  ftronger 
than  they  are  at  prefent.  Thou  art  unwilling  now, 
and  fo  thou  wilt  be  hereafter,  and  in  all  likelihood 
much  more  unwilling.  So  that  this  reafon  will  every 
day  improve  upon  thy  hands,  and  have  fo  much  the 

4  more 


326  TTjc  folly  and  danger 

ERM.  more  ftrength  by  how  much  the  longer  thou  conti* 
nueft  in  thy  fins.  Thou  haft  no  reafon  in  the  world 
againft  the  prefent  time  but  only  that  it  is  prefent  ; 
why  when  hereafter  comes  to  be  prefent  the  reafon 
will  be  juft  the  fame.  So  that  thy  prefent  unwilling- 
nefs  is  fo  far  from  being  a  juft  reafon  againft  it,  that 
it  is  a  good  reafon  the  other  way  ;  becaufe  thou  art 
unwilling  now,  and  like  to  be  fo,  nay  more  fo  here- 
after i  if  thou  intendeft  to  do  it  at  all  thou  Ihouldeft 
fet  about  it  immediately,  and  without  delay. 

2.  Another  reafon  which  men  pretend  for  the  de- 
laying of  this  work,  is  the  great  difficulty  and  unplea- 
fantnefs  of  it.  And  it  cannot  be  denied  but  that  there 
will  be  fome  bitternefs  and  uneafinefs  in  it,  propor- 
tionably  to  the  growth  of  evil  habits,  and  the  ftrength 
of  our  lufts,  and  our  greiiter  or  lefs  progrefs  and  con- 
tinuance in  a  finful  courfe :  fo  that  we  muft  make  ac- 
count of  a  fharp  conftid:,  of  fome  pain  and  trouble  in 
the  making  of  this  change,  that  it  will  coft  us  fome 
pangs  and  throws  before  we  be  born  again.  For  when 
nature  hath  been  long  bent  another  way,  it  is  not  to 
be  expe<5led  that  it  fhould  be  reduced  and  brought 
back  to  it's  firft  ftraightnefs  without  pain  and  vio- 
lence. 

But  then  it  is  to  be  confidcred,  that  how  difficult 
and  painful  foever  this  work  be  it  is  neceffary,  and 
that  (hould  overrule  all  other  confiderations  whatfo- 
€ver  j  that  if  we  will  not  be  at  this  pains  and  trouble, 
we  muft  one  time  or  other  endure  far  greater  than 
thofe  which  we  now  feek  to  avoid  \  that  it  is  not  fo 
difficult  as  we  imagine,  but  our  fears  of  it  are  greater 
than  the  trouble  will  prove  ;  if  we  were  but  once  re- 
folved  upon  the  work,  and  ferioufly  engaged  in.  it, 

the 


of  irrefolution  and  delaying.  3  ly 

the  greatefl  part  of  the  trouble  were  over  ;  it  is  like  S  E  R  M, 
the  fear  of  children  to  go  into  the  cold  water,  a  faint 
trial  increafeth  their  fear  and  apprehenfion  of  it ;  but 
fo  foon  as  they  have  plunged  into  it  the  trouble  is 
over,  and  then  they  wonder  why  they  were  fo  much 
afraid.  The  main  difficulty  and  unpleafantnefs  is  in 
our  firll  entrance  into  religion  ;  it  prefently  grows  to- 
lerable, and  foon  after  eafy,  and  after  that  by  degree* 
fo  pleafant  and  delightful,  that  the  man  would  not 
for  all  the  world  return  to  his  former  evil  flate  and 
condition  of  life. 

We  fhould  confider  like  wife  what  is  the  true  caufe 
of  all  this  trouble  and  difficulty ;  it  is  our  long  conti- 
nuance in  a  finful  courfe  that  hath  made  us  fo  loth  to 
leave  it  -,  it  is  the  cuftom  of  finning  that  renders  it  fb 
troublefom  and  uneafy  to  men  to  do  otherwife :"  it  i^ 
the  greatnefs  of  our  guilt,  heightned  and  enflamed  by 
many  and  repeated  provocations,  that  doth  fo  gall 
our  confciences,  and  fill  our  fouls  with  fo  much  ter- 
ror :  it  is  becaufe  we  have  gone  fo  far  in  an  evil  way 
that  our  retreat  is  become  fo  difficult,  and  becaufe  wc 
have  delayed  this  work  fo  long  that  we  are  now  fo  un^- 
willing  to  go  about  it ;  and  confequently,  the  longer 
we  delay  it  the  trouble  and  difficulty  of  a  change  will 
encreafe  daily  upon  us.  And  all  thefe  confiderations 
are  fo  far  from  being  a  good  reafon  for  more  delays, 
jthat  they  are  a  ftrong  argument  to  the  contrary  :  be- 
caufe the  work  is  difficult  now,  therefore  do  not  make 
it  more  fo  ;  and  becaufe  your  delays  have  cncreafed 
the  difficulty  of  it,  and  will  do  more  and  more,  there- 
fore delay  no  longer. 

3.  Another  pretended  encouragement  to  thefe  de- 
Ijays  is  the  great  mercy  and  patience  of  God*    He 

com- 


328-  The  folly  aJid  danger 

SERM.  commonly  bears  longer  with  finners,  and  therefore 
there  is  no  fuch  abfoliite  and  urgent  necefTity  of  a 
fpeedy  repentance  and  reformation  of  our  lives.  Men 
have  not  the  face  to  give  this  for  a  reafon,  but  yet 
for  all  that  it  lies  at  the  bottom  of  many  mens  hearts; 
So  Solomon  tells  us,  Ecclef.  viii.  11.  "  Becaufe  fen- 
**  tence  againfl  an  evil  work  is  not  executed  fpeedily, 
"  therefore  the  heart  of  the  fons  of  men  is  fully  fet 
"  in  them  to  do  evil. 

But  it  is  not  always  thus.  There  are  few  of  us 
but  have  feen  feveral  inftances  of  God's  fe verity  to 
finners,  and  have  known  feveral  perfons  furprifed  by 
a  fudden  hand  of  God,  and  cut  off  in  the  very  a6t  of 
fin  without  having  the  leafl  refpite  given  them,  with- 
out time  or  liberty  fo  much  as  to  afk  God  forgivenefs, 
and  to  confider  either  what  they  had  done,  or  whi- 
ther they  were  going.  And  this  may  be  the  cafe  of 
any  finner,  and  is  fo  much  the  more  likely  to  be  thy 
cafe  becaufe  thou  doft  fo  boldly  prefume  upon  the 
mercy  and  patience  of  God. 

But  if  it  were  always  thus,  and  thou  wert  fure  to 
be  fpared  yet  a  while  longer  ;  what  can  be  more  un- 
reafonable  and  difingenuous  than  to  refolve  to  be  evii 
becaufe  God  is  good,  and  becaufe  he  fuifers  fo  long 
to  fin  fo  much  the  longer,  and  becaufe  he  affords 
thee  a  fpace  of  repentance  therefore  to  delay  it  and 
put  It  off  to  the  laft.?  The  proper  defign  of  God*4 
goodnefs  is  to  lead  men  to  repentance,  and  he  never 
intended  his  patience  for  an  encouragement  to  men  to 
continue  in  their  fins,  but  for  an  opportunity  and  an 
argument  to  break  them  off  by  repentance. 

Thefe  are  the  pretended  reafons  and  encouragcr 
ments  to  men  to  delay  their  repentance  and  the  re- 
formation 


of  trrefoluiion  and  delaying,  32^^ 

Formation  of  their  lives,  and  you  fee  how  groundlefs  SERM. 
and  unreafonable  they  are  ;  which  was  the  firfl  thing 
I  propounded  to  fpeak  to. 

II.  I  Ihall  add  fome  farther  confiderations,  to  en- 
gage men  effectually  to  {<^x.  about  this  work  fpecdily, 
and  without  delay.  And  becaufe  they  are  many  I 
fhall  infift  upon  t*hole  which  are  moft  v*^eighty  and 
confiderable,  without  being  very  curious  and  iblici- 
tous  about  the  method  and  order  of  them  :  P'or  pro- 
vided tliey  be  but  effe6lual  to  the  end  of  perfuafion^ 
it  matters  not  how  inartificially  they  are  ranged  and 
difpofed. 

I.  Confider,  that  in  matters  of  great  and  necefla- 
ry  concernment,  and  which  mud  be  done,  there  is 
no  greater  argument  of  a  weak  and  impotent  mind 
than  irrefolutlon  -,  to  be  undetermined  where  the  cafe 
is  fo  plain  and  the  neceffity  fo  urgent ;  to  be  always 
about  doing  that  which  we  are  convinced  muft  be 
done, 

ViUuros  aglmus  fe?nper^  nee  vhimus  tmqtiam. 

We  are  always  intending  to  Jive  a  new  life,  but 
can  never  find  a  time  to  fet  about  it.  This  k  as  if  a 
man  Ihould  put  off  eating  and  drinking  and  fleeping 
from  one  day  and  night  to  another,  till  he  have 
ilarved  and  deftroyed  himfelf.  It  feldom  falls  under 
any  man's  deliberation  whether  he  fhould  live  or  not, 
if  he  can  chufe  ;  and  if  he  cannot  chufc,  it  is  in  vain 
to  deliberate  about  it.  It  is  much  more  abfurd  to 
deliberate  whether  we  fliould  live  virtuouily  or  reli- 
gioufiy,  foberly  or  righteouQy  in  the  world,  for  that 
upon  the  matter  is  to  confuit  whether  a.  man  fhould  bs 
happy  or  not :   nature  hath  determined  this  for  us, 

^^•I-  Uu  and 


Tl^he  folly  and  danger 
and  we  need  not  reafon  about  it  •,  and  confequentIy> 
we  ought  not  to  delay  that  which  we  are  convinced  is 
fo  neceffary  in  order  to  it. 

2.  Confider  that  religion  is  a  great  and  a  long  work, 
and  alks  fo  much  time  that  there  is  none  left  for  the 
delaying  of  it.  To  begin  with  repentance,  which  is 
commonly  our  firft  entrance  into  religion  ;  this  alone 
is  a  great  work,  and  is  not  only  the  bufinefs  of  a  fud- 
den  thought  and  refolution,  but  of  execution  and  ac- 
tion :  It  is  the  abandoning  of  a  finful  courfe,  which 
we  cannot  leave  till  we  have  in  fome  degree  maftered 
our  lufts  •,  for  fo  long  as  they  are  our  mafters,  like 
Pharaoh,  they  will  keep  us  in  bondage  and  "  not 
**  let  us  go  to  ferve  the  Lord,"  The  habits  of  fin 
and  vice  are  not  to  be  plucked  up  and  caft  off  at  once  ; 
as  they  have  been  long  in  contradling,  fo  without  a 
miracle  it  will  require  a  competent  time  to  fubduc 
them  and  get  the  vidory  over  them  ^  for  they  are 
conquered  jufl  by  the  fame  degrees  that  the  habits  of 
grace* and  virtue  grow  up  and  get  flrength  in  us. 

So  that  there  are  feveral  duties  to  be  done  in  reli- 
gion, and  often  to  be  repeated  ♦,  many  graces  and . 
virtues  are  to  be  long  praiSlifed  and  exercifed  before 
the  contrary  vices  will  be  fubdued,  and  before  we  ar- 
rive to  a  confirmed  and  fettled  ftate  of  goodnefs ;  fuch 
a  flate  as  can  only  give  us  a  clear  and  comfortable 
evidence  of  the  fincerity  of  our  refolution  and  repen- 
tance, and  of  our  good  condition  towards  Goo.  We 
have  many  lulls  to  mortify,  many  pafiions  to  govern 
and  bring  into  order ;  much  good  to  do,  to  make 
what  amends  and  reparation  we  can  for  the  much 
evil  we  have  done :  we  have  many  things  to  learn  j 
^d  many  to  unlearn,  to  which  we  ihall  be  flrongly 
2  '    prompt' 


of  irrefolution  and  delaying,  33  T 

prompted  by  the  corrupt  inclinations  of  our  nature,  S  E  R  M. 
and  the  remaining  power  of  ill  habits  and  cuftoms : 
and  perhaps  we  may  have  fatisfadtion  and  reftitution  to 
make  for  the  many  injuries  we  have  done  to  others, 
in  their  perfons,  or  eftates,  or  reputations :  in  a  word, 
we  have  a  body  of  fin  to  put  off,  v/hich  clings  clofe 
to  us  and  is  hard  to  part  with :  we  have  to  "  cleanfe 
"  our  felves  from  all  filthinefs  of  flefh  and  fpirit,  and 
"  to  perfect  holinefs  in  the  fear  of  God  •,"  toencreafe 
and  improve  our  graces  and  virtues  •,  to  "  add  to  our 
"  faith   knowledge,  and  temperance,  and   patience, 
"  and  brotherly  kindnefs,  and  charity  ;  and  to  abound 
"  in  all  the  fruits  of  righteoufnefs,  which  are  by  Je- 
"  sus  Christ  to  the  praife  and  glory  of  God  :"    we 
have  to  be  ufeful  to  the  world,  and  exemplary  to 
others  in  a   holy  and   virtuous   converfation  j     our 
"  light  is  fo  to  fhine  before  men,  that  others  may  fee 
"  our  good  works,  and  glorify  our  father  which  is  in 
"  heaven. 

And  do  we  think  all  this  is  to  be  done  in  an  in- 
flant,  and  requires  no  time  ?  That  we  may  delay  and 
putoffto  the  lalt,  and  yetdoallthis  work  well  enough? 
Do  we  think  we  can  do  all  this  in  time  of  fick- 
nefs  and  old  age,  when  we  are  not  fit  to  do  any  thing; 
when  "  the  fpirit  of  a  man"  can  hardly  bear  the  in- 
firmities of  nature,  much  lefs  a  guilty  confcience  and 
a  wounded  fpirit  ?  Do  we  think  that  when  the  day 
hath  been  idly  fpent  and  fquandred  away  by  us, 
that  v/e  fhall  be  fit  to  work  when  the  night  and  dark- 
nefs  comes  ?  When  our  underftanding  is  weak,  and 
our  memory  frail,  and  our  will  crooked,  and  by  a 
long  cuftom  of  finning  obftinately  bent  the  wrong 
way,  what  can  we  then  do  in  religion?  What  rea, 
U  u  2  fonable. 


332  ^be  folly  and  danger 

S  E  R  M.  Ion  able  or  acceptable  fervice  can  wc  then  perform  to 
God  ?  When  our  candle  is  juft  fmking  into  the  foc- 
ket,  how  fhall  "  our  light  fo  fhine  before  men,  that 
"  others  may  fee  our  good  works  ?'* 

Alas !  the  longed  life  is  no  more  than  fufficient  for 
a  man  to  reform  himfelf  in,  to  repent  of  the  errors  of 
his  life,  and  to  amend  what  is  amifs :  to  put  our 
fouls  into  a  good  pofture  and  preparation  for  another 
■world,  to  train  up  our  fclves  for  eternity,  and  to  make 
ourfelves  "  meet  to  be  made  partakers  of  the  inhc.i- 
*'  tance  of  the  faints  in  light." 

^.  Confidcr  what  a  defperate  hazard  we  rjn  by 
thefe  delays.  Every  delay  of  repentance  is  a  ventur- 
ing the  main  chance.  It  is  uncertain  whether  here- 
after we  fhall  have  time  for  it,  and  if  we  have  time 
whether  we  fliall  have  a  heart  to  it,  and  the  affiftance 
of  God's  grace  to  go  thorough  with  it.  God  indeed 
hath  been  gracioufly  pleafcd  to  promife  pardon  to 
repentance,  but  he  hath  no  were  promifed  life  and 
leifure,  the  aids  of  his  grace  and  holy  fpirit  to  thofe 
who  put  off  their  repentance  :  he  hath  no  where  pro- 
rnifed  acceptance  to  meer  fbrrow  and  trouble  for  fin, 
without  "  fruits  meet  for  repentance,  and  amendment 
*'  of  life  :"  he  hath  no  where  promifed  to  receive 
them  to  mercy  and  favour  who  only  give  him  good 
words,  and  are  at  lad  contented  to  condefcend  fo 
far  to  him  as  to  promife  to  leave  their  fins  when 
they  can  keep  them  no  longer.  Many  have  gone 
thus  far  in  times  of  affliclion  and  ficknefs,  as  to  be 
^wakened  to  a  great  fenfe  of  their  fins,  and  to  be 
mightily  troubled  for  their  wicked  lives,  and  to  make 
folemn  promifes  and  profeffions  of  becoming  better  \ 
^nd  yet  upon  their  deliverance  and  recovery  all  hath 

yaniflied 


XIV. 


ofirrefolution  afid  delaying,  333 

vanifhed  and  come  to  nothing,  and  their  "  righte-  S  E  R  M. 
"  oiifnefs  hath  been  as  the  morning  cluuu,  and  as 
«  the  early  dew  which  paiTeth  away:"  and  why 
ihould  any  man,  meerly  upon  account  of  a  death-bed 
repentance,  reckon  himfelf  in  a  better  condition  than 
thofe  perfons  ^vho  have  done  as  much  5:"^-  gone  as 
far  as  he ;  and  there  is  no  other  difference  between 
them  but  this,  that  the  repentance  of  the  former  -.vas 
tried  and  proved  infincere,  but  the  death  bed-repen- 
tance never  came  to  a  trial ;  and  yet  for  all  that  God 
knows  whether  it  were  (incere  or  not,  and  liow  it 
would  have  proved  if  the  man  had  lived  longer. 
Why  fliould  any  man  for  offering  up  to  God  the 
meer  refufe  and  dregs  of  his  life,  and  the  days  "  which 
"  himfelf  hath  no  pleafure  in,"  expe(5l  to  receive 
the  reward  of  eternal  life  and  happinefs  at  his  hands  ? 
But  though  we  do  not  defign  to  delay  this  work 
fo  long,  yet  ought  we  to  confider  that  all  delays  in  a 
matter  of  this  confequence  are  extremely  dangerous  5 
becaufe  we  put  off  a  bufinefs  of  the  greateft  concern- 
ment to  the  future,  and  in  fo  doing  put  it  to  the  ha- 
zard whether  ever  it  fhall  be  done :  for  the  future  is 
as  much  out  of  our  power  to  command,  as  it  is  to 
call  back  the  time  which  is  paft.  Indeed  if  w%  could 
arreft  time  and  ftrike  off  the  nimble  wheels  of  his 
chariot,  and  like  Jofhua  bid  the  fun  fland  ftill,  and 
make  opportunity  tarry  as  long  as  we  had  occafion 
for  it  ;  this  were  fomcthing  to  excufe  our  delay,  or 
at  lead  to  mitigate  or  abate  the  folly  and  unreafona- 
blenefs  of  it :  but  this  we  cannot  do.  It  is  in  our 
power,  under  the  influence  of  God's  grace  and  holy 
fpirit,  to  amend  our  lives  now,  but  it  is  not  in 
pur  power  to  live  till  to  morrow  3  and  who  will  part 

with 


^he  folly  and  danger 
with  an  eftate  in  hand,  which  he  may  prefently  en- 
ter upon  the  pofTeffion  of,  for  an  uncertain  reverfion  ? 
And  yet  thus  we  deal  in  the  great  and  everlafting  con- 
cernments of  our  fouls  *,  we  trifle  away  the  prefent 
opportunities  of  falvation,  and  vainly  promife  to  our 
felves  the  future  ;  we  let  go  that  which  is  in  our 
power,  and  fondly  difpofeof  that  which  is  out  of  our 
power,  and  in  the  hands  of  God. 

Lay  hold  then  upon  the  prefent  opportunities,  and 
look  upon  every  a6tion  thou  doft,  and  every  oppor- 
tunity of  doing  any,  as  pofTibly  thy  lafl-,  for  fo  it 
may  prove,  for  any  thing  thou  canft  tell  to  the  con- 
trary, if  a  man's  life  lay  at  flake  and  he  had  but  one 
throw  for  it,  with  what  care  and  with  what  concern- 
ment would  he  m.anage  that  a£lion?  What  thou  art 
doing  next  may,  for  ought  thou  knoweft,  be  for  thy 
life  and  for  all  eternity.  So  much  of  thy  life  is  mod 
certainly  paft,  and  God  knows  thou  haft  yet  done 
little  or  nothing  towards  the  fecuring  of  thy  future 
happinefs:^it  is  not  certain  how  much  or  how  little 
is  remaining,  therefore  be  fure  to  make  the  befl:  ufe 
of  that  little  which  may  be  left,  and  wifely  to  m.a- 
nage  the  laft  flake. 

4.  Seeing  the  delay  of  repentance  doth  mainly  re- 
ly upon  the  hopes  and  encouragement  of  a  future  re- 
pentance, let  us  confider  a  little  how  unreafonable 
thefe  hopes  are,  and  how  abfurd  the  encouragemaent 
is  which  men  take  from  them.  To  fin  in  hopes  that 
hereafter  we  fliail  repent,  is  to  do  a  thing  in  hopes 
that  we  (liall  one  day  be  mightily  afhamed  of  it, 
that  we  fliallone  time  or  other  be  heartily  grieved  and 
troubled  that  we  have  done  it :  it  is  to  do  a  thing  in 
hopes  that  we  fhall  afterwards  condemn  our  felves  for 

it. 


of  irrefolution  and  delaying,  335 

it,  and  wilh  a  thoufand  times  we  had  never  done  it  j  S  E  R  M, 

XIV 
in  hopes  that  we  fhall  be  full  of  horror  at  the  thoughts 

of  what  we  have  done,  and  fliall  treafure  up  fo  much 
guilt  in  our  confciences  as  will  make  us  a  terror  to  our 
felves,  and  be  ready  to  drive  us  even  to  defpair  and 
diflraclion.  And  is  this  a  reafonable  hope  ?  Is  this  a 
fitting  encouragement  for  a  wife  man  to  give  to  him- 
felf,  to  any  adlion  ?  And  yet  this  is  plainly  the  true 
meaning  of  mens  going  on  in  their  fins,  in  hopes 
that  hereafter  they  fliall  repent  of  them. 

5.  If  you  be  flill  refolved  to  delay  this  bufinefs  and 
put  it  off  at  prefent,confider  well  with  your  felves  how 
long  you  intend  to  delay  it.  I  hope  not  to  the  lafl, 
not  till  ficknefs  come  and  death  make  his  approaches 
to  you.  This  is  next  to  madnefs,  to  venture  all  up- 
on fuch  an  after-game.  'Tis  juft  as  if  a  man  fhould 
be  content  to  be  fhipwreckt,  in  hope,  that  he  fhall 
afterwards  efcape  by  a  plank  and  get  fafe  to  fhore. 
But  I  hope  none  are  fo  unreafonable,  yet  I  fear  that 
many  have  a  mind  to  put  it  off  to  old  age,  though 
they  do  not  care  to  fay  fo.  Seneca  expoltulates  ex- 
cellently with  this  fort  of  men  ;  "  Who  fhall  enfure 
"  thy  hfe  till  that  time?  Who  fliall  pafs  his  word  for 
"  thee,  that  the  providence  of  God  will  fuffer  all 
"  things  to  happen  and  fall  out  juft  as  thou  haft  de- 
"  figned  and  forecaft  them  ?  Art  thou  not  afliamed  to 
c^  referve  the  reliques  of  thy  life  for  thy  felf,  and 
«'  fet  apart  only  that  time  to  be  wife  and  virtuous,  in, 
"  which  is  good  for  nothing  ?  How  late  is  it  then  to 
''  begin  to  live  v/ell  when  thy  life  is  almoft  at  an  end? 
"  What  a  ftupid  forgetfulnefs  is  it  of  our  mortality, 
"  to  put  off  good  refolutions  to  the  fiftieth  or  fixtieth 
"  year  of  our  age,  and   refolve  to  begin  to   do  bet- 

"  ter 


336  ^he  folly  and  danger 

E  R  M.  «  ter  at  that  time  of  Jife  to  which  very  few  perfonS 
''  have  reached?'* 

But  perhaps  thou  art  not  altogether  fo  unreafona- 
ble,  but  defireft  only  to  refpite  this  work  ^ill  the  firfl 
heat  of  youth  and  lufl  be  over,  till  the  cooler  and 
more  confiderate  part  of  thy  life  come  on  y  that  per- 
haps thou  thinkefl  may  be  the  fittefl:  and  moft  conve- 
nient feafon.  But  ftill  we  reckon  upon  uncertainties^ 
for  perhaps  that  feafon  may  never  be :  however,  to 
be  fure  it  is  much  more  in  our  power,  by  the  afFift:- 
ance  of  God's  grace,  which  is  never  wanting  to  the 
fincere  endeavours  of  men,  to  conquer  our  lulls  now^ 
and  to  refill  the  moll  heady  and  violent  temptations 
to  vice,  than  either  to  fecure  the  future  time,  or  to 
recover  that  which  is  once  pall  and  gone. 

Some  feem  yet  more  reafonable,  and  are  content 
to  come  lower,  and  defire  only  to  put  it  off  for  a  ve- 
ry little  while.  But  why  for  a  little  while  ?  Why  till 
to  morrow  ?  To  morrow  will  be  as  this  day,  only 
with  this  difference,  that  thou  wilt  in  all  probability 
be  more  unwilling  and  indifpofcd  then. 

So  that  there  is  no  future  time  which  any  man  can 
reafonably  pitch  upon.  All  delay  in  this  cafe  is  dan- 
gerous, and  as  fenllefs  as  the  expedation  of  the  idiot 
defcribed  by  the  poet,  who  being  come  to  the  river 
fide  and  intending  to  pafs  over,  flays  till  all  the  water 
in  the  river  be  gone  by  and  hath  left  the  channel  a 
dry  paffage  for  him. 

— —  ^/  ilk 

Lahitur^  &  lahettir  m  om7is  volubilis  <£vum. 

But  the  river  runs,  and  runs,  and  will  run,  and  if  he 
fhould  flay  a  thoufand  years  will  never  be  the  nearer 

being 


of  irrefohitmi  and  delaying,  %yj 

being  dry.     So  that  if  the  man  mud  go  over,  and  S  |^^M* 
there  be  neceffity  for  it,  (as  there  is  for  repentance) 
the  only  wife  refolution  to  be  taken  in  this  cafe,  is  to 
wade  or  fwim  over  as  well  as  he  can,  becaufe  the  mat. 
ter  will  never  be  amended  by  tarrying. 

6.  Laftly,  confider  what  an  unfpeakable  happi- 
nefs  it  is  to  have  our  minds  fettled  in  that  condition, 
that  we  may  without  fear  and  amazement,  nay  with 
comfort  and  confidence  expc6b  death  and  judgment. 
Death  is  never  far  from  any  of  us,  and  the  general 
judgment  of  the  world  may  be  nearer  than  we  area- 
ware  of;  for  "  of  that  day  and  hour  knoweth  no 
*'  man  :'*  and  thefe  are  two  terrible  things,  and  no- 
thing can  free  us  from  the  terror  of  them  but  a  good 
confcience,  and  a  good  confcience  is  only  to  be 
had  either  by  innocence,  or  by  repentance  and  a- 
mend  men  t  of  life.  Happy  man  !  who  by  this  means 
is  at  peace  with  God,  and  wich  himfelf;  and  can  think 
of  death  and  judgment  without  dread  and  afloniili- 
ment.  For  "  the  fling  of  death  is  fin-/'  and  the 
terror  of  the  great  day  only  concerns  thofe  who  have 
lived  wickedly  and  impenitently,  and  would  not  be 
perfuaded,  neither  by  the  mercies  of  God,  nor  by 
the  fearof  his  judgments,  to  repent  and  turn  to  him  : 
but  if  we  have  truly  forfaken  our  fins,  and  do  {\t>.- 
cerely  endeavour  to  live  in  obedience  to  the  laws  and 
commancJs  of  God,  the  more  we  think  of  death  and 
judgment  the  greater  matter  of  joy  and  comfort  will 
thefe  things  be  to  us :  for  "  bleffed  is  that  fervant, 
«'  whom  his  Lord  when  he  comes  fhall  find  fo  do- 
*'  ing."  Let  us  therefore  as  foon  as  poffibly  we  can 
put  pur  felves  into  this  pofture  and  preparation  ac- 
cording to  that  advice  of  our  bleffed  Saviour,  Luke 

Vol,  L  X  X  xii. 

7- 


33^  ^he  folly  and  danger 

ERM.  xii.  '^r^^  -^^G.  "  Let  your  loins  be  girded  about,  and 
"  your  Jamps  burning,  and  ye  your  {dvt%  like  unto 
"  men  that  wait  for  their  Lord." 

And  now  I  hope  that  enough  hath  been  faid  to 
convince  men  of  the  great  unreafonablenefs  and  folly 
of  thefe delays;  nay  I  believe  that  moft  men  are  con- 
vinced of  it  by  their  own  thoughts,  and  that  their 
confciences  call  them  fools  a  thoufand  times  for  it : 
but  O  that  I  knew  what  to  fay  that  might  prevail 
with  men  and  effedually  perfuade  them  to  do  that 
which  they  are  fo  abundantly  convinced  is  fo  necef- 
fary. 

And  here  I  might  addrefs  my  felf  to  the  feveral 
ages  of  perfons.  You  that  are  young,  and  have  hi- 
therto been  in  a  good  mcafure  innocent,  may  prevent 
the  devil,  and  by  an  early  piety  give  God  the  firft 
pofTeflion  of  your  fouls  •,  and  by  this  means  never 
be  put  to  the  trouble  of  fo  great  and  folemn  a  repen- 
tance, having  never  been  deeply  engaged  in  a  wick- 
ed life :  you  may  do  a  glorious,  I  had  almoft  faid 
a  meritorious  thing,  in  cleaving  ftedfaftly  to  God 
and  refolving  to  ferve  him,  when  you  are  fo  impor- 
tunately courted  and  fo  hotly  aflaulted  by  the  devil 
and  the  world.  However,  you  may  not  live  to  be 
old  \  therefore  upon  that  confideration  begin  the  work 
prefently,  and  make  ufe  of  the  opportunity  that  is 
now  in  your  hands. 

You  that  are  grown  up  to  ripenefs  of  years  and  are 
in  the  full  vigour  of  your  age,  you  are  to  be  put  in 
mind  that  the  heat  and  inconfideratenefs  of  youth  is 
now  pad  and  gone,  that  reafon  and  confideration  are 
now  in  their  perfecftion  and  flrength,  that  this  is  the 
very  age  of  prudence  and  difcretion,  ofwifdomand 

warinefs : 


cf  irrefolution  and  delaying.  339 

warinefs  :  fo  that  now  is  the  proper  time  for  you  to SE  R  M. 
be  ferious,  and  wifely  to  fecure  your  future  happinefs. 

As  for  thofe  that  are  old,  they  methinks  fliould 
need  no  body  to  admonilh  them,  that  it  is  now  high 
time  for  them  to  begin  a  new  life,  and  that  the  time 
paft  of  their  lives  is  too  much  to  have  fpent  in  fia 
and  folly.  There  is  no  trifling  where  men  have  a 
great  work  to  do,  and  but  little  time  to  do  it  in. 
Your  fun  is  certainly  going  down  and  near  it's  fetting, 
therefore  you  fhould  quicken  your  pace,  confiderlng 
that  your  journey  is  never  the  Ihorter  becaufe  you 
have  but  little  time  to  perform  it  in.  Alas  man  ! 
thou  artjuft  ready  to  die,  and  haft  thou  not  yet  be- 
gun to  live  ?  Are  thy  paffions  and  lufts  yet  unfubdu- 
cd,  and  have  they  had  no  other  mortification  than 
what  age  hath  given  them  ?  'Tis  ftrange  to  fee  how 
in  the  very  extremities  of  old  age,  many  men  are  as 
if  they  had  ftill  a  thoufand  years  to  live,  and  make 
no  preparation  for  death,  though  it  dogs  them  at  the 
heels  and  is  juft  come  up  to  them  and  ready  to  give 
them  the  fatal  ftroke.    . 

Therefore  let  us  not  put  off  this  neceflary  work  of 
reforming  our  felves,  in  what  part  and  age  of  our 
lives  foever  we  be.  "  To  day,  whilft  it  is  called  to 
"  day,  left  any  of  you  be  hardened  through  the  de- 
*'  ceitfulnefs  of  fin."  Nay  to  day  is  with  the  iateft 
to  begin  this  work,  had  we  been  wife  we  would  have 
begun  it  fooner.  It  is  God's  infinite  mercy  to  us 
that  it  is  not  quite  too  late,  that  the  day  of  God's 
patience  is  not  quite  expired,  and  the  door  fliut  an 
gainft  us.  Therefore  do  not  defer  your  repentance 
to  the  next  folemn  time,  to  the  next  occafion  of  re- 
ceiving the  bkffed  facrament :  do  not  fay  I  will  then 
X  3^  a  yeform 


The  folly  and  danger 
reform  and  become  a  new  man,  after  that  I  will  take 
leave  of  my  kiils  and  fin  no  more.     For  let  us  make 
what  hade  we  can  we  cannot  poffibly  make  too  much. 

t  roper  at  vherc  nemo  fatis. 

No  man  makes  hafie  enough  to  be  good,  to  "ceafe 
*  to  do  evil,  and  to  learn  to  do  well."  Be  as  quick 
as  we  will  life  will  be  too  nimble  for  us,  and  go  on 
fafter  than  our  work  does,  and  death  will  go  nigh  to 
prevent  us  and  furprize  us  unawares. 

Do,  do,  finner ;  abufe  and  negledt  thy  felf  yet  a 
little  while  longer,  till  the  time  of  regarding  thy  foul 
and  working  out  thine  own  falvation  be  at  an  end, 
and  all  the  opportunities  of  minding  that  great  con- 
cernment be  flipped  out  of  thy  hands,  never  to  be 
recovered,  never  to  be  called  back  again  ;  no,  not 
by  thy  mod  earneil  wilhes  and  defires,  by  thy  mod 
fervent  prayers  and  tears  ;  and  thou  be  brought  in- 
to the  condition  of  prophane  Efau,  who  for  once  de- 
fpifing  the  ble.Ting  loft  it  for  ever,  "  and  found  no 
^'  place  of  repentance  though  he  fought  it  carefully 
"  with  tears." 

To  conclude :  art  thou  convinced  that  thy  eter- 
nal happinefs  depends  upon  following  the  advice 
which  hath  now  been  given  thee  ^  Why  then  do  but 
behave  thy  feif  in  this  cafe,  as  thou  and  all  prudent 
men  are  wont  to  do  in  matters  which  thou  canft  not 
but  acknowledge  to  be  of  far  lefs  concernment.  If 
a  man  be  travelling  to  fuch  a  place,  fo  foon  as  he 
finds  himfelf  out  of  the  way  he  prefently  flops  and 
makes  towards  the  right  way,  and  hath  no  inclina- 
tion to  go  wrong  any  farther  :  if  a  man  be  fick,  he 
ytxW  be  well  prefcntly,  if  he  can,  and  not  put  it  off 


of  irrefolution  and  delaying,  24  X 

to  the  future  :  moil  men  will  gladly  take  the  firft  op-  S  E  R  M. 
portunity  that  prefents  it  felf,  of  being  rich  or  great,  ^^^* 
every  man  almoft  catches  at  the  very  lirfl  offers  of  a 
great  place  or  a  good  purchafe,  and  fecures  them  pre- 
fently  if  he  can,  left  the  opportunity  be  gone  and 
another  fnatch  thefe  things  from  him.  Do  thou  thus 
fo  much  more  in  matters  fo  much  greater.  Return 
from  the  error  of  thy  way,  be  wife,  fave  thy  felf, 
as  foon  as  poffibly  thou  canfl.  When  happinefs  pre- 
fents it  felf  to  thee  do  not  turn  it  off,  and  bid  it  come 
again  to  morrow.  Perhaps  thou  mayefl  never  be  fb 
fairly  offered  again,  perhaps  the  day  of  falvation  may 
not  come  again  to  morrow,  nay  perhaps  to  thee  to 
morrow  may  never  come.  But  if  we  were  fure  that 
happinefs  would  come  again,  yet  why  fhould  we 
put  it  off  ?  Does  any  man  know  how  to  be  fafe  and 
happy  to  day,  and  can  he  find  in  his  heart  to  tarry 
till  to  morrow } 

Now  the  God  of  all  mercy  and  patience  give  every 
one  of  us  the  wifdom  and  grace  to  know  and  to  do 
"  in  this  our  day,  the  things  that  belong  to  our 
"  peace,  before  they  be  hid  from  our  eyes  -,"  for  the 
fake  of  our  bleffed  Saviour  and  Redeemer,  "  tp 
"  whom  with  the  Father  and  the  Holy  Ghoft  be 
'^  all  honour  and  glory  now  and  for  ever.   Amen.         w 


S  E  R- 


242  T^he  dtftinguijhing  charaEier 


S    E   R    M    O    N    XV. 

The  diftinguifliing  charader  of  a  good 
and  a  bad  man. 


I  J  O  H  N   in.  lo. 

hi  this  the  children  of  Goi>  are  mamfeft^  and  the  children 
of  the  devil:  whofoever  doth  not  right  eoufnefs  is  not 
cfGoD. 

IT  is  certainly  a  matter  of  the  greateft  confequencc 
to  us,  both  in  order  to  our  prefent  peace  and  fu- 
ture happinefs,  truly  to  underftand  our  fpirltual 
flate  and  condition,  and  whether  we  belong  to  God 
and  be  his  children  or  not :  and  it  is  not  fo  difficult 
as  is  commonly  imagined  to  arrive  at  this  knowledge, 
if  we  have  a  mind  to  it,  and  will  but  deal  impartially 
•with  our  felves  -,  for  the  text  gives  us  a  plain  mark 
and  chara6ler  whereby  we  may  know  it,  "  in  this 
.■'  *'  the  children  of  God  are  manifeft,  and  the  children 
"  of  the  devil :  whofoever  doth  not  righteoufnefs  is 
*'  not  of  God." 

From  which  words  I  ihall  endeavour  by  God's  af- 
fiftance  to  lay  men  open  to  themfelves,  and  to  repre- 
fent  to  every  one  of  us  the  truth  of  our  condition  ; 
and  then  leave  it  to  the  grace  of  God,  and  every 
man's  ferious  confideration,  to  make  the  bed  ufe 
of  it. 


And 


of  a  good  and  a  bad  man.  34J 

And  it  will  conduce  very  much  to  the  clearing  of  SER  NC. 
this  matter  to  confider  briefly  the  occafion  of  thefe 
words.  And  this  will  beft  appear  by  attending  (led- 
faftly  to  the  main  fcope  and  defign  of  this  epiftle. 
And  I  think  that  no  man  that  reads  it  with  attention 
can  doubt  but  that  it  is  particularly  defigned  againft 
the  impious  ^td  of  the  Gnoftics  who,  as  tjie  fathers 
tell  us,  fprang  from  Simon  Magus,  and  pretended 
to  extraordinary  knowledge  and  illumination,  from 
whence  they  had  the  name  of  Gnofticks ;  but  not- 
withftanding  this  glittering  pretence  they  did  allow 
themfelves  in  all  manner  of  impious  and  vicious  prac- 
tices, "  turning  the  grace  of  God  into  lafcivioufnefs,** 
as  St.  Jude  fpeaks  of  them.  And  that  St.  John  aims 
particularly  at  this  fort  of  men  is  very  evident  from  the 
frequent  and  plain  allufions  throughout  this  epiflle  to 
thofe  names  and  titles  which  this  fed  afllimed  to 
themfelves,  as  chap.  ii.  ver.  4.  "  he  that  faith,  I  know 
"  him,  and  keepeth  not  his  commandments,  is  a  li- 
"  ar,  and  the  truth  is  not  in  him,"  And  verfe  9. 
'*  he  that  faith  he  is  in  the  light,  and  hateth  his 
"  brother,  is  in  darknefs  even  until  now."  Which 
paflages,  and  many  more  in  this  epiftle,  do  plainly 
refer  to  the  pretences  of  thi^  fecft  to  more  than  ordina- 
ry knowledge  and  illumination  in  the  myfleries  of 
religion ;  notwithftanding  they  did  fo  notoriouily  0 
contradi<5l  thefe  glorious  pretences  by  the  impiety 
of  their  lives,  and  particularly  by  their  hatred  and 
enmity  to  their  fellow-Chriftians.  For,  as  the  an- 
cient fathers  tell  us,  they  pretended  that  whatever 
they  did  they  could  not  fin :  and  this  our  apoftle  in- 
timates in  the  beginning  of  this  epiftle,  "  if  we  fay 
**  that  we  have  no  fin  we  deceive  our  felves,  and  the 

"  truth 


# 


^hc  dijlinguifiing  character 
"  truth  is  not  in  us."  And  they  held  it  lawful  to  re- 
nounce Chriftialiity  to  avoid  perfecution  *,  and  not 
only  fo,  but  alfo  to  join  with  the  heathen  in  perfecut- 
ing  the  Chriftians  j  which  feeins  to  be  the  reafon  why 
the  apoftle  fo  often  taxeth  them  "  for  hatred  to  their 
"  brethren,"  and  calls  them  murtherers. 

Now  to  Ihew  the  inconfiftence  of  thefe  principles 
and  pradices  with  Chriftianity  the  apoftle  ufeth  many 
arguments,  amongft  which  he  particularly  infifteth 
upon  this,  that  nothing  is  more  eflential  to  a  dilciple 
of  Christ  and  a  child  of  God  (by  which  titles  Chri- 
ftians were  commonly  known)  than  to  abftain  from  the 
pradice  of  all  fin  and  wickednefs ;  ver.  6.  of  this 
chap.  "  whofoever  abideth  in  him  finneth  not  •,  who- 
«  foever  finneth  hath  not  feen  him,  neither  known 
"  him,"  (whatever  knowledge  they  might  pretend 
to,  it  was  evident  they  were  deftitute  of  the  true 
knowledge  of  God  and  his  fon  Jesus  Christ)  and 
verfe  7.  "  little  children,  let  no  man  deceive  you  -,  he 
"  that  doth  righteoufnefs  is  righteous,  even  as  he  is 
^  righteous  •,"  and  verfe  8. "  he  that  committeth  fin 
"  is  of  the  devil  j"  and  verfe  9.  "  whofoever  is  born 
«  of  God  doth  not  commit  fin  i"  let  men  pretend 
>  what  they  will,  wickednefs  is  a  plain  mark  and  cha- 
tP  radler  of  one  that  belongs  to  the  devil  -,  as  on  the 
contrary  righteoufnefs  is  an  evidence  of  a  "  child 
"  of  God,  in  this  the  children  of  God  are  manifefl, 
«*  and  the  children  of  the  devil,  &c. 

I  fhall  briefly  explain  the  words,  and  then  confider 
the  matter  contained  in  them. 

By  the  children  of  God,  and  the  children  of  the 
devil,  are  meant  good  and  bad  men  j  it  being  ufual 
in  the  phrafe  of  fcripture  to  call  perfons  or  things 

which 


^ 


of  a  good  and  a  bad  man.  345 

•which  partake  of  fuch  a  nature  or  quality  the  chil-  SERM, 
dren  of  thofe  who  are  eminently  endued  with  that  na- 
ture and  difpofition.  Thus  they  who  are  of  the  faith 
of  Abraham,  and  do  the  works  of  Abraham,  are  called 
Abraham's  children  :  in  like  manner,  thofe  who  in 
their  difpofition  and  adlions  imitate  God  are  called 
the  children  of  God  \  and  on  the  contrary,  thofe 
that  addid  themfelves  to  fm  and  impiety  are  counted 
of  another  race  and  defcent,  they  refemble  the  devil 
and  belong  to  him  as  the  chief  and  head  of  thatfadion. 

By  righteoufnefs  is  here  nieant  univerfal  goodnels 
and  conformity  to  the  law  of  God,  in  oppofition  to 
fin  which  is  the  tranfgrefilon  of  that  law. 

By  being  manifeft  is  meant  that  hereby  good  and 
bad  men  are  really  didinguifhed,  fo  that  everyone  that 
will  examine  his  condition  by  this  mark  may  know 
of  which  number  he  is,  and  to  what  party  he  be- 
longs. 

I  come  now  to  the  main  argument  contained  in 
the  words,  which  is  to  give  us  a  certain  character  and 
mark  of  diftindion  between  a  good  and  bad  man  5 
h  tj/tw,  "  by  this  the  children  of  God  are  manifeft^ 
"and  the  children  of  the  devil:  whofoever  doth 
"  not  righteoufnefs  is  not  of  God.'* 

In  the  management  of  the  following  difcourfe  I 
fhall  proceed  in  this  method. 

Firtl,  we  will  conhder  the  character  and  mark  of 
difference  between  a  good  and  bad  man  which  is  here 
laid  down,  "  whofoever  doth  not  righteoufnefs  is  not 
«  of  God.'' 

Secondly,  I  jfhall  endeavour  to  fliew  that  by  this 
mark  every  man  may,  with  due  care  and  diligence, 
come  to  the  knowledge  of  his  fpiritual  ftate  and  con- 

VoL.  I,  y  y  dition. 

7' 


'Tlje  dijlinguipnng  charaBer 
dition.     "  By  this  the  children  of  God  are  manifeft, 
*'  and  the  children  of  the  devil." 

Thirdly,  I  fhall  enquire  whence  it  comes  to  pafs, 
that  notwithilanding  this  fo  many  perfons  are  at  fo 
great  uncertainty  concerning  their  condition. 

I.  We  will  confider  the  charadler  and  mark  of  dif- 
ference between  a  good  and  bad  man  which  is  here 
in  the  text,  "  whofoever  doth  not  righteoufnefs  is  not 
"  of  God  :"  which  implies  likewife  on  the  contrary, 
that  "  whofoever  doth  righteoufnefs  is  of  God." 
Now  in  the  ftrideft  fenfe  of  this  phrafe  he  only  who 
lives  in  all  the  commandments  of  God  blamelefs 
can  be  faid  to  do  righteoufnefs  ;  but  in  this  fenfe 
c'  there  is  none  that  doth  righteoufnefs,  no  not 
*'  one  •/'  confequently  none  could  be  the  children 
fo  God  ;  but  the  text  fuppofes  fome  to  be  fo,  and 
therefore  by  doing  righteoufnefs  the  apoille  muft  ne- 
cefTarily  be  underftood  to  mean  fomething  that  is 
Ihort  of  perfed  and  unfinning  obedience.  So  that 
the  queftion  is,  what  doing  of  righteoufnefs  is  fuffi- 
cient  to  denominate  a  man  a  child  of  God,  and  to 
put  him  into  a  ftate  of  grace  and  favour  with  him. 

And  I  do  not  intend  nicely  to  ftate  this  matter. 
*Tis  not  perhaps  pofTible  to  be  done,  nothing  be- 
ing more  difficult  than  to  determine  the  very  utmoft 
bounds  and  limits  of  things,  and  to  tell  exadly  and 
juft  to  a  point  where  the  line  of  difference  between 
virtue  and  vice,  between  the  ftate  of  a  good  and  a  bad 
man,  is  to  be  placed  :  and  if  it  could  be  done,  ic 
would  be  of  no  great  ufe  •,  for  I  take  it  to  be  no  part 
of  my  bufinefs  to  tell  men  how  many  faults  they  may 
have,  and  how  little  goodnefs,  and  yet  be  the  chil- 
dren of  God  :  but  rather  to  acquaint  them  what  de- 
grees 


of  a  good  and  a  bad  man.  347 

grces  of  holinefs  and  goodnefs  are  neceflary  to  give  SE  R  M. 
men  a  clear  and  comfortable  evidence  of  their  good 
eftate  towards  God,  and  then  to  perfuade  them  in 
order  to  their  peace  and  afilirance  to  endeavour  after 
fuch  degrees.  Wherefore  to  ftate  the  bnfinefs  fo  far 
as  is  neceffary  to  give  men  a  fufficient  knowledge 
of  their  condition,  I  Ihall  briefly  confider  who  they 
are  that  in  the  apottle's  fenfe  may  Ije  faid  to  be  doers 
of  righteoufnefsjor  not  doers  of  it.  And  becaufe  the 
apoftle  lays  down  the  rule  negatively,  I  ihall  therefore 
In  the  firft  place,  enquire  who  they  are  that  iia  the 
apoillc's  fenfe  may  be  faid  not  to  do  righteoufnefs. 

1 .  They  that  live  in  the  general  courfe  of  a  wick- 
ed life,  in  the  pradlice  of  great  and  known  fins,  as 
injuftice,  intemperance,  filthy  and  fenfual  lufts,  pro- 
fane  negledl  and  contempt  of  God  and  religion,  fo 
that  by  the  whole  courfe  and  tehor  of  their  adlions  it 
is  plain  beyond  all  denial  that  "  there  is  no  fear  .of 
"  God  before  their  eyes."  Concerning  thefe  the 
cafe  is  fo  very  evident  that  it  feems  too  mild  and  gentle 
an  exprefTion  to  call  them  not  doers  of  righteoufnefs. 

2.  They  who  live  in  the  habitual  pra6tice  of  any 
one  known  fin,  or  in  the  negled:  of  any  confiderable 
part  of  their  known  duty.  For  any  vicious  habit  de- 
nominates a  man,  and  puts  him  into  an  evil  flate. 

3.  They  who  are  guilty  of  the  fingle  a6l  of  a  very 
heinous  and  notorious  crime ;  as  a  deliberate  ad  of 
blafphemy,  of  murther,  perjury,  fraud  or  opprelfion, 
or  of  any  other  crime  of  the  like  enormity.  For 
though  ordinarily  one  fingle  ad  of  fin  doth  not  de- 
nominate one  a  bad  man,  when  the  general  courfe 
of  the  man's  life  is  contrary  ;  yet  the  fingle  ads  of 
fome  forts  of  fins  are  fo  crying  and  heinous,  and  do 

,     yy2  fo 


2^8  T'he  dijlingiiijloing  charaBer 

E  R  M.  fo  ftare  every  man's  confcience  in  the  face,  that  the^^ 
are  juftly  efteemed  to  be'  of  equal  malignity  with 
vicious  habits  of  an  inferior  kind  •,  becaufe  they  do 
almoil  neceflarily  fuppofe  a  great  depravation  of 
mind,  and  a  monftrous  ahenation  from  God  and 
goodnefs  in  the  perfon  that  deliberately  commits 
them.  And  they  who  are  guilty  in  any  of  thefe  three 
degrees  now  mentioned  are  moft  certainly  not  doers 
of  nghteoufnefs,  and  confequently  it  is  manifeft  that 
they  are  not  the  children  of  God. 

In  the  fecond  place,  I  lliall  enquire  who  they  are 
that  in  the  apoftle's  fenfe  may  be  faid  to  do  righte- 
oufnefs.  In  fhort,  they  who  in  the  general  courfe  of 
their  lives  do  keep  the  commandments  of  God.  And 
thus  the  fcripture  generally  exprefieth  this  matter,  by 
*'  keeping  the  commandments  of  God,  and  by  hav- 
*'  ing  refpe6l  to  all  his  commandments ;  by  obedience 
*'  to  the  gofpel  of  Christ  -,  by  being  holy  in  all  man- 
*'  ner  of  converfation  ;  by  abflaining  from  all  kind 
*'  of  evil  \  by  cleanfing  our  felves  from  all  filthinefs 
*'  of  the  flefh  and  fpirit ;  and  by  pradifmg  holinefs 
«  in  the  fear  of  God  :"  to  which  I  fhall  add  the  de- 
fcription  which  St.  Luke  gives  us  of  fhe  righteouf- 
riefs  of  Zacharias  and  Elizabeth,  Luke  i.  6.  "  They 
«'  were  both  righteous  before  God,  walking  in  all 
*'  the  commandments  and  ordinances  of  the  Lord 
"  blamelefs."  All  which  expreffions  do  plainly  fig- 
nify  the  adlual  conformity  of  our  lives  and  aftions, 
in  the  general  courfe  and  tenor  of  them,  to  the  laws 
and  commands  of  God.  And  this  implies  thefe  two 
things;  That  "  the  tenor  of  our  hves  and  adbions  be 
"  agreeable  to  thefe  laws  of  God  :'*  and  that  "  thefe 
**  adions  be  done  with  a  fincere  and  upright  mind  :" 
4  ■  out 


of  a  good  and  a  bad  man.  349 

pu|:  of  regard  to  God  and  another  world,  and  not  for  S  E  R  M. 
low  and  temporal  ends. 

And  I  chufe  rather  to  defcribe  a  righteous  man  by 
the  a6lual  conformity  of  the  general  courfe  of  his  ac- 
tions to  the  law  of  God,  than  (as  feme  have  done)  by 
a  fincere  defire  or  refolution  of  obedience.  For  a  de- 
fire  may  be  fincere  for  the  time  it  lads,  and  yet  va- 
nifli  before  it  comes  to  any  real  effe(5l.  And  how  in- 
nocently foever  it  was  intended,  it  is  certainly  a  great 
miftake  in  divinity,  and  of  a  very  dangerous  confe- 
quence  to  the  fouls  of  men,  to  affirm  that  a  dcfire  of 
grace  is  grace  ;  and  confequently  by  the  fame  reafon, 
that  a  defire  of  obedience  is  obedience.  A  fincere 
defire  and  refolution  to  be  good  is  indeed  a  good  be- 
ginning, and  ought  by  all  means  to  be  cherillied  and 
encouraged  •,  but  yet  it  is  far  enough  from  being  the 
thing  defired,  or  from  being  accepted  for  it  in  th!t 
cfleem  of  God  :  for  God  never  accepts  the  defire  for 
the  deed,  but  where  there  is  no  pofiibility,  no  oppor- 
tunity of  doing  the  thing  defired  ^  but  if  there  be, 
and  the  thing  be  not  done,  there  is  no  reafon  to  ima- 
gine that  the  defire  in  that  cafe  fhouid  be  accepted  as 
if  the  thing  were  done.  For  inftance,  if  a  man  give 
alms  according  to  his  ability,  and  would  give  more 
if  he  were  able,  in  this  cafe  the  defire  is  accepted  for 
the  deed.  And  of  this  cafe  it  is  and  no  other  that 
the  apoftle  fpeaks,  2  Cor.  viii.  12.  ''  If  there  be 
"  firft  a  wilHng  mind,  it  is  accepted  according  to  that 
"  a  man  hath,  and  not  according  to  that  he  hath 
"  not."  That  is,  God  interprets  and  accepts  the  cha- 
rity of  men  according  to  the  largenefs  of  their  hearts, 
and  not  according  to  the  ilraitnefs  of  their  fortunes : 
but  it  is  a  great  miftake  to  draw  a  general  conclufion 

from 


350  The  di/finguijhing  charaBer 

SERM.  from  this  ttyx^  that  in  all  cafes  God  accepts  the  will 
for  the  deed.  For  though  a  man  fincereiy  defire  and 
refolve  to  reform  his  life  (as  I  doubt  not  many  men 
often  do)  but  do  it  not  when  there  is  time  and  oppor- 
tunity for  it,  thefe  defires  and  refoluuions  are  of  no 
account  with  God-,  all  this  "  righteoufnefs  is  but  as 
*'  the  morning  cloud,  and  as  the  early  dew  which 
"  pafleth  away."  Men  are  not  apt  to  miftake  fo 
groily  in  other  matters.  No  man  believes  hunger  to 
be  meat,  or  thirft  to  be  drink  ;  and  yet  there  is  no 
doubt  of  the  truth  and  fmcerity  of  thefe  natural  -de- 
fires. No  man  thinks  that  covetoufnefs  or  a  greedy 
defire  to  be  rich  is  an  eftate,  or  that  ambition  or  an 
infatiable  defire  of  honour  is  really  advancement:  jufl 
fo,  and  no  otherwife,  a  defire  to  be  good  is  righteouf- 
nefs. The  apoftle's  caution  a  little  before  the  text 
may  fitly  be  applied  to  thispurpofe,  "  little  children, 
"  let  no  man  deceive  you  :  he  that  doth  righteouf- 
««  nefs  is  righteous,  even  as  he  is  righteous."  Not 
but  that  the  befl  of  men  do  fometimes  fall  through 
infirmity,  and  are  betrayed  by  furprife,  and  born 
down  by  the  violence  of  temptation;  but  if  the  gene- 
ral courfe  of  our  actions  be  a  doing  of  righteoufnefs, 
the  grace  of  the  gofpel,  in  and  through  the  merits  of 
our  bleffed  Saviour,  doth  accept  of  this  imperfed 
but  fincere  obedience. 

11.  I  Iliall  endeavour  to  fhew  that  by  this  mark  e- 
very  man  may  with  due  care  and  diligence,  arrive  at 
the  certain  knowledge  of  his  fpiritual  ftate  and  condi- 
tion. "  By  this  the  children  of  God  are  manifefl, 
*'  and  the  children  of  the  devil :  whofoever  doth  not 
"  righteoufnefs  is  not  of  God."  By  which  the  apoftle 
means  that  this  is  a  real  mark  of  difference  betwixt 

good 


of  a  good  a?2d  a  had  ?nan,  35^ 

good  and  bad  men,  and  that  whereby  they  very  often  ^^'  ^  J^- 
manifefl  themfelves  to  others  •,  efpecially  when  the 
courfe  of  their  Hves  is  eminently  pious  and  virtuous, 
or  notorioufly  impious  and  wicked.  But  becaufe  it 
doth  not  fo  much  concern  us  curiouDy  to  enquire  in- 
to, much  lefs  feverely  to  cenfure  the  flate  of  other 
men,  I  fhall  only  confider  at  prefcnt  how  far  by  this 
mark  and  character  every  man  may  make  a  certain 
judgment  of  his  own  good  or  bad  condition. 

I.  By  this  character,  as  I  have  explained  it,  he 
that  is  a  bad  man  may  certainly  know  himfelf  to  be 
fo,  if  he  will  but  coniider  his  condition,  and  do  not 
wilfully  deceive  and  delude  himfejf.  As  for  thofe 
who  are  vicious  in  the  general  courfe  of  their  lives, 
or  have  been  guilty  of  the  a6l  of  fome  heinous  or  no- 
torious fin  not  yet  repented  of ;  their  cafe  is  fo  plain 
for  the  moft  part,  even  to  themfelves,  that  they  can 
have  no  manner  of  doubt  concerning  it.  Such  men 
(land  continually  convi6led  and  condemned  by  tht 
fentence  of  their  own  minds :  and  whenever  they  re- 
flecfl  upon  themfelves  (which  they  do  as  feldom  as  they 
can)  they  are  a  terror  to  themfelves,  and  full  of  a- 
mazement  and  fearful  expedation  of  judgment.  Not 
but  that  even  in  fo  plain  a  cafe  many  men  do  ufc 
great  endeavours  to  cheat  them.felves,  and  would  be 
very  glad  to  find  out  ways  to  reconcile  a  wicked  life 
with  the  hopes  of  heaven,  and  to  gain  the  favour,  at 
leaft  the  forgivenefs  of  God,  without  repentance  and 
amendment  of  their  lives.  And  to  this  end  they  are 
willing  to  confefs  their  fins,  and  to  undergo  any  pe- 
nance that  fhall  be  impofed  upon  them,  that  only  ex- 
cepted which  only  can  do  them  good,  I  mean,  real 
reformation.     And  when  the  prieft  hath  abfolved 

them. 


352  ^he  diftinguipjing  cbaraBer 

S  £  R  M.  them,  xhty  would  fain  believe  that  God  hath  forgi- 
1..^.^-^  ven  them  too ;  however,  they  return  to  their  formef 
courfe,  and  being  ftrongly  addicted  to  their  Kifts,  be- 
tween ftupidity  and  foohfh  hopes  they  at  laft  come 
to  this  defperate  refolution,  to  venture  all  upon  the 
abfolutlon  of  the  prieft,  Et  valeat  quantum  valere  po^ 
teft^  let  it  have  what  effe(5t  it  can  ;  though  I  dare  fay 
that  in  their  mofl  ferious  thoughts  they  are  horribly 
afraid  it  will  do  them  no  good. 

And  for  thofe  who  are  finners  of  a  lefTer  rate,  and 
perhaps  allow  themfelves  only  in  one  kind  of  vice^ 
they  likewife  have  reafon  to  conclude  themfelve^  in  a 
bad  condition  ;  efpecially  if  they  confider  that  he 
who  lives  in  the  breach  of  any  one  commandment  of 
God  is  guilty  of  all,  becaufe  he  contemns  that  authori- 
ty which  enabled  the  whole  law.  And  'tis  eafy  for 
any  man  to  difcern  the  habit  of  any  fin  in  himfelf ; 
as  when  he  frequently  commits  it,  when  he  takes 
up  no  firm  refokitions  againft  it,  when  he  ufeth  no 
competent  care  to  avoid  the  temptations  to  it,  nor 
puts  forth  any  vigorous  endeavours  to  break  oft  from 
it ;  or  however,  ftill  continues  in  the  pradice  of  it. 
For  the  cudomary  pr?.flice  of  any  known  fin  is  utter- 
ly inconfillent  with  fmcere  refolutions  and  endeavours 
againfl:  it,  there  being  no  greater  evidence  of  the  in- 
fincerity  of  refolutions  and  endeavours  in  any  kind 
than  flill  to  go  on  to  do  contrary  to  them. 

2.  By  this  charadler  likewife  they  that  arefincere- 
ly  good  may  generally  be  well  allured  of  their  good 
condition,  and  that  they  are  the  children  of  God. 
And  there  are  but  two  things  necelTary  to  evidence 
this  to  them  j  that  the  general  courfe  and  tenor  of 
their  adions  be  agreeable  to  the  laws  of  God  j  and^ 

that 


of  a  good  and  a  bad  man,  3  53 

that  they  be  fincere  and  upright  in  thofe  anions.  And  S  ER  M. 
both  thefe  every  man  may  fufficiently  know  concern- 
ing  himfelf ;  for  if  the  laws  of  God  be  plain,  and 
lye  open  to  every  man's  underflanding,  then  it  is  as 
eafy  for  every  man  to  know  when  he  obeys  God  and 
keeps  his  commandments,  as  when  he  obeys  the 
commands  of  his  father  or  his  prince,  and  when  he 
keeps  the  known  Jaws  of  the  land.  And  no  fenfible 
or  confiderate  man  ever  had  any  doubt  of  this  kind, 
for  if  a  man  can  know  any  thing  he  can  certainly  tell 
when  he  keeps  or  breaks  any  known  lav/  ;  fo  that  all 
doubts  of  this  nature  are  frivolous  and  idle  pretences 
to  cover  mens  faults,  and  fuch  as  they  would  be 
afhamed  to  alledge  in  any  other  cafe. 

And  a  good  man  may  like  wife  know  when  he 
obeys  God  lincerely.  Not  but  that  men  often  deceive 
themfelves  with  an  opinion,  or  at  lead  a  groundlefs 
hope  of  their  own  fincerity  ;  but  if  they  will  deal 
fairly  with  themfelves,  and  ufe  due  care  and  diligence, 
there  are  very  few  cafes  (if  any)  wherein  they  may 
not  know  their  own  fincerity  in  any  a6t  of  obedience 
to  God  :  for  what  can  a  man  know  concerning  him- 
felf if  not  the  reality  of  his  own  intentions  ?  If  a 
man  IHould  in  earned  tell  me,  that  he  doubted. very 
much  whether  he  had  that  friendfhip  for  me  which 
he  made  profefTion  of,  and  that  he  was  afraid  that 
his  affedtion  to  me  was  not  real  and  fincere,  I  confels 
I  Ihould  doubt  of  it  too  •,  becaufe  I  fhould  certainly 
conclude  that  no  man  could  know  that  matter  fo  wel^ 
as  he  himfelf. 

And  there  is  no  doubt  but  whoever  hath  a  hearty 
kindnefs  for  another,  and  a  fincere  defire  to  ferve 
and  pleafe  him,  knows  he  has  it.     And  accordingly 

Vol.  L  Z  z  good 

7- 


^he  diftinguijhing  charadler 
good  and  holy  men  in  Scripture  do  every  where  with 
great  confidence  and  affurance  appeal  to  God  concern- 
ing the  integrity  and  fincerity  of  their  hearts  towards 
him.     Job  and  David,  Hezekiah  and  Nehemiah  in 
the  old  teftament ;  and  in  the  new  St.  Paul  for  him- 
felf  and  Timothy,  make  this  folemn  profeflion  of 
their  fincerity,    2  Cor.  i.  12.  "  our  rejoicing  is  this, 
*'  the  teftimony  of  our  confcience,  that  in  fimplici- 
"  ty  and  godly  fincerity  we  have  our  converfation  ia 
"  the  world."     And  I  cannot  call  to  mind  fo  much 
as  any  one  paflage  in  fcripture,  from  whence  it  can 
be  collected  that  any  good  man  ever  doubted  of  his 
own  fincerity.    And  to  fay  the  truth,  it  would  not 
be  modefty  but  impudence  in  any  man  to  declare  that 
he  fufpe61:s  himfelf  of  hypocrify  •,  good  men  have  al- 
ways abhprred  the  thoughts  of  it.     "  Ye  have  heard 
<«  of  the  patience  of  Job,"  and  yet  he  could  not  bear 
to  have  his  integrity  queftioned.     It  was  a  brave  and 
generous  fpeech  of  his,  "  till  I  die,  I  will  not  remove 
"  my  integrity  from  me. 

And  yet  it  hath  fo  happened  that  this  is  become  a 
very  common  doubt  among  religious  people,  and 
they  have  been  fo  unreafonably  cherifhed  in  it  as  to 
have  it  made  a  confiderable  evidence  of  a  man's  fin- 
cerity to  doubt  of  it  himfelf.  It  is  indeed  faid  in 
fcripture,  Jer.  xvii.  9.  "  that  the  heart  is  deceitful 
"  above  ail  things,  and  defperately  wicked,  who  can 
*'  know  it  ?"  which  is  true  concerning  our  future  in- 
tentions and  actions  :  no  man  knowing  how  his  mind 
may  change  hereafter.  Little  did  Hazael  think  that 
ever  he  fhould  do  thofe  things  which  the  prophet 
foretold  him.  But  though  this  be  true  in  it  felf,  yet 
'tis  not  the  meaning  of  that  text.    For  the  prophet 

in 


of  a  good  and  a  bad  man,  355 

in  that  chapter  plainly  makes  ufe  of  this  confideration  5^^^* 
of  the  falfhood  and  deceitfulnefs  of  man's  heart  as  an 
argument  to  take  off  the  people  of  Ifrael  from  truft- 
ing  in  the  arm  of  fleih,  and  in  thofe  promifes  which 
were  made  to  them  of  foreign  afTiftance  from  E- 
gypt :  becaufe  men  may  pretend  fair  and  yet  deceive 
thofe  that  rely  upon  them,  for  "  the  heart  of  man  is 
"  deceitful  and  defperately  wicked,"  and  none  but 
God  knows  whether  mens  inward  intentions  be  an- 
fwerable  to  their  outward  profefTions ;  "  for  he  fearch- 
*^  eth  the  heart  and  trieth  the  reins."     And  this  I 
verily  believe  is  all  that  the  prophet  here  intends^ 
that  there  is  a  great  deal  of  fraud  and  deceit  in  the 
hearts   of  bad  men,  fo  that  no  man  can  rely  upon 
their  promifes  and  profeffions ;  but  God  knows  the 
hearts  of  all  men.  But  now  becaufe  God  alone  knows 
the  hearts  of  all  men  and  the  fincerity  of  their  inten- 
tions towards  one  another,  doth  it  from  hence  follow 
that  it  is  a  thing  either  impolTible  or  very  difficult 
for  any  man  to  know  the  fincerity  of  his  own  prefent 
intentions  and  adions  ?  To   make  any  fuch  conclu- 
fions  were  to  "  condemn  the  generation  of  God's 
«'  children,"  thofe  holy  and  excellent  men  in  fcrip- 
ture.  Job,  and  David,  and  Hezekiah,  and  St.  Paul, 
who  do  frequently  appeal  to  God  concerning  their 
own  integrity.     And  furely  when  the  apoftle  faitlu 
«  no  man  knows  the  things  of  a  man,  but'  the  fpirit 
«  of  a  man  which  is  in  him,"  he  plainly  fuppofes 
that  every  man  is  confcious  to  the  motions  and  in- 
tentions of  his  own  mind.     I  have  infilled  the  long- 
er upon  this  that  I  might  from  the  very  founda- 
tion deftroy  an  imagination,  which  is  not  only  un- 
true in  it  felf,  but  has  likewifc  been  a  very  great 

ZiL%  hin- 


The  dijlinguijlding  charadier 
hindrance  to  the  peace   and  comfort  of  many  good 
men. 

III.  Let  us  enquire  whence  it  comes  to  pafs  that 
notvvithdanding  this  fo  many  perfons  are  at  fo  great 
uncertainty  about  their  fpiritual  condition.  For  the 
clearing  of  this  matter  we  will  diftindly  confider 
thefe  three  things.  P'irft,  the  grounds  of  the  falfe 
hopes  and  confidence  of  men  really  bad  concerning 
their  good  condition.  Secondly,  the  caufelefs  doubts 
and  jealoufies  of  men  really  good  concerning  their 
bad  condition.  And  thirdly,  the  juft  caufes  of 
doubting  in  others.  As  for  the  troubles  and  fears  of 
men  who  are  notoriouHy  bad  and  live  in  the  pradice 
of  known  vices,  thefe  do  not  fall  under  our  confidera- 
tion  :  if  they  be  troubled  about  their  condition,  it 
is  no  more  than  what  they  ought  to  be;  and  if  they 
be  only  doubtful  of  it,  it  is  lefs  than  they  ought  to 
be.  To  perfons  in  this  condition  there  is  only  coun- 
fel  to  be  given  to  leave  their  fins  and  become  better, 
but  no  comfort  to  be  adminiftred  to  them  till  firft 
they  have  followed  thatcounfel :  for  till  they  reform, 
if  they  think  themfelves  to  be  in  a  bad  condition, 
they  think  juft  as  they  ought  and  as  there  is  great 
reafon,  and  no  body  ihould  go  about  to  perfuade 
them  otherwife. 

Firft  then,  we  v/ill  confider  the  grounds  of  the  falfc 
hopes  and  confidence  of  men  really  bad  concerning 
their  good  condition.  I  do  not  now  mean  the  worft 
of  men,  but  fuch  as  make  fome  fliew  and  appearance 
of  goodnefs.  It  is  very  unpleafing  to  men  to  fall  un- 
der the  hard  opinion  and  cenfure  of  others,  but  the 
moft  grievous  thing  in  the  world  for  a  man  to  be 
condemned  by  himfelf ;.  and  therefore  it  is  no  won- 
I  der 


of  a  good  and  a  bad  man.  3  57 

dcr  that  men  ufe  all  manner  of  fhifts  to  avoid  fo  great  SE  R  M. 

XV 
an  inconvenience  as  is  the  ill  opinion  of  a  man's  felf 

concerning  himfelf  and  his  own  condition. 

Some  therefore  rely  upon  the  profefTion  of  the 
Chriftian  faith,  and  their  being  baptized  into  it. 
But  this  is  fo  far  from  being  any  exemption  from  a 
good  life,  that  it  is  the  greatell  and  moft  folemn 
obligation  to  it.  Doft  thou  believe  the  dod:rine  of 
the  gofpel  ?  thou  of  all  men  art  inexcufable  if  thou 
allowed  thy  felf  in  ungodlinefs  and  worldly  lufts. 

Others  truft  to  their  external  devotion,  they  fre- 
quent the  church  and  ferve  God  conftantly,  they 
pray  to  him,  and  hear  his  word,  and  receive  the 
bleffed  facrament :  but  let  us  not  deceive  our  felvesj 
God  is  not  mocked.  All  this  is  fo  far  from  making 
amends  for  the  impiety  of  our  lives,  that  on  the 
contrary  the  impiety  of  our  lives  fpoils  all  the  accep- 
tance of  our  devotions.  "  He  that  turneth  away 
"  his  ear  from  hearing  the  law  (that  is,  from  obeying 
"  it)  even  his  prayer  fhall  be  an  abomination.'' 

Others  who  are  fenfible  they  are  very  bad  depend 
very  much  upon  their  repentance,  efpecially  if  they 
fet  folemn  times  apart  for  it.  And  there  is  no  doubt 
but  that  a  fincere  repentance  will  put  a  man  into  a 
good  condition  :  but  then  it  is  to  be  confidered  that 
no  repentance  is  fincerc  but  that  which  produceth  a 
real  change  and  reformation  in  our  lives.  For  we 
have  not  repented  to  purpofe  if  we  return  again  to 
our  fins.  It  is  well  thou  art  in  fome  meafure  fenfible 
of  thy  mifcarriage,  but  thou  art  never  fafe  till  thou 
haft  forfaken  thy  fins  •,  thy  eftate  and  condition  to- 
wards God  is  not  changed,  till  thou  haft  really  alter- 
ed thy  felf  and  the  courfe  of  thy  life. 

Others 


T'he  difiinguijhing  charaBer 
Others  fatisfy  themfelves  with  the  exercife  of  fome 
particular  graces  and  virtues,  juftice,  and  liberality, 
and  charity.  And  is  it  not  a  thoufand  pities  that  thy 
Jife  is  not  all  of  a  piece,  and  that  all  the  other  parts 
of  it  are  not  anfwerable  tothefe,  that  thou  Ihouldeft 
lofe  the  reward  of  fo  much  real  goodnefs  out  of  thy 
fondnefs  to  any  one  vice  or  luft,  that  when  "  thou 
"  art  not  far  from  the  kingdom  of  God"  for  lack  of 
one  or  two  things  more  thou  fhouldeft  fall  iliort  of  it  ? 
Haft  thou  never  heard  what  the  fcripture  faith,  that 
*'  he  who  offends  in  one  point  is  a  tranfgreflbr  of  the 
"  whole  law  ?"  To  make  a  man  a  good  man  all  parts 
of  goodnels  muft  concur,  but  any  one  way  of  wick- 
ednefs  is  fufficient  to  denominate  a  man  bad. 

Laftly,  Some  who  are  very  careful  of  their  outward 
carriage  and  converfation,  but  yet  are  confcious  to 
themfelves  of  great  fecret  faults  and  vices,  when  they 
can  find  no  comfort  from  themfelves  and  the  teftimo- 
ny  of  their  own  confciences,  are  apt  to  comfort 
themfelves  in  the  good  opinion  which  perhaps  others 
have  of  them.  But  if  we  know  our  felves  to  be  bad 
and  "  our  own  hearts  do  condemn  us,'*  it  is  not  the  good 
opinion  of  others  concerning  us  which  can  either  al- 
ter or  better  our  condition.  They  may  have  reafon 
for  their  charity,  and  yet  thou  none  for  thy  confi- 
dence. Truft  no  body  concerning  thy  felf  rathei*  than 
thy  felf,  becaufe  no  body  can  know  thee  fo  well  as 
thou  may  eft  know  thy  felf. 

Thefc,  and  fuch  as  thefe,  are  the  hopes  of  the  hy- 
pocrite, which  Job  elegantly  compares  to  the  fpiders 
web,  finely  and  artificially  wrought  but  miferably 
thin  and  weak ;  fo  that  we  our  felves  may  fee  through 
them,  and  if  we  lay  the  leaft  ftrefs  upon  them  they 

will 


of  a  good  a72d  a  bad  man.  3  59 

will  break.  They  are  but  pleafant  dreams  and  delu-  S  ^^^* 
fions,  which  whenever  we  are  awakened  to  a  ferious 
confideration  of  our  condition  by  the  apprehenfionsof 
approaching  death  and  judgment,  will  prefently  va- 
nifhand  difappear;  fo  the  fame  holy  man  tells  us. 
Job  xxvii.  8.  "  What  is  the  hope  of  the  hypocrite, 
"  when  God  taketh  away  his  foul?*' 

Secondly,  we  will  confider  in  the  next  place  the 
caufelefs  doubts  and  jealoufies  of  men  really  good, 
concerning  their  bad  condition.  For  as  fome  are 
prone  beyond  all  reafon  to  delude  themfelves  with 
vain  hopes  of  their  good  condition,  fo  others  are  apt 
as  unreafonably  to  torment  themfelves  with  ground- 
lefs  fears  and  jealoufies  that  their  eflate  is  bad.  And 
of  thefe  doubts  there  are  feveral  occafions,  the  chief 
whereof  I  fhall  mention,  by  which  we  may  judge  of 
the  reft  that  are  of  the  like  nature. 

I.  Some  are  afraid  that  they  are  reprobated  from 
all  eternity,  and  therefore  they  cannot  be  the  children 
of  God.  This  is  fo  unreafonable,  that  if  it  were  not 
a  real  caufe  of  trouble  to  fome  perfons  it  did  not  de- 
ferve  to  be  confidered.  For  no  man  that  fincerely 
endeavours  to  pleafe  God  and  to  keep  his  command- 
ments hath  from  fcripture  the  leaft  ground  to  fufpecSl 
any  latent  or  fecret  decree  of  God  againft  him  that 
fhall  work  his  ruin.  But  whatever  the  decrees  of 
God  be  concerning  the  eternal  ftateofmen,  fmce 
they  are  fecret  to  us  they  can  certainly  be  no  rule 
either  of  our  duty  or  comfort.  And  no  man  hath 
reafon  to  think  himfelf  rejedled  of  God,  either  from 
eternity,  or  in  time,  that  does  not  find  the  marks 
of  reprobation  in  himfelf,  I  mean  an  evil  heart  and 
life.    By  this  indeed  a  man  may  know  that  he  is 

out 


XV. 


360  7^^  diftingutjhing  charaBer 

SERM.  out  of  God's  favour  for  the  prefent,  but  he  hath 
no  reafon  at  all  from  hence  to  conclude  that  God 
hath  from  all  eternity  and  for  ever  caft  him  off. 
That  God  calls  him  to  repentance,  and  affords  to 
him  the  fpace  and  means  of  it,  is  a  much  plainer  fign 
that  God  is  willing  and  ready  to  have  mercy  on  him 
than  any  thing  elfe  is,  or  can  be,  that  God  hath 
utterly  caft  him  off.  And  therefore  for  men  tojudge 
of  their  condition  by  the  decrees  of  God  which  are 
hid  from  us,  and  not  by  his  word  which  is  "  near  us 
*'  and  in  our  hearts,"  is  as  if  a  man  wandring  in  the 
wide  fea,  in  a  dark  night  when  the  heaven  is  all  cloud- 
ed about,  fhould  yet  refolve  to  fteer  his  courfe  by 
the  ftars  which  he  cannot  fee,  but  only  guefs  at,  and 
negleft  the  compafs,  which  is  at  hand  and  would  af- 
ford him  a  much  better  and  more  certain  diredion. 
This  therefore  is  to  be  rejedled  as  a  fond  and  ground- 
lefs  imagination,  and 'which  ought  to  trouble  no  bo- 
dy, becaufe  no  body  doth  nor  can  know  any  thing  con- 
cerning it.  Mofeshath  long  fince  very  well  determin- 
ed this  matter,  Deut.  xxix.  29.  "  Secret  things  belong 
"  unto  the  Lord  our  God,  but  thefe  things  which 
*'  are  revealed,  belong  unto  us  and  our  children  for 
*'  ever,  that  we  may  do  all  the  words  of  this  law." 

2.  Good  men  are  confcious  to  themfelves  of  many 
Frailties  and  imperfedlions,  and  therefore  they  are  a- 
fraid  of  their  condition.  But  God  confiders  the  in- 
firmities of  our  prefent  ftate,  and  experts  no  other  o- 
bedience  from  us  in  order  to  our  acceptance  with  himi, 
but  what  this  ftate  of  imperfe6lion  is  capable  of:  and 
provided  the  fincere  endeavour  and  general  courfe  of 
our  lives  be  to  pleafe  him  and  keep  his  command- 
ments,. |:he  terms  of  the  gofpelarefo  merciful,  that 

our 


of  a  good  and  a  bad  man.  361 

our  frailties  fhall  not  be  imputed  to  us,  fo  as  to  af-  S  E  R  M, 
fedl  our  main  ftate,  and  to  make  us  ceafe  to  be  the 
children  of  God.  And  though  we  may  be  guilty  of 
many  errors  and  fecret  fins,  which  efcape  our  notice 
and  obfervation,  yet  it  is  not  impofTible  for  us  to  ex- 
ercife  fuch  a  repentance  for  thefe  as  will  be  available 
for  their  pardon.  For  we  have  to  deal  with  a  mer- 
ciful God,  who  is  pleafed  to  accept  of  fuch  an  obe- 
dience and  of  fuch  a  repentance  as  we  are  capable  of 
performing.  Now  there  is  a  great  difference  between 
thofe  fins  which  require  a  particular  repentance  before 
we  can  hope  for  the  pardon  of  them,  (as  all  great  and 
deliberate  and  prefumptuous  fins  do,  which  are  never 
committed  without  our  knowledge,  and  are  fo  far 
from  flipping  out  of  our  memory  that  they  are  con- 
tinually flying  in  our  faces,  and  we  cannot  forget 
them  if  we  would)  and  fins  of  infirmity  occafioned 
by  furprife  and  violence  of  temptation,  through  ig- 
norance or  inadvertency:  for  a  general  repentance^ 
fuch  as  we  every  day  exercife  in  our  devotions  and 
prayers  to  God,  may  fuffice  for  thefe.  I  fpeak  noc 
this  to  hinder  any  from  a  more  particular  repentance 
of  all  their  known  failings,  the  more  particular  the  bet- 
ter \  but  to  remove  the  groundlefs  fears  and  jealoufies 
of  men  about  their  main  ftate  and  condition.  And 
if  any  aflc  how  I  know  that  a  general  repentance  will 
fuffice  for  thefe  kind  of  fins  ?  I  anfwer,  becaufe  more 
than  this  in  many  cafes  is  impoflible  ;  fo  that  either 
we  mufl:  refl:  fatisfied  that  God  will  forgive  them  up- 
on thefe  terms,  or  conclude  that  they  fliall  not  be  for^ 
given  at  all,  which  is  contrary  to  the  whole  tenor  of 
.thefcriptures:  I  fay,  in  many  cafes,  more  than  this 
is  impoffible,  becaufe  fins  of  igaorance,  and  thofd 
Vol.  I.  .A  a  a  common 

7- 


^fhe  dtjllnguip^ing  charaBer 

Common  errors  and  frailties  of  human  life,  which  Da- 
vid calls  fecret  fins,  are  not  particularly  known  to  us 
when  they  are  committed,  and  confcquently  it  is  im- 
polTible  that  we  fhould  particularly  repent  of  them. 
And  therefore  in  this  cafe  there  can  be  no  doubt  but 
that  God  doth  accept  of  a  general  repentance,  as  he 
did  from  David  when  he  made  that  humble  confefTi- 
on  and  prayer  to  him,  Pfal.  xix.  12.  "  Who  can 
"  underftand  his  errors?  cleanfe  thou  me  from  fe. 
"  cret  fins." 

3.  They  are  afraid  their  obedience  is  not  fmcerc, 
becaufe  it  proceeds  many  times  from  fear  and  not  al- 
ways out  of  pure  love  to  God.  For  anfwer  to  this: 
It  is  plain  from  fcripture  that  God  propounds  to  men 
feveral  motives  and  arguments  to  obedience,  fome 
proper  to  work  upon  their  fear,  as  the  threatnings  of 
punifhment;  fome  upon  their  hope,  as  the  promifes  of 
blefling  and  reward ;  others  upon  their  love,  as  the 
mercies  and  forgivenefs  of  God.  From  whence  it  is 
evident  he  intended  they  Ihould  all  work  upon  us. 
And  accordingly  the  fcripture  gives  us  inftances  in  each 
kind.  "  Noah  moved  with  fear  obeyed  God  in  pre- 
"  paring  an  ark.  Mofcs  had  refpedt  unto  the  recom- 
"  pence  of  reward:  Mary  Magdalen  loved  much.'* 
And  as  it  is  hard  to  fay,  fo  it  is  not  necefiary  to  de- 
termine, juft  how  much  influence  and  no  more  each  of 
thefe  hath  upon  us :  it  is  very  well  if  men  be  reclaim- 
ed from  their  fins  and  made  good  by  the  joint  force 
of  all  the  confiderations  which  God  offers  to  us.  To 
be  fure  love  is  the  nobleft  and  moft  generous  princi- 
ple of  obedience,  but  fear  commonly  takes  the  firft 
and  faflefl  hold  of  us,  and  in  times  of  violent  temp- 
tation is  perhaps  the  beft  argument  to  keep,  even  the 
beft  of  men,    within  the  bounds  of  their  duty,    4.  A- 


fjfa  good  and  a  had  man.  363 

4.  Another  caufe  of  doubting  in  good  men  is.  From  S  E  R  M* 
a  fenfe  of  their  imperfed  performance  of  the  dutie-*^ 
of  religion,  and  of  the  abatement  of  their  affections 
towards  God  at  fome  times.  They  have  many  wan- 
dring  thoughts  in  prayer  and  other  exercifes  of  de- 
votion, and  they  cannot  for  their  lives  keep  their 
minds  continually  intent  on  what  they  are  about. 
This  we  fhould  flrive  againft  as  much  as  wc  can,  and 
that  is  the  utmoft  we  can  do ;  but  to  cure  this  whol- 
ly is  impoffible,  the  infirmity  of  our  nature  and  the 
frame  of  our  minds  will  not  admit  of  it :  and  there- 
fore no  man  ought  to  queftion  his  fmcerity,  becaufe 
he  cannot  do  that  which  is  impoffible  for  men  to  Ao, 

And  then  for  the  abatement  of  our  affedions  to 
God  and  religion  at  fome  times,  this  naturally  pro- 
ceeds from  the  inconftancy  of  men's  tempers,  by  rea- 
fon  of  which  it  is  not  poffible  that  the  beft  of  men 
fhould  be  able  always  to  maintain  and  keep  up  the 
fame  degree  of  zeal  and  fervour  towards  God.  But 
our  comfort  is,  that  God  doth  not  meafure  mens  fm- 
cerity by  the  tides  of  their  affedions,  but  by  the  con-> 
llant  bent  of  their  refolutions  and  the  general  tenor 
of  their  lives  and  adlions. 

5.  Another  caufe  of  thefe  doubts  is,  that  men  ex- 
pe6t  more  than  ordinary  and  reafonable  aiTurance  of 
their  good  condition  -,  fome  particular  revelation  from 
God,  an  extraordinary  impreffion  upon  their  minds 
to  that  purpofe,  which  they  think  the  fcripture  mean^ 
by  the  teftimony  and  feal  and  earneft  of  the  fpirir. 
God  may  give  this  when  and  to  whom  he  pleafes, 
but  I  do  not  find  he  hath  any  where  promifed  it. 
And  all  that  the  fcripture  means  by  thofe  phrafes  of 
the  teftimony,  and  feal  and  earneft  of  the  fpirit,  is 

A  a  a  2  ta 


The  dijltngiiijlnng  charaBer 
to  my  apprehenfion  no  more  but  this,  that  the  holy 
Spirit,  which  God  beftowed  upon  Chriftians  info  pow- 
erful and  fenfible  a  manner,  was  a  feal  and  earnefl  of 
their  refurrcdion  to  eternal  life,  according  to  that 
plain  text,  Rom.  viii.  1 1.  "  If  the  fpirit  of  him  that 
*^  raifed  up  Jesus  from  the  dead  dwell  in  you,  he 
"  that  raifed  up  Christ  from  the  dead  fhall  alfo 
*^  quicken  your  mortal  bodies,  by  his  fpirit  that  dwell- 
**  eth  in  you."  But  then,  who  they  are  that  have 
the  fpirit  of  God,  is  only  to  be  known  by  the  real 
fruits  and  effeds  of  it.  If  we  be  "  led  by  the  fpirit, 
*^  and  walk  in  the  fpirit,  and  do  not  fulfil  the  lufts 
•'  of  the  fiefh,  then  the  fpirit  of  God  dwelleth  in  us." 
But  this  is  very  far  from  an  immediate  and  extraordi- 
nary revelation  from  the  fpirit  of  God  to  the  minds 
of  good  men  telling  them  in  particular  that  they  are 
the  children  of  God.  I  know  not  what  pecuhar  fa- 
vour God  may  fhew  to  fome,  but  I  know  no  fuch 
thing,  nor  ever  yet  met  with  any  wife  and  good  man 
that  did  affirm  it  of  himfelf :  and  I  fear  that  in  moft 
of  thofe  vv^ho  pretend  to  it,  it  is  either  meer  fancy  or 
grofs  delufion. 

6.  As  for  the  cafe  of  melancholy  it  is  not  a  reafo- 
nable  cafe,  and  therefore  doth  not  fall  under  any  cer- 
tain rules  and  direftions.  They  who  are  under  the 
power  of  it  are  feldom  fit  to  take  that  counfel  which 
alone  is  fit  to  be  given  them,  and  that  is,  not  to  be- 
lieve themfelves  concerning  themfelves,  but  to  truft 
the  judgment  of  others  rather  than  their  own  appre-t 
h,enfions.  In  other  cafes  every  man  knows  himfelf 
beft,  but  a  melancholy  man  is  moft  in  the  dark  as  to 
himfelf  This  caufe  of  trouble  and  doubting  is  very 
much  to  be  pitied,  but  hard  to  be  removed,  unlefs  by 
4  phyfick, 


of  a  good  and  a  bad  man.  ^63 

phyfick,  or  by  time,  or  by  chance.  One  may  hap-  S  E  R  M. 
pen  to  fay  fomething  that  may  hit  the  humour  of  a 
melancholy  man,  and  fatisfy  him  for  theprefent;  but 
reafon  muft  needs  fignify  very  little  to  thofe  perfons, 
the  nature  of  whofe  diftemper  it  is  to  turn  every 
thing  that  can  be  faid  for  their  comfort  into  objedi- 
ons  againft  themfelves. 

Thirdly,  but  befides  thofe  who  miftake  their  con- 
dition either  by  prefuming  it  to  be  better,  or  fearing 
it  to  be  worfe  than  it  is,  there  are  likewife  others 
who  upon  good  grounds  are  doubtful  of  their  condi- 
tion, and  have  reafon  to  be  afraid  of  it :  thofe  I  mean, 
who  have  fome  beginnings  of  goodnefs  which  yet 
are  very  imperfedl.  They  have  good  refolutions 
and  do  many  things  well,  but  they  often  fall,  and  arc 
frequently  pulled  back  by  thofe  evil  inclinations  and 
habits  which  are  yet  in  a  great  meafure  unfubdued  in 
them.  Thefe  I  cannot  liken  better  than  to  the  bor- 
derers between  two  countries,  who  live  in  the  marches 
and  confines  of  two  powerful  kingdoms,  both  which 
have  a  great  influence  upon  them,  fo  that  it  is  hard 
to  fay  whofe  fubjeds  they  are,  and  to  which  prince 
they  belong  :  thus  it  is  with  many  in  religion,  they 
have  pious  inclinations  and  have  made  fome  fair  at- 
tempts towards  goodnefs,  they  have  begun  to  refrain 
from  fin  and  to  refift  the  occafions  and  temptations 
to  it ;  but  ever  and  anon  they  are  maftered  by  their 
old  lulls,  and  carried  off  from  their  beft  refolutions; 
and  perhaps  upon  a  little  confideration  they  repent 
and  recover  themfelves  again,  and  after  a  while  arc 
again  entangled  and  overcome. 

Now  the  cafe  of  thefe  perfons  is  really  doubtful 
both  to  themfelves  and  others.    And  the  proper  di* 

rcdion 


The  diftlnguipoingcharaSter 
re(5lion  to  be  given  them  in  order  to  their  peace  and 
fettlement,  is  by  all  means  to  encourage  them  to  go 
on  and  fortify  their  good  refolutions  •,  to  be  more  vi- 
gilant and  watchful  over  themfelves,  to  ftrive  againft 
fm  and  to  refill  it  with  all  their  might.  And  accord- 
ing to  the  fuccefs  of  their  endeavours  in  this  conflidl, 
the  evidence  of  their  good  condition  will  every  day 
clear  up  and  become  more  manifeft  ;  the  more  wc 
grow  in  grace,  and  the  feldomer  we  fall  into  fin, 
and  the  more  even  and  conflant  our  obedience  to  God 
is,  fo  much  the  greater  and  fuller  fatisfa6lion  we  fhall 
have  of  our  good  eftate  towards  God  :  for  "  the  path 
*'  of  the  juft  is  as  the  Ihining  light,  which  fhines 
•'  more  and  more  unto  the  perfed  day :"  And  "  the 
««  work  of  righteoufnefs  Ihall  be  peace,  and  the  efFe£l 
•'  of  righteoufnefs  quietnefs  and  afTurance  for  ever." 

I  ihall  only  make  two  or  three  inferences  from  what 
hath  been  difcourfed  upon  this  argument,  and  fa 
conclude. 

1 .  From  hence  we  learn  the  great  danger  of  fins 
of  omifTion  as  well  as  commiflion ;  "  whofoever  doth 
*'  not  righteoufnefs  is  not  of  God."  The  meer  ne- 
gledl  of  any  of  the  great  duties  of  religion,  of  piety  to- 
wards God,  and  of  kindnefs  and  charity  to  men, 
though  we  be  free  from  the  commiflion  of  great  fins, 
is  enough  to  call  us  out  of  the  favour  of  God  and  to 
fhut  us  for  ever  out  of  his  kingdom.  "  I  was  hun- 
*'  gry,  and  ye  gave  me  no  meat  \  thirfty,  and  ye 
*'  gave  me  no  drink;  fick  and  in  prifon,  and  ye 
«  vifited  me  not ;  therefore  depart  ye  curfed." 

2.  It  is  evident  from  what  hath  been  faid,  that  no- 
thing can  be  vainer  than  for  men  to  live  in  any  courfe 
of  fin  and  impiety,  and  yet  to  pretend  to  be  the 

children 


of  a  good  and  a  bad  man,  ^^j 

children  of  God,  and  to  hope  for  eternal  life.     The  S  E  R  M. 
children  of  God  will  do  the  works  of  God,   and  who-  ,  ^[ 
ever  hopes  to  enjoy  him  hereafter,  will  endeavour  to 
be  like  him  here  ;  "  every  man  that  hath  his  hope 
"  in  him,  purifies  himfelf  even  as  he  is  pure." 

3.  You  fee  what  is  the  great  mark  and  charader 
of  a  man's  good  or  bad  condition ;  "  whofoever  doth 
*'  righteoufnefs  is  of  God,  and  whofoever  doth  not 
*'  righteoufnefs  is  not  of  God."  Here  is  a  plain  and 
fenfible  evidence  by  which  every  man,  that  will  deal 
honeftly  with  himfelf,  may  certainly  know  his  own 
condition  ;  and  then  according  as  he  finds  it  to  be, 
may  take  comfort  in  it,  or  make  hafte  out  of  it. 
And  we  need  not  afcend  into  heaven,  nor  go  down 
into  the  deep,  to  fearch  out  the  fecret  counfels  and  de- 
crees of  God  ;  there  needs  no  anxious  enquiry  whe- 
ther v/e  be  of'the  number  of  God's  eled  :  if  we  dai- 
ly mortify  our  lufts  and  grow  in  goodnefs,  and  take 
care  to  add  to  our  faith  and  knowledge,  temperance 
and  patience  and  charity  and  all  other  Chrillian 
graces  and  virtues,  we  certainly  take  the  bed  courfe 
in  the  world  to  "  make  our  caihng  and  eledion  fure." 
i^nd  without  this  it  is  impofTible  that  we  fhouldhave 
any  comfortable  and  "well-grounded  ailurance  of  our 
good  condition.  This  one  mark  of  doing  righteouf- 
nefs is  that  into  which  all  other  figns  and  charaders, 
which  are  in  fcripture  given  of  a  good  man,  are  final- 
ly refolved-,  and  this  anfwers  all  thofe  various  phra- 
fes  which  fome  men  would  make  to  be  fo  many  feve- 
ral  and  diftindt  marks  of  a  child  of  God  •,  as  whether 
we  have  the  true  knowledge  of  God  and  divine  illu- 
mination, for  "  hereby  we  know  that  we  know  him 
^  if  we  keep  his  commandments :"  whether  we  fin- 

cerely 


368  The  dijlingiiijhing  charaSter 

ER  M.  cerely  love  God,  for  "  this  is  the  love  of  God,  that 
"  we  keep  his  commandments :  and  whether  God 
loves  us,  for  "  the  righteous  Lord  loveth  righteouf- 
*'  nefs  and  his  countenance  will  behold  the  upright  :'*^ 
whether  we  be  regenerate  and  born  of  God,  for 
"  whofoever  is  born  of  God  finneth  not  :'*  whether 
we  have  "the  fpiritof  God  witnefTing  with  our  fpi- 
"  fits  that  we  are  the  children  of  God,"  for  "  as  ma- 
*'  ny  as  have  the  fpirit  of  God  are  led  by  the  fpirit,"  and 
«  by  the  fpirit  do  mortify  the  deeds  of  the  flefli :"  whe* 
ther  we  belong  to  Christ,  and  have  an  intereft  in  him 
or  not,  for  "  they  that  are  Christ's  have  crucified  the 
"  flefh  with  the  affedions  and  lufts  thereof:"  in  a 
word,  whether  the  promife  of  heaven  and  eternal 
life  belong  to  us,  for  "  without  holinefs  no  man  fhall 
"  fee  the  Lord,  but  if  we  have  our  fruit  unto  ho- 
**  linefs,  the  end  will  be  everlafting  life."  So  that 
you  fee  at  laft,  the  fcripture  brings  all  this  to  one 
mark,  holinefs  and  obedience  to  the  Jaws  of  God, 
or  a  vicious  and  wicked  life  ;  "  in  this  the  children 
*'  of  God  are  manifeft,  and  the  children  of  the  devil ; 
*«  whofoever  doth  not  righteoufnefs  is  not  of  God.'* 
Let  us  then  deal  impartially  with  our  felves,  and 
bring  our  lives  and  adions  to  this  trial,  and  never  be 
at  reft  till  the  matter  be  brought  to  feme  ifllie,  and 
we  have  made  a  deliberate  judgment  of  our  conditi* 
on,  whether  we  be  the  children  of  God  or  not :  and 
if  upon  a  full  and  fair  examination  our  confciences 
give  us  this  teftimony,  that  by  the  grace  of  God  we 
have  "  denied  ungodlineis  and  worldly  lufts,"  and 
have  "  lived  fobcrly,  and  righteoufly,  and  godly  in 
•'  this  prcfent  world,"  we  may  take  joy  and  comfort 
in  iti   for  "  if  our  heart  condemn  us  not,  then  have 

"  we 


of  a  good  and  a  bad  man.  369 

"  we  confidence  towards  God  :"   but  if  upon  theSERM. 

XV 
fearch  and  trial  of  our  ways  our  cafe  appear  clearly  to 

be  otherwife,  or  if  we  have  juft  caufe  to  doubt  of  it, 
let  us  not  venture  to  continue  one  moment  longer  in 
fo  uncertain  and  dangerous  a  condition.     And  if  we 
defire  to  know  the  way  of  peace  the  fcripture  hath 
fet  it  plainly  before  us,  "  waHi  ye,  make  ye  clean, 
"  put  away  the  evil  of  your  doings  from  before  mine 
"  eyes,  ceafe  to  do  evil,  learn  to  do  well:"   "  come 
"  now  and  let  us  reafon  together,  faith  the  Lord 
"  though  your  fins  be  as  fcarlet,  they  fliallbe  as  white 
"  as  fnow :"  "  let  the  wicked  forfake  his  way,  and 
"  the  unrighteous  man  his  thoughts,  and  \tt  him  re- 
"  turn  unto  the  Lord,  and  he  will  have  mercy  up- 
*'  on  him,  and  to  our  God,  for  he  will  abundantly 
"  pardon."     Though  our  cafe  be  very  bad,  yet  it  is 
not  defperate ;  "  this  is  a  faithful  faying,  and  worthy 
"  of  all  men  to   be  embraced,  that  Jesus  Christ 
*'  came  into  the  world  to  fave  fmners:"  And  he  is 
ftill  willing  to  fave  us,  if  we  be  but  willing  to  leave 
our  fins  and  to  ferve  him  in  holinefs  and  righteouf- 
nefs  the  remaining  part  of  our  lives.     We  may  yet 
be  "  turned  from  darknefs  to  light,   and  from  the 
"  power  of  Satan  unto  God  :'*  wc  who  have  ventur- 
ed fo  long  upon  the  brink  of  ruin,  may  yet  by  the 
infinite  mercies  of  God,  and  by  the  power  of  his 
grace,  be  refcued  from  the  bafe  and  miferable  flave- 
ry  of  the  devil  and  our  lulls  "  into  the  glorious  liber- 
"  ty  of  the  fons  of  God." 

And  thus  I  have  endeavoured,  with  all  \}i\t  plain- 

nefs  I  could,  to  reprefent  every  man  to  himfelf,  and 

to  let  him  clearly  fee  what  his  condition  is  towards 

God,  and  how  the  cafe  of  his  foul  and  of  his  eternq,! 

Vol.  L  B  b  b  happinefs 


2yo  Of  the  joy  which  Is  in  heaven 

happinefs  flands.  And  I  do  verily  believe  that  what 
I  have  faid  in  this  matter  is  the  truth  of  God,  to 
which  we  ought  all  gladly  to  yield  and  render  up  our 
felves.  For  "  great  is  truth,  and  mighty  above  all 
"  things :"  fhe  is  faithful  and  impartial  in  her  coun- 
fels,  and  though  fhe  be  not  always  welcome,  yet  'tis 
always  wife  to  hearken  to  her,  for  in  great  kindnefs 
and  charity  fhe  lets  men  know  their  condition  and 
the  danger  of  it,  that  they  may  take  care  to  prevent 
it :  "  with  her  is  no  accepting  of  perfons,  and  in  her 
**  judgment  there  is  no  unrighteoufnefs."  1  will  con- 
*Antonin.  clude  all  with  that  excellent  advice  of  a  *  heathen 
lib.  10.  philofopher,  "  make  it  no  longer  a  matter  of  difpute 
"  what  are  the  marks  and  figns  of  a  good  man,  but 
**  immediately  fet  about  it,  and  endeavour  to  become 
"  fuch  an  one." 


SERMON    XVI. 

Of  the  joy  which  is  in  heaven  at  the  re- 
pentance of  a  finner. 

rm  ,  ill  I     II  I 

LUKE  XV.  7. 

/  fay  unto  you y  that  likewife  joy  floall  be  in  heaven  over 
one  finner  that  repenteth^  more  than  over  ninety  and 
nine  juji  perfons  which  need  no  repentance. 

SERM.      AFTER  many  attempts  made  in  vain  to  re- 
"^^^'     Jlx.  claim  finners  from  their  evil  ways  and  to  bring 
them  to  the  wifdom  of  the  juft,  it  is  hard  for  us,  who 
are  the  melTengers  of  God  to  men>  not  to  fit  down 

i^ 


at  the  repentance  of  a  fmner,  371 

in  defpondence,  and  at  Jafl  quite  to  defpair  of  doing  S  E  R  M, 
good  upon  them.  But  when  I  confider  the  infinite  ,J^l^ 
patience  of  God  with  finners,  and  how  long  his 
Ipirit  ftrives  with  them,  why  iliould  we,  we  who  are 
finners  our  {dvt%^  think  much  to  bear  with  finners, 
and  patiently  to  contend  with  their  obftinacy  and  per- 
verfenefs  ?  When  I  confider  that  our  bleffed  Savi- 
our, the  great  preacher  and  pattern  of  righteoufnefs, 
<3id  not  give  over  the  word  of  men  nor  defpair  of 
their  recovery :  this  methinks  Ihould  make  us,  who 
are  amballadors  for  Christ,  unwearied  in  befeeching 
men  in  his  ftead  to  be  reconciled  to  God. 

And  of  this  we  have  a  famous  inftance  in  this  chap- 
ter :  the  publicans  and  finners,  as  they  had  done  fe- 
veral  times  before,  came  to  hear  our  Saviour  :  he 
treated  them  very  kindly,  and  converfed  familiarly 
with  them  •,  at  this  the  Pharifees  were  difpleafed  and 
murmured,  and  this  unreaibnable  murmuring  of  theirs 
gave  occafion  to  the  three  parables  in  this  chapter. 

In  which  our  Saviour  does  at  once  anfwer  the 
objeftion  of  the  Pharifees,  and  give  all  pofTible  en- 
couragement to  the  repentance  of  thefe  great  finners. 
He  anfwers  the  Pharifees  by  letting  them  plainly 
fee  that  he  was  about  the  beft  work  in  the  world, 
the  mofl:  acceptable  to  God,  and  matter  of  greateft 
joy  to  all  the  heavenly  inhabitants.  Inftead  of  a  fe- 
vere  reproof  of  their  uncharitablenefs  he  offers  that 
calmly  to  their  confideration,  which  ought  in  all  rea- 
fon  to  convince  them  that  he  was  no  ways  to  blame 
for  this  familiar  converfation  of  his  with  finners, 
having  no  other  defign  upon  them  but  to  reclaim 
them  from  their  vices,  and  to  make  them  fit  com- 
pany for  the  beft  of  men  •,  that  he  v/as  a  fpiritual 
B  b  b  2  P^y^i^ 


Of  the  joy  which  is  in  heaven 
phyficlan,  and  therefore  his  proper  work  and  employ- 
ment Jay  among  his  patients.  And  then  inftead  of 
terrifying  thefe  Tinners,  who  feemed  to  come  with  a 
good  mind  to  be  inftruded  by  him,  he  gently  infi- 
nuates  the  moft  winning  arguments  and  the  greatefl 
encouragement  to  repentance  -,  by  fhewing  how  ready 
God  was,  after  all  their  fins  and  provocations,  to  re- 
ceive them  to  his  grace  and  favour,  provided  they 
did  fincerely  repent  and  betake  thcmfelves  to  a  bet- 
ter courfe  :  And  not  only  fo,  but  that  the  repentance 
of  a  finner  is  a  great  joy  to  the  great  King  of  the 
world,  and  to  all  that  holy  and  heavenly  hoft  that 
attend  upon  him. 

From  which  method  of  our  Saviour  in  treating 
fo  great  finners  fo  gently,  I  cannot  but  make  this 
obfervation,  for  my  own  ufe  as  well  as  for  others  ; 
that  it  is  good  to  give,  even  the  greatefl  of  finners, 
all  the  encouragement  we  can  to  repentance  ;  and 
though  men  have  been  never  fo  bad,  yet  if  they  have 
but  this  one  good  quality  left  in  them,  that  they  are 
patient  to  be  inflruded,  and  content  to  hear  good 
counfel,  we  fhould  ufe  them  kindly  and  endeavour 
to  recover  them  by  the  fairefl  means  ;  not  fo  much 
upbraiding  them  for  their  having  been  bad,  as  en- 
couraging them  to  become  better. 

To  this  purpofe  our  Saviour  uttered  three  pa- 
rables •,  of  "  the  recovery  of  a  lofl  fheep  j "  of  "  finding 
*'  a  loft  piece  of  money  ;  '*  of  "  the  return  of  a  prodi- 
"  galfon  to  his  father ;  "  and  though  they  all  aim  at 
the  fame  fcope  and  defign,  yet  our  Saviour  ufeth  this 
variety,  not  only  to  convey  the  fame  thing  to  fe- 
veral  capacities  in  a  more  acceptable  manner,  one 
fimilitude  happening  to  hit  one  perfon  and  another 

another. 


at  the  repentance  of  a /inner.  373 

another,  but  likewife  to  inculcate  fo  weighty  a  mat-  S  E  R  M. 

.  XVI 

tcr  the  more  upon   his  hearers,  and  to  fix  it  more 

deeply  in  their  minds. 

The  words  which  I  have  read  are  the  moral  or 
application  of  the  firfl  parable,  concerning  a  man 
who  had  an  hundred  fheep,  and  having  loft  one 
leaves  the  ninety  and  nine  to  go  to  feek  that  which 
was  loft  ;  and  having  found  it,  with  great  joy  brings 
it  home.  By  which  our  Saviour  gives  us  to  under- 
ftand,  what  joy  God  and  the  blefled  fpirits  above 
take  in  the  converfion  of  a  finner.  "  I  fay  unto  you, 
' "  that  likewife  joy  ftiall  be  in  heaven  over  one  finner 
"  that  repenteth,  more  than  over  ninety  and  ninejuft 
''  perfons  which  need  no  repentance."  Than  which 
nothing  could  have  been  more  proper,  both  to  filence 
the  uncharitable  murmuring  of  the  Pharifees  againft 
our  Saviour  for  converfing  with  publicans  and  fin- 
ners  to  fo  good  an  end,  and  likewife  to  encourage 
finners  to  repent :  For  why  fhould  the  Pharifees  be 
difpleafed  at  that  which  was  fo  great  a  pleafure  to 
God  and  the  holy  angels  :  and  what  greater  encou- 
ragement to  repentance  than  this,  that  God  is  not 
only  willing  to  receive  the  returning  finner,  but  that 
the  news  of  his  repentance  is  entertained  in  heaven 
with  fo  much  joy,  that  if  it  be  pofFible  for  the  blefled 
inhabitants  of  that  place  to  have  any  thing  added 
to  their  happinefs,  this  will  be  a  new  accefTion  to  it  ? 

There  are  three  things  in  the  words  which  require 
a  very  careful  explication. 

I.  How  we  are  to  underftand  the  joy  that  is   in 
heaven  at  the   converfion  of  a  finner  ? 

3.  Who  are  here  meant  by  the  juft  perfons  that 
need  no  repentance  ? 

2.  With 


Of  the  joy  which  is  in  heaven 

3,  With  what  reafon  it  is  here  faid,  that  there  is 
"  more  joy  in  heaven  over  one  finner  that  repenteth, 
"  than  over  ninety  and  nine  jufl  perfons  who  need 
*'  no  repentance." 

There  is  fome thing  of  difficulty  in  each  of  thefe, 
which  deferves  our  heedful  and  attentive  confide- 
ration.  - 

I.  How  we  are  to  underftand  the  joy  that  is  in 
heaven  at  the  repentance  of  a  finner  ?  And  this  (  as 
indeed  this  whole  pafTage  of  our  Saviour's)  we  are 
not  to  underftand  too  ftridly  and  rigoroufly,  but  as 
fpoken  in  a  great  meafure  after  the  manner  of  men, 
and  by  way  of  accommodation  to  our  capacity,  fo 
far  as  the  perfons  here  fpoken  of  are  capable  of  any 
addition  to  their  joy  and  happinefs. 

As  it  refers  to  God,  it  feems  very  inconfiftent  with 
the  happinefs  and  perfection  of  the  divine  nature  to 
fuppofe  him  really  capable  of  joy,  any  more  than 
of  grief,  or  any  other  pafTion :  becaufe  this  would 
be  to  imagine  fome  new  accefllon  to  his  pleafure  and 
happinefs,  which  being  always  infinite  can  never  have 
any  thing  added  to  it.  And  therefore  we  are  to  un- 
derftand this,  as  it  relates  to  God,  in  the  fame  man- 
ner as  we  do  infinite  other  pafliages  of  fcripture  where 
human  paiTions  are  afcribed  to  him,  to  be  fpoken  by 
way  of  condefcenfion  and  after  the  language  and  man- 
ner of  the  fons  of  men ;  and  to  fignify  only  thus  much 
to  us,  that  the  converfion  of  a  finner  is  a  thing  highly 
pleafing  and  acceptable  to  God, 

As  it  refers  to  angels  and  other  blefled  fpirits,  I  fee 

no  inconvenience  why  it  may  not  be  underftood  more 

ftridlly  and  literally  \  that  they  conceive  a  new  joy  at 

the  news  of  a  finner's  repentance,  and  find  a  frefh 

I  pleafure 


at  the  repentance  of  a  [inner.  375 

pleafure  and  delight  fpringing  up  in  their  minds  when-  ^^?,^* 
ever  they  hear  the  joyful  tidings  of  a  finner  refcued 
from  the  flavery  of  the  devil  and  the  danger  of  eter- 
nal damnation  ♦,  of  a  new  member  added  to  the  king- 
dom of  God,  that  fhall  be  a  companion  and  a  fharer 
with  them  in  that  blelTednefs  which  they  enjoy.  There 
feems  to  me  to  be  nothing  in  this  repugnant  to  the 
nature  and  happinefs  of  blefied  fpirits  in  another 
world.  For  it  is  certain,  that  there  are  degrees 
of  happinefs  among  the  blefied  :  from  whence  it 
necefiarily  follows,  that  fome  of  them  may  be  hap- 
pier than  they  are.  And  it  is  very  probable,  fmce 
the  happinefs  of  angels  and  good  men  is  but  finite, 
that  thofe  who  are  moft  happy  do  continually  receive 
new  additions  to  their  bleflednefs  ;  and  that  their 
felicity  is  never  at  a  Hand  but  perpetually  growing 
and  improving  to  all  eternity ;  and  that  as  their 
knowledge  and  love  do  encreafe,  fo  likewife  the  ca- 
pacity and  caufes  of  their  happinefs  arc  flill  more  and 
more  enlarged  and  augmented  :  So  that  it  is  reafon- 
able  enough  to  fuppofe  that  there  is  really  joy,  among 
the  angels  and  fpirits  of  juft  men  made  perfed:,  over 
every  finner  that  repenteth. 

II.  Who  are  here  meant  by  the  juft  perfons  who 
need  no  repentance.^  That  our  Saviour  in  this  ex- 
preflion  gives  fome  glance  and  refledlion  upon  the 
Pharifees  (who  prided  themfelves  in  their  own  righte- 
oufnefs,  and  inftead  of  confefFing  their  fins  to  God 
flood  upon  their  own  juftification,  as  if  they  needed 
no  repentance)  is  very  probable :  becaufe  this  parable 
was  defigned  to  anfwer  their  murmurings  againfl  him, 
for  converfing  with  publicans  and  finners,  and  by  the 
by  to  give  a  check  to  thofe  who  were  fo  conceited  of 

their 


XVI. 


376  Of  the  joy  which  is  i?t  heaven 

S  ER^M.  their  own  righteoufnefs  as  if  they  had  no  need  of  re- 
pentance. And  this  is  very  fuitable  to  what  our  Sa- 
viour elfewhere  fays  to  them  upon  the  like  occafion, 
that  "  the  whole  have  no  need  of  the  phyfician,  but 
"  the  fick ;"  that "  he  came  not  to  call  the  righte- 
*'  ous,  but  the  finners  to  repentance."  But  yet 
though  our  Saviour  exprefleth  himfelffo  as  that  the 
Pharifees  might  with  reafon  enough  apply  it  to  them- 
felves,  that  there  was  more  joy  in  heaven  over  one 
finner  that  repenteth  than  over  ninety  and  nine  of  them, 
who  were  fo  conceited  of  their  own  righteoufnefs  that 
they  thought  they  had  no  need  of  repentance  (for  in- 
deed our  Saviour  delivers  himfelf  fo,  as  to  leave 
room  for  fuch  a  fevere  application)  yet  I  think  there  is 
but  little  doubt  to  be  made  but  that  he  intended  fome- 
thing  farther ;  and  that  fuppofing  the  Pharifees  were 
as  juft  as  they  pretended,  and  were  really  righteous 
men,  fo  as  to  ftand  in  no  need  of  fuch  a  repentance 
as  great  finners  do,  yet  our  Saviour  affirms,  "  there 
^  was  more  joy  in  heaven  over  one  penitent  fin- 
"  ner  than  over  ninety  and  nine  fuch  juft  perfons." 

But  are  there  any  perfons  in  the  world  fo  jufl,  as 
abfolutely  to  Hand  in  need  of  no  repentance.?  No, 
there  was  never  any  fuch  perfon  in  the  world,  him 
only  excepted  who  faid  this,  our  blefled  Saviour, 
"  who  had  no  fin,  neither  was  guile  found  in  his 
"  mouth."  And  therefore  this  phrafe  of  needing 
no  repentance  is  to  be  underftood  in  a  qualified 
fenfe,  and  with  fome  allowance ;  otherwife  our  blefied 
Saviour  had  fuppofed  a  cafe  which  never  was,  of  a 
great  number  of  perfedly  righteous  men.  And  our 
Saviour's  meaning  in  this  is  fufficiently  explained 
in  the  lafl  parable  of  this  chapter,  concerning  the 

prodigal 


at  the  repentance  of  afmner,  377 

prodigal  fon  ;  where  the  prodigal  fon  is  the  ''  fihner  SE  R  M. 
''  that  repented  \^  and  his  elder  brother,  who  had  always 
obfervedand  obeyed  his  father,  he  is  the  "juft  perfon 
"  who  needed  no  repentance."  So  that  by  him  our  Sa- 
viour plainly  defigns  thofe,  who  being  rehgioufiy  e- 
ducated  and  brought  up  in  the  fear  of  God,  had  never 
broke  out  into  any  extravagant  and  vicious  courfe  of 
life,  and  fo  in  fome  fenfe  had  no  need  of  repentance, 
that  is,  of  changing  the  whole  courfe  of  their  lives, 
as  the  prodigal  fon  had.  Not  but  that  the  befl  of 
men  are  guilty  of  many  faults  and  infirmities,,  which 
they  have  too  much  caufe  to  repent  of,  as  our  Savi- 
our fufficiently  intimates  in  that  parable :  For  cer- 
tainly it  was  no  fmall  infirmity  in  the  elder  brother 
to  be  fo  envious,  and  to  take  fo  heinoufiy  the  joyful 
welcome  and  entertainment  which  his  prodigal  bro- 
ther at  his  return  found  from  his  father:  but  yet  this 
fingle  fault  and  fudden  furprife  of  paiTion,  confidcr- 
ing  the  conftant  duty  which  he  had  paid  to  his  father- 
throughout  the  courfe  of  his  life,  did  not  make  him 
fuch  a  fmner  as  to  need  fuch  a  repentance  as  his  bro- 
ther did,  which  con  filled  in  a  perfect  change  of  the 
whole  courfe  of  his  life.  And  of  fuch  juH:  perfons  as 
thefe,  and  of  fuch  a  repentance  as  this,  it  feems  very 
plain  that  our  Saviour  intended  this  difcourfe. 

III.  But  the  main  diiiiculty  of  all  is,  with  what 
reafon  it  is  here  faid  that  "  there  is  more  joy  in  hea- 
"  ven  over  one  finner  that  repenteth,  than  over  nine- 
"  ty  and  nine  juft  perfons  which  need  no  repientance?'* 
Is  it  not  better  not  to  offend,  than  to  fm  and  repent  ? 
Is  not  innocence  better  than  amendment,  and  i\\^ 
wifdom  of  prevention  to  be  preferred  before  that 
of  remedy?  Is  it  worth  the  while  to  do  amifs  to  make 

VolL  C  c  c  way 


^y^  Of  the  joy  which  is  in  heaven 

E  R  M.  way  for  repentance?  and  is  not  this  almoft  like  "  fin- 
''  ning  that  grace  may  abound  ?"  And  if  repentance 
be  not  better  than  righteoufnefs,  why  is  there  more 
joy  in  heaven  over  the  penitent  than  over  the  righ- 
teous ;  nay  over  one  penitent  finner,  than  over  nine- 
ty and  nine  jufl  perfons?  Do  not  the  blefied  always 
rejoice  moft  in  that  which  is  really  bed?  Here  is  the 
difficulty,  and  it  requires  fome  care  and  confiderati- 
on  clearly  to  remove  it.  In  order  to  which  be  pleaf- 
ed  to  confider  thefe  three  things,  which  I  think  to  be 
Very  material  to  the  clearing  of  it. 

I .  That  the  fame  thing  confidered  in  feveral  ref. 
pedls,  may  in  fome  refpedls  have  the  advantage  of  an- 
other thing,  and  for  thofe  reafons  be  preferred  be- 
fore it,  and  yet  not  have  the  advantage  of  it  abfolute- 
ly  and  in  all  refpedls.  Moral  comparifons  are  not  to 
be  exadled  to  a  mathematical  ilri6lnefs  and  rigour. 
To  this  purpofe  I  have  obferved  in  a  former  dif- 
courfe,  that  it  was  long  fince  judicioufly  noted  by 
Ariftotle,  "  that  moral  and  proverbial  fpeeches  are 
"  not  to  be  taken  too  ftridly,  as  if  they  were  univer- 
*'  fally  true,  and  in  all  cafes :"  It  is  fufficient  if  they 
be  true  for  the  moft  part,  and  in  feveral  refpedts 
which  are  very  confiderable.  And  of  this  nature  are 
moft  of  the  proverbs  of  Solomon,  and  whofoever  fhall 
go  about  to  make  out  the  truth  of  them  in  all  cafes, 
does  in  my  opinion  take  a  very  hard  tafk  upon  him- 
felf  But  which  is  nearer  to  my  purpofe,  our  Savi- 
ou  R  himfelf  in  the  chapter  before  my  text,  and  in 
the  moral  application  of  a  parable  too,  (namely  that 
of  the  unjuft  fteward)  ufeth  a  proverbial  fpeechjuft  in 
the  fame  manner;  "  the  children  of  this  world  are 
"  in  their  generation  wifer  than  thechildren  of  light :" 

which 


at  the  repentance  of  a  finner.  379 

which  Is  only  a  wife  obfervation  that  is  generally  S  ER  M. 
true  and  in  many  refpefts,  but  not  abfolutely  and  u-  ^ ' 
niverfally.  For  fome  men  have  been  as  wife  and  di- 
ligent for  the  glory  of  God  and  intereft  of  their  fouls, 
as  ever  any  man  was  for  this  world,  and  fot  the  ad- 
vancement of  his  temporal  intereft.  Of  the  like  na- 
ture is  this  faying  ufed  by  our  Saviour,  probably  ta- 
ken (as  our  Saviour  did  many  other  proverbial 
fpeeches)  from  the  Jews,  and  applied  to  his  own  pur- 
pofe.  For  there  are  feveral  fayings  of  the  JewiHi  maf- 
ters  much  to  this  purpofe:  As,  "  great  is  the  digni- 
*'  ty  of  penitents ;  great  is  the  virtue  of  them  that 
"  repent,  fo  that  no  creature  may  ftand  in  their  rank 
"  and  order.'*  And  again,  "  the  righteous  may  not 
"  ftand  in  the  fame  place  with  thofe  that  have  repent' 
"  ed."  Thefe  I  confefs  were  very  high  fayings,  but 
yet  very  well  defigned  for  the  encouragement  of  re- 
pentance. And  they  are  not  without  good  reafon, 
as  will  appear  if  we  confider  thefe  two  things. 

Firft,  that  the  greater  the  difficulty  of  virtue  is, 
fo  much  the  greater  is  the  praife  and  commendation 
of  it :  and  not  only  we  our  felves  take  the  more  joy 
and  comfort  in  it,  but  it  is  more  admirable  and  de- 
lightful to  others.  Now  it  cannot  be  denied  to  be 
much  more  difficult  to  break  off  a  vicious  habit,  than 
to  go  on  in  a  good  way  which  we  have  been  trained 
up  in,  and  always  accuftomed  to.  Thofe  that  have 
been  well  educated  have  great  caufe  to  thank  Godj 
and  to  acknowledge  the  care  of  their  parents  and  teach- 
ers :  for  piety  and  goodnefs  are  almoft  infinitely  eafi-' 
er  to  fuch  perfons,  than  to  thofe  who  have  wanted 
this  advantage.  It  is  happy  for  them  they  never 
tafted  of  unlawful  pleafures  \  if  they  had,  they  would 
C  c  c  ^  poffibly 


380  ^fibejoy  which  is  in  heaven 

S  E  R  M.  pofTibly  have  drank  as  deep  as  others :  it  is  well  they 
were  never  entangled  in  a  finful  courfe,  nor  enflaved 
to  vicious  habits,  nor  "  hardened  through  the  deceit- 
"  fulnefs  of  fin  ;"  if  they  had,  they  might  pofTibly  ne- 
ver have  been  recovered  out  of  the  fnare  of  the  de- 
vil.    By  the  happinefsofa  good  education,  and  the 
merciful  providence  of  God,  a  great  part  of  many 
mens  virtue  confifls  in  their  ignorance  of  vice,  and 
their  being  kept  out  of  the  way  of  great  and  dange- 
rous temptations  -,  rather  in  the  good  cuftoms  they 
have  been  bred  up  to,  than  in  the  deliberate  choice 
of  their  wills  -,  and  rather  in  the  happy  preventions 
of  evil,  than  in  their  refolute  conftancy  in  that  which 
is  good.     And  God  who  knows  what  is  in  man,  and 
fees  to  the  bottom  of  every  man's  temper  and  incli^ 
nation,  knows  how  far  thk  man  would  have  fallen 
had  he  had  the  temptations  of  other  men  -,  and  how 
irrecoverably  perhaps  he  fhould   have  been  plunged 
in  an  evil  courfe,  had  he  once  entred  upon  it.     So 
|:hai:  repentance  is  a  very  great  thing  -,  and  though  it 
be  the  moiljuft,  and  fit,  and  reafonable  thing  in 
the  world ;  yet  for  all  that  it  deferves  great  commen- 
dation, becaufe  it  is  for  the  moft  part  fo  very  hard 
and   difficult.       And  therefore    though,  abfolutely 
fpeaking,   innocence  is  better  than  repentance,  yet, 
as  the  circumftances  may  be,  the  virtue  of  fome  peni- 
tents may  be  greater  than  of  many  jufl  and  righteous 
perfons. 

Secondly,  there  is  this  confideration  farther  to  re- 
commend repentance,  that  they  who  are  reclaimed 
from  a  wicked  courfe  are  many  times  more  thorough- 
ly and  :^ealou{ly  good  afterwards  :  their  trouble  and 
^emorfe  for  their  fins  does  quicken  ^nd  fpur  them  on 


at  the  repentance  ofafmner.  381 

in  the  ways  of  virtue  and  goodnefs,  and  a  lively  fenfe  S  E  R  M. 
of  their  paft  errors  is  apt  to  make  them  more  careful 
and  confcicntious  of  their  duty,  more  tender  and  fear- 
ful of  offending  God,  and  defirous,  if  it  were  poflible, 
to  redeem  their  former  mifcarriages  by  their  good 
behaviour  for  the  future.     Their  love  to  God  is  ufu- 
ally    more    vehement  and  burns    with  a   brighter 
flame,  "  for  to  whomfoever  much  is  forgiven  they 
^'  will  love  much."     And  they  are  commonly  more 
zealous  for  the  converfion  of  others,  as  being  more 
fcnfible  of  the  danger  finners  are  in  and   more  apt  to 
commiferate  their  cafe,  remembring  that  it  was  once 
their  own  condition,  and  with  what  diliiculty   they 
were  refcued  from  fo  great  a  danger.     And  for  the 
mofl  part  great  penitents  are  more  free  from  pride 
and  contempt  of  others,  the  confideration  of  what 
themfelves  once  were  being  enough  to  keep  them 
humble  all  their  days.     So  that  penitents  are  many 
times  more  throughly  and  perfedly  good,  and  after 
their  recovery  do  in  feveral  refpeds  outftrip  and  ex- 
cel thofe  who  were  never  engaged  in  a  vicious  courfe 
of  life  :  as  a  broken  bone  that  is  well  fet  isfometimes 
ftronger  than  it  was  before. 

2.  It  will  conduce  alfo  very  much  to  the  extenu- 
ating of  this  difficulty,  to  confider.that  our  Saviour 
does  not  here  compare  repentai)ce  with  abfokite  in- 
nocence and  perfect  righteoufnefs,^  but  with  the  im- 
perfect obedience  of  good  men,  who  are  guilty  of  ma- 
ny fins  and  infirmities ;  but  yet  upon  account  of  the 
general  courfe  and  tenor  of  their  lives  are  by  the  mer- 
cy and  favour  of  the  gofpel  efleemed  jufl  and  righte- 
ous perfons;  and,  for  the  merits  and  perfed  obedience 
pf  oyr  blefled  Saviour,  fo  accepted  by  God.    Now 

this 


382  Of  the  joy  which  is  in  heaven 

S  E  R  M.  this  alters  the  cafe  very  much,  and  brings  the  penitent 
and  this  fort  of  righteous  perfons  much  nearer  to  one 
another  :  fo  that  in  comparing  them  together,  the 
true  penitent  may  in  fome  cafes,  and  in  fome  refpefls, 
have  the  advantage  of  the  righteous,  and  deferve  up- 
on fome  accounts  to  be  preferred  before  him. 

3.  Which  is  principally  to  be  confidered  for  the 
full  clearing  of  this  difficulty  \  this  palfage  of  our 
Saviour  is  to  be  underftood  as  fpoken  very  much 
after  the  manner  of  men,  and  fuitably  to  the  nature 
of  human  pafTions,  and  the  ufual  occafions  of  mov- 
ing them.  We  are  apt  to  be  exceedingly  affe6led 
with  the  obtaining  of  what  we  did  not  hope  for,  and 
much  more  with  regaining  of  what  we  looked  upon 
as  loft  and  defperate.  Whatever  be  the  reafon  of  it, 
fuch  is  the  nature  of  man,  that  we  are  not  fo  fenfibly 
moved  at  the  continuance  of  a  good  which  we  have 
long  poffefTed,  as  at  the  recovery  of  it  after  it  was  loft 
and  gone  from  us.  And  the  reafons  of  a  judicious 
value  and  efteem  of  a  fettled  pleafure  and  content- 
ment are  one  thing,  and  the  caufes  of  fudden  joy  and 
tranfport  another.  A  continued  courfe  of  goodnefs 
may  in  it  felf  be  more  valuable,  and  yet  repentance 
after  a  great  fall  and  long  wandrings  may  be  much 
more  moving  and  furprizing.  For  where  things  are 
Gonftant  and  keep  in  the  fame  tenor,  they  are  not  apt 
in  their  nature  to  give  any  new  and  fudden  occafion 
of  joy.  And  this  is  the  reafon  given  in  the  parable 
of  the  prodigal  fon  *,  where  the  father  tells  his  eldeft 
fon,  who  was  fo  offended  at  the  joyful  reception  ancj 
welcome  of  his  prodigal  brother,  that  "  he  had  been 
**  always  with  him,  and  all  that  he  had  was  his  \ 
that  is,  he  was  fenfible  of  his  conftant  duty  and  obe- 
dience, 


at  the  repentance  of  a  Jinner.  383 

dience,  than  which  nothing  could  have  been  more  S  E  R  M. 

XVI 
acceptable ;  and  that  it  had  not,  nor  Ihould  not  lofe 

it's  reward  •,  but  the  return  of  his  other  fon,  after  he 
had  given  over  all  hopes  of  him,  and  looked  upon  his 
cafe  as  defperate,  this  was  a  marvellous  furprife  and 
a  happinefs  beyond  expe<5lation,  which  is  the  proper 
and  natural  caufe  of  joy  and  gladnefs  :  and  therefore 
he  tells  him,  that  upon  fuch  an  occafion  "  it  was  meet 
"  that  we  fhould  make  merry  and  be  glad,  for  this 
"  thy  brother  was  dead,  and  is  alive  again  ;  was  loft, 
"  and  is  found."  His  elder  fon's  continuance  in  his 
duty  was  the  enjoyment  of  what  he  had  always  had, 
but  the  return  of  his  prodigal  fon  was  the  retrieving 
of  what  he  had  given  up  for  lofb,  and  a  kind  of  re- 
furredion  from  the  dead.  And  thus  our  bleffed  Sa- 
viour, to  encourage  the  repentance  of  finners,  repre- 
fents  God  after  the  manner  of  men;  as  if  our  heaven- 
ly Father  did  conceive  fuch  a  joy  upon  the  repentance 
of  a  finner  as  earthly  parents  are  wont  to  do  upon  the 
feturn  of  a  v/ild  and  extravagant  fon  to  himfelf  and 
his  duty. 

Having  thus,  as  briefly  and  clearly  as  I  could,  ex- 
plained the  feveral  diffij:ulties  in  the  text,  I  fhail  now 
deduce  fome  inferences  from  it,  and  fo  conclude. 

I.  Firft,  that  the  blefled  fpirits  above  have  fomc 
knowledge  of  the  affairs  of  men  here  below,  becaufe 
they  are  faid  to  rejoice  at  the  converfion  of  a  finner. 
This  is  fpoken  more  particularly  of  the  angels,  as 
appears  by  comparing  what  is  more  generally  faid  in 
the  text,  that  "  there  is  joy  in  heaven,"  with  what 
is  more  particularly  expreffed  in  the  loth  verfe,  that 
"  there  is  joy  in  the  prefence  of  the  angels"  over  one 
finner  that  repentcth.  Now  whether  the  angels  come 
4  to 


<j8^  Of  the  joy  which  is  in  heaven 

ERM.  to  this  knowledge  by  virtue  of  their  miniftry  here 
below  for  the  good  of  the  eleft,  and  fo,  in  their  con- 
tinual intercourfe  between  heaven  and  earth,  bring  to 
their  fellow-fervants  in  heaven  the  joyful  news  of  the 
repentance  of  finners  upon  earth  j  or  whether  God 
be  pleafed  from  time  to  time  to  reveal  it  to  them,  as 
a  thing  extremely  welcome  and  delightful  to  good 
fpirits,  and  tending  to  the  increafe  of  their  happinefs» 
as  it  is  not  very  material  to  enquire,  fo  perhaps  im- 
pofTible  for  us  to  determine. 

However,  it  cannot  from  hence  be  concluded  that 
the  angels  or  faints  in  heaven  have  fuch  an  univerfal 
knowledge  of  our  condition  and  affairs,  as  to  be  a 
reafonable  ground  and  warrant  to  us  to  pray  to  them, 
yea  or  to  defire  them  to  pray  for  us  -,  no,  though 
this  were  done  without  any  folemn  circumftances  of 
invocation.  For  they  may  very  well  know  fome 
things  concerning  us  wherein  their  own  comfort  and 
happinefs  is  likewife  concerned,  and  yet  be  ignorant 
of  all  the  reft  of  our  affairs.  This  one  thing  we  are 
fure  they  know,  becaufe  our  Saviour  hath  told  us 
fo  \  but  we  are  fure  of  no  more.  And  there  is  nei- 
ther equal  reafon  for  their  knowledge  of  our  other 
concernments,  nor  is  there  any  revelation  in  fcripture 
to  that  purpofe. 

2.  Secondly,  if  God  and  the  bleffed  fpirits  above 
rejoice  at  the  converfion  of  a  finner,  fo  Ihould  we 
too  ;  and  not  fret  and  murmur  as  the  Pharifees  here 
did.  This  is  the  temper  of  the  devil,  and  of  very 
bad  men,  to  regret  and  envy  the  good  and  happinefs 
of  others.  For  it  is  reafonable  to  believe,  that  pro- 
portionable to  the  joy  that  is  in  heaven  at  the  repen- 
tance of  a  finner,  is  the  grief  and  vexation  of  the  de- 
vil 


at  the  repent  ante  of  a  ftn7ier,  385 

vil  and  his  inflruments,  of  evil  fpirits  and  wicked  S  K  r  M. 
men.  And  as  the  devil  delights  in  deftroying  foul", 
and  "  goes  about  like  a  roaring  lion  feeking  whom 
*'  he  may  devour  j"  fo  no  doubt  he  is  in  great  rage 
and  gnafhes  out  of  very  difcontent,  when  at  any- 
time he  is  fruftrated  of  his  hopes,  and  the  prey  which 
he  thought  himfelf  fure  of  is  fnatched  out  of  his 
jaws.  And  thus  we  fee  it  is  with  bad  men,  they  do 
perfecute  thofe  that  forfake  them  and  their  wicked 
ways,  and  refufe  to  go  along  with  them  to  the  fame 
excefs  of  riot. 

And  this  is  no  where  more  vlfible  than  among 
thofe  of  the  church  of  Rome.  How  full  of  wrath 
and  indignation  are  they  againft  thofe  who,  out  of 
pure  conviction  of  the  errors  and  corruptions  of  their 
church,  come  over  to  ours  ?  How  do  they  perfecute 
them  with  flanders  and  Reproaches  and  with  all  the  ef- 
feds  of  hatred  and  malice  ?  So  that  many  times  they 
canfcarce  refrain  from  doing  them  a  real  mifchief,  even 
where  it  is  dangerous  to  themfelves  to  attempt  it  : 
as  if  they  envied  them  the  grace  of  God  and  the 
opportunity  of  being  faved. 

Iknow  it  is  too  natural  to  thofe  of  all  commu- 
nions, to  be  eager  and  fierce  againft  thofe  that  de- 
fert  them  :  and  yet  fuppofing  they  had  the  truth 
certainly  on  their  fide  (which  they  cannot  all  have) 
I  fee  no  great  reafon  for  this  temper  and  carriage  ; 
for  why  fhould  I  caft  away  my  patience  and  my  cha^ 
rity,  becaufe  another  man  hath  made  fhipwreck  of 
his  faith  ?  But  I  do  not  remember  any  where  a- 
mong  mankind  to  have  obferved  a  more  implacable 
malice,  a  more  fincere  and  hearty  ill-will,  than  they 
of  the  church  of  Rome  do  conflantly  exprefs  towards 

Vol.  I.  Ddd  thofe 

7- 


386  Of  the  joy  which  is  in  heaven 

S  E  R  M.  thofe  that  forlake  them  •,  nay,  though  they  give  never 
{o  modeft  and  reaionable  an  account  of  their  change, 
and  behave  themfelves  towards  their  old  friends  with 
all  the  kindnefs  and  compaiTion  in  the  world  •,  yet 
their  hatred  and  indignation  againft  them  runs  fo 
high,  that  one  may  plainly  fee  they  would  fooner 
forgive  a  man  the  greateft  fins  that  human  nature 
can  be  guilty  of,  and  the  breach  of  all  the  ten  com- 
mandments, than  this  one  crime  of  leaving  their 
church,  that  is  in  truth  of  growing  wiferand  better. 

3.  Thirdly,  the  confideratlon  of  what  hath  been  faid 
fhould  mightily  inflame  our  zeal  and  quicken  our  in- 
duftry  and  diligence  for  the  converfion  of  finners. 
For  if  the  converfion  of  one  foul  be  worth  Jo  much 
labour  and  pains,  and  matter  of  fuch  joy  to  the  blefied 
God  and  good  fpirits,  what  pains  fhould  not  we  take 
in  fo  corrupt  and  degenerate  an  ^ge  as  this  of  ours  ; 
where  impenitent  Tinners  do  fo  much  abound,  and 
the  juft  are  almofl  failed  from  among  the  children  of 

men  ?    - 

Our  bleffed  Saviour  indeed  (according  to  the 

extraordinary  decency  of  all  his  parables )  puts  the 
cafe  very  charitably,  and  lays  the  fuppofition  quite 
on  the  other  fide  :  if  there  were  but  one  finner  in 
the  world,  or  but  one  of  an  hundred,  yet  we  fhould, 
very  zealouQy  intend,  and  with  all  our  might,  the 
redu6lion  of  this  one  loft  fheep  ;  and  iliould  never 
be  at  reft  till  this  fmgle  wandring  foul  were  found 
and  faved.  But  God  knows  this  is  not  our  cafe,  but 
quite  otherwife  ;  which  fhould  quicken  our  endea- 
vours fo  much  the  more,  and  make  us  beflir  our- 
felves  to  the  utmoft,  having  always  in  our  minds  that 
admirable  faying  of  St.  James,   "  he  that  converteth 

"  a  fin- 


at  the  repentance  ofafinner.  387 

*'  a  finner  from  the  error  of  his  way  fliall  fave  a  foul  S  E  R  M. 

•  XVJ 

"  from  death."  He  that  knows  the  value  of  an  im- 
mortal foul,  and  how  fearful  a  thing  it  is  to  perifh 
everlailingly,  can  think  no  pains  too  much  to  take 
to  fave  a  foul  from  death. 

4.  Laftly,  what  an  argument  and  encouragement 
is  here  to  repentance,  even  to  the  greatefl  of  fmners  ? 
They,  I  am  fure,  ftand  mod  in  need  of  it :  and 
though  they  of  all  others  have  the  lead  reafon  to  look 
for  mercy,  yet  they  fhall  not  be  refufed  j  though 
they  be  like  the  publicans  and  heathens  among  the 
Jews,  who  were  not  only  reputed  but  many  times  really 
were  the  worftof  men  ;  though  like  the  prodigal  fon, 
here  in  the  parable,  they  have  run  away  from  their 
father  and  wafted  their  eftate  in  lewd  and  riotous 
courfes ;  yet  whenever  they  come  to  themfelves  and 
are  willing  to  return  to  their  father,  to  acknowledge 
their  folly  and  repent  of  it,  he  is  ready  to  receive 
them  ;  nay  much  more  ready  to  receive  them  than 
they  can  be  to  come  to  him  :  for  v/hen  the  prodigal 
was  but  coming  towards  his  father,  and  "  was  yet 
"  afar  off,  the  father  runs  to  meet  him,"  and  em- 
braceth  him  with  as  much  kindnefs  as  if  he  had  never 
offended  him,  and  entertains  him  with  more  joy  than 
if  he  had  always  continued  v/ith  him. 

How  does  the  great  God  condefcend  to  encourage 
our  repentance ;  reprefenting  himfelf  and  all  the  blef- 
fed  company  of  heaven  as  tranfported  v/ith  joy  at  the 
converfion  of  a  finner,  and  almoft  fetting  a  greater 
value  upon  repentance  than  even  upon  innocence  it 
felf  ?  and  if  our  heavenly  father,  who  hath  been  fo 
infinitely  offended  and  fo  highly  provoked  by  us  be- 
yond all  patience,  be  fo  ready,  fo  forward,  fo  glad 
D  d  d  2  to 


3S8  Of  the  joy  which  is  in  heaven 

E^  R  M.  to  receive  us,  and  there  be  no  hindrance,  no  difficulty, 
no  difcouragement  on  his  part  -,  is  it  pofTible  after 
all  this  that  we  can  be  fuch  fools  and  fuch  enemies  to 
ourfelves,  as  to  be  backward  to  our  own  happinefs ! 
All  of  us,  the  beft  of  us,  have  too  much  caufe  for 
repentance  ;  and  I  fear  too  many  of  us  ftand  in  need 
of  that  repentance  intended  by  our  Saviour  in  the 
text,  which  confifls  in  the  change  of  our  whole 
lives. 

But  I  will  not  upbraid  ^ou  with  your  faults  -,  hav- 
ing no  defign  to  provoke,  but  only  to  pcrfuade  men.  I 
leave  it  to  every  one's  conicience  to  tell  him  how  great 
a  finner,  how  grievous  an  '  offender  he  hath  been. 
God  knows  we  take  no  pleafure  in  mentioning  the 
fins  of  men,  but  only  in  their  amendment  \  and  we 
would,  if  it  were  pofTible,  even  without  minding 
them  how  bad  they  have  been,  perfuade  and  encou- 
rage them  to  be  better. 

It  is  but  a  fmall  confideration  to  tell  you  how  much 
it  would  chear  and  comfort  our  hearts,  and  quicken 
our  zeal  and  induftry  for  the  falvation  of  our  fouls, 
to  fee  fome  fruit  of  our  labours-,  that  all  our  pains 
are  not  lofl,  and  that  all  the  good  counfel  that  is 
from  hence  tendered  to  you  is  not  like  rain  falling 
upon  the  rocks,  and  fhowers  upon  the  fands. 

'  But  I  have  much  greater  confiderations  to  offer  to 
you  \  that  your  repentance  will  at  once  rejoice  the 
heart  of  God,  and  angels,  and  men :  that  it  is  a  re- 
turning to  a  right  mind,  and  the  reftoring  of  you  to 
yourfelves,  to  the  eafe  and  peace  of  your  own  con- 
fciences,  and  to  a  capacity  of  being  everlaftingJy 
happy  :  that  it  is  to  take  pity  upon  yourfelves  and 
your  poor  immortal  fouls  j   and  to  take  due  care  to 

prevent 


at  the  repentance  of  afinner.  3S9 

prevent  that  which  is  to  be  dreaded  above  all  things,  S  ^R  M. 
the  being  miferable  for  ever :  and  laft  of  all,  that  if 
thou  wilt  not  repent  now,  the  time  will  certainly 
come,  and  that  perhaps  in  this  life,  when  you  fhall 
fee  the  greateft  need  of  repentance,  and  perhaps 
with  miferable  Efau  find  no  place  for  it,  though  you 
feek  it  carefully  with  tears ;  when  you  "  fhall  cry, 
"  Lord,  Lord,  and  the  door  fhall  be  fhut  againft 
'^  you  ;  and  fhall  feek  to  enter,  but  fhall  not  be  a- 
"  ble.  To  be  fure  in  the  other  world  you  fhall  eter- 
nally repent  to  no  purpofe,  and  be  continually  la- 
menting your  wretched  condition  without  hopes  of 
remedy  •,  for  there  fhall  be  weeping  and  wailing  with- 
out efFed:,  without  intermiffion,  and  without  end. 

And  what  caufe  have  v/e  to  thank  God  that  this 
is  not  yet  our  cafe,  that  we  are  yet  on  this  fide  the 
pit  of  deflru6lion,  and  the  gulf  of  defpair  ?  O  the  in- 
finite patience  and  boundlefs  goodnefs  of  God  to  fin- 
ners!  with  what  clemency  hath  he  fpared  us,  and  fuf- 
fered  our  manners  thus  long  ?  And  with  what  kind- 
nefs  and  concernment  does  he  ftill  call  upon  us  to  leave 
our  fins  and  to  return  to  him,  as  if  in  fo  doing  we 
fhould  make  him  happy  and  not  our  felves?  With 
what  earneft  longings  and  defires  doth  he  wait  and 
wifh  for  our  repentance,  faying,  "  O  that  there  were 
"  fuch  an  heart  in  them !  O  that  they  would  heark- 
"  en  unto  my  voice  !  when  fhall  it  once  be?"  Thus 
God  is  reprefented  in  fcripture  as  patiently  attending 
and  hftning  what  effedl  his  admonitions  and  counfels, 
his  reproofs  and  threatnings  will  have  upon  finners, 
Jer.  viii.  6.  "  I  hearkened  and  I  heard,  but  they  fpake 
"  not  aright :  no  man  repented  him  of  his  wicked- 
i*  nefs,  faying,  what  have  I  done  ?  Every  one  turn- 

«  Cd 


390  Of  the  joy  which  is  in  heaven  &c. 

S  E  R  M.  <<  ed  to  his  courfe,  as  the   horfe  rufheth  into  the 
«  battel." 

And  is  not  this  our  cafe  ?  God  hath  long  waited  for 
our  repentance;  and  once  a  year  we  folemnly  pretend 
to  fet  about  it :  but  many  of  us  hitherto,  I  fear,  in- 
ftead  of  returning  to  God  have  but  more  bhndly  and 
furioufly  run  on  in  our  courfe,  Hke  the  horfe  that  has 
no  underflanding;  yea  in  this  more  brutifh  than  the 
beaft,  that  he  ruflieth  into  the  battel  without  any 
confideration  of  death  or  danger,  and  deftroys  him- 
felf  without  a  fyllogifm:  but  we  finners  have  reafon, 
and  yet  are  mad ;  the  greatell  part  of  evil  doers  are 
fufficiently  fenfible  of  the  danger  of  their  courfe,  and 
convinced  that  eternal  mifery  and  ruin  will  be  the 
end  of  it  \  and  yet,  I  know  not  how,  they  make  a 
fliift  upon  one  pretence  or  other  to  difcourfe  and  rea- 
fon themfelves  into  it. 

But  becaufe  the  "  word  of  God  is  quick  and  power- 
"  ful,  and  fharper  than  a  two-edged  fword,"  and 
comes  with  a  greater  weight  and  force  upon  the  minds 
of  men  than  any  human  perfuafion  whatfoever,  I  will 
conclude  all  with  thofe  fhort  and  ferious  counfels  and 
exhortations  of  God  to  finners  by  his  holy  prophets. 

"  Confider  and  Ihew  your  felves  men,  O  ye  tranf- 
*«  greffors :  Be  inllrudled,  O  Jerufalem,  left  my  foul 
"  depart  from  thee :  feek  the  Lord  while  he  may  be 
«  found  j  call  upon  him  while  he  is  near:  repent  and 
*'  turn  your  felves  from  all  your  tranfgreiTions,  fo 
«^  iniquity  Ihall  not  be  your  ruin," 


S  E  R. 


39» 

SERMON     XVIL 

of  the  fin  againft  the  holy  Ghoft. 


M  A  TTH.  xii.  31,32. 

Wherefore  1  fay  unto'you^  all  manner  of  fin  and  hlafphe- 
myfhall  he  forgiven  unto  men^  hut  the  Mafphemy  againft 
the  holy  Ghoft  fhall  not  he  forgiven  unto  men. 

And  whofoever  fpeaketh  a  word  againft  the  fon  of  man^ 
it  fhall  he  forgiven  him :  hut  whofoever  fpeaketh  a- 
gainft  the  holy  Ghoft  ^  it  fhall  not  he  forgiven  him^  nei- 
ther in  this  worlds  neither  in  the  world  to  come. 

TH  E  occafion  of  thefe  words  of  our  bleffed  SERM. 
Saviour  was  the  bJafphemy  of  the  Phari-  ^J^'^ 
fees  againft  that  divine  power  by  which  he 
wrought  his  miracles,  and  particularly  did  caft  out 
devils.  Which  works  of  his,  though  they  were 
wrought  by  the  fpirit  of  God,  yet  they  obftinateiy 
and  malicioufly  imputed  them  to  the  power  of  the 
devil.  Upon  which  our  Savioup.  takes  occaiion  to 
declare  the  danger  of  the  fin,  which  he  calls  blafphe- 
ming  of  the  holy  Ghoft :  and  tells  them  that  this  was 
fo  great  a  fin  above  all  other,  that  it  is  in  a  peculiar 
manner  unpardonable.  "  Wherefore  I  fay  unto  you, 
«  &c." 

For  the  explaining  of  thefe  words,  and  the  nature 
and  unpardonablenefs  of  this  fm,  we  will  enquire  in- 
to thefe  four  things : 

Firft,  what  is  the  difference  between  ipeaking  a- 
gainft  the  fon  of  man,  and  fpeaking  againft  the  ho- 
ly Ghoft.  Secondly, 


Of  the  Jin  againjl  the  holy  Ghoft, 

Secondly,  wherein  the  nature  of  this  fin  or  bkf' 
phemy  againfl  the  holy  Ghoft  doth  confift. 

Thirdly,  in  what  fenfe  thi«  fin  is  here  faid  to  be 
peculiarly  unpardonable.     And 

Fourthly,  upon  what  account  it  is  fo. 

I.  What  is  the  difference  between  fpeaking  againft 
the  fon  of  man  and  fpeaking  againft  the  holy  Ghoft. 
The  reafon  of  this  enquiry  is,  becaufe  the  text  plainly 
puts  a  great  difference  between  them,  though  it  be 
hot  obvious  to  difcern  where  it  lies.  For  our  Savi- 
our tells  us,  that  "  whofoever  fpeaks  a  word  againft 
*'  the  fon  of  man  it  fhall  be  forgiven  him,  but  who- 
*'  foever  fpeaketh  againft  the  holy  Ghoft  it  fhall  ne- 
"  ver  be  forgiven  him  :"  and  yet  this  blafphemy  of 
the  Pharifees  againft  the  holy  Ghoft  was  fpeaking  a- 
gainft  the  fon  of  man.  For  to  fay  he  caft  out  devils 
by  the  power  of  the  devil,  though  it  was  a  blafphe- 
mingof  theholy  Ghoft  by  whofe  power  he  wrought 
thefe  miracles,  yet  it  was  likewife  a  blafpheming  of 
Christ  himfelf,  and  was  in  effedt  to  fay  that  he  was 
no  true  prophet  nor  did  come  from  God,  but  was  a 
magician  and  impoftor. 

For  the  removing  of  this  difficulty  I  fliall  not  need  to 
fay  as  fome  learned  men  have  done,  that  by  the  fon  of 
man  is  here  to  be  underftood  any  man,  and  that  our  Sa- 
viour is  not  particularly  defigned  by  it.  That  feems 
very  hard,  when  our  Saviour  is  fo  frequently  in  the 
gofpel  called  the  fon  of  man.  And  efpecially  when 
St.  Luke  reciting  thefe  words  does  immediately  be- 
fore give  him  this  very  title  to  put  the  matter  out  of 
all  doubt,  Luke  xii.  8,  9,  10.  "  Alfo  I  fay  unto 
«  you,  whofoever  fhall  confefs  me  before  men,  him 
*^  ftiall  the  rQ.n  of  man  alfo  confefs  before  the  angels 

A  «  of 


Of  the  Jin  againft  the  holy  Ghoji.  393 

*^  of  God  :  but  he  that  denieth  me  before  men  fhall  SER  M. 
"  be  denied  before  the  angels  of  God."  Upon  which  ^^y  i 
it  follows^  "  and  whofoever  fhall  fpeak  a  word  againft 
*'  the  fon  of  man  it  Ihall  be  forgiven  him."  So  that 
in  all  reafon  the  fon  of  man  is  the  very  fame  perfon 
that  had  this  title  given  him  in  the  foregoing  wordsjviz. 
our  bleffed  Saviour.  So  that  I  take  it  for  granted, 
that  by  fpeaking  againft  the  fon  of  man  is  here  meant 
fpeaking  againft  Christ:  and  by  fpeaking  againft 
him,  as  it  is  oppofed  to  fpeaking  againft  the  holy 
Ghoft,  is  meant  all  thofe  reproaches  and  contumelies 
which  they  caft  upon  our  Saviour's  perfon,  without 
refleding  upon  that  divine  power  which  he  teftified  by 
his  miracles.  As  their  reproaching  him  with  the  mean- 
nefs  of  his  birth,  "  Is  not  this  the  carpenter  s  fon  ?'* 
with  the  place  of  it  (as  they  fuppofed)  "  out  of  Gali* 
"  lee  arifeth  no  prophet :"  their  refleding  upon  his  lifej 
faying  that  he  was  "  a  wine-bibber  and  a  glutton,  a 
«'  friend  of  publicans  and  finnersj"  with  many  other 
calumnies  which  they  malicioully  caft  upon  him. 

But  by  fpeaking  againft  the  holy  Ghoft  is  meant 
their  blafpheming  and  reproaching  that  divine  power 
whereby  he  wrought  his  miracles ;  which  though  it 
did  at  laft  likewife  refledl  upon  our  Saviour's  per- 
fon, yet  it  was  an  immediate  refledtlon  upon  the  holy 
Ghoft,  and  a  blafpheming  of  him  -,  and  therefore  it 
is  called  fpeaking  againft  the  holy  Ghoft,  by  way  of 
diftiniSbion  or  oppofition  to  the  other  calumnies  which" 
they  ufed  againft  our  Saviour  ;  which  were  proper 
blafphemies  and  reproaches  of  his  perfon,  but  not  of 
the  holy  Ghoft  alfo,  as  this  was.  This  feems  to' 
me  to  be  the  true  difference  here  intended  by  our 
Saviour  between  "  fpeaking  againft  the  fon' of  man. 
Vol.  I  Eee  -  «  and 

8. 


Of  the  fm  againjl  the  Holy  Ghoji. 
"  and  fpcaking  agalnfl  the  holy  Ghofl."  Let  us  in  the 
II.  Second  place,  enquire  wherein  the  nature  of 
this  fin  or  blafphemy  againft  the  holy  Ghofl  doth  con- 
fift.     And   the  true  nature  of  this  fin,  though  it  be 
fo  plainly  to  be  gathered  from  our  Saviour's  defcrip- 
tion  of  it,  yet,  I  know  not  how,  a  great  many  learn- 
ed men  have  made  a  hard  fhift  to  miftake  it.     Some 
have  made  it  to  be  final  impenitency,  becaufe  that  is 
unpardonable.     But  why  that,  rather  than  any  thing 
elfe  that  is  bad,  fiiould  be  called  a  blafpheming  of  the 
holy  Ghofl:,  it  is  hard  to  give  a  reafon.     Others  have 
placed  the  nature  of  it  in  a  "  wilful  and  obfliinate  op- 
"  pofition  of  the  truth :"  which  though  it  be  a  great 
fin,and  included  in  the  fin  here  fpoken  of,  or  a  conco- 
mitant of  it  ;  yet  there  is  great  reafon  to  believe  that 
this  is  not  all  that  is  here  meant  by  it.     Others  would 
have  it  to  confifl:  in  a  malicious  oppofition  of  the 
truth,  "  when  men  know  and  are  convinced  that  it 
*'  is  the  truth  •,"  which  is  a  great  fin  indeed,  if  ever 
any  man  were  guilty  of  it ;  but  it  is  a  great  quefl:ion 
whether  human  nature  be  capable  of  it.    A  man  may 
indeed  have  fafficient  means  of  convidlion,  and  yet 
not  be  convinced  ;  but  it  is  hardly  imaginable  that  a 
man   fliould   oppofe  the  truth  when  he  is  actually 
convinced  that  it  is  the  truth.     And  to  mention  no 
more,  others  think  it  to  confift  in  a  renouncing  of 
the  truth  for  fear  of  fuffering ;  which  made  Francis 
Spira  to  think  that  he  had  committed  this  fin. 

But  with  all  due  refpedl  to  the  judgment  of  others, 
I  cannot  think  that  any  of  thefe  is  the  fin  our  Sa- 
viour here  defcribes.  As  I  fiiall  endeavour  plainly 
to  fliew,  by  confidering  the  occafion  of  our  Savi- 
our's mentioning  of  it,  the  perfons  upon  whom  our 

Sa- 


Of  the  Jin  againfl  the  Holy  Ghojl.  35tJ 

Saviour  chargeth  this  fin,  and  upon  what  account  SERM. 
he  chargeth  them  with  it. 

At  the22d  ver.  of  this  chapter  there  was  brought 
to  our  Saviour  "  one  poITelTed  with  a  devil,  Wind 
"  and  dumb,  and  he  healed  him."  Upon  this  "  the 
"  people  were  amazed,  and  faid,  is  not  this  the  fon 
"  of  David  ?"  that  is,  the  Meffias.  The  Pharifees 
hearing  this,  with  great  bitternefs  and  contempt  faid, 
"  this  fellow  doth  not  call  out  devils  but  by  Beelze- 
"  bub  the  prince  of  devils."  Upon  this  our  Savi- 
our reprefents  to  them  the  unreafonablenefs  of  this 
calumny  ;  and  that  upon  thefe  two  confiderations  : 
I  ft.  That  it  was  very  unlikely  that  the  devil  fhould 
lend  him  this  power  to  ufe  it  againft  himfelf  "  Every 
"  kingdom  divided  againft  it  felf  is  brought  to  de-* 
"  folation  :  and  every  city  or  houfe  divided  againft 
"  it  felffhall  not  ftand.  And  if  Satan  caft  out  Satan, 
"  he  is  divided  againft  himfelf,  how  fhail  then  his 
'^  kingdom  ftand  ?  2dly.  Our  Saviour  tells  them, 
they  might  with  as  much  reafon  attribute  all  mira- 
cles to  the  devil.  There  were  thofe  among  themfelves 
who  caft  out  devils  in  the  name  of  the  God  of  Ab^ra- 
ham,  Ifaac  and  Jacob  (as  Origen,  and  Tertulliait, 
and  Juftin  Martyr  tell  us.)  Of  thefe  our  Saviour 
fpeaks,  and  afks  the  Pharifees  "  by  what  power  they 
"  caft  them  out  ?"  But  they  acknowledged  that 
thefe  did  it  by  the  power  of  God,  and  there  was  no 
caufe,  but  their  malice,  why  they  fhould  not  have 
acknowledged  that  he  did  it  likewife  by  the  fame 
power,  ver.  27.  "  If  I  by  Beelzebub  caft  out  devils, 
"  by  whom  do  your  children  caft  them  out?  there- 
"  fore  they  ftaall  be  your  judges  j"  that  is,  this  may 
be  fufficicnt  to  convince  you  of  malice  to  me  :  "  but 

E  e  e  2  "if 


Of  the  fin  againjithe  Holy  Ghoft. 
«'  if  I  caft  out  devils  by  the  fpirit  of  God,  then  the 
"  kingdom  of  God  is  come  unto  you,"  that  is, 
the  MefTias  is  come  •,  becaufe  he  wrought  thefe  and 
(Other  miracles  to  prove  that  he  was  the  MefTias.  And 
then  it  follows,  "  wherefore  I  fay  unto  you,  all 
^'  manner  of  fin  and  blafphemy  (hall  be  forgiven 
*'  unto  men,  but  the  blafphemy  againfl  the  holy 
*^  Ghoft  fliall  not   be  forgiven  unto  men." 

So  that  the  Pharifees  are  the  perfons  charged  with 
this  fin  or  blafphemy  againft  the  holy  Ghoft.  And 
their  blafphemy  was  plainly  this,  that  when  he  caft 
out  devils  by  the  fpirit  of  God,  they  faid  he  did  it  by 
the  power  of  the  devil  -,  they  maliciouQy  afcribed 
thefe  works  of  the  holy  Ghoft  to  the  devil. 

And  that  this  is  the  ground  why  our  Saviour 
chargeth  them  with  this  fin  againft  the  holy  Ghoft 
is  yet  more  plain  from  St.  Mark,  Mark  iii.  28,  29,  30. 
^f  verily  I  fay  unto  you,  all  fins  fliall  be  forgiven 
^'  unto  the  fons  of  men,  and  blafphemies  wherewith 
^'  foever  they  ftiall  blafpheme  :  but  he  that  blafphe- 
^^  meth  agfiinft  the  holy  Ghoft,  hath  never  foigive- 
^'  nefs,  but  is  in  danger  of  eternal  damnation  •,  be- 
"  caufe  they  faid  he  hath  an  unclean  fpirit:"  that  is, 
becaufe  the  Pharifees  charged  him  to  be  a  magician 
and  to  have  a  familiar  fpirit,  by  whofe  afTiftance  he 
did  thofe  works ;  when  in  triith  he  did  them  by  the 
fpirit  of  God  ;  therefore  our  Saviour  declares  them 
guilty  of  this  fin  of  blafpheming  the  holy  Ghoft 
"which  fhould  never  be  forgiven. 

So  that  the  nature  of  this  fin  did  confift  in  a  moft 
malicious  oppofition  to  the  utmoft  evidence  that 
puld  be  given  to  the  truth  of  any  religion.  Our 
blefted Saviour,  to  fhew  that  he  was  fent  by  God, 

and 


Of  the  Jin  againjl  the  Holy  Ghoji.  397 

;  ERM 
XVII. 


and  came  from  him,  wrought  miracles,  fuch  as  did  ^  ^  ^  ^• 


plainly  evidence  a  divine  power  and  prefence  accom- 
panying him.  For  in  St.  Luke  he  is  faid  to  do  them 
"  by  the  fingerof  God,"  Luke  xi.  20.  "  by  the  finger 
"  of  God,"  that  is,  to  do  fuch  things  as  were  undeni- 
able evidences  of  the  divine  power  and  prefence.  And 
this  is  the  utmofl  teftimpny  that  God  ever  gave  to  any 
perfon  that  was  fent  by  him.  And  the  Pharifees  were 
eye-witnefles  of  thofe  miracles  which  our  Saviour 
wrought,  fo  that  they  could  not  deny  them  :  yet 
fuch  was  their  oppofition  to  him  and  his  doi5trine, 
that  though  they  faw  thefe  things  done  by  him,  and 
could  not  deny  the  reality  of  them,  yet  rather  than 
they  would  own  him  to  be  the  MefTias  and  his  doc- 
trine to  come  from  God,  they  mofl  malicioufly  and 
unreafonably  afcribed  them  to  the  power  of  the  devil. 
And  this  was  the  blafphemy  which  they  were  guilty 
of  againft  the  holy  Ghoft.  And  herein  lay  the  great- 
nefs  of  their  fm,  in  refifting  the  evidence  of  thofc 
miracles  which  were  fo  plainly  wrought  by  the  ho- 
ly Ghoft  ;  and  which,  though  themfelves  faw,  yet 
they  malicioufly  imputed  them  to  the  devil,  rather 
than  they  would  be  convinced  by  them.  And  this 
is  fo  very  plain,  that  hardly  any  man,  that  confiders 
our  Saviour's  difcourfe  upon  this  occafipn,can  other- 
wife  determine  the  nature  of  this  fin,  efpecially  if  he 
do  but  attend  to  thofe  remarkable  words  which  I 
cited  before  (Mark  iii,  29.)  "  but  he  that  blafphe- 
"  meth  againft  the  holy  Ghoft  hath  never  forgive- 
"  nefs,  but  is  in  danger  of  eternal  damnation  ;  be- 
"  caufe  they  faid,  he  hath  an  unclean  fpirit."  I  come 
now  to  the 

IIL  Third 


XVII. 


393  Of  the  fin  againfl  the  Holy  Ghofl, 

SERM.  III.  Third  thing  I  propounded,  namely,  in  what 
fenfc  this  fin  is  here  faid  to  be  peculiarly  unpardoria^ 
ble:  For  this  fin  our  Saviour  pofitively  affirms  to 
be  in  this  different  from  all  other  fins,  that  it  is  ca- 
pable of  no  pardon  :  '^  I  fay  unto  you,  all  m^inner  of 
*'  fin  and  blafphemy  fhail  be  forgiven  unto  men  ;  but 
*^  the  blafphemy  againfl  the  holy  Gholl  fhall  not 
^^  be  forgiven  unto  men  :"  and  to  (hew  what  he 
means  by  the  not  forgiving  of  it,  he  tells  us,  that 
eternal  punifliment  fhall  follow  It  in  the  other  world. 
*^  Whofoever  fpeaketh  a  word  againfl  the  fon  of 
*'  man,  at  fhall  be  forgiven  him :  but  whofoever 
"  fpeaketh  againfl  the  holy  Ghofl,  it  fhall  never  be 
^  forgiven  him,  neither  in  this  world,  nor  m  the 
*^  world  to  come."  Which  St.  Mark  expreffeth  more 
plainly,  that  it  fhall  bring  thofe  who  are  guilty  of  it 
to  eternal  damnation,  Mark  iii.  29.  "  he  that  blaf- 
*'  phemeth  againfl  the  holy  Ghofl,  hath  never  for- 
**  givcnefs,  but  is  liable  to  eternal  damnation."  So 
that  when  our  Saviour  fays,  "  it  fhall  never  be  for- 
*^  given,  neither  in  this  world,  nor  in  the  world  to 
*'  Gome,'*  he  does  not  intend  to  infinuate  that  fome 
fins  which  are  not  forgiven  in  this  world  may  be  for- 
given in  the  other  ;  but  in  thefe  words  he  either  al- 
ludes to  the  opinion  of  the  Jews  concerning  the  ef- 
fect of  the  highefl  excommunication,  the  fentence 
v/hereof  they  held  not  to  be  reverfible,  neither  in 
this  world  nor  the  other  ;  or  elfe  the  reafon  of  this 
cxprefTion  may  probably  be  to  meet  with  a  common 
and  falfe  opinion  amongfl  the  Jews,  which  was,  that 
fbme  fins  which  are  not  pardoned  to  men  in  this  life* 
may  by  facrifices  be  expiated  in  the  other ;  and  there- 
fore he  fiys  it  fhall  never  be  forgiven,  neither  in  this 

world 


Of  the  Jin  againft  tloe  Holy  Ghoji.  399 

world  nor  the  other.  And  St.  Mark  more  plainly,  S  E  R  ]>•{* 
that  thofe  who  are  guilty  of  it"  fhall  never  have  for- 
**  givenefs,"  but "  be  liable  to  eternal  damnation."  So 
that  our  Saviour's  meaning  feems  plainly  to  be  this, 
that  this  fin  is  altogether  incapable  of  forgivenefs, 
I  know  fome  have  endeavoured  to  mollify  this  mat- 
ter, but  (I  think)  without  fufficient  reafon.  Grotius 
underftands  the  words  comparatively,  that  any  fort 
of  fin  fhall  fooner  be  forgiven  than  this  againft  the 
holy  Ghoft  ;  and  that  our  Saviour  only  intended 
to  exprefs  the  greatnefs  and  heinoufnefs  of  this  fin 
above  others,  in  which  refpedt  the  pardon  of  it 
would  be  more  difficult  than  of  any  other  fin  ;  but 
yet  that  the  cafe  of  fuch  a  perfon  is  not  abfolutely  dc- 
fperate:  but  if  our  Saviour  had  intended  to  fay, 
that  this  fin  was  abfolutely  unpardonable,  I  would 
fain  know  how  could  he  have  expreffed  the  matter 
in  higher  and  fuller  words  ?  Dr.  Hammond  mollifies 
the  words  another  way,  that  this  fin  fhall  never  be 
pardoned,  but  upon  a  particular  repentance  for  it :  as 
if  our  Saviour's  meaning  was,  that  a  general  repen- 
tance, which  was  fufficient  for  fins  of  ignorances 
wouki  not  be  fufficient  in  this  cafe,  but  there  moil 
be  a  particular  repentance  for  it,  without  which  it 
would  never  be  pardoned.  But  this  is  by  no  means 
agreeable  to  the  fcope  of  our  Savioitr's  difcourfc: 
becaufe  he  plainly  intends  to  difference  this  from  all 
other  forts  of  fins,  I  fay  unto  you,  all  manner  of  fin 
and  blafphemy  fhall  be  forgiven  unto  men.  But  ac- 
cording to  this  interpretation  otir  Saviour  muft 
mean,  that  all  other  fins  wouki  be  forgiven  upon  a 
general  repentance  ;  which  is  not  true,  for  there  arc 
many  other  fins  befides  fias  of  ignorance,  there  arc 
3  wilful 


XVII. 


4^o  Of  the  fin  againjl  the  Holy  Ghoji, 

S  E  R  M.  wilful  and  heinous  fins,  fuch  as  wilful  murder  and 
adultery  and  blafphemy,  (that  only  excepted  which 
is  againil  the  holy  Ghoft)  and  the  like  grofs  fins, 
which  all  divines  hold  ihall  not  be  forgiven,  but  up- 
on a  particular  repentance.  So  that  this  interpretati- 
on does  not  fufficiently  difference  this  fin  from  all 
otherforts  of  fins,  which,  it  is  yet  veiy  plain,  our  Sa- 
viour intended  to  do.  It  remains  then  that  thefe 
words  muft  in  all  reafon  be  underflood  abfolutely,- 
that  the  perfons  that  are  guilty  of  this  great  fin  fhall 
never  have  it  forgiven  unto  them.  And  it  may  be  this 
will  not  feemfo  harfh,  when  we  have  confidered  in  the 

IV.  Fourth  place,  how  it  comes  to  pafs  that  this 
fin  is  above  all  others  incapable  of  pardon :  and  that, 
upon  thefe  two  accounts. 

Firft,  becaufe  by  this  fin  men  refift  their  lafl  re- 
medy, and  oppofe  the  befi  andutmoft  means  of  their 
convidlion.  What  can  God  be  imagined  to  do  more 
to  convince  a  man  of  a  divine  revelation,  or  of  the 
truth  of  any  dodtrine  or  meflage  that  comes  from  him, 
than  to  work  miracles  to  this  purpofe  ?  And  what 
greater  afiTurance  can  men  have  that  miracles  are 
wrought,  than  to  be  eye-witnefles  of  them  them- 
felves  ^  And  if  men  will  refift  fuch  evidence,  what 
can  God  do  more  for  their  fatisfadion  ?  If,  when  men 
fee  plain  miracles  wrought,  they  will  fay  that  it  is  not 
the  power  of  God  that  does  them,  but  the  power  of 
the  devil  :  and  if,  when  men  fee  the  devils  caft  out, 
they  will  fay  that  the  devil  confpires  againft  himfelf  j 
this  is  to  outface  the  fun  at  noon-day,  and  there  is 
no  way  left  to  convince  fuch  perverfe  perfons  of  the 
truth  of  any  divine  revelation.  So  that  there  is  no 
remedy  but  fuch  perfons  muft  continue  in  their  op- 

pofitiori 


Of  the  Jin  agatnft  the  holy  Ghoji,  40 1 

pofition  to  the  truth.     For  this  is  fuch  a  fill  as  does  SERM. 
r    .  ,  ^  ,  n  J       XVII. 

in  It  s  own  nature  Inut  out  and  prevent  all  remedy. 

And  he,  that  thus  perverfely  and  malicioufly  oppo- 
feth  the  truth,  muft,  upon  the  fame  grounds,  unavoid- 
ably continue  in  his  oppofition  to  it  \  bccaufe  there 
is  nothing  left  to  be  done  for  his  convidlion,  more 
than  is  already  done.  If  God  lliould  fend  a  perfon 
immediately  from  heaven  to  him  to  convince  him  of 
his  error,  he  can  give  him  no  greater  teftimony,  that 
he  comes  from  God,  than  miracles :  and  if  when  God 
enables  that  perfon  to  work  thefe  by  the  power  of 
his  fpirit,  this  man  will  obftinately  impute  them  to  the 
power  of  the  devil,  he  defeats  all  the  imaginable  means 
of  his  own  convidion.  So  thatitisno  wonder  if  that  fin 
be  unpardonable,  which  refifts  the  laft  and  utmoft  means, 
which  God  hath  ever  yet  thought  fit  to  ufe  to  bring 
men  to  repentance  and  falvation.  And  if  God  were 
willing  to  reveal  himfelf,  and  the  way  to  pardon  and 
falvation  to  fuch  a  one,  he  doth,  by  this  very  temper 
and  difpofition,  render  himfelf  incapable  of  being  fa- 
tisfied  and  convinced  concerning  any  divine  revelation. 

Secondly,  becaufe  this  fin  is  of  that  high  nature, 
that  God  is  therefore  juflly  provoked  to  withdraw/ 
his  grace  from  fuch  perfons  •,  and,  it  is  probable,  re- 
folved  fo  to  do  j  without  which  grace  they  will  con- 
tinue impenitent.  There  is  no  doubt  bvit  God,  if  he 
will,  can  workfo  powerfully  upon  the  minds  of  men 
by  his  grace  and  fpirit,  as  to  convince  the  moil  ol> 
ftinate:  and  fuppofing  them  to  be  convinced  and 
repent,  it  cannot  be  denied  but  that  they  would  be 
forgiven.  And  therefore  when  our  Saviour  here  fays 
they  fhall  not;  be  forgiven,  it  is  reafonable  to  fuppofe  that 
he  means,  that  when  perfpns  are  come  to  th^t  des:ree  ojf 

Vol.  I.  Fff  "obfti- 


Ofthefm  againfl  the  holy  Ghojl, 
obftinacy  and  malice,  God  will  (asjuftly  he  may)  with- 
draw his  grace  from  them  :  "  his  fpirit  will  not  ftrive 
"  with  them"  to  overcome  their  obftinacy,  but  will  leave 
them  to  the  biafs  of  their  o>vn  perverfe  and  mali- 
cious minds :  which  will  flill  engage  them  in  a  far- 
ther oppofition  to  the  truth,  and  finally  fink  them 
into  perdition.  So  that  being  deferted  by  God,  and 
for  want  of  the  neccfiary  help  and  aid  of  his  grace 
(juflly  withdrawn  from  them )  continuing  finally  im- 
penitent, they  become  incapable  of  forgivenefs  both 
in  this  world  and  that  v/hich  is  to  come.  And  there 
is  nothing  that  can  feem  harfh  or  unreafonable  in  this, 
to  thofe  who  grant  (  as  I  think  all  men  do)  that  God 
may  be  fo  provoked  by  men  as  juftly  to  withdraw 
his  grace  from  them  in  this  life,  that  grace  which  is 
necefifary  to  their  repentance.  And  furely  if  any 
provocation  be  likely  to  do  it,  this  cannot  be  denied 
to  be  of  all  others  the  greatefl,  obftinately  and  ma- 
licioufly  to  oppofe  the  utmoft  evidence  that  God 
ever  gave  to  the  truth  of  any  dodrine  revealed  by 
him.  And  of  this  the  Pharifees,  who  are  here  charged 
•with  this  fin  againft  the  holy  Ghofi:,  were  notorioully 
guilty  in  refilling  the  clear  evidence  of  our  Saviour's 
miracles. 

And  thus  I  have  done  v/ith  the  four  things  I  pro- 
pounded to  enquire  into  from  thefe  words,  namely, 
the  difference  between  fpeaking  againft  the  fon  of 
man,  and  fpeaking  againft  the  holy  Ghoft  \  wherein 
the  nature  of  this  fin  of  blafphemy  againft  the  holy 
Ghoft  does  confift.  \  and  in  what  fenfe  this  fin  is  faid 
to  be  unpardonable  ,  and  upon  what  account  it  is  fo  ; 
r.amelyj  bccaufe  men  by  this  fin  refift  their  laft  reme- 
^iy,  and  oppofe  the  heft  and  utmoft  means  of  their 


Ofthejifi  agaifijl  the  holy  Ghojl^  403 

convi6lion  :  and  becaufe  it  may  reafonably  be  fuppof-  ^  yrqr'^' 
ed,  that  upon  provocation  of  this  high  nature,  God  may 
and  is  refolved  to  withdraw  that  grace  from  fuch  per- 
fons  which  is  neceflary  to  their  repentance,  without 
which  their  fin  remains  for  ever  unpardonable. 

All  that  now  remains  is  to  make  this  difcourfe 
fome  way  or  other  ufeful  to  ourfelves.  And  it  may 
very  well  ferve  to  thefe  two  purpofes.  Firft,  to  com- 
fort fome  very  good  and  pious  perfons,  who  are  liable 
to  defpair  out  of  an  apprehenfion  that  they  have  com.- 
mitted  this  fin.  Secondly,  to  caution  others  againft 
the  approaches  to  it. 

I.  Firft,  to  comfort  fome  very  good  and  pious 
perfons,  who  are  liable  to  defpair  upon  an  apprehen- 
fion that  they  have  committed  this  great  and  unpar- 
donable fin  ;  and  confcquently  are  utterly  incapable 
of  ever  being  reflored  to  the  mercy  and  favour  of 
God.  And  nothing  can  be  more  for  the  comfort  of  fuch 
perfons  than  to  underfland  aright  what  the  nature  of 
this  fin  is,  and  wherein  the  heinoufnefs  of  it  doth 
confift;  which  I  have  endeavoured  to  manifeft.  And 
if  this  be  the  nature  of  it  which  I  have  declared,  as  it 
feemsvery  plain  that  it  is,  then  I  cannot  fee  how  any 
perfon  now  is  likely  to  be  in  thofe  circumflances  as  to 
be  capable  of  committing  it.  And  being  a  fin  of  fo 
heinous  a  nature,  and  declared  by  our  Saviour  to 
be  abfolutely  unpardonable,  there  is  no  reafon  to  ex- 
tend it  beyond  the  cafe  to  which  ourSAViouR  applies 
it  -,  which  was  the  refilling  of  the  evidence  of  the  mi- 
racles which  were  wrought  for  the  truth  of  Chriftia- 
nity,  by  thofe  who  were  eye-witneflfes  of  them,  that 
is,  by  thofe  who  had  the  utmofi:  aiTurance  of  them 
that  human  nature  is  capable  of.  And  not  only  a 
Fff^  bare 


Of  the  fin  againjl  the  holy  Ghojl. 
bare  refinance  of  that  evidence,  but  with  a  very  ma- 
licious circumftance,  fo  as  to  impute  thofe  works, 
which  were  wrought  by  the  holy  Ghoft,  to  the  power 
of  the  devil.  This  was  the  cafe  of  the  Pharifces 
whom  our  Saviour  chargeth  with  this  fin.  And  no 
body  hath  warrant  to  extend  this  fm  any  farther  than 
this  cafe :  and  without  good  warrant  it  would  be  the 
moft  uncharitable  thing  in  the  world  to  extend  it  any 
farther. 

That  which  comes  nearefl  to  it,  both  in  the  hei- 
noufnefs  of  the  crime  and  the  unpardonablenefs  of  it, 
is  total  apoftafy  from  Chriftianity,  after  the  embracing 
of  it  and  full  convidlion  of  the  truth  of  it.  And 
this  the  fcripture  feems  to  place,  if  not  in  the  fame 
rank,  yet  very  near  to  it.  And  of  this  the  apoftlc 
ipeaks  very  often  in  the  epiflle  to  the  Hebrews 
under  the  Name  of  unbelief,  and  £m  by  way  of 
eminence,  as  being  the  great  fin  that  Chriftians 
were  in  danger  of  falling  into,  called  in  that  e- 
piftle,  (Heb.  xii.  i.)  >;  guVse/W©*  ufxa^Ttoty  the  fin 
which  Chriftians,  by  reafon  of  the  circumftances  they 
were  then  in,  were  efpecially  fubjedl  to  :  and  he  pa- 
rallels it  with  the  cafe  of  the  Jews  in  the  wildernefs, 
concerning  whom  "  God  fware  that  they  fhould  not 
«  enter  into  his  reft,"  namely,  the  earthly  Canaan 
which  was  a  type  of  heaven,  chap.  iii.  ver.  i8.  And 
chap.  vi.  ver.  4,  5^6.  more  exprefly  :  "  For  it  is  im- 
♦*  poftible  that  thofe  who  were  once  enlightened,  and 
*'  have  tafted  of  the  heavenly  gift,  and  were  made 
"  partakers  of  the  holy  Ghoft,  and  have  tafted 
"  the  good  word  of  God,  and  the  powers  of  the 
*'  world  to  come,  if  they  fhould  fall  away,  to  renew 
«  themagain  to  repentance."  Where  by  impo(rible,thc 

Icaft 


Of  the  Jin  againji  the  holy  Ghoji,  405 

leaft  that  can  be  meant  is,  that  it  is  extremely  difficult  for  SERM. 
fuch  perfons  to  recover  themfelves  by  repentance.  And 
'tis  obfervable  that  thofe  perfons  are  faid  to  have  been 
partakers  of  the  holy  Ghofl,  by  which  is  meant 
that  they  were  endued  with  a  power  of  miracles  by 
the  holy  Ghoft,  or  were  under  the  con vidlion  of  them, 
as  having  feen  them  wrought  by  others.  So  that  this 
apoftafy  may  be  faid  in  that  refpe6l  to  be  "  a  fin  a- 
*'  gainft  the  holy  Ghoft.'*  So  likewife,  chap.  x.  ver.  26. 
"  If  we  fin  wilfully  after  we  have  received  the  know- 
"  Jedge  of  the  truth/'  ( that  is,  if  we  apoflatizc  from 
Chriftianity,  after  we  have  embraced  the  profefTion  of 
it^  as  appears  plainly  from  the  fcope  of  the  apoflle's 
difcourfe)  "there  remains  no  more  facrifice  for  fin:'* 
which  expreffion  declares  this  fin  either  to  be  un- 
pardonable, or  fomething  very  like  it.  And  at  the 
29th  ver.  thofe  perfons  are  faid  to  "  tread  under  foot 
*'  the  Son  of  God,  and  to  do  defpite  unto  the  fpirit  of 
*'  grace."  Which  fignifies  that  the  fin  there  fpoken 
of  is  more  immediately  committed  againft  the  holy 
Spirit  of  God.  Sl  Peter  likewife  declares  the  great 
danger  of  this  fin,  2  Pet.  ii.  20.  "  If  after  they  have 
*'  efcaped  the  pollutions  of  the  world  through  the 
"  knowledge  of  the  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ 
**  they  are  again  entangled  therein  and  overcome, 
*'  the  latter  end  is  worfe  with  them  than  the  begin- 
"  ning."  St.  John  hkewife  feems  to  fpeak  of  this  Ha 
of  apoftafy,  and  to  call  it  "  a  fin  unto  death;"  dif- 
couraging  Chriftians  rather  from  praying  for  thofe 
who  were  fallen  into  it  ;  which  gives  great  fufpidon 
that  he  looked  upon  it  as  hardly  pardonable,  i  Joh. 
V.  16.  "  If  any  man  fee  his  brother  fin  a  fin  unto 
*'  death,  he  fliall  afic,  and  he  ftiall  give  him  life 

1  «  for 


4o6  Of  the  Jin  againft  the  holy  Ghcjl, 

SERM.  «  f-Qj.  tj^(3(-g  jI^^j  ^jj^  j^qj.  yj^jQ  (jeath.  There  is  a  fifi 
*'  unto  death,  I  do  not  fay  that  he  fhall  pray  for  it.'* 
Now  that  by  the  fin  unto  death  the  apoftle  here 
means  apoftafy  from  the  Chriftian  religion  to  the  hea- 
then idolatry,  feems  extremely  probable  from  what 
follows,  ver.  i8.  "  We  know  that  whofoever  is  born 
*'  of  God  finneth  not,  but  keepeth  himfelf,  and  that 
"  wicked  one  toucheth  him  not-,"  that  is,  he  pre^ 
ferveth  himfelf  from  idolatry,  which  the  devil  had  fe- 
duced  the  world  into,  ver.  19.  "  And  we  know  that 
*'  we  are  of  God,  and  the  whole  world  lieth  in  wick- 
*'  ednefs,  Iv  toT  wovg^w,  in  the  wicked  one  ♦,"  that  is,  is 
under  the  power  of  the  devil  \  "  and  we  know  that 
*'  the  Son  of  God  is  come,  and  hath  given  us  un- 
*'  derftanding  to  know  him  that  is  true;"  that  is,  to 
diftinguifli  between  the  true  God  and  idols.  And 
then  it  follows,  "  this  is  the  true  God  and  eternal 
"  life :  little  children,  keep  yourfelves  from  idols." 
Which  lafl  caution  is  a  key  to  the  underilanding  of  all 
the  reft,  and  makes  it  very  probable,  that  the  fin 
unto  death  is  apoftafy  from  Chriftianity  unto  idola- 
try: otherwife  it  is  hard  to  imagine  how  the  laft 
claufe  comes  in,  "  little  children,  keep  your  felves 
"  from  idols."  And  this  is  that  fin  which  of  all  o- 
ther  approacheth  neareft  to  this  fin  againft  the  holy 
Ghoft-  which  our  Saviour  fpeaksof,  and  concerning 
the  pardonablenefs  of  which  the  fcriptnre  feems  to 
fpeak  very  doubtfully.  But  if  it  were  of  the  fame 
unpardonable  nature,  yet  this  can  be  no  trouble  to 
thofe  perfonsi  am  fpeakingof,  who  cannot  but  know 
themfelves  to  be  far  enough  from  the  guilt  of  this  fin. 
As  for  thole  other  fins,  which  by  fome  are  taken  to 
be  the  fins  againft  the  holy  Ghoft,  they  are  either  fuch 

as 


Of  the  Jin  agatnjl  the  holy  Ghoft.  407 

as  perhaps  no  man  is  capable  of  committing,  as  a^  E  R  r^. 
malicious  oppofition  to  the  truth,  when  I  am  convin- 
ced and  know  it  to  be  the  truth  :  for  this  feems  to  be 
a  contradicftion,  to  know  any  thing  to  be  the  truth, 
and  to  believe  it  to  be  fo,  and  yet  to  oppofe  it;  be- 
caufe  the  underflanding  can  no  more  oppofe  truth  as 
truth,  than  the  will  can  refufe  good  as  good.  Or 
elfe,  they  are  fuch  as  no  man  can  know  he  is  guilty 
of  in  this  life;  as,  final  impenitency,  which  fuppof- 
cth  a  man  to  live  and  die  without  repentance.  Or 
elfe,  fuch  as  I  think  no  good  man  is  incident  to  -,  a5» 
a  malicious  and  perverfe  oppofing  of  the  truth  after 
fufficient  means  of  convidion.  However,  none  of 
thefe  are  that  which  the  fcripture  defcribes  to  be 
the  fin  againfl  the  holy  Ghoft,  as  I  have  already 
fhewn. 

But  flill  there  are  two  things  which  ufually  trouble 
honed  and  well-meaning  perfons,  but  are  rather  the 
effe6ls  of  melancholy  than  any  reafonable  ground  of 
trouble.  Some  think  that  every  deliberate  fin  againfl 
knowledge,  and  after  convi6lion,  is  the  fin  againft 
the  holy  Ghoft.  This  is  acknowledged  to  be  a  very- 
great  aggravation  of  fin,  and  fuch  as  calls  for  a  great 
and  particular  repentance ;  but  does  by  no  means  ren- 
der a  man  incapable  of  forgivenefs.  Others  are  trou- 
bled with  blafphemous  thoughts,  and  thofe  they 
think  to  be  the  fin  againft  the  holy  Ghoft.  But  this 
is  generally  the  meer  effed:  of  melancholy,  and  the 
perfons  that  are  troubled  with  thefe  black  thoughts  are 
no  ways  confenting  to  them,  but  they  rife  in  their 
minds  perfectly  againft  their  wills  and  without  any 
approbation  of  theirs  :  and  in  this  cafe  they  are  fo  far 
from  being  the  unpardonable  fin,  that  I  hope,  yea 

and 


4o8  Of  the  fill  again/l  the  holy  Ghojt. 

S  E  R  M.  and  verily  believe,  they  are  no  fins  at  all,  but  the 
1  Zl  i  tnecr  efFeds  of  a  bodily  diftemper;  and  no  more 
imputed  to  us  than  the  wild  and  idle  ravings  of  a 
man  in  a  frenzy  or  a  fever.  And  God  forbid  that 
the  natural  effeds  of  a  bodily  difeafe  fhould  bring 
guilt  upon  our  fouls.  So  that  thefe  perfons  have 
reafon  enough  for  comfort  j  but  the  mifery  is,  their 
prefent  diftemper  renders  them  incapable  of  it. 

2.  Secondly,  the  other  ufe   I  would  make  of  this 
difcourfe  is,  to  caution  men  againft  the  degrees  and 
approaches  of  this  fin.   For  if  the  fin  againft  the  holy 
Ghoft  be  of  fuch  a  high  nature  and  fo  unpardonable, 
then  all  approaches  to  it  are  very  dreadful.  Such  as  are, 
profane  fcoffing  at  religion,  and  the  holy  fpirit  of  God 
which  dwells  in  good  men :  abufe  of  the  holy  fcrip- 
tures,  which  were  indited  by  the  fpirit  of  God  :  per- 
verfe   infidehty,    notwithftanding  all    the   evidence 
which  we  have  for  the  truth  of  Chriftianity,  and  fuf- 
ficient  aflfurance  of  the  miracles  wrought  for  the  con- 
firmation of  it,  brought  down  to  us  by  credible  hifto- 
ry,  though  we  are  not  eye-witnefles  of  them :    ob- 
ftinacy  in  a  finful  and  vicious  courfe,  notwithftand- 
ing all  the  motives  and  arguments  of  the  gofpel  to 
perfuade  men  to  repentance.     Sinning  againft  the 
clear  convidion  of  our  confciences,  and  the  motions 
and  fuggcftions  of  God's  holy  Spirit  to  the  contrary. 
Malicious  oppofing  of  the  truth  when  the  arguments 
for  it  are  very  plain  and  evident  to  any  impartial  and 
unprejudiced  mind,  and  when  he  that  oppofeth  the 
truth  hath  no  clear  fatisfadion  in  his  own  mind  to 
the  contrary,  but  fuffers  himfelf  to  be  furioufly  and 
headily  carried  on  in  his  oppofition  to  it.     Thefe  are 
all  fins  of  a  very  high  nature,  and  of  the  neareft  afH- 

pity 


Ofthefm  againft  the  holy  Ghoji.  409 

nity  with  this  great  and  unpardonable  fin,  of  any  that  SE  R  M 
can  eafijy  be  inftanced  in.  And  though  God,  to  ^^'"• 
encourage  the  repentance  of  men,  has  not  declared  '^"'"'^ 
them  unpardonable,  yet  they  are  great  provocations ; 
and  if  they  be  long  continued  in,  we  know  not  how 
foon  God  may  withdraw  his  grace  from  us,  and  fuf- 
fer  us  to  be  «  hardened  through  the  deceitfulnefs  of 
"  fin." 

Be  ready  then  to  entertain  the  truth  of  God  when- 
ever it  is  fairly  propounded  to  thee,  and  with  fuch 
evidence  as  thou  art  willing  to  accept  in   other  mat- 
ters where  thou  haft  no  prejudice  nor  intereft  to  the 
contrary.     Do  nothing  contrary  to  thy  known  duty, 
but  be  careful  in  all  things  to  obey  the  convidions  of 
thine  own  confcience,  and  to  yield  to  the  good  mo- 
tions and  fuggeftions of  God's  holy  Spirit,  who  works 
fecretly  upon  the  minds  of  men,  and  infpires  us  ma- 
ny times  gently  with  good  thoughts  and  inclinations, 
and  IS  grieved  when  we  do  not  comply  with  them  ; 
and  after  many  repulfes  will  at  laft  withdraw  himfelf 
from  us,  and  leave  us  to  be  alTaulted  by  the  tempta- 
tions of  the  devil,  and  to  be  hurried  away  by  our  own 
iufts  into  ruin  and  perdition. 


^'l]"'^'  ^gg  S  E  R- 


410 


SERMON    XVIII. 

The  example  of  Jefus  in  doing  good. 


ACTS   X.  38. 

'Who  went  about  doing  good. 


HEN  almighty  God  defigaed  the  re- 
formation of  the  world  and  the  reftoring 
of  man  to  the  image  of  God,  the  pat- 
tern after  which  he  was  firft  made,  he 
did  not  think  it  enough  to  give  us  the  mod  perfedl 
laws  of  holinefs  and  virtue  •,  but  hath  likewife  fet  be- 
fore us  a  living  pattern,  and  a  familiar  example  to  ex- 
cite and  encourage  us,  to  go  before  us  and  ihew  us 
the  way,  and  as  it  were  to  lead  us  by  the  hand  in  the 
obedience  of  thofe  laws.  Such  is  the  fovereign  au- 
thority of  God  over  men  that  he  might,  if  he  had 
pleafed,  have  only  given  us  a  law  written  with  his 
own  hand,  as  he  did  to  the  people  of  Ifrael  from 
mount  Sinai :  but  fuch  is  his  goodnefs,  that  he  hath 
fent  a  great  embaffador  from  heaven  to  us,  "  God 
"  .  manifeftcd  in  the  flefh,"  to  declare  and  interpret 
his  will  and  pleafure  •,  and  not  only  fo,  but  to  fulfil 
that  law  himfelf,  the  obfervation  whereof  he  requires 
of  us.  The  bare  rules  of  a  good  life  are  a  very  dead 
and  ineffectual  thing  in  comparifon  of  a  living  exam- 
ple, which  fhews  us  the  poffibility  and  pradicable- 
nefs  of  our  duty;  both  that  it  may  be  done,  and  how 
to  do  it.  Religion  indeed  did  always  confift  in  an  imita- 
tion of  God,  and  in  our  tefemblance  of  thofe  excel- 
lencies 


T^he  example  of  Jefus  m  dohig  good.  411 

lencles  which  fhine  forth  in  the  befl'  and  moft  perfe61:  S  E  R  M, 

XVIII 
being;  but  we   may  imitate  him   now   with  much 

greater  eafe  and  advantage,  fince  God  was  pleafed  to 
become  man  on  purpofe  to  fhew  us  how  men  may 
become  hke  to  God.  And  this  is  one  great  end  for 
which  the  fon  of  God  came  into  the  world,  and  "  was 
"  madeflefh,  and  dwelt  among  us,"  and  converfed  fo 
long  and  familiarly  with  mankind  •,  that  in  his  own  per- 
fon  and  life  he  might  give  us  the  example  of  all 
that  holinefs  and  virtue  which  his  laws  require  of  us. 
And  as  he  was  in  nothing  hker  the  fon  of  God  than 
in  being  and  doing  good,  fo  is  he  in  nothing  a  fitter 
pattern  for  our  imitation  than  in  that  excellent  cha- 
racter given  of  him  here  in  the  text,  that  "  he  went 
"  about  doing  good/' 

In  which  words  two  things  offer  themfelves  to  our 
confideration. 

Firfl,  our  Saviour's  great  work  and  bufinefs  in 
the  world,  which  was  to  do  good  :  oV  (J'/JjaS-sv  guspj^g- 
Twi',  v/ho  employed  himfelf  in  being  a  benefa6lor  to 
mankind.  This  refers  more  efpecially  to  his  healing 
the  bodily  difeafes  and  infirmities  of  men.  "God 
"  anointed  Jesus  of  Nazareth  with  the  holy  Ghoft 
"  and  with  power  \  who  went  about  doing  good, 
'*^  and  healing  all  that  were  oppreded  of  the  devil.'* 
intimating  to  us  by  this  inftance  of  his  doing  good, 
that  he,  who  took  fo  much  pains  to  refcue  mens  bodies 
from  the  power  and  pojOTelTion  of  the  devil,  would  not 
jet  ^heir  fojls  remain  under  his  tyranny.  But  though 
the  tdxt  inftanceth  only  in  one  particular,  yet  this 
general  exprefTion  of  doing  good  comprehends  all 
thofe  feveral  ways  whereby  he  was  beneficial  to  man- 
kind, 

G  g  g  a  Second* 


7he  example  of  ye  fits  in  doing  good. 

Secondly,  here  is  his  dihgence  and  induflry  in  thIS 
work,  "  he  went  about  doing  good  ;"  he  made  it 
the  great  bufinefs  and  conflant  employment  of  his 
hfe.  I  iliall  propound  to  you  the  pattern  cf  our  Sa- 
viour in  both  thefe  particulars. 

I.  His  great  work  and  bufinefs  in  the  world  was 
to  do  good.  The  moli:  pleafant  and  delightful,  the 
moft  happy  and  glorious  work  in  the  world.  It  is  a 
work  of  a  large  extent,  and  of  an  univerfal  influence  ; 
and  comprehends  in  it  all  thofe  ways  whereby  we 
may  be  ufeful  and  beneficial  to  one  another.  And 
indeed  it  were  pity  that  fo  good  a  thing  fhould  be 
confined  within  narrow  bounds  and  limits.  It  reach- 
Gth  to  the  fouls  of  rnen,  and  to  their  bodies  ;  and  is 
converfant  in  all  thofe  ways  and  kinds  whereby  we 
ipay  ferve  the  temporal  or  fpi ritual  good  of  our  neigh- 
bour, and  promote  his  prefent  and  his  future  happir 
n,efs.  What  our  blefied  Saviour  did  in  this  kind, 
and  we  in  imitation  of  him  ought  to  do,  I  fhall  re-^ 
duce  to  thefe  two  heads.  Firft,  doing  good  to  the 
fouls  of  men  and  endeavouring  to  promote  their  fpi- 
ritual  and  eternal  happinefs.  Secondly,  the  procur-r 
ing  of  their  temporal  good,  and  contributing  as  much 
as  may  be  to  their  happinefs  in  this  prefent  life. 

I.  Doing  good  to  the  fouls  of  men  and  endeavour^ 
ing  to  promote  their  fpiritual  and  eternal  happinefs, 
by  good  inftru(5lion,  and  by  good  example. 

Firfl,  by  good  inftrpdion.  And  under  inflrudcion 
I  comprehend  all  the  means  of  bringing  men  to  the 
Icnowledge  of  their  duty,  and  exciting  them  to  the 
practice  of  it ;  by  inftrufting  their  ignorance,  and  re- 
moving their  prejudices,  and  redlifying  their  mif- 
takes,  by  perfuauon  and   by  reproofs  and  by  makr 

ing 


I'be  e:^ampk  ofjeftis  in  doing  good.  41 J 

ing  lafting  provifion  for  the  promoting  of  thefe  ends.  ^  J^Jl??' 

By  inftruding  men's  ignorance.  And  this  is  a 
duty  which  every  man  owes  to  another  as  he  hath 
opportunity,  but  efpecially  to  thofe  who  are  under 
©ur  care  and  charge,  our  children  and  fervants  and 
near  relations,  thofe  over  v/hom  we  have  a  fpecial 
authority,  and  a  more  immediate  influence.  This  our 
blelTed  Saviour  made  his  great  work  in  the  world, 
to  inftrud  all  forts  of  perfons  in  the  things  which 
concerned  the  kingdom  of  God  and  to  diredl  them 
in  the  way  to  eternal  happinefs  ;  by  publick  teaching, 
and  by  private  converfation,  and  by  taking  occafion 
from  the  common  occurrences  of  human  hfe,  and 
every  objed  that  prefented  it  felf  to  him,  to  infiil 
good  counfel  into  men,  andtoraife  their  minds  to  the 
confideration  of  divine  and  heavenly  things.  And 
though  this  was  our  Saviour's  great  employment, 
and  is  theirs  more  particularly  whofe  office  it  is  to 
teach  others  -,  yet  every  man  hath  private  opportu- 
nities of  inftrud:ing  others,  by  admonifliing  them  of 
their  duty,  and  by  dire6ling  them  to  the  bed  means 
^nd  helps  of  knowledge  •,  fuch  as  are  books  of  piety 
and  religion,  with  vv^hich  they  that  are  rich  may  fur- 
nilh  thofe  who  are  unable  to  provide  for  them- 
felves. 

And  then  by  removing  men's  prejudices  againft 
tjie  truth,  and  redifying  their  miltakes.  This  our 
Saviour  found  very  difficult ;  thegenerahty  of  thofe 
with  whom  he  had  to  do  being  flrongly  prejudiced 
againfi  him  and  his  doclrine  by  falfe  principles, 
which  they  had  taken  in  by  education,  and  been  train- 
ed up  to  by  their  teachers.  And  therefore  he  ufed  a 
great  deal  of  meeknefs  in  intruding  thofe  that  op- 

pofed 


414  ^^^  example  ofjefus  in  doing  good. 

E  R  M.  pofed  themfelves,  and  exercifed  abundance  of  patience 
in  bearing  with  th?^  infirmities  of  men,  and  their 
dulnefs  and  (lownefs  of  capacity  to  receive  the  truth. 

And  this  is  great  charity,  to  confider  the  inveterate 
prejudices  of  men  •,  efpecially  thofe  which  are  rooted 
in  education,  and  which  men  are  confirmed  in  by  the 
reverence  they  bear  to  thofe  that  have  been  their 
teachers.  And  great  allowance  is  to  be  given  to  men 
in  this  cafe,  and  time  to  bethink  themfelves  and  t» 
confider  better.  For  no  man  that  is  in  an  error 
thinks  he  is  fo;  and  therefore  if  we  go  violently  to 
rend  their  opinions  from  them,  they  will  but  hold 
them  fo  much  the  faller;  but  if  we  have  patience  to 
unrip  them  by  degrees,  they  will  at  laft  fall  in  pieces 
of  themfelves. 

And  when  this  is  done,  the  way  is  open  for  coun- 
fel  and  perfuafion.  And  this  our  Saviour  admini- 
ftred  in  a  mod  pov/erful  and  effedtual  manner,  by  en- 
couraging men  to  repentance,  and  by  reprefenting 
to  them  the  infinite  advantages  of  obeying  his  laws, 
and  the  dreadful  and  dangerous  confequences  of  break- 
ing of  them.  '  And  thefe  are  arguments  fit  to  work 
upon  mankind,  becaufe  there  is  fomething  within  us 
that  confents  to  the  equity  and  reafonablenefs  of  God's 
Jaws.  So  that  whenever  we  perfuade  men  to  their 
duty,  how  backward  foever  they  may  be  to  the  prac- 
tice of  it,  being  ftrongly  addidled  to  a  contrary  courfe, 
yet  we  have  this  certain  advantage,  that  we  have  their 
confciences  and  the  mod  inward  fenfe  of  their  minds 
on  our  fide,  bearing  witnefs  that  what  we  counfel  and 
perfuade  them  to,  is  for  their  good. 

And  if  need  be  v;e  muft  add  reproof  to  counfel. 

This  our  Saviour  did  v/ith  great  freedom,  and  fome- 

2  times 


The  example  ofjefus  m  doing  good.  41^ 

times  with  fharpnefs  and  feverity,  according  to  the  S  E  R  M. 
condition  of  the  perfons  he  had  to  deal  withal.  But  ^^^^^' 
becaufe  of  his  great  authority,  being  a  teacher  im- 
mediately fent  from  God,  and  of  his  intimate  know- 
ledge of  the  hearts  of  men,  he  is  not  a  pattern  to  us 
in  all  the  circumftances  of  difcharging  this  duty ; 
which,  of  any  other,  requires  great  prudence  and  dif- 
cretion  if  we  intend  to  do  good,  the  only  end  to  be 
aimed  at  in  it.  For  many  are  fit  to  be  reproved 
whom  yet  every  man  is  not  fit  to  reprove ;  and  in 
that  cafe  we  mud  get  it  done  by  thofe  that  are  fit, 
and  great  regard  muft  be  had  to  the  time  and  other 
circumftances  of  doing  it,  fo  as  it  may  moft  probably 
have  it's  effect. 

I  will  mention  but  one  way  ofinftrudlion  more, 
and  that  is  by  making  lading  provifion  for  that  pur- 
pofe :  as  by  founding  fchools  of  learning,  efpecially 
t9  teach  the  poor  to  read,  which  is  the  key  of  know- 
ledge ;  by  building  of  churches  and  endowing  them ; 
by  buying  or  giving  in  impropriations,  or  the 
like.  Thefe  are  large  and  lafting  ways  of  teaching 
and  inftruding  others,  which  will  continue  when 
v/e  are  dead  and  gone ;  as  it  is  faid  of  Abel,  that 
*'  being  dead  he  yet  fpeaks,"  And  this  our  Saviour 
virtually  did  by  appointing  his  apoftles  after  he  had 
left  the  world,  to  "  go  and  teach  ail  nations,''  and  or- 
dering a  conftant  fuccefiion  of  teachers  in  his  church 
to  inftrud  men  in  the  Chriilian  religion,  together 
with  an  honourable  maintenance  for  them.  This 
we  cannot  do  in  the  way  that  he  did,  who  had  "  all 
"  power  in  heaven  and  earth,"  but  wc  may  be  fub- 
fervient  to  this  defign  in  the  ways  that  I  have  men- 
tioned.    Which  I  humbly  commend  to  the  confidera- 

tion 


'416  T^he  example  of  'J ejus  in  doing  good, 

1  E  R  M.   tlon  of  thofe  whom  God  hath  blefTed  with  great  cf* 

■SJ-\  7  1  T  T 

ftates,  and  madecapable  of  effeding  fuch  great  works 
of  charity. 

Secondly,  another  way  of  doing  good  to  the  fouls 

of  men  is  by  good  example.     And  this  our  blefled 

Saviour  was  in  the  utmoft  perfe6tion.      For  he 

"  fulfilled  all  righteoufnefs,  had  no  fin,  neither  was 

*'  guile  found   in  his  mouth."     And  this  v/e  fliould 

endeavour  to  be^  as  far  as  the  frailty  of  our  nature  and 

imperfedtion  of  our  prefent  flate  will  fuffer.     For 

good  example  is  an  unfpeakable  benefit  to  mankind, 

and  hath  a  fecret  power  and  influence  upon   thofe 

with  whom  we  convtrfe,  to  form  them  into  the  fame 

difpofition  and  manners.  It  is  a  living  rule,  thatteach- 

eth   men  without  trouble,  and  lets  them  fee  their 

faults  without  open  reproof  and  upbraiding.     BefideS 

that  it  adds  great  weight  to  a  man's  counfel  and  per- 

fuaiion,  when  we  fee  that  he  advifes  nothing  but  what 

he  does,  nor  exa6ls  any  thing  from  others  from  which 

he  himfelf  defires  to  be  excufed.    As  on  the  contrary?- 

nothing  is  more  cold  and  inflgnificant  than  good 

counfel  from  a  bad  man,  one  that  does  not  obey  his 

own  precepts,  nor  follow  the  advice  which  he  is  fa 

forward  to  give  to  others. 

Thefe  are  the  feveral  ways  of  doing  good  to  the 
fouls  of  men,  wherein  we  who  are  the  difciples  of  the 
bleffed  Jesus  ought  in  imitation  of  his  example  to 
exercife  our  felves  according  to  our  feveral  capacities 
and  opportunities.  And  this  is  i\\^  noblefl  charity, 
and  the  greateft  kindnefs  that  can  be  fliewn  to  hu- 
man nature  ♦,  it  is  in  the  mod  excellent  fenfe  to  "  give 
"  eyes  to  the  blind,  to  fet  the  prifoners  at  liberty," 
to  refcue  men  out  of  thefaddeilfiavery  and  captivity, 

and 


The  example  cfyefus  in  doing  good.  417 

and  to  "  fave  fouls  from  death."  And  it  is  the  mofl  S  E  R  M. 
Jailing  and  durable  benefit,  becaufe  it  is  to  do  good  ^^^^^• 
to  all  eternity. 

2.  The  other  way  of  being  beneficial  to  others  is 
by  procuring  their  temporal  good,  and  contributing 
to  their  happinefs  in  this  prefent  life.  And  this,  in 
fubordination  to  our  Saviour's  great  defign  of  bring- 
ing men  to  eternal  happinefs,  was  a  great  part  of  his 
bufinefs  and  employment  in  this  world.  He  went 
about  "  healing  all  manner  of  ficknefies  and  difeafes,'* 
and  refcuing  the  bodies  of  men  from  the  power  and 
pofTeflion  of  the  devil. 

And  though  we  cannot  be  beneficial  to  men  in 
that  miraculous  manner  that  he  was ;  yet  we  may  be 
fo  in  the  ufe  of  ordinary  mqans :  we  may  comfort  the 
afRi6led,  and  vindicate  the  opprefTed,  and  do  a  great 
many  adls  of  charity  which  our  Saviour  by  reafon 
of  his  poverty  could  not  do  without  a  miracle  :  we 
may  fupply  the  neceflities  of  thofe  that  are  in  want, 
"  feed  the  hungry,  and  clothe  the  naked,  and  vifit 
"  the  fick,"  and  minifter  to  them  fuch  comforts  and 
remedies  as  they  are  not  able  to  provide  for  them- 
felves  :  we  may  take  a  child  that  is  poor  and  deftitute 
of  all  advantages  of  education  and  bring  him  up  in 
the  knowledge  and  fear  of  God,  and  without  any 
great  expence  put  him  into  a  way  wherein  by  his  di- 
ligence and  induftry  he  may  arrive  to  a  confiderable 
fortune  in  the  world,  and  be  able  afterwards  to  re- 
lieve hundreds  of  others.  Men  glory  in  raifing  great 
and  magnificent  ftru6lures,  and  find  a  fecret  pleafure 
to  fee  fets  of  their  own  planting  to  grow  up  and  flou- 
rifh :  but  furely  it  is  a  greater  and  more  glorious 
work  to  build  up  a  man,  to  fee  a  youth  of  our  own 

Vol.  I.  H  h  h  planting, 

8, 


XVIII. 


4 1 8  ^e  example  of  Jefus  in  doing  good. 

SERM.  planting,  from  the  fmall  beginnings  and  advantages 
we  have  given  him,  to  grow  up  into  a  confiderable 
fortune,  to  take  root  in  the  world  and  to  Ihoot  up  to 
fuch  a  height  and  fpread  his  branches  fo  wide,  that 
we  who  firft  planted  him  may  ourfelves  find  comfort 
and  fhelter  under  his  Ihadow.  We  may  many  times 
with  a  fmall  liberality  Ihore  up  a  family  that  is  ready 
to  fall,  and  flruggles  under  fuch  neceffities  that  it  is 
not  able  to  fupport  itfelf.  And  if  our  minds  were  as 
great  as  fometimes  our  eftates  are,  we  might  do  great 
and  publick  works  of  a  general  and  lading  advantage, 
and  for  which  many  generations  to  come  might  call 
us  blefled.  And  thofe  who  are  in  the,  loweft  condi- 
tion may  do  great  good  to  others  by  their  prayers,  if 
they  themfelves  be  as  good  as  they  ought.  For  "  the 
**  fervent  prayer  of  a  righteous  man  availeth  much.'* 
The  intercefTion  of  thofe  who  are  in  favour  with  God 
(  as  all  good  men  are )  are  not  vain  wifhes,  but  many 
times  effedlual  to  procure  that  good  for  others  which 
their  own  endeavours  could  never  have  effeded  and 
brought  about. 

I  have  done  with  the  firft  thing.  The  great  work 
and  bufmefs  which  our  blelTed  Saviour  had  to  do  in 
the  world,  and  that  was  to  do  good.  I  proceed  to  the 

11.  Second  thing  contained  in  the  text,  our  Sa- 
viour's diligence  and  induftry  in  this  work,  "He 
*'  went  about  doing  good."  He  made  it  the  great 
bufmefs  and  conftant  employment  of  his  life,  he  travel- 
led from  one  place  to  another  to  feek  out  opportuni- 
ties of  being  ufeful  and  beneficial  to  mankind.  And 
this  will  fully  appear  if  we  briefly  confider  thefe  fol- 
lowing particulars : 

Firft, 


The  example  ofjefus  in  domg  good.  419 

Firft,  how  unwearied  our  blefTed  Saviour  was  in  SER  M. 

.      .  XVIII. 

doing  good.  He  made  it  his  only  bufinefs,  and  fpent 

his  whole  life  in  it.  He  was  not  only  ready  to  do 
good  to  thofe  that  came  to  him  and  gave  him  op- 
portunity for  it  and  befought  him  to  do  it,  but  went 
himfelf  from  one  place  to  another  to  feek  out  objects 
to  exercife  his  charity  upon.  He  went  to  thofe  who 
could  not,  and  to  thofe  who  would  not  come  to  him ; 
for  fo  it  is  written  of  him,  "  he  came  to  feek  and 
*'  to  fave  that  which  was  loft."  He  was  con- 
tented to  fpend  whole  days  in  this  work,  to  live  in 
a  croud,  and  to  be  almoft  perpetually  opprell  with 
company  :  and  v/hen  his  difciples  were  moved  at  the 
rudenefs  of  the  people  in  prefTing  upon  him  he  re- 
buked their  impatience,  and,  for  the  pleafure  he  took 
in  doing  good,  made  nothing  of  the  trouble  and  in- 
convenience that  attended  it. 

Secondly,  if  we  confider  how  much  he  denied  him- 
felf in  the  chief  comforts  and  convenlencies  of  human 
life  that  he  might  do  good  to  others.  He  negle6led 
the  ordinary  refrelhments  of  nature,  his  meat,  and 
drink,  and  deep,  that  he  might  attend  this  work.  He 
was  at  every  body's  beck  and  difpofal  to  do  them 
good.  When  he  was  doing  cures  in  one  place  he  was 
fcnt  for  to  another,  and  he  either  went  or  fent  healing 
to  them,  and  did  by  his  word  at  a  diftance  what  he 
could  not  come  in  perfon  to  do.  Nay  he  was  willing 
to  deny  himfelf  in  one  of  the  deareft  things  in  the 
world,  his  reputation  and  good  name.  He  was  con- 
tented to  do  good,  though  he  was  ill  thought  of  and 
ill  fpoken  of  for  it.  He  would  not  refufe  to  do  good 
on  the  fabbath-day,  though  he  was  accounted  pro- 
fane for  fo  doing.  He  knew  how  fcandalous  it  was 
H  h  h  2  among 


T'he  example  ofjefm  in  doiJig  good. 
among  the  Jews  to  keep  company  with  publicans  and 
finners,  and  yet  he  would  not  decline  fo  good  a  work 
for  all  the  ill  words  they  gave  him  for  it. 

Thirdly,   if  we  confider  the  malicious  oppofition 
and  finifter  conftrudion  that  his  good  deeds  met  with- 
al.    Never  did  fo  much  goodnefs  meet  with  fo  much 
enmity,  endure  fo  many  affronts  and  fo  much  con- 
tradidion  of  finners.     This  great  benefador  of  man- 
kind was  hated  and  perfecuted  as  if  he  had  been  a 
publick  enemy.     While  he  was  inflruding  them  in 
the  meekell  manner,  they  were  ready  to  'ftone  him 
for  telling  them  the  truth :  and  when  the  fame  of  his 
miracles  went  abroad,  though  they  were  never  fo 
ufeful  and  beneficial  to  mankind,  yet  upon  this  very 
account  they  confpire  againfl  him  and  feek  to  take 
away  his  life.     Whatever  he  faid  or  did,  though  ne- 
ver fo  innocent,  never  fo  excellent,  had  fome  bad 
interpretation  put  upon  it,  and  the  great  and  Ihining 
virtues  of  his  life  were  turned  into  crimes  and  mat- 
ter of  accufation.     For  his  calling  out  of  devils, 
he  was  called  a  magician  -,   for  his  endeavour  to  re- 
claim men  from  their  vices,  "  a  friend  of  publicans 
"  and  finners  i"  for  his  free  and  obliging  converfa- 
tion,  "  a  wine-bibber  and  a  glutton."    All  the  bene- 
fits which  he  did  to  men,  and  the  bleffings  which  he 
fo  liberally  Ihed  among  the  people,  were  conftrued 
to  be  a  defign  of  ambition  and  popularity,  and  done 
with  an  intention    to  move  the  people  to  fedition, 
and  to  make  himfelf  a   king  :   enough  to  have  dif- 
couraged  the  greateft  goodnefs,  and  have  put  a  damp 
upon   the  moft  generous  mind,    and  to    make   it 
fick  and  weary  of  well-doing.     For  what  more  grie- 
vous than  to  have  all  the  good  one  does  ill  interpret- 


^e  example  of  Jefm  in  doing  good.  42 1 

cd,  and  the  beft  a6lions  in  the  world  made  matter  of  S  E  R  M-' 
calumny  and  reproach  ? 

And  then  laftly,  if  we  confider  how  chearfully, 
notwithftanding  all  this,  he  perfevered  and  continued 
in  well-doing.  It  was  not  only  his  bufinefs,  but  his 
delight:  "I  delight  (fays  he)  to  do  thy  will,  Omy 
*'  God."  The  pleafurc  which  others  take  in  the  moft 
natural  adions  of  life,  in  eating  and  drinking  when 
they  are  hungry,  he  took  in  doing  good,  it  was 
"  his  meat  and  drink  to  do  the  will  of  his  father.'* 
He  plied  this  work  with  fo  much  diligence  as  if 
he  had  been  afraid  he  fhould  have  wanted  time  for  it. 
*'  I  miift  work  the  work  of  him  that  fent  me,  while 
"  it  is  day,  the  night  cometh  when  no  man  can 
"  work."  And  when  he  was  approaching  towards 
the  hardeil  and  moft  unpleafant  part  of  his  fervice, 
but  of  all  others  the  moft  beneficial  to  us,  I  mean  his 
death  and  fufFerings,  he  was  not  at  eafe  in  his  mind 
till  it  was  done  •,  "  How  am  I  ftraitned  (  fays  he  ) 
"  till  it  be  accompliftied."  And  juft  before  his  fuf- 
fering,  with  what  joy  and  triumph  does  he  refledt 
upon  the  good  he  had  done  in  his  life  ?  "  Father,  I 
<«  have  glorified  thee  upon  earth,  and  finilhed  the 
"  work  which  thou  haft  given  me  to  do."  What 
a  blelTed  pattern  is  here  of  diligence  and  induftry  in 
doing  good  }  how  fair  and  lovely  a  copy  for  Chri- 
ftians  to  write  after  ? 

And  now  that  I  have  fet  it  before  you,  it  will  be 
of  excellent  ufe  to  thefe  two  purpofes  :  to  fliew  us 
our  defeds  •,  and  to  excite  us  to  our  duty. 

I.  To  ftiew  us  our  defeds.  How  does  this  bleffed 
example  upbraid  thofe  who  live  in  a  dired  contradic- 
tion to  it  i  who,  inftead  of  "  going  about  doing  good," 

are 


^e  example  of  Jefus  in  doing  good. 
are  perpetually  intent  upon  doing  mifchief ;  who  arc 
wife  and  adive  to  do  evil,  but  to  do  good  have  no 
inclination,  no  underflanding  ?    And  thofe  likewifc 
who,   though  they  are  far  from  being  fo  bad,  yet 
wholly  negled  this  bleffed  work  of  doing  good  ? 
They  think  it  very  fair  to  do  no  evil,   to  hurt  and 
injure  no  man  :  but  if  preachers  will  be  fo  unreafon- 
able  as  to  require  more,  and  will  never  be  fatisfied  till 
they  have  perfuaded  them  out  of  their  eftate,  and  to 
give  to  the  poor  till  they  have  almoft  impoveriftied 
themfelves,  they  defire  to  be  excufed  from  this  im- 
portunity.    But  we  are  not  fo  unreafonable  neither. 
We  defire  to  put  them  in  mind,  that  to  be  charitable 
according  to  our  power  is  an  indifpenfable  duty  of  re- 
ligion :    that  we  are  commanded  not  only  to  abftain 
from  evil,  but  to  do  good  •,  and  that  our  bleffed  Sa- 
viour hath  given  us  the  example  of  both  ;   he  did 
not  only  do  no  fin,  but  he  went  about  doing  good. 
And  upon  this  nice  point  it  was  that  the  young  rich 
man  in  the  gofpel  and  his  Saviour  parted.   He  had 
*'  kept  the  commandments  from  his  youth.  Thou 
•*  fhalt  not  kill.     Thou  fhalt  not  commit  adultery, 
**  Thou  fhalt  not  fteal : "  he  had  been  very  careful  of 
the  negative  part  of  religion  ;  but,  when  it  came  to 
parting  with  his  eftate  and  giving  to  the  poor,  this  he 
thought  too  hard  a  condition,  and  upon  this  he  for- 
fook  our  Saviour  and  forfeited  the  kingdom  of  hea- 
ven. And  it  is  very  confiderablc,  and  ought  to  be  of- 
ten and  ferioufly  thought  upon,  that  our  Saviour  de- 
fcribing  to  us  the  day  of  judgment  reprefents  the  great 
judge  of  the  world  acquitting  and  condemning  men 
according  to  the  good  which  they  had  done,  or  ne- 
gledlcd  to  do  in  ways  of  m^icy  and  charity  3  for  feed- 
%  ing 


^he  example  ofyefus  in  doing  good-  42} 

ing  the  hungry,  and  clothing  the  naked,  and  vifiting  S  E  R  M, 
the  fick,  or  for  negleding  to  do  thefe  things  :  than 
which  nothing  can  more  plainly  and  cffe6tually  de- 
clare to  us  the  neceflity  of  doing  good,    in  order  to 
the  obtaining  eternal  happinefs. 

There  are  many  indeed  who  do  not  altogether 
negled  the  doing  of  this  work,  who  yet  do  in  a  great 
meafure  prevent  and  hinder  themfelves  from  doing 
it  as  they  ought,  under  a  pretence  of  being  employ- 
ed about  other  duties  and  parts  of  religion.  They 
are  fo  taken  up  with  the  exercifes  of  piety  and  devo- 
tion in  private  and  publick,.  with  prayer,  and  read- 
ing and  hearing  fermons,  and  preparing  themfelves 
for  the  facrament,  that  they  have  fcarce  any  leifurc 
to  mind  the  doing  of  good  and  charitable  offices  to 
others  :  or  if  they  have,  they  hope  God  will  pardon 
his  fervants  in  this  thing,  and  accept  of  their  piety 
and  devotion  inftead  of  all.  But  they  ought  to  con- 
fider,  that  when  thefe  two  parts  of  religion  come  in 
competition,  devotion  is  to  give  way  to  charity, 
mercy  being  better  than  facrificc :  that  the  great  end 
of  all  the  duties  of  religion,  prayer,  and  reading  and 
hearing  the  word  of  God,  and  receiving  the  holy 
facrament,  is  to  difpofe  and  excite  us  to  do  good,  to 
jnake  us  more  ready  and  forward  to  every  good  work: 
and  that  it  is  the  greateft  mockery  in  the  world,  up* 
on  pretence  of  ufing  the  means  of  religion  to  ne* 
gledt  the  end  of  it ;  and  becaufe  we  are  always  prepar* 
ing  our  felves  to  do  good,  to  think  that  we  arc  for 
ever  excufed  from  doing  any. 

Others  are  taken  up  in  contending  for  the  faith, 
and  fpend  all  their  zeal  and  heat  about  fome  contro* 
verfies  in  religion  5  and  therefore  they  think  it  but 

reafon- 


424  ^^^  example  of  ye/us  in  doing  good. 

S  E  R  M.  reafonable  that  they  fliould  be  excufed  from  thofe 
.XVIII.  meaner  kind  of  duties,  becaufe  they  ferve  God,  as 
they  imagine,  in  a  higher  and  more  excellent  way  ; 
as  thofe  who  ferve  the  king  in  his  wars  ufc  to  be  ex- 
empted from  taxes  and  offices.  But  do  thofe  men 
confider  upon  what  kind  of  duties  more  efpecially 
our  bleffed  Saviour  and  his  apoftles  lay  the  great 
weight  and  ftrefs  of  religion  ?  that  it  is  to  the  meek 
and  merciful,  and  peaceable  that  our  Saviour  pro- 
nounceth  blelTednefs  ?  that  "  pure  religion  and  unde- 
"  filed  before  God  and  the  father  is  this,  to  vifit  the 
<'  fathcrlefs  and  widows  in  their  afflidlion?"  that 
"  the  wifdom  which  is  from  above  is  full  of  mercy 
"  and  good  works  ?"  Thefe  are  the  great  and  weighty 
things  of  religion,  which,  whatever  elfe  we  do,  ought 
not  to  be  left  undone.  Do  they  confider,  that  a 
right  faith  is  wholly  in  order  to  a  good  life,  and  is 
of  no  value  any  farther  than  it  hath  an  influence  up- 
on it  ?  So  that  whatever  other  duties  we  may  be  ob- 
liged to,  nothing  can  excufe  us  from  this.  How 
much  better  is  it  to  do  good,  to  be  really  ufeful  and 
beneficial  to  others,  and  how  much  more  clearly  and 
certainly  our  duty,  than  to  quarrel  about  doubtful 
and  uncertain  opinions  ?  Were  men  Chriftians  indeed, 
they  would  be  fo  much  delighted  and  taken  up  with 
this  better  work,  (more  acceptable  to  God,  and  more 
profitable  to  men)  that  they  coi>ld  not  find  leifure, 
or  if  they  could,  they  could  not  find  in  their 
hearts  to  employ  all  their  time  and  zeal  about  things 
which  are  at  fo  great  a  diflance  from  th^  life  and 
heart  of  religion,  as  mod  ofthofequeftions  are  which 
Chriftians  at  this  day  contend  and  languifh  about. 
Were  we  pofTdled  with  the  true  fpirit  of  Chriftianity^ 

thefc 


The  example  ofjefus  in  dohig  good,  42  c 

thefe  would  be  but  dry  and  infipid  and  taftlefs  things  SE  RM. 
to  us,  in  comparifon  of  the  blefled  employment  of  J^^f^ 
doing  good  in  a  more  real  and  fubftantial  way.  If 
the  fincere  love  of  God  and  our  neighbour  were  but 
once  throughly  kindled  in  our  hearts,  thefe  pure  and 
heavenly  flames  would  in  a  great  meafure  extinguifh 
the  unchriftian  heats  of  difpute  and  contention ;  as 
fires  here  below  are  ready  to  languifh  and  go  out, 
when  the  fun  in  his  full  ftrength  fhines  upon  them. 

II.  But  the  hardeil  part  of  my  tafic  is  yet  behind, 
and  it  is  flrange  it  fhould  be  fo  \  and  that  is  to  per- 
fuade  us  to  the  imitation  of  this  blefied  example.  Let 
us  *'  go  and  do  likewife  ;  let  the  fame  mind  be  in  us 
"  that  was  in  Christ  Jesus;"  let  us  tread  in  the 
fbeps  of  the  great  God  and  the  bed  man  that  ever  was, 
our  blefied  Saviour,  who  "  wentabout  doing  good.'* 
Methinks  the  work  it  felf  is  of  that  nature,  that  men 
fiiould  not  need  to  be  courted  to  it  by  perfuafion^ 
nor  urged  by  importuriity.  The  very  propofal  of  the 
thing,  and  the  pattern  which  I  have  fet  before  you, 
is  temptation  and  allurement  enough  to  a  generous 
and  well-difpofed  mind.  But  yet  to  inflame  you  the 
more  to  fo  good  a  work,  be  pleafed  to  dwell  with  m.e 
a  little  upon  thefe  following  confiderations  : 

Firfb,  it  is  an  argument  of  a  great  and  generous 
mind,  to  employ  our  felves  in  doing  good,  to  ex- 
tend our  thoughts  and  care  to  the  concernments  of 
others,  and  to  ufe  our  power  and  endeavours  for  their 
benefit  and  advantage  \  becaufe  it  Ihews  an  inclinati- 
on and  defire  in  us  to  have  others  happy  as  well  as 
our  felves. 

Thofe  who  are  of  a  narrow  and  envious  fpirit,  of 

a  mean  and  fordid  difpofition,  love  to  contrad  them- 

VoL.  L  I  i  i  felves 

8, 


The  example  of  Jefiis  in  doing  good, 
feJvcs  within  themfelves,  and  like  the  hedgehog  to 
fhoot  out  their  quills  at  every  one  that  comes  near 
them.  They  take  care  of  no  body  but  themfelves, 
and  foolillily  think  their  own  happinefs  the  greater 
becaufe  they  have  it  alone  and  to  themfelves.  But 
the  nobleft  and  mod  heavenly  difpofitions  think  them- 
felves^happiefl  when  others  fliare  with  them  in  their 
happinefs.  Of  all  beings  God  is  the  fartheft  remov- 
ed from  envy,  and  the  nearer  any  creature  approach- 
eth  to  him  in  bleffednefs  the  farther  is  it  off  from  this 
hellifh  quality  and  difpofition.  It  is  the  temper  of 
the  devil  to  grudge  happinefs  to  others ;  he  envied 
that  man  fhould  be  in  paradife  when  he  was  caft  out 
ofheavoai. 

Other  perfe6tions  are  (as  one  fays)  of  a  more  me- 
lancholic and  folitary  difpofition,  and  fhine  bright- 
eft  when  they  are  alone,  or  attained  to  but  by  a  few  -, 
once  make  them  comm.on  and  they  lofe  their  luftre. 
But  it  is  the  nature  of  goodnefs  to  communicate  it 
felf,  and  the  farther  it  fpreads  the  more  glorious  it  is. 
God  reckons  it  as  one  of  his  moft  glorious  titles,  as 
the  brighteftgem  in  his  diadem,  "  the  Lord  mighty 
"  to  fave."  He  delights  not  to  fhew  his  fovereignty 
in  ruining  the  innocent  and  deftroying  helplefs  crea- 
tures •,  but  in  refcuing  them  out  of  the  jaws  of  hell 
and  deftrudion.  To  the  d^vil  belongs  the  title  of 
the  deftroyer. 

Without  this  quality  of  goodnefs  all  other  perfec- 
tions would  change  their  nature,  and  lofe  their  ex- 
cellency. Great  power  and  wifdom  would  be  terri- 
ble, and  raife  nothing  but  dread  and  fufpicion  in  us : 
for  power  without  goodnefs  would  be  tyranny  and 
cpprefTion,    and  wifdom  would   become  craft  and 

treachery. 


Tthe  example  ofjefus  i?i  doing  good,  427 

treachery.  A  being  endued  with  knowledge  and  S  E  R  M. 
power,  and  yet  wanting  goodnefs,  would  be  nothing  v.,....^^,.,^ 
elfe  but  an  irrefiftible  evil,  and  an  omnipotent  mif- 
chief.  We  admire  knowledge,  and  are  afraid  of  pow- 
er, and  fufpedl  wifdom :  but  we  can  heartily  love  no- 
thing but  goodnefs,  or  fuch  perfeftions  as  are  in  con- 
jundlion  with  it.  .  For  knowledge  and  power  rhay  be 
in  a  nature  moft  contrary  to  God's  ;  the  devil  hath 
thefe  perfe(5lions  in  an  excelling  degree.  When  all 
is  done,  nothing  argues  a  great  and  generous  mind 
but  only  goodnefs ;  which  is  a  propenfion  and  difpo- 
fition  to  make  others  happy,  and  a  readinefs  to  do 
them  all  the  good  offices  v/e  can. 

Secondly,  to  do  good  is  the  mod  pleafant  employ- 
ment in  the  world.     It  is  natural;  and  whatever  is  fo 
is  delightful.     We  do  like  our  feives  whenever   we 
relieve  the  wants  and  diflreffes  of  others.     And  there- 
fore this  virtue  among  all  other  fiath  peculiarly  enti- 
tled itfelf  to  the  name   of  humanity.     We  anfwer 
our  own  nature,  and  obey  our  reafon,  and  (hew  our 
feives   men,  in  fhewing   mercy   to    the    miferable. 
Whenever  we  confider  the  evils  and  afflicftions  of  o- 
thers,  we  do  with  the  greateft  reafon  colledt  our  duty 
from  our  nature  and  inclination,  and  make  our  ov/n 
wifhes  and  defires  and  expedlations  from  others  a  law 
and  rule  to  our  feives.     And  this  is  pleafant,  to  fol- 
low  our   nature,    and    to    gratify   the   importunate 
di6tates  of  our  own  reafon.     So  that  the  benefits  we 
do  to  others  are  not  more  welcome  to  them  that  re- 
ceive them,  than    they  are  delightful  to  us   that  do 
them.     We  eafe  our  own  nature  and  bowels  whene- 
ver we  help  and  relieve  thofe  who  are  in  want  and 
neceffity.     A^  on  the  contrary,  no  man  that  hath  not 
lii^  diveftecj 


428  The  example  of  J  ejus  in  doing  good, 

SE  RM.  divefled  himfeif  of  humanity  can  be  cruel  and  hard- 
XVTTr  ... 

hearted  ^to  others  without  feeling  fome  pain  in  him- 
feif. There  is  no  fenfual  pleafure  in  the  world  com- 
parable to  the  delight  and  fatisfadtion  that  a  good 
man  takes  in  doing  good.  This  Cato  in  Tully  boafts 
of  as  the  great  comfort  and  joy  of  his  old  age,  "  that 
"  nothing  was  more  pleafant  to  him  than  the  con- 
"  fcience  of  a  well-fpent  life,  and  the  remembrance 
"  of  many  benefits  and  kindneffes  done  to  others." 
Senfual  pleafures  are  not  lading,  but  prefently  vanilh 
and  expire:  but  that  is  not  the  word  of  them,  they 
lewe  a  fting  behind  them,  as  the  pleafure  goes  off, 

Succedit  frigida  cur  a. 

Sadnefs  and  melancholy  come  in  the  place  of  it,  guilt 
and  trouble  and  repentance  follow  it.  But  ,the  plea- 
fure of  doing  good  remains  after  a  thing  is  done,  the 
thoughts  of  it  lie  eafy  in  our  minds,  and  the  reflexion 
upon  it  afterwards  does  for  ever  minifter  joy  and  de- 
light to  us.  In  a  word,  that  frame  of  mind  which  in- 
clines us  to  do  good  is  the  very  temper  and  difpofiti- 
on  of  happinefs.  Solomon,  after  all  his  experience 
of  worldly  pleafures,  pitches  at  laft  upon  this  as  the 
greateft  felicity  of  human  life,  and  the  only  good  ufe 
that  is  to  be  made  of  a  profperous  and  plentiful  for- 
tune, Eccl.  iii.  12.  "I  know  that  there  is  no  good 
"  in  them,  but  for  a  man  to  rejoice  and  do  good  in 
"  his  life."  And  a  greater  and  a  wifer  than  Solo- 
mon hath  faid,  that  "  it  is  more  blefled  to  give  than 
*'  to  receive." 

Thirdly,  to  employ  ourfelves  in  doing  good  is  to 

imitate  the  higheft  excellency  and  perfedlion :   it  is 

to  be  like  God  "  who  is  good  and  doth  good,"  and  to 

4  be 


T'he  example  ofjefus  in  doing  good.  429 

belike  him  in  that  which  he  eflecms  his  greatefl glory,  S  E  R  M. 
and  that  is,  his  goodnefs.  It  is  to  be  like  the  Son  o^Go  d, 
who  when  he  took  our  nature  upon  him,  and  lived 
in  the  world,  "  went  about  doing  good."  It  is  to  be 
like  the  blefled  angels,  whofe  great  employment  is  to 
be  "  miniftring  fpirits  for  the  good  of  others."  To 
be  charitable  and  helpful  and  beneficial  to  others,  is 
to  be  a  good  angel,  and  a  faviour  and  a  god  to 
men.  And  the  example  of  our  blefled  Saviour 
more  efpecially  is  the  great  pattern  which  our  reli- 
gion propounds  to  us.  And  v/e  have  all  the  reafon 
in  the  world  to  be  in  love  with  it ;  becaufe  that  very 
goodnefs  which  it  propounds  to  our  imitation,  was  fo 
beneficial  to  ourfelves  :  when  we  ourfelves  ^tt\  and 
enjoy  the  happy  effefls  of  that  good  which  he  did  in 
the  world,  this  Ihould  mightily  endear  the  example 
^,to  us,  and  make  us  forward  to  imitate  that  love  and 
/'kindnefs  to  which  v/e  are  indebted  for  fo  many  blef- 
fings,  and  upon  which  all  our  hopes  of  happinefs  do 
depend. 

And  there  is  this  confiderable  difference  between 
our  Saviour's  charity  to  us,  and  ours  to  others :  he 
did  all  purely  for  our  fakes  and  for  our  benefit,  where- 
as all  the  good  we  do  to  others  is  a  greater  good  done 
to  ourfelves.  They  indeed  are  beholden  to  us  for  the 
kindnefs  we  do  them,  and  we  to  them  for  the  op- 
portunity of  doing  it.  Every  ignorant  perfon  that 
comes  in  our  way  to  be  inftru6led  by  us,  every  fin- 
ner  whom  we  reclaim,  every  poor  man  we  relieve,  is 
a  happy  opportunity  of  doing  good  to  ourfelves, 
and  of  "  laying  up  for  ourfelves  a  good  treafure  a- 
"  gainft  the  time  which  is  to  come,  that  we  may  lay 
*'  hold  on  eternal  life.''     By  this  principle  the  beft 

and 


The  example  of  J  ejus  In  doing  gooS. 
and  the  happieft   man  that  ever  was  governed   his 
life  and  adions,  efteenjing  it "  a  more  blefifed  thing  to 
"  give  than  to  receive." 

Fourthly,  this  is  one  of  the  greateft  and  mofl:  fub- 
llantial  duties  of  religion ;  and,  next  to  the  love  and  ho- 
nour  which  we  pay  to  God  himfelf,  the  mofl accept- 
able fervice  that  we  can  perform  to  him.  It  is  one 
half  of  the  law,  and  next  to  the  firft  and  great  com- 
mandment, and  very  like  unto  it :  like  to  it  in  the 
excellency  of  it's  nature,  and  in  the  necefTity  of  it's  o- 
bligation.  For  "  this  commandment  we  have  from 
"  him,  that  he  who  loveth  God  love  his  brother  al- 
*'  fo."  The  firfl:  commandment  excels  in  the  digni- 
ty of  the  objed:  -,  but  the  fecond  hath  the  advantage 
in  the  reaHty  of  it's  effects.  For  "  our  righteoufnefs 
«'  extendeth  not  to  God,"  we  can  do  him  no  real  be- 
nefit; but  our  charity  to  men  is  really  ufeful  and  be- 
neficial to  them.  For  which  reafon  God  is  content- 
ed, in  many  cafes,  that  the  external  honour  and  wor- 
jfhip,  which  by  his  pofitive  command  he  requires  of 
us,  fhould  give  way  to  that  natural  duty  of  love  and 
mercy  which  we  owe  to  one  another.  And  to  fliew 
how  great  a  value  he  puts  upon  charity,  he  hath  made 
it  the  great  teftimony  of  our  love  to  himfelf;  and  for 
want  of  it,  reje6i:s  all  other  profefTions  of  love  to  him 
as  falfe  and  infincere.  "  If  any  man  fay,  I  love  God, 
<'  and  hateth  his  brother,  he  is  a  liar.  For  he  that 
*'  loveth  not  his  brother  whom  he  hath  feen,  how 
"  can  he  love  God  whom  he  hath  not  feen  ?'* 

Fifthly,  this  is  that  which  will  give  us  the  great- 
cil  comfort  when  we  come  to  die.  It  will  then  be  no 
pleafure  to  men  to  refledl  upon  the  great  eftates 
they  have  got,  and  the  great  places  they  have  been 

advanced 


^he  example  of  Jefus  in  doing  good.  43 1 

advanced  to,  becaufe  they  are  leaving  thefe  things,  ^|^j^j' 
and  they  will  ftand  them  in  no  (lead  in  the  other 
v/orld  :  "  Riches  profit  not  in  the  day  of  wrath  :"  but 
the  confcience  of  v/ell-doing  will  refrefh  our  fouls  even 
under  the  very  pangs  of  death.  With  what  content- 
ment does  a  good  man  then  look  upon  the  good  he 
hath  done  in  this  hfe  ?  and  with  what  confidence  doth 
he  look  over  into  the  other  world,  where  he  hath 
provided  for  himfelf  "  bags  that  wax  not  old,  a  trea- 
"  fure  in  the  heavens  that  faileth  not?"  For  though 
our  eftates  will  not  follow  us  into  the  other  world,  our 
good  works  will ;  though  we  cannot  carry  our  riches 
along  with  us,  yet  we  may  fend  them  before  us  to 
make  way  for  our  reception  into  everlafting  habita- 
tions. In  fhort,  works  of  mercy  and  charity  will  com- 
fort us  at  the  hour  of  death,  and  plead  for  us  at  the 
day  of  Judgment,  and  procure  for  us  at  the  hands  of 
a  merciful  God  a  glorious  recompence  at  the  refur- 
reclion  of  the  juil.     Which  leads  me  to  the 

Lafl  confideration  I  fhall  offer  to  you  ;  which  is 
the  reward  of  doing  good  both  in  this  world  and  the 
other.  If  we  believe  God  himfelf,  he  hath  made 
more  particular  and  encouraging  promifes  to  this 
grace  and  virtue  than  to  any  other. 

The  advantages  of  it  in  this  world  are  many  and 
great.  It  is  the  way  to  derive  a  lading  bleffing  upon 
our  eftates.  Ads  of  charity  are  the  beft  deeds  of 
fettlement.  We  gain  the  prayers  and  bleflingsof  thofe 
to  whom  we  extend  our  charity,  and  it  isnofmall  thing 
to  have  "  the  bleffing  of  them  that  are  ready  to  perifii 
"  to  come  upon  us.'*  For  God  "hears  the  prayers 
"  of  the  deftitute,  and  his  ear  is  open  to  their  Lry.'* 
Charity  is  a  great  fecurity  to  us  in  ti^m.cs  of  evil :  and 

that 


T'he  example  df  J  ejus  in  doing  good. 
that  not  only  from  the  fpecial  promife  and  provi- 
dence of  God,  which  are  engaged  to  preferve  from 
want  thofe  that  reheve  the  neceffities  of  others  ;  but 
Jikewife  from  the  nature  of  the  thing,  which  makes 
way  for  it's  own  reward  in  this  work!.  He  that  is 
charitable  to  others  provides  a  fupply  and  retreat  for 
himfelf  in  the  day  of  diftrefs  :  for  he  provokes  man- 
kind by  his  example  to  like  tendernefs  towards  him, 
and  prudently  befpeaks  the  commiferation  of  others 
asainft  it  comes  to  be  his  turn  to  fland  in  need  of  it. 
Nothing  in  this  world  makes  a  man  more  and  furer 
friends  than  charity  and  bounty,  and  fuch  as  will  Hand 
by  us  in  the  greateft  troubles  and  dangers.  "  For  a 
*'  good  man  (fays  the  apoftle)  one  would  even  dare  to 
"  die."  'Tis  excellent  counfel  of  the  fon  of  Sirach  ; 
*'  Lay  up  thy  treafure  according  to  the  command- 
*'  ment  of  the  moft  High,  and  it  (hall  bring  thee 
"  more  profit  than  gold.  Shut  up  thy  alms  in  thy 
"  ftorehoufe,  and  it  fhall  deliver  thee  from  all  afflic- 
"  tion  :  it  fhall  fight  for  thee  againfl  thine  enemies, 
«  better  than  a  mighty  fhield  and  ftrong  fpear."  It 
hath  fometimes  happened  that  the  obligation  that 
men  have  laid  upon  others  by  their  charity,  hath  in 
cafe  of  danger  and  extremity  done  them  more  kind- 
nefs  than  all  the  reft  of  their  eftate  could  do  for  them  ; 
and  their  alms  have  literally  delivered  them  from 

death. 

But  what  is  all  this  to  the  endlefs  and  unfpeakabk 
happinefs  of  the  next  life,  where  the  returns  of  doing 
good  will  be  vaftly  great,  beyond  what  we  can  now 
expea  or  imagine  !  for  God  takes  all  the  good  we  do 
to  others  as  a  debt  upon  himfelf,  and  he  hath  eftate 
and  treafure  enough  to  fatisfy  the  greateft  obligations 


we 


"The  example  of  Jefus  in  doing  good,  43  J 

we  can  lay  upon  him.  So  that  we  have  the  truth, 
and  goodnefs,  and  fufficiency  of  God  for  our  fecurity, 
that  what  we  fcatter  and  fow  in  this  kind  will  ^row 
iip  to  a  plentiful  harvefl  in  the  other  world  ;  and  that 
all  our  pains  and  expence  in  doing  good  for  a  few 
days  will  be  recompenfed  and  crowned  with  the  joys 
and  glories  of  eternity.  ' 


S    E    R    M   O    N      XIX. 

On  the  fifth  of  November,    1678.    Be- 
fore the  honourable  houfe  of  qommons. 


LUKE    ix.  SS.  5^. 

But  he  turned  and  rebuked  them^  and  faid^  ye  know  not 
what  manner  of  fpirit  ye  are  of  \  for  the  fon  of  man 
is  not  come  to  deflroy  mens  lives ^  hut  to  fave  them. 

AMong  many  other  things,  which  mayjuftly  re-  sER  !^w 
commend  the  Chriftian  religion  to  the  appro-  XIX, 
bation  of  mankind,  the  intrinfick  goodnefs  of  it  is 
moil  apt  to  make  imprelTion  upon  the  rninds  of  feri- 
ous  and  confiderate  men.  The  miracles  of  it  are  the 
great  external  evidence  and  confirmation  of  it's  truth 
and  divinity  ;  but  the  morality  of  it's  do6lrines  and 
precepts,  fo  agreeable  to  the  beft  reafon  and  wifeft 
apprehenfions  of  mankind,  fo  admirably  fitted  for 
the  perfeiSling  of  our  natures,  and  the  fweetning  of 
the  fpirits  and  tempers  of  m;en,  fo  friendly  to  human 
Vol.  I.  Kkk  Ibciety,^ 

a. 


On  thejifth  of  November^ 
foclety,  and  every  way  fo  well  calculated  for  the 
peace  and  order  of  the  world  :  thefe  are  the  things 
which  our  religion  glories  in,  as  hc^r  crown  and  ex- 
cellency. Miracles  are  apt  to  awaken  and  aftonifh, 
and  by  a  fenfible  and  over-powering  evidence  to 
bear  down  the  prejudi&s  of  infidelity ;  but  there  are 
fccret  charms  in  goodnefs,  which  take  faft  hold  of 
the  hearts  of  men,  and  do  infenfibly,  but  effedtual- 
ly,  command  our  love  and  efteem. 

And  furely  nothing  can  be  more  proper  to  the  oc- 
cafion  of  this  day,  than  a  difcourfe  upon  this  argu- 
ment ;  which  fo  diredlly  tends  to  corred  that  un- 
chriftian  fpirit,  and  miflaken  zeal,  which  hath  been 
the  caufe  of  all  our  troubles  and  confufions,  and  had 
fo  powerful  an  influence  upon  that  horrid  tragedy 
which  was  defigned,  now  near  upon  fourfcore  years 
ago,  to  have  been  adled  as  upon  this  day. 

And  that  v/e  may  the  better  underfland  the  reafon 
of  our  Saviour's  reproof  here  in  the  ttia^  it  will  be 
requifite  to  confider  the  occafion  of  this  hot  and  fu- 
rious zeal  which  appeared  in  fome  of  his  difciples. 
And  that  was  this :  our  Saviour  was  going  from 
Galilee  to  Jerufalem,  and  being  to  pafs  through  a 
village  of  Samaria,  he  fent  meflengers  before  him  to 
prepare  entertainment  for  him ;  but  the  people  ot 
that  place  would  not  receive  him,  becaufe  he  was 
going  to  Jerufalem  :  the  reafon  whereof  was,  the  dif- 
ference of  religion  which  then  was  between  the  Jews 
and  the  Samaritans.  Of  which  I  fhail  give  you  this 
brief  account. 

The  Samaritans  were  originally  that  colony  of  the 
AflTyrians,  which  we  find  in  the  book  of  Kings  was, 
upon  the  captivity  of  the  ten  tribes,  planted  in  Sa- 
maria 


before  the  honourable  hoiife  of  commons.  435 

maria  by  SalmanafTer.  They  were  heathens,  andSERM, 
worihipped  their  own  idols,  till  they  were  fo  infefted 
with  lions,  that  for  the  redrefs  of  this  mifchief  they 
defired  to  be  inftruded  in  the  worfhip  of  the  God  of 
Ifrael,  hoping  by  this  means  to  appeafe  the  anger  of 
the  god  of  the  country ;  and  then  they  worfhipped 
the  God  of  Ifrael  together  with  their  own  idols  \  for 
fo  it  is  faid  in  the  hiftory  of  the  Kings,  "  that  they 
"  feared  the  Lord,  and  ferved  their  own  gods." 

After  the  tribe  of  Judah  were  returned  from  the 
captivity  of  Babylon,  and  the  temple  of  Jerufalem 
was  rebuilt,  all  the  Jews  were  obliged  by  a  folemn 
covenant  to  put  away  their  heathen  wives.  It  hap- 
pened that  Manafles,  a  Jewifh  priefl,  had  married  the . 
daughter  of  Sanballat  the  Samaritan ;  and  being  un- 
willing to  put  away  his  wife,  Sanballat  excited  the 
Samaritans  to  build  a  temple  upon  mount  Gerizim 
near  the  city  of  Samaria,  in  oppofition  to  the  tem- 
ple at  Jerufalem,  and  made  Manafles  his  fon  in  law 
prieft  there. 

Upon  the  ftuilding  of  this  new  temple  there  arofe 
a  great  feud  between  the  Jews  and  Samaritans,  which 
in  procefs  of  time  grew  to  fo  violent  a  hatred,  that 
they  would  not  fo  much  as  fliew  common  civility  to 
one  another.  And  this  was  the  reafon  why  the  Sa- 
maritans would  not  receive  our  Saviour  in  his  jour- 
ney, becaufe  they  perceived  he  was  going  to  worfhip 
at  Jerufalem. 

At  this  uncivil  ufage  of  our  Saviour,  two  of  his 
difciples,  James  and  John,  prefently  take  fire,  and 
out  of  a  well  meaning  zeal  for  the  honour  of  their  maf- 
ter,  and  of  the  true  God,  and  of  Jerufalem  the  true 
place  of  his  worHiip,  they  are  immediately  for  dil- 

K  k  k  2  patching 


436  On  the  fifth  of  November^ 

S  ER  M.  patching  out  of  the  way  thefe  enemies  of  God,  and 
Christ,  and  the  true  religion-,  thefe  heretics  and 
fchifmaticks,  for  fo  they  called  one  another.  And 
to  this  end  they  defire  our  Saviour  to  give  them 
power  to  "  call  for  fire  from  heaven  to  confume 
*'  them,"  as  Elias  had  done  in  a  like  cafe,  and  that 
too  not  far  from  Samaria-,  and  it  is  not  improbable 
that  their  being  fo  near  the  place  where  Elias  had 
done  the  like  before,  might  prompt  them  to  this  re- 
queft. 

Our  Saviour  feeing  them  in  this  heat,  notwith- 
ftanding  all  the  reafons  they  pretended  for  their  paf- 
fion,  and  for  all  they  (heltered  themfelves  under  the 
great  example  of  Elias,  doth  very  calmly  but  fevere- 
ly  reproye  this  temper  of  theirs,  "  ye  know  not  what 
"  manner  of  fpirit  ye  are  of:  for  the  fon  of  man  is 
"  not  come  to  deftroy  mens  lives,  but  to  fave  them.'' 

Gmtius  obferves,  that  thefe  two  excel! .^nt  fenten- 
ces  are  left  cut  in  a  rnanufcript  that  is  in  England, 
I  cannot  tell  what  rnanufcript  he  refers  to;  but  if  it: 
were  a  copy  written  out  in  the  height  of  popery,  no 
wonder  if  fome  zealous  tranfcriber,  offended  at  thispaf- 
fage,  flruck  it  out  of  the  gofpel,  being  confident  our 
Saviour  would  not  fay  any  thing,  that  was  fo  di- 
redlly  contrary  to  the  current  dodrine  and  pradlice  of 
thofe  times.  But  thanks  be  to  God,  this  admirable 
faying  is  ftill  preferved,  and  can  never  be  made  ufe 
of  upon  a  fitter  occafion. 

"  Ye  know  not  what  rnanner  of  fpirit  ye  are  of:" 
that  is,  ye  own  your  felvcs  to  be  my  difciples,  but 
do  you  confider  what  fpirit  now  adls  and  governs  you  \ 
not  that  furely  which  my  dodlrine  defigns  to  mould 
and  fafhion  you  into,  which  is  not  a  furious  and  per- 

fecuting 


before  the  hQnourahle  houfe  of  cpmvions,       -     437 

fccutine  and  deftrudive  fpirit,  but  mild  and  gentle  S  E  R  M. 

•  XIX 

and  faving  ;  tender  of  the  lives  and  interefls  of  men, 

even  of  thofe  who  are  our  greateft  enemies:  you 
ought  to  confider,  that  you  are  not  now  under  the 
rough  and  four  difpenfation  of  the  law,  but  the  calm 
and  peaceable  inftitution  of  the  gofpel  ;  to  which  the 
fpirit  of  Elias,  though  he  was  a  very  good  man  in  his 
time,  would  be  altogether  unfultable.  God  permit- 
ted it  then,  under  that  imperfect  way  of  religion,  but 
now  under  the  gofpel  it  would  be  intolerable :  for 
that  defigns  univerfal  love,  and  peace,  and  good 
will:  and  now  no  difierence  of  religion,  no  pretence 
of  zeal  for  God  and  Christ  can  v/arrant  and  jufti- 
fy  this  paiTionate  and  fierce,  this  vindictive  and  ex- 
terminating fpirit. 

"  For  the  fon  of  man  is  not  come  to  deflroy  mens 
"  liveSj  but  to  fave  them."  He  fays  indeed  t\{t- 
where,  that  he  "  was  not  come  to  fend  peace,  but  a 
*'  fword  •,"  which  we  are  not  to  underftand  of  the 
natural  tendency  of  his  religion,  but  of  the  accidental 
event  and  effect  of  it,  through  the  malice  and  per- 
verfenefs  of  men  :  but  here  he  fpeaks  of  the  proper 
intention  and  defign  of  his  coming:  he  came  not  to 
kill  and  deflroy,  but  "  for  the  healing  of  the  na- 
"  tions;"  for  the  falvation  and  redemption  of  man- 
kind, not  only  "  from  the  wrath  to  come,"  but  from 
a  great  part  of  the  evils  and  miferies  of  this  life  :  he 
came  to  difcountenance  all  fiercenefs  and  rage  and 
cruelty  in  men,  one  towards  another  j  to  reftrain  and 
fubdue  that  furious  and  unpeaceable  fpirit,  which  is 
fo  troublefom  to  the  world,  and  the  caufe  of  fo  ma- 
ny mifchiefs  and  diforders  in  it :  and  to  introduce  a 
religion  which  confults  not  only  the  eternal  falvation 

of 


43  S  On  the  fifth  of  November^ 

SE  R  M.  of  mens  fouJs,  but  their  temporal  peace  and  fecurity, 
their  comfort  and  happinefs  in  this  world. 

The  words  thus  explained  contain  this  obfervati- 
on,  "  that  a  revengeful  and  cruel  and  deftrudlive  fpi- 
*^  rit,  is  diredly  contrary  to  the  defign  and  temper  of 
*'  the  gofpel,  and  not  to  be  excufed  upon  any  pre- 
"  tence  of  zeal  for  God  and  religion." 

In  the  profecution  of  this  argument,  I  fliall  con- 
fine my  difcourfe  to  thefe  three  heads. 

Firft,  to  fhew  the  oppofition  of  this  fpirit  to  the 
truefpirit  and  defign  of  the  ChriHian  religion. 

Secondly,  the  unjuftitiablenef;  of  it  upon  any  pre- 
tence of  zeal  for  God  and  religion. 

Thirdly,  to  apply  this  difcourfe  to  the  occafion 
of  this  day. 

Firfl:,  I  fhall  Ihew  the  oppofition  of  this  fpirit  to 
the  true  fpirit  and  defign  of  the  Chriftian  religion : 
that  it  is  direftly  oppciite  to  the  main  and  funda^ 
mental  precepts  of  the  gofpel,  and  to  the  great  pat- 
terns and  examples  of  our  religion,  our  bleffed  Sa- 
viour, and  the  primitive  Chriftians. 

I,  This  fpirit  which  ourSAViObR  here  reproves 
in  his  difciples,  is  diredly  oppofite  to  the  main  and 
fundamental  precepts  of  the  gofpel ;  which  command 
us  to  "  love  one  another,  and  to  love  all  men,"  even 
our  very  enemies  \  and  are  fo  far  from  permitting  us 
to  perfecute  thofe  who  hate  us,  that  they  forbid  us 
to  hate  thofe  who  perfecute  us  :  they  require  us  to 
be  "  merciful  as  our  father  which  is  in  heaven  is  mer- 
"  ciful ;"  to  be  "  kind  and  tender-hearted,  forbear- 
"  ing  one  another,  and  forgiving  one  another,  if  any 
*'  man  have  a  quarrel  againfl  any,  even  as  God  for 
**  Christ's  fake  hath  forgiven  us:"  and  "  to  put! 

*'on 


before  the  honourable  hoiife  of  commons.  439 

"  on  as  the  eleft  of  God,  bowels  of  mercy,  meeknefs  S  E  R  M. 
*^  and  long-fuffering,"  and  to  "  follow  peace  with  ^^^^ 
'*  all  men,"  and  to  "  fhew  all  meeknefs  to  all  men  •," 
and  particularly  the  pallors  and  governors  of  the 
church  are  efpecially  charged  to  be  of  this  temper, 
"  the  fervant  of  the  Lord  muft  not  drive,  but  be 
"  gentle  unto  all  men  ;  apt  to  teach,  in  meeknefs 
*'  infl:ru6ling  thofe  that  oppofe  themfelves,  if  perad- 
"  venture  God  will  give  them  repentance  to  the  ac- 
"  knowledgment  of  the  truth."  To  all  which  pre- 
cepts, and  many  more  that  I  might  reckon  up,  no- 
thing can  be  more  plainly  oppofite  than  inhuman 
cruelties  and  perfecutions,  treacherous  confpiracies 
and  bloody  mafiacres,  a  barbarous  inquilition,  and  a 
holy  league  to  extirpate  all  that  differ  from  us.  And 
inflead  of  "  inftrudling  in  meeknefs  thofe  that  oppofe 
'•^  themfelves,"  to  convert  men  with  fire  and  faggot, 
and  to  teach  them  as  Gideon  did  the  men  of  Succoth 
with  briars  and  thorns  ;  and  inflead  of  waiting  for 
their  repentance,  and  endeavouring  to  recover  them 
out  of  the  fnare  of  the  devil,  to  put  them  quick  into 
his  hands,  and  to  difpatch  them  to  hell  as  faft  as  is 
pofnble.  If  the  precepts  of  Chriftianity  can  be  con- 
tradidted,  furely  it  cannot  be  done  more  grofly  and 
palpably  than  by  fuch  pradiccs. 

2.  This  fpirit  is  likewife  direflly  oppofite  to  the 
great  patterns  and  examples  of  our  religion,  our  blef- 
fed  Saviour,  and  the  primitive  Chriflians.  It  was 
prophefied  of  our  Saviour  that  he  fhould  be  the 
prince  of  peace,  and  fhould  make  it  one  of  his  great 
bufineffes  upon  earth,  to  make  peace  in  heaven  and 
earth,  to  reconcile  men  to  God  and  to  one  another, 
Xq  take  up  all  thole  feuds,  and  to  extinguifh  all  thofe 

animofi- 


44o  On  the  fifth  of  November^ 

SE  R  M.  animofities  that  were  in  the  world  ;  to  brino;  to  an  agree- 

XIX 

ment  and  a  peaceable  demeanour  one  towards  another 

thofe  that  were  mofl  diftant  in  their  tempers  and  in- 
terefts  •,  to  *'  make  the  lamb  and  the  wolf  lie  down 
'^  together,  that  there  might  be  no  m,ore  deftroying 
^'  nor  devouring  in  all  God's  holy  mountain ;"  that  is, 
that  that  cruel  and  deftruclive  fpirit,  which  prevailed 
before  in  the  world,  fliould  then  be  banifhed  cut  of  all 
Chriftian  focieties. 

And  in  conformity  to  thefe  predi6lions,  when  our 
Saviour  was  bcnn  into  the  world,   the  angels  fang 
that  heavenly  anthem,  "  glory  to  God  in  the  high- 
''  eft,  peace  on  earth,  and  good  will  among  men." 
And  when  he  appeared  in   the  world,  his  whole  life 
and  carriage  was  gentle  and  peaceable,  full  of  meek- 
nefs  and  charity.     His  great  bufmefs  was  to  be  bene- 
ficial to  others,  to  feek  and   to  fave  that  which  was 
loft  ;  "  he  went  about  doing  good,"  to  the  bodies 
and  to  the   fouls  of  men:  his  miracles  were  not  de- 
ilru6live  to   mankind,  but  healing   and   charitable. 
He  could,  if  he  had  pleafed,  by  his  miraculous  pow- 
er have  confounded  his  enemies,  and  have  thundred 
out  death  and  deftrudiion   againft  the   infidel  world,- 
as  his  pretended  vicar  hath   fmce  done  againft  here- 
ticks.     But  intending  that  his  religion  Ihould  be  pro- 
pagated in  human  ways,  and  that  men  Ihould  be  drawn 
to  the  profeftion  of  it  by  the  bands  of  love,  and  the 
cords  of  a  man,  by  the  gentle  and  peaceable  methods 
of  reafon  and  perfualion ;  he  gave  no  example   of  a 
furious  zeal  and  religious  rage  againft  thofe  who  de- 
fpifed  his  doftrine.     It  was  propounded  to  men  for 
their  great  advantage,  and  they  rejected  it  at  their  ut- 
moft  peril.     It  feemed  good  to  the  author  of  this  in- 
3  ftitution- 


hefore  the  honour  ahle  houfe  of  commons.  44  i 

ftitution  to  compel  no  man  to  it  by  temporal  punlfh-  SE  R  M. 
ments.  When  he  went  about  making  profelytes  he  ^  _^ 
offered  violence  to  no  man,  only  faid,  "  If  any  man 
"  will  be  my  difciple,  if  any  man  will  come  after 
*'  me."  And  when  his  difciples  were  leaving  him, 
he  does  not  fet  up  an  inquifition  to  torture  and  pu- 
nifh  them  for  their  defedion  from  the  faith,  only  fays,, 
**  will  ye  alfo  go  away  ? 

And  in  imitation  of  this  bleffed  pattern  the  Chrifti- 
an  church  continued  to  fpeak  and  ad  for  feveral  ages» 
And  this  was  the  language  of  the  holy  fathers,  Leii 
nova  nonfevindicat  ultore gladio^ "  the  Chriflian  law  doth 
"  not  avenge  it  felf  by  the  fword.'*  This  was  then  the" 
ftile  of  councils,  Nemini  ad  credendum  vim  inferre^  "  to 
offer  violence  to  no  man  to  compel  him  to  the  faith.'^ 
I  proceed  in  the 

II.  Second  place,  to  fhew  the  unjuftifiablenefs  of  this 
fpirit  upon  any  pretence  v/hatfoever  of  zeal  for  God 
and  religion.  No  cafe  can  be  put  with  circumflari- 
ces  of  greater  advantage  and  more  likely  to  juflify 
this  fpirit  and  temper,  than  the  cafe  here  in  the  text. 
Thofe  againft  whom  the  difciples  would  have  called 
for  fire  from  heaven,  were  hereticks  and  fchifmaticks 
from  the  true  church  ;  they  had  affronted  our  Savi- 
OUR  himfelf  in  his  own  perfon  ;  the  honour  of  God, 
and  of  that  religion  which  he  had  fet  up  in  the  worlds 
and  of  Jerufalem  which  he  had  appointed  for  the  place 
of  his  worfhip,  were  all  concerned  in  this  cafe :  fo  thaf 
if  ever  it  were  warrantable  to  put  on  this  fierce  and 
furious  zeal,  here  was  a  cafe  that  feemed  to  require 
it:  but  even  in  thefe  circumftances  our  Saviour 
thinks  fit  to  rebuke  and  difcountenanee  this  fpirit, 
•*  ye  know  not  what  manner  of  fpirit   ye  are  of  ^' 

Vol.  I.  LU  And 

8. 


On  the  ffth  of  November^ 
And  he  gives  fuch  a  reafon  as  ought  in  all  differences 
of  religion,  how  wide  foever  they  be,  to  deter  men 
from  this  temper,  "  for  the  fon  of  man  is  not  come 
"  to  deftroy  mens  lives,  but  to  fave  them ;"  that  is, 
this  fpirit  is  utterly  inconfiftent  with  the  great  defign 
of  Chriftian  religion,  and  the  end  of  our  Saviour's 
coming  into  the  world. 

And  nov/,  what  hath  the  church  of  Rome  to  plead 
for  her  cruelty  to  men  for  thecaufe  of  religion,  which 
the  difciples  might  not  much  better  have  pleaded  for 
themfelves  in  their  cafe?  What  hath  fhe  to  fay  againft 
thofe  who  are  the  objedls  of  her  cruelty  and  perfecu- 
tion,  which  would  not  have  held  againft  the  Samari- 
tans ?  Does  fhe  pradlife  thefe  feverities  out  of  a  zeal 
for  truth,  and  for  the  honour  of  God,  and  Christ, 
and  the   true  rehgion  ?  Why,  upon  thefe  very  ac- 
counts it  was,  that  the  difciples  would  have  called  for 
fire   from  heaven  to  have  deftroyed  the  Samaritans. 
Is  the  church  of  Rome  perfuaded  that  thofe  whom 
fhe  perfecutes  are  hereticks   and  fchifmaticks,  and 
that  no  puniihment  can  be  too  great  for  fuch  offen- 
ders? So  the  difciples  were  perfuaded  of  the  Samari- 
tans •,  and  upon   much  better  grounds :  only  the  dif- 
ciples had  fome  excufe  in  their  cafe,  which  the  church 
of  Rome  had  not-,  and  that  was  ignorance  :  and  this 
apology  our  Saviour  makes  for  them,  "  ye  know 
•^  not  what  manner  of  fpirit  ye  are  of:"  they  had 
been  bred  up  in  the  Jewifh  religion,  which  gave  fome 
indulgence  to  this  kind  of  temper,  and  they  were  a- 
ble  to  cite  a  great  example  for  themfelves ;  befides, 
they  were  then  but  learners  and  not  thoroughly  in- 
flru6led  in  the  Chriftian  dodlrine.     But  in  the  church 
of  Rome,  whatever   the  cafe  of  particular  perfons 

may 


before  the  honourable  houfe  of  commons.  443 

may  be,  as  to  the  whole  church  and  the  governing  S  ^^^* 
part  of  it,  this  ignorance  is  wilful  and  affedled,  and 
therefore  inexcufable.  For  the  Chriftian  religion, 
which  they  profefs  to  embrace,  does  as  plainly  teach 
the  contrary  as  it  does  any  other  matter  whatfoever: 
and  it  is  not  more  evident  in  the  new  teflament  that 
Christ  died  for  finners,  than  that  Chriftians  fhould 
not  kill  one  another,  for  the  mifbelief  of  any  article 
of  revealed  religion  ;  much  lefs  for  the  difbelief  of 
fuch  articles  as  are  invented  by  men,  and  impofed  as 
the  dodrines  of  Christ. 

You  have  heard  what  kind  of  fpirit  it  is,  which 
our  Saviour  here  reproves  in  his difciples.  It  was  a 
furious  and  deftru6live  fpirit,  contrary  to  Chriftian 
charity  and  goodnefs.  But  yet  this  may  be  faid  in 
mitigation  of  their  fault,  that  they  themfelves  offered 
no  violence  to  their  enemies :  they  left  it  to  God,  and 
no  doubt  would  have  been  very  glad  that  he  would 
have  manifefted  his  feverity  upon  them,  by  fending 
down  "  fire  from  heaven"  to  have  confumed  them. 

But  there  is  a  much  worfe  fpirit  than  this  in  the 
world,  which  is  not  only  contrary  to  Chriftianity,  but 
to  the  common  principles  of  natural  religion,  and 
even  to  humanity  itfelf  ;  which  by  falfhood  and  per- 
fidioufnefs,  by  fecret  plots  and  confpiracies,  or  by 
open  fedition  and  rebellion,  by  an  inquifition  or  maf- 
facre,  by  depofing  and  killing  kings,  by  fire  and 
fword,  by  the  ruin  of  their  country,  and  betraying 
it  into  the* hands  of  foreigners :  and  in  a  word,  by 
dilTolving  all  the  bonds  of  human  fociety,  and  fub- 
verting  the  peace  and  order  of  the  world,  that  is,  by 
all  the  wicked  ways  imaginable,  doth  incite  men  both 
to  promote  and  to  advance  their  religion.  As  if  all  the 
L  11  2  world 


444  0^  ^^^  fif^^  ?/"  A^(9^'^;;;/^c^r, 

SE  R  M-  world  were  made  for  them,  and  there  were  not  only 
no  other  Chriftians,  but  no  other  men  befides  them- 
felves  ;  as  Babylon  of  old  proudly  vaunted,  "  I  am, 
"  and  there  is  none  befides  me:'*  and  as  if  the  God, 
whom  the  Chriftians  worfhip,  were  not  "the  God  of 
"  order  but  of  confufion  •, '*  as  if  he  whom  we  call 
"  the  Father  of  mercies,"  were  delighted  with  cru- 
elty, and  could  not  have  a  more  pleafing  facrifice  of- 
fered to  him  than  a  mafiacre,  nor  put  a  greater  honour 
Vipon  hispriefts  than  to  make  them  judges  of  an  inqui- 
fition,  that  is,  the  inventors  and  decreers  of  torments 
for  men  more  righteous  and  innocent  than  themfelves. 

Thus  to  mifreprefent  God  and  religion,  is  to  di- 
ved them  of  all  their  majefty  and  glory.  For  if  that 
of  Seneca  be  true,  that  fine  honitate  nulla  majcftas^ 
^'  without  goodnefs  there  can  be  no  fuch  thing  as 
"  majefty,"  then  to  feparate  goodnefs  and  mercy 
from  God,  compaffion  and  charity  from  religion,  is 
to  make  the  two  beft  things  in  the  world,  God  and 
religion,  good  for  nothing. 

How  much  righter  apprehenfions  had  the  heathens 
of  the  divine  nature,  which  they  looked  upon  as  fo 
benign  and  beneficial  to  mankind,  that  (as  Tully  ad- 
mirably fays)  Dii  immor tales  ad  ufum  hominum  fabre- 
fa5fi  pene  videantur^  "  the  nature  of  the  immortal 
"  gods  may  almoft  feem  to  be  exadly  framed  for  the 
"  benefit  and  advantage  of  men."  And  as  for  religion, 
they  always  fpake  of  it  as  of  the  great  band  of  human 
fociety,  and  the  foundation  of  truth  and  fidelity,  and 
juilice  among  men.  But  when  religion  once  comes 
Xo  fupplant  moral  righteoufnefs,  and  to  teach  men 
the  abfurdeft  things  in   the  world,    "  to  lie  for  thQ 

^^  truth,  and  to  kill  men  for  God's  fake:"  when 

it 


before  the  honourable  houfe  of  commons,  445 

it  ferves  to  no  other  purpofe,  but  to  be  a  bond  of  S  E  R  M. 
confpiracy,  to  inflame  the  tempers  of  men  to  a  great- 
er fiercenefs,  and  to  fet  a  keener  edge  upon  their 
fpirits,  and  to  make  them  "ten  times  more  the  chil- 
*'  drcn  of  wrath  and  cruelty  than  they  were  by  na- 
*'  ture,".  then  furely  it  lofes  it's  nature,  and  ceafes  to 
be  rehgion  :  for  Jet  any  man  fay  worfe  of  atheifm 
and  infidelity,  if  he  can.  And,  for  God's  fake,  what 
is  rehgion  good  for,  but  to  reform  the  manners  and 
difpofitions  of  men,  to  reftrain  human  nature  from 
violence  and  cruelty,  from  falfhood  and  treachery, 
from  fedition  and  rebellion  ?  Better  it  were  there 
were  no  revealed  religion,  and  that  human  nature 
were  left  to  the  condud  of  it's  own  principles  and  in- 
clinations, which  are  much  more  mild  and  mercifuJ> 
much  more  for  the  peace  and  happinefs  of  human 
fociety  ;  than  to  be  adled  by  a  religion  that  infpires 
men  with  fo  wild  a  fury,  and  prompts  them  to  com- 
mit fuch  outrages  :  and  is  continually  fupplanting 
government,  and  undermining  the  welfare  of  man- 
kind ;  in  fhort,  fuch  a  religion  as  teaches  men  to  pro- 
pagate and  advance  itfelf  by  means  fo  evidently  con- 
trary to  the  very  nature  and  end  of  all  rehgion. 

And  this,  if  it  be  well  confidered,  will  appear  to 
be  a  very  convincing  way  of  reafoning,  by  lliewing 
the  lafi:  refult  and  confequence  of  fuch  principles,  and 
of  fuch  a  train  of  propofitions,  to  be  a  mod  grofs 
and  palpable  abfurdity.  For  example,  we  will  at 
prefent  admit  popery  to  be  the  true  religion,  and 
their  dodrines  of  extirpating  hereticks,  of  the  law- 
fulnefs  of  depofing  kings,  and  fubverting  govern- 
ment by  all  the  cruel  and  wicked  ways  that  can  be 
thought  of,  to  bcj  as  in  truth  they  are,  the  dodrines 
3  of 


XIX. 


44^  On  the  fifth  of  November^ 

SER^^^-  of  this  religion  :  in  this  cafe,  I  would  not  trouble 
myfelf  to  debate  particulars  :  but  if  in  the  grofs,  and 
upon  the  whole  matter  it  be  evident  that  fuch  a  reli- 
gion as  this  is  as  bad  or  worfe  than  infidelity  and  no 
religion,  this  is  convidion  enough  to  a  wife  man, 
and  as  good  as  a  demonftration,  that  this  is  not  the  true 
religion,  and  that  it  cannot  be  from  God. 

How  much  better  teachers  of  religion  were  the  old 
heathen  philofophers  ?  In  all  whofe  books  and  writ- 
ings there  is  not  one  principle  to  be  found  of  trea- 
chery or  rebellion  :  nothing  that  gives  the  leaft  coun- 
tenance to  an  aflaffination  or  a  maffacre,  to  the  be- 
traying of  one's  native  country,  or  the  cutting  of 
his  neighbour's  throat  for  difference  in  opinion.  I 
fpeak  it  with  grief  and  fhame,  becaufe  the  credit  of 
our  common  Chriflianity  is  fomewhat  concerned  in  it, 
that  Panastius  and  Antipater  and  Diogenes  the  Stoick, 
Tully  and  Plutarch  and  Seneca  were  much  honcfcer 
and  more  Chriftian  cafuiib,  than  the  Jeluijts  are,  or  the 
generality  of  the  cafuifts  of  any  other  order,  that  I 
know  of,  in  the  church  of  Rome.  I  come  now  in  the 

III.  Third  and  laft  place,  to  make  feme  applica- 
tion of  this  difcourfe. 

I.  Let  not  religion  fuffer  for  thofe  faults  and  mlf- 
carriages  which  really  proceed  from  the  ignorance  of 
religion,  and  from  the  want  of  it.  That  under  co- 
lour and  pretence  of  religion,  very  bad  things  are 
done,  is  no  argument  that  religion  itfelf  is  not  good  : 
beeaufe  the  bed  things  are  liable  to  be  perverted 
and  abufed  to  very  ill  purpofes,  nay  the  corruption 
of  them  is  commonly  the  word  ;  as,  they  fay,  the 
richefl:  and  noblefl  wines  make  the  fharpeft  vinegar. 
"  If  the  light  that  is  in  you,"  faith  our  Saviour, 
"  be  darknefs,  how  great  is  that  darknefs  ?\        2 .  Let 


before  the  honourable  houfe  of  commons,  447 

2.  Let  us  beWare  of  that  church  which  counte-  ^^,';;,^^- 
nanceth  this  unchriftian  fpirit  here  condemned  by  our 
Saviour;  and  which  teaches  us  fuch  doctrines,  and 
warrants  fuch  pradices  as  are  confonant  thereto. 
You  all  know,  without  my  faying  fo,  that  I  mean  the 
church  of  Rome  ;  in  which  are  taught  fuch  do<5trines 
as  thefe,  that  hereticks,  that  is,  all  who  differ  from 
them  in  matters  of  faith,  are  to  be  extirpated  by 
fire  and  fword  •,  which  was  decreed  in  the  third  and 
fourth  Lateran  councils,  where  all  Chriftians  are 
ftridtly  charged  to  endeavour  this  to  the  uttermoft  of 
their  power,  Jicut  reputari  ctipiunt  £ff  haberi  fidekSy 
"  as  they  defire  to  be  efteemed  and  accounted  Chri- 
"  ftians.'*  Next  their  dodrines  of  depofing  kings,- 
and  of  abfolving  their  fubjedls  from  obedience  to 
them ;  which  are  not  only  univerfally  believedj  but 
pradifed  by  the  popes  and  Roman  church  for  feveral 
ages.  Indeed  this  dodlrine  hath  not  been  at  all  times 
alike  frankly  and  openly  avowed,  but  it  is  undoubt- 
edly theirs  \  and  hath  frequently  been  put  in  execu- 
tion, though  they  have  not  thought  it  fo  convenient 
at  all  turns  to  make  profefFion  of  it.  It  is  a  certain 
kind  of  engine,  which  is  to  be  fcrew'd  up  or  let  down 
as  occafion  ferves ;  and  is  commonly  kept  like  Go- 
liah*s  fword  in  the  fandluary  behind  the  ephod,  but 
yet  fo  that  the  high-prieft  can  lend  it  out  upon  an 
extraordinary  occafion. 

And  for  practices  confonant  to  thefe  dodlrines,  I 
Ihall  go  no  farther  than  the  horrid  and  bloody  de- 
fign  of  this  day.  Such  a  myftery  of  iniquity,  as  had 
been  hid  from  ages  and  generations  •,  fuch  a  mafter- 
piece  of  villainy,  as  eye  had  not  feen,  nor  ear  heard, 

nor  ever  before  entred  into  the  heart  of  man :  fo  pro- 

digioully 


448  On  the  fifth  of  November^ 

E  R  M.  digioufly  barbarous,  both  in  the  fubftance  and  circiirn- 
ftancesof  it,as  is  not  to  be  paralJel'd  in  all  the  volumi- 
nous records  of  time,  from  the  foundation  of  the  world- 

Of  late  years  our  aJverfarics  (for  fo  they  have 
made  themfelves  without  any  provocation  of  ours) 
have  almofl  had  the  impudence  to  deny  fo  plain  a 
matter  of  fa<5t  -,  but  I  wiih  they  have  not  taken  an 
efFe(5lual  courfe  by  frefh  confpiracies,  of  equal  or 
greater  horror,  to  confirm  the  belief  of  it  with  a  wic- 
nefs.  But  I  (hall  not  anticipate  what  will  be  more 
proper  for  another  day,  but  confine  my  felf  to  the 
prefent  occafion. 

I  will  not  trouble  you  with  the  particular  narrative 
of  this  dark  confpiracy,  nor  the  obfcure  manner  of 
it's  difcovery,  which  Bellarminehimfelfacknowledges 
not  to  have  been  without  a  miracle.  Let  us  thank 
God  that  it  was  fo  happily  difcovered  and  difap- 
pointed,  as  1  hope  their  prefent  defign  will  be  by 
the  fame  wonderful  and  merciful  providence  of  GoD 
towards  a  moft  unworthy  people.  And  may  tlie 
lamenefs  and  halting  of  Ignatius  Loyola,  the  found- 
er of  the  Jefuits,  never  depart  from  that  order,  but 
be  a  fate  continually  attending  all  their  villainous 
plots  and  contrivances. 

I  fhail  only  obferve  to  you,  that  after  the  difco- 
very of  this  plot  the  authors  of  it  were  not  convinced 
of  the  evil,  but  forry  for  the  mifcarriage  of  it.  Sir 
Everard  Digby^  whofe  very  original  papers  and  let- 
ters are  now  in  my  hands,  after  he  was  in  prifon,  and 
knew  he  muft  fuffer,  calls  it  the  beft  caufe  -,  and  was 
extremely  troubled  to  hear  it  cenfured  by  catholics 
and  priefts,  contrary  to  his  expedlation,  for  a  great 
fin :  "  let  me  tell  you,  fays  he,  what  a  grief   it  is 

*'  to 


before  the  honourable  hoiife  of  cornmom,  449 

*'  to  hear  that  fo  much  condemned,  v>^hich  I  did  be-  S  F  R  M. 

-  -TV- 

lieve  would  have  been  otherwife  thought  of  by  ca-     ' 
"  thoHcks."     And  yet  he  concludes  that  letter  with 
thefe  words:  "  in  how  full  joy  fhould  I  die,  if  I  could 
"  do  any  thing  for  the  caufe  which  I  love  more  than 
"  my  hfe!"  And  in  another  letter  he  fays,  he  could 
have  faid  fomething  to  have  mitigated  the  odium  of 
this  bufinefs,  as  to  that  point  of  involving  thofe  of 
his  own  religion  in  the  common  ruin,  "  I  dare  not 
''  (fays  he)  take  that  courfe  that  I  could,  to  make  it 
"  appear  lefs  odious,  for  divers  were  to  have  been 
"  brought  out  of  danger,    who   now  would  rather 
"  hurt  them  otherwife.     I  do  not  think  there  would 
*'  have    been   three  worth  the  faving,  that  fhould 
"  have  been  loft."     And  as  to  the  reft,  that  were  to 
have  been  fwallowed  up  in  that  deftrudion,  he  feems 
not  to  have  the  leaft  relenting  in  his  mind  about 
them.     All  doubts  he  feems  to  have  looked  upon  as 
temptations,  and  intreats  his  friends  "  to  pray  for  the 
"  pardoning,  of  his   not  fufficient  ftriving    againft: 
"  temptations  fince  this  bufinefs  was  undertook.'* 

Good  God  !  that  any  thing  that  is  called  religion^ 
fhould  fo  perfedly  ftrip  men  of  all  humanity,  and 
transform  the  mild  and  gentle  race  of  mankind  into 
fuch  wolves  and  tygers :  that  ever  a  pretended  zeal 
for  thy  glory  fhould  inftigate  men  to  difhonour  thee 
at  fuch  a  rate  !  It  is  believed  by  many,  and  not  with- 
out caufe,  that  the  pope  and  his  fadlion  are  the  anti- 
chrift.  I  will  fay  no  more  than  I  know  in  this  mat- 
ter ;  I  am  not  fo  fure  that  it  is  he  that  is  particularly  de- 
figned  in  fcripture  by  that  name,  as  lam  of  the  main  arti- 
cles of  the  Chriftian  faith:  but  however  that  be,  I  chal- 
lenge antichrift  himfelf,  whoever  he  be,  and  whenever 
he  comes,  to  do  worfe  and  wickeder  things  than  thefe. 

Vol.  L  M  m  m  But 


45^  On  the  fifth  of  November^ 

S  E  R  M.  gnt  I  mufl  remember  my  text,  and  take  heed  of 
imitating  that  fpirit  which  is  there  condemned,  whilft 
I  am  inveighing  againft  it.  And  in  truth  it  almoft 
looks  uncharitably  to  fpeak  the  truth  in  thefe  mat- 
ters, and  barejy  to  relate  what  thefe  men  have  not 
bkifhed  to  do.  I  need  not,  nay  I  cannot,  aggravate 
thefe  things  •,  they  are  too  horrible  in  themfelves> 
even  when  they  are  exprefifed  in  the  fofteft  and  gen- 
tled words. 

I  would  not  be  underftood  to  charge  every  particu- 
lar perfon  who  is,  or  hath  been  in  the  Roman  commu- 
nion, with  the  guilt  of  thefe  or  the  like  practices :  But  I 
mud  charge  their  dodlrines  and  principles  with  them:  I 
mud  charge  the  heads  of  their  church,  and  the  pre- 
valent teaching  and  governing  part  of  it,  who  are 
ufually  the  contrivers  and  abetters,  the  executioners 
and  applauders  of  thefe  curfed  defigns. 

I  do  willingly  acknowledge  the  great  piety  and 
charity  of  feveral  perfons  who  have  lived  and  died 
in  that  communion,  as  Erafmus,  father  Paul,  Thu- 
anus,  and  many  others  •,  who  had  in  truth  more 
goodnefs  than  the  principles  of  that  religion  do  either 
incline  men  to,  or  allow  of.  And  yet  he  that  con- 
fiders  how  univerfally  almod  the  papids  in  Ireland 
were  engaged  in  that  maflacre,  which  is  dill  fredi 
in  our  memories,  will  find  it  very  hard  to  determine 
how  many  degrees  of  innocency  and  good-nature,  or 
of  coldnefs  and  indifferency  in  religion,  are  neceflary 
to  overbalance  the  fury  of  a  blind  zeal  and  a  mif- 
guided  confcience. 

I  doubt  not  but  papids  are  made  like  other  men. 
Nature  hath  not  generally  given  them  fuch  favagc 
and  cruel  difpofitions,  but  their  religion  hath  made 
them  fo;    Whereas  true  Chridianity  is  not  only  the 

bed. 


before  the  honour  able  honfe  of  commons.  451 

bed,  but  the  beft-natured  inftitution  in  the  world  ;  S  E  R  M^ 
and  fo  far  as  any  church  is  departed  from  good-na- 
ture, and  become  cruel  and  barbarous,  fo  far  is  it  de- 
generated from  Chriflianity.  I  am  loth  to  fay  it^ 
and  yet  I  am  confident  'tis  very^  true,  that  many  pa- 
pifts  would  have  been  excellent  perfons  and  very  good 
men,  if  their  rehgion  had  not  hindered  them  ;  if* 
the  doclrines  and  principles  of  their  church  had  not 
perverted  and  fpoiled  their  natural  difpofitions. 

I  fpeak  not  this  to  exafperate  you,  worthy  patri- 
ots and  the  great  bulwark  of  our  religion,  to  any 
unrcafonable  or  unnecelTary,  much   lefs  unchrifiiian 
feverities  againft  them  :  no,  let  us  not  do  like  them; 
let  us  never  do  any  thing  for  religion  that  is  contrary 
to  it :  but  I  fpeak  it  to  awaken  your  care  thus   far 
that  if  their  priells  will  always  be  putting  thefe  per- 
nicious principles  into  the  minds  of  the  people,  effec- 
tual provifion  may  be  made,  that  it  may  never  be 
in  their  power  again  to  put  them   in  pradlice.     We 
have  found  by  experience,  that  ever  fince  the  refor- 
mation they  have  been  continually  pecking  at  the 
foundations  of  our  peace  and  religion :   when  God 
knows  we  have  been  fo  far  from  thirfting  after  their 
blood,  that  we  did  not  fo  much  as  defire  their  dif- 
quiet  but  in  order  to  our  own  necelTary  fafety,  and 
indeed  to  theirs. 

And  God  be  praifed  for  thofe  matchlefs  inflances 
which  we  are  able  to  give  of  the  generous  humani- 
ty and  Chriftian  temper  of  the  Englifli  protellants. 
After  Q.  Mary's  death,  when  the  protefiant  religion 
was  reftored,  bilhop  Bonner,  notwithflanding  all  hi& 
cruelties  and  butcheries,  was  permitted  quietly  to  live 
and  die  amongft  us.  And  after  the  treafon  of  this 
day,  nay  at  this  very  time,  fmce  the  difcovery  of  fo 
M  ra  m  ?t  barbarous 


On  the  fifth  of  November  y 
barbarous  a  defign,  and  the  higheft  provocation  in 
the  world,  by  the  treacherous  murder  of  one  of  his 
majefly's  juflices  of  the  peace,  a  very  good  man  and 
a  moft  excellent  magiftrate,  who  had  been  adlive  in 
the  difcovery  of  this  plot ;  I  fay,  after  all  this,  and 
notwithftanding  the  continued  and  infupportable  in- 
folence  of  their  carriage  and  behaviour,  even  upon 
this  occafion,  no  violence,  nay  not  fo  much  as  any  in- 
civility, that  I  ever  heard  of,  hath  been  offered  to  a- 
ny  of  them.  I  would  to  God  they  would  but  feriouf- 
ly  confider  this  one  difference  between  our  religion 
and  theirs,  and  which  of  them  comes  neareft  "  to  the 
"  wifdom  which  is  from  above,"  which  is  peace- 
able, and  gentle,  and  full  of  mercy.  And  I  do  hear- 
tily pray,  and  have  good  hopes,  that  upon  this  oc- 
cafion God  will  open  their  eyes  fo  far,  as  to  convince 
a  great  many  among  them,  that  that  cannot  be  the 
true  religion  which  infpires  men  with  fuch  barbarous 
minds. 

I  have  now  done  -,  and  if  I  have  been  tranfported 
upon  this  argument  fomewhat  beyond  my  ufual  tem- 
per, the  occafion  of  this  day,  and  our  prefent  circum- 
flances  will,  I  hope,  bear  me  out.  I  have  exprefiTed 
Kiyfelf  all  along  with  a  juft  fenfe,  and  with  no  un- 
juft  feverity,  concerning  thefe  horrid  principles  and 
pradlices ;  but  yet  with  great  pity  and  tendernefs  to- 
wards thofe  miferably  feduced  fouls,  who  have  been 
deluded  by  them,  and  enfnared  in  them.  And  I  can 
truly  fay,  as  the  Roman  orator  did  of  himfelf  upon 
another  occafion.  Me  natura  mferkordem^  patriafe^ 
veriimy  crudekm  nee  patria  nee  natura  ejfe  voluit.  My 
nature  inclines  me  to  be  tender  and  compafTionate  ;  a 
hearty  zeal  for  our  religion,  and  concernment  for  the 
publick  welfare  of  my  country,    may  perhaps  have 

made 


before  the  honourable  houfe  of  commons,  4  r  j 

made  me  a  little  fevere  -,  but  neither  my  natural  dif-  s  E  R  M, 
pofition,  nor  the  temper  of  the  Englifli  nation,  nor  ,  ^^' 
the  genius  of  the  proteftant,  that  is,  the  true  Chriftian 
religion,  will  allow  me  to  be  cruel. 

For  the  future,  let  us  "  encourage  ourfelves  in  the 
"  Lord  our  God  •,'*  and  commit  our  caufe,    and 
"  the  keeping  of  our  fouls  to  him  in  well  doing  :  '* 
And,   under  God,  let  us  leave  it  to  the  wifdom  and 
care  of  his  majefty,    and  his  two   houfes  of  parlia- 
ment, to  make  a  lading  provifion  for  the  fecurity  of 
our  peace  and  religion,   againft  all  the  fecret  contri- 
vances and  open  attempts  of  "  thefe  fons  of  vio- 
"  lence."     And  let  us  remember  thofe  words  of  Da- 
vid, Pfal.  xxxvii.  12,  13,  14,  15.  "  The  wicked  plot- 
"  teth  againft  the  juft,  and  gnafheth  upon  him  with 
"  his  teeth  :  The  Lord  fhall  laugh  at  him,  for  he 
"  feeth  that  his  day  is  coming.     The  wicked  have 
"  drawn  out  the  fword,  and  bent  their  bow,  to  caft 
^'  down  the  poor  and  needy,  and  to  flay  fuch  as  be  of 
'^  upright  converfation  :  Their  fwords  fliall  enter  into 
"  their  own  heart,  and  their  bows  fhall  be  broken." 

And  I  hope,  confidering  what  God  hath  hereto- 
fore  done,  and  hath  now  begun  to  do  for  us,  we  may 
take  encouragement  to  our  felves  againft  all  the  ene- 
rgies of  our  religion,  which  are  confederated  againft 
us,  in  the  words  of  the  prophet,  Ifa.  viii.  9,  10. 
c'  AfTociate  yourfelves,  O  ye  people,  and  ye  fhall  be 
c'  broken  in  pieces,  and  give  ear,  all  ye  of  far  coun- 
"  tries :  gird  your  felves,  and  ye  fhall  be  broken  in 
"  pieces  :  gird  your  felves,  and  ye  fhall  be  broken  in 
*'  pieces :  take  counfel  together,  and  it  fhall  come  to 
''  nought :  fpeak  the  word  and  it  fhall  not  ftand. 
"  For  God  is  with  us." 

And 


On  the  fifth  of  November^  &c. 

And  now  what  remains,  but  to  make  our  moft  de- 
vout and  thankful  acknowledgments  to  almighty 
God,  for  the  invaluable  blefling  of  our  reformed  re- 
ligion, and  for  the  miraculous  deliverance  of  this  day, 
and  for  the  wonderful  difcovery  of  the  late  horrid  and 
barbarous  confpiracy  againft  our  prince,  our  peace, 
and  our  religion. 

To  him  therefore,  our  moft  gracious  and  merciful 
God,  our  fhield,  and  our  rock,  and  our  mighty  de- 
liverer :  who  hath  brought  us  out  of  the  land  of  E- 
gypt,  and  out  of  the  houfe  of  bondage ;  and  hath 
itx.  us  free  from  popifh  tyranny  and  fuperftition,  a 
yoke  which  neither  we  nor  our  fathers  were  able  to  bear : 

Who  hath,  from  time  to  time,  delivered  us  from 
the  bloody  and  mercilefs  defigns  of  wicked  and  unrea- 
fonable  men  ;  and  hath  rendered  all  the  plots  and  con- 
trivances, the  mifchievous  counfels  and  devices  of 
thefe  worfe  than  heathens,  of  none  effecT: : 

Who  did,  as  upon  this  day,  refcue  our  king  and 
our  princes,  our  nobles  and  the  heads  of  our  tribes, 
the  governors  of  our  church  and  the  judges  of  the 
land,  from  that  fearful  deftrudion  which  was  ready 
to  have  fwallowed  them  up  : 

Who  ftill  brings  to  light  the  hidden  things  of  dark- 
nefs,  and  hath  hitherto  preferved  our  rehgion  and 
civil  interefts  to  us,  in  defpight  of  all  the  malicious 
and  reftlefs  attempts  of  our  adverfaries : 

Unto  that  great  God,  who  hath  done  fo  great 
things  for  us,  and  hath  faved  us  by  a  mighty  falvati- 
on :  who  hath  delivered  us,  and  doth  deliver  us,  and, 
we  truft,  will  ftill  deliver  us :  be  glory  and  honour, 
thankfgiving  and  praife,  from  generation  to  genera- 
tion.   And  let  all  the  people  fay,  Amen, 

A  Table 
4 


A  Table  of  the  Texts  of  each 
Sermon. 

SERMON    I. 

JOB  xxvlii.  2S.    And  unto  man   he  /aid',    behold!    the  fear  of 
the  Lord  that  is  n^vifdom ;    and  to  depart  from    efvil  is  under- 
flanding,  P^gC  I 

SERMON    II. 
2  P  E  T.  iii.  3.    Knoiving  thisfrfl,  that  there  fiall  come  in  the  lafi 
days  /coffers,    njualking  after  their  cwn  Itt/ls.  p.  7^ 

SERMON    III. 
P  R  O  V.  xlv,  34.  Right  eou/ne/s  exalteth  a  nation',  hut  Jin  is  the  re^ 
proach  of  any  people.  p.  94 

SERMON     IV. 
PSALM  xix/  1 1 .    And  in  keeping  of  them  there  is  great  renvard. 

p.  109 

SERMON    V. 

PHIL.  iii.  8.    Tea  doubt lefs,  and  I  count  all  things  but  iofs  for  the 
excellency  of  the  knoiv  ledge  of  Chriji  Je/us  my  Lord,  p.  1 28 

S  E  R  M  O  N     VI. 

1  J  O  H.  V.  3 .  And  his  commandments  are  not  grievous i.  P«  1 52 

SERMON    VII. 

2  T  I  M.  ii.  19.    Lei  e<very  one  that  nameth  the  name  of  Chri/i  de- 
part from  iniquity.  P*  ^74 

SERMON     VIIL 

PHIL.  iii.  20.    For  our  conquer fation  is  in  heaven,  P*  ^94 

SERMON    IX. 
I  S  A.  ix.  1 2,  I  3.  For  all  this  his  anger  is  not  turned  away,  hut  his 
hand  is  fir  etched  out /ill :  For  the  people  turneth  not  to  him  that 
fmteth  them,  neither  do  they /eek  the  Lord  of  hop,  p.  219 

SERMON    X. 
HEB.  iii.    13.  Exhort  one  another  daily  ivhile  it  is  called  to  day, 
leji  any  of  you  he  hardened  through  the  deceitfulnefs  cffn,      p.  237 

S  E  R- 


A  Table  of  the  Texts. 
SERMON    XI. 
1  COR.  iii.  15.  But  he  himfelfjhallhefaved^yetfoaibyjire,  p.  255 

SERMON     XII. 
P  8  A  L.  cxix.  156.  Great  pace  ha^oe  they  that  lo've  thy  law,  and  no- 
thing/hall offend  them,  p.   279 

SERMON    XIII. 
PS  AL.  cxix.  59.  i  thought  on  ?ny  nvays,  and  turned  my  feet  unto  thy 
tejiimonies.  p.    30 1 

SERMON    XIV. 
PS  A  L.  cxix.  60.  I  made  hajie,  and  delayed  not  to  keep  thy  command- 
ments, p.  322 
SERMON    XV. 
I  JOH.  iii.    10.   In  this  the  children  of  God  are  manifejl,  and  the 
children  of  the  devil:  <whofoe*ver  doth  not  right eoujnfes  is  not  of 
God,  P-  3f2 
SERMON    XVI. 
LUKE  XV.  7.  Ifay   unto  you  ^    that  Uhnx:ife  joy  Jhallhe  in  hea--ven 
over  one Jinner  that  repent eth,  more  than  o'ver  nfkety  and  nine  jufl 
^er/ons  nvhich  need  no  repentance.  P-  370 
SERMON    XVII. 
M  A  T  T  H.  ix.  3 1 ,  3  2.    Wherefore  Ifay  unto  you,  all  manner  of  fin 
and  llajphemy pall  be  forgi'ven  unto  men  :  but  the  hlafphemy  againji 
the  holy  Ghof  fhall  not "  he  forgi'ven  unto  men. 
And  nvhofoe'ver  fpeaketh  a  nvord  againji  the  Son  of  man,    it  fhall 
he  forgi'ven  him  :   But  wohofoeter  fpeaketh  againfl  the  holy  Gboji^ 
it  Jhall  not  be  forgi'ven  him,  neither  in  this  'world,   neither  in  the 
luorldto  come*                                                                   p.  391 
SERMON    XVIII. 
ACTS   X.   38.              Who  ivent  about  doing  good,  p.  410 

SERMON    XIX. 
LUKE  ix.  55,56.  But  he  turned  and  rebuked  them,  andfaid,  ye 
kno'va  not  nuhat  manner  of  fpirit  ye  are  of-,  for  the  fan  of  man  is 
not  come  to  dejiroy  mens  li'ves,*but  tofave  them,  P*  433 


The  End  of  the  firft  Volume. 


\ 


L»r*-s 


5fe 


■*.,,"♦ 


m 


>% 


>M^ 


t    !♦<•. 


•■'^'     ^- 


> '  It 


I 


T^'l^ 


./•  < 


■■•■■'•■■■T.'io 


'-<">, 


