LIBRARY  OF  THE  THEOLOGICAL  SEMINARY 

PRINCETON,  N.  J. 

Presented  by 

Division...:. : **•*" 


;.7 


■i 


SERMONS 

ON    SEVERAL 

Subjects  and  Occasions, 

By  the  mofl:  Reverend 

Dr.  John  riLLorsoN, 

LATE 

Lord  Archbifhop  of  Canterbury. 


VOLUME    ^^^    SEVENTH. 


LONDON: 

Printed  for  R.  Ware,  A.  Ward,  y,  and  P.  Knap f ok,  T,  Lotigmatii 

R.  Hett,  C.  Hitch,  J.  Hodges,  S.  Aufteny  J.  and  R,  Tsnfon, 

y.  and  H.  P  ember  ton,  and  y.  Ri'vington* 

M  DCC  XLIII. 


SERMON     CXI. 

The  danger  of  all  known  fin,  both  from 
the  light  of  nature  and  revelation. 


ROM.  i.  18,  19. 

For  the  wrath  of  God  is  revealed  from  heaven  agalnfi 
all  ungodlinefs  and  unrighteoufnefs  of  men^  who  hold 
the  truth  in  unrighteoufnefs  \  hecaufe  that  which  may 
he  known  of  God  is  manifejl  in  them^  for  God  hath 
fhewed  it  unto  them, 

IN  the  beginning  of  this  chapter,  the  apoftle  de-  s  E R  M. 
clares  that  he  was  particularly  defigncd  and  ap-  ^^^^^^^^ 
pointed  by  God  to  preach   the  gofpel    to  the 
world,  and  that  he  was  not  afliamcd  of  his  minidry,  fermonon 
notwithftanding  all  the  reproach  andperfecution  it  was  this  text. 
attended  withal,  and  notwithftanding  the  flight  and 
undervaluing  opinion  which  the  world  had  of  the  do- 
ftrine  which  he  preached,  it  being  "  to  the  Jews  a 
"  Humbling- block,  and  to  the  Greeks  fooliflinefs  i" 
for  tho'  this  might  refledl  fome  difparagement  upon 
it  in  the  eiteem  of  fenfual  and  carnal  men,  yet  to 
thofe  who  weighed  things  impartially,  and  confider'd 
the  excellent  end  and  defign  of  the  chriftian  doflrine, 
and  the  force  and  efficacy  of  it  to  that  end,    it  will 
appear  to  be  an  inftrument  admirably  fitted  by  the 
wifdom  of  GoD,  for  the  reformation  and  falvation 
of  mankind. 

Vol.  VII.  13  H  2  And 

I. 


1 8 1 6  7he  danger  of  all  knoiim  fin,  both  from 

SERM.  And  therefore  he 'tells  us,  verfe  i6.  that  how 
^li  ,  much  foever  it  was  defpifed  by  that  ignorant  and 
inconfiderate  age,  "  he  was  not  afliamcd  of  the  gof- 
*'  pel  of  Christ  ;  bccaufc  it  is  the  power  of  God 
"  unto  falvation,  to  every  one  that  believeth,  to  the 
"  Jew  flrfl,  and  alfo  to  the  Greek  i"  that  is,  the 
doctrine  of  the  gofpel  fincerely  believed  and  em- 
braced, is  a  mod  proper  and  powerful  means,  de- 
figned  by  God  for  the  falvation  of  mankind ;  not 
only  of  the  Jews,  but  alfo  of  the  Gentiles. 

The  revelations  which  God  had  formerly  made, 
were  chiefly  retrained  to  the  jewifli  nation  ;  but  this 
great  and  laft  revelation  of  the  gofpel,  was  equally 
calculated  for  the  benefit  and  advantage  of  all  man- 
kind. The  gofpel  indeed  was  firfl  preached  to  the 
Jews,  and  from  thence  publifh'd  to  the  whole  world  •, 
and  as  this  dodrine  was  defign'd  for  the  general  be- 
nefit of  mankind,  fo  it  was  very  likely  to  be  efiedual 
to  that  end,  being  an  inftrument  equally  fitted  for 
the  falvation  of  the  whole  world,  Gentiles  as  well  as 
Jews  5  "  it  is  the  power  of  God  to  falvation  to  every 
"  one  that  believes,  to  the  Jew  firfl,  and  alfo  to  the 
*'  Greek." 

And  to  Ihew  the  efficacy  of  it,  he  inftanceth  in 
two  things,  which  render  it  fo  powerful  and  efiedlual 
a  means  for  the  falvation  of  mankind. 

Firfl,  becaufe  therein  the  grace  and  mercy  of  God 
in  the  juflification  of  a  finner,  and  declaring  him 
righteous,  is  fo  clearly  revealed,ver.  17.  "  For  therein 
''  is  the  righteoufnefs  oF  God  revealed,  from  faith  to 
**  faith,  as  it  is  written,  the  jufl  fliall  live  by  faith." 
This  is  very  obfcurely  exprefl,  but  the  meaning  of 
this  text  will  be  very  much  cleared,  by  comparing 
it  with  another  in  the  iiid  chapter  of  this  epiflle,  ver. 

20 


the  light  of  nature  and  revelation.  iZiy 

10,  21,  22,  &c.  where  the  apoftle  fpeaks  more  fully  SE  RM. 
and  exprefly  of  the  way  of  our  juftification  by  the  faith  ^^^' 
of  Jesus  Christ  ,  that  is,  by  the  behef  of  the  gofpeJ. 
He  afferts  at  the  :20th  verfe,  "  that  by  the  deeds  of 
"  the  law  there  ihali  no  flefh  be  juflified  in  the  fight 
"  of  God."  To  this  v/ay  of  juftification  "  by  the 
"  deeds  of  the  law,"  he  oppofeth  "  the  righteouf- 
"  nefs  of  God  by  the  faith  of  Jesus  Christ,  to 
"  all,  and  upon  all  them  that  believe,"  which  is 
the  gofpel  way  of  juftification,  ver.  21,  22.  "  But 
"  now  the  righteoufnefs  of  God  without  the  law  is 
"  manifefted,  being  witnefted  by  the  law  and  the 
''  prophets,  .even  the  righteoufnefs  of  God,  Which  is 
*'  by  the  faith  of  Jesus  Christ,  unto  all,  ,  and 
**  upon  all  them  that  believe."  "  The  righteoufnels 
*'  of  God  without  the  law  is  manifefted :"  that  is,, 
the  way  which  God  hath  taken  to  juftify  finners, 
and  declare  them  righteous  "  without  the  deeds  of  the 
"  law,"  that  is,  without  obferving  the  law  ofMofes, 
*'  is  manifefted,"  that  is,  is  clearly  revealed  in  the 
gofpel,  (which  is  the  fame  with  what  the  apoftle 
had  faid  before,  that  "  the  righteoufnefs  of  God  is 
*'  revealed  in  the  gofpel)  being  witnefTed  by  the  law 
*'  and  the  prophets,"  that  is,  the  righteoufnefs  of 
God,  or  the  juftification  of  finners  by  Jesus 
Christ,  is  clearly  revealed  in  the  gofpel,  being 
alfo  in  ta  more  obfcure  manner  attefted  or  foretold 
in  the  old  teftament,  which  he  calls  "  the  law  and 
"  the  prophets*,"  and  this  fully  explains  that  difficuk 
phrafe  of  "  the  righteoufnefs  of  God  being  re- 
"  vealed  by  the  golpel  from  fiiith  to  faith  ;"  that 
is,  by  a  gradual  revelation,  being  more  obfcurely 
foretold  in  the  old  teftament,  and  clearly  difcovered 
in  the  new  j  fo  that  thefe  two  pafiages  are  equiva- 
lent i 


1 8 1 3  ^he  danger  of  all  known  Jin,  both  from 

SERM.lent;  "  in  the  gofpel,  the  righteoufiiefs  of  God   is 

^'"''^-     **  revealed  from  faith  to  faith  j"  and  "  the  righte- 
"  oufnefs  of   God  without  the  works  of  the  law  is 
*'  maniferted,   being  witnefied  by  the  law  and   the 
*'  prophets."  There  is  the  firfl:  and  more   impcrfed 
revelation  of  it,  but  the  clear  revelation  of  it  is  in  the 
gofpel  -,  this  the  apoftle  calls  "  a  revelation  from  faith 
'^  to  faith,"  that  is  from  a  more  imperfed  and  obfcure, 
to  a  more  exprefs  and  clear  difcovery  and  belief  of  it. 
And  then  the  citation  v/hich  follows  is  very  pertinent, 
"  as  it  is  written,  thejuft  fhall  live  by  faith  i"  for  this 
citation  out  of  the  old  teftament  plainly  fhews,  that 
the  way  of  juftification  by  faith  was  there  mentioned  ; 
or,  as  our  apoftle  exprefleth  it,  "  was  witnefied  by  the 
"  law  and  the  prophets ;"  and  confequently  that  this 
was  a  gradual  difcovery,  which  he  calls  *'  a  revelation 
*«  from  faith  to  faith."  "  Thejuft  fhall  live- by  faith  i^* 
that  is,  good  men  fhall  be  faved  by  their  faith,  fhall 
be  juflified   and  efteemed  righteous  in  the  fight  of 
God,  and  finally  faved  by  their  faith.     And  fo  the 
apoftle  in  the  vth  chap,  of  this  epiftle,  ver.  i8.  calls 
our  juftlfication  by  the  faith   of  the  gofpel,  "  the 
*'  juftiiication  of  life,"  in  oppofition  to  condemna- 
tion and  death,  which  very  well  explains  that  faying 
of  the  prophet,  "  the  juft  Ihall  live  by  faith."  I 
have  been   the  longer  upon  this,    that  I  might  give 
fome  light  to  a  very  difficult  and  obfcure  text. 

Secondly,  the  other  inftance  whereby  the  apoftle 
proves  the  gofpel  to  be  fo  powerful  a  means  for  the 
recovery  and  falvation  of  men  is,  that  thei-ein  alfo 
the  feverity  of  God  againft  impenitent  finners,  as 
well  as  his  grace  and  mercy  in  the  juftlfication  of  the 
penitent,  is  clearly  revealed,  ver.  i8.  ^'  For  the  wrath 
*'  of   God  is     revealed  from   heaven,    againft  all 

*'  ungodlinefs 


the  light  of  nature  and  revelation.  iSig 

<^  ungodlinefs  and  unrighteoufnefs  of  men, who  holds ERm, 
"  the  truth  in  unrighteoufnefs ;  becaufe  that  which  <_^^ 
*'  may  be  known  of  God  is  manifefted  in  them,  for 
"  God  hath  Ihewn  it  unto  them.'*  The  firil,  viz. 
the  f^race  of  God  in  our  jullification  and  the  remif- 
fion  of  finspafl,  is  a  moft  proper  and  powerful  argu- 
ment to  encourage  us  to  obedience  for  the  future  ; 
nothing  being  more  likely  to  reclaim'men  to  their  du- 
ty, than  the  afTurance  of  indemnity  for  pafl:  crimes  - 
and  the  other  is  one  of  the  moft  effectual  confidera- 
tions  in  the  Avorld  to  deter  men  from  fin,  that  "  the 
''  wrath  of  God  is  revealed  from  heaven  againft  all 
''  ungodlinefs  and  unrighteoufnefs  of  men,  &c.'* 

From  which  words  I  Ihall  obferve  thefe  fix 
things. 

Firft,  the  infinite  danger  that  a  wicked  and  fmful 
courfe  doth  plainly  expofe  men  to.  "  The  wrath  of 
*'  God  is  here  faid  to  be  revealed  againft  the  impiety 
*'  and  unrighteoufnefs  of  men." 

Secondly,  the  clear  and  undoubted  revelation  which 
the  gofpel  hath  made  of  this  danger.  ^'  The  wrath 
*'  of  God  •'  againft  the  fins  of  men,  is  faid  to  be 
*'  revealed  from  heaven.'* 

Thirdly,  that  every  wicked  and  vicious  pradlicc 
doth  expofe  men  to  this  great  danger.  "  The  wrath 
"  of  God  "  is  faid  to  be  "  revealed  againft  all  un- 
*'  godhnefs,  and  unrighteoufnefs  of  men.'* 

Fourthly,  that  it  is  a  very  great  aggravation  of  fin^ 

for  men  toofFend  againft  the  light  of  their  own  minds. 

The  apoftle  here  aggravates  the  impiety  and  wicked- 

nefs  of  the  heathen  world,  that  they  did  not  live  up 

to  the  knowledge  which  they  had  of  God,  but  con- 

tradided  it  in  their  lives,  which  he  calls  *'  holding 

"  the  truth  in  unrighteoufnefs.'^ 

'  Fifcnly, 


I  ?  20  TZ^^  dmiger  of  all  known  fm^  both  from 

SK  R  Nr.  Fifthly,  the  natural  knowledge  which  men  have  of 
,/f^\ ^  God,  if  they  live  wickedly,  is  a  clear  evidence  of  their 
"  holding  the  truth  in  unrighteoufnefs."  The  apo- 
flle  therefore  chargeth  them  with  "  holding  the  truth 
*'  in  unrighteoufnefs,"  becaufe  "  that  which  may 
"  be  known  of  God  is  manifefted  in  them,  God  hav- 
*'  ing  Ihewed  it  to  them." 
Sixthly,  and  lafi.ly,that  the  clear  revelation  of  the  wrath 
of  God  in  the  gofpel,  againftthe  impiety  and  wickednefs 
of  men,  renders  it  a  very  powerful  and  likely  means  for 
the  recovery  and  falvation  of  men.  For  the  apoftle 
proves"  the  gofpel  of  Christ  to  be  the  power  of  God 
"  to  lalvation,"  becaufe  "  therein  the  wrath  of  God  is 
"  revealed  from  heaven  againft  all  ungodlinefs  and  un- 
*'  righteoufnefs  of  men^who  hold  the  truth  in  unrigh- 
*'  teoufnefs ;"  that  is,  againft  all  impenitent  Tinners. 

1  Ihall  at  the  prefent,  by  God's  alTiftance,  fpeak 
to  the  three  firft  of  thefe  particulars. 

Firft,  the  infinite  danger  that  a  wicked  and  finful 
courfe  doth  plainly  expofe  men  to.  If  there  be  a 
God  that  made  the  world,  and  governs  it,  and  takes 
care  of  mankind,  and  hath  given  them  laws  and 
rules  to  live  by,  he  cannot  but  be  greatly  difpleafed 
at  the  violation  and  tranfgreflion  of  them  ;  and  cer- 
tainly the  difpleafure  of  God  is  the  moft  dreadful 
thing  in  the  world,  and  the  effedls  of  it  the  moft  in- 
lupportable.  Thegreateft  fear  is  from  the  greateft 
danger,  and  the  greateft  danger  is  from  the  greateft 
power  offended  and  enraged  ;  and  this  is  a  confidera- 
tion  exceeding  full  of  terror,  that  by  a  finful  courfe 
we  expofe  ourfelves  to  the  utmoft  difpleafure  of  the 
great  and  terrible  God  ;  for  '>  who  knows  the 
^"  power  of  his  wrath?"  and  "  who  may  ftand  be- 
^..1"  fore  himwhen  once  he  is  angry.?  according  to 

thy 


tJje  light  of  nature  and  revelation.  1821 

*'  thy  fear,  fo  is  thy  wrath  "  (faith  the  Pfalmift.)  S  F^R  M. 
There  is  no  paffion  in  the  mind  of  man  that  is  more  ^  ' 
boundlcfs  and  infinite  than  our  fear,  it  is  apt  to  make 
wild  and  frightful  reprefentations  of  evils,  and  to 
imagine  them  many  times  greater  than  really  they 
are  \  but  in  this  cafe  our  imagination  mud  fall  ihort 
of  the  truth  and  terror  of  the  thing;  for  the  wrath 
of  God  doth  far  exceed  the  utmoil  jealoufy  and  fufpi- 
cion  of  the  moft  fearful  and  guilty  confcience  ;  and 
the  greateft  fmner  under  his  greateft  anguiih  and 
defpair,  cannot  apprehend  or  fear  it  more  than  there 
is  reafbn  for;  "  according  to  rhy  fear,  fo  is  thy  wrath." 

If  il  were  only  the  wrath  and  difpleafure  of  men 
that  the  fmner  were  expofed  to,  there  might  be  rea- 
fon  enough  for  fear,  becaufe  they  have  many  times 
pov/er  enough  to  crulli  an  offender,  and  crueity 
enough  to  fret  every  vein  of  his  body,  and  to  tor- 
ment him  in  every  part:  but  the  wrath  and  venge- 
ance of  men  bears  no  comparifon  with  the  wrath  of 
God.  Their  pafTions  are  many  times  flrong  and 
bluftering;  but  their  arm  is  but  iliort,  and  their 
power  fmall,  "  they  have  not  an  arm  like  God,  nor 
*'  can  they  thunder  with  a  voice  like  him.'*  They 
may  defign  confiderable  harm  and  mifchief  to  us^ 
but  it  is  not  always  in  the  power  of  their  hand  to 
wreak  their  malice  upon  us,  and  to  execute  all  the 
mifchief  which  their  enraged  minds  may  prompt  them 
to;  the  very  utmoft  they  can  defign,  is  to  torment 
our  bodies,  and  to  take  away  our  lives,  and  when 
they  have  defigned  this,  they  may  die  urfl:,  and  "  re- 
''•  turn  to  their  dud,  and  then  their  thoughts  peri(h 
*'  with  them,"  and  all  their  malicious  def.gns  are  at 
an  end  ;  they  are  always  under  the  power  and  go- 

Vol.  VII.  .     13  I  verqmen^ 

I. 


CXI. 


1 S  2  2  7 he  danger  of  all  kno^n  f.n,  both  from 

S  F^RM.  vernment  of  a  fuperior  being,  and  can  go  no  fcir- 
,  thcr  than  he  gives  them  leave.  However  if  they 
do  their  worfb,  and  fhoot  all  their  arrows  at  us,  we 
cannot  (land  at  the  mark  long,  their  wrath  will  Ibon 
make  an  end  of  us,  and  fet  us  free  from  all  their  cruel- 
ty and  opprefTion  ;  "  they  can  but  kill  the  body,  and 
*'  after  that  they  have  no  more  that  they  can  do  j" 
their  mod  refined  malice  cannot  reach  our  fpirits,  no 
weapon  that  can  be  formed  by  the  utmoft  art  of 
man  can  pierce  and  wound  our  fouls  ;  they  can  drive 
us  out  of  this  world,  but  they  cannot  purfue  us 
into  the  other  ;  fo  that  at  the  word  the  grave 
will  be  a  fandluary  to  us,  and  death  a  Mc  retreat 
from  all  their  rage  and  fury. 

But  the  wrath  of  God  is  not  confined  by  any 
of  thefe  hmits.  '^  Once  hath  God  fpoken "  (faith 
David  by  an  elegant  hebrew  phrafe  to  exprefs 
the  certainty  of  the  thing)  ''  once  hath  God 
''  fpoken,  and  twice  I  have  heard  this,  that 
*'  power  belongs  to  God,"  Pfal.  Ixii.  ii.  "  He 
"  hath  a  mighty  arm,"  and  when  he  pleafeth  to 
ftretch  it  out,  none  may  flay  it,  nor  "  fay  unto  him 
*'  what  doft  thou  ;"  he  hath  power  enough  to  make 
good  all  his  threatnings;  whatever  he  fays  he  is 
able  to  efFe6t,  and  whatever  he  "  purpofeth  he  can 
*'  bring  to  pafs  •,"  for  "  his  counfel  fhall  ftand,  and 
*'  he  will  accomplifh  all  his  pleafure  ;''  he  need  but 
fpeak  the  word,  and  it  is  done ;  for  we  can  neither 
refift  his  power,  nor  fly  from  it;  if  we  fly  to  the 
utmoft  parts  of  the  earth,  his  Jiand  can  reach  us,  for 
"  in  his  hand  are  all  the  corners  of  the  earth  5"  if  we 
take  refuge  in  the  grave  (and  we  cannot  do  that  without 
his  leave)  thither  his  wrath  can  follow  us ;  and  there  it 
---^1^— **u^J^s  J  for  his  power  is  not  confined  to  this 

world. 


the  light  of  nature  afid  revelatio?!.  182-^ 

world,  nor  limited    to  our  bodies;"  after  he  hadi'^IiRM. 
kili'd,  he  can  "  deftroy  both  body  and  foul  in  Mi^       ^^^' 

And  this  is  that  wrath  of  God  which  is  ''•  revealed 
"  from  heaven,  "  and  which  the  apollJe  chiefly  in- 
tends, viz.  the  mifery  and  puniihment  of  aRodier 
world,  this  God  hath  threatned  finners  withal  ;  to 
exprefs  which  to  us,  as  fully  as  words  can  do,  he 
heaps  up  in  the  next  chapter  fo  many  weighty  and 
terrible  words,  *'  indignation  and  wrath,  tribulation 
*'  and  anguilh  upon  every  foul  of  man  that  doth 
**  evil ; "  in  oppofition  to  that  great  and  glorious 
reward  of  "  immortality  and  eternal  life,'*  which 
is  promifed  to  ''  a  patient  continuance  in  well- 
"  doing.  " 

So  that  "  the  wrath  of  God  *'  which  is  here  de- 
nounced "  againft  the  impiety  and  unrighteounels 
*'  of  men,"  comprehends  all  the  evils  and  miferies 
of  this  and  the  other  world,  which  every  finner  is  in 
danger  of  whiljl  he  continues  impenitent ;  for  as 
according  to  the  tenor  of  the  gofpel,  "  godlinels 
*'  hath  the  promifes  of  this  life,  and  of  that  which  is 
*'  to  come,"  fo  impenitency  in  fin  expofeth  men 
to  the  evils  of  both  worlds,  to  the  judgments  of  the 
life  that  nov/  is,  and  to  the  endlefs  and  intolerable 
torments  of  that  which  is  to  come.  And  what  can 
be  more  dreadful  than  the  difpleafure  of  an  al- 
mighty and  eternal  being  ?  who  can  punifh  to  the 
utmofl,  and  "  who  lives  for  ever,"  to  execute  his 
wrath  and  vengeance  upon  finners  ;  fo  that  well 
might  the  apoftle  fay,  "  it  is  a  fearful  thing  to  fall 
"  into  the  hands  of  the  living  God." 

"  ConjTider  this,  all  ye  that  forget  God,"  that  neg- 
led  him,  and  live  in  continual  difobedience  to  his 
holy  and  righteous  laws ;  much  more  thofe  v/ho  de- 

13  I  2  fpife 


I P24  ^he  danger  of  all  known  fm,  both  from 

SERM.  fpife  and  affront  him,  and  JIve  in  a  perpetual  de- 
u^^^^.^^  fiance  of  him.  "  Will  ye  provoke  the  Lord  to 
"  jealoufy?  are  ye  flrongcr  than  he?"  think  of  it 
fcrioufly,  and  forget  him  if  yon  can,  defpife  him  if 
you  dare ;  confider  this,  left  he  take  you  into  con- 
fideration,  and  rouze  like  a  lion  out  of  fleep,  and 
*'  tear  you  in  pieces,  and  there  be  none  to  deliver.** 
This  is  the  firft  obfervation,  the  infinite  danger  that 
a  wicked  and  finful  courfe  doth  expofe  men  to, 
c*  the  wrath  of  God,"  which  doth  not  only  fignify 
more  than  all  the  evils  that  we  know,  but  than  all 
thofe  which  the  wildeft  fears  and  fufpicions  of  our 
minds  can  imagine. 

Secondly,  the  next  thing  obfervable,  is  the  clear 
and  undoubted  rcvebtion  which  the  gofpel  has 
made  of  this  danger,  *'  the  wrath  of  God  is  re- 
*«  vealed,  &c."  By  which  the  apoftle  intimates  to 
us,  that  this  was  but  obfcurely  known  to  the  world 
before,  at  lead  in  comparifon  of  that  clear  difco- 
very  which  the  gofpel  hath  now  made  of  it  -,  fo  that 
I  may  allude  to  that  expreffion  in  Job,  which  he 
applies  to  dtath  and  the  g'-ave,  that  "  hell  is  naked 
«'  before  u:^  and  deftrudion  hath  no  covering." 

Not  but  that  mankind  had  always  apprehenfions 
and  jealoufies  of  the  danger  of  a  wicked  life,  and 
fmners  were  always  afraid  of  the  vengeance  of  God 
purfuing  their  evil  deeds,  not  only  in  this  life,  but 
after  it  too  -,  and  tho'  they  had  tuniM  the  puni(h- 
ments  of  another  world  into  ridiculous  fables,  yet 
the  wifer  fort  of  mankind  could  not  get  it  out  of 
their  minds,  that  there  was  fomething  real  under 
them  ;  and  that  Ixion's  wheel,  which  by  a  perpetual 
motion  carried  him  about  \  and  Sifyphus  his  ftone  ; 
•which  he  was  perpetually  rolling  up  the  hill,  and 

when 


the  light  of  nature  and  revelation,  1825 

when  he  had  got  it  near  the  top  tumbled  down,  and3  E  R  M 
ftill  created  him  a  new  labour ;  and  Tantalus  his .  ^1^ 
continual  hunger  and  thirft,  aggravated  by  a  perpe- 
tual nearnefs  of  enjoyment,  and  a  perpetual  difap- 
pointment ;  and  Prometheus  his  being  chained  to  a 
rock,  with  an  eagle  or  vulture  perpetually  preying 
upon  his  liver,  which  grew  as  faft  as  it  was  gnawed  i 
I  fay  even  the  wifer  among  t\\t  headiens  look'd  upon 
thefe  as  fantailical  reprefentations  of  fomething  that 
was  real,  viz.  the  grievous  and  endlefs  punilhment 
of  fmners,  the  not  to  be  endured,  and  yet  perpe^ 
tually  renewed  torments  of  another  world,  for  in  the 
midft  of  all  the  ignorance  and  degeneracy  of  the  hea* 
then  world,  mens  confciences  did  accufe  them  when 
they  did  amifs,  and  they  had  fecret  fears  and  mif- 
givings  of  fome  mighty  danger  hanging  over  them 
from  the  difpleafure  of  a  fuperior  being,  and  the 
apprehenfion  of  fome  great  mifchiefs  likely  to  fol- 
low their  wicked  adlions,  which  fome  time  or  other 
would  overtake  them  ;  which  becaufe  they  did  not 
always  in  this  world,  they  dreaded  them  in  the  next. 
And  [this  was  the  foundation  of  all  thofe  fuperfti- 
tions,  whereby  the  ancient  pagans  endeavoured  fo 
carefully  to  appeafe  their  offended  deities,  and  to 
avert  the  calamities  which  they  feared  they  v/ould 
fend  down  upon  them.  But  all  this  while  they  had 
no  certain  affurance  by  any  clear  and  exprefs  reve- 
lation from  God  to  that  purpofe,  but  only  the  jca- 
loufies  and  fufpicions  of  their  own  minds,  naturally 
confequent  upon  thofe  notions  which  men  generally 
had  of  God,  but  fo  obfcured  and  depraved  by  the 
lulls  and  vices  of  men,  and  by  the  grofs  and 
falfe  conceptions  which  they  had  of  God,  that  they 
only  ferv'd  to  make  them  fuperftitious,   but  were 

not 


cxr. 


826  The  danger  of  all  knozvnfin,  both  from 

SERM.  not  clear  and  ftrong  enough  to  make  them  wifely 
and  lerioufly  rehgious.  And  to  fpeak  the  truth,  the 
more  knowing  and  inquifitive  part  of  the  heathen 
world  had  brought  alJ  thefe  things  into  great  doubt 
and  uncertainty,  by  the  nicety  and  fubtiity  of  dis- 
putes about  them  j  fo  that  it  was  no  great  won- 
der, that  thefe  principles  had  no  greater  effcd:  upon 
the  lives  of  men,  when  their  apprehenfions  of  them 
were  fo  dark  and  doubtful. 

But  the  gofpel  hath  made  a  mofl:  clear  and  cer- 
tain revelation  of  thefe  things  to  mankind.  It  was 
written  before  upon  mens  hearts  as  the  great  fanc- 
tion  of  the  law  of  nature,  but  the  imprcfTions  of 
this  were  in  a  great  meafure  blurred  and  worn  out, 
fo  that  it  had  no  great  power  and  efficacy,  upon  the 
minds  and  manners  of  men  ;  but  now  it  is  clearly 
difcovercd  to  us,  *'  the  wrath  of  God  is  revealed 
'*  from  heaven/'  which  cxprefllon  may  well  imply 
in  it  thefe  three  thing?. 

Firfl,  the  clearnefs  of  the  difcovery  ;  "  the  wrath 
"  of  God  is  faid  to  be  revealed." 

Secondly,  the  extraordinary  manner  of  it ;  it  is 
faid  CO  be  "  revealed  from  heaven." 

Thirdly,  the  certainty  of  it ;  not  being  the  re- 
fult  of  fubtle  and  doubtful  reafonings,  but  having  a 
divine  teftimony  and  confirmation  given  to  it, 
which  is  the  proper  meaning  of  "  being  revealed 
''  from  heaven." 

Firft,  it  imports  the  clearnefs  of  the  difcovery. 
The  punifhment  of  finncrs  in  another  world  is  not 
fo  obfcure  a  matter  as  it  was  before  ;  it  is  now  ex- 
prefly  declared  in  the  gofpel,  together  with  the  par- 
ticular circumftances  of  it,  namely,  that  there  is 
another  life  after  this,  wherein  men  Ihall  receive  the 

juft 


the  light  of  nature  and  revelation^  1827 

juft  rccompence  of  reward  for  all  the  actions  done  ^  ^  ^  ^'*' 
by  them  in  this  life  ;  that  there  is  a  particular  time  u-— y~ 
appointed,  wherein.  God  will  call  all  the  world  to  a 
folemn  account,  and  thofe  who  are  in  their  graves 
fliall  by  a  powerful  voice  be  raifcd  to  life,  and  thofe 
who  fhall  then  be  found  alive  fhall  be  fuddenly 
changed;  "  when  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,*'  the 
eternal  and  only  begotten  Son  of  God,  who  once 
came  in  great  humility  to  fave  us,  fhall  come  again 
*'  in  power,  and  great  glory,"  attended  with  his 
mighty  angels,  and  "  all  nations  lliall  be  gathered 
*'  before  him,"  and  all  mankind  fhall  be  feparated 
into  two  companies,  the  righteous  and  the  v/icked, 
who  after  a  full  hearing,  and  fair  trial,  fhall  be  fen- 
tenced  according  to  their  adions,  the  one  "  to  eter- 
''  nal  life  and  happinels,"  the  other  ''  to  everlafl:- 
*^  ing  mifery  and  torment." 

So  that  the  gofpel  hath  not  only  declared  the 
thing  to  us,  that  there  fhall  be  a  future  judgment; 
but  for  our  farther  afTurance  and  fatisfadion  in  this 
matter,  and  that  theie  things  might  make  a  deep 
impreffion,  and  flrike  a  great  awe  upon  our  minds, 
God  hath  been  pleafed  to  reveal  it  to  us  with  a  great 
many  particular  circumfl:ances,fuch  as  are  very  worthy 
of  God,  and  apt  to  fill  the  minds  of  men  v/ith  dread 
and  aftonifliment,  as  ofcen  as  they  think  of  them. 

For  the  circumflances  of  this  judgment  revealed 
to  us  in  the  gofpel,  are  very  folemn  and  awful,  not 
fuch  as  the  wild  fancies  and  imaginations  of  men 
would  have  been  apt  to  have  dreft  it  up  v/ithal,  fuch 
as  are  the  fidions  of  the  heathen  poets,  and  the  ex- 
travagancies of  Mahomet ;  v/hich  tho'  they  be  terri- 
rible  enough,  yet  they  are  withal  ridiculous  •,  but 
fuch  as  are  every  way  becoming  the  majefty  of  the 

great 


1828  T^he  danger  of  all  knoiJDnfn^  both  from 

S  E  R  M-  great  God,  and  the  ibiemnity  of  the  great  day,  and 
^^^^.-  .  fuch  as  do  not  in  the  leaft  favour  of  the  vanity  and 
Jighnefs  of  humane  imagination. 

For  what  more  fair  and  equal,  than  that  men 
fhould  be  tried  by  a  man  like  thcmfelves,  one  of  the 
fame  rank  and  condition,  that  had  experience  of  the 
infirmities  and  temptations  of  humane  nature?  {o 
our  Lord  tells  us,  that  ''  the  Fathlr  hath  com- 
*'  mitted  all  judgment  to  the  Son,  bccaufe  he  is  the 
*'  Son  of  man,'*  and  therefore  cannot  be  excepted 
againft,  as  not  being  a  fit  and  equal  judge.  And 
this  St.  Paul  offers  as  a  clear  proof  of  the  equitable 
proceedings  of  that  day  ;  "  God  (fays  he^  hath  ap- 
"  pointed  a  day,  in  which  he  will  judge  the  world 
*'  in  righteoufnefs,  by  that  man  whom  he  hath  or- 
«  dained." 

And  then  what  more  congruous  than  that  the  Son 
of  God,  who  had  taken  fo  much  pains  for  the  falva- 
tion  of  men,  and  came  into  the  world  for  that  pur- 
pofe,  and  had  ufed  all  imaginable  means  for  the  re- 
formation of  mankind,  I  fay  what  more  congruous, 
than  that  this  very  perfon  fliouM  be  honoured  by 
God  to  fit  in  judgment  upon  the  world,  and  to  con- 
demn thofe,  who  after  all  the  means  that  had  beqn 
tried  for  their  recovery,  would  not  repent  and  be 
faved.  And  what  more  proper,  than  that  men,  who 
are  to  be  judged  for  "  things  done  in  the  body/* 
fhould  be  judged  in  the  body,  and  confequently  that 
the  refurredion  of  the  dead  fliould  preceed  the  gene- 
ral judgment  .? 

And  what  more  magnificent  and  fultable  to  this 
glorious  folemnity,  than  the  awful  circumflances 
which  the  fcripture  mentions  of  the  appearance  of 
this  great  judge;   that   he    fhall  "  defcend    from 

*'  heaven'* 


the  light  of  nature  and  revelation.  "1829 

"  heaven"  in  great  majefty  and  glory,  attended  with  S  E  R  M, 
"  his  mighty  angels,  and  that  every  eye  (hall  fee 
*'  him;"  that  upon  his  appearance,  the  frame  of  na- 
ture Ihall  be  in  an  agony,  and  the  whole  world  in 
flame  and  confufion;  that  thofe  great  and  glorious 
bodies  of  light  fhall  be  obfcured,  and  by  degrees  ex- 
tinguifh'd;  "  the  fun  fliall  be  darkncd,  and  the 
*'  moon  turned  into  blood,  and  all  the  powers  of 
"  heaven  fhaken^"  yea,  "  the  heavens  themfelves 
"  fhall  pafs  away  with  a  great  noife,  and  the  ele- 
"  ments  diHolve  with  fervent  heat ;  the  earth  alfo, 
*'  and  all  the  works  that  are  therein  fhall  be  burnt 
^'  up."  I  appeal  to  any  man,  whether  this  be  not 
a  reprefentation  of  things  very  proper  and  fuitable 
to  that  great  day,  wherein  he  who  made  the  world 
fhall  come  to  judge  it  ?  and  whether  the  wit  of  man 
ever  devifed  any  thing  fo  awful,  and  fo  agreeable  to 
the  majedy  of  God,  and  the  folemn  judgment  of  the 
whole  world  ?  The  defcription  which  Virgil  makes  of 
the  judgment  of  another  world,  of  the  elyfian  fields, 
and  the  infernal  regions,  how  infinitely  do  they  fall 
fliort  of  the  majefty  of  the  holy  fcripture,  and  the 
defcription  there  made  of  heaven  and  hell,  and  of 
the  great  and  terrible  day  of  the  Lord  !  fo  that  in 
comparifon  they  are  childifh  and  trifling  ;  and  yet 
perhaps  he  had  the  mod  regular  and  mofl  go- 
vern'd  imagination  of  any  man  that  ever  lived, 
and  obferved  the  greatefl  decorum  in  his  charaders 
and  defcriptions.  But  who  can  declare  "  the  great 
"  things  of  God,  but  he  to  whom  God  fhall  re- 
*'  veal  them!" 

Secondly,  this  expreflion  of  ''  the  wrath  of  God 
''  being  revealed  from  heaven,"  doth  not  only  im- 

VoL.  Vir.  13  K  ply 

I. 


1830         The  danger  of  all  known  fin^  both  from 
S  E  R  M.  ply  the  clear  difcovery  of  the  thing,    but    likewifc 
fomething  extraordinary  in  the  manner  of  the  difco- 
very.    It  is  not  only  a  natural  imprelfion  upon    the 
minds  of  men,    that  God   will  feverely  punifh   Tin- 
ners 5  but  he  hath  taken  care   that   mankind  fhould 
be  inflru6ted  in  this  matter  in  a  very  particular  and 
extraordinary   manner.  He  hath  not  left  it   to    the 
reafon  of  men  to  colled  it  from  the  confideration  of 
his  attributes  and  perfedlions,  his  holinefs  and  juftice, 
and  from  the  confideration  of  the  promifcuous  admi- 
niftration  of  his  providence  towards  good  and    bad 
men  in  this  world,  but  he  hath  been  pleafed  to  fend 
an  extraordinary  perfon  from  heaven,  on  purpofe  to 
declare  this  thing  plainly  to  the  world,  "    the  wrath 
*'  of  God  is  revealed  from  heaven-,"  that  is,  God 
fent  his  own  Son  from  heaven,  on  purpofe  to  declare 
his  wrath  againft  all  obilinate  and  impenitent  Tinners, 
that  he  might  effeftually  awaken  the  drowfy  world 
to  repentance  •,   he  hath  fent  an  extraordinary    am- 
balTador  into  the  world,  to  give  warning  to  all  thofe 
who  continue   in  their  fins,  of   the  judgment  of  the 
great  day,    and  to  fummon  them  before  his  dreadful 
tribunal.     So  the  apoftle  tells   the  Athenians,  A6ts 
xvii.  30,  31.  "Now  he  commandeth   all  men  every 
''  where  to  repent  *,  becaufe  he  hath  appointed  a  day  in 
"  which  he  will  judge  the  world    in  righteoufnefs, 
*'  t)y  that  man  whom  he  hath  ordained,  whereof  he 
"  hath  given  alTurance  unto  all  men,  in  that  he  hath 
«  raifed  him  from  the  dead." 
I  Thirdly,  this  exprelTion  implies  likewife  the  certain- 
tainty  of  this  difcovery.     If  the  wrath  of  God  had 
only  been  declared  in  the  difcourfes  of  wife  men, 
tho'  grounded  upon  very  probable  reafon,  yet  it  might 
have  been  brought  into  doubt  by  the  contrary  reafon- 

ings 


the  light  of  nature  and  revelation,  1 8  3 1 

ings  of  fubtle  and  difputing  'men  :  but  to  put  the  SERM. 
matter  out  of  all  queftion,  we  have  a  divine  teO:i- 
mony  for  it,  and  God  hath  confirmed  it  from  hea- 
ven, by  figns,  and  wonders,  and  miracles,  efpeclally 
by  the  refurrediion  of  JesusChrist  from  the  dead; 
for  "  by  this  he  hath  given  aflfurance  unto  all  men, 
*'  that  it  is  he  who  is  ordained  of  God  to  judge  the 
"  quick  and  the  dead." 

Thus  you  fee  in  what  refpeft  "the  wrath  of  God" 
is  faid  to  be  "  revealed  from  heaven,"  in  that  the 
gofpel  hath  made  a  more  clear,  and  particular,  and  cer- 
tain difcovery  of  the  judgment  of  the  great  day,  than 
ever  was  made  to  the  world  before.  I  proceed  to  the 

Third  obfervadon,  which  I  fliall  fpeak  but  briefly 
to  ;  namely,  that  every  wicked  and  vicious  pradice 
doth  expofe  men  to  this  dreadful  danger.  The  apo- 
ftle  inflanceth  in  the  two  chief  heads  to  which  the 
fins  of  men  may  be  reduced,  impiety  towards  God, 
and  unrighteoufnels  towards  men ;  and  therefore  he 
is  to  be  underflood  to  denounce  the  wrath  of  God 
againft  every  parncular  kind  of  fin,  comprehended 
under  thefe  general  heads ;  fo  that  no  man  that  al- 
lows himfelf  in  any  impiety  and  wickednefs  of  Ijfe, 
can  hope  to  efcape  the  wrath  of  God.  Therefore 
it  concerns  us  to  be  entirely  religious,  and  "  to  have 
"  refped  to  all  God's  commandments  i"  and  to  take 
heed  that  we  do  not  allow  ourfelves  in  the  pradice  of 
any  kind  of  fin  whatfoever,  becaufe  the  living  in  any 
one  known  fin,  is  enough  to  expofe  us  to  the  dreadful 
wrath  of  God.  Tho'  a  man  be  juft  and  righteous 
in  his  dealings  with  men,  yet  if  he  negled  the  wor- 
fiiip  and  fervice  of  God,  this  will  certainly  bring  him 
under  condemnation  :  a^rd  on  the  other  hand,  tho'  a 
man  may  ferve  God  never  fo  diligently  and  devout- 

J3  k:  2  h/., 


cxr. 


I S  3  2  7he  danger  of  all  known  fm^  both  from 

SERM.  ly,  yet  if  he  be  defedive  in  righteoufncfs  toward 
men,  if  he  deal  falQy  and  fraudulently  with  his 
neighbour,  he  Ihali  not  efcape  the  wrath  of  God  ; 
tho'  a  man  pretend  to  never  fo  much  piety  and  de- 
votion, yet  if  he  be  unrighteous,  "  he  fhall  not  inhe- 
''  rit  the  kingdom  of  God  ;"  if  any  man  "  over- 
"  reach  and  defraud  his  brother  in  any  matter, 
"  the  Lord  is  the  avenger  of  fuch/'  faith  St.  Paul 
I  Their,  iv.  6. 

So  that  here  is  a  very  powerful  argument  to  take 
men  off  from  all  fin,  and  to  engage  them  to  a  con- 
Itant  and  careful  difcharge  of  their  whole  duty  toward 
God  and  men,  and  to  reform  whatever  isamifs  either 
in  the  frame  and  temper  of  their  minds,  or  in  the  adlions 
and  courfe  of  their  lives  \  becaufe  any  kind  of  v/icked- 
nefs,  any  one  fort  of  vicious  courfe,  lays  men  open  to 
the  vengeance  of  God,  and  the  punifliments  of  ano- 
ther world;  "  the  wrath  of  God  is  revealed  from 
*'  heaven  againft  all  ungodhnefs,  and  unrighteoufnels 
<'  of  meui"  there  is  no  exception  in  the  cafe,  we 
mud  forfake  all  fin,  fubdue  every  lull,  "  be  holy  in 
'<^  all  manner  of  converllition,"  othervvife  we  can  have 
no  reafonable  hopes  of  efcaping  the  wrath  of 
God,  and  the  damnation  of  hell.  But  to  proceed 
to  the 

Fourth  obfervation  ;  namely,  that  it  is  a  very 
great  aggravation  of  fin,  for  men  to  offend  again il 
the  light  of  their  own  minds.  The  apoftle  here  ag- 
o-ravates  the  wickednefs  of  the  heathen  world,  that 
they  did  not  live  up  to  that  knowledge  which  they 
had  of  God,  but  contradicfled  it  in  their  lives, 
«'  holding  the  truth  of  God  in  unrighteoulhefs." 
And  that  he  fpeaks  here  of  the  heathen,  is  plain  from 
his  following  difcourfe,  and  the  characfler  he  gives  of 

ihofe 


the  light  of  nature  and  revelation.  1833 

thofe  perfons  of  v/hom  he  was  fpeaking,  "  who  hold  S  E  R  m. 
"  the  truth  of  God  in  unrighteoufnels  •,  becaufe  that ,  ^[^ 
"  which  may  be  known  of  God  is  manifeft  in  them, 
''  for  God  hath  fhewn  it  unto  them  j"  and  this  he 
proves,  becaufe  thofe  v/ho  were  deditute  of  divine 
revelation,  were  not  without  all  knowledge  of  God, 
being  led  by  the  fight  of  this  vifible  world,  to  the 
knowledge  of  an  invifible  being  and  power  that  was 
the  author  of  it,ver.  20,  21."  For  the  invifible  thinp-.s 
*'  of  him  from  the  creation  of  the  world  are  clearly 
"  feen,  being  underilood  by  the  things  which  are 
*'  made,  even  his  eternal  power  and  godhead, 
*'  fo  that  they  are  without  excufe -,  becaufe  that  when 
"  they  knew  God,  they  glorified  him  not  as  God." 
(H^ec  efi  fumma  deli^i^  nolle  agnofcere^  quern  ignorare 
non  foffis^  {2L\\h  Tertullian  to  the  heathen  ;  "  this  is 
*'  the  height  of  thy  fault,  not  to  acknowledge  him, 
*'  whom  thou  canft  not  but  know,  not  to  own  him, 
*'  of  whom  thou  canfl  not  be  ignorant  if  thou 
*'  wouldft  i")  "  neither  were  thankful  i"  they  did  not 
pay  thofe  acknowledgments  to  him  which  of  right 
were  due  to  the  author  of  their  being,  and  of  all 
good  things  \  lij.cLrouL(Xi^Ti<JOLV  cy  TcTr  d^ioKcyicriJ.c'is 
cwTwv, "  they  were  fool'd  with  their  own  reafonings." 
This  he  fpeaks  of  the  philofophers,  who  in  thofe 
great  arguments  of  the  being  and  providence  of 
God,  the  immortality  of  the  foul,  and  the  rewards 
of  another  world,  had  iofi:  the  truth  by  too  much 
fubtilty  about  it,  and  had  diiputed  themfelves  into 
doubt  and  uncertainty  about  thofe  things  which  were 
naturally  known  ;  for  Jiimiim  altercando  Veritas  amlt- 
titiir  ;  "  truth  is  many  times  loft  by  too  much  con- 
*'  tention  and  difpute  about  it,  and  by  too  eager  a 
''  purfuit  of  it  men   many  times  out-run  it;   and 

"  leave 


1 8  ^4  The  dafiger  of  all  known  Ji}7,  both  from 

SERM.  "  leave  it  behind  i"  vcr.  22.  **  and  profefiing  them- 
"  felvcs  to  be  wife  they  became  fools."  Men  never 
play  the  fools  more,  than  by  endeavouring  to  be  over- 
fubtle  and  wife  ;  ver.  23.  "  and  changed  the  glory  of 
"  the  incorruptible  God,  into  an  image  made  like  to 
*'  corruptible  man,  and  to  birds,  and  to  four-footed 
"  bcails,  and  creeping  things ;"  here  he  fpeaks  of 
the  fottiHinefs  of  their  idolatry,  whereby  they  pro- 
voked God  to  give  them  up  to  all  manner  of  lewd- 
nefs  and  impurity,  ver.  24.  "  Vv'herefore  God  alfo 
"  gave  them  up  unto  uncleannefs,  through  the  lulls 
"  of  their  own  hearts ;"  and  again,  ver.  26.  "  for 
"  this  caufe  God  gave  them  up  to  vile  aftedlionsj" 
and  then  he  enumerates  the  abominable  lulls  and 
vices  they  were  guilty  of,  notwithdanding  their  natu- 
ral acknowledgment  of  the  divine  juilice,  ver.  32. 
*'  who  knowing  the  judgment  of  God,  that  they 
"  which  commit  fuch  things  are  worthy  of  death, 
''  not  only  do  the  fame,  but  have  pleafure  in  them 
*'  that  do  them."  By  all  which  it  appears  that  he 
fpeaks  of  the  heathen,  who  offended  again  ft  the  na- 
tural light  of  their  own  minds,  and  therefore  were 
without  excufe.  S^uamfihi  veniam  fperarepojjunt  im- 
fietatis  fu£y  qui  non  agnofcimt  cultum  ejus^  quern  pr or ^ 
sus  ignorari  ah  hominihus  fas  non  ejl  ?  Jaith  La6tantius, 
*'  hovv;-  can  they  hope  for  pardon  of  their  impiety, 
*'  who  deny  to  v/orfliip  that  God,  of  whom  it  is 
*'  not  poilible  mankind  Ihould  be  wholly  igno- 
*'  rant  ?  " 

So  that  this  is  '^  to  Iiold  the  truth  in  unrighteouf- 
*•'"  nefs,"  injurioufly  to  Ihpprefs  it^  and  to  hinder  the 
power  and  eoicacy  of  it  upon  our  minds  and  ac- 
tions J  for  fo  '(.\-\Q  word  xaT£;^«v  fometimes  fignifies,  as 
well  as  to  hold  fad,  and  this  every  man  does,  v/ho 

acts 


the  light  of  nature  and  revelation.  1835 

a6ls  contrary  to  what   he  believes  and  knows  ;  he  S  E  RM. 
offers  violence  to  the  light  of  his  own  mind,  and  , 
does  injury  to  the  truth,  and  keeps  that  a  prifoner, 
which  would    fet  him  free  ;  ''  ye  fliall  knovs^  the 
"  truth  (lays  our  Lord)  and   the  truth  fliall  make 
"  you  free." 

And  this  is  one  of  the  highed  aggravations  oF  the 
fins  of  men,  to  offend  againft  knowledge,  and  that 
light  v/hich  God  hath  ki  up  in  every  man's  mind. 
If  men  wander  and  flumble  in  the  dark,  it  is  not  to 
be  v/onder'd  at  ;  many  times  it  is  unavoidable,  and 
no  care  can  prevent  it :  but   in  the  light  it  is  ex- 
pelled   men    fhould   look  before  them,  and  difcern 
their  way.     That  natural  light  which   the  heathen 
had,  though  it  was  but  comparatively  dim  and  im- 
perfedl,  yet  the  apoflle  takes  notice  of  it  as  a  great 
aggravation    of    their    idolatrous   and    abominable 
practices.     Thofe  natural  notions  which  all  men  hav^ 
of  God 5    if  they  had  in  any  m.eafure  attended  to 
them,  and  governed  themfelves  by  them,  might  have 
been  fufficient  to   have  preferved  them  from  diPno- 
nouring    the   deity,    by   worHiipping    creatures  in- 
flead   of  God  ;    the  common  light  of  nature  was 
enough  to  have  difcovered  to  them  the  evil  of  thofe 
lewd  and  unnatural  practices,  which  many  of  them 
were  guilty  of;  but  they  detained  and  fupprefl  the 
truth  moil  injurioufly,  and  would  not  fuffer  it  to  have 
its  natural  and  proper  influence  upon  them  ;  and  this 
is   that  which  left  them  without  excufc,  that  from 
the  light  of  nature  they  had   knowledge  enough  to 
have  done  better,  and  to  have  preferved  them  from 
thole  great  crimes   which  were  fo  common  among 
them. 

And 


CXI. 


1836  ^he  danger  of  all  laicwnjin^  both  from 

S  ]•:  R  M.  And  if  this  was  fo  great  an  aggravation  of  the 
impiety  and  wickednefs  of  the  heathen,  and  left 
them  "  without  excufe ;"  what  apology  can  be  made 
for  the  impiety  and  unrighteoufnefs  of  chriftians, 
who  have  fo  (Irong  and  clear  a  hght  to  difcover  to 
them  their  duty,  and  the  danger  of  neglecting  it, 
to  whom  "  the  wrath  of  God  is  plainly  revealed 
*'  from  heaven,  againft  all  ungodlinefs  and  unrighte- 
*'  oufnefs  of  men  ?'*  The  truths  of  the  gofpel  are  fo 
very  clear  and  powerful,  and  fuch  an  improvement 
of  natural  light,  that  men  muft  ufe  great  force  and 
violence  to  fupprefs  them,  and  to  hinder  the  efficacy 
of  them  upon  their  lives.  And  this  is  a  certain  rule, 
by  how  much  the  greater  our  knowledge,  by  fo  much 
the  lefs  is  our  excufe,  and  fo  much  the  greater  punifli- 
ment  is  due  to  our  faults.  So  our  Lord  hath 
told  us,  Luke  xii.  47.  "  That  fervant  which  knew 
''  his  Lord's  will,  and  prepared  not  himfelF,  nei- 
*'  ther  did  according  to  his  will,  fliall  be  beaten 
*'  with  many  ftripes."  And  John  ix.  41.  ''•  If  ye 
"  were  blind  (fays  our  Saviour  to  the  Jews)  ye 
*'  fhould  have  no  fin."  So  much  ignorance  as 
there  is  of  our  duty,  fo  much  abatement  of  the  wil- 
fCTlnefs  of  our  faults;  but  ''  if  we  fin  wilfully,  af- 
"  ter  we  have  received  the  knowledge  of  the  truth, 
*'  there  remains  no  more  facrifice  for  fin,  but  a  fear- 
''  ful  expedation  of  judgment  and  fiery  indignation," 
fays  the  apoftle  to  the  Hebrews,  chap.  x.  25,  27. 
"  If  we  fin  wilfully  after  we  have  received  the 
*'  knowledge  of  the  truth  j"  implying,  that  men 
cannot  pretend  ignorance  for  their  faults,  after  fo 
clear  a  revelation  of  the  will  of  God,  as  is  made  to 
mankind  by  the  gofpel. 

,    And 


the  light  of  nature  and  revelation.  i  S37 

And  upon  this  confideration  it  is,  that  our  Savi-  S  E  RM. 
OUR  doth  fo  aggravate  the  impenitency  and  unbe- ,  " 
lief  of  the  Jews,  becaufe  it  was  in  oppofition  to  all 
the  advantages  of  knowledge,  v/hich  can  be  ima- 
gined to  be  afforded  to  mankind,  John  xv.  22,  23, 
24.  "  If  I  had  not  come  and  fpoken  unto  them, 
"  they  had  not  had  fin  ;  "  that  is,  in  comparifon  their 
fin  had  been  much  more  excufable  ;  "  but  now  they 
"  have  no  cloke  for  their  fin."  "He  that  hateth  me, 
"  hateth  my  Father  alfo:  if  I  had  not  done 
"  among  them  the  works  which  none  other  man 
"  did,  they  had  not  had  fin ;  but  now  have  they 
"  both  feen,  and  hated  both  me,  and  my  Father." 
How  is  that?  Our  Saviour  means,  that  they  had 
now  finned  againA  all  the  advantages  of  knowing 
the  will  of  God,  that  mankind  could  pofTibly  have; 
at  once  oppofing  natural  light,  which  was  the  dif- 
penfation  of  the  Father  ;  and  the  clcareft  revela- 
tion of  God's  will,  in  the  difpenfation  of  the  gof- 
pel  by  his  Son  ;  "  now  have  they  both  feen  and 
"  hated  both  me  and  Father." 

The  two  remaining  obfervations  I  fhall  referve  to 
another  opportunity. 


Vol  VII.  13  L  SERMON 

I. 


SERMON     CXII. 

The  danger  of  all  known  fin,  both  from 
the  light  or  nature  and  revelation. 

ROM.    i.    i8,  19. 

For  the  wrath  of  God  is  revealed  from  heaven,  againjl 
all  imgodlinefs  and  unrighteoufnefs  of  men,  who  hold 
the  truth  in  unrighteoufnefs  •,  becaufe  that  which  may 
he  known  of  God  is  manifefl  in  them,  for  God  hath 
fhewed  it  unto  them. 

SERM.  T  Have  handled  four  of  the  obfervations  which  I 
y^^^rl^    I    rais'd   from  thefe  words ;   and   fhall  now   pro- 
The  fe-     -*"  ceed  to  the  other  two  that  remain, 
cond  fer-         rj,|     ^^^^l^  obfervation  was,  that  the  natural  know- 
mon  oa  re- 

ikis text,     ledge  which  men  have  of  God,  if  they  live  contrary  to 

it,  is  a  fufficient  evidence  of"  their  holding  the  truth 
*'  of  God  in  unrighteoufnefs."  For  the  reafon  why 
the  apoftle  chargeth  them  with  this,  is,  "  becauie 
•^'  that  which  may  be  known  of  God  is  manifefl:,  in 
''  that  God  hath  fhewed  it  unto  them." 

There  is  a  natural  knowledge  of  God,  and  of  the 
duty  we  owe  to  him,  which  the  apoflle  calls  to  yvca^cv 
tS  ©sS,  "  that  of  God  which  is  obvious  to  be 
*'  known"  by  the  light  of  nature,  and  is  as  much  as 
is  abfolutely  neceflary  for  us  to  know.  There  is 
fomething  of  God  that  is  incomprehenfible,  and 
beyond  the  reach  of  our  underftandings  ;  but  his  be_ 
ing  and  effcntial  perfedions  may  be  known,  which 
he  calls  his  eternal  power  vind  godhead  j    thefe  he 

tells 


7ke  danger  of  all  known  fin ^  &c.  1 8 .  q 

tells  us  "  are  clearly  feen,  being  underftood  by  the  S  E  R  jvf. 
«  things  which  are  made  ; "  that  is,  the  creation  of  J^ll: 
the  world  is  a  plain  demonflration  to  men,  of  the 
being  and  power  of  God  ;  and  if  fo,  then  "  God 
'^  is  naturally  known  to  men  ;  "  the  contrary  where- 
of Socinus  pofitively  maintains, .  tho'  therein  he  be 
forfaken  by  mofl  of  his  followers ;  an  opinion,  in 
my  judgment,  very  unworthy  of  one,  who,  not 
without  reafon,  was  eileemed  fo  great  a  mafter  of 
reafon  •,  and  (tho'  I  beheve  he  did  not  fee  it)  under- 
mining the  ilrongeft  and  fureft  foundation  of  \\\\  re- 
ligion, which,  when  the  natural  notions  of  God  are 
once  taken  away,  will  certainly  want  its  bell  fup- 
port.  Befides  that  by  denying  any  natural  know- 
ledge of  God,  and  his  effential  perfedions,  he  freely 
gives  away  one  of  the  mod  phuuble  grounds  of 
oppofmg  the  dodrine  of  the  Trinity.  But  becaufe 
this  is  a  matter  of  great  confequence.  and  he  v/as  a 
great  man,  and  is  not  to  be  confuted  by  contempt, 
but  by  better  reafon,  if  it  can  be  found  j  I  will  con- 
fider  his  reafons  for  this  opinion,  and  return  a  parti- 
cular anfwer  to  them. 

Firft,  he  fays  that  if  the  knowledge  of  God  were 
natural,  it  would  not  be  of  faith  ;  but  the  apoftle  fays, 
that  "  we  m.ull  believe  that  he  is  "  Tlie  force  of 
which  argument,  if  it  have  any,  lies  in  this,  that 
the  object  of  faith  is  divine  revelation,  and  there- 
fore we  cannot  be  faid  to  believe  what  we  naturally 
know.  The  fchoolmen  indeed  fay  fo ;  but  the 
fcripture  ufeth  the  word  faith  more  largely,  for  a 
real  perfuafion  of  any  thing,  whether  grounded  up- 
on fenfe,  or  reafon,  or  divine  revelation.  And  our 
Saviour's  fpeech  to  Thomas,  "  becaufe  thou  haft 
^'  feenj  thou  haft  believed,'*  does  fufficiently  inti- 
13  L  2  matCa 


1840  T^'he  danger  of  all  known  Jin  ^  both  from 

E  R  M.  mate,  that  a  man  may  believe  what  he  fees  •,  and 
if  fo,  what  fhould  hinder,  but  that  a  man  may  be 
faid  to  believe  what  he  naturally  knows ;  that  is, 
be  really  perfuaded  that  there  is  a  God  from  natu- 
ral light  ? 

Secondly,  his  next  argument  is,  bccaufe  the  fame 
apoftle  concludes  Enoch  to  have  believed  God,  be- 
caufe  he  pleafed  God,  '^  and  without  faith  it  is 
"  impoflible  to  pleafe  him."  From  whence  he  fays 
it  is  certain  that  men  may  be  without  this  belief, 
which  if  it  be  natural  they  cannot.  Indeed  if  the 
apoftle  had  faid,  that  whoever  believes  a  God,  mud 
of  ncceftity  obey  and  pleafe  him,  then  the  inference 
had  been  good,  that  all  men  do  not  naturally  believe 
a  God,  becaufe  it  is  certain  they  do  not  pleafe  him  ; 
but  it  is  not  good  the  other  way,  no  more  than  if 
a  man  fhould  argue  thus,  that  becaufe  whoever  ads 
reafonably,  mud  be  endowed  with  reafon,  therefore 
men  are  not  naturally  endowed  with  reafon.  For  as 
men  may  naturally  be  endowed  with  reafon,  and 
yet  not  always  make  ufe  of  it ;  fp  men  may  natu- 
rally know  and  believe  a  God,  and  yet  not  be  careful 
10  pleafe  him. 

His  third  argument  is,  that  the  fcrlpture  fays  that 
there  are  fome  that  do  not  believe  a  God,  for  which 
he  cites  that  of  David,  "  the  fool  hath  fiid  in  his 
"  heart  there  is  no  God  •,'*  which  certainly  proves, 
"that  bad  men  live  io^  as  if  they  believed  there  were 
no  God  ;  nay,  it  may  farther  import,  that  they  en- 
deavour as  much  as  they  can,  to  ftiflc  and  extin- 
cTuifli  thebelief  of  a  God  in  their  minds,  and  would 
gladly  perfuade  themfelves  there  is  no  God,  becaufe 
it  is  convenient  for  them  there  fliould  be  none ; 
and  whether  David  meant  fo  or  not,  is  is  very  pro- 
bable 


the  light  of  nature  and  revelation.  1841 

bable  thac  fome  may  arrive  to  that  lieight  of  Im-  S5E  R  M. 
piety,  as  for  a  time  at  leaft,  and  in  fome  moods, 
to  disbelieve  a  God,  and  to  be  very  confident  of 
the  arcruments  on  that  fide.  But  v/hat  then  ?  is  the 
knowkdo-e  and  behef  of  a  God  therefore  not  na- 
tural to  mankind?  nature  it  felf,  as  conftant  and 
uniform  as  it  is,  admits  of  Ibme  irregularities  and 
exceptions,  in  efFeds  that  are  meeriy  natural,  much 
more  in  thofe  which  have  fomething  in  them  that 
is  voluntary,  and  depends  upon  the  good  or  bad  ufe 
of  our  reafon  and  underftanding  *,  and  there  is  no  ar- 
guing from  what  is  monftrous,  againft  what  is  na- 
tural. It  is  natural  for  men  to  have  five  fingers  up- 
on a  hand,  and  yet  fome  are  born  otherwife :  but  in 
voluntary  agents,  that  which  is  natural  may  be  per- 
verted, and  in  a  great  meafure  extinguifh'd  in  fome 
particular  inftances  ;  fo  that  there  is  no  force  at  all 
in  this  objedtion. 

His  fourth  and  lafl  argument  is,  that  there  have 
not  only  been  particular  perfons,  but  whole  nations 
who  have  had  no  fenfe,  nor  fo  much  as  fufpicion  of 
a  deity.  This  I  confefs  were  of  great  force,  if  it  were 
true  •,  and  for  the  proof  of  this,  he  produceth  the 
inftance  of  Brafil  in  America.  Bat  I  utterly  deny 
the  matter  of  fa6t  and  hiftory,  and  challenge  any 
man  to  bring  good  teftimony,  not  only  of  any  na- 
tion, but  of  any  city  in  the  world,  that  ever  were 
profefTed  atheifts. 

I  know  this  was  aflirmed  of  fome  part  of  Brafil, 
by  fome  of  the  firft  difcoverers,  who  yet  at  the  fame 
time  owned,  that  thefe  very  people  did  mofl  ex- 
prefly  believe  the  immortality  of  the  foul,  and  the 
rewards  and  punifhments  of  another  life;  opinions 
which  no  man  can   well  reconcile  with  the  denial 

and 


184^  The  danger  of  all  known  fin^  both  from 

SERM.  and  disbelief  of  a  deity.  But  to  put  an  end  to  this 
argument,  later  and  more  perfect  difcoveries  have 
found  this  not  to  be  true,  and  do  alTure  us  upon  bet- 
ter acquaintance  with  thofe  barbarous  people,  that 
they  are  deeply  pofTcfl:  with  the  belief  of  one  fu- 
preme  God,  who  made  and  governs  the  world. 

Having  thus  given  a  particular  anfwer  to  Socinus 
his  arguments  againfl:  the  natural  knowledge  of  a 
God,  I  will  now  bricfiy  offer  fome  arguments  for 
it.  And  to  prove  that  the  knowledge  and  belief  of 
a  GcD  is  natural  to  mankind,  my 

Firfl  argument  Ihall  be  from  the  univerfal  confent, 
in  this  matter,  of  all  nations  in  all  ages.  And  this  is 
an  argument  of  great  force,  there  being  no  better 
way  to  prove  any  thing  to  be  natural  to  any  kind  of 
being,  than  if  it  be  generally  found  in  the  whole 
kind.  Omrdtim  confenfus  nature  vox  eft^  *^  the  con- 
*'  fent  of  all  is  the  voice  of  nature,"  faith  Tully. 
And  indeed  by  what  other  argument  can  we  prove 
that  realbn,  and  fpecch,  and  an  inclination  to  focicty 
are  natural  to  men ;  but  that  thefe  belong  to  the 
whole  kind? 

Secondly,  unlefs  the  knowledge  of  God  and  his 
effential  perfe6lions  be  natural,  I  do  not  fee  what 
fufiicient  and  certain  foundation  there  can  be  of  re- 
vealed religion.  For  unlefs  we  naturally  know  God 
to  be  a  being  of  all  perfection,  and  confequendy 
that  whatever  he  fays  is  true,  I  cannot  fee  what  di- 
vine revelation  can  fignify.  For  God's  revealing  or 
declaring  fuch  a  thing  to  us,  is  no  necelTary  argu- 
ment that  it  is  fo,  unlefs  antecedendy  to  this  revela- 
tion, we  be  pofleft  firmly  with  this  principle,  that 
whatever  God  fays  is  true.  And  v/hatever  is 
known  antecedently  to  revelation,   mufl:  be  known 

by 


the  light  of  nature  and  revelation.  184.3 

by  natural  light,  and  by  reafonings  and  deduclionsSER  M. 
from  natural  principles.      I  might  farther  add  to  this   ^^^^" 
argument,  that  the  only  flandard   and  meafure   to 
judge  of  divine  revelations,  and  to  diftinguifh  be- 
tween what  are  true,  and  what  are  counterfeit,  are 
the  natural  notions  which  men  have  of  God  and  of 
his  eiTential  per  feci  ions. 

Thirdly,  if  the  notion  of  a  God  be  not  natural,  I 
do  not  fee  how  men  can  have  any  natural  notion  of 
the  difference  of  moral  good  and  evil,  juft,  and  un- 
jufl.  For  if  1  do  not  naturally  know  there  is  a 
God,  how  can  I  naturally  know  that  there  is  any 
law  obliging  to  the  one,  and  forbidding  the  other  ? 
all  law  and  obligation  to  obedience,  necclTarily  flip- 
pofmg  the  authority  of  a  fuperior  being.  But  the 
apoftle  expreOy  afferts,  that  the  Gentiles  who  were 
deftitute  of  a  revealed  law,  ''  v/ere  a  law  unto  them- 
'^  felvesj"  but  there  cannot  be  a  natural  law  ob- 
liging mankind,  unlefs  God  be  naturally  known  to 
them. 

And  this  Socinus  himfelf  in  his  difcourfe  upon 
this  very  argument  is  forced  to  acknowledge.  "  In 
"  all  men  (lays  he)  there  is  naturally  a  difference  of 
*'  jud,  and  unjuif,  or  at  lead  there  is  planted  in  all 
''  men  an  acknowledgment  that  juft  ought  to  be 
"  preferr'd  before  unjuft,  and  that  which  is  honeft, 
*'  before  the  contrary;  and  this  is  nothing  elfe  but 
"  the  word  of  God  within  a  man,  which  who- 
"  foever  obeys,  in  ^o  doing  obeys  God,  tho' 
"  otherwife  he  neither  know  nor  think  there  is  a 
*'  God  •,  and  there  is  no  doubt  but  he  that  thus  obeys 
*'  God,  is  accepted  of  him."  So  that  here  is  an  ac- 
knowledgment; of  a  natural  obligation  to  a  law, 
without  any  natural  knowledge  of  a  fuperior  autho- 
rity ; 


1 844  The  danger  of  all  k?20wnjin,  both  from 
S  ERM-j-jty.  which  I  think  cannot  be;  and  which  is  worfe, 
that  a  man  may  obey  God  acceptably,  without 
knowing  and  beheving  there  is  a  Godj  which  di- 
redly  thwarts  the  ground  of  his  firft  argument  from 
thofe  words  of  the  apoftle,  "  without  faith  it  is  im- 
*'  polTibie  to  pleafe  God  -,  for  he  that  cometh  to 
*'  God,"  that  is,  he  that  will  be  reHgious  and 
pleafe  God,  "  mud  believe  that  he  is;"  fo  hard  is 
it  for  any  man  to  contradid  nature,  without  contra- 
di(5ling  himfeif. 

Fourthly,  my  lad  argument  I  ground  upon  the 
words  of  the  apoPde  in  my  text,  "  that  which  may 
"  be  known  of  God,  is  manifeft  in  them  •,  for  God 
*'  hath  Ihewed  -  it  unto  them."  "  is  manifeft  in 
*'  them,  Gv  aMrci<:  among  them,"  God  hath  fufH- 
ciently  manifefted  it  to  mankind.  And  which  way- 
hath  God  done  this  ?  by  revelation  ?  or.  by  the  na- 
tural light  of  reafon  ?  he  tells  us  at  the  20th  verfe, 
''  for  the  invifible  things  of  him  from  the  creation 
''  of  the  world  are  clearly  {ztw ;"  that  is,  God, 
who  in  himfeif  is  invifible,  ever  fince  he  hath 
created  the  world,  hath  given  a  vifible  demonftra- 
tion  of  himfeif,  that  is,  "  of  his  eternal  power 
*'  and  Godhead,  being  underftood  by  the  things 
*'  which  are  made."  The  plain  fenfe  of  the  whole  is, 
that  this  wife  and  wonderful  frame  of  the  world, 
which  cannot  reafonably  be  afcribed  to  any  other 
caufe  but  God,  is  a  fenfible  demonftration  to  all 
mankind,  of  an  eternal  and  powerful  being  that 
was  the  author  and  framer  of  it.  The  only  queftion 
now  is,  whether  this  text  fpeaks  of  the  knowledge 
of  God  by  particular  revelation,  or  by  natural 
light  and  reafon,  from  the  contemplation  of  the 
works  ot    God  ?  Socinus  having  no  other  way  to 

avoid 


the  light  of  nature  and  revelation.  1 845 

avoid  the  force  of  this  text,  will  needs  underfland  S  E  R  ivf. 
it  of  the  knowledge  of  God  by  the  revelation  of  ^ 
the  gofpel.  His  words  are  thefe;  "  the  apofllc 
*'  therefore  fays  in  this  place,  that  the  eternal  God- 
"  head  of  God,  that  is,  that  which  God  would 
"  always  have  us  to  do  (for  the  Godhead  is  fome- 
*'  times  taken  in  this  fenfe)  and  his  eternal  power, 
*'  that  is,  his  promlle  which  never  fails,  (\n  which 
"  fenfe  he  faid  a  little  before  that  the  gofpel  is 
*'  the  power  of  God)  thefe,  I  fay,  were  never 
''  iQ.^x\  by  men,  that  is,  were  never  known  to 
^^  them  fince  the  creation  of  the  world,  are  known 
"  by  his  works,  that  is,  by  the  wonderful  operation 
"  of  God,  and  divine  men,  efpecially  of  Christ 
*'  and  his  apoftles."  Thefe  are  his  very  words,  and 
now  I  refer  it  to  any  indifferent  judgment,  whether 
this  be  not  a  very  forced  and  conftrained  inter- 
pretation of  this  text;  and  whether  that  which  I 
have  before  given,  be  not  infinitely  more  free  and 
natural,  and  every  way  more  agreeable  to  the  obvi- 
ous fenfe  of  the  words,  and  the  fcope  of  the  apoftle's 
argument.  For  he  plainly  fpeaks  of  the  heathen, 
and  proves  them  to  be  inexcufable,  becaufe  ''  they 
"  held  the  truth  in  unrighteoufnefs,"  and  having  a 
natural  knowledge  of  God,  from  the  contemplation 
of  his  works,  and  the  things  which  are  made, 
*<  they  did  not  glorify  him  as  God."  And  therefore 
I  fhall  not  trouble  my  felf  to  give  any  other  anfwer 
to  it ;  for  by  the  abfurd  violence  of  it  in  every  part, 
it  confutes  it  felf  more  effedlually  than  any  difcourfe 
about  it  can  do. 

1  have  been  the  larger  upon  this,    becaufe  it  is  a 
matter  of  fo  great  confequence,  and  lies  at  the  bot- 

VoL.  Vll.  13  M  torn 

I. 


1846  Hoe  danger  of  all  knoivtiftty  both  from 
SERM.  torn  of  all  religion.  For  the  natural  knowledge 
^^2_j  which  men  have  of  God,  is  when  all  is  done, 
the  fureft  and  fiifteft  hold  that  religion  hath  on  hu- 
mane nature.  Befides,  how  fhould'  God  judge  that 
part  of  the  world,  who  are  wholly  deflitute  of  divine 
revelation,  if  they  had  no  natural  knowledge  of  him, 
and  confequently  could  not  be  under  the  diredion 
and  government  of  any  law?  For  "  v/here  thefe  is 
*'  no  law,  there  is  is  no  tranlgrefTion  ;"  and  where 
men  are  guilty  of  the  breach  of  no  law,  they  cannot 
be  judged  and  condemned  for  it ;  for  ''  the  judgment 
*'  of  God  is  according  to  truth." 

And  now  this  being  eftabhfli'd,  that  men  have  a  na- 
tural knowledge  of  God  ;  if  they  contradld  it  by  their 
life  and  pradlice,  they  are  guilty  of  "  detaining  the 
"  truth  of  God  in  unrighteoufnefs."  For  by  this 
argument  the  apoftle  proves  the  heathen  to  be  guilty 
of  ''  holding  the  truth  in  unrighteoufnefs,"  becaufe 
notwithdanding  the  natural  knowledge  which  they 
had  of  God  "  by  the  things  which  are  made,"  they 
lived  in  the  pra£i:ice  of  grofs  idolatry,  and  the  moft 
abominable  fins  and  vices. 

And  this  concerns  us  much  more,  who  have  the 
glorious  light  of  the  gofpel  added  to  the  light  of 
nature.  For  if  they  who  offended  againft  the  light  of 
nature,  were  liable  to  the  judgment  of  God,  o^  how 
much  forer  punifliment  fhali  we  be  thought  worthy, 
if  we  negled  thofe  infinite  advantages  which  the  re- 
velation of  the  gofpel  hath  fuperadded  to  natural 
light  ?  he  hath  now  fet  our  duty  in  the  cleared  and 
llrongeft  light  that  ever  was  afix)rded  to  mankind, 
fo  that  if  we  will  not  now  believe  and  repent,  there 
is  no  remedy  for  us,  but  we  mud  "  die  in  our  fins-, 
«  if  wc  Cn  wilfully,  after  Co  much  knowledge  of  the 

"  truth. 


the  light  of  nature  and  revelation.  1 847 

"  truth,  there  remains  no  morefacrifice  for  fin  ;  butsE  RM. 
*'  a  feari'il  looking  for  of  judgment  and  fiery  indlg-    ^^^^* 
*'  nation  to  confume  us." 

The  fum  of  what  hath  been  laid  on  this  argument, 
is  briefly  this  ;  that  men  have  a  natural  knowledge  of 
God,  and  of  thofe  great  duties  which  refult  from 
the  knowledge  of  him ,  fo  that  whatever  men  fay, 
and  pretend  as  to  the  main  things  of  religion,  "  the 
''  worfhip  of  God,  and  juftice  and  righteoufneis 
''  towards  men/'  fetting  afide  divine  revelation,  we 
are  all  naturally  convinc'd  of  our  duty,  and  of  what 
we  ought  to  do,  and  thofe  who  live  in  a  bad  courfe, 
need  only  be  put  in  mind  of  what  they  naturally 
know,  better  than  any  body  ^\{q.  can  ttW  them, 
that  they  are  in  a  bad  courfe,  fo  that  I  may  ap- 
peal to  all  wicked  men  from  themfelves,  rafh,  and 
heated,  and  intoxicated  with  pleafure  and  vanity, 
tranfported  and  hurried  away  by  lufl  and  paffion  ; 
to  themfelves,  ferious  and  compofed,  and  in  a  cool 
and  confiderate  temper.  And  can  any  fober  man 
forbear  to  follow  the  convidtions  of  his  own  mind, 
and  to  refolve  to  do  what  he  inwardly  confents  to 
as  befl  ?  let  us  but  be  true  to  ourfelves,  and  obey 
the  didates  of  our  own  minds,  and  give  leave  to 
our  own  confcience  to  counfel  us,  and  tell  us  what 
we  ought  to  do,  and  we  lliall  be  "  a  law  to  ourfelves.'* 
I  proceed  to  tf^e 

Sixth  and /.aft  obfervation,  namely,  that  the  clear 
revelation  of  the  wrath  of  God  in  the  gofpel, 
againft  the  impiety  and  unrighteoufnefs  of  men,  is 
one  principal  thing  which  renders  it  fo  very  power- 
ful and  likely  a  means  for  the  falvation  of  mankind. 
For  the  apoflle  inftanceth  in  two  things,  which  give 
the  gofpel  fo  great  an   advantage  to  this  purpofe, 

13  M  2  i\\Q 


1848  ^he  danger  of  all  known  fm^  both  from 

S  E  R  M.  the  mercy  of  God  to  penitent  Tinners,  and  his  fevc- 
^^^J-  ^  rity  toward  the  impenitent ;  both  which  are  fo 
fully  and  clearly  revealed  in  the  gofpel.  "  The 
*'  gofpel  is  the  power  of  God  to  falvation,  to  every 
*'  one  that  believeth,  becaufe  therein  the  righteouf- 
«'  nefs  of  God  is  revealed;"  that  is,  his  great  grace 
and  mercy  in  the  juftification  and  pardon  of  finners 
by  Jesus  Christ,  which  I  have  already  fhewn  to 
be  meant  by  "  the  righteoufnefs  of  God,"  by  com- 
paring this  with  the  explication  which  is  given  of 
*'  the  righteoufnefs  of  God,"  chap.  iii.  ver.  22. 

The  other  reafon  which  he  gives  of  the  gofpel's  being 
"  the  power  of  God  to  falvation,"  is  the  plain  de- 
claration of  the  feverity  of  God  toward  impenitent 
finners,  ''  becaufe  therein  alfo  the  wrath  of  God  is 
"  revealed  from  heaven,  againft  all  ungodlinefs 
*'  and  unrighteoufnels  of  men."  The  force  of  which 
argument  will  appear,  if  we  confider  thefe  following 
particulars. 

Firft,  that  the  declarations  of  the  gofpel  in  this 
matter  are  fo  plain  and  exprefs. 

Secondly,  that  they  are  very  dreadful  and  ter- 
rible. 

Thirdly,  that  there  is  no  lafety  or  hope  of  impu- 
nity for  men  that  go  on  and  continue  in  their  fins. 

Fourthly,  that  this  argument  will  take  hold  of  the 
mod  defperate  and  profligate  finners,  and  ftill  retain 
its  force  upon  the  minds  of  men,  when  all  other 
confiderations  fail,  and  are  of  little  or  no  efficacy. 
And, 

Fifthly,  that  no  religion  in  the  world  can  urge 
this  argument  with  that  force  and  advantage  that 
chriftianty  does. 

Fird, 


the  light  of  nature  and  revelation,  •  1840 
Firfl:,  that  the  declarations  of  the  gofpel  in  thIsSERM. 
matter  are  moft  plain  and  exprefs ;  and  that  not  Jl^il: 
only  againft  fm  and  wickednefs  in  general,  but 
againfl  particular  fins  and  vices ;  fo  that  no  man 
that  lives  in  any  evil  and  vicious  courfe,  can  be  igno- 
rant of  his  danger.  Our  Lord  hath  told  us  in  general, 
what  fhall  be  the  doom  of  the  workers  of  iniquity, 
yea  tho'  they  may  have  owned  him,  and  made 
profefTion  of  his  name,  Matth.vii.  21.  "  Not  every 
"  one  that  faith  unto  me,  Lord,  Lord,  ihall  enter 
«*  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  but  he  that  doth  the 
*'  will  of  my  Father  which  is  in  heaven.  Many 
"  will  fay  unto  me  in  that  day.  Lord,  Lord,  &c. 
"  then  will  I  profefs  unto  them,  I  never  knew  you, 
"  depart  from  me,  ye  that  work  iniquity."  Matth. 
xiii.  49,  50.  "  So  fhall  it  be  at  the  end  of  the  world, 
*'  the  angels  fhall  come  forth,  and  fever  the  wicked 
"  from  among  the  jufl,  and  fhall  caft  them  into  the 
"  furnace  of  fire  ;  there  fhall  be  wailing  and  gnafliino- 
"  of  teeth,"  Matth.  XXV.  46.  "  The  wicked  fhall 
"  go  away  into  everlauing  punifhment,  but  the 
<*  righteous  into  life  eternal."  John  v.  28,  29.  *^  The 
'<  hour  is  coming,  in  which  all  that  are  in  the  graves 
*'  fhall  hear  his  voice,  and  fhall  come  forth ;  they 
*'  that  have  done  good,  unto  the  refurredion  of  life, 
*'  and  they  that  have  done  evil,  unto  the  refurreclion 
«  of  damnation."  Rom.  ii.  6.  St,  Paul  tells  us  that 
there  is  "  a  day  of  wrath,  and  of  the  revelation  of 
"  the  righteous  judgment  of  God,  who  will  render 
*'  to  every  man  according  to  his  deeds;  to  them 
"  who  obey  not  the  truth,  but  obey  unrighteouf^ 
"  nefs,  indignation  and  wrath,  tribulation  and  an- 
**  guilli  upon  every  foul  of  man  that  doth  evil.'* 
2  ThefT.  i.  7,  ^^^.  ''  That  the  Lord  Jesus  fhall  be 

/  ''  revealed 


cxir. 


1S50       '    ^he  danger  of  all  know7ifin,  both  from 

S  E  R  M.  "  revealed  from  heaven,  with  his  mighty  angels  va 
"  fiaming  fire,  taking  vengeance  on  them  that  know 
*'•  not  God,  and  that  obey  not  the  gofpel  of  our 
''  Lord  Jesus  Christ;  who  fhall  be  puniflicd 
"  with  everlafting  dcftrudlion  from  the  prefence  of 
"  the  Lord,  and  from  the  glory  of  his  power." 
Nothing  can  be  more  plain  and  exprefs  than  thefe 
general  declarations  of  the  v/rath  of  God  againft 
finners ;  that  there  is  a  day  of  judgment  appointed, 
and  a  judge  conftituted  to  take  cognifance  of  the  ac- 
tions of  men,  to  pafs  a  fevere  fentence,  and  to  in- 
flidl  a  terrible  puniHiment  upon  the  workers  of  ini- 
quity. 

More  particularly  our  Lord  and  hisapoftles  have 
denounced  the  wrath  of  God  againfl:  particular  fins 
and  vices.  In  feveral  places  of  the  new  teftament,  there 
are  catalogues  given  of  particular  fins,  the  pra6lice 
whereof  will  certainly  fhut  men  out  of  the  king- 
dom of  heaven,  and  cxpofe  them  to  the  wrath  and 
^vengeance  of  God.  i  Cor.  vi,  9, 10.  ''  Know  ye  not 
*'  that  the  unrighteous  fhall  not  inherit  the  king- 
*'  dom  of  God?  Be  not  deceived,  neither  fornica- 
''  tors,  nor  idolaters,  nor  adulterers,  nor  effeminate, 
*'  nor  abufers  of  themfelves  with  mankind,  nor 
*'  thieves,  nor  covetous,  nor  drunkards,  nor  revilers, 
*'  nor  extortioners,  fhall  inherit  the  kingdom  of 
«'  God.'*  So  likewife.  Gal.  v.  19,  20,  21.  ''  The 
"  works  of  the  flefli  are  manifeft,  which  are  thefe, 
"  adultery,  fornication,  witchcraft,  hatred,  variance, 
*'  emulations,  wrath,  ftrife,  feditions,  herefies,  en- 
"  vyings,  murders,  drunkennefs,  revellings,  and  fuch 
*'  like  :  of  the  which  I  tell  you  before,  as  I  have  alfo 
*^  told  you  in   times  pad,    that  they  th^t  do  fjch 

*'  things  fhall  not  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God." 

Col. 


the  light  of  nature  and  revelation,  1 8  r  r 

Col.  iii.  5,  6.  "-^  Mortify  therefore  your  members  SERm. 
*'  upon  earth,  fornication,  unclcannefs,  inordinate  J^J^ 
"  affedion,  evil  concupifcence,  and  covetoufnefs, 
*'  which  is  idolatry,  for  which  things  fike  tlie  wrath 
*'  of  God  cometh  on  the  children  of  difobedience." 
Rev.  xxi.  8.  "  The  fearful  and  unbelieving,'*  (that 
is,  thofe  who  rejeded  the  chriilian  religion,  notwith- 
ftanding  the  clear  evidence  that  was  ofFer'd  for  it, 
and  thofe  who  out  of  fear  fliould  apoftatize  from  it,) 
"  The  fearful  and  unbelieving,  and  the  abominable/* 
(that  IS,  thofe  who  were  guilty  of  iinnatural  lufts,  not 
fit  to  be  named)  "  and  murderers,  and  whoremongers, 
*'  and  forcerers,  and  idolaters,  and  all  liars "  (that 
is,  all  forts  of  falfe  and  deceitful  and  perfidious  per- 
fons)  "  fhali  have  their  part  in  the  lake  which  burns 
*'  with  fire  and  brimfl:one,which  is  the  fecond  death.'* 
And  not  only  thefe  grofs  and  notorious  fins,  which 
are  fuch  plain  violations  of  the  law  and  light  of  na- 
ture ;  but  thofe  wherein  mankind  have  been  apt  to 
take  more  liberty,  as  if  they  were  not  fufHciently 
convinced  of  the  evil  of  them  ;  as  *'  the  refilling  of 
''  civil  authority,"  which  the  apoftle  tells  us,  they 
that  are  guilty  of,  ''  Ihall  receive  to  themfelves  dam- 
^'  nation,"  Rom.  xiii.  2.  "  Profane  fwearing  in 
"  common  converfation,"  which  St.  James  tells 
us  brings  men  under  the  danger  of  damna- 
tion, chap.  V.  12.  "  Above  all  things,  my  brethren, 
"  fwear  not,  left  ye  fall  under  condemnation.'*  Nay, 
our  Saviour  hath  told  us  plainly,  that  not  only  for 
wicked  acSlions,  but  for  every  evil  and  fmful  word, 
men  arc  obnoxious  to  the  judgment  of  God.  So  our 
Lord  alTures  us,  Matth.  xii.  36,  37.  "  I  fay  unto 
"  you,  that  every  idle  v/ord  that  men  fhall  fpeak, 
''  they  Pnall  give  an  account  thereof  in  the  day  of 

*'  judgment. 


1 8  c  I  T'he  danger  of  all  hiownfin^  bothfrom^ 

SKR  M.  «  judgment.     For  by   thy  words  thou  fhalt  be  jufti- 
CXIl.    a  1^^^^  ^^^  l^y  fj^y  words  thou  Ihalc  be  condemned." 

He  had  fpoken  before  of  that  great  and  unpardonable 
fin  of  "  blafpheming  the  Holy  Ghost  i"  and  be- 
caufe  this  might  be  thought  great  feverity  for  evil 
words,  he  declares   the  reafon   more    fully,  becaufe 
words  fliew  the  mind  and  temper  of  the  man,   ver. 
34.   ''  For  out  of  the  abundance  of  the  heart   the 
'^  mouth  fpeaketh."     *'  The  charadler  of  the  man 
''  is  fhewn  by  his  words,"  faith  Menander.     Profert 
enm  mores  plerumque  oratio  ((i\ith  Quintilian)  ^  ani- 
mi  fecreta  detegit ',    ''  A  man's  fpeech  difcovers  his 
*'  manners,  and  the  fecrets  of  his  heart ;  ut  livit 
*•'  etiam  quemque  dicere^   men  comm.only   Ipeak    as 
*'  they  live  *,"    and  therefore  our  Saviour  adds, 
"  a  good  man  out  of  the  good  treafure  of  his  heart, 
*'  bringeth  forth  good  things;  and  an  evil  man  out 
"  the  evil  treafure  of  his  heart  bringeth  forth  evil 
*'  things  :  but  I  fay  unto  you  that  every  idle  word, 
*'  Trav  pfi/jia  d^-yov^^*  by  which  I  do  not  think   our 
Saviour  means,  that  men  fliall  be  called  to  account 
at  the  day  of  judgment,  for  every  trifling  and  impa- 
tient and  unprofitable  word,  but  every  wicked  and 
finful  word  of  any  kind,  as  if  he  had  faid,  do  you 
think  this  fevere  to   make  words  an  unpardonable 
fault  ?  I  fay   unto  you   that  men  fliall  not  only  be 
condemned    for    their   malicious   and  blafphemous 
fpeeches  againft   the  Holy  Ghost  s  but  they  fhall 
likewife  give  a  ftridt  account  for  all  other  wicked  and 
finful  fpeeches  in  any  kind  tho'  much  inferior  to  this. 
And  this  is  not  only  mofl  agreeable  to  the  fcope  of 
our  Saviour,  but  is  confirmed  by  fome  greek  co- 
pies, in  which  it  is  Trav  friixa.  ttcv/i^Jv,  "  every  wicked 

**  word  which  men  fnall   fpeak,  they  fliall  be  ac- 
countable 


the  light  of  nature  and  revelation,  ^^53 

<^  countable  for  it  at  the  day  of  judgment."    But  SERM. 
this  by  the  by.  ^^^^* 

Oar  Saviour  likewife  tells  us,  that  men  fhall 
not  only  be  proceeded  ag.%inft  for  fins  of  commif- 
fion,  but  for  the  bare  omilTion  and  neglefl  of  their 
duty,  efpecially  in  works  of  mercy  and  charity  \  for 
not  feeding  the  hungry,  and  the  like,  as  we  fee, 
Matth.  XXV.  and  that  for  the  omiffion  of  thefe,  he 
will  pais  that  terrible  fentence,  "  depart  ye  curfed, 
"  &c."  So  that  it  nearly  concerns  us  to  be  careful 
of  our  whole  life,  of  all  our  words  and  adions, 
fince  the  gofpel  hath  fo  plainly  and  exprefly  decla- 
red, that  "  for  all  thefe  things  God  will  bring  us 
«'  into  judgment."  And  if  the  threatnings  of  the 
gofpel  be  true,  "  what  manner  of  perfons  ought 
*'  we  to  be,  in  all  holy  converfation  and  godli- 
''  nefs  ? " 

Secondly,  as  the  threatnings  of  the  gofpel  are 
very  plain  and  exprefs,  fo  are  they  likewife  \tx^ 
dreadful  and  terrible.  I  v/ant  words  to  exprefs  the 
lead  part  of  the  terror  of  them  -,  and  yet  the  ex- 
prefTions  of  fcripture  concerning  the  mifery  and  pu- 
nifhment  of  finners  in  another  world,  are  fuch  as 
may  juftly  raife  amazement  and  horror  in  thofe  that 
hear  them.  Sometimes  it  is  exprcft  h^  "'  a  depart- 
"  ing  from  God,"  and  a  perpetual  banillimenc 
*«  from  his  prefence,"  who  is  the  foundation  of  all 
comfort,  and  joy,  and  happinefs ;  fometimes  "  by 
"  the  iofs  of  our  fouls,"  or  our  felves.  "  What 
«'  fhall  it  profit  a  man  to  gain  the  whole  v/orld  and 
c'  lofehis  own  foul  ?  "  or,  fas  it  is  in  another  evan- 
gelifl)  "  to  lofe  himfelf .?  "  not  that  our  being  fliali 
be  deflroyedj  tlut  would  be  a  happy  Iofs  indeed, 

Vol.  VII.  13  N  to 


1S54  The  danger  of  all  know7i  fin,  both  from 

S  E  R  iVr.  to  him  that  is  fentcnced  to  be  for  ever  miferablc  ; 
but  the  man  flrall  ftill  remain,  and  his  body  and 
foul  continue  to  be  the  foundation  of  his  mifery,  and 
a  fcene  of  perpetual  woe  and  difcontent,  which  our 
Saviour  calls  "  the  dcilroying  of  body  and  foul  in 
"  helJ,"  or  ^'  going  into  everlaRing  punifhment, where 
*'  there  (hall  be  wailing  and  gnafliing  of  teeth, 
*'  where  the  worm  dies  not,  and  the  fire  is  not 
*'  quenched."  Could  I  reprefent  to  you  the  hor- 
ror of  that  difmal  prifon,  into  which  wicked  and 
impure  fouls  are  to  be  thruft,  and  the  mifery  they 
muft  there  endure,  without  the  leaft  fpark  of  com- 
fort, or  glimmering  of  hope,  how  they  wail  and 
grone  under  the  intolerable  wrath  of  God,  the  in- 
folent  fcorn  and  cruelty  of  devils,  the  fevere  lafhes 
and  flings,  the  raging  anguifh  and  horrible  defpair 
of  their  own  minds,  without  intermifTion,  without 
pity,  without  hope  of  ever  feeing  an  end  of  that 
mifery,  which  yet  is  unfupportable  for  one  mo- 
ment *,  could  I  reprefent  thefe  things  to  you  accord- 
ing to  the  terror  of  them,  what  effedl  muft  they  have 
upon  us  ?  and  with  what  patience  could  any  man 
bear  to  think  of  plunging  himfelf  into  this  mifery  ? 
and  by  his  own  wilful  fault  and  folly  to  endanger 
his  "  coming  into  this  place  and  flate  of  torments?" 
efpecially  if  we  confider  in  the 

Third  place,  that  the  gofpel  hath  likewlfe  decla- 
red, that  there  is  no  avoiding  of  this  mifery,  no  hopes 
of  impunity,  if  men  go  on  and  continue  in  their 
lins.  The  terms  of  the  gofpel  in  this  are  peremp- 
tory, that  ''  except  we  repent,  we  fhall  perifli;" 
that  "  v/ithout  holinefs  no  man  Ihall  fee  the  Lord  ;  ** 
that  "  the  unrighteous  ihall  not  inherit  the  king- 
*•  dom  of  God.'*    And  this  is  a  very  prcfTing  con- 

fid^ration, 


the  light  of  nature  and  revelation.  i  B55' 

^deration,  and  brings  the  matter  to  a  fhort  andSERM, 
plain  ifTue.  Either  we  mufl:  Jeave  our  fins,  or  die  ,J^i^ 
in  them ;  either  we  muft  repent  of  them,  or  be 
judged  for  them  ;  either  we  muft  forfake  our  fins, 
•and  break  off  that  wicked  courie  which  we  have 
lived  in,  or  we  mull  quit  all  hopes  of  heaven  and 
happinefs,  nay,  we  cannot  "  efcape  the  damnation 
"  of  hell,"  The  clear  revelation  of  a  future  judg« 
ment  is  fo  prefiing  an  argement  to  repentance,  as 
no  man  can  in  reafon  refift,  that  hath  not  a  mind 
to  be  miferable.  "  Now  (futh  Sc.  Paul  to  the 
*'  Athenians)  he  flraightly  chargeth  all  men  every 
*'  v/here  to  repent,  becaufe  he  hath  appointed  a 
''  day  in  the  which  he  will  judge  t\\Q  world  in  righ- 
*'  teoufnefs." 

Men  may  cheat  themfelves,  or  fuffer  themfelves  to 
be  deluded  by  others,  about  feveral  means  and  de- 
vices of  reconciling  a  wicked  life,  with  the  hopes  of 
heaven  and  eternal  falvation  ;  as  by  mingling  fome 
pangs  of  forrow  for  fin,  and  fome  hot  fits  of  devo- 
tion with  a  finfal  life  ;  which  is  only  the  interrup- 
tion of  a  wicked  courfe,  without  reformation  and 
amendment  of  life :  but  "  let  no  man  deceive  you 
*'  with  vain  words;"  for  our  blefiTed  Saviour 
hath  provided  no  other  ways  to  fave  men,  but  up^ 
on  the  terms  of  repentance  and  obedience. 

Fourthly,  this  argument  takes  hold  of  the  mod 
defperate  and  profligate  finners,  and  ftill  retains  its 
force  upon  the  minds  of  men,  when  almoft  all  other 
confiderations  fail,  and  have  loft  their  efficacy  upon 
us.  Many  men  are  gone  fo  far  in  an  evil  courfe, 
that  neither  fiiame  of  their  vices,  nor  the  love  of 
God  and  virtue,  nor  the  hopes  of  heaven  are  of  any 
force  with  them,  to  reclaim  them  and  bring  them 

13  N  2  to 


1 0  5  ^  ^^^^  ^j;;^^r  of  all  known  fm,  both  from 

SERM.  to  a  better  ^ mind  :  but  there  is  one  handle  yet  left, 
^2ilj  whereby  ro  lay  hold  of  them,  and  that  is  their  fear. 
Tliis  is  a  paffion  that  lies  deep  in  our  nature,    being 
founded  in  felF-prcfervation,   and  flicks  fo  clofely  to 
us,  that  we  cannot  quit  our  felvcs  of   it,  nor  fliake 
it  OiT.     Men  may  put  oft  ingenuity,  and  break  thro* 
all  obligations  of  gratitude.    Men  may  harden  their 
forehead-s,  and  conquer  all  fenfe  of  fliame  ♦,  but  they 
can  never  perfe6lly  fiiile  and  fabdue  their  fears-,  they 
can    hardly   {o  extinguilli  the  fear  of  hell,    but  that 
foiTie  fparks  of  that  fire  will  ever  and  anon  be  flying 
about  in  their  confciences,  efpecially  when  they  are 
made  fober,  and  brought  to  themlelves  by  afflicftion, 
and  by  the  prefent  apprehenfions  of    death,    have  a 
nearer  fi2;ht  of  another  world.  And  if  it  was  fo  hard 
for  the  heathen  to  conquer  thefe  apprehenfions,  how 
much  harder  muft  it  be  to  chriftians,    who  have  fo 
much  greater  alfurance  of  thefe  things,  and  to  whom 
"  the   wrath  of   God   is  fo  clearly   revealed   from 
''  heaven,  againft  all  ungodlinefs  and  unrighteoufnels 
"  of  m.enr" 

Fifthly,  no  religion  in  the  world  ever  urged  this 
arguhient  upon  men,  with  that  force  and  advantage 
v/hich  chrifcianity  does.  The  philofophy  of  the  hea- 
then gave  men  no  fteady  aflurance  of  the  thing  \  the 
mod  knowing  perfons  among  them  w^ere  not  agreed 
about  a  future  iiate  ;  the  greateft  part  of  them  fpake 
but  doubtfully  concerning  another  life.  And  befides 
the  natural  jealoufies  and  fufpicions  of  mankind  con- 
cerning thefe  things,  they  had  only  fome  fair  proba- 
bilities of  reafon,  and  the  authority  of  their  poets, 
who  talk'd  they  knew  not  what  about  the  elyfian 
fields,  and  the  infernal  regions,  and  the  three  judges 
of  hell  s    {o  that  the  wifcft  among  them  had  hardly 

afTurance 


the  light  of  nature  a7jd  revelation.  .^  1S57 

afifarance  enough   in  themfelvesof  the  truth  of  the  SERM, 
thing,  to  prefs  it  upon  others  with  any  great  con- 
fidence, and  therefore  it  was  not  likely  to  have  any 
great  efficacy  upon  the  generality  of  mankind. 

As  for  the  jewifli  religion  ;    tho'  that  fjppofed  and 
took  for  granted  the  rewards  of  another  w-orld,  as  a 
principle  of  natural    religion  ;   yet    in   the  law    of 
Mofes  there  v/as  no  particular  and  exprefs  revelation 
of  the  life  of  the  world  to  come  ♦,  and  what  was  de- 
duced  from  it,  was  by  remote  and   obfcure  confe- 
quence.  '   Temporal  promifes  and  threatnings  it  had 
many  and  clear,    and  their  eyes  were  fo  dazzled  with 
thefe,    that  it  is  probable  that  the  generality  of  them 
did  but  little  confider  a  future  ilate,  till  they  fell  into 
great  temporal  calamities  under  the  Grecian  and  Ro- 
man empires,  whereby  they  were  almoft  necelTarily 
awakened  to  the  confideration  and  hopes  of  a  better 
life,  to  relieve  them  under  their  prefent   evils  and 
iiifferings ;  and  yet  even  in  that  time   they  were  di- 
vided into  two  great  fadlons  about  this  matter,  the 
one  affirming,    and  the  other  as  confidently  denying 
any  life  after  this.    But  "  the  gofpel  hath  brought 
*'  life  and    immortahty  to  light,"    as  we  are  aifured 
from  heaven  of   the  truth   and  reality  of    another 
Hate,    and  a  future  judgment.     The  Son   of  God 
was  fent  into  the  world  to  preach  this  dodrine,  and 
rofe  again  from  the  dead,    and  was  taken   up  into 
heaven,  for  a  vifible  demonftration  to  all  mankind  of 
another  life  after  this,  and  confequently  of  a  future 
judgment,  which  no  man  ever  doubted  of,    that  did 
firmly  believe  a  future  ftatc. 

The  fum  of  all  that  I  have  faid  is  this  ;  the  gofpel 
hath  plainly  declared  to  us,  that  the  only  way  to 
falvation  is  by  forfaking  our  fins,  and  living  a  holy 

and 


1858  The  danger  of  all  known  f.n^  both  from 

SE  RM.  and  virtuous  Jife;  and  the  mod:  efFeclual  argument  in 
_  _•  ,  the  world  to  perfuade  men  to  this,  is  the  confidera- 
tion  of  the  infinite  danger  that  a  finful  courfe  expo- 
leth  men  to,  fince  the  wrath  of  God  continually  hangs 
over  fmners,  and  if  they  continue  in  their  fins,  will 
certainly  fall  upon  them,  and  overwhelm  them  with 
mifery,  and  he  that  is  not  moved  by  this  argument, 
is  loft  to  all  intents  and  purpofcs. 

All  that  now  remains,  is  to  urge  this  argument 
upon  men,  and  from  the  ferious  confidcration  of  it,to 
perfuade  them  to  repent,  and  reform  their  wicked 
Jives.  And  was  there  ever^age  wherein  this  was  more 
needful  ?  when  iniquity  doth  not  only  abound,  but 
even  rage  among  us ;  when  infidelity  and  profane- 
nefs,  and  all  manner  of  lewdnels  and  vice  appears 
fo  boldly  and  openly,  and  men  commit  the  greateft 
abominations  without  blufhing  at  them  ;  when  vice 
hath  got  fuch  head  that  it  can  hardly  bear  to  be 
check'd  and  controlled,  and  when,  as  the  Roman 
hiftorian  complains  of  his  times,  ad  ea  tempora^  qui- 
bus  nee  vitia  noftra  nee  remedia  pati  pcjfwnus^perven- 
turn  ejl'^  *'  things  are  come  to  that  pafs,  that  we  can 
*'  neither  bear  our  vices,  nor  the  remedies  of  them." 
Our  vices  are  grown  to  a  prodigious  and  intolerable 
height,  and  yet  men  hardly  have  the  patience  to  hear 
of  them  ',  and  furely  a  difeafe  is  then  dangerous  in- 
deed, when  it  cannot  bear  the  leverity  that  is  necef- 
fary  to  a  cure.  But  yet,  notwithftanding  this,  we 
who  are  the  mefiengers  of  God  to  men,  to  warn 
them  of  their  fin  and  danger,  muftnot  keep  filence, 
and  Ipare  to  tell  them  both  of  their  fins,  and  of  the 
judgment  of  God  which  hangs  over  them;  that 
*'  God  will  vifit  for  thefe  things,"  and  that  ''  his 
**  foul  will  be  avenged  on  fuch  a  nation  as  this,'' 

at 


the  light  of  nature  and  revelation,  ^^859 

at  leafl  we  may  have  leave  to  warn  others,   who  are  ^  ERM. 
not  yet  *'  run  to  the  fame  excefs  of   riot,    to  iavc 
'^  themfelves    from      this    untoward     generation.'* 
"  God's  judgments  are  abroad  in   the  earth,"  and 
call  aloud  upon  us,  "   to  learn  righteoufnefs.'* 

But  this  is  but  a  fmall  confederation,  in  companion 
of  the  judgment  of  another  world,  Vv'hich  we  who 
call  our  felves  chriilians,  do  profefs  to  believe,  as  one 
of  the  chief  articles  of  our  faith.  The  confidera- 
tion  of  this  fhould  check  and  cool  us  in  the  heat  of 
all  our  finful  pleafures;  and  that  bitter  irony  of  So- 
lomon fhould  cut  us  to  the  heart ;  "  rejoice,  O 
''  young  man,  in  thy  youthjand  let  thy  heart  chear 
*'  thee  in  the  days  of  thy  youth,  and  walk  in  the 
*'  ways  of  thy  heart,  and  in  the  fight  of  thine 
*'  eyes;  but  know  that  for  all  thefe  things  God 
"  v/ill  bring  thee  into  judgment."  Think  often  and 
feriouOy  on  that  time,  wherein  "  the  wrath  of 
*'  God,'*  which  is  now  "  revealed  againft  fin,'* 
fhall  be  executed  upon  finners ;  and  if  we  believe 
this,  we  are  flrangely  ftupid  and  obilinate,  if  v/e 
be  not  moved  by  it.  The  alTurance  of  this  made 
St.  Paul  extremely  importunate  in  exhorting  men  to 
avoid  fo  great  danger,  z  Cor.  v.  10,  11.  ''  We 
"  mufl  all  appear  before  the  judgment-feat  of 
''  Christ,  that  every  one  may  receive  the  things 
«  done  in  the  body,  according  to  what  he  hath  done, 
"  whether  it  be  good,  or  evil.  Knov/ing  therefore 
«  the  terrors  of  the  Lord,  v/e  perfuade  men.'* 
And  if  this  ought  to  move  us  to  take  fo  great  a 
care  of  others,  much  more  of  our  itV^;t%.  The 
judgment  to  come  is  a  very  amazing  confidcration, 
it  is  a  fearful  thing  to  hear  of  it,  but  it  will  be  much 
more   terrible  to  fee  it^  elpecialiy   to  thofe  whofc 

guik 


CXII. 


i860  The  danger  cf  all  known  Jin  ^  &c. 

S  ER  M.  guilt  mufl:  needs  make  them  fo  heartily  concern'd 
in  the  difmal  confcquences  of  it ;  and  yet  as  fure  as 
I  fiand,  and  you  fit  here,  "  this  great  and  terrible 
"  day  of  the  Lord  will  come,  and  who  may  abide 
"his  coming!*'  what  will  we  do,  when  that  day 
fhall  furprize  us  carelefs  and  unprepared !  what  un- 
fpcakable  horror  and  amazement  will  then  take  hold 
of  us!  when  "  lifting  up  our  eyes  to  heaven,  we 
*'  fliall  fee  the  Son  of  man  coming  in  the  clouds  of  it, 
''  with  power,  and  great  glory  \'  when  that  powci-- 
ful  voice  which  fhall  pierce  the  ears  of  the  dead  fhall 
ring  through  the  world,  "  arife  ye  dead,  and  come 
"  to  judgments"  when  the  mighty  trumpet  fhall 
found,  and  wake  the  fleepers  of  a  thoufand  years, 
and  fummon  the  difperfed  parts  of  tlie  bodies  of  all 
men  that  ever  lived,  to  rally  together  and  take  their 
place ;  and  the  fouls  and  bodies  of  men  which  have 
been  fo  long  flrangers  to  one  another,  fhall  meet  and 
be  united  again,  to  receive  the  doom  due  to  their 
deeds;  what  fear  fliall  then  furprize  finners,  and  how 
will  they  tremble  at  the  prefence  of  the  great  judge, 
and  "  for  the  glory  of  his  majefty!"  how  will  their 
confciences  fly  i'n  their  faces,  and  their  own  hearts 
condemn  them,  for  their  wicked  and  ungodly  lives, 
and  even  prevent  that  fentence  which  yet  fhall 
certainly  be  pad  and  executed  upon  them.  But  I 
will  proceed  no  further  in  this  argument,  which  hath 
fo  much  of  terror  in  it. 

I  will  conclude  my  fermon,  as  Solomon  doth  his 
Ecclefiades,  chap.  xii.  13,  14.  '^  Let  us  hear  th^ 
"  conclufion  of  the  whole  matter  ;  fear  God,  and 
*'  keep  his  commandments,  for  this  is  the  wholg 
"  of  man ;  for  G  o  d  fliall  bring  every  work 
*'  into  judgment,  and  every  fecret  thing,  whether 

"  it 


Knowledge  and  praSiice^  &c.  i86k 

^'  it  be  good,  or  whether  it  be  evil."  To  which  I  will 
only  add  that  ferious  and  merciful  admonition  of  ''  a 
*'  greater  than  Solomon,"  I  mean  the  great  judge  of 
the  whole  world,  our  blefl'^d  Lord  and  Saviour, 
Luke  xxi.  34,  ^^^  ^6.  "  Take  heed  to  yourfelves,  left 
"  at  any  time  your  hearts  be  overcharged  with  furfeit- 
*'  ing,  and  drunkennefs,  and  the  cares  of  this  hfe, 
*'  and  fo  that  day  come  upon  you  at  unawares.  For 
"  as  a  fnare  fliall  it  come  on  all  them  that  dwell  on 
"  the  face  of. the  whole  earth.  Watch  ye  therefore, 
"  and  pray  always,  that  ye  may  be  accounted  worthy 
*'  to  efcape  all  thefe  things  that  fball  come  to  pafs, 
*'  and  to  (land  before  the  Son  of  man  :"  to  whom 
with  the  Father,,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  &c. 


SERMON      CXIII. 

Knowledge   and    prafiice  neceflary  in 
religion. 


JOHN  xiii.  17. 
If  ye  knozv  thefe  things^  happy  are  ye  if  ye  do  them, 

r-T^  W  O  things  make  up  religion,  the  knowledge  s  E  R  U, 
J        and  the  pradice  of  it ;  and  the  fird  is  wholly  ^^^^'' 
in  order  to  the  fecond  5  and  God   hath  not 
revealed  to  us  the  knowledge  of  himfelf  and  his  will, 
merely  for  the  improvement  of  our  underflanding, 
but  for  the  bettering  of  our  hearts  and  lives ;  not  to 
entertain  our  minds  with  the  fpeculations  of  religion 
and  virtue,  but  to  form  and  govern  our  adions.  ''  U 
"  ye  know  thefe  things,  happy  are  ye  [^  ycdo  them." 
Vol.  VIL  13  O  In 

I. 


cxrii. 


1862  Knowledge  and pracllce 

SE  RM.       In  which  words,  our  blelTed  Saviour  does  from  a 
particular  indance  take  occafion    to  fettle  a  general 
conclufion  -,  namely,  that  religion  doth  mainly  con- 
fift  in  pradice,  and  that   the  knowledge  of  his  doc- 
trine, without  the  real  eire61:s  of  it  upon   our  lives, 
will  bring   no  man  to  heaven.     In  the  beginning  of 
this  chapter  cur  great  Lord   and  mailer,   to  teilify 
his  love  to  his  difciples,  and  to  give  them  a  lively  in- 
ftance  and  example  of  that  great  virtue  of  humility, 
is  plcafed   to  condefcend  to  a   very  low  and  mean 
office,  fuch  as  was  ufed  to  be  performed  by  fervants 
to  their  mailers,  and  not  by  the  mailer  to  his  fervants ; 
namely,  to  wafh  their  icti ;  and  when  he  had  done 
this,  he  asks  them  if  they  did  underftand  the  mean- 
ing of  this  ftrange  adion.     "  Know  ye  what  1  have 
*'  done  unto  you?  ye  call  me  mailer,  and  Lord, 
*'  and   ye   fay  well,  for  fo  I  am  :  if  I  then  your 
"  Lord  and  mailer  have  waihed  your  feet,  ye  alfo 
**  ought  to  waili  one   anothers  feet;    for    I  have 
*'  given  you  an  example,  that  ye  fhould  do  as  I  have 
*'  done  to  you.     Verily,  verily,  I  fay  unto  you,  the 
"  fervant  is  not  greater  than  the  Lord,  neither  he 
"  that  is  imi^  greater  than  he  that  fent  him  ;   if  ye 
"  know  thefe  things,  happy  are  ye  if  ye  do  them.'* 
As  if  he  had  faid,  this  which  I  have  now  done,   is 
eafy  to  be  underitood,  and  fo  like  wife  are  all  thofe 
other  chriilian   graces   and   virtues,  which    I  have 
heretofore  by  my  do6trine  and  example  recommended 
to  you ;  but  it  is  not  enough  to  know  thefe  things, 
but  ye  muit  likewife  do  them.   The  end  and  the  life 
of  all  our  knowledge  in  religion,  is  to  put  in  practice 
what  we  know.     It  is  necefTary  indeed  that  we  fhould 
know  our  duty,    but    knowledge  alone  will  never 
bring  us  to  that  happinefs,  which  religion  dellgns  to 

make 


necejfary  in  religicn.  ^^^3 

make  us  partakers  of,  if  our  knowledge  have  not  its  ^  ^  R  M. 
due  and  proper  influence  upon  our  lives.  Nay,  lo 
far  will  our  knowledge  be  from  making  us  happy,  if 
it  be  feparated  from  the  virtues  of  a  good  life,  that 
it  will  prove  one  of  the  heavieil  aggravations  of  our 
mifery  ;  and  it  is  as  if  he  had  laid,  "  if  ye  know 
"  thefe  things,  wo  be  unto  you,  if  you  do  them 
«'  not.'' 

From  thefe  words  then,  I  ihall  obferve  thefe  three 
things,  which  I  fhall  fpeak  but  briefly  to. 

Firfl,  that  the  knowledge  of  God's  will,  and  our 
duty,  is  necefliiry  to  the  pradice  of  it;  "  if  ye  know 
^'  thefe  things  ;"  which  fuppofeth  that  we  muft  know 
our  duty,  before  we  can  do  it. 

Secondly,  that  the  knowledge  of  our  duty,  and 
the  practice  of  it,  may  be,  and  too  often  are  feparated. 
This  likewife  the  text  fuppofeth,  that  men  may 
know  their  duty,  and  yet  not  do  it  ;  and  that  this 
is  very  frequent,  which  is  the  reafon  why  our  Savi- 
our gives  this  caution. 

Thirdly,  that  the  pradice  of  religion,  and  the  do- 
ing of  what  we  know  to  be  our  duty,  is  the  only 
way  to  happinefs  ;  "  if  ye  know  thefe  things,  happy 
*'  are  ye  if  ye  do  them."  I  begin  with  the 

Firft  of  thefe,  namely,  that  the  knowledge  of 
God's  will  and  our  duty,  is  necefTary  in  order  to 
the  pradice  of  it.  The  truth  of  this  proportion  is 
fo  clear  and  evident  at  firft  view,  that  nothing  can 
obfcure  \t^  and  bring  it  in  queftion,  but  to  endeavour 
to  prove  it ;  and  therefore  inftead  of  fpending  time 
in  that,  I  fhall  take  occafion  from  it,  juftly  to  reprove 
that  prepofterous  courfe  which  is  taken,  and  openly 
avowed  and  juftificd  by  fome,  as  the  fafeft  and  beft 
way  to  make  men  religious,  and  to  bring  them  to 
J3  O  2  happi. 


t564  Kfwwledge  and  practice 

SlUi  M.  happinefs  j  namely,  by  taking  away  from  them  the 
^^jl^  means  of  knowledge  •,  as  if  the  befc  way  to  bring  men 
to  do  the  will  of  God,  were  to  keep  men  from 
knowing  it.  For  what  elfe  can  be  the  meaning  of 
that  maxim  fo  current  in  the  church  of  Rome, 
"  that  ignorance  is  the  mother  of  devotion?"  or 
of  that  ft  range  and  injurious  practice  of  theirs  of 
locking  up  from  the  people  that  great  ftore-houfe 
and  treaiury  of  divine  knowledge,  "  the  holy  fcrip- 
"  turts,"  in  an  unknown  tongue  ? 

I  know  very  well,  that  in  juftiiication  of  this  hard 
img^  of  their  people,  it  is  pretended  that  knowledge 
is  apt  to  puff  men  up,  to  make  them  proud  and 
contentious,  rciradlory  and  difobedient,  and  here-  . 
tical,  and  what  not?  and  particularly,  that  the  free 
and  familiar  ufe  of  the  holy  fcriptures  permitted  to 
the  people,  hath  miniilred  occafion  to  the  people 
of  fLailing  into  great  and  dangerous  errors,  and  of 
making  great  difturbance  and  divifions  among 
chrifiians.  For  anfwer  to  this  pretence,  I  defire 
thefe  four  or  five  things  may  be  confidered. 

Firft,  that  unlefs  this  be  the  natural  and  necef- 
fary  cffe6]:  of  knowledge  in  religion,  and  of  the 
free  ufe  of  the  holy  fcriptures,  there  is  no  force  in 
this  reafon  ;  and  if  this  be  the  proper  and  natural 
efk'(3:  of  this  knowledge,  then  this  reafon  will  reach 
a  great  way  farther,  than  thofe  who  make  ufe  of 
it  are  willing  it  fliould. 

Secondly,  that  this  is  not'  the  natural  and  necef^ 
fary  effe6l  of  knowledge  in  religion,  but  only  acci- 
dental, and  proceeding  from  mens  abufe  of  it  ; 
for  which  the  thing  itfelf  is  not  to  be  taken  away. 

Thirdly,  that  the  proper  and  natural  effefls  and 
fonfequences  of  ignorance,  are   equally   pernicious, 

and 


neceffary  in  religion,  1865 

and  much  more  certain  and  unavoidable,  than  thofc  S  E  R  M. 
which  are  accidentally  occafion'd  by  knowledge. 

Fourthly,  that  if  this  rcafon  be  good,  it  is  much 
llronger  for  withholding  the  fcriptures  from  the 
priefls  and  the  learned,  than  from  the  people. 

Fifthly,  that  this  danger  was  as  great,  and  as  well 
known  in  the  apoflles  times,  and  yet  they  took  a 
quite  contrary  courfe. 

Firft,  i  defire  it  may  be  confider'd  that  unlefs 
this  be  the  natural  and  necefTary  effed  of  knowledge 
in  religion,  and  of  the  free  ufe  of  the  holy  fcrip- 
tures, there  is  no  force  in  this  reafon  ;  for  that 
v»^hich  is  necelTary,  or  highly  ufeful,  ought  not  to  be 
taken  away,  becaufe  it  is  liable  to  be  perverted,  and 
abufed  to  ill  purpofes.  If  it  ought,  then  not  only 
knowledge  in  religion,  but  all  other  knowledge 
ought  to  be  rcilrained  and  fupprsfs'd  j  for  all  know- 
ledge is  apt  to  puff  up,  and  liable  to  be  abufed  to 
many  ill  purpofes.  At  this  rate,  light,  and  liberty, 
and  reafon,  yea  and  life  it  k\^,  ought  all  to  be  taken 
away,-  becaufe  they  are  all  greatly  abufed  by  many 
men,  to  fome  ill  purpofes  or  other  ,  fo  that  unlefs 
thefe  ill  eftcds  do  naturally  and  necellarily  Ipring 
from  knowledge  in  religion,  the  obje6bion  from 
them  is  of  no  force  ;  and  if  they  do  neceflarily  flow 
from  it,  then  this  reafon  will  reach  a  great  way  far- 
ther than  thofe  that  make  ufe  of  it  are  willing  it 
fhould  •,  for  if  this  be  true,  that  the  knowledge  of  re- 
ligion, as  it  is  revealed  in  the  holy  fcriptures,  is 
of  its  own  nature  fo  pernicious,  as  to  make  men 
proud  and  contentious  and  heretical,  and  difobedf- 
ent  to  authority,  then  the  blame  of  all  this  would 
fall  upon  our  blefied  SaViour,  for  reveahng  fo 
pernicious  a  doftrine  and  upon  his  apoftles  for  pub-^ 

iifhing 


cxiir. 


S66  Knowledge  and  praBice 

SERM-  llfliing  this  dodlrine  in  a  known  tongue  to  all  man- 
kind, and  thereby  laying  the  foundation  of  perpe- 
tual fchifms  and  herefies  in  the  church. 

Secondly,  but  this  is  not  the  natural  and  necef- 
fary  eftedl  of  knowledge  in  religion,  but  only  acci- 
dental, and  proceeding  from  mens  abufc  of  it,  for 
which  the  thing  it  fclf  ought  not  to  be  taken  away. 
And  thus  much  certainly  they  will  grant,  becaufe  it 
cannot  with  any  face  be  denied  ;  and  if  fo,  then 
the  means  of  knowledge  are  not  to  be  denied,  but 
only  men  arc  to  be  cautioned  not  to  pervert  and 
abufe  them.  .  And  if  any  man  abufe  the  holy  fcrip- 
tures  to  the  patronizing  of  error  or  herefy,  or  to 
any  other  bad  purpofe,'  he  does  it  at  his  peril,  and 
mufc  give  an  account  to  God  for  it,  but  ought  not 
to  be  deprived  of  the  means  of  knowledge,  for  fear 
he  fiiould  make  an  ill  ufe  of  them.  We  muft  not 
hinder  men  from  being  chriftians,  to  preferve  them 
from  being  hereticks ;  and  put  out  mens  eyes,  for 
fear  they  fhould  fome  time  or  other  take  upon  them 
to  difpute  their  way  with  their  guides. 

I  remember  that  St.  Paul,  i  Cor.  viii.  i .  takes 
notice  of  this  accidental  inconvenience  of  knowledge, 
that  it  pufFeth  up,  and  that  this  pride  occafioned 
great  contentions  and  divifions  among  them  :  but 
the  remedy  which  he  prefcribes  againft  this  mif- 
chief  of  knowledge  is  not  to  withhold  from  men 
the  means  of  it,  and  to  celebrate  the  fervice  of 
God,  the  prayers  of  the  church,  and  the  reading  of 
the  fcriptures  in  an  unknown  tongue,  but  quite  con- 
trary, chap.  xiv.  of  that  epiRle,  he  (Iridly  enjoins 
that  the  fervice  of  God  in  the  chnrch  be  fo  per- 
formed, as  may  be  for  the  edification  of  the  people  5 
which  he  fays  cannot  be,  if  it  be  celebrated  in  an 

unknown 


necejfary  in  religion,  1867 

unknown   tono;ues   and  the  remedy   he   prefcribes  SERM. 
^  ^  ^  CXIIL 


CXTTI 

againft  the  accidental  mifchief  and  incovenience  of 


knowledge,  is  not  ignorance,  but  charity,  to  go- 
vern their  knowledge,  and  to  help  them  to  make 
right  ufe  of  it ;  ver.  20.  of  that  chap,  after  he 
had  declared  that  the  fervice  of  God  ought  to 
be  performed  in  a  known  tongue ,  he  imme- 
diately adds,  ''  brethren,  be  not  children  in  un- 
*'  derftanding ;  howbeit  in  malice  be  ye  children, 
"  but  in  underflanding  be  ye  men."  He  com- 
mends knowledge,  he  encourageth  it,  he  requires  it 
of  all  chriftians  ;  fo  far  is  he  from  checking  the  pur- 
fuit  of  it,  and  depriving  the  people  of  the  means  of 
it.  And  indeed  there  is  nothing  in  the  chriflian 
religion,  but  what  is  fit  for  every  man  to  know, 
becaufe  there  is  nothing  in  it,  but  what  is  defigned 
to  promote  holinefs  and  a  good  life ;  and  if  men 
make  any  other  ufe  of  their  knowledge,  it  is  their 
own  fault,  for  it  certainly  tends  to  make  men  good  ; 
and  being  fo  ufeful  and  necefiary  to  fo  good  a  pur- 
pofe,   men  ought  not  to  be  debarr'd  of  it. 

Thirdly,  let  it  be  confider'd,  that  the  proper  and 
natural  efFe6ts  and  confequences  of  ignorance  are 
equally  pernicious,  and  much  more  certain  and  un- 
avoidable, than  thofe  which  are  accidentally  occa- 
fioned  by  knowledge ;  for  fo  far  sis  a  man  is  igno- 
rant of  his  duty,  it  is  impofTible  he  fhould  do  it. 
He  that  hath  the  knowledge  of  religion,  may  be  a 
bad  chriftian,  but  he  that  is  deftitute  of  it,  can  be 
none  at  all.  Or  if  ignorance  do  beget  and  promote 
fome  kind  of  devotion  in  men,  it  is  fuch  a  devo- 
tion as  is  not  properly  religion,  but  fuperftition  j 
the  ignorant  man  may  be  zealouily  fuperflitious,  but 
without  fome  meafure  of  knowledge,  no  man  can  be 

truly 


if! 6 3  Knowledge  and  p7'a8iice 

SERAf;  truly  religious.     "  That  the  foul  be  without  know- 
^'^ilfj  ''  ledge  it  is  not  good,"  fays  Solomon,  Prov.  xix.  z. 
becaule  good  practices  depend  upon  our  knowledge, 
and  muit  be  directed  by  it ;  when  as  a  man  that  is 
trained  up  only  to  the  outward  performance  of  fome 
things   in  religion,    as  to   the  faying  over  fo  many 
prayers  in  an  unknown  tongue,  this  man  cannot  be 
truly  religious,  becaufe  nothing  is  religious,  that  is 
not  a  reafonable  fervice  ;  and  no  fervice  can  be  rea- 
fonable,  that  is  not  directed  by  our  underftanding. 
Indeed,  if  the  end  of  prayer  were  only  to  give  God 
to  underftand  what  we  want,  it  were  all  one  what 
language  we  prayed  in,  and  whether  we  underflood 
what  we  asked  of  him  or  not :  but  fo  long  as  the 
end  of  prayer  is   to  teftify    the  fenfe  of  our  own 
wants,  and  of  our  dependence  upon  God  for  the 
fupply  of  them,  it  is  impoflible  that  any  man  fliould 
in  any  tolerable  propriety  of  fpeech  be  faid  to  pray, 
who  does    not   underhand  what  he  asks;   and   the 
faying  over  fo  many  pater  nofiers  by  one  that  does 
not  underftand  the  meaning  of  them,  is  no  more  a 
prayer,  than  the  repeating  over  fo  many  veries  in 
Virgil.     And  if  this  were  good  reafoning,  that  men 
inuft  not  be  permitted  to  know  fo  much  as  they  can 
in  religion,  for  fear  they  fhould  grow  troublefome 
with  their  knowledge,  then  certainly  the  beft  way  in 
the  world  to  maintain  peace  in  the  chrifcian  church, 
would  be  to  let  the  people  know  nothing  at  all  in 
religion  ;  and  the  bed  way  to  fecure  the  ignorance 
of  the  people  would  be  to  keep  the  priefts  as  igno- 
rant as  the  people,  and  then  to  be  fure  they  could 
teach  them  nothing :  but  then  the   mifchief  would 
be,  that  out  of  a  fondnefs  to  maintain  peace  in  the 
chriftian  church,  there  would  be  no  church,  nor  no 

chriftianity ; 


necejfary  in  relegion.  1869 

diriilianlty;  which  would  be  the  fame  wife  contri-SERM. 
vance,  as  if  a  prince  (hould  deftroy  his  fubjecls,    to  ^^^^^• 
keep  his  kingdom  quiet. 

Fourthly,  \<^i  us  hkewife  confider,  that  if  this  rea- 
fon  be  good,  it  is  much  ftronger  for  withholding  the 
fcriptures  from  the  priefls,  and  the  learned,  than 
from  the  people;  becaufe  the  danger  of  itartinp- 
errors  and  herefies,  and  countenancing  them  from 
fcripture,  and  managing  them  plaufibly  and  with 
advantage,  is  much  more  to  be  feared  from  the  learn- 
ed, than  from  the  common  people ;  and  the  expe- 
rience of  all  ages  hath  fhewn,that  the  great  broachers 
and  abetters  of  herefy  in  the  chriftian  church,  have 
been  men  of  learning  and  wit ;  and  moll  of  the  fa- 
mous herefies,  that  are  recorded  in  ecclefiaftical 
hidory,  have  their  names  from  fome  learned  man  or 
other  \  fo  that  it  is  a  great  miftake  to  think  that  the 
way  to  prevent  error  and  herefy  in  x\\t  church,  is  to 
take  the  bible  out  of  the  hands  of  the  people,  fo 
long  as  the  free  ufe  of  it  is  permitted  to  men  of 
learning  and  skill,  in  whofe  hands  the  danger  of  per- 
verting it  is  much  greater.  The  ancient  fathers,  I 
am  fure,  do  frequently  prefcribe  to  \!i\t  people  the 
conftant  and  careful  reading  of  the  holy  fcriptures, 
as  the  furefl  antidote  againft  the  poifon  of  dangerous 
errors,  and  damnable  herefies ;  and  if  there  be  fo 
much  danger  of  fedudion  into  error  from  the  oracles 
of  truth,  by  what  other  or  better  means  can  we  hope 
to  be  fecured  againfl:  this  danger?  if  t\iQ  word  of 
God  be  fo  crofs  and  improper  a  means  to  this  end, 
one  would  think  that  the  teachings  of  men  lliould 
be  much  lefs  effedual ;  fo  that  men  muR-  either  be 
left  in  their  ignorance,  or  they  mud  be  permitted 
to  learn   from  the  word  of  truth  \    and  whatever 

V'oL.  VII.  13  P  force 

2. 


1870        -  Knov:]edge  and  praElke 

SE  RM. force  this  reafon  of  the  danpfer  of  hercfy  hath  In  ir, 
to  deprive  the  common  people  of  the  ufe  of  the 
fcrlptures,  I  am  fure  it  is  much  flronger  to  wrcfl: 
them  out  of  the  hands  of  the  priefts  and  the  learned, 
becaufe  they  arc  much  more  capable  of  perverting 
them  to  fo  bad  a  purpofe. 

Fifthly,  and  laftly,  this  danger  was  as  great  and 
vifible  in  the  age  of  the  apoftles,  as  it  is  now  ;  and 
yet  they  took  a  quite  contrary  courfe :  there  were 
herefies  then,  as  well  as  now,  and  either  the  fcrlp- 
tures were  not  thought  by  being  in  the  hands  of  the 
people  to  be  the  caufe  of  them,  or  they  did  not 
think  the  taking  of  them  out  of  their  hands  a  pro- 
per remedy.  The  apoftles  in  all  their  epiftles,  do 
earneftly  exhort  the  people '^  to  grow  in  knowledge," 
and  commend  them  for  "  fearching  the  rcriptures'%and 
charge  them  that  *'  the  word  of  God  fhould  dwell 
*'  richly  in  ,them.''  And  ^t.  Peter  takes  particular 
notice  of  fome  men  wrefting  fome  difficult  pallages 
in  St.  Paul's  epiftles,  as  likewife  in  the  other  fcrlp- 
tures, to  their  own  deftrudlion,  2  Pet.  iii.  16.  where 
fpeaking  of  St.  Paul's  epiftles,  he  fiiys,  '^  there  are 
*'  fome  things  hard  to  be  underftood,  which  they 
''  that  are  unlearned  and  unftable  wreft,  as  they  do 
*^  alfo  the  other  fcriptures,  to  their  own  deftru(5tion.'' 
Here  the  danger  objeded  is  taken  notice  of;  but  the 
remedy  prefcribed  by  St.  Peter,  is  not  to  take  from 
the  people  the  ufe  of  the  fcriptures,  and  to  keep 
them  in  ignorance ;  but  after  he  had  cautioned  againft 
the  like  weaknefs  and  errors,  he  exhorts  them  to 
«'  grow  in  knowledge/'  ver.  17,  18.  ''ye  there- 
*'  fore,  beloved,  feeing  ye  know  thefe  things  before** 
(that  is,  feeing  ye  are  fo  plainly  told  and  warned  oF 
this  danger)  ''  beware  left  ye  alfo  being  Jed  away 

''  with 


necejfary  in  religion.  a  871 

"  with  tlie  error  of  the  wicked,  fall  from  your  own  SERM. 
^'  fledfaflnefs;  but  grow  in  grace,  and  in  the  know-  ,^!^ 
''  ledge  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus 
*'  Ch  rist,"  (that  is,  of  the  chriftian  religion  ;) 
believing,  it  feems,  that  the  more  knowledge  they 
had  in  religion,  the  lefs  they  would  be  in  danger  of 
falling  into  damnable  errors.  I  proceed  to  the 

Second  obfervation,  viz.  that  the  knowledge  of 
our  duty,  and  the  practice  of  it,  may  and  often  are 
feparatcd.  This  likewife  is  fuppofed  in  the  x.t\x.^ 
that  men  may,  and  often  do  know  the  will  of  God, 
and  their  duty,  and  yet  fail  in  the  pradice  of  it.  Our 
Saviour  elfewhere  fuppofeth,  that  many  "  know 
"  their  mafter's  will,  who  do  not  do  it ;"  and  he 
compares  thofe  ".  that  hear  his  fayings,  and  do  them 
"  nor,  to  a  foolifh  man  that  built  his  houfe  upon 
*'  the  fand."  And  St.  James  fpsaks  of  fome,  "  who 
*«  are  hearers  of  the  word  only,  but  not  doers  of  it," 
and  for  that  reaibn  fall  fhort  of  happinefs.  And  this 
is  no  wonder,  becaufe  the  attaining  to  that  know- 
ledge of  religion  which  is  necelTary  to  falvation  is  no 
difficuk  task.  A  great  part  of  it  is  written  in  our 
hearts,  and  we  cannot  be  ignorant  of  it  if  we  would  ; 
as  that  there  is  a  God,  and  a  providence,  and  ano- 
ther ftate  after  this  life,  wherein  we  fhall  be  reward- 
ed, or  punifhed,  according  as  we  have  lived  here  in 
this  world  ;  that  God  is  to  be  worshipped,  to  be 
prayed  to  for  what  we  want,  and  to  be  praifed  for 
what  we  enjoy.  Thus  far  nature  inftrudts  men  in 
religion,  and  in'  the  great  duties  of  morality,  as 
juflice,  and  temperance,  and  the  like.  And  as  for 
revealed  religion,  as  that  Jesus  Christ  the  Son  of 
God  came  in  our  nature  to  fave  us,  by  revealing  our 
duty  more  clearly  and  fully  to  us,  by  giving  us  a 

13  P  2  more 


I? 72  Knowledge  ajtd  practice 

SH  R  M.  more  perfecl  example  of  holinefs  and  obedience  In  his 
own  life  and  converfition,  and  by  dying  for  our  fins, 
and  rifing  again  forour Juftification  ;  thefe  are  things 
which  men  may  eafily  underftand  ;  and  yet  for  all  that 
they  are  difficultly  brought  to  thepradlice  of  religior. 
I  fhall  indance  in  three  forts  of  perfons,  in  whom 
the  knowledge  of  religion  is  more  remarkably  feparated 
from  the  pradlice  of  it ;  and  for  diftinftion  fake, 
I  may  call  them  by  thefe  three  names  ;  the  fpeculative, 
the  formal,  and  the  hypocritical  chrirtian.  The  firftof 
thefe  makes  religion  only  a  fcicnce,  the  fecond  takes 
it  up  for  a  falhion,  the  third  makes  fome  worldly 
advantage  of  it,  and  ferves  fome  fecular  intereft  and 
defign  by  it.  All  thefe  are  upon  feveral  accounts 
concerned  to  underfland  fomething  of  religion  ;  but 
yet  will  not  be  brought  to  the  pradice  of  it. 

The  fir  ft  of  thefe,  whom  I  call  the  fpeculative 
chriftian,  is  he  who  makes  religion  only  a  fcience, 
and  ftudies  it  as  a  piece  of  learning,  and  part  of  that 
general  knowledge  in  which  he  aiTe6l:s  the  reputation 
of  being  a  mafter  •,  he  hath  no  defign  to  pra61:ife  it, 
but  he  is  loth  to  be  ignorant  of  it,  becaufe  the 
knowledge  of  it  is  a  good  ornament  of  converlation, 
and  will  ferve  for  difcourfe  and  entertainment  among 
thofe  who  are  difpofed  to  be  grave  and  ferious  •,  and 
becaufe  he  does  not  intend  to  pra61ife  it,  he  pafieth 
over  thofe  things  which  are  plain  and  eafy  to  be  un- 
derftood,  and  applies  himfelf  chiefly  to  the  confide- 
ration  of  thofe  things  which  are  more  abfirufe,  and 
will  afford  matter  of  controverfy  and  fubtle  difpute, 
as  the  do£l:rineof  the  trinity,  predeftination,  free-will, 
and  the  like.  Of  this  temper  fecm  many  of  the 
fchoolmen   of  old  to  have  been,  who  made  it  their 

great  ftudy  and  bufinefs  to  puzzle  religion,  and  to 

make 


necejfary  in  religion  187? 

make  every  thing  in  it  intricate,  by  llarting  m^nitt  S  E  RM. 
queftions  and  difficulties  about  the  plained  truths  ; ,  ^^^^ 
and  of  the  fame  rank  ufuaJiy  are  the  heads  and  leaders 
of  parties  and  fadions  in  religion,  who  by  needlefs 
controverfies,  and  endlefs  difputes  about  fome  thinn- 
er other,  commonly  of  no  great  moment  in  relio-ion, 
hinder  themfdves  and  others  from  minding  thepradice 
of  the  great  and  fubftantial  duties  of  a  good  life. 

Secondly,  there  is  the  formal  chriilian,  who  takes 
up  religion  for  a  fafhion.  He  is  born  and  bred  in 
a  nation  where  chriftianity  is  profeft,  and  counte- 
nanced, and  therefore  thinks  it  convenient  for  him  to 
know  fomething  of  it.  Of  this  fort  there  are,  I 
fear,  a  great  many,  who  read  the  fcriptures  fometimes 
as  others  do,  to  know  the  hiftory  of  it;  and  go  to 
church,  and  hear  the  gofpel  preached,  and  by  this 
means  come  in  fome  meafure  to  underfland  the  hifto- 
ry of  our  Saviour,  and  the  chriflian  dodrine  ;  but 
do  not  at  all  bend  themfelves  to  comply  with  the 
great  end  and  defign  of  it ;  they  do  not  heartily  en- 
deavour to  form  and  fafhion  their  lives  according  to 
the  laws  and  precepts  of  it;  they  think  they  arevery^ 
good  chriftians,  if  they  can  give  an  account  of  the 
articles  of  their  faith,  profefs  their  belief  in  God 
and  Christ,  and  declare  that  they  hope  tobefaved 
by  him,  tho'  they  take  no  care  to  keep  his  com- 
mandments. Thefe  are  they  of  whom  our  Savi- 
our fpeaks,  Luke  vi.  46.  "  who  call  him  Lord, 
"  Lord,  but  do  not  the  things  which  he  faid." 

Thirdly,  hypocritical  chriftians,  v/ho  make  an  in- 
tereft  of  religion,  and  ferve  fome  worldly  ^olix^^  by 
it.  Thefe  are  concerned  to  underftand  religion  more 
than  ordinary,  that  they  may  counterfeit  it  hand- 
fom  ly,  and  may  not  be  at  a  lofs  when  they  have  oc- 

cafion 


CXIII. 


1874  Knowledge  and  fm^ice 

SERAI,  cafion  to  put  on  the  garb  of  ir.  And  this  is  one 
part  of  the  character  wiiich  the  apollle  gives  of 
thofe  perfons,  who  he  foretels  would  appear  in  the 
Jail  days,  2  Tim.  iii.  2.  he  fays  they  llwuld  be  *'  lo 
"  vers  of  their  own  kWcs^  covetous,  heady,  high- 
*'  minded,  Jovers  of  pltafure  more  than  lovt^-s  of 
*'  God,  having  a  form  of  godhnefs,  but  denying 
*«  the  power  of  it." 

Now  thefe  men  do  not  Jove  reh'gion,  but  they 
have  occafion  to  make  ufe  of  it ;  and  therefore  they 
will  have  no  more  of  it  than  will  juft  ferve  their 
purpofe  and  defign.  And  indeed  he  that  hath  any 
other  defign  in  religion  than  to  pleafe  God,  and 
fave  his  foul,  needs  no  more  than  fo  much  knov/ledge 
of  it,  as  v^^ill  ferve  him  to  a6t  a  part  in  it  upon  occa- 
fion.    I  come  to  the 

Third  and  Jaft  obfervation,  viz.  that  the  pradlice 
of  religion,  and  the  doing  of  what  we  know  to  be 
our  duty,  is  the  only  way  to  happinefs;  ''  if  ye 
''  know  thefe  things,  happy  are  ye  if  ye  do  them  ;" 
not  "  if  ye  know  thefe  things  happy  are  ye ;"  but 
*'  if  ye  know  and  do  them."  Now  to  convince  men 
of  fo  important  a  truth,  I  fliall  endeavour  to  make 
out  thefe  two  things: 

Firfl,  that  the  gofpel  makes  the  pra6tice  of  re- 
jigion  a  necefiary  condition  of  our  happinefs. 

Secondly,  that  t\\t  nature  and  reafbn  of  the  thing 
makes  it  a  necefiary  qualification  for  it. 

Firft,  the  gofpel  make  the  pradlice  of  religion  a 
necefiary  condition  of  our  happinefs.  Our  Sa  viou  r 
in  his  firfi:  fcrmon,  where  he  repeats  the  promifc  of 
blcflTcdnefs  fo  often,  makes  no  promife  of  it  to 
the  mere  knowledge  of  religion,,  but  to  the  habit 
s^nd  pniaice  of  chriilian  graces  and  virtues,  of  meek- 

nefsj 


neceffary  in  religion.  187^ 

nefs,  and  humility,  and  mercifulne(s,  and  righteouf-  S  E  R  M. 
nefs,  and  peaceablenefs,  and  purity,  and  patience  '^'^'^ 
under  fufFerings  and  perfecutions  for  righteoufnefs 
fake.  And  Matth.  vii.  21.  our  Saviour  doth  mod 
fully  declare,  that  the  happineis  which  he  promifes, 
did  not  belong  to  thofe  who  made  profeffion  of  his 
name,  and  were  fo  well  acquainted  with  his  dodrine, 
as  to  be  able  to  inftrufl  others,  if  themfelves  in  the 
mean  dme  did  not  pratflife  it;  *'  not  every  one 
"  that  faith  unto  me,  Lord,  Lord,  fhall  enter  into 
"  the  kingdom  of  heaven ;  but  he  that  doth  the 
"  will  of  my  Father  v/hich  is  in  heaven.  Many 
*^  will  fiy  unto  me  in  that  diy.  Lord,  Lord, 
*'  have  we  not  prophefied  in  thy  name,  and  in  thy 
*'  name  cad  out  devils,  and  done  many  wondrous 
''  works?  and  then  will  I  profefs  unto  them, I  never 
"  knew  you,  depart  from  me,  ye  workers  of  iniqui- 
"  ty."  Tho'  they  profefs  to  know  him,  yet  be- 
caufe  their  lives  were  not  anfwerable  to  the  knowledge 
which  they  had  of  him,  and  his  dodirine,  he  declares 
that  *'  he  will  not  know  them,"  but  bids  them 
*'  depart  from  him."  And  then  he  goes  on  to  fhev.^ 
that  tho' a  man  attend  to  the  dodlrine  of  Christ,  and 
gain  the  knowledge  of  it 5  yet  if  it  do  not  defcend 
into  his  life,  and  govern  his  a6lions,  all  that  man*s 
hopes  of  heaven  are  fond  and  ground lefs ;  and  only 
that  man's  hopes  of  heaven  are  well-grounded,  who 
knows  the  do&ine  of  Christ,  and  does  it,  ver.  24. 
*'  whofoever  lieareth  thefe  fayings  of  mine,  and  doth 
"  them,  I  will  hkcn  him  to  a  wife  man,  who  built 
*'  his  houfe'upon  a:  rock,  and  the  rain  defcended^ 
*'  and  the  floods  came,  and  the  winds  blew,  and 
"beat  upon  that  houfe,  and  it  Ml  not,  for  it  was 
"  founded  upon  ^  rock  >  and  every  one  that  hear- 

*'    cth 


1876  Knowledge  and  praBlce 

SERM.  "  eth  thefe  fayings  of  mine,  and  doth  them  no% 
^'^'/'^•.''  Hiall  be  liken'd  to  a  foohfh  man,  v.- ho  built  his 
"  houfe  upon  the  land,  and  the  rain  dcfcendcd,  and 
"  the  floods  came,  and  the  winds  blew,  and  beat  upon 
''  that  houfe,  and  it  fell,  and  great  v/as  the  fall  of  it." 
The*  a  man  had  a  knowledge  of  religion  as  great 
and  perfed:  as  that  which  Solomon  had  of  natu- 
ral things,  "  large  as  the  fand  upon  tiie  fea- 
"  fliore  •,"  yet  all  this  knowledge,  feparated  from 
practice,  would  be  like  the  fand  alfo  in  another  re- 
fpe6l,  a  weak  foundation  for  any  man  to  build  his 
hopes  of  happinefs  upon. 

To  the  fame  purpofe  St.   Paul  fpeaks,  Rom.  ii. 
13.    "  not  the   hearers   of  the  law  are  juft   before 
"  God  5  but  the  doers  of  the  law  fhall  be  juftified." 
So  likewife  St.  James,  chap.  i.  22.  "  Be  ye  doers  of 
"  the  word,  and  not  hearers  only,  deceiving  your 
"  own  felvesj"  and  ver.  25.  "  Whofo  looketh  into 
"  the  perfed  law  of  liberty  "  (that  is,  the  law  or 
dodlrine  of  the  gofpel)  ''  and  continueth  therein,  he 
'^  being  not  a  forgetful  hearer  but  a  doer  of  the  work, 
''  this  man  fhall  be  blefTed  in   his  deed  j'*  and  there- 
fore he  adds,  that  the  truth  and  reality  of  religion 
are  to  be  meafured  by  the  effe(5ls  of  it,  in  the  govern- 
ment of  our  words,  and  ordering  of  our  lives,  ver. 
26.  "  If  any  man  among  you  leem  to  be  religious, 
«*  and  bridleth  not  his  tongue,  but  deceiveth  his  own 
*'  heart,  this  man's    religion    is  .vain.     Pure    reli- 
*'  gion,    and    undefiled    before  God  and  the    Fa- 
*'  THER  is  this;   to  vifit  the  fathcrlefs  and  widow 
**  in  their  afflidion,  and  to  keep  himfclf  unfpotted 
"  from   the    world."     Men   talk  of  religion ,    and 
keep  a  great  ftir  about  it  *,   but  nothing   will   pafs 
for  true  religion  before  God,   but  the  virtuous  and 

charitable 


fiecejfary  in  religiort.  ^^77 

charitable  adlions  of  a  good  Jifc ;  and  God  wiJl  ac-S  E  R  M, 
cept  no  man  to  eternal  Jife  upon  any  other  condi-^^^^^J- 
tion.     So  the  apoftle  tells  us   moft   expreQy,  Heb. 
xii.  14.  "  FoJJow  peace  with  all  men,  and  holinefs, 
"  without  which  no  man  fhall  fee  the  Lord.** 

Secondly,  as  God  hath   made  the  pradice  of  re- 
ligion a  neceflary  condition  of  our  happinefs,  fo   the 
very  nature  and  reafon  of  the  thing  makes  it  a  ne- 
cefTary  qualification  for  it.      It  is  neceflary   that   we 
become  like  to  God,  in  order  to  the  enjoyment  of 
him  i  and  nothing  makes  us  like  to  God,  but  the 
pradice  of  holinefs  and  goodnels.     Knowledge  in- 
deed is  a  divine  perfedlion  ;  but  that  alone,  as  it  doth 
not  render  a  man  like  God,  fo  neither  doth  itdifpofe 
him  for  the  enjoyment  of  him.     If  a  man  had  the 
underdanding   of  an  angel,   he  might  for  all  that 
be  a  devil ;  "  he  that  committeth  fin  is  of  the  devil,'* 
and  whatever  knowledge  fuch  a  man  may  have,  he 
is  of  a  devilifli  temper  and  difpofition  :  ''  but  every 
*'  one    that  doth   righteoufneis  is  born  of  God.'* 
By  this  we  are  like  Goo,  and  only  by  our  likenefs 
to  him,  do  we  become  capabJe  of  the  fight  and  en- 
joyment of  him  ;    therefore  every  man  that  hopes  to 
be  happy  by  the  bleflTed  fight  of  God  in  the  next 
life,  muft  endeavour  after  holinefs  in  this  life.     So, 
the  fameapoftle  tells  us,  i  John  iii.  3.  "  every  man 
«  that  hath  this  hope  in  him  purifieth  himfelf,  even 
*'  as  he  is  pure.'*     A  wicked  temper  and  difpofition 
of  mind  is,  in  the  very  nature  of  the  thing,  utter- 
ly inconfiftent  with  all  reafonable  hopes  of  heaven. 

Thus  I  have  (hewn  that  the  pradtice  of  religion, 
and  the  doing  of  what  we  know  to  be  our  duty,  is 
the  only  way  to  happinefs. 

Vol.  VII.  13  Q  And 

2. 


CXiU. 


1878  Knowledge  and  praElice^  &c. 

S  E  R  M.  And  now  the  proper  inference  from  all  this  is,  to 
put  men  upon  the  careful  pradlice  of  religion.  Let 
no  man  content  himfelf  with  the  knowledge  of  his 
duty,  unlefs  he  do  it ;  and  to  this  purpofe  I  fl:iall 
briefly  urge  thefe  three  confiderations. 

Firll,  this  is  the  great  end  of  all  our  knowledge 
in  reli^L^ion,  to  pradlife  what  we  know.  The  know- 
ledge of  God  and  of  our  duty  hath  fo  effential  a 
refpe£t  to  pradlice,  that  the  fcripture  will  hardly 
allow  it  to  be  properly  called  knowledge,  unlefs  it 
have  an  influence  upon  our  lives,  i  John  ii.  3,  4. 
**  Hereby  we  know  that  we  know  him,  if  we 
*'  keep  his  commandments.  He  that  faith  I  know 
"  him,  and  keepeth  not  his  commandments,  is  a 
«'  liar,  and  the  truth  is  not  in  him." 

Secondly,  praftice  is  the  bed  way  to  increafe  and 
perfe6l  our  knowledge.  Knowledge  directs  us  in  our 
praftice,  but  pradlice  confirms  and  increafeth  our 
knowledge,  John  vil.  17.  "  If  a  man  will  do  the 
"  will  of  God,  he  Ihall  know  of  the  dodrine.'* 
The  bed  way  to  know  God,  is  to  be  like  him  our 
felves,  and  to  have,  the  lively  image  of  his  perfedi- 
ons  imprinted  upon  our  fouls  ;  and  the  bell:  way  to 
underltand  the  chriftian  religion,  is  ferioufly  to  fet 
about  the  pradice  of  it ;  this  will  give  a  man  a 
better  notion  of  chriftianity,than  any  fpeculation  can. 

Thirdly,  without  the  pradice  of  rehgion,  our 
knowledge  will  be  fo  far  from  being  any  furtherance 
and  advantage  to  our  happinefs,  that  it  will  be  one 
of  the  unhappieft  aggravations  of  our  mifery.  He 
that  is  ignorant  of  his  duty,  hath  fome  excufe  to  pre- 
tend for  himfelf:  but  he  that  underftands  the  chri- 
ftian  religion,  and  does  not  live  according  to  it, 
hath  no  cloke  for  \\i%  fm.    The  defers  of  our  know- 

Jedge^ 


TraBice  in  religion  necejfary^  tzc.  1879 

ledge,  unlefs  they  be  grofs  and  wilful,  will  find  an 
eafy  pardon  with  God  :  but  the  faults  of  our  lives 
fhall  be  feverely  punilh'd,  when  we  know  our  duty 
and  would  not  do  it.  I  will  conclude  with  that  of 
our  Saviour,  Luke  xii.  47,  48.  "  That  lervant 
"  which  knew  his  Lord's  will,  and  prepared  not 
<«  himfelf,  neither  did  according  to  his  will,  fhall 
*'  be  beaten  with  many  llripes  *,  for  unto  whomfoe- 
"  ver  much  is  given,  of  him  much  fhall  be  requi- 
*'  red."  When  v/e  come  into  the  other  world,  no 
confideration  will  fting  us  more,  and  add  more  to 
the  rage  of  our  torments  than  this,  that  we  did 
wickedly,  when  we  underitood  to  have  done  better ; 
and  chofe  to  make  our  felves  miferable,  when  we 
knew  fo  well  the  way  to  have  been  happy. 


SERMON    CXIV. 

Pradice  in  religion   neceffaryj    in  pro- 
portion to  our  knowledge. 

LUKE  xii.  47,  48. 

And  that  fervant  which  knew  his  Lord'^  will,    an^ 

prepared  not  himfelf^  neither  did  according  to  his 

will ^flo all  he  beaten  with  many  ftripes  :    but  he  that 

knew  not^  and  did  commit  things  worthy  of  ftripes^ 

Jhall  be  beaten  zvithfewjlripes.  For  unto  whomfoever 

7nuch  is  given,    of  him  Jhall  much  be  required ;  and 

to  whom  men  have  committed  much,  of  him  they  will 

ask  the  more, 

N  profecution  of  the  argument  which  I  handled  S  E  R  ^f. 
in  my  lad  difcourfe,    namely,    that   the  know-    ^''^^'^• 
ledge  of  our  duty,  without  the  praftice  of  it,  will 
13  Qji  not 


CXIV. 


880  Pra^ice  in  religion  necefary^ 

S  EJ^^  M.  not  bring  us  to  happinefs,  I  fhall  proceed  to  fnew, 
that  if  our  pradice  be  not  anfwerable  to  our  know- 
ledge, this  will  be  a  great  aggravation  both  of  our 
fin  and  punifhment. 

And  to  this  purpofe,  I  have  pitched  upon  thefe 
words  of  our  Lord,  which  are  the  appHcation  of 
two  parables,  which  he  had  delivered  before,  to 
ftir  up  men  to  a  diligent  and  careful  practice  of  their 
duty,  that  fo  they  may  be  in  a  continual  readi- 
nefs  and  preparation  for  the  coming  of  their  Lord. 
The  firft  parable  is  more  general,  and  concerns  all 
men,  who  are  reprefcnted  as  fo  many  fervants  in  a 
great  family,  from  which  the  Lord  is  abfent,  and 
they  being  uncertain  of  the  time  of  his  return, 
fhould  always  be  in  a  condition  and  pofture  to  re- 
ceive him.  Upon  the  hearing  of  this  parable,  Pe- 
ter enquires  of  oar  Saviour,  whether  he  intended 
this  only  for  his  difciples,  or  for  all  ?  To  which 
queftion  our  Saviour  returns  an  anfwer  in  ano- 
ther parable,  which  more  particularly  concerned 
them  ;  who  becaufe  they  were  to  be  the  chief  ru- 
lers and  "governors  of  his  church,  are  reprefented 
by  the  ftewards  of  a  great  family,  ver.  42.  "  who 
*'  then  is  that  faithful  and  wife  fteward,  whom  his 
"  Lord  fliall  make  ruler  over  his  houfhold,  to 
"  give  them  their  portion  of  meat  in  due  feafon  ?'* 
If  he  difcharge  his  duty,  "  blelTed  is  he,"  but  if  he 
fliall  take  occafion  in  his  Lord's  abfence,  to  do- 
mincer  over  his  fellow- fervants,and  riotoufly  to  waftc 
his  Lord's  goods,  his  Lord  when  he  comes 
will  punifli  him  after  a  more  fevere  and  exemplary 
ynanner. 

And  then  follows  the  application  of  the  whole, 
in  the  words  of  the  itKt^  "  and  that  fervant  which 

"  knew 


in  proportion  to  our  knowledge.  1 8  8  r 

^'  knew  his  lord's  will  and   prepared   not  himfelf,  SERM, 

I  ex  IV 

"  neither  did  according  to  his  will,  ihall  be   beaten 

*'  with  many  ftripes."  As  if  he  had  faid,  and  well 
may  fuch  a  fervant  deferve  {o  fevere  a  punifliment, 
who  having  fuch  a  truft  committed  to  him,  and 
knowing  his  lord's  will  fo  much  better,  yet  does 
contrary  to  it;  upon  which  our  Saviour  takes  oc- 
cafion  to  compare  the  fault  and  punifhment  of  thofe 
who  have  greater  advantages  and  opportunities  of 
knowing  their  duty,  with  thofe  who  are  ignorant  of 
it  \  *'  that  fervant  which  knew  his  lord's  will,  and 
"  prepared  not  himfelf,  neither  did  according  to  it, 
"  fhall  be  beaten  with  many  flripes :  but  he  that 
*'  knew  not,  but  did  commit  things  worthy  of 
^'  ftripes,  fhall  be  beaten  with  few  ftripes."  And 
then  he  adds  the  reafbn  and  the  equity  of  this  pro- 
ceeding, "  for  unto  whomfoever  much  is  given,  of 
*'  him  fhall  be  much  required  ;  and  to  whom  men 
"  have  committed  much,  of  him  they  wjll  ask  the 
"  more.'*    . 

The  words  in  general  do  allude  to  that  law  of 
the  Jews,  mentioned  Deut.  xxv.  2.  where  the  judge 
is  required  to  fee  the  malefadtor  punifh'd  according 
to  his  fault,  by  a  certain  number  of  flripes ;  in  re- 
lation to  which  known  law  among  the  Jews,  our 
Saviour  here  fays,  that  "  thofe  who  knew  their 
"  lord's  will,  and  did  it  not,  fhould  be  beaten  with 
*'  many  flripes :  but  thofe  who  knew  it  not,  Ihould 
*'  be  beaten  with  few  flripes."  So  that  there  arc 
two  obfervations  lie  plainly  before  us  in  the  words. 

Firfl,  that  the  greater  advantages  and  opportuni- 
ties any  man  hath  of  knowing  his  duty,  if  he  do  it 
not,  the  greater  will  be  his  condemnation  ;  "  the 
^^  fervant  which  knew  his  iQrd's  will,  and  prepared 


i8g2  FraBice  in  religion  neceffary, 

SKRM.  "  not  hlmfelf,  neither  did  according  to  it,  fliall  b^ 
CXIV.    jt  beaten  with  many  ftripes.'* 

Secondly,  that  ignorance  is  a  great  excufe  of  mens 
faults,  and  will  IcfTcn  their  punifhment  -,  "  but  he 
*'  that  knew  not,  but  did  commit  things  worthy  of 
*'  ftripes,  fhall  be  beaten  with  few  ftripes." 

I  fhall  begin  with  the  latter  of  thcfc  fird,  be- 
caufe  it  will  make  way  for  the  other  j  viz.  that 
ignorance  is  a  great  excufe  of  mens  faults,  and  will 
leffcn  their  punifhment  ;  "  he  that  knew  not,  but 
"  did  commit  things  worthy  of  flripes,  fhall  be 
*'  beaten  with  few  ftripcs." 

For  the  clearing  of  this,  it  will  be  rcquifite  to 
confider  what  ignorance  it  is  which  our  Saviour 
here  fpeaks  of  •,  and  this  is  neccfTary  to  be  enquired 
into,  becaufe  it  is  certain  that  there  is  fome  fort  of 
ignorance  which  doth  wholly  excufe  and  clear  from 
all  manner  of  guilt ;  and  there  is  another  fort,  which 
doth  either  not  at  all,  or  very  little  extenuate  the 
faults  of  men,  fo  that  it  muft  be  a  third  fort,  diffe- 
rent from  both  thefe,  which  our  Saviour  her» 
means. 

Firfl,  there  is  an  ignorance  which  doth  wholly 
excufe  and  clear  from  all  manner  of  guilt,  and  that 
is  an  abfolute  and  invincible  ignorance,  when  a  per- 
fon  is  wholly  ignorant  of  the  thing,  which  if  he 
knew,  he  fhould  be  bound  to  do,  but  neither  can 
nor  could  have  help'd  it,  that  he  is  ignorant  of  it ; 
that  is,  he  either  had  not  the  capacity,  or  wanted 
the  means  and  opportunity  of  knowing  it.  In  this 
cafe  a  perfon  is  in  no  fault,  if  he  did  not  do  what 
he  never  knew,  nor  could  know  to  be  his  duty. 
For  God  meafures  the  faults  of  men  by  their  wills, 
and  if  there  be  no  defedl  there,  there  can  be  no 

suilt. 


in  proportion  to  our  knowledge.  if! 8 3 

guilt;  for  no  man  is  guilty,  but  he  that  is  confci-  SERM. 
ous  to  himfeif  that  he  would  not  do  what  he  knew  .^^^Z* 
he  ought  to  do,  or  would  do  what  he  knew  he 
ought  not  to  do.  Now  if  a  man  be  fimply  and  in- 
vincibly  ignorant  of  his  duty,  his  negled  of  it  is  al- 
together involuntary ;  for  the  -^nW  hath  nothing 
to  do,  where  the  underflanding  doth  not  firfl  dd- 
redt.  And  this  is  t\\^  cafe  of  children  who  are  not 
yet  come  to  the  ufe  of  reafon  \  for  tho'  they  may 
do  that  which  is  materially  a  fault,  yet  it  is  none  in 
them,  becaufe  by  reafon  of  their  incapacity,  they 
are  at  prefent  invincibly  ignorant  of  what  they  ought 
to  do.  And  this  is  the  cafe  likevv^ife  of  idiots,  who 
are  under  a  natural  incapacity  of  knowledge,  and  fo 
far  as  they  are  fo,  nothing  that  they  do  is  imputed  to 
them  as  a  fault.  The  fame  may  be  faid  of  diftrac- 
ted  perfons,  v/ho  are  deprived  either  wholly,  or  at 
fome  times,  of  the  ufe  of  their  underftandin,Q;s :  fo 
far,  and  fo  long  as  they  are  thus  deprived,  they  are 
free  from  all  guilt  -,  and  to  perfons  who  have  the 
free  and  perfedl  ufe  of  their  reafon,  no  negledl  of 
any  duty  is  imputed,  of  which  they  are  abfolutely 
and  invincibly  ignorant.  For  inftance,  it  is  a, duty 
incumbent  upon  all  mankind,  to  believe  in  the  Son 
of  God,  where  he  is  fufficiently  manifefted  and  re- 
vealed to  them  ;  but  thofe  who  never  heard  of  him, 
nor  had  any  opportunity  of  coming  to  the  know- 
ledge of  him,  fhall  not  be  condemned  for  this  infi- 
delity, becaufe  it  is  impoffible  they  fhould  "  believe 
*'  on  him,  of  v/hom  they  never  heard  ; "  they  may 
indeed  be  condemned  upon  other  accounts,  for  fin- 
ning againft  the  light  of  nature,  and  for  not  obey- 
ing "  the  law  which  was  written  in  their  hearts ;  " 
for  what   th€  apoftle  fays  of  the  revelation  of  the 

law. 


1884  7ra5tice  in  religion  neccffary^ 

«  E  R  M.  law,  is  as  true  of  any  other  revelation  of  God,  "  as 
*  *'  many  as  have  finned  without  law,  Ihall  alfo  perifh 
"  without  law  *,  and  as  many  as  have  finned  under 
"  the  law,  ihall  be  judged  by  the  law,"  Rom.  ii.  12, 
In  like  manner,  thofe  who  have  finned  without  the 
gofpel,  (that  is,  who  never  had  the  knowledge  of 
it)  fliall  not  be  condemned  for  any  offence  againft 
that  revelation  which  was  never  made  to  them,  but  for 
their  violation  of  the  law  of  nature ;  only  they  that 
have  finned  under  the  gofpel,  flmll  be  judged  by  it. 

Secondly,  there  is  likewife  another  fort  of  igno- 
rance, which  either  does  not  at  all,  or  very  little  ex- 
tenuate the  f:iuits  of  men,  when  men  are  not  only 
icrnorant,  but  choofe  to  be  fo  ;  that  is,  when  they 
"wilfully  negled  thofe  means  and  opportunities  of 
knowledge  which  are  afforded  to  them  ;  fuch  as  Job 
fpeaks  of,  Job  xxi.  14.  "  who  fay  unto  God  de- 
**  part  from  us,  for  we  defire  not  the  knowledge  of 
<«  thy  ways."  And  this  fort  of  ignorance  many 
among  the  Jews  were  guilty  of,  when  our  Saviour 
came  and  preached  to  them,  but  they  would  not  be 
in(lru6led  by  him ;  "  the  light  came  among  them, 
*'  but  they  loved  darknefs  rather  than  light,"  as  he 
himfelf  fays  of  them  ;  and  as  he  fays  elfewhere  of 
the  pharifecs,  "  they  rejefted  the  counfel  of  God 
«'  againft  themfelves,"  they  wilfully  fhut  their  eyes 
againft  that  light  which  offered  it  felf  to  them  ;  "  they 
•'  would  not  lee  with  their  eyes,  nor  hear  with  their 
"  ears,  nor  underftand  with  their  hearts,  that  they 
"  might  be  converted,  and  healed."  Now  an  igno- 
rance in  this  degree  wilful,  can  hardly  be  imagined 
to  carry  any  excufe  at  all  in  it.  He  that  knew 
not  his  lord's  will,  becaufe  he  would  not  know  it, 
bccaufe  he  wilfully  rejefted  the   means  of  coming 

to 


in  proportion  to  our  knowledge.  1885 

t6  the  knowledge  of  it,  deferves  to  be  beaten  withSERM* 
as  many  ilripes,  as  if  he  had  known  it ;  becaufe  he 
might  have  known  it,  and  would  not.  He  that 
will  not  take  notice  of  the  king's  proclamation,  or 
will  flop  his  ears  when  it  is  read,  and  afterwards 
offends  againfl  it,  does  equally  deferve  punifhment 
with  thofe  who  have  read  it,  and  heard  it  ;  and  difo- 
bey'd  it;"  becaufe  he  was  as  grofly  faulty  in  not 
knowing  it  -,  and  there  is  no  reafon  that  any  man's 
grols  fault  fhould  be  his  excule. 

So  that  it  is  neither  of  thefe  forts  of  ignorance 
that  our  Savioup.  means,  neither  abfolute  and  in- 
vincible ignorance,  nor  that  which  is  grofly  wilful 
and  affe6i:ed  5  for  the  firfl,  men  deferve  not  to  be 
beaten  at  all,  becaufe  they  cannot  help  it  \  for  the 
latter,  they  deferve  not  to  be  excufed,  becaufe 
they  might  have  helped  their  ignorance,  and  would 
not. 

But  our  Saviour  here  l]:)eaks  offuch  an  ignorance 
as  does  in  a  good  degree  extenuate  the  fault,  and  yet 
not  wholly  excufe  it  ;  for  he  fays  of  them,  that 
"  they  knew  not  their  lord's  will,*'  and  yet  that 
this  ignorance  did  not  wholly  excufe  them  from 
blame,  nor  exempt  them  from  punifhment,  "  but 
"  they  fhould  be  beaten  with  few  ftripes."     In  the 

Third  place  then,  there  is  an  ignorance  which  is 
in  forne  degree  faulty,  and  yet  does  in  a  great 
meafure  excufe  the  faults  which  proceed  from  it  5 
and  this  is  when  men  are  not  abfolutely  ignorant  of 
their  duty,  but  only  in  comparifon  of  others,  who 
have  a  far  more  clear  and  diftindt  knowledge  of  it ; 
and  though  they  do  not  grofly  and  wilfully  negled 
the  means  of  further  kaowledge,  yet  perhaps   they 

Vol. VII.  13  R  i^ 

3. 


1^86  Pracllce  in  religion  necejjaryj 

S  E  R  M.  do  not  make  the  bed  ufe  they  might  of  the  oi> 
P^"^'   portLinities  they  have  of  knowing  their  duty  better  5 
and   therefore  in  comparifon   of  others,  who  have 
far  better  means  and   advantages  of  knowing  their 
lord's  will,  they  may  be  faid  not  to  know  it,  tho* 
they  are  not  fimply  ignorant  of  it,  but  Oiily  have 
a  more  obfcure  and  uncertain  knowledge  of  it.  Now 
this  Ignorance   does   in  a  great  meafure  excufe  fuch 
perfons,  and  extenuate  their  crimes,  in  comparifon 
of  thofe  who  had  a  clearer  and  more  perfed:  know- 
ledge of  their  mafter's  will  ;  and  yet  it  does  not  free 
them  from  all  guilt ;  bccaufe  they  did  not  live  up  to 
that  degree  of  knowledge  which  they  had  ;  and  per- 
haps if  they  had  ufed  more  care  and  induftry,  they 
might  have  known   their  lord's  will  better.     And 
this  was  the  cafe  of  the  heathens,  who  in  compari- 
fon of  thofe  who  enjoyed  the   light  of  the  gofpel, 
might  be  faid  not  to  have  known  their  lord's  will,  tho* 
as  to  many  parts  of  their  duty,  they  had  fome  di- 
redtions    from   natural  light,    and  their  confciences 
did  urge  them  to  many  things  by  the  obfcure  appre- 
henfions  and  hopes  of  a  future  reward,  and    the  fear 
of  a  future  punifhment.    But  this  was  but  a  very  ob- 
fcure and  uncertain  knowledge,  in  comparifon  of  the 
clear  light  of  the  gofpel,  which  hath difcovered  to  us 
our  duty  fo  plainly  by  the  laws  and  precepts  of  it,,  and 
hath  prefenteduswith  fuch  powerful  motives  and  arga- 
ments  to  obedience  in  the  promifes  and  threatnings 
of  it.     And  this  likewife  is  the  cafe  of  many  chri- 
ftians ;  who  either  through  the  natural  (lownefs  of  their 
underftandings,  or  by    the  negled  of  their  parents 
and  teachers,  or  other  circumftances  of  their  educa- 
tion, have  had   far   lels  means    and  advantages  of 

knowledge   than  others.     God  does  not  expert  fo 

much 


in  proportion  to  our  knowledge.  1887 

ffuuch  from  thofe  as  from  others,  to  whom  he  S  E  R  M. 
hath  given  greater  capacity,  and  advantages  of^^  ' 
knowledge  5  and  when  our  Lord  fhall  come  to  call 
his  fervants  to  an  account,  they  fhall  be  beaten 
with  fewer  ftripes  than  others ;  they  fhall  not  whol- 
ly efcape,  becaule  they  were  not  wholly  ignorant ; 
but  by  how  much  they  had  lels  knowledge  than 
others,  by  fo  much  their  punifhment  fhall  be  lighter. 

And  there  is  all  the  equity  in  the  world  it  fhould 
be  fo,  that  men  fhould  be  accountable  according  to 
what  they  have  received,  and  that  to  whom  lefs  is 
given,  lefs  fhould  be  required  at  their  hands.  The 
fcripture  hath  told  us,  "  that  God  will  judge  the 
*'  world  in  righteoufnefs ;"  now  juftice  does  require, 
that  in  taxing  the  punifhment  of  offenders,  every 
thing  fhould  be  confidered,  that  may  be  a  jull:  ex- 
cufe  and  extenuation  of  their  crimes,  and  that  ac- 
cordingly their  punifhment  fhould  be  abated.  Now 
the  greateft  extenuation  of  any  fault  is  ignorance, 
which  when  it  proceeds  from  no  fault  of  ours,  no 
fault  can  proceed  from  it;  fo  that  fo  far  as  any 
man  is  innocently  ignorant  of  his  duty,  fo  far  he  is 
cxcufable  for  the  negled  of  it :  for  every  degree  of 
ignorance  takes  off  fo  much  from  the  perverfenefs 
of  the  will ;  i^  nihil  ardet  in  inferno^  niji  propria  vo- 
Imtas^  "  Nothing  is  puniflVd  in  hell,  but  what  is 
*'  voluntary,  and  proceeds  from  our  wills." 

I  do  not  intend  this  difcourfe  for  any  commen- 
dation of  ignorance,  or  encouragement  to  it.  For 
knowledge  hath  many  advantages  above  it,  and  is 
much  more  defirable,  if  we  ufe  it  well;  ajid  if 
we  do  not,  it  is  our  own  fault ;  if  we  be  not  want- 
ing to  ourfelves,  we  may  be  much  happier  by  our 
knowledge,  than  any  man  can  be  by  his  ignorance ; 
13  R  2  for 


i888  Fra5tice  in  religion  nccejfary^ 

SERM.  for  tho'  ignorance  may  plead  an  excufe,  yet  it  can 

^^^^'  hope  for  no  reward;  and  it  is  always  better  to  need 
no  excufe,  than  to  have  the  bed  in  the  world  ready 
at  hand  to  plead  for  ourfelves.  Befides,  that  we 
may  do  well  to  confider,  that  ignorance  is  no 
where  an  excufe  where  it  is  chcrifh'd  -,  fo  that  ic 
would  be  the  vaineft  thing  in  the  world  for  any  man 
to  fofter  it,  in  hopes  thereby  to  excufe  himfelf  -,  for 
where  it  is  wilful  and  chofen,  it  is  a  fault,  and 
(as  I  faid  before)  it  is  the  mod  unreafonable  thing 
in  the  world,  that  any  man's  fault  fhould  prove  his 
excufe.  So  that  this  can  be  no  encouragement  to 
ignorance,  to  fay  that  it  extenuates  the  faults  of  men : 
for  it  does  not  extenuate  them,  whenever  it  is  wil- 
ful and  afFecled  ;  and  whenever  it  is  defigned  and 
chofen,  it  is  wilful ;  and  then  no  man  can  rea- 
fonably  defign  to  continue  ignorant,  that  he  may 
have  an  excufe  for  his  faults,  becaufe  then  the  igno- 
rance is  wilful,  and  whenever  it  is  fo,  it  ceafeth  to 
be  an  excufe. 

I  the  rather  fpeak  this,  becaufe  ignorance  hath  had 
the  good  fortune  to  meet  with  great  patrons  in  the 
world,  and  to  be  excoll'd,  tho'  not  upon  this  account, 
yet  upon  another,  for  which  there  is  leis  pretence  of 
reafon;  as  if  it  were  the  mother  of  devotion.  Of  fu- 
perflition  I  grant  it  is^  and  of  this  we  fee  plentiful 
proof,  among  thofc  who  are  fo  careful  to  preferve  and 
cherifh  it :  but  that  true  piety  and  devotion  fhould 
fpring  from  it,  is  as  unlikely  as  that  darknefs  fhould 
produce  light.  I  do  hope  indeed,  and  charitably 
believe,  that  the  ignorance  in  which  fome  are  de- 
tained by  their  teachers  and  governors,  will  be  a  real 
excufe,  to  as  many  of  them  as  are  otherwife  honed 
and  fincerc  j  but  I  doubt  not  but  \!i\^  errors  and  faults 

which 


in  proportion  to  our  knowledge.  i88r^ 

which  proceed  from  this  ignorance,  will   lie  heavy  SERM. 
upon  thofe  who   keep  them  in   it.     I  proceed  to  ^^^^* 
the 

Second  obfervation,  that  the  greater  advantages 
and  opportunities  any  man  hath  of  knowing  the 
will  of  God,  and  his  duty,  the  greater  will  be  his 
condemnation  if  he  do  not  do  it.  "  The  fervant 
'*  which  knew  his  lord's  will,  and  prepared  not 
*'  himfelf,  neither  did  according  to  it,  fhall  be 
"  beaten  with  many  itripes."  "  Which  knew  his 
"  lord's  v/ill,  and  prepared  not  himfelf;"  the 
preparation  of  our  mind  to  do  the  will  of  God, 
whenever  there  is  occafion  and  opportunity  for  it, 
is  accepted  with  him ;  a  will  rightly  difpofed  to 
obey  God,  tho'  it  be  not  brought  into  ad,  for 
want  of  opportunity,-  does  not  lofe  its  reward  :  but 
when,  notwithftanding  we  know  our  lord's  will, 
there  are  neither  of  thefe,  neither  the  ad,  nor  the  pre- 
paration and  refolution  of  doing  it,  what  punifh- 
ment  may  we  not  expedl  ? 

The  juft  God,  in  punifhing  the  fins  of  men,  pro- 
portions the  punifhment  to  the  crime,  and  where 
the  crime  is  greater,  the  punifhment  rifeth  ;  as  a- 
mongft  the  Jews,  where  the  crime  is  fmall,  the  ma- 
le fador  was  fentenced  to  "  a  few  flripes;"  where  it 
was  great,  he  was  "  beaten  with  many."  Thus  our 
Saviour  reprefents  the  great  judge  of  the  world 
dealino;  with  finners ;  according  as  their  fins  are  ao-- 
gravated,  he  will  add  to  their  punifliment.  Now 
after  all  the  aggravations  of  fin,  there  is  none  that 
doth  more  intrinfically  heighten  the  malignity  of  it, 
than  when  it  is  committed  againft  the  clear  know- 
ledge of  our  duty,  and  that  upon  thefe  three  ac- 
eounts. 

Firfr, 


cxr 


1890  Practice  in  religion  nee e [far y, 

SERM.  Fird:,  becaufe  the  knowledge  of  God's  will  is  ib 
great  an  advantage  to  the  doing  of  it. 

Secondly,  becaufe  it  is  a  great  obligation  upon  us 
to  the  doing  of  it. 

Thirdly,  becaufe  the  neglefl  of  our  duty  in  this 
cafe  cannot  be  without  a  great  deal  of  wilfulnefs  and 
contempt.  I  fhall  fpeak  briefly  to  thefe  three. 

Firft,  becaufe  the  knowledge  of  God's  will  is  fo 
great  an  advantage  to  the  doing  of  it ;  and  every 
advantage  of  doing  our  duty,  is  a  certain  aggra- 
vation of  our  negled  of  it.  And  this  is  the  rea- 
fon  which  our  Saviour  adds  here  in  the  text,  "  for 
*'  to  whomfoever  much  is  given,  of  them  much 
*^  will  be  required ;  and  to  whom  men  have  com- 
"  mittcd  much,  of  him  they  will  ask  the  more.'* 
It  was,  no  doubt,  a  great  difcouragement  and  difad- 
vantage  to  the  heathens,  that  they  were  fo  doubtful 
concerning  the  will  of  God,  and  in  many  cafes  left 
to  the  uncertainty  of  their  own  reafon,  by  what  way 
and  means  they  might  befl  apply  themfelves  to  the 
pleafing  of  him,  and  this  difcouraged  feveral  of  the 
wifefl:  of  them  from  all  ferious  endeavours  in  religion, 
thinking  it  as  good  to  do  nothing,  as  to  be  miftaken 
about  it.  Others  that  were  more  naturally  devout,and 
could  not  fatisfy  their  confciences  without  fome  ex- 
preflions  of  religion,  fell  into  various  fuperftitions, 
and  were  ready  to  embrace  any  way  of  worfhip 
which  cuftom  prefcribed,  or  the  fancies  of  men 
could  fugged  to  them-,  and  hence  fprang  all  the 
ilupid  and  barbarous  idolatries  of  the  heathens.  For 
ignorance  growing  upon  the  world,  that  natural  pro- 
penfion  which  was  in  the  minds  of  men  to  religion, 
and  the  worlhip  of  a  deity,  for  want  of  certain  di- 
redion,  expreft  it  felt  in  thofe  foolifh  and  abomina- 
ble idolatries,  which  were  pradi.^cd  among  the  hea- 
thens. "^^'^* 


in pi^oportion  to  our  knowledge.  iZgi 

And  is  it  not  then  a  mighty  advantage  to  us,  that  S  ER  M. 

•      •  cxiv 

we  have  the  clear  and  certain  direction  of  divine  re- 
velation ?  we  have  the  will  of  God  plainly  difcovered 
to  us,  and  all  the  parts  of  our  duty  clearly  defined 
and  determined,  fo  that  no  man  that  is  in  any  mea- 
fure  free  from  intereft  and  prejudice,  can  eafily  mif- 
take  in  any  great  and  material  part  of  his  duty. 
We  have  the  nature  of  God  plainly  revealed  to  us, 
and  fuch  a  charader  of  him  given,  as  is  mod  fuita- 
ble  to  our  natural  conceptions  of  a  deity,  as  render 
him  both  awful  and  amiable  j  for  the  fcripture  repre- 
fents  him  to  us  as  great  and  good,  powerful  and  mer- 
ciful, a  perfedt  hater  of  fin,  and  a  great  lover  of 
mankind  i  and  we  have  the  law  and  manner  of  his 
worfhip  (fo  far  as  was  needful)  and  the  rules  of  a 
good  life  clearly  expreft  ?nd  laid  down ;  and  as  a 
powerful  motive  and  argument  to  the  obedience  of 
thofe  laws,  a  plain  difcovery  made  to  us  of  the  end- 
lefs  rewards  and  punifhments  of  another  world.  And 
is  not  this  a  mighty  advantage  to  the  doing  of  God's 
will,  to  have  it  fo  plainly  declared  to  us,  and  fo  pow- 
erfully enforced  upon  us  ?  fo  that  our  duty  lies 
plainly  before  us ;  we  fee  what  we  have  to  do,  and 
the  danger  of  negleding  it ;  fo  that  confidering  the 
advantage  we  have  of  doing  God's  will,  by  our 
clear  knowledge  of  it,  we  are  altogether  inexcufa- 
ble  if  we  do  it  not. 

Secondly,  the  knowledge  of  our  Lord's  will  is 
likewife  a  great  obligation  upon  us  to  the  doing  of 
it.  For  what  ought  in  reafon  to  oblige  us  more  to 
do  any  thing,  than  to  be  fully  afTur'd  that  it  is  the 
will  of  God,  and  that  it  is  the  law  of  the  great  fo- 
vereign  of  the  world,  who  is  able  to  fave,  or  to  de- 
flroy  ?    that  it  is  the  pleafure  of  him  that  made  us^ 

and 


iScjZ  Tradiice  in  religion  7i€ceJ[aryy 

SEJ^^  M.  and  who  hath  declared  that  he  defigns  to  make  us 
happy,  by  our  obedience  to  his  laws  ?  To  that  if  wc 
know  thclc  things  to  be  the  will  of  God,  we  have 
the  greatell  obligation  to  do  them,  whether  we  con- 
fider  the  authority  of  God,  or  our  own  intereft,  and 
if  we  negledl  them,  we  have  nothing  to  fay  in  our 
own  excufe.  We  know  the  law,  and  the  advantage 
of  keeping  it,  and  the  penalty  of  breaking  it,  and 
if  after  this  wc  v/ill  tranfgrels,  there  is  no  apology 
to  be  made  for  us.  They  have  fomething  to  plead 
for  themfelves,  who  can  fay,  that  tho'  they  had 
fome  apprehenfion  of  fome  parts  of  their  duty,  and 
their  minds  were  apt  to  didate  to  them  that 
they  ought  to  do  fome  things,  yet  the  different 
apprehenfions  of  mankind  about  feveral  of  thefc 
things,  and  the  doubts  and  uncertainties  of  their 
own  minds  concerning  them,  made  them  eafy  to 
be  carried  off  from  their  duty,  by  the  vicious  in- 
clinations of  their  own  nature,  and  the  tyranny  of 
cuftom  and  example,  and  the  pleafant  temptations  of 
fiefh  and  blood ;  but  had  they  had  a  clear  and  un- 
doubted revelation  from  God,  and  had  certainly 
known  thefe  things  to  be  his  will,  this  would  have 
conquered  and  born  down  all  objections  and  tempta- 
tions to  the  contrary  -,  or  if  it  had  nor,  would  have 
ilopt  their  mouths,  and  taken  away  all  excufe  from 
them.  There  is  fome  colour  in  this  plea,  that  in 
many  cafes  they  did  not  know  certainly  what  the 
will  of  God  was,  but  for  us  who  own  a  clear  reve- 
lation from  God,  and  profefs  to  believe  it,  what 
can  we  fay  for  our  felves,  to  mitigate  the  feverity  of 
God  towaj'ds  usj  why  he  fhould  not  pour  forth  all. 
his  wrath,  and  execute  upon  us  the  fiercenefs  of  his 


anger  > 


Thirdly, 


in  proportion  to  our  knowledge,  1 893 

ThirdlVj  the  ncgled  of  God's  wiii  \rhen  we  knowS  E  RM» 
it,  cannot  be  without  a  great  deal  of  vvilfulnefs  and 
contempt.  If  we  know  it,  and  do  it  not,  the  fault 
is  folely  in  our  wills,  and  the  more  wilful  any  fin  is, 
the  more  heinoudy  wicked  is  it.  There  can  hardly 
be  a  greater  aggravation  of  a  crime,  than  if  it  pro- 
ceed from  meer  obftinacy  and  pcrverfeneis ;  and  if 
we  know  it  to  be  our  Lord's  will,  and  do  it 
not,  v/e  are  guilty  of  the  highefl:  contempt  of  the 
greateft  authority  in  the  world.  And  do  we  think 
this  to  be  but  a  fmall  aggravation,  to  affront  the 
great  fovereign  judge  of  the  world  ?  not  only  to 
break  his  laws,  but  to  trample  upon  them  and  de- 
fpife  them,  when  we  know  whofe  laws  they  are  ? 
*'  will  we  provoke  the  Lord  to  jeaioufy  ?  are  we 
*'  ftronger  than  he  ?  "  we  believe  that  it  is  God  who 
faid,  "  thou  fhalt  not  commit  adultery  5  thou  iliak 
"  not  fleal ;  thou  fhalt  not  bear  falfe  witnefs  againll 
.*'  thy  neighbour;  thou  flialt  not  hate,  or  opprels^ 
*'  or  defraud  thy  brother  in  any  thing ;  but  thou 
"  ihalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thy  k\^':,  "  and  will 
we  notwithftanding  venture  to  break  thefe  laws, 
knowing  whofe  authority  they  are  ftampt  withal? 
after  this  contempt  of  him,  v/hat  favour  can  we  hope 
for  from  him.?  what  can  we  fay  for  our  felves,  why 
any  one  of  thofe  many  llripes  which  are  threatned 
fliould  be  abated  to  us  ?  Ignofci  aliquatenus  ignoraU' 
tU  pot  eft  \  contemptus  veniam  non  habet  5  "  fomething 
*'  may  be  pardoned  to  ignorance ;  but  contempt 
"  can  exped  no  forgiveneis."  Lie  that  llrikes  his 
prince,  not  knowing  him  to  be  fo,  hath  fomething 
to  fay  for  himfelf,  that  tho'  he  did  a  difloyal  ad, 
yet  it  did  not  proceed  from  a  di (loyal  mind  :  but;- 
Vol.  VIL  13  S  h« 

2. 


1  Pg  j.  PraBlce  hi  religion  necejjary^ 

S  E  R  M.  he  that  firll  acknowledged!  him  for  his  prince,  and 
cxiV.  ^i^^j^  affronts  him,  deferves  to  be  profecuted  with 
the  utmoft  fevcrity,  becaufe  he  did  it  wilfuJly,  and 
in  metr  contempt.  The  knowledge  of  our  duty, 
and  that  it  is  the  will  of  God  which  we  go  againft, 
takes  away  all  polTible  excufc  from  us ;  for  nothing 
can  be  faid,  why  we  fliould  offend  him  who  hath 
both  authority  to  command  us,  and  power  to  de- 
ilroy  us. 

And  thus  I  have,  as  briefly  as  I  could,  repre- 
fented  to  you  the  true  ground  and  reafon  of  the  ag- 
gravation of  thofe  fins,  which  are  committed  againft 
the  clear  knowledge  of  God's  will,  and  our  duty  *, 
becaufe  this  knowledge  is  fo  great  an  advantage  to 
the  doing  of  our  duty  \  fo  great  an  obligation  upon 
us  to  it  ;  and  becaufe  the  negled  of  our  Lord's 
will  in  this  cafe,  cannot  be  without  great  wilfulnefs, 
and  a  downright  contempt  oF  his  authority. 

And  (hall  I  now  need  to  tell  you,  how  much  it 
concerns  every  one  of  us,  to  live  up  to  that  know- 
ledf^e  which   we  have  of  our  Lord's  will,    and  to 
prepare  our  felves  to  do  according  to  it ;  to  be  al- 
ways in  a  readinefs   and  difpofition  to  do  what  wc 
know  to  be  his  will,  and   adually  to  do  it,  when 
there  is  occafion  and  opportunity  .^  and  it  concerns 
us  the  more,    becaufe  we,    in  this  age  and  nation, 
have  fo  many  advantages,  above  a  great  part  of  the 
world,   of   coming  to  the  knowledge  of  our  duty. 
Wc  enjoy  the  clearefl:  and  mod   perfed:  revelation 
which  God  ever  made  of  his  will  to  mankind,  and 
have  the  light  of  divine  truth  plentifully  fhed  amongfl 
us,  by  the  free  ufe  of  the  holy  fcriptures,  which  is 
not  a  fealed  book  to  us,  but   lies  open  to  be  read, 
and  lludicd  by  usj   this   fpiritual  food  is  "  rained 

''  down 


in  proportion  to  our  knowledge.  1865 

**  down  like  manna  round  about  our  tents,'*  andSERM. 
every  one  may  gather  fo  much  as  is  fufficient ;  we 
are  not  dinted;  nor  -have  the  word  of  God  given 
out  to  us  in  broken  pieces,  or  mix'd  and  adulterated, 
here  a  lellbn  of  fcripture,  and  there  a  legend  ;  but 
whole  and  entire,  fincere  and  uncorrupt. 

God  hath  not  left  us,  as  he  did  the  heathens  for 
many  ages,  to  the  imperfed:  and  uncertain  direc- 
tion of  natural  light ;  nor  hath  he  revealed  his  will 
to  us,  as  he  did  to  the  Jews,  in  dark  types  and  fha- 
dows  :  but  hath  made  a  clear  difcovery  of  his  mind 
and  will  to  us.  The  difpenfation  which  we  are  un- 
der, hath  no  veil  upon  i?,  "  the  darknefs  is  paff^ 
"  and  the  true  light  now  fhineth  ;  we  are  of  the 
"  day,  and  of  the  light,"  and  therefore  it  may 
juftly  be  expe(fl:ed  that  we  Hiould  "  put  off  the  works 
"  of  darknefs,  and  walk  as  children  of  the  light." 
Every  degree  of  knowledge  which  we  have,  is  an 
aggravation  of  the  fins  committed  againil  it,  and 
when  our  Lord  comes  to  pals  fentence  upon  us,  will 
add  to  the  number  of  our  fbripes.  Nay,  if  God 
iliould  inflid  no  pofitive  torment  upon  finners ;  yet 
their  ov/n  minds  would  deal  moil  feverely  with 
them  upon  this  account,  and  nothing  will  gill  their 
confciences  more  than  to  remember  againft  what 
light  they  did  offend.  For  herein  lies  the  very  na- 
ture and  fting  of  all  guilt  to  be  confcious  to  our 
felves,  "  that  we  knew  what  we  ought  to  have 
"  done,  and  did  it  not."  The  vices  and  corruptions 
which  reigned  in  the  world  before,  will  be  pardona- 
ble, in  comparifon  of  ours.  "  The  times  of  that 
"  ignorance  God  winked  at :  but  now  he  com- 
"  mands  all  men  every  where  to  repent,"  Man- 
kind   had  fome  excufe  for  their  errors  before,  and 

iq  S  2  God 


1S96  Fraclice  in  religion  neceffary 

F,R  M.  God  was  pleafed  in  a  great  meafure  to  overlook  them  : 
but   "   if  wc  continue  dill  in  our  fins,  we  have  no 
"  cloke  for  them."  All  the  degrees  of  light  which 
we  enjoy,  are  fo   many   talents  committed   to  us  by 
our  Lord,  for  the  improving  whereof  he  will  call 
U5  to  a  {lri(5t  accounts  "  for  unto  whomfoever  much 
*'  is  given,  of  him  much  fhall  be  required  \  and  to 
"  whom  he  hath  committed  much,  of  him  he  will 
*'  ask  the  more."     And  nothing  is  more  reafonable, 
than  that  men  fliould  account  for  all  the  advantages 
and  opportunities  they  have  had  of  knowing  the  will 
of  God  s  and  that  as  their  knowledge  was  increafed, 
fo  their  forrow  and  punifhment  fhould  proportiona- 
bly  rife,  if  they  fin  againft  it.     The  ignorance  of  a 
great  part  of  the  world  is  defervedly  pitied  and  la- 
mented by  us,  but  the  condemnation  of  none   is  fo 
bad,  as  of  thofe  who  having  the  knowledge  of  God's 
will,  neglefed  to  do  it  j  *^  how  much  better  had  it 
*'  been   for  them  not   to  have  known  the  way  of 
*'  righteoufnefs,  than  after  they  have  known  it,  to 
*'  turn  from  the  holy  commandment  delivered  un- 
*'  to  them  !  "  If  we  had  been  born,  and  brought  up 
in  ignorance  of  the  true  God   and  his  will,  "  we 
''  had  had  no  fin  ;  "  in  comparifon  of  what  now  we 
have:  '*  but   now   that  we   fee,  our  fin    remains." 
This  will  aggravate  our  condemnation  beyond  mea- 
fure,  that   we   had    the  knowledge  of  falvation  fo 
clearly  revealed  to  us.     Our  duty  lies  plainly  before 
us,  we  know  what  v/e  ought  to  do,  and  "  what  man- 
''  ner  of  perfons   we  ought  to  be,  in  all  holy  con- 
"  verfation  and  godlinefs."     We  believe  the  com- 
ing- of  our  Lord  to  judgment,  and  we  know  not 
now  foon  he  may  be  "  revealed  from    heaven  with 
^^  his  mighty  angels,"  not  only  "  to  take  vengeance 


on 


in  fr  (fortiori  to  our  knowledge,  i^gy 

«  on  them  that  know  not  God,"  but  on  them  that  SERm. 
have  known  him,  and  yet  "  obey  not  the  o-ofpel  ^^^^* 
*«  of  his  Son."  And  if  all  this  will  not  move  us 
to  prepare  our  felves  to  do  our  Lord's  will,  wc 
defcrve  to  have  our  ftripes  multiplied.  No  condem- 
nation can  be  too  heavy  for  thofe  who  oftend 
againft  the  clear  knowledge  of  God's  will/ and  their 
duty. 

Let  us  then  be  perfuaded  to  fet  upon  the  pradice 
of  what  we  know  ;  let  the  light  which  is  in  our 
underftandings,  defcend  upon  our  hearts  and  lives ; 
let  us  not  dare  to  continue  any  longer  in  the  prac- 
tice of  any  known  fin,  nor  in  the  neglcdl  of  any 
thing  v/hich  v/e  are  convinced  is  our  duty,  and  "  if 
^'  our  hearts  condemn  us  not,"  neither  for  the  ne^-- 
leS:  of  the  means  of  knov/ledge,  nor  for  rebelling 
againft  the  light  of  God's  truth  fhining  in  our 
minds,  and  glaring  upon  our  confciences,  "  then 
"  have  we  confidence  towards  God  :  but  if  our  hearts 
"  condemn  us,  God  is  greater  than  our  hearts,  and 
"  knows  all  tilings.'* 


SERMON 


SERMON     CXV. 

The  {ins  of  men  not  chargeable  upon 
God;  but  upon  themlelvcs. 

J  A  M  E  S  i.  13,  14. 

Let  no  man  fay ^  ni:hen  he  is  tempted^  I  am  tempted  of 
God  ;  for  God  cannot  be  tempted  with  evil^  neither 
iempteth  he  any  man :  but  every  man  is  tempted^ 
when  he  is  drawn  away  of  his  own  lifl^  and  en. 
iiced, 

SERM.  I^TEXT  to  the  belief  a  God,  and  his  provj- 

^-^v^*    I  ^V     ^^"^^5  thtvt  is  nothing    more    fundamen- 

The  firll    -i-    ^    tally  necefTary   to   the  pradice  of  a  good 

^^^°"  °"  life,  than  l;he  belief  of  thefc  two  principles,   "  that 

*'  God  is  not  the  author  of  fin,"  and  ''  that  every 

**  man's  fin  lies  at  his  own  door,  and  he  hath  rea- 

<^  fon   to  blame  himfelf  for    all   the   evil  that  he 

*'  does." 

Firft,  "  that  God  is  not  the  author  of  fin,"  that 
he  is  no  way  accefi^ary  to  our  faults,  either  by  tempt- 
ing or  forcing  us  to  the  commifiion  of  them.  For 
if  he  were,  they  would  neither  properly  be  fins,  nor 
could  they  be  juftly  puniiLed.  They  would  not  pro-' 
perly  be  fins,  for  fin  is  a  contradiction  to  the  will 
of  God  ;  but  fuppofing  men  to  be  either  tempted  or 
necefiitated  thereto,  that  which  we  call  fin,  would 
cither  be  a  meer  paflive  obedience  to  the  will  of  God, 
or  an  adtive  compliance  with  it,  but  neither  way  a 
contradidion  to  it.     Nor  could  thefe  aclions  be  jullly 

punilhed  -, 


^heftm  of  men  not  chargeahU  upon  God,  &c.      1899 
puniihed;    for   all     punifnment  fuppofeth   a  fault,    ^^\?^' 
and  a    fault    fuppofeth    liberty,  and  freedom   from  ^•^-x^ 
force  and  neceffity  ;  fo   that  no  man  can  be  juftly 
puniflied  for    that  which  he  cannot  help,    and  no 
man  can    help   that   which   he    is    necelTitated  and 
compell'd   to.     And    tho'  there   were    no   force  in  . 
the  cafe,  but  only  temptation,  yet  it  would  be  un- 
reafonable  for  the  fame  perfon  to  tempt  and  punifh. 
For  as  nothing  is  more  contrary    to    the    holinefs 
of  God  than  to  tempt  men  to  fin  ;  fo  nothing  can 
be  more  againft  jufcice  and   goodnefs,  than  firfl  to 
draw  men  into  a  fault,  and  then  to  chaftife  them 
for  it.     So   that  this  is  a  principle  which  lies    at   . 
the  bottom    of   all    religion,  "  that    God    is   not 
"  the  author  of  the  fins  of  men."     And  then. 

Secondly,  "  that  every  man's  fault  \i^%  at  his  own 
*'  door,  and  he  has  reafbn  enough  to  blame  him- 
'■'  feif  for  all  the  evil  that  he  does."  And  this  is 
that  which  makes  men  properly  guilty,  that  when 
they  have  done  amifs,  they  are  confcious  to  them- 
felves  it  was  their  own  ad,  and  they  might  have 
done  otherwile  ;  and  guilt  is  that  which  makes  men 
liable  to  punifhment;  and  fear  of  pumifliment  is  the 
great  reftraint  from  fin,  and  one  of  the  principal  ar- 
guments for  virtue  and  obedience. 

And  both  thefe  principles  our  apoftle  St.  James 
does  here  fully  afTert  in  the  words  which  I  have  read 
unto  you.  "  Let  no  man  fay,  when  he  is  tempted, 
*'  I  am  tempted  of  God  ;  for  God  cannot  be  temp- 
"  ted  with  evil,  neither  tcmpteth  he  any  man  :  but 
"  every  man  is  tempted,  when  he  is  drawn  away  of 
"  his  own  lull,  and  enticed." 

In  which  words,    thefe  two   things  are  plainly 

contained. 

Firft, 


The  Jim  of  men  ?iot  chargeable  upon  God^ 

Firil,  that  God  doth  not  tempt  any  man  to  [\n. 
"  Let  no  man  fay  when  he  is  tempted,  1  am  temp- 
"  ted  of  God  ;  for  God  cannot  be  tempted  with. 
"  evil,  neither  tempteth  he  any  man.'* 

Secondly,  that  every  man's  fault  lies  at  his  own 
door,  and  he  is  his  own  greateft  tempter.  "  But 
**  every  man  is  tempted,  when  his  is  drawn  away  of 
'«  his  own  lufl,  and  enticed." 

I.  That  God  doth  not  tempt  any  man  to  fin. 
*'  Let  no  man  fay,  when  he  is  tempted,  I 
*'  am  tempted  of  God;  for  God  cannot  be  temp- 
««  ted  with  evil,  neither  tempteth  he  any  man.'* 
In  which  words,  there  are  three  things  to  be  con- 
fidercd. 

Finl,  the  propofition  which  the  apoille  here  re- 
jects, and  that  is,  "  that  God  tempts  men."  ''  Let 
**  no  man  fay,  when  he  is  tempted,  I  am  tempted 
«  of  God." 

Secondly,  the  manner  in  which  he  rcje£i:s  it, 
*«  Let  no  man  fay  fo."  By  which  manner  of  fpeak- 
ing,  the  apoftle  infinuates  thefe  two  things.  i.That 
men  are  apt  to  lay  their  faults  upon  God  :  for  when 
he  fays,  "  let  no  man  fay  fo,"  he  intimates,  that 
men  are  apt  to  fay  io^  and  it  is  very  probable  that 
fome  did  fay  fo  -,  and,  2dly,  that  it  is  not  only  a 
fault,  but  an  impious  aflertion  to  fiy  that  God 
tempts  men.  He  fpcaks  of  it  as  a  thing  to  be  re- 
ceded with  adetcftation.  "  Let  no  man  fay  ;"  that 
is,  far  be  it  from  us  to  affirm  a  thing  fo  impious  and 
diflionourable  to  God. 

Thirdly,  the  reafon  and  argument  that  he  brings 
againft  it,  "  for  God  cannot  be  tempted  with  evil, 
**  neither  tempteth  he  any  man." 

Firll, 


but  upon  themfehes,  190 1 

Firft,  the  proportion  which  the  apoftle  here  rejefls,  S  E  RM. 
and  that  is,  ^'  that  God  tempts  men:"  "  Jet  no  man  ^'^'^• 
"  fay,  when  he  is  tempted,  I  am  tempted  of  God." 
Now  that  we  may  the  more  diftindly  underfland 
the  meaning  of  the  propofition,  which  the  apoftle 
here  rejeds,  it  will  be  very  requifite  to  confider  what 
temptation  is,  and  the  feveral  forts  and  kinds  of  it. 
To  tempt  a  man,  is,  in  general,  nothing  elfe  but  to 
make  trial  of  him  in  any  kind  what  he  will  do.  la 
fcripcure,  temptation  is  commonly  confin'd  to 
the  trial  of  a  man's  good  or  bad,  of  his  virtuous  or 
vicious  inclinations.  But  then  it  is  fuch  a  trial  as 
endangers  a  man's  virtue,  and  if  he  be  not  well 
refolved,  is  likely  to  overcome  it,  and  to  make  him 
fall  into  fin.  So  that  temptation  does  always  im- 
ply fomething  of  danger  the  word  way.  And  men 
are  thus  tempted,  either  from  themfelves,  or  by 
others ;  by  others  chiefly  thefe  two  ways. 

Firft,  by  dired  and  downright  perfuafions  to 
fin. 

Secondly,  by  being  brought  into  fuch  circum- 
flances  as  v/ill  gready  endanger  their  falling  into 
it,  tho'  none  folicit  and  perfuade  them  to  it. 

Firfl,  by  dire6l  and  downright  perfuafions  to  fin. 
Thus  the  devil  tempted  our  firft  parents,  by  repre- 
fenting  things  fo  to  them,  as  might  on  the  one  hand 
incite  them  to  fin,  and  on  the  other  hand  weaken 
and  loofen  that  which  was  the  great  curb  and  reftraint 
from  it.  On  the  one  hand  he  reprefents  to  them 
the  advantages  they  fliould  have  by  breaking  God's 
command.  "  God  doth  know  that  in  the  day  ye  eat 
«'  thereof,  then  your  eyes  fhall  be  opened,  and  ye 
*«  fhall  be  as  gods,  knov/ing  good  and  evil."  On 
Vol.  VIL  13  T  .  the 

2, 


1002  Th^fms  of  men  not  chargeable  upon  God  ; 
S  E  R  M.  the  other  hand,  he  reprefents  the  danger  of  offending 
C>^V.  riot  to  be  fo  great  and  certain  as  they  imagined. 
"  The  ferpent  faid  unto  the  woman,  ye  fhall  not 
^'  furcly  die.**  And  the  devil  had  fo  good  fuccefs 
in  this  way  of  tempting  the  firil  Adam,  as  to  en- 
courage him  to  fct  upon  the  fecond,  our  bleffed  Sa- 
viouR,  in  tiie  fame  manner ;  for  he  would  have 
perluaded  him  "  to  flill  down  and  worfliip  him," 
by  offering  him  "  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  world, 
^■'  and  the  glory  of  them."  And  thus  bad  men 
many  times  tempt  others,  and  endeavour  to  draw 
them  into  the  fame  wicked  courfcs  with  themfelves. 
Solomon  reprefents  to  us  the  manner  and  the  danger 
of  it,  Prov.  i,  10,  ii,  13,  14.  '^  My  Son,  if  fin- 
*^  ners  entice  thee,  confent  thou  not  j  if  they  fiy, 
•'  come  with  us,  let  us  lay  wait  for  blood,  let  us 
*^  lurk  privily  for  the  innocent  without  caufe  ;  we 
"  lliall  find  all  precious  lijbftance,  we  Pnall  fill  our 
"  houfes  with  fpoil.  Caft  in  thy  lot  amongft  us,  let 
"  us  all  have  one  purfc."  This  is  the  firil  way  of 
temptation. 

And  to  be  fure  God  tempts  no  man  this  way.  He 
offers  no  arguments  to  man  to  perfuade  him  to  fin; 
he  no  where  propofeth  either  reward  or  impunity  to 
finners  h  but  on  the  contrary  gives  all  imaginable 
encouragement  to  obedience,  and  threatens  the  tranf- 
greffign  of  his  law  with  molt  dreadful  punilhments. 

Secondly,  men  are  likewife  tempted,  by  being 
brought  into  fuch  circumftances,  as  will  greatly  en- 
danger their  falling  into  fin,  tho'  none  perfuade 
them  to  it ;  and  this  happens  two  ways ;  when  men 
are  remarkably  befet  with  the  allurements  of  the 
world,  or  affaulted  with  the  evils  and  calamities  of  it  ; 
for  either  of  thefe  conditions  are  great  temptations 

to 


but  upon  them/} Ives,  1903 

to  men,  and  make  powerful  afTaults  upon  them,  ef- S  E  R  M, 
pecially  when  they  faJl  upon  thofe  who  are  ill  dif-    CXV. 
pofed  before,  or  are  but  of  a  weak  virtue  and  refo- 
lutlon. 

The  allurements  of  the  world  are  flrong  temp- 
tations; riches,  and  honours,  pleafures,  are  the 
occafions  and  incentives  to  many  lufts.  Honour  and 
greatneis,  power  and  authority  over  others,  efpe- 
cialiy  when  men  are  fuddenly  lifted  up,  and  from  a 
low  condition,  are  apt  to  tranfport  men  to  pride 
and  iinfolency  towards  others.  Power  is  a  flrong  li- 
quor which  does  eafily  intoxicate  weak  minds, 
and  oiake  them  apt  to  fiy  and  do  indecent  things. 
'^  Man  that  is  in  honour  and  underflands  not,  is 
*'  hke  the  beads  that  perifh ;"  intimating  that  men 
who  are  exalted  to  an  high  condition,  are  very  apt 
to  forget  themfelves,  and  to  play  the  fools  and 
beafts.  It  requires  great  confideration,  and  a  well 
poifed  mind,  not  to  be  lifted  up  with  one's  con- 
dition. Weak  heads  are  apt  to  turn  and  grow 
dizzy,  when  they  look  down  from  a  great  height. 

And  fo  likewife  eafe  and  profperity  are  a  very 
ilippery  condition  to  moft  men,  and  without  great 
care  do  endanger  the  falling  into  great  fins.  So  So- 
lomon obferves,  Prov.  i.  32.  "  For  the  turning 
*'  away  of  the  fim.ple  fliall  flay  them,  and  the  pro- 
*'  fperity  of  fools  fhall  deftroy  them."  For  this  rea- 
fon  Agur  maketh  his  prayer  to  God,  that  he  would 
"  give  him  neither  poverty  nor  riches/'  but  keep 
him. in  a  mean  condition,  becaufe  of  the  danger  of 
both  extrem.es,  Prov.  xxx.  8,  9.  "  Give  me  not  riches^ 
*'  left  I  be  full,  and  deny  thee."  Both  the  eager 
defire  and  the  poffelTion  and  enjoyment  of  riches  do 
frequently  prove  fatal  to  men,  So  our  Savioi/r  tells 
13  T  2  us 


1 904         T^he  fi?is  of  men  not  chargeable  upon  God; 

us  clfewhere  very  emphatically,  Matth.  xix.  23,  24. 
"  Verily  I  lay  unto  you,  that  a  rich  man  fhall  hardly 
"  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven  :  and  again  I 
''  fay  unco  you,  it  is  cafier  for  a  camel  to  go  through 
"  the  eye  of  a  needle,  than  for  a  rich  man  to  enter 
''  into  tiie  kingdom  of  God."  St.  Paul  likewife  very 
fully  declares  unto  us  the  great  danger  of  this  condi- 
tion, I  Tim.  vi.  9,  10.  "  But  they  that  will  be  rich 
*'  fall  into  temptation,  and  a  fnare,  and  into  many 
*'  foolifh  and  hurtful  lufbs,  which  drown  men  in 
''  deftruclion  and  perdition  ;  for  the  love  of  money 
"  is  the  root  of  all  evil,  which  while  fome  coveted 
*'  after,  they  have  erred  from  the  faith,  and  pierced 
«'  themfelves  through  with  many  forrows." 

But  the  greateft  bait  of  all  to  flefh  and  blood,  is 
fenfual  pleafures ;  the  very  prefence  and  opportunity 
of  thefe,  are  apt  to  kindle  the  defires,  and  to  in- 
flame the  kifls  of  men,  elpecially  where  thefe  temp- 
tations meet  with  fuitable  tempers,  where  every 
ipark  that  falls  catcheth. 

And  on  the  other  hand,  the  evils  and  calamities 
of  this  world,  efpecially  if  they  threaten  or  fall  upon 
men  in  any  degree  of  extremity,  are  ftrong  temp- 
tations to  humane  nature.  Poverty  and  want,  pain 
and  fufiering,  and  the  fear  of  any  'great  evil,  efpe- 
cially of  death,  thefe  are  great  ftraits  to  humane 
nature,  and  apt  to  tempt  men  to  great  fins,  to  im- 
patience and  difcontent,  to  unjufl  and  difhonefl  fhifts, 
to  the  forfaking  of  God,  and  apoftafy  from  his  truth 
and  religion.  Agur  was  fenfible  of  the  dangerous 
temptation  of  poverty,  and  therefore  he  prays  againft 
that,  as  v>^ell  as  againft  riches  i  "  give  me  not  po- 
*'  verty,  leil  being  poor  I  ftcal,  and  take  the  name 
"  of  the  Lord   my  God  in  vainj"  that  is,  left  I 

be 


but  upon  themfelves,  "190C 

be  tempted  to  theft,  and  perjury.  The  devil,  whofe  S  E  R  m. 
trade  is  to  tempt  men  to  Hn^  knew  very  well  the 
force  of  thefe  forts  of  temptations,  when  he  defires 
God  firft  to  touch  Job  in  his  eftate,  and  to  fee  what 
effed  that  would  have,  Job  i.  ir.  "  But  put  forth 
*'  thine  hand  now,  and  touch  aJl  that  he  hath,  and 
*'  he  will  curfe  thee  to  thy  face/'  And  when 
he  found  himfelf  deceived  in  this,  furely  he 
thought,  that  were  he  but  afflidled  with  great  bodily 
pains,  that  would  put  him  out  of  all  patience,  and 
fiefh  and  blood  would  not  be  able  to  withfland  this 
temptation,  chap.  ii.  5.  "  But  put  forth  thine 
''  hand  now,  and  touch  his  bone  and  his  flefli,  and 
"  he  will  curfe  thee  to  thy  face."  And  this  was  the 
great  temptation  that  the  primitive  chriftians  were 
aflaulted  withal;  they  were  tempted  to  forfake 
Christ  and  his  religion,  by  a  mod  violent  perfecu- 
tion,  by  the  fpoiling  of  their  goods,  by  imprifon- 
ment,  and  torture,  and  death.  And  this  is  that 
kind  of  temptation  which  the  apoftle  particularly 
ipeaks  of  before  the  text,  "  blefled  is  the  man  that 
'^  endureth  temptation;  for  when  he  is  tried,  he 
*'  fliall  receive  the  crown  of  life,  which  the  Lord 
*'  hath  promifed  to  them  that  love  him  -,"  and  then 
it  follows,  "  let  no  man  fay  when  he  is  tempted,  I  am 
*'  tempted  of  God."  And  thus  I  have  given  an  ac- 
count of  the  feveral  forts  of  temptations  comprehended 
under  this  fecond  head,  namely,  when  men  are  temp- 
ted by  being  brought  into  fuch  circumilances  as  do 
greatly  endanger  their  filling  into  fin^by  the  allurements 
of  this  world,  and  by  the  evils  and  calamities  of  it. 

And  the  queftion  is,  how  far  God  hath  an  hand 
in  thefe  kind  of  temptations,  that  lb  we  may  know 
how  to  limit  this  propofition,  wiiich  the  apoitle  here 

rejeds, 


igo6        T^hefins  of  men  not  chargeable  upon  God  ; 

SERM,  rejediis,  "  that  men  are  tempted  of  God."     *'  Let 
CXV.     <c  no  man  fay,  when  he  is  tempted,  I  am  tempted 

^^^^  '^  of  God." 

That  the  providence  of  God  does  order,  or  at  lead 
permit  men  to  be  brought  into  thefe  circumiiances  I 
have  fpoken  of,which  are  fuch  dangerous  temptations 
to  fin,  no  man  can  doubt,  that  believes  his  providence 
to  be  concerned  in  the  affairs  of  the  world.  All  the 
difficulty  is,  how  far  the  apoftle  does  here  intend  to 
exempt  God  from  an  hand  in  thefe  temptations. 
Now  for  the  clearer  underftanding  of  this,  it  will 
be  rcquifitc  to  confider  the  feveral  ends  and  reafons, 
\vhich  thofe  who  tempt  others  may  have  in  tempting 
them  ;  and  all  temptation  is  for  one  of  thefe  three 
ends  or  reafons ;  either  for  the  trial  and  improve- 
ment of  mens  virtues  ;  or  by  way  of  judgment  and 
punifhment  for  fome  former  great  'fins  and  provoca- 
tions i  or  with  a  direct  purpofe  and  defign  to  feduce 
men  to  fm  ;  thefe  1  think  are  the  chief  ends  and  rea- 
fons that  can  be  imagined,  of  exercifing  men  with 
dangerous  temptations. 

Firft,  for  the  exercifc  and  improvement  of  mens 
graces  and  virtues.  And  this  is  the  end  which  God 
always  aims  at,  in  bringing  good  men,  or  permitting 
them  to  be*  brought  into  dangerous  temptations. 
And  therefore  ^i,  James  fpeaks  of  it  as  a  matter  of 
joy,  when  good  men  are  exercifed  with  afflidions  ; 
not  becaufe  afflidions  are  dcfirable  for  themfelves, 
but  becaufe  of  the  happy  confequenccs  of  them,  ver. 
2,  3.  of  this  chapter,  "  My  brethren,  count  it  all 
*'  joy,  when  ye  fall  into  divers  temptations ;  know- 
**  ing  this,  that  the  trying  of  your  faith  worketh 
"  patience."  And  to  the  fame  purpofe  St.  Paul, 
Rom.  v.  3,  4,  5.  "  We  glory  in  tribulation,  know- 


4C 


mg 


but  upon  themfelves.  ^9^7 

«'  ing  that  tribulation  worketh  patience,  and  patience  S  E  R  M- 
*'  experience  ;"  d'oMii-nr  patience  trieth  a  man,,^^^,^^^ 
''  and  this  trial  worketh  hope,  and  hope  maketh  not 
"  afhamed.'*  Thefe  are  happy  efFeds  and  confe- 
quences  of  afHidion  and  fufFering,  when  they  im- 
prove the  virtues  of  men  and  increafe  their  graces, 
and  thereby  make  way  for  the  increafe  of  their  glo- 
ry. Upon  this  account  St.  James  pronounceth  thofe 
blefTed,  who  are  thus  tempted.  "  BlelTcd  is  the  man 
'•  that  endureth  temptation ;  for  when  he  is  tried,  he 
''  fhall  receive  the  crown  of  life,  which  the  Lord 
"  hath  promifed  to  them  that  love  him." 

And  this  certainly  is  no  difparagement  to  the  pro- 
vidence of  God,  to  permit  men  to  be  thus  tempted, 
when  he  permits  it  for  no  other  end,  but  to  make 
them  better  men,  and  thereby  to  prepare  them  for  a 
greater  reward :  and  fo  the  apoRle  aflfures  us,  Rom. 
viii.  17,  18.  '^  If  fo  be  we  fuffer  with  him,  wcfliall 
''  alfo  be  glorified  with  him  %  for  I  reckon  that  the 
^'  fufFerings  of  this  prefent  time  are  not  worthy  to  be 
"  compared  with  the  glory  that  fhall  be  revealed  in  us.'* 
Andver.  28.  "  For  we  know  that  all  things  fhair 
''  work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love  God." 
And  this  happy  end  and  ifTue  of  temptations  to  good 
men  the  providence  of  God  fecures  to  them  (if  they 
be  not  wanting  to  themfelvcs)  one  of  thefe  two  ways, 
either  by  proportioning  the  temptation  to  their 
ftrength;  or  if  it  exceed  that,  by  miniftring  new 
flrength  and  fupport  to  them,  by  the  fecret  and  ex- 
traordinary aids  of  his  Holy  Spirit. 

Firfl,  by  proportioning  the  temptation  to  their 
flrength  -,  ordering  things  fo  by  his  fecret  and  wife 
providence,  that  they  fhall  not  be  afliiulted  by  any 
temptations  which  is  beyond  their  flrength  to  refill 

and 


1908        ^hejins  of  men  mi  chargeable  upon  God  ; 

and  overcome.  And  herein  the  fecurity  of  good 
men  doth  ordinarily  confift ;  and  the  very  bed  of 
us,  thofe  who  have  the  firmed  and  moil  refolute  vir- 
tue were  in  infinite  danger,  if  the  providence  of  God 
did  not  take  this  care  of  us.  For  a  temptation  may 
fet  upon  the  beft  men  with  fo  much  violence,  or  fur- 
prize  them  at  fuch  an  advantage,  as  no  ordinary  de- 
gree of  grace  and  virtue  is  able  to  v/ithitand :  but 
where  men  are  fincerely  good,  and  honeftly  refolved, 
the  providence  of  God  doth  ward  off  thefe  fierce 
blow?,  and  put  by  thefe  violent  thruds,  and  by  a  fecret 
difpofalof  things  keep  them  from  being  aflaul ted  by 
thefe  irrefidible  kinds  of  temptations. 

The  confideration  whereof,  as  it  is  a  great  en- 
couragement to  men  to  be  fincerely  good,  fo  like- 
wife  a  great  argument  for  a  continual  dependence 
upon  the  providence  of  God,  and  to  take  us  off" 
from  confidence  in  our  felves,  and  our  own  drength. 
And  this  ufe  the  apodle  makes  of  it,  i  Cor.  x.  12. 
''  Wherefore  let  him  that  thinketh  he  dandeth," 
(that  is  confident  that  nothing  diall  be  able  to  diake 
him,  or  throw  him  down)  "  take  heed  led  he  fall ; 
"  there  hath  no  temptation  taken  you,  but  fuch  as 
"  is  common  to  men  \  \i  juyj  avOpcoTrjv©^,  but  what  is 
*'  humane  •,"  nothing  but  what  an  humane  drength, 
aflided  by  an  ordinary  grace  of  God,  may  be  able 
to  refid  and  conquer.  But  there  are  greater  and 
more  violent  temptations  than  thefe,  which  you 
have  not  yet  been  tried  with  ;  and  when  thole  hap- 
pen, we  mud  have  recourfe  to  God  for  an  extraor. 
dinary  aflldance.     And  this  is  the 

Second  way  I  mention'd,  whereby  the  providence 
of  God  does  fecure  good  men  in  cafe  of  extraordi- 
nary  temptations,    which  no  humane  drength  can 

probably 


kit  upon  themfehes.  2909 

probably  refift.     And  this   the  fame  apoftle  afiuresSERM. 
us  of  in  the  very  next  words,  "  God  is  faithful,  who    ^^^• 
*'  will  not  fuffer  you  to  be  tempted  above  what  you 
"  are  able,  but  will  with  the  temptation  alfo  make 
"  a  way  to  efcape,  that  you  may  be  able  to  bear 
"  it."  That  is,  in  cafe  of  great  and  violent  tempta- 
tions (fuch  as  the  chriftians  in  the  height  of  their 
perfecutions  were  expofed  to)  God  will  fecretly  mi- 
nider  ftrength  and  fupport  equal   to  the  force  and 
power  of  the  temptation.     And  this  God  did  in  an 
extraordinary  manner  to  the  chriftian  martyrs,  and 
that  to  fuch  a   degree,    as  made   them  joyfully  to 
embrace  their  fufferings,  and  with  the  greateft  chear- 
fulnefs    in    the    world   to  endure   thofe    torments, 
which  no  humane  patience  was  able  to  bear.     And 
where  God  doth  thus  fecure  men  againft  temptati- 
ons, or  fupport  them  under  them,  .it  is  no  reflexion 
at  all  upon  the  goodnefs  or  juilice  of  his  providence, 
to  permit  them  to  be  thus  tempted. 

Secondly,  God  permits  others  to  be  thus  tempted, 
by  way  of  judgment  and  punifliment  for  fome  former 
great  fins  and  provocations  w^hich  they  have  been 
guilty  of  And  thus  many  times  God  punifheth 
great  and  notorious  offenders,  by  permitting  them  to 
fall  into  great  temptations,  which  meeting  with  a 
vicious  difpofition,  are  likely  to  be  too  hard  for  them, 
efpecially  confidering  how  by  a  long  habit  of  wick- 
ednefs,  and  wilful  commifTion  of  great  and  notorious 
fins,  they  have  made  themfelves  an  eafy  prey  to 
every  temptation,  and  have  driven  the  Spirit  of 
God  from  them,  and  deprived  themfelves  of  thofe 
aids  and  reftraints  of  his  grace,  which  he  ordinarily 
affords,  not  only  to  good  men,  but  iikewife  to 
Vol  Vir.  13  U  thofe 

2 


The  Jins  of  men  not  chargeable  upon  God  ; 
thofe   who  arc  not  very  bad.     And   thus    God   is 
iiiid  to  have  "  hardened  Pharaoh  "  by  thofe  plagues 
and  judgments  which    he  fent   upon    him  and   his 
kingdom.     But  if  we  carefully  read  the  ftory,  it  is 
faid  that  **  he  firft  hardened  himfelf "  and  then  that 
''  God  hardened  him-,"    that  is,  he  being  harden'd 
under  the  firfb  judgments  of  God,  God  fcnt  more, 
which  meeting    with   his  obftinacy,  had   this  natu- 
ral  effect  upon  him,  to  harden  him  yet  more  •,  not 
that  God  did  infufe  any  wickedrtefs  or  obftinacy  in- 
to him,  but  by  his  juft  judgments  fent  more  plagues 
upon  him,    which    hardened    him    yet   more,    and 
which  were  likely  to  have  that  elFecl  upon  him,  con- 
fidering  the  ill  temper  of  the  man.  And  it  was  jufl  by 
way  of  punifhment  that  they  Ihould.  And  fo  likewife, 
Joiliua  xi.   19,  20.  it  is  faid  that  the  cities  of  the 
Canaanites  did  not  make  peace  with  Jofhua,  becaufe 
^»  it    was  of  the  Lord  to    harden      their    hearts, 
*''  that  they  fliould  come  againft  Ifrael  in  battle,  that 
*'  he  might  deftroy  them  utterly  •,"  that  is,  for  their 
former  iniquities,  the  meafure  whereof  was  now  full, 
the  providence  of  God  did  juftly  bring  them  into, 
and    leave  them  under   thofe  circumftances,  which 
made  them  obftinate  againft  all  terms  of  peace,  and 
this  proved  fatal  to  them. 

And  in  the  like  fenfe  we  are  to  under ftand  feve- 
ral  other  expreflions  in  fcripture,  which  likewife 
might  feem  very  harfh.  As  Ifaiah  vi.  10.  ''Make  the 
*'  heart  of  this  people  fat,  and  make  their  ears  heavy, 
''  and  fluit  their  eyes,  left  they  fee  with  their  eyes, 
*'  and  hear  with  their  ears,  and  underftand  with 
"  their  hearts,  and  convert  and  be  healed  ;  '*  all 
which  expreflions  fignify  no  more,  but  that  God,  for 
the  former   provocations  and    impenitency  of  that 

people. 


hut  upon  themfelves,  1911 

people,  did  leave  them  to  their  own  hardnels  and  S  E  R  M. 
blindnefs,  fo  that  they  did  not  defire  to  underlland 
and  make  ufe  of  the  means  of  their  recovery.  So 
like  wife,  Rom.  i,  24.  God  is  laid  to  have  given  up 
the  idolatrous  heathen  "  to  uncleannefs,  to  vile  and 
"  unnatural  Jufts ; "  and  ver.  28.  "to  a  reprobate 
*•  and  injudicious  mind;"  that  is,  as  a  punifhment 
of  their  idolatry,  he  left  them  to  the  power  of  thofe 
temptations,  which  betrayed  them  to  the  vileft  lufts. 
And  to  mention  but  one  ttxt  more,  2  TheiT.  ii.  1 1. 
the  apoflile  threatens  thofe  that  rejecled  the  truth, 
that  "  for  this  caufe  God  would  fend  them  flrong 
"  delufions  ('the  efficacy  of  error)  that  thcyfliould  bf 
"  lieve  a  lye,  and  that  they  all  might  be  damned,  who 
"  believed  not  the  truth,  but  had  pleafure  m  unrighte- 
"  oufnefs ; "  that  is,  as  a  juft  punifhment  for  their 
renouncing  the  truth,  God  gave  them  over  to  the 
power  of  dekifion  •,  their  error  had  its  full  fcope  at 
them,  to  tempt  them  with  all  its  colours  and  pre- 
tences. 

Bat  it  is  obfervable,  that,  in  all  thefe  places  which 
I  have  mention'd,  God  is  faid  to  give  men  up  to 
the  power  of  temptation,  as  a  punifhment  of  fome 
former  great  crimes  and  provocations.  And  it  is 
not  unjuft  with  God  thus  to  deal  with  men,  to  leave 
them  to  the  power  of  temptation,  when  they  had 
Jfirft  wilfully  forfaken  him ;  and  in  this  cafe  God 
doth  not  tempt  men  to  fin,  but  leaves  them  to  them- 
felves,  to  be  tempted  by  their  own  hearts  luds  j 
and  if  they  yield  and  are  conquered,  it  is  their  own 
fault,  becaufe  they  have  neglected  God's  grace, 
whereby  they  might  have  been  able  to  have  refifled 
thofe  temptations ;  and  have  forced  his  Holy  Spi- 
rit to  withdraw  himfelf  from  them,  and  to  leave 

13  U  i  them 


T9 1 2        ^hejins  of  men  not  chargeable  upon  God  ; 

SERM-them  open  and  naked  to  thofe  aflliults  of  tempta- 
tion, againfl:  which  they  might  otherwife  have  been 
fufficiently  armed. 

Thirdly,  the  lafc  end  of  temptation  which  I  men- 
tioned, is  to  try  men,  with  a  dired:  purpofe  and  in- 
tention to  feduce  men  to  fin.  Thus  wicked  men 
tempt  others,  and  thus  x\\t  devil  tempts  men.  Thus 
he  tempted  our  firfl:  parents,  and  feduced  them  from 
their  obedience  and  allegiance  to  God.  Thus  he 
tempted  Job,  by  bringing  him  into  thofe  circum- 
flances,  which  were  very  likely  to  have  forc'd  him 
into  impatience  and  difcontent.  And  thus  he  tempted 
our  blefied  Saviour  ;  but  found  nothing  in  him  to 
work  upon,  or  to  give  him  any  advantage  over 
him.  And  thus  he  daily  tempts  men,  by  laying  all 
forts  of  baits  and  fnares  before  them,  "  going  about 
"  continually,  feeking  whom  he  may  feduce  and 
^'  deftroy  \ "  and  as  far  as  God  permits  him,  and 
his  power  reacheth,  he  fuits  his  temptations  as  near 
as  he  can  to  the  humours  and  appetites  and  inclina- 
tions of  men,  contriving  them  into  fuch  circum- 
flances,  as  that  he  may  ply  his  temptations  upon 
them  to  the  greatefl  advantage  \  propounding  fuch 
objects  to  them,  as  may  mod  probably  draw  forth 
the  corruptions  of  men,  and  kindle  their  irregular 
defires,  and  inflame  their  lufts,  and  tempt  their  evil 
inclinations  that  way,  which  they  are  mofl  ftrongly 
bent.  He  tempts  the  covetous  man  with  gain,  the 
ambitious  man  with  preferment,  the  volup>uous  man 
with  carnal  and  fenfual  pleafures ;  and  where  none 
of  thefe  baits  will  take,  he  ftirs  up  his  inftruments 
to  perlccute  thofe,  who  are  ftedfafi:  and  confirmed 
in  refolutions  of  piety  and  virtue,  to  try  if  he  can 
work  upon  their  fear,  and  Ihake  their  conftancy  4nd 

fidelity 


but  upon  themfehes.  1 915 

fidelity  to  God  and  goodnefs  that  way  ;  and  all  that.  SE  R  IVT.- 
he  doth  with  a  diredt  defigii  and  earned  defire  to  .  ^^^• 
feduce  men  from  their  duty,    and  to  betray  them 
to  fin. 

But  thus  "  God  tempts  no  man,"  and  in  this 
fenfe  it  is  that  the  apoflle  means,  that  '«  no  man 
*'  when  he  is  tempted,  is  tempted  of  God."  God 
hath  no  defign  to  feduce  any  man  to  fin.  He 
often  proves  the  obedience  of  men,  and  fuffers  them 
to  '^  fall  into  divers  temptations,  for  the  trial  of 
'^  their  faith,"  and  exercife  of  their  obedience  and 
other  virtues ,  and  he  permits  bad  men  to  be  afiiaulted 
with  great  temptations,  and  as  a  punifhment  of 
their  former  obftinacy  and  impiety,  withdraws  the 
aids  and  affiflances  of  his  grace  from  them,  and 
leaves  them  to  their  own  weaknefs  and  folJy ;  but 
not  fo  as  to  take  away  all  redr^nt  of  his  grace  even 
from  bad  men,  unlefs  it  be  upon  very  high  provo- 
cation, and  a  long  and  obftinate  continuance  in  fin  : 
but  God  never  tempts  any  man,  with  any  intention 
to  feduce  him  to  fin,  and  with  a  defire  he  fhould  do 
wickedly.  This  is  the  proper  work  of  the  devil  and 
his  inflruments  ;  in  this  fenfe  it  is  far  from  *'  God 
'^  to  tempt  any  man ; "  and  whenever  in  the  ordi- 
nary courfe,  and  by  the  common  permifTion  of  his 
providence,  men  '^  fall  into  temptation,"  the  ut- 
moil  that  God  does,  is  "  to  leave  them  to  them- 
*'  felves ; "  and  he  does  not  do  this  neither,  but  to 
thofe  who  have  highly  provoked  him  to  depart 
from  them,  that  is,  to  thofe  who  have  juflly  de- 
ferved  to  be  fo  dealt  withal. 

And  thus  I  have  confider'd  the  propofition  which 
the  apoflle  here  rejeds,  namely,  ^'  that  God  tempts 
?'  men^ ''  and  have  fhewn  as  clearly  as  I  can,  how  it 


1914  T^hefim  of  men  not  chargeable  upon  God  ; 
ERM.  is  to  be  limited  and  underflood.  I  now  proceed  \o 
the  fecond  thing  which  I  propounded  to  confi- 
der,  viz.  the  manner  in  which  the  apoflle  rejects 
this  propofition,  "  let  no  man  fay  when  he  is 
*'  tempted,  I  am  tempted  of  God."  By  which 
manner  of  Ipeaking,  he  infinuates  two  things. 

Firft,  that  men  are  apt  to  lay  their  faults  upon  God* 
For  when  he  fiiys,  "  let  no  man  fay  fo,"  he  intimates 
that  men  were  apt  to  fay  thus ;  and  'tis  probable  fom.c 
did  fay  fo,  to  excufe  themfelves  for  their  deferring 
their  religion  upon  the  temptation  of  perfecution  and 
fdffering.  'Tis  not  unlikely  that  men  might  lay  the 
fault  upon  God's  providence,  which  expofe  them  to 
theie  difficult  trials,  and  thereby  tempted  them  to 
forfake  their  religion. 

But  hov^ever  this  be,  we  find  it  very  natural  to 
men,  to  transfer  their  faults  upon  others.  Men 
are  naturally  fenfible  when  they  offend,  and  do  con- 
trary to  their  duty  ;  and  the  guilt  of  fm  is  an  hea- 
vy burden,  of  which  men  would  be  glad  to  eaie 
themfelves  as  much  as  they  can  ;  and  they  think  it  is 
a  mitigation  and  excufe  of  their  faults  if  they  did  not 
proceed  only  from  themfelves,  but  from  the  violence 
and  compulfion,  the  temptation  and  inftigation  of 
others.  But  efpecially  men  are  very  glad  to  lay  their 
faults  upon  God,  becaufe  he  is  a  full  and  fufficient 
excufe,  nothing  being  to  be  blamed  that  comes  from 
him.  Thus  Adam  did,  upon  the  commifllon  of  the 
very  firft  fin  that  mankind  was  guilty  of.  When  God 
charged  him  for  breaking  of  his  law,  by  eating  of  l\\z 
fruit  of  the  forbidden  tree,  he  endeavours  to  excufe 
himfelf  by  laying  the  fault  obliquely  upon  God  j  "  the 
*'  woman  whom  thou  gaveft  to  be  with  me,  flie 
"  gave  me  of  the  tree,  and  I  did  eat.'*     "  The  wo- 

*'  maa 


hut  upon  themfehves.  191 5 

<^  man  whom  thou  gaveft  to  be  with  me^"  he  does  S  KRM. 
what  he  can  to  derive  the  fault  upon  God.  And 
though  his  be  very  unreafonable,  yet  it  feems  in  is 
very  natural.  Men  would  fain  have  the  pleafure  of 
committing  fin,  but  then  they  would  be  glad  to  re- 
move as  much  of  the  trouble  and  guilt  of  it  from 
themlelves  as  they  can. 

Secondly,  this  manner  of  fpeech,  which   the  apo- 
file  here  ufeth,  doth  infinuate  farther  to  us,  that   ft 
is  not  only  a  falfc,  but  an  impious  affertion  to  fay 
that  God  tempts  men  to  fin.     He  fpeaks  of  it,  noc 
as  a   thing  unfit  to  be  faid,  but  fit  to  be  rejeded 
with  the  greatefl  indignation  ;  '*'  \tt  no  man  fay,'* 
that  is,  far  be  it  from  us  to  affirm  any  thing  fo  im- 
pious and  fo  difhonourable  to  God.     For  nothing 
can  be  more  contrary  to  the  holy  and  righteous  na- 
ture  of  God,  and  to  thofe  plain  declarations  which 
he  hath  made  of  himfelf,  than  to  feduce  men  to  wick- 
ednefs ;  and  therefore  no  man,  that  hath  any  regard 
to  the  honour  of  God,  can  entertain  the  leafl  fufpi- 
cion  of  his  having  any  hand  in  the  fins  of  men,  or 
cr'iwt  heed  to  any  principles  or  dodrines,  from  whence 
fo  odious  and   abominable  a  confequence  may   be 
drawn.     I  proceed  to  the 

Third  thing  I  propounded  to  confider,  viz.  the 
reafon  or  argument  which  the  apoftle  brings  againft 
this  impious  fuggeftion ;  "  that  God  cannot  be  temp- 
"  ted  with  evil,"  and  therefore  no  man  can  imagine 
that  he  fiiould  tempt  any  man  to  it^  "  let  no  man 
''fay,  when  he  is  tempted,  I  am  tempted  of  God  ;  for 
*'  God  cannot  be  tempted  vvidi  evil,  neither  tempteth 
««  he  any  man."     And  in  fpeaking  to  this,  I  fhall 

Firfl,  confider  the  ftrength  and  force  o^  this  ar- 
gument \  and 

Secondly, 


cxv. 


1916        The  fins  of:  men  not  chargeable  upon  God  j 
S  E  R  M.       Secondly,  the  nature  and  kind  of  it. 

Firfl,  the  (Irength  and  force  of  this  argument, 
"  God  cannot  be  tempted  with  evil,  neither  tempt- 
*'  eth  he  any  man-,"  d7reiio^7&  o?i  xaMoav,  "  he  is 
*'  untemptible  by  evil ;"  he  cannot  be  drawn  to  any 
thing  that  is  bad  himfelf,  and  therefore 'it  cannot 
be  imagined  he  fhould  have  any  inclination  or  de^ 
fign  to  feduce  others.  And  this  will  appear  to 
be  a  ftrong  and  forcible  argument,  if  we  confider, 

Firfl,  the  propofition  upon  which  it  is  grounded, 
*'  that  God  cannot  be    tempted  by  evil." 

Secondly,  the  confequence  that  clearly  follows 
from  it-,  and  that  is,  that  becaufe  God  cannot  be 
tempted  by  evil,  therefore  "  he  cannot  tempt  any 
"  man  to  it." 

Firft,  we  will  confider  the  propofition  upon  which 
this  argument  is  built,  and  that  is,  ''  that  God  can- 
«'  not  be  tempted  by  evil."  He  is  out  of  the  reach 
of  any  temptation  to  evil.  Whoever  is  tempted  to 
any  thing,  is  either  tempted  by  his  own  inclination, 
or  by  the  allurement  of  the  objecft,  or  by  fome  ex- 
ternal motive  and  confideration :  but  none  of  all  thefe 
can  be  imagined  to  have  any  place  in  God,  to  tempt 
him  to  evil. 

For,  firft,  he  hath  no  temptation  to  it  from  his 
own  inclination.  The  holy  and  pure  nature  of  God 
is  at  the  greateft  diftance  from  evil,  and  at  the  greateft 
contrariety  to  it.  He  is  fo  far  from  having  any  in- 
clination to  evil,  that  it  is  the  only  thing  in  the 
world  to  which  he  hath  an  irreconcilable  antipathy. 
This  the  fcripture  frequently  declares  to  us,  and  that 
in  a  very  emphatical  manner,  Pfal.  v.  4.  '^  He  is  not 
*^  a  God  that  hath  pleafure  in  wickednefs,  neither 
«'  fhall  evil  dwell  with  him.'*    The  words  are  a 

diminution^ 


buf  upon  the mf elves »  ^9^7 

diminution,    and  lefs   is  faid,  than  is  intended  by  SERM. 

cxv 
them  ;  the  meaning  is,that  God  is  fo  far  from  taking 

pleafure  in  fin,  that  he  hath  a  perfed  hatred  and 
abhorrence  of  it.  Hab»  ii.  i^.  "  Thou  art  of  purer 
''  eyes  than  to  behold  evil,  and  canll  not  Jook  upon 
*'  iniquity."  As  when  men  hate  a  thirig  to  the  highefh 
degree,  they  turn  away  their  eyes.^  and  cannot  en- 
dure to  look  upon  it.  Lighi  and  darknefs  are  not 
more  oppofite  to  one  another,  than  the  holy  nature 
of  God  is  to  fin.  "  What  fellow/hip  hath  light 
*'  with  darknefs,  or  God  with  Belial  ?" 

Secondly,  there  is  no  allurement  in  the  objed:,  to 
ftir  up  any  inclination  in  him  towards  it.  Sin  in 
its  very  nature  is  imperfedion,  and  irregularity, 
crookednefs,  and  deformity;  fo  that  unlefs  there  be 
an  inclination  to  it  beforehand,  there  is  nothing- in 
it  to  move  any  one's  liking  or  defire  towards  it; 
it  hath  no  attra6lives  or  enticements  in  it,  but  to  a 
corrupt  and  ill-difpofed  mind. 

Thirdly,  neither  are  there  external  motives  and 
confiderations,  that  can  be  imagined  to  tempt  God 
to  it.  All  arguments  that  have  any  temptation,  are 
either  founded  in  hope  or  in  fear  ;  either  in  the  hops 
of  gaining  fome  benefit  or  advantage,  or  in  the  fear 
of  falling  into  fome  mifchief  or  inconvenience. 
Now  the  divine  nature  being  perfedly  happy,  and 
perfedly  fecured  in  its  own  happinefs,  is  out  of  the 
reach  of  any  of  thefe  temptations.  Men 'are  many 
times  tempted  to  evil  very  ftrongly  by  thefe  confi- 
derations ;  they  want  many  things  to  make  them 
happy,  and  they  fear  many  things  which  may 
make  them  miferable ;  and  the  hopes  of  the  one 
and  the  fears  of  the  other,  are  apt  to  work  very 

Vol.  VI r.  13  X  power- 


3  9  i  8  7 he  fins  of  men  not  chargeable  upon  God; 
H  R  M.  powerfully  upon  them,  to  fedace  them  from  their 
^^^J^X^i^i  duty,  and  to  draw  them  to  fin  :  but  the  divine  na- 
ture is  firm  againfl:  all  thefe  attempts,  by  its  own 
fulncfs  and  fccurity.  So  that  you  fee  now  the  pro- 
pofition,  upon  which  the  apoflle  grounds  his  argu- 
ment, is  evidently  true,  and  beyond  all  exception, 
"  that  God  cannot  be  tempted  with  evil."  Let  us 
then  in  the 

Second  place,  confider  the  confequence  that 
clearly  follows  from  it,  that  becaufe  God  cannot  be 
tempted  with  evil,  "  therefore  he  cannot  tempt  any 
"  man  to  it."  For  why  fliould  he  defire  to  draw 
men  into  that,  which  he  himfclf  abhors,  and  which 
is  fo  contrary  to  his  own  nature  and  difpofition  ? 
when  men  tempt  one  another  to  fin,  they  do  it  to 
make  others  like  themfelves;  and  when  the  devil 
tempts  men  to  fin,  it  is  either  out  of  dired  malice 
to  God,  or  out  of  envy  to  men.  But  none  of  thcfe 
confiderations  can  have  any  place  in  God, or  beany 
motive  to  him  to  tempt  men  to  fin. 

Bad  men  tempt  others  to  fin,  to  make  them  like 
themfelves,  and  that  with  one  of  thcfe  two  defigns ; 
cither  few  the  comfort  or  pleafure  of  company,  or  for 
the  countenance  of  it,  that  there  may  be  fome  kind 
of  apology  and  excufe  for  them. 

For  the  comfort  and  pleafure  of  company.  .  Man 
does  not  love  to  be  alone  j  and  for  this  realbn  bad 
men  endeavour  to  make  others  like  themfelves,  that 
agreeing  with  them  in  the  fame  difpofition  and  man- 
ners, they  may  be  fit  company  for  them.  For  no 
man  takes  pleafure  in  the  fociety  and  converfation  of 
thofe,  who  are  of  contrary  tempers  and  inclinations 
to  them,  becaufe  they  are  continually  warring  and 
clafliing  with  one  another.     And  for  this  reafon  bad 

men 


but  upon  themfehes,  19 19 

men  hate  and  perfecute  thofe  that  are  good.    «'  LetSER  M, 

•  cxv 

*'  us  Jie  in  wait  (fay  they)  for  the  righteous,  becaufe 

*'  he  is  not  for  our  turn,  and  he  is  contrary  to  our 
"  doings  ;  he  is  grievous  unto  us  even  to  behold  5 
"  for  his  Yih  is  not  Jike  other  mens,  and  his  ways 
**  are  of  another  fafliion  ♦,"  as  it  is  expreft  in  the 
Wifdom  of  Solomon.  So  that  wicked  men  tempt 
others  to  fin,  that  they  may  have  the  pleafure  and 
contentment  of  their  fociety.  But  now  for  this  rea- 
fon  God  cannot  be  imagined  to  tempt  men  to  fin  i 
becaufe  that  wouki  be  the  way  to  make  them  un- 
like himfelf,  and  fuch  as  his  foul  could  take  no 
pleafure  in. 

Another  defign  that  bad  men  have  in  feducing 
others  to  fin,  is  thereby  to  give  countenance  to  their 
bad  adlions,  and  to  be  fome  kind  of  excufe  and 
apology  for  them.  Among  men,  the  multitude  of 
offenders  does  fometimes  procure  impunity,  but  it 
always  gives  countenance  to  vice ;  and  men  are  apt 
to  alledge  it  in  their  excufe,  that  they  are  not  alone 
guilty  of  fuch  a  fault,  that  they  did  not  do  it  without 
company  and  example;  which  is  the  reafonofthat 
law,  Exod.  xxiii.  2.  "  Thou  fhalt  not  follow  a  mul- 
*'  titude  to  do  evil  ;"  implying,  that  men  are  very 
apt  to  take  encouragement  to  any  thing  that  is  bad 5 
from  company  and  example.  But  neither  hath  this 
reafon  any  place  in  God,  who  being  far  from  doing 
evil  himfelf,  can  have  no  reafon  to  tempt  others  to 
do  fo,  by  way  of  excufe,  and  vindication  of  him- 
felf. 

And  v/hen  the  devil  tempts  men  to  fin,  it  is  either 

out  o["  dired  malice  to  God,  or  out  of  envy  to  men. 

Out  of  malice  to  God,    to  fpoil  his  workmanfliip, 

^nd  to  pervert  that  which  came  innocent  and  upright 

1 3  X  i  out 


1 9^o         I'hejins  of  men  not  chargeable  upon  God  j 

SERM.outof  his  hands-,    to  rob  God  of  his  fubjecls,  and 
cxv  • 

to  debauch  them  from    their  duty  and  allegiance  to 

him  •,  to  flrengthen  the  rebellion  which  he  has  raifed 

againfl  God,  and  to  mai:e  him  as  many  enemies  as 

he  can.     But  for  this  end   God   cannot   tempt  any 

man  \  for  this  would  be  to  procure  difnonour  to  him- 

^€[\^  and  to  deface  the  work  of  his  own  hands. 

Another  reafon  why  the  devil  tempts  men,  is 
envy.  When  he  was  fallen  from  God,  and  happi- 
nefs,  and  by  his  own  rebellion  had  made  himfelf 
miferable,  he  was  difcontented  to  fee  the  happy  con- 
dition of  man,  and  it  grieved  him  at  his  very 
heart  •,  and  this  moved  him  to  tempt  man  to  fin, 
that  he  might  involve  him  in  the  fame  mifery  into 
which  he  had  plunged  himfelf.  It  is  a  pleafure  to  envy 
to  overturn  the  happinefs  of  others,  and  to  lay  them 
level  with  themfelves.  But  the  divine  nature  is 
full  of  goodnefs,  and  delights  in  the  happinefs  of  all 
his  creatures.  His  own  incomparable  felicity  has 
placed  him  as  much  above  any  temptation  to  envy- 
ing others,  as  above  any  occafion  of  being  contem- 
ned by  them.  He  grudges  no  man's  happinefs,  and 
therefore  cannot  tempt  men  to  fin,  out  of  a  defire 
to  fee  them  miferable.  So  that  none  of  thole  confi- 
derations  which  move  the  devil  to  tempt  men  to  fin, 
and  evil  men  to  tempt  one  another  to  do  wickedly, 
can  be  imagined  to  have  any  place  in  God. 

And  thus  you  fee  the  force  of  the  apoftle's  argu- 
ment, that  becaufe  '^  God  cannot  be  tempted  to 
''•  evil,"  therefore  "  he  can  tempt  no  man."  None 
tempt  others  to  be  bad,  but  thofe  who  are  firfi:  fo 
themfelv^es.     I  iliull  now  in  the 

Second  place,  confider  the  nature  and  kind  of  the 
argument,  which  the  apollle  here  ufeth,  "Jet no  man 

«  fay 


hid  tipo?tthemfehes.  192 1 

*^  fay,  when  he  is  tempted,  I  am  tempted  of  God  ;SE  rm. 
''  for  God  cannot  be  tempted  with  evil,  neither 
"  tempteth  he  any  man."  It  does  not  rejed  this  im- 
pious propofition  barely  upon  his  own  authority  ; 
but  he  argues  againft  it  from  the  nature  and  per- 
fedlion  of  God  -,  and  therein  appeals  to  the  common 
notion  of  mankind  concerning  God.  We  might 
very  well  have  refted  in  his  authority,  being  an 
apoflle  commiffioned  by  our  Saviour,  and  extra- 
ordinarily afiified  and  witnefTcd  to,  by  the  miracu- 
lous gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  wherewith  he  was 
endowed.  But  he  condefcends  to  give  a  reafon  of 
what  he  fays,  and  appeals  to  the  common  principles 
of  mankind.  For  all  men  will  readily  agree  to 
this,  "  that  God  hath  all  imaginable  perfedlion:" 
but  it  is  a  plain  imperfedion  to  be  liable  to  be  tempt- 
ed to  evil,  and  therefore  "  God  cannot  be  tempted 
*'  to  evil."  And  if  fo,  it  is  as  impofTible  "  that  he 
"  fliould  tempt  others  to  its"  for  none  can  have 
either  an  inclination  or  interefl  to  feduce  others  to 
evil,  but  thofe  who  have  been  firil  feduced  to  it 
themfelves. 

Now  in  this  method  of  arguing,  the  apoflle 
teacheth  us  one  of  the  furefl  ways  of  reafoning  in 
religion ;  namely,  from  the  natural  notions  which 
^  men  have  of  God.  So  that  all  dodrines  plainly 
contrary  to  thofe  natural  notions  which  men  have 
of  God,  are  to  be  rejeded,  what  authority  foever 
they  pretend  to  j  whatever  plainly  derogates  from 
the  goodnefs  or  juftice  of  God,  or  any  other  of  his 
perfedions,  is  certainly  falfe,  what  authority  foever 
It  may  claim  from  the  judgment  of  learned  and 
pious  men ;  yea  tho'  it  pretend  to  be  countenanc'd 
from  the  texts  and  expreffions  of  holy  fcripture.  Be- 

caufe 


1922  Thefim  of  men  not  chargeable  upon  God  ; 
Serm.  c^ufe  nothing  can'be  entertain'd  as  a  divine  revela- 
tion,  which  plainly  contradidls  the  common  natural 
notions  which  mankind  have  of  God.  For  all  rea- 
foning  'about  divine  revelation,  and  whether  that 
which  pretends  to  be  'io^  be  really  fo  or  not,  is  to 
be  governV]  by  thofe  natural  notions.  And  if  any 
thing  that  pretends  to  be  a  revelation  from  God, 
fliould  teach  men  that  there  is  no  God,  or  that  he 
is  not  wife,  and  good,  andjufl,  and  powerful^  this 
is  reafon  enough  to  rejed  it,  how  confident  fbever 
the  pretence  be,    that  it  is  a  divine  revelation. 

And  if  any  thing  be,  upon  good  grounds  in 
reafon,  received  for  a  divine  revelation,  ("as  the 
holy  fcriptures  are  amongft  chriftians)  no  man  ought 
to  be  regarded,  who  from  thence  pretends  to  main- 
tain any  dodrine  contrary  to  the  natural  notions, 
which  men  have  of  God  j  fuch  as  clearly  contradidb 
his  hoilnefs,  or  goodnefs,  or  juftice,  or  do  by  plain 
and  undeniable  confequence  make  God  the  author 
of  fin,  or  the  like;  becaufe  the  very  attempt  to 
prove  any  fuch  thing  out  of  the  fcripture,  does  ftrike 
at  the  divine  authority  of  thofe  books.  For  if  they 
be  from  God  it  is  certain  they  can  contain  no 
fuch  thing.  So  that  no  man  ought  to  fuffcr  himfelf 
to  be  feduced  into  any  fuch  opinions,  upon  pretence 
that  there  are  exprefiions  in  fcripture,  which  fecm 
to  countenance  them.  For  if  they  really  did  fo, 
the  confcquence  would  not  be  the  confirming  of  fuch 
opinions;  but  the  weakning  of  the  authority  of 
the  fcripture  it  felf.  For  juft  fo  many  arguments  as 
any  man  can  draw  from  fcripture  for  any  fuch  opi- 
nion, fo  many  weapons  he  puts  into  the  hands  of 
atheifts  againft  the  fcripture  it  felf, 

I  do 


but  upon  themfelves.  1923 

I  do  not  fpeak  this,  as  if  I  thonght   there  were^ERM* 
any  ground  from  fcripture  for  any  fuch  dodrine,  I  am  ^..^-y"^ 
very  certain  there  is  not.     And  if  there  be  any  par- 
ticular cxprellions,  which  to  prejudic'd  men  may  feem 
to  import  any  fuch  thing,  every  man  ought  to  go- 
vern himfelf  in  the  interpretation  of  fuch  pailages, 
by  what  is  clear  and  plain,  and  agreeable  to  the  main 
fcope   and   tenor   of  the  bible,  and  to  thofe  natural 
notions  which  men  have   of  God,  and  of  his   per- 
fedlions.     For  when  all    is   done,    this  one  of  the 
furelt  ways  of  reafoning   in  religion  ^  and   whoever 
guides  himfelf,  and  fleers  by  this  compafs,  can  ne- 
ver err  much:  but  v/hoever  fuffers  himfelf  to  be  led 
away  by  the  appearance  of  fome  more  obfcure  phrafes 
in  the  exprefflons  of  fcripture,  and  the  glofies  of  men 
upon  them,  without  regard    to  this  rule,    may  run 
into  the  greateft  delufions,  may  wander   eternally, 
and  lofe  himfelf  in  one  miilake  after  another,  and 
Ihall  never  find  his.  way  out  of  thisendlels  labyrinth, 
but  by  this  clue. 

Jf  St.  James  had  not  been  an  apoftle,  the  argument 
which  he  ufed  would  have  convinced  any  reafonable 
man,  "  that  God  tempts  no  man  to  iin,  becaufe 
"  he  cannot  be  tempted  with  evil  himfelf,"  and 
therefore  it  is  unreafonable  to  imagine  "  he  fhould 
''  tempt  any  man."  For  he  argues  from  fuch  a 
principle,  as  all  mankind  will,  at  firfl  hearing,  aP 
fent  to. 

And  thus  I  have  done  with  the  firfl:  thing  afTerted 
by  the  apoflle  here  in  the  text;  *^  that  God  tempts 
*'  no  man  to  (in,"  "  Let  no  man  fay,  when  he  is 
*'  tempted,  I  am  tempted  of  God  ;  for  God  can- 
"  not  be  tempted  of  evil,  neither  tempteth  he  any 
*'  man."     Before  I  proceed  to  the  fecond  afTertion, 

*<  that 


1924        T^hefins  of  men  not  chargeable  upon  God  ; 

"  that  every  man  is  his  own  greatefl  tempter,"  I 
fhoLild  draw  fome  ufeftil  inferences  from  what  hath 
been  already  dehvered  :  but  I  referve  both  the  one 
and  the  other  to  the  next  opportunity. 


SERMON     CXVI.  • 

The  fins  of  men  not  chargeable  upon 
God  ;  but  upon  themfelves. 


J  A  M  E  S  i.  13,  14. 

Let  no  man  fay^  ijchen  he  is  tempted^  I  am  tempted  0 
God  ;  for  God  cannot  be  tempted  with  m/,  neither 
iempteth  he  any  man :   hut  every  7nan  is   tempted^ 
when  he  is  drawn  away  of  his  own  luft^    and  en. 
ticed, 

SERM.  "^^THEN  I  made  entrance  upon  thefe  words. 


CXVI.     '^/mi     J  j.q]^  yQ^^   j-j^^j.  ^ej^j.   |.Q  fhe  behefofa 


W 

J      ^     ^       God  and  a  providence,  nothing  is  more 

Thefecond  rr  .  o-  r  j 

fermonon  fundamentally  neceiiary   to  the  practice  or   a  good 

this  text,    ijfg^  x\\m  the  belief  of  thefe  two  principles;  "  that 

"  God  is  not  the  author  of  the  fins  of  men;"  and 

*'  that    every    man's  fault  lies    at    his  own  door.'* 

And  both  thefe  principles  St.  James  does  clearly  and 

fully  aflert  in  thefe  words. 

Firft,  "God  tempts  no  man  to  fin.'* 

Secondly,    "   every   man   is    his    own    greateft 

''  tempter." 

The  firft  of  thefe  I  have  largely  fpoken  to  in  my 

former  difcourfej  and  from  what  1  then  faid,  I  itiall 

only 


hut  upon  themfehes.  1925 

only  draw  a  few  ufeful  inferences,  before  I  proceed  S  E  R  M. 
to  the  fccond,  viz.  thefe  which  follow.  CXVI. 

Firft,  let  us  beware  of  all  fuch  dodlrines,  as  do 
any  ways  tend  to  make  God  the  author  of  fin  ; 
either  by  laying  a  neceffity  upon  men  of  finning,  or 
by  laying  fecret  defigns  to  tempt  and  feduce  men  to 
fin.  Nothing  can  be  farther  from  the  nature  of 
God,  than  to  do  any  fuch  thing,  and  nothing  can 
be  more  difhonourable  to  him,  than  to  imagine  any 
fuch  thing  of  him;  ''  he  is  of  purer  eyes  than  to 
*'  behold  evil ;"  and  can  we  think,  that  he  who 
cannot  endure  to  fee  it,  fhould  have  any  hand  in 
it  ?  we  find  that  the  holy  men  in  fcripture  are  very 
careful  to  remove  all  thoughts  and  fufpicion  of  this 
from  God.  Elihu,  Job  xxxvi.  3.  before  he  would 
argue  about  God's  providence  with  Job,  he  refolves 
in  the  firft  place,  to  attribute  nothing  to  God, 
that  is  unworthy  of  him.  *'  I  will  (fays  he)  afcribe 
•'  righteoufnefs  to  my  maker."  So  likewife  St,  Paul, 
Rom.  vii.  7.  "  What  fhall  we  fay  then.?  is  the  law 
««  fin?  God  forbid.'*  *^  Is  the  law  fm?"  that  is, 
hath  God  given  men  a  law  to  this  end,  that  he  might 
draw  them  into  fin,?  far  be  it  from  him.  Gal.  ii. 
17.  ''  Is  Christ  the  miniiler  of  fin.?  God  for- 
"  bid."  ' 

Yoii  fee  then  how  tender  good  men  have  ahvays 
been  of  afcribing  any  thing  to  God,  that  might 
feem  to  render  him  the  author  of  fin.  So  that  we 
have  reafon  to  take  heed  of  all  do61:rines  that  arc  of 
this  tendency  ;  fuch  as  are  the  dodlrine  of  an  abfo- 
\  lute  and  irrefpedive  decree  to  damn  the  greateft 
part  of  mankind ;  and  in  order  to  that,  and  as  a 
means  to  it,  efficacioufly   to  permit   them  to  fin. 

Vol.  VII.  13  Y  For 

3- 


1926  The  fins  of  men  ?iot  chargeable  upon  God  5 
SERAI.  For  if  thcie  things  be  true,  that  God  hath  abfolutc- 
ly  decreed  to  damn  the  greateft  part  of  men,  and  to 
make  good  this  decree  he  permits  them  to  fin,  not 
by  a  bare  permilTion  of  leaving  them  to  themfelves, 
but  by  fuch  a  permifllon  as  fiiall  be  efficacious  j  that 
is,  he  will  fo  permit  them  to  i\n^  as  they  cannot 
avoid  it;  then  thofe  who  are  under  this  decree  of 
God 5  are  under  a  neceflity  of  finning ;  which  ne- 
celTity,  fince  it  does  not  proceed  from  themfelves, 
but  from  the  decree  of  God,  does  by  confequencc 
make  God  the  author  of  fin.  And  then  that  the  other 
dodrine,  which  is  fubfervient  to  this,  that  God  does 
byaphyfical  and  natural  influence  upon  the  minds 
and  wills  of  men,  determine  them  to  every  action 
that  they  do,  to  bad  actions  as  well  as  good.  I 
know  they  who  fay  fo,  tell  us  that  God  only  deter- 
mines men  to  the  action,  but  not  to  the  evil  of  it. 
For  inflance,  when  Cain  killed  his  brother,  God  de- 
termin'd  him  (they  fay)  to  the  natural  a6lion  of 
taking  away  a  man's  life,  which  in  many  cafes  may 
be  done  without  fin.  Very  true  :  but  if  in  thefe 
tircumftances  the  natural  adion  could  not  be  done 
without  committing  the  fin,  he  that  determined 
him  to  the  natural  adion,  determin'd  him  likcwife 
to  the  fin. 

I  am  far  from  any  thought  that  thofe  that  main- 
tain thefe  dodrines,  had  any  intention  to  make  God 
the  author  of  fm  :  but  if  this  be  the  true  necelTary 
confequence  of  thefe  doftrines,  there  is  reafon  enough 
to  rejed  them,  how  innocent  ibever  the  intention  be 
of  diofe  who  maintain  them. 

Secondly,  ht  not  us  tempt  any  man  to  fin.  AH 
piety  pretends  to  be  an  imitation  of  God,  therefore 

let  us  endeavour  to  be  like  him  in  this.    *Tis  true 

indeed. 


hut  upon  themfehes,  1927 

indeed,  we  may  be  tempted  with  evil,  and  therefore 3  E  RH- 
we  are  likely  enough  to  tempt  others :  but  we  ought 
not  to  do  fo.  It  is  contrary  to  hoHnefs  and  good- 
nefs,  to  the  temper  and  difpofition  of  the  moft  per- 
fe6l  being  in  the  world.  God  tempts  no  man  ;  nay, 
it  is  the  proper  v/ork  and  employment  of  the  devil, 
'tis  his  very  trade  and  profeffion;  he  goes  about 
feeking  whom  he  may  betray  into  fin  and  deftru6lion. 
To  this  end  he  walks  up  and  down  the  earth,  wait- 
ing all  opportunities  and  advantages  upon  men  to 
"di"aw  them  into  fin  ^  fo  that  we  are  his  fli<5lors  and  * 
inftruments,  whenever  we  tempt  men  to  fin. 

Let  thofe  confider  this,  who  are  fo  adlive  and  bufy 
to  feduce  miCn  into  any  kind  of  wickednels,  and  to 
infirudl  them  in  the  arts  of  iniquity,  who  tempt 
men  into  bad  company  and  courfes,  and  take  plea- 
fure  in  debauching  a  virtuous  perfon,  and  make  it 
matter  of  great  triumph  to  make  a  fober  man  drunk, 
as  if  it  were  fo  glorious  an  adion  to  ruin  a  foul,  and 
dedroy  that,  which  is  miOre  worth  than  the  v/hole 
world.  Whenever  you  go  about  this  work,  remem- 
ber whofe  inftruments  you  are,  and  whofe  work  you 
do,  and  what  kind  of  work  it  is.  Tempting  others 
to  fin  is  in  fcripture  called  murder,  for  which  reafon, 
the  devil  is  faid  to  be  "  a  murderer  from  the  be- 
"  ginning,"  becaufe  he  was  a  tempter.  *'  Who- 
*'  foever  committeth  fin  is  of  the  devil  :"  but  who- 
foever  tempts  others  to  fin,  is  a  fort  of  devil 
himfelf. 

Thirdly,  fince  God  tempts  no  man,  let  us  not 
tempt  him.  There  is  frequent  mention  in  fcrip- 
ture of  mens  tempting  God,  i.  e.  trying  him  as  it 
were  whether  he  will  do  any  thing  for  their  fakes, 
that  is  mif  becoming  his  goodnefs,  and  v/ifdom,  and 
f 3  if  2  faith-^ 


1928        Thejlns  of  men  not  chargeable  upon  God; 

SERM,  faithfulnefs,  or  any  other  of  his  perfedions.  Thus 
__  _.  the  liraelites  are  laid  to  have  "  tempted  God  in 
''  the  wildcrnefs  forty  years  together,"  and  in  that 
fpace,  more  remarkably  ten  times.  The  meaning 
of  which  expreffions  is,  that  when  God  had  pro- 
mifed  Abraham  to  bring  his  feed  into  the  land 
of  Canaan,  that  people,  by  their  great  and  repeated 
provocations  of  God,  did  often  provoke  him  to 
have  deftroyed  them,  and  confequently  to  have  fail'd 
of  the  promife  which  he  made  to  the  fathers.  The 
devil  like  wife  tempted  our  Saviour  to  tempt 
God,  by  calling  himfeif  down  from  the  pinacle  of 
the  temple,  in  confidence  that  the  angels  would  take 
care  of  him  :  but  our  Saviour  anfwers  him,  "  it 
"  is  'written,  thou  fhalt  not  tempt  the  Lord 
"  thy  God."  From  which  inflance  it  appears,  that 
men  are  faid  to  tempt  God,  whenever  they  exped 
the  protedion  of  his  providence  in  an  unwarranta- 
ble way.  God  hath  promifed  to  take  care  of  good 
men:  but  if  they  negled  themfelves,  or  willingly 
call  themfelves  into  danger,  and  expe6l  his  provi- 
dence and  prote6tion,  they  do  not  truft  God,  but 
tempt  him ;  they  try  whether  God's  providence 
will  countenance  their  rafhnels,  and  provide  for  them, 
when  they  negledt  themfelves;  and  protcd  them 
from  thofe  dangers  to  which  they  wilfully  expofe 
themfelves. 

So  likcwile  if  we  be  negligent  in  our  callings, 
whereby  we  fliould  provide  for  our  families,  if  we 
iavifh  away  that  which  we  fhould  lay  up  for  them, 
and  then  depend  npon  the  providence  of  God  to 
fupply  them,  and  take  care  of  them,  we  tempt 
God  to  that  which  is  unworthy  of  him  ;  which  is 
to  give  approbation  to  our  folly,  and  to  countenance 

our 


but  upon  thefnfehes,  1929 

our  floth  and  carelefnefs.  We  cannot  feduce  God,  S  E  R  M. 
and  draw  him  to  do  any  thing  that  mil^becomes  ^^^^• 
him,  but  we  tempt  him,  in  expe6ling  the  care  and 
protedtion  of  his  providence,  when  we  wilfully  run 
our  felves  into  danger,  and  negledl  the  means  of 
providing  for  our  own  fafety.  And  thus  I  have 
done  with  the  firil  great  principle  contain'd  in  the 
text ;  viz,  "  That  God  is  not  the  author  of  the  fins 
"  of  men."     I  proceed  now  to  the 

Second,  ^'  that  every  man  is  his  own  greatefl 
"  tempter."  <'  But  every  man  is  tempted,  when 
"  he  is  drawn  afide  of  his  own  lufl,  and  enticed." 
God  does  not  tempt  any  man  to  fin  :  but  every  man 
is  then  tempted,  when  by  his  own  lufl:,  his  irreo-u- 
lar  inchnation  and  defire,  he  is  feduced  to  evii,  and 
enticed  ;  k^  cPiXia^oix^.v©',  is  caught  as  it  were  with 
a  bait,  for  fo  the  greek  word  fignifies. 

In  which  words  the  apofl:le  gives  us  a  true  ac- 
count of  the  prevalency  and  efficacy  of  temptation 
upon  men.  It  is  not  becaufe  God  has  any  defien 
to  enfnare  men  in  fin  ;  but  their  own  corruption  and 
vicious  inclinations  feduce  them  to  that  which  is 
evil.  To  inftance  in  the  particular  temptations  the 
apoftle  was  fpeaking  of,  perfecution  and  fufferino- 
for  the  caufe  of  religion,  to  avoid  which,  many  did 
then  forfake  the  truth,  and  apofl:atiz'd  from  their 
chrifl:ian  profeffion.  The  true  caufe  of  which,  was 
not  the  providence  of  God,  which  permitted  them 
to  be  expos'd  to  thofe  fufferings  ;  but  their  inordi- 
nate love  of  the  good  things  of  this  life,  and  their 
unreafonable  fears  of  the  evils  and  fufferings  of  it  ; 
they  valued  the  enjoyments  of  this  prefent  life,  more 
than  the  favour  of  God,    and  that  eternal  happi- 

nefs 


jg^o        Thejtm  of  me  ft  not  chargeable  upon  God  ; 

SERM  nefs  which  he  had  promised  to  them  in  another 
CXVI.  jjf^j  and  they  feared  the  perfccutions  of  men,  more 
than  the  threatnings  of  God,  and  the  dreadful  pu- 
nifliments  of  another  world.  They  had  an  inordi- 
nate affedion  for  the  eafe  and  pleafure  of  this  life, 
and  their  unwillingnefs  to  part  with  eafe,  was  a 
great  temptation  to  them  to  quit  their  religion  ;  by 
this  bait  they  were  caught,  when  it  came  to  the 
trial. 

And  thus  it  is  proportionably  m  all  other  forts  of 
temptations.  Men  are  betrayed  by  themfelves,  and 
the  temptation  without  hath  a  party  within  them, 
with  which  it  holds  a  fecret  correfpondence,  and 
which  is  ready  to  yield  and  give  confent  to  it;  fo 
that  it  is  our  own  confent,  and  treachery  to  our 
felves,  that  makes  any  temptation  miller  of  us,  and 
without  that  we  are  not  to  be  overcome  *,  "  every 
"  man  is  tempted,  when  he  is  drawn  afide  of 
*'  his  own  lull,  and  enticed."  It  is  the  luft  of  men 
complying  with  the  temptations  which  are  offer'd  to 
us,  wliich  renders  them  effedual,  and  gives  them  the 
vi^^tory  over  us. 

In  the  handling  of  this  argument.  I  fhall  from 
thefe  words  of  the  apoftle  obferve  to  you  thefe  two 
things. 

Firll,  that  as  the  apoflle  doth  here  acquit  God 
from  any  hand  in  tempting  men  to  fin,  fo  he  does 
not  afcribe  the   prevalency  of    temptation   to    the 

devil. 

Secondly,    that    he    afcribcs     the    prevalency    of 

temptation   to   the  lufl  and   vicious  inclinations   of 

n>en,  which  feduce  them  to  a  compliance  with  the 

temptations    that  are  prefentcd  to  them  ;  *^  every 


*'  man 


but  upon  themf elves.  193  i 

«^  man  is  temoted,  when  he  is  drawn  afide  of  his  ^"^^  f^^^' 
*'  own  iuft,  and  enticed."     Thefe  two  obfervations 
Hiall  be  the  fubjefb  of  my  prefent  difcourfe. 

Firft,  that  as  the  apoftle  doth  here  acquit  God 
from  any  hand  in  tempting  men  to  l^n,  fo'he  does 
not  afcribe  the  prevalency  and  efficacy  of  temptation 
to  the  devil.  That  he  acquits  God,  I  have  fhewn 
at  large  in  my  former  difcourfe.  It  is  evident  hke- 
wife,  that  he  does  not  afcribe  the  efficacy  and  pre- 
valency of  temptation  to  the  devil  ,  for  the  apoftle 
in  this  difcourfe  of  his  concerning  temptations,  makes 
no  exprefs  mention  of  the  devil  ;  he  fuppofeth  in- 
deed, that  baits  are  laid  for  men,  "  every  man  is 
"  tempted,  when  he  is  drawn  afide  of  his  own  lufl, 
"  and  enticed  \  "  i.  e.  when  he  plays  with  the  baits 
that  are  laid  for  him,  and  fwallows  them.  And  the 
fcripture  elfev/here  frequently  tells  us,  that  the  devil 
is  very  active  and  bufy  to  tempt  men,  and  is  conti- 
nually laying  baits  before  them  ;  but  their  own  lufls 
are  the  caufe  why  they  are  caught  by  them. 

And  I  do  the  rather  infi ft  upon  this,  becaufe  men 
are  apt  to  lay  great  load  upon  the  devil,  in  tlie  bu- 
finefs  of  temptation,  hoping  thereby  either  wholly, 
or  at  laaft  in  a  great  meafure  to  excufe  themfelves  ; 
and  therefore  I  fhall  here  confider,  how  flir  the  devil 
by  his  temptations  is  the  caufe  of  the  fins  which 
men  by  compliance  with  thofe  temptations  are  drawn 
into. 

Firft,  it  is  certain  that  the  devil  is  very  aclivc 
and  bufy  to  minifter  to  them  the  occafions  of  fin, 
and  temptations  to  it.  For  ever  fince  he  fell  from 
God,  partly  out  of  enmity  to  him,  and  partly  out 
of  envy  and  malice  to  mankind,  he  hath  made  ic 
his  great  bufinefs  and  employment  to  feduce  men 


to 


1932        TJjeJins  of  jnen  not  chargeable  upon  God; 
SERM.  to  fin  ;  and  to  this  end  he  walks  up  and  down  the 
^^Y^', earth,  and  watcheth  all  occafions  and  opportunities 
to  tempt  men  to  fin  :  and  fo  far  as  his  power  reach- 
eth,  and  God  permits  him,  he  lays  baits  and  tempta- 
tions   before   them    in   all    their    ways,    prefenting 
them   with  the  occafions   and  opportunities  to  fin, 
and  with   fuch   baits  and  allurements  as  are  moft 
fuitable  to  their  tempers,  and  moft  likely  to  prevail 
with  their  particular  inclinations,  and  as  often  as  he 
can,  furprizing  men  with  thefe  at  the  eafieft  time 
of  accefs,  and  with  fuch  circumftances,  as  may  give 
his  temptations  the  greateft    force  and  advantage. 
Of  this  the  fcripture  afifures  us  m  general,  when  it 
tells  us  of  thefe  wiles  and  devices  of  Satan,  and  of 
the  methods  of  his  temptations ;   fo  that  tho'  wc  do 
not   particularly   difcern    how   and  when   he  doth 
this,  yet  we  have  no  reafon  to  doubt  of  the  thing, 
if  we  believe  that  there  is  fuch  a  fpirit  in  the  world, 
as  the  fcripture   particularly  tells  us  there  is,  that 
works   in  the  children  of  difobedience,    and   that 
God,  from  whom  nothing  is  hid,  and   who  fees 
all    the  fecret  engines  which  are   at  work  in    the 
world,  to  do  us  good  or  harm,  hath  in  mercy  to 
mankind  given  us  particular  warning  of  it,  and  that 
we  may  not   be   wholly  ignorant  of  our  enemies, 
and  their  malicious  defigns  upon  us,  that  we  may 
be  continually  upon  our  guard,  aware  of  our  dan- 
ger, and  armed  againfi:  it. 

Secondly,  the  devil  does  not  only  prefent  to  men 
the  temptations  and  occafions  of  ^in ;  but  when  he 
is  permitted  to  make  nearer  approaches  to  them, 
does  excite  and  ftir  them  up  to  comply  with  thefe 
temptations,  and  to  yield  to  them.  And  this  he 
does,  not  only  by  employing  his  inftruments  to  ^o- 

licit 


hut  upon  thetn/elves.  ^933 

licit  for  him,  and  to  draw  men  to  fin  by  bad  coun-SERM. 
{c\  and  example,  which  we  ice  frequently  done, 
and  probably  very  often  by  the  devil's  inftigationj 
(thofe  who  are  very  wicked  themfelves,  and  confe- 
quently  more  enilav'd  to  the  dtviU  and  under  his 
power,  being  as  it  were  fa6bors  for  him  to  feduce 
others;)  befides  this,  *tis  not  improbable  but 
the  devil  himfelf  does  many  times  immediately  ex- 
cite men  to  fin^  by  working  upon  the  humours  of 
their  bodies,  or  upon  their  imaginations ;  and  by 
that  means  infufing  and  fuggeiting  evil  motions 
into  them  j-  or  by  diverting  them  from  thofc 
thoughts  and  confiderations,  which  might  check 
and  retrain  them  from  that  wickednefs  to  which 
he  is  tempting  them  ;  or  by  fome  other  ways  and 
means  more  fecret  and  unknown  to  us.  For  the 
power  of  the  fpirics,  whether  good  or  bad,  and  the 
manner  of  their  operations  upon  our  minds,  are 
things  very  fecret,  ahd  of  which  we  can  give  little 
or  no  account,  but  yet  for  all  that,  we  have  many 
times  rcafon  fufficient  to  believe  a  thing  to  be  fo, 
when    we  are    wholly    ignorant    of    the  manner 

of  it. 

And  there  is  reafon,   for  what  is  faid  in  fcripture, 

to  believe  that  the  devil,  in  fome  cafes,  hath  a  more 
immediate  power  and  influence  upon  the  minds  of 
men,  to  excite  them  to  fin,  and,  where  he  difco- 
vers  a  very  bad  inclination  or  refolution,  to  help  it 
forward,  and  to  keep  men  to  it ;  as  when  it  is  faid, 
Johnxiii.  27.  that  "  the  devil  enter'd  into  Judas," 
to  pufli  him  on  in  that  ill  defign  which  he  had  al- 
ready  engaged  in,  of  betraying  our  Saviour.  And 
A6ls  V.  3.*  Satan  is  faid  to  have  "  filled  the  heart  of 
Vol.  VII.  13  Z  Ananias 

3- 


1934        ^hefins  of  men  not  chargeable  upon  God  ; 
S  E  R  M.  '«  Ananias,  to  lye  to  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  to  keep 
^  J_ ,'  i  *'  back 'part  of  the  price*'   for  which  he  had  foki  his 
edate  -,  which  exprelfions  do   feem  to  intimate  to  us 
feme  [more   immediate  power  and   influence  which 
tlie  devil  had  upon  thofe  perfons :  but  then  'tis  very 
obfervablc,  that  this  power  is  never  afcribed  to  the 
devil,  but  in  the  cafe  of  great  and  horrid  fins,    and 
where  men  are  beforehand  notorioufly  depraved,  and 
either  by  the  aftual  commilTion  of  fome  former  great 
fin,  or  by  ^entertaining  fome  very   wicked  defign, 
have  provoked  Gob  to  permit  the  devil  a  nearer 
accefs  to  them.     For  Judas  had  firfl:  taken  counfel 
how  to  betray  Chp.ist,    before  it  is  faid  "  the  devil 
"  entred  into  him,"    to  pufh  him  on  to  the  execu- 
tion of  it.     And  Ananias  his  covetoufnefs  had  firft 
tempted  him  to  keep  back  part  of  his  eftatc,  before 
it  is  fiid  "  the  devil  filled  his  heart  to    lye  to  the 
*^  Holy  Ghost  •,"  fo  that  what  power  the  devil  hath 
over  men,  they  firfl  give  it  him  s  they  confent  to  his 
outward  temptations,  before  he  can  get  within  them. 
Hence  it  is  tiiat  in  fcripture  great  fmners  are  defcribed, 
asbein'3"  more  immediately  under  the  government  and 
influence  of  the  devil.    Ephef.  ii.  i,   2.    where  the 
apoftle  fpeaking  of  thofe,  who  from    heathenifm 
were  converted  to  chrifl:ianity,  '^  you  ffays  he)  hath 
S'  he  quickned,  who  were  once  dead  in  trefpafTes  and 
''^  fins  *,  wherein  in  times  paftye  walked,according  to 
'•'  the  courfe  of  this  w^orld,  according  to  the  prince  of 
^^  the  power  of  the  air,  the  fpirit  that  now  worketh 
*'  in  the  children  of  difobedience,  or  unbelief  j"  tS 

*'  ads  and  infpi res  ^  the  children  of  unbelief  j"  that 
is,  tliofe  who  continue  in  their  infidelity,  *&nd  would 
!iot  believe  and  obey  the  gofpel.      When  men  are 

notorioufly 


but  upon  themfekes.  1935 

ROtorioufly  wicked  and  difobedient  to  die  counfels  of  SERM. 

.  .  CXVI 

God,    the  devil   is   faid    to  a(5b   and  infpire  them, 

which  certainly  fignifies  fome  more  immediate  power 

and  influence  which  he  hath  over  fuch  perfons. 

For  as  it  is  very  probable,  that  the  devil  is  fome- 
times  permitted  to  come  near  good  men  fo  as  to 
tempt  them  ;  io  by  notorious  wickednefs  and  im- 
piety, men  do  give  admillion  to  him,  and  he  is  per- 
mitted by  thejuft  judgment  of  God,  to  exercife 
greater  dominion  over  them.  By  refifling  his 
temptations,  we  drive  him  from  us.  So  St.  James 
tells  us,  chap.  iv.  ver.  7.  "  Refift  the  devil,  and  he 
*'  will  flee  from  you  :"  but  as  we  yield  to  his  tempta- 
tions, he  continually  makes  nearer  approaches  to  us, 
and  gains  a  greater  power  over  us. 

Thirdly,  but  for  all  this,  the  devil  can  force  no 
man  to  fm  •,  his  temptations  may  move  and  excite 
men  to  fln,  but  that  they  are  prevalent  and  eiTedual, 
proceeds  from  our  own  will  and  confent;  'tis  our 
own  lufl:s  cloflng  with  his  temptations,  that  produce 
fin,  the  devil  hath  more  or  lels  power  over  men, 
according  as  they  give  way  to  him  ;  but  never  fo 
much  as  to  force  their  wills,  and  to  compel  them  to 
confent  to,  and  comply  with  his  temptations ;  the 
grace  of  God -doth  hardly  ofi^er  this  violence  to 
men  for  their  good,  in  order  to  their  falvation ;  and 
therefore  much  lefs  will  he  permit  the  devil  to  have 
this  power  over  men  to  their  ruin  and  defl:ru6lion, 
God's  commanding  us  to  refifl:  the  devil,  fappo- 
feth  that  his  temptations  are  not  irrefiftible. 

Fourthly,from  what  hath  been  laid, it  appears,  that 

tho'  the  devil  be  frequently  acceflary  to  the  flns  of 

men,    ye*t   we    our  felves  are  the  authors  of  them ; 

he  tempts  us  many  times  to  fin,  but  it  is  we  that 

23  Z  2,  com- 


I9.3^>  ^hejins  cf  men  not  chargeable  upon  God  ; 
SERM.  commit  it.  His  temptations  may  fometimes  be  (o 
'  violent  as  to  extenuate  our  fault,  but  never  fo  forci- 
ble as  wholly  to  excufe  us ;  for  we  are  fo  far  guilty 
of  fin,  as  we  give  our  confent  to  it  5  and  how  power- 
ful foever  the  temptation  be  to  any  kind  of  evil, 
there  is  always  enough  of  our  own  will  in  it  to  ren- 
der us  guilty. 

I  am  far  from  thinking  that  the  devil  tempts  men 
to  all  the  evil  that  they  do.  I  rather  think  that  the 
greatefl  part  of  the  wickednefs  that  is  committed  in 
the  world,  fprings  from  the  evil  motions  of  mens 
own  minds.  Mens  own  lufts  are  generally  to 
them  the  word  devil  of  the  two,  and  do  more 
ftrongly  incline  them  to  fin,  than  any  devil  without 
them  can  tempt  them  to  it.  It  is  not  to  be  doubted, 
that  the  devil  does  all  the  mifchief  he  can  to  the 
fouls  of  men,  fo  far  as  God  permits  him ;  and  tho' 
the  number  of  evil  angels  be  probably  very  great, 
yet  it  is  but  finite,  and  every  one  of  them  hath  a 
limited  powers  and  tho'  they  be  very  adlive,  yet 
they  can  be  but  one  where  at  oncej  fo  that  his  ma- 
lice at  the  utmoil  does  only  all  the  evil  that  it  can, 
not  all  that  it  would  ;  he  plies  where  he  has  the  beft 
cuftom,  where  he  has  the  fairefl  opportunity,  and 
the  greatefl  hopes ;  he  leaves  men  many  times  for  a 
feafon  (as  it  is  faid)  he  did  our  Saviour,  becaufe  he 
defpairs  of  luccels  at  that  time  ;  and  it  may  be  fome- 
times when  he  is  gone,  thefe  perfons  grow  fecure, 
and  through  their  own  fecurity  and  folly  fall  into 
thofe  fins,  which  the  devil  with  all  his  baits  and 
wiles,  whilft  they  were  upon  their  guard,  could  not 
tempt  them  to  commit. 

Others  after  he  has  made  them  fure,  and  put  them 
into  the  way  of  ir,  will  go  on  of   themfelvcs,    and 

are 


but  upon  the mf elves,  ^937 

are  as  mad  of  finning,  as  forward  to  deflroy  ^^y^' 
themfelves,  as  the  devil  hinifelf  could  wifh  •,  fo  that  ..•-v-nJ' 
he  can  hardly  tempt  men  to  any  wickednefs,  which 
he  does  not  find  them  inclined  to  of  themfelves.  Thefe  / 
he  can  trufl  with  themfelves,  and  leave  them  to  their 
own  inclinations  and  conduft,  finding  by  experience, 
that  they  will  do  as  ill  things  of  their  own  motion, 
as  if  Satan  flood  continually  at  their  right  hand  to 
prompt  them,  and  put  them  on,  fo  that  he  can  go 
into  a  far  country,  and  employ  himfelf  elfewhere, 
and  leave  them  for  a  long  time,  being  confident  that 
in  his  abfence  they  will  not  bury  their  talent,  and 
hide  it  in  a  napkin,  but  will  improve  it  to  a  great 
advantage.  And  I  wiili  that  our  own  age  did  not 
afford  us  too  many  inflances  of  this  kind,offach  for- 
ward and  expert  finners  as  need  no  tempter  either  to 
inflrudl  or  excite  them  to  that  which  is  evil.  Now 
in  this  cafe  the  devil  betakes  himfelf  to  other  per- 
fons,  and  removes  his  fnares  and  baits  where  he 
thinks  there  is  more  need  and  occafion  for  them. 

So  that  we  may  realbnably  conclude,  that  there  is 
a  great  deal  of  wickednefs  committed  in  the  world, 
which  the  devil  hath  no  immediate  hand  in,  tho' 
he  always  rejoiceth  in  it  when  it  is  done ;  and  that 
there  is  a  great  deal  more  reafon  to  attribute  all  good 
to  the  motions  and  operations  of  the  Spjrit  of 
God,  than  to  afcribe  all  fin  and  wickednefs  in  the 
world  to  the  devil  ;  becaufe  the  Spirit  of  God  is 
more  powerful,  and  is  always  every  where,  and  is 
more  intent  upon  his  defign,  and  as  forward  to  pro- 
mote it,  as  the  devil  can  be  to  carry  on  his  work ; 
nay,  I  doubt  not  but  he  is  moreadive  to  excite 
men  to  good,  than  the  devil  can  be  to  tempt  them 
to  evil.     And  yet  for   all  this,   I  think  there  is  no 

great 


193S  Tbejns  of  men  not  chargeable  upon  God  ; 
5ER  M.  great  reafon  to  doubt,  but  that  good  men  do  many 
^  _.^  good  adllons  of  their  own  inclination,  without  any 
fpecial  and  immediate  motion  from  the  Spirit  of- 
God.  They  are  indeed  at  firft  regenerate,  and  fane- 
tilled  by  the  Hol.y  Ghost,  and  are  continually  af- 
terwards under  the  condudl  of 'the  fame  Spirit; 
but  where  there  is  a  new  nature,  it  is  of  itfelf  in- 
clinable to  that  which  is  good,  and  will  bring  forth 
fruits,  and  do  adlions  anfwerable.  Much  lefs  do  I 
think  that  the  devil  tempts  every  man  to  all  the  evil 
that  he  does,  or  the  greateft  part.  When  the  lufts 
of  men,  and  the  habits  of  vice  are  grown  ftrong 
and  confirmed,  the  devil  may  fpare  his  temptations 
in  a  great  meafure  -,  for  after  wicked  men  are  wound 
up  to  fuch  a  pitch  of  impiety,  they  will  go  a  great 
vi^hileof  themfelves. 

I  have  done  with  the  firfl  obfervation,  that  as  the 
apoftle  acquits  God  from  having  any  hand  in  tempt- 
ing men  to  Tin,  fo  neither  does  he  afcribe  the  efficacy 
and  pre  valency  of  temptation  to  the  devil.  I  pro- 
ceed to  the 

Second  obfervation,  that  he  afcribes  the  efficacy 
and  fuccefs  of  temptation  to  the  lufts  and  vicious  in- 
clinations of  men,  which  feduce  them  to  a  confcnt 
and  compliance  with  the  temptations  which  are  af- 
forded to  them.  "  Every  man  is  tempted,  when 
*'  he  is  drawn  afide  of  his  own  luft,  and  enticed." 
We  have  many  powerful  enemies  ;  but  we  are  much 
more  in  danger  of  treachery  from  within,  than  of 
.  allaults  from  without.  All  the  power  of  our  ene- 
mies could  not  deftroy  us,  if  we  were  but  true  to 
ourfelves  -,  fo  that  the  apoftle  had  great  reafon  to  af- 
chbe  the  efficacy  of  temptation  to  the  irregular   de- 

fires  and  vicious  inclinations  of  men,  rather    than 

to 


but  upon  themfehes.  1939 

to  thofe  temptations  which  the  providence  of   GodSERM. 
permits  them  to  be  affaulted  with,  and  confequent-    ^^^'^^• 
^ly  to  lay  the  blame  of  mens  fins  chiefly  upon  them- 
felves. 

And  that  chiefly  upon  thefe  two  accounts. 

Firfl,  becaufe  the  lulls  of  men  are  in  a  great  mea- 
fure  voluntary. 

Secondly,  God  hath  put  it  in  our  power  to  refifl 
thofe  temptations,  and  overcome  them.  Now  fo 
far  as  the  lufts  of  men  are  voluntary,  it  is  their  own 
fault  that  they  are  feduced  by  them,  and  if  God 
hath  put  it  in  our  power  to  refift  and  overcome  temp- 
tations, we  may  blame  ourfelves,  if  we  be  overcome 
and  foiled  by  them. 

Firft,  the  lulls  of  men  are  in  a  great  meafure  vo- 
luntary. By  the  lufts  of  men,  I  mean  their  irregular 
defires  and  vicious  inclinations.  I  grant  that  the  na^ 
ture  of  man  is  very  much  corrupted,  and  degenera- 
ted from  its  primitive  integrity  and  perfedion  ;  but 
we  who  are  chriftians,  have  received  that  grace  in 
baptifm,  v/hereby  our  natures  are  fo  far  healed,  as 
if  we  be  not  wanting  to  ourfelves,  and  do  not  negled: 
the  means  which  God  hath  appointed  to  us,  we  may 
mortify  our  lulls,  and  live  a  new  life  •,  fo  that  if 
our  lufts  remain  unmortified,  v/e  ourfelves  are  in 
fault,  much  more  if  they  gain  new  ftrength,  and  pro- 
ceed to  habits  -,  for  this  could  not  be,  if  we  did  not 
after  we  come  to  age,  and  are  able  to  difcern  beween, 
and  to  choofe  good  and  evil,  voluntarily  confent  to 
iniquity,  and  by  wilful  and  deliberate  pradice  of 
known  fins,  improve  the  evil  inclinations  of  our  nature 
into  vicious  habits:  but  if  inftead  of  mortifying  and 
fubduing  the  evil  propenfions  of  our  nature  (which 
h  m  very  difficult  work  to  moft  perfons,  if  they  be- 


:in 


1940  olefins  of  men  not  chargeable  Upon  God  ; 
S  E  R  M  crln  it  betimes)  we  will  cherifli  and  give  new  life  and 
power  to  them,  we  forfeit  the  grace  which  we  re- 
ceived in  baptifm,  and  bring  ourielves  again  under 
the  power  and  dominion  of  fin  ;  and  no  wonder  then, 
if  our  lulls  feduce  us,  and  make  us  ready  to  comply 
with  the  temptations  of  the  world  and  the  devil. 

Nay,  and  after  this  it  is  dill  our  own  fault,  if  we 
do  not  mortify  our  lufts ;  for  if  we  would  hearken 
to  the  counfel  of  God,  and  obey  his  calls  to  repen- 
tance, and  fincerejy  beg  his  grace  and  Holy  Spi- 
rit to  this  purpofe,  we  might  yet  recover  ourfelvcs, 
and  "  by  the  Spirit  mortify  the  lufts  of  the  flefh  j'* 
for  tho'  w^e  have  \t{i  God,  he  hath  not  quite  forfaken 
us,  but  is  ready  to  afford  his  grace  again  to  us,  tho' 
we  have  negledted  and  abufed  it,  and  to  give  his 
Holy  Spirit  to  thofe  that  ask  him,  tho'  they  have 
forfeited  it,  fo  that  tho'  our  lufts  fpring  from  fome- 
thing  which  is  natural,  yet  that  they  live  and  have 
dominion  over  us,  is  voluntary,  becaufe  we  might  re- 
medy it  if  we  would,  and  make  ufe  of  thofe  means 
which  God  in  the  gofpel  offers  to  us. 

Secondly,  God  hath  put  it  in  our  power  to  refift 
thefe  temptations,  and  overcome  them  ;  fo  that  it 
is  our  own  fault,  if  we  yield  to  them,  and  be  over- 
come by  them. 

It  is  naturally  in  our  power  to  refift  many  forts  of 
temptations  j  and  the  grace  of  God,  if  we  do  not 
negled  it,  and  be  not  wanting  to  ourfelves,  puts  it 
in  our  power  to  refift  any  temptation  that  may  hap- 
pen to  us. 

Firft,  it  is  naturally  in  our  power  to  refift  many 
forts  of  temptations.  If  we  do  but  make  ufe  of 
our  natural  reafon,  and  thofe  con fiderat ions  which  are 
common  and  obvious  to  men,  we  may  eafily  refift 

the 


but  upon  t he mf elves.  ^94-1 

the  temptations  to  a  great  many  fins.  Some  fins  ^™?;r^ 
are  To  horrid  in  their  nature,  that  when  we  have  the 
Itrongeft  temptations  to  them  ;  we  cannot  but  have 
a  natural  averfion  from  them  5  as  dehberate  mur- 
der, the  danger  and  guilt  whereof,  are  both  fo  great, 
as  make  it  eafy  for  any  confiderate  man  to  refill  the 
ftrongeft  temptation  to  it,  even  that  of  revenge. 
A  plain  ad  of  injuftice,  whether  by  great  fraud,  or 
by  downright  opprefTion,  is  fo  bafe  and  difgracefuj, 
fo  odious  and  abhorred  by  humane  nature,  that  it  is 
not  difncult  to  a  man  that  hath  but  a  common  under- 
flanding,  and  common  Inchnation  to  be  honeft,  to 
overcome  the  greatefl  temptation  of  gain  and  ad- 
vantage; nay  he  muft  offer  confiderable  violence  to 
his  nature  and  reafon,  to  bring  himfelf  to  it  at 
firft.  Prophanenefs  and  contempt  of  God  and  re- 
ligion is  fo  monftrous  a  fault,  and  of  fo  dreadful  an 
appearance,  that  every  man  that  will  but  ufe  his  rea- 
fon, can  have  no  temptation  to  it,  either  from  grati- 
fying his  humour,  or  pleafing  his  company,  or  fhew- 
ing  his  wit,  that  can  be  of  equal  force  with  the  ar- 
guments which  every  man's  mind  and  conlcience  is 
apt  to  fugged  to  him  agalnfl:  it. 

Nay,  there  are  many  fins  much  inferior  to  thefe, 
the  temptations  whereto  may  by  the  ordinary  reafons 
and  confiderations  of  prudence  and  intered,  be  baf- 
fled and  put  out  of  countenance.  To  inftance  in 
common  fwearing,  to  which  I  think  there  is  no 
temptation,  either  from  pleafure  or  advantage,  but . 
only  from  fafhion  and  cuftom.  Now  this  tempta- 
tion is  eafy  to  be  conquer 'd,  by  confidering  that  eve- 
ry man  that  profeffeth  to  believe  the  bible,  muft  ac- 
knowledge it  to  be  a  fin  ;  and  if  any  man  be  con- 

VoL.VIK  ^4  A  yinc'd 


^he  pns  of  men  not  chargeable  upon  God  ; 
vinc'd  that  it  is  a  fin,  I  dare  undertake  to  convince 
him  that  he.  can  leave  it.  He  that  can  choore  at  any 
time  whether  he  will  fpeak  or  not  (which  it  is  certainly 
in  every  man's  power  to  do)  can  choofe  whether  he 
v;ill  fwear  when  he  fpeaks.  If  he  lays  he  does  it  by 
cuftom  and  habit,  and  when  he  does  not  think  of  it ; 
a  very  little  cire  and  refolution  will  in  a  fhort  time 
cure  any  man  of  that  cudom  ;  fo  that  it  is  naturally  in 
every  man's  power,  to  break  off  this  fin. 

Secondly,  the  grace  of  God  puts  it  into  our  power, 
if  we  do  not  negled:  it,  and  be  not  wanting  to  our- 
ielves,  to  refill  any  temptation  that  may  happen  to 
us;  and  what  the  grace  of  God  puts  into  our  power, 
is  as  truly  in  our  power,  as  what  we  can  do  ourfelves. 
God  offers  his  grace  to  every  man  under  the  gofpeJ, 
for  he  has  promifed  "  to  give  his  Holy  Spirit 
"  to  them  that  ask  him,"  and  it  is  naturally  in 
every  man's  power  to  ask  it,  other  wife  the  promife 
ficrnifies  nothino;  ^  for  if  no  man  can  ask  the  Spirit 
of  God,  till  he  firft  have  it,  then  to  promife  it  to  them 
that  ask  it,  is  to  promife  it  to  them  who  have  it  al- 
ready, and  then  'tis  needlefs  to  ask  it.  And  if 
God  offers  his  grace  to  every  man,  then  'tis  every 
man's  fliult  if  he  have  it  not  \  and  tvtry  man  that 
hath  it,  may  by  the  ordinary  afTiltance  of  that  grace, 
refill  any  ordinary  temptation.  And  if  at  any  time 
God  fuffers  good  men  to  be  affiulted,  he  hath  pro- 
mifed in  fuch  cafes  an  extraordinary  grace  and  affif- 
tance  :  and  that  either  ''  he  will  not  fuffer  us  to  be 
"  tempted  above  what  we  are  able,  or  that  with  the 
*'  temptation  he  will  find  a  way  to  efcape,  that  wc 
"  may  be  able  to  bear  it." 

And  thus  I  have  done  with  the  fecond  thing   I 

propounded  to  fpeak   to  from  thefe    words,    that 

every 


hut  upon  themfehes.  T543 

every  man  Is  his  own  greatefl:  tempter.     *'  Every   p^^-ij^^* 
"  man  is  tempted,  when  he  is  drawn  afide  of  his  s„^^/0 
*'  own    luft  and  enticed."     And   now  the   proper 
inferences  from  what  I  have  been  all   this  while  dif- 
courfing  to  you,  are  thefe  three. 

Firft,  not  to  think  to  excull  ourfelves,  by  laying; 
the  blame  of  our  fins  upon  the  temptation  of  the  de- 
vil. That  the  devil  tempts  us  is  not  our  fault,  bc- 
caufe  we  cannot  help  it ;  but  it  is  our  voluntary  com- 
pliance with  his  temptations,  our  confenting  to  that 
evil  which  he  folicits  us  to,  which  maketh  us  guilty. 
*'  Every  man  is  tempted,  when  he  is  drawn  afide  of 
*'  his  own  luils  ^"  the  lufts  of  our  own  hearts  o-jve 
the  efficacy  to  xht  temptations  of  the  devil :  men 
many  times  fin  upon  the  motions  and  fuggefiions  of 
the  devil :  but  tho'  he  be  guilty  of  tempting  us, 
we   are.  guilty  of  confenting  to  his    temptations. 

Many  times  we  are  not  fure  that  the  devil  tempts 
us  to  fuch  a  fin,  but  we  are  fure  that  we  commit 
it,  and  confequently  that  we  are  guilty  of  it.  Nay 
it  is  certain,  if  there  were  no  devil,  many  would  be 
wicked,  and  perhaps  not  much  lefs  wicked  than  ihty 
are.  The  lulls  and  vicious  inclinations  of  men 
would  yield  to  the  temptations  of  the  world,  tho* 
there  were  fnone  to  manage  them,  and  to  {qi  them 
on  to  the  greateft  advantage  ;  fo  that  we  cannot  ex-  ^ 
cufe  our  faults  upon  this  account,  that  we  are  temp- 
ted by  the  devil.  If  this  were  a  fufficient  excufe 
for  us,  the  devil  would  take  no  pleafure  in  tempt- 
ing us ;  the  whole  defign  of  his  temptation  beino- 
to  make  us  guilty,  and  by  the  guilt  of  fin  to  make 
us  miferable. 

Secondly,  from  hence  we    learn  what  reafon  we 
have   to  pray  to  God,  that  he  would  "  not  lead 

14  A  2  us 


CXVI 


7  944  T!hefim  of  men  not  chargeable  upon  God  ; 
SERM.  "  us  into  temptation,''  i.e.  not  permit  us  to  fall 
into  it ;  for  in  the  phrafe  of  fcripture,  God  is  many 
times  faid  to  do  thofe  things,  which  his  providence 
permits  to  be  done.  The  bed  of  us  have  fomc 
remainders  of  luft,  fome  irregular  defires  and  appe- 
tites, which  will  be  apt  to  betray  us  to  fin,  when 
powerful  temptations  are  prefented  to  us  •,  fo  that  it 
is  a  great  happinefs  to  the  belt  of  men,  to  be  kept 
by  the  providence  of  God  out  of  the  way  of  violent 
temptations;  for  our  own  ftrength  to  refill  them  is 
but  fmall,  and  we  are  apt  ro  be  fecure,  and  to  negle6t 
our  guard  •,  we  are  tdX-^  to  be  furprized,  and  in  con- 
tinual danger  through  our  own  weaknefs  or  carelef- 
nefs.  Our  greateft  fecuriry  is,  if  we  be  fincere,  and 
heartily  defircus  to  do  well,  and  firmly  refolved 
againft  fin,  and  do  depend  upon  God  for  his  grace 
and  afTiliance,  that  riis  providence  will  not  fuffer 
us  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  dangerous  and  violent 
temptations,  which  probably  would  be  too  hard 
for  us  ;  he  who  knows  what  our  ftrength  is, 
<'  will  not  fuffer  us  to  be  tempted  above  what 
''  we  are  able." 

Thirdly,  from  hence  we  may  learn  the  bed  way  to 
difarm  temptations,  and  to  take  away  the  power  of 
them,  and  that  is,  by  mortifying  our  lulls,  and  fub- 
duing  our  vicious  inclinations.  When  this  is  done, 
(which  by  the  grace  of  God  may  be  done)  tempta- 
tion hath  loft  its  greateft  advantage  upon  us.  'Tis 
the  confpiracy  of  our  lufts,  with  the  temptations 
that  ^QX.  upon  us,  that  betrays  us  into  their  power. 
The  true  reafon  why  men  fall  into  fin,  is  not  becaufc 
they  are  tempted,  but  becaufe  there  is  fomething  with- 
in them,  which  inclines  and  difpofes  them  to  com- 

jily  with  the  temptation,  and  to  yield  to  it.     It  is 

faid. 


but  upon  themfehes,  194^ 

faid,  when  the  devil  came  to  our  Saviour  to  tempt  S  E  R  M. 
him,  that  "  he  found  nothing  in  him,"  and  there-  ,  ^^^^• 
fore  his  temptations  had  no  force  upon  him.  The 
more  we  mortify  our  lufts,  the  lels  the  devil  will  find 
in  us,  for  his  temptations  to  work  upon.  Every  fpark 
is  'dangerous,  when  it  falls  upon  combuftible  matter  j 
but  tho'  f parks  fly  never  fo  thick,  there  is  no  danger, 
fo  long  as  there  is  nothing  about  us  to  catch  fire. 

If  we  will  not  be  drawn  afide  and  enticed  to  fin, 
let  us  mortify  our  lufls  ;  for  fb  far  as  we  are  morti- 
fied, we  are  out  of  the  power  of  temptation. 

Men  are  apt  to  complain  of  temptations,  that 
they  are  too  hard  for  them,  and  that  they  are  not 
able  to  refill  them,  tho'  they  pray  to  God  conti- 
nually for  his  grace  to  that  purpofe.  This  indeed 
is  one  means  very  proper  and  neceflury  to  be  ufed  ; 
but  this  is  not  all  that  we  are  to  do  ;  we  mud  break 
off  habits  of  fin,  and  fubdue  our  lulls,  and  keep 
under  our  inclinations,  and  then  we  fhall  find  our 
felves  able  to  refill  and  encounter  temptations  with 
more  fuccefs.  And  'till  we  do  this,  in  vain  do  we 
pray  for  God's  grace,  and  depend  upon  him  for 
ftrength  to  overcome  the  temptations  that  do  aflauk 
us  \  for  God's  grace  was  never  defign'd  to  counte- 
nance the  fioth  and  negligence  of  rpen,  but  to  en- 
courage and  fecond  our  refolutions  and  endeavours 
of  well-doing.  If  we  exped  God's  grace  and 
afiiftance  upon  other  terms,  we  tempt  God,  and 
provoke  him  to  leave  us  to  the  power;  of  temp- 
tations, to  be  ''  drawn  away  and  enticed  by  our 
^'  own  lufts. 


SERMON 


[  1946  ] 

SERMON    CXVII. 

Proving  Jesus  to  be  the  M  £  s  s  i  a  s, 


MATTH.  xi.  2,  3,  4,  5,  6. 

"Now  when  John  had  heard  in  prifon  the  works  of 
Christ,  he  fen  t  two  of  his  difciples^  and  f aid  unto 
him^  art  thou  he  that  fhould  come  ;  or  do  we  look 
for  another  ?  Jesus  anfwered  and  f aid  unto  them^ 
go  and  fhew  John  again  thefe  things  which  ye  do 
hear  and  fee.  ne  blind  receive  their  fight^  and 
the  lame  walk,  the  lepers  are  cleanfed^  and  the  deaf 
hear^  the  dead  are  raifed  up,  and  the  poor  have  the 
gofpel preached  unto  them.  And  bleffed  is  he  whofoe^ 
verjhall  not  he  offended  in  me. 

SERM.      A     BOUT  the  time  of  our  Saviour's  appear- 
CXVJI.     /%     ing  in  the  world,  there  was  a  general  ex- 
^-^^^~  X   -^  pedation   of  a  great  prince,    that  fhould 
come  out  of  Judea,  and  govern  alJ  nations :  this  the 
Gentiles  had  from   the  prophefies    of  the   Sibyls, 
which  fpake  of  a  great  king  that  was  to  appear  in  the 
world  about  that  time.  So  Virgil  tells  us,that  the  time 
of  Aut^uflius  was  the  utmoft  date  of  that  prophcfy  \ 
Ultima  Cumai  venit  jam  carminis  atas : 
And  Suetonius  tells  us,  '•  that  all  over  the  eaflern 
*'  countries,  there  was  an  ancient  and  conftant  tra- 
*'  dition,    that  fuch  a  prince  Hiould  fpring  out   of 
"  Judea:'*    And  for  this  reafon  it  is,    that  our  Sa- 
viour is  call'd  by  the  prophet,  "  the  expedation 
*'  of  the  nations.'* 

But 


Proving  ]  Esv  s  to  i^e  the  Messias.  ^947 

But  more  efpecially  among  the  Jews,  there  was  at  S  E  R  m. 
that  time  a  more  lively  and  particular  expedlation,  .^^^j^' 
grounded  upon  the  predidlions  of  their  prophets,  of 
a  prince  whom  they  cali'd  the  Messias,  or  the 
Anointed  •,  and  thofe  who  were  more  devout  among 
them,  did  at  that  time  wait  for  his  appearance ;  as 
it  is  faid  of  Simeon,  that  "  he  waited  for  the  con- 
*'  folation  of  Ifrael."  Hence  it  was,  that  when 
John  the  baptiil  appeared  in  the  quality  of  an  ex- 
traordinary prophet,  "  they  fent  from  Jerufalem  to 
"  enquire  whether  he  were  the  Messias?"  John  i. 
19.  "  The  Jews  fent  priefts  and  levites  from  Jeru- 
"  falem  to  ask  him,  who  art  thou  ?  and  he  confef- 
*'  fed,  and  denied  not,  but  confefled,  I  am  not  the 
''  Christ."  The  Sanhedrim,  to  whom  it  belonged 
to  judge  who  were  the  true  prophets,  fent  to  know 
whether  he  was  theMtssiAs  ornot?  "  he  would  not: 
*'  take  this  honour  to  himfelf ;"  but  told  them  the 
Messias  was  jufl  at  hand  ;and  the  next  day,  "  when 
*'  Jesus  came  to  be  baptized  of  him,"  he  bare  re- 
cord, "  that  he  was  the  Son  of  God,  and  that  he 
*'  faw  the  Spirit  defcending  and  abiding  upon 
«  him." 

So  that  it  is  plain  that  he  knew  him,  and  bare 
witnefs  of  him,  which  makes  it  the  more  flrange 
that  here  in  the  text,''  he  Hiould  fend  two  of  his  dil- 
"  ciples  to  enquire,",  whether  he  were  the  Messias 
or  not?  "  art  thou  he  that  Ihould  come,  or  do  we 
^  look  for  another?"  that  is,  art  thou  the  Messias, 
or  not?  for  fo  he  is  calfd  in  the  ancient  prophefies 
of  him,  6  se;^^/^^^'©"}  h^  ^^^^^  lliould  come,  Geif. 
xlix.  10.  *'  The  fcepter  fliall  not  depart  from  Judah, 
*'  till  Shiloh  come." 


For 


194^  P'^'oving  Jesus  to  be  the  Messiah. 

s  E  R  M.  For  the  refolution  of  this  difficulty,  it  is  very 
CXVJI.  probably  laid  by  interpreters,  and  I  think  there  is  no 
reafon  to  doubt  of  it,  that  John  the  Baptift  did  not 
fend  this  meiTage  for  his  own  fatisfadtion,  but  to  fa- 
tisfy  his  diiciples,  who  were  never  very  willing  to 
acknowledge  Jesus  for  the  Messias,  becaufe  they 
thought  he  did  (hadow  and  cloud  their  mailer.  From 
whence  w«  may  take  notice,  how  mens  judgments 
are  apt  to  be  perverted  by  faction  and  intereft ;  and 
that  good  men  are  too  prone  to  be  fwayed  thereby  *, 
for  fuch  we  fuppofe  the  difciples  of  John  to  have 
been  ;  they  will  not  believe  their  own  mailer,  when 
they  apprehend  him  to  fpeak  againlt  their  interell ; 
for  they  knew  that  they  mud  rile  and  fall  in  their 
reputation  and  efteem,  as  their  mailer  did.  They  be- 
lieved that  their  mailer  was  a  prophet,  and  came 
from  God  j  yet  for  all,that,they  could  not  digell  his 
tellimony  of  C  h  R  i  s  t,  becaufe  that  let  him  above 
their  mailer  ;  which  they  were  lagacipus  enough  to 
perceive,  that  it  tended  to  the  diminution  and  lelTen- 
ing  of  themfelves.  And  that  this  was  the  thing 
which  troubled  them,  appears  plainly  from  the  com- 
plaint which  they  make  to  their  mailer,  John  iii.  26. 
*'  The  difciples  of  John  came  to  him  and  faid,  he 
"  that  was  with  thee  beyond  Jordan,  to  whom  thou 
*'  barell  witnefs,  behold  the  fame  baptizeth,  and  all 
*'  men  come  to  him."  This  troubled  them,  to  fee 
him  invade  their  mailer's  office,  and  that  he  began 
to  have  more  followers  than  John  hadj  ''  he  bap- 
*'  tizeth,  and  all  men  come  to  him." 

This  prejudice  John  had  endeavoured  to  root  out 
of  their  minds,  by  telling  them,  that  he  had  al- 
ways declared  that  he  was  not  the  Messias,  ver  28. 
*'  You  your  felves  bear  me  witnefs,    that  I  faid,  I 


"  am 


Trovlng  Jesus  to  be  the  Messias.  T949 

««  am  not  the  Christ,  but  that  I  am  fent  before^^E^^M. 
"  him."  But  when  he  perceived  it  ftill  to  flick 
with  them,  and  that  they  obferved  all  his  actions, 
and  the  miracles  that  he  wrought,  as  if  they  had  a 
mind  to  pick  a  quarrel  with  him  (for  St.  Luke, 
who  relates  the  fame  (lory,  tells  us,  that  when  our 
Saviour  had  healed  the  centurion's  fervant,  and 
raifed  from  the  dead  the  widow 's  fon  at  Naim,  the 
difciples  of  John  fhewed  him  all  thefe  things^  1  fay, 
John  Baptift  perceiving  that  they  watched  him  fo 
narrowly,  fent  two  of  his  difciples  to  him,  thaE 
they  might  receive  full  fatisfadlion  from  him. 

And  St.  Luke  tells  us,  that  upon  their  coming  to 
him,  he  wrought  many  of  his  miracles  before  them, 
to  convince  them  that  he  was  the  true  Messias,  Luke 
vii.  21,  22.  "  And  in  that  fame  hour  he  cured  many 
*'  of  their  infirmities,  and  plagues,  and  of  evil  fpirits  \ 
«'  and  to  many  that  were  blind  he  gave  fight  \ " 
and  then  faid  to  the  difciples  of  John,  "  go  your 
•'  way,  and  tell  John  what  things  ye  have  feen  and 
"  heard  \  how  that  the  blind  fee,  and  the  lame 
<'  walk,  the  lepers  are  cleanfed,  and  the  deaf  hear, 
*'  and  the  dead  are  raifed,  and  to  the  poor  the  gofpel 
"  is  preached  5  and  bleffed  is  he  that  is  not  of- 
*'  fended  in  me." 

So  that  you  fee  that  the  reafon  why  John  Baptift 
fent  to  our  Saviour  to  knov/ whether  he  was  the 
Messias,  was  not  to  fatisfy  himfelf,  for  he  had  no 
doubt  of  it ;  but  perceiving  his  difciples  to  be  ill- 
aftedted  towards  our  Saviour,  and  hearing  them 
fpeak  with  fome  envy  of  his  miracles,  he  fent  them 
£0  hims   that  by  feeing  what   he  did  and    hearing 

Vol.  VLI.  14  B  whac 


ig^o  ^rcving  Jesus  to  he  the  Messias. 

SER  M.  what  account  he  save  of  himfelf,  they  mieht  receive 
J  full  fiitisfadtion  concerning  him.j 

I  have  been  the  longer  in  the  clearing  of  this, 
that  men  upon  every  appearance  of  contradidion  in 
the  evangt'lical  hiftory,  may  not  be  too  forward  to 
fufpedl  the  truth  of  it  j  but  may  be  convinced,  that 
if  they  woula  but  have  patience  to  examine  things 
carefully,  they  would  find  that  the  (lory  does  fuffi^ 
ciently  vindicate  it  felf;  and  tho'  it  be  penn'd» 
with  great  fimphcity,  yet  there  is  iufHcient  care 
taken,  to  free  it  from  being  guilty  of  any  contra- 
didion  to  it  fclf. 

The  occafion  of  the  wo'-ds  being  thus  cleared, 
there  are  in  them  thefe  two  things  confiderable. 

Firfl,  what  it  was  that  John  the  baptili  fent  his 
difciples  to  be  fatisfied  abouc ;  and  that  was,  whe- 
ther he  was  the  Messias  or  not  ?  ^  now  when  Johi^ 
*'  had  heard  in  prifon  the  works  of  Christ,  he 
^'  fent  two  of  his  difciples."  The  circumilance  of 
his  being  in  prifon,  feems  to  be  mention'd,  to  inti- 
mate to  us  the  reafon  why  he  did  not  come  him- 
felf along  with  them  j  he  ^enc  two  of  his  difciples 
to  him,  who  fiid  unto  him,  **  art  thou  he  that 
"^*  fhould  come,  or  do  we  look  for  another  ?  *'  and 
then. 

Secondly,  the  anfwer  which  our  Saviour  returns 
to  this  mefHige  ;  *'  Jssus  anfwered  and  faid  unto 
?*  them,  go  and  fnew  John  again  the  things  which 
<*  ye  do  fee  and  hear  ;  the  blind  receive  their  fight, 
**  the  lame  walk,  the  lepers  are  cleanfed,  and  the 
^*  deaf  hear,  the  dead  are  raifed  up,  and,  the  poor 
^*  have  the  gofpel  preached  unto  them  ;  and  blefied 
?f  |s  lie^  whofoever  iliall  not  be  offended  in  me." 

So 


Proving  JesUs  to  he  the  Messias*  1951  ] 

So  that   thefc  words  contain,  firfl:,    the  evidence  S  E  RM. 

CXVII. 


which  our   Saviour    gives  of  his  being  the  true  ^^^^^• 


Mess  I  AS.  Secondly,  an  intimation  that  notwith 
Handing  all  this  evidence  which  he  gave  of  himfelf, 
yet  many  would  be  offended  at  him,  and  rejed:  him  9 
♦'  blelTed  is  he,  whofoever  is  not  offended  in  me." 

Firft,  the  evidence  which  our  Saviour  gives  of 
his  being  the  true  Mess i as,  and  to  prove  thisj 
there  were  but  two  things  neceffary. 

1.  To  Ihew  that  he  was  fent  by  God,  and  had  a 
particular  commiffion  from  him. 

2.  That  he  was  the  very  perfon  of  whom  the 
prophets  foretold  that  he  fhould  be  the  Messias. 

The  firft  of  thefe  he  proves  by  the  miracles  which 
he  wrought ;  and  the  fecond,  by  the  correfpon- 
dency  of  the  things  he  did,  with  what  was  foretold 
by  the  prophets  concerning  theMsssiAs  5  the  pro- 
phefies  concerning  the  Messias  were  accomplifla'd 
in  him. 

Firft,  by  the  miracles  which  he  wrought ;  "  the 
"  blind  receive  their  fight,  and  the  lame  walk,  the 
"  lepers  are  cleanfed,  and  the  deaf  hear,  and  the 
*'  dead  are  raifed  up."  Here  is  a  brief  enumeration 
of  the  feveral  forts  of  miracles  which  our  Saviour 
wrought,  and  thefe  were  a  teftimony  to  him  that 
he  came  from  God,  and  was  fent  and  commiffioned 
by  him  to  declare  his  will  to  the  world.  So  he 
himfelf  tells  us,  John  v.  o^^,  ''  I  have  a  greater  wit- 
*'  nefs  than  that  of  John,  for  the  works  which  the 
**  Father  hath  given  me  to  finKh,  the  fam(^ 
*'  works  that  I  do,  bear  witnefs  of  me,  that  the 
*'  Father  hath  fent  me."  Upon  the  evidence  of 
thefe  miracles,  Nicodemus,  a  ruler  among  the  Jews, 
was  convinced  that  he  was  fent  by  God,  John  ni.  2^ 
14  B  2  "  We 


Proving  Jesus  fo  l(  the  Mess i as. 

"  We  know  that  thou  art  a  teacher  come  from 
"  God,  for  no  man  can  do  thefe  miracles  that  thou 
''  dofl,  except  God  be  with  him."  Nay  his  greatefl 
enemies  were  afraid  of  his  miracles,  knowing  how 
proper  an  argument  they  are  to  convince  men,  John 
xi.  47.  when  the  chief  priefts  and  pharifees  were 
met  together  in  council  againft  him,  they  concluded, 
that  if  he  were  permitted  to  go  on  and  work  mira- 
cles, he  would »draw  all  men  after  him.  "  What 
*'  do  we?  (fay  they)  for  this  man  doth  many  mi- 
"  racles  \  if  wc  let  him  thus  alone,  all  men  will 
•'  believe  on  him."  This  they  faid,  upon  occafion 
of  the  great  miracle  of  raifing  Lazarus  from  the 
dead. 

And  in  reafon^  miracles  are  the  higheft  atteftation 
that  can  be  given  to  the  truth  and  divinity  of  any 
dodrine  ;  and  fuppofing  a  dodlrine  not  to  be  plainly 
unworthy  of  God,  and  contrary  to  thofe  natural  noti- 
ons which  men  have  of  God  and  religion,  we  can 
hr.ve  no  greater  evidence  of  the  truth  of  it,  than  mi- 
racles ;  they  are  fuch  an  argument,  as  in  its  own  na- 
ture is  apt  to  perfuade  and  induce  belief. 

All  truths  do  not  need  miracles ;  fome  are  of  eafy 
belief,  and  are  fo  clear  by  their  own  light,  that  they 
need  neither  miracle  nor  demonftration  to  prove 
them.  Such  are  thofe  felf-evident  principles  which 
mankind  do  generally  agree  in  \  others  which  arc 
not  fo  evident  by  their  own  light,  we  are  content 
to  receive  upon  clear  demonflration  of  them,  or 
very  probable  arguments  for  them,  without  a  miracle. 
And  there  are  fome  truths,  which  however  they 
may  be  fufficiendy  obfcure  and  uncertain  to  moft 
men,  yet  are  they  fb  inconfiderable,  and  of  fo  fmall 
confequence,   ;u  not    to  deferve   the  attedation  of 

miracles  \ 


Proving  Jesus  to  be  the  Mess i As.  rg^j 

miracles ;  fo  that  there  is  no  reafon  to  exped:  that  S  E  R  M. 

CXVff 

God  lliould  interpofe  by  a  miracle,  to  convince  men 
of  them. 

Nee  Deus  interjit^  nifi  dignus  vindice  nodus 
Incident. 

But  for  fuch  truths  as  are  necefTary  to  be  known 
by  us,  but  are  not  fufficiently  evident  of  themfelves, 
nor  capable  of  cogent  evidence,  efpecially  to  preju- 
diced and  interefted  perfons,  God  is  pleafed  in  this 
cafe  many  times  to  work  miracles  for  our  convic- 
tion \  and  they  are  a  proper  argument  to  convince 
us  of  a  thing  that  is  either  in  it  felf  obfcure  and 
hard  to  be  believed,  or  which  we  are  prejudiced 
againfl:,  and  hardly  brought  to  believe ;  for  they 
are  an  argument  a  majori  ad  minus ^  they  prove  a 
thing  which  is  obfcure  and  hard  to  be  believed, 
by  fomething  that  is  more  incredible,  which  yeC 
they  cannot  deny  becaufe  they  fee  it  done.  Thus 
our  Saviour  proves  himfelf  to  be  an  extraordinary 
perfon,  by  "  doing  fuch  things  as  never  man  did ;" 
he  convinceth  them,  that  they  ought  to  believe 
what  he  faid,  becaufe  they  faw  him  do  thofe  things, 
which  were  harder  to  be  believed  (if  one  had  noC 
feen  them)  than  what  he  faid. 

Miracles  are  indeed  the  greatefl  external  confirma- 
tion and  evidence  that  can  be  given  to  the  truth  of 
any  dodlrine,  and  where  they  are  wrought  with  all  the 
advantages  they  are  capable  of,  they  are  an  unqueftio- 
nable  demonftration  of  the  truth  of  it ;  and  fuch  were 
our  Saviour's  miracles  here  in  the  it^t^  to  prove 
that  he  was  the  true  Mess  ias  ;  here  are  miracles  of 
all  kinds,  "  the  blind  receive  their  fight,  and  the 
*'  lame  walk,  the  lepers  are  clean  fed,  and  the  deaf 
*«  hear,  and  the  dead  are  raifed  up."  For  the  na- 
ture 


1 954  Proving  Jesus  to  ie  f/je  Messias, 

SERM.  turc  of  them,  they  are  fuch  as  are  mofl  likely  to  be 
divine  and  to  come  from  God,  for  they  were  healing 
and  beneficial   to  mankind.     Our  Saviour  here  in- 
flanceth  in   thofe  things  which  are  of  greateft  benefit 
and  advantage,  and  whicii  free  men  from  the  greateft 
miferies  and  inconveniences;  the  relioring  of  fight  to 
the  blind,  and   hearing  to  the  deaf;  foundnefs  and 
health  to  the  lame  and   the  leprous,  and  life  to  the 
dead.     And  then  for  the  number  of  them,  they  were 
many;  not  one   inftance  of  a  kind,  but  feveral  of 
every  kind,  and  great  multitudes  of  moft  of  them, 
and  for  the  manner  of  their  operation,    they  were 
publick,  in  the  fight  and  view  of  great  multitudes  of 
people;  to  fte  them  from  all  fufpicion  of  fraud  and 
impofture,  they  were  not  wrought  privately  and  in 
corners,  and  given  out  and  noifed  abroad,  but  before 
all  the  people,  fo  that  every  one  might  fee  them,  and 
judge  of  them  ;  not  only  among  his  own  difciples 
and  followers,  as  the  church  of  Rome  pretends  to 
work  theirs,  but  among  his  enemies,  ''  to  convince 
*'  thofe  that  did   not  believe;'*  and  this   not  done 
once,  and  in  one  place,  but  at  feveral    times,  and  ia 
all  places  where  he  came,  and  for  a  long  time,  for 
three  years  and  a  half,  and  after  his  death,  he  en- 
dowed his  difciples  and   followers  with   the  fame 
power,  which  lafted  for  fome  ages.     And  then  for 
the  quality  of  them,  they  were  miracles  of  the  greateft 
magnitude ;    thofe    of  them,    which  in  themfelves 
might  have  been   performed   by  natural  means,  as 
healing  the  lame  and  the  leprous,  and  the  deaf,  he 
did  in  a  miraculous  manner,  by  a  word  or  a  touch, 
yea,  and  many  times  at  a  great  diftance.     But  others 
were  not  only  in  the  manner  of  their  operation,   but 

in  the  nature  of  the  thing  unqueftionably  miracu- 
lous. 


proving  Jesvs  to  be  tbe.ME^siAs.  ^95ir 

ious,  as  giving  of  fight  to  thofe  that  had  been  born  S  E  R  M. 
bhnd,  and  rufing  up  the  dead  to  life,  as  Lazarus, 
after  he  had  lain  jn  the  grave  four  days  ;  and  him- 
felf  afterwards,  the  third  day  after  he  nad  been  buried  ; 
which,  if  there  ever  was  or  can  beany  unquediona- 
ble  miracles  in  the  world,  ought  certainly  to  be  re- 
puted fuch.  So  that  our  blefTed  Saviour  had  all 
the  acceftation  that  miracles  can  give,  that  he  came 
from  God.  And  this  is  the  iirft  evidence  of  his  be- 
ing the  ?v^  ESS  I  AS. 

Ta-f  Jews  acknov/jedge  that  theMEssiAS  when  he 
comes  Ihall  work  great  miracles  -,  their  own  tal- 
mud  confeifeth,  that  "'  Jesus  the  <bn  ot  Jofeph  and 
*'  Mary  did  work  great  miracles  i"  and  the  hiftory 
of  the  gofpel  does  particularly  relate  more  and  great- 
er miracles  wrougiu  by  him,  than  by  Mofes  and  all 
the  prophets  that  had  been  fince  the  world  began  j  fo 
that  we  may  ftill  put  the  fame  quedion  to  the  Jews, 
which  they  did  jn  our  Saviour's  time  to  one  ano- 
ther;  ''  when  Christ  cometh,"  when  the  Mes- 
siAs  whom  ye  exped  comes,  '^  will  he  do  more 
^'  miracles  than  thefe  which  tiiis  man  hath  done?" 

But,  fecondly,  this  wil!  yet  more  clearly  appear 
by  the  correfpondency  of  the  things  here  mentioned, 
with  what  was  foretold  by  the  prophets  concerning 
the  Mess  I  AS, 

Not  to  mention  innumerable  circumdances  of  his 
birthj  and  life,  and  death,  and  refurredlion,  and  zf- 
cenfion  into  heaven,  together  with  the  fuccefs  and 
prevalency  of  his  dodrine  in  the  world,  all  which 
are  pundualiy  foretold  by  fome  or  other  of  the  pro- 
phets :  I  fhall  confine  myfelf  to  the  particulars  here 
in  the  text. 


195^  Proving  Jesus  to  be  the  Messias. 

SERM.  Firfl,  It  was  foretold  of  the  Mess  i  as,  that  he 
y_^  ^^  fhould  work  miraculous  cures.  Ifa.  xxxv.  4,  5,  6. 
fpeaking  of  the  Messias,  *'  he  wilJ  come  andfave 
*'  you  y  then  the  eyes  of  the  Wind  fnall  be  opened, 
"  and  the  ears  of  the  deaf  flialJ  be  unftopp'd  •,  then 
*'  fhall  the  lame  man  leap  as  an  hart,  and  the  tongue 
^'  of  the  dumb  fing  ;"  this  you  fee  was  fulfilled 
here  in  the  text.  *Tis  true  indeed,  the  text  mentions 
another  miracle  v/hich  is  not  in  the  prophet,  that 
«'  he  raifed  the  dead  j"  but  if  God  did  more  than 
he  promifed  and  foretold,  this  is  no  prejudice  to  the 
argument,  if  all  that  he  foretold  was  accomplifh'd  in 
him.  Befides,  the  Jews  have  a  proverb,  that  God 
is  not  content  to  perform  barely  what  he  promifeth, 
but  "  he  ufually  doth  fomething  over  and  above  his 
*'  promife.'*  That  the  Messias  fhould  "  heal  the 
"  blind,  and  the  deaf,  and  the  lame,"  Ifaiah  pro- 
phefied;  and  God  makes  good  this  promife  and  pre- 
diftion  to  the  full  >  the  Messias  did  not  only  do 
thefe,  but  which  is  more  and  greater  than  any  of 
thefe,  "  he  raifed  the  dead  to  life." 

Secondly,  it  was  likewife  foretold  of  the  Messias, 
that  he  "  fliould  preach  die  gofpel  to  the  poor,'* 
Ifa.  Ixi.  I.  ''The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  God  is  upon 
*'  me,  becaufe  he  hath  anointed  me  .  to  preach  good 
*'  tidings  unto  the  meek,  ctayyeX/^sc^ou  -aT'/j^x^l^^  to 
*'  preach  the  gofpel  or  good  tidings  to  the  poor  j'* 
10  the  LXXII  render  the  words ;  and  they  are  the 
very  words  ufed  by  our  Saviour  here  in  the  itxt. 
*Tis  true  indeed,  this  was  no  miracle,  but  it  was  the 
pundual  accomplilhment  of  a  prophefy  concerning 
the  Mess  ias,  and  confequently  an  evidence  that  he 
was  the  Me  s  s  ias.  But  befides  it  had  fomething  m 
it  which  was  very  ftrange  to  the  Jews^  and  very  dif-. 

ferenc 


Proving  Jesus  to  be  the  Messias,  1957 

ferent  from  the  way  of  their  dodcors  and  teachers  j  ^E '^^  ^* 
for  the  rabbles  among  the  jews  would  fcarce  indriKfl 
any  but  for  great  reward;  they  would  meddle  with 
none  but  thofe  that  were  able  to  requite  their  pains  j 
tiie  ordinary  and  poorer  fort  of  people  they  had  in 
great  contempt,  as  appears  by  that  flighting  exprcf- 
fion  of  tiiem,  John  vii.  48,  49.  "  Have  any  of 
"  the  rulers  of  the  pharifces  believed  on  him  ?  but 
*'  this  people  who  knoweth  not  the  Jaw  are  curfed." 
And  Grotius  upon  this  text  tells  us,  that  thejewifli 
maders  had  this  foolifh  and  infolent  proverb  among 
them,  that  ''  the  Spirit  of  God  doth  not  refl 
"  but  upon  a  rich  man,"  to  which  this  predidioa 
concerning  the  Messias  was  a  diredc  contra- 
didion :  "  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  upon  mc, 
*'  becaufe  he  hath  anointed  me  to  preach  the  gofpel 
**  to  the  poor."  In  old  time  the  prophets  were  ef- 
pecially  fent  to  the  kings  and  princes  of  the  people  : 
but  this  great  prophet  comes  to  "  preach  the  gofpel 
''  to  the  poor."  None  have  fo  little  reafon  to  be 
proud  as  t\\t  fons  of  men,  but  never  was  any  fo  hum- 
ble as  the  Son  of  God  -,  our  Saviour's  whole  Jifs^ 
and  dodrine  was  a  con  tradition  to  the  falfe  opinions 
of  the  world  *,  they  thought  the  rich  and  great  men 
of  tiie  world  the  only  happy  perfons,  but  he  camic 
''  to  preach  gLid  tidings  to  the  poor/'  to  bring 
good  news  to  them  v/hom  the  great  dodors  of  the 
law  defpifed,  and  {tx.  at  nought;  and  therefore  to 
confound  their  pride  and  folly,  and  to  confute 
their  falfe  opinions  of  things,  he  begins  that 
excellent  fermon  of  his  with  this  fiying,  "  blef. 
''  fed  are  the  poor,  for  theirs  is  the  kingdom  of 
^'  God." 

Vol.  VIL  14 C  Thirdly, 

3' 


395S  Proving  Jesus  to  be  the  Messias. 

SFkM.      Thirdly,    it  was  foretold  of  the   Messias,  thaC 
^.liL  ^^^^  world     Iliould   be  offended     at   him,    Ifa.   viii. 
14.  "  He  fhall  be  f  ;r  a  ftone  of  (lumbling,  and  for 
"  a  rock  of  oftence  to  both    the  houfes  of  Ifrael." 
And  Ifa.  Jiii.  1,2,    3.    "    Who   hath  believed    our 
*'  report?  and  to  whom  is  the  arm  of  the   Lord 
*'  revealed?    he  hath  no  form  nor  comelinels,  ^r^^ 
*'  when  we  fee  him,    there  is  no   beauty   that   we 
*'  fliould  defire  him  -,  he  is  defpifed  and  rejected  of 
*'  men,  and  we  hid  as  it  were  our  faces  from  him  j 
*'  he  v/as  defpifed,   and  we  eileemed  him  not^"  and 
this  likewile  \s  iniimated  in  the  hiil  words  of   the 
ttxz^  "  and  bltfied  is  hewhofoever  fliall  notbeoffend- 
"  ed  in  me/'  Intimating,   that  notwithftanding  the 
great  works  diat  he  did  among  them,  which  teilified 
of  him  that  he  came  from   God,    notwithftanding 
the   predidions   of   their   prophets  concerning    the 
Messias,    were  fo  clearly  and  pundtually  accom- 
Tjhfh'd  in  him ;    yet  notwithftanding  all   this,    they 
would  take  offence  at  him  upon  one  account  or  other, 
and  reied:  him  and  hi3do6trine;    but  even  this,  that 
they  rejected  him,  and  would  not  own  him  for  their 
Messias,  was  another  fign  or  evidence  that  he  v/as 
the  true  Messias   foretold   by    the  prophets;    for 
among  other  things  this  was  exprefly  predided  con- 
cerning him,    that  he  fliouid  be  defpifed  and  rejedled 
of  men. 

And  thus  I  have  done  v/ith  the  firfl  thing  I  pro- 
pounded to  fpeak  to  -,  nam.ely,  the  evidence  which 
our  Saviour  here  gives  of  his  being  the  true 
Messias, 

Firft,  the  many  and  great  miracles  which  he 
wrought,  prove  that  he  came  from  God.     And, 

Secondly, 


Proving  Jesus  to  be  the  Messias.  1959 

Secondly,  the  correfpondence  of  the  things  he  did,  S  E  xR.  M. 
with  what  was  foretold   by  the  prophets  concerning" 
the  Messias,  declare  him  to  be  the  true  Messias. 

I  now  proceed  to  the  next  thing  I  propounded  to 
fpeak  to,  namely, 

Secondly,  an  intimation  in  the  text,  that  notwith- 
flanding  all  the  evidence  Christ  gave  of  himfelf, 
yet  many  would  be  offended  at  him,  and  reje6t  him 
and  his  dodrine.  In  fpeaking  to  which,  it  will  be 
very  proper  to  con fider, 

Fird,  how  the  poor  came  to  be  more  difpofed  to 
receive  the  gofpel  than  others. 

Secondly,  what  thofe  prejudices  are  which  the 
world  had  againft  our  Saviour  and  his  religion 
at  its  firfl:  appearance,  as  alfo  thofe  which  men  have 
at  this  day  againft  the  chriftian  religion,  and  to 
endeavour  to  fhew  the  unreafonablenefs  of  them. 

Thirdly,  how  happy  a  thing  it  is  to  efcape  and 
overcome  the  common  prejudices  which  men  have 
asiainft  reh'orion. 

Firft,  how  the  poor  came  to  be  more  difpofed  to 
receive  the  gofpel  than  others  -,  "  the  poor  have  the 
"  gofpel  preached  unto  them."  Which  does  not  only 
fignify  that  our  Saviour  did  more  efpecially  apply 
himfelf  to  them,  but  likewife  that  they  were  in  a 
nearer  difpofition  to  receive  it,  and  did  of  all  others 
give  the  moft  ready  entertainment  to  his  do&ine: 
and  this  our  Saviour  declares  to  us  in  tl^Q  beo-jn- 
ning  of  his  fermon  upon  the  mount,  when  he  pro- 
nounceth  the  poor  blefTed  upon  this  account,  becaufe 
they  were  nearer  to  the  kingdom  of  God  than 
others  ♦,  "  bleiTcd  are  the  poor,  for  theirs  is  the 
kingdom  or  God."  So  likewife  Si,  James,  chap.  ii. 
%'er.  5.  ^'  Hath  not  God  chofen  the  poor  of  this 

14  C  z  **  world 


CXVII. 


ig'^o  Provmg  Jesus  to  he  the  Messias. 

S  KR  J^^^  *'  world  rich  in  faith,  and  heirs  of  the  kingdom, 
"  which  he  harli  promifed  to  them  that  love  him?" 
So  that  it  Teems  the  poor  were  upon  fome  account 
or  other  in  a  nearer  dirpofuion  to  receive  the  gofpel, 
than  the  great  and  rich  men  of  this  world.  And  of 
this  there  are  three  accounts  to  be  given. 

Firfl,  the  poor  had  no  earthly  mterefb  to  engage 
them  to  rejedl  our  Saviour  and  his  doflrine.  The 
high  priefts,  and  fcribcs,  and  pharifees  among  the 
Jews,  they  had  a  plain  worldly  intercfl:  which  did 
engage  them  to  oppofe  our  Saviour  and  his 
doctrine;  for  if  he  were  received  for  the  Messias, 
and  his  do6lrinc  embraced,  they  mufb  of  neccfTity 
lofe  their  fway  and  authority  among  the  people  •,  and 
all  that  which  rendred  them  fo  confiderable,  their 
pretended  skill  in  the  law,  and  in  the  traditions  and 
obfervances  of  their  fathers,  together  with  their  ex- 
ternal fhews  of  piety  and  devotion,  would  fignify 
nothing,  if  our  Saviour  and  his  dodlrine  fhould 
take  place.  And  there  are  very  few  fo  honed  and 
fmcere,  as  to  be  content  for  truth's  fake,  to  part 
with  their  reputation  and  authority,  and  to  become 
lefs  in  the  elleem  of  men  than  they  were  before. 
Few  are  fo  impartial  as  to  quit  thofe  things  which 
they  once  had  laid  great  weight  upon,  and  kept  a 
great  ftir  about,  becaufe  this  is  to  acknowledge  that 
ihey  were  in  an  error,  and  miftaken  in  their  zeal, 
which  few  have  the  ingenuity  to  own,  tho'  it  be 
never  fo  plain  to  others.;  and  therefore  it  is  no  won- 
der that  our  Saviour's  do6lrine  met  with  fo  much 
refillance  from  thofe,  who  were  fo  much  concern'd 
in  point  of  honour  and  reputation,  to  make  head 
againfl  rt.  And  this  account  our  Saviour  him- 
felf  gives  us  of  their  infidelity,    John  v.  44.  "  How 

**  can 


Proving  Jesus  to  be  the  Messias.  196 i 

«'  can  ye  believe,-  which  receive  honour  one  of  ano-  SE  R  A/r. 
"  ther,  and  feek  not  the  honour  which  cometh  of ,    _     Jy 
''  God   only?"    And   chap.  xii.  43.  "    For   they 
"  loved  the  praife  of  men  more  than  the  praife  of 
«  God.*' 

And  belides   the  point  of  reputation,  thofe   thac 
were  rich,  were  concerned  in  point  of  intereft,    to 
oppofe  our  Saviour   and  his  do6lrine  ;  becaufe  he 
cali'd  upon  men  "  to  deny  themfelves,  and  to  pare 
"  with  houfcs  and  lands,    yea  and  life  it  {t%  for  his 
*'  fake,  and  for  the  gofpei's/'  which  muft  needs  be 
a  very  hard  and  unpleafant  do6lrine  to   rich  men, 
who  had  great  eftates,  and  had  fet  their  hearts  upon 
them*     Upon  this  account  it  is  that  our   Saviour. 
pronouncech  it  fo  ''  hard  for  a  rich  man  to  enter 
*'  into   the  kingdom  of   God  j"  and  compares  it 
with  thofe    things  that  are  mod  difficult,    and  hu- 
manly impoffible ;  "  I  fay  unto  you,  it  is   eafier  for 
''  a  camel  to  go  through  the  eye  of  a  needle,  than 
*'  for  a  rich  man  to  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God." 
But  now  the  poor  were  free  from   thefe  incum- 
brances and  temptations  ;    they  had  nothing  to  lofe, 
and  therefore  our  Saviour's  dodrine  went   down 
more  eafily  with  them  •,  becaufe  it  did  not  contra- 
di6t  their  intereft,  as  it  did  the  intereft  of  thofe  who 
had  great  eftates  and  pofteffions. 

Secondly,  another  reafon  of  this  is,  that  thofe  that 
are  poor,  and  enjoy  little  of  the  good  things  of  this 
life,  are  willing  to  entertain  good  news  of  happinefs 
in  another.  Thofe  who  are  in  a  ft  are  of  prefent 
mifery  and  fuftering,  are  glad  to  hear  that  it  Ihall  be 
well  with  them  hereafter,  and  are  willing  to  liften  , 
to  the  good  "news  of  a  future  happinefs;  and  there- 
fore our  Saviour,  when  he  had  pronounced  the 

**  poor 


1962  Vrovhig  Jesus  to  he  the  Messias. 

SERM.  "  poor   blefled/*  Luke  vi.   20.    adds   by  way   of 
'^     '    oppofition,  ver.   24.  "  Bat  wo  unto  you  that  are 
*'  rich  ;    for   ye   have    received  your  confolation." 
They  were  in  fo    comfortable  a  condition  at  pre- 
fent,    that  they    were  not    much    concerned    what 
Ihould  become  of  them  hereafter  ;  whereas  all   the 
comfort    that   poor  men    have,    is   the  hopes  of  a 
better  condition,  non  ft  male  nunc^  ^  olim  fic  erit^ 
that  *'  if  it  be  bad  now,  it  will  not  be  fo  ahvays," 
and  therefore   no  wonder  if  the  promifes  and  alTu- 
rance  of  a  future  happinefs  be  very  welcome  to  them. 
Thirdly,  if  by  the  poor  we  do  not  only  under- 
ftand  thofe  who  are  in  a  low  and  mean  condition 
as  to  the  things  of  this  world,  but  fuch  likevvife  as 
had  a  temper  and    difpofition  of  mind  fuitable  to 
the  poverty  of  their  outward  condition,  which  our 
Saviour  calls  "  poverty  of  fpirit,"  by  which  he 
means ''  meeknefs  and  humility,"  there  is  no  doubt 
but  that  fuch  a  fi'ame  and  temper  of  fpirit  is  a  great 
difpofition  to  the  receiving  of  truth.     And  that  this 
is  included  in  the  notion  of  poverty,   is  very  plain, 
both  from  the  words  of  the  prophefy  I  cited  before, 
Ila.  Ixi.  I.  "  The  Spirit   of  the  Lord  is  upon 
**  me,    bfecaufe    the   Lord   hath   anointed   me  to 
«*  pr  ach  good  tidings  to  the  meek,   and  to  bind 
*'  up  cue  broken-hearted  \ "  and  likewife  from  our 
Saviour's  defcription  of  thefe  perfons,  in  one  of 
the  evaii^'.eiifts,  Matth.  v.  3.  "  Blefled  are  the  poor 
"  in  fpirit,  for  theirs  is  the  kingdom  of  God."  So 
that  bv  the  poor   who  are  fo  nearly  difpofed  to  re- 
ceive the  gofpel,  our  Saviour  intended  thofe,  who» 
being  in  a  poor  and  low  condition  in  refpedl  of  out- 
ward things,  were  likewife   meek   and   humble  in 
their  fpirits.     Now  meeknefs  and  humility  are  great 

difpo- 


Proving  Jesus  to  be  the  Messias.  196] 

dirpofitions  to  the  entertainino;  of  truth.  Thefe  orraces^^  '"<  '^f. 
and  virtues  do  prepare  the  minds  of  men  for  learn-""' 
ing  and  inftrudtion  ;  meeknefs  and  modeHy,  and 
humihty,  are  the  proper  difpofitions  of  a  fcholar. 
He  that  hath  a  mean  opinion  of  himfelf  is  ready 
to  leiu-n  of  others  -,  he  who  is  not  blinded  by  pride 
or  paiTion,  is  m.ore  apt  to  confider  things  impar- 
tially, and  to  pafs  a  truer  judgment  upon  them, 
than  the  proud  and  pafnonate.  PafTion  and  pride 
are  great  obftacles  to  the  receiving  of  truth,  and  to 
our  improvement  in  knowledge.  PaiTion  does  not 
only  darken  the  minds  of  men,  but  puts  a  falfe 
bias  upon  our  judgments,  which  draws  them  off 
many  times  from  truth,  and  fways  them  that  way  to 
v/hich  our  pafTion  mclines  th.em.  A  man  of  a  calm 
and  meek  tem.pcr,  (lands  always  indiiferent  for  the 
receiving  of  truth,  and  holds  the  balance  of  his 
judgment  even  ;  but  pafTion  fways  and  inclines  it 
one  way,  and  that  commonly  agamLt  truth  and 
reafon.  So  likewife  pride  is  a  great  impediment  to 
knowledge,  and  the  very  woril  quality  that  a  learner 
can  have,  it  obftrucls  all  the  palTiges  whereby  know- 
'led2;e  Hiould  enter  into  us,  it  makes  men  refufe  in- 
llruclion,  out  of  a  conceit  they  need  it  not.  Many 
men  mi.dit  have  knov/n  more,  had  a  not  been  for 
the  vain  opinion  which  they  have  entertained  of  the 
fufficiency  of  their  knowledge.  Tins  is  true  in  all 
kinds  of  learning,  but  more  efpecially  as  to  the 
knowledge  of  divine  things.  For  God  loves  to 
communicate  himfelf,  and  bellow  his  grace  and  wif- 
dom  upon  meek  and  humble  minds.  So  the  fcrip- 
pture  tells  us,  PHil.  x::v.  9.  "  The  meek  will  he 
*■•  guide  in  judgment,  and  the  meek  will  he  teach 
♦'  his  ways,"     And  i  Pet.  v.  5.  '*  Be  clothed  with 

"  humility  J 


1964  Proving  Jesus  to  be  the  Messias. 

SE  RiM.*'  humility  ;  for  God  refifteth  the  proud,  and  giv- 
<-'X^VII.  ^c  gj-j-^  gj.^(,£  fQ  j.}^g  humble.*' 

And  thus  I  have  fhewn  in  what  rcfpeds  the  poor 
were  more  difpofcd  for  the  receiving  thegofpel,  than 
others.     I  now  proceed  to  the 

Second  thing,  namely,  what  thofe  prejudices  and 
objedions  are,  which  the  world  had  again  (I  our  Sa- 
viour and  his  religion  at  their  firll  appearance  ^  as 
alfo  to  enquire  into  thofe  which  men  have  at  this 
day  againft  the  chriftian  religion,  and  to  fhew 
the  weaknefs  and  unreafonablenefs  of  them.  I 
begin, 

Firft,  with  thofe  prejudices  which  the  world  had 
againft  our  Saviour  and  his  religion  at  their  firft 
appearance. 

Both  Jews  and  Gentiles  were  offended  at  him  and  his 
do6trine  j  but  not  both  upon  the  fame  account.  They 
both  took  exceptions  at  him,  efpecially  at  his  low  and 
fuffering  condition  ;  but  not  both  upon  the  fame 
reafon.  I  fhall  begin  with  the  exceptions  which  the 
Jews  took  againft  our  blefTed  Saviour  and  his  re- 
lio-ioni  and  1  ftiall  reduce  them  all,  or  at  leaft  the 
moft  confiderable  of  them  (as  I  find  difperfed  in 
the  hiftory  of  the  gofpel,  and  in  the  Ad;s  of  the 
apoftles)  to  thcfe  ^ix  heads. 

Firft,  the  exceptions  which  they  took  againft  him 
upon  account  of  his  extradlion  and  original. 

Secondly,  at  the  meannefs  of  his  condition,  con- 
trary to  their  univerfal  expedlation. 

Thirdly,  as  to  his  miracles. 

Fourthly,  his  converfation. 

Fifthly,  the  prejudice  that  lay  againft  him  from 
the  oppofition  that  was  made  by  perfons  of  the 
gr^ateft  knowledge  and  authority  among  them.  And, 

Laftly, 


Proving]ES\j^fo  be  the  Mtls>sia^.  1965 

Laflly,  that  the  reIi2;ioa  which  he  endeavour'd  SERM. 

CXVIl 
to   introduce,    did  abohfh  and  fuperfede  their   an- 
cient   religion,    as  of  no   longer  ufe   and    continu- 
ance, though  it  was  plain  it  was  at  firft  inftituted  by 
God. 

Firft,  the  exceptions  which  they  took  at  his-  ex- 
tradion  and  original.  In  relation  to  this  they  were 
offended  at  three  things. 

I. That  his  original  was  known  among  them.  This 
you  find  urged  againfl  him,  John  vii.  27.  "  We 
"  know  this  man  whence  he  is,  but  when  the  Mes- 
"  SI  AS  comes,  no  man  knows  whence  he  is." 

This  to  be  fure  was  no  juft  exception  in  reafon 
againfl  him.  For  what  if  his  extradion  were  known, 
might  he  not  be  from  God  for  all  that  .^  They 
owned  Mofes  for  the  greatefl  prophet  that  ever  was, 
and  yet  it  it  was  very  well  known  from  v/hence  he 
was. 

But  they  feem  to  refer  to  fome  prophefy  of  the 
old  teflament,  which  did  feem  to  afTert  h  much ' 
If  they  meant  that  his  extradion  fhould  be  altoo-e- 
ther  unknown ;  they  knew  very  well,  and  believed 
the  contrary,  that  "  he  was  to  be  of  the  line  of 
"  David,  and  to  come  out  of  Bethlehem."  If  thev 
referred  to  that  prophefy,  that  "  a  virgin  fliould 
"  conceive  and  bear  a  fon,"  and  i^o  underflood  that 
he  fhould  be  without  father  -,  this  was  really  true, 
tho'  they  thought  that  he  was  the  fon  of  jofeph. 
And  if  he  affirmed  that  he  had  no  father,  he  did 
fufiiciently  juflify  it  by  his  miracles;  that  being  as 
eafy  to  be  believed  pofTible  by  a  divine  power,  as 
the  miracles  which  he  wrought ;  which  yet  they  could 
not  deny,  becaufe  they  faw  them. 

Vol.  Vir.  14  D  i.  Another 

3- 


1^66  Fnvlng  Jesus  to  be  the  Messia?* 

SHRM.  2.  Another  prciudice  ao;ainft  his  extradion,  wa<? 
the  meannefs  of  his  parents  and  breeding.  This 
you  land  mentioned,  Matth.  xiii.  54,  c,^,  "  "Whence 
"  hath  this  man  this  wifdom,  and  thcfe  mighty 
*'  works  ?  is  not  this  the  carpenter's  fon  ?  is  not  his 
*'  mother  called  Mary  •,  and  his  brethren  James  and 
*'  Jofes,  and  Simon  and  Judas?  and  his  fifters,  are 
*'  they  not  all  v/ith  us?  whence  then  hath  this  man 
''  thefe  things  ?  and  they  were  offended  in  him.'* 
And  fo  1  ike  wife,  John  vii.  15.  "  How  knoweth  this 
''  man  letters,  having  never  learned  ? " 

A  ftrange  prejudice  and  moft  unreafonable.  They 
could  not  believe  him  to  be  an  extraordinary  perfon, 
becaufe  his  parents  and  relations,  his  birth  and  breed- 
ing were  fo  mean.  He  had  been  brought  up  to  a 
trade,  and  not  brought  up  to  learning :  whereas  in 
reafon,  this  ought  to  have  been  an  argument  juft  the 
other  way  ;  that  he  was  an  extraordinary  perfon,  and 
divinely  alTifled,  who  all  on  the  ludden,  without 
the  help  and  afliflance  of  education,  gave  fuch  evi- 
dence of  his  great  wifdom  and  knowledge,  and  did 
fuch  mighty  works.  This  could  not  be  imputed 
to  his  breeding,  for  that  was  mean ;  therefore  there 
muft  be  fomeching  extraordinary  and  divine  in  it. 
Thus  another  man,  who  had  been  free  from  prejudice, 
would  have  reafoned. 

3.  The  moft  unreafonable  prejudice  of  all,  in  re- 
fped  of  his  extraction,  was  grounded  upon  a  fpiteful 
an^  malicious  proverb,  concerning  the  country  where 
our  Saviour  was  brought  up,  and  they  fuppofed 
him  to  be  born  ;  and  that  was  Galilee.  John  i.  46. 
"  Can  any  good  thing  come  out  of  Nazareth  ? " 
And  John  vii.  41.  ''  Shall  the  Messias  come  out  of 
*'  Galilee  }  "  And  ver.  52.  *' Search  and  look,  for  out 
«'  of  Galilee  arifeth  no  prophet."  But 


Trovhig  Jesus  to  he  the  Messi  as.  .1967 

But  it  feenis  Nathanae],  who  was  a  o;ood  man,  was  S  E  R  M. 

.  CXVII. 

edily  taken  off  from  this  common  prejudice,  when 

PhiHp  faid  to  him,  "  come  and  fee."     He  bids  him 
come  and  fee   the  works  he  did,  and  then  refers  it 
to  him,  whether  he  would  believe  his  own  eyes,  or 
an  old  proverb :  however  it  feems  the  Jews  laid  great 
weight  upon  it,  as  if  this  alone  were  enough  to  con- 
fute all  his   miracles,  and    after  they  had  fliot  this 
bolt  at  him  ;    the    bufinefs  were   concluded  clearly 
againfl:  him.  But  prudent  and  confiderate  men  do  not 
ufe  to  give  much  credit  to  ill-natur'd  proverbs ;   the 
good  or  bad  characters  which  are  given  of  countries 
are  not  underdood  to  be  univerfally  true,  and  with- 
out exception.     There  is  no  place  but  hath  brought 
forth  fome  brave  fpirits,  and  excellent  perfons ;  what- 
ever the  general  temper  and  difpofition  of  the  inha- 
bitants may  be.    Among  the  Grecians,  the  Boeotians 
were  efteem'd  a  dull    people,  even  to  a  proverb  \ 
and  yet  Pindar,  one  of  their  chief  poets,  was  one  of 
them.     The  Scythians  were  a  barbarous  nation,  and 
one  would   have  thought  no  good  could   have  come 
from  hence ;  and  yet  that  country  yielded  Anacharfis  an 
eminent  philofopher.     The  Idumeans  were  aliens,  and 
Itrangers  to  the  covenant  \  and  yet  Job,  one  of  the 
bed  men  that  ever  was,  came  from  thence.     God 
can  raife  up  eminent  perfons  from  any  place  ;  Abra- 
ham from  Urof  the  Chaldees,  and  an  idolatrous  peo- 
ple.    Nay,  as  our  Saviour  tells  us,  "  he  can  out 
"  of  ftones  raife  up  children  unto  Abraham."     The 
wife  God,   in  the  government  of  the  world,  does 
not  tie  himfelf  to  our  foolifh  proverbs.     It  is  not 
necefifary  to  make  a  man  a  prophet,  that  he  fhould 
be  bred  in  a  good   air.     If  God  fends  a  man,  it 
matters  not  from  what  place  he  comes. 

140  2  Secondly^ 


1963  Provi/tg  Jesus  to  be  the  Messias. 

KRM.      Secondly,  another  head  of  exception  againfl:  our 

->V\/^  II  ■'  7 

Saviour,  was  the  mcannefs  of  his  outward  condi- 
tion, fo  contrary  to  the  univcrHil  cxpedation  of  the 
Jews.  The  Jews,  from  the  tradition  of  their  fa- 
thers, to  whicli  they  (as  the  church  of  Rome  does 
at  this  day,)  paid  a  greater  reverence  than  to  the 
written  word  of  God,  were  pofTeft  with  a  ftrong 
perfuafion,  that  the  Messias,  whom  they  expe6led, 
was  to  be  a  great  prince  and  conqueror,  and  to  Tub- 
due  all  nations  to  them ;  fo  that  nothing  could  be  a 
greater  defeat  to  their  expectations,  than  the  mean 
and  low  condition,  in  v/hich  our  Saviour  appeared; 
fo  that  upon  this  account  they  were  almofi:  univer- 
fally  offended  at  him. 

But  this  prejudice  was  very  unreafonable.  For 
neither  did  their  prophets  foretel  any  fuch  thing,  as 
the  temporal  greatnefs  of  the  Messias  :  but  on  the 
contrary  moft  exprefly,  that  "  he  fhould  be  defpifed. 
"  and  rejedled  of  men,"  that  "  he  fhould  be  a 
"  man  of  forrows  and  fufferings,"  and  at  lad  "  be 
**  put  to  death;"  which  was  diredly  contrary  to 
what  they  expedled  from  their  ill-grounded  tra- 
dition. 

Thirdly,  againft  his  miracles  they  made  thefe  two 
exceptions, 

I.  That  he  wrought  them  by  magical  skill,  and 
by  the  power  of  the  devil. 

Which  was  fo  exorbitantly  unreafonable  and  ma- 
licious, that  our  Saviour  pronounceth  it  to  bean 
'^  unpardonable  fin,"  and  for  anfwer  to  it,  appeals 
to  every  man's  reafon,  whether  it  was  likely  "  that 
"  the  devil  fhould  confpire  againft  himfelf,  and 
*'  aflift  any  man  to  overthrow  his  own  kingdom  ?" 
for  it  was  plain,  our  Saviour's  dodrine  was  direflJy 

contrary 


Proving  Jesus  fo  be  the  Messias.  1969 

contrary    to   the  devil's  defign  ;    and  therefore  to  ^;^,^J^* 
affift  him  to  work  miracles  for  the  confirmation  of  1 
it,  muft  have  been  apparently  againft  his  own  inte- 
reft,  and  to  the  ruin  of  his  own  kingdom. 

2.  They  pretended  that  though  he  did  many 
great  works,  yet  he  gave  them  no  fign  from  hea- 
ven. Matth.  xvi.  i.  It  is  faid,  "  they  defired  him 
^'  to  fhew  them  a  fign  from  heaven."  It  fecms  they 
expeded  that  God  fliould  give  fome  immediate 
teftimony  to  him  from  heaven ;  as  he  did  to  Elias, 
when  fire  came  down  from  heaven,  and  confumed 
his  enemies;  and  particularly  they  expeded,  that 
when  he  was  upon  the  crofs,  if  he  were  the  true 
Messias,  he  fhould  have  come  down  and  faved 
himfelf :  and  becaufe  he  did  not  anfwer  their  expe- 
dation  in  this,  they  concluded  him  an  impoftor. 

Now  v/hat  could  be  more  unreafonable }  when  he 
had  wrought  fo  many  other,  and  great  miracles, 
perverfly  to  infill  upon  fome  particular  kind  of  mi- 
racle which  they  fancied?  as  if  God  were  bound  to 
gratify  the  curiofity  of  men  ^and  as  if  our  Saviour 
were  not  as  much  "  declared  to  be  the  Son  of  God, 
"  by  rifing  again  from  the  dead/*  as  if  he  had 
*'  come  down  from  the  crofs. 

Fourthly,  as  to  his  converfation,  they  had  thele 
three  exceptions. 

I.  That  he  ufed  no  feverity  in  his  habit  or  diet, 
took  too  much  freedom,  as  they  thought ;  "  came 
«'  eating  and  drinking/'  that  is,  he  freely  ufed  the 
creatures  of  God,  for  the  end  for  which  they  were 
given,  with  temperance  and  thankfgiving ;  and  did 
not  lay  thofe  rigorous  reftraints  upon  himfelf  in  thefe 
matters,  which  many,  that  were  efteemed  the  mofl 
religious  among  them,  ufed  to  do. 

But 


ex  VII 


1 970  Proving  Jesus  to  be  the  Mess i  as. 

SERM.  But  he  plainly  iliews  them,  that  this  exception 
was  mecrly  out  of  their  prejudice  againfl  him.  For 
if  he  had  come  in  the  way  of  aufterity,  they  would 
haverejeded  him  as  well.  They  were  refolved  to 
find  fault  with  him,  whatever  he  did.  Matth.  xi.  16. 
"  Whereunto  fhall  I  liken  this  generation  ?  John  the 
"  baptifl:  came  neither  eating  nor  drinking,  and  they 
*'  fay  he  hath  a  devil.'*.  He  lived  in  a  more  auftere 
and  melancholy  way,  "  he  came  in  the  way  of 
*'  righteoufnefs,"  ufed  great  ftridtnefs  and  feverity  in 
his  habit  and  diet,  and  this  they  took  exception  at. 
Our  Saviour  was  of  a  quite  contrary  temper,  and 
that  did  not  pleafe  them  neither.  "  Tiie  fon  of  man 
*'  came  eating  and  drinking,  and  they  fay,  behold 
**  a  wine-bibber,  and  a  glutton."  So  that  let  our 
Saviour  have  done  what  he  would,  he  could  not 
have  carried  himfelf  fo,  as  to  have  efcaped  the  cen- 
fures  of  men,   fo  peevilhly  and  perverfly  difpofed. 

2.  That  he  kept  company  with  publicans  and 
finners. 

To  which  exception  nothing  can  be  more  reafona- 
ble  than  cur  Saviour's  own  anfwer  ;  that  he  was 
fent  to  be  a  phyfician  to  the  world,  '^  to  call  finners 
"  to  repentance ;"  and  therefore  they  had  no  reafon 
to  be  angry,  or  think  it  flrange,  if  he  converfed 
with  his  patients  among  whom  his  proper  employ- 
ment lay. 

3.  They  objeded  to  him  profanenefs  in  breaking 
the  fabbath,  and  that  furely  was  plain,  that  "  he 
«'  could  not  be  of  God,  if  he  kept  not  the  fabbath- 
«'  day."  The  truth  was,  he  had  healed  one  on  the 
fabbath-day. 

To  this  our  Saviour  gives  a  mod  reafonable  and 
fatisfadlory  anfwer,  that  furely  * '  it  was  lawful  to  do 

*'  good 


ProvtJig  Jesus  to  he  the  Messias.  197  i 

««  good  on  the  fabbath-day  j"  that  that  was  butaSERM. 
pofitive  inflitution,  but  works  of  mercy  are  natural 
and  moral  duties;  and  God  himfelf  had  declared, 
that  he  would  have  even  his  own  inftitutions  to  give 
way  to  thofe  greater  duties,  that  are  of  natural  and 
eternal  obligation.  ''  I  will  have  mercy  and  not  facri- 
"  fice."  And  then  from  the  end  of  the  fabbath  5 
the  fabbath  was  made  for  the  reft  and  refrefhment 
of  man  ;  and  therefore  could  not  be  prefumed  to  be 
intended  to  his  prejudice.  "  The  fabbath  was  made 
"  for  man  :  and  not  man  for  the  fabbath." 

Fifthly,  another  great  prejudice  againft  him,  was, 
that  perfons  of  the  greateft  knov/ledge  and  autho- 
rity among  them,  did  not  embrace  his  dodlrine. 
John  vii.  48.  "  Have  any  of  the  rulers  or  pharifees 
* '  believed  on  him  ?*'  fo  that  here  was  the  infallible 
rule  and  authority  of  their  church  againft  him. 

There  is  no  doubt,  but  the  example  and  authority 
of  our  guides  ought  to  fvvay  very  much  with  us, 
and  overrule  us  in  doubtful  cafes  j  but  not  againft 
plain  and  convincing  evidence  -,  there  v/e  ought  to 
follow,  "  and  obey  God  rather  than  men."  There 
is  fometimes  a  vifible  and  palpable  corruption  in 
thofe  who  are  to  lead  us ;  they  may  have  an  intereft 
to  oppofe  the  truth :  and  thus  it  was  with  the  phari- 
fees and  rulers  at  that  time ;  and  fo  it  hath  been 
among  chriftians  in  the  great  degeneracy  of  the 
Roman  church.  The  chriftian  religion  was  never 
more  endangered,  nor  ever  more  corrupted,  than 
by  thofe  who  have  been  in  greateft  authority  in  that 
church,  who  ought  to  have  underftood  religion  beft, 
and  have  been  the  principal  fupport  of  it.  "  Men 
''  may  err  :  but  God  cannot."  So  that  when  God 
fends  a  prophet,  or  by  his  word  does  plainly  declare 

his 


197"  Proving  JesUs  to  be  the  Messias. 

SF.  R  M.  his  will  to  us,  humane  example  and  authority  ceafeth, 

y^ \,and  is  of  no  force. 

Tiie  laft  prejudice  I  fhall  mention,  which  the 
Jews  had  againft  our  Saviour  and  his  do6lrine, 
was^  that  it  did  abolifli  and  fuperfede  their  rehgion, 
as  of  no  longer  ufe  and  continuance ;  though  it  was 
plain  it  was  inftituted  by  God. 

This  had  been  a  very  fpecious  pretence  indeed, 
had  not  this  been  part  of  their  religion,  and  hiad  not 
their  own  prophets  foretold,  that  the  Messias 
fliould  come  and  perfefl  what  was  wanting  and  de- 
fedive  in  their  inftitution.  It  is  exprefly  faid  in 
their  law,  "  that  God  would  raife  unto  them  ano- 
"  ther  prophet,  like  to  Mofes,  and  that  they 
"  fhould  hear  him,"  when  he  came.  So  that  in 
truth  it  was  the  accomplifhment  of  all  thole  revela- 
tions which  were  made  to  the  Jews,  and  did  not 
reprove  the  jewifli  religion  as  falfe,  but  as  imperfed  : 
and  did  not  contradict  and  overthrow  ;  but  "  per- 
"  fed  and  ful51  the  law  and  the  prophets." 

And  thus  I  have  gone  over  the  chief  exceptions 
and  offences  which  the  Jews  took  at  our  Saviour 
and  his  dodrine  •,  and  I  hope  fuaiciently  fhewn  the 
unreafonablenefs  of  them.  I  have  not  now  time  to 
proceed  to  what  remains  :  but  by  what  hath  been 
faid,  you  may  eafily  fee,  upon  what  flight  and  un- 
reafonable  grounds  men  may  be  prejudiced  againft 
the  beft  perfon  and  things,  and  yet  be  very  confi- 
dent all  the  while  that  they  are  in  the  right.  For 
fo  no  doubt  many  of  the  Jews,  who  oppofed  our 
Saviour  and  his  dodrine,  thought  themfelves  to 
be.  Therefore  it  concerns  us  to  put  on  meeknefs, 
and  humility,  and  modefty,  that*" we  may  be  able  to 

judge  impartially  of  things,  and  our  minds  may  be 

preftrved 


The  prejudices  again/}  chrifiianity  confidcrd.        1973 

preferved  free  and  indifferent  to  receive  the  truths 
of  Gjd,  when  they  are  ofFer'd  to  us:  other  wife  felf- 
conceic  and   paiTion    will  fo  bhnd    our  minds,  and 
bias  our  judgments,  that  we  (hall  be   unable  to  dif- 
ccrn,    and  unwilling  to  entertain  the   plained   and 
moll  evident  truths.     We  fee  here  by  the  fid  ex^ 
ample  of  the  Jews,  that  by  giving  way  to  palTion, 
and  cherifliing  pride  and  felf-conceir,  men  may  be 
fo  deeply  prejudiced  againfl  the  truth,  as  to  refiH: 
the  cleared   light,  and    rejed  even  falvation  it  felf, 
when  it  is  offer'd   to  them.     So  that   it  is  not   in 
vain,  that   xX^^  fcripture  fiith,  "  \^x.  every  man  be 
"  fwift  to  hear,  and  flow  to  wrath  ;  for  the  wrath 
*'  of  man  workeih   not  the  righteoufnefs  of  God  •,'* 
and   exhorts    us    fo   earneftly,    "  to  receive    with 
«'  meeknefs  the  word  of  God,  which  is  able  to  ilive 
«-  our  fouls." 


S  E  .R  M  O  N    CXVIII. 

The  prejudices    againfl    chriftianity 
^    confider'd. 


M  A  T  T  H.    xi.   6. 

And  hkjtfed  is  he  'ujhofoever  jJoall  not  he  offended  in  me, 

I  Have  from  thcfe  words  propounded  to  confider  sERM, 
two  things,  CXVIII. 

I.  Thofe  prejudices  and  objedlons  which  die  y\^,  f^rft 


world  had  agamfl  our  Saviour   and  his  religion  Sermon  on 
,     .      ^  ^  ir      ^  •        '    .    this  text. 

at  their  firft   appearance;   as  alfo   to  enquire  into 
Vol.  VIL  14  E  thofe 

3- 


J  974       The  prejudices  againjl  chrijlianity  confider'd. 

E  R  M.  thofe  which  men  at  this  day  do  more  efpecially  infiH: 
upon,  againit  the  chriftian  religion  j  and  to  fliew 
the  unrcafonablenefs  of  them. 

11.  How  happy  a  thing  it  is  to  efcape  and  over- 
come the  common  prejudices  which  men  have 
againft  religion. 

I  have  entred  upon  the  firfl:  of  thefc,  the  preju- 
dices which  the  world  had  againft  our  Saviour  and 
his  relipion.  When  this  great  teacher  of  mankind 
came  from  God,  though  he  gave  all  imaginable 
teftimony  and  evidence  that  he  was  fent  from  hea- 
ven •,  yet  the  grcatefl  part  of  the  world,  both  Jews 
and  Gentiles,  were  mightily  offended  at  him,  and 
deeply  prejudiced  again  (I  him  and  his  do6lrine  s  but 
not  both  upon  the  fame  account. 

I  have  already  given  you  an  account  of  the  chief 
exceptions  which  the  Jews  made  againft  our  Savi- 
our and  his  dodrine,  and  have  Ihewn  the  unrca- 
fonablenefs of  them. 

I  proceed  now  to  confider  the  principal  of  thofe 
exceptions,  which  the  Gentiles  and  heathen  philo- 
fophers  took  at  our  Saviour  and  his  dodrine.  I 
fliall  mention  thefe  four. 

Firft,  that  chriftianity   was   a   great   innovation, 
and  contrary  to  the  received  inflitutions  of  the  world. 
Secondly,  they  cbie(5led  againft  the  plainnefs  and 
fimplicity  of  the  doctrine. 

Thirdly,  that  it  wanted  denionftration. 
Fourthly,  that  the  low  and  fuffering  condition  of 
our  Saviour  v/as  unfuicable  to  one  that  pretended 
to  be  the  Son  of  God,  and  to  be  appointed  by 
him  for  a  teacher  and  reformer  of  the  world.  Thefe 
are  the  chief  exceptions  which  the  heathen,  and  efpe- 
cially their  philofophcrs,  took  at  our  Saviour  and 
hii  do^rine,  '        '  Y^^% 


The  prejudices  agamjl  chrtfliamty  conftder'd,        1 9  7^ 
Firft,  that  the  chriftian   religion  was  a  great!  ^n-  S  E  R  M. 
novation,   and  contrary  to  the  received  inditutions  of  ^^^^ 
the  world  ;   and   confequently  that  it  did  condemn 
the  religion  which  had  been  fo  univerfally  received 
and  eftablilh'd  in  .the  world  by  fo  long  a  continu- 
ance of  time.     And  no  wonder  if  this  made  a  great 
impreflion  upon  them,  and  raifed  a  mighty  preju- 
dice in  the  minds  of  men  againft  the  chriftian  re- 
ligion  \  no  prejudices  being  fb  flrong  as  thofe  that 
are  fix'd  in  the  minds  of  men  by  education  :  and 
.of  all  the  prejudices  of  education,  none  fo  violent 
and  hard  to   be   removed,  as  thofe   about  religion, 
yea  though    they  be   never   fo  groundlels  and  un- 
reafonable.     "  Hath  a  nation  changed  their  gods, 
*'  which  yet  are  no  gods?"   intimating  to  us,  that 
men  are  very   hardly  brought  off  from  that   reli- 
gion  which  they  have  been  brought  up  in,    how 
abfurd    foever   it  be.     When  chriftianity  was  firft 
propounded  to  the  heathen  world,  had  men  been 
free  and  indifferent,  and  not  prepofTefs'd  with  other 
apprehenfions  of  God  and  religion  ;  it  might  then 
have  been  expeded  from  them,  that  they  lhoul4 
have  entertain'd  it  with  a  readinefs  of  mind  propor- 
tionable to  the  reafonablenels  of  it.     Bat  the  cafe 
was  quite  otherwife,  the  world  had  for  many  ages 
been  brought  up  to  another  way  of  worfliip,  and 
inui'd  to  rites  and  fuperflitions  of  a  quite  different 
nature.     And  this  fways  very  much  with  men  ;  fe- 
quimur  major es  nojlros^  qui  felidter  feqtmti  funt  -fuos  -, 
as    one  of  the  heathens   laid  in  thofe  days,  ''  we 
"  follow     our    anceflors,    who    happily     followed 
''  theirs;'"   men    are  hardly  brought  to   condemn 
thofe  opinions  and  cufloms  in   religion,  which  them- 
felves  and  their  forefiUhers  have    always  embrace4 

14  E  2  anci 


1 97^  *^^^  P^^judkes  againj}  chrifiianity  confiderd. 
SERM.  and  followed.  And  wife  men  efpecially  are  loth  to 
admit  {o  great  a  change  in  a  matter  of  fo  great  a 
concernment  as  religion  is.  So  that  this  mud  be  ac- 
knowledged to  have  been  a  confiderable  prejudice 
againft  the  chriflian  religion  at  its  firfl:  appearance. 
But  yet  upon  a  thorough  cx.miination,  this  will  not  be 
found  fufficient  in  reafon  to  withhold  men  from  em- 
bracing chridianity,  if  we  confider  thefe  four  things. 

1.  No  prudent  perfon  thinks,  that  the  example 
and  curtom  of  his  forefithers  obllgeth  him  to  that 
which  is  evil  in  itfelf,  and  pernicious  to  him  that 
does  it ;  and  there  is  no  evil,  no  danger  equal  to  that 
of  a  falfe  religion  ;  for  that  tends  to  the  ruin  of  mens 
fouls,  and  their  undoing  for  ever.  A  man  might  bet- 
ter ailed ge  the  example  of  his  forefathers  to  judify  his 
errors  and  follies  in  any  other  kind, than  in  this,  which 
is  fo  infinitely  pernicious  in  the  confequences  of  it . 

2.  In  a  great  corruption  and  degeneracy,  it  is  no 
fufficient  reafon  againd  a  reformation,  that  it  makes 
a  change.  When  things  are  amifs,  it  is  always  fit 
to  amend  and  reform  them ;  and  this  cannot  be  done 
without  a  change.  The  wifed  among  the  heathens 
did  acknov/ledge,  that  their  religion  was  mixt  with 
very  great  follies  and  fuperditions,  and  that  the  lives 
and  manners  of  men  were  extremely  corrupt  and  de- 
generate ;  and  they  endeavour'd,  as  much  as  they 
could,  and  durd,  to  reform  thefe  things.  And 
therefore  there  was  no  reafon  to  oppofe  an  effedual 
reformation,  for  fear  of  a  change*,  a  change  of 
things  for  the  better,  tho'  it  be  ufualiy  hard  to 
be  effected,  being  always  a  thing  to  be  dedred  and 
wifned  for. 

3.  The  change  which  chridianity  defign'd,  was 

the  lead  liable  to  exception  that  could  be,  being  no- 
thing 


The  prejudices  againfl  chrljlianity  corifiderd.        1977 
thing  elfc  in  the  main  of  it,  but  the  reducing  of  natu-^^^,-^- 
ral  religion,  the  bringi'-g  of  men  back  to  fuch  ap- 
prehenfions  of  God,,  and  fuch  a  way  of  worfhipping 
him,  as  was  mod  fuitabie  to  the ''divine  nature,  and 
to  the  natural  notions  of  mens  minds  ;  nothing  elfe 
but  a  deiign  to  periuade  men  of  the  one  true  God> 
maker  of  the  world,   that  he  is  a  fpirit,  and  to  be 
worfhipped    in  fuch   a  manner  as  is  fuitabie  to  his 
fpiritual  nature.     And  then  for  matters  of  pradice, 
to  bring  men  to  the  obedience  of  thofe  precepts  of 
temperance,   and  juflicc,   and    charity,    which    had 
been  univerfally  acknowledged  even  by  the  heathens 
themfelves  to  be  the  great  duties  which  men  owe  to 
themfelves  and  others.     And  that  this  is  the  main  de- 
fign  of  the  chrifl".ian  rehgion,  the  apoftle  hath  told  us 
in  mod  plain  exprefs  words,  Tit.  ii.  11,    12.   "The 
*'  grace  of  God,  (that  is,  the  dodrine  of  the  gol^ 
''  pel)  which  hath  appeared  to  all  men,  and   brings 
"  lalvation,  teacheth  us,    that   denying  ungodlineis 
*'  and  worldly  Juils,   we  fhould   live  foberly,    and 
*'  righteouHy,  and  godly  in  this  prefent  world." 

And  all  that  the  chriftian  religion  adds  beyond 
this,  is  means  and  helps  for  our  direction,  and  afTif- 
tance,  and  encouragem.ent  in  the  difcharge  and  per- 
formance of  x.\\i:[c  duties.  For  our  dire6lion,  God 
hath  fent  his  Som  in  our  nature,  to  declare  his  will 
to  us,  and  to  be  a  pattern  of  holinefs  and  virtue. 
For  our  affiilance,  he  hath  promifed  the  aids  of  his 
Hjly  Spirit  i  and  for  our  encouragement,  he 
ofllrs  to  us  pardon  of  fin  in  the  blood  of  his  Son, 
and  eternal  life  and  happinefs  in  another  world.  This 
is  a  fliort  fum  and  abridgment  of  the  chriftian  reli- 
gion, and  there  is  nothing  of  all  this  that  can  rea- 

fonably  be  excepted  againft. 

4.  God, 


197S       The  prejudices  againjl  chnftianlty  confider'd. 

S  E  R  IVI.      A    God,  confulcrino;  the  preiudice  of  the  heathens 
CXVJll  ... 

"againfl:  chriftianity,  by  reafon  of  their  education  in  a 

contrary  religion,  was  ftrong  and  violent,  was  pleafed 
to  give  fuch  evidence  of  the  truth  of  chriftianity,  as 
was  of  proportionable    flrength    and   force  to  re- 
move and  conquer  this  prejudice.     He  was  pleafed 
to  o-ive  tcftimony  to  the  firft  founder  of  this  religioa 
by  mighty  miracles,  and  particularly  by  his  refurrec- 
tion  from  the  dead  :    but  becaufe  the  report  of  thefe 
things  was  only  brought  to  the  heathen  world,  and 
they   had  not  feen  the  things  themfelves  ;  therefore 
he  enabled  thofe  who  were  the  witneffesof  thefe  things 
to  the  world,  to  work  as  great  miracles  as  he   had 
done.     And  when  they  faw  thofe  who  gave  teftimo- 
ny  to  our  Saviour's  miracles,    do  as  great  and 
flrange  things  themfelves,  as   they  teftified  of  him, 
there  was  no   reafon   any  longer  to  doubt  of  the 
truth  of  their  teftimony.     So  that  though  the  pre- 
judice of  the  heathen  againfl   chriftianity  was  very 
great,  yet  the  evidence  which  God  gave  to  it,  was 
ftrong  enough  to  remove  it.     The  dodrine  of  chri- 
ftianity was  fuch  as  might  have   recommended  itfelf 
to  impartial  men,  by  its  own  reafbnablenefs :    but 
meeting  with  violent  prejudices  in  thofe  to  whom  it 
was  offer' d,  God  was  pleafed  to  give  fuch  a  confir- 
mation to  itj  as  was  fufHcient  to  bear  down   thofe 
prejudices. 

Secondly,  another  objedion  againfl:  chriftianity, 
was  the  plainnefs  and  fimplicity  of  the  dodlrine. 
They  expeded  fome  deep  fpeculations  in  natural  or 
moral  philofophy  •,  they  made  full  account,  a  teacher 
fent  from  heaven  would  have  inftruded  them  in  the 
profoundeft  points,   and  difcours'd  to  them  about  the 

firft  principles  of  things,  and  the  nature  of  the  foul, 

and 


ne  prejudices  cigainji  chrijlianity  confiderd.       1979 

and  the  chief  end  of  man,  with  a  fubtilty  and  elo-  S  E  R  m. 

.  ex  V 1 1 1 

quence  infinitely  beyond  that  of  their  greatefl  fophif-  ,,...^ -^ 

ters,  and  able  to  bear  down  all  oppoficion  and  con- 
tradiflion :  but  inftead  of  this,  they  are  told  a  plain 
flory  of  the  life  and  miracles  of  Jesus  Christ, 
and  of  his  dying  upon  the  crofs,  and  rifing  from  the 
dead,  and  afcending  into  heaven  ;  and  a  few  plain 
precepts  of  Jife  ;  and  all  this  delivered  without  any  or- 
naments of  art,  or  infinuation  of  eloquence,  to  gain  the 
favour  and  applaufc  of  thofe  to  whom  they  related 
thefe  things. 

But  now,  this  truly  confider'd,  is  fb  far  from  be* 
ing  any  real  objeftion  againfl  the  chriftian  do6lrine, 
that  it  is  one  of  the  greatefl  commendations  that  can 
be  given  of  it :  for  matter  of  fad  ought  to  be  relate4 
in  the  mofl  plain,  and  fimple,  and  unaffecled  man- 
ner *,  and  the  lefs  art  and  eloquence  is  ufed  in  the 
telling  of  a  flory,  the  more  likely  it  is  to  gain  be^ 
lief.  And  as  for  our  Saviour's  precepts  how  plaia 
foever  they  might  be,  I  am  fure  they  are  a  colledlioq 
of  the  moil  excellent  and  reafonable  rules  of  a  goocj 
life,  and  the  freefl  from  all  vanity  and  folly,  that 
are  to  be  met  v/ith  in  any  book  in  the  world.  AncJ 
can  any  thing  be  more  worthy  of  God,  and  more  like- 
ly to  proceed  from  him,  than  ib  plain  and  ufcful  a 
do6lrine  as  this  ?  The  language  of  law  is  not  wont 
to  be  fine  and  perfuafive,  but  Ihort,  and  full  of  au- 
thority. Thus  it  is  among  men:  and  furely  it  is 
jnuch  fitter  for  God  to  fpeak  thus  to  men,  than  for 
men  to  one  another. 

Thirdly,  it  is  objedled,  that  the  doflrine  of  our 
Saviour  and  his  apoflles  wanted   demonftration  \. 
they  feemed  to  impofe  too  much  upon  the  under- 

.^andings  of  rpen,    an4  to  deliver  things  too  ma- 

giflerially^ 


iqSo      The  prejudices  agalnjl  chrljlianity  confider  d. 

SF.  RM.  gifterially,  not  demondrating  things   from   intrinfi- 
J '._^  cal  arguments,  but  requiring  belief  and  affcnt  with- 
out proof. 

Tr.is  the  apoftle  St.  Paul  readily  acknowledgeth, 
that  in  preaching   the  gofpel  to  the  world,  they  did 
not  proceed  in    the  way  of  the  heathen  orators  and 
philofophers,    i  Cor.  iv.  4.    "My  fpeech  and  my 
*'  preaching  was  not  in  the  enticing  v;ords  of  man's 
*'  wifdom  :  but  in  demonflration  of  the  Spirit  and 
*'  of  power  j"that  is,  they  did  not  go  in  the  way  of 
humane  eloquence  and  demonriration  :  but  yet  their 
do6trine  did  not  want  its  evidence  anddemonilration, 
though  of  another  liind.     They  did  not  go  about  to 
bewitch    men  by  eloquence,  not   to  entangle    their 
minds  by  fubde  reafoningSjthe  force  of  which  very  few 
are  capable  of:    but   they  offered  to  miCn  a   fciifible 
proof  and  demondration  of  the  truth  of  what  they 
delivered,  in  thofe  flrange  and  miraculous  operations, 
to  which  they  were  enabled  by   the  Holy  Ghost. 
And  this  was  a  fenfible  evidence,  even  to  the  meajieil 
capacity,    of  a  divine  afilHance  going   along   vv'ith 
them,  and  giving  teftimony  to  them.     I  appeal  to 
any  man,  whether  the  refurrecTdon  of  Jesus  Cpirist 
from  the  dead,  and  his  afcending  into  heaven,  be  not 
a  clearer  demonfiration  of  another  life  after  this,  and 
more  \tvt\  to  the  capacities  of  all  mankind,  than  the 
fineil  and  fubtileft  arguments  that  can  be  drawn  from 
the  immaterial  nature  of  the  foul,  its  power  of  re- 
flexion upon   itfelf,  and    independency  upon   body 
as  to  fome  of  its  operations  ^  which  yet  are  fome  of 
the  chiefeil  arguments  that  philofophy   affords,  to 
prove  the  immortality  of  our  fouls. 

Fourthly,  the  heathens  objected,  that  the  low  and 
mean  condition  our  Saviour  was  unfuitable  to  one 

that 


The  prejudices  againjl  chrijiianify  confiderd.       198  r 
that  pretended  to   be  t\\t  Sont  of  God,  and  to  be  ?.|^,^^- 
appointed  by  God  to  be  a  teacher  and    reformer  of  .^.^^^^ 
the  world.     This  to  the  heathen  philofophers  did  not 
only  appear  unreafonable,  but  even  ridiculous.     So 
St.  Paul  tells  us,  i  Cor.  i.  23.  "  We  preach  Christ 
"  crucificdj  to  the  Jews  a  ftumbling-block,  and  to 
''  the  Greeks  fooUlhnefs :"  to  think  that  a  man  who 
appeared    in    fuch  mean   circum (lances,  fhould   be 
fit  to   reform   the  world  ;    and    one    who    himfelf 
was  put  to  death,  fliould  be  relied  upon  for  life  and 
immortality. 

This  objection  I  have  heretofore  confider'd  at  large, 
and  therefore  fhall  now  fpeak  but  very  briefly  to  it. 

Befides  thofe  excellent  reafons  and  ends  which  the 
fcripture  afligns  of  our  Saviour's  humiliation  ;  as 
that  he  might  be  a  teacher  and  example  to  us  ; 
that  he  might  make  expiation  for  our  fins  ;  that  by 
fufFering  himfelf,  he  might  learn  to  eommiferate  us  ; 
that  "  by  death  he  might  deftroy  him  that  had  the 
''  power  of  death,  that  is  the  devil,  and  might  de- 
"  liver  thofe  who  through  fear  of  death  were  all 
**  their  lives  fubjedl  to  bondage  j"  I  fay,  befides 
thefe,  it  was  of  great  ufe  that  he  fhould  live  in  fo 
mean  and  afflided  a  condition,  to  confront  the  pride, 
and  vanity  and  fantaftry  of  the  world  •,  and  to  con- 
vince men  of  thefe  two  great  truths,  that  God  may 
love  thofe  whom  he  afflids  ;  and  that  men  may  be 
innocent,  and  virtuous,  and  contented  in  the  midft 
of  poverty,  and  reproach,  and  fuffering.  Had  our 
bleffed  Saviour  been  a  great  temporal  prince,  his 
influence  and  example  might  pofllbly  have  made  more 
hypocrites  and  fervile  converts;  but  would  not  have 
perfuaded  men  one  jot  more  to  be  inwardly  good 
and  virtuous.     The  great  argument  which  muii  do 

Vol.  VII,  14  F  that, 

4 


1982       T^he  prejudices  againjl  chrtfiianitj  conjxierL 

?  R  R  M  that,  mud  be  fctch'd,  not  from  the  pomp  and  pro- 
CXVnL  j- g^.|j.y  Qf  ti^is  world,  but  from  the  eternal  happinefs 
and  mifery  of  the  other.  Befides,  had  he  appear'd 
in  any  great  power  and  fplendor,  the  chrilHan  reh-  ^ 
gion  could  not  have  been  \o  clearly  acquitted  from 
the  fufpicion  of  a  worldly  intereft  and  defign,  which 
would  have  been  a  far  greater  objedlion  againfl  it, 
than  this  which  I  am  now  fpeaking  to. 

Add  to  all  this,  that  the  wifeft  of  the  heathen 
philofophers  did  teach,  that  worldly  greatnefs  and 
power  are  not  to  be  admired,  but  defpifed  by  a  truly 
wife  man  i  that  men  may  be  virtuous,  and  good, 
and  dearly  beloved  of  God,  and  yet  be  liable  to 
great  miferies  and  fufferings;  and  that  whoever 
futfers  unjuilly,  and  bears  it  patiently,  gives  the 
greateft  tefiimony  to  goodnefs,  and  does  moft  ef- 
ft:dually  recommend  virtue  to  the  world  ;  that  a 
good  man  under  the  hardeft  circumftances  of  mi- 
^  fery,  and  reproach,  and  fuffering,  is  the  fitted  per- 
fon  of  all  other  to  be  the  minifter,  and  apoftle,  and 
preacher  of  God  to  mankind  :  and  furely  they  who 
fay  fuch  things  (which  the  heathens  have  done)  had 
no  reafon  to  objed  to  our  blefled  Saviour  his  low 
and  fuffering  condition. 

As  to  that  part  of  the  objedlion,  that  he  who  pro- 
mis'd  immortality  to  others  could  not  fave  himfelf 
from  death  and  fuffering,  confidering  that  he  who 
was  put  to  death,  refcu'd  himfelf  from  the  power  of 
the  grave :  it  is  fo  far  from  being  ridiculous,  that 
nothing  can  be  more  reafonable  than  to  rely  upon 
him  for  our  hopes  of  immortality,  who  by  rifing 
from  the  grave,  and  conquering  death,  gave  a  plain 
demonflration  that  he  was  able  to  make  good  what 
lie  promifcd, 

I  have 


The  prejudices  againji  chrijlianlty  confiderd.        1 9  S  3 

I  have  done  with  the  exceptions  which  were  made  s  E  RM. 
againlt  our  Saviour  and  his  do6lrine  at  their  firft.^^^J_ 
appearance  in  the  world.     I  proceed  in  the 

lid  Place  to  confider  the  prejudices  and  objedions 
which  men  ac  this  day  do  more  particularly  infill 
upon,  againft  our  Saviour  and  his  religion:  and 
they  are  many. 

Firfl,  fome  that  relate  to  the  incarnation  of  our 
Saviour. 

Secondly,  to  the  time  of  his  appearance. 

Thirdly,  that  we  have  not  now  fulHcient  evidence 
of  the  truth  of  chriftianity  ;  the  main  arguments  for 
it  relying  upon  matters  of  fad,  of  which,  at  this  (M" 
ftance,  we  have  not,  nor  can  be  expeded  to  have, 
fufficient  afllirance. 

.    Fourthly,  that  the  terms  of  it  feem  very  hard, 
and  to  lay  too  great  reftraints  upon  humane  nature. 

Fifthly,    that   it   is   apt  to  difpirit   men,  and  to 
break  the  vigour  and  courage  of  their  minds. 
-    Sixthly,    the  divifions  and  faclions  that  are  among 
chriftians. 

Seventhly,  the  wicked  lives  of  the  greatcfl  part  of 
the  profeffors  of  chriftianity.  In  anfwer  to  all  which, 
I  do  not  propofe  to  fay  all  that  may  be  faid,  but  as 
briefly  as  I  can  to  offer  fo  much,  as  may,  if  not  give 
full  fatisfaflion,  yet  be  fufficient  to  break  the  force 
of  them,  and  to  free  the  minds  of  men  from  any 
great  perplexity  about  them? 

As  to  the  firft,  which  relates  to  the  incarnation  of 
our  Saviour  j  and  thefecond  to  the  time  of  his  ap- 
pearance ;  I  know  that  thele  and  moft  of  the  reft  I 
have  mentioned,  wereurg'd  by  the  heathen  againft: 
chriftianity  :  but  they  are  now  more  efpecially  in- 
fifted  upon  both  by  the  fccret  and  open  enemies  of 
our  religion.  •     14  F  i  The 


1984       TZ?-? prejudices  againjl  chrijlianity  conjiderd, 
SERM.      The  objedions  againft  his  incarnation  I  have  elfe- 
J^^^^^^i^  where  *  confider'd :    and  therefore   fhall  proceed  to 
the  next,  viz. 

Secondly,  as  to  the  time  of  our  Saviour's  ap- 
pearance, it  is  objeded,  if  he  be  the  only  way  and 
means  of  falvatioT,  why  did  he  come  no  fooner  into 
the  world  •,  but  fuifer  mankind  fo  long  without  any 
hopes  or  means  of  being  faved  ?  this  was  objected  by 
Porphyry  of  old,  and  flill  flicks  in  the  minds  of 
men.     To  this  I  anfwer. 

I.  It  is  not  fit  for  creatures  to  call  their  creator  to 
too  flridl  an  account  of  his  adlions.  Goodnefs  is 
free,  and  may  a6t  when  and  how  it  pleafeth  j  and 
*'  as  God  will  have  mercy  on  whom  he  will  have 
*'  mercy,"  fo  he  may  have  mercy  at  what  time  he 
pleafeth,  and  is  not  bound  to  give  us  an  account  of 
his  matters.  This  is  much  like  the  objection  of  the 
atheifl  againft  the  being  of  God  ;  that  if  there  were 
fuch  an  infinite  and  eternal  being,  he  would  furely 
have  made  the  world  fooner,  and  not  have  been 
without  all  employment  for  fo  long  a  duration : 
fuch  another  objection  is  this  againft  our  Sa- 
viour, that  if  he  had  been  the  Son  of  God,  he 
would  have  begun  this  great  and  merciful  work  of 
the  redemption  of  mankind  fooner,  and  not  have 
delay'd  it  fo  long,  and  fuIFer'd  mankind  to  perifh 
for  four  thoufand  years  together. 

But  it  Sfeems  in  the  one  as  well  as  the  other,  God 
took  his  own  time,  and  he  beft  knew  what  time  was 
fitteft.  The  fcripture  tells  us,  that  "  in  the  fulnefs  of 
''  time,  God  f^nt  his  Son"  :  when  things  were  ripe 
for  it,  and  all  things  accomplifli'd  that  God  thought 
requifite  in  order  to  it.     In  judging  of  tlic^  ac^cions  of 

our 

«  John  i.  J4.  Sermon  xliii. 


^he  prejudices  againjl  chrijlianity  confiderd,       1 9 S  5 

our  earthly  governors,    thofe  who  are  at  a  diflance  S  E  R  M. 

•  CXVIII 

from   their  counrels,     what  conjedures  foever  they, 

may  make  of  the  reafons  of  them,  will  neverthelefs, 
if  they  have  that  refped  for  their  wifdom  which 
they  ought,  believe,  that  how  ftrange  foever  fome  of 
their  adions  may  feem,  yet  they  were  done  upon 
good  reafon,  and  that  they  themfelves,  if  they  knew 
the  fecrets  of  their  counfels,  ihould  think  fo.  Much 
more  do  we  owe  that  reverence  to  the  infinite  wif- 
dom of  God,  to  believe  that  the  counfels  of  his  will 
are  grounded  upon  very  good  reafon,  tho'  we  do  not 
fee  many  times  what  it  is. 

z.  It  is  not  true  that  the  world  was  wholly  deftl- 
tute  of  a  way  and  means  of  falvation  before  our 
Saviour's  coming.  Before  the  law  of  Mofes  was 
given,  men  were  capable  of  being  received  to  the  mercy 
and  favour  of  God, upon  their  obedience  to  the  law  of 
nature,  and  their  fincere  repentance  for  the  violation 
of  it,  by  virtue  of  "  the  lamb  that  was  flain  from 
*'  the  foundation  of  the  world."  Men  were  faved 
by  Christ  both  before  and  under  the  law,  without 
any  particular  and  exprefs  knowledge  of  him.  There 
were  good  men  in  other  nations,  as  well  as  among 
the  Jews,  as  Job,  and  his  friends  alfo,  feem  to  have 
been.  In  all  ages  of  the  world,  and  "  in  every 
"  nation,  they  that  feared  God  and  wrought  righte- 
"  oufnefs  were  accepted  of  him."  The  ficrifice  of 
Christ  which  is  the  meritorious  caufe  of  the  lal- 
vation  of  mankind,  looks  back  as  well  as  forward  ; 
and  God  was  reconcilable  to  men,  and  their  fins  were 
pardon*d,by  virtue  of  this  great  propitiation  that  was 
to  be  made.  In  which  kn^^Q  perhaps  it  is,  that 
Christ  is  faid  to  be  "  the  lamb  flain  from  the 
'^  foundation  of  the  v/orld/'   Heb.  ix.  25,26.  The 

apoille 


19^6       7he  prejudices  againjl  cbrijliajiity  confiderd. 

CXv^Il!"  ^P°^^^  intimates  to  us,  that  if  this  facrifice  which 
was  offered  in  the  lafl:  ages  of  the  world,  iiad  not 
been  available  in  former  ages,  "  Christ  mail  have 
*'  often  fuffcr'd  fince  the  foundation  of  the  world  : 
•'  but  now  hath  he  appeared  once  in  the  conclufion 
*'  of  the  ages,  to  put  away  fin  by  the  facrifice  of 
ci  himfelf." 

g.  He  did  appear  at  that  time  in  which  the  world 
flood  moft  in  need  of  him  \  when  the  whole  world, 
both  Jews  and  Gentiles,  were  funk  into  the  greateft 
degeneracy  both  in  opinion  and  praftice,  and  the 
condition  of  mankind  feem'd  to  be  even  defperate 
and  pad  remedy.  This  was  the  needful  time,  when 
it  was  mod  feafonable  for  this  great  phyfician  to 
come,  and  fhew  his  pity  and  his  skill  in  our  recovery. 
God  could  have  fent  his  Son  many  ages  before ;  but 
he  thought  fit  to  try  other  ways  firfl:,  and  to  referve 
this  powerful  remedy  to  the  lafl  \  "  lafl  of  all  he 
*'  fent  his  Son.'* 

4;  The  time  of  our  Saviour's  appearing  was 
of  all  ages  of  the  world  the  fittefl  feafon  for  his 
coming  ;  whether  we  confider, 

1.  That  the  world  was  at  that  time  befl  prepared 
and  difpofed  for  receiving  the  chriflian  religion  :    or, 

2.  That  this  was  the  fittefl  feafon  that  ever  had 
been,  for  the  eafy  difFufing  and  propagating  of  this 
religion.  I  afTign  thefe  reafons  as  tending  to  give 
men  fome  fatista6lion,  why  this  great  blelTing  was 
delay'd  fo  long;  it  being  rather  an  argument  of 
wifdom  and  goodnefs,  than  of  the  want  of  either, 
to  defer  things  to  that  time,  in  which  they  are  moft 
likely  to  have  their  efi^ed.  Not  but  that  perhaps 
other  and  better  reafons  may  be  given.  To  be 
fare  God  had  very  good  reafons  for  this   difpenfa- 

tionj 


^'he  prejudices  agamfi  chriftianity  conjtderd.       J  9  ^7 

tion,  whether  we  can  hit  upon  them  or  not.    In  the  (?xvill. 
mean  time  thefe  feem  not  to  be  altogether   inconfi- 
derable. 

I .  That  the  world  was  at  that  time  beft  prepared 
and  difpofed  for  receiving  the  chriftian  religion.  All 
the  while  our  Saviour's  coming  was  delay 'd,  God's 
providence  was  difpofing  things  for  it,  and  training 
up  mankind  for  the  entertaining  of  this  great  blef- 
fing.  The  jewifh  religion  was  always  very  burden- 
fom,  but  much  more  towards  the  expiration  of 
the  jewifh  flate,  partly  by  the  intolerable  multitude 
of  external  obfervances,  which  were  daily  multiplied 
upon  them,  under  pretence  of  traditions  from  their 
fathers ;  and  partly  by  reafon  of  their  fubje6i;ion  to 
the  Romans,  which  made  the  exercife  of  their  reli^ 
gion  in  many  refpedls  more  difficult. 

And  the  heathen  world  was  in  a  very  good  mea- 
fure  prepared  for  chriftianity,  by  being  civiliz'd. 
About  the  time  of  our  Saviour's  coming  into  the 
world,  philofophy  and  learning  had  been  fo  diffus'd 
by  the  Roman  conquefe,  as  had  brought  a  great 
part  of  the  world  from  barbarifm  to  civility.  Befides 
that  their  philofophy  had  this  efFed  upon  men,  to 
refine  their  reafon,  and  in  a  good  degree  to  detedt 
the  follies  of  the  heathen  idolatry  and  fuperftition. 

'Tis  true  indeed  learning  and  philofophy  flourifh'd 
a  great  while  before,  in  the  time  of  the  Grecian  em- 
pire, and  perhaps  before  that  in  fome  other  nations  ; 
and  the  conquefts  of  the  Grecians  were  very  fpeedy 
and  of  vail  extent :  but  yet  they  were  neither  fo  uni- 
verfal,  nor  fo  well  fettled ;  nor  did  they  propagate 
their  philofophy  and  civility  together  with  their 
conquefls,  as  the  Romans  did.  So  that  there  was  no 
age  of  i\\^  world,  wherein  mankind  were  fo  gene- 
rally 


CXVJII. 


1988       ^hepri:judicei  ^g^i^J^  chrijlianity  confider^J, 
SERAT.  rally  prepared  and  difpofed  for  the  receiving  of  the 
gofpcl,  as  that  wherein  our  Saviour  appeared. 

2.  This  was  likewife  the  fitteft  leafon  for  the  eafy 
difFufing  and  propagating  of  the  chriftian  religion. 
The  Romans,  together  with  their  conquefts,  did 
very  much  propagate  their  language,  which  made 
the  ways  of  communication  far  more  eafy  ;  and  by  the 
long  and  frequent  correfpondence  of  the  feveral  parts 
of  that  empire  one  with  another,  the  ways  of  travel 
and  pafifage  from  one  country  to  another  were 
more  ready  and  open.  So  that  no  age  can  be  in- 
flanc'd,  in  all  refpecfls  fo  convenient  for  the  fpeedy 
propagating  of  a  new  religion,  as  that  wherein  our 
Saviour  appear'd,  viz.  when  the  Roman  empire 
was  at  its  height.  And  it  was  very  agreeable  to  the 
goodnefs  and  wifdom  of  the  divine  providence, 
that  the  braveft  and  mod  virtuous  people  in  the 
world  ^infinitely  beyond  either  the  Pcrfians  and  Gre- 
cians) Ihould  be  chofen  by  God,  as  one  of  the 
chiefeft  means  for  the  fpreading  of  the  bed  and  moft 
perfe6b  revelation  that  ever  God  made  to  the  world. 

Thirdly,  it  is  obje6ted,  that  we  have  not  now 
fufficient  evidence  of  the  truth  of  chriflianity,  the 
main  arguments  for  it  relying  upon  matters  of  fad, 
of  which  at  this  diftance,  we  have  not,  nor  can  be 
fuppos'd  to  have,  fufficient  aiTurance.  To  this  1 
anfwer, 

I.  That  men  noC  only  may  have,  but  have  an 
undoubted  alTurance  of  matters  of  fadt,  ancienter 
than  thefe  we  are  fpeaking  of;  and  the  diftance  of 
them  from  our  times  creates  no  manner  of  fcruple 
in  the  minds  of  men  concerning  them.  That  there 
was  fuch  a  man  as  Alexander  the  great,  and  that 
he  conquered  Darius  and  the  Perfians  j  that  Julius 

Casfar 


I'he  prejudices  againft  chri/lianity  confiderd,  1989 
Csefar  invaded  our  nation,  and  in  fome  meafure  Tub-  ^^^  RM. 
dued  it ;  and  that  he  overcame  Pompey  in  the 
battle  of  Pharfalia  \  and  innumerable  other  things 
which  I  might  inflance  in,  that  were  done  before 
our  Saviour's  time,  are  firmly  believ'd  Vv'ithout 
any  manner  of  doubt  and  fcruple  by  mankind,  not- 
withilanding  they  were  done  fo  Jong  ago.  So  that 
ancient  matters  of  fa6l  are  capable  of  clear  evidence, 
and  we  may  have  fufficient  afTurance  of  them.  And 
where  there  is  equal  evidence,  if  we  do  not  give 
equal  belief,  the  fault  is  not  in  the  argument,  but  in 
the  paffion  or  prejudice  of  thofe  to  whom  it  is  pro- 
pofed. 

2.  We  have  every  whit  as  great  aflurance,  (nay 
greater  if  it  can,  or  needed  to  be)  of  the  matters 
upon  which  the  proof  of  chriilianity  relies,  as  of 
thofe  which  I  have  mention'd.  The  matters  of  fade, 
upon  which  the  truth  of  chriilianity  relies,  are,  that 
there  was  fuch  a  perfon  as  Jesus  Christ  j  that  he 
wrought  fuch  miracles  ;  that  he  v/as  put  to  death 
at  Jerufalem  under  Pontius  Pilate  \  that  he  rofe  again 
from  the  dead,  and  was  vifibly  taken  up  into  heaven  ; 
that  he  beftowed  miraculous  gifts  and  powers  upon 
the  apoftles,  to  make  them  competent  witnelTes  of 
his  reflirredion,  and  of  the  truth  of  that  do6^:rine 
which  they  publifh'd  in  his  name  \  that  accordingly 
they  preach'd  the  gofpel  to  the  world,  and  in  a 
lliort  fpace  without  any  humane  advantages  did  pro- 
pagate it,  and  gain  entertainment  for  it  in  moft  parts 
of  the  then  known  world. 

Now  thefe  matters  of  fad  have  the  fame  tefti- 
mony  of  hiftories,  wrote  in  thofe  times,  and  con- 
veyed down  to  us,  by  as  general  and  uncontroled  a 
tradition,  as  the  conquefts  of  Alexander,  and  Julius 

Vol.  V\\,  14  G  C^far. 

4^ 


J  990       The  prejudices  agaujjl  chrljlianliy  confidefd, 

SERM.  C^llir.     So  that  if  we  do  not  afford  equal  belief  to 

CXVIJI.     ,  •     •  r  1  1  r  •   J- 

them,  It  IS  a  iign  that  we  have  lome  prejudice  or 

intereft  again  ft  the  one,  more  than  againfb  the  other, 
though  the  evidence  for  both  be  equal.  Nay,  I  go 
farther,  that  the  evidence  for  thefe  things  which  are 
the  foundation  of  chriftianity,  is  ^o  much  the  greater, 
becaufe  that  which  depended  upon  it,  was  of  far 
greater  concernment  to  the  world,  and  confequently 
mankind  were  more  obliged  to  fearch  more  nar- 
rowly into  it. 

For  our  Saviour's  life,  and  death,  and  refurrec- 
tlon,  we  have  the  teftimony  of  a  great  number  of 
eye-witnelTes,  who  have  wrote  the  hiftory  of  thefe 
things.  And  though  they  were  truly  extraordinary 
perfonsj  and  gave  teftimony  to  themfelves  by  mira- 
cles ;  yet  at  prefent  I  defire  no  more,  but  that  they 
be  looked  upon,  as  knowing  and  honed  relators  of 
what  they  heard  and  faw  ;  and  that  the  fame  credit 
be  given  to  them,  which  we  give  toXivy,  and  Arian, 
and  Q:^  Curtius,  for  plain  events,  and  matters  of 
fad. 

But  yet  I  muft  add  withal,  that  befides  the  mi- 
racles which  they  wrought,  they  gave  greater  tefti- 
mony of  their  integrity,  than  any  hiftorian  in  the 
world  ever  did.  For  they  willingly  fufFer'd  the 
greateft  perfecution  and  torment,  yea  and  death  itfelf, 
in  confirmation  of  the  truth  of  what  they  deliver'd. 
And  for  the  propagating  of  the  chriftian  religion 
through  fo  great  a  part  of  the  world,  it  is  evident 
by  the  effe6t  beyond  all  denial. 

So  that  for  the  matters  of  faci:,  upon  v/hich  the 
truth  of  chriftianity  does   depend,  here    is  greater, 
and  more  advantageous  evidence  of  hiftory,  than  for 
any  other  matter  of  equal  antiquity  whatfoever. 

3.  As 


Tloe  prejudices  agamfl  chriftianify  confiderd,  1991 
2.  As  to  the  fubRance  of  thefe  matters  of  fadl,  S  E  R  M. 
we  have  the  concurring  teftimony  of  the  greatell 
enemies  of  the  chriftian  religion.  That  there  were 
fuch  perlbns  as  our  Saviour  and  his  apoftles,  that 
they  preached  fuch  a  dodrine,  that  they  wrought 
fuch  miracles  •,  for  this  we  have  the  acknowJedgmenc 
of  the  Jews,  and  the  teftimony  of  the  heathen  hillo- 
rians,  and  particularly  of  Celfus,  and  Porphyry, 
and  Julian,  who  were  the  particular  and  moil  learned 
adverfaries  of  the  chridian  religion.  So  that  as  to 
the  matters  of  fi\6V,  there  Is  no  objedion  againft  them, 
whatever  ufe  we  may  make  of  them,  or  whatever  con- 
fequences  we  may  draw  from  them.  And  I  prefume 
it  agreed  by  all  objedlors,  that  if  thefe  matters  of 
fadt  be  true,  they  are  a  fufficient  foundation  of  the 
truth  of  our  religion,  and  we  are  very  unequal  to 
our  religion,  if  we  make  a  doubt  of  thefe  things, 
which  the  greateft  enemies  of  chridianiry  never  had 
the  face  to  deny. 

I.  And  befides  all  this,  to  recompenfe  the  difad- 
vanta9:e  which  v/e  have  of  thofe  who  faw  the  mira- 
cles  of  our  Saviour  and  his  apoftles,  we  have  the 
tejiimonium  rei^  the  evidence  of  the  effects  of  thefe 
things  to  confirm  our  belief  of  them  \  and  this  is 
an  advantage  which  the  firfl  ages  of  chriflianity 
could  not  have.  V/e  fee  our  Saviour's  predidions 
of  the  fuccefs  of  his  religion  in  the  world,  in  the  pro- 
pagating and  eftablilliing  of  it  fully  accomplifl:i'd, 
notwithtlanding  the  fierce  oppofition  and  refiftance 
that  was  made  againfl  it  by  the  greatefl  powers  of 
the  world.  We  fee  the  difperfion  of  the  Jews  in  all 
nations,  and  the  mifery  and  contempt  which  they 
every  where  fufFer  ;  and  that  now  for  above  fixtecn 
hundred  years,  they  have  continued  a  diftin(5l  people, 

14  G  2  ,  and 


1992       Th^  prejudices  again  ft  cbrijlianity  confider  d, 
SER  M.  and  a  fpedacle  of  the  divine  juRIce and  feverity,  for 
■  reje6ting  and  crucifying  the  Son  of  God,  and  for  a 
larting  and  ftanding  tellimony  of  the  truth  of  our 
Saviour's    predidion,   and    of   the    chriflian    re- 
ligion. 

So  that  though  we  live  at  this  diftance  from  the 
rife  and  beginning  of  chriftianity  ;  yet  we  have 
the  relation  of  thofe  things,  which  give  confirmation 
to  it,  conveyed  down  to  us  in  as  credible  a  manner, 
as  any  ancient  matter  of  fa6l  ever  was ;  and  the  ef- 
fcfts  of  things  remaining  to  this  day,  do  give  tefti- 
mony  to  the  truth  of  it. 

Fourthly,  it  is  objeded,  that  the  terms  of  chriftia- 
nity feem  very  hard,  and  to  lay  too  great  reftraints 
upon  humane  nature.  It  commands  us  to  mortify 
our  lufts,  and  fubdue  our  paflions,  and  ''  deny  un- 
"  godhnefs,  and  to  live  foberly,  and  righteouOy,  and 
«'  godly  in  this  prefent  world  :  to  be  holy  in  all  man- 
''  ner  of  converfation  >  to  have  refped;  to  whatever 
"  things  are  honeft,  and  true,  and  juft,  and  virtu- 
"  ous,  and  of  good  report;  and  to  deny  ourfelves  j" 
and  to  part  with  the  deareft  enjoyments  of  this  life, 
*'  yea,  and  with  life  itfelf,  for  the  fake  of  Christ, 
*«  and  his  gofpel."  Now  thefe  feem  to  be  very 
hard  terms  to  forego  all  the  prefent  pleafures  and  en- 
joyments of  this  life,  in  hopes  of  a  future  happinefs 
which  we  are  lefs  afTur'd  of. 

To  this  I  anfwer, 

I. That  this  is  a  greater  objedionagainft religion  in 
o-eneral,  than  the  chriftian  religion.  For  natural  re- 
ligion requires  of  us  all  the  main  duties  that  chrifti- 
anity does,  and  gives  us  far  lefs  afTurancc  of  the 
reward  of  our  obedience.  Natural  religion  requires 
piety,  and  juftice,  and  charity,  the  due  government  of 

our 


^he  prejudices  agahTjl  chrijlia7iity  confJerd.      1993  ' 

our  appetites  and   palTions,    as  well  as   chridlanity  SERM- 
does  j  but  does  not  difcover  to  us  the  rewards  of 
another  world,  by  many  degrees  fo  clearly,    as  our 
Lord  and  Saviou  R,who  hath  "  brought  life  and  im-  * 
"  mortality  to  light  by  the  gofpel,"  and  by  his  refur- 
redion   from  the  dead,  and  afcenfion  into  heaven, 
hath  given  us  full  afilirance  of  another  life  after  this, 
and  of  a  glorious  immortality.     So  that  though  we 
have  not,  nor  can  have  the  evidence  of  kn^c^  for  a 
future  date,  yet  we   have  all  the  rational  evidence 
for  it,  that  can  be  wifli'd  or  expe6led  ;  and  much 
more  than     men     have    for     thofe    adventures    of 
their  lives  and  fortunes,  which  they  frequently  make 
in  the  world,  and  think  themfelvcs  reafonable  in  lo 
doing. 

2.  The  reflraints  which  chriftianity  lays  upon  men, 

are  in  the  judgment  of  mankind  fo  far  from  being 

an  objedion  againft  it,  that  they  are  highly  to  the 

commendation  of  it.     Nay,  it  were  the  greatefl  ob- 

jedlion  that  could  be  againft  our  religion,  if  it  did 

fet  us  at  liberty  from  thofe  reftraints.     What  can  be 

more  to  the  credit  of  any  religion  than  to  command 

men  to  bejuft,  and  charitable,  and  peaceable  ?  and  what 

more  to  the  advantage  of  the  profelTors  of  it  ?  and  on 

the  contrary,  what  can  ref»e6l  more  upon  any  religion, 

than  to  indulge  and  allow  men  in  any  vice  contrary  to 

thefe  ?  it  fhews  men  are  glad  to  make  any  thing  an 

objeflion  againft  chriftianity  when  they  lay  hold  of 

that,  which    if  it  had  been  otherwife,  they  would 

have  made  ten  times  more  clamour  againft  it  for  the 

contrary. 

3.  As  for  moft  of  thefe  reftraints  which  chriftiani- 
ty lays  upon  us,  they  are  of  that  nature,  fo  much 
both  for  our  private  and  pubiick  advantage,  that  fet- 

ting 


1 994  ^^-^  prejudices  CJgainJl  chrijlianity  conjider'd, 
S  E  R  M.  tln.^  afide  all  confiderations  of  relioflon,  and  of  the 
rewards  and  punifhments  of  another  life,  they  arc 
really  good  for  us,  and  if  God  had  not  laid  them 
upon  us,  we  ought  in  reafon,  in  order  to  our  tem- 
poral benefit  and  advantage,  to  have  laid  them  upon 
ourfelves.  If  there  were  no  religion,  I  know  men 
would  not  have  fuch  ftrong  and  forcible  obligations 
to  thefe  duties  ;  but  yet  1  fay,  though  there  were  no 
religion,  it  were  good  for  men,  in  order  to  temporal 
ends,  to  their  health,  and  quiet,  and  reputation, 
and  fafety,  in  a  word,  to  die  private  and  publick 
profperity  of  mankind,  that  men  fhould  be  tempe- 
rate, chafte,  and  juft,  and  peaceable,  and  chari- 
table, and  kind,  and  obliging  to  one  another,  rather 
than  the  contrary.  So  that  religion  does  not  create 
thofe  reftraints  arbitrarily,  but  requires  thofe  things 
of  us,  which  our  reafon,  and  regard  to  our  ad- 
vantage, which  the  neceffity  and  conveniency  of  the 
things  themfelves,  without  any  confideration  of  re- 
ligion, would  in  mod  cafes  urge  us  to. 

4.  As  to  the  cafe  of  perfecution  for  religion  ; 
befides  that  it  does  not  now  happen  fo  frequently 
as  it  did  in  the  beginning  of  chriltianity,  nay  very 
leldom  in  comparifon,  if  all  things  be  confider'd,  it 
cannot  be  thought  unreafonable,  both  becaufe  reli- 
gion offers  to  us,  in  confideration  of  our  prefent  fuf- 
ferings,  a  happinefs  unfpeakably  greater  than  that 
which  we  forego  for  the  fake  of  religion  \  and  becaufe 
when  it  happens,  God  does  extraordinarily  enable 
men  to  go  through  it  with  courage  and  comfort,  as 
we  fee  in  the  examples  of  the  primitive  chriftians, 
who  in  great  numbers  of  all  tempers  and  ages,  did 
volunarily  choofe  to  give  up  themfelves  to  thefe  fuffer- 
lags,  when  there  was  no  necefTicy  laid  upon  them, 

but 


^he  prejudices  againjl  chrijliantfy  corifider'd,       1 995 

but  fair  terms  of  retreat  were  offer'd  to  them  by  ^^^^^5^xvl^ 
enemies.  It  is  one  thing  when  a  man  fuffers  by  the 
law,  and  cannot  help  it-,  and  another  thing  when 
men  may  avoid  fuffering.  In  the  former  cafe  men 
fubmit  to  necefTity,  and  bear  it  as  v/ell  as  they  can  > 
in  the  latter  cafe,  if  men  fuffer,  it  is  a  fign  they  firm- 
ly believe  the  reward  of  it ;  and  if  they  fuffer  chear- 
fully,  and  with  joy,  as  mod  of  the  martyrs  did,  it  is 
a  plain  evidence  that  God  affords  them  extraordinary 
fupport  in  their  fufferings  ;  and  then  the  cafe  is  not 
very  hard,  when  religion  puts  them  upon  nothing, 
but  what  it  gives  them  caufe,  and  enables  them,  to 
rejoice  in  the  doing  of  it. 

Fifthly,  it  is  objected ;  that  the  chriftian  religion 
is  apt  to  difpirit  men,  and  to  break  the  courage  and 
vigor  of  their  minds,  by  the  precepts  of  patience,  and 
humility,  and  meekncls,  and  forgiving  injuries,  and 
the  like.     This  objedion  hath  made  a  great  noife  in 
the  world,  and  hath   been  urged   by  men  of  great 
reputation,  and  a  deep  infight  into  the  tempers  of 
men,  and  affairs  of  the  world.     It  is  faid  to  be  par- 
ticularly infilled  upon  by  Machiavel,  and  very  likely 
it  may  ;  though  1  think  that  elfewhere  he  is  pleafcd 
to  fpcak  with  terms  of  refpedl,  not  only  of  religion 
in  general,  but  likewife  of  the  chriflian  religion-,  and 
(which  feems  very  much  to  contradi6t  the  other)  he 
fays   in  the  firft  book  of  his  difcourfes  upon  Livy, 
(chap,  xi.)  that  the  greatnefs  and  fuccefs  of  Rome  is 
chiefly  to  be  afcribed  to  their  piety  and  religion ;  and 
that  Rome  was  more  indebted  to  Numa  Pompilius 
for  fettling  religion  among  them,  than  to  Romulus 
the  founder  of  their  flate  -,  and  the  reafon  he  gives  is 
much  to  our  prefent  purpofe ;  for,  fays  he,  without 
religion  there  can  be  no  military  difcipline,  religion 

being 


199^  ^he  prejudices  againjl  chrijlianity  confider'd, 
SERM.  beino;  the  foundation  of  o-ood  Jaws  and  orood  diC 
'  cipline.  And  particularly  he  commends  the  Sam- 
nites,  who  betook  themfelves  to  religion,  as  their 
hift  and  bed  remedy  to  make  men  courageous, 
nothing  being  more  apt  to  raife  mens  fpirits  thaa 
religion. 

Bat  howfoever  this  objedion  be,  I  dare  appeal 
both  to  reafon  and  experience  for  the  confutadoa 
of  it, 

I .  To  reafon,  and  that  as  to  thefe  two  things. 

(i.)  That  the  chriftian  reh'gion  is  apt  to  plant  in 
the  minds  of  men  principles  of  the  greateft  refolution 
and  trued  courage.  It  teacheth  men  upon  the  bed 
and  mod  rational  grounds  to  defpife  dangers,  yea  and 
death  itfelf,  the  greated  and  mod  formidable  evil  in 
this  world  ;  and  this  principle  is  likely  to  infpire  men 
with  the  greated  courage  ;  for  what  need  he  fear 
any  thing  in  this  world,  who  fears  not  death,  after 
which  there  is  nothing  in  this  world  to  be  feared .? 
and  this  the  chridian  religion  does,  by  giving  men 
the  adurance  of  another  hfe,  and  a  happinels,  infi- 
nitely greater  than  any  is  to  be  enjoyed  in  this 
world.  And  in  order  to  the  fecuring  of  this 
happinefs,  it  teacheth  men  to  be  holy,  and  jud, 
and  to  exercife  a  good  confcience  both  toward  God 
and  man,  which  is  the  only  way  to  free  a  man 
from  all  inward  and  tormenting  fears  of  what 
may  happen  to  him  after  death.  "  This  makes 
"  the  righteous  man  to  be  (as  Solomon  fays)  bold 
"  as  a  lion."  Nothing  renders  a  man  more  un- 
daunted as  to  death,  and  the  confequences  of  it, 
than  the  peace  of  his  ov/n  mind  ;  for  a  man  not  to 
be  confcious  to  himfelf  of  having  wilfully  difpleafcd 
him,  v/ho  alone  can  make  us  happy  or  miferable  in 

the 


^he  prejudices  againjl  chrijlianity  conjider'd.  ^997 
the  other  world.  So  that  a  o-ood  man,  beino;  fecure  SERM. 
of  the  favour  of  God,  may  upon  that  account  rea-  .,^^r>^r-^ 
fonably  hope  for  a  greater  happinels  after  death  than 
other  men :  whereas  a  bad  man,  if  he  be  fober,  and 
have  his  fenfes  awakened  to  a  ferious  confideration 
of  things,  cannot  but  be  afraid  to  die  5  and  be  ex- 
tremely anxious  and  folicitous  what  v/iil  become 
of  him  in  another  world.  And  furely  it  would 
make  the  flouted  man  breathing  afraid  to  venture 
upon  death,  when  he  fees  hell  beyond  it.  PolTibly 
there  may  be  fomiC  monftcrs  of  men,  who  may  have 
fo  far  fupprcfs'd  the  fenfe  of  religion,  and  Itupiiied 
their  confciences,  as  in  a  good  meafure  to  have  con- 
quered the  fears  of  death,  and  of  the  confequences 
of  it.  But  this  happens  but  to  very  ^qw^  as  the  poet 
tells  us  in  the  perfon  of  an  epicurean. 

Felix  qui  potuit  rerum  cognofcere  caufas^ 

Atqiie  metus  omnes  i^  incxorabile  fatirm 

Subjecit  pedibus^  ftrepitumque  Acherontis  avari. 

There  are  very  few  that  attain  to  this  temper* 
but  at  fome  times.  So  that  \i  vice  and  wickednefs  do 
generally  break  the  firm nefs  of  mens  fpirits ;  it  re- 
mains, that  nothing  but  religion  can  generally  give 
men  courage  againft  death.  And  this  the  chriftian 
religion  does  eminently  to  thofe  who  Yv7t  according 
to  it  \  our  blefTed  Saviour  having  delivered  us 
from  the  fear  of  death,  by  conquering  death  for  us, 
and  giving  us  alTurance  of  the  glorious  rewards  of 
another  life. 

(2.)  Meeknefs,  and  patience,  and  humility,  and 
modefty,  and  fuch  virtues  of  chriftianity,  do  not  in 
reafon  tend  to  difpirit  men,;  and  break  their  true  cou- 
rage, but  only  to  regulate  it,  and  take  away  the 
fierccnefs  and  brutidinefs  of  it.  This  we  fee  in  ex- 
VoL.VIL  14  H  pedence, 

4. 


T998       The  prejudices  agalnji  cbnjlianity  confider'd. 

SERM.  pciience,  that  men  of  the  trued  courap-e,  have  many 
CXVIII. 


'  times   lead   of  pride  and  infolence,  of  palTion  and 


5ercenefs.  Thofe  who  are  better  bred,  are  common- 
ly of  more  gende  and  civil  difpofitions :  but  yet  they 
do  not  therefore  want  true  courage,  though  they 
have  not  the  roughnefs  and  fool-hardinefs  of  men  of 
ruder  breeding.  So  in  a  true  chriftian,  courage  and 
<yreatnefs  of  mind,  is  very  confident  with  meeknefs, 
and  patience,  and  humihty.  Not  that  all  good  men 
are  very  courageous  -,  there  is  much  of  this  in  the 
natural  temper  of  men,  which  religion  does  not  quite 
alter.  But  that  which  I  am  concerned  to  maintain 
is,  that  chridianity  is  no  hindrance  to  mens  courage, 
and  xki'sX  ceteris  "paribus^  fuppofmg  men  of  equal  tem- 
pers, no  man  hath  fo  much  reafon  to  be  valiant,  as 
he  that  hath  a  good  confcience  ;  I  do  not  mean  a 
bludering,  and  boiderous,  and  rafli  courage  ;  but  a 
fober,  and  calm,  and  fixt  valour. 

2.  I  appeal  to  experience  for  the  truth  of  this. 
Did  ever  greater  courage  and  contempt  of  death  ap- 
pear in  all  ages,  and  kxt^^  and  conditions  of  men, 
than  in  the  primitive  martyrs?  were  any  of  the  hea- 
then foldiers  comparable  to  the  chridian  legion,  for 
refolution  and  courage,  even  the  heathens  themfelves 
being  judges?  The  religion  of  Mahomet  feems  to 
be  contrived  to  infpire  men  with  fiercenefs  and  defpe- 
ratenefs  of  refolution,  and  yet  I  do  not  find,  .but 
that  generally  where  there  hath  been  any  equality  for 
number,  the  chridians  have  been  fuperior  to  them 
in  valour,  and  have  given  greater  indances  of  refolu- 
tion and  courage,  than  the  Turks  have  done.  So 
that  I  wonder  upon  what  grounds  this  objedlion  hath 
been  taken  up  againd  chridianity,  when  there  is  no- 
thing either  in  the  nature  of  this  religion,  or  from 

the 


The  prejudices  againjl  Jesus,  ^c.  ^999 

the  experience  of  the  world,  to  give  any  tolerable 
countenance  to  it.  And  furely  the  bed  way  to  know 
what  effe6b  any  religion  is  likely  to  have  upon  the 
minds  of  men,  is  to  confider  what  effefls  it  hath  had 
m  the  conftant  experience  of  mankind.  There  re- 
mains the  other  two  objedions,  which  I  mentioned, 
but  I  mull  referve  them  to  another  opportunity. 


SERMON'    CXIX. 

The  prejudices  againft  Jesus  and  his 
rehgion  confider'd. 


M  A  T  T  H.  xi.  6. 

'And  Uejfed  is  he  whofoevsr  Jhall  not  he  offended  in  me. 


F 


ROM  thefc  words  I  propofed  to  confider  thefe  serM, 
two  things.  CXIX. 

I.   The  prejudices  and  objedlions  which  the 
world  at  firft  had,  and  many  ft  ill  have,  againft  our  fermonon 
blefTed  Saviour  and  his  religion.  this  text. 

II.  That  it  is  a  great  happinefs  to  efcape  the  com- 
mon prejudices  which  men  are  apt  to  entertain 
againft  religion. 

I  have  confidered  thofe  objedions  which  the  Jews 
and  heathen  philofophers  made  againft  our  Savi* 
OUR  and  his  religion  :  and, 

II.  Thofe  which  at  this  day  are  infifted  upon  by 
the  fecret  and  open  enemies  of  our  religion.  And  I 
mentioned  feven,  the  two  laft  of  which  I  fhall  r^ow 
fpeak  to. 

14  I^  2  Sixthly, 


120!:  6  The  prejudices  agcilnjl  Jesus 

SERM.  Sixthly,  it  is  objedled  that  there  are  many  divi- 
fionsand  fadions  among  chriftians.  This  I  confefs 
is  a  great  reproach  and  fcandal  to  our  rehgion  :  but 
no  fuflicient  argument  againft  it.     And, 

1.  To  lefTen  and  abate  the  force  of  this  objedion, 
it  is  to  be  confider'd,  that  a  very  great  part  of  the 
divifions  that  are  among  thofe  that  are  call'd  chri- 
ftians, are  about  things  that  do  not  concern  the 
eflentials  of  chriflianity,  and  therefore  they  are  no  . 
argument  that  chriflianity  is  not  true,  becaufe  they 
bring  no  fufpicion  of  doubt  and  uncertainty  upon 
the  fundamentals  of  chriftianity,  which  all  agree  in, 
though  they  differ  in  other  things.  *Tis  true  in- 
deed they  are  very  undecent,  and  contrary  to  the 
nature  and  precepts  of  the  chriftian  religion,  which 
above  any  religion  in  the  world  does  ftridly  re- 
quire love  and  unity.  They  take  off  much  from  the 
ftrength  and  beauty  of  religion:  but  do  by  no 
means  deflroy  the  truth  of  it. 

2.  How  many  and  great  foever  they  may  be,  yet 
they  can  with  no  colour  of  reafon  be  imputed  to 
the  chriflian  religion,  as  giving  any  caufe  or  en- 
couragement to  them,  however  by  accident  it  may 
be  the  occafion  of  them.  For  no  man  doubts  but 
that  the  beft  things  in  the  world  may  be  perverted  by 
bad  men,  and  made  an  occafion  of  a  great  deal  of 
mifchief  in  the  world,  and  yet  be  very  innocent  of 
all  that  mifchief.  No  man  can  deny  but  that  chriftia- 
nity does  flridly  enjoin  love,  and  peace,  and  unity 
among  all  the  members  of  that  profeiTion  -,  and  fo 
far  as  chriflians  are  fadious  and  unpeaceable,  fo  far 
they  are  no  chriflians.  So  that  a  man  may  as  well 
except  againfl  phiiofophy,  becaufe  of  the  differences 
that  were  among  the  philofophers,  and  fay  there  was 

no 


and  his  religion  conjiderd*  2oor 

ho  truth   amone  them,    becaufe  they  were  notallSERM. 

cxrx 
agreed  in  all  things;    as  call  the  truth  of  chriftianity 

in  queflion,    for    the   differences   that   are    among 

chriftians.  Nay,  a  man   might  every  whit  as  well 

except  againft  laws  and  government ;    becaufe,  not- 

with (landing  them,  there  are  frequent  feditions  and 

rebellions,  infinite  fuits  and  controverfies  occafion'd 

even  by  the  very  laws  :    but  no  man  was  ever  fo.un- 

reafonable  as  to  think  this  a  good  reafon  againfl  laws 

and  government. 

3.  The  divifions  of  chriftians  are  fo  far  from  being 
an  argument  againfl  chriftianity,  that  on  the  con- 
trary, they  are  an  argument  that  men  fhpuld  em- 
brace chriflianity  more  heartily,  and  make  more 
confcience  of  obeying  the  precepts  of  it.  And  if 
they  did  this,  the  greatefl  part  of  thofe  contentions 
and  uncharitable  animofides  which  are  among  them 
would  prefently  ceafe.  If  the  chriftian  religion  were 
truly  entertained,  and  men  did  ferioufly  mind  the 
precepts  of  it,  and  give  up  themfelves  to  the  obe- 
dience of  its  Jaws,  differences  would  not  be  eafily 
commenced,  nor  fo  vehemently  profecuted,  nor  fo 
pertinaciouOy  continued  in,  as  they  are.  Mea 
would  not,  upon  every  flight  reafon,  and  little  doubt 
and  fcruple,  rend  and  tear  the  body  of  Chflist  in 
pieces,  and  feparate  themfelves  from  the  communion 
of  the  church  they  live  in,  and  in  which  they  were 
baptized  and  received  their  chriflianity. 

If  men  ferioufly  confider'd,  and  truly  underflood 
what  they  do,  when  they  divide  the  church  of 
C  H  R  I  s  T  upon  little  fcruples  and  pretences,  they 
would  hardly  be  able  to  think  themfelves  chriflians, 
whilfl  they  continued  in  thefe  unchriflian  and  uncha- 
ritable pradices. 

If 


2002  7he prejudices  againjl  Jesus 

SERM.  If  men  would  but  be,  or  do  what  chridianlty  re- 
*  quires,  there  would  be  no  occafion  for  this  objection  ; 
and  if  men  will  not,  chriflian  religion  is  not  to  be 
blamed  for  it,  but  thofe  that  a6t  16  contrary  to  the 
plain  precepts  and  dire(flions  of  it.  I  proceed  to 
the 

Seventh  and  lafl:  objection,  the  vicious  and  wicked 
lives  of  a  great  part  of  the  profefTors  of  chriftianity. 
This  is  a  heavy  objedlion  indeed,  and  fuch  an  one, 
that  though  we  may  juftly  be  afhamed  to  own  the 
truth  of  it,  yet  can  we  not  have  the  face  to  deny  it. 
*Tis  fo  fad  a  truth,  that  it  is  enough  to  confound  usj 
and  to  fill  all  our  faces  with  fhame  and  bluihing:  but 
yet  it  is  an  objection  not  fo  ftrong  againfl:  chriftianity, 
as  it  is  fhameful  to  chriftians.  And  notwithftanding 
the  utmoft  force  of  it, we  have  nocaufe  to  be'afhamed 
of  the  gofpel  of  Christ  ;  but  the  gofpel  of  Christ 
may  juftly  be  afhamed  of  us.  For  whatever  wc  be, 
*'  the  gofpel  of  Christ  is  the  power  of  God  unto 
*'  falvation."  The  natural  tendency  of  it  is  to  re- 
form and  fave  men,  and  "  the  wrath  of  God  is 
*'  therein  revealed  againft  all  ungodlinefs  and  un- 
*'  righteoufnefs  of  men,  hov/ever  they  may  detain 
*'  the  truths  of  God  in  unrighteoufnefs,'*  and  not 
fufter  them  to  have  their  due  and  proper  influence 
upon  their  hearts  and  lives. 

But  that  I  may  give  a  more  clear  and  particular 
anfwer  to  it,  I  defire  you  to  attend  to  thele  follow- 
ing confiderations. 

I.  It  cannot  be  denied,  but  that  chriftianity  hath 
had  once  very  great  and  marvellous  eftedls  upon  the 
hearts  and  lives  of  men.  And  for  this  I  appeal  to 
the  lives  and  manners  of  the  primitive  chriftians, 
for  which  we  have  not  only  the  teftimony  of  our 

own 


and  his  religion  confider^d.  2003 

own  books  and  writers,    but  even  of  the  adverfaries  S  E  R  M* 
of  our  religion.  What  reformation  chriflianity  atfirft 
wrought  in  the  manners,  of  men,  we  have  clear  and 
full  tedimony,  from  what  the  apoftles  wrote  concern- 
ing the  feveral  churches  which  they  planted  in  fe- 
vcral  parts  of  the  world.    What  hearty  unity  and 
afTedion  there  was  among  chriftians ;    even  to  that 
degree,  as  to  make  men  bring  in  their  private  ellates 
and  pofTefTions  for    the   common  fupport  of  their 
brethren,  we  may  read  in  the  hiilory  of  the  Ads  of 
the  apoftles.     The  city  of   Corinth,  by  the  account 
which  Strabo  gives  of  it,    v/as  a  very  vicious  and 
luxurious  place,  as  moft  in  the  world ;  and  yet  we 
fee  by  St.   Paul,    what  a   ftrange  reformation  the 
chriftian  religion  made  in  the  lives  and  manners  of 
many  of  them  ;  i  Cor.  vi.  9,  10,  11.    "  Be  not  de- 
*'  ceivedj    neither  fornicators,  nor  adulterers,    nor 
"  idolaters,    nor  effeminate,  nor  thieves,  nor  cove- 
*'  tous,    nor  drunkards,     nor   revilers,    nor  extor- 
*'  tioners,  fhall  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God.  And 
"  fuch  were  fome  of  you  :  but  ye  are  wallied,  but 
"  ye  arc  fandified,   but  ye  are  juftified,  in  the  name 
"  of  the  Lord  Jesus,   and  by  the  Spirit  of  our 
"  God.".  And  furely  it  is  no  fmall  matter  to  re- 
claim men  from  fuch  a  profligate  courfe  of  life.  The 
apoftle  inftanceth  in  crimes  and  vices  of    the  firft 
rate,  from  which  yet  he  tells  us  many  were  cleanfed 
and  purified  "  by  the  name  of 'the  Lord   Jesus, 
"  and  the  Spirit  of  God  ;'*  that  is,  by  the  power 
and  efHcacy  of  the  chriftian  dodrine,  together  with 
the  co-operation  of  God's  Holy  Spirit. 

After  the  apoftles,  the  ancient  fathers,  in  their 
apologies  for  chriftianity,  give  us  a  large  account  of 
the  great  power  and  efficacy  of  the  chnftian  doctrine 

upon 


2004  ^^^  prejudices  agalnjl  J  e  s  l^  s 

S  E  R  M.  upon  the  lives  and  manners  of  men.  Tertutiian  tells 
^^^  the  Roman  governors,    that  their  prifons  were  full  of 
malefadlors,  committed  for  fcvcral  crimes  •,    but  they 
■were  all  heathens.    De  veftris  femper  afimt  career^ 
*^  their  prifons  were  thronged  with  criminals  of  their 
''  own  religion  :"  but  there  were  no   chriflians  to 
be  found  committed  there  for  fuch  crimes  -,    Nemo 
illic  chriftianusy  nift  hoc  tantum^  &c.    '*  There  were 
*'  no  chriflians  in  their  prifons,    but  only   upon  ac- 
"  count  of   their  religion."  Or  if   there  were  any 
malefactors  that  had  been  chriflians,  they  left  their 
religion  when  they  fell  into  thofe  enormities.  And 
afterwards  he  adds,  that  if  chriflians  were  irregular 
in  their  lives,  they  were  no  longer  accounted  chri- 
flians, but  were  banifh'd  from  their  communion  as 
unworthy  of  it.    And  they  appealed  to  the  heathens, 
what  a  fudden  and   flrange  change  chriflianity  had 
made  in  feveral  of  the  mofl  lewd,  and  vicious,  and 
debauched  perfons,    and  what  a  vifible  reformation 
there  prefently  appeared  in  the  lives  of  the  worft  of 
men,  after  they  had  once  entertained  the  chriflian 
dodlrine. 

And  thefe  teflimonies  are  fo  much  the  flronger, 
becaufe  they  are  publick  appeals  to  our  adverfaries, 
which  it  is  not  likely  they  who  were  fo  perfecuted  and 
liated  as  the  chriflians  were,  would  have  had  the  confi- 
dence to  have  made,  if  they  had  not  been  notori- 
oudy  true,  even  the  enemies  themfelves  being 
judges. 

And  that  they  were  fo,  we  have  the  confefTion  of 
the  heathens  themfelves.  I  fliall  produce  tv/o  remark- 
able teflimonies  to  this  purpofe,  and  one  of  them 
from  the  pen  of  one  of  the  bitterefl  enemies  that  the 
chriflian  religion  ever  had. 

Pliny, 


and  his  religion  conjider'd,  2005* 

Pliny,  in  his  epiflle  to  Trajan  the  emperor,  gives  S  E  R  M. 
him  an  account,  ''  that  having  examined  the  chrifti- 
*'  ans,  fetting  afide  the  fuperftition  of  their  way, 
**  he  could  find  no  fault ;  and  that  this  was  the 
*'  fum  of  their  error,  that  they  were  wont  to  meet 
''  before  day,  and  fing  a  hymn  to  Christ,  and 
''  to  bind  themfelves  by  folemn  oath  or  facrament, 
"  not  to  any  wicked  purpofe,  but  not  to  fleal,  nor 
"  rob,  nor  commit  adultery,  nor  break  their  faith? 
''  nor  detain  the  pledge."  So  that  it  feems  the 
fum  of  their  error  was,  to  oblige  themfelves  in  the 
ilridefl  manner  againft  the  greateft  vices  and  crimes. 
Which  methinks  is  a  great  teftimony  from  an  ene- 
my and  a  judge,  one  who  would  have  been  ready 
to  difcover  their  faults,  and  had  opportunity  of  en- 
quiring into  them. 

My  other  witnels  is  Julian  the  emperor  and  apo- 
ftate,  who  in  one  of  his  epiftles  tells  us,  ''  the 
"  chriftians  did  feverely  punifh  fedition  and  im- 
"  piety.*'  And  afterwards  exhorting  the  heathen 
priefts  to  all  offices  of  humanity,  and  efpecially  alms 
towards  the  poor;  he  tells  them,  they  ought  to  be 
more  careful  in  this  particular,  and  to  mend  this  fault ; 
"  becaufe  (fays  he)  the  Galileans  taking  advantage 
*'  of  our  negled:  in  this  kind,  have  very  much 
"  ftrengthned  their  impiety  (for  fo  he  calls  their 
''  religion^  by  being  very  intent  upon  thefe  offices, 
*'  and  exemplary  in  their  charity  to  the  poor,  where- 
"  by  they  gained  many  over  to  them." 

And  in  his  49th  epiftle  to  Arfacius  the  high- 
prieft  of  Galatia,  he  recommends  to  him,  among 
other  means  for  the  advancement  of  paganifm ,  the 
building  of  hofpitals,  and  great  liberality  to  the 
poor,  not  only  of  their  own  religion,  but  others. 
Vol,  VII.  14  I  "  For, 


2oo6  'The  prejudices  again]}  Jesus 

S  i'  R  M.  ««  For,  fays  he,  it  is  a  fhame  that  the  impious  Ga- 
l^^.^1j  "  hkans  fhould  not  only  maintain  their  own  poor, 
''  but  ours  alfo  \  wherefore  let  us  not  fufFer  them 
*'  to  outdo  us  in  this  virtue."  Nothing  but  the 
force  of  truth  could  have  extorted  fo  full  an  acknow- 
ledgment of  the  great  hunraiiity  and  charity  of  the 
chriltians,  from  fo  bitter  an  cni:my  of  our  religion 
as  Julian  was.  If  he  owned  it,  we  may  be  fure  it 
was  very  great  and  exemplary. 

So  that  you  fee  that  the  chriflian  religion  had  a 
very  great  power  and  efficacy  upon  the  lives  and 
manners  of  men  when  it  firft  appeared  in  the  world. 
And  the  true  fpirit  and  genius  of  any  religion,  the 
force  of  any  inftitution  is  bed  ^ttn  in  the  primitive 
effects  of  it  -,  before  it  be  weakened  and  difpirited 
by  thofe  corruptions,  which  in  time  are  apt  to  infi- 
nuate  themfclves  into  the  beft  things.  For  all  laws 
and  inlfitutions  are  commonly  more  vigorous,  and 
have  greater  effedls  at  firll,  than  afterwards  j  and  the 
bell  things  are  apt  in  time  to  degenera^te  and  to  contrad 
foil  and  ruft.  And  it  cannot  in  reafon  be  expeded 
otherwife.  So  that  though  it  be  a  thing  to  be  be- 
wailed, and  by  the  greateft  care  and  diligence  to 
be  refilled,  yet  it  is  not  fo  extremely  to  be  won- 
der'd  at,  if  chriflianity,  in  the  fpace  of  fixteen  hun- 
dred years,  hath  abated  much  of  its  firfl:  flrength 
and-  vigor. 

Efpecially  confidcring,  there  were  feveral  cir- 
cumflances,  that  gave  chriflianity  mighty  advan- 
tages at  firfb,  efpecially  the  miraculous  powers  which 
did  accompany  the  firfl  publication  of  the  gofpel; 
which  muft  needs  be  full  of  convidion  to  thofe  who 
iiiw  the  wonderful  effedts  of  it :  the  extraordinary- 
operation  of  the  Spirit  of  God  upon  the  minds  of 

men, 


and  his  reh'giofi  conjiderd,  2007 

men,  to  difi^ofe  them    to  the   receiving  of  if,  the  SERM. 
perfecuted  and  fuffering    Hate  that   chriilians  v/ere  "' 

generally  in,  which  made  thofe  who  embraced  the 
profellion  to  be  generally  ferious  and  in  good  earned 
in  it,  and  kept  up  a  continual  heat  and  zeal  in  the 
minds  of  men  for  that  religion  which  coil  them  io 
dear,  and  for  which  they  fufFer'd  fo  much  :  and  the 
fury  of  their  enemies  againft  it,  did  naturally  inflame 
their  love  and  kindnefs  to  one  another  •,  nothing 
being  a  greater  endearment  among  men,  than  com- 
mon fufierino-s  in  a  common  caufe.  So  long;  as 
chriftians  were  not  corrupted  by  fccular  intcreds  ^ 
and  by  denying  all  for  Christ,  were  free  from 
covetoufnefs  and  ambition,  the  great  roots  of  all 
evil,  the  church  of  Christ,  "  though  fhe  was 
"  black,  yet  Hie  v/as  comely,  and  terrible  as  an 
"  arm.y  with  banners ;  "  fhe  was  all  this  while  in  an 
excellent  pofture  to  refift  the  temptations,  and  fishc 
againft  the  vices  and  corruptions  of  the  world  :  but 
after  the  world;  broke  in  upon  the  church,  and  chri- 
(lianity  was  countenanced  by  the  powers  of  the 
world,  and  watered  with  fecular  preferments  and 
encouragements,  no  wonder  if  the  tares  began  to 
grow  up  with  the  wheat:  then  "  iniquity  began  to 
*'•  abound,  and  the  love  of  many  began  to  grow 
*'  cold."  When  the  fun  of  profperity  began  to  fliine 
upon  the  chriftian  profeiTion,  then  no  wonder  if  the 
vermin  bred  and  fv/armed  every  v/here.  When  it 
grew  creditable  and  advantageous  for  men  to  be 
chriftians,  this  muft  in  all  realbn  m.ake  a  world  of 
hypocrites  and  counterfeit  profeiTors. 

Thefj  things,  I  reckon,  muft  in  reafon  make  a 
mighty  difference  between  the  firft  ages  of  chri- 
fiianityj  and  thofe  which  have  foilovv^'d  fmcej    and 

14-  I  Z  na 


2oo8  T^ke  prejudices  againfl  Jesus 

SERM.  no  wonder,  if  the  real  fruits  and  effe6ls  of  religion 
^^^^-  in  thefe  leveral  dates  of  chridianity  be  very  unequal. 
For  profperity  and  adverfity  made  a  wide  difference 
in  this  matter.  The  perfecution  of  any  religion 
naturally  makes  the  profeflbrs  of  it  real ;  and  the 
profperity  of  it  does  as  naturally  allure  and  draw  in 
hypocrites.  Befides  that  even  the  bed  of  men  are 
more  corrupted  by  profperity  than  afflidlion. 

But  tho'  chridians  were  bed  under  perfecution, 
yet  God  did  not  think  fit  always  to  continue  them 
in  that  date,  becaufe  he  would  not  tempt  them  and 
tire  them  out  with  perpetual  fufFerings  3  and  after 
he  had  given  the  world  a  fufficient  experiment  of 
the  power  and  efficacy  of  the  chridian  religion,  in 
maintaining  and  propagating  it  felf  in  defpite  of  all 
the  violence  and  oppofition  of  the  world,  fufficient  for 
ever  to  give  reputation  to  it ;  he  then  thought  good 
to  leave  it  to  be  kept  up  by  more  humane  ways, 
and  fuch  as  offer  lefs  violence  to  the  nature  of  a 
man.  Being  once  edablifh'd  and  fettled  in  the 
world,  and  upon  equal  terms  of  advantage  with 
other  religion^,  God  left  it  to  be  fupportcd  by  more 
ordinary  means ;  by  pious  education,  and  diligent 
indruction,  and  good  laws  and  government,  with- 
out miracles,  and  without  perfecution,  and  without 
thofe  extraordinary  and  overpowering  communica- 
tions of  his  grace  and  Spirit  which  he  afforded  to 
the  fird  ages  of  chridianity. 

I  have  infided  the  longer  upon  this,  that  men 
may  fee  what  effefls  chridianity  hath  had  upon  the 
lives  of  men,  by  which  we  may  fee  the  proper 
nature  and  efficacy  of  it  ;  and  withal  may  not  won- 
der fo  much  that  it  hath  not  the  fame  effedls  now. 
Though  it  be  matter  of  great  diame  to  us,   that 

they 


and  his  religion  confiderd,  2009 

they  are  ib  vaftly  difproportionable  to  what  they  were  S  E  R  M, 
at  lirll.  .  ^^^^• 

2.  Though  the  difproportion  be  very  great  be- 
tween the  efFeds   of  chriftianity  at  firfl,  and  what 
it  hath  now  upon  the  lives  of  men ;  yet  we  ought 
not  to  deny,  but  it  hath  ftill  fome  good  efFedls  upon 
mankind  ;  and  it  is  our  great  fhame  and  fault  that 
it  hath  no  better.     If  we  will  fpeak  juftly  of  things, 
as  to  the  general  civility  of  life  and  manners,  free- 
dom from  tyranny,  and  barbaroufnefs,  and  cruelty, 
and  fome  other  enormous  vices ;  yea  and  as  to  the 
exemplary  piety  and  virtue  of  great  numbers  of  par- 
ticular perfbns  of  feveral  nations,   there  is  no  com- 
parifon  between   the  general  ftate  of  chriftendom, 
and  the  pagan  and  mahometan  parts  of  the  world. 
Next  to  chriftianity,  and  the  law  of  Mofes,  (which 
was   confined    to  one   nation^  philofophy    was  the 
mod  likely  inflrument  to  reform  mankind  that  hath 
been  in  the  world  ;  and  it  had  very  confiderabie  ef- 
fedls  upon  fome  particular  perfons,  both  as  to   the 
redifying  of  their  opinions,  and  the  reforming  of 
their  lives :  but  upon  the  generality  of  mankind  it 
did  very  little  in  either  of  thefe  refpeds,   efpecially 
as  to  the  redlifying  of  the  abfurd  and  impious  opi- 
nions of  the  people  concerning  God,  and  their  fu- 
perftitious  worfhip  of  the  deity.     Whereas  the  chri- 
ftian  religion  did  univerfally,  wherever  it  came,  fet 
men  free  from  thofe  grofs  impieties  and  fuperiliti- 
ons,  and  taught  men  *to  worfhip  the  only  true  God 
in  a  right  manner. 

Though  we  mufl  confefs  to  the  eternal  reproach 
of  the  chriftian  religion,  that  the  wefcern  church 
hath  degenerated  fo  far,  that  it  feems  to  be  in  a 
great  meafure  relaps'd  into  the  ignorance  and  fuper- 

llition 


2010  The  prejudices  againft  Jesus 

^c^rx*  ^^^^^^"^  ^^  paganifm;  out  of  which  degeneracy,  that 
God  hath  refcued  us,  we  have  infinite  caufe  to  adore 
his  goodnefs,  fo  we  have  all  the  reafon  in  the  world 
to  dread  and  detefl:  a  return  into  this  fpiritual  Egypt, 
this  houfc  of  darkncfs  and  bondao;e,  and  the  brinsi- 
ing  of  our  necks  again  under  "  that  yoke,  which 
*'  neither  we  nor  our  flithers  were  able  to  bear." 

So  that  you  fee  that  there  are  dill  very  confiderable 
effcds  of  the  chriflian  religion  in  the  world,  yea  and  I 
doubt  not  but  in  thofe  places  v/here  it  is  moll  cor- 
rupted and  degenerated  *,  becaufe  they  flill  retain  the 
eflential  dodrines  of  chriftianity,  which  have  not 
quite  loft  their  force,  notwithftanding  the  many  er- 
rors and  corruptions  that  are  mixt  with  them.  And 
as  God  knows,  and  every  man  fees  it,  that  the  ge- 
nerality of  chriftians  ?.re  very  bad,  notwithftanding 
all  the  influence  of  that  excellent  religion  which 
they  profeis  \  yet  I  think  it  is  very  evident,  men 
would  be  much  worfe  without  it.  For  though  v<^ry 
many  who  have  entertained  the  principles  of  chriftiani- 
ty are  very  wicked  in  their  lives  \  yet  many  are  other- 
wife  :  and  thofe  that  are  bad  have  this  advantage  by 
their  religion,  that  it  is  in  its  nature  apt  to  re- 
duce and  recover  men  from  a  wicked  courfe,  and 
fometimes  does  :  whereas  the  cafe  of  thofe  perfons 
would  have  been  defperate,  were  it  not  for  thofe 
principles  of  religion  which  were  implanted  in  them 
by  chriftian  education,  and  though  they  were/  long 
fupprefs'd,  yet  did  at  laft  awaken  thcin  to  a  confi- 
deration  of  their  condition,  and  proved  the  happy 
means  of  their  recovery. 

3.  I  will  not  deny  but  there  are  fome  perfons  as 
bad,  nay  perhaps  worfe,  that  have  been  bred  up 
in  the  chriftian  religion,  than  are  commonly  to  be 

found 


mid  his  religion  cciifider'd,  son 

found  In  the  darknefs  of  paganifm  ;  for  the  corrup-  S  E  R  M. 
tion  of  the  beil  things  is  the  vvorfl,  and  thofe  who 
have  refilled  fo  great  a  light  as  that  of  the  gofpel 
is,  are  like  to  prove  the  moil  defperately  wicked  of  all 
others.  There  is  nothing  that  men  make  worfe  ufe  of, 
than  of  light  and  liberty,  two  of  the  heft  and  mod 
pleafant  things  in  the  world.  Knowledge  is  many  times 
abufed  to  the  worll  purpofe,  and  liberty  into  licen- 
tioufnefs  and  fedition  -,  and  yet  no  man  for  all  that 
thinks  ignorance  defirable,  or  Vv^ould  wifh  a  perpe- 
tual night  and  darknefs  to  the  world ;  and  conclude 
from  the  inconveniencies  of  abufed  liberty,  that  the 
beil  (late  of  things  would  be,  that  the  generality  of 
mankind  fhould  be  all  fiaves  to  a  few,  and  be 
perpetually  chained  to  the  oar,  or  condemned  to 
the  mines. 

There  are  many  times  as  bad  confequences  of  good 
things,  as  of  bad  :  but  yet  there  is  a  great  difference 
between  good  and  bad  for  all  that.  As  knowledge 
and  liberty,  fo  likewife  the  chridian  religion  is  a 
great  happinefs  to  the  world  in  general,  though  fome 
are  fo  unhappy  as  to  be  the  worfe  for  it ;  not  be- 
caufe  religion  is  bad,  but  becaufe  they  are  io, 

4.  If  religion  be  a  matter  of  mens  free  choice,  it 
is  not  to  be  expeded  that  it  Ihould  neceffarily  and 
conflandy  have  its  effedls  upon  men ;  for  it  works 
upon  us  not  by  way  of  force  or  natural  ne- 
ceflity,  but  of  moral  perfuafion.  If  religion,  and 
the  grace  of  God  which  goes  along  with  it,  did 
force  men  to  be  good  and  virtuous,  and  no  mun 
could  be  fo  unlefs  he  were  thus  violendy  forced, 
then  it  would  be  no  virtue  in  any  man  to  be  good, 
nor  any  crime  and  fault  to  be  otherwife.  For  then 
the  reafon  why  fome  men  were  good,  would  be  be- 
caufe 


^012  ^ht'  prejudices  againjl  Jesus 

S  E  R  M.  caufe  they  could  not  help  it ;  and  others  bad,  becaufc 

CXix.  |.j^g  grtice  of  God  did  not  make  them  io  whether 
they  would  or  not. 

But  religion  does  not  thus  work  upon  men.  It 
directs  men  to  their  duty  by  the  fliorteil  and  plained 
precepts  of  a  good  life  \  it  perfuades  men  to  the 
obedience  of  thefe  precepts,  by  the  promifes  of  eter- 
nal happinefs,  and  the  thrcatnings  of  eternal  m.ifery 
in  cafe  of  obftinate  difobedience  ;  it  offers  us  the  af- 
fiilaiice  of  God's  Holy  Spirit,  to  help  our 
weaknefs,  and  enable  us  to  that,  for  which  "  we  are 
*'  not  fuffiicient  of  ourfelves:"  but  there  is  nothing 
of  violence  or  neceffity  in  all  this.  After  all, 
^men  may  dilobey  thefe  precepts,  and  not  be  per- 
fuaded  by  thefe  arguments,  may  not  make  ufe  of 
this  grace  which  God  offers,  may  "  quench  and  re- 
«^  fifl:  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  rejedl  the  counfel  of 
*'  God  againft  themfelves."  And  the  cafe  being 
thus,  it  is  no  wonder,  if  the  temptations  of  this  pre- 
fent  world  prevail  upon  the  vicious  inclinations  of 
men  againft  their  duty,  and  their  true  intereft  ;  and 
coniequentlyifthe  motives  and  arguments  of  the  chri- 
llian  religion  have  not  a  conftant  and  certain  effed: 
upon  a  great  part  of  mankind.  Not  but  that  chri. 
ftianity  is  apt  to  bring  men  to  goodnefs  \  but  fome 
are  fo  obflinately  bad,  as  not  to  be  wrought  upon 
by  the  moft  powerful  confiderations  it  can  offer  to 
them. 

5,  It  cannot  be  denied,  but  that  chriftianity  is  as 
well  framed  to  make  men  good,  as  any  religion  can 
be  imagined  to  be  -,  and  therefore  wherever  the  fault 
be,  it  cannot  be  in  the  chriftian  religion,  that  we 
are  not  good.  So  that  the  bad  lives  of  chriftians 
are  no  fufRcient  objedion  either  againft  the  truth  or 

good- 


and  his  religion  confider'd.  2013 

goodnefs  of  the  chriftian  dodrine.     Befides  the  con-  ^^^^j^' 
firmation  that  was  given  to  it  by  miracles,  the  excel- 
lency of  the  do6lrine,  and  its   proper   tendency  to 
make  men  holy  and  virtuous,  are  a  plain  evidence 
of  its  divine  and  heavenly  original.     And  furely  the 
goodnefs  of  any  religion  confifts  in  the  fufficiency  of 
its  precepts  to  dired:  men  to  their  duty  ;  in  the  force 
of  its  arguments   to   perfuade   men  to  it ;  and  the 
luitablenefs  of  its  aids  and  helps  to  enable  us  to  the 
difcharge  and  performance  of  it.     And  all  thofe  ad- 
vantages the  chriftian  religion  hath  above  any  religion 
or  inftitution  that  ever  was  in  the  world.     The  rea- 
fonable  and  plain  rules  of  a  good  life  are  no  where 
fo  perfedly  colled ed,    as  in  the  difcourfes  of  our 
bleffcd  Saviour    and   his   apoftles.     No   religion 
ever  gave  men  fo  full  afTurance  of  the  mighty  re- 
wards and  punifhments  of  another  world  ;  nor  fuch 
gracious  promifes  of  divine  afllllance,  and  fuch  evi* 
dence  of  it,  efpccially  in  the  piety,  and  virtue,  and 
patience,   and  felf-denial  of  the    primitive  chrifti-r 
ans,    as  the   dodrine  of  God   our  Saviour  hath 
done,  "  which  teacheth   men   to  deny  ungodlinefs 
*'  and  worldly  lufts,  and  to  live  ibberly,  and  righte- 
''  oufly,  and  godly  in  this  prefent   world,  in  con- 
*'  templation  of   the  bleflfed    hope  and   the  glori- 
*'  ous  appearance  of  the  great  God,  and  our  Sa- 
"  viouR  Jesus  Christ;  who  gave    himfelf  for 
''  us,  that  he    might   redeem  us  from  all  iniqui- 
**  ty,  and  purify  to  himfelf  a  peculiar  people  zea- 
"  lous  of  good  works." 

6.  and  laftly,  after  all  that  hath  or  can  be  faid,  ic 
muft  be  acknowledged,  and  ought  fadly  to  be  la- 
mented by  us,  that  the  wicked  lives  of  chriftians  are 
a  marvellous  fcandal  and  reproach  to  our  holy  reli- 

VoL.  VII,  14  K  gion^ 

4. 


2014  ^^'<^  prejudices  again jl  Jesus 

SERM.  Orion,  and  a  C!,rcat  obftacle  to  the  fpreadinp-  oF  it 
^_^  J^j  in  the  world,  and  a  real  objedion  againft  it  to 
prejudiced  perfons,  with  whom  it  doth  juflly  bring 
into  doubt  the  goodnefs  and  efficacy  of  the  inflitu- 
tion  it  felf,  to  fee  how  little  efFed  it  hath  upon  the 
hearts  and  lives  of  men.  It  is  hard  for  a  man  to 
maintain  the  reputation  of  an  excellent  mailer  in  any 
kind,  when  all  the  world  {tt%^  that  mod  of  his 
fcholars  prove  dunces.  Whatever  commendation 
may  be  given  to  any  art  or  fcience,  men  will  que- 
llion  the  truth  and  reality  of  it,  when  they  fee  the 
greateft  part  of  thofe  who  profefs  it,  not  able  to  do 
any  thing  anfwerable  to  it.  The  chriftian  religion 
pretends  to  be  an  art  of  fcrving  God  more  decently 
and  devoutly,  and  of  living  better  than  other  men  ♦, 
but  if  it  be  fb,  why  do  not  the  profeflbrs  of  this 
excellent  religion  fhew  the  force  and  virtue  of  it  in 
their  lives?  and  though  I  have  fufficiently  fhewn, 
that  this  is  not  enough  to  overthrow  the  truth  and 
difparage  the  excellency  of  the  chriftian  dodlrine ; 
yet  it  will  certainly  go  a  great  way  with  prejudiced 
perlbns,  and  it  cannot  be  expeded  otherwife. 

So  that  we  have  infinite  reafon  to  be  afhamed, 
that  there  is  fo  plain  a  contrariety  between  the  laws 
of  chriftianity,  and  the  lives  of  the  greateft  part  of 
chriftians  \  fo  notorious  and  palpable  a  difference  be- 
tween the  religion  that  is  in  the  bible,  and  that  which 
is  to  be  fecn  and  read  in  \!\\t  converfations  of  men. 

"Who  that  looks  upon  the  manners  of  the  prefent 
age,  could  believe,  (if  he  did  not  know  itj  that  the 
holy  and  pure  dodlrine  of  the  chriftian  religion  had 
ever  been  fo  much  as  heard,  much  M^  pretended  to 
be  entertained  and  believed  among  us  ?  nay  among 
thofe  who  feem  to  make  a  more  icrious  profeffion 

of 


mid  his  religion  confider'd.  2015 

of  religion,  when  wc  confider  how  flrangely  theySERM 
allow  themfelves  in  malice  and  envy,  in  paiTion  and 
anger,  and  uncharitable  cenfures,  and  evil  fpeak- 
ing,  in  fierce  contentions  and  animofities ;  who  would 
believe  that  the  great  inftrument  of  thefe  mens  re- 
ligion, I  mean  the  holy  bible,  by  which  they  pro- 
fefs  to  regulate  and  govern  their  lives,  were  full  of 
plain  and  ftrid  precepts  of  love  and  kindnefs,  of 
charity  and  peace,  and  did  a  hundred  times  with  all 
imaginable  feverity,  and  under  pain  of  forfeiting 
the  kingdom  of  God,  forbid  malice  and  envy,  and 
revenge,  and  evil  fpeaking,  and  rafli  and  unchari- 
table cenfures,  and  tell  us  fo  plainly  that  the  chridian 
religion  obligeth  men  "  to  put  off  all  thefe  i"  and 
that  "  if  any  man  feem  to  be  religious  and  bridleth 
''  not  his  tongue^  that  man's  religion  is  vain  ?"  do 
men  read  and  hear  thefe  things  every  day,  and  pro- 
fels  to  believe  them  to  be  the  truths  of  God,  and 
yet  live  as  if  they  were  verily  pcrfuaded  they  were 
falfe?  what  can  we  conclude  from  hence,  but  either 
that  this  is  not  chriflianity,  or  the  greatefl  part  of  us 
are  no  chriftians  ? 

So  that  if  one  of  the  apoftles  or  primitive  chri- 
ftians fhould  rife  from  the  dead,  and  converfe  among 
us,  how  would  he  wonder  to  fee  the  face  and  com- 
plexion of  chriflianity  alter'd  from  what  it  was  in 
their  days  ;  and  were  it  not  for  the  name  and  title 
which  we  bear,  would  fooner  guefs  us  to  be  any 
thing  than  chriftians? 

So  that  upon  the  whole  matter,  there  is  no  way 
to  quit  our  felves  of  this  objection,  and  to  wafh  away 
the  reproach  of  it,  but  to  mend  and  reform  our 
lives.  'Till  this  be  done,  it  is  unavoidable,  but  the 
vicious  manners  of  men  will  aifecl  our  religion  with 
14  K  2  obloquy 


20 1 6  The  prejudices  againfi  Jesus 

Oc^X^'  ^^^o^^^y  ^'^^  reproach,  and  derive  an  ill  conceit  and 
opinion  of  it  into  the  minds  of  men.  And  I  cannot 
fee  how  Christianity  can  ever  gain  much  ground  in 
the  world,  'till  it  be  better  adorned  and  recommend- 
ed by  the  profefTors  of  it.  Nay  we  have  jufl  caufe 
to  fear,  that  if  God  do  not  raife  up  fome  great  and 
eminent  inftruments  to  awaken  the  world  out  of  this 
ftupid  lethargy,  that  chriftianity  will  every  day  de- 
cline, and  the  world  will  in  a  fhort  fpace  be  over- 
run with  atheifm  and  infidelity.  For  vice,  and  fu- 
perftition,  and  enthufiafm,  which  are  the  reigning 
difeafes  of  chriflendom,  when  they  have  run  their 
courfe,  and  finifh'd  their  circle,  do  all  naturally  end, 
and  meet  in  atheifm.  And  then  it  will  be  time  for 
the  great  judge  of  the  world  to  appear,  and  effec- 
tually to  convince  men  of  that,  which  they  would 
not  be  perfuaded  to  believe  by  any  other  means. 
And  of  this  our  Saviour  hath  given  us  a  terrible 
and  fearful  intimation  in  that  queftion  of  his ; 
*«  when  the  fon  of  man  comes,  fhall  he  find  faith 
«*  upon  earth?"  our  Saviour  hath  not  pofitively 
affirmed  it,  and  God  grant  that  we  may  not  make 
it,  and  find  it  true. 

And  thus  I  have,  by  God's  afTiflance,  given  the 
bed  fatisfa6]:ion  I  could,  to  the  miOfl  material  excep- 
tions I  have  met  with  agalnft  our  blellcd  Saviour 
and  his  religion.     The 

lid  thing  remains  briefiy  to  be  fpoken  to,  viz. 
how  happy  a  thing  it  is  to  efcape  the  common  preju- 
dices which  men  are  apt  to  entertain  againfi  religion, 
«'  bleifed  is  he  whofoever  fhall  not  be  oftcnded  in 
««  me."  And  this  will  appear  if  v/e  confider  thefe 
three  or  four  things. 

Firft,  that  prejudice  does  many  times  fway  and 

bias 


CXIX. 


and  his  religion  confiderd,  2017 

bias  men  againft  the  plained  and  clearefl:  truths.  WeS  E  R  M. 
fee  in  daily  experience,  what  a  falfe  bias  prejudice 
puts  upon  mens  underftandings.  Men  that  are  edu- 
cated in  the  grofleft  errors  and  fuperftitions,  how 
hard  it  is  to  convince  them  that  they  arc  in  a  wrong 
way !  and  with  what  difficulty  are  they  perfuaded  of 
their  miftake!  nay  they  have  hardly  the  patience 
to  be  told  they  are  in  an  error,  much  lefs  to  confider 
what  may  be  ofFer'd  againft  it.  How  do  the  pai^ 
fions  and  lufts  of  men  blind  them  and  lead  them 
afide  from  the  truth,  and  incline  them  to  that  fide 
of  the  queftion  which  is  mod  favourable  to  their  lufts 
and  interefts  ?  how  partially  do  men  lean  to  that  part 
which  makes  moft  for  their  advantage,  though  all 
the  reafon  in  the  world  lie  on  the  other  fide  ? 

Now  ignorance  and  mifiake  are  a  great  fiavery  of 
the  underftanding,  if  there  were  no  worfe  confe- 
quences  of  our  errors  :  and  therefore  our  Saviour 
fays  excellently,  that  the  truth  makes  men  free ; 
*'  ye  ftiall  know  the  truth,  and  the  truth  ftiall  make 
"  you  free." 

Secondly,  prejudice  does  not  only  bias  men  againft 
the  plaincft  truths,  but  in  matters  of  greateft  con- 
cernment, in  things  that  concern  the  honour  of 
God,  and  the  good  of  others,  and  our  own  welfare 
and  happinefs.  Prejudices  againft  religion  occafion 
miftakes  of  the  higheft  nature,  and  may  lead  men  to 
fuperftition  and  idolatry,  and  to  all  manner  of  im- 
piety, nay  many  times  to  atheifm  and  infidelity. 
The  prejudices  againft  the  dodrine  of  our  Saviour 
are  of  another  concernment  than  the  prejudices 
which  men  have  againft  the  writers  of  natural  philo- 
fophy  or  eloquence,  or  any  other  humane  art  or 
'fcience.     If  a  man's  prejudice  make  him  err  in  thele 

matters 


20 1 8  The  prejudices  againft  Jesus 

matters,  the  thing  Is  of  no  great  moment:  but  the 
bufinefs  of  religion  is  a  matter  of  the  greatcft  and 
weightieft  concernment  to  mankind. 

Thirdly,  the  confequences  of  mens  prejudices  in 
thefe  things  prove  many  times  fatal  and  deftrudlive 
to  them.  Men  may  upon  unreafonable  prejudices 
*'  rejed  the  counfcl  of  God  againft  themfclves,"  as 
it  is  faid  of  the  chief  prieftsand  pharifees  among  the 
Tews.  Men  may  oppofe  the  truth  fo  obftinately  and 
perverfly,  as  to  be  "  fighters  againft  God,"  and  to 
bring  certain  ruin  and  *'  fwift  deftrudion  upon 
«'  themfelves,"  both  in  this  world,  and  the  other; 
as  the  Jews  did,  who  by  oppofing  the  do6lrine  of 
the  gofpel,  and  perfecuting  our  Saviour  and  his 
difciples,  "  fiird  up  the  meafure  of  their  fins,  'till 
*'  wrath  came  upon  them  to  the  uttermoft."  It  is 
eafy  to  entertain  prejudices  againft  religion,  and  by 
confidering  only  the  wrong  fide  of  things,  to  fortify 
our  prejudices  to  fuch  a  degree,  and  entrench  our 
felves  fo  ftrongly  in  our  errors,  that  the  plaineft  and 
moft  convincing  truths  fhall  not  be  able  to  have 
any  accefs  to  us,  or  make  any  impreiTion  upon 
us:  but  all  this  while  we  do  in  truth  under- 
mine our  own  happinefs,  and  are  fecretly  work- 
ing our  own  ruin ;  and  while  we  think  we  are  op- 
pofing an  enemy,  we  are  deftroying  our  felves  \ 
«<  for  who  hath  hardenM  himfelf  againft  God"  and 
his  truth,  *'  and  profpered  ? '  The  principles  of  reii- 
o-ion  area  firm  and  immoveable  rock,  againft  which 
the  more  violently  wc  dafti  our  felves,  the  more 
miferably  we  fhall  be  fplit  and  fhattcr'd.  Our 
blefled  Saviour  and  his  religion  have  been  to 
many,  and  are  to  this  day,  *'  a  ftone  of  ftumbling, 
'*  and  a  rock  of  ofi'ence,"  but  he  himfelf  hath  told 


and  his  religion  confider'd,  20 1 9 

us  what  fhallbe  the  fate  of  thofe  who  are  offended  ^^^^^^X^' 
him;  "  whofoever  fhall  fall  on  this  ilone,  fliall  be 
*'  broken;  but  upon  whomfcever  it  fhall  fall,  it  fhall 
''  grind  him  to  powder.'*  And  therefore  well  might 
he  fay  here  in  the  text,  "  bleiTed  is  he  whofoever 
''  fhall  not  be  offended  in  me." 

Fourthly,  there  are  but  few  in  comparifon,    who 
have  the  happinefs  to  efcape  and  overcome  the  com- 
mon prejudices  which  men  are  apt  to  entertain  againfl 
religion.     Thus  to  be  fure  it  was  when  chriflianity 
firft  appeared  in  the  w'orld :    and  though  among  us 
tiie  great  prejudice  of  education  be  removed  ;    yet 
there  are  ftill   many,    v/ho   upon   one  account   or 
other  are  prejudiced  againft    religion,    at   leafl  fo 
far,  as  not  to  yield  to  the  power  of  it  in  their  lives. 
Few  men  are  fo  impartial  in  confidering  things,  as 
not  to  be  fwayed  by  the  intereft  of  their  lufls  and 
pafTions,  as  to  keep  the  balance  of  their  judgments 
even,  and  to  fuifer  nothing  but  truth  and  reafon  to 
weigh  with   them.      We  generally   pretend  to  be 
"  pilgrims  and  ftrangers  in  the  world,"    and  to  be 
all  travelling  towards  heaven :  but  few  of  us  have  the 
indifferency  of  travellers ;  who  are  not  concern'd  to 
find  out  the  faired  and  the  eafiefl  way,  but  to  know 
which  is  the  right  way,    and  to  go  in  it.      Thus  it 
fhould  be  with  us,  our  end  Ihould  always  be  in  our 
eye,  and  we  fhould  choofe  our  way  only  with  refpe6fc 
to  that;    not  confidering  our  inclination  fo  much  as 
our  defign ;  nor  choofing  thofe  principles  for  the  go- 
vernment of  our  lives,   which  are  mofl  agreeable  to 
our  prefent  defires,    but  thofe  which  will  mod  cer- 
tainly   bring  us  to   happinefs    at    the  laft ;     and 
that  I  am  fure  the   principles  of  the  chriftian   reli- 
gion, firmly  believed  and  pradifed  by  us,  will  do. 

Let 


2020  ^he  prejudices  againjl  Jesus 

^OC^Y^*  ^'^^  "^  ^^^^"  ^^  perfuaded  by  all  that  hath  been 
faid  upon  this  argument,  to  a  firm  belief  of  the 
chritlian  dodlrine.  I  hope  you  are  in  fome  mea- 
fure  fatisfied,  that  the  obje6tions  againft  it  are  not 
fuch,  as  ought  much  to  move  a  wife  and  confide- 
rate  man.  If  we  beHeve  that  God  hath  taken  fo 
much  care  of  mankind,  as  to  make  any  certain  reve- 
lation of  his  will  to  them,  and  of  the  way  to  eter- 
nal happinefs  ;  let  us  next  confider,  whether  any 
religion  in  the  world  can  come  in  competition 
with  the  chriflian,  and  with  half  that  reafon  pre- 
tend to  be  from  God,  that  chriflian ity  is  able 
to  produce  for  it  felF,  whether  we  confider  the 
things  to  be  believed  or  the  duties  to  be  pradlifed, 
or  the  motives  or  arguments  to  the  pra£lice  of 
thofe  duties,  or  the  divine  confirmation  that  is 
given  to  the  whole.  And  if  we  be  thus  perfuaded 
concerning  it,  let  us  refolve  to  live  up  to  the  laws 
and  rules  of  this  holy  religion.  Our  belief  of  it 
fignifies  nothing  without  the  fruits  and  effedls  of  a 
good  life.  And  if  this  were  once  refolved  upon, 
the  difiiculty  of  believing  would  ceafe  \  for  the 
true  reafon  why  men  are  unwilling  to  believe  the 
truths  of  the  gofpel,  is  becaufe  they  are  loth  to  put 
them  in  practice.  "  Every  one  that  doth  evil, 
*'  hateth  the  light."  The  true  ground  of  mens 
prejudice  againfl  the  chriflian  dodrine,  is  becaufe  they 
have  no  mind  to  obey  it ;  and  when  all  is  done,  the 
great  objedlion  that  lies  at  the  bottom  of  mens  minds 
againfl  it,  is,  that  it  is  an  enemy  to  their  lufts,  and  they 
cannot  profefs  to  believe  it  without  condemning  them- 
felves,  for  not  complying  with  it  in  their  lives  and 
pradice. 

SERMON 


[    2021    ] 

SERMON    CXX. 

Jesus  the  S  o  n   of  God,   prov'd  by 
his  refiirredicn. 

R  O  M.  i.  4. 

And  declared  to  be  the  Son  gF  God,  with  pzver^  ac- 
cording  to  the^viiKii:  of  holinefs^  hy  the  refurre^ion 
from  the  dead, 

T.  Paul  in  the  beginning  of  this  epiftle  ^ac- 3  ^  p^ ]vr, 
cording  to  his  cuflom  in  the  red)   ililes  him-    CXX. 
lelf  an  apoftle,    particularly    call'd,    arid   fet 
apart  by  God,  for  the  preaching  of  the  gofpcl ;  the 
main  fubjedt  whereof    was,  "  Jesus  Chris*t   our 
"  Lord  *,"  who  as  he  was,according  to  his  divine  na- 
ture, ^'  the  eternal   Son  of  God  i"  fo  according  to 
his   humane   nature,    he  was  not  only  "  the   fon  of 
*'  man,'*  but  aifo  "  the  Son  of  God."  "  Accord- 
*'  ing  to  the  flefh"  (that  is,  the  v/eaknefs,  and  frail- 
ty, and  mortality  of  this  humane  nature)  "  he  was 
*'  the  fon  of  David,"    that  is,  of   his   poftcrity  by 
his   mother,     who   was  of   that   houfe   and     line. 
"  Made  of  the   feed  of   David,    according   to  the 
"  flefh,"  ver.  3.  "  But  according  to  the  Spirit  of 
"  holinefsi"  (that  is^  in  regard  of  that  divine  power 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  was  manifeded  in  him, 
efpecially  in  his  refurre^fcion   from    the   dead)  "  he 
«^  was  demonftrated  to  be  the  Son  of  God  ;"  even 
according  to  his  humane  nature ;  "  declared  to  be 
««  the  Son  of  God,  with  power,  according  to  the 
*^  Spirit  of  holinefs,  by  the  refurredlion  from  the 
*'  dead.'' 
Vol.  VIL  14 1.  Ail 

4* 


2022  ]esv  s  tjbe  S  OS  of  Go  Dy 

S  E  R  M.      All  the  difficulty  in  the  words  is  concerning  the 
^^^^     meaning  of  this  phrafe  of  Christ's  being"  declared 
^'  to  be  the  Son  of  God:"  the  word  is  o^:^sv1©', 
which    moft    frequentlv    in  fcripture  does  Tignify, 
"  predcUinated,    decreed,    determined  i"^but  like- 
wile   fignifics,  that    which   is  "  defined,    declared, 
*'  demiOii  It  rated,  put  out  of  all  doubt  and  contro- 
*'  verfy."      And     in     this     fenfe    our    tranflation^ 
rer,d:!rs  it,    as    if    the    apoitlc  had   faid,    that    our 
LoviD  Jasus   Christ,    though   according  to  the 
frailty  and  weakncfs  of  his  humane  nature,  he  was 
of  the  feed  of  David  ;  yet  in  refped  of  that  divine 
power  of  the   Holy  Ghost,  which  manifcfted  it- 
felf  in  him,  efpecially  in  his  refurrefbion   from  the 
dead,  he  was  ^'  declared  to  be  the  Son  of  God,  with 
**  power,"  that  is,  mightily,  powerfully  demonflratcd 
to  be  fo;  fo  as  to  put  the   matter   out  of    difpute 
znd  conrrovcriy. 

And  eherefore  following  our  own  tranflation,  I  fhall 
handle  tiie  words  in  this  fcnfe,  as  containing  this  pro- 
pofition  in  them  :  "  that  the  refurrection  of  our 
^'  Lord  Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead,  by  the  Ho- 
<^'  LY  Gkost,  is  a  powerful  dcmonftration  that  he 
^'  was  the  Son  of  God.'- 

And  it  will  conduce  very  much  to  the  clearing 
of  Hi  is  propofition  to  confider  thele  two  things. 

F:rlt,  upon  what  account  Christ,  as  man,  is  faicj 
to  be  ''  the  SoM  of  God." 

Secondly,  in  what  fenfe  he  is  faid  to  be  ''  de- 
^'  clarcd  to  be  the  Son  of  God,  by  his  refurredlion 
f  from  the  dead."  The  confideration  of  thefe  two 
particulars  will  tully  clear  this  propofition,  and  the; 
apoilk's  meaning  in  ita 

-••  Firft, 


pfoifd  by  his  refurreStion,  2023 

FirdjUpon  what  account  Ch  rist,  ds  a  Pxiin,  is  faid  3  E  R  M. 
to  be  "  the  Son  of  God."  And  for  our  rigiit  appre- 
henfion  of  this  matter,  it  is  very  well  worthy  ourobfer- 
vation,  that  Christ,  as  man,  is  no  wherein  fcripture 
faid  to  be*"  the  Son  of  God,"  but  with  relation  to 
the  divine  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  fome  way  or 
other  eminently  manifefted  in  him  ;  1  fay  the  divine 
power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  the  lord  and  giver 
of  life,  as  he  is  called  in  the  a  icient  creeds  of  the 
chriftian  church.     For  as  men  are  naturally    faid  to 
be   the  children  of  thoie  from  whom  they   receive 
their  life  and  being;  lb  Christ,  as  man,  is  faid  to 
be  "  the  Son  of  God^^'  becaufe  he  had  life  com- 
municated to  him,  from  the  Father,  by   an  im- 
mediate power  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  or  the  Holy 
Ghost,     Firil  at  his  conception,  which  was  by  the 
Holy    Ghost.      The  conception    of  our    bkiTt^d 
Saviour  was    an   immediate    a6l    of    the  power 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  overfhadowing,  as  the  fcripture 
exprefleth  it,    the   bJefTed    mother   of  our   Lord  : 
and  then    at   his   refurredion,  when  after  his  dt^xth^ 
he  was,  by  the  operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  railed 
to  life  again.  " 

Now  upon  thefe  two  accounts  only,  Christ  as 
man  is  faid  in  fcripture  to  be  ^^  the  Son  of  God.'* 
He  was  really  fo  upon  account  of  his  conception ; 
but  this  was  fecret  and  invifible:  but  moil  eminent- 
ly and  remarkably  lb,  upon  account  of  his  refurrec- 
tion,  which  v/as  open  and  vifible  to  all. 

I.  Upon  account  of  his  conception  by  the  power  of 
the  Holy  Ghost. Tliat  upon  this  account  he  was  called 
"  the  Son  of  God,"  St.  Luke  moil  exprefly  tells  us, 
Luke  i. 35. where  the  angel  tells  the  virgin  Mary,  that 
f'  thetJoLY  Ghost  fhould  come  upon  h^r-,  and  the 
14  L  2  *'  power 


2024  Jesus  the  Son  of  God, 

S  K  R  M.  «f  power  of  the  highefl  fhould  overfhadow  her,  and 
'  therefore  that  holy  thing,  which  lliould  be  born 
"  of  her,  lliould  be  called  the  Son  of  God.*'  And 
this  our  Saviour  means  by  "  the  Father's  fandi- 
**  fying  him,  and  fending  him  into  the  world  ;'*  for 
which  reafon  he  (Iiys  he  might  juilly  call  himfelf  the 
Son  of  Got),  John  x.  35,  36.  "  If  he  call  them 
*'  gods,  unto  whom  the  word  of  God  came,  and 
*'  the  fcripture  cannot  be  broken  :  fay  ye  of  him, 
"  whom  the  Father  hath  fandified,  and  fent  into 
"  the  world,  thou  blafphemeft,  becaufe  1  faid  I  am 
"  the  Son  of  God  ? "  if  there  had  been  no  other 
reafon,  this  had  been  fufficient  to  have  given  him  the 
title  of  the  Son  of  God,  that  he  was  brought  into 
the  world  by  the  fancftincation,  or  divine  power  of 
the  Holy  Ghost. 

2.  Christ  is  alfo  faid  in  fcripture  to  be  the  Son 
of  God,  and  to  be  declared  to  be  fo  upon  account  of 
*^  his  refurredion  from  the  dead,"  by  the  power 
of  the  Holy  Ghost.  His  refurredion  from  the 
dead,  is  here  in  the  text  afcribed  to  "  the  Spirit 
*'  of  holinefs,  or  the  Holy  Ghost."  And  fo  in 
other  places  of  fcripture,  Rom.  viii.  11.  "If 
*'  the  Spirit  of  him  that  raifed  up  Jesus  from 
'^  the  dead,  dwell  in  you:'*  and,  i  Pet.  iii.  18. 
*'  Being  put  to  death  in  the  flefli  :  but  quickned  in 
*'  the  Spirit  ;'*  that  is,  he  fuffered  in  that  frail 
mortal  nature  which  he  afTumed  j  but  was  raifed  again 
by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  of  the  Spirit 
of  God  which  refided  in  him.  And  upon  this  ac- 
count he  is  exprefly  laid  in  fcripture  to  be  the  Son 
of  God.  Pfal.  ii.  7.  "  I  will  declare  the  decree  ; 
*'  the  Lord  hath  faid  unto  me,  thou  art  my  Son, 
\\  this  day  have  I  begotten  thecj"  to  which  per- 
haps 


provd  hy  his  refurre6iion.  202^ 

haps  the  apoftle  alludes  here  in  the  text,  whenheSERM. 
fays  that  "  Christ  was  decreed  to  be  the  Son  of  ,^^^^r;^ 
"  God  by  his  refurredion  from  the  dead."  To  be 
fore  thefe  words,  *'  this  d..y  iiave  I  begotten  thee,'* 
St.  Paul  exprefly  tells  us  were  accompli lli'd  in  the 
refurredion  of  Christ;  as  if  God  by  raifing  him 
from  the  dead,  had  begotten  him,  and  decreed  him 
to  be  his  Son."  Adls  xii.  32,  ^^.  «'  And  we  de- 
*'  clare  unto  you  glad  tidings^  how  that  the  promife 
"  which  was  made  unto  the  fathers,  God  hath  ful- 
"  filled  the  fame  unto  their  children,  in  that  he  hath 
*'  raifed  up  Jlsus  again,  as  it  is  alfo  written  in  the 
'^  fecond  pfalm,  thou  art  my  S0N5  this  day  have  I 
'«  begotten  thee." 

He  was  the  Son  of  God  before,  as  he  was  conceived 
by  the  Holy  Ghost  ;  but  this  was  fccret  and  invi- 
fible,  and  known  only  to  the  mother  of  our  Lord: 
and  therefore  God  thought  6.t  to  give  a  publickand 
vifible  demonftration  of  it,  fo  as  to  put  the  matter 
out  of  all  queftion,  he  declared  him  in  a  powerful 
manner  to  be  his  Son,  by  giving  him  a  new  life 
after  death,  by  raifing  him  from  the  dead ;  and  by 
this  new  and  eminent  teftimony  given  to  him,  de- 
clared him  again  to  be  his  Son,  and  confirmed  the 
title  which  was  given  him  before  upon  a  true,  but 
more  fecret  account,  of  his  being  conceived  by  the 
Holy  Ghost. 

And  as  our  Saviour  is  faid  to  be  the  Son  of  God 
upon  this  twofold  account,  of  his  conception  by 
the  Holy  Ghost,  and  his  refurredtion  to  life  by 
the  Spirit  of  God:  fo  the  fcripture  (which  does 
folicitoufly  purfue  a  refemblajice  and  conformity  be- 
tween Christ  and  chriftians)  does  likewife  upon 
a   twofold  account  (anfwerable  to  our  Saviour's 

birth 


2026  Jesus  tbe  So  n  of  G  od, 

SERM.  birth  and  refurrecftidn)  call  true  believers  and  chri- 
^^"^  Itiuns,  "  the  children  oi  God  ,"  viz.  upon  account 
of  their  regt^nerution  or  new  birth,  by  the  opera- 
tion ot  the  SpuvIT  of  God-,  and  upon  account  of 
their  refurredion  to  eternal  life,  by  the  power  of  the 
fame  Spirit. 

Upon  account  of  our  regeneration  and  becoming 
chriltians  by  the  power  and  operation  of  the  K)ly 
Spirit    of  God   upon  our  minds,  we  are  faid  to 
be  the  children  of  God,  as  being  regenerated  and 
born  again  by  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God.     And 
this  is  our  nrfl:  adoption.     And  for  this  reafon  the 
Spirit    of  God  conferred  upon  chriilians   at  their 
baptifm,  and  dwelling  and    refiding  in  them   after- 
wards, is  called  "  the  Spirit  of  adoption-,"^  Rom. 
viii.  15    "Ye  have  received  the  Spirit   of  adop- 
*'  tion,  whereby  you  cry  abba  Father  •,"    and  Gal. 
iv.  5,  6.  believers  are  faid  to  "  receive  the  adop- 
*'  tion   of  fonsj    God    having  fent  forth  the  Spi- 
*'   RiT    of  his  Son   into    their  hearts,  crying  abba 
*'  Father  •,"    that   is,  all   chriftians,  for  as  much 
as   they  are  regenerated  by   the  Hjly  Spirit  of 
God,  and  having   the  Spirit  oI  God  dwelling  in 
them,  may  with  confidence  call  God  Father,  and 
look  upon  themfelves  as  his  children.     So  the  apoflie 
tells  us,  Rom.  viii.  14.  "  That  as  many  as  are  led 
"  (or  aded)  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  are  the  fons 
*'  God." 

But  though  we  are  faid  to  be  the  children  of  God 
upon  account  of  our  regeneration,  and  the  Holy 
Spirit  of  God  dv/elling  and  refiding  in  chriRians; 
yet  we  are  eminently  fo,  upon  account  of  our  refur- 
re6lion  to  eternal  life,  by  the  mighty  power  of  God's 
Spirit.  This  is  our  final  adoption  and  the  confum- 

matioa 


frovd  by  his  refurreBion.  2027 

mation   of  it;  and   therefore  Rom.  viii.  21.  this   isSERM, 


(JXX 

called  "  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  fons  of  God," 


becaufe  by  this  we  are  for  ever  "  delivered  from  the 
^'  bondage  of  corruption  ;"  and  by  way  of  emi- 
ncncy,  " .  the  adoption,  viz.  the  redemption  of  our 
''  bodies." 

We  are  indeed  "  the  fons  of  God  "  before,  upon 
account  of  the  regenerating  and  fandifying  virtue 
of  the  Hoi.Y  Gh  ;ST  ;  but  finally  and  chiefly  upoa 
account  of  our  rciurredion  by  the  power  of  the  di- 
vine Spirit.  So  St.  John  tells  us,  that  then  we 
fhall  be  declared  to  be  '  the  fons  of  God,"  after 
another  manner  than  we  are  now:  i  John  iii.  i, 
"  Bv.^hold  what  manner  of  love  the  Father  hath 
*'  bellowed  upon  us,  that  we  fhould  be  called  the 
"  fons  of  GoD."'^  Now  we  are  the  fons  ot  God,'* 
(that  is,  our  adoption  is  begun  in  our  regeneration 
and  fandlificarion)  "  but  it  doth  not  yet  appear  what 
"  we  fhall  be  ♦,"  we  fhall  be  much  more  eminently 
fo  at  the  rellirredion.  "^  We  knoH',  that  Vv^hcn  he 
*'  fhair  appear,  we  fhall  be  like  him." 

But  the  mofi  exprefs  and  remarkable  text  to  this 
purpofe,  is,  Luke  xx.  36.  where  good  men,  after  the 
refurredtion,  are  for  this  reafon  laid  to  be  "  the 
"  children  of  God,"  becaufe  they  are  "  the  chil- 
*'  dren  of  the  refurreflion."  "  But  they  who  fhall 
"  be  accounted  worthy  to  obtain  that  world,  and 
^'  the  refurredion  from  the  dead,  neither  marry  nor 
*'  are  given  in  marriage,  neither  can  they  die  any 
"  more  -,  for  they  are  equal  to  the  angels,  and  are 
*^*  the  children  of  God,  being  the  children  of  the 
*'  refurredion."  For  this  reafon  they  are  fiid  to 
be  "  the  chi.dren  of  God,"  becaufe  they  are  raifed 
by  him  to  a  new  life  \  and  to  be  made  partakers  of 

that 


cxx. 


2028  Jesus  /Z'^Son  of  Go Tf, 

SERM.  that  which  is  promifcd  to  them,  and  refcrved  for 
them.  For  that  all  arc  railed  by  the  power  of 
God,  out  of  the  dull  of  the  earth,  are  not  there- 
fore '*  the  children  of  God  ;"  but  only  they  that 
have  part  in  the  bldletl  relurredion  to  eternal  life, 
and  "  do  inherit  the  kingdom  prepared  for  them." 
Not  thole  who  are  railed  to  a  perpetual  death,  and 
the  "  refurredion  of  condemnation."  Thefe  are 
not  "  the  children  of  God  ;"  but  "  the  children 
*'  of  wrath,"  and  *'  the  children  of  perdition.'* 

But  the  refurredlion  of  thejuft,  is  the  full  and  linal 
declaration,  that  we  are  "  the  children  of  God  ,"  not 
only  becaufe  we  are  reflored  to  a  new  life,  but  be- 
caufc  at  the  refurredlion,  we  are  admitted  to  the  full 
poireffion  of  that  blefled  inheritance  which  is  pur- 
chafed  for  us,  and  promifed  to  us. 

And  the  Spirit  of  God  which  is  conferred  upon 
believers  in  their  reg^jneration,  and  afterwards  dwells 
and  refides  in  them,  is  the  pledge  and  earned  of  our 
final  adoption,  by  our  refurrc(5lion  to  eternal  Yi^t ; 
and  upon  this  account,  and  no  other,  is  faid  to  be 
the  earned  of  our  future  inheritance,  and  the  feal 
and  confirmation  of  it.  Eph.  i.  13.  *'  In  whom 
*'  alfo,  after  that  ye  believed,  ye  were  fcaled  by  the 
*'  Holy  Spirit  of  promife,  which  is  the  earned 
"  of  our  inheritance,  until  the  redemption  of  the 
*'  purchafed  pofiefrion-,"  that  is,  the  Holy  Spirit 
of  God  which  chridians  were  made  partakers  of, 
upon  their  fincere  belief  of  the  chridian  religion,  is 
the  feal  and  earned  of  our  refurredion  to  eternal 
life  -,  as  the  apodlc  plainly  tells  us,  in  that  remar- 
kable text  i  Rom.  viii.  11.  "  If  the  Spirit  of 
*'  him  that  raifed  up  Jesus  from  the  dead  dwell  in 
^.^  you,  he  that  raifed  up  Christ  from  the  dead, 

"  diail 


prov'd  by  his  refurreBion,  202^ 

^'^  fLall  alfo  quicken   your  mortal   bodies,   by   his  S  ER  M. 
•*^  Spirit  that  dwelleth  in  you." 

I  have  been  the  longer  upon  this,  becaufe  it  ferves 
fully  to  explain  to  us  thofe  obfcure  phrafes,  of  "  the 
*'  feal  and  earned,  and  firfl-fruits  of  the  Spirit,'* 
which  many  have  miftaken  to  import  fome  particu- 
lar and  fpiritual  revelation  or  impreflion  upon  the 
minds  of  good  men,  affuring  them  of  their  falva- 
tion.  Whereas  the  apoftle  intended  no  more  by 
them,  but  that  the  Spirit  of  God  which  dwells 
in  believers,  enabling  them  "  to  mortify  the  deeds 
«'  of  the  flefh,  and  to  bring  forth  the  fruits  of  the 
*'  Spirit,"  is  a  pledge  and  earned  to  us,  of  a  blelTed 
refurredion  to  eternal  li/e  by  the  power  of  the 
Spirit  of  God  which  now  dwells  in  us,  and  is  the 
fame  Spirit  which  raifed  up  Jesus  from  the  dead* 
And  in  this  chapter,  the  Spirit  of  God  is  faid, 
ver.  16.  "  to  bear  witnefs  to  our  fpirits,"  that  is 
to  affure  our  minds,  "  that  we  are  the  children  of 
'^  God  ;"  that  is,  that  we  are  his  children  now,  and 
confequently  heirs  of  a  glorious  refurredlion  to  eter- 
nal life :  for  fo  it  follows  in  the  next  words,  ''  and 
*'  if  children,  then  heirs,  heirs  of  God,  and  joint 
*'  heirs  with  Christ;  if  fo  be  that  we  fuffer  with 
*^  him,  that  we  may  alfo  be  glorified  together.'* 
And  this  being  glorified  together  with  Christ  at 
the  refurreclion,  he  calls,  ver.  19.  "  the  manlfeda- 
'«  tion  of  the  fons  of  God."  Thus  you  fee  how  in 
conformity  to  the  Son  of  God,  our  elder  brother, 
we  are  faid  to  be  the  fons  of  God,  becaufe  we  are 
now  regenerated,  and  fhall  at  the  lad  day  be  raifed 
up  to  eternal  life,  by  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of 
God.    I  proceed  to  the 

Vol.  VI L  14  M  SeconcJ 

4- 


2030  Jesvs  the  Son  of  Go  Dy 

'S^J^'  Second  thing  I  propounded  to  fpeak  to,  for  the 
clearing  of  thefe  words,  namely,  in  what  fenfe 
Christ  isfaid  to  be  "  declared,  or  demonftrated  to 
*'  be  the  Son  of  God  by  his  refurredtion  from  the 
''  dead."  By  which  the  apoflle  means  thefe  two 
things. 

1.  That  by  his  refurrcdion  from  the  dead  he  was 
approved  by  God  to  be  the  true  Messias,  and  vin- 
dicated to  the  world  from  all  fufpicion  of  being  a 
deceiver  and  impoftor.     And  confequently  in  the 

2.  Place,  that  hereby  God  gave  teftimony  to  the 
truth  and  divinity  of  his  dodlrine. 

I.  By  his  refurredion  from  the  dead,  he  was  ap- 
proved by  God  to  be  the  true  Messias,  foretold 
by  the  prophets,  and  expedled  at  that  time  by  the 
Jews,  and  fufficiently  vindicated  to  the  world  to  be 
no  deceiver  and  impoftor. 

And  for  our  fuller  underftanding  of  this,  we  are 
to  confider  thefe  two  things. 

(i.)  What  the  apprehenfions  and  expectations  of 
the  ^ews  were  concerning  the  Messias.     And 

(2.)  What  the  many  crimes  were  which  they  laid 
to  our  Saviour's  charge,  and  for  which  they  con- 
demned him. 

(i.)  What  the  apprehenfions  and  expedations  of 
the  Jews  were  concerning  the  Messias.  And  it  is 
VLx  plain  from  the  evangelical  hiftory,  that  diey 
generally  apprehended  thefe  two  things  of  him :  that 
the  Messias  was  to  be  "  the  Son  of  God,  and  the 
"  king  of  Ifrael  j"  and  therefore  that  our  Saviour 
by  affirming  himfelf  to  be  the  Messias,  did  call 
himfelf  *'  the  Son  of  God,  and  the  king  of  Ifrael.  " 
John  i.  41.  Andrew  tells  his  brother  Simon,  "  we 
*'  have  found  the  Messias;"  ver.  45,    Philip  tells 

Natha- 


prov'd  by  his  refurrcBion,  ^©3  r 

Ncithanael,  "  we  have  found  him,  of  whom  MofesSERM. 

•        •  cxx 

*'  in  the  law,  and  the  prophets  did  writer"  that  is,, 

the  Messias.    ver.   49.  Nathanael   upon   difcourfe 

with  our  Saviour,    being  convinced   that  he  was 

the  Messias,    owns  him  in  thefe  terms;   "  Rabbi, 

*'  thou  art  the   Son  of   God,  thou  art  the  king  of 

"  Ifrael."  John  vi.  6g,  Peter  declares  his  belief  that 

he  was  the    Christ,  or  the  MbSsiAs,    in  thefe 

words,  *'  we  beheve  and  are  fure  that  thou  art  the 

"  Son  of  the  living  God."  This  appears  likewife 

from  the  high-prieft's  queftion  to  him,  Matth.  xxvi. 

63.  *'  Art  thou  the  Christ,  (that  is,  the  Messias) 

"  the  Son  of  the  living  God  •,"  or  as  is  it  in  St, 

Mark,  "  the    Son  of  the  bleffed ;"    compared  with 

Pilate's  queftion,  "  art  thou  the  king  of  the  Jews?" 

and  when  he  was  upon  the  crofs,  fome  reviled  him 

under  the  notion  of  the  Son  of  God,  Matth.  xxvii. 

40.  "  If  thou  be  the  Son  of  God,  come  down  from 

*'  the  crofs:"    others  under  the  notion  of  "    the 

*'  king  of  Ifrael,"  ver.  42.  "  If  he  be  the  king  of 

"  Ifrael,  Jet  him  come  down  from  the  crofs."  Fx^om 

all  which   it  is  plain  that  the  Jews  expeded    and 

believed,  that  the  true  Messias  was  to  be  the  Son 

of  God,  and  the  king  of  Ifrael;   and  whoever  was 

not  fo,  was  a  deceiver  and  impoftor.     But  our  Sa- 

viouR  affirmed  himfelf  to  be  the  true  Messias,  and 

the  Son  of  God.    Now  God  by  raifing   him  from 

the  dead,    did   abundantly  vindicate   him    to    the 

world,  from  all   fufpicion  of  impofture ;    and  gave 

teftimony  to  him,  that  he  was  all  that  he  faid    of 

himfelf,  viz.  "  the  true  Messias,  and  the  Son  of 

*'  God." 

Which  will  further  appear,  if  we  confider,  (2dly,) 

what  were  the  crimes  ^which  the  Jews  laid   to  our 

14  M  2  Sa- 


2032  Jesus  the  Son  of  God, 

SE  R  M.  Saviour's  charo;e,  and  for  which  they  condemned 
,^^^_V^ . him ;    and  they    were  mainly   thefe   two,    that  by 
giving  himfelf  to  be  the  Messias,  he  made  him- 
felf  "  king  of  Ifrael,   and  the  Son  of  God."     Of 
the  firft  of  thefe  they  accufed  him  to  Pilate,  hoping 
by  this  accufation  to  make  him  guilty   of  fedition 
againft  the  Roman  government  j  for  faying,  that  he 
was  "  the  king  of  Ifrael.'\    Of  the  other  they  ac- 
cufed him   to  the  chief  prieds,  as  being  guilty    of 
blafphemy,   in   that    not  being  the    Messias,    he 
caird  himfelf  ''  the  Son  of  God."     And  upon  this 
they   laid    the  main  ftrefs,   as  being  a  thing    that 
would  condemn  him  by  their  law.      They  charged 
him  with  this  in  his  life-time,  as  appears  by  thofe 
words  of   our  Saviour,   John  x.  2^.  '*  Say  ye^uof 
^'  him  whom  the  Father  hath  fandtified,  and  fent 
*'  into  the  world,  thou  blafphemeft,    becaufe  I  faid 
*'  I  am  the  Son  of  God  ?"  And  when  he  was  ar- 
raigned before  the  chief  priefts,    they   accufed  him 
of  this,  and  he  owning  this  charge,  ''  thathecall'd 
*'  himfelf  the  Son  of  God,'*  upon  this  they  judged 
him  guilty  of  death.    Matth.  xxvi.  6^^  66,  ''  Then 
''  the  high  priefl:  rent  his  clothes,   and  faid,  he  hath 
'*  fpoken  blafphemy,   what  further  need  have  we  of 
*'  witnefs  ?  behold,    now  ye  have  heard  his  blafphe- 
'^  my.  What  think  ye  .?  they  anfwered,   he  is  guilty 
*^  of  death."  And  when  Pilate  told  them,    that  he 
found  no  fault  in  him,    they  ftill   inftance  in  this  as 
his  crime,  John  xlx.  7.   "  We  have  a  law,    and  by 
*'  our  law  he  ought  to  die,  becaufe  he  made  himfelf 
t'  the  Son  of  God." 

Now  this  being  the  crime  which  was  charged  up- 
on him,  and  for  which  he  was  crucified,  and  put  to 
death  5  God,  by  raifing   him  from   the  dead,  and 

taking 


proved  by  his  refur region.  2033 

taking  him  up  into  heaven,  gave  teftimony  to  him,  S  E  R  M 
that  be  was  no  impoftor,  and  that  he  did  not  vainly 
arrogate  to  himfelf  to  be  the  Messias,  and  the  Son 
of  God.  God  by  raifing  him  from  the  dead,  by 
the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  gave  a  mighty 
demonftration  to  him,  that  he  was  the  Son  of  God. 
For  which  reafon  he  is  faid  by  the  apoftle,  i  Tim. 
iii.  16.  to  be  "  juftified  by  the  Spirit."  The 
Spirit  gave  teftimony  to  him  at  his  baptifm,  and 
by  the  mighty  works  that  appeared  in  him  in  his 
life-time  ;  but  he  was  mod  eminently  and  remarkably 
"  juftified  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  by  his  refurredlion 
"  from  the  dead ;"  God  hereby  bearing  him  wit- 
nefs,  that  he  was  unjuftly  condemned,  and  that  he 
afTumed  nothing  to  himfelf,  but  what  of  right  did 
belong  to  him,  when  he  faid  he  was  the  Messias, 
and  the  Son  of  God.  For  how  could  a  man  that 
was  condemned  to  die  for  calling  himfelf  the  Son  of 
God,  be  more  remarkably  vindicated,  and  more 
clearly  proved  to  be  fb,  than  by  being  raifed  from 
the  dead,  by  the  power  of  God  ^ 

And,  2dly,  God  did  confequently  hereby  give 
teftimony  to  the  truth  and  divinity  of  our  Saviour's 
dodrine.  Being  proved  by  his  refurre6lion  to  be 
the  Son  of  God,  this  proved  him  to  be  a  teacher 
fent  by  him,  and  what  he  declared  to  the  world  was 
the  mind  and  will  of  God.  For  this  none  was 
'  more  likely  to  know,  and  to  report  truly  to  man- 
kind, than  the  Son  of  God,  who  came  from  ''  the 
*'  bofom  of  his  Father."  And  becaufe  the  refur- 
redion  of  Christ  is  fo  great  a  teftimony  to  the 
truth  of  his  dodrine,  hence  it  is  that  St.  Paul  tells 
us,  that  the  belief  of  this  one  article  of  C  h  r  i  s  t's 
refurrediionj     is    fufiicient    to   a  man's    falvation, 

Rom. 


2034  Jesus   the  Son  of  God, 

SERM.  Rom.  X.  9.  "  If  thou  fhalt  confefs  with  thy  mouth 

CXX.  ct  j.|^g  Lord  Jesus,  and  lliak  beheve  in  thy  heart, 
"  that  God  hath  raifed  him  from  the  dead,  thou 
*'  Ihalt  be  faved."  The  reafon  is  plain,  becaufe  the 
refurredlion  of  Christ  confirmed  the  truth  and  di- 
vinity of  his  dodlrine  ;  fo  that  the  behef  of  our 
Saviour's  refurredion  does  by  neceffary  confequence 
infer  the  behef  of  his  whole  dodlrine.  That  God 
raifed  him  from  the  dead,  after  he  was  condemned 
and  put  to  death  for  calling  himfelf  the  Son  of 
God,  is  a  demonftration  that  he  really  was  the  Son 
of  God  j  and  if  he  was  the  Son  of  God,  the  do- 
<5lrine  which  he  taught  was  true,  and  from  God. 

And  thus  I  have  fhewn  you,  how  the  refurre5tion 
of  Christ  from  the  dead,  is  a  powerful  demon- 
ilrauon  that  he  was  the  Son  of  God. 

All  that  remains,  is  briefly  to  draw  feme  pradical 
inferences  from  the  confideration  of  our  Saviour's 
refurre6lion. 

ift.  To  confirm  and  eflablifh  our  minds  in  the  be- 
lief of  the  chriftian  religion,  of  which  the  refurredion 
of  Christ  from  the  dead  is  fo  great  a  confirma- 
tion. And  therefore  I  told  you  that  this  one  article 
is  mentioned  by  St.  Paul  as  the  fum  and  abridgment 
of  the  chriftian  faith;  "  if  thou  fhalt  confefs 
*'  with  thy  mouth  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and 
«'  believe  in  thy  heart  that  God  hath  raifed  him 
"  from  the  dead,  thou  fhalt  be  faved."  The  belief 
of  our  Saviour's  refurredion  doth  by  necefiiary 
confequence  infer  the  belief  of  his  whole  dodlrine ; 
for  he  who  believes  that  God  raifed  him  from  the 
dead,  after  he  was  put  to  death  for  calling  him- 
felf the  Son  of  God^  cannot  but  believe  him  to  be 

the 


provd  by  his  refurrcBion,  203^ 

the  Son  of  God  •,  and  confequently  that  the  dodlrineS  E  R  m. 
which  he  dehvered  was  from  God.  .   _  ^' 

2dly,  The  refurredion  of  Christ  from  the  dead 
aiTures  us  of  a  future  judgment,  and  of  the  recom- 
pences  and  rewards  of  another  world.  That  Ch  rist 
was  raifed  from  the  dead,  is  a  demonftration  of  ano- 
ther life  after  this  ;  and  no  man  that  beheves  the  im- 
mortahty  of  our  fouls,  and  another  life  after  this, 
ever  doubted  of  a  future  judgment ;  fo  that  by  the 
refurreftion  of  Christ  from  the  dead,  God  hath 
given  afTurance  unto  all  men  of  a  future  judgment, 
and  confequently  of  the  recompences  and  rewards  of 
another  world. 

The  confideration  whereof  ought  to  have  a  mighty 
influence  upon  us,  more  efpecially  to  thefe  three 
purpofes. 

I  ft.  To  raife  our  minds  above  the  prefent  enjoy- 
ments of  this  life.  Were  but  men  convinced  of  this 
great  and  obvious  truth,  that  there  is  an  infinite  dif- 
ference between  time  and  eternity,  between  a  few 
days  and  everlafling  ages  •,  would  we  but  fome- 
times  rcprefent  to  ourfelves,  what  thoughts  and  ap- 
prehenfions  dying  men  have  of  this  world,  how  vain 
and  empty  a  thing  it  appears  to  them  ;  how  like  a 
pageant  and  fhadow  it  looks,  as  it  pafTeth  away 
from  them  ;  methinks  none  of  thefe  things  could 
be  a  fufficient  temptation  to  any  man  to  forget  God 
and  his  foul  -,  but  notwithftanding  all  the  prefent  de- 
lights and  allurements  of  fenfe,  we  fliould  be  ftrong- 
ly  intent  upon  the  concernments  of  another  world, 
and  almoft  wholly  taken  up  with  the  thoughts  of  the 
vaft  eternity  which  we  are  ready  to  enter  into.  For 
what  is  there  in  this  world,  this  vaft  and  howling 
wildernefs,  this  rude  and  barbarous  country  which 

wc 


2036  Jesus  the  Son  of  Go v^ 

SERM.  we  are  but  to   pals  through,  which   fliould  detain 
'     and  entangle  our  affedions,  and  take  off  our  thoughts 
from  our  everlafting  habitation,  from  that  better,  and 
that  heavenly  country  where  we  hope  to  live  and  to 
be  happy  for  ever  ? 

2dly,  The  confideration  of  the  rewards  of  another 
world  fliOuld  comfort  and  fupport  us  under  the 
troubles  and  afflidtions  of  this  world.  The  hopes 
of  a  blefled  refurredion  are  a  very  proper  confide- 
ration to  bear  us  up  under  the  evils  and  preffures  of 
this  life.  If  we  hope  for  fo  great  a  happinefs  here- 
after, we  may  be  contented  to  bear  fome  afflidlions 
in  this  world ;  becaufe  the  bleflednefs  which  we  ex- 
ped  will  fo  abundantly  recompenfe  and  outweigh 
our  prefent  fufferings.  So  that  the  apoftle  afTures  us, 
Rom.  viii.  18.  "  We  know  that  the  fufferings  of  this 
*'  prefent  time  are  not  worthy  to  be  compared  with 
*'  the  glory  that  fhall  be  revealed  in  us."  The  con- 
fideration whereof  was  that  which  made  the  primi- 
tive chriftians  to  triumph  in  their  fufferings,  and  in 
the  midll  of  all  their  tribulations  "  to  rejoice  in  the 
''  hopes  of  the  glory  of  God  ;"  becaufe  their  fuffer- 
ings did  really  prepare  and  make  way  for  their 
glory.  So  the  fame  apoftle  tells  us,  2  Cor.  iv.  17, 
1 8.  "  Our  light  afilidlions  which  are  but  for  a 
*'  moment,  work  for  us  a  far  more  exceeding  and 
*'  eternal  weight  of  glory  ;  whilfl  we  look  not  at 
*'  the  things  which  are  feen  ;  for  the  things  which 
*^  are  feen  are  temporal,  but  the  things  which  are  not 
'*  feen  are  eternal." 

3dly,  and  laftly,  the  affurance  of  our  future  re- 
ward is  a  mighty  encouragement  to  obedience  and  a 
holy  life.  What  greater  encouragement  can  we  have 
than  this,  that  all  the  good   which  we  do  in   this 

world 


prov'd  by  bis  refiirreBion,  2037 

world  will  accompany  us  into  the  other  ?  "  that  when  SERM 
"  we  reft  from  our  labours,  our  works  will  follow 
*'  us?  "  that  when  we  fhall  be  ftript  of  other  things, 
and  parted  from  them,  thefe  will  ftill  remain  with 
us,  and  bear  us  company?  our  riches  and  honours, 
our  fenfual  pleafures  and  enjoyments  will  all  take  their 
leave  of  us,  when  we  leave  this  world  ;  nay  many 
times  they  do  not  accompany  us  fo  far  as  the  grave, 
but  take  occafion  to  forfake  us,  when  we  have  the 
greateft  need  and  ufe  of  them  :•  but  piety  and  virtue 
are  "  that  better  part  which  cannot  be  taken  from 
*'  us."  All  the  good  adions  which  we  do  in  this 
world  will  go  along  with  us  into  the  other,  and 
through  the  merits  oF  our  Redeemer  procure  for 
us,  at  the  hands  of  a  gracious  and  merciful  God,  a 
glorious  and  eternal  reward  ;  not  according  to  the 
meannefs  of  our  fervices,  but  according  to  the  boun- 
ty of  his  mind,  and  the  vaftnefs  of  his  treafures  and 
eftate. 

Now  what  an  encouragement  is  this  to  holinefs 
and  obedience,  to  confider  that  it  will  all  be  our 
own  another  day  \  to  be  affured  that  whoever  lerves 
God  faithfully,  and  does  fuffer  for  him  patiently, 
does  lay  up  fo  much  treafure  for  himfelf  in  another 
world,  and  provides  lafting  comforts  for  himfelf,  and 
faithful  and  conftant  companions,  that  will  never 
leave  him  nor  forfake  him  ? 

Let  us  then  do  all  the  good  we  can,  while  we  have 
opportunity,  and  ferve  God  with  all  our  might, 
knowing  that  no  good  adion  that  we  do  fhall  be  loft 
and  fall  to  the  ground,  that  every  grace  and  virtue 
that  we  exercife  in  this  life,  and  every  degree  of  them, 
*«  fhall  receive  their  full  recompence  at  the  refurrec- 
*'  tionof  thejuft.'* 

Vol.  VII.  14  N  How 


^038  ^be  danger  of  apoflafy  frOm  chrilli unity. 

How  fhoLild  this  inrpire  us  with  refolution  and 
zeal  and  indudry  in  the  fervice  of  God,  to  have 
llich  a  reward  continually  in  our  eye  ?  how  fhould  it 
tempt  us  to  our  duty,  to  have  a  crown  and  a  king- 
dom offered  to  us,  "  joys  unfpeakable  and  full  of 
"  glory,  fuch  things  as  eye  hath  not  feen,  nor  ear 
"  heard,  nor  have  entred  into  the  heart  of  man  ?  '* 
And  fuch  are  the  things  which  God  hath  laid  up 
for  them  who  love  him  heartily,  and  ferve  him 
faithfully  in  this  world. 


SERMON     CXXI. 

The  danger  of  apoftafy  from  chriftianity. 

H  E  B.  vi.  4,  5,  6 

For  it  is  impojfible  for  thofe  who  were  once  enlightened^ 
and  have  tajled  of  the  heavenly  gift^  and  were  made 
•partakers  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  a7id  have  tafted  the 
good  word  of  God,  and  the  powers  of  the  world  t& 
come  J  if  they  fijall  fall  away,  to  renew  them  again 
unto  repentance:  feeing  they  crucify  to  themf elves 
the  Son  ^  God  afrefi,  and  put  him  to  an  open 
fijame. 


SERM.  ^   ■  ^ 


cxxr. 


HESE  words  arc  full  of  difficulties,  and  the 

I       mifunderftanding   of  them    hath   not   only 

been  an  occafion  of  a  great  deal  of  trouble, 

and  even  defpair  to  particular  perfons,  but  one  of  the 

chief  reafons  why  the  church  of  Rome  did  for  a  long 

time  reject:  the  authority  of  this  book  5  which  by  the 

way 


T^he  danger  of  apojlafy  from  chrifltantiy,  203/^ 

way  I  cannot   but  take  notice  of  as  a  demonftratlve  S  E  R  IV{. 
indance  both  of  the  fallible  judgment  of  that  church,  * 

and  of  the  faJhbiJity  of  oral  tradition  ;  for  St.  Jerom 
more  than  once  exprefly  tells  us,  ''  that  in  his  time 
"  (which  was  about  400  years  after  Christ)  the 
'^  church  of  Rome  did  not  receive  this  epidle  for  ca- 
*'  nonical  :"  but  it  is  plain,  that  fince  that  time, 
whether  moved  by  the  evidence  of  the  thing,  or 
(which  is  more  probable)  by  the  confent  and  autho- 
rity of  other  churches,  they  have  received  it,  and  do 
at  this  day  acknowledge  it  for  canonical ;  from  whence 
one  of  thefe  two  things  will  necediirily  follow  ;  ei- 
ther that  they  were  in  an  error  for  400  years  together 
while  they  rejeded  it ;  or  that  they  have  fince  erred 
for  a  long  time  in  receiving  it.  One  of  thefe  is 
unavoidable  \  for  if  the  book  be  canonical  now,  it 
was  fo  from  the  beginning-,  for  Bellarmine  himfelf 
ccnfeiTeth  (and  if  he  had  not  confePfcd  it,  it  is  never- 
thelefs  true  and  certain)  that  x!i\t  church  cannot  make 
a  book  canonical,  which  was  not  fo  before ;  if  it 
was  not  canonical  at  fird",  it  cannot  be  made  fo  after- 
ward ;  fo  that  let  them  choofe  which  part  they  will, 
it  is  evident,  beyond  all  denial,  that  the  church  of 
Rome  hath  aclually  erred  in  her  judgment  concern- 
ing the  authority  of  this  book  -,  and  one  error  of 
this  .  kind  is  enough  to  deftroy  her  infallibility, 
there  being  no  greater  evidence  that  a  church  is  not 
infalUble,  than  if  it  plainly  appear  that  fhe  hath  been 
deceived. 

And  this  alfo  is  a  convincing  inftance  of  the  falli- 
bility of  oral  tradition.  For  if  that  be  infallible  in 
delivering  down  to  us  the  canonical  books  of  fcrip- 
ture,  it  necelTarily  follows,  that  whatever  books  were 
delivered  down  to  us  for  canonical  in  one  age,  muil 

14  N  2  hay§ 


CXXI 


^04.0  The  danger  of  apoftafy  from  chrijli^mf'^. 

S  F,  R  M.  have  been  fo  in  all  ages  ;  and  whatever  was  rejeded 
in  any  age,  muft  always  have  been  reje6Ved  :  but  we 
plainly  fee  the  contrary,  Trom  the  in  fiance  ot  this 
epift'!--,  concerning  which  the  church  of  Rome  (which 
pretends  to  be  the  great  and  laithful  prelerver  of 
tradition)  hath  in  feveral  ages  deliver'd  feveral  things. 
This  is  a  peremptory  indance  both  of  the  fal- 
libility of  the  Roman  church,  and  of  her  oral  tra- 
dition. 

Having  obferved  this  by  the  way,  which   I  could 
not  well  pafs  by  upon  fo  fair  an  occafion,  Ifhall  be- 
take myfelf  to  the  explication  of  thefe  words  ;   to- 
wards which  it  will  be  no  fmall  advantage  to  con- 
fider   the  particular   phrafes  and  expreffions  in    the 
text.     "  It  is    impofilble    for  thofe  who  w-ere  once 
-'•  enlightned  i"  that  is,  were  folemnly  admitted  into 
the  church  by  baptifm,  and  embraced  the  profelTion 
of  chriilianity.     Nothing  was  more  frequent  among 
t^nz  ancients,  than  to  call  baptifm  "  (fctincr^ov,  illumi- 
"  nation  j'*  and  thofe  v/ho  were  baptized  were  called, 
"  (pooTi^c/jLsvo;,  enlightned  perfons,"   becaufe  of  that 
divine  illumination  which  was  conveyed  to  the  minds 
of  men  by  the  knowledge  of  chriftianity,  the  doc- 
trine whereof  they  made  prof efTion  of  at  their  baptifm. 
And  therefore  Juftin  Martyr  tells  us,  "  that  by  cal- 
"  ling  upon  God    the  Father,  and  the  name  of 
*'  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  name  of  the 
*'  Holy  Ghost,  c  (poari^ofx^v©^  Xasroct,  the  enlight- 
*'  ned  perfon  is  wafhed ;"  and  again  more  exprefly, 
*'  KaXetVoa  ^  t^tc  X^t^'v  (pioricr/aor,  this  laver^fpeak- 
*'  ing  of  baptifm)  is  called  illumination."     And  St. 
Cyprian  gives-  us  the  reafon  -,  becaufe  by  virtue  of 
baptifm /;/  expiatum  pe5lus  ac  purum  defuper  fe  lumen 
infundit^  "  Jight  is  infufcd  from  above  into  the  puri- 

*'  fied 


^he  danger  of  apojlafy  from  chrifliamfy,         2  o  \  1 
««  fied/oul."     And  that    this  expreffion   is  fo  to  be^E^^Y' 
underftood  here  in  the  ttxt^  as  alfo  chap.  x.  y.,  the 
Syriac   and  Ethiopic  give  us  good   ground   to   be- 
lieve ;    for  they  render  the  text  thus,    ''  it  is  impof- 
"  fible  for  thofe  who  have  been  once  baptized,    and 
"  have  tafted   of  the   heavenly    gift."    And  at  the 
xth  chap.  ver.  32.    which  we  tranOate,    but  call  to 
"  remembrance  the  former  days,   in  which  after  ye 
«  were  illuminated,    ye   endured   a   great   fight  of 
«'  afflictions ;"  that  is,  call  to  mind  the  former  days, 
in  wliich  after  by  baptifm  ye  had  publlckly  embraced 
the  profefTion  of  chriftianity,    ye  were  upon  that  ac- 
count expofed  to  many  grievous  fufferings  and  perfe- 
cutions.  So  that  I  think  there  can  be  no  great  doubt, 
but,  by  "  thofe  that  were  once  enlightned,''  the  apoftlc 
means  thofe  that  were  baptized. 

To  proceed  then,  "  for  it  is  impoflible   for  thole 
'^  who  were  once  enlightned,  and  have  tailed  of  the 
*'  heavenly  gift,    and   were  made  partakers  of  the 
*'  HoL  Y  Ghos  t  •,"  thefe  two  exprelTions  feem    to 
denote  the  fpiritual  benefits  and  graces  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  conferred  upon  chriftians  by  baptifm  •,  parti- 
cularly regeneration,    which  is  the  proper  work  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,    and  juflification  and  remifTion  of 
fins.     So  we  find   faith,    whereby  we  are  juftified, 
called  the  gift  of  God,  Eph.  ii.  8.  "  Faith  is  the  gift 
"  of  God  ;"  and  our  juftification  is  called  a  gift,  and 
a  free  gift,  five  feveral  times  in  one  chapter,  Rom.  v. 
15,  16,  17,  18.  "  But  not  as  the  offence,    fo  alfo  is 
"  the  free  gift ;    for  if  through  the  offence  of  one 
"  many  be  dead,    much  more  the  grace  of   God, 
*'  and  the  gift    by  grace,     which  is  by  one  man 
"  Je  sus  Ch  r  I  s  T,hath  abounded  unto  many  -,"  and 
what  this  free  gift  is,  he  tells  us  in  the  next  words, 

viz. 


2  o  J  2  Ths  danger  of  apojlafy  from  chriftlanity. 

SERAI-  viz.    j'^ification,    or    rcmifTion  of     fins,    vcr.    \G. 

>^.^j^^.'/  "  -^'^"^  "o^  ^s  '^  ^^s  by  ^"^  ^^^^^  finned,  fo  is  the 
"  gift;  for  the  judgment  was  by  one  to  condemna- 
*'  tiOiis  but  the  ^xi^^  gift  is  of  many  offences  unto 
•*  jutlification.  For  if  by  one  man's  oifence,  death 
"  reigned  by  one,  much  more  they  which  receive 
*'  abundance  of  grace,  and  of  the  gift  of  righteouf. 
"  nefs,  fhall  reign  in  life  by  one  Jesus  Christ. 
"  Therefore  as  by  the  ofience  of  one,  judgment 
"  came  upon  all  m.en  to  condemnation :  even  fo  by 
"  the  righteoufnefs  of  one,  the  free  gift  came  upon 
*'  all  men  unto  juftification  of  life/'  So  that  by 
*'  the  heavenly  gitr, "  I  underltand  remiffion  of 
fins,  and  by  being  "  made  partakers  of  the  Holy 
"  Ghost"  the  fanclifying  power  and  efficacy  of 
God's  Spirit. 

"  And  have  taded  the  good  word  of  God  •," 
that  is,  entertained  the  gofpel,  which'is  here  called 
^'  the  good  word  of  God  i"  by  reafon  of  the  gra- 
cious  promifes  contained  in  it,  particularly  the  pro- 
mifes  of  eternal  life  and  happinefs. 

*'  And  the  powers  of  the  v/orld  to  come," 
c'^uy  x.a«^  rs  /aeXXcvr©-  a'jwv©^,  the  powers  of  the 
gofpel  age ;  that  is,  the  miraculous  powers  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  which  were  beflowed  upon  men,  in 
order  to  the  propagation  of  the  gofpel.  And  that 
this  is  the  true  meaning  of  this  phrafe,  will  I  think 
be  very  plain  to  any  one  who  ft^'dl  but  confider, 
that  the  word  rJ^uvdaci^  is  generally  in  fcripture 
ufed  for  miraculous  powers  and  operations ;  and 
particularly  to  exprefs  the  miraculous  gifts  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  which  were  befhowed  upon  the 
apoHlcs  and  firfl  chriftianS;  (I  need  not  cite  the  par- 
ticular tCJ^ts  for  the  proof  of  this,  they  are  fo  many 

an4 


7he  danger  cf  apojlafy  from  ckrijlianiiy,  2043 

and  fo  well  known  -,)  and  then  if  we  confider  /arther,  S  e  R  M. 

/"•  V  v"  r 

that  the  times  of  the  gofpel,  the  days  of  the  Mes- 
s  IAS,  are  frequently  called  by  the  '^tw ^  feculum futu- 
rum^  '^  the  age  to  come."  And  indeed  this  is  the 
very  phrafe  uled  by  the  LXXII  concerning  our  Sa- 
viour, Ifa.  ix.  6.  where  he  is  called  according  to 
our  tranflation,  "  the  everlafting  Father,"  but 
according  to  that  of  the  LXXII  -ujar-n^  [xiKKovT& 
didi-j&i  "  the  Father  of  the  future  age."  And  this 
very  phrafe  is  ufed  once  more  in  this  epiftle  to  the 
Heb.  chap.  ii.  5.  '^  For  unto  the  angels  hath  he 
*'  not  put  in  fubjcdlion  the  world  to  come,  whereof 
"  we  now  fpeak."  He  had  faid  before,  "  that  the 
*'  law  was  given  by  angels,"  ver.  2.  "  If  the  word 
"  fpoken  by  angels  was  ftedfafti"  but  thedifpenfa- 
tion  of  the  gofpel,  which  he  calls  "  the  world  to 
"  come,"  or  the  future  age,  was  not  committed  to 
them,  this  was  adminiftred  by  the  Son  of  God  ; 
"  unto  the  angels  hath  he  not  put  into  fubjc6lioii 
"  the  world  to  come."  And  'tis  obfervable,  that 
this  phrafe  is  only  ufed  in  this  epiftle  to  the  He- 
brews, becaufe  the  Jews  very  well  underftcod  the 
meaning  of  it,  being  that  whereby  they  commonly 
expreft  the  times  of  the  gofpel  according  to  that 
ancient  tradition  of  the  houfe  of  Elias,  which  dif- 
tributed  the  duradon  of  the  world  into  three  aicjy^s-, 
or  ages;  the  age  before  the  law,  the  age  under  the 
law,  and  the  age  of  the  Messias,  which  they 
called  tht feculura fuiurum^  or  ''  the  age  to  come;" 
and  which  is  likewife  in  fcripture  called,  ''  the  lad 
*«  days,  or  times,  and  the  conclufion  of  the  ages." 
Concerning  which,  it  was  particularly  prophefied, 
that  the  Holy  Ghost  fhould  be  poured  forth  upon 
men  in  miraculous  gifts  and  powers.     And  to  this 

very 


20  ^4         '^^■^^  da?2ger  of  apojiafy  from  chrifiianity. 
S  I'.  X  w.  very  pi^pofe   the  prophet  Joel  is  cited  by  St.  Peter, 

^3'!^  Acis  li.  1 6,  17.  "  That  is  that  which  was  fpoken  by 
''  the  piophct  Joel,  and  it  fhall  come  to  pafs  in  the 
'  \ift  days  (lait.i  GodJ  I  will  pour  out  of  my  Spi- 
''  RiT  upon  all  ficflij  and  your  Tons  and  your 
"  daagnctrrs  ih.ill  prophefy,  &c."  From  all  which  it 
is  very  cvi  lent,  that  by  ''  tailing  of  the  powers  of 
*'  the  world  to  come,"  is  meant  being  partakers  of 
the  miraculous  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  which 
were  poured  forth  in  the  gofpel  age,  by  the  Jews 
commonly  called  '*  the  world  to  come." 

"  If  they  fliall  fall  away  ^'^  that  is,  if  after  all 
this  they  fhall  apoiiatize  from  this  profefTion,  out 
of  love  to  this  prelent  world,  or  from  the  fear  of 
perfecutions  and  fufFerings. 

"  It  is  impoffible  to  renew  them  again  to  repen- 
*'  tance  •,"  that  is,  it  is  a  thing  very  difficult,  hardly 
to   be   hoped    for,     that   fuch   wilful  and  notorious 
apoftates   fhould   be   reftored   again  by  repentance. 
For  the  word  ac/^Jvarov,  which  we  tranflate  "  impolli- 
*'ble,"  is  not  always  to  be  taken  in  the  ftrideft  fenfe, 
for  that  which  abfolutely  cannot  be  ;  but  many  times 
for  that  which  is  fo  very  difficult  that  it  feems  next: 
to  an  impoffibility.     So  our  Saviour,  that  which  in 
one  place  he  calls  "  exceeding  hard,  viz.  for  a  rich 
*'  man  to  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven",   he 
afterwards  calls  "  impoffible   with   men ;"    and  fo 
here  I  underftand  the  apoftle,  that  thole  who  apo- 
llatize  from  chrifiianity,  after  baptifm  and  the  benq^- 
fits  of  it,    "  'tis  exceeding  hard   to   recover   them 
*'  again  to  repentance:"  this  phrafe  "  -sraKiv    ava- 
*'  raLvn{jA^  «f  ixzrdvoiavy  to  renew  them  again  to  re- 
*'  pentance,"    fome  underftand  of   reftoring   them 
again  to  the  peace  and  communion  of  the  church, 

by 


The  danger  of  apojlafy  from  chrijiianify.  2045 
by  a  courfe  of  penance,  fuch  as  was  preicribed  inSERM' 
the  ancient  church  to  great  offenders  5  and  then  they 
underfland  by  aVJvolov,  not  a  natural,  but  a  moral 
impoflibility ;  that  which  cannot  be  done  according 
to  the  orders  and  conftitutions  of  the  church ;  that 
is,  the  church  did  refufc  to  admit  apoflates,  and 
fome  other  great  offenders,  as  murderers  and  adul- 
terers, to  a  courfe  of  penance,  in  order  to  their  re- 
conciliation with  the  church  ;  this  TerCulHan  tells  us 
was  the  flriftnefs  of  the  church  in  his  time,  nei^ue 
idololatria ^neque fanguini pax  ah  etckjia  redditur\  *'  they 
*'  admitted  neither  idolaters,  nor  murderers  to  the 
"  reconciliation  of  the  church."  Though  they  were 
never  fo  penitent,  and  fhed  never  fo  many  tearSjyet  he 
fays  they  wGrejejunifpacis  lachrywa^  their  tears  were  in 
vain,  to  reconcile  them  to  the  peace  and  communion 
of  the  church.  He  fays  indeed  they  did  not  abfolutely 
pronounce  their  cafe  defperate  in  refpedl  of  God's  par-^ 
don  and  forgivenefs ;  fed  d$  venid  Deo  refervamus, 
*'  for  that  they  referr'd  them  to  God  :^*  but  they 
were  never  to  be  admitted  again  into  the  church ;  ib 
ilrid  were  many  churches,  and  that  upon  the  authority 
of  this  text ;  though  the  church  of  Rome  was  more 
moderate  in  this  matter,  and  for  that  reafon  calPd 
the  authority  of  this  book  into  queftion. 

Bat  I  fee  no  reafon  why  thefe  words  fliould  pri- 
marily be  underilood  of  reftoring  men  to  the  com- 
munion of  the  church  by  penance  :  but  they  feem  to 
be  meant  of  redoring  men  to  the  flivour  of  God  by 
repentance  \  of  which  indeed  their  being  reftor'd  to 
the  communion  of  the  church  was  a  good  fign. 
This  the  apoffle  fays  was  very  difficult,  for  thofe 
who  after  baptifm,   and  the  feveral  benefits  of  it, 

VoL.VIL  14  O  did 


2046  The  danger  of  apojlafy  from  chrijlianity. 

SERM.  did  apQllatize  from   chriltianicy,   ''  to  be  recover'd 
"  again  to  repentance." 

"  Seeing  they  crucify  to  themfelves  the  S  o  n  of 
^'  God  afrefli,  and  put  him  to  an  open  fhame." 
This  is  fpoken  by  way  of  aggravation  of  the  crime 
of  apoilafy,  that  they  who  fall  otf  from  chriltianity, 
in  effedt  and  by  interpretation  do  crucify  "  the  S  o  n  cf 
*'  God"  over  again,and  expole  him  to  fhame  and  re- 
proach, as  the  Jews  did  ,  for  by  denying  and  re- 
nouncing of  him,  they  declare  him  to  be  an  im- 
poftor,  and  confequently  worthy  of  that  death 
which  he  fuffered,  and  that  ignominy  which  he  was 
expofed  to;  and  therefore,  in  account  of  God,  they 
are  laid  to  do  that,  which  by  their  adlions  they  do 
approve;  fo  that  it  is  made  a  crime  of  the  highefl 
nature,  as  if  they  ihould  "  crucify  the  Son  of  God,'* 
and  ufe  him  in  the  mod  ignominious  manner,  even 
^'  tread  under  foot  the  Son  of  God,"  as  the  ex- 
prefTion  is  to  the  fame  purpofe,  chap.  x.  29. 

Thus  I  have  endeavour'd,  as  briefly  and  clearly  as 
I  could,  to  explain  to  you  the  true  meaning  and  im- 
portance cf  the  feveral  phrafes  and  expreffions  in 
the  text ;  the  fenfe  whereof  amounts  to  this,  that  if 
thofe  who  are  baptized,  and  by  baptifm  have  re- 
ceived remiiTion  of  fins,  and  do  believe  the  dodlrine 
of  the  gofpel,  and  the  promifes  of  it,  and  are  en- 
dow'd  with  the  miraculous  gifts  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  if  fuch  perfons  as  thefe  Ihall  after  all  this 
apoftatize  from  chriflianity,  it  is  very  hard,  and  next 
to  an  impoffibility,  to  imagine  how  fuch  perfons 
lliould  recover  again  by  repentance,  feeing  they  are 
guilty  of  as  great  a  crime,  as  if  in  their  own  per- 
fons they  had  put  to  death  and  ignominioufly 
ufed  the  Son  of  God,  becaufe  by  rejeiling  of  him, 

tliey 


"The  danger  of  apoflafyfrom  chrijitanify.  2047 

they  declared    to  the    Vv^orld  that  he   fuffcred    de-  ^.^^^j^^* 
fervedly.  u-*-v— «-* 

Having  thus  explained  the  words,  in  order  to  the 
further  vindicanon  of  them  from  the  miftakes  and 
mifapprehenfions  which  have  been  about  them,  I 
fliall  endeavour  to  make  out  thefe  five  things. 

I  ft.  That  the  fin  here  mention'd  is  not  "  the  fin 
*'  againft  the  HoL  Y  Gh  OS  T." 

2dly,  That  the  apoftle  does  not  declare  it  to  be 
abfolutely  impoflible,  but  only  that  thofe  who  are 
guilty  of  it  are  recover'd  to  repentance  with  great 
difficulty. 

3d'y,  That  it  is  not  a  partial  apoftafy  from  the 
chriilian  religion  by  any  particular  vicious  prac- 
tice. 

4thly,  That  it  is  a  total  apoftafy  from  thechriftian 
religion,  and  more  efpecially  to  the  heathen  idolatry, 
which  the  apoftle  here  fpeaks  of. 

5thly5  The  reafon  of  the  difficulty  of  the  recovery 
of  thofe  who  fall  into  this  fin.  "^ 

I  ft,  That  the  fin  here  mention'd  is^ot  "  the  fin 
"  agciinft  the  Ho  l  y  Gh  ost,"  which  I  have  here- 
tofore difcourfed  cf,and  ffiewn  wherein  the  particular 
nature  of  it  does  confift.  There  are  three  things 
which  do  remarkably  diftinguiffi  the  fin  here  fpoken 
of  in  the  text,  from  '^  the  fin  againft  the  Holy 
«  Ghost"  defcribed  by  our  Sa v  i  o  u  r. 

I  ft,  The  perfons  that  are  guilty  of  this  fin  here 
in  the  text,  are  evidently  fuch  as  had  embraced  chri- 
ftianity,  and  had  taken  upon  them  the  profeffion  of 
it :  whereas  thofe  whom  our  Sav  i  o  u  r  chargeth 
with"  the  fin  againft  the  Holy  Ghost,"  are 
fuch  as  conftantly  oppofed  his  dodrine,  and  refifted 
the  evidence  he  offer'd  for  it. 

14  O  2  2dly,  The 


2048  The  danger  of  apojlafy  from  chrifliajiity. 

S  E  RM.  2dly,  The  particular  nature  of  "  the  fin  again  the 
^^^^I,^^^  *«  Holy  Ghost"  confiftcd  in  blafpheming  the 
Spirit,  whereby  our  Saviour  wrought  his  mira- 
cles, and  faying  he  did  not  thofe  things  by  the 
Spirit  of  God,  but  by  the  afTiftance  of  the  devil, 
in  that  malicious  and  unreafonable  imputing  of  the 
plain  efFeds  of  the  Holy  Ghost  to  the  power  of 
the  devil,  and  confequently  in  an  obftinate  refufal  to 
be  convinced  by  the  miracles  that  he  wrought :  but 
here  is  nothing  of  all  this  fo  much  as  intimated  by 
the  apoftlc  in  this  place. 

3ly,  "  The  fin  againflthe  Holy  Ghost  "  is  de- 
clared to  be  abfolutely  '^  unpardonable,  both  in  this 
•'  world,  and  in  that  which  is  to  come.'*  But  this  is 
not  declared  to  be  abfolutely  unpardonable  i  which 
brings  me  to  the 

2d  thing,  namely,  that  this  fin  here  fpoken  of 
by  the  apoftle,  is  not  faid  to  be  abfolutely  unpardor 
nable.  It  is  not  *'  the  ^in  againft  the  Holy  Ghost  j*' 
and  whatever  elfe  it  be,  it  is  not  out  of  the  compals 
of  God's  pardon  and  forgivencfs.  So  our  Sa- 
viour hath  told  us,  "  that  all  manner  of  fin  what- 
*'  foever  that  men  have  committed  is  capable  of  par- 
*'  don,  excepting  only  the  fin  againft  the  Holy 
"  Ghost."  And  though  the  apoftle  here  ufes  a 
very  fevere  cxprefTion,  that  "  if  fuch  perfons  fall 
*'  away,  it  is  impoftible  to  renew  them  again  to  re- 
"  pcntance  j"  yet  I  have  fhewn  that  there  is  no  ne- 
cefTity  of  underftanding  this  phrafe  in  the  ftrideft 
fenfe  of  the  word  "  impofiiblc  ;'*  but  as  it  is  elfe- 
wherc  ufed,  for  that  "  which  is  extremely  difficult.*' 
Nor  indeed  will  our  Saviour's  declaration,  which 
I  mentioned  before,  that  all  fins  whatfoever  are  par- 
donable, except  "  the  fin  againft  the  Holy  Ghost," 

fuffer 


TZv  danger  of  apoftafy  from  chrijlianity,  2049 

fuffer  us  to  underllaiid  thefe  words  in  the  mod  rif^o-  E   R  M. 

^   r  CXXL 

rous lenle. 

3dly,  The  fin  here  fpoken  of,  is  not  a  partial  apo- 
flafy  from  the  chriftian  religion  by  any  particular  vi- 
cious pra6lice.  Whofoever  lives  in  the  habitual  prac- 
tice of  any  fin  plainly  forbidden  by  the  chrillian  law, 
may  be  faid  fo  far  to  have  apoftatized  from  chriftia- 
nity ;  but  this  is  not  the  falling  away  which  the 
apoftle  here  fpeaks  of.  This  may  be  bad  enough, 
and  the  greater  fins  any  man  who  profeffcth  himfelf  a 
chriftian  lives  in,  the  more  notorioufly  hecontradids 
his  profeflion,  and  fills  off  from  chriilianity,  and 
the  nearer  he  approaches  to  the  fin  in  the  ttxt,  and 
the  danger  there  threatned  :  but  yet  for  all  that,  this 
is  not  that  which  the  apoflle  fpeaks  of. 

4thly,  But  it  is  a  total  apoftafy  from  the  chriftian 
religion,  more  efpecially  to  the  heathen  idolatry,  the 
renouncing  of  the  true  Gop,  and  our  Saviour,  and 
the  worftiip  of  falfe  gods   which   the   apoftle  here 
ipeaks  of.    And  this  will  be  evident,  if  we  confider 
the  occafion  and  main  fcope  of  this  epiftlc.     And 
that  was  to  confirm  the  Jews,  who   had  newly  em- 
braced chriftianity,  in  the  profeflion  of  that  religion  ; 
and  to  keep  them  from  apoftatizing  from  it,  becaufc 
of  the  perfecutions  and  fufferings  which  attended  that 
profeflion.  It  pleafed  God,  when  chriftianity  firft  ap- 
peared in  the  world,  to  permit  the  powers  qf  the  world 
to  raife  a  vehement  perlecution  againft  the  profeflTors 
of  it,  by  reafon  whereof  many  out  of  bafe  fear  did  apo- 
ftatize  from  it,  and  in  tcftimony  of  their  renouncing 
it,  were  forced  to  facrifice  to  the  heathen  idols.  This 
is  that  which  the  apoftle  endeavours  to  caution  and 
arm  men  againft  throughout  this  epiftle.     Chap.  ii. 
I.  "  therefore  wc  ought  to  give  the  more  earneft 

*'  heed 


2050  ^-^^  danger  of  apojlafy  frc77i  chrijlianity. 

SERM.  "  heed  to  the  things  which  we  have  heard,  left  at 
cxxr.  "  any  time  we  fhould  fail  away:"  and  chap.  iii.  12. 
it  is  called  "  an  evil  heart  of  unbelief  to  apoftatize 
*'  from  the  living  God.""  Take  heed,  brethren,  left 
''  there  be  in  any  of  you  an  evil  heart  of  unbelief  to 
*'  depart  from  the  living  God  j"  that  is,  to  fall  from 
the  worfnip  of  the  true  God  to  idolatry.  And  chap. 
X.  23.  "  Let  us  hold  faft  the  profeiTion  of  our  faitli 
"  without  wavering,  not  forfaking  the  afTemblingof 
*'  ourfelves  together :"  that  is,  not  declining  the  af- 
femblies  of  chriftians  for  fear  of  penecution;  and 
ver.  26.  it  is  called  "  a  finning  wilfully,  after  we 
*'  have  received  the  knowledge  of  the  truth  ;'"  and 
ver.  39.  "a  drawing  back  to  perdition. "  And 
chap.  xii.  it  is  call'd  by  way  of  eminency,  "  the  fin 
*'  which  fo  eafily  befets  ;"  the  fin  whic'h  in  thofe 
times  of  perfecution,  they  were  fo  liable  to. 

And  I  doubt  not  but  this  is  the  fin  which  St..  John 
fpeaks  of,  and  calls,  "  the  ^m  unto  death,"  and  does 
not  require  chriftians  "  to  pray  for  thofe  who  fall  into 
"  it,"  with  any  afturance  that  it  fliall  be  forgiven  ; 
I  John  v.  16.  ''  There  is  a  fin  unto  deaths  I  do 
'^  not  fay  that  he  ftiall  pray  for  it.  All  unrighteoufnefs 
''  is  fin,  and  there  is  a  fin  not  unto  death."  "  We 
^'  know  that  whofoever  is  born  of  God,  finneth  not  i'* 
that  is,  does  not  fiill  into  the  ^m  of  apoilafy  from 
chriftianity  to  that  of  the  heathen  idolatry  :  "  but 
*'  he  that  is  begotten  of  God  keepeth  himfelf,  and 
''  that  wicked  one  toucheth  him  not  ;"  and  then 
ver.  21.  he  adds  this  caution,  "  little  children,  keep 
"  yourfelves  from  idols."  Which  fufficiently  fhews 
what  that  fin  was  which  he  was  fpeaking  of  before. 

So  that  this  being  the  fin  which  the  apoftle  defign'd 
to  caution  men  againft  throughout  this  epiftle,  it  is 

very 


Tl:e  danger  of  apojlafy  from  chrifiajiify,  2051 

very  evident  what  "  falling  away  "  it  is  he  here    qxxl' 
fpeaks  of,  namely,  a  total  apodafy  from  chridianity, 
and  more  efpecially  to  the  heathen  idolatry. 

5thly,  We  will  confider  the  reafon  of  the  diffi- 
culty of  recovering  fuch  perfons  by  repentance.  *•■  If 
''  they  fall  away,  it  is  extremely  diffiicult  to  renew 
"  them  again  to  repentances"  and  that  for  thefe 
three  reafons. 

1 .  Bccauie  of  the  greatnefs  and  helnoufnefs  of  the  fin. 

2.  Becaufe  it  renounceth,  and  cafleth  off  the  means 
of  recovery. 

3.  Becaufe  it  is  fo  high  a  provocation  of  God  to 
withdraw  his  grace  from  fuch  perfons. 

I.  Becaufe  of  the  greatnefs  and  heinoufnefs  of  the 
fin,  both  in  the  nature  and  circum (lances  of  it.  It 
is  downright  apoftafy  from  God,  a  dired:  renoun- 
cing of  him,  and  rejed:ing  of  his  truth,  after  men 
have  owned  it,  and  been  inwardly  perfuaded  and  con- 
vinced of  it,  and  fo  the  apoHle  expreffeth  it  in  this 
epiftle,  calling  it  "  an  apoftafy  from  the  living 
*'  God,  a  finning  Vv^ilfully  after  we  have  received 
*'  the  knowledge  of  the  truth."  It  hath  all  the  ag- 
gravations that  a  crim.e  is  capable  of,  being  againft 
the  cleared  light  and  knowledge,  and  the  fulled  con- 
vidion  of  a  man's  mind,  concerning  the  truth  and 
goodnefs  of  that  religion  which  he  renounceth ; 
againd  the  greated  obligations  laid  upon  him  by  the 
grace  and  mercy  of  the  gofpel ;  after  the  free  par- 
don of  fins,  and  the  grace  and  affidance  of  God's 
Spirit  received,  and  a  miraculous  power  conferr'd 
for  a  witnefs  and  tedimony  to  themfelves,  of  the  un- 
doubted truth  of  that  religion  which  they  have  em- 
braced. It  is  the  highed  affront  to  the  Son  of 
God,  who  revcviled  this  religion  to  the  world,  and 


fealed 


CXXI. 


20^2  ^Je  da7iger  of  apoftafy  from  chnfliainty. 

S^^R  M.  fcaled  it  with  his  blood ;  and,  in  effe(5t,  an  exprefllon 
of  as  high  malice  to  the  author  of  this  reh'gion,  as 
the  Jews  were  guilty  of  when  they  put  him  to  fo 
cruel  and  fliameful  a  death. 

Now  a  fin  of  this  heinous  nature  is  apt  naturally 
either  to  plunge  men  into  hardnefs  and  impenirency, 
or  to  drive  them  to  defpair  \  and  cither  of  thefe  con- 
ditions are  cffeftual  bars  to  their  recovery.  And  both 
thefe  dangers  the  apofile  warns  men  of  in  tliis  epiftlc. 
Chap.  iii.  12,  13.  ''  Take  heed,  brethren,  left  there 
*^  be  in  any  of  you  an  evil  heart  of  unbelief,  to 
'*  apoftatize  from  the  living  God  :  but  exhort  one 
*'  another  daily,  whilft  it  is  called  to  day,  left  any 
*'  of  you  be  hardned  through  the  deceitfulneis 
*'  of  fin."  Or  elfe  the  reflexion  upon  fo  horrid  a 
crime  is  apt  to  drive  a  man  to  defpair  \  as  it  did  Judas, 
who  after  he  had  betray 'd  the  Son  of  God, 
could  find  no  eafe  but  by  making  away  himfelf  5 
the  guilt  of  fo  great  a  fin  filled  him  with  fuch  ter- 
rors, that  he  was  glad  to  fly  to  death  for  refuge, 
and  to  lay  violent  hands  upon  himfelf.  And  this 
likewife  was  the  cafe  of  Spira,  whofe  apoftafy  though 
it  was  not  total  from  the  chriftian  religion,  but  only 
from  the  purity  and  reformation  of  it,  brought  him 
to  that  dcfperation  of  mind  which  was  a  kind  of  hell 
upon  earth.  And  of  this  danger  likewife  the  apo- 
ftle  admoniflieth,  chap.  xii.  15.  *'  Looking  dili- 
*'  gently,  left  any  man  fail  of  the  grace  of  God 
*'  (or  as  it  is  in  our  margin,  left  any  man  fall  from 
**  the  grace  of  God)  left  any  root  of  bittern efs 
*'  fpringing  up  trouble  you  \'  and  then  he  com- 
pares the  cafe  of  fuch  perfons  to  Efau,  who,  when 
he  had  renounced  his  birthright,  to  which  the  blef- 
fing  was  annexed,  was  afterwards,  when  he  would 

have 


T^he  danger  of  apoftafy  from  chrifiianit)\  ^^Si 

E  R  M 
cxxi. 


have  inherited  the  bleffing,    rejeded,  and  ''  found  ;.SE.^^^^^- 


*'  no  place  of  repentance,  though  he  fought  it  care- 
"  fully  with  tears." 

2dly,  Thofe  who  are  guilty  of  this  fin,  do  renounce 
and  caft  off  the  means  of  their  recovery  -,  and  there- 
fore it  becomes  extremely  difficult  "  to  renew  them 
"  again  to  repentance."  They  rejedl  the  gofpel, 
which  affords  the  befc  arguments  and  means  to  re- 
pentance, and  renounce  the  only  way  of  pardon  and 
forgivenefs.  And  certainly  that  man  is  in  a  very 
fad  and  defperate  condition,  the  very  nature  of  whofe 
difeafe  is  to  rejed:  the  remedy  that  fhould  cure  him. 
And  this  the  apoftle  tells  us,  was  the  condition  of 
thofe  who  apoilatized  from  the  gofpel,  chap.  x.  26, 
27.  "  For  if  we  fm  wilfully  after  we  have  received 
*'  the  knowledge  of  the  truth,  there  remaineth  no 
*'  more  facrifice  for  fm ;  but  a  certain  fearful  looking 
*'  for  of  judgment,  and  fiery  indignation,  which 
''  fliall  devour  the  adverfary."  The  great  facrifice 
and  propitiation  for  fin  was  "  the  Son  of  God  ^'* 
and  they  who  renounce  him,  Vv^hat  way  of  expia- 
tion can  they  hope  for  afterward?  what  can  they 
expecl  but  to  fall  into  his  hands  as  a  judge,  whom  they 
have  rejeded  as  a  facrifice  and  a  Saviour  ?  And  then, 

3dly,  Thofe  who  are  guilty  of  this  fm,  provoke 
God  in  the  higheft  manner  to  withdraw  his  grace 
and  Holy  Spirit  from  them,  by  the  power  and 
efficacy  whereof  they  fhould  by  brought  to  repen- 
tance ;  fo  that  it  can  hardly  otherwife  be  expeded, 
but  that  God  fhould  leave  thofe  to  themfelves,  who 
have  fo  unworthily  forfaken  him  -,  and  v/holly  with- 
draw his  grace  and  Spirit  from  fuch  perlbns  as 
have  fo  notorioufly  ^'  offered  defpite  to  the  Spirit 
*'  of  grace." 
Vol.  VIL  14  P  I  do 

5- 


3054  "The  danger  of  apojlafy  from  cbriftianity, 

SERM.     I  do  not  fay  that  God  always  does  this,  he  is 
^^^^-  fometimes  better  to  fuch  perfons  than  they  have  de- 
ferved  from   him,  and  faves  thofe  who  have  done 
what  they  can  to  undo  themfdves,and  mercifully  puts 
forth  his  hand  to  recover  them  who  were  ''  drawing 
"  back  to  perdition  j"  efpecially  if  diey  were  fud- 
denly   furprized  by  the  violence  of  temptation,  and 
yielded    to  it   not  deliberately  and  out  of    choice, 
but  merely  through  weaknels  and    infirmity,  and  fo 
foon  as  they  refiedled  upon  themfelves,  did   return 
and  repent :  this  was  the  cafe  of  St.  Peter,  who  be- 
ing furprized  with   a  fudden  fear  denied  Christ  i 
but  being  admonifh'd  of  his  fin  by  the  fignal  which 
our  Saviour  had  given  him,  he  was  recovered  by 
a  fpeedy  and  hearty  repentance.     And  fo  likewife  fe- 
veral  of  the  primidve  chriflians,  who  were  at  firft 
overcome  by  fear  to  renounce  their  religion,  did  af- 
terwards recover  themfelves,  and  dy'd  refolute  mar- 
tyrs :  but  it  is  a  very  dangerous  Hate,  out  of  which 
but  few  recover,  and  with  great  difficulty. 

And  thus  I  have  done  with  the  five  things  I  pro- 
pounded to  make  out,  for  the  clearing  of  this  text 
from  the  miftakes  and  mifapprehenfions  which  have 
been  about  it.  I  ihall  now  draw  fome  ufeful  infe- 
rences from  hence  by  way  of  application,  that  we 
may  fee  how  far  this  doth  concern  ourfelves  j  and 
they  ihall  be  thefe. 

I  ft.  From  the  fuppofition  here  in  the  text,  diat 
fuch  perfons  as  are  there  defcribed  (namely,  thofe  who 
have  been  baptized,  and  by  baptifm  have  received 
Tcmifiion  of  fins,  and  did  firmly  believe  the  gofpel, 
and  the  promifes  of  it,  and  were  endowed  with  mi- 
raculous gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost)  that  thefe 
raay  fall  away  ;  this  fhould  caution  us  all  againft 

confidence 


I'he  danger  of  apoftafy  from  chriftianify.  205^ 
confidence  and  fecurity  ;  when  thofe  that  have  gone  ^E^^^- 
thus  far  may  fall,  "  let  him  that  flandeth  take. 
"  heed." 

Some  are  of  opinion,  that  thofe  whom  the  apoftle 
here  defcribes  are  true  and  fincere  chridians,  and  that 
when  he  fays,  "  it  is  impoffible  if  they  fall  away,  to 
*«  renew  them  again  to  repentance,"  he  means  that 
they  cannot  fall  away  totally,  fo  as  to  ftand  in  need 
-of  being  renewed  again  to  repentance :  but  this  is 
diredly  contrary  to  the  apoftle's  defign,  which  was 
to  caution  chriftians  againft  apoftafy,  becaufe  if  they 
did  fall  away,  their  recovery  would  be  fo  exceeding 
difficult  j  which  argument  does  plainly  fuppofe  that 
they  might  fall  away. 

On  the  other  hand,  there  are  others  who  think 
the  perfons,  here  defcribed  by  the  apoftle,  to  be  hy- 
pocritical chriftians,  who  for  fome  bafe  ends  had  en- 
tertained chriftianity,  and  put  on  the  proFeffion  of 
it,  but  not  being  fincere  and  in  good  carneft,  would 
forfake  it  when  perfecution  came.     But  befides  that 
this  is  contrary  to  the  defcription  which  the  apoftle 
makes  of  thefe  perfons,  who  are  faid  '^  to  have  tafted 
"  of  the  heavenly  gift,  and  to  have  been  made  parta- 
''  kers  of  the  Holy  Ghos  T  i"  by  which  if  we 
underftand  juftification   and  remiftion  of  fins,   and 
the  fandlifying  virtue  of  the  Ho ly  Ghost,  which 
in  all  probability  is  the  meaning  of  thefe  phrafes, 
thefe  are  bleifings  which  did  not  belong  to  hypocrites, 
and  which  God  does  not  beftow  upon  them  ;  I  fay, 
befides  this,  there  is  no  reafon  to  imagine  that  the 
apoftle  intended  fuch  perfons,  when  it  is  likely  that 
there  were  very  few  hypocrites  in  thofe  times  of  per- 
fecution •,  for  what  ftiould  tempt  men  to  diffemble 
chriftianity,  when  it  was  fo  dangerous  a  profeffion  ? 

14  P  2  or 


2056  T'Zr  danger  of  apojlafyfrom  chrijiianity, 

SERM.  orvvhat   worldly  ends  could  tnen  have  in   taking 
CXXI.^  that   profeflion   upon  them,  which  was   fo  diredly 
contrary  to  their  worldly  interefts  ? 

So  that  upon  the  whole  matter,  I  doubt  not  but 
the  apoftle  here  means  thole  who  are  real  in  the  pro- 
fefllon  of  chriftianity,  and  that  fuch  '^  might  fall 
"  away."  For  we  may  eafily  imagine,  that  men 
might  be  convinced  of  the  truth  and  goodnefs  of  the 
chriftian  dodrine,  and  in  good  earneft  embrace  the 
profcflion  of  it,  and  yet  not  be  fo  perfedlly  weaned 
from  the  world,  and  fo  firmly  rooted  and  eftablifhed 
in  that  perfuafion,  as  when  it  came  to  the  trial,  to 
be  able  to  quite  all  for  it,  and  to  bear  up  againft  all 
the  terrors  and  afiluilts  of  pcrfecution  \  fo  that  they 
might  be  real  chriftians,  and  no  hypocrites,  though 
they  were  not  fo  perfedly  eftabliflied  and  confirmed, 
and  fo  fincerely  refolved  as  many  others.  They  were 
not  like  Sf.  Paul,  and  thofe  tried  perfons  whom  he 
fpeaks  of,  Rom.  viii.  35,  37.  "  Who  fliall  feparate 
*^'  us  from  the  love  of  Christ?  fhall  tribulation, 
"  or  difl:refs,or  perfecution,  or  famine,  or  nakednefs, 
*'  or  peril,  or  fword  ?  nay,  in  all  thefe  things  we  are 
"  more  than  conquerors."  (They  had  been  tried  by 
all  thefe,  and  yet  had  held  out)  upon  which  he  breaks 
out  into  thofe  triumphant  exprelTions ;  ''  I  am  per- 
*'  fuaded,  that  neither  death,  nor  life,  nor  angels, 
*'  nor  principalities,  nor  powers,  nor  things  prefent, 
^'  nor  things  to  come,  nor  height,  nor  depth,  nor 
«'  any  other  creature,  fliall  be  able  to  feparate  us 
•'  from  the  love  of  God,  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus 
*'  our  Lord."  They  might  not  (I  fay)  be  like 
thofe  :  and  yet  for  all  that  be  real  in  their  profeflion 
of  chriftianity,  and  no  hypocrites. 

In 


The  danger  of  apojlafy  front  chrijliantty,  2057 

In  Ihorr,  I  take  them  to  be  fuch  as  our  S  av  i-  S  E  R  m. 
Our  defcribes  him  to  be  "  who  received  the  feed  ^^^^'^^• 
"  into  ftony  places,"  namely,  *'  he  that  heareth 
"  the  word,  and  anon  with  joy  receiveth  it:  yet 
"  hath  he  not  root  in  himfelf,  but  dureth  for  a 
"  while;  for  when  tribulation  or  perfecution  arifeth 
"  becaufe  of  the  word,  by  and  by  he  is  offended.'* 
This  is  no  defcription  of  a  hypocrite ;  but  of  one 
that  was  real,  as  far  as  he  went  (for  he  is  faid  "  to 
"  receive  the  word  with  joy")  but  was  not  well 
rooted,  and  come  to  fuch  a  confirmed  Hate,  as  re- 
folutely  to  withftand  the  aflaults  of  perfecution. 

So  that  tho'  we  have  truly  embraced  chriftianity, 
and  are  in  a  good  degree  fincere  in  the  profeffion 
of  it,  yet  there  is  great  reafon  why  Ave  fhould  nei- 
ther be  "  fecure  nor  confident  in  our  felves.'* 
*^  Not  fecure,"  becaufe  there  is  great  danger  that 
our  refolutions  may  be  born  down  one  time  or  other 
by  the  affaults  of  temptation,  if  we  be  not  continu- 
ally vigilant,  and  upon  our  guard.  "  Not  confi- 
''  dent  in  our  felves,'*  becaufe  "  we  fland  by  faith, 
''  and  faith  is  the  gift  of  God;''  therefore  as 
the  apodle  infers,  "  we  fhould  not  be  high-minded, 
"but  fear."  Men  may  have  gone  a  great  way  in 
chriflianity,  and  have  been  fincere  in  their  profeffion 
of  it  ;  and  yet  afterwards  may  apoftatize  in  the 
fouleft  ^manner,  not  only  fall  off  to  a  vicious  life, 
but  even  defert  the  profeffion  of  their  religion.  I 
v/ould  to  G  o  D  the  experience  of  the  world  did  not 
give  us  too  much  reafon  to  believe  the  poffibility  of 
this.  When  we  fee  fo  many  revolt  from  the  pro- 
feffion of  the  reformed  religion,  to  the  corruptions 
and  fuperflitions  of  Rome  ;  and  others  from  a  reli- 
gious and  fober  life,  to  plunge  themfelves  into  all 

kinc| 


I'he  danger  of  apoflafy  from  chrijlianity, 

kind  of  Jewdnefs  and  debauchery,  and  it  is  to  be 
feared,  into  atheifm  and  infidelity  •,  can  we  doubt 
any  longer  whether  it  be  pofTible  for  chriftians  to 
fall  away  ?  I  wifh  we  were  as  certain  of  the  pofTibi- 
lity  of  their  recovery,  as  we  are  of  their  falling,  and 
that  we  had  as  many  examples  of  the  one  as  of  the 
other. 

Let  us  then  be  very  vigilant  over  ourfelves,  and 
according  to  theapoftle's  exhortation,  2  Pet.  iii.  17. 
*'  Seeing  we  know  thefe  things  before,  beware,  left 
*'  we  alfo  being  led  away  with  the  error  of  the 
*'  wicked,  fall  from  our  own  ftedfaftnefs." 

2dly,  This  fhews  us  how  great  an  aggravation 
it  is,  for  men  to  fin  againft  the  means  of  know- 
ledge which  the  gofpel  affords,  and  the  mercies 
which  it  offers  unto  them.  That  which  aggravated 
the  fin  of  thefe  perfons  was,  that  after  they  "  were 
«'  once  enlightned,'*  that  is,  at  their  baptifm  were 
inftrucled  in  the  chriftian  dodlrine,  the  cleared  and 
moftperfedl  revelation  that  ever  was  made  of  God's 
will  to  mankind,  that  after  they  v/ere  "  juftified 
"  freely  by  God's  grace,"  and  had  received  re- 
miflion  of  fins,  and  had  many  other  benefits 
conferred  upon  them;  that  after  all  this,  they 
fliould  fall  off  from  this  "  holy  religion."  This 
was  that  which  did  fo  heighten  and  inflame  their 
guilt,  an[d  made  their  cafe  fo  near  defperate.  The 
two  great  aggravations  of  crimes  are  wilfulnefs  and 
ingratitude  ;  if  a  crime  be  wilfully  committed,  and 
committed  againfl  one  that  hath  obliged  us  by  the 
greateft  favours  and  benefits.  Now  he  commits  a 
fault  wilfully,  who  does  it  againft  the  clear  know- 
ledge of  his  duty.  Ignorance  excufeth  \  for  fo  far 
a5  a  man  is  ignorant  of  the  evil  he  does,  fo  far  the 

H  aft  ion 


^he  danger  of  afoflnfy  from  chrijliantty,  2059 

a6lIon  is  involuntary:  but  knowledge  makes  it  to  SERM. 
be  a  wilful  fault.  And  this  is  a  more  peculiar  ag- 
gravation of  the  fins  of  chriftians,  becaufe  God 
hath  afforded  to  them  the  greateft  means  and  op- 
portunities of  knowledge ;  that  revelation  which 
God  hath  made  of  his  will  to  the  world  by  our 
bleffed  Saviour,  is  the  cleared  light  that  ever 
mankind  had,  and  the  mercies  which  the  gofpel 
brings  are  the  greateft  that  ever  were  offer'd  to  the 
fons  of  men  ;  the  free  pardon  and  remifTion  of  all 
our  fins,  and  the  afliftance  of  God's  grace  and 
Ho  L  Y  S  p  I  R  I  T,  to  help  the  weaknefs  of  our  na- 
ture, and  enable  us  to  do  what  God  requires  of  us. 
So  that  we  who  fin  after  baptifiii,  after  the  know- 
ledge of  chriftianity,  and  thofe  great  blelTings  which 
the  gofpel  bellows  on  mankind,  are  of  all  perfons 
in  the  world  the  moft  inexcufable.  The  fins  of 
heathens  bear  no  proportion  to  ours,  becaufe  they 
never  enjoyed  thofe  means  of  knowledge,  never 
had  thofe  bleffings  conferred  upon  them,  which 
chriflians  are  partakers  of;  fo  that  we  may  apply 
to  our  felves  thole  fevere  words  of  the  apoltie  in 
this  epiflle,  ''  how  ihall  we  efcape,  if  we  negled: 
*'  fo  great  falvation  ? "  hear  how  our  Saviour 
aggravates  the  faults  of  men  upon  this  account,  of 
the  wilfulnefs  of  them,  and  their  being  committed 
againft  the  exprefs  knowledge  of  Go  d  's  will ;  Luke 
xii.  47,  4S.  *'  The  fervant  which  knew  his  lord's 
*'  will,  and  prepared  not  himfelf,  neither  did  ac- 
*'  cording  to  his  will,  fhall  be  beaten  with  many 
"  ftripes  ;  for  unto  whomfoever  much  is  given,  of 
*'  him  fhall  much  be  required  ;  and  to  whom  men 
"  have  committed  much,  of  him  they  will  ask  the 
*'  more.'*     The  mean^  and  mercies  of  the  gofpel 

are 


2o6o  The  danger  of  apojlafy  from  chrijlianity. 

S  E  RM.  are  fo  many  talents  committed  to  our  truft,  of  the 
^^^^*     neglecfl  whereof  a  feverc  account  will  be  taken  at 
the  day  of  judgment.     If  we  be  wilful  offenders, 
there  is  no  excufe  for  us,   and   little  hopes  of  par- 
don.    "   If  we  fin   wilfully  -after  we  have  received 
"  the  knowledge  of  the  truth,"  (fays  the  apoftle  in 
this  epiftle)  "  there  remains   no  more  facrifice  for 
*'  fin."     I  know  the  apoftle  fpeaks  this  particularly 
of  the  fm  of  apoiiafy  from  chriftianity  ;  but  it  is  in 
proportion  true  of  ail  other  fins,  which   thofe  who 
have  received  the  knowledge  of  the  truth  are  guilty 
of.     They,  who  after  they  have  entertained  chrifti- 
anity, and  made  fome  progrefs  in  it,  and  been  in 
fome  meafure  reformed  by  it,  do  again  relapfe  into 
any  vicious  courfe,  do  thereby  render  their  condi- 
tion very  dangerous.     So  St.  Peter  tells  us,  2  Pet. 
ii.  20,  21.  *'  If  after  they  have  efcaped  the  pollu- 
*'  tions  of  the  world  through  the  knowledge  of  the 
*'  Lord    and  Saviour    J-ssus    Christ, 
*'  they  are  again  entangled  therein,  and  overcome, 
*'  the  latter  end  is  worfe  with  them  than  the  begin- 
*'  ning.     For    it  had  been  better  for  them,  not  to 
*'  have  known  the  way  of  righteoufnefs,   than  after 
*'  they  have  known  it,  to  turn  from  the  holy  com- 
*'  mandment  delivered  unto  them.'*     Therefore  we 
may  do  well  to  confider  ferioufly  what  we  do,  when 
under   the  means  and  opportunities  of  knowledge 
which  the  gofpel  afibrds  us,    and    the  ineftimablc, 
blefTings  and  favours  which  it  confers  upon  us,  we 
live  'in  any  wicked  and  vicious    courfe.     Our  fins 
are  not  of  a  common  rate,  when  they  have  fo  much 
of  wilfulnefs  and  unworthinefs    in  them.     If  men 
Ihall  be  feverely  punilli'd  for  living  againfl:  the  light 

of  nature  ;  what  vengeance  fhall  be  poured  on  thofe 

*  who 


^36  danger  of  apojlafy  from  chriflianity,         206  r 
who  offend  againft  the  glorious  h'ght  of  the  gofpelpSE  RM. 
"  this  is  the  condemnation,  that  h'ght  is  come,  &c.'\ 

3dly,  The  confideration  of  what  hath  been  faid  is 
matter  of  comfort  to  thofe,  who  upon  every  faihng 
and  infirmity  are  afraid  they  have  committed  "  the 
*'  unpardonable  fin,'*  and  that  it  is  impofTible  for 
them  to  be  reftor'd  by  repentance.  There  are  many 
who  being  of  a.  dark  and  melancholy  temper,  are 
apt  to  reprefent  things  worfe  to  themfelves  than 
there  is  reafon  for,  and  do  many  tirries  fancy  them- 
felves guilty  of  great  crimes,  in  the  doing  or 
^negle£ring  of  thofe  things  which  in  their  nature 
are  indifferent,  are  apt  to  aggravate  and  blow 
Up  every  little  infirmity  into  an  unpardonable  fin. 
Moil  men  are  apt  to  extenuate  their  fins,  and  not 
to  be  fenfible  enough  of  the  evil  and  heinoufnefs  of 
them ;  but  it  is  the  peculiar  infelicity  of  melancholy 
perfons  to  look  upon  their  faults  as  blacker  and 
greater  than  in  truth  they  are;  and  whatfoever 
they  hear  'and  read  in  fcripture,  that  is  fpokea 
againft  the  grblfeft  and  moft  enormous  offenders, 
they  apply  to  themfelves ;  and  when  they  hear  of 
the  "  fin  againft  the  Hol  y  Gh  os  t,"  and  "  the 
«'  fin  unto  death,"  or  read  this  x.<^yit  which  I  am 
iiow  treating  of,  they  prefently  conclude  that  they 
are  guilty  of  thefe  fins,  and  that  this  is  a  defcrip- 
tion  of  their  cafe.  Whereas  "  the  fin  againft  the 
*'  HoL  Y  Ghost^'  is  of  that  nature,  that  probably 
none  but  thofe  that  faw  our  Sav  i  o  u  r  ^s  miracles 
are  capable  of  committing  it  j  and  excepting  that, 
there  is  no  fin  whatfoever  that  is  unpardonable.  As 
for  "  the  fin  unto  death,"  and  that  here  fpoken  of 
in  the  text,  I  have  ihewn  that  they  are  a  total 
apoftafy  from  the  chriftian  religion,  more  efpeciaily 

Vol.  VII,  14  Q^  to 

J. 


CXXI. 


2062  The  danger  of  apojlafy  from  chrtjlianify. 

SERM.  to  the  heathen  idolatry;    which  thefe  perfons  I  am 
fpeaking  of,  have  no  reafon   to  imagine  themfelves 
cruilty  of.      And  though  great  and  notorious  crimes 
committed  by  chriftians  may  come  near  to  this,and  it 
may  be  very  hard  for  thofe  who  are  guilty  of  them, to 
recover  themfelves  again  to  repentance  *,    yet  to  be 
fure,    for  the  common    frailties  and    infirmities   of 
humane  nature,   there  is  an  open  way  of  pardon  in 
the  gofpei,    and  they  are  many  times  forgiven  to  us 
upon  a  general  repentance;    fo  that  upon  account  of 
thefe,  which  is  commonly  the  cafe  of  the  perfons  I 
am  fpeaking  of,    there  is  not  the  lead  ground  of 
defpair ;  and  though  it  be  hard  many  times  for  fuch 
perfons  to  receive  comfort,    yet  it  is  eafy  to  give  it, 
and  that  upon  fure  grounds,  and  as  clear  evidence  of 
fcripture,  as  there  is  for  any  thing ;    fo  that  the  firft 
thing  that  fuch  perfons,  who  are   fo   apt  to  judge 
thus  hardly  of  themfelves,  are  to  be   convinced   of 
(if  poflible)  is  this,   that  they  ought  rather  to  truft 
the  judgment  of  others  concerning  themfelves,  than 
their  own  imagination,  which  is  fo  diftemper'd,  that 
it  cannot  make   a  true  reprefentation  of  things.     I 
know  that  where  melancholy  does  mightily  prevail, 
it  is  hard  to  perfuade  people  of  this :  but  till  they  be 
perfuaded  of  it,  I  am  fure  all  the  reafon  in  the  world 
will  fignify  nothing  to  them. 

4thly,  This  fl:iould  make  men  afraid  of  great 
and  prefumptuous  fins,  which  come  near  apoftafy 
from  chriflianity ;  fuch  as  deliberate  murder,  adul- 
tery, grofs  fraud  and  opprefTion,  or  notorious  and 
habitual  intemperance.  For  what  great  difference  is 
there,  whether  men  renounce  chriftianity ;  or  pro* 
lefiing  to  believe  it,  "  do  in  their  works  deny  it  V* 
fome  of  thefe  fins  which  I  have  mention'd,  particu- 
larly 


The  danger  of  apojlafy  from  chrifiamty.  2063 

larly  murder  and  adultery,  were  ranked  in  the  fameSE  r  m. 
degree  with  apoftafy  by  the  ancient  church ;  and  fo  ^^ 
fevere  was  the  difcipline  of  many  churches,  that 
perfons  guilty  of  thefe  crimes  were  never  admitted  to 
the  peace  and  communion  of  the  church  again,  what- 
ever teftimony  they  gave  of  their  repentance.  I  will 
not  fiy  but  this  was  too  rigorous ;  but  this  fliews  how 
inconfiftent  with  chriftianity  thefe  crimes,  and  others 
of  the  like  degree  of  heinoufnefs,  were  in  thofe  days 
thought  to  be.  They  did  not  indeed,  as  Tertullian 
tells  us,  think  fuch  perfons  abfolutely  incapable  of 
the  mercy  of  God  ;  but  after  fuch  a  fall,  fo  noto- 
rious a  contradidion  to  their  chriftian  profciTion,  they 
thought  it  unfit  afterwards  that  they  fhould  ever  be 
reckon'd  in  the  number  of  chriftians. 

5thly,  It  may  be  ufeful  for  us  upon  this  occafion 
to  refledl  a  little  upon  the  ancient  difcipline  of  the 
church,  which  in  fome  places  fas  I  have  told  you) 
was  fo  kwtVQ^  as  in  cafe  of  fome  great  crimes  after 
baptifm,  as  apoftafy  to  the  heathen  idolatry,  murder, 
and  adultery,  never  to  admit  thofe  that  were  guilty 
of  them,  to  the  peace  and  communion  of  the 
church  'y  but  all  churches  were  fo  (trid,  as  not  to 
admit  thofe  who  k\\  after  baptifm  into  great  and  no- 
torious crimes,  to  reconciliation  with  the  church,  but 
after  a  long  and  tedious  courfe  of  penance,  after  the 
greateft  and  mod  publick  tedimonies  of  forrow  and 
repentance,  after  long  fading  and  tears,  and  the 
greated  figns  of  humiliation  that  can  be  imagined. 
In  cafe  of  the  greated  offences  they  were  feldom  re- 
conciled, till  they  came  to  lie  upon  their  death- beds  : 
and  in  cafe  of  other  fcandalous  fins,  not  'till  after  the 
humiliation  of  many  years.  This  perhaps  may  be 
thought  too  great  feverity ;  but  1  am  fure  we  are  as 
14  0^2  much 


2064         The  danger  of  apoftafy  from  chrifilanitj. 
SKRM.  much  too  remifs  now,  as  they  were  ovcr-rigorou: 
^^[j  then  :   but  was  the  ancient  difcipline  of  the  church 
in  any  degree  put  in  pradlice  now,  what  cafe  would 
the  generality  of  chriftians  be  in  ?  in  >vhat  herds  and 
fhoals  would  men  be  driven  out  of  the  communion 
of  the  church  ?  'tis  true,   the  prodigious  degeneracy 
and  corruption  of   chriftians  hath  long  fmce  broke 
thefe  bounds,    and  'tis  morally  impolfible  to  revive 
the  ftridnels  of  the  ancient  difcipline  in  any  meafure, 
till  the  world  grow  better  -,   but  yet  we  ought  to  re- 
fled,  with  fhame  and   confufion  of  face,    upon  the 
purer  ages  of  the  church,    and  fadly   to  confider, 
how  few  among  us  would  in  thofe  days  have  been 
accounted  chriftians;    and  upon  this  confideration  to 
be  provoked  to  an  emulation  of  thofe  better  times, 
and  to  a  reformation  of  thofe  faults  a,nd  mifcarriages, 
which  in  the  beft  days  of  chriftianity  were  reckon'd 
inconfift^nt  with  the  chriftian  profefiion  \   and  to  re- 
member that  though  the  difcipline  of  the  church  be 
not  now  the  fame  it  was  then,  yet  the  judgment  and 
fe verity  of   God  is  ;    and  that  thofe  who  live  in  any 
vicious  courfe  of  life,  though   they  continue   in   the 
communion  of  the  church,    yet  they  fliall  be  "  fhut 
't  out  of  the  kingdom  of  God."  "  We  are  fure 
*'  that  the  judgment  of  God  will  be  according  to 
*'  truth,  againft  them  which  commit  fuch  things." 

6thly,  and  laftly,  the  confideration  of  what  hath 
been  faid,  fliould  confirm  and  eftablidi  us  in  the  pro- 
,  feftion  of  our  holy  religion.  'Tis  true,  we  are  not 
now  in  danger  of  apoftatizing  from  chriftianity  to 
the  heathen  idolatry ;  but  we  have  too  many  iad 
examples  of  thofe  who  apoftatize  from  the  profellion 
of  the  gofpel,  which  they  have  taken  upon  them  in 
baptifm,  to  atheifm  and  infidelity,  to  all  manner  of 

impiety 


ne  danger  of  apojlafy  from  chrijlianify.  2065 
impiety  and  lewdnefs.  There  are  many  who  daily SERM. 
fall  off  from  the  profelTion  of  the  reformed  religion,  > 
to  the  grofs  errors  and  fuperfticions  of  the  Roman 
church,  which  in  many  things  does  too  nearly  re- 
femble  the  old  pagan  idolatry.  And  what  the 
apoftle  here  fays  of  the  apoftates  of  his  time,  is 
proportionably  true  of  thofe  of  our  days,  that 
"  they  who  thus  fiill  away,"  it  is  "  extremely  dif- 
"  ficult  to  renew  them  again  to  repentance.'*  And 
it  ought  to  be  remembred,  that  the  guilt  of  this? 
kind  of  apoftafy  hath  driven  fome  to  defpair ;  as  in 
the  cafe  of  Spira,  who,  for  refifting  the  light  and 
convictions  of  his  mind,  was  cad  into  thofe  agonies, 
and  fill'd  with  fuch  terrors,  as  if  "  the  very  pains  of 
"  hell  had  taken  hold  on  him  ;''  and  in  that  fearful 
defpair,  and  in  the  midft  of  thofe  hoi*rors,  he  breathed 
out  his  foul. 

"  Let  us  then  hold  fall  the  profeffion  of  our 
*'  faith  without  wavering  j"  and  ht  us  take  heed 
how  we  contradict  the  profelTion  of  our  faith  by 
^ny  impiety  and  wickednefs  in  our  MvQ^-y  remem- 
bring  that  "  it  is  a  fearful  thing  to  fall  into  the 
^'  hands  of  the  living  God."  I  will  conclude  with 
the  words  of  the  apoftle  immediately  after  the  text 
'^  the  earth  which  drinketh  in  the  rain  that  cometh 
*'  oft  upon  it,  and  bringerh  forth  herbs  meet  for 
*'  them  by  whom  it  is  drefied,  receiveth  blefling 
«  from  God.  But  that  which  beareth  thorns  and 
"  briers,  is  rejected,  and  is  nigh  unto  curfing,  whofe 
"  end  is  to  be  burned."  And  how  gladly  would  £ 
add  the  next  words!  "  but,  beloved,  we  are  per- 
*'  fuaded  better  things  of  you,  and  things  that  ac- 
«'  company  falvation,  though  we  thus  fpeak." 

SERMON 


[  2o66  ] 

SERMON    CXXII. 

Christ  the  author,  and  obedience  the 
condition  of  falvation. 

■  ■ 

H  E  B.   V.  9. 

And  heing  made  f  erf  c5i^  he  became  the  author  of  eternal 
falvation  unto  all  them  that  obey  him, 

THIS  is  fpoken  of  Christ,  our  great 
high-prielt  under  the  gofpel  ;  upon  the 
excellency  of  whofe  perfon,  and  the  efficacy 
of  his  facrifice  for  the  eternal  benefit  and  falvation 
of  mankind,  the  apoftlc  infilh  fo  largely  in  this, 
and  the  following  chapters  •,  but  the  fum  of  all  is 
briefly  comprehei^ded  in  the  ttxt,  that  our  high- 
pried  "  being  made  perfect,  became  the  author  of 
*^  eternal  falvation  to  them  that  obey  him." 

In  which  words  we  have  thefe  four  things  confi- 
derable. 

id,  the  great  blelTing  and  benefit  here  fpoken 
of,  and  that  is  "  eternal  falvation  ; "  and  this  im- 
plies in  it,  not  only  our  deliverance  from  hell,  and 
redemption  from  eternal  mifery  -,  but  the  obtaining 
of  eternal  life  and  happinefs  for  us. 

adly,  the  author  of  this  great  blefTing  and  benefit 
to  mankind  ;  and  that  is  "  J  e  su  s  C  h  r  i  s  t  the 
*'  Son  of  God,'*  who  is  here  reprefented  to  us 
under  the  notion  of  our  high-prieft,  who,  by  making 
atonement  for  us,  and  reconciling  us  to  Gop,  is 
faid  to  be  the  "  author  of  eternal  falvation"  to  man- 
kind. 


Christ  the  author,  and  ohedie?ice  the,  ^c.  2067 
3dly,  the  way  and  means  whereby  he  became  S  E  R  M.- 
the  author  of  our  falvation  ;  "  being  made  perfecl,  ^-^^^^• 
"  he  became  the  author  of  eternal  falvation.'*  The 
word  is  TviX^w^eir,  having  confummated  his  work, 
and  finifh'd  his  courfe,  and  received  the  reward  of 
it.  For  this  word  hath  an  allufion  to  thofe  that 
run  in  a  race,  where  he  that  wins  receives  the  crown. 
And  to  this  the  apoflle  plainly  alludes,  Phil.  iii. 
12.  where  he  fays,  "  not  as  though  I  had  already 
««  attained,"  ^^  on  ricJ^n  %\a^ovj  not  as  if  I  had  al- 
ready taken  hold  of  the  prize  i  but  I  am  prefling, 
or  reaching  forward  towards  it;  i' ji'o'^k]  TgrsXetcu/xof, 
or  were  already  perfect ;  that  is,  not  as  [^  1  had 
finilh'd  my  courfe,  or  had  the  prize  or  crown  in  my 
hand  ;  but  I  am  prefling  forward  towards  it.  In 
like  manner,  our  bleffed  Saviour,  when  he  had 
finifh'd  the  courfe  of  his  humiliation  and  obedience, 
which  was  accomplifh'd  in  his  fufFerings,  and  had 
received  the  reward  of  them,  being  rifen  from  the 
dead,  and  exalted  to  the  right-hand  of  God,  and 
crown'd  with  glory  and  honour,  he  is  faid  to  be 
T^Xaco^stV  made  perfed  ;  and  therefore  when  he  was 
giving  up  the  ghofl  upon  the  crofs,  he  faid,  John 
xix.  30.  "  T£T£\37occ,  it  is  finilh'd/*  or  perfeded  5 
that  is,  lie  had  done  all  that  was  neceflary  to  be 
done,  by  way  of  fuffering,  for  our  redemption.  And 
the  fame  word  is  likewife  ufed  Luke  xiii.  32.  con- 
cerning our  Saviour's  fufferings,  "  I  do  cures 
*'  to  day  and  to  morrow,  ;^  tJj  r^rr^  nXeiSixaiy  and 
**  the  third  day  I  fhall  be  perfeded  i  "  this  he 
fpake  concerning  his  own  death.  And  therefore 
chap.  ii.  10.  God  is  faid  ''  to  make  the  captain 
*'  of  our  falvation  perfed  through  fufferings ;  J^iJi 
^_  sra^ni^dT^av  tsX«wV^;,'*   And  thus  OUr  high-prieft 

being 


2b68         Christ  the  author,  and  obedience  the 

SER  M. being  made  perfect  in  this  {t^{<z^  that  is,  having  fi- 
CXXII.  ^^^^  his  courle,  which  was  accompHrhed  in  his 
fufferings,  and  having  received  the  reward  of  them, 
in  being  exalted  at  the  right-hand  of  God,  "  ha 
*'  became  the  author  of  eternal  liilvation  to  us." 

4thly,  you  have  here  the  qualifications  of  the  per- 
fons,  who  are  made  partakers  of  this  great  benefit, 
or  the  condition  upon  which  it  is  fufpended,  and 
that  is  "  obedience  ;'*  "  he  became  the  author  of 
"  eternal  falvation  to  them  that  obey  him.'* 

Thefe  are  the  main  things  contained  in  the  text. 
For  the  fuller  explication  whereof,  1  fhall  take  into 
confideration  thefe  five  things. 

I  ft,  how,  and  by  what  means  Christ  is  the 
"  author  of  our  falvation." 

2dly,  what  obedience  the  gofpel  requires  as  a  con- 
dition, and  is  pleafed  to  accept  as  a  qualifications^ 
in  thofe  who  hope  for  eternal  falvation. 

3dly,  we  will  confider  the  pofTibility  of  perform- 
ing this  condition,  by  that  grace  and  alliftance 
which  is  ofi'er'd,  and  ready  to  be  afforded  to  us  by 
the  gofpel. 

4thly,  the  neceflity  of  this  obedience,  in  order 
to  eternal  life  and  happinefs. 

And  5thly,  I  fhall  fhew  that  this  is  no  prejudice 
to  the  law  "  of  faith,"  and  the  ''  free  grace  and 
*'  mercy  of  God,"  declared  in  the  gofpel. 

I  ft,  we  will  confider  how,  and  by  what  means 
•'  Christ  is  the  author  of  our  falvation  j"  and  this 
is  contain'd  in  thefe  words,  ''  being  made  perfec5l  he 
*'  became  the  author  of  eternal  falvation,"  that  is 
(as  I  told  you  before)  having  finifli'd  his  courfe  which 
was  accomplifti'd  in  his  laft  fufferings ;  and  having 

E^??^X?^  ^b?  ^?!!^^^4  ^f  ^J^\  being  exalted  at  the 

risht-^ 


coridhlon  of  fakatioju  2069 

right-hand  of  God,  he  became  the  "  author  ofeter-  ^^^^^ 
"  nal  falvation"  to  us;  fo  that  by  all  he  did, 
and  fuffer'd  for  us,  in  the  days  of  his  flefh,  and  in 
the  ilate  of  his  humihation,  and  by  all  that  he  flill 
continues  to  do  for  us,  now  that  he  is  in  heaven  at 
the  right-hand  of  God  j  he  hath  efteded  and  brought 
about  the  great  work  of  our  falvation.  His  dodrine 
and  his  hfe,  his  death  and  fuffcrings,  his  refurredlion 
from  the  dead,  and  his  powerful  intercefiion  for  us 
at  the  right-hand  of  God,  have  all  a  great  influence 
upon  the  reforming  and  faving  of  mankind  ;  and  by 
all  thefe  ways  and  means,  he  is  the  author  and  caufe 
of  our  falvation  ;  as  a  rule,  and  as  a  pattern,  as  a 
price  and  propitiation,  and  as  a  patron  and  advocate 
that  is  continually  pleading  our  caufe,  and  interceed- 
ing  with  God  on  our  behalf,  ^'  for  m»ercy  and  grace 
*'  to  help  in  time  of  need." 

And  indeed  our  condition  requir'd  an  high-pried 
who  was  qualified  in  all  thefe  refpecls,  for  the  reco- 
very of  mankind  out  of  that  corrupt  and  degene- 
rate  ftare  into   which  it  was  funk  ;  an  high-pried: 
*'  whofe  lips  fliould  preferve  knowledge/'  and  from 
whofe  mouth  we  might  learn  the  law  of  God  ;  whofe 
life  fhould  be  a  perfedl  pattern  of  holinefs  to  us,  and 
his  death  a  propitiation  for  the  fins  of  the  whole  world  -, 
and  by  whofe  grace  and  affiftance  wg  (hould  be  endowed 
with  power  and  flrength  r .,  mortify  our  lufts ;  and  to 
perfed  holinefs  in  the  fear  of  God  ;  and  therefore  "  fuch 
"  an  high-priefl  became  us,  who  was  holy,  harmlefs, 
"  undefiled,    and  fepLrate  from  finners,  who   mio-ht 
««  have  compaiTion  on  the  ignorant,and  them  that  are 
"  out  of  the   way,    and    being  himfelf  compafs'd 
«^  with  infirmities,  might  have  the  feeling  of  ours 
«  being  in  all  points  tempted  as  we  are,  only  with- 
Vol.  VII.  ^      14  R.  u  ^uc 

5. 


2070         Christ  the  author^  and  obedience  the 

SERM.'"  out  fin;'*  and  iti   a  word,  "  might  be   able  Co 

<.XXIL  ^j  ^       ^^  ^1^^  utmolt  all  thofe  that  come  to  God  by 

*'  him,  feeing  he  ever  liveth  to  make  intercefTion  for 

"  us;' 

By  thefe  qualifications  our  high-priefl  is  defcribed 
in  this  epiftle ;  and  by  thefe  he  is  every  way  fuited 
to  all  our  defeds  and  infirmities,  all  our  v/ants  and 
neceflities;  to  inftrucl  our  ignorance  by  his  do(5lrine, 
and  to  lead  us  in  the  path  of  righteoufiiefs  by  his  mofl 
holy  and  moft  exemplary  hfe ;  to  expiate  the  guilt 
of  our  fins  by  his  death  j  and  to  procure  grace  and 
afliftance  for  us,  by  his  prevalent  intercelTion  on 
our  behalf  By  all  thefe  ways,  and  in  all  thefe  relpefls, 
he  is  faid  to  be  "  the  author  of  eternal  falvation." 

I  ft,  by  the  holinefs  and  purity  of  his  doflrine, 
whereby  we  are  perfedly  inflrucfled  in  the  will  of 
God  and  our  duty,  and  powerfully  excited  and  per- 
fuaded  to  the  praftice  of  it.  The  rules  and  direc- 
tions of  a  holy  life  were  very  obfcure  before,  and 
the  motives  and  encouragements  to  virtue  but  weak 
and  ineffectual,  in  comparifon  of  what  they  are  now 
rendered  by  the  revelation  of  the  gofpel.  The  ge- 
neral corruption  of  mankind,  and  the  vicious  prac- 
tice of  the  world,  had  in  a  great  meafure  blurr'd 
and  defac'd  the  natural  law  -,  fo  that  the  heathen 
world,  for  many  ages,  had  but  a  very  dark  and 
doubtful  knowledge  of  their  duty,  efpecially  as  to 
feveral  inftances  of  it.  The  cudom  of  feveral  vices 
had  fo  prevailed  among  mankind,  as  almoft  quite 
to  extinguifli  the  natural  fenfe  of  their  evil  and  de- 
formity. And  the  Jews,  who  enjoy'd  a  confiderable 
degree  of  divine  revelation,  had  no  ftri<5t  regard  to 
the  morality  of  their  adtions ;  and  contenting  them- 
fcves  with  forae  kind    of  outward   conformity    to 

the 


condition  of  falvatton.  2071 

i^.t  bare  letter  of  the  ten  commandments,  were  ^^'^iyU^j' 
mod  wholly  taken  up  with  little  ceremonies  and  ob- 
fcrvances,  in  which  they  placed  the  main  of  their 
religion,  almoft  wholly  nigleding  the  greater  duties 
and  "  weightier  matters  of  the  law." 

And  therefore  our  blefTed  Saviour,  to  free  man- 
kind from  thefe  wanderings  and  uncertainties  about 
the  will  of  God,  revealed  the  moral  law,  and  ex- 
plained the  full  force  and  meaning  of  it,  clearing  all 
doubts,  and  fupplying  all  the  defeds  of  it,  by  a 
more  particular  and  explicit  declaration  of  the  fe- 
veral  parts  of  our  duty,  and  by  precepts  of  greater 
perfe(5lion,  than  the  world  was  fufficiently  acquainted 
withal  before  -,  of  greater  humility  and  more  uni- 
verfal  charity  •,  of  abflaining  from  revenge  and  for- 
giving injuries,  and  returning  to  our  enemies  good 
for  evil,  and  love  for  ill-will,  and  blelTings  and 
prayers  for  curfes  and  perfecutions.  Thefe  virtues 
indeed  were  fometimes,  and  yet  but  very  rarely,  re- 
commended before  in  the  counfels  of  wife  men  •,  but 
either  not  in  that  degree  of  perfedion,  or  not  under 
that  degree  of  necefficy,  and  as  having  the  force  of 
laws,  and  laying  an  univerfal  obligation  of  indifpenfi- 
ble  duty  upon  all  mankind. 

And  as  our  blefTed  Saviour  hath  given  a  greater 
clearnefs,  and  certainty,  and  perfeftion,  to  the  rule 
of  our  duty,  io  he  hath  reveal'd,  and  brought  into 
a  clearer  light,  more  powerful  motives  and  encou- 
ragements to  the  condant  and  careful  pradice  of  it ; 
for  "  life  and  immortality  are  brought  to  light  by 
*'  the  gofpeU''  the  refurredion  of  Chpjst  from 
the  dead  being  a  plain  and  convincing  demonflra- 
tion  of  the  immortality  of  our  fouls,  and  another 
jife  after  this^  and  an  evidence  to  us  both  of  his 
14  H  2  power 


S372         Christ /^f  author,  and  obedience  the 
SF.  RM.  power,  and  of  the  fidelity  of  his  promife,  to  raife  ns 
^^^^".  from  the  dead.     Not   but  that  mankind  had  fome 
obfcure  apprehenfions  of  thefe  things  before.     Good 
men    had    always   good   hdpes  of  another  life  and 
future  rewards  in  another  world  \  and  the  worft    of 
men  were   not   without  fome  fears  of  the  judgment 
and  vengeance  of  another  world  ;  but  men  had  dif- 
puted  themfelves  into  ^rtuL  doubts  and   uncertainties 
about  thefe  things;  and   as  men  that  are   in  doubt, 
are  almofl  indir/cient  which    way  they  go ;  fo   the 
uncertain  apprehenfions  which  men  had  of  a  future 
ftate,  and  of  the  rewards  and  punifliments  of  ano- 
ther world  had  but  a  very  faint   influence  upon  the 
minds  of  men,  and  wanted  that  prefilng  and  deter- 
mining force   to   virtue   and  a  good  life,  which  a 
firm    belief    and  clear   conviction  of  thefe   things, 
would  have  infufed  into  them. 

But  now  "  the  light  of  the  glorious  gofpel  of 
"  Christ"  hath  fcattered  all  thefe  clouds,  and 
chafed  away  that  grofs  darknefs  which  hid  the  other 
world  from  our  fight,  and  hath  removed  all  doubts 
concerning  the  immortality  of  mens  fouls,  and  their 
future  ftate;  and  now  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  with 
all  its  treafures  of  life  and  happinefs,  and  glory,  lies 
open  to  our  view,  and  "  hell  is  alio  naked  before 
«*  us,  and  deftrudion  hath  no  covering."  So  that 
the  hopes  and  fears  of  men  are  now  perfectly  awak- 
ned,  and  all  forts  of  confiderations  that  may  fervc 
to  quicken  and  encourage  our  obedience,  and  to 
deter  and  affrighten  men  from  a  wicked  life,  are  ex- 
pofed  to  the  view  of  all  men,  and  do  ftare  every 
man's  confcience  in  the  flice.  And  this  is  that  which 
renders  the  gofpel  fo  admirable  and  powerful  an  in- 
ftrument   for  the  reforming  of  mankind,    and,    as 

the 


condition  of  falvation.  2073 

the  apoflle  calls  it  "  the  mighty  power  of  God  untoS  E  R  M. 
*'  falvation-,"  becaufe  therein  life  and  immortality, 
are  fet  before  us,  as  the  certain  and  glorious  reward 
of  our  obedience  ;  and  therein  alfo  ''  the  wrath  of 
"  God  is  revealed  from  heaven,  againft  all  ungod- 
*'  linefs  and  unrighteoufnefs  of  men."  So  that  con- 
fidering  the  perfedion  of  our  rule,  and  the  powerful 
enforcements  of  it  upon  the  confciences  of  men,  by 
the  clear  difcovery  and  firm  alTurance  of  the  eternal 
recompence  of  another  world  ;  nothing  can  be  ima- 
gined better  fuited  to  its  end,  than  the  do&ine  of 
the  gofpel  is  to  make  men  Vv^ife,  and  holy,  and  good 
unto  falvation ;  both  by  inftruding  them  perfedly  in 
their  duty,  and  urging  them  powerfully  to  the  prac- 
tice of  it. 

2dly,  the  example  of  our  Saviour's  life  is  likewife 
another  excellent  means  to  this  end.  The  law  lays 
an  obligation  upon  us ;  but  a  pattern  gives  life  and 
encouragement,  and  renders  our  duty  more  eafy,  and 
pradlicable,  and  familiar  to  us  ;  for  here  we  fee  obe- 
dience to  the  divine  law  pradlifed  in  our  own  nature, 
and  performed  by  a  man  like  ourfelves,  "  in  all 
^'  things  like  unto  us,  fin  only  excepted."  'Tis  true 
indeed,  this  exception  makes  a  great  difference,  and 
feerns  to  take  off  very  much  from  the  encouraging 
force  and  virtue  of  this  example.  No  v/onder  if 
he  that  was  without  fin,  and  was  God  as  well  as  man, 
performed  all  righteoufnefs  ;  and  therefore,  where 
is  the  encouragement  of  this  example?  that  our 
nature,  pure  and  uncorrupted,  fupported  and  aflifted 
by  the  divinity  to  which  it  was  united,  fliould  be 
perfeflly  conformed  to  the  law  of  God,  as  it  is  no 
llrange  thing,  fo  neither  doth  it  feem  to  have  that 
force  and  encouragement  in  it,  which  an  example 

more 


2  074  ChK  1ST  the  author^  and  obedicJice  the 
SF  R  M.  more  fliited  to  our  weaknefs  might  have  had.  Bat 
^^iHj  ^hen  this  cannot  be  deny'd,  that  it  hath  the  advan- 
tage of  perfedion,  which  a  pattern  ought  to  have, 
and  to  which,  though  v/e  can  never  attain,  yet  we 
may  always  be  afpiring  towards  it ;  and  certainly 
we  cannot  better  Jearn,  how  God  would  have  men 
to  live,  than  by  feeing  how  God  himfelf  lived, 
when  he  was  pleafed  to  aflume  our  nature,  and  to 
become  man. 

And  then,  we  are  to  confider  that  the  Son  oF  God 
did  not  afiume  our  nature  in  its  higheft  glory  and 
perfedlion,  but  compafs'd  with  infirmities,  and  liable 
in  all  points  to  be  tempted  like  as  we  are  •,  but  ftill 
it  was  without*  fm;  and  therefore  God  doth  not 
exadl  from  us  perfed  obedience,  and  that  we  fhould 
*'  fulfil  all  righteoufnefs,"  as  he  did  ;  he  makes  al- 
lowance for  the  corruption  of  our  nature,  and  is 
plealed  to  accept  of  our  fincere,  though  very  im- 
perfcd  obedience.  But  after  all  this,  his  humane 
nature  was  united  to  his  divinity,  and  he  had  the 
''  Spirit  without  mealure  ;'•  and  this  would  indeed 
make  a  wide  difference  between  us  and  our  pattern, 
as  to  the  purpofe  of  holiriefs  and  obedience,  if  we 
were  deftitute  of  that  afiiftance  which  is  necefiiary 
to  enable  us  to  the  difcharge  of  our  duty  ;  but  this 
God  offers,  and  is  ready  to  afford  to  us,  for  he  hath 
promifed  '*^  to  give  his  Holy  Spirit  to  them  that 
^*  ask  him  ;"  and  "  the  Spirit  of  him  that  raifed 
*'  up  Christ  Jesus  from  the  dead"  dwells  in 
all  good  men,  who  fincerely  defire  to  do  the  will  of 
God  ;  "  in  the  working  out  our  falvation,  God 
*'  worketh  in  us  both  to  will  and  to  do." 

So  that  as  to  that  obedience  which  the  gofpel  re- 
quires of  us,  if  we  be  not  wanting  to  ourfelves  \  if 

we 


CXXIL 


condition  of  fahation.  2075 

we  do  not  "  receive  the  grace  of  God  in  vaIn,"S^ERM. 
and  "  quench  and  refill  his  bJefled  S  p  i  r  i  t,"  wc, 
may  be  as  really  affifted  as  the  So  n  of  God  him- 
felf  was ;  for,  in  this  refpedl,  alJ  true  and  fincere 
chrillians  are  "  the  Sons  of  God  ;"  fo  that  St. 
Paul  tells  us,  Rom.  viii.  14.  "  As  many  as  are  led 
"  by  the  S  p  I  R.  I  T  of  God,  t\\(ty  are  the  fons  of 
"  God." 

So  that  if  all  things  be  duly  confider'd,  the  life  of 
our  blelTed  Sa v  i  o  u  r,  as  it  is  th^  mofl  perfed,  fo  m 
the  main,  it  is  a  very  proper  pattern  for  our  imitation, 
and  could  not  have  come  nearer  to  us,  without  want- 
ing that  perfection  which  is  neceflary  to  a  complete 
and  abiblute  pattern.  The  Son  of  God  conde- 
fcended  to  every  thing  that  might  render  him  the 
mod  familiar  and  equal  example  to  us,  excepting 
that,  which  as  it  was  impoffible,  fo  had  been  infi- 
nitely difhonourable  to  him,  and  would  have  fpoil'd 
the  perfedion  of  his  example  ;  he  came  as  near  to  us 
as  was  fit  or  poffible  "  being  in  all  things  like  unto  us, 
''  fin  only  excepted  ;"  that  is,  abating  that  one  thing, 
which  he  came  to  deftroy  and  abolilli,  and  which 
would  have  deftroyed  the  very  end  of  his  coming  ; 
for  if  he  had  not  been  "  without  fin,"  he  could 
neither  have  made  an  expiation  for  fin,  nor  have 
been  a  perfed  pattern  of  holinefs  and  obedience. 

And  as  the  life  of  our  bleflcd  Saviour  had  all 
the  perfedion  that  is  requifite  to  an  abfolute  pattern 
(fo  that  by  confidering  his  temper  and  fpirir,  and 
t\\Q,  adions  of  his  life,  we  may  reform  all  the  vicious 
inclinations  of  our  minds,  and  the  exorbitances  of 
our  paffions,  and  the  errors  and  irregularities  of  our 
lives)  fo  it  is  a  very  powerful  example,  and  of  great 
force  to  oblige  and  provoke  us  to  the  imitation  of 

it; 


2076  Ch  R  r  ST  //6^  author^  and  obedience  the 

S  E  R  M.  it ;  for  it  is  the  example  of  one  whom  we  ought  to 
CXXH.^  j-ey^rence,    and  have  reafon  to  love,    above  any  pcr- 
ibn  in  the   world  :     the  example  of  our   prince  and 
fovereign   lord,    of   our  bed    friend    and    greateft 
benefactor,  of  the  high-pried  of  our  profeiTion,  and 
the  captain  of  our   falvation,    of  the  author   and  fi- 
nifher  oF  our  fiith,  of  one  v/ho  came  down  from 
heaven  for  our  lakes,  and  was  contented   to   alTume 
our  nature  together  v^ith  the  infirmities  of  ir,  and  to 
live   in  a  low  and   mean  condition,   for   no   other 
reafon  but  that  lie  might  have  the   opportunity   to 
inftrud  and  lead  mankind  in  the  way  to  life,  to  de- 
liver us  from  fin  and  wrath,  and  to  bring  us  to  Goo 
and  happinefs.      'Tis  the  example  of  one  who  laid 
down  his  life  for  us,  and  fealed  his  love  to  us  in  his 
blood,  and  whilll  we  were  enemies,  did  and  fuffer'd 
more  for  us,  than  ever  any  man  did  for  his  friend. 

And  furely  thefe  con fiderations  cannot  but  mightily 
recommend  and  endear  to  us  this  example  of  our 
Lord  and  Sav i o u r.  We  are  ambitious  to  imi- 
tate thofe  whom  we  highly  efteem  and  reverence, 
and  are  apt  to  have  their  examples  in  great  venera- 
tion, from  whom  we  have  received  great  kindnefTes 
and  benefits,  and  are  always  endeavouring  to  be  like 
thofe  whom  we  love,  and  are  apt  to  conform  our 
felves  to  the  will  and  pleafure  of  thofe  from  whom 
we  have  received  great  favours,  and  who  are  con- 
tinually heaping  great  obligations  upon  us. 

So  that  whether  we  confider  the  excellency  of  our 
pattern,  or  the  mighty  endearments  of  it  to  us,  by 
that  infinite  love  and  kindnefs  which  he  hath  ex- 
prefs'd  towards  us,  we  have  all  the  temptation,  ard 
all  the  provocation  in  the  world,  to  endeavour  to  be 
like  Jiim  j  far  who  would   not  gladly  tread  in  the 

fteps 


condition  of  falvafion.  2077 

fleps  of  the  Son  of  God,  and  of  the  beft  friendSERM^ 

.  CXXII 

that  the  fons  of  men  ever  had }   who  will  not  follow 

that  example  to  which  we  ftand  indebted  for  the 
greateft  blefTmgs  and  benefits  that  ever  were  procured 
for  mankind  ?  thus  you  fee  of  what  force  and  ad- 
vantage the  example  of  our  blefled  Saviour  is 
toward  the  recovery  and  falvation  of  mankind, 

3dly,  he  is  "  the  author  of  eternal  falvation," 
as  he  hath  purchafed  it  for  us,  by  the  merit  of  his 
obedience  and  fufFerings,  by  which  he  hath  obtained 
eternal  redemption  for  us  \  not  only  deliverance  from 
the  wrath  to  come,  but  eternal  life  and  happinefs, 
when  by  our  fins  we  had  juftly  incurred  the  wrath 
and  difpleafure  of  almighty  God,  and  were  liable  to 
eternal  death  and  mifery.  He  was  contented  to  be 
fubftituted  a  facrifice  for  us,  "  to  bear  our  fins  in 
"  his  own  body  on  the  tree,"  and  to  expiate  the 
guilt  of  all  our  offences  by  his  own  fufferings.  He 
died  for  us,  that  is,  not  only  for  our  benefit  and 
advantage,  but  in  our  place  and  flead  -,  fo  that  if  he 
had  not  died~we  had  eternally  perifh'd  ,  and  becaufe 
he  died,  we  are  faved  from  that  eternal  ruin  and  pu- 
nilhment,  which  was  due  to  us  for  our  fins. 

And  this,  tho'  it  be  no  where  in  fcripture  call'd 
by  the  name  or  term  of  fatisfadiion,  yet,  which  is 
the  fame  thing  in  effedl,  it  is  call'd  "  the  prize  of 
*'  our  redemption  j"  for  as  we  are  fmners,  we  are 
liable  and  indebted  to  the  juflice  of  God,  and  our 
bleffed  Saviour  by  his  death  and  fufferings  hath 
difcharged  this  obligation;  which  difcharge,  fince 
it  was  obtained  for  us  by  "  the  fhedding  of  his  pre- 
"  cious  blood,"  ''  without  which,'*  the  fcripture 
exprefly  fiys,  "  there  had  been  no  remifTionof  fin,'* 
why  it  may  not'  properly  enough  be  called  payment 

Vol.  VII.  14  S  and 


207S         C  H  R  I  s  T  the  author^  and  obedience  the 

^•xxiY  ^^<^^  ^^tisfa(5lion,  I  confcfs  I  cannot  underdand.  Not 
that  God  was  angry  with  his  S  o  n,  for  he  was  always 
well  pleafcd  with  him-,  or  that  our  Saviour 
fuffer'd  die  very  fame  which  the  finner  fhould  have 
done  in  his  own  perfon,  the  proper  pains  and  tor- 
ments of  the  damned  :  but  that  his  pcrfed;  obedience 
and  grievous  fufFerings,  undergone  for  our  fakes, 
and  upon  our  account,  were  of  that  value  and 
efteem  with  God,  and  his  voluntary  facrifice  of  him- 
felf  in  our  flead,  fo  highly  acceptable  and  well- 
pleafing  to  him,  that  he  thereupon  was  pleafed  to 
enter  into  a  covenant  of  grace  and  mercy  with 
mankind ;  wherein  he  hath  promifed  and  engaged 
himfelf  to  forgive  the  fins  of  all  thofe  who  fincerely 
repent  and  believe,  and  to  make  them  partakers  of 
eternal  life.  And  hence  it  is,  that  the  blood  of 
Christ,  which  was  fhed  for  us  upon  the  crofs,  is 
calPd  ''  the  blood  of  the  covenant  i"  as  being  the 
fanc^lion  of  that  new  covenant  of  the  gofpel,  into 
which  God  is  enter'd  with  mankind  ;  and  not  only 
the  confirmation,  but  the  very  foundation  of  it  j  for 
which  realbn,  the  cup  in  the  Lord's  fupper  (which 
reprefents  to  us  the  blood  of  Christ)  is  call'd 
*'  the  new  teilament  in  his  blood,  which  was  fhed 
*'  for  many  for  the  remifTion  of  fins." 

4thly,  and  laftly,  Christ  is  fiid  to  be  "  the 
"  author  of  our  fxlvation,'*  in  refpedt  of  his  powerful 
and  perpetual  intercefTion  for  us  at  the  right-hand  of 
God.  And  this  feems  to  be  more  efpecially  intima* 
ted  and  intended,  in  that  expreflion  here  in  the  text, 
that  "  being  made  perfect  he  became  the  author  of 
*'  eternal  falvation  to  them  that  obey  him."  Which 
words  of  "  his  being  perfedled,"  do,  as  I  have 
fliew'd  before,   more  immediately  refer  to  his  fufFer- 


condition  of  falvation.  2079 

ings,  and  the  [reward  that  followed  them,  ^'  his  exal-  p^yj^j' 
*'  tation  at  the  right  hand  of  God,"  where  "  he 
"  lives  for  ever  to  make  intercefTion   for  us ;"  by 
which  perpetual  and  mod  prevalent  intercefTion  of 
his,  he  procures  all  thofe  benefits  to  be  bellowed  up- 
on us,  which  he  purchafed  for  us  by  his  death ;  the 
forgivenefs  of  our  fins,    and  our  acceptance   with 
God,  and  perfedl  reftitution  to  his  favour,  upon  our 
faith  and  repentance,   and  the  grace  and  alTiltance  of 
Go d's  Holy  Spirit  to  enable  us  to  a  fincere 
difcharge  of  our  duty,  to  ftrengthen  us  againfl:  all 
the  temptations  of   the  world,    the  flefh,    and  the 
devil,  to  keep  us  from  all  evil,  and  to  preferve  us  to 
his  heavenly  kingdom. 

And  this  is  that  which  our  apodle  calls  "  obtain- 
"  ing  of  mercy,  and  finding  grace  to  help  in  time  of 
•'  need,"  chap.  iv.  ver.  16.  of  this  epift.  Our  blef- 
fed  Sav  I  o  u  R  now  that  he  is  advanced  into  heaven, 
and  ''  exalted  on  the  right-hand  of  the  majedy  on 
*'  high,"  doth  out  of  the  tendercO:  affedion  and  com- 
pafTion  to  mankind,  ftill  profccute  that  great  and 
merciful  defign  of  our  falvation,  which  was  begun 
by  him  here  on  earth,  and  in  virtue  of  his  meritori- 
ous obedience  and  futferings  does  offer  up  our  prayers 
to  God,  and  as  it  were  plead  our  caufe  with  God, 
and  reprefent  to  him  all  our  wants  and  necelTities, 
and  obtain  a  favourable  anfwer  of  our  petitions  put 
up  to  God  in  his  name,  and  all  neceffary  fupplies  of 
grace  and  ftrength,  proportionable  to  our  tempta- 
tions and  infirmities. 

And  by  virtue  of  this  powerful  intercefTion  of  our 
blefTed  Sav  i  o  u  r  and  R  e  d  e  e  m  e  r,  our  fins  are 
pardoned  upon  our  fincere  repentance,  our  prayers  are 
graciouQy  anfwered,   our  wants  are  abundantly  fup- 

14  S  2  pLcu^ 


2o8o  Christ  the  author^  and  obedience  the 
S  E  R  M.  plied,  and  the  grace  and  afTiftance  of  Go  d  's  S  p  i- 
R  I  T  are  plentifully  afforded  to  us,  to  excite  us  to 
our  duty,  to  ftrengthen  us  in  well  doing,  to  com- 
fort us  in  afflidions,  to  fupport  us  under  the  greatefl: 
trials  and  fufFerings,  and  "  to  keep  us  through  faith 
"  unto  falvation.*' 

And  for  this  reafon,  as  the  purchafing  of  our  fal- 
vation  is  in  fcripture  attributed  to  the  death  and 
fufFerings  of  C  h  r  i  s  t  ;  fo  the  perfecting  and  fi- 
nifhing  of  it  is  afcribed  to  the  prevalency  of  his  in- 
tercefTion  at  the  right-hand  of  G  o  d  for  us.  So  the 
apoftle  tells  us,  chap.  vii.  ver.  25.  that  "  he  is  able 
*'  to  fave  to  the  uttermofl  all  thofe  that  come  to 
"  Go  D  by  him;  feeing  he  ever  liveth  to  make  in- 
'«  tercelTion  for  us."  He  died  once  to  purchafe  fal- 
vation  for  us  \  and  that  we  may  not  fall  iliort  of  it, 
but  receive  the  full  benefit  of  this  purchafe,  *'  he 
*'  lives  for  ever  to  m.ake  intercelTion  for  us;"  and 
thus  "  he  faves  to  the  uttermoft  all  thofe  that  come 
*'  to  God  by  him  *,  "  that  is,  he  takes  care  of  the 
whole  bufinels  of  our  filvation  from  firft  to  lad. 
And  now  that  he  is  in  heaven,  he  is  as  intent  to 
procure  our  welfare  and  happinefs,  and  as  tenderly 
concerned  for  us,  as  when  he  lived  here  among  us 
upon  earth,  as  when  he  hung  upon  the  crofs,  and 
«'  poured  out  his  foul  an  offering  for  our  fins  -,"  for 
he  appears  at  the  right-hand  of  Go  d  in  our  nature, 
that  which  he  affumed  for  our  fakes,  which  was 
made  fubjecl  to,  and  fenfible  of  our  infirmities,  and 
which  "  was  tempted  in  all  things  like  as  we  are, 
*'  only  without  fin  ; "  and  therefore  "  he  knows 
*'  how  to  pity  and  fuccour  them  that  are  tempted  j '' 
and  from  the  remembrance  of  his  own  fufferings,  is 
prompted  to  a  compalTionate  fenfe  of  ours,    and 

never 


cxxir. 


condition  of  f ah  at  ion,  20S 

never  ceafeth  in  virtue  of  his  blood.^   which  was  Ihed  SE^  RM. 
for  us,  to  plead  our  caufe  with  God,  and  to  inter- 
cede powerfully  in  our  behalf. 

So  that  the  virtue  and  efficacy  of  Ch  r  t  s  t  's  ui^ 
terceffion  on  our  behalf,  is  founded  in  the  redemp- 
tion, which  he  wrought  for  us,  by  his  blood  and 
fufferings ;  which,  being  cnter'd  into  heaven,  he  re« 
prefents  to  God  on  our  behalf.  As  the  high- 
prieft  under  the  law  did  enter  into  the  holy  place, 
with  the  blood  of  the  facrifice  that  had  been  offered, 
and  in  virtue  of  that  blood  interceded  for  the  peo- 
ple :  "  fo  C  H  R  I  s  T  by  his  own  blood  enter'd  into 
*'  the  holy  place,  having  obtained  eternal  redemp- 
"  tion  for  us : "  as  the  apofde  fpeaks,  chap.  ix. 
ver.  12.  he  enter'd  into  "  the  holy  place,"  that  is 
«'Jnto  heaven  it  felf,"  to  make  interceffion  for  us, 
as  the  apoftle  explains  himfelf,  ver.  24.  ''  Christ 
"  is  not  enter'd  into  the  holy  places  which  are 
*'  made  with  hands ;  but  into  heaven  it  k\^^  to  ap- 
*'  pear  in  the  prefence  of  God  for  us."  And 
chap.  X.  ver.  12,  fpeaking  of  Christ's  appear- 
ing for  us  at  the  right-hand  of  God,  "  this  man 
*'  (fays  he)  after  he  had  offer'd  one  iacrifice  for  fin 
*'  for  ever'*  (that  is,  a  facriiice  of  perpetual  virtue 
and  efficacy) ''  fat  down  at  the  right-hand  of  God," 
that  is  to  intercede  for  us  in  virtue  of  that  facrifice. 

From  all  which  it  appears  that  the  virtue  of 
Ch  R  I  s  T  's  mediation  and  intercefllon  for  us  in  hea- 
ven, is  founded  in  his  facrifice,  and  the  price  of  our 
redemption  which  he  paid  on  earth,  in  ihedding  his 
blood  for  uSo 

From  whence  the  apoftle  reafons,  that  "  there  is 
*'  but  one  mediator  between  God  and  man,"  by 
whom  wx  are   to  addrcfs    our  prayers  to  God  ; 

I  Tim. 


2082  C  H  R  I  s  T  //5^  author^  and  obedience  the 

SERM.  I  Tim.  ii.  5.  "  There  is  one  God,  and  one  mcdi- 
^XIL  t(  ^^^^  between  God  and  men,  the  man  Christ 
"  Jesus,  who  gave  himfelf  a  ranfom  for  all.'* 
His  mediation  is  founded  in  his  ranfom,  or  the 
price  which  he  paid  for  our  redemption.  The  apo- 
ftle  indeed  docs  not  fay  there  is  "  but  one  media- 
*'  tor'*  between  God  and  man  in  exprefs  words, 
but  furely  he  means  fo  \  if  by  faying  "  there  is  one 
*'  God,"  he  means  there  is  but  one  God  ;  for 
they  are  joined  together,  and  the  very  fame  expref- 
fion  ufed  concerning  both;  "  there  is  one  God, 
*'  and  one  mediator  between  God  and.  men:'* 
that  is,  there  is  "  but  one  God,  and  one  media- 
*'  tor."  But  then,  they  of  the  church  of  Rome 
endeavour  to  avoid  this  plain  ityil^  by  diftinguilh- 
ing  between  a  mediator  of  redemption,  and  a  me- 
diator of  interceflion  :  but  now  if  C  h  r  i  s  t  's  me- 
diation, by  way  of  interceffion,  be  founded  in  the 
virtue  of  his  redemption ;  then  if  there  be  but  one 
mediator  of  redemption,  then  there  is  but  one  me- 
diator of  intercefTion  in  heaven  for  us.  "  There  is 
''  one  God  and  one  mediator  between  God  and 
"  men,  the  man  Christ  Jesus,  who  gave  him- 
'«  felf  a  ranfom  for  all."  So  that  the  power  and 
prevalency  of  his  interceflion  is  founded  in  his  ran- 
fom, that  is,  the  price  of  our  redemption  ;  in  vir- 
tue whereof  alone  he  intercedes  with  God  for  us, 
as  the  apoflle  to  the  Hebrews  does  mod  plainly  af- 
fert.  So  that  all  other  interceffors  in  heaven  for  us 
are  excluded  from  offering  and  prefenting  our  prayers 
to  God,  befides  "  our  high-priefl,  who  is  at  the 
''  right-hand  of  God,  and  lives  for  ever,  to  make 
''  interceflion  for  us/'  and  by  virtue  of  his  inter- 
ceflion, *^  is  able  to  fave  to  the  uttermoft  alJ  thole 

*^'  that 


conditio?!  of  falvation,  20S3 

*'  that  come  to  God  by  him,"  that  is,  who  put  up  S  E  R  M. 
their  prayers   to  God  in   the  alone  virtue  of  his  ,_^^  ,-^ 
mediation.     So  that  as  there  is  no  need  of  any  other, 
if  his  intercefiTion  be  available  "  to  fave  to  the   ut-    - 
"  termoft:  "  fo  there  is  great  danger  in  applying  to 
any  other  (whether  faint  or  angel,   or  even  the  blef- 
fed  virgin)  if  the  benefit  of  his  intercefllon  be  li- 
mited to  thofe  ''  who  come  to  God  by  him.'*  And 
thus  I  have  fhewn  by  what  means  Christ  is  the 
author  of  our  falvation ;  which  was  the  fir(t  thing: 
propos'd  to  be  confider'd.  I  proceed  to  the 

Second  thing  I  propofed  to  enquire  into  ;  namely, 
what  obedience  the  gofpel  requires  as  a  condition, 
and  is  pleafed  to  accept  as  a  qualification  in  thofe 
who  hope  for  eternal  falvation.  And  this  I  fhall 
explain,  firfl:  negatively,  and  then  pofitively. 

I  ft,  negatively  ;  it  is  not  a  meer  outward  pro- 
fefTion  of  the  chriftian  religion,  and  owning  of 
Christ  for  our  Lord  and  lawgiver,  that  will 
be  accepted  in  this  cafe.  "  Not  every  one  that  faith 
"  unto  me.  Lord,  Lord,  (faith  our  Savi- 
*'  our)  fhall  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God." 
By  which  we  may  very  reafonably  underftand,  all 
that  profefllon  of  religion,  which  falls  fliort  of  obe-  ^ . 
dience  and  a  holy  life ;  as  the  profeffion  of  faith  in 
Ch  R  1ST,  being  baptized  into  his  name  and  reli- 
gion, the  mere  belief  of  his  dodrine,  and  the  own- 
ing of  him  for  our  Lord  and  Saviour;  no, 
nor  the  external  worfliip  of  him,  and  profefllon  of 
fubjedlion  to  him,  by  prayer  and  hearing  his  word 
and  communicating  in  the  holy  facrament.  No, 
though  this  be  fet  off  in  the  moft  glorious  man- 
ner, by  prophefying  and  working  miracles  in  his 
name  5  for  fo  it  follows  in  th?  next  words,   ^«  many 

fhall 


20^4  C  H  R  I  s  T  /y6^  author,  and  obedience  the 
SERM."  fhall  fay  to  me  in  that  day,  Lord,  Lord, 
CXXII  <t  \ixvt  we  not  prophefied  in  thy  name,  and  in  thy 
"  name  have  call  out  devils,  and  in  thy  name  have 
''  done  many  wondrous  works?  we  have  eat  and 
*'  drunk  in  thy  prefence,  and  have  heard  thee 
*'  preach  in  our  ilreets."  But  he  tells  us,  that 
nothing  of  all  this,  without  obedience  to  his  laws, 
will  be  lufiicient  to  gain  us  admiflion  into  heaven. 

2dly,  policively ;  that  which  God  requires  as  a 
condition,  and  will  accept  as  a  qualification  in  thofe 
who  hope  for  eternal  life,  is  faith  in  Christ  and 
a  fincere  and  univerfal  obedience  to  the  precepts 
of  his  holy  gofpel.  "  Not  every  one  that  faith 
*'  unto  me.  Lord,  Lord,  fliall  enter  into  the 
*'  kingdom  of  God  :  but  he  that  doth  the  will  of 
''  my  Father  which  is  in  heaven."  And  here  in 
the  text  it  is  exprefly  faid,  that  "  Christ  is  the 
''  author  of  eternal  falvation  to  them  that  obey  him, 
"  ToT?  uVaxaao-iv  clur^"  to  them  that  hearken  to 
him;  that  is,  to  them  that  do  fo  hear  and  believe 
his  gofpel,  as  to  obey  it  ;  to  them,  and  no  other, 
he  is ''  the  author  of  eternal  falvation." 

And  that  we  may  the  more  clearly  and  diftindly 
iinderftand  what  obedience  it  is,  which  the  gofpel 
exads  as  an  indifpenfible  condition  of  eternal  falva- 
tion, and  a  neceffary  qualification  in  all  thofe  who 
hope  to  be  made  partakers  of  it ;  we  may  be 
pleafed  to  confider,  that  there  is  a  virtual  and  an 
a6lual  obedience  to  the  laws  of  God  ;  a  perfe6l  and 
fincere  obedience  to  them ;  the  explication  of  thefe 
terms,  will  give  us  a  diftindl  conception  of  the  things 
we  are  fpeaking  of. 

I  ft,  there  is  a  virtual,  and  there  is  an  a6lual  obe- 
dience to  the  laws  of  God.     By  an  adual  obedience, 

I  mean 


Condition  of  fahafmu  2085 

f  mean  the  pradice  and  exercife  of  the  feveral  SERiVr. 
graces  and  virtues  of  chriftianity,  and  the  courfe  and 
tenor  of  a  holy  life  \  when  ''  out  of  a  good  conver- 
"  fation  men  do  fhew  forth  their  works,"  and  by  the 
outward  actions  of  their  Hves,  do  give  real  teitimony 
of  their  piety,  juRice,  fobriety,  humility,  meeknefs, 
and  charity,  and  all  other  chriftian  graces  and  virtues, 
as  occafion  is  miniftred  for  the  pradtice  and  exercife 
of  them. 

By  a  virtual  obedience,  I  mean  a  fincere  belief  of 
the  gofpel,  of  the  holinefs  and  equity  of  its  precepts, 
of  the  truth  of  its  promifes,  and  the  terror  of  its 
thrcatnings,  and  a  true  repentance  for  all  our  fins. 
This  is  obedience  in  the  root  and  principle  *,  for  he 
who  fmcerely  believes  the  gofpel,  and  does  truly  re- 
pent of  the  errors  and  mifcarriages  of  his  life,  is  firm- 
ly refolved  to  obey  the  commandments  of  God,  and 
to  walk  before  him,  in  holinefs  and  righteoufnels 
all  the  days  of  his  life  ;  fo  that  there  is  nothing  that 
prevents  or  hinders  this  man's  ad"ual  obedience  to  the 
laws  of  God,  in  the  courfe  of  a  holy  and  good  life, 
but  only  the  want  of  time  and  opportunity  for  it. 
And  this  was  the  cafe  of  thofe,  who,  upon  thehearino- 
of  the  gofpel  v/hen  it  was  firft  preached  to  them, 
did  heartily  embrace  it,  and  turn  from  their  fins, 
and  the  worfhip  of  idols,  to  the  true  and  living  God, 
but  perhaps  were  cut  off  foon  after  \  (as  there  were 
many  who  being  but  newly  gained  to  chriftianity, 
were  prefently  put  to  death,  and  fuiier'd  martyrdom 
for  that  profefTion  ;)  there  is  no  doubt  to  be  made, 
but  that  in  this  cafe,  a  virtual  obedi(^nce  was  in 
fuch  perfons  a  fufficient  qual ideation  for  eternul. 
hfe. 

Vol.  Vir.  14  T  Bu: 


4c86  CuRizr  the  author,  and  obedience  the 

S  E  R  M.  But  where  there  is  time  and  opportunity  for  the 
CXXU.  ^  gxgj.(.jfg  qP  qui-  obedience,  and  the  practice  of  the 
virtues  of  a  holy  hfe,  there  adlual  obedience  to  the 
laws  and  precepts  of  the  gofpel  is  neceflary,  to  quahfy 
us  for  eternal  happinefs  \  fo  that  tho*  a  man  do  fm- 
cerely  believe  the  gofpel,  and  truly  repent  of  his  fins, 
and  refolve  upon  a  better  life  \  yet  if  he  do  not  af- 
terwards in  the  courfe  of  his  life  put  this  refolution 
in  pradice,  and  "  bring  forth  fruits  meet  for  repen- 
tence,*'  and  amendment  of  life,  and  perfevere  in  a  holy 
courfe,  his  firft  refolution  of  obedience,  though  it 
were  fincere,  will  not  avail  him  to  falvation.  Nay, 
if  he  fhould  continue  for  fome  time  in  the  refolution 
and  pradice  of  a  holy  and  virtuous  life,  and  after- 
wards fall  off  from  it,  and  "  turn  from  the  holy  com- 
*'  mandment  delivered  unto  him,  his  latter  end 
"  would  be  worfe  than  his  beginning ;  all  his  righ- 
•■^  toufnefs  that  he  hath  done  would  not  be  remem- 
«'  bred;  he  fhall  die  in  his  iniquity."  For  "  with- 
''  out  holinefs  no  man  fhall  fee  the  Lord."  "  IF 
*'  any  man  draw  back,  God's  foul  will  have  no  plea- 
*'  fure  in  him."  This  is  fo  very  clear  and  plain  from 
fcripture,  that  no  man  can  entertain  a  contrary  per- 
fuafion,  without  contradicting  the  whole  tenor  of  the 

bible.  , 

The  fum  of  what  I  have  liiid  is  this,  that  a  virtual 
obedience  and  fincere  faith  and  repentance  are  fuffi- 
cient,  where  there  is  no  time  and  opportunity  for 
a6tual  obedience  and  the  pradice  of  a  good  life  :  but 
where  there  is  opportunity  for  adual  obedience,  and 
the  continued  praclice  of  a  good  life,  and  perfeve- 
rancc  therein  ;  they  are  indifpenfably  necelTary  in 
order  to  our  eternal  falvation,  and  a  well  grounded 
Jiope  and  afiurance  of  it. 

2d!y,  there 


condition  of  falvation,  2087 

sdly,  there  is  a  perfed,  and  there  is  a  fincere  obe-  S  E  R  M. 
diencc.  Perfedl  obedience  confifts  in  the  exadt  con- 
formity of  our  hearts  and  lives  to  the  law  of  God, 
without  the  lead  imperfedion,  and  without  failing 
in  any  point  or  degree  of  our  duty.  And  this  obe- 
dience, as  it  is  not  confident  with  the  frailty  and  in- 
firmity of  corrupt  nature,  and  the  imperfedion  of 
our  prefent  date,  fo  neither  doth  God  require  it  of 
us  as  a  necedary  condition  of  eternal  life.  We  arc 
indeed  commanded  to  be  "  perfe6l,  as  our  Father 
"  which  is  in  heaven  is  perfedl :"  but  we  are  not  to 
underdand  this  dridly  and  rigorouQy  ^  for  that  is 
not  only  impollible  to  men  in  this  prefent  date  of 
imperfe6lion,but  abfolutely  impodible  to  humane  na- 
ture, for  "  men  to  be  perfedl  as  God  is  per  fed  :'' 
but  the  plain  meaning  of  this  precept  is,  that  we 
fhould  imitate  thofe  divine  perfedions  of  goodnefs, 
and  mercy,  and  patience,  and  purity,  and  endeavour 
to  be  as  like  God  in  all  thefe  as  we  can,  and  be  dill 
afpiring  after  a  nearer  refemblance  of  him,  as  may 
be  evident  to  any  one  who  confiders  the  connexion 
and  occafion  of  thefe  words. 

By  a  dnccre  obedience,  I  mean  fuch  a  conformity 
of  our  lives  and  adions  to  the  law  of  God>  as  to 
the  general  courfe  and  tenor  of  them,  that  we  do  not 
live  in  the  habitual  pradlice  of  any  known  fin,  or 
in  the  cudomary  negled  of  any  material  or  confide- 
rable  part  of  our  known  duty ;  and  that  we  be  not 
wilfully  and  deliberately  guilty  of  the  fingle  ad  of 
heinous  and  notorious  fins,  as  I  have  formerly  ex- 
plained this  matter  more  at  large,  in  another  dif- 
courfe.  And  this  obedience,  even  in  the  bed  of  men, 
is  mixt  with  great  frailty  and  imperfedion  ;  but  yet 
becaufe  it  is  the  utmod  that  we  can  do  in  this  date  of 
14  T  2  infirmty 


2o83  C  H  R  I  s  T  /^<f  author^  and  obedience  the,  he. 
S  E  R  M.  infirmity  and  iiriperfe6lion,  the  terms  of  the  gofpel 
y^,^^^  are  fo  merciful  and  gracious,  as  that  God  is  pleafed 
for  the  fake  of  the  meritorious  obedience  and  fuffer- 
ings  of  our  blefled  Saviour,  to  accept  this  fincere^ 
tliough  imperfc6l  obedience,  and  to  reward  it  with 
eternal  life.  And  this,  I  doubt  not,  after  all  the 
intricate  difputes,  and  infinite  controvcrfies  about 
•this  bufincfs,  is  the  true  and  clear  flate  of  the 
•matter. 

And  this  fincere  obedience  which  the  gofpel  re- 
quires of  us,  as  a  condition  of  our  happinefs,  though 
it  be  fometimes  called  by  divines,  evangelical  per- 
fecSlion  *,  yet  it  is  but  very  improperly  fo  called  5 
for  nothing  is  properly  perfed  to  which  any  thing  is 
■wanting  j  and  great  defeds  and  imperfections  mufl 
needs  be  acknowledged  in  the  obedience  of  the  befl 
and  holieft  men  upon  earth ;  and  they  who  pretend 
to  perfedion  in  this  life,  do  neither  underftand  the 
law  of  God,  nor  themfelves,  but  (as  St.  John  fays 
of  fuch  perfons)  "  they  deceive  themfelves,  -and  the 
"  truth  is  not  in  them  ;"  and  befides  other  im- 
perfedtions,  thefe  two  are  evident  in  them,  ignorance 
and  pride. 

And  thus  much  may  fuffice  to  have  fpoken  to  this 
fecond  particular,  namely,  what  obedience  the  gof- 
pel requires  as  a  condition,  and  is  pleafed  to  accept 
as  a  qualification  for  eternal  life. 


SERMON 


C  2oBg  ] 

SERMON    CXXIII. 

The  poffibility  and  neceffity  of  gofpel- 
obedience,  and  its  coniiRence  with 
free  ^race. 


1 


H  E  B.  V.  9. 

/^nd  being  madeperfe5i^  he  became  the  author  of  eternal 
fahation  unto  all  them  that  obey  him, 

OR  the  explication  of  thefe  words,   I  propos*d  SER  M. 
to  confider  thefe  five  things.  SS^iilj 

I  ft.  How  and  by  what  means  Christ  is  the  Thefe- 
author  of  our  falvation.  ^^^^  ^^^^ 

2dly,  What  obedience   the  gofpel  requires  as  a  this  text, 
condition,  and  is  pleafed  to  accept  as  a  quahfication 
in  thofe  who  hope  for  eternal  falvation. 

3dly,  The  poffibility  of  our  performing  this  con- 
dition, by  that  grace  and  affiftance  which  is  ofFer'd, 
and  ready  to  be  afforded  to  us  by  the  golpel. 

4thly5  The  necefTity  of  this  obedience,  in  order 
to  eternal  life  and  happinels. 

5thly,  The  confiflency  of  this  method  and  means 
of  our  falvation  with  the  law  of  faith,  and  the  free 
grace  and  mercy  of  God  declared  in  the  gofpel. 

I  have  handled  the  two  firft  of  thefe,  and  now 
proceed  to  the 

Third  thing  I  propofed  to  confider,  viz.  the 
pofTibiHty  of  our  performing  this  condition,  by 
that  grace  and  affiftance  which  is  offer'd  and  ready 
to   be    afforded    to  us    by    the    gofpel.      For    if 

Christ 


2090       T^he  pcfftbilify  and  necejfify  ofgofpeUcbedience^ 
S  K  R  M.  Christ  be  "  the  author  of  eternal  falvation  only 
P^^j^'^  "  to  thole  who  obey  him  •,''    tlien  thofe  who  live  in 
difobedience  to  the  gofpel  are  in  a  ftate  of  damna- 
tion.     But  there  cannot  be  the  guilt  of  difobedience, 
where  obedience  is  impofiible  *,  no  man  being  guilty, 
orjuftly  liable   to  punifhment,    for  the  not    doing 
of  that,    which  it  was  no  ways  pofTible  for  him  to 
do.     Therefore  the   covenant  of   the  gofpel,    into 
which  God  is  enter'd  with  mankind,  doth  neceffi- 
rily  fuppofe  the  poffibiliry  of  performing  the  condi- 
tion of  It;  otherwife  it  leaves  them  in  as  bad  a  con- 
dition as  they  were  in  before,    becaufe  it  only  offers 
new  bleilings  and  benefits  to  us,    but  fets  us  never 
the  nearer  the  obtaining  of  them,  if  fo  be  the  con- 
dition  upon  which  they  are  granted  be  altogether 
impofTible  to  us  \    nay,  it  renders  our  (late  many  de- 
grees worfc,  if  our  not  performing  the  condition  of 
fuch  gracious  offers  brings  us  under  new  and  greater 
guilr. 

If  it  be  fald,  that  fome  perfons  have  great  be- 
nefit by  it,  becaufe  they  by  an  efpecial  and  effedual 
grace  fhall  be  enabled  to  perform  the  conditions  of 
this  covenant ;  is  not  this  a  mighty  ftraitning  to  the 
grace  and  mercy  of  the  gofpel,  to  confine  it  within 
fo  narrow  a  compafs,  as  flill  to  leave  the  greateft 
part  of  mankind  in  a  worfe  condition,  than  if  falva- 
tion had  never  been  offer'd  to  them :  as  it  certainly 
does,  if  (as  this  doflrine  does  neceflarily  fuppofej  the 
guilt  and  punifhment  of  men  lliall  be  greatly  in- 
creafed  and  heigh tned  by  their  contempt  of,  and 
difobedience  to  the  gofpel ;  when  at  the  fime  time  it 
is  acknowledged,  that  it  was  not  pofTible  for  thofe 
men  to  obey  it ;  for  want  of  that  fpecial  and 
l^ffcftual  grace,    which  is  necefiary   to  enable  them 

thereto. 


and  its  confijlence  with  free  grace.  209 1 

thereto.     I  do  not  love  to  handle  thefe  points  con-SERM. 
tentioufly,     but  this  in  my  apprehenfion   does   as^^J^ 
much  derogate  from    the   amplitude  and  riches  of 
God's  grace  in  the  gofpel,  as  any   thing  that  can 
eafily  be  faid. 

And  therefore,  for  the  right  dating  and  clearing 
of  this  matter,  I  fliall  endeavour  to  make  out  thefe 
three  things. 

I.  That  we  are  not  fufficient  of  our  felves,  and 
by  any  power  in  us,  to  perform  the  condition  of  the 
gofpel. 

2,.  That  the  grace  of  Go  d  is  ready  to  enable  and 
alTift  us  to  the  performance  of  thefe  conditions^  if 
we  be  not  wanting  to  our  felves. 

3.  That  what  the  grace  of  Go  d  is  ready  to  ena- 
ble us  to  do,  if  we  be  not  wanting  to  our  felves,  that 
may  properly  be  faid  to  be  poflible  to  us,  and,  in 
fome  fenfe,  in  our  power. 

I .  That  we  are  not  fufficient  of  our  felves,  and 
by  any  power  in  us,  to  perform  the  condition  of  the 
gofpel.  The  grace  of  God  doth  clearly  appear  in 
the  whole  bufinefs  of  our  falvation  :  "  by  grace  ye 
*'  are  fived  ("fays  the  apoftlej  and  that  not  of  your 
"  felves,  it  is  the  gift  of  Go  d."  Faith  is  the  gift 
of  God,  and  fo  is  repentance.  "  It  is  God  that 
"  works  in  us  both  to  will  and  to  do  of  his  own 
''  goodnefs  j"  that  is,  who  both  inclines  and  excites 
us  to  that  which  is  good,  and  enables  us  to  do  it. 
*'  Without  me  (fays  Ch  r  i  s  t)  ye  can  do  nothing." 
And  ''  through  Christ  ftrengthning  me"  (faith 
Sr.  Paul)  "  I  am  able  to  do  all  things  i"  all  things 
v/hich  God  requires  of  us,  and  expe6i:s  to  be  done 
by  us  in  order  to  our  falvation.  Without  the  grace 
of  Chris  t,  "  we  are  without  flrcngth  \  and  are 

"  not 


2092       7"/'^  pojfibility  and  necejjify  ofgofpel-obedience, 
SEx^M    «  not  fufHcient  ofourfelves,  as  of  ourfelves,  to  think 
\^!^  ''  ^  8°°^  thought  ;"  that  is,  we  are  not   fufficient 
of  ourfelves  to  defign  or  refolve  upon  any  thing  that 
is  good-,  "  but  our  fufficiency  is  of  God." 

I'he  depravation  of  our  nature  hath  brought  a 
great  impotency  and  difabihty  upon  us  to  that 
which  is  good  5  and  v^^e  have  made  ourfelves  much 
weaker  by  evil  pra6lice ;  by  the  power  of  evil  habits, 
we  are  enflaved  to  our  luds,  and  "  fold  under  fin."  So 
that  if  at  any  time  we  are  convinced  of  our  duty, 
and  from  that  convidlion  have  an  inclination  to 
that  which  is  good,  "  evil  is  prefent  to  us."  When 
the  law  of  God  gives  us  the  knowledge  of  our  du- 
ty, and  flares  our  confciences  in  the  face,  "  there 
*'  is  another  law  in  our  members,  warring  againft  the 
*'  law  of  our  minds,  and  bringing  us  into  captivity 
*'  to  the  law  of  fm,  which  is  in  our  members." 
Sin  brings  us  under  the  power  of  Satan,  and  gives 
him  dominion  over  us.  "  For  his  fcrvants  ye  are 
•'  whom  ye  obey  •,"  fo  that  he  rules  and  bears  fway 
in  us,  and  "  we  are  led  captive  by  him  at  his  plea- 
*'  fure."  Evil  and  vicious  habits  are  a  kind  of  fe- 
cond  nature  fuperinduced  upon  us,  which  takes 
away  our  power  and  liberty  to  that  which  is  good, 
and  renders  it  impofiible  to  us  to  raife  and  refcue  our 
felves  •,  fo  that  "  we  are  prifoners  and  captives,  'till 
*'  the  Son  of  God  fets  us  free ;  and  dead  in  tref^ 
*'  pafles  and  fins,'till  he  gives  us  life."  And  therefore 
the  prophet  reprefents  the  recovery  of  ourfelves  from 
the  bondage  of  fin,  by  fuch  things  as  are  naturally 
impofiible,  to  fhew  how  great  our  weaknefs  and  im- 
potency is;  Jcr.  xiii.  23.  "Can  the  ethiopian  change 
*'  his  skin,  or  the  leopard  his  fpors?  then  may  yc 
*'  alio  do  good,  who  are  accuftomed   to  do  evil." 

And 


and  its  conjiflence  with  free  grace,  2093 

And  by  how  much  fironger  the  chains  of  our  fins  are,  SJ^^R  ^'J- 
and  the  more  unable  we  arc  to  break  loofe  from 
them;  by  fo  much*  the  greater  and  more  evident 
is  the  neceffity  of  the  divine  aflidance,  and  of 
the  -power  of  God's  grace,  to  knock  off  thofe  fet- 
ters, and  to  refcue  us  from  this  bondage  and 
flavery. 

2.  The  grace  of  God  is  ready  to  afTift  and  enable 
us  to  the  performance  of  thefe  conditions,  that  is, 
to  faith  and  repentance,  and  all  \}.\t  purpofes  of  obe- 
dience and  ahoiy  hfe;  if  we  be  not  wanting  to  our 
felves,  and  do  not  rejed  or  neglect  to  make  ufe  of 
that  grace,  which  God  oiicrs  us,  and  is  read/  to  afford 
us  in  a  very  plentiful  manner.  And  this  is  tiiat 
which  renders  all  the  mercies  cF  the  gofpel  effcdual 
(if  it  be  not  our  owii  fault,  and  wihul  negkd)  to 
the  great  end  and  defign  of  our  falvation  j  iind  with- 
out this,  all  the  gracious  offers  of  the  gofpel  would 
fignify  nothing  at  all  to  our  advantage. 

And  this  like  wife  is  that  which  renders  the  un- 
behef  and  impenitency  and  difobedience  of  men  ut- 
terly inexcufable  ;  becaufe  nothing  of  all  this  does 
proceed  from  want  of  power,  but  of  will  to  do  bet- 
ter. And  therefore  this  is  fo  neceffary  an  encourage- 
ment to  all  the  endeavours  of  obedience  and  a  good 
life,  that  men  fhould  be  afTured  of  God's  readinefs 
to  afiifl:  and  help  them  in  the  doing  of  their  duty, 
that  without  this  the  revelation  of  the  gofpel,  tho' 
never  fo  clear,  would  fignify  nothing  to  us,  all  the 
precepts  and  diredions  for  a  good  life,  and  the  mod 
vehement  perfuaiions  and  exhortations  to  obedience, 
would  have  no  force  and  life  in  them;  for  what 
fignifies  it  to  diredl  the  dead,  and  fpeak  to  them  that 
cannot  hear,  and  to  perfuade  men,  tho*  it  were  with 

Vol.  VIk  14  U  ail 


2  c  9 1      7hc  foJJibiUty  and  necejjtty  ofgofpeU  obedience^ 
^^  ^y\  '^  the  earneftnefs  in  the  world,  to  thofe  things  whicl^, 
'  It  is  impofilble  for  them  to  do? 

Therefore  our  blcffcd  Saviour,  when  he  had  laid 
down,  and  explained  the  precepti  of  holinefs  and  vir- 
tue in  his  fcrmon  upon  the  mount,  to  encourage 
them  to  what  he  had  been  directing  and  propofing 
to  them,  he  afTures  them  that  God  is  ready  to  aliord 
his  grace  and  afTidancc  to  all  thofe  that  are  fincerely 
defirous  to  do  his  wiJl,  and  do  earnelliy  implore  his 
grace  and  aflillance  to  that  purpofe,  Matth.  vii.-7, 
8,  9,  10,  II.  "  Ask  (faun  her)  and  it  fhall  be 
*'  given  you  ;  feek,  and  ye  Iliiil  find ;  knock,  and 
*'  it  fliall  be  opened  unto  you  :  for  every  one  that 
"  asketh,  receiveth ;  and  he  that  feeketh,  nndeth  ; 
"  and  to  him  that  knocketh,  it  ihall  be  opened.** 
So  that  if  any  man  want  the  grace  and  affii^ance  of 
GoD*s  Holy  Spirit,  it  is  his  own  iault ;  it  is 
either  for  want  of  feeking,  or  for  want  of  earneft- 
nefs  in  askings  for  our  Saviour  exprefly  aiTures  us, 
that  he  denies  it  to  none ;  "  for  every  one  chat  ask- 
"  eth,  receiveth." 

And  to  give  us  a  more  lively  and  fenfible  afTurance 
of  this,  he  reprefents  the  care  and  kindncfs  of  God  to 
men,  by  the  afFe6lions  of  earthly  parents  to  their  chil- 
dren,who  tho'  they  be  many  dmes  evil  themfclves,  yet 
are  not  wont  to  deny  their  children  necediry  good 
things,  when  they  dccendy  and  dutifully  beg  them 
at  their  hands  ;  "  what  man  is  there  of  you,  whom 
*'  if  his  fon  ask  bread,  will  he  give  him  a  (tone? 
"  or  if  he  ask  a  fifli,  will  he  give  him  a  ferpent? 
"  If  ye  then  being  evil,  know  how  to  give  good 
*'  gifts  unto  your  children,  how  much  more  fhall  your 
*'  Father  which  is  in  heaven,  give  good  things  to 
"  them  that  ask  him  ?  "  Here  is  a  general  promife 

and 


and  its  conjtjtence  with  free  grace.  209  J 

and  declaration,  that  upon  our  humble  and  earned  ^.^^^J; 
prayer  to  God,  he  will  grant  us  whatever  is  good 
and  necefiary,  by  which  is  certainly  intended  in  the 
firfl:  place,  fpiritual  good  things,  btcaufe  thefe  are  the 
be  ft  and  mod  neccflary ;  and  to  fatisfy  us  that  our 
S^  V  1  o  UR  did  in  the  firft  place,  and  more  efpecially 
mean  thefe,  St.  Luke  does  particularly  inftance  in 
the  grace  and  afTiftance  of  God's  Holy  Spirit. 
Luke  xi.  13.  "  How  much  more  ftiall  your  heavenly 
"  Father  give  the  Holy  Spirit  to  them  that 
''  ask  hun?"  "  the  Holy  Spirit,"  that  is,  the 
continual  prefence  and  influence  of  it  to  all  the  pur- 
pofes  of  guidance  and  diredion,  of  grace  and  affif- 
tance,  of  comfort  and  fupport  in  our  chriflian  courfe* 

And  what  elfe  is  the  meaning  of  that  parable  of 
our  Saviour's  concerning  the  talents  intruded  with 
every  man,  according  to  his  capacity  and  opportuni- 
ties, Matth.  XXV.  I  fay,  what  elfe  can  be  the  mean- 
ing of  it  but  this  ?  that  God  is  before-hand  with 
every  man^  by  affording  the  advantages  and  oppor- 
tunities of  being  happy,  and  fuch  a  meafure  of  grace 
and  afTiftance  to  that  end,  which  if  he  faithfully 
improve,  he  ftiall  be  admitted  '^  into  the  joy  of  his 
"  Lord.'' 

And  upon  this  confideration  of  the  gracious  pro^ 
mifes  of  the  gofpel  to  this  purpofe,  it  is,  that  the 
apoftle  St.  Paul  doth  fo  earneftly  exhort  chriftians  to 
endeavour  after  the  higheft  degree  of  univerfal  holi- 
nefs  and  purity,  that  we  are  capable  of  in  this  life; 
2  Cor.  vii.  t.  '*  Having  therefore  thefe  promifes, 
*'  dearly  beloved,  let  us  cleanfe  ourfelves  from  all 
'*  filthinefs  of  flefh  and  fpiritj  perfeding  holinels 
*'  in  the  fear  of  God."  And  fo  likewile  Phil.  ii. 
12,  13.  "  Wherefore,  my  beloved,  work  out  your 
14  U  2  "  own 


2096  ^he  fojjibility  and  nccejjiiy  of  gofp el-obedience ^ 
S  E  R  M.  *'  own  falvation  with  fear  and  trembling"  ^that  is, 
9^^^}^'i  ^vith  great  care  and  concernment,  left  you  fhould  fall 
fhort  of  it)  "  for  it  is  God  that  workcth  in  you 
«'  both  to  will  and  to  do,  of  his  good  pleafure." 
The  confideratim  of  God's  rcadinefs  to  afiift  us, 
and  of  his  grace  which  is  always  at  hand  to  ftir 
up  our  wiils  to  that  which  is  good,  and  to  flrengthen 
us  in  the  doing  of  it,  ought  to  be  a  great  argu- 
ment and  encouragement  to  us,  to  put  forth  our 
utmoft  endeavours,  and  fo  co-operate  with  the  grace 
of  God  toward  our  own  falvation. 

And  the  apoille  St.  Peter  ufeth  the  fame  argu- 
ment to  prefs  men  to  ufe  their  utmoft  '^  diligence, 
"  to  make  their  calling  and  eledion  fure,"  by- 
abounding  in  all  the  virtues  of  a  good  life,  2  Pet.  i. 
2,  4.  "  According  as  his  divine  power  hath  given 
"  us  all  things  which  pertain  to  life  and  godlinels." 
Cthat  is,  hath  fo  plentifully  furnifh'd  us  with  all  the 
requifites  to  a  godly  life)  "  through  the  knowledge 
"  of  him  that  hath  called  us  to  glory  and  virtue" 
(that  is,  by  knowledge  of  the  gofpel  and  the  grace 
therein  offered  to  us)  "  whereby  he  hath  given  unto 
*'  us  exceeding  great  and  precious  promifes,  that  by 
*'  thefe  ye  might  be  partakers  of  a  divine  nature, 
*'  having  efcaped  the  corruption  that  is  in  the  world 
*^  through  lull."  And  then  from  the  confideration 
of  this  divine  power,  conveyed  to  us  by  the  gofpeJ, 
and  the  promiles  of  it,  he  exhorts  men  ''  to  give  all 
«'  diligence,  to  add  to  their  faith,  virtue,  and  know- 
*'  ledge,  and  temperance,  and  patience,  and  god- 
**  linefs,  and  brotlierly  love  and  charity.'* 

And  indeed  the  fcripture  every  where  afcribcs  our 
regeneration  and  Hmdtiiication,  the  beginning,  and 
progrefsj  and  perfcverancc  of  our  obedience,  to  the 

powerful 


and  its  confijience  with  free  grace.  2097 

powerful  grace  and  afiiflance  of  God's  Holy  SERM. 
Sp  I  R  I  T  -,  we  arefaid  to  be  "  regenerated  and  born:  _  J: 
"  again  of  the  Spirit,  to  be  renewed  and 
"  fandlified  by  the  Ho  ly  Ghost,  to  be  led  by 
*'  the  S  p  I  R I  T,  and  by  the  S  p  i  R  1  t  to  mortify 
"  the  deeds  of  the  flefh,"  and  in  a  word,  ^«  to  be 
**  kept  by  the  mighty  power  of  God  through 
'^  faith  unto  falvation." 

3.  What  the  grace  of  God  is  ready  to  enable  ug 
to  do,  if  v/e  be  not  wanting  to  our  felves,  may 
properly  be  faid  to  be  pofiible  to  us,  and  in  fome 
fenfe,  in  our  power.  That  may  be  faid  to  be  pof^ 
fible  to  us,  which  tho'  we  **  cannot  do  of  our  felves 
*'  as  of  our  felves,"  (that  is  by  our  own  natural 
power)  yet  we  can  do  by  the  help  and  afTiftance  of 
another,  if  that  afllftance  be  ready  to  be  afforded  to 
us ;  as  we  are  fure  the  grace  of  G  o  d's  Holy 
Spirit  is,  becaufe  he  hath  promifed  it  to  them 
that  feek  it,  and  "  he  is  faithful  who  hath  pro- 
"  mifed." 

That  cannot  be  faid  to  be  wholly  out  of  any 
man's  power,  which  he  may  have  for  asking  j  that 
which  we  are  able  to  do  by  the  llrength  and 
afliftance  of  another,  is  not  impoiTible  to  us.  Surely 
St.  Paul  did  no  ways  derogate  from  the  grace  of 
God  when  he  faid,  '^  I  am  able  to  do  all  things 
*'  thro'  Christ  ftrengthening  me  ; "  he  reckons 
himfelf  able  to  do  ail  that  which  by  the  ftrength  of 
Christ   he  was  enabled  to  do. 

And  this  is  the  true  ground  of  all  the  perfuafions 
and  exhortations,  which  we  meet  with  in  fcripture, 
to  holinefs  and  obedience,  which  would  all  be,  not 
only  to  no  purpofe,  but  very  unreafonable,  if  we 
were  wholly  deftitute  of  power  to  do  what  God 

commands : 


£09^  TbepnJJih  'lify  and  vecpjjity  of  gofpeUobedtencey 
S  F,  5<  M-  commands :  but  if  he  be  always  ready  at  hand  X.(S 
'  afTiil  us  b ,  a  grace  fufHcient  for  us,  if  he  co-operate 
with  us  in  the  work  of  oar  falvanOij,  then  is  there 
abundant  ground  of  encourageinenr  ro  o.ir  ei  dca- 
vours  ;  andifwefdl  Ihurt  oi  ecern.il  la!varion,  it  is 
wholly  our  own  fa.jlt  *,  it  is  i.ot  becaufe  Goo  is 
wanting  to  us  in  tnofe  aids  and  allillances  of  his 
grace  which  are  necefiary  ;  but  because  we  are  want- 
ing to  our  felves,  in  not  feeking  G  o  d's  grace  more 
earneftly,  or  by  neglecting  to  make  ufe  of  it  when 
it  is  afforded  to  us.  For  it  is  really  all  one,  both 
to  the  encouragement  of  our  endeavours,  and  to  the 
rend  ring  of  our  difobedience  inexcufablc,  whether 
we  be  able  of  our  felves  to  perform  the  condition 
of  the  gofpcl,  or  God  be  ready  to  aflin:  us  by 
his  grace  and  Holy  Spirit  to  that  pur- 
pofe. 

Wherefore,  as  the  apoftle  exhorts,  Heb.  xii.  12, 
1^9  H>  15-  "  ^'^''^  'JP  ^^^^  hands  which  hang  down, 
*'  and  the  feeble  knees,  and  make  ftraight  paths  for 
*'  your  feet,  left  that  which  is  lame  be  turned  out 
*'  of  the  way,  but  let  it  rather  be  healed.  Follow 
*'  holinefs,  without  which  no  man  fhall  fee  the 
**  Lord  5  looking  diligently  left  any  man  fail  of 
*'  the  grace  of  God  j  "  intimating,  that  it  is  want 
of  care  and  diligence  on  our  part,  if  the  grace  of 
God  fail  of  its  end,  and  be  not  effectual  to  all  the 
purpofes  of  faith,  and  repentance,  and  obedience^ 
God  does  not  withhold  his  grace  from  us:  but 
men  may  receive  it  in  vain,  if  they  do  not  make 
ufe  of  it.  And  thus  I  have  done  with  the  third 
thing  I  propofed  to  confider  from  thefe  words.  I 
proceed  to  the 

Fourth, 


and  its  confftence  whh  free  grace.  2Coq 

Fourth,   viz.   to  confider  the  neceinty  of  this  obe-  SF.RM. 
dience,  in  order  to  our  obtaining  of  eternal  life  and^^^^^^-, 
happiaeji:.   *    Ch  R  IST  is  the  author  of  eternal  fal- 
"  vation  ro  thein  that  obey  him;  ''  that  is,   to  fuch, 
and  only  to  iuch,  as  live  in  obedience  to  the  precepts 
of  his  iioly  gofpel,  to  them  who  frame  the  general 
courfe  o\  their  lives  according  to  his  Jaws.     Some 
men  (eem  to  be  \o  afraid  of  the  merit  of  obedience 
and   good   works,  tiiac  they  are   loch  ro  afTert    the 
neceffity  of  tnem,  and  do  it  with  io  much  caution, 
as  if  they  we.e  not  throughly  perfuaded  ot  it,  or  did 
apprehend  inwc  dangerous  conlequences  of  it :  but  tli is 
fear  ib  ptrfedly  groundlefs ;  as  if  merit  could  not  be 
exckided,   without  cading  off  our  duty,  and  releafino- 
our  lelves  trom  any  necelHry  obligation  to  be  good. 
For  any  man  iure'y  may  eafily  dilcern  a  plain  dif- 
ference betvveen  a  wortainels  of  defert,  and  a  fitnefs 
of  receiving  a  rebel,  being  penitent  and    forry  for 
what  he  hath  done  •,    though  fie  cannot  deferve  a 
pardon,  yet  he  may  thereby  be  qualified  and  made 
meet  to  receive  it;  though  repentance  do  not  make 
him  worthy,  yet  it  may  make  him  capable  of  it, 
which  an  obl^inare  rebel,  and  one  that  perfifts  in 
his  diOoyaky,  is  not.     This  is  a  thing  fo  plain  oJ  it 
k\^^  that  it  would  be  wafle  of  time  and  words  to 
infifi:  Io  ger  upon  the  proof  of  it. 

Now  I  lie  necelTity  of  obedience,  in  order  to  eter- 
nal life  and  happinels  relies  upon  thefe  three  grounds. 

iH,    upon   the   conilitution   and  appointment  of 
Go  D. 

2dly,  the  general  reafon  of  rewards. 

jdly,  upon  the  particular  nature  of  that  reward, 
which  God  will  confer  upon  us  for  our  obedience. 

ifl,  the 


2100  ne  pojjihilify  and  necejfity  ofgofpeU  obedience, 
SERM.  ift,  the  conftitution  and  appointment  of  God. 
^^^^^i^"  Eternal  life  is  the  gift  of  God  i"  and  he  may 
do  what  he  will  with  his  own,  he  may  difpcnfc 
his  gifts  and  favours  upon  what  terms  and  conditi- 
ons he  pleafech  ;  and  therefore  if  he  hath  plainly 
declared,  that  "  to  them  who  by  patient  continu- 
*'  ance  in  well-doing  feek  for  glory,  and  honour, 
*'  and  immortality,  he  will  give  eternal  life  ;  "  that 
*'  without  holinefs,  no  man  Ihali  fee  the  Lord;" 
but  "  if  we  have  our  fruit  unco  holinefs,  our  end 
"  fliall  be  everlalling  life  j  "  who  fhall  refill  his 
will,  or  dilpute  hispleaiure?  The  right  and  autho- 
rity of  God  in  this  matter  is  fo  unqueftionable, 
that  it  admits  of  no  contefl;  and  the  bieilir.gs  and 
•  benefits  proposed,  are  fo  infinitely  great  and  inva- 
luable, that  no  condition  of  obtauiing  them,  wnich 
is  polTible  to  be  perform'd  by  us,  can  be  thought 
hard  and  unequal ;  fo  that  we  ought  thankfully  to 
receive  fo  great  a  favour,  let  the  terms  and  condi- 
tions of  it  be  what  they  will  ;  and  if  there  were  no 
other  reafon  for  the  impofing  of  thefe  conditions 
upon  us,  of  faith,  and  repentance,  and  obedience, 
but  meerly  the  will  and  pleafure  of  Go  d,  this  were 
enough  to  filence  all  objedions  againft  it. 

But  idly,  the  necefilty  of  obedience,  in  order  to 
eternal  life,  is  likewife  founded  in  the  reafon  of 
rewards  in  general.  For  though  the  meafure  and 
degree  of  our  reward  fo  infinitely  beyond  the  pro- 
portion of  our  beft  duty  and  fervicc,  as  eternal  life 
and  happinefs  is,  I  fay,  though  the  meafure  and  de- 
gree of  this  reward  be  founded  in  the  immenfe 
bounty  and  goodncfs  of  God-,  yet  the  reafon  of 
reward  in  general,  is  necelTarily  founded  in  our  obe- 
dience to  God's  lav/s ;  for  according  to   the  true 

nature 


and  its  conjiftence  with  free  grace,  2  lo  i  • 

nature  and  reafon  of  things,  nothing  but  obedience  S  E  R  m. 

CXXIII 
is  capable  of  reward.     For  though  authority   may 

pardon  the  breach  and  tranfgreilions  of  laws,  and  re- 
mit the  puniiliment  due  thereto,  yet  to  reward  the 
contempt  of  laws,  and  wih'^ul  difobedience  to  them, 
is  direclly  contrary  to  the  defign  of  government, 
and  does  plainly  overthrow  the  very  reafon  and 
end  of  all  laws,  and  makes  obedience  and  difobedi- 
ence to  be  all  one,  if  fo  be  they  are  equally  capable 
of  reward  :  and  therefore  nothing  can  be  more  abfurd 
and  ienflefs,  than  for  any  man  to  hope  to  be  rewarded 
by  God,  who  does  not  Wvo,  in  a  fmcere  obedience  to 
his  laws.  "  Every  man  that  hath  this  hope  in  him,'* 
(that  is,  in  Christ  Jesus,  to  be  faved  by  him)  "  pu- 
''  rifieth  himfelf,  even  as  he  is  pure  i"  that  is,  en- 
deavours to  be  like  him  in  the  purity  and  obedience 
of  his  life :  and  nothing  furely  can  be  more  unreafona- 
ble  than  to  expert  to  be  rewarded  by  the  great  go- 
vernor and  judge  of  the  world,  if  we  be  difobe- 
di.ent  to  his  lawsj  for  where  obedience  to  law  is  re- 
fufed,  there  all  reafon  and  equity  and  reward  ceafeth. 
No  wife  prince  can  think  fit  to  reward  difloyal ty 
and  contempt  of  his  laws  ;  becaufe  to  reward  it, 
would  be  to  encourage  it  -,  much  lefs  will  God, 
the  great  and  infinitely  wife  governor  of  the 
world. 

3dly,  the  neceflity  of  obedience  will  yet  more 
evidently  appear,  if  we  confider  the  particular  na- 
ture of  that  reward,  which  God  v/iil  confer  upon 
us  for  our  obedience.  The  happinels  of  heaven, 
which  is  the  reward  promifed  in  the  gofpel,  is  de- 
fcribed  to  us  by  the  fight  and  enjoyment  of  God. 
Now  to  render  us  capable  of  this  blefied  reward,  it 
is  necefiary  that  we  be  like  God  5  but  nothing  but 

VoL.VIL  14  X  obe- 

6. 


2 102  I'he  poJJibiHty  and  ?iecej]ity  of  gofpel-obediencej 
SERM.  obedience  and  holinefs,  and  *'  beinor  renewed  after 
•  ''  the  image  of  him  who  created  us  in  righteouf- 
"  nefs"  can  make  us  like  to  God.  For  he  that 
would  be  like  God  mud  be  holy,  and  juft,  and  good, 
and  patient,  and  merciful,  as  God  is  ;  and  this  alone 
can  make  us  capable  of  the  blelTcd  fight  and  enjoy- 
ment of  God  5  for  unlefs  "  vvc  be  like  him,  we  can- 
''  not  fee  him  as  he  is,"  and  if  we  fhould  be  admit- 
ted into  heaven,  we  could  not  find  any  pleafure  and 
happinefs  in  communion  with  him.  "  Blefled  are 
"  the  pure  in  heart  (fays  our  Saviour)  for  they 
*'  Ihall  fee  God."  '^  Without  holineis  (fays  the 
"  apoftle)  no  man  Ihall  fee  the  Lord."  And  in- 
deed it  is  in  the  very  nature  of  the  thing  imponible, 
that  a  wicked  man  (whilft  he  remains  fo)  fhould 
ever  be  happy,  bccaufe  there  can  be  no  agreeable  and 
delightful  fociety  between  thofe  that  are  of  a  quite 
contrary  temper  and  difpofition  to  one  another,  be- 
tween him  ''  who  is  of  purer  eyes  than  to  behold 
*'  iniquity,"  and  a  finful  and  impure  creature.  For 
*'  what  fellowfhip  (faith  the  apoflle)  can  righteouf- 
<'  nefs  have  with  unrighteoufhefs?  what  communion 
«  hatli  light  with  darknefs,  or  God  with  belial?" 
that  is,  with  the  wicked  and  difobedient.  'Till  we 
become  like  to  God  in  the  frame  and  temper  of 
our  minds,  there  can  be  no  happy  fociety  between 
him  and  us ;  we  could  neither  delight  ourfelves  in 
God,  nor  he  take  any  pleafure  in  us;  for  "  he  is 
«'  not  a  God  that  hath  pleafure  in  wickednefs,  nei- 
*'  therfliall  evil  dwell  with  him.  The  wicked  fliall 
«'  not  ftand  in  his  figlu,  he  hateth  all  the  workers 
•^^  of  iniquity."  It  cannot  be  otherwife,  but  that 
there  mud  be  an  eternal  jarring  and  difcord  between 
the  righteous   and   holy  Godj  aud   wicked   and 

unrighte* 


a?id  its  confi/lence  with  free  grace.  2103 

unrighteous  men.  *'  I  will  behold  thy  face  (fays'^ERM. 
*'  David)  in  righteoufnefs."  There  is  no  looking  1^\.' 
God  in  the  face,  upon  any  other  terms.  If  we  have 
been  "  workers  of  iniquity,"  God  will  caft  us  out  of 
his  fight,  and  in  great  anger  bid  us  to  "  depart 
"  from  him  ;"  and  we  alfo  fhall  defire  him  to  "  de- 
"  part  from  us,"  being  unable  to  bear  the  fighc  of 
him. 

So  that  there  is  great  reafon  why  holinefs  and  obe- 
dience fhould  be  made  the  conditions  of  eternal  life 
and  happinefs,  fince  in  the  very  nature  of  the  thing 
it  is  Jo  neceflliry  a  qualification  for  the  blefied  fight  and 
enjoyment  of  God,  who  to  us  is  the  caufe  and  foun- 
tain of  happinefs.     I  come  in  the 

Fifth  and  laft  place,  to  fhew  that  this  method  and 
means  of  our  falvation  is  no  prejudice  to  the  law  of 
faith,  and  to  the  free  grace  and  mercy  of  God   de- 
clared in  the  gofpel.     The   gofpel  is   called  "  the 
'^  law  of  faith,  and  the  law  of  grace,**  in  oppofi- 
tion  to  the  Jewifli  difpenfation,  which  is  called  "  the 
"  law,  or  covenant  of  works,'*  becaufe  it  confifteth 
fo  much  in  external  rites  and  obfervances,  which  were 
but  "  types   and  fhadows  of  good  things  to  come,** 
(as  the  apoftle  calls  them  in  this  epiftle,)  and  which 
when  they  were  come,  that  law  did  expire  of  itfclf, 
and  was  out  of  date,  the  obhgation  and  obfervance 
of  it  was  no  longer  necefiTary  -y  but   "  a  better  cove- 
"  nant,  which  v/as  eftablifhed  upon  better  promifes,'* 
came  in  the  place  of  it,  and  men   were  ''  judified 
"  by  faith,"    that   is,    by  fincerely   embracing  the 
chriftian  religion,  and  were  no  longer  under  an  obli- 
gation to  that  external,  and   fervile,  and   impcrfed: 
difpenfation,  which  confided  in  circumcifion,  and  in 
almoft  an  endlefs  number  of  external   ceremonies, 
14X2  Thefc 


2 1 04.  The  poffihiltfy  and  necejjity  of  gofpeU  obedience, 
SERM,  Thefe  arc  the  works  of  the  Jaw  fo  often  fpoken  of 
y^^^"  by  St.  Paul,  concerning  which  the  Jews  had  not 
only  an  opinion  of  the  neccffity  of  them  to  a  man's 
juftification  and  falvation,  but  likewifc  of  the  merit 
of  them ;  in  oppofition  to  both  which  opinions,  St. 
Paul  calls  the  covenant  of  the  golpel,  ''  the  law  of 
*'  faith,   and  the  law  of  grace." 

But  there  is  no  where  the  lead  intimation  given, 
either  by  our  Saviour  or  his  apoftles,  that  obedi- 
ence to  the  precepts  of  the  gofpel  (which  are  in  fub- 
flance  the  m.oral  law  cleared  and  perfe6ted)  is  not 
neceflary  to  our  acceptance  with  God,  and  the  ob- 
taining of  eternal  life  ;  but  on  the  contrary,  'tis  our 
Saviour's  exprefs  direcfcion  to  the  young  man,  who 
ask'd  /'  what  good  things  he  fhould  do,  that  he 
'^  might  obtain  eternal  life  ;  if  thou  wilt  (fays  he) 
"  enter  into  life,  keep  the  commandments ;"  and 
that  he  might  underftand  what  commandments  he 
meant,  he  inllance'ih  in  the  precepts  of  the  moral  lav/. 
And  indeed,  the  whole  tenor  of  our  Saviour's  fer- 
mons,  and  the  precepts  and  writings  of  the  apoftles, 
are  full  and  exprefs  to  this  purpofe.  "  Not  every 
««  one  that  faith  unto  me,  Lord,  Lord,  fliall  en- 
''  ter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven  :  but  he  that  doth 
*'  the  will  of  my  Father  which  is  in  heaven. 
*'  Whofoever  heareth  thefe  fayings  of  mine  (that  is, 
''  thefe  precepts  which  I  have  delivered)  and  doth 
^-  them  nor,  I  will  liken  him  to  a  foolifli  man, 
*'  who  built  his  houfe  upon  the  fand,  and  the  rain 
^'  defcended,  and  the  floods  came,  and  the  winds 
*'  blew,  and  beat  upon  that  houfe,  and  it  'i(^\\^  and 
*^  great  was  the  fall  of  it.  If  ye  know  thefe  things, 
<^  happy  are  ye,  if  ye  do  them.  In  every  nation, 
^^  he  that  fearetli  God,  and  worketh  righteoufnefs, 

''  is 


and  its  confijlence  with  free  grace.  2105 

*^  Is  accepted  of  him.  InjEsusCHRisT  neither  S  E  R  m. 
*'  circLimcifion  avaiJeth  any  thing,  nor  uncircumci- 
**  fion  •,  but  faith,  that  is  aded  and  infpired  by  cha- 
'^  rity."     And  that  the  apoftle  here  means  "   that 
''  charity  or  iove,"  which  is,   *'  the  fulfilling  of  the 
"  law,"  is  evident  from   what   he   fays  elfewhere  • 
"  that  neither  circumcifion  availeth   any  thing,    nor 
*'  uncircumcifion -,  but  the  keeping  of  the  command- 
*'  ments  of  God  ;"  in  which  ttxt  it  is  plain,    that 
the  apoflle  fpeaks  of  the  terms  of  our  juftification, 
and   what  is  available  with   God  to   that  purpofe. 
And  St.  James  to  the  fame  purpofe,    tells  us,    that 
by  the    works    of  obedience   "  our  faith   is  made 
''  perfe6l,"  and  that  ''  faith  without  works  is  dead-,'* 
and  furely  a  dead   faith  will  neither  juflify  nor  fave 
any  man.  St.  John    likewife  very  earneftly  cautions 
us  to  take  heed    of  any  fuch  dodrinc,    as  would  take 
av/ay  the  neceility  of  righteoufnefs  and  obedience; 
*'  little  children  (fays  he)  let  no  man  deceive  you, 
"  he  that  doth  righteoufneis  is  righteous,    as  he  is 
*'  righteous."    To  all  which  I  fhall  only  add   the 
plain  words  of  my  ttx^  "  that  Christ  became 
''  the  author  of  eternal  falvation  to    them  that  obey 
^'  him." 

So  that  no  man  hath  reafon  to  fear,  that  this 
dodrine  of  the  necefTity  of  obedience  to  our  accep- 
tance with  God,  and  the  obtaining  of  eternal  life, 
fnould  be  any  ways  prejudicial  to  the  law  of  faith, 
and  the  law  of  grace.  For  fo  long  as  thefe  three 
things  are  but  aiTerted  and  fecured  : 

I  ft.  That  faith  is  the  root  and  principle  of  obe- 
dience and  a  holy  life,  and  that  ''  without  it,  it  is 
^'  impOiTibJe  to  pleafe  Gop." 

adiy,  That 


cxxiir 


2106       The  pojjibility  and  necejjity  of  go/pel-  obedience^ 
SERM.       2dly,  That  we  fland  continually  in  need   of  the 
divine  grace  and  afTiftance  to  enable   us  to    perform 
that  obedience  which  the  gofpel  requires  of  us,  and 
is  pleafed  to  accept  in  order  to  eternal  life.     And, 

3d]y,  That  the  forgivenefs  of  our  fins,  and  the 
reward  of  eternal  life,  are  founded  in  the  free  grace 
and  mercy  of  God,  conferring  thefe  blefiings  upon 
us,  not  for  the  merit  of  our  obedience,  but  only 
for  the  merit  and  fatisfadtion  of  the  obedience  and 
futferings  of  our  blelTed  Sav  i  o  u  r  and  R  e- 
D  E  E  M  b  R  ;  I  fay,  fo  long  as  we  aflert  theTe  three 
things,  we  give  all  that  thegofpei  anywhere  afcribes 
to  faith,  and  to  the  grace  of  God  revealed  in  the 
gofpel. 

I  have  been  careful  to  exprefs  thefe  things  more 
fully  and  diftindlly,  that  no  man  may  imagine,  that 
whilft  we  afTert  the  neceffity  of  obedience  and  a  holy 
life,  we  have  any  defign  to  derogate  in  the  lead 
from  the  faith  and  the  grace  of  God  j  but  only  to 
engage  and  encourage  men  to  hoiineis  and  a  good 
life,  by  convincing  them  of  the  ablolute  and  indif- 
penfable  necefTity  of  it,  in  order  to  eternal  falvation. 
For  all  that  I  have  faid,  is  in  plain  engliQi  no  more 
but  this,  that  it  is  neceflury  for  a  man  to  be  a  good 
man,  that  he  may  get  to  heaven  ;  and  whoever  finds 
iault  with  this  doctrine,  finds  fault  with  the  gofpel 
it  felf,  and  the  main  end  and  defij2;n  of  the  Q;race  of 
God  therein  revealed  to  mankind,  v/hich  offers 
falvation  to  men  upon  no  other  terms  than  thefe 
which  I  have  mentioned  *,  and  to  preach  and  prefs 
this  dodlrinc,  is  certainly,  if  any  thing  in  the 
world  can  be  fo,  to  purfue  the  great  end  and  defign 
of  the  chriftian  religion,  fo  plainly  and  exprefly  de- 
clared by  St.  Paul,  l^it.  ii.   II,  12,  <^  The  grace  of 

"God 


and  its  conjijlence  with  free  grace,  2 107 

"God  that  bringeth  falvation,  hath  appear'd  SERM. 
"  to  all  men,  teaching  us,  that  denying  ungodJinefsJ^^l^^l^ 
*'  and  worldly  lulls,  we  ihould  live  foberly,  righte- 
"  ouily,  and  godly  in  this  prefent  world."  And  if 
the  grace  of  God  declared  in  the  gofpel  have  this 
effedt  upon  us,  then  we  may  with  confidence  "  wait 
"  for  the  blefTcd  hope,  and  the  glorious  appearance 
"  of  the  grea^  God,  and  our  Sav iour  Jesus 
"  Christ,  who  gave  himfelf  for  us,  that  he 
"  might  redeem  us  from  all  iniquity,  and  purify  to 
''  himfelf  a  peculiar  people  zealous  of  good  works  i" 
and  then  he  adds,  *'  thefe  things  teach  and  exhort, 
"  and  rebuke  with  all  authority  i"  that  is,  declare 
and  inculcate  this  dodlrine,  and  rebuke  feverely  thofe 
who  teach  or  pradlife  contrary  to  it.  And  he  repeats 
it  again  with  a  more  vehement  charge  to  Titus,  to 
prefs  upon  men  the  neceflity  of  obedience  and  good 
works,  chap.  iii.  8.  "  This  is  a  faithful  faying,  and 
*'  thefe  things  I  will  that  thou  affirm  conftantly, 
"  that  they  who  have  believed  in  God,  be  careful 
«'  to  maintain  good  works." 

All  that  nov/  remains,  is  to  make  fome  ufeful 
inferences  from  what  hath  been  faid  upon  this  argu- 
ment, and  fo  to  conclude  this  difcourfe. 

Firft  of  all,  to  convince  us  that  an  em.pty  pro- 
felTion  of  the  chriflian  religion,  how  fpecious  and 
glorious  foever  it  be,  if  it  be  deflitute  of  the  fruits 
of  obedience  and  a  holy  life,  will  by  no  means  avail 
to  bring  us  to  heaven.  No  profefiion  of  faith  in 
Christ,  no  fubjedion  to  him,  tho'  we  be  bap- 
tized in  his  name,  and  lid  our  felves  in  the  number 
of  his  difciples  and  followers,  tho*  we  have  made  a 
conftant  profefTion  of  all  the  articles  of  tiic  chriftian 

faithj 


2 1 oS  Tfje  pofjihlUty  and  necejjity  afgofpeUohcdience^ 
SERM.  faith,  and  have  performed  all  the  external  parts  and 
,^,,^^5,  ^  duties  of  religion,  have  gone  conftantly  to  church, 
and  frequented  the  fervice  of  God,  and  have  joined 
in  publiciv  prayers  to  Go  d  with  great  appearance  of 
devotion,  and  have  heard  his  word  with  great  reve- 
rence and  attention,  and  received  the  blelTcd  facra- 
ment  with  all  imaginable  exprefilons  of  love  and  gra- 
titude to  our  blefTed  Redeemer;  nay  tho*  we 
had  heard  our  blelfed  Saviour  himfelf  "  teach  in 
*'  our  ftreets,  and  had  eaten  and  drunken  in  his 
"  prefence ;"  yet  if  all  this  while  "  we  have  not 
"  done  the  will  of  G  o  d,"  and  obeyed  his  laws, 
none  of  all  thefe  things  will  fignify  any  thing  to 
bring  us  to  heaven,  and  make  us  partakers  of  that 
falvation,  which  he  hath  purchafed  for  mankind. 

But  vv'c  cannot  plead  fo  much  for  our  felves,  as 
thofe  did,  of  whom  our  Saviour  fpeaks.  None 
of  us  Ihall  be  able  to  alledge  for  our  felves  at  the 
great  day,  that  "  we  had  prophefied  in  his  name, 
''  and  in  his  name  had  cad  out  devils,  and  in  his 
*'  name  had  done  many  wonderful  works  i"  and  yet 
if  we  could  alledge  all  this,  it  would  do  us  no  good. 
i\li  that  fuch  can  Hiy  for  themfelves  is,  that  ''  they 
*'  have  cali*d  him  LoR  D,  Lord,"  that  is,  they 
have  made  profcfiion  of  his  religion,  and  been  calTd 
by  his  name,  that  they  have  paid  an  outward  honour 
and  refpecl:  to  him,  and  declared  a  mighty  love  and 
afTeftion  for  him ;  but  "  they  have  not  done  his 
'^  will,  but  have  harcd  to  be  reformed,  and  have 
"  cad  his  commandments  behind  their  backs"  they 
have  only  born  the  leaves  of  an  outward  profefnon, 
but  "  have  brought  forth  no  fruit  unto  holinefs," 
and  therefore  can  have  no  reafonable  expectation, 
that  "  their  end  fliould  be  evcrlafting  life.''  So  that 

when 


and  its  conjijiefice  mihfree  gMce,  2 1 0,9 

when  thefe  men  fhall  appear  before  the  great  and  s  S  R  M. 
terrible  judge  of  the  world,  they  Ihall  have  nothing  ^^^^^^I- 
to  fay,  but  thofe  vain  words,  "  Lo  r  d,  L o  r  d  :"  to 
which  cur  Saviour  will  anfwer  in  that  day, 
*'  why  call  ye  me.  Lord,  Lord,  when  ye 
**  would  not  do  the  things  which  I  faid?"  notwith- 
flanding  all  your  profelfion  of  faith  in  me^  and 
fubjedion  to  me,  "  ye  have  been  workers  of  iniquity, 
*'  therefore  depart  from  me,  I  know  ye  not  whence 
*'  ye  are." 

Secondly,  the  confideratlon  of  what  hath  been 
faid  fhould  flir  us  up  to  a  thankful  acknowledgment 
of  what  the  author  of  our  falvation  hath  done  for  us  j 
and  there  is  great  reafon  for  thankfulnefs,  whether 
we  confider  the  greatnefs  of  the  benefit  conferred 
upon  us,  or  the  way  and  manner  in  which  it  was 
purchafed,  or  the  eafy  and  reafonable  terms  upon 
which  it  may  be  obtained. 

iftj  if  we  confider  the  greatnefs  of  the  benefij 
conferred  upon  us,  and  than  is  falvation,  "  eternal 
*^  falvation,"  which  comprehends  in  it  all  the  blef- 
fings  and  benefits  of  the  gofpel,  both  the  means  and 
the  end,  our  happinefs,  and  the  way  to  it,  by 
*'  faving  us  from  our  fins^'*  from  the  guilt  of  them, 
by  our  juflifi cation  in  the  blood  of  Christ;  and 
from  the  power  and  dominion  of  them,  by  the 
fandtifying  grace  and  virtue  of  the  H  o  l  y  Ghost, 
And  it  comprehends  the  end,  our  deliverance 
from  hell  and  the  wrath  to  come,  and  the  bellow- 
ing of  happinefs  upon  us,  a  great  and  lafling  happi- 
nefs, great  as  our  wifhes,  and  immortal  as  our 
fouls;  all  this  is  comprehended  in  '^  eternal  fal- 
vation/ 


*«    t/ciMon  '* 


Vol.  VII.  14  Y       ■  2dly,If 

6. 


2110  Jhc  pDfj'ibility  and  necejjlty  ofgofpeUobedience, 
S  E  R  M.  2dly,  If  we  confidcr  the  way  and  manner  in 
wviilj  which  this  great  benefit  was  purchafed  and  procured 
for  us ;  in  a  way  of  infinite  kindnefs  and  condefcen- 
fion,  in  the  lowed  humiliation,  and  the  unparalld'd 
iliffcrings  of  the  Son  of  God  ;  for  ''  never  was 
"  there  any  forrow  like  unto  his  forrow,  wherewith 
"  the  Lord  afflided  him  in  the  day  of  his  fierce 
"  anger  j"  in  his  "  taking  upon  him  the  form  of  a 
**  fervant  •,'*  and  the  perfon  of  a  finner,  and  his 
*'  becoming  obedient  to  death,  even  the  death  of  the 
*'  crofs,"  which  was  the  punilhment  of  the  vileft 
flaves,  and  the  mod  heinous  malefadors.  The  Son 
of  Go  D  came  down  from  heaven,  from  the  highefl 
pitch  of  glory  and  happinefs,  into  this  lower*world, 
this  "  vale  of  tears,"  and  fink  of  fin  and  forrow  ; 
and  was  contented  himfelf  to  lufFer,  to  fave  us  from 
eternal  ruin ;  to  be  the  mod  defpicable,  and  the 
mod  miferable  man  that  ever  was,  that  he  might 
raife  us  to  glory  and  honour,  and  advance  us  to  a 
'  ftate  of  the  greated  happinefs  that  humane  nature  is 
capable  of. 

3dly,  If  we  confider  the  eafy  and  reafonable  terms 
upon  which  we  may  be  made  partakers  of  this  un- 
fpeakable  benefit,  and  that  is  by  a  condarit  and  fin- 
cere  and  univerdil  obedience  to  the  laws  of  God, 
which  fuppofech  repentance  towards  God,  and  faith 
in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  as  the  root  and 
principle  of  all  the  virtues  of  a  good  life ;  that  is, 
by  doing  that  which  bed  becomes  us,  and  which  is 
mod  agreeable  to  the  original  frame  of  our  nature 
and  to  the  dictates  of  our  reafon,  and  which  fetting 
afide  the  confideration  of  our  reward,  is  really  bed 
for  our  prefent  benefit  and  advantage,  our  comfort 
And  happinefs,  even  ia  this  worlds   for   God,    in 


giving 


and  its  confiftence  with  free  grace.  2111 

giving  laws  to  us,    hath  impofed  nothing  upon  u^,  jjxxill. 

but  what  in  all  reafon  ought  to  have  been  our  choice, 

if  he  had  not  impofed  it  ;    nothing  but  what  is  for 

our  good,  and  is  in  its  own  nature  neceflary  to  make 

us  capable  of  that  happinefs  which  he  hath  promifed 

to  us.     And  vv^hat  can   be  more  gracious,    than  to 

make  one  benefit  the  condition  of  a  greater?  than 

to  promife  to  make  us  happy   for  ever,  if  we  will 

but  do  that  which  upon  all  accounts  is  really   beft 

and  mod  for  our  advantage  in  this  prefent  life  ? 

Thirdly,  here  is  abundant  encouragement  given 
to  our  obedience  ;  we  have  the  divine  afTiftance  pro- 
mifed to  us,  to  enable  us  to  the  performance  of  the 
mod  difficult  parts  of  our  duty  ;  we  have  the  H  o  l  y 
SpiRiTofGoDto  help  our  infirmities,  to  ex- 
cite us  to  that  which  is  good,  and  to  help  and 
firengthen  us  in  the  doing  of  it. 

For  our  further  encouragement  we  are  afllired  of 
the  divine  acceptance  in  cafe  of  our  fincere  obedi- 
ence, notwithftanding  the  manifold  failings  and  im- 
perfedions  of  it,  for  the  fake  of  the  perfedl  righte- 
oufnefs  and  obedience,  and  the  meritorious  fufierings 
of  our  blefTed  Saviour:  and  tho'  "  when  we 
"  have  done  all  we  can  do,  we  are  unprofitable 
''  fervants,"  and  have  done  nothing  but  what  was 
our  duty,  yet  G  o  d  is  pleafed  to  accept  v/hat  we  can 
do,  becaufe  it  is  fincere,  and  to  forgive  the  dcfeds 
and  imperfefbions  of  our  obedience,  for  his  fake, 
who  ''  fulfilled  all  righteoufnefs." 

And  befides  all  this,  we  have  the  encoura2:ement 
of  a  great  and  everlafting  reward,  infinitely  beyond 
all  proportion  of  any  fervice  and  obedience  that  v/e 
can  perform.  And  if  God  be  ready  to  afTiIt  and 
Itrengthcn  us  in  the  doing  of  our  duty,  and  be  willing 

14  Y  i  fa 


2 1 1 2  The pofibiltfy  and  necejjity  ofgof[>eUobedience,hc. 
S  E  R  M.  fo  gracioLiQy  to  accept  and  to  reward  at  fuch  a  rate 
■  the  fincerity  of  our  endeavours  to  pleafe  h  im,  not- 
withftanding  all  the  failings  and  imperfeflions  of  our 
beft  lervice  and  obedience  ;  what  can  we  poffibly  de- 
fire  more  for  our  encouragement,  to  "  patient  con- 
*'  tinuance  in  well-doing,"  and  to  be  ''  ftedfaft 
''  and  unmoveable,  and  abundant  in  the  work  of  the 
"  Lord?" 

Fourthly  and  laftly,  the  confideration  of  what 
hath  been  faid  upon  this  argument  may  ferve  feverely 
to  rebuke  the  groundlefs  prefumption  of  thofe,  who 
rely  with  fo  much  confidence  upon  Christ  for 
eternal  falvation,  without  any  confcience  or  care  to 
keep  his  commandments ;  as  if  falvation  lay  upon 
his  hands,  and  he  knew  not  how  to  difpofe  ot  it, 
and  were  glad  of  any  one  that  would  come  and  take 
it  off  upon  any  terms.  No,  "  he  came  to  fave  us 
*'  from  our  Tins,  to  redeem  us  from  all  iniquity,  and 
"  to  purify  to  himfelf  a  peculiar  people  zealous  of 
*'  good  works." 

So  that  the  falvation  which  he  hath  purchafed  for 
us,  doth  neceffarily  imply  our  forfaking  of  our  fins, 
and  returning  to  Go  d  and  our  duty  •,  and  his  death 
and  fufferings  are  not  more  an  argument  of  his  great 
love  to  mankind,  than  they  are  a  demonftration  of 
his  perfedl  hatred  of  fin.  So  that  if  we  continue  in 
the  love  and  pra6tice  of  fin,  we  defeat  the  whole 
defign  of  his  coming  into  the  world,  and  of  all  that 
he  hath  done  and  flUTered  for  us  ;  and  the  redemp- 
tion which  Christ  hath  wrought  for  us  will  not 
avail  us  in  the  lead.  "  Salvation  is  far  from  the 
«  wicked,"  (lays  David,  Pfal.  cxix.  155.^  If  we  have 
been  "  workers  of  iniquity,"  the  Sa v  i  o  u  r  of  the 
world  when  he  comes  to  judge  it,  wilJ  bid  us  "to  de^ 
^^  part  from  him."  From 


^he  authority  o/"  J  e  s  u  s  Ch  r  i  s  t,  &c,        21 13 

From  all  that  hath  been  faid,  it  is  evident,  that 
it  is  the  greateft  prefumption  in  the  world  for  any 
man  to  hope  to  obtain  eternal  falvation  by  any  de- 
vice whatfoever,  or  in  the  communion  of  any 
church  whatfoever,  without  obedience  and  a  holy 
life.  For  tho'  our  obedience  cannot  merit ;  yet  it  is 
neceflary  to  qualify  and  difpofe  us  for  it :  tho'  it  does 
not  make  us  ftridly  worthy  j  yet  it  makes  us "'  meet 
*'  to  be  made  partakers  of  the  inheritance  of  the 
*'  faints  in  light." 


SERMON     CXXIV. 

The  authority  of  J  e  s  u  s  C  h  r  i  s  t,  with 
the  commiffion  and  promife  which 
he  gave  to  his  apoftles. 


M  A  T  T  H.     xxviii.  i8,;i9,  20. 

And  Jesus  came  and  fpake  unto  them^  faying^  all  power 
is  given  unto  me  in  heaven  and  in  earth :  go  ye  there- 
fore and  teach  all  nations^  baptizing  them  in  the 

.  name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the 
HolyGhost:  teaching  them  to  ohferve  all  things 
whatfoever  I  have  commanded  you  :  and  loy  I  am 
with  you  alway^  even  unto  the  end  of  the  world. 


1 


"^  HES  E  words  are  the  laft  that  our  blefTed  SR  R  M. 
Saviour  fpake  to  his  apoftles,  immediate- ^^ 
Jy  before  his   afcenfion  into  heaven  ;   and 


there  are  thefe  three  things  contained  in  them, 


I.  A 


2 1 14        ^he  authority  ^ Jesus  Chr ist,  with  his 
SERM.      I.    A  declaration  of  his  own    authority  j    "  all 
cxxiv.^  tc  pQ^(,j.  J3  given  unto  me  both  in  heaven  and  in 
"  earth.'' 

II.  A  commifTion  to  his  difciples  grounded  upon 
that  authority  ;  ''  go  ye  therefore  and  teach  all  na- 
''  tions,  baptizing  them  in  the  name  oF  the  Fa- 
''  THER,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy 
''  Ghost:  teaching  them  to  obfcrve  all  things 
*'  whatfoevcr  I  have  commanded  you." 

III.  A  promife  to  encourage  them  in  this  work  •, 
"  and  lo,  I  am  with  you  alway,  even  unto  the  end 
"  of  the  world." 

L  Here's  our  Saviour's  declaration  of  his  own 
authority;  "  all  power  is  given  unto  me  in  heaven 
*'  and  earth."  Here's  an  unlimited  power  and  au- 
thority given  him  over  all  creatures  in  heaven  and 
earth.  This  the  fcripture  tells  us  was  conferred  upon 
him,  as  a  reward  of  his  fufferings,  Philip,  ii.  J], 
9,  10.  "  He  humbled  himfelf,  and  became  obedient 
*'  unto  death,  even  the  death  of  the  crofs.  Where- 
*'  fore  God  alfo  hath  highly  exalted  him,  and  given 
*'  him  a  name,  which  is  above  every  name ;  that 
*'  at  the  name  of  Jlsus  every  knee  fhould  bow,  of 
^'  things  in  heaven,  and  things  in  earth,  and  things 
^'  under  the  earth  j"  that  is,  that  all  creatures,  an- 
gels, and  men,  and  devils,  fhould  do  homage,  and 
acknowledge  fubjedlion  to  him. 

II.  Here  is  the  commilTion  he  gave  to  his  apoftles, 
by  virtue  of  this  authority  ;  "  go  ye  therefore  and 
*'  teach  all  nations."  The  commiiTion  which  he 
here  gives,  is  founded  in  the  authority  lie  had 
before  received.  Having  all  power  committed  to 
him,  he  conflitutes  and  appoints  the  apodles  trnd 
their  fuccefibrs  to  manage  the  affairs  of  this  his  fpi- 

ritual 

/ 


commtjjion  and  promife  to  his  apoflks.  2115 

ritual  kingdom  upon  earth-,  and  this  feems  to  ^^  ^^^vfy 
the  fame  commiflion  which  St.  John  mentions  in- 
other  words,  John  xx.  21.  "  As  my  Father  hath 
"  fent  me,  even  fo  fend  I  you;"  that  is,  as  my 
Father  commiffion'd  me  before,  ^o  now  havins: 
received  full  authority  from  him,  I  commiflion  you. 

Now  in  this  commiflion,  which  our  Saviour  gave 
to  his  difciples,  I  fliall  take  notice, 

Firfl:,  of  the  general  import  and  defign  of  it. 

Secondly,  a  more  particular  declaration  how  they 
were  to  manage  this  dcfign. 

Firfl:,  the  general  import  and  defign  of  this  com- 
miflion ;  "  go  ye  and  teach  all  nations.'*  The  word 
which  we  tranflate  teach,  is  /xa^^yirsuo-ars,  difciple 
all  nations,  endeavour  to  make  all  the  world  chri- 
flians.  One  would  think  here  was  a  power  plainly 
enough  given  them,  to  preach  the  golpel  to  the  Gen- 
tiles, as  well  as  the  Jews.  Which  will  more  fully 
appear,  if  we  compare  this  paflTage  in  St.  Matthew 
with  the  other  evangelifls.  St,  Mark,  chap.xvi,  15. 
hath  it ;  "  go  ye  into  all  the  world,  and  preach  the 
''  gofpel  to  every  creature."  From  which  text  I 
fuppole  St.  Francis  thought  himfelf  bound  to  preach 
to  beafts  and  birds,  and  accordingly  did  it  very  of-- 
ten,  and  with  wonderful  fuccefs  as  they  tell  us  in 
the  legend  of  his  life.  But  to  extend  our  Saviour's 
commiflion  fo  far,  is  want  of  common  {tn^Q'^  in 
which  St.  Francis  (tho*  they  tell  us  he  had  other 
gifts  and  graces  to  an  eminent  degree)  was  plainly 
defedive. 

But  to  proceed,  St.  Luke  chap.  xxlv.  47.  tells  us, 
our  Saviour  commanded,  that  *'  repentance  and 
"  remifllon  of  fins  fliould  be  preached  in  his  name 
"  among  all  nations,  beginning  at  Jerufalem."     So 

that 


2 1 1 6  The  author! fy  ^/^JesusChrist,  with  his 
S  E  R  M.  that  their  commidion  did  plainly  extend  to  the  Gen« 
tiJes  as  well  as  to  the  Jews ;  only  they  were  to  be- 
gin with  the  Jews,  and  to  preach  the  gofpel  firll  to 
them,  and  when  they  had  gone  over  Judea  and  Sa- 
maria, then  to  pafs  to  other  nations,  as  St.  Luke 
doth  mod  exprefly  declare,  Adls  i.  8.  "  Ye  fhall  re- 
*'  ceive  power,  after  that  the  Holy  Ghost  is 
*'  come  upon  you,  and  ye  fhall  be  witnefTes  unto 
*'  me,  both  in  Jerufalem,  and  in  all  Judea,  and 
*'  in  Samaria,  unto  the  uttermoft  parts  of  the 
*'  earth." 

But  fee  the  flrange  power  of  prejudice,  to  blind 
the  eyes  even  of  good  men,  in  the  plaineft  matters. 
The  difciples  of  our  Saviour,  for  all  ih^y  had  en- 
tertained a  new  religion,  yet  they  retained  the  old 
pride  and  prejudice  of  their  nation,  againft  the  reft 
of  the  world ;  as  if  none  but  themfelves  had  any 
(hare  in  the  favour  of  God,  or  were  to  have  any  part 
in  the  falvation  of  the  M  e  s  s  i  a  s. 

Our  Saviour  did  fo  far  confider  this  preju- 
dice of  theirs,  that  he  never  in  his  life -time  acquain- 
ted them  with  this  matter,  fo  as  to  make  them 
fully  to  underftand  it,  becaufe  they  were  not  able 
to  bear  it.  And  it  is  very  probable,  that  this  is  one 
of  thofe  things  which  our  S  av  i  o  u  r  meant,  John 
xvi.  12,  13.  "  I  have  yet  many  things  to  fay  unto 
«  you ;  but  ye  cannot  bear  them  now.  Howbcit 
<«  when  the  Spirit  of  truth  is  come,  he  will 
*«  guide  you  into  all  truth."  That  is,  he  Ihould  lead 
them  into  the  knowledge  of  thofe  truths,  of  which 
they  were  not  then  capable.  And  tho*  our  Savi- 
our, after  his  refurreclion,  feems  to  have  declared 
this  fufficiently  to  them  -,  yet  by  their  pradlice  after 
his  afcenfion,   it  appears  that  they  underftood  all 

this 


commijjion  and  promt fe  to  his  apojiles.  2117 

this  only  of  the  Jews,  namely  that  they  were  toSE  RM. 
preach  the  gofpel  fird  to  the  Jews  that  were  at  Je- 
rufalem,  and  in  Judea,  and  then  to  thofe  that  were 
difperfed  in  other  nations  ;  for  'tis  clear  from  the 
hiftory  of  their  firft  preaching,  recorded  in  the  Adls, 
that  they  preached  to  none  but  to  the  Jews,  and  the 
profelytes  of  the  jewifh  religion.  So  flrong  was 
their  prejudice,  that  they  had  not  the  lead  fufpicion 
that  this  blefTing  of  the  gofpel  was  intended  for  the 
heathen  world  -,  nor  were  they  convinced  to  the 
contrary  'till  St,  Peter  had  a  fpecial  vifion  and  re- 
velation to  this  purpofe,  and  the  Holy  Ghost 
came  upon  the  Gentiles  in  miraculous  gifts,  as  he 
Had  done  before  upon  the  Jews  that  were  converted 
to  chriftianity.  And  thus  the  Spirit  of  G  o  d 
*'  led  them  into  this  truth,"  and  then  they  under- 
ftood  this  command  of  our  Saviour's  in  a  laro-er 
fenfe.  And  to  this  St.  Peter  plainly  refers,  Adls 
X.  42.  where  he  tells  us,  how  that  Christ  after 
his  refurredion  appeared  to  them,  and  "  com- 
*'  manded  them  to  preach  unto  the  people."  So 
likewife  do  Paul  and  Barnabas,  Ads  xiii.  46.  where 
they  fpeak  thus  to  the  Jews,  "  it  was  neceflary  that 
"  the  word  fhould  firfl  be  preached  to  you,  but 
"  feeing  ypu  put  it  from  you,  lo  we  turn  to  the 
"  Gentiles,  for  fo  hath  the  Lord  commanded  us.'* 
Now  he  no  where  commanded  this,  but  in  this  com- 
million,  which  he  gave  them  before  his  afcenfion. 

Secondly,  you  have  here  a  particular  declaration 
how  they  were  to  manage  this  v/ork  of  making  dif- 
ciples  to  the  chriftian  religion. 

1.  By  baptizing  them  into  the  chriftian  faith. 

2.  By  inftrufling  them  in  the  precepts  and  prac- 
tices of  a  chriftian  life. 

Vol.  VII,  14  Z  i.  By 

6, 


2  1 18        7 be  authority  of  ]esvs  Christ,  "Wifh  his 
.SERM.       I.  By   baptizing   them   into   the  chriftian  faith, 
^^^^^^  ^vhich   is    here   called    "    baptizing    them    in    the 
'^  name  of  the  Fat  h  e  r,  and  of  the  So  n,  and  of 
*'  the   Holy    Ghost."     Baptifm  is   a   folemn 
rite  appointed  by   our  Saviour  for  the  inida- 
ting  perfons  into  the  chriftian  religion  :  but  it  was 
a   ceremony  in  ufe  before,  both   among   the   Jews 
and  Gentiles.     The  heathens  obferved  it  at  the  ini- 
tiating perfons  into   their  religious  myderiesj  and 
the  Jews,   when   they  admitted    profelytes  to  their 
reliction  -,  at  which  time  the  males  (as  Maimonides 
tells  us)    were  both  circumcifed    and  baptized,  the 
Vomen  were  only  baptized.     One  circumflance  of 
the  baptifm  of  grown  perfons  w^as,  that  ftanding  in 
the   water   up  to  the  neck,    they  received    feveral 
precepts  of  the  law.     And   as  the  jewifh   writers 
further  tell  us,  this  ceremony  did  not  only  belong 
to  them  that  were  of  grown  years,  but  to  the  chil- 
dren of  the  profelytes,  if  it  were  defired,  upon  con- 
dition, that  when  they  came  to  years  they   lliould 
continue  in  that  religion. 
N^     Now  tho'  this  was  a  religious  ceremony  ufed  both 
by  Jews  and  Gentiles,  and  without  any  divine  in- 
ftitution,  that  we  know  of,  our  blefled  Saviour 
(who  in  none  of  his  inftitutions  feems  to  have  fa- 
1  vour'd  unncceilary  innovations)  was  fo  far  from  the 
'  iuperftition  of  declining  it  upon  this  account,  tho^ 
k  had    been  in    religious   ufe  both     among   Jews 
;  und  Gentiles,  that  he  feems  the  rather  to  have  chofen 
it  for  that  very  reafon.     For  feeing  it  was  a  com- 
irion  rite  of  all  religions,  and  in  it  felf  very   figni- 
iicant  of  that  purity  which    is  the  great  defign  of 
all  religions,    it  was  the   more   likely  to  find  the 
cafier  acceptance^  and  to  be  moft  fwitabk  to  that^ 

which 


V 


€mn?nijjim  and  promife  to  his  apojlles.  2119 

which  he  intended  to  be  the  uRiverfaJ  religion  of  the  SE  R  M. 
world.  ^^^-^^'^'• 

As  for  the  form  of  baptifm,  ^^  m  th&  name  of 
'*^  the  Father,  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy 
"  G  HOST,"  it  plainly  refers  to  that  fhort  creed,  or 
profefTion  of  faith,  which  was  required  of  thofe  thac 
v/ere  to  be  baptized,  anfwerably  to  the  reciting  of 
the  precepts  of  the  law,  at  the  baptizing  of  profe- 
lytes   among    the  Jews  ;   now    the    articles  of  this 
creed  were  reduced  to  thefe  three  heads,  "  of  the  F4.- 
^'ther^  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost/'  and  con- 
tains what  was  neceffary  to  be  believed  concerning 
each  of  thefe.     And   this  probably   is  that  which 
the  apoftle  calls  the  dodlrine  of  baptifm,   Heb.  vi, 
2.  viz.  a  fhort  fummary  of  the  chriftian  faith,  the 
profefllon  whereof  was  to  be  made  at  baptifm  -,  of 
which  the  moft  ancient    fathers   make  fo  frequent 
.mention,  calling  it ''  the  rule  of  faith.*'  It  was  a  great  ' 
while  indeed  before  chridians  tied  themfelves  (Iricftly 
to  that  very  form  of  words,  which  we  now  call  the 
apoftles  creed,    but    the  fenfe  was   the   fame,  tho^ 
every  one  expreft  it   in  his  own  words ;    nay  the  , 
fame  father  reciting  it  upon  feveral  occafions,  does  \ 
not  confine  himfelf  to  the  very  fame  expreffions  :  a 
plain    indication   that  they   were    not  then   flridly 
bound  up  to  any  form  of  words,  but  retaining  the 
ienfe  and  fubftance  of  the  articles,  every  one  expreft 
them  as  he  pleafed.     So  that   '^  to  baptize  in  the-' 
*'  name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of 
"  Holy  Ghost,"  is  to  perform  this  rite  or  fa- 
crament  by  the  authority  of,  and  with  fpecial  rela- 
tion to  the  three  perfons  of  the  bleiTed  trinity,  F  a- 
ther.  Son,   and  Holy  Ghost,  as  the  chief 
objeds  of  the  chriflian  fiith,  whereof  lolemn  pro^ 

14  Z  ^  id^iQin 


cxxiv, 


2 1 2 o       The  authority  ^'Jesu«s  Christ,  with  his 

SER  M.  feffion  was  then  made.  So  that  upon  this  form  of 
baptifm  appointed  by  our  Saviour,  compared 
with  what  is  elfewhere  faid  in  fcripture,  concerning 
the  divi.iity  of  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost, 
is  principally  founded  the,  dodrine  of  the  blefled 
trinity,  I  mean  in  that  fimplicity  in  which  the  fcrip- 
ture hath  delivered  it,'  and  not  as  it  hath  been  fince 
confounded  and  entangled  in  the  cobwebs  and  niceties 
of  the  fchools.  The  fcripture  indeed  no  where  calls 
them  perfons,  but  fpeaks  of  them  as  we  do  of  feve- 
ral  perfons,  and  therefore  that  word  is  not  unfitly 
ufed  to  cxprefs  the  difference  between  them,  or  at 
leail  we  do  not  know  a  fitter  word  for  that  pur- 
pofe. 

By  "  baptizing  them  in  the  name  of  the  Fa- 
*'  T  H  E  R,  Son,  andHo  LY  G  h  o  s  t,"  is  meant, 
the  initiating  of  men  by  this  folemn  rite  and  cere- 
mony into  the  chrilliian  religion,  upon  their  pro- 
fefTion  of  the  necelTary  do6lrines  of  it  concerning  the 
Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  and  a 
folemn  llipulation  and  engagement  to  live  according 
to  thofe  do(5lrines :  which  promife  of  a  fuitable  life 
and  pradice  was  likewife  made  at  the  fam.e  time, 
as  Judin  Martyr  and  other  of  the  ancient  fathers  do 
teftify. 

'  But  before  I  leave  this  head,  it  is  very  fit  to  take 
particu]:.r  notice  what  ufe  the  anabaptifts  make  of 
this  text  fo  as  in  effed  to  lay  the  whole  ftrefs  of 
their  caufe  upon  it ;  as  if  by  virtue  of  this  command 
of  our  S  Aviou  r's,  and  the  manner  wherein  it  is 
exprefo'd,  all  infants,  even  thofe  of  chriftian  parents, 
who  are  themfelves  already  admitted  into  the  new 
covenant  of  the  gofpe,  were  excluded  from  bap- 
tifm,    becaufe  it  is   here  faid  by  our  Sav  i  o  u  r. 


€ommi[Jion  and  promtfe  to  his  apojlles.  2121 

««  go  ye,  and  difciple  all  nations,  baptizing  them;*VSSRM. 
from   whence   they  infer,     ( and   very  clearly   and  ^U^,^ 
flrongly  as  they  think)  that  none  are  to  be  bap- 
tized, but  fuch  as  are  firft  throughly  inftruded  in  the 
chriftian  religion,  and  made  difciples,  which  infants 
are  not,  but  only  thofe  who  are  grown  to  fome  ma^^ 
turity  of  years  and  underflanding :  but  the  opinion 
and  practice  of  the  ancient  church  in  this  matter,  is 
a  fufficient  bar  to  this  inference,  at  leaft  to  the  clear- 
nefs  of  it.     And   indeed   it   cannot  reafonably  be 
imagined,  that  the   apoftles,  who  had  alJ   of  them 
been  bred   up   in  the  jewifh   religion,  which   con- 
flantly,  and  by  virtue  of  a  divine  precept  and  in- 
fhitution,  admitted  infants  into  that  church,  and  to 
the  benefits  of  that  covenant,  by  the  rite  of  circum- 
cifion,  and  likewife  the  infants  of  profelytes  by  bap- 
tifm,  (as  I  obferved  before)  I  fay  no  man  can  rea- 
fonably imagine,  that  the  apoftles  could  underftand  \ 
our  S  Av  I  o  u  R  ,  as  intending  by  any  confequence 
from  this  text,  to  exclude  the  children  of  chriftians 
out  of  the  chriftian  church,   and  to  debar  them  of 
the  benefits  of  the  new  covenant  of  the  goipeJ :  the 
children  of  chriftians  being  every  whit   as  capable  \    /;' 
of  being    taken   into  this    new  covenant;  and  ofl    ^\^P'- 
partaking  of  the  benefits  of  it,  as  children   of  the  : 
Jews  were  of  being  admitted  into  the  old.     Unlels 
we  will  fuppofe  (which  at  firft  fight  feems  very  harfh 
and  unreafonable)   that  by  the   terms  of  the  chri- 
ftian religion,  children  are  in  a  much  wprfe  condi- 
tion, than  the  children  of  the  Jews  were  under  the  law. 
So  that  the  parity  of  reafon  being  fo  plain,  nothing 
jefs  than  an  exprefs  prohibition  from  our  S  av  i  o  u  r, 
and  an  exception  of  children  from  baptifm,  can  be 
thought^  fufficient  to  deprive  the  children  of  chri- 
ftians 


2122       T/je  aut/jon'fy  of  ]EsvsCuRiyr,  with  his 
SERM.  ftians  of  any  privilege,  of  which  the  jewifli  were 
capable.     For  the  plain  meaning  of  this  commifTion 
to  the  apoflles  is,  to  go  and  *'  profelyte  all  nations 
*'  to  the  chridian  religion,"  and  to  admit   them  fo- 
kmnly  into  it  by  baptifm,  as  the  Jews  were  wont 
to  profelyte  men  to  their  religion  by  circumcifion 
and  baptilm  \  by  which  rites  alfo  they  took  in  the 
children  of  the  profelytes,  upon  promife  that  when 
they  came  to  years  they  fliould  continue  in  that  re- 
ligion.    And  if  this  was  our  Saviour's  meaning, 
the  apoftles  had  no  reafon  from  the  tenor  of  their 
commifTion,  to  underftand  that  the  children  of  chri- 
ftian  profelytes  were  any  more  excluded,  than  the 
children  of  profelytes   to  the  jev/ifh   religion,  un- 
lefs  our  Saviour  had  exprefly  excepted  them  ;  for 
it  is  a  favourable  cafe,  and  in  a  matter  of  privilege, 
and  therefore  ought  not  to  be  determined  to  debar 
children  of  it,  upon  any  obfcure  confequence  from 
a  text,  which  it  is  certain  v^as  never  fo  underftood 
by  the  chriftian  church,  for  1500  years  together.    I 
have  done  with  the  firil  part  of  their  commifTion, 
which  was  to  difciple  or  profelyte  all  nations  to  tiie 
chriftian  religion,  and  to  admit  them  into  the  chri- 
flian  church,  by  the  rite  or  facrament  of  baptifm.  I 
proceed  to  confider  the 

Second  part  of  their  commifTion,  which  was  to, 
inftrucl  men  in  the  precepts  and  duties  of  a  chri- 
ftian life,  *'  teaching  them  to  obferve  all  things 
«'  whatfoever  I  have  commanded  you."  You  fee 
how  their  commifilon  bounds  and  limits  them,  they 
were  to  teach  others  thofe  precepts  which  Christ 
had  taught  and  deliver'd  to  them  •,  thef  had  no 
power  by  virtue  of  this  commifTion  to  make  new 
Jaws,  which  fhould  be  of  univerfal  and  perpetual  ob^'- 

gatiou, 


comnitjjion  and  promife  to  bis  apoftks.  1 1 23 

gation5and  confequently  necefifary  to  the  falvation  of  SERM. 
all  chriilians  -,  they  were  only  to  be  the  publifhers,  ^^^^Jj 
but  not  the  authors  of  this  new  religion.  And  there- 
fore St.  Paul,  when  the  Corinthians  confuked  him 
aboCit  feveral  things  relating  to  marriage  and  virgi- 
nity, he  only  gives  his  advice,  but  would  not  take 
upon  him  to  make  a  law  in  thofe  cafes  that  fhould 
b^  binding  to  all  chriftians.     And  for  the  fame  rea- 
fon  chriftians  do  generally  at  this  day,    think  them- 
felves  abfolved  from  the  obligation  of  that  canon, 
which  was  made  even  in  a  council  of  the  apoftles, 
as  to  all  thofe  branches  of  it,  the  reafon  whereof  is 
now  ceafed.     But  notwithftanding  this,  the  autho- 
rity which  our  Saviour  conferred  upon  his  apo- 
files  to  teach  his  doflrine,  does  in  the  nature  of  it 
necefTarily  imply  a  power  of  governing  the  focieties 
of  chriftians,  under  fuch  officers,  and  by  fuch  rules, 
as  are  moft  fuitable  to  the  nature  of  fuch  a  fociety, 
and  moft  fit  to  promote  the  great  ends  of  the  chri- 
ftian  religion  :  for  without  this  power  of  govern-- 
ing,  they  cannot  be  fuppos'd  to  be  endowed  with 
fufficient  authority  to  teach  \  and  therefore  in  pur- 
fuance  of  this  commifTion,  we  find  that  the  apoftles 
did  govern  the  focieties  of  chriftians  by   fuch  rules 
and    conftitutions,    as   were  fitted  to   the    prefent 
circumftances  of  chriftianity.     And  as  they  did  ap- 
point temporary  officers  upon   emergent  occafions, 
fo  they  conftituted  others  that  were  of  perpetual  ufe 
in  the.  church,  for  the  inftruding  and  governing  of 
chriftians,  and  that  in  fuch  a  fubordination  to  one 
another,  as  would  be  moft  effedual  to  the  attain- 
ing of -fte  end  of  government ;    which  fubordina- 
tion of  governors,  hath  not  only  been   ufed  in  all 

religions,  but  in  all  the  Well-regulated  civil  focie- 
ties 


cxxiv. 


^.124      ^hc  authority  of  Jesvs  Christ,  witb  his 
SERM.  ties  that  ever  were  in  the  world.     And   this  may 
fuffice  to  have  fpoken  of  the  fecond  part  of  their 
commifTion. 

The  third  and  lad  thing  in  the  text,  is  the  pro- 
mife  which  our  Saviour  here  makes  for  the  en- 
couragement of  the  apoftles  in  this  work  ;  "  lo,  I 
*'  am  with  you  always,  even  unto  the  end  of  the 
•'  world  j"  that  is,  tho'  I  be  going  from  you  in 
perfon,  yet  I  will  ftill  be  prefent  with  you  by  my 
power  and  Spirit.  And  furely  this  mud  needs 
l3e  a  great  encouragement  to  have  him  engaged  for 
their  afTiftance,  *'  who  had  all  power  in  heaven  and 
*'  earth  committed  to  him,"  as  he  tells  them  at  the 
1 8  th  verie. 

I  fhall  endeavour  therefore,  as  far  as  the  time  will 
permit,  to  explain  to  you  the  true  meaning  and  ex- 
tent of  this  promife.  That  it  is  primarily  made  to 
the  apoftles,  no  man  can  doubt,  that  confiders  that 
it  was  fpoken  to  them  immediately  by  our  Saviour; 
and  in  regard  to  them,  the  meaning  of  it  is  plainly 
this,  that  our  Saviou  r  would  fend  down  the  Holy 
Ghost  -upon  them,  in  miraculous  gifts,  to  qualify 
and  enable  them  for  the  more  fpeedy  planting  and 
propagating  of  the  gofpel  in  the  world,  and  that  he 
would  be  with  them,  and  alTifl:  them  extraordinarily 
in  this  work. 

And  that  this  is  the  primary  meaning  of  it,  in  re- 
gard to  the  apoftles,  will  be  very  plain,  by  confider- 
ing  how  this  promife  is  exprefs'd  by  the  other  evan- 
gelifts;  Mark  xvi.  17.  inftead  of  this  promife,  you 
have  thefe  ,words,  immediately  after  our  Saviour 
had  given  them  commiftion  to  go  and  preach  the  gof- 
pel, "  go  ye  into  all  the  world,  and  preach  the  gof- 
*'  pel   to   every   creature ;  he  that  believeth  and  is 

baptized 


commijjion  andpromife  to  hh  apoflksl  1\l^ 

"  baptized,  fhaJJ  be  flived  ;  but  he  that  believeth  S  E  R  M, 
«  not,  fhall  be  damned."  And  then  it  follows,  ^^ 
"  thefe  figns  iliall  follow  them  that  believe ;  in 
"  my  name  they  fhall  caft  out  devils,  and  fhall 
*'  fpeak  with  new  tongues."  And  Luke  xxiv.  49. 
inftead  of  ''  lo,  1  am  with  you,"  it  is  laid,  "  be- 
"  hold,  I  fend  the  promife  of  my  Father  upon 
"  you,"  that  is,  the  miraculous  gifts  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  ;  for  it  follows  in  the  next  words,  "  but 
"  tarry  ye  in  the  city  of  Jerufalem,  until  ye  be 
"  endowed  with  power  from  on  high."  This  St, 
Luke  himfelf  interprets  of  the  promife  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  Ads  i.4,  5.  "  He  commanded 
"  them  that  they  fhould  not  depart  from  Jerufalem, 
"  but  wait  for  the  promife  of  the  Father,  which, 
*'  faith  he,  ye  have  heard  of  me.  For  John  truly 
*'  baptized  with  water,  but  ye  fhall  be  baptized 
"  with  the  H  o  L  Y  Ghost,  noE  many  days  hence." 
And  ver.  8.  '^  Ye  lliall  receive  power  after  that  the 
"Holy  Ghost  is  come  upon  you,  and  ye 
"  fliall  be  witneiTes  unto  me,  both  in  Jerufalem, 
"  and  in  all  Judea,  and  in  Samaria,  and  unto  t\iQ  ut- 
"  termoil  part  of  the  earth."  So  that  no  man  that 
compares  thefe  texts  together,  can  doubt,  but  that 
this  was  the  primary  meaning  of  this  promife,  as  it 
was  made  to  the  apoflles. 

But  then  it  is  as  plain  likewife,  that  this  promife 
is  to  be  extended  farther  than  to  the  perfons  of  the 
apoflles,  even  to  all  thofe  that  fhould  afterwards  fuc- 
ceed  them  in  this  work  of  preaching  the  gofpel, 
and  baptizing,  becaufe  our  Saviour  adds,  that 
"  he  would  be  with  them  to  the  end  of  the  world ;" 
which  words,  becaufe  they  reach  far  beyond  the 
apoflles  times,  (as  I  fhall   fhew  by  and  by)  mufl  be 

Vo,L.  Vn.  15  A  necefTa- 

6. 


2  126       ^he  authority  of  Jesus  Christ,  *with  his 

S  E  R  M.  neceflarily  extended  to  fuch  perfons  in  after-ages,   aj 
CXXIV.  ^^^^^  ^,^j,j.y  Q^  fi^g  f^nig  work. 

There  are  two  famous  controverfies  about  the  fenfc 
of  thefe  words,  in  which  this  promife  is  expreft. 

The  firfl  is,  concerning  the  circumftance  of  time 
mentioned  in  this  promife,  '^  alway,  to  the  end  of 
*'  the  world." 

The  other  concerning  the  fubftance  of  the  promife 
itfelf,  v/hat  is  meant  by  our  Saviour's  ''  being 
"■^  with  them."  In  the  firft  we  have  to  deal  with 
theenthufiafts,  in  the  latter  with  the  papifts.  I  Ihall 
examine  the  pretences  of  both  thefe,  as  briefly  and 
plainly  as  I  can. 

Firft,  concerning  the  circumdance  of  time  expreft 
in  thefe  words,  "  alway,  to  the  end  of  the  world. ** 
The  enthufiafls  would  perfuade  us,  that  the  meaning 
of  thefe  phrafes  is  not  to  be  extended  beyond  that  age, 
and  that  this  promife  is  to  be  limited  to  the  apoftles 
perfons,  and  that  the  fenfe  of  it  is,  that  Christ 
would  be  with  the  apoftles,  Tracrar  ra.:  yf/^s^a?,.  all 
their  days  fo  long  as  they  fhould  live,  and  that 
would  be,  £Cj}>  t*  o-jyTsXeias"  t5  aicov©',  to  the  end  of 
that  ages  thus  they  tranflate  it,  and  with  no  worfe 
defign  than  to  take  away  the  neceflity  of  a  gofpel- 
rniniftry. 

But  this  pretence  will  vanifti,  if  we  can  make 
good  thefe  two  things. 

1.  That  the  letter  of  this  promife  extends  farther 
than  the  perfons  of  the  apoftles,  and  the  continuance 
fjf  that  age. 

2,  However  that  be,  it  is  certain  that  the  rcafon 
of  it  extends  to  all  that  fhould  fucceed  them  in  their 
miniftry,  to  the  end  of  the  world. 

I.  The 


€ommiJjion  andpromife  to  his  apofiles.  '  2127 

f .  The  letter  of  this  promife  extends  farther  than^|;  '^-  ^^• 
theperfons  of  the  apoftles,  and  the  continuance  ot  '^'^^" 
that  age.  I  will  eafily  grant  that  the  phrafe  Tr^cra? 
Tcl^  KJ^jULf pas-  fignifies  only  continually  -,  ^'  1  will  be 
''  with  you  continually  ;"  but  then  the  other  phrafe, 
'£&)r  w  o-uvTsXetaji^  oucov©^,  ^^l^il  the  end  of  the 
world,  is  feveral  times  in  fcripture  undeniably  ufd 
for  the  end  and  dilTolution  of  all  things,  and  can- 
not with  any  probability  be  fnewn  to  be  ever  ufed 
otherwife.  In  this  kni'Q  it  is  unqueftionably  vStd 
three  times,  Match,  xiii.  '^  The  harvcft  is  the  end 
«'  of  the  world."  Ver.  39.  "  So  fhall  it  be  at  the 
^'  end  of  the  world."  Ver.  40.  and  ver.  §g.  it  is 
faid,  that  at  "  the  end  oFthe  world,  the  angels  (hdll 
''  come  forth,  and  fever  the  wicked  from  thejufl, 
*'  and  cad  them  into  the  furnace;"  which  mufl  ei- 
ther be  underftood  of  the  end  of  the  world,  and  of 
the  day  of  judgment,  or  there  will  be  no  clear  text 
in  the  whole  bible  to  that  purpofe  ;  and  it  is  very 
probable,  that  this  phrafe  is  ufed  in  the  fame  fenft% 
Matth.  xxiv.  3.  where  the  difciples  ask  our  Saviour, 
'*  what  fhali  be  the  fign  of  thy  coming,  and  of  the 
*'  end  of  the  world?"  as  will  appear  to  any  one 
that  confiders  our  Saviour's  anfwer  to  this  que- 
flion;  the  latter  part  whereof  cannot,  v^irhoiit 
too  much  violence,  be  accommodated  to  any  tlunc.' 
but  the  final  difibiution  of  the  world.  Now  if  this 
phrafe  be  every  where  elfe  in  fcripture  ufed  in  this 
fenfe,  there  is  no  rcafon  why  it  fhouid  be  taken  other- 
wife  in  the  text,  only  to  ferve  the  purpofe  of  an  un- 
reafbnable  opinion. 

1   know  there  are  phrafes  very  near  a-kin  to  this, 

which  are  ufed  in  a  qii'.re  different  knk^  name]/,  for 

the  expiration  of  the  Jcwiih  (late,  and  that  we  may 

15  A  2  kiiOr>r 


r2i28       The  authority  of  Jesus  Christ,  n^olth  his 

SRRM.  know  how  to  diftino-uifh  them,  it  is  obfervable,  that 
when  the  fcripture  Ipcaks  of  the  end  of  the  world, 
it  is  called  cruvrsXeia  rl  ou/Sij©-'^  the  end  of  the  age, 
in  the  fingular  number ;  but  when  it  fpeaks  of  the 
times  before  the  gofpel,  it  always  exprefleth  them  in 
the  plural ;  the  reafon  of  which  is,  that  famous  tra- 
dition among  the  Jews,  of  the  houfe  of  Elias,  which 
diftributcd  the  whole  duration  of  the  world  into  three 
ages  •,  the  age  before  the  Jaw,  the  age  under  the 
law,  and  the  age  of  the  M  essias  ;  and  this  laft 
age  they  looked  on  with  great  difference  from  the 
reil:,  as  the  famous  anil  glorious  age,  which  was  to  be 
as  it  were  the  beginning  of  a  new  world :  and  there- 
fore the  Jews  in  their  writings  conftantly  call  it  the 
fecuhimfiiturumy  the  age,  or  the  world  to  come  :  and 
therefore  the  apoftle  in  this  epiftle  to  the  Hebrews, 
calls  the  ftate  of  the  gofpel  by  that  name,  as  bed 
known  to  them,  Heb.  ii.  5.  "  But  unto  the  angels 
''  hath  he  not  put  in  fubjedlion  the  world  to  come, 
*'  whereof  we  now  fpeak ;"  that  is,  the  law  was 
given  by  the  difp6fition  of  angels  ;  but  the  dif- 
penfation  of  the  gofpel,  v/hich  is  call'd  the  world  to 
come,  was  managed  and  adminifcred  by  the  Son 
of  God.  So  like  wife  Heb.  vi.  5.  thofe  miraculous 
powers  which  accompanied  the  firit  preaching  of 
the  gofpel,  are  cail'd  cf^uvdixeig  r^  //sXXcvr©'  ouoav©', 
*'  the  powers  of  the  world  to  come,"  that  is,  of 
the  gofpel-age. 

So  that  this  lad  age  of  the  gofpel,  is  that  which 
the  fcripture  by  way  of  eminency  calls  "  the  age ;" 
thofe  that  went  before  are  conftantly  called  cct:ov?r, 
the  ages  in  the  plural  number.  So  we  find,  Eph. 
iii  9.  the  gof|3el  is  called  "  the  difpenfation  of  the 
t'  my  fiery  that  was  hid  in  God,'*  t-Tri  twv  ouujvwv, 

^'  from 


commijion  and promife  to  his  apofJes.  2  '  ^9 

««  from  ages  i"  and  you  have  the  lame  phraie,  Col.  ^|;^ 
i.  26.  Upon  the  fame  account,  the  expiration  of  the 
Jewilh  ftate,  is  in  fcripture  called  "  the  lad  times, 
^'  and  the  lafl:  days/'  Heb.  i.  2.  "  But  in  the  Jaft 
"  days,  God  hath  fpoken  to  us  by  his  Son."  i  Cor. 
X.  If.  ''  Thefe  things  are  written  for  our  admoni- 
''  tion,  upon  whom  rd  rsXri  roa'v  ajajvwv,  the  ends  of 
«'  the  ages  are  come."  In  the  fame  fenfe  theapoftle, 
Heb.  ix.  26.  fpeakingof  Christ,  fays,  that  "  he 
"  apDcared,  IttI  c-vvnXeia.  tmv  cuwvgov,  at  the  end  or 
"  the  ages,"  to  take  away  fin;  that  is,  at  the  con- 
cluiion  of  the  ages  which  had  gone  before,  in  the 
lad  age.  So  that  if  we  will  be  governed  in  the  in- 
terpretation of  this  text,  by  the  conilant  ufe  of  this 
phrafe  in  fcripture,  the  letter  of  this  promife  will  ex- 
tend to  the  end  of  the  world. 

2.  But  however  this  be,  it  is  certain  that  the  rea- 
fon  of  this  promife  does  extend'  to  all  thofe  that 
fliould  fucceed  the  apoftles  in  their  miniftry  to  the 
end  of  the  world  -,  I  will  fuppofe  now  (to  give  the 
adverfaries  their  utmofl  fcope)  that  which  we  have 
no  reafon  to  grant,  that  the  letter  of  this  promife 
reacheth  only  to  the  apoftles  and  their  age,  and  that 
our  Saviour's  meaning  was  no  more  but  this,  that 
he  would  fend  down  the  Holy  Ghost  upon 
them  in  miraculous  gifts,  to  qualify  and  enable  them 
for  the  fpeedy  planting  and  propagating  the  gofpel 
in  the  world,  and  that  he  would  be  with  them  'till 
this  work  was  done.  Now  fuppofmg  there  were 
nothing  more  than  this  intended  in  the  letter  of  it, 
this  ought  not  much  to  trouble  us,  fo  long  as  it  is 
certain,  that  the  reafon  of  it  does  extend  to  the  fuc- 
celTors  of  the  apoftles  in  all  ages  of  the  world.  I 
do  not  mean^  that  the  reafon  of  this  promife  does 

give 


2 1 40  ^he  authority  i^/'JesUsChrist,  with  his 
SERM.  orivc  us  fufficient  afTurance,  that  God  will  alTift  the 
'  teachers  and  governors  of  his  church  in  all  ages,  in 
the  fame  extraordinary  manner  as  he  did  the  apo- 
ftles,  becaufe  there  is  not  the  like  reafon  and  necef- 
fity  for  it  •,  but  that  we  have  fufficient  afTurance  from 
the  reafon  of  this  promife,  that  God  will  not  be 
wanting  ta  us,  in  fuch  fitting  and  neceffary  affiPcance, 
as  the  ftate  of  religion,  and  the  welfare  of  it  in  eve- 
ry age  fliall  require :  for  can  we  imagine  that  God 
would  ufe  fuch  extraordinary  means  to  plant  a  re- 
ligion in  the  world,  and  take  no  care  of  it  after- 
wards? that  he  who  had  begun  fo  good  a  work,  fo 
great  and  glorious  a  defign,  would  let  it  fall  to  the 
ground  for  want  of  any  thing  that  was  necclTary  to 
the  fupport  of  it  ? 

This  is  reafonable  in  itfelfj  but  we  are  not  alfo 
without  good  ground  for  thus  extending  the  general 
reafon  of  particular  promifes  beyond  the  letter  of 
them.  The  apoftle  hath  gone  before  us  in  this,  for 
Heb.  xiii  5,  6.  he  there  extends  two  particular  pro- 
mifes of  the  old  teftament  to  all  chriftians,  *'  let 
*'  your  converlation  (fays  he)  be  without  covetoufnels, 
'*  and  be  content  with  fuch  things  as  ye  have :  for  he 
"  hath  faid,  I  will  never  leave  thee  nor  forfake  thee.'* 
And  again,  "  the  Lord  is  my  helper,  I  will  not 
*'  fear  what  man  can  do  unto  me."  Thefe  promifes 
wcr^  made  to  particular  perfons ;  the  firft  of  them 
to  Jofhua,  and  the  other  to  David  ;  but  yet  the  apo- 
ftle applies  them  to  all  chriftians,  and  to  good  men 
in  all  ages,  becaufe  the  general  ground  and  reafon  of 
them  extended  fo  flir.  He  who  gave  Joihua  and 
David  this  encouragement  to  their  duty,  will  certain- 
ly be  as  good  to  us,  if  we  do  ours. 

And 


commijfion  and  pr oral fe  to  his  apojlles,  2 13 1 

And  thus  I  have  done  with  the  firll  controverfy  about  S  E- R  ^^« 
the  fenfe  of  thefe  words,  which  concerns  the  circum-  ^.^rY^s*/" 
llances  of  time  mentioned  in  this  promife,  *'  alway, 
*'  to  the  end  of  the  world,"  and  have  plainly  fhewn, 
that  both  the  letter  and  the  reafon  of  this  promife 
does  extend  farther  than  the  perfons  of  the  apoftles, 
and  the  continuance  of  that  age,  even  to  all  that 
iliould  fucceed  them  in  their  miniftry  to  the  end  of 
the  world.     I  come  now  to  confidcr. 

Secondly,  the  fubftance  of  the  promife  itfelf, 
namely,  what  is  meant  by  our  Saviour's  "  being 
"  with  them."  And  here  our  adverfaries  of 
the  church  of  Rome  would  fain  perfuade  us,  that 
this  promife  is  made  to  the  church  of  Rome,  and 
that  the  meaning  of  it  is,  that  that  church  Ihould  al- 
ways be  infallible,  and  never  err  in  the  faith.  But 
as  there  is  no  mention  of  the  church  of  Rome  in  this 
promife,  nor  any  v/here  elfe  in  fcripture  upon  the 
like  occafion,  whereby  we  might  be  direded  to 
underftand  this  promife  to  be  made  to  that  church  ; 
fo  to  any  unprejudiced  perfon  the  plain  and  obvious 
fenfe  of  this  promife  can  be  no  other  than  this,  that 
our  Saviour  having  commifiioned  the  apoftles  to 
go  and  preach  the  chriftian  religion  in  the  world,  he  • 
promifes  to  afTiil  them  in  this  work,  and  thofe  that 
Jhould  fucceed  them  in  it,  "  to  the  end  of  the  world.'* 
But  how  any  man  can  conftrue  this  promife,  fo  as 
to  make  it  fignify  the  perpetual  infallibility  of  the 
Roman  church,  I  cannot  for  my  life  devife,  and  yet 
this  is  one  of  the  main  texts  upon  which  they 
build  that  old  and  tottering  fabrick  of  their  infal- 
libility. 

Here  is  a  general  promife  of  alTiflance  to  the  pallors 
and  governors  of  tht  church,  in  all  ages  to  the  end 

of 


2132  ^he  authority  of  Jesus  Christ,  loithhis 
SERM.  of  the  world;  but  that  this  afTiftance  fhall  always 
F^jY^  ,  be  to  vc\^  degree  of  infallibility,  (as  it  was  to  the 
apodJes)  can  neither  be  concluded  from  the  letter  of 
this  promife,  nor  from  the  reafon  of  it ;  much  \di^ 
can  it  be  from  hence  concluded,  that  the  nlTiftance 
here  promifed,  if  it  were  to  the  degree  of  infallibi- 
lity, IS  to  be  limited  and  confined  to  the  fupreme 
pallor  and  governor  of  the  Roman  church. 

That  the  afTiftance  here  promifed  fliall  always  be 
to  the  degree  of  inflillibility,  can  by  no  means  be 
concluded  from  the  letter  of  this  promife.  Indeed 
there  is  no  pretence  or  colour  for  it  \  he  muft  have  a 
very  peculiar  fagacity  ;  that  can  find  out  in  thefe 
words,  "  I  am  with  you  always,"  a  promife  of  in- 
fallible afTiftance.  Is  not  the  promife  which  God 
made  to  Joftiua,  and  which  the  apoftle  to  the  He- 
brews applies  to  all  chriftians,  and  to  all  good  men 
in  all  ages,  "  I  will  never  leave  thee  nor  forfake 
*'  thee,"  the  very  fame  in  fenfe  with  this,  "  I  will 
«'  be  with  you  always  V^  and  yet  furely,  no  man 
did  ever  imagine,  that  by  virtue  of  this  promife, 
every  chriftian,  and  every  good  man  is  infallible. 

But  neither  can  it  be  inferr'd  from  the  reafon  of 
this  promife,  that  this  alTiPcance  Ihall  always  be  to 
the  degree  of  infallibility.  It  was  fo  indeed  to  the 
apoftles  \  the  miraculous  gifts  of  the  Ho  l  y  Ghost, 
which  were  beftowed  upon  them  for  the  more  fpeedy 
and  effedual  planting  and  propagating  of  the  gofpel 
in  the  world,werea  divine  teftimony  and  confirmation 
to  the  dodtrine  which  they  delivered  ;  and  having  this 
divine  teftimony  given  to  them,  we  are  certain  that 
they  were  fecured  from  error  in  the  delivery  of  that 
dodlrine.  So  that  the  apoftles  had  no  other  infalhbility, 
but  what  depended  upon,  and  was  evidenced  by  the 

miraculous  gifts  wherewith  they  were  endowed  \  and 

therefore 


commidlon  and  promife  to  his  apojlles.  2133 

therefore  without  the  like  erifts,  none  can  with  rea-  ?.?w^^ 
ion  pretend  to  the  like  infallibih'ty  :  for  infaJhbiiity 
fignifies  an  extraordinary  allillance  of  God's  Spi- 
rit, whereby  thofe  who  are  thus  affiited  are  fecu- 
red  from  error.  This  every  conHdent  man  may,  if 
he  pleafeth,  pretend  to  ;  but  no  man  is  to  be  be- 
lieved to  have  k^  but  he  who  can  give  fuch  evidence 
of  it,  as  is  fit  to  fatisfy  reafonable  men,  that  he  hath 
it.  Now  the  only  fufficient  evidence  of  fuch  an  ex- 
traordinary divine  affillance  is  the  power  of  mira- 
cles. This  indeed  is  the  great  external  tedimony  of 
a  teacher  come  from  God,  "  if  he  do  fuch  works 
"  as  none  can  do,  except  God  be  with  him;"  and 
this  evidence  the  prophets  of  old,and  our  Sa v  i  o  u  r, 
and  his  apoflles,  always  gave  of  their  infallibility. 
And  if  the  pope  and  general  councils  can  give  the 
tefiimony  of  fuch  miracles  for  their  infallibility,  as 
Mofes,  and  our  Saviour,  and  his  apoftles  did 
work,  we  are  ready  to  acknowledge  it.  Such  a 
teftimony  as  this  would  give  the  world  a  thoufand 
times  more  fatisfadlion  concerning  their  infallibility, 
than  all  the  fubtle  arguments  of  Bellarmine,  and  all 
their  writers.  But  if  they  cannot,  they  may  difpute 
about  it  to  the  end  of  the  world  ;  and  every  man 
that  hath  but  the  fame  confidence  may  pretend  to  ic 
with  as  much  reafon  as  they  do. 

But  to  proceed  in  my  argument,  here  is  a  plain 
reafon  why  this  extraordinary  affiftance  fhould  be 
granted  to  the  apoftles  at  firft  5  and  another  reafon 
as  plain,  why  it  fhould  not  be  continued  afterwards. 
It  was  reafonable,  and  in  fome  degree  necefTary,  that 
the  apoftles  ftiould  be  thus  affifted  at  the  firft  publi- 
cation of  the  gofpel,  namely  to  give  fatisfadion  to 
the  world,  that  they  were  faithful  and  true  witneftes 

Vol.  VJI.  15  B  of 

6. 


2134  '^i^^  authority  of  Jesus  Christ,  njoith  his 
SF  R\r  of  the  dodrine  and  miracles  of  Christ.  But 
'  fince  this  doftrinc  and  thefe  miracles  are  recorded  to 
pofterity,  by  thofe  very  perfons  that  were  thus 
afTiftcd,  here  is  as  plain  a  reafon,  why  after  the 
gofpel  was  planted  and  eflablifli'd  in  the  world, 
this  infallibility  fliould  ceafe.  So  long  as  we  have 
an  infallible  foundation  of  faith,  namely,  the  divine 
revelation  configned  in  writing,  and  tranfmitted 
down  to  us  by  teftimony  of  undoubted  credit,  what 
need  is  there  now  of  a  fixt  and  (landing  infallibility 
in  the  church  ?  but  having  handled  this  argument 
more  at  large  elfewhere,  I  fhall  infill  no  further 
upon  it  here. 

1  have  now  done  with  the  three  things  I  pro- 
pounded to  difcourie  upon  from  this  text.  You 
have  heard  v/hat  authority  our  Sav  i  o  y  r  had  given 
him  j  what  commiiTion  he  gave  to  his  difciples ; 
and  what  afilftance  he  hath  promifed  to  the  paflors 
and  crovernors  of  his  church  to  the  end  of  the 
world  :  namely,  fuch  an  afTiftance  as  is  fui table  to 
the  exi'^encies  of  the  church,  in  the  feveral  ages 
and  ftates  of  chriftianity ;  which  aflidance  was  at 
firft  very  extraordinary  and  miraculous.  God  was 
pleafed  to  give  witnefs  to  the  firft  teachers  and 
publifhers  of  the  gofpel,  "  with  figns  and  wonders 
«*  and  divers  miracles,  and  gifts  of  the  Holy 
' '  Ghost-,"  and  this  at  firft  was  in  a  very  great 
decree  neceflary,  it  not  being  otherwife  imaginable, 
how  chriftianity  could  have  born  up  againft  all  that 
force  and  violent  oppofition  which  was  raifed  againft 
it:  but  this  extraordinary  afliftance  was  but  a  tempo- 
rary and  tranfient  difpenfation.  God  did,  as  it  were, 
pals  by  ''  m  the  ftrong  and  mighty  wind,  in  the 
"  earthquake,  and  in  the  fire :"  but  he  was  in  the 

«  ftil! 


tommljjion  and prvmife  to  his  apofiles.  2  f  35 

**  ftill  voice,"  that  is,  he  defisined  to  fettle  and  con-  S  E  R  M. 
tinue  that  difpenfation,  m  that  more  calm  and 
fecret  way  of  afliftance,  which  offers  lefs  violence  to 
the  nature  of  man,  but  which  was  intended  for  the 
conftant  and  permanent  difpenfation. So  that  we  have 
no  reafon  to  think,  that  God  hath  now  forfaken  his 
church,  though  he  be  not  v/ith  \t  in  fo  fenfible  and 
extraordinary  a  manner. 

But  then  if  any  particular  church  defire  and  ex- 
pe6l  this  blelled  prefence  and  alTiflance  of  God's 
Holy  Spirit,  we  mud  remember,  that  there 
is  a  condidon  to  be  performed  on  our  parts.  For 
how  abfolute  foever  this  promife  may  be,  in  refpecl 
of  the  church  univerlal  \  it.  is  certainly  conditional 
to  any  particular  church,  as  fad  experience  in  many 
inftances  hath  fhewn.  God  hath  long  fince  \^it  the 
church  of  Jerufalem,  vv^here  the  gofpel  was  firfl  pub- 
lifhM  ;  he  hath  left  the  church  of  Antioch,  v/here 
the  believers  of  the  gofpel  were  firft  cali'd  chriiiians ; 
he  hath  \dx.  the  famous  churches  of  Afia,  to  that 
degree  of  defolation,  that  the  ruins  and  places  of 
fome  of  them  are  hardly  at  this  day  certainly  known. 
And  this  may  alfo  be  the  fate  of  any  particular 
church,  not  excepting  Rome  her  {tVi^  for  all  her 
pride  and  confidence  to  the  contrary.  "  Behold 
^'  therefore  the  goodnefs  and  feverity  of  God  :  to- 
"  wards  them  that  fell,  feverity  ;  but  towards  us 
"  goodnefs,  if  we  continue  in  his  goodnefs,  other- 
"  wife  we  alfo  Ihall  be  cut  off.'* 

This,  as  I  obferved  before,  is  fpoken  particularly 
to  the  Roman  church ;  the  apoftJe  fuppofeth  that 
the  church  of  Rome  her  felf  may  be  guilty  of  apofl^- 
ly  from  the  faith,  and  cut  off  by  unbelief,  and  in- 
deed feems  to  foretel  it ;  which  how  it  confifls  with 
15  B  2  dieir 


2  136       The  authority  of  ]es\js  Christ,  with  his 

S  E  R  M.  their  confident  pretence  to  infallibility,  let  them  look 
to  It. 

And  let  all  particular  churches  look  to  themfelves 
tliat  they  do  not  forfeit  this  promife  of  divine 
alTiilance.  For  Christ  hath  not  fo  tied  himfelf 
to  any  particular  church,  but  that  if  they  forfake 
him,  he  may  leave  them,  and  "  remove  his  candle- 
"  flick  from  them."j  There  have  been  many  fad  in- 
ftanccb  of  this,  fince  the  firfi:  planting  of  chrifcianity  ; 
and  we  have  nc  fmall  reafon  to  apprehend  that  it 
rtJay  come  to  be  our  own  cafe  •,  for  certainly  we  have 
many  of  thofe  marks  of  ruin  among  us,  which  did 
foretel  the  dellrudion  of  the  Jev/ifli  church  and  na- 
tion •,  horrible  profanenefs  and  contempt  of  religion, 
divifion  and  animofities  to  the  higheft  degree,  and 
an  univerfal  difTjlutenefs  and  corruption  of  manners. 
And  why  fliouid  we,  who  do  the  fame  things, 
think  our  fe'ves  exempted  from  the  fame  fate  ?  what 
can  we  expect,  but  that  God  fliould  deal  with  us, 
as  he  did  with  them,  "  take  away  the  kingdom 
''  of  God  from  us,  and  give  it  to  a  nation  that 
^'  will  bring  forth  the  fruits  of  it?** 

The  condition  of  this  great  promife  here  in  the 
text,  to  the  paftors  and  governors  of  the  chriftian 
church,  is  the  faithful  execution  of  their  commifTion^ 
if  they  do  fincerely  endeavour  to  gain  men  to  the 
belief  and  pradice  of  chriflianity,  Christ  hath 
promifed  to  be  with  them.  The  performance  of  this 
condition  doth  primarily  concern  the  chief  gover- 
nors of  the  church,  and  next  to  them  the  minilters 
of  the  gofpel  in  general,  that  they  fliould  be  diligent 
^nd  faithful  in  their  refpe6tive  flations,  "  teaching 
*«  men  to  obferve  all  things  whatfoever  Christ 
f^  hath  commanded.'*    And  if  v/e  would  make  this 

our 


commijjlon  and promife  to  his  aboftles,  2 137 

our  great  work,  to  inftru6t  our  refpedive  charges  in  S  E  rm. 
the  neceflliry  dodrines  of  faith,  and  the  indifpenfa- 
ble  duties  of  a  good  life,  we  fhould  have  far  lels 
trouble  with  them  about  other  matters.  And  that  we 
may  do  this  work  efFedualIy,we  mufl  be  ferious  in  our 
inftrudlionsand  exemplary  in  our  lives.  "  Serious  in  our 
inftrudions  i''  this  certainly  theapoftle  requires  in  the 
higheft  degree,  when  he  chargeth  minifters,  *'  fo  to 
"  fpeak,  as  the  oracles  of  God,"  to  which  nothing 
can  be  more  contrary,  than  to  trifle  with  the  word  of 
God,  and  to  fpeak  of  the  weightieft  matters  in  the 
world,  the  great  and  everlafting  concernments  of  the 
fouls  of  men,  in  fo  flight  and  indecent  a  manner,  as  is 
not  only  beneath  the  gravity  of  the  pulpit,  but  even  of 
a  well-regulated  ftage.  Can  any  thing  be  more  un- 
iliitable,  than  to  hear  a  minifter  of  God  from 
this  folemn  place  to  break  jefts  upon  fin,  and  to 
quibble  upon  the  vices  of  the  age  ?  this  is  to  fhoot 
without  a  bullet,  as  if  we  had  no  mind  to  do 
execution,  but  only  to  make  men  fmile  at  the  mention 
of  their  faults ;  this  is  fo  naufeous  a  folly,  and  of  fo 
pernicious  confequence  to  religion,  that  hardly  any 
thing  too  fevere  can  be  faid  of  it. 

And  then  if  v/e  would  have  our  inftrudions 
efFedtual,  we  mud  be  "  exemplary  in  our  lives.'* 
Ariftotle  tells,  that  the  manners  of  the  fpeaker  have 
y.\)^ior<ir)v)  irhiv^  the  moft  fovereign  power  of  per- 
fuafion.  And  therefore  Cato  puts  it  into  the  defini- 
tion of  an  orator,  that  he  is,  vir  bonus ^  dicendiperi- 
tus^  "  a  good  man,  and  an  eloquent  fpeaker."  This 
is  true  as  to  all  kinds  of  perfuafion  ;  the  good  opi- 
nion which  men  have  of  the  fpeaker,  gives  great 
weight  to  his  words,  and  does  ftrangely  difpofe  the 
niinds  of   men  to  entertain  his  counfels.     But  tha 

reputation 


2138  The  dijiculties  of  a 

reputation  of  goodnefs  is  more  efpecially  neceflary 
and  ufeful  to  thofe  whofe  proper  w.ork  it  is  to  per- 
fuade  men  to  be  good*,  and  therefore  the  apodle, 
when  he  had  charged  Titus  to  put  men  in  mind  of 
their  duty,  immediately  adds,  "  in  all  things 
*'  (hewing  thy  fclf  a  pattern  of  good  v/orks."  None 
fo  fit  to  teach  others  their  duty,  and  none  fo  likely 
to  gain  men  to  it,  as  thofe  who  pra<5tife  it  them- 
felves  ;  becaufe  hereby  we  convince  men  that  we 
are  in  earneft,  when  they  fee  that  we  perfuade  them 
to.  nothing,  but  what  we  choofe  to  do  our  felves. 
This  is  the  way  to  "  flop  the  mouths  of  men,'* 
and  to  confute  their  malice,  by  an  exemplary  piety 
and  virtue.  So  St,  Peter  tells  us,  i  Pet.  ii.  15. 
**  For  fo  is  the  will  of  God,  that  by  well-doing  ye 
'*  put  to  filence  the  ignorance  of  foolifli  men." 


SERMON     CXXV, 

The  difficulties  of  a    chriftian   life 
confidcr'd. 


LUKE  xiii.    24. 

Strive  to  enter  in  at  the  ftrait  gate  •,  for  many,  I  fay 
unto  youy  will  feck  to  enter  in^  and  fhall  ?iot  be 
able. 

S  E  R  M.  ^  H'"^  HERE  are  two  great  miflakes  about  the 
^^^^'       1       nature  of  religion,  equally  fill fe,  and  equally 
pernicious  to  the  fouls  of  men  :  and  the  de- 
viJ,  whofe  great  defign  it  is  ^0  keep  men  off  from 

religion 


cxxv. 


chrijiiaii  life  conjlderd,  2139 

religion  by  any  means,  makes  ufe  of  both  thcfe  S  E  R  m; 
miHakes,  to  ferve  his  own  purpofe  and  deiign  upon 
the  leveral  tempers  of  men.  Thofe  who  are  melan- 
choly and  ferioLis,  he  difheartens  and  difcourageth 
from  attempting  it,  by  the  extreme  trouble  and  dif- 
ficulty of  \t^  reprefenting  it  in  fo  horrid  and  fright- 
ful a  ihape,  incumber'd  with  fuch  difficulties,  and 
attended  with  luch  troubles  and  fufFerings,  as  are 
infuperable ,  and  intolerable  to  humane  nature ; 
whereby  he  perfuades  men,  that  they  had  better  ne- 
ver attempt  it,  fmce  they  may  defpair  to  go  through 
with  it. 

On  the  other  hand,  thofe  who  are  fanguine  and 
full  of  hopes,  he  poffefTes  with  a  quite  contrary  ap- 
prehenfion  \  that  the  bufinefs  of  religion  is  fo  ihort 
and  eafy  a  work,  that  it  may  be  done  at  any  time,  and 
if  need  be,  at  the  laft  moment  of  our  lives,  tho*  it 
is  not  fo  well  to  put  it  upon  the  laft  hazard  \  and 
by  this  means,  ,  a  great  part  of  mankind  are 
]ull*d  in  fccurity, .  and  adjourn  the  bufinefs  of  reli- 
gion from  time  to  time  ;  and  becaufe  it  is  fo  eafy, 
and  fo  much  in  their  power,  they  fatisfy  them- 
felves  with  an  indeterminate  refolution  to  fet  about 
that  bufinefs  fome  time  or  other  before  they  die,  and 
fo  to  repent,  and  make  their  peace  with  God  once 
for  all. 

Thefe  pretences  contradifl  one  another,  and  there- 
fore cannot  be  both  true,  but  they  may  both  be 
falfe,  as  indeed  they  are,  and  truth  lies  between 
them  ;  religion  being  neither  fo  flight  and  eafy  a 
work  as  fome  would  have  it,  nor  lb  extremely  dif- 
ficult and  intolerable,  as  others  would  repreTent  it. 
To  confute  the  falfe  apprehenfions  which  fome  have 
of  the  eafinefs  of  it,  our  S  av  i  o  u  r  tells  us  there 

muil 


zi^o  T'/je  difficulties  of  a 

SERM.  j^ufl;  be  fome  ftrlving -,  and  to  futisfy  us,  that  the 
difficulties  of  religion  are  not  fo  great  and  infupera- 
ble,  as  fome  would  make  them,  our  Saviour 
tells  us,  that  thofe  who  "  ftrive"  fhall  fucceed  and 
*'  enter  in  j "  but  thofe  who  only  "  feek,"  that  is, 
do  not  vigoroufly  fet  about  the  bufinefs  of  religion, 
but  only  make  fome  faint  attempts  to  get  to  hea- 
ven, "  fhall  not  be  able  to  enter  in."  "  Strive 
*'  to  enter  in  at  the  flrait  gate  j  for  many,  I  fay 
*'  unto  you,  will  feek  to  enter  in,  but  Ihall  not  be 
«  able." 

The  occafion  of  which  words  of  our  bleffed  Sa- 
viour, was  a  queftion,  that  was  put  to  him,  by 
one  of  his  difciples,  concerning  the  number  of  thofe, 
that  fhould  be  faved,  ver.  23.  One  faid  unto  him, 
''  Lord,  are  there  few  that  be  faved  }  "  To  which 
curious  queftion,  our  S  av  i  o  u  r  (according  to  his 
manner,  when  fuch  kind  of  queftions  were  put  to 
himj  does  not  give  a  dire6l  anfwer,  becaufe  it  was 
neither  neceffary,  nor  ufeful  for  his  hearers  to  be 
refolved  in,  it  did  not  concern  them,  to  know  what 
number  of  perfons  fhould  be  faved,  but  what  courfe 
they  fliould  take  that  they  might  be  of  that  num- 
ber;  and  therefore,  inftead  ofiatisfying  their  curio- 
fities,  he  puts  them  upon  their  duty  ;  admonifhing 
them,  inftead  of  concerning  themfelves  what  fliould 
become  of  others,  to  take  care  of  themfelves. 
"  And  he  faid  unto  them,  ftrive  to  enter  in  at  the 
*'  ftrait  gate  -,  for  many,  I  fay  unto  you,  Ihall  feek 
*'  to  enter  in,  and  fhall  not  be  able."  He  does 
not  fay,  that  "  but  few  fhall  be  faved  ;"  (as  fome 
have  prefumptuoufly  ventur'd  to  determine)  but  only 
few  in  comparifon  of  thofe  "  many,  that  fhall  feek 
*'  to  enter  in,  and  fliall  not  be  able." 


^  chrifiian  life  confider'd,  2 14 1 

'    In  thefe  words  we  may  confider  thefe  two  things.   ^^^^* 

Firfl,  the  duty  enjoined,  "   drive  to  enter  in  at  ^^.^^-^ 
*'  the  ftr^t  gate." 

Secondly,  the  reafon  or  argument  to  enforce  it, 
"  for  many  fhal]  feek  to  enter  in,  and  ihall  not  be 
*'  able." 

Firfl,  the  duty  enjoined  5  '*  flrive  to  enter  in  at 
^'  the  ftrait  gate."  Which  words  being  metapho- 
rical, I  Ihall  ftrip  them  of  the  metaphor,  that  fo  we 
may  fee  the  plain  meaning  of  them.  Now  by  this 
metaphor,  or  rather  allegory,  thefe  three  things  are 
plainly  intended. 

id,  the  courfe  of  a  holy  and  chriftian  life,  in 
order  to  the  obtaining  of  eternal  happinefs,  is  here 
reprefented  to  us  by  a  way,  which  every  man,  that 
would  come  to  heaven,  muft  walk  in.  For  fo 
St.  Matthew  (who  exprefleth  this  more  fully)  makes 
mention  of  a  way,  as  well  as  a  gate,  by  which  we 
muft  enter  into  it;  ''  ftrait  is  the  gate,  and 
**  narrow  is  the  way,  that  leadeth  to  life."  And 
this,  tho'  it  be  not  exprefs'd  by  St.  Luke,  is  ne- 
ceflarily  underftood,  "  flrive  to  enter  in  by  the 
*'  ftrait  gate,"  that  is,  into  the  way  that  leads  to 
life. 

2dly,  the  firft  difficulties  of  a  holy  and  religious 
courfe  of  life,  are  here  reprefented  to  us,  ''  by  a 
«  ftrait  gate."  For  the  gate  at  which  we  enter, 
and  the  way  in  which  we  walk,  can  fignify  nothing 
elfe,  but  the  beginning  and  progrefs  of  a  holy  and 
religious  courfe. 

3dly,  our  diligence  and  conftancy  in  this  courfe,  ^ 
are  reprefented  by  ftriving,  a  word  which  hath  a 
great  force  and  emphafis  in  it,  dycaviC^i^^^  a.  meta- 
phor taken  from  the  earneft  contention  which  was 

Vol.  VIL.  15  C  ufed 

6. 


cxxv. 


2142        ^  T^h^  difficulties  of-a 

£  E  R  M.  ufed  in  the  olympick  games,  by  thofe  who  flrovc 
fcr  maftery  in  running  or  wreftling,  or  any  of  the 
other  exercifes  which  were  there  ufed. 

Secondly,  here  is  a  reafon  added  to  enforce  the 
exhortation  or  duty  ;  "  for  many  fhall  feek  to  enter 
"  in,  and  fhall  not  be  able  : ''  that  is,  there  are  a 
great  many  that  v/ill  do  fomething  in  chriftianity, 
and  make  fome  faint  attempts  to  get  to  heaven, 
who  yet  fliall  fall  fhort  of  it,  for  want  of  fuch 
a  firm  refolution  and  earneftnels  of  endeavour,  as  is 
neceflary  to  the  attaining  of  it. 

Having  thus  explained  the  v/ords,  I  fhall  take 
occafion  from  the  firfl  part  of  them,  namely,  the 
duty  of  exhortation,  to  handle  thefe  three  points, 
very  ufeful  for  us  to  confider,  and  to  be  well  in- 
llru6led  in. 

I  ft,  the  difficulties  of  a  holy  and  chriftian  courfe. 

2dly,  the  firm  refolution  and  earnefl  endeavour 
that  is  required  on  our  part  for  the  conquering  of 
thefe  difficulties. 

3dly,  that  thefe  difficulties  are  not  fo  great  and 
infuperable,  as  to  be  a  jufl  difcouragement  to  our 
endeavours  ;  if  we  will  flrive,  we  may  mailer  them. 

.Firft,  the  difficulties  of  a  holy  and  chriftian  courfe. 
And  thefe  are  either  from  our  felves,  or  from  fome- 
thing without  us. 

I .  From  our  klvtSy  from  the  [original  corruption 
afid  depravation  of  our  nature,  and  the  power  of 
evil  habits  and  cufloms,  contracted  by  vicious  prac- 
tices. Our  natures  are  vitiated  and  depraved,  in- 
clined to  evil,  and  impotent  to  good  ;  befides,  that 
being  habituated  to  fm  and  vice,  it  is  a  matter  of 
infinite  difficulty  to  break  offacuftom,  and  to  turn 
the  courfe  of  our  life  another  way.    Now  becaufe 

this 


chrijlian  life  conjider'd,  2143 

this  is  the  difficulty  of  our  firfl  entrance  into  reli-SERM. 
gion,  it  is  reprefented  by  "  a  ftrait  gate,"  which  is       '     * 
hard  to  get  through. 

2.  There  are  likewife  other  difficulties  from  with- 
out;  as  namely,  the  oppofition  and  perfecution  of 
the  world,  which  was  very  raging  and  violent  in 
the  firft  begianings  of  chrifhianity.  And  this  our 
Saviour  reprefents  by  the  ruggednefs and  roughnefs 
of  the  way,  as  St.  Matthew  exprefTeth  it,  chap.  vii. 
14.  "  Strait  is  the  gate,  and  narrow  is  the  way  that 
*''  leads  to  life,"  Kcxi  rc^Xi/jt/^cs^y)  r\  oc^o?,  confragofa 
eft  viay  (fo  Grotius  renders  it)  the  way  is  craggy, 
full  of  afflidions  and  troubles. 

So  that  thefe  are  the  two  great  difficulties  in  a 
chriftian  courfe,  indifpofition  from  within,  and  op- 
pofition from  without. 

I.  Indifpofition  from  within.  And  this  makes 
religion  fo  much  the  more  difficult,  becaufe  it  checks 
us  at  our  very  firft  entrance  upon  our  chriftian 
courfe,  and  makes  us  unwilling  to  fet  out.  The'sN 
corruption  of  our  nature,  and  thofe  vicious  habits 
which  by  a  long  cuftom  of  fin  we  have  contra6ted 
do  ftrongly  incline  us  to  the  contrary  way,  fo  that  a 
man  muft  offer  great  force  and  violence  to  hinifelf 
that  will  conquer  this  difficulty.  It  is  one  of  the 
hardeft  things  in  the  world  to  break  off  a  vicious 
habit,  and  to  get  loofe  from  the  tyranny  of  cuftom. 
The  prophet  Jeremiah  fpeaks  of  it,  as  next  to  a  na- 
tural impoffibility,  chap.  xiii.  23.  *'  Can  the  ethio- 
"  pian  change  his  skin  ?  or  the  leopard  his  fpots  ? 
*^  then  may  ye  alfo  do  good,  that  are  accuftomed  to 
^'  do  evil."  This  requires  great  ftriving  indeed. 
Nothing  fliews  the  fpirit  and  refolution  of  a  man 
more,  than  to  contend  with  an  inveterate  habit ;  for 

15  C  2  ia 


2  144  ^^^  diffuuUies  of  a 

S  E  R  M.  in  this  cafe  a  man  flrives  asainft  the  very  bent  and 
CXXV     .      .       •  . 

inclination  of  his  foul ;  and  'tis  eafier  to   fet  a  man 

againft  all  the  world,  than  to  make  him  fight  with 

himfelf:  and  yet  this  every  man  mufl:  do,  who  from 

any  wicked  courfe  of  life,  betakes   himfelf  fcrioufly 

to  religion  -,  he  mud  as  it  were  lay  violent  hands  upon 

himfelf,  and  fight  with  the  man  he  was  before  ;  and 

this   in  fcripture  is  emphatically  cxpreit  to  us,   by 

*'  crucifying   the  old  man,  with  the  affections   and 

*'  lufts  thereof."  A  chriftian  when  he  firft  enters  upon 

a  holy  and  good  courfe  of  life,  is  reprefented  as  two 

perfons  or  parties  at  civil   war  one  with  another, 

"  the  old,  and   the    ne^v   man  ;"  fo  that   whoever 

will  be  a  chriftian  muft  put  off  himfelf,  and  become 

another  man ;  and  'tis  no  eafy  matter  for  a  man  to 

quit  himfelf. 

2.  In  our  chriftian  courfe,  we  muft  likewife  expedl 
to  meet  with  great  oppofition  from  without.  Blef- 
fed  be  God,  chriftianity  hath  generally  been  for  ma- 
ny ages  free  from  this  difficulty,  which  attended  the 
firft  profefTion  of  it ;  it  was  then  indeed  a  very  fteep 
and  craggy  way,  very  rough  and  thorny,  not  to  be 
travelled  in  without  Iweat  and  bloody  the  dangers 
and  hazards  of  the  profellion  were  fuch,  as  were  not 
to  be  encountered  by  a  mere  moral  refolution,  and  the 
natural  ftrength  of  flefh  and  blood  ;  the  perfecution 
that  attended  it  was  fo  hot,  and  the  torments  which 
threatned  it  ^o  terrible,  that  the  fenfual  and  incon- 
fiderate  part  of  mankind  would  rather  venture  hell 
at  a  diftance,  than  run  themfelves  upon  fo  prefent  and 
evident  a  danger. 

But  fince  thele  ages  of  perfecution,  this  difficulty 
hath  been  in  a  great  meafure  removed.  Not  but  the 
true  ;*cligion  hath  ftill  its  enemies  in  the  world  j   but 

thev 


chrijlian  life  conjider^d,  2  H5 

thty  are  not  let  loofe,  as  they  were  in  thofe  times;  SERm, 
it  is  flill  perfecutcd  and  expofed  to  the  malice  and  ^^'^^• 
reproach,  but  not  to  the  rage  and  fury  of  unreafo- 
nable  men.  In  the  calmeft  times  there  is  hardly 
any  man  can  be  a  flrict  and  fincere  chriftian,  without 
being  liable  to  hatred  and  contempt,  without  deny- 
ing himfelf  many  of  thofe  worldly  advantages,  which 
thofe  who  make  no  confcience  of  the  ftrifl  laws 
of  chriftianity  may  make  to  themfelves ;  fo  that  at 
all  times  it  requires  a  good  degree  of  conftancy  and 
refolution  to  perfevere  in  a  holy  courle,  and  to  bear  up 
againfl:  the  oppofition  of  the  world,  and  to  withftand 
its  temptations,  to  be  "  harmlefs  and  blamelefs  in  the 
"midftof  a  crooked  and  perverie  nation  j"  not  to  be 
infeded  with  the  eminent  and  frequent  examples  of 
vice,  and  carried  down  with  the  ftreami  of  a  cor- 
rupt and  degenerate  age.  So  that  tho'  our  difficul- 
ties be  not  always  the  fame,  and  equal  to  thofe  which 
the  primitive  chriftians  encountered,  yet  there  is 
enough  to  exercife  our  beft  refolution  and  care  ; 
tho'  the  main  body  of  the  enemies  of  chriftianity  be 
broken,  and  "  the  fons  of  Anak  be  deftroyed  out 
*'  of  the  land  ;  yet  fome  of  the  old  inhabitants  are 
"  (till  left,  to  be  thorns  in  our  fides,  and  pricks  in 
^^  our  eyes,"  that  true  religion  may  always  have 
fomething  to  exercife  its  force  and  vigour  upon.  I 
have  done  with  the  firft  point,  the  difficulties  of  a 
chriflian  courfe.     I  proceed  to  the 

Second,  the  earned  endeavour  that  is  to  be  ufed 
on  our  part,  for  the  conquering  of  thefe  difficul- 
ties. And  to  the  bufinefs  of  religion,  if  we  will 
fet  upon  it  in  good  earned,  thefe  three  things  are 
requirecj. 

1%  a 


2146  '  *The  difficulties  of  a 

S  E  R  M.     I  ft,  a  mighty  refolution  to  engage  us  in  a  holy 
^^"^^'.and  chriftian  courle. 

2dly»  great  diligence  and  induflry  to  carry  us  on 
in  it. 

3dly,  an  invincible  conflancy  to  carry  us  through 
it,  and  make  us  perfevcrc  in  it  to  the  end. 

ifl,  a  mighty  refolution  to  engage  us  in  a  holy 
and  good  courfe.  For  want  of  this,  mofl  men  mif- 
carry  and  ftumble  at  the  very  threfhold,  and  never 
get  through  the  flrait  gate,  never  mafter  the  diffi- 
culties of  the  firfl  entrance.  Many  arc  well  difpofed 
towards  religion,  and  have  fits  of  good  inclina- 
tion that  way,  (efpccially  in  their  young  and  ten- 
der years)  but  they  want  firmnefs  of  refolution  to 
conquer  the  difficulties  of  the  firfl  entrance  upon  a 
religious  and  virtuous  life  j  like  the  young  man  that 
came  to  our  Saviour,  well  inclined  to  do  fome 
good  thing,  that  '^  he  might  inherit  eternal  life  ;'* 
but  when  it  came  to  the  point,  he  gave  back,  he 
was  divided  betwixt  Christ  and  the  world, 
and  had  not  refolution  enough  "  to  part  with  all 
«  for  him." 

r  Many  men  (I  doubt  not)  have  frequent  thoughts 
and  deliberations  about  a  better  courfe  of  life,  and 
are  in  a  good  mind  to  take  up,  and  break  off 
that  lewd  and  riotous  courfe  they  are  in  ;  but  they 
cannot  bring  themfelves  to  a  fixt  purpofe  and  re- 
folution :  and  yet  without  this  nothing  is  to  be  done, 
*^  the  double-minded  man  is  unflable  in  all  his 
*^  ways.'*  There  mufl  be  no  indifferency  and  irre. 
folutenefs  in  our  minds,  if  we  will  be  chriftians  ; 
we  mufl  ^  not  flop  at  the  gate,  but  refolve  to  prefs 
in.  We  fee  that  men  can  take  up  peremptory  refo- 
lutions  in  other  matters,  to  be  rich  and  great  in  the 

world. 


drift  tan  life  confider'd. '  2 1 47 

world,  and  they  can  be  true  and  fteadfafl  to  thefe  S  E  R  m. 
refolutions ;  and  why  lliould  not  men  refolve  to  bci 
wife  and  happy,  and  ftand  to  thefe  refolutions  and 
make  them  good  ?  God  is  more  ready  to  affifl  and 
ftrengthen  thefe  kind  of  refolutions  than  any  other  j 
and  1  am  fure  no  man  hath  fo  much  reafon  to  re- 
folve upon  any  thing,  as  to  live  a  holy  and  vir- 
tuous life  j  no  other  refolution  can  do  a  man  that 
good,  and  bring  him  that  comfort  and  happinefs 
that  this  will. 

2dly,  the  bufinefs  of  religion,  as  it  requires  a 
mighty  refolution  to  engage  us  in  a  holy  and  good 
courfe,  fo  likewife  a  great  diligence  to  carry  us  on 
in  it.  When  we  are  got  through  the  (Irait  gate, 
we  muft  account  to  meet  with  many  difficulties 
in  our  way  ;  there  are  in  the  courfe  of  a  chriftian 
life  many  duties  to  be  performed,  v/hich  require 
great  pains  and  care ;  many  temptations  to  be  re- 
filled,which  will  keep  us  continually  upon  our  guard; 
a  great  part  of  the  way  is  up  hill,  and  not  to  be 
climb'd  without  labour ;  and  the  fcripture  frequently 
calls  upon  us,  "  to  work  out  our  falvation  with  fear 
''  and  trembling*,"  that  is,  with  great  care  and  in- 
duftry  ;  *'  to  give  all  diligence  to  make  our  calling 
"  and  eledion  fure  j"  to  folio v/  holinefs,  c^jo^xetv,  ta 
purfue  it  with  great  earnellnefs.  Nothing  in  this 
world  that  is  of  value,  is  to  be  had  on  other  terms  j 
and  we  have  low  thoughts  of  heaven,  if  v*'e  think 
any  pains  too  much  to  get  thither. 

3dly,  the  bufinefs  of  religion  requires  an  invinci- 
ble conftancy  to  carry  us  through  it,  and  to  make 
us  perfevere  in  it  to  the  end.  Refolution  may  make 
a  good  entrance  ;  but  it  requires  great  conftancy 
aad  firmneisi  of  mindj,  to  hold  out  in  a  good  courfe* 

A 


21^8  "The  difficulties  of  a 

S  E  R  M.  A  good  refoJution  may  be  taken  up  upon  a  prc- 
CXXV.  f(;nt  heat  and  may  cool  again  ;  but  nothing  but 
a  conftant  and  fteady  temper  of  mind  will  make  a 
man  perfevere  ;  and  yet  without  this,  no  man  ihail 
ever  reach  heaven.  "  He  that  continueth  to  the 
*'  end  fhall  be  laved;  but  if  any  man  draw  back, 
"  God's  foul  will  have  no  pleafure  in  him."  God 
puts  this  cafe  by  the  prophet,  and  determines  it, 
Ezekiel  xviii.  24.  "  When  the  righteous  man  turn- 
*'  eth  away  from  his  righteou fnefs,  fhall  he  live  ? 
*'  all  his  righteoufnefs  that  he  hath  done,  fliall  not 
*'  be  mentioned;  in  his  trefpafs  that  he  hath  tref- 
*'  pafTcdj  and  in  his  fin  that  he  hath  finned,  in  them 
'^  he  fhall  die  ;'*  nay  fo  far  will  his  righteoufnefs 
be  from  availing  him,  if  he  do  not  perievere  in  it, 
that  it  will  render  his  condition  much  worfe,  to  have 
gone  fb  far  towards  heaven,  and  at  laft  to  turn  his 
back  upon  it.  So  St.  Peter  tells  us,  2  Pet.  ii.  20, 
21.  "  For  if  after  they  have  efcaped  the  pollutions 
•*  of  the  world,  through  the  knowledge  of  the 
*'  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  they  are 
♦'  again  entangled  therein  and  overcome  ;  the  latter 
**  end  is  worfe  with  them  than  the  beginning  •,  for 
♦'  it  had  been  better  for  them  not  to  have  known 
*'  the  way  of  righteoufnefs,  than  after  they  have 
»'  known  it,  to  turn  from  the  holy  commandment 
**  delivered  unto  them."     I  proceed  to  the 

Third  point,  namely,  that  the  difficukies  of  a 
holy  and  chriftian  life  are  not  fo  great  and  infu- 
perable,  as  to  be  a  jufl:  ground  of  difcouragement 
to  our  endeavours.  All  that  I  have  faid  concern- 
ing the  difficulties  of  religion,  was  with  no  defign  to 
damp,  but  rather  to  quicken  our  induftry  -,  for, 
upon  the  whole  matter,  when  all  things  are  duly 

confidered. 


chriftian  life  conjlderd,  2 149 

confidered,  it  will  appear  that  *'  Christ's  yokeSERM. 
"  is  eafy  and  his  burden  light  \  that  the  com-  ^^■^^• 
*'  mandments  of  G  o  d  are  not  grievous  \ "  no, 
not  this  commandment  of  "  ftriving  to  enter  ia 
"  at  the  ftrait  gate-,"  which  I  fhall  endeavour  to 
make  manifed  by  taking  thefe  four  things  into  con- 
fideration. 

I.  The  affiftance  which  the  gofpel  offers  to  us. 
God  hath  there  promifed  "  to  give  his  Holy 
"  Spirit  to  them  that  ask  him;"  and  by  the 
afTiftance  of  G  o  d's  H  o  l y  S  p  i  r  i  t,  we  may  be 
able  to  conquer  all  thofe  difficulties.  Indeed  if 
we  were  left  to  ourfelves,  to  the  impotency  and 
weaknels  of  our  own  nature,  we  Ihould  never  be 
able  to  cope  with  thefe  difficulties ;  every  temp- 
tation would  be  too  hard  for  us ;  every  little  op- 
pofition  would  difcourage  us :  but  ' '  God  is  with 
*'  us,  and  there  is  nothing  too  hard  for  him." 
If  the  principles  of  a  holy  life  were  only  the 
birth  of  our  own  refolution,  they  would  eafily  be 
born  down  \  but  they  are  from  God,  of  a  hea- 
venly birth  and  original ;  and  whatfoever  is  "  born 
"  of  God,  overcometh  the  world."  John  i.  12, 
13.  "  As  many  as  received  him,  ;to  them  gave 
''  he  power  (sgyo-Zav,  the  privilege)  to  become 
"  the  fons  of  God,  even  to  them  that  believe 
"  on  his  name,  which  were  born  not  of  blood 
"  nor  of  the  will  of  the  fleili,  nor  of  the  will  of 
"  man,  but  of  Go  d.'* 

God  confiders  the  impotency  of  humane  nature, 
in  this  deprav'd  and  degenerate  (late  into  which  we 
are  funk,  and  therefore  he  hath  not  left  us  to  our 
felves ;    but  when  he  commands  us  to  ''  work  out 

Vol.  VII.  15  D  our 

6. 


2 1  ^o  T^hc  dijjiculiies    of  a 

S  E  R  M.  our  own  falvation,"  he  tells  us  for  our  encourage- 
CXXV.^  ment,  that  "  he  himfelf  works  in  us  both  to  will 
"  and  to  do  j'*  ^he  does  not  bid  us  to  be  ftrong  in 
our  own  ftrength,  for  he  knows  we  have  no 
ftrength  of  our  own,  but  to  be  "  ftrong  in  the 
"  Lord,  and  in  the  povv'er  of  his  might-,"  and 
what  may  not  even  a  weak  creature  do,  that  is  fb 
powerfully  afTifled  ?  if  we  will  but  make  ufe  of  this 
ftrength,  nothing  can  be  too  hard  for  us.  All  that 
God  expeds  from  us  is,  that  we  fhould  comply  with 
the  motions  of  his  S  p  i  r  i  t,  and  be  as  fincere  in 
the  ufe  of  our  own  endeavours,  as  he  is  in  the  offers 
of  his  grace  and  afiiftance. 

2.  Let  us  confider,    that  the  greateft  difficulties 
are  at  firft ;  'tis  but  making  one  manful  onfet,  and 
fullaining   the  firft  brunt,    and  the  difficulties   will 
abate  and  grow  lefs,  and  our  ftrength  will  every  day 
increafe  and  grow  more.  ''  The  gate  is  ftrait:"  but 
when  we  have  once  got  through  it,  "  our  feet  will  be 
«*  fet   in  an  open  place."     After  fome  ftruggling 
to  get  thro%  we  fhall  every  day  find  our  felves  at 
more  eafe  and  liberty.      It  will  be    very    hard   at 
firft,  to  mafter  our   vicious  inclinations,  to  change 
the  habit  of  our  minds,  and  the  courfe  of  our  lives, 
and  to  adl  contrary  to  what  we  have  been  long  ac- 
cuftomed  :    but   this  trouble  lafts   but  for   a  little 
while  j  thefe  pangs  of  the  new-birth,    tho'  they  be 
ftiarp,  yet  they  are  not  ufually  of  long  continuance. 
It  does  indeed  require  great  refolution  and  firmnels 
of  mind,  to  encounter  the  firft  difficulties  of  religion : 
but  if  we  can  but  ftand  it  out  for  one  brunt,  our  ene- 
my will  give  way,  and  the  pleafure  of  vidory  will 
tempt  us  on.    It  is  trgubkfgme  to  conflid:  with 


great 


chrijlian  life  confiderd,  2151 

great  difficulties,  and  men  are  loth  to  be  brought  to  |^|y^ 
it :    but   when  we   are  engaged,    it  is  one   of    the  ^,,,^^«^ 
greatefl:  pleafures  in  the  world   to  prevail   and  con- 
quer.    Many  men  are  loth  to  go  to  war  \  but  after  a 
litde  ruccefs,they  areas  loth  to  give  over 5  that  which 
was  a  terror  to  them  at  firfl,  turns  into  a  pleafure. 

3.  Confider  that  cuftom  will  make  any  courfe  of 
life  tolerable,  and  mod  things  eafy.  Religion,  and 
the  pradice  of  a  holy  life  is  difficult  at  firfl:;  but. 
after  we  are  once  habituated  to  it,  the  trouble  v»'i!l 
wear  off  by  degrees,  and  that  which  was  grievous 
will  become  eafy;  nay,  by  degrees,  much  more 
pleafant  than  ever  the  contrary  pradice  was.  We  fee 
the  daily  experience  of  this,  in  the  mod  difficult  and 
laborious  employments  of  this  world  ;  a  little  pains 
tires  a  man  at  firfl,  but  when  he  is  once  feafoned  and 
enured  to  labour,  idlenefs  becomes  more  tedious  and 
troublefome  to  him  than  the  hardeil  work.  Cuftoni 
will  make  any  thing  eafy,  tho'  it  be  a  htcle  unnatu- 
ral. Nothing  is  more  unnatural  than  fin  ;  'tis  not 
according  to  our  original  nature  and  frame,  but  it  is 
the  corruption  and  depravation  of  it,  a  fecond  na- 
ture fuperinduced  upon  us  by  cuflom ;  whereas  the 
pradice  of  hohnefs  and  virtue  is  agreeable  to  our 
original  and  primitive  ftate,  and  fin  and  vice  are  the 
perverting  of  nature  contrary  to  our  reafon,  and 
the  defign  of  our  beings,  and  to  all  obligations  of 
duty  and  interefl :  but  by  returning  to  God  and 
our  duty,  we  return  to  our  primitive  flate ;  we  ad 
naturally,  and  according  to  the  intention  of  our 
beings ;  and  when  the  force  of  a  contrary  cuftom  is 
taken  off,  and  the  bias  clapt  on  the  other  fide^  ''  wc? 
'*  /hall  run  the  ways  of  Go  d*s  commandments  v/ith 
'5  D  2  «'  v?:^:^:. 


21^2  The  difficulties  of  a 

SERM.  «'  more  delight"    and   fatisfadlion,    than   ever  we 

For  fin  is  a  violence  upon  our  natures,  and  that  is 
always  uneafy,  yet  it  is  made  more  tolerable  by  cu- 
flom:  but  religion  reftores  men  to  their  natural 
flate,  and  then  we  are  at  eafe  and  refl.  Religion  is 
at  firft  a  yoke  and  burden :  but  unlefs  we  take  this 
upon  us,  we  fliall  never  "  find  reft  to  our  fouls." 

4thly  and  laftly,   confider  the  reward  that  religion 
propounds,    and  this  muft  needs   fweeten  and  miti- 
gate all  the  troubles  and  difficulties  that  are  occafi- 
oned  by  it.     This  ftrait  gate,  through  which   we 
muft  enter ;  and  this  craggy  way  which  we  are  to 
climb  up,  leads  to  life  •,  and  he  is  a  lazy  man  in- 
deed, that  will  not  ftrive  and  ftruggle  for  life.  All 
that  a  man  can  do,   he   will  do   for    his  Mt^    for 
this  miferable  life,  which  is  fo  fhort  and   uncertain, 
and  "  born  to  trouble  as  the  fparks  fly  upwards  i'* 
a  life  not  worth  the  having,  nor  worth  the  keeping 
with  any  great  care  and  trouble,  if  it  were  not  in 
order  to  a  better  and  happier  life.     But  'tis  not  this 
life   which   our   Saviour    means;    that  indeed 
were  not  worth    all   this  ftriving  for  :    'tis  eternal 
life  •,  a  ftate  of  perfed  and  endlefs   happinefs ;    of 
"  joys  unfpeakable  and  full  of  glory."      And  who 
would  not  "  ftrive  to  enter  in  at  that  gate,"  which 
leads  to  fo  much  felicity  ?  can  a  man  pofTibly  take 
too  much  pains,  be  at  too  much  trouble  for  a  few 
days,  to  be  happy  for  ever  .? 

So  often  as  I  confider  what  incredible  induftry 
men  ufe  for  the  things  of  this  life,  and  to  get  a  fmall 
portion  of  this  world,  I  am  ready  to  conclude, 
that   either  men  do    not  believe    the    rewards  of 

another 


chrijlian  life  conjiderd.  2153 

^  another  world,  or  that  they  do  not  underfland 
I  them  j  elle  they  could  not  think  much  to  be  at  the 
fame  pains  for  heaven,  that  they  can  chearfully 
beftow  for  the  obtaining  of  thefe  corruptible  things. 
Can  we  be  fo  unconfcionable,  as  to  think  God 
unreafonable,  when  he  offers  heaven  and  everlafting 
happinefs  to  us,  upon  as  eafy  terms,  as  any  thing 
in  the  world  is  ordinarily  to  be  had  ?  and  are  not 
we  very  foolilh  and  unwife,  to  put  away  eternal 
life  from  us,  when  we  may  have  it  upon  terms 
fo  infinitely  below  the  true  worth  and  value 
of  it. 

I  have  now  done  with  the  three  things  which 
I  propounded  to  Ipeak  to  from  the  firft  part  of 
thefe  words,  which  are  fo  many  arguments  to  en- 
force the  exhortation  here  in  the  text ;  "  to  ftrive 
*'  to  enter  in  at  the  flrait  gate,''  and  to  give  all 
diligence,  by  the  courfe  of  a  holy  and  virtuous 
life,  to  get  to  heaven;  and  we  may  affure  our 
felves,  that  nothing  Icfs  than  this  will  bring  us 
thither.  So  our  Sav  i  o  u  r  tells  us,  in  the  latter 
part  of  the  text ;  that  "  many  Ihall  feek  to  enter 
**  in,  and  fhall  not  be  able.'*  I  proceed  now  to 
the 

Second  part  of  the  text;  the  reafon  or  argu- 
ment whereby  this  exhortation  is  enforced ;  "  ftrive 
^'  to  enter  in  at  the  flrait  gate  j  for  many,  I  fay 
^'  unto  you,  fhall  feek  to  enter  in,  and  fhall  not 
*'  be  able."  Every  feeking  to.  enter  in  will 
not  gain  our  admifHon  into  heaven ;  therefore 
there  mufl  be  flriving:  for  men  may  do  many 
things  in  religion,  and  make  feveral  faint  attempts 
to  get  to  heaven,   and  yet  at  lafl  fall  fhort  of  it, 

for 


21^4  '^he  difficulties  of  a 

S  E  R  M.  for  want  of  earned  contention  and  endeavour 
CXxy.  ^^hich  isnecefTary  to  the  attaining  of  it.  We  mufl: 
make  religion  our  bufinefs,  and  fet  about  it  with 
all  our  might,  and  perfevere  and  hold  out  in  it,  if 
ever  we  hope  to  be  admitted  to  heaven  -,  "  for 
'^  many  fhall  feek  to  enter,  that  fhall  be  fliut 
''  out." 

Now  what  this  feeking  is,  which  is  here  oppo- 
fed  to  "  driving   to   enter  in  at  the  ftrait   gate,'* 
our    Saviour    declares   after  the    text,    ver.   25. 
«'  When  once  the  mailer  of  the  houfe  is  rifen  up, 
*«  and  hath  fhut  to  the  door,  and  ye  begin  to  ftand 
«'  without,  and  knock  at  the  door,  faying,  Lord, 
"  Lord,   open  unto  us ;  and  he  fhall  anfvver  and 
*'  fay  unto  you,    I  know  you  not  whence  ye  are; 
*«  then  fhall  ye  begin  to  fay,    we   have  eaten  and 
*'  drunk  in  thy  prefence,  and  thou  hafl   taught  in 
**  our  flreets ;  but  he  fhall  fay,   I  tell  you,  I  know 
*«  you  not  whence  ye  are ;    depart  from  me  all  ye 
*^  workers  of  iniqutiy."  St.  Matthew  mentions  fome 
other    pretences    which    they  fhould    make ;   upon 
which  they    fhould  lay    chiim   to  heaven,    Matth. 
vii.  21,22,23.  "  Not  every  one  that  iaith  unto  me, 
"  Lord,  Lord,    fhall  enter  into  the  kingdom 
*'  of  heaven :  but  he  that  doth  the  will  of  my  Fa- 
*'  T  H  E  R  which  is  in  heaven.     Many  will  fay  unto 
"  me  in  that  day.  Lord,  Lord,    have  we  not 
**  prophefied  in  thy  name  ?  and  in  thy  name  have 
*'  cad  out    devils?    and   in  thy   name   done  many 
*'  wonderful  works?   and  then  will  I  profefs  unto 
"  them,    I  never  knew  you  •,   depart   from  me  ye 
^'  that  work  iniquity."    After  all  their   feeking  to 
enter  in,    and  notwithdanding  all  thefe  pretences, 

they 


chrijlian  life  conjider'd.  ^^55 

they  lliall  be  fhut  out,  and  be  for  ever  banifh'd^^^^y  * 
from  the  prefence  of  God.  This  fhall  be  their 
doom,  which  will  be  much  the  heavier,  becaufe  of 
the  difappointment  of  their  confident  expedlation 
and  hope.  So  St.  Luke  telJs  us,  chap.  xiii.  28,  29, 
"  There  fliall  be  weeping  and  gnafhing  of  teeth  > 
"  when  ye  fhall  fee  Abraham,  and  Ifaac,  and  Ja- 
"  cob,  and  all  the  prophets  in  the  kingdom  of 
«'  God,  and  ye  your  felves  thrufl  out.  And  they 
*'  fhall  come  from  the  eafl:,  and  from  the  weft, 
*'  and  from  the  north,  and  from  the  fouth,  and 
"  fhall  fit  down  in  the  kingdom  of  God."  To 
which  St.  Matthev/  adds,  chap.  viii.  ver  12.  ''  But 
*'  the  children  of  the  kingdom  fhall  be  call  out 
^'  into  utter  darknefs ;  there  fhall  be  weeping  and 
«'  gnafhing  of  teeth.''  And  then  our  Saviour 
concludes  ("Luke  xiii.  30.^  "  Behold,  there  are  laft 
<'  that  ftiall  be  firil,  and  iirfl  which  fhall  be  laft.'* 
From  all  which  it  appears,  with  what  confidence  many 
men,  upon  thefe  falfe  pretences  (which  our  Sa- 
V  I  o  u  R  calls  "  feeking  to  enter  in")  fhall  lay  claim 
to  heaven,  and  how  ftrangely  they  fhall  be  difap- 
polnted  of  their  expedlation  and  hope;  when  they 
fhall  find  themfelves  caft  out  of  heaven,  who  they 
thought  had  out-done  all  others  in  religion,  and 
were  the  only  members  of  the  true  church,  and 
"  the  children  and  heirs  of  the  kingdom;"  and 
fhall  fee  others,  whom  they  thought  to  be  out  of 
the  pale  of  the  true  church,  and  excluded  from  all 
terms  of  falvation,  come  from  all  quarters,  and  find 
free  admiffion  into  heaven  •,  and  fhall  find  them- 
felves fo  grofly  and  widely  miftaken,  that  thofe 
very  perfons,  whom  they  thought  to  be  laft,    and 

of 


2156  7 he  difficulties  of  a 

SERM.  of  all  others  fartheft  from  falvation,  fhall  be  firft  ^ 

f\  \[  \r\j 

'  and  they  themfelves,  whom  they  took  for  "  the 
''  children  of  the  kingdom,"  and  fuch  as  fhould  be 
admitted  into  heaven  in  the  firft  place,  fhall  be  re- 
jected and  caft  out. 

So  that  by  "  feeking  to  enter, "  we  may  under- 
fland  all  thofe  things  which  men  may  do  in  reli- 
gion, upon  which  they  fhall  pretend  to  lay  claim 
to  heaven,  nay,  and  confidently  hope  to  obtain  it ; 
and  yet  fhall  be  fhamefully  difappointed,  and  fall 
fliort  of  it.  Whatever  men  think,  and  believe,  and 
do  in  religion,  what  privileges  foever  men  pretend, 
what  ways  and  means  foever  men  endeavour  to  ap- 
peafe  the  deity,  and  to  recommend  themfelves  to 
the  divine  favour  and  acceptance,  all  this  is  but 
*'  feeking  to  enter  in,"  and  is  not  that  ftriving 
which  our  Saviour  requires.  "  If  men  do  not 
"  do  the  will  of  God,  but  are  workers  of  ini- 
*'  quity,"  it  will  all  fignify  nothing  to  the  obtaining 
of  eternal  happinefs. 

Our  Saviour  here  inflanceth  in  mens  profef- 
fion  of  his  religion,  ^'  calling  him  Lord,Lordj" 
in  their  perfonal  familiarity  and  converfation  with 
him,  by  "  eating  and  drinking  in  his  prefence " 
and  company  ;  in  their  having  heard  him  preach 
the  do(5lrine  of  life  and  falvation,  "  thou  haft  taught 
*'  in  our  ftreets;"  in  their  having  prophefied,  and 
wrought  great  miracles  in  his  name  and  by  his 
power,  "  have  we  not  prophefied  in  thy  name  ?  and 
"  in  thy  name  caft  out  devils  ?  and  in  thy  name 
'^  done  many  wonderful  works  ?  "  thefe  were  great 
and  glorious  things  which  they  boafted  of  j  and  yet 
nothing  of  all  this  will  do,  if  men  *'  do  not  the 

will 


chrijlian  life  conjtder'd.  ^^57 

«  will  of  God  ; '*  notwithftandino;  all  this,  hewillSERM/ 

CXYV 

lay  unto  them,  "  I  know  ye  not  whence  ye  are,  de-  \,^^^^1^ 
*'  part  from  me,  ye  workers  of  iniquity.'* 

And  by  a  'plain  parity  of  reafon,  whatever  ^{q, 
men  do  in  religion,  what  attempts  foever  men  may 
make  to  get  to  heaven,  upon  what  privileges  or 
pretences  foever  they  may  lay  claim  to  eternal  life, 
they  will  certainly  fall  fhort  of  it,  if  they  "  do 
"  not  the  will  of  God,"  but  ''  arc  workers  of  ini- 
"  quity."  My  bufinefs  therefore  at  this  time  Ihall 
be,  to  difcover  the  feveral  falfe  claims  and  pretences 
which  men  may  make  to  heaven,  and  yet  fhall  never 
enter  into  it.  And  to  this  purpofe  I  fhall  inftance 
in  feveral  particulars,  by  one  or  more  of  which 
men  commonly  delude  themfelves,  and  are  apt  to 
entertain  vain  and  ill-grounded  hopes  of  eternal  fal- 
vation. 

id,  fome  trail  to  the  external  profefTion  of  the 
true  religion. 

2dly,  others  have  attained  to  a  good  degree  of 
knowledge  in  religion,  and  they  rely  much  upon 
that. 

3dly,  there  are  others  that  find  themfelves  much 
affeded  with  the  word  of  God,  and  the  dodrines 
contained  in  it. 

4thly,  others  are  very  flrid  and  devout  in  the 
external  worfhip  of  G  o  d. 

5thly,  others  confide  much  in  their  being  mem- 
bers of  the  only  true  church,  in  which  alone  falva- 
tion  is  to  be  had,  and  in  the  manifold  privileges 
and  advantages  which  therein  they  have  above  others 
of  getting  to  heaven. 

6thly,  others  think  their  great  zeal  for  God  and 
his  true  religion,  will  certainly  fave  them. 

Vol.  VII.  15  Er  7thly, 

6. 


2158  7he  difficulties  of  a 

^c^xv^'      7^^^y'  ot^^i's  go  a  great  way  in  the  real  prafticc 
of  religion, 

Sthly,  others  rely  much  upon  the  fincerity  of 
their  repentance  and  converfion,  whereby  they  are 
put  into  a  ftate  of  grace,  and  become  the  children  of 
God,  and  heirs  of  everlafcing  hfe  ;  and  being  once 
truly  fo,  they  can  never  fall  from  that  flate,  fo  as 
finally  to  mifcarry. 

Laftly,  others  venture  all  upon  a  death-bed  re- 
pentance, and  their  importunity  with  G  o  d  to  re- 
ceive them  to  mercy  at  the  lad.     * 

I  fhall  briefly  go  over  thefe  particulars,  which  are 
the  feveral  ways  whereby  men  "  feek  to  enter  '* 
into  heaven,  and  hope  to  get  thither  at  laft  ;  and 
iliall  fbew  the  infufficiency  of  them  ;  and  that  there 
is  fomething  beyond  all  this  neceffary  to  be  done  for 
the  attainment  of  everlafting  falvation. 

I  ft,  fome  truft  to  the  mere  external  profefTion  of 
t\\t  true  religion,  and  think  it  enough  to  call  him.. 
Lord,  Lord,  to  be  baptized  in  his  name,  and 
thereby  to  be  admitted  members  of  the  chriftian 
church.  What  the  apoftle  fays  of  the  profeffion  of 
the  jewifh  religion,  and  the  outward  badge  of  it, 
«  circumcifion,"  may  be  applied  to  the  profefTion 
of  chriftianity  made  in  baptifm,  Rom.  ii.  17,  25, 
28,  29.  "  Behold  thou  art  called  a  Jew,  and  reft- 
«'  eft  in  the  law,  and  makeft  thy  boaft  of  God. 
«'  Circumcifion  verily  profiteth,  if  thou  keep  the 
*'  law  j  but  if  thou  be  a  breaker  of  the  law,  thy 
*<  circumcifion  is  made  uncircumcifion  :  for  he  is 
*'  not  a  Jew  that  is  one  outwardly,  neither  is 
*'  that  circumcifion,  which  is  outward  in  the  fTefh ; 
*'  but  he  is  a  Jew  which  is  one  inwardly,  and  cir- 
*^  cumcifion  is  that  of  the  heart,  in  the  fpirit,  and 

"  not 


chriftian  life  coiifider'd.  2  J  59 

"  not  in  the  letter/'  The  cafe  is  the  fame  of  thofe  ^?.5x¥° 
who  make  only  an  outward  profeflion  of  chriftia- 
nity.  *'  Baptifm  verily  profiteth,  if  we  perform 
"  the  condition  of  that  covenant  which  we  entred 
*'  into  by  baptifm;"  but  if  we  do  not,  our  bap- 
tifm is  no  baptifm:  for  "  he  is  not  a  chriftian, 
"  which  is  one  outwardly,  nor  is  that  baptifm  which 
"  is  outward  in  the  flefh  ;  but  he  is  a  chrlflian 
*'  which  is  one  inwardly,  and  baptifm  is  of  the 
**  heart,  in  the  fpirit,  and  not  in  water  only.''  So 
St.  Peter  tells  us,  i  Pet.  iii.  21.  that  baptifm 
is  not  only  the  walhing  of  the  body  with  water, 
and  "  the  putting  away  of  the  filth  of  the  fieih  ; 
"  but  the  anfwer  of  a  good  confcience  towards 
"  God." 

The  promife  of  eternal  life  and  happinefs  is  not 
made  to  the  external  profefHon  of  religion  v/ithout 
the  fincere  and  real  pradice  of  it.  "  Why  call  ye 
"  me  Lord,  Lord,  (fays  our  Sav  10  u  r)  and 
^'  do  not  the  things  which  I  fay  ? "  The  fcripture 
hath  no  where  faid,  "  he  that  is  baptized  fhall  be 
*'  fived;"  but  ''  he  that  believeth  and  is  baptized, 
"  he  that  repenteth  and  is  baptized,  Ihall  be  fa- 
"  ved."  This  deferves  to  be  ferioufly  confidered 
by  a  great  many  chriftians,  who  have  nothing  to 
ihew  for  their  chriftianity,  but  their  names  ;  whofe 
befl  tide  to  heaven  is  their  baptifm,  an  engagement 
entred  into  by  others  m  their  name,  but  never 
confirmed  and  made  good  by  an  ad:  of  their  own  % 
a  thing  which  was  done  before  they  remember, 
and  which  hath  no  other  effect  upon  their  hearts 
and  lives,  than  if  it  were  quite  forgotten. 

2dly,  there  are  others  who  have  attained  to  a 
good    degree  of  knov/ledge  in  religion,    and  they 

15  E  2  hope 


2 1 6o  The  difficulties  of  a 

SERM.  hope  that  will  fave  them.  But  if  our  knowledge 
\^^yf^  in  religion,  though  never  fo  clear  and  great,  do 
not  defcend  into  our  hearts  and  lives,  and  govern 
our  adions,  all  our  hopes  of  heaven  are  built  upon 
a  falfe  and  fandy  foundation.  So  our  Saviour 
tells  us,  Matth.  vii.  26.  "  Every  one  that  heareth 
''  thefe  fayings  of  mine,  and  doth  them  not,  ihall 
'^  be  likened  unto  a  foolifh  man,  which  built 
*'  his  houfe  upon  the  fand."  And  John  xiii.  17. 
**  If  ye  know  thefe  things,  happy  are  ye,  if  ye  do 
*'  them.'* 

There  is  not  a  greater  cheat  in  religion,  nothing 
wherein  men  do  more  grofly  impofe  upon  them- 
felves,  than  in  this  matter,  as  if  the  knowledge  of 
religion,  without  the  pradice  of  it,  would  bring 
men  to  heaven.  How  diligent  are  many  in  read- 
ing and  hearing  the  word  of  God,  who  yet  take 
no  care  to  pradife  it  in  their  lives  't  like  thofe  in 
the  prophet,  Ezek.  xxxiii.  31.  of  whom  God  com- 
plains, "  They  come  unto  thee  as  the  people  com- 
«'  eth,  and  they  fit  before  thee  as  my  people,  and 
*'  they  hear  my  words;  but  they  will  not  do 
*«  them."  None  do  fo  foolilhly,  and  yet  fo  de- 
fervedly  mifs  of  happinefs,  as  thofe  who  are  very 
careful  to  learn  the  way  to  heaven,  and  when 
they  have  done,  will  take  no  pains  at  all  to  get 
thither. 

3dly,  there  are  others  who  find  themfelves  much 
affe6led  with  the  word  of  God,  and  the  preaching 
of  it  \  and  this  they  take  for  a  very  good  fign,  that 
it  has  its  due  effect  upon  them.  And  this  happens 
very  frequently,  that  the  word  of  G  o  d  makes 
confiderable  imprefTions  upon  men  for  the  prefent, 
and  they  arc  greatly  affedled  with  it,  and  troubled 

for 


chrijiian  life  conjider'd.  2 1 6 1 

for  their  fins,  and  afraid  of  the  judgments  of  God,  SE  r  m, 
and  the  terrible  vengeance  of  another  world  ;  and 
upon  this  they  take  up  fome  refolutions  of  a  better 
courfe,  which  after  a  litde  while  vanifh  and  come 
to  nothing.     This  was  the   temper  of  the  people 
of    Ifrael,    they    delighted    to   hear    the    prophet 
fpeak  to  them  in  the  name  of  God,  Ezek.  xxxiii* 
32.  "  And  lo,  thou  art  unto  them   as  a  very  lovely 
*'  fong  of  one   that    hath   a    pleafant  voice,   and 
"  can  play  well  upon  an  inftrument,  for  they  hear 
"  thy    words,    but    they   do    them    not."     Mark 
vi.  20.  it  is  faid  that  Herod  had    a  great  reverence 
for  John    the  baptift,    "   that    he   obferved    him, 
"  and    heard  him  gladly ;"   but  yet  for   all  that, 
he  continued   the  fame   cruel  and  bad   man    that 
he  was  before.     And  in  the  parable  of  the  fower, 
Matth.   xiii.  20.    there   are    one    fort    of   hearers 
mentioned,  who,  "  when  they  heard  the  word,  re- 
^^  ceived  it  with  joy ',  but  having  no  root  in  them- 
"  felves,  they  endured  but  for  a  while,  and  when 
*'  tribulation  or  perfecution  arifeth,  becaufe  of  the 
''  word,  prefendy  they  are  offended."     There  are 
many  men  who  have  fudden  motions  in  religion, 
and  are   mightily  affeded  for  the  prefent ;  but  it 
mud  be  a  rooted  and  fixt  principle,  that  will  en- 
dure and  hold    out  againft    great    difficulties  and 
oppofition.     Adls  xxiv.    25.    it  is   faid   that  when 
St.   Paul   *'   reafoned  of    righteoufnefs,    and   tem- 
*^'  perance,    and  judgment  to  come,    Felix   trem- 
*'  bled :"  and  nothing  is  more  frequent,  than  for 
men  to  be    mightily  ftartled  at  the  preaching  of 
the  word,    when    their   judgments  are    convinced 
and    born   down,    and   their    confciences    touched 

to  the  quick  ;    a  lively  reprefentation  of  the  evil 

'■-   •  of 


2 1 62  ^he  difficulties  of  a 

SE  R  M.  of  fin,  and  the  infinite  danger  of  a  finful  courfe, 
CXXV.^  may  ftir  up  the  pafTions  of  grief  and  fear,  and 
dart  fuch  Itings  into  the  confciences  of  men,  as 
may  make  them  extremely  reftlefs  and  unquiet, 
and  work  fome  good  thoughts  and  incUnations 
in  them  towards  a  better  courfe;  and  yet  like 
metals,  when  the  heat  is  over,  they  may  be  the 
harder  for  having  been  melted  down. 

4thly,  others  fliew  great  ftridnefs  and  devotion 
in  the  worfliip  of  God,  and  this  they  hope  will 
be  accepted,  and  cannot  fail  to  bring  them  to 
heaven:  and  yet  fome  of  the  worft  of  men  have 
been  very  eminent  for  this.  The  Pharifees  were 
the  moft  exad  people  in  the  world  in  matter  of 
external  ceremony  and  devotion  ;  and  yet  for  all 
this,  our  Saviour  plainly  tells  them,  that  *'  they 
*«  were  farther  from  the  kingdom  of  God,"  than 
thofe  who  feemed  to  be  fartheft,  "  than  publi- 
*'  cans  and  harlots ;"  and  that  becaufe  they  were 
fo  very  bad,  under  fo  great  a  pretence  of  devotion, 
*'  therefore  they  ihould  receive  the  greater  dam- 
«'  nation.** 

Not  but  that  external  devotion  is  a  neceflary 
exprefTion  of  religion,  and  highly  acceptable  to 
God,  when  it  proceeds  from  ^  pious  and  devout 
mind,  and  when  men  are  really  fuch  in  their 
hearts  and  lives,  as  their  external  devotion  repre- 
fents  them  to  be  :  but  when  the  outward  garb 
of  religion  is  only  made  a  cloke  for  fin  and 
wickedncfs,  when  there  is  nothing  within  to  anfwer 
all  the  fhew  that  we  fee  without,  nothing  is  more 
odious  and  abominable  to  God.     Thefe  are  mere 

engines   and    poppets  in  religion,   all  the  motions 

we  fee  without    proceed   from  an    artificial    con- 
trivance. 


chrlftian  life  confider^L  2 163 

trlvance,  and  not  from  any  inward  principle  of  SE  R  Ai: 
Mfe  ;  and  as  no  creature  is  more  ridiculous  than 
an  ape,  becaufe  the  bead  makes  feme  pretence  to 
humane  fhape ;  fo  nothing  is  more  fuHbm  than 
this  hypocritical  devotion,  becaufe  it  looks  like  re- 
ligion, but  is  the  fartheft  from  it  of  any  thing  in^ 
the  world. 

f  thly,  others  confide  very  much  in  their  being 
members  of  the  only  true  church,  in  which  alone 
falvation  is  to  be  had,  and  in  the  manifold  pri- 
vileges and  advantages  which  they  have  thereby 
above  others  of  getting  to  heaven.  Thus  the 
Jews  confined  falvation  to  themfelves,  and  looked 
upon  all  the  reft  of  the  world  as  excluded  fi*om 
it.  And  not  only  fo,  but  they  believed  that  by 
one  means  or  other  every  Ifraelite  lliould  be 
faved.  So  that  they  were  the  jewifh  catholick 
church,  out  of  which  there  was  no  hope  of  falva- 
tion for  any. 

The  fame  pretence  is  made  by  fome  chriftians 
at  this  day,  who  engrofs  falvation  to  themfelves, 
and  will  allow  none  to  go  to  heaven  out  of  the 
communion  of  their  church  ;  and  have  fo  or- 
dered the  matter,  that  hardly  any  that  are  in  it 
can  mifcarry.  They  are  member's  of  an  infallible 
church,  which  cannot  pofTibly  err  in  matters  of 
faith,  *'  they  have  not  only  eat  and  drunk  in 
*'  Christ's  prefence, "  but  have  eat  and  drunk 
his  very  corporal  prefence,  the  natural  fubftance 
of  his  fiefh  and  blood ;  they  have  not  only  our 
blcfled  Saviour,  but  innumerable  other  inter- 
ceffors  in  heaven  ;  they  have  not  only  their  own 
merits  to  plead  for  them,  but  in  cafe  they  be  de- 
fedive,  they   may  have  the  merits  of  others  af- 

figned  ^ 


cxxv. 


2164  The  difficulties  of  a 

SRRM.  figned  and  made  over  to  diem,  out  of  the  in- 
finite flock  and  treafure  of  the  church,  upon 
which  they  may  challenge  eternal  Jife,  as  of  right 
and  due  belonging  to  them  ;  and  by  a  due  courfe 
of  confefTion  and  abfolution,  may  quit  fcores  with 
God  for  all  their  fins  from  time  to  time.  Or 
if  they  have  negledled  all  this,  they  may,  after 
the  mod  flagitious  co'jrfe  of  life,  upon  attrition 
(that  is,  upon  fome  trouble  for  fin,  out  of  fear  of 
hell  and  damnation)  joined  with  confeflion  and 
abfolution,  .get  to  heaven  at  laft  j  provided  the 
pried  mean  honeftly,  and  do  not,  for  want  of  in- 
tention, deprive  them  of  the  faving  benefit  and 
tffet^l  of  this  facrament. 

Bat  is  it  poffible  men  can  be  deluded  at  this 
rate!  as  to  think  that  confidence  of  their  own  good 
condition,  and  want  of  charity  to  others,  will 
/* carry  them  to  heaven  ?  that  any  church  hath  the 
j^  privilege  to  fave  impenitent  finners  ?  and  they  are 
really  impenitent,  who  do  not  exercife  fuch  a  re- 
pentance, as  the  gofpel  plainly  requires  \  and  if 
men  die  in  this  flare,  whatever  church  they  are  of, 
the  great  judge  of  die  world  hath  told  us,  that 
*'  he  will  not  know  them,"  but  will  bid  them  '^  to 
"  depart  from  him,  becaufe  they  have  been  workers 
'*  of  iniquity.'* 

6thly,  others  think  that  their  zeal  for  God  and 
his  true  religion  will  certainly  fave  them.  But  zeal,  if 
it  be  not  ''  according  to  knowledge,"  if  it  be  miftaken 
in  its  objedl,  or  be  irregular  or  excefiive  in  the  de- 
gree, is  fo  far  from  being  a  virtue,  that  it  may  be  a 
great  fin  and  fault;  and  tho'  it  be  for  the  truth,  yet 
if  it  be  deftitute  of  charity,  and  feparated  from  the 
virtues  of   a  good  life,   it  will  not  avail  us.     So 


cxxv. 


chrijiian  life  conjider'd.  216^ 

Sl  Paul   tells  us,  that  *'  tho'  a  man  fhali  give  his  ''^X?^^^- 
''  body  to  be  burnt;  yet  if  he  have  not  charity,  it 
*'  is  nothino;. '» 

7thly,  others  go  a  great  way  in  the  real  practice  of 
religion,  and  this  lure  will  do  the  bufinefs.  And 
it  is  very  true,  and  certain  in  experience,  that  re- 
ligion may  have  a  confiderable  awe  and  influence 
upon  mens  hearts  and  lives,  and  yet  they  may 
fall  fhort  of  happi nefs.  Men  may  in  many  confide- 
rable inftances  perform  their  duty  to  God  and  man; 
and  yet  the  retaining  of  one  luH:,  the  pradlice  of 
any  one  known  fin,  may  hinder  them  from  "  en- 
''  tering  in  at  the  ftrait  gate."  Herod  did  not 
only  "  hear  John  gladly,"  but  "  did  many  things'* 
in  obedience  to  his  dodrine ;  and  yet  he  was  a  ve- 
ry bad  man.  The  pharifee  thanked  God  (and  it 
may  be  truly)  "  that  he  was  not  like  other  men, 
"  an  extortioner,  or  unjult,  or  an  adulterer  ;"  and 
yet  the  penitent  publican  was  "  juftined  before 
*'  him."  The  young  man  who  came  to  our  Sa- 
viour to  know  what  he  fhould  do  to  enter  into 
life,  and  of  whom  our  Saviour  teftifies,  that  he 
was  "  not  far  from  the  kingdom  of  God,"  and 
that  he  ''  wanted  but  one  thing  ;  "  yet  for 
want  of  that  he  mifcarried.  And  St.  James  af- 
fures  us,  that  "  if  a  man  keep  the  whole  law, 
*'  and  yet  fail  in  one  point,  he  is  guilty  of  all." 
If  we  be  workers  of  iniquity  in  any  one  kind 
Christ  will  difown  us,  and  bid  us  "  depart  from 
*'  hmi." 

8thly,  others  rely  upon  the  fincerity   of  their  re- 
pentance and  converfion,  whereby  they  are  put  in- 
to  a  llate  of  grace,    from  whence  they  can  never 
finally  fall.     They    did   once  very  heartily  repent 
Vol.  VIL  15  F  of 


2 1 66-  7he  difficulties  of  a 

SERM.  of  their  wicked  lives,  and  did   change  their  courfe, 
■  '  and  were  really  reformed,    and  continued   a  great 
while  in  that  good   courfe.     And  all  this  may    be 
certainly  true,  but  it  is  as  certain  that  they  are  rc- 
lapfed  into    their   former   evil   courfe:    and    if  fo, 
the    prophet   hath  told   us  their   doom,  that   '*  if 
"  the  righteous  man  forfake  his  righteoufnefs,  his 
*'  righteoufnefs   fhall  not    be  rcmembred  ;    but  in 
"  the  fin    that  he    hath   finned,    in   that  fhall  he 
*^  die."     So   that  "    a  righteous    man    may   turn 
"  from  his  righteoufnefs,  and  commit  iniquity,  and 
*'  die   in    it.'*     For  the  prophet  doth  not   here  (as 
fome  vainly  pretend)  put  a  cafe,  which  is  impofTible 
in   fadt  fhould  happen,    unlefs  they  will   fay,    that 
the  other  cafe  which  he  puts  together  with  it,  of 
"  the  wicked  man's  turning  away    from  his  wick- 
*'  ednefs   and    doing    that    which   is    lawful    and 
''  right,"  is  likewife  impofTible,    which   God   for- 
bid.    And    that    men    may    fall    from  a   ftate  of 
grace,  is  no  matter  of  difcouragement  to  good  men ; 
but  a  good  caution  againft  fecurity,  and   an  argu- 
ment to  greater  care  and  watchfulnefs,  according  to 
that  of  the  apoftle,  *'  let  him   that  flandeth  take 
*'  heed  lefl  he  fall ;"  which  admonition  were  furely 
to  litde  purpofe,  if  it  were  impoffible  for  them  that 
^iland  to  fall. 

^  \  Laftly,  others  venture  all  upon  a  death-bed  re- 
pentance, and  their  importunity  with  God  to  receive 
them  to  mercy  at  lad.  This  indeed  is  only  *'  to 
«'  feek,"  and  not  "  to  ftrive  to  enter  inj"  and 
thefe  perhaps  are  they  whom  our  Sa v  i  o  u  r  repre- 
fents  as  "  (landing  without,  and  knocking  at  the 
*'  door,  faying  Lord,  Lord,  open  unto  usj'* 
or  as  St.  Matthew  expreffeth  it,  "  many  fhall  fay  to 

me 


chrijiian  life  conjiderd.  2167 

me  that  day.  Lord,  Lord,"  which  Is  mofl  pro-  ^.^,.^^^' 
bably  meant  of  the  day  of  judgment,  when  their 
cafe  is  brought  to  the  lad  extremity ;  and  next  to 
that  is  the  day  of  death,  when  men  are  entring  into 
a  ftate  of  endlefs  happinefs  and  mifery.  And  no 
wonder,  if  the  finner  would  then  be  glad,  when  he 
can  no  longer  continue  in  this  world,  to  be  admit- 
ted into  happinefs  in  the  next :  but  the  door  is  then 
fhut  to  mod  finners,  and  it  is  a  miracle  of  G  o  d's 
grace  and  mercy,  if  any  repentance  that  men  can 
then  exercife,  (which  at  the  beft  muPc  needs  be  very 
confufed  and  imperfecl)  will  then  be  accepted ;  if 
any  importunity  which  men  can  then  ufe,  will  be 
available.  For  with  what  face  can  we  expe^b,  than 
after  all  the  evil  actions  of  a  long  life,  God  fhould 
be  mollified  towards  us  by  a  few  good  words,  and 
accept  of  a  forc'd  and  conilraincd  repentance  for  all 
our  wilful  and  deliberate  crimes,  and  that  he  fhould 
forgive  us  all  our  fins  upon  a  litde  importunity, 
when  we  can  fin  no  longer,  and  will  repent  no 
Iboner. 

I:?8t  us  then  by  all  that  hath  been  faid,  be  effec- 
tually perfuaded  to  mind  the  bufinefs  of  religion  in 
good  earned,  and  with  all  our  might,  efpecially  the 
practice  of  it  in  the  exercife  of  all  the  graces  and 
virtues  of  a  good  life,  l^ti  us  heartily  repent  of  all 
the  fins  of  our  pad  life,  and  refolve  upon  a  better 
courfe  for  the  future  ;  and  let  us  not  delay  and  put 
off"  this  necefliiry  work  to  the  mod  unfit  and  impro- 
per time  of  old  age,  and  ficknefs,  and  death  :  but 
let  us  fet  about  it  prefendy,  and  enter  upon  a  good 
courfe,  and  make  all  the  fpeed  and  progrefs  in  it  we 
can. 

15  F  i  And 


2  1 63  ^he  difficulties  of^  &;c. 

ERM.       And  let  us  remember,  that  whatever  we  do  in 
religion  wiirnot  bring  us  to  heaven  if  we  do  not 
*'  do  the  will  of   our  Father  which  is  in  hea- 
"  ven  i"  if  we  do  not  give  up  our  felves  to  a  con- 
flant  and  univerfal  obedience  to  his  laws.     This  is 
"  to  ft  rive  to  enter  in  at  the  ftrait  gate  :"    and  tho* 
we  "  ftrive    to  enter   in"    a   thoufand  other  ways, 
'*  we  fliall  not  be  able-,'*  and  after  all  our  confidence 
and  conceit  of  our  felves,    and  our  own  righteouf- 
nefs,  and  fecurity  of  our  falvation   from  the  privi- 
leges of  any  church,  it  will  be  a  ftrange  damp  and 
difappointment  to  us,    to  fee  the  fincere  chriftians, 
who  have  done  the  will  of  God,  and  lived  in  obe- 
dience to  his  laws,    to  come  from  all  quarters,  and 
churches  in  the  Vv^orld,  and  "  fit  down  with  Abra- 
*'  ham,     Ifaac,     and    Jacob    in    the    kingdom   of 
^'  God,"  when  we  who  thought  our  felves  "  the 
*'  children  of  the  kingdom,  fliall  be  cad  out,"   be- 
caufe  we  have  been  "  workers  of    iniquity."  I  will 
conclude  all  with  thofe  plain   words  of    the  apoftle, 
Rom.  ii.  7,  8,  9.    "    To   them,    who    by    patient 
*'  continuance  in  well-doing,  feek  for  glory  and  ho- 
**  nour,  and  immortality  ;    eternal  life :    but   unto 
*<  them  that  are  contentious,   and  do  not  obey  the 
*'  truth,  but  obey  unrighteoufnefs;  indignation  and 
^'^  wrath,    tribulation,    and  anguifli  upon  every  foul 
•«  of  man  that  doth  evil  -,    in  the  day  when   God 
^'  (hall  judge  tlie  fecrets  of  men  byjEsusCHRisr 
5'  according  to  the  gofpel." 


SER  M  ON 


[  2i69  I 

SERMON    CXXVL 

The  parable  of  the  rich  man^,  and 
Lazarus. 


LUKE  xvi.  19,  20. 

"There  was  a  certain  rich  man^  which  was  clothed  in 
purple  and  fine  linen^  and  fared  fumptuoujly  every 
day  :  and  there  was  a  certain  beggar^  named  Lazarus^ 
which  was  laid  at  his  gate  full  of  fores. 

I  intend  by  G  o  d's  afTiftance  to  go  over  this  para-  S  E  R  M. 
ble,  than  which  I  think  there  is   none  in  the  ^^^vli^ 
whole  gofpel,    which  is  more  apt  to  afFed  men.   The  firil 
or  which  is  more  artificially  contrived,    ^^d  in  the  ^^[^^"^^^^ 
circumftances  whereof  a  greater  decorum    is   ob- 
ferved. 

;  It  is  a  great  queflion  among  interpreters,  whether 
this  narration  concerning  the  rich  man  and  Lazarus 
be  a  parable,  or  a  hiftory,  or  a  mixture  of  both. 
That  it  is  not  a  hiftory,  th^  refemblance  between  it 
and  others  of  oqr  Sav  i  o  u  r's  parables,  will  eafily 
convince  any  man  that  is  not  contentious ;  befides 
that,  in  fome  ancient  copies,  'tis  ufher'd  in  with 
this  preface,  "  and  he  fpake  a  parable  to  his 
*'  difciples  :  a  certain  rich  man,  &c." 

But  yet  as  fome  of  the  ancients  have  not  improba- 
bly conjedur'd,  it  feems  to  be  fuch  a  kind  of  para- 
ble, as  had  fomething  of  a  real  foundation  ;  as 
namely,  that  there  was  fuch  a  poor  man  as  Lazarus 
is  here  defcribed,  and  of  that  name  among  the 
Jews :  for  in  a  meer  parable  'tis  altogether  unufual 


X 170        7he  parable  of  the  rich  man,  and  Lazarus, 
SE  R  M.  to  name  perfons,  nor  is  this  done  in  any  other  of  our 
Saviours  parables. 

But  whether  this  be  fo  or  not,  is  not  worth  the 
difputing,  becaufe  it  alters  not  the  cafe  as  to  our 
Sav  I  o  u  r's  purpofe,  and  the  inftrudlions  which  we 
may  learn  from  it. 

In  the  handling  of  this  parable,  I  fhall  explain  it 
as  I  go  along,  and  draw  two  forts  of  inflrudions  or 
obfervations  from  it. 

The  firft  fort  of  obfervations  iliall  be  from  the 
circumftances  which  ferve  for  the  decorum  of  the 
parable  :  and  thefe  I  will  not  warrant  to  be  all  in- 
tended by  our  Sav  i  o  u  r  ;  but  only  to  be  true  in 
themfelves,  and  ufeful,  and  to  have  a  probable  rife 
from  fome  circumftances  of  the  parable ;  and  there- 
fore I  ftiall  fpeak  but  very  briefly  to  them. 

The  fecond  fort  of  obfervations  fhall  be  fuch  as 
are  grounded  upon  the  main  fcope  and  intent  of  the 
parable  •,  and  thefe  I  iliall  infill  more  largely  upon.  I 
begin, 

Firft,  with  thofe  obfervations  and  inftrudions 
which  I  lliall  gather  up  from  the  circumftances  which 
ferve  for  the  decorum  of  the  parable  j  and  I  ftiall 
take  them  in  order  as  they  lie  in  the  parable. 

Ver.  19.  "  Tjiere  was  a  certain  rich  man,  which 
"  was  clothed  in  purple  and  fine  linen,  and  fared 
*'  fumptuoufly  every  day.'*  Some  think  that  ^ur  Sa- 
viour in  this  defcription  refleded  upon  Herod, 
becaufe  he  defcribes  this  rich  man  to  be  ''  clothed 
<^'  in  purple."  But  this  conjedlure  is  without  reafon  s 
for  befides  that  it  was  not  our  Sav  i  o  u  r's  cuftom 
in  his  preaching,  to  give  fecret  girds  to  the  magi- 
ftrate;  'tis  certain  that  it  was  long  after  our  Sa- 
viour's time,   that  purple  was  appropriated  to 

kings. 


^'he  parable  of  the  rich  man^  and  Laza  rus.  2 1 7 1 
kings.  It  was  .then,  and  a  great  while  after,  the  S  E  R  M. 
wear  of  rich  and  powerful  men,  and  of  the  favou- 
rites and  great  men  of  the  court,  who  are  frequently 
in  ancient  hiftories  call'd  the  purpurati^  thofe  that 
wore  purple. 

That  v/hich  I  obferve  from  hence,  is,  that  the  rich 
man  is  not  here  cenfured  for  'enjoying  what  he  had, 
for  wearing  rich  apparel,  and  keeping  a  great  table. 
This  of  it  M^^  if  it  be  according  to  a  man's  edate 
and  quality,  and  without  intemperance,  is  fo  far  from 
being  a  fault,  that  it  is  a  commendable  virtue.  But 
here  was  his  fault,  that  he  made  all  to  ferve  his  own 
fenfuality  and  luxury,  without  any  confideration  of 
the  wants  and  neceffities  of  others :  whereas  one  of 
the  great  ufes  of  the  plentiful  tables  of  rich  men,  is 
from  the  fuperfluity  of  them  to  feed  the  poor  and 
the  hungry. 

Ver.  20.  ''  And  there  was  a  certain  beggar  named 
"  Lazarus,"  as  if  our  Saviour  had  faid,  for  in- 
ftance,  poor  Lazarus  whom  ye  all  knew.  And  here ' 
I  cannot  but  take  notice  of  the  decorum  which  our 
Saviour  ufes.  He  would  not  name  any  rich 
man,  becaufe  that  was  invidious,  and  apt  to  pro- 
voke. He  endeavours  to  make  all  men  fenfible  of 
their  duty  ;  but  he  would  provoke  none  of  them  by 
any  peevifh  reflexion  ;  for  nothing  is  more  impro- 
per than  to  provoke  thofe  whom  we  intend  to  per- 
fuad^.  While  a  man's  reafon  is  calm  and  undifturb- 
ed,  it  is  capable  of  truth  fairly  propounded ;  but  if 
we  once  ftir  up  mens  palBons,  it  is  like  m.uddying 
of  the  waters,  they  can  difcern  nothing  clearly  at^ 
terwards.     But  to  proceed  in  the  parable. 

"  There  was  a  certain   beggar   named  Lazarus, 
^*  which  was  laid  at  the  rich  man's  gate  full  of  fores, 

and 


2172         ^he  parable  of  ths  rich  ma)!^  ajid  Lazarus^ 

SERM.  "  and  v/as  defirous  to  be  fed  with  the  crumbs  which 
CXXV'J 

"^  f^'ll  from  his  table,    moreover  the  dogs  came  and 

'  licked  his  fores."  Here  are  three  great  aggravati- 
ons of  the  rich  man's  uncharitablenefs. 

I  ft,  that  here  was  an  objed  prefented  it  felf  to 
him. 

2d]y,  fuch  an  objed  as  would  move  any  one's  pity, 
a  man  reduc'd  to  extreme  mifery  and  neceflity. 

3dly,  a  little  relief  would  have  contented  him. 

I  ft,  here  was  an  objedl  preiented  it  felf  to  him, 
Lazarus  laid  at  a  rich  man's  gate  >  fo  that  as  often  as 
he  went  out  of  his  own  houfe  and  came  in,  he  could 
not  but  take  notice  of  him.  Good  men  that  are  cha- 
ritably difpofed,  will  inquire  out  obje6ls  for  their 
charity,  and  not  always  ftay  till  they  thruft  them- 
felves  upon  them :  but  he  is  a  very  bad  man,  who> 
when  an  object  of  great  pity  and  charity  is  prefented, 
is  fo  far  from  relenting  towards  him,  that  he  ftops 
his  ear  to  his  cry,  and  turns  away  his  face  from  him. 
He  is  an  uncharitable  man,  who  being  rich,  and 
hearing  of  the  miferies  of  others,  does  not  take 
them  into  confideration  :  but  what  we  fee  with  our 
eyes  is  much  more  apt  to  affe6l  us.  So  that  this  was 
ah  argument  of  a  very  cruel  difpofition  in  the  rich 
man,  that  having  fo  many  occafions  of  feeing  Laza- 
rus, he  lliould  never  be  moved  to  commiferate  him. 

2dly,  here  was  fuch  an  obje6b  prefented  to  him, 
as  would  move  any  one's  pity,  a  man  reduced  to  ex- 
treme mifery  and  neceftity.  Here  was  no  common 
objed  of  charity,  a  man,  not  only  in  extreme  want, 
but  in  great  pain  and  anguifh,  and  fo  helplefs,  that 
he  was  unable  to  keep  off  the  dogs  from  being 
troublefome  to  him.     And  yet  this  did  not  move 

him. 

3dly,  a 


7he  parable  of  the  rich  man,  and  Lazarus.      2 1 7  J 

3dl7,  a  very  little  relief  would  have  contented  S  E  R  M, 
this  poor  man,  and  have  been  a  great  kindnefs  to 
him  ;  that  which  the  rich  man  might  have  fpared 
without  the  lead  prejudice  to  himfelf.  He  would 
have  been  glad  to  have  been  "  fed  with  the  crumbs 
<"'  which  kW  from  the  rich  man's  table; ''  and  yet 
the  parable  intimates  that  the  rich  man  was  fo  hard- 
hearted, as  not  to  afford  him  thefe. 

Ver.  Z2.  "  And  it  came  to  pafs  that  the  beggar 
"  died,  and  was  carried  by  the  angels  into  Abra- 
*'  ham's  bofom."  Here  was  a  great  and  fudden 
change !  he,  who  when  he  was  alive  was  neglected 
by  mxn,  and  contumelioufly  expos'd  like  a  dead 
carcafe  to  the  dogs,  when  he  dies,  is  attended  on 
by  the  angels,  and  by  them  fafely  conveyed  into  a 
ilate  of  unfpeakable  happinefs.  He  who  Jay  at 
the  rich  man's  gate,  and  could  find  no  entrance 
there,  is  admitted  into  heaven.  ''  The  beggar  died,  ' 
*'  and  was  carried  into  Abraham's  bofom." 

'Tis  very  obfervable,  that  our  Saviour  in 
this  parable  reprefents  men  as  pafling  immediately 
out  of  this  life  into  a  ftate  of  happinefs  or  torment. 
And  as  in  no  other  place  of  fcripture,  fo  neither  in 
this,  where  it  had  been  fo  proper,  does  our  Savi- 
our give  the  leaft  intimation  of  the  flate  of  pur- 
gatory, which  the  church  of  Rome  hath  devifed, 
and  makes  fo  much  profit  and  advantage  of,  which, 
becaufe  it  is  fo  vifible  and  apparent,  we  may  without 
uncharitablenefs  fuppofe  to  be  the  reafon  why  they 
keep  fuch  a  ftir  about  it. 

"  And  was  carried  by  the  angels  into  Abraham's 
*^  bofom."  It  was  an  ancient  tradition  among  the 
Jews,  that  the  angels  did  attend  good  men  at  their 
death,  and  carry  their  fouls  into  paradife,  which  is 

Vol.    VII,  J5  G  here 

7- 


2 174  The  parable  of  the  rich  man^  and  Lazarus. 
SERM.  here  called  "  Abraham's  bofom."  And  this  was 
a  proper  place  for  Lazarus,  who  had  been  neg- 
leded  by  the  rich  man  ;  to  be  conveyed  into  "  Abra- 
*'  ham's  bofom,"  who  was  of  a  quite  contrary  temper, 
and  loved  to  entertain  and  relieve  ftrangers. 

And  paradife  is  fitly  call'd  "  Abraham's  bofom,** 
becaufe  the  Jews  had  fo  great  a  veneration  for  Abra- 
ham, and  that  defervedly  for  his  eminent  faith  and 
obedience,  that  they  gave  him  the  firft  place  among 
the  blefted.  Hence  is  the  cxprefTion,  Matth.  viii. 
II.  of  "  fitting  down  with  Abraham,  and  Ifiac, 
«'  and  Jacob  in  the  kingdom  of  Go  d."  Now  this 
exoreffion  of  "  being  in  Abraham's  bofom,"  is  an 
allufion  to  the  cuftom  of  feafl-s  among  the  Jews, 
•where  the  moft  efteemed  and  beloved  gueft  fat  next 
him  that  was  chief  at  the  feafi:,  and  leaned  on  his 
bofom.  Hence  St.  John  is  calPd  the  difciple  whom 
Jesus  loved,  becaufe  when  he  fat  at  meat,  he 
leaned  on  his  bofom.  John  xiii,  23.  Hence  likewife 
is  the  expreflion  of  our  S  av  i  o  u  r's  being  "  in  the 
'«  bofom  of  his  Fat  h  e  r,"  to  fignify  his  dearneis 
to  him,  John  i.  18,  "  No  man  hath  feen  God 
*'  at  any  time;  the  only  begotten  Son  which  is 
*'  in  the  bofom  of  the  Fathe  r,  he  hath  decla- 
«  red  him." 

I  proceed.  "  The  rich  man  alfo  died,  and  was 
**  buried."  "  The  rich  man  alfo  died-,  "  this  is  very- 
elegant  and  emphatical,  infmuating  to  us,  what  the 
fcripture  fo  often  takes  notice  of,  that  riches,  for  all 
mens  confidence  in  them,  will  not  deliver  from 
death.  This  rich  man  indeed  was  out  of  danger  of 
being  flarved  and  famifhed,  as  poor  Lazarus  was. 
But  death  had  no  other  ways  to  come  at  him.  It  is 
pjobabk  enough,  that  he  might  be  furfcitcdi  by  "  fa- 

**  ring 


7h^  parable  of  the  rich  mariy  and  Lazarus,      ^  17^ 

"  ring  fumptuoufly  every  day."     "The  rich  man  SERM., 
"  alfo  died."  c^^^Vf; 

*'  And  was  buried."  And  here  again  we  may  ob- 
ferve  the  ftricft  decorum  which  our  S  av  i  o  u  r  ufes 
in  this  parable.  It  is  not  faid  of  Lazarus,  that  he 
was  buried,  but  only  that  "  he  died ;  "  it  is  proba- 
ble that  he  was  flung  out  of  the  way  into  fome  pit 
or  other :  but  of  the  rich  jjian  it  is  faid,  "  he  was 
*'  buried."  And  this  is  all  the  advantage  which  a 
rich  man  hath  by  a  great  eflate  after  he  is  dead, 
to  have  a  pompous  and  folemn  funeral ;  which  yet 
fignifies  nothing  to  him  after  death,  becaufe  he  is 
infenfible  of  it. 

Ver.  23.  "  And  in  hell  he  lift  up  his  eyes  being 
''  in  torments,  and  feeth  Abraham  afar  off,  and 
"  Lazarus  in  his  bofom."  As  corporal  ads  are  at- 
tributed to  G  o  D  in  fcripture,  fo  iikewife  to  fepa- 
rated  fouls. 

"  In  hell  he  lift  up  his  ^^j^^^  being  in  torments ;  '* 
intimating  to  us,  that  this  fenfual  and  voluptuous 
man  had  ftupidly  paft  away  his  life  without  any  fe- 
rious  thoughts  and  confideration  :  but  now  at  laft 
he  was  awakened,  when  it  was  too  late,  and  begaa 
to  confider.  "  In  hell  he  lift  up  his  eyes,  being  in 
''  torments." 

O  the  ilupidity  of  finners !  who  run  on  blindly 
in  their  courfe,  and  never  open  their  eyes  'till  they  are 
fallen  into  the  pit ;  who  cannot  be  brought  to  con- 
fider, 'till  confideration  will  do  them  no  good  ;  'till 
it  ferve  to  no  other  purpofe,  but  to  enrage  their 
confciences,  and  to  multiply  the  flings  of  them. 

Thus  it  was  with  this  rich  man,  "  he  lift  up  his 
«'  eyes  being  in  torments,  and  feeth  Abraharii  afir 
^«  off,    and  Lazarus  in   his  bofom.'*    Our  Savi^ 

JJ    G    2J  OU  I^ 


2176  ^^  far  able  of  the  rich  man,  and  Lazarus. 
SE  R  M.  OUR  reprefents  him  as  feeing  that  which  would  thcrl 
^^^Zij  "^^^  probably  come  to  his  mind.  Feeling  his  own 
mifery,  he  began  to  confider  the  happy  condition 
of  the  poor  man  whom  he  had  fo  cruelly  negle6led. 
And  indeed  one  great  part  of  the  torment  of  hell 
confifts  in  thofe  reflexions  which  men  fhall  make 
upon  the  happinefs  which  they  have  wilfully  loft 
and  negleded,  and  the  fins  whereby  they  have 
plunged  themfelves  into  that  miferable  (late. 

Ver.  24.  "  And  he  cried,  and  faid,  father  Abra- 
«'  ham,  have  mercy  on  me,  and  fend  Lazarus,  that 
*«  he  may  dip  the  tip  of  his  finger  in  water,  and 
«'  cool  my  tongue  ;  for  I  am  tormented  in  this 
**  flame."  See  how  the  fcene  is  changed  ;  now  he 
is  fain  to  beg  relief  of  the  beggar,  who  had  fued  to 
him  in  vain. 

"  Send  Lazarus  that  he  may  dip  the  tip  of  his 
*'  finger  in  water,  and  cool  my  tongue."  Here  is 
another  very  decent  circumftance ;  the  rich  man  is 
reprefented  as  not  having  the  face  to  beg  any  great 
relief  from  Lazarus,  towards  whom  he  had  been  fo 
hard-hearted.  "  To  dip  the  tip  of  his  finger  in 
"  water,  to  cool  his  tongue,*'  had  been  a  very  great 
favour  from  Lazarus,  to  whom  the  rich  man  had 
denied  even  the  "  crumbs  which  fell  from  his 
"  table." 

*^  For  I  am  tormented  in  this  flame."  The  fcrlp- 
ture  loves  to  make  ufe  of  fenfible  reprefcntations, 
to  itl  forth  to  us  the  happinefs  and  mifery  of  the 
next  life ;  partly  by  way  of  condefcenfion  to  our 
underllandings,  and  partly  to  work  more  power- 
fully upon  our  affedtions.  For  whilft  we  are  in  the 
body,  and  immers'd  in  fenfe,  we  are  moft  apt  to  be 
n^oved  by  fuch  defcriptions  of  things  as  are  fenfi- 
ble 5 


1*1:6  parable  of  the  risb  mariy  and  Lazarus.       2 177 
ble-,  and  therefore  the  torments  of  wicked  men  inSERM.- 
hell,  are  ufiially  in  fcripture  defcribed  to  us,  by  one  ^^^^ 
of  the  quickeft  and  fharpeft  pains  that  humane  na- 
ture is  ordinarily  acquainted  withal,  namely,  by  the 
pain  of  burning  ;  fire  being  the  mod  adive  thing 
in  nature,  and  therefore  capable  of  caufing  xh^  fliarp- 
eft  pains. 

But  we  cannot  from  thefe  and  the  like  expref- 
fions  of  fcripture  certainly  determine  that  this  is  the 
true  and  proper  pain  of  hell  :  all  that  we  can  infer 
from  thele  defcriptions  is  this,  that  the  fufferings  of 
wicked  men  in  the  other  world,  fhall  be  very  ter- 
rible, and  as  great,  and  probably  greater  than  can 
polTibly  be  defcribed  to  us  by  any  thing  that  we  are 
now  acquainted  withal ;  for  who  knows  the  power 
of  G  o  D  's  anger,  and  the  utmoft  of  what  omni- 
potent juftice  can  do  to  finners  ?  for  as  the  glory  of 
heaven,  and  the  joys  of  God's  prefence  are  now 
inconceivable  ;  fo  likewife  are  the  torments  of  hell, 
and  the  miferies  of  the  damned.  "  Eye  hath  not 
''  fcen,  nor  ear  heard,  neither  have  entred  into  the 
''  heart  of  man,"  thofe  dreadful  things  '*  which 
*'  God  prepares  for  them  that  hate  him.''  Who 
can  imagine  the  utmoft  fignificancy  of  thofe  phrafes 
which  the  fcripture  ufes  to  fet  forth  this  to  us,  of 
Go  D  's  being  ''  a  eonfuming  fire,'*  of  being  "  tor- 
"  mented  in  flames,'*  of  God*s  ^'  wrath  and  jear 
"  loufy  fmoking"  againft  finners,  and  all  the  curfes 
that  are  written  in  his  book,  falling  upon  them? 
who  can  conceive  the  horror  of  thofe  expreflions, 
^^  of  the  worm  that  dies  not,  and  the  fire  that  is 
"  not  quenched,"  of  God's  "  pouring  out  the 
*^  vials  of  his  wrath,"  of  being  "  deliver'd  over  to 
[^  the  tormentor/'  of  being  <^  thruft  into  utter  dark- 

^«  nefs,'^ 


2 17S  ^^^  parable  of  the  rich  man,  and  Lazarus, 
SERM.  ««  nefs,'*  of  being  "  cad  into  the  Jake  of  fire  and 
CXXVl.  J,  brimftone?'*  Thefe  forms  of  fpeech  feem  to  be 
borrowed  from  thofe  things  which  among  men  are 
mod  dreadful  and  affrighting  ;  and  to  be  calculated 
and  accommodated  to  our  capacities ;  and  not  fo 
much  intended  to  exprefs  to  us  the  proper  and  real 
torments  of  hell,  as  to  convey  to  us  in  a  more  fenfi- 
ble  and  affedling  manner  the  fenfe  of  what  the  fcrip- 
ture  fays  in  general,  that  "  it  is  a  fearful  thing  to 
<^  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living  God." 

Ver.  25.  "  But  Abraham  faid,  fon,  remember 
"  that  thou  in  thy  life-time  received'fl:  thy  good 
"  things,  and  likevvife  Lazarus  evil  things ;  but  now 
*'  he  is  comforted,  and  thou  art  tormented.  Abra- 
*'  ham  faid,  fon,  remember."  It  is  very  obferva- 
ble,  how  our  S  av  i  o  u  r  choofes  to  reprefent  to 
us  the  difcourfe  between  Abraham  and  the  rich 
man  -,  tho'  there  was  the  greatefl  difference  between 
them  imaginable,  the  one  was  in  heaven,  and  the 
other  in  hell,  yet  they  treated  one  another  civilly. 
Abraham  is  brought  in.  giving  the  common  terms 
of  civility  to  this  wretched  wicked  man,  and  calling 
him  fon  ;  ^'  fon,  remember."  It  was  indeed  a  very 
fevere  thing  which  he  faid  to  him ;  he  put  him  in 
mind  of  his  former  profperity,  and  of  his  fault  in 
his  unmerciful  ufage  of  Lazarus;  "  remember,  fon, 
*'  that  thou  in  thy  life-time  received'fl  thy  good 
>^«  things,  and  Lazarus,  &c. "  But  yet  whilft  he 
fpeaks  fuch  fharp  things  to  him,  he  bates  bad  lan- 
guage. A  man  may  fay  very  fevere  things,  where 
a  juft  occaHon  requires  it ;  but  he  mufl  ufe  no  re- 
viling y  rem  ipfam  dic^  mitte  male  loqui^  ''  fay  the 
"  thing,  but  ufe  no  bad  language."  And  this,  as 
one  fays,  is  the  true  art  of  chiding,  the  proper  flile 

wherein 


^he  parable  of  the  rich  man,  and  Lazarus,       2iyg 

wherein  we  mud  ufe  to  reprove.     If  we  do   it  with  S  E  R  M. 

mah'ce,  and  anger,  and  contempt,  it  is  misbecom-, 

ing,  even  tho'  we  defpair  of  doing  good  :   but  if 

we  hope  for  any  good   effect,  we  are   like  to  mils 

of  it  this  way;  for  as  the  apoflle  /ays  excelJentiy, 

*'  the  wrath  of  man  worketh  not  the  righteoufnels 

«  of  God." 

Some  think  that  Abraham  gives  the  rich  man  the 
title  of  Ion  ironically,  and  by  way  of  jeer :  but  with- 
out all  reafon.  For  furely  there  is  not  fo  much 
bad  nature  in  heaven,  as  to  feoff*  at  thole  who  are 
in  mifery.  Befides  that,  we  find  our  Saviour 
obferving  this  decorum  of  good  language  in  other 
of  his  parables  :  as  particularly,  in  that  of  the  king 
who  invited  guefts  to  the  marriage  of  his  fon,  Matth. 
xxii.  II.  When  the  king  faw  there  the  man,  that 
came  without  his  wedding  garment,  tho'  he  pad  a 
very  fevere  fentence  upon  him,  yet  he  gives  him  the 
common  terms  of  civihty  ^  "  friend,  how  camil 
*'  thou  hither  }  " 

This  fhould  teach  us  chriflians,  how  we  ought  to 
demean  ourfelves  towards  thofe  who  are  at  the  greatefl 
dillance  from  us,  and  how  we  ought  to  behave 
ourfelves  towards  one  another  in  the  greateft  dit- 
ferences  of  religion.  None  fure  can  be  at  greater 
diflance,  than  Abraham  m  paradife,  and  the  rich 
man  in  hell;  and  yet  our  Saviour  would  not 
reprefent  them  as  at  terms  of  defiance  with  one 
another.  One  might  have  expeded  that  Abraham 
fliould  have  reviled  this  poor  wretch,  and  diidain'd 
to  have  fpoken  to  him  :  but  this  is  not  the  temper 
of  heaven,  nor  ought  it  to  be  of  good  men  upon 
earth,  even  towards  the  worft  of  men. 

How 


2i8o       'T^he  parable  of  the  rich  man^  and  Lazarus. 

SERM.  How  docs  this  condemn  our  rudenefs  and  im- 
,^^^^'  patience  with  one  another  in  our  religious  differen- 
ces !  we  think  no  terms  bad  enongh  to  ufe  to- 
wards one  another :  and  yet  one  of  the  mod  fa- 
mous difputes  that  we  find  mentioned  in  fcripture, 
and-  that  between  the  moft  oppofue  parties  that 
can  be  imagined,  v/as  managed  after  another  fa- 
fliion  ;  I  mean  that  recorded  by  St.  Jude  between 
Michael  the  archangel,  and  the  devil,  ver.  9.  '^  Yet 
"  Michael  the  archangel,  when  contending  with 
*'  the  devil,  he  difputed  about  the  body  of  Mofes, 
"  durft  not  bring  a  railing  accufation,"  he  durfi. 
not  allow  himfelf  this,  no  not  in  the  heat  of  dis- 
pute, when  perfons  are  moll:  apt  to  fly  out  into  paf- 
fion,  becaufe  it  v/as  indecent,  and  would  have  been 
difpleafing  to  God  ;  this  I  believe  is  the  true  reafon 
V-  "why  it  is  faid,  "  he  durft  not  bring  a  raihng  accu- 
'  •*'  fation."  And  yet  I  may  add  another,  which  is 
not  improper  for  our  confideration,  I  am  fure  ic 
iiath  a  good  moral ;  the  devil  would  have  been  too 
hard  for  him  at  railing,  he  was  better  skill'd  at 
that  weapon,  and  more  expert  at  that  kind  of 
difpute. 

Which  confideration  may  be  a  good  argument  to 
us  againfl  reviling  any  man.  If  we  revile  the 
good,  we  are  unjuft,  becaufe  they  deferve  it  not  5 
if  we  revile  the  bad,  we  are  unwife,  becaufe  we 
fhall  get  nothing  by  it.  I  could  almofl  envy  the 
character  which  was  given  of  one  of  the  Romans; 
nefcivit  qiiid  ejj'et  fnaledicere,  "  he  knew  not  what 
*'  it  was  to  give  bad  language." 

I  proceed.  ''  Son,  remember  that  thou  in  thy  life- 
**  time  receivedft  thy  good  things.'*  *'  Thy  good 
*«  things,"  thofe  which  thou  didft  value  and  efteem 

fo 


The  parah^  of  the  rich  nian^  and  Lazarus.       2181 
fo  hio-Jr.y,   and  didfl  place  thy  chief  happuiefs  in,SER]VI, 
a?  if  there  had  been  no   other  orood   to  be   ibuo;ht  ^^    ^  \ 
after.     "  TJiy  good  things,"  and  indeed  fo  he  ufed 
them,  as   if  he  had   been  the  fole  lord   and  pro- 
prietor of  them,  and  they  had  not  been  commit- 
ted to  him,    as  a  fteward,  to  be  difpenfed  for  hiss 
mafter's  ufe,  for  the  clothing  of  the  naked,  and  the 
feeding  of  the  hungry,  and  the  relieving   of  thofe 
in  diftrefs. 

Ver.  27,  28.  ^^  Then  he  faid,  I  pray  thee  there- 
"  fore,  father,  that  thou  wouldft  fend  him  to  ^ 
"  my  father's  houfe  :  for  I  have  five  brethren-,  that 
"  he  may  teftify  unto  them,  left  they  alfo  come 
*'  into  this  place  of  torment.'*  Here  the  rich  man, 
tho'  in  hell,  is  reprefented  as  retaining  fome  ten- 
dernefs  for  his  relations,  as  folicitous  left  they  iliould 
be  involved  in  the  fame  mifery  with  himfelf.  The 
laft  piece  of  that  v/hich  commonly  remains  in  men, 
is  natural  affedlion,  which  is  not  fo  much  a  virtue, 
as  a  natural  principle,  and  is  common  to  many- 
brute  bcafts.  When  a  man  puts  off  this,  we  may 
give  him  up  for  loft  to  all  manner  of  goodnels.  To 
be  ''  without  natural  aftedlion,"  is  the  worft  cha- 
rader  can  be  given  of  a  man.  Our  Saviour 
reprefcnts  this  rich  man  in  hell  as  not  fo  totally 
degenerate  as  to  be  quite  deftitute   of  this. 

I  think  fome  attribute  this  motion  of  the  rich 
man  concerning  his  brethren  to  another  caufe;  as 
if  he  had  defired  it,  not  out  of  kindnefs  to  them, 
but  out  of  regard  to  himfelf,  as  being  afraid  that  • 
if  his  brethren  who  probably  were  corrupted  by 
his  example,  had  perifli'd  by  that  means,  it  would 
have  been  an  aggravation  of  his  torments.  But  th^s 
conjecture   is  too    fubtile,  and    without  any  good 

Vo  L,  VII.  15  H  ground  5 

7' 


2 1 82       7he  parable  of  the  rich  man^  and  Lazarus. 
^^  ^}\-  ground  ;  for  every  man  carries  his  burdcii  ^.f  guHt 
^^^^^^^^.^^  with  him  out  of  this  world,  and  it  is  not  incico. 

/  _       fed   by  any  confequence  of  our  adions  here.     For 

the  crime  of  a  bad  example  is  the  fame  whether  men 
follow  it  or  not,  becaufe  he  that  gives  bad  ex- 
ample  to  others,    does  what  in    him  lies  to  draw 

^>cvKvt*'H/>''them  into  fin;  and  if  they  do  not  follow  it,  that 

!tfK4,*/ (t  J^,is  no  mitigation  of  his  fault. 

h/?  .  ,  J.  ^  ^  ^^ve  but  one  obfervation  more,  and  that  is 
LL^  jirom  the  mention  ot  his  brethren  as  his  neareft 
relations,  which  is  a  great  aggravation  of  the  rich 
man's  uncharitablenefs,  becaufe  he  is  reprefented  as 
having  no  children  to  take  care  for,  and  yet  he 
would  not  confidcr  the  poor. 

And  thus  I  have,  as  briefly  as  I  could,  endea- 
vour'd  to  explain  this  parable,  and  have  made  fuch 
obfervations  from  the  circumftances  of  it,  as  may 
be  ufeful  for  our  inftrudion.  But  as  I  premifed 
at  firfl  5  I  will  not  warrant  all  thcfe  obfervations 
to  be  certainly  intended  by  our  Saviour  ;  I  know 
very  well  that  every  circumllance  of  a  parable  is 
not  to  be  prefl  too  far,  the  moral  accommodation 
does  chiefly  belong  to  the  main  fcope  of  it,  and 
many  circumfl:ances  are  only  brought  in  to  fill  up 
the  parable,  and  to  make  up  a  handfomer  way  for 
that  which  is  mofl  material,  and  principally  intended  : 
but  fo  long  as  the  obfervations  are  true  and  ufeful, 
and  have  a  fair  colour  and  occafion  from  the  cir- 
cumfl:ances,  it  is  well  enough  ;  to  be  fure  there  is 
no  harm  done.  I  proceed  to  the  fecond  fort  of 
obfervations,  namely,  fuch  as  are  drawn  from  the 
main  fcope  and  intent  of  the  parable,  which  I  pro- 
mifed  to  fpeak  more  largely  to  5  and  they  are  fix, 
which  I  fhall  handle  in  order. 

Firfl, 


The  parable  of  the  rich  man-^  and  Lazarus,       2183 
Firil,  I  obfervc  that  uncharitablenefs  and  unmerci-  SERm: 
fiilnels    to    the  poor,    is  a  great  and  damning  fin.  ^^^^^^• 
We  find  no  other  fault  imputed  to  the  rich  man 
but  this,  that  he  took  no  care  out  of  his  fupcrflui- 
x^j  and    abundance  to  relieve  this  poor  man  that 
lay  at  his  gate.     He   is  not  charged  for  want  of 
juftice,  but  of  charity  \  not  for  having  got  a  great 
eftate  by  fraud  or  opprefiion,  but  that  in  the  midfl 
of  this  abundance  he  had  no  confideration  and  pity 
for  thofe  that  were  in  want. 

I  fliall  endeavour  to  make  out  this  obfervation  by 
the  parts  of  it. 

id,  that  unmerci fulnefs  and  uncharitablenefs  to 
the  poor  is  a  great  fin. 

2dly,  fuch  a  fin,  as  alone  and  without  any  other 
guilt,  is  fufficient  to  ruin  a  man  for  ever.  I  (hall 
fpeak  to  thcfe  feverally. 

I  ft,  that  unmercifulnefs  and  uncharitablenefs  ta 
the  poor  is  a  very  .great  fin.  It  contains  in  its 
very  nature  two  black  crimes,  inhumanity  and 
impiety. 

I.  Inhumanity  ;  it  is  an  argument  of  a  cruel 
and  favage  difpofition,  not  to  pity  thofe  that  are  in 
want  and  mifery.  And  he  doth  not  truly  pity  the 
miferies  of  others,  that  doth  not  relieve  them  when 
he  hath  ability  and  opportunity  in  his  hands.  Tcn- 
dernefs  and  compafiion  for  the  fufFerings  of  others 
is  a  virtue  fo  proper  to  our  nature,  that  it  is 
therefore  call'd  humanity,  as  if  it  were  efiential  to 
humane  nature,  and  as  if  without  this,  we  did  not 
deferve  the  name  of  men.  To  fee  men  like 
ourfelves,  "  bone  of  our  bone,  and  flefh  of  our 
*^'  flefli,"  labour  under  want  and  necefilty,  and 
yet  not  to  be  moved  to  commiferate  them,  this  is 

15H  2  a 


1^  184       "The  parable  of  the  rich  man^  and  Lazarus. 
SERM-  a  fio-n  that  we   have  put  off  our  own  nature,  other- 
^^  *  wife  we  fhould  pity  the  fufferings  of  it  in  others, 

For  whenever  we  behold  a  man  hke  ourlelves 
groning  under  want,  and  prefl  with  neceflity,  and 
do  not  relent  towards  him,  and  are  not  ready  to 
relieve  him,  we  arc  hard-hearted  to  our  own  na- 
ture, and  do  in  fome  fenfe  what  the  apoftle  fays 
<'  no  man  ever  did  ''  (that  is,  none  retaining  the 
temper  and  affedions  of  a  man)  '>  hate  his  own 
«  flefh." 

This  the  fcripture  fpeaks  of  as  a  mofl  barbarous 
fort  of  inhumanity,  and  calls  it  murder,  i  John 
iii.  15.  "  Whofo  hateth  his  brother  is  a  mur- 
*'  derer;"  and  not  to  relieve  our  brother  in  want, 
is  to  hate  him  *,  for  this  is  the  inftance  wliich  the 
apoftle  gives  at  the  17th  verfe,  ''  v/hofo  hath  this 
''  world's  goods,  and  feeth  his  brother  in  want,  and 
*^'  ihutteth  up  his  bowels  of  companion  from  him  i'* 
"whofo  doth  not  confider  the  poor,  is  a  manflayer 
and  a  murderer,  he  is  cruel  to  his  own  nature,  nay 
were  he  fufficiently  fenfible  of  the  condidon  of  hu- 
mane nature,  he  is  cruel  to  himfelf. 

Scbfl  thou  a  poor  man  in  great  mifcry  and  want, 
there  is  nothing  that  hath  betallen  him,  but  wh«t 
is  common  to  man,  what  might  have  been  thy 
lot  and  portion  as  well  as  his,'^nd  what  may  hap- 
pen to  thee  or  thine  another  time.  Make  it  there- 
fore thine  own  cafe ;  (for  fo  the  providence  of 
God  may  make  it  one  time  or  other,  and  thou 
provokeft  him  to  make  it  fo  fpeedily  by  thy  un- 
i  merciful  difpofition  toward  the  poor ;)  I  fay,  make 
it  thine  own  cafe,  if  thou  wert  in  the  poor  man's 
condition,  and  he  in  thine,  confult  thine  own  bowels, 

and  tell  me  how  thou  wouldil  wiili  him  to  be  af- 

fedled 


\ 

The  parable  of  the  rich  man^  and  Lazarus]  2185 
fd:ed  toward  thee.  Wouldft  thou  be  willing  thatSERivf. 
he  fhould  flight  and  repulfe  thee,  and  fliut  up  his 
bov^els  of  compaiTion  from  thee?  if  not,  then  do 
not  thou  fo  deal  with  him,  confider  that  it  may 
be  taine  own  cafe,  therefore  do  not  thou  give  the 
worli  any  bad  example  in  this  kind,  do  not  teach 
men  to  be  unmerciful,  left  they  learn  of  thee,  and 
thou  find  the  ill  effeds  of  it,  when  it  comes  to  be 
thine  own  condition.  This  is  the  firfb  aggravation 
of  this  fin,  the  inhumanity  of  it.     But, 

2.  Befides  the  inhumanity  of  this  fin,  it  is  like- 
wife  a  great  impiety  toward  God.  Unmercifulnefs 
to  the  poor  hath  this  fourfold  impiety  in  it ;  it  is 
a  contempt  of  God  ;  an  ufurpation  upon  his  right; 
a  flighting  of  his  providence  ;  and  a  plain  demonfl:ra- 
tion  that  we  do  not  love  God,  and  that  all  our 
pretences  to  religion  are  hypocritical  and  infincere. 

1.  It  is  a  contempt  of  God,  and  a  reproaching 
of  him  -,  fo  Solomon  tells  us,  Prov.  xiv.  31.  "  He 
*^  that  opprefTeth  the  poor,"  (not  only  he  that 
dealeth  unjuftly  with  a  poor  man,  but  he  that  is  un- 
charitable towards  him,  as  appears  by  the  oppofition, 
"  but  he  that  honoureth  him  hath  mercy  on  the 
*'  poor ;"  here  oppreflion  of  the  poor  is  oppofed  t^o 
want  of  chanty  towards  him  -,)  ''  he  that  opprefieth 
*'  the  poor  reproacheth  his  maker."  Hov/  is  that  ? 
he  defpifeth  God  who  made  him  after  his  own 
image  and  likenefs :  for  the  poor  man  bears  the 
image  of  God  as  well  as  the  rich,  fo  that  thou 
canfl:  not  opprefs  or  negled  him,  without  fome  re- 
flexion upon  God,  whofe  image  he  bears. 

2.  The  uncharitable  man  is  an  ufurper  upon  God's 
right,  "  the  earth  is  the  Lord's  and  the  fulnefs 
^*  thereofj   and  he  hath  given  it  to  the  children  of 

"  men,'* 


2  r  86         The  parable  of  the  rich  man,  and  Lazarus. 
S  E  RM.  «c  men,"  not  abiblutely  to  difpofe  of  as  they  plerfe? 
but  in  trufb,    and  with  certain  refervations,    fo  a:  to 
.,be  accountable  to  him  for  the  difpolid  of  it.  In  reiped 
of  other  men,    we  are  indeed  true  proprietors  of  our 
eftatcs:     but   in    refpcd  of    God,    we   are    but 
flcwards ;  and  he  will  call  us  to  an  account  ho^v  vvc 
have  laid  them  out.      So  much  as  we  need  is  ours  ; 
but  beyond  what  will  fupport  us,  and  be  a  conveni- 
ent   provifion  for  our  family,   in  the  rank  wherein 
God  hath  placed  us,   all  that  is  given    to  us,   that 
>xwe  may  give  it  to  others.     And  if  Go  d  hath  been 
liberal  to  us  in  the  bleiTings  of  this  life,  it  is  on  pur- 
pofc;  to  give  us  an  opportunity,   and  to  engage  us  to 
be  fo  to  others  that  fland  in  need  of   our  charity  y 
and  wc  are  falfc  to  our  truft,  if  we  keep  thofe  things 
to  our  felves,  which  we  receive  from  God  for  this 
very  end  that  we  might  diftributc  them  to  others, 
according  to  the  proportion  of  our  ability  and  their 
necefTity.     This  is  to  hide  our  Lo  rd's  talent  in  a 
napkin,  and  that  which  thou  ftorcft  up  in  this  cafe 
isunjuftly  detained  by  thee;   for  God   intended  it 
fhould  have  been  for  bread  for  the  hungry,    and  for 
clothes  for  the  naked,   for  the  relief  and  fupport  of 
thofe  who  were  ready  to  perifh. 

3.  The  uncharitable  man  is  impious  in  flighting  of 
God's  providence.  He  does  not  confider  that  riches 
and  poverty  are  of  the  Lor  d,  that  he  can  foon 
change  our  condition,  and  that  it  is  an  cafy  thing 
with  him  to  make  a  rich  man  poor.  We  do  not 
fufHcicntly  reverence  the  providence  which  rules  the 
"world,  if  when  God  hath  blefl  us  with  plenty  and 
abundance,  we  have  no  pity  and  regard  for  thofe 
that  are  in  need.  God  can  foon  turn  the  wheel,  and 
lay  thee  as  low  as  the  poor  man  whom  thou  doft 

negled. 


ne parable  of  the  rich  man^  and  Lazarus.        2 1 S7 
negled.     He  can    "   call  down  the  mighty  fromSERM. 
*'  their  feat,  and  exalt  the  humble  and  the  meek ;  fill  ^^^^  ^- 
*'  the  hungry  with  good  things,  and  fend  the  rich 
*'  empty  away.'* 

Go  d's  providence  could  eafily  have  difpofed  of 
things  otherwife,  to  have  fecured  every  man  from 
want :  but  he  hath  on  purpofe  ordcr'd  this  variety 
of  conditions,  high  and  low,  rich  and  poor,  not 
that  fome  men  might  have  an  advantage  to  infult 
over  and  defpife  others,  but  that  there  might  be  an 
opportunity  for  the  exercife  of  feveral  virtues;  that 
the  poor  might  have  an  opportunity  to  exercife  their 
dependence  upon  God,  and  their  patience  and  fub- 
milTion  to  his  will,  and  that  the  rich  might  ihcw 
their  temperance,  and  moderation,  and  charity. 

4.  Unmercifulnefs  to  the  poor  is  a  plain  demon- 

Itration  that  we  do  not  love  God,   and  that  all  our 

Cither  pretences  to  religion  are  hypocritical  and  in- 

fjicere.      St.  James  itWs  us,    that  "  pure  religion 

^'  and  undefiied  before  God  and  "the  Father, 

*  is  this,    to  vifit  the  fatherlefs  and  the  widow," 

Jmes  i.   27.  That    "   the  wifdom  which  is  from 

"above  is  full  of  mercy  and  good  fruits,"  chap.  iii. 

1/  St.  John  reprefents  this  uncharitable  difpofition 

as  utterly   inconfiftent  with  the  true  love  of  G  o  Dj 

I  phn  iii.  17.  *'  But  v/holb  hath  this  world's  goods, 

•'  nd  feeth    his  brother   have  need,    and   fhutteth 

*'  ID   his  bowels   of  compafTion  from  him  ;    how 

*'  d/elleth  the  love  of    God    in   him?"    In  vain 

does  Cuch  a  man  pretend  to  love  God;  nay,  chap. 

iv.  ve.  20.  he  tells  us  that  it  is  impoflible  fuch  a 

man  tould  love  God.  "  If  a  man  fay  I  love  God, 

"  and'iateth  his  brother,    he  is  a  liar;  for  he  that 

^'  loycih  not  his  brother  whom  he  hath  feen,    how 

''  can 


2 1  3  8  The  parable  of  the  rich  man,  and  Lazarus, 
SE  R  M.  "  can  he  love  God  whom  he  hath  not  feen  ?"  This 
CXX^g.  ^(^ft^rvcs  to  be  feriouily  confidci'd  by  thofe  who 
make  a  great  Ihew  of  devotion,  and  are  at  great 
pains  ia  prayer,  and  fafting,  and  reading,  and 
hearing  the  word  of  God,  and  in  all  other  frugal 
exerciles  of  religion,  which  ftand  them  in  no  mo- 
ney ;  left  all  their  labour  be  lofb  for  want  of  this 
one  necelTary  and  eflential  part;  hit  with  the  young 
man  in  the  gofpel,  after  they  have  kept  all  other 
commandments,  they  be  rejedled  by  Christ 
for  lack  of  ''  this  one  thing."  I  have  done  with  the 
firfi:  part  of  the  obfervation,  that  unmercifulnefs  is  a 
very  great  fin.     I  proceed  to  the 

2d,  that  it  is  fuch  a  fin,    as  alone,    and  without 
any  other  guilt,  is  fuilicient  to  ruin  a  man  for 'ever. 
The  parable  lays  the  rich  man's  condemnation  upon 
this ',    it  was   the  guilt  of  this  fin  that  tormcntec 
him  when  he  was  in  hell.     The  fcripture  is  full  d 
fevere  threatnings  againil  this  fin.      Prov.  xxi.   lo. 
*'  Whofo  floppeth  his  ears  at  the  cry  of  the  poor 
<^  he  alfo  fiiall  cry  himfelf,    but  fiiall  not  be  heard/ 
God  will  have  no  regard  or  pity  for  the  man  tht 
regardeth    not  the  poor.     That  is  a  terrible  tet, 
James  ii.  13.  "  He    fhall  have   judgment  withwc 
"  mercy,  that  hath  Ihewed  no  mercy.'* 

Our  Saviou  r  hath  two  parables  to  reprefen  to 
us  the  danger  of  this  fin  ;  this  here  in  the  text,  .nd 
that  in  Luke  xii.  concerning  the  covetous  man^hat 
enlarged  his  barns,  and  was  (till  laying  up,  bi^t 
laid  nothing  out  upon  the  poor :  upon  whici  our 
Say  I  o  u  r  makes  this  obfervation,  which  is  the 
moral  of  the  parable,  ver.  21.  ''^  So  is  le  that 
*'  layeth  up  treafure  for  himfelf,  and  is  not  rich  to- 
«'  wards  God  i'*  fo  fliall  he  be,  fuch  an  iflle  of  his 

'  folly 


7/6^  parable  of  the  rich  man,  and  Lazarus.        2 1 89 
folly  may  every  one  expe6l,  who  layeth  up  treafure  S  E  R  M. 
for  himfelf,  but  does  not  Jay  up  riches  with  Go  d.  ,^_^^,,„„^^^,,^ 
How  is   that  ?   the  fcripture  tells    us,  by   works  of 
mercy    and     charity  -,    this  our    Sav  i  o  u  r     calls 
"  layincr    up  for  our  felves  treafures  in  heaven  y^ 
Matth.  vi.  20.  And  Luke  xii.  33.  he  calls  giving  of 
alms,    ''  providing  for  our  felves  bags    that  wax 
"  not  old,  a  treafure  in  heaven  that  faileth  not." 

There  is  no  particular  grace  and  virtue  to 
which  the  promife  of  eternal  life  is  fo  frequently 
made  in  fcripture,  as  to  this  of  mercy  and  cha- 
rity to  the  poor.  Matth.  v.  7.  "  BlelTed  are  the 
"  merciful,  for  they  lliall  find  mercy."  Which 
promife,  as  it  does  not  exclude  a  reward  in  this 
world,  fo  it  feems  principally  to  refpeft  the  mercy 
of  God  at  the  great  day.  Luke  xiv.  12,  13,  14. 
''  When  thou  makefl  a  feaft,  invite  not  the  rich, 
*'  for  they  will  recompenfe  thee  again :  but  invite 
*«  the  poor,  and  the  maimed,  and  the  lame,  and 
"  the  blind,  for  they  cannot  recompenfe  thee; 
"  but  thou  fhalt  be  recompenfed  at  the  refur- 
<'  region  of  the  juft,"  Luke  xvi.  9.  "  Make 
"  therefore  to  your  felves  friends  of  the  mammon 
"  of  unrighteoufnefs,  that  when  ye  fliall  fail,  they 
''  may  receive  you  into  everlafting  habitations." 
I  Tim.  vi.  17,  18,  19.  "  Charge  them  that  are 
'«  rich  in  this  world,  that  they  do  good,  that  they 
"  be  rich  in  good  works,  ready  to  diftribute,  wil^ 
**  ling  to  communicate,  laying  up  in  ftore  for  them- 
*<  felves  a  good  foundation,'*  as  the  word  ^rfAKi©^ 
is  fometimes  ufed,  ''  a  good  treafure  againft  the 
*'  time  which  is  to  come,  that  they  may  lay  hold  of 
«'  eternal  hfe.'* 

Vol.  VIL  15  ^  BuC 

7r 


2  1  go  The  parable  of  a  rich  man,  and  Lazarus, 
5KRM.  But  the  mod  confiderable  text  of  all  other  to  this 
^^  '  puipofc,  is  in  Matth.  xxv.  where  our  Saviour 
gives  us  a  defcription  of  the  judgment  of  the  great  day  : 
and  if  that  be  a  true  and  proper  reprefentation  of  the 
procefs  of  that  day,  then  the  grand  enquiry  will  be, 
what  works  of  charity  have  been  done  or  negleft- 
ed  by  us,  and  accordingly  fentence  fnall  be  pad 
upon  us. 

The  proper  refult  from  all  this  difcourfe  is  to 
perfi-iade  men  to  this  necelTary  duty.  Our  eternal 
happincls  does  not  io  much  depend  upon  the  ex- 
crcife  of  any  one  fingle  grace  or  virtue,  as  this  of 
charity  and  mercy.  Faith  and  repentance  are  more 
general  and  fundamental  graces,  and  as  it  were  the 
parents  of  all  the  reft :  but  of  all  fingle  virtues  the 
fcripture  lays  the  greateft  weight  upon  this  of 
charity;  and  if  we  do  truly  believe  the  precepts 
of  the  gofpel,  and  the  promifes  and  threatnings 
of  it,  we  cannot  but  have  a  principal  regard 
to  it. 

I  know  how  averfe  men  generally  are  to  this  duty, 
which  makes  them  fo  full  of  excufes  and  objeftions 
againft  it. 

1.  They  have  children  to  provide  for.  This  is 
not  the  cafe  of  all,  and  they  whofe  cafe  it  is,  may 
do  well  to  confider,  that  it  will  not  be  amifs  to 
leave  a  blelTing,  as  well  as  an  inheritance  to  their 

\\children. 

2.  They  tell  us  they  intend  to  do  fomething 
when  dicy  die.  I  doubt  that  very  much  j  but  grant- 
ing their  intention  to  be  real,  why  Ihould  men  choofe 
to  fpoil  a  good  work,  and  take  away  the  grace 
and  acceptablenels  of  it,  by  the  manner  of  do- 
ing? it  fiiev/s  a  great  backvvardnefs  to  the, work, 

when 


The  parable  of  the  rich  man^  and  Lazarus,  2 1 9 1 
when  we  defer  it  as  Ions;  as  we  can.  Pie  that  wills  ERM. 
not  do  good,  till  he  be  forced  by  the  laft  necef- 
fity,  diu  noluit^  *'  v/as  long  unv^illing."  It  is  one 
of  the  worll  compliments  we  can  put  upon  God, 
to  give  a  thing  to  him  w^hen  we  can  keep  it  no 
longer. 

3.  Others  fay  they  may  come  to  want  themfelvess 
and  it  is  prudence  to  provide  againO:  that.  To  this 
I  anfwer. 

(i.)  I  believe  that  no  man  ever  came  the  fooner  to 
want  for  his  charity.  David  hath  an  exprefs  cbfer- 
vation  to  the  contrary,  Pfal.  xxxvii.  25.  "  I  have 
*'  been  young  and  now  am  old,  yet  have  I  not 
<'  {ttxi  the  righteous  forfaken,  nor  his  feed  begging 
*'  bread."  And  tho'  he  ufes  a  general  word,  yet 
that  by  the  righteous  here  he  intended  the  merciful 
man,  is  evident  from  the  next  words,  "  he  is  ever 
*t  merciful  and  lendeth." 

And  befides  David's  obfervation,  we  have  ex- 
prefs promifes  of  God  to  fecure  us  againft  this 
fear.  Pfal.  xli.  i,  2.  '*  Bleflcd  is  he  that  confider- 
"  eth  the  poor,  the  Lord  will  deliver  him  in 
*'  time  of  trouble,  the  Lord  will  preferve  him 
*'  and  keep  him  alive,  and  he  fliall  be  blelTed  upon 
*'  the  earth."  Prov.  xxviii.  27.  '^  He  that  giveth 
''  unto  the  poor  fliall  not  lack." 

(2.)  Thou  mayeil  come  to  want  tho'  thou  give 
nothing ;  thou  may 'ft  lofe  that  which  thou  haft 
fpared  in  this  kind  as  well  as  the  reft  •,  thou  may'ft 
lofe  all  and  then  thou  art  no  better  fccurcd 
againft  want,  than  if  thou  hadft  been  charitable. 
Befides  that,  when  thou  art  brought  to  poverty,  thou 
wik  want  the  comfort  of  having  done  this   duty, 

15  I  ^  anci 


CXXVl 


192       The  parable  of  the  rich  man^  and  Lazarus. 
?  ER  M.  and  may'ft  juftly  look  upon  the  negled  of  this  duty 
as  one  of  the  caufes  of  thy  poverty. 

(3.)  After  all  our  care  to  provide  for  our  felves, 
we  mud  trufl:  the  providence  of  God  ;  and  a  man 
can  in  no  cafe  fo  fafely  "  commit  himfelf  to  Go  d 
''  as  in  vsrell-doing."  If  the  providence  of  God 
(as  v/e  all  believe)  be  peculiarly  concera'd  to  blels 
one  man  more  than  another,  I  dare  fay  the  charita- 
ble man  will  not  have  the  lead  portion. 

4.  There  is  a  worfe  objection  than  all  thefe 
made  by  fome  grave  men,  who  would  be  glad  un- 
der pretence  of  piety  to  flip  themfelyes  out  of 
this  duty  •,  and  that  is  this,  that  it  favours  of  po- 
pery to  prefs  good  works  with  fo  much  earneftneft 
upon  men,  as  if  we  could  merit  heaven  by  them  ; 
fo  that  they  dare  not  be  charitable  out  of  a  pious 
fear,  as  they  pretend,  left  hereby  they  fliould  enter- 
tain the  dodrine  of  merit. 

But  if  the  truth  were  known,  I  doubt  covetouf- 
nefs  lies  at  the  bottom  of  this  objedion  :  however  ic 
is  fit  it  fhould  be  anfwer'd.     And, 

(i.)  I  fay  that  no  man  that  is  not  prejudiced  ei- 
ther by  his  education  or  intereft,  can  think  that  a 
creature  can  merit  any  thing  at  the  hand  of  God, 
to  whom  all  that  we  can  polTibly  do,  is  antecedently 
due ;  much  lefs  that  we  can  merit  fo  great  a  reward 
as  that  of  eternal  happinefs. 

(2.)  Tho'  we  deny  the  merit  of  good  works,  yet 
^e  firmly  believe  the  neceflity  of  them  to  eternal 
life.  And  that  they  are  neceflary  to  eternal  life,  is 
as  good  an  argument  to  perfuade  a  wife  man  to  do 
them,  as  if  they  were  meritorious;  unlefs  a  man  be 
fp  vain-glorious  as  to  think  heaven  not  worth  the 

having 


7he  parable  of  the  rich  man^  and  Lazarus.       2193 

having  unlefs  he  purchafe  It  himfelf  at  a  valuable  S  E  R  M. 
confideration.  CXXVL 

And  now  let  me  earneflly  intreat  you,  as  you  love 
God  and  your  own  fouls,  not  to  negledl  this  duty ; 
left  you  bring  your  felves  to  the  fame  miferable  ftate 
with,  this  rich  man,  to  whom  the  leaft  charity  that 
could  be  ask'd  was  denied.  Our  Saviour  hath 
purpofely  left  this  parable  on  record,  to  be  a  tefti- 
mony  and  a  witnefs  to  us ;  left  we  being  guilty  of 
the  fame  fin,  *'  Ihould  come  into  the  fame  place  of 
"  torment." 

And  if  any  ask  me  according  to  what  proportion 
of  his  eftate  he  ought  to  be  charitable  ?  I  cannot  de- 
termine that.  Only,  \tt  no  man  negledl  his  duty, 
becaufe  I  cannot  (and  it  may  be  no  one  elfe  can) 
tell  him  the  exad  proportion  of  his  charity  to  his 
eftate.  There  are  fome  duties  that  are  ftridly  deter- 
mined, as  thofe  of juftice  ;  but  God  hath  left  our 
charity  to  be  ^'  a  free-will  offering."  In  the  pro- 
portion of  this  duty,  every  one  muft  determine  him^- 
felf  by  prudence  and  the  love  of  G  o  d  :  God  hath 
left  this  duty  undetermined,  to  try  the  largenefs  of 
our  hearts  towards  him  ;  only  to  encourage  us  to  be 
"  abundant  in  this  grace,"  he  hath  promifed,  that 
according  to  the  proportion  of  our  charity,  fhall  be 
the  degree  of  our  happinefs,  2  Cor.  ix.  6.  «'  He  that 
<'  foweth  plentifully,  fhall  reap  plentifully."  But  let 
us  be  fure  to  do  fomething  in  this  kind  5  any  part  of 
our  eftate  rather  than  none. 

I  will  conclude  with  that  excellent  counfel  of  the 
fon  of  Syrach,  Eccl.  iv.  "  My  fon,  defraud  not  the 
"  poor,  and  make  not  the  needy  eye  to  wait  long ; 
*^  make  not  a  hungry  foul  forrowful,  neither  pro- 
^'  voke  a  man  in  his  diftrefs  s  add  not  more  trou- 

''  bk 


(J  I  The  parable  of  the  rich  7nan^  and  Lazarus. 
*'  bic  to  a  heart  that  is  vexed,  defer  not  to  give  to 
"  him  that  is  in  need.  Rejed  not  the  fupplication 
*'  of  the  afflided,  nor  turn  away  thy  face  from  a 
^'  poor  man ;  turn  not  away  thy  eye  from  the  needy, 
**  and  give  him  none  occafion  to  curfe  thee.  For 
^^  if  he  curfe  thee  in  the  bitternefs  of  his  foul,  his 
*'  prayer  Ihall  be  heard  of  him  that  made  him.  Let 
**  it  not  grieve  thee  to  bow  down  thine  car  to  the 
«^  poor,  and  give  him  a  friendly  anfwer  with  meek. 
**  nefs.  Be  as  a  father  to  the  father! efs,  and  inftead 
•'  of  a  husband  to  their  mother  ;  fo  (halt  thou  be 
<*  as  the  S  o  N  of  the  moil  high,  and  he  Ihall  love 
<'  thee  more  than  thy  mother  doth," 


SERMON    CXXVII. 

The  parable  of  the  rich  man,  and 
Lazarus. 


LUKE    xvi.  19,  20. 

*![here  was  a  certain  rich  man^  which  was  clothed  in 
fur  fie  and  fine  linen^  and  fared fumptuoufly  every  day  : 
and  there  was  a  certain  beggar^  named  Lazarus^ 
which  was  laid  at  his  gate  full  of  fores. 

S  E  R  M.  TT  Proceed  to  our  fecond  obfervation,  that  a  man 
CXXVII.   I    jyj3y  be  poor  and  miferable  in  this  world,  and 

-^  yet  dear  to  God.  The  begger  Lazarus,  tho' 
IrmonTn'^he  was  fo  much  flighted,  and  defpifed  in  his  life- 
thistext.    time  by  this  great  rich  man,  yet  it  appeared  when 

he  came  to  die,  that  he  was  not  negleded  by  God, 

for 


The  parable  of  the  rich  man,  and  Lazarus.       2 1 95 
for  "  he  gave  his  angels  charge  concerning  him,**  S  E  R  M. 
to  convey  him  to  happinefs,   ver.  22.  *'  the  beg-f^^^^^' 
"  gar  died,   and  was  carried  into  Abraham's  bo- 
*'  fom." 

But  this  truth  is  not  only  reprefented  to  us  in  a 
parable,  but  exemplified  in  the  life  of  our  blefied 
S  Av  I  ou  R.  "Never  was  any  man  fo  dear  to  God 
as  he  was,  for  he  \^a^, "  his  only  begotten  S  o  n-, 
*'  his  beloved  Son,  in  whom  he  was  well  pleafed  :*' 
and  yet  how  poor  and  mean  was  his  condition  in 
this  world  !  infomuch  that  the  Jews  were  offended 
at  him,  and  could  not  own  one  that  appeared  in 
fb  much  meannefs,  for  the  true  Messias.  He 
was  born  of  mean  parents,  and  perfecuted  as  foon 
as  he  was  born;  he  was  deftitute  of  worldly  ac- 
commodations •,  *'  the  foxes  had  holes,  and  the 
*'  birds  of  the  air  had  nefis;  but  the  Son  of  man 
*'  had  not  where  to  lay  his  head.  He  was  defpifed 
"  and  rejedled  of  men,  a  man  of  (brrows,  and  ac- 
'*  quainted  with  grief." 

God  could  have  fent  his  Son  into  the  world 
with  majefty  and  great  glory,  and  have  made  all 
the  kings  of  the  earth  to  have  bowed  before  him, 
and  paid  homage  to  him  :  but  the  wifdom  of  God 
chofe  rather  that  he  fliould  appear  in  a  poor  and 
humble,  in  a  fuffering  and  afflidled  condition,  to 
confound  the  pride  of  the  world,  who  meafure  the 
love  of  God  by  thefe  outward  things,  and  think 
that  God  hates  all  thofe  whom  he  permits  to  be. 
afflifted.  . 

Now  it  was  not  poffible  to  give  a  greater  and 

^clearer  demonftration  of   this  truth,    that  goodnels 

and  fuffering  may  meet  together  in  the  fame  perfon, 

than  in  the  Son  of  God,  "  who  did  no  fin,  neither 

*«  was 


2  19^        ^^^  p^^Me  of  the  rich  tnan^  and  Lazatus. 

SERM.  "  was  guile  found  in  his  mouth  ;  yet  it  plcafed  the 
CXXyir.  <c  Lord  to  bruife  him,  and  to  put  him  to  grief." 
Afflidlions  in  this  world  are  fo  far  from  being 
a  fign  of  God's  hatred,  that  they  are  an  argument 
of  his  love  and  care;  "  whom  the  Lord  loveth 
*'  he  chafteneth,  and  fcourgeth  every  fon  whom  he 
*'  receiveth."  Thofe  he  defigns  for  great  things 
hereafter,  he  trains  up  by  great  hardfhips  in  this 
world,  and  by  many  tribulations  prepares  them 
for  a  kingdom.  This  courfe  God  took  more  efpeci- 
ally  in  the  firfl  planting  of  chriftianity ;  the  poor 
chiefly  were  thofe  that  received  the  gofpel.  "  Not 
*'  many  mighty,  nor  many  noble ;  but  the  bafe 
*'  things  of  the  world,  and  the  things  that  v/ere 
"  defpifed  did  God  choofe."  "  Hearken  my 
*'  beloved  brethren,  (faith  St.  James  chap„  ii.  5.) 
''  hath  not  God  chofen  the  poor  in  this  world,  rich 
*'  in  faith,  and  heirs  of  the  kingdom,  which  he 
*'  hath  promifed  to  them  that  love  him  ?  " 

Now  this  confideration  fhould  perfuade  to  pati- 
ence under  the  greaceft  fufFerings  and  afflidions  in 
this  world.  God  may  be  our  Father,  and  chaften 
us  fevcrely  ;  nay  this  very  thing  is  rather  an  argu- 
ment that  he  is  fo.  God  may  love  us  tho'  the  world 
hate  us.  'Tis  but  excrcifing  a  little  patience,  and 
thefe  ftorms  will  blow  over,  and  we  fhall  be  re- 
moved into  a  calmer  region,  where  "  all  tears 
"  fhall  be  wiped  from  our  eyes ;  and  death  and  for- 
««  row  fball  be  no  more.'*  This  was  the  portion 
of  the  Son  of  God  here ;  but  "  it  is  a  faithful  fay- 
*'  ing,  that  if  we  be  dead  with  him,  we  Ihall  alio 
*'  live  with  him,  if  we  fuffer  with  him,  we  fhall 
*•  alfo  reign  with  him."  Therefore  thofe  who  fuffer 
in  this  world  ought  not  \p  be  moved,  ''  as  tho' 

<'  fome 


4( 


The  parable  of  the  rich  man^  and  Lazarus.       2 1 97 

fome  flrange  thing  happened  unto  them  ;  but  they  S  E  R  M: 
fhould  rather  rejoice,  in  as  much  as  they  are  par- 
takers of  Ch  rist's  lufFerings,  that  when  his 
glory  fhall  be  revealed,  they  alfo  may  be  glad 
*'  with  exceeding  joy,"  i  Pet.  iv.  12,  13.  I  pro- 
ceed to  a 

Third  obfervation,  which  is  the  different  eflateof 
good  and  bad  men  after  this  life ;  "  Lazarus  died^ 
"  and  was  carried  by  the  angels  into  Abraham's 
''  bofom  :  the  rich  man  died,  and  went  to  hell.'* 
This  the  jufliice  of  divine  providence  feems  to 
require  ,  fo  that  if  there  had  been  no  revelation  of 
God  to  this  purpofe,  it  is  a  thing  very  credible  to 
natural  reafon,  v^^hether  we  confider  God  or  our 
felves.  If  v/e  confider  God,  our  reafon  tells  us, 
that  he  is  the  holy  and  righteous  governor  of  the 
world,  and  confequently,  that  he  loves  goodneis 
and  hates  fin,  and  therefore  is  concern'd  to  counte- 
nance the  one,  and  difcountenance  the  other,  in  fuch 
a  folemn  and  publick  manner,  as  may  vindicate  his 
holinefs  and  juftice  to  the  world.  Now  the  dif- 
penfations  of  his  providence  are  prom ifcuous  in  this 
world  \  and  therefore  it  feems  very  reafonable,  that 
there  fhould  be  a  general  afTize,  a  fair  and  open 
trial  *,  when  "  God  will  render  to  every  man  accord- 
*'  ing  to  his  works." 

And  if  we  confider  ourfelves,  this  will  appear 
very  credible;  for  this  has  been  the  conftant  opi- 
nion, not  only  of  the  common  people,  but  of  x\\q, 
wifeft  perfons,  who  had  only  the  light  of  nature 
to  guide  them.  Nay,  if  we  do  but  fearch  our  own 
confciences,  we  fliall  find  an  inward  and  fecret  ac- 
knowledgment of  this,  in  that  inward  peace  and 
fatisfadion  we  find  in  any  good  adion,  and  in  that 
VoL.VIL  15  K  Ihame 

7. 


2 1  g^       ^Ihe  parable  of  the  rich  man,  and  Lazarus. 
SERM.  Ihamc   and    fear   and   horror   that   haunts    a    man 
cxxvjf.^jr^^^  ^^  commiffion   of  any,  tho'   never  fo  fecret 
a  fin. 

And  as  reafon  and  fcripture  together  do  afTure  us 
of  a  future  judgment ;  fo  hkewife,  that  men,  when 
they  pafs  out  of  this  world,  fhall  meet  with  the 
proper  confequences  and  rewards  of  their  adions  in 
the  other.  And  tho'  the  happinefs  or  mifery  of 
men  be  not  fo  compleat  as  it  fliall  be  after  the 
pubhck  judgments  yet  it  is  unfpeakably  great.  La- 
zarus is  reprefented  as  very  happy  immediately  after 
his  pafTing  out  of  this  world,  he  is  faid  to  be  "  car- 
*'  ried  into  Abraham's  bofom  i"  by  which  the  Jews 
exprefs  the  happinefs  of  the  future  flate.  And  the 
rich  man  is  reprefented,  as  in  great  anguifh  and 
torment.  But  what  the  happinefs  of  good  men, 
and  the  mifery  of  wicked  men  fliall  be  in  the 
other  ftate,wecan  but  now  imperfedly  and  unskilfully 
defcribe.  Each  of  thefe  I  have  in  another  dil- 
courfe  *  fpokeh  fomething  to.     I  proceed  to  a 

Fourth  obfervation,  the  vafl  difference  between 
mens  conditions  in  this  world,  and  the  other. 
The  rich  man  profpered  here,  and  was  afterwards 
tormented  :  Lazarus  was  poor  and  miferable  in  this 
v/orld,  and  happy  in  the  other;  ver.  25.  "  Re- 
*'  member  that  thou  in  thy  life-time  receivedft  thy 
*'  good  things,  and  Lazarus  evil  things  •,  but  now 
*'  he  is  comforted,  and  thou  art  tormented.'*  And 
it  is  very  agreeable  to  the  wifdom  of  God,  to  make 
fuch  a  difference  between  mens  conditions  in  this 
world  and  the  other ;  and  that  for  thefe  two  rea- 
fons.  '•' 

id,  for  the  trying  of  mens  virtue. 

*  ^€r7nm  CLXIH  on  Rom^Vh  zi,  22» 

2dly, 


Tbeparahk  of  the  rich  man,  and  Lazarus.       2199 

2dly5  ini  order  to  the  recompenfing  of  it.  CXX^'h' 

I.  For  the  trial  of  mens  virtue.  For  this  end  v 
principally  God  ordains  the  fufferlngs  of  good 
men,  and  permits  the  beft  of  his  fervants  many 
times  to  be  involved  in  the  greatefl  calamities,  to 
try  their  faith  in  him,  and  love  to  him  ;  to  improve 
their  virtue,  and  to  prevent  thofe  fms  into  v/hich 
the  mighty  temptations  of  a  perpetual  profperity 
are  apt  to  draw  even  the  beil  of  men  •,  to  take 
off  their  affections  from  the  love  of  this  vain  world, 
and  to  engage  and  fix  them  there,  v^hcre  they 
fhall  never  repent  that  they  have  placed  them  % 
to  prove  their  fincerity  towards  God,  and  to 
cxercife  their  patience  and  fubmiffion  to  his  will ; 
to  prepare  them  for  the  glory  of  the  next  life, 
and  to  make  the  happinefs  of  heaven  more  wel- 
come to  them,  when  they  fliall  come  to  it. 

2d]y,  in  order  to  the  recompenfing  of  men : 
that  they  who  will  take  up  with  the  pleafures  and 
enjoyments  of  this  prefent  world,  and  take  no  care 
for  their  future  ftate,  that  they  who  will  gratify  their 
fenfes,  and  negled  their  immortal  fouls,  may  inherit 
the  proper  confequences  of  their  wretched  choice. 
And  on  the  other  hand,  that  they  who  love  God 
above  all  things,  and  had  rather  endure  the  greateft 
evils,  than  do  the  lead,  that  they  who  look  beyond 
the  prefent  fcene  of  things,  and  believe  the  reali- 
ty and  eternity  of  the  other  Hate,  and  live  ac- 
cordingly, may  not  be  difappointed  in  their  hopes^ 
and  ferve  God  and  fuffer  for  him  for  nothino^. 
From  this  confideration  of  the  difference  between 
the  condition  of  men  in  this  world  and  the  other^ 
we  may  infer, 

15  K  2  I,  That 


^200       7he  parable  of  the  rich  man^  and  Lazarus. 

sERM.  I.  That  no  man  fhould  meafure  his  felicity  or 
J;^j^J^|J;J__^' unhappinefs  by  his  lot  in  this  world.  If  thou  re- 
ceived thy  good  things,  art  rich  and  honourable, 
and  hall  as  much  of  the  things  of  this  world  as 
thine  heart  can  wifh,  art  fplendidly  attired,  and 
*'  farefl:  fumptuoufly  every  day  i"  art  "  in  no  trouble 
*'  like  other  men,  neither  art  plagued  like  other 
"  folk-,"  do  not  upon  this  blefs  thyfelf  as  the 
happy  man.  On  the  other  hand,  art  thou  poor 
and  miferable,  deftitute  of  all  the  conveniences  and 
accommodations  of  this  life  ?  do  not  repine  at  thy 
lot  and  murmur  at  God  for  having  dealt  hardly 
with  thee.  No  man  can  be  pronounced  happy  or 
miferable  for  what  befals  him  in  this  life  ;  ''  no 
*'  man  knows  love  or  hatred  by  thefe  things  •, "  this 
life  is  but  a  fhort  and  inconfiderable  duration,  and 
it  matters  not  much  what  entertainment  we  meet 
withal,  as  we  are  paffing  through  this  world  :  the 
flate  of  eternity  is  that  wherein  the  happinefs  or  mi- 
fery  of  men  fhall  be  determined.  He  is  the  happy 
man  who  is  fo  in  that  life  which  fhall  never  have  an 
end  ',  and  he  is  miferable  that  fhall  be  fo  for  ever. 

2.  We  fhould  not  fet  too  great  a  value  upon 
the  bleiTmgs  of  this  life.  We  may  "  receive  our 
*'  good  things "  here,  and  "  be  tormented"  hereaf- 
ter i  nay,  this  very  thing  will  be  no  inconfiderable 
part  of  our  torment,  none  of  the  lead  aggravations 
of  our  mifery,  that  we  "  did  receive  our  good 
*'  things."  Nothing  afflidls  a  man  more,  and  touch- 
eth  him  more  fenfibly  when  he  is  in  mifery,  than 
the  remembrance  of  his  former  profperity ;  load  he 
never  been  happy,  his  mifery  would  be  the  lefs. 

Therefore  we  fhould  be  fo  far  from  applauding 
our  felves  in  the  profperity  of  this  world,  that  we 

Ihould 


ne  parable  of  the  rich  man^  and  Lazarus,       2iq\ 
fiiould   rather   be   afraid  of  "  receiving   our  good  S  E  R  Nf. 
"  things"  here  ;  left  God  fhould  put  us  off  with  ^^^ 
thefe  things,  and  this  fliould  be  all  our  portion,  and 
kft  our   mifery  in   the  next  world   be   the  greater 
for  our  having  been  happy. 

The  felicities  of  this  world  are  tranfient,  and  tho* 
our  happinefs  were  never  fo  compleat,  yet  it  \% 
going  olF,  and  palling  away  ;  and  when  it  is  gone 
and  paft,  if  mifery  fucceed  it,  it  had  better  never 
have  been.  "  Remember,  thou  in  thy  life-time  re- 
"  ceived'lt  thy  good  things  \  "  thefe  things  are  only 
for  our  life-time,  and  how  fhort  is  that  I  did  mea 
ferioudy  confider  this,  they  would  not  fet  fuch  a 
price  upon  any  of  the  tranfient  enjoyments  of  this 
life,  as  for  the  fake  of  them  to  negledl  the  great 
concernments  of  another  world.  We  are  apt  to  be 
dazzled  with  the  prefent  glittering  of  worldly  glory 
and  profperity  *  but  if  we  would  look  upon  thefe 
things  as  they  will  be  fhordy  gone  from  us,  how 
little  would  they  fignify  !  the  rich  man  here  in  the 
parable  did,  no  doubt,  think  himfelf  a  much  hap- 
pier man  than  poor  Lazarus  that  lay  at  his  door ; 
and  yet  after  a  little  while  how  glad  would  he 
have  been  to  have  changed  conditions  with  this  poor 
man  I  when  he  was  "  in  torments,"  then  no  doubt 
he  wifh'd  that  he  had  fufFered  all  the  mifery  and 
want  in  this  world  which  Lazarus  did,  provided  he 
might  have  been  comforted  as  he  was,  and  ''  car- 
*'  ried  by  angels  into  Abraham's  bofom."  We 
fliould  value  this  world,  and  look  upon  it,  as  this 
rich  man  did,  not  when  he  enjoyed  it,  but  when 
he  was  taken  from  it ;  and  we  fhould  efteem  it,  and 
ufe  it  while  we  may,  as  he  wifh'd  he  had  done  when 
it  was  too  late. 

3.  We 


2  202       ne  parable  of  the  rich  man^  and  Lazarus. 
S  E  R  M.       ?.  We  fhould  not  be  exceflively  troubled  if  w^ 

'  meet  with  hardfhip  and  afflidlion  here  in  this  world  ; 
becaufe  thofe  whom  God  defigns  for  the  greateft 
happinefs  hereafter,  may  receive  evil  things  here. 
Thus  our  blefled  Saviour,  "  the  captain  of 
"  our  falvation,  was  made  perfecT:  through  fuffer- 
*'  ings  ;"  this  was  the  method  which  God  ufcd 
towards  his  own  Son,  firft  *'  he  fufFered,  and  then 
"  entred  into  glory."  He  fufFered  more  than  any  of 
us  can  bear ;  and  yet  he  fupported  himfelf  under  all 
his  fufferings  by  the  confideration  of  the  glory  that 
would  follow  ;  "  for  the  joy  that  was  fet  before 
^^  him,  he  endured  the  crofs,  and  defpifed  the 
«  fhame." 

The  fame  confideration  fhould  arm  us  with  pa- 
tience and  conftancy  under  the  greateft  evils  of  this 
life.     The  evils  that  we  lie  under  are  pafTing  and 

'  going  off;  but  the  happinefs  is  to  come.  And  if 
the  happinefs  of  the  next  world  were  no  greater, 
nor  of  longer  continuance,  than  the  miferies  of  this 

,   world  •,  or  if  they  did   equally  anfwer  one  another  j 

'iyet  a  wife  man  would  choofe  to  have  mifery  firfl, 
and  his  happinefs  laft.  For  if  his  happinefs  were 
firft,  all  the  pleafure  and  comfort  of  it  would  be 
eaten  out  by  difmal  apprehenfions  of  what  was  to 
follow:  but  his  fufferings,  if  they  were  firft,  would 
be  fweetncd  by  the  confideration  of  his  future  hap- 
pinefs ;  and  the  bitternefs  of  his  fufFerings  would  give 
a  quicker  relifh  to  his  happinefs  when  it  fhould 
come,  and  make  it  greater. 

Bat  a  good  man  under  the  fufFerings  of  this  life, 

hath  not  only  this  comfort,  that  his  happinefs  is  to 

come,  but  likewife  that  it  fhall  be  infinitely  greater 

than  his  fufFerings  \  that  thefe  are  but  fliort,  but 


^he  parable  cf  the  rich  nian^  and  Lazarus,        2203 

that  iball  never  have  an  end.  And  this  was  that  serm. 
which  fortified  the  firft  chriftians  againft  all  that 
the  mahce  and  cruelty  of  the  world  could  do  againft 
them.  They  thought  themfelves  well  paid,  if 
"  through  many  tribulations  they  might  at  kft 
*'  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  G  o  d  j "  becaufe  they 
believed  that  the  joys  of  the  next  life  would  abun- 
dantly recompenfe  all  their  labours  and  fufferings 
in  this  world.  They  expedled  a  mighty  reward  far 
beyond  all  their  fufferings ;  they  v/ere  firmly  per- 
fuaded  that  they  fhould  be  vaft  gainers  at  the  laft. 
So  the  apoftle  tells  us  of  himfelf,  Rom.  viii.  18.  "I 
"  reckon  that  the  fufferings  of  this  prefent  time 
''  are  not  v/orthy  to  be  compared  v^ith  the  glory 
''  that  ihall  be  revealed."  And  to  the  fame  pur- 
pofe,  2  Cor.  iv.  17,  18.  "  Our  light  afBiftions^ 
"  which  are  but  for  a  moment,  work  for  us  an 
*'  eternal  weight  of  glory,  whilft  we  look  not  at 
"  the  things  which  are  {(z^\\  but  at  the  things  which 
"  are  not  {t^n  ;  for  the  things  which  are  {t^w  are 
"  temporal,  but  the  things  which  are  not  k.^n  are 
"  eternal."  If  we  would  confider  all  things  toge- 
ther, and  fix  our  eyes  as  much  upon  the  happinefs 
and  glory  of  the  next  world,  as  upon  the  pomp 
and  fplendor  of  this  ;  if  we  would  look  as  much  at 
'^  the  things  which  are  not  {t^n^  as  the  things 
*'  which  are  feen,"  we  fhould  eafily  perceive,  that 
he  who  fuffcrs  in  this  world  does  not  renounce  his 
happinefs,  only  puts  it  out  to  interefl,  upon  terms 
of  the  greatell  advantage. 

4.  We  fhould  do  all  things  with  a  regard  to  our 
future  and  eternal  ftate.  It  matters  not  much  what 
our  condition  is  in  this  world,  becaufe  that's  to 
continue  but  for  a  little  while  ;  but  we  ought  to 

have 


2  2  04  ^he  parable  of  the  rich  man^  and  Lazarus, 
SERM.  have  a  great  and  ierious  regard  to  that  flate  that 
.  1  _'  ; never  fhall  have  an  end.  Therefore  whenever  we 
arc  doing  any  tiling,  we  fhould  confider  what  in- 
fluence fuch  an  action  will  have  upon  the  happinefs 
or  niifcry  of  the  next  Jife.  We  fhould  meafure 
every  adion  and  every  condition  of  our  lives  by  the 
reference  of  them  to  eternity.  To  be  rich  and 
great  in  this  world  will  contribute  nothing  to  our 
future  happinefs;  all  thefe  things  which  we  fo  much 
dote  upon,  and  purfue  with  fo  much  eagernefs,  will 
not  commend  any  man  to  God;  they  wi-ll  fignify 
nothing  when  v/e  come  to  appear  before  our  judge. 
Death  will  llrip  us  of  thefe  things,  and  in  the  other 
world,  the  foul  of  the  poorefl  man  that  ever  lived 
fhall  be  upon  equal  terms  with  the  ricKeft.  Nothing 
but  holinefs  and  virtue  will  then  avail  us ;  and  it  is 
but  a  htde  while  and  we  fhall  all  certainly  be  of  this 
mind,  that  the  bed  thing  men  can  do  in  this  world, 
is  to  provide  for  the  other.     I  proceed  to  a 

Fifth  obfervation,  that  the  flate  of  men  in  the 
next  world  is  fixt  -and  unchangeable;  which  I 
ground  upon  ver.  26.  "  Between  us  and  you 
*'  there  is  a  great  gulf  fixt,  fo  that  they  that  vvould 
*'  pafs  from  hence  to  you  cannoi:,neither  can  they  pals 
*'  to  us  that  would  come  from  thence".  By  which 
words  our  Sav  i  o  u  r  feems  not  only  to  intend, 
that  they  that  are  in  heaven  and  hell  can  have  no 
communication  and  intercourfe  with  one  another; 
but  likewife  that  they  are  lodg'd  in  an  immutable 
ftate.  Thole  that  are  happy  are  like  to  continue  fo  ; 
and  thofe  that  are  mif^rrable  are  immutably  fixt  in 
that  flate. 

I.  As  to  thofe  that  are  in  happinefs  there  can  be 
no  great  doubt.     For  what  can  tempt  men  that 

have 


The  parable  of  the  rich  man,  and  Lazarus,       2205 

have  fo  narrowly  efcap'd  the  danofcrs  and  tempta-  S  E  R  M. 
tions  of  a  wicked  world,  and  are  pofieft  ot  lb 
great  a  happinefs  by  the  free  grace  and  mercy  of  -<: 
God,  to  do  any  thing  whereby  they  may  forfeit 
their  happinefs ;  or  fo  much  as  to  entertai/i  a 
thought  of  offending  that  God,  to  whom  they 
cannot  but  be  fenfible  how  infinitely  they  are  ob- 
liged ?  In  this  imperfed  flate  few  men  have  fo  litde 
goodnefs  as  to  fin  without  temptation  j  but  in  that 
flate  where  men  arc  perfedly  good,  and  can  have  no 
temptation  to  be  othervvife,  it  is  not  imaginable  that 
they  fhould  fall  from  that  fcate. 

2.  As  to  the  Hate  of  thedamned,that  thatlikewife 
is  immutable  the  fcripture  does  feem  plainly  enough 
to  afTert,  when  it  calls  it  "  an  everlafting  deftrudi- 
*'  on  from  the  prefence  of  the  Lord,'*  and  ufes 
fuch  exprefTions  to  fet  forth  the  continuance  of  their 
mifery,  as  fignify  the  longed  and  mod  intermina- 
ble duration,  expreffions  of  as  great  an  extent  as 
thofe  which  are  ufed  to  fignify  the  eternal  happi- 
nefs of  the  blefTed  -,  and  as  large  and  unlimited,  as 
any  are  to  be  had  in  thofe  languages  wherein  the 
fcriptures  are  v/ritten. 

Befides  that  wicked  men  in  the  other  world  are  in 
fcripture  reprefented  as  in  the  fame  condition  with 
the  devils,  of  whom  there  is  no  ground  to  believe 
that  any  of  them  ever  did  or  will  repent.  Not  be- 
caufe  repentance  is  impolTible  in  its  own  nature  to, 
thofe  that  are  in  extreme  mifery,  but  becaufe  j:here 
is  no  place  Ml  for  it.  Being  under  an  irreverfible 
doom,  there  is  no  encouragem.ent  to  repentance, 
no  hope  of  mercy  and  pardon,  without  which  re- 
pentance is  impofTible.  For  if  a  man  did  utterly 
defpair  of  pardon,  and  were  afllired  upon  good 
VoL.Vn.  15  L  ground. 


-7     .''*    ^^-^^-^W    ''^^^a.^J 


CXXVll 


22.o5  ^hc  parable  of  the  rich  man,  and  Lazarus, 
SERM.  »round,  that  God  would  never  fhew  mercy  to 
him,  in  this  cafe  a  man  would  grow  defperate, 
and  not  care  what  he  did.  He  that  knows 
whatever  he  does,  he  is  miferable  and  undone,  will 
not  matter  how  he  demeans  himfelf.  All  motives 
to  repentance  are  gone  after  a  man  once  knows  it 
v/iil  be  to  no  purpofe.  And  this  the  fcripture 
lecms  to  r-eprefent  to  us,  as  the  cafe  of  the  devils 
and  dan^ned  fpirits.  Becaufe  their  flate  is  finally 
determined,  and  they  are  concluded  under  an  irre- 
verfible  lentence,  therefore  repentance  is  impofllble 
to  them. 

Sorry,  no  doubt,  they  are,  and  heartily  troubled 
that  by  their  own  fin  and  folly  they  have  brought  this 
mifery  upon  themfelves,  and  they  cannot  but  conceive 
an  everlaftingdifpleafureagainH:  themfelves, for  having 
been  the  caufe  and  authors  of  their  own  ruin  ^  and  the 
rclkxion  of  this  will  be  a  perpetual  fpring  ofdifcon- 
tent,  and  fill  their  minds  with  eternal  rage  and 
vexation ;  and  To  long  as  they  feel  the  intolerable 
punifhments  of  fin,  and  grone  under  the  infupporta- 
blc  torments  of  it,  and  fee  no  end  of  this  miferable 
liate,  no  hope  of  getting  out  of  it,  they  can  be  no 
otherwife  affe6led,  than  with  difcontent  to  themfelves, 
and  rage  and  fury  againfl  God. 

They  are  indeed  penitent  fo  far  as  to  be  troubled 
at  themfelves  for  what  they  have  done  •,  but  this  trouble 
v/orks  no  change  and  alteration  in  them  -,  they  ftill 
hate  God  who  infli(5ls  theie  punifhments  upon 
them,  and  who  they  believe  is  determined  to  con- 
tinue them  in  this  miferable  flate.  The  prefent 
anguilh  of  their  condition,  and  their  defpair  of  bet- 
tering it,  makes  them  mad  ;  and  their  minds  are 
fo  diftra^ed  by  the  wildnefs  of  their  pafTions,  and 

their 


The  parable  of  the  rich  i7ian^  and  Lazarus,       2207 

their  fpirits  fo  exafperated  and  fet  on  fire  by  their  S  EJl  M. 
own  giddy  motions,  that  there  can  be  no  reii  and 
filence  in  their  fouis  not  fo  much  as  the  liberty   of 
one  calm  and  fedate  thought. 

Or  if  at  any  time  they  refiecfl  upon  the  evil  of 
their  fins,  and  fhould  entertain  any  thoughts  of  re- 
turning to  G  o  D  and  their  duty,  they  are  prefently 
checkt  with  this_  confideration,  that  their  cafe  is  de- 
termined, that  God  is  implacably  offended  with 
them,  and  is  inexorably  and  peremptorily  refolved 
to  make  them  miferable  for  ever  -,  and  during  this 
perfuafion,  no  man  can  return  to  the  love  of  G  o  d 
and  goodnefs,  without  which  there  can  be  no  re- 
pentance. 

This  confideration,  of  the  immutable  ftate  of 
men  after  this  life,  fhould  engage  us  with  all  fe- 
rioufnefs  and  dihgence  to  endeavour  to  fecure  our 
future  happinefs.  God  hath  '*  fet  before  us  good 
"  and  evil,  Mt  and  death,"  and  we  may  yet  choofe 
v/hich  we  pleafe ;  but  in  the  other  world,  we  muil 
{land  to  that  choice  which  we  have  made  here,  and 
inherit  the  confequences  of  it. 

By  fin  mankind  is  brought  into  a  miferable  fiate  ; 
but  our  condition  is  not  defperate  and  pad  remedy. 
God  hath  fent  his  S  o  n  "  to  be  a  P  r  i  n  c  e  and 
''  a  Savi  o  u  R,  to  give  repentance  and  rcmiffion  of 
"  fins."  So  that  tho'  our  cafe  be  bad,  it  need  not 
continue  fo,  if  it  be  not  our  own  fault.  There  is  a 
poffibility  now  of  changing  our  condition  for  the 
better,  and  of  laying  the  foundation  of  a  perpetual 
happinefs  for  our  fclves.  The  grace  of  God  calls 
upon  us,  and  is  ready  to  affift  us  ;  fo  that  no  man's 
cafe  is  fo  bad,  but  there  is  a  polfibility  of  bettering 
it,  if  we  be  not  wanting  to  our  felves,  and  will  make 
If  L  2  ufe 


2268       The  parable  of  the  rich  man^  and  Lazarus, 

SERM.  ufe  of  the  prrace  which  God  offers,  who  is  never 
^  _  _  _^' wanting  to  the  fincere  endeavours  of  men.  Under 
the  influence  and  alfiftance  of  this  grace,  thofe  who 
are  "  dead  in  trefpaffcs  and  fins,  may  pafs  from 
"  death  to  W^c^'*  may  be  "  turned  from  darknefs 
"  to  light,  and  from  the  power  of  Satan  unto 
"Go  D."  So  long  as  we  are  in  this  world  there  is 
a  pofTibihty  of  being  tranilated  from  one  ftate  to 
another,  from  the  ''  dominion  of  Satan  into  the 
"  kingdom  of  God's  dear  Son."  But  if  we 
negledt  the  opportunities  of  this  Ufe,  and  ftand  out 
againft  the  off,^rs  of  God's  grace  and  mercy,  there 
will  no  overtures  be  made  to  us  in  the  other  world. 
After  this  life  is  ended,  God  will  try  us  no 
more ;  our  final  mifcarriage  in  this  world  wil^ 
prove  fatal  to  us  in  the  other,  and  we  fhall  not 
be  permitted  to  live  over  again  to  corredt  our  errors. 
«  As  the  tree  fdls,  fo  it  Ihall  lie ;''  fuch  a  Hate  as 
we  are  fettled  in,  when  we  go  out  of  this  world, 
fhall  be  fixt  in  the  other,  and  there  will  be  no 
poiTibility  of  changing  it.  We  are  yet  in  the  hand 
of  our  own  counfel,  and  by  God's  grace  we  may 
mould  and  faihion  our  own  fortune.  But  if  we 
trifle  away  this  advantage,  we  fhall  "  fall  into  the 
*'  hands  of  the  living  God,"  out  of  which  there 
is  no  redemption.  God  hath  yet  left  heaven  and  hell 
to  our  choice,  and  we  had  need  to  look  about  us, 
and  choofe  well,  who  can  choofe  but  once  for  all 
and  for  ever.  There  is  yet  a  fpace  and  opportunity 
left  us  of  repentance  j  but  fo  foon  as  we  ftep  out  of 
this  life,  and  are  entred  upon  the  other  world,  our 
condition  will  be  fealed,  never  to  be  reverft.  And 
becaufe  after  this  life  there  will  be  no  further  hopes 
of  mercy,  there  will  be  no  pofTibility  of  repentance. 

«  This 


The  parable  of  the  rich  man^  and  Lazarus,       2209 

s  E  R  M. 

cxxvii. 


*'  This  is  the  accepted  time,    this  is  the  day  of  fal    S  E  R  M 


''  vation ,  therefore  to-day  if  ye  will  hear  his  voice, 
^'  harden  not  your  hearts  ;  left  God  fvvear  in  his 
"  wrath  that  we  fhall  not  enter  into  his  reft."  I 
proceed  to  a 

Sixth  obfervation,  that  a  ftanding  revelation  of 
God  is  evidence  fufficient  for  divine  things. 
"  They  have  Mofes,  and  the  prophets,  let  them 
''  hear  them ;"  that  is,  they  have  the  books  of  Mofes 
and  the  prophets,  written  by  men  divinely  infpired, 
thefe  do  fufficiently  declare  to  them  the  will  of  G  o  d 
and  their  duty  ;  and  it  is  unreafonable  to  demand 
or  expe6l  that  God  ftiould  do  more  for  their  con- 
vi<flion  and  fatisfadlion. 

I  know  very  well  the  text  fpeaks  only  of  the 
fcriptures  of  the  old  teftament,  thofe  of  the  new 
being  not  then  extant  when  this  parable  was  deli- 
ver'd.  But  what  is  here  faid  concerning  the  fcrip- 
tures of  the  old  teftament,  is  equally  applicable  to 
the  new ;  and  tho'  Abraham  do  only  recommend 
Mofes  and  the  prophets,  there  is  no  doubt  but  he 
would  have  faid  the  fame  concerning  Christ  and 
his  apoftles,  if  the  books  of  the  nev/  teftament  had 
been  then  extant.  So  that  what  I  ihall  fay  upon  this 
obfervation,  does  indifferently  concern  the  whole 
fcripture. 

And  that  I  may  make  out  this  obfervation  more 
fully,  1  Ihall  take  thefe  five  things  into  confide- 
ration. 

I  ft,  what  we  are  to  underftand  by  a  divine  reve- 
lation. 

2dly,  give  a  brief  account  of  the  feveral  kinds 
of  it, 

3dly,  fhew 


2210       The  parable  of  the  rich  man^  and  Lazarus. 
S  E  R  M.      qdly,   Ihew  what  advantage  this  ftandina:  reve- 
vl— .--_■■  ^^^^Q^  ^^  ^^^  fcriptures  hath  above  any  other  way 
of  conveying  the  will  of  God  to  the  v/orld, 

4thly,  that  there  is  fufficient  evidence  for  the  di- 
vinity of  the  fcriptures. 

5thly,  that  it  is  unreafonable  to  exped  that  God 
fliould  do  more  for  our  convidion,  than  to  afford 
jiich  a  landing  revelation  of  his  mind  and  will. 
1  lliall  go  over  thefe  as  briefly  as  I  can.  I  begin 
with  the 

ill,  what  we  are  to  undcrlland  by  a  divine  re- 
velation.    By  a  divine  revelation  we  are  to  under- 
fiand  "  a  fupernatural  difcovery,  or  manifeftation  of 
*'  any   thing  to  us  ^"  I  fay,    "  fupernatural,"  be- 
caufe  it  may  either  be  immediately  by  God  \  or 
by  the  mediation  of  angels,  as  moft,  if  not  all  the 
revelations  of  the  old  teftament  were.     "  A  fjper- 
"  natural  difcovery  or  manifeftation,"  either  imme* 
diately  to  our  minds,  by  our  underftandings  and  in- 
v/ard   faculties ;    (for  I  do  not  fo  well  underftand 
the  diftindtion  between  underllanding  and  imagina- 
tion, as   to  be  careful  to  take  notice  of  it,)  or  ti^Q 
mediately   to  our  underftandings  by  the  mediation 
of  our  outward  fenfes,  as  by  an  external  appearance 
to  our  bodily  eyes,  or  by  a  voice  and  found  to  the 
fcnfe  of  hearing.     ''  A  difcovery  or  manifeftation 
^'  of  a  thing,"    whether    it   be  fuch   as  cannot  be 
known   at  all  by  the  ufe  of  our  natural  reafon   and 
underftandings ;  or  fuch  as  may  be   difcovered   by 
natural  light,  but  is  more  clearly  revealed  or  made 
known,  or  we  are  awakened  to  a    more  particular 
and  attentive  confideration  of  it.     For  it  is  not  at 
all  unfuitable  to  the  wifdom  of  God,  to   make  a 
fupernatural  difcovery  to  us  of  fuch  things  as  may 

be 


The  parable  of  the  rich  man^  and  Lazarus,       2211 
be   known  by  the  light   of  nature,   either  to  give  S  E  R  M. 
us  a    clearer    manifellation  of   fuch  truths  as  were  ^^5)3' 
more  obfcurely  known,  and  did  as  it  were  lie  bu- 
ried in  our  underflandings  •,  or  d^o.  to  quicken  our 
minds  to  a  more  ferious  and  lively  confideration   of 
thofe  truths. 

2dly,  for  the  feveral  kinds  of  divine  revelations. 
That  they  Vv^ere  various,  the  apoftle  to  the  Heb- 
rews tells  US5  chap.  i.  i.  "God  who  at  fundry 
*''  times,  and  in  divers  manners,  fpake  to  the  fa- 
"  thers  by  the  prophets  •,"  v/here  by  prophets  we 
are  to  underfland  not  only  thofe  who  did  foretel 
future  things  ;  but  any  perfon  that  was  divinely 
infpired,  and  to  whom  God  was  pleafed  to  make 
any  fupernatural  difcovery  of  himfelf. 

Now  the  feveral  kinds  of  revelation  taken  notice 
of  by  the  Jevv^s,  are  vifions  5  dreams ;  prophefy  ;  ora- 
cle j  infpiration,  or  that  which  we  call  the  Holy 
Ghost;  voice  Bath-col-^  or  that  which  was  the 
higheft  of  all,  which  they  call  gradus  Mofalcus^  the 
degree  of  revelation  v/hich  was  peculiar  to  Mofes. 
The  Jewifh  v/riters,  efpecially  Maimonides,  have 
many  fubtle  obfervations  about  the  differences  of 
thefe  feveral  kinds  of  revelation,  which  depend  up- 
on fubtle  and  philofophical  diftindions  of  the  facul- 
ties of  perception  \  as  that  fome  of  thefe  revela- 
tions were  by  impreflion  only  upon  the  underftand- 
ing  •,  fome  only  upon  the  imagination  j  fome  upon 
both  ;  fome  upon  the  outward  fenfes;  but  the  fimple 
and  plain  difference  between  them,  fo  fir  as  there 
is  any  ground  in  fcripture  to  diftinguifli  them,  feems 
to  be  this ;  vifion  was  a  reprefentation  of  fomething 
to  a  man,  when  he  was  waking,  in  oppofition  to 
dreams,  which   were  reprefentations  made  to  men 

in 


2212  The  parable  of  the  rich  ma?2j  and  Lazarus. 
S  E  R  M.  in  their  fleep.  Prophefy  might  be  either  dream  or 
'  vifion,  and  the  Jews  obferve  that  it  v/as  always  one 
of  thefe  two  ways,  which  they  grounded  upon 
Numb.  xii.  6.  "  \i  there  be  a  prophet  among  you. 
*'  I  the  Lord  will  make  myfelf  known  to  him  in 
*'  a  vifion,  and  will  fpeak  unto  him  in  a  dream." 
But  prophefy  in  the  llrid:  notion  of  it,  had  this 
peculiarly  belonging  to  it,  that  it  was  not  only 
monitory  or  inflrudive,  but  did  foretel  fome  event 
of  concernment  to  others  \  and  the  Jewifh  dodtors 
tell  us,  that  it  was  a  clearer  revelation,  and  car- 
ried a  greater  affurance  along  with  it,  and  that 
this  was  common  to  all  the  three,  that  there  was 
fomething  of  extafy  and  tranfport  of  mind  in  all 
thefe. 

The  fourth  fort  of  revelation,  which  was  by  ora- 
cle, which  is  call'd  Urim  and  Thummim,  v/as  a 
rendering  of  anfwers  to  queftions,  by  the  high-prieft 
looking  upon  the  ftones  in  the  breall-platc,  which 
how  it  was  done,  is  uncertain. 

The  fifth  fort  of  revelation  is  that  which  they 
call  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  was  a  more  calm 
and  gende  inlpiration,  without  any  extraordinary 
tranfport  of  mind  or  extafy  ;  fuch  as  David  had  in 
the  writing  of  the  pfalms. 

The  loweft  of  all  was  that  which  they  call'd 
Bath'Col^  which  was  by  a  voice  from  heaven  ; 
and  this  is  l\\^  way  of  revelation,  which  the 
Jews  obferved  did  only  continue  among  them  from 
the  days  of  the  prophet  Malachi  to  our  Sa- 
viour. 

The  highefc  of  all  was  that  which  they  call'd  gra- 
dus  Mofaicusy  to  which  the  Jews  give  feveral  pre- 
rogatives above  all  the  other  ways  of  revelation  ; 

as 


T^he  parable  of  the  rich  man^  and  Lazarus,  2213 
as  that  is  was  done  by  imprellion  merely  upon  the  SERM, 
underllanding,  without  txti^y^  or  rapture,  or  tranf- 
port,  when  he  was  waking,  and  in  his  ordinary 
temper,  and  his  fenfes  not  bound  up  either  by  ex- 
tafy  or  deep,  that  it  was  a  revelation  immediately 
from  God  himfeif,  and  not  by  the  mediation  of 
angels,  without  any  fear,  or  amazement,  or  fainting, 
which  was  incident  to  other  prophets  ;  and  the 
fpirit  of  prophefy  refted  upon  him,  and  he  could 
exert  it  arbitrarily,  and  put  it  forth  when  he 
would.  Of  which  thus  much  is  evidently  true  from 
the  flory  of  him,  that  the  fpirit  of  prophefy  did 
reft  more  conftantly  upon  him,  and  that  he  could 
exert  it  with  greater  freedom,  and  without  any  dif- 
cernible  amazement  or  tranfport  from  his  ordinary 
temper.  But  that  it  was  by  impreffion  merely  upon 
his  underftanding,  as  that  is  a  diftind:  faculty  from 
the  imagination,  is  not  fo  certain  :  that  it  was  al- 
ways by  an  immediate  communication  from  God 
without  the  mediation  of  angels,  feems  not  to  be 
true  J  for  St.  Stephen  tells  us,  that  "  the  law  was 
*'  given  by  the  difpofition  of  angels,"  Ads  vii.  53. 
And  St.  Paul  that  '*  it  was  ordained  by  i\\q  angels 
"  in  the  hand  of  a  mediator,"  that  is  Mofes,  Gal. 
iii.  19.  But  that  the  revelation  which  was  made 
to  him,  had  fome  fmgular  prerogatives  above  thofe 
of  other  prophets,  is  plain  from  fcripture,  Numb, 
xii.  5,  65  7,  8.  when  Aaron  and  Miriam  con- 
tended with  Mofes  as  being  equal  to  him,  God  tells 
them  that  there  was  a  vaft  difference  between  him 
and  other  prophets  j  "  hear  now  my  v/ords,  if  there 
"  be  a  prophet  among  you,  I  the  Lord  will 
"  make  myfelf  known  unto  him  in  a  vifion,  and 
*'  will   fpeak  unto  him  in  a  dream.     My  fervant 

Vol.  VII.  15  M  "  IMofes 


22  14       ^^^  parable  of  the  rich  man,  and  Lazarus. 
SE  RM.  "  Mofes  is  not  fo. —  With  him  will  I  fpeak  mouth 
CXXVir.  cc  ^^    mouth,    even   apparently,    and    not  in    dark 
"  fpeeches,    &c."    Exod.  xxxiii.   ii.    "  And  the 
"  Lo  R  D  fpake  unto  Mofes  face_  to  face,  as  a  man 
"  fpeaketh     unto    his    friend."     Deut.  xxxiv.    lo. 
*'  And  there  arofe   not  a   prophet   fince   in    Ifrael 
"  like  unto  Mofcs,  whom  the  Lor  d  knew  face  to 
*'  face."     All  which  fignify  at  leafh  this,  that  God 
made  the  clearcft,  and  mod  familiar,  and  mod  per- 
fe6t  difcoveries  to  Mofes   of  any  of  the  prophets  ; 
only  our  Lo  r  d  Jesus  Christ,  by  whom  God 
hath  difcovered  his  will  to  us  under  the  new   te(ta- 
nient,  did  excel  Mofes  •,  Mofes  being  but  "a  faith- 
*'  ful  fervantj"  that  is,    hiimilis  amicus^    a    meaner 
fort  of  friend;    but  "  the    Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
*'  the  only  begotten  Son  of  Go  D,"who  came  from 
*'  the  bofom  of  his  Father,"  and  was  intimately 
acquainted  with  the   fecrets  of  his  will,  and  "  had 
*'  not  the  Spirit   given   him  by  meafure,"  but 
the  moft  plentiful  effufion  of  it,  being  "  anointed 
*'  above  his  fellows." 

Now  thefe  being  the  fc^veral  forts  and  degrees  of 
revelation,  which  God  hath  made  of  himfelF  to 
the  world,  the  holy  fcriptures  are  a  fyflem  or  col- 
lection of  thefe,  the  authentick  inftrumentsor  record, 
by  which  the  things  revealed  any  of  thefe  ways,  are 
tranfmitted  to  us,  and  is  therefore  called  "  the 
*'  word  of  God,"  as  containing  thofe  things  which 
G  o  D  in  feveral  ages  hath  fpoken  to  the  world  ; 
that  is,  matters  of  divine  revelation,  which  are  ne- 
ceflary  to  be  known  by  men,  in  order  to  their  eter- 
nal happinefs.  And  this  being  now  the  great  and 
Handing  revelation  of  God,  which  is  to  con- 
tinue to  the  end  of  the  world,  I  intend  to  limit 

my 


57'^  parable  of  the  rich  man^  and  Lazarus,       2215 
iny  difcourfe  folely   to  this,  as  being  the   only  re-SERM. 
Velacion  which  we  are  concerned  to  enquire  after.        ^^^{^« 

And  therefore  in  the  third  place,  to  fhew  you 
what  advantage  this  (landing  revelation  of  the  fcrip- 
turcs  hath  above  private  revelations  made  to  par- 
ticular perfons,  and  frequendy  repeated  and  re- 
newed in  feveral  ages  ;  that  fo  it  may  appear  both 
agreeable  to  the  wifdom  of  God  to  fettle  revela- 
tions in  this  way,  as  being  more  commodious-, 
and  likewife  to  his  goodnefs,  it  being  a  real  pri- 
vilege which  thefe  latter  ages  of  the  world  enjoy, 
that  they  have  a  more  fixt  and  certain  way  of  be- 
ing acquainted  with  the  will  of  God,  than  thofe 
ages  had,  which  were  govern'd  by  fuch  private 
revelations,  as  were  nov/  and  then  made  to  par- 
ticular perfons.     And  the  advantages  are  thefe. 

I.  It  is  a  moft  certain  way  of  conveyance  of 
things,  and  more  fecure  and  free  from  impoflure. 
Suppofe  a  revelation  made  to  a  particular  perfon, 
which  is  of  general  concernment,  that  this  may 
have  a  general  and  lading  effecl,  he  mufb  impart 
it  to  others,  as  many  as  he  can,  and  give  them 
the  bed  afTurance  he  can  of  it ;  and  thefe  muft  re- 
late it  to  others  ;  and  fo  it  muft  pafs  from  hand 
to  hand,  to  be  delivered  from  parents  to  their 
children.  Now  this  way  of  conveying  a  revela- 
tion by  oral  report,  muft  needs  be  liable  to  many 
uncertainties,  both  by  involuntary  miftakes,  through 
weaknefs  of  memory  or  underilanding  ;  and  wilful 
falfifications  and  impoflures,  out  of  malice  and  de- 
fign.  So  that  the  effevft  of  an  unrecorded  revelation 
can  neither  be  large  nor  Jading,  it  can  but  reach  a 
few  perfons,  and  continue  a  little  while  in  its  full  cre- 
dibility j  and  the  farther  it  goes,  the  weaker,  like 

15  M  2  circles 


2  2 1 6       The  parabk  of  the  rich  man,  and  Lazarus. 

S  F  R  M.  Circles  made  in  water,  which   the  more  they  enlarge 
cxxvir  - 

, ^^.,,^' themfelves,    and   the  longer   they  continue  the   lefs 

difcernible  they  are,  'till  at  length  they  quite  difap- 

pear.     Whereas    being  once    recorded    by    perlons 

fccured   from  error  by  fupernatural   and  divine  af- 

fiftance,  they  are  not  liable  to  thofe  eafy  falfifications 

ormiliakeSjWhich  traditional  reports  and  relations  are 

neccHirily,  thro-  human  malice  or  weaknefs,  liable  to. 

2.  It  is  a  more  general  and  univerfal  way  of 
conveyance;  which  is  evident  from  the  common 
experience  of  the  world,  v/ho  have  pitched  upon 
this  way  of  writing  things  in  books,  as  that  which 
doth  mod  eafily  convey  the  knowledge  and  notice 
of  things  to  the  generality  of  men. 

3.  It  is  a  more  uniform  way  of  conveyance  ; 
that  is,  things  that  are  once  written  and  propagated 
that  way,  lie  equally  open  to  all,  and  come  in  a 
manner  with  equal  credit  to  all ;  it  being  not  mo- 
rally impoflible  that  a  common  book,  that  palfeth 
through  all  hands,  and  which  is  of  vaft  impor- 
tance and  concernment,  fhould  be  liable  to  any 
material  corruption,  without  a  general  confpiracy  and 
agreement,  which  cannot  be,  but  that  it  muft  be 
generally  known.  So  that  confidering  the  com- 
monnefs,  and  univerfal  concernmient  of  this  book 
of  the  fcriptures,  all  men  are  in  a  manner  equal- 
ly, that  is,  every  man  is  fufficiently  and  compe- 
tently affured  of  the  credit  of  it ;  that  is,  that  wc 
are  not  in  any  material  thing  impofed  upon  by 
falfe  copies.  But  in  traditional  revelation  it  is 
quite  otherwife;  tradition  being  a  very  unequal  and 
ununiform  way  of  conveyance.*  For  feeing  it  may 
be  of  general  concernment,  and  all  cannot  have  it 
at  the   firft  hand,  that  is,   immediately  from  him 

to 


The  parable  of  the  rich  many  and  Lazarus.        2217 

to  whom  it  was  made;  but  fome  at  the  fecond,  ^^^^^* 
others  at  the  third,  fourth,  or  fifth  hand,  or  much 
further  off ;  the  credit  of  it  will  be  necelTarily  weak- 
ned  by  every  remove.  A  report  that  comes  through 
many  hands,  being  like  the  argument  we  call  in- 
dudion  •,  and  as  the  ftrength  and  goodnefs  of  that 
depends  upon  the  truth  of  every  one  of  thofe  in- 
fiances  that  make  it  up,  fo  that  if  any  of  them  fail, 
the  whole  argument  is  naught ;  fo  the  credit  of  a 
report  that  pafleth  through  twenty  hands,  depends 
upon  the  integrity  and  fufficiency  of  all  the  relators, 
and  whatever  there  is  either  of  falfliood  and  malice, 
or  of  incapacity  of  underflanding,  or  frailty  of  me- 
mory in  any  of  the  relators,  fo  much  of  weaknefs  is 
derived  into  the  report  or  tcflimony  ;  and  confe- 
quently  the  aflurance  which  v/e  can  have  of  a  pri- 
vate revelation,  which  is  delivered  traditionally 
through  a  great  many  perfons,  muft  needs  be  very 
unequal. 

4.  It  is  a  more  lading  way  of  conveyance.  "Which 
jikewife  appears  by  experience,  we  having  now  no- 
thing at  all  of  thehiftory  of  ancient  times,  but  what 
is  conveyed  down  to  us  in  writing. 

5.  It  is  a  more  humane  way  of  conveyance,  which 
requires  lefs  of  miracle  and  fupernatural  interpofi- 
tion  for  the  prefervation  of  it.  This  book  of  the 
fcriptures  may  with  ordinary  humane  care  be  tranf- 
mitted  intire,  and  free  from  any  material  errci-,  to 
all  fucceeding  ages :  but  revelations  unwritten,  if 
they  have  any  lading  and  confiderable  efFe6t,  they 
muft  at  leaft  in  every  age  be  renewed  and  repeated  ; 
other  wife  in  a  very  fhort  fpace,  either  through  the 
unfaithfulnefs,    or   carelefnefs  and    frailty  of  men, 

thej 


2  2 1 8        The  parable  of  the  rich  man,  and  Lazarus, 

SERM.  they  will  either  be  quite  loft,  or  fo  corrupted  and 
'  depraved,   that  they  will  fignify  nothing. 

From  all  which  it  appears,  that  we  have  fo  little 
caufe  to  murmur  aud  repine  at  the  providence  of 
God,  which  in  thefe  latter  ages  of  the  v/orld  does 
not  make  thofe  more  immediate  difcoveries  and 
manifeftations  of  himfelf  to  us,  that  he  did  to 
former  ages,  that  we  have  rather  great  reafon  to 
admire  the  wifdom  and  goodnefs  of  G  o  d  's  provi- 
dence, which  hath  privileged  us  v/ith  this  ftanding 
revelation  of  his  written  word,  which  hath  fo  many 
ways  the  advantage  of  frequent  and  extraordinary 
revelation,  and  in  refpecfl  of  the  generality  of  man- 
kind, is  much  more  ufcful  and  eiFedual  to  its  end. 
I  know  there  are  fome  that  have  endeavoured  to 
perfuade  the  world,  that  dodlrines  may  much  better 
be  preferved  by  common  rumour  and  report,  than 
by  writing  and  record  ;  but  I  hope  there  is  no  man 
fo  deflitute  of  common  fenfe  as  to  believe  them  con- 
trary to  the  experience  of  all  men. 

I  come  now  to  the  fourth  thing  I  propos'd  to 
be  confider'd ;  namely,  that  there  is  fufiicient  evi- 
dence of  ihe  divinity  of  the  fcriptures.  By  the  di- 
vinity of  the  fcriptures.  I  mean,  that  they  v/ere  re- 
vealed by  GcD_»  and  that  the  things  contained  in 
them  were  not  invented  by  men,  but  difcovered  to 
men  by  God;  and  that  the  penmen  of  thefe 
boctis  did  not  write  their  ov/n  private  conceptions, 
but  were  infpired  by  the  Holy  Gkost.  Now 
if  we  can  be  fatisfy'd  of  this,  we  ought  to  receive 
the  fcriptures  with  the  fame  reverence,  as  if  an 
angel  from  heaven  fhouid  declare  thefe  things  unto 
us,  or  as  if  God  fhouid  immediately  reveal  them 

to 


^he  parable  of  the  rich  man,  and  Lazarus.        2219 
to  our  minds  •,  for  nothing  can   come  with  greater  S  E  R  M. 
authority  than  this,  that  we  believe  it  to  be  revealed 
by  God  ;  and  provided  we  be  allured   of  this,  it 
matters  not  which -way  ,  the  thing  hath  the  fame 
authority. 

Now  that  we  have  fuflicient  evidence  of  the  di- 
vinity of  the  fcriptures,  will  beft  appear,  by  confi- 
dering  what  is  fufficient  to  give  authority  to  a  book, 
fo  that  no  prudent  or  reafonable  man  can  queftion, 
but  that  the  book  was  writ  by  him  v/hofe  name  it 
bears.  For  what  evidence  we  would  accept  of  for 
the  authority  of  other  books,  we  muft  not  refufe  in 
this  cafe  for  t\\t  fcriptures,  if  we  do,  we  deal  un- 
equally, and  it  is  a  fign  that  we  do  not  want  evi- 
dence for  the  authority  of  the  fcriptures,  but  that  we 
have  no  mind  to  believe  them. 

Now  the  utmofl  authority  that  any  book  is  ca- 
pable of,  is,  that  it  hath  been  tranfmitted  down  to 
us  by  the  general  and  uncontroll'd  teftimony  of  all 
ages,  and  that  the  authority  of  it  was  never  queRio- 
ned  in  that  age  wherein  it  was  written,  nor  inva- 
lidated ever  fince. 

And  this  evidence  we  have  for  the  authority  of 
the  fcriptures.  As  for  the  old  teflament,  I  fhall 
not  now  labour  in  the  proof  of  that  by  arguments 
proper  to  it  felf,  but  fhall  take  the  divinity  of  them 
upon  the  authority  of  the  new,  which,  if  it  be 
proved,  is  fufficient  evidence  for  it,  tho^  there  wens 
no  other. 

Now  for  the  fcriptures  of  t\\t  new  teflament,  I  de- 
fire  but  thefe  two  things  to  be  granted  to  me  at 
firfl. 

I .  That  all  were  written  by  thofe  perfons  whofe 
names  they  bear:  and  for  this  we  have  as  much 

authority 


2  2  2  o        Thi  parable  of  the  rich  man^  and  Lazarus, 
SRRM.  authority  as  for  any  books  in   the  world,   and  fa 
1^'much  as  may  fatisfy  men  in  other  cafes,  and  there- 
fore not  to  be  rejeded  in  this. 

2.  That  thofe  who  wrote  thofe  books  were  men 
of  integrity,  and  did  not  wilfully  falfify  in  any 
thing  \  and  this  cannot  reafonably  be  denied,  be- 
caufe  thefe  very  perfons  gave  the  utmoft  evidence 
that  men  could  give  of  their  integrity.  The  higheft 
attellation  that  any  man  can  give  of  the  truth  of 
what  he  relates,  is  to  Jay  down  his  life  for  the  teiti- 
mony  of  it ;  and  this  the  apoftles  did. 

Now  if  this  be  granted,  that  they  did  not  falfify 
in  their  relations  concerning  the  miracles  of  Christ, 
and  his  refurredion,  and  the  miraculous  gifts  which 
were  bellowed  upon  the  apoftles  after  his  afcen- 
fion  *,  this  is  as  great  an  evidence  as  the  world  can 
give,  and  as  the  thing  is  capable  of,  that  our  Sav  i  - 
OUR  was  ''  a  teacher  come  from  God,"  and  that 
the  apoftles  were  extraordinarily  afTifted  by  the 
Holy  Ghost-,  and  if  this  be  granted,  what  can 
be  defired  more  to  prove  the  divinity  of  their  wri- 
tings ? 

But  it  may  be  faid,  that  tho'  the  apoftles  were 
granted  to  be  men  of  integrity,  and  that  they  did 
not  wilfully  falfify  in  their  relations,  yet  they  might 
be  miftaken  about  thofe  matters.  But  that  they 
were  not,  we  have  as  much  evidence  as  can  be  for 
any  thing  of  this  nature,  namely,  that  the  things 
which  are  related  are  plain  fenfible  matters  of  fad, 
about  which  no  man  need  miftake,  unlefs  he  will ; 
and  they  did  not  write  things  upon  the  report  of 
others,  who  might  poflibly  have  defigns  to  deceive, 
but  upon  the  fureft  evidence  in  the  world,  their 
own  knowledge,  and  the  teftimony  of  their  fcnfes  j 

«  the 


The  parable  of  the  rich  man^  and  Lazarus^        2221 
*'  the  thino;s  that  we  have  ittn  and  heard  teflify  we  S  E  R  M. 
''  unto  you."  So  that  if  they  were  miftaken  in  thefe  el___J 
things,  no  man  can  be  fure  of  any  thing  ;  and  by 
the  fame  reafon  that  we  disbeheve  the  authority  of 
the  fcriptures  upon  this  account,  we  muft  believe 
nothing  at  all.     This  is  in  fhort  the  whole  force  of 
the  argument  for  the  divinity  of  the  fcriptures,  which 
I  might  have  enlarged  infinitely  upon  ,  but  I  defiga 
now  only  briefly  to  reprefent  to  you,  that  we,  who 
live  at  the  diftance  of  fo  many  ages  from  the  time  of 
this   revelation,    are   not  deftitute  of  fufficient  evi- 
dence for  the  authority  of  the  fcriptures,  and  fuch 
evidence,    as  they    who   rejedl   in    other  cafes,  are 
efleemed  unreafonable. 

I  fhould  come  now  to  the 

f  th,  and  lad  thing,  namely,  that  It  is  unreafonable 
to  exped,  that  God  fliould  do  more  for  our  con- 
vidion,  than  to  afford  us  a  Handing  revelation  of 
his  mind  and  will,  fuch  as  the  books  of  the  holy 
fcriptures  are.  Bat  this  I  fhall  refer  to  another  op- 
portunity, in  a  particular  difcourfe  upon  the  31(1 
verfe,  which  contains  tl'te  main  defign,  the  fum, 
and  fubftance  of  this  whole, parable. 


Vol.     VII.  :f  5  N  SER- 

7- 


[    2222    ] 

SERMON    CXXVIII. 

The  parable  of  the  rich  man,   and 
Lazarus. 

L  U  K  E    xvi.  31. 

Jf  they  bear  not  Mofes  and  the  prophets  ^  neither  wiU 
they  he  perfuaded  though  one  rofe  from  the  dead. 

SE  R  M.  f^f"^  H  E  S  E  words  are  the  conclufion  of  that 
cxxviiL^  I  excellent  parable  of  our  Saviour  con- 
The  third  "^  cerning  the  rich  man  and  Lazarus,  and 
fermon  onj-j-^^y  ^^j,^  j.}^^  ^^^\  anfwer  which  Abraham  eives  to 
this  text.  -^  n  1      .     •         • 

Preach'd   the  rich  man's  lalt  requeit;  who  being  in  great  tor- 

at  white-  Yntm^  and  not  able  to  obtain  any  eafe  for  himfelf, 
16-^8.  '  is  reprefented  as  concerned  for  his  relations,  whom 
he  had  left  behind  him  upon  earth  ;  left  they  alfo  by 
their  own  carelefnefs  and  folly  f!:iould  plunge  them- 
felves  into  the  fame  mifcry  that  he  was  in,  and 
therefore  he  begs  of  Abraham,  that  he  would  "  fend 
*'  Lazarus  to  his  father's  houfe,'*  where  he  had 
*^  five  brethren,  that  he  might  teflify  unto  them, 
*'  left  they  alfo  fhould  come  to  that  place  of  tor- 
*'  ment."  To  which  requelt  Abraham  anfwers, 
that  there  was  no  neceflity  of  fuch  an  extraordinary 
courfe  to  be  ufed  towards  thofe  who  had  fufficient 
means  of  conviction  fo  near  at  hand,  if  they  would 
but  hearken  to  them,  and  make  ufe  of  them. 
'"^  Abraham  faith  unto  him,  they  have  Mofes  and 
"  the  prophets  ;  let  them  hear  them." 

But  the  rich   man    prefTeth  his  requefl    further, 
wpon  this  reafon,  that  they  might  not  perhaps  be 

moved 


7le  parable  of  the  rich  man-,  and  Lazarus.       2123 
moved    by    Mofes   and  the  prophets,    nay  it  was  ^^-^^^^^^^ 
likely  they  would  not  be  moved  by  them  ;  for  they 
had  always  [had  them,    and  yet  they  remained  im- 
penitent :    but  if  a  fpecial  mcfTenger  Ihould  be  fent 
to  them   from  the  dead,    this  certainly   could    not 
fail  to  awaken  them,  and  bring  them  to  repentance, 
ver.  30.   "  And  he  faid,  nay,  father  Abraham,  but 
"  if  one  went  unto   them  from  the  dead,  they  will 
"  repent."      To  which    Abraham    makes  this  pe- 
remptory reply,    "  if  they   hear  not  Mofes  and  the 
'^  prophets,  neither  will  they  be  perfuaded,  tho'  one 
"  role  from  the  dead." 

In  which  words  Abraham  abfolutely  denies  that 
there  is  any  fuch  probability,  much  lefs  certainty 
that  thofe  who  rejed  a  publick  credible  revelation  of 
God,  fuch  as  that  of  the  holy  fcripture  is,  fhould 
be  effeclually  convinced  by  a  mefienger  from  the 
dead.  And  our  Saviour  brings  in  Abraham 
delivering  himfelfvery  pofitively  in  this  matter,  and 
therefore  we  may  prelume  it  to  be  our  S  av  i  o  u  r's 
own  fenfe,  and  may  rely  upon  it  for  a  truth  •,  which 
however  at  fir  11:  fight  it  may  not  be  fo  evident,  yet 
I  hope  in  the  progrefs  of  this  difcourfe  to  make  it 
fufficiently  clear. 

But  before  I  undertake  that,  I  Hiall  premife  a 
caution  or  two  to  prevent  all  miftake  in  this 
matter. 

Firfl,  that  we  are  not  to  underftand  thefe  words 
too  flridlly  and  rigoroufly,  as  if  the  thing  were 
fimply  and  in  it  felf  impofrible,that  a  man  who  is  noc 
convinced  by  hearing  or  reading  Mofes  and  the  pro- 
phets, fhould  be  brought  to  repentance  any  other 
way.  For  it  is  very  pofTible  in  the  nature  of  the 
thing,  yea,  and  likely  enough,  that  a  man  who  is 
I  f  N  2  noc 


2224       7'/j£'  parable  of  the  rich  man^  and  Lazarus. 

S  E  R  M.  not  convinced  by  calm  evidence  and  perfuafion,  may 
cxx  vf  n  *       J 

yet  be  very  mucli  wrought  upon  by  a  ftrange  and 

amazing  accident ;  and  if  one,  whom  he  had  known 
when  he  was  ahve,  fhould  appear  to  him  from  the 
dead,  and  declare  the  certainty  of  a  future  fiate, 
and  the  condition  of  things  in  another  world,  there 
is  little  doubt  to  be  made,  but  that  this  would 
more  rouze  and  awaken  him  to  confider  his  danger, 
than  all  the  threatnings  of  God's  word;  and  'tis 
very  pofTible  that  by  the  concurrence  of  God's 
grace,  this  might  prove  an  effedual  means  to  con- 
vince fuch  a  man,  and  to  bring  him  to  repentance. 
And  yet  for  all  this,  it  is  not  probable  upon  the 
whole  matter,  and  if  all  circumftances  be  duly  con- 
fider'd,  that  this  fhould  generally  have  a  permanent 
efied  upon  men,  fo  as  throughly  to  reclaim  fuch 
perfons  as  do  obfcinately  refill  the  light  and  counfcls 
of  G  o  d's  word. 

Secondly,  another  caution  I  would  give  is  this, 
that  we  are  not  to  underlland  thefe  words  fo,  as 
to  weaken  the  force  of  that  argument  from  mira- 
cles for  the  proof  and  confirmation  of  a  divine 
dodrine,  as  if  our  Saviou  r  intended  to  infinuate, 
that  miracles  are  not  a  proper  and  fufficient  argu- 
ment to  convince  men.  For  our  Saviour  does 
not  here  oppofe  Mofes  and  the  prophets  to  a  mira- 
culous teitimony ;  but  he  advanceth  the  publick 
evidence  and  teftimony  v/hich  Mofes  and  the  pro- 
phets had  above  the  evidence  of  a  fingle  and  pri- 
vate miracle ;  for  Mofes  and  the  prophets  had  their 
confirmation  from  miracles ;  and  miracles  are  the 
great  evidence  and  atteftation  which  God  hath 
always  given  to  the  divinity  of  any  peribn  or  do- 
(ftrines  and  therefore  Abraham  cannot  be  thought 

£0 


The  parable  of  the  rich  man,  and  Lazarus,       2225" 
to   fpeak  any   thing  to  the  prejudice  of   miracles,  S  EJR  M. 
when  he  fays,  "  if  they  hear  not  Mofes  and    the^'^^'^^^^ 
"  prophets,   neither  will  they  be  perfuaded,    tho' 
«'  one    rofe.from  the  dead."      Nay,    fo  far  is   he 
from  that,  that  this  reafoning  of  his  is  rather  for 
the  advantage    of  miracles.     For  Mofes    and   the 
prophets  had  the  confirmation  of  many  and  great, 
of  publick  and  unqueftionable  miracles;    a  credible 
relation  whereof  was  conveyed    down  to  after-ages. 
So  that  if  rational  means  of'  convi£l:ion  were  the 
thing  defired,   it  was   not  likely    that  thofe,    who 
were  not  perfuaded    by    Mofes  and    the   prophets, 
which  were  acknowledged  by  themfelves  to  have  had 
the   confirmation  of  fo  many  undoubted  miracles, 
lliould  in  reafon  be  convinced  by  a  private  and  fmglc 
miracle.  »  j 

Thefe  confiderations  being  premifed  by  way  of 
caution,  I  come  now  to  make  out  the  truth  of  what 
is  here  afferted  in  the  text.  And  for  the  full  clear- 
ing of  this  matter,  I  fhall  fpeak  to  thefe  two  pro^ 
pofitions. 

Firft,  That  it  is  unreafonable  to  exped  that  God 
fhould  do  more  for  the  convidion  of  men,    than  to 
afford  them  a  Handing  revelation  of  his   mind  and 
will ;  fuch  as  that  of  the  holy  fcriptures  is.      And  if 
fo,  then 

Secondly,  that  upon  the  whole  matter  it  is  very 
improbable,  that  thofe  who  rejed:  this  publick  reve- 
lation of  God,  Ihould  be  effedually  convinced,  tho- 
one  fhould  fpeak  to  them  from  the  dead. 

Firfl,  that  it  is  unreafonable  to  exped  that  G  o  s 
fhould  do  more  for  the  convidlion  of  men,  than  to 
afford  them  a  ftanding  revelation  of  his  mind  and 
¥7 ill  \  fuch  as  that  of  the  holy  fcriptures  is.     This  is 

ftrongly 


2  226  The  parable  of  the  rich  man,  and  Lazarus. 
SERM.  ftrongly  implied  in  Abraham's  firft  anfwer,  "  they 
CXXVrijc  j^^^^  Moles,  and  the  prophets,  let  them  hear 
"  them  j"  as  if  he  had  faid,  having  fuch  means  of 
convitflionfo  near  at  hand,  why  fhould  tlieydefire  and 
expert  any  other  ?  \x.  is  in  this  cafe  of  the  fcriptures, 
as  in  that  of  God's  providence;  God  does  not 
commonly  prove  his  providence  to  men  by  extraor- 
dinary inilances  of  his  power,  and  by  changing  the 
courfe  of  nature,  to  convince  every  man  in  the 
world  that  he  governs  it :  but  by  (landing  teftimonies 
of  his  wifdom  and  power,  and  goodnefs ;  by  thefe 
God  does  fufficiently  fatisfy  confiderate  men  of  his 
government  and  care  of  the  v/orld  ;  and  tho'  he  do 
leldom  manifefl:  himfelf  in  fupernatural  and  extra- 
ordinary ways,  yet  he  hath  not  left  himfelf  without 
a  witnefs,  by  the  conftant  courfe  of  nature,  in  the 
returns  of  day  and  night,  in  the  revolutions  of  the 
feafons  of  the  year,  ''*  in  that  he  gives  us  rain  from 
"  heaven  and  fruitful  feafons,  filling  our  hearts  with^ 
*'  food  and  gladnefs."  and  thefe  ftanding  arguments 
of  his  providence,  tho'  they  be  not  fo  much  taken 
notice  of  becaufe  they  are  fo  common,  yet  they  are 
daily  miracles,  and  we  can  hardly  imagine  greater, 
and  we  fhould  be  ftrangely  amazed  at  them,  but  that 
they  are  fo  very  frequent  and  familiar. 

The  cafe  is  the  flime  as  to  divine  revelation. 
God  hath  not  thought  fit  to  gratify  the  perverfe 
curiofity  of  men,  by  affording  to  every  man  a 
particular  and  immediate  revelation  of  his  mind 
and  will :  but  he  hath  given  us  a  ftanding  revela- 
tion, which  at  firil  had  the  greateft  and  moft  mi- 
raculous confirmation,  and  he  hath  ftill  \th  us  fufH- 
cient  means  of  being  affured  of  the  truth  of  this 
revelation,    and  cf  the  confirmation  that  was  at  the 


^he  parahk  cf  the  rich  man^  ajid  Lazarus,  2227 
firil  given  to  it-,  and  we  tempt  God,  by  demand-  SERM. 
ing  extraordinary  figns,  when  we  may  receive  fo  "^ 
abundant  fatisf'aclion  in  an  ordinary  way.  This  being 
admitted,    I  lliall  proceed  in  the 

Second  place  to  fhew,  that  it  is  upon  the  whole 
matter,  and  all  circum fiances  confider'd,  very  im- 
probable, that  thofe  who  rejedl  this  publick  reve- 
lation from  God,  fhould  be  effedually  convinced, 
tho'  one  fhould  fpeak  to  them  from  the  dead. 
And  this  is  that  which  is  exprefly  alTerted  here  in 
the  text,  "  if  they  hear  not  Mofes  and  the  pro- 
^'  phcts,  neither*  will  they  be  perfuaded,  ^tho'  one 
"  rofe  from  the  dead,"  Not  but  that  any  man 
would  be  very  much  flartled  and  amazed, if  one  (hould 
come  from  the  dead  to  warn  him  out  of  the  danger 
of  his  wicked  life  ;  but  yet  for  all  that  it  is  very  un- 
likely that  they  who  obflinately  and  perverfely  re- 
fufe  to  be  convinced  by  Mofes  and  the  prophets, 
would  be  efiedually  perfuaded  (that  is,  fo  as  to  be 
•brought  to  repentance  and  reformation  of  their  lives) 
"  tho'  one  fliould  rife  from  the  dead.'*  And  that 
for  thefe  reafons. 

1 .  Becaufe  if  fuch  miracles  were  frequent  and  fa- 
miliar, it  is  very  probable  they  would  have  but  very 
iitde  effecl ;  and  unlefs  we  fuppofe  them  com- 
mon and  ordinary,  we  have  no  realgn  to  exped  them 
at  all. 

2.  Men  have  as  great  or  greater  reafon  to  be- 
lieve the  threatnings  of  Goo's  word,  as  the  di(^ 
courfe  of  one  that  fhould  fpeak  to  them  from  the  dead. 

3.  The  very  fame  reafon  which  makes  men  to  re- 
jed  the  counfels  of  Go  d  in  his  word,  would  In  all 
probability  hinder  them  from  being  convinced  by  a 
particular  miracle. 

4.  Ex- 


2  228         l^he  parable  of  the  rich  man^  and  Lazarus. 
SERM.       4.  Experience  does  abundantly   teftify,    how  in- 
effedual   extraordinary  ways  are  to  convince  thofe 
who  are  obllinateJy  addidled  and  wedded   to  their 
iufts. 

5,  An  effedlual  perfuafion  (that  is,  fuch  a  belief 
as  produceth  repentance  and  a  good  life)  is  the 
gift  of  God,  and  depends  upon  the  operation  and 
concurrence  of  God's  grace,  which  there •  is  no 
reafon  to  exped  either  in  an  extraordinary  way,  or 
in  an  extraordinary  degree,  after  men  have  obfti- 
nately  rejedled  the  ordinary  means  which  God  hath 
appointed  to  that  end. 

I .  If  fuch  miracles  as  a  fpecial  mefTenger  from 
the  dead  to  v/arn  and  admonifh  men,  were  fre- 
quent and  famih'ar,  it  is  very  probable  they  would 
have  but  very  litde  effecl  upon  men,  and  unlefs 
we  fuppofe  them  common  and  ordinary,  we  have 
no  reafon  to  expect  them  at  all.  For  it  is  unrea- 
fonable  at  firfl  fight,  that  the  worfl  and  mofl 
obftinate  fort  of  finners  fhould  exped  this,  as  a 
peculiar  favour  and  privilege  to  themfelves,  and 
that  God  fliould  not  do  as  much  for  others, 
who  have  deferved  it  more,  and  would  probably 
make  better  ufe  of  it  -,  and  if  thefe  things  were 
common,  it  is  very  probable  that  men  would 
not  be  much  moved  by  them.  It  may  be  while 
the  apprehenfion  of  fuch  a  thing  were  frelli  upon 
them,  they  would  take  up  fome  good  refolutions ; 
as  finners  ufual  ly  do,  while  they  are  under  prc- 
fent  conviclions  of  confcience,  and  the  hand  of 
God,  by  fome  great  affliction  or  ficknefs,  lies  hea- 
vy upon  them :  but  ftill  they  would  be  apt  to  de- 
fer their  repentance,  and  put  it  off  'till  the  prefent 
amazement  were  a  little   over,   and  the  terror  of 

their 


The  parable  of  the  rich  man^  and  Lazarus,       2229 

their  firft  apprehenfions  were  abated  and  worn  off  S  E  R  M; 
by  degrees,  and  after  a  Jitde  while  they  would  re-   ^^^^^^ 
turn    to    their    former    courfe.      And    this   is    too 
probable,    from    what    we    fee    men  do   in    other 
cafes   not  very    much  remote    from  this.     It  is  a 
very  terrible  and  amazing  thing  to  fee  a  man  die, 
and  folemnly  take  his  laft  leave  of  the  world.     The 
very  circumflances  of  dying  men   arc  apt  to  flrike 
us  with  horror :  to  hear  fuch  a  man   how  fenfibly 
he   will  fpeak   of  the  other  world,  as   if  he   were 
jull  come  from  it,  rather  than  going    to  it;  how 
feverely  he  will  condemn  himfelf  for  the  folly  and 
wickednefs  of  his  life ;  with  what  paffion  he  will 
wifli  that  he  had  Jived   better,    and    ferved  God 
more  fincerely  ;  how  ferioufly  he  will  refolve  upon 
a  better   life,    if  God  would  be  pleafed  to  raife 
him  up,  and  try  him  but  once  more  ;   with  what 
zeal  and  earneftnels  he  will  comm.end  to  his  bed 
friends    and    neareil  relations  a    religious  and  vir- 
tuous courfe   of  life,   as  the  only  thing    that  will 
minifter  comfort   to   them  when  they  come  to  be 
in    his    condition.      Such   difcourfes    as    thefe  are 
very  apt  to  move  and   afFed  men    for  the   time, 
and    to    ftir   up  in    them   very  good    refolutions, 
whilft    the    prefent    fit   and    imprefTion  lads :    but 
becaufe  thcfe  fights   are  very   frequent,  they   have 
feldom  any  great  and  permanent  efFed  upon  men. 
Men  confider  that  it  is  a  very  common  cafe,  and 
fmners  take  example  and  encouragement   from  one 
another;    every    one    is   affedled   for   the    prefent, 
but  few  are  fo  effedually  convinced,  as  to  betake 
themfelves  to  a  better  courfe. 

Vol.  VII.  15  Q  And 

8. 


2230       7he  parable  of  the  rich  man^  and  Lazarus. 

SF.RM.  And  if  apparitions  from  the  dead  were  as  con:- 
nion  as  it  is  for  men  to  die,  we  may  reafonably 
prefume  that  the  difcourfes  of  dead  and  dying,  of 
thofe  that  are  going,  and  thofe  who  come  from 
the  dead,  would  have  much  the  fame  efFed:  upon  the 
generality  of  men. 

Bat  if  we  fuppofe  this  a  fingular  cafe,  (which 
there  is  no  reaibn  to  do)  in  that  cafe  the  efFe6l 
would  probably  be  this ;  a  man  that  were  itrongly 
addicted  to  his  lufts,  and  had  no  mind  to  leave  them, 
would  be  apt  when  the  fright  was  over,  to  be 
cafily  perfuaded  that  all  this  was  merely  the  work 
of  fancy  and  imagination  -,  and  the  rather,  becaufe 
fuch  things  did  not  happen  to  others  as  well  as  to 
himfelf. 

2.  We  have  as  great  or  greater  reafon  to  be- 
lieve the  warnings  or  threatnings  of  G  o  d's  word, 
as  the  difcourfes  of  one  that  fhould  come  to  us 
from  the  dead.  For  the  threatnings  of  God's 
word  againil  fuch  fins  as  natural  light  convinceth 
men  of,  have  the  natural  guilt  and  fears  of  men  : 
on  their  fide,  the  particular  teflimony  of  eve-  ' 
ry  man's  confcience,  and  the  concurrent  teflimo- 
ny of  mankind  to  the  probability  of  the  thing;  j 
and  to  give  us  full  aflurance  of  the  truth  and 
reality  of  them,  we  have  a  credible  relation  of 
great  and  unqueftionable  miracles  wrought  on  pur- 
pofe  to  (give  teilimony  to  thofe  perfons  who  de- 
nounced thofe  threatnings,  that  they  came  from 
God.  So  that  here  is  a  very  publick  and  au- 
thentick  teftimony  given  to  the  threatnings  of  Go  d's 
word,  more  fui table  to  the  generality  of  man- 
kind, and  of  greater  authority  than  a  private  ap- 

parition. 


^he parable  of  the  rich  man,  and  Lazarus.        2231 

parition,  or  a  Tingle  miracle;  and  if  that  will  ^^^^v./i^Jj; 
convince  men,   why  Ihould   we   fuppofe  that    this 
will? 

3.  The  very  fame  reafon  which  makes  men  to 
"  rejed  the  counfels  of  God"  in  his  word,  would, 
m  all  probability,  hinder  men  from  being  coiivin- 
ced  by  an  apparition  from  the  dead.  It  is  not 
generally  for  want  of  evidence,  that  men  do  not 
yield  a  full  and  effedual  affent  to  the  truth  of 
God's  word,  I  mean,  that  they  do  not  believe 
it  fo  as  to  obey  it;  but  from  the  intered  of  fome 
luft.  The  true  caufe  is  not  in  mens  underftand- 
ings,  and  becaufe  there  is  not  reafon  enough  to 
fatisfy  them,  that  the  fcriptures  are  the  word  of 
God  :  but  in  the  obftinacy  of  their  wills,  which 
are  enflaved  to  their  lufts.  And  the  difcafe  be- 
ing there,  it  is  not  to  be  cured  by  more  evidence, 
but  by  more  confideration,  and  by  the  grace  of 
God,  and  better  refolutions. 

The  man  is  addicted  to  fome  vice  or  other, 
and  that  makes  him  unwilling  to  entertain  thofe 
truths  which  would  check  and  controul  him  in  his 
courfe.  The  light  of  God's  word  is  offenfive  to 
him,  and  therefore  he  would  fhut  it  out.  This 
account  our  blcffed  Saviour  gives  of  the  en- 
mity of  the  Jews  againft  him  and  his  dodrine, 
John  iii.  19.  "  Light  is  come  into  the  world,  and 
"  men  love  darknefs  rather  than  light,  becaufe 
*'  their  deeds  are  evil;  for  every  one  that  doth 
^'  evil,  hateth  the  light,  neither  cometh  he  to  the 
^*  light,  left  his  deeds  Ihould  be  reproved."  Upon  the 
fame  account  it  is,  that  men  refift  the  doctrine  of 
the  holy  fcriptures;  not  becaufe  they  have  fuffici- 
15  O  2  ent 


2232       ^he  parable  of  the  rich  man,  and  Lazarus. 

SKRM-  ent  reafon  to  doubt  of  their  divine  authority  -,  but 
p^^-  ]  becaufe  they  are  unwilhng  to  be  govern'd  by 
them,  and  to  conform  their  lives  to  the  laws  and 
precepts  of  that  holy  book :  for  the  wills  of 
men  have  a  great  influence  upon  their  underftand- 
ings,  to  make  afient  eafy  or  difficult  ;  and  as  ma- 
ny are  apt  to  afient  to  what  they  have  a  mind 
to,  fo  they  are  How  to  believe  any  thing  which 
crofieth  their  humours  and  inclinations  ;  fo  that 
tho'  greater  evidence  were  offer'd,  it  is  likely  it 
would  not  prevail  with  them,  becaufe  the  matter 
does  not  flick  there.  Their  wills  are  diftemper'd, 
"  men  hate  to  be  reformed, "  and  this  makes 
them  "  cad  the  laws  of  God  behind  their  backs*," 
and  if  God  himfelf  fhould  fpeak  to  them  from 
heaven,  as  he  did  to  the  people  of  Ifrael,  yet 
for  all  that,  they  might  continue  "  a  (lifF- 
**  necked  and  rebellious  people."  Tho'  the  evi- 
dence were  fuch  as  their  underftandings  could  not 
refift ;  yet  their  wills  might  ftill  hold  out,  and  the 
prefent  condition  of  their  minds  might  have  no 
Jafting  influence  upon  their  hearts  and  lives  ;  fuch  a 
violent  convidlion  might  affed:  them  for  the  prefent, 
but  the  fenfe  of  it  might  perhaps  wear  off  by  de- 
grees, and  then  they  would  return  to  their  former 
hardnefs.  Men  by  a  long  and  obftinate  condnu- 
ance  in  fin,  may  bring  themfelves  to  the  temper 
and  difpofuion  of  devils  5  who  though  "  they 
"  believe  and  tremble  "  at  the  thoughts  of  God 
and  his  threatnings,  yet  they  are  Vv^icked  flill; 
for  fb  long  as  men  retain  a  flrong  affeflion  for 
their  lufts,  they  will  break  through  all  convidtion, 
p.nd  what  evidence  foever  be  oifer'd  to  them,  they 

win 


^he  parable  of  the  rich  man^  and  Lazarus.  2235 
will  find  fome  way  or  other  to  avoid  it,  and  to  SERM. 
delude  themfelves.  The  plain  truth  of  the  cafe  is 
this,  (if  men  will  honeftly  fpeak  their  confciences^ 
they  cannot  deny  it)  they  do  not  call  for  more 
evidence,  either  bccaufe  they  want  it,  or  are  wil- 
ling to  be  convinced  by  it ;  but  that  they  may 
feem  to  have  fome  excufc  for  themfelves,  for  not 
being  convinced  by  that  evidence  which  is  afforded 
to  them. 

4thly,  experience  does  abundantly  teftify,  how 
ineffedlual  extraordinary  ways  are  to  convince  and 
reclaim  men  of  depraved  minds,  and  fuch  as  are 
obftinately  addided  to  their  lufts.  We  find  many 
remarkable  experiments  of  this  in  the  hiftory  of 
the  bible.  What  wonders  were  wrought  in  the 
fight  of  Pharaoh  and  the  Egyptians !  yet  they 
were  harden'd  under  all  thefe  plagues.  Balaam, 
who  "  greedily  followed  the  wages  of  unrighte- 
^^  oufnefs,"  was  not  to  be  ftopt  by  the  admoni- 
tion of  an  angel.  The  Jews,  after  fo  many  mira- 
cles which  their  eyes  had  feen,  continued  to  be  a 
"  flifF-necked  and  gain-laying  people  j"  fo  that  it 
is  hard  to  fay  which  was  more  prodigious,  the 
wonders  which  God  wrought  for  them,  or  their 
rebellions  againfh  him  ;  and  when  "  in  the  fulnefs 
"  of  time,"  the  S  o  N  of  G  o  D  came,  and  did  among 
them  ''  the  works  which  never  man  did,"  fuch^ 
as  one  would  have  thought  might  have  brought 
the  worfl  people  in  the  world  to  repentance,  thofe  of 
Tyre  and  Sidon,  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  yet  they 
repented  not.  Yea  the  very  thing  which  the  rich 
man  here  in  my  text  requefled  of  Abraham  for 
his  brethren,  was  done  among  them ;  Lazarus  did 

rife 


223  4-       7he  parable  of  the  rich  vian^  and  Lazarus. 
S  E  R  M.  rife   from  the  dead,  and  teftified  unto   them,    and 
they  were  not  perfuaded. 

And  which  is  yet  more,  our  S  av  i  o  u  r  himfelf, 
according  to  his  own  predi6lion  while  he  was  alive, 
^'  rofe  again  from  the  dead  the  third  day,  *' 
and  was  vifibly  taken  up  into  heaven  j  and  yet 
how  few  among  them  did  "  beheve,  and  give 
''  glory  to  God  ?'*  fo  that  we  fee  the  very  things 
here  fpoken  of  in  the  ttyx^  made  good  in  a  fa- 
mous inftance-,  they  who  *'  believed'  not  Mofcs 
*'  and  the  prophets,"  which  teftified  of  the  M  e  s- 
s  I  A  s,  were  "  not  perfuaded  when  he  rofe  from 
*'  the  dead.'* 

And  does  not  our  own  experience  tell  us,  how 
little  efFed  the  extraordinary  providences  of  God 
have  had  upon  thofe  who  were  not  reclaimed  by 
his  word  ?  It  is  not  long  fince  God  fhewed 
himfelf  among  us,  by  *^  terrible  things  in  righ- 
*'  teoufnefs,"  and  vifited  us  with  three  of  his 
foreft  judgments,  war,  and  peftilence,  and  fire  % 
and  yet  how  does  all  manner  of  wickednefs  and 
impiety  ftill  reign  and  rage  among  us ;  it  is  a  very 
fad  confideration  to  fee  how  litde  thofe  who  have 
outlived  the  plagues,  have^been  reformed  by  them  ; 
*'  we  have  not  return'd  to  the  Lord,  nor  fought 
«  him  for  all  this." 

I  may  appeal  to  the  experience  of  particular  per- 
fons.  How  frequently  do  we  fee  men,  after  great 
afflidlions,  and  tedious  fufferings,  and  dangerous 
fickneffes,  return  to  their  former  evil  courfes  !  and 
tho*  they  have  been  upon  the  brink  of  eternity, 
and  "  the  terrors  of  death  have  compafs'd  them 
i^  about,  and  the  pains  of  hell  have  aimoft  taken 

'^  hold 


T&  parable  of  the  rich  man^  and  Lazarus,  2235 
"  hold  ofthem,"  tho' they  have  had  as  lively  and  SERM 
ienfible  convidions  of  another  world,  as  if  they  ^^^J^ljff 
had  fpoken  with  thofe  that  had  come  from  thence, 
or  even  been  there  themfelves  j  yet  they  have 
taken  no  warning,  but  upon  their  deliverance 
and  recovery,  have  been  as  mad,  as  furious  fin- 
ners  as  they  were  before;  fo  that  it  ought  to  be 
no  fuch  wonder  to  us,  which  xkiz  text  tells  us ,  that 
««  if  men  hear  not  Mofes  and  the  prophets,  nei- 
<^  ther  will  they  be  perfuaded,  though  one  role 
"  from  the  dead."  Efpecially,  if  we  confider  in 
the 

5th  and  lad  place,  that  an  effedual  perfjafion 
(that  is,  fuch  a  belief  as  produceth  repentance  and 
a  good  life)  is  the  gift  of  God,  and  depends  up- 
on the  operation  and  concurrence  of  his  grace, 
which  is  not  to  be  expeded  in  an  extraordinary 
way,  v^here  men  have  obftinately  rejedled  the  or- 
dinary means  appointed  by  God  for  that  end. 
To  be  effe6lually  perfuaded  to  change  our  lives, 
and  become  new  men,  is  a  work  not  to  be  done 
without  the  aOlflance  of  God's  grace,  and  there  is 
litdc  reafon  to  exped  that  God  will  afford  his 
grace  to  thofe  who  reje6b  and  defpife  the  coun- 
fels  of  his  word.  The  dodrine  of  falvation  con- 
tain'd  in  the  holy  fcriptures,  and  the  promifes 
and  threatnings  of  God's  word,  are  the  ordinary 
means  which  God  hath  appointed  for  the  con- 
verfion  of  men,  and  to  bring  them  to  repentance; 
and  if  we  fincerely  ufe  thefe  means,  we  may  con- 
fidently expedt  the  concurrence  of  God's  grace  to 
make  them  effedual  ;  but  if  we  negle6t  and  refifl 
thefe  means,  in  confidence  that  God  Ihould  at- 
tempt 


2236  The  parable  of  the  rich  man^  and  Lazaruu 
SERM.  tempt  our  re  overy  by  fome  extraordinary  ways, 
though  he  fho'uld  gratify  our  prefumptuous  and  un- 
rcaibnable  curiofity,  lb  far  as  to  fend  "  one  from 
*'  the  dead  to  tellify  unto  us:"  yet  we  have  n-o 
reafon  to  expedl  the  affiflance  of  his  grace,  to  make 
fuch  a  convidtion  effedual  to  our  repentance,  when 
we  have  fo  long  defpifed  his  word,  and  refilled 
his  S  p  I  R  I  T,  which  are  "  the  power  of  God  unto 
*^  falvation.'* 

Without  his  grace  and  aflidance,  the  mod  pro- 
bable means  will  prove  ineffectual  to  alter  and 
change  our  corrupt  natures ,  "  by  grace  we  are  fa- 
"  ved,  and  that  not  ofourfelves,  it  is  the  gift  of 
"  God."  This  grace  is  revealed  to  us  in  the 
gofpel  j  and  the  alTiftances  of  it  are  conveyed  to  us  by 
the  gofpel ;  and  it  is  great  preemption  to  promife  to 
ourfelves  the  afiiftance  of  G  o  d's  grace  in  any 
other  way   than  he  hath  been  pleafed    to  promife 

it  to  us. 

And  thus  I  have  fhevvn  you,  as  briefly  and  plain- 
ly as  I  could,  how  unlikely  it  is,  that  thofe  who 
obftinately  rejeft  a  clear  and  publick  revelation 
of  God,  fhould  be  efFedually  convinced  and 
brought  to  repentance  by  any  apparitions  from  the 
dead. 

I  fhall  only  make  two  or  three  inferences  from 
this  difcourfe  which  I  have  made,  and  fo  conclude. 

I  ft,  fince  the  fcriptures  are  the  publick  and  ftand- 
jno-  revelation  of  God's  will  to  men,  and  the 
ordinary  means  of  falvation,  we  may  hence  con- 
'  elude,  that  people  ought  to  have  them  in  fuch  a 
language  as  they  can  underfland.  This  our  S  a- 
V  I  0  u  R  plainly  fuppofeth  in  the  difcourfe  which 

he 


^he  parable  of  the  rich  man^  and  Lazarus,       223 


7 


])e  reprefents  between   Abraham  and  iHie  rich  man  ;  ^^^^,,^j 
defiring  that  Lazarus  might  be   fent  From  the  dead  .^^.^.-.^ 
*'  to  his  brethren,  to  teftify  unto  them  i"  to  which 
requeft  Abraham  would  not  have-  given  this  anfwer 
and  advice,  "    they  have  Mofes  and  the  prophets, 
''  Jet  them  hear  them,"  had  he  fuppofed  that   the 
fcriptures  then  were    or  for  the  future   ought    to 
be    Jockt    up  from   the  people   in    an    unknown 
tongue ;    for   the  rich  man  might  very  well  have 
replied,    "  nay,    father    Abraham,"    but  they  are 
not  permitted  to  have  '^  Mofes  arid  the  prophets** 
in    fuch  a  language  as    they   can  underftand ;  and 
therefore  there  is  more  need  why  "  one  ihould  be         ^ 
*'  fent  from  the  dead  to  teilify  unto  them." 

Nor  would  Abraham  have  faid  again,  ^^  if  they 
"  hear  not  Mofes  and  the  prophets,  neither  will 
"  they  be  perfuaded."  For  how  fhould  men  hear 
what  they  cannot  underftand,  fo  as  to  be  perfuaded 
by  it? 

It  is  evident  then,  that  our  S  av  1 0  u  r,  accord- 
ing to  the  reafoning  of  this  parable,  takes  it  for 
granted,  that  the  holy  fcriptures  are  the  flanding 
and  ordinary  means  of  bringing  men  to  faith  and 
repentance,  and  that  the  people  are  to  have  the  free 
ufe  of  them.  But  fince  our  Saviour's  time, 
the  church  of  Rome  hath  found  a  mighty  incon- 
venience in  this,  and  therefore  hath  taken  the  fcrip- 
tures out  of  the  hands  of  the  people.  They  will 
not  now  let  them  ''  have  Mofes  and  the  prophets," 
the  gofpiel  of  our  bleffed  Saviour,  and  the  writings 
of  his  apoftles,  becaufe  they  are  really  afraid  they 
fliould  "  hear  them,"  and  by  hearing  of  them,  be  con- 
vinced and  perfuaded  of  the  errors  and  corruptions 

Vol.  VIL  15  P  of 


2238       The  parable  of  the  rich  man^  and  Lazarus, 
S  E  R  M.  of  their  church  -,  but  inftcad  of  the  fcripturcs  of  the 
'"^^■^^^old  and   new  tcftament,  they  have  put  into    their 
hands  a   legend  of  famous   apparitions   of  "  men 
"  from  the  dead,  teftifying  unto  them"  concerning 
purgatory  and  tranfubftantiation,  and  the  worfhip  of 
the  bleffcd  virgin  and  the  faints,  and  the  great  be- 
nefit and  refrediment  which  fouls  in  purgatory  have 
by  the  indulgences  of  the   pope,  and  the  prayers  of 
the  living  put  up  to  faints  and  angels  on  their  be- 
half ;   fo  that  in   the  church  of  Rome,    quite  con- 
trary to  our  S  Av  I  o  u  r's   method,  men  arc  per- 
fuaded  of  their  religion,    of  their    new  articles  of 
faith,  and  ways  of  worfhip,  not  by  Mofes  and  the 
prophets,  not  by  the  do(5lrine  of  the  holy  fcriptures 
(for  they  every  where  teftify  againft   them)  but  by 
abfurd  romances,  and  ill-contriv'd  fid  ions  of  appa- 
ritions from  the  dead.     I  will  difmifs   this  matter 
with  this  one  obfervation,  that  however  interefted 
and  confident  men  may  kt  a  bold  face   upon  any 
thino-,  yet  it  cannot  to  confiderate  men  but  feem  a 
very  hard  cafe,  that  there  fhould  be  no  falvation  to 
be  had  out  of  the  church  of  Rome  ;  and  yet  the  or- 
dinary, and  (in  our  Saviour's  judgment^  the  mofl 
effectual  means  of  falvation  are  not  to  be  had  in  it. 

But  I  pafs  from   this,  to  that  which  does  more 
immediately  concern  our  pradlice. 

2dly,  let  us  hear  and  obey  that  publick  revela- 
tion of  G  o  D  's  will,  which  in  fo  much  mercy  to 
mankind,  he  hath  been  pleafed  to  afford  us.  This 
is  an  inedimable  privilege  and  advantage  which  the 
world  in  many  ages  was  deilitute  of,  having  no 
other  guide  to  condu6l  them  to  eternal  happinefs 
but  the  light  of  nature,  and  fome  particular  revela- 
tions. 


The  parable  of  the  rich  ?nan,  and  Lazarus.  2239 
tlons,  which  now  and  then  God  was  pleafcd  to  SERM. 
make  of  his  will  to  men:  but  now  God  hath  fet^^''^'^'^^^^ 
up  a  great  and  ftanding  light  in  the  world,  the  doc- 
trines of  the  holy  fcriptures  ;  and  by  the  gofpel  of 
his  blefifed  Son,  hath  '*  given  the  knowledge  of 
«'  fcilvation  to  all  men,  for  the  remiffion  of  their 
"  fms,  through  the  tender  mercies  of  God,  where- 
*'  by  the  day-fpring  from  on  high  hath  vifited  us, 
«'  to  give  light  to  them  that  fit  in  darknefs,  and 
*'  in  the  fiiadow  of  death,  and  to  guide  our  feet 
"  into  the  way  of  peace,"  to  convince  us  of  the 
error  of  our  ways,  and  to  diredl  us  in  our  dutv. 
"  We,  upon  whom  the  ends  of  the  world  are 
*'  come,"  do  enjoy  all  the  advantages  of  divine  re- 
velation which  the  world  ever  had,  and  as  great  as 
the  world  ever  Ihall  have.  "  GorT  in  thefe  laft 
"  days  hath  fpoken  unto  us  by  his  Son,"  and  if 
we  will  not  hear  him,  God  will  employ  no  other 
extraordinary  prophet  and  mclTenger  to  us.  ''  If 
*'  the  wrath  of  G  o  d  fo  clearly  revealed  from  hea- 
"  ven  by  the  gofpel  of  our  blefTcd  Saviour, 
*'  againft  all  ungodlinefs  and  unrightcoufnefs  of 
''  men  5 "  if  the  terror  of  the  great  day,  and  the 
fear  of  eternal  torment ;  if  the  dreadful  fufierings  of 
the  Son  of  God  for  our  fins,  and  the  merciful 
offers  of  pardon  and  reconciliation  in  his  blood, 
and  the  glorious  hopes  of  eternal  life  and  happi- 
nefs  will  not  prevail  with  us  to  leave  our  fins,  and 
to  amend  our  lives,  v/c  have  no  reafon  to  expect 
that  God  lliould  ufe  any  farther  means  to  reclaim 
us  •,  that  he  fhould  ever  make  any  more  attempts  for 
our  recovery.     And  therefore, 

15  P  2  ^dly. 


2240       T&  parable  of  the  rich  man^  and  Lazarus.. 

S  E  R  \f.        oclly    and  Jaftly,  thofe  who  are  not  brought  to 
cxx  VI I  r 

repentance,  and  effcdualiy  perfuaded  by  this  clear 

and   publick  reveJation  which  God  hath   made  of 

his  will  to  men  in  the  holy  Icriptures,  have  reafon 

to  look  upon  their  cafe  as  dt-Jpcrate. 

Methinks  it  fliould  not  be  a  defirable  thing  to 
any  of  us  to  be  convinced  by  an  apparition,  the 
thing  is  fo  dreadful  and  full  of  terror  ;  befides,  that 
it  argues  men  to  be  ftrangely  hardened  in  a  bad 
courfe,  and  obilinately  bent  upon  their  evil  ways, 
when  nothing  will  affright  them  from  their  fins, 
but  what  will  almofl:  put  them  out  of  their  wits  ; 
when  nothing  will  keep  them  from  running  into  hell, 
but  a  fearful  and  ghaftly  mefTenger  from  thence. 
What  a  terrible  fight  would  it  be  to  any  of  us,  to' 
meet  one  of  our  companions,  whom  we  had  lately 
known  in  this  world,  frefh  come  out  of  thofe  flames, 
with  the  fmell  of  fire  and  brimdone  upon  him  ! 
what  imagination  can  paint  to  it  k\^  the  dread  and 
horror  of  fuch  a  fpedtacle  !  the  rich  man  here  in 
the  parable,  when  he  was  in  hell,  is  reprefented  as 
fenfible  of  the  inconvenience  of  this,  and  therefore 
he  did  not  defire  to  be  fent  himfelf  to  his  brethren, 
but  defned  that  Lazarus  might  go  and  teftify  unto 
them  :  he  was  apprehenfive  how  frightful  a  fight 
he  himfelf  muft  needs  have  been  to  them,  and 
therefore  he  defires  that  they  might  have  a  gentle 
warning  by  one,  who  from  out  of  Abraham's  bo- 
fom  had  {ttn.  the  miferies  of  the  damned,  but  en- 
joyed the  ftate  of  the  bleffed. 

But  \tt  not  us  tempt  G  o  d  by  any  fuch  un reafon- 
able  demand,  who  fpeaks  to  us  every  day  by  the 
plain  declarations  of  his  vv'ord,  and  hath  of  late 
'  years 


The  parable  of  the  rich  man,  and  Lazarus.       2241 

years  call'd  fo  loudly  upon  us  by  the  voice  of  his  SERM. 
providence  to  repent  and  turn  to  him  ;  by  fo  many  ^^^^^ 
miracles  of  mercy  and  deliverance,  as  God  hardly 
ever  wrought  for  any  prince  and  people,    and  by 
fuch  terrible  vollies  of  judgments,  and  full  viols  of 
wrath,  as  have  feldom  been  poured  out  upon  any 
nation.     God  fpeaks  to  you  by  his  miniflers,  men 
like  your  felves  (God  knows,  poor  frail  and  finful 
men)  but  we  are  fure,  that  when  we  call  you   to 
repentance,  we  deliver  to  you  the  will  and  plcafure, 
the   counfels   and  commands   of    the    great  God, 
which  ("whatever  account   may  be  made  of  us)  do 
certainly  challenge   your  molt  awful  attention  and 
regard.     And   v/e  are  fenfible  that  we  are  call'd  to 
a  very  difficult   and  unpleafant   work,  to  contend 
with  the  lulls  and  vices  of  men,  to  drive  againfl: 
the  (Irong  and  impetuous  ftreams  of  a  wicked  and 
perverfe  generation  ;  and  nothing  in  the  world  could 
move  us  to  this  unwelcome  and  grievous  importu- 
laty,  but  a  great  and  jud  kn^t  of  our  own  duty, 
and  your  danger.     And  if  we  will  not  take  thefe 
warnings,  why  (hould  we  exped  that  God  fliould 
vouchlafe  to  fend  an  exprefs  meffenger  to  us  from 
the  other  world,    to  certify  us  how  all  things  arc 
there,  and  that  not  fo  much  to  help  the  weaknefs 
of  our  faith,  as  to  humour  the  perverfenefs  of  our 
infidelity  ?  and  why  fhoiild    we  imagine   that  this 
courfe  would  prove  more  effeclual  ?    "  hi  us  not 
"  deceive  our   felves,"  the  fame  lulls  which  now 
detain  men  fo  flrongly  in  impenitency  and  unbe- 
lief, would  in  all  probability  hurry  them  on  to  hell, 
tho'  an  angel  from   heaven  Ihould  meet  them  in 
their  way,  to  give  a  flop  to  them.     This  indeed 

might 


2242       ^he  parable  of  the  rich  nian^  and  Lazarus, 
SERM.  mieht  ftartle  us;  but  nothine;  is   like  to  fave  us, 

^  if  the  word  of  G  o  d  and  his  grace  do  not. 

But  arc  we  in  earned,  and  would  we  "  be  perfuaded 
««  if  one  fhould  rife  from  the  dead  ?  "  God  hath 
condefcended  thus  far  to  us,  there  is  "  one  rilen 
*'  from  the  dead  to  teftify  unto  us,''  Jesus  the 
Son  of  God,  who  "  died  for  our  fins,  and  rofe 
**  again  for  our  juftification,'*  and  is  afcended  into 
heaven,  and  fet  down  at  the  right  hand  of  God, 
to  afiurc  us  of  a  blefled  refurrection,  and  a  glori- 

'ous  immortality.  And  if  this  will  not  fatisfy  us, 
God  will  gratify  our  curiofity  no  farther.  If  we 
*'  will  not  believe  him,  whom  God  hath  fent," 
and  to  convince  us  that  he  hath  fent  him,  hath 
*'  raifed  him  up  from  the  dead,  we  fhall  die  in  our 
*'  fins,"  and  perilh  in  our  impcnitency.  God  hath 
in  great  mercy  to  mankind  done  that  which  is 
abundandy  fufficient  to  convince  thofe  who  are  of 
a  teachable  temper  and  difpofition ;  but  in  great 
wifdom  and  juftice  he  hath  not  thought  fit  to  pro- 
vide any  remedy  for  the  wilful  obflinacy  and  in- 
tradlable  perverfenefs  of  men. 

Now  God,  who  hath  the  hearts  of  all  men  in 
his  hands,  perfuades  us  all,  "  to  break  off  our  fins 
*'  by  repentance,  and  to  give  glory  to  God,"  be- 
fore death  and  darkncfs  come,  and  the  day  of  our 
final  vifitation  overtake  us,  when  we  may  perhaps 
be  furprized  by  a  fudden  fi:rokc,  or  feized  upon  by  a 
violent  difeafe,  and  may  have  no  fenfe  and  ap- 
prehenfion  of  our  approaching  danger  ;  or  if  we 
have,  '^  may  find  no  place  for  repentance,  tho* 
"^  we  fcek  it  with  tears;"  which  God  grant 
may  never    happen  to  be   the  cafe  of  any  of  us, 

for 


7he  children  of  this  ivorld,  &c.  224^^ 

for  his    mercy's    fake    in    Christ    Jesus,   to 
whom  with  the  Father,  &c. 


SERMON  CXXIX. 

The  children  of  this  world  wifer  than 
the  children  of  light. 

LUKE    xvi.  8. 

For  the  children  of  this  world  are  in  their  generation 
wifer  than  the  children  of  light. 


T 


HESE    words  are  in  the  parable   of  thesERM, 
rich  man's  Iteward,  who  being  called  upon  CXXix, 
to   give  up  his  accounts,  in  order  to   his  Preached 
being  difcharge^  from  his  office,    caft  about  with  ^^ '^^^^'^~ 
himfelf,    what  courfc  he  had  beft  to  take,  to  pro-  m^^"^ 
vide  for  his  fubfiftence,  when  he  Ihould  be  turned 
out  of  his  employment.     At  laft  he  refolves  upon 
this-,     that  he  will  go    to  his    Lord's    debtors, 
and  take  a  favourable  account  of  them  ;    and  in- 
Head  of  "  a  hundred  meafures  of  oil,    write  down 
•'  fifty,"   and  inftead  of  ''  a  hundred  meafures  of 
*'  wheat,  write  down  fourfcore ;"  that  by  this  means 
he  might  oblige  them  to   be  kind  to  him  in   his 
neceffity.     The  lord    hearing   of   this,  commends 
the  unjufl:  fteward,  "  becaufe  he  had  done  wiicly  v'* 
that    is,    he  took   notice    of  his   difhoncfly;    but 
praifed  his  fhrewdnefs  and  fagacity,  as  having  done 
prudently  for  himfelf,  though  he  did  not  deaj  juilly 

with 


22  44  TX^  children  of  this  world 

SER^- with  him;  and  this  is  ufual  among  mm. 
^^^^^.^.^^^  When  we  fee  a  man  ingenioiidy  bad,  to  com- 
mend his  wir,  and  to  L\y  it  is  great  pity  he  doth- 
not  ufe  it  better,  and  apply  it  to  good  purpofes. 
Upon  the  vvhole,  our  Saviour  makes  this  obfer- 
vation  ;  "  that  the  children  of  this  world  are  in 
"  their  generation  wifer  than  the  children  of 
**  h'ghti"  as  if  he  had  faid,  thus  did  the  worldly 
wife  man,  thus  provident  was  he  for  his  future 
fecuricy  and  fubfiftence.  He  no  fooncr  underftands 
that  he  is  to  be  turned  out  of  his  office,  but  he 
confiders  what  provifion  to  make  for  himfelf  againfl 
that  time.  And  is  it  not  pity,  that  good  men  do 
not  apply  this  wifdom  to  better  and  greater  pur- 
pofes ?  for  is  not  every  man  fuch  a  fteward,  intruflcd 
by  G  o  D  with  the  bleffings  of  this  hfe,  and  many 
•  opportunities  of  doing  good  ?  for  all  which,  fince 
he  mufl  fhortly  give  an  account,  he  ought  in  all 
reafon  fo  to  ufe  them,  as  thereby  to  provide  for  the 
happinefs  of  another  hfe,  againft  this  temporal  life 
have  an  end. 

And  this  is  all  the  parallel  intended  in  this  pa- 
rable, as  we  may  fee  by  our  Sav  i  o  u  r's  applica- 
tion of  it.  For  parables  are  not  to  be  ftretched 
to  an  exaft  parallel  in  all  the  parts  and  circumftances 
of  them  ;  but  only  to  be  applied  to  the  particular 
point  and  purpofc  intended.  A  parable,  and  the 
moral  accommodation  of  it,  being  (as  one  well  ob- 
fervesj  not  like  two  plains,  which  touch  one  another 
in  every  part ;  but  like  a  globe  upon  a  plain,  which 
only  toucheth  in  one  point.  Tlius  our  Sav  i  o  u  R 
feparates  the  wifdom  of  this  fteward  from  his  in- 
juftice,  and  propofeth  that  to  our  imitation ;  "  the 

children 


wifer  than  the  children  of  light,  2245 

*'  children  of  this  world  are  in  their  generation  wifer  ^5  E  R  M. 
*'  than  the  children  of  Jight."  *JX',^ 

The  words  are  a  comparifon  ;  in  which  we  have 

ifl:,  the  perfons  compared,  "  tho.  chiUren  of  this 
*'  world,"  and  the  "  children  of  light,"  It  is  a 
very  ufjal  phrafe  among  the  Hebrews,  when  they 
would  exprefs  any  thing  to  partake  of  fuch  a  na- 
ture or  quality,  to  call  it  the  fon  or  child  of  fuch  a 
thing.  Thus  good  men  are  call'd  "  the  children  of 
«'  God,"  and  bad  men  *'  the  children  of  the 
'«  devil;'*  thofe  who  mind  earthly  things,  and 
make  the  things  of  this  world  their  greatell  aim  and 
defign,  are  called  "  the  children  of  this  world  ;'*' 
and  thofe  who  are  better  enlightned  with  the  know- 
ledge of  their  own  immortality,  and  the  belief  of  a 
future  (late  after  this  life,  are  cali'd  ''  the  children 
<'  of  light." 

2dly,  here  is  the  thing,  wherein  they  are  compa- 
red, and  that  is,  as  to  their  wifdom  and  pru- 
dence. 

3dly,  the  obje6l  of  this  prudence,  which  is  not 
the  fame  in  both*,  as  if  the  fenfe  were,  "  thechil- 
*'  dren  of  this  world  are  wifer  than  the  children  of 
*'  light,"  as  to  the  things  of  this  world  ;  but  here 
^re  two  feveral  objedls  intended,  about  which  the 
prudence  of  thefe  two  forts  of  perfons  is  refpedlively 
cxercifed ;  the  concernments  of  this  world  and  the 
other.  And  our  Saviour's  meaning  is,  that 
"  the  children  of  this  world  are  wifer  in  their  gene- 
*'  ration  •,"  that  is,  "  in  their  way,  viz.  as  to  the 
interefts  and  concernments  of  this  world,  ''  than  the 
"  children  of  light  are  in  theirs,"  viz.  as  to  the 
interefts  and  concernments  of  the  other  world. 

Vol.  Vil.  1 5  0.  4thly, 

8. 


2246  7 he  children  of  this  world 

-X^i  y'  4tH^y»  here  is  a  decifion  of  the  matter,  and  which 
of  them  it  is  that  excels  in  point  of  prudence,  in 
their  way  j  and  our  Sav  i  o  u  r  gives  it  to  the 
*'  children  of  this  world  -,  they  are  wifer  in  their  ge- 
"  ncration,  than  the  children  of  light." 

Now  this  propofition  is  not  to  be  taken  in  the 
utmoft  (tridnefs  and  rigor  •,  as  if  it  were  univerfally 
true,  and  without  any  exception  ;  as  if  no  man  had 
ever  been  fo  wife  and  provident  for  his  foul,  and 
the  concernments  of  another  world,  as  worldly 
men  are  for  the  interefts  and  concernments  of  this 
life.  For  there  are  fome  that  are  fools  at  large, 
and  imprudent  in  their  whole  conduct  and  manage- 
ment, both  as  to  their  affairs  of  this  world,  and  the 
other;  who  are  in  too  flridl  a  fenfe,  "  the  children 
■''  of  this  world/  They  mind  nothing  but  this 
world,  and  yet  are  groily  imprudent,  even  in  their 
profecution  of  their  temporal  interefts :  they  neg- 
led  and  forego  all  other  worldly  advantages,  for 
the  lake  of  a  little  fenfual  pleafure ;  and  then  they 
]ofe  and  deftroy  that  too,  by  an  over-hot  and 
eager  purfuit  of  it,  and  turn  it  at  laft  into  gali 
and  wormwood.  And  there  are  others,  (as  St. 
Paul  for  inftance;  who,  I  doubt  not,  have  been  as 
prudent  and  zealous,  and  induftrious  for  the  pro^ 
moting  of  religion,  and  the  falvation  of  them- 
felves  and  others,  as  any  man  can  be  about  the  affairs 
of  this  prefent  life  ;  and  I  hope  there  are  fome  fuch 
in  every  age,  but  God  knows  they  are  very  few, 
and  their  wifdom  and  indudry  is  feldom  fo  equal, 
and  conftant,  and  uniformj  as  that  of  *.'  the  men  of 


^^  this  world." 


So 


isjifer  than  the  children  of  light,  2247 

So  that  we  are  to  underfland  this  faying  of  our  SE  R  M 
Sav  I  o  u  R^s  with  the  fame  allowance  as  we  generally ,  ^  ' 
do  all  moral  and  proverbial  fpeechez,  that  they  are 
true  for  the  mod  part,  and  the  inftances  and  excep- 
tions to  the  contrary  are  very  rare.  It  is  feldom 
^^tv\^  that  good  men  are  {o  wife  for  the  concernments 
of  their  fouls,  and  of  religion,  as  many  worldly  men 
are  for  their  worldly  interefl:. 

In  fpeaking  to  this  propofition,  I  ihalJ  do  thefe 
three  things. 

Firft,  confirm  and  illuftrate  the  truth  of  it,  by 
confidering  the  feveral  parts  and  properties  of  wif- 
dom. 

Secondly,  give  fome  probable  account  of  this, 
by  confidering  what  advantages  "  the  children  of 
"  this  world  have  above  the  children  of  light." 

Thirdly,  I  fliall  draw  fome  inferences  from  the 
whole,  by  way  of  application. 

Firilj  1  fhall  endeavour  to  confirm  and  illuftrate 
the  truth  of  this,  by  confidering  the  feveral  parts 
and  properties  of  wifdom.  Now  this  is  wifdom, 
to  mind  and  regard  our  chief  endj  and  by  all 
means  to  promote  it  5  and  this  regard  to  our  chief 
end  doth  exprefs  it  felf  chiefly  in  thefe  particu„ 
lars  5  in  our  being  firmly  fixed  and  refolvcd  upon 
if,  in  choofing  the  fitted  means  for  the  compaffino- 
and  accomplilhing  of  it ;  in  a  diligent  ufe  of  thofe 
means ;  in  an  invincible  conftancy  and  perfeverance 
in  the  profecution  of  it ;  and  in  making  all  thincrs 
to  fubmit  and  to  ftoop  to  it.  Thefe  are  the  prin- 
cipal parts  and  properties  of  wifdom ;  and  I  fhall 
fhew,  that  in  all  thefe  "  the  children  of  this  world'* 
do  ufually  excel  '^  the  children  of  licrht/* 

J  5  0^2  ift^  they 


2248  The  children  of  this  world 

SERM.  iH",  they  are  ufually  more  firmly  fixed  and 
CXXIX.  rg^Qi^ej  ^^poPj  |-}^eir  end.  Whatever  they  fet  up 
for  their  end,  riches,  or  honours,  or  pleafures,  they 
are  fixed  upon  it,  and  fleady  in  the  profecution 
of  it.  If  they  fet  up  for  riches  or  honour,  they 
neglecl  and  delpife  pleafure,  if  it  crofs  either  of 
thofe  ends.  And  this  fixed  refolution  of  the  end 
is  the  <yreat  fpring  of  aclion,  and  that  which  in- 
fpires  men  with  vigour  and  dihgence  in  the  ufe 
of  means ;  and  the  more  refolved  men  are  upoa 
the  end,  the  more  active  and  induftrious  they  will 
be  in  the  ufe  of  means  •,  for  the  end  governs  the 
means,  and  gives  law  and  meafure  to  our  activity 
and  induftry  in  the  ufe  of  them,  and  fweetens  and 
allays  the  trouble  and  difficulty  of  them. 

So  that  where  the  end  is  once  firmly  fixed  and 
lefolved  upon,  there  will  not  be  wanting  fervour  of 
profecution  ;  but  if  we  be  wavering  and  unfleady  as 
to  our  end,  this  will  '  weaken  our  hands,  and 
quench  the  heat  of  our  endeavours,  and  abate  ths 
heat  of  our  endeavours,  and  abate  the  eagernefs  of 
our  purfuit,  and  according  to  the  degree  of  it, 
will  derive  a  debility  and  inconftancy  into  all  our 
motions.  "  The  double-minded  man  (as  St.  James 
•'  fays)  is  unliable  in  all  his  ways."  Now  ''  the 
*«  children  of  this  world"  are  commonly  more  fixed 
and  refolved  upon  their  end,  than  "  the  children 
"  of  light."  'Tis  rare  to  fee  the  whole  life  and 
adlions  of  a  good  man,  fo  conftantly  and  uniformly 
confpiring  to  the  furtherance  of  his  great  end,  fo 
diredly  tending  to  the  falvation  of  his  foul,  and 
the  increafe  of  his  glory  and  happinefs  in  another 
world  5   as  th^  adlions  of  a  worldly  man,  and  the 

whole 


unfer  than  the  children  of  light.  2249 

whole  courfe  of    his    hfe  do    to  the  advancincr  or^;^.j^  f' 

1  •  1  11        •  n  v.JvAl  A. 

his  worldly  interelts.  The  covetous  or  ambitious 
men  feldom  do  any  thing  to  the  bed  of  their 
knowledge,  that  is  impertinent  to  their  end, 
much  lefs  contrary  to  it  ;  through  every  thing  that 
they  do  one  may  plainly  fee  the  end  they  aim 
at,  and  that  they  are  always  true  to  it :  whereas 
the  bed  men  do  many  things,  which  are  plainly 
crofs  and  contrary  to  their  end,  and  a  great  many 
more,  which  have  no  relation  to  it  -,  and  whea 
they  mind  it,  it  is  rather  by  fits  and  darts,  than  in 
any  even  courfe  and  tenour  of  actions.  , 

And  oF  this  we  have  a  famous  indance  in  that-^ 
worldly  and  fecular  church,  which  now  for  feveral 
hundred  of  years  hath  more  deadily  purfu'd  the 
end  of  fecular  greatnefs  and  dominion,  than  any 
other  church  hath  done  to  the  ends  of  true  religion, 
the  glory  of  G  o  d,  and  the  falvation  of  the  fouls 
of  men,  fo  tliat  there  is  hardly  any  dodlrine  or 
pradice  peculiar  to  that  church,  and  differing  from 
our  common  chridianity,  but  it  hath  a  dired  and 
vifible  tendency  to  the  promoting  of  fome  worldly 
intered  or  other.  For  indance,  why  do  they  deny 
the  people  the  holy  fcriptures  and  the  fervice  of 
God  in  a  language  which  they  can  underdand? 
but  that  by  keeping  them  in  ignorance,  they  may 
have  them  in  more  perfect  (layery  and  fubjtdlion 
to  them?  why  do  they  forbid  their  prieds  to 
marry  ?  but  that  they  may  have  no  intered  didindt 
from  chat  of  their  church,  and  leave  all  to  it  when 
they  die  ?  to  what  end  is  auricular  confefTion  ?  but 
to  keep  people  in  awe,  by  the  knowledge  of  their 
fecrets  ?  why  mud  the  laity  only  receive  the  facra- 

ment 


2250  'The  thildren  of  this  world 

SERM.  mcnt  m  one  kind,  but  to  draw  a  greater  reve" 
rence  to  the  pricll,  whofe  privilege  it  fhall  be  to 
receive  in  both?  and  why  is  the  intention  of  the 
prieft  neceflfary  to  the  efficacy  of  t\\t  facraments  ? 
but  to  perfuade  the  people,  that  notwithftanding 
the  gracious  intention  of  God  toward  mankind^ 
they  cannot  be  faved  without  the  good-wil)  of  the 
prieft  ?  the  dodlrines  of  purgatory  and  indulgences 
are  a  plain  device  to  make  their  markets  of  the 
fins  and  fouls  of  men.  I  might  inftance  in  a  hun- 
dred things  more  in  that  church,  which  are  of 
the  fame  tendency.  This  St,  John  foretold  fhould 
be  the  charadler  of  the  fpirit  of  antichrift,  that  it 
fhould  be  a  worldly  fpirit,  and  the  dodlrines  of 
it  fhould  ferve  a  fecular  intereft  and  defign,  i  John 
iv,  5.  *'  They  are  of  the  world,  and  they  fpeak 
*'  from  the  world,  and  the  world  hears  them/* 
What  church  is  there  in  the  world,  fo  true  through- 
out to  the  intereft  of  religion,  as  this  worldly 
church  hath  been  to  its  own  fecular  power  and 
Vgreatnefs  ? 

2dly,  "  the  children  of  this  world  "  are  wifer 
in  the  choice  of  means  in  order  to  their  end  ;  and 
this  is  a  great  part  of  wifdom.  For  fome  means 
will  bring  about  an  end  with  lefs  pains  and  diffi- 
culty, and  expence  of  time  than  others.  And  the 
men  of  the  world  are  very  ingenious  in  difcerning 
the  fitnefs  and  force  of  means  to  their  feveral 
ends.  To  what  a  certainty  have  men  reduced  all 
the  ways  and  arts  of  gain,  and  growing  rich,  and 
of  rifing  to  honour  and  preferment .?  what  long 
trains  will  men  lay  to  bring  about  their  defired 
end?   what  fubtile  methods  have  men  devifed,  to 

infinuate 


U'lfer  than  the  children  of  light,  2251 

infinuate  themfelves  into  court;  and  when  they  are  SER^f. 
there,  to  plant  themfelves  in  the  eye  of  their  prince, 
and  in  the  fun-fhine  of  his  favour  ?  and  then  they 
have  as  many  ways  of  worming  others  out,  as  of 
fere  wing  themfelves  in. 

But  in  the  concernments  of  our  fouls,  and  the 
affairs   of  another  world,  how  dull  and  injudicious 
are   we  ?    and  how  aukwardly  and  untowardly  do 
we  apply  means   to  ends,  as  if  men  were  "  only 
*'  wife  to  do  evil,  but  to  do  good  had   no  under- 
"  flanding,"  as  the  prophet  complains?    by  what 
incongruous   and   irregular   means  do  many  (who 
would  feem  to  be,  and  fometimes  perhaps  are,  very- 
zealous   in  religion)  endeavour  (as   they    think)    to 
promote  God's  glory,  by  pious  frauds  and  coun- 
terfeit miracles,  and  telhng  officious  lies  for  God  ? 
what    a   compafs    do    many  men    fetch  to  go   to 
heaven,    by   innumerable   devices   of  will-worfhip, 
by   voluntary  fevcrities,  neither  pleafing  to  God, 
nor  profitable  to  men  ?  by  tedious  pilgrimages  and 
fenfelefs  ceremonies,  and   innumerable  litde  external 
obfervances  of   no  virtue  or  efficacy   in   religion  ? 
and  by  wandring  through  a  wildernefs  of  opinions, 
and  the  bufhes  and  brakes  of  unprofitable  queftions, 
and  controverfies  ?  whereas  the  way  to  heaven  lies 
plain  and  ftraight  before  us,  confifting  in  fimplicity. 
of  belief,  and   in    holinefs    and  innocency  of  life. 
Not    but    that  there   are    great    differences  in  the 
church   of  Rome,  between    the  fecular  priefts  and 
the  regular ;  between  the  janfenifls  and  the  jefuits : 
but  they  ftill  unite   in  a  common  intereft,  and  are 
fubjedl  to  antichrift  their  common  head.     They  do 
not  feparate  from  one  another,    and   excommuni- 
cate 


i»2  q2  "The  children  of  this  world 

SERM.oate  one  another,  and  declare  ao-ainft  one  anotherj 
y-^^J^  that  they  are  not  of  the  true  church.   "  Satan  ne- 
*'  ver  calls  out  Satan  •,"  and    though   he  loves  di- 
vifions  among  chriftians,  yet  he  always  takes   care, 
that  "  his  own   kingdom  be  not   divided    againft 
**  it  felf,"  fo  as  to  endanger  the  ruin  of  it.    And 
whenever  they  have  any  hopeful  defign  for  the  ex- 
tirpation of  proteflants,  they  can  lay  afide  their  en- 
mities, and  be  reconciled  in   fuch  a  defign.     Then 
the  pope  and  the  kings  of  the  earth  "  take  coun- 
*'  fcl   together,"  and  like  Herod  and  Pilate,  when 
Christ  was  to  be  crucified,  can  be  made  friends 
at  a  day's  warning.     Whereas  the  divifions  of  the 
true  church  are  pernicious  to  it,  and,  as  we  fee  at 
this  day  among  ourfelves,  our  fenfelefs  differences 
and  wild    heats  on  both    fides,    do   contribute  to 
the  fetting  up  of  popery,  and  the  ruin  of  the  re- 
formed religion ;  and  yet  no  perfuafion,  no  experi- 
ence can  make  us  wifer. 

3d]y,  *'  the  children  of  this  world  "  are  com- 
monly more  diligent  in  the  ufe  of  means  for  the 
obtaining  of  their  end ;  they  will  fweat  and  toil, 
and  take  any  pains,  '*  rife  up  early  and  lie  down 
*'  late,  and  eat  the  bread  of  carefulnefs  ;"  their 
thoughts  are  continually  running  upon  their  bufi- 
nefs,  and  they  catch  at  every  opportunity  of  pro- 
moting it  *,  they  will  pinch  nature  and  harafs  it ; 
and  rob  themfelves  of  their  reft,  and  all  the  com- 
fort of  their  lives  to  raife  their  fortune  and  eftate. 
What  drudges  were  Casfar  and  Alexander  in  the 
way  of  fame  and  ambition?  how  did  they  tire 
themfelves  and  others  with  long  and  tedious  marches? 
to  what  inconveniences  and  dangers  did   they  ex- 

pofe 


,  ..  CXXIX. 


'    m)ifer  than  the  children  of  light,  2253 

pofe  themfdves  and  thoufands  more  ?  what  havock  S  E  R  M 
and  deftrudlion  did  they  make  in  the  world,  that 
they  might  gain  to  themfelves  the  empty  tide  of 
conquerors  of  it  ?  when  the  men  of  the  world  en- 
gage in  any  defign,  how  intent  are  they  upon  itj 
and  with  what  vigour  do  they  profecute  it  ?  they 
do  not  counterfeit  a  dihgence,  and  feem  to  be 
more  ferious  and  induftrious  than  in  truth  they 
are  ;  they  are  rather  hypocrites  the  other  way,  and 
would  conceal  their  covetoufnefs  and  ambition,  and 
not  feem  to  afpire  after  riches  and  honours  fo  much 
as  indeed  they  do. 

But  in  the  purfuit  of  better  things,  how  cold  and 
remils  are  we  ?  with  what  a  carelefs  indifference 
do  moft  men  mind  their  fouls  ?  how  negligent 
and  formal,  and  many  times  hypocritical  are  they 
in  the  fervice  of  God,  and  the  exercife  of  reli- 
gion ?  with  what  a  pitiful  courage,  and  with  what 
faint  fpirits  do  they  refill  fin,  and  encounter  the 
temptations  of  it?  and  how  often,  and  how  ealily 
are  they   foiled  and  baffled  by  therri. 

4th]y,  the  men  of  the  world  are  more  invin- 
cibly confiant  and  perdnacibus  in  the  purfuit  of 
earthly  things ;  they  are  not  to  be  bribed  or  taken 
off  by  favour  or  fair  words ;  not  to  be  daunted 
by  difficulties,  or  dafht  out  of  countenance  by  the 
frowns  and  reproaches  of  men.  Ofter  an  ambi- 
tious man  any  thing  fhort  of  his  end  and  aim,  to 
take  him  off  from  the  profecution  of  it ;  he  fcorns  the 
motion,  and  thinks  you  go  about  to  fool  him  out  of 
his  intereft.  Bait  a  covetous  man  with  temptanons 
of  pleafure,  to  get  his  money  from  him;  how  gene- 
roufly    will   this  mean-fpirited    man  trample  upoa 

Vol.  VI L  15  R  plealure. 


2254  ^'^^  children  of  this  world 

s  K  R  M  plcafure,  when  it  would  tempt  him  from  his  defign 

^^^^^"^  of  being  rich? 

Difficulties  do  not  daunt  them,  but  whet  their 
courage,  and  quicken  their  endeavours,  and  fet  a 
keener  edge  upon  their  fpirits.  Give  an  ambitious 
man  almoft  a  demonflration  of  the  impoffibility 
of  his  attempts ;  conlra  audentior  ihit^  he  will  go  on 
fo  much  the  more  boldly  and  refolutely.  In  the 
ways  of  religion  men  are  apt  to  be  difcouraged 
and  put  out  of  countenance,  by  contempt  and 
reproach;  but  a  covetous  man  is  not  to  bejeer'd 
and  flurtcd  out  of  his  money  and  eflate ;  he  can 
be  content  to  be  rich,  and  give  leave  to  thofe  that 
are  not  fo,  to  laugh  at  him. 

Populus  mihi  fibilat^  at  mihi  plaudo. 

The  rich  worldling  can  hug  himfelf  and  his 
bags,  when  the  world  hifleth  at  him ;  he  can  bear 
«*  to  be  hated,  and  perfecuted,  and  have  all  man- 
«*  ner  of  evil  fpoke  againfl  him  for  money  fake :" 
and  in  the  purfuits  of  thefe  defigns,  men  will, 
with  great  refolution,  encounter  enmity  and  op- 
pofition,  and  endure  great  fufferings  and  perfecu- 
tion.  How  many  have  been  martyrs  to  their  lulls, 
and  have  facrificed  their  eafe  and  health,  and  even 
their  lives,  in  the  profecution  of  their  ambitious,  and 
covetous,  and  voluptuous  defigns  ? 

But,  on  the  other  hand,  how  eafily  are  men 
checked  and  diverted  from  a  good  courfe,  by  the 
temptations  and  advantages  of  this  world;  how 
many  are  cold  in  their  zeal  for  religion,  by  the 
favour  and  friendfhip  of  this  world  ?  and  as  their 
goods  and  eltates  have  grown  gr^er,  their  devo- 
tion 


mclfer  than  the  children  of  light.  ^255 

tion  hath  grown  Ms.     How  apt  are  they  to  be  ter-  S  E  R  M. 
rifled  at  the  apprehenfion  oF  danger  and  fufferings ; 
and,   by  their  fearful  imaginations,  to  make  them 
greater    than    they   are,    and    with   the   people   of 
Ifrael  to  be  difhearten'd  from  all  farther  attempts 
of  entering  ''  into  the  land  of  promife/'  becaufe 
it    is    *'  full  of  giants  and  the  fons  of  Anak  ?  '* 
How  eafily  was  Peter  -frighted    into    the    denial 
of  his  mailer  ?  and  when  our  S  avio  u  r   was  ap- 
prehended, how   did  his  difciples  forfake  him,  and 
fly  from  him  ?  and  tho'  they  were  conftant   after- 
wards  to  the  death,  yet  it  was  a  great  while  before 
they  were  perfedly   armed  and  fteeled  againft  the 
fear  of  fuffering, 

5thly,  the  men  of  the  world  will  make  all  things 
ftoop  and  fubmit  to  that  which  is  their  great  end 
and  defign  ;  their  end  rules  them  and  governs  them, 
and  gives  laws  to  all  their  afiions ;  they  will  make 
an  advantage  of  every  thing,  and  if  it  will  not  fervc 
their  end  one  way  or  other,  they  will  have  no- 
thing to  do  with  it.  If  an  ambitious  man  feek 
wealth,  it  is  but  in  order  to  his  defign  to  purchafe 
friends,  and  flrengthen  his  intereft,  and  to  make  his 
rifing  the  eafier ;  he  will  lay  his  whole  eftate  at 
the  ftake,  rather  than  mifs  of  his  end.  The  covetous 
man  will  quit  his  pleafure,  when  it  lies  crofs  to. 
his  intereft,  if  he  have  any  cxpenfive  luft  and 
chargeable  vice,  he  will  turn  it  off,  or  exchange 
it  for  fome  more  frugal  and  profitable  ^m. 

But  in  the  affairs   of  religion,  and    the  concern- 
ments of   our  fouls,  how  frequently  do   men    a6b 
without  a    due   regard   and  confideration    of  their 
great  end?    and  inftead  of   making   other   things 
15  R  2  fubmit 


2256  The  children  of  this  world 

S  E  R  M.  fubmit  to  it,  they  often  bow  and  bend  it  to  their  infc- 
CXXIX.  j.j(^f.  interefh  They  make  heaven  Hoop  to  earth,  and 
rehgion  to  fervt  a  worldly  defign  ;  and  the  glory 
of  God  to  give  way  to  gain,  and  the  great  con- 
cernments of  their  fouls,  and  their  eternal  Hilvation, 
to  their  temporal  profit  and  advantage.  The 
men  of  the  world  are  generally  true  to  their  great 
end,  and  pay  it  that  refped  which  is  due  to  it, 
and  will  fufier  nothing  to  take  place  of  it  in 
their  efteem  and  aftedlion ;  and  if  men  were  as 
v/ife  for  their  fouls  and  for  another  world,  they 
would  bring  all  things  to  their  great  end,  and 
make  all  the  concernments  of  this  temporal  life 
to  yield  and  give  way  to  the  great  concern- 
ments of  their  eternal  happinefs.  I  proceed  in 
the 

Second  place  to  give  fome  account  of  this,  whence 
it  comes  to  pafs,  that  "  the  children  of  this  world 
*'  are  wifer  in  their  generation  than  the  children 
*'  of  light."  And  this  I  fhall  do  by  confider- 
ing  what  advantages  "  the  children  of  this  world'* 
have,  as  to  the  affairs  of  this  world,  above  what 
good  men  have,  as  to  the  concernments  of  ano- 
ther world,  I  ihall  in  (lance  in  four  or  ^vt  of  the 
chief. 

ill,  the  things  of  this  world  are  prefent  and 
I'enfible,  and  becaufe  of  their  nearnefs  to  us,  are 
apt  to  ftrike  powerfully  upon  our  fenfes,  and  to 
affect  mightily  to  excite  our  defires  after  them, 
and  to  work  flrongly  upon  our  hopes  and  fears  : 
but  the  things  of  another  world  being  remote 
from  usr^re  leflened  by  tiielr  diftance,  and  con- 
feouently  are  not  apt  to  work  fo  powerfully  upon. 


our 


ivifer  than  the  children  of  light. 
our  minds.  They  are  invifible  to  us,  and  only  diC 
cerned  by  faith,  which  is  a  more  obfcure  and  lefs 
certain  perception  of  things,  than  we  haveofthofe 
cbjeds  which  are  prefented  to  our  bodily  eyes. 
"  The  things  which  God  hath  prepared  for 
*'  them  that  love  him,"  the  g!ory  and  happr 
nefs  of  the  next  world,  are  "  things  which  eye 
*'  hath  not  ^ctn^  nor  ear  heard  "  ''  The  children 
''  of  light"  do  not  lee  God,  as  "  the  children 
*'  of  this  world"  fee  mammon. 

2dly,  the  fenfual  delights  and  enjoyments  of  this 
world,  are  better  fuited  and  more  agreeable  to  the 
corrupt  and  degenerate  nature  of  men,  than  fpiri- 
tual  and  heavenly  things  are  to  thofe  that  are 
regenerate.  In  this  lapfed  and  degenerate  Hate 
of  mankind,  appetite  and  fenfe  are  apt  to  prevail 
above  reafon  ;  and  therefore  thofe  things  which 
are  moft  delightful  to  fenfe,  we  favour  and  mind, 
and  love  to  bufy  ourfelves  about  them,  becaufe 
they  are  moil  fuitable  to  the  animal  life,  which 
is   the   governing  principle  of  corrupt  nature. 

And  the  reafon  of  this  is  plain,  becaufe  that 
principle  in  worldly  and  fenfual  men,  which  pur- 
fues  earthly  things,  is  in  thofe  who  are  un regenerate 
entire  and  undivided,  and  confequently  the  affec- 
tions and  inclinations  of  the  whole  man  do  all 
tend  one  v/ay,  and  run  out  towards  thofe  things  in 
a  full  and  undivided  ftream  ;  whereas  good  men 
are  but  regenerate  in  part,  and  tho'  they  have  a 
principle  of  fpiritual  life  in  them,  y^t  their  affec- 
tions are  divided,  and  there  is  a  great  flruggling  and 
Gonflid  between  flefh  and  fpirit,  and  it  is  a  great  while 
before  the  fpiritual  principle  doth    clearly  prevail, 

and 


2258  ^Ije  children  of  this  world 

S  E  R  M.  and  get  a  perfect  vidory  over  our  fenfual  appetites 
CXXJ^X.  ^^^  inclinations.  Mens  affedions  to  the  world  are 
entire  and  unbroken,  and  therefore  they  purfue  thcfe 
things  with  all  their  might :  but  the  belt  men  are 
but  good  in  part ;  and  that  heavenly  principle 
which  is  in  them,  is  very  much  hindred  in  its  ope- 
rations by  a  contrary  principle,  our  earthly  and 
fenfual  inclinations,  which  are  hardly  ever  perfectly 
fubdu'd  and  brought  under  in  this  world. 

3dly,  the  wordly  man's  faith  and  hope,  and 
fear  of  prefent  and  fenfible  things,  is  commonly 
llronger  than  a  good  man's  faith,  and  hope,  and 
fear  of  things  future  and  eternal.  Now  faith,  and 
hope,  and  fear,  are  the  great  principles  which  go- 
vern and  bear  fway  in  the  adions  and  lives  of  men. 
If  a  man  be  once  firmly  perfuaded  of  the  reality 
of  a  thing,  and  that  it  is  good  for  him,  and  pot 
felTed  with  good  hopes  of  obtaining  it,  and  great 
fears  and  apprehenfions  of  the  dangers  of  mifTing  it, 
this  man  may  almoft  be  put  upon  any  thing.  The 
merchant  trafficks,  and  the  husbandman  plows  and 
fows  in  faith  and  hope,  bccaufe  he  is  convinced 
that  bread  is  neceffary  to  the  fupport  of  life,  and 
hopes  that  God  will  fo  blefs  his  labours,  that  he 
fhall  reap  the  fruit  of  them,  and  plainly  fees,  that 
if  he  do  not  take  this  pains,  he  muft  ftarve.  But 
how  few  are  there  that  believe,  and  hope,  and  fear 
concerning  the  things  of  another  world,  as  "  the 
«'  children  of  this  world"  do  concerning  the  things 
of  this  world  ?  if  any  man  ask  me,  how  I  know 
thi^  ?  I  appeal  to  experience  ;  it  is  plain  and  vifible 
in  the  lives  and  adions  and  endeavours  of  men. 
fiood  men  are  feldom  fo  effedually  and  throughly 

perfuaded 


wifer  then  the  children  of  light.  225:9 

perfuaded  of  the  principles  of  religion,  and  the  truth  S  E  R  M. 
of  the  fayings  contained  in  the  holy  fcriptures,  as  ^^^'^• 
the  men  of  the  world  are  of  their  own  fayings  and 
proverbs.  Men  do  not  believe  that  "  honefty  is  the 
*'  befl  policy,"  or  as  Solomon  exprefleth  it,  that 
*^  he  that  walketh  uprightly,  walketh  furely ; "  as 
the  men  of  the  world  believe  their  own  maxims, 
that  "  a  man  may  be  too  honell:  to  live  ; "  that 
"  plain-dealing  is  a  jewel,  but  he  that  wears  it 
*'  fliall  die  a  beggar."  Few  mens  hopes  cf  heavea 
are  fo  powerful  and  vigorous,  and  have  fo  fenfjble 
an  effed  upon  their  Jives,  as  the  worldly  man*s 
hopes  of  gain  and  advantage.  Men  are  not  ^o 
afraid  to  fwcar,  as  they  are  to  fpeak  treafon ;  they 
are  not  fo'  firmly  perfuaded  of  the  danger  of  fm  to 
their  fouls  and  bodies  in  another  world,  as  of  the 
danger  to  which  fome  crimes  againft  the  laws  of 
men  do  expofe  their  temporal  lives  and  fafety  i 
therefore  they  will  many  times  venture  to  offend 
God,  rather  than  incur  the  penalty  of  human  laws. 
4thly,  the  men  of  the  world  have  but  one  defign, 
and  are  wholly  intent  upon  it,  and  this  is  a  great 
advantage.  He  that  hath  but  one  thing  to  mind, 
may  eafily  be  skill'd  and  excel  in  it.  When  a  man 
makes  one  thing  his  whole  bufinefs,  no  wonder  if 
he  be  very  knowing  and  wife  in  that.  Now  the 
men  of  the  world  mmd  worldly  things,  and  have 
no  care  and  concernment  for  any  thing  elfe.  Ic  is  a 
fay.ng,  I  think,  of  Thomas  Aquinas,  cave  ab  illo  qui 
nnicum  legit  librum :  '^  he  is  a  d.a-gerous  man  that 
*'  reads  but  one  book  j  "  he  that  gives  his  mind  but 
to  one  thing,  mult  needs  be  too  hard  for  any  man  at 
that,  Application  to  one  thing,  efpecially  m  mat- 
ters 


CXXIX 


2260  ^he  childre)2  of  this  world, 

SE  R  M.  ters  of  pradticc,  gains  a  man  perfed  experience  in 
it,  and  experience  furnifheth  him  with  obfervations 
about  it,  and  tiiefe  malcc  him  wife  and  prudent  ia 
that  thing. 

But  good  men,  tho'  they  have  a  great  afFedion 
for  heaven  and  heavenly  things,  yet  tne  bufinefs 
and  necefficles  of  this  hfe,  do  very  much  divert  and 
take  them  off  from  i\iQ.  care  of  better  things  \  they 
are  divided  between  the  concernments  of  this  life  and 
the  other ;  and  tho'  there  be  but  *'  one  thing  ne- 
"  cefTary"  in  comparifon,  yet  the  conveniencies  of 
this  hfe  are  to  be  regarded ;  and  tho'  our  fouls  be 
our  main  care,  yet  fome  confideration  mud  be 
had  of  our  bodies,  that  they  may  be  fit  for  the 
fervice  of  our  fouls  ;  fome  provifion  muff  be  made 
for  their  prefent  fupport,  fo  long  as  wc  continue 
in  thefe  earthly  tabernacles ;  and  this  will  neceffarily 
engage  us  in  the  world,  fo  that  we  cannot  always 
and  wholly  apply  our  felves  to  heavenly  things,  and 
mind  them  as  the  men  of  the  world  do  the  things 
of  this  world. 

5thly,  and  laffly,  the  men  of  the  world  have  a 
greater  compafs  and  liberty  in  the  purfuit  of  their 
worldly  defigns,  than  good  men  have  in  the  profe- 
cution  of  their  intereft.  The  ''  children  of  light " 
are  limited  and  confin'd  to  the  ufe  of  lawful  means, 
for  the  compaffing  of  their  ends ,  but  the  men  of 
the  world  are  not  fo  ftrait-laced,  quocmque  modo 
rem^  they  are  refolv'd  upon  the  point,  and  will  ftick 
at  no  means  to  compals  their  end.  They  do  not 
Hand  upon  the  nice  diffindlions  of  good  and  evil, 
of  right  and  wrong,  invented  by  fpeculative  and 
fcrupulous  men^  to  puzzle  bufinefs,    and  to  hinder 

and 


wijer  than  the  childre?!  of  light.  2261 

•and  dlfappoint  great  defigns.  If  Ahab  have  a  mind  S  ^^^^^' 
to  Naboth's  vineyard,  and  Naboth  will  not  let  him 
be  honed,  and  have  it  for  a  valuable  confideration, 
he  will  try  to  get  it  a  cheaper  way  :  Naboth  ihall 
by  falfe  witnefs  be  made  a  traitor,  and  his  vine- 
yard by  this  means  fhall  be  forfeited  to  him.  And 
thus  the  unjuft  fteward  in  the  parable  provided  for 
himfelf ;  he  wronged  his  lord,  to  fecure  a  retreat  to 
himfelf  m  the  time  of  his  diftrefs. 

The  third  and  laft  thing  only  remains,  to  make 
fome  inferences  from  what  hath  been  faid  by  way  of 
application.     And, 

I  ft,  notwithftanding  the  commendation  which  hath 
been  given  of  the  wifdom  of  this  world,  yet  upon 
the  whole  matter  it  is  not  much  to  be  valued  and 
admired.  It  is  indeed  great  in  its  way  and  kind  ; 
but  it  is  applied  to  little  and  low  purpofes,  em- 
ploy'd  about  the  concernments  of  a  fhort  time 
and  a  few  days,  about  the  worft  and  meaneft  part 
of  our  felves,  and  accompanied  with  the  negled  of 
greater  and  better  things,  fuch  as  concern  our  fouls, 
and  our  whole  duration,  even  our  happinefs  to  all 
eternity.  And  therefore  that  which  the  world  ad- 
mires and  cries  up  for  wifdom,  is  in  the  efteem  of 
God,  who  judgeth  of  things  according  to  truth, 
but  vanity  and  folly.  "  The  wifdom  of  the  world 
"  (faith  St.  Paul)  is  foolifhnefs  with  God."  The 
rich  man  in  the  parable,  who  increafed  his  goods, 
and  enlarged  his  barns,  and  Ic/id  up  for  many  years, 
did  applaud  himfelf,  and  was  no  doubt  applauded 
by  others  for  a  very  wife  man  :  but  becaufe  ''  he 
*'  laid  up  treafure  for  himfelf,  and  was  not  rich  to- 
*'  ward  God,"  that  is,  did  not.  employ  his  c(hue 

Vol.  VIL  15  S  c© 

8» 


01 


62  ^he  children  of  this  'world 

SERM   to  good   and  charitable  purpofes,  therefore  God, 

^^^^w  ^^^°  ^^^^^  "°  ^^^y  ^^^  ^^  ^^^  ^^^^^  name,  calls  this 
^^  man   ''  fool  -,  thou  fool,   this   night  iliall  thy  foul 

''  be  taken   from  thee,    and    then   whofc    fhall  all 
*^  thefe  things  be  ?  "  And   our  Sav  i  o  u  R  here  in 
the  text,  while  he  commends  the  "  wifdom  of  the 
•'  children  of  this  world,'*  he  adds  that  which  is  a 
confiderable    blemifh   and    abacemcnt  to   it,  "  the 
*'  children  of  this  world  are  wifcr,  cl^  th  yri^d'^ 
''  Twv  ?aura)v,  for  their  age,"  for  the  concernments  of 
this  prefent  life  •,  but  this  is  but  a  fhort  and  purblind 
wifdom,  which  fees  but  a  little  way,  and  ccnfiders 
only  things  prefent  and  near  at  hand  ;  whereas  true 
wifdom  hath  a  larger  and  farther  profped:,  and  re- 
gards the  future  aS  well  as  the  prefent,  and '  takes 
care  to  provide  for  it.    Nay,  our  Saviour  gives 
the  wifdom  of  this  world  its  utmofl  due,  when  he 
fays,  *'    the  children    of  this  world  are  wifer  for 
*'  their  generation  ;"  for  this  is  the  very  bed  that 
can  be  faid  of  it,  it  feldom  looks  fo  far,  and  holds 
out  fo  long.     Many  men  have  furvived  their  own 
projeds,  and  have  lived  to  fee  the  folly  and  ill  fate 
of  their   covetous   and    ambitious  defigns.     So  the 
prophet  tells  us,  Jer.  xvii.  ii.  *'  As  the  partridge 
«'  fitteth  on  eggs,  and  hatcheth  them  not ;  fo   he 
«'  that  getteth  riches,  and  not  by  right,  fhall  leave 
*«  them   in  the  midft  of  his   days,  and  at  his  end 
"  fhall  be  a  fool." 

This  is  wifdom,  to  regard  our  main  Interefl:  ; 
but  if  we  be  wrong  in  our  end,  (as  all  worldly  men 
are)  the  fader  and  farther  we  go,  the  more  fatal  is 
our  error  and  miftake.  ''  The  children  of  this 
''  world"  are  out  in  their  end,  and  midaken  in 
'  the 


niDifer  than  the  children  of  light,     '  2263 

the  main;  they  are  wife  for  this  world,  which  is^ERM.- 
inconfiderable  to  eternity;  wife  for  a  little  while,  ^'^^^^^* 
and  fools  for  ever. 

2d]y,  from  what  hath  been  fiid,  we  may  infer,  that 
if  we  lofe  our  fouls,  and  come  fliort  of  eternal  hap- 
pinefs,  it  is  through  our  own  fault  and  grofs  negled  ; 
for  we  fee  that  men  are  wile  enough  for  this 
world  ;  and  tr.e  fame  prudence,  and  care,  and  di* 
ligence  applied  to  the  concernments  of  our  fouls, 
would  infallibly  make  us  happy,  '^^'j^  our  Sa- 
VI OUR.  here  in  the  text  tells  us,  that  ufually  lefs 
wifdom  and  indudry,  than  the  men  of  this  world 
life  about  x!vvt  things  of  this  world,  is  exerciled 
by  "  the  children  of  light,"  who  yet  at  lad, 
through  the  mercy  of  God,  do  attain  eternal 
life. 

So  that  it  is  very  plain,  that  if  men  would  but 
take  that  care  for  their  immortal  fouls,  which  they 
generally  do  for  their  frail  and  dying  bodies,  and  be 
,  as  heartily  concerned  for  the  unleen  world,  and 
for  eternity,  as  they  are  for  things  vifible  and  tem- 
poral, they  would  with  much  more  certainty  gain 
heaven,  than  any  man  can  obtain  v/orldly  riches 
and  honours.  And  can  we  in  confcience  defire 
more,  than  to  be  happy  for  ever,  upon  as  eafy  and 
upon  more  certain  terms,  than  any  man  can  be  rich 
or  great  in  the  world  }  for  we  may  mils  of  thefe 
things  after  all  our  travel  and  pains  about  them; 
or  if  we  get  them,  we  may  lofe  them  again  ; 
birt  if  we  ''  feek  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  his 
''  righteoufnefs;"  if  we  be  fincerely  good  we  are 
lure  to  have  the  reward  of  it,  even  that  "  eternal 
"  life,  which  God,  that  cannot  lie,  hath  promiied;" 
15  S  2  if 


2264  ^'^^  children  of  this  world 

9F,  R?^/^•  if  wc  "  lay  up  for  our  felves  treafurcs  in  heaven," 
CXXIX.  ^i^^y  ^-^  ^e  f^fe  and  fecure  there,  where  "  no  moth 
^         "can   corrupt,     nor    thieves    break    through    and 

''  deal." 

If  we  would  ferioufly  think  of  the  other   world, 
and  were  throughly   poflfcft  with  a  firm    belief    of 
the  eternity  of  that  happinefs  or  mifery,  which  re- 
mains for   men  after   this  life,    we  fhould   pray  to 
God  and  hear  his  word,  and  perform  all  the  duties 
of  re^pion,    with  the   fame  care  and  concernment, 
with  the  fame  tervour  and  intention   of    mind,  as 
men  profecute  their    worldly    bufinefs.      Were  we 
fully  perfuaded  of  the  unfeen  glories  and  torments 
of  the  other  world,    v/e  fliauld  be    much   more  af- 
fedled  with  them,    than  with    all    the    temptations 
and   terrors  of  fenfe ;  becaufe    in    reafon    they  are 
much  more    confiderabie.      The  difgrace    of    the 
pillory  will  fright  men  from  perjury  •,  and  will  not 
everlading  fliame  and  confufion  ?   the  fear  of  death 
will  deter  many  men  from    robbing  and    flealing, 
who  would  perhaps  venture  upon  thefe  crimes,    if 
there  were  no  danger  in   them  j   and  will  not  the 
horrors  of  the   ''  fecond  deaths,  of  the  worm   that 
*'  dies  not,    and  the   fire    that    is   not  quenched,'* 
have  as   great    an  awe  and  influence  upon  us  ?  If 
they  have  not,  it  is  a  fign,  that  we  do  not  equally 
believe  the  danger  of  humane  Jaws,  and  the  dam- 
nation of  hell. 

Surely  men  have  not  the  fame  belief  of  heaven, 
and  affedion  for  it,  that  they  have  for  this  world. 
If  they  had,  their  care  and  diligence  about  thefe 
things  would  be  more  equal.  For  we  are  not  ^o 
weak  as   we   make  our  felves ,  we  are  not  yet  fo 

degenerate. 


wtfer  than  the  children  of  light.  2265 

deo-enerate,  but  if  we  would  fet  our  felves  ferioufly  S  E  R  M. 
to  it,  and  earneftly  beg  the  affiilance  of  God's 
grace,  we  might  come  to  know  our  duty,  and 
our  v;ills  might  be  engaged  to  follow  the  diredtions 
of  our  underftandings,  and  our  affedions  to  obey 
the  command  of  our  wills,  and  our  adions  to  fol- 
low the  impulfe  of  our  aff^dions.  Much  of  this  is 
naturally  in  our  power ;  and  what  is  wanting,  the 
grace  of  Go  d  is  ready  to  fupply.  We  can  go  to 
the  church,  and  we  can  hear  the  word  of  G  o  d,  and 
we  can  confider  what  we  hear,  we  can  pray  to 
God,  and  fay,  "  we  believe.  Lord  help  our  un- 
"  belief,"  and  enable  us  to  do  what  thou  requireft 
of  us  j  and  we  can  forbear  a  great  many  fins, 
v/hich  we  rafhly  and  wilfully  run  into  j  a  great 
prefent  danger  will  fright  us  from  fin,  a  terrible 
ftorm  will  drive  us  to  our  devotion,  and  teach  us 
to  pray  -,  a  fharp  fit  of  the  gout  will  take  a  man  off 
from  drinking ;  the  eye  of  a  mafter  or  magiftrate 
will  refhrain  men  fi-om  many  things,  which  they 
fay  they  cannot  forbear.  So  that  we  do  but  coun- 
terfeit, and  make  our  felves  more  cripples  than  we 
are,  that  we  may  be  pitied;  for  if  fear  will  reftrain 
us,  it  is  a  fign  that  we  can  forbear ;  if  '^  the  rod 
*'  of  afflidlion  will  fetch  it  out"  of  us,  and  make 
us  do  that,  which  at  other  times  we  fay  we  are  un- 
able to  do,  this  is  a  demonflration  that  it  is  in  us, 
and  that  the  thing  is  in  our  power. 

It  is  true,  we  can  do  nothing  that  is  good  with- 
out the  afiiftance  of  God's  grace :  but  that  affiftance 
which  we  may  have  for  the  asking,  is  in  efFcft  in 
our  own  power.  So  that  if  the  matter  were 
iearched  to  the  bottom,  it   is  not  want  of  power 

that 


2  266  T^he  children  of  this  world 

SERM.  that  hinders  us  from  doing  our  duty,  but  floth  dnd 
"negligence;  for  God  iiacn  "  given  us  exceeding 
"  great  and  precious  promifcs,  whei;eby  we  may  be 
*'  made  partakers  of  a  divine  nature  ;"  and  by  vir- 
tue whereof,  if  we  be  not  wanting  to  our  felves,  we 
may  "  cleanfe  our  felves  from  all  filthinefs  of  ficfh 
*'  and  fpirit,  and  perfedl  holinefs  in  the  fear  of 
«  God." 

3dly  and  laftly,  what  a  fhame  and  reproach  is 
this  to  "  the  children  of  light!  **  Our  Saviour 
fpeaks  this  by  way  of  upbraiding,  as  v/e  may  judge 
by  the  terms  of  comparifon  which  he  uietii^,  that 
"  the  children  of  this  world  ihould  be  wifer  than 
*'  the  children  of  light,"  that  is,  than  "  wifdom's 
"  own  children  ;"  and  that  they  fhould  be  "  wifer 
*^  in  their  generation,"  that  is,  for  the  concern- 
ments of  a  fhort  and  inconfiderable  time,  than  the 
others  are  for  all  eternity. 

How  fhould  it  make  our  blood  to  rife  in  our 
faces,  and  fill  us  with  confufion,  that  the  men  of 
this  world  fhould  be  more  prudent  and  skilful  in  the 
contrivance  and  management  of  their  little  affairs, 
more  refolute  and  vigorous  in  the  profecution  of 
them  ;  than  we  are  about  the  ev^rlailing  concern- 
ments of  our  fouls  !  that  a  7/orldly  church  fhould  ufe 
v/ifer  and  more  effecfcual  means  to  promote  and  up- 
hold ignorance,  and  error,  and  fuperftition  ;  than 
we  do  to  build  up  the  true  church  of  Christ  in 
knowledge,  and  faith,  and  charity!  that  the  men 
of  the  world  fhould  toil,  and  take  more  pains  for 
"  the  deceitful  riches;"  than  we  do  for  "  the 
*'  true ;"  and  be  contented  to  hazard  more  for  "  a 
^«  corruptible  crown,'*  than  we  for  ''  an  incorrup- 

"  tible!" 


^jDtfer  than  the  children  of  light .  2267 

^«  tible!"  that  they  fhould  love  pleafure  more,  thanSERM- 
we  do  Go  D,  and  mind  their  bodies  and  temporal ^^^^J^\ 
eftates  more,  than  we  do  our  fouls  and  our  eternal 
happinefs ! 

Do  but  obferve  the  men  of  the  world,  what  a 
pace  they  go,  v/hat  large  and  nimble  fleps  tjiey  take 
in  the  purluit  of  earthly  things ;  they  do  not 
feek  riches  "  as  if  they  fought  them  not."  and  love 
the  world  "  as  if  they  loved  it  not,"  and  enjoy  the 
prefent  delights  of  this  world,  ''  as  if  they  pofTefled 
*'  them  not;"  tho'  ''  the  fafliion  of  this  world 
*'  paficth  away  :"  but  we  feek  heaven^  "  as  if  we 
*'  fought  it  not,"  and  love  G  o  d  "  as  if  we  loved 
*'  him  not,"  and  mind  eternity  and  the  w^orld  to 
come,  "  as  if  v/e  minded  them  not;"  and  yet 
"  thcr  fafhion  of  that  world  doth  not  pafs  away," 

But  to  all  this  it  may  be  faid,  you  have  already 
told  us,  that  "  the  children  of  this  world"  have  fb 
many  advantages  above  "  the  children  of  light," 
that  it  is  no  wonder  if  they  excel  and  outftrip  them; 
and  it  is  very  true,  that  in  many  refpedls  they  have 
the  advantage  of  them.  But  if  "  the  children  of 
"  light"  would  look  about  them,  and  take  all 
things  into  confideration,  they  might  fee  fomething 
very  confiderable  to  balance  the  advantages  on  the 
other  fide.  It  is  true,  the  things  of  this  world  are 
prefent  and  fenfible  :  but  fo  long  as  we  have  fuffici- 
ent  affurance  of  the  reality  of  a  future  flate,  and  of 
the  rewards  and  punilhments  of  it,  the  greatnels  and 
eternity  of  thefe  is  fuch  an^  amazing  confideration 
that  no  diftance  can  render  them  inconfiderable  to  a 
prudent  and  thinking  man.  And  tho'  the  men  of 
the  world  have  an  entire  principle,  which  is  not  di- 
vided 


2268  The  children  of  this  world,  &c. 

ocxix  ^^'^^^  between  God  and  the  world;  whereas  in 
■good  men  there  is  a  great  conflidl  of  contrary  prin- 
ciples, the  flefh  and  fpirit :  yet  this  difadvantage  is 
likewife  balanced  by  that  powerful  afiiflance  of 
God's  grace,  which  is  promifed  to  all  good  men, 
who  heartily  beg  it  of  him,  and  are  fincerely  re- 
folved  to  make  ufe  of  it.  And  laftly,  tho'  the 
nien  of  the  world  have  many  ways  to  compafs  their 
ends ;  yet  *^  the  children  of  light''  have  one  great 
and  infallible  one.  All  the  means  which  the  men  of 
the  world  ufe  to  accompiifh  their  defigns,  may  fail 
and  mifcarry;  for  ''  the  race  is  not  to  the  fwift, 
"  nor  the  battle  to  the  ftrong,  nor  yet  bread  to  the 
''  wife,  nor  riches  to  men  of  underflanding,  nor 
*'  favour  to  men  of  skill ;  but  time  and  chance  hap- 
"  pen  to  all ;"  but  he  that  fincerely  ferves  God, 
and  ufeth  the  means  for  the  attaining  of  everlafting 
falvation,  is  fure  to  attain  it;  if  we  "  feek  the 
*'  righteoufnefs  of  God"  as  we  ought,  we  fhall 
certainly  be  admitted  into  his  kingdom.  And  this 
furely  is  an  unfpeakable  advantage  which  "  the  chil- 
*'  dren  of  light"  have  above  ''  the  children  of  this 
*'  world,"  that  if  we  faithfully  ufe  the  means,  we 
cannot  fail  of  the  end  ;  ''  if  we  have  our  fruit  unto 
"  holinefs,  our  end  fliall  be  everlafting  life ;"  which 
God  of  his  infinite  goodnefs  grant  to  us  all  for  hia 
mercies  fake* 


SERMON 


/ 


[  2269  ] 

SERMON     CXXX. 

Concerning  tlic  perfedion  of  God. 

M  A  T  T  H.    V.  48. 

Be  ye   therefore  perfe^y    even  as   your    Father 
which  is  in  heaven  is  perfe5f. 


T 


HESE  words  are  the  conclufion  which  Our  sERM» 
Saviour   draws  from  thofc   precepts  of ^^^^2^- 
greater  perfe6lion,  than  any  laws  that  were  The  firft 

extant  in  the  world  before,  ver.  44. "  I  fay  unto  you,  Sermon  on 

this  texta 
*'  love  your  enemies,   blefs  them  that  curfe  you,  do 

*'  good   to  them  that  hate  you,  and  pray  for  thofe 

*'  that  defpitefully  ufe  you  and  perfecute  you."  And 

to  perfuade  them    hereto,  he  propounds   to  them 

the  pattern  of  the  divine  pcrfedion  ;   telling  them, 

that  being    thus   affcdled    towards  their    enemies, 

they  Ihould   refemble   God,  ver.  45.  "  That   ye 

"  may  be  the  children  of  your  heavenly  Fathetx  ; 

*'  for  he  maketh  the   fun    to  rife  on  the  evil,  and 

"  on  the  goods  and  lendeth  rain  on  the  juft,  and 

*'  on  the  unjuft." 

And  then  he  tells  us,  that  if  we  be  not  thus  af- 
fedled  towards  our  enemies,  and  thofe  that  have 
been  injurious  to  us,  we  are  fo  far  from  being  like 
God,  that  we  are  but  juft  level  with  the  word 
of  men,  ver.  46,  47.  "  For  if  ye  love  them 
*'  which  love  you,  what  reward  have  you^  do  not: 
«'  even  the  publicans  the  fame  ?   and   if  ye  filute 

Vol.  VIL  i/:;  T  ''  vowr 

8. 


2270  Concerning  the perfe^iion  of  God. 

SERM.  '«  your  brethren  only,  what  do  ye  more  than  others? 
cxxx.  <c  ^Q  ^Q^  ^^^^  ^j^g  publicans  fo  ?  "  And  then  con- 
cludes, that  if  we  would  attain  that  perfedlion  which 
the  chriftian  religion  defigns  to  advance  men  to, 
we  muft  endeavour  to  be  like  God  in  thefe  per- 
fedlions  of  goodnefs  and  mercy,  and  patience ; 
*'  be  ye  therefore  perfeft,  as  your  Father  which 
"  is  in  heaven  is  perfedl.*'  In  which  words  we 
have, 

Firft,  the  abfolute  perfedion  of  the  divine  nature 
fuppofed;  "  as  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven  is 
«'  perfeft." 

Secondly,  it  is  propounded  as  a  pattern  to  our 
imitation.    "  Be  ye  therefore  perfed,  &c." 

In  handling  of  thefe  words  I  fhall  do  thefc  four 
things. 

I.  Confider  how  we  are  to  conceive  of  the  "  di- 
*'  vine  perfedlion." 

II.  I  fhall  lay  down  fome  rules  whereby  we  may 
govern  and  rectify  our  opinions  concerning  the  at- 
tributes and  perfections  of  God. 

III.  How  far  we  are  ta  imitate  the  perfedions 
of  God,  and  particularly  what  thofe  divine  qua- 
lities are,  which  our  Saviour  doth  here  more 
elpecially  propound  to  our  imitation. 

IV.  I  fliall  endeavour  to  clear  the  true  meaning 
of  this  precept,  and  to  fhew  that  the  duty  here 
intended  by  our  Saviour  is  not  impoflible  to 
us ;  and  then  conclude  this  difcourfe  with  fome  ufe- 
ful  inferences  from  the  whole. 

I.  I  Ihall  confider  how  we  are  to  conceive  of 
the  "  divine  perfeftions  :'*  thefe  two  ways, 

I.  By 


Concermng  the perfeSiwn  of  God.  '2271 

1.  By  afcribing  all  imaginable  and  pofTible  per-  SERAI 
kdion  to  God.  cxxx.  * 

2.  By  feparating  and  removing  all  manner  of  im- 
per  fed  ion  from  him. 

I.  By  afcribing  ail  imaginable  and  pofTible    per- 
fedion  to  Go  D  *,  abfolute  and  univerfal    perfcdiona 
not  limited  to   a  certain  kind,  or  to  certain  parti- 
culars ;  but  whatever  we  can  conceive  and  imagine 
to    be  a  perfedion,    is    to    be   afcribed  to   him  i 
yea,  and  beyond   this,  whatever  pofTible   perfedion 
there    is,    or    poOible    degree    of  any    perfc6lion> 
which  our  Ihort  underltandings  cannot  conceive  or 
comprehend,    is  to    be  afcribed  to  him.     For  we 
are  not  to  confine  the  perfedlion  of  G  o  d  to  our 
imagination,    as  "  if  we   could  find  out    the   al- 
<'  mighty  to  perfedion:"  but,  on  the  contrary,  to 
believe  the  perfedion  of  the  divine    nature  to   be 
boundlefs  and  unlimited,    and  infinitely  to   exceed 
our  higheft  thoughts  and  apprehenfions. 

More  particularly,  all  kinds  and  degrees  of  per- 
fedlion  are  to  be  afcribed  to  God,  which  either 
do  not  imply  a  plain  contradidion,  or  do  not  ar- 
gue fome  imperfe6l:ion,  or  are  not  evidendy  in- 
confifcent  with  fome  other  and  greater  perfec-. 
tion. 

Some  things  may  feem  to  be  perfedions,  which 
in  truth  are  not,  becaufe  they  are  plainly  im- 
pofTible,  and  involve  a  contradidlion,  as  that 
what  has  once  been,  fliould  by  any  power  be 
made  not  to  have  been  ;  or  that  any  thing,  which 
by  its  nature  is  limited  and  confin'd  to  one  place, 
iliould  at  the  fame  time  be  in  another.  Thefe 
things  in  reafon   are  impofTible,   and  therefore  not 

15X2  to 


2272  Concer?iing  the perfeBion  of  Gob, 

S  E  R  AI.  to  be  fuppofed  to  fall  under  any  power  how  un- 
limited Ibever.  For  if  we  once  afcribc  contra- 
didions  to  God,  we  deftroy  his  being  •,  becaufc  then 
to  be,  and  not  to  be,  power,  and  no  power,  would 
be  all  one. 

And  then  there  are  fome  perfedtions  which  do 
argue  and  fuppofe  imperfedlions  in  them  j  as  mo- 
tion, the  quicknefs  and  fwiftncfs  whereof  in  crea- 
tai*es  is  a  perfection,  but  then  it  fuppofeth  a  finite 
and  limited  nature :  for  a  boundlefs  and  immenfe 
being,  that  is  every  where  prefcnt  at  once,  hath  no 
need  to  move  from  one  place  to  another  •,  and 
therefore,  though  motion  be  a  perfeSion  in  crea- 
tures, there  is  no  reafon  to  afcribe  it  to  God, 
becaufe  it  fuppofeth  a  greater  imperfedion. 

And  there  are  alfo  fome  imaginable  degrees  of 
perfedion,  which,  becaufe  they  are  inconfiftent 
with  other  perfedions,  are  not  to  be  admitted  in 
the  divine  nature.  For  inftance,  fuch  degrees  of 
goodnefs  and  mercy  may  be  imagined,  as  would 
quite  exclude  and  fhut  out  juftice ;  and  on  the 
other  hand  fuch  a  flridlnefs  and  a  rigor  of  juftice, 
as  would  leave  no  room  at  all  for  patience  and 
mercy  *,  and  therefore  fuch  degrees  are  not  really 
to  be  eileemed  perfedions.  For  this  is  a  certain 
truth,  that  nothing  is  a  divine  perfection,  which 
evidendy  clafheth  with  any  other  neceiTary  and  el^ 
fential  perfection  of  the  divine  nature.  We  mufl: 
fo  confider  the  perfedions  of  God,  that  '  they 
may  accord  and  confift  together  ;  and  therefore  it 
cannot  be  a  perfedion  of  God  to  be  fo  good 
and  gracious  as  to  encourage  fin,  and  to  over- 
tlirow  i\\^  reverence  of  his  own  laws  and  govern- 
ment. 


Concerning  the  ferfeBion  of  God.  2  273 

ment.  'Tis  not  goodnefs,  but  eafmefs  and  weak-  Serm. 
nels,  to  be  contented  to  be  perpetually  injured  ^■^^^• 
and  affronted.  'Tis  not  patience  to  be  willing 
to  be  everlaftingly  trampled  upon.  So  likewife  on 
the  other  hand,  'tis  not  a  perfedion  to  be  fo  fe- 
vere  and  rigorous,  as  to  fmite  a  finn^r  in  the  in- 
llant  that  he  offends,  not  to  be  able  to  refrain 
from  punifhment,  and  to  give  time  for  repen- 
tance. 

But  whatever  perfedlion  is  conceivable  or  pof^ 
fible,  and  argues  no  imperfection,  nor  is  repug- 
nant to  any  other  neceffary  perfedlion,  is  to  be 
afcribed  to  God  ;  for  this  is  the  mod  natural 
and  eafy  conception  that  we  can  have  of  God, 
that  he  is  the  mod  perfed:  being.  This  natural 
light  doth  firft  fuggeft  and  ofi^er  to  the  minds 
of  men,  and  we  cannot  conceive  of  God  as  meer 
power  and  will,  without  wifdom  and  goodnefs. 
Hence  it  is  that  the  Greeks  Call  God  very  of- 
ten, TO  xeetlov,  *'  the  befl  of  beings,'-  and  the 
Latin,  optimus  maxmus,  "  the  befl  and  the  great- 
*'  eft,  •'  heatiffima  Cs?  perfe^liffma  fiatura^  conftans  ^ 
ferfetla  ratio^  "  the  happiefl  and  moft  perfedt  na- 
"  ture,  immutable  and  abfolute  reafbn :"  and  ma- 
ny other  fuch  exprefTions  which  we  meet  with  in 
the  writings  of  the  heathen  philolbphers.  I  rea- 
dily grant,  that  the  firft  and  moft  obvious  thought 
which  men  have  of  God,  is  that  of  his  great- 
nefs  and  majefty  ;  but  this  necelTarily  involves  or 
infers  his  goodnefs  ;  as  Seneca  excellently  rcafons, 
pirmus  deorum  cultus  eft  deos  credere^  dein  reddere 
illis  majeftatem  fuam^  reddere  honitatem^  fine  qua  nul- 
la majeftasy  "  the  firft  worfhip  of  the   gods,  is  to 

"  believe 


2274  Concerning  the  perfect  ion  of  Go  D^ 

SER  M.  <c  believe  their  being  ;  next  to  afcribe  to  them 
*'  grearnefs  and  majcfty,  to  afcribe  to  them 
*'  goodnefs,  without  which  there  can  be  no  ma- 
"  jefty." 

And  we  iliall  find  all  along  in  PJato  and  Tul- 
]y,  and  the  bed  and  wifefl  writers  among  the 
heathen?,  that  they  every  where  attribute  the  high- 
efl:  excellencies  and  perfedtions  to  the  divine  na- 
ture, and  do  fleer  and  govern  all  their  difcourles 
of  God  by  this  principle,  that  perfedlion  is  to 
be  afcribed  to  him  :  and  whenever  any  thing  is 
laid  of  God,  they  examine  whether  it  be  a  per- 
fection or  not-,  if  it  be,  they  give  it  him  as  his 
due ',  if  it  be  not,  they  lay  it  afide  as  a  thing  not 
fit   to  be   fpoken   of  him. 

And  in  the  fcripture  we  do  every  where  find 
perfe61:ion  afcribed  to  the  nature  and  works  and 
laws  of  God,  to  every  thing  that  belongs  to  him, 
or  proceeds  from  him.  Job  xxxvii.  i6.  '*  Dofl 
*'  thou  know  the  wondrous  works  of  him  that  is 
*'  perfed  in  knowledge?"  And  again,  "  Canfl 
*'  thou  by  fearching  find  out  God?  canfl:  thou 
*^  find  out  the  almighty  to  perfedlion  ? "  Pfalm. 
xviii.  30.  "  As  for  God  his  way  is  perfed.** 
Pfalm.  xix.  7.  "  The  law  of  the  Lord  is  per- 
«'  fed." 

I  fhall  not  need  to  confider  particularly  the  fe- 
veral  perfections  of  the  divine  nature  -,  I  fhall  on- 
ly give  you  a  brief  fchcme  and  draught  of  them. 
V/hatever  perfection  can  be  imagin'd  either  in 
the  manner  of  being  or  a6ting,  is  to  be  afcribed 
to  God  ;  therefore,  as  to  his  nature,  we  fay  that 
he  is  a  fpirit,  that  is,  that  he   is  not  meer  body 

or 


Concerning  the  perfeEiion  of  God.  2275; 

or  matter,  becaufe  that  would  exclude  feveral  other  S  E  R  M. 
perfedions ;  for  meer  matter  is  incapable  both  of .  _  ^j 
knowledge  and  liberty,  being  determined  by  ne- 
cefTary  laws  and  motions ;  and  yet  without  know- 
ledge and  liberty,  there  can  be  no  wifdom  nor 
goodnefs.  We  fay  of  God,  that  he  is  of  him- 
felf,  and  without  caufe,  and  does  not  owe  his  be- 
ing to  any  other  ;  and  confequently  that  he  is  ne- 
cefllirily,  and  that  he  cannot  but  be,  and  cannot 
be  otherwife  than  he  is;  for  that  which  is  of  it 
felf,  did  not  choofe  whether  it  would  be  or  not, 
nor  whether  it  would  be  thus  or  otherwife;  for 
to  fuppofe  any  thing  to  deliberate  or  confult 
about  its  own  being,  is  to  fuppofe  it  to  be  be- 
fore it  is. 

We  muft  fay  of  G  o  d  likewife,  that  he  is  im- 
menie,  and  every  where  prefent,  becaufe  to  be 
limited  is  an  imperfcdion  ;  and  that  he  is  eternal, 
that  is,  ever  was,  and  Ihall  be ;  for  to  ceafe  to 
be,  is  a  greater  imperfection  than  fometime  not  to 
have  been. 

And  then  we  are  to  fay  of  God,  that  he  is 
the  caufe  of  all  other  beings;  that  they  are  made 
by  him,  and  depend  upon  him  ;  that  he\  kuows 
all  things,  and  can  do  all  things  in  the  nriolt 
perfedl  manner,  by  a  glance  of  his  mind,  and  by 
the  meer  beck  and  nod  of  his  will,  without  long 
Itudy  or  deliberation,  without  laborious  pains  and 
endeavours,  and  confequently  that  nothing  is  ex- 
empted from  his  knowledge  and  power,  and 
providence,  and   that  he  adminifters  all    things   in 

a  way  of  goodnefs   and   wifdom,    of  juftice  and 

truth  5 


2276  Concerning  th perfection  of  God. 

SERM.  truth;  and  therefore  all  things  are  to  be  referred 
cxxx 

'   to  him,  as  their  lad    end.     All  thcfe  perfeflions^ 

and  all  other  that  are  pofTiblc,  we  are  to  look  up- 
on the  divine  nature  as  fully  and  immutably  pof- 
feft  of,  and  that  in  an  higher  and  more  excellent 
degree  than  our  finite  underitandings  are  able  to 
conceive  or  comprehend. 

2.  As  we  are  to  afcribe  all  imaginable  pofTiblc 
perfections  to  God,  fo  we  are  to  feparate  and 
remove  all  manner  of  imperfedion  from  him. 
We  mud  not  obfcure  or  blemifh  the  divine  na- 
ture with  the  leaft  fhadow  or  blot  of  imperfec- 
tion. If  we  once  admit  of  this,  to  afcribe  any 
thing  to  God  which  argues  imperfedion,  we 
flrike  at  the  foundation,  and  deftroy  one  of  the 
cleareft  and  mod  elTential  notions  which  men  have 
of  God.  And  therefore  we  find  the  fcripture 
very  careful  to  remove  all  kinds  of  natural  or  mo- 
ral imperfection  from  God.  Gen.  xviii.  25.  ''  That 
*'  be  far  from  thee  to  do  after  this  manner,  to 
*'  flay  the  righteous  with  the  wicked,  and  that 
*^  the  righteous  fhould  be  as  the  wicked,  that  be 
*«  far  from  thee  ;  fliall  not  the  judge  of  all  the 
*^  world  do  right.?"  Deut.  xxxii.  iv.  ''  A  God 
''  of  truth,  and  without  iniquity."  Rom.  ix.  14. 
"  What  fliall  we  fay  then,  is  there  unrighteouf- 
**  nefs  with  God  ?  God  forbid,"  far  be  it  from 
him. 

Hence  it  is  that  in  fcripture  holinefs  Is  fo  fre- 
quendy  afcribed  to  God,  which  fignifies  the  pu- 
rity and  freedom  of  the  divine  nature  from  that 
which  we  call  fin 5  and  God  is  very  folicitous  to 

giv® 


Concerning  the  perfeBton  of  Got),  2267 
elve  us  fuch  a  notion  of  himfelF,  as  may  remove  S  E  RM, 
fin    and    unrishteoiifnefs    at   the   greateft   diftance j 


.Q...V,W...W^*^  V.W         —         ^. 


from  him,  becaufe  that  is  the  greateft  of  imperfec- 
tions.    Is  it  an  imperfedion  to  countenance  fin  ?  the 
fcripture  acquits  God  of  it,  Pfal.  v.  4,  5,  <'  Thou 
''-  art  not  a  God  that  hath  pleafure  in  wickednels 
*'  neither  fhall  evil  dwell  with  thee.  **     Is  it  an  im- 
perfedion  to  go  from  ones  word,  or  to  change  ones 
mind  ?  this  likewife  is  removed  from  God.   i  Sam, 
XV.  29.  ''  The  ftrength  of  Ifrael  will  not  lye  or  re- 
''  pent :  he  is  not  a  man,  that  he  fhould  repent." 
Is  it  an  imperfedion  to  want  any  thing,   to  be  lia- 
ble to  any  thing,  to  depend  upon  any  thing  with- 
out   ones    felf  for    happinefs  ?    this    alfo  is   to   be 
{^t  far  from  him.     Job  xxii.  2,3.    "  Can  a  man  be 
"  profitable  to  God  ?  or  is  it  a  gain  to  him,  that 
*'  thou  makefl  thy  way  perfed  ?  "  Job  xxxv.  6,  7. 
«'   If  thou  finned,  what  doll  thou  againd  him  ?  or 
*'  if  thy  tranfgrefTions  be  multiplied,  what  dofl  thou 
"  unto  him }   if  thou   art   righteous,    what  gived 
'^  thou  him  ?  or  what  receiveth  he  of  thine  hand  l 
"  thy  wickednefs  may  hurt  a  man  as  thou  art,  and 
"  thy  righteoufnefs  may   profit  the  fon  of  man.'* 
Is  it  an  imperfedion  to  tempt,  or  to  be  tempted  to 
fin.?  this  is  to  be  feparated  from  God,    "  he  can- 
*'  not  be  tempted  of  evil,  neither  tempteth  he  any 
"  man,"  faith  St.  James,  chap.  i.  17.  And  to  men- 
tion no   more,  is  it  an   imperfedion  to  be  in  any 
refped  mutable?  this  is  denied  of  God.  "  With 
*'  him  there  is  no  variablenels,  or  fhadow  of  turn= 
c«  ing."     Thus  you  fee  how  we  are  to  conceive  of 
the  perfedions  of  God,  by  afcribing  all  imagina- 
Vol.  VIL  15  U  U^ 


2278  Concerning  the  p  erf e^  ion  of  Gov.  ^ 

.  S.ER  Af.  ble  and  poiTible  perfedions  to  him,  and  removing 
all  (hadow  of  imperfedion  from  him.  I  proceed 
in  the 

lid  place  to  lay  down  fome  rules  by  which  wc 
may  rectify  and  govern  our  opinions  concerning  the 
attributes  and  perfedlions  of  God:  the  bed  lean 
think  of^  are  thefe  following. 

Firft,  let  us  begin  with  the  mofl  natural,  and 
plain,  and  eafy  psrfedions  of  God,  and  lay  them 
for  a  foundation,  and  redify  all  our  other  appre- 
henfions  of  God,  and  reafonings  about  him,  by 
thefe  j  and  thefe  are  his  power,  wifdom,  and  good- 
nefs,  to  which  mod  of  the  reft  may  be  reduced. 
Right  apprehenfions  and  a  firm  belief  of  thefe 
will  make  it  eafily  credible  to  us,  that  all  things 
were  made  and  are  governed  by  him  •,  for  his  good- 
nels  will  difpofe  and  incline  him  to  communicate  being 
to  other  things,  and  to  take  care  of  them  when 
they  are  made.  And  infinite  power  and  wifdom 
render  him  able  to  do  all  this  without  any  labour 
or  difficulty,  and  without  any  difturbance  of  his  eafe 
or  happinefs,  as  Epicurus  would  feem  vainly  to 
fear;  who  in  truth  did  not  believe  a  God, 
but  pretended  only  to  deny  his  providence,  and 
that  he  either  made  or  govern'd  the  world,  be- 
caufe  he  was  loth  to  lay  Q^  much  trouble  upon 
him.  Vain  man  !  as  if  thofe  things  which  are  im- 
poffible  and  difficult  to  our  weaknefs  and  folly, 
might  not  be  infinitely  eafy  to  infinite  power  and 
wifdom. 

Particularly  the  goodnefs  and  juftice  of  G  o  d  are 
not  fo  difficult  to  apprehend,  as  the  difputes  and 

eontro- 


Concerning  the  perfeBlon  nf  God.  2279 

controverfies  about  them  have  rendered  them  to  S  E  R  M. 
many.  When  we  confider  infinite  knowledge  and 
power,  we  may  eafily  lofe  our  lelves,  and  go  out 
of  our  depth,  by  wading  too  far  into  them  :  there 
is  fomething  concerning  thefe,  that  is  unimaginable, 
and  unaccountable  to  our  reafon  ;  we  may  not 
be  able  to  underftand  how  fomething  may  be  pro- 
duc'd  from  nothing,  becaufe  it  argues  fuch  an  ex- 
cefs  of  power,  as  we  cannot  comprehend  j  but  yet 
we  are  forc'd  to  acknowledge,  that  either  the 
world  mud  be  produc'd  from  nothing,  or  that 
matter  was  eternally  of  it  felf,  which  is  every  whit 
as  hard  to  imagine,  as  that  infinite  power  fhould 
be  able  to  produce  it  from  nothing.  So  likewife 
we  are  not  able  to  conceive,  how  God  can  cer- 
tainly know  future  events,  which  depend  upon  vo- 
luntary and  uncertain  caufes,  becaufe  we  cannot  ap- 
prehend infinite  knowledge  *,  but  this  we  may  eafily 
be  fatisfied  in,  that  infinite  pov/er  and  knowledge 
may  be  able  to  do,  and  know  many  things,  which 
we  cannot  conceive  how  they  can  be  known  of 
done,  no  more  than  a  child  can  imagine  how  a 
great  mathematician  can  demonilrate  his  propofiti-. 
ens.  Only  this  we  are  fure  of,  as  we  can  be  of 
any  thing,  that  no  power  can  do  that  which  is 
evidently  impofllble,  and  implies  a  plain  contra- 
diction. 

We  are  not  able  perhaps  to  reconcile  the  particu-- 
lar  providences  of  God  with  his  univerfal  good- 
nefs,  juftice,  and  wifdom,  becaufe  we  cannot  lee  to 
the  end  of  his  ways  and  v/orks  at  one  view,  and  fee 
every  part  with  relation  to  the  whole  ;  which  would 

5.5  U  2  appear- 


cxxx. 


:i So  Concerning  the perfeBion  of  God, 

S  E  R  M.  appear  very  wife,  if  we  knew  the  whole  feries  of 
things,  andfaw  the  entire  defign  together,  as  God 
himfelf  dees,  to  whom  (as  Solomon  tells  us)  "  all 
"  his  ways  are  known  from  the  beginning." 

So  that  however  we  may  be  at  a  lofs  in  our  con- 
ceptions of  God's  infinite  knowledge  and  power, 
yet  goednefs,  and  juflice,  and  truth,  are  notions  eafy 
and  familiar;  and  if  we  could  not  underftand  thefe, 
the  whole  bible  would  be  infignificant  to  us.  For 
all  revelation  from  God  fuppofeth  us  to  know  v/hat 
is  meant  by  goodnefs,  juflice,  and  truth :  and 
therefore  no  man  can  entertain  any  notion  of  God, 
v/hich  plainly  contradids  thefe.  And  it  is  foolifh 
for  any  man  to  pretend,  that  he  cannot  know  what 
goodnefs  and  juftice,  and  truth  in  G  o  d  are :  for 
if  we  do  not  know  this,  'tis  all  one  to  us,  whether 
God  be  good  or  not,  nor  could  we  imitate  his 
goodnefs ;  for  he  that  imitates,  endeavours  to  make 
himfelf  like  fomething  that  he  knows,  and  mud  of 
neceffity  have  fome  idea  of  that  to  which  he  aims 
to  be  like :  fo  that  if  wc  had  no  certain  and  fettled 
notion  of  the  goodnefs  and  juftice,  and  truth  of 
God,  he  would  be  altogether  an  unintelligible  be- 
ing •,  and  religion,  which  confifts  in  the  imitauon 
of  him,  would  be  utterly  impofTible. 

Now  thefe  being  the  moil  eafy  and  intelligible 
perfedions  of  God,  by  which  he  is  faid  in  fcrip- 
xure  to  'declare  his  name,  that  is,  to  make  himfelf 
known  to  us,  we  ihould  govern  all  our  reafonings 
about  God  (as  concerning  his  decrees,  and  his  con- 
currence with  th^  free  adlions  of  men,  and  his 
particular  providence,  which  are  things  more  dark 

and 


Concerni7ig  the perfeBicn  of  God.  2281 

and  obfcure)  by  what  is  more  clear ;  and  we  fhall  S  E  R  M. 
find  in  fcripture,  that  in  all  th^fe  points  holy  men 
do  condantly  appeal  to  thefe  unqueftionable  and 
intelligible  perfections  of  God.  "  Wilt  thou  de- 
"  ftroy  the  righteous  with  the  wicked  ?  (faith  Abra- 
*'  ham)  that  be  far  from  thee.  Shall  not  the  judge 
*'  of  all  the  world  do  right  ?  "  Y/e  may  be  mif- 
taken  ;  but  God  certainly  knows  who  are  wicked, 
and  who  are  righteous ;  and  he  knows  how  to 
punifh  the  wicked,  and  fave  the  righteous :  but  we 
cannot  be  midaken  in  this  principle,  "  that  the 
"  judge  of  all  the  world  v/ill  do  right."  Thus 
Mofes  fitisfies  himfelf  and  others,  concerning  the 
particular  providences  of  God  towards  the  people 
of  Ifrael.  Deut.  xxxii,  3,  4.  '-  I  will  publilh  the 
*'  name  of  the  L  o  n  d  :  all  his  ways  are  judgment ; 
"  a  God  of  truth,  and  without  iniquity,  juft  and 
*'  right  is  he."  This  we  certainly  know  of  God. 
So  St.  Paul,  Rom.  ii.  2.  "  Thou  art  inexculible, 
*'  O  man  ! "  Whatfoever  excule  men  may  pretend 
for  their  faults,  he  lays  down  this  for  a  principle, 
*'  we  are  fure  the  judgment  of  God  is  according 

"  to  truth." 

Secondly,  \tt  us  always  confider  the  perfedlions 
pfGoD  in  conjunction,  and  fo  as  to  reconcile  them 
with  one  another.  Do  not  confider  God  as 
meer  power  and  fovereignty,  as  meer  mercy  and 
goodnefs,  as  meer  juftice  and  feverity  ;  but  as  all 
thefe  together,  and  in  fuch  a  meafure  and  degree 
as  may  make  them  confident  with  one  another. 
The  greateft  miflakes  in  religion  are  certainly  fprung 
from  this  rootj  from  feparating  the  perfediojis  of 

G  0  Dj, 


22{>2  Concerning  the  perfection  of  G  ob, 

SERM.  God,  and  confidering  them  fingly,  and  framing 
^^^■j  fjjch  wide  and  large  notions  of  one,  as  to  exclude 
anotiier :  whereas  the  perfedlions  of  God  agree 
together,  and  that  is  not  a  divine  perfedion  which 
contradicts  any  other  perfedion.  Among  men  in- 
deed an  eminent  degree  of  any  one  excellency 
does  ufually  ihut  out  fome  other;  and  therefore 
it  is  obferv'd,  that  power  and  moderation,  love 
and  difcretion,  do  not  often  meet  together ;  that  a 
great  memory  and  a  fmall  judgment,  a  good 
"wit  and  an  ill  nature,  are  many  times  found  in 
conjundtion:  but  in  infinite  perfedion  all  per- 
fections do  eminently  meet  and  confift  together ; 
and  it  is  not  necefiary  that  one  excellency  fhould 
be  raifed  upon  the  ruins  of  another. 

And  if  this  had  been  well  confider'd,  men 
would  not,  by  being  too  intent  upon  God's 
fovereignty,  with  negle6t  of  his  other  perfections, 
have  fpoken  thofe  hard  things  about  predeftina- 
tion :  for  the  fovereignty  of  God  doth  by  no 
means  {tt  him  above  the  eternal  laws  of  good- 
.nefs,  and  truth,  and  righteoufnefs.  And  if  this 
v^ere  confidered,  men  would  not,  by  poring  upon 
the  juftice  and  feverity  of  God,  be  fo  fwallowed 
up  in  defpair :  for  G  o  d  is  not  fo  fevere,  but  he  is 
merciful  to  the  penitent,  and  hath  Mx.  a  retreat  for 
the  returning  finner.  If  this  weire  well  confider'd, 
it  would  check  the  prefumption  of  thofe  who  en- 
courage themfelves  in  fin,  by  fancying  to  themfclves 
a  G  o  D  of  all  mercy  and  goodnefs  -,  and  "  becaufe 
"  fentence  againft  an  evil  wcrtk  is  not  fpeedily  exe- 
*'  cuted,  therefore  their  heart   is  fully  fet  in  them 

"  to 


Q)?2cer fling  the  perfeSlion  of  God.  2283 

"  to   do  evil : "  for  it  is   not  goodnefs  and  mercy  ^J^y^^' 
finally    to  bear  with  and    forgive   obflinate  offen- 
ders,   but    want    of  prudence   and    good  govern, 
ment. 

Thirdly,    among    different    opinions    concerning 
God  (as  there  always  have  been  and  will  be  in  the 
world)  choofe  thofe  which  are  farthefl  from  extre- 
mity ;    becaufe   truth  as  well  as    virtue  ufually   lies 
between  the  extremes.      And  here  I  will  inflance  iri 
that   controverfy,    which  has  much    difquieted   the 
church  almoft  in  all  ages,    concerning  the  decrees 
of    G  o  D ;    about   which  there  are   two  extremes, 
the  one  that  God  peremptorily   decrees  the    final 
condition  of  every   particular  perfon,    that  is,  their 
everlafting  happinefs   or    mifery,    without    any  re- 
gard or  confideration  of  the  good  or  bad   aclions 
of  men.     The  other,    that   God  decrees  nothing 
concerning  any    particular    perfon,  but  only  in  ge- 
neral, that  men  found  under  fuch  and   liich  quali^ 
fications  ihall    be  happy  or  miferable,   and   puts  it 
into  their  own  power  to  qualify  themfelves.    Now 
he  that  is  doubtful  in  this  matter,    as  every  man 
mufl    be  that  underflands  the  difHcukies   on  both 
fides,    had   bed  take    up   in  the    middle  opinion, 
that  God  decrees   the  final  condition  of  particu- 
lar perfons   with   refped    to  certain   qualifications, 
which,  fpeaking  abfolutely,  are  not  in  every  man's 
power;  but  yet,    under    the    influence    of    God's 
grace,  which  is  never  wanting  to  the  fincere  en- 
deavours   of    men,    may    be  faid    to   be     i-n    our 
power,    in  the  fame  fenfe    as  St.  Paul  fays,    "  I 
«'  am  able    to  do  all  things   through   Christ 

'*  ftrengthning 


22 o A  Concerning  the perjeclion  cf  Govt, 

SERM.  "  flrcngthning  me:'*  for  befides,  that  this  in  all 
CXXX.  probability  is  the  truth,  there  will  be  this  advan- 
tage in  it,  that  he  that  ftands  in  the  middle,  is 
like  to  be  more  moderate  towards  the  difTen- 
tcrs  on  both  fides,  than  either  of  them  will  be 
to  one  another;  becaufe  the  middle  is  not  fo 
far  from  cither  extreme,  as  the  extremes  are  from 
one  another.  At  the  worft,  he  ftands  faireft  for 
an  impartial  enquiry  after  truth,  and  when  he  has 
fatisfied  himfelf  where  the  truth  lies,  he  may 
more  filently  pals  over  to  it,  without  any  great 
imputation  of  inconfiftency ;  which  cannot  but  be 
remarkable  in  him,  who  pafteth  from  one  extreme 
to  another. 

Fourthly,  and  laftly,  entertain  no  opinion  con- 
cerning God,  that  doth  evidently  contradi6l  the 
pradice  of  religion,  and  a  good  life,  though  ne- 
ver fo  fpecious  and  fabtile  arguments  may  be  ufed 
to  perfuade  it.  Truth  is  mofi:  eafily  feen,  and 
difcern'd  in  thole  realbnings  and  opinions  which 
tend  to  pradlice  ;  becaufe  the  abfurdity  and  incon- 
venience of  them  is  fooneft  difcovered :  whereas 
we  cannot  fo  certainly  find  out  the  truth  or  falf- 
hood  of  thofc  opinions,  which  fpeculative  men  de- 
vife  in  their  ftudies,  without  any  confideration 
whether  they  ferve*  any  real  purpofe  of  life  or  not. 
Men  indeed  are  very  apt  to  form  thofe  notions, 
which  are  mod  remote  from  common  fenfe  and 
ufe*,  becaufe  more  pains  and  wit  are  required  to 
make  them  plaufible :  but  there  needs  no  other 
argument  to  make  a  wife  man  defpife  them,  than 
that  they  are  unprofitable,  and  fignify  nothing  to 
our  pradice,  and  to  make  men  truly  better. 

Tliis 


Concerning  the  perfeBion  ofGoT).  2285 

This  is  univerfally  true  in  all  kind  of  know-SERM. 
ledge,  but  mod  confiderable  in  the  knowledge  of 
God  and  religion;  becaufe  that  knowledge  is  of 
the  greatefl  confideration.  We  need  not  fcruple 
to  admit  fome  things,  not  fo  evident  to  natural 
reafon,  if  we  be  fatisfied  of  the  truth  of  them,  from 
an  higher  and  more  cogent  reafon :  as  that  God 
has  revealed  it,  and  faid  it ;  this  general  reafon  may 
perfuade  us  of  a  thing  that  is  above  and  beyond  na- 
tural reafon  :  but  we  may  not  admit  any  thing  for  a 
divine  revelation,  which  evidently  contradids  and 
weakens  the  practice  of  an  holy  Jife ;  becaufe  this 
is  the  main  end  of  all  divine  revelation ;  and  ws 
know  God,  only  in  order  to  the  fervzce  and  imita- 
tion of  him. 

Let  us  then  look  upon  all  knowledge  that  con- 
tradids  pradice,  as  vain  and  falfe,   becaufe  it  de- 
ftroys  its  end.      There  are  many  things   that  feem 
probable   enough  in  fpeculation,  which  yet  we  mod 
pertinaciouHy  deny,  becaufe  they  are  not  pradica- 
ble ;    and    there    are    many    things,     which    feem 
doubtful  in  fpeculation,  and  would  admit  of   great 
difpute,  which  yet  becaufe  they  are  found   true  in 
practice  and  experience,    are  to  be  taken  for  certain 
and    unqueftionable.      The    d^yh?  \oyo^^    the   idle 
reafoning  of  the  Stoicks,   was  a  thing   contemned 
by     the    wifer   philofophers,    as    vain   and    ufelefs 
fubtilty.     Zeno  pretends  to  demonftrate  there  is  no 
motion  ;  and  what  is  the  confequence  of  this  fpecu» 
lation,  but  that  men    muft  ftand  ftill  ?    but  fo  long 
as  a  man  finds  he   can  walk,    all    the   fophiftry  in 
the  world  will  not  perfuade  him,    that   motion    is 
Vol.  VII.  15  X  impoffible. 


22^6  Concemhig  the  perfeBion  of  God. 

S  E  R  M.  Impoflible.  In  like  manner,  they  that  would  per- 
fuade  us,  that  men  can  do  nothing,  nor  contri- 
bute any  more  to  their  own  Hmdlification,  than 
flocks  or  ftones,  and  upon  fcripture-metaphors 
mifunderftood,  (as  our  "  being  dead  in  trefpafTes  and 
«'  fins,  and  created  to  good  works")  graft  notions, 
which  are  impoiTible  and  abfurd  in  pradbice,  do 
not  confider  that  the  natural  confequence  of  this 
is,  that  men  muft  do  nothing  at  all  in  religion, 
never  think  of  God,  nor  pray  to  him,  nor  read 
his  word,  nor  go  to  church;  but  fit  ftill  and  be 
wholly  pafllve  to  the  operations  of  God's  grace. 
But  however  this  may  feem  plaufible,  and  men 
may  think  they  add  much  to  the  glory  of  God's 
grace,  while  they  deny  any  power  in  the  crea- 
ture j  yet  every  confiderate  man  will  prefently  ap- 
prehend, that  this  is  by  no  means  to  be  admit- 
ted, becaufe  it  contradids  pradice,  and  makes  all 
the  commands  and  exhortations  of  God's  word 
vain  and  to  no  purpofe;  becaufe  it  deftroys  reli- 
crlon,  and  difcourages  the  endeavours  of  men  5 
makes  them  (lothful  and  carelefs  of  *'  working 
"  out  their  own  falvation  •"  than  which  nothing 
can  fet  a  man  farther  from  God's  grace  and 
aifiilance,  and  more  immediately  difpofe  him  for 
ruin ;  and  upon  fbme  lijch  falfe  reafoning  as  this, 
the  (lothful  fervant  in  the  parable  '^  hid  his  ta- 
«'  lent  in  a  napkin,  and  buried  it  in  the  earthy" 
but  when  he  was  tailed  to  account,  his  ex- 
cufe  was  not  admitted,  but  "  he  was  cafl  into 
*'  utter  darknefs."  The  two  other  particulars, 
namely  how  far  we  are  to  imitate  the  divine   per- 

fedions. 


Concerning  the  perfection  o/GoX).  2287 

feftions,  and  particularly  what  thofe  divine  qualitiesSE RM. 
are,  which  our  Sa  v  i  o  u  r  doth  here  more  ef- 
pecially  propound  to  our  imitation,  and  likewife 
to  clear  the  true  meaning  of  this  precept,  and  to 
fhew  that  the  duty  here  enjoin'd,  "  be  ye  per- 
«'  feet,  as  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven  is 
"  perfedl,**  is  not  impoinble  to  us :  both  thefe  I 
Ihall  refer  to  another  opportunity. 


■^. 


i.^X  z  ATabl« 


A  Table  of  the  Texts  of  each 
Sermon. 

SERMON    CXI,  CXII. 

RO  M.  i.  1 8,  19.  For  the  'wrath  of  God  is 
revealed  from  heaven  againfi  all  ungodlinefs  and 
unrighteoiifnefs  of  men^  who  hold  the  truth  in  un^ 
righteoufnefs  \  hecaiife  that  which  may  be  known  of 
God  is  manifeji  in  them^  for  God  hath  fhewed  it 
unto  thevu  page  1 8 1 5 ,  1838. 

SERMON    CXIII. 

JOHN  xiii.  17.  If  ye  know  thefe  things^  happy 
are  ye  if  ye  do  them.  p.  1 8  5 1  *, 

SERMON     CXIV. 

LUKE  xii.  47,  48.  And  that  fcrvant  which  knew 
his  LoRD'i  will^  and  prepared  not  himfelf  nei- 
ther did  according  to  his  will^  floall  he  beaten  with 
many  ftripes :  hut  he  that  knew  not^  and  did  com- 
mit things  worthy  of  firipes^  fhall  he  beaten  with 
few  Jiripes.  For  unto  whomfoever  7nuch  is  givcn^ 
(if  him  fhall  much  be  required  \  and  to  whom  men 
have  committed  much,  of  him  they  will  ask  the 
more.  p.  1879. 

SERMON     CXV,  CXVI. 

TAMES  i.  13,  14.  Let  no  man  fay,  when  he  is 
tempted,  I  am  tempted  of  God  i  for  God  can- 

not  hi  tempted  with  evil,  neither  tcmpteih  he  any 

man : 


A  Table  of  the  Texts. 
man :     hut   every    man    is   tempted^    when  he    is 
drawn  away  of  his  own  luji^    and  enticed, 

p.  1898,   1924. 

SERMON    CXVII. 

M  A  T  T  H.  xi.  2,  3,  4,  5,  6,  Now  when  John  had 

heard  in  prifon    the  works  of  Christ,  he  fent 

two   of  his  difciples^  and  faid  unto  him^  art  thou 

he  that  fhould  come  ;    or  do  we  look  for  another  ? 

Jesus  anfwered  and  faid  unto  them^  go^  and  fhew 

John    again   thefe    things  which    ye    do  hear  and 

fee,     The  Mind    receive  their  ftght^    and  the  lame 

walk^  the  lepers   are  cleanfed^  and  the  deaf  hear^ 

the  dead  are  raifed  up^  and  the  poor  have  the  go f pel 

preached  unto   them.     And  bleffed  is  he  who fo ever 

JJoall  not  he  offended  in  me,  p.  1946. 

SERMON    CXVIII,  CXIX. 

M  A  T  T  H.  XI.  6.  Jnd  hleffed  is  he  whofoever 
fhall  not  he  offended  in  me.  p.  1973,  1999. 

SERMON    CXX. 

R  O  M.  i.  4.  And  declared  to  he  the  Son  of  God, 
with  power ^  according  to  the  Spirit  of  holi- 
fiefs ^  hy  the  refurre£lion  from  the  dead,        p.  202 1. 

SERMON    CXXI. 

H  E  B.  vi.  4,  5,  6.  Tor  it  is  impoffible  for  thoft  'whu^ 
were  once  enlightened^  and  have  tajied  of  the  hea-- 
venly gift^  and  were  made  partakers  of  the  HohY 
Ghost,  and  have  tajied  the  good  word  of  God, 
and  the  powers  of  the  world  to  come  ;  if  they  Jh^ll 

fall 


A  Table  of  the  Texts. 

fall  away^  to  renew  them  again  unto  repentance: 
feeing  they  crucify  to  themfehes  the  Son  of  God 
cfrefi^    md  put  him  to  an  open  fhame,    p.  2038. 

SERMON     CXXIl,  CXXIII. 

H  E  B.  V.  9.  And  being  made  per fe5f^  he  became  thi 
author  of  eternal  falvation  unto  all  them  that  obey 
him.  p.   iO(56,  2089. 

SERMON    CXXIV. 

M  A  T  T  H-    xxviii.    18,    19,    20.    And  Jesu^ 

came  and  fpake  unto  them^  f<^ying',  c^U  power  is 
given  unto  me  in  heaven  and  in  earth :  go  ye  there- 
fore and  teach  all  nations^  baptizing  them  in  the 
name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the 
HolyGhos't:  teaching  them  to  obferve  all  things 
whatfoever  I  have  commanded  you :  and  lo^  I  am 
with  you  alway^  even  unto  the  end  of  the  world, 

p.    2113, 

S  E  R  M  O  N    CXXV. 

LUKE  xiii.  24.  Strive  to  enter  in  at  the  ftrait 
gate ;  for  many^  I  fay  unto  yoUy  will  feek  to  en- 
ter in^  and  fhall  not  be  able.  p.  2138. 

SERMON  CXXVI,  CXXVII. 

LUKE  xvi.  19,  20.  There  was  a  certain  rich 
man^  which  was  clothed  in  purple  and  fine  linen^ 
end  fared  fumptuoufly  every  day :  and  there  was  a 
certain  beggar^  named  Lazarus^  which  was  laid 
at  his  gate  full  of  fori s^  p,  2169,  2194. 

SERMON 


A  Table  of  the  Texts. 

SERMON     CXXVIII. 

LU  K  E  XV i.  31.  If  they  hear  not  Mofes  and 
the  prophets^  neither  will  they  he  perfuaded  though 
one  rofe  from  the  dead.  p.  2222, 

SERMON    CXXIX. 

LUKE  xvi.  8.  For  the  children  of  this  world 
are  in  their  generation  wifer  than  the  children  of 
of  light.  p,  2243. 

SERMON    CXXX. 

M  A  T  T  H.   V.  ^S,  Be  ye  therefore  perfeEl^  even 
as  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven  is  f§rfe5i, 

jp.  2269. 


The  End  of  the  Seventh  Volume, 


*  \ 


^^ 


f^  >f-^ 


'A.--^'^ 


