LIBRARY  OF  THE  THEOLOGICAL  SEMINARY 

PRINCETON,  N.  J. 

Presented  by 

Division 

s,,,, QM        \ 


v.  y 


■fl 


SERMONS 


ON    SEVERAL 


Subjects  and  Occasions, 


By  the  mod  Reverend 


Dr.  John  tillotson, 


LATE 


Lord  Archbifliop  of  Canterbury. 


VOLUME    the   FOURTH, 


LONDON: 

Printed  for  R.  Ware,  A.  Ward,  J.  and  P.  Knapton,  T.  Longman, 

R.  Hett,  C.  Hitch,  J.  Hodges,  S.  Aujlen,  J.  and  R.  Ton/on, 

J.  and  H.  P  ember  ton,  and  J .  Rivington. 

M  DCC  XLII. 


[  447  3 

SERMON     LI. 

Of  the  education  of  children. 

P  R  O  V.    xxii.  6. 

Train  up  a  child  in  the  way  he  Jhould  go,  and  when  he 
is  old  he  will  not  depart  from  it. 

I  Have  on  purpofe  chofen  this  text  for  the  fubject  SERM, 
of  a  preparatory  difcourfe  in  order  to  the  revi  v-  ^  ^}^ 
ing  of  that  fo  fhamefully  neglected,  and  yet 
mod  ufeful  and  neceffiry  duty  of  catechifing  chil- 
dren and  young  perfons :  But  I  fhall  extend  it  to 
the  confideration  of  the  education  of  children  in  ae- 
neral,  as  a  matter  of  the  greateft  confequence  both 
to  religion  and  the  publick  welfare. 

For  we  who  are  the  minifters  of  God  ought  not 
only  to  inftrucl:  thofe  who  are  committed  to  our 
charge  in  the  common  duties  of  chriftianity,  fuch 
as  belong  to  all  chriftians,  but  likewife  in  all  the 
particular  duties  which  the  feveral  relations  in  which 
they  (land  to  one  another  do  refpectively  require 
and  call  for  from  them. 

And  amongft  all  thefe  I  know  none  that  is  of 
greater  concernment  to  religion  and  to  the  good 
order  of  the  world,  than  the  careful  education  of 
children.  And  there  is  hardly  any  thing  that  is 
more  difficult,  and  which  requires  a  more  prudent 
Vol.  IV.  5X2  and 

t. 


44  S  Concerning  the  education  of  children. 

SE  R  M.  and  diligent  and  conftant  application   of  our  bed 
care  and  endeavour. 

It  is  a  known  laying  of  Melancthon  that  there  are 
three  things  which  are  extremely  difficult,  parturire, 
docere,  regere ;  "  to  bear  and  bring  forth  children, 
to  inltruct  and  bring  them  up  to  be  men,  and  to 
govern  them  when  they  arrive  at  man's  eftate.'* 
The  inftruction  and   good  education  of  children  is 
none  of  the  lead  difficult  of  thefe.     For  to  do  it  to 
the  befl  advantage  does  not  only  require  great  faga- 
-city  to  difcern   their  particular  difpofition  and  tem- 
per, but  great  difcretion  to  deal  with  them  and  ma- 
nage them,  and  likewife  continual  care  and  diligent 
attendance  to  form  them  by  degrees  to  religion  and 

virtue. 

It  requires  great  wifdom  and  induftry  to  advance 
a  confiderable  edate,  much  art  and  contrivance  and 
pains  to  raife  a  great  and  regular  building  :  But  the 
greatefl  and  nobleft  work  in  the  world,  and  an  effect 
of  the  greatefl  prudence  and  care,  is  to  rear  and 
build  up  a  Man,  and  to  form  and  fafhion  him  to 
piety,  andjuflice,  and  temperance,  and  all  kind  of 
honed  and  worthy  actions.  Now  the  foundations 
of  this  great  work  are  to  be  careHly  laid  in  the 
tender  years  of  children,  that  it  may  rife  and  grow 
up  with  them  -,  according  to  the  advice  of  the  wife 
man  here  in  the  text,  "  Train  up  a  child  in  the 

way  he  fhould  go,  and  when  he  is  old  he  will  not 

depart  from  it." 

In  which  words  are  contained  thefe  two  things. 

Firft,  the  duty  of  parents  and  indruetors  of  chil- 
dren, "  Train  up  a  child,  C5V."  By  childhood  here 
I  undcrdand  the  age  of  perfons  from  their  birth, 

but 


(I 


Concerning  the  education  of  children.  440 

but  more  efpecially  from  their  firft  capacity  of  in-  S  E  R  M. 
ftruction  till  they  arrive  at  the  ftate  and  age  which 
next  fucceeds  childhood,  and  which  we  call  youth  j 
and  which  is  the  proper  feafbn  for  confirmation. 
For  when  children  have  been  well  catechized  and 
intruded  in  religion,  then  is  the  fitted  time  for  them 
to  take  upon  themfelves  and  in  their  own  perfons  to 
confirm  that  folemn  vow  which  by  their  fureties  they 
made  at  their  baptifm. 

'*  Train  up  a  child  in  the  way  he  fhould  go," 
that  is,  in  the  courfe  of  life  that  he  ought  to  lead ; 
inftruct  him  carefully  in  the  knowledge  and  prac 
tice  of  his  whole  duty  to  God  and  men,  which  he 
ought  to  obferve  and  perform  all  the  days  of  his 
life. 

Secondly,  here  is  the  confequent  fruit  and  bene- 
fit of  good  education  :  M  And  when  he  is  old  he 
"  will  not  depart  from  it."  This  we  are  to  un- 
derftand  according  to  the  moral  probability  of  things : 
Not  as  if  this  happy  effect  did  always  and  infallibly 
follow  upon  the  good  education  of  a  child,  but  that 
this  very  frequently  is,  and  may  probably  be  pre- 
fumed  and  hoped  to  be  the  fruit  and  effect  of  a 
pious  and  prudent  education.  Solomon  means  that 
from  the  very  nature  of  the  thing  this  is  the  mod 
hopeful  and  likely  way  to  train  up  a  child  to  be  a 
good  man.  For  as  Ariftotle  truly  obferves,  "  Mo- 
ral fayings  and  proverbial  fpeeches  are  to  be  un- 
flood  only  \-k\  to  -utcXv,  that  is,  to  be  ufually  and 
for  the  mod  part  true."  And  though  there  may 
be  feveral  exceptions  made,  and  inftances  given  to 
the  contrary,  yet  this  doth  not  infringe  the  general 
truth  of  them :  But  if  in  frequent  and  common  ex- 

7  perience 


45°  Concerning  the  education  of  children. 

S  R  R  M.  perience  they  be  found  true,  this  is  all  the  truth  that 
is  expected  in  them,  becaufe  it  is  all  that  was  in- 
tended by  them. 

And  of  this  nature  is  this  aphorifm  or  proverb  of 
Solomon  in  the  text;  and  fo  likewife  are  moft  of  the 
wife  flyings  of  this  book  of  the  Proverbs,  as  alfo 
of  Ecclefiaftes :  And  we  do  greatly  miftake  the 
defign  and  meaning  of  them  whenever  we  go 
about  to  exact  them  to  a  more  ftrict  and  rigorous 
truth,  and  mail  upon  due  confideration  find  it  im- 
poflible  to  bring  them  to  it. 

So  that  the  true  meaning  of  the  text  may  be 
fully  comprifed  in  the  following  propofition. 

"  That  the  careful,  and  prudent,  and  religious 
"  education  of  children  hath  for  the  mod  part  a 
14  very  good  influence  upon  the  whole  courfe  of 
"  their  lives.'' ' 

In  the  handling  of  this  argument  I  defign  by 
God's  afliftance,  to  reduce  my  difcourfe  to  thefe 
five  heads. 

I.  I  mail  fhew  more  generally  wherein  the  good 
education  of  children  doth  confift,  and  feverally  con- 
fider  the  principal  parts  of  it. 

II.  I  fhall  give  fome  more  particular  directions 
for  the  management  of  this  work  in  fuch  a  way  as 
may  be  moft  effectual  for  its  end. 

III.  I  fhall  take  notice  of  fome  of  the  common 
and  more  remarkable  mifcarriages  in  the  performance 
of  this  duty. 

IV.  I  fhall  endeavour  to  make  out  the  truth  of 
this  propofition,  by  fhewing  how  the  good  educati- 
on of  children  comes  to  be  of  fo  great  advantage, 

and 


Concerning  the  education  of  children.  45 1 

and  to  have  fo  powerful  and  lading  an  influence  upon  s  E  R  &*; 
their  whole  lives. 

V.  And  laftly  ;  I  fhall,  by  the  mod  powerful 
arguments  I  can  offer,  endeavour  to  ftir  up  and 
perfuade  thofe  whole  duty  this  is,  to  dilcharge  it 
with  great  care  and  corifcience. 

I.  I  fhall  fhew  more  generally  wherein  the  good 
education  of  children  doth  confift,  and  feverally  con- 
fider  the  principal  parts  of  it.  And  under  this 
head  I  fhall  comprehend  promifcuoufly  the  duty  of 
parents,  and,  in  cafe  of  their  death,  of  guardians  ; 
and  of  godfathers  and  godmothers;  though  this  for 
the  mod  part  fignifies  very  little  more  than  a  pious 
and  charitable  care  and  concernment  for  them,  be- 
caufe  the  children  for  whom  they  are  fureties  are 
feldom  under  their  power :  And  the  duty  likewife 
of  thofe  who  are  the  teachers  and  inftruclors  of 
them  :  And  the  duty  alfo  of  matters  of  families  to- 
wards fervants  in  their  childhood  and  younger  years : 
And  laftly  the  duty  of  minifters,  under  whofe  pa- 
rochial care  and  infpection  children  are  as  members 
of  the  families  committed  to  their  charge :  I 
lay,  under  this  head  I  fhall  comprehend  the  duties 
of  thefe  refpectively,  according  to  the  feveral  ob- 
ligations which  lie  upon  each  of  them  in  their 
feveral  relations  to  them.  And  I  fhall  reduce  them 
to  thefe  eight  particulars,  as  the  principal  parts  where- 
in the  education  of  children  doth  confift. 

Firft,  in  the  tender  and  careful  nurfing  of  them. 

Secondly,  in  bringing  them  up  to  be  baptized  and 
admitted  members  of  Christ's  church,  at  the 
times  appointed  or  accuftomed  in  the  national  church 
of  which  the  parents  are  members. 

Thirdly, 


Concerning  the  education  of  children. 

Thirdly,  in  a  due  care  to  inform  and  inftruct 
them  in  the  whole  compafs  of  their  duty  to  God 
and  their  neighbour. 

Fourthly,  and  more  efpecially  in  a  prudent  and 
diligent  care  to  form  their  lives  and  manners  to  re- 
ligion and  virtue. 

Fifthly,  in  giving  them  good  example. 

Sixthly,  in  wife  reftraints  from  that  which  is  evil, 
by  feafonable  reproof  and  correction . 

Seventhly,  in  bringing  them  to  be  publickly  ca- 
techized by  the  minifter  in  order  to  confirmation. 

Eighthly,  in  bringing  them  to  the  bifhop  to  be 
folemnly  confirmed,  by  their  taking  upon  them- 
lelves  the  vow  which  by  their  fureties  they  enter'd 
into  at  their  baptifm. 

I.  In  the  tender  and  careful  nurfing  of  children. 
I  mention  this  firft,  becaufe  it  is  the  firfl  and  mod 
natural  duty  incumbent  upon  parents  towards  their 
children  :  And  this  is  particularly  the  duty  of  mo- 
thers. This  affection  and  tendernefs,  nature,  which 
is  our  fureft  guide  and  director,  hath  implanted  in 
all  living  creatures  towards  their  young  ones:  And 
there  cannot  be  a  greater  reproach  to  creatures  that 
are  endued  with  reafon,  than  to  neglect  a  duty  to 
which  nature  directs  even  the  brute  creatures  by  a 
blind  and  unthinking  inflinct.  So  that  it  is  fuch  a 
duty  as  cannot  be  neglected  without  a  downright 
affront  to  nature,  and  from  which  nothing  can  ex- 
cufe  but  difability,  or  ficknefs,  or  the  evident  dan- 
ger of  the  mother,  or  the  interpofition  of  the  fa- 
ther's authority,  or  fome  very  extraordinary  and 
publick  neceffity. 

This 


Concerning  the  education  of  children.  453 

This  I  forefce  frill  feem  a  very  hard  faying  to  nice  SER  M. 
and  delicate  mothers,  who  prefer  their  own  eafe  and ,_  '  j 
pleafure  to  the  fruit  of  their  own  bodies  :  but  whether 
they  will  hear,  or  whether  they  will  forbear,  I  think 
myfelf  obliged  to  deal  plainly  in  this  matter,  and  to 
be  fo  faithful  as  to  tell  them  that  this  is  a  natural  duty  -, 
and  becaufe  it  is  fo,  of  a  more  neceflary  and  indifpen- 
fible  obligation  than  any  pofitive  precept  of  revealed 
religion  j  and  that  the  general  neglect  of  it  is  one  cc 
the  great  and  crying  fins  of  this  age  and  nation  \  a^d 
which,  as  much  as  any  fin  whatfoever,  is  evidently  a 
punifhment  to  itfelf  in  the  palpable  ill  effects  and  con- 
fequences  of  it :  which  I  fhall,  as  briefly  as  I  can,  en- 
deavour to  reprefent ;  that  if  it  be  pofiible,  we  may 
in  this  firfb  point  of  education,  fo  fundamental  and  ne- 
ceflary to  the  happinefs  both  of  parents  and  children, 
and  confequently  to  the  publick  good  of  humane  fo- 
ciety,  be  brought  to  comply  with  the  unerring  inftincl: 
of  nature,  and  with  the  plain  dictate  of  the  common 
reafon  of  mankind,  and  the  general  practice  of  all 
ages  and  nations. 

Firft ,  the  neglect  of  this  duty  is  a  fort  of  expofing 
of  children ;  efpecially  when  it  is  not  done,  as  very 
often  it  is  not,  with  more  than  ordinary  care  and 
choice.  It  always  expofeth  them  to  manifefl:  incon-  - 
venience,  and  fometimes  to  great  danger  ;  even  to 
that  degree  as  in  the  confequence  of  it  is  but  little  bet- 
ter than  the  laying  a  child  in  the  ftreets,  and  leaving 
it  to  the  care  and  companion  of  a  parifh.  There  are 
two  very  vifible  inconveniencies  which  do  commonly 
attend  it. 

1  ft,  Strange  milk,which  is  very  often  difagreeable  to ' 
the  child,  and  with  which  the  child  to  be  fure  fucks  in 
Vol.  IV,  5  Y  the 


Concerning  the  education  of  children. 

the  natural  infirmities  of  the  nurfe,  together  with  a  great 
deal  of  her  natural  inclinations  and  irregular  pafiions, 
which  many  times  flick  by  the  child  for  a  long  time 
after :  and  which  is  worie  than  all  this,  it  fometimes 
happens  that  fome  fecret  difeafe  of  the  nurfe  is  con- 
veyed to  the  child. 

2dly,  A  fhameful  and  dangerous  neglect  of  the 
child,  efpecially  by  fuch  nurfes  as  make  a  trade  of  it ; 
of  whom  there  are  great  numbers  in  and  about  this 
great  city  :  who,  after  they  have  made  their  firft  and 
main  advantage  of  the  child  by  the  exceflive,  not  to  fay 
extravagant  vails, which  ufually  here  in  England,  above 
all  other  places  in  the  world,  are  given  at  chriftnings: 
and  then  by  the  {Irak  allowances  which  are  commonly 
made  afterwards  for  the  nurfing  and  keeping  of  the 
child,  are  often  tempted,  not  to  fay  worfe,  to  a  great 
neglect  of  the  child  ;  which,  if  it  happen  to  die  for 
want  of  due  care,  fets  the  nurfe  at  liberty  to  make  a 
new  advantage  by  taking  another  child. 

Nor  can  it  well  be  other  wife  expected  than  that  a 
nurfe,  who  by  this  courfe  is  firft.  made  to  be  unnatural 
to  her  own  child,  fhould  have  no  great  care  and  ten- 
dernefs  for  a  child  which  is  not  her  own. 

I  have  heard  a  very  fad  obfervation  made  by  thofe 
who  have  had  the  opportunity  to  know  it,  that  in  fc- 
veral  of  the  towns  and  villages  about  London,  where 
this  trade  of  nurfing  children  is  chiefly  driven,  hardly 
one  in  five  of  thefe  children  Jives  out  the  year  :  and 
this  furely  is  a  danger  which  natural  affection  as  well 
as  duty  does  oblige  parents  to  take  all  poflible  care  to 
prevent. 

Secondly,  this  courfe  doth  moft  certainly  tend  very 
much  to  the  eftrariging  and  weakning  of  natural  af- 
fection 


Concerning  the  education  of  children,  455 

Fec*lion  on  both  fides  -,  I  mean  both  on  the  part  of  S  E  R  M 
the  mother  and  of  the  child.     The  pains  of  nurfing  v-^— 
as  well  as  of  bearing  children  doth   infenfibly   create 
a  ftrange  tenderneis  of  affection  and  care  in  the  mo- 
ther.    "  Can  a  woman,  fays  God,  forget  her  fuck- Ha.  xlix, 
"  ing  child,   that  me  mould  not  have  compaffion  on  l5 
"  the  fon  of  her  womb  ?"  Can  a  woman  ?  that  is,  a 
mother,  not  a  nurfe  ;  for  the   fucking  child  is  laid 
to  be  the  fon  of  her  womb.     God  fpeaks  of  this  as 
a  thing  next  to  impoffible. 

And  this  likewife  is  a  great  endearment  of  the  mo- 
ther to  the  child :  which  endearment,  when  the  child 
is  put  out,  is  transferred  from  the  mother  to  the 
nurfe,  and  many  times  continues  to  be  fo  for  a  great 
many  years  after  ;  yea,  and  often  to  that  degree  as  if 
the  nurfe  were  the  true  mother,  and  the  true  mother 
a  mere  ftranger.  So  that  by  this  means  natural  affec- 
tion mufi  be  extremely  weaken*d  ;  which  is  great  pity, 
becaufe  when  it  is  kept  up  in  its  full  ftrength  it  often 
proves  one  of  the  bed  fecurities  of  the  duty  of  a 
child. 

But  becaufe  this  fevere  doctrine  will  go  down  but 
very  hardly  with  a  great  many,  I  muft  take  the  more 
care  to  guard  it  againfl  the  objections  which  will  be 
made  to  it.  Thofe  from  natural  difability,  or  ficknefs  5 
from  evident  and  apparent  danger  of  the  mother,  or 
from  the  interpofition  of  the  father's  authority,  or 
from  plain  neceiTity ;  or  if  there  be  any  other  that 
have  an  equal  reafon  with  thefe,  I  have  prevented  al- 
ready by  allowing  them  to  be  juft  and  reafonable  ex- 
ceptions from  the  general  rule,  when  they  are  real3 
and  not  made  pretences  to  fhake  off  our  duty. 

p>  Y  2  But 


Concerning  the  education  of  children. 

But  there  are  befides  thefe,  two  Objections  which 
,  indeed  are  real,  but  yet  feem  to  have  too  great  a 
weight  with  thofe  who  would  fain  decline  this  duty, 
and  are  by  no  means  fufficient  to  excufe  mothers,  no 
not  thofe  of  the  higheft  rank  and  quality,  from  the 
natural  obligation  of  it.  And  they  are  thefe  :  the 
manifeft  trouble,  and  the  manifold  reftraints  which 
the  careful  difcharge  of  this  duty  does  unavoidably 
bring  upon  thofe  who  fubmit  themfelves  to  it. 

i ft,  For  the  trouble  of  it,  I  have  only  this  to  fay, 
and  I  think  that  no  more  need  to  be  faid  about  it  -, 
^hat  no  body  is  difcharged  from  any  duty  by  reafon 
of  the  trouble  which  necefiarily  attends  it,  and  is  in- 
separable from  it;  fince  God  who  made  it  a  duty 
forefaw  the  trouble  of  it  when  he  made  it  fo. 

2dly,  As  to  the  manifold  reftraints  which  it  lays 
upon  mothers ;  this  will  beft  be  anfwered  by  confider- 
ing  of  what  nature  thefe  reftraints  are.  And  they 
are  chiefly  in  thefe  and  the  like  inftances.  This  duty 
reftrains  mothers  from  fpending  their  morning  and 
their  money  in  curious  and  coftly  drcffing  -,  from 
mi  fpending  the  reft  of  the  day  in  formal  and  for  the 
molt  part  impertinent  vifits,  and  in  feeing  and  hear- 
ing plays,  many  of  which  are  neither  fit  to  be  ken 
or  heard  by  modeft  perfons  and  thofe  who  pretend  to 
religion  and  virtue  ;  as  I  hope  all  chriftians  do,  efpe- 
ciaiiy  perfons  of  higher  rank  and  quality  :  and  it  re- 
ftrains them  likewife  from  trifling  away  a  great  part  of 
the  night  in  gaming,  and  in  revelling  till  pail  mid- 
night, I  am  loth  to  lay  how  much. 

Thefe  are  thofe  terrible  reftraints  which  this  natural 
duty,  of  mothers  nurfing  their  children,  lays  upon 

them. 


Concerning  the  education  of  children.  457 

them.  Now  I  cannot  but  think  all  thefe  to  be  very  $  E  R  M. 
happy  reftraints  :  happy  furely  for  the  child  •,  and  in 
many  refpecls  happy  for  the  father,  and  for  the  whole 
family,  which  by  this  means  will  be  kept  in  much 
better  order :  but  happiefl  of  all  for  the  mother,  who 
does  herein  not  only  difcharge  a  great  and  neceHary 
duty,  but  is  hereby  alio  hinder'd  from  running  into 
many  great  faults,  which  before  they  will  be  forgiven 
muft  coft  her  a  deep  contrition,  and  a  very  bitter  re- 
pentance. 

Perhaps  I  may  have  gone  further  in  this  unufual 
argument,  than  will  pleafe  the  prefent  age  :  but  I 
hope  poflerity  will  be  fo  wife  as  to  confider  it  and  lay 
it  to  heart.  For  I  am  greatly  afraid  that  the  world 
will  never  be  much  better  till  this  great  fault  be 
mended.  I  proceed  to  the  next  particular  where- 
in the  good  education  of  children  doth  confiit, 
namely, 

II.  In  bringing  them  to  be  baptized  and  admitted 
members  of  Christ's  church,  at  the  times  appoint- 
ed or  accuftomed  in  the  national  church  of  which  the 
parents  are  members.  I  mean,  to  bring  them  to  the 
church  to  be  there  publickly  initiated,  and  folemnly 
admitted  by  baptifm.  And  this  the  rules  of  the 
church  of  England  do  ftrictly  enjoin,  unlefs  the  child 
be  in  danger  of  death ;  and  in  that  cafe  only  it  is  al- 
lowed to  adminifter  baptifm  privately,  and  in  a  fum- 
mary  way  without  performing  the  whole  office  :  but 
then  if  the  child  live,  it  is  ordered  that  it  mall  be 
brought  to  the  church,  where  the  remainder  of  the 
office  is  to  be  folemnly  performed. 

I  know  that  of  late  years,  fince  our  unhappy  con- 
fufions,  this,  facrament  hath  very  frequently  been  ad- 

7  miniflxed 


a co  Concerning  the  education  of  children. 

miniftred  in  private:  and  miniftcrs  have  been  in  a 
manner,  and  to  avoid  the  greater  mifchief  of  repara- 
tion, neceflitated  to  comply  with  the  obftinacy  of  the 
greater  and  more  powerful  of  their  pariffiioncrs  ; 
who  for  their  eafe,  or  humour,  or  for  the  convenience 
of  a  pompous  chriftening,  will  either  have  their  chil- 
dren baptized  at  home  by  their  minifter ;  or  if  he  re- 
fbfe,  will  get  fome  other  minifter  to  do  it  -,  which  is 
very  irregular. 

Now  I  would  intreat  fuch  perfons  calmly  to  confi- 
der  how  contrary  to  reafon,  and  to  the  plain  defign 
of  the  inftitution  of  this  facrament,  this  perverfe  cuf- 
tom,  and  their  obftinate  refolution  in  it,  is.  For  is 
there  any  civil  fociety  or  corporation  into  which  per- 
fons are  admitted  without  fome  kind  of  folemnity  ? 
and  is  the  privilege  of  being  admitted  members  of  the 
chriftian  church,  and  heirs  of  the  great  and  glorious 
promifes  and  bleffings  of  the  new  covenant  of  the 
gofpel  lefs  confiderable,  and  fit  to  be  conferred  with 
lefs  folemnity  ?  I  fpeak  to  chriftians,  and  they  who 
are  fo  in  good  earneft  will,  without  my  ufing  more 
words  about  it,  confider   what  I  fay   in  this  parti- 


cular. 


III.  Another  and  very  necefTary  part  of  the  good 
education  of  children  is,  by  degrees  to  inform  and 
carefully  to  initruct  them  in  the  whole  compafs  of 
their  duty  to  God,  their  neighbour,  and  themfelves : 
that  fo  they  may  be  taught  how  to  behave  themfelves 
in  all  the  Heps  of  their  life,  from  their  firft  capacity  of 
reafon  till  they  arrive  at  the  more  perfect  ufe  and  ex- 
ercife  of  that  faculty  -,  when,  if  at  rirft  they  be  well 
inftructed,  thcjy  will  be  better  able  to  direct  and  go- 
vern themfelves  afterwards. 

This 


Concerning  the  education  of  children.  459 

This  duty  God  does  exprefly  and  very  particularly  S  E  R  M. 
charge  upon  his  own  peculiar  people,  the  people  of  u— y--^ 
Ifrael,  fpeaking  of  the  law  which  he  had  given  them  : 
V  Thou  (halt,  fays  he,  teach  them  diligently  unto  Deut'  V1* 
"  thy  children,  and   fhalt  talk  of  them  when  thou. 
*c  fitted  in  thine  houfe,  and  when  thou  walked  by  the 
"  way  •,  when  thou  lied  down,  and  when  thou  rifeft 
"  up."     And  this  God  long  before  promifed,  that 
Abraham,  the   father  of ' the  faithful,    would  do; 
<c  I  know  Abraham,  fays  he,  that  he  will  command  Gen.xviii. 
*'  his  children  and  his  houfhold  after  him  to  keep  the  I9* 
"  way  of  the  Lord." 

This  work  ought  to  be  begun  very  early,  upon  the 
firft  budding  and  appearance  of  reafon  and  un- 
derstanding in  children.  So  the  prophet  directs  ; 
"  Whom  fhaJI  he  teach  knowledge  ?  whom  fhall  he  Na.xxviiL 
c*  make  to  understand  doctrine  ?  them  that  are9, 
u  weaned  from  the  milk,  and  drawn  from  the 
"  breads :  for  precept  mud  be  upon  precept,  &c. 

To  this  end  we  mud,  by  fuch  degrees  as  they  are 
capable,  bring  them  acquainted  with  God  and  them-  ' 
felves.  And  in  the  fird  place  we  mud  inform  them, 
that  there  is  fuch  a  being  as  God,  whom  we  ought  to 
honour  and  reverence  above  all  things.  And  then% 
that  we  are  all  his  creatures,  and  the  work  of  his  hands, 
"  that  it  is  he  that  hath  made  us,  and  not  we  our- 
"  felves :"  that  he  continually  preferves  us,  and  gives 
us  all  the  good  things  that  we  enjoy :  and  therefore 
we  ought  to  ask  every  thing  of  him  by  prayer,  be- 
caufe  this  is  an  acknowledgment  of  our  dependence 
upon  him  ;  and  to  return  thanks  to  him  for  all  that 
we  have  and  hope  for,  bccaufe  this  is  a  juft  and  eafy 

tribute, 


d.6o  Concerning  the  education  of  children. 

SERM.  tribute,  and   all  that  we  can   render  to  him  for  his 
numberlefs  favours  and  benefits. 

And  after  this,  they  are  to  be  inftructed  more  par- 
ticularly in  their  duty  to  God  and  men,  as  I  fhall 
fhew  more  fully  afterwards.  And  becaufe  fear  and 
hope  are  the  two  pafiions  which  do  chiefly  fway  and 
govern  humane  nature,  and  the  main  iprings  and 
principles  of  action  ;  therefore  children  are  to  be 
carefully  informed  that  there  is  a  life  after  death, 
wherein  men  fhall  receive  from  God  a  mighty  and 
eternal  reward,  or  a  terrible  and  endlefs  punifhment, 
according  as  they  have  done  or  neglected  their  duty  in 
this  life  :  that  God  will  love  and  reward  thofe  who 
do  his  will  and  keep  his  commandments,  but  will 
execute  a  dreadful  punifhment  upon  the  workers  of 
iniquity  and  the  wilful  tranfgrefibrs  of  his  laws. 

And,  according  as  they  are  capable,  they  are  to 
be  made  fenfible  of  the  great  degeneracy  and  corrup- 
tion of  humane  nature,  derived  to  us  from  the  fail 
and  wilful  tranfgreflion  of  our  lirft  parents  ;  and  of 
the  way  of  our  recovery  out  of  this  miferable  eftate 
by  Jesus  Christ  ;  whom  God  hath  fent  in  our  na- 
ture to  purchafe  and  accomplifh  the  Redemption  and 
Salvation  of  mankind,  from  the  captivity  of  fin  and 
fatan,  and  from  the  damnation  of  hell. 

IV.  The  good  education  of  children  confifts  not 
only  in  informing  their  minds  in  the  knowledge  of 
God  and  their  duty,  but  more  efpecially  in  endea- 
vouring with  the  greatefl:  care  and  prudence  to  form 
their  lives  and  manners  to  religion  and  virtue.  And 
this  mud  be  done  by  training  them  up  to  the  exercife 
of  the  following  graces  and  virtues. 

Firft, 


Concerning  the  education  of  children.  461 

Firft,  to  obedience  and    modefty ;    to  diligence  SERM. 
and  fincerity  ;  and  to  tendernefs    and  pity,  as  the 
general  difpofitions  to  religion  and  virtue. 

Secondly,  to  the  good  government  of  their  par- 
dons, and  of  their  tongue  -,  and  particularly  to  fpeak 
truth,  and  to  hate  lying  as  a  bafe  and  vile  quality  ; 
thefe  being  as  it  were  the  foundations  of  religion 
and  virtue. 

Thirdly,  to  piety  and  devotion  towards  God  ;  to 
fobriety  and  chaftity  with  regard  to  themfelves ;  and 
to  juflice  and  charity  towards  all  men ;  as  the 
principal  and  eifential  parts  of  religion  and  virtue. 

Firft,  as  the  general  di/pofitions  to  religion  and 
virtue,  we  muft  train  them  up, 

1  ft,  To  obedience.  Parents  muft  take  great  care 
to  maintain  their  authority  over  their  children ; 
otherwife  they  will  neither  regard  their  commands, 
nor  hearken  to  and  follow  their  inftruclions.  If 
they  once  get  head  and  grow  ftubborn  and  difobe- 
dient,  there  is  very  little  hope  of  doing  any  great 
good  upon  them. 

idly,  To  modefty,  which  is  a  fear  of  fhame  and 
difgrace.  This  difpofition,  which  i9  proper  to  chil- 
dren, is  a  marvellous  advantage  to  all  good  pur- 
pofes.  "  They  are  modeft,  fays  Ariftotle,  who  are 
"  afraid  to  offend,  and  they  are  afraid  to  offend 
"  who  are  moft  apt  to  do  it;"  as  children  are, 
becaufe  they  are  very  much  under  the  power  of  their 
paffions,  without  a  proportionable  ftrcngth  of  rea- 
ibn  to  govern  them  and  keep  them  under. 

Now  modefty  is  not  properly  a  virtue,  but  it  is 
a  very  good  fign  of  a  tradable  and  toward ly  dif- 
pofition, and  a  great  prefervative  and  fecurity  again  it 

Vol.  IV.  5  Z  fin 

1. 


462  Concerning  the  education  of  children. 

8ERM.  fin  and  vice:    and  thofe  children,  who  are  much 
LI 

'  ^  under   the  restraint  of  modeity,   we  look  upon  as 

moil  hopeful  and  likely  to  prove  good  ;  whereas  im- 
modefty  is  a  vicious  temper  broke  loofe  and  got  free 
from  all  reftraint :  fo  that  there  is  nothing  left  to 
keep  an  impudent  perfon  from  fin3when  fear  of  fhame 
is  gone :  for  fin  will  foon  take  poffeMlon  of  that  per- 
ibn  whom  fhame  hath  left.  He  that  is  once  ber 
come  fhamelefs  hath  proftituted  himfelf.  Therefore 
preferve  this  difpofition  in  children  as  much  as  is 
pofiible,  as  one  of  the  befl  means  to  preferve  their 
innocency,  and  to  bring  them  to  goodnefs. 

gdly,  to  diligence,  fine  qtid  vir  magnus  nunquam 
extitit  \  "  without  which,  lays  one,  there  never 
"  was  any  great  and  excellent  perfon."  When  the 
Roman  hiltorians  defcribe  an  extraordinary  man, 
this  always  enters  into  his  character  as  an  efTential 
part  of  it,  that  he  was  incredibili  induftrid^  dillgentid 
fingidari,  "  of  incredible  induflry,  of  fingular  dili- 
"  gence;"  or  fomething  to  that  purpofe.  And 
indeed  a  perfon  can  neither  be  excellently  good, 
nor  extremely  bad,  without  this  quality.  The  de- 
vil himfelf  could  not  be  fo  bad  and  michievous  as 
he  is,  if  he  were  not  fo  fcirring  and  reftlejs  a  fpirit, 
and  did  not  compafs  the  earth,  and  "  go  to  and 
f%  fro  feeking  whom  he  may  devour." 

This  is  part  of  the  character  of  Sylla,  and  Ma- 
rius,  and  Catiline,  thofe  great  diiturbers  of  the  Ro- 
man ftate  -,  as  well  as  of  Cefar  and  Pompey,  who 
were  much  greater  and  better  men,  but  yet  gave 
{rouble  enough  to  their  country,  and  at  laft  difiblv- 
cd  the  Roman  commonwealth  by  their  ambition 
and  contention  for  fuperiority  :  This,  I  fay,  enters 

into 


Concerning  the  education  of  children.  463 

into  all  their  characters,  that  they  were  of  a  vigo- 
rous and  indefatigable  fpirit.  So  that  diligence  in 
it  felf  is  neither  a  virtue  nor  a  vice,  but  may  be 
applied  either  way,  to  good  or  bad  purpofes ;  and 
yet  where  all  other  requifites  do  concur  it  is  a  very 
proper  inftrument  and  difpofition  for  virtue. 

Therefore  train  up  children  to  diligence,  if  ever 
you  defire  they  fhould  excel  in  any  kind.     "  TheProv.  x.  4, 
"  diligent  hand,    faith   Solomon,    maketh  rich  -, " 
rich  in  eftate,  rich  in  knowledge.     "  Seed  thou  aprov.  xxii. 
cc  man  diligent  in  his  bufinefs?  as  the  lame  wife  man29* 
obferves,  he  fhall  ftand  before  princes,  he  fhall  not 
(land  before,  mean  or  obfeure  men."     And  again, 
The  hand  of  the  diligent  fhall  bear  rule,  but  thePrOV-  xii, 
flothful  fhall  be  under  tribute."     Diligence  puts24" 
almofl  every  thing  into  our  power,  and  will  in  time 
make   children   capable    of  the  beft  and    greatefl: 
things. 

Whereas  idlenefs  is  the  bane  and  ruin  of  chil- 
dren ;  it  is  the  unbending  of  their  fpirits,  the  ruft 
of  their  faculties,  and  as  it  were  the  laying  of  their 
minds  fallow,  not  as  husbandmen  do  their  lands 
that  they  may  get  new  heart  and  ftrength,  but  to 
impair  and  lofe  that  which  they  have.  Children 
that  are  bred  up  in  lazinefs  are  almofl  necefTarily 
bad,  becaufe  they  cannot  take  the  pains  to  be  good ; 
and  they  cannot  take  pains,  becaufe  they  have  never 
been  inured  and  accuftomed  to  it ;  which  makes 
their  fpirits  reflive,  and  when  you  have  occaficn  to 
quicken  them  and  fpur  them  up  to  bufinefs,  they 
will  ftand  frock  ftill. 

Therefore  never  let  your  children  be  without  a 
calling,  or  without  fome  uleful,  or  at  leaft  innocent 

5  Z  2  employ* 


464  Concerning  the  education  of  children. 

5  E  rm.  employment  that  will  take  them  up ;  that  they  may 
not  be  put  upon  a  kind  of  necefllty  of  being  vicious 
for  want  of  fomething  better  to  do.  The  devil 
tempts  the  active  and  vigorous  into  his  fervice, 
knowing  what  fit  and  proper  instruments  they  are 
to  do  his  drudgery :  but  the  flothful  and  idle,  no 
body  having  hired  them  and  fet  them  on  work, 
lie  in  his  way,  and  he  Humbles  upon  them  as  he 
goes  about ;  and  they  do  as  it  were  offer  themfelves 
to  his  fervice,  and  having  nothing  to  do  they  even 
tempt  the  devil  himfelf  to  tempt  them,  and  to  take 
them  in  his  way. 

4thly,  To  fincerity ;  which  is  not  fo  properly  a 
fingle  virtue,  as  the  life  and  foul  of  all  other  graces 
and  virtues  5  and  without  which,  what  fhew  of 
goodnefs  foever  a  man  may  make,  he  is  unfound 
and  rotten  at  the  heart.  Cherifh  therefore  this  dif- 
pofition  in  children,  as  that  which  when  they  come 
to  be  men  will  be  the  great  fecurity  and  ornament 
of  their  lives,  and  will  render  them  acceptable  both 
to  God  and  Men. 

5thly,  To  tendernefs  and  pity :  which,  when 
they  come  to  engage  in  bufinefs  and  to  have  deal- 
ings in  the  world,  will  be  a  good  bar  againfl  in- 
juftice  and  opprefllon ;  and  will  be  continually 
prompting  us  to  charity,  and  will  fetch  powerful 
arguments  for  it  from  our  own  bowels. 

To  preferve  this  goodnefs  and  tendernefs  of  na- 
ture, this  fo  very  humane  and  ufeful  affection,  keep 
children,  as  much  as  poflible,  out  of  the  way  of 
bloody  fights  and  fpectacles  of  cruelty,  and  dif. 
countenance  in  them  all  cruel  and  barbarous  ufage 
of  creatures  under  their  power  j  do  not  allow  them 

to 


Concerning  the  education  of  children.  46  r 

to  torture  and  kill  them  for  their  fport  or  pleafure  ;  SeRm. 
becaufe  this  will  infenfibly  and  by  degrees  harden  their  ,    Lr- 
hearts,  and  make    them  lefs   apt    to  companionate 
the  wants  of  the   poor  and   the  fufferings   and  af- 
flictions of  the  miferable. 

Secondly,  as  the  main  foundations  of  Religion 
and  virtue,  children  muft  be  carefully  trained  up 
to  the  government  of  their  paffions,  and  of  their 
tongues ;  and  particularly  to  fpeak  truth,  and  to 
hate  lying  as  a  bafe  and  vile  quality. 

1  ft,  To  the  good  government  of  their  paffions. 
It  is  the  diforder  of  thefe,  more  efpecially  of  defire, 
and  fear,  and  anger,  which  betrays  us  to  many 
evils.  Anger  prompts  men  to  contention  and  mur- 
der :  inordinate  defire,  to  covetoufnefs  and  fraud 
and  oppreffion :  and  fear  many  times  awes  men 
into  fin,  and  deters  them  from  their  duty. 

Now  if  thefe  paffions  be  cherifhed,  or  even  but 
let  alone  in  children,  they  will  in  a  fhort  time  grow 
headftrong  and  unruly,  and  when  they  come  to  be 
men  will  corrupt  the  judgment,  and  turn  good- 
nature into  humour,  and  the  underftanding  into 
prejudice,  and  wilfulneis  :  but  if  they  be  carefully 
obferved  and  prudently  reftrained,  they  may  by  de- 
grees be  managed  and  brought  under  government  - 
and  the  inordinacy  of  them  being  pruned  away, 
they  may  prove  excellent  inftruments  of  virtue. 

Therefore  be  careful  to  difcountenance  in  chil- 
dren any  thing  that  looks  like  rage  and  furious  an- 
ger, and  to  mew  them  the  unreafonablenefs  and 
deformity  of  it.  Check  their  longing  defires  after 
things  pleafant,  and  ufe  them  to  frequent  difappoint- 
ments  in  that  kind  5  that  when  you  think  fit  to 

gratify 


Concerning  the  education  of  children. 

gratify  them  they  may  take  it  for  a  favour,  and 
not  challenge  every  thing  they  have  a  mind  to  as 
their  due ;  and  by  degrees  may  learn  to  fubmit  to 
the  more  prudent  choice  of  their  parents,  as  being 
much  better  able  to  judge  what  is  good  and  fit  for 
them. 

And  when  you  fee  them  at  any  time  apt  out  of 
fear  to  neglect  their  duty,  or  to  fall  into  any  fin,  or 
to  be  tempted  by  telling  a  lye  to  commit  one  fault 
to  hide  and  excufe  another,  which  children  are  very 
apt  to  do ;  the  belt  remedy  of  this  evil  will  be  to  plant 
a  greater  fear  againft  a  lefs,  and  to  tell  them  what 
and  whom  they  mould  chiefly  fear  \  "  not  him  who 
"  can  hurt  and  kill  the  body,  but  him  who  after 
cc  he  hath  killed  can  deftroy  both  body  and  foul 
"  in  hell." 

The  neglect  of  children  in  this  matter,  I  mean 
in  not  teaching  them  to  govern  their  paffions,  is  the 
true  caufe  why  many  that  have  proved  fincere  chrifti- 
ans  when  they  came  to  be  men,  have  yet  been  very 
imperfect  in  their  con  verfation,  and  their  lives  been 
full  of  inequalities  aud  breaches,  which  have  not 
only  been  matter  of  great  trouble  and  difquiet  to 
themfelves,  but  of  great  fcandal  to  religion  \  when 
their  light  which  mould  mine  before  men  is  fo  of- 
ten darkened  and  obfcured  by  thefe  frequent  and  vi- 
fible  infirmities. 

2dly,  To  the  government  of  their  tongues.  To 
this  end  teach  children  filence,  efpecially  in  the  pre- 
fence  of  their  betters.  And  as  loon  as  they  are  ca- 
pable of  fuch  a  lefTon,  let  them  be  taught  not  to 
fpeak  but  upon  confideration,  both  of  what  they  lay, 
and  before  whom.  And  above  all,  inculcate  upon  them 

that 


Concerning  the  education  of  children.  467 

that  mod  necefTary  duty  and  virtue  of  fpcakingSE  R  M. 
truth,  as  one  of  the  beft  and  ftrongeft  bands  of  hu- 
mane fociety  and  commerce  :  and  porTds  them  with 
the  bafenefs  and  vileneis  of  telling  a  lye  ;  for  if  it  be 
fo  great  a  provocation  to  give  a  man  the  lye,  then 
furely  to  be  guilty  of  that  fault  muft  be  a  mighty  re- 
proach. 

They  who  write  of  Japan  tell  us  that  thofe  People, 
though  mere  heathens,  take  fuch  an  effectual  courfe 
in  the  education  of  their  children,  as  to  render  a  lye, 
and  breach  of  faith,  above  all  things  odious  to  them : 
infomuch  that  it  is  a  very  rare  thing  for  any  perfon 
among  them  to  be  taken  in  a  lye,  or  found  guilty  of 
breach  of  faith.  And  cannot  the  rules  of  chriftianity 
be  rendered  as  effectual  to  reftrain  men  from  thefe 
faults  which  are  fcandalous  even  to  nature,  and  much 
more  fo  to  the  chriftian  religion  ? 

To  the  government  of  the  tongue  does  likewifc 
belong  the  retraining  of  children  from  lewd  and  ob- 
fcene  words,  from  vain  and  profane  talk ;  and  efpe- 
daily  from  horrid  oaths  and  imprecations :  from  all 
which  they  are  eafily  kept  at  firft,  but  if  they  are 
once  accuflomed  to  them,  it  will  be  found  no  fuch 
eafy  matter  for  them  to  get  quit  of  thefe  evil  habits. 
It  will  require  great  attention  and  watchfulnefs  over 
themfelves,  to  keep  oaths  out  of  their  common  dif- 
courie  :  but  if  they  be  heated  and  in  paflion,  they 
throw  out  oaths  and  curfes  as  naturally  as  men  that 
are  highly  provoked  fling  (tones,  or  any  thing  that 
comes  next  to  hand  at  one  another  :  fo  dangerous  a 
thing  is  it  to  let  any  thing  that  is  bad  in  children  to 
grow  up  into  a  habit. 

Thirdly, 


468  Concerning  the  education  of  children. 

SERM.      Thirdly,  as  the  principal  and  effential  parts  of  re- 
ligion and  virtue,  let  children  be  carefully  bred  up, 

1  ft,  Tofobriety  and  temperance  in  regard  to  them- 
felves ;  under  which  I  comprehend  likewife  purity  and 
chaftity.     The  government  of  the  fenfual  appetite  as 
to  all  kind  of  bodily  pleafures  is  not  only  a  great  part 
of  religion,  but  an  excellent  inflrument  of  it,  and  a 
neceflary  foundation  of  piety  and  juftice.     For   he 
that  cannot  govern  himfelf  is  not  like  to  difcharge 
his  duty  either  to  God  or  men.     And  therefore  St. 
Paul  puts  fobriety  firft,  as  a  primary  and  principal 
virtue  in  which  men  are  inftrucled  by  the  chriftian 
religion,  and  which  mult  be  laid  as  the  foundation 
both  of  piety  towards  God,  and  of  righteoufnefs  to 
men.     "  The  grace  of  God,  for  fo  he  calls  the  gof- 
pel,  that  brings  falvation  unto  all  men,  hath  ap- 
peared ;  teaching  us,  that  denying  ungodlinefs  and 
worldly  lufts,  we  mould  live  foberly,  and  righte- 
oufly,  and  godly  in  this  prelent  world."     It  firfl 
teacheth  us  to  live  foberly :  and  unlefs  we  train  up 
children  to  this  virtue,  we  mud  never  expect  that  they 
will     live    righteoufiy    or   godly  in    this     prefent 
world. 

Efpecially,  children  mud  be  bred  up  to  great  fo- 
briety and  temperance  in  their  diet,  which  will  re- 
trench the  fuel  of  other  inordinate  appetites.  It  is  a 
good  faying  I  have  met  with  fcmewhere,  Magna  pars 
*virt utis  eft  bene  moratus  venter ',  "  a  well-manner'd  and 
"  well-govern'd  appetite,  in  matter  of  meats  and 
•«  drinks,  is  a  great  part  of  virtue."  I  do  not  mean, 
that  children  fhould  be  brought  up  according  to  the 
rules  of  a  Leftian  diet,  which  fets  an  equal  flint  to  all 

ftomachs, 


46 

u 

<c  - 


Concerning  the  education  of  children.  469 

ftomachs,  and  is  as  fenfelefs  a  thing  as  a  law  would  S  E  R  M. 
be  which  fhould  injoin  that  fhoes  for  all  mankind 
fhould  be  made  upon  one  and  the  fame  lad. 

2dly,  To  a  ferious  and  unaffected  piety  and  devo- 
tion towards  God,  ftill  and  quiet,  real  and  fubftan- 
tial,  without  much  fhew  and  noife  ,  and  as  free,  as 
may  be,  from  all  tricks  of  fuperftition,  or  freaks  ot 
enthufiafm  \  which,  if  parents  and  teachers  be  not 
very  prudent,  will  al mod  unavoidably  infinuate  them- 
felves  into  the  religion  of  children  ;  and  when  they 
are  grown  up  will  make  them  appear,  to  wife  and  fo- 
ber  perfons,  fantaftical  and  conceited ;  and  rendci* 
them  very  apt  to  impofe  their  own  foolifh  fuperfti- 
tions  and  wild  conceits  upon  others,  who  underhand 
religion  much  better  than  themfelves. 

Let  them  be  taught  to  honour  and  love  God  above 
all  things,  to  ferve  him  in  private,  and  to  attend 
conftantly  upon  his  publick  worfhip,  and  to  keep 
their  minds  intent  upon  the  feveral  parts  of  it,  with- 
out wandring  and  diffraction  :  to  pray  to  God  as  the 
fountain  of  all  grace  and  "  the  giver  of  every  good 
■*  and  perfect  gift :"  and  to  acknowledge  him,  and  to 
render  thanks  to  him,  as  our  moft  gracious  and  con- 
front benefactor,  and  the  great  patron  and  preferver 
of  our  lives :  to  be  careful  to  do  what  he  commands, 
arid  to  avoid  what  he  hath  forbidden  :  to  be  always 
under  a  lively  fenfe  and  apprehenfion  of  his  pure  and 
all-feeing  eye,  which  beholds  us  in  fecret :  and  to  do 
every  thing  in  obedience  to  the  authority  of  that 
great  "  lawgiver,  who  is  able  to  fave  and  to  deftroy  *% 
and  with  an  awful  regard  to  the  ftrict  and  impartial 
<c  judgment  of  the  great  day.'* 

Vol.  IV.  6  A  jdly, 

1. 


LI. 


470  Concerning  the  education  of  children.  * 

SERM.  gdly,  To  juflice  and  honefty  :  to  defraud  and  op- 
prefs  no  man  *,  to  be  as  good  as  their  word,  and  to 
perform  all  their  promifes  and  contracts ;  and  endea- 
vour to  imprint  upon  their  minds  the  equity  of  that 
great  rule,  which  is  fo  natural,  and  fo  eafy,  that  even 
children  are  capable  of  it  ;  I  mean  that  rule  which 
our  blefTed  Saviour  tells  us,  "  is  the  law  and  the 
"  prophets,"  namely,  that  we  fhould  do  to  others  as 
we  would  have  others  do  to  us  if  we  were  in  their  cafe 
and  circum (lances,  and  they  in  ours. 

You  that  are  parents  and  have  to  do  in  the  world, 
ought  to  be  jufl  and  equal  in  all  your  dealings.  In  the 
firil  place  for  the  fake  of  your  own  fouls,  and  next 
for  the  fake  of  your  children ;  not  only  that  you  may 
entail  no  curie  upon  the  eflate  you  leave  them,  but 
likewife  that  you  may  teach  them  no  injuflice  by  the 
example  you  fet  before  them ;  which  in  this  particu- 
lar they  will  be  as  apt  to  imitate  as  in  any  one  thing  •, 
becaufe  of  the  prefent  worldly  advantage  which  it 
feems  to  bring,  and  becaufe  juflice  is  in  truth  a  manly 
virtue  and  lead  underflood  by  children  ;  and  there- 
fore injuflice  is  a  vice  which  they  will  foonefl  praclife 
and  with  the  lead  reluclancy,  becaufe  they  have  the 
lead  knowledge  of  it  in  many  particular  cafes :  and 
becaufe  they  have  fo  little  fenfe  of  this  great  virtue, 
they  fhould  not  be  allowed  to  cheat,  no  not  in  play 
and  fport,  even  when  they  play  for  little  or  nothing  : 
for  if  they  praclife  it  in  that  cafe,  and  be  unjufl  in  a 
little,  they  will  be  much  more  tempted  to  be  fo  when 
they  can  gain  a  great  deal  by  it. 

I  remember  that  Xenophon  in  his  inflitution  of 
Cyrus,  which  he  defigned  for  the  idea  of  a  well-edu- 
cated prince,  tells  us  this  little  but  very  inftructive 

flory 


Concerning  the  education  of  children.  4.J1 

dory  concerning  young  Cyrus :  that  his  governor,  the  S  E  R  M- 
better  to  make  him  to  underftand  the  nature  of  judice, 
puts  this  cafe  to  him:' you  fee  there,  fays  he  to  Cy- 
rus, two  boys  playing,  of  different  dature;  the  lefler 
of  them  hath  a  very  long  coat,  and  the  bigger  a  Ve- 
ry fhort  one:   now,  fays  he,  if  you  v/ere  a  judge  how 
would  you  difpofe  of  thefe   two  garments  ?    Cyrus 
immediately,  and  with  very  good  reafon  as  he  thought, 
pafleth  this  fudden  fentence,  that  the  teller  boy  mould 
have  the  longer  garment,  and  he  that  was  of  lower 
dature  the   fhorter,    becaufe   this  certainly    was  fit- 
ted   for    them    both :    upon    which    his    governor 
fharply  rebukes  him  to  this  purpofe  •,  telling  him, 
that  if  he  were  to  make  two  coats  for  them  he  faid 
well  ;  but  he  did  not  put  this  cafe  to  him  as  a  tailor 
but  as  a  judge,  and  as  luch   he   had   given  a  very 
wrong  fentence  :  for  a  judge,  fays  he,  ought  not  to 
confider  what  is  mod  fit,  but  what  is  juft  ;    not  who 
could  make  the  bed  ufe  of  a  thing,  but  who  hath 
the  mod  right  to  it. 

This  I  bring  partly  to  fhew  in  what  familiar  ways 
the  principles  of  virtue  may  be  indilled  into  children  ; 
but  chiefly  to  prove  that  judice  is  a  manly  virtue, 
and  that  there  is  nothing  wherein  children  may  be 
more  eafily  milled,  than  in  matter  of  right  and 
wrong  :  therefore  children  mould  be  taught  the  ge- 
neral principles  and  rules  of  judice  and  righteoufnefs, 
becaufe  if  we  would  teach  them  to  do  judice  we  mud 
teach  them  to  know  what  judice  is.  For  many  are 
unjud  merely  out  of  ignorance  and  for  want  of 
knowing  better,  and  cannot  help  it. 

4thly,  To  charity  ;  I   mean  chiefly   to  the  poor 
and  deditute  ;  becaufe  this,  as  it  is  an  effential  fo  it 

6  A  2  is 


472  Concerning  the  education  of  children. 

SERM  is  a  mod  fubftantial  part  of  religion.  Now  to  en- 
j  courage  this  difpofition  in  children  we  mud  not  on- 
ly give  them  the  example  of  it,  but  muft  frequently 
inculcate  upon  them  fuch  paflages  of  fcripture  as 
thefe,  "  that  pure  religion  and  undefiled  before  God 
"  and  the  Father  is  this,  to  vifit  the  fatherlefs 
"  and  the  widows  in  their  affliction  :■•'  "  that  as  we 
<c  fow  in  this  kind,  fo  we  lhall  reap:"  that  "  he 
"  fha.ll  have  judgment  without  mercy  who  hath 
tC  fhewed  no  mercy  :"  that  at  the  judgment  of  the 
great  day  we  fhall  in  a  very  particular  manner  be 
called  to  an  account  for  the  practice  or  omiffion  of 
this  duty,  and  fhall  then  be  abfolved  or  condemned 
according  as  we  have  exercifed  or  neglected  this  great 
virtue  of  the  chriftian  religion. 


SERMON    LIL 

Of  the  education  of  children. 


P  R  O  V.     xxii.  6. 

Train  up  a  child  in  the  way  he  JJoould  go,  and  when  he 
is  old  he  will  not  depart  from  it. 

V.  r  B  1HE  good  education  of  children  confifls 
in  giving  them  good  example.  This 
courfe  David  took  in  his  family,  as  ap- 
tfal.  ci.  2.  pears  by  that  folemn  refolution  of  his,  "  I  will  be- 

"  have  myfelf  wifely  in  a  perfect  way,  I  will  walk 

u  within  my  houfe  with  a  perfect  heart."     Let  pa- 
rents 


Concerning  the  education  of  children.  473 

rents  and  matters  of  families  give  good  example  to  S  E  R  M. 
their  children  and  fervants,  in  a  conftant  ferving  of, 
God  in  their  families,  which  will  nourifh  religion  in 
thofe  that  are  under  their  care :  and  let  them  alfo  be 
exemplary  in  a  fober   and  holy  converfation  before 
thofe  that  belong  to  them. 

And  let  not  your  children,  as  far  as  is  pofllble, 
have  any  bad  examples  to  converfe  with,  either 
among  your   fervants,  or  their  own   companions  ; 

left  "  by  walking  with  them  they  learn  their  way 
"  and  get  a  blot  to  their  fouls."  There  is  con^ 
tagion  in  example,  and  nothing  doth  more  flily 
infinuate  ix.^  and  gain  upon  us  than  a  living  and 
familiar  pattern  ;  therefore,  as  much  as  in  you  lies, 
let  children  always  have  good  examples  before 
them. 

Efpecially,  let  parents  themfelves  be  exemplary  to 
them  in  the  bed  things,  becaufe  their  example  is  of 
all  other  the  moft  powerful,  and  carries  greateft  au- 
thority with  it.  And  without  this,  inftruction  will 
fignify  very  littky  and  the  great  force  and  efficacy 
of  it  will  be  loft.  We  fhall  find  it  very  hard  to  per- 
fuade  our  children  to  do  that  which  they  fee  we  do 
not  praclife  ourfelves.  For  even  children  have  fo 
much  fenfe  and  fagacity  as  to  underftand  that  a6lions 
are  more  real  than  words,  and  a  more  certain  indi- 
cation of  what  a  man  doth  truly  and  inwardly  be- 
lieve. Example  is  the  moft  lively  way  of  teaching, 
and  becaufe  children  are  much  given  to  imitation,  it 
is  likewife  a  very  delightful  way  of  inftruction,  and 
that  of  which  children  are  moft  capable  ;  both  be- 
caufe it   is  beft  underftood,  and  apt  to  make  the 

deepeft  impreffion  upon  them. 

So 


474  Concerning  the  education  of  children. 

S  E  R  M.  go  th^  brents,  above  all  others,  have  one  aretf. 
ment  to  be  religious  and  good  themfelves,  for  the 
fake  of  their  children.  If  you  defire  to  have  them 
good,  the  bell,  way  to  make '  them  fo  is  to  give 
them  the  example  of  it  in  being  good  yourfelves. 
For  this  reafon  parents  fhould  take  great  care  to  do 
nothing  but  what  is  worthy  of  imitation.  Your 
children  will  follow  you  in  what  you  do,  therefore 
do  not. go  before  them  in  any  thing  that  is  evil. 
The  evil  example  of  parents  is  both  a  temptation 
and  encouragement  to  children  to  fin,  becaufe  it  is 
a  kind  of  authority  for  what  they  do,  and  looks  like 
a  jufbification  of  their  wickednefs. 

With  what  reafon  canil  thou  expect  that  thy  chil- 
dren fhould  follow  thy  good  instructions,  when  thou 
thyfelf  giveft  them  an  ill  example  ?  thou  doft  but  as 
it  were  becken  to  them  with  thy  head,  and  Ihew 
them  the  way  to  heaven  by  thy  good  counfel,  but 
thou  takeft  them  by  the  hand  and  leaded  them  in 
the  way  to  hell  by  thy  contrary  example.  When- 
ever  you  fwear  or  tell  a  lye,  or  are  paffionate  and  fu- 
rious, or  come  drunk  into  your  family,  you  weaken 
the  authority  of  your  commands,  and  lofe  all  reve- 
rence and  obedience  to  them  by  contradicting  your 
own  precepts. 

The  precepts  of  a  good  man  are  apt  to  raife  and 
inflame  others  to  the  imitation  of  them,  but  when 
they  come  from  one  who  is  faulty  and  vicious  in 
that  kind  himfelf,  they  are  languid  and  faint,  and 
give  us  no  heart  and  encouragement  to  the  exercife 
of  thofe  virtues,  which  we  plainly  fee  they  do  not 
practife  themfelves.  It  is  the  apo (tie's  argument* 
"  JThou  therefore  that  ceacheft  another,  teacheft  thou 

"  not 


Concerning  the  education  of  children.  47 £ 

c<  not  thyfelf?"     Thou  that  teacheft  thy  children  to  S  ERM. 

fpeak  truth,  doft  thou   tell  a  lye  ?  Thou  that  fayed .    -  -_j 

they  muft  not  fwear,  doft  thou  profane  the  name  of 

God  by  cuftomary  oaths  and  curfes?  Thou  art  unfit 

to  be  "  a  guide  of  the  blind,  a  light  to  them   that 

"  fit  in  darknefs,  an  inftructor  of  the  foolifli,  and. 

"  a  teacher  of  babes  ;  becaufe  thou  thyfelf  haft  only 

"  a  form   of  knowledge  and  of  truth   in  the  law," 

but  art  deftitute  of  the  life  and  practice  of  it.     In  a 

word,   if  you  be  not  careful  to  give  good  example 

to  your  children,  you  defeat  your  own  counfels  and 

undermine  the  beft  inftructions  you  can  give  them  •> 

and  they  will  all  be  fpilt  like  water  upon  the  barren 

fands,  they  will  have  no  effect,  they  will  bring  forth 

no  fruit. 

VI.  Good  education  confifts  in  wife  and  early  re- 
ftraints  from  that  which  is  evil,  by  feafonable  reproof 
and  correction.      And   this  alfo  is  one  way  of  in- 
ftruction  :    fo    Solomon    tells   us,    "  The  rod   and  Pr°v,xxix> 
c<  reproof  giveth  wifdom:"  And  though  both  thefe  5* 
do  fuppofe  a  fault  that  is  paft,  yet  the  great  end 
of  them  is  to  prevent  the  like  for  the  future,  and  to 
be   an  admonition  to   them  for  the  time  to  come. 
And  therefore  whatever  will   probably  be  effectual 
for  future  caution  and  amendment,  ought  to  be  fuf- 
ficient  in   this  kind,    becaufe  the  end  is   always  to 
give  meafure  to  the  means :  And  where  a  mild  and 
gentle  rebuke  will  do  the  bufinefs,  reproof  may  flop 
there  without  proceeding  farther ;  or  when  that  will 
not  do,  if  a  fharp  word  and  a  fevere    admonition 
will  be  effectual,  the  rod  may  be  fpared. 

Provided  always,  that   your  lenity   give   no  en- 
couragement to  fin,  and  be  fo  managed  that  children 

7  may 


476  Concerning  the  education  of  children. 

SERM.  may  perceive  that  you  are  in   good  earned,  and  re- 
v_  -yA.j  ^>IvpH  that  if  they  will  not  reform  they  fhall   cer- 
tainly be  punifhed.     And    provided  likewife,    that 
your  lenity  bear  a  due  proportion  to  the  nature  and 
quality  of  the  fault.     We  muft  not  ufe  mildnefs   in 
the  cafe  of  a  wilful  and  heinous   fin,  efpecially  if  it 
be  exemplary  and  of  publick  influence.     To  rebuke 
gently  upon  fuch  an  occafion   is  rather  to  counte- 
nance the  fault,   and  feems  to  argue  that  we  are  not 
fenfible  enough  of  the  enormity  of  it,  and  that  we 
have  not  a  due  diflike  and  deteftation  for  it :  fuch 
cold  reproofs  as  thofe  which  old  Eli  gave  his  fons, 
1  Sam.  11   u  Y/hy  do  you  fuch  things  ?  for  I    hear  of  your 
<c  evil  dealings    by    all  this  people,"    that  is,  their 
carriage  was  fuch  as  gave  publick  fcandal :  "  Nay> 
my   Sons ;    for  it  is  not  a  good  report   that   I 
hear,  you  make  the  Lord's  people  to  tranfgrefs." 
Such  a  cold  reproof  as  this,  where  the  crime  was 
fo  great  and   notorious,   was  a  kind  of  allowance 
of  it,  and  a  partaking  with  them  in  their  fin  -,  and 
fo  God  interprets  it,  and  therefore  caMs  it  "  a  kick* 
ap.  u.   4C  .^  ^^  ^-s   facr-Qce^  ancj  a  defpifing  of  his  offer- 

"  ing :"  And  he  threatens  Eli  with  mod  terrible 
judgments  upon  this  very  account,  "  becaufe  his 
"  fons  made  themfelves  vile,  and  he  retrained  them 
"  not." 

So  that  our  Severity  muft  be  proportioned  to  the 
crime.  Where  the  fault  is  great,  there  greater  fe- 
ver ity  muft  be  ufed  ;  fo  much  at  leaft  as  may  be 
an  effectual  reftraint  for  the  future.  Here  was  Eli's 
mifcarriage,  that  in  the  cafe  of  fo  great  a  fault  as 
his  Sons  were  guilty  of,  his  proceeding  was  neither 
proportioned  to  the  crime,  nor  to  the  end  of  re- 
proof 


Concerning  the  education  of  children.  477 

proof  and   correction,  which  is  amendment   for  the  SERIvl. 

future  :  but  he  ufed  fuch  a  mildnefs  in  his  reproof  of, \jt 

them,  as  was  more  apt  to  encourage  than  reftrain 
them  in  their  vile  courfe3 :  for  \o  the  text  fays. 
"  that  his  fons  made  themfelves  vile,  and  he  re- 
"  drained  them  not." 

There  are  indeed  fome  difpofitions  fo  very  tender 
and  tractable,  that   a   gentile   reproof  will    fufRcc. 
But  moil  children  are  of  that  temper  that  correction 
mufl  be  fometimes  ufed,  and  a  fond   indulgence  in 
this  cafe  is  many  times  their  utter  ruin  and  undoing ; 
and  in  truth  not  love  but  hatred.     So  the  wife  man  Prov-  X11*- 
tells,     "  He  that  fpareth  the  rod    hateth    his   ion, 
"  but  he  that  loveth  him  chafteneth  him  betimes. 
"  Chaften   thy  fon  while  there  is  hope,  and  let  not   Jr  X1X* 
cc  thy    foul     fpare    for    his    crying.5*     And   again,  Ch.  xxii. 
"  Foolifhnefs  is  bound  up  in   the  heart  of  a  child, 1 5* 
"  and  the  rod  of  correction  fhall  drive  it  far  from 
cc  him.     Withhold  not  correction   from  the  child,  Ch.  xxiii. 
«c  for  if  thou  beared  him  with  the  rod  he  mall  not13,  Iv* 
"  die :  Thou  fhalt  beat  him  with  the  rod,  and  flialt 
"  deliver  his  foul  from  hell."     Again,  "  The  rodc^-XXiX# 
"  and  reproof  giveth   wifdom,    but  a  child   left  to  D* 
<c  himfelf  bringeth  his  mother  to  fhame :"  He  men- 
tions   the   mother   emphatically,  becaufe  me  many 
times  is    mod  faulty  in  this  fond  indulgence  ;   and 
therefore   the    fhame    and    grief  of   it  doth  juftly 
fall  upon  her. 

So  that  correction  is  of  great  ufe,  and  often  ne- 
ceffary  -9  and  parents  that  forbear  it,  are  not  only 
cruel  to  their  children,  but  to  themfelves  :  for  God 
many  times  punifhes  thole  parents  very  feverely  who 
have  neglected    this    neccflary    piece   of   difcipiine. 

Vol.  IV.  6  B  There 

l 


III. 


478  Concerning  the  education  of  children. 

SERM.  There  is  hardly  to  be  found  in  the  whole  bible  a 
more  terrible  temporal  threatning  than  that  con- 
cerning Eli  and  his  houfe,  for  his  fond  indulgence 
to  his  Ions,  who  when  they  came  to  be  men  proved 
fucli  horrible  fcandals  not  only  to  their  father,  but 
to  the  prieft's  office  j  and  to  that  degree  as  -'  to 
"  make  the  facrifices  of  the  Lord  to  be  abnorred 
44  by  all  the  people. "  I  will  recite  the  threatning 
at  large,  tor  an  admonition  to  parents  that  they 
be  not  guilty  in  this  kind.      "  The  Lord   faid  to 

i&inuiii  „  Samuel,    Behold    I  will  do  a  thing  in    Ifrael  at 

11,12,13,  ° 

14.  cC  which  both   the   ears  of  every  one   that  heareth 

"  it  mall  tingle :  In  that  day  I  will  perform  againft 
Eli  all  things  which  I  have  fpoken  concerning  his 
houfe  ;  when  I  begin  I  will  alfo  make  an  end. 
For  I  have  told  him  that  I  will  judge  his  houfe 
'*  for  ever  for  the  iniquity  which  he  knoweth,  be- 
"  caufe  his  fons  made  themfelves  vile,  and  he  re- 
a  ftrained  them  not:  And  therefore  I  have  fworn 
"  unto  the  houfe  of  Eli,  that  the  iniquity  of  Eli's 
"  houfe  fhall  not  be  purged  with  iacriiice  nor  offer- 
"  ing  for  ever."  I  know  very  well  that  this  enor- 
mous wickednefs  of  Eli's  fons  was  committed  by 
them  after  they  were  grov/n  to  be  men,  but  this  in- 
ftance  is  neverthelefs  to  my  prefent  purpofe,  there 
being  hardly  any  doubt  to  be  made  but  that  it  was 
the  natural  effect  of  a  remifs  and  too  indulgent  an 
education. 

Yea  very  often  God  doth  correct  and  remarkably 
punifh  fond  parents  by  thofe  very  children  who  have 
wanted  due  reproof  and  correction  :  Of  which  the 
fcripture  gives  us  a  remarkable  inftance  in  Adoni- 
jah,  upon   the   mention  of  whole  rebellion   againft 

David 


Concerning  the  education  of  children.  479 

David  his  Either,   the  text  takes  particular  notice  of SERM. 

.  lII. 

his  father's  extreme   fondnefs  of  him,  as  both  the 

procuring  and  meritorious  caufe  of  it  3  "  For  his 
"  father  had  not  difpleafed  him  at  any  time  in  fay- 
"  ing,  why  haft  thou  done  fo  i"  And  on  the  con- 
trary, the  wife  fon  of  Sirach  tells  us,  "  that  he 
**  that  chaftifeth  his  fon  mall  have  joy  of  him." 

VII.  The  next  thing  I  mall  mention  as  a  part  of 
good  education  is,  the  bringing  of  children  to  be 
publickly  catechized  by  the  minifter,  to  prepare  them 
for  folemn  confirmation. 

It  was  with  a  particular  refpecl  to  this  work  of 
publick  catechizing,  and  by  way  of  introduction  to  it, 
that  I  at  firft  propofed  to  treat  thus  largely  of  the  good 
education  of  children,  hoping  it  might  be  of  good 
life  to  handle  this  fubjedl  more  fully  than  it  hath 
ufually  been  done,  at  leaf!  to  my  knowledge,  from 
the  pulpit. 

And  therefore  I  fhall  fay  fomething,  and  that  ve- 
ry briefly,  concerning  the  nature,  and  concerning 
the  neceflity  and  great  ufefulnefs  of  catechizing 
children. 

Firft,  for  the  nature  of  it,  it  is  a  particular  way 
of  teaching  by  queftion  and  anfwer,  accommodated 
and  fitted  for  the  inftruftion  of  children  in  the  prin- 
ciples of  religion.  I  do  not  indeed  find,  that  this 
particular  method  is  any  where  injoined  in  fcrip- 
ture  •,  but  inftruclion  in  general  is :  and  I  doubt 
not  but  that  upon  this  general  warrant  parents  and 
minifters  may  ufe  that  way  of  inftru&ion  of  chil- 
dren which  is  moft  fit  and  proper  to  infhl  into  them 
the  principles  of  religion.  It  is  true  that  the  word 
V<£\fQ(&v7   from   whence   our   word   catechifm  doth 

5  B  2  come, 


480  Concerning  the  education  of  children. 

come,  is  ufed  in  fcripture  to  fignify  teaching  in  ge- 
neral :  bat  it  hath  fince  by  ecclefiaftical  writers  been 
appropriated  to  that  particular  way  of  inftruclrion 
which  hath  been  long  in  ufe  in  the  chriftian  church, 
and  is  commonly  called  catechizing. 

Secondly,  as  to  the  neceflity  and  great  ufefulnefs 
of  it  j  catechizing  hath  a  particular  advantage  as  to 
children  :  becaufe  they  are  fubiect  to  forgetfulnefs  and 
want  of  attention.  Now  catechizing  is  a  good  reme- 
dy againlt  both  thefe;  becaufe  by  queftions  put  to 
them  children  are  forced  to  take  notice  of  what  is 
taught,  and  muft  give  fome  anfwcr  to  the  queftion 
that  is  asked :  and  a  catechifm  being  fhort,  and  con- 
taining in  a  little  compafs  the  moft  necefifary  prin- 
ciples of  religion,  it  is  the  more  eafily  remembred. 

The  great  ufefulnefs  and  indeed  the  neceffity  of  it 
plainly  appears  by  experience.  For  it  very  feldom 
happens,  that  children  which  have  not  been  cate- 
chized have  any  clear  and  competent  knowledge  of 
the  principles  of  religion  ;  and  for  want  of  this  are 
incapable  of  receiving  any  great  benefit  by  fermons, 
which  fuppofe  perfons  to  be  in  fome  meafure  inftruc- 
ted  before-hand  in  the  main  principles  of  religion. 

Befides,  that  if  they  have  no  principles  of  religion 
fixed  in  them,  they  become  an  eafy  prey  to  feducers. 
And  we  have  had  fad  experience  of  this  in  our  age ; 
and  among  many  other  difmal  effects  of  our  late  civil 
confufions  this  is  none  of  the  lead,  that  publick  cate- 
chizing was  almoft  wholly  difufed,and  private  too  in 
moil  families :  for  had  catechizing  of  children  been 
continued,  it  is  very  probable  that  this  age  would  have 
been  infelled  with  fewer  errors  and  with  fewer 
fchifms;  and  that  there  would  not  have  been  fo 

41111  ch 


Concerning  the  education  of  children.  481 

much  apoftafy   from   the  fundamentals  of  religion.  SERM. 
For  it  is,  I  think,  a  true  obiervation,  that  catechiz-  ,_„ 
ing,  and   the  hiflory   of  the  martyrs   have  been  the 
two  great  pillars  of  the  proteftant  religion. 

There  being  then  fo  great  a  neceflity  and  ufefulnefs 
of  this  way  of  inftruclion,  I  would  earneflly  recom- 
mend the  practice  of  it  to  parents  and  mafters  of  fa- 
milies with  refpect  to  their  children  and  fervants.  For 
I  do  not  think  that  this  work  mould  lie  wholly  up- 
on minifters.  You  muft  do  your  part  at  home,  who 
by  your  conftant  refidence  in  your  families  have  bet- 
ter and  more  eafy  opportunities  of  inculcating  the 
principles  of  religion  upon  your  children  and  fer- 
vants. There  you  mufl  prepare  them  for  publick  ca- 
techizing, that  the  work  of  the  minifler  may  not  be 
too  heavy  upon  him. 

As  to  the  part  which  concerns  minifters,  I  intend 
by  God's  affiftance,  fo  loon  as  the  bufinefs  can  be 
put  into  a  good  method,  to  begin  this  exercife.  And 
I  do  earned] y  intreat  ail  that  have  young  children 
and  fervants,  to  bring  fuch  of  them  as  are  fit  to  be 
publickly  catechized  and  intruded  in  the  principles 
of  relig-ion :  and  I  mall  as  often  as  fhall  be  thought 
expedient  fpend  fome  time  in  this  work,  between 
afternoon  prayers  and  fermon. 

The  catechifm  to  be  ufed  fhall  be  that  appointed 
in  our  liturgy,  which  is  fhort,  and  contains  in  it  the 
chief  principles  of  the  chriftian  religion.  And  I  fhall 
make  a  fhort  and  plain  explication  of  the  heads  of 
it  ;  iliitable  to  the  capacity  of  children.  And 
becaufe  this  may  not  probably  be  of  fo  great  ad- 
vantage to  thofe  who  are  of  riper  years  and  under- 
ftandings,  yet  becaufe  children  are  to  be  inftructed  as 

well 


482  Concerning  the  education  of  children. 

SERM.  well  as  men,  I  mud  intreat  thofe  who  are  like  to  car- 
ry away  the  Jeaft  profit,  to  bring  with  them  the 
more  patience  :  efpecially  fince  I  mall  for  their  fakes, 
in  the  conftant  courfe  of  my  afternoon's  fermons, 
more  largely  and  fully  explain  the  chief  principles  of 
the  chriftian  belief  :  a  work  which  you  know  I  have 
fome  time  ago  entred  upon. 

VIII.  The  laft  thing  I  fhall  mention,  and  with 
which  the  ftate  of    childhood   ends,  is   bringing  of 
children  to  the  bimop,  to  be  folemnly  confirmed,  by 
their  taking  upon  themfelves  the  vow  which  by  their 
fureties  they  entred  into  at  their  baptifm. 

This  is  acknowledged  by  almoft  all  feels  and  par- 
ties of  chriflians  to  be  of  primitive  antiquity,  and  of 
very  great  ufe  when  it  is  performed  with  that  due 
preparation  of  perfons  for  it,  by  the  minifters  to 
whole  charge  they  belong,  and  with  that  ferioufnefs 
and  folemnity  which  the  nature  of  the  thing  doth  re- 
quire. 

And  to  that  end  it  were  very  defirable  that  confir- 
mations mould  be  more  frequent,  and  in  fmaller 
numbers  at  a  time;  that  fo  the  bimop  may  apply 
himfelf  more  particularly  to  every  perfon  that  is  to 
be  confirmed,  that  by  this  means  the  thing  may 
make  the  deeper  imprcflion,  and  lay  the  ftronger  ob- 
ligation upon  them. 

One  thing  more  I  could  wifh,  both  to  prevent  con- 
fufion,  and  for  the  cafe  alfo  of  the  bifhop,  that  his 
work  may  not  be  endlefs,  that  minifters  would  take 
care  that  none  may  prefent  themfelves  to  the  bifhop, 
or  be  prefented  by  the  minifters,  to  be  confirmed  a 
fecond  time  :  becaufe  a  great  many  are  wont  to  offer 
themfelves  every  time  there  is  a  confirmation,    which 

is 


Concerning  the  education  of  children.  ±% -? 

is  both  very  diforderly  and  unreafonabk,  there  being  S  E  R  M. 
every  whit  as  little  reafbn  for  a  fecond  confirmation, 
as  there  is  for  a  fecond  baptifm :  and  if  any  perfons 
need  fo  often  to  be  confirmed,  it  is  a  fign  that  confir- 
mation hath  very  little  effect  upon  them. 

II.  I  proceed  to  the  fecond  general  head, which  was 
to  give  fome  more  particular  directions  for  the  ma- 
nagement of  this  work  of  the  good  education  of  chil- 
dren in  fuch  a  way  as  may  be  molt  etieclual  to  its 
end. 

Firft,  endeavour,  as  well  as  you  can,  to  difcover  the 
particular  temper  and  difpofition  of  children,  that 
you  may  fuit  and  apply  yourfelves  to  it,  and  by  link- 
ing in  with  nature  may  fleer  and  govern  them  in  the 
fweeteft  and  eafiefl  way.  This  is  like  knowledge  of 
the  nature  of  the  ground  to  be  planted,  which  huf- 
bandmen  are  wont  very  carefully  to  enquire  into,  that 
they  may  apply  the  feed  to  the  foil,  and  plant  in  it 
that  which  is  mod  proper  for  it : 

Quid  qiueque  ferat  regio,  quid  quceque  recufet. 
Hie  fegetes>  illic  veniunt  felicius  uvce. 

Every  foil  is  not  proper  for  all  forts  of  grain  or  fruit ; 
one  ground  is  fit  for  corn,  another  for  vines.  And 
fo  it  is  in  the  tempers  and  difpofitions  of  children  : 
fome  are  more  capable  of  one  excellency  and  virtue 
than  another,  and  fome  more  ftrongly  inclined  to  one 
vice  than  another  :  which  is  a  great  fecret  of  nature 
and  providence,  and  it  is  very  hard  to  give  ajuftand 
fatisfactory  account  of  it. 

It  is  good  therefore  to  know  the  particular  tempers 
of  children,  that  we  may  accordingly  apply  our  care 
to  them 3  and  manage  them  to   the  Deft  advantage  : 

that 


484  Concerning  the  education  of  children. 

S  R  R  M.  that  where  we  difcern  in  them  any  forward  inclina- 
LII  . 

tions  to  good,  we  may  call  in  fuch  feeds  and  prin- 
ciples, as,  by  their  fuitablenefs  to  their  particular 
tempers,  we  judge  moft  likely  to  take  fooneft  and 
deepeil  root :  and  when  thefe  are  grown  up,  and  have 
taken  pofTeffion  of  the  foil,  they  will  prepare  it  for 
the  feeds  of  other  virtues. 

And  fo  likewife  when  we  difcover  in  their  nature  a 
more  particular  difpofition  and  leaning  towards  any 
thing  which  is  bad,  we  mud  with  great  diligence  and 
care  apply  fuch  inftructions,  and  plant  fuch  principles 
in  them,  as  may  be  mod  effectual  to  alter  this 
evil  difpofition  of  their  minds  \  that  whilft  nature  is 
tender  and  flexible  we  may  gently  bend  it  the  other 
way  :  and  it  is  almofl  incredible  what  flrange  things 
by  prudence  and  patience  may  be  done  towards  the 
rectifying  of  a  very  perverfe  and  crooked  difpofi- 
tion. 

So  that  it  is  of  very  great  ufe  to  obferve  and  dif- 
cover the  particular  tempers  of  children,  that  in 
all  our  inftruclion  and  management  of  them  we 
may  apply  ourfelves  to  their  nature  and  hit  their 
peculiar  difpofition  :  by  this  means  we  may  lead 
and  draw  them  to  their  duty  in  humane  ways,  and 
fuch  as  are  much  more  agreeable  to  their  temper  than 
conftraint  and  neceflity,  which  are  harm  and  churlifh, 
and  againft  the  grain.  Whatever  is  done  with  de- 
light goes  on  cheerfully,  but  when  nature  is  com- 
pelled and  forced,  things  proceed  heavily :  there- 
fore, when  we  are  forming  and  fafhioning  children  to 
religion  and  virtue,  we  fhould  make  all  the  advan- 
tage we  can  of  their  particular  tempers.  This  will 
be  a  good  direction  and  help  to  us  to  conduct  na- 
ture 


Concerning  the  education  of  children,  4S5 

ture  in  the  way  it  will  mod  eafily  go.  Every  temper  s  E  R  \f. 
gives  fome  particular  advantage  and  handle  where- 
by we  may  take  hold  of  them  and  (leer  them  more 
eafily  :  but  if  we  take  a  contrary  courfe  we  mud 
expect  to  meet  with  great  difficulty  and  reluc- 
tancy. 

Such  ways  of  education  as  are  prudently  fitted  to 
the  particular  difpofitions  of  children  are  like  wind 
and  tide  together,  which  will  make  the  work  go  on 
amain  :  but  thofe  ways  and  methods  which  are  ap- 
plied crofs  to  nature  are  like  wind  againd  tide, 
which  make  a  great  fur  and  conflict,  but  a  very  flow 
progrefs.  Not  that  I  do,  or  can  expect  that  all 
parents  fhould  be  philofophers,  but  that  they  fhould 
ufe  the  bed  wifdom  they  have  in  a  matter  of  fo  great 
concernment. 

Secondly,  in  your  indruction  of  children  endea- 
vour to  plant  in  them  thofe  principles  of  religion  and 
virtue  which  are  moil  fubdantial,  and  are  like  to 
have  the  bed  influence  upon  the  future  government 
of  their  lives,  and  to  be  of  continual  and  lading  ufe 
to  them.  Look  to  the  feed  you  fow,  that  it  be  found 
and  good,  and  for  the  benefit  and  ufe  of  mankind  : 
this  is  to  be  regarded,  as  well  as  the  ground  into 
which  the  feed  is  cad. 

Labour  to  beget  in  children  a  right  apprehenfion 
of  thofe  things  which  are  mod  fundamental  and 
neceffary  to  the  knowledge  of  God  and  our  duty  ; 
and  to  make  them  fenfible  of  the  great  evil  and 
danger  of  fin  •,  and  to  work  in  them  a  firm  belief 
of  the  next  life,  and  of  the  eternal  rewards  and  re- 
compences  of  it»  And  if  thefe  principles  once  take 
root  they  will  fpread  far  and  wide,  and  have  a  vad 

Vol.  IV.  6  C  influence 

1. 


Concerning  the  education  of  children. 

influence  upon  all  their  actions  \  and  unlels  fome 
powerful  luft,  or  temptation  to  vice  hurry  them 
away,  they  will  probably  accompany  them  and  ftick 
by  them  as  long  as  they  live. 

Many  parents,  according  to  their  bed  knowledge 
and  apprehenfions  of  religion  in  which  they  them- 
felves  have  been  educated,  and  too  often  according 
to  their  zeal  without  knowledge,  do  take  great  care 
to  plant  little  and  ill-grounded  opinions  in  the  minds 
of  their  children,  and  lb  fafhion  them  to  a  party  by 
infufmg  into  them  the  particular  notions  and  phrafes 
of  a  feci:,  which  when  they  come  to  be  examined 
have  no  fubftance,  nor  perhaps  fenfe  in  them :  And 
by  this  means,  inftead  of  bringing  them  up  in  the 
true  and  folid  principles  of  chriftianity,  they  take 
a  great  deal  of  pains  to  inftruct  them  in  fome  doubt- 
ful doctrines  of  no  great  moment  in  religion,  and 
perhaps  falfe  at  the  bottom  ;  whereby  inftead  of 
teaching  them  to  hate  fin,  they  fix  them  in  fchifm, 
and  teach  them  to  hate  and  damn  all  thofe  who 
differ  from  them  and  are  oppofite  to  them  ;  who 
yet  are  perhaps  much  more  in  the  right,  and  far 
better  chriftians  than  themfelves. 

And  indeed  nothing  is  more  common  and  more 
to  be  pitied,  than  to  fee  with  what  a  confident  con- 
tempt and  fcornful  pity  fome  ill-inftructed  and 
ignorant  people  will  lament  the  blindnefs  and  igno- 
rance of  thofe  who  have  a  thoufand  times  more  true 
knowledge  and  skill  than  themfelves,  not  only  in 
all  other  things,  but  even  in  the  practice  as  well 
as  knowledge  of  the  chriftian  religion  :  believing  thofe 
who  do  not  relifh  their  affected  phrafes  and  uncouth 
forms  of  fpeech  to  be  ignorant  of  the  my  fiery  of 

the 


Concerning  th-e  education  of  children,  487 

the  gofpel,  and  utter  flrangers  to  the  life  and  power  S  E  R  M. 
of  godlinefs. 

But  now  what  is  the  effect  of  this  miftaken  way 
of  education  ?  The  harveft  is  jufl  anfwerable  to  the 
husbandry, 

Infelix  lolium  &  fteriles  dominant ur  avena  *, 

As  they  have  fown,  fo  they  muft  expect  to  reap ; 
and  inftead  of  good  grain  to  have  cockle  and  tares; 
"  They  have  fown  the  wind,  and  they  fhall  reap 
u  the  whirlwind,"  as  the  expreffion  is  in  the  pro- 
phet; inftead  of  true  religion,  and  of  a  fober'and 
peaceable  converlation,  there  will  come  up  new  and 
wild  opinions,  a  factious  and  uncharitable  fpirit,  a 
furious  and  boifterous  zeal,  which  will  neither  fufTer 
themfelves  to  be  quiet,  nor  any  body  that  is  about 
them. 

But  if  you  defire  to  reap  the  effects  of  true  piety 
and  religion,  you  muft  take  care  to  plant  in  chil- 
dren the  main  and  fubftantial  principles  of  chriftia- 
nity,  which  may  give  them  a  general  bias  to  holi- 
nefs  and  goodnels,  and  not  to  little  particular  opi- 
nions, which  being  once  fixed  in  them  by  the  ftrong 
prejudice  of  education  will  hardly  ever  be  rooted 
out. 

Thirdly,  do  all  that  in  you  lies  to  check  and 
difcourage  in  them  the  firft  beginnings  of  fin  and 
vice  :  fo  foon  as  ever  they  appear  pluck  them  up 
by  the  roots.  This  is  like  the  weeding  of  corn, 
which  is  a  necefifary  piece  of  good  husbandry.  Vice3 
like  ill  weeds  grow  apace,  and  if  they  once  take  to 
the  foil  it  will  be  hard  to  extirpate  and  kill  them : 
but  if  we  watch  them  and  cut  them  up  as  foon  as 

6  C  2  they 


4? 8  Concerning  the  education  of  children. 

S  E  R  iVf.  they  appear,  this  will  clifcourage  the  root  and  make 
'  j  it  die. 

Therefore  take  great  heed  that  your  children  be 
not  habituated  and  accuflomed  to  any  evil  courfe. 
A  vice  that  is  of  any  confiderable  growth  and  con- 
tinuance will  foon  grow  obftinate,  and  having  once 
fpread  its  root,  it  will  be  a  very  difficult  matter 
to  clear  the  ground  of  it.  A  child  may  be  fo  long 
neglecled  till  he  be  overgrown  with  vice  to  that  de- 
gree, that  it  may  be  out  of  the  power  of  parents 
ever  to  bring  him  to  good  fruit.  If  it  once  gain 
upon  the  depraved  difpofition  of  children,  it  will 
be  one  of  the  hardeft  things  in  the  world  to  give  a 
flop  to  it.  It  is  the  Apoftle's  caution  "  to  take 
"  heed  of  being  hardened  by  the  deceitfulnefs  of 
<c  fin,"  which  they  who  go  on  in  an  evil  courfe 
will  mod  certainly  be.  We  fhould  obferve  the  firfl 
appearances  of  evil  in  children,  and  kill  thofe  young 
ftrpents  as  foon  as  they  ftir  left  they  bite  them  to 
death. 

Fourthly,  bring  them,  as  foon  as  they  are  capa- 
ble of  it,  to  the  publick  worihip  of  God,  where 
lie  hath  prom i fed  his  more  efpecial  prefence  and 
blefling.  It  is  in  Zion,  the  place  of  God's  publick 
worfhip,  where  "  the  Lord  hath  commanded  the 
"  blefllng,  even  life  for  evermore :  "  There  are  the 
means  which  God  hath  appointed  for  the  begetting 
and  increafing  of  grace  in  us :  This  is  the  pool 
where  the  angel  ufeth  to  come  and  to  move  the  wa- 
ters :  bring  your  children  hither,  where  if  they  dili- 
gently attend  they  may  meet  with  an  opportunity 


of  being  healed. 


And 


Cone er ?2i ng  the  education  of  children.  489 

And  when  they  come  from  the  church,   call  them  SERM. 

t   T  r 

frequently  to  an  account  of  what  they  have  heard 
and  learned  there :  this  will  make  them  both  to 
attend  more  diligently  to  what  they  hear,  and  to 
lay  it  up  in  their  memories  with  greater  care,  and 
will  fix  it  there  fo  as  to  make  a  deeper  and  more 
Jading  impreffion  upon  their  minds. 

Fifthly,  be  careful  more  efpecially  to  put  them 
upon  the  exercife  and  practice  of  religion  and  vir- 
tue, in  fuch  indances  as  their  under  (landing  and  age 
are  capable  of.  Teach  them  fome  fhort  and  proper 
forms  of  prayer  to  God,  to  be  faid  by  them  de- 
voutly upon  their  knees  in  private,  at  lead  every 
morning  and  evening.  A  great  many  children  neg- 
lect this,  not  from  any  ill  difpofition  of  mind,  but 
becaufe  no  body  takes  care  to  teach  them  how  to 
do  it.  And  if  they  were  taught  and  put  upon  do- 
ing it,  the  habit  and  cuftom  of  any  thing  will  after 
a  little  while  make  that  eafy  and  delightful  enough, 
which  they  cannot  afterwards  be  brought  to  without 
great  difficulty  and  reluctancy. 

Knowledge  and  practice  do  mutually  promote  and 
help  forward  one  another.  Knowledge  prepares  and 
difpofeth  for  practice,  and  practice  is  the  bed  way 
to  perfect  knowledge  in  any  kind.  Mere  fpecula- 
tion  is  a  very  raw  and  rude  thing  in  comparifon 
of  that  true  and  didinct  knowledge  which  is  gotten 
by  practice  and  experience.  The  mod  exact  skill 
in  geography  is  nothing  compared  with  the  know- 
ledge of  that  man,  who  befides  the  fpeculative  part 
hath  travelled  over  and  carefully  viewed  the  Coun- 
tries he  hath  read  of.  The  mod  knowing  man  in 
the  art  and  rules  of  navigation  is  no  body  in  com- 
parifon 


49  3  Concerning  the  education  of  children. 

SER M.  parifon  of  an  experienced  pilate  and  feaman.  Becaufe 
J^t  knowledge  perfected  by  practice  is  as  much  different 
from  mere  fpeculation,  as  the  skill  of  doing  a  thing 
is  from   being  told   how  a   thing   is   to    be   done. 
For   men   may   eafily   miftake   rules,   but   frequent 
praclice  and  experience  are  feldom  deceived.     Give 
me  a  man  that  conftantly  does   a  thing  well,  and 
that  fhail  fatisfy  me  that  he  knows  how  to  do  it. 
That  faying  of  our  bleffed  Saviour,  "  If  any  man 
"  will   do  my  will,  he  fhall  know  of  the  doctrine 
tC  whether  it   be  of  God,  or  whether  I  fpeak  of 
<c  my  felf,"  is  a   clear  determination  of  this  mat- 
ter, namely,  that  they  underftand  the  will  of  God 
bed  who  are  moft  careful  to  do  it.     And  fo  like- 
wife   the   beft  way   to  know  what  God    is,    is  to 
tranfcribe  his  perfections  in  our  lives  and  actions ; 
to  be  holy,  and  jufl,    and  good,  and   merciful  as 
he  is. 

Therefore  when  the  minds  of  children  are  once 
throughly  pofTefi:  with  the  true  principles  of  reli- 
gion, we  fhould  bend  all  our  endeavours  to  put 
them  upon  the  practice  of  what  they  know:  let 
them  rather  be  taught  to  do  well  than  to  talk  well  *, 
rather  to  avoid  what  is  evil,  in  all  its  fhapes  and 
appearances,  and  to  practife  their  duty  in  the  feve- 
ral  inftances  of  it,  than  "  to  fpeak  with  the  tongues 

Jobxxviii."  of  men  and  angels  :"  "  Unto  man  he  faid,  be- 
"  hold,  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  that  is  wifdom,  and 

i  Job.  ii.    «  to  depart  from  evil  is  underftanding."    u  Hereby, 

3*  4*  "  faith  St.  John,  we  know  that  we  know  him,  if 
"  we  keep  his  commandments  :  he  that  faith  I 
"  know  him  and  keepeth  not  his  commandments 
fcC  is  a  liar,  and  the  truth  is  not  in  him." 

7  Xenophon 


Concerning  the  education  of  children.  491 

Xenophon  tells  us,  that  the  Perfians  inftead  of  S  E  R  m. 
making  their  children  learned  taught  them  to  be  ^J^L* 
virtuous;  and  inftead  of  filling  their  heads  with  fine 
{peculations,  taught  them  honefty,  and  fincerity, 
and  refolution  -,  and  endeavoured  to  make  them 
wife  and  valiant,  juft  and  temperate.  Lycurgus  alio 
in  the  inftitution  of  the  Lacedemonian  common- 
wealth took  no  care  about  learning,  but  only  about 
the]  lives  and  manners  of  their  children :  though  I 
mould  think  that  the  care  of  both  is  beft,  and  thac 
learning  would  very  much  help  to  form  the  man- 
ners of  children,  and  to  make  them  both  wifer  and 
better  men :  and  therefore  with  the  leave  of  fo 
great  and  wife  a  lawgiver,  I  cannot  but  think  that 
this  was  a  defect  in  his  inftitution  :  becaufe  learn- 
ing, if  it  be  under  the  conduct  of  true  wifdom  and 
goodnefs,  is  not  only  an  ornament  but  a  great  ad- 
vantage to  the  better  government  of  any  kingdom 
or  commonwealth. 

Sixthly,  there  muft  be  great  care  and  diligence 
ufed  in  this  whole  bufinefs  of  education,  and  more 
particularly  in  the  inftruclion  of  children.  There 
muft  be  "  line  upon  line,  and  precept  upon  pre- rfa.  xxviii. 
"  eept,  here  a  little  and  there  a  little,"  as  the  pro- 10» 
phet  expreffeth  it.  The  principles  of  religion  and 
virtue  muft  be  inftilled  and  dropt  into  them  by 
fuch  degrees  and  in  fuch  a  meafure  as  they  are  ca- 
pable of  receiving  them  :  for  children  are  narrow- 
mouth'd  vefTels,  and  a  great  deal  cannot  be  poured 
into  them  at  once. 

And  they  muft  alfo  be  accuftomed  to  the  prac- 
tice and  exercife  of  religion  and  goodnefs  by  de- 
grees, till  holinefs  and  virtue  have  taken  root,  and 

they 


492  Concerning  the  education  of  children. 

SERM.  they  be   well    fettled    and    confirmed   in   a    good 
i_Jl    'j  courfe.     Now  this  requires  conflant  attendance  and 
even  the  patience  of  the  husbandman  to  wait  for  the 
fruit  of  our  labours. 

In  fome  children  the  feeds  that  are  fown  fall 
into  a  greater  depth  of  earth,  and  therefore  ate  of 
a  flow  difclofure,  and  it  may  be  a  confiderable 
time  before  they  appear  above-ground  ;  it  is  long 
before  they  fhoot  and  grow  up  to  any  height,  and 
yet  they  may  afterwards  be  very  confiderable : 
Sir  H.  W. «  which,  as  an  ingenious  author  obfervcs,  mould 
"  excite  the  care  and  prevent  the  defpair  of  pa- 
"  rents :  for  if  their  children  be  not  iuch  fpeedy 
"  fpreaders  and  branchers  as  the  vine,  they  may 
«*  perhaps  prove 

•proles  tarde  crefcentis  oliva" . 

It  is  a  work  of  great  pains  and  difficulty  to  recti- 
fy a  perverfe  diipofition.  It  is  more  eafy  to  palliate 
the  corruption  of  nature,  but  the  cure  of  it  requires 
time  and  careful  looking  to.  An  evil  temper  and 
inclination  may  be  covered  and  concealed,  but  it  is  a 
great  work  to  conquer  and  fubdue  it.  It  mud  firft 
be  check'd  and  flopped  in  its  courfe,  and  then  weak- 
en'd  and  the  force  of  it  be  broken  by  degrees, 
and  at  laft,  if  it  be  poffible,  deflroyed  and  rooted 
out. 

Seventhly  and  laftly,  to  all  thefe  means  we  mud 
add  our  conftant  and  earned  prayers  to  God  for  our 
children,  that  his  grace  may  take  an  early  poflefTion 
of  them  j  that  he  would  give  them  virtuous  incli- 
nations and  towardly  difpofitions  for  goodnefs : 
and  that  he  would  be  pleafed  to  accompany  all  our 

endea- 


Concerning  the  education  of  children.  493 

endeavours   to  that  end  with  his  powerful  afliftance  S  E  R  M. 
and  bl effing  •,  without  which,  all  that  we  can  do  will 
prove  ineffectual.     Parents  may  plant,  and  minifters 
may  water,  but  it  is  God   that   mult   give  the  in- 
creafe. 

Be  often  then  upon  your  knees  for  your  children. 
Do  not  only  teach  them  to  pray  for  themfelves,  but 
do  you  likewife  with  great  fervour  and  earheft- 
nefs  u  commend  them  to  God  and  to  the  power 
"  of  his  grace,"  which  alone  is  able  to  fanctify 
them.  Apply  yourfelvesto  "  the  fattier  of  lights  ; 
•*  from  whom  comes  every  good  and  perfect  gift :" 
beg  his  Holy  Spirit,  anc|  ask  divine  knowledge 
and  wifdom  for  them  of  him,  "  who  giveth  to  all 
"  liberally  and  upbraideth  no  man  :"  befeech  him 
to  feafon  their  tender  years  with  his  fear,  which  is  the 
beginning  of  wifdom :  pray  for  them  as  Abraham 
did  for  lfhmael,  "  O  that  Ifhmael  may  live  in  thy 


"  fight." 


Many  parents,   having  found  all  their  endeavours 
for  a  long  time  together  ineffectual,  have  at  length 
betook  themfelves  to  prayer,  earned  and  importu- 
nate prayer  to  God,  as  their  laft  refuge.     Monica, 
the  mother  of  St.  Auffin,  by  the  conftancy  and  im- 
portunity of  her  prayers  obtained  of  God  the  con- 
verfion  of  her  fon,  who  proved  afterwards  fo  great 
and  glorious  an  inftrument  of  good  to  the  church 
of  God  :  according  to  what  St.  Ambrofc  bifhop  of 
Milan,  to  encourage  her  to  perfevere  in  her  fervent 
prayers  for  her  fon,  had  faid  to  her,  Fieri  non  pot  eft 
utfilius  tot  lachrymarum  pereat :  "  It  cannot  be,  lays 
"  he,  that  a  fon  of  fo  many  prayers  and  tears  mould 
"  mifcarry,"     God's  grace  is  free,  but  it  is  not  un- 
Vol.  IV,  6  D  likely 

1. 


494  Concerning  the  education  of  children. 

likely  but  that  God  will  at  lad  give  in  this  blefling 
to  our  earneft  prayers  and  faithful  endeavours. 

Therefore  pray  for  them  M  without  ceafing,  pray 
"  and  faint  not."  Great  importunity  in  prayer 
feldom  fails  of  a  gracious  anfwer :  our  bleffed 
Saviour  fpake  two  parables  on  purpofe  to  en- 
courage us  herein :  not  becaufe  God  is  moved, 
much  lefs  becaufe  he  is  tired  out  with  our  importu- 
nity -,  but  becaufe  it  is  an  argument  of  our  firm 
belief  and  confidence  in  his  great  goodnefs :  "  and 
"  to  them  that  believe  all  things  are  poflible,  fays 
"  our  bleffed  Lord  :  "     To  whom,  ttV. 


S   E  R  M  O  N     LIII. 

Of  the  education  of  children. 


P  R  O  V.    xxii.  6. 

Train  up  a  child  in  the  way  he  Jhould  go,  and  when  he 
is  old  he  will  not  depart  from  it. 

S  E  R  M.  TT  Proceed  to  the  next  general  head  which  I  pi  o- 
LIII.  ^         pofed,  namely, 

■*■  III.  To  difover  fome  of  the  more  remarkable 
and  common  mifcarriages  in  the  management  of 
this  work.  I  do  not  hereby  mean  grofs  neglects  for 
want  of  care,  but  miftakes  and  mifcarriages  for  want 
of  prudence  and  skill,  even  when  there  is  no  want 
©f  care  and  diligence  in  parents  and  inftructors.  And 

I 


Concerning  the  education  of  children.  495 

Ifhall  for  method's  fake  reduce  the  more  confiderable  S?*M' 
and  common  mifcarriages  to  thefe  three  heads. 

Firft,  in  matter  of  inflruction. 

Secondly,  in  matter  of  example. 

Thirdly,  in  matter  of  reproof  and  correction. 

I.  In  matter  of  inftruction.  Parents  do  very  often 
mainly  mifcarry  in  not  teaching  their  children  the 
true  difference  between  good  and  evil,  and  the  de- 
grees of  them  ;  as  when  we  teach  them  any  thing 
is  a  fin  that  really  is  not,  or  that  any  thing  is  not  a 
fin  which  in  truth  is  fo :  or  when  we  teach  them  to 
lay  more  ftrefs  and  weight  upon  things  than  they 
will  bear  ;  making  that  which  perhaps  is  only  con- 
venient to  be  in  the  highefc  degree  neceiTary,  or 
that  which  it  may  be  is  only  inconvenient,  or  may 
be  an  occafion  of  fcandal  to  fome  weak  chriftians, 
to  be  a  fin  in  its  own  nature  damnable. 

Parents  do  likewife  lay  too  great  a  weight  upon 
things,  when  they  are  as  diligent  to  inftrudt  them 
in  leiTer  things,  and  as  ftrict  in  injoining  them,  and 
as  fevere  in  punifhing  the  commiflion  or  neglect  of 
them,  according  as  they  efteem  them  good  or  evil, 
as  if  they  were  the  weightier  things  of  the  lav/,  and 
matters  of  the  greateft  moment  in  religion. 

Thus  I  have  known  very  careful  and  well-mean- 
ing parents  that  have  with  great  feverity  reftrained 
their  children  in  the  wearing  of  their  hair :  nay  I 
can  remember  fince  the  wearing  of  it  below  their 
ears  was  looked  upon  as  a  fin  of  the  firft  magni- 
tude 5  and  when  minifters  generally,  whatever  their 
text  was,  did  in  every  fermon  either  find  or  make 
an  occafion  with  great  feverity  to  reprove  the  great 
fin  of  long  hair  \  and  if  they  faw  any  one  in  thj 

5  D  2  congrc* 


496  Concerning  the  education  of  children. 

SERM.  congregation  guilty  in  that  kind,  they  would  point 
him  out  particularly,  and  let  fly  at  him  with  great 
zeal. 

I  have  likewife  known  fome  parents  that  have 
ftri&ly  forbidden  their  children  the  ufe  of  fome  forts 
of  recreations  and  games  under  the  notion  of  hein- 
ous fins,  upon  a  miftake,  that  becaufe  there  was  in 
them  a  mixture  of  fortune  and  skill  they  were 
therefore  unlawful  \  a  reafon  which  I  think  hath 
no  weight  and  force  in  it,  though  I  do  not  deny 
but  humane  laws  may  for  very  prudent  reafons  ei- 
ther reftrain  or  forbid  the  ufe  of  thefe  games,  be- 
caufe of  the  boundlefs  expence  both  of  money  and 
time  which  is  many  times  occafioned  by  them. 

I  have  known  others,  nay  perhaps  the  fame  per- 
fons,  that  would  not  only  allow  but  even  encou- 
rage their  children  to  defpife  the  very  fervice  of 
God  under  fome  forms,  which  according  to  their 
feveral  apprehennons  they  efteemed  to  be  iuperftiti- 
ous  or  factious.  Bat  this  I  have  ^  ever  thought  to 
be  a  thing  of  molt  dangerous  confequence,  and 
have  often  obferved  it  to  end  either. in  the  neglect 
or  contempt  of  ah    :-ligion. 

And  how  many  parents  teach  their  children  doubt- 
ful opinions,  and  lay  great  ilrefs  upon  them  as  if 
they  were  faving  or  damning  points  \  and  hereby 
fet  fuch  an  edge  and  keennefs  upon  j:hem  for  or 
againft  fome  indifferent  modes  and  circum fiances  of 
God's  worihip  as  if  the  very  being  of  a  church  and 
the  elfence  of  religion  were  concerned  in  them  P 

Thefe  certainly  are  great  miftakes,  and  many 
times  have  very  pernicious  effects,  thus  to  confound 
things  which  are  of  fo  wide  and  vaft  a  difference 

as 


Concerning  the  education  of  children.  /tCj 

as  good  and  evil,  lawful  and  unlawful,  indifferent  S  %  R  M. 
and  Decenary.  For  when  children  come  to  be  men,  _'jm_J 
and  to  have  a  freer  and  larger  view  of  the  wo 
and  fhall  find  by  the  contrary  practice  of  very  Svife 
and  ferious  perfons  that  they  have  quite  different 
apprehenfions  of  thefe  matters,  and  do  not  think 
that  to  be  a  fin  v/hich  their  parents  have  fo  fir  icily 
forbidden  them  under  that  notion,  and  many  times 
punifhed  them  more  feverely  for  the  doiflg  of  it 
than  if  they  had  told  a  lye.  this  may  make  them  apt 
to  queftion  whether  any  thing  be  a  fin  :  and  the 
violences  which  they  offer  to  their  conferences,  and 
the  drain  that  they  give  them  upon  fuch  an  occafion, 
by  complying  with  the  general  practice  of  ethers 
contrary  to  the  principles  of  their  education,  doth 
many  times  open  a  gap  for  great  and  real    fins. 

Befides,  that  children  which  are  bred  up  in  high 
prejudices  for  or  againft  indifferent  opinions  or 
practices  in  religion,  do  ufually  when  they  are  grown 
up  prove  to  be  men  of  narrow  and  contracted  fpi- 
rits,  peevilh  and  froward  and  uncharitable,  and 
many  times  great  bigots  and  zealots  either  in  the 
ways  of  fuperflition  or  faction,  according  to  the 
principles  which  have  been  inftilled  into  them  to 
bias  them  either  way.  And  very  hardly  do  they 
ever  quit  themfelves  fo  clearly  of  their  prejudices, 
as  to  become  wife  and  peaceable  and-  fubitantial 
Chriftians. ' 

In  fhort,  if  we  carefully  obferve  it,  we  fhall  find 
that  when  children  have  been  thus  indifcreetly  edu- 
cated, their  religion  differs  as  much  from  that  of  fober 
and  judicious  chriftians  as  the  civil  behaviour  and 
converfation  of  thofe  who  have  been  unskilfully  and 

con- 


49^  Concerning  the  education  of  children. 

SET^r¥*  conceitedly  taught  how  to  carry  themfelves,  does 
from  the  behaviour  of  thofe  who  have  had  a  more 
free  and  generous  education. 

II.  In  matter  of  example.  There  are  many  pa- 
rents whofe  lives  are  exemplary  in  the  main,  who 
yec  feem  to  ufe  too  great  a  freedom  before  their 
children.  It  is  an  old  rule,  and  I  think  a  very  good 
one : 

Maxima  debetur  pueris  reverentia. 

"  There  is  a  very  great  reverence  due  to  children." 
There  are  many  things  which  are  not  fins,  and  there- 
fore may  lawfully  be  done,  which  yet  it  may  not 
be  prudent  and  expedient  to  do  before  all  perfons. 
There  are  fome  words  and  actions  fo  trivial  and  light, 
that  they  are  not  fit  to  be  faid  or  done  before  thofe 
for  whom  we  have  a  reverence.  There  is  a  certain 
freedom  of  converfation  which  is  only  proper  among 
equals  in  age  and  quality,  which  if  we  ufe  before 
our  fuperiors  and  betters,  we  feem  to  contemn  them ; 
if  before  our  inferiors,  they  will  go  nigh  to  contemn 
us. 

It  ought  to  be  confidered,  that  children  do  not  un- 
derftandthe  exact  limits  of  good  and  evil,  fo  that  if  in 
our  words  or  actions  we  go  to  the  utmoft  bounds  of 
that  which  is  lawful,  we  fhall  be  in  danger  of  fhewing 
them  the  way  to  that  which  is  unlawful.  Children  are 
not  wont  to  be  careful  of  their  ileps,  and  therefore 
we  will  not  venture  them  to  play  about  a  precipice, 
or  near  a  dangerous  place,  where  yet  men  that  will 
take  care  may  go  fafely  enough.  And  therefore  pa- 
rents mould  be  very  careful  to  keep  their  children 
from  the  confines  of  evil,  and  at  as  great  a  diftance 

from 


Concerning  the  education  of  children.  499 

from  it  as  they  can.  And  to  this  end  their  words  SERM. 
and  actions  fhould  be  ever  tempered  with  gravity  and  c- 
circumfpection,  that  children  may  not  fee  or  hear  any 
thing  which  may  acquaint  them  with  the  approaches 
to  fin,  or  carry  them  to  the  borders  of  vice ;  left 
they  mould  not  flop  jiift  there,  but  take  a  ftcp 
further  than  you  intended  they  fhould  go. 

III.  In  matter  of  reproof  and  correction  :  many 
religious  and  careful  parents  are  guilty  of  two  great 
mifcarriages  in  this  part  of  education. 

Firft,  Of  too  much  rigor  and  feverity  ;  which, 
efpeciaiiy  with  fome  fort  of  tempers,  hath  very  ill 
fuccefs.  The  firft  experiment  that  mould  be  made 
upon  children  fhould  be  to  allure  them  to  their  duty, 
and  by  reafonable  inducements  to  gain  them  to  the 
love  of  goodnefs  -,  by  praife  and  reward,  and  fome- 
times  by  fhame  and  difgrace :  and  if  this  v/ill 
do,  there  will  be  no  occafion  to  proceed  to  feverity; 
efpeciaiiy  not  to  great  feverities,  which  are  very  un- 
fuitable  to  humane  nature.  A  mixture  of  prudent  and 
feafonable  reproof  or  correction  when  there  is  occafion 
for  it,  may  do  very  well ;  but  whips  are  not  the  cords 
of  a  man  :  humane  nature  may  be  driven  by  them, 
but  it  mud  be  led  by  fweeter  and  gentler  ways. 

Speufippus  caufed  the  pictures  of  joy  and  gladnefs 
to  be  kt  round  about  his  fchool,  to  fignify  that 
the  bufinefs  of  education  ought  to  be  rendred  as 
pleafant  as  may  be  :  and  indeed  children  fland  in 
*  need  of  all  the  enticements  and  encouragements  to 
learning  and  goodnefs.  Met  us  hand  diuturni  ma- 
gifter  officii^  fays  Tully;  cc  Fear  alone  will  not  teach 
"  a  man  his  duty  and  hold  him  to  it  for  a  long 
"  time : M  For  when  that  is  removed,  nature  will 

break 


5  co  Concerning  the  education  of  children, 

SF.RM.  break  loofe  and  do  like  it  felf  :  befides,  that  fr e- 
quent  corrections  make  punifhments  to  lofe  their 
awe  and  force,  and  are  apt  to  fpoil  the  difpofnion 
of  children,  and  to  harden  them  againft  fhame  > 
and  after  a  while  they  will  defpife  correction,  when 
they  rind  they  can  endure  it. 

Great  feverities  do  often  work  an  effect  quite  con- 
trary to  that  which  was  intended.  And  many  times 
thoie  who  were  bred  up  in  a  very  fevere  fchool,  hate 
learning  ever  after  for  the  fake  of  the  cruelty  that 
was  ufed  to  force  it  upon  them  :  and  fo  likewife  an 
endeavour  to  bring  children  to  piety  and  goodnefs 
by  unreafonable  ftrictneis  and  rigor  does  often  be- 
get in  them  a  lading  difguft  and  prejudice  againft 
religion,  and  teaches  them,  as  Erafmus  lays,  virtu- 
tern  ftmul  cdijfe  £s?  noffe^  "  to  hate  virtue  at  the 
«*  fame  time  that  they  teach  them  to  know  it:" 
for  by  this  means  virtue  is  reprcfented  to  the  minds 
of  children  under  a  great  difadvantage,  and  good 
and  evil  are  brought  too  near  together:  fo  that 
whenever  they  think  of  religion  and  virtue,  they 
remember  the  feverity  which  was  wont  to  accom- 
pany the  inftructions  about  it ;  and  the  natural  ha- 
tred which  men  have  for  punifhment  is  by  this  means 
derived  upon  religion  it  felf.  And  indeed  how 
can  it  be  expected  that  children  fhould  love  their 
duty,  when  they  never  hear  of  it  but  with  a  hand- 
ful of  rods  fhak'd  over  them  ? 

I  infill  upon  this  the  more,  becaufe  I  do  not  re- 
member to  have  obferved  more  notorious  inftances 
of  great  mifcarriage,  than  in  the  children  of  very 
ftrid  and  fevere  parents;  of  which  I  can  give  no 
other  account  but  this,  that  nature  when  it  is  thus 

over- 


Concerning  the  education  of  children.  501 

ER3 
LIIL 


overcharged  recoils  the    more    terribly  :    it    hath  SE^RM. 


fbmething  in  it  like  the  fpring  of  an  engine,  which 
being  forcibly  prefs'd  does  upon  the  firft  liberty  re- 
turn back  with  fo  much  the  greater  violence.  In 
like  manner  the  vicious  difpefitions  of  children, 
when  restrained  merely  by  the  feverity  of  parents, 
do  break  forth  ftrangely  as  foon  as  ever  they  get 
loofe  and  from  under  their  difcipline. 

Secondly,    another  mifcarriage  in  this  matter  is 
when  reproof  and  correction  are  accompanied  and 
managed  with  pafllon.     This  is  to  betray  one  fault, 
and  perhaps  a  greater  in  the  punifhment  of  another, 
Bcfides,  that  this  makes  reproof  and  correction  to 
look  like  revenge  and    hatred,  which  ufually  does 
not   perfuade  and  reform  but  provoke  and  exafpe- 
rate.     And  this  probably  may  be  one  reafon  of  the 
apoftle's  admonition,    4c  parents  provoke  not  yourHeb.  x, 
"  children  unto  wrath,"  becaufe  that  is  never  likely12, 
to  have  any  good  effect.     Correction  is  a  kind  of 
phyfick,  which   ought    never  to  be  adminiitred  in 
paffion,  but  upon  connfel  and  good  advice. 

And  that  pafllon  is  incident  to  parents  upon  this 
occafion,  the  apoftle  tells  us  when  he  fays,  "  that  Heb.  x,: 
"  the  parents  of  our  flefh  chaflen  us  for  their  plea-12, 
*c  fure,"  that  is,  they  do  it  many  times  to  gratify 
their  paffion ;  but  God  challens  us  for  our  profit, 
not  in  anger  but  with  a  defign  to  do  us  good  ; 
and  can  we  have  a  better  pattern  than  our  heavenly 
Father  to  imitate  ? 

A  father  is  as  it  were  a  prince  and  a  judge  in  his 
family :  there  he  gives  laws,  and  inflicts  cenfures 
and  punifhments  upon  offenders.     But  how  misbe- 

Vol.  IV.  6  E  coming 

2. 


502  Concerning  the  education  of  children. 

SER  M. coming  a  thing  would  it  be  to  fee  a  judge  pafi 

_^^_j  fentence  upon  a  man  in  choler  ?  It  is  the  fame 
thing  to  fee  a  father  in  the  heat  and  fury  of  his 
paffion  correct  his  child.  If  a  father  could  but  fee 
himfelf  in  this  mood,  and  how  ill  his  pafiion  be- 
comes him,  inftcad  of  being  angry  with  his  child 
he  would  be  out  of  patience  with  himfelf.  I  proceed 
to  the  next  thing  I  propofed,  namely, : 

IV.  To  make  out  the  truth  of  of  the  proportion 
contained  in  the  text,  by  fhewing  how  the  good  edu- 
cation of  children  comes  to  be  of  fo  great  advantage, 
and  to  have  fo  good  and  lading  an  influence  upon 
their  whole  lives. 

I  confefs  there  are  fome  wild  and  favage  natures, 
monftrous  and  prodigious  tempers,  hard  as  the  rocks, 
and  barren  as  the  fand  upon  the  fea-fhore;  which  dip- 
cover  ftrong  and  early  propenfions  to  vice,  and  a 
violent  antipathy  to  goodnefs.  Such  tempers  are  next 
to  defperate,  but  yet  they  are  not  utterly  intractable 
to  the  grace  of  God  and  the  religious  care  of  Pa- 
rents. 

I  hope  fuch  tempers  as  thefe  are  very  rare,  though 
God  is  pleafed  they  fhould  ibmetimes  appear  in  the 
world,  as  inftances  of  the  great  corruption  and  de- 
generacy of  humane  nature,  and  of  the  great  need  of 
divine  grace.  But  furely  there  is  no  temper  that  is 
abfolutely  and  irrecoverably  prejudiced  againft  that 
which  is  good.  This  would  be  fo  terrible  an  objec- 
tion againft  the  providence  of  God  as  would  be  very 
hard  to  be  anfwered.  God  be  thanked,  moft  tempers 
are  tradable  to  good  education,  and  there  is  very  great 
probability  of  the  good  fuccefs  of  it,  if  it  be  care- 
fully and  wifely  managed. 

And 


Concerning  the  education  of  children,  503 

And  for  the  confirmation  of  this  truth  I  fhall  in-  S  E  R  M. 
fiance  in  two  very  great  advantages  of  a  religious  and 
virtuous  education  of  children. 

1  ft,  It  gives  religion  and  virtue  the  advantage  of 
the  firft  pofTeifion. 

2dly,  The  advantage  of  habit  and  cuftom. 

Firft,  good  education  gives  religion  and  virtue  the 
advantage  of  the  firft  poficflion.  The  mind  of  man 
is  an  active  principle,  and  will  be  employed  about 
fomething  or  other.  It  cannot  ftand  idle,  and  will 
therefore  take  up  with  that  which  firft  offers  itfelf. 
So  foon  as  reafon  puts  forth  itfelf,  and  the  under- 
ftanding  begins  to  be  exercifed,  the  mind  of  man 
difcovers  a  natural  thirft  after  knowledge,  and  gree- 
dily drinks  in  that  which  comes  firft.  If  it  have  not 
the  waters  of  life  and  the  pure  ftreamsof  goodnefs  to 
allay  that  thirft,  it  will  feek  to  quench  it  in  the  fil- 
thy puddles  and  impure  pleafures  of  this  world. 

Now  fmce  children  will  be  bufying  their  minds 
about  fomething,  it  is  good  that  they  fhould  be  enter- 
tained with  thebeft  things  and  with  thebeft  notions  and 
principles  of  which  their  underftanding  and  age  are  ca- 
pable. It  is  a  happy  thing  to  be  principled,  and,  as  I 
may  fay,  prejudiced  the  better  way,  and  that  religion 
fhould  get  the  firft  poffeffion  of  their  hearts.  For  it  is 
certainly  a  great  advantage  to  religion  to  be  planted  in 
a  tender  and  frefh  foil.  And  if  parents  be  carelefs, 
and  neglect  this  advantage,  the  enemy  will  be  fure 
to  fow  his  tares  while  the  husbandman  is  afleep. 

Therefore  we  mould  prevent  the  devil  by  giving 
God  and  goodnefs  an  early  poffeflion  of  our  chil- 
dren, and  by  letting  him  into  their  hearts  betimes. 
Pofifefiion  is  a  great  point,  and  it  is  of  mighty  con- 

6  E  2  fequence 


£04  Concerning  the  education  of  children. 

S  E  R  M.  fequence  to  have  nature  planted  with  good  feeds  be- 
fore vicious  inclinations  fpring  up  and  grow  into 
ftrength  and  habit. 

I  know  that  there  is  a  fpiteful  proverb  current  in 
the  world,  and  the  devil  hath  taken  care  to  fpread  it 
to  the  difcouragement  of  an  early  piety,  "  A  young 
int  and  an  old  devil  ;"  but  notwithstanding  this, 
a  young  faint  is  mod  likely  to  prove  an  old  one. 
Solomon  to  be  fure  was  of  this  mind,  and  I 
make  no  doubt  but  he  made  as  wife  and  true  pro- 
verbs as'  any  body  hath  done  fince :  him  only 
excepted  who  was  a  much  greater  and  wifer  man  than 
Solomon. 

Secondly,  good  education  gives  likewife  the  ad- 
vantage of  habit  and  cudom  ;  and  cudom  is  of 
mighty  force.  It  is,  as  Pliny  in  one  of  his  Epidles 
fays  of  it,  efficacijfimus  omnium  rerum  magifter^  ct  the 
cc  mod  powerful  and  effectual  mailer  in  every  kind.5* 
It  is  an  acquired  and  a  fort  of  fecond  nature,  and 
next  to  nature  itfelf  a  principle  of  greated  power. 
Cuftom  bears  a  huge  fway  in  all  humane  actions. 
Men  love  thofe  things  and  do  them  with  eafe  to 
winch  they  have  been  long  inured  and  accu domed. 
And  on  the  contrary  men  go  againd  cudom  with 
great  regret  and  uneafinefs. 

And  among  all  others,  that  cudom  is  mod  drong 
which  is  begun  in  childhood  :  and  we  fee  in  experi- 
ence the  flrange  power  of  education  in  forming  per- 
fons  to  religion  and  virtue.  Now  education  is  no- 
thing but  certain  cudoms  planted  in  childhood,  and 
which  have  taken  deep  root  whild  nature  was 
sender. 

We 


Concerning  the  education  of  children.  goc 

We  fee  likewife  in  common  experience  how  dan-  S  E  R  M. 
geroas  an  evil  habit  and  cuftom  is,  and  how  hard 
to  bealter'd.  Therefore  the  Cretians,  when  they  v.  ould 
curfe  a  man  to  purpofe,  wifhed  that  the  gods  would 
engagehimin  fome  bad  cuftom,  looking  upon  a  man 
after  that  to  be  irrecoverably  loft.  So  o  j  the  other 
fide,  to  be  engaged  in  a  good  cuftom  is  an  unlpea  - 
able  advantage  ;  efpecially  for  children  to  be  habit  i- 
ated  to  a  holy  and  virtuous  courfe,  before  the  habits 
of  fin  and  vice  have  taken  root  and  are  confirmed  in 
them. 

We  are  too  naturally  inclined  to  that  which  is 
evil :  but  yet  this  ought  not  to  difcourage  us,  be- 
caufe  it  is  certain  in  experience  that  a  contrary  cus- 
tom hath  done  much  in  many  cales,  even  where  na- 
ture hath  been  ftrongiy  inclined  the  other  way.  De- 
mofchenes  did  by  great  refoltftiqn  and  aJmoft  infiT 
nite  pains,  and  after  a  long  habit,  alter  the  natural 
imperfection  of  his  fpeech,  and  even  in  dtipkc  of 
nature  became  the  mod  eloquent  man  perhaps  that 
ever  lived.  And  this  amounts  even  to  a  demonftra- 
tion,  for  what  haih  been  done  may  be  done. 

So  that  it  is  not  univerfally  true  which  Ariftotle 
fays,  "  that  nature  cannot  be  altered."  It  is  true 
indeed  in  the  inftance  which  he  gives  of  throwing  a 
ftone  upward  ;  you  cannot,  fays  he,  by  any  cuftom, 
nay  though  you  fling  it  up  never  fo  often,  teach  a 
flone  to  afcend  of  itfelf :  and  fo  it  is  in  many  other 
inftances  in  which  nature  is  peremptory  :  but  nature 
is  not  always  fo  ;  but  fometimes  hath  a  great  latitude: 
as  we  fee  in  young  trees,  which  though  they  natu- 
rally grow  ftraight  up,  yet  being  gently  bent  may 
be  made  to  grow  any  way.  But  above  all,  moral  in- 
clinations 


£o6  Concerning  the  education  of  children. 

SERM.  clinations  and  habits  do  admit  of  great  alteration,  and 
t  it r  /» 

are  fubject  to  the  power  of  a  contrary  cuftom. 

Indeed  children  when  they  come  to  be  men,  mould 
take  great  care,  that  they  do  not  owe  their  religion 
only  to  cuftom ;  but  they  mould  upon  confideration 
and  due  examination  of  the  grounds  of  it,  fo  far  as 
they  are  capable  of  doing  it,  make  it  their  choice. 
And  yet  for  all  that  we  muft  not  deny  the  beft  reli- 
gion in  the  world  this  greateft  advantage  of  all  other. 
It  is  certainly  a  great  happinefs  for  children  to  be 
inclined  to  that  which  when  they  come  to  under- 
ftand  themfelvcs  they  would  make  their  choice,  if 
they  wrere  indifferent:  but  an  indifferency  cannot  be 
preferved  in  children  :  and  therefore,  fince  they  will 
certainly  be  biafled  one  way  or  other,  there  is  all 
the  reafon  in  the  world  why  we  mould  endeavour 
to  bias  them  the  better  way.  Parents  may  often 
miftake  about  what  is  bed,  but  if  they  love  their 
children  they  cannot  but  wifh  and  endeavour  that 
they  may  be  good  and  do  what  is  beft. 

I  come  now  to  the  laft  head  I  propofed,  which 
was, 

V.  To  endeavour  by  the  mod  powerful  argu- 
ments I  can  offer,  to  ftir  up  and  perfuade  thofe 
whofe  duty  this  is,  to  difcharge  it  with  great  care 
and  confcience. 

If  the  foregoing  difcourfe  be  true,  what  can  be 
faid  to  thofe  who  are  guilty  in  the  higheft  degree 
of  the  grofs  neglect  of  this  great  duty  ?  who  nei- 
ther by  inftruclion,  nor  example,  nor  reftraint  from 
evil,  do  endeavour  to  make  their  children  good. 
Some  parents  are  fuch  monfters,  I  had  almoft  faid 
devils,  as  not  to  know  how  "  to  give  good  things 

"  to 


Concerning  the  education  of  children.  r0y 

"  to  their  children-,"    but  inftead    of  bread   give  SERA*, 
them  a  ftone,  inftead  of  a  fifh  give  them  a  ferpent,     LIlL 
inftead  of  an  egg  give  them  a  fcorpion,  as  our  Sa- 
viour exprefieth  it. 

Thefe  are  evil  indeed,  who  train  up  their  chil- 
dren for  ruin  and  deftruction  j  in  the  iervice  of  the 
devil,  and  in  the  trade  and  myftery  of  iniquity : 
who,  inftead  of  teaching  them  the  fear  of  the  Lord, 
infufe  into  them  the  principles  of  atheifm,  and  irre- 
ligion,  and  profaneneis :  inftead  of  teaching  them 
to  love  and  reverence  religion,  they  teach  them  to 
hate  and  defpife  it,  and  to  make  a  mock  both  of 
fin  and  holinefs:  inftead  of  training  them  up  in  the 
knowledge  of  "  the  holy  fcriptures  which  are  able 
*«  to  make  men  wife  unto  falvation,"  they  do  adifi- 
care  ad  gehennarn,  "  they  edify. them  for  hell,"  by 
teaching  them  to  profane  that  holy  book,  and  to 
abufe  the  word  of  God  which  they  ought  to  trem- 
ble at,  by  turning  it  into  jeft  and  rallery  :  inftead  of 
teaching  them  to  pray  and  to  blefs  the  name  of 
God,  they  teach  them  to  blafpheme  that  great  and 
terrible  name,  and  to  profane  it  by  their  continual 
oaths  and  imprecations :  and  inftead  of  bringing 
them  to  God's  church,  they  carry  them  to  the  de- 
vil's chapels,  to  playhoufes  and  places  of  debauchery, 
thofe  fchools  and  nurferies  of  lewdnefs  and  vice. 

Thus  they,  who  ought  to  be  the  great  teachers 
and  examples  of  holinefs  and  virtue,  are  the  chief 
encouragers  and  patterns  of  vice  and  wickednefs  in 
their  children  ;  and  inftead  of  reftraining  them  from 
evil,  they  countenance  them  in  it,  and  check  all 
forward  inclinations  to  goodnefs ;  till  at  laft  they  make 
them  ten  times  more  the  children  of  wrath,  than 

they 


508  Concerning  the  education  of  children. 

S  E  R  M.  they  were  by  that  corrupt  nature  which  they  derived 
from  them  ;  and  hereby  treafure  up,  both  for  their 
children  and  themfelves,  cc  wrath  againft  the  day 
"  of  wrath  and  the  revelation  of  the  righteous 
"  judgment  of  God." 

But  I  hope  there  are  few  or  none  fuch  here. 
They  do  not  ufe  to  frequent  God's  houfe  and 
worfhip.  And  therefore  I  fhall  apply  my  felf  to 
thole  who  are  not  fo  notorioufly  guilty  in  this  kind, 
though  they  are  greatly  faulty  in  neglecting  the  good 
education  of  their  children.  And  for  the  greater 
conviction  of  fuch  parents,  I  fhall  offer  to  them  the 
following  confiderations. 

Firft,  confider  what  a  fad  inheritance  you  have 
conveyed  to  your  children.  You  have  tranfmitted 
to  them  corrupt  and  depraved  natures,  evil  and  vi- 
cious inclinations :  ycu  have  begotten  them  in  your 
own  image  and  likenefs,  fo  that  by  nature  they 
are  children  of  wrath.  Now  methinks  parents  that 
have  a  due  fenfe  of  this  mould  be  very  folicitcus, 
by  the  befl  means  they  can  ufe,  to  free  them  from 
that  curfe  -,  by  endeavouring  to  correct  thofe  per- 
verfe  difpofitions  and  curfed  inclinations  which  they 
have  tranfmitted  to  them.  Surely  you  ought  to  do 
all  you  can  to  repair  that  broken  eftate  which  from 
you  is  defcended  upon  them. 

When  a  man  hath  by  treafon  tainted  his  blood 
and  forfeited  his  eftate,  with  what  grief  and  regret 
doth  he  look  upon  his  children,  and  think  of  the 
injury  he  hath  done  to  them  by  his  fault?  and 
how  folicitous  is  he,  before  he  die,  to  petition 
the  king  for  favour  to  his  children  ?  how  earneftly 
doth  he  charge   his  friends  to  be  careful  of  them 

and 


Concerning  the  education  of  children.  509 

and  kind  to   them  ?  that  by  thefe  means  he  may  S  E  RM-' 

1  iff 
make    the  beft  reparation  he  can  of  their  fortune  ,       ^j 

which  hath  been  ruin'd  by  his  fault. 

And  have  parents  fuch  a  tendernefs  for  their 
children,  in  reference  to  their  eftate  and  condition  in 
this  world  ;  and  have  they  none  for  the  good  eftate- 
of  their  fouls  and  their  eternal  condition  in  another 
world  ?  if  you  are  fenfible  that  their  blood  is  taint- 
ed, and  that  their  beft  fortunes  are  ruin'd  by  your 
fad  misfortunes  \  why  do  you  not  beftir  your  Cdves 
for  the  repairing  of  God's  image  in  them  ?  Why  do 
you  not  "  travel  in  birth  till  Christ  be  formed  in 
<c  them  ?  "  Why  do  you  not  pray  earneftly  to  God 
and  give  him  no  reft,  who  hath  reprieved,  and  it 
may  be  pardoned  you,  that  he  would  extend  hi3 
grace  to  them  alio,  and  grant  them  the  bleffings 
of  his  new  covenant  ? 

All  your  children  are  begotten  of  the  bond- wo- 
man •,  therefore  we  mould  pray  as  Abraham  did, 
u  O  that  Ilhmael  may  live  in  thy  fight : "  O  that 
thefe  fons  of  Hagar  may  be  heirs  of  a  bleffing. 

Secondly,  confider  in  the  next  place,  that  good 
education  is  the  very  beft  inheritance  that  you  can 
leave  to  your  children.  It  is  a  wife  faying  of  Solo-  Eccl.  viw 
mon,  "  that  wifdom  is  good  with  an  inheritance ;  "  7- 
but  furely  an  inheritance,  without  wifdom  and  vir- 
tue to  manage  it,  is  a  very  pernicious  thing.  And 
yet  how  many  parents  are  there  who  omit  no  care 
and  induftry  to  get  an  eftate  that  they  may  leave  it 
to  their  children,  but  ufe  no  means  to  form  their 
minds  and  manners  for  the  right  ufe  and  enjoy- 
ment of  it ;  without  which  it  had  been  much  hap- 

Vo  l.   IV.  6  F  pier 

2. 


510  Concerning  the  education  of  children. 

S  ER  M.  pier  for  them  to  have  been  kh  in  great  poverty  and 
LIIL     itraits? 

Doll  thou  Jove  thy  child  ?  this  is  true  love  to 
any  one,  to  do  the  bed  for  him  we  can.  Of  all 
your  toil  and  labour  for  your  children,  this  may  be 
all  the  fruit  they  may  reap,  and  all  that  they  may 
live  to  enjoy,  the  advantage  of  a  good  education. 
All  other  things  are  uncertain.  You  may  raife  your 
children  to  honour,  and  fettle  a  noble  eftate  upon 
them  to  fupport  it.  You  may  leave  them,  as  you 
think,  to  faithful  guardians,  and  by  kindnefs  and 
obligation  procure  them  many  friends :  and  when 
you  have  done  all  this,  their  guardians  may  prove 
unfaithful  and  treacherous,  and  in  the  changes  and 
revolutions  of  the  world  their  honours  may  flip  from 
under  them,  and  their  "  riches  may  take  to  them- 
"  felves  wings  and  fly  away:5'  And  when  thefe  arc 
gone,  and  they  come  to  be  nipp'd  with  the  frofts 
of  adverlity,  their  friends  will  fall  off  like  leaves  in 
autumn.  "  This  is  a  fore  evil,  which  yet  I  have 
**  feen  under  the  fun.3' 

But  if  the  good  education  of  your  children  hath 
made  them  wile  and  virtuous,  you  have  provided  an 
inheritance  for  them  which  is  out  of  the  reach  of 
fortune,  and  cannot  be  taken  from  them.  Crates 
the  philofopher  ufed  to  Hand  in  the  higheft  places 
of  the  city,  and  cry  out  to  the  inhabitants,  "  O  yc 
u  people !  why  do  you  toil  to  get  eftates  for  your 
"  children,  when  you  take  no  care  for  their  edu- 
"  cation  ? "  This  is,  as  Diogenes  faid,  to  take  care 
of  the  fhoe,  but  none  of  the  foot  that  is  to  wear 
it  ^  to  take  great  pains  for  an  eftate  for  your  chil- 
dren. 


Concerning  the  education  of  children.  5 1 1 

dren,  but  none  at  all  to  teach  them  how  to  ufe  it ;  SERM. 
that  is,  to  take  great  care  to  undo  them,  but  none  K_x~  —  j 
to  make  them  happy. 

Thirdly,  conhder  that  by  a  careful  and  religious 
education  of  your  children  you  provide  for  your 
own  comfort  and  happinefs.  However  they  happen 
to  prove,  you  will  have  the  comfort  of  a  good  con- 
fcience  and  of  having  done  your  duty.  If  they  be 
good,  they  are  matter  of  great  comfort  and  joy  to 
their  parents.  "  A  wife  ion,  fakh  Solomon,  mak- 
"  eth  a  glad  father."  It  is  a  great  fatisfaction  to 
fee  that  which  we  have  planted  to  thrive  and  grow 
up  \  to  find  the  good  effect  of  our  care  and  in- 
duftry,  and  that  the  work  of  our  hands  doth  pros- 
per. The  fon  of  Sirach,  among  feveral  things  for 
which  he  reckons  a  man  happy,  mentions  this  in 
the  firft  place,  "  He  that  hath  joy  of  his  chil-E,:cJui. 
"  dren."  xxv,  >.' 

On  the  contrary,  in  wicked  children  the  honour 
of  a  family  fails,  our  name  withers,  and  in  the 
next  generation  will  be  quite  blotted  out:  whereas 
a  hopeful  poflerity  is  a  profpect  of  a  kind  of  eter- 
nity. We  cannot  leave  a  better  and  more  lading 
monument  of  our  felves,  than  in  wife  and  virtuous 
children.  Buildings  and  books  are  but  dead  things 
in  comparifon  of  thefe  living  memorials  of  our 
felves. 

By  the  good  education  of  your  children  you 'pro- 
vide for  your  felves  fome  of  the  beft  comforts  both 
for  this  world  and  the  other.  For  this  world  ;  and 
that  at  fuch  a  time  when  you  mod  fland  in  need 
of  comfort,  I  mean  the  time  of  ficknefs  and  old 
age.     Wife   men  have  been  wont  to  lay  up  fome 

6  F  2  prjfidit 


5 1 2  Concerning  the  education  of  children. 

S  WT  Pr</ttiafenetttttis,  fomething  to  fupport  them  in  that 
v^-v-w  gloomy  and  melancholy  time,  as  books,  and  friends, 
or  the  like.  Bat  there  is  no  fuch  external  com- 
fort at  fuch  a  time  as  good  and  dutiful  children. 
They  will  then  be  the  light  of  our  eyes,  and  the 
cordial  of  our  fainting  fpirits ;  and  will  recompenfe 
all  our  former  care  of  them  by  their  prefent  care 
of  us:  and  when  we  are  decaying  and  withering 
away,  we  fhall  have  the  pleafure  to  fee  our  youth 
as  it  were  renewed,  and  our  felves  flourifhing  'again 
in  our  children.  The  fon  of  Sirach  fpeaking  of  the 
comfort  which  a  good  father  hath  in  a  well  edu- 
Ecclus.  catecj  forij  "  Though  he  die,  fays  he,  yet  he  is  as 
"4'5'  "  if  he  were  not  dead,  for  he  hath  left  one  be- 
w  hind  him  that  is  like  himfelf.  While  he  Jived 
<c  he  law  and  rejoiced  in  him,  and  when  he  died 
"  he  was  not  forrowful." 

Whereas  on  the  contrary,  "  a  foolifh  fon  is,  as 
"  Solomon  tells  us,  a  heavinefs  to  his  mother," 
the  mifcarriage  of  a  child  being  apt  moll  tenderly 
to  affect  the  mother.  Such  parents  as  neglect  their 
children,  do  as  it  were  provide  fo  many  pains  and 
aches  for  themfelves  againft  they  come  to  be  old. 
And  rebellious  children  are  to  their  infirm  and  a°;ed 
parents  fo  many  aggravations  of  an  evil  day,  fo 
many  burdens  of  their  age  :  they  help  to  bow  them 
down  and  "  to  bring  their  gray  hairs  fo  much  the 
<c  fooner  with  forrow  to  the  grave."  They  do  ufually 
repay  their  parents  all  the  neglect  of  their  educati- 
on by  their  undutifui  carriage  towards  them. 

And  good  children  will  likewife  be  an  unfpeak- 
able  comfort  to  us  in  the  other  world.     When  we 
come  to  appear  before  God    at  the  day  of  judg- 
ment* 


Concerning  the  education  of  children.  £  13 

ment,  to  be  able  to  fay  to  him,  "  Lo  !  here  am  I  3  ^  ^  ^r- 
**  and  the  children  which  thou  haft  given  me :  "  how 
will   this  comfort  our  hearts,  and  make   us  lift  up 
our  heads  with  joy  in  that  day  ? 

Fourthly,  confider  that  the  lured  foundation  of 
the  publick  welfare  and  happinefs  is  laid  in  the 
good  education  of  children :  families  are  increafed 
by  children,  and  cities  and  nations  are  made  up  of 
families.  And  this  is  a  matter  of  fo  great  concern- 
ment both  to  religion  and  the  civil  happinefs  of  a 
nation,  that  anciently  the  bed  conflituted  common- 
wealths did  commit  this  care  to  the  magiflrate  more 
than  to  parents. 

When  Antipater  demanded  of  the  Spartans  fifty 
of  their  children  for  hoftages,  they  ofrer'd  rather 
to  deliver  to  him  twice  as  many  men  •,  fo  much 
did  they  value  the  lofs  of  their  country's  education. 
Bat  now  amongft  us  this  work  lies  chiefly  upon 
parents.  There  are  feveral  ways  of  reforming  men  ; 
by  the  laws  of  the  civil  magiflrate,  and  by  the  pub- 
lick  preaching  of  miniders.  Bat  the  mod  likely 
and  hopeful  reformation  of  the  world  mud  begin 
with  children.  Wholfom  laws  and  good  fermons 
are  but  flow  and  late  ways :  the  timely  and  the  mod 
compendious  way  is  a  good  education.  This  may  be 
an  effectual  prevention  of  evil,  whereas  all  after-ways 
are  but  remedies,  which  do  always  fuppofe  fome 
neglect  and  omiiTion  of  timely  care. 

And  becaufe  our  laws  leave  fo  much  to  parents, 
our  care  mould  be  fo  much  the  greater  :  and  wc 
mould  remember  that  we  bring  up  our  children  for 
the  publick,  and  that  if  they  live  to  be  men,  as 
they  come  out  of  our  hands  they  will  prove  a  pub- 
lick 


Concerning  the  education  of  children. 

lick  happinefi  or  mifchief  to  the  age.  So  that 
we  can  no  way  better  deferve  of  mankind  and  be 
greater  benefactors  to  the  world,  than  by  peopling 
it  with  a  righteous  offspring.  Good  children  are 
the  hopes  of  pofterity,  and  we  cannot  leave  the 
world  a  better  legacy  than  well-difciplin'd  children. 
This  gives  the  world  the  bed  fecunty  that  religion 
will  be  propagated  to  pofterity,  and  that  the  gene- 
rations to  come  mall  know  God,  "  and  the  chil- 
"  dren  that  are  to  be  born  fhall  fear  the  Lord.'* 

This  was  the  great  glory  of  Abraham,  next  to 
his  being  the  friend  of  God,  that  he  was  the  father 
of  the  faithful.     And  the  careful  education  of  chil- 
dren,   "  in   the   nurture    and   admonition   of    the 
6C  Lord,"  is  fo  honourable  to  parents,  that  God 
himfelf  would  not  pafs  it  by  in  Abraham  without 
fpecial  mention  of  it  to  his  everlafting  commenda- 
Gen.  x\n'.t-on.  «  J  know  Abraham,  lays  God,  that  he  will 
«6. command   his  children   and    his    houfhold  after 
"  him  to  keep  the  way  of  the  Lord,  and  to  do 
iC  juftice  and  judgment.'' 

Fifthly,  confider  yet  further  the  great  evils  con- 
fequent  upon  this  neglect.  And  they  are  manifold. 
But  not  to  enlarge  particularly  upon  them,  they  all 
end  in  this,  the  final  mifcarriage  and  ruin  of  chil- 
dren. Do  but  leave  depraved  corrupt  nature  to  its 
felf,  and  it  will  take  its  own  courfe,  and  the  end 
of  it  in  all  probability  will  be  miferable. 

If  the  generous  feeds  of  religion  and  virtue  be 
not  carefully  fown  in  the  tender  minds  of  children, 
and  thofe  feeds  be  not  cultivated  by  good  educa- 
tion, there  will  certainly  fpring  up  briers  and 
thorns5  of  which  parents  will  not  only  feel  the  in- 
conveniences, 


19 


Concerning  the  education  of  children,  5 1 5 

conveniences,  but  every  body  elfe  that  comes  near  s  E  R  M- 
them.  LliL 

NegJeSfis  urenda  filix  innafcitur  cgris. 

If  the  ground  be  not  planted  with  fbmethincr  that  is 
good,  it  will  bring  forth  that  which  is  either  ufe- 
Jefs  or  hurtful,  or  both  \  for  nature  is  feldom  barren, 
it  will  either  bring  forth  ufeful  plants,  or  weeds, 

We  are  naturally  inclined  to  evil,  and  the  neg- 
lect of  education  puts  children  upon  a  kind  of  ne- 
cefTity  of  becoming  what  they  are  naturally  inclined 
to  be.  Do  but  kt  them  alone,  and  they  will  ibon 
be  habituated  to  fin  and  vice.  And  when  they  arc 
once  accuflomed  to  do  evil,  they  have  loft  their  li- 
berty and  choice  :  they  are  then  hardly  capable  of 
good  counfel  and  inftruction :  or  if  they  be  patient 
to  hear  it,  they  have  no  power  to  follow  it,  being 
bound  in  the  chains  of  their  fins,  and  led  captive 
by  Satan  at  his  pleafure.  And  when  they  have 
brought  themfelves  into  this  condition,  their  ruin 
feems  to  be  fealed,  and  without  a  miracle  of  God's 
grace,  they  are  never  to  be  reclaimed. 

Nor  doth  the  mifchief  of  this  neglect  end  here, 
but  it  extends  it  felf  to  the  publick,  and  to  pofre- 
rity.  If  we  neglect  the  good  education  of  our  chil- 
dren, they  will  in  all  probability  prove  bad  men  5 
and  thele  will  neglect  their  children  ;  and  fo  the 
foundation  of  an  endlefs  mifchief  is  laid  j  and  our 
pofterity  will  be  bad  members  both  of  church  and 
commonwealth. 

If  they  be  neglected  in  matter  of  inftruction, 
they  will  either  be  ignorant  or  erroneous :  either 
they  will  not  mind   religion,  or  they  will   difturb 

the 


5 1 6  Concerning  the  education  of  children. 

S  E  R  M.  the  church  with  new  and  wild  opinions :  and  I  fear, 
j  that    the    neglect   of    inftructing    and    catechizing 
youth,  of  which  this  age  hath  been  fo  grofly  guil- 
ty, hath  made  it  fo  fruitful  of  errors   and  ftrange 
opinions. 

But  if  befides  this,  no  care  be  taken  of  their  lives 
and  manners,  they  will  become  burdens  of  the  earth, 
and  pelts  of  humane  fociety,  and  fo  much  poifon  and 
infection  let  abroad  into  the  world. 

Sixthly  and  laftly,  parents  mould  often  confider 
that  the  neglect  of  this  duty  will  not  only  involve 
them  in  the  inconvenience  and  fhame,  and  forrow,  of 
their  childrens  mifcarriage,  but  in  a  great  meafure  in 
the  guilt  of  it  :  they  will  have  a  great  fhare  in  all  the 
evil  they  do,  and  be  in  fome  fort  chargeable  with  all 
the  fins  they  commit.  If  the  children  bring  forth 
wild  and  four  grapes,  the  parents  teeth  will  be  fet  on 
edge. 

The  temporal  mifchiefs  and  inconveniences  which 
come  from  the  carelels  education  of  children  as  to  cre- 
dit, health  and  eftate,  all  which  do  ufually  fuffer  by 
the  vicious  and  lewd  courfes  of  your  children  ;  thefe 
methinks  mould  awaken  your  care  and  diligence:  but 
what  is  this  to  the  guilt  which  will  redound  to  you 
upon  their  account?  Part  of  all  their  wickednefs  will 
be  put  upon  your  fcore  ;  and  poffibly  the  fins,  which 
they  commit  many  years  after  you  are  dead  and  gone, 
will  follow  you  into  the  other  world,  and  bring  new 
fuel  to  hell,  to  heat  that  furnace  hotter  upon  you. 

However,  this   is  certain,  that  parents  muft   one 
day  be  accountable  for  all  their  neglects  of  their  chil- 
dren :  and  fo  likewife  fhall  minifters  and  matters  of 
families  for  their  people  and  fervants,  fo  far  as  they 
had  the  charge  of  them.  And 


Concerning  the  education  of  children.  517 

And  what  will  parents  be  able  to  fay  to  God  at  the  SERM. 
day  of  judgment  for  all  their  neglects  of  their  chil- 
dren, in  matter  of  inftruction,  and  example,  and  re- 
flraint  from  evil  ?  How  will  it  make  your  ears  to 
tingle,  when  God  fhall  arife  terribly  to  judgment, 
and  fay  to  you,  "  Behold !  the  children  which  I  have 
"  given  you;  they  were  ignorant,  and  you  inftructed 
"  them  not;  they  made  themfelves  vile,  and  you  re- 
"  ltrained  them  not :  why  did  not  you  teach  them  at 
"  home,  and  bring  them  to  church  to  the  publick  or- 
<c  dinances  and  worfhip  of  God,  and  train  them  up  to 
u  the  exercife  of  piety  and  devotion  ?  But  you  did  not 
"  only  neglect  to  give  them  good  inftruction,  but  you 
M  gave  them  bad  example  :  and  lo !  they  have  fol- 
<c  lowed  you  to  hell,  to  be  an  addition  to  your  tor- 
"  ment  there." 

"  Unnatural  wretches!  that  have  thus  neglected, 
4i  and  by  your  neglect  deftroyed  thofe,whofe  happineis 
"  by  fo  many  bonds  of  duty  and  affection  you  were 
"  obliged  to  procure :  behold  !  the  books  are  now  open, 
<c  and  there  is  not  one  prayer  upon  record  that  ever 
"  you  put  up  for  your  children  :  there  is  no  memorial, 
*c  no  not  fo  much  as  of  one  hour  that  ever  was  ferioLily 
<c  fpent  to  tram  them  up  to  a  lenfe  of  God,  and  to 
u  the  knowledge  of  their  duty  :  but  on  the  contrary 
"  it  appears,  that  you  have  many  ways  contrived  their 
u  milery,  and  contributed  to  their  ruin,  and  help'd 
"  forward  their  damnation.  How  could  you  be  thus 
"  unnatural  ?  How  could  you  thus  hare  your  own 
w  rlcfh,  and  hare  your  own  fouls  ?  How  much  better 
*•  had  it  been  for  them,  and  how  much  better  for 
*'  you,  that  they  had  never  been  born  ?** 

Vol.  IV.  6G  Would 

z 


ri8  Concerning  the  education  of  children. 

S  F R  m.  Would  not  fuch  a  heavy  charge  as  this  make 
every  joint  of  you  to  tremble?  will  it  not  cut  you 
to  the  heart,  and  pierce  your  very  fouls,  to  have 
your  children  challenge  you  in  that  day,  and  lay  to 
you  one  by  one,  4C  Had  you  been  as  careful  to 
€<  teach  me  the  good  knowledge  of  the  Lord, 
•c  as  I  was  capable  of  learning  it :  had  you  been 
"  but  as  forward  to  inftruct  me  in  my  duty,  as 
"  I  was  ready  to  have  hearken'd  to  it,  it  had  not 
<c  been  with  me  as  it  is  at  this  day  •,  I  had  not 
<c  now  flood  trembling  here  in  a  fearful  expecta- 
<c  tion  of  the  eternal  doom  which  is  juft  ready  to 
46  be  p?ds'd  upon  me.  Curfed  be  the  man  that  begat 
"  me,  and  the  paps  that  gave  me  fuck.  *Tis  to 
"  you  that  I  muft  in  a  great  meafure  owe  my  evcr- 
"  lading  undoing."  Would  it  not  ftrike  any  of 
us  with  horror  to  -Le  thus  challenged  and  reproached 
by  our  children  "  in  that  great  and  terrible  day  of 
«  the  Lord  ?" 

I  am  not  able  to  make  fo  dreadful  a  repre- 
fentation  bf  this  matter  as  it  deferves.  But  I  would 
by  ail  this,  if  it  be  poflible,  awaken  parents  to  a 
fei-fe  of  their  duty,  and  terrify  them  out  of  this 
grofs  and  fhameful  neglect  which  fo  many  are 
guilty  of.  For  when  I  ferioufly  confider  how 
fupinely  remifs  and  unconcerned  many  parents  are 
as  to  the  religious  education  of  their  children,  I 
cannot  but  think  of  that  faying  of  Auguftus  con- 
cerning Herod,  "  Better  be  his  dog  than  his  child :'• 
I  think  it  was  fpoken  to  another  ptirpofe,  but  it  is 
true  likewife  to  the  purpole  1  am  fpeaking  of: 
better  be  fome  mens  dogs,  or  hawks,  or  horfes, 

than 


Concerning  the  education  of  children.  5 1 9 

than  their  children :  for  they   take  a   greater  care  S  E  R  M. 
to  breed  and    train  up   thefe  to  their   feveral  ends 
and  ufes,  than  to  breed  up  their  children  for  eternal 
happineis. 

Upon  all  thefe  accounts,  "  train  up  a  child  in 
"  the  way  he  fhould  go,  that  when  he  is  old  he 
"  may  not  depart  from  it : "  that  neither  your 
children  may  be  miferablc  by  your  faulr,  nor  you 
by  the  neglect  of  fo  natural  and  neccflary  a  duty 
towards  them.  God  grant  that  all  that  are  con- 
cerned may  lay  thefe  things  ferioufly  to  heart, 
for  his  mercies  fake  in  Jesus  Christ;  to  whom, 
with  thee  O  Father,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  be 
all  honour   and  glory  both  now  and  ever.  Amen, 


fl4*& 


€  G  2 


SERMON 


C  52°  J 

SERMON     LIV. 

Of  the  advantages  of  an  early  piety. 

Preached  in  the  church  of  St.  Lawrence-Jury, 
in  the  year  1662. 

ECC  LES.  xii.  1. 

Remember  now  thy  creator  in  the  days  of  thy  youth, 
while  the  evil  days  come  not,  7ior  the  years  draw 
nigh,  when  thou  fhalt  fay  y  I  have  nopleafure  in  them, 

S  E  R  M.  Hf^"  t^ie  f°rmer  difcourfes,  concerning  the  education 
LIV^  I  of  cmidren,  I  have  carried  the  argument  through 
the  ftate  of  childhood  to  the  beginning  of  the 
next  ilep  of  their  age  which  we  call  youth  ;  when 
they  come  to  exercife  their  reafon,  and  to  be  fit  to 
take  upon  themlelves  the  performance  of  that  folemn 
vow  which  was  made  for  them  by  their  fureties  in 
baptiim. 

To  encourage  them  to  fet  ferioufly  and  in  good 
earned  about  this  work,  I  lhall  now  add  another  dif- 
courfe  concerning  the  advantages  of  an  early  piety. 
And  to  this  purpofe  I  have  chofen  for  the  foundation 
of  it  thefe  words  of  Solomon,  in  his  book  called  Ec- 
lefiaftes  or  the  Preacher  :  "  Remember  now  thy  cre- 
"  ator  in  the  days  of  thy,youth>  while  the  evil  days 

w  come 


Concerning  the  advantages,  &c.  tzi 

*'  come  not,  nor  the  years  draw    nigh   when  thou  SER M. 
u  fhalt  fay  I  have  no  pleaiure  in  mem." 

It  will  not  be  necefLry  to  give  an  account  of  the 
context  any  further  than  to  tell  you,  that  this  book 
of  the  royal  preacher  is  a  lively  deicription  of  the  va- 
nity of  the  world  in  general,  and  particularly  of  the 
life  of  man.  This  is  the  main  body  of  his  fermon,  in 
which  there  are  here  and  there  fcatcered  many  ferious 
reflexions  upon  ourfelves,  and  very  weighty  confidera- 
tions  to  quicken  our  preparations  for  our  latter  end, 
and  to  put  us  in  mind  of  "  the  days  of  darknefi 
"  which  will  be  many,"  as  the  preacher  tells  us  in 
the  chapter  before  the  text. 

Among  thefe  is  the  admonition  and  advice  in  the 
words  of  the  text :  which  do  indeed  concern  thole 
that  are  young,  but  yet  will  afford  ufeful  matter 
of  meditation  to  perfons  of  all  ages  and  conditions 
whatfoever  :  of  great  thankfulnefs  to  almighty  God 
from  thofe  who  by  the  grace  of  God,  and  his 
blefting  upon  a  pious  education,  have  entred  upon 
a  religious  courfe  betimes :  and  of  a  deep  forrow  and 
repentance  to  thofe  who  have  neglected  and  let  flip 
this  beft  opportunity  of  their  lives ;  and  of  taking 
up  a  firm  refolution  of  redeeming  that  lofs,  as  much 
as  is  poflible,  by  their  future  care  and  diligence : 
and  to  them  more  efpecially,  who  are  grown  old 
and  have  not  yet  begun  this  great  and  neceflary 
work,  it  will  minifter  occafion  to  refolvc  upon  a 
fpeedy  retreat,  and  without  any  further  delay  to 
return  to  God  and  their  duty  •,  left  the  opportunity 
of  doing  it,  which  is  now  almoft  quite  ipent,  be 
loft  for  ever. 

The 


4C 


t22  Concerning  the  advantages 

SERM.  The  text  contains  a  duty,  which  is  "  to  remem- 
u  ber  our  creator;'*  and  a  limitation  of  it,  more 
cfpecially  to  one  particular  age  and  time  of  our  life  -, 
"  in  the  days  of  our  youth :  "  not  to  exclude  any 
other  age,  but  to  lay  a  particular  emphafis  and 
weight  upon  this:  "  remember  thy  creator  in  the 
"  days  of  thy  youth,"  that  is,  more  efpecially  in 
this  age  of  thy  life  :  to  intimate  to  us,  both  that 
this  is  the  fitted  feafon,  and  that  we  cannot  begin 
this  work  too  foon. 

And  this  is  further  illuftrated  by  the  oppofition  of 
it  to  old    age  :  "  when  the  evil  days  come  not,  nor 

the  years  draw  nigh,  of  which   thou  fhalt  fay  I 

have  no  plealure  in  them :  "  this  is  a  defcription 
of  old  age,  the  evils  whereof  are  continually  grow- 
ing ;  and  which  in  refpect  of  the  cares  and  griefs, 
the  diftempers  and  infirmities  which  ufually  attend 
it,  is  rather  a  burden  than  a  plcafure. 

In  the  handling  of  thefe  words,  I  mail  do  thefe 
three  things, 

Firft,  I  mail  confider  the  nature  of  the  act  or  duty 
here  injoin'd,   and  that  is  u  to  remember  God. 

Secondly,  I  mall  confider  what  there  is  in  the 
notion  of  God  as  creator  which  is  more  particularly 
apt  to  awaken,  and  oblige  us  to  the  remembrance  of 
him. 

Thirdly,  I  fhall  confider  the  limitation  of  this 
duty  more  efpecially  to  this  particular  age  of  our 
lives,  "  the  days  of  our  youth : "  why  we  fhould 
begin  this  work  then,  and  not  put  it  off  to  the  time 
of  old  age. 

I.  I  fhall  confider  the  nature  of  the  act  or  duty 
here  injoin'd,   which  is   "  to  remember  our  crea- 

«  tor." 


of  an  early  piety.  * 2<> 

"  tor."  For  the  understanding  of  which  exprefiionSE  R  u. 
and  others  of  the  like  nature  in  fcripture,  it  is  to  LlV' 
be  confider'd  that  it  is  very  ufual  in  fcripture  to 
exprefs  religion  and  the  whole  duty  of  man  by 
fome  eminent  act,  or  principle,  or  part  of  religion  : 
fometimes  by  the  knowledge  of  God,  and  by  faith 
in  him  ;  and  very  frequently  by  the  fear  and  by  the 
love  of  God  •,  becaufe  thefe  are  the  great  principles 
and  parts  of  religion  :  and  fo  likewife,  though  not 
fo  frequently,  religion  is  exprefs'd  by  the  remem- 
brance of  God  :  now  remembrance  is  the  actual 
thought  of  what  we  do  habitually  know. .  To  re- 
member God  is  to  have  him  actually  in  our  minds, 
and  upon  all  proper  occafions  to  revive  the  thoughts 
of  him,  and  as  David  exprefTcth  it,  to  let  him  al- 
ways before  us :  "  1  fet  the  Lord,  lays  he,  always 
cc  before  me,"  that  is,  God  was  continually  prefent 
to  his  mind  and  thoughts. 

And  in  oppofition  to  this  we  find  wicked  men 
in  fcripture  defcribed  by  the  contrary  quality,  for- 

getrulnefs  of  God  :  fo  they  are  defcribed  in  Job;Jobviii. 
"  fuch  are  the   paths  of  them  that  forget   God," '3- 

that  is,  of  the  wicked  :    and   the   fame  defcription 
David    gives    of  them.     "  The  wicked,   fays  he,Pfal.  ix. 
u  mail  be  turned  into  hell,  and  all  the  nations  that17* 
<c  forget  God  :"  and  elfewhere  he  gives  the  fame 
character  of  a  wicked  man,  u  that  God  is  not  in  all pfa1' *•  4*' 
"  his  thoughts.5  * 

And  the  courfe  of  a  religious  life  is  not  unfitly 
exprefs'd  by  our  remembrance  of  God.  For  to  re- 
member a  perfon  or  thing  is  to  call  them  to  mind 
upon  all  proper  and  fitting  occafions :  to  think 
actually  of  them,  fo.  as  to  do  that  which  the  re- 
membrance 


LIV. 


r  ?  4.  Concerning  the  advantages 

SE  RM.  membrance  of  them  does  require,  or  prompt  us  toj 
To  remember  a  friend,  is  to  be  ready  upon  occa- 
sion to  do  him  all  good  offices :  to  remember  a 
kindnefs  and  benefit,  is  to  be  ready  to  acknowledge 
and  requite  it  when  there  is  an  opportunity  :  to  re- 
member an  injury,  is  to  be  ready  to  revenge  it : 
and  in  a  word,  to  remember  any  thing  is  to  be 
mindful  to  do  that  which  the  memory  of  fuch  a 
thing  doth  naturally  fugged  to  us. 

So  that  to  remember  God,  is  frequently  and  in  our 
moft  ferious  and  retired  thoughts  to  confider  that  there 
is  luch  a  being  as  God  is  -,  of  all  power  and  perfec- 
tion, who  made  us  and  all  other  things,  and  hath 
given  us  laws  to  live  by,  fuitable  to  our  natures  ;  and 
will  call  us  to  a  ftricl  account  for  our  obfervance  or 
violation  of  them,  and  accordingly  reward  or  punifh 
us  i  very  often  in  this  world,  and  to  be  fure  in  the 
other. 

It  is  to  revive  often  in  our  minds  the  thoughts  of 
God  and  of  his  infinite  perfections,  and  to  live  con- 
tinually under  the  power  and  awe  of  thefe  apprehen- 
fions,  that  he  is  infinitely  wife  and  good,  holy  and 
juft  j  that  he  is  always  prefent  with  us,  and  obferves 
what  we  do,  and  is  intimate  to  our  moft  fecret 
thoughts,  "  and  will  bring  every  work  into  judg- 
Cc  ment,  and  every  fecret  thing,  whether  it  be  good, 
cc  or  whether  it  be  evil  j"  as  the  preacher  tells  us  in 
the  conclufion  of  this  fermon. 

The  duty  then  here  required  of  us,  is  fo  loon  as  we 
arrive  at  the  ufe  of  reafon  and  the  exercife  of  our  un- 
derflandings,  to  take  God  into  con  fide  rat  ion,  and  to 
begin  a  religious  courfe  of  life  betimes ;  to  conie- 
crate  the  beginning  of  our  days  and  the  flower  and 

ftrength 


of  an  early  piety.  525 

ftrength  of  them  to  his  fervice  :  whilft  our  mind  is  SERM. 
yet  foft  and  tender,  and  in  a  great  meafure  free  from 
all  other  impreffions,  to  be  mindful  of  the  being  that 
is  above  us;  and  in  all  our  defigns  and  actions  to  take 
God  into  confideration,  and  to  do  every  thing  in  his 
fear,  and  with  an  eye  to  his  glory.  "  Remember  thy 
"  creator/*  that  is,  honour,  fear,  love,  obey  and 
ferve  him  ;  and  in  a  word,  do  every  thing  as  be- 
comes one  that  is  mindful  of  God,  and  hath  him  con- 
tinually m  his  thoughts. 

II.  I  fliall  in  the  next  place  confider,  what  there  is 
in  the  notion  of  God  as  our  creator  that  is  more  par- 
ticularly apt  to  awaken  and  oblige  men  to  the  re- 
membrance of  God.  The  text  does  not  barely  re- 
quire us  to  remember  God,  but  to  remember  him  as 
the  author  and  founder  of  our  Beings  •,  "  Remember 
"  thy  creator."  And  there  is  certainly  fome  particu- 
lar emphafis  in  it,  fo  that  God  qonfidered  under  the 
notion  of  our  creator  is  apt  to  ftrike  us  with  a  parti- 
cular regard  and  awe  of  him.  And  that  upon  a 
threefold  account;  as  creation  is  a  fen fible demon ftra- 
tion  to  us,  1  ft,  Of  the  being.  2dly, -Of  the  power; 
and  ^dlvj  Of  the  goodnefs  of  God. 

Firft,  Of  his  being.  The  creation  is  of  all  other 
the  mod  fenfible  and  obvious  argument  of  a  Deity. 
Other  confiderations  may  work  upon  our  reafon  and 
underftanding,  but  this  doth  as  it  were  bring  God 
down  to  our  fenfes.  So  often  as  we  look  up  to 
heaven,  or  down  upon  the  earth ;  upon  ourfelves,  or 
into  ourfelves ;  upon  the  things  without  us,  and  round 
about  us  ;  which  way  foever  we  turn  our  eyes,  we  are 
encountered  with  plain  evidences  of  a  fuperior  being, 
which   made  us  and   all  other  things  :    every   thiog 

Vol.  IV.  H  hie  1 

2. 


r  Concerning  the  advantages 

which    we   behold    with   our    eyes   doth    in   lbmc 

way  or  other  reprefent  God  to  us  and  bring  him  to 

our  minds,  fo  as  we  cannot  avoid  the  fight  of  him,  if 

Pfal.xi;:.  we  would.     So  the  pfaimift  tells  us,  "  The  heavens 

l'  ci  declare  the  glory  of  God,  and  the  firmament  fhews 

<:  the  work  of  his  hands. "    And  fo  likewife  St.  Paul, 

Rom.i.     "  The  invifible  things  of  him,  from  the  creation  of 

20*  "  the  world,  are  clearly  feen,  being  underflood  by 

"  the  things  which  are  made ;  even  his  eternal  power 

"  and  godhead." 

Secondly,  as  the  creation  is  a  demonftration  of 
God's  infinite  power.  And  this  confideration  is  apt 
to  work  upon  our  fear,  the  mod  wakeful  paiTaon  of 
all  other  in  the  foul  of  man  :  infomuch  that  the  a- 
theift  would  fain  afcribe  the  original  apprehenfion  and 
belief  of  a  deity  to  the  natural  fears  of  men  ;  Primus 
in  rfa  ..:os  fecit  timor,  "  Fear  firft  made  Gods ;"  and 
by  this  means  would  fain  perfuade  us  that  it  is  fo 
far  from  being  true  that  God  is  our  creator,  that  he 
is  merely  the  creature  of  our  own  vain  fear  and  ima- 
gination. 

But  furely  this  is  very  unreafonable.  For  if  there 
be  a  God  that  made  us,  there  is  infinite  reafon  why 
we  mould  ftand  in  awe  of  him,  and  have  him  always 
in  our  mind  and  thoughts-,  becaufe  he  who  made  us 
and  all  other  things,  if  we  neglect  him  and  forget  fo 
great  a  benefactor,  can  as  eafily  make  us  miferable,  cr 
turn  us  out  of  being.  Therefore  "  remember  thy 
6t  creator,"  and  defpife  or  forget  him  at  thy  utmoit 
peril. 

1  nirdly,  as  the  creation  is  a  demonftration  of  the 
goodnefs  of  God  to  his  creatures.  This  confidera- 
tion of  God  as  our  creator,  doth  naturally  fuggeft 

to 


of  an  early  piety.  -    527 

to  our  minds,  that  his  goodnefs  brought  us  into  be-  S  E  R  M. 
ing  *,  and  that  if  being  be  a  benefit,  God  is  the 
fountain  and  author  of  it ;  that  his  goodnefs  called 
us  out  of  nothing,  and  made  us  to  be  what  we  are ; 
"  for  of  his  good  pleafure  we  are  and  were  creat- 
<c  ed."  He  was  under  no  necefiity  of  doing  it  \  for 
he  was  from  eternal  ages  happy  in  himfelf  before 
we  were,  and  would  have  been  fo  to  all  eternity 
though  we  had  never  been ;  nor  was  it  po:Tib!c 
he  could  be  under  any  obligation  to  us  before  we 
were. 

And  he  js  not  only  our  creator  as  he  gave 
us  our  beings  at  firft,  but  likewife  as  we  are 
preferved  and  continued  in  life  by  the  fame 
goodnefs  which  nrft  gave  us  life  and  breath  ; 
"  for  of  his  goodnefs  we  are  as  well  as  were  ere- 
"  ated." 

And  can  we  forget  fo  great  a  benefaclor,  and  be 
"  unmindful  of  the  God  that  formed  us  ?"  Can  we 
choofe  but  remember  the  founder  of  our  beings,  the 
great  patron  and  preferver  of  our  lives  ?  And  fo  foon 
as  we  arrive  at  the  ufe  of  reafon,  and  difcover  this 
great  benefaclor  to  whom  we  owe  our  lives  and 
all  the  bleffings  of  them,  can  we  forbear  to  do 
homage  to  him,  and  to  fay  with  David,  "  O 
"  come,  let  us  worfhip  and  fall  down  and  kneel 
"  before  the  Lord  our  maker:  for  he  is  the 
"  Lord  our  God,  it  is  he  that  hath  made  us, 
"  and  not  we  ourfelves ;  we  are  his  people,  and 
"  the  Iheep  of  his  pafture."  I  proceed  to  confider 
in  the 

IJI.  and  laft  place,  the  reafon  of  the  limitation  of 
this  duty  more  efpecially  to  this  particular  age  of  our 

6  H  2  lives3 


r^S  Concerning  the  advantages 

SERM.  lives,  "  Remember  now  thy  creator  in  the  days  of 

LI  V  • 

"  thy  youth,  when  the  evil  days  come  not,  nor  the 

"  years  draw  nigh  when  thou  fhalt  fay  I  have  no 

"  pleafure  in  them :"    "  now  ;  in  the  days  of  thy 

"  youth  ;"  by  which  Solomon  plainly  defigns  two 

things, 

Firft,  To  engage  young  perfons  to  begin  this 
great  and  neceffary  work  of  religion  betimes,  and 
as  foon  as  ever  they  are  capable  of  taking  it  into 
confideration,  "  Remember  thy  creator  in  the  days 
"  of  thy  youth."  And  the  fon  of  Sirach  much 
to  the  lame  purpofe,  fpeaking  of  one  that  in  good 
earned  applies  his  heart  to  wifdom,  defcribes  him 
in  this  manner,  "  He  will  give  his  heart  to  refort 
"  early  to  the  Lord  that  made  him  ;"  which  is 
the  fame  with  the  expreffion  in  the  text,  "  of  re- 
"  membring  our  creator  in  the  days  of  our 
"  youth." 

Secondly,  to  engage  young  perfons  to  fet  about 
this  work  prefently,  and  not  to  defer  it  and  put  it 
off  to  the  future,  as  molt  are  apt  to  do  -9  "  Remem- 
cc  ber  now  thy  creator  in  the  days  of  thy  youth:" 
elpecially,  not  to  adjourn  it  to  the  mod  unfit  and 
improper  time  of  all  other,  to  the  time  of  infir- 
mity and  old  age,  "  now,  the  days  of  thy  youth ; 
66  when  the  evil  days  come  not,  nor  the  years  draw 
"  nigh  when  thou  fhalt  fay  I  have  no  pleafure  in 
**  them  :  while  the  fun,  or  the  light,  or  the  moon, 
cc  or  the  ftars  be  not  darken'd,  &c." 

And  how  much  reafon  there  is  to  prefs  both  thefe 
confideratioris  upon  young  perfons,  I  (hall  endea- 
vour to  fhew  in  the  following  particulars. 

Firft, 


of  an  early  piety.  529 

Firft,  becaufe  in  this  age  of  our  lives  we  have  the  SERM. 
greater!:  and  mofl  fenfible  obligation  "  to  remember 
"  God  our  creator :  in  the  days  of  our  youth," 
when  the  bleffing  and  benefit  of  life  is  new,  and 
the  memory  of  it  frefh  upon  our  minds.  It 
ought  not  indeed  to  be  ib,  but  we  find  it  true 
which  Seneca  fays,  Nihil  citilis  fenefcit  qiiam  gratia, 
"  Nothing  fooner  grows  old  and  out  of  date  than 
"  obligations j"  and  we  are  but  too  apt  to  forget 
what  we  have  the  greateft  reafon  to  remember. 

In  this  age  of  our  life,  when  we  begin  to  come 
to  the  free  ufe  and  exercife  of  our  reafon,  the  firft 
thing  we  are  intruded  in,  and  if  we  were  not 
taught  it  we  mould,  though  perhaps  more  flowly, 
difcover  and  find  it  out  of  ourfelves :  I  fay,  the 
firft  thing  we  are  inftrucled  in  and  inquifitive  about 
is  the  author  of  our  beings,  and  how  we  came  in- 
to the  world :  and  when  God  firft  appears  to  our 
minds,  and  we  come  by  degrees  clearly  to  underftand 
by  whofe  bounty  and  blefting  it  is  that  we  are  and 
have  been  preferved  thus  long,  without  our  own  care  ; 
principally  by  the  providence  of  God,  and  under 
him  by  thofe  inftruments  which  he  hath  raifed  and 
preferved  for  that  purpofe:  when  we  confider  this, 
we  cannot  but  be  ftrangely  furprized  both  v/ith  the 
novelty  of  the  benefit  and  the  greatnefs  of  it. 

And  when  we  have  well  viewed  ourfelves,  and 
look'd  about  us,  upon  the  Creatures  below  us,  all 
of  them  fubjeel;  to  our  dominion  and  ufe:  and 
when  we  confider  ferioufly  in  what  a  noble  rank  and 
order  of  creatures  we  are  placed  5  and  how  fearful- 
ly and   wonderfully    we  are   made,    not    groveling 

upon  the  earth  or  bowed  down  to  it,  but  of  a  beau- 
tiful 


gqo  Concerning  the  advantages  of 

SERA*,  tiful  and  upright  fbape  of  body,  and  fuch  a  majefty 
^J^Z^j  of  countenance,  as  if  we  were  all  kings  of  the  crea- 
tion:  and   which  is  much  more  excellent  than  this, 
that  we  are  endued  with  minds    and  understandings, 
with  reaibn  and  Ipeech,  whereby  we  are  capable  not 
only  of  converting  with  and  benefiting  one  another, 
but  alfo  of  the  knowledge  and  friendfhip  and  enjoy- 
ment of  the  bell  and  moft  perfect  of  beings,  God 
himfelf :  I  fay  when  we  firft  confider  this  and  medi- 
tate ferioufly  upon  it,  can  we  pofiibly  ever  after  for- 
get God  ?  Shall  we  not  naturally  break  out  into  that 
enquiry  which  Elihu  thinks  fo  proper  for  man  that  he 
wonders  it  is  not  in  every  man's  mouth,  "  Where  is 
Job  xxxv.  "  God  my  maker,  who  teacheth  me  more  than  the 
10,  ii.    cc  bea-ffo  of  the  earth,  and  maketh  me  wifer  than  the 
**  fowls  of  heaven  ??' 

So  that  there  is  a  very  fpecial  obligation  upon  us 
to  be  mindful  of  God  in  this  age  of  our  lives,  when 
we  firft  come  to  the  knowledge  of  him,  and  when 
the  fenfe  of  his  favours  is  frefh  and  new  to  us ;  and 
not  only  fo,  but  when  the  blefling  of  life  is  at  the 
very  bell  and  in  its  verdure  and  Mower ;  when  our 
health  is  in  its  ftrength  and  vigor,  and  the  pleafures 
and  enjoyment  of  life  have  their  full  tafte  and  per- 
fect relifh.     So  Job  defcribes  the  days  of  his  youth, 

"  O  that  I  were  as  in  months  pall,  as  in  the  davs 
Tob  xxiXi  . 

2,3,4.    "  when  God  preferved  me  \  when  his  candle  mined 

"  upon  my  head,  and  when  by  his  light  I  walked 
<c  through  darknefs,  as  I  was  in  the  days  of  my 
"  youth,  fcfr." 

Indeed  when  the  evil  days  are  once  come,  and  thou 
art  enter'd  upon  the  years  in  which  thou  thyfelf  haft 

no  pleafure,  there  might  be  fome  fort  of  pretence  then 

to 


of  an  early  piety.  531 

to  forget  God  ;  becaufe  then  life  begins  to  wither  S  R  R  M. 

1 1  v 
and  decay,  and  not  only  the  glofs  and   beauty  but 

even  the   comfort  and   fweetnefs  of  it   is  gone,  and 

it  becomes   an   infipid    and    tadelefs  thing  :    "  but 

"  thou  art  inexcufable,   O  man,  whoever  thou  art,*' 

if  thou  art  unmindful  of  God  in   the  bed  age  of 

thy  life,  and  when  the  fenfe  of  his   benefits  ought 

upon  all  accounts  to  make  the  ftrongeft  and  deepen: 

imprefiions  upon  thy  mind. 

Secondly,  the  reafon  will  be  yet  ftronger  to  put 
us  upon  this,  if  we  confider  that  notwithstanding 
the  great  obligation  which  lies  upon  us  "  to  re- 
"  member  our  creator  in  the  days  of  our  youth," 
we  are  mod  apt  at  that  time  of  all  other  to  forget 
him.  For  that  which  is  the  great  bleffing  of  youth 
is  alfo  the  great  danger  of  it,  I  mean  the  health 
and  profperity  of  it;  and  though  men  have  then 
leaft  reafon,  yet  they  are  moil  apt  to  forget  God 
in  the  height  of  pleafure  and  in  the  abundance  of  all 
things. 

Youth  is  extremely  addicted  to  pleafure,  becaufe 
it  is  moil:  capable  and  mod  fenfible  of  it ;  and 
where  we  are  mod  apt  to  be  tranfported,  there  we 
are  mod  apt  to  tranfgrefs.  Nothing  does  fo  befot 
tliQ  mind  and  extinguifh  in  it  all  fenfe  of  divine 
things  as  fenfual  pleaiures.  If  we  fall  in  love  with 
them,  they  will  take  off  our  thoughts  from  religion 
and  deal  away  our  hearts  from  God.  "  For  no 
"  man  can  ferve  two  maders,"  and  "  the  carnal 
"  mind  is  enmity  againd  God." 

Befides  that  youth  is  rafli  and  inconfiderate,  be* 
caufe  unexperienced  ;  and  confequently  not  apt  to 
be  cautious  and  prudent,  no  not  as  to  the  future  con- 
cernments 


Concerning  the  advantages 

cernments  of  this  temporal  life ;  much  ids  of  that 
which  feems  to  be  at  fo  much  a  greater  didance, 
and  for  that  reaibn  is  fo  very  ieldom  in  our 
thoughts. 

Thirdly,  becaufe  this  age  is  of  all  other  the  fit- 
ted and  bed  to  begin  a  religious  courfe  of  life. 
And  this  does  not  contradict  the  former  argument, 
though  it  feems  to  do  fo.  For  as  it  is  true  of  chil- 
dren, that  they  are  mod  prone  to  be  idle  and  yet 
fitted  to  learn  \  fo  in  the  cafe  we  are  fpeaking  of 
both  are  true,  that  youth  is  an  age  wherein  we  are 
too  apt,  if  left  to  our  felves,  to  forget  God  and  re- 
ligion, and  yet  at  the  fame  time  fitted  to  receive 
the  imprcfiions  of  it. 

Youth  is  <etas  difciplina^  the  proper  age  of  difci- 
pline  •,  very  obfequious  and  tradable,  fit  to  receive 
any  kind  of  imprefiion  and  imbibe  any  tincture  : 
now  we  mould  lay  hold  of  this  golden  opportunity. 
This  age  of  fupplenefs,  and  obedience,  and  patie- 
ence  for  labour,  mould  be  plied  by  parents,  before 
that  rigor  and  ftiffnefs  which  grows  with  years  comes 
on  too  fad.  Childhood  and  youth  are  choice  fea- 
fons  for  planting  of  religion  and  virtue,  and  if  pa- 
rents and  teachers  fleep  in  this  feed- time  they  are  ill 
husbandmen  ;  for  this  is  the  time  of  plowing  and 
fowing. 

This  age  is  certainly  the  mod  proper  for  induc- 
tion, according  to  that  of  the  prophet,  "  Whom 
„  '  '"  fhall  he  teach  knowledge?  whom  fhall  he  make 
<c  to  underdand  doctrine  ?  them  that  are  weaned 
"  from  the  milk  and  drawn  from  the  bread.  For 
"  precept  mud  be  upon  precept,  and  line  upon 
"  line,  here  a  little  and  there  a  little."     And  the 

fooner 


of  an  early  pie fy.  533 

Iboner  this  is  done*  the  better;  only  things  muft  be  SERM. 

0                    LIV. 
inftilled  into  them  gently  and  by  degrees.  1 -y-^j 

It  is  a  noted  faying  of  Ariftotle,  "  that  young 
<c  perfons  are  not  fit  to  hear  lectures  of  moral  phi- 
"  Iofophy ; "  becaufe  at  that  age  paffion  is  fo  pre- 
dominant and  unruly  :  by  which,  I  think,  he  only 
means  that  the  minds  of  young  perfons  are  leafr. 
prepared  to  receive  the  precepts  of  morality  and 
to  fubmit  to  them ;  but  that  he  does  not  hereby  in- 
tend, that  therefore  no  care  ought  to  be  ufed  to 
form  the  minds  and  manners  of  youth  to  virtue 
and  goodnefs.  He  certainly  underflood  the  nature 
and  power  of  evil  habits  too  well  to  be  of  that 
mind  ;  and  confequently  muft  think  that  the  prin- 
ciples of  morality  ought  with  great  care  and  dili- 
gence to  be  initill'd  into  young  perfons  betimes  % 
becaufe  they  of  all  other  have  the  mod  need  of  this 
kind  of  inftruction,  and  this  age  is  the  moft  pro- 
per feafon  for  it :  and  the  lefs  their  minds  are  pre- 
pared  for  it,  fo  much  the  more  pains  ought  to  be 
taken  with  them,  that  they  may  be  taught  to  go- 
vern and  fubdue  their  paflions  before  they  grow  too 
fliff  and  headftrong.  So  that  if  the  feeds  of  reli- 
gion and  virtue  be  not  planted  in  our  younger 
years,  what  is  to  be  expected  in  old  age  ?  accord- 
ing to  that  of  the  fon  of  Sirach,  "  tf  thou  haftEcclus, 
"  gathered  nothing  in  thy  youth,  how  canft  thouxxv.  13, 
4C  expect  to  find  any  thing  in  thine  age  ?  M 

Young  years  are  tender  and  eafily  wrought  up- 
on, apt  to  be  moulded  into  any  fafhion  ;  they  are 
udum  &?  molle  lutumy  "  like  moid  and  foft  clay" 
which  is  pliable  to  any  form  -,  but  foon  grows  hard, 
and   then   nothing   is  to  be    made  of  it.     It  is  a 

Vo  l.  IV.  6  I  very 

2. 


534  Concerning  the  advantages 

SERM.  very 'difficult  thing  to  make  impreffions  upon  age, 
and  to  deface  the  evil  which  hath  been  deeply  im- 
printed upon  young  and  tender  minds.  When  good 
inftru&ion  hath  been  neglected  at  firft,  a  conceit- 
ed ignorance  doth  commonly  take  pofleflion,  and 
obftruct  all  the  pafifages  through  which  knowledge 
and  wifdom  fhould  enter  into  us. 

Upon  this  confideration  the  work  of  religion 
fhould  be  begun  betimes,  becaufe  it  is  a  mighty 
advantage  to  any  thing  to  be  planted  in  a  ground 
that  is  newly  broken  up.  It  is  juft  the  fame  thing 
for  young  perfons  to  be  enter'd  into  a  religious 
courfe,  and  to  have  their  minds  habituated  to  vir- 
tue before  vicious  cuftoms  have  got  place  and  ftrength 
in  us :  for  whoever  fhall  attempt  this  afterwards 
will  meet  with  infinite  difficulty  and  oppofition, 
and  muft  difpute  his  ground  by  inches. 

It  is  good  therefore  to  do  that  which  mud  be 
done  one  time  or  other,  when  it  is  eafieft  to  be 
done ;  when  we  may  do  it  with  the  greatefl  advan- 
tage, and  are  likely  to  meet  with  the  lead  and 
weake{l  oppofition.  We  fhould  anticipate  vice  and 
prevent  the  devil  and  the  world,  by  letting  God 
into  our  hearts  betimes,  and  giving  religion  the  firft 
feifin  and  pofTefTion  of  our  fouls.  This  is  the  time 
of  fowing  our  feed,  which  muft  by  no  means  be  neg- 
lected. For  the  foul  will  not  lie  fallow  ;  good  or 
evil  will  come  up.  If  our  minds  be  not  cultivated 
by  religion,  fin  and  vice  will  get  the  pofleflion  of 
them  :  but  if  our  tender  years  be  feafoned  with  the 
knowledge  and  fear  of  God,  this  in  all  probability 
will  have  a  good  influence  upon  the  following  courfe 
of  our  lives, 

in 


of  an  early  piety.  535 

In  a  word,  this  age  of  our  lives  is  proper  for  la-  SERM. 
hour  and  conflict  ;<  becaufe  youth  is  full  of  heat  and 
vigor,  of  courage  and  refolution  to  enterprize  and 
effect  difficult  things.  This  heat  indeed  renders 
young  perfons  very  unfit  to  advife  and  direct  them- 
felves,  and  therefore  they  have  need  to  be  advifed 
and  directed  by  thofe  who  are  wifer  and  more  ex- 
perienced :  but  yet  this  heat  makes  them  very  fit 
for  practice  and  action  ;  for  though  they  are  bad  at 
counfel,  they  are  admirable  at  execution,  when  their 
heat  is  well  directed ;  they  have  a  great  deal  of 
vivacity  and  quicknefs,  of  courage  and  conftancy  in 
the  way  wherein  they  are  fet. 

Befides,  that  youth  hath  a  great  fenfe  of  honour 
and  virtue,  of  praife  and  commendation,  which  are 
of  great  force  to  engage  young  perfons  to  attempt 
worthy  and  excellent  things.  For  hope  and  confi- 
dence, flrength  and  courage,  with  which  fenfe  of 
honour  and  defire  of  praife  are  apt  to  infpire  them, 
are  admirable  inffruments  of  victory  and  maflery  in 
any  kind  ;  and  thefe  are  proper  and  mod  peculiar 
to  youth.  u  I  write  unto  you  young  men,  faith 
"  St.  John,  becaufe  ye  are  ftrong,  and  have  over- 
"  come  the  evil  one.'* 

And,  befides  the  fpirit  and  vigor  of  youth,  young 
perfons  have  feveral  other  qualities  which  make 
them  very  capable  of  learning  any  thing  that  is 
good.  They  are  apt  to  believe,  becaufe  they  have  not 
been  often  deceived  ;  and  this  is  a  very  good  quality 
in  a  learner.  And  they  are  full  of  hopes,  which 
will  encourage  them  to  attempt  things  even  beyond 
their  flrength  ;  becaufe  hope  is  always  of  the  future, 
and  the   life  of  young  perfons  is  in  a  great  mea- 

6  I  2  re 


336  Concerning  the  advantages 

SER M. fure  before  them  and  yet  to  come.  And,  which  is  a 
good  bridle  to  reftrain  them  from  that  which  13  evil, 
they  are  commonly  very  modeft  and  bafhrul :  and 
which  is  alfo  a  lingular  advantage,  they  are  more  apt 
to  do  that  which  is  honeft  and  commendable  than  that 
which  is  gainful  and  profitable,  being  in  a  great  mea- 
fure  free  from  the  love  of  money,  which  experience, 
as  well  as  the  apotlle,  tells  us  cc  is  the  root  of  all 
ct  evil."'  Children  are  very  feldom  covetous,  be- 
caufe  they  have  feldom  be^n  bitten  by  want. 

Fourthly,  this  is  the  moft  acceptable  time  of  all 
other,  becaufe  it  is  the  firft  of  our  age.  Under  the 
lav  the  firft- fruits  and  the  firh>born  were  God's. 
In  like  manner  we  ihould  devote  the  firft  of  our 
age  and  time  to  him.  God  is  the  firit  and  moft  ex- 
cellent of  beings,  and  therefore  it  is  fit  that  the  prime 
of  our  age  and  the  excellency  of  our  ftrengch  fliould 
be  dedicated  to  him  and  his  fervice. 

An  early  piety  m  -.ft  needs  be  very  acceptable  and 
pleafing  to  God.  Our  bleiled  Lord  took  great 
pleafure  to  fee  little  children  come  unto  him  •,  an 
emblem  of  the  pleafure  he  takes  that  men  fliould 
lift  themfelves  betimes  in  his  fervice.  St.  John  was 
the  youngeft  of  all  the  difciples,  and  our  Saviour 
had  a  very  particular  kindnefs  and  affection  for  him ; 
for  'he  is  faid  to  be  "  the  difciple  whom  Jesus 
u  loved.5' 

It  is  a  good  fign  that  we  value  God  as  we  ought, 
and  have  a  true  efteem  for  his  fervice,  when  we  can 
find  in  our  hearts  to  give  him  our  good  days,  and 
the  years  which  we  ourfelves  have  pleafure  in  :  and 
that  we  have  a  grateful  fenfe  of  his  benefits  and 
^f  our   mighty  obligation  to  him,  when  we  make 

the 


of  an  early  piety.  537 

the  quicker!  and  beft  returns  we  can,  and  think  no-  S  E  R  u. 

T  \\T 

thing   too  good  to  render  to  him   from  whom  we  ,   _  11 
have  received  all. 

It  is  likewife  an  argument  of  great  fincerity, 
which  is  the  Soul  of  all  religion  and  virtue,  when 
a  man  devotes  himfelf  to  God  betimes  -,  becaufe  it 
is  a  good  evidence  that  he  is  not  drawn  by  thofe 
forcible  conftraints,  nor  driven  to  God  by  that  pref- 
fing  necefTity  which  lies  upon  men  in  time  of  fick- 
nefs  and  old  age.  And  on  the  contrary,  it  cannot 
but  be  very  difpjeafing  to  God  to  be  neglected  by 
us  when  we  are  in  the  flower  and  vigour  of  our 
age :  when  our  blood  is  warm  and  our  fpirits  quick, 
and  our  parts  are  at  the  bed:,  then  to  think  our 
felves  too  good  to  ferve  God  ;  what  an  affront  is 
this  to  him  who  hath  deferved  fo  infinitely  well  of 
us,  and  beyond  the  beft  and  utmoft  that  we  can 
poffibly  do  ? 

Befides,  that  there  is  a  peculiar  kind  of  grace 
and  lovelinefs  in  the  worthy  and  excellent  actions 
of  young  perfons,  great  things  being  hardly  ex- 
pected from  them  at  that  age.  Early  habits  of  vir- 
tue, like  new  clothes  upon  a  young  and  comely 
body,  fit  very  gracefully  upon  a  flraight  and  well- 
fhap'd  mind,  and  do  mightily  become  it. 

As  there  is  joy  in  heaven  at  the  converfion  of  a 
great  and  old  finner,  fo  it  cannot  but  be  a  very  de- 
lightful fpectacle  to  God  and  angels,  and  to  the 
fpirics  of  juft  men  made  perfect,  to  fee  a  young  per- 
fon,  befieged  by  powerful  temptations  on  every  fide, 
to  acquit  himfelf  glorioufly,  and  refoiuteiy  to  hold 
out  againft  the  mod  violent  aflaults:  to  behold  one 
in  the  prime  and  flower  of  his  age,  that  is  courted 

by 


538  Concerning  the  advantages 

SERM.  by  pleafures  and  honours,  by  the  devil  and  all  the 
bewitching  vanities  of  this  world,  to  reject  all  thefe 
and  to  cleave  fleadfaftly  to  God  :  nay,  to  frown  upon 
all  thefe  temptations  and  to  look  down  upon  them  with 
indignation  and  fcorn,  and  to  fay,  let  thofe  dote 
upon  thefe  things  who  know  no  better  :  let  them 
adore  fenfual  pleafures  and  lying  vanities,  who  are 
jo-norant  of  the  fincere  and  folid  pleafures  of  reli- 
gion and  virtue  :  'let  them  run  into  the  arms  of  temp- 
tation who  can  forget  God  their  creator,  their  pre- 
ferver,  and  the  guide  of  their  youth :  as  for  me,  I 
will  ferve  the  Lord,  and  will  employ  my  whole 
time  either  innocently  or  ufefully,  in  fcrving  God, 
and  in  doing  good  to  men  who  are  made  after  the 
image  of  God.  This  work  fhall  take  up  my  whole 
life,  there  fhall  be  no  void  or  empty  fpace  in  it ;  I 
will  endeavour,  as  much  as  poffibly  I  can,  that  there 
may  be  no  gap  or  breach  in  it  for  the  devil  and  his 
temptations  to  enter  in  :  Lord,  I  will  be  thine,  I 
have  chofen  thee  for  my  happinefs  and  my  portion  for 
ever :  "  Whom  have  I  in  heaven  but  thee  ?  and  there 
'c  is  none  upon  earth  that  I  defire  befides  thee.  Lo  ! 
"  they  that  are  far  from  thee  fhall  perifh  :  but  it  is 
"  good  for  me  to  draw' near  to  God,"  to  begin  and 
end  my  days  in  his  fear  and  to  his  glory. 

Fifthly  and  lailly,  this  age  of  our  llfQ  may,  for 

any  thing  we  know,  be  the  only  time  we  may  have 
for  this  purpofe  ;  and  if  we  caff  off  the  thoughts  of 
God-  and  defer  the  bufmefs  of  religion  to  old  age,  in- 
tending, as  we  pretend,  to  fet  about  it  at  that  time, 
we  may  be  cut  off  before  that  time  comes,  "  and 
**  turned  into  hell  with  tiK  people  that  forget  God." 

The 


of  an  early  piety.  539 

The  work  of  religion   is  the  moil  neceflary  of  all  SER  M, 
0  .  J  LI  v. 

other,  and  mud  be  done  one  time'or  other,  or  we 

are  certainly  usdone  for  ever.  We  cannot  begin  it  too 

foon,  but  we  may  eafily  delay  it  too  long  \  and  then 

wc  are  miferable  paft  all  recovery.  He  that  would  not 

venture  his  immortal  foul,  and  put  his  everlafting 

happinefs  upon  the  greater!  hazard  and   uncertainty, 

muft  make  religion  his  firft  bufinefs  and  care,  mult 

think  of  God  betimes   "  and  remember  his  creator 

".«  in  the  days  of  his  youth." 

I  have  now  done  with  the  three  things  which  I 
propofed  to  conlider  from  thefe  words.  The  Infe- 
rences from  this  whole  difcourfe  lhall  be  thefe  two, 

Firft,  to  perfuade  thofe  that  are  young  to  remem- 
ber God  their  creator,  and  to  engage  in  the  ways  of 
religion  and  virtue  betimes. 

Secondly,  to  urge  thofe  who  have  neglected  this 
firft  and  beft  opportunity  of  their  lives,  to  repent 
quickly  and  return  to  a  better  mind ;  left  the  oppor- 
tunity be  loft  for  ever,  and  their  cafe  becomes  deipe- 
rate  and  paft  remedy. 

Firft,  to  perfuade  thofe  that  are  young  to  remem- 
ber God  their  creator  betimes,  and  to  engage  early 
in  the  ways  of  religion  and  virtue.  Do  not  fuffer 
yourfelves  to  be  cheated  and  bewitched  by  fenfual 
fatisfaclion,  and  to  be  deftroyed  by  eafe  and  profpe- 
rity.  Let  not  a  perpetual  tenor  of  health  and  plea- 
fure  foften  and  diflblve  your  fpirits,  and  banifh  all 
wife  and  ferious  thoughts  out  of  your  minds.  Be  not 
fo  foolifh  and  unworthy,  as  to  think  that  you  have 
a  privilege  to  forget  God  when  he  is  moft  mindful 
of  you  ;  cc  when  the  candle  of  the  Lord  fhines  about 
"  your  tabernacle,"  and  you  are  enjoying  the  health, 
and  ftrength,  and  fweetnefs  of  life, 

No 


54°  Concerning  the  advantages 

S  E  R  M.      No  man  knows  what  he  does,  and  what  an  invalu- 
LIV 

able  treafure  he  prodigally  wades,  when  he  lets  flip 

this  golden  feafon  and  opportunity  of  his  lift ;  whilft 
he  is  yet  innocent  and  untainted  with  fin  and  vice, 
and  his  mind  is  clear  of  all  bad  imprefllons,  and  ca- 
pable of  the  belt  \  not  enflaved  to  evil,  and  at  liber- 
ty to  do  well. 

Confider  that  the  ways  of  religion  and  virtue  are 
nothing  fo  difficult  and  unpleafant  now,  as  they  will 
be  hereafter  :  and  that  the  longer  you  forget  God, 
and  the  more  you  are  eftranged  from  him,  the  more 
unwilling  you  will  be  to  think  of  him  and  to  return 
to  him  :  that  your  lulls  will  every  day  gain  more 
flrength,  and  your  hearts  by  degrees  will  con- 
tract fuch  a  fliffnefs  and  hardnefs  that  it  will  be  no 
eafy  matter  to  work  upon  them. 

Therefore  "  remember  your  creator  in  the  days 
"  of  your  youth  :  to  day,  whilft.  it  is  called  to  day, 
"  left  any  of  you  be  hardened  through  the  deceit  ful- 
«•  nefs  of  fin."  When  will  you  think  of  beginning 
a  o-ood  courfe,  if  not  now  ?  You  have  a  great  work 
before  you,  which  cannot  be  done  in  a  little  time, 
which  cannot  be  begun  and  finilhed  at  once.  Your 
whole  life  is  no  more  than  fuffieient  for  it ;  to  do  it 
to  the  bell  advantage,  and  as  it  ought  to  be  done. 
Do  not  then  think  of  crowding  it  into  a  corner  of 
your  life,  much  lefs  of  putting  it  off  to  the  very  end 
of  it :  "  when  that  night  comes,  no  man  can 
<6  work." 

Confider  further  \  if  we  will  deny  God  the  hearty 
and  vigorous  fervice  of  our  befl  days,  how  can  we  ex- 
pect that  he  will  accept  the  faint  and  flattering  de- 
votions of  old  age?  Wife  men  are  wont  to  forccafi: 

and 


of  an  early  piety.  54  r 

and  provide  fome  ftay  and  comfort  for  themfelves  s  E  R  M* 
againft  the  evils  and  infirmities  of  that  time  •,  that 
they  may  havefomething  to  lean  upon  in  their  weak- 
nefs,  fomething  to  mitigate  and  allay  the  troubles 
and  afflictions  of  that  dark  and  gloomy  evening  : 
that  what  they  cannot  enjoy  of  prelcnt  pleafure  and 
fatisfaction  may  in  fome  meafure  be  made  up  to  them 
in  comfortable  reflexions  upon  the  pail  actions  of  a 
holy  and  innocent,  an  ufeful  and  well-fpent  life. 

But  on  the  other  hand,  if  we  have  neglected  reli- 
gion, and  forgotten  God  days  without  number  \  if 
we  have  lived  an  ungodly  and  jvicious  life,  we  have 
treafured  up  fo  much  guilt  and  remorfe,  fo  ma- 
ny aggravations  of  our  forrow  and  anguifli  againft  an 
evil  day  ;  and  have  foolifhly  contrived  to  make  our 
burden  then  heavier!,  when  we  are  lead  able  to  fland 
under  it  \  and  have  provided  and  laid  in  infinite  mat- 
ter for  repentance,  when  there  is  hardly  any  fpace  and 
opportunity  left  for  the  exercife  of  it ;  and  when  we 
fhall  be  utterly  difheartned  from  fetting  about  fo  vaft 
a  work,  of  which  we  can  fee  no  end ;  and  yet  have 
fo  little  time  for  it,  that  if  we  do  any  thing  at  all  in 
it  we  fhall  be  forced  to  huddle  it  up  in  fo  much  hade 
and  confufion,  as  will,  I  doubt,  fignify  but  very  little 
either  to  our  prcfent  comfort,  or  our  future  happi- 
nefs. 

Confider  this  in  time,  all  ye  that  forget  God  in 
the  day  of  your  profperity  and  in  the  bed  age  of  your 
life,  and  yet  when  the  day  of  affliction  and  the  infir- 
mities of  age  come  upon  you,  you  would  be  glad  then 
to  have  God  mindful  of  you,  and  merciful  to  you. 
But  if  thou  wouldlt  not  have  him  "  caff,  thee  off  in 
"  thine  old  age,  and  foriake  thee  when  thy  llrength 

Vol.  IV,  6  K  "fails, 

2. 


Concerning  the  advantages 

fails,  do  thou  remember  him  in  the  days  of  thy 
youth,"  in  the  prime  and  vigour  of  thine  age : 
for  this  is  the  acceptable  time3  this  is  the  day  of 
"  falvation." 

Therefore  "  acquaint  thyfelf  with  him,  and  re- 
"  member  him  now  ;  in  the  days  of  thy  youth  ;H  de- 
fer not  fo  neceflary  a  work,  no  not  for  one  moment  : 
begin  it  juft  now,  that  fo  thou  mayeft  have  made 
fome  goodprogrefs  in  it  "  before  the  evil  days  come ; 
a  before  the  fun,  and  the  moon,  and  the  ftars  be 
"  darkened,"  and  all  the  comforts  and  joys  of  life  be 
fled  and  gone. 

Be  not  deceived,  O  man,  whofoever  thou  art ; 
"  for  God  is  not  mocked.5*  He  will  not  be  put  off 
by  us  "  with  the  days  in  which  we  ourfelves  have  no 
«c  pleafure."  Offer  up  thyfelf  a  living  facrifice  and 
not  a  carcafe,  if  thou  wouldft  be  accepted.  Do  not 
provoke  and  affront  the  living  God  by  offering  up  to 
him  faint  fpirits,  and  feeble  hands,  and  dim  eyes, 
and  a  dead  heart.  He  hath  been  bountiful  to  us  in 
giving  us  the  beft  blefTings  of  life,  and  all  things 
richly  to  enjoy  ^  and  do  we  grudge  him  the  mod 
valuable  part  of  our  lives,  "  and  the  years  which  we 
"  ourfelves  have  pleafure  in  ?  Do  we  thus  requite  the 
^  Lord  ?  foolifh  people  and  unwife  1"  Is  the  giver 
of  all  good  things  unworthy  to  receive  from  us  any 
thing  that  is  good  ?  "  If  we  offer  up  the  lame  in 
"  facrifice,  is  it  not  evil  ?  and  if  we  offer  up  the 
<c  blind,  is  it  not  evil  ?  Offer  it  now  to  thy  gover- 
"  nor,  and  try  if  he  will  beplcafed  with  thee  and  ac- 
M  cept  thy  perfon."  Hath  God  deferved  fo  ill  at 
our  hands,  that  we  mould  forget  and  negled  him  ? 
and  hath  the  devil  deferved  fo  well  of  us,  that  we 

fliould 


of  an  early  piety.  543 

lhould  be  contented  to  fpend  the  bed  part  of  our  S  E  R  M. 
lives   in  his  fervice,  which  is  perfect  flavery  ?  Was 
he  our  creator,  or  can  he  make  us  happy  ?  Nay,  does 
he  not  carry  on  a  moft  malicious  defign  to  make  us 
for  ever  miferabie  ? 

Secondly,  let  me  urge  thofe  who  have  neglected 
this  firft  and  bed  opportunity  of  their  lives  to  repent 
quickly  and  return  to  a  better  mind,  left  all  oppor- 
tunity of  doing  it  be  loft  for  ever,  and  their  cafe  be- 
come  defperate  and  pad  remedy.  Refolve  to  redeem, 
if  it  be  poffible,  the  time  which  you  fhould  have  im- 
proved :  you  have  fquander'd  away  too  much  already, 
wafte  no  more  of  this  precious  opportunity  of  life  : 
you  have  deferred  a  necefTary  work  too  long,  delay 
it  no  longer.  Do  not  delude  yourfelves  with  vain 
hopes  that  this  work  may  be  done  at  any  time,  and 
in  an  inftant  i  and  that  if  you  can  but  fafhion  your 
Jaft  breath  into  "  Lord  have  mercy  upon  me,"  this 
will  prevail  with  God  and  make  atonement  for  the 
long  courfe  of  a  wicked  and  finful  life.  What  ftrange 
thoughts  have  men  of  God  and  heaven,  what  extras 
gant  conceits  of  the  little  evil  of  fin  and  the  great 
eafinefs  of  repentance,  that  can  impofe  upon  them- 
felves  at  this  rate  ? 

Bethink  yourfelves  better  in  time,  "  confider  and 
"  fhew  yourfelves  men."  What  will  you  do  in  the 
day  of  your  diftrefs,  who  have  neglected  God  in  your 
moft  flourishing  and  profperous  condition  ?  What  will 
you  fay  to  him  in  a  dying  hour,  who  fcarce  ever  had 
one  ferious  thought  of  him  all  your  life  ?  Can  you 
have  the  face  at  that  time  to  befpeak  him  in  this 
manner?  "  Lord,  now  the  world  and  my  lulls  have 
•c  left  me,  and  I  feel  myfelf  ready  to  fink  into  eternal 

6  K  2  per- 


544.  Concerning  the  advantages 

5ER M.  "  perdition,  I  lay  hold  upon  thy  mercy  to  deliver 
V^"  my  foul  from  going  down  into  the  pit.  I  have 
"  heard  ftrange  things  of  thy  goodnefs  and  that  thou 
*c  art  merciful  even  to  a  miracle.  This  is  that  which 
44  I  always  trufted  to,  that  after  a  long  life  of  fin 
44  and  vanity  thou  wouldft  at  laft  be  pacified  with 
44  a  few  penitent  words  and  fighs  at  the  hour  of 
44  death.  Let  me  nor,  I  pray  thee,  be  difappointed 
44  of  this  hope  and  put  to  confufion." 

Is  this  an  addrefs  fit  to  be  made  to  a  wife  man, 
much  lefs  to  the  all- wife  and  juft  judge  of  the  world  ? 
and  yet  this  feems  to  be  the  plain  interpretation  of 
the  late  and  forc'd  application  of  a  great  and  ha- 
bitual finner  to  almighty  God  in  his  laft  extremi- 
ty, and  when  he  is  juft  giving  up  the  ghoft  and 
going  to  appear  before  his  dreadful  tribunal. 

I  fay  again,  let  no  man  deceive  you  with  vain 
words  or  with  vain  hopes,  or  with  falfe  notions  of  a 
flight  and  fudden  repentance  :  as  if  heaven  were  an 
hofpital  founded  on  purpofe  to  receive  all  fick  and 
maimed  perfons,  that  when  they  can  live  no  longer 
to  the  lufts  of  the  fichi  and  the  finful  pleafures  of 
this  wrorld,  can  but  put  up  a  cold  and  formal  peti- 
tion to  be  admitted  there. 

No,  no,  as  fure  as  God  is  true,  they  fhall  never 
fee  the  kingdom  of  God,  who  inftead  of  feeking 
it  in  the  firft  place  make  it  their  laft  refuge  and 
retreat :  and  when  they  find  themfelves  under  the 
fentence  of  death  and  damnation,  only  to  avoid  pre- 
sent execution,  and  fince  there  is  no  other  remedy, 
do  at  laft  bethink  themfelves  of  getting  to  heaven, 
and  fall  upon  their  knees  to  petition  the  great  judge 
pf  the  world  that  they  may  be  tranfported  thither. 

Can 


of  an  early  piety.  54 r 

Can  any  man  in  reafon  expect  that  fuch  a  petition  s  E  R  M. 
will  be  granted  ?  I  tell  yon  nay  •,  but  except  you  re- 
pent fooner,  and  at  a  fitter  time,  and  after  a  better 
fafhion,  you  fhall  certainly  perifh.  As  much  as 
God  defires  the  falvation  of  men,  he  will  not  pro- 
ftitute  heaven,  and  fet  the  gates  of  it  wide  open 
to  thofe  who  only  fly  to  it  in  extremity,  but  never 
fought  it  in  good  earned,  nor  indeed  do  now  care 
for  it  or  defire  it  for  any  other  reafon,  but  to  ex- 
cufe  them  from  going  to  hell.  They  have  no  va- 
lue for  heaven,  becaufe  they  are  in  no  ways  fit  for 
it,  but  yet  they  think  hell  to  be  the  worfe  place  of 
the  two. 

The  ever  blefTed  God  is  himfelf  abundantly  fufH- 
cient  for  his  own  happinefs,  and  does  not  need  our 
company  to  make  any  addition  to  it:  nor  yet  is 
heaven  fo  defolate  a  place,  or  fo  utterly  void  of  in- 
habitants, that  like  fome  newly  difcovered  plantation 
it  mould  be  glad  to  receive  the  mod  vile  and  pro- 
fligate perfons,  the  fcum  and  refufe  of  mankind. 
There  are  an  innumerable  company  of  glorious  an- 
gels, much  nobler  creatures  than  the  bed  of  men, 
to  people  thofe  blefTed  regions.  "  Tho -lands  of 
"  thoufands  continually  fland  before  God,  and  ten 
"  thoufand  times  ten  thoufands  mmifter  unto 
"  him." 

We  do  abfolutely  (land  in  need  of  God  to  make 
us  happy,  but  he  hath  no  need  of  us  to  help  him 
to  be  fo.  God  indeed  is  fo  good,  as  to  defire 
our  happinefs  as  earneftly  as  if  it  were  necefTiry  to  his 
own  :  but  he  is  happy  in  and  from  himfelf,  and 
without  him  it  is  impoflible  we  fhould  be  happy, 
nay,  we  muft  of  neceflity  be  for  ever  miferable. 

To 


54 6  Concerning  the  advantages,  &c. 

SERM.  To  conclude;  if  we  would  have  God  to  accept 
us  in  a  dying  hour,  and  our  bleffed  Saviour  "  to 
"  remember  us  now  he  is  in  his  kingdom,"  Jet  us 
think  of  him  betimes,  and  "  acquaint  ourfelves  with 
"  him  that  we  may  beat  peace:  now  before  the  evil 
"  days  come,  and  the  years  draw  nigh  when  wc 
"  mail  fay  we  have  no  pleafure  in  them.'* 

"  O  that  men  were  wife,  that  they  underftood 
"  this,  that  they  would  confider  their  latter  end." 
Which  God  of  his  infinite  goodnefs  grant  that  we 
may  all  ferioufly  lay  to  heart,  in  this  our  day  -,  and 
may  learn  betimes  "  fo  to  number  our  days,  that 
"  we  may  apply  our  hearts  to  wifdom :"  for  his 
mercies  fake  in  Jesus  Christ,  to  whom  with  the 
Father  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  be  all  honour  and 
glory,  now  and  for  ever.     Amen. 


THE 


THE 

RULE  of  FAITH: 

Or   an    ANSWER   to  the 

TREATISE  of  Mr.  J.S. 

Entitled, 

S  URE-FO  OTING,  &c. 


£4f 


To  my  honoured  and  learned  Friend 

Dr.  STILLINGFLEET, 


S  I  R, 

I  Have,  with  a  great  deal  of  pkafure  and 
fatisfaflion,  read  over  your  book,  which  I 

find  in  every  part  anfwerable  to  its  title \ 
viz.  A  rational  account  of  the  grounds  of  the 
protectant  religion.  And  now  I  thank  you  for 
it,  net  only  as  a  private  favour ,  but  a  publick 
benefit.  No  fooner  had  I  perufed  it,  but  I  met 
with  a  difcourfe  entitled,  Sure-footing  in  chrif- 
tianity.  And  although  I  have  ?io  fmall  preju- 
dice again/l  books  with  conceited  titles,  yet 
I  was  tempted  to  look  into  this,  becaufe  it 
pretended  to  contain  animadverfions  on  fome 
paffages  in  your  book,  which  I  hadfo  lately  read 
over.  Upon  perufal  of  which  animadverfions, 
I  found  that  the  author  of  them  had  attacked 
(and  in  his  own  opinion  confuted)  a  page  or 
two  in  your  book.  This  drew  me  on  to  take  a 
view  of  his  main  difcourfes:  which,  becaufe 
they  arc  in  great  vogue  among  fome  of  his  own 
party,  and  do  with  an  unufual  kind  of  confi- 

Vol.  IV.  6L  dencc 

2. 


£5° 


dence  and  oftentation  pretend  to  the  newefi  and 
moji  exaff  fafhion  of  writing  controverfy,  as 
being  all  along  demonftrative  and  built  upon 
felf-evident  principles ;  therefore  1  rejolved 
throughly  to  examine  them,  that  I  might  dif- 
cover  (if  I  could)  upon  what  fo  firm  and  jolid 
foundations  this  high  and  mighty  confidence  was 
built. 

But  before  I  had  entered  upon  this  undertak- 
ing, I  met  with  a  letter  from  the  author  of 
fure- footing  to  his  anfwerer,  din  fling  him 
how  he  ought  to  demean  himfelf  in  his  anfwer. 
In  which  letter,  though  there  be  many  things 
liable  to  great  exception,  yet  becaufe  I  am  un- 
willing to  be  diverted  from  the  main  que  (lion, 
I  fall  not  argue  with  him  about  any  of  thofe 
?natters  -,  only  take  leave  to  ufe  the  fame  liberty 
in  managing  my  anfwer,  which  he  hath  ajfumed 
to  himfelf  in  pre/bribing  laws  ■  to  me  about  it  : 
therefore,  without  taking  any  farther  notice  of 
his  letter3  I  addrefs  myfelf  to  his  book. 


THE 


£4* 

THE 


RULE  of  FAIT  H. 


PART      I. 

The  explication  and  ft  ate  of  the  queftion. 

SECT.    I. 

§.  i.  '    IT-1  HE  queftion   he  propounds  to  himfelf  The  ex- 

to  debate,    is,  "  What  is   the  rule   0fP^ation 
■  '  .      of  the 

"  faith?"    In  order    to  the  reiolution  Terms  of 
whereof  he  endeavours,  *he  ^e" 

Firft,  to  fix  the  true  notion  of  thefe  two  terms, 
Rule  and  Faith:  which  way  of  proceeding  I 
cannot  but  allow  to  be  very  proper  and  reafonable, 
but  I  can  by  no  means  think  his  explication  of  thofe 
terms  to  be  fufficient.  He  tells  us,  "  That  a 
"  rule  is  that  which  is  able  to  regulate,  or  guide 
<c  him  that  ufeth  it  :"  in  which  defcription,  as  in 
many  other  paflages  of  this  book,  he  is  plainly  guilty 
of  that  which  he  taxeth  in  Mr.*  Whitby,  that  is,  *  p>  lg0j 
"  the  confounding  of  a  rule,  by  making  Regulating 
"  and  Guiding  to  be  equivalent  words."  But  tor 
this  I  am  no  farther  concerned  than  to  take  no- 
tice of  it  by  the  way  :  the  fault  which  I  find  in 
this  definition  is,  that  it  doth  not  make  the  thing 
plainer  than  it  was  before  -,  fo  that  no  man  is  the 
wifer  for  it,  nor  one  jot  nearer  knowing  what  a 
rule  is.     He  pretends  to    tell    Englifhmen  what  a 

6L  2  rule 


$$2  The  RULE  of  FAITH. 

?AR.T  rule  is;  and  for  their  clearer  underflanding  of  this 

%=a^Lamj  word,  lie  explains  it  by  a  word  lefs  removed  from 
the  latin,  "  a  rule  is  that  which' is  able  to  regu- 
"  late  him  that  nfeth  it  -, "  juft  as  if  a  man  mould 
go  about  to  explain  what  a  lawgiver  is,  by  faying, 
**  he  is  one  that  hath  the  power  of  legiflation." 
Of  the  two  he  had  much  better  have  faid,  that  a 
rule  is  a  thing  that  is  able  to  rule  him  that  ufeth 
it,  though  this  be  nothing  but  an  explication  of  the 
fame  word  by  it  felf. 

§  2.  Not  much  better  is  his  explication  of  the 
term  faith,  which  he  tells  us,   in  the  common  fenfe 

*  p.  4.  of  mankind,  is  the  fame  with  believing.  *  He 
declared  indeed  beforehand,  "  that  he  did  not  in- 
iC  tend  to  give  rigorous  fchool- definitions  of  either 
ci  this  or  the  former  word  ;"  and  (to  do  him  right) 
he  hath  not  in  the  lead  fwerv'd  from  his  intention. 
It  were  to  be  wifh'd  he  had  prefae'd  fome  fuch 
thing  to  his  demonftrations  ;  for  the  reader  will  find, 
that  they  are  not  a  whit  more  rigorous  than  hi$ 
definitions  •,  the  latter  of  which  doth  very  much  re- 
femble  the  country-man's  way  of  defining,  who  be- 
ing ask'd  by  his  neighbour  what  an  invafion  was, 
after  fome  ftudy  told  him  very  gravely,  "  that  an 
5t  invafion  was  as  if  he  mould  fay  an  invafion.  M 
In  like  manner  Mr.  S.  tells  us,  u  that  faith  (or 
*c  which  is  all  one,  belief)  is  the  fame  with  be- 
<e  lieving  -, "  which,  in  my  apprehenfion,  is  but  a 
fountry  definition,  unlefs  the  interpofing  of  thofc 
folemn  words  [in  the  common  fenfe  of  mankind  J 
may  be  thought  to  mend  the  matter.    This  puts  me 

J  p,  159.  in  mind  of  what  Mr.  S.  lays  in  his  *  tranfition   (zt 

h,e  calls  it)  where  he  gives  the  reader,  an  account  what 

feafce 


The  RULE  of  FAITH.  553 

feats  he  hath  done  in  his  book :  M  he  will  fee  (fays  SECT. 
<c  he)  I  take  my  rife  at  the  meaning  of  the  words 
"  Rule  and  Faith  -,  this  known,  I  eftablifh  my  firft 
"  principles  in  this  prefent  matter  to  be  thefe,  viz. 
"  a  rule  is  a  rule,  faith  is  faith."  This  is  the 
right  felf-evident  method  he  talks  fo  much  of,  and 
his  principles  agree  admirably  well  with  his  defini- 
tions. If  he  had  but  proceeded  in  the  fame  me- 
thod, and  added,  "  that  a  rule  of  faith  is  a  rule  of 
"  faith  ;  that  oral  tradition  is  oral  tradition  ,  and 
"  that  to  fay,  oral  tradition  is  the  rule  of  faith,  is 
iC  as  much  as  to  fay  oral  tradition  is  the  rule  of 
'  "  faith,"  the  whole  bufinefs  had  been  concluded 
without  any  more  ado ;  and  I  think  no  body  would 
have  gone  about  to  confute  him. 

§  3.  Rejecting  then  his  way  of  definition  as 
inept  and  frivolous,  and  no  ways  tending  to  give  a 
man  a  clearer  notion  of  things;  I  .(hall  endeavour 
to  explain  a  little  better  (if  I  can)  the  meaning  of 
thefe  terms. 

A  rule  (when  we  fpeak  of  a  rule  of  faith)  is  a 
metaphorical  word,  which  in  its  firft  and  proper 
fenfe,  being  applied  to  material  and  fenfibje  things, 
is  the  meafure  according  to  which  we  judge  of 
the  ftraightnefs  and  crookednels  of  things ;  and  from 
hence  it  is  transferred  by  analogy  to  things  moral 
or  intellectual.  A  moral  rule  is  the  meafure  accord- 
ing to  which  we  judge  whether  a  thing  be  good 
or  evil  •,  and  this  kind  of  Rule  is  that  which  is  com- 
monly called  a  law,  and  the  agreement  or  difagree- 
ment  of  our  actions  to  this  rule,  is  fuitably  to  the 
metaphor,  called  rectitude  or  obliquity.  An  intel- 
lectual rule  is   the  meafure  according  to  which  wc 

judge 


5?4  The  RULE  of  FAITH. 

PART  judge  whether  a  thing  be  true  or  falfe;  and  this  is 
either  general  or  more  particular.  Common  no- 
tion?, and  the  acknowledged  principles  of  reafon, 
are  that  general  rule,  according  to  which  we  judge 
whether  a  thing  be  true  or  falfe.  The  particular 
principles  of  every  fcience  are  the  more  particular 
rules  according  to  which  we  judge  whether  things 
in  that  fcience  be  true  or  falfe.  So  that  the  gene- 
ral notion  of  a  rule  is,  that  it  is  u  a  meafure,  by 
"  the  agreement  or  difagreement  to  which  we  judge 
"  of  all  things  of  that  kind  to  which  it  belongs." 

§  4.  Faith,  though  both  among  facred  and  pro- 
fane writers  it  be  ufed  many  times  more  general- 
ly, for  a  perfuafion  or  aflent  of  the  1  to  any 
thing  wrought  in  us  by  any  kind  of  argument; 
yet,  as  it  is  a  term  of  art  ufed  by  divines,  it  figni- 
fies  that  particulai  i  of  affent  which  is  wrought 
in  us  by  teftimony  or  authority  :  fo  that  divine 
faith,  which  we  are  now  fpeaking  of,  is  an  alTent 
to  a  thing  upon  the  teftimony  or  authority  of  God; 
er,  which  is  all  one,  "  an  aflent  to  a  truth  upon 
ct  divine  revelation." 

§  5.  A  rule  of  faith  is  the  meafure,  according 
to  which  we  judge  what  matters  we  are  to  affent 
to^  as  revealed  to  us  by  God,  and  what  not.  And 
more  particularly,  the  rule  of  chriftian  faith  is  the 
meafure,  according  to  which  we  are  to  judge  what 
we  ought  to  ?ff,-  to,  as  the  doctrine,  revealed  by 
Christ  to  the  ivc  what  not. 

§  6.  c.o  that  this  queftion,  "  What  is  the  rule 
M  of  chriftian  faith  ?  "  fuppofeth  a  doctrine  revealed 
by  Christ  to  the  world  ;  and  that  that  doctrine 
was  intelligibly  and  entirely  delivered  by   Christ 

t? 


The  RULE  of  FAITH.  $$$ 

to    his  apoftles,   and  fufficient    confirmation  given  SECT. 
to  it ;  that   this  doctrine  was  in  the  fame   manner  ^^^^j 
published  to  the  world  by  the  apoflles,  who  like- 
wife  gave  fufficient  evidence  of  the  truth  of  it.    All 
this  is  neceiFarily  luppofcd  in  the  queftion  :  for  it 
would  be  in  vain  to  enquire  whether  this  or  that  be 
the   rule  of  chriftian  faith,    if  fuch  a  thing   as  the 
chriftian    faith    were    not     firft    fuppofed.     Vvhen  • 
therefore   we   enquire  what  is  the  rule  of  chriftian 
faith  ?    the   meaning    of  that  enquiry   is,    by  what 
way   and  means  the  knowledge  of  Christ's  doc- 
trine is  conveyed  certainly  down   to   us,  who    live 
at  the  diftance  of  fo  many  ages  from  the  time  of  its. 
firft  delivery  :  for  this  being  known,  we   have  the 
rule  of  faith  ;  that  is,  a  meafure  by  which  we  may 
judge  what  we  are   to  afTent  to,  as  the  doctrine  of 
Christ,   and  what  not.     So  that  when  any  que- 
ftion arifeth  about  any  particular  proportion,   whe- 
ther this  be  part  of  Christ's  doctrine,  we  may  be 
able  by  this  rule  to  refolve  it. 

.    SECT.     II. 

§  i.  'T'HE  next  thing  to  be  confidered,    is  his  Mr.  s*$ 

a     reiblution  of  this  queftion  ;   by  which  we  f^ch.° 
fhall  know  what  his  opinion  is  concerning  the  rule 
of  faith  -,    for  that   being  known,    the  controverfy 
between  us  will  eafily  be  ftated. 

His  opinion  in  general  is,  that  oral  or  practical 
tradition  (in  oppofition  to  writing,  or  any  other 
way  that  can  be  aftigned)  is  the  rule  of  faith.  By 
oral  or  practical  tradition,  he  means  "  *  a  delivery  *  p.  *l% 
"  down  from  hand  to  hand  (by  words,  and  a  con- 
"  ftant  courfe  of  frequent  and  viable  actions,  con- 

"  form  able 


the  RULE  of  FAITH. 

formable  to  thofe  words)  of  the  fenfe  and  faith  of 
"  forefathers." 

§  2.  Now,  that  I  may  bring  the  controverfy  be- 
tween us  to  a  clear  (late,  I  am  firft  to  take  a  more 
particular  view  of  his  opinion  concerning  the  rule 
of  faith,  that  fo  I  may  the  better  underftand  how 
much  he  attributes  to  oral  tradition,  and  what  to 
the  fcriptures  or  written  tradition.  And  then  I  am 
to  lay  down  the  proteftant  rule  of  faith,  that  fo  it 
may  appear  how  far  we  agree,  and  how  far  we  dif- 
fer. The  fum  of  what  he  attributes  to  oral  tradition, 
fo  far  as  can  be  collected  out  of  fo  obfcure  and  con- 
fufed  a  difccurfe,  may  be  reduced  to  thefe  five 
heads. 

§  3.  Firft,  that  the  doctrine  of  chriftian  religion 
was  delivered  by  Christ  to  the  apoftles,  and  by 
them  publifhed  to  the  world  ;  and  that  the  age 
which  firft  received  it  from  the  apoftles,  delivered 
it  as  they  received  it  without  any  change  or  cor- 
ruption to  their  children,  and  they  to  theirs,  and 
fo  it  went  on  folely  by  this  way  of  oral  tradition. 
This  is  the  fum  of  his  explication  of  tradition, 
difc.  5th. 

§  4.  Secondly,  that  this  way  alone  is  not  only 
fufflcicnt  to  convev  this  doctrine  down  to  all  ages 
certainly,  and  without  any  alteration  •,  but  it  is  the 
only  pofiible  way  that  can  be  imagined  of  convey- 
ing down  a  doctrine  fecurely  from  one  age  to  ano- 
ther. And  this  is  the  natural  refuk  of  his  difcourfe 
about  the  properties  of  a  rule  of  faith  :  for  if  the 
true  properties  of  the  rule  of  faith  do  belong  to  oral 
tradition,  then  it  is  a  fufricicnt  means ;  and  if  thofe 
properties  do  folely  and  efTentially  appertain  to  it, 

and 


The  RULE  of  FAITH.  5S7 

and  are  incompatible  to  any  thing  elfe  (as  he  endea-  SECT, 
vours  to  prove)  then  it  is  impofiible  there  fhould  ^^-^j 
be  any  other  way. 

§  5.  Thirdly,  that  it  is  impoflible  this  means  fhould 
Fail  or  mils  of  its  end ;  that  is,  the  doctrine  of 
Christ  being  once  put  into  this  way  of  convey- 
ance, it  can  neither  ceafe  to  defcend,  nor  be  at  any 
time  corrupted  or  changed  in  its  defcent.  This  is 
that  which  his  demonftrarions  pretend  to  prove. 

§  6.  Fourthly,  that  the  infallibility  of  oral  tradi- 
tion, or  the  impoffibility  of  its  failing,  is  a  nrft 
and  felf-evident  principle.  This  he  frequently  afterts 
throughout  his  book. 

§  7.  Fifthly,  that  this  way  of  oral  tradition  hath 
de  fafto  in  all  ages  been  acknowledged  by  chrifti- 
ans,  as  the  only  way  and  means  whereby  the  doc- 
trine of  chriftianity  hath  been  conveyed  down  to 
them.  And  this  is  that  which  he  attempts  to  prove 
from  the  confent  of  authority. 

§8.  As  for  the  fcriptures,  he  grants  them  indeed 
to  have  been  written  by  men  divinely  infpired,  and 
to  contain  a  divine  doctrine,  even  the  fame  which  is 
delivered  by  oral  tradition  ;  fo  he  tells  us>  cC  *  'Tis*  P.  117-g 
<c  certain  the  apoftles  taught  the  fame  doctrine  they 
"  writ."  But  then  he  denies  it  to  be  of  any  ufe 
without  oral  tradition,  becaufe  neither  the  letter 
nor  fenfe  of  it  can  without  that  be  afcertained  :  fo 
he  faith  in  his  letter  to  Dr.  Cafaubon,  "  *  As  for*  P.  137. 
the  fcriptures  (^fcertaining  their  letter  and  fenfe, 
which  is  done  by  tradition)  'tis  clear  they  are  of 
incomparable  value ;  not  only  for  the  divine 
doctrine  contained  in  them,  but  alfo  for  many 
particular  pafifages,  whofe  fource  OX  firft  attefta- 
Vol.  IV.  6  M,  M  tta) 

3- 


The  RULE  o/FJIfH. 
PART"  tion  not  being  univerfal,  nor  their  nature  much 
rj-_i^  cc  practical,  might  poflibly  have  been  loft   in   their 
"  conveyance  down  by  tradition.5'     Where,  though 
he  gives  the  fcriptures  very  good  words,  it  is  to  be 
underftood,  provided   they  will  be  fubordinate,  and 
acknowledge  that  they  owe  their  fenfe  and  their  be- 
in°-  intelligible  and  ufeful    to  oral  tradition.     For  if 
any  man   fliall    prefume  to  fay,  that  this  book  hath 
any  certain  fenfe  without  oral  tradition,  or  that  God 
can  write  plainly  and  intelligibly,  and  that  this  book 
which  he  hath  endited  is  fo  written,  and  doth  not  de- 
pend upon  tradition  for  its  fenfe  and  interpretation  5 
then  the  mod  fcurrilous  language  is  not  bad  enough 
for  the  fcriptures :    then  what  are  thofe  facred  writ- 
•A-pend.ings,   but  "  *  ink  varioufly  figured  in  a  book  -f,  un- 
4th.  pag.  tt  fenfed   characters,  waxen-natured  words,  not   yet 

2  10  . 

f  Pi  68.  *c  fenfed,  nor  having  any  certain  interpreter,  but  fit 
"  to  be  play'd  upon  diverfly  by  quirks  of  wit  ?  that 
<c  is,  apt  to  blunder  and  confound,  but  to  clear  little 
*c  or  nothing."  Thefe,  with  many  other  difgraceful 
terms,  he  very  liberally  bellows  upon  the  divine 
oracles  ;  the  confideration  whereof,  did  it  not  mini- 
fter  too  much  horror,  would  afford  fome  comfort ; 
for  by  this  kind  of  rude  ufage,  fo  familiar  with  him 
towards  his  adverfaries,  one  may  reafonably  conjec- 
ture, that  he  doth  not  reckon  the  fcriptures  among 
his  friei'ds. 

§  9.  And  whereas  he  faith,  "  That  the  fcriptures 
cc  have  preferved  many  particular  pafTages,  which, 
<c  becaufe  their  fource  or  firft  atteftation  was  not  uni- 
<c  verfal,  nor  their  nature  much  practical,  might 
"  poffibly  have  been  loft  in  their  conveyance  down  by 
M  tradition  &••  this  is  impoffible,  according  to  his  hy- 

pothefis : 


The  RULE  of  FAITH.  559 

pothefis :  for  if  neither  the  fcripture's  letter,  nor  the  s  E^C  T. 
certain  fenfe  of  it,  as  to  the  main  body  of  chriftian 
doctrine,  could  have  been  fecured  without  oral  tradi- 
tion -,  that  is,  if  we  could  not  have  known  that  thofe 
pafTages  which  contain  the  main  points  of  Christ's 
doctrine,  either  had  been  written  by  men  divinely  in- 
fpired,  or  what  the  fenfe  of  them  was,  but  from  the 
confonancy  and  agreement  of  thofe  pafTages  with  the 
doctrine  which  was  orally  preached  by  the  apoftles; 
how  can  we  be  certain  either  of  the  letter  or  fenfe  of 
other  particular  paflages  which  mud  necelTarily  want 
this  confirmation  from  oral  tradition,  becaufe  "  their 
"  firft  atteftation  was  not  univerfal,  nor  their  nature 
*<  much  practical  ?*-  Nay,  his  difcourfe  plainly  im- 
plies, that  we  can  have  no  fecurity  at  all,  either  of  the 
letter  or  fenfe  of  any  other  parts  of  fcripture,  but  on- 
ly thofe  which  are  coincident  with  the  main  body  of 
chriftian  doctrine,  as  is  evident  from  thefe  words, 
"  *  Tradition  eitablimed,  the  church  is  provided  of  a*  p#  u5, 
"  certain  and  infallible  rule  to  preferve  a  copy  of  the 
"  fcriptures  letter  truly  fignificative  of  Christ's 
"  fenfe,  as  far  as  it  is  coincident  with  the  main  body 
<c  of  chriftian  doctrine  preached  at  firft  •,"  becaufe 
<c  fenfe  writ  in  mens  hearts  by  tradition,  can  eafily 
<c  guide  them  to  correct  the  alteration  of  the  out- 
4t  ward  letter."  This  I  perceive  plainly  is  the  thing 
they  would  be  at,  they  would  correct:  the  outward 
letter  of  fcripture  by  fenfe  written  in  their  hearts  *, 
and  then,  inftead  of  leaving  out  the  fecond  command- 
ment, they  would  change  it  into  a  precept  of  giving 
due  worlhip  to  images,  according  to  the  council  of 
Trent-,  and  a  thoufand  other  alterations  they  muft 
make  in  the  bible,  to  make  it  truly  fignificative  of 

6  M  2  the 


560  The  RULE  of  FAITH. 

P  A  R  T  the  fenfe  of  their  church.  Bat  furely  the  outward  let- 
ter of  other  paifages  of  fcripture,  which  were  not  in- 
tended to  fignify  points  of  faith,  is  equally  liable  to 
alterations  :  and  yet  the  church  is  not  by  tradition 
provided  of  any  way  to  correct  thefe  alterations  when 
they  happen  -,  becaufe  tradition  doth,  as  this  corollary 
implies,  only  furnifh  the  church  with  a  certain  and 
infallible  rule  of  preferving  a  copy  of  the  fcriptures 
letter,  fo  far  as  it  is  coincident  with  the  main  body 
of  chriftian  doctrine. 

P.  117.  §  10.  Again,  he  tells  us,  "  *  Tradition  eftablifhed, 
"  the  church  is  provided  of  a  certain  and  infallible 
"  rule  to  interpret  fcripture-letter  by,  fo  as  to  arrive 
"  certainly  at  Christ's  fenfe,  as  far  as  the  letter  con- 
<c  cerns  the  body  of  chriftian  doctrine  preached  at 
"  firft,  or  points  requifite  to  falvation.'*  So  that 
whatever  he  may  attribute  to  fcripture  for  fafhion's 
fake,  and  to  avoid  calumny  with  the  vulgar,  as  he 
fays  very  ingenuoufly  in  his  explication  of  the  15th 
corollary  *,  neverthelefs  'tis  plain,  that  according  to 
his  own  hypothefis,  he  cannot  but  look  upon  it  as 
perfectly  ufelefs  and  pernicious.  That  'tis  altogether 
ufelefs,  according  to  his  hypothefis,  is  plain  ;  for  the 
main  body  of  chriftian  doctrine  is  fecurely  conveyed 
to  us  without  it,  and  it  can  give  no  kind  of  confir- 
mation to  it,  becaufe  it  receives  all  its  confirmation 
from  it ;  only  the  church  is  ever  and  anon  put  to 
a  great  deal  of  trouble  to  correct  the  alteration  of 
the  outward  letter,  by  tradition  and  fenfe  written  in 
their  hearts.  And  as  for  all  other  parts  of  fcripture 
which  are  not  coincident  with  the  main  body  of 
chriftian  doctrine,  we  can  have  no  certainty  either 
that  the  outward  letter  is  true  ;  nor,  if  we  could,  can 

we 


The  RULE  of  FAITH.  561 

we  poflibly  arrive  at  any  certain  fenfe  of  them.    And  S  E  C  T. 
that  it  is  intolerably  pernicious,  according  to  his  hypo- ,  __  '   j 
thefis,  is  plain,  becaufe  "  *  every  filly  and  upftart  here-*  P.  40. 
•*  fy fathers  itfelf  upon  it;"  and  when  men  leave  tra- 
dition (as  he  fuppofeth  all  hereticks  do)  the  fcripture 
is  the  moft  dangerous  engine  that  could  have  been  in- 
vented, being  to  fuch  perions  only  "  *  waxen-natur'd*  p  6g 
words,  not  ienfed,  nor  having   any  certain  inter- 
preter ;  but  fit  to  be  play'd  upon  diverfly  by  quirks 
of  wit;  that  is,  apt  to  blunder  and  confound,  but 
<c  to  clear  little  or  nothing."     And  indeed,  if  his 
hypothefis  were  true,  the  fcriptures  might  well  de- 
ferve  all  the  contemptuous  language  which  he  ufeth 
againft  them  ;  and  *  Mr.  White's  comparifon  of  them*  Apology 
with  Lilly's  almanack,  would  not  only  be  pardon- for  tradi- 
able,  but  proper  ;  and  (unlefs  he  added  it  out  of  pru- 165!    S" 
dence,  and  for  the  peoples  fake,  whom  he  may  think 
too  fuperftitioufly  conceited  of  thofe  books)  he  might 
have  fpared  that  cold  excufe  which  he  makes  for  ufing 
this  fimilitude,   "  that  it  was  agreeable  rather  to  the 
"  impertinency  of  the  objection  than  the  dignity  of 
"  the  fubjecl:."     Certain  it  is,  if  theie  men  are  true 
to  their  own  principles,  that  notwithstanding  the 
high  reverence  and  efteem  pretended  to  be  born  by 
them  and  their  church  to  the  fcriptures,  they  muffc 
heartily  defpife  them,  and  wifh  them  out  of  the  way : 
and  even  look  upon  it  as  a  great  overfight  of  the  di- 
vine providence  to  trouble  his  church  with  a  book, 
which,  if  their  difcourfe  be  of  any  confequence,  can 
fland  catholicks  in  no  fiead  at  all,  and  is  fo  dangerous 
and  mifchievous  a  weapon  in  the  hands  of  hereticks. 

SECT, 


The  RULE  of  FAITH. 
SECT.    III. 


The  pro-  §  *•  TJ^ng  tnus  taken  a  view  of  his  opinion, 
teftant  JTl   and  confidered  how  much  he  attributes  to 

oral  tradition,  and  how  little  to  the  fcriptures  ;  be- 


concern- 


ing  the  fore  I  aflail  his  hypothefis,  I  fhall  lay  down  the 
fJ-h  Prote^ant  rule  of  faith  ;  not  that  fo  much  is  necef. 
fary  for  the  anfwering  of  his  book,  but  that  he  may 
have  no  colour  of  objection,  that  I  proceed  altogether 
in  the  deftructive  way,  and  overthrow  his  principle, 
as  he  calls  it,  without  fubftituting  another  in  its  room. 
The  opinion  then  of  the  protectants  concerning  the 
rule  of  faith,  is  this  in  general,  that  thofe  books 
which  we  call  the  holy  fcriptures,  are  the  means 
whereby  the  chriftian  doctrine  hath  been  brought 
down  to  us.  And  that  he  may  now  clearly  under- 
ftand  this,  together  with  the  grounds  of  it  (which 
in  reafon  he  ought  to  have  done  before  he  had  for- 
faken  us)  I  fhall  declare  more  particularly  in  thefe 
following  propofitions. 

§  2.  Firft,  that  the  doctrine  of  chriftian  religion 
was  by  Christ  delivered  to  the  apoftles,  and  by  them 
firft  preached  to  the  world,  and  afterwards  by  them 
committed  to  writing  ;  which  writings,  or  books, 
have  been  tranfmitted  from  one  age  to  another  down 
to  us  :  fo  far  I  take  to  be  granted  by  our  prefent  ad- 
verfaries.  That  the  chriftian  doctrine  was  by  Christ 
delivered  to  the  apoftles,  and  by  them  publifhed  to 
the  world,  is  part  of  their  own  hypothefis.  That 
this  doctrine  was  afterwards  by  the  apoftles  commit- 
*  P.  1x7-  ted  to  writing,  he  alfo  grants,  corol.  29.  "  *  'Tis  cer- 
«c  tain  the  apoftles  taught  the  fame   doctrine  they 

writ 


t(  -       .»* 


The  RULE  of  FAITH.  563 

<c  writ-,"  and  iffo,  it  mud  be  as  certain  that  they  $  E  C  TV 
writ  the  fame  doctrine  which  they  taught.     I  know  ^_^  lnuJ 
it  is  the  general  tenet  of  the  papifts,  that  the  fcrip- 
tures  do  not  contain  the  entire  body  of  chriftian  doc- 
trine, but  that  befides  the  doctrines  contained  in  fcrip- 
ture,  there  are  alfo  others  brought  down  to  us  by  oral 
or  unwritten  tradition.    But  Mr.  S.  who  fuppofeth  the 
whole  doctrine  of  chriftian  religion  to  be  certainly 
conveyed  down  to  us  folely  by  oral  tradition,  doth 
not  any  where,  that  I  remember,  deny  that  all  the 
fame  doctrine  is  contained  in  the  fcriptures ;  only  he 
denies  the 'fcriptures  to  be  a  means  fufficient  to  con- 
vey this  doctrine  to  us  with  certainty,  fo  that  we  can 
by  them  be  infallibly  aiTured  what  is  Christ's  doc- 
trine, and  what  not.     Nay,  he  feems  in  that  paflage 
I  laft  cited  to  grant  this,  in  faying  that  the  apcftles 
did  both  teach  and  write  the  fame  doctrine.     I  am 
fure  Mr.  White  (whom  he  follows  very  clofely  through 
his  whole  book)  does  not  deny  this,   in  his  apology 
for  tradition  •,  where  he  faith,  "  *  that  it  is  not  the  ca-  *  p<  l?I^ 
"  tholick  pofition,  that  all  its  doctrines  are  not  con- 
"  tained  in   the  fcriptures."     And  that  thole  writ- 
ings or    books  which  we  call  the  holy  fcriptures, 
have  been  tranfmitted  down   to  us,  is  unquestionable 
matter  of  fact,  and  granted  univerfally  by  the  papifts, 
as  to  all  thofe  books  which  are  owned  by  proteftants 
for  canonical. 

§  3.  Secondly,  that  the  way  of  writing  is  a  fuffi- 
cient means  to  convey  a  doctrine  to  the  knowledge  of 
thofe  who  live  in  times  very  remote  from  the  age  of 
its  firft  delivery.  According  to  his  hypothetic,  there 
is  no  pofTible  way  of  conveying  a  doctrine  with  cer- 
tainty and  fecurity  befides  that  of  oral  tradition ;  the 

falihood 


564  The  RULE  of  FAITH. 

PART  falfhood  of  which  will  fufficiently  appear,  when  I 
fhall  have  fhewn,  that  the  true  properties  of  a  rule 
of  faith  do  agree  to  the  fcriptures,  and  not  to  oral 
tradition.  In  the  mean  time  I  fhall  only  offer  this  to 
his  confideration,  that  whatever  can  be  orally  de- 
livered in  plain  and  intelligible  words,  may  be  writ- 
ten in  the  fame  words  \  and  that  a  writing  or  book 
which  is  publick,  and  in  every  one's  hand,  may  be 
conveyed  down  with  at  lead  as  much  certainty  and 
fecurity,  and  with  as  little  danger  of  alteration,  as 
an  oral  tradition.  And  if  fo,  I  underftand  not  what 
can  render  it  impoflible  for  a  book  to  convey  down 
a  doctrine  to  the  knowledge  of  after-ages.  Befides, 
if  he  had  looked  well  about  him,  he  could  not  but 
have  apprehended  fome  little  inconvenience  in  mak- 
ing that  an  effential  part  of  his  hypothefis,  which  is 
contradicted  by  plain  and  conftant  experience  :  for 
that  any  kind  of  doctrine  may  be  fufficiently  conveyed, 
by  books,  to  the  knowledge  of  after-ages,  provided 
thofe  books  be  but  written  intelligibly,  and  preferved 
from  change  and  corruption  in  the  conveyance,  (both 
which  I  fhall  be  fo  bold  as  to  fuppofe  pofiible)  is  as  little 
doubted  by  the  generality  of  mankind,  as  that  there 
are  books.  And  furely  we  chriftians  cannot  think  it 
impofTible  to  convey  a  doctrine  to  pofterity  by  books, 
when  we  confider  that  God  himfelf  pitched  upon  this 
way  for  conveyance  of  the  doctrine  of  the  jewifh  re- 
ligion to  after-ages  \  becaufe  it  is  not  likely  that  fo 
wife  an  agent  ihould  pitch  upon  a  means  whereby  ic 
was  impoffible  he  ihould  attain  his  end. 

§.  4.  Thirdly,  that  the  books  of  fcripture  are 
fufficiently  plain,  as  to  all  things  neceffary  to  be  be- 
lieved and  practifed,    He  that  denies  this,  ought  in 

reafoo 


Tie  RULE  of  FAITH.  565 

Tcaibn  to  inftance  in  Tome  neceffary  point  of  faith,  SECT, 
or  matter  of  practice,  which  is  not  in  fome  place  \_^  l_j 
of  fcripture  or  other  plainly  delivered.  For  it  is 
not  a  fufficient  objection  to  fay,  "  *  that  the  greateft  P.  38.  39. 
"  wits  among  the  proteftants  differ  about  the  fenfe 
<c  of  thole  texts,  wherein  the  generality  of  them 
"  fuppofe  the  divinity  of  Christ  to  be  plainly 
"  and  clearly  expreffed ;"  becaufe,  if  nothing  were 
to  be  accounted  fufHciently  plain,  but  what  it  is  im- 
polfible  a  great  wit  fhould  be  able  to  wreft  to  any 
other  fenfe,  not  only  the  fcriptures  but  all  other 
books,  and  (which  is  word  of  all  to  him  that  makes 
this  objection)  all  oral  tradition  would  fall  into  un- 
certainty. Doth  the  traditionary  church  pretend 
that  the  doctrine  of  Christ's  divinity  is  con- 
veyed down  to  her  by  oral  tradition  more  plainly 
than  it  is  exprelTed  in  fcripture  ?  I  would  fain  know 
what  plainer  words  me  ever  ufed  to  exprefs  this  point 
of  faith  by,  than  what  the  fcripture  ufeth,  which 
exprefly  calls  him  "  God,  the  true  God,  God  over 
"  all,  bleffed  for  evermore."  If  it  be  fa  id,  that 
thole  who  deny  the  divinity  of  Christ  have  been 
able  to  evade  thefe  and  all  other  texts  of  fcripture, 
but  they  could  never  elude  the  definitions  of  the 
church  in  that  matter  ;  it  is  eafily  anfwered,  that 
the  fame  arts  would  equally  have  eluded  both ;  but 
there  was  no  reafon  why  they  fhould  trouble  them- 
felves  fo  much  about  the  latter-,  for  why  mould 
they  be  folicitous  to  wreft  the  definitions  of  councils, 
and  conform  them  to  their  own  opinion,  who  had 
no  regard  to  the  church's  authority  ?  if  thofe  great 
wits  (as  he  calls  them)  had  believed  the  fayings  of 
fcripture  to  be  of  no  greater  authority  than  the  de- 
Vol.  IV.  6N  finitions 

3* 


566  the  RULE  of  FAITH. 

PART,  finitions  of  councils,  they  would  have  anfwcred  texts  of 
J-,  fcripture,  as  they  have  done  the  definitions  of  councils  ; 
not  by  endeavouring  to  interpret  them  to  another  fenfe, 
but  by  downright  denying  their  authority.  So  that 
it  feems  that  oral  tradition  is  liable  to  the  fame  in- 
convenience with  the  written,  as  to  this  particular. 

§.  5.  And  of  this  I  fhall  give  him  a  plain  inftance 
in  two  great  wits  of  their  church,  the  prefent  pope, 
and  Mr.  White ;  the  one  the  head  of  the  traditiona- 
ry church,  as  Mr.  S.  calls  it  j  the  other  the  great 
mailer  of  the  traditionary  doctrine.    Thefe  two  great 
wits,    the  pope   and  Mr.  White,    notwithstanding 
the  plainnefs  of  oral  tradition,  and  the  impoffibility 
of  being  ignorant  of  it,  or  miftaking  it,  have  yet 
been  fo  unhappy  as  to  differ  about  feveral  points  of 
faith ;  infomuch  that   Mr.  White  is  unkindly  cen- 
fured  for  it  at  Rome,  and  perhaps  here  in  England 
the  pope  fpeeds  no  better ;  however,  the  difference 
continues  (till  fo  wide,  that  Mr.  White  hath  thought 
fit  to  difobey  the  fummons  of  his  chief  paftor,  and 
like  a  prudent  man,  rather  to  write  againft  him  here 
out  of  harm's  way,  than  to  venture  the  infallibility 
of  plain  oral  tradition  for  the  doctrines  he  maintains, 
againfl:  a  practical  tradition  which  they  have  at  Rome 
of  killing  hereticks. 

Methinks   Mr.  S.   might  have  fpared  his  brags, 
"  that  he  hath  evinced  from  clear  reafon,  *  that  it  is 
%v  a  far   more   impoflible  to  make  a  man  not  to  be, 

"  than  not  to  know  what  is  riveted  into  his  loul 
cc  by  fo  oft  repeated  fenfations,  (as  the  chriflian  faith 
"  is  by  oral  and  practical  tradition)  and  that  it  ex- 
"  ceeds  all  the  power  of  nature  (abftracting  from  the 
*  cafes  of    madnefs    and  violent  difeafe)   to  blot 

"  know* 


The  RULE  of  FAITH.  567 

tc  knowledge,  thus   hVd,   out  of   the  foul   of  one  SECT. 

Ill 

"  fmgle  believer ;   infomuch,  that  fooner  may    all ._.  -v-^_f 

"  mankind  perifh,  than  the  regulative  virtue  of 
"  tradition  mifcarry  -,  nay,  fooner  may  the  finews  of 
<c  entire  nature,  by  overtraining,  crack,  and  fhe 
"  lofe  all  her  activity  and  motion,  that  is,  herfelf, 
"  than  one  (ingle  part  of  that  innumerable  multi- 
"  tude  which  integrate  the  vafl  teflification,  which 
"  we  call  tradition,  can  poflibly  be  violated ;M  when 
after  he  hath  told  us,  u  *  that  the  city  of  Rome 
•c  was  bleft  with  more  vigorous  caufes  to  imprint  *  P.  116. 
"  Christ's  doctrine  at  firft,  and  recommend  it 
"  to  the  next  age,  than  were  found  any  where  dfc ; 
"  and  confequently  that  the  frream  of  tradition,  in 
"  its  fource  and  firffc  putting  into  motion,  was 
"  more  particularly  vigorous  there  than  in  any  other 
<c  fee  j  and  that  the  chief  paftor  of  that  fee  hath  a 
**  particular  title  to  infallibility  built  upon  tradition, 
*'  above  any  other  paftor  whatfoever  5  not  to  dilate 
"  on  the  particular  afiiftances  to  that  bifhop,  fpring- 
"  ing  out  of  his  divinely  conftituted  office:"  when, 
I  fay,  after  all  this  quaint  reafoning  and  rumbling 
rhetorick  about  the  infallibility  of  oral  tradition, 
and  the  particular  infallibility  of  the  bifhop  of 
Rome  built  on  tradition,  we  cannot  but  remember; 
that  this  great  oracle  of  oral  tradition  the  pope,  and 
this  great  matter  of  it  Mr.  White,  who  is  fo  pecu- 
liarly skill'd  in  the  rule  of  faith,  have  fo  manifeft- 
ly  declar'd  themfelves  to  differ  in  points  of 
faith.  For  that  the  pope  and  his  congregation  ge- 
neral at  Rome,  have  condemn'd  all  his  books  for 
this  reafon,  becaufe  "  *  they  contain  feveral  propo- 
*  fitions  manjfeftly  heretical,"  is  a  fign  that  thde^j^ 

6  N  2  two  P.  9- 


598  The  RULE  of  FAITH. 

PA  R  T.  two  great  wits  do  not  very  well  hit  it  in  matters  of 

• j  faith -,  and  either  that   they  do  not  both   agree  in 

the  fame  rule  of  faith,  or  that  one  of  them  does 
not  rightly  underftand  it,  or  not  follow  it.     And 
now,  why  may  not   that  which  Mr.  S.  unjuftly  fays 
concerning  the  ufe  of  fcripture,  be  upon  this  account 
juftly    applied  to    the  bufmefs   of   oral   tradition  ? 
Ci  *  If  we  fee  two  fuch  eminent  wits  among  the  papifts 
tc  (the  pope  and  Mr.  White)  making  ufe  of  the  felf- 
tc  fame,  and  as  they  conceive,  the  bed  advantages 
"  their  rule  of  faith  gives  them  *,  and  availing  them- 
ci  felves  the  beft  they  can  by  acquired  skill,  yet  dif- 
"  fer  about  matters  of  faith  ;  what  certainty  can  we 
<G  undertakingly  promife  to  weaker  heads,  that  is,  to 
<c  the  generality  of  the  papifts,"  in  whom  the  go- 
vernors of  the  church  do  profefTedly  cherifh  igno- 
rance for  the  increafing  of  their  devotion  ? 

§  6.  Fourthly,  we  have  fufficient  aflurance  that  the 
books  of  fcripture  are  conveyed  down   to  us  without 
any  material  corruption  or  alteration.     And  he  that 
denies  this,  muft  either  reject  the   authority  of  all 
books,  becaufe  we   cannot  be  certain  whether  they 
be  the  fame  now  that  they  were  at  firft ;  or  elfe, 
give  fome  probable  reafon  why  thefe  fhould  be  more 
liable  to  corruption  than  others.     But  any  man  that 
confiders    things,    will  eafily   find   that    it  is  much 
more  improbable  that  thefe  books  fhould  have  been 
either  wilfully    or  involuntarily   corrupted,   in  any 
thing   material    to  faith  or  a  good  life,    than  any 
pther    books    in    the    world  -,    whether    we  confi- 
der  the   peculiar  providence  of  God    engaged  for 
the  prefervation  of  them,  or   the   peculiar  circum- 
#ances  of  thefe  bepks,    If  they  were  written  by  men 

divinely 


The  RULE  of  FAITH.  569 

divinely  infpircd,  and  are  of  ufe  to  chriflians,  as  is  s  EC  T. 
acknowledged  (at  lead  in  words)  on  all  hands,    no- 
thing is  more  credible,  than  that  the  fame  divine  pro- 
vidence which  took  care  for  the  publishing  of  them, 
would  likewife  be  concerned  to  preferve  them  entire. 
And  if  we   confider  the    peculiar  circumftances   of 
thefe  books,  we  fhall  find  it  morally  impoflible  that 
they  mould  have  been  materially  corrupted,  becaufe 
being  of  univerfal  and  mighty  concernment,  and  at 
firfl  diffufed  into  many  hands,  and  ibon  after  tranf- 
lated  into  mod  languages,  and  moil  paffages  in  them 
cited  in  books  now  extant,  and  all  thefe  now  agree- 
ing in  all  matters  of  importance,  we  have  as   great 
afiurance  as  can  be  had  concerning  any  thing  of  this 
nature,  that  they  have  not  fuffered  any  material  al- 
teration, and  far  greater  than  any  man  can  have  con- 
cerning the  incorruption  of  their  oral  tradition,  as 
I  fhall  fhew  when  I  come  to  anfwer  the  thing  which 
he  calls  demonflration. 

§.7.  Fifthly,  that  defafto  the  fcripture  hath  been 
acknowledged  by    all    chriflians,    in   former    ages, 
to    be  the  means  whereby  the  doctrine  of  Christ 
hath  with  greateft  certainty  been  conveyed  to  them. 
One  good  evidence  of  this  is,  that  the  primitive  ad- 
verfaries  of  chriflian  religion  did  always  look  upon 
the  fcripture  as    the   ftandard  and  meafure  of  the 
chriftian  doctrine,  and   in  all  their  writing  againft 
chriftianity,  took  that  for  granted  to  be  the  chriftian 
faith  which  was  contained  in  thofe  books ;  there  hav- 
ing not  as  yet  any  philofopher  rifen  up  who  had  de- 
monftrated  to  the  world,  that  a  doctrine  could  not, 
with  fuflicient  certainty  and  clearnels,  be  conveyed 
by  writing  from  one  age  to  another.     But  how  al> 

furd 


57o  The  RULE  of  FAITH. 

PART  furd  had  this  method  of  confuting  chriftian  religion 
_,  been,  if  it  had  been  then  the  publick  profeflion  of 
chriftians  that  the  fcriptures  were  not  the  rule  of  their 
faith  ?  How  eafy  had  it  been  for  the  fathers,  who 
apologized  for,  and  defended  chriftian  religion,  to 
have  told  them  they  took  a  wrong  meafure  for  their 
doctrine ;  for  it  was  not  the  principle  of  chriftians, 
that  their  faith  was  conveyed  to  them  by  the  fcrip- 
tures, and  therefore  it  was  a  fond  undertaking  to  at- 
tack their  religion  that  way  ;  but  if  they  would  ef- 
fectually argue  againft  it,  they  ought  to  enquire  what 
that  doctrine  was  which  was  orally  delivered  from 
father  to  Ion,  without  which  the  fcriptures  could  iigni- 
fy  no  more  to  them  than  an  unknown  cipher  without 
a  key,  being  of  themfelves,  without  the  light  of  oral 
tradition,  only  an  heap  of  unintelligible  words,  cc  un- 
<€  fenfed  characters,  and  ink  varioufly  figured  in  a 
€C  book  ; "  and  therefore  it  was  a  grofs  miftake  in 
them,  to  think  they  could  understand  the  chriftian 
religion  (like  their  own  philofbphyj  by  reading  of 
thofe  books,  or  confute  it  by  confuting  them, 
Thus  the  fathers  might  have  defended  their  religi- 
on ;  nay  they  ought  in  all  reafon  to  have  taken 
this  courfe,  and  to  have  appealed  from  thofe  dead 
ienflefs  books  to  the  true  rule  of  faith,  the  living 
voice  of  the  church  eflential.  But  doth  Mr.  S.  find 
any  thing  to  this  purpofe  in  the  apologies  of 
the  fathers  ?  if  he  hath  difcovered  any  fuch  matter, 
he  might  do  well  to  acquaint  the  world  with  it,  and 
make  them  wifer ;  in  the  mean  time,  I  fhall  inform 
him  what  I  have  found,  that  the  fathers  never  ex- 
cept againft  that  method,  but  appeal  frequently 
from  the  flanderous  reports  and   mifreprefentations 

which 


The  RULE  of  FAITH.  S7i 

which  were  made  of  their  doctrine,  to  the  books  of  S  E  C  T. 
fcripture,  as  the  true  ftandard  of  it. 

§  8.  Another  evidence  that  chriftians  in  all  ages 
fince  the  apoftles  times,  have  owned  the  fcriptures 
for  the  rule  of  their  faith,  is,  that  the  fathers,  in 
their  homilies,  did  ufc  conftantly  to  declare  to  the 
people  what  they  were  to  believe,  and  what  they 
were  to  practife  out  of  the  fcriptures  -,  which  had 
been  mofl  abfurd  and  fendefs,  had  they  believed  not 
the  fcriptures  but  fomething  elfe  to  have  been  the 
rule  of  faith  and  manners.  For  what  could  tend 
more  to  the  feducing  of  the  people  from  Mr.  S's 
fuppofed  rule  of  faith,  oral  tradition,  than  to  make 
a  daily  practice  of  declaring  and  confirming  the 
doctrines  of  the  chriftian  faith  from  the  fcriptures  ? 
had  the  ancient  fathers  been  right  for  Mr.  S's  way, 
they  would  not  have  built  their  doctrine  upon  fcrip- 
ture •,  perhaps  not  have  mentioned  it,  for  fear  of 
giving  the  people  an  occafion  to  grow  familiar  with 
fo  dangerous  a  book  -,  but  rather  (as  their  more  pru- 
dent pofterity  have  done)  would  have  locked  it  up 
from  the  people  in  an  unknown  tongue,  and  have 
{tt  open  the  flores  of  good  wholfbm  traditions ;  and 
inftead  of  telling  them  (as  they  do  moft  frequently) 
"  thus  faith  the  fcripture,"  would  ©nly  have  told 
them,  "  this  is  the  voice  of  the  eliential  church  ; 
"  thus  it  hath  been  delivered  down  by  hand  to  us 
"  from  our  forefathers." 

§  9.  I  might  add  for  a  third  evidence,  the  great 
malice  of  the  enemies  and  perfecutors  of  chriftiani- 
ty  againft  this  book,  and  their  cruel  endeavours  to 
extort  it  out  of  the  hands  of  chriftians,  and  deflroy 
it  out  of  the  world,  that  by  this  means  they  might 

extirpate 


572  The  RULE  of  FAITH. 

PART  extirpate  Chriftianity.  For  it  feems  they  thought, 
that  the  abolifhing  of  this  book  would  have  been 
the  ruin  of  that  religion.  But  (according  to  Mr.  S's 
opinion)  their  malice  wanted  wit;  for  had  all  the 
bibles  in  the  world  been  burn'd,  chriftian  religion 
would  neverthelefs  have  been  entirely  preferv'd,  and 
fafely  tranfmitted  down  to  us  by  fenfe  written  in 
mens  hearts,  with  the  good  help  of  Mr.  S's  demon- 
flrations.  Nay,  their  church  would  have  been  a 
great  gainer  by  it ;  for  this  occafion  and  parent  of 
all  herefy  the  fcripture  being  once  out  of  the  way, 
fhe  might  have  had  all  in  her  own  hands,  and  by 
leading  the  people  in  the  fafe  paths  of  tradition, 
and  confequently  of  fcience,  might  have  made  them 
wife  enough  to  obey.  Well,  but  fuppofe  the  per- 
fecutors  of  chriftianity  miftook  themfelves  in  their 
defign,  how  came  the  chriftians  in  thofe  days  to  be 
fo  tenacious  of  this  book,  that  rather  than  deliver 
it/ they  would  yield  up  themfelves  to  torments  and 
death  ?  and  why  did  they  look  upon  thole  who 
out  of  fear  delivered  up  their  books,  as  apoftates 
and  renouncers  of  chriftianity  ?  and  if  they  had  not 
thought  this"  book  to  be  the  great  inftrument  of 
their  faith  and  falvation,  and  if  it  had  really  been 
of  no  greater  confideration  than  Mr.  W.  and  Mr.  S. 
would  make  it  -,  why  fhould  they  be  fo  loth  to  part 
with  a  few  M  unfens'd  characters,  waxen- natur'd 
"  words,  to  be  play'd  upon  diverfly  by  quirks 
"  of  wit,  that  is,  apt  to  blunder  and  confound, 
"  but  to  clear  little  or  nothing?"  Why  mould 
they  value  their  lives  at  fo  cheap  a  rate  as  to  throw 
them  away  for  a  few  infignihxant  fcrawls,  and  to 
lhed  their  blood  for  "  a  little  ink  varioufly  figured 

in 


The  RULE  of  FAITH.  S7i 

sg  in  a  book  ? "  Did  they  not  know,  that  the  fafety  SECT, 
of  chriftianity    did    not  depend   upon    this  hook  ?  Ujr.  ' 
Did  no  chriftian   then  linderftand  that,  which  (ac- 
cording to  Mr.  S.)  no  chriftian  can  be  ignorant  of, 
viz.   that  not  the  fcripture,    but  unmiftakable  and 
indefectible  oral   tradition   was    the   rule  of  faith? 
why  did  they  not  confider,  that  though  this  letter- 
rule  of  hereticks  had  been  confumed  to  afhes,  yet 
their  faith  would  have  lain  fafe,  "  and  been  prefer ved 
"  entire  in  its  *  fpiritual  caules,    mens  minds,  the  *  P.  3^ 
"  nobleft  pieces  in  nature  ?  "'Some  of  them  indeed 
did  deliver  up   their  books,  and  were  called  tradi- 
toreS)  and  I  have  fome  ground  to  believe,  that  thefe 
were  the  only  traditionary  chriftians  of  that  time, 
and  that  the  reft  were  confefTors  and  martyrs  for  the 
letter- rule.     And  if  this  be  not  evidence  enough,  that 
the  fcriptures  have   always   been   acknowledged  by 
chriftians  for  the  rule  of  faith,  I  fhall,  when  I  come 
to  examine   his  testimonies  for  tradition  (with  the 
good  leave  of  his  diftinction  between  fpeculators  and 
teftifiers)  prove  by  mod  cxprefs  teflimony,  that  ic 
was   the  general  opinion  of  the  fathers,  "  that  the 
?*  fcriptures   are   the    rule  of  chriftian  faith  j"  and 
then,  if  his  demonfiration  of  the  infallibility  of  tra- 
dition will  enforce,  that  as  teftifiers  they  muft  needs 
have  fpoken  otherwile,  who  can  help  it  ? 

SECT.    IV, 

§  1.  TTAving  thus  laid  down  the  proteftant  rule  How 

H  of  faith,  with  the  grounds  of  it  •,  all  that^nrfaU 
now  remains  for  me  to  do  towards  the  clear  and  full  low  to  oral 
Vol.  IV.  6  O  ftating traditloa- 


574  7&'  RULE  of  FAITH. 

PART  ftating  of  the  controverfy  between  us,  is  to  take  no* 
tice  briefly,  and  with  due  limitations, 

Firft,  how  much  the  proteftants  do  allow  to  oral 
tradition. 

Secondly,  what  thofe  things  are  which  Mr.  S.  thinks 
fit  to  attribute  to  his  rule  of  faith,which  we  fee  nocaufe 
to  attribute  to  ours :  and  when  this  is  done,  any  one 
may  eafily  difcern  how  far  we  differ. 

§  2 .  Firft,  how  much  proteftants  do  allow  to  oral 
tradition. 

i.  We  grant  that  oral  tradition,  in  feme  circum- 
ftances,  may  be  a  fufficient  way  of  conveying  a  doc- 
trine ;  but  withal  we  deny,  that  fuch  circumftances 
are  now  in  being.  In  the  firft  ages  of  the  world> 
when  the  credenda  or  articles  of  religion,  and  the 
agenda  or  precepts  of  it  were  but  few,  and  fuch  as 
had  the  evidence  of  natural  light  \  when  the  world 
was  contracted  into  a  few  families  in  comparifon,  and 
the  age  of  men  ordinarily  extended  to  fix  or  kvtn 
hundred  years ;  it  is  eafy  to  imagine,  how  fuch  a  doc- 
trine, in  fuch  circumftances,  .might  have  been  pro- 
pagated by  oral  tradition,  without  any  great  change 
or  alterations.  Adam  lived  till  Methufelah  was 
above  two  hundred  years  old,  Methufelah  lived  till 
Sem  was  near  an  hundred,  and  Sem  outlived  Abra- 
ham :  fa  that  this  tradition  need  not  pais  through 
more  than  two  hands  betwixt  Adam  and  Abraham* 
But  though  this  way  was  fufficient  to  have  preferred 
religion  in  the  world,  if  men  had  not  been  wanting 
to  them  (elves  ;  yet  we  find  it  did  not  prove  effectual : 
for  through  the  corruption  and  negligence  of  men  af- 
ter the  flood  (if  not  before)  when  the  world  began 

f 


The  RULE  of  FAITH.  575 

to  multiply,  and  the  age  of  man  was  fhortned,  the  s  E  C  T. 
knowledge  and  worihip  of  the  one  true  God  was  ge-  u^^w 
nerally  loft  in  the  world.     And  fo  far  as  appears  by 
fcripture-hiftory  (the  only  record  we  have  of  thofc 
times)  when  God   called  out  Abraham  from  Ur  of 
the  Chaldees,  the  whole  world  was  lapfed  into  poly- 
theifm  and  idolatry.     Therefore,  for  the  greater  fe- 
curity  of  religion  afterwards,  when  the  pofterity  of 
Abraham  was  multiplied  into  a  great  nation,  the  wif- 
dom  of  God  did  not  think  fit  to  intruft  the  doctrine 
of  religion  any  longer  to  the  fallible  and  uncertain 
way  of  tradition,  but  committed  it  to  writing.    Now 
that  God  pitched  upon  this  way,  after  the  world  had 
fadly  experienced  the  unfuccefsfulnefs  of  the  other,  / 
feems  to  be  a  very  good  evidence  that  this  was  the 
better  and  more  fecure  way  \  it  being  the  ufual  me- 
thod of  the   divine    difpenfations  not  to  go  back- 
wards, but  to  move  towards  perfection,  and  to  pro- 
ceed from  that  which  is  lefs  perfect  to  that  which  is 
more.     And  the  apoflle's  *  reafoning  concerning  thc*Kcblv 

1  °  o  vm.    7. 

two  covenants,  is  very  applicable  to  thefe  two  me- 
thods of  conveying  the  doctrine  of  religion  -,  "  if 
"  the  firfl:  had  been  faultlefs,  then  mould  no  place 
"  have  been  fought  for  a  fecond." 

§  3.  So  likewife,  when  Christ  revealed  his  doc- 
trine to  the  world,  it  was  not  in  his  life-time  com- 
mitted to  writing ;  becaufe  it  was  entertained  but  by 
a  few,  who  were  his  difciples  and  followers,  and  who, 
fo  long  as  he  continued  with  them,  had  a  living 
oracle  to  teach  them.  After  his  death,  the  apoftles, 
who  were  to  publim  this  doctrine  to  the  world,  were 
afiifted  by  an  infallible  fpirit,  fo  as  they  were  fecured 
from  error  and  miftake  in  the  ddivcry  of  it.     But 

6"  O  2  whem 


576  The  RULE  of  FAITH. 

PART  when   this  extraordinary  aftiftance  failed,  there  was 
need  of  fome  other  means  to  convey  it  to  poftcrity, 
that  fo  it  might  be  a  fixed  and  (landing  rule  of  faith 
and  manners  to  the  end  of  the  world.     To  this  end 
the  providence  of  God  took  care   to  have   it  com- 
mitted to  writing.     And  that  Mr.  S.  may  fee  this  is 
not  a  conjecture  of  proteftants,  but  the  fenfe  of  for- 
mer times,  Ifhall  refer  him  to  St.  Chryfoflom  {homil. 
i.  in  Matth.)  who  tells  us,  "  That  Christ  left  no- 
thing in  writing  to  his  apoftles,  but  inftead  there- 
of did  promife  to  bellow  upon  them  the  grace  of 
<c  his  Holy   Spirit,  faying,  John  xiv.  He  fhall 
bring  all  things  to  your  remembrance,  &c.  But 
becaufe  in  progrefs  of  time  there  were  many  grie- 
vous mifcarriages  both  in   matter  of  opinion,  and 
alio  of  life  and  manners  ;  therefore  it  was  requi- 
"  fire    that   the    memory    of  doctrine    fhould    be 
u  preferved  by  writing."     So  long  then  as  the  apo- 
ftles lived,  who  were  thus  infallibly  aflifted,  the  way 
of  oral  tradition  was  fecure,  but  no  longer  ;  nor  even 
then,  from  the  nature  of  the  thing,  but  from  that  ex- 
traordinary and  fupernatural  affiftance  which  accom- 
panied the  deliverers. 

§  4.  And  therefore  it  is  no  good  way  of  argument 
againft  the  way  of  tradition  by  writing,  which  he  lays 
fo  much  weight  upon,  *  "  That  the  apoftles  and 
"  their  fuccenors  went  not  with  books  in  their  hands 
*c  to  preach  and  deliver  Christ's  doctrine,  but  words 
"  in  their  mouths-,  and  that  primitive  antiquity 
<c  learned  their  faith  by  another  method,  a  long  time 
iC  before  many  of  thofe  books  were  univerfally  fpread 
*c  among  the  vulgar."  For  what  if  there  was  no 
need  of  writing  this  doctrine,    whiift  thofe   living 

oracles 


"The  RULE  of  FAITH.  577 

oracles  the  apoftles  were  prefent  with  the  church  ?  3  E  c  T. 
doth  it  therefore  follow  that  there  was  no  need  after- 
wards when  the  apoftles  were  dead,  and  that  extraor- 
dinary and  fupernatural  afliftance  was  ceafed  ?  If  the 
preachers  now-a-days  could  give  us  any  fuch  afTurance, 
and  confirm  all  they  preach  by  fuch  frequent,  and  pub- 
lick,  and  unqueftionable  miracles  as  the  apoftles  did  ; 
then  we  need  not  examine  the  doctrines  they  taught 
by  any  other  rule,  but  ought  to  regulate  our  belief 
by  what  they  delivered  to  us  :  but  feeing  this  is  not 
:he  cafe,  that  ought  in  all  reafon  to  be  the  rule  of 
our  faith,  which  hath  brought  down  to  us  the  doc- 
trine of  Christ  with  the  greater!  certainty ;  and  this 
I  fhall  prove  the  fcriptures  to  have  done. 

§  5.  So  that  in  thofe  circumftances  I  have  men- 
tioned, we  allow  oral  tradition  to  have  been  a  fufiici- 
ent  way  of  conveying  a  doctrine  ;  but  now  confider- 
ing  the  great  increafe  of  mankind,  and  the  fhortnefs 
of  man's  life  in  thefe  latter  ages  of  the  world,  and  the 
long   tract  of  time  from  the  apoftles  age  down  to 
us,    and  the   innumerable  accidents  whereby  in  the 
fpace  of  1 500  years,  oral  tradition  might  receive  in- 
fenfible  alterations,  fb  as  at  laft  to  become  quite  ano- 
ther   thing    from  what  it  was  at  firft,    by  paftlng 
through  many  hands  •,  in  which  paflage  all  the  mis- 
takes  and   corruptions  which   (in    the   feveral   ages 
through  which  it  was  tranfmitted)  did  happen,  either 
through  ignorance,  or  forgetfulnefs,  or  out  of  intereft 
and  defign,  are  neceflarily  derived  into  the  laft  :  fo 
that  the  farther  it  goes,  the  more  alteration  it  is  liable 
to  *,  becaufe  as  it  pafleth  along,  more  errors  and  cor- 
ruptions are  infufed  into  it.     I  fay,   confidering  all 
this,  we  deny,  that  the  doctrine  of  chriftian  religion 

eouldf 


S7%  Me  RULE  of  FA  I TH. 

PART  could,  with  any  probable  fecurity  and  certainty,  have 
been  conveyed  down  to  us  by  the  way  of  oral  tradi- 
tion ;  and  therefore  do  reafonably  believe,  that  God 
forefeeing  this,  did  in  his  wifdom  fo  order  things, 
that  thole  perfons  who  were  afTifled  by  an  infallible 
fpirit  in  the  delivery  of  this  doctrine,  mould,  before 
they  left  the  world,  commit  it  to  writing-,  which  was 
accordingly  done :  and  by  this  inftrument  the  doc- 
trine of  faith  hath  been  conveyed  down  to  us. 

§  6.  Secondly,  we  allow,  that  tradition  oral  and 
written,  do  give  us  fufficient  affurance  that  the  books 
of  fcripture  which  we  now  have,  are  the  very  books 
which  were  written  by  the  apoftles  and  evangeliils : 
nay  farther,  that  oral  tradition  alone  is  a  competent 
evidence  in  this  cafe  ;  but  withal  we  deny,  that  oral 
tradition  is  therefore  to  be  accounted  the  rule  of  faith. 
The  general  affurance  that  we   have  concerning 

books  written  long  ago,  that  they  are  fo  ancient,  and 
were  written  by  thofe  whofe  names  they  bear,  is  a 
conftant  and  uncontroli'd  tradition  of  this,  tranfmit- 
ted  from  one  age  to  another ;  partly  orally,  and  part- 
ly by  the  teftimony  of  other  books.  Thus  much  is 
common  to  fcripture  with  other  books.  But  then  the 
fcriptures  have  this  peculiar  advantage  above  other 
books,  that  being  of  a  greater  and  more  univerfal 
concernment,  they  have  been  more  common  and  in 
every  body's  hands,  more  read  and  iludied  than  any 
other  books  in  the  world  whatfbever  ;  and  confe- 
quently,  they  have  a  more  univerfal  and  better- 
grounded  atteftation.  Moreover,  they  have  not  on- 
ly been  owned  univerfally  in  all  ages  by  chriftians  (ex- 
cept three  or  four  books  of  them,  which  for  fome 
time  were  queflioned  by  fome  churches,  but  have 

fince 


ne  RULE  of  FAITH.  S7$ 

ilnce  been  generally  received,)  but  the  greater!  ene-  SECT. 
mies  of  our  religion,  the  jews  and  heathens,  never  ^^-  -  _j 
quedioned  the  antiquity  of  them,  but  have  always 
taken  it  for  granted,  that  they  were  the  very  books 
which  the  apodles  writ.  And  this  is  as  great  an  afifu- 
rance  as  we  can  have  concerning  any  antient  book, 
without  a  particular  and  immediate  revelation. 

§  y.  And  this  concefTion  doth  not,  as  Mr.  S.  fup- 
poieth,  make  oral  tradition  to  be  finally  the  rule  of 
faith  ;  for  the  meaning  of  this  quedion,  (."  What  is 
"  the  rule  of  faith  ?"  )  is,  what  is  the  next  and  im- 
mediate means  whereby  the  knowledge  of  Christ's 
doctrine  is  conveyed  to  us  ?  So  that  although  oral  tra- 
dition be  the  means  whereby  we  come,  to  know  that 
thefe  are  the  books  of  fcripture,  yet  thefe  books  arc 
the  next  and  immediate  means  whereby  we  come  to 
know  what  is  Christ's  doctrine,  and  confequently 
what  we  are  to  believe. 

§  8.  Nor  doth  this  concefTion  make  oral  tradition 
to  be  the  rule  of  faith,  by  a  parity  of  reafon ;  as  if 
becaufe  we  acknowledge  that  oral  tradition  alone  can 
with  competent  certainty  tranfmit  a  book  to  after-ages, 
we  mud  therefore  grant  that  it  can  with  as  much  cer- 
tainty convey  a  doctrine  confiding  of  feverah  articles 
of  faith  (nay,  very  many,  as  Mr.  White  acknow- 
ledges *  )  and  many  laws  and  precepts  of  life  :  fo  be-  *  Rufhw. 
caufe  oral  tradition  fufficiently  afTures  us  that  this  is^'^ 
magna  chartay  and  that  the  flatute-book,  in  which 
are  contained  thofe  laws  which  it  concerns  every 
man  to  be  skilful  in ;  therefore,  by  like  parity  of  rea- 
fon, it  mufl  follow,  that  tradition  itfelf  is  better  than 
a  book,  even  the  bed  way  imaginable  to  convey  down 
fuch  laws  to  us.     Mr.  S.  faith  *  exprefly  it  is  j  but*  P.  23. 

how 


52o  The  RULE  of  FAI TH. 

PART  how  truly,  I  appeal  to  experience,  and  the  wifdonj 
of  our  Jawgivers,  who  feem  to  think  otherwife.  Tra- 
dition is  already  defined  to  us,  "  a  delivery  down 
*6  from  hand    to    hand  of  the  fenfe    and   faith    of 
a  forefathers,"  i.  e.   of  the   gofpel    or  menage  of 
Christ.     Now  fuppofe  any  oral  meiTage,  confiding 
of  an  hundred  particularities,  were  to  be  delivered  to 
an  hundred  feveral  perfons  of  different  degrees  of  un- 
derflanding  and  memory,  by  them  to  be  conveyed  to 
an  hundred  more,  who  were  to  convey  it  to  others, 
and  fo  onwards  to  a  hundred  defcents  -9  is  it  probable 
this  mefiage,  with  all  the  particularities  of  it,  would 
be  as  truly  conveyed  through  fo  many  mouths,  as  if 
it  were  written  down  in  fo  many  letters,  concerning 
which  every  bearer  mould  need  to  fay  no  more  than 
this,  that  it  was  delivered  to  him  as  a  letter  written 
by  him  whofe  name  was  fubferibed  to  it  ?    I  think  it 
not  probable,  though  the  mens  lives  were  concerned 
every  one  for  the  faithful  delivery  of  his  errand  or  let- 
ter.    For  the  letter  is  a  menage  which  no  man  can 
miftake  in,  unlefs  he  will  \  but  the  errand  fo  difficult 
and  perplexed  with  its  multitude  of  particulars,  that 
it  is  an  equal  wager  againft  every  one  of  the  mefTen- 
gers,  that  he  either  forgets,  or  miftakes  fomething  in 
it;  it  is  ten  thoufand  to  one,  that  the  firft  hundred  do 
not  all  agree  in  it  \  it  is  a  million  to  one,  that  the  next 
fucceflion  do  not  all  deliver  it  truly  ;  for  if  any  one 
of  the  hundred  miftook   or  forgot  any  thing,  it  is 
then   impofiible  that  he  that  received  it  from  him 
Should  deliver  it  right  ;  and  fo   the  farther  it  goes, 
the  greater  change  it  is  liable  to.     Yet  after  all  this  I 
do  not  fay,  but  it   may  be  demonftrated  in  Mr.  S's 
way,  to  have  more  of  certainty  in  it  than  the  original 
letter. 

$  9.  Thirdly, 


5T&  RULE  of  FAITH.  58  i 

$.  9.  Thirdly,  we  allow,  that  the  doctrine  ofS  E  C  T. 
chriftian  religion  hath  in  all  ages  been  preached  to 
the  people  by  the  paftors  of  the  church,  and  taught 
by  chriftian  parents  to  their  children  $  but  with 
great  difference,  by  forne  more  plainly,  and  truly, 
and  perfectly  ♦,  by  others  with  leis  care  and  exact- 
nefs,  according  to  the  different  degrees  of  ability 
and  integrity  in  paftors  or  parents;  and  likewife 
with  very  different  fuccels,  according  to  the  diffe- 
rent capacities  and  difpofitions  of  the  learners.  We 
allow  likewife,  that  there  hath  been  a  conftant  courfe 
of  vifible  actions,  conformable,  in  fome  meafure,  to 
the  principles  of  chriftianity  -,  but  then  we  fay,  that 
thofe  outward  acts  and  circumftances  of  religion  may 
have  undergone  great  variations,  and  received  great 
change,  by  the  addition  to  them,  and  defalcation 
from  them  in  feveral  ages.  That  this"  not  only  is 
poffible,  but  hath  actually  happened,  I  fhall  fhew 
when  I  come  to  anfvver  his  demonftration.  Now, 
that  feveral  of  the  main  doctrines  of  faith  contained 
in  the  fcripture,  and  actions  therein  commanded, 
have  been  taught  and  practifed  by  chriftians  in  all 
ages  (as  the  articles  furnmed  up  in  the  apofiles  creed, 
the  Life  of  the  two  facraments)  is  a  good  evidence  fo 
far,  that  the  fcriptures  contain  the  doctrine  of  chri- 
ftian religion.  But  then,  if  we  confider  how  we 
come  to  know  that  fuch  points  of  faith  have  been 
taught,  and  fuch  external  actions  practifed  in  all 
ages,  it  is  not  enough  to  fay,  there  is  a  prefent  mul- 
titude of  chriftians  that  profefs  to  have  received 
fuch  doctrines  as  ever  believed  and  practifed,  and  from 
hence  to  infer  that  they  were  fo  ;  the  inconfequence 
of  which  argument  I  fhall  have  a  better  occalion  to 
1    Vol,  IV.  6P  ft 

2- 


532  The  RULE  of  FAITH. 

PART,  fhcw  afterwards:  but  he  that  will  prove  this  to  any 
man's  fatisfaction,  muft  make  it  evident   from   the 
bell  monuments  and  records  of  feveral  ages,  that  is, 
from  the  moft  authentick  books  of  thole  times,  that 
iuch  doctrines  have  in  all  thofe  ages  been  conflant- 
]y  and  univerfally  taught  and  practifed.     But  then 
if  from  thofe  records  of  former  times  it  appear  that 
other  doctrines,  not  contained  in   fcriptures,  were 
not    taught  and  practifed    univerfally     in   all  ages, 
but  have   crept    in  by  degrees,  fome  in   one  age, 
and  fome  in  another,   according  as  ignorance  and 
fuperftition  in   the  People,  ambition  and  interefl  in 
the  chief  paftors  of  the  church,  have  miniftred  oc- 
cafion  and  opportunity  ;  and  that  the  innovators  of 
thefe    doctrines  and  practices,  have  all  along  pre- 
tended  to  confirm  them  out  of  fcripture,   as  the 
acknowledg'd  rule  of  faith  ;  and  have  like  wife  ac- 
knowledged the  books  of  fcripture  to  have  defend- 
ed without  any  material  corruption  or  alteration  (all 
which  will  fufficiently  appear  in  the  procefs  of  my 
difcourfe)  then  cannot  the  oral  and  practical  tradition 
of  the  prefent  church,  concerning  any  doctrine,  as 
ever  believed  and  practifed,  which  hath  no  real  foun- 
dation in  fcripture,  be  any  argument  againft  thefe 
books,  as  if  they  did  not  fully  and  clearly  contain 
the   chriflian  doctrine.     And   to  lay   the   fcripture 
is  to  be  interpreted  by  oral  and  practical  tradition, 
is  no  more  reafonable  than  it  would  be  to  interpret 
the  ancient  books  of  the  law,  by  the  prefent  prac- 
tice of  it  •,  which  every  one,  that  compares  things 
fairly  together,  muft  acknowledge  to  be  full  of  de- 
viations from  the  ancient  law. 

SECT, 


The  RULE  of  FAITH. 


SECT.      V. 

§.  i.  idly j  TjOW    much  more  he   attributes  to  h0Vv 

Jul  his  rule  of  faith,  than  we  think  fit  much  Mr. 

S.attri- 

to  attribute  to  ours.  butes  to 

i.  We  do  not  fay,  that  it  is  impofiible,  in  thehJ.s  ^^f 
nature  of  the  thing  that  this  rule  mould  fail,  that  is,  more*  than 
either  that  thefe  books  mould  ceafe  to  defcend,  or  Proteftanti 
mould  be  corrupted.  This  we  do  not  attribute  to 
them,  becaufe  there  is  no  need  we  mould.  We 
believe  the  providence  of  God  will  take  care  of  them, 
and  fecure  them  from  being  either  loft  or  mate- 
rially corrupted  ;  yet  we  think  it  very  poflible  that 
all  the  books  in  the  world  may  be  burn'd  or  other- 
wife  deflroyed.  All  that  we  affirm  concerning  our 
rule  of  faith,  is,  that  it  is  abundantly  fufficient  (if 
men  be  not  wanting  to  themfelves)  to  convey  the 
chriftian  doctrine  to  all  fuccefiive  ages;  and  we  think 
him  very  unreafonable  that  expects  that  God  mould 
do  more  than  what  is  abundantly  enough,  for 
the  perpetuating  of  chriftian  religion  in  the  world. 
§.  2.  Secondly,  nor  do  we  fay  that  that  certainty 
and  affurance  which  we  have,  that  thefe  books  are 
the  fame  that  were  written  by  the  apoftles,  is  a  firft 
and  felf-evident  principle  :  but  only  that  it  is  a  truth 
capable  of  evidence  fufficient,  and  as  much  as  we 
can  have  for  a  thing  of  that  nature.  Mr.  S.  may, 
if  he  pleafe,  fay  that  tradition's  certainty  is  a  firft 
and  felf-evident  principle ;  but  then  he  that  fays 
this,  mould  take  heed  how  he  takes  upon  him  to 
demonftrate  it.     Ariftotle  was  fo  wife  as  never  to 

6  P  2  demon- 


The  RULE  of  FAITH. 

demonfrrate  firfl  principles,  for  which  he  gives  this 
very  good  reafon,  becaufe  they  cannot  be  demon- 
ftrated.  And  mod  prudent  men  are  of  opinion, 
that  a  felf-evident  principle,  of  all  things  in  the 
world  mould  not  be  demonftrated,  becaufe  it  needs 
not :  for  to  what  purpofe  fhould  a  man  write  a 
book  to  prove  that  which  every  man  muft  aifent  to 
without  any  proof,  fo  foon  as  it  is  propounded  to 
him  ?  I  have  always  taken  a  felf-evident  principle  to 
be  fuch  a  proportion*  as  having  in  it  felf-fufficient 
evidence  of  its  own  truth,  and  not  needing  to  be 
made  evident  by  any  thing  elfe.  If  I  be  herein 
miftaken,  I  delire  Mr.  S.  to  inform  me  better. 

§  3.  So  that  the  true  Rate  of  the  controverfy 
between  us,  is,  whet-her  oral  and  practical  tradition, 
in  oppofition  to  writing  and  books,  be  the  only 
way  and  means  whereby  the  doctrine  of  Christ 
can  with  certainty  and  fecurity  be  conveyed  down 
to  us,  who  live  at  this  diftance  from  the  age  of 
Christ  and  his  apoftles  :  this  he  affirms,  and  the 
proteftants  deny,  not  only  that  it  is  the  fote  means, 
but  that  it  is  fufficient  for  the  certain  conveyance 
of  this  doctrine  ;  and  withal  affirm,  that  this  doc- 
trine hath  been  conveyed  down  to  us  by  the  books 
of  holy  fcripture,  as  the  proper  meafure  and  flan- 
dard  of  our  religion  :  but  then  they  do  not  exclude 
oral  tradition  from  being  one  means  of  conveying 
to  us  the  certain  knowledge  of  thefe  books  ;  nor  do 
they  exclude  the  authentick  records  of  former  ages, 
nor  the  conflant  teaching  and  practice  of  this  doc- 
trine, from  being  fubordinate  means  and  helps  of 
conveying  it  from  one  age  to  another  j  nay,  fo  far 

arc 


?be  RULE  of  FAITH. 

are  they  from  excluding  thefe  concurrent  means, 
that  they  fuppofe  them  always  to  have  been  ufed, 
and  to  have  been  of  great  advantage  for  the  propa- 
gating and  explaining  of  this  doctrine,  fo  far  as 
they  have  been  truly  fubordinate  to,  and  regulated 
by  thefc  facred  oracles,  the  holy  fcriptures,  which, 
they  fay,  do  truly  and  fully  contain  that  doctrine 
which  Christ  delivered  to  his  apoftles,  and  they 
preached  to  the  world.  To  illufbrate  this  by  an  in- 
fiance  :  fuppofe  there  were  a  controverfy  now  on 
foot,  how  men  might  come  to  know  what  was  the 
true  art  of  logick  which  Ariftotle  taught  his  fcho- 
lars  -,  and  fome  fhould  be  of  opinion,  that  the  only 
way  to  know  this  would  be  by  oral  tradition  from 
his  fcholars ;  which  we  might  eafily  underfland  by 
confulting  thofe  of  the  preient  age,  who  learned  it 
from  thole  who  received  it  from  them,  who  at  laft 
had  it  from  Ariftotle  himfelf:  but  others  fhould 
think  it  the  furefb  way  to  ftudy  his  organon,  a  book 
acknowledged  by  all  his  fcholars  to  have  been  writ- 
ten by  himfelf,  and  to  contain  that  doctrine  which 
he  taught  them.  They  who  take  this  latter  courfe, 
fuppofe  the  authority  of  oral  tradition  for  the  con- 
veying to  them  the  knowledge  of  this  book  ;  and 
do  fuppofe  this  doctrine  to  have  been  taught  and 
practifed  in  all  ages,  and  a  great  many  books  to 
have  been  written  by  way  of  comment  and  explica- 
tion of  this  doctrine  ;  and  that  thefe  have  been  good 
helps  of  promoting  the  knowledge  of  it.  And  they 
may  w?ell  enough  fuppofe  all  this,  and  yet  be  of 
opinion  that  the  truefl  meafure  and  ftandard  of 
Ariftotle's  doctrine  is   his  own  book  -3    and  that  it 

would 


586  The  RULE  of  FAITH. 

PART  would  be  a  fond  thing  in  any  man,  by  forcing  an 
J  interpretation  upon  his  book,  either  contrary  to,  or 
very  foreign  and  remote  from  the  obvious  fenfe  of 
his  words,  to  go  about  to  reconcile  this  book  with 
that  method  of  difputing  which  is  ufed  by  the  pro- 
feffed  ariftotelians  of  the  preient  age,  and  with  all 
that  fcholaftick  jargon  whiclj  Mr.  S.  learned  at 
Lisbon,  and  has  made  him  fo  great  a  man  in  the 
fcience  of  all  controverfy,  as  even  to  enable  him  to 
demonftrate  firft  and  felf-evident  principles,  a  trick 
not  to  be  learned  out  of  Ariftotle's  organon.  The 
application  is  fo  eafy,  that  I  seed  not  make  it. 


T  H  E 


S$7 
THE 

RULE  of   FAITH. 

PART     IL 

Concerning  the  properties  of  the  Rule  cf  Faith ; 
and  whether  they  agree  folely  to  oral  tra- 
dition. 

SECT.    I. 

$  i.  T  T Aving  thus  endeavoured  to  bring  the  con-s  ECT. 
-*-  -**  troverfy  between  us  to  its  clear  and  true  ^-A^j 
flate,  that  fb  we  might  not  quarrel  in  the  dark, 
and  difpute  about  we  know  not  what ;  I  come  now 
to  grapple  more  clofely  with  his  book.  And  the 
main  foundations  of  his  difcourie  may  be  reduced  to 
thefe  three  heads : 

Firft,  that  the  efTential  properties  of  fuch  a  way 
and  means  as  can  with  certainty  and  fecurity  con- 
vey down  to  us  the  doctrine  of  Christ,  belong 
folely  to  oral  tradition.  This  he  endeavours  to  prove 
in  his  five  firft  difcourfes. 

Secondly,  that  it  is  impofTible  that  this  way  of 
oral  tradition  mould  fail.  And  this  he  pretends  to 
prove  in  his  four  lad  difcourfes. 

Thirdly,  that  oral  tradition  hath  been  generally 
reputed  by  chriftians  in  all  ages,  the  fole  way  and 
means  of  conveying  down  to  them  the  doctrines  of 

Christ. 


II 


c33  The  RULE  of  FAITH. 

PART  Christ.  And  this  he  attempts  to  fhew  in  his  Iaft 
chapter,  which  he  calls,  *c  The  confent  of  authority 
£fc  to  the  fubftance  of  his  foregoing  difcourfes."  If 
he  make  good  thefe  three  things,  he  hath  acquitted 
himfelf  well  in  his  undertaking ;  but  whether  he 
hath  made  them  good  or  not,  is  now  to  be  exa- 
mined. 

§  2.  Firft,  whether  the  effential  properties  of  fuch 
a  way  and  means  as  can  with  certainty  and  fecurity 
convey  down  to  us  the  knowledge  of  Christ's 
doctrine,  belong  folely  to  oral  tradition  ? 

The  true  way  to  meafure  the  efTential  properties 
of  this  or  that  means,  is  by  confidering  its  fuffici- 
ency  for  its  end  :  for  whatfoever  is  necefTary  to 
make  any  means  liafficient  for  the  obtaining  of  its 
end,  is  to  be  reputed  an  effential  property  of  that 
means,  and  nothing  elie.  Now,  becaufe  the  end  we 
are  fpeaking  of  is  the  conveyance  of  the  knowledge 
of  Christ's  doctrine  to  all  thofe  who  are  con- 
cerned to  know  it,  in  fuch  a  manner  as  they  may 
be  fufficiently  certain  and  fecure  that  it  hath  receiv- 
ed no  change  or  corruption  from  what  it  was  when 
it  was  firft  delivered.  From  hence  it  appears,  that 
the  means  to  this  end,  muft  have  thefe  two  proper- 
ties :  i ft,  It  muft  be  fufficiently  plain  and  intel- 
ligible. 2dly,  It  muft  be  fufficiently  certain  to  us, 
that  is,  fuch  as  we  may  be  fully  fatisfiecl  concern- 
ing it,  that  it  hath  received  no  corruption  or  alte- 
ration. If  it  have  thefe  two  conditions,  it  is  fufTL 
cient  for  its  end  ;  but  if  it  want  either  of  them, 
it  muft  nccefTarily  fall  fhort  of  its  end:  for  if  k 
be  not  plain  and  intelligible,  it  cannot  convey  th?s 
doctrine  to  our  knowledge  j  if  it  be  not  certain,  we 

cannot 


The  RULE  of  FAITH.  5?9 

cannot  be  affur'd,  that  that  do&rine  which  it  brings  SECT, 
down  to  us  for  the  doctrine  of  Christ,  is  really  <^_—^, 
fuch. 

§  3.  I  know  he  afllgns  more  properties  of  this 
means,  which  he  calls  the  Rule  of  Faith  ;  but  upon 
examination  it  will  appear,  that  they  either  fall  in 
with  thefe  two,   or  do  not  at  all  belong  to  it :  as, 

Firft,  "  That  *  it  muft  be  plain  and  felf- eviden t  *  P.  11; 
"  to  all,  as  to  its  exiftence."  Nothing  can  be  more 
frivolous,  than  to  make  this  a  property  of  any  things 
becaufe  whofoever  enquires  into  the  properties  of 
a  thing,  is  fuppofed  to  be  already  fatisfied  that  the 
thing  is. 

Secondly,  "  That  it  be  f  evidenceable,  as  to  its  t  p-  n, 
"  ruling  power;"  that  is,  as  he  explains  himfelf, 
"  *  that  men  be  capable  of  knowing,  that  it  de-*p  3, 
"  ferves  to  be  relied  on  as  a  rule."  By  which  he 
muft  either  underftand  the  certainty  of  it:  and 
then  it  falls  in  with  the  fecond  property  I  mention- 
ed, and  is  the  fame  with  the  fixth  which  he  lays 
down  ;  or  elfe  he  means  more  generally,  that  it  is 
the  property  of  a  rule,  that  men  be  capable  of 
knowing  that  it  hath  the  properties  of  a  rule:  for 
I  underftand  not  how  a  man  can  know  that  any 
thing  deferves  to  be  relied  on  as  a  rule,  otherwife 
than  by  knowing  it  hath  the  properties  of  a 
rule,  that  is,  that  it  is  fuiflcient  for  its  end.  But 
at  this  rate  a  man  may  multiply  the  properties  of 
things  without  end,  if  the  evidence  of  a  thing,  as 
to  its  exiftence,  be   one  property ;   and  then,    that 

we  be  capable  of  knowing  that  it  is  fuch  a  thing,  be 
another. 

Vol.  IV.  6  CL  §4.  Thirdly, 

3- 


p.  12. 


The  RULE  of  FAITH. 

§  4.  Thirdly,  "  that  it  be  *  apt  to  fettle  and 
juftify  undoubting  perfons. "  What  he  means 
here  by  fettling  undoubting  perfons,  I  am  not  able, 
on  a  fudden,  to  comprehend,  becaufe  I  underftand 
not  what  unfettJes  a  man  befides  doubting  ;  for  if  a 
man  be  but  fo  well  fatisfied  about  any  thing  as 
to  have  no  doubt  concerning  it,  I  do  not  eafily 
apprehend  how  he  can  be  icttled  better,  that  is, 
how  his  mind  can  be  more  at  reft  than  not  to  doubt. 
But  if  by  undoubting  perfons  he  means  thofe  who 
do  not  doubt  for  the  prefent,  but  afterwards  may 
doubt,  then  I  perceive  what  he  means  by  apt  to 
fettle  undoubting  perfons,  viz.  apt  to  fettle  perfons 
when  they  do  doubt,  that  is,  when  they  are  not 
undoubting  perfons.  As  for  juftifying  undoubting 
perfons,  if  he  means  that  whofoever  fecurely  relies 
on  this  rule  ought  of  right  to  be  acquitted,  as  act- 
ing rationally  in  ib  doing  ;  this  is  plainly  confe- 
quent  upon  the  two  properties  I  have  laid  down: 
for  if  the  means  of  conveying  Christ's  doctrine 
be  fufficiently  plain  and  certain,  every  man  that  re- 
lies upon  it  is  juftified  in  fo  doing,  becaufe  he  trufts 
a  means  which  is  fufneient  for  its  end. 

§  5.  Fourthly,  "  that  *  it  be  apt  to  fatisfy  fully 
"  the  mod  fceptical  diflenters  and  rational  doubters.5* 
For  its  aptitude  to  fatisfy  rational  doubters,  that 
plainly  follows  from  the  fufficient  certainty  of  it  ; 
but  why  it  mould  be  a  neceffary  property  of  a  rule 
of  faith,  to  be  apt  to  fatisfy  the  mod  fceptical  dif- 
fenter,  I  can  no  more  divine,  than  I  can,  why  he 
mould  call  a  diffenter  fceptical,  which  are  repug- 
nant terms  :  for  a  fceptick  is  one  who  neither  af- 
fents  to  any  thing,  nor  dhTents  ;  but  is  in  a  perpetual 

fulpenfe, 


The  RULE  of  FAITH.  S9i 

fufpenfe,  becaufe  he  looks  upon  every  opinion,  asSECT. 
balanced  by  a  contrary  opinion  of  equal  probability,  ^^L^ 
without  any  inclination  of  the  fcales  cither  way. 
But  if  by  the  moft  fceptical  difTentcr  he  means  only 
a  fceptick,  one  that  doth  not  believe  the  doctrine  of 
Christ,  nor  any  fhing  elfe ;  then  I  would  fain 
know  what  that  is  which  in  reafon  is  apt  fully  to  la- 
tisfy  fuch  a  perfon.  If  any  thing  will,  fure  a  dc- 
monftration  will ;  but  there  is  no  aptitude  at  all  in 
a  demonflration,  to  fatisfy  him  who  doubts  whether 
there  be  any  fuch  thing  as  a  demonftration,  and  like- 
wile  queftions  the  certainty  of  all  thofe  principles  from 
whence  any  conclufion  can  be  demonftrated.  And  thofe 
who  are  moft  fceptical,  profefs  to  doubt  of  all  this. 

§.6.  Fifthly,    "  That  it  *  be  apt    to   convince *p§ , ,  I2# 
"  the  moft   obftinate  and  acute  ad verfary."     If  the 
rule  be  plain  and  certain,  the  moft  acute  adverfi- 
ry  may  be  convinced  by  it  if  he  will,  that  is,  if  he 
be  not   obftinate  -,  but  if  he  be   obftinate,   that  is, 
fuch  a  one  as  will  not  be  convinced,  but  will   per- 
fift  in   his  error   in    defpite   of   all   evidence   that 
can  be   offered    him,    then  I  muft  profefs    that    I 
do    not  know  any   kind  of    evidence  that  is  apt 
to    convince     that   man   who    will    not    be    con- 
vinced  by  any  reafon  that   can  be   propounded  to 
him.      And   that  he  ought  not  to  have  expected 
this  from   any   rule  of  faith,  though  never  fo  felf- 
evident,    he   might  have    learned   from    the  fame 
author,  in  whom  he  may  find  his  chief  properties 
of  the  rule  of  faith,  if  he  had  but  had  the  patience 
to  have  confider'd  his  explication  of  them;  I  mean  *Analyf. 
Dr.  Holden  *,  who  lays  down  the  fecond  property  fid-1, '• 
of  the  rule  of  faith  (or,  as  he  calls  it,  c«  the  means 

6  Q_2  where- 


If. 


592  The  RULE  of  FAITH. 

PA  R  T.  "  whereby  we  come  to  the  knowledge  of  revealed 
"  truth")  in  thefe  words,  "  another  (viz.  condition 
"  of  this  means,  &c.)  is,  that  it  be  apt  of  its  own 
cc  nature  to  afford  the  greated  true  and  rational 
<c  certainty,  to  all  men  without  exception,  to  whom 
<c  the  knowledge  of  it  fhall  come ;  provided  they 
"  be  furnifhed  with  the  faculty  of  reafon,  and 
"  have  their  minds  purified  from  all  paffion  and 
fc  lud,  which  do  (as  he  tells  us,  cap.  6.)  often  hin- 
<c  der  the  mod  fagacious  perfons  from  understanding 
"  the  mod  evident  and  manifed  truth.  Now  I 
"  fuppofe  obflinacy  to  be  the  effect  of  pafllon  and 
"  luft." 

If  Mr.  S.  mean,  that  the  rule  of  faith  muft  be 
apt  to  conquer  obftinacy,  and  make  men  lay  it  afide, 
I  cannot underftand  this  neither;  unlefshe  mean  that 
the  rule  of  faith   muft  be  a  cudgel,  which  the  tra- 
ditionary church  have  been  good  at,  and  may  ufe  it 
again  when  occafion  ferves  ;  for  none  but  they  have 
a  title  to  it  upon  a  church  account,    as  Mr.  S.  tells 
us,  corol.  10.     But  fetting  afide  this,  I  do  not  know 
any   thing  elfe  that   is   apt  to  conquer    obftinacy: 
not  the  cleared  reafon,  or  the  ftrongeft  demondrati- 
on,  for  that  I  am  fure  is  no  ways  fitted  to  combat  a 
wilful   and   unrealonable  humour  with  any  probabi- 
lity of  fuccefs.     And   if  any  one  doubt  of  this,  if 
he  will  but  make  trial,  he  may  eafily  be  convinced 
by   experience  how   unapt  obdinate  perfons  are  to 
be  convinced  by  reafon.     I  do   not  know  any  thing 
that  ever  carried  greater  evidence  than  the  doctrine 
of  Christ,  preached   by  himfelf  and  his   apodles 
to  the  obdinate  Jews,  and  confirmed   by  multitudes 
of  unquedionable  miracles ;  and  yet  we  do  not  find 

by 


The  RULE  of  FAITH.  5n 

by  the  fuccefs  of  it,  that  it  was  fo  very  apt  to  con-S  EC  T. 
vince  thofe  that  were  obftinate.  And  no  man  can  i^^il.^ 
judge  of  the  aptitude  of  a  means  to  an  end,  other- 
wife  than  by  the  ufual  and  frequent  fuccefs  of  it 
when  it  is  applied.  Nor  do  I  think  that  the  doc- 
trine of  the  gofpel  was  ever  intended  for  that  pur- 
pofe.  God  hath  provided  no  remedy  for  the  wil- 
ful and  perverfe,  but  he  hath  done  that  which  is 
fufficient  for  the  fatisfying  and  winning  over  of 
thofe  who  are  teachable  and  willing  to  learn :  and 
fuch  a  difpofition  fuppofeth  a  man  to  have  Jaidafide 
both  fcepticifm  and  obftinacy. 

§.  7.  Sixthly,  cc  that  *  it  be  certain  in  itfelf."        *  p.  I2. 

Seventhly,  "  that  f  it  be  abfolutely  afcertainable  ,  p 

"   to  US." 

Thefe  two  are  comprehended  in  the  fecond  pro- 
perty I  laid  down ;  fo  that  I  have  nothing  to  fay 
againft  them,  but  that  the  lad  looks  very  like  a 
contradiction,  "  abfolutely  afcertainable  to  us ;" 
which  is  to  fay,  u  with  relpecl  to  us,  without  re- 
"  fpect  to  us  ;"  for  abfolutely  feems  to  exclude  re- 
fpect,  and  to  us  implies  it. 

Having  thus  fhewn,  that  the  {even  properties  he 
mentions,  are  either  coincident  with  thefe  two  I 
have  laid  down,  or  confequent  upon  them,  or  ab- 
furd  and  impertinent ;  it  remains,  that  the  true  pro- 
perties of  a  rule  of  faith  are  thofe  two  which  I  firfl 
named,  and  no  more. 


SECT. 


The  RULE  of  FAITH. 


SECT.    II. 

That  the  §•  i  •  T    E  T  us   now  fee  how   he   endeavours  to 

properties  JL#  fhew,  that  thefe  properties  agree   folely  to 

cf  faith     ora^  tradition  :  he  tells  us  M  there  are  but  two  preten- 

beiongto  c«  ders  t0  thjs  tjtje  0f  being  the  rule  of  faith,  fcrip- 

"  ture  and  oral  tradition  ;  thefe  properties  do  not  be- 

"  long  to  fcripture,  and   they  do  to  oral  tradition, 

"  therefore  folely  to  it."  A  very  good  argument,  if  he 

can  prove  thefe  two  things,  "  that  t\iz(t   two  pro- 

"  pcrties  do  not  belong  to  fcripture,    and  that  they 

"  do  to  oral  tradition." 

§.2.  In  order  to  the  proving  of  the  firft,  that 
thefe  properties  do  not  belong  to  fcripture,  he  pre- 
*  P.  13-  mifeth  this  note,  "  *  that  we  cannot  by  the  fcrip- 
"  tures  mean  the  fenfe  of  them,  but  the  book,  that 
"  is,  fuch  or  fuch  characters  not  yet  fenfed  or  inter- 
"  preted."  But  why  can  we  not,  by  the  fcriptures, 
mean  the  fenfe  of  them  ?  He  gives  this  clear  and  ad- 
mirable reafon,  becaufe  the  fenfe  of  the  fcripture, 
is,  ci  the  things  to  be  known,  and  thefe  we  confefs 
"  are  the  very  points  of  faith,  of  which  the 
"  rule  of  faith  is  to  afcertain  us."  Which  is  juft 
as  if  a  man  mould  reafon  thus :  thofe  who  fay  the 
ftatute-book  can  convey  to  them  the  knowledge  of 
the  flatute-law,  cannot  by  the  ftatute-book  mean  the 
fenfe  of  it,  but  the  book ;  that  is,  fuch  or  fuch  cha- 
racters not  yet  fenfed  or  interpreted  j  becaufe  the 
fenfe  of  the  ftatute-book  is  the  thing  to  be  known; 
and  thefe  are  the  very  laws,  the  knowledge  whereof 
is  to  be  conveyed  to  them  by  this  book  :  which 
is  to  lay,  that  a  book  cannot  convey  to  a  man  the 

know- 


CI 

cc 


735*  £C7L£  of  FAITH.  Sg$ 

knowledge  of  any  matter,  becaufe  if  it  did,  it  would  SECT, 
convey  to  him  the  thing  to  be  known.  But  that  he 
may  farther  fee  what  excellent  reafoning  this  is,  I 
fhall  apply  this  paragraph  to  oral  tradition,  for  the 
argument  holds  every  whit  as  well  concerning  that : 
"  To  fpeak  to  them  in  their  own  language,  who 
"  fay  that  oral  tradition  is  their  rule,  we  mud  pre- 
"  mife  this  note,  that  they  cannot  mean  by  oral  tra- 
c<  dition  the  knCc  of  it,  that  is,  the  things  to  be 
"  known  *,  for  thofe,  they  confefs,  are  the  very 
u  points  of  faith,  of  which  the  rule  of  faith  is  to 
"  afccrtain  us:  when  they  fay  then,  that  oral  tra- 
dition is  the  rule  of  faith,  they  can  only  mean 
by  oral  tradition  the  words  wherein  it  is  deli- 
vered, not  yet  fenfed  or  interpreted,  but  as  yet  to 
"  be  fenfed  ;  that  is,  fuch  or  fuch  founds,  with  their 
"  aptnefs  to  fignify  to  them  affuredly  God's  mind, 
c6  or  afcertain  them  of  their  faith  ;  for  abftracting 
"  from  the  fenfe  and  actual  fignification  of  thofe  words, 
<c  there  is  nothing  imaginable  left  but  thofe  founds, 
"  with  their  aptnefs  to  fignify  it:"  when  he  hath 
anfwered  this  argument,  he  will  have  anfwered  his 
own.  In  the  mean  while,  this  difcourfe,  that  he 
who  holds  the  fcripture  to  be  the  rule  of  faith, 
muft  needs  by  the  fcriptures  mean  a  book  void  of 
fenfe,  &c.  becaufe  otherwife  if  by  fcripture  he; 
Ihould  underftand  a  book,  that  hath  a  certain  fenfe 
in  it,  that  fenfe  muft  be  the  doctrine  of  Ch  r  ist, 
which  is  the  very  thing  that  this  book  is  to  convey 
to  us  •,  I  fay,  this  difcourfe  tends  only  to  prove  it 
an  abfurd  thing  for  any  man,  that  holds  fcripture 
the  means  of  conveying  Christ's  doctrine,  to  un- 
derftand  by    the    fcripture  a   book  that  conveys 

Chrijt's 

i 


596  Tie  RULE  of  FAITH. 

PART  Christ's  doctrine.     This   being    his  own  reafon, 
put  into  plain  Englifh,  I  leave  the  reader  to  judge 
whether  it  be  not  fomething  fhort  of  perfect  fcience 
and  demonftration.     Nay,  if  it  were  throughly  exa- 
mined,   I   doubt  whether    it  would  not  fall    fhort 
of  that  low  pitch  of  fcience  which  he  fpeaks  of  in 
his  preface,  where  he  tells  us,  "  that  the   way   of 
cc  fcience  is  to  proceed  from  one  piece  of  fenfe  to 
"  another." 

§  3.  Having  premifed  this,  that  by  the  fcriptures  we 
muft  mean  only  dead  characters,  that  have  no  fenfe 
under  them,  he  proceeds  to  fliew  that  thefe  dead 
characters  have  not  the  properties  of  a  rule  of  faith 
belonging  to  them.  "Which  although  it  be  nothing 
to  the  purpofe  when  he  hath  fhewn  it,  yet  it  is  very 
pleafant  to  obferve  by  what  crofs  and  untoward  argu- 
ments he  goes  about  it  :  of  which  I  will  give  the 
reader  a  tafte  by  one  or  two  in  fiances. 

In  the  firft  place  he  fhews  that  it  cannot  be  evi- 
dent to  us,  "  that  thefe  books  were  written  by  men 

*  P.  14.  "  divinely  infpired,  becaufe  *  till  the  feeming  contra- 

c<  dictions  in  thofe  books  are  folved,  which  to  do,  is 
"  one  of  the  moil  difficult  tasks  in  the  world,  they 
"  cannot  be  concluded  to  be  of  God's  inditing." 
Now  how  is  this  an  argument  againft  thofe,  who  by 
the  fcriptures  muft  mean  unfenfed  letters  and  charac- 
ters ?  I  had,  always  thought  contradictions  had  been 
in  the  fenfe  of  words,  not  in  the  letters  and  charac- 
ters -,  but  I  perceive  he  hath  a  peculiar  opinion,  that 
the  four  and  twenty  letters  do  contradict  one  ano- 
ther. 

*  P.  17.        The  other  inflance  fhall  be  in  his  lafl  argument  *, 

which  is  this,  "  that  the  fcripture  cannot  be  the  rule 

of 


The  RULE  of  FAITH,  597 

u  of  faith,  bccaufc  thofe  who   are  to  be  ruled  and  S  E  c  T« 

II 
"  guided  by  the  icripture's  Jetter  to  faith,  cannot  be 

"  certain  of  the  true  fenfe  of  it  :"  which  is  to  fay, 
that  unfenfed  letters  and  characters  cannot  be  the  rule 
of  faith,  becaufe  the  rule  of  faith  muft  have  a  certain 
fenfe,  that  is,  muft  not  be  unfenfed  letters  and  charac- 
ters ;  which  in  plain  cnglifh  amounts  to  thus  much, 
unfenfed  letters  and  characters  cannot  be  the  rule  of 
faith,  that  they  cannot. 

§  4.  And  thus  1  might  trace  him   through  all  his 
properties  of  the  rule  of  faith,  and  let  the  reader  fee 
how  incomparably   he  demonstrates  the  falfhood  of 
this  proteftant  tenet  (as  he  calls  it)  that  a  fenkkfs  book 
may  be  a  rule  of  faith.     But  I  am  weary  of  purfuinc- 
him  in  thele  airy  and  phantaftical  combats,  and  fhall 
leave  him  to  fight   with  his  own  fancies,  and  batter 
down  the  caities   which   himfelf  hath  built.     Only  I 
think  fit  to  acquaint  him,  once  for  all,  with  a  great 
fecret  of  the  proieftant  doctrine,  which  it  feems  he 
hath  hitherto  been  ignorant  of  (for  I  am  (till  more 
confirmed  in   my  opinion,  that  he  forfook  our  reli- 
gion before  he  underftood  it)  that  when  they  fay  the 
fcriptures  are  the  rule  of  faith,  or  the  means  where- 
by Christ's  doctrine   is  conveyed  down  to  them, 
they  mean  by  the  fcriptures  books  written  in  fuch 
words  as  do  fufficiently  exprefs  the  fenfe  and  meaning 
of  Christ's  doctrine. 

§  5.  And  to  fatisry  him  that  we  are  notabfurd  and 
unreafonable  in  iuppofing  the  fcriptures  to  be  fuch  a 
book,  I  would  beg  the  favour  of  him  to  grant  mc 
thefe  four  things,  or  fhew  reafon  to  the  contrary, 

Vol.  IV.  6  R  Firft, 


The  RULE  of  FAITH. 

Firft,  that  whatever  can  be  fpoken  in  plain  and 
intelligible  words,  and  fuch  as  have  a  certain  fenfe, 
may  be  written  in  the  fame  words. 

Secondly,  that  the  fame  words  are  as  intelligible 
when  they  are  written  as  when  they  are  fpoken. 

Thirdly,  That  God,  if  he  pleafe,  can  indite  a 
book  in  as  plain  words  as  any  of  his  creatures. 

Fourthly,  that  we  have  no  reafon  to  think  that 
God  affects  obfcurity,  and  envies  that  men  mould 
underffond  him  in  thofe  things  which  are  neceflary  for 
them  to  know,  and  which  mull  have  been  written  to 
no  purpofe  if  we  cannot  underftand  them.     St  Luke 

*  Luke  i.  *  tells  Theophilus,    that  he    wrote    the    hiftory  of 
3>  4-        Christ  to  him,  on  purpofe  to  give  him  a  certain 

knowledge  of  thofe  things  which  he  writ.  But  how 
a  book  which  hath  no  certain  fcnf^,  fhould  give  a 
man   certain    knowledge  of   things,  is   beyond   my 

*  John  xx.  capacity.     St.  John  *  faith,  that  he  purpofely  com- 
31,  mitted  feveral of  Christ's  miracles  to  writing,  that 

men  might  believe  on  him.     But  now,  had  Mr.  S. 
been  at  his  elbow,  he  would  have  advifcd  him  to 
fpare  his  labour,  and  would  have  given  him  this  good 
reafon  for  it  ;    becaufe   when    he  had    written    his 
book,  no  body  would  be  able  to  find  the  certain  fenfc 
of  it  without  oral  tradition,  and  that  alone  would  fe- 
curely  and    intelligibly  convey    both    the    doctrine 
of  Christ,  and  the  certain  knowledge  of  thofe  mi- 
racles which  he  wrought  for  the  confirmation  of  it* 
If  thefe  four  things  be  but  granted,  I  fee  not  why, 
when  we  fay  that  the  fcriptures  arc  the  means  of  con- 
,  veying  to  us  Christ's  doctrine,  we  may  not  be  al- 
lowed to  underftand  by  the  fcriptures,  a  book  which 

doth 


The  RULE  of  FAITH.  599 

doth  in  plain  and  intelligible  words  exprefs  to  us  this  SE  C  T. 
dodfcrme,  y^-^-^ 

SECT.     III. 

§  i.   ^  ND  now,  although  this  might,  have  been  Mr.  S'« 

-£-W  a  fufficient  anfwer  to  his  exceptions  againft  Exceptions 

3.?<iiiut 

the  fcriptures,  as  being  incapable  of  the  properties  of  fcripture 
a  rule  of  faith  5  becaufe  all  of  them  fuppofe  that  examined. 
which  is  apparently  falfe  and  abfurd,  as  granted  by 
prote Hants,  viz.  that  the  fcriptures  are  only  a  heap 
of  dead  letters  and  infignificant  characters,  without 
any  fenfe  under  them  ;  and  that  oral  tradition  is  that 
only  which  gives  them  life  and  fenfe :  yet,  "becaufe 
feveral  of  his  exceptions  pretend  to  mew,  that  the 
true  properties  of  a  rule  of  faith  do  not  at  all  apper- 
tain to  the  fcriptures  ;  therefore  I  mail  give  particu- 
lar anfwers  to  them,  and,  as  I  go  along,  fhew  that 
tradition  is  liable  to  all  or  moft  of  thole  exceptions, 
and  to  far  greater  than  thofe. 

§  2.  Whereas  he  fays,  "  *  it  cannot  be  evident*  p.  13. 
<c  to  proteflants,  from  their  principles,  that  the  books 
"  of  fcripture  were  originally  written  by  men  divine- 
"  ly  infpired  :"  I  will  fhew  him  that  it  may,  and 
then  anfwer  the  reafons  of  this  exception. 

It  is  evident  from  an  univerfal,  conftant,  and  un- 
controlled tradition  among  chriftians,  not  only  oral, 
but  written,  and  from  the  acknowledgment  of  the 
greater!:  adverfaries  of  our  religion,  that  thefe  books 
were  originally  written  by  the  apoftles  and  evange- 
lifts.  And  this  is  not  only  a  proteftant  principle,  but 
the  principle  of  all  mankind,  "  That  an  undoubted 
'*  tradition  is  fufficient  evidence  of  the  antiquity  and 

6  R  2  "  au- 


6oo  The  RULE  of  FAITH. 

PART"  author  of  a  book,"  and  all  the  cxtrinfecal  argu- 
[fj M  ments  that  can  ordinarily  be  had  of  a  book  writ- 
ten long  ago. 

Next,  it  is  evident  that  the  apoffles  were  men  di- 
vinely infpired,  that  is,  fecured  from  error  and  mif- 
take  in  the  writing  of  this  doctrine,  from  the  mi- 
racles that  were  wrought  for  the  confirmation  of  it  ; 
becaufe  it  is  unreasonable  to  imagine,  that  the  divine 
power  mould  lb  remarkably  fnterpofc  lor  the  confir- 
mation of  a  doctrine,  and  give  fo  eminent  an  attefta- 
tion  to  the  apollles  to  convince  the  world  that  they 
were  immediately  appointed  and  comniiiTioned  by 
God,  and  yet  not  fecure  them  from  error  in  the  de- 
livery of  it.  And  that  fuch  miracles  were  w  rought, 
is  evident  from  as  credible  hiftories  as  we  have  »or  any 
of  thofe  things  which  we  do  mofl  firmly  believe. 
And  this  is  better  evidence  that  ths  apollles  were  men 
divinely  infpired,  than  bare  oral  tradition  can  furnifh  us 
withal  :  for  fetting  afide  the  authentick  relation  of 
thefe  matters  in  books,  it  is  mod  probable,  that  oral 
tradition  of  itfelf,  and  without  books,  would  fcarce 
have  preferved  the  memory  of  any  of  thofe  particu- 
lar miracles  of  our  faviour  and  his  apoftles  which  are 
recorded  in  fcripturc.  And  for  the  probability  of 
this,  I  offer  thefe  two  things  to  his  confideration. 

Firff,  no  man  can  deny  that  memorable  perfons 
have  lived,  and  actions  been  done  in  the  world  in- 
numerable, whereof  no  hiftory  now  extant  makes  any 
mention. 

Secondly,  he  himfelf  will  grant,  that  our  faviour 
wrought  innumerable  more  miracles  than  are  recorded 
in  fcripture.  And  now  I  challenge  him  to  fhew  the 
fingle  virtue  of  oral  tradition,  by  giving  an  account 

of 


The  RULE  of  FAITH.  6or 

cf  any  of  thofe  perfons,  or  their  actions,  who  lived  S  E  C  T. 
1500  or  2000  years  ago,  befidcs  thofe  which  are  men- ,  -  -  _j 
tioned  in  books  >  or  to  give  a  catalogue  but  of  ten 
of  thofe  innumerable  miracles  wrought  by  our  favi- 
ourj  which  are  not  recorded  by  the  evangelifts,  with 
circumftances  as  punctual  and  particular  as  thofe  arc 
clothed  withal :  if  he  can  do  this,  it  will  be  a  good 
evidence  that  oral  tradition  fingly,  and  by  itfelf,  can 
do  fomething  ;  but  if  he  cannot,  'tis  as  plain  an 
evidence  on  the  contrary,  that  if  thole  actions  of  for- 
mer times,  and  thofe  miracles  of  our  Saviour  and 
his  apoftles  which  are  recorded  in  books,  had  never 
been  written,  but  intrufted  folely  to  oral  tradition, 
we  fliould  have  heard  as  little  of  it  at  this  day,  as 
we  do  of  thofe  that  were  not  written. 

§  3.  Now  to  examine  his  reafons  for  this  exception  : 
Firfl,  he  faith,  "  *  'tis  mod  manifeft  that  this*  p#  ,♦ 
"  cannot  be  made  evident  to  the  vulgar,  that  fcrip- 
u  ture  was  written  by  men  divinely  infpired."  This 
reafon  is  as  eafily  anfwered,  by  faying  it  is  moil:  ma- 
nifeft that  it  can  :  but  befides  faying  fo,  I  have 
fhewed  how  it  may  be  made  as  evident  to  the  vulgar, 
as  other  things  which  they  do  moll  firmly,  and  upon 
good  grounds,  believe.  Even  the  rudeft  of  the  vulgar, 
and  thofe  who  cannot  read,  do  believe  upon  very  good 
grounds  that  there  was  fuch  a  king  as  William  the 
conqueror;  and  the  miracles  of  Christ  and  his  apo- 
ftles are  capable  of  as  good  evidence  as  we  have  for  this. 

Secondly,  he  fays,  "  *  this  cannot  be  evident  to*  P.  15, 
the  curious  and  mod  fpeculative  fearchers,  but  by  l^' 
fo  deep  an  infpection  into  the  fenfe  of  fcripture,  as 
fhall  difcover  fuch  fecrets,  that  philofophy  and  hu- 
"  mane  induftry  could  never  have  arrived  to."  As  if 

we 


cc 

K  ( 


602  Tie  R  UL  E  of  FAITH. 

PART.  we  could  not  be  afiiired  that  any  thing  were  written  by 
men  divinely  infpired,  unlefs  it  were  above  the  reach 
of  humane  understanding  ;  and  as  if  no  man  could 
know  that  this  was  our  Saviour's  doctrine,  "  What- 
"  ever  ye  would  that  men  mould  do  unto  you,  that 
<c  do  ye  likewife  unto  them,"   becaufe  every  one  can 
under  (land  it.     Bat  if  there  were  more  myfteries  in 
the  fcriptures  than  there  are,  I  hope  a  man  might  be 
fatisfied   that  they  were  written  by  men  divinely  in- 
ipired, without  a  clear   comprehenfion  of  all  thofe 
myfteries.     The  evidence  of  the  infpiration  of  any 
perfon  doth  not  depend  upon  the  plainnefs  or  fubli- 
mity  of  the  things  revealed  to  him,  but   upon  the 
goodnefs  of  the  arguments  which  tend  to  perfuade  us 
that  the  perfon  is  fo  infpired ;  and  the  argument  that 
is  mod  fit  to  fatisfy  us  of  that,  is,  if  he  work  mi- 
racles.    Now  I  would  gladly  know  why  a  learned 
man  cannot  be  allured  of  a  miracle,  that  is,  a  plain 
fenfible  matter  of  fact  done  long  ago,  but  "  by  fodecp 
an  infpedion  into  the  fenfe  of  fcripture,  as  (hall  dis- 
cover fuch  fecrets  that  philoibphy  and  humane  in- 
duftry  could  never  have  arrived  to." 
?.   14.       §  4.  Thirdly,  becaufe  "  *  all  the  fceming  contra- 
Cc  dictions  of  fcripture  muft  be  folved,  before  we  can 
"  out  of  the  bare  letter  conclude  the  fcripture  to  be 
"  of  God's  inditing  •,  to  folve  which  literally,  plain- 
<c  ly,  and  fatisfactorily  (he  tells  us)  the  memory  of  fo 
<c  many  particulars,  which  made  them  clearer  to  thofe 
"  of  the  age  in  which  they  were  written,  and  the 
c<  matter  known,  muft  needs   be  fo   worn   out   by 
"  tract  of  time,  that    it    is  one  of  the  moft  diffi- 
"  cult  tasks   in  the  world."     As  if  we  could  not  be- 
lieve a  book  to  be  of  God's  inditing,  becaufe  there 

feem 


CC 

(I 


Tie  RULE  of  FAITH.  603 

fecm  now  to  be  fomc  contradictions  in  it,  which  weSECT. 
have  reafon  to  believe  could  eafily  have  been  folved  ,  ***• 
by  thofe  who  liv'd  in  the  age  in  which  it  was  written. 
Or  as  if  oral  tradition  could  help  a  man  to  folve  thele 
contradictions,  when  the  memory  of  particulars  ne- 
ccfTary  for  the  clear  fblution  of  them  is  (ashimfelf  con- 
feiTes^)  worn  out  by  tract  of  time.  If  Mr.  S.  can,  in 
order  to  the  fblution  of  the  feeming  contradictions  of 
fcripture,  demonftrate,  that  oral  tradition  hath  to  this 
day  preferved  the  memory  of  thofe  particulars  (neceA 
fary  for  that  purpofe)  the  memory  of  which  mufl  needs 
be  long  fince  worn  out  by  trad  of  time,  then  I  will 
readily  yield,  that  his  rule  of  faith  hath  in  this  parti- 
cular the  advantage  of  ours.  But  if  he  cannot  do 
this,  why  doth  he  make  that  an  argument  againft  our 
rule,  which  is  as  ftrong  againft  his  own  ?  This  isJjuft 
like  captain  Everard's  friend's  way  of  arguing  againft 
the  proteftants,  that  they  cannot  rely  upon  fcripture, 
becaufe  it  is  full  of  plain  contradictions  impoffible  to 
be  reconciled ;  and  therefore  they  ought  in  all  reaibn 
to  fubmit  to  the  infallibility  of  the  church.  And  for 
an  inftance  of  fuch  a  contradiction,  he  pitched  upon 
the  three  fourteen  generations  mentioned  in  the  firft 
of  St.  Matthew,  becaufe  the  third  feries  of  generations, 
if  they  be  counted,  will  be  found  to  be  but  thirteen. 
Not  to  mention  now,  how  this  difficulty  hath  been 
fufficiently  fatisfied  both  by  proteftant  and  popifh 
commentators,  without  any  recourfe  to  oral  tradition ; 
that  which  I  take  notice  of,  is  the  unreafonablenefs  of 
making  this  an  exception  againft  theproteftants,  when 
it  comes  with  every  whit  as  much  force  upon  themfelves. 
Suppofe  this  contradiction  not  capable  of  any  folu- 
tion  by  proteftants  (as  he  affirms)  and  I  fhould  fub- 
mit 


604  The  RULE  of  FAI TIL 

PART  mit  to  the  infallibility  of  the  church  ;  can  he  affur; 

^  l_j  me,  that  infallibility  can  make  thirteen,  fourteen  ? 
If  it  cannot,  how  am  I  nearer  fatisfaction  in  this 
point,  by  acknowledging  the  infallibility  of  the 
church  ?  the  cafe  is  the  very  fune,  as  to  Mr.  S's 
exception,  if  I  owned  oral  tradition,  I  mould  be 
never  the  nearer  (blving  the  feeminsj  contradictions 
of  fcnpture,  and  confequently  I  could  not  in  reafon 
conclude  it  to  be  of  God's  inditing.  So  that  in 
truth,  thefe  exceptions,  if  they  were  true,  would 
not  firike  at  protellancy,  but  at  chriflian  religion  ; 
which  is  the  general  unhappinefs  of  mofl  of  the 
popi'ri  arguments;  than  which  there  is  no  greater 
evidence,  that  the  church  of  Rome  is  not  the  true 
mother,  becaufe  fhe  had  rather  chriftianity  mould  be 
deftroyed,  than  it  mould  appear  that  any  other 
church  hath  a  claim  to  it.  It  is  a  work  very  pro- 
per for  the  heretick  Marcion,  to  afiault  religion  this 

*  L.  i.    way;    who,    as  Tertullian  *  tells  us,    writ  a  whole 

contr.  book,  which  he  called  Antithefes,  wherein  he  rec- 
koned up  all  the  contradictions  (as  he  thought) 
between  the  old  and  new  teftament :  but  methinks 
it  is  very  improper  for  the  papifts,  who  pretend  to 
be  the  only  true  chriftians  in  the  world,  to  drain 
their  wits  to  difcover  as  many  contradictions  as  they 
can  in  the  fcripture,  and  to  prove  that  there  is  no 
way  of  reconciling  them  ;  the  natural  confequence 
of  which  is,  the  expofing  of  this  facred  instrument 
of  our  religion,  and  even  chriftianity  itfelf  to  the 
fcorn  of  atheifts.  Therefore,  to  be  very  plain  with 
Mr.  S.  and  captain  Everard,  I  am  heartily  forry  to 
fee,  that  one  of  the  chief  fruits  of  their  converfion 

is  to  abufe  the  bible. 

§5.  Second- 


<m  RULE  of  F Aim.  6o$ 

§5.  Secondly,  he  fays,  "  *  that  proteftants  can-S  ECT. 

U  not    know    how  many  the    books   of   fcripture 

"  'ought  to  be,  and  which  of  the  many  controverted 
<c  ones  may  be  fecurely  put  in  that  catalogue, 
"  which  not."  This  he  proves,  by  laying,  "  'tis 
"  mod  palpable,  that  few,  or  at  Icaft  the  rude  vul- 
"  gar,  can  never  be  affured  of  it."  And  if  this  be  a 
good  argument,  this  again  is  a  gcod  anfwer,  to  fay 
it  is  not  mod  palpable.  But  I  fhall  deal  more  libe- 
rally, and  tell  him,  that  we  know  that  juft  fo  many 
ought  to  be  received  as  uncontroverted  books,  con- 
cerning which,  it  cannot  be  ffiewn  there  was  ever 
any  controverfy  *,  and  fo  many  as  controverted,  con- 
cerning which  it  appears  that  queftion  hath  been 
made :  and  if  thofe  which  have  been  controverted 
have  been  fince  received  by  thofe  churches  which 
once  doubted  of  them,  there  is  now  no  farther  doubt 
concerning  them,  becauie  the  controverfy  about  them 
is  at  an  end*  And  now  I  would  fain  know,  what 
greater  certainty  oral  tradition  can  give  us  of  the 
true  catalogue  of  the  books  of  fcripture  :  for  it  muft 
either  acknowledge  fome  books  have  been  contro** 
verted,  or  not  •,  if  not,  why  doth  he  make  a  fuppofi* 
tion  of  controverted  books  ?  If  oral  tradition  acknow- 
ledge fome  to  have  been  controverted,  then  it  cannot 
affure  us  that  they  have  not  been  controverted,  nor 
confequently  that  they  ought  to  be  received  as  never 
having  been  controverted  ;  but  only  as  fuch,  concern- 
ing which  thofe  churches  who  did  once  raife  a  con- 
troverfy about  them,  have  been  fince  fatisfied  that 
they  are  canonical.  The  traditionary  church  now  re- 
ceives the  epiftle  to  the  Hebrews  as  canonical.  I  ask, 
do  they  receive  it  as  ever  delivered  for  fuch  ?  that 
Vol.  IV.  6  S  they 


6o6  Tbe  RULE  of  FAITH. 

PART  they  muft,  if  they  receive   it  from  oral   tradition, 
^JJ^j  which  conveys  things  to  them  under  this  notion,  as 

*  Com.  in  ever  delivered  -,  and  yet  St.  Hierom  fpeaking  f  not  as 
Efai.  c.  6.  a  fpecu]ator5  but  a  teftifier;  faith  exprefly  of  it  »,  "  that 

"  the  cultom  of  the  Latin  church  doth  not  receive  it 
"  among  the  canonical  fcriptures."  What  faith  Mr. 
S.  to  this  ?  It  is  clear  from  this  teftimony,  that  the 
Roman  church,  in  St.Hierom's  time,  did  not  acknow- 
ledge this  epiftle  for  canonical ;  and'tis  as  plain,  that 
the  prefent  Roman  church  doth  receive  it  for  canonical. 
Where  is  then  the  infallibility  of  oral  tradition?  How- 
does  the  living  voice  of  the  prefent  church  afTure  us, 
that  what  books  are  now  received  by  her  were  ever 
received  by  her  ?  And  if  it  cannot  do  this,  but  the 
matter  mud  come  to  be  tried  by  the  bed  records  of 
former  ages  (which  the  proteftants  are  willing  to  have 
their  catalogue  tried  by)  then  it  feems  the  proteftants 
have  a  better  way  to  know  what  books  are  canonical, 
than  is  the  infallible  way  of  oral  tradition ;  and  fo  long 
as  'tis  better,  no  matter  tho'  it  be  not  called  infallible. 

*  P.  i-.        §6-  Thirdly,  he  fays,  "  *  the  Proteftants  cannot 

"  know,  that  the  very  original,  or  a  perfectly  true 
M  copy  of  theie  books  hath  been  preferved.5*  It 
is  not  neceflary  that  they  fhould  know  either  of 
theie,  it  is  fufficient  that  they  know,  that  thofe 
copies  which  they  have,  are  not  materially  cor- 
rupted in  any  matter  of  faith  or  practice ;  and  that 
they  have  iufEcient  aflurance  of  this,  I  have  already 
ihewn.  And  how  doth  he  prove  the  contrary  ? 
By  his  ufual  argument,  with  faying,  "  it  is  manifeft- 
u  ly  impoflible."  But  how  do  the  church  of  Rome 
know  that  they  have  perfectly  true  copies  of  the 
fcriptures  in  the  original  languages  ?  they  do  not  pre- 
tend 


The  RULE  of  FAITH.  6o> 

tend  to  know  this,  the  learned  men  of  that  church  s  E  ^  T- 
acknowledge  the  various  readings  as  well  as  we,  and  v— -v— * 
do   not   pretend   to  know   otherwife  than  by   pro- 
bable conjecture  (as  we  alio  may  do)  which  of  thofe 
readings  is  the  true  one.    And  why  fhould  it  be  more 
neceflary  for  us  to  know  this,  than  for  them  ?  If  they 
think  it  reafonable  to  content  themfelves  with  know- 
ing, that  no  material  corruptions  have  crept  into  thofe 
books,  fo  may  we.     And  that  there  have   not,  we 
know  by  better  arguments  than  oral  tradition,  even 
by  the  aflurance  we  have  of  God's  vigilant  providence, 
and  from   a  moral  impoflibility  in  the  thing,  that  a 
book  fo  univerfally  difperfed,  and  tranflated  into  fo 
many  languages,  and  conflantly  read  in  the  afTemblies 
of  chriftians,  mould  have  been  materially  corrupted, 
fo  as  that  all  thofe  copies  and  tranflations  fhould  have 
agreed  in  thofe  corruptions.     And  this  reafon  St.  Au- 
ftin  *  gives  of  the  prefervation  of  the  fcriptures  entire  *  Fp.  48. 
rather  than   any  other  book  ;  if  Mr.  S.  likes  it  not, 
he  may  call  St.  Auftin  to  account  for  it. 

§  7.  Fourthly,  he  fays,  "  the  proteftants,  at  lead  the  *  P.  15. 
rudeft  vulgar,  can  have  no  affurance  that  thofe  books 
are  rightly  tranflated,  becaufe  they  cannot  beafTured 
either  of  the   ability  or  integrity  of  tranflators." 
Fifthly,  "  Nor  can  they  (fays  *  he)  be  afTured,  that  *  p   ,5 
•€  the  tranfcribers,  and  printers,  and  correctors  of  the  17. 
"  prefs  have  carefully  and  faithfully  done  their  part, 
<c  in  tranfcribing  and  printing  the  feveral  copies  and 
"  tranflations  of  fcripture  aright  ;  becaufe  they  only 
can  have  evidence  of  the  right  letter  of  fcripture, 
who  flood   at   their  elbows  attentively  watching 
they  fhould  not  err  in  making  it  perfectly  like  a 
*4  former  copy  -,  and  even  then,  why  might  they  not 
"  miftruft  their  own  eyes  and  aptnefs  to  overke  ?"  I 

6  S  2  1  pat 


it 


6o3  The  RULE  of  FAITH. 

PART  put  thcfe  two  exceptions  together,  becaufe  the  fame 
anfwer  will  ferve  them   both.     The  grounds  of  thefe 
exceptions,  if  they  have  any,  are  thefe  :  that  no  man 
is  to  be  trufted,  cither  for  his  skill  or  honefty;  and, 
that  it  is  dangerous  for  men  to  truft  their  own  eyes. 
Unlefs  both  thefe  be  true,  thefe  exceptions  are  of  no 
force :  for  if  we  can  be  affured  that  oiher  men  have 
fufficient  skill  in  any  thing  which  we  ourfelves  do  not 
diffidently  underftand,we  may  be  affured  that  thofe  who 
tranflated  the  bible  had  skill  in  the  original  languages; 
becaufe  very  credible  perlbns  tell  us  fo,  and  we  have  no 
reafon  to  doubt  their  teflimony   in   this  particular, 
more  than  in  any  other  matter.     So  that  if  we  can 
have  fufneientaffurance  of  mens  integrity  in  any  thing, 
we  have  no  reafon  10  doubt  of  the  skill  ot  tranflators, 
transcribers,  or  printers  ;    and  if  we   can   have  no 
aiTurance  of  mens  integrity  in  any  thing,   then  no 
man  can  be  affured  there  was  fuch  a  man  as  Henry 
the  eighth  •,    and   yet  I  hope  the  church   of  Rome 
makes  no  doubt  of  it  :   nor  can  any  man  be  affured 
there  is  fuch  a  city  as  Rome,  who  hath  not  feen  it  ; 
1 6.    nay,  if  he  have,  "  *  why  may  he  not  miftrufl:  his  own 
"  eyes  ?"     And,  which  is  the  iaddeft  inconvenience 
cf  ail,  if  no  body  be  to  be  trufted,   nor  mens  own 
eyes,  (and   for  the  fame  reafon,  fure  not  their  ears) 
what  becomes  of  the  infallibility  of  oral  and  practi- 
cal tradition  ?  which  neceffarily  fuppofeth  a  compe- 
tent underftanding,   a  faithful   memory,   an   honefl 
mind,   in    the    generality    of  thofe   who   delivered 
Christ's  doctrine  down  to  us  :  and  by  what  means 
foever  a  man  can  be  affured  of  thefe,  by  the  fame  he 
may  much  more  eafily  be  affured  of  the  ability  and  in- 
tegrity of  tranflators,  tranferibers,  and  printers.    But 
above  all,  it  fuppofeth  that  mens  ears  and  eyes  cannot 

deceive 


The  PMLE  of  FAITH.  609 

deceive  them  in  thofe  things  which  they  are  taughtSECT.- 
and  fee  practifed.  l}}'_  t 

Is  it  not  very  pretty   to  fee  what    pitiful  fhifts 
men  that  ferve  an  hypothefis  are  put  to  ?  when,  to 
maintain  infallibility,  they  are  forced  to  run  to  the 
extremities  of  fccpticifm  •,  and  to  defend  the  certain- 
ty of  oral  tradition,  ("which  depends  upon  the  cer- 
tainty of  mens  fenfes,    and  an  affurance  of  the  abi- 
lity and  integrity   of  thofe  who  were  dead  fifteen 
-hundred  years  before  we  were  born)  are  glad  to  take 
refuge  in   principles  quite  contrary  -,  fuch  as  thefe, 
that  we  can  have  no  affurance,  but  that  whole  pro- 
feffions  of  men  "  *  might   hap  to  be   knaves,  "* p- »& 
that  we  can  have  no    fufHcient  evidence  that   any 
man  made  his  copy  perfectly  like  the  former,  unlefs 
"  *  we  (tood  at  his  elbow, attentively  watching  mm:  "*  p.  16, 
nay,  and  if  we  did  fo,  we  have  ilill  reafon  to  diC- 
truft  our  fenfes.     In  fhort,  all   humane   faith   fup- 
pofeth   honefty  among  rz?i  \  and   that  for  matters 
of  fact  and  plain  objects  of  fenfe,  the  general  and 
uncontrolled  teftimony  of  mankind  is  to  be  credi- 
ted -,    and  for  matters  of  peculiar  skill  and   know- 
ledge, that  the  generality  of  thofe  who  are  account- 
ed skilful  in  that  kind,  are  to  be  relied  upon :   for, 
as  Ariftotle  well  obferves,  there  is  no  greater  fign  of 
an  undifciplined  wit  (or,  to  ufe  one  of  Mr.  S's  fine 
phrafes,    *  4«  of  a  man  not    acquainted   with    the  *  Preflice* 
"  paths  of  fcience")  than  to  expect  greater  evidence 
for  things   than  they  are  capable  of.     Every  man 
hath  reafon  to  be  affured  of  a  thing  which  is  capa- 
ble of  fufficient  evidence,  when   he  Jiath  as  much 
evidence  for  it  as  the  nature  of  that  thing  will  bear, 
and  as  the   capacity  he  is  in  will    permit  him  to 

have. 


610  The  RULE  of  FAITH. 

have.  And,  as  Mr.  White  fays  well,  "  *  fatisfaclion  is 
"  to  be  given  to  every  one  according  to  his  capa- 
<c  citv  ;  it  is  fufficient  for   a  child    to   believe  his 
"  parents  \  for  a  clown  to  believe   his  preacher." 
Falkland,  And  this  is  univerfally  true  in  all  cafes,  where  we 
P-  33-       have  not  better  or  equal  evidence  to  the  contrary. 
But  fuch  is  the  unhappinefs  of  the  popifh  doctrines, 
that  if  people  were  permitted   the  free  ufe  of  the 
fcripture,  they   would  eafily  difcern  them  to  have 
no  probable  foundation  in  it,  and  to  be  plainly  con- 
trary  to  it  •,    fo   that  it    cannot  be    fafe   for  their 
preachers  to  tell  the  people  that  the  fcripture  is  the 
only  rule  of  faith,   left  they  fhould   find  caufe  not 
to  believe  them,  when  they  teach  doctrines  fo  plain- 
ly contrary  to  that  rule. 
*  P.  17.         §  8.  Laftly,  he  fays,  "  *  the  proteftants  cannot 
be  certain  of  the  true  fenfe  of  fcripture."     Does  he 
mean  of  plain  texts,  or  obfcure  ones  ?  Of  the  true 
fenfe  of  plain  texts  I  hope  every  one  may  be  cer- 
tain •,  and  for  obfcure  ones,  it  is  not  neceffary  every 
one  fhould.     But  it  may  be  there  are  no  plain  texts 
in  the  fcriptures :  then  the  reafon  of  it  muft  be  (till 
Mr.  S.  can  fhew  a  better)  either  becaufe  it  is  im- 
pofiible  for  any  one  to  write  plainly  -,   or  becauie 
God  cannot  write  fo  plainly  as  men  ;  or  becaufe  we 
have  good  reafon  to  think  that  he  would  not  write 
things  neceffary  for  every  one  to  believe,  fo  as  men 
might  clearly  underftand  him. 
4  p  But  he  tells  us,  "  *  the  numerous  comments  upon 

il  fcripture  are  an  evidence  that  no  man  can  be 
•«  certain  of  the  true  fenfe  of  it."  I  hope  not ; 
for  if  thofe  numerous  commentators  do  generally 
agree  in  the  fenfe  of  plain  texts  fas  'tis  certain  they 

do) 


The  RULE  of  FAITH.  6u 

do)  then  this  argument  figniiies  nothing  as  to  fuch  SECT. 
texts  ;  and  as  for  thofe  which  are  obfcure,  let  com-  ^1  !,_ 
mentators  differ  about  them  as  much  as  they  pleafe, 
fo  long  as  all  neceffary   points  of  faith  and  matters 
of  practice  are  delivered  in  plain  texts.     He  adds, 
"  *  There  are  infinite  difputes  about  the  fenfe  of*  p#  I%. 
Ci  fcripture,   even    in    moil    concerning  points,   as 
"  in  that  of  Christ's  divinity."  But  are  not  com- 
mentators,   both  proteftant   and   popifh,    generally 
agreed  about  the  fenfe  of  fcripture   in  that  point  ? 
And  what  if  fome   out    of  prejudice    miftake,  or 
out  of  perverfenefs  do  wreft  the  plained   texts   of 
fcripture  for  the  divinity  of  Christ,  to   another 
fenfe  ?  is  this  any  argument  that  thofe  texts  are  not 
fufliciently    plain  ?    can   any    thing  be   Ipoken   or 
written  in  words  fo  clear  from  ambiguity,   which  a 
perverfe  or  prejudiced  mind  fhall  not  be  able  to  vex 
and  force  to  another  meaning  ?  God  did  not  write 
the  fcriptures  for  the  froward  and  the  captious,  but 
for  thofe  who  will  read  them  with  a  free  and  un- 
prejudiced   mind,  and  are  willing  to  come  to  the 
knowledge  of  the  truth.     If  Mr.  S.  had  been  con- 
verfant  in  the  writings  of  the  fathers,  he  could  not 
but  have  taken  notice  with  what  confidence  they  at- 
tempted to  prove  the  divinity  of  Christ  out  of 
fcripture,  as  if  that  did  afford  convincing  arguments 
for  this  purpofe.  St.  Chryfoftom  *  profeffes  to  demon-  *  Horn. 
(Irate  out  of  fcripture,  "  that  the  Son  is  of  the  fame  3  2  <*e 
M  fubflance  with  the  Father;"  and  relies  upon  font! 
fcripture  alone  for   this,    without  mentioning  any 
other  kind  of  argument :  fo  that  it  feems  St.  Chry- 
foftom was  not  acquainted  with  the  infufficiency  of 
fcripture    for  the  conviction  of  hcreticks  in  this 

point  5 


6i2  The  RULE  of  FAITH. 

PA  RT  pointy  and  that  he  was  either  ignorant  of  the  (infalli* 
^00r^mmj  ble)  way  of  demonftrating  this  point  from  oral  tradi- 
tion, or  had  no  great  opinion  of  it.  The  fame  father 
*  Horn.  7.  elfewhere  *  arguing  againft  hereticks  about  the  di- 
Pnoca.  vinity  of  Christ,  fays,  w  that  they  pervert  the  fcrip- 
u  ture,  to  ftrengthen  their  herefy  from  thence."  But 
then  he  does  not  (with  Mr.  S.)  blame  the  fcripture, 
and  fliy  that  this  doctrine  is  not  there  delivered  with 
fufficient  clearnels  ;  but  contrariwife  he  fays,  "  that 
<c  the  fcripture  is  clear  enough,  but  the  corrupt  minds 
cc  of  hereticks  will  not  fee  what  is  there  contained." 
Had  St.  Chryfoflom  been  a  true  fon  of  the  traditio- 
nary church,  he  would  have  Jaid  hold  of  this  occa- 
fion  to  vilify  the  fcriptures,  and  to  fhew  the  necef- 
fity  of  regulating  our  faith  not  by  flich  uncertain 
records,  but  by  the  infallible  reports  of  oral  tra- 
dition. 

§  9.  But  becaufe  Mr,  S.  lays  great  weight  (in  fe- 
veral  parts  of  his  book)  upon  this  exception  againft 
Scripture,  viz.  "  that  proteftants  cannot  be  certain 
€i  of  the  true  fenfe  of  it ;  "  therefore  I  lhall  not  con- 
tent my  felf,  only  to  have  fhewn  that  we  may  be 
fufficiently  certain  of  the  fenfe  of  fcripture,  fo  far  as 
to  underftand  all  neceflary  matters  of  faith  and 
practice,  and  that  more  than  this  is  not  necefTary  ; 
but  mall  likewife  return  this  exception  upon  him,  by 
enquiring  into  thefe  two  things  -t 

1.  How  the  traditionary  church  can  be  more 
certain  of  the  true  fenfe  of  fcripture  than  the  pro- 
tectants ? 

2.  How  they  can  be  more  certain  of  the  true 
fenfe  of  tradition,  than  proteflants  of  the  true  fenfe 
of  fcripture? 

1.  How 


The  RULE  of  FAITH.  613 

i.  How  the  traditionary  church  can  be  more  cer-  s  ET£T" 
tain  of  the  true  fenfe  of  fcripture  than  proteltants  ?  u 
they  pretend  to  have  an  oral  tradition  of  the  true 
fenfe  of  it,  delivered  down  from  father  to  fon.    But 
this  only  reacheth  to  thofe  texts,  which  are  coinci- 
dent with  the  main  body  of  chriftian  doctrine ;  as 
for  all  other  parts  of  fcripture,  they  are  as  ufelels  to 
papiftsj    as   they   fuppofe   they    are  to   us  *,  becaufe 
wanting  the  help  of  oral  tradition,   they  cannot  be 
certain   of  one  tittle  of   them.     And  as  for  thofe 
texts,  the  fenfe  whereof  is  conveyed  down  by  oral 
tradition  •,  this  fenfe  is,   I   hope,  delivered  in  fome 
words  or  other  :     and    have   all  preachers,   and  fa- 
thers, and  mothers,  and  nurfes,   the  faculty  of  deli- 
vering  this  fenfe  in  words  fo  plain  as  cannot  pofii- 
bly  be  miftaken  or  wrefled  to  another  fenfe  ?  I  am 
forry  that  when  every  one  hath  this  faculty  of  fpeaking 
their  thoughts  plainly,  the  Holy  Ghost  mould  be 
reprefented  as  not  able  to  convey  his  mind  to  men 
in  intelligible  words.     And  does  not  his  own  ob- 
jection rebound  upon   himfelf  ?  if  the  church  have  a 
certain   fenfe   of  fcripture  orally  delivered,    whence 
are  the  numerous  comments  of  the  fathers  upon  ir, 
and  of  later  writers  of  their  church,  and  the  infinite 
difputes  about  the  fenfe  of  it,  in  the  mod  concern- 
ing points  ?    viz.  "  The  efficacy  of  God's   grace, 
"  the  fupremacy  of  St.   Peter,  the  infallibility  of  a 
"  pope   and  council  by  immediate  affiftance  of  the 
"  Holy  Ghost  !  "  what  a  ftir  is  made  about  the 
fenfe  of  daho  tibi  claves^  tu  es  Petrus^  &  fuper  banc 
felram,  L$c.  fa  fee  oves  ?  Do  not  they  differ  about  the 
meaning  of  thefe  texts  among  themfelves,  as  much 
2S  they  do  from  the  lathers,    and  from  the  prote- 
Vol.  IV.  6T  fonts? 


tfi4  The  RULE  of  FAITH. 

PART  ftants?  fome  underftandinff  them  of  St.  Peter's  fu- 
jj  ° 

i^yL^j  premacy  only,  others  of  his  infallibility,  others  of 
his  infallibility  only  in  and  with  a  general  council  ; 
which  yet  others  do  not  allow  to  pope  or  council 
from  any  immediate  afilftance,  but  only  from  the 
rational  force  of  tradition,  fuppofing  that  the  pope 
and  council  hold  to  it.  If  oral  tradition  have  brought 
down  a  certain  fenfe  of  thefe  texts,  why  do  they 
not  produce  it,  and  agree  in  it  ?  if  it  have  not  (to 
*  p-  l7-  ufe  a  hoc  phrale  of  his  own  *)  "  'tis  perfect  phren- 
"  zy  to  lay  they  can  be  certain  of  the  true  fenfe  of 
"  fcripture." 

If  he  fay,  they  are  by  tradition  made  certain  of 
the  true  fenfe  of  fcripture,  fo  far  as  it  concerns 
the  main  body  of  chriftian  doctrine,  and  do  all 
aoree  in  it,  and  that  is  fufS.cient  j  then  I  ask  him, 
what  are  thole  points  of  faith  which  make  up 
the  body  of  chriftian  doctrine?  He  will  tell  me, 
they  are  thofe  which  all  catholicks  agree  to  have 
defcended  to  them  from  the  apoftles  by  a  conftant 
and  uninterrupted  tradition.  I  enquire  farther,  how 
I  fhall  know  what  is  the  certain  fenfe  of  fcripture  fo 
far  as  it  concerns  thefe  points  ?  He  muft  anfwer  as 
before,  that  that  is  the  true  fenfe  which  all  ca- 
tholicks agree  to  have  defcended  to  them  by  tradi- 
tion. Which  amounts  to  this,  that  all  catholicks 
do  agree  in  the  fenfe  of  fcripture  lb  far  as  they 
do  all  agree  in  it.  It  is  to  be  hoped,  that  the  pro- 
teftants  (how  much  foever  at  prcfent  they  differ  about 
the  fenfe  of  fcripture)  may  in  time  come  to  as  good 
*Exom,  agreement  as  this.  This  brings  to  my  remem- 
eait.  p.  brance  a  paffage  or  two  of  Mr.  CrcfTy  •,  the  one  in 
5S4'         his  appendix  *,  where  he  tells  us,  "  That  as   it  is 

"  impof- 


The  RULE  of  FAIT H.  61$ 

C£  impofllble  thac  hcreticks  fhould  agree  in  any  other  SECT. 
"  way  than  in  faction-,  fo  it  is  impofllble  that  I  -  ^-^o 
"licks  fhould  differ  in  points  of  fi*ith.n  Why  To? 
were  not  thofe  catholicks  firft,  who  afterwards 
became  hcreticks?  and  when  they  became  fo,  did 
they  not  differ  in  points  of  belief?  yes,  but  here 
lies  the  conceit,  when  they  began  to  differ,  then, 
they  ceafed  to  be  catholicks;  therefore  catholicks 
can  never  differ  in  points  of  faith.  The  other 
paffage  is,  where  he  fays  *,  "  that  he  hath  for-  *  Exomo- 
"  faken  a  church  where  unity  was  impofllble,  &c.  l°g-c-53- 
"  and  betaken  himfelf  to  a  church  where  fchifm  is 
"  impofllble."  This  Jaft  claufe,  u  that  fchifm  is 
<c  impofllble  in  their  church,"  cannot  poflibly  be 
true  but  in  the  fame  abfurd  and  ludicrous  fenfe,  in 
which  it  is  impofllble  for  catholicks  to  differ  in 
points  of  belief.  For  he  cannot  deny  but  that  it 
ispoflible  for  men  to  break  off  from  the  communion 
of  their  church,  which  in  his  fenfe  is  fchifm.  But 
here  is  the  iubtilty  of  it,  no  fchifmatick  is  of  their 
church,  becaufe  fo  foon  as  he  is  a  fchifmatick  he  is 
out  of  it;  therefore  fchifm  is  impofllble  in  their 
church.  And  is  it  not  as  impofllble  in  the  church 
of  England  ?  W  here  Mr.  Cr.  might  have  done  well 
to  have  continued,  till  he  could  have  given  a  wifer 
reafon  of  forfaking  her. 

§  10.  But  to  return  to  our  purpofe;     Mr.  Rufh- 
worth  *  acknowledged,  that  the  fcripture  is  of  itfeJ .  . 

fufffciently   plain  as    to  matters  of  practice;  for  hefca.  12. 
asks,  "  Who  is  fo  blind  as   not  to   fee   that  thefc 
*c  things  are  to  be  found  in  fcripture  by  a  fenfibk\ 
"  common,  and  difcreet  reading  of  it ;  though  p 
*c  haps  by  a  rigorous-  and  exact  balancing  of  cv< 

6  T  z.  !c  par- 


6i6  Tk  RULE  of  FAITH. 

u  particular  word  and  fyllable,  any  of  thefe  things 
"  would  vanilli  away  we  know    not    how*  ?  "     So 
that  for  the  direction  of  our  lives   and  actions,  he 
confeffeth  the  fcripture   to  be  fufric:ently  plain,    if 
men   will  but   read    it  fenfibly  and  difcreetly,  and 
(he   fays)  that  he  is  blind  that    does  not  fee    this. 
But   who    fo  blind    as   he  who   will  not   fee,    that 
the  fenfe  of  fcripture  is   as   plain   in   all  necefTary 
points  of  faith  ?  I  am  fure  St.  Auftin  makes  no  dif- 
t)e  dc&r.  ference,  when  he  tells  us,    "  *  Thkt  in  thofe  things 
"  which  are  plainly  fet  down  in  fcripture,  we  may 
<6  find  all   thofe  things  in  which  faith  and  manners 
"  of  life    are   comprehended. *'     And  why  cannot 
men,  in  reference  to  matters  of  faith  as  well  as  of 
practice,  read  the  fcriptures  fenfibly  and  difcreetly  ; 
without  fuch  a  rigorous  balancing  of  every  word  and 
fyllable,  as  will  make  the  fenfe  vanifh  away  wc  know 
not  how  ?  If  the  fcripture  be  but  fuHiciently  plain 
to  fuch  as  will  ufe  it  fenfibly   and   diicreedy,   I  do 
not  underftand  what  greater  plainnefs  can  be  defired 
in  a  rule ;  nor  can  I  imagine  what  kind  of  rule  it 
muft  be  that  can  be  unexceptionably  plain  to  captious 
cavillers,    and   fuch  as   are   bent  to   play   the  fool 
with  it. 

Well,  fuppofe  the  fcriptures  be  not  fufficiently 
clear  as  to  matters  of  faith,  and  hereupon  I  have 
recourie  to  the  church  for  the  true  fenfe  of  fcripture; 
mud  I  believe  the  church's  fenfe  to  be  the  true  lenle 
of  fuch  a  text,  though  I  fee  it  to  be  plainly  con- 
trary to  the  genuine  fenfe  of  the  words  ?  yes,  that 
I  muft,  or  elfe  I  make  myfelf,  and  not  the  church, 
judge  of  the  fenfe  of  icripture,  which  is  the  grand 
hereiy  of  the  proteftants.     But  then  I  muft  not  fup- 

pofe3 


The  RULE  of  FAITH.  617 

pofe,  much  lefs  believe,  that  the  church's  fenfe  of  S  E  C  t. 
fuch  text  is  contrary  to  the  genuine  meaning  of  it  •, 
no,  although  I  plainly  fee  it  to  be  fo  :  this  is  hard 
again  on  the  other  hand ;  efpecially  if  it  be  true 
which  is  acknowledged  both  by  Dr.  Holden  and 
Mr.  CrefTy,  viz.  that  though  general  councils  cannot 
miftake  in  the  points  of  faith  which  they  decree,  yet 
they  may  miftake  in  the  confirmation  of  them  from 
texts  of  fcripture,  that  is,  they  may  be  miftaken 
about  the  fenfe  of  thofe  texts.  And  if  Mr.  S.  think 
his  brethren  have  granted  too  much,  he  may  fee 
this  exemplified  in  the  fecond  council  of  Nice  (to 
mention  no  other)  which,  to  eftablifh  their  doctrine 
of  image-worfhip,  does  fo  palpably  abufe  and  wrefl 
texts  of  fcripture,  that  I  can  hardly  believe  that  any 
papift  in  the  world  hath  the  forehead  to  own  that 
for  the  true  fenfe  of  thofe  texts  which  is  there  oiven 
by  thofe  fathers. 

§  11.  Secondly,  how  the  traditionary  church  can 
be  more  certain  of  the  true  fenfe  of  their  traditional 
doctrines,  than  the  proteftants  can  be  of  the  true 
fenfe  of  fcripture  ?  and  this  is  worthy  of  our  enquiry, 
becaufe  if  the  bufinefs  be  fearch'd  to  the  bottom,  it 
will  appear  (befides  all  other  inconveniences,  which 
oral  tradition  is  much  more  liable  to  than  fcrip- 
ture) that  the  certain  {cnCc  and  meaning  of  tradi- 
tional doctrine  is  as  hard  to  come  at  as  the  fenih 
of  fcripture.  And  this  I  will  make  appear  by  ne- 
ceffiry  confequence  from  their  own  conceffions. 
Mr.  White  and  Mr.  S.  fay,  that  the  great  fecu- 
rity  of  tradition  is  this,  that  it  is  not  tied  to  cer- 
tain phrafes  and  fet  forms  of  expreflion,  but  the 
fame  fenfe  is  conveyed  and  fettled  in  mens  hearts  by 

various 


6i8  The  RULE  of  FA  IT  II. 

PART  various  exprefilons.     But  according  to  Mr.  Rufli- 
i^^L^j  worth,  this  renders  tradition's  fenfe  uncertain  -,    for 
*  Dial.  2.  he  fays,  "  *  'tis  impoffiblc  to  put  fully,  and  beyond 
*e     °*      "  all  quarrel,  the  fame  fenfe  in  divers  words."    So 
that  if  men  do  not  receive  tradition  in  a  fenfible, 
common,  difcreet  way    (as  Mr.   Rufh worth  fpeaks 
concerning  reading  the  fcriptures)   but  will  come  to 
a  rigorous  and  exact  balancing  of  every  particular 
phrale,   word,    and  fyllable,  the  fenfe    of  tradition 
will  be  in  the  very  fame  danger  of  uncertainty,  and 
be  liable  to  vanifh  we  know   not  how.     Dr.  Hol- 
•Analyf.  ^^  *  lays  down  thefe  two  principles,    €C  Firft,  that 
fide!,  l.  i.  w  no  truth  can  be  conveyed  down  from  man  to 
"  man  but  by  fpcech  ;  and  fpeech   cannot  be  but 
"  by  words ;  and  all  words  are  either  equivocal  in 
"  themfelves,  or  liable  to  be  differently  underftood 
"  by   feveral  perfons.     Secondly,    that   fuch  is  the 
<c  frame  of  man's  mind,  that  the  fame  truths  may 
"  be   differently    apprehended    and   underitcod   by 
«*  different  perfons  :  "  and  if  this  be  true,  then  tra- 
ditional doctrines,    if    they  be  delivered  Jby  fpeech 
and  words,  will  be  liable  to  uncertainties  and  am- 
biguities,   as   to   their   f^nk,    as   well  as    fcripture. 
»  .        i  Mr.    CrefTy    *  tells  us,    "  that    reafon    and    ex- 
c.  6.  "  pcrience  fhew,    that  differences   will   arife    even 

"  about  the  writings  of  the  fathers,  and  any  thing 
«'  but  the  teftimony  of  the  prefent  church."  If 
this  be  true,  tradition  wholly  falls  into  uncertainty : 
for  if  difference  will  arife  about  the  writings  of  the 
fathers  how  they  are  to  be  interpreted,  I  fuppofe 
the  writings  of  councils  will  be  liable  to  the  fame 
inconvenience :    and    if   the  whole   prefent  church 

cannot  declare  her  icnfc  of  any  traditional  doctrine 

Other- 


The  RULE  of  FAITH.  619 

otherwifc  than  by  a  council,  (unlels  with  the  jefuits s  E S-  j.**. 
they  will  epitomize  the  church  into  the  pope)  and  ^.^^j 
the  decrees  of  a  council   cannot  be  univerfally  di£ 
perfed   (or  at  lead  never  ufe  to  be)  but  by  writing: 
and  if  differences  will  arife  about  the  interpretation 
of  that  writing,   as  well  as  any  other,  then  this  pre- 
fent  infallible  authority  (which  Mr.  CrefTy  magni-   - 
fies  fo  much  for  ending  of  differences)  leaves  all  con- 
troverfies  arifing  about  the  fenfe  of  tradition  as  inde- 
terminable as  ever  ;  and  they  muft  for  ever  remain 
fo,  till  general  councils  have  got  the  knack  of  pen- 
ning their  decrees  in  words  which  will  fo  infallibly 
exprefs  their  meaning  to  the  moil  captious  cavil- 
ler, that  no  difference  can  poffibly  arife  about  the 
interpretation  of  them,  or  elfe  (which  will  be  more 
fuitable  to  this  wife  hypothefis)    till  general  coun- 
cils (being   convine'd    by  Mr.   S's  demonftrations) 
fhall  come  to  underftand  themfelves  fo  well,  as  noc 
to  intrufl  their  decrees  any  more  to  the  uncertain 
way  of  writing,    but  for  the  future  to  communicate 
them  to  the   world  by  the  infallible  way   of  oral 
tradition.     And  to  mention  no  more,  Mr.  Knott  *,    t;n  .:   , 
(who  agrees  with  the  other  thus  far,  that  the  cer-c.  z.fed, 
tain  fenfe  of  fcripture  is  only  to  be  had  from  the6, 
church)  fpeaks  to  this  purpofe,  that  before  we  can  be 
certain  that   this  is  the  true  fenfe  of  fuch  a  text,  we 
mud  either  be  certain  that  this  text  is  capable  of  no 
other  fenfe,    as  figurative,  myflicaJ,  or  moral  ;  or  if 
it  be,    we   muft    have  fome   certain  and  infallible 
means  to    know   in    which  of   them  it    is  taken, 
which  can  be  known  only  by  revelation.     If  this  be 
true,  then  by  a  fair  parity  of  reafon,  before  I  can 
be  certain  that  this  is  the  fenfe  of  a  doctrinal  tra- 
dition 


\ 


62o  The  RULE  of  FAITH. 

dition  delivered  down  to  me,  I  mufl  either  be  cCr* 
tain  that  the  words  in  which  this  tradition  was  ex- 
prelTed  when   it  was  delivered  to  me,  are  capable  of 
no   other   fenfe    (as  figurative,  myftical,  or   moral) 
befides  that   in    which  I   underftood  them  •,    or  if 
thev  be  (as  certainly   they  will    be)  capable  of  any 
of  thefe  other  fenfes,  then  mull  I  have  fome  certain 
and   infallible    means  whereby   to   know   in  which 
of  thefe  they  are  taken  :  and  this  can  no   more  be 
known  without  a  revelation,  than  which  is  the  true 
fenfe  of  fuch  a  text  of  fcripture.     If  it  be  faid,  that 
the  fenfe   of  a  traditionary  doctrine  may  by  different 
expreflions  be  flill   farther  and   farther  explained  to 
me  till  I  come  certainly  to  underftand  the  fenfe  of 
it  •,  this  will  not  help  the  matter  :  for  if  thefe  kinds 
of  cavils  be  good,  that  a  man  cannot  be  certain  of 
the  meaning  of  any  words,  till  he  can  by  an  infal- 
ble  argument  demonflrate  either  that  they  cannot  be 
taken,  or  that  they  are  not  taken  in  any  other  fenfe  j 
I  fay,    if  this  cavil  will  hold,    then  every  new  ex- 
predion  whereby  any  one  fhall  endeavour  to  explain 
any  traditional  doctrine,  is  liable  to  the  fame  incon- 
venience which  thofe  words  in  which  it  was  firft  de- 
livered to  me  were  liable  to.     From  all  which  it  is 
evident,    that    the   traditionary    church  can   be   no 
more  certain  of  the  fenfe  of  their  traditional  doc- 
trines, than  proteftants  may  be  of  the  fenfe  of  fcrip- 
ture. 

§  12.  Thefe  are  his  exceptions  contained  in  his 
fecond  difcourfe  -,  and  of  what  force  they  are,  hath 
been  examined.  But  becaufe  he  forelaw  that  it  might 
be  replied,  that  thefe  defects  might  in  part  be  pro- 
vided againft  "  by  hiftory,  by  the   providence   of 

God, 


The  RULE  of  FAITH.  621 

cc  God,  by  teftimonies  of  councils  and  Others,  andSECT. 

-  in 

"  by  die  fufncient  dearnefs  of  fcripture  as  to  the  fun-^,.^  J^j 
"  damentals  j"  he  endeavours  to  fhew  that  thefefip--    - 
nify  little  to  this  purpofe. 

Firft,  "  Not  hiftory*,  becaufe  few  are  skilled  p.  17, 18, 
in  hiftory,  and  they  that  are  not,  cannot  fufdy 
rely  upon  thofe  that  are  skilled,  unlefs  they  knew 
certainly  that  the  hiftorians  whom  they  rely  on 
had  fecure  grounds,  and  not  bare  hear-fay  for  what 
"  they  writ,  and  that  they  were  not  contradicted 
"  by  others  either  extant  or  perimed.5'  How  much 
credit  is  to  be  given  to  uncontrolled  hiftory  by  the 
learned,  and  how  much  by  the  vulgar  to  men  of 
skill,  I  have  already  fhewn.  I  (hall  only  add  now, 
that  if  this  reafoning  be  true,  it  is  impoffible  for  any  , 
man  to  be  certain  by  hiftory  of  any  ancient  matter 
of  fact,  as  namely,  that  there  were  fuch  perfons 
as  Julius  Cefar  and  William  the  conqueror,  and 
that  they  invaded  and  conquered  England,  becaufe 
(according  to  him)  we  cannot  know  certainly  that 
the  hiftorians,  who  relate  thefe  things,  and  upon 
whofe  authority  we  rely,  "  had  fecure  grounds,  and 
*c  not  bare  hear-fay,  for  what  they  writ :  and  that 
"  they  were  not  contradicted  by  others  either  ex- 
"  tant  or  perimed,"  is,  I  am  fure,  impoflible  for 
any  man  to  know :  for  who  can  tell  now  what  was 
contained  in  thofe  books  which  are  periined?  fo 
that  if  this  be  requifite  to  make  every  hiftorical  re- 
lation credible,  to  know  certainly  that  it  was  not 
contradicted  by  any  of  thofe  books  which  we  do 
not  know  what  they  were,  nor  what  was  in  them,  we 
can  have  no  certainty  of  any  ancient  fact  or  hiftory  : 
for  who  knows  certainly  that  fome  books  that  are 
Vol.  IV.  6  U  perifhed 

4. 


622  We  RULE  of  FAITH. 

PART  pcriflied  did  not  contradict  whatever  is  written  in 
y_^_  If  books  that  are  extant  ?  nay,  if  this  reafoning  hold, 
we  can  have  no  certainty  of  any  thing  conveyed  by 
oral  tradition  :  for  what  though  the  prieft  tell  me  this 
was  the  doctrine  of  Christ  delivered  to  him  ?  un- 
lefs  I  know  that  all  others  agree  with  him  in  this  tra- 
dition, I  cannot  rely  upon  his  tefiimony  :  nor  then 
*  Anfwer  neither,  in  Mr.  Knott's  *  opinion,  "  becauie  the  tefti- 
to  Chil-  <t  m0ny  of  preachers  or  parlors  is  humane  and  fal- 
§  ?3.  '  '  "  lible!  unlefs  (according  to  his  jargon)  a  conclufion, 
<c  deduced  from  premifes,  one  of  which  is  only  pro* 
"  bable,  may  be  fufficient  to  bring  our  underftand- 
"  ing  to  an  infallible  act  of  faith,  viz.  if  fuch  a  con- 
"  clufion  be  taken  fpeciMcative  ;  whereas  if  it  be  ta- 
"  ken  reduplicative,  as  it  is  a  conclufion,  it  can  only 
u  beget  a  probable  afTent  ;"  which  is  to  fay,  that 
confidered  barely  as  a  conclufion,  and  fo  far  as  in  rea- 
fon  it  can  deferve  afTent,  it  is  only  probable  ;  but 
confidered  as  it  ferves  an  hypothefis,  and  is  conveni- 
ent to  be  believed  with  reafon  or  without,  fo  it  is  in- 
fallible. But  to  carry  the  fuppofition  farther  :  put 
the  cafe,  that  the  whole  prefent  age  afTembled  in  a  ge- 
neral council,  fhould  declare  that  fuch  a  point  was  de- 
livered to  them  ;  yet  (according  to  Mr.  S.)  we  cannot 
fafely  rely  upon  this,  unlefs  we  knew  certainly,  that 
thofe  whom  they  relied  on  "  hao]  fecure  grounds,  and 
"  not  bare  hear-fay,  for  what  they  delivered  ;  and  that 
ct  they  were  not  contradicted  within  thefpace  of  1500 
"  years  by  any  of  thofe  that  are  deadi"  which  is  im- 
poflible  for  any  one  now  to  know. 

But  to  fhew  how  inconfiftent  he  is  with  himfelf  in 

thefe  matters,  I  will  prefent  the  reader  with  a  paflagc 

or  two  in  another  part  of  his  book,  where  he  endea- 

irs  to  prove  that  men  may  fafely  rely  on  a  general 

and 


ff&  RULE  of  FAITH.  62; 

and  uncontrolled  tradition.     He  tells  us,  "  *  That  SEC  T. 
*'  the  common  courie  of  humane  converfation  makes  i_-v~ ^j 
"  it    madnefs   not    to   believe   great  multitudes   of*  *J-  49- 
*fi  knowers,  if  no  pofilble   confiderations  can   awa- 
"  ken  in  our  reafon  a  doubt  that  they  confpire  to  de- 
"  ceive  us."     And  a   little  after,  "  *  nor  can  any,  *  *&<*• 
"  unlefs  their  brains  rove  wildly,  or  be  unlettled  even 
"  to  the  degree  of  madnefs,  fufpect  deceit,  where  fuch 
"  multitudes  agree  unanimoufly  in  a  matter  of  £161." 
Now  if  men  be  but  fuppofed  to  write,  as  well  as  to 
fpeak,  what  they  know,  and  to  agree  in  their  writ- 
ings about  matter  of  fact ;  then  it  will  be  the  fame 
"  madnefs  not  to  believe  multitudes  of  hiftorians, 
where  no  pofiible  confideration  can  awaken  in  'our 
reafon  a  doubt  that  they  have  confpired  to  deceive 
us ;  and  mens  brains  muft  rove  wildly,  and  be  un- 
fettled  even  to  the  degree  of  phrenzy,  who  fufpect 
«c  deceit  where  fuch  multitudes  unanimously  agree  in 
u  a  matter  of  fact."     And  this  feems  to  me  to  be  the 
great  unhappinefs   of  Mr.  S*s  demonftrations,  that 
they  proceed  upon  contradictory  principles ;  fo  that 
in  order  to   the  demonftrating  of  the  uncertainty  of 
books  and  writings,  he  muft  fuppofe  all  thofe  prin- 
ciples to  be  uncertain,  which  he  cakes  to  be  felf-evi- 
dent  and  unqueftionable,  when  he  is  to  demonftrate 
the  infallibility  of  oral  tradition. 

§  13.  Secondly,  he  tells  us  *,  "  the  providence  of  *  p.  31, 
"  God  is  no  fecurity  againfl  thofe  contingences  the 
ic  fcriptures  are  fubject  to  ;  becaufe  we  cannot  be  cer- 
**  tain  of  divine  providence  or  afiiftance  to  his  church, 
"  but  by  letter  of  fcripture  ;  therefore  that  muft  firfb 
M  be  proved  certain,  before  we  mention  the  church, 
5  or  God's  afiiftance  to  her."     As  if  we  pretended 

6  U  2  there 


624  We  RULE  cf  FAITH. 

PART  there  were  any  promife  in  fcripture  that  God  would 
l^v^j  preferve  the  letter  of  it  entire  and  uncorruptcd,  or  as 
if  we  could  not  otherwife  be  afTured  of  it ;  as  if  the 
light  of  natural  reafon  could  not  allure  us  of  God's 
providence  in  general,  and  of  his  more  efpecial  care 
of  thofe  things  which  are  of  greatefl  concernment  to 
us,  fuch  as  this  is,  that  a  book  containing  the  method 
and  the  terms  of  falvation  mould  be  preferved  from 
any  material  corruption.  He  might  as  well  have  faid, 
that  without  the  letter  of  fcripture  we  cannot  know 
that  there  is  a  God. 
*  p    g  §  14.  Thirdly,  "  Nor  (fays  he  *)  can  teftimonies 

19.  cc  of  councils  and  fathers  be  fufficient  interpreters  of 

"  fcripture."  We  do  not  fay  they  are.  Our  prin- 
ciple is,  that  the  fcripture  doth  fufficiently  interpret  it 
felf,  that  is,  is  plain  to  all  capacities,  in  things  necef- 
fary  to  be  believed  and  practifed.  And  the  general 
coafent  of  fathers  in  this  doctrine  of  the  fufficient 
plainncfs  of  fcripture  (which  I  fhall  afterwards  mew) 
is  a  good  evidence  againfi  them.  As  for  obfeure  and 
more  doubtful  texts,  we  acknowledge  the  comments 
of  the  fathers  to  be  a  good  help,  but  no  certain  rule 
of  interpretation.  And  that  the  papifts  think  fo,  as 
well  as  we,  is  plain ;  inafmuch  as  they  acknowledge 
the  fathers  to  differ  among  themfelves  in  the  interpre- 
tation of  icvcral  texts  :  and  nothing  is  more  familiar 
in  all  popifh  commentators,  than  to  differ  from  the 
antjent  fctheis  about  the  fenfe  of  fcripture.  And  as 
for  councils,  Dr.  Holden  and  Mr.  Crefly  (as  I  faid 
before)  do  not  think  it  neceflary  to  believe  that  al- 
ways to  be  the  true  fenfe  of  texts  which  councils  give 
of  them,  when  they  bring  them  to  confirm  points  of 
lu    Nay,  if  any  controverfy  arife  about  the  fenfe 

of 


(.1 


cc 


The  RULE  of  FJITH.  625 

of  any  text  of  fcripture,  it  is  impoffible  (according  SECT, 
to  Mr.  Rufhworth's  principles)  for  a  council  to  decide  ^-v~J 
either  that,  or  any  other  controverfy  :  for  he  *  makes  *  Dial-  2< 
it  his  bufinefs  to  prove,  "  that  controverfies  cannot 
"  be  decided  by  words  ;'*  and  if  this  be  fo,  then  they 
cannot  be  decided   at  all,  unlefs  he  can  prove  that 
they  may  be  decided  without  words,  and  confequently 
that  councils  may  do  their  work  bed  in  the  quakers 
way  by  filent  meetings. 

§  15.  Fourthly,  "  Nor  can  (fays  he  *)  the  clear-  *  P.  20, 
<c  nefs  of  fcripture  as  to  fundamentals  be  any  help21, 
againfl  thefe  defects."  Why  not  ? 
Firft,  becaufe  "  a  certain  catalogue  of  fundamen- 
tals was  never  given  and  agreed  to  by  fufficient 
u  authority,  and  yet  without  this  all  goes  to  wreck." 
I  hope  not,  fo  long  as  we  are  fure  that  God  would 
make  nothing  neceflary  to  be  believed  but  what  he 
hath  made  plain  •,  and  fo  long  as  men  do  believe  all 
things  that  are  plainly  revealed  (which  is  every  one's 
fault  if  he  do  not)  men  may  do  well  enough  without 
a  precife  catalogue.  But  fuppofe  we  fay,  that  the  ar- 
ticles of  the  apoilles  creed  contain  all  neceffary  mat- 
ters of  fimple  belief;  what  hath  Mr.  S.  to  fay  againfl 
this  ?  I  am  fure  the  Roman  catechifm,  fet  forth  by 
the  decree  of  the  council  of  Trent,  fays  *  as  much  as  *  Pnefat. 
this  comes  to,  viz.  "  that  the  apodles  having  receiv- 
<c  ed  a  command  to  preach  the  gofpel  to  every 
u  creature,  thought  fit  to  compofe  a  form  of  chrif- 
"  tian  faith,  namely  to  this  end,  that  they  might 
"  all  think  and  fpeak  the  fame  things,  and  that  there 
"  might  be  no  fchifms  among  thofe  whom  they  had 
"  called  to  the  unity  of  faith,  but  that  they  might 
"  all  be  perfect  in  the  fame  fenfe  and  the  fame  opi- 

46  ni©n: 


626  The  RULE  of  FAITH. 

PART  "  nion  :  and  this  profefTion  of  the  chriftian  faith  and 
.  ^ :  l_f  "  hope,  fo   framed  by  them,  the  apoftles  called  the 
"  fymbol  or  creed."     Now  how  this  end  of  bring- 
ing men  to  unity  of  faith,  and  making  them  per- 
fectly of  the  fame  fenfc  and  opinion,  could  probably 
be  attained  by  means  of  the  creed,  if  it  did  not  con- 
tain all  ncceflary  points  of  fimple  belief,   I  can  by  no 
means   under  (land.     Befides,  a  certain  catalogue  of 
fundamentals  is  as  necefTary  for  them  as  for  us;  and 
when  Mr.  S.  gives  in  his,  ours  is  ready.     Mr.  Chil- 
lingworth  had  a  great  defire  to  have  feen  Mr.  Knott's 
catalogue  of  fundamentals,    and  challenged  him  to 
produce  it,  and  offered  him  very  fairly,  that  when- 
ever he  might  with  one  hand  receive  his,  he  would 
with  the  other  deliver  his  own  :  but  Mr.  Knott,  tho* 
he  ftill  perfiftcd  in  the  fame  demand,  could  never  be 
prevailed  with   to   bring  forth  his  own,  but  kept  it 
for  a  fecret  to  his  dying  day.     But  to  put  a  final  itop 
to  this  canting  demand  of  a  catalogue  of  fundamen- 
tals (which  yet  I  perceive  I  fhall  never  be  able  to  do, 
becaufe  it  is  one  of  thofe  expletive  topicks  which  po- 
pifh  writers,  efpecially  thofe  of  the  lowed  form,  do 
generally  make  ufe  of  to  help  out  a  book)  however, 
to  do  what  I  can  towards  the  Hopping  of  it,  I  defire 
Mr.  S.  to  anfwer  the  reafons  whereby  his  friend  Dr. 

*  Analyf.  Holden  *  fhews  the  unreafonablenefs  of  this  demand, 
fid.  1.  i.    and  likewife  endeavours  to  prove  that  fuch  a  catalogue 

would  not  only  be  uielefs  and  pernicious  if  it  could  be 
given,  but  that  it  is  manifeftly  impoffible  to  give  fuch 
a  precife  catalogue. 

*  P.  21.        Secondly,  he  asks,  "*  Is   it  a  fundamental   that 

"  Christ  is  God  ?  If  fo,  whether  this  be  clearer  in 
"  fcripture,  than  that  God  hath  hands,  feet,  &C."1 

To 


Tbe  RULE  of  FAITH.  627 

To  which  I  anfwer  by  another  queftion,  is  it  clear  SECT, 
that  there  are  figures  in  fcripture,  and  that  many.^  _  1 
things  are  fpoken  after  the  manner  of  men,  and  by 
way  of  condefcenfion  and  accommodation  to  our  ca- 
pacities ;  and  that  cuflom  and  common  fcnfc  teacheth 
men  to  diftinguifh  between  things  figuratively  and 
properly  fpoken  ?  If  fo,  why  cannot  every  one  eafily 
underftand,  that  when  the  fcripture  faith  "  God  hath 
"  hands  and  feet,  and  that  Christ  is  the  vine  and 
"  the  door,"  thefe  are  not  to  be  taken  properly,  as 
we  take  this  propofition,  that  Christ  is  God,  in 
which  no  man  hath  any  reafon  to  fufpccl  a  figure  ? 
When  Mr.  S.  tells  us,  "  that  he  percheth  upon  thQ 
<c  fpecifical  nature  of  things,"  would  it  not  offend 
him,  if  any  one  mould  be  fo  filly  as  to  conclude  from 
hence  that  Mr.  S.  believed  himfelf  to  be  a  bird,  and 
nature  a  perch  ?  and  yet  not  only  the  fcriptures,  but 
all  fober  writers,  are  free  from  fuch  forced  and  fantas- 
tical metaphors.  I  remember  that  Origen  *  taxeth*  L.  4? 
Celfus's  wilful  ignorance  in  finding  fault  with  the* 
fcriptures,  for  attributing  to  God  humane  affections, 
as  anger,  &c.  and  tells  him,  "  that  any  one  who 
"  had  a  mind  to  underftand  the  fcriptures,  might 
<c  eafily  fee,  that  fuch  expreflions  were  accom- 
<c  modated  to  us,  and  accordingly  to  be  under- 
"  flood  ;  and  that  no  man,  that  will  but  compare 
"  thefe  expreflions  with  other  pafTages  of  fcripture, 
"  need  to  fail  of  the  truefenfe  of  them."  But  (ac- 
cording to  Mr.  S.)  Origen  was  to  blame  to  find 
fault  with  Celfus  for  thinking  that  the  fcriptures  did 
really  attribute  humane  affections  to  God  ;  for  how 
could  he  think  otherwife,  when  "  the  mod  funda- 
*'  mental  point  is  not  clearer  in  fcripture,  than  that 

"God 


628  The  RULE  of  FAITH. 

FART.  «  God  hath  hands,  feet.  &c.  ?"   How  could  Origen 

If  ^ 

^^^^j  [n  reafon  expeft  from  Celfus  (though  never  fo  great 
a  philofopher)  chat  he  fhould  be  able,  without  the 
help  of  oral  tradition,  to  diftinguifh  between  what  is 
fpoken  literally,    and  what   by  a  certain   fcheme  of 

*  Hasret.  fpcech  ?     Theodoret  *  tells  us  of  one  Audasus,  who 

*4"held  that  God  had  a  humane  fhape,  and  bodily  mem- 
bers *,  but  he  does  not  fay  that  the  reafon  of  this  er- 
ror was,  becaufe  he  made  fcripture  the  rule  of  his 
faith,  but  exprefly  becaufe  "  he  was  a  fool,  and  did 
*c  foolifhly  underitand  thofe  things  which  the  divine 
"  fcriptures  fpeak  by  way  of  condefcenfion."  So 
that  although  ivlr.  S.  is  pleafed  to  make  this  wife 
objection,  yet  it  feems  (according  toTheodoretJ  that 
men  do  not  miftake  fuch  texts,  either  for  want  of  oral 
tradition,  or  of  fufPtcient  clearneis  in  the  icriptures, 
but  for  want  of  common  reafon  and  fenfe.     And  if 

Mr.  S.  know  of  any  rule  of  faith  that  is  fecure  from 
all  pofiibility  of  being  miftaken   by  foolifh  and  per- 

verfe  men,  1  would  be  glad  to  be  acquainted  with  it, 

and  with  him  for  its  fake. 

SECT.    IV. 

Thatfcrip-§  *•  TN  his  next  difcourfe  he  endeavours  to  fhew, 
ture  i$  a  X  that  unlearned  perfons  cannot  be  juftified  as 

rule  to  the  acting  rationally  in  receiving  the  fcripture  for  the 
unlearned,  worcj  0f  God,  and  relying  upon  it  as  a  certain  rule  ; 
molt  ratio-  becaufe  they  are  not  capable  of  fatisfaction  concerning 
nal  doubt-  thefe  matters.  But  I  have  already  fhewn  that  they 
are,  and  (hall  not  repeat  the  fame  over  again.    And 

*  P.  24.    whereas  he  fays  *,  "  that  feveral  profeflions  all  pretend 

«c  to  fcripture,  and  yet  differ,  and  damn,  and  perfe- 

"  cute 


The  RULE  of  FAITH.  629 

<g  cute  one  another  about  thefe  differences  -,**  the  an-S  E  c  t. 
fwer  is  eafy  :  that  they  all  pretend  to  fcripture,  is  an  u-i3^d 
argument  that  they  all  acknowledge  it  to  be  the  word 
of  God,  and  the  rule  of  faith  ;  and  that  they  are  ge- 
nerally agreed  about  the  fenfe  of  thofe  plain  texts 
which  contain  the  fundamental  points  of  faith,  is  evi- 
dent in  that  thofe  feveral  profeffions  acknowledge  the 
articles  contained  in  the  apoflles  creed  to  be  fuffici- 
cntly  delivered  in  fcripture :  and  if  any  profeffions 
differ  about  the  meaning  of  plain  texts,  that  is  not  an 
argument  that  plain  texts  are  obfeure,  but  that  fbme 
men  are  perverfe.  And  if  thofe  profeffions  damn  and 
perfecute  one  another  about  the  meaning  of  obfeure 
texts,  the  fcripture  is  not  in  fault,  but  thofe  that  do  fo. 

§  2.  And  whereas  he  pretends  *,  "  that  the  fcrip-A  p  ±„- 
"  ture  is  not  able  to  fatisfy  fceptical  diilenters  and  ra-  2$>  *7* 
"  tional  doubters,  becaufe  nothing  under  a  demon- 
"  ftration  can  fatisfy  fuch  perfons  fo  well  concerning 
lc  the  incorrruptednefs  of  originals,  the  faithfulness  of 
"  tran flations,  &c.   but  that  fearching  and   fincere 
H  wits  may  ftill  maintain  their  ground  of  fufpenfe 
"  with  a  might  it  not  beotherwife?'*  This  hath  been 
anfwered  already,  partly  by  fhewing  that  the  fcrip- 
ture was  not  intended  to  fatisfy  fcepticks,  and  that  a 
demon  drat  ion  is  not  fufficient  to  give  fatisfatfion  to 
them  ;  and  partly  by  fhewing  that  rational  doubters 
may  have  as  much  fatisfaction  concerning  thofe  mat- 
ters, as  the  nature  of  the  thing  will  bear  j  and  he  is 
not  a  rational  doubter  that  defires  more. 

But  that  he  may  fee  the  unreafonablencis  of  thisdif- 
courfe,  I  fhall  briefly  fhew  him,  that  all  mankind  do 
in  matters  of  this  nature  accept  of  fuch  evidence  as 
falls  fhort  of  demgnftration  j  and  that  his  great  friends 

Vo  l.  IV.  6  X  and 

4^ 


630  The  RULE  of  FAITH. 

PART  and  matters,  from  whom  he  hath  taken  the  main 
^**1^  grounds  of  his  book  (though  he  manageth  them  to 
lefs  advantage,)  do  frequently  acknowledge,  that  it  is 
reafonable  for  men  to  acquicfee  in  fuch  affurance  as 
falls  fhort  of  infallibility,  and  fuch  evidence  as  is  lefs 
than  demonftration.     Do  not  mankind  think  them- 
felves  furrkiently  affured  of  the  antiquity  and  authors 
of  feveral  books,  for  which  they  have  not  demonftra- 
tive  evidence  ?  Doth  not  Ariftotle  fay,  that  things  of 
a  moral  and  civil  nature,  and  matters  of  fad  done 
long  ago,  are  incapable  of  demonftration  \  and  that 
it  is  madnefs  to  expect  it  for  things  of  this  nature  ? 
Are  there  no  paffages  in  books  fo  plain,  that  a  man 
may  be  fufflciently  fatisfied   that  this  and  no  other 
is  the  certain  fenfe  of  them  ?  if  there  be  none,  can 
any  thing  be  fpoken  in  plainer  words  than  it  may  be 
written  ?  if  it  cannot,  how  can  we  be  fatisfied  of  the 
certain  fenfe  of  any  doctrine  orally  delivered  ?  and  if 
we  cannot  be  fo  fatisfied,  where*  s  the  certainty  of  oral 
tradition  ?  but  if  books  may  be  written  fo  plainly  as 
that  we  may  be  abundantly  fatisfied  that  this  is  the  cer- 
tain fenfe  of  fuch  and  fuch  paffages,  then   we  may 
reafonably  reft  fatisfied  in  evidence  for  thefe  matters 
fhort  of  demonftration.     For  was  ever  the  fenfe  of 
any  words  fo  plain  as  that  there  did  not  remain  this 
ground  of  fufpenfe,  that  thofe  words  might  be  ca- 

*  Dial.  2.  pable  of  another  fenfe  ?  Mr.  Rufhworth  *  fays, "  that 
feet  7-      16  difputative  fcholars  do  find  means  daily  to  explicate 

<c  the  plaineft  words  of  an  author  to  a  quite  different 
"  fenfe  :"  and  that  the  world  might  be  furnifh'd  with 
an  advantageous  inftance  of  the  poffibility  of  this, 

*  De  bonis  Raynaudus  *  ( a  writer  of  their  own)  hath  made  a 
&  maiu    wanton  experiment  upon  the  apoftles  creed,  and  by  a 

finifter 


The  RULE  of  FAITH.  631 

(inifter    ( but   poflible  )   interpretation,    hath   made  SECT. 
every  article  of  it  herefy  and  blafphcmy,  on  purpofe  ^ -y— «j 
to  fhew  that  the  plained  words  are  not  free  from 
ambiguity.     Bat  may  be  Mr.  S.  can  outdo  the  Apo- 
Stles,  and  can  deliver  the  christian  doctrine  fo  clear- 
ly, that  he  can  demonstrate  it   impoflible  for  any 
man  to  put  any  other  fenfe  upon  any  of  his  words 
than  that  which  he  intended.     I  do  not  know  what 
may  be  done,  but  if  Mr.  S.  doth  this  he  mud  both 
amend  his  Style  and  his  way  of  demonstration. 

Is  Mr.  S.  fufficiently  aflured  that  there  is  fach  a 
part  of  the  world  as  America  ?  and  can  he  demon- 
strate this   to  any  man  without   carrying  him  thi- 
ther ?  can  he  fhew  by  any  neceSTary  argument,  that 
it  is  naturally  impoflible  that  all  the  relations  con- 
cerning that  place  fhouJd   be  falfe  ?  when   his  de- 
monstrations have  done  their  utmoft,  cannot  "  *  a*  P.  27; 
"  Searching  and    fincere  wit  at  leaft  maintain  his 
ground  of  fufpenfe  with  a  might  it  not  be  other- 
wise ? ■ '  and,  with  an  is  it  not  poflible    that  all 
men  may   be   liars,    or     that  a  company  of   tra- 
vellers may  have  made  ufe  of  their  privilege  to  abufe 
the  world  by  falie  reports,  and  to  put  a  trick  up- 
on mankind  ?  or  that  all  thofe  who  pretend  to  go 
thither,  and  bring  their  commodities  from  thence, 
may  go  to  fome  other  parts  of  the  world,  and  tak- 
ing pleafure  in  abufing  others  in  the  fame  manner 
as  they  have  been  impofed  upon  themfelves,  may 
fay  they  have  been  at  America  ?  who  can  tell  but 
all  this  may  be  fo  ?  and    yet  I  fuppofe  notwithstand- 
ing the  poSTibility  of  this,   no  man  in   his  wits  is 
now  poSTefTed  with  So  incredibile  a  foliy  as  to  doubc 
whether   there  be  Such  a  place.     The  cafe  is  the 

6X2  very 


4C 


632  The  RULE  of  FAITH. 

TART  very  fame  as  to  the  certainty  of  an  ancient  book, 
and  of  the  fenfe  of  plain  expreffions :  we  have  no 
demonftration  for  thefe  things,  and  we  expect  none 
becaufe  we  know  the  things  are  not  capable  of  it. 
We  are  not  infallibly  certain,  that  any  book  is  fa 
ancient  as  it  pretends  to  be,  or  that  it  was  written 
by  him  whofe  name  it  bears,  or  that  this  is  the 
fenfe  of  fuch  and  fuch  paffages  in  it  j  it  is  poffible 
all  this  may  be  otherwife,  that  is,  it  implies  no 
contradiction  :  but  we  are  very  well  aflured  that  it 
is  not  -,  nor  hath  any  prudent  man  any  juft  caufe  to 
make  the  lead  doubt  of  it.  For  a  bare  polfibility 
that  a  thing  may  be,  or  not  be,  is  no  juft  caufe  of 
doubting  whether  a  thing  be  or  not.  It  is  poffible 
all  the  people  of  France  may  die  this  night,  but  I 
hope  the  poffibility  of  this  doth  not  incline  any  man 
in  the  lead  to  think  it  will  be  fo  :  it  is  poffible  the 
fun  may  not  rife  to  morrow  morning ;  and  yet,  for 
all  this,  I  foppofe  that  no  man  hath  the  lead  doubt 
but  that  it  will. 

§  3.  But  becaufe  this  principle,  viz.  "  That  in 
€i  matters  of  religion  a  man  cannot  be  reaibnably 
"  fatisfy'd  with  any  thing  lefs  than  that  infallible 
a  afTurance  which  is  wrought  by  demonftration,'9' 
is  the  main  pillar  of  Mr.  S's  book  5  therefore,  be- 
fide  what  hath  been  already  faid  to  (hew  the  unrea- 
fonablenefs  of  this  principle,  I  fhail  take  a  little 
pains  to  manifeft  to  him  how  much  he  is  con- 
tradicted in  this  by  the  chief  of  his  brethren 
of  the  tradition,  viz.  Mr.  Rufhworth,  Dr.  Holden, 
Mr.  Crefly,  and  Mr.  White,  who,  befides  Mr.  S. 
and  one  J.  B.  are  (fo  far  as  I  can  learn)  all  the  pub- 
lick  patrons  that  ever  this  hypothefis  of  oral  tradi- 
tion 


The  RULE  of  FAITH.  633 

tion  hath  had  in  the  world  ;  and  if  Mr.  White   (as  SECT. 
I  have  reafon  to  believe)  was  the  author  of  thofe  dia- 


logues which  pafs  under  Rufh worth's  name,  the  num- 
ber them  is  yx  ^s-  ^ow  ^  *  can  ^evv  t^iat  tn*s 
principle  (efteem'd  by  Mr.  S.  fo  fundamental  to  this 
hypothefis)  is  plainly  contradicted  by  the  principal 
affertors  of  oral  tradition,  I  fhall  hereby  gain  one  of 
thefe  two  things,  either  that  thefe  great  patrons  of 
oral  tradition  were  ignorant  of  the  true  foundation 
of  their  own  hypothefis,  or  that  this  principle  is  not 
neceffary  for  the  fupport  of  it.  Not  that  I  would 
be  fo  underflood  as  if  I  did  deny  that  thefe  very 
perfons  do  fometimes  fpeak  very  big  words  of  the 
necefllty  of  infallibility  :  but  if  it  be  their  plcafore 
to  contradift  themfelves,  as  I  have  no  reafon  to  be 
difpleafed,  fo  neither  to  be  concerned  for  it;  but 
fhall  leave  it  to  Mr.  S.  to  reconcile  them  firft  to 
themfelves,  and  then  (if  he  pleafes)  afterwards  to 
himfelf. 

§  4.  I  begin  with  Mr.  Rufhworth  of  immortal 
memory,  for  that  noble  attempt  of  his,  to  perfuade 
the  world  that  nowithftanding  he  was  the  firft  in- 
ventor of  this  hypothefis  of  oral  tradition,  yet  he 
could  prove  that  the  church  had  in  all  ages  owned 
it,  and  proceeded  upon  it  as  her  only  rule  of  faith. 
He  in  his  third  dialogue,  *  when  his  nephew  ob-  *  Se&  3* 
jecls  to  him,  "  that  perhaps  a  proteftant  would  fay  &  4>i 
"  that  all  his  foregoing  difecurfe  was  but  probabili- 
"  ty  and  likelihood,  and  therefore  to  hazard  a 
<c  man's  eftate  upon  peradventures,  were  fome- 
cc  thing  hard,  and  not  very  rationally  done : "  re- 
plies thus  to  him,  "  what  fecurity  do  your  mer- 
M  chants,  your  ftatefmen,  your  foidiers3  thofe  that 


!•  g° 


634  3&  RULE  of  FAITH. 

PART"  go  to  law,  nay,  even  thole  that  till  your  grounds 
u     l^j"  and  work  for  their  livings;  what  fecurity,   I  fay, 
"  do  all  thefe  go  upon  ?  is  it  greater  than  the  fe- 
M  curity  which   thefe  grounds  afford  ?    furely  no; 
<c  and  yet  no  man  efleems  them  foolifh.     All  hu- 
"  mane  affairs  are  hazardous,    and  have  fome  ad- 
"  venture  in  them  :  and  therefore  he  who  requires 
M  evident  certainty  only  in  matters  of  religion,  dif- 
"  covers  in  himfelf  a  lefs  mind  to  the  goods  pro- 
"  mifed  in  the  next  life,   than  to  thefe  which  he 
*c  feeks  here  in  this  world  upon  weaker  affurance. 
<c  Howfoever,  the  greateft  evidence  that  can  be  to 
"  him  that  is  not  capable  of  convincing  demon- 
<c  ftrations    (which    the   greater!  part  of  mankind 
M  fall  fliort  of)  is  but  conjectural."     So  that  (ac- 
cording to  Mr.  Rufh worth)  it  is  not  reafon  and  dif- 
cretion,  buC  want  of  love  to  God  and    religion, 
which  makes  men  require  greater  evidence  for  mat- 
ters of  religion  than  for  humane  affairs,  which  yet 
(he  tells  us)  "  are  hazardous,  and  have  fome  adven- 
<c  ture  in  them,"  and  confequently  are  not  capable 
of  demonftration.      Befides,  "  if  demonftrative  evi- 
<c  dence  be  an  effential  property  of  the  rule  of  faith. 
c*  (as  Mr.   S.  affirms)    then  this  rule  cannot   (ac- 
tfc  cording   to   Mr.  Rufhworth)  be    of  any  ufe  to 
tc  the  greateft  part  of  mankind,  becaufe  they   are 
<c  not    capable     of  convincing    demonflrations.  " 
3 bid.  feci.  Again,  "  do  but  confider  (fays  he  *  )  how  unequal 
6*  •«  and  unjuft  a  condition  it   is,    that  the  claim  of 

the  prefent  church  mall  not  be  heard,  unlefs  fhe 
can  confute  all  the  peradventures  that  wit   may 
*«  invent,  and  folve  all  the  arguments  which  the  in- 
*•  finite  variety  of  time,  place,,  and  occafions  may 

M  have 


4C 


The  RULE  of  FAITH.  635 

€<  have  given  way  unto ;  and  then  you  will  lee  how  SECT. 

"  unreafonable  an  adverfary  he   is,  who  will  not  be  t_  -w-„jj 

<c  content  with  any  fatisfaction,  but  fuch  as  man's  na- 

*c  ture  fcarcely  affords."     And  is  it  not  equally  unjuft: 

in  Mr.  S.  M  not  to  let  fcripture's  claim  be  heard,  un- 

u  lefs  we  can  confute  every  perad venture  [and  might 

ec  it  not  be  otherwife]  that  wit  may  invent  ?  "  See  then 

"  how  unreafonable  an   adverfary  Mr.  S.   is,  who 

iC  will  not  be  content  with  any  fatisfaction,  but  fuch 

cl  as  (according  to  Mr.  Rufhworth)  man's  nature 

Cl  fcarcely  affords." 

Dr.  Holden  (I  confefs)  flates  the  matter  fome- 
what  cautioufly,  when  he  tells  us, "  *  that  it  mail  fuf- *  ^.  *  c  iv 
ic  fice  for  the  prefent  to  determine,  that  the  wifdom  of 
<f  the  creator  hath  afforded  us  fuch  an  affurance, 
€<  efpecially  of  truths  neceffary  to  falvation,  as  is 
«c  fuitable  to  our  nature,  and  bed  fitted  for  the  fafe 
*c  conduct  of  our  lives  in  moral  and  religious  af- 
<c  fairs  : M  but  if  we  interpret  thefe  general  expref- 
fions  by  the  paffages  I  before  cited  out  of  Mr. 
Rufhworth  (as  in  reafon  we  may,  fince  the  doctor 
is  beholden  to  him  for  the  befl  part  of  his  book) 
then  nothing  can  make  more  againft  Mr.  S's 
principle. 

§  5.  Mr.  CrefTy  in  his  exomologefis,  *  fays,  "  that  *  C.  10. 
cc  fuch  teachers  as  approached  nearefl  to  the  foun- 
"  tain  of  truth,  Christ  and  his  apoflles,  had  means 
cc  of  informing  themfelves  in  apoftolical  tradition 
iC  incomparably  beyond  us."  Mr.  S.  may  do  well 
to  fhew  what  thofe  means  were  which  are  fo  in- 
comparably beyond  his  infallibility  and  demonftra- 
tion.  The  fame  author*  does  very  much  applaud  *  c.  52. 
Stapleton's  determination  of  the  queftion  concerning feci 

the 


636  We  RULE  of  FAITH. 

PART,  the  church's  infallibility,  which  is  as  follows,  «  that 
«**:,_,"  the  church  does  not  expect  to  be  taught  by  Goo 
"  immediately  by  new  revelations,  tyit  makes  ufe  of 
*  feveral  means,    &c.   as  being  govern'd  not  by 
"  apoftles,  &c.  but  by  ordinary  paftors  and  teachers. 
"  That  thefe  paftors  in  making  ufe  of  thefe  feveral 
"  means  of  decifion,  proceed  not  as  the  apoftles  did, 
«  with  a  peculiar  infallible  direction  of  the  Holy 
«c  Spirit,  but  with  a  prudential  collection  not  al- 
ee ways  neceffary.    That  to  the  apoftles,  who  were 
«  the  firft  mafters  of  evangelical  faith,  and  founders 
«  of  the  church,  fuch  an  infallible  certitude  of  means 
"  was  necefiarv ;  not  fo  now  to  the  church,  8rc.° 
If  this    be   true,    that   an   infallible    certitude    of 
means  is   not  now  neceflary  to  the  church  3   and 
that  her  paftors  do  now  in  deciding  matters  of  faith 
proceed  only  with  a  prudent  colle&ion  not  always 
neceflary  *  then  it  mould  feem  that  a  fearchmg  wit 
may  maintain  his  ground  of  fufpenfe,  even  againft 
their  church  alfo,  "  with  a  might  it  not  be  other- 
*A^end  «  wife?"  Again  Mr.  Crefly*  tells  us,  «  that  truth 
c.5.        «  and  our  obligation  to  believe  it,  is  in  an  higher 
"  degree  in  fcripture  than  in  the  decifions  of  the 
«  church,  asBellarmine  acknowledges;"  which  is 
to  fay,  that  we  may  have  greater  aflurancc  of  the 
truth  of  doctrines  contain'd  in  the  fcriptares,  than 
we  can  have  of  any  doctrine  from  the  determina- 
tion of  the  church.    But  if  we   have  the  greateft 
affurance  that  can  be  of  truths  deliver'd  to  us  by 
the  church,  as  Mr.  S.  affirms,  then  I  would  fain 
learn  of  him  what  that  greater  degree  of  affurance  is 
which  Bellarmine  fpeaks  of,  and  whether  it  be  greater 

than  thegreateft?  Not  to  infift  upon  that  (which 

yet 


The  RULE  of  FAITH.  637 

y^t  I  cannot  but  by  the  way  take  notice  of)   thatSEL.T. 
Mr.  CrefTy,  by  his  approbation  of  this  determination ,       ^j 
of  Bellarmine's,  doth  advance   the   fcripture  above 
the  church,  as   to  one  of  the   molt  effential  pro- 
perties   of    the    rule  of   faith,    viz.   the   certainty 
of  it. 

But  the  moft  eminent  teftimony  to  my  purpofe 
in  Mr.  Crefly,  is  that  famous  paffage  *  (which  hath  *  c-  4°- 
given  fo  much  offence  to  feveral  of  his  own  church)  ie  **  c* 
wherein  he  acknowledges  "  the  unfortunatenefs  (to 
<c  him)  of  the  word  infallibility,"  and  tells  us, 
"  that  he  could  find  no  fuch  word  in  any  council , 
c*  that  no  neceflity  appeared  to  him  that  either  he 
"  or  any  other  proteftant  fhould  ever  have  heard 
u  that  word  nam'd,  and  much  lefs  prefs'd  with  fo 
u  much  earneftnefs  as  of  late  it  has  generally  been 
"  in  difputations  and  books  of  controverfy  ;  and 
"  that  Mr.  Chillingworth  combats  this  word  with 
"  too  great  fuccefs,  infomuch  that  if  this  word 
w  were  once  forgotten,  or  but  laid  by,  Mr.  Chilhng- 
cc  worth's  arguments  would  lofe  the  greateit  part 
*c  of  their  ftrength  -,  and  that  if  this  word  were 
K  confined  to  the  Ichools  where  it  was  bred,  there 
*c  would  be  (till  no  inconvenience:  and  that  fince 
<c  by  manifeft  experience  the  Englifh  proteftants 
"  think  themfelves  fb  fecure,  when  they  have  leave 
"  to  (land  or  fall  by  that  word,  and  in  very  deed 
<c  have   fo   much   to  fay  for  themfelves  when  they 

are  prefied  unnecefTarily  with  it:  fince  likewife  it 

is  a  word  capable  of  fo  high  a  fenfe  that  we  tan- 
*'  not  devife  one  more  full  and  proper  to  attribute  to 

God  himfelf,  Sec."  Since  all  this  is  fo,  he  thinks 
he  cunnot  "  be   blamed,  if  fuch  reafons  move  him 

Vol.  IV.  6Y  "to 

4- 


cc 


«c 


638  The  RULE  of  FAITH. 

PART  «<  to  wifh  that  that  the  proteftants  may  never  be 
^!^^a  invited  to  combat  the  authority  of  the  church  un- 
4<  der  that  notion."    A  very  ingenuous  acknowledg- 
ment, aud  as  crofs  to  Mr.  S's  principle  as  any  thing 
can  be.     But  the  word  infallibility  was  not  fo  un- 
fortunate to  Mr.   Crefly,   as   his    untoward    expli- 
cation of  the   fore-cited  pafTage    in   his  appendix, 
which  he  afterwards  publifhed  chiefly  by  way  of  vin- 
dication of  himfelf  againft  the  learned  author  of  the 
preface  to  my  lord  Falkland's  difcourfe  of   infalli- 
*  Append,  bility.     There  he  tells  us  *,  "  that  there  are  feveral 
fe&.2,and«  degrees  of  infallibility."   And  that  we  may  know 
°'  what  degrees  of  infallibility  he  thinks   necefCtry  to 

be  attributed  to  the  church,  this  following  pafTage 
will  inform  us :  "  methinks  (he  fays)  if  God  have 
"  furnifhed  his  divine  and  fupernatural  truth,    with 

45  evidence  equal  to  this,  that  the  fun  will  fhine  to- 
c;  morrow,  or  that  there  will  be  a  fpring  and  har- 

46  veil  next  year,  we  are  infinitely  obliged  to  blefs 
c<  his  providence,  and  juitly  condemned,  if  we  re- 
"  fule  to  believe  the  leait  of  fuch  truths,  as  fhew- 
<c  ing  lefs  affection  to  fave  our  fouls  than  the  dull 
*'  plowmen  to  fow  their  corn,  who  certainly  have 
"  far  lefs  evidence  for  their  harveft  than  catholicks 
"  for  their  faith  ;  and  yet  they  infift  not  peevifhly 
4t  upon  every  capricious  objection,  nor  exact  an  in- 
"  fallible  fecurity  of  a  plentiful  reaping  next  lummer, 
66  but  notwithitanding  all  difficulties  and  contin- 
"  gencies  proceed  chearfully  in  their  painful  husban- 
Ct  dry."  So  that  according  to  this  difcourfe,  what- 
ever degree  of  alTurance  the  church  hath,  or  can 
give  to   thofe   who  rely  upon  her,  it  is  plain  that 

no  further  degree  is  neceflary  than  what  the  husband- 
man 


The  RULE  of  FAITH.  639 

man  when  he  fows,  hath  of  a  plentiful  harveft,  and  SECT, 
that  men  are  juftly  condemned  if  they  refufe  to  be- 
lieve  the   leaft  truth  upon  fuch  fecurity,  which  yet 
(by  his  own  acknowledgment)  is  liable  to  contin- 
gencies :   nay  farther,  that  men  are  not  reasonable, 
"  but  peevifh,  in  exacting  infallible    fecurity,  and 
"  infilling   upon  every    capricious  objection,     fuch 
"  as  is  Mr.  S's  might  it  not  be  otherwife?"  Now 
as  to   this  degree  of  aflu ranee,   or  (as  he  calls  it) 
infallibility,  1  cannot  but  .grant  what  he  fays  of  it  to 
be  mofc  true,  viz.  "  that  in  a  fevere  acceptation  of 
"  the    word,    it    is    not   rigoroufly   infallible,  that 
"  is,  (as  he  explains  it)  it  is  not  abfolutely  impo£ 
*c  fible  nor  does  it  imply  a  flat  contradiction"  that 
the  thing  whereof  we  are  fo  allured  may  be  other* 
wife :     but    then   I    utterly   deny,    that  according 
to  any  true   acceptation  of  this  word,    fuch  a  de- 
gree of  afiurance  as  he  fpeaks  of  can  be  called  in- 
fallibility ;  and  withal  I  affirm,  that  none  of  thofe 
feveral   degrees  of  infallibility  which  he    mentions, 
excepting  that  only  which  imports  an  abfolute  im- 
poMibility,    can   with   any    tolerable   propriety    of 
fpeech,  or  regard  to  the  true  meaning  and   ufe  of 
the  word,  have   the  name  of  infallibility  given   to 
them.  For  infallibility  can  fignify  nothing  elfe  but  an 
utter  impoflibiluy  that  one  mould  be  deceived  in  that 
matter  as   to  which  he  is  fuppofed  to  be  infallible  ; 
and  to  fay  fuch  a   thing  is  impoffible,  is  to  lay  that 
the  exiitence  of  it  implies  a  flat  contradiction  :   fo 
that  whofoever  afTerts  degrees  of  infallibility,  is  obli- 
ged to  fhew  that  there  are  degrees  of  abibltite  im- 
poflibilities,  and  of  perfect  contradictions  j   and  ha 
had  need  (of  a  very  lharp  and  piercing  wit,  that  ip. 

6  Y  2  ta 


640  The  RULE  of  FAITH. 

PART  to   find  out  degrees  where  there   neither   are   nor 
^}'^_j  can  be  any.     Indeed,  in  refpe£fc  of  the  objects  of 
knowledge,  it  is  eafy  to  conceive   how  infallibility 
may  be  extended  to  more  objects  or  fewer  *,  but  in 
refpecl  of  the  degree  of  affurancc    (of  which  Mr. 
CreiTy  fpeaks)  it  is   altogether   unimaginable  how 
any  one  can  be  more  or  lefs  out  of  all  poflibility   of 
being   deceived  in  thofe  things  wherein  he  is  fup- 
pofed  to  be  infallible ;  for  no  one  can  be  more  re- 
moved from  the  poflibility  of  being  deceived,  than 
he  that  is  out  of  all   poflibility  of  being  deceived ; 
and    whofoever    is  lefs  than    this  is  not  infallible, 
becaufe    he    only    is  fo    who    is    out  of   all  pofli- 
bility of  being  deceived  in  thofe  matters   wherein 
he  is  fuppofed  to  be  infallible  :     fo  that  Mr.  Crefly's 
lower  degrees  of  infallibility  are  no  degrees  of  that 
aflurance   which  may   properly  be  called   infallible 
(for  that  can  have  no  degrees)  but  of  that  aflurance 
which  is  lefs  than   infallible.     And  he  needed  not 
have  raifed  all  this  dull  about  the  degrees  of  infalli- 
bility, had   it  not   been   that  by  the  means  of  fuch 
a  cloud  he  might  make  the  more  convenient  efcape 
out  of  that  (trait  he  was  in  between  the  clamours  of 
his  own  church,  and  the  advantage  which  his  adver- 
faries  made  of  his  free  and   open   difcourfe   againft 
infallibility:    for  any    one  that  carefully  reads   his 
book,  will  find   that  he  underftands  nothing  by  the 
infallibility    or  the  church,    but  "  an  authority  of 
"  obliging  all  chriftians  to  fubmit  to  her  decifions," 
which  is  no  more  but   what   every  fupreme    civil 
judge  hath   in  matters,  viz.  a   power  to  determine 
thofe  controverfies  that  lie  before  him  as  well  as  he 
can  or   will,  and  when  that  is  done  every  one  is 

bound 


The  RULE  of  FAITH.  641 

bound  to  fubmit  to  fuch  determinations ;  but  vet s  E  c  T* 

IV 
for  all    this,  no  man  ever  dreamt  a  fupreme   civil  i^-y^j 

judge  to  be  infallible  more  than  another  man.  I  do 
not  now  difpute  the  extent  of  the  church's  autho- 
rity :  but  if  me  have  no  other  infallibility  but  what 
a  full  authority  of  decifion  does  fuppofe,  I  am  fure 
flie  hath  none  at  all. 

Before  I  leave  Mr.  Crefly,  I  cannot  but  take  no- 
tice how  unfortunate  and  difingenuous  he  is  in  ex- 
plaining the  meaning  of  thefe  words  of  his  own,  viz. 
["  againft  this  word  infallibility  Mr.  Chilling- 
"  worth's  book  especially  combats,  and  this  with 
"  too  too  great  fuccefs'1]  which  in  his  appendix  *  *  C.  $2 
he  interprets  thus;  "  fuccefs,  I  mean,  not  againft  the****'  • 
"  church,  but  againft  his  own  foul,  and  the  fouls 
<c  of  his  fellow-engliih  proteftants,  6cc."  As  if  one 
that  had  wifhed  well  to  Cefar  mould  have  faid, 
c<  that  Pompey  had  fought  againft  him  with  too 
"  too  great  fuccefs  ;"  and  being  afterwards  chal- 
lenged by  Cefar's  party,  as  having  faid  that  Pompey 
had  conquered  Cefar,  he  mould  explain  himfelf  thus, 
"  fuccefs,  I  mean  not  againft  Cefar,  but  againft  his 
"  own  life,  and  the  Jives  of  his  followers.  Can  any 
thing  be  finer,  than  for  a  man  to  fay,  that  by  Pom- 
pey's  fuccefs  in  fighting  againft  Cefar,  he  means  that 
Cefar  had  beaten  Pompey  ?  which  is  no  more  than  if 
one  mould  take. the  liberty  to  interpret  white  by  black. 

§  6.  Laftly,  Mr.  White  doth  moft  exprefly  con- 
tradict this  principle  of  Mr.  S's  in  thefe  following 
paffages.  In  his  preface  to  Mr.  Rufhworth  he  fays, 
*'  that  fuch  a  certainty  as  makes  the  caufe  always 
"  work  the  fame  eftecT,  though  it  take  not  away 
*•  the  abfolute  poffibility  of   working    otherwife, 

"  ought 


6<2  Me  RULE  of  FAITH. 

PAR  T.  "  ought  abfolutely  to  be  reckoned  in  the  degree  0f 

^^^w"  true  certainty;    and    thoie  authors  are   miitaken 

"  v/ho  undervalue  it."     So  that   it  feems  Mr.  S.  is 

mifraken     in    affirming    that    a    man    cannot    be 

certain    of  any  thing  fo  Jong  as  there   is  any  pot 

Ability  that  it   may    be  otherwife.     In   his  anfwer 

*P.ii.i~  t0  my   ^orc^   Falkland,  he  fays,    w   *  that  in  moral 

"  mutters,     and    fuch   as   are   fubjecl:    to    humane 

«*  action,  we  mull:  expect  fuch  afTurance  as  humane 

•*  actions  bear.     If  for  the  government  of  yourfpi- 

"  ritual  life  you  have  as  much  as  for  the  manage- 

"  ment  of  your  natural  and  civil  life,  what  can  you 

*c  expect  more  ?  Two  or  three  witnefTes  of  men  be- 

"  yond  exception  will  call  a  man   out  of  not  only 

"  his  lands  but  life  and  all.     He  that  among  mer- 

*c  chants  will  not  adventure,  where  there  is  a  hun- 

fc  dred  to  one  of  gaining,  will  be  accounted  a  filly 

cc  factor  :  and  among  foldiers,  he  that  will  fear  dan- 

cc  gtT,  where  but  one  of  a  hundred  is  (lain,  fhall 

4C  not  efcape  the  flain  of  cowardice.     What   then 

"  fhall  we  expect  in  religion,  but  to  fee  a  main  ad- 

"  vantage  on  the  one  fide  which  we  may  reft  our- 

"  felves  on  ?  and  for  the   reft  remember  we  are  men 

"  fubjecl  to  chance  and  mutability,  and  thank  God 

"  he  hath  given  that   afiurance  in   a  fupernatural 

cc  way,  which  we  are  contented  withal  in  our  civil 

<c  ventures  and  jpoiTcfiions,  which  never thelefs  God 

"  knoweth  we  often  love  better  and  would  hazard 

"  lefs  than  the  unknown  good  of  the  life  to  come." 

1  p-  3C»  Again,  "  *  If  God  almighty  hath  in  all  forts  and 

"  manners  provided  his  church  that  fhe   may  en- 

"  lighten  every  man  in  his  way  that  goeth  the  way 

"  jof  a  man,  then  let  every  man  confider  which  is 

"  the 


The  RULE  of  FAITH.  643 

u  the  fit  way  for  himfelf,  and  what  in  other  matters s E  ^T« 
44  of  that   way,    he   accounteth  evidence.     And  if^., -  —  _j 
44  there  be  no  intereft  in   his    foul   to  make    him 
44  loth   to  believe,  what  in   another  matter    of  the 
44  like  nature  he  doth  not  flick  at,    or   heavy  to 
"  practife   what  he  fees  clearly  enough,  I  fear  not 
44  his  choice."     Once  more;    directing  a  man  in 
his  fearch  after  rational  fatis faction  in  matters  of  re- 
ligion, he  hath  this   paflage;  *4  *  Befides  this,  he*  p.  4<$. 
46  muft  have  this  care,  that  he  feek  what   the   na-    « 
4{  ture  of  the  fubjefl:  can  yield,  and  not  as  thofe 
<c  phyficians,  who  when  they  have  promifed  no  lels 
44  than  immortality,  can  at  lafi  only  reach  to  fome 
44  confervation   of  health  or  youth  in  fome  fmall 
Kg  decree:  fo  I  could  wifti  the  author  to  well  allure 
44  himfelf  firft  that  there  is  poffibly  an  infallibility, 
44  before  he  be  too  earned  to  be  contented  with  no- 
44  thing  lefs  •,  for  what  if  humane  nature  mould  not 
44  be  capable  of  fo  great  a  good  ?  would  he  there- 
44  fore  think  it  fitting  to  live  without  any  religion, 
44  becaufe  he  could  not  get  fuch  a  one  as  himfelf 
cc  defired,  though  with  more  than  a  man's  wifh  ? 
44  Were  it  not  rational  to  fee,  whether  among  reli- 
"  gions  fome  one  have  not  fuch  notable  advantages 
46  over  the  reft,  as  in  reafon  it  might  feem  humane 
44  nature  might  be  contented  withal  ?  Let  him  call 
cc  his  account  with  the  dearefl  things  he  hath,  his 
44  own  or  friends  lives,  his  eftate,  his  hope  of  pof- 
44  terity,  and   fee  upon  what  terms  of  advantage 
44  he  is  ready  to  venture  all  thefc;  and  then  return 
*4  to  religion,  and  lee  whether,  if  he  do  not  ven- 
cC  ture  his  foul  upon  the  like,  it  be  truly  reafon  or 
^  fome  other  not  confefTed  motive,  which  with- 

4C  draw* 


644  7he  RULE  of  FAITH. 

PART"  draws  him.  For  my  own  part,  as  I  doubt  not 
^^^^  "  of  an  infallibility,  fo  1  doubt  not  but  fetting  that 
<4  afide,  there  be  thofe  excellencies  found  on  the 
<c  catholick  party  which  may  force  a  man  to  pre- 
"  fer  it,  and  to  venture  all  he  hath  upon  it  be- 
"  fore  all  other  religions  and  feels  in  the  world. 
<c  Why  then  may  not  one  who  after  long  fearching 
cc  findeth  no  infallibility  reft  himfelf  on  the  like, 
*c  fuppofmg  man's  nature  affords  no  better  ?  " 

Are  not  thefe  fair  conceflions,  which  the  evidence 
and  force  of  truth  have  extorted  from  thefe  authors  ? 

*  Letter  ^°  ^at  lt  ^eems  tnat  tnat  which  Mr.  S.  calls  "  *a 
to  his  anf- <c  civil  piece  of  atheiftry,"  is  advanced  in  mofl  ex- 
iverer,p.s.pre^s  worcjs  by    his  bed  friends;    and   therefore     I 

hope  he  will  (as  he  threatens  me)  "  be  fmart  with 
cc  them  in  oppofition  to  fo  damnable  and  funda- 
<c  mental  an  error."  And  whenever  he  attempts 
this,  I  would  intreat  him  to  remember  that  he  hath 
thefe  two  things  to  prove :  Firft,  that  no  evidence 
but  demonftration  can  give  a  man  fufficient  aflii- 
rance  of  any  thing.  Secondly,  that  a  bare  poffi- 
bility  that  a  thing  may  be  otherwife,  is  a  rational 
caufe  of  doubting,  and  a  wife  ground  of  fufpenfe  : 
which  when  he  hath  proved,  I  fhall  not  grudge  him 
his  infallibility. 


SECT, 


5  I. 


The  RULE  of  F  A  IT  II 

SECT.      V. 

-HE  lad  part  of  this  third  difcourfe  endea-  That 
vours  to  mew,   "  that  the  fcripture  is  not  is  f£ffici_ 
"  convie"live  of  the  molt  obftinate  and  acute  adverfa-ent  to  con- 
"  lies.*     As  for  the  obftinate,  he  knows  my  mind  ,^acuc:e 
already.     Let  us   fee  why  the  molt  acute  adverfary  adverfa- 
may  not  be  convinced  by  fcripture :    becaufe,  as  he  'that 
objects  *,  nVft,  "  we  cannot  be  certain  that  this  book  fufficjently 
<c  is  God's  word,  becaufe  of  the  many  ftrange  ab-"p^"8> 
<c  furdities  and  herefies  in  the  open  letter  as  it  lies,  as 
"  that  God  hath  hands  and  feer,  8cc.  and  becaufe 
"  of  the  contradictions  in  it  :"  to  which  I  have  al- 
ready returned  an  anfwer.     Secondly,  becaufe  (as  he 
faith  *)  "  we  cannot  be  certain  of  the   truth  of  the*  p,  ^r, 
"  letter  in  any  particular  text,   that  it  was  not  foifted 
<c  in,  or  feme  way  altered  in  its  fignificativeneis ;  and 
"  if  it  be  a  negative  propofition,  that  tl\Q  particle 
"  [not]  was  not  inferted;  if  affirmative,  not  kft  out" 
And  if  we  pretend  to  be  certain  of  this,  cc  he  de- 
"  mands  *  our  demonfiration  for  it.'3     But  how  un-  *  p   » ,i 
reafonable  this  demand  is,  I  hope   I  have  fufficiently 
ihewn.     And  to  fhew  it  yet  further,  I  ask  him,  how 
their  church  knows,   that  the  particle  [not]  was  not 
left  out  of  any  text   in  which  it  is  not  found  in  their 
copies  ?  I  know  he  hath  a  ready  anfwer,  viz.  by  oral 
tradition.     But  this    (according   to   him*)   "only*p#I15 
cc  reaches  to  fcriptures  letter  fo  far  as  it  is  coincident 
"  with  die  main  body  of  chriftian  doctrine  j"  con- 
cerning the  reft  of  fcripture  it  is  impofiible  (accord- 
ing to  his  own  principles)  that  they  mould  have  any 
fecurity  that  the  particle  [not]  was  not  unduly  inferr- 
ed, or  left  out  by  the  tranfcribers.     Nay,  as  to  thofe 
Vol.  IV.  6  Z  texts 

4- 


646  1U  RU  L  E  of  FA  I  ril. 

PARI'  texts  of  fcripture  which  fall  in  with  the  main  body 
j  L  j  of  chriftian  doctrine,  I  demand  his  demonftration 
that  the  particle  [not]  was  not  unduly  inferted  or 
left  out,  not  only  in  thofe  texts,  but  alfo  in  the  oral 
tradition  of  the  doctrines  coincident  with  the  fenfe  of 
thofe   texts.     If  he  fay,  it  was  impoflible  any   age 
fhould  confpire  to  leave  out  or   infert  the  particle 
[not]  in  the  oral  tradition  -,  fo  fay  I  it  was  that  they 
fhould  confpire  to  leave  it  out  of  the  written  text  : 
but  then  I  differ  from  him  thus  far,  that  I  do  not 
think  this  naturally  impoflible,  fo  as  that  it  can  rigo- 
roufly  be  demonftrated,  but  only  morally  impoflible, 
fo  that  no  body  hath  any  reafbn   to  doubt  of  it  j 
which  to  a  prudent  man  is  as  good  as  a  demonftra- 
tion.    Pyrrho  himfelf  never  advanced  any  principle 
of  fcepticifm    beyond  this,  viz.  that  men  ought  to 
queftion   the  credit  of  all  books,  concerning  which 
they  cannot  demonftrate  as  to  every  fentence  in  them, 
that  the  particle  [not]  was  not  inferted  (if  it  be  affir- 
mative) or  left  out  (if  it  be  negative.)     If  fo  much 
be  required  to  free  a  man  from  reafbnable  doubt- 
ing concerning  a  book,  how  happy  are  they  that  have 
attained  to  infallibility  ?    What  he  faith  concerning 

*  P.  "2.  the  varia  leftiones  *  of  fcripture,  hath  already  had  a 

fufRcient  anfwer. 

§  2.  In  his  fourth  difcourfe  he  endeavours  to  fhew, 

"  *  that  the  fcripture  is  not  certain  in  itfelf,  and  confe- 
P.  *  x  • 

"  quently  not  afcertained  to  us.'3     Firft,  "  not  cer- 

*  p   ,,    "  tain,  materially  confidered  *  as  confuting  of  fuch. 

"  and  fuch  characters,  becaufe  books  are  liable  to  be 
"  burnt,  torn,  blotted,  worn  out."  We  grant  it  is 
not  impoflible  but  that  any,  or  all  the  books  in  the 
world,  may  be  burnt :  but  then  we  fay  likewife,  that  a 

book 


Tie  R  UL  E  of  FA  I  TIL  647 

book  fo  univerfally  dffperfed  may  eafily  be  preferved  ; s  E  C  T* 
though  we  have  no  afliirance  that  God  will  preferve  v-*~/—~ ; 
it,  in  cafe  all  men  mould  be  fo  foolifh  or  fo  carelefs  as 
to  endeavour  or  fuffer  the  abolition  of  it.    But  it  feems 
the  fcripturcs  cannot  be  a  rule  of  faith  if  they  be  li- 
able to  any  external  accidents :    and  this  (he  ^elJs  us) 
M  *  though  it  may  feem  a  remote  and  impertinent*  P.  34, 
"  exception,  yet  to  one  who  confiders  the  wife  dif- 
"  pofitions  of   divine   providence,  it  will  deierve  a 
"  deep  confederation  •,  becaufe  the  faivation  of  man- 
"  kind  being  the  end  of  God's  making  nature,  the 
"  means  to  it  fhould  be  more  fettled,  ftrong  and  un- 
"  alterable,  than  any  other  piece  of  nature  whatever." 
But  notwithstanding  this  wife  reafon,  this  exception 
flill  feems  to  me  both  remote  and  impertinent :  for 
if  this  which  he  calls  a  reafon  be  a  truth,  it  will  from 
thence  neceflarily  follow  not  only  that  the  doctrine  of 
Christ  muft  be  conveyed  by  fuch  a  means  as  is  more 
unalterable  than  the  courfe  of  nature;  but  alio  by  a 
clear  parity  of  reafon,  that  all  the  means  of  our  fai- 
vation do  operate  towards  the  accompli  filing  of  their 
end  with  greater  certainty  than  the  fire  burns,  or  the 
fun  {nines  ;  which  they  can  never  do,  unlefs  they  ope- 
rate more  necefTarily   than  any  natural  caufes ;  how 
they  can  do  fo  upon  voluntary  agents,  I  defire  Mr.  S. 
to  inform  me. 

§  3.  He  proceeds  by  a  long  harangue  to  fhew, 
"  *  that  not  only  thefe  material  characters  in  them-*  P.  34. 
46  felves  are  corruptible,  but  in  complexion  with  the 
4C  caufes,  actually  laid  in  the  world  to  preferve  them 
"  entire  •,  becaufe  either  thofe  caufes  are  material, 
"  and  then  they  are  alfo  liable  to  continual  alterati- 
*c  ons  i  or  fpiritual,  that  is,  the  minds  of  men,  and 

6  Z  2  "  from 


64S  The  RULE  of  FAIT H. 

P  ART"  from  thefe  we  may  with  good  reafon  hope  for  a 
.  *  _j  "  greater  degree  of  conftancy,  than  from  any  other 
"  piece  of  nature  ;"  which,  by  the  way,  is  a  very 
flrange  paradox,  that  the  actions  of  voluntary  agents 
have  a  greater  certainty  and  conftancy  in  them  than 
thofe  of  natural  agents ;  of  which  the  fall  of  angels 
and  men,  compared  with  the  continuance  of  the  fun 
and  ftars  in  their  nrft  ftate,  is  a  very  good  evidence. 

*  P.  3".       §  4-  BJt  he  adds  a  caution  *9  "  that  they  are  per- 

cc  feclly  unalterable  from  their  nature,  and  unerrable, 
<c  if  due  circum dances  be  obferved,  that  is,  if  due 
cc  propolals  be  made  to  beget  certain  knowledge,  and 
"  clue  care  ufed  to  attend  to  fuch  propofals."  But 
who  can  warrant,  that  due  propofals  will  always  be 
made  to  men,  and  due  care  ufed  by  them  ?  If  thefe 
be  uncertain,  where's  the  conftancy  and  unerrablenefs 
he  talks  fo  much  of  ?  fo  that  notwithftanding  the  con- 
ftancy of  this '  fpiritual  caufe  (the  mind  of  man)  of 
prcferving  fcriptures  entire,  yet  in  order  to   this  (as 

*  P.  36-    he  tells  *  us)  tc  fo  many  actions  are  to  be  done,  which 

"  are  compounded  and  made  up  of  an  innumerable 

"  multitude  of  feveral   particulars   to  be  obferved, 

66  every  of  which  may  be  miftaken  apart,  each  being 

€4  a  diftincl  little  action  in  its  fingle  felf,  fuch  as  is 

cc  the  tranfcribing  of  a  whole  book,  confifting  of  fuch 

<c  myriads  of  words,  fingle  letters,  and  tittles  or  flops  j 

cc  and  the  feveral  actions  of  writing  over  each  of 

t£  thefe  io  ftiort  and  curfory,  that   it  prevents  dili- 

"  gence,  and  exceeds  humane  care,   to  keep  awake 

ic  and   apply    diftincl:   attentions   to  every  of  thefe 

•  tv -1      "  diftincl  actions. "   Mr.  Rufnworth  *  much  outdoes 

a.  7.      Mr.  S.  in  thefe  minute  cavils,  for  he  tells  us,   "  that 

6t  fuppofing  an   original  copy  of  Christ's  words, 

"  written 


The  RULE  of  FAITH.  649 

Cc  written  by  one  of  the  evangelitTs  in  the  fame  Ian-  SECT 
a  guage,  let  him  have  fet  down  every  word  and  fyl- 
ft  lable  :  yet  men  converfant  in   noting  the  changes 
"  of  meanings  in  words,  will  tell  us,  that  divers  ac- 
"  cents  in  the  pronunciation  of  them,  the  turning  of 
fic  the  fpeaker's  head  or  body  this  or  that  way,   &c. 
may  fo  change  the  fenfe  of   the  words,  that  they 
will  feem  quite  different  in  writing  from  what  they 
were  in  fpeaking."     I  hope  that  oral  and  practical 
tradition  hath  been  careful  to  preferve  all  thefe  cir- 
cumftances,  and  hath  delivered  down  Christ's  doc- 
trine with  all  the  right  traditionary  accents,  nods,  and 
geftures  necefTary  for  the  understanding  of  it  •,  other- 
wife  the  omiflion  of  thefe  may  have  fo  altered  the 
fenfe  of  it,  that  it  may  be  now  quite  different  from 
what  it  was  at  firft.     But  to  anfwer  Mr.  S.  we  do  not 
pretend  to   be  allured  that  it  is  naturally  impoITible 
that   the  fcriptures   fhoukl   have  been  corrupted  or 
changed,   but  only  to  be  fufHciently  allured  that  they 
have  not  received   any  material  alteration,  from  as 
good  arguments  as  the  nature  of  the  fubject  will  bear. 
But  if  this  reafon  had  not  been  very  fhort  and  curfory, 
he  might  eafily  have  reflected  that  oral  tradition  is 
equally  liable  to  all  thefe  contingencies  ;  "for  it  doth 
"  as  much  prevent  diligence,    and  exceed  humane 
"  care,   to  keep  awake  and  apply  diftinct  attentions 
"  to  the  diftinct  actions  of  fpeaking,  as  of  writing." 
And  I  hope  he  will  not  deny,  that  a  doctrine  orally 
delivered,  confilts  of  words,  and  letters,  and  accents, 
and  flops,  as  well  as  a  doctrine  written  -0  and  that  the 
feveral  actions  of  fpeaking  are  as  fhort  and  curfory 
as  of  writing. 

§  5.  Secondly % 


The  RULE  of  FAITH. 

§  5.  Secondly,  he  tells  us  *,  "  fcripture,  formally 
"  confidered,  as  to  its  figmficativenefs,  is  alio  uncer- 
c<  tain:"  Firft,  u  f  becaufe  of  the  uncertainty  of  the 
"  letter:"  This  is  already  anfwered.  Secondly,  "  *  be- 
"  caufe  the  certain  fenfe  of  it  is  not  to  be  arrived  to 
"  by  the  vulgar,  who  are  deflitute  of  languages  and 
Cc  arts."  True,  where  men  are  not  permitted  to  have 
the  fcriptures  in  their  own  language,  and  underftand 
no  other :  but  where  they  are  allowed  the  fcriptures 
mandated  into  their  own  language,  they  may  under- 
ftand them  ;  all  neceffary  points  of  faith  and  prac- 
tice being  fufficicndy  plain  in  any  tranflation  of  the 

*  P#  -g<  bible  that  I  know  of.     And  that  *  eminent  wits  can- 

not agree  about  the  fenfc  of  texts  which  concern  the 
main  points  of  faith,  hath  been  fpoken  to  already. 

§  6.  As  for  the  reverence  he  pretends  to  fcripture 
in  the  conclufion  of  his  fourth  difcourfe,  he  might 
have  fpared  that,  after  all  the  rallery  and  rudenefs 
he  hath  ufed  againft  it.  It  is  eafy  to  conjecture,  both 
from  his  principles  and  his  uncivil  exprefTions  con- 
cerning them,  what  his  efteem  is  of  thofe  facred 
oracles.  Probably  it  was  requifite  in  prudence  to  cafl 
in  a  few  good  words  concerning  the  fcriptures,  for 
the  fake  of  the  more  tender  and  fqueamifh  novices  of 

*  Dial.  2.  their  religion,  or  (as  Mr.  Rufhworth's  nephew  *  fays 
feet.  14.    frankly  and  openly)  "  for  the  fatisfaclion  of  indiffe- 

"  rent  men,  that  have  been  brought  up  in  this  verbal 
"  and  apparent  refpect  of  the  fcripture  ;"  who  it 
fcems  are  not  yet  attained  to  that  degree  of  catholick 
piety  and  fortitude,  as  to  endure  patiently  that  the 
word  of  God  fhouk'l  be  reviled  or  flighted.  Befides 
that  in  reference  to  thofe  whom  they  hope  hereafter 
:  (who  rriiiht  be  too  much  alienated  from 

their 


The  RULE  of  FAITH.  651 

their  religion,  if  he  had  exprefTed  nothing  but  con-  SECT. 
tempt  towards  a  book,  which  proteftants  and  chrif-  K^^>rmmKj 
tians  in  all  ages,  till  the  very  dregs  of  popery,  have 
been  bred  up  to  a  high  veneration  of)  it  was  not 
much  amifs  to  pafs  this  formal  compliment  upon  the 
bible  •,  which  the  wife  of  his  religion  will  eafily 
underftand,  and  may  ferve  to  catch  the  reft.  But  lee 
him  not  deceive  himfelf,  "  God  is  not  mocked." 

SECT.  VI. 

§  1.   QEcondly,  he  comes  to  fhew  *,  "  that   the  That  the 
.  *3  "  properties  of  a  rule  of  faith  belong  to  v\0^^ 
"  oral  tradition."     And,  firft,  he  gives  a  tedious  ex- of  faith  da 
planation  of  the  nature  of  this  oral  practical  tradition,  ri0tbelon3 
which  amounts  to  this  •,  that  as  in  reference  to  the  ci-  tradition. 
vil  education  of  children,  "  they  are  taught  their  own  *  °  +1' 
"  and  others  names,  to  write,  and  read,  and  exercife 
"  their  trades : "  fo  in  reference  to  religion,  "  the 
<c  children  of  christians  firft  hear  founds,  afterwards 
"  by  degrees  get  dim  notionsof  God,  Christ, Sa- 
viour, heaven,  hell,  virtue,  vice,  and  by  degrees 
practife  what  they  have  heard  -9  they  are  (hewn  to 
fay  grace,   and    their   prayers,    to   hold  up  their 
**  hands,  or  perhaps  eyes,  and  to  kneel,  and  other 
poftures.      Afterwards  they   are  acquainted  with 
the  creed,  ten  commandments,   and  facraments, 
fome  common  forms  of  prayer,  and  other  practices 
of  chriftianity,  and  are  directed  to  order  their  lives 
<c  accordingly,  and  are  guided  in  all  this  by  the  ac- 
"  tions  and  carriage  of  the  elder  faithful  j  and  this 
"  goes  on  by  infenfible  degrees,  not  by  leaps,  from  a 
*'  hundred  years  to  a  hundred,  but  from  month  to 

"  month, 


«c 


652  The  RULE  of  FAITH. 

PART  *<  month,  and  even  Ids."     If  this  be  all  that  tradi- 
^Ji^j  tion  doth,  this  is  nothing  but  what  is  done  among 
proteftants,  and   that  with  greater   advantage  ;    be- 
caufe  we  always  teach  children  to  fay  their  prayers 
in  a  known  tongue,  fo  as  they  may  underftand  them. 
And  we  alfo  teach  them  the  creed,  and  ten  com- 
mandments, and  the  facraments,  fo  many  as  Christ 
hath  inftituted,  and  no  more.     So  that  if  this  be  fo 
infallible  a  way  of  conveying   the  doctrine  of  chri- 
iiianity,  we  have  it  among  us :  and  we  do  over  and 
befides  inftruct  them  in  rhe  fcriptures,  which  are  the 
authentick  inftrument  whereby  Christ's  doctrine  is 
conveyed  to  us.     But  then  we  do  not  fuppofe  (as  his 
hypothefis   necefTarily  enforceth  him  to  do)  that  the 
chriftian  doctrine  is  equally  taught  and  learned  by  all ; 
but  by  fome  more,  by  others  lefs  perfectly,  according 
to  the  different  abilities  and  diligence  of  parents  and 
teachers,  and  the  various  capacities  and  difpofitions  of 
children  ;    whereas  his  hypothefis  falls,  if  all  or  at 
leaft  the  generality  of  parents,  do  not  inftruct  their 
children  with  the  like  exactnefs,  and  if  the  generality 
of  children  do  not  receive  this  doctrine  in  the  fame 
perfection  that  it  is  delivered.     For  if  it  be  taught  or 
received  with  any  variation,   it  mud  necefTarily  be  {o 
conveyed,  and  thefe  variations  will  grow  daily.     I 
had  thought  he  v/ould  have  told  us  how  all  parents 
do  teach  their  children  the  whole  body  of  Christ's 
doctrine,  and  explain  to  them  every  part  of  it  in  a 
hundred  or  a  thoufand  feveral  expreffions  fignifying 
the  fame  fenfe,  and  not  have  inflanced  in  two  fet  forms, 
fuch  as  the  creed,  and  ten  commandments  ;  for  ac- 
*  Apolcg.  cording  to  Mr.  White  *,   "  that  cannot  be  a  tradition 
"  which  is  delivered  down  in  fet  words." 

§  2.  Having 


The  RULE  of  FAITH.  653 

§  2.    Having  thus  explained  oral   tradition,    heSECT. 
comes  to  mew  that  the  properties  of  a  rule  of  faith 
agree  to  it.  I  have  already  mewed,  that  the  true  pro- 
perties of  a  rule  of  faith  are  but  two,  viz.  "  That  it 
u  be  plain  and  intelligible,  and  that  it  be  fufficiently 
"  certain."     The  firft  of  thefe,   that  oral  tradition 
may  deliver  a  doctrine  plainly  and   intelligibly,   I 
grant  him  :    All  the  difficulty  is  about  the  fecond 
property,  whether  we  have  fufficient  alTurance  that 
the  doctrine  delivered  down  by  oral  tradition  hath  re- 
ceived  no  corruption  or  change  in  its  conveyance: 
and  all  that  he  pretends  to  prove  in  this  difcourfe,  is, 
that  if  this  rule  hath  been  followed  and  kept  to  all 
along,  the  chriftian  doctrine  neither  hath,  nor  can 
have  received  any  change,  that  is,  if  tht  next  age 
after  the  apoilies  did  truly,  and  without  any  altera- 
tion, deliver  the  chriftian  doctrine  to  ueir  immediate 
fucceflbrs,  and  tney  to  theirs,  and  ib  on,  then  upon 
this  lUppofition  me  doctrine  of  the  prefent   traditio- 
nary church  mull  be  the  very  lame  with  that  which 
was   delivered  to   the  apotles.     AH  this  is  readily 
granted  to  him.     But  that  this  rule  nam  always  been 
followed,  nay,  that  it  is  impofTible  there  mould  have 
been  any  deviation  from  it  (as  he  pretends)  this  we 
deny,  not   only  as  untrue,  but  as  one  of  the  mufb 
aburd  propositions  that  ever  yet  pretended  to  de- 
monilrative  evidence. 


Vol.  IV.  7  A  THE 

4« 


«S4 


PART 

THE 


RULE  of    FAITH. 


PART     III. 

In  which  Mr.  Sys  demonjl  rations  and  corollaries 
are  examined. 

SECT.     I. 

Confide-    §  i.T§^  Efrre   I  come   to  fpeak  particularly    to 
rations  g%  nib  uemonitratioris,  I  ftiall   premife  thefe 

touching  M^Jr  r  i  r--  n.  •  j 

hisdemon-  -"^--^  two  conhderations  :  r'irit,  tliat  (uccord- 
ftrationsinirtg  to  the  principles  of  the  patrons  of  tradition) 
no  man  can,  by  his  private  reafon,  certainly  rind 
out  the  true  rule  of  faith.  Secondly,  that  (accord- 
ing to  Mr.  S.)  the  way  of  demonstration  is  no  cer- 
tain way  to  find  out  the  rule  of  faith.  If  eithei  of 
thefe  be  made  out,  his  demonftrations  lofe  all  their 
force.  If  the  firft  be  made  good,  then  he  cannot 
demonftrate  the  infallibility  of  tradition,  nor  confe- 
quently,  that  that  is  the  rule  of  faith.  If  the  fe- 
cond,  then  the  way  of  demonftration  which  he 
pretends  to  take,  fignifies  nothing. 

§  2.  Firft,  no  man  can  (according  to  the  prin- 
ciples of  the  patrons  of  tradition)  by  his  private 
reafon  certainly  find  out  what  is  the  rule  of  faith. 
Suppofe  a  heathen  to  be  defirous  to  inform  him- 
felf  of  $he  chriflian  faith ;  in  order  to  which  he  is 

inquifitive 


"The  RULE  cf  FAITH  655 

inquifitive    after  Tome  rule  by  which  may  take  a  SECT- 
meafure  of  it,   and  come  certainly  to  know  what  it ,_,_.  L^_j 
is :  he  enquires  of  chriftians  what  their  rule  is,  and 
finds  them  divided  about  it,  fome  faying  that  the 
fcripture,  others  that  oral  tradition,  is  the  rule.     In 
this  cafe  it  is  not  pofllble  (without  a  revelation)   for 
this  man  to  find  out  the  rule  of  faith,  but  by  his  own 
private  reafon  examining  and    weighing  the  argu- 
ments and  pretences  of  both  fides.     And  when  he 
hath  done  this,  unlefs   he  can  by  his  reafon  demon- 
ftrate   that  the  one  is  a  certain  and  infallible  rule, 
and    the  other  not    fo,  he  hath  not  (according  to 
Mr.   S.)  found  out  the   rule  of  faith.     But  reafon 
can  never  do  this,  according  to  Mr.  S.     For  fpeak- 
ing  of  demonftrating  the  certainty  of  tradition,  he 
tells  us,  "  *  that  tradition  hath  for  its  bafis  man's*  p- 53-' 
<5  nature,  not  according  to  his  intellectuals,  which 
"  do  but  darkly  grope  in  the  purfuit  of  fcience,  &c." 
And  again,  *  fpeaking  how  reafon  brings  men  to  *  Append, 
the  rule  of  faith,  he  ufes  this  comparifon  "  fhe  is  2d,i>,i83* 
like  a  dim-fighted  man,  who  ufed  his  reafon  to 
find  a  trufty  friend  to  lead  him  in  the  twilio-ht, 
and  then  relied  on  his  guidance  rationally  with- 
out ufmg  his  own  reafon   at  all  about  the  way  it 
(df."     So  that  (according  to  him)  the  certainty 
of  tradition  cannot  be  founded  on  demonftration, 
becaufe  it  is  not  founded  in  the  intellectual  part  of 
man,  which  only  can    demonftrate.     Befides,  if  it 
were  founded  in  the  intellectual   part,  yet   that  can 
never  be  able  to  demonflrate  the  certainty  of  tradi- 
tion, becaufe  that  faculty  which  is  dim-fighted,  and 
does  but  grope  darkly  in   the    purfuit  of  fcience,  is 
uncapable  of  framing  demonftrations.    Nor  can  any 

7  A  2  man 


656  The  RULE  of  FA  II "  H. 

PART  man  underftand  how  dim-fighted  reafon  fhould  fee 
^[Jl^t  clearly  to   choofe  its  guide  any  more  than  its  way, 
efpecially  if  it  be   coniidered  what  a  pretty  contra- 
diction it  is,  to  fay  that  reafon,  as  it  is  dim-fighted, 
can  fee  clearly. 

But  Mr.  CrefTy  is  not  contented  to  call  every 
man's  reafon  dim-fighted,  he  ventures  a  ftep  farther, 
and   calls  it   hoodwink'd  and  blind  :   for  he  tells  us, 

*  Append."  *  that  private  reafon  is  apparently  a  molt  fallible 
c.6.  feft.8. "  guide  •,  "  and  he  pities  -f-  my  lord  Falkland's  cafe, 

•j-  Ibid-      becaufe  in  the  fearch  of  the   true  religion  he  did 
tea.  9.  ° 

"  betake  himfelf  to  the  calual  conduct  of  blind,  hu- 

"  mane,  natural  reafon,"  which  afterwards  he  calls 

*  Ibid.      "  *  a  guide  that  two  perfons  cannot  poffibly  fol- 
fca.  11.    a  jQW  together,  becaufe  no  two  perfons  (that  ever 

c'  followed  any  other  guide    befide  authority)   did 

Ci  or  could  trunk  all  things    to  be  reafonable  that 

£i  all  others  thought  fo  j  and  by  confequence  fuch 

'«  a  guide  that  as  long  as  he  continues  in  that  office, 

"  there  cannot  poffibly  be  any  church  any  where  : 

"  which  (fays  he)  is  an  infallible  eviction  that  this 

<c  is  an  imaginary  feducing   guide,  fincc  it  is  im« 

<c  poffible  that   that   fhould  be  a  guide  appointed. 

u  for  any  chriftian,  which  neither  Ch  rist  nor  his 

"  apoftles,  nor  any  of  their    followers   ever   men- 

4C  tioned,  yea,  which  formally  deftroys  one  of  our 

cc  twelve  articles  of  the  apoflles  creed,   viz.    I  be- 

"  lieve  the  holy  catholick  church.'*     Thus  he  does 

by  reafon  clearly  and  infallibly  evince,  that  reafon 

cannot  be  otherwife  than  a  mofl  blind  and  fallible 

guide.     This  it  is  to  talk  of  things  when   a  man 

looks  only  upon  one  fide  of  them  ;  as  if  becauie 

reafon  has  a  blind  fide,  and   is   uncertain  in  fome 

things, 


r,be  RULE  of  FAITH.  657 

things,  therefore  we  ought  to  conclude  her  univer-  SECT. 

fally  blind  and  uncertain  in  every  thing ;  and  as  if  ^^ 
becaufe  all  men  cannot  think  all  things  reafonable 
which  any  one  man  thinks  to  be  fo,  therefore  it  is 
to  be  doubted  whether  thole  common  principles  of 
reafon  be  true,  which  mankind  are  generally  agreed 
in.  And  that  Mr.  Crefly  fpeaks  here  of  the  ufe  of 
our  private  reafon  in  the  finding  out  of  our  rule, 
is  clear  from  what  he  fays  in  the  next  fection,  viz. 
"  that  this  hoodwink'd  guide  (enquiring  into 
*c  fcripture,  and  fearching  after  tradition)  may  pot 
"  fibly  ftumble  upon  the  way  to  unity  and  truth, 
M  that  is,  the  true  catholick  church."  If  this  be 
true,  why  does  Mr.  S.  pretend  that  he  can  by  rea- 
fon demonftrate  the  infallibility  of  tradition,  and  by 
this  hoodwink'd  miide  lead  men  to  the  true  rule 
of  faith  ?  and  what  a  pitiful  encouragement  would 
this  be  to  an  inquifitive  philofopher  (who  knowing 
no  other  guide  but  his  reafon,  whereby  to  find  out 
whether  fcripture  or  tradition  be  the  rule)  to  tell 
him  that  by  the  help  of  this  hoodwink'd  guide  he 
might  poflibly  ftumble  upon  the  right? 

A  man  may  juftly  ftand  amazed  at  the  incon- 
fiftency  of  thefe  mens  difcourfes  and  principles.  In 
one  mood  they  are  all  for  demonftration,  and  for 
convincing  men  in  the  way  of  perfect  fcience,  which 
is  the  true  rule  of  faith  :  but  then  again  when  ano- 
ther fit  takes  them,  there's  no  fuch  thing  as  fci- 
ence, humane  reafon  grows  all  on  the  fudden  dim- 
fighted,  and  at  the  next  word  is  ftruck  ftark-blind  ; 
and  then  the  very  utmoft  that  it  can  do  towards  the 
bringing  of  an  unprejudiced  and  inquifitive  perfon 
to  the  true  rule  of  faith,  is  to  leave  him  in  a  pofc 

fibility 


65S  The  RUL  E  of  FAITH. 

PART  fibiiity  of  (tumbling  upon  it;  but  if  he  be  a  heretick 
KJm^^mmmJ  that  makes  ufe  of  private  reafon  for  his  guide,  then 

*  Append,  k  *  it  is  impoffible  but  that  he  with  his  blind  guide 
c.  7.  ied.  <c  ^ajj  gjj  -nto  t^e  ^ ,,     j  cannot-5  for  my  partj 

imagine  how  they  can  reconcile  the  blindnels  of  hu- 
mane reafon  with  all  that  noife  which  they  make 
about  fcience  and  demonftration  ;  but  this  I  muft 
confeis,  that  thefe  kind  of  difcourfes  which  I  meet 
with  in  Mr.  S.  and  Mr.  Crefly,  are  very  proper 
arguments  to  perfuade  a  man  of  the  blindnels  of 
humane  reafon.  And  indeed  there  is  one  paflfage  in 
Mr.  Crefly,  which  gives  me  very  great  fatisfaction 
* It)lcJ-  concerning  thefe  matters,  where  he  tells  us,  u  *  that 
"  the  wit  and  judgment  of  catholicks  is  to  re- 
"  nounce  their  own  judgment,  and  depofe  their 
"  own  wit."  Now  he  that  profeffes  to  have  done 
this,  may  write  contradictions,  and  no  body  ought 
to  challenge  him  for  it.  However,  it  is  a  very  in- 
genuous acknowledgment,  that  when  he  forfook  our 
church  and  turned  papift,  he  laid  afide  his  judg- 
ment and  wit ;  which  is  juft  fiich  an  heroick  act  of 
judgment,  as  if  a  man,  in  a  bravery  to  Ihew  his 
liberty,  would  fell  himfelf  for  a  (lave.  I  am  glad 
to  underftand  from  an  experienced  perfon,  what 
charges  a  man  muft  be  at  when  he  turns  roman  ca- 
tholick,  namely,  that  whoever  will  embrace  that  re- 
ligion muft  forfeit  his  reafon. 

§  3.  Secondly,  the  way  of  demonftration  is  (ac- 
cording to  Mr.   S.)  no  certain  way  to  find  out  the 

*  p-353>rule  of  faith.     In  his  4th  appendix  *  againft  my 

lord  of  Down,  one  of  the  eight  mines  (as  he  calls 
them)  which  he  lays  to  blow  up  my  lord's  diflua- 
five  againft  popery,  is  this,     "  That  the  method 

"  he 


He  RULE  of  FA  I  TIL  659 

**  he  takes  in  difiuading  cannot  be  held  in  reafbnSECT- 
f*  to  have   power   to   diffuade,  unlefs  it  be  proper .   -  V  j 
«'  to  that  effect,  that  is,    not  common  to  that  ef- 
"  feci:  and  a  contrary  one.     Now,  that  being  mod 
"  evidently  no   method  or  way   to  fuch  an  effect 
"  which  many  follow  and  take,  yet  arrive   not  at 
"  that  effect  •,  'tis  plain  to  common  fenfe,  that  my 
46  lord  of  Down  mifcalls  his  book  a  diffuafive,   and 
"  that  it  can  have  in  it  no  power  of  moving  the 
"  underftanding  one   way  or  other,  unlefs  he  can 
<s  firft  vouch  fome  particularity  in  the  method  he 
"  takes,  above  what's  in  others  in  which  we  expe- 
**  rience  mifcarriage,    &c."     If  this  be  true,  then 
his  method   of  demonftration,  is  no  way  to  make 
men   certain  of  what  he  pretends  to   demonftrate, 
"  becaufe  that  is  moil  evidently  no  way  to  an  effect 
4t  which  many  follow  and  take,  yet  arrive  not  at 
cl  that  effect ;  fo  that  'tis  plain    to  common  fenfe 
"  that   Mr.   S's   demonftrations  can  have  in  them 
"  no  power    of  moving  the  underftanding  one  way 
"  or  other,  unlefs   he  can  vouch  fome  particularity 
"  in  the  demonftrations  he  pretends  to  bring,  above 
"  what   is    in   other    pretended    demonftrations  m 
"  which  we  experience  mifcarriage."    D~>  not  Tho- 
mas and  Scotus  fas  Mr.  White  tells  us  *)  all  along  *  Exetafi* 
pretend  to  demonftrate  ?   and  yet  it  is  generally  be- "'  2^* 
lieved  that  (at  leaft  where  they  contradict  one  ano- 
ther) one   of   them   failed    in    his    demonftrations. 
Did   not  Mr   Charles  Thynne  pretend  to  have  de- 
monltrated    that  a  man  at   one  jump   might  leap 
from  London   to  Rome  ?  and  yet  I  do  not  think 
any    one    was  ever    iatisfy'd  with    his    demonftra- 
tions.    And  Mr,  S.  knows  one  in  the  world  (whom 

I 


66o  "The  R  UL  E  of  FA  I TH. 

PARTI  will  not  name,  becaufe  he  hath  fince  ingenuoufly 
acknowledged  his  error)  who  thought  he  had  de- 
monftrated   the  quadrature  of  the  circle,    and  was 
fo  confident  of  it  as  to  venture  the  reputation    of 
his  demonstrations  in  divinity  upon  it,  and  fome  of 
thofe  divinity  demonftrations  were   the    very  fame 
with  Mr.  S's.     Since  therefore  the  Vvorld  hath  ex- 
perienced fo   much   nn  Carriage  in   the  way  of  de- 
monstration, before  Mr.  S's  demonftrations  can  be 
allowed  to  fignify   any  thing,    he  muft  (according 
to  his  own  law)    vouch  fome  particularity   in   his 
way  and  method  of  demonstration  above   what   is 
in   other  mens.     He  hath  not  any   where   (that  I 
remember)  told  us  what  that  particularity  is,  where- 
in his  way  of  demonftration  is  above  other  mens : 
nor  can  I  upon  the  moil  diligent  fearch  find  any 
peculiar    advantage   that   his  way  has   more    than 
theirs  above-mentioned  ;  unlefs  this  be  one  that  he 
pretends  to  demonftrate  a  felf- evident  principle,  and 
herein  I   think    he  hath  plainly  the    advantage  of 
Mr.    Charles    Thynne ;    and    unlels   this   may  be 
counted  another  advantage,  that  he  has  fo  extraor- 
dinary a  confidence  and  conceit  of  his  own  demon- 
ftrations ;  and    in  this  particular,  I   muft  acknow- 
ledge that  he  clearly  excels  all  that  have  gone  be- 
fore him  :  In  all  other  things,  his  way  of  demon- 
ftration is  but  like  his  neighbours. 


SECT. 


rbe  RULE  of  FA  Lffc  66 1 

SECT.     II. 

§  I.   T  Come  now  to  examine  his  demonstrations  of  Mr.  S?s 
I   this  felf-evident  principle   (as  he  often  calls  fte™°0*"  - 
it)   that  oral   tradition  is  a  certain  and  infallible  way  priori* 
of  conveying  Christ's  doctrine  from  one  age  to 
another,  without  any  corruption  or  change  \  which 
is  to  fay,  that  it  is  impofiible  but  that  this  rule  fhould 
always  have  been  kept  to.     That  this  is  not  a  felf-evi- 
dent principle,  needs  no  other  evidence  than  that  he 
goes  about  to  demonflrate  it.    But  yet,  notwithftand- 
ing  this,  I  think  he  hath  as  much  reafon  to  call  this 
a  ielf-evident  principle,  as  to  call  his  proofs  of  it  de- 
monftrations. 

§  2.  In  order  to  his  demonstration  a  priori >  he 
lays  *  thefc  four  grounds,  which   I  mall  fet  down  in  *  P.  si* 
his  own  words.     Firft,  "  that  ohriftian  doctrine  was 
"  at  firft  unanimoufly  fettled  by  the  apoftles,  in  the 
"  hearts  of  the  faithful,  difperfed  in  great  multitudes 
<c  over  feveral  parts  of  the  world/'  Secondly,  <c  that 
this  doctrine  was  firmly  believed  by  all  thole  faith- 
ful to  be  the  way  to  heaven,  and  the  contradict- 
ing or  defer  ting  it,  to  be  the  way  to  damnation  : 
"  lo  that  the  created  hooes  'and  fears  imaginable 
"  were  by  engaging  the  divine  authority  ftrongly  ap- 
<c  plied  to  the  minds  of  the  firft  believers,  encourage 
ci  ing  them  to  the  adhering  to  that  doctrine,  and  de- 
u  terring   them  from   relinqui filing  it ;  and  indeed 
infinitely  greater  than  any  other  whatever,  fprfng- 
ing  from  any  temporal  confideration  :    and  that 
this  was  in   all   ages  the  perfuafion  of  the  faith- 
ful."   Thirdly,  "  that  hopes  of  good  and  fears 
Vol.  IV,  7  B 

4- 


f  (. 


it 


Cc 


662  fk  ££/££  of  FAITH. 

PART."  of  harm  ltrongly  applied,  are  the  caufcs  of  actual 
1  will."  Fourthly,  "  that  the  thing  was  feafible  or 
within  their  power :  that  what  they  were  bred  to 
was  knowable  by  them.  This  put,  it  follows  as 
certainly,  that  a  great  number  or  body  of  the  firft 
"  believers,  and  after  faithful  in  each  age,  that  is, 
"  from  age  to  age, would  continue  to  hold  themfelves, 
*c  and  teach  their  children  as  themfelves  had  been 
"  taught,  that  is,  would  follow  and  flick  to  tradition ; 
"  as  it  doth,  that  a  caufe  put  actually  caufing  produc- 
"  eth  its  effect."  This  is  his  demonftration  with  the 
grounds  of  it. 

§  3.  To  fhew  the  vanity  and  wcaknefs  of  this  pre- 
tended demonftration,  I  fhall  aflail  it  thefe  three  ways  •, 
by  fhewing,  firft,  that  if  the  grounds  of  it  were  true 
they  would  conclude  too  much,  and  prove  that  to  be 
impoffible  which  common  experience  evinceth,  and 
himfelf  muft  grant  to  have  been.  Secondly,  that  his 
main  grounds  are  apparently  falfe.  Thirdly,  that 
his  demonftration  is  confuted  by  clear  and  undeni- 
able inftances  to  the  contrary. 

SECT.     III. 

The  firft  §   1.   IF  the  grounds  of  it  were  true,  they  would 
antwer  to  X  conclude  too  much,  and  prove  that  to  be 

his  de-  •  ■         1  , 

monftra-  impoffible  which  common  experience  evinceth,  and 
tI0n*  himfelf  muft  grant  to  have  been.  For  if  thefe  two 
principles  be  true,  "  that  the  greateft  hopes  and  fears 
"  are  ftrongiy  applied  to  the  minds  of  all  chriftians  ; 
*•  and  that  thofe  hopes  and  fears  ftrongiy  applied 
"  are  the  caufe  of  actual  will  to  adhere  constantly 
"  to  Christ's  doctrine s"  then  from  hence  it  fol- 

46  lows 


The  RULE  of  FAITH.  663 

lows  that  none  that  entertain  this  doctrine  can  ever  SEC T. 
fall  from  it,  becaufe  falling  from  it  is  inconfvftent  ^^^~~J 
with  an  actual  will  of  adhering  conftantly  to  it :  for 
fuppofin'g  (as  he  doth)  certain  and  conftant  caufes  of 
actual  will  to  adhere  to  this  doctrine,  thofe  who  en- 
tertain it  muft  actually  will  to  adhere  to  it,  becaufe  a 
caufe  put  actually  caufmg  produceth  its  effect,  which 
is  conftant  adherence  to  it.  And  if  this  were  true, 
thefe  two  things  would  be  impoxTible ;  firft,  that  any 
chriftian  ifiould  turn  apoftate  or  heretick  •,  fecondJy, 
that  any  chriftian  fhould  live  wickedly  :  both  which 
not  only  frequent  and  undoubted  experience  doth 
evince,  but  himfelf  muft:  grant  de  fafto  to  have 
been. 

§  2.  Firft,  it  would  be  impoftible  that  any  chri- 
ftian mould  turn  apoftate  or  heretick.  Herefy,  ac- 
cording to  him,  is  nothing  elfe  but  the  renouncing  of 
tradition.  Now  he  tells  us,  "  *  that  the  firft  renoun- *  p  gQ 
<c  cers  of  tradition  muft:  have  been  true  believers  or 
*c  holders  of  it  ere  they  renounced  it  •,"  and  I  fup- 
pofe  there  is  the  fame  reafon  for  apoftates.  But  if  all 
chriftians  or  true  believers  (as  he  calls  them)  have 
thefe  arguments  of  hope  and  fear  ftrongly  applied, 
and  hope  and  fear  ftrongly  applied  be  the  caufes  of 
actual  will  to  adhere  to  this  doctrine ;  'tis  neceftary  all 
chriftians  mould  adhere  to  it,  and  impoftible  there 
mould  be  either  apoftates  or  hereticks.  For  if  thefe 
caufes  be  put  "  in  all  the  faithful  actually  caufing  (as  the 
"  grounds  of  his  demonstration  fuppofejand  indefec- 
"  tiblenefs  be  the  proper  and  neceflary  effect  of  thefe 
"  caufes,1'  as  he  alio  faith  *,  then  it  is  impoftible*  p.  -- 
that  where  thefe  caufes  are  put,  there  fhoukl  be  any 
defection  :  for  a  proper  and   ncceifary  effect  cannot 

7  B  2  but 


664  Tbe  RULE  of  FAITH. 

PART  but  be   where   the  caufes  of  fuch  an  effecl  are   put, 

i^-^^j  efpecially  if  they  be  put  actually  caufing;  and  confei 

quently  'tis  impoffible  that  any  fingle  chriftian  fhould 

ever  either  totally  apoftatize  or  fall  into  herefy,  that 

is,  renounce  tradition. 

§  3.  And  that  this  is  a  genuine  confequence  from 
thefe  principles  (though  he  will  not  acknowledge  it 
here,  becauie  he  faw  it  would  ruine  his  demonftra- 
tion)  is  liberally  acknowledged  by  him  in  other  parts 
^  P.  54-  of  his  difcourfe.  For  he  tells  us,  "  *  that  it  exceeds 
ci  all  the  power  of  nature  (abstracting  from  the  caufes 
<c  of  madnefs  and  violent  difeafe)  to  blot  the  know- 
"  ledge  of  this  doctrine  out  of  the  foul  of  one  fingle 

*  P.  78.    "  believer  -,  and  *  that  fince  no  man   can  hold  con- 

cc  trary  to  his  knowledge,  nor  doubt  of  what  he  h 

C6  nor  change  and  innovate  without  knowing  he  doth 

<c  fo,  it  is  a  manifeft  impofilbility  a  whole  age  mould 

c:  fall  into  an  abfurdity  lo  inconfiilent  with  the  nit  ire 

*  P.  89.   "  of  one  fingle  man.'5     And,  "  *  that  it  is  perhaps 

€C  impoflible  for  one  fingle  man  to  attempt  to  deceive 
li  pofterity  by  renouncing  tradition."  Which  paf- 
fa^-es  laid  together  amount  to  thus  much,  that  it  is 
impoflible  that  tradition  fhould  fail  in  any  one  fingle 
pcrfon.  And  though  in  the  pafTage  lail  cited  he  fpeaks 
faintly,  and  with  a  perhaps,  as  if  he  apprehended 
fome  danger  in  fpeaking  too  peremptorily,  yet  any 
one  would  eafily  fee  the  laft  to  be  as  impoffible  as  any 
of  the  reft.  And  he  himfelf  elfcwhere,  being  in  the 
full  career  of  his  bombafl  rhetorick,  delivers  it  round- 

*  P„  54.    ly  without  fear  or  wit,  "  *  fooner  may  the  finews  of 

<c  entire  nature  by  overflraining  crack,  and  fhe  lofe 
"  all  her  activity  and  motion,  that  is,  herfelf,  than 
<c  one  fingle  part  of   that   innumerable   multitude 

"  which 


The  RULE  of  FAITH.  66^ 

C5  which  integrate  that  vafl   tellification  which  we  s  E  C  T. 

•  ill 

c'  call  tradition,  can  pollibly  be  violated.**  ,^_  'j 

§  4.  Bat  it  may  be  we  deal  too  hardly  with  him,  and 
prefs  his  demonftration  too  far,  becaufe  he  tells  us  he 
only  intends  by  it  to  prove  that  the  generality  of  chri- 
stians will  always  adhere  to  tradition.     But  if  he  in- 
tended to  prove  no  more  but  this,  he  mould  then  have 
brought  a  demonftration  that  would  have  concluded 
no  more  ;  but  this  concludes  of  all  as  well  as  of  the 
generality  of  chriitians.     A  clear  evidence  that  it  is 
no  demonftration,   becaufe  it  concludes  that  which  is 
evidently  falfe,  that  there  can  be  no  apoftates  or  here- 
ticks.     Befides,  fuppofmg  his  demonftration  to  con- 
clude only  that  the  generality  of  chriftians  would  al- 
ways adhere  to  tradition,  this  is  as  plainly  confuted 
by  experience,  if  there  be  any  credit  to  be  given  to 
hiftory,     St.  Hierom  tells  us,  "  *  that  Liberius  bi-*  Chron. 
*6  mop  of  Rome  (for  all  his  particular  title  to  infal-^.an"uin 
"  libility  built  upon  tradition,  as  Mr.  S.  fpeaks,  00-352. 
"  roll.  28.)  turned  Arian.     And  that  *  Arianifm  was  *  Ad  an. 
tC  eftabiifhed  by  the  fynod  of  Ariminum,  which  was 3L'-'' 
cc  a  council  more  general  than  that  of  Trent.     And 
cc  that  *  almoft  all  the  churches  in  the  whole  world*  Ad  an. 
under  the  names  of  peace  and  of  the  emperor,  were  2°4- 
polluted  by  communion  with  the  Arians."  Again, 
that  *  under  the  emperor  Conftantius  (Eufebius  and  Adverf. 
cc  Hippatius  being  confuls)  infidelity  was  fubferibed  Luciier* 
"  under  the  names  of  unity  and  faith.  And  *  that  the*  Ibitl- 
"  whole  world  groned  and  wondered  to  fee  itfelf  turned 
"  Arian."     And  he*ufes  this  as  an  argument  to  the*  Ibid. 
Luciferians,  to   receive  into   the   church  thofe  who 
had  been  defiled  with  the  herefy  of  Arius,  becaufe  the 
number  of  thofe  who  had  kept  themfelves  orthodox 

was 


cc 

cc 


The  RULE  of  FAITH. 

was  exceeding  fmalJ :  u  for  (fays  he)  the  fynod  of 
"  Nice  which  confided  of  above  three  hundred  bi- 
K  (hops,  received  eight  Arian  bifhops  whom  they 
"  might  have  call  out  without  any  great  lols  to  the 
"  church.  I  wonder  then  how  fome,  and  thofe  the 
M  followers  of  the  Nicene  faith,  can  think  that  three 
<c  confeffors  (  viz.  Athanafius,  Hilarius,  Eufebius ) 
"  ought  not  to  do  that  in  cafe  of  neceffity  for  the 
"  good  and  fafety  of  the  whole  world,  which  fo  ma- 
cc  ny  and  fo  excellent  perfons  did  voluntarily."  It 
feems  Arianifm  had  prevailed  very  far,  when  St.  Hie- 
rom  could  not  name  above  three  eminent  perfons  in 
the  church  who  had  preferved  themfelves  untainted 
*Incr,ift.  with  it.  Again,  "  *  Arius  in  Alexandria  was  at  flrfb 
ad  Galat.  cc  but  one  fpark5  DUt  becaufe  it  Was  not  prefently  ex- 
<c  tinguifh'd,  it   broke  out  into  a  flame  which  de- 

*  Orat.    li  voured  the  whole  world."     Gregory  Nazianzen  * 
20.  &  2I-]1kewife  tei]s  us  t0  the  fame  purpofe,  "  that  the  Arian 

"  herefy  feized  upon  the  greateft  part  of  the  church." 
And  to  fliew  that  he  knew  nothing  of  Mr.  S's  de- 
monftration  of  the  indefeclibility  of  the  generality  of 

*  Orat.     chriftians,  he  asks,  u  *  where  are  thofe  that  define 
25>  "  the  church  by  multitude,  and  defpife  the  little  flock, 

"  Sec.  ?"  And  this  herefy  was  of  a  long  continuance, 
for  from  its  rife  which  happened  in  the  20th  year  of 

*  Chron.  Conftantine,  it  continued  (as  Joh.  Abbas  *  hath  cal- 
ad  annum cu]ated  ]t)  266  years.     And  the  Pelagian  herefy  (if 
Maurit.     we  may  believe  Bradwardine,  one  of  the  great  cham- 
pions of  the  church  againft  it)  did  in  a  manner  pre- 
vail as  much  as  Arianifm,  as  the  faid  author  complains 

*  Caufa    in  his  preface  to  his  book,  u  *  that  almoft  the  whole 
Du*         <c  world  was  run  after  Pelagius  into  error."     Will 

Mr.  S.  now  fay,  "  that  in  the  height  of  thefe  herefics 

"  the 


Ttoe  RULE  cf  FAITH.  667 

fc  the  generality  of  chriflians  did  firmly  adhere  toSECT. 
tc  tradition  ? M  If  he  iay  they  did,  let  him  anfvver  [r- 
the  exprefs  tefti monies  produced  to  the  contrary : 
but  if  they  did  not,  then  his  demonflration  alio  fails 
as  to  the  generality  of  chriflians.  And  if  the  greater 
part  of  chriflians  may  fall  off  from  tradition,  what 
demonflration  can  make  it  impoflible  for  the  leifer 
to  do  fo  ?  who  will  fay  it  is  in  reafon  impoflible 
that  a  thoufand  perfons  fliould  relinquifh  tradition, 
though  nine  hundred  of  them  have  already  done  it, 
and  though  the  remainder  be  no  otherwifc  fecured 
from  doing  fc,  than  thofe  were  who  have  actually 
relinquished  it  ?  Now  is  not  this  a  clear  evidence 
that  this  which  he  calls  a  demonflration  a  priori 
is  no  fuch  thing  ?  becaufe  every  demonflration  a 
priori?  mufl  be  from  caufcs  which  are  neceflary, 
whereas  his  demonflration  is  from  voluntary  caufes. 
So  that  unlefs  he  can  prove  that  voluntary  caufes  arc 
neceffary,  he  fhall  never  demonflrate  that  it  is 
impoffible  for  the  generality  of  any  company  of 
men  to  err,  who  have  every  one  of  them  free-will, 
and  arc  every  one  of  them  liable  to  paflion  and 
miflake. 

§  5.  From  all  this  it  appears,  that  his  whole  di£ 
courfe  about  the  original  and  progrefs  of  herefy,  and 
the  multitudes  of  hereticks  in  ieveral  ages,  is  as  clear 
a  confutation  of  his  own  demonflration  as  can  be 
defired.  The  only  thing  that ; he  offers  in  that  dif- 
courfe,  to  prevent  this  objection,  which  he  forefaw 
it  liable  to,  is  this,  "  it  is  not  (fays  he  *)  to  be  expected  *  p#  $-; 
"  but  that  fome  contingencies  fhould  have  place, 
cc  where  a  whole  fpecies  in  a  manner  is  to  be  wrought 
6C  upon  j  it   fufficeth  that  the  caufcs  to  preferve  faitli 

M  inde- 


668  The  RULE  of  FAITH. 

PART  "  indcnciently  entire,  are  as  efficacious  as  thofe 
"  which  are  laid  for  the  prefervation  of  mankind  \ 
<s  the  virtue  of  faith  not  being  to  continue  longer 
"  than  mankind  its  only  fubject  does  -,  and  they  will 
"  eafily  appear  as  efficacious  as  the  other,  if  we 
"  confider  the  flrength  of  thofe  caufes  before  expli- 
*c  cated,  and  reflect  that  they  arc  effectively  power- 
"  ful  to  make  multitudes  daily  debar  themfelves  of 
"  thofe  pleafures  which  are  thz  caufes  of  mankind's 
"  propagation;  and  if  we  look  into  hiftcry  for  ex- 
<(  perience  of  what  hath  palled  in  the  world  fince 
"  the  propagating  of  chriftianity,  we  fhall  find 
"  more  particulars  failing  in  propagating  their 
"  kind,  than  their  faith.5*     To  which  I  anfwer, 

Firfl,  that  it  may  reafonably  be  expected  there 
fhould  be  no  contingencies  in  any  particulars,  where 
caufes  of  actual  will  are  fuppofed  to  be  put  in  all  •, 
**  becaufe  (as  he  fays  truly)  a  caufeput  actually  caufing 
*'  cannot  but  produce  its  effect."  Suppofe  then  con- 
flant  caufes  laid  in  all  mankind  of  an  actual  will  to 
fpeak  truth  to  the  beft  of  their  knowledge,  were  it  not 
reafonablc  to  expect  that  there  would  be  no  fuch  con- 
tingency to  the  world's  end,  as  that  any  man  Ihould 
tell  a  lye?  Nay,  it  were  madnefs  for  any  man  to 
think  any  fuch  contingency  fhould  be,  fuppofing 
caufes   actually  caufing  men  always  to  fpeak  truth. 

Secondly,  it  is  far  from  truth,  "  that  the  caufes  to 
"  prcferve  faith  indeficiently  entire,  are  as  efficacious 
M  as  thofe  which  are  laid  for  the  propagation  of 
M  mankind,"  And  whereas  he  would  prove  the 
flrength  of  thofe  caufes  which  are  laid  to  prefer ve 
faith,  •*  becaufe  they  are  effectively  powerful  to 
"  make  multitudes  daily  debar  themfelves  of  thofe 

li  pleafures 


The  RULE  of  FAITH.  669 

«c  pleafures  which  are  the  caufes  of  mankind's  pro  pa-  SECT. 
"  gation  f*  I  hope  no  body  that  hath  read  the  innume- . 
rable  complaints  which  occur  in  their  own  hiftorians, 
and  others  of  the  beft  and  mod  credible  of  their  own 
writers,  of  more  than  one  age  concerning  the  gene- 
ral viciouinefs  and  debauchery  of  their  pnefts  and 
monks,  will  be  over-forward  to  believe  that  all  thofe 
who  debar  themfelves  of  lawful  marriage,  do  abftain 
from  thofe  unlawful  pleafures. 

§  6.  But  nothing  can  be  more  impudent  than 
what  he  adds,  "  that  if  we  look  into  hiftories  for 
"  experience  of  what  hath  pafs'd  in  the  world  fince 
"  the  firft  planting  of  chriftianity,  we  fhall  find  far 
"  more  particulars  failing  in  propagating  their  kind, 
"  than  their  faith."  Do  any  hiftories  confirm  it 
to  have  been  the  experience  of  the  world,  that  the 
far  greateft  part  of  the  world  did  in  any  age  give 
over  propagating  their  kind  ?  But  hiftories  do  con- 
firm that  the  far  greateft  part  of  the  chriftian  world 
did  fall  off  to  Arianifm  and  Pelagianifm  ;  and  con- 
fequently,  as  he  fuppofeth,  did  defert  and  renounce 
tradition.  Did  ever  whole  nations  and  vaft  terri- 
tories of  the  world  either  wholly,  or  for  far  the 
greateft  part  of  them,  take  up  an  humour  againft 
propagating  mankind  ?  And  yet  both  hiftory,  and 
the  experience  of  the  prefent  age  affures  us,  that  a 
great  part  of  Afia  and  of  Africk  (where  themoft  flou- 
riming  churches  in  the  world  once  were)  are  fallen 
off  from  chriftianity,  and  become  either  mahome- 
tans  or  heathens.  In  Africk  almoft  all  thofe  vaft 
regions,  which  chriftianity  had  from  heathenifm, 
mahometanifm  hath  regained  from  chriftianity. 
All    the    north    part  of    Africk    lying  along    the 

Vol.  IV,  7  C  Mediter- 

5 


TIL 


6;o  The  RULE  of  FAITH. 

PA  RT.  Mediterranean   (where  chriftianity  flourifhed  once  as 
much  as  ever  it  did  at  Rome)  is   at  this  time  ut- 
terly void  of  chriftians,  excepting  a  few  towns  in  the 
hands  of  the  European  princes.     And  not  to  men- 
tion all  particular  places,  the  large  region  of  Nubia, 
which   had   (as  is  thought)  from  the   apoftles  time 
prcferled  the  chriflian  faith,  hath  within  thefe  150 
years  for  want  of  miniflers   (as  Alvarez  *  tells  us) 
quitted  chriftianity,  and  is  partly  revolted  to  heathen- 
ifm,  partly  fallen  off  to  mahometanifm.     So  that  it 
feems,  that  notwithstanding  the  argument  of  hope 
and  fear,  the  very  teachers  of  tradition,  may  fail  in 
a  largely  extended  church.     As  for  Afia,  in  the  eaft- 
erly   parts  of  it,  there   is   not    now   one   chriflian 
to  four  of  what  there  were  500  years  [ago  j  and  in  ' 
the  more  foutherly  parts  of  it  (where  chriftianity  had 
taken  the  deepeft  root)  the  chriftians  are  far  inferior 
in  number  to  the  idolaters  and  mahometans,  and  do 
daily  decreafe.     What  thinks   Mr.  S.  of  all  this  ? 
Have  thofe  chriftian  nations  which  are  turn'd  maho- 
metans and  pagans  failed  in  their  faith  or  not  ?  If 
they  have,    I  expect  from  him  clear   inftances    of 
more  that  have  failed  in  propagating  their  kind. 

§  7.  But,  befides  thofe  who  have  totally  apofta- 
tized  from  chriftianity,  hath  not  the  whole  Greek 
church,  with  the  jacobices  and  neflorians,  and  all 
thofe  other  feels,  which  agree  with,  and  depend 
upon  thefe,  and  which,  taken  together,  are  manifold- 
ly greater  than  the  Roman  church  ;  I  fay,  have  not 
all  thefe  renounced  tradition  for  fcveral  ages  ?  And 
here  in  Europe,  hath  not  a  great  part  of  Poland, 
Hungary,  both  Germany's,  France,  and  Switzerland  : 
have  not  the  kingdomi  of  Great-Britain,  Denmark, 

Sweden, 


"Tie  RULE  of  FAITH.  67t 

Sweden,  and  a   confiderable  part  of  Ireland  in  Mr.  S  E  C  T 

S's  opinion  deferred  tradition  ?  If  I  mould  once  fee , l/i-j^. 

a  whole  nation  fail,  becaufe  no  body  would  marry 

and  contribute  to  the  propagation  of  mankind  ;  and 

fliould  find  this  fullen  humour  to  prevail  in  feveral 

nations,  and  to  overfpread  vaft  parts  of  the  world, 

I  mould  then   in  good  earneil  think  it  poflible  for 

mankind   to  fail  j  unlefs  I  could  fhew  it   impofllble 

for  other  nations  to  do  that  which  I  fee  fome  to  have 

done,  who  wrere  every  whit  as  unlikely  to  have  done 

it.     So  that   whatever   caufe   he  afiigns  of  herefy, 

**  *  as  pride,  ambition,  lull,"  or  any  other  vice  or*  P.  67. 

intereft,    if  the'e  can  take  place  in   whole  nations, 

and  make   them  renounce  tradition,  "  then  where's 

a  the  efEcacy  of  the  caufes  to  preferve  faith  indefi- 

"  ciently    entire  in  any  ? "    For    the  demonftration 

holds  as  (Irongly  for  all  chriftians  as  for  any. 

§  8.  Secondly,  from  thefe  grounds  it  would  fol- 
low that  no  chriftian  can  live  wickedly  -,  becaufe  the 
end  of  faith  being  a  good  life,  the  arguments  of 
hope  and  fear  muft  in  all  reafon  be  as  powerful 
and  efficacious  caufes  of  a  good  life,  as  of  a  true 
belief.  And  that  his  demonftration  proves  the  one 
as  much  as  the  other,  will  be  evident  from  his  own 
reafoning;  for  he  *  argues  in  this  manner,  "  Good, 
is  the  proper  object  of  the  will ;  good  propofed 
makes  the  will  to  defire  that  good,  and  confequently 
the  known  means  to  obtain  it :  now  infinite  goods 
and  harms  fuhiciently  propofed  are  of  their  own 
nature  incomparably  more  powerful  caufes  to  carry 
the  will  than  temporal  ones.  Since  then,  when 
two  caufes  are  counterpoifed,  the  lefTer,  when  ic 
;  comes  to  execution,  is  no  caufe  as  to  the  fubftance 

7  C  2  •«  of 


*  P.  62. 


67z  The  RULE  of  FAITH. 

PART"  of  that  effect,  it  follows  that  there  is  no  caufe  to 
i lzi  i"  move  the  wills  of  a  world  of  believers  to  be 
"  willing  to  do  that  which  they  judge  would  lofe 
"  themfelves  and  their  posterity  infinite  goods,  and 
ct  bring  them  infinite  harms,  &cc.  in  cafe  a  fufficient 
"  prcpofal  or  application  be  not  wanting,"  which 
he  tells  us  *  is  not  wanting,  "  becaufe  chriflianity 
"  urged  to  execution  gives  its  followers  a  new  life 
u  and  a  new  nature,  than  which  a  nearer  application 
"  cannot  be  imagined."  Doth  not  this  argument 
extend  to  the  lives  of  chriftians,  as  well  as  their  be- 
lief ?  So  that  he  may  as  well  infer  from  thefe  grounds, 
that  it  is  impoflible  that  thofe  who  profeis  chriftiani- 
ty  fhould  live  contrary  to  it,  as  that  they  fhould  fail  to 
deliver  down  the  doctrine  of  Christ  -,  becaufe  what- 
ever can  be  an  inducement  and  temptation  to  any 
man,  to  contradict  this  doctrine  by  his  practice, 
may  equally  prevail  upon  him  to  falfify  it.  For  why 
fhould  men  make  any  more  fcruple  of  damning 
themfelves  and  their  pollerity  by  teaching  them  falfe 
doctrines,  than  by  living  wicked  lives  ?  which  are 
equally  pernicious  with  heretical  doctrines,  not  only 
upon  account  of  the  bad  influence  which  fuch  examples 
of  fathers  and  teachers  are  like  to  have  upon  their 
fcholars,  but  likewife  they  are  one  of  the  ftrongeft 
arguments  in  the  world  to  perfuade  them,  that  their 
tea-:  hers  do  not  themfelves  believe  that  religion  which 
t'ley  teach;  for  if  they  did,  they  would  live  accord* 
ing  to  it.  Why  mould  any  man  think,'  that  thofe 
arguments  of  hope  and  fear  which  will  not  prevail 
upon  the  generality  of  chriftians  to  make  them  live 
holy  lives,  mould  'be  fo  necenarily  efficacious  to 
make  them  fo  much  concerned  for  the  preierving  of 


Toe  RULE  of  FAITH.  673 

a  right  belief?  Nay,  we  have  great  reafon  to  believe  SEC  T. 
that  fuch  perfons  will  endeavour  as  much  as  may  be,  ■__,--  _j 
to  bend  and  accommodate  their  belief  to  their  Jives. 
And  this  is  the  true  fource  of  thofe  innovations  in 
faith,  for  which  we  challenge  the  church  of  Rome  ; 
which  any  man  may  eafily  difcern,  who  will  but 
confider  how  all  their  new  doctrines  are  fitted  to  a 
fecular  intereft,  and  a  gratifying  that  inordinate  ap- 
petite after  riches  and  dominion  which  reigns  in  the 
court  of  Rome,  and  in  the  upper  part  of  the  clergy 
of  that  church. 

SECT.    IV. 

§  l.  CEcondiy,  the  main   grounds   of  his  demon-  Thc  fe- 
^  ftration  are  apparently  falfe:  for,  cond  anf- 

Firft,  this  demonftration  fuppofeth  that  the  gene-  Vf^to  hls 
rality  of  chriftian  parents  in  all  ages  perfectly  under-  ftraaon. 
flood  the  doctrine  of  Christ,  and  did  not  miftake 
any  part  of  it  -,  that  they  remembred  it  perfectly, 
and  that  they  were  faithful  and  diligent  to  inftruct 
their  children  in  it ;  which  is  as  contrary  to  experi- 
ence as  that  the  generality  of  chriftians  are  know- 
ing and  honeft.  It  fuppofeth  likewife,  chat  this 
doctrine,  and  every  fubftantial  part  of  it,  was  re- 
ceived and  remembred  by  the  generality  of  children 
as  it  was  taught ;  and  was  underftood  perfectly  by 
them  without  the  lead  material  miftake :  fo  he  tells 
us,  <c  *  that  the  fubftance  of  faith  comes  clad  in  fuch  *  p  -* 
"  plain  matters  of  fact,  that  the  moil  ftupid  man 
46  living  cannot  poflibly  be  ignorant  of  it."  But  whe- 
ther this  be  reafonable  to  be  fuppofed  or  no,  may 
eafily  be  determined,  not  only  from  every  man's 

own 


674  *&  RULE  of  FAITH. 

PART  own  cxoerience  of  the  world,  but  from  a  more  ad- 
i__.  l^_j  vantageous  in  fiance  of  the  experience  of  the  fir  ft 
age  of  chriftianity.  Was  there  ever  a  more  know* 
irig  and  diligent  teacher  of  this  doctrine  than  our 
feviour  ?  and  yet  his  difciples  fell  into  many  miftakes 
concerning  it  :  fo  that  in  order  to  the  certain  pro- 
pagating of  it,  the  wifdom  of  God  thought  it  re- 
quifite  to  endue  even  thole  who  had  learned  this 
doctrine  from  hjmfelf  with  an  infallible  fpirit,  by 
which  they  might  be  led  into  all  truth,  and  fecured 
from  error  and  miftake;  which  had  been  unnecef- 
jary,  had  it  been  impoffible  for  them  to  miftake 
this  doctrine,  The  apoftles,  who  taught  the  world 
by  an  infallible  fpirit,  and  with  infinitely  more  ad- 
vantage than  ordinary  parents  can  teach  their  chii- 
dren,  yet  in  all  the  churches  which  they  planted, 
they  found  chriftians  very  apt  to  miftake  and  per- 
vert their  doctrine,  as  appears  by  their  frequent 
complaints  in  melt  of  their  epifcles.     Nay  the  apo- 

*  llcb.  v.ftle  chargeth  the  generality  of  the  Hebrews  *  with 
lI'  12'  fuch  a  degree  of  duinefs  and  flupidity,  that  after  fit- 
ting time  and  means  of  infiruction  they  were  ftill 
ignorant  of  the  very  principles  of  chriftianity  :  fo 
he  tells  them,  "  that  when  for  the  time  they  ought 
c£  to  be  teachers  of  others,  they  had  need  that  one 
"  mould  teach  them  again  which  be  the  nrft  prin- 
"  pies  of  the  oracles  of  God."     And  St.  Hierom 

*  Adverf.  tells  us,  "  *   that  the  primitive  churches  were  taint- 
?         <c  ^  wj^  rnany  grofs  errors  whilft  the  apoftles  were 

"  alive,  and  the  blood  of  Christ  yet  warm  in 
"  Judea."  Bat  it  may  be  there  have  been  better 
teachers  fince,  and  children  are  more  apt  to  learn 
now  than  men  were  then.  Who  knows  how  the 
wcrld  may  be  changed  ?  §  2.  S$- 


The  RULE  of  FAITH.  67$ 

§  2.  Secondly,  this  demonftration  fuppofeth  the  SECT, 
hopes  and  fears  which  chriftian  religion  applies  to ,_  1^'Ji^j 
mens  minds  to  be  certain  and  necefTary  caufes  of 
actual  will  in  men  to  adhere  to  the  doctrine  of 
Christ;  and  confeqnently  that  they  muft  necefTa- 
rily  adhere  to  it.  That  he  fuppofeth  them  to  be 
neceflary,  I  have  his  own  word  for  it ;  for  he  tells 
us,  "  *  that  he  hath  endeavoured  to  demonstrate*  P.  75. 
"  the  indefectiblenefs  of  tradition  as  the  proper  and 
"  neceflary  effect  of  thofe  caufes  which  preferve  and 
4C  continue  tradition  on  foot  •,  •'  and  what  thofe 
caufes  are  he  told  us  before,  "  *  that  they  are*  P.  60* 
tc  hopes  and  fears  ftrongly  applied."  But  I  hope 
that  the  indefectiblenefs  of  tradition  cannot  be  a 
neceflary  effect  of  the  ftrong  application  of  thofe 
hopes  and  fears,  unlels  thofe  hopes  and  fears  be  a 
neceflary  caufe  of  that  effect.  And  indeed  this  is 
fufficiently  implied  in  his  faying,  "  that  they  are 
u  the  caufes  of  actual  will  in  chriftians  to  adhere  to 
M  tradition."  For  if  thefe  caufes  of  actual  will  bs 
conftant  (as  he  muft  fuppofe)  then  they  are  certain 
and  necefTary  and  infallible  caufes  of  adhering  to 
this  doctrine.  For  whatever  is  in  act  is  necefTary 
while  it  is  fo,  and  if  it  be  conftantly  in  act,  the  ef- 
fect is  always  neceflary.  But  what  a  wild  fuppofiti- 
on  is  this,  that  moral  motives  and  arguments  work- 
ing upon  a  free  principle,  the  will  of  man,  do 
neceflarily  produce  their  effect?  Is  it  neceflary  that 
the  hopes  of  heaven  and  the  fears  of  hell  fhould 
keep  chriftians  conftant  to  the  doctrine  of  Christ  ? 
and  is  it  not  as  neceflary  that  thefe  arguments 
mould  prevail  upon  them  to  the  practice  of  it  I  It  is 
in  vain  to  go  about  to  demonftrate  that  all  men 

muft 


676  The  RULE  of  FAITH. 

PART  mud  be  good  who  have  fufficient  arguments  pro- 

t  t  r 

^J^l^,  pounded  to  them,  when  experience  tells  us  the  con- 
trary. Nay,  it  is  in  reaibn  impoflible  that  moral 
arguments  mould  be  of  a  neceflary  and  infallible  ef- 
ficacy, becaufe  they  are  always  propounded  to  a  free 
agent,  who  may  choofe  whether  he  will  yield 
to  them  or  not.  Indeed  it  is  always  reafonable 
that  men  fhould  yield  to  them,  and  if  they  be 
reafonable  they  will  \  but  fo  long  as  they  are  free, 
it  can  never  be  infallibly  certain  that  they  will.  And 
if  men  be  not  free,  it  is  no  virtue  at  all  in  them 
to  be  wrought  upon  by  thefe  arguments.  For  what 
virtue  can  it  be  in  any  man  to  entertain  the  chri- 
stian doctrine,  and  adhere  to  it,  and  live  according- 
ly, if  he  does  all  this  necefTarily,  that  is,  whether 
he  will  or  no,  and  can  no  more  choofe  whether  he 
will  do  fo  or  not,  than  whether  he  will  fee  the  light 
when  the  fun  mines  upon  his  open  eyes,  or  whe- 
ther he  will  hear  a  found  when  ail  the  bells  in  the 
town  are   ringing  in  his  ears,  or  (to  ufe  Mr.  S's  * 

*  P.  53-  fimiiitudes)  whether  he  will  "  feel  heat,  cold,  pain, 
"  pleafure,  or  any  other  material  quality  that  affects 
"  his  fenfes."  We  fee  then  how  unreafonable  his 
fuppofitions  are,  and  yet  without  thefe  grounds  his 
demonstration  falls.  For  if  it  be  poflible  that  chri- 
stians may  miftake  or  forget  the  doclrine  of  Christ, 
or  any  part  of  it,  or  be  defective  in  diligence  to 
inftruct  others  in  it  •,  or  if  it  be  poflible  that  the 
will  of  man  which  is  free,  may  not  be  necefTarily 
and  infallibly  fwayed  by  the  arguments  of  hope  and 
fear  •,  then  it  is  poflible  that  tradition  may  fail. 
And  is  not  this  a  good  demonstration  which  fup- 
ports   its  felf  upon  iuch  principles  as  do  directly 

affront 


The  RULE  of  FAITH.  677 

affront  the  con  (font  experience,  and  the  cleared  rea-  SECT, 
ion  of  mankind  ?  Lj      'j 

§  3.  And  here  I  cannot  but  take  notice  how  in- 
confident  he  is  to  himfelf  in  laying  the  grounds  of 
tradition's  certainty.  In  one  part  of  his  book  he 
tells  us,  "  *  that  tradition  hath  for  its  bafis  the  bed*  p-  53> 
"  nature  in  the  univerfe,  that  is,  man's  ;  not  ac- 
"  cording  to  his  moral  part,  defectible  by  reafon 
of  original  corruption  ;  nor  yet  his  intellectuals, 
darkly  groping  in  the  purfuit  of  fcience,  cVc. 
but  according  to  thofe  faculties  in  him  perfectly 
and  necefiarily  fubject  to  the  operations  and  drokes 
"  of  nature,  mat  is,  his  eyes,  ears,  handling,  and 
the  direct  imprefiion  of  knowledge,  as  naturally 

and  necefiarily  ifiuing  from  the  affecting  thole 
fenfes,  as  it  is  to  feel  heat,  cold,  pain,  pleafure 
or  any  other  material  quality.'*  So  that  accord- 
ing to  this  difcourfe,  the  bafis  of  tradition  is  not 
man's  nature  confidered  as  moral,  and  capable  of 
intellectual  reflection  ;  for  in  this  confideration  it 
is  dark  and  defectible  :  but  man's  nature  confidered 
only  as  capable  of  directj  fenfitive  knowledge,  as 
acting  naturally  and  necefiarily.  Which  is  to  fay, 
that  tradition  is  founded  in  the  nature  of  man  con- 
fidered not  as  a  man  but  a  brute  j  under  which  con- 
fideration, I  fee  no  reafon  why  he  fhould  call  it  the 
bed  nature  in  the  univerfe.  But  now,  how  will  he 
reconcile  this  difcourfe  with  the  grounds  of  his  de- 
mondrations  ?  where  he  tells  us,  that  the  dability 
of  tradition  is  founded  in  the  arguments  of  hope 
and  fear,  the  objects  of  which  being  future  and  ae 
a  didance  cannot  work  upon  a  man  immediately 
by  direct  impreflions  upon  his  fenfes,  but  mud  work 
Vol.  IV.  7  D  upon 


<c 


cc 


<c 


678  the  RULE  of  FAITH. 

PART  upon  him  by  way  of  intellectual  reflexions  and  con- 
^  '_i  fideration.  For  I  hope  he  will  not  deny  but  that 
the  arguments  of  hope  and  fear  work  upon  man 
according  to  his  moral  and  intellectual  part,  elk 
how  are  they  arguments  ?  and  if  man  according  to 
his  moral  part  be  (as  he  fays)  defectible,  how  can 
the  indefectibility  of  tradition  be  founded  in  thole 
arguments  which  work  upon  man  only  according  to 
his  moral  part  ?  I  have  purpofely  all  along  (both  for 
the  reader's  eafe  and  mine  own)  neglected  to  take 
notice  of  feveral  of  his  inconfiftences  -,  but  thefe  are 
fuch  clear  and  tranfparent  contradictions,  that  I  could 
do  no  lels  than  make  an  example  of  them. 

SECT.      V. 

Hirdly,   this  Demonftration  is  confuted 
by  clear  and  undeniable  inftances  to  the 
contrary.     I  will  mention  but  two. 

Firft,  the  tradition  of  the  one  true  God,  which 
was  the  eafieft  to  be  preferved  of  any  doctrine  in  the 
World,  being  fhort  and  plain,  planted  in  every 
man's  nature,  and  perfectly  fuited  to  the  reafon  of 
mankind.  And  yet  this  tradition,  not  having  pad 
through  many  hands  (by  reafon  of  the  long  age  of 
man)  was  fo  defaced  and  corrupted,  that  the  world 
did  lapfe  into  polytheifm  and  idolatry.  Now  a  man 
that  were  fo  hardy  as  to  demonftrate  againft  matter 
-of  fact,  might  by  a  flronger  demonstration  than 
Mr.  S's,  prove  that  though  it  be  certain  this  tradi- 
tion hath  failed,  yet  it  was  impoflible  it  mould  fail ; 
as  Zeno  demonftrated  the  impofllbility  of  motion 
againft  Diogenes  walking  before  his  eyes.     "  For 

"  the 


The  RULE  of  FAITH.  679 

<c  the  doctrine  of  the  one  true  God  was  fettled  in  the  SECT. 
<c  heart  of  Noah,  and  firmly  believed  by  him  to  be 
"  the  way  to  happinefs,  and  the  contradicting  or  de- 
"  ferting  of  this  to  be  the  way  to  mifery."     And 
this  doctrine  was  by  him  fo  taught  to  his  children, 
who  were  encouraged  by  thefe  motives  to  adhere  to 
this  doctrine,  and  to  propagate  it  to  their  children, 
and  were  deterred  by  them   from  relinquishing  it. 
And  this  was  in  all  ages  the  perfuafion  of  the  faith- 
ful.    Now  the  hopes  of  happinefs,  and  the  fears  or 
mifery  ftrongly  applied,  are  the  caufes  of  actual  will. 
Befides,  the  thing  was  feafible,  or  within  their  power-, 
that   is,  what    they    were   bred    to  was    knowable 
by  them,  and  that  much  more  eafily  than  any  other 
doctrine  whatfoevcr,  being  fhort,  and  plain,  and  na- 
tural.    "  This  put,  it  follows  as  certainly   that   a 
"  great  number  in  each  age  would  continue  to  hold 
u  themfelves,  and  teach  their  children  as  themfelves 
•*  had  been  taught,  that  is,  would  follow  and  (tick 
iC  to  this  tradition  of  the  one  true  God,  as  it  doth 
*c  that  a  caufe  put  actually  caufing  produceth  itsef- 
"  feet.     Actually  I  fay;  for  fince  the  caufe  is  put, 
ct  and  the  patient  difpofed,  it  follows  inevitably  that 
M  the  caufe  is  put  flill  actually  caufing."     This  de- 
monstration which  concludes  an  apparent  falfhood, 
hath  the  whole  ftrength  of  Mr.  S's,  and  feveral  ad- 
vantages beyond  it.     For  the  doctrine  conveyed  by 
this   tradition  is  the  mod  important,  being  the  firfl 
principle  of  all  religion  ;  the  danger  of  corrupting  it 
as  great,  the  facility  of  preferving    it  much  greater, 
than  of  the   chriftian  doctrine,  for  the  caufes  before- 
mentioned.     And  yet,  after  all,  it  fignifies  nothing 
againft  certain  experience,  and  unqueflionable  matter 

7  D  2  "of 


6So  Tie  RULE  of  FAITH. 

P  A  R  T  of  faft ;  only  it  fufficiently  fhews  the  vanity  of  Mr, 
c^-v^j  S's  pretended  demonflration,  built  upon  the  fame  or 
weaker  grounds. 

§  2.  Secondly,  the  other  inftance  fhall  be  in  the 
Greek  church,  who  received  the  chriflian  doctrine 
as  entire  from  the  apoftles,  and  had  as  great  an 
obligation  to  propagate  it  truly  to  poflerity,  and 
the  fame  fears  and  hopes  ftrongly  applied  to  be  the 
actual  caufes  of  will ;  in  a  word,  all  the  fame  argu- 
ments and  caufes  to  preferve  and  continue  tradition 
on  foot,  which  the  Roman  church  had  •,  and  yet, 
to  the  utter  confufion  of  Mr.  S's  demonftration, 
tradition  hath  failed  among  them.  For  as  -{pecu- 
lators, they  deny  the  proceffion  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
from  the  Son  ;  and  as  teflifiers,  they  dilbwn  any 
fuch  doctrine  to  have  been  delivered  to  them  by 
the  precedent  age,  or  to  any  other  age  of  their 
church  by  the  apoftles  as  the  doctrine  of  Christ. 

§  3.  To  this  inflance  of  the  Greek  church,  becaufc 
Mr.  White-  hath  offered  fomething  by  way  of  an- 
*  Apology  fwer,  I fhall  here  confider  it.     He  tells  us,   "*that 
for  tmditi- «  the  plea  of  the  Greek  church  is  non-tradition  ;  al- 
on>  v'  s*'  "  ledgingonly  this,  that  their  fathers  did  not  deliver 
"  the  doctrine   of  ~the   proceffion   of    the   Holy 
<c  Ghost  ;  not  that  they  fay   the  contrary  \  which 
<{  clearly  demonflrates  there  are  no  oppofite  tradi- 
*c  tions  between  them  and  us."     But  this  was  not 
the  thing  Mr.  White  was  concerned  to  do,  to  demon- 
strate there  were  no  oppofite  traditions  between  the 
Greeks  and  the  Latins,  but  to  fecure  his  main  demon- 
ftration of    the  impoffibility  of   tradition's    failing 
againft  this   inflance.      For    that  the  Greeks   have 
no  fuch   tradition  as  this,  "  that  the  Holy  Ghost 

"  pro- 


fife  RULE  of  FAITH.  681 

"  proceeds  from  the  Son"  is  as  good  evidence  of  the  s  E^  r- 

failure  of  tradition  as  if  they  had  a  pofitive  tradition,  < ^^j 

"  that  he  proceeds  only  from  the  Father  -, ?  efpe- 
cially  if  we  confider  that  they  *  charge  the  Latin  church  *  phc^ 
with  innovation  in  this  matter,  and  fay  that  the  addition  ep.  7. 
of  that  claufe, "  of  the  proceflion  from  the  Son  alio,"  is 
a  corruption  of  the  ancient  faith,  and  a  devil ifli  in- 
vention. Why  then  does  Mr.  White  go  about  to 
baffle  fo  material  an  objection  (and,  I  fear,  his  own 
confcience  likewife)  by  a  pitiful  evafion  inftead  of 
a  folid  anfwer?  What  though  there  be  no  oppo- 
fite  traditions  between  the  Greek  and  Latin  church, 
yet  if  their  faith  be  oppofite,  will  it  not  from  hence 
follow  that  tradition  hath  failed  in  one  of  them  ? 
I  wonder  that  Mr.  White,  who  hath  fo  very  well 
confuted  the  infallibility  of  popes  and  councils,  and 
thereby  undermined  the  very  foundation  of  that 
religion,  ihould  not  by  the  fame  light  of  reafon  dis- 
cover the  fondnefs  of  his  own  opinion  concerning  the 
infallibility  of  oral  tradition,  which  hath  more  and 
greater  abfurdities  in  it  than  that  which  he  confutes. 
And  to  mew  Mr.  White  the  abfurdity  of  it,  I 
will  apply  his  demonstration  of  the  infallibility  of 
chriftian  tradition  in  general,  to  the  Greek  church 
in  particular ;  by  which  every  one  will  fee  that  it 
does  as  ftrongly  prove  the  impofiibility  of  tradition's 
failing  in  the  Greek  church,  as  in  the  Roman-catho- 
lick,  as  they  are  pleafed  to  call  it.  His  demonstration 
is  this,  "  *  Christ  commanded  hisapoftles  to  preach*  Deficit, 

"  to  all  the  world,  and  left  any  one  mould  doubt &  cjjeo1- 

'  '  trail  1. 

"  of  the  effect,  he  fent  his  Spirit  into  them  to  bring  feft.  4, 
"  to  their  remembrance  what  he  had  taught  them ; 
"  which  Spirit  did  not  only  give  them  a  power  to 

"  da 


632  Me  RULE  of  FAITH. 

PART  "  do  what  he  inclined  them  to,  but  did  caufe  them 
III 

'  .;  "  actually  to  do  it."     I  cannot  but  take  notice  by 

the  way,  of  the  ill    confcquence  of  this,  which  is, 
that  men  may  doubt  whether  thofe  who  are  to  teach 
the  doctrine  of  Christ  will  remember  it,  and  teach 
it   to   others,    unlefs   they   have  that    extraordinary 
and  efficacious  afliftance  of  the  Holy  Ghost  which 
the  apoftles  had  :  if  this  be  true,  his  demonftration  is 
at  an   end,  for  he  cannot  plead  that  this   afliftance 
hath  been  continued  ever  fince  the  apoftles.     He  pro- 
ceeds, "the  apoftles  preached  this  doctrine  •,  the  na- 
<c  tions  underftood   it,    lived  according  to  it,   and 
**  valued  it  as   that  which  was  necefTary  to  them  and 
46  their  pofterity,   incomparably  beyond   any  thing 
"  elfc."     All   this  I    fuppcle  done  to  and  by  the 
Greeks  as. well  as  any  other  nation.     "  Thefe  things 
being  put,  it  cannot  enter  into  any  man's  under- 
ftanding,    but  that  the  chriftian  [Greeks]  of  the 
"  firft  age,   being  the  fcholarsof  the  apoftles,  could 
<c  and  would  earneftly  commend  the  chriftian  doc- 
trine to  their  pofterity  -,  if  fo,  it  is  evident  that  they 
did.     So  that   the    continuance  of    purity  of  the 
faith  in  the  [Greek]  church  is  founded  upon  this, 
that  fathers  always  delivered  the  fame  doctrine  to 
their  children  which  they  had  received  from  their 
fathers,  and  did  believe  it  under  this  very  notion 
and  title  as  received ;  nor  could  any  one  [of  that 
church]  deliver  another  doctrine  under  this  title, 
but  he  would  be  convinced  of  a  Jye  by  the  reft ; 
and  if  the  whole  [Greek]  church  mould  endeavour 
to  deliver  a  new    doctrine  under  that  title,  [and 
there's  the   fame  reafon  if  they    fhould  leave  out 
any  article  of  the  old  doctrine]  that    whole  age 

"  would 


CC 


The  RULE  of  FAITH.  6^3 

cc  would  be  in  their  conferences  condemned  of  per-  SECT. 
"  fidioufnefs  and  parricide.  Now  this  is  as  impof- ._'_,_/ 
"  fible  as  it  is  that  all  mankind  fhould  confpire  to 
<c  kill  themfelves."  And  he  afterwards  *  gives  the  *  Ibid, 
reafon  why  it  is  fo  impoflible  that  tradition  fhould  e  5" 
fail,  and  it  is  a  very  bold  and  faucy  one,  "  that  if 
"  the  tradition  of  the  chriftian  faith  be  not  more 
"  firm  than  the  courfe  of  the  fun  and  moon,  and 
"  the  propagation  of  mankind,  then  God  hath 
"  fhewn  himfelf  an  unskilful  artificer."  What  is 
there  in  all  this  demonstration,  which  may  not  be 
accommodated  to  the  Greek  church  with  as  much 
force  and  advantage  as  to  the  catholick  ?  unlefs  he 
can  fhew  that  it  is  very  poflible  that  all  the  men  in 
Greece  may  confpire  to  kill  themfelves,  but  yet  ab- 
folutely  impoflible  that  all  the  men  in  the  world 
fhould  do  fo ;  which  I  am  fure  he  cannot  fhew,  un- 
lefs he  can  demonflrate,  that  though  it  be  poflible 
for  a  million  of  as  wife  men  as  any  are  to  be  found 
in  the  world  together,  to  confpire  to  do  a  foolifh  ac- 
tion, yet  it  is  impoflible  that  a  hundred  millions 
not  one  jot  wifer  than  the  other,  fhould  agree  toge- 
ther to  the  doing  of  it. 

§  4.  From  all  this  it  appears,  that  Mr.  White's 
anfwer  to  this  objection  doth  not  fignify  any  thing 
to  his  purpofe.  For  if  theproceflion  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  was  part  of  Christ's  doctrine,  then  it  was 
delivered  by  the  apoftles  to  the  Greek  church  ;  if  fo, 
they  could  not  fail  to  deliver  it  down  to  the  next  age, 
and  that  to  the  next,  and  fb  on  s  but  it  feems  they 
have  failed.  •*  Where  then  is  the  force  of  hopes  and 
*c  fears  ftrongly  applied?  where  are  the  certain 
"  caufes  of  actual  will  to  adhere  to  this  doctrine  ? 

**  why 


it 

1C 


684  The  RULE  of  FAITH. 

PART"  why   is  not  the  effect  produced,  the  caufes  being 

SmJ^r^j  "  put  actually  caufrng  ?"  If  the  apoflles  delivered  this 

doctrine,  oral  tradition  is  fo  clear  and  unmiftakable, 

*  P.  53,  &  "  and  *  brings  down  faith  clad  in  fuch  plain  matters 
54'  "  of  fact,  that  the   mod  ftupid  man  living  (much 

"  leis  the  Greeks,  that  were  the  flower  of  mankind) 

*  Ibid.      "  could  not  poflibly  be  ignorant  of  it  ;  nay  *,  it  ex- 

"  ceeds  all  the  power  of  nature  to  blot  knowledge 
"  thus  fixed  out  of  the  foul  of  one   fingle  believer 

*  P.  7$.   "  (much    more    of  Co   van:  a  church)  And  *  fince 

cc  no  man  can  hold  contrary  to  his  knowledge,  or 
"  doubt  of  what  he  holds,  nor  change  and  innovate 
without  knowing  he  did  fo,  'tis  a  manifeft.  impof- 
fibility,  a  whole  church  fhould  in  any  age  fall  into 
an  abfurdity  fo.inconfiflent  with  the  nature  of  one 
P.  86.   •*  fingle   man.     And  fince  *  'tis  natural  for  every 
u  man  to  fpeak  truth,  and  grace  is  to  perfect  nature 
u  in  whatever  is  good  in  it,  it  follows  that  one  truly 
"  chriftian  heart  is  far  more  fixed  to  veracity,  than 
"  others  not  imbued  with  thefe  heavenly  tenets ;  and 
*'  confequendy  that  a  multitude  of  fuch  muft  incom- 
*c  parably  exceed  in  point  of  teftifying  the  fame  num- 
*c  ber  of  others,  unfortified  by  Christ's  doctrine." 
p.  sg.    And  fince  "  *  fuch  a  thought  cannot  enter  into  the 
*'  moft  depraved  nature,  as  to  harm  another  without 
"  any  good  to  himfelf,  and  yet  this  mufl  be  if  we 
put  chriftian  fathers  mif-teaching  their  children  un- 
received  doctrines  for  received  (and  I  hope  for  the 
M  fame  reafon,  received  doctrines  for  unreceived)  con- 
■  trary  to  their  knowledge.     For  fuppofing  fanctity 
<c  in   the   (Greek)  church  (and  why  may  we  not  as 
u  well  as  in  the  Latin)  that  is,  that  multitudes  in  it 
*  make  heaven  their  firfl  love,  and  look  on  fpiritual 

•c  goods, 


Tie  RULE  of  FAITH.  685 

c-  goods,  as  their  main  concern,  Sec.  it  follows,  that  s  ECT. 

u  had  tht  fathers  of  that  church,  in  any  age,  contented  ■ -\_j 

"  to  miflead  their  pofterity  from  what  themfelves  (not 
11  only)  conccitcd(but  knew)  to  be  true,  they  mould  do 
*c  the  moll  extreme  harm  imaginable  to  others  with- 
out any  the  lead  good  to  themfelves  :  which  is  per- 
haps impofTible  in  one  fmgJe  man,  more  in  few,  but 
infinitely  in  a  multitude,  efpecially  of  good  men.9* 
§  5.  Thus  I  might  apply  the  reft  of  his  ranting 
rhctorick  (but  that  I  am  weary  of  tranferibing  it) 
concerning  "  *  the  natural  love  of  parents  to  their  *  I*.  90^ 
cc  children"  (unlefs  we  fuppofe  the  Greek  church  de-^1- 
flitutc  of  it)  which  muft  needs  engage  them  to  ufe 
the  means  proper  to  bring  them  to  heaven,  and  fave 
them  from  hell  :  as  alfo  concerning  u  the  natural  care 
4C  men  have  of  not  lofing  their  credit  by  telling  per- 
"  nicious  lies.'3  And,  not  to  omit  the  befl  part  of 
his  demonftration  *  (which  was  therefore  prudently  *  P.  93; 
referved  to  the  lafl  place)  I  might  likewife  mew 
how  the  principles  of  each  fcience,  arithmetick 
geometry,  logick,  nature,  morality,  hiftorical  pru- 
dence, politicks,  metaphyfxeks,  divinity,  and  laft 
of  all  the  new  fcience  of  controverfy  (as  he  ca.lL  it) 
or  the  bleffed  art  of  eternal  wrangling  and  difput- 
*c  ing  (the  firft  principle  whereof  (he  tells  us)  isy  that 
<c  tradition  is  certain)  do  all  contribute  to  ihew  the 
u  certainty  of  tradition,"  that  is,  the  impoffibilicy 
that  any  part  of  Christ^s  doctrine  ihould  fail  in  the 
Greek  church  any  more  than  in  the  Latin.  And 
furely  arithmetick,  geometry,  logick,  natural  philo- 
fophy,  metaphyficks,  See.  will  ail  ffand  up  for  the 
Greek  church  in  this  quarrel  ;  for  confidering  that 
Greece  v/as  the  place  where  the  arts  and  fciences  were 
Vol.  IV.  7  E  born 


St 
€C 

IC 


686  The  RULE  of  FAITH. 

PART  born  and  bred,  it  is  not  to  be  imagined  that  they 
_,fhould  be  fo  difingenuous  and  unnatural,  as  not  to 
contribute  their  belt  afliftance  to  the  fervice  of  their 
country. 

§  6.  But  it  may  be  the  Greeks  cannot  fo  juftly  pre- 
tend to  oral  tradition  as  the  Latins.     What  if  St.  Pe- 
ter, the  head  of  the  apoftles,  thought  fit  to  fhare 
fcripture  and  tradition  between  theie  two  churches, 
and  laying  his  left  hand  on  the  Greek  church,  and  his 
right  on  the  Latin,  was  pleafed  to  confer  the  great 
blefling  of  oral  tradition    upon  the  Latin   church? 
which  being  to  be  the  feat  of  infallibilit)',  it  was  but 
fitting,  that  fhe  mould  be  furnifhed  with  this  infallible 
way  of  conveying  the  chriiiian  doctrine.     And  there- 
fore it   may  be,  that  as   the  fcriptures  of  the  new 
teftament  were  left  in  Greek,  fo  oral  tradition  was  de- 
livered down  only  in  Latin.     This,  I  confefs,  is  not 
altogether  without  lome  fhew  of  reafon :  Mr.  S.  may 
do  well  to  take  the  matter  into  his  deeper  confidera- 
tion  ;  he  hath  in  his  time  improved  as  weak  probabi- 
lities as  theie  into  lufty  demonstrations.     And  if  he 
could  but  demonftrate  this,  it  would  very  much  wea- 
ken the  force  of  this  inftance  of  the  Greek  church  : 
otherwife  (for  ought  I  feej  this  inflance  will  hold 
good  againft  him  •,  and  whatever  he  can  lay  for  the 
impolTibility  of  tradition's  failing  in  the  Latin  church, 
may  all  be  laid  of  the  Greek  church  \  if  he  will  but 
grant  inat  the  apoftles  preached  the  fame  doctrine  to 
them  both  •,  that  the  arguments  of  hope  and  fear 
which   this  doctrine  contains  in  it,  were  applied  as 
ftrongly  to  the  Greeks  as  to  the  Latins.     And  yet 
notwithstanding  all  this,  tradition  hath  plainly  failed 
in  the  Greek  church.     Let  him  now  aflign  the  age 

wherein 


The  RULE  of  FAITH.  687 

wherein  fo  vaft  a  number  of  men  confpired  to  leave  S  E  C  T. 
out  the  article  of  the  proceffion  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
and   fhew  how   it  was  pofiible  a  whole  age   could 
confpire  together  to  damn  their  pofterity,  or  how  the 
faith  of  immediate  forefathers  might  be  altered  with- 
out any  fuch  confpiracy,  and  we  are  ready  to  iatisfy 
him  how  the  doctrine  of  the  Latin  church  might  be 
corrupted  and  altered,  and  to  tell  him  punctually  in 
what  age  it  was  done.    And  until  he  do  this,  I  would 
intreat  him  to  trouble  us  no  more  with  thofe  canting 
queftions  (wherein  yet  the  whole  force  of  his  demon- 
ftration  lies).  How  is  it  pofiible  a  whole  age  fhould 
confpire  to  change  the  doctrine  of  their  forefathers  ? 
And  in  what  age  was  this  done  ?  For  if  it  be  reafon- 
able  to  demand  of  us,  in  order  to   the  overthrowing 
of  his  demonflration,    to  aflign   the   particular  age 
wherein  the  Latin  church  confpired  to  change  the  an- 
cient doctrine ;  with   the  fame  reafbn  we  require  of 
him,  in  order  to  the  maintaining  of  his  demonftra- 
tion,  to  name  the  particular  age  wherein  the  Greek 
church  confpired  to  alter  the  doctrine  of  Christ 
(which  was  undoubtedly  in  the  firft  age  truly  deli- 
vered to  them  by  the  apoftles)  and  alfo  to  fhew  from 
the  rational  force  and  ftrength  of  tradition,  how  it  is 
more  impoflible  for  the  whole  church  to  have  failed 
in  tranfmittihg  the  doctrine  of  Christ  down  to  us, 
or   to  have  confpired  to  the  altering  of  it,  than  for 
fuch  a  multitude  of  chriftians  as  is  the  vaft:  body  of 
the  Greek  church.     If  Mr.  S.  or  Mr.  White  fhew 
this,  they  do  fomething  5  otherwife,  I  muft  tell  them, 
that  unlefs  they  can  manage  thefe  pretty  things  they 
call  demonftrations  better,  they  muft  fhortly  either 
quit  their  reafon,  or  their  religion  -,  or  clfe  return  to 

7  E  2  the 


688  Tie  RULE  of  FAITH. 

V  A  R  T  the  honefl:  old  miwipftmus  of  the  infallibility  of  the 
church  from  an  extraordinary  and  immediate  afiiftance 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  :  or  (to  make  the  bufinefs  fhort, 
and  flop  ail  gaps  with  one  bufh)  come  over  to  the 
jefuits,  and  acknowledge  the  pope's  infallibility  both  in 
matters  of  faith  and  fact  -,  by  which  means  they  may 
reconcile  themfelves  to  him,  and  prevent  that  direful 
flroke  which  threatens  them  from  Rome,  and  is  ready 
to  cut  them  off  from  the  body  of  the  traditionary 
church.  And  thus  I  have  done  with  his  fir  ft  demon- 
flration  :  and  I  take  it  for  a  good  fign  that  the  popifh 
caufe  is  at  a  very  low  ebb,  whenfuchftuffas  thismufl 
be  called  demonftration. 

SECT.    VI. 

Mr.  S's     §  i.  T  Come  now  to  his  demon ftration  a  pqfteriorij 

demonftra-  |     which,   although  it  fall  of  it  felf  if  the  de- 

riori.         monftration  a  priori  rail,  yet  becaufe  it  hath  iome 

peculiar  abfurdities  of  its  own,  I  fhall  confider  it  by 

it  felf  as  well  as  with  relation  to  the  other. 

§  2.  Before  he  comes  to  lay  it  down  with  the 
grounds  of  it,  according  to  his  ufual  faihion,  he  pre- 
mifeth  fomething  as  yielded  by  proteftants,  which,  in 
his  fenfe,  no  proteftant  ever  granted.  Juft  fo  he 
dealt  with  us  before  concerning  the  fcriptures,  faying, 
"  that  by  them  the  proteftants  mufr  mean  unfenfed 
"  letters  and  characters."  But  let  us  fee  what  it  is. 
»  p  ^  «  *  That  this  demonftration  a  pofierioriy  feems  a 
*c  needlefs  endeavour  againft  the  proteftants,  who 
ct  yield  that  thofe  points  in  which  we  agree,  as  the 
*c  trinity,  incarnation,  &c.  came  down  by  this  way 
c<  of   tradition  :    and  this  (he  faith)  no  proteftant 

a  ever 


The  RULE  of  FAITH. 

«<  ever  denied."  And  then  he  asks,  <c  whether  the  S  E  C  T. 
"  fame  virtue  of  tradition  would  not  have  been  as  ^J1  - 
"  powerful  to  bring  down  other  points  in  which  we 
"  do  not  agree,  had  any  fuch  been  ?"  Now  if  he 
fpeak  any  thing  to  his  own  purpofe,  he  muft  fuppofe 
proteftants  to  yield  that  all  thofe  points  wherein  we 
are  agreed,  were  conveyed  down  to  us  foldy  by  oral 
tradition  without  writing  :  but  this  all  proteftants  de- 
ny. So  that  that  only  which  would  avail  his  caufe 
againft  us,  is  to  ffiew,  that  thofe  points  wherein  we 
differ,  have  not  only  come  down  to  us  by  oral  teach- 
ing, but  that  they  are  likewife  contained  in  fcripture, 
without  which,  we  fay,  we  can  have  no  fufficient  cer- 
tainty and  affurance  at  this  diftance,  that  they  were 
the  doctrine  of  Christ,  and  that  they  were  not  ei- 
ther totally  innovated,  or  elfe  corrupted  in  the  con- 
veyance from  what  they  were  at  firit.  And  if  he 
can  Ihew  this  concerning  any  point  in  difference, 
I  promife  to  yield  it  to  him. 

§  3.  I  come  now  to  his  demonftration,  which  I 
fhall  ict  down  in  his  own  words  with  the  principles 
upon  which  it  relies.  "  *  The  effect  then  we  will  *  p.  ~7) 
"  pitch  upon,  and  avow  to  be  the  proper  one  of  fuch  ?8- 
a  caufe,  is  the  prefent  perfuafion  of  traditionary 
chriftians  (or  catholicks)  that  their  Faith  hath  de- 
fended from  Christ  and  his  apoftles  uninterrup- 
tedly, v/hich  we  find  mod  firmly  rooted  in  their 
heart  ;  and  the  exiftence  of  this  perfuafion  we  af- 
firm to  be  impoffible  without  the  exiftence  of  tra- 
dition's ever  indeficiency  to  beget  it.  To  prove 
this,  I  lay  this  firft  principle,  that  age  which 
"  holds  her  faith  thus  delivered  from  the  apoftles, 
"  neither  can  itfelf  have  changed  any  thing  in  it,  nor 

"  know 


c: 

<c 


69o  The  RULE  of  FAITH. 

PART  <c  know  or  doubt  that  any  age  fince  the  apoftles 
, "  had  changed  or  innovated  therein.  The  fecond 
"  principle  fhall  be  this :  no  age  could  innovate 
"  any  thing,  and  withal  deliver  that  very  thing  to 
*'  pofterity  as  received  from  Christ  by  continual 
"  fucceflion."  The  fum  of  which  is  this,  that  be- 
caufe  a  prefent  multitude  of  chriflians  (viz.  the  Roman 
churchy  are  perfuaded,  that  Christ's  doctrine  hath 
defcended  to  them  folely  by  an  uninterrupted  oral 
tradition,  therefore  this  perfuafion  is  an  effect  which 
cannot  be  attributed  to  any  other  caufe  but  the  in- 
deficiency  of  oral  tradition.  For  if  neither  the  pre- 
fent age,  nor  any  age  before,  could  make  any  change 
or  innovation,  then  the  perfuafion  of  the  prefent 
age  is  a  plain  dcmonftration  that  this  doctrine  was 
always  the  fame,  and  confequently  that  tradition 
cannot  fail. 

§  4.  In  anfwer  to  this,  I  fhall  endeavour  to  make 
good  thefe  four  things. 

Firft,  that  thefe  principles  wholly  rely  upon  the 
truth  of  the  grounds  of  his  demonftration  a  priori. 

Secondly,  that  thefe  principles  are  not  fufficiently 
proved  by  him. 

Thirdly,  that  doctrines  and  practices,  which  muft 
be  acknowledged  to  have  been  innovated,  have  made 
the  fame  pretence  to  uninterrupted  tradition. 

Fourthly,  that  it  is  not  the  prefent  perfuafion  of 
the  church  of  Rome,  (whom  he  calls  the  traditio- 
nary chriftians)  nor  ever  was,  that  their  faith  hath 
defcended  to  them  folely  by  oral  tradition.  If  I  can 
now  make  good  thefe  four  things,  I  hope  his  de- 
monftration is  at  an  end. 

SECT. 


The  RULE  of  FAITH. 

SECT.    VII.. 

§  i.  'HpHAT  thefe  principles  wholly  rely  upon  T 

A  the  truth  of  the  grounds  of  his  demon-  anfwwIL 
ftration  a  priori.  For  if  the  doctrine  of  Christ  ^is  iccond 
was  either  imperfectly  taught  in  any  age,  or  mi£  doa.0* 
taken  by  the  learners,  or  any  part  of  it  forgotten  (as 
it  feems  the  whole  Greek  church  have  forgot  that 
fundamental  point  of  the  proceflion  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  as  the  Roman  church  accounts  it)  or  if  the 
arguments  of  hope  and  fear  be  not  neceflary  caufes 
of  actual  will  to  adhere  to  tradition,  then  there  may 
have  been  changes  and  innovations  in  any  age,  and 
yet  men  may  pretend  to  have  followed  tradition. 
But  I  have  fhewn,  that  ignorance,  and  negligence, 
and  miftake,  and  pride,  and  luft,  and  ambition,  and 
any  other  vice  or  intereff,  may  hinder  thofe  caules 
from  being  effectual  to  preferve  tradition  entire  and 
uncorrupted.  And  when  they  do  fo,  it  is  not  to 
be  expected  that  thofe  perfons  who  innovate  and 
change  the  doctrine,  fhould  acknowledge  that  their 
new  doctrines  are  contrary  to  the  doctrine  of 
Christ  *,  but  that  they  fhould  at  firft  advance  them 
as  pious,  and  after  they  have  prevailed  and  gained 
general  entertainment,  then  impudently  affirm  that 
they  were  the  very  doctrines  which  Christ  deli- 
vered -,  which  they  may  very  fecurely  do,  when 
they  have  it  in  their  power  to  burn  all  that  fhall 
deny  it. 

§2.1  will  give  a  clear  inftance  of  the  poffibility 
of  tins  in  the  doctrine  of  tranfubffantiation,  by 
Ihewing  how  this  might  eafily  come  in3  in  the  ninth 

or 


The  RULE  of  FAITH. 

cr  tenth  age  after  Christ.  We  will  fuppofe  then 
that  about  this  time,'  when  univerfal  ignorance, 
and  the  genuine  daughter  of  it  (call  her  devotion  or 
fuperflition)  had  overfpread  the  world,  and  the  ge- 
nerality of  people  were  ftrongly  inclined  to  believe 
flrange  things  •>  and  even  the  greateft  contradictions 
were  recommended  to  them  under  the  notion  of 
myfleries,  being  told  by  their  priefls  and  guides, 
that  the  more  contradictious  any  thing  is  to  reafon, 
the  greater  merit  there  is  in  believing  it :  I  fay,  let 
us  fuppofe,  that  in  this  (late  of  things  one  or  more 
of  the  moil  eminent  then  in  the  church,  either 
out  of  defign,  or  out  of  fuperilitious  ignorance  and 
miflake  of  the  fenfe  of  our  Saviour's  words  ufed 
In  the  confecration  of  the  facrament,  fhould  advance 
this  new  doctrine,  that  the  words  of  confecration, 
*•  this  is  my  body,"  are  not  to  be  underflood  by 
any  kind  of  trope  (as  the  like  forms  in  fcripture  are, 
"  as  I  am  the  vine,  I  am  the  door,"  which  are  plain 
tropes)  but  being  ufed  about  this  great  myflery  of 
the  facrament  ought  in  all  reafon  to  be  fuppofed 
to  contain  in  them  fome  notable  myflery  ;  which 
they  will  do,  if  they  be  underflood  of  a  real  change 
of  the  fubftance  of  bread  and  wine,  made  by  virtue 
of  thefe  words,  into  the  real  body  and  blood  of 
.  our  Saviour;  and  in  all  this,  I  fuppofe  nothing 
but  what  is  fb  far  from  being  impofTible,  that  it  is 
too  ufual  for  men,  either  out  of  ignorance  or  inte- 
refl,  to  advance  new  opinions  in  religion.  And 
fuch  a  doctrine  as  this  was  very  likely  to  be  advan- 
ced by  the  ambitious  clergy  of  that  time,  as  a  pro- 
^  bablc  means  to  draw  in  the  people  to  a  greater  vene- 

fca.  4.'  "  ration  of  them  j  which  advantage  Mr.  Rufhworth  * 

feema 


the  RULE  of  FA  IT 'H.  693 

fcems    to  be    very  fenfible  of,    when    -he  tells  us,  SEC  r. 

...  v  1 

that  the  power  of  the  priefl  in  this  particular  "  is.^_  _^j 

'**  fuch  a  privilege,  as  if  all  the  learned  clerks  that 
"  ever  lived  fince  the  beginning  of  the  world  fhould 
"  have  ftudied  to  raife,  advance,  and  magnify  ibme 
"  one  ftate  of  men  to  the  higheft  pitch   of  reve- 
"  rence  and  eminency,  they  could  never  (without 
«'  fpecial  light  from  heaven)   have  thought  of  any 
"  thing  comparable  to  this."     I  am  of  his  mind, 
that  it  was  a  very  notable  device,  but  (I  am  apt  to 
think)  invented  without  any  fpecial  light  from  hea- 
ven.    Nor  was  fuch    a  doctrine  lets  likely  to  take 
and  prevail  among  the  people  in   an  age  prodigi- 
oufly  ignorant,  and  ftrongly  inclined  to  fuperfiition, 
and  thereby   well    prepared  to  receive   the  groffefl 
abfurdities' under  the  notion  of  myfteries  ;  especially 
if  they    were  .fuch  as  might  feem   to    conciliate   a 
greater    honour   and    reverence    to    the   facrament. 
Now  fuppofing  fuch  a  doctrine  as  this,  fo  fitted  to 
the -humour  and  temper  of  the  age,  to  be  once  af- 
ferted,  either  by  chance  or  out  of  defign,   it  would 
take   like   wildfire ;   efpecially   if  by   feme  one   or 
more  who  bore  fway   in    the  church,    it  were  but 
recommended  with  convenient  gravity  and  fbiemni- 
ty.     And  although  Mr.  Rufhworth  fays,  "  *  it  is*  D1VJ.3, 
"  impoffible  that  the  authority  of  one  man  mould  cc '  7* 
"  fway  fo  much    in   the  world,    becaufe  (lays  he) 
"  furely  the  devil   himfelf    would  rather   help  the 
"  church,  than  permit  fo  little  pride  amor-;  men|" 
yet   I  am  not  fo  thoroughly  fatisned  with  this  cun- 
ning reafon  :  for  though  he  delivers  it  confidently, 
and  "with  a  furely,  yet  I  make  ibme  doubt  whether 
the  devil  would  be  fo  forward  to  help  the  church  > 
Vol.  IV.  7  F  nay, 

5- 


694  Me  RULE  of  FAITH. 

P  A  R  T  nay,  on  the  contrary,  I  am  inclined  to  think  that 
IJL  i  he  would  rather  choofe  to  connive  at  this  humble 
and  obfequious  temper  in  men,  in  order  to  the 
overthrow  of  religion,  than  crofs  a  defign  fo  dear  to 
him  by  unfeafonable  temptations  to  pride  :  fo  that 
notwithstanding  Mr.  Rufhworth's  reafon,  it  feems 
very  likely  that  fuch  a  doctrine,  in  fuch  an  age, 
might  eafily  be  propagated  by  the  influence  and  au- 
thority of  one  or  a  few  great  perfons  in  the  church. 
For  nothing  can  be  more  fuitable  to  the  eafy  and 
paflive  temper  of  fuperftitious  ignorance,  than  to 
entertain  fuch  a  doctrine  with  all  imaginable  gree- 
dinefs,  and  to  maintain  it  with  a  proportionable  zeal. 
And  if  there  be  any  wifer  than  the  reft,  who  make 
objections  againft  it,  as  if  this  doctrine  were  new 
and  full  of  contradictions,  they  may  eafily  be  born 
down  by  the  ftream,  and  by  the  eminency,  and 
authority,  and  pretended  fanctity  of  thole  who  arc 
the  heads  of  this  innovation.  And  when  this  doc- 
trine is  generally  fwallowed,  and  all  that  oppofe  it 
are  looked  upon  and  punifhed  as  hereticks,  then  it 
is  feafonable  to  maintain  that  this  doctrine  was 
the  doctrine  of  forefathers  ;  to  which  end  it  will  be 
fufHcient  to  thofe  who  are  willing  to  have  it  true, 
to  bend  two  or  three  fayings  of  the  ancients  to  that 
purpofe.  And  as  for  the  contradictions  contained 
in  this  doctrine,  it  was  but  telling  the  people  then 
(as  they  do  in  effect  now)  that  contradictions  ought 
to  be  no  fcruple  in  the  way  of  faith  ;  that  the  more 
impoffible  any  thing  is,  'tis  the  fitter  to  be  believ- 
ed ;  that  it  is  not  praife-worthy  to  believe  plain 
poflibilities,  but  that  this  is  the  gallantry  and  heroi- 
cal  power  of  faith,  this  is  the  way  to  oblige  God 

almighty 


The  RULE  of  F AIT II  b95 

almighty  for  ever  to  us,  to  believe  flat  and  down-  SECT, 
right  contradictions :  "  for  God  requires  at  the  ,  Jrl_  _j 
"  people's  hands  (as  Mr.  Ruihworth  *  tells  us)  a* Dial.  i. 
11  credulity  of  things  above  and  beyond  nature  ;  nay,  *e^-4- 
"  beyond  all  tht  fables,  be  it  fpoken  with  refpect, 
"  that  ever  man  invented."  After  this  doctrine 
had  proceeded  thus  far,  and  by  the  mod  inhumane 
feverities  and  cruelties  fupprefs'd  diffenters,  or  in  a 
good  meafure  rooted  them  out ;  then,  if  they  pleafe, 
even  this  new  word  tranfubftantiation  may  pretend 
alio  to  antiquity,  and  in  time  be  confidently  vouch- 
ed for  a  word  ufed  by  chriftians  in  all  ages,  and 
tranfmitted  down  to  them  by  thofe  from  whom 
they  received  the  doctrine  of  the  facrament  as  a 
term  of  art  appendant  to  it.  And  when  a  fuper- 
ftitious  church  and  defigning  governors  have  once 
gained  this  pofr,  and  by  means  of  this  enormous 
article  of  tranfubftantiation  have  fufrkiently  debauch- 
ed the  minds  of  men,  and  made  a  breach  m  their 
underftandings  wide  enough  for  the  entertaining  of 
any  error,  though  ever  fo  grofs  and  fenflefs  j  then 
innovations  come  in  amain,  and  by  moles  *  and  the 
more  abfurd  and  unreafonable  any  thing  is,  it  is 
for  that  very  reafon  the  more  proper  matter  for  an 
article  of  faith.  And  if  any  of  thefe  innovations  be 
objected  againft,  as  contrary  to  former  belief  and 
practice,  it  is  but  putting  forth  a  lufty  act  of  faith 
and  believing  another  contradiction,  that  though 
they  be  contrary,  yet  they  are  the  fame. 

§  3.  And  there  is  nothing  in  all  this  but  what  is 
agreeable  both  to  hiitory  and  experience.  For  that 
the  ninth  and  tenth  ages,  and  thofe  which  followed 
them  till  the  reformation,  were  thus  prod  igioufiy  igno- 

7  F  2  rant 


696  Tie  RULE  of  FAITH. 

r  rant  and  fuperftitious,  is  confirmed  by  the  unanimous 
confcnt   of   all  hiftories  •,   and   even   by  thofe   wri- 
ters, that  have  been  the  greater!;  pillars  of  their  own 
religion.     And  experience  tells  us,  that  in  what  age 
foever  there  are  a  great  company  of  fuperftitious  peo- 
ple, there  will  never  be  wanting  a  few  crafty  fellows 
to  make  ufe  of  this  eafy  and  pliable  humour  to  their 
own  ends.    Now  that  this  was  the  (late  of  thofe  ages 
of  the  church,  will  be  evident  to  any  from  thefe  teiti- 
■;:  Tn  vit.    monies.     Platina  *  writes  of  pope  Romanus,  that  he 
Rom  mi    nu]}»j  the  acts  of  his  predeceflor  Stephanus :  "  for 
A.C.goa  "  (S^YS  ne)  ^az&  popes  minded  nothing  elfe  but  how 
"  they  might  extinguifh  both  the  name  and  dignity 
<c  of  their  predecefTors."     And  if  fo,  who  can  doubt 
but  that  thefe  popes  who  made  it  their  bufinefs  to  de- 
fcroy  the  very  memory  of  their  anceftors,  would  be 
very  little  careful  to  preferve  the  doctrine  of  forefa- 
thers.    Bat  what  the  care  of  thofe  times  was  in  this 
particular,  may  be  conjectured  from  what  Onuphrius 

*  In  Fla-  *  fays  by  way  of  confutation  of  that  pafiage  in  Pla- 
tm*  tina,    concerning  pope  Joan's  reading  publickly  at 

R.ome  at  her  nrii  coming  thither.  "  This  (fays  he) 
u  is  utterly  falfe,  for  there  was  nothing  that  they  were 
cc  lefs  folicitous  about  in  thofe  times,  than  to  furnifh 
"  the  city  with  any  publick  teachers."  And  the  time 
which  Onuphriu  f,  was  much  about  the  be- 

*  Anno    ginning  >f  the  tzi:th  century,     Phil.  Bargomenfis  * 
9°^*         fays,  "  it  happened   in  that  age,  through  the  fioth- 

"  fuinefs  of  men,  that  there  was  a  general  decay  of 
"  virtue  both  in  the  head  and  members."     Again, 

*  Anno     "  *  thefe  times,  through  the  ambition  and  cruel  tyran- 

?°8'        *«  ny  of  the  popes,  were  extremely  unhappy — for  the 

*  oopes  fetting  afide  the  fear  of  God  and  his  wor- 

Jh 


7he  RULE  of  FAITH.  697 

cc  fhip,  fell  into  fuch  enmities  among  themfelves  as  SEC  t. 
*c  cruel  tyrants  exercife  towards  one  another."     Sa-  ^-^J^ 
bellicus  *  fays,  "  it  is  wonderful  to  obferve  what  a  *  Ennead 
4<  ftrange  forgetfulnefs  of  all  arts  did  about  this  time  9-l.i.uim 
"  feize  upon  men  •,  infomuch  that  neither  the  popes,  9 
"  nor  other  princes,  feemed  to  have  any  lenfe  or  ap- 
u  prehenfion  of  any  thing  that  might  be  uftful  to 
*c  humane  life.     There  were  no  wholibm  laws,  no 
"  reparations  of  churches,  no  purfuit  of  liberal  arts  5 
"  but  a  kind  of  ftupidity  and  madnefs,  and  forgetful- 
"  nefs  of  manners  had  pofiefled  the  minds  of  men." 
And  a  little  after,  "  I  cannot  (fays  he)  but  much  won- 
"  der  from  whence  thefe  tragical  examples  of  popes 
<c  mould  fpring  -,  and  how  their  minds  ihouid  come 
"  to  be  fo  devoid  of  all  piety,  as  neither  to  regard 
"  the  perfon  which  they  fuftained,  nor  the  place  they 
"  were  in.'3     Sigonius  *  fpeaking  of    thefe  times,  *  De  reg. 
about   the    beginning  of    the  tenth    century,    calls Ital-  *•  6- 
them  "  die  foulell  and    blackefl,  both  in  reipect  of 
the  wickednefs  of  princes,  and  the  madnefs  of  the 
people  that  are  to  be  found  in  all  antiquity.5'    Ge- 
nebrard  *  fpeaking  of  the  fame   time  :    "  this  (fays  *  chron. 
he)  is  called  the  unhappy  age  ;  being  deftitute  of  1- 4. 
men  eminent  for  wit  and  learning,  as  alio  of  fa- 
mous princes  and  popes.     In  this  time  there  was 
fcarce  any  thing  done  worthy  to  be  remembred  by 
pofterity."     And  he  adds  afterwards,  "  but  chiefly 
unhappy  in  this  one  thing,  that  for  almofl  an  hun- 
dred and  fifty  years  together,  about  fifty  popes  did    - 
utterly  degenerate  from  the  virtue  of  their  ancef- 
tors."     He  fhould  have  added  farther,  but  even  to 
a  miracle  happy  in  another  refpecl:,  that  during  this 
long  and  total  degeneracy  from  the  piety  and  virtue 

of 


69g  tt*  RULE  of  FAITH. 

PART  of  their  anceftors,  they  did  not  in  the  lead  fwerve 

vL/-^j  from  them  in  matter  of  faith  and  doctrine  :  a  thing 

incredible,  were  there  not  demonftration  for  it.  Wer- 

*  Fafcic.  ner  *  gives  this  character  of  that  time ;  "  about  the 
tempor.     cc  vear  0f  our  Lord  one  thoufand  there  began  an 

"  effeminate  time,"  in  which  the  chriflian  faith  be- 
"  gan  to  degenerate  exceedingly,  and  to  decline  from 
"  its  ancient  vigour  \  infomuch  that  in  many  coun- 
cc  tries  of  chriftendom,  neither  facraments  nor  eccle- 
w  fiaftical  rites  were  obferved — And  people  were  gi- 
<c  ven  to  ibothfaying  and  witchcraft,  and  the  prieft 
"  was  like  the  people. "  It  feems  by  this  teftimony, 
that  tradition  did  falter  a  little  in  that  age,  elfe  the 
chriflian  faith  could  not  pofiibly  have  degenerated 
and  declined  fo  very  much  :  and  (which  threatens 
Mr.  S's  demonftration  moft  of  all)  cC  that  the  pracli- 
"  cal  tradition  of  facraments,  and  other  ecclefiaftical 
«'  obfervances,  did  fai.1  in  many  chriflian  countries." 

*  Epift.    Gerbert  *,   who  lived  in  that  time,  gives  this  fhort 
4°*  character  of  the  Roman  church,  in  an  epiflle  of  his 

to  Stephen,  deacon  of  that  church,  u  the  world  flands 
M  amazed  at  the  manners  of  Rome."  But  moft  full 
is  the  complaint  of  a  great  prelate  of  the  church  *  con- 
facr.  1.  i .  cerning  thofe  times ;  "  in  the  weft  (Tays  he)  and  al- 
c.S.  «  moft  all  the  world  over  (efpecially  among  thofe 
cC  who  were  called  the  faithful)  faith  failed,  and  there 
"  was  no  fear  of  God  among  them:  (it  feems  the  ar- 
<c  gument  of  fear  had  loft  its  force)  juftice  was  pe- 
"  rimed  from  among  men,  and  violence  prevailing 
"  againft  equity  governed  the  nations.  Fraud,  de- 
"  ceit,  and  the  arts  of  cozenage  were  grown  univer- 
"  fal.  All  kind  of  virtue  gave  way  as  an  ufelefs 
cc  thing,  and  wickednefs  fupplied  its  place.     The 

i€  world 


The  RUL  E  of  FAITH.  699 

u  world  feemed  to  be  declining  apace  towards  its  yjj 
<c  evening,  and  the  fecond  coming  of  the  fon  of  man  v— -v— > 
"  to  draw  near  :  for  love  was  grown  cold,  and  faith 
u  was  not  found  upon  earth.  All  things  were  in 
"  confufion,  and  the  world  looked  as  if  it  would  re- 
<c  turn  to  its  old  chaos. — All  forts  of  fornication 
<c  were  committed  with  the  fame  freedom  as  if 
"  they  had  been  lawful  actions ;  for  men  neither 
M  blufhed  at  them,  nor  were  punifhed  for  them. 
**  — Nor  did  the  clergy  live  better  than  the  people. 
«  — For  the  bifhops  were  grown  negligent  of  the 
«c  duty  of  their  place,  &c.  In  a  word,  men  ran  them- 
cc  felves  headlong  into  all  vice,  and  all  flefh  had  cor- 
"  rupted  its  way."  And  farther,  to  fhew  the  great 
neglect  of  priefts  and  bifhops  in  the  work  of  teaching 
and  inftructing  (which  is  fo  necefTary  to  the  preferr- 
ing of  tradition  inviolable)  I  will  add  the  teftimonyof 
one  *  who  lived  in  thofe  times;  who  tells  us,  "  that  *  Elfr'c- 
"  in  thofe  days  the  priefts  and  bifhops,  who  ought  to  fccTrdot. 
u  have  been  the  pillars  of  the  church,  were  fo  negli- 
"  gent  that  they  did  not  mind  the  divine  fcripture  ; 
"  nor  take  any  care  to  teach  and  inftruct  fcholars  that 
<c  might  fucceed  them,  as  we  read  holy  men  had  ufed 
"  to  do,  who  left  many  fcholars  perfectly  inftructed 
"  to  be  their  fuccefTors."  If  they  had  only  neglected 
the  fcriptures,  all  might  have  been  well  enough  j  but  it 
feemsthey  took  no  care  to  inftruct  people  "  in  the  way 
u  of  oral  tradition,  not  to  furnifh  the  church  with  a  new 
«c  generation  of  able  teachers,  who  might  deliver  down 
•<  from  hand  to  hand  the  fenfe  and  faith  of  forefathers." 
This  laft  teftimony  the  late  learned  lord  primate  of  Ire- 
land, bifhop  Ufher  (inrhis  book  de  chriftian,  ecckf.fuc- 
cejft  6cc»  *  where  feveral  of  theteftimonies  I  have  pro-  *  c.  2.  & 

duced, 3* 


y:0  The  RULE  of  FAITH 

P  A  R  T  duced,  with  many  more  to  the  fame  purpofe,  may  b£ 
nI*  feen)  cites  out  of  a  MS.  in  Bennet  college  library  in 
Cambridge  ;  concerning  the  authority  of  which  MS. 
there  need  be  no  difpute  between  Mr.  S.  and  me  •,  be- 
caufe  the  wliole  force  and  effect  of  this  teftimony  is 
fufficiently  contained  in  thofe  citations  which  I  have 
brought  out  of  publick  and  unqueftionable  books. 

§  4.  All  thefe  testimonies  which  I  have  produced 
are,  in  general  and  for  the  fubflance  of  them,  con- 
firmed by  two  of  the  greater!  props  of  the  Romifh 
^  „      church,  Bellarmine  and  Baronius.     Bellarmine  *  fays 
pcntif.  1.4.  of  this  tenth  age,  "  that  there  was  never  any  either 
c.  12.       cc  more  unlearned  or  more  unhappy.  Baronius  ipeaks 
*  Annal.   *  more  particularly  •,  "  what  was  then  the  face  of  the 
torn.  10.   u  Roman  church  ?    how  deformed  ?    when  whores, 
anno  900.  u  ^  ^  powerful  than  vile,  bore  the  chief  fway   at 
"  Rome  ;   and  at  their  pleafure  changed   fees,  ap- 
"  pointed  bifhops  •,  and  (which  it  is  horrible  to  men- 
*c  tion)  did  thruft  into  St.  Peter's  fee  their  own  gal- 
4'  lants,  falie  popes,  who  would  not  have  been  men- 
«  tioned  in  the  catalogue  of  the  Roman  popes,    but 
"  only  for  the  more  difcincl  recording  of  fo  long  a 
rt  fucceflion  of  times."  And  a  little  after,  "Christ 
"  was  then  (it  feems)  in  a  very  deep  deep— And 
*c  which  was  worfe  \  when  the  Lord  was  thus  afleep 
cc  there  were  no  difciples  to  awaken  him,  being  them- 
"  felves  all  fait   afleep.     What    kind  of  cardinals, 
u  presbyters,  and  deacons,  can  we  think  were  cholen 
"  by  thefe  monfters,  when  nothing  is  fo  natural  as  for 
<c  every  one  to  propagate  his  own   likenels  ?"     It  is 
very  much  that  thefe  lewd  women,  and  their  favourite 
popes,  cardinals,    and  bifhops,  who  then  fwaved  the 
church,  fhould,  when  they  were  fo  carelefs  of  their 

own 


The  RULE  of  FA  ITH.  701 

own  fouls,  be  fo  tender  of  the  falvation  of  pofterity  ;  S  E  C  T. 
and  when  they  adminidred  all  other  affairs  of  the  v^^l^ 
church  fo  extravagantly,  mould  be  fo  careful  of  the 
main  chance,  as  to  tranfmit  the  chridian  doctrine  en- 
tire and  uncorrupted  to  fucceeding  ages.  Yet  Mr.  S. 
hath  demondrated  this  a  pqfieriori,  which  feems  fo 
very  ftrange  to  a  man  that  confiders  things  a  priori. 

§5.  But  it  may  be  this   difmal  date  of  the  Ro- 
man   church  laded   but  a  little  while  ;  and  fhe  did 
in  the  fame  age,  before  tradition  could  be  interrupted, 
recover  herielf  out  of  this   degenerate    condition. 
I  will  therefore  enquire  a  little  into  the  irate  of  fuc- 
ceeding times.     And  I  find  in  the  thirteenth  century, 
St.  Bernard  *  complaining,  that   the  degeneracy   of  *  In  con- 
the  priefts  was   in  his  days  greater  than  ever ;  rt  we  pluii 
<c  cannot  (fays  he)  now  fay,  as  is  the  people  fo   is  term.  1. 
"  the  pried ;  for  the  people  are  not  fo  bad  as  their 
*•  priefts."     In  the   fifteenth    century,  Nic.  de  Cle- 
mangiis,  who  lived  in  that  time,  wrote  a  book  upon 
this  argument,  "  of  the  corrupt  date  of  the  church  j'* 
by  which  we  may  make  fome  judgment  whether  in 
that   age  it  was  (as  Mr.  S.  fays)  impoflible  but  that 
the  chriftian  doctrine  mould  be  entirely  preferved, 
and    faithfully    and    diligently    taught.     He   fays, 
"  *  there  was  an  univerfal  degeneracy  in  the  church,  *  C.  3 
<c  from  the  very  head  of  it  to  its  lowed  members.5' 
In   the  fame  chapter  he   complains,  a  who  is  there 
"  that  preaches    the    gofpel   to    the  people?    who 
<fl  Ihews  them  the   way  to  falvation  either  by  word 
"  or  action  ?  "    It   feems  there  was   a  great  failure 
both  of  oral  and  practical  tradition.     Again  *,  (peak-  *  C.  5, 
ing  of  the  pope's  taking  to  hirnfelfthe  collation  of  all 
vacant     bimopricks    and    dignities-,    he  fays,    one 

Vol.  IV.  7  G  mighc 


7t>2  The  RULE  of  FAITH. 

PART,  might  think  the  pope  did  this,  "  that  the  church 
,L_^  '  _i  u  might  be  provided  of  worthier  governors,  both 
"  in  I'clpedt  of  their  learning,  and  their  lives,  did 
"  not  the  thing  itfelf  declare  the  contrary,  and  that 
"  ignorant  and  uielefs  perfons  (provided   they   had 
**  money)  were  by  fimony  advanced  to  the  higheft 
*  C.  6.    *t  degrees  in  the  church."     And  *  fpeaking  what  a 
vaft  number  of  candidates  there  was  ufually  at  Rome 
from  all  parts  waiting  for  benefices  and  dignities,  he 
tells  us,  "  that  many  of  thefe  did  not  come  from 
44  their  ftudies,  or  from  fchools  of  learning,  to  go- 
"  vern  parifhes ;  but  from  the  plow,  and  from  the 
**  meaneft  profefiions :    and   that  they  underftood 
**  Latin  and  Arabick  much  at  the  fame  rate  •,  and 
"  many  of  them  could  not  read  at  all.     But  it  may 
44  be  (fays  he)  their  manners  were  fuch  as  might  be 
44  fome  excufe   for  their  ignorance.     No;    though 
44  their  learning  was  but  little,  their  virtue  was  lefs ; 
44  for  being    brought   up  in  idlenefs,  they  followed 
44  nothing  but  debauchery  and  fports,  &c.  Hence 
*'  it  comes  to  pafs,  that  in  all  places    there  are  lb 
44  many  wicked,  and  wretched,  and  ignorant  priefts  — 
•*  Hence   it  is  that  priefts  are   fo   contemned    by 
44  the  common   people. — Formerly  the  priefthood 
41  was  highly  honoured  by  the  people,  and  nothing 
44  was  more  venerable  than  that  order  of  men  ;  but 

*  r         41  now  nothing  is  more  vile  and  defpicable. —  *  I 

"  make  no  doubt,  but  there  are  now  more  thieves 
44  and  robbers,    than    true   pallors  in  the  church. 

*  C.  ii.    ^  — *  Why   mould   any  man  now  flatter  himfelf 

46  with  hopes  of  preferment,  becaufe  of  his  virtue 
44  or   learning  ?    Men   do   not  now    (as  formerly) 

*  C.  13.  f<  rife  in  the  church  by  fuch  arts  m     ■  ■■*  Which  of 

"  thofc 


The  RULE  of  FAITH.  703 

*'  thofe  that  are  now-a-days  advanced  to  the  pontifical  SECT* 
"  dignity,  hath  fo  much  as  perfunctorily  read,  or  ■_«-v-  _j 
"  heard,  or  learnt  the  fcriptures;  yea,  or  ever 
"  touched  any  more  than  the  cover  of  the  bible  ?  " 
Again,  *  fpeaking  of  the  prodigious  covetoufnefs  of*  q  t. 
the  governors  of  the  church,  and  the  grofs  neglect 
of  their  flocks,  "  they  would  (fays  he)  much  more 
"  contentedly  bear  the  lofs  of  ten  thoufand  fouls, 
M  than  of  ten  or  twelve  millings.  But  why  do 
"  I  fay  more  contentedly?  when  without  the 
"  lead  trouble  or  disturbance  to  themfelves,  they 
"  can  bear  the  lofs  of  fouls ;  a  thing  fo  far  from 
"  their  care,  that  it  never  enter'd  into  their  thoughts." 
Had  the  hereticks  of  thofe  days  but  had  wit  enough, 
and  a  little  money,  they  might  (it  ieems)  for  a 
fmall  fum  have  hired  the  governors  of  the  church  to 
have  renounced  tradition,  or  to  have  ceafed  to  pro- 
pagate it ;  though  they  had  known  that  in  fo  doing 
they  fhould  have  damned  all  their  pofterity.  Ha 
goes  on,  and  tells  us,  «'  that  if  there  were  perhaps 
46  any  one  who  did  not  take  thefe  courfes,  the  reft 
"  would  fnarl  at  him,  call  him  fool,  and  fay 
"  he  was  un6t  to  be  a  pried,  —  So  that  the  ftudy 
of  the  fcriptures  (together  with  the  profeflbrs  of 
it)  was  turned  into  laughter  and  fcorn  by  all  •,  but 
(which  is  prodigious)  efpecially  by  the  popes, 
who  prefer  their  own  tradition  many  degrees  bc- 
*c  fore  the  commands  of  God/*  I  defire  Mr.  S. 
to  take  notice  in  what  kind  of  times  tradition  was 
fet  up  againft  fcripture.  Again,  *  fpeaking  of  the#p  g 
choice  of  perfons  to  be  priefls,  he  tells  us,  "  that 
"  there  was  no  enquiry  made  into  their  Jives, 
"  no  queftion  about  their  manners.     As  for  their 

7  G  Z  "  learning 


u 


704  7be  RULE* of  FJITH. 

P  A  R  T  "  learning  (fays  he)  what  need   I  fpeak  o  f  that  ? 

Lgmt^^mmm^  "  when  we  fee  the  priefts,  almoft  univerfally,  have 
"  much  ado  to  read,  though  but  in  an  hefi  taring 
tc  and  fpelling  famion,  drawing  out  one  fyllable  af- 
<c  ter  another,  without  underftanding  either  the 
cc  fenfe  of  what  they  read,  or  the  words."  I  am 
now  reconciled  to  oral  tradition,  and  convinced  that 
there  was  great  need  of  it  in  thofe  ages  in  which 
fcarce  any  of  the  priefts  could  either  write  or   read. 

*  C.  20,  I  omit  the   particulars  of  what  he  fays,  "  *  con- 
%li  23*     "  cerning  the   common   drunkennefs  and  inconti- 

"  nency  of  priefts,  who  (becaufe  they  made  con- 
"  fcience  of  marriage)  kept  whores  in  their  houfes  •, 
"  concerning  the  difiblute  lives  of  monks*,  and  con- 
*'  cerning  nunneries,  which  inftead  of  being  the 
"  fancluaries  of  God,  were  the  abominable  flews 
"  of  Venus,  and  the  receptacles  of  lafcivious  young 
*'  men  j"  infomuch  (fays  he)  "  that  at  this  day 
"  it  is  the  fume  thing  to  put  a  virgin  into  a  nunnery, 
"  and  to  make  her  a  common  ftrtM»pet.M  And  to 
fhew  that  he  does  not  fpeak  thefe  things  of  a  few,  but 
with  relation  to  the  general  corruption  of  that  age, 

*  C.  27.    ne  ^ds,  "  *  that  wickednefs  did    fo  abound    in   all 

fc;  orders  of  men,  that  fcarce  one  among  a  thou- 
"  fand  was  to  be  found  who  did  truly  live  up  to  his 
*f  profelTion  :  and  if  there  was  any  one  that  did  not 
•i  follow  thefe  lewd  courfes,  he  became  ridiculous  to 
•*  others,  and  was  branded  either  as  an  infolcnt  fin- 
ft  gular  madman,  or  an  hypocrite."  I  will  con-- 
elude  this  long  teftimony  with  the  character  which 

*  C.  26.    he  gives  *  of  one  of  the  popes  of  his  time,  Clement 

by  name,  viz.  If  That  he  did  chiefly  apply  himfelf 
*  to  gratify  and  oblige  all  the  parafites  and  buf- 
foons 


7he  RULE  of  FAI TH.  y0g 

"  foons  that  had  any  intereft  in  the  feveral  courtsSECT. 
"  of  princes :  and  to  this  end,  did  confer  upon  thefe,  ^^^^^ 
"  and  upon  handfom  young  hoys  (which  he  much 
"  delighted  in)  almoll:  all  the  vacaat  bifhopricks,  and 
a  moil  of  die  other  church  dignities."  It  is  well  that 
oral  tradition  hath  the  fecurity  of  infallibility,  other- 
wife  it  had  in  all  probability  been  loft  among  this 
lewd  fort  of  people,  which  yer  they  gravely  call 
the  holy  roman  catholick  church. 

§  6.  To  this  effect  I  might  have  produced  tefti- 
monies  cencerning  every  age  from  the  ninth  to 
the  fixteenth  -,  but  Mr.  CrefTy  hath  faved  me  that 
labour,  who  acknowledges,  c<  *  that  thefe  worft*  Fxomo- 
"  times  of  the  church,  when  ignorance,  worldlinefs, i0g* c*  °°* 
pride,  tyranny,  &c.  reigned  with  fo  much  fcope ; 
when  the  popes  (fo  wicked,  fo  abominable  in  their 
lives)  enjoyed  fo  unlimited  a  power  even  over  ie- 
cular  princes  themfelves,  and  much  more  over  the 
clergy :"  I  fay,  he  acknowledges  that  theie  word 
times  continued  during  the  fpace  of  about  fix  ages 
before  Luther :  a  competent  time  (one  would  think) 
for  tradition  to  have  mifcarried  in,  were  it  not  (as 
Mr.  S.  fays)  indefectible.  Mr.  Crefiy  indeed  tells 
us,  "  *  that  this  was  to  him  an  irrefragable  teftimo-  *  i^ 
u  ny  of  a  ftrange  watchfulnefs  of  divine  provi- 
*c  dence  over  the  church,  to  preferve  it  from  the 
"  gates  of  hell  (that  is,  eftablifhed  and  dangerous 
<;  errors)  during  thefe  worft  times.*9  And  very 
likely  it  is  that  this  might  appear  fo  to  fuch  a  ca- 
tholick, M  whofe  judgment,  he  tells  us,  it  is  to 
"  renounce  his  own  judgment :"  but  it  will  never 
appear  irrefragable  to  any  man  that  hath  his  judg- 
ment about  him,  unlefs  Mr.  CreiTy  can  prove,  that 

by 


CI 
it 

a 


7c6  The  RULE  of  FAITH. 

PART  by  that  phrafe,  viz.  the  gates  of  hell,  the  fcripture 
does  not  mean  grofs  wickednefs  of  life,  as  well  as 
dangerous  errors  in  opinion  \  and  likewife,  that  a 
general  vicioufnefs  and  debauchery  of  manners  is  not 
as  pernicious  to  chriftianity,  and  as  deftructivc  to 
the  end  of  it,  as  eflablifhcd  errors  in  doctrine. 
And  if  fo,  that  the  providence  of  God  is  not  equal- 
ly concerned  to  prefer ve  the  church  from  things 
equally  pernicious.  When  he  hath  proved  thefe 
three  things,  then  this  declamatory  difcourfe  of  his 
may  fignify  fomething,  but  not  before. 

§  7.  Now  if  this  be  a  true  reprefentation  of  the 
ftate  of  the  Roman  church  in  thofe  ages,  was  not 
this  a  very  fit  time  for  the  devil  to  play  his  pranks 
in?  Will  any  man  that  reads  thofe  teftimonies,  think 
it  imponTole  that  the  doctrine  of  Christ  fhould 
have  been  depraved  in  this  age  ;  or  that  the  moft 
fenfelefs  and  abfurd  tenets  might  then  be  brought 
in  under  the  notion  of  chriftian  doctrines  ?  when 
fcarce  any  one  knew  what  the  doctrine  of  Christ 
was :  when  a  general  ignorance  of  letters,  and  almoft 
an  univerfal  ftupidity  and  madnefs  had  feized  upon 
the  minds  of  men  :  when  there  was  a  horrid  depra- 
vation of  manners,  and  a  general  failure  of  virtue 
and  piety  both  in  the  head  and  members  of  the 
church  :  when  the  lives  of  the  popes  were  tragically 
wicked,  and  no  footfleps  of  piety  appeared  in  them  : 
when  for  about  150  years  together,  in  a  con- 
tinued fucccfiion  of  50  popes,  there  was  fcarce  one 
pious  and  virtuous  man  (or  woman)  fate  in  that 
chair:  when  the  whores  governed  Rome,  and  put 
out,  and  put  in  biinops  at  their  pleafure  ;  and  made 
their    own  gallants  popes,  who   would   be  fare  to 

make 


<Tbe  RULE  of  FAITH.  7o7 

make  a  college   of  cardinals    of  fuch   monfters   as  SECT. 

vir 
themfelves :   when  pretty   boys,   and  paraftes,   and  ^^^^ 

buffoons,  led  the  head  of  the   church  by   the  noie, 
and  were   gratiiied   with    the  belt  bifhopricks  and 
dignities  in  the  church  :  when  there  was  a  general 
decay  of  knowledge,  and  defection  of  the  chriftiaa 
faith,    when   in  many  countries  neither  iacramenrs, 
nor  other  ecclefiaftical  rites  were  obferved :    when 
violence   and  fraud,  and  all  the  arts  of  deceit  and 
cozenage,    and  blacker    arts    than   thefe,  were   the 
common  ftudy   and  practice :    when  imtemperance, 
and  all  kind  of  lewdnefs  and  debauchery,  reigned 
in  all   forts   and  orders  of  men  :    when  the   gene- 
rality of  bifhops   and  priefts    (who,    according  to 
Mr.  Rufhworth  *,  can  only   teach  the  traditionary  *  Dial.  3. 
doctrine)  were    ignorant   in  the   fcriptures,    and  in      " 
every  thing  elfe  (very    few  of  them   being  able  fo 
much  as  to  read  tolerably)  and  did  neglect  to  teach 
the  people,  and  to  breed  up   any  in  knowledge  to 
fucceed  them  in  their  office ;  and  in  the  lewdnefs  of 
their  lives  did  furpafs   the  vileft  of  the  people :  was 
not  fuch  an  age  a  fit  ieafon    to  plant  the  doctrine 
of  tranfubftantiation    in?     Or    if  any    thinp"   more 
monftrous  than  that  can  be  imagined,  it  might  then 
have  taken  place ;  for  what  weeds  would  not  have 
grown  in  fo  rank  a  foil  ?  Doth  Mr.  S.   think  it  im- 
poMible,    that  thofe  that  were  born  in  the  church 
then  mould  be  ignorant  of  the  doctrine  of  Christ, 
when  fcarce  any  one  would  take  the  pains  to  teach  it 
them  ;    or  that  it  could   then  have   been    altered, 
when  fo   few  underftood  and   fewer   practifed   it  ? 
when    prodigious  impiety  and  wickednefs  did  over- 
fpread    the  church   from   the   pope  down    to  the 

meaneil 


7o»  The  RULE  of  FAITH. 

PART  meaneft  of  the  laity,  can  any  one  believe  that  men 
J*LW  generally  made  confcience  to  indraft   their  children 
in  the  true  faith  of  Christ?    Was  it  impolTible 
there   mould  be  any  neglect   of  this  duty,  when  all 
others  failed ?  That  there  fhould  be  any  miftake  about 
the  doctrine  of  Christ,  when  there  was  fo  much 
*  Dial.  3.  ignorance:  unlefs  he  be  of  Mr. Rufhworth's  *  mind, 
fedt.  7.      u  wno  reckons  ignorance  among  the  parents  of  reli- 
tc  gion."  Where  were  then  the  arguments  of  hope 
and  fear?  were  they,  flxongly  applied,  or  were  they 
not?  were  they  caufes  of  actual  will  in  chriftians  to 
believe  well  when  they  lived  fo  ill  ?    or  is  chriftianity 
only  fitted  to. form  mens  minds  to  a  right  belief,  but 
of  no  erncacy  to  govern  their  lives?  Hath  Christ 
taken  care  to  keep  his  church  from  error,  but  not  from 
m  „  vice?  as  the  great  cardinal  Perron*  (ftooping  below 

K.  fames,  his  own  wit  and  realbn  toferve  a  bad  cauie)  tells  us, 
1.  4.  c.  6.  cc  tnat  the  church  fmgs,  and  will  fing  to  the  end  of 
tc  the  world,  I  am  black,  but  I  am  fair  ;  that  is  to 
M  fay,  I  am  black  in  manners,  but  fair  in  doctrine." 
As  if  the  meaning  of  the  prophefies  and  promifes  of 
the  fcripture  made  to  the  church  were  this,  that  by  the 
extraordinary  care  of  God's  providence,  and  peculi- 
ar afilftance  of  his  Holv  Spirit,  fhe  mould  be 
wicked,  but  orthodox  to  the  end  of  the  world. 
Where  were  then  the  vigorous  caufes  imprinting 
Christ's  doctrine,  and  continuing  it  more  particular- 
ly at  Rome  than  any  where  elfe  •,  and  of  fecuring  that 
fee  and  its  fuprcme  pallor  in  the  faith  and  practice  of 
the  chriftian  doctrine,  above  any  other  fee  or  paftor 
whatfoever  ?  Who  is  fo  little  verfed  in  hiitory,  as 
not  to  underftand  the  difmal  (late  of  religion  in 
the  Romilh church  in  thole  times?  Who  does  not 

know 


The  RULE  of  F A  IT  It.  709 

know  what  advantages  the  bifhops  of  Rome  and  S  EC  1 . 
their  fervile  clergy,  made  of  the  ignorance  and  fiw 
perflation  of  thofe  and  the  fucceeding  agej ;  and  by 
what  arts  and  fteps  they  railed  themfcJves  to  that 
power  which  they  held  in  the  church  for  a  long 
while  after  ?  when  they  could  tread  upon  the  necks 
of  princes,  and  make  a  great  king  walk  bare-foor, 
and  yield  himfelf  to  be  fcourged  by  a  company  of 
petulant  monks  :  when  they  could  fend  any  man  up- 
on an  errand  to  vifit  the  holy  fepulchre,  or  the  fhrine 
of  fuch  a  faint ;  and  command  five  or  fix  kin.^s 
with  great  armies  upon  a  ncedleis  expedition  into 
the  holy  land,  that  fo  during  their  abfence  they 
might  play  their  own  game  the  better :  when  they 
could  mint  miracles,  and  impofe  upon  the  belief 
of  the  people  (without  the  authority  of  any  an- 
cient books)  abfurd  and  counterfeit  tales  of  an- 
cient faints  and  martyrs,  as  delivered  down  to  them 
by  tradition  ;  and  could  bring  that  foppifh  book 
the  legend,  almoft  into  equal  authority  and  ve- 
neration with  the  bible  -,  and  perfuade  the  eafy 
people  that  St.  Denys  carried  his  own  head  in  his 
hand,  after  it  was  cut  off,  two  miles,  and  kifs'd 
it  when  he  laid  it  down.  Any  one  that  mall  but 
reflect,  upon  the  monftrous  practices  of  the  Ro- 
man bifhops  and  clergy  in  thefe  ages,  the  ft  range 
feats  they  play'd,  and  what  ablurdities  they  impofed 
upon  the  fuperftitious  credulity  of  princes  and  peo- 
ple, may  readily  imagine  not  only  the  poffibility, 
but  the  eafinefs  of  innovating  new  doctrines  as  they 
pleafed,  under  the  fpecious  pretences  of  antiquity, 
and  conftanc  and  uninterrupted  tradition. 

Vol.  IV,  7  H  §  8.  And 

5. 


©n 


7io  The  RULE  of  FAITH. 

PART       §  8.  And  this  kind  of  difcourfe  concerning  the 
KmJ}Lm^  poflibility  of  errors  coming  into  the  church,  is  nor, 
*  Apology  as  Mr.  White  ridicuioufly  compares  it^    "  *  as  if  an 
radm"t<  orator  mould  go  about   to  perfuade  people,   that 
46  George,  by  the  help  of  a  long  flaff,  and  a  nim- 
"  ble  cad  of  his  body,  and  fuch-  like  advantages, 
"  might  leap   over  Paul's  fteeple ;  never  confider- 
*f  ing  all  the  while  the   difproportion   of  all  thefe 
Ci  advantages  to  the  height  of  the  fleeple:  fo  (faith 
"  he)    he  that  difcourfeth  at  large  how  errors  ufe 
"  to  fild  into  man's   life,  without  comparing    the 
"  power  of  the  caufes  of  error  to  the  flrength  of 
"  refitting,  which  confifcs  in  this  principle,  nothing 
cc  is  to  be   admitted  but  what  defcends   by  tradi- 
"  tion,  csV.  fays  no  more  towards  proving   an  er- 
"  rcr's   over-running  the  church,  than    the  orator 
"  for  George's  leaping  over  the  fteeple."  How  vain 
is  this  ?  when   it  appears  from  this  inftance  that   I 
have    given    of  the  flate  of    the  Roman   church, 
in  the  ninth  and   tenth    centuries,    and  afterwards, 
that  the  caufes  of  error  were  infinitely  flronger  than 
the  power  of  refiflance.     The  great  caufes  of  error 
are  ignorance   and  vice  ;    where  ignorance  reigns, 
there's  no  power :  where  vice,   no   will   to  refill  it. 
And  how  great  the  ignorance  and  vicioufneis  of  all 
orders  of  men  in   the   Roman  church  was,    is  too 
apparent    from    the    teftimonies    I    have    brought. 
Where  was  the  flrength  of  refifting  error,  when  for 
150  years  together  the  popes  were  the  vilefl  of  men, 
bifhops   and    priefls   overwhelmed  with    ignorance, 
abandoned  to  all  manner  of  vice,   and  molt  fupinely 
negligent  in  inftructing  the  people  ?  in  fuch  a  de- 
generate flate  of  a  church,  what  flrength  is  there 

in 


Tie  RULE  of  FAITH.  711 

in  this  principle,  "  nothing  is  to  be  admitted  but  SECT. 
"  what  defcends  by  tradition  ?  "  when  thofe,   whn_      '_j 
ought  to   teach    men  what  that  doctrine   is  which 
was  derived    to    them   by  tradition,    arc  generally 
careleis  of  their  duty,  and  ignorant  themfelves  what 
that  doctrine  is ;  when  they  addict  themfelves  whol- 
ly to  the  fatisfying  of  their  ambition,  and  other  lufts, 
and     carrying    on     defigns    of  gain,    and  getting 
dominion  over  the  people;    what  can   hinder  men 
Co  difpofed  from  corrupting  the  doctrine  of  Christ, 
and    fuiting    it   to    their  own   iufts   and   interefts  ? 
and  what  fhall  hinder   the   people  from  embracing 
thofe  corruptions  •,  when  by  the  negligence  of  their 
paftcrs  to  inflruct  them,  and  not  only  fo,  but  alfo 
by    their    being  deprived    of   the   fcriptures   in   a 
known  tongue,  they   are  become  utterly  incapable 
of  knowing  what  the  true  doctrine  of  Christ  is  ? 
fo  that  in  an  age  of  fuch  profound  ignorance  and 
vice,  and  general  neglect  of  inftruction ,  'tis   fo  far 
from  being    impoflible    for    errors    to    over-run    a 
church,  that  the    contrary   is    morally   impoflible  ; 
and    George's  long    ftafr   and  advantageous  cart  of 
his  body,  are  more  powerful  caufes'to  enable  him  to 
leap  over  Paul's  fteeple,    than  this  principle,   a  that 
a  nothing  is  to  be  admitted,  but  what  defcends  by 
iC  tradition,"  is  to  keep  errors  out  of  a  church  in 
an  ignorant  and  vicious  age  ;  when  few  or  none  are 
either  able  or  willing  to  inflruct  men  in  the  truth. 
For  fuppofe  this  always  to  have  been  the  principle 
of  chriftians,  viz.  "  that  nothing  is  to   be  admit- 
"  ted  as  the  doctrine  of  Christ,  but  what  is  de- 
"  fcended  to  them  by  tradition  : "    how  fhall  this 
principle  fecure  the  church  from  herefy,  any  more 

7  H  2  than 


J12 


The  RULE  of  FJITH. 


PART  than  this,  viz.   cC  that   nothing   but  truth  is  to  be 
HI 

"  aircnted  to,"    doth  fecure   men   from  error  ?   or 

more  than  this,  viz.  "  that  no  man  is  to  do  any  thing 

"  but  what  is  wife  and  virtuous,"   does  fecure  the 

generality  of  mankind  from  folly  and  vice  ? 


The  Se- 
cond anf- 
wcr  to  his 
fecond 
demon- 
flration. 


SECT.  VIII. 

§  i.  ^Econdly,  the  principles  upon  which  this  de- 
J  monftration  relies,  are  not  fufficiently  proved 
by  him. 

His  firft  principle  is  this,  "  that  age,  which  holds 

"  her   faith  delivered  thus  from  the    apoftles,   nei- 

**  thcr  can  it  lelf  have  changed  any  thing  in  it,  nor 

"  know  or    doubt  that  any  age  fi nee   the  apoftles 

"  had  changed  or    innovated    any    thing   therein. 

"  This    propofition    (he   tells  us)    needs  no   proof 

<c  to    evidence   it,    but  only    an    explication  :  for 

««  fmce  no   man   can  hold    contrary   to  his  know- 

"  led^e,  c  r  doubt  of  what  he  holds,  nor  change  or 

*c  innova     in   the   cafe  propofed,  without  knowing 

**  he  di-    fo;  'tis  a   manifell  impofTibiliry  a   whole 

«  age     ^ould  fall  into  an  abfurdity  fo  inconfiiient 

"    nth  ihe  nature  of  one  fingle  man."     Bat  (by  his 

Favour)  that  which   he  fays   is  no  procf,    but  only 

an  explication,  is   a  proof  if  it  be  anything;  and 

the  force  of  it  is  this :    "  that  which   is  inconfiftent 

<c  with  the  nature  of  one  fingle  man,  is  manifeflly 

61  ioTpoffible  to  a  whole  age ;  but  it  is  inconfiftent 

4C  with  the  nature  of  any  fingle  man  to  hold  con- 

"  trary  to   his  knowledge,   &V.  therefore  impofiible 

"  to  a  whole  age  *,  and  coniequenly,  that  age  which 

*«  holds  her  faith  delivered  thus  from  the  apoftles, 

i6  neither 


735*  RULE  of  FAITH.  713 

"  neither    can    it     felf  have   changed   any   thing,  SECT. 
<c  nor,  iScV  fo  that  in  order  to  the  making  good^  N   xi 
of  this   firft    principle,    Mr.   S.  hath   left   nothing 
unproved  but  only  this  propofition,  namely,  that  it 
is  impoffible    that  any    one    fingle   man   that  holds 
his   faith    to    have    been   delivered  -uninterruptedly 
from  the  apoitles,  mould  either  himfelf  have  chang- 
ed any   thing  in    it,  or    know  or  doubt  that   any 
age  fince    the    apoitles   hath  changed   or  innovated 
any  thing   therein  :  and  to  make  out  the  truth  of 
this    propofition ,    there    only    remains  this   to   be 
proved,  viz.  that  it  is  impofiible  for  any  fingle  man 
to  be  miltaken  :  for  if  that  be  poffible,  then  con- 
trary to  Mr.  S.  a  man  may  hold  that  to  have  been 
delivered  as    a  doctrine  of  faith  from   the  apoitles 
which  was  not  fo  delivered. 

§  2.  His  fecond  principle  is  this,  "  that  no  age 
"  could  innovate  any  thing,  and  withal  deliver  that 
"  very  thing  to  pofterity  as  received  from  Christ 
"  by   continual  lucceflion."     He    proves    it    thus ; 
"  fince  man  is   a   ratiorui  creature,  he  mult  have 
<c  fome  reafon    or  motive  g"od  or  bad,  which  he 
6C  propofeth  to  himfelf  as  an  end  to  be  atchieved 
<c  by   his  action:  and  whatever  his   remote  end  is, 
"  his   immediate   end,    in    telling   polterity  a   late 
"  invented   thing  was    held  immediately  before,  is 
"  to  make  them  believe  it.     Wherefore  fince  a  ^m 
"  impoffibility    cannot    be    a  motive    to    one    not 
"  frantick  :  and  fince  'tis  evidently  im poffible  they 
«  Ihould  make  pofterity  believe  a  thing  fo  univer- 
"  (ally    known    to    be   falfe,     as   this    muft    needs 
"  be,  &V.  it  is  as  impeffi bie  this   principle  fhould 

"  falter,  as  that  the  foregoing  age  lhouid  confpire 

«  to 


714  The  RULE  cf  FAITH. 

PART  "  to  act  without  a  motive,  or  that  the  fuccecding 
"  age  mould  believe  what  they  know  to  be  other- 
"  wife,  that  is,  mould  hold  both  fides  of  a  contra- 
cc  diction  in  a  clear  matter  of  fact."  The  force 
of  which  is  this,  that  it  is  impoMible  that  any  man 
not  frantick  fhould  attempt  to  innovate  in  matter 
of  chriftian  doctrine,  becaufe  the  immediate  end  of 
fuch  an  attempt  muft  be  to  have  his  new  doctrine 
believed  •,  but  it  is  impoffible  he  fhould  attain  this 
end,  and  impoffible  he  mould  not  fee  that  it  is 
impoiTible  to  attain  it  :  now  a  fecn  impoffibility  is 
an  end  that  cannot  move  any  one  that  is  not  fran- 
tick ;  therefore  no  man  that  is  not  frantick,  can 
attempt  to  innovate  in  matter  of  chriftian  doc- 
trine. Thus  he  hath  demonftrated  it  impoffible 
that  there  mould  be  any  hcreticks,  if  a  heretick 
be  one  that  attempts  to  innovate  in  matter  of  chri- 
ftian doctrine  :  for  if  there  be  any  fuch  attemp- 
ted they  muft  be  frantick,  and  if  they  be  fran- 
tick they  can  be  no  hereticks ;  for  herefy  im- 
plies a  crime,  but  God  will  not  impute  the  acti- 
ons of  mad  men  to  them  as  faults.  Again,  fuppofe 
he  that  attempts  to  innovate  be  miftaken  (and  I 
hope  Mr.  S.  will  grant  that  a  heretick  is  fallible^ 
and  think  that  which  he  delivers  as  Christ's  doc- 
trine to  be  really  fo,  though  indeed  it  be  not ;  why 
mould  fuch  a  perfon  think  it  impoffible  to  make 
men  believe  that  to  be  received  from  Christ 
which  he  really  thinks  was  received,  and  thinks  he 
can  make  it  appear  that  it  was  fo  ?  and  if  this  be 
granted,  then  it  is  net  impoffible  that  man,  though 
he  be  a  rational  creature,  may  attempt  to  innovate. 
And  if  10,  then  his  fecond  principle  is  not  proved. 

If 


The  RULE  of  FAITH.  7,5 

If  Mr.  S.  had  any  rcaard  to  the  noble  fcience  of  S  E  C  T. 

*~^  TV 

controversy  (whereof  he  pretends  to  be  fo  great  a  ma-  l_l'J^_J 
iter)  he  would  not  bring  fuch  trifling  fophilms  inftead 
of  demonftrative  proofs  :  and  nothing  leis  than  a  de- 
monftrative  proof  will  ferve  to  eftablifh  any  prin- 
ciple upon  which  a  demonilration  is  to  be  built. 

SECT.     IX. 

v- Octanes  and   practices,  which    muft  be  The  third 
acknowledged    to  have  been  innovated,  vfr^sVfc- 
have  made  the  fame  pretence  to  uninterrupted  tra-  c°Rci  dc- 
dition.     And  of  this  I  mall  give  feveral  inftances  ;  ^Z^' 
one  among  the  jews,  the  reft  among  chriftians. 

i.  I  mall  inftance  among  the  traditionary  jews, 
whofe  perfuafion  in  our  Saviour's  time  was,  and 
ftill  is,  that  their  oral  doctrine,  which  they  call  their 
cabala,  hath  defcended  to  them  from  Mofes  uninter- 
ruptedly. Now  here  is  the  exiftence  of  fuch  a  per- 
fuafion, as  Mr.  S.  affirms  to  be  "  impoftible  without 
c<  tradition's  evcr-indeficiency  to  beget  it.  And  this 
perfuafion  of  theirs  is  molt  exactly  parallel  with  the  pre- 
tenfions  of  the  Romifh  church  according  to  Mr.  S. 
For  here's  a  multitude  of  traditionary  jews,  manifoldly 
greater  in  proportion  to  the  diffenters  in  that  church, 
than  the  Romifh  church  is  in  comparifon  to  thofe  chri- 
ftians  that  diffent  from  her.  Jofephus  tells  us  *,  "  that  *  Antiq. 
"  the  richer  fort  were  of  the  perfuafion  of  the  fid-^udo  1 13' 
"  ducees,  but  the  multitude  were  on  the  pharifces 
<c  fide."  So  that  the  pharifces  had  this  mark  of  the  true 
church  (as  Bcllarmine  calls  it)  common  to  them  with 
the  church  of  Rome,  that  they  were  the  greateft  num- 
ber, and  fo  they  continue  to  this  very  day  ;  infomuch 
that  although  they  do  not  call  themfelves  the  catho* 

licks, 


n6  The  RULE  of  FAITH. 

?  A  RT.  licks,  yet  I  am  lure  they  call  all  jews  that  do  dhTent 

ill        *  • 

Xm^  lmmJ  from  them  fchifmaticks.     Now  that  the  fadducees 

were  for  the  written  law  againft  oral  tradition,  is,  I 
confefs,  no  credit  to  us;  but  that  our  Saviour  re- 
proved the  traditionary  doctrines  and  practices  of  the 
pharifees,  becaufe  by  them  they  made  void  the  writ- 
ten law,  is  much  more  to  the  difcredit  of  the  afler- 
tors  of  oral  tradition.  Both  romanifts  and  pharifees 
own  alike  a  written  doctrine,  but  then  they  both  pre- 
tend the  truefenfe  and  explication  thereof  to  have  de- 
fcended  to  them  by  oral  tradition.  For  juft  as  the 
Ibid.  1.  tradiriorary  chriftians  do  now,  fo  Jofephus  tells  *  us 
&  de  bell,  the  traditionary  jews  of  old,  the  pharifees,  did  pre- 
Jud.  l.  i.  tenj  by  tne[r  oraj  tradition  to  interpret  the  law  more 
2.  c.  12.  accurately  and  exactly  than  any  other  feet.  In  like 
1  Antl<I-  manner  he  f  tells  us,  "  that  all  things,  that  belonged 
"  to  prayer  and  divine  worfhip,  were  regulated  and 
"  adminiftred  according  to  their  interpretations  of 
"  the  law."  And  they  both  agree  in  this,  to  make 
void  the  word  of  God  by  their  tradition  ;  which  the 
pharifees  did  no  otherwife  than  Mr.  S.  does,  by  equal- 
ling oral  tradition  to  fcripture ;  nay  preferring  it  above 
fcripture,  in  making  it  the  fole  rule  of  faith,  and  in- 
terpreting the  fcripture  according  to  it.  Hence  are 
thofe  common  fayings  in  the  talmud,  and  other  jewilh 
books :  "  do  not  think  that  the  written  law  is  the 
"  foundation,  but  that  the  law  orally  delivered  is  the 
"  right  foundation  ;"  which  is  to  fay  with  Mr.  S. 
u  that  not  the  fcripture,  but  oral  tradition  is  the 
ct  true  rule  of  faith.9'  A^ain,  u  there  is  more  in 
11  the  words  of  the  fcribes  (viz.  the  teftifiers  of  tra- 
"  ditibn)  than  in  the  words  of  the  wr.tien  law  " 
Again,  "  the  oral  law  excels  tne  written,  as  mucn  as 

"  the 


tie  RULE  of  FAITH.  yXy 

tc  the  foul  doth  the  body  -"  which  accords  very  well  S  K  c  T. 
With  what  Mr.  S.  frequently  tells  us,  that  the  fcrip- 
ture  without  tradition  is  but  a  dead  letter,  deilitute  of 
life  and  fenfe.     Hence  alfo  it  is  that  they  required  the 
people  (as  the  traditionary  church  does  now)  to  yidd 
up  themielves  to  the  dictates  of  tradition  even  .in  the 
mod  abfurd  things,  as  appears  by  that  common  fay- 
ing among  them,  '*  if  the  fcribes  fay  that  the  right 
"  hand  is  the  Mty  and  the  kit  thtrignt  (that  bread 
"  is  flerti,  and  wine  is  blood)  hearken   to  them,  M 
that  is,  make  no  fcrupie  of  whatsoever  .they  deliver  as 
tradition,  though  never  fo  contrary  to  reafon  or  lenlc. 
And  laflly,  the  doclnnes  of  the  phanlees  were  many 
of  them  practical  ;    fuch  were  all   thole  which  con- 
cerned  external  rites  and  obfervances,  as  waffling  of 
hands  and  cups,  &c.  fo  that  thefe  pharifaical  tradi- 
tions had  alfo  that  unfpcakable  advantage  which  Mr. 
S.  fays  renders  their  traditions  unmiftakcable,  u  that 
"  they  were  daily  praclifed,  and  came  down  clad  in 
"  fuch  plain    matters  of  fact,  that  the  mod  ftupid 
"  man  living  could    not    poflibly   be  ignorant    of 
"  them."     Therefore,  according  to  Mr.   S's  prin- 
ciples, it   was  impoffible  that  any  age  of  the  jews 
mould    be   perfuaded    that    thefe   things  were  com- 
manded by  Mofes,  and  ever  fince  obferved,  if  they 
had  not  been  fo  :  and  yet  our  Saviour  denies  thefe 
cuftoms  to  have  been  of  any  fuch  authority  as  they 
pretended. 

§  2.  But  I  needed  not  to  have  taken  all  this  pains 
to  fhew  the  agreement  which  is  between  the  traditio- 
nary jews  and  pipifb,   their  own  writers  fo  liberally 
acknowledging  [Zm     Mr.  White  *  indeed  fays,  rt  that*  ^  **?' 
"  the  faith  of  the  jews  was  not  delivered  to  themtraft  i. 
Vol.  IV.  6  1  «  orally  feci.  6- 

5- 


7I8  The  RULE  of  FAITH 

PART  "  orally,  but  by  writing  i"  than  which  nothing  can 
y_JJ  1^  be  more  inconfiftent  with  his  hypothcfk     For  if  the 
jewifh  faith  was  conveyed  to  them  not  orally  but   by 
writing,  then  either  the  jewifh  church  had  no  fuffi- 
cient  rule  of  faith,  or  elfe  a  writing  may  be  fuch  a 
rule.     But  other  of  their  champions  make  great  ufe  of 
the  parallel,  between  the  traditionary  jews  and  the  ro- 
mifh  church,  to  confirm  from  thence  their  own  tra- 
ditionary doctrines.     Cardinal  Perron  hath  a  full  paf- 
*  Rep.  to fage  to  thispurpofe  : "  as  this  (fays  he*)  is  to preferve 
K.  James,  tt  a  fotmcj  anc}  entire  refpedfc  to  the  majefty  of  the  an- 
c.  4.         cc  cient  moiaick  fcnpture,  to  believe  and  obierve  not 
<c  only  all  the  things  which  are  therein  actually  con- 
"  tained,  but  alio  thofe  things  which  are  therein  con- 
"  tained  mediately  and  relatively,  as  the  doctrines  of 
"  paradife,  &c.  which  were  not  contained  therein  but 
"  mediately,  and  by  the  authority  which  it  gave  to 
"  the  depofition  of  the  patriarchal  and  moiaick  tradi- 
'*  tion,  preferved  by  heart,  and  in  the  oral  doctrine 
"  of  the  fynagogue :  fo  this  is  to  preferve  a  found  and 
"  entire  refpect  to  themajeftyof  the  apoftolical  fcrip- 
6c  ture,  to  believe  and  obferve  all  the  things  which  it 
u  contains,  not  only  immediately  and  by  itfelf,  but 
Ct  mediately  and  by  reference  to  the  apoftolical  tra- 
ditions, to  which  in   grofs  and  generally   it  gives 
the  authority. of  apoftolical  doctrines,  and   to  the 
u  church  the  authority  of  guardian  and  depofitary  to 
M  preferve  and  atteft  them."  Voyfin,  in  his  obferva- 
g  p    .      tions  upon  Raymundus  Martin,  *  tells  us,  "  that  as 
fid.  p.  145-"  in  the  old  law  the  great  confiilory  at  Jerufalem  was 
"  the  foundation  of  the  true  tradition,  fo  (fays  he) 
"  the  fee  of  Rome   is   the  foundation  of  our  tradi- 
u  tion.    And  as  the  continual  fucceflion  of  the  high 

"  priefh 


Tfoe  RULE  of  FAITH.  719 

«s  priefts  and  fathers  among  the  jews  was  the  great  SECT. 
*  confirmation  of  the  truth   of  their  traditions,  ib 
"  (fays  he)  with  us  the  truth  of  our  catholick  doc- 
<c  trine  is   confirmed   by  a   continual  fucceffion   of 
"  popes." 

§  3.  From  all  this  it  appears,  that  the  pharifees 
among  the  jews  made  the  lame  pretence  to  oral  tradi- 
tion which  the  papifls  do  at  this  day  according  to 
Mr.  S.  And  if  ib,  then  Mr.  S's  demonfiration 
a  pqfteriori  is  every  whit  as  flrong  for  the  jews 
againft  our  Saviour,  as  it  is  for  the  papifls  againft 
the  proteflants.  For  we  find  that  in  our  Saviour's 
time,  it  was  then  the  prefent  perfuafion  of  the  tradi- 
tionary jews,  that  their  faith,  and  their  rites,  and  the 
true  fenfe  and  interpretation  of  their  written  law  was 
defcended  from  Mofes  and  the  prophets  to  them  un- 
interruptedly i  which  we  find  was  rnoft  firmly  rooted 
in  their  hearts.  But  the  jews  had  conftant  tradition 
among  them,  that  the  Messiah  was  to  be  a  great 
temporal  prince  :  and  though  the  letters  of  the  pro- 
phefies  concerning  him,  might  well  enough  have  been 
accommodated  to  the  low  and  fuftering  condition  of 
our  Saviour  ;  yet  they  did  infallibly  know  that 
their  Messiah  was  to  be  another  kind  of  perfon, 
from  fenfe  written  in  their  hearts,  from  the  interpre- 
tation of  thofe  prophefies  orally  brought  down  to 
them  from  the  patriarchal  and  mofaick  tradition  pre- 
ferved  by  heart,  and  in  the  oral  doctrine  of  the  iyna- 
gogue,  and  from  the  living  voice  of  their  church  ef- 
fential,  that  is,  the  univerfal  confent  of  the  then  tra- 
ditionary jews.  If  it  be  faid,  that  the  jewifh  tradi- 
tion did  indeed  bring  dov/n  feveral  doctrines  not  con- 
tained   in   fcripture,  of  paradife,  of  hell,  of  the  laft 

7  I  2  judgment, 


s** 


tte  RULE  of  FAITH. 


PART  judgment,  of  the  refurreclion,  Sec  fas  cardinal  Per- 
il J  ..  • 
ikr-L-f'-iuj  rcn  affirmsj  but  it  did  not  bring  down  this  point  of 

the  Iv]  essi  a  h's  being  a  temporal  prince  :  then  as  Mr, 
*?/6'  S.  *  asks  us,  fo  the  jew  does  him  3  "  by  what  virtue 
4t  tradition  brought  down  thofe  other  points  ?  and 
"  whether  the  fame  virtue  were  not  powerful  to  bring 
<;  down  this  as  well  as  thofe  ?"  Then  he  will  ask 
him  farther,  "  is  there  not  a  necefTary  connexion  and 
•*  relation  between  a  con  (fan  t  caufe  and  its  formal  e£> 
ii  feet?  fo  that  if  its  formal  effircl  be  points  received 
<c  as  delivered  ever,  the  proper  caufe  mud  be  an  ever-* 
"  delivery  ♦,  whence  he  will  argue  from  fuch  an  ef. 
4C  feet  to  its  caufe  for  any  particular  point,  and  con- 
tC  fequently  for  this  point  that  is  in  controverfy  be-* 
"  tween  jews  and  chriftians,  concerning  the  Mes- 
iC  siak's  being  a  temporal  prince,  in  cafe  it  be  a 
u  point  held  ever  delivered  ;M  but  moft  certain  it  is, 
it  was  fo  held  by  the  jew3  in  our  Saviour's  time, 
and  hath  been  held  fo  ever  fince  to  this  day. 

I  fliall  not  trouble  the  reader  with  transcribing  the 
reft  of  this  demon(lration,only  defirehim  as  he  reads 
it  over,  to  imagine  inftead  of  Mr.  S.  a  pharifee  de-* 
m  on  ft  rating  againft  one  of  Christ's  difciples,  the 
infallibility  of  the  oral  tradition  of  the  jews  :  and  I 
doubt  not  but  he  will  find  this  demonftration,  and 
every  part  of  it  (changing  only  the  namesj  as  for^ 
cibly  concluding  Christ  not  to  be  the  Messiah,  as 
it  doth  infer  any  point  of  popery  againft  the  prote- 
ctants. 

§  4.  Before  I  leave  this  inftance  of  the  jewifh  tra- 

\z\  &c    ^ition,  I  ftnU  briefly  confider  what  Mr. White*  hath 

offered  by  way  of  anfwer  to  it ;  as  iirft,  "  that  the 

M  matter  of  thefe  traditions  is  nothing  elfe  but  explir 

"  cations 


<tte  RULE  of  FAITH.  721 

«c  cations  of  fcripture  framed  and  invented  by  their  s  £C  T. 
**  own  rabbins,"  So  we  fay,  that  the  popifh  traditions 
are  innovations.  But  then  Mr.  White  and  Mr.  S. 
tell  us,  that  they  can  demonftrate  them  to  be  de- 
fended from  ChrIst  and  his  apoltles,  becaufe  it  is 
the  prefent  perfuafion  of  a  multitude  of  chriftians  that 
they  are  fo  defcended.  In  like  manner,  if  this  dc- 
monftration  be  good,  the  jews  can  prove  their  tradi- 
tions to  be  defcended  from  Mofes  and  the  prophets. 
Secondly,  he  fays,  "  that  the  form  of  thefe  traditions 
"  is  more  ridiculous  than  the  canting  of  gypfics,  or 
"  the  juggling  of  hocus-pocus,  becaufe  it  confifts  in 
"  inventing  the  fenfe  of  the  fcripture  from  the  myfte- 
"  ries,and  numbers,  tind  changes  of  letters."  This  is 
a  grofs  inexcuiable  miftake.  For  though  the  jews 
have  fuch  a  cabala  (call'd  Gematry)  as  this  which 
Mr.  White  defcribes;  yet  that  cabala  which  is 
argued  in  this  inftance,  and  which  our  Saviour. 
reproves  in  the  Phariiees  by  the  name  of  tradition, 
is  quite  another  thing,  and  among  the  jewiili  writers 
known  by  the  name  of  the  unwritten  or  oral  law; 
which  they  lay  was  delivered  to  Mofes  on  rm 
Sinai,  and  by  him  conveyed  to  Aaron  and  Jofl 
and  the  elders,  and  fuccciTively  delivered  down 
from  one  age  to  another  ;  and  at  laft  by  Rabbi  Jc- 
hudah  compiled  into  one  volume  which  they  call 
mifhna,  or  c/Vj-tpsxnr.  And  this  does  not  confiit 
in  the  art  of  numbring,  combining,  or  changing  or 
letters,  as  Mr.  White  imagines.  But  fuppoie  it  did 
fo,  and  were  more  ridiculous  than  he  conceits  it  to 
be  -,  the  inftance  would  be  fo  much  the  more  con- 
clufive  againft  them,  if  what  they  affirm  be  true, 
*c  that  oral  tradition  is  infallible,  and  that  the  per- 

<c  fuafion 


722  Tlje  RULE  of  FA  I TH. 

P  A  R  T  «  fuafion  of  a  traditionary  church  in  any  age,   tha£ 

\_j-  ' t "  fuch  a  doctrine  defcended  to  them  from  Christ 

"  or  Moles,  be  a  demonftration  that  it  did  fo:  M  for 
if  this  be  fufficient  evidence  it  is  nothing  to  the  pur- 
pole  what  the  doclrine  be  either  for  matter  or  form  : 
for  if  it  be  once   demonftrated  to  have  come  from 
Christ   or  Moles,  it  is  without   any  farther  dis- 
pute, to  be  received  as  of  divine  authority.     So  that 
Mr.  White  quite   alters   the  (late  of  the  queftion  -9 
which  was  not  whether  the  jewifh  cabala  be  abfurd 
and  ridiculous,  but  whether  the  general  perfuafion  of 
the  jews  in  any  age,  that  it  defcended  to  them    by 
uninterrupted   tradition  from   Mofes,  be   a  demon- 
ftration that  it  did  fo.     If  it  be,    then  the  jewifh 
cabala  is  as  demon  ftratively  of  divine  authority  as 
the  oral  doclrine  of  the  papifts.     Thirdly,  he  fays, 
"  this  cabala  was  a  doclrine  delivered  to  few,  and 
"  that  with  drift,  charge  to  keep  it  from  publicity, 
*'  and  fo  communicate  it  again  fuccelTively  to  a  fe- 
<x  led  committee  of  a   few ;  wherein  (fays  he)  you 
cc  may  fee  as  fair  an  opportunity  for  juggling  and 
"  cozenage,  as  in  our  cafe  there  is  an  impofiibility." 
This  I  think  is  true  of  the  cabala,  which  (it   feems) 
Mr.  White  had  only  in  his  view,  but  is  a  horrible 
mi  flake  if  he  fpeaks  of  the  oral  law  which  was  con- 
tained in  the  milhna,  and  which  this  inflance  only 
*  In  pne-  intends.     For  of  this  Maimonides  *   fays  exprefly, 
fat.  fum.  C6    kat   in   every  age,  from   the  time  of  Mofes   to 
"  Rabbi  Jehudah,  who   compiled   the  milhna,  the 
"  oral  law   was   publickly  taught:    and    that  after 
fcl  Rabbi  Jehudah  had  compiled  it  into  one  volume, 
M  the  Ifraelites  did  generally  write  out  copies  of  it, 
u  and  it  was  every  where  carefully  taught,  for  fear 

"  left 


the  RULE  of  FAITH.  723 

"  left  the  oral  law  fhould  by   forgetfulnefs  be  loft  SECT. 

IX 
<c  among  the  jews."     So  that  upon  account  of  the 

publicknefs  of  the  doctrine,  there  is  as  great  an  im- 
poiiibility  of  juggling  and  cozenage  in  the  cafe  of  the 
jewifh  as  of  the  romifh  tradition.  Befides,  was 
warning  of  hands  and  cups,  which  they  alfo  pre- 
tended to  have  come  down  to  them  from  Mofes, 
and  to  have  been  conftantly  practifed  in  every  a^e, 
a  fecret  thing  ?  was  it  not  a  practical  tradition,  and 
performed  in  a  fenfible  matter?  If  therefore  no 
age  can  confpire  to  impofe  upon  the  next  in  a 
plain  cuftom-,  and  if  an  univerfal  tradition  of  fuch 
a  thing  cannot  come  in  without  fuch  a  confpiracy : 
how  could  this  be  the  perfuafion  of  any  age,  that 
warning  of  hands,  &c.  was  prefcribed  by  Mofes 
and  practifed  in  all  ages,  if  it  had  not  truly 
been  fo  ? 

§  5.  Secondly,  as  for  inftances  among  chriftians, 
whereof  many  remain  yet  upon  record  ;  as  namely,  the 
various  and  oppofite  traditions  about  the  time  of 
eafter,  and  concerning  the  baptifm  of  hereticks  \ 
and  the  apoftolical  tradition  (as  St.  Auftin  calls  it) 
concerning  the  admiffion  of  infants  to  the  commu- 
nion; all  which  have  been  frequently  urged  in 
this  controverfy,  and  none  of  them  yet  fufficient- 
Iy  anfwered;  I  ihall,  to  avoid  tedioufnefs,  pafllng 
by  thefe,  infift  only  upon  that  of  the  chiliads;  which 
in  Juftin  Martyr's  time,  w^s  the  perfaafion  of  all 
orthodox  chriftians,  that  is  (in  Mr.  S's  dialed)  of 
all  the  holders  to  tradition.  For  if  notwithftand- 
ing  the  perfuafion  of  that  age,  that  this  doctrine 
was  defcended  to  them  from  the  apoftles,  it  was  not; 
really  fo  defcended ;  then  the  perfuafion  of  chriftians 

in 


724  The  RULE  of  FAITH. 

P  A  R  T  in    any  age,  that  a  doctrine  was  brought  down   td 
k^^^^j  them  from  the  apoftles,   is  no  dcmonftration  that  it 

was  fo. 
*Apol.         §  6<  Xo    this  inftance   Mr.  White  anfwers  *  by 
&c.  '       telling  us,  "that    Eufebius  fays  that    this  tradition 
"  fprang  from  Papias"  (a  good  but  a  credulous  and 
fimple  man)  who  it  feems  was  miftaken  in  laying  that 
it  was  the  apoftles  doctrine.     But  for  all  this  Juftin 
Martyr   fays  it  was  received  by  all  orthodox  chrifti- 
ans  in   his   time,  as   a  doctrine  defcended  to  them 
from  the  apoftles.     And  if  Juftin  faid  true,  nothing 
can  make    more  aeainft   their  demonflration  of  the 
infallibility  of  tradition,    than  the    natural   confe- 
quence  from  thefe  two  layings  of  Eufebius  and  Juftin, 
which  is   this,    "  that  the   miftake  of  one  fimple 
ct  and  credulous  man  may  in  an  age  or  two  give 
"  occafion  to   the   univerfal  entertainment  of  a  doc- 
V  trine,  as  defcended  down  to  them  from  Christ 
"  and  his  apoftles,  when  there  was  no  fuch  matter." 
Hath  not  Mr.  White   now  done  his  rule  of  faith 
great  fervice  by  this  anfwer  ?  But  it  is  according  to 
his  manner  in  all  his  writings,  to  fay  any  thing  to 
remove  a  prefent  objection,  though  never  fo  much 
to  the  prejudice  of  his  main  hypothefis  ;  than  which 
I  do  not   know  any  quality  in  a  writer  which  doth 
more  certainly  betray  the  want  cither  of  judgment, 
or  of  fincerity,  or  of  a  good  caufe. 
*  Apol.        §  7-  And  whereas   he  fays,  "  *  that  Irensus  his 
p.  81.       <t  teftimony  proves  it  to  be  no  tradition;  for  he  fets 
down  the  fuppofed  words  of  our  Saviour,  which 
plainly   fhews  it  is  a  ftory,    not  a  tradition ;   a 
c*  tradition  being  a  fenfe  delivered,  not  in  kt  words, 
46  but   fettled   in  the   auditors  hearts  by  hundreds 

"  of 


*fa  RULE  of  FAITH.  725 

*c  of  different  expreiTions  explicating  the  lame  mean-  SECT. 
<c  ing."     When  I  confider  this  paffageof  Mr. White,  t__  _u 
I  confefs  I  cannot  compliment  him,  and  fay  (as  he 
makes  his  nephew   do  in   the  dialogue    *   between  *  j>„pn_ 
them)    "  I  cannot  but  applaud  your   difcouife,    it  worth 
"  hath  fo  pleafing  and  attractive  a  countenance."  And  ^' 
again,  "  f  I  am  not  able  to  oppoie  what  you  fay  by 
<c  any  weighty  objection,  your  arguments  being  not  Je^  -  * 
<c  only    ftrong  and  nervous,  but  of  10  comely  and 
"  winning  a  complexion,  &C."     I   cannot  (I  fay) 
fpeak  all  this  of  his  prefent  argument  •,  but  I  may 
defervedly  apply  to  it  the  lad  part  of  his  nephew's 
compliment,    that   it    is  an    argument    fo   framed, 
"  as   if,    without  any  evidence  of  its  confequence, 
"  it  would  perfuade   men  to  believe   it."     But  to 
return  an  anfwer  to  this  pafiage :  it  feems  (accord- 
ing to  Mr.  White)   that   Irenaeus  was    miitaken  in 
the  very  nature  of  tradition :    and  if  fo  learned   a 
father  was  ignorant  in   the  common  rule  of  faith, 
"  what  can   we  (to  ufe  Mr.  S's   words  * )  under-  *  p,  35> 
"  takingly  promife  to  weaker  heads  ? "  Mr.  S.  in- 
ftanceth    in    the    creed  and  ten    commandments  as 
the  principal  traditions  which  parents  teach  their  chil- 
dren •,  but  now  Mr.  White  can  fhew  plainly,  "  that 
<c  thefe  are  no  traditions  but  ftories,  becaufe  tradition 
"  is  a  fenfe  delivered  not  in  fet  words,  &c."     As 
if  Christ   and  his  apoftles  could  deliver  no  doc- 
trine   unlefs    they    exprefTed     the    fame   thing   an 
hundred  feveral  ways.     But    fuppofe    they   did    fo 
(which  no  man  hath  any  reafon  to  imagine,  becaufe 
a    thing  may  be   exprefTed  as  plainly  by  one  way 
as  by  an  hundred)  can  no  man  deliver  this  tradition 
who  (peaks  it  in  any  one  of  thofe  expreflions  ?  If 

Vol.  IV.  7  K  one 

6. 


726  The  RULE  of  FAITH. 

PART  one  mould  employ  his  fervant  to  carry  a  mefTage, 
!__,,_•,  and  (becaufe  Mr.  White  thinks  this  necefTary)  fhould 
fettle  the  meaning  of  it  in  his  heart,  by  telling 
him  the  fame  thing  in  an  hundred  feveral  expref- 
fions  ;  and  the  fervant  fhould  go  and  deliver  this 
mefiage  in  one  of  thofe  very  expreflions  that  his 
matter  ufed  to  him,  and  fhould  fay  thefe  were 
his  mailer's  very  words  ;  would  not  this  be  well 
enough  ? 

No;  if  he  had  come  to  fuch  a  philofopher  as 
Mr.  White,  he  would  foon  have  given  him  to  un- 
derstand that  he  was  not  fit  to  bring  a  menage,  or 
to  be  credited  in  it,  who  had  fo  little  wit  as  not 
to  know  that  a  meffage  is  a  thing  not  to  be  de- 
livered in  fet  words.  And  now  I  would  intreat 
Mr.  White   to  reconcile  himfelf  in  this  matter  to 

*  Dialog,  his  friends.     Mr.  Rufhworth  fays,  "  *  'Tis  impof- 
i.ied.  6.  "  fible  to   put  fully,  and  beyond  all  quarrel,    the 

ci  fame  fenfe  in  divers  words:"  which,  if  it  be 
true,  I  would  fain  know  what  certain  courfe  Mr. 
White  can  prefcribe  to  explicate  the  fame  meaning 
by  hundreds  of  different  expreflions,  and  confequent- 
ly  how  tradition  can  be  infallibly  conveyed,  by 
fettling   the  fenfe  of  it  in  the   auditors  hearts  by 

•  Exomo-  fuch  variety  of  expreflions.     Mr.   CrefTy  *  likewife 
f°|.*c'IO'(a  zealous  aflfertor  of  tradition)  does  affirm,  u  that 

*c  the  primitive  churches  were  even  to  excefs  fcru- 
<c  pulous  in  maintaining  the  very  phrafes  of  tradi- 
"  tionary  doctrines;  which  (according  to  Mr. 
•*  White)  plainly  fhews  thele  doctrines  to  be  ftories, 
<c  not  traditions,  becaufe  tradition  is  a  fenfe  delivered 
M  not  in  kt  wordy."     The  fame  author  complains, 

iq  id     *C  *  C^at  ^CW  amono   tne*r   learnedeft   matters    of 

con* 


The  RULE  of  FAITH.  jzy 

"  controverfy,  propofe  the  points  to  be  difputed  be-  SKC  r. 
<c  tween  them  and  the  proteftants  in  the  language  ^^^^ 
•*  of  the  church.''     By  which,   I  fuppofe,    he  does 
not  mean,    that  thefe  controvertifts  were  to  blame 
in  that  they  did  not  fettle  the  fenfe  of  thefe  points 
by  hundreds  of  different  exprefllons  explicating  the 
fame  meaning,  but  that  they  did  not  keep  to   the 
words  wherein  the  church  had  in  councils,  or  other- 
wife  (if  there  be  any  other  way)  declared  her  knfQ 
of  thofe  points.     Again  *  he  fays,  "  that  St.  Paul,  *  Ibid.  c. 
*'  referring  to  the  doctrine  fettled  by  oral  inftruc-2''  e  ' 2* 
"  tion,  to  fhew  the  uniformity  of  it  every  where, 
"  calls  it  a  form  of  wholfom  words."  From  whence 
we  may  conclude  either  that  St.  Paul  did  not  well 
to  call  the  traditionary  doctrine  (as  Mr.  Creffy  fays 
he  does)  a  form  of  words,  or  dih  (which  is  more 
probable)    that    Mr.  White  is  miftaken  in  faying, 
"  that  a    tradition  is  a  fenfe  not  delivered  in   fet 
"  words."     Furthermore,  the  fame  *  Mr.  CrefTy  *  Ibid.  c. 
tells  us,  "  that  St.  Auguftine  was  careful  not  only28k(^  u 
u  to  deliver  traditional  truths  themfelves,  but  the 
<c  terms  alio  in  which   thofe  truths  were  conveyed 
"  to  his  times."     But  now  Mr.  White  could  have 
informed  St.  Auguftine,  that  this  officious  care  of 

his  was  not  only  fuperfluous  but  pernicious  to   tra- 
dition. 

§  8.  But  to  return  to  Juftin's  teftimony ;  to 
which  the  fum  of  Mr.  White's  anfwer,  is,  "  that 
tc  Juftin  efteem'd  it  not  as  a  point  neceffary 
"  to  falvation,  but  rather  a  piece  of  learning 
"  higher  than  the  common  -,  fince  he  both  acknow- 
"  ledges  other  catholicks  held  the  contrary,  and 
11  entitles  thofe  of  his  perfuafion,  xa-ra  israfla.  op&c- 

7   K  2  yvw/jiovff) 


PA 
I 


728  The  RULE  of  FAITH. 

i  R  T  «  yy«(ucy?s-,  right    in  all  opinions,    that  is,    wholly 
_j  "  of  his  own  mind."     It   is    not   material   to  mv 
purpofe,  whether  or  no  Juftin  Icok'd  upon  this  as 
a  point  ncceffary  to  ialvation,  lb  long  as  it  is  evi- 
dent that  he  looked  upon  it  as  a  divine  revelation, 
and   part  of  the   chnitian    doctrine.     And  yet,   it 
feems,  he  thought  it  a  point  of  more  than  ordinary 
importance,  becaufe  he  joins  it  with  the  doctrine  of 
the  refurrection,   and  fays  that  it  was  not  difowned 
by  any  but  thofe  who   alio  denied  the  refurrection. 
But  whereas  Mr.  White  fays,  "  that  Juftin  acknow- 
il  ledges  other  catholicks   to  have  held    the  contra- 
cc  ry  *,  "  I  hope  to  make  it  evident  from  the  fcope 
and  feries  of  his  difcourfe,  that  he  acknowledges  no 
fuch  thing  *,  but   that   the  plain   defign  of  his  dif- 
courfe,  is  to  fhew  that  this  doctrine  was  owned  by 
*  Dial.     &N  trae  chriflians.     For  when  Trypho  asks  him  *, 
cum  whether  the  chriflians  did  indeed  believe  that  Jeru- 

Trl5U*      falem  mould    be  rebuilt,  £sfr.  he  returns  him    this 
p.  $v\j. 

Edit.  Lu-  anfover,  <c  I  am  not  fuch  a  wretch  as  to  fpeak  other- 

*5'  "  wife  than  I  think.    I  have  told  thee  before,  that 

"  my  felf  and  many  others  (as  ye  all   know)   are 

*«  of  the  mind  that  this  will  come  to  pafs.     But, 

"  that  many   indeed  of    thofe  chriflians   who  are 

"  [not]  of  the  pure  and  pious  perfuafion,  do  not 

"  own  this,  I  have  intimated  to  thee."     That  the 

negative  particle  (though  omitted  in  the  copy)  ougfit 

to  be  thus  inferted,    will  be  clear  to  any  one  that 

confiders  what  follows :  for  after  he  had  fpoken  of 

thofe  who    difown   this   doctrine,    he   immediately 

adds,   by  way  of  farther  defcription  of  them,  that 

though  they  are  called  chriflians,  yet  in  truth  they 

are  not  chriflians,  in  thefe  words :  J?  for  of  thefe 

(viz. 


<Tke  RULE  of  FAITH.  729 

**  (viz.    the    difowners   of  this  doctrine)  who   are  SECT. 
"  called   indeed  chriltians,    but  are   atheiitical  and  y^^La 
u  impious  hereticks,  I  have  fhewed  thee  that  they 
"  teach    in    all  points  blafphemous,  atheiftical  and 
"  abilird  things.     Bat  that  ye  may  know  that  I  do 
"  not  fay  this  for  you  only,    I  will,  according   to 
"  my   ability,    compile  all  thefe  difcourfes  which 
"  have  pad  between  us  into  one  piece-,  in  which  I 
"  will  by  writing  make  profeflion  of  this  very  thing 
*c  which  I   now  declare   to   you.     For   I   do   not 
"  choofe  to  follow  men  or  the  doctrines  of  men, 
a  but  God  and  fuch  doctrines  as  are  from  him.  And 
*c  though   ye  may  have  converfed  with  fome  who 
M  are  called  christians,  and  yet  do  not  acknowledge 
•■  this  j    but  even  dare  to  blafpheme   the   God  of 
<c  Abraham,  and  the  God  of  Ifaac,  and  the  God 
"  of  Jacob  -,  who  alfo  fay  that    there  is   no  refur- 
M  rection  of  the  dead,  but  that  fo  foon  as  they  die 
"  their    fouls   are   received   into  heaven :    do  not 
"  count  thefe  men  chriltians  -,  no  more  than  a  man, 
"  that    confiders  things    rightly,    would   own   the 
"  f&lducees,   and  fuch  like  feels,  to  be  jews,  &c. 
*c  but  I   my  felf,  and    as   many   christians   as    are 
4C  thoroughly  of  the  right  pcrfuafion,  do  both  know 
"  that  there  (hall  be  a  refurrectic:i  of  the  flefh,  and 
"  a   thouland   years    in  Jerufalem,    which    (hall   be 
"  built,    adorned    and   enlarged,    £*fr.'*     Can   any 
thing  be  plainer  than  that  Juftin  endeavours  by  this 
difcourfe   to  fatisfy  Trypho,    that   this    point    they 
•were  fpeaking  of  was  a  divine  doctrine,  and  owned 
to  be  fo  by  all  christians  -,  except  fuch  as  did  only 
bear  the  name  and  title  of  chriltians,  but  were  in- 
deed Wafphemous  hereticks  and  deniers  of  the  refur- 

rsclion  ? 


73o  7be  RULE  of  FAITH. 

PART  re^jon  p  by  which  character,  that  he  intends  to  de» 
%^^rmmmj  fcribe  the  impious  feds  of  the  gnofticks  will  appear 
by  and  by.     So  that  Mr.  White  mufl  either  allow 
the     inferting    of   the    negative    particle    (which 
*  Nov.'     Mr.  Mede  *  proves  to  have   been   omitted   in  the 
V^'  p*     copy)  or  elfe  acknowledge  that  thofe  who  arc  chri- 
ftians  only  in  name,  but  in  truth  are  impious  blas- 
phemous and  abfurd  hereticks,    may  properly  be  faid 
to  be  of  the  pure  and  pious  opinion  of  the  chrifti- 
ans.     And   if  only   thefe  be   the  other  catholicks, 
whom  Mr.  White  fays  Juilin  acknowledges  to  have 
held  contrary  to  the  millenaries,  I  am  contented  he 
fhould  make  his  beft  of  them.    If  Mr.  White  fhould 
blame  the  inferting  of  the  negative  particle  [not]  in- 
to Juftin's   text,  as  too  great  a  boldnefs    with  the 
fathers  *,  it  were  eafily  anfwered,  that  the  fenfe  evi- 
dently requires  it  :  and  in  fuch  a  cafe  it  is  no  bold- 
nefs, but  fuch  a  liberty  as  the  moft  learned  of  their 
own  interpreters  and  commentators  upon  the  fathers 
do  frequently  take.  And  as  for  Mr.  S.  if  he  takes  of- 
fence at  this,  one  may  with  reafon   (fince  the  exi- 
gency of  the  fenfe  plainly  requires  the  inferting  of 
*p-3I-     it)  demand  of  him  (what  he  *  unreafonably  does  of 
us   in  relation  to  all  the  affirmative  propofitions  of 
fcripture)  to  demonftrate  that  the  particle  [not]  was 
not  left  out  of  this  claufe  of  Juftin  by   thofe  who 
tranfcribed  the  book.     But  befides  the  exigency  of 
the  fenfe  in  this  place,    that  the  negative  ought  to 
have  been   inferted,   will   appear    by  the  reference 
which  Juftin  makes   in   this   pafiiige  to  fomething 
foregoing  in  the  fame  dialogue.     "  I  have  (fays  he) 
"  declared   to  thee  before,  that  my  felf  and  many 
"  others   are  of  the  mind  that  this  will  come  to 

"  pafs. 


The  RULE  of  FAITH.  73r 

*c  pafs.  But,  that  many  indeed  of  thofe  chriftians,  SECT. 
"  who  are  [not]  of  the  pure  and  pious  perfuafion  ^-  -*_j 
"  do  not  own  this,  I  have  intimated  to  thee.  For 
iC  of  thefe,  who  are  called  indeed  chriftians  but  are 
**  atheiftical  and  impious  hereticks,  I  have  fhewed 
"  thee  that  they  teach  in  all  points  blafphemous, 
u  atheiftical,  and  abfurd  things."  In  thefe  words 
he  plainly  refers  to  fome  precedent  pafTage,  which 
if  it  can  be  found  will  be  a  certain  key  to  open  to 
us  the  fenfe  of  this  place.  I  know  that  Mr.  Mede 
*  (perhaps  not  obferving  it)  thought  that  pafTage  - 
to  have  been  fraudulently  expunged  by  the  enemies 
of  the  millenary  opinion :  but  it  feems  to  me  to  be 
ftill  extant  ;  for  I  find  towards  the  beginning  of 
this  dialogue,  after  that  Juftin  had  endeavoured  to 
prove  at  large  out  of  fcripture  this  glorious  coming 
of  Christ,  and  to  refute  thofe  who  applied  the 
texts  produced  by  him  to  that  purpofe  to  Heze- 
kiah,  and  to  Solomon,  whofe  falling  off  to  idola- 
try he  occafionally  mentions ;  whereupon  Trypho 
objects  to  him,  that  many  who  were  called  chriftians, 
did  alfo  communicate  in  the  idol-feafts  :  to  this,  I 
fay,  I  find  Juftin  returning  this  anfwer  :  *  firft,  *  p-  2S3» 
he  denies  not,  "  *  that  there  are  fuch  as  thefe  who 
"  own  themfelves  chriftians,  and  confefs  the  cruci- 
tc  fied  Jesus  to  be  both  Lord  and  Christ,  and 
yet  teach  not  his  doctrines,  but  the  doctrine  of 
f educing  fpirits."  But,  fays  he,  "  we  who  are 
the  difciples  of  the  true  and  pure  doctrine  of 
Jesus  Christ,  are  from  this  very  thing  the 
"  more  ftrengthned  in  our  faith,  and  become 
"  more  confirmed  in  the  hope  which  by  him  hath 
*'  been  declared  to  us.  For  now  we  fee  thofe 
_  "  things 


tc 


y3a  The  RULE  vf  FAITH. 

PA  RT"  things  vifibly  and  effectually  accomplifh'd  which 
"  he  before-hand  told  us  would  be  done  in  his 
Cc  name.  For  he  faid,  many  fhall  come  in  my 
"  name,  Sec."  By  which  hope  any  one  that  reads 
the  antecedents  and  confequents,  will  plainly  Ice  that 
Juftin  means  the  hope  of  the  millennium  (which  he 
had  been  fpeaking  of  before)  and  confequently  of  the 
refurrection,  which  he  looked  upon  as  having  a  ftrict 
connexion  with  the  doctrine  of  the  millennium,  be- 
caufe  (as  he  tells  us  afterwards)  this  doctrine  was  denied 
by  none  but  fuch  as  alio  denied  the  refurrection.  And  of 
thefe  men  his  defcription  runs  on  in  thefe  words,  7rc>.- 
Xol  &c.  "  Many  fiaith  he)  both  are  and  have  been, 
"  that  have  come  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  and  taught 
"  both  to  fpeak  and  do  atheiftical  and  blafphemous 
"  things ;  and  are  by  us  denominated  from  thofe  men 
"  from  whom  each  of  their  doctrines  and  opinions  had 
"  its  rife  (namely  as  it  follows,  marcionites,valentinians, 
*'  &c.)  and  all  thefe  in  their  feveral  ways  teach  men  to 
"  blafpheme  the  creator  of  the  univerfe,  and  the 
"  Christ,  whofe  coming  was  foretold  by  him, and 
<c  the  God  of  Abraham,  Ifaac,  and  Jacob.  But  we 
"  have  no  communion  with  them,  as  knowing  them 
"  to  be  atheiflical  and  impious,  6cc."  This  paflage 
in  hand,  when  I  compare  it  with  the  text  before  quo- 
ted and  confider  the  words  and  characters  of  them 
both,  I  cannot  but  believe  it  the  very  fame  that  he 
refers  to  in  thefe  words,  "  I  have  declared  to  thee,  I 
u  have  intimated  to  thee,  8cc."  If  fo,  the  matter  in 
controverfy  is  clear,  that  the  doctrine  of  the  miile* 
nium  was  univerfal  :  if  it  be  not  the  fame,  I  could 
wifh  to  be  fhewed  fome  other  place  in  this  dialogue 

where  Juftin  makes  any  fuch  declaration  or  intima- 
tion. 


The  RULE  of  FAITH.  733 

fion.     In  the  mean  while,  by  comparifon   of  thefe  SECT, 
places,  it  is  evident  there  are  but  two  forts  of  men 
that  Juftin  fpcaks  of.     Firft,  tc  who  believe  the  mil-* 


"  doclrine,  6cc.  viz.  myfelf  and  many  others j"  again,  **>$&?& 

\'ta.?. 

"  the  right  perfuafion."     Secondly,  "  who  deny  the  i  oftoy 

'C      milLaniiim    ?         mot-Mr      plirifl-ione         Aif-n        Trillin    •       Kn  f         l 


"  lenium  ?  we  the  difciples  *  of  the  true  and   pure  ^.,,'^  ^ 

doclrine,  &x.  viz.  myfelf  and  many  others j"  again, 
"  myfelf  and  as  many  chriftians  as  are  thoroughly  f  of 


millenium  ?  many  chriftians,  faith  Juftin  :  but 
what  chriftians  ?  of  a  right  perfuafion  ?  that,  faith 
he,  I  have  fignified  before,  tss-  ^S',  &c.  for  I  have 
fhewed  thee  of  them  who  are  called  chriftians,  but 
are  indeed  atheifts  and  impious  hereticks,  that 
<c  they  teach  blafphemous  and  atheiftical,  and  abfurd 
"  things :"  and  true  it  is,  he  did  mew  before,  "that 
"  thole  who  denied  the  millenium  were  many  in 
"  number,  and  were  called  chriftians,  &c.  but  were 
<c  teachers  of  blafphemous  and  atheiftical  things,  Sec. 
c<  and  known  to  be  atheifts  and  impious,  &c.''  But  he 
fliewed  it  of  none  other  befides  thefe  :  fo  that  if  this 
doclrine  were  likewife  denied  by  many  chriftians  of 
the  pure  and  pious  perfuafion,  then  Juftin  Martyr  had 
foully  forgot  himfelf  -,  but  if  not,  then  it  is  plain  that 
the  tranferibers  have  wronged  Juftin,  by  leaving  out 
a  negative  which  ought  to  have  been  inferted.  It  is 
worth  obferving  by  the  way  how  Mr.  White  pleafes 
himfelf  with  falfe  and  frivolous  criticifms  upon  the 
words  ttcWovs  and  op&oyva>/-tov«f.  Falfe  they  are,  as 
Mr.  White  fhall  know  if  he  defires  to  hear  any  more 
of  them  ;  and  frivolous  they  are  render'd  by  my  pre- 
ceding difconrfe  •,  for  which  reafon  I  fay  no  more  of 
them.  But  I  think  he  may  do  well  hereafter  (as 
Mr.  S.  *  warily  fuggeftsj  not  to  engage  himfelf,  nor  *  p.  53, 
be  hook'd  by  others,  out  of  his  own  infallible  way, 

Vol.  IV.  7  L  but 

6. 


734  fti  RULE  of  FAITH. 

Part,  but  leave  it  wholly  to  the  *  bird-witted  hereticks  (a* 
x^^L^j  Mr.  S.  calls  them,)  to  perch  upon  the  fpecirlcal  natures 
*  P«  69*  of  words,  as  he  does  of  things. 

§  9.  Befides  thefe  inflances  I  have  given  of  doc- 
trines and  practices,  which  Mr.  S.  cannot  deny  to 
have  been  innovated,  I  might  inftance  likewife  in  the 
chief  points  of  popery,  and  fhew,  that  for  all  their 
pretence  to  tradition,  they  are  really  innovations. 
But  becaufe  this  would  engage  me  in  tedious  difputes 
about  particular  points,  I  will  only  fingle  out  one  of 
their  mod  fundamental  doctrines,  viz.  that  of  tran- 
fubftantiation  ;  concerning  which  I  fhall  mew  that, 
notwithstanding  it  is  the  univerfal  perfuafion  of  the 
prefent  Roman  church,  yet  they  have  not,  nor  can 
have  any  afTurance  that  it  was  the  doctrine  of 
Christ,  and  that  it  is  defcended  to  them  by  an  un- 
interrupted tradition.  I  mall  not  at  all  contend  againft 
the  word  tranfubflantiation  (which  is  generally  ac- 
knowledged to  be  new)  but  only  the  thing  fignified 
by  it,  a  fubftantial  change  of  the  bread  and  wine  in- 
to the  body  and  blood  of  Ch  rist.  And  this  I  might 
fhew  at  large  not  to  have  been  the  doctrine  of  the 
ancient  Fathers.  But  becaufe  Mr.  White  and  Dr. 
Holden,  and  Mr.  Crefly  do  fo  frequently  and  confi- 
dently tell  us,  that  nothing  is  to  be  reputed  a  tradi- 
tionary doctrine,  the  contrary  whereof  hath  been  pub- 
lickly  held  by  any  catholick  who  continued  after- 
wards uncenfured,  and  in  the  communion  of  the 
church  :  therefore  I  fhall  content  myfelf  at  prefent 
with  one  clear  teftimony,  and  that  of  a  very  eminent 
perfon  in  the  church,  St.  Theodoret,  concerning 
whom  pope  Leo  (in  an  epiftle  to  him,  at  the  end  of 
Theodoret's  works)  gives  this  teftimony,  "  that  in 

the 


The  RULE  of  FAITH.  735 

<c  the  judgment  of  the  apodolick  fee  he  was  freeSECT. 
"  from  ah  ftain  of  herefy."     The  pafTage  I  intend  is  ^^-^j 
in  his  dialogues,  between  a  catholick  under  the  name 
of  Orthcdoxus,  and  Eranides,  who  fudained  the  pei- 
fon  of  an  heretick.     Eranilles  *  maintaining  that  the*  Dialc 
body  of  Christ  was  changed  into  the  fubdance  of 
the  divinity,  he  illuftrates  it  by  this  fimilitude.  "  As 
"  (fays   he)   the  fymbols  ©f  the  Lord's  body  and 
"  blood  are  one  thing  before  the  invocation  of  the 
"  pried  ;  but  after  the  invocation,  are  changed  and  do 
"  become  another  thing  :  fo  the  body  of  our  Lord, 
cC  after  his  afcenfion,  is  changed  into  the  divine  fub- 
"  dance."     To  which  Orthodoxus  returns  this  an- 
fwer,  "  thou  art  caught  in  thine  own  net.     Becaufe 
<c  the  mydical  fymbols  after  confecration  do  not  pafs 
"  out  of  their  own  nature  *,  for  they  remain  in  their 
"  former  fubdance,   figure  and  appearance,  and  may 
M  be  feen  and  handled  even  as  before.3'    He  does  not 
only  in  exprefs  words  deny  the  fubdance  of  the  fym- 
bols to   be  changed,  but  the  occafion  upon  which 
theie  words  are  brought  in,  and  the  fcope  of  them  (if 
they  be  of  any  force  againd  the  heretick's  illudration) 
renders  them  uncapable  of  any  other  fenfe.  When  Mr. 
S.  hath  anfwered  this  tedimony,  I  have  more  for  him. 
That  which  I  mainly  urge  againd  this  doctrine  is, 
the  mondrous  abfurdities  and  contradictions  contain'd 
in    it,  together  with  the   neceflary   confequence  of 
them.     Several   of   the    abfurdities   of  it    are   well 
brought  together  by  Scotus  *,  who  tells  us,  that  to  *  Diih'nS. 
prove  the  poflibility  of  Christ's  body  being  con-1-*'  dllt* 

.       1  j         i_       /      •  -  1        •  10.  qu.  I 

tamed  under  the  fpecies  of   bread  and  wine,  many  n.  3. 
things  mud  be  proved  which  feem  to  involve  a  con- 
tradiction, as3  1.  ct  That  one  quantum  (or  extended 

7  L  2  "  body) 


736  The  RULE  of  FAITH. 

PART"  body)  may  be  together  in  the  very  fame  place 
"  with  another.    2.  That  a  lefs  quantum  may  be  to- 
<c  gether  in  the  fame  place  with  a  greater  ;"  i.  e.  a 
body  of  lefs  extenfion  may  occupy  not  only  the  fame, 
but  as  much  room   as  a  body  of  greater  extenfion 
does:,  which  is  to  fay  no  more  but  this,  that  a  body 
lefs  than  another  may  be  as  great  as  that  other  even 
whilft  it  is  lefs  than  it.     3.  a  That  a  greater  quan- 
**  turn  may    be  together  with  every  part  of  a  lefs 
"  quantum,"  i.  e.  a  body  that  is  greater  than  ano- 
ther  may  be  as  little  as  the  lead  part  of  that  other 
body  which  is  lefs  than  it.  4.  "  That  a  fubjeel:  may  be 
cs  without  quantity,"  i.  e.    there    may   be  a  body 
which  hath  no  kind  of  magnitude.     5.  That  a  body 
may  be  fomewhere  where  it  was  not  before,  without 
changing  its  place,  i.  e.  a  body  may  be  removed  to 
another  place,    whilft    it   remains  ftill  in    the  fame 
place.     6.  "  That  a  quantum  may  be  without  any 
"  quantitative  mode,  i.  e.   a  body  may  be  extended 
without  any  manner  of  extenfion.     "  The  poflibi- 
"  lity  of  all  which,  he  faith  (and  I  am  very  much  of 
fc<  his  mind)   it   would   be   too   tedious  a  work  to 
<c  prove ;"  and  therefore  he  only  attempts  to  prove 
the  two  laft5  which  (in  all  reafon)  is  work  enough  for 
one  man.     All  thefe  feeming  contradictions  fas  he 
modeflly  calls   them)  are  by  his    own  acknowledg- 
ment involved  in  this  doctrine.  To  thefe  I  might  add 
many  more,  as  how  a  thing  can  be  faid  to  be  changed 
into  another  thing  which  did  exift  before  :  how  a  bo- 
dy can  be  prefent  in  a  place  after  the  manner  of  a 
fpirit :  and  yet  this  they  affirm  concerning  the  pre- 
fence  of  Christ's  body  in  the  facrament :  one  might 
£S  well  fay  that  fnew  is  black,  but  not  after  the  manner 

9f 


The  RULE  of  FA  IT H.  737 

of  blacknels,  but  in  the  way  of  whitenefs,  which  is  to  S  E  c  T. 

-  iX 

talk  nonfenfe  after  the  manner  of  fenie :   How  the  _^^ 

whole  body  of  Christ  can  be  contained  under  the*  Ibid. 

qu.   I,  n. 


s  se- 


leaft  fenfible  part  of  the  fpecies  of  bread,  as  i 
nerally  affirmed  :  nay,   and   Scotus  *  adds,  that  the 
whole  body  is  under  every  little  part  in  it;  full  pro- 
portion ;  for  he  fays  exprefly,  "  that   the  head  and 
u    the  foot  of  the  body  of  Christ  are  as  far   dif- 
"  tant  from  one  another  in  the  facrament,  m  they 
u  are  in  heaven  •,"  as  if  one  fhould  fay  that  a  body, 
all  whofe  parts    lie  within  the  com  pais  of  a  fmail 
pin's-head,  may  yet  within  that  little  compafs  have 
parts  two  yards  diftant  from  one  another :  and  laflly, 
"  how  the  fenfible  fpecies  of  bread,  e.  g.  quantity, 
c<  whitenefs,  foftnefs,  6cc.    can   exifl    without    any 
"  fubject :"   to  affirm   the   poffibility  of  which  (as 
generally  they  do)  is  to  fay  that  there  may  be  quan- 
tities of  white  and  foft  nothings ;  for  this  is  the  plain 
englifh    of   that   afTertion,    "    that   fenfible  fpecies 
"  may  exift  without  a  fubject ; "  which  being  ftript 
of  thofe  terms  of  art  (fpecies  and  fubjecl)  that   do 
a  little  difguife  it,  it  appears  to  be  plain  nonfenfe. 

Now  the  proper  and  necefTary  confequence  of  this 
doctrine  is  to  take  away  all  certainty,  and  efpecially 
the  certainty  of  fenfe:  for  if  that  which  my  fight 
and  tafte  and  touch  do  all  aflure  me  to  be  a  little 
piece  of  wafer,  may  notwithstanding  this  beflefh  and 
blood,  even  the  whole  body  of  a  man  ;  then  not- 
withftanding  the  greatefl  aflurance  that  icnk  can 
give  me,  that  any  thing  is  this  or  that,  it  may  be 
quite  another  thing  from  what  fenfe  reported  it  to 
be.     If  fo,  then  farewel  the  infallibility  of  tradition, 

which  depends  upon  the  certainty  of  fenfe :  and  which 

is 


738  The  RULE  of  FAITH. 

PART  is  a  worfe  confequence,  if  this  doctrine  be  admitted, 
"*; .we  can  have   no  fufficient  affurance  that  the  chri- 
ftian  doctrine   is  a  divine  revelation.     For  the  affu- 
rance  of  that  depending  upon  the  afilirance  we  have 
of  the  miracles  faid  to  be  wrought  for  the  confir- 
mation of  it,  and  all  the  afifurance  we  can  have   of 
a  miracle  depending  upon  the  certainty  of  our  fenfes  \ 
it  is  very  plain  that  that  doctrine  which  takes  away 
the  certainty  of  knCc,  does  in  fo  doing  overthrow  the 
certainty   of  chriftian  religion.     And  what   can  be 
more  vain  than  to  pretend,  that  a  man  may  be  af- 
fured  that  fuch  a  doclrine  is  revealed  by  God,  and 
confequently  true,  which  if  it  be  true,  a  man  can 
have  no  affurance  at  all    of  any  divine  revelation  ? 
furely  nothing  is   to   be  admitted  by   us  as  certain, 
which  being  admitted  we  can  be  certain  of  nothing. 
It  is  a  wonder  that  any  man  who  confiders  the  natural 
confequences  of  this  doctrine  can  be  a  papift  *,  unlefs 
he  have  attained  to  Mr.  Creffy's  pitch  of  learning, 
who  fpeaking  of  the  difficult  arguments  wherewith 

*  Exomol.  this  doctrine  was  preffed,  fays   *   plainly,  "   I  muft 

c. 73.  left.  ct  anfwcr  freely  and  ingenuoufly,  that  I  have  not 
"  learned  to  anfwer  fuch  arguments,  but  to  defpife 
"  them.**  And  if  this  be  a  good  way,  whenever 
we  have  a  mind  to  believe  any  thing,  to  fcorn  thofc 
objections  againfl  it  which  we  cannot  folve>  then 
chriftian  religion  hath  no  advantage  above  the 
vileft  enthufiafms  •,  and  a  turk  may  maintain  Ma- 
homet and  his  alcoran  (in  oppofition  to  Christ 
and  his  doctrine)  againfl:  all  that  Grotius,  or  any 
other  hath  faid,  if  he  can  but  keep  his  countenance, 
and  gravely  fay,  "  I  have  not  learned  to  anfwer 
cc  fuch  arguments,  but  to  defpife  them." 

§10.1 


The  RULE  of  FAITH.  739 

§  io.  I  will  add  one  inftance  more  in  another  S  e  C  T- 
kind,  to  mew  the  uncertainty  of  oral  and  practical  1  IX- 
traditions,  and  that  mail  be  the  tradition  concerning 
pope  Joan  ;  than  which  fcarce  any  thing  was  ever 
more  generally  received  in  the  hiflorical  kind.  Many 
and  great  authors  affirm  it,  as  teftifiers  of  the  general 
fame.  None  ever  denied  it  till  the  reformers  had 
made  ufe  of  it  to  the  diiadvantage  of  popery. 
Since  that  time  not  only  papifts  deny  it,  but  feveral 
of  our  own  writers  ceafe  to  believe  it.  Phil.  Bergo- 
menfis  tells  the  (lory  thus :  "  Anno  858.  John  the 
"  7th  pope,  &c.  The  tradition  is,  "  that  this  per- 
u  fon  was  a  woman,  &c."  Here's  an  oral  tradition. 
He  concludes  thus  :  "in  deteftation  of  whole  filthineis, 
and  to  perpetuate  the  memory  of  her  name,  the 
popes  even  to  this  day  going  on  procefiion  with 
the  people  and  clergy,  when  they  come  to  the 
<c  place  of  her  travail,  &x.  in  token  of  abomina- 
M  tion  they  turn  from  it,  and  go  a  by-way,  and  be- 
"  ing  pad  that  deteftable  place,  they  return  into  the 
"  way,  and  finifh  their  proceflion."  Here  is  one 
practical  tradition.  "  And  for  avoiding  the  like 
4t  miicarriages,  it  was  decreed  that  no  one  mould 
"  thereafter  be  admitted  into  St.  Peter's  chair,  pri~ 
<c  ufquam  per  for  at  am  fedem  fuiuri  Pontific is  genitalia 
■*  ab  ultimo  diacono  cardinak  attrettarentur : "  here  is 
another  with  a  witnefs.  *  Sabcllicus  relates  the  fame  -,  *  Enead, 
and  moreover  fays,  "  that  this  porphyry  chair  was 
"  in  his  time  to  be  [cen  in  the  pope's  palace." 
He  adds  indeed,  "  that  Platina  thinks  that  this  tra- 
<c  dition  of  pope  Joan  was  not  faithfully  delivered 
"  to  pofterity.  Bat  however  (fays  he)  fuch  a  tradition 
"  there  is."     Concerning  the  rirffc  practical  tradition 

Platina 


9. 1.  1 


74o  The  RULE  of  FAITH. 

PA  RT  Platina  fays,  "  that  he  may  not  deny  it."  For  the 
y^J^^j  fecond,  "  he  thinks  the  chair  rather  defign'd  for  a 
"  fcool  for  another  ufe,  &c."  He  concludes,  "  thefe 
<c  things  which  I  have  related  are  commonly  re- 
"  ported,  yet  from  uncertain  and  obicure  authors: 
"  therefore  I  reiblved  (fays  he)  briefly  and  nakedly 
"  to  fet  them  down,  left  I  mould  feem  too  obftinate- 
"  ly  and  pertinaciouQy  to  have  omitted  that  which 
**  almoft  all  affirm."  It  is  no  wonder  that  he  fays 
the  authors  of  this  report  were  uncertain  and  obfeure, 
fince  fo  very  few  writ  any  thing  in  that  age.  But 
fuppofe  none  had  writ  of  it,  fb  long  as  he  acknow- 
ledges it  to  have  been  a  general  oral  tradition  attefted 
by  a  folemn  and  confeant  practice,  it  has  (according 
to  Mr.  S's  principles)  greater  certainty  than  if  it  had 
been  brought  down  to  us  by  a  hundred  books  written 
in  that  very  age.  So  that  here's  an  oral  and  practical 
tradition,  continued  we  are  fure  for  fome  hundreds  of 
years,  preferved  and  propagated  by  a  folemn  practice 
of  the  popes,  clergy,  and  people  of  Rome  in  their 
proceflions,  and  by  a  notorious  cuftom  at  the  election 
of  every  pope  *,  and  in  a  matter  of  fo  great  impor- 
tance to  their  religion  (the  honour  of  the  fee  of 
Rome,  and  the  uninterrupted  fucceffion  from  St.  Peter 
being  fo  nearly  concerned  in  it)  that,  had  it  been 
falfe,  they  had  been  obliged  under  pain  of  damna- 
tion, not  only  not  to  have  promoted  it,  but  to  have 
ufed  all  means  to  have  difcovered  the  falfity  of  it. 
Therefore  Mr.  S.  is  bound  by  his  own  principles  ei- 
ther to  allow  it  for  a  truth,  or  elle  to  give  an  ac- 
count when  and  how  it  began ;  which  may  pofiibly 

*  P.  340.be  made  out  by  u  we  metaphyficians"  (as  he  *  ftyles 

himfelf,  and  his  fcientihxal  brethren)  but  I  allure  him 

+  P.  537.  it  is  pad  the  skill  of  f  note-book  learning. 

SECT. 


the  RULE  of  FAITH. 

SECT.      X. 

§  i.    |  T  is  not  the  prefent  perfuafion  of  the  church  The  fourth 
1   of  Rome,  nor   ever   was,    that   their  faith  hiffecod 
hath  defccnded  to  them  by  oral  tradition  as  the  fole  demonftra- 
rule   of  it.     And   this    being  proved,    the   fuppo-tl0n* 
fition  upon  which  his  demonftration  is  built  falls  to 
the  ground. 

And    for   the   proof   of  this,    I   appeal    to  that 
*  decree    of  the  council   of  Trent,  in  which  they  *  Decret 
declare,  "  that  becaufe  the  chriflian  faith  and  difci-PrimuiT* 
"  pline   are    contained  in    written    books  and   un-^^ 
<c  written  traditions,  &c.   therefore  they  do  receive 
<c  and  honour  the  books  of  fcripture  and  alfo  tra- 
"  dition   [pari   pie  talis  affeftu  ac  reverentia]    with 
"  equal  pious   affection  and  reverence  ♦,  "  which  I 
underftand    not  how  thofe   do   who   fet  afide    the 
fcripture,  and  make  tradition  the  fole  rule  of  their 
faith.     And  confonantly  to  this  decree,  the  general 
doctrine  of  the  Romifh  church  is,  "  that  fcripture 
"  and  tradition  make  up  the  rule  of  faith."     So 
the  Roman   catechifm   (fet  forth  by  order  of  the 
council  of  Trent)  fays,  "  *  that  the  fum  of  the  doc-  *  rn  prJi; 
"  trine  delivered  to  the  faithful  is  contained  in  thefat* 
"  word  of  God,  which  is  diflributed  into  fcripture 
"  and  tradition."     Bellarmine  *  fpeaks  to  the  lame*  Dever- 
purpofe,  "  that  the  fcripture  is  a  rule  of  faith,  not&c  jei* 
"  an  entire  but  partial  one.     The  entire  rule  is  the  I2« 
««  word  of  God,  which  is  divided  into  two  partial 
"  rules,  fcripture,  and  tradition."  According  to  this, 
the  adequate  rule  of  faith  is  the  word  of  God  ;  which 
is  contained  partly  iri  fcripture,  and  partly  in  the 
Vol.  IV.  7  M  tradition 


742  fbe  RULE  of  FAITH. 

PART,  tradition  of  the  church.  And  that  fcripture  is 
vJ^^jlookM  upon  by  them  as  the  principal  rule  and  pri- 
mary foundation  of  their  faith,  and  tradition  as  only 
{implying  the  defects  of  fcripture,  as  to  fome  doc- 
trines and  rites  not  contained  in  fcripture,  mult  be 
evident  to  any  one  that  has  been  converfant  in  the 

*  Devcr  chief  of  their  controverfial  divines.  Bellarmiue  * 
*>°  Drei.  where  he  gives  the  marks  of  a  divine  tradition, 
f»ni.4.P"  freaks  to  this  purpofe,  "  that  that  which  they  call  a 
c.  9.         "  divine   tradition    is  fuch  a  doctrine  or  rite  as  is 

"  not  found  in  fcripture,  but  embraced  by  the 
"  whole  church  •,  and  for  that  reafon  believed  to 
"  have  defcended  from  the  apoflles."     And  he  tells 

*  Ibid.  c.  us  farther,  "  *  that  the  apoflles  committed  all   to 
n.  «  writing    which   was    commonly    and    publickly 

"  preached  •,  and  that  all  things  are  in  fcripture, 
"  which  men  are  bound  to  know  and  believe  ex- 
*4  plicitly  :  "  but  then  he  fays,  "  that  there  were 
iC  other  things  which  the  apoflles  did  not  common- 
«  ly  and  publickly  teach  -,  and  thefe  they  did  not 
"  commit  to  writing,  but  delivered  them  only  by 
'•  v/ord  of  mouth  to  the  prelates  and  priefls  and 
"  perfect  men  of  the  church."  And  thefe  are  the 
apotiolical  traditions  he  fpeaks  of.     Cardinal  Perron 

*  Reply     *  fays,  a  that  the  fcripture  is  the  foundation  of  the 

obierv.  3.  |c  chrrftian  doctrine,    either  mediately  or  immedi- 
c.  4«  . 

"  ately.     And  that  the  authority  of  unwritten  tra- 

«  dition  is  founded  in  general  on  thefe  fentences  of 

Theff. "  the  apoflle,  *  hold  the  traditions,  &c."     Again, 

K.  15.        "  4-  the  things  which  thou  haft  heard  of  me  among 

\  \  u      l£  many  witnefies    commit   to  faithful  men,  &c." 

And  "  that  the  authority  of  the  church  to  preferve, 

cc  and  efpecially  to  declare  thefe,  is  founded  in  this 

"  propo- 


The  RULE  of  FAITH.  74.3 

<c  propofition,  viz.  *  that  the  church   is  the  pillar  SECT. 
<c  and  ground  of  truth."    So  that  according  to  him,  ^^^l^j 
the  primary  rule  of  faith  is  the  fcripture,  in  which*  1  Tim. 
the   authority  of  tradition  is  founded.     Mr.  Knott"1, 'S* 

[ays  exprefly,  "  we  acknowledge  the  holy  fcrip-*  Charity 
<4  ture  to  be  a  moft  perfect  rule,  for  as  much  as  ae< 
"  writing  can  be  a  rule;  we  only  deny  that  it  ex-k&-  J- 
"  eludes,  either  divine  tradition,  though  it   be  un- 
"  written,    or  an  external  judge   to  keep,     to  pro- 
"  pofe,  to  interpret  it,    &c.''9     So  that   (according 
to   him)   fcripture  is    a  perfecl:  rule,    only  it    d 
not  exclude  unwritten  tradition,  (5V.  by  which  that 
he  does  not  underiiand  (as  Mr. .  S.  does)  a  concurrent 
oral   tradition  of  all  the   fame  doctrines    which  are 
contained  in  fcripture,  but  other  doctrines  not  there- 
in contained,  is  plain  from  what  he  fays  elfewhere, 
ct  *  we  clo  not   diftinguifh  tradition  from  the  writ-*  Reply  to 

"  ten    word,    becaufe   tradition    is   not   written   by  ^ir' C 

.  .  '  c  2.  feci. 

"  any,  or  in  any  booK   or  writing  -,  but  becaufe  it  170. 

"  is  not  written   in   the  fcripture  or  bible  ;  "  Bel- 
larmine  f  alfo  fays  the   fame.     And  as  for  the  in-f  De  ver- 
terpreting  of  fcripture,    he    tells  us,    "  that  thisisboDei» 
"  not    the   office    cf   a    rule,    but   of   a  judge."  c.  2. 
ct  *  There  is  (fays  he)  a  great  and  plain  diftincti- *  Charity 
"  on   between   a    judge  and   a   rule.     For  as  in  a™?^111" 

P  1     c     n 

"  kingdom  the  judge  hath  his  rule  to  follow,  which fea.  %.' 
cC  are  the  received  laws  and  cuftoms;  which  are  not 
c '  Gt  or  able  to  declare,  and  be  judges  thetri- 
"  felves,  but  that  office  muft  belong  to  a  Jivino- 
"  judge:  fo  the  holy  fcripture  is  and  may  be  a  rule, 
"  but  cannot  be  a  judge."  Here  lie  makes  the 
fcripture  as  much  a  rule  for  matters  of  faith,  as  the 
laws  of  the  land  are  for  civil  matters.     And  in  his 

7  M  2  reply 


7H  ^  RULE  of  FAITH. 

PART  reply  to  Mr.  Chillingworth,  he  hath  a  chapter  of 

K^-v-L^t  above  150  pages,  the  title  whereof  is,  "  fcripture  is 

ci  not  the  only  rule  of  faith  •,  M  which  (had  he  with 

Mr.  S.  believed  oral  tradition  to  be  the  fole  rule  of 

faith)  had  been  as  abfurd  as  it  would  be  to  write  a 

-  book  to  prove  that  turks  are  not  the  only  chrifti- 

-fins  in   the  world.     Mr.    CrefTy   like  wife   (not   very 

confidently  to  himfelf)   lays  down  this  conclufion  •, 

Exomol.  u  *  tne  entire  rule  of  faith  is  contained  not  only  in 

c.  20.  .... 

"  fcripture,  but  likewife  in  unwritten  tradition." 

§  2.  Now    all  this  is   as   contrary  as  can   be    to 

Mr.    Rufhworth's    new*  rule    of   faith.     Therefore 

*uj£agUl'    Mr.   White   fays,    *  "  they  fpeak    ill  who    teach 

p.  96.       "  that  fome  things  are  known  in  the  church   from 

<c  fcripture,  fome  by  tradition."  And  Dr.  Holden  (in 

oppofition  to  thofe  who  make  fcripture  any  part  of 

the  rule   of  faith)   advances  one  of  the  mod  wild 

and  uncharitable  pofitions  that  ever  1  yet  met  withal, 

Ajialyf.     •      tt  *  tnat  *f  one  fhould  believe  all  the  articles  of 

fid.    1.    I  .  C. 

6.  <c  the  catholick  faith,  &c.    for  this  reafon    becauie 

tC  he  thought  they  were  all  exprefly  revealed  in 
«'  fcripture,  or  implicitly  contained,  fo  as  they 
cc  might  be  deduced  from  thence,  and  would  not 
*c  have  believed  them,  had  he  not  judged  that  they 
"  mi°"ht  be  evinced  from  fcripture ;  yet  this  man 
"  could  be  no  true  catholick  :   becaufe  (as  he  tt\h 

?  C.  8.  «  us  afterwards  *)  we  muft  receive  the  chriftian 
ii  doctrine  as  coming  to  us  by  tradition  ;  for  only 
tc  by  this  means  (excluding  the  fcriptures)  Christ 
"  hath  appointed  revealed  truths  to  be  received  and 
£  communicated.  "  In  the  mean  time  cardinal 
Ferron  (uniefs  he  altered  his  mind)  is  in  a  fad  cafe, 
v^ho    believed    the   authority   of   tradition   it    fclf 

for 


the  RULE  of  FAITH,                   745 
for  this  reafon,    becaufe  it   was  founded  in   fcrip- s  etc  t- 
ture.  i v j 

§  3.  And   this  fundamental  difference  about  the 
rule  of  faith,  between  the  generality  of  their  divines 
and  Mr.   S's  fmall  party,  is  fully  acknowledged  by 
the  traditionifts  themfelves.  Dr.  Holden  lays,  "  *  that*  L.  1.  c. 
u  their   divines   who  refblve  faith  according  to  the^* 
<c  common  opinion,  do  inevitably  fall  into  that  fhame- 
ful  circle   (of  proving  the  divine  authority  of  the 
fcripture  by  the  church,  and  the  infallibility  of  the 
church  back  again  by  the  fcripture)  becaufe  they 
"  dare  not  build  their  faith  upon  the  natural  evidence 
46  and  certainty  of  tradition."  So  that  Dr.  Holden's 
way  of  refolving  faith,  is  different  from  the  common 
opinion  of  their  divines,  u  which  he  fays  *  does  not*  L-  lc* 
"  differ  from  the  opinion  of  thofe  who  refolve  their 
"  faith  into  the  private  fpirits  •,"  and  this  (according 
to  Mr.  White  *  )  is  the  very  way  of  the  calvinifls,*  Exetaf> 
and  of  the  abfurdeft  feds.     Nay,   Mr.  White  faysP'  /C' 
farther  *,  that  he  will  be  content  to  fuffer  all  the  pu-*  Ibid, 
nifhment  that   is  due  to  calumniators,  if  the  roman 
divines  (he  there  fpeaks  of)  do  not  hold  the  fame 
rule  of  faith  with  the  calvinifls,  and  ail  the  abfurdeft 
feels.     So  that  it  feems  that  the  calvinifls,    &c.  do 
not  in  their  rule  of  faith  differ  from  the  papifts,  but 
only  from  Mr.  White,  Mr.  S.  &c.     Now  the  divines 
he   there  fpeaks  of,  are  the  cenfors  of  doctrines  at 
Rome,  according  to  whofe  advice  his  infallible  holi- 
nefs  and  the  cardinals  of  the  inquifition  do  ufually  pro- 
ceed in  cenfuring  of  doctrines.     Concerning  thefe  di- 
vines he  goes  on    to  expoftulate    in    this  manner  -, 

M  *  fhall  we  endure  thefe   men   to  fit  as  cenfors  and  *  T, 

lb.  p. 

^  judges  of  faith,  who  agree  with    hereticks  in  the 73. 

««  very 


746  The  RULE  of  FAITH, 

PART4'  very  firft  principle  which  diftinguifnes  catholicks 
v, ^^j  "  from  hereticks  ?"     Again,  "  *  thefe  are  thy  gods, 

*  P.  144."  O  Rome !   upon  thefe  thou  depended,  whilft  prat- 

"  ing  ignorance  triumphs  in  the  Roman  college." 
And  he  lays  the  fame  likevvife  of  the  generality  of 
the  fcbool- divines,  whom  he  calls  fceoticks,  becaufe 
they  do  not  own  his  demonftrative  way.     Infomuch 

*  P.  64.  that  he  tells  us,  "  *  that  few  found  parts  are  left  unin- 
t  p'  *49' "  fecled  with  this  plague  of  fcepticifm  j  f  that  this  is 
6s.         '  c<  an  univerfal  gangrene  ;  *  that   there  are  but   few 

cc  that  go  the  way  of  demonftration,  and  thefe  are  ei- 
"  ther  wearied  out,  or  gKq  live  retiredly,  or  defpair 
<c  of  any  remedy  of  thefe  things."  And  indeed  all 
along  that  book  he  bemoans  himfelf  and  his  traditio- 
nary brethren  as  a  defolate  and  forlorn  party,  who 
have  truth  on  their  fide,  but  want  company  and  en- 

*  P.  loi.couragement.     So  he  tells  us,  "  *  that  the  true  fcien- 

"  tifical  divines  dare  not  profefs  their  knowledge,  left 
"  they  mould  be  expofed  by  the  fophifters  of  their 
"  church  to  the  derifion  and  fcorn  either'  of  their 
6;  judges  or  of  the  people." 

§  4.  So  that  upon  examination  of  the  whole  mat- 
ter, it  appears  that  Mr.  S's  demonftration  proceeds 
upon  a  falle  fuppofition,  8<  that  it  is  the  perfuafion  of 
<c  their  prefent  church,  that  tradition  is  the  fole  rule 
"  of  faith."  For  there  is  no  fuch  matter  -,  unlefs 
Mr,  S.  mean  by  their  church  a  few  private  perfons, 
who  are  looked  upon  by  thofe  who  have  the  chief 
power  in  their  church  as  heretical  :  as  we  may  reafon- 
ably  conjecture  by  the  proceedings  at  Rome  again  ft 
Mr.  White  •,  many  of  whole   boqks  are   there  con- 

*  Exetaf.  demned,  "  *  as  containing  things  manifeftly  hereti- 
P-  9-         «  cal,  erroneous  in  the  faith,  rafh,  fcandalous,  fedi- 

Cc  tious, 


tte  RULE  of  FAITH.  y±y 

H  tious,    and   falfe  refpectively,  &c."    And  all  this  SECT. 
done,  notwithstanding  that  the  chief  fubjecr.  of  thofe .  ^^l^j 
books  is  the  explication  and  defence  of  this  mod  ca- 
tholick   principle,  c'   that  oral    tradition  is  the  only 
"  rule  of  faith."     To  (urri  up  then  the  whole  bufi- 
nefs  :  if  nothing  be  to  be  owned  for  chriftian  doc- 
trine (as  the  traditionifts  fay)  but  what  is  the  general 
perfuafion  of  thofe  who  are  acknowledged  to  be  in 
the  communion  of  the  roman  catholick  church  -,  then 
much  lefs  can  this  principle  (  "  that  oral  tradition  is 
"  the  fole  rule  of  faith")  which  is  pretended   to  be 
the  foundation  of  the  whole  chriftian  doctrine,  be  re- 
ceived as  defcended  from  Christ  and  his  apofdes  ; 
fince  it  is  fo  far  from  being  the  general  perfuafion  of 
that   church  at   prcfent,  that  it   has   been,  and  full 
is  generally  difowned.     But  Mr.  White  has  a  falvo 
for  this.     For  although  he  grants,  "  *  that  very  ma-5  Apolog, 
"  ny  of  their   fchoolmen  maintain  that  tradition  js**'  \  ' 
'■'  necefiary  only  for  lome  points  not  clearly  exprefTed 
<c  in  fcripture,  whence  (he  fays)  it  feems  to  follow 
c:  that  they  build  not  the  whole  body  of  their  faith 
"  upon  tradition :"  yet  he  tells  us,  "  there  is  a  vail 
"  difTerencc  betwixt  relying  on  tradition,  and  faying 
<c  or  thinking  we  do  fo."     Suppofe  there  be  ;  yet  I 
hope  that  mens  faying  that  they  do  not  rely  on  tradi- 
tion as  their  only  rule,  is  a  better  evidence  that  they 
do  not,  than  any  man's  furmife  to  the  contrary  is  that 
they  do,   tho'   they  think  and  lay  they  do  not ;  which 
is  in  effect  to  fay  that  they  do,  tho'  we  have  as  much 
aflurance  as  we  can  that  they  do  not.  Befides,  "  how  is 
"  this  rulefelf-evident  to  all,  even  to  the  rude  vulgar  as 
"  to  its  ruling  power"  (as  Mr.  S.  affirms  it  is)  when 
the  greateft  part  even  of  the  learned  among  them 

think 


74 8  the  RULE  of  FAITH. 

P  A  R  T  think  and  fay  that  it  is  not  the  only  rule  ?    Bat  Mr. 
White  endeavours  to  llluftrate  this  dark  point  by  a 
*  fimilitude,  which  is  to  this  ferfz  ;    as  the  fcepticks 
who  deny  this  principle,  "  that  contradictions  can- 
iC  not   be  true   at  once,  yet  in  their   lives  and  civil 
u  actions    proceed   as    if  they  owned  it:5'    fo  the 
fchoolmen,    though  they  deny  tradition  to  be   the 
only  rule  of  faith,  yet  by  refolving  their  faith  into 
the  church    which  owns    this    principle,   they    do 
alio  in    practice   own   it  though  they  fay  they  do 
not.     So  that  the  generality  of  learned  papifts  are 
juft  fuch  catholicks  as  the  fcepticks  are  dogmatics, 
that  is,  a  company  of  abfurd   people  that   confute 
their  principles  by  their  practice.     According  to  this 
reafoning  I  perceive  the  proteftants  will  prove  as  good 
catholicks  as  any,  for  they  do    not   only  think  and 
fay  that   tradition  is  not  the  rule  of  faith;  but   that 
they   practically  rely  upon  it,  Mr.  S.  hath  pad  his 
word  for  them :  for  he  afTures  us  *  (and  we  may 
rely  upon  a  man  that  writes  nothing  but  demon- 
ftration)  "  that   if  we  look  narrowly  into  the  bot- 
"  torn  of  our  hearts,  we  mall  difcover  the  natural 
€c  method  of  tradition,  to  have  unawares  fettled  our 
"  judgments  concerning  faith  •,  however,  when  our 
"  other  concerns   awake  defign  in  us,  we   proteft 
"  againft  it,  and  feem  perhaps  to  our  unreflecting 
"  felves  to  embrace  and  hold  to  the  mere  guidance 
"  of  the  letter  of  fcripture."     So  that  in  reality  we 
are  as  good  catholicks,  and  as  true  holders  to  tradi- 
tion as  any  papifts  of  them  all,  at  the  bottom  of  our 
thoughts  and  in  our  fettled  judgment  *,  however  we 
have  taken  up  an  humour  to  proteft  againft  it,  and 
may  feem  perhaps  to  our  unreflecting  felves  to  be 
proteftants,  §5-  Tnu* 


The  RULE  of  FAITH.  749 

§  5.  Thus  much  may  fuffice  to  have  fpoken   to  S  E  C  Tj 
his  two  great  arguments ;   or  *  as  he  (good  man)  ._ 1.  _, 
unfortunately  calls  them  demonftrations ;  which  yet*  P.  173- 
to  fay  truth  are  not  properly  his,  but  the  author  of 
Rufhworth's  dialogues,  the  main  foundation  of  which 
book  is  the  fublfance  of  thefe  demonstrations.     On- 
ly before  I  take  leave  of  them,  I  cannot  but  reflect 
upon  a   paflage  of   Mr.  S's  *,  wherein  he  tells  his*  p.  163; 
readers,  "  that  they  are  not  obliged    to  bend  their 
"  brains  to  ftudy  his  book  with  that  feverity  as  they 
"  would  do  an  euclid  -,  "  meaning  perhaps   one    of 
Mr.  White's  euclids  ;  for  it  does  not  appear  by   his 
way   of  demonftration    that  ever  he  dealt  with  any 
other.     As  for  the  true  euclid,  I  fuppofe   any  one 
that  hath  tailed  his  writing,  will  at  the  reading  of 
Mr.  S's  unbend  his  brains  without  bidding,  and  fmile 
to  fee  himfelf  fo  demurely  difcharged  from  a  ftudy 
fc>  abfurd  and  ridiculous. 

SECT.     XL 


§  1.      '  Should    now    take    into  fconfideration    his  Concern- 
-*  ninth  difcourfe,  in  which  he  pretends  "  toin?  fom,e 

r  other  ad- 

"  open  the  incomparable  firength  of  the  church's  vantages 

"  humane  authority,  and  the  advantages  which  accrue  °f  tra(li- 

J  J  °  tion,  &c. 

cC  to  it  by  tne  fupernatural  afllftances  of  the  Holy 

61  Ghost:"    but  that  there  is  nothing   material  in 

it,  which  hath  not  been  anfwered   already.     Only  I 

defire  him  to  explain,    how    the   fupernatural   affif- 

tances  of  the   Holy  Ghost,  can  (according  to  his 

principle^  add  to  our  afiurance  of  the  certainty  of 

tradition.     Becaufe  we  can  have  no  greater  certainty 

of  the  fupernatural  afliftance  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 

Vol.  IV.  7  N  than 

6. 


75©  92*  RULE  of  FAITH. 

PART  than  we  have  that  there  is  an  HoLy  Ghost,  and  of 
i_~lWLj  this  we  can  have  no  certainty  (according  to  Mr.  S.) 
but  by  tradition,  which  conveys  this  do&rine  to  us. 
And  if  tradition  of  itfelf  can  infallibly  aflure  us 
that  there  are  fupernatural  afllftances  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  then  a  man  mud  know  that  tradition  is 
infallible  antecedently  to  his  knowledge  of  any  fu- 
pernatural afliftance.  And  if  Co9  what  can  any  fu- 
pernatural afliftance  add  to  my  afTurance  of  the  cer- 
tainty of  tradition,  which  I  do  fuppofe  to  be  in- 
fallible before  I  can  know  of  any  fupernatural  af- 
liftance ?  Can  any  thing  be  more  ludicrous,  than 
to  build  firft  all  our  certainty  of  the  afliftance  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  upon  the  certainty  of  tradition, 
and  then  afterwards  to  make  the  certainty  of  tradi- 
tion to  rely  upon  the  afliftance  of  the  Holy  Ghost  ? 
as  if  that  could  contribute  to  our  afTurance  of 
the  certainty  of  tradition,  which  unlefs  tradition 
be  flrfl  fuppofed  certain,  is  it  felf  wholly  uncer- 
tain. 

§  2.  The  conclufion  of  this  ninth  difcourfe  is 
fomewhat  ecftatical ;  pofilbly  from  a  fudden  difor- 
der  of  his  fancy  upon  the  contemplation  of  his  own 
performances,  to  fee  what  a  man  he  has  made  of  him- 
ielf  (with  the  help  of  Rufhworth's  dialogues)  or  ra- 
ther what  his  party  has  made  him  by  the  office  they 

*df  l6*'  Put  uPon  ^im  :  f°r  'lt  feems  (by  his  telling)  "  *  Mr. 
"  Crefly  and  the  reft  are  ordained  to  cajole  the  fools, 
*6  leaving  him  the  way  ofreafon  and  principles  ;  and 
¥  that  himfelf  is  chofen  out  to  demonftrate  to  the 
"  wife,  or  thofe  who  judge  of  things  per  altijftmas 
"  caufas"  In  the  difcharge  of  which  glorious  of- 
fice, he  declares,  "  that  he  intends  no  confutation 

"of 


The  RULE  of  FAITH.  751 

e<  of  thofe  authors  which  Mr.  CrefTy  and  others  have  SECT. 

"  meddled  with  :  yet  if  any  will  be  fo  charitable  as  .^     1^ 

"  to  judge  he  hath  fblidly  confuted  them,  becaufe 

u  he  hath  radically  and  fundamentally  overthrown 

*c  all  their  arguments,  &c.  he  fhall  rejoice  and  be 

••*  thankful."     That  the  *  intelligent  reader  (for  he*  P.  irq. 

writes  to  none  but  fuch)  may  alfo  rejoice  with  him, 

I  fhall  recite  the   whole  paffage,  for  it  is  thick  of 

demonftration,  and  as  likely  as  any  in  his  book  to 

have  the  altijfimas  can  fas  contained  in  it. 

§  3.  "  *  It  would  require  a  large  volume  to  un-*  p.  0^ 
ct  fold  particularly  how  each  virtue  contributes  to 
"  fhew  the  inerrable  indeficiency  of  tradition,  and 
<c  how  the  principles  of  almoft  each  fcience  are  con- 
"  cerned  in  demon ftrating  its  certainty  :  arithme- 
tick  lends  her  numbring  and  multiplying  faculty, 
to  fcan  the  vaft  number  of  teftifiers;  geometry 
her  proportions  to  fhew  a  kind  of  infinite 
ftrength  of  certitude  in  chriflian  tradition,  above 
thofe  atteftations  which  breed  certainty  in  hu- 
"  mane  affairs ;  logick  her  skill  to  frame  and  make 
"  us  fee  the  connexions  it  has  with  the  princi- 
"  pies  of  our  underflanding  ;  nature  her  laws  of 
<c  motion  and  action  ;  morality  her  firft  principles 
"  that  nothing  is  done  gratis  by  a  cognofcitive  na- 
ture, and  that  the  body  of  traditionary  doctrine 
is  mofl  conformable  to  practical  reafon :  hiflori- 
cal  prudence  clears  the  impoflibility  of  an  undif- 
cernable  revolt  from  points  fo  defcended  and  held 
fo  facred  :  politicks  fhew  this  to  be  the  belt  way 
imaginable  to  convey  down  fuch  a  law  as  it  con- 
cerns every  man  to  be  skilful  in  ;  mctaphyflcks 
engages  the  efTences  of  things,  and  the  very  notion 

7  N  2  "of 


cc 

cc 

CC 

cc 


(« 

CC 

cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 


752  The  RULE  of  FAITH. 

PART  u  of  being  which  fixes  every  truth,  fo  eflablifhing 

III  -  • 

^_ _  '  _,  "  the  fcientifical  knowledges  which  fpring  from  each 

"  particular  nature   by  their  firft  caufes  or  reafons 

"  exempt  from  changes  or  motion.  Divinity  demon- 

*c  ftrateth  it  moft  worthy  God,  and  mod  conducive 

<c  to  bring  mankind   to  blifs.     Laftly,  controverfy 

cc  evidences  the  total  uncertainty  of  any  thing  con- 

<c  cerning  faith  if  this  can  be  uncertain,  and  makes 

"  ufe  of  all  the  reft  to  eftablifh    the   certainty   of 

"  this   firft  principle."     A  very  fit  conclufion  for 

fuch  demonftrations  as  went  before.     It  is  well  Mr. 

S.  writes  to  none  but  intelligent  readers  j  for  were  it 

not  a  thoufand  pities,  that  fo  manly,  and  iblid,  and 

convincing  a  difcourfe  as  this  fhould  be  caft  away 

upon  fools  ? 

SECT.  XII. 

Mr.  S's     §  r.      AS  for  his  corollaries,  fuppofing  them  to 

corollaries  jfj^.  be  rightly  deduced  from  his  former  dif- 

courfes,  they  muft  of  neceffity  fall  with  them.     For 

they  fignify  nothing,  but  upon  this  fuppofition  that 

his  foregoing  difcourfes  are  true.     And  yet  this  being 

granted,  it  were  eafy  to  fhew  that  mofl:  of  them  are 

grofly  faulty.     For  firft,  feveral  of  them  are  plainly 

coincident.    The  fecond,  viz.  "  None  can  with  right 

<c  pretend  to  be  a  church  >  but  the  followers  of  tradi- 

"  tion,"  is  the  very  fame  in  fenfe  with  the  i  ith,  viz. 

<c  No  company  of  men  hang  together  like  a  body  of 

"  a   chriftian  commonwealth  or  church,    but   that 

"  which  adheres  to  tradition."     So  Jikewife  the  12th 

and   14th  are  contained  in  the  15th:   the  1 6th  and 

17th  in  the  19th  :  the  16th,  17th,  18th,  and  19th,  in 

the 


3**  RULE  of  FAITH.  753 

the  21ft.  And  the  32c!  and  34th  in  the  31ft.  Se-  SECT, 
condly,  divers  of  them  are  manifeftly  abfurd,  as  the 
12th,  13th,  14th,  1 6th,  17th,  18th,  19th;  the  fum 
of  which  is,  "  that  there  is  no  arguing  againfl  tradi- 
*  tion  from  fcripture,  or  the  authority  of  the  church, 
"  or  fathers  and  councils,  or  from  hiflory  and  tcfli- 
"  monial  writings,  or  from  contrary  tradition,  or  rea- 
u  fon,or  any  inflances  whatfoever  :"  which  is  as  much 
as  to  fay,  "  if  this  propofition  be  true,  that  tradition  is 
M  certain,  then  it  cannot  by  any  kind  of  argument  be 
"  proved  to  be  falfe."  But  is  this  any  peculiar  confec- 
tary  from  the  truth  of  this  propofition  ?  doth  not  the 
fame  follow  from  every  propofition,  that  if  it  be  true, 
it  cannot  be  proved  to  be  falfe  ?  yet  no  man  was  ever 
yet  fo  frivolous,  as  to  draw  fuch  a  confequence  from 
the  fuppofed  truth  of  any  propofition.  His  23d  alio 
is  fingularly  abfurd,  "  that  there  is  no  poflibility  of 
M  arguing  at  all  againfl  tradition  rightly  underflood, 
tc  or  the  living  voice  of  the  catholick  church,  with 
<c  any  (hew  of  reafon."  Thefe  are  large  words.  It 
might  have  contented  a  reafonable  man  to  have  faid, 
that  no  good  argument  could  be  brought  againfl  it  : 
but  he  is  jealous  of  his  hypothefis,  andean  never  think 
it  fafe  till  it  be  fhot-free  ;  nor  will  that  content  him, 
but  it  mud  alfb  be  impoflible  for  any  one  to  make  a 
fhew  of  mooting  at  it.  This  were,  I  confefs,  a  pe- 
culiar privilege  of  Mr.  S's  difcourfes  above  other 
mens  ;  if  they  were  (as  he  fays)  by  evidence  of  de- 
monftration  fo  fecured,  that  not  only  no  fubftantial 
argument  could  be  brought  againfl  them,  but  that 
even  the  mofl  fubtile  fchoolman  of  them  all  mould 
not  be  able  to  come  near  them  with  fo  much  as  a  w- 
detur  quod  non%     But  it  may  be  he  means  no  more  by 

.    this 


He  RULE  of  FAITH. 

this  corollary,  than  what  he  faid  in  the  1 8th,  viz. 
"  that  no  folid  argument  from  reafon  can  be  brought 
•*  againft  tradition  :"  If  fo,  then  the  fenfe  of  his 
23d  corollary  mud  be  this,  "  that  there  is  no  pofii- 
4c  bility  of  arguing  at  all  againft  tradition  with  any 
"  folid  fhew,  or  fubftantial  fhadow  of  reafon  ;"  which 
would  be  a  little  inconvenient.  I  will  inftance  but  in 
one  more,  his  40th,  which  is  this,  U  the  knowledge 
"  of  tradition's  certainty  is  the  fir  ft  knowledge  or 
*c  principle  in  controverfial  divinity ;  i.  e.  without 
"  which  nothing  is  known  or  knowable  in  that  fci- 
M  ence."  Which  is  to  infer,  that  becaufe  he  hath 
with  much  pains  proved  the  certainty  of  tradition, 
therefore  it  is  felf- evident,  i.  e.  needed  no  proof. 
Nay,  it  is  to  conclude  the  prefent  matter  in  contro- 
verfy,  and  that  which  is  the  main  debate  of  his  book 
to  be  the  firft  principle  in  controverfial  divinity,  i.  e. 
fuch  a  propofition  as  every  one  ought  to  grant  before 
he  can  have  any  right  to  difpute  about  it.  This  is  a 
very  prudent  courfe,  to  make  begging  the  firft  ques- 
tion the  firft  principle  in  controverfy  -,  which  would  it 
but  be  granted,  I  am  very  much  of  his  mind  that  the 
method  he  takes  would  be  the  beft  way  to  make  con- 
troverfy a  fcience;  becaufe  he  that  fhould  have  the 
luck  or  boldnefs  to  beg  firft,  would  have  it  in  his 
power  to  make  what  he  pleafed  certain. 

§  2.  Were  it  worth  while,  I  might  farther  purfue 
the  abfurdities  of  his  corollaries.  For  they  are  not  fo 
terrible  as  he  makes  fhew  of,  by  his  telling  Dr.  Ca- 
*P.  330.  faubon,  "  *  that  fure-footing  and  its  corollaries  may 
"  put  him  out  of  his  wits :"  which  though  intended 
for  an  affront  to  the  doctor,  yet  it  may  be  mollified 
with  a  good  interpretation  j  for  if  the  reading  of 

wild 


The  RULE  of  FAITH.  y5g 

wild  and  fantaftical  fluff  be  apt  to  diforder  a  very  S  E  C  T« 
learned  head,  then  fo  far  Mr.  S's  faying  may  have 
truth  in  it. 

It  remains  only  that  I  requite  his  41ft  corollary, 
not  with  an  equal  number,  but  with  two  or  three  na- 
tural confectaries  from  the  doctrine  of  his  book. 

Firft,  no  man  can  certainly  underftand  the  mean- 
ing of  any  book  whatfoever,  any  farther  than  the 
contents  of  it  are  made  known  to  us  by  a  concurrent- 
oral  tradition.  For  the  arguments  whereby  he  and 
Mr.  Rufhworth  endeavour  to  prove  it  impofiible 
without  tradition  to  attain  to  the  certain  fenfe  of  fcrip- 
ture,  do  equally  extend  to  all  other  books. 

Secondly,  the  memory  of  matters  of  fact  done 
long  ago  may  be  better  preferved  by  general  Rumour 
than  by  publick  records.  For  this  is  the  plain  englifh 
of  that  affertion,  #  that  oral  tradition  is  a  better  and 
*'  more  fecure  way  of  conveyance  than  writing." 

Thirdly,  that  the  generality  of  papiffo  are  no  chri- 
ftians  :  for  if  (as  he  affirms)  tradition  be  the  fole  rule 
of  faith,  and  thofe  who  difown  this  rule  be  ipfo  fa5t» 
cut  off  from  the  root  of  faith,  i.  e.  unchriflian'd  ; 
and  if  fas  I  have  fhewn)  the  generality  of  papifts  do 
difown  this  rule :  then  it  is  plain  that  they  are  no 
«hriftians. 


THE 


756 

THE 

RULE  of    FAITH 


PART      IV. 

Tcjlimonies  concerning  the  rule  of  faith. 

SECT.     I. 

PART  §  i.  fTT^HUS  far   in  the  way  of  reafon  and 

1V-  principles.     The    reft  is   note -book 

Mr.  S's  -^       learning,  which  he  tells  us  "  *  he  is 

teihmonies"  not  much  a  friend  to  ;"  and  there  is  no  kindnefs 

examined. 

*  P.  337.  loft,  for  it  is  as  little  a  friend  to  him  and  his  caufe  as 
he  can  be  to  it.  I  mall  firft  examine  the  authorities 
he  brings  for  tradition  ;  and  then  produce  exprefs  tefti- 
monies  in  behalf  of  fcripture.  In  both  which  I  fhall 
be  very  brief  -9  in  the  one,  becaufe  his  teftimonies  re- 
quire no  long  anfwer  %  in  the  other,  becaufe  it  would 
be  to  little  purpofe  to  trouble  Mr.  S.  with  many  fa- 
thers, who,  for  ought  appears  by  his  book,  is  ac- 
quainted with  none  but  father  White,  as  I  ihall  fhew 
hereafter.  By  the  way,  I  cannot  much  blame  him 
for  the  courfe  he  ufes  to  take  with  other  mens  teftimo- 
nies, becaufe  it  is  the  only  way  that  a  man  in  his  cir- 
cumftanccs  can  take  ;  otherwife,  nothing  can  be  in  it 
felf  more  unreafonable,  than  to  pretend  to  anfwer  tel- 
timonies  by  ranking  them  under  fo  many  faulty  heads ; 
and  having  fo  done,  magifterially  to  require  his  ad- 

verfuy 


The  RULE  of  FAITH.  757 

verfary  to  vindicate  them,  by  mewing  that  they  do  S  E  c  T: 
not  fall  under  fome  of  thofe  heads,  though  he ._  '— ,_j 
have  not  faid  one  word  p.gainfl  any  of  them  par- 
ticularly ;  nay,  though  he  have  not  fo  much  as  re- 
cited any  one  of  them  ;  for  then  the  trick  would 
be  fpoiled,  and  his  cathoJick  reader,  who  perhaps 
may  believe  him  in  the  general,  might  fee  rea- 
fon  not  to  do  fo  if  he  fhould  defcend  to  particu- 
lars, which  (as  he  well  obferves)  would  make  his 
"  *  difcourfe  to  look  with  a  contingent  face."         *  P.  161; 

$2.1  begin  with  his  three  authorities  from  fcrip- 
ture  ;  which  when  I  confider,  I  fee  no  reafon  why  he 
(of  all  men)  fhould  find  fault  with  my  lord  bifhop 
of  Down's   difluafive  for  being    fo  u    *  thin  and*  P.  320* 
"  Height    in   fcripture-citations."      Nor    do    I   fee 
how    he    will    anfwer    it  to    Mr.    Rufhworth,  for 
tranfgreffing  that  prudent  rule  of  his,  viz.  "  *  that*  Dial,  zl 
"  the  catholick  fhould  never  undertake  to  convince fect*  4" 
"  his  adverfary  out  of  fcripture,  &c."     For  which 
he  gives   this  fubftantial  reafon,    "    *  becaufe  this*  Ibid, 
<c  were  to  flrengthen  his  opponent  in  his  own  ground 
"  and  principle,  viz.  that  all    is   to  be  proved  out 
"  of  fcripture  ;"  which  he  tells  us  prefently  after  is 
no  more  fit  to  convince,  "  than  a  beetle  is  to  cut 
"  withal  ;"    meaning    it  perhaps   of  texts  fo   ap- 
plied as  thefe  which  follow.       "    *   This   fhaii   be*  Ifa.  sf. 
"  to    you   a  direct  way,    fo  that   fools  cannot  err8, 
"  in  it.     f  This   is  my  covenant  with  diem,  faith  +  Ifa.  59. 
"  the  Lord  5  my  fpirit  which  is  in  thee,  and  my  2U 
"  words  which  I  have  put  in  thy  mouth  (hall  not  de- 
"  part  from  thy  mouth,  and  from  the  mouth  of  thy 
"  feed,  and  from  the  mouth  of  thy  feeds  feed  from 
"  henceforth  for  ever.     *  I  will  give  my  law  in  their  *  Jcr.  3  u 

Vol.  IV.  7  O  «  bowels .33- 

6. 


758  The  RULE  of  FAITH. 

PART  "  bowels,   and   in   their    hearts  will  I   write  it  :" 

IV  . 

v_^-ylmj  From  which  texts    if  Mr.  S.   can   prove   tradition 

to  be  the  only  rule  of  faith,  any  better  than  the 
philofophers  ftone  or  the  longitude  may  be  pro- 
ved from  the  firfl  chapter  of  Genefis,  I  am  con- 
tent they  mould  pafs  for  valid  testimonies  :  tho*  I 
might  require  of  him  (by  his  own  law)  before 
thefe  texts  can  fignify  any  thing  to  his  purpofe, 
to  demonftrate  that  this  is  the  traditionary  fenfe 
of  thefe  texts,  and  that  it  hath  been  univerfally 
in  all  ages  received  by  the  church  under  that  no- 
tion 5  and  then  to  fhew  how  it  comes  to  pafs  that 
fo  many  of  the  fathers,  and  of  their  own  commen- 
tators have  interpreted  them  to  another  fenfe  : 
and  laftly,  to  fhew  how  fcripture  which  has  no 
certain  fenfe  but  from  tradition,  and  of  the  fenfe 
whereof  tradition  cannot  afifure  us,  unlefs  it  be  the 
rule  of  faith ;  I  fay,  how  fcripture  can  prove  tradition 
to  be  the  rule  of  faith,  which  can  prove  nothing  at 
all  unlefs  tradition  be  firft  proved  to  be  the  rule 
of  faith.  This  I  take  to  be  as  fhameful  a  circle,  as 
that  wherewith  Dr.  Holden  upbraids  the  generality 
of  his  brethren. 

§  3.  I  proceed  to  his  authorities  from  fathers  and 
councils ;  (all  which  not  one  of  them  excepted)  he 
hath  taken  out  of  Mr.  White's  tabula  fuffragiales^ 
without  the  leaft  acknowledgment  from  whom  he 
had  them.  And  that  it  might  be  evident  that  he 
had  not  confulted  the  books  themfelves  for  them, 
he  hath  taken  them  with  all  their  faults,  and  with 
the  very  fame  errors  of  citation  which  Mr.  White 
had  been  guilty  of  before  him.  So  that  though 
*  P.  239.  he  is  pleafed  to  fay  of  himfelf  M  that  *  he  is  a  bad 

"  tran- 


Tie  RULE  of  FAITH.  759 

"  tranfcriber,"  yet  I  muft  do  him  that  right,  to  af-  s  E  c  % 
furc  the  reader  that  he  does  it  very  punctually  and 
exactly. 

§  4.  He  begins  with  councils,   of  which  he  tells 
us  he  will  only  mention  three  in  ieveral  ages. 

The  firft  is  the  firft  fynod  of  Lateran.  One  might 
have  expected,  after  he  had  told  us  he  would  men- 
tion three  in  feveral  ages,  he  fhould  have  produced 
them  according  to  the  order  of  time,  and  have  be- 
gun with  the  council  of  Sardica,  which  was  near 
300  years  before  the  Lateran.  But  there  was  a 
good  reafon  why  the  Lateran  fhould  be  firft  pro- 
duced, viz.  becaufe  it  is  mentioned  before  the  other 
in  Mr.  White's  book.  Well,  but  what  fays  this  fy- 
nod ?  "  we  all  confefs  unanimoufly,  and  confe- 
"  quently  with  one  heart  and  mouth,  the  tenets  and 
"  fayings  of  the  holy  fathers  -,  adding  nothing,  fub- 
u  drafting  nothing  of  thofe  things  which  are  deli- 
"  vered  us  by  them  ;  and  we  believe  as  the  fathers 
61  have  believed,  we  preach  fo  as  they  have  taught," 
The  force  of  which  teftimony  Mr.  S.  lays  upon 
the  word  delivered,  as  if  that  word  where-ever  it  is 
met  with  in  councils  or  fathers,  muft  needs  be  un- 
derftood  of  oral  delivery ;  whereas  it  is  a  general 
word  indifferently  ufed  for  conveyance  either  by 
writing  or  word  of  mouth.  In  this  place  it  plain- 
ly refers  to  the  writings  of  particular  fathers,  out 
of  whom  a  long  catalogue  of  teftimonies  againft  the 
herefy  of  the  monothelites  had  been  readjuft  before 
this  declaration  of  the  fynod.  Now  what  fignifies 
this  to  oral  tradition's  being  the  rule  of  faith,  that 
this  fynod  declares  her  faith,  in  oppofition  to  the 
herefy  of  the  monothelires,  to  be  confonant  in  all 

7  O  2  things 


jio  The  RULE  of  FAITH. 

PART  things  to  thofe  teftimonies  which  had  been  produced 
out  of  the  fathers  ? 


The  next  is  the  council  of  Sardica ;  out  of  en  epiftle 
of  which  council  he  cites  thefc  words,  M  we  have 
"  received  this  doctrine,  we  have  been  taught  fo, 
u  we  hold  this  catholick  tradition,  faith  and  confef- 
a  fion."  Which  are  general  words,  and  indiffe- 
rently applicable  to  oral  tradition,  or  writing,  or 
both.  But  be  they  what  they  will,  Mr.  S.  ought 
not  to  have  been  ignorant,  that  this  council  was 
rejected  by  St.  Auftin,  and  other  orthodox   fathers, 

*  Concil.  as  *  Binius  acknowledges ;  and  which  is  more,  that 
the  latter  part  of  this  epiftle  (out  of  which  part 
Mr.   S.  cites  thefe  words)   which  contains  a  confef- 

p  An.  347.  fion  of  faith,  is  by  *  Baronius  (and  after  him  by 
Binius)    proved    to   have  been  furreptitioudy  added. 
For  though  it  be  found  in  Theodoret,   and  men- 
tioned by  Sozomen  j  yet  Baronius  thinks  that  it  was 
the  arian  confeffion  compoied  by  the  falfe  fynod  of 
Sardica  which  fate  at  the  lame  time ;  and  that  So- 
zomen lighting  upon  it,  perhaps  miftook  it  for  the 
confefiion  of  the  orthodox  fynod  of  the  fame  name. 
However  that  be,  he  proves  out  of  Athanafius,  and 
from  the  teftimony  both  of  the  eaftern   and  weftern 
bifhops,   "  that  council  of  Sardica  did  not  fo  much 
"  as  add  one  word  or   tittle,  no   nor    fo  much   as 
"  explain    any    thing  in    the  Nicene    faith."     But 
Mr.  White  fays  nothing  of  this,  and  therefore  Mr.  S. 
could  not,  who  is   no  fpeculator  in    thefe  matters, 
but  only  as  a  teftifier  delivers  down   thefe    autho- 
rities  to  us   as   he    received    them    by   hand  from 
Mr.  White  -9  and  if  the  word  tradition   be  but  in 
fhem,  they  are  demonftrative. 

As. 


The  RULE  of  FAITH.  76i 

As  for  his  teftimonies  from  the  fecond  council  of  SECT. 
Nice,  (which  he  calls  the  feventh  general  council)  u     '_«_, 
who  pretended  their  doclrine  of  image-worfhip  to 
have  defcended   to  them  by  an  uninterrupted  tradi- 
tion,   and  proved   it    molt    doughtily    by   texts  of 
fcripture  ridiculoufly  wrefled,  by  impertinent  fayings 
out  of  obfcure  and  counterfeit  authors,  and  by  fond 
and  immodeft  (lories  (as  is  acknowledged   by  pooe 
*  Adrian    the    6th)    of   apparitions   and    womens  *  Q~uodlj- 
dreams,  &c.    for  which  I  refer  the  reader  to  thetedbyCI* 
council   it  M£ ;  which  is  fuch  a  mels  of  fopperies,  Etpencae- 
that  if  a  general  council  of  atheifts  had  met  together  epift.  ad 
with  a  defign  to  abufe  religion  by  talking  ridicu-Tim  c-  4- 
loufly  concerning  it,    they  could   not   have  it  done 
more  effectually  :  I  fay,  as  for  his  teftimonies  from 
this  council,  I  (hall  refer  Mr.  S.  to  that  weftera 
council  under  Charles  the  great,   which  a  little  after 
at  Francfort  condemned,  and  alfo  fully  confuted  the 
decifions  of  this  council,    calling    their  pretended 
cC  tradition   of  image-worfhip  [putidiflimam  traditio- 
"  neni]  a  moil  (linking  tradition.5* 

Thefe  are  his  authorities  from  councils ;  "  where 
<c  fays  he)  we  fee  general  councils  relying  on  tl\Q 
•c  teaching  of  the  fathers  or  foregoing  church,  and 
"  on  the  church's  tradition  as  their  rule,  &c.,f 
where  does  he  fee  any  fuch  matter  ?  or  where  does 
he  fee  general  councils?  was  the  council  of  Late- 
ran  a  general  one?  or  was  the  council  of  Sardica? 
if  it  was,  let  him  (hew  hew  the  fecond  of  Nice  could 
be  the  feventh  general  council.  Mr.  White  mull 
write  more  explicitly,  and  fay  which  are  general 
councils,  which  not,  otherwife  he  will  lead  his 
friends  into  dangerous  mi  (lakes. 

§  4,  «  After 


The  RULE  of  FAITH. 

§  4.  "  After  ancient  councils  (not  fo  ancient  nei- 
ther) let  us  (fays  he)  give  a  glance  at  fathers.5* 
Glance  is  a  modeft  word,  and  yet  I  doubt  whether 
ever   the  fathers  had   fo    much  as  that  from  him. 
Before  I  fpeak  particularly  to  his  teftimonies   from 
the  fathers,  I  fhail  mind  him  of  what  Mr.  Rufh- 
*Dial.  3.  Worth  fays  in  general,   viz.  "  *  that  he  who  feeks 
•  5%     "  tradition  in  the  fathers,  and  to  evince  it  by  their 
"  teftimony,   takes  an  hard  task  upon  him,   6cc." 
*      l  "     Again,  "  *f  as  in  other  points,  fo  even  in  'this  of 
"  the  refolution  of  faith,  as  doctors  feem  to  differ 
"  now-a-days,  fo  might  the  fathers  alfo."     If^this 
be    true,  Mr.    S.   is    not    likely   by  a   few    tefti- 
monies out  of  the  fathers,  to  prove  that  tradition,  is 
the  fole  rule  of  faith.     But  let  us  fee  what  he  has 
done. towards  it. 

He  begins  with  a  faying  of  pope  Celeftine  to  the 
fathers  of  the  Ephefine  council.  "  Now  therefore 
"  we  muft  act  with  a  common  endeavour  to  pre- 
"  ferve  things  believed,  and  retained  to  this  very 
w  time  by  fucceflion  from  the  apoftles."  Binius's 
other  reading  of  [dW^yjV  for  cPiarPc^^]  quite  fpoils 
the  force  of  this  citation  which  Mr.  S.  put  upon  the 
word  fucceflion.  But  read  it  how  he  will  ♦,  why 
may  not  the  christian  doctrine  be  faid  to  come  by 
fucceflion  from  the  apoftles,  when  it  is  tranfmitted 
to  us  by  fcripture,  as  well  as  when  by  oral  traditi- 
on ?  I  am  fure  the  fame  Celeftine  in  an  epiftle  to 
Cyril,  commends  him  for  defending  the  faith  by 
1  fcripture :  u  this  (fays  he)  is  a  great  triumph  of 
M  our  faith,  to  demonftrate  our  opinions  fo  ftrong- 
M  ly,  and  to  overthrow  the  contrary  by  teftimo- 
ct  nies  from  fcripture."     And  neither  in  this  epiftle, 

nor 


the  RULE  of  FAITH.  763 

nor  the  other,  does  he  make  any  mention  of  oral  SEC  T. 
tradition. 

Next  he  cites  that  known  place  in  Irenasus  : 
"  but  what  if  the  apoftles  had  not  left  us  the  fcrip- 
<6  tures,  ought  we  not  to  follow  the  order  of  tra- 
4<  dition,  &c.  ? "  this  makes  clearly  againft  him  ; 
for  it  implies,  that  now  the  apoftles  have  left  us  the 
fcriptures,  we  ought  to  follow  them.  The  other 
pafTage  he  cites  out  of  Irenseus,  lib.  1.  c.  3.  is  a 
clear  eviction  that  he  did  not  confult  the  book.  For 
he  puts  two  fayings  together  which  he  had  met  with 
in  Mr.  White,  immediately  one  after  the  other  ;  and 
becaufe  Mr.  White  had  cited  lib.  1.  c.  3.  for  the 
firft  faying,  and  brought  in  the  other  immediately 
upon  it  with  an  (et  rurfus)  again,  &c.  Therefore 
Mr.  S.  (who  is  of  a  right  traditionary  temper, 
which  is  to  take  things  eafily  upon  truft  himfelf, 
and  require  demonflration  from  others)  concluded 
that  thefe  fayings  were  in  the  fame  place,  though  in 
truth  they  are  in  feveral  books.  As  for  the  tefti- 
mony  it  felf,  there  is  nothing  in  it  to  Mr.  S's 
purpofe  befides  the  word  tradition,  which  Irenseus 
does  often  apply  to  fcripture  as  well  as  oral  tradi- 
tion ;  and  there  is  nothing  in  this  place  to  deter- 
mine it  to  oral  tradition. 

His  teftimonies  out  of  Origen  will  do  him  lels 
{lead :  for  every  one  that  hath  been  converfant  in 
the  writings  of  that  father,  knows  what  he  means  by 
the  church's  tradition  preferved  by  order  of  fucce£ 
fion,  viz.  themyftical  interpretations  of  the  fcripture, 
which  (he  fays)  were  delivered  by  the  apoftles  to  the 
governors  of  the  church,  and  by  them  down  from 
hand  to  hand.  If  this  be  the  tradition  Mr.  S.  con- 
tends 


764  The  RULE  of  FAITH. 

PART  tends  for,  Origen  is  at  his  fervice ;  if  it  be  not,  I  af- 
^j,  _^j  fure  him  he  is  not  for  his  turn. 

Next  comes  Tertullian,  concerning  whom  (as  alfo 
Origen)  the  papift:  upon  occafion  thinks  it  enough  to 

*  Adverf.  reply  in  St.  Hierom's  words  *,  "  as  for  Tertullian, 
Hclvid.     c<  J  nave  nothing  to  fay  of  him  but  that  he  is  not 

"  a  man  of  the  church."  Whatever  he  was,  thefc 
are  his  words,  "  if  thou  beeft  but  a  chriftian,  be- 
"  lieve  what  is  \traditum~\  delivered.'*  And  here's 
nothing  again  but  the  word  delivered ;  which  (as  I 
have  faid)  is  indifferent  to  written  or  oral  tradition, 
if  the  circumftances  do  not  determine  it  to  one  \  as 
here  they  do  (very  unluckily  for  Mr.  S.)  to  the 
fcripture.  For  he  difputes  here  againfl  Marcion, 
who  denied  the  fiefh  of  Christ  ;  and  who  to  main- 

*  His  opi-  tain  that,  denied  his  nativity,  and  *  expunged  the 
HistotVri-  wn°le  hiftory  of  it  out  of  the  gofpel;  "  but  (faith 
ginaliain-u  Tertullian)  by  what   authority  doft   thou   this  ? 

ChHftTde-*'  ^  t^ou  ^e  a  ProP^et>  foretel  fomething;  if  an 
lereMar-  "  apoftle,  preach  publickly ;  if  apoftolical,  be  of 
cftnneca-S  "  t^ie  aP0U^e's  mind  ;  if  no  more  but  a  chriftian, 
roejus  "  believe  what  is  delivered."  And  where  delivered  ? 
tux  ^x  ^ut  *n  thofe  initruments  or  books  of  the  gofpel,  out 
qua,  oro  of  which  (as  Tertullian  immediately  before  tells  us) 
tate^&c"*  Marcion  had  made  bold  to  expunge  this  ftory. 

As  for  his  teftimonies  out  of  Athanafius,  the  two 
firft  of  them  prove  nothing,  <c  but  that  faith  comes 
"  down  from  our  anceftors,  or  was  by  them  de- 
"  livered  to  us;"  which  no  body  denies:  nor  is 
there  a  word  in  either  of  them  concerning  oral,  in 
oppofition  to  written  tradition.  The  third  teftimo- 
ny  is  out  of  an  epiftle  to  Epicletus,  to  whom  Atha- 
nafius writing  concerning  thofe  who  held  Christ's 

body 


The  kULE  of  FAITH.  765 

body  to  be  confubftantial  with  his  divinity,  tells  him  SECT, 
this  was  fo  grofs  a  conceit,  that  it  needed  no  felici- 
tous confutation  •,  but  that  it  would  be  a  fufficient 
anfwer  to  fay  in  general,  "  the  orthodox  church  was 
"  not  of  that  mind,  our  fathers  did  not  think  fo." 
From  whence  Mr.  S.  infers,  "  that  tradition  is  held 
"  by  him  a  fole   fuflicient  rule  of  faith,  and   the 
<c  only  anfwer  to  be  given  why  we  reject  points  from 
«  faith,  &c."     But  if  he  had  confulted  the  book, 
he  would  not  have  inferred  that  this  was  the  only 
anfwer  to  be  given,  &c.   For  it  immediately  follows, 
"  but   left  from  our   being    wholly  filent,  the   in- 
c*  ventors  of  evil  things  mould  take  occafion  to  be 
"  more  impudent,  it  will   be  good  to  recite  a  few 
"  pafTages  out  of  fcripture,  &c,"  And  from  thence 
he  confutes  them  at  large.     It  was  fo  grofs  an  error, 
that  he  thought  it  might  be  fufficient,  without  bring- 
ing particular  arguments  out  of  fcripture  againft  it, 
to  fay  that  it  was  contrary  to  the  ancient  faith ;  but 
yet  left  they  fhould  (if  he  had  laid  no  more)   have 
taken  boldnefs  from  thence,  and   thought   that  no- 
thing  more   could  be  faid  againft  it,    therefore  he 
confutes  it  from  particular  texts  of  fcripture.     And 
what  in  his  opinion  was  the  fufficient  rule  of  faith, 
Mr.  S.  might  have  feen  at   the  beginning  of  this 
epiftle,  from  theie  words,    "  that  faith  which  was 
u  profcfTed  by  the' fathers  in  that  council    (viz.  the 
"  Nicene)  according  to  the  fcriptures,  is  to  me  fuf- 
"  ficient,  &c."   It  feems  that  fcripure  was   to  him 
the   rule   and    ftandard  whereby  to  judge  even  the 
creeds  of  general  councils. 

Mr.  S.   lays  he,  will  be  fhorter  in  the  reft,  and  lb 

will  I.     Fur  what  is  to  be  faid  to  teftimonies  brought 

Vol.  IV.  7P  ^ 


766  Tie  RULE  of  FAITH. 

P  A  R  T  at  a  venture  ?  when  he  that  brings  them,  had    he 

vf^t-^  read  the  books  themfelves,  could   not  have  had  the 
face  to   have  brought   them.     Such   is  this  out  of 

*Stromat.  *  Clem.  Aiexand.  "  as  if  one  of  a  man  becomes  a 
"  bead,  like  thofe  infected  with  Circe's  poifon  \  fo 
«c  he   hath    forfeited  his  being  a  man  of  God  and 
*c  faithful  to  our  Lord,  who  fpurns  againft  ecclefia- 
4C  ftical  tradition,   and  leaps  into  opinions  of  hu- 
U  mane  eleftion."     Mr.  S.  knows    whofe  way  of 
quoting  this  is,  to  pick  a  bit  out   of  the  midft  of 
a  text  that  founds  fomething  towards  his  purpofe, 
and  leave  out  the  reft  which  would  make  it  evi- 
dent  to  be    meant  juft  contrary.     Yet   I    cannot 
charge    this  wholly   upon   Mr.  S.   whofe   implicit 
faith  were   it   not  for  his  culpable  ignorance  might 
excufe  him.     But  for  his  feducer  Mr.  White,  how 
he  can  acquit   himfelf  of  fo  foul  an  imputation,  I 
leave  it   to  any  ingenuous  papift  to  judge,  when  I 
have  nakedly  kt  the  whole  paiTage  before  him.     Cle- 
ment fpeaking  of  hereticks  who  relinquifh  the  fcrip- 
ture,  or   abufe  it  by  wretting  it  to  their  lulls,  fays, 
M  men  who  deal  in  matters  of  higher!  importance, 
"  muft  need  commit  great  errors,  if  they  do  not 
"  take  and  hold  the  RULE  of  FAITH  from 
"  truth  itfelf.     For  fuch  men  ha/ing  once  deviated 
«c  from  the  right  way,  do  likewife  err  in  moil  parti- 
'<  culars;  probably  becaufe  they  have  not  the  facul- 
«c  ty  of  diftinguifliing  truths  and  falfhoods,  perfecl:- 
««  ly  exercifed,  to  choofe  what  ought  to  be  chofen. 
"  For  if  they  had  this,  they  would  be  ruled  by  the 
«  divine  SCRIPTURES.     [Therefore  as  if  any 
P  of  mankind  mould  become  a  bead  in  fuch  iort  as 

*  w-„    «  thofe  who  were  *  bewitched  by  Circe*  even  fo  he 
p*xQ&*  "  hath 


The  RULE  of  FA  I  T  H.  ?57 

'•  hath  loft  his  being;  a  man   of  God  and  abidinc  SECT- 

O  Or 

u  faithful  to  the  Lord,  who  hath  fpurned    againtt ._     1^ 
**  the  tradition  of  the  church,  and  skipp'd  into  the 
"  opinions  of  humane  feels  *,]    (not  of  humane  elec-  *  dniti- 
<c  tion,  as  Mr.  S.  blindly  following  Mr.  White  does**- 
<c  mod  abfurdly    tranfhte  it)  but   he  that  hath  re- 
"  turned  from    his  errors,  and   hearkened    to   the 
"  SCRIPTURES,  and  conformed  his  life  to  the 
"  truth,  is  as  it  were  advanced  from  a  man  to  a  God." 
At  the  fame  rate  he  goes  on  for  feveral  pages  together, 
taking  the  fcriptures  for  an  indemonflrable  princi- 
ple, from  which  all  divine  doctrines  are  to  be  de- 
mon!! rated,  and   for  the  criterion  whereby  they  are 
to  be  tried,  and  charges  the  hereticks  in  fuch  words 
as    we    cannot     find    fitter    for   adverfaries,    "  as 
(fays  he)  naughty  boys  fhut  out  their  fchoolmafl 
ter,  fo  thefe  drive  the  prophefies  out  of  the  church, 
fufpecting    that    they   will   chide   and  admonifh, 
them  -,  and  they  patch  together  abundance  of  fal£ 
hoods  and  fictions  that  they  may  feem  RATIO- 
N  A  LLY  not  to  admit  the  fcriptures."     Again, 
fpeaking   of  thefe  hereticks  affronting  the  fcripture, 
he  tells  us,   "  they  oppofe  the  •  divine  tradition  wSH  *  _ 
humane  doctrines, -f  by  other  traditions  [delivered  ^pouT S- 
from  hand  to  hand]  that  they  may  eftablifh  a  fe&i*".  <  , 
or  herefy."  Again,  he  fays,  "  they  adulterate  the  ow*- 
"  truth,    and   ileal    the   rule  of  faith,  &c.  but  for?5,**2'" 
"  ORAL  frauds  they    mall  have  WRITTEN  F 
"  punifhments."     But  enough  of  this ;    wholbever 
defires  to  fee  more  of  it,  let  him  read  on  where  thefe 
men  to   their  own   fhame  have  directed  us,  and  fee 
whether  any  protectant  can   fpeak  more  fully   and 
plainly  in  this  controverfy.     The  whole  truft  of  the 

7  P  2  papifts 


6t 

<( 

CI 


763  The  RULE  of  FAIT IL 

PART  papifts  is  upon  the  equivocal  fenfe  of  the  word  tra- 
dition. Which  word  is  commonly  ufed  by  the  fa- 
thers to  fignify  to  us  the  fcripture  or  divine  tradi- 
tion, as  Clement  here  calls  it  •,  but  the  papifts 
underftand  it  of  their  unwritten  tradition,  and  to 
this  they  apply  all  thofe  paffages  in  the  fathers 
where  tradition  is  honourably  mentioned.  So  Mr.  S. 
deals  with  us  in  the  tefti monies  I  have  already 
examined :  and  there  is  nothing  of  argument  in  thofe 
few  which  remain,  but  from  the  ambiguity  of  this 
word  ;  which  I  need  not  Ihew  of  every  one  of  them 
in  particular,  for  whofoever  mall  read  them  with 
this  key  will  find  that  they  are  of  no  force  to  con- 
clude what  he  drives  at. 

§  5.  As  for  his  citations  out  of  the  council  of 
Trent,  by  which  he  would  prove  it  to  be  the  per- 
fuafion  of  their  prefent  church,  that  tradition  is  the 
fole  rule  of  faith ;  I  have  already  fhewn  that  that 
council  hath  declared  otherwife,  and  is  otherwife  un- 
derftood  by  the  chief  of  their  own  writers.  And 
therefore  he  did  prudently  to  conceal  in  an  6cc. 
thofe  choking  words,  in  which  the  council  declares 
itfelf  u  to  receive  and  honour,  with  equal  pious 
«  affection  and  reverence,  the  books  of  fcripture 
cc  and  unwritten  traditions."  And  after  a  deal 
of  muffling,  what  a  pitiful  account  is  it  that  he  at 
laft  gives  of  that  council's  putting  fcripture  con- 
ftantly  before  tradition,  becaufe  fcripture  being  in- 
terpreted by  tradition,  is  of  the  fame  authority  "  as 
«  if  an  apoftle  or  an  evangelift  were  prefent,  and 
*«  therefore  no  wonder  they  honour  fcripture-tefti- 
6C  mony  lb  as  to  put  it  before  tradition  •,"  which  is 
to  fey,  that  becaufe  fcripture   is  fubordinate  to  tra- 


dition 


tfbe  RULE  of  FAITH.  769 

dition,  and  to  be  regulated  by  it,  therefore  it  de-  SECT, 
ferves  to  be  put  before  it.  Befides,  if  icripture  and  ,  ^  l^j 
tradition  be  but  feveral  ways  of  conveying  the  evan- 
gelical and  apoftolical  doctrine,  why  fhould  he 
imagine  an  evangelift  or  apoftle  to  be  more  prefent 
by  the  Icripture  than  by  oral  tradition  ?  efpecially  if 
it  be  confidered,  that  he  fuppofes  fcripture  to  be  an 
uncertain,  and  tradition  an  infallible  way  of  convey- 
ing this  doctrine. 

SECT.     II. 

J  1.    A   LL  that     now  remains,  is  to  confirm  theTenim^ 

X~\  precedent  difcouifc  by  teftimonies  of  the J1?^"^ 
moil  eminent  perfons  of  the  church,  in  feveral  ages ;  fcripture. 
in  which  I  ihall  not  need  to  be  large,  being  fo 
happily  prevented  by  that  full  account  which  is 
given  of  the  fenfe  of  the  ancients  in  this  matter,  in 
the  anfvver  to  Labyrintbus  Cantuarienfis  $  which 
Mr.  S.  may  if  he  pleafe  confult  for  his  farther 
conviction. 

§2.1  begin  with  the  hiftorical  account  which  Eu- 
febius  gives  of  committing  the  gofpel  to  writing  ; 
which  is  to  this  purpofe,  viz.  «'  *  that  the  Romans  *  Hi ftor. 
were  not  content  with  the  doctrine  preached, 
unlefs  it  were  alio  committed  to  writing-,  and 
therefore  did  earneftly  beg  of  Mark,  Peter's 
companion,  that  he  would  leave  them  a  monu- 
ment in  writing  of  that  doctrine  which  had  been 
delivered  to  them  by  word  of  mouth.  And  this 
was  the  occafion  of  the  writing  of  St.  Mark*s 
gofpel.  And  when  Peter  did  understand  that  this 
work  was  publifh'd  (being  fuggefted  by  the  di- 
vine 


exiei.  1.2. 
c.  14* 


77o  The  RULE  of  FAITH. 

3PA  RT  «  vine  revelation  of  the  Holy  Sp  irit)   it  is  faid 
'c  he  was   very  much  pleafed  with  the    ready    and 
"  earned  defire  of  thofe  perfons ;  and  that    by    his 
"  authority  he  confirmed  this  writing,  to  the  end 
"  that  it  might  be  every  where  read  in  the  church." 
As   for    St.   Matthew  and  S:.  John,    he  tells  us, 
Ibid.  1. "  *  that  of  all  the  difciples,  they  two  only  have  left 
c*         "  monuments  in  writing-,  of  whom  it  is  alfo  report- 
u  ted  that  they  betook  themfelves  to  write,  being 
"  drawn  thereto  by  neceffity.     Matthew,   after  he 
<c  had  preached  the  word  of  God  to  the  jews,  and 
cc  was  refolved  to  go  to  other  nations,  wrote  his 
"  gofpel  in  the  language  of  his  country  ;  and    thus 
"  by  the  diligence  and  pains  of  writing,  did  abun- 
"  dantly  fupply   the   want  of  his  prefence  to  thofe 
"  whom  he  left.     And  when  Mark  and  Luke  had 
"  publifh'd   their  gofpel,  it  is  reported  that  John 
(who  had  always  ufed  to  preach   the  word  with* 
out  writing   it)  being  at  length  wrought  upon  by 
"  the   fame  reafon  did    betake    himfelf  to  write.'* 
From    this    account  it  is   clear,    that  the   apoftles 
thought   it    neceiTary,  for   the   prefervation  and  fe- 
cure  conveyance    of  the  chriftian  doctrine,  that  it 
fhould  be  put  into  wrriting ;  and   that  they  judged 
this  a  better  way  to  fupply  the  want  of  their   pre- 
fence  than  oral  tradition.     Therefore   the  fame  au- 
•Ibid.c.  thor  tells  us*,  "  that  the  difciples,  who  immediate- 

A    1 

"  ly  fucceeded  the  apoftles,  as  they  travelled  to 
"  preach  the  gofpel  to  thofe  who  had  not  yet  heard 
"  the  word  of  faith,  did  with  great  care  alfo  de- 
*c  liver  to  them  the  writings  of  the  holy  evangelifts." 
•Ibid.  c.  Again,  w  *  that  Ignatius  as  he  travelled  towards 
"  Rome  (where   he    was  to   fuffer)    exhorted   the 

"  churches 


10. 


The  RULE  of  FAITH.  7?t 

*c  churches  of  every  city  to  hold   fad  the  tradition  SECT. 
Cc  of  the  apoftles  •,  which   (as  alfo  by  writing  he  tcf-  ^j}^^ 
"  tified)  for  the  greater  fecurity  he  held  necefTary  to 
*«  be  copied  in  writing." 

§  4.  That  the  hereticks  of  old  made  the  fame 
"  pretence  which  the  papifts  make  now,  of  oral  tra- 
dition in  oppofition  to  fcripture,  the  fame  Eufebius 
tells  us ;  and  withal,  that  books  are  a  fufficienc  con- 
futation of  this  pretence.  "  *  Thofe  (fays  he)  who*  ibid.  1. 
"  were  of  the  herefy  of  Artemon,  faid  that  all  theirs-  c-  *J» 
"  forefathers  and  the  apo files  themfelves  had  re- 
"  ceived  and  taught  the  fame  things  which  they 
*c  alfo  did,  and  had  preferved  the  true  teaching  un- 
"  to  the  time  of  Victor  bimop  of  Rome,  whofe  (iic- 
46  cefTor  Zephyrinus  corrupted  it.  And  this  (faith 
"  he)  would  have  great  probability,  were  it  not  fir-ft 
iC  of  all  contradicted  by  the  fcripture ;  and  next,  if 
u  there  did  not  remain  the  writings  of  other  bre- 
<c  thren  much  more  ancient  than  Victor's  time, 
*c  &c.  in  the  books  of  all  whom  Christ's  divini- 
"  ty  is  acknowledged."  And  afterwards  he  tells  us, 
that  thefe  hereticks  did  change  and  corrupt  the  fcrip- 
tures  to  bring  them  to  their  opinions ;  fo  Mr.  S. 
tells  us,  "  that  the  outward  letter  of  fcripture  ought 
"  to  be  corrected  by  tradition  and  ienfe  written  in 
u  mens  hearts." 

St.  Hierom  alfo  tells  us,  <c  *  that  the  hereticks  *  n 

Cora..  ~a 

"  were  wont  to  fay,  we  are  the  ions  of  the  wife,  Ifa.  c 19. 
a  who   did  from  the  beginning    deliver  down    to 
"  us  the  apoflolical  doctrine  j"    but  he  adds,  "  that 
"  the    true   fons   of  Judah   adhere   to   the   fcrip- 
I*  turc" 

§  4.  That 


772  The  RULE  of  FAITH. 

PART      §  ^    7  xuc  fcripture   is   fufHciently   plain  in   all 
.__  v--._^  thin  ■    neceflary. 

*  In  2  St.  Chryibftom,  "  *  all  things  in  the  divine  fcrip- 

TilCl    C    2  • 

hom. 4  f4  tures  are  P^11  and  Straight.  Whatfoever  things 
M  are  neceflary  are  man i fed." 

St.  Auilin  having  fpoken  of  the  profoundnefs  of 

*Epift.  3.  fcripture,  adds>  "  not  that  thofe  things  which  are  ne- 
"  cefTary  to  falvation  are  fo  hard  to  be  come  at  : 
iC  but  (iaith  he)  when  one  hath  there  attained  faith, 
u  without  which  there  is  no  pious  and  right  living, 
"  there  are  befides  many  dark  and  myfterious  things, 

*  Ibid.     w  &c."     Again  *,  "  the  manner  of  fpeech  in  fcrip- 

"  ture  how  eafy  is  it  to  all,  though  few  can  pene- 
"  trate  to  the  bottom  of  it  ?  thofe  things  which 
"  it  plainly  contains,  it  fpeaks  without  difguife 
<c  like  a  familiar  friend  to  the  heart  of  the  learned 
cc  and  unlearned.3'  How  will  Mr.  S.  reconcile 
this  with  his  great  exception  againft  fcripture  ? 
And  what  thefe  things  are,  which  are  plainly 
contained    in   fcripture,    the    fame    father    tells  us 

*  De  doc-  elfewhere,  in  thefe   words,  "  *  among  thofe  things 
L  3.  c.q."  which     are    plainly  fet    down    in   fcripture,    all 

"  thofe  things  are  to  be  found  which  comprehend 
<c  faith  and  good  manners."  The  fame  St.  Aufirin 
(as  alfo  Clement  in  the  book  which  Mr.  White 
quoted)  for  the  underflanding  of  obfcure  texts  of 
fcripture,  directs  us  not   to  tradition,    but    to    the 

*  De  uni-  plain  text,   without  which  he  exprefly  fays,  "  *  there 

tateecciei.cc  Would  be  no  way  to  underftand  them.'* 
c.  c.  . 

§  5.  That  fcripture  is  fo  plain,  as  to  be  fit  to 

determine  controverfies. 

Juftin    fure  thought    fb,    when   difputing    with 

Trypho,  concerning  a  point  wherein  the  Jew  had 

tradition 


The  RULE  of  FAITH.  773 

tradition  on    his   fide,    he  told   him    "    he   would  SECT. 

"  bring  fuch   proofs   (to  the  contrary)  as  no  man^^ 

"  could   o-ainfay  :  attend  (fays  he)    to  what  I  fhall 

"  recite   out  of  the   holy   fcriptures,  proofs  which 

"  need  not  to  be  explained,  but  only  to  be  heard." 

Mr.    White   might    have   found   likewife  much   to 

this  purpofe  in  his  Clement. 

But  not  to  tire  my  reader  in  a  point  which 
the  ancients  abound  with,  I  fhall  only  produce 
the  judgment  of  Conftantine  *  in  that  folemn  era-*  The*. 
tion  of  his  to  the  council  of  Nice,  wherein  he^rj/^ 
bewails  "  their  mutual  oppofitions,  efpecially  in  c.  7. 
"  divine  things  j*'  concerning  which  they  had 
the  doctrine  of  the  Holy  Spirit  recorded  in 
writing  ;  "  for  ("fays  he)  the  books  of  the  evaii- 
"  gel  ills  and  ape  files,  and  the  oracles  of  the  old 
<c  prophets,  do  evidently  teacfi  us  what  we  ought 
u  to  think  of  the  divine  majefty.  Therefore  laying 
"  afide  all  feditious  contention,  let  us  determine  the 
ic  matters  in  queftion  by  teftimonies  out  of  the  di- 
"  vine  writings."  Not  a  word  of  any  other  tradi- 
tion but  fcripture,  which  was  held  evident  enough 
in  thofe  days,  though  now  Mr.  S.  tells  us  it  is  not 
fufficient  to  decide  that  controverfy  about  the  di- 
vinity of  Christ. 

§  6.  Laftly,  that  fcripture  is  the  rule  of  faith. 

Irenasus :  cc  *  the  method  of  our  falvation  we*  ^  , 
<c  have  not  known  by  any  other  but  thofe  men  1. 
"  by  whom  the  gofpel  came  to  us,  which  then 
"  they  preached,  but  afterwards  by  the  will  of 
"  God  delivered  it  to  us  in  the  fcriptures,  to  be 
cc  for  the  future  the  foundation  and  pillar  of  our 
«  faith." 

Vol.  IV:  1  CL  St. 

6. 


774  The  RULE  of  FA  I TH. 

PART  St.  Cyprian,  the  church  hath  ever  held  a  good 
^JYi^j  catholic!;  •,  yet  Mr.  S.  *  take;;  notice  that  he  erred  in 

*  P.  314  a  point  of  faith  j  and  perhaps  the  rather,  becaufe 
+  Dial.  3  .Mr.  Rufhworth  -f  had  told  him  that  he  was  not 
fct.  13.    thejrs  ln  this  controverfy.  "  For  (fays  he)  St.  Cyprian 

"  feems  to  think  that  the  refolution  of  faith  was  to 
c;  be  made  into  icripture,  and  not  into  tradition." 
B-it  that  we  may  not  feem  to  accept  of  this  cour- 
tefy  from  him,  nor  yet  wholly  to  defpife  it,  I  mail 
offer  this  one  tcftimony  inftead  of  many  out  of 
that  father  *,  who  being  oppofed  with  an  argument 
•Epift.74.  from  tradition,  demands,  "  *  whence  have  you  that 
iS  tradition  ?  comes  it  from  the  authority  of  the 
"  Lord,  and  of  the  gofpel,  or  from  the  epiftles 
"  of  the  apoftlcs  ?  For  God-  teflifies  that  we  are  to 
4C  do  thofe  things  which  are  written,  &c.  If  it  be 
tc  commanded  in  the  gofpel,  or  contained  in  the 
c<  epiftles  or  a£ts  of  the  apoftles,  then  let  us  obferve 
•«  it  as  a  divine  and   holy  tradition." 

*  Ad  Con-  Hilary  *  commends  Conftantius  the  emperor  tt  for 
feat,         u  regulating  the  faith  only  according  to  thofe  things 

"  which  are  written."  And  to  oblige  him  to  de- 
jerve  this  commendation,  he  adds,  "  he  who  re- 
cc  fufes  this  is  antichrift,  and  who  difTembles  in  it 
c;  is  anathema." 

*  Lib  -.  Optatus  '*,  concerning  the  controverfy  with  the 
defchifm.  donatifts.    asks  who  (hall   be  judge?    and   anfvvers 

'  himfelf,  "  the  fcriptures:"  which  he  illuftrates  by 
the  fimilitude  of  a  father  who  delivered  his  will 
orally  to  his  children  while  he  was  living,  but  when 
he  was  dying,  caufed  it  to  be  written  in  lafting 
tables,  to  decide  all  controverfies  that  might  hap- 

pen 


The  RULE  of  FAITH.  775 

pen  among  them   after  his  death.     The  paflfage   is  s  E  c  T- 
large,  and  it  is  obvious  to  apply  it.  u--v-— -* 

Bafil  maintaining    the  doxology  as  it  was  ufed  in 
his  days,  fays,  "  *  thus  we  received  it  from  our  fa-*  De  SP- 
"  thers  ;*'    but  adds   immediately,    "    this    is  notc.7. 
"  enough  for  us,  that  it  is  the  tradition  of  the  fa- 
"  thers,    for    they    followed    the   authority  of    the 
"  fcriptures,  making    its    teftimonies  the  principles 
<c  upon  which    they   built.''     He  has  indeed  in  the 
fame  book  *  a  paffage  much  infilled  on  by  the  pa-  *  c.  zf 
pifts  concerning  unwritten  traditions  •,  but  withal,  he 
fays  thofe  traditions  were   fecretly   conveyed,  which 
makes  all  the  reft  of  no  ufe  to  Mr.  S. 

Chryfoftom   *  having  mentioned  feveral  herefies,  *Hom.$. 
directs  how  they  may  be  avoided,  viz.  "  by  attend- VI e,rlil- ^ 
u  ing  to  the  faith  delivered,  and  looking  upon  all 
**  that  difagrees  from  that  as  adulterate.     For  (Tays 
ct  hej   as  thofe  who  give  rules  do  not  put  men  up- 
cc  on  a  curious  enquiry  after  any  meafures,  but  bid 
a  them  keep  to  the  rule  given  ;  fo  it  is  in  opini- 
ons.    But  no  body  will  attend  to  the  fcriptures ; 
if  we  did,  we  fhould  not  only  not  fall  into  errors 
ourfelves,  but  alfo  refcue  thofe  that  are  deceived.5' 
Again,  u  *  if  we  would  be  throughly  converfant  in  *  Horn? 
u  the  fcriptures,    we  fhould   be  inftrucled  both   in52-inJoh: 
"  right  opinions  and  a  good  life."  Again,  "  among 
"  the  many  feels  of  chriftians    *   it  will  be  eafy  to  *  H0m. 
"  judge  of   the  right,  if  we  believe  the  fcriptures, 33  waft,' 
"  becaufe  they  are  plain  and  true  :  if  any  one  agree  ap°iU 
"  with  thefe  he  is  a  chriftian  ;    if  he   contradicts 
"  them  he  is  far  from  this  rule.'' 

7  CL*  jSfii 


cc 

4C 


776  Tie  RULE  of  FAITH. 

PART.      St.   Auftin  calls   the  fcripture,    *  the  divine  ba- 

^SL^j  lance  for  the  weighing  of  dodrines.     Again,  "  the 

•CeBapt.u  holy  fcripture  (fays  he)    fixeth   the  rule   of  our 

com  do-  |C  doftrine."     And  accordingly  himfelf  ufes  it  both 

1%  '  2"   in  his  difpute  with  Maximinus,  to  whom  he  fays, 

•  Contr.  tc  *  Neither   ought  I  now    to  alledge    the    Nicene 

Max'  M>  council,  nor  thou  that  of  Jriminum  :  for  neither 

«  am  I  bound  to  the  authority  of  the  one,  nor  thou 

«  of  the  other.      Let  us  both  conteft  with  the  au- 

«  thorities  of  fcripture,  which   are  witneffes  com- 

«•  mon  to  us  both."     And  alfo  againft   the  dona- 

Deuni-  tifts  in   thefe  words  :   "  *  let   them,    if  they  can, 


tat.ccdef.<c  demonftrate  their  church  not  by  the  talk  and  ru- 
•«  mours  [or  oral  tradition]   of  the   Africans,   not 


by  the  councils  of  their  own  biftiops,  not  by 
■<  the  books  of  their  difputers,  not  by  deceitful  mi- 
«  racies,  &c.  but  by  the  prefcript  of  the  law,  pro- 
's phets,  &c.  i.  e.  by  all  the  canonical  authorities  of 
"  the  holy  books." 

*  Com  Hicrom  faith,  "  of  thofe  things,  which  without 
merTin  "  the  authorities  and  teftimonies  of  the  fcripture, 
^gg-  ci«  men  invent  of  their  own  heads  as  from  apofto- 

<«  Ileal  tradition,  they  are  finittcn  with  the  iword 

•«  of  God." 

Theophilus  Alexander  whom  Hierom  hath  trani- 

*  Pafchal  lated,  calls  fcripture  more  than  once  •  the  rule, 
L  3-  and  the  teftimonies  of  it  the  firm  foundations  of 
i-  L  3      dbcirine.  And  again  faith,  "  f  It  comes  from  a  de- 

««  moniacal  fpirit  that  men  follow  the  fophifms  of 
«  humane  minds,  and  think  any  thing  divine  that 
"  wants  the  authority  of  fcripture." 

*  Hserct.  Theodoret  *  charges  all  herefies  upon  the  not 
fc^1-1-*- following  of  fcripture,    which   he  calls  "  the  in- 

iH      9  x  «  flexible 


The  RULE  of  FAITH.  777 

"  flexible  rule  of  truth.  "Again,  "  we  have  learned^  JjT. 
«  the   rule  of  opinion  from  the  divine  fcripture." , — ^^j 

After  the  fathers,   I  ihali  produce  the  teftimonies 
of  two  eminent  perfons  of  latter  times,  Gerfon  and 

yGerfon  in  his  *  book  of  the  trial   of  doctrines,*  Parti, 
hath   this   remarkable   paiTage  •,    "  in    the  trial  ofConficL  2' 
"  doclrines,   that   which  is  firft  and  principally  to 
"  be  confidered,    is,  whether  a  dodrine  be  confor- 
«  mable   to  the  holy  fcripture,  &c.  The  reafon  of 
"  this  is,  becaufe  the  fcripture  is  delivered  to  us  as  a 
«  SUFFICIENT  and  INFALLIBLE  RULE  for 
"  the  government  of  the  whole  ecclefiaftical  body  and 
"  its  members  to  the   end  of  the  world.     So  that 
«  it  is  fuch  an  art,  fuch  a  rule  or  exemplar,  that 
«  any    other   do&rine    which    is    not  conformable 
"  to  it,  is  to  be    renounced  as  heretical,   or  to  be 
"  accounted    fufpicious,   or    not   at  all    appertain- 
«  ing  to  religion."    Again,  "  *  it  is  evident  how*Dedr. 
««  pernicious  the   rejection  of  the  holy  fcripture  is,^^ 
«  and  how  certain  a  preparatory  for  the  reception  of  a  fklfis. 
«  antichrift."  Once  more,  «  f  what  mifchief,  wJiatt^ifl 
"  danger,   what  confufion   hath  happened  through  cumcif# 
«  contempt  of  the   holy  fcripture,    which   fure   is&c, 
"  fufficient  for  the  government  of  the  church  (elfe 
<<  Christ  mud  have  been  an  imperfect  lawgiver) 
"  let  us  ask  experience,  Sec." 

Lyra  alfo  writes  thus  •,  "  *  as  in  philofophy  truth* Prolog 
is  difcovered  by  reducing  things  to  their  farlt  ana&c. 


«  felf-evident  principles ;    fo  in  the  writings  deli- 

"  vered  by  the  holy  doctors,  truth  is  difcovered,  as 

«  to  matters  of  faith,  by  reducing  them  to  the  ca- 

"  nonical  fcriptures." 

Sir, 


778  The  RULE  of  FAITH. 

PART.  Sir,  "  you  know  how  eafy  it  were  to  fwell  up  a 
"  large  volume  with  teftimonies  to  this  pur- 
iC  pofe ;  efpecially  if  I  fhould  take  the  courfe 
u  that  Mr.  White  does,  to  hale  in  quotations 
"  though  ever  fo  impertinent  >  or  ufe  the  wretch- 
"  ed  importunity  which  Mr.  S.  does,  to  per- 
"  fuade  them  to  be  pertinent.  But  thefe  tefti- 
"  monies  which  I  have  nakedly  fet  down,  leav- 
**  ing  them  to  fpeak  for  themfelvcs,  are  enough 
"  to  fatisfy  an  unpaffionate  reader,  fuch  an  one  as 
"  dares  truft  himfelf  with  the  ufe  of  own  eyes  and 
"  reafon.  As  for  that  fort  of  men  which  choofe 
"  to  follow  noife  rather  than  light,  we  mud  be 
c*  content  to  leave  them  to  the  blind  conduct  of 
"  thofe  guides,  who  having  no  better  means  to 
"  keep  their  followers  to  them,  go  hallowing  in 
"  the  dark,  and  fill  their  ears  with  the  infignifi- 
<c  cant  founds  of  infallibility,  indefectibility,  felf- 
"  evidence  and  demonftration." 

"  Concerning  the  appendix  wherein  you  are  par- 
"  ticularly  challeng'd,  I  hope  for  an  account  very 
"  fhortly,  and  fo  take  leave>" 


Sir,. 

Your  affectionate  friend, 


JOHNTILLOTSON* 


O  F 

SlNCERITY^^CoNSTANCY 

I  N    T  H  E 

Faith  and  Profeffion 

o  F    t  H  E 

TRUE  RELIGION. 


T  O    H  I  S 


SACRED    MAJESTY 


KING  WILL  1AM, 


THESE 


E  R  M  O  N  S 


ARE 


Moft  humbly  Dedicated, 
By  the  Author's  Relicl, 


Elizabeth  lilktfon. 


Vol.  IV.  a  R  THE 

7- 


THE 

PUBLISHER 

TO    THE 

READER. 

F~Y^HE  AUTHOR  of  thefefer- 
JL      mons  was  fo  well  known,  parti- 
cularly for  his  moji  excellent  and 
ufeful  difcourfes  from  the  pulpit,  that  I 
jhall  not  attempt^  by  any  thing  I  can  fay ', 
to  recommend  thei?i  to  the  publick.      I 
know  very  well,  they  have  already  that 
credit  in  the  world,  which  will  render 
any  apology  needlefs ;  efpecially  when,  by 
this  publication  of  them,  they  Jhall  fpeak 
for  themfelves. 

I  think   it  requifite,    only   to  affure 
the    reader,    that   they    are    what  they 

7  R  2  preti 


The    PREFACE. 

pretend  to  be,  the  genuine  works  of  that 
great  man. 

Whilfl  I  had  the  happinefs  of  con- 
verfing  with  him,  he  was  pleas  d  {at 
my  requefi)  to  inJlruSt  me  in  the  cha- 
racter in  which  he  wrote  all  his  fer- 
mans  :  and  fome  of  thefe  now  publijhed, 
having  been  tra7tfcribed  by  me  fome  years 
fnce,  were  fowtd  a?no?igJl  his  papers, 
corrected  with  his  own  hand. 

By  what  he  had  been  pleas  d  to  fay, 
that  I  was  mailer  of  his  chara&er, 
and  by  the  few  errata  he  obfervd  iit 
my  firfl  performance^  I  was  e?icouraged 
to  fet  about  this  work ;  in  which  I 
can  folem?ily  profefs,  that  I  have  ob- 
fervd  a  religious  care  and  flriSlnefs, 
neither  to  omit  7ior  add  aity  thing, 
but  a?i  of,  a  the,  or  the  like,  when 
the  fenfe  plainly  required  it;  and  of 
that  too  I  have  given  ?wtice,  by  affix- 
ing  this  mark  [  a  ]  upon  the  word  which 

I  did 


The    PREFACE. 

J"  did  not  find  in  the  original ;  Jo  that 
the  reader  is  left  to  judge  of  the  fit- 
?iefis  of  fuch  additions ;  which,  after 
all,  are  fo  very  few  a7id  inconfidera- 
ble,  as  fcarcely  to  deferve  this  ?iotice  \ 
07ily  that  he  might  be  fatisfied  {in  cafe 
the  printer  do  his  part)  that  he  hath 
here,  what  he  expeSis,  a  perfeSl  tran- 
fcript  of  thefe  fermons;  and  in  thefn 
a  true  and  lively  Jirain  of  chriflian 
piety  and  eloquence,  fo  fitted  to  all 
capacities,  that  I  cannot  but  hope,  all 
that  fo  all  read  them  will  be  the  better 
for  them>  even  thofe  not  excepted  [if 
there  be  any  fuch)  who  may  have  en- 
tertaind  any  unreafonable  prejudices 
againfl  them,  or  their  moft  reverend 
author. 

/   have    always   thought,    and  oft  \ 
faid  it,   that  if  any  'were  leaven  d  with 
prejudice  agai?i.Jl  him,  they  were,  to  be 

fure,  fuch  as  did  not  know  him  ;  and 

the 


The    PREFACE. 

the  farther  I  go  in  his  writings^  the 
more  I  am  ajfurd,  that  it  muji  be  Jo. 
But  becaufe  the  Jermons  themfelves,  to 
which  I  refer  ^  are  not  yet  all  of  them 
publifhed)  I  muji  leave  this  to  the  judg- 
ment oj  the  impartial  reader >  when  the 
whole  fhall  be  finifSd^  which  is  defgrid 
with  ail  conve7tient  fpeed. 


Lambeth,  JJ  a     "Rnrfcpr 

April  2,'  1695.  ■**>«.    JDdlJVCl. 


SER- 


SERMON      LV, 

Of  fincerity  towards  God  and  man. 


J  O  H  N  i.  47- 

y  ejus  Jaw  Nathanael  coming  to  him,  and  faith  of  him, 
behold  an  Ifraelite  indeed,  in  whom  is  no  guile. 

WHO  this  Nathanael  was,  upon  whom  our  SERM. 
Saviour  beftows  this  extraordinary  cha-      j^r- 
ra£fcer,   doth    not   certainly  appear,    hi6preachvi 
name  being  but  once  more  mentioned  in  the  whole ac  King- 
hiftory  of  the  gofpel :  for  certain,   he  was  a  good2C;,  1604. 
man,  who  deferved  this  extraordinary  commendati- tlie  laA  his 

prn.cc 

on;  and  none  but  ourSAViouR,  "  who^knew  whatp^^^ 

«'  was  in   man,  and  needed  not  that  any  fhould  td\ 

"  him,"  could  have  given  it,  efpecially  of  one  whom 

he  had  never  feen  before  that  time  ;  for  when  "  Je- 

**  sus  faw  him  coming  to  him,   he    faith  of  him, 

*4  behold  an  Ifraelite  indeed.  " 

The  whole  nation  of  the  Jews  were  Ifraelites  by 
natural  defcent,  being  the  feed  of  Jacob  or  Ifrael  *, 
but  in  a  fpecial  and  more  excellent  fenfe,  none  are 
efteem'd  the  true  poflerity  of  Ifrael,  but  thofe  who 
refembled  this  father  of  their  nation,  in  true  piety 
and  goodnefs  •,  for  (as  the  apoftle  reafons)  "  they 
a  are  not  all  Ifrael,  who  are  of  Ifrael ;  "  they  on- 
Jy  are  Ifraelites  indeed  who  refemble  good  old  Ja- 
cob in  the  fmcerity  of  his  piety,  and  the  fimplicity 
cif  his  temper  and  diipofition  3  for  our  Saviour 

feems 


LV. 


7S 8  Ofjincerity  towards  God  and  man. 

SERM.  feems  here  to  alJude  to  that  character  which  is  given 
of  Jacob  (Gen.  xxv.  27.)  "  That  he  was  a  plain 
u  man,or,asthehebrew  word  fignifies,  a  perfect  and 
"  fincere  man,"  in  oppofition  to  his  brother  Eiau 
who  is  faid  to  be  cunning,  fo  that  to  be  an  Ifraelite 
indeed,  is  to  be  a  downright  honed  man,  without 
fraud  and  guile,  without  any  arts  of  hypocrify  and 
deceit. 

In  fpeaking  of  this  virtue  of  fincerity,  which  is 
the  higheft  character  and  commendation  of  a  good 
man,  I  mall  confider  it,  as  it  refpects  God  and 
man.  As  it  refpects  God,  fo  it  imports  the  truth 
and  fincerity  of  our  piety  and  devotion  towards  him. 
As  it  regards  men,  fo  it  fignirles  a  fimplicity  of 
mind  and  manners,  in  our  carnage  and  conventi- 
on, one  towards  ^another :  both  thefe  are  included, 
and  very  probably  were  intended,  in  the  character 
which  our  Saviour  here  gives  Nathanael. 

I.  I  mall  confider  this  grace,  or  virtue  of  fince- 
rity, as  it  refpects  God,  and  fo  it  imports  the  truth 
and  fincerity  of  our  piety  towards  him,  that  we 
heartily  believe,  and  fear,  and  honour  him,  and  that 
the  outward  expreilions  of  our  piety  and  obedience 
to  him  are  the  genuine  ifTue  of  our  inward  apprehen- 
fions  of  him,  and  affections  towards  him  ;  and  this 
no  doubt,  our  Saviour  intended,  in  the  firft  place, 
in  the  character  of  this  good  man,  that  he  was  a 
man  of  a  real  and  fubftantial  and  unaffected  piety, 
and  in  truth,  what  he  appeared  to  be;  that  he  did 
fincerely  love  God  and  his  truth,  and  was  ready  to 
embrace  it,  whenever  it  was  fairly  prcpofed  to  him, 
as  did  plainly  appear  in  his  carriage  towards  our 
Saviour  5  for  when  Philip  invited  him  "  to  come 

"  and 


Of  fincerity  towards  God  and  man.  7S9 

u  and  fee  him,"  he  did  not  conceal  the  prejudice  and  3  &kM. 
objection  he  had  againft  him,  grounded  UDon  a 
common,  but  uncharitable  proverb,  "  that  out  of 
"  Nazareth  arifeth  no  prophet-  "  but  having  an 
honed  and  fincere  mind,  he  was  not  Jo  carried  a- 
way  by  a  popular  prejudice,  as  not  to  have  patience 
to  be  bttter  inform 'd,  and  therefore  was  eafily  per- 
fuaded  10  go  and  fee  our  Saviour,  and  to  dif- 
courfe  with  him  himfelf,  and  being  fatisfied  that  he 
was  the  Messias,  he  prefently  owns  him  for  fuch, 
calling  him  "  the  Son  of  God,  and  the  king  of  If- 
"  rael.  "  And  becaufe  fincerity  is  the  very  heart 
and  fubftance  of  religion,  it  concerns  us  not  only  to 
endeavour  after  this  temper  and  difpofition,  but  to 
enquire  into  the  nature  and  properties  of  it,  that 
we  may  know  when  we  have  it,  and  may  have  the 
comfort  of  it.  I  fhall  mention  five  or  fix  proper- 
ties of  a  fincere  piety,  by  which  men  may  fuffici- 
ently  know  the  integrity  of  their  hearts  towards 
God. 

1.  Our  piety  is  then  fincere,  when  the  chief  rea- 
fons  and  predominant  motives  of  it  are  religious ; 
and  I  call  that  a  religious  or  rational  motive,  which 
regards  God  and  another  world,  in  oppofition  to 
men,  and  to  our  prefent  temporal  advantages ; 
when  the  principal  and  fwaying  motives  of  our 
piety,  arc  a  fenfe  of  God's  authority  over  us,  and 
of  our  duty  and  obligation  to  him  ;  a  fear  of  his 
difpleafure  and  threatnings,  and  the  hopes  of  thz 
glorious  reward  which  he  hath  promifed  to  obedi- 
ence 5  thefe  motives  are  properly  religious,  becaufe 
they  refpecl  God,  and  are  the  arguments  to  obedi- 
ence, which  he  himfelf  offers  to  us,  to  perfuade  us 

Vol.  IV.  7  $  to 


7Qo  Of  fincerity  towards  God  and  man, 

SERM.  to  our  duty;  and  that  is  a  fincere  piety,  which  >3 
wrought  in  us  by  thefe  confederations,  how  unequal- 
ly ibever  mixed,  for  even  in  the  molt  of  men,  fear 
does  many  times  prevail  more  than  love,  and,  in 
cafe  of  great  temptation,  may  preferve  men  from 
fin,  when  perhaps  no  other  confideration  will  do 
it.  On  the  contrary,  that  is  an  unfincere  piety,  to 
which  we  are  moved  meerly  by  the  regard  of  men, 
and  the  confideration  of  fome  temporal  advantages. 
And  when  thefe  have  the  chief  influence  upon  us, 
it  is  eafy  for  any  man  to  difcern  in  himfelf ;  for  he 
that  will  carefully  obferve  himfelf,  can  hardly  be 
ignorant  of  the  true  fphng  and  motive  of  his  own 
actions :  but  there  is  one  fign  whereby  a  man  may 
certainly  know  that  his  heart  is  not  right  towards 
God,  and  that  is,  if  when  thefe  motives  are  abfent, 
cur  piety  and  zeal  for  the  true  religion  doth  either 
ceafe,  or  is  fenfibly  cooled  and  abated ;  as  if  im- 
piety, or  popery,  or  any  thing  elfe  that  is  bad, 
begin  to  be  in  fafhion,  and  to  have  the  counte- 
nance  of  great  examples  ;  if  thofe  whom  we  fear> 
and  upon  whom  we  depend,  do  difcover  any  incli- 
nation that  way ;  if  the  garb  of  religion  ceafe  to 
be  for  our  interefr,  or,  in  the  revolution  of  things, 
happen  to  be  contrary  to  it  :  if  in  any  of  thefe 
cafes,  we  let  fall  the  profeflion  of  our  religion,  or 
neglect  the  practice  of  it,  this  is  a  plain  and  un- 
deniable demonftration  of  the  infincerity  of  our  for- 
mer piety. 

2.  A  fincere  piety  mufl  be  rooted  in  the  heart, 
and  be  a  living  principle  within  us  :  for  as  the  apo- 
ftle  reafons  in  another  cafe,  "  he  is  not  a  Jew  who  is 
*•  one  outwardly,  but  he  who  is  one  inwardly,  and 

44  m 


Of  fincerity  towards  God  and  man.  794. 

K  in  the  heart  \n  and  without  this  all  outward  ads  SERM. 
81  of  piety  and  devotion  are  hypocrify ;  a  picture  of 
88  religion,  and  a  form  of  godlinefs,  without  the  life 
"  and  power  of  it." 

3.  A  third  evidence  of  a  fincerc  piety  is,  when 
men  are  religious  in  private  and  in  fecret,  as  well  as 
in  publick  and  in  the  open  view  of  men.  He  is 
truly  devour,  who  is  fo  in  his  family,  and  in  his 
clofet,  where  he  hath  no  witnefs,  but  God,  and  his 
own  foul,  as  well  as  in  the  church.  He  is  a  down- 
right honeft  man,  who  will  make  good  his  word, 
and  perform  his  promife,  when  no  proof  can  be 
made  of  it,  and  no  law  compel  him  to  it,  as  readi- 
ly as  if  there  had  been  an  hundred  witneffes  of  it. 
He  is  fincerely  juft,  who  will  not  detain  from  another 
his  right,  though  he  be  ignorant  of  it ;  nor  wrono- 
any  man,  though  he  could  do  it  with  all  the  fecre- 
cy  and  fafety  in  the  world  •,  who  will  not  impofe 
upon  another's  ignorance  or  unskilfulnels,  though 
never  fo  much  to  his  own  benefit  or  advantage  : 
he  is  truly  charitable,  who  would  not  only  as  foon, 
but  rather  fboner  give  his  alms  in  fecret,  than  in  the 
fight  of  men:  and  he  is  truly  grateful,  who  when 
there  is  occafion  and  opportunity,  will  acknowledge 
a  kindnefs  and  requite  a  benefit  to  the  relations  of 
his  deceafed  friend,  though  he  be  fure  that  all  me- 
mory of  the  obligation  died  with  him,  and  that 
none  are  confeious  of  it,  but  God  and  his  own 
confeience.  And  indeed  there  is  fcarce  any  act 
of  piety  and  virtue,  the  fincerity  of  which  may 
not  by  this  evidence  be  known  by  us :  as  on  the 
contrary  a  man  may  for  certain  conclude  himfeif  a 
hypocrite,  if  he  be  not  the  fame  in  the  prefence  of 

7  S  2  God* 


ygz  Of  fine  er  It y  towards  God  and  man. 

SE  R  M.  God,  and  his  own  confeience,  that  he  is  in  the  fight 
of  men. 

4.  Another  evidence   of  a  fincere  piety  is  a  con- 
flant  tenour  of  goodnels  in  the  general  courfe  of  our 
lives.     I  do  not  now  fpeak  of  the  firft  beginnings  of 
piety,  in  new  converts,  which  are  many  times  very 
imperfect,  and  fuch  as  afford  little  or  no  evidence  of 
a  man's  fincerity  •,  but  in  thofe  who  have   made  any 
confiderable  progrefs  in  goodnefs  \  the  habits  of  any 
known   fin,    and*  the  wilful   and  deliberate  neglect 
of  our  duties,  and    even   the  fingle  acts    of  more 
heinous  crimes,  will  bring  in  queftion  our  fincerity, 
and   are  by  no  means   to   be  fhelter'd   under    the 
name  of  infirmity:  for  thefe  the  grace  of  God,   if 
v/e   be  not  wanting  to  ourfelves,  will  enable  us  to 
fubd.ue  ;  and  he  is  not  fincerely  good,  who  doth  no: 
feriouily  endeavour  to  be  as  good  as  he  can,  and  does 
not  make  life  of  that  grace  which  God   is   ready  to 
afford  to  all  trie  purpofes,  tho'  not  of  a  perfect,  yet  of 
a  fincere  obedience  to  the  laws  of  God. 

5.  Another  evidence  of  a  fincere  piety  is,  that 
our  obedience  to  God    be  uniform  and   univerfal, 
equally  refpecting  all  the  laws  of  God,  and  every 
part  of  our  duty  •»  that  it  do  not  content  itfelf  with 
an  efpecial  regard  to  fome  precepts  of  the  law    tho* 
never  fo  confiderable,  and  allow  itfelf  in  the  breach, 
or  neglect  of  the  reft ;  no   nor  with  obferving   the 
duties  of  one  table  of  the  law,  if  it  overlook  the 
other ;  no  nor  with  obedience  to  ail  the  command- 
ments of  God,  one  only  excepted.     St.  James  puts 
this  cafe,  and  determines,  "  that  he  that   keeps  the 
*'  whole  law,  faving  that  he  offends  in  one  point,  is 
*4  guilty  of  ail,"  that  is,  is  not  fincere  in  his  obe- 
dience 


Of  fmcerity  towards  God  and  man.  793 

dience  to    the   reft.     And  therefore   we  muft  take  S  E  R  M. 
great  heed    that  we  do  not  fet  the  commandments  l  — J_ 
of  God  at  odds,  and  dafh  the  two  tables  of  the  law 
againft  one  another,  left,   as  St.  James  fays,   l<  we 
"  break  the  whole  law.5'     And  yet   I    fear  this  is 
too  common  a  fault,  even  arnongft  thofe  who  make 
a  great  profeffion  of  piety,    that  they  are  not  fuffi- 
ciently   fenfible  of   the   obligation  and  neceffity  of 
the    duties  of  the  fecond   table,  and   of  the  excel- 
lency of  thofe  graces  and  virtues,   which  refpcct  our 
carriage  and  converfation  with  one  another.     Men 
do  not  feem  to   confider,    that  God  did  not  give 
laws  to  us,  for  his  own  fake,  but  ours ;  and  therefore 
that  he  did  not  -only  defign  that  we  mould  honour 
him,  but  that  we  mould  be  happy  in  one  another ; 
for  which  reafon  he  joins  with  our  humble  and  duti- 
ful deportment  towards  himfdf,  the  offices  of  juftice 
and  charity  towards  others,  Micah  vi.  3.  "  he  hath 
*c  fhewed  thee,   O  man,  what  is  good;  and  what 
"  doth  the  Lord  require  of  thee,  but  to  do  juftice, 
"  and  to  love  mercy,  and  to  walk  humbly  with  thy 
"  God  ?"  And  1  John  iv.  21.    "  This  command- 
**  ment  have  we  from  him,  that  he  who   loveth 
u  God,  love  his  brother  alfo."     And  yet  it  is  too 
vifible  that  many,  who  make  a  great  profeffion  of 
piety    towards  God,   are   very  defective    in  moral 
duties ;    very  unpeaceable,   and  turbulent    in    their 
fpirits,  very   peevifh  and  paffionate,  very  conceited 
and  cenforious,    as   if  their  profeffion   of  godlinefs 
did   exempt    them    from  the  care   and    practice  of 
chriftian  virtues.     But  we  muft  not  fo  fix  our  eye 
upon  heaven,  as  to   forget   that  we  walk  upon    the 
c.;r;h,    and   to    neglect  the  ordering  of  our  fteps 

and 


794-  Of  fincerity  towards  God  and  man. 

SERM.  and  converfation  among  men,  left  while  we  are 
crazing  upon  the  ftars,  we  fall  into  the  ditch  of  grofs 
and  foul  immorality. 

It  is  very  podible,  that  men  may  be  devout  and 
zealous  in  religion,  very  nice  and  fcrupulous  about 
the  worfhip  and  fervice  of  God  ;  and  yet  becaufe  of 
their  palpable  defect  in  points  of  juftice  and  ho- 
nelty,  of  meeknefs  and  humility,  of  peace  and  cha- 
rity, may  be  grofs  and  odious  hypocrites.  For  men 
mud  not  think  for  fome  acts,  either  of  outward  or 
inward  piety,  to  compound  with  God  for  the  neg- 
lect of  mercy  and  judgment,  or  to  demand  it  as  a 
ricmt  from  men  to  be  excufed  from  the  great  duties 
and  virtues  of  humane  converfation  ;  or  pretend  to 
be  above  them,  becaufe  they  relate  chiefly  to  this 
world,  and  to  the  temporal  happinefs  of  men;  as 
if  it  were  the  privilege  of  great  devotion,  to  give 
a  licence  to  men  to  be  peevifh  and  froward,  four 
and  morofe,  fupercilious  and  cenforious  in  their  be- 
haviour towards  others.  Men  mud  have  a  great 
care  that  they  be  not  intent  upon  the  outward  parts 
of  religion,  to  the  prejudice  of  inward  and  real  good- 
nefs,  and  that  they  do  not  fo  life  the  means  of  re- 
ligion, as  to  neglect  and  lofe  the  main  end  of  it  : 
that  they  do  not  place  all  religion  in  fading  and 
outward  mortification  :  for  though  thefe  things  be 
very  ufeful  and  neceflfary  in  their  place,  if  they  be 
difcreetly  managed,  and  made  fubfervient  to  the 
great  ends  of  religion  -,  yet  it  is  often  feen  that  men 
have  fo  unequal  a  refpect  to  the  feveral  parts  of 
their  duty,  that  fading  and  corporal  feverity,  thofe 
meager  and  lean  duties  of  piety,  in  comparifon,  do 
like  Pharaoh's  lean  kine,  "devour  and  eat  up  almod 

"  all 


Of fincerlty  towards  God  and  man.  79 5 

*c.all  the  goodly  and  well-favoured,"  the  great  and  SERM; 
fubftantial  duties  of  the  chriftian  life ;  and  therefore 
men  muft  take  great  heed,  left  whilft  they  are  fo  in- 
tent upon  mortifying  themfelves,  they  do  not  mortify 
virtue  and  good-nature,  humility  and  meeknefs  and 
charity,  things  highly  valuable  in  themfelves,  and 
amiable  in  the  eyes  of  men,  and  in  the  fight  of  God 
of  great  price. 

For  the  neglect  of  the  moral  duties  of  the  fecond 
table  is  not  only  a  mighty  fcandal  to  religion,  but 
of  pernicious  confequence  many  other  ways.  A  fierce 
and  ill-governed,  an  ignorant  and  injudicious  zeal 
for  the  honour  of  God,  and  fomething  or  other  be- 
longing necefTarily,  as  they  think,  to  his  true  wor- 
fhip  and  fervice,  hath  made  many  men  do  many  un- 
reafonable,  immoral  and  impious  things,  of  which 
hiftory  will  furnifh  us  with  innumerable  inftances,  in 
the  practice  of  the  jefuits  and  other  zealots  of  the 
church  of  Rome ;  and  there  are  not  wanting  too 
many  examples  of  this  kind  amongft  ourfelves  :  for 
men  that  are  not  fober,  and  confiderate  in  their  re- 
ligion, but  give  themfelves  up  to  the  conduct:  of 
blind  prejudice,  and  furious  zeal,  do  eafily  perfuade 
themfelves  that  any  thing  is  lawful,  which  they 
fbrongly  fancy  to  tend  to  the  honour  of  God,  and 
to  the  advancement  of  the  caufe  of  religion.  Hence 
fome  have  proceeded  to  that  height  of  abfurdity, 
in  their  zeal  for  their  religion  and  church,  as  to 
think  it  not  only  lawful  but  highly  commendable 
and  meritorious  to  equivocate  upon  oaths  and 
break  faith  with  hereticks,  and  to  deftroy  all  thofc 
that  differ  from  them ;  as  -if  it  were  piety  in  fome 
cafes  to  lie  for  the  truth,  and  to  kill  men  for  God's 
fake,  ,  So 


796  Of  fincerity  towards  God  and  man. 

S  E  R  M.  So  that  if  we  would  approve  the  integrity  of  our 
hearts  to  God,  and  evidence  to  ourfelves  the  fince- 
rity of  our  obedience,  we  ought  impartially  to  re- 
gard all  the  laws  of  God,  and  every  part  of  our  du- 
ty :  and  if  we  do  not,  our  heart  is  not  upright  with 
God.  5Tis  obfervable  that  fincerity  in  fcripture  is 
often  called  by  the  name  of  integrity,  and  perfection, 
becaufe  it  is  integrated  and  made  up  of  all  the  parts 
of  our  duty. 

6.  The  lafl  evidence  I  mall  mention  of  the  fince- 
rity of  our  religion  is,  if  it  hold  out  againft  per- 
fection, and  endure  the  fiery  trial.  This  is  the 
utmoft  proof  of  our  integrity,  when  we  are  called 
to  bear  the  crofs,  to  be  willing  then  to  expofe  all 
our  worldly  interefl,  and  even  life  kfelf,  for  the 
caufe.of  God  and  religion.  This  is  a  trial  which 
God  doth  not  always  call  his  faithful  fervants  to  ; 
but  they  are  always  to  be  prepared  for  it,  in  the 
purpofe  and  refolution  of  their  minds.  This  our 
Saviour  makes  the  great  mark  of  a  true  difciple, 
*•  if  any  man  (faith  he)  will  be  my  difciple,  let 
•*  him  deny  himlelf,  and  take  up  his  crofs,  and 
"  follow  me."  This  is  a  certain  fign,  "  that  men 
4i  have  received  the  word  into  good  ground," 
and  are  well-rooted  in  their  religion,  when  they 
are  not  fhaken  by  thefe  fierce  affaults ;  "  forma- 
"  ny  (as  our  Saviour  tells  us)  hear  the  word,  and 
"  with  joy  receive  it  ;  but  having  not  root  in 
"  themfclves,  they  endure  but  for  a  while,  and 
"  when  perfecution  or  tribulation  arifcth,  becaufe  of 
"  the  word,  prcfently  they  are  offended  f*  nay  fome, 
when  they  fee  perfecution  coming  at  a  diftance,  wheel 
of!  and  bethink  themfclves  of  making  their  retreat 

in 


Of  fincerity  towards  God  and  man.  ygj 

in  time,    and   "  of  agreeing  with  their  adverfary,  SERM* 
*'  whiltt  he  is  yet    in   the  way." 

So  that  conflancy  to  our  religion  in  cafe  of 
danger,  and  fuifering  for  it,  is  the  bed  proof  of 
our  fincerity.  This  is  the  fiery  trial,  as  the  fcrip- 
ture  calls  it,  which  will  try  what  materials  we  are 
made  of,  and  whether  we  love  God  and  his  truth 
in    fincerity. 

And  thus  I  have  confidered  fincerity  as  it  re- 
flects God,  and  imports  true  piety  and  religion 
towards  him  ;  and  1  proceed  to  the  fecond  confe- 
deration, 

II.  Of   fincerity   as  it  regards  men ;   and  fo  it 
fignifies  a   fimplicity  of  mind  and  manners  in  our 
converfation,    and    carriage    one  towards  another  ; 
finglenefs  of  heart,  difcovering   itfelf  in  a  conftant 
plainnefs    and  honed   opennefs   of    behaviour,    free 
from    all   infidious    devices,    and   little  tricks,    and 
fetches  of  craft  and  cunning  j  from  all  falle  appear- 
ances and  deceitful    difguifes   of  ourfelves  in  word 
or  action  ;    or  yet  mGre  plainly,  it  is  to   fpeak   as 
we    think,  and    do  what   we    pretend    and  profefs, 
to  perform  and   make  good  what  we  promife,  and, 
in  a  word,  really  to  be,  what  we  would  ieem  and  ap* 
pear    to  be. 

Not  that   we  are  obliged    to  teil  every   man  all 
our  mind  ;  but  we  are  never  to  declare  any  thing 
contrary    to  it :  we  may  be  filent,  and  conceal  as 
much  of  ourfelves,  as  prudence,  or  any  other  good 
reafon  requires  •,  but  we  mud  not  put  on  a  difguife> 
and   make  a  falfe  appearance   and   empty  /hew  of 
what  wc  are  not,  either  by  word  or  action.     Con- 
trary   to    this    virtue    is   ( I  fear )    moil;    of    that 
Vo  l.  IV.  7  T 

7- 


798  Offmcerity  towards  God  and  man. 

SERM.  compliment  which  is  current  in  converfation,  and 
which  for  the  mod  part  is  nothing  but  words,  to 
fill  up  the  gaps,  and  fupply  the  emptinefs  of  dif- 
courfe  •,  and  a  pretence  to  that  kindnefs  and  efleern 
for  perfons,  which  either  in  truth  we  have  not,  or 
not  to  that  degree  which  our  expreffions  feem  to  im- 
port ;  which  if  done  with  defign,  is  that  which  we 
call  flattery,  a  very  odious  fort  of  infincerity,  and  fo 
much  the  worfe,  becaufe  it  abufes  men  into  a  vain 
and  foolifh  opinion  of  themfelves,  and  an  ill-grounded 
confidence  of  the  kindnefs  and  good-will  of  others 
towards  them  5  and  fo  much  the  more  dangerous, 
becaufe  it  hath  a  party  within  us,  which  is  ready  to 
let  it  in  ;  it  plays  upon  our  felf-love,  which  greedily 
catcheth  at  any  thing  that  tends  to  magnify  and  ad- 
vance us  \  for  God  knows,  we  are  ail  too  apt  to 
think  and  make  the  beft  of  our  bad  felves,  fo  that 
very  few  tempers  have  wifdom  and  firmnefs  enough 
to  be  proof  againft  flattery ;  it  requires  great  confi- 
deration  and  a  refolute  modefly  and  humility,  to  re- 
iift  the  insinuations  of  this  fcrpent ;  yea,  a  little  rude- 
nefs  and  morofeneis  of  nature,  a  prudent  diftruft  and 
infidelity  in  mankind,  to  make  a  man  in  good  ear- 
ned to  reject  and  defpife  it. 

Now  befides,  that  all  hypocrify  and  infincerity  is 
mean  in  itfelf,  having  falfhood  at  the  bottom  \  it 
is  alfo  often  made  ufe  of,  to  the  prejudice  of  others, 
in  their  rights  and  interefts.  For  not  only  diflimu- 
lation  is  contrary  to  fincerity,  becaufe  it  confirts  in 
a  vain  mew  of  what  we  arc  not,  in  a  falfe  mufter 
of  our  virtues  and  good  qualities,  in  a  deceitful  re- 
prefentation  and  undue  character  of  our  lives :  but 
there  are  likewiie  other  qualities  and  actions  more  in- 
con- 


Offmcerity  towards  God  and  man.  799 

confident  with  integrity,  which  are  of  a  more  inju-  SERAI. 
rious  and  mifchicvous  confequence  to  our  nature,  as 
falfhood  and  fraud,  and  perfidioufneis,  and  infinite 
little  crafts  and  arts  of  deceit,  which  men  praclife 
upon  one  another  in  their  ordinary  converfation  and 
intercourfe.  The  former  is  great  vanity:  but  this 
is  grofs  iniquity. 

And  yet  thefe  qualities  dexteroufly  managed,  fo  as 
not  to  lie  too  plain  and  open  to  difcovery,  are  look'd 
upon  by  many,  as  figns  of  great  depth  and  fhrewd- 
nefs,  admirable  inftruments  of  bufinefs,  and  nccefTary 
means  for  the  comparing  our  own  ends  and  defigns ; 
and   tho'  in  thofe  that   have   fuffered  by  them,  and 
felt  the  mifchief  of  them,  they  are  always  accounted 
difhoneft,   yet  among  the  generality  of  lookers  on, 
they  pafs  for  great  policy  ;  as  if  the  very  skill  of  go- 
verning and  managing  humane  affcirs,  did  confift  in 
thefe  little  tricks  and  devices :  but  he  that  looks  more 
narrowly  into  them,  and  will  but  have  the  patience 
to  obferve  the  end  of  them,  will  find  them  to  be 
great  follies,  and  that  it  is  only  for  want  of  trucwil- 
dom  and  understanding,  that  men  turn  afide  to  tricks, 
and  make  diflimulation  and  lies  their  refuge.     It  is 
Solomon's  obfervation,  c'  that  he  that  walketh  up- 
"  rightly,  walketh  furely  -,  but  the  folly  of  fools  is 
"  deceit."      The  folly  of  fools,    that  is,  the  mod 
egregious  piece  of  folly  that  any  man  can  be  guilty 
of,  is  to  play  the  knave  :  the  vulgar  tranflation  ren- 
ders this  claufe  a  little  otherwife,  but  yet  cowards  the 
fame  fenfe,  fedftultus  divertit  ad  dolos^  "  but  the  for>} 
"  turns  afide  to  tricks;"  to  make  uie  of  thefe,  is  a 
fign  the  man  wants  underftanding  to  fee  the  plain 
*nd  direcl  way  to  his  end.     I  will  not  deny  but  thefe 

7  T  2  huts 


r    8eo  Gffjicerity  towards  God  and  man. 

S  E  Px  m.  little  arts  may  ferve  a  prefent  turn,  and  perhaps  fuo 
ccfsfully  enough  ;  but  true  wifdom  gees  deep,  and 
reacheth  a  great  way  farther,  looking  to  the  end  of 
things,  and  regarding  the  future  as  well  as  the  pre- 
fent, and,  by  judging  upon  the  whole  matter  and 
furn  of  affairs,  doth  clearly  diicern,  that  craft  and  cun- 
ning  are  only  ufeful  for  the  prefent  occafion  -,  where- 
as integrity  is  of  a  lading  ufe,  and  will  be  fcrvice- 
able  to  us  upon  all  occafions,  and  in  the  whole  courfe 
of  our  lives  -,  and  that  diffimulation  and  deceit,  tho' 
they  may  do  fome  prefent  execution  in  bufinefs,  yet 
they  recoil  upon  a  man  terribly  afterwards,  fo  as  to 
make  him  dagger,  and  by  degrees  to  weaken,  and 
at  lad  to  dedroy  his  reputation,  which  is  a  much 
more  ufeful  and  fubitantial  and  lading  indrument  of 
profperity  and  fuccefs  in  humane  affairs  than  any 
tricks  and  devices  whatfoever.  Thus  have  I  confi- 
dered  this  great  virtue  of  fincerity,  both  as  it  re- 
gards God,  and  the  mutual  converfation  and  in- 
tercourfe  of  men  one  with  another. 

And  now  having  explained  the  nature  of  fincerity 
to  God  and  man,  by  declaring  the  properties  of  it, 
and  in  what  indances  we  ought  chiefly  to  pra&ife  ir, 
and  what  things  are  contrary  to  it  ;  that  winch  re- 
mains, is  to  perfuade  men  to  endeavour  after  this  ex- 
cellent quality,  and  to  pra&ife  it  in  ail  the  words 
and  actions  of  their  lives. 

Let  us  then,  in  the  firfl  place,  be  fincere  in  our 
religion,  and  ferve  God  in  truth  and  uprightnefs  of 
heart,  out  of  confeience  of  our  duty  and  obligations 
to  him,  and  not  with  finider  refpccls  to  our  private 
intereft  or  pafTion,  to  the  publick  approbation  or 
cenfure  of  men.  Let  us  never  make  ufe  of  reli- 
gion 


Ofjincerity  towards  God  and  man.  So  t 

gion  to  ferve  any  bafe  and  unworthy  ends,  cloking  SERM. 
our  defigns  of  covetoufhefs,  or  ambition,  or  revenge, 
with  pretences  of  confeience  and  zeal  for  God  ;  and 
let  us  endeavour  after  the  reality  of  religion,  always 
remembring  that  a  fincere  piety  doth  not  confnt 
in  fhew,  but  fubftance,  not  in  appearance,  but  in 
effect ;  that  the  fpirit  of  true  religion  is  ftill  and 
calm,  charitable  and  peaceable,  making  as  little 
fhew  and  flir  as  is  poffible ;  that  a  truly  and  fin- 
cerely  good  Man  does  not  affect  vain  oftentation, 
and  an  unfeafonable  difcovery  of  his  good  qualities, 
but  endeavours  rather  really  to  be,  than  to  feem  reli- 
gious, and  of  the  two  rather  feeksto  conceal  his  piety, 
than  to  fet  it  out  with  pomp  ;  gives  his  alms  pri- 
vately °>  prays  to  God  in  fecret,  and  makes  no  ap- 
pearance of  religion,  but  in  fuch  fruits  and  effects 
as  cannot  be  hid  in  the  quiet  and  filent  virtues  of 
humility,  and  meeknefs,  and  patience,  of  peace  and 
charity,  in  governing  his  paftions,  and  taking  heed 
not  to  offend  with  his  tongue,  by  (lander  and  ca- 
lumny, by  envious  detraction  or  rafh  cenfure,  or  by 
any  word  or  action  that  may  be  to  the  hurt  and  pre- 
judice of  his  neighbour  :  but,  on  the  contrary,  it  is 
a  very  ill  fign,  if  a  man  affect  to  make  a  great 
noife  and  buftle  about  religion  ;  if  he  blow  a  trum- 
pet before  his  good  works,  and  by  extraordinary 
fhews  of  devotion  fummon  the  eyes  of  men  to  be- 
hold him,  and  do,  as  it  were,  call  aloud  to  them 
to  take  notice  of  his  piety,  "  and  to  come  and 
"  fee  his  zeal  for  the  Lord  of  hofts."  It  is  not 
impoffible  but  fuch  a  man,  with  all  his  vanity  and 
oftentation,  may  have  fome  real  goodnefs  in  him  *, 
but  he  is  as  the  hypocrites  are,    and  does  as  like 

one 


T:Oi  Offinccrity  towards  God  and  man. 

S  E  R  M.  one  as  is  poftible ;  and  by  the  mighty  mew  that  he 
y^j  makes,  to  wife  and  confiderate  men,  greatly  brings 
in  queftion  the  fincerity  of  his  religion. 

And  with  the  fincerity  of  our  piety  towards 
God,  let  us  join  the  fimplicity  and  integrity  of 
manners  in  our  converfation  with  men.  Let  us 
ftritStly  charge  our  felves  to  ufe  truth  and  plainnefs 
in  all  our  words  and  doings  -,  let  our  tongue  be  ever 
the  true  interpreter  of  our  mind,  and  our  expref- 
ilons  the  lively  image  of  our  thoughts  and  affecti- 
ons, and  our  outward  actions  exactly  agreeable  to 
our  inward  purpofes  and  intentions. 

Amongft   too  many  other  inftances  of  the  great 
corruption  and  degeneracy  of  the  age  wherein  we 
live,   the    great  and   general  want  of  fincerity  in 
converfation  is  none  of  the  Jeaft.     The  world  is 
grown  fo  full  of  diffimulation  and  compliment,  that 
mens   words   are  hardly  any   fignification    of  their 
thoughts  -,  and  if  any  man  meafure  his  words  by   his 
heart,  and  fpeak  as  he  thinks,  and  do  not  exprefs  more 
kindnefs  to  every  man,  than   men  ufually  have  for 
any  man,  he  can  hardly  efcape  the  cenfure  of  rude- 
nefs  and  want  of  breeding.     The  old  englifh  plain- 
nefs  and  fincerity,  that  generous  integrity  of  nature 
and   honefty   of  difpofition,    which    always   argues 
true  greatnefs  of  mind,  and  is  ufually  accompanied 
with  undaunted  courage  and  reiblution,   is  in  a  great 
meafure  loft  among  us ;  there  hath  been  a  long  en- 
deavour to  transfrom  us  into  foreign  manners  and 
fafhions,  and  to  bring  us  to  a  fervile  imitation  of 
none  of  the  beft  of  our  neighbours,  in  fome  of  the 
worft  of  their  qualities.     The  dialect  of  convention 
now-a-days   ib  fwell'd  with  vanity  and    compli- 
ment. 


Of  fincerity  towards  God  and  man,  f : 

rnent,  and  fo  forfeited  (as  I  may  lay)  with  exprefiions  SE  R  M- 
of  kindnefs  and  reipecl:,  that  if  a  man  that  lived  an 
age  or  two  ago  mould  return  into  the  world  again, 
he  would  really  want  a  dictionary  to  help  him  to 
underftand  his  own  language,  and  to  know  the  true 
intrinfick  value  of  the  phrafe  in  fafhion,  and  would 
hardly  at  firft  believe  at  what  a  low  rate  the  higheft 
ftrains  and  exprefiions  of  kindnefs  imaginable  do 
commonly  pafs  in  current  payment ;  and  when  he 
fhould  come  to  underftand  it5  it  would  be  a  great 
while  before  he  could  bring  himfelf,  with  a  good 
countenance  and  a  good  confcience,  to  converfe  with 
men  upon  equal  terms,  and  in  their  own  way. 

And,  in  truth,  it  is  hard  to  fay,  whether  it  mould 
more  provoke  our  contempt  or  our  pity,  to  hear 
what    folemn    exprefiions   of  refpecl:   and   kindnefs 
will  pafs  between  men,  almoft  upon  no  occafion  ; 
how  great  honour  and  efteem  they  will  declare  for 
one  whom  perhaps  they  never  heard  of  or  law  be- 
fore, and  how  entirely  they  are  all  on  the  fudden 
devoted  to  his  fervice  and  intereft,  for  no  reafon  j 
how  infinitely  and  eternally  obliged  to  him  for  no 
benefit,  and  how  extremely  they  will  be  concerned 
for  him,  yea,    and  afflicted   too,  for  no  caufe.     I 
know  it  is  faid,   in  juftification  of  this  hollow  kind 
of  converfaticn,  that   there  is  no  harm,  no  real  de- 
ceit in  compliment,  but  the  matter  is  well  enough, 
fo  long  as  we  underftand  one   another  *,   £?  verba 
valent  tit  nummi,  "  words  are  like  money,"  and  when 
the  current  value  of  them  is  generally  underftood, 
no  man  is  cheated  by  them.     This  is  fomething,  if 
fuch  words  were  any  thing  ;  but  being  brought  into 
the  account,  they  are  rneer  cyphers.     However,  it 

is 


804  Of  jincerity  towards  God  and  man. 

SE  RM.  is  ftill  a  iuft  matter  of  complaint,  that  fincerity  and 
plainnefs  arc  out  of  fafhion,  and  that  our  language 
is  running  into  a   lye,  that  men  have  almoft  quite 
perverted  the  uie   of  fpeech,    and   made  words  to 
fignify  nothing  ;  that  the  greatefl  part  of  the  con- 
vention of  mankind,  and  of  their  intercourfe  with 
one  another,   is   little  elfe   but   driving  a   trade  of 
difiimulation  ;  infomuch  that  it  would  make  a  man 
heartily   fick    and  weary  of  the  world,  to  fee  the 
little  fincerity   that   is   in  ufe  and  practice  among 
men,  and  tempt  him  to  break  out  into  that  me- 
lancholy complaint  and  wifh  of  the  prophet.  Jer.  ix. 
"  O  that  I  had  in  the  wildernefs  a  lodging- place 
"  of  way- faring  men,  that  I  might  leave  my  peo- 
u  pie,   and  go  from  them  :  for  they  are  all  adulte- 
"  rers,  and  an  aflembly  of  treacherous  men.     And 
<c  they  bend  their  tongues  like  their  bow^for  lies, 
"  but  have  no  courage  for  the  truth  upon  earth. 
<c  Take  ye  heed  every  one  of  his  neighbour,  and 
<c  trull   ye  not  in  any  brother  :  for  every  brother 
"  will  utterly  fupplant,    and  every  neighbour  will 
"  walk  with  flanders.     Thine  habitation  is  in  the 
"  midft  of  deceit  \    one  fpeaketh  peaceably  to  his 
<c  neighbour,    but    in  his  heart   he   lieth  in   wait. 
<c  Shall  not  I  vifit  for  thefe  things,  faith  the  Lord  ? 
"  and  fhall  not  my  foul  be  avenged  of  fuch  a  na- 
"  tion  as  this  ? 

Such  were  the  manners  of  the  people  of  Ifrael  at 
that  time,  which  were  both  the  forerunner  and  the 
caufe  of  thofe  terrible  calamities  which  befell  them 
afterwards  ;  and  this  character  agrees  but  too  well 
to  the  prefent  age,  which  is  fo  wretchedly  void  of 
truth  and  fincerity  ;   for  which  reafon  there  is  the 


greater 


Of  fincerity  towards  God  and  man.  805 

greater  need  to  recommend  this  virtue  to  us,  which  SER  M< 

LV 
feems  to  be  fled  from  us,  "  that  truth  and  righteouf-, 

M  nefsmay  return^  and  glory  may  dwell  in  our  land, 

"  and  God  may  fhew  his  mercy  upon  us,  and  grant 

cc  us  his  falvation,  and  righteoufhefs  and  peace  may 

<c  kifs  each  other."     To  this  end  give  me  leave  to 

offer  thefe  following   confederations. 

Firft,  that  fincerity  is  the  higheft  commendation, 
and  the  very  bed  character,  that  can  be  given  of 
any  man  ;  it  is  the  folid  foundation  of  all  virtue,  the 
heart  and  foul  of  all  piety  and  goodnefs  \  it  is  in 
fcripture  called  perfection,  and  frequently  joined  with 
it ;  and  throughout  the  bible,  there  is  the  greater!: 
ftrefs  and  weight  laid  upon  it  ;  it  is  fpoken  of  as  the 
fum  and  comprehension  of  all  religion.  M  Only  fear 
"  the  Lord,  and  ferve  him  in  fincerity  and  truth  " 
fays  Jofhua  to  the  people  of  Ifrael,  Jof.  xxiv.  14.  God 
takes  great  pleafure  in  it ;  fo  David  afTures  us,  1  Chr. 
xxix.  17.  "  I  know,  my  God,  that  thou  tried  the 

heart,  and  hail  pleafure  in  uprightnefs :"  and  again, 

thou  loved  truth  in  the  inward  parts." 

To  this  difpofition  of  mind  the  promifes  of  divine 
favour  and  bleffing  are  particularly  made,  Pfal.  xv# 
1,  2.  "  Lord,  who  fhall  dwell  in  thy  tabernacle?  who 
"  fhall  dwell  in  thy  holy  hill  ?  he  that  walketh  up- 
"  rightly,  and  worketh  righteoufnefs,  and  fpeaketh 
"  the  truth  from  his  heart."  Pfal.  xxxii.  2.  "  Bleifed 
"  is  the  man  unto  whom  the  Lord  imputeth  no 
u  fin,  and  in  whofe  fpint  there  is  no  guile." 

And  'tis  obfervable  that  this  character  of  our  Sa- 
viour here  given  of  Nathanael,  is  the  only  full  and 
perfect  commendation  that  we  read  was  ever  given 
by   him  of  any  particular  perfon.     He  commends 

Vol.  IV.  7  U  fome 


806  Of  fmcerity  towards  God  and  man. 

SERM.fome  particular  a6ls  of  piety  and  virtue  in  others,  as 
LV:  t  St.  Peter's  confeflion  of  him,  the  faith  of  the  centu- 
'  rion,  and  of  the  woman  that  was  healed  by  touching 
the  hem  of  his  garment,  the  charity  of  the  woman 
that  caft  her  two  mites  into  the  treafury,  and  the 
bounty  of  that  other  devout  woman  who  poured  up- 
on him  a  box  of  precious  ointment :  but  here  he'gives 
the  particular  character  of  a  good  man,  when  he  fays 
of  Nathanael,  that  he  was  "  an  Ifraelite  indeed,  in 
«  whom  was  no  guile."  And  the  apoftle  mentions 
this  quality,  as  the  chief  ingredient  into  the  character 
of  the  belt  man  that  ever  was,  our  bleffcd  Saviour, 
«  who  did  no  fin,  neither  was  guile  found  in  his 

"  mouth." 

Secondly,  the  rarity  of  this  virtue  is  a  farther  com- 
mendation of  it.  A  fincercly  pious  and  good  man, 
Without  any  guile  or  difguife,  is  not  a  fight  to  be  feen 
every  day.  Our  Saviour  in  the  text  fpeaks  of  it,  as 
a  thins;  very  extraordinary  and  of  a  fpecial  remark 
and  obfervation,  and  breaks  out  into  fome  kind  of 
wonder  upon  theoccaiion,  as  if  to  fee  a  man  of  per- 
fect integrity  and  fimplicity  were  an  occurrence  very 
rare  and  unufual,  and  fuch  as  calls  for  our  more 
efpecial  attention  and  regard,  "  Behold  (faith  he) 
«  an  Ifraelite  indeed,  in  whom  there  is  no  guile." 

Thirdly,  the  want  of  fmcerity  will  quite  fpoil 
the  virtue  and  acceptance  of  all  our  piety  and  obe- 
dience, and  certainly  deprive  us  of  the  reward  of 
it.  All  that  we  do  in  the  fervice  of  God,  all  our 
external  obedience  to  his  laws,  if  not  animated  by 
fmcerity,  is  like  a  facrifi.ee  without  a  heart,  which  is 
an  abomination  to  the  Lord. 

Fourthly, 


Of  Jincerity  towards  God  and  man.  807 

Fourthly,  hypocrify  and  infincerity  is  a  very  vain  S  E  R  M. 
and  foolifh  thing  ;    it  is  defigned  to  cheat  others, 
but  is  in  truth  a  deceiving  of  ourfelves.     No  man 
would  flatter  or  difTemble,  did  he  believe  he  were 
fettn  and  difcovered  ;  an  open  knave  is  a  great  fool, 
who  deftroys  at  once  both  his  defign  and  reputation  : 
and  this  is  the  cafe  of  every  hypocrite ;  all  the  dis- 
agreement which  is   between    his   tongue  and    his 
thoughts,  his  actions  and  his  heart,  is  open  to  that 
eye,  from  which  nothing   can   be  hid  ;    <k  for  the 
"  ways  of  man  are  before  the  eyes  of  the  Lord, 
"  and  he  feeth  all  his  goings  \  there  is  no   dark- 
"  nels  nor  fhadow  of  death,  where  the  workers  of 
I8  iniquity  may  hide  themfelves." 

Fifthly,  truth  and  reality  have  all  the  advantages 
of  appearance,  and  many  more.  If  the  fhew  of 
any  thing  be  good  for  any  thing,  I  am  fure  fmcerity 
is  better  ;  for  why  does  any  man  difTemble,  or  feem 
to  be  that  which  he  is  not,  but  becaufe  he  thinks  it 
good  to  have  fuch  a  quality  as  he  pretends  to  ?  for  to 
counterfeit  and  difTemble,  is  to  put  on  the  appear- 
ance of  fome  real  excellency.  Now  the  bed  way  in 
the  world  for  a  man  to  feem  to  be  any  thing,  is  re- 
ally to  be  what  he  would  feem  to  be.  Befides,  that 
it  is  many  times  as  troublefome  to  make  good  the 
pretence  of  a  good  quality,  as  to  have  it ;  and  if  a 
man  have  it  not,  it  is  ten  to  one,  but  he  is  dif- 
covered to  want  it,  and  then  all  his  pains  and  labour 
to  feem  to  have  it  is  loft.  There  is  fomcthing  unna- 
tural in  painting,  which  a  skilful  eye  will  eafily  dif- 
cern  from  native  beauty  and  complexion. 

It  is  hard  to  perfonate  and  act:  a  part  long  ;  for 
where  truth  is  not  at  the  bottom3  nature  will  always 

7  U  2  be 


?c8  Of fincerity  towards  God  and  man. 

be  endeavouring  to  return,  and  will  peep  out  and  be- 
tray herfelf  one  time  or  other.    Therefore  if  any  man 
think  it  convenient  to  ieem  good,  let  him  be  fo  in- 
deed, and   then   his  goodnefs  will  appear  to  every 
boJy's  fatisia&ion  •,  for  truth  is  convincing,  and  car- 
ries its  own  light  and  evidence  along  with  it,  and 
will  not  only  commend  us  to  every  man's  confcience, 
but  which  is  much  more,  to  God,  who  fearcheth 
and  feeth  our  hearts  •,  fo  that  upon  all  accounts  fin- 
cerity is  true  wifdom.     Particularly  as  to  the  affairs 
of  this  world,  integrity   hath  many  advantages  over 
all  the   fine  and  artificial  ways  of  diftimulation  and 
deceit  \  it  is  much  the  plainer  and  eafier,  much  the 
fafer  and  more  fecure  way  of  dealing  in  the  world  * 
it  hath   lefs   of  trouble   and  difficulty,  of  entangle- 
ment and  perplexity,  of  danger  and  hazard  in  it  j 
it  is  the  ihorteft  and  nearefl  way  to  our  end,  carrying 
us  thither  in  a  ftraight  line,  and  will  hold  out  and 
lail  longed.    The  arts  of  deceit  and  cunning  do  con- 
tinually grow  weaker  and  lefs  effectual   and  fer vice- 
able  to  them  that  ufe  them  ;  whereas  integrity  gains 
firength   by  ufe,  and  the  more  and  longer  any  man 
practifeth  ir,  the  greater  fervice  it  does  him,  by  cor-' 
firming  his  reputation,  and  encouraging  thofe  with 
whom  he  hath  to  do,  to  repofe  the  greater  truft  and 
confidence  in  him,  which  is  an  unfpeakable  advan- 
tage in  the  bufinefs  and  affairs  of  life. 

But  a  diffembler  muft  always  be  upon  his  guard, 
and  watch  himfelf  carefully,  that  he  do  not  contra* 
didk  his  own  pretence ;  for  he  a£ls  an  unnatural  part, 
and  therefore  mud  put  a  continual  force  and  reftraint 
upon  himfelf.  Truth  always  lies  uppermoft,  and  if 
a  man  do  not  carefully  attend,  he  will  be  apt  to  bolt 

it 


Of fncerity  towards  God  and  man.  809 

it  out :  whereas  he  that  acts  fincerely,  hath  the  eafieft  S  E  R  M. 
task  in  the  world  5  becaufe  he  follows  nature,  and  fo  t  tLl. 
is  put  to  no  trouble  and  care  about  his  words  and 
actions  j  he  needs  not  invent  any  pretences  before- 
hand, nor  make  excufes  afterwards,  for  any  thing 
he  hath  faid  or  done. 

But  infmcerity  is  very  troublefome  to  manage  •,  a 
man  hath    fo  many  things  to  attend  to,  fo  many 
ends  to  bring  together,   as  make  his    life   a  very 
perplext  and  intricate  thing.     Oportet  mendacem  effe 
memorem,   "  a  liar  had  need  of  a  good  memory,'* 
left  he  contradict  at  one  time  what  he  faid  at  ano- 
ther:   but  truth    is    always    confident   with   itfelf, 
and  needs   nothing    to  help  it   out ;    it    is   always 
near  at  hand,  and  fits  upon  our  lips,  and  is  ready 
to  drop  out  before  we  are  aware  •,  whereas  a  lye  is 
troublefome,   and  fets  a  man's  invention  upon   the 
rack,  and  one  trick  needs  a  great  many  more  to 
make  it  good.     It  is  like,  building  upon  a  falfe  foun- 
dation, which  continually  (lands  in  need  of  props  to 
fhore  it  up,  and  proves  at  lafc  more  chargeable  than 
to  have  railed  a  fubftantial  building  at  firft  upon  a 
true  and  folid  foundation  ;  for  fincerity  is  firm  and 
fubftantial  ;  and  there  is  nothing  hollow  and  unfound 
in  it,  and  becaufe  it  is  plain  and  open,  fears  no  dif- 
covery,  of  which  the  crafty  man  is  always  in  dan* 
ger,  and  when  he  thinks  he  walks  in  the  dark,  all  his 
pretences  are  fo  tranfparent,  that  he  that  runs  may 
read  them  :  he  is  the  laft  man  that  finds  himfelf  to  be 
found  out,  and  whilft  he  takes  it  for  granted  that  he 
makes   fools   of  others,  he   renders  himfelf  ridicu- 
lous. 

Add 


Sio  Offmccrity  towards  God  a?id  man. 

SERM.  Add  to  all  this,  that  fincerity  is  the  moft  compen. 
ilYj-j  dious  wifdom,  and  an  excellent  inftrument  for  the 
fpeedy  difpatch  of  bufinefs  j  it  creates  confidence  in 
thofe  we  have  to  deal  with,  faves  the  labour  of  many 
enquiries,  and  brings  things  to  an  ifluc  in  few  words: 
it  is  like  travelling  in  a  plain  beaten  road,  which 
commonly  brings  a  man  fooner  to  his  journey's  end, 
than  by-ways,  in  which  men  often  lofe  themfelves. 
In  a  word,  whatsoever  convenience  may  be  thought 
to  be  in  falfhood  and  diilimulation,  it  is  foon  over  ; 
but  the  inconvenience  of  it  is  perpetual,  becaufe  it 
brings  a  man  under  an  everlafting  jealoufy  and  fuf- 
picion,  fo  that  he  is  not  believed  when  he  fpeaks 
truth,  nor  trufted,  when  perhaps  he  means  honeftly  : 
when  a  man  hath  once  forfeited  the  reputation  of  his 
integrity,  he  is  fet  fail,  and  nothing  will  then  ferve 
his  turn,  neither  truth  nor  falfhood. 

And  I  have  often  thought,  that  God  hath  in  great 
wifdom  hid  from  men  of  falfe  and  difhoneft  minds 
the  wonderful  advantages  of  truth  and  integrity  to  the 
profperity  even  of  our  worldly  affairs  ;  thefe  men  are 
fo  blinded  by  their  covetoufnefs  and  ambition,  that 
they  cannot  look  beyond  a  prefent  advantage;  nor 
forbear  to  feize  upon  it,  tho'  by  ways  never  fo  indi- 
rect -,  they  cannot  fee  fo  far,  as  to  the  remote  con- 
sequences of  a  fteddy  integrity,  and  the  vaft  benefit 
and  advantages  which  it  will  bring  a  man  at  laft. 
Were  but  this  fort  of  men  wife  and  clear-fighted 
enough  to  difcern  this,  they  would  be  honed,  out  of 
very  knavery,  not  out  of  any  love  to  honefty  or 
virtue,  but  with  a  crafty  defign  to  promote  and  ad- 
vance more  effectually  their  own  interefts  ;  and 
therefore  the  juftice  of  the  divine  providence  hath 

hid 


Of  Jincerity  towards  God  and  man.  8 1  x 

hid  this  trued  point  of  wifdom  from  their  eyes,  that  SERM. 
bad  men  might  not  be  upon  equal  terms  with  the 
juft  and  upright,  and  ferve  their  own  wicked  defigns 
by  honed  and  lawful  means. 

Indeed,  if  a  man  were  only  to  deal  in  the  world 
for  a  day,  and  fhould  never  have  occafion  to  con- 
vert more  with  mankind,  never  more  need  their 
good  opinion,  or  good  word,  it  were  then  no  great 
matter  (fpeaking  as  to  the  concernments  of  the 
world)  if  a  man  fpent  his  reputation  all  at  once,  and 
ventured  it  at  one  throw :  but  if  he  be  to  con- 
tinue in  the  world,  and  would  have  the  advantage 
of  converfation  whilft  he  is  in  it,  let  him  make  ufe 
of  truth  and  fincerity  in  all  his  words  and  actions, 
for  nothing  but  this  will  laft  and  hold  out  to  the 
end  ;  all  other  arts  will  fail,  but  truth  and  integri- 
ty will  carry  a  man  through,  and  bear  him  out  to 
the  laft. 

'Tis  the  obfervation  of  Solomon,  Prov.  xii.  19. 
cc  The  lip  of  truth  is  eftablifhed  for  ever  :  but  a 
iC  lying  tongue  is  but  for  a  moment.'*  And  the 
wifer  any  man  is,  the  more  clearly  will  he  difcern, 
how  ferviceable  fincerity  is  to  all  the  great  ends  and 
purpofes  of  humane  life  ;  and  that  man  hath  made  a 
good  progrels,  and  profited  much  in  the  fchool  of 
wifdom,  who  valueth  truth  and  fincerity  according 
to  their  worth.  Every  man  will  readily  grant  them 
to  be  great  virtues,  and  arguments  of  a  generous 
mind,  but  that  there  is  fo  much  of  true  wifdom  in 
them,  and  that  they  really  ferve  to  profit  our  intereft 
in  this  world,  feems  a  great  paradox  to  the  generali- 
ty of  men  •,  and  yet  I  doubt  not  but  it  is  undoubted- 
ly true,  and  generally  found  to  be  fo,  in  the  experi- 
ence of  mankind.  Laftly, 


8 1 2  Of  Jincerity  forwards  God  and  matt. 

SERM.      Laftly,  Confider  that  it  is  not  worth  our  while  to 

T  \T 

diffcmble,  confidering  the  fhortneis  and  efpecially  the 
uncertainty  of  our  lives.  To  what  purpofe  fhould 
we  be  fo  cunning,  when  our  abode  in  this  world  is 
fo  fhort  and  uncertain  ?  why  fhould  any  man  by  diC- 
fembiing  his  judgment,  or  acting  contrary  to  it,  in- 
cur at  once  the  difpleafure  of  God,  and  the  difcon- 
tcnt  of  his  own  mind  ?  efpecially  if  we  confider,  that 
all  our  diffimulation  fhall  one  day  be  made  manifeft 
and  publifhed  on  the  open  theatre  of  the  world,  be- 
fore God,  angels,  and  men,  to  our  everlafting  fhame 
and  confufion ;  all  difguife  and  vizards  fhall  then  be 
pluckt  off,  and  every  man  fhall  appear  in  his  true 
colours.  "  For  then  the  fecrets  of  men  fhall  be 
"  judged,  and  God  will  bring  every  work  intojudg- 
"  ment,  and  every  fecret  thing,  whether  it  be  good, 
"  or  whether  it  be  evil.  Nothing  is  now  covered, 
"  which  fhall  not  then  be  revealed,  nor  hid  which 
*'  fhall  not  then  be  known." 

Let  us  then  be  now  what  we  would  be  glad  to  be 
found  in  that  day,  when  all  pretences  fhall  be  exa- 
mined, and  the  clofeft  hypoenfy  of  men  fhall  be  laid 
open  and  dafht  out  of  countenance  -,  when  the  fecrets 
of  all  hearts  fhall  be  difcloled,  and  all  the  hidden  works 
of  darknefs  fhall  be  revealed,  and  all  our  thoughts, 
words,  and  actions  fhall  be  brought  to  a  ftridl  and  fe- 
vere  trial,  and  be  cenfured,  by  that  impartial  and  in- 
fallible judgment  of  God,  which  is  according  to 
truth  ;  "  in  the  day  when  God  fhall  judge  the  fe- 
46  crets  of  men  by  Jesus  Christ." 

To  whom,  with  the  Father  and  the  Holy 
Ghost,  be  glory  now  and  for  ever.     Amen. 

SERMON 


S    E  R  M  O  N     LVI. 

The  excellency  cf  Abraham's  faith  and 

obedience. 


HEBREWS    xi.  17,  18,  19. 

By  faith  Abraham,  when  he  was  fried,  offered  up  lfr.ee : 
end  he  that  had  received  the  promifes  offered  up  his 
only  begotten  fon :  of  whom  it  was  faid,  that  in 
Ifaac  floall  thy  feed  be  called:  accounting  that  God 
was  able  to  raife  him  up,  even  from  the  dead  \ 
from  whence  alfo  he  received  him  in  a  figure. 


f~TT*  H  E  deflgn  of  this  epiftle  to  the  Hebrews  is  3  e  R  M. 

to  recommend  to  them  the  chriftian  religion,     LV]-^J 

to    which   they    were  but  newly  converted,  pre:lc'aeci 

and  to  encourap-e  them  to   confbancy  in  the  profef-  at  White- 

.  .  hail  i&o5 

fion  of  it,  notwithftanding    the  fufferings  which  at-  bef(Jre  th^ 

tended  it.  He  lets  before  them  in  this  chapter  fe-  princes 
veral  examples  in  the  old  teftament  of  thofe,  who, 
thos  they  were  under  a  much  more  imperfect  diipen- 
fation,  yet  by  a  iledfaft  belief  in  God  and  his  pro- 
mifes, had  performed  fuch  wonderful  acts  of  obedi- 
ence and  felf-denial. 

He  begins  with  the  patriarchs  before  the  flood  •, 
but  infills  chiefly  upon  the  examples  of  two  eminent 
perfons  of  their  own  nation,  as  nearell  to  them,  and 
moil  likely  to   prevail  upon   them,  the  examples  of 

Vol.  IV.  yX  Abraham 

7. 


LVI 


$14  The  excellency  of 

SERM.  Abraham  and  Mofes,  the  one  the  father  of  their  na- 
tion, the  other  their  great  lawgiver,  and  both  of 
them  the  greater!:  patterns  of  faith,  and  obedi- 
ence, and  felf- denial,  that  the  hiftory  of  ail  former 
ages,  from  the  beginning  of  the  world,  had  af- 
forded. 

I  fhall  at  this  time,  by  God's  afliftance,  treat  of 
the  firft   of  thefe,  the    example  of  Abraham,    the 
coni Lancy  of  whofe   faith,  and   the   chearfulnefs  of 
whofe  obedience,  even  in  the  difficulteft  cafes,  is  fo 
remarkable  above  all  the  other  examples  mentioned 
in  this  chapter.     For,  "  at  the  command  of  God  he 
"  \tk  his   kindred  and  his   country,  not  knowing 
"  whither  he  fhould  go;3'  by  which  eminent  act  of 
obedience  he  declared  him  felf  to  be  wholly  at  God's 
difpofal,  and  ready  to  follow  him:  but  this  was  no 
trial  in  comparifon  of  that  here  in   my  text,  when 
God  commanded  him  "  to  offer  up  his  only  ion :"  but 
fuch  was  the  immutable  ftedfaftnefs  of  his  faith,  and 
the  perfect  fubmiflion  of  his  obedience,  that  it  does 
not  appear  that  he  made  the  leaf!:  check  at  it ;  but 
out  of  perfect   reverence  and  obedience   to  the  au- 
thority of  the  divine  command,  he  went  about   it 
as  readily  and  chearfully  as  if  God  had  bid  him  do 
ibme  imall  thing  :  "  by  faith  Abraham,  when  he  was 
cc  tried,  offered  up  Ifaac.'1 

For  the  explication  of  which  words,  it  will  be  re- 
quisite to  confider  two  things 

Firft,  the  trial  or  temptation  in  general. 

Secondly,  the  excellency  of  Abraham's  faith  and 
obedience  upon  his  trial. 

Firft,   the   trial  or   temptation    in  general :    it  is 
faid  "  that  Abraham  when  he  was  tried,  the  word  13 


Abrahams  faith  and  obedience.  8  i  J 

"  tt«(0^o/jl6v©',  being  tempted:"  that  is,  God  intend-  S  ERM. 
ing  to  make  trial  of  his   faith  and  obedience ;  and  ,_  ^  ^  , 
fo  it  is  expreft,  Gen,  xxii.  i.  where  it  is  faid,  "  that 
"  God    did   tempt  Abraham,  and  faid  unto  him, 
Qi  take  now  thy  (on,    thine  only  fon." 

Now  there  are  two  difficulties  concerning  this  mat- 
ter. It  feems  contrary  to  fcripture.  that  God  fhould 
tempt  any  man ;  and  contrary  to  reafon  •,  becanfe 
God,  who  knows  what  every  man  will  do,  need- 
ed not  to  make  trial  of  any  man's  faith  and  obe- 
dience. 

Firft,  it  feems  contrary  to  fcripture;  which  fays, 
"  God  tempts  no  man :  "  and  'tis  moil  true,  that 
God  tempts  no  man,  v/ith  a  defign  to  draw  him  in- 
to fin  ;  but  this  doth  not  hinder,  but  he  may  try 
their  faith  and  obedience  with  great  difficulties,  to 
make  them  the  more  illuftrious.  Thus  God  tempted 
Abraham ;  and  he  permitted  Job,  and  even  our 
bleffed  Saviour  himfelf  to  be  thus  tempted. 

Secondly,  it  feems  contrary  to  reafon,  that  God, 
who  knows  what  any  man  will  do  in  any  circum- 
ftances,  fhould  go  to  make  trial  of  it.  But  God 
does  not  try  men  for  his  own  information  ;  but  to 
give  an  illuftrious  proof  and  example  to  others  of 
faith  and  obedience  :  and  tho'  after  this  trial  of 
Abraham,  God  fays  to  him,  "  now  I  know  that 
"  thou  loveft  me,  becaufe  thou  haft  not  withheld 
"  thy  fon,  thine  only  fon  from  me;"  yet  we 
are  to  underftand  this  as  fpoken  after  the  manner 
of  men  •,  as  God  elfewhere  fpeaks  to  Abraham  con- 
cerning Sodom;  "  I  will  go  down  now  to  lee 
fi  whether  they  have   done  altogether  according  to 

7X2  "  the 


8  1 6  The  excellency  of 

<c  the  ay  which  is  come  up  unto  me ;  and  if  not, 
"  I  will  know.s? 

I  proceed  to  the  fecond  thing  I  propofed,  the  ex- 
cellency of  Abraham's  faith  and  obedience  upon  this 
trial  :  "  By  faith  Abraham  when  he  was  tried  offered 
"  up  Uaac."  God  accepts  of  it,  as  if  he  had  done 
it ;  becaufe  he  had  done  it  in  part,  and  was  ready  to 
have  performed  the  reft,  if  God  had  not  counter- 
manded him. 

And  this  act  of  faith  and  obedience  in  Abraham 
will  appear  the  more  iiluftrious,  if  we  confider  thefe 
three  things. 

I.  The  firmnefs  and  ftedfaftnefs  of  his  faith,  not- 
withftanding  the  objections  againfl  it. 

II.  The  conftancy  of  his  refolution,  notwithstand- 
ing the  difficulty  of  the  thing.     . 

III.  The  reaibnablenefs  of  his  faith,  in  that  he 
gave  fatisfaction  to  himfelf  in  fo  hard  and  perplext 


a  cafe. 


I.  The  firmnefs  and  ftedfaftnefs  of  his  faith  will 
appear,  if  we  confider  what  objections  there  were 
in  the  cafe,  enough  to  fhake  a  very  ftrong  faith. 
There  were  three  great  objections  againfl:  this  com- 
mand, and  fuch  as  might  in  reafon  make  a  wife  and 
good  man  doubtful  whether  this  command  were 
from  God. 

The  horrid  nature  of  the  thing  commanded. 

The  grievous  fcandal  that  might  feem  almoit  un- 
avoidably to  follow  upon  it. 

And  the  horrible  confequence  of  it,  which  feemed 
no  make  the  former  promile  of  God  to  Abra- 
ham void, 

Firft, 


Abrahams  faith  and  obedience.  817 

Firft,  the  horrid  nature  of  the  thing  commanded,  SER  M. 
which  was  for  a  father  to  kill  his  own  child.     This 
rnuft  needs   appear   very    barbarous   and  unnatural, 
and  look  liker  a  facrifice  to  an  idol,  than  to  the  true 
God. 

It  feemed  to  be  againft  the  law  of  nature,  and  di- 
rectly contrary  to  that  kindnefs  and  affection  which 
God  himfelf  had  planted  in  the  hearts  of  parents  to- 
wards their  children. 

And  there  is  no  affection  more  natural  and  ftrong 
than  this  ;  for  there  are  many  perfons  that  would  re- 
deem the  lives  of  their  children  with  the  hazard  of 
their  own.  Now  that  God  hath  planted  fuch  an 
affection  in  nature,  is  an  argument  that  it  is  good,  and 
therefore  it  could  not  but  feem  ftrange,  that  he 
mould  command  any  thing  contrary  to  it :  and  in 
this  cafe,  there  were  two  circumflances  that  increafed 
the  horror  of  the  fact ;  that  his  fon  was  inno- 
cent •,  and  that  he  was  to  flay  him  with  his  own 
hands. 

i„  That  his  fon  was  innocent.  It  would  grieve 
the  heart  of  any  father^  to  give  up  his  fon  to  death, 
tho'  he  were  never  fo  undutiful  and  difobedient.    - 

So  paffionately  was  David  affected  with  the  death 
of  his  fon  Abfalom,  as  to  wifh  he  had  died  for  him, 
tho'  he  died  in  the  very  act  of  rebellion,,  and  tho' 
the  faving  of  his  life  had  been  inconfiftent  with  the 
peace  of  his  government. 

How  deep  then  rnuft:  it  fink  into  the  heart  of  a 
father,  to  give  up  his  innocent  fon  to  death  ?  and  fuch 
a  fon  was  Iiaac,for  any  thing  that  appeared  to  the  con- 
trary. God  himfelf  gave  him  this  teftimony,"  that  he 
11  was  the  fon  whom  his  father  loved,"  and  there  is 

no 


8 1 8  The  excellency  of 

SERM.  no  intimation  of  any  thing  to  the  contrary.     Now 
.     J_l  M  this  could  not  but  appear  ftrange  to   a  good  man, 
.that  God  mould  command  an  innocent  peribn  to  be 
put  to  death.     But, 

2.  That  a  father  fhould  be  commanded,  not  only 
to  give  up  his  fon  to  death,  but  to  Gay  him  with  his 
own  hands ;  not  only  to  be  a  fpectator,  but  to  be  the 
actor  in  this  tragedy.  What  father  woula  not  fhrink, 
and  fcart  back  at  fuch  a  command  ?•  what  good  man 
.dally  in  fuch  a  cafe,  and  where  nature  was  fo  hard 
ft,  would  not  ha  i  i  apt  to  have  looked  upon 
fuch  a  revelation  as  this,  rather  as  the  fuggePdon  and 
illufion  of  an  evil  fpirit,  than  a  command  of  God  ? 
and  yet  Abraham's  faith  was  not  daggered,  fo  as 
to  call  this  revelation  of  God  in  queftion. 

Secondly,  the  grievous  fcandal  that  might  feem 
almoft  unavoidably  to  follow  upon  it,  was  another 
at  objection  againft  it.  The  report  of  fuch  an 
action  would  in  all  appearance  blemifh  the  reputation, 
even  of  fo  good  a  man,  amongft  all  fober  and 
confiderate  perfons,  who  could  hardly  forbear  to 
cenfure  him,  as  a  wicked  and  unnatural  man. 

And  this  was  a  hard  cafe,  for  a  man  to  be  put  to 
facriiice  at  once  two  of  the  cleared  things  in  the 
world,  his  reputation  and  his  fon  :  nor  could  he  have 
eafily  defended  himfelf  from  this  imputation,  by 
ailedging  an  exprefs  revelation  and  command  of 
God  for  it  \  for  who  would  give  credit  to   it  ? 

A  revelation  to  another  man  is  nothing   to  me, 
unlefs   I  be   allured,  that  he  had  fuch  a  revelation, 
;ch  I  cannot  be,  but  either    by    another  inline- 
Nation,  or  by  feme  miracle  to  confirm  it. 

The 


Abraham's  faith  and  obedience.  Siq 

The  ad:  had  an  appearance  of  fo  much  horror,  S  E  ] 
that  it  was  not  eafily  credible  that  God  mould  com- 
mand it  j  and  if  every  man's  confident  pretence  to 
revelation  be  admitted,  the  word  actions  may  plead 
this  in  their  excuie.  So  that  this  pretence  would  have 
been  fo  far  from  excufing  his  fault,  that  it  mud  ra- 
ther have  been  efteemed  an  high  aggravation  of  it, 
by  adding  the  boldeft  impiety  to  the  mod  barbar 
inhumanity. 

But  Abraham  was  not  {tumbled  at  this,  nor  at  the 
advantage  which  the  enemies  of  his  religion  would 
make  of  iuch  an  occafion,  who  would  be  ready  to 
fay,  "  here  is  your  excellent  good  man,  and  likely 
"  to  be  a  friend  of  God,  who  was  fo  cruel  an 
*c  enemy  to  his  own  fon  !"  All  this, 'tis  probable,  he 
might  confider  :  but  it  did  not  move  him,  being  re- 
folved  to  obey  God,  and  to  leave  it  to  his  wifdom 
to  provide  againft  all  the  inconveniencies  that  might 
follow  upon  it. 

Thirdly,  the  firongeft  objection  of  all  was  the 
horrible  confequence  of  the  thing,  which  feemed  to 
clam  with  former  revelations,  and  to  make  void  the 
promife  which  God  had  before  made  to  Abraham, 
C6  that  in  his  feed  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  mould 
"  be  blefled,"  which  promife  was  exprefly  limited 
to  Ifaac  and   his  poiterity,  who  had  then  no  fon. 

And  of  this  difficulty  the  apoflle  takes  exprefs 
notice  in  the  text,  u  that  he  that  had  received  the 
ct  promifes  (that  is,  was  perfuaded  of  the  truth  and 
"  faithfulnefs  of  them)  offered  up  his  only  begotten 
6C  fon,  of  whom  it  was  laid,  that  in  Ifaac  fhall  thy 
55  feed  be  called." 


And 


LVI. 


820  The  excellency  of 

SERM.  And  this  objection  is  really  fo  ftrong,  that  if 
Abraham  could  not  have  given  himfelf  fatisfaction 
about  it,  he  might  juftly  have  queftioned  the  truth 
of  the  revelation.  For  no  man  can  poffibly  enter- 
tain two  contradictory  revelations  as  from  God,  but 
he  muft  of  neceffity  queftion  one  or  both  of  them  : 
but  fo  ftrong  was  Abraham's  faith,  as  not  to  be 
fhaken  by  the  Teeming  contradiction  of  thefe  two 
revelations. 

II.  We  will  confider  the  conftancy  of  his  refo- 
lution  to  obey  God,  notwithstanding  the  harfhnefs 
and  difficulty  of  the  thing.  Tho'  Abraham  were 
firmly  perfuaded,  that  this  command  to  kill  his  fon 
was  really  from  God  *,  yet  it  is  no  eafy  matter  for 
a  man  to  bring  himfelf  to  obey  God  in  fo  difficult 
a  cafe,  and  out  of  meer  reverence  to  the  divine  au- 
thority, to  diveft  himfelf  of  his  nature,  and  to 
thwart  the  ftrongeft  inclinations  of  it  ;  a  man  would 
be  very  apt  to  confer  with  flefh  and  blood  in  fuch  a 
cafe.  Let  but  any  man  that  knows  what  it  is  to 
be  a  father,  lay  his  hand  upon  his  heart,  and  con- 
fider his  own  bowels ;  and  he  will  be  aftonifhed  at 
Abraham's  obedience  as  well  as  his  faith. 

"  To  take  his  fon,  his  only  fon,  his  fon  whom 
"  he  loved,"  and  in  whom  he  placed  all  his  hopes 
of  a  happy  pofterity,  and  with  his  own  hands  to 
deftroy  him  and  all  his  hopes  together  !  it  muft  be 
a  ftrong  faith  that  will  engage  a  man  to  obedience 
in  fo  difficult  an  inftance. 

There  is  one  circumftance  more  efpecially,  which 
renders  Abraham's  obedience  very  remarkable ; 
the  deliberatenefs  of  the  action.  It  had  not  been  fo 
much,  if  fo  foon  as  he  had  received  this  command 

from 


Abraham's  faith  and  obedience.  821 

from  God,  he  had  upon  a  fudden  impulfe  and  tran£  S  ERM. 

T  V  f 

port  of  zeal  done  this. 

Bat  that  his  obedience  mi^ht  be  the  more  o-fo- 

rious,  and  have  all  the  circumftances  of  advantage 

o 

given  to  it,  God  would  have  it  done  deliberately, 
and  upon  full  confideration  ;  and  therefore  he  bad 
him  go  to  the  mountain  three  days  journey  from 
the  place  where  he  was,  and  there  to  offer  up 
his  fon.  r 

It  is  in  acts  of  virtue  and  obedience,  as  in  acts 
of  fin  and  vice  •,  the  more  deliberate  the  fin  is,  and 
the  more  calm  and  fedate  temper  the  man  is  in 
when  he  commits  it,  the  greater  is  the  fault ; 
whereas,  what  is  done  by  furprize,  in  the  heat  of 
temptation  or  tranfport  of  paffion,  hath  fome  ex- 
cufe  from  the  fuddennefs  and  undeliberatenefs  of  it. 

So  it  is  in  acts  of  virtue  and  obedience,  cfpecial- 
ly  if  they  be  attended  with  confiderable  difficulty, 
the  more  deliberately  they  are  done,  the  more  vir- 
tuous they  are,  and  the  greater  praife  is  due  to 
them. 

£}ow,  that  Abraham's  obedience  might  want  no- 
thing to  heighten  it,  God  teems  on  purpofe  to 
have  put  fo  long  a  fpace  betwixt  the  command  and 
the  performance  of  it  \  he  gives  him  time  to  cool 
upon  it,  to  weigh  the  command,  and  to  look  on 
every  fide  of  this  difficult  duty  ;  he  gives  fcope  for 
his  reafon  to  argue,  and  debate  the  cafe,  and  op- 
portunity for  natural  affection  to  play  its  part,  and 
for  flefh  and  blood  to  raife  all  its  batteries  ao-ainfl* 
the  refolution  which  he  had  taken  up. 

And  now  we  may  eafily  imagine,  what  conflict 
this  good    man  had  within   himfelf,    during    thofe 

Vol.  IV.  7  Y  three 

7, 


822  The  excellency  of 

S  E  R  M.  three  days  that  he  was  travelling  to  the  mountain  in 
LVI  • 

Moriah  ;  and  how  his  heart  was  ready  to  be  rent  in 

pieces,  betwixt  his  duty  to  God,  and  his  affection 
to  his  child  •,  fo  that  every  ftep  of  this  unwelcome 
and  wearifome  journey,  he  did,  as  it  were,  lay  vio- 
lent hands  upon  himfelf. 

He  was  to  offer  up  his  fon  but  once  ;  but  he  fa- 
crificed  himfelf  and  his  own  will  every  moment 
for  three  days  together  ;  and  when  he  came  thither, 
and  all  things  were  ready,  the  altar,  the  wood,  and 
the  fire,  and  the  knife,  it  muff  needs  be  a  tab- 
bing queftion,  and  wound  him  to  the  heart,  which 
his  innocent  fon  fo  innocently  askt  him,  "  where  is 
"  the  lamb  for  a  burnt-offering?  " 

It  muff  be  a  flrong  faith  indeed,  and  a  mighty 
refolution,  that  could  make  him  to  hold  out  three 
days  againfl  the  violent  affaults  of  his  own  nature, 
and  the  charming  prefence  of  his  fon,  enough  to 
melt  his  heart,  as  often  as  he  cad  his  eyes  upon 
him  :  and  yet  nothing  of  all  this,  made  him  to 
flagger  in  his  duty,  •«  but  being  itrong  in  faith,  he 
"  Rave  gl°rv  t0  God,"  by  one  of  the  moft  miracu- 
lous ads  of  obedience  that  ever  was  exacted  from 
any  of  the  fons  of  men. 

III.  In  the  third  and  lafl  place,  I  come  to  con- 
fider  the  reafonablenefs  of  his  faith,  in  that  he  was 
able  to  give  fatisfaclion  to  himfelf  in  fo  intricate 
and  pcrplext  a  cafe.  The  conflancy  of  Abraham's 
faith,  was  not  an  obftinate  and  ftubborn  perfuafion, 
but  the  refult  of  the  wifeff  reafcning,  and  fobereft 
confideration. 

So  the  text  fay,  "  that  he  counted,  the  word  is 
*c  Xoyio-a/juv©',  he  reafoned  with  himfef,  that  God 

"  was 


Abrahams  faith  and  obedience.  823 

*c  was  able  to  raife  him   up  from    the  dead  5 n  fo  SER M; 

•  •  LVI 

that  he  debated  the  matter  with  himfelf,   and  gave 

himfelf  fatisfaction,    concerning   the  objections  and 
difficulties  in  the  cafe ;  and  being  fully  fatisfled  that 
it  was  a  divine  command,  he  refolved  to  obey  it. 
As  for  the  objections  I  have  mentioned  : 

1.  The  horrid  appearance  of  the  thing,  that  a 
father  fhould  flay  his  innocent  fon.  Why  lhould 
Abraham  fcruple  the  doing  this,  at  the  command 
of  God,  who  being  the  author  of  life,  hath  power 
over  it,  and  may  relume  what  he  hath  given,  and 
take  away  the  life  of  any  of  his  creatures  when  he 
will,  and  make  whom  he  pleafeth  inftruments  in 
the  execution  of  his  command  ? 

It  was  indeed  a  hard  cafe,  confidcring  natural 
affection  ;  and  therefore  God  did  not  permit  it  to 
be  executed. 

But  the  queftion  of  God's  right  over  the  lives  of 
men  ;  and  of  his  authority  to  command  any  man 
to  be  the  inftrument  of  his  pleafure  in  fuch  a  cafe, 
admits  of  no  difpute. 

And  tho'  God  hath  planted  ftrong  affections  in 
parents  towards  their  children ;  yet  he  hath  written 
no  law  in  any  man's  heart  to  the  prejudice  of  his 
own  fovereign  right.  This  is  a  cafe  always  ex- 
cepted, and  this  takes  away  the  objection  of  in- 
juftice. 

2.  As  to  the  fcandal  of  it,  that  could  be  no  great 
objection  in  thofe  times,  when  the  abfblute  power 
of  parents  over  their  children  was  in  its  full  force, 
and  they  might  put  them  to  death  without  being 
accountable  for  it.  So  that  then  it  was  no  fuch 
(larding  matter   to    hear  of  a    father    putting  his 

7  Y  2  child 


824  ^he  excellency  of 

SERM.  child  to  death.  Nay,  in  much  later  times  we  find 
that  in  the  moil  ancient  laws  of  the  Romans  (I 
mean  thofe  of  the  xii  tables)  children  are  abfolutely 
put  in  the  power  of  their  parents,  to  whom  is 
given,  jus  vita  &  necis,  "  a  power  of  life  and 
"  death  over  them  ;  "  and  likewife  to  fell  them  for 
flaves. 

And  tho5  amongft  the  Jews  this  paternal  power 
was  limited  by  the  law  of  Mofes  •,  and  the  judg- 
ment of  life  and  death  was  taken  out  of  the  fa- 
ther's hands,  except  in  cafe  of  contumacy  and  re- 
bellion j  (and  even  in  that  cafe  the  procefs  was  to 
be  before  the  elders  of  the  city)  yet  it  is  certain, 
that  in  elder  times  the  paternal  power  was  more 
abfolute  and  unaccountable,  which  takes  off  much 
from  the  horror  and  fcandal  of  the  thing,  as  it 
appears  now  to  us  who  have  no  fuch  power. 

And  therefore  we  do  not  find  in  the  hiftory,  that 
this  objection  did  much  flick  with  Abraham  •,  it  be- 
incr  then  no  unufual  thing  for  a  father  to  put  his 
child  to  death  upon  a  juftY  account. 

And  the  command  of  God,  who  hath  abfolute 
dominion  over  the  lives  of  his  creatures,  is  certain- 
ly ajuft  reafon  ;  and  no  man  can  reafonably  fcru- 
ple  the  doing  of  that,  upon  the  command  ot  God, 
which  he  might  have  done  by  his  own  authority, 
without  being  accountable  for  the  action,  to  any 
but  God  only. 

3.  As  to  the  objection  from  the  horrible  confe- 

quence  of  the  thing  commanded,  that  the  flaying  of 

Ifaac  feemed  to  overthrow  the  promife,  which  God 

had  made  before  to  Abraham,  "  that  in   Ifaac  his 

feed  fhould  be  called  :"  This  feems  to  him  to  be 

the 


Abraham's  faith  and  obedience.  82  r 

the  great  difficulty,  and  here  he  makes  ufe  of  reafon,  SERM. 

to  reconcile  the  feeming  contradiction  of  this  com-  ^ 

mand  of  God  to  his  former  promife.     So  the  text 

tells  us,  "  that  he  offered  up  his  only  begotten  fon, 

M  of  whom  it  was  laid,  that  in  Ifaac  fhall  thy  feed 

"  be  called  ;  reafoning  that  God  was  able  to  raife 

«'  him  up  from  the  dead.  "     So  that  tho'  Iiaac  were 

put  to  death,  yet  he  law,  how  the  promife  of  God 

might  ftill  be  made  good  by  his  being  raifed  from  the 

dead,  and  living  afterwards  to  have  a  numerous  po- 

flerity. 

There  had  then  indeed  been  no  inftance,  or  ex- 
ample of  any  fuch  thing  in  the  world,  as  the  refur- 
r  eel  ion  of  one  from  the  dead,  which  makes  Abra- 
ham's faith  the  more  wonderful  :  but  he  confirmed 
himfelf  in  this  belief,  by  an  example  as  near  the  cafe 
as  might  be  •,  "  he  reafoned,  that  God  was  able  to 
"  raife  him  from  the  dead,  from  whence  alfo  he  had 
Cc  received  him  in  a  figure.'' 

This  I  know  is  by  interpreters  generally  underflood 
of  Iiaac's  being  delivered  from  the  jaws  of  death, 
when  he  was  laid  upon  the  altar,  and  ready  to  be 
flain.  But  the  text  feems  not  to  fpeak  of  what  hap- 
pened after ;  but  of  fomething  that  had  paffed  be- 
fore, by  which  Abraham  confirmed  himfelf  in  this 
perfuafion,  that  if  he  were  flain,  God  would  raife  him 
up  again. 

And  fo  the  words  c^sv  ly.cuila-aro  ought  to  be  ren- 
dered,  in  the  pad  time,  "  from  whence  alfo  he  had 
u  received  him  in  a  figure."  So  that  this  expreffion 
plainly  refers  to  the  miraculous  birth  of  Ifaac,  when 
his  parents  were  pad   the  age  of  having  children  •, 

which 


ga6  ^>je  excellency  of 

which  was  little  lefs  than  a  refurreclion  from  the 
dead. 

And  fo  the  fcripture  ipeaks  of  it,  Rom.  iv.  17. 
u  Abraham  believed  God,  who  quickeneth  the  dead, 
"  and  calleth  the  things  which  are  not,  as  if  they 
"  were  ;  and  not  being  weak  in  faith,  he  confidered 
"  not  his  own  body  which  was  dead  ;"  and  a  little 
before  the  text,  (fpeaking  of  the  miraculous  birth  of 
Ifaac)  "  and  therefore  fprang  thereof  one,  and  him 
"  as  good  as  dead,  as  many  as  the  flars  of  heaven." 

From  whence  (as  the  apoftle  tells  us)  Abraham 
reafoned  thus  \  that  God,  who  gave  him  Ifaac  at  firft 
in  fo  miraculous  a  manner,  was  able  by  another  mi- 
racle to  reftore  him  to  life  again,  after  he  was  dead, 
and  to  make  him  the  father  of  many  nations.  "  He 
"  reafoned,  that  God  was  able  to  raife  him  up  from 
cc  the  dead,  from  whence  alfo  he  had  received  him  in 
"  a  figure." 

Thus  you  fee  the  reafonablenefs  of  Abraham's 
faith  ;  he  pitched  upon  the  main  difficulty  in  the 
cale,  and  he  anfwered  it,  as  well  as  waspornbie  :  and 
in  his  reafoning  about  this  matter  he  gives  the  utmoft 
weight  to  every  thing  that  might  tend  to  vindicate 
the  truth  and  faithfulnefs  of  God's  promife,  and  to 
make  the  revelations  of  God  confident  with  one 
another  •,  and  this,  tlio'  he  had  a  great  intereft  and  a 
very  tender  concernment  of  his  own,  to  have  biaffed 
him. 

For  he  might  have  argued  with  great  appearance 
and  probability   the  other  way  :  but  as  every  pious 
and  good  man  fhould  do,  he  reafoned  on  God's  fidc^ 
and  favoured  that  part.     Rather  than  difobey  a  com- 
mand 


Abraham  s  faith  and  obedience.  827 

xhand  of  God,  or  believe  that  his  promife  fiiould  3  J 
be  fruftrate,  he  will  believe  any   thing   that  is  ere-  ^ 
dible  and  poffible,  how   improbable   foever.     Thus 
far  faith  will  go  ;  but  no  farther.     From  the  believ- 
ing of  plain  contradictions  and  impofiibi Ikies,  it  al- 
ways de fires  to  be  excufed. 

Thus  much  for  explication  of  the  words  ;  which  I 
hope  hath  not  been  altogether  unprofitable,  becaufe 
it  tends  to  clear  a  point  which  hath  fomething  of  dif- 
ficulty and  obfeurity  in  it,  and  to  vindicate  the  holy 
fcripture,  and  the  divine  revelation  therein  contained, 
from  one  of  the  moft  fpecious  objections  of  infide- 
lity. 

But  I  had  a  farther  defign  in  this  text ;  and  that  is, 
to  make  fome  cbfervations  and  inferences  from  it,  thac 
may  be  of  ufe  to  us.     As, 

Firft,  that  humane  nature  is  capable  of  clear  and 
full  fatisfaction,  concerning  a  divine  revelation.  For 
if  Abraham  had  not  been  fully  and  pad  all  doubt  aC 
fured,  that  this  was  a  command  from  God  j  he 
would  certainly  have  fpared  his  fon.  And  nothing 
is  more  reafonable,  than  to  believe,  that  thofe,  to 
whom  God  is  pleafed  to  make  immediate  revelations 
of  his  will,  are  fome  way  or  other  allured  that  they 
are  divine ;  otherwife  they  would  be  in  vain,  and  to 
no  purpofe. 

But  how  men  are  aflured  concerning  divine  reve- 
lations made  to  them,  is  not  fo  eafy  to  make  out  to 
others ;  only  thefe  two  things  we  are  fure  of. 

1.  That  God  can  work  in  the   mind  of  man  a 
firm  perfuafion  of  the  truth  of  what  he  reveals,  and 
that  fuch  a  revelation  is  from  him.     This  no  man 
can  doubt  of,  that  confiders  the  great  power  atid  in- 
fluence, 


LVI. 


828  The  excellency  of 

ERM.  fluence,  which  God,  who  made  us,  and  perfectly 
knows  our  frame,  mud  needs  have  upon  our  minds 
and  underflandings. 

2.  That  God  never  offers  any  thing  to  any  man's 
belief,  that  plainly  contradicts  the  natural  and  elTen- 
tial  notions  of  his  mind  •,  becaufe  this  would  be  for 
God  to  deftroy  his  own  workmanfhip,  and  to  imr 
pofe  that  upon  the  underftanding  of  man,  which 
whilft  it  remains  what  it  is,  it  cannot  poflibly 
admit. 

For  inftance,  we  cannot  imagine  that  God  fhould 
reveal  to  any  man  any  thing  that  plainly  contradicts 
the  efifential  perfections  of  the  divine  nature  :  for  fach 
a  revelation  can  no  more  be  fuppofed  to  be  from 
God,  than  a  revelation  from  God,  that  there  is  no 
God  ,  which  is  a  downright  contradiction. 

Now  to  apply  this  to  the  revelation  which  God 
made  to  Abraham,  concerning  the  facrificing  of  his 
fon  :  this  was  made  to  him  by  an  audible  voice,  and 
he  was  fully  fatisfied  by  the  evidence  which  it  car- 
ried along  with  it,  that  it  was  from  God. 

For  this  was  not  the  firft  of  many  revelations  that 
had  been  made  to  him,  fo  that  he  knew  the  manner 
of  them,  and  had  found  by  manifold  experience, 
that  he  was  not  deceived,  and  upon  this  experience 
was  grown  to  a  great  confidence  in  the  truth  and 
goodnefs  of  God.  And  it  is  very  probable,  the 
firft  time  God  appeared  to  Abraham,  becaufe  it  was 
a  new  thing,  that  to  make  way  for  the  credit  of  fu- 
ture revelations,  God  did  fhew  himfelf  to  him  in 
fo  glorious  a  manner,  as  was  abundantly  to  his  con- 
viction. 

And 


Abraham's  faith  and  obedience.  829 

And  this  St.  Stephen  does  feem  to  intimate,  Acts  SE  RM. 
vii.  2.  "  The  God  of  glory  appeared  to  our  father 
"  Abraham  when  he  was  in  Mefopotamia."  Now 
by  this  glorious  appearance  of  God  to  him  at  firfr, 
he  was  fo  prepared  for  the  entertainment  of  after- 
revelations,  that  he  was  not  ftaggered  even  at  this, 
concerning  the  facrificing  of  his  fon,  being  both  by 
the  manner  of  it,  and  the  affurance  that  accompa- 
nied it,  fully  fatisfied,  that  it  was  from  God. 

Secondly,  I  obferve  from  hence  the  great  and  ne- 
cefTary  ufe  of  reafon  in  matters  of  faith.  For  we  fee 
here,  that  Abraham's  reafon  was  a  mighty  flrength- 
ning  and  help  to  his  faith.  Here  were  two  revela- 
tions made  to  Abraham,  which  feemed  to  clafh  with 
one  another  ;  and  if  Abraham's  reafon  could  not 
have  reconciled  the  repugnancy  of  them,  he  could 
not  poflibly  have  believed  them  both  to  be  from 
God;  becaufe  this  natural  notion  or  principle, 
"  that  God  cannot  contradict  himfelf,"  every  man 
does  firft,  and  more  firmly  believe,  than  any  revela- 
tion whatfoever. 

Now  Abraham's  reafon  relieved  him  in  this  ftrair. 
So  the  text  exprefly  tells  us,  "  he  reafoned  with 
"  himfelf,  that  God  was  able  to  raife  him  from  the 
"  dead." 

And  this  being  admitted,  the  command  of  God, 
concerning  the  flaying  of  Ifaac,  was  very  well  con- 
fiftent  with  his  former  promife,  "  that  in  Ifaac  his 
«  feed  fhould  be  called." 

I  know,  there  hath  a  very  rude  clamour  been  railed 
by  fome  perfons,  (but  of  more  zeal,  I  think,  than 
judgment)  againft  the  ufe  of  reafon  in  matters  of 

Vol.  IV.  7  Z  faith r 

7- 


"S^o  2"*^  excellency  of 

SERM.  faith  :  but  how  very  unreafbnable  this  is,  will  appeal* 
to  any  one  that  will  but  have  patience  to  coniider 
thefe  following  particulars. 

i .  The  nature  of  divine  revelation ;  that  it  doth 
not  endow  men  with  new  faculties,  but  propoundeth 
new  objects  to  the  faculties,  which  they  had  before. 
Reafon  is  the  faculty  whereby  revelation  is  to  be  dif- 
cerned  ;  for  when  God  reveals  any  thing  to  us,  he 
reveals  it  to  our  underftanding,  and  by  that  we  are 
to  judge  of  it.  Therefore  St.  John  cautions  us,  i  John 
iv.  i.  "  not  to  believe  every  fpirit ;  but  to  try  the 
fpirits  whether  they  are  of  God  ;  becaufe  many 
falfe  prophets  are  gone  out  into  the  world ;"  that 
is,  there  are  many  that  falfiy  pretend  to  infpiration  : 
but  how  can  thefe  pretenders  be  tried  and  difcerned 
From  thole  that  are  truly  infpired,  but  by  ufing  our 
reafon,  in  comparing  the  evidence  for  the  one  and 
the  other  ? 

2.  This  will  farther  appear,  if  we  confider  the 
nature  of  faith.  Faith  (as  we  are  now  fpeaking  of 
it)  is  an  aflent  of  the  mind  to  fomething  as  re- 
vealed by  God  :  now  all  afTent  muft  be  grounded  up- 
on evidence  -,  that  is,  no  man  can  believe  any  things 
unlefs  he  have  or  thinks  he  hath  fome  reafon  to  do 
fo.  For  to  be  confident  of  a  thing  without  reafon, 
is  not  faith  ;  but  a  prefumptuous  perfuafion  and  ob- 
ftinacy  of  mind. 

3.  This  will  yet  be  more  evident,  if  we  confider 
the  method,  that  mud  of  neceflity  be  ufed  to  con- 
vince any  man  of  the  truth  of  religion.  Suppofe,  we 
had  to  deal  with  one  that  is  a  flranger  and  enemy  to 
phriftianity,  what  means  are  proper  to  be  ufed  to 

gain 


Abraham's  faith  and  cbedience.  831 

gain  him  over  to  it  ?  the  mofr.  natural  method  furely  s  E  ^  *vI* 
were  this,  to  acquaint  him  with  the  holy  fcriptures, 
which  are  the  rule  of  our  faith  and  practice.  He 
would  ask  us,  "  why  we  believe  that  book  ?"  The 
proper  anfwer  would  be,  st  becaufe  it  is  the  word 
"  of  God  ;  "  this  he  could  not  but  acknowledge 
to  be  a  very  good  reafon,  if  it  „were  true  :  but  then 
he  would  ask  "  why  he  believed  it  to  be  the  word 
"  of  God,  rather  than  Mahomet's  alcoran,  which 
pretends  no  lefs  to  be  of  divine  infpiration  ?" 
If  any  man  now  fhould  anfwer,  "  that  he  could 
give  no  reafon,  why  he  believed  it  to  be  the  word 
of  God,  only  he  believed  it  to  be  fo,  and  fo  every 
man  elfe  ought  to  do  without  enquiring  after  any 
farther  reafon,  becaufe  reafon  is  to  be  laid  afide  in 
<c  matters  of  faith ;"  would  not  the  man  prefentiy 
reply,  "  that  he  had  juft  as  much  reafon  as  this  comes 
"  to,  to  believe  the  alcoran,  or  any  thing  die  £* 
that  is,  none  at  all  ? 

But  certainly  the  better  way  would  be  to  fatisfy 
this  man's  reafon  by  proper  arguments  that  the  fcrip- 
tures are  a  divine  revelation,  and  that  no  other  book 
in  the  world,  can  with  equal  reafon  pretend  to  be  fo : 
and  if  this  be  a  good  way,  then  we  do  and  muft  call 
in  the  aiiiftance  of  reafon  for  the  proof  of  our  reli- 


cc 

t: 
cc 
cc 


gion. 


4.  Let  it  be  confidered  farther,  that  the  higheft 
commendations  that  are  given  in  fcripture  to  any 
one's  faith,  are  given  upon  account  of  the  reafon- 
ablenefs  of  it.  Abraham's  faith  is  famous,  and 
made  a  pattern  to  all  generations,  becaufe  he  rea- 
foned  himfelf  into  it,  notwithftanding  the  objections 

7   Z  2  tO 


832  The  excellency  of 

S  E  R  M.  to  the  contrary,  and  he  did  not  blindly  break  thro* 
thefe  .objections,  and  wink  hard  at  them  •,  but  he 
looked  them  in  the  face,  and  gave  himfelf  reafon- 
able  fatisfaction  concerning  them. 

The  centurion's  faith  is  commended  by  our  Sa- 
viour, Matth.  viii.  9.  becaufewhen  his  fervant  was 
fick,  he  did  not  defire  him  to  come  to  his  houfe, 
but  "  to  fpeak  the  word  only,  and  his  fervant  mould 
M  be  healed  :M  for  he  reafoned  thus,  "I  am  a  man 
"  under  authority,  having  foldiers  under  me,  and  I 
*6  fay  to  this  man  go,  and  he  goeth  ;  and  to  another, 
<c  come,  and  he  cometh  •,  and  to  my  fervant,  do  this, 
cc  and  he  doth  rt."     Now  if  he,  that  was  himfelf 
under    authority,   could   thus   command  thofe  that 
were  under  him  •,  much  more  could  he  that  had  a 
divine  power  and  commilTion,  do  what  he  pleafed  by 
his  word.     And  our  Saviour  is  fo  far  from  repre- 
hending him    for  reafoning  himfelf  into  this  belief, 
that  he  admires  his  faith  fo  much  the  more  for  the 
reafonableneis  of  it,  ver.   10.    "  When  Jefus  heard 
"  this,  he  marvelled,  and  laid  to  them  that  followed 
u  him,  verily  I  fay  unto  you,  I  have  not  found  fo 
"  great  faith,  no  not  in  lfrael." 

In  like  manner  our  Saviour  commends  the  wo- 
man of  Canaan's  faith,  becaufe  ihe  enforced  it  fo 
reafonably,  Matth.  xv.  22.  She  fued  him  to  help 
her  daughter  ;  "  but  he  anfwered  her  not  a  word  **' 
and  when  his  difciples  could  not  prevail  with  him  to 
mind  her,  yet  dill  fhe  preffed  him,  "  faying,  Lord 
"  help  me  ;M  and  when  he  repulfed  her  with  this 
fevere  anfwer,  "  it  is  not  meet  to  take  the  childrens 
"  bread  and  caft  it  to  dogs ;"  flic  made  this  quick 

and 


Abrahams  faith  and  obedience.  833 

and  modeft  reply,  "  truth,  Lord  •,  yet  the  dogs  eat  S  ERM.- 
«  of  the  crumbs  which  fall  from  their  mailers  ta-v 
<4  ble."  She  acknowledgeth  her  own  unwortbinefi  ; 
but  yet  believes  his  goodnefs  to  be  fuch,  that  he 
will  not  utterly  reject  thofe  who  humbly  feek  to 
him  •,  upon  which  he  gives  her  this  teflimony,  "  O 
u  woman,  great  is  thy  faith  !" 

The  apoftles  were  divinely  infpired  ;  and  yet  the 
Bereans  are  commended,  becauie  they  inquired  and 
fatisfied  themfelves  in  the  reafons  of  their  belief, 
before  they  afTented  to  the  doctrine  which  was  de- 
livered to  them,  even  by  teachers  that  certainly  were 

infallible. 

5.  None  are  reproved  in  fcripture  for  their  unbe- 
lief, but  where  fumxient  reafon  and  evidence  was  of- 
fered to  them.  The  Ifraelites  were  generally  blamed 
for  their  infidelity  \  but  then  it  was  after  fuch  mighty 
wonders  had  been  wrought  for  their  conviction. 

The  Jews,  in  our  Saviour's  time,  are  not  con- 
demned fimply  for  their  unbelief;  but  for  not  be- 
lieving when  there  was  fuch  clear  evidence  offered  to 
them.  So  our  Saviour  himfelf  fays,  "  if  I  had 
"  not  done  amongfl  them  the  works  which  no  other 
"  man  did,  they  had  not  had  fin." 

Thomas  indeed  is  blamed  for  the  perverfenefs  of 
his  unbelief,  becaufe  he  would  believe  nothing  but 
what  he  himfelf  faw. 

Laftly,  to  mew  this  yet  more  plainly,  let  us  confider 
the  great  inconvenience  and  abfurdity  of  declining 
the  ufe  of  reafon  in  matters  of  religion.  There  can 
be   no  greater  prejudice  to  religion,  than  to  decline 

this  trial.  _ 

To 


7ie  excellency  of 

To  fay,  we  have  no  reafon  for  our  religion,  is  to 
fay,  it  is  unreafonable.  Indeed  it  is  reafon  enough  for 
any  article  of  our  faith,  that  God  hath  revealed  it  ; 
becaufe  this  is  one  of  the  ftrongeft  and  mod  cogent 
reafons  for  the  belief  of  any  thing.  But  when  we 
fay  God  hath  revealed  any  thing,  we  muft  be  ready 
to  prove  it,  or  dib  we  fay  nothing.  If  we  turn  off 
reafon  here,  we  level  the  bell  religion  in  the  world 
with  the  wildeft  and  mod  abfurd  enthuftafms. 

And  it  does  not  alter  the  cafe  much,  to  give  rea- 
fon ill  names,  to  call  it  blind,  and  carnal  reafon.  Our 
bed  reafon  is  but  very  fhort  and  imperfect :  but  ftnee 
it  is  no  better,  we  muft  make  ufe  of  it  as  it  is,  and 
make  the  beft  of  it. 

Before  I  pafs  from  this  argument,  I  cannot  but  ob- 
ferve,  that  both  the  extremes  of  thofe  who  differ 
from  our  church,  are  generally  great  declaimers 
again  ft  the  ufe  of  reafon  in  matters  of  faith.  If  they 
find  their  account  in  it,  'tis  well ;  for  our  parts  we 
apprehend  no  manner  of  inconvenience,  in  having 
reafon  on  our  fide  5  nor  need  v/e  to  defire  a  better 
evidence,  that  any  man  is  in  the  wrong,  than  to  hear 
him  declare  againft  reafon,  and  thereby  to  acknow- 
ledge that  reafon  is  againft  him.  Men  may  vilify  rea- 
fon as  much  as  they  pleafe ;  and  tho*  being  reviled 
ihe  reviles  not  again,  yet  in  a  more  ftill  and  gentle 
way,  (he  commonly  hath  her  full  revenge  upon  all 
thole  that  rail  at  her. 

I  have  often  wondered  that  people  can  with  pa- 
tience endure  to  hear  their  teachers  and  guides  talk 
againft  reafon  ;  and  not  only  fo,  but  they  pay  them 
the  greater  fubmiftion  and  veneration  for  it.     One 

would 


Abraham's  faith  and  obedience.  S-»  - 

would  think    this  but  an  odd    way  to  gain  '  audio- SEEUkfi 
rity  over  the  minds  of  men :  but  fome  skilful  and     LV1 
defigning  men  have  found  by  experience,  that  it  is  a 
very  good  way  to  recommend  them  to  the  igno- 
rant ;  as  nurfes  ufe  to  endear  themfelves  to  children, 
by  perpetual  noiie  and  nonfenfe. 

Thirdly,  I  obferve,  that  God  obligeth  no  man 
to  believe  plain  and  evident  contradictions,  as  mat- 
ters of  faith.  Abraham  could  not  reafonably  have 
believed  this  fecond  revelation  to  have  been  from 
God,  if  he  had  not  found  fome  way  to  reconcile  it 
with  the  firft.  For  tho'  a  man  were  never  fb 
much  difpofed  to  fubmit  his  reafon  to  divine  reve- 
lation ;  yet  it  is  not  poffible  for  any  man  to  believe 
God  againflGoD  himfelf. 

Somq  men  feem  to  think,  that  they  oblige  God 
mightily,  by  believing  plain  contradictions.  But 
the  matter  is  quite  otherwife.  He  that  made  man  a 
reafonable  creature,  cannot  take  it  kindly  from  any 
man  to  debafe  his  workmanfhip,  by  makinc-  him- 
felf unreafonable.  And  therefore,  as  no  fervice,  or 
obedience  -9  fo  no  faith  is  acceptable  unto  God,  but 
what  is  reafonable  :  if  it  be  not  fo,  it  may  be  con- 
fidence or  prefumption  5  but  it  is  not  faith.  For 
he  that  can  believe  plain  contradictions,  may  believe 
any  thing  how  abfurd  foever  ;  becaufe  nothing  can 
be  more  abfurd,  than  the  belief  of  a  plain  contra- 
diction ;  and  he  that  can  believe  any  thing,  believes 
nothing  upon  good  grounds,  becaufe  to  him  truth 
and  falfhood  are  all  one. 

Fourthly,  I  obferve,  that  the  great  caufe  of  the 
defect  of  mens  obedience  is  the  weaknefs  of  their 

faith. 


S$6  The  excellency  of 

SERM. faith.  Did  we  believe  the  commands  of  God  in 
the  gofpel,  and  his  promifes  and  threatnings,  as 
firmly  as  Abraham  believed  God  in  this  cafe  \  what 
fhould  we  not  be  ready  to  do,  or  fuffer,  in  obedi- 
ence to  him  ? 

If  our  faith  were  but  as  flrong  and  vigorous  as 
his  was,  the  effects  of  it  would  be  as  great  and 
confpicuous.  Were  we  verily  perfuaded,  that  all 
the  precepts  of  our  religion  are  the  exprefs  laws  of 
God,  and  that  all  the  promifes  and  threatnings  of 
the  gofpel  will  one  day  be  verified  and  made  good ; 
"  what  manner  of  perfbns  mould  we  be  in  all  holy 
"  converfation  and  godlinefs  ? M  How  would  the 
lively  thoughts  of  another  world,  raile  us  above  the 
vanities  of  this  prefent  life  ;  and  kt  us  out  of  the 
reach  of  the  mod  powerful  temptations  that  this 
*vorld  can  aflault  us  withal ;  and  make  us  to  do  all 
things  with  regard  to  eternity,  and  to  that  folemn 
and  dreadful  account  which  we  muft  one  day  make 
to  God  the  judge  of  all  ? 

It  is  nothing  but  the  want  of  a  firm  and  fteady 
belief  of  thefe  things  that  makes  our  devotion  fo 
dead  and  heartlefs,  and  our  refolutions  of  doing  bet- 
ter fb  weak  and  inconflant.  This  it  is  that  makes 
us  fb  eafy  a  prey  to  every  temptation  •,  and  the 
things  of  this  world  to  look  fo  much  bigger  than  they 
are,  the  enjoyments  of  it  more  tempting,  and  the 
evils  of  it  more  terrible  than  in  truth  they  are  ; 
and  in  all  difputes  betwixt  our  confeience  and  our 
intereft,  this  makes  us  hold  the  balance  fo  unequal- 
ly, and  to  put  our  foot  upon  the  lighter  fcale,  that 
it  may  feem  to  weigh  down  the  other. 

In 


Abraham 's  faith  and  obediefice.  837 

In  a   word,    in   proportion    to  the   ftrength    orSERM. 
weaknefs  of  our  faith,  our  obedience  to  God  will 
be  more  or  lefs  conftarit,  uniform,  and  perfect  -,  be- 
caufe  faith  is  the  great  fource  and  fpring  of  all  the 
virtues  of  a  good  lift. 

Fifthly,  we  have  great  rcafon  to  fubmit  to  the 
ordinary  flrokes  of  God's  providence  upon  our 
felves,  or  near  relations,  or  any  thing  that  is  dear 
to  us.  Moft  of  thefe  are  eafy,  compared  with 
Abraham's  cafe ;  it  requires  a  prodigious  ftrength 
of  faith  to  perform  fo  miraculous  an  act  of  obe- 
dience. 

Sixthly,  and  laftly,  we  are  utterly  inexcufable,  if 
we  difobey  the  eafy  precepts  of  the  gofpel.  "  The 
"  yoke  of  Christ  is  eafy,  and  his  burden  light,'* 
in  comparifon  of  God's  former  difpenfations.  This, 
was  a  grievous  commandment  which  God  gave  to 
Abraham,  to  facri ike  his  only  fon  :  u  it  was  a  hard 
"  faying  indeed  ;  and  which  of  us  could  have  been 
*c  able  to  bear  it  ?  " 

But  if  God  think  fit  to  call  us  to  the  more  difficult 
duties  of  felf-denial,  and  fuffering  for  his  truth  and 
righteoufnefs  fake,  we  muft,  after  the  example  of 
faithful  Abraham,  not  think  much  to  deny,  or  part 
with  any  thing  for  him,  no  not  life  it  felf.  But 
even  this,  which  is  the  hardeft  part  of  religion,  is 
ealier  than  what  God  put  upon  Abraham. 

For  it  doth  not  offer  near  the  violence  to  na- 
ture, to  lay  down  our  life  in  a  good  caufe,  as  it 
would  do  to  put  a  child  to  death  with  our  own 
hands.  Befides  the  confideration  of  the  extraordi- 
nary comfort  and  fupport,  and  the  glorious  rewards 

Vol.  IV.  8  A  that 


838  *£ke  excellency  of 

SER M.  that  arc  exprefly  promifed  to  our  obedience  and 
felf-denial  in  fuch  a  cafe  5  encouragement  enough 
to  make  a  very  difficult  duty  eafy. 

And  whilfl  I  am  perfuading  you  and  my  felf 
to  refolution  and  conuancy  in  our  holy  religion, 
notwithstanding  all  hazards  and  hardfhips  that  may 
attend  it,  I  have  a  juft  fenfe  of  the  frailty  of  hu- 
mane nature,  and  of  humane  refolution  :  but  with- 
al, a  moil  firm  perfuafion  of  the  goodnefs  of  God, 
that  he  will  not  fuffer  thofe  who  fincercly  love  him 
and  his  truth,  "  to  be  tempted  above  what  they 
"  are  able." 

I  will  add  but  one  confideration  more,  to  mew 
the  difference  betwixt  Abraham's  cafe  and  ours. 
God  commanded  him  to  do  the  hardeft  thing  in  the 
world,  to  facrifice  his  only  fbn  ;  but  he  hath  given  us 
an  eafy  commandment  ;  and  that  he  might  effectu- 
ally oblige  us  to  our  duty,  he  hath  done  that  for 
us  which  he  required  Abraham  to  do  for  him  ; 
•*  he  hath  not  fpared  his  own  fbn,  his  only  fon  ; 
«c  but  hath  given  him  up  to  death  for  us  all :  and 
*  hereby  we  know,  that  he  loveth  us,  that  he  hath 
*'  given  his  fbn  for  us." 

What  God  required  of  Abraham,  he  did  not 
intend  fhould  be  executed ;  but  one  great  defign  of 
it  was  to  be  a  type  and  figure  of  that  immenfe  love, 
and  kindnefs  which  he  intended  to  all  mankind  in 
the  facrifice  of  his  fon,  as  a  propitiation  for  the  fins 
of  the  whole  world. 

And"  as  the  moft  clear  and  exprefs  promrfc  of 
the  Mi6si  as  was  made  to  Abraham  ;  fo  the  moft 
exprefs  and  lively  type  of  the  Miss  1  as  that  we  meet 

witjj 


Abraham's  faith  and  obedience.  839 

with  in  all  the  old  teftament,  was  Abraham's  of-  S  E  R  M. 
fering  up  his  fon.  And  as  St.  Hierom  tells  us  LVI 
(from  an  ancient  and  conftant  tradition  of  the  Jews) 
the  mountain  in  Moriah,  where  Abraham  was  com- 
manded to  facrifice  Ifaac,  was  mount  Calvary,  where 
our  Lord  alfo  was  crucified  and  offered  up,  "  that 
"  by  this  one  facrifice  of  himfelf  once  offered,  he 
M  might  perfect  for  ever  them  that  are  fanctified, 
"  and  obtain  eternal  redemption  for  us." 

"  Now  to  him  that  fitteth  upon  the  throne,  and 
iC  to  the  lamb  that  was  flain ;  to  God  even  our 
"  father,  and  to  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  firft 
"  begotten  from  the  dead  -,  to  the  prince  of  the 
"  kings  of  the  earth  ;  to  him  that  loved  us,  and 
"  warned  us  from  our  fins  in  his  own  blood  ;  to 
•*  him  be  glory  and  honour,  thankfgiving  and 
u  power,  now  and  for  ever,  Amen." 


«  A  2  SER- 


[  840  ] 

SERMON    LVIL 

Mofes's  choice  of  affli&ed  piety,  rather 
than  a  kingdom. 


H  E  B.  xi.  24,  25. 

By  faith  Mofes  when  he  was  come  to  years,  refufed  t* 
be  called  the  fin  of  Pharaoh's  daughter  ;  choofing  ra- 
ther tofuffer  affliclion  with  the  people  of  God,  than  to 
enjoy  the  pkafures  of  Jin  for  a  feafon, 

SERAI K  I  "*\ H E  text  fets  before  us  a  great  pattern  of 
LYiL»  felf-denial  :    for   our   better   underflanding 

Preached  whereof  I  will  give  a  brief  account  of  the 

frills    kiftory  of  Mofes,  to  which  our  apoftle  in  this  paf- 

befbrethe  fage  doth  refer. 

pmcefs  When  Mofes  was  born,  his  parents  (for  fear  of 
the  cruel  law  which  Pharaoh  had  made,  "  that  all 
M  the  male  children  of  the  Hebrews,  fo  foon  as 
"  they  were  born,  fhould  be  put  to  death")  after 
they  had  hid  him  three  months,  did  at  lad  expofe 
him  in  an  ark  of  bulrufhes,  upon  the  river  Nile, 
and  committed  him  to  the  providence  of  God, 
whom  they  defpaired  to  conceal  any  longer  by  their 
own  care. 

Pharaoh's    daughter,   coming  by  the  river  fide, 
cfpied  him,  and  had  companion  on  him  $  and  guef- 

fing 


Mofess  choice  of  afflicted  piety,  &c.  841 

fins  him  to  be  one  of  the  hebrew  children,  called  S  E  R  M. 
for  an  hebrew  nurfe,  to  take  care  of  him,  who,  as 
the  providence  of  God  had  ordered  it,  proved  to 
be  the  child's  own  mother.  As  he  grew  up,  Pha- 
raoh's daughter  took  care  of  his  education  in  all 
princely  qualities,  and  adopted  him  for  her  fon  ; 
and  Pharaoh  (as  Jofephus  tells  us)  being  without  fon, 
defigned  him  heir  of  his  kingdom. 

Mofes  refilled  this  great  offer.  But  why  did  he 
refufe  it,  when  it  feemed  to  be  prefented  to  him  by 
the  providence  of  God,  and  was  brought  about  in 
fo  tlrange  a  manner ;  and  when  by  this  means  he 
might  probably  have  had  it  in  his  power  to  have 
eafed  the  Ifraelites  of  their  cruel  bondage,  and  per- 
haps have  had  the  opportunity  of  reducing  that 
great  kingdom  from  the  worlhip  of  idols  to  the 
true  Goo  ?  why  would  he  refufe  a  kingdom  which 
was  offered  to  him  with  fo  fair  an  opportunity  of  do- 
ing  fo  much  good  ? 

That  which  feems  to  have  prevailed  with  Mofes, 
was  this,  that  he  could  not  accept  the  offer  without 
forfaking  God,  and  renouncing  his  religion  ;  for 
confidering  how  ftrangely  the  Egyptians  were  ad- 
dicted to  idolatry,  he  could  never  hope  to  be  accepted 
For  heir  of  that  kingdom,  unlels  he  would  violate 
his  confcience,  either  by  abandoning  or  diffembling 
his  religion. 

And  how  unlikely  it  was,  that  he  fhould  pre- 
vail with  them  to  change  their  religion,  he  might 
cafily  judge  by  the  example  of  Jofeph,  who,  tho* 
he  had  fo  much  authority  and  efleem  amongft  them, 
by  having  been  fo  great  a  benefactor  to  their  nation  ; 

yet 


$42  Mofes  s  choice  of  afflicltd piety ; 

SERAI.  yCt   he  could  never  move    them  in  the  leaft  in 
LVIi.      . 

that  matter. 

Now  feeing  he  had  no  hopes  of  attaining,  or  en- 
joying that  dignity,  without  finning  gricvoufly 
againft  God,  he  would  not  purchafe  a  kingdom  at 
fo  unconfcionable  a  price.  And  as  for  the  delive- 
rance of  his  people,  he  was  content  to  truft  the 
providence  and  promife  of  God  for  that  \  and  in 
the  mean  time  was  refolved  rather  to  take  a  part  in 
the  afflictions  of  God's  people,  "  than  to  enjoy  the 
**  pleafures  of  fin  for  a  feafon." 

From  the  words  thus  explained,  I  fhall  take  oc- 
cafion  to  confider  thefe  four  things. 

I.  Mofes's  felf-denial,  in  preferring  and  choofing 
a  ftate  of  afflicted  piety,  before  any  finful  enjoy- 
.ments  whatfoever,  before  the  greateft  earthly  happi- 
nefs  and  profperity,  when  it  was  not  to  be  attained 
and  enjoyed  upon  other  terms  than  of  finning  againft 

God. 

II.  I  mail  confider  thofe  circum (lances  of  this  felf- 
denial  of  Mofes,  which  do  very  much  commend  and 
fet  off  the  virtue  of  it. 

III.  The  prudence  and  reafonablenefs  of  this  choice, 
in  preferring  a  ftate  of  afflicted  piety  and  virtue,  be- 
fore the  greateft  profperity  and  pleafure  of  a  finful 

courfe. 

IV.  Suppofing  this  choice  to  be  reafonable,  I  fhall 
enquire  how  it  comes  to  pais,  that  fo  many  make  ano- 
ther choice. 

I.  We  will  confider  Mofes  his  felf-denial,  in  pre- 
ferring a  ftate  of  afflicted  piety  before  the  greateft 
Earthly  happineis  and  profperity,  when  it  is  not  to  be 

enjoyed 


rather  than  a  lingdottl.  843 

enjoyed  upon  other  terms,  than  of  finning  againft  s  E  R  M* 
God.  He  was  adopted  heir  of  the  kingdom  of. 
Egypt,  (one  of  the  greatefl  and  molt  flourifhing 
kingdoms  then  in  the  world  ; )  but  he  could  not 
hope  to  attain  to  this  dignity,  and  to  fecure  himfelf 
in  the  poffciTion  of  it,  upon  other  terms  than  of 
complying  with  that  nation,  in  their  idolatrous  reli- 
gion and  worfhip. 

Now  being  brought  up  in  the  belief  of  the  true 
God,  the  God  of  IfraeJ,  by  his  mother,  to  whom 
Pharaoh's  daughter  had  committed  him,  he  could 
not,  without  great  violence  to  his  confeience,  and 
the  principles  of  his  education,  renounce  the  true 
God,  and  fall  off  to  the  idolatry  of  the  Egyptians  : 
and  for  this  reafon  "  he  refufed  to  be  called  the  fon 

of  Pharaoh's  daughter,  choofing  rather  to  fuffer 

affliction  with  the  worfhippers  of  the  true  God," 
than  to  have  the  temporary  enjoyment  of  any  thing 
that  was  not  to  be  had  without  fin  ;  for  fo  the  word 
ought  to  be  render'd,  J  Tgcjcrxaigjp  tym  dpapria: 
m.Trb\av<riv9  <c  than  to  have  the  temporary  enjoy - 
"  ment  of  fin."  So  here  was  Mofes  his  felf-denial, 
that  he  chofe  rather  to  fuffer  affliction  with  the  wor- 
ihippers of  the  true  God,  than  to  gain  a  kingdom, 
by  the  renouncing  of  God  and  religion. 

II.  We  will  confider  thofe  circumftances  of  his 
felf- denial,  which  do  very  much  commend  and  fat 
off  the  virtue  of  it. 

1.  What  it  was  he  refufed  to  be  called  ;  "  the  foa 
"  of  Pharaoh's  daughter  *M  that  is,  to  be  the  heir 
of  one  of  the  greatefl:  and  moft  flourifhing  kingdoms 
in  the  world ;  a  temptation  fo  great,  that  the  devil 

him- 


844  Mofes's  choice  of  afflifted piety \ 

S  E  R  M.  himfelf  could  not  find  out  one  much  greater,  when  he 
fet  upon  the  fon  of  God  to  tempt  him  to  fall  down 
and  worfhip  him. 

And  when  we  confider  for  what  inconfiderable 
things  fome  men  fell  their  religion  and  their  contin- 
ences, we  fhall  think  it  no  fmall  temptation  which 
Moles  here  refilled.  Si  violandum  eft  jus%  regnandi 
caufd  violandum  eft  ;  "  If  a  man  would  do  any  unjuft 
*c  thing,  and  violate  his  religion  and  confeience,  he 
"  would  not  do  it  for  lefs  than  a  kingdom  ;  and  it 

«c  would  be  a  very  hard  bargain,  even  upon  thofe 
"  terms.5* 

2.  Confider  not  only  what  he  refufed,  but  what 
he  chofe  in  the  place  of  it ;  a  ftate  of  great  affliction 
and  fufFering.  Had  he  refufed  a  kingdom,  and  cho- 
fen  the  quiet  condition  of  a  fubject  of  middle  rank 
(beneath  envy  and  above  contempt)  his  felf-denial  had 
not  been  fo  great  •,  nay,  perhaps  he  had  made  a  wife 
choice,  in  the  account  of  the  wifeft  men,  in  prefer- 
ring a  plentiful  and  quiet  retirement,  before  the 
cares  of  a  crown,  and  the  burden  of  publick  govern- 
ment. 

But  it  is  very  rare  to  find  a  Man  that  would  choole 
rather  to  be  oppreft  and  perfecuted,  than  to  be  a 
prince,  and  to  have  the  fweet  power  to  ufe  others  as 
he  pleafed. 

3.  Confider  how  fair  a  profpect  he  had  of  en- 
joying this  kingdom,  if  he  could  but  have  come 
up  to  the  terms  of  it.  He  did  not  reject  it,  bc- 
caufe  he  defpaired  of  attaining  it :  for  he  had  all 
the  right  that  a  good  title  could  give  him,  being 
adopted  heir  to  it  $  and  yet  he  refufed  it* 


I 

rather  than  a  kingdom.  845 

To  which  I  may  add,  that  his  breeding  was  fuch  S  E  R  ML 
as  might  eafily  kindle  ambitious  thoughts  in  him. 
He  was  brought  up  in  Pharaoh's  court,  and  was 
the  darling  and  favourite  of  it ;  exceeding  beautiful 
(as  Jofephus  tells  us)  c<  and  learned  in  all  the  wifdom 
a  of  the  Egyptians  j"  than  which,  no  two  qualities 
are  more  apt  to  puff  up  and  fwell  a  man  with  big 
thoughts  of  himlelf. 

They  that  are  bred  in  a  low  condition,  never 
think  of  a  kingdom ;  men  not  being  apt  to  afpire 
to  things  which  are  remote,  and  at  a  great  diftance 
from  them. 

But  nothing  is  more  rare  in  perfons  of  great 
and  generous  minds,  than  fuch  a  felf-denial  as  this. 

4.  Let  it  be  confidered,  in  the  laft  place,  that  this 
was  a  deliberate  choice,  not  any  rafh  and  Hidden  de- 
termination made  by  him  when  he  was  of  incompetent 
age  to  make  a  true  judgment  of  things.  And  this 
the  apoftle  takes  notice  of  in  the  text,  as  a  very  me- 
morable circumitance,  "  that  when  he  was  come  to 
"  years,  he  refufed  to  be  called  the  fon  of  Pha- 
"  raoh's  daughter/'  And  St.  Stephen  tells  us,  that 
he  was  full  forty  years  old  when  he  made  this 
choice,  Acts  vii.  23.  cC  When  he  was  full  forty  years 
"  old,  it  came  into  his  heart  to  vifit  his  brethren  the 
"  children  of  Ifrael."  When  he  was  of  ripeft 
judgment,  and  in  the  height  of  iiis  prcfperity  and 
reputation,  he  made  this  choice;  for  it  is  faid  in 
the  verfe  before,  "  that  Mofes  was  learned  in  all 
"  the  wifdom  of  the  Egyptians,  and  mighty  in 
"  word  and  deed;"  that  is,  he  was  in  great  repu- 
tation for  his  wifdom  and  valour. 

Vol.  IV.  8  B  This 

8 


S46  Mofes9  s  choice  of  affdtUd piety, 

RM.  This  feems  to  refer  to  other  pafiages  of  his  life, 
which  are  not  recorded  in  the  (cripture  hiftory,  but 
related  at  large  by  Jofephus,  out  of  hiftoriahs  extant 
in  his  time.  For  he  tells,  that  when  xht  Ethiopians 
had  invaded  Egypt,  and  almoft  over-run  it,  Pha- 
raoh was  directed  by  the  oracle  at  Memphis  to 
make  Moles  his  general,  who  by  his  extraordinary 
conduct  and  courage  overthrew  the  Ethiopians,  and 
drave  them  out  of  Egypt. 

This  Mofes  did  not  think  fit  to  relate  of  himfelf ; 
but  St.  Stephen  feems  to  allude  to  it,  when  he  fays, 
cc  that  he  was  mighty  in  word  and  deed:"  And 
then  it  follows ;  "  and  when  he  was  full  forty  years 
"  old,  it  came  in  his  heart  to  vifi:  his  brethren,  the 
"  children  of  Ifrael;"  that  is,  when  he  was  at  full 
maturity  of  judgment,  and  in  the  height  of  his 
profperity  and  reputation,  he  quitted  the  court  of 
Egypt,  and  went  to  vifit  his  affli&ed  brethren,  and 
choie  rather  to  take  part  with  them  in  their  fufTer- 
ings,  than  to  accept  thofe  great  offers  that  were  made 
to  him. 

There  is  likewife  another  pafTage  in  Jofephus  con- 
cerning Mofes,  which  feems  to  be  a  forerunner  of 
the  contempt  which  he  mewed  afterwards  of  the 
crown  of  Egypt  •,  that  when  Mofes  was  about  three 
years  old,  Thermufis,  the  daughter  of  Pharaoh, 
brought  the  child  to  him,  who  took  him  in  his 
arms,  and  put  his  diadem  upon  his  head  ;  but  Mofes 
took  it  off,  and  call  it  to  the  ground,  and  trampled 
it  under  his  tc^t.  This  was  but  a  childifh  acl,  and 
they  who  few  it,  would  eafily  believe,  that,  for  all  his 
.a  contempt:  of  it  then,  if  it  were  put  upon  his 

head 


rather  than  a  kingdom.  847 


'I"/ 


head  in  g-ood  earneft,  when  he  came  to  be  a  man,  SER  \f. 
he  would  hold  it  on  fader,  and  ule  it  with  more  re- ^.^^j 
fpecl. 

And  it  is  not  improbable,  but  that  the  apoftle 
might  have  ibme  regard  to  this,  when  he  fays,  Ct  that 
"  Mofes  when  he  comes  to  years  •, "  intimating 
that  he  did  not  only  trample  upon  the  diadem  of 
Pharaoh,  when  he  was  a  child  ;  but  when  he  was 
come  to  years,  and  was  capable  of  judging  better  of 
thoie  things,  u  he  rcfufed  to  be  called  the  fon  of  Pha- 
"  raoh's  daughter." 

But  before  I  proceed  any  farther,  I  cannot  but 
take  notice  of  an  objection,  which  may  feem  to  re- 
flect greatly  upon  the  integrity  of  Mofes.  Can  we 
think  him  fo  very  confcientious  a  man,  who  per- 
fuaded  the  people  of  Ifrael,  and  pretended  God's 
direction  in  the  caie,  to  cheat  the  Egyptians  of  their 
jewels  under  a  fraudulent  pretence  of  borrowing 
them  ?  There  is  fome  difficulty  in  the  thing,  as  at 
firfr.  fight  it  appears:  and  yet  I  doubt  not,  with 
your  favourable  attention,  and  free  from  prejudice, 
to  vindicate  Mofes  clearly  in  this  matter. 

And  I  fhall  not  infifl  upon  that  which  is  com- 
monly and  truly  faid  in  this  cafe;  that  God,  who 
is  the  fupreme  Lord  of  all  things,  may  transfer  the 
rights  of  men  from  one  to  another :  becaufe  the  ob- 
jection doth  not  lie  againft  God's  right  to  take  away 
from  any  man  what  he  hath  given  him  ;  but 
againfl  the  fraudulent  manner  of  doing  it,  which, 
feems  unworthy    of    God    to    command    or    en- 


courage. 


JB  2  Now 


84S  Mofess  choice  of  affiitted  piety, 

Now  this  matter,  I  think,  is  capable  of  another 
and  much  clearer  anfwer  ;  which  in  fhort  is  this,  and 
grounded  upon  the  hiftory,  as  we  find  it  related, 
Exod.  xii.  The  providence  oi  God  did,  it  feems, 
defign  by  this  way  to  make  fome  reparation  to  the 
Israelites,  for  the  tyrannical  ufage  which  they  had  re- 
ceived from  the  Egyptians  •,  and  that  firft  (as  the 
text  expreQy  tells  us)  "  in  giving  them  favour 
"  with  the  Egyptians,"  who  in  truth,  for  their  own 
ends,  and  to  get  rid  of  fuch  troubiefome  guefts, 
were   difpofed  to  lend   them  any  thing  they  had. 

Thus  far  all  is  right ;  here  is  nothing  but  fair  bor- 
rowing and  lending :  and  if  the  Ifraelites  acquired  a 
right  to  thofe  things  afterwards,  there  was  then  no 
obligation  to  refiitution. 

Let  us  fee  then  how  the  providence  of  God 
brought  this  about :  namely,  by  permitting  the 
Egyptians  afterwards,  without caufe,  and  after  leave 
given  them  to  depart,  to  purfue  them,  with  a  defign 
to  have  deftroyed  them ;  by  which  hoftility  and 
perfldioufnefs  they  plainly  forfeited  their  right  to 
what  they  had  only  lent  before.  For  this  .hoftile 
attempt,  which  would  have  warranted  the  Ifraelites 
to  have  fpoiled  them  of  their  jewels,  if  they  had 
been  in  the  pofTefTion  of  the  Egyptians,  did  certainly 
warrant  them  to  keep  them  when  they  had  them ; 
and  by  this  means  they  became  rightful  pofTeffors  of 
what  they  had  only  by  loan  before,  and  could  not 
have  detained  without  fraud  and  injuftice,  if  this 
hoftility  of  the  Egyptians  had  not  given  them  a  new 


title  and  clear  right  to  them. 


But 


rather  than  a  kingdom.  8  9 

But  I  proceed  to  the  third  thing  I  propofed,  SERM. 
which  was  to  vindicate  the  prudence  and  reafonable- 
nefs  of  this  choice.  And  in  fpeaking  to  this,  I  fnail 
abftract  from  the  particular  cafe  of  Mofes,  and 
fhew  in  general, cc  that  it  is  a  prudent  and  reafonable 
"  thing,  to  prefer  even  an  afflicted  ftate  of  piety 
"  and  virtue,  before  the  greateft  pleafures  and  pro- 
"  fperity  of  a  finful  courfe  :"  and  this  will  appear, 
if  we  confider  thefe  two  things. 

I.  The  fufferings    of  good  men  upon  account  of 
religion,  together  with  the  reward  of  them. 

II.  The    temporary  enjoyment   of  fin,  with  the 
mifchiefs      and     inconveniencies    confequent    upon 

them. 

I.  The  fufferings  of  good  men  upon  the  account 
of  religion,  together  with  the  reward  of  them.  This 
Mofes  had  in  his  eye,  when  he  made  this  choice ; 
for  therefore  "  he  chofe  to  fuffer  affliction  with  the 
"  people  of  God,  rather  than  to  enjoy  the  pleafures 
"  of  fin  which  are  but  for  a  feafon,  becaufe  he 
"  had  refpect  to  the  recompence  of  reward." 
And  tho*  he  had  but  a  very  imperfect  difcovery  in 
comparifon  of  the  future  ftate ;  yet,  it  feems,  he 
had  fo  much  affurance  of  the  goodnefs  of  God, 
as  firmly  to  believe,  that  he  mould  be  no  lofer  at 
the  lad,  by  any  thing  that  he  fuffered  for  God  and 
religion. 

Indeed,  if  there  were  no  life  after  this,  and  we 
had  no  expectation  beyond  this  world,  the  wifefl 
thing  we  could  do,  would  be  to  enjoy  as  much  of 
the  prefent  contentment  of  this  world,  as  we  could 
nuke  ourfelves  mailers  of.     But  if  we  be  defigned 

for 


2  to  Mofcs's  choice  of  affli&ed  piety, 

SERVf .  for  immortality,  and  mall  be  unfpeakably  happy,  or 
intolerably  miferable  in  another  world,  according 
as  we  have  demeaned  ourfelrcs  in  this  life ;  then 
certainly  it  is  reasonable,  that  we  mould  take  the 
greateft  care  of  the  longefl:  duration,  and  be  con- 
tent todifpenfe  with  fome  prefent  inconveniencies  for 
an  eternal  felicity  -vand  be  willing  to  labour  and  take 
pains  for  a  little  while,  that  we  may  be  happy  for 
ever.  And  this  is  accounted  prudence  in  the  account 
of  the  wifefc  men,  to  part  with  a  little  in  prefent,  for 
a  far  greater  future  advantage. 

But  the  difproportion  betwixt  time  and  eternity 
is  fo  vail,  that  did  we  but  firmly  believe,  that  we 
mall  live  for  ever,  nothing  in  this  world  could 
reafonably  be  thought  too  good  to  part  withal,  or 
too  grievous  to  fuffer,  for  the  obtaining  of  a  blefled 
immortality.  And  upon  this  belief  and  perfuafion  of 
a  mighty  reward,  beyond  all  their  prefent  fufferings, 
and  that  they  mould  be  infinite  gainers  at  the  laft, 
the  primitive  christians  were  kept  from  finking  un- 
der their  prefent  fufferings,  and  fortified  againfl  all 
that  the  malice  and  cruelty  of  the  world  could  do 
unto  them.  And  if  we  would  confider  all  things 
together,  and  mind  the  invifible  things  of  another 
world,  as  well  as  the  things  which  are  feen,  we 
fhould  eafily  difcern,  that  he  who  fuffers  for  God 
and  religion  does  not  renounce  his  happinefs,  but  put 
it  out  to  intereft  upon  terms  of  greateft  advantage, 
and  does  wifely  confider  his  own  belt  and  molt  lad- 
ing intereft.     This  is  the  firft. 

II.  This  will  yet   more  evidently  appear,  if  we 
confider  the  temporary  enjoyments  of  fin,  together 

with 


rather  than  a  kingdom.  2c  i 

with  the   mifchiefs  and    inconveniences  attending,  S  E  R  M. 
and  confequent  upon  them  •,  that  as   to  the  nature  ^J^'ii* 
of  them,  they   are  mix'd  and   imperfect;  as  to  the 
duration    of  them,    they  are   fhorr,  and  but  fbr   a 
ieafon  ;    as   to   the   final    iffue   and   confequence  of 
them,  that  they  end  in  mifery  and  ibrrovv. 

i.  As  to  the  nature  of  them,  all  the  pleafures 
and  enjoyments  of  fin  are  mix'd  and  imperfecl.  A 
wicked  man  may  make  a  (hew  of  mirth  and  pleafure, 
"  but  even  in  laughter  his  heart  is  fbrrowful,  and 
"  the  end  of  that  mirth  is  heavinefs."  Tiiere  can 
be  no  true  and  fincere  pleafure  in  any  finful  and 
vicious  courfe,  tho'  it  be  attended  with  all  the  pomp 
and  fplendor  of  outward  happineis  and  profperityj 
for  wherever  fin  and  vice  is,  there  mult  be  guile ; 
and  wherever  guilt  is,  the  mind  will  be  reftleis  and 
unquiet. 

For  there  are  two  very  troubiefome  and  tor- 
menting paflions,  which  are  naturally  confequent  up- 
on guilt  \  fliame  and  fear :  lhame,  arifmg  from  the 
apprehenfion  of  the  danger  of  being  difcovered ; 
and  fear,  from  the  apprehenfion  of  the  danger  of 
being  punimed  :  and  thefe  do  continually  haunt  the 
finner,  and  fill  him  with  inward  horror  and  confu- 
fion  in  his  mod  fecret  retirements.  And  if  fin  were 
attended  with  no  other  trouble  but  the  guilt  of  it, 
a  wife  man  would  not  commit  it,  if  it  were  for 
no  other  reafon,  but  merely  for  the  peace  and  quiet 
of  his  own  mind. 

2.  The  enjoyments  of  fin  as  to  the  duration  of 
them,  are  but  fhort.  Upon  this  confideration, 
JVlofes  fet  no  price  and  value  upon   them,  but  pre- 

.  .  f erred 


gr2  MofesJs  choice  of  ajfli  51  ed  piety, 

SERM.  ferred  affliction   and   fuffering   in   good   company, 
'    and  in  a  good  caufe,  before  "  the  temporary  enjoy- 

"  ments  of  firi." 

If  the  enjoyments  of  this  world  were  perfect  in 
their  nature,  and  had  no  mixture  of  trouble  and 
forrow  in  them  ;  yet  this  would  be  a  great  abate- 
ment of  them,  that  they  are  of  fo  fnort  and  uncer- 
tain a  continuance.  The  pleafure  of  molt  fins  ex- 
pires with  the  act  of  them  •,  and  when  that  is  done, 
the  delight  vaniffieth. 

I  cannot  deny  but  that  there  are  feveral  worldly  ad- 
vantages to  be  purchafed  by  fin,  which  may  perhaps 
be  of  a  longer  continuance  -,  as  riches  and  honours, 
the  common  purchafe  of  covetoufnefs  and  ambition, 
and  of  that  long  train  of  inferior  vices  which   at- 
tend upon  them,  and  minifter  unto  them  :  but  even 
thole  enjoyments  are,  in  their  own  nature,  of  an  un- 
certain continuance,  and  much  more  uncertain   for 
being  purchafed  by  indirect  and  ill  means.      But  if 
the  enjoyment  of  thefe  things  were  lure  to  be  of  the 
fame  date  with  our  lives ;  yet  how  fhort  a  duration  is 
that,  compared  with  eternity  ?  make  the  utmoft  al- 
lowance to  thefe  things,  that  can   be,  yet  we  can 
but  enjoy  them  whilft  we  are  in  this  world.     When 
we  come  into  the  world  of  fpirits,  it  will  fignify  no- 
thing to  us  to  have  been  rich  or  great  in  this  world. 
When  we  fhall  ftand  before    that   higheft  tribunal, 
it   will    not    avail    us    in    the    leaft  to  have    been 
princes,  and  great  men,  and  judges  on  the  earth ; 
the  pooreft  man  that  ever  lived  in  this  world,  will 
then  be  upon  equal  terms  with  the  biggefl  of  us 
all. 

For 


rather  than  a  kingdom.  853 

For  all  mankind  fhall  then   fland  upon   a  level,  SER  M". 
and  thofc  civil  di  functions  of  rich  and  poor,  of  bale 
and   honourable,  which  fecm  now   fo  confiderable, 
and   make  fuch  a  glaring  difference  amongft  men 
in  this  world,  mall  all  then  be  laid  afide,  and  moral 
differences  (hall  only  take  place.     All  the  diitincLions 
which  will  then  be  made,  will  be   betwixt  the  good 
and    the    bad,  the  righteous  and  the  wicked  j  and 
the  difference   betwixt  a   good  and  bad  man,  will 
be   really    much    greater,    than   ever  it   feemed   to 
be  betwixt  the  higheft  and  meaneft  perfons  in  this 
world. 

And  if  this  be  (o^  why  fhould  we  value  the  enjoy- 
ments of  fin  at  fo  high  a  rate,  which,  at  the  beft, 
are  only  eonfidcrable  (and  that  only  in  the  imagi- 
nation of  vain  men)  during  our  abode  in  this 
world  *,  but  bear  no  price  at  all  in  that  country 
where  we  muff,  live  for  ever  :  or  if  they  did,  we 
cannot  carry  them  along  with  us.  The  guilt  of  them, 
indeed,  will  follow  us  with  a  vengeance  j  the  injuftice 
and  ail  the  ill  arts  we  have  ufed  for  the  getting  or 
keeping  of  them,  efpecially,  if  at  once  we  have 
"  made  ffiipwreck  of  faith  and  a  good  conlcience/* 

If  we  have  changed  our  religion,  or,  which  is 
much  worfe,  if  continuing  in  the  profeffion  of  ir, 
we  have  betrayed  it,  and  the  interelt  of  it,  for 
the  gaining  or  fecuring  of  any  of  theie  things ;  we 
fhall  find,  to  our  forrow,  that  tho'  "  thQ  enjoyments 
*c  of  fin  were  but  for  a  feafon,"  the  guilt  of  it  will 
never  leave  us  nor  forfake  us  -,  but  will  fticfc  clofe  to 
us,  and  make  us  miferable  for  ever.  But  this  belongs 
to  the 

Vol.  IV.  SC  Hid  Thing 

t 


854  Mofes  *s  choice  of  affliSIed  piety, 

S  E  R  M.  Hid  Thing  I  propofed  to  fpeak  to,  namely,  the 
final  iflue  and  confequence  of  a  finful  courfe,  which 
is  mifery  and  forrow,  many  times  in  this  world;  but 
molt  certainly  in  the  next. 

1.  In  this  world,  the  very  belt  ifTue  and  confe- 
quence of  a  finful  courfe,  that  we  can  imagine, 
is  repentance:  and  even  this  hath  a  great  deal  of 
fenfible  pain  and  trouble  in  it  •,  for  it  is  many 
times  (efpecially  after  great  fins,  and  a  long  con- 
tinuance in  them,)  accompanied  with  much  re- 
gret and  horror;  with  deep  and  piercing  forrow  ; 
with  difmal  and  defpairing  thoughts  of  God's 
mercy  ;  and  with  fearful  apprhenfions  of  his  wrath 
and  vengeance.  So  that,  if  this  were  the  word 
confequence  of  fin,  (which  indeed  is  the  bed)  no 
man  that  confiders  and  calculates  things  wifely, 
would  purchafe  the  pleafure  of  any  fin,  at  the 
price  of  fo  much  anguifh  and  forrow  as  a  true 
and  deep  repentance  will  coft  him  -,  efpecially, 
fince  a  true  repentance  does,  in  many  cafes,  oblige 
men  to  the  reftitution  of  that  which  hath  been 
gained  by  fin,  if  it  been  hath  got  by  the  injury 
of  another. 

And  this  confideration  quite  takes  away  the  plea- 
fure and  profit  of  an  ill-gotten  eftate.  Better  ne- 
ver to  have  had  it,  than  to  be  obliged  to  refund 
it.  A  wife  man  will  forbear  the  mofl  plealant 
meats,  if  he  know  before-hand  that  they  will  make 
him  deadly  fick,  and  that  he  fhall  never  be  at 
cafe,  till  he  have  brought  them  up  again. 

No  man  that  believes  the  threatnings  of  God, 
and  the  judgments  of  another  world,  would  ever 

fig, 


rather  than  a  kingdom.  855 

fin,  but  that  he  hopes  to  retrieve  all  again  by  re- 
pentance. But  it  is  the  greated  folly  in  the  world 
to  commit  any  fin  upon  this  hope  :  for  that  is  to 
pleafe  ones  felf  for  the  prefent,  in  hopes  to  havs 
more  trouble  afterwards  than  the  pleafure  comes  to. 
But,  efpecially  no  man  would  be  guilty  of  an  act 
of  injudice  and  oppreftion,  in  hopes  to  repent  of 
it  afterv/ards ;  bccaufe  there  can  be  no  repentance 
for  fuch  fins  without  reditu tion  ;  and  'tis  perfect 
madnefs  for  a  man  to  run  the  hazard  of  his  foul, 
to  get  an  edate,  in  hopes  of  redoring  it  again  ; 
for  fo  he  mud  do  that  truly  repents  of  fuch  a  fin. 
But, 

2.  In  the  other  world,  the  final  ifiue  and  confe- 
quence  of  all  the  pleafures  of  fin  unrepented  of, 
will  certainly  be  mifery  and  forrow.  How  quietly 
fbever  a  finner  may  pafs  through  this  world,  or  out 
of  it,  mifery  will  certainly  overtake  him  in  the 
next,  unfpeakable  and  eternal  mifery,  arifing  from 
an  apprehenfion  of  the  greateft  lofs,  and  a  fenfe  of 
the  fharpeft  pain ;  and  thofe  fadly  aggravated  by 
the  remembrance  of  pad  pleafure,  and  the  defpair 
of  future  eafe. 

From  a  fad  apprehenfion  and  melancholy  re- 
flexion upon  his  inedimable  lofs.  In  the  other 
world  the  finner  fhall  be  eternally  feparated  from 
God,  who  is  the  fountain  of  happinefs.  This  is 
the  fird  part  of  that  miferable  fentence  which  fhall 
be  pad  upon  the  wicked  -,  "  depart  from  me." 

Sinners  are  not  now  fenfible  of  the  joys  of  hea- 
ven, and  the  happinefs  of  that  date,  and  therefore 
are  not  capable  of  edimating  the  greatnefs  of  fuch 

8  C  2  a  lois : 


856  Mofes's  choice  of  ajjiitled  piety , 

ERM.  a  lofs :  but  this  ftupidity  and  infenfiblenefs  of  fin* 
ners,  continues  only  during  this  prefcnt  flate,  which 
affords  men  variety  of  objects  and  pleasures  to  divert 
and  entertain  them  :  but  when  they  are  once  en- 
teral upon  the  other  world,  they  will  then  have 
nothing  elfe  to  take  up  their  thoughts,  but  the  fad 
condition,  into  which  by  their  own  wilful  negli- 
gence and  folly  they  have  plunged  themfelves. 
They  fhall  then  lift  up  their  eyes,  and  with  the  rich 
man  in  the  parable,  at  once  fee  the  happinefs  of 
others,  and  rlel  their  own  miiery  and  torment. 

But  this  is  not  all.  Befides  the  apprehenfion  of 
f0  great  a  lofs,  they  fhall  be  fenfible  of  the  foreft 
and  fharpefc  pains  ;  and  how  grievous  thofe  fhall 
be  we  may  conjecture  by  what  the  fcripture  fays  of 
them  in  general ;  that  they  are  tht  effects  of  a 
mighty  difpleafure,  of  anger  and  omnipotence  met 
together,  far  greater  than  can  be  defcribed  by  any 
pains  and  fufferings  which  we  are  acquainted  withal 
in  this  world  :  cc  for  who  knows  the  powrer  of  God's 
"  anger,'*  and  the  utmoft  of  what  omnipotent  jus- 
tice can  do  to  finners?  "  It  is  a  fearful  thins:  to 
"  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living  God  ." 

One  would  think,  this  were  mifery  enough,  and 
needed  no  farther  aggravation  :  but  yet  it  hath  two 
terrible  ones  ;  from  the  remembrance  of  pad  plea- 
sures, and  the  defpair  of  any  future  eafe  and  re- 
medy. 

The  remembrance  of  pad  pleafure  makes  prefent 
fufferings  more  fharp  and  fenfible.  For  as  nothing 
commends  pleafure  more,  and  gives  a  quicker  re- 
]ifh  to  happinefs,    than  precedent  pain   and  fuffer- 


in°" : 


rather  than  a  kingdom.  857 

ing:  (for  perhaps  there  is  not  a  greater  pleafure  inSERM. 
the  world,  than  in  the  fudden  eafe  which  a  man 
finds  after  a  fharp  fit  of  the  (lone)  fo  nothing  en- 
rageth  affliction  more,  and  fets  a  keener  edge  upon 
mifery,  than  to  pafs  into  great  pain  immediately 
out  of  a  date  of  eafe  and  pleafure.  This  was  the 
flinging  aggravation  of  the  rich  man's  torment, 
"  that  in  his  life- time  he  had  received  his  good 
"  things  and  had  fared  fo  delicioufly  every  day." 

But  the  greated  aggravation  of  all  is,  the  defpair 
of  any  future  eafe  and  remedy.     The  duration  of 
this   mifery  is  fct  forth  to  us  in  fcripture,  by  fuch 
expreffions  as  do  fignify   the  longed  and  mod  in- 
terminable duration,  "  depart  ye  curfed  into  ever- 
6C  lading  fire,  Matth.  xxv.  and  Mark  ix.  43.  where 
"  the  worm  dies   not,  and  the  fire  is  not  quench- 
"  ed."     And  in  the  Revelation  it  is  faid,    <c  that 
"  the  wicked   (hall  be   tormented,  day  and  night, 
Ce  for  ever  and   ever  ;"    without  intermiffion,  and 
without  end.     And  this  furely  is  the  perfection  of 
mifery,    for  a  man   to  lie  under   the  greatefl    tor- 
ments,   and  to  be   in  defpair   of  ever  finding  the 
lead  eafe. 

Let  us  now  compare  things  together  ;  on  the  one 
hand,  the  fufferings  of  good  men,  for  a  good  con- 
fcience,  and  the  reward  that  follows  them ;  and  on 
the  other  hand,  the  enjoyments  of  fin,  and  the 
mifchief  and  mifery  that  attend  them,  and  will  cer- 
tainly overtake  them  in  this  world,  or  in  the  next : 
and  then  we  ihall  eafily  difcern  which  of  thefe  is  to 
be  preferred  in  a  wife  man's  choice. 

And 


LVIl. 


858  Mofes*s  choice  of  afflicted  piety, 

SERM.  And  indeed  the  choice  is  fo  very  plain,  that  a 
man  mud  be  very  Orange  ] y  forfaken  of  his  reafon, 
and  blinded  by  fenfe,  who  does  not  prefer  that 
courfe  of  life,  which  will  probably  make  him  hap- 
pier in  this  world,  but  moil  certainly  in  the  next. 

IV.  There  remains  now  only  the  fourth  and  lad 
particular  to  be  fpoken  to  ;  viz.  fuppofing  this  choice 
to  be  reafonable,  to  enquire  whence  it  comes  to 
pafs  that  fo  many  make  a  quite  contrary  choice. 
How  is  it,  that  the  greater!:  part  of  mankind  are  fo 
widely  miilaken,  as  to  prefer  the  temporary  enjoy- 
ments of  fin  before  confeience  and  religion  j  efpe- 
cially,  if  it  be  attended  with  great  afflictions  and 
fufferings  ?  and  of  this,  I  mail  give  you  as  brief  an 
account  as  1  can,  and  fo  conclude  this  difcourfe. 

This  wrong  choice  generally  proceeds  from  one 
or  both  of  thefe  two  caufes ;  from  want  of  faith ,  or 
from  want  of  confederation  ;  or  of  both. 

1.  One  great  reafon  why  men  make  fo  impru- 
dent a  choice,  is  unbelief  ^  either  the  want  of  faith, 
or  the  weaknefs  of  it.  Either  men  do  not  believe 
the  recompences  of  another  life,  or  they  are  not  fo 
firmly  perfuaded  of  the  reality  of  them.  If  men  do 
not  at  all  believe  thefe  things,  there  is  no  founda- 
tion for  religion  \  "  for  he  that  cometh  unto  God 
*<  (that  is,  he  that  thinks  of  being  religious) 
4t  muft  believe  that  God  is,  and  that  he  is  a  re- 
ec  warder  of  them  that  diligently  feek  him,"  as  the 
apoftle  reafons  in  the  beginning  of  this  chapter. 

But  I  hope,  there  are  but  few  that  are,  or  can 
be  infidels,  as  to  thefe  great  and  fundamental  prin- 
ciples of  religion.     But  it  is  to  be  feared,  that  the 

faith 


rather  than  a  kingdom,  8;" 9 

Faith  of  a  great  many  is  but  weak  and  wavering  \  S  F.  R  M 
their  faith  is  rather  negative  j  they  do  not  disbe-  ^ 
lieve  thefe  things,  but  they  are  not  firmly  perfuaded 
of  them ;  their  faith  is  rather  an  opinion,  than  a 
rooted  and  well-grounded  perfuafion  ;  and  therefore 
no  wonder,  if  it  be  not  fo  ftrong  and  vigorous  a 
principle  of  action,  like  the  faith  of  Abraham  and 
Mofes,  and  other  worthies  mentioned  in  this  chap- 
ter. For  where  faith  is  in  its  full  ftrength  and  vi- 
gour, it  will  have  proportionable  effects  upon  the 
refolutions  and  wills  of  men  :  but  where  it  is  but 
Weak,  it  is  of  little  or  no  efficacy.  And  this  is  the 
true  reafon,  why  fo  many  forfake  religion,  and  cleave 
to  this  prefent  world  •,  and  when  it  comes  to  the 
pufb,  choofe  rather  to  fin,  than  ;to  fuffer  ;  and  will 
rather  quit  the  truth,  than  endure  perfecution  for  it. 
Thefe  are  they  whom  our  Saviour  defcribes, 
"  who  receive  the  word  with  joy,  and  endure  for  a 
<c  while  ;  but  when  tribulation  and  perfecution  a- 
"  rifeth  becaufe  of  the  word,  prefently  they  are 
"  offended :  "  not  that  they  did  not  believe  the. 
word;  but  their  faith  had  taken  no  deep  root, 
and  therefore  it  withered.  The  weaknefs  and  wa- 
vering of  mens  faith,  makes  them  unliable  and  in- 
conftant  in  their  courfe  -,  becaufe  they  are  not  of 
one  mind,  but  divided  betwixt  two  interefls,  that 
of  this  world,  and  the  other  ;  "  and  the  double- 
<c  minded  man  (as  St.  James  tells  us)  is  unliable  in 
<c  all  his  ways." 

It  is  generally  a  true  rule ;  fo  much  wavering  as 

we  fee  in  the  actions  and  lives  of  men,    fo  much 

.  weaknefc  there    U    in    their  faith  3-  and   therefore 

.        lis 


8  6  o  Mofess  choice  of  ajfitUd  piety, 

SERM.  he  that  would  know  what  any  man  firmly  believes-, 
let  him  attend  to  his  actions  more  than  to  his  pro- 
feilions. 

If  any  man  live  fo  as  no  man  that  heartily  be- 
lieves the  chriftian  religion  can  live,  it  is  not  credi- 
ble, that  fuch  a  man  doth  firmly  believe  the  chrifti- 
an religion.  He  fays  he  does ;  but  there  is  a  greater 
evidence  in  the  cafe  than  words ;  there  is  tefiimonium 
ret,  the  man's  actions  are  to  the  contrary,  and  they 
do  beft  declare  the  inward  fenfe  of  the  man.  Did 
men  firmly  believe,  that  there  is  a  God  that  go- 
verns the  world,  "  and  that  he  hath  appointed  a 
u  day,  wherein  he  will  judge  it  in  righteoufnefs ;  " 
and  that  all  mankind  fhall  fhortly  appear  before 
him,  and  give  an  account  of  themfelves,  and  all 
their  actions  to  him  ;  and  that  thofe  "  who  have  kept 
"  the  faith  and  a  good  confcience,  and  have  lived 
"  foberly,  and  righteoufly,  and  godly  in  this  prefent 
"  world,"  mall  be  unfpeakably  and  eternally  happy $ 
*'  but  the  fearful  and  unbelieving,"  thofe  who  out 
of  fear  or  intereft,  have  deferted  the  faith,  or  lived 
wicked  lives,  "  fhall  have  their  portion  in  the  lake, 
"  which  burns  with  fire  and  brimftonej"  I  fay, 
were  men  firmly  perfuaded  of  thefe  things,  it  is 
hardly  credible  that  any  man  mould  make  a  wrong 
choice,  and  forfake  the  ways  of  truth  and  righte- 
oufenefs,  upon   any  temptation  whatfoever. 

Faith,  even  in  temporal  matters,  is  a  mighty 
principle  of  action,  and  will  make  men  to  attempt 
and  undergo  ftrange  and  difficult  things.  The  faith 
of  the  gofpel  ought  to  be  much  more  operative  and 
powerful,     becaufq   the  objects  of  hope  and  fear, 

which 


rather  than  a  kingdom.  86  r 

which  it  prefents  to  us,  are  far  greater,  and   moreSERNl. 
confiderable,    than  any  thing  that  this  world  can 
tempt  or  terrify  us  withal. 

Would  we  but  by  faith  make  prefent  to  our 
minds,  the  invifible  things  of  another  world,  the 
happinefs  of  heaven,  and  the  terrors  of  hell ;  and 
were  we  as  verily  pcrfuaded  of  them,  as  if  they 
were  in  our  view  \  how  mould  we  defpife  all  the 
pleafures  and  terrors  of  this  world ;  and  with  what 
eafe  mould  we  refill  and  repel  all  thofe  temptations, 
which  would  feduce  us  from  our  duty,  or  draw  us 
into  fin  ! 

A  firm  and  unfhaken  belief  of  thefe  things 
would  effectually  remove  all  thofe  mountains  of  dif- 
ficulty and  difcouragement,  which  men  fancy  to 
themfelves  in  the  ways  of  religion.  "  To  him  that 
"  believeth,  all  things  are  poffible,"  and  moft  things 
would  be  eafy. 

2.  Another  reafon  of  this  wrong  choice  is  want 
of  confideration ;  for  this  would  flrengthen  our 
faith,  and  make  it  more  vigorous  and  powerful : 
and  indeed  a  faith  which  is  well  rooted  and  efta- 
blifhed  doth  fuppofe  a  wife  and  deep  confideratioa 
of  things ;  and  the  want  of  this  is  a  great  caufe 
of  the  fatal  mifcarriage  of  men ;  that  they  do  not 
fit  down  and  confider  with  themfelves  ferioufly, 
how  much  religion  is  their  intereft,  and  how  much 
it  will  coft  them  to  be  true  to  it,  and  to  perfevere 
in  it  to  the  end. 

We  fuffer  our  felves  to   be  governed  by   fenfe, 

and  to  be  tranfported   with  prefent  things ;  but  do 

not  confider  our  future  and  lafting  interefl:,  and  the 

Vol.  IV.  8  D  whote 

8. 


S  6  2  Mofess  choice  of  affdfted  piety, 

SERM  whole  duration  of  an  immortal  foul.  And  this  is 
the  reafon,  why  fo  man  many  are  hurried  away  by 
the  prefent  and  fenfible  delights  of  this  world,  be- 
caufe  they  will  not  take  time  to  think  of  what  will 

be  hereafter. 

For  it  is  not  to  be  imagined,  but  that  the  man 
who  hath  ferioufly  confidered  what  fin  is,  the 
fhortneis  of  its  pleafure,  and  the  eternity  of  its 
punifhment,  mould  refolve  to  forfake  fin,  and  to  live 
a  holy  and  virtuous  life. 

To  conclude  this  whole  difcourfe.  If  men  did 
but  ferioufly  believe  the  great  principles  of  religion  j 
the  being  and  the  providence  of  God  ;  the  immortality 
of  their  fouls ;  the  glorious  rewards,  and  the  dreadful 
punifhments  of  another  world,  they  could  not  pof- 
fibly  make  fo  imprudent  a  choice,  as  we  fee  a  great 
part  of  mankind  to  do,  they  could  not  be  induced 
to  forfake  Go  d  and  religion  for  any  temporal  intereft 
and  advantage ;  to  renounce  the  favour  of  heaven, 
and  all  their  hopes  of  happinefs  in  another  world, 
for  any  thing  that  this  world  can  afford  ;  nay  not 
for  the  whole  world,  if  it  were  offered  to  them. 
For  as  cur  Saviour  reafons  in  this  very  cafe,  of 
forfaking  our  religion  for  any  temporal  intereft, 
or  conlideration  5  "  what  is  a  man  profited  if  he 
"  gain  the  whole  world,  and  lofe  his  own  foul  ? 
u  or  what  fhalJ  a  man  give  in  exchange  for  his 
«  foul  ? 

Whenever  any  of  us  are  tempted  in  this  kind,; 
let  that  folemn  declaration  of  our  Saviour  and  our 
judge  be  continually  in  our  minds  ;  "  he  that  con- 
*fc  fcfleth  me   before  men,    him  will  I  confeis  alio 

before 


rather  than  a  kingdom.  863 

<c  before  my  father  which  is  in    heaven  :   but  who-  SEJ1^" 

<c  foevcr  (hall  be  afhamed  of  me  and  of  my  words 

u  in  this  adulterous  and  finfiri   generation,  of  him 

"  fhall  the  fon   of  man  be  afhamed,  when  he  (hall 

"  come  in  the  glory  of  his  father,  with  his  holy 

"  angels.*' 

And  we  have  great  caufe  to  thank  God,  to  lee 
fo  many  in  this  day  of  trial,  and  hour  of  temptation, 
to  adhere  with  fo  much  refolution  and  conftancy 
to  their  holy  religion,  and  to  prefer  "  the  keeping 
<c  of  faith,  and  a  good  confcience,"  to  all  earthly 
confiderations  and  advantages. 

And  this  very  thing,  that  fo  many  hold  their 
religion  fo  fafl,  and  are  fo  loth  to  part  with  it,  gives 
great  hopes  that  they  intend  to  make  good  ufe  of 
it,  and  to  frame  their  lives  according  to  the  holy 
rules  and  precepts  of  it ;  which  alone  can  give  us 
peace,  whilif.  we  live,  and  comfort  when  we  come 
to  die  ;  and  after  death  fecure  to  us  the  pofTeffion 
of  a  happinefs  large  as  our  wifhes,  and  lading  as  our 
fouls. 

"  To  which,  God  of  his  infinite  goodnefs  brino- 
"  us  all,  for  his  mercy's  fake,  in  Jesus  Christ: 
"  to  whom,  with  the  Father,  and  the  Holy 
"  Ghost,  be  all  honour  and  glory,  world  without 
"  end.     Amen." 


2  D  2  SERMON 


[864  ] 


SERMON    LVIII. 

Of  conflancy  in  the  profeffion  of  the 
true  religion. 


HEB.  x,  23. 

Lei  us  hold  faft  the  profejjion  of  our  faith  without 
wavering  *,  for  he  is  faithful  that  promifed. 

SERM.rT^HE  main  fcope  and  defign  of  this  epiftle 

LVIII.  t0   t}ie  Hebrews  is  to  perfuade  the  Jews, 

The  firft  wno  wcre  newly  converted  to  chriftianity, 

fermonon  t0  continue  ftedfaft  in  the  profefTion   of  that  holy 
tins  text. 

and  excellent   religion   which   they  had  embraced  ; 

and  not  to  be  removed  from  it,  either  by  the  fub- 
tile  infinuations  of  their  brethren  the  Jews,  who  pre- 
tended that  they  were  in  poffeiiion  of  the  true  an- 
cient religion,  and  the  only  true  church  of  God 
upon  earth  -,  or  by  the  terror  of  the  heathen  perfe- 
lecution,  which  was  fo  hot  againft  them  at  that 
time.  And  to  this  end  tht  author  of  this  epiftle 
doth  by  great  variety  of  arguments  demonftrate  the 
excellency  of  the  chriflian  religion  above  the  jewifh 
dilpenfation  ;  and  fhews  at  large,  that  in  all  thofe 
refpects  upon  which  the  Jews  valued  themfelves  and 
their  religion  (as  namely  upon  the  account  of  their 
lawgiver,  their  high-priefls,  and  their  facriflces)  the 
chriflian  religion  had  every  way  the  advantage  of 
them. 

And 


Of  conjiancy  in  the  profejjion,  &c.  865 

And  having  made  this  clear,  he  concludes  with  an  S  E  R  M. 
earned  exhortation    to   them  to  continue  ttedfad  in 
the  profeflion  of  this  excellent  religion,  which  was 
revealed  to  them  by  the  Son  of  God,  the  true  pro- 
pitiatory facrifice,  and  the  great  high- pried  cf  their 
profeflion,    and   into   which  they  had  folemnly  been 
initiated  and  admitted  by  baptifm  5  ver.  19,  20,  21, 
22.  "  Having  therefore,  brethren,  boldnefs  to  enter 
into  the  holied,  by  the  blood  of  Jesus,  by  a  new 
and  living  way,  which  he  hath  confecrated  for  us 
through  the  vail, that  is  to  lay,  his  flefh  -9  and  hav- 
ing an  high-pried  over  the  houfe  of  God  ;  let  us 
"  draw  near  with  a  true  heart,  in  full  afiurance  of 
"  faith,"  that  is,  let  us  fincerely  ferve  God  with  a 
firm  perfuafion  of  the   truth  and  excellency  of  this 
holy  religion,  into  the  profeflion  whereof  we  were 
folemnly  admitted  by  baptifm  %  for  that  is  undoubt- 
edly the  meaning  of  the  following  words  ;  "  having 
"  our  hearts  fprinkled  from  an  evil  confcience,  and 
tc  our  bodies  warned  with  pure  water  j'5  the  water, 
with  which  our  bodies  are  warned  in  baptifm,  figni- 
fying  our  fpiritual   regeneration,   "  and  the  purging 
"  our  confciences  from  dead  works,  to  ferve  the  liv- 
"  ing  God."     From  all  which  he  concludes,  "  let 
"  us  hold  fad  the  profeflion  of  our  faith  without  wa- 
"  vering  :"  This  refers  to  that  folemn  profeflion  of 
faith,  which  was  made  by  all  chridians  at  their  bap- 
tifm, and  which  is  contained  in  the  ancient  creed  of 
the  chridian  church,  called   by   the  ancient  fathers, 
"  the  rule  of  faith." 

Let  us  hold  fad,   Karl^wjxcv,  let  us  firmly  retain  ; 
the  fame  with  x^Too/asy  tik  6/jioXoy/ar,  chap.  iv.  14. 
Seeing  then  we  have  a  great  high- pried  which  is 

pafled 


wwvju£    u*vn    irnv     HH^V  «l   t>lv**w    »'5"^"vh 


LVilf. 


866  Of  conjfnncy  in  the 

Serm.  "  pafifed  into  the  heavens,  Jesus  the  Son  of  God? 
"  Jet  us  take  fall  hold  of  our  profefTion."  So  here 
in  the  text,  the  apoflle  upon  the  fame  confideration 
exhorts  chriflians  to  retain  or  hold  fad,  ¥  ofioKoylocv 
HP??  iXdrfctor,  the  confefTion,  or  profefTion  of  their 
hope  ;  that  is,  the  hope  of  the  refurrcfrion  of  the 
dead,  and  everlafling  life,  which  was  the  conclufion 
of  that  faith  or  creed,  whereof  in  baptifm  they  made 
a  folemn  profefiion.  "  Let  us  hold  fall  the  profef. 
u  fion  of  our  faith  or  hope,  without  wavering  •,"  the 
word  is  drXin^  inflexible,  unmoveable,  fleady,  and 
not  apt  to  waver  and  be  fhaken  by  every  wind  of  con- 
trary doctrine,  nor  by  the  blafts  and  ftorms  of  perfe- 
cution.  "  For  he  is  faithful  that  hath  promifed."  If 
we  continue  faithful  and  fleady  to  God,  he  will  be 
faithful  to  make  good  all  the  promifes  he  hath  made 
to  us. 

In  the  words  thus  explained,  there  are  two  things 
which  I  fhall  diftinctJy  confider. 

Firfl,  the  exhortation  ;  "  let  us  hold  fail  the  pro- 
"  feflion  of  our  faith,  without  wavering  :"  and, 

Secondly,  the  argument  or  encouragement  ufed 
to  enforce  it;  "  he  is  faithful  that  promifed."  I  be-" 
gin  with  the 

Firfl,  the  exhortation,  to  be  conftant  and  fleady 
in  the  profefiion  of  the  chriflian  religion  ;  "  let  us 
cc  hold  fa  ft  the  profefiion  of  our  faith  without  wa- 
"  vering."  In  the  handling  of  this,  and  that  we 
may  the  better  underfland  the  true  meaning  of  this 
exhortation  here  in  the  text,  I  fhall   do  thefe  two 


tnings. 


I.  I  fhall  fhew  negatively,  wherein  this  conflancy 
and  fleadinefs  in  the  profefiion   of  the  true  religion 

does 


profejjion  of  the  true  religion.  £67 

does  not  confift.     And  here  I  fhall  remove  one  or  S  RRM. 
two  things  which  are  thought  by  fome  to  be  incon- 
fifrenc  with  conftancy  and  fledfaftnefs  in  religion. 

JI.  I  fhall  mew  pofitively,  what  is  implied  in  a 
conftant  and  fteady  profeflion  of  the  true  religion. 

I.  I  fhall  fhew  negatively,  what  conftancy  and 
fteadfaftnefs  in  the  profeflion  of  the  true  religion  does 
not  imply.  And  there  are  two  things  which  are 
thought  by  fome  to  be  implied,  6C  in  holding  faff,  the 
'*  profeflion  of  our  faith  without  wavering." 

Firft,  that  men  fhould  not  take  the  liberty  to  exa- 
mine their  religion,  and  enquire  into  the  grounds  and 
reafons  of  it. 

Secondly,  that  men  fhould  obftinately  refufe  to 
hear  any  reafons  that  can  be  brought  againfl  the  true 
religion,  as  they  think,  which  they  have  once  enter- 
tained. 

Firft,  that  men  fhould  not  take  the  liberty  to  exa- 
mine their  religion,  and  to  enquire  into  the  grounds 
and  reafons  of  it.  This,  I  think,  is  fo  far  from  be- 
ing forbidden  in  this  exhortation  ;  that,  on  the  con- 
trary, I  doubt  not  to  make  it  appear,  that  a  free  and 
impartial  enquiry  into  the  grounds  and  reafons  of  our 
religion,  and  a  thorough  trial  and  examination  of 
them,  is  one  of  the  beft  means  to  confirm  and  efta- 
blifh  us  in  the  profeflion  of  it :  I  mean,  that  all  per- 
fons  that  are  capable  of  it  fhould  do  it,  and  that 
they  will  find  great  benefit  and  advantage  by  it.  For 
I  do  not  think,  that  this  is  a  duty  equally  and  indif- 
ferently incumbent  upon  all ;  nor  indeed  fit  and  pro- 
per for  all  perfons  ♦,  becaufe  all  are  not  equally  capable 
of  doing  it.  There  are  two  forts  of  perfons  that  arc 
in  a  great  meafure  incapable  of  doing  it. 

1.  Children.  2.  Such 


868  Of  ccnfiancy  in  the 

SERM.  2.  Such  grown  peribns  as  are  of  a  very  mean  and 
\s-ktk^  low  capacity,  and  improvement  of  underftanding. 
Children  are  not  fit  to  examine,  but  only  to  learn 
and  believe  what  is  taught  them  by  their  parents 
and  teachers.  They  are  fit  to  have  the  fear  of  God, 
and  the  principles  of  the  true  religion,  inftillcd  into 
them :  but  they  are  by  no  means  fit  to  difcern  be- 
tween a  true  and  falfe  religion,  and  to  choofe  for 
themfelves,  and  to  make  a  change  of  their  religion  ; 
as  hath  of  late  been  allowed  to  them  in  a  nation  not 
far  from  us,  and  by  publick  edict  declared,  that 
children  at  feven  years  old,  are  fit  to  choofe  and  to 
change  their  religion  :  which  is  the  firit  law  I  ever 
heard  of,  that  allows  children  at  that  age  to  do  any 
act  for  themfelves,  that  is  of  confequence  and  impor- 
tance to  them,  for  the  remaining  parts  of  their  lives, 
and  which  they  fhall  ftand  obliged  to  perform  and 
make  good.  They  are  indeed  baptized,  according 
to  the  cuftom  and  ufage  of  the  chriflian  church,  in 
their  infancy  :  but  they  do  not  enter  into  this  obliga- 
tion themfelves  ;  but  their  fureties  undertake  for 
them,  that  when  they  come  to  age,  they  fhall  take 
this  promife  upon  themfelves,  and  confirm  and  make 
it  good.  But  furely,  they  can  do  no  act  for  them- 
felves, and  in  their  own  name,  at  that  age,  which  can 
be  obligatory.  They  can  neither  make  any  contracts 
that  fnall  be  valid,  nor  incur  any  debt,  nor  oblige 
themfelves  by  any  promife,  nor  choofe  themfelves  a 
guardian,  nor  do  any  act  that  may  bring  them  under 
an  inconvenience,  when  they  mall  come  at  age. 
And  can  we  think  them  of  difcretion  fufficient  at 
that  time,  to  do  a  thing  of  the  greateft  moment  and 
confequence  of  all  other}  and  which  will  concern 

them 


profejjion  of  the  true  religion.  869 

them  to  all   eternity;  namely,  to  choofe  their  re-SF.  R  M". 
ligion?   There   is  indeed  one  part  of  one  religion 
(which  we  all  know)  which  children  at  {even  years  of 
age  are  fit  (I  do  not  fay  to  judge  of,  but)  to  be  as 
fond  of,  and  to  pradtife  to  as  good  purpofe  as  thofe 
of  riper  years ;  and  that  is,  to  worfhip  images,   to 
tell  their  beads,  to  fay  their  prayers,  and  to  be  pre* 
fent  at  the  fervice  of  God  in  an  unknown  tongue  5 
and  this  they  are  more  likely  to  choofe  at  that  age, 
than  thofe  who  are  of  riper  and  more  improved  un- 
derstandings ;  and  if  they  do  not  choofe  it  at  that 
time,  it  is  ten  to  one,  they  will  not  choofe  it  after- 
wards.    I  fhall  fay  no  more  of  this,  but  that  it  is  a 
very  extraordinary  law,  and  fuch  as  perhaps  was  ne- 
ver thought  of  before,  from  the  beginning  of  the 
world.     Thus  much  for  children. 
2- As  for  grown   perfonsl,  who   are  of  a  very  low 
and  mean  capacity  of  understanding,  and  either  by 
reafon  of  the  weaknefs  of  their    faculties,  or  other 
difadvantages  which  they  lie  under,  are  in  little  or  no 
probability  of  improving  themfelves  :  thefe  are  al- 
ways to  be  confidered  as  in  the  condition  of  children 
and    learners,    and   therefore   mult  of  necefTity,    in 
things,  which  are  not  plain  and  obvious  to  the  meanert 
capacities,  truft  and  rely  upon  the  judgment  of  others. 
And  it  is  really  much  wifer  and  fafer  for  them  lb  to 
do,  than  to  depend  upon  their  own  judgments,  and 
to  lean  to  their  own  understandings  ;  and  fuch  per- 
fons,  if  they  be  modeft  and  humble,   and  pray  ear- 
nestly to  God  for   his  aSTiftance  and  direction,  and 
are  careful  to  practife  what  they  know,  and  to  live 
up  to  the  beft  light  and  knowledge  which  they  have, 
fhall  not  mifcarry  merely  for  want  of  thofe  farther 

Vol.  IV.  ♦  E  degrees 

8. 


g^o  Of  covftancy  in  the 

SERM.  degrees  of  knowledge  which  they  had  no  capacity  nor 
LV!iL»  opportunity  to  attain  ;  becaufe  their  ignorance  is  un- 
avoidable, and  God  will  require  no  more  of  them 
than  he  hath  given  them,  and  will  not  call  them 
to  account  for  the  improvement  of  thofe  talents, 
which  he  never  committed  to  them.  And  if  they  be 
led  into  any  dangerous  error,  by  the  negligence  or  ill 
conduct  of  thole,  under  whofe  care  and  inftruclion  the 
providence  of  God  permitted  them  to  be  placed,  God 
will  not  impute  it  to  them  as  a  fault ;  becaufe  in  the 
circumflances  in  which  they  were,  they  took  the  bell 
and  wifeft  courfe  that  they  could,  to  come  to  the 
knowledge  of  the  truth,  by  being  willing  to  learn 
what  they  could  of  thole  whom  they  took  to  be  wifer 
than  themfelves. 

But  for  fuch  perfons,  who  by  the  maturity  of 
their  age,  and  by  the  natural  ftrength  and  clearnefs 
of  their  understandings,  or  by  the  due  exercife  and 
improvement  of  them,  are  capable  of  enquiring  in- 
to, and  underftanding  the  grounds  of  their  religion, 
and  difcerning  the  difference  betwixt  truth  and  er- 
ror (I  do  not  mean  in  unnecefTary  points,  and  mat- 
ters of  deepen:  learning  and  fpeculation,  but  in  mat- 
ters necelTary  to  falvation)  it  is  certainly  very  rea- 
fonable,  that  fuch  perfons  mould  examine  their  re- 
ligion, and  underftand  the  reafom  a_nd  grounds 
of  it. 

And  this  mud  either  be  granted  to  be  reafonable, 
or  elfe  every  man  muft  continue  in  that  religion  in 
which  he  happens  to  be  fixed  by  education,  or  for 
any  other  reafon  to  pitch  upon,  when  he  comes 
to  years,  and  makes  his  free  choice.  For  if  this  be 
a  good   principle,  that  no  man   is  to  examine  his 

religion, 


LV- II. 


profejjlon  of  the  true  religion.  871 

religion,  but  take  it  as  it  is,  and  to  believe  it,  S^ERM. 
and  reft  fatis5ed  with  it ;  then  every  man  is  to  remain 
in  the  religion  which  he  firfl  lights  upon,  whether 
by  cnoice  or  the  chance  of  his  education.  For  he 
ought  not  to  change  but  upon  reafon  ;  and  reafon  he 
can  have  none,  unlefs  he  be  allowed  to  examine  his 
religion,  and  to  compare  it  with  others,  that  by  the 
companion  he  may  difcern  which  is  beft,  and  ought 
in  reafon  to  be  preferred  in  his  choice.  For  to  him 
that  will  not,  or  is  not  permitted  to  iearch  into  the 
grounds  of  any  religion,  all  religions  are  alike;  as  all 
things  are  of  the  fame  colour  to  him  that  is  always 
kept  in  the  dark ;  or  if  he  happens  to  ccme  into 
the  light,  dares  not  open  his  eyes,  and  make  ufe  of 
them  to  difcern  the  different  colours  of  things. 

But  this  is  evidently,  and  at  firfl  fight  unreafonable 5 
becaufe  at  this  rate,  every  man  that  hath  once  en- 
tertained an  error,  and  a  falfe  religion,  mud  for 
ever  continue  in  it.  For  if  he  be  not  allowed  to 
examine  it,  he  can  never  have  reafjn  to  change ; 
and  to  make  a  change  without  reafon,  is  certainly 
unreafonable,  and  mere  vanity  and  inconftancy. 

And  yet,  for  ought  I  can  fee,  this  is  the  principle 
which  the  church  of  Rome  doth  with  great  zeal  and 
earneftnefs  inculcate  upon  their  people;  difcouraging 
all  doubts  and  enquiries  about  their  religion,  as  temp- 
tations of  the  devil  •,  and  all  examinations  of  the 
grounds  and  reafons  of  their  religion,  as  an  inclina- 
tion and  dangerous  Hep  towards  herefy.  For  what 
elfe  can  they  mean,  by  taking  the  fcriptures  out  of 
the  hands  of  the  people,  and  locking  them  up  from 
them  in  an  unknown  tongue  •,  by  requiring  them  ab- 

S  E  2  lolutely 


$72  Of  conjlancy  in  the 

S  E  R  M.  folutely  to  fubmit  their  judgments,  and  to  refign 
them  up  to  that  which  they  are  plcafcd  to  call  the 
catholick  church,  and  implicitly  to  believe  as  me 
believes,  tho'  they  know  not  what  that  is?  This  is, 
in  truth,  to  believe  as  their  priefl  tells  them  ->  for  that 
is  all  the  teaching  part  of  the  church,  and  all  the 
rule  of  faith  that  the  common  people  are  acquainted 
with. 

And  it  is  not  fufficient  to  fay  in  this  matter,  that 
when  men  are  in  the  truth,  and  of  the  right  religion, 
and  in  the  bofom  of  the  true  church,  they  ought  to 
red:  fatisfied,  and  to  examine  and  enquire  no  farther. 
For  this  is  manifeftly  unreafonablc,  and  that  upon 
thefe  three  accounts. 

i.  Becaufe  this  is  a  plain  and  fhameful  begging 
of  the  thing  in  queftion;  and  that  which  every 
church,  and  every  religion  doth  almoft  with  equal 
confidence  pretend  to ;  that  theirs  is  the  only  right 
religion,  and  the  only  true  church.  And  thefe 
pretences  are  all  alike  reafonable  to  him  that  never 
examined  the  grounds  of  any  of  them,  nor  hath  com- 
pared them  together.  And  therefore  it  is  the  vain- 
efl  thing  in  the  world  for  the  church  of  Rome  to 
pretend,  that  all  religions  in  the  world  ought  to 
be  examined,  but  theirs  j  becaufe  theirs,  and  none 
elfe,  is  the  true  religion.  For  this  which  they  fay 
ib  confidently  of  it,  that  it  is  the  true  religion,  no  man 
can  know  till  he  hath  examined  it,  and  fearched  in- 
to the  grounds  of  it,  and  hath  confidered  the  objec- 
tions which  are  againil  it.  So  that  it  is  fond  partia- 
lity to  lay,  that  their  religion  is  not  to  be  examined 
by  the  people  that  profefs  it,  but  that  all  other  re- 
ligions 


profejfion  of  the  true  religio?j.  873 

ligions  ought  to  be  examined,  or  rather,  becaufe  they  S  E  R  \\ 
are  different  from  that  which  they  preiume  to  be  the  JiI" 
only  true  religion,  ought  to  be  condemned  at  all  ad- 
ventures, without  any  farther  enquiry  :  this,  I  lay,  is 
fond  partiality  ;  becaufe  every  religion  and  every 
church  may  (for  ought  that  appears  to  any  man  that  is 
not  permitted  to  examine  things  impartially)  fay  the 
fame  for  them felves,  and  with  as  much  Reafon ;  and 
if  fo,  then  either  every  religion  ought  to  permit  it 
felf  to  be  examined  ;  or  elfe  no  man  ought  to  exa- 
mine his  own  religion,  whatever  it  be  ;  and  confe- 
quently  jews,  and  turks,  and  heathens,  and  hereticks, 
ought  all  to  continue  as  they  arc,  and  none  of  them  to 
change ;  becaufe  they  cannot  reafonably  change,  with- 
out examining  both  that  religion  which  they  leave, 
and  that  which   they   embrace  inftead  of  it. 

2.  Admitting  this  pretence  were  true,  that  they 
are  the  true  church,  and  have  the  true  religion  ;  this 
is  fo  far  from  being  a  reafon  why  they  fhould  not  per- 
mit it  to  be  examined,  that,  on  the  contrary,  it  is  one 
of  the  bell  reafons  in  the  world,  why  they  fhould  al- 
low it  to  be  examined,  and  why  they  may  fafcly 
fuffer  it  to  be  fo.  They  fhould  permit  it  to  be  tried, 
that  men  may  upon  good  rqafon  be  fatisfied  that  it 
is  the  true  religion  :  and  they  may  fafely  fuffer  it  to 
be  done  *,  becaufe,  if  they  be  fure  that  the  grounds 
of  their  religion  be  firm  and  good,  I  am  fure  they 
will  be  never  the  worfe  for  being  examined  and  look'd 
into.  But  I  appeal  to  every  man's  reafon,  whether 
it  be  not  an  ill  fign  that  they  are  not  fo  fure  that  the 
grounds  of  their  religion  are  folid  and  firm,  and  fuch 
as  will  abide  the  trial,  that  they  are  fo  very  loth  to 

have 


8  74  Of  conjlancy  in  the 

S  E  R  M.  have  them  fearched  into  and  examined  ?  This  cannot 
but  tempt  a  wife  man  to  fufpect,  that  their  church  is 
not  founded  upon  a  rock  ;  and  that  they  themfelves 
know  fomething  that  is  amifs  in  their  religion,  which 
makes  them  fo  loth  to  have  it  tried,  and  brought  to 

the  touch. 

3.  It  is  certain  among  all  ehriftians,  that  the  doc- 
trine preached  by  the  apofties  was  the  true  faith  of 
Christ;  and  yet  they  never  forbad  the  chriftians 
to  examine  whether  it  was  fo  or  not:  nay,  on 
the  contrary,  they  frequently  exhort  them  to  try 
and  examine  their  religion,  and  whether  that  doctrine 
which  they  had  delivered  to  them  was  the  true  faith 
of  Christ.     So    St.  Paul,  2  Connth.   xiii.  5. 

examine  yourfelves,  whether  ye  be  in  the  faith ; 

prove  your  own  felves."  And  again,  1  Thef.  v.  21. 

prove  ail  things,  hold  fad  that  which  is  good  ;  M 
intimating  to  us,  that  in  order  to  the  holding  faft  the 
profeflion  of  our  faith,  it  is  requifite  to  prove  and 
try  it.  And  fo  likewife  St.  John's  Ep.  1.  iv.  1.  be- 
"  loved,  believe  not  every  fpirit,  but  try  the  fpirits 
<c  whether  they  are  of  God  •,  becaufe  many  falfe 
<c  prophets  are  gone  out  into  the  world."  And 
he  gives  a  very  notable  mark,  whereby  we  may 
know  the  fpirit  of  truth,  and  the  fpirit  of  error. 
The  fpirit  of  error  carries  on  a  worldly  intereft  and 
defign  ;  and  the  doctrines  of  it  tend  to  fecular  power 
and  greatnefs ;  verie  5.  M  they  are  of  the  world  ; 
"  therefore  fpeak  they  of  the  world,  and  the  world 
"  heareth  them."  Act.  xvii.  11.  St.  Luke  commends 
it  as  an  argument  of  a  more  noble  and  generous 
fpirit  in  the  Bereans,  that  they  examined  the  doctrine 

which 


tc 


frofejjion  of  the  true  religion.  8yc 

which  the  apoftles  preachM  u  whether  it  were  agree-  SERM. 
46  able  to  the  fcriptures;"  and  this  without  difpa-  ^^jj 
ragement  to  their  infallibility,  "  thefe,  faith  he,  were 
"  more  noble  than  thofe  of  Theffalonica,  in  that 
"  they  received  the  word  with  all  readinefs  of  mind, 
Ci  and  fearceded  the  fcriptures  daily,  whether  thofe 
"  things  were  fo."  They  were  ready  to  receive  the 
word;  but  not  blindly,  and  with  an  implicit  faith, 
but  ufing  due  care  to  examine  the  doctrines  which 
they  were  taught,  and  to  fee  if  they  were  agreeable 
to  that  divine  revelation  of  the  holy  fcriptures  which 
they  had  before  received.  It  feems  they  were  not 
willing  to  admit  and  iwallow  contradictions  in  their 
faith.  And  we  defire  no  more  of  the  church  of 
Rome,  than  that  they  would  encourage  the  people 
"  to  fearch  the  fcriptures  daily,5'  and  to  examine 
whether  their  doctrines  be  according  to  them.  We 
would  be  glad  to  hear  the  pope  and  a  general  coun- 
cil commend  to  the  people  the  fearching  of  the  fcrip- 
tures ;  and  to  try  their  definitions  of  faith  and  decrees 
of  worfhip  by  that  rule,  to  fee  whether  what  they  have 
defined,  and  decreed  to  be  believed  and  practifed,  be 
agreeable  to  it ;  their  worfhip  of  Images ;  their  folemn 
invocation  of  angels,  and  of  the  blefTed  virgin,  and 
the  faints  departed ;  the  facrament  under  one  kind 
only;  the  publick  prayers  and  fervice  of  God  in  an 
unknown  tongue;  the  frequent  repetition  of  the  pro- 
pitiatory facrifice  of  Christ's  body  and  blood  in 
the  mafs.  Had  the  Bereans  been  at  the  council  of 
Trent,  and  pleaded  their  right  "  to  fearch  the  fcrip- 
"  tures,  whether  thefe  things  were  fo, "  I  doubt, 
they  would  have  been  thought  very  troublefome  and 

imperti- 


p^6  Of  conjiancy  in  the 

SERM.  impertinent,  and  would  not  have  been  praifed    by 

the  pope  and  council  for  their  pains,  as  they  are  by 

St.  Luke. 

You  fee  then,  upon  the  whole  matter,  that  it  is 

a  very  groundlefs  and  fufpicious  pretence  of  the 
church  of  Rome,  that  becaufe  they  are  infallibly  in 
the  right,  and  theirs  is  the  true  religion,  therefore 
their  people  muft  not  be  permitted  to  examine  it. 
The  doctrine  of  the  apoftles  was  undoubtedly  the 
true  faith  of  Christ;  and  yet  they  not  only  per- 
mitted the  people  to  examine  it,  but  exhorted  and 
encouraged  them  fo  to  do,  and  commended  them 
for  it :  and  any  man,  that  hath  the  fpirit  of  a  man, 
muft  abhor  to  fubmit  to  this  flavery,  not  to  be  al- 
lowed to  examine  his  religion,  and  to  enquire  freely 
into  the  grounds  and  reafons  of  it ;  and  would  break 
with  any  church  in  the  world  upon  this  fingle  point ; 
and  would  tell  them  plainly,  if  your  religion  be  too 
good  to  be  examined,  I  doubt  it  is  too  bad  to  be  be- 
lieved. 

If  it  be  faid,  that  the  allowing  of  this  liberty 
is  the  way  to  make  people  perpetually  doubting  and 
unfettled  \  I  do  utterly  deny  this,  and  do  on  the  con- 
trary with  good  reafon  affirm,  that  it  is  apt  to  have 
the  contrary  effect:  \  there  being  in  reafon  no  better 
way  to  eftablifh  any  man  in  the  belief  of  any  thing, 
than  to  kt  him  fee  that  there  are  very  good  grounds 
and  reafons  for  what  he  believes ;  which  no  man  can 
ever  fee,  that  is  not  permitted  to  examine  whether 
there  be  fuch  reafons  or  not.  So  that,  befides  the 
reafonablenefs  of  the  thing,  it  is  of  great  benefit 
and  advantage  to  us  -,  and  that  upon  thele  accounts. 

i.  To 


profeffio?t  of  the  true  religion.  877 

r.  To  arm    us  asrainft   feducers.     Fie  that  hath$ERM- 

examined  his  religion,  and  tried  the  grounds  of  it, , _^ 

is  mod  able  to  maintain  them,  and  make  them  good 
againft  all  afTaults  that  may  be  made  upon  us,  to  move 
us  from  our  ftedfaftnefs :  whereas  he  that  hath  not 
examined,  and  confequently  does  not  underfrand  the 
reafons  of  his  religion,  is  liable  "  to  be  tofTed  to  and 
"  fro,  and  to  be  carried  about  with  every  wind  of 
"  doctrine,  by  the  Height  of  men,  and  the  cunning 
"  craftinefs  of  thofe  that  lie  in  wait  to  deceive."  For 
when  he  is  attempted,  he  will  either  defend  his  reli- 
gion, or  not :  if  he  undertake  the  defence  of  it  be- 
fore he  hath  examined  the  grounds  of  it,  he  makes 
himfelf  an  eafy  prey  to  every  crafty  man  that  will 
fct  upon  him  *,  he  expofeth  at  once  himfelf  to  dan- 
ger, and  his  religion  to  difgrace :  if  he  decline  the 
defence  of  it,  he  muft  be  forced  to  take  fanctuary 
in  that  ignorant  and  obftinate  principle,  that  becaufe 
he  is  of  an  infallible  church,  and  lure  that  he  is, 
in  the  right,  therefore  he  never  did  nor  will  exa- 
mine whether  he  be  fo  or  not.  But  how  is  he, 
or  can  he  be  fure  that  he  is  in  the  right ;  if  he 
have  no  other  reafon  for  it,  but  his  confidence,  and 
his  being  "  wifer  in  his  own  conceit,  than  feven 
"  men  that  can  render  a  reafon  ?  '*  It  is  a  fhameful 
thing  in  a  wife  man,  who  is  able  to  give  a  good 
reafon  of  all  other  actions  and  parts  of  his  life,  to 
be  able  to  fay  nothing  for  his  religion,  which  con- 
cerns him  more  than  all  the  red. 

2.  To  examine  and  underftand  the  grounds  of 
our  religion,  will  be  a  good  means  (by  the  aftif- 
tance  of  God's  grace)  to  keep  us  conftant  to   it, 

Vol.  IV.  %  F  era 

8. 


878  Of  cojifiancy  in  the 

SERM.  even  under  the  fiery  trial.     When  it  comes  to  this, 
Lvin 

that   a    man    muff   furTer  for    his  religion,  he  had 

need  to  be  well  eftablifhed  in  the  belief  of  it  ; 
which  no  man  can  fo  well  be,  as  he  that  in  fome 
meafure  underftands  the  grounds  and  reafons  of 
his  belief.  A  man  would  be  well  allured  of 
the  truth  and  goodnefs  of  that  for  which  he  would 
lay  down  his  life ;  otherwife  he  dies  as  a  fool  dies, 
he  knows  not  for  what.  A  man  would  be  loth  to 
fet  fuch  a  feal  to  a  blank,  I  mean  to  that  which 
he  hath  no  fuflicient  ground  and  reafon  to  believe 
to  be  true  \  which,  whether  he  hath  or  not,  no  man 
that  hath  not  examined  the  grounds  of  his  religion 
can  be  well  afTured  of.  This  St.  Peter  prefcribes, 
as  the  bed  preparative  for  fuifTering  for  righteouf- 
nefs  fake,  the  firft  epiftle  of  Peter,  iii.  14,  15. 
"  but  if  ye  furTer  for  righteoulhefs  fake,  happy  are 
*'  ye ;  and  be  not  afraid  of  their  terror,  neither 
be  troubled  ;  but  fandtify  the  Lord  Gqd  in  your 
hearts ;  (that  is,  make  him  the  great  object  of 
4t  your  dread  and  trull)  and  be  ready  always  to 
**  give  an  anfvver  to  every  man  that  asketh  you  a 
"  reafon  of  the  hope  that  is  in  you.'* 

Secondly,  "  the  holding  fait  the  profefilon  of 
*c  our  faith  without  wavering, "  doth  not  imply, 
that  men  mould  obftinately  refufe  to  hear  any  rea- 
fon againft  that  religion  which  they  have  embraced, 
and  think  to  be  the  true  religion.  As  men  mould 
examine  before  they  choofe ;  fo  after  they  have 
chofen,  they  fliould  be  ready  to  be  better  informed, 
if  better  realon  can  be  offered.  No  man  ought  to 
think  himielf  fo  infallible  as  to  be  privileged  from 

hearing 


profrfjion  of  the  true  religion.  879 

hearing  rcafon,  and  from  having  his   doctrines  and  S  E  R  M. 

I  VIII 
dictates  tried  by  that  teft. 

Oar  bleffed  Saviour  himfclf,  the  mod  infalli- 
ble perfon  that  ever  was  in  the  world,  and  "  who 
"  declared  the  truth  which  he  had  heard  of  God," 
yet  he  offered  himfelf  and  his  doctrine  to  this  trial. 
John  viii.  46.  "  which  of  you  convinceth  me  of 
*«  tin?"  that  is,  offalfhood  and  error  ?  "  and  if  I 
"  fpeak  the  truth,  why  do  ye  not  believe  me  ?"  he 
was  fure  he  fpake  the  truth  ;  and  yet  for  all  that,  if 
they  could  convince  him  of  error  and  miftake,  he 
was  ready  to  hear  any  reafon  they  could  brino-  to 
that  purpofe.  Though  a  man  be  never  fo  fure  than 
he  is  in  the  true  religion,  and  never  fo  rcfblved  to 
continue  ccnftant  and  ftedfafl  in  it  •,  yet  reafon  is  al- 
ways to  be  heard,  when  it  is  fairly  offered.  And  as 
we  ought  always  to  be  "  ready  to  give  an  anRver  to 
"  thole  who  ask  a  reafon  of  the  hope  and  faith  that 
"  is  in  us  •,"  fo  ought  we  Iikewife  to  be  ready  to 
hear  the  reafons  which  others  do  fairly  offer  againft 
our  opinion  and  perfuafion  in  religion,  and  to  de- 
bate the  matter  with  them  -,  that  if  we  be  in  the 
right,  and  they  in  th(d  wrong,  we  may  rectify 
their  mifiake,  "  and  in  (tract  them  in  meeknefs,  if 
"  God  peradventure  may  give  them  repentance  to 
*'  the  acknowledgment  of  the  truth.  " 

We  are  not  only  to  examine  our  religion,  before 
we  peremptorily  fix  upon  it  ;  but  after  we  are,  as 
we  think  upon  the  beft  reafon,  eftablifh'd  and  fet- 
tled in  it.  Tho'  we  ought  not  to  doubt  and  wa- 
ver in  our  religion  upon  every  flight  and  trifling 
objection   that  can  be  brought  againft  it ;    yet  we 

S  F  2  ourshc 


£80  Of  conjlancy  in  the 

SERM.  ought  always  to  have  an  ear  open  to  hear  reafon, 
j  and  confider  any  thing  of  weight  and  moment  that 
can  be  offered  to  us  about  it.  For  it  is  a  great 
difparagement  to  truth,  and  argues  a  diftruft  of  the 
goodnefs  of  our  caufe  and  religion,  to  be  afraid  to 
hear  what  can  be  faid  againft  it ;  as  if  truth  were 
fo  weak,  that  in  every  conflict  it  were  in  danger  to 
be  bafHed  and  run  down,  and  go  by  the  word  ; 
and  as  if  the  reafons  that  could  be  brought  againft 
it,  were  too  hard  for  it,  and  not  to  be  encounter'd 
by  thofe  forces  which  truth  has  on  its  fide. 

We  have  that  honeft  confidence  of  the  goodnefs 
of  our  caufe  and  religion,  that  we  do  not  fear 
what  can  be  faid  againft  it ;  and  therefore  we  do 
not  forbid  our  people  to  examine  the  objections  of 
our  adverfaries,  and  to  read  the  beft  books  they 
can  write  againft  it.  But  the  church  of  Rome  are 
fo  wife  in  their  generation,  that  they  will  not  per- 
mit thofe  of  their  communion  to  hear  cr  read 
what  can  be  faid  againft  them  :  nay,  they  will  not 
permit  the  people  the  ufe  of  the  holy  fcriptures, 
which  they,  with  us,  acknowledge  to  be  at  leaft  an 
efTential  part  of  the  rule  of  faith.  They  tell  their 
people,  that  after  they  are  ence  of  their  church  and 
religion,  they  ought  not  to  hear  any  reafons  againft 
it ;  and  though  they  be  never  fo  ftrong,  they  ought 
not  to  entertain  any  doubt  concerning  it  ;  becaufe 
all  doubting  is  a  temptation  of  the  devil,  and  a  mor- 
tal fin.  But  furely  that  church  is  not  to  be  heard, 
which  will  not  hear  reafon  -,  nor  that  religion  to  be 
much  admired,  which  will  not  allow  thofe  that  have 
onceembrae'd  it,  to  hear  it  ever  after  debated  and  exa- 
mined. 


frofejfion  of  the  true  religion.  88 1 

mined.     This  is  a  very  fufpicious  bufinefs,  and  ar-  S  E  R  M. 
gues,  that  either  they  have  not  truth  on  their  fide ;  J^ZlLi 
or  that  truth  is  a  weak,  and  pitiful,  and  fneaking 
thing,  and  not  able  to  make  its  party  good  againft 
error. 

I  fhould  now  have  proceeded  in  the  fecond  place, 
to  fliew  pofitively  what  is  implied,  "  in  holding  faft 
"  the  profeffion  of  our  faith  without  wavering -,'* 
and  then  to  have  confidered  the  argument  and  en- 
couragement hereto,  "  becaufe  he  is  faithful  that 
"  promifed."  But  I  ihall  proceed  no  farther  at 
this  time. 


A 


A  Table  of  the  Texts  of  each 

Sermon. 

SERMON    LI. 

ROVERBS  xxii.  6.  Train  up  a  child  in  the 
way  he  Jhoidd  go,  and  when  he  is  old  he  will  not 
depart  from  it .  page  447  • 

SERMON    LII. 

PROjV.  xxii.  6.  Train  up  a  child  in  the  way  he 
jhoidd  go,  and  when  he  is  old  he  will  not  depart 
jrom  it.  p.  472 

SERMON    LII. 

PROV.  xxii.  6.  Train  up  a  child  in  the  way  he 
Jhoidd  go,  and  when  he  is  old  he  will  not  depart 
jrom  it.  p.  494 

SERMON    LIV. 

ECCLES.  xii.  1.  Remember  now  thy  creator  in 
the  days  of  thy  youth,  while  the  evil  days  come  not, 
nor  the  years  draw  nigh,  when  thou  jhalt  fay,  I 
have  no  pleafure  in  them.  p.  520 

The  R  U  L  E  of  FAITH :  or  an  anfwer  to  the  trea- 
tife  of  Mr.  Serjeant,  entitled,    Surefooting,    &c. 

P-  547 
SERMON    LV. 

JOHN  i.  47  Jefus  faw  Nathan 'a el  coming  to  himy 
and  faith  of  him,  behold  an  Ifraelite  indeed,  in  whom 
is  no  guile.  p.  7  8  7 

SERMON    LVI. 

HEB.  xi.  17,  18,  19.  By  faith  Abraham,  when  he 
was  tried,  offered  up  Ifaac :  and  he  that  had  received 
the  promifes,  offered  up  his  only  begotten  fon  :   of 

whom 


A  Table  of  the  Texts. 

whom  it  was  /aid,  that  in  Jfaac  Jhall  thy  feed  fa 
called:  accounting  that  God  was  able  to  raife  him 
up,  even  from  the  dead  \  from  whence  alfo  he  re- 
ceived him  in  a  figure,  p.  gjo 

SERMON    LVII. 

HEB.   xi.  24,  25.    By  faith  Mofes,   when  he  was 
come  to  years,  refufed  to  be  called  the  fin  of  Pha- 
raoh's daughter  ;  choofing   rather  to  fuffer  afjUffion 
with  the  people  of  God,  than  to  enjoy  the  pleafures  of 
fin  for  afeafon.  "  4         p.  84q 

SERMON    LVIII. 

HEB.  x.  25.  Let  us  hold  fafi  the  prof effion  of  cur 
faith  without  wavering  \  for  he  is  faithful  that 
prowifed.  p.  ^4. 


The  End  of  the  Fourth  Volume. 


i 


