f,,'  ■ 


^ 


¥■     -^.v^vfe^- 


LIBRARY  OF  THE  THEOLOGICAL  SEMINARY 


PRINCETON,  N.  J. 

Presented  by 


Section y 


Division. 


SERMONS 

ON    SEVERAL 

Subjects  and  Occasions, 

By  the  moft  Reverend 

V 

Dr.  fOHN  TILLOTSOK 

LATE 

Lord  Archbifliop  of  Canterbury. 
VOLUME   the   TENTH. 


-^©3*» 


LONDON: 

Printed  for  K.  Warty  A.  Ward,  J,  and  P.  Knapton,  T.  Longman, 
'    R,  Hett,  C.  Hitch,  J.  Hodges,  S.  Aupn,  J.  and  R.  Tsn/on, 
J.  and  H.  Pemberton,  and  J.  Ri'vington. 

mmu    I  »    ■■    !■■■  11    ■  '■  I  I. 

M  DCC  XLIIL 


[4225   ] 

SERMON   CLXXXIII. 

The  uncertainty  of  the  day  of  judg- 
ment, confider'd  and  improv'd 

MARK    XIII.  32,  33. 

But  of  that  day,  and  that  hour  knowsth  no  man^  no  not 
the  angels  which  are  in  heaven^  neither  the  Son, 
but  /^^  Fat  H  E  R.  Take  ye  heed,  watch  and  pray  j 
for  ye  know  not  when  the  time  is. 


THESE  words  are  fpoken  by  our  Sa-SERM, 
V I  o  u  R  of  the  day  of  judgment ;  for  tho'  ^^J^ 
in  this  chapter,  as  likewife  in  the  xxivth 
of  St.  Matthew,  and  the  xxift  of  St.  Luke,  which 
are  parallel  to  Vi^  our  Saviour  difcourfeth  very 
particularly  and  largely  concerning  the  eminent; 
appearance  of  his  power  and  juflice  in  the  deftruc- 
tion  of  Jerufalem,  which  may  perhaps  fometimes  in 
fcripture  be  called  his  coming ;  yet  it  is  plain  like- 
wife,  that  he  difcourfeth  there  concerning  his  coming 
to  judgment  at  the  end  of  the  world.  For  we  find 
in  the  xxivth  of  St.  Matthew,  that  after  our  S  avi- 
OUR  had  foretold  his  difcipks  of  the  utter  ruin  of 
Jerufalem^  they  came  afterwards  to  him,  to  enquire 
more  particularly  about  it  -,  ver.  5.  "  And  as  he  ^x. 
**  upon  the  mount  of  olives,  the  difciples  came  unto 
*'  him  privately,  faying,  tell  us,  when  fhall  thefe 
"  things  be?  and  what  fhall  be  the  fign  of  thy 
"  coming,  and  of  the  end  of  the  world  ?  "  Where 
there  are  two  feveral  queftions,  to  which  our  S  av  i- 

VOL.    X,  '21    B  OUR 

I, 


4226  Of  the  uncertainty  of 

S  E  R  M.  OUR  returns    a  diftindl  anfwer.     The  firft,    when 

CLXXXIII 

s,^^^/-^  thofe  things  he  had  been  fpeaking  of  before  fhould 
be  ?  that  is,  the  things  which  related  to  the  deftruclion 
of  Jerufalem,  for  of  that  only  he  had  been  fpeaking 
of  before.  The  other  queflion  was  *'  concerning 
•'  the  fign  of  his  coming,  and  of  the  end  of  the 
*'  world." 

The  reafon  of  their  joining  thefe  two  queflions 
together,  feems  to  be  this,  (as  is  very  probable  from 
many  texts  of  the  new  teflament)  viz.  that  the  apo- 
ftles  did  think  (and  our  S  avio  u  r  permitted  them 
for  a  long  time  to  remain  under  this  miftake)  that 
the  end  of  the  world,  and  the  general  judgment, 
would  be  prefently  after  the  deftrudion  of  Jeru- 
falem. 

Now  to  this  fecond  queflion  of  theirs,  concerning 
the  end  of  the  world,  and  our  S  av  i  o  u  r  's  com- 
ing to  judgment,  he  gives  an  anfwer  in  the  latter 
part  of  that  chapter,  ver.   29.  ''  But  immediately 
*'  after  the  tribulation  of  thofe  days,  the  fun  fhall 
♦*  be   darkned,    and   the  moon  fhall   not  give  her 
*'  light;  and  then  fhall  appear  the  fign  of  the  Som 
*'  of  man  in  heaven."    Not   that  the  general  judg- 
ment of  the  world  was  immediately   to  follow  the 
deflru6tion  of  Jerufalem  ;  for  there  were  many  other 
things  to  intervene,  as    is  manifeft  from    St.  Luke^ 
chap.  xxi.   24.  "  That  the  Jews  fliould  be  led  cap- 
''  tivc  into   all    nations,    and  Jerufalem   fhould   be 
«'  troden  down  of  the  gentiles,  until  the  times  of  the 
"  gentiles  were  fulfilled  "     And    tho'  thefe  things 
be    expreft  in    a    few    words,    yet    they    compre- 
hend a  long  tra6l  of    time  ;  for  the  captivity  of  the 
Jews  hath  continued  for  above  1600  years,  and  is 
not  yet  at  an  ^nd.     And  then  after  the  accomplifh- 

ment 


the  day  of  judgment.  422- 

ment  of  thcfe  things,  it  follows,  '^  that  there  fhall  SErm. 

"  be  figns  in   the  fiin  and   the  moon,   and    then  ?^^^'^'"- 

*'  they  fhalJ  fee  the  Son  of  man  coming  in  a  cloud 

««   with  power  and  great  glory.'*     And  then  he  idh 

them  in  conclufion,  "  that  thefe  things  fhould  be- 

*'  gin  to  come  to  pafs,'*  that  is,  fome  of  them  fhould 

happen,  *'  before  the  end  of  that  generation  ;  *'  and 

fo  they  did,  for  the  deftrudlion  of  Jerufalem  was 

about  forty  years  after.     But  when  the  end  of  all 

fhould  be,  that  is,  when  the  day  of  judgment  would 

happen,    he    could  not  tell  them  the  precife  time, 

ver.  36.  "  But  of  that  day  and  hour  knoweth  no 

"  man,  no  not  the  angels  of  heaven,  but  the  Fa- 

•«  T  H  E  R  only  ; "    and  it  is  added  in  St.  Mark, 

*'  neither  the  S  o  n." 

Now  by  '*  that  day  and  hour"  is  meant  that  fa- 
mous and  terrible  time  of  the  general  judgment  of 
the  world,  which  St.  Peter  calls  by  way  of  eminency, 
*'  the  day  of  the  Lord,"  2  Pet.  iii.  10.  "  The  day 
''  of  the  Lord  will  come,  as  a  thief  in  the  night ;'» 
that  is,  it  will  furprize  men  fuddenly  and  unexpec- 
tedly, becaufe  no  man  can  tell  when  it  will  be ;  it 
will  Heal  upon  the  world,  as  a  thief  does  into  a 
houfe  by  night.  "  But  of  that  day  and  hour  know- 
*'  eth  no  man,  no  not  the  angels  which  are  in  hea- 
"  ven,  neither  the  Son,  but  the  Fat  h e  r.  Take 
**  ye  heed,  watch  and  pray  ;  for  ye  know  not  when 
**  the  time  is.'* 

Having  thus  cleared  all  difficulties  concerning  the 
general  meaning  of  the  Text,  that  it  is  to  be  under- 
ftood  of  the  day  of  judgment,  and  not,  as  fome  learned 
men  have  thought,  of  the  deftrudtion  of  Jcrulaiem, 
I  fhall  now  confider  the  words  more  particularly,  and 
ihey  contain  in  them  thefe  two  things. 

Firft, 


Of  the  uncertainty  of 

Firft,  the  uncertainty  of  the  day  of  judgrtient,  ai 
to  us,  and  all  other  creatures.  *'  But  of  that  day 
"  and  hour  knoweth  no  man,  no  not  the  angels  of 
"  heaven,  neither  the  Son,  but  the  Fat  h  e  r." 

Secondly,  that  the  confideration  of  the  uncertainty 
of  the  time,  fHo.uld  make  us  very  careful  to  be  al- 
ways prepared  for  it,  "  Take  ye  heed,  watch  and 
''  pray ;  for  ye  know  not  when  the  time  is.'*  i 
ihall  fpeak  as  briefly  as  I  can  to  both  thefe. 

Firil,  our  Saviour  here  declares  the  uncer- 
tainty of  the  time,  as  to  us,  and  all  creatures,  when 
the  general  judgment  fhall  be.  And  ro  exprefs  this 
the  more  emphatically,  he  tells  us, 

I.  That  God  only  knows  it.  *^  Of  that  day 
«'  and  hour,  yV«^  ofo\v,  et  juyi  o TlaT/Jp,  none  knows,' 
«'  but  the  Fat  H  £  r.'*  For  tho*  we  tranflate  it, 
*^  no  man 3"  yet  in  the  Greek  it  is  more  general, 
t'  none  knows  but  the  Father,  that  is  God 
''  only.'*  For  the  word  Fat  h  e  r  is  feveral  times 
in  the  new  teftament,  not  ufed  perfonally,  in  way  oF 
difcindion  from  "  the  Son,  and  the  Holy 
«'  Ghost-,"  but  fignifies  "  the  deity,"  the  Fa- 
ther being /^;;j  ^  principium  deitatiSy  "  the  foun- 
*'  tain  and  principle  of  the  deity." 

"  Of  that  day  and  hour,'*  the  word  w^  is  not 
here  to  be  taken  ftridlly  for  the  meafure  of  time,  com- 
monly call'd  "  an  hour ; "  this  were  to  make  our 
Saviou  r's  expreflion  very  flat,  after  he  had  de-' 
nied  that  -'  the  day  '*  is  known,  to  deny  that  they 
know  "  the  hour  •,  *'  for  if  they  do  not  know  "  the 
"  day,"  much  lefs  ''  the  hour."  Now  in  thefc 
kind  of  fpeeches,  the  expreflion  ought  to  rife,  and 
that  which  is  mofl:  emphatical  ought  to  be  faid  in 
tlie  laft  place  i  fo  that  it  fhould  rather  have  been, 

"  they 


the  day  ^f  judgment,  4229 

*^  they  know  not  the  hour,  no  nor  the  day :"  but  S  E  R  M. 
^^  here  does  undoubtedly  fignify  the  appointed  ^i^)^* 
fcafon  or  time ;  and  fo  the  four  feafons  of  the  year 
ai'e  by  the  Greeks  called  i'^r  \  and  in  this  fenfe 
the  word  is  mod  certainly  ufed  by  the  evangelifl: 
Sit.  John,  chap.  vii.  30.  ''  But  no  man  laid  hands 
*'  upon  him,"  fpeaking  of  C  h  r  i  s  t,  "  becaufe  his 
^-  hour  was  not  yet  come,"  that  is,  the  time  ap- 
pointed for  his  fuffering  ;  and  that  which  in  the  text 
is  called  "  hour,"  is  in  the  next  verfe  called  y.oc^eor, 
which  figniiies  a  particular  feafon  or  appointed  time. 
*>  Ye  know  not  when  the  time  is,''  that  is,  the 
time  which  God  hath  particularly  defigned  and 
appointed  for  this  great  work  of  judging  the  world. 

2.  He  excludes  from  the  knowledge  of  it,  thofe 
who  were  moll  likejy  to  know  it,  if  God  had  not 
abfolutcly  referved  it  to  himfelf.  "  Of  that  day  and 
*'  hour  knows  none,  no  not  the  angels,  neither  the 
"  Son.'* 

(i.)  "  Not  the  angels,  which  are  in  heaven  ;'*  tho* 
they  be  creatures  of  fo  perfed  a  knowledge,  tho» 
they  be  "  the  miniftersof  God,"  and  do  continual- 
ly attend  upon  him,  and  "  behold  his  face,"  and  un- 
derftand  much  more  of  the  works  of  God,  and 
his  providence  in  regard  to  the  affairs  of  the  world, 
than  we  who  live  here  below  in  fo  much  error  and 
ignorance,  that  «^  dwell  in  houfes  of  clay,  whofe 
"  foundations  are  in  the  dud  : "  yet  the  particular 
time,  when  God  will  judge  the  world,  he  hath  re- 
ferved as  a  fecret  to  himfelf,  and  not  communicated 
it  fo  much  as  to  the  angels,  who  are  defigned  to 
wait  upon  the  great  judge  of  the  world,  and  to  make 
up  his  train  in  that  folemnity.  So  our  Saviour 
tells  us,  Match,  xxv.  31.  that  «  the    Son  of  man 

"  fliall 


4230  Of  the  uncertainty  of 

SERM  «  (hall  come  in  his  glory,  and  all  the  holy  angek 
CLxxxui. ,,  ^.^j^  j^j^  „     ^^^  ^^  hkewife  the  apoftle,  2  ThefT. 

i.  7.  that  "  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  fhall 
^'  be  revealed  from  heaven,  with  his  mighty 
"  angels." 

But  this  is  not  only  hid  from  "  the  angels,"  but, 
which  is  yet  more,  from  "  the  S  o  n  "  himfelf.  "  Of 
"^'  that  day  and  hour  knov/s  none,  no  not  the  angels 
^'  which  are  in  heaven,  neither  the  Son,''  This 
feems  ftrange  indeed,  that  *'  the  Son  of  God," 
who  came  from  "  the  bofom  of  his  Fat  h  e  r," 
and  therefore  is  more  likely  than  any  tu  know  his 
fecrets,  that,  "  he,  whom  God  had  ordained  to  be 
"  the  judge  of  the  world,"  into  whofe  hands  he  had 
committed  that  great  truft  and  authority,  fhould  not 
be  acquainted  with  the  time  of  this  judgment :  nay, 
that  "  he  in  whom  are  all  the  treafures  of  wifdom 
*'  and  knowledge,  and  in  whom  the  divinity  does 
*'  fubftannally  refide,'*  fhould  not  know  this  time, 
this  feems  incredible,  but  that  he  himfelf  hath  told 
us  fo.  It  was  indeed  a  common  faying  among  the 
Jews,  that  the  time  of  the  end  of  the  world  was  re- 
vealed to  none  :  but  yet  one  would  think,  the  Son 
were  always  excepted.  Nay  how  can  it  well  be 
otherwife,  if  we  believe  him  to  be  G  o  d  ?  And  in- 
deed the  fathers,  in  their  difputes  with  the  Arians, 
have  mightily  puzzled  themfelves  '*ibout  this  text. 

Some,  and  thofe  of  no  fmall  account,  have  un- 
dcrflood  thefe  words,  as  if  our  Saviour  only  in- 
tended to  put  off  his  difciples  from  a  more  particu- 
lar enquiry  about  this  matter  ;  not  that  he  was  igno- 
rant of  the  day  of  judgment,  but  that  he  did  not 
know  it,  fo  as  to  reveal  it  to  them ;  which  is  by  no 
means  to  be  admitted,  not  only  becaufe  it  looks  too 

like 


the  day  of  judgment.  423  i 

like  the  equivocation   of  the  jcfuits^    but  likewife  SERM. 

^^T  YYYTIT 

becaufe  the  fame  may  be  faid  of  the  angels ;  fince  it 
is  no  otherwife  denied  of  the  angels^  that  they  know 
this  time,  than  it  is  of  the  Son.  Others  fay,  that 
his  humane  nature  was  not  ignorant  of  the  day  of 
judgment,  but  that  it  did  not  know  this  of  itfelf, 
but  by  virtue  of  its  union  with  the  divine  nature. 
But  our  S  Av  I o  u  R  abfolutely  fays,  that  the  So  n 
did  not  know  it.  And  therefore  others  more  rea- 
fonably  have  diflinguifhed  between  his  humane  na- 
ture and  divine  \  and  though  as  G  o  d  he  could  not 
be  ignorant  of  any  thing,  yet  his  humane  under- 
Handing  did  not  know  it.  And  it  is  not  unrea- 
fonable  to  fuppofe,  that  the  divine  wifdom  which 
dwelt  in  our  S  av  i  ou  r,  did  communicate  itfelf  to 
his  humane  foul  according  to  his  pleafure  \  and  fo 
his  humane  nature  might  at  fome  times  not  know 
fome  things.  And  if  this  be  not  admitted,  how 
can  we  underfiand  that  pafiTagc  concerning  our  S  a- 
viouR,  Luke  ii.  52.  that  "  Jesu  s  grew  in  wif- 
''  dom  and  ilature  •,"  or  as  the  word  yiXr^t/a  may 
more  fitly  be  tranflated  "  in  age,  and  in  favour 
*'  with  God  and  man  .?"  For  if  the  humane  na- 
ture of  C  H  R I  s  T  did  neceifarily  know  all  things 
by  virtue  of  its  union  with  the  divinity,  he  could 
not  then,  as  man,  be  faid  ''  to  grow  in  wifdom." 

And  this  I  think  may  be  iufficient  for  the  clearing 
of  this  difficulty,  concerning  the  Son's  not  know- 
ing the  particular  time- which  God  had  appointed 
for  judging  the  world  :  and  if  he  did  not  know 
it,  it  is  furely  no  reflexion  upon  his  difciples,  if  they 
were  ignorant  of  it,  or  miftaken  about  it.  Their 
infallibility  was  only  in  things  that  were  revealed  to 
them,  but  cannot  be  imagined  to  extend  to  things 

Vo  L.X.  21  C  nod 


-CLXXXUI. 


4232  Of  the  uncertainty  of 

SERM.  not  revealed.  And  thus  I  have  done  with  the  firft 
thing,  namely,  the  uncertainty  of  the  time  of  the 
general  judgment,  as  to  all,  but  God  only.  "  Of 
''  that  day  and  hour  knowcth  none,  no  not  the  an- 
*'  gels  which  are  in  heaven,  neither  the  Son,  but 
"  the  Fat  H  e  r."     I  proceed  now  to  the 

Second  thing,  which  I  mainly  intended,  viz. 
that  the  confideration  of  the  uncertainty  of  the  time 
fliould  make  us  very  careful  to  be  always  prepared 
for  it.  "  Take  ye  heed,  watch  and  pray  •,  for  ye 
"  know  not  when  the  time  is."  In  which  words  we 
have, 

Firfl,  a  general  caution ;  '*  take  ye  heed."  Look 
to  it,  that  ye  be  not  furprized  and  overtaken  by  that 
time.  The  time  being  fo  uncertain,  they  were  al- 
ways in  danger. 

Secondly,  more  particular  direflions  how  they 
fliould  demean  thcmfclves  in  this  cafe.  And  our 
Saviour  diredls  to  two  things,  vigilancy  and 
prayer;  "  watch  and  pray." 

Thirdly,  there  is  a  reafon  added  to  enforce  this 

care  and   diligence,    from   the    uncertainty    of  the 

time  as  to  us  :  "  for  ye  know  not  when  the  time  is." 

From  whence  1  Ihall  obferve  by  the  way,    the 

great  goodnefs  of  God  to  us,  and  his  fingular  care 

of  us.     That  as  he  is  gracious  and   merciful  to  us, 

in  giving  us  the  knowledge  of  thofe   things  which 

arc  neceflary  and  uleful  for  us  to  know  ;  fo  no  lefs 

in  keeping  us  ignorant  of  other  things,  which  are  not 

only  not  necefiliry  for  us  to  know,  but  which  it  would 

be  very  much  to  our  harm  and  prejudice,  to  hvave  the 

knowledge   of  them  communicated    to  us.     God 

hath  acquainted  us  with  whatever  is  necefTary  to  di- 

'  rc6l  and  excite  us  to  our  duty  j  but  he  hath  pur- 

pofeiy 


the  day  ofjudgmmt,  4233 

pofely  concealed  from  us  thoie  things,  which  might  SERM. 
tend  to  make  us  flothful  and  carelefs,  negligent  and  ^^^^^^"• 
remifs  in  it.     He  hath  not  acquainted  us  with  the 
fecrets  of  his  decrees  and  providence  5  but  hath  re- 
ferved  thefe  in  his  own  power ;  becaufe  it  would  be 
really  to  our  difad vantage  to  have  the  knowledge  of 
them.     If  we  knew  all  events  before-hand,  and  how 
and   when   all  things  would  happen,  we  Ihould  be 
too  much  concerned   about  fome   things,    and  too 
little  about  others  ;  and  therefore  God  hath,  in  great 
wifdom  and   goodnefs,  afforded  us  the  knowledge 
of  thofe  things  which  are  mofl  proper  and  ufeful 
for  us,  whereby  we  may  be  inftru6led  in  our  duty, 
and  encouraged  and  ftirred  up  to  it.     Job  xxviii.  28. 
"  Unto  man  he  faith,  the  fear  of  the  Lo  r  d,  that  1/ 
*'  is  wifdom  ;  and  to  depart  from  evil,  is  underftand-  ^ 
«'  ing."     This  is  the  knowledge  which  is  fit  for  us, 
and  which  no  man  is  deftitute  of,  but  by  his  own 
fault,  and  grofs  negled  of  himfelf. 

So  that  God  is  very  good  to  us,  both  in  re- 
vealing fome  things  to  us,  and  in  hiding  other 
things  from  us  ;  particularly  thofe  things  which  we 
are  fpeaking  of,  concerning  the  time  of  the  end  of 
the  world,  and  the  judgment  of  the  great  day. 
Which  did  men  certainly  know  to  be  fo  far  off, 
as  it  really  was  in  our  S  aviou  r's  time,  and  may 
perhaps  now  be,  it  would  very  much  abate  the 
force  and  awe  of  it  upon  the  minds  of  men  ;  for 
then  men  would  think  themfelves  fafe,  till  death 
fliould  remove  them  out  of  the  world.  But  when, 
for  any  thing  we  know,  the  general  judgment  of 
the  world  may  overtake  us  the  next  moment ; .  this 
confideration  gives  a  great  deal  of  weight  to  ali 
the  reft,  and  is  apt  to  ftrike  a  particular  terror  into 
21  C  2  men. 


CLXXXIU. 


4234.  Of  the  uncertainty  of 

SERM.  men.  What  man  would  not  be  afraid  to  offend,  if 
he  did  not  know  but  that  the  next  moment  he  fhould 
be  brought  to  his  trial,  before  a  fevere  and  impar- 
tial judge?  So  that  for  this  reafon,  God  hath  in 
great  kindnefs  to  us  concealed  this  matter  from  us, 
and  like  a  wife  and  good  father,  inftead  of  grati- 
fying our  curiofity,  hath  confulted  our  real  benefit 
and  advantage. 

Befides  this,  that  it  is  always  ufeful  to  the  world 
to  be  kept  in  awe  by  the  continual  danger  and  ter- 
ror of   an  approaching  judgment,    there   feems   to 
have  been  a  more  particular  reafon  why  our  Sa- 
viour would  have  the  difciples  and  firft  chriftians 
ignorant  of  this  thing;    for    which  reafon   he  dif- 
courfed  fo  to  them  concerning  it,  as  that  they  might 
rather  apprehend,  that  the  end  of  all  things  was  at 
hand,  and   might   probably  happen   in  their  time. 
And  thus  it  feems  his  difciples  underftood  his  fpeech 
concerning  St.  John,  as  if  *'  he  Ihould  not  die  till 
*'  our  Lord  came  to  judgment."     And  the  apo- 
flles,    in  feveral  of  their  exhortations,  feem  to  urge 
chriftians  from  this  very  confideration,  of  the  near- 
nefs  of  the  general  judgment.     So  St.  Paul,    Phil, 
iv.  5.  *'  Let  your  moderation  be  known  to  all  men; 
*'  the  Lord   is   at  hand."     And  the  author   to 
the  Hebrews,  chap.  x.  25.  encourageth  chriftians  to 
conftancy  in  their  profeftion  upon  the  fame  account j 
*^  not  forfaking  the  aficmbling  yourfeves  together, 
"  as  the  manner  of  fame  is  •,  but  exhorting  one  ano- 
*'  thcr,  and  fo  much  the  more,  becaufe  the  day  ap- 
*'  proachcth."     So  likewife  Sc.  James,  chap.  v.  9. 
*'  Grudge  not  one  againft  another,  brethren,  left  ye  be 
*'  condemned:  behold,  thejudge  ftandeth  at  the  door. '» 
And  St.  Pettr  tells  us,  that  feveral  impious    men 

fcofFe4 


the  day  of  judgment.  4235 

fcoffed  at  them  upon  this  account,  as  if  the  apoflles  S  E  R  M. 
had  been  deceivers  in  this  matter,  and  therefore  faid,^^"^^^"^" 
**  where  is  the  promife  of  his  coming?"  as  it  were 
upbraiding  them,  for  putting  men  in  a  vain  expedla- 
tion  of  it. 

And  it  was  no  inconvenience  at  all,  that  the  apo- 
ftles  and  firft  chriftians  had  this  apprehenfion  of  the 
nearnefs  of  that  time ;  for  no  confideration  could  be 
more  forcible  to  keep  them  ftedfaft  in  their  profef- 
Hon,  and  to  fortify  them  againft  fufferings,  than  a 
perfuafion  of  the  approach  of  that  day,  wherein 
thofe  who  fuffered  for  Christ  fhould  be  fo  glori- 
oufly  rewarded ;  and  thofe  who  for  fear  of  fuffering 
fell  off  from  him,  Ihould  be  fo  terribly  punifh'd. 
And  nothing  could  be  more  proper  and  powerful,  to 
wean  their  affe&ions  from  the  Jove  of  this  world, 
and  to  make  them  willing  to  part  with  any  thing  in 
it,  than  to  apprehend  that  there  would  fliordy  be  an 
end  of  it,  and  then  all  the  enjoyments  of  it  would 
fignify  nothing.  So  that  their  ignorance  in  this  mat- 
ter was,  by  the  providence  of  God,  admirably  fit- 
ted for  the  animating  and  encouraging  of  chriftians 
to  a  great  zeal  and  conftancy  in  the  profefTion  of 
their  faith,  and  in  the  propagating  of  it,  as  think- 
ing they  had  but  a  httle  while  to  do  this  great 
work  in. 

And  it  will  be  in  all  ages  to  the  end  of  the  world, 
a  good  argument  to  men  to  vigilancy  and  conftant 
preparation  •,  becaufe  if  they  be  reniifs  and  carelcfs, 
the  great  judge  of  the  world  may  ''  come  in  a  day 
**  that  they  think  not  of,  and  at  an  hour  when  they 
"  are  not  aware."  But  to  return  to  the  particulars  I 
propounded  to  fpeak  to  from  the  words. 

Finl:, 


4,236  Of  i^^  uncertainty  of 

SERM.  Firfl,  here  is  a  general  caution,  "  take  ye  heed;'* 
ci-xxxiii.j^j^  heedfully  to  it,  that  ye  be  not  furprized  and 
overtaken  by  that  time :  for  being  uncertain  when  ic 
will  happen,  ye  are  alv/ays  in  danger.  But  becaufe 
this  general  caution  is  only  premifed  by  our  S  a- 
VI OUR,  to  make  way  for  the  more  particular  di- 
redions,  therefore  I  fhall  not  infift  upon  this,  but  in 
the  fecond  place  proceed  to  them.  And  they  are 
thele  two  ;  "  watch  and  pray." 

I.  Vigilancy,  which  is  a  large  duty,  and  com- 
prehends under  it  the  whole  care  of  a  chriftian  life; 
all  that  watchfulnefs  and  preparation  which  we  ought 
to  ufe,  that  we  be  not  furprized  by  that  terrible  day ; 
that  we  be  not  found  in  fuch  a  condition,  as  flothful 
and  negligent  fervants  ufed  to  be  in,  when  their  lord 
comes  fuddenly  upon  them,  and  finds  all  things  in 
confufion  and  diforder.  And  to  this  our  Saviour 
alludes  feveral  times  in  his  exhortations  to  watchful- 
nefs: Luke  xii.  o^c^^  36.  "  Let  your  loins  be  girded 
"  about,  and  your  lamps  burning,  and  ye  yourfelves 
"  like  unto  men  that  wait  for  their  Lord.  Blefled 
*'  are  thofe  fervants,  whom  the  Lord  when  he 
''  comes  fhall  find  watching.'*  And,  ver.  40.  "  Be 
*«  ye  therefore  ready  alfoj  for  the  Son  of  man 
*'  cometh  at  an  hour  when  ye  think  not."  So  that 
this  watchfulnefs  implies  a  continual  care  of  our  lives 
and  anions,  that  we  be  always  in  fuch  a  poflure  as 
we  would  be  willing  the  great  judge  of  the  world 
fhould  take  us  in,  doing  thofe  things  which  we 
fhould  not  be  afhamed  to  own,  if  he  fliould  come 
fuddenly  upon  us,  and  fummon  us  before  his  tribu- 
nal; ^J^^^  avoiding  thofe  things  which  would  be  mat- 
ter of  ihame  and  confufion  to  us  at  his  appearance. 
Luke  xxi.  34,  o^r^^  36.  where  ourSAviouR  giveth 

this 


the  day  of  judgment,  4237 

this  caution,  he  inftanceth  in  fome  particular  fins,  SERM. 

CLXXYIII 

which  are  more  diredlly  contrary  to  this  "  vigilance  j'*  u— v— J 

as  intemperance,  and  an  inordinate  love  and  cafe  about 

earthly  things.   "  Take  heed  to  yourfelvcs,  left  your 

*'  hearts  be  overcharged  with  furfeiting  and  drunken- 

*'  nefs  and  the  cares  of  this  life,  and  fo  that  day  come 

"  upon  you  unawares :  for  as  a  fnare  ihall  it  come 

"  on  all  that  dwell  on  the  face  of  the  whole  earth. 

''  Watch  ye  therefore,  and  pray  always,  that  ye  may 

*'  be  accounted  worthy  to  efcape  all  thofe  things  that 

"  Ihall  come  to  pafs,  and  to  ftand  before  the  Son 

*'  of  man." 

It  would  be  a  large  work  to  defcend  to  all  particu- 
lars, whereby  we  fhould  exprefs  our  care  and  vigi- 
lance. I  ihall  mention  but  a  few ;  but  fuch  as  will 
comprehend  moft  others  under  them. 

I.  We  fhould  rcfolve  without  delay,  to  put  our- 
felves  into  that  ftate  and  condition,  in  which  we  may 
not  be  afraid  judgment  fhould  find  us.  It  is  to  be 
feared,  that  a  great  part  of  mankind  are  in  that  loofe 
and  negligent  pofture,  in  the  time  of  their  health  and 
profperity,  in  which  if  the  great  judge  of  the  world 
fhould  furprize  them,  and  bring  them  to  a  fpcedy 
trial,  it  would  go  ill  with  them;  their  cafe  would  be 
fad  and  deplorable  beyond  all  imagination,  infinite- 
ly fadder  than  of  a  malefa6lor  'ftanding  before  an 
earthly  judge,  guilty  of  great  and  notorious  crimes, 
and  continually  expeding  the  fentence  of  death  to  be 
pafs'd  upon  him.  Such  is  the  condition  of  all  im- 
penitent finners,  who  have  lived  carelcfs  and  dilTolute 
lives,  without  any  ferious  confideration  of  their  fu- 
ture ftate,  or  preparation  for  it;  who  have  in  the 
general  courfe  of  their  lives  negledled  God  and  re- 
ligion, and  a  great  many  neceffary  and  effential  parts 

of 


^238  Q/'  the  uncertainty  of 

SERM.  of  their  duty,  and  have  indulged  themfelvcs,  either 
^^^^a^^'m  a  continual  courfe  of  impiety  and  wickednefs,  or 
of  fenfual  pleafures  and  vanity.  What  fhall  become 
of  thofe  whom  the  judge  of  the  world  fhall  find  in 
this  condition,*  cither  adlually  wicked,  or  wretchedly 
fecure  ? 

Nay,  thofe  who  do  in  fome  meafure  and  degree 
mind  religion,  how  few  of  them  live  under  "  the 
<*  powers  of  the  world  to  come,"  have  "  their  loins 
*'  girded  about,  and  their  lamps  burning,"  and  are 
habitually  fo  prepared,  as  if  they  were  in  a  continual 
expectation  of  the  coming  of  their  Lord?  So  that 
in  the  fecure  and  negligent  pofture  that  mod  men 
live,  even  the  better  fort  of  men,  if  judgment  fhould 
overtake  them,  how  few  could  be  faved  ?  For  this 
caufe  "  God  is  long-fufFering  to  men,  becaufc 
'^  he  is  not  willing  that  any  fhould  perilh,  but  that 
**  all  Ihould  come  to  repentance."  And  if  he  fhould 
not  by  his  merciful  providence  awaken  many  men  to 
confideration  and  care  of  themfelvcs,  and  by  fome 
great  afflidion,  or  long,  ficknefs,  put  men  upon  fe- 
rious  thoughts,  and  give  them  the  fpace  and  op- 
portunity to  recoiled  themfelvcs,  to  make  up  their 
accounts,  and  fo  make  their  peace  with  Go  d,  and 
to  put  themfelvcs  into  a  better  pofture  for  another 
world,than  they  ufually  are  in  the  time  of  their  health 
and  profperity,  it  is  very  much  to  be  feared,  that 
the  grcatefl  part  of  thofe  who  are  tolerably  good, 
would  be  deftroyed  in  their  fecurity. 

But  this  patience  of  God  will  not  always  laft ; 
but  "  the  day  of  the  Lord  will  come  as  a  thief  in 
''  the  night,"  and  will  furprize  the  carelcfs  world  all 
at  once,  and  give  them  no  time  "  to  trim  up  their 
'«  lamps,"  and  *'  to  get  oil,"  if  they  be  not  pro- 
vided 


the  day  of  judgmerit*  4239 

vided  already ;  but  in  an.inflant  the  door  will  be  fhut  S  E  R M. 

CLXXXTTT 

againft  them,  and  they  fhall  never  enter  into  the 
kingdom  of  Go  d.  This  day  hath  not  yet  happen'd ; 
but  it  will  certainly  come,  and,  as  our  Saviour 
fays,  "  will  come  as  a  fnare  upon  all  them  that  dwell 
*^  upon  the  face  of  the  whole  earth.'*  And  "  blef- 
"  fed  is  that  fervant,  whom  his  Lord  when  he 
*'  comes  fiiall  find  ready.'* 

So  that  our  firft  care  mud  be  to  get  out  of  this 
dangerous  (late  of  fin  and  fecurity ;  ''  to  break  off 
'«  our  fins  by  repentance,"  that  we  may  be  capable 
of  the  mercy  of  God,  and  at  peace  with  him,  be- 
fore he  comes  to  execute  judgment  upon  the  world : 
for  *till  this  be  done,  we  are  every  moment  in  dan- 
ger; and  if  death  or  judgment  ihould  overtake  us 
in  this  impenitent  (late,  we  are  lod  beyond  recovery. 

2.  After  this  great  work  of  repentance  is  over, 
we  fhould  be  very  careful  how  we  contrad  any  new 
guilt,  by  returning  to  our  former  fins,  or  by  the 
grofs  negled  of  any  part  of  our  duty.  A  true  and 
fincere  repentance  will  put  us  into  a  fafe  condition  : 
but  then  we  muft  take  heed,  that  we  do  not  repent 
of  our  repentance,  and  bring  ourfelves  into  danger 
again,  by  (larting  afide  from  thofc  good  refolutions, 
which  we  had  fo  folemnly  taken  up.  For  every  de- 
liberate and  prefumptuous  fin  that  we  are  guilty  of 
after  our  repentance,  does  endanger  our  (late,  and 
fiiakc  the  foundations  of  our  peace:  but  if  we 
rehpfe  into  our  former  evil  courie,  or  after  our  re- 
pentance we  allow  ourfelves  in  the  habitual  pradlice 
of  any  known  fin,  either  our  repentance  was  infin- 
cere  betore,  or  if  it  were  true  for  \Xi^  time,  we  are 
fallen  trom  it,  and  all  that  we  have  done  fignifies 
nothing,    and  we  have  the  whole  work  to   begin 

Vol.  X.  21  D  again, 

X. 


4240  Of  the  uncertainty  of 

SERM.  again.  And  if  the  judgment  of  God  lliould  over- 
cLxxxiii-  ^^i^g  yg^  before  we  have  renewed  our  repentance,  and 
reformed  our  lives,  we  ftiould  be  found  in  the  num- 
ber of  "  the  ungodly,  who  cannot  ftand  in  judg- 
"  ment.' '  So  that,  as  it  concerns  us  to  make  hafte 
out  of  an  impenitent  date,  fo  no  lefs  to  order  our 
converfation  afterwards  with  great  vigilancy  and 
care  :  left  by  relapfing  into  our  former  fins,  and  be- 
ing furprifed  in  them  by  the  judgment  of  God,  we 
fall  into  condemnation. 

3.  Let  us  negledt  no  opportunity  of  doing  good, 
but  always  be  employing  ourfelvcs,  either  in  a6ls  of 
religion  and  piety  towards  God,  or  of  righteoufnefs 
and  charity  towards  men,  or  in  fuch  afts  as  are  fub- 
ordinate  to  religion  ;  I  mean  the  works  of  a  lawful 
calling,  in  which,  if  we  demean  ourfclves  with  dili- 
gence and  good  confcience,  we  may  be  faid  to  ferve 
God,  and  to  live  in  his  fear,  becaufe  we  are  go- 
vern'd  by  the  rules  of  religion,  all  the  while  we  arc 
about  our  worldly  bufinefs,  and  providing  for  the  ne- 
cefiities  of  this  life  in  an  honeft  and  induftrious 
way. 

More  particularly,  we  fhoiild  ftriclly  charge  our- 
felves,  according  to  our  eflate  and  opportunities,  to 
be  very  much  in  the  works  of  mercy  and  charity  ; 
remembring  that  our  Saviour  hath  reprefented 
this  as  a  fpecial  matter  of  enquiry  at  the  judgment 
of  the  great  day,  how  we  have  acquitted  and  dif- 
charged  ourfelves  in  duties  of  this  kind,  and  that  no- 
thing does  more  immediately  qualify  us  for  the  mercy 
of  God,  when  we  Ihall  come  to  ftand  before  his 
judgment-feat,  than  to  have  fliewn  mercy  to  our  bre- 
thren :  as  on  the  other  hand,  the  fcripture  hath  terri- 
bly threatned,  that  "  he  ftiall  have  judgment  without 

''  mercy, 


the  day  of  judgment »  4241 

"  mercy,  that  hath  Ihewed  no  mercy."  By  thefe  SERM- 
and  all  other  a6ts  of  a  good  life,  we  fhall  be  in  a 
conftant  readinefs  and  preparation  for  the  coming  of 
our  Lord.  And,  oh,  what  a  happinefs  and  com- 
fort will  it  be  to  us,  to  be  found  by  him  thus  em- 
ployed!  "  BlefTed  is  that  fervant  whom  his  Lord 
*'  when  he  cometh  fhall  find  fo  doing.'*  I  pro- 
ceed, 

4.  We  fhould  often  review  our  lives,  and  call  our 
felves  to  a  flrid  account  of  our  adlions,  that  "  judg- 
^'  ing  our  felves,  we  may  not  be  judged,''  and  con- 
demn it  "  by  the  Lord."  This  frequent  exami- 
nation of  our  felves  will  give  us  to  underftand  our 
errors  and  mifcarriages  ;  which,  if  we  ferioufly  confi- 
der,  mud  needs  prompt  us  to  repentance,  and  en- 
gage us  in  purpofcs  and  refolutions  of  amendment. 
And  the  pradlice  of  this  is  certainly  the  bed  way  to 
keep  our  accounts  clear,  and  to  prevent  that  hor- 
rible confufion  which  we  fhall  be  in,  if  judgment 
fliould  furprife  us  unawares,  when  we  have  the  guilt 
of  great  and  manifold  fins  unrepented  of,  lying  up- 
on our  confciences,  like  a  heavy  weight,  ready  to 
fink  us  into  eternal  perdition.  Befides,  that  this 
ftrid  and  frequent  examination  of  our  adions,  will 
be  an  excellent  means  to  make  us  more  careful  for 
the  future  to  avoid  thofe  faults  and  mifcarriages 
which  we  have  obferved  in  our  felves  before.  We 
fliould  be  afliamed  to  fall  into  thofe  errors  again,  for 
which  we  have  fo  lately  and  feverely  cenfured  and 
condemned  our  felves. 

5.  Another  part  of  our  preparation  for  the  com- 
ing of  our  Lord,  is,  an  humble  truft  and  confi- 
dence in  the  virtue  of  his  death  and  pafllon,  as  the 
only  meritorious  caufe  of  the  remifilon  of  our  fins, 

21   D  2,  and 


4242  Of  the  uncertainty  of 

I  K  s  E  R  M.  and  the  reward  of  eternal  life.     Tho'  we  be  regene- 
cLxxxi  .  j.^^^^  ^^^  renewed  by  the  H  o  l  y  Gh  os  t,  and  by 

the  affiftance  of  G  o  d  's  grace  enabled  to  perform 
works  of  righteoufncfs,  and,  as  is  faid  of  Zachary 
and  Elifabeth,  "  to  live  in  all  the  commandments 
"  and  ordinances  of  the  Lord  blamelefs  ;"  that 
is,  in  the  general  courfe  of  our  lives,  to  yield  a 
fincere  obedience  to  the  laws  of  God  :  yet  becaufe 
*'  in  many  things  we  offend,"  and  our  befl  righte- 
oufnefs  is  very  imperfefi:,  and  falls  extremely  fhort  of 
that  exa6l  and  flri«5l  duty,  which  the  law  of  God  re- 
quires \  and  if  it  were  perfedl,  our  obedience  for  the 
future  could  make  no  reparation  to  the  julfice  of 
God  for  pad  fins  and  tranfgreflions ;  therefore  we 
cannot  hope  for  our  own  righteoufnefs  to  be  juftified 
and  accepted  with  God,  and  upon  the  merit  of  it 
to  have  our  fins  pardon'd,  much  lefs  to  be  rewarded 
with  eternal  life.  God  indeed  of  his  infinite  mer- 
cy is  pleafed,  upon  our  repentance,  to  pardon  our  fins 
pad,  and  upon  our  fincere  obedience  to  give  us 
eternal  life;  and  without  thefe  qualifications  we  fhall 
never  be  made  partakers  of  thefe  blefilngs  \  except 
we  repent^  our  fins  fiiall  not  be  forgiven  us,  and 
''  without  holinefs  no  rnan  fhall  fee  the  Lord." 
But  then  it  is  not  for  the  merit  of  our  repentance 
and  righteoufnefs,  that  thefe  blefilngs  are  conferr'd 
upon  us  5  but  for  the  meritorious  obedience  and  fuf- 
ferings  of  our  blefi^ed  Saviour:  that  mod  ac- 
ceptable facrifice  of  himfelf,  which  he  ofier'd  to 
God  in  our  dead,  and  in  our  behalf,  hath  purcha- 
fed  and  procur'd  thefe  benefits  for  us,  and  "  we  are 
"  accepted  in  his  beloved  Son,"  and  "  judified  free- 
"  ly  by  his  grace  through  the  redemption  that  is  in 
*'  J5SUS  Christj"  and  therefore  ''  not  for 

*'  any 


the  day  of  judgment ,  4243 

"  any  works  of  righteoufnefs  which  we  have  done,  S  E  R  M, 
"  but  of  his  mercy  he  favcs  us."  And  here  we  ^^^^[^ 
are  to  fix  our  hopes  of  juftification  and  falvation,  viz. 
upon  that  perfe6l  propitiation  and  fatisfadlion,  which 
Christ  by  the  facrifice  of  himfelf  once  ofFer'd 
hath  made  for  the  fins  of  the  whole  world.  For  the 
alone  merit  of  this  facrifice,  God  is  gracioufly  plea- 
fed  to  forgive  us  all  our  fins,  upon  our  true  repen- 
tance, and  to  reward  our  fincere,  tho'  very  imper- 
fedl  obedience,  with  eternal  life.  So  that  "  through  \ 
"  faith  in  the  blood  of  Ch  r  i  s  t,"  not  by  con- 
fidence in  our  felves  and  our  own  righteoufnefs, 
"  we  obtain  remifTion  of  fins,  and  eternal  life." 
And  it  is  not  only  in  it  felf  great  arrogance,  but 
great  ingratitude  to  our  bleffed  redeemer,  *'  who 
"  gave  himfelf  for  us,"  to  afcribe  that  to  the  merit 
of  our  own  righteoufnefs,  or  the  merits  of  the  faints, 
which  nothing  in  heaven  or  earth,  but  '^  the  pre- 
*'  cious  blood  of  C  H  R  I  s  t,  who  was  a  lamb  with- 
*'  out  fpot  or  blemifh,"  could  have  purchafed  for 
us.  And  it  is  argument  and  encouragement  enoucrh 
to  holinefs  and  obedience  of  life,  that  without  it 
we  cannot  fee  God  ;  and  by  it  we  are  qualified  for  that 
happinefs  which  Christ  hath  purchafed  for  us,  and, 
as  the  apoftle  exprefTeth  it,  are  made  meet  ''to  made 
"  partakers  of  the  inheritance  of  the  faints  in  light."  "^ 

6.  And  laflly,  to  awaken  and  maintain  this  vi- 
gilancy  and  care,  we  fliould  often  reprefent  to  our 
minds  the  judgment  of  the  great  day,  which  will 
certainly  come,  tho'  we  know  not  the  time  of  it. 
And  if  any  confideration  in  the  world  will  make 
men  watchful  and  diligent,  certainly  this  will,  that 
the  judgment  of  God  continually  hangs  over  them, 
5ind  may  feize  upon    them   at  any  time  3  nay,  for 

ought 


244-4  Of  the  uncertainty  of 

SERM.  ought  we  know,  the  judgment  of  God  may  now 
be  '*  (landing  at  the  door,"  and  be  ready  to  rufh 
in  upon  us,  whilft  we  are  fo  negligent  and  fecurc. 
For  this  day,  whenever  it  fhall  be,  will  come  fud- 
denly,  and  furprife  the  carelefs  world,  when  they 
lead  think  of  it,  and  look  for  it.  So  our  Lord 
himfelf  hath  foretold,  that  "  as  a  fnare  it  fhall  come 
"  upon  all  them  that  dwell  on  the  face  of  the  whole 
"  earth  :  "  that  is,  the  greateft  part  of  mankind 
fhall  be  taken  unprepared,  when  they  are  unprovided 
for  it;  nay, when  they  are  generally  lull'd  alleep  in 
a  ftupid  fecurity  and  infidelity  ;  when  the  world  is 
grown  athciftical,  and  do  hardly  believe  any  fuch 
thing  as  a  future  judgment.  So  our  S  av  i  o  u  r 
feems  to  intimate,  Luke  xviii.  8.  "  When  the  Son 
*'  of  man  cometh,  fhall  he  find  faith  upon  earth  ?  " 
And  if  this  be  a  mark  and  token  of  the  general 
judgment,  we  have  too  much  caufe  to  apprehend 
that  it  is  drawing  on  apace  ;  for  never  was  there 
any  age,  fince  the  general  flood,  that  we  knew  of, 
when  "  iniquity  did  fo  abound,'*  and  the  infidelity 
of  mankind  was  fo  full,  fo  great,  and  fo  general ; 
when  profanenefs  and  atheifm,  the  open  contempt 
of  God  and  religion,  was  fo  raging  and  violent  ; 
and  when,  as  our  Lord  fays,  there  was  fo  little 
*'  faith  to  be  found  on  the  earth,'*  whether  by 
fciith  we  underfland  the  belief  of  the  principles  of 
religion,  or  the  fidelity  of  men  one  towards  another. 
For  was  there  ever  any  age,  wherein  falfe  accufation, 
perjury  and  fubornation  were  more  rife  and  impu- 
dent ?  wherein  the  reverence  of  an  oath  was  fo  loft, 
and  the  facred  obligation  of  it  in  fo  little  regard 
among  men.  So  that  if  the  great  judge  of  the  world 
fhould  delay  his  coming,  hugiane  fociety  feems  ready 

to 


the  day  of  judgment.  4245 

to  disband  and  difTolve  of  it  felf,  for  want  of  mu-  S  e  R  m , 
tual  truft  and  confidence  among  men  to  hold  it  to-  ^^^"^' 
gether.  ^-^^v^^^ 

And  this  want  of  faith,  in  both  fenfes,  we  owe  ' 
in  a  great  meafure  to  popery  5  which  by  its  artificial 
ways  of  falfhood  and  perjury  (which  when  they  have 
to  deal  with  hereticks,  they  have  upon  folcmn  oc- 
cafions  declared  lawful)  harh  not  only  weakned, 
but  even  deftroyed  the  credit  of  mankind  with  one 
another,  as  we  find  of  late  by  fad  experience.  And  ; 
as  for  infidelity  in  religion,  they  have  not  only  given 
great  occafion  to  it,  by  the  monftrous  abfurdities 
they  have  brought  into  religion ;  and  by  over- 
draining  the  faith  of  men  in  fome  parts  of  it,  have 
brought  them  to  a  disbelief  of  the  whole ;  as  is  at 
this  day  too  vifible  in  many  of  the  mod  knowing 
perfons  of  their  communion,  both  in  France  and 
Italy :  but  befides  this,  they  have  in  their  writings, 
to  gain  men  to  a  dependence  upon,  and  fubmifTion 
to  the  infallibility  of  their  church,  undermined  the 
foundation  of  religion,  and  induftrioufly  endeavoured 
to  bring  men  to  fcepticifm  and  infidelity  ;  hoping 
that  when  they  have  made  men  of  no  religion,  they 
will  be  fit  for  theirs,  which  in  too  many  refpeds  is 
next  to  none  \  and  in  fome,  worfe. 

But  whether  the  judgment  of  the  great  day  be 
near  at  hand,  or  farther  off,  God  alone  knows  \ 
this  is  certain,  that  God  hath  in  great  mercy  de- 
layed it  for  a  long  time,  becaufe  '^  he  is  not  will- 
"  ing  that  any  fhould  perifh,  but  that  all  fhould 
"  come  to  repentance."  And  it  is  no  lefs  certain 
that  it  may  come  at  any  time,  and  will  come  when 
men  leaft  expedt  it,  when  the  world  is  in  great 
fecurity,    and  very  little  apprehenfive  of  the  near- 


4246  Of  the  uncertainty  of 

SERM.  nefs  and  danger  of  it;  which  is  reafon  and  argu- 
CLxxxiii.  ^^^^  enough  to  continual  care  and  vigilancy  :  for 
it  may  come  the  next  hour,  the  next  moment,  for 
any  thing  we  know  to  the  contrary  :  and  whenever 
it  comes,  if  we  be  not  prepared,  it  will  be  too  late 
to  begin  that  work  -,  if  "  our  lamps  be  gone  out," 
and  "  we  want  oil,"  we  cannot  provide  ourfelves  in 
fuch  a  hurry  ;  we  fhall  be  full  of  fear  and  amazement, 
but  we  fhall  "  find  no  place  for  repentance,"  and  a 
deliberate  preparation  for  our  great  trial.  As  the 
great  judge  of  the  world  then  finds  us,  fo  will  he 
deal  with  us  ;  fuch  as  our  ftate  and  condition  then  is, 
fuch  will  be  our  fentence  and  doom  to  all  eternity. 
And  is  not  this  argument  enough  to  us  to  be  always 
upon  our  guard,  always  watchful  and  always  ready  ? 
becaufe  "  the  Son  of  man  may  come  at  an  hour 
*'  when  we  think  not ;"  and  if  we  be  not  then  pre- 
pared, it  will  be  too  late  to  fet  about  it ;  the  oppor- 
tunity of  doing  it^  and  we  ourfelves  are  lofl  for 
ever. 

This  is  the  firfl  direflion  our  Saviour  o-jves 
us,  continual  vigilancy  and  watchfulnefs  over  ourfelves 
in  general. 

The  lid  direction  is  more  particular,  and  that  is 
prayer;  "  take  ye  heed,  watch  and  pray.'*  And 
the  pradice  of  this  duty  of  prayer  will  be  of  great 
advantage  to  us  upon  thefe  two  accounts. 

1.  As  it  tends  to  awaken  and  excite  our  care  and 
diligence  in  the  bufinefs  of  religion. 

2.  As  it  is,  if  fincerely  performed,  efFc6lual  to  en- 
gage the  divine  blefTing  and  aiTiftance  to  fecond  our 
care   and   endeavours,    and   to   fccure    them    from 


mifcarriage. 


I.  It 


the  day  of  judgment.  4247 

1.  It  is  very  apt  to  awaken  and  excite  our  care  S  E  R  M. 
and  diligence  in  the  bufinefs  of  religion.  For  when- 
ever we  heartily  beg  of  God  to  alTiil  us  by  his 
grace,  to  any  thing  that  is  good,  we  mind  ourielves 
of  our  own  duty ;  and  both  reafon  and  fcripture  will 
tell  us,  that  we  pray  to  G  o  d  in  vain  for  his  help, 
if  we  will  do  nothing  ourielves  \  that  it  is  grofs  hy- 
pocrify,  and  an  impudent  mocking  of  God,  to 
implore  his  grace  and  affiilance,  if  we  be  not  re- 
folved  to  put  forth  our  own  endeavours.  Prayer  in- 
deed fuppofeth  that  we  (land  in  need  of  the  divine 
help  •,  but  it  implies  likewife  a  refolution  on  our 
part,  to  do  what  we  can  ourfelves ;  otherwifc  "  we 
"  ask  in  vain,"  and  have  no  reafpn  to  hope  that 
God  will  hear  our  prayers,  and  grant  our  requells, 
though  never  fo  earneftly  and  importunately  put  up 
to  him. 

2.  If  we  ufeour  fmcere  endeavours  for  the  eife6l- 
ing  of  what  we  pray  for,  prayer  is  x!^t  moil  effedual 
means  to  engage  the  divine  blelTing  and  affidance  to 
fecond  our  endeavours,  and  to  fecure  them  from 
mifcarriage.  And  v/ithout  the  aid  of  God's  grace, 
and  his  blefiing  upon  our  endeavours,  they  will  all  be 
ineffe6tual,  and  fignify  nothing  -,  we  fhall  not  be  able 
fo  much  as  "  to  watch  one  hour."  If  God  be 
not  with  us,  "  the  watchman  waketh  but  in  vain:" 
for  "  the  way  of  a  man  is  not  in  himfelf,  it  is  not 
"  in  man  that  walketh  to  dired  his  fteps."  It  is  ne- 
ceflary  therefore,  that  we  continually  implore  the 
divine  grace,  and  that  we  do  not  rely  upon  our  own 
ftrength,  and  the  ficklenefs  and  uncertainty  of  our 
own  refolutions,  according  to  the  wife  advice  of  So- 
lomon, Prov.  iii.  5,  6.  "  Truft  in  the  Lor  D  with 
*'  all  thine  heart,  and  lean   not;  to  thine  own  under- 

VoL.  X.  21 E  ''  ftanding, 

I, 


424B  Of  the  uncertainty  of 

S  E  R  M.  u  Handing.  In  all  thy  ways  acknowledge  him,  and 
^,^^..^1^^  he  fhall  diredl  thy  paths."  Therefore  as  ever  we 
hope  to  perfeverc  and  continue  in  a  good  courfe, 
and  to  order  our  lives  fo,  as  to  be  in  preparation 
for  judgment,  let  us  every  day,  by  continual  and  fer- 
vent prayer,  apply  ourfelves  to  the  fountain  of 
griice  and  mercy,  for  his  aid  and  help,  to  make  us 
vigilant  over  ourfelves,  and  all  the  adlions  of  our 
lives;  to  enable  us  to  ''  a  patient  continuance  in 
''  well-doing,  to  keep  us  from  every  evil  work, 
*'  and  to  preferve  us  to  his  heavenly  kingdom." 

And  to  this  purpofe,we  have  all  the  encouragement 
v.'hich  the  afTurance  of  the  divine  goodnefs,  and  the 
fecurity  of  his  never- failing  promife  can  give  us. 
It  is  but  asking  and  receiving.  So  St.  James 
tells  us,  fpeaking  of  this  heavenly  wilciom  to  direct 
us  in  our  chriftian  courfe,  fo  as  we  may  "  be  perfe6t 
**  and  entire  wanting  nothing."  James  i.  5.  ''  If 
''  any  of  you  lack  wifdom,  let  him  ask  of  God, 
*'  who  giveth  to  all  men  liberally,  and  upbraideth 
"  not,  and  it  fliall  be  given  him."  I  proceed  to 
the 

Third  and  lad  part  of  the  text,  which  is  the 
reafon  which  our  Saviour  here  adds  to  enforce 
our  care  and  diligence  in  a  matter  of  fo  great  con- 
cernment, viz.  the  uncertainty,  as  to  us,  of  the 
particular  time,  when  this  day  of  judgment  will  be. 
'•  Ye  know  not  when  the  time  is."  Therefore  we 
jhould  always  be  in  expectation  of  it,  always  in  a  rea- 
dinefs  and  preparation  for  it.  The  certainty  of  the 
thing,  and  that  "God  hath  appointed  "  and  de- 
termined "  a  time,  in  which  he  will  judge  the  world 
"  in  righteoufnefs,"  though  we  were  fure  this  day 
were  hx  off,  ought  in  all  reafon  to  make  us  very 

watch  ful 


the  day  of  judgment,  4  2  ^'  9 

watchful  over  ourfeJves,  and  very  careful  of  all  our  S  E  R  M. 
a6lions,  very  ftridt  and  confcientious  in  the  difcharge* 
and  performance  of  every  part  of  our  duty.  If 
there  were  no  more  but  this,  that  we  muft  one  day 
be  caird  to  a  ftrid  account  for  all  the  adlions  of 
our  lives,  and  receive  thejuil:  recompencc  of  them, 
and  according  to  the  nature  and  quality  of  them  be 
fentenc'd  to  eternal  happinefs,  or  everlafting  mifery  -, 
this  alone  were  a  mighty  argument.  So  Sc.  Peter 
reafons,  2  Pet.  iii.  10,  11,  12.  "  But  the  day  of  the 
"  Lord  will  come,  in  the  which  the  heavens  fliall 
"  pafs  away  with  a  great  noife,  and  the  elements 
"  fhall  melt  with  fervent  heat;  the  earth  alfo,  and 
"  the  works  that  are  therein,  fhall  be  burnt  up. 
"  Seeing  then  all  thcfe  things  ihall  be  diflblved, 
"  what  manner  of  perfons  ought  ye  to  be  in  all  holy 
"  converfation  and  godlinefs ;  looking  for ,  and 
"  halting  unto  the  coming  of  the  day  of  God?'* 
that  is,  making  fpeedy  preparation  for  it.  The  very 
expectation  of  this  ''  terrible  day  of  the  Lord," 
at  how  great  a  diftance  foever,  fhould  make  us 
diligent,  that  whenever  it  fhall  be,  *'  we  may  be 
"  found  of  him  in  peace,  without  Ipot  and  blame- 
*'  lefs." 

But  it  adds  a  great  deal  of  awe  and  force  to  this 
argument,  to  confider,  that  for  ought  we  know  to 
the  contrary,  this  judgment  may  furprife  us  at  any 
time  \  that  this  very  night  we  may  be  awakened  by 
the  found  of  that  mighty  trumpet,  which  fhall  pierce 
the  ears  of  all  the  world,  and  fummon  the  living  and 
the  dead  to  judgment.  And  God,  who  is  the  lover 
of  fouls,  and  defirous  to  fave  us  any  ways,  by  hope 
and  by  fear,  by  his  mercies  and  by  his  corre6bions, 
by  our  knowledge  and  by  our  ignorance,  hath  pur- 
21  E  2  pofely 


4250  Of  the  uncertainty  of 

SERM.  pQfe]y  concealed  from  us  the  time  of  his  coming  to 
^judgment,  to  the  end  we  may  always  be  prepared, 
and  that  we  might  continually  (land  in  awe  of  it  •, 
and  for  fear  our  Lord  fnould  come  upon  us   una- 
wares, might  always  be  in  a  pofture  to  receive  him. 
^,    And  whatever  the  fecure  part  of  mankind  may 
think,  who   "   put   far  from  them  the  evil  day,'* 
how  carelefs  and  confident  foever  they  may  be,  it 
would  for  all  that  be  a  terrible  thing  to  them,  all  on 
the  fudden,  "  to  fee  the  Son  of   man   coming  in 
"  the  clouds  of  heaven,  with  his   m^ighty  angels  i*' 
to  hear  the   great  "  trumpet   found,"    fummoning 
the  dead   to  arife  and  come  to  judgment  ^  to  fee  the 
whole  world  in  a  combuflion,  and  the  whole  frame 
of  nature  ready  to  difTolve  and  fall  in  pieces,  ''  the 
"  fun   darkened,  and  the  moon  turned  into  blood, 
*'  and  all  the  powers  of  heaven  fhaken,  the  eardi 
"  and  all  the  works  that  are  therein  flaming  about 
"  us  j"  to  fee  the  dead  darting  out  of  their  graves, 
fome  with  great  joy,  others  in  a  mighty  amazement 
and  fright,  according  to  their  fcveral  expedations  of 
a  happy  or  fearful  doom.     What  a  furprife  would 
It  be  to  drowfy  and  carelefs  finners,  to  be  thus  fud- 
denly   and  unexpededly  overtaken  ?  How    will  the 
profane  infidel  like  to  find    himfelf  fo  terribly  con- 
futed by   his  own  eyes,  and  forced  to  believe  that 
which  will  make  him  tremble  ?    It  will  then  be  too 
late  for   men  to    think  to  make  their  peace  with 
God,  and  to  prepare  for  judgment.  And  if  there 
were  any  time  for  it,  the  horror  and  amazement  that 
finners  will  then  be  in,  will  hinder  them  from  doing 
any  thing.     Thus  the  fcripture  reprefents  the  fear- 
ful cafe  of  impenitent  finners,  Vv^ho  arc  thus  furprifed, 
as  not  knowing  what   to  do  with  themfelves,  nor 

•  whither 


the  day  of  judgmefit  425 1 

whither  to  fly  for  fafety,   as  ready  to  betake  them-  S  E  R  M. 
felves  any  whither  for  fhelter  and  refuge,  as  "  calling  ^^^^''^"'* 
*'  upon  the  mountains  and  rocks  to  fall  upon  them, 
"  and  hide  them  from  the  face  of  him  that  fits  upon  \ 
*'  the  throne,  and  from  t\\Q  wrath  of  the  lamb;'' 
hereby  fignifying  to  us,  that  finners  fhall  be  in  fuch 
a  conflernation,  and  fo  deep  a  defpair  of  the  mercy 
of  God  towards   them,  that  initead  of  addrelTiog 
themfelves  to  him,  they  fhall  turn  their  fupplications 
to  "  the  mountains  and  rocks,"  as  being  more  exo- 
rable  than  he. 

But  this  pofTibly  may  not  be  our  cafe ;  this  dread- 
ful day  may  not  [come  in  our  days ;  and  yet  it  is  mad- 
nefs  to  run  a  venture  in  a  matter  of  fuch  moment ; 
but  if  it  fhould  not,  I  muil  tell  you,  that  the  cafe 
of  a  dying  fmner  is  not  much  different,  who  hath 
negleded  God  and  religion  in  his  life-time,  and 
would  never  think  of  betaking  himfelf  to  him,  or 
making  any  fubmilTion,  till  his  juftice  be  ready  to 
cut  him  off.  And  how  fecure  and  carelefs  foever 
finners  may  be  now,  no  man  knows  how  foon  he 
may  be  reduced  to  the  very  laft  opportunity  of  mak- 
ing his  peace  v/ith  God,  and  may  be  brought  into 
thofe  fad  and  miferable  ftraits,  that  no  man  that  is 
in  his  wits  would  be  in  for  all  the  world ;  that  he 
may  have  nothing  that  can  give  him  the  leafl  hope 
of  being  favcd  from  eternal  perdition,  but  a  fudden 
and  confufed,  and  in  all  probability,  an  inefFedtual 
repentance,  nothing  but  this  one  plank  to  truft  to, 
which  it  is  ten  thoufand  to  one  whether  it  ever  bring 
him  to  fhore. 

Therefore  be  wife,  finner,  in  time,  and  feize  upon 
the  prefent  opportunities  of  life,  and  improve  them 
with  all  thy  might,  with  all  poflible  care  and  dili- 
gence, 


A.7^2  ^he  certainty^  and  the  blejfednefs  of 

gence,  lefi:  judgment  find  thee  unprepared ;  or  in 
cafe  God  in  mercy  to  the  world  fhould  delay  it 
yet  longer,  left  death  feizc  upon  thee  carelefs  and 
unprovided.  And  when  that  is  once  in  view,  it  is 
but  very  little  that  can  be  done  by  way  of  prepara- 
tion :  for  as  ''  there  is  no  counfel  nor  v/ifdom,  no 
*'  work  nor  device  in  the  grave,  whither  we  muft 
"  go,"  fo  there  is  very  little  when  we  are  come  near 
to  it  ♦,  and  therefore,  "  blelTed  is  that  fervant,  whom 
*'  his  lord  when  he  cometh  ihall  find  watching." 


SERMON  CLXXXIV. 

The   certainty,  and  the   bleffednefs  of 
the  refurrcdion  of  true  chriftians. 


I  T  H  E  S  S.    iv.  14. 

'For  if  we  believe  that  Jesus  died^  and  rofe  again  ; 
even  fo  them  alfo  which  flcep  in  ] esu  s  will  God 
bring  with  him, 

SERM.  r"Y~^HE  words  which  I  have  read  are  an  argu- 
[^f^^^  ^  rnent  of  the  bleffed  refurredion  of  good 
men  to  eternal  life,  grounded  upon  the  refur- 
redlion  of  C  h  r  i  s  t.  In  the  verfe  before,  the  apo- 
ftle  comforts  chriftians,  concerning  their  brethren  that 
were  already  departed  in  the  faith  of  C  h  r  i  s  t, 
that  there  was  no  reafon  why  they  ftiould  fo  immo- 
derately grieve  for  them.  "  But  I  would  not  have 
"  you  ignorant,  brethren,  concerning  them  which 
«'  are  afleep,  that  ye  forrow  not,  even  as  others  that 

"  have 


»  the  refurreBion  of  true  chrijlians,  4253 

"  have  no  hope  ;"  that  is,  as  the  heathens  do,  who  S  E  RM, 
mourn  for  their  dead  friends  in  fo  grievous  a  nian-^l?f^ 
mer,  as  if  they  were  utterly  extinguifhed  by  death, 
and  they  had  no  imagination  of  any  life  beyond 
this.  And  thus  we  find  the  apoflle  elfewhere  defcrib- 
ing  the  flate  of  the  heathen  world  ;  Eph.  ii.  12. 
that  "  they  were  aliens  from  the  commonwealth  of 
"  Ifrael,  flrangers  from  the  covenant  of  promife, 
"  having  no  hope.'* 

But  chriftians  fhould  not  mourn  for  their  deceafed 
friends,  as  the  heathen  were  wont  to  do,  who  had  no 
hope  of  a  better  life  ;  becaufe  chriftians  profefs  to  be~ 
lieve  that  Christ  is  rifen  from  the  dead,  and  af- 
cended  into  heaven :  "  for  if  we  believe  that  Jesus 
*'  died  and  rofe  again,  even  fo  them  alfo  which 
^^  deep  in  J  E  s  u  s,  will  God  bring  with  him.'* 

There  are  two  things  to  be  explained  in  the  words, 
before  we  come  to  confider  the  matter  of  them. 

Firft,  what  is  meant  by  "  thofe  that  fleep  m 
«  Jesus." 

Secondly,  what  by  "  God's  bringing  them  with 
"  him." 

Firft,  what  is  meant  by  <'  thofe  that  fleep  in 
"  Jesus."  Sleep  is  a  metaphor  ufed  for  death, 
by  all  forts  of  writers  profane  and  facred  \  and  by 
the  ancient  chriftians,  the  place  of  burial  was  called 
xci^viTo'etov,  that  is,  *''  a  fleeping-place,"  This  me- 
taphor is  fometimes  applied  to  the  death  of  the 
wicked,  but  moft  frequently  ufed  of  the  death  of  the 
righteous,  becaufe  to  them  it  is  truly  a  reft.  And 
fo  the  prophet,  fpeaking  of  the  death  of  the  righte- 
ous, calls  it,  Ifaiah  Ivii.  2.  "  They  fhall  enter  into 
*'  peace,  they  ftiall  reft  in  thoir  beds," 

And 


^254  ^h^  certainty,  and  the  bleffednefi  of 

S  E  R  M.  And  the  death  of  the  righteous  is  very  fitly  called 
cLxxxiv.  tj  ^  fleep,"  both  as  it  is  a  reft  from  labour  and  paiii. 
"  BlelTed  are  the  dead  which  die  in  the  Lord  j 
"  for  they  reft  from  their  labour,"  Rev.  xiv.  13. 
And  like  wife  becaufe  ileep  is  not  final,  but  in  order 
to  waking  again.  The  death  of  the  righteous  is 
not  an  eternal  fleep  of  the  body,  but  that  ftiall  be 
awakened  in  the  morning  of  the  refurre(5lion. 

But  why  is  the  death  of  good  men  call'd  "  a 
*^  fleeping  in  J  e  s  u  s .?  o\l  "Ua^^  for  J  e  s  u  s  fake  ;'' 
which  may  feem  to  have  fome  particular  relation  to 
thofe  who  died  martyrs  for  Christ;  as  fome 
iikewife  undcrftand  that  text.  Rev.  xiv.  13.  "  Blefled 
''•  are  the  dead  which  die  in  the  Lor  d,"  that  is, 
that  fufter  for  his  caufe ;  "  for  they  reft  from  their 
"  labours,"  that  is,  their  fufferings  are  then  at  an 
end.  But  we  fhall  beft  underftand  the  meaning  of 
this  phrafe,  by  comparing  it  with  thofe  others  which 
feem  to  be  equivalent  to  it,  as  i  Cor.  xv.  18.  "  They 
"  alfo  that  are  fallen  afleep  in  C  h  r  i  s  t  ;"  ver.  23. 
"  They  that  are  Ch  r  i  s  t's  at  his  coming,"  that 
is,  they  that  belong  to  him,  that  died  in  the  faith 
cf  C  H  r  I  s  T.  So  Iikewife  is  this,  2  Theft',  iv.  10. 
"  The  dead  in  C  h  R  i  s  t  fliall  rife  firft,"  that  is, 
the  chriftians  that  are  dead  before  the  coming  of 
Christ,  ftmll  firft  be  raifed,  before  thofe  that  are 
alive  fliall  be  changed.  Heb.  xi.  13.  "  All  thefe 
"  died  in  faith,"  that  is,  in  firm  belief  of  G  o  d's 
promife  of  a  better  life.  So  that  "  to  fleep  in 
*'  C  H  R  I  s  T,  to  be  C  H  R  I  s  t's,  to  die  in  Christ, 
*'  to  die  in  the  faith,"  do  all  feem  to  fignify  the 
fame  thing,  viz.  to  die  in  the  ftate  of  true  chriftians. 
For  fo  we  underftand  the  like  exprefllons  of  "  be- 
<'  ing  in  Chris  t,"  Rom.  viii.  i.  *'  He  that  is  in 

«'  Christ," 


the  refurre5iion  vf  true  chrijlians,  4255 

"Chris  t,"  that  is,  every  fincere  chriftian  ;  and  of  ^  ^  ^  ^' 

CLXXXIV* 

*'  abiding  in  C  h  r  i  s  t,"  John  xv.  4.  "  He  that  abid- 
"  eth  in  me."  So  ''  to  die  in  Christ,"  is  to  die  a 
true  chriftian,  in  the  faith  and  obedience  of  the  gofpel. 

And  it  is  obfervable  that  in  the  phrafe  and  ftile  of 
the  new  teflament,  "  we  are  faid  to  die  all  in,  and 
*'  with  C  H  R  I  s  T  ;  to  be  in  him,  and  to  live  in  him., 
"  and  to  walk  in  him,"  by  our  fandification  and  obe- 
dience; "  to  die  with  him/*  by  the  mortification  cf 
our  lufts; "  to  rife  with  him,"  by  our  renovation  to  a 
new  Yi^Q ;  "  to  afcend  with  him  into  heaven,'' and  to  have 
"  our  life  hid  with  Christ  in  God,"  by  our  heaven- 
ly affedions  and  hopes ;  and  by  death,''  to  deep  in  him.'* 

But  before  I  pals  over  this  phrafe  of  "  fleeping 
*'  in  Jesus,"  there  is  one  difficulty  more  about 
the  fleep  of  the  foul,  which  feems  to  be  countenanced 
from  this  text,'' thofethatfleepin  Je  sus,  IhallGoD 
*'  bring  with  him ;"  as  if  the  apoflle  fpake  here  of 
the  fouls  of  good  men  which  had  been  adeep,  and 
Christ  fhould  bring  with  him  to  be  united  to 
their  bodies,  which  fhould  be  raifed  ;  as  likewife 
from  the  whole  tenor  of  the  apotlle's  difcourfe  about 
the  refurredion,  i  Cor.  xv.  where  the  apoflle  fays  no- 
thing of  the  living  of  the  foul  before  the  body  be 
raifed  ;  as  if  the  foul  feparared  from  the  body  were 
in  a  ftate  of  infenfibility^till  the  refurredion.  Bat  the 
true  anfwer  to  this  is,  that  neither  our  Saviour  in 
his  difcourfe  of  the  refurredion,  nor  St.  Paul,  in  the 
xvth  chapter  to  the  Corinthians,  nor  here  in  this  text, 
do  keep  clofely  to  the  proving  of  the  relurredlion  of  the 
body  •,  but  of  a  bleffed  immortality  after  this  life^ 
againfl  the  Sadducees,  who  faid  "  there  was  no  refur- 
"  redlion,  neither  angel  nor  fpirit.'*  But  fometimes 
they  prove  that  there  is  a  life  after  death  j  and  fome- 
Vol.  X.  aj  F  tim^ 


4256  The  certainty,  and  the  bJeJfednefs  of 

S  E  R  M.  times  that  at  the  refurredion,  the  foul  fhall  be  joined 
cLxxxiv.  ^^  ^  fpii-itual  and  heavenly  body,  and  that  the  whole 
man  fhall  enjoy  perfect  blifs  and  happinefs. ' 

But  this  opinion,  or  rather  dream,  concerning  the 
Heep  of  the  foul  from  the  time  of  death,  that  is, 
from  the  time  of  the  feparation  of  the  foul  from  the 
body  till  the  general  refurredion,  may  be  efFedually 
confuted  thefe  two  ways  : 

1,  By  taking  away  the  ground  of  it:  and, 

2.  By  producing  feveral  texts  of  fcripturc,  which 
are  utterly  inconfiftent  with  it.  And  this  I  Hiall  the 
rather  do,  becaufe  fome  men  have  taken  a  great  deal 
of  pains  to  eftablifli  and  prove  this  opinion  ;  tho'  I 
confefs  I  do  not  well  underfland  to  what  Qnd^  becaufe 
there  is  as  little  comfort  as  truth  in  it. 

■f  I.  By  taking  away  the  only  ground  that  I  know 
of,  of  this  opinion ;  and  that  is,  from  the  frequent 
metaphor  and  refemblance  in  fcripturc  of  death  to 
jQeep.  And  indeed  thofe  which  are  dead,  are  fre- 
quendy  in  fcripture  faid  "  to  deep,  or  to  be  fallen 
''  afleep  :"  but  then  (which  falls  out  very  crofs  to 

i  this  opinion)  this  metaphor  of  fleep  is  no  where  in 

'  fcripturc  applied  to  the  foul,  but  to  the  body  refting 
in  the  grave,  in  order  to  its  being  awakened  and 
raifed  out  of  this  fleep  at  the  refurredion.  And  thus 
it  is  frequently  ufed,  with  exprefs  reference  to  the 
body,  Dan.  xii.  2.  "  Many  of  them  that  fleep  in 
"  the  duft  of  the  earth  fliall  awake ;"  and  furely 
"  floeping  in  the  dufl:  of  the  earth,"  can  only  be 
applied  to  the  body.  And  more  exprefly  yet,  Matth. 
xxvii.  52.  "  And  the  graves  were  opened,  and  many 
*'  bodies  of  faints  which  flept,  arofe.  A(fls  xiii. 
"   0,6.  David,  after  he  had  ferved  his  own  genera- 

>.V^*  tion  by  the  will  of  God,  fell  afleep,  and  was  laid 

"  unto 


the  refurreBion  of  true  chrijliam,  4^57 

^'  unto  his   fathers,    and  faw   corruption:    but  he  SERM. 

CLXXXIV. 

*'  whom  God  raifed  again,  faw  no  corruption." 
Now  "  that  of  David  which  fell  aOeep,  and  was 
''  buried  with  his  fathers,  and  faw  corruption,"  was 
certainly  "  his  body ;"  and  that  of  our  Saviour 
which  *'  was  raifed  again,  and  fav/  no  corruption,'* 
was  likewife  *'  his  body,"  according  to  that  pre- 
diclion  concerning  him,  "  thou  wilt  not  leave  my 
"  foul  in  hell,  in  Hades^'  by  which  is  plainly  meant 
the  flare  and  place  of  fouls  feparated  from  the  body ; 
"  nor  fuffer  thy  holy  one  to  fee  corruption,"  that 
is,  the  body  of  our  blciTed  Lord  to  rot  in  the 
grave,  i  Coi.  xv.  20.  ''  But  now  is  Ch  rist 
*'  rifen  from  the  dead,  and  become  the  firfl-fruits  of 
"  them  that  flept ;  *'  that  is,  the  refurredion  of  his 
body  out  of  the  grave,  is  an  earned  and  afTurance 
that  our  bodies  alfo  fhall  be  raifed.  And  ver.  51. 
*'  We  lliall  not  all  fleep,  but  wc  fhall  all  be  changed  i'* 
where  the  apoftle  undoubtedly  fpeaks  both  of  the 
death  and  change  of  thefe  corruptible  bodies.  And 
fo  likewife  the  text  is  to  be  underflood  of  the  refur- 
region  of  the  bodies  of  the  faints,  which  fliall  be 
raifed  up  by  the  found  of  the  great  trumpet,  and 
reunited  to  their  fouls,  that  they  may  in  perfon  ac- 
company Christ  at  his  coming.  So  that  it  is 
*'  the  body,"  which  is  every  where  faid  in  fcripture 
"  to  fleep,"  and  not  ^'  the  foul,"  and  if  {q^  then 
the  only  foundation  of  this  opinion  is  taken  away. 

2.  I  fhall  fnew,  that  this  opinion  of  the  fleep  of 
the  foul  is  utterly  inconflftent  with  feveral  pafTages 
of  fcripture,  which  plainly  fuppofe  the  contrary ;  as 
Lukexvi.  22,  23.  where,  in  the  parable  of  the  rich 
man  and  Lazarus,  the  different  ftates  of  good  and 
bad  men,  immediately  after  their  departure  out  of 
21  F  2  tills 


42  5  S  The  certaint)\  and  the  blejfednefs  of 

S  E  R  M.  this  life,  are  defcribed  \  but  they  are  fo  defcribcd, 
that  it  is  evident  that  the  fouls  of  neither  of  them 
are  adeep.     It  is  faid  of  Lazarus,  that  "  he  was  car- 
"  ried  by  the  angels  into  Abraham's  bofom,"  and 
that  there  "  he  was  comforted  i'*    and  of  the  rich 
man,  that  "  he  was  in  hell,'*  and  there  ''  tormented 
"  in  flames."     This  was  not  like   to  be  a  ftate  of 
fleep  and  infenfibility,  and  the  rich  man  cries  out  of 
his  torment  -,  and  that  we  may  be  fure  he  was  awake, 
he  is  faid  "  to  lift  up  his  eyes."     And  there  is  all 
the  reafon  that  can  be  to  conclude,  that  Lazarus  was 
every  whit  as  fenfible  of  the  comfort  and  happinefs 
that  he  was  in,  as  the  rich  man  was  of  his  torment. 
Luke  xxiii.  43.  where  our  Saviour  fays  to  the 
penitent  thief,    "  this  day  fhalt  thou  be  with  me  in 
"  paradife:*'  but  not  furely  to  fleep  there 'till  the 
refurredion.     Tho'  fome  have  endeavoured  to  avoid 
the  force  of  this  text,  by  referring  ''  this  day"  to 
what  goes  before,  and  not  to  what  follows  after ;  as 
if  our  S  A  V  I  o  u  R  had  faid  •,  "  I  fay  unto  thee  this 
"  day;"    and  not    "  this  day   thou  flialt  be  with 
*'  me  in  paradife :  "  which  is  a  foolifli  evafion,  be- 
"  caufe,  "  I  fay  unto  thee,"  neceflfarily  implies  the 
prefent  time,   and  there  is  no  need  to  add,    "  this 
*'  day  •, "  befides  that  there  is  no  fuch    phrafe  any 
where  ufed,  as  *'  I  fay  unto  thee  this  day."     Phil. 
i.  23.   "I  am  in  a  fl:rait  between  two,  having  a  dc- 
*'  Are  to  depart,  and  to  be  with  Christ,  which 
-   "  is  far  better."  But  if  "  to  be  with  Chris  t,"  be 
to  be  in  a  ftate  of  fleep  and  infenfibility,  how  is  that 
fo  much   "  better"  than  to  be  in  the  body,    ferving 
God  and  his  Church  ?     2  Cor.  v.  6.    "  Therefore 
*'  we  are  always  confident,  knowing  that  while  we 
*"  fo]ourn  in  the  body,    we  are   abfent  from    the 

*'  L0RD5 


the  refurreBion  of  true  chrijiians. '  4259 

«  Lo  p.  D  ;  we  are  confident,  I  fay,  and  willing  ra-  ^^f^'^ 
^^  ther  to  be  abfent    from   the  body,  and  prefent  ^ 
«  with  the  Lord."     But  certainly,  "  to  be  pre- 
^-  fent  with  the  Lord,"    which   the  apoftle  here 
affirms  that  good  men  are,  fo  foon  as  they  depart  out 
of  the  body,  mud  needs  fignify  a  (late  of  happinefs  j 
which  "  fleep"  is  not,  but  only  of  infenfibility.    Be- 
fides  that  the  apoftle's  argument  would  be  very  flat, 
and  but  a  cold  encouragement  to  chriftians  againft 
the  fears  of  death,  that  as  icon  as  we  are  dead,  we 
fhall  fall  aHeep  and  become  infenfible.     But  the  apo- 
ftle ufeth  it  as  an  argument,  why  we  fhould  be   wil- 
ling to  die  as  foon  as  God  pleafeth,  and  the  fooner 
the  better ;  becaufe  fo  foon  as  ever  we  quit  thefe  bo- 
dies, "  we  Ihall  be  prefent  with  the  Lord,"  that 
is,  fhall  be  admitted   in  the  blifsful  fight  and  en- 
joyment of  him ;  and  that  whilit  we  "  abide  in  the 
^'  body,"  we  are  detained  from  our  happinefs.    But 
if  our  fouls  fleep  as  well  as  our  bodies,  till  the  gene- 
ral refurredion,  it  is  all  one  whether  we  continue  ia 
the  body  or  not,  as  to  any  happinefs  we  fhall  enjoy  in 
the  mean  time  \  which  is  diredly  contrary  to  the  main 
fcope  of  the  apoflle's  argument. 

Secondly,  what  is  here  meant  by  "God's  bring- 
"  ing  with  him  thofe  that  fleep  in  J  je  s  u  s .? "  In 
general  thefe  words  fignify  a  blefTcd  refurredion,  as 
may  be  feen  by  the  oppofition  5  "  If  we  believe  that 
"  Jesus  died,  and  rofe  again  j  even  fo  them  alfo 
"  that  fleep  in  J  e  s  u  s  fliall  God  bring  with  him.'* 
Where  to  C  h  r  i  s  t's  death  is  oppofed  *'  our  fleep- 
"  ing  in  J  E  s  u  s  ;"  and  to  his  refurredion,  "  God's 
*'  bringing  us  with  him  j"  that  is,  his  raifing  us  out 
of  the  grave  to  accompany  him  at  his  coming.  But  the 
pieaning  of  this  exprefllon  will  befl  appear,  by  con- 

fidering 


4260  7he  certainty y  and  the  blejfed?iefs  of 

S  E  R  M.  fidering  v/hat  follows  after  the  text ;  "  For  this  we 
fay  by  the  word  of  the  Lor  d,"  that  is,  by  fpe- 
cial  revelation,  "  that  we  that  are  alive,  and  remain 
"  at  the  coming  of  the  Lord,  fhall  not  prevent 
"  tUem  that  are  afleopi'*  that  is,  we  fhall  r^yi  be 
taken  up  uuo  heaven  before  the  faints  'v!i^  are  alrea- 
dy dead  fhall  be  railed :  but  thus  it  fhall  be,  "  the 
*^  Lord  himJelf  Oiali  defcend  from  heaven  with  a 
"  fhout,  and  the  voice  of  an  archangel,  and  with 
"  the  trump  of  God,  and  the  dead  in  Christ 
*'  fhall  rife  firfl  •,  then  we  which  are  alive  and  re- 
*'  main,  fhall  be  caught  up  together  with  them  in 
*'  the  clouds,  to  meet  the  Lo  r  d  in  the  air."  The 
plain  meaning  of  all  which  is,  that  firil  ''  the  dead 
''  in  Christ"  fhall  be  raifed,  and  taken  up  to 
him  in  the  air,  to  accompany  him  at  his  coming, 
and  thus  "  he  fhall  bring  them  with  him  •,"  and  then 
*'  thofe  whofe  are  alive  at  his  coming"  fhall  be 
changed  and  taken  up  likewife,  "  to  nieec  the 
"  Lord  in  the  air."  And  the  fame  account  the 
fame  apoflle  gives  us,  i  Cor.  xv.  51,  52.  *'  Behold, 
*'  fays  he,  I  fhew  you  a  myftery,"  (which  is  the 
fame  he  had  faid  before  in  the  former  text,  "  this 
*'  we  fay  unto  you  by  the  word  of  the  Lord)  I 
"  fliew  you  a  myftery'*  (lb  he  calls  that  which  was 
not  revealed  to  all  by  our  Saviour,  but  to 
himfelf  particularly)  "  we  fhall  not  all  fleep,  but 
"  we  fhall  be  changed  j"  that  is,  all  fliall  not  die, 
but  at  the  coming  of  Christ  many  fhall  be 
found  alive  and  changed ;  but  thefe  fhall  have  no 
advantage  of  thofe  who  were  dead  in  Christ 
before :  for  "in  a  moment,  in  the  twinkling  of 
*'  an  eye,  at  the  laft  trump,  the  dead  fhall  be  raifed 
^'  incorruptible,"    that    is,     with   fpiritual     bodies 

which 


the  refurreBion  of  true  chrijllaiis.  42  6  r 

which  will  be  no  more  liable  to  corruption  ^  '^  and  S  E  R  M. 
"  wc,"  that  is,  thofe  that  remain  then  alive,  ^^"^j^ 
*'  fhall  alfo  be  changed."  From  all  which  it  ap- 
pears, that  the  meaning  of  this  expreiTion,  '^  thofe 
*'  that  fleep  in  Jesus  fhall  God  bring  wiih  aim,'* 
is  this,  that  the  Lord  Jesus  fhall  come  "  in 
"  the  clouds  of  heaven,  in  the  glory  of  his  Fa* 
*'  T  H  E  R,"  and  by  the  found  "  of  the  trump  of 
"God  ihall  raife  the  dead  in  Christ.'*  And 
our  Saviour  tells  us  more  particularly,  that  this 
fhall  be  done  by  the  minifiry  of  angels,  Matth. 
xxiv.  30,  31.  *^  When  the  Son  of  man  comes 
"  with  power  and  great  glory,  that  the  angels  fliall 
*'  with  the  great  found  of  the  trumpet,  gather  the 
**  ele(5t  from  the  four  winds-,"  and  when  they  are 
thus  gathered,  "  Go  d  fhall  bring  them  with  him.'* 

And  here  I  cannot  but  obferve,  that  the  title  of 
God  is  given  to  our  Saviour,  who  is  to  be 
judge  of  the  world.  "  Them  that  ileep  in  Jesus, 
"  fhall  God  bring  with  him."  And  elfewhere  our 
apoftle  fpeaking  of  this  glorious  appearance  and 
coming  of  C  h  r  i  s  t  to  judgment,  calls  hjm  "  the 
"  great  God,"  Tit.  ii.  13.  "  Looking  for  the  blel- 
*'  fed  hope,  and  glorious  appearance  of  the  great 
*'  G o D  and  our  Saviour  Jesus  Ch  ris t." 
Which  cannot  be  underfbood  of  the  appearance  of 
two  pcrfons,  viz.  God  the  Father,  and  his 
Son  Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour;  for  then 
the  article  would  have  been  added  to  diftinguilh 
them,  and  it  v/ould  not  have  been  ^  c-wr-^pos-  yi/aaiv, 
but  yj,  t5  (T(3^Ti\^o<:  ^fxol'jj  as  if  he  had  faid,  "  the 
^^  appearance  of  the  great  God,  and  of  J  e  s  u s 
"  Christ  our  Saviour;"  whenas  according  to 
the  propriety  of  the  greek,  the  article  being  want- 
ing, 


CLXXXIV. 


4262  Ihe  certainty,  and  the  blejfednefs  of 

SERM.  ing,  it  ought  to  be  rendered  thus,  ''  looking  for 
"  the  appearing  of  Jesus  Christ  the  great 
*'  God  and  our  Saviour."  This  is  very  much 
confirmed,  in  that  the  fame  apoflle  here  in  the  text, 
fpeaking  of  C  h  R  i  s  t's  coming  to  judgment,  calls 
him  God;  "  them  fhall  God  bring  with  him/' 

The  words  thus  explained,  give  us  this  obferva- 
tion  ;  that  it  is  a  firm  principle  of  the  chriftian  re- 
ligion, that  thofe  who  die  in  the  faith  of  Christ, 
that  is,  in  the  ftate  of  true  chriftianity,  fhall  have  a 
bleffcd  refurredion.  ''  If  we  believe,  faith  the  apo- 
''  file,  that  Jesus  died,  and  rofe  again;  even  fo 
"  them  alfo  that  fleep  in  him,  fhall  God  bring 
''  with  him."  The  apoftle  to  the  Hebrews  reckons 
the  refurreftion  of  the  dead  among  "  the  principles 
*'  of  the  doctrine  of  Christ,"  Heb.  vi.  2. 

In  fpeaking  to  this  obfervation,  I  fhall  do  thefc 
three  things : 

Firfl,  I  fhall  fliew  what  it  is  to  die  in  the  faith  of 
Christ,  or  in  the  ftate  of  a  true  chriftian,  which 
is  here  called,  «'  fleeping  in  J  e  s  u  s." 

Secondly,  I  fliall  Ihew  how  the  death  and  refur- 
redlion  of  C  h  r  i  s  t  are  an  argument  and  proof  of 
our  refurredlion  from  the  dead.     And, 

Thirdly,  wherein  the  blefTednefs  of  the  refurreflion 
of  the  juR- doth  confift. 

Firft,  what  it  is  to  die  in  the  faith  of  C  h  r  i  s  t, 
or  in  the  ftate  of  a  true  chriftian,  which  is  here  call'd, 
"  fleeping  in  Jesus."  And  this  imports  one  of 
thefe  two  things;  either, 

I .  That  we  die  in  fuch  a  belief  of  the  dodtrine  of 
Christ,   as  hath  been  accompanied  with  a   holy 
obedience  of  life,  to  the  commands  and   precepts  of 
tliegofpel;  that  our  profeflion  of  the  chriftian  re- 
ligion 


the  refurreBion  of  true  chnjiians.  426? 

ligion  hath  evidenced  itfelf  in  the  virtues  of  a  good  S  E  R  m« 
life,  in  the  condant  courfe  and  tenor  of  an  holy  and  "^^^^'^^• 
unblameable  converfation.  This  aflurance  the  chri- 
ftian  religion  gives  us,  that  '«  if  we  have  our  fruit 
^'  unto  holinefs,  our  end  fliall  be  everlafling  life." 

Or  elfe,  2.  that  wc  exercife  fuch  a  fincere  and  un- 
feigned repentance  before  death  for  the  errors  and 
miicarriages  of  our  lives,  as  produceth  a  firm  pur- 
pofe  and  refolution  of  amending  our  hves,  if  Go  d 
fhould  be  pleafed  to  prolong  and  continue  them. 
For  only  fuch  a  belief  and  profefTion  of  the  chridian 
religion,  as  produceth  one  of  thefe  efFeds,  doth  put 
us  into  a  (late  of  grace,  and  give  us  hope  of  a  blefled 
refurredlion  to  eternal  life. 

The  firO:  of  thefe  efFeds  is  much  to  be  preferred, 
viz.  the  general  courfe  and  tenor  of  a  holy  life;  the 
latter  being  infinitely  more  hazardous,  by  reafon  of 
the  deceitfulnefs  of  our  hearts,  and  the  infinite  un- 
certainty of  a  death-bed  repentance. 

Secondly,  I  fhall  fliew  how  the  death  and  refur- 
redion  of  C  h  r  i  s  t  are  an  argument  and  proof 
of  our  refurredlion  from  the  dead.  '*  If  we  be- 
"  lieve,   ^cy 

I  fhall  fhew  by  and  by,  how  the  refurreclion  of 
C  H  R  I  s  T  is  an  argument  and  proof  of  our  refur- 
redion.  But  why  is  his  death  here  mentioned  as 
part  of  the  argument }  "  If  we  believe  that  Christ 
''  died."  The  reafon  is  obvious:  becaufe  the  truth 
of  the  miracle  of  his  refurredlion  depends  upon  the 
reality  of  his  death  ;  for  if  C  k  r  i  s  t  was  not  really 
dead,  then  he  could  not  rife  from  the  dead,  and  the 
pretence  of  his  refurredion  was  a  delufion  and  im- 
poflure :  but  if  he  was  really  dead,  and  rofe  again 
from  the  dead,-  then  have  we  a  firm  ground  for  ta^ 

Vol.  X.  21  G  belief 

I. 


4264  The  certainty,  and  the  blejfednefs  of 

SERM.  belief  of  a  future  refurredlion.  Now  this  chri- 
*  ilians  do  believe,  that  Christ  was  really  dead, 
and  rofc  again  from  the  dead,  and  that  upor> 
very  good  grounds.  We  need  not  doubt  but  that 
the  malice  of  the  Jews  took  care  to  kill  him  •,  and 
the  flory  makes  it  evident,  becaufe  blood  and  wa- 
ter came  out  of  his  fide,  which  is  a  certain  proof 
that  his  heart  was  pierced  \  and  it  could  not  be 
a  deliquium,  or  a  fainting  fit,  becaufe  after  his 
blood  was  exhaufted,  he  could  not  naturally  return  to 
life  again.  But  we  need  not  contend  much  about 
this,  fmce  the  heathens  who  are  unconcern'd  con- 
fefs  this.  Tacitus,  in  the  15th  book  of  his  annals, 
tells  us,  "  that  Jesus  was  put  to  death  by  cruci- 
*«  fixion  under  Pontius  Pilate.'*  And  Jofephus,  who 
was  a  Jew  both  by  his  birth  and  religion,  and  lived 
prefently  after  our  S  a  v  i  o  u  r's  time,  in  the  xviiith 
book  of  his  Jewifh  antiquities  tells  us,  *'  that 
*'  Christ  was  crucified,  and  that  he  appeared 
*'  to  his  followers  the  third  day,  rifen  from  the 
"  dead." 

Now  this  cannot  in  reafon  be  faid  to  be  done  only 
in  appearance,  and  to  be  a  mere  illufion  of  mens 
fenfes,  as  fome  ancient  hereticks  pretended ;  becauie 
that  which  may  be  an  evafion  in  any  cafe,  is  to 
be  admitted  in  none.  For  what  greater  evidence  is 
poITible  of  any  one's  rifing  from  xht  dead,  than  the 
circumflances  of  our  Saviour's  refurredion  .^ 
That  there  was  a  great  earthquake,  and  that  the 
flone  was  rolled  away  from  the  grave  and  the  grave- 
clothes  found  there,  and  his  body  gone ;  and  that 
after  this  he  appeared,  and  convers'd  fo  often  with 
fo  many,  to  whom  he  was  well  known  when  alive, 
and  entertained  long  difcourfes  with  them,  and  did 

eat 


the  refitrrediion  of  true  chrljliam,  4^6^ 

eat  and  drink  with  them,  and  permit  them  to  handle  SERM. 
his  body,  and  to  put  their  fingers  into  the  wonnd  of 
Jiis  fide  ;  and  all  this  cxadlly  agreeing  with  his  own 
predidion.  So  that  if  we  believe  the  providence  of 
God,  we  cannot  think  it  to  be.fo  little  vigilant,  as 
that  men  after  their  utmoft  care,  mud  neceflarily  be 
deluded  in  a  matter  of  fo  great  confequence. 

Now  I  fliall  (hew,  that  the  death  and  refurredliort 
of  Christ  is  a  very  good  argument  of  our  re- 
iurre6bion.  i  Cor.  xv.  20.  Christ  is  faid  to  be 
"  rifen  from  the  dead,  and  become  the  firft-fruits  of 
"  them  that  flept."  Not  that  he  was  the  firfl  that 
was  raifed  from  the  deadj  for  Elijah  and  Elifha 
raifed  fome,  and  fo  did  our  Saviour  himfelf  in 
his  life-time  :  but  the  apoftle  here  alludes  to  the  firfl:- 
fruits  among  the  Jews,  which  were  a  pledge  and  an 
earned  of  a  future  harveft.  In  like  manner  the  re- 
furrcdlion  of  C  h  r  i  s  t  is  call'd  "  the  firft- fruits  of 
"  them  that  flept,"  becaufe  it  is  an  earneft  of  that 
general  harveft,  which  fhould  be  at  the  end  of  the 
world,  when  "  the  angels,  the  reapers,  ihall  come 
*'  to  gather  the  ele6l  from  the  four  winds."  But 
the  refurrcdion  of  others  before  Christ  was  no 
earned  of  this,  becaufe  they  *'  were  raifed,"  but 
Christ  is  faid  ''  to  rife  from  the  dead  by  his 
"  own  power."  And  in  this  fenfe  he  is  truly  faid 
by  St.  John,  Rev,  i.  5.  to  be  "  the  fird-begotten 
**  from  the  dead."  And  this  fecures  our  refurrec- 
tion  to  eternal  life ;  becaufe  he  who  hath  promifed  to 
raifc  us  up,   ''  did  raife  himfelf  from  the  dead." 

And  that  Christ   intended  to  lay  great  drefs 

upon  this  argument,  appears  in   that  he  foretold  it 

fo  often,  as  the  great  fign  that  he  would  give  to  the 

Jews  to  convince  their  infidelity.     John  ii.  !§,  ^9- 

21  G  2  "  Th€ 


4266  The  certainty y  and  the  bleffedncfs  of 

c^x^—  "  The  Jews  faid  unto  him,  what  fign  fhewefl  thou 
"  unto  us  ?  Jesus  anfwered,  deftroy  this  temple, 
"  and -I  will  raife  it  up  in  three  days;  fpeaking  of 
''  the  temple  of  his  body."  And  Matth.  xii.  '^g^ 
40.  he  tells  the  Jews,  that  he  would  give  them  "no 
"  other  fign,  but  the  fign  of  the  prophet  Jonah, 
''  that  as  he  was  three  days  and  three  nights  in  the 
•*'  whale's  belly,  fo  fhould  the  So  n  of  man  be  three 
*'  days  in  the  bowels  of  the  earth." 

Now  the  refurredion  of  C  h  r  i  s  t  from  the  dead, 
and,  which  was  confequent  upon  it,  his  afcenfion  in- 
to heaven,  does  firft  give  us  fatisfadlion  in  general  of 
another  life  after  this,  and  an  immortality  after 
death ;  and  then  of  his  power  to  raife  us  from  the 
deadj  becaufe  "  he  raifed  himfelf ;"  as  the  apoftle 
argues,  Rom.  viii.  1 1.  "  Jf  the  Spirit  of  him 
*'  that  raifed  up  Jesus  from  the  dead  dwell  in 
*'  yo"j,  he  that  raifed  up  Ch  R  ist  from  the  dead, 
*'  fhali  alfb  quicken  your  mortal  bodies,  by  his 
'^  Spirit  which  dwelleth  in  you."  And  then,  laft- 
ly,  it  fecures  us  of  his  truth  and  fidelity,  that  he 
v/ill  perform  what  he  hath  promifed  us.  He  could 
not  have  promifed  any  thing  more  improbable  than 
this,  that  he  himfelf  would  rife  again  the  third  day  ; 
and  therefore  fince  he  kept  his  word  in  this,  there  is 
no  reafon  to  diftruft  him  in  any  thing  elfe  that  he 
hath  promifed.  By  his  own  refurrecftion  from  the 
dead,  he  wrought  fuch  a  miracle,  as  is  the  moll  pro- 
per to  confirm  us  in  the  belief  of  our  refurredlion  to 
crernal  life:  Rev.  i.  18.  "  I  am  he  that  liveth,  and 
*'  was  dead ;  and  behold  I  am  alive  for  evermore, 
5«  amen,  amen."  What  is  that  ?  we  have  it  ex- 
plain'd.  Rev.  iii.  14.  where  he  fays  of  himfelf,  *«  I 
^'  p,m    the  amen,    the  faithful  and  true   witnefs.  " 

This 


the  refurreBion  of  true  chrijliam,  4267 

This   very  thing  that  Christ    was    dead,    and  S  E  R  M. 
lives  again,  makes  him  "  the  amen,  the  true  and 
"  faithful  witnefs."     I  proceed  to  the 

Third  and  lafb  thing,  viz.  wherein  the  bleflednefs 
of  the  refurre(5lion  of  the  juft  fhail  confift ;  namely 
in  thefe  two  things. 

I.  In  the  mighty  change  which  fhall  be  made  \a 
thefe  vile  and  mortal  bodies  of  ours,  and  the  glo- 
rious qualities  they  fhall  then  be  inverted  wichaL 
And, 

II.  In  the  confequent  happinefs  of  the  whole  man, 
of  the  foul  and  body  united  and  purified. 

I.  In  the  mighty  change  which  (hall  then  be  made 
in  thefe  vile  and  mortal  bodies  of  ours,  and  the  glo- 
rious qualities  which  they  fhall  then  be  invefted 
withal.  But  wherein  this  glory  fhall  confiit,  becaufe 
it  is  matter  of  pure  revelation,  we  mud  wholly  rely 
upon  fcripture  for  the  particular  account  and  explica- 
tion of  it.  And  there  are  three  texts  of  fcripture, 
wherein  this  glorious  change  which  fhall  be  made  in 
our  bodies  at  the  refurredlion,  is  more  particularly 
mentioned  and  defcribed.     The 

Firit  is  Luke  xx.  ^^^  2^-  "  -^^^  ^^^Y  '*'^'^°  ^^^^ 
"  be  counted  worthy  to  obtain  that  world,  and  the 
"  refurreftion  from  the  dead,  neither  marry,  nor  are 
"  given  in  marriage."  This  our  Saviou  r  fpeaks, 
becaufe  that  which  occafioned  this  difcourfe  conceri- 
ing  the  refurredion,  was  a  queftion  moved  by  cne 
Sadducees  concerning  a  woman  that  had  ieven 
husbands  in  her  life- time;  upon  which  they  ciptiouf- 
]y  ask'd  our  Saviour,  "  whofe  wife  of  *:  {even 
"  this  woman  fhould  be  at  the  refurrci£t;on  r"  To 
which  our  Saviou  r  anfwers,  by  taking  away  the 
foundation  of  it,    telling  them,  that  m  the  other 

world 


4268  ^he  certainty,  and  the  bleffednefs  of 

S  E  R  M.  world  ''  they  neither  marry,  nor  are  given  in  mar- 
' "  riage."  And  the  reafon  of  this  is  very  obvious  ; 
becaufe  the  reafon  why  men  marry  now,  is  becaufe 
they  are  mortal,  and  therefore  to  prefcrve  and  pro- 
pagate the  kind,  which  would  otherwife  fail,  mar- 
riage was  inftituted:  but  in  the  other  world  this 
reafon  will  ceafe;  becaufe  then  men  Hiall  be  im- 
mortal, and  die  no  more.  And  therefore  our 
Saviour,  after  he  had  faid,  "  that  at  the  re- 
*'  furredlion  of  the  dead,  men  neither  marry, 
''  nor  are  given  in  marriage,"  he  immediately 
adds  as  the  reafon  of  it,  "  neither  can  they  die 
"  any  more,  for  they  are  equal  unto  the  angels  •," 
that  is,  they  fhall  be  like  them  in  the  immortal  du- 
ration of  their  beings ;  "  and  are  the  children  of 
*'  God,  being  the  children  of  the  refurredlion.'* 
Good  men  are  now  "  the  children  of  God,** 
becaufe  they  refcmble  him  in  the  holy  difpofition  of 
their  minds :  but  then  they  fliall  be  like  him  in  the 
participation  of  his  happinefs,  fo  far  as  finite  and 
created  beings  are  capable;  the  whole  man,  the 
body  as  well  as  the  foul,  fhall  be  partakers  of  im- 
mortality. And  this  is  a  glorious  change,  for  a 
frail  and  mortal  body,  liable  to  pains,  and  difeafes, 
and  death,  to  become  immortal,  and  freed  from  all 
thofc  troublefome  accidents,  to  which  they  are  now 
liable.     The 

Second  text  to  this  purpofe  is,  Phil.  iii.  20.  "  But 
"  our  converfation  is  in  heaven,"  fays  St.  Paul, 
fpeaking  of  true  and  fincere  chriftians ;  "  but  our 
'^  converfation  is  in  heaven,  from  whence  alfo  we 
"  look  for  the  Sav  i  o  u  r,  the  Lord  Jesus 
"  Christ,  who  fhall  change  our  vile  body,  that 
"  it  may  be  fafhioned  like  unto  his  glorious  body, 

accord- 


the  refurreSlion  of  true  chrijltans,  4.269 

^«  according  to  the  working  of  that  mighty  power,  SERm. 
"  whereby  he  is  able  even  to  fubdue  all  things  to^^^^^^^' 
"  himlelf."  And  this  is  a  great  change  indeed 
whether  we  confider  that  our  bodies  now  are  vile 
and  corruptible ;  or  the  pattern  according  to  which 
they  fhall  be  changed,  "  they  fhall  be  failiioned  like 
"  to  the  glorious  body  of  our  blefTcd  Sav  i  o  u  r  ;'» 
that  wherein  he  now  fits  in  the  higheft  heavens,  at 
the  right  hand  of  the  throne  of  God.  And  what 
glory  can  we  defire  beyond  that,  with  which  God 
thought  fie  to  reward  his  own  Son,  after  all  his 
obedience  and  fufferings  ?  And  this  will  be  the  more 
credible,  if  we  confider  the  relation  which  the  fcripture 
mentions  fo  often  between  Christ  and  all  true 
chriftians.  He  is  the  head,  and  they  are  the  mem- 
bers ;  now  there  muft  be  a  conformity  between  thefe. 
A  glorious  head,  and  vile  members,  would  make  a 
monilrous  and  irregular  body  ;  nay,  the  head  could 
not  be  glorious,  if  the  members  were  not  fo  too. 
Or,  laftly,  if  we  confider  the  mighty  power  which 
will  be  put  forth  for  the  efFedling  this  change.  The 
omnipotency  of  the  Son  of  God  will  exert  itfelf 
in  this  work.  So  the  apoftle  here  tells  us,  "  that 
"  the  Lo  RD  Jesus  Christ  will  change  our 
*'  vile  body,  and  fafhion  it  like  unto  his  glo- 
''  rious  body,  according  to  the  working  of  that 
"  mighty  power,  whereby  he  is  able  even  to  fubdue 
"  all  things  to  himfelf."  Omnipotency  will  dif- 
play  its  whole  force  in  bringing  about  this  change. 
And  what  cannot  that  almighty  power  do,  which 
is  able  to  conquer  and  fubdue  all  things  ? 

The  third  text,  and  that  wherein  this  change  is 
moft  fully  and  particularly  defcribed,  is  i  Cor.  xv. 
2^,  ^'  But  fome  will  fay,  how  arc  the  dead  raifcd  ^ 

*'  and 


The  certainty^  and  the  biejfedrtefa  of 

"  and  with  what  bodies  do  they  come?  "  This 
was  the  common  objedlon  which  the  infidels  made 
againft  this  article  of  the  refuf region  :  either  men 
fhall  rife  with  the  fame  bodies  which  they  had  in 
this  hfe  ;  or  they  fhall  not.  If  with  the  fame  bodies 
which  they  had  \n  this  life,  to  what  purpofe  will 
that  be?  fince  in  the  other  world  men  fhall  not  eat 
or  drink,  or  propagate  their  kind,  and  confequently 
have  no  ufe  of  fuch  a  body  as  ours  now  is:  but  if  it 
be  not  the  fame  body,  how  then  are  mens  bodies 
raifed  ?  To  this  queftion,  the  apoflle  gives  a  clear 
anfwer;  that  the  bodies  of  men  which  fliall  be  raifed, 
fhall  in  fome  refpedt  be  the  fame,  and  in  other  re- 
fpeds  not  the  fame  ;  the  matter  and  fubftaace  of 
the  body  may  ftill  be  the  fame,  and  yet  may  under- 
go a  mighty  change,  be  fafliioned  after  another  man- 
ner, and  be  endowed  with  quite  other  qualities  than 
it  had  before.  And  this  he  illuilrates  by  two  in- 
ftances. 

1.  By  the  difference  between  the  corn  which  is 
fbwn,  and  that  which  grows  up.     And, 

2.  By  the  difference  of  feveral  forts  of  bodies, 
which  are  all  made  of  the  fame  kind  of  matter. 

I .  From  the  difference  between  the  corn  which  is 
fown,  and  that  which  is  grown  up,  ver.  0,6^  ^y,  38. 
''  Thou  fool,  that  which  thou  foweft  is  not  quick- 
*'  ned,  except  it  die,"  that  is,  unlefs  it  be  firft 
buried  in  the  earth,  and  rot,  and  be  corrupted  there  v 
*'  and  that  which  thou  foweft,  thou  foweft  not  that 
*'  body  which  fhall  be  ;  but  bare  grain,  as  of  wheat  or 
*'  fome  other  kind."  "  But  bare  grain,"  that  is 
a  naked  grain,  without  either  ftalk,  or  blade,  or  ear  : 
**  but  God  giveth  it  a  body,  as  it  hath  pleafed 
**  himj"  that  is,   the  author  of  nature   makes  ic 

fpring 


tJye  r^furrcBlon  of  true  chriftianu  4^27  f 

fpring  up  in  a  blade,  which  grows  up  into  a  ftalk,  ^  ^'  ^-^  '^• 
which  bears  an  ear  that  contains  many  grains  of  corn ;     * 
"  and  to  every  feed  his  own  body,'*    that  is,  a  body 
of  the  fame  kind  with  the  feed  that  was  fovvn. 

2.  The  other  inftance  is  from  the  difference  of  f> 
veral  forts  of  bodies,  which  are  all  made  of  the  fame 
kind  of  matter,  put  into  different  forms,  fome  more 
perfed  and  glorious,  and  others  lefs  :  ver.  39,  40, 
41.  "  All  flefh  is  not  the  fame  flefii  \  but  there  is 
"  one  flefh  of  men,  another  of  beads,  another  of 
''  hfhes,  and  another  of  birds  j'*  and  yet  all  thefe 
are  fafhioned  out  of  the  fame  kind  of  matter. 
'^  There  are  aifo  celeftial  bodies,  and  bodies  terreftri- 
''  al  \  but  the  glory  of  the  celeftial  is  one,  and  the 
"  glory  of  the  terreftrial  is  another  ;"  and  the  ce- 
leftiaJ.  bodies  are  of  a  different  luftre  and  glory ; 
"  for  there  is  one  glory  of  the  fun,  and  another 
*'  glory  of  the  moon,  and  another  glory  of  the  ffars, 
*'  and  one  ftar  differeth  from  another  ftar  in  glory." 

And  then  he  applies  thefe  inftances  to  the  reiiir- 
region,  ver.  42.  "  So  alfo  is  it  in  the  refurredlion 
"  of  the  dead,"  The  matter  which  was  vile  before, 
when  it  was  buried  in  the  earth,  puts  on  another 
form,  and  by  the  power  of  God  is  raifed  up  a 
different  thing,  and  far  more  glorious  than  when  it 
was  put  into  the  earth :  ver.  42,  43,  44.  "  It  is 
*'  fown  in  corruption,  it  is  raifed  in  incorruption  ; 
*'  it  is  fown  in  diflionour,  it  is  raifed  in  glory;  it  is 
"  fown  in  weaknefs,  it  is  raifed  in  power  ;  it  is 
"  fown  a  natural  (or  an  animalj  body,  it  is  raifed  a 
"  fpiritual  body."  I  ihali  briefly  explain  thefe  fe- 
veral  expreflions  which  reprefent  to  us  the  difference 
between  our  bodies  as  they  now  are,  and  as  they 
Ihall  be  at  the  refurredion. 

VOL.X.  21  H  It 

I, 


4272  TZ>^  certainty^  and  the  blejfednefs  of 

SERM.      "  It  is  Town  in  corruption,  it  is  raifcd  in   incor- 

CLXXXIV 

^'"  ruption."  Our  bodies,  as  they  are  now,  are  un- 
equally tempered,  and  in  a  perpetual  flux  and  change, 
continually  tending  to  corruptien,  being  made  of 
fuch  contrary  principles  and  qualities,  as  by  their  per- 
petual confliction  do  confpirc  the  ruin  and  diflTolution 
of  it.  But  when  they  are  raifecl  again,  they  fhall 
be  fo  tempered  and  refined  as  to  be  free  from  all 
thefe  deftrudivc  qualities  which  threaten  a  change 
and  dilTolution  ;  "  they  fhall  be  raifed  incorruptible,** 
fo  as  not  to  be  liable  to  decay  and  death.  The 
body,  though  it  continues  ftill  material  and  confifbs 
of  matter,  fhall  then  partake  of  the  immortality  of 
the  foul  to  which  it  is  united,  and  be  of  equal  dura- 
tion with  it.  So  the  apoftlc  tells  us,  ver.  52,  ^^^ 
"  The  dead  fhall  be  raifed  incorruptible  •,  for  this 
*'  corruptible  mufl  put  on  incorruption,  and  this 
«'  mortal  muft  put  on  immortality." 

•*  It  is  fown  in  difhonour,  it  is  raifed  in  glory.'* 
Our  bodies,  when  they  are  committed  to  the  earth, 
are  vile  ofFenfive  carcafes,  and  therefore  we  hide  and 
bury  them  out  of  fight :  but  they  fhall  be  raifed 
beautiful  and  glorious,  as  different  from  what  they 
were  before,  as  the  heavenly  manfions,  in  which  they 
are  to  dwell  for  ever,  are  from  that  dark  cell  of  the 
grave,  out  of  which  they  are  raifed  ;  and  they  that 
before  were  only  fit  company  for  duft  and  worms, 
fhall  be  admitted  into  the  reviving  prefence  of  Go  d, 
and  the  blefled  fociety  of  angels. 

"  It  is  fown  in  weaknefs,  it  fhall  be  raifed  in  power.** 
Our  bodies  now  fall  to  the  ground  through  their  own 
frailty,  and  drop  into  the  grave  through  the  weak- 
nefs and  infirmity  of  nature  to  fupport  and  bear 
them  up  any  longer  :  but  though  they  fall  through 

weak- 


the  refurreBion  of  true  chrijlians.  4^73 

weaknefs,  thev  fhall  at  the  refurredion  be  endowed  S  E  R  M. 

.  CLXXXIV; 

with  fuch  a  life,  and  flrength  and  vigour,  as  to  be 
able,  without  any  change  or  decay  to  abide  and  con- 
tinue for  ever  in  the  fame  ftate. 

'*  It  is  fown  a  natural  body,  '4.u;^ihov,  an  animal 
•'  body,"  an  earthly  cottage  or  tabernacle  fitted  for 
the  foul  to  lodge  in  for  a  little  while  ;  "  but  it  is 
*'  raifed  a  fpiritual  body."     And  this  is  the  fum  of 
all  the  reft.     Our  bodies  in  this  world  are  grols  flefh 
and  blood,  liable  to  be  affeded  with  natural  and  kn- 
fual    pleafures,  and  to  be  afflidled  with  natural  pains 
and  difeafes,  to  be  prefs'd  with  natural  necefTities  of 
hunger  and  thirft,  and  obnoxious  to  all  thofe  changes 
and  accidents  to  which  natural  things  are  fubjecl : 
''  but  it  fhall  be  raifed  a  fpiritual  body,"  pure  and 
refined  from  the  dregs  of  matter  -,  it  fhall  not  hun- 
ger nor   thirft,  be   difeafed  or   in   pain   any  more. 
Thefe  "  houfes  of  clay,  whofe  foundation  is  in  the 
*'  duft,"  are  continually  decaying,    and    therefore 
they  ftand  in  need  of  perpetual  reparation  by  food 
and  phyfick :  but  "  our  houfe  which  Ihall  be  from 
*'  heaven,"  ftiall  be  of  fuch  lafting  and  durable  mat- 
ter, as  not  only  time,  but  even  eternity  itfelf  fhall 
make  no   impreflion   upon   it,    or  caufe   the  leaft 
d?ecay    in    it.     "   They    wh.o    fhall    be  accounted 
"  worthy,"    fays    our   Saviour,   "  to    obtain 
"  that  world,  and  the  refurredion  from  the  dead, 
*'  cannot  die  any   more,  but  fhall  be  like  the  an- 
*'  gels,  and  are  the  children  of  God;"  that  is, 
in  fome  degree  fhall  partake  of  the  felicity  and  im- 
mortality of  G  o  D  himfelf,  who  is  "  always  the  fame, 
"  and  his  years  fail  not.'*     "  It  is  raifed  a  fpiritual 
"  body."     We  fhall  then  be  as  it  were  all  fpirit, 
and  our  very  bodies  fhall  be  then  fo  raifed  and  re- 
21  H  2  fined. 


4274  ^f^^  certainty y  and  the  blefTednefs  of 

SERM.  fined,  that  they  fhall  be  no  doa;,  no  impediment  to 
the  operations  of  our  fouls.  And  furely  we  cannot 
but  think  this  a  glorious  change,  when  we  confider 
how  our  bodies  do  now  crufh  our  fpirits,  and  what 
a  melancholy  and  dead  weight  they  are  upon  them, 
and  how  grievous  an  incumbrance,  and  trouble  and 
temptation  they  are  fr  •  the  mofV  part  to  us  in  this 
mortal  fiate.     I  proceed  now  to  the 

ild  thing,  wherein  the  blefTednefs  of  the  juft  at 
the  refurredion  fliall  confift,  viz.  in  the  confequent 
happinefs  of  the  whole  man,  of  the  foul  and  body 
united  and  purified,  the  one  from  fm,  the  other  from 
frailty  and  corruption  ;  and  both  admitted  to  the  blefled 
fight  and  enjoyment  of  the  ever  blefifed  Go  d.  But  this 
is  an  argument  too  big  for  our  narrow  apprehenfions  • 
of  things,  whilfl  we  are  in  this  mortal  ftate  ;  a  fiib- 
jedt  too  unwieldy  for  fuch  children,  as  the  wifefl: 
of  us  all  are  while  we  are  in  this  world  ;  and  when- 
ever we  attempt  to  fpeak  of  it,  we  do  but  "  fpeak 
*'  like  children,  and  underftand  like  children,^*  and 
reafon  like  children  about  it.  "  That  which  is  im- 
"  perfed  mud  be  done  away ;"  our  fouls  muft  be 
raifed  to  a  greater  perfection,  and  our  underftandings 
fiU'd  with  a  ftronger  and  Headier  light  before  we 
can  be  fit  to  handle  fuch  a  fubject,  according  to  the 
worth  and  dignity  of  it.  We  muft  firft  have  been 
in  heaven,  and  poflcfs'd  of  that  felicity  and  glory 
which  is  there  to  be  enjoyed,  before  we  can  think  or 
talk  of  it  in  any  meafure  as  it  deferves.  In  the 
mean  time,  whenever  we  fet  about  it  we  fliall  find 
our  faculties  opprefs'd  with  the  weight  and  fpjendor 
of  fo  vaft  and  glorious  an  argument  ;  like  St.  Paul, 
who  when  he  was  caught  up  into  paradife,  faw  and 
hi^avd  that,  which  when   he  came  down  into  this 

world 


the  refurre^ilon  of  true  chrtjllans.  4-75 

world  again,  he  was  not  able  to  exprels,  and  which  SERM. 
is  not  poiTible  for  man  to  utter.  '■^'^'''  '^" 

So  that  in  dircourring"  of  the  ftate  of  the  blelTed, 
we  mud  content  ourfelves  with  what  the  fcripture 
hath  declared  in  general  concerning  it,  that  it  is  a 
ftate  of  perfed:  freedom  from  all  thofe  infirmities 
and  imperfedions,  thofe  evils  and  miferies,  thofe  fins 
and  temptations  to  which  we  are  liable  in  this  world; 
a  ftate  of  unfpeakable  and  endlefs  joy  and  happi- 
nefs  in  the  blefled  fight  and  prefence  of  God,  and 
in  the  happy  fociety  of  "  an  innumerable  com- 
*'  pany  of  angels,"  and  of  "  the  fpirits  of  juft  men 
"  made  perfed.'* 

So  St.  John  defcribes  the  felicities  and  glories  of 
that  flate,  as  they  were  reprefented  to  him  in  a 
vifion,  Rev.  xxi.  2,  3,  4.  "  And  I  John  faw  the 
"  holy  city,  new  Jerufalem,  coming  down  from  God 
*'  out  of  heaven,  prepared  as  a  bride  adorned  for 
"  her  husband.  And  1  heard  a  great  voice  out  of  hea-' 
*'  ven,  faying,  behold,  the  tabernacle  of  God  is 
with  men,  and  he  will  dwell  wir'^  hem,  and  they 
fhall  be  his  people,  and  G^od  himfHf  (hall  be  with 
*'  them.,  and  be  their  God.  And  Go  d  fhall  wipe 
'^  away  all  tears  from  their  eyes :  and  there  fhall  be 
^^  no  more  death,  neither  forrow,  nor  crying,  neither 
^*  Ihall  there  be  any  more  pain  •,  for  the  former 
"  things  are  pafTed  away  ;"  that  is,  all  thofe  evils 
which  we  faw  and  fufFer'd  in  this  world,  will  for 
ever  vanifh  and  difappear.  And  ver.  23.  "  And 
"  the  city  had  no  need  of  the  fun,  neither  of  the 
"  moon  to  fhine  in  it :  for  the  glory  of  God  did 
"  lighten  it,  and  the  lamb  is  the  light  thereof." 
And  which  is  the  greateft  privilege  and  felicity  of 
^lU,  no  fin  iball  be   there  ^  ver.  27,  "  And  there 

''  ihall 


(C 


4276  ^f^^  certainty y  and  the  bkjfednefs^  &c. 

S  E  R  M.  "  (hall  in  no  wife  enter  into  It  any  thing  that  defileth:'* 
'  and  confequently  no  mifery  and  curfe  Ihall  be  there : 
chap.  xxii.  3,  4.  "  And  there  ihall  be  no  more 
"  curfe;  but  the  throne  of  God,  and  of  the  lamb 
"  fhall  be  in  it,  and  his  Servants  fhall  ferve  him, 
*'  and  chey  fhall  fee  his  face.*'  In  which  lafh  words, 
cur  employ  men  c  and  our  happincfs  are  exprefs'd  ; 
but  what  in  particular  thefe  fhall  be,  and  wherein 
they  fhall  confilt,  it  is  impofTible  for  us  now  to  de- 
fcribe;  it  is  fufHcient  to  know  in  general,  that  our 
employment  fhall  be  our  unfpeakable  pleafure,  and 
every  way  fuitable  to  the  glory  and  happinefs  of  that 
ftate,  and  as  much  above  the  noblefl  and  moft  de- 
lightful employment  of  this  world,  as  the  pcrfedion 
of  our  bodies,  and  the  powers  of  our  fouls  fhall  then 
be  above  what  they  were  in  this  world. 

In  a  word,  our  happinefs  fhall  be  fuch  as  is  worthy 
of  the  great  king  of  the  world  to  beftow  upon  his 
faithful  fervants,  and  infinitely  beyond  thejufl  re- 
ward of  their  bell  fervices ;  it  is  "  to  fee  God,  and 
*'  to  be  ever  with  him,  in  whofe  prefence  is  fulnefs 
''  of  joy,  and  at  whofe  right-hand  ^re  pleafures  for 
*'  evermore.'* 


•  SERMON 


[  4277  ] 

SERMON  CLXXXV. 

Of  the  happinefs  of  good  men,  in  the 
future  ftate. 


I    J  O  H    iii.  2. 
//  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  Jhall  be ;  hut  we  know^ 
that  when  hejhdl  appear,  we  Jhall  be  like  him  ;  for 
we  jhall  fee  him  as  he  is, 

THE  great  defign  of  this  epiflle  is  to  per-  sERM. 
fuade   men  to  purity  and  holinefs  of  life,  clxxxv. 
without  which  we  can  lay  no  claim  to  the  r^j^^  £j.|^ 
promifes  and  privileges  of  the  gofpel.    Chriflians  arefermon  on 
call'd  "  the  children  of  God  ;"  and  this  is  a  great ^  ^^^^^^* 
privilege  indeed,  a  mighty  argument  of  God's  love 
and  favour  to  us,  to  own  us  for  his  children.     "  Be- 
"  hold  what  manner  of  love  the  Father   has 
'^  bellowed  upon  us,  that  we  Ihould  be  called  the 
*'  fons  of  God."     This  is  the   happinefs  of  our 
prefent  condition :  "  now  we  are  the  fons  of  God; 
'<  and  if  fons,  then  heirs;"  this  gives  a  title  to  a 
future  inheritance.     "  And  it  does  not  yet  appear 
"  what  we  fhall  be ;  '*  the  circumftances  of  our  fu- 
ture happinefs  and  glory  are  not  perfeftly  revealed  to 
us,  only  thus  much  m  general  is  difcover'd  to  us,  that 
we  fhall  be  very  happy,  becaufe  we  lliall  be  admit- 
ted to  the  immediate  fight  and  enjoyment  of  God; 
and  we  cannot  fee  him  and  enjoy  him,  unlefs  we  be 
like  him;   and  to  be  like  God,  is  to  be  happy» 
cc  ^^  know  that  when  he  Ihall  appear,  lav  (pavgpco- 
*«  ^il^  that  is,  when  it  Ihall  appear.   It  doth  not  ytt 

''  appear 


Of  the  happtnefs  of  good  men, 

appear  what  we  iiiall  be,  but  when  it  fliall  ap- 
pear," that  is,  when  our  future  happincfs  Ihall  be 
revealed  to  u^:  ic  is  not  yet  particularly  difcovered  to 
us,  but  thus  much  m  general  we  know  of  it  before- 
hand, that  ''  we  fhall  be  like  God,  for  we  fliall 
*'  fee  him  as  he  is  '*  In  which  words  there  are  thefe 
four  things  worthy  of  our  confideration. 

Firft,  the  prefent  obfcurity  of  our  future  ftate,  as 
to  ttie  particular  circumfbances  of  that  happinefs  which 
good  men  Ihall  enjoy  in  another  world:  "  it  doth 
*'  not  yet  appear  what  we  fhall  be." 

Secondly,  that  thus  much  we  certainly  know  of  it 
in  general,  that  it  fhall  confift  in  the  fight  and   en- 
/  joymcnt  of  God;   "we  know  that  when^  fhall 

''  appear,  we  (hall  fee  him  as  he  is." 

Thirdly,  wherein  our  likends  to  God  fliall  con- 
fitt:   "  we  ?a2i\\  be  like  him." 

Fourthly,  the  neceffary  connexion  between  our 
likenefs  to  God,  and  our  fight  and  e.^joj.'ment  of 
him:  "  we  fhall  be  like  him,  for  v.e  Inalj  fee  him 
"  as  he  is;"  that  is,  becaufe  "  we  fliall  fee  him  as 
*'  he  isj"  therefore  ic  is  certain  "  we  fhall  be  like 
*'  him ;  "  for  unlefs  we  be  like  God,  we  are  not  ca- 
pable of  feeing  and  enjoying  hun. 

Firft,  the  prefent  obfcurity  of  our  future  ftate,  as 
to  the  particular  circumftances  of  that  happinefs 
which  good  men  fliall  enjoy  in  another  world  :  "  it 
*'  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  Ihall  be."  Tnc 
fcripture  tells  us,  that  it  is  "  a  glory  yet  to  be  re- 
"  vealed  :  *'  that  there  fhall  be  fuch  a  ftate  of  hap- 
pinefs for  good  men  in  another  world,  though  it 
was  in  a  great  meafure  obfcure  to  the  world  before, 
both  to  J.^ws  and  Gentiles,  yet  it  is  now  clearly  re- 
vealed   to    us    by    "   the    appearance    of   J  is  us 

^'  Christ, 


in  the  future  Jlate,  A'^79 

•*  Christ,  who  hath  brought  life  and  immorta-  S  E  R  M 
"  lity  to  light  by  the  gofpel."  But  the  particular  ^^^^ 
circumflances  of  this  happinefs  are  ftill  hid  from  us  j 
and  as  it  is  a  needlefs,  fb  it  would  be  a  faulty  curio- 
fity  in  us  to  pry  and  enquire  into  them.  It  ia 
enough  that  we  certainly  knov/  there  is  fuch  a  flatej 
the  knowledge  of  this  m  general  is  enough  to 
quicken  our  diligence,  and  excite  our  endeavours  for 
the  obtaining  and  fecuring  of  it  :  it  is  enough  to 
mortify  all  evil  afFedtions  in  us,  and  to  baffle  all 
temptations  to  fin,  to  know  that  it  will  rob  us  of 
lo  great  a  felicity,  as  G  o  d  harh  promifed  to  us ;  ic 
is  enough  to  fupport  and  comfort  us  under  all  the 
miferies  and  affliclions  of  this  prefent  time,  to  be 
fully  afTured  that  after  a  few  days  of  forrow  and 
trouble  are  over,  we  Ihall  be  unfpeakably  and  eternal- 
ly happy.  A  firm  perfuafion  of  this,  is  argument 
enough  to  our  obedience,  and  a  fufficient  fupport  to 
our  faith  and  patience,  and  we  need  enquire  no  far- 
ther.  Thus  much  God  hath  revealed  to  us  for  our 
comfort  and  encouragement,  the  reft  he  hath  con- 
ceal'd  from  us ;  and  it  would  be  a  bold  intrufion  in- 
to his  fecrets,  to  pry  and  fearch  any  farther ;  and  if 
we  fliould,  it  would  be  to  no  purpofe.  For  in 
things  which  depend  upon  divine  revelation  it  is 
impoflible  for  us  to  know  any  more,  than  God  is 
pleafed  to  reveal  to  us.  In  matters  of  pure  revela- 
tion, we  cannot  go  beyond  the  word  of  the  L  o  r  d  ; 
"  the  things  of  God  knoweth  no  man,  but  the 
"  Spirit  of  Go d,"  or  he  to  whom  the  Spirit 
of  Go  D  fhall  reveal  them.  If  one  fhould  come  from 
a  ftrange  country,  never  known  and  difcover'd  be- 
fore, and  fhould  only  tell  us  in  general,  that  it  was 
a  moft  pleafant  and  delightful  place,  and  the  inhabi- 
VoL,  X.  21   I  tants 


4280  Of  the  happinefs  of  good  men^ 

SERM.  ^2,s\X.%  a  brave,  and  generous,  and  wealthy  peo- 
*  pie,  under  the  government  of  a  wife  and  great  king, 
ruling  by  excellent  lav/s  *,  and  that  the  particular  de- 
lights and  advantages  of  it  were  not  to  be  imagined 
by  any  thing  he  knew  in  our  own  country,  and 
{hould  fay  no  more  of  it :  if  we  gave  credit  to 
the  perfon  that  brought  this  relation,  it  would  cre- 
ate in  us  a  great  admiration  of  the  country  defcribed 
to  us,  and  a  mighty  concern  to  fee  it  and  live  in  it : 
but  it  would  be  a  vain  curiofity  to  reafon  and  con- 
jecture about  the  particular  conveniences  of  it;  be- 
caufe  it  would  be  impoflible,  by  any  difcourfe,  to  ar- 
rive at  the  certain  knowledge  of  any  more,  than 
he  who  only  knew  it  was  pleafed  to  tell  us.  This  is 
the  cafe  as  to  our  heavenly  country.  Our  blefled 
Saviour,  who  "  came  down  from  heaven, 
*'  from  the  bofom  of  his  Father,"  hath  re- 
vealed to  us  a  ftate  of  happinefs  and  glory  in  ge- 
neral, that  there  is  fuch  "  a  kingdom  prepared  for 
"  us*,'*  and  when  he  was  leaving  the  world  he 
told  us,  that  he  was  going  thither  by  the  way  of 
the  grave ;  and  when  he  was  rifen  again  from  the 
dead,  and  was  afcended  into  heaven,  he  promifed 
to  come  again  at  the  end  of  the  world,  and  to  raifc 
us  out  of  the  grave,  and  to  carry  us  into  thofe  ce- 
leftial  manfions,  where  "  we  fhall  be  for  ever  with 
"  the  Lord."  And  beyond  this  he  haiii  made 
no  particular  difcovery  to  us  of  the  felicity  of  that 
place,  he  hath  given  us  no  pun6lual  reprefentation  of 
the  glory  of  it  •,  he  hath  not  declared  to  us  in  a  fpe- 
cial  manner,  what  our  work  and  employment  fhall 
be,  in  what  way  God  will  communicate  himfelf 
to  us,  nor  what  kind  of  converfation  we  fhall  have 
with  the  blefled  angels,  and  with  one  another,  and 

how 


in  the  future  Jiate.  4281 

how  far  we  fhall  know,  or  be  known  to  one  ano-  S  E  R  M. 

C^  T    V  Y  Y  1^ 

ther ;  or  whether  we  fhall  Hand  afFedled  in  any  pecu- 
liar manner  to  thofe  who  were  our  friends  and  rela- 
tions, and  acquaintance  in  this  world.  Thcfe,  and 
perhaps  a  thoufand  things  more  which  may  concern 
the  glories  of  that  Hate,  and  the  happinefs  and  em- 
ployment of  "  the  fpirits  of  juft  men  made  perfed,'* 
our  Saviour  hath  told  us  nothing  of,  but  only 
in  general;  nnd  it  is  impolTible  for  us  with  any  cer- 
tainty to  make  out  the  reft,  any  more  than  children 
can  make  a  conjedure  of  the  defigns  and  reafonings 
of  a  wife  man ;  not  only  becaufe  it  would  be  of 
no  great  ufe  to  us,  but  becaufe  the  imperfedion  of 
human  nature,  and  of  our  faculties  in  this  ftate  of 
mortality,  is  not  able  to  bear  a  full  and  clear  repre- 
fen  tation  of  fo  great  a  glory. 

When  our  Saviour  was  transfigured  tipon 
the  mount,  and  a  little  image  of  heaven  was  fhewn 
to  men.  the  difciplcs  were  ftrangely  amazed,  and 
knew  not  what  they  faid.  And  St.  Paul  tells  u:, 
that  when  he  was  "•  taken  up  into  the  third  heaven," 
the  things  which  he  faw  and  heard  there,  were  "  not 
"  to  be  utter'd."  So  that  well  might  the  apoftle  fay 
here  in  the  text,  "  it  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we 
''  fhall  be."  Our  future  ftate  is  very  obfcure  to  us 
while  we  are  in  this  world,  as  to  any  diftindl  and  par- 
ticular knowledge  of  it. 

There  are  a  fort  of  idle  men  in  the  world,  I  mean 
the  fchoolmen,  who  have  been  very  bufy  and  bold  in 
their  enquiries,  very  peremptory  in  their  determina- 
tions of  feveral  things  relating  to  it :  but  after  all 
our  fearch  and  ftudy,  it  is  impoffible  for  us  to  advance 
one  ftep  farther  in  the  knowledge  of  it,  than  God 
hath  been  pleafed  in  his  holy  word  to  reveal  it  to  us. 
21  I  2  And 


4282  Of  the  happinefs  cf  good  men^ 

SERM.  And  how  much  God  hath  revealed,  I  fliall  in  dif- 

CLXXXV.  r  c     • 

couning  or  ttie 

Second  particular  confider ;  namely,  that  thus 
much  we  know  of  it  in  general,  that  it  fnall  confill 
in  the  bleiTed  vifion  of  God.  "  It  doth  not  yet 
*'  appear  what  we  fhall  be  •,  but  when  he  fhall  ap- 
"  pear,  ve  fhall  fee  him  as  he  is."  Thus  much  all 
chriilians  know,  becaufe  our  S  avi  our  hath  plainly 
revealed  it  to  them,  that  the  bleflednefs  of  the  faints 
fhould  confift  in  the  vifion  of  Go  d.  Matth.  v.  8. 
*'  BlefTed  are  the  pure  in  heart;  for  they  fhall  fee 
"  God."  Which  the  apoflle  exprefTeth  with  a  lit- 
tle variation,  Heb.  xii.  14,  "  Without  holinefs  no 
*■  man  fhall  fee  the  Lor  d."  Here  is  a  great  thing 
exprcd  to  us  in  a  few  words,  "  we  fhall  fee  him  as 
"'  he  is  -, "  for  the  better  underflanding  of  which,  it 
will- be  convenient  to  enquire  into  thefe  three  things. 

I.  What  is  meant  here  by  ''  feeing  G  o  d." 

II.  What  by  "  feeing  him  as  he  is.'* 

III.  The  fitnefs  of  this  metaphor  to  exprefs  to  us 
the  happinefs  of  our  future  flate. 

I.  What  is  meant  by  ^'  feeing  God."  The  fchool- 
men  have  fpun  out  abundance  of  fine  cobwebs  about 
this,  which  in  their  language  they  call  "  the  beati- 
*'  fick  vifion  of  God,"  and  they  generally  defcribe 
and  explain  it  fo  as  to  render  it  a  very  dry  and  fap- 
lefs  thing.  They  make  it  to  confifl  in  a  perpetual 
gazing  upon  God,  and  contemplating  the  divine 
efTencc  and  perfcdtions,  in  which  as  in  a  clearer  mir- 
rour,  they  fuppofe  men  to  fee  and  know  all  orher 
things.  But  this  is  a  very  jejune  and  infipid  notion 
of  happinefs,  but  yet  fiiitable  enough  to  the  gull 
and  inclination  ofthofe  that  devifed  it.  Arid  indeed 
xn^v*  are  naturally  apt  to  form  luch  notions  of  Gop 

and 


in  the  future  Jiate.  4283 

and  heaven  to  thenifelves,  as  are  moft  agreeable  to  ^  E  R  M, 
their  own  appetites  and  inclinations.  So  the  heathen  ^^^^^^* 
world  framed  to  themfelves  gods  after  their  own 
image  and  likenefs,  of  like  pafTions  and  inclinati- 
ons, and  lufts  with  themfelves ;  and  fuch  a  heaven 
as  pleas'd  themfelves,  and  was  moft  fuitable  to  their 
own  grofs  imaginations  of  pleafure  and  happinefs ; 
and  therefore  they  defcribed  it  by  pleafant  fields, 
and  clear  rivers,  and  fhady  walks.  So  likewife  Ma- 
homet framed  fuch  a  paradife,  as  is  moft  agreeable 
to  our  fenfual  appetites  and  lufts.  In  like  manner 
the  fchoolmen,  who  addifted  themfelves  wholly  to 
contemplation,  would  have  the  happinefs  of  hea- 
ven to  confift  in  that  which  they  themfelves  took 
moft  delight  in.  But  furely  the  fcripture  underftands 
fomething  more  ''  by  the  fight  of  God,'*  than  a 
bare  contemplation  of  him.  It  is  a  known  rule 
given  by  divines  for  the  underftanding  of  fcripture ; 
*'  the  words  that  fignify  fenfe  and  knowledge,  are 
"  very  often  in  fcripture  to  be  fo  underftood,  as  to 
''  comprehend  in  them  thofe  affedlions  and  effedls, 
*'  which  fenfe  and  knowledge  are  apt  to  produce  in 
*'  us/'So  our  knowledge  of  Go  d  doth  in  fcripture  many 
times  import  the  fum  of  all  religion,  the  whole  duty 
of  man,  "  he  that  faith  I  know  him,  and  kecp- 
*'  eth  not  his  commandments,  is  a  liar : "  and 
God's  knowing  of  us,  fignifies  the  whole  happinefs 
of  man.  ^'  The  Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  his." 
So  tafting  and  fight  are  in  fcripture  put  for  experi- 
ence and  enjoyment,  Pfal.  xxxiv.  8.  *'  Tafte  and 
"  lee  that  the  L  o  r  d  is  gracious."  Lament,  iii.  i. 
"  I  am  the  man  that  have  feen  afflidion,"  that  is, 
•'  that  have  fuffered  it."  i  Pet.  iii.  10.  '' He  that 
"  will  love  life,  and  fee  good  days,"  that  is,  "  en- 

''  joy 


4  2  S  4  Of  the  happinefs  of  good  men^ 

S  E  RM.  <«  joy  them."  And  fo  we  ufe  the  word  in  common 
fpeech.  To  fee  a  friend,  is  to  enjoy  the  pleafure  of 
his  company,  and  all  the  advantages  of  hi3  conver- 
fation.  So  here  ^'  the  fight  of  God  "  doth  com- 
prehend and  take  in  all  the  happinefs  of  a  future 
flatc.  As  to  fee  the  king,  includes  the  court,  and 
all  the  glorious  circumflances  of  his  attendance  •,  fo 
''  to  fee  Go  D,'^  does  take  in  all  that  glory  and  joy 
and  happinefs  which  flows  from  his  prefcnce. 

I  grant  indeed,  that  this  expreflion  primarily  and 
immediately  denotes  our  perfcd  knowledge  of  Go  d 
.  in  the  other  life,  in  oppofition  to  thofe  obfcure  and 
more  imperfect  difcoveries  and  apprchenfions  which 
we  have  of  him  in  thefe  earthly  bodies  :  for  I  think 
we  need  make  no  doubt,  but  that  fight  is  here  taken 
in  a  fpiritual  and  intelleclual  fenfe.  We  are  not  to 
Ts^  dream  that  we  fliall  fee  God   witii  our  bodily  eyes ; 

for  being  a  pure  fpirit,  he  cannot  be  the  objed  of 
any  corporeal  fenfe.  But  we  fhall  have  fuch  a  fight 
of  him,  as  a  pure  fpirit  is  capable  of  ^  we  fhall  fee 
him  with  the  eyes  of  our  minds  and  underflanding. 
And  in  this  fenfe,  we  do  in  fome  degree  '^  fee 
*'  God"  in  this  life,  by  faith  and  knowledge  :  but 
it  is  but  "  darkly  '  and  as  it  were  *'  through  a 
"  glafs"  that  we  fee  him,  as  the  apoftle  expreffeth 
it.  But  when  we  come  to  heaven,  our  underfland- 
ings  fhall  be  raifed  and  cleared  to  fuch  a  degree  of 
ftrength  and  perfc<flion,  that  we  fliall  know  God 
after  a  far  more  perfect  manner,  than  we  are  capa- 
ble of  in  this  frate  of  mortality.  And  this  perfed 
knowledge  of  him,  together  with  the  happy  effeds 
of  it,  thofe  affedlions  which  it  fhall  raife  in  us,  and 
that  bleffcd  enjoyment  of  the  chief  good  which  we 
are  not  able  to  exprcfs,  is  that  which  is  call'd  "  the 
"  fight  of  God."  II.  Vv'hat 


in  the  future  JIate.  ^285 

II.  What  is  here  meant  by  '«  feeing  God  as  he  Serm. 
<«  is  :  we  fhall  fee  him  as  he  is."     Now  this  doth  ^^l^^xv. 
farther  and  emphatically  exprefs  our  perfed  know- 
ledge and  enjoyment  of  God. 

I.  Oar  perfed  knowledge  of  him.  Not  that  wc 
are  to  imagine,  that  when  we  come  to  heaven,  our 
underdanding  can,  or  Ihall  be  railed  to  fuch  a  pitch, 
as  to  be  able  perfedly  to  comprehend  the  infinite 
nature  and  perfedlions  of  God  :  for  all  created  un- 
derflanding  being  naturally  finite,  we  cannot  ima- 
gine that  it  can  be  flretched  to  the  comprehenfion 
of  what  is  infinite,  as  the  divine  nature  and  perfec- 
tions are.  But  our  knov/ledge  fhall  be  advanced  and 
raifed  to  fuch  degrees  of  perfedion,  as  a  finite  and 
created  underftanding  is  capable  of. 

And  we  may  very  reafonably  conceive,  (and  in- 
deed the  fcripture  leads  us  to  it,  without  and  be- 
yond which,  it  is  not  fafe  to  fpeak  of  thefe  things) 
I  fay,  we  may  reafonably  conceive  the  perfecftion 
of  this  knowledge  to  confifl  in  thefe  three  things : 
in  a  more  immediate,  and  clear,  and  certain  know- 
ledge of  the  divine  nature  and  perfedions,  than  we 
are  capable  of  in  this  flate  of  mortality. 

(i.)  We  fhall  then  have  an  immediate  knowledge 
of  God.  In  this  world  we  fee  him  by  the  means 
and  help  of  his  word  and  works ;  we  fee  him  as  he 
hath  manifcfted  and  revealed  himfelf  to  us  in  the 
holy  fcriptures,  as  he  hath  reprefented  himfelf  to  us 
in  the  creatures,  as  the  apoftle  tells  us,  Rom.  i.  20. 
*'  That  his  eternal  power  and  godhead  are  clearly 
"  feen  by  the  things  that  are  made."  Bat  thus  we 
do  not  fee  God  immicdiately  and  diredly  ;  but  by 
a  reflexion  of  his  perfedlions  from  the  works  of 
creation  and  providence.     We  fee  him  by  faith  at 


4  2  S  6  Of  the  happinefs  of  good  men, 

SERM.  a  great  diflance,  which  the  apoftle  calls  "  feeing 
cLxxxv.  a  him"  as  it  were  "  through  a  glafs,"  i  Cor.  xiii. 
12.  Now  faith  in  fcripture  is  mod  frequently  op- 
pofed  to  fight,  which  is  a  more  immediate  view  and 
nearer  difcovery  of  a  thing,  2  Cor.  v.  7.  "  We  walk 
'^  by  faith,  and  not  by  fight."  But  in  heaven  we 
fhall  have  an  immediate  and  dired  fight  of  God, 
that  which  the  fcripture  calls  "  feeing  him  face  to 
*'  face  ;  **  not  at  a  diftance,  as  we  do  now  by  faith  ; 
not  by  reflexion,  as  we  do  now  fee  him  in  the  crea- 
tures •,  but  we  Ihall  have  an  immediate  and  dired 
view  of  him.  *'  Faith  Ihall  then  ccafe,"  as  the  apo- 
ftle tells  us,  and  be  perfedled  in  fight,  becaufe  of 
the  ncarnefs  and  evidence  of  the  obje6b. 

(2.;  We  fhall  not  only  then  have  an  immediate, 
but  a  far  clearer  knowledge  of  God,  than  we  have 
now  in  this  life,  i  Cor.  xiii.  12.  "  We  now  fee 
''  him  in  a  glafs  darkly,  Iv  odvlyixan^  in  a  riddle," 
which  is  an  obfcure  and  involved  declaration  of  a 
thing.  We  have  now  but  very  dark  and  confufed 
apprehenfions,  and  fuch  as  do  not  only  reprefent  him 
very  imperfe6tly,  but  many  times  very  falfly  to  us. 
While  our  fouls  are  muffled  in  thefe  grofs  bodies, 
we  are  compafs'd  about  with  clouds,  which  do  in  a 
great  meafure  intercept  the  fight  of  him  :  but  the 
light  of  glory  will  fcatter  all  thefe  clouds,  "  the 
"  vail  fliaM  then  be  taken  away."  The  refurredion 
Will  refine  our  bodies  to  that  purity,  that  they 
fhall  be  fit  infi:ruments  for  our  fouls.  We  Ihall 
have  fpiritual  bodies,  as  the  apoftle  tells  us,  i  Cor. 
XV.  fo  purified  from  all  thefe  dregs  which  now  in- 
cumber them,  that  they  fhall  be  fit  to  be  united  to 
a  Ipirit,  and  to  ad  with  it ;  and  then  "  we  fiiall 
''  with  open  face   behold  the  glory  of  God,"  as 

the 


in  the  future  Jiate,  4287 

the  apoftle  expreflech  it,  2  Cor.  iii.  18.  or  as  k  is  ^E^RM. 
here  in  tlie  texr,  "  we  ihall  fee  him  as  he  is."  We 
fee  him  now  many  times  "  as  he  is  not  j"  that  is, 
we  arc  h'able  to  falfe  and  miftaken  conceptions  of 
him:  but  then  "  we  fhall  fee  him  as  he  is."  The 
cJearnels  of  our  knowledge  will  free  us  from  all  error 
and  miftake  about  him.  We  are  now  many  times  at  a 
lois,  what  conceptions  to  have  of  G  o  d  ^  we  are  hard  put 
to  it  to  reconcile  one  perfec1:ion  of  Go  d  with  another, 
and  to  make  them  confident  and  agree  together. 
We  believe  his  providence  ;  but  we  are  puzzled  many 
times  how  to  make  that  accord  with  his  goodneis 
and  juflice :  but  in  heaven  we  fhall  fee  the  harmony 
of  all  thefe,  and  that  it  was  nothing  but  our  igno- 
rance and  darknefs,  vi^hich  made  us  imagine  any  dif- 
cord  and  difagreement  in  them. 

(3  )  We  Ihall  then  likewife  have  a  certain  know- 
ledge of  G  o  D,  free  from  all  doubts  concerning  him. 
There  may  be  a  certainty  in  faith  ;  but  not  that 
high  degree  of  evidence  and  aiTurance  which  is  ia 
fight.  'Tis  fpoken  by  way  of  abating  the  certainty 
of  faith,  when  it  is  called  "  the  evidence  of  things 
*'  not  feen."  Nay,  many  times  the  faith  of  good 
men  is  mix'd  with  a  great  deal  of  fear  and  doubt  of 
the  contrary.  But  in  the  ftate  of  glory,  we  fhall 
not  be  liable  to  any  of  thefe  doubtings  and  jealou- 
fies,  which  do  fo  frequently  poffefs  the  befl  of  mea 
in  this  world.  Then  "  we  fhall  know,  as  alfo  we 
*'  are  known,"  as  the  apoftle  expreffeth  it,  i  Cor. 
xiii.  12.  As  God  now  knows  us,  fo  Ihall  we  thea 
know  him,  as  to  the  truth  and  certainty  of  our 
knowledge. 

Now  fuch  an  immediate,  and  dear,  and  certain 
knowledge  of  God,  as  hath  been  defcribed,   doth 

V  o  L.  X.  2 1  K  necefjarily 


42  83  Of  the  happinefi  of  good  meriy 

S  E  R  M.  neceflfarily  fuppofe  a  very  great  elevation  of  our  un- 
v-^  /—J  derftandings,  above  what  this  flate  of  mortality  can 
bear.  We  cannot  now  have  a  clear  and  immediate 
fight  of  God,  becaufe  the  weaknefs  and  imperfec- 
tion of  our  prefent  ft-atc  will  not  admit  of  it.  In 
this  life,  our  underftandings  are  eafily  over-borne  by 
the  luftre  and  excellency  of  an  objed.  Hence  it 
was  that  God  faid  to  Mofes,  when  he  fo  earneftly 
defired  to  fee  his  face,  "  thou  canft  not  fee  my  face 
"  and  live,"  Exod.  xxxiii.  20.  So  tranfcendent 
and  glorious  a  fight  would  quite  overwhelm  and 
overcome  our  faculties ;  as  the  light  of  the  fun,  if 
we  look  (ledfaftly  and  diredlly  upon  it,  will  dazzle 
and  blind  the  flrongeft  eye.  The  fight  of  fo  glo- 
rious a  being  as  God  is,  of  fo  much  excellency  and 
happinefs,  and  perfedion,  as  concenter  in  him, 
would  /ill  us  with  joy  and  wonder,  too  great  for 
frail  mortality  to  bear  :  but  in  the  flate  of  glory,  the 
eye  of  the  foul,  that  is,  our  underflanding  faculty 
fhall  be  enlarged  unto  that  capacity,  and  purified  to 
that  clearnefs,  and  elevated  to  that  ftrength,  as  to 
be  able  to  receive  and  bear  fo  much  of  the  luflre 
and  glory  of  the  divine  nature  and  perfection,  as  is 
confident  with  the  finitenefs  of  a  humane  under- 
itanding,  and  fuitable  to  the  perfedlion  of  a  glori- 
fied foul  \  and  our  underflandings  fliall  then  be 
raifed  and  advanced  to  fuch  a  flrcngth,  that  they 
fhall  be  fo  far  from  being  opprefs'd  and  burdened 
with  the  prefence  of  God,  and  from  finking  under 
the  weight  of  his  glory,  that  they  fhall  be  infinitely 
ravifh'd  and  dehghted  with  it. 

2.  "  To  fee  Go  D  as  he  is,"  does  imply  our  per- 
fe6l  enjoyment  of  him.  We  fhall  not  only  perfedly 
know   him,  but  we    (hall  take  infinite  pleafure  in 

him^ 


in  the  future  ft  ate,  4289 

him,  in  beholding  Ws  glory,  in  praifing  and  ad-SERM. 
miring  his  goodnefs,  in  doing  his  will  with  all  ima- 
ginable readinefs  and  chearfulncfs.  I  do  not  pre- 
tend to  defcribe  to  you  the  particularities  of  that 
ftate,  and  all  the  blefTed  comforts  and  enjoyments^of 
it ;  "  it  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  fhall  be."  God 
hath  not  told  us,  and  none  but  he,  who  is  the  au- 
thor and  fountaiH  of  this  happinefs,  can  difcover  it 
to  us.  Let  it  fuffice  us,  that  God  hath  afTured  us 
of  it,  and  hath  prepared  it  for  us-,  and  it  can  be  no 
mean  thing  which  the  infinite  wifdom,  and  goodnefs, 
and  power  of  G  o  d  hath  defigned  for  t'a^  final  re- 
ward of  thofe  who  love  him,  and  of  thofe  whom  he 
loves.  If  we  know  thus  much  of  it,  that  it  is  cer- 
tain beyond  all  doubt,  and  vaft  beyond  all  imagina- 
tion, we  have  nothing  more  to  wifh,  but  that  Go  d 
would  fit  us  for  it,  and  as  foon  as  he  pleafeth,  bring 
us  to  the  enjoyment  of  it. 

III.  We  will  confider  the  fitnefs  of  this  metaphor, 
to  exprefs  to  us  the  happinefs  of  our  future  ftate. 
And  that  the  fcripture  doth  very  much  delight  to  kt 
forth  to  us  the  blefTednefs  of  heaven,  by  this  meta- 
phor of  "  feeing,"  it  is  evident  from  the  frequent 
ufe  of  it  in  fcripture,  Matth.  v.  8.  "  BlefTed  are  the 
**  pure  in  heart  ;  for  they  fliall  fee  God.'*  i  Cor. 
xiii.  12.  "  We  fhall  fee  him  face  to  face."  Heb, 
xii.  14.  "  Without  holinefs  no  man  Ihall  fee  the 
'*  Lord."  And  herein  the  text,  **  we  fhall  fee 
"  him  as  he  is"  And  indeed  God  is  pleafed,  in 
fcripture,  to  make  fenfiblc  defcriptions  of  the  happi- 
nefs and  mifery  of  another  world,  and  by  way  of 
accommodation  to  our  underftandings,  and  condefcen- 
fion  to  the  weaknefs  and  imperfedions  of  this  ftate, 
to  fee  forth  heaven  and  hell  to  us  by  fuch  things  as 

21  K  2  arc 


4290  Of  the  happinefs  of  good  men, 

SERM-are  fcnfible,  and  that  not  only  to  help  our  undcN 
{landings  to  a  more  eafy  conception  of  things,  but 
likevvife  to  move  and  roufe  our  affedlions,  which 
while  we  are  in  the  body,  and  immeri.'d  in  fenfe,  are 
commonly  mod  powerfully  wrought  upon,  by  fenfi- 
ble  reprefentations  of  things.  And  therefore  hell  is 
defcribed  to  us  by  fuch  things  as  affed  the  fenfe  of 
feeling,  becaufe  that  is  capable  of  the  greateft  and  fharp- 
eft  pain  ;  and  the  enjoyments  of  heaven  by  the  fenfe 
of  fight,  becaufe  that  is  the  nobleft  of  all  our  fenfes; 
and  the  primary  and  proper  objed  of  it  is  mod  de- 
lightful, and  of  the  moft  ipiritual  nature  of  any  cor- 
poreal thing. 

I.  Sight  is  the  nobleft  and  moft  excellent  of  all 
our  fenfes :  and  therefore  the  frame  of  the  eye  is  the 
moft  curious  of  all  other  parts  of  the  body,  and  the 
deareft  to  us,  and  that  which  we  preferve  with  the 
greateft  tendernefs.  When  the  apoftle  would  fet  forth 
the  mighty  affedlion  which  the  Galatians  bore  to 
him,  he  fays,  "  they  would  have  plucked  out  their 
*'  very  eyes  for  him."  'Tis  the  moft  comprehenfive 
fenfe,  hath  the  largeft  fphere,  takes  in  the  moft  ob- 
jects, and  difcerns  them  at  the  greateft  diftance.  It 
can  in  a  moment  pafs  from  earth  to  heaven,  and  fur- 
vey  innumerable  objeds.  It  is  the  moft  pure  and 
fpiritual,  and  quickeft  in  its  operations,  andapproach- 
eth  neareft  to  the  nature  of  a  fpirituaJ  faculty.  Of 
all  our  fenfes,  it  carries  the  greateft  evidence  and  cer- 
tainty along  with  it,  and  the  reports  of  it  are  the  moft 
certain  and  unqueftionable.  Hence  we  ufe  to  fay, 
that  one  eye-witnefs  is  more  than  ten  ear-witnefles. 
When  Job  would  exprefs  to  us  the  moft  perfect 
knowledge  of  God,  he  does  it  by  fight.  Job  xlii. 
5,  "  I  have  heard  of  thee  by  the   hearing  of  the 


in  the  future  Jlate.  4^91 

^c  ear  •,  but  now  my  eye  fees  thee  :  "  that  is,  he  had  S  E^RM. 
a  more  perfedt  and  clear  difcovery  of  God  and  his 
perfeaions,  than  ever  he  had  before.     And  to  men- 
tion but  one  thing  more  ^  it  is  that  fenfe  which  is 
more  apt  to  work  upon  our  affedlions. 
Segniiis  irritant  animos  demijjapr  aures^ 
^am  quafmt  oculis  commit] a  fidelihus  ; 
«^  The  things  which   we  hear  reported,  are  not  fo 
«'  apt   to  move  our  pity,  or  anger,  or  love,  as  the 
"  things  which  we  fee  with  our  eyes."  So  that  in  all 
thcfe  refpe6ts,    of  the   dignity  and   excellency,  the 
largenefs  and  comprehenfivenefs,  the  fpirituahty  and 
quicknefs,  the  evidence  and  certainty  of  this  fenfe, 
and  the  power  it  hath  to  raife  our  afFedions,  it  is  the 
fitteft  to  reprefent  to  us  the  nobleft  employment  and 
operation  of  our  fouls  in  the  (late  of  glory. 

2.  The  primary  and  proper  objed  of  this  fenfe, 
is  the  moft  delightful,  and  of  the  moft  fpiritual  na- 
ture of  any  corporeal  thing,  and  that  is  light.  ''  The 
«  light  of  the  eye  rejpiceth  the  heart,"  Prov.  xv.  30. 
«'  Li^ht  is  fweet,  and  a  pleafant  thing  it  is  for  the 
«  eye'^to  behold  the  fun,''  Ecclef.  11.7-  I^  ^^  the 
pureft  and  moft  fpiritual  of  all  corporeal  things,  and 
therefore  God  choofeth  to  reprefent  himfelf  by  it. 
*c  God  is  light,  and  in  him  is  no  darknefs  at  all." 

And  thus  I  have  done  with  the  fecond  thing  I 
propounded  to  fpeak  to  j  namely,  that  thus  much 
in  aeneral  we  certainly  know  of  the  happineis  of 
our'future  ftate,  that  it  fhall  confift  in  -  the  fight  of 
ct  God."  I  fhould  now  proceed  to  the  third 
thing,  namely,  wherein  our  likenefs  to  God  fhall 
confift  J  but  this  I  Ihall  refer  to  another  opportu- 
nity, 

SERMON 


[  4292  ] 

SERMON  CLXXXVL 

Of  the  happinefs  of  good  men,  in  the 
future  ftate. 


S  E  R  M. 

CLXXXVI. 


I  J  O  H  N  III.  2. 

//  doth  not  yet  appear  what  wejhall  be ;  hat  we  know, 
that  when  hejhall  appear,  wejhall  he  like  him-,  for 
we  Jhallfee  him  as  he  is. 

IN  thefe  words  are  four  things  worthy  of  our 
confideration. 

cond  fe'r.  ^'^^'  ^^^  P^^^^"^  obfcurity  of  our  future  ftate, 

mon  on     ^s  to  the  particular  circumftanccs  of  that  happinefs 
this  text,    which  good  men  fliall  enjoy  in  another  world.     "  It 
"  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  fliall  be." 

Secondly,  what  we  know  of  it  in  general ;  that 
it  fhall  confift  in  the  perfect  knowledge  and  enjoy- 
ment of  G  o  D  •,  both  which  are  comprehended  in 
that  expreffion,  ''  We  fhall  fee  him  as  he  is." 

Thirdly,  wherein  our  likenefs  and  conformity  to 
God  fhall  confift.  «  This  we  know,  that  when 
"  he  fhall  appear,  we  fhall  be  like  him." 

Fourthly,  the  neceffary  connexion  between  our 
likenefs  and  conformity  to  Go  d,  and  our  fight  and 
enjoyment  of  him.  The  two  firft  of  thefe  I  have 
fpoken  ro.     I  fhall  now  proceed  to  the 

Third,  namely,  wherein  our  likenefs  and  confor- 
mity to  Go  D  fhall  confift.  «  We  know  that  when 
''  he  fhall  appear,  we  fhall  be  like  him.''    In  thefe 

two 


Of  the  happinefs  of  good  men,  &c.  4293 

two  things,  in  the  immortah'ty  of  our  nature,  and  in  Serm. 
the  purity  of  our  fouls.  clxxxvi, 

I.  In  the  immortality  of    our  nature.     In  this  ^^^^ 
mortaJ  ilate,  we  are  not  capable  of  that  happinefs 
which  confifls  in  the  vifion  of  God,  that  is,  in  the 
perfect  knowledge,  and  perpetual  enjoyment  of  him. 
The  imperfedion  of  our  ftate,  and  the  weaknefs  of 
our  faculties,  cannot  bear  the  fight  of  fo  glorious  and 
refplendent  an  objedl,  as  the  divine  nature  and  per- 
fections are:  "  we  cannot  fee  God  and  live."     The 
frailty  of  our  mortal  condition  is  unequal  to  fuftain 
fo  great  a  weight  of  glory  ;  to  be  fure  it  is  incapa- 
ble  of  eternal  felicity:  nothing  but  an  immortal  na- 
ture  can  be   happy  for  ever.      And   therefore   the 
fcripture  tells  us,  that  when  our  bodies  ihall  be  raifed, 
the  quality  and  condition  of  them  fhall  be  quite  al- 
tered, and  that  our  blefled  Saviour   fhall  by  his 
almighty  power  make  a   mighty  change  in  them, 
from  what  they  were  in  this  mortal  flate,  Phil.  iii. 
20,  21.  "  Our  converfation  is  in  heaven,  from  whence 
"  alfo  we  look  for  a  S  avi o u  r,  the  L  o  r  d  J e- 
"sus  Christ;  who  fhall  change  our  vile  body, 
"  that  it  may  be  fafhioned  like  unto  his  glorious 
^'  body,  according  to  the   working  whereby  he  is 
"  able  even  to  fubdue  all  things  to  himfelf.''     And 
the  apoftle  tells  us  more  particularly,  wherein  this 
change  doth  cojififl,  i  Cor.  xv.  41.  "  It  is  fown  in 
*'  corruption,  it  is  raifed  in  incorruption  ;  it  is  fown 
*'  in  difhonour,   it  is  raifed  in  glory  ;  it  is  fown  in 
*'  weaknefs,  it  is  raifed  in  power  5  it  is  fown  a  na- 
"  tural  body,   it  is  raifed  a  fpiritual  body."    Thefe 
corruptible,  and  vile,  and  weak,  and  grofs  bodies, 
which   we    wear  and  carry  about   us  for  a  while, 
and   at  laft   put  off,  and  lay  down  in  the  grave, 

fhali 


4294  Of  the  happinefs  of  good  men^ 

SERM.  fhall  by  the  power  of  God  at  the  refurredion,  be 
CLxxxvi  ^.g^^^j  and  advanced  into  fpiritual  and  vigorous, 
glorious  and  immortal  bodies.  Our  bodies  are  now 
but  a  tabernacle,  a  temporary  and  moveable  dwel- 
ling that  fhall  fhorcly  be  taken  down  *,  but  at  the 
refurredion,  they  fhall  become  a  fix'd  and  lettled 
habitation,  a  houfe  that  fhall  never  decay,  nor  come 
to  ruin.  So  the  apoftle  tells  us,  2  Cor.  v.  i.  "  We 
*'  know  that  if  our  earthly  houfe  of  this  tabernacle 
*'  were  diiTolved,  we  have  a  building  of  God,  a 
*'  houfe  not  made  with  hands,  eternal  in  the  heavens." 
And  when  this  bltffed  change  fhall  be  made,  *'  mor- 
*'  tality  fliall  be  fwallowed  up  of  hie  j  for  this  cor- 
*'  ruptible  mull  put  on  incorruption,  and  this  mor- 
"  tal  mufl  put  on  immortality."  And  there  is  a  ne- 
cefTity  of  this,  in  order  to  our  pcrfed  happinefs. 
For  that  is  not  a  perk6b  happineis,  which  fliall  ex- 
pire and  have  an  end,  which  it  mufl:  have,  if  we  were 
ftill  liable  to  mortality.  And  therefore  the  apoflle 
is  peremptory,  that  there  mufl  be  fuch  a  change, 
becaufe  our  bodies,  as  they  are  now  conflituted  and 
framed,  are  utterly  incapable  of  the  happinefs  of 
the  next  life.  Ver.  50.  "  Now  this  I  fay,  brethren, 
"  that  flefh  and  blood  cannot  inherit  the  kingdom 
*'  of  God."  Where  by  fiefli  and  blood,  the  apo- 
flle does  not  mean,  as  many  have  imagined,  our  fin- 
ful  and  impure  nature ;  but  our  frail  and  mortal  na- 
ture, confifling  of  fuch  grofs  materials  as  flefh  and 
blood  are,  for  the  maintenance  and  fupport  of  which, 
there  is  continual  need  of  new  recruits,  and  frefh 
fupplies  of  nourifhment  by  meat  and  drink.  Such  a 
nature  as  this,  which  is  neceffarily  mortal,  "  can- 
"  not  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God,"  which  is  a 
ftate  of  perpetual  and  cndlefs  happinefs.     And  that 

the 


in  the  future  Ji ate.  4295 

the   apoftle   means   this   by  the  phrafe  of  "  flefh  SERM. 
*'  and  blood,"  is  evident  beyond   all  doubt,    from 
the    next    words,    which   he   adds  by   way  of  ex- 
plication  of  v/hat  he  had  faid,  "  this,  I  fay,  bre- 
*'  thren,  flefli  and   blood  cannot  inherit  the  king- 
*'  dom  of  God;  neither   doth    corruption   inherit 
*'  incorruption."     That  which  is  liable  to  death  and 
corruption,  is  not  capable  of  immortal  glory  and 
happinefs.     And  therefore  our  nature  mud  be  made 
immortal ;  and  immortality  makes  us  like  to  God, 
and  is  an  evident  teftimony  and  declaration  that  we 
are  "  the  fons  of  Go  d.     We  are  now  the  children 
'*  of  Go  D,"  in  refpedl  of  our  title  to  a  future  in- 
heritance  ;  but   this  is  hid  from  the  world:  but   at 
the  refurredion,  when  we  fhall  bear  the  image  of 
his  immortality,  this  will  be  an  evident  mark  of  our 
being  "  the  fons  of  God."     As  our  blefTed   Sa- 
viour was  "  mightily  declared  to  be  the  Son  of 
"  God,  by  his  refurrection  from  the  dead  ;"  fo  like- 
wife  lliall  his  members  be  declared  to  be  "  the  chil- 
*'  dren  of  God,"    by  that   glorious  change    that 
fhall  be  made  in   them  at  the   refuriedtion,  when 
*'  this  mortal  (hall  put  on  immortality."     Then  we 
are  "  the  fons   of  God"  indeed  in    an   emiinent 
manner,  when  "  we  can  die  no  more." 

And  therefore  it  is  worth  our  obfervation,  that 
the  fcripture  gives  us  the  title  of  "  the  children  of 
''  God,"  more  efpecially  upon  this  account,  Luke 
^^-  ZSt  3^'  "  ^^^  ^^^y  which  fhall  be  counted 
"  worthy  to  obtain  that  world,  and  the  refurredlion 
*'  from  the  dead,  can  die  no  more,  but  are  equal  to 
^'  the  angels,  and  are  the  children  of  God,  being 
*'  the  children  of  the  refurreftion."  And  Rom. 
viii.  19.  the  refurredlion  is  caird,  "  the  manifeflation 

Vol.  X.  21  L  *'  of 

2. 


4296  of  the  happinefs  of  good  tnen, 

SERM.  '«  of  the  Tons  of  God."  And  ver.  21.  ''Our  being 
dcJivered  from  the  bondage  of  corruption,  into  the 
''  glorious  hberty  of  the  fons  of  Go  d."  And  ver. 
23.  it  is  call'd  our  adoption  or  fonfhip-,  *'  We  our 
*'  fdves  grone  within  ourfelves,  waiting  for  the 
"  adoption,viz.  the  redemption  of  our  bodies."  This 
is  the  firft  thing,  wherein  our  likenefs  and  refem- 
blance  to  God  in  our  future  ftate  of  happinefs  fhall 
confift,  the  immortahty  of  our  nature ;  without 
which  we  could  not  be  capable  of  the  blclTed  vifion 
of  God,  and  the  everlafling  enjoyment  of  him. 

II.  It  fhall  confift  in  the  purity  of  our  fouls.  Now 
purity  is  a  freedom  from  fin,  which  is  the  great 
ftain  and  defilement  of  the  foul.  Before  we  can  be 
admitted  into  heaven,  we  muft  be  quit  of  all  thofc 
vicious  and  corrupt  inclinations,  of  all  thofe  inordi- 
nate defires  and  paflions,  which  defile  our  fouls,  and 
render  us  unlike  to  G  o  d.  In  this  world,  every  good 
man  does  "  mortify  his  earthly  and  corrupt  aftec- 
«'  tions,"  and  in  fome  meafure,  "  bring  them  into 
''  obedience  and  fubjedion  to  the  Jaw  of  God.'* 
But  ftill  there  are  fome  relicks  of  fin,  fome  fpots 
and  imperfedions  in  the  holinefs  of  the  belt  men. 
But  upon  our  entrance  into  the  other  world,  we  fliall 
quite  "  put  off  the  old  man  with  the  affections  and 
**  lufls  thereof,"  we  fhall  be  perfedly  "  delivered 
*'  from  this  body  of  fin  and  death,"  and  together 
with  this  mortal  nature  part  with  all  the  rem.ainders 
of  fin  and  corruption,  which  cleave  to  this  mortal 
ftate.  For  till  "  our  earthly  houfe  oF  this  taber- 
"  nacle  be  diffolved,'*  we  fhall  never  be  wholly 
cleanfed  from  the  leprofy  of  fin.  While  we  are  in 
this  world,  we  muft  be  continually  "  clean fing  our 
"  felves  from  all  filthinefs  of  fiefti  and  fpirlt,    and 

'^  perfedting 


in  the  future  Jiate.  4297 

'•'  pcrfedllnor  holinefs  in  the  fear  of  G  o  d  :  "  but  we  S  E  R  M. 
Ihall  never  be  wholly  cleanfed, we  fhall  never  be  perfed-  ^,.1,.^,.^ 
]y  holy  in  this  life  ;  but  in  the  other  ftate,  all  fm  and 
imperfection  ihall  be  done  away,  and  we  fhall  be  "  pre- 
''  fented  to  G  o  d,  without  fpot  or  wrinkle,  or  any  fuch 
"  thing."  And  perfcd  holinefs  is  the  image  of  G  o  d, 
and  the  very  neareft  refemblance  of  the  divine  na- 
ture, that  creatures  are  capable  of. 

But  how  our  fouls  fhall  be  purified  from  thofe 
remainders  of  fm  and  dregs  of  corruption,  which  are 
in  the  bed  men,  while  they  are  in  this  v/orld,  it  is 
not  neceffary  that  we  Ihould  be  able  perfedly  to  ex- 
plain. It  ought  to  be  fufHcient  to  us,  that  he  who 
hath  promifed  it,  is  able  to  do  it  one  way  or  other  ;  p^^^^^  a 
only  I  am  confident,  and  have  great  reafon  to  be  fo,  ^^^^ 
that  this  purification  will  not  be  wrought  by  the  fire  - " 
of  purgatory.  For  if  there  be  any  fuch  thing,  as 
there  is  not  the  lead  fpark  of  divine  revelation  for 
it,  (and  how  any  body  Ihould  come  to  know  it  other- 
wife,  is  not  eafy  to  imagine)  it  is  granted  to  be  a 
material  fire  ;  and  if  it  be  fo,  it  is  no  ways  fitted, 
either  for  the  punifhment  or  purgation  of  impure 
fouls.  Indeed  if  men  carried  their  bodies  into  purga- 
tory, the  fire  of  it  might  be  a  cruel  torment  and 
vexation  to  them  :  but  how  a  fire  fhould  fcorch  a 
fpirit,  is  I  believe  beyond  the  fubtilty  of  a  fchool- 
man  to  make  out  j  much  lefs  is  it  fitted  to  purge 
and  take  away  fin.  And  if  the  truth  were  known,  it 
was  never  ferioufly  intended  for  this  purpofe,  to  do  any 
good  to  the  dead,  but  to  drain  the  purfes  of  the  living, 
by  deluding  them  with  a  vain  hope  of  getting  their 
friends  delivered  out  of  that  imaginary  torment. 

But  we  who  take  our  faith  from  the  word  of  Go  d, 
and  not  from  the  fiftions  of  menj  do  believe  that 

21  L  2  th€ 


4298  Of  the  happinefs  of  good  inen, 

'L^xY^T  ^^^  ^^^^^  ^^  S^°^  "^^"  ^°  immediately  pafs  out  of 
this  world  into  a  flateof  happinefs  ;  and  that  he  who 
beftows    this    happinefs    upon    them,    does    qualify 
them  for  it,  before  he  admits  them  into  it.     And  if 
we  confider  the  matter  well,  we  fhaJl  find  that  a  man 
who  hath  truly  repented   of  his    fins,    and  through 
the  mercy  of  G  o  d   in  J  e  s  u  s  C  h  r  i  s  t   huch  ob- 
tained of  God  the  pardon  and  forgivtnefs  of  them, 
and  is  firmly  refolved  againft  fin,  and  doth  truly  en- 
deavour to  mortify  his  luds,  and  to  lead  a  holy  life, 
and  by  the  grace  of  God  docs  ''  dc.y  ung'^l'!!'efs 
"  and  worldly  lulls,  and  lives  fobtriy,  and   r:^  re- 
"  oufiy,  and  godly  in  this  prefent  world  ;"  I  fay, 
we  fhall  find  that  fuch  a  man  is  "  not  far   from  the 
*'  kingdom  of  God,"  but  very  nearly  qualified  and 
difpofed  for  it,  and  that  there  hardly  wants  any  thing 
to  make  fuch  a  man  perfectly  good,  but  only  to  re- 
inove  out  of  his  way  thofe  obdacles  and  impediments 
to  virtue,  and  to  free  him  from  thofe  circum (lances 
of  infirmity  and  temptation,  v/hich  do  unavoidably 
encompafs  us  in  tiiis  world  ;  fuch  as  are  ignorance, 
and  the  inftigations  of  our  bodily  temper  to  irregular 
appetites  and    paiTions,  that  which  the  apoflle  calls 
*'  the  law  in  our  members  warring  againft  the  law 
"  of  our  minds  ;"  the   nece/Tities  of  this    life,  the 
temptations  of  the  devil  and  of  bad  company,  and 
the  like  ;  all  which   do  appertain  to  this  (late,  and 
which  we  (liall  be  quit  of,  fo  foon  as  we  leave  this 
world,  and  put  off  thefe  frail  and  mortal   bodies  : 
and  v/hen  thcfe  are  removed,  we  are  free  from   the 
bondage  of  fin,  and  have  nothing  to  hinder  and  di- 
vert that  (Irong  bent  and  inclination  of  mind,  which 
IS  in  every  good  man,  to  do  the  will  of  God.     So 
chat  our  very  cranfution  iiuo  another  Hate  does  of  it 

fclf 


in  the  future  Ji ate,  4299 

felf  afiert  us  into  this  "  glorious  liberty  of  the  Tons  S  E  RM. 

CL.\  X  XVI 

"  of  God."  And  if  befidcs  this  any  thing  more 
be  necefTary  to  cleanfe  U3  from  fin,  and  perfect  the 
holinefs  and  purity  of  our  fouls,  we  need  not  be  'lq* 
licitous  about  the  way  and  manner  of  it,  but  may 
reft  confident,  that  "  he  who  hath  begun  a  good 
"  work  in  us,  will  perfedl  it  in  the  day  of  C  h  r  i  s  t  ," 
and  that  what  is  wanting  in  our  love  to  God,  or 
charity  to  men,  in  goodnefs,  and  meeknefs,  and  pu- 
rity, or  any  grace  or  virtue  whatfoever,  fhall  then  be 
added  to  them,  that  "  fo  an  entrance  may  be  mini- 
"  ftred  to  us  abundantly  into  the  everlafting  king- 
^'  dom  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus 
''  Christ.  This  we  know,  that  when  he  fhall 
"  appear,  we  fhall  be  like  him ;"  like  him  in  the 
immortality  of  our  nature,  and  in  the  purity  of  our 
fouls,  which  are  the  very  image  of  God,  and  the 
moft  exprefs  chara6ler  of  the  divine  nature.     The 

Fourth  and  laft  thing  remains,  which  is  to  ihew 
the  neceflary  connexion  which  is  between  our  likenels 
and  conformity  to  God,  and  our  fight  and  enjoy- 
ment of  him  :  "  we  know  that  we  fhall  be  like 
"  him,  for  we  fhall  fee  him  as  he  is."  Which  im- 
plies that  unlefs  we  be  "  like  God,"  we  are  m  no 
capacity  of  "  the  blefTed  fight  and  enjoyment  of  him." 

I.  Likenefs  to  God  in  the  immortality  of  our 
nature,  is  necefTary  to  make  us  capable  of  the  hap- 
pinefs  of  the  next  life  j  which  confifts  in  the  blelTed 
and  perpetual  vifion  and  enjoym.ent  of  God.  If 
our  natures  were  mortal,  we  were  incapable  of  feeing 
God.  What  was  faid  of  Mofes,  is-  equally  true  of 
all  mankind  in  this  ftate  of  mortality.  "  We  cannot 
"  fee  the  face  of  G  o  d  and  live."  Nothing  that 
is  frail  and  dying  can  endure  the  fplendor  of  fo  great 

a 


43  oo  Of  the  kappinefs  of  good  men, 

SERM.  a  glory;  nothing   that  flands  m   need  of  continual 

CLXXXVI.        f^        J  iJ  * 

'reparation,  as  "  fiefh  and  blood"  does,  can  "  in- 
"  herit  the  kingdom  of  God;"  nothing  but  a 
fixt  and  immutable  nature,  which  can  never  decay, 
is  capable  of  cverlafting  happinefs. 

But  this  part  of  likenefs  and  conformity  to  God, 
though  it  be  necelTary  to  make  us  capable  of  the  fe- 
licity of  another  world,  yet  it  is  no  part  of  our  duty 
and  care:  if  we  endeavour  after  the  other,  which 
confiRs  in  holinefs  and  purity,  God  will  work  this 
in  us,  and  for  us,  without  any  concurrence  of  ours. 
All  that  he  requires  of  us,  is,  that  we  firmly  believe 
it,  and  patiently  expe61:  it,  and  fervently  pray  for  it, 
and  afpire  after  it.  And  indeed  our  likenefs  to 
God  in  this  refped,  depends  upon  our  conformity 
to  him  in  purity  and  holinefs.  For  as  ''by  fm 
"  death  entered  into  the  world,  and  fo  death  pafTed 
"  upon  all  men : "  fo  nothing  but  holinefs  can  reflore 
us  to  immortality. 

The  foundation  of  all  our  hopes  of  a  blefTcd  im- 
mortality, is  to  be  laid  in  the  price  of  our  redemption, 
as  the  meritorious  caufe  of  it,  and  in  our  being  "  re- 
*«  newed  after  the  image  of  God,  in  righteoufnefs 
••  and  true  holinefs,"  as  the  proper  qualification  and 
capacity  for  it  on  our  parts.  We  muft  "  have  our 
*'  fruit  unto  holinefs,"  if  we  look  that  "  the  end 
"  fliould  be  everlafiing  Hfe."  And  to  this  purpofe  it 
is  excellently  faid  in  the  Wifdom  of  Solomon,  "  the 
"  keeping  of  God's  commandments  is  the  affurance  of 
"  immortality,and  immortality  makes  us  like  to  God." 
And  therefore  I  fliall  mainly  apply  myfelf  to  the 

lid  thing,  namely,  to  fhevv^.  that  our  likenefs  to 
G  o  d  in  the  purity  of  our  fouls  is  neceffary  to  make 
us  capable  of  the  bleflcd  fight  and  enjoyment  of  him  in 

the 


in  the  future  Jlate.  43^1 

the  next  life.  It  is  neceflary  as  a  condition  of  the  things  S  E  R  M, 
and  it  is  neceifary  as  a  qualification  in  the  perfon. 

i.  It  is  necelliry  as  a  condition  of  the  thing  to  be 
performed  on  our  part,  before  we  can  exped  that 
God  fhould  make  good  the  promife  of  eternal  life 
and  happinefs  to  us.  The  exprefs  conftitution  and  ap- 
pointment  of  Go  d  hath  made  it  neceflary,  who  hath 
told  us,  "  without  holinefs  no  man  Hiall  fee  him  ;'* 
that  "  if  we  fow  to  the  flefli,  we  fhall  of  the  fiefli 
''  reap  corruption;  but  if  we  fow  to  the  Spirit,'* 
that  is,  if  we  be  fandtified  and  renewed,  "  we  fhall 
"  of  the  S  PI  R  IT  reap  everlafting  life."  And  if  this 
were  a  mere  arbitrary  condition,  impofed  upon  us  by 
the  fovereign  will  of  God,  without  any  necelTity 
from  the  nature  of  the  thing,  yet  we  ought  to  accept 
it,  as  a  very  eafy  condition  -,  when  he  hath  only  faid, 
as  the  prophet  did  to  Naaman,  "  v/afn  and  be  clean.** 
Certainly  no  man  can  refufe  fo  great  a  benefit  and 
blefTing  conferred  upon  fuch  cheap  and  tolerable 
terms.  God  hath  promifed  us  eternal  life ;  a  mighty 
blefling  indeed !  for  the  obtaining  of  which,  no  con- 
dition that  is  pofTible  can  be  thought  hard  and  unrea- 
fonable.  And  what  does  he  require  of  us  for  the  ob- 
taining of  it }  but  that  v/e  "  cleanfe  ourfelves  from 
"  all  filthinefs  of  flefh  and  fpirit,  and  perfed  holinefs 
*'  in  the  fear  of  God;"  that  is,  that  we  do  with  all 
care  and  diligence  abflain  from  fin,  and  endeavour  to 
live  a  holy  life;  to  conform  ourfelves  to  the  will  of 
God,  and  to  be  obedient  to  his  laws.  He  does  not 
require  perfedl  holinefs  of  us  in  this  life,  but  a  fincere 
endeavour  after  it,  and  he  hath  promifed  to  afTiil  our 
endeavour  -,  and  if  we  go  as  far  as  we  can,  he  will 
perfedb  what  is  wanting.  So  that  there  is  nothing  in 
all  this,  but  what  is  very  pofHble  for  every  man  to 

do. 


43  02  0/  the  happtnefi  of  good  men, 

SE  R  M.  do,  by  the  affiftance  of  that  grace  which  he  hath  pro- 
CLxxxvi.  ^-^^^j  to   afford    us;  and  if  it  be  pofTible,  we  can- 
not anfwer  our  negledl  of  it,  when  all  our  hopes  of 
happinefs  depend  upon  it.    But  this  is  not  all,  there 

is  yet, 

2.  A  farther  necefTity  of  it,  inwardly  to  qualify 
and  difpofe  us  for  the  fight  and  enjoyment  of  Go  d. 
\Ve  cannot  poflibly  love  God,  nor  take  delight  in 
him,  unlefs  we  be  like  him  in  the  temper  and  difpo- 
fition  of  our  minds.  If  we  would  know  what  will 
make  us  happy,  we  mufl  look  upon  the  great  pattern 
of  happiness  and  that  is  Go  D  himfelf,  who  as  he  is 
the  mod  powerful,  and  wife,  and  every  way  perfed, 
fo  is  he  the  happieft  being  in  the  world.  So  that  if 
we  would  be  happy,  we  muft  be  like  God.  We 
cannot  be  fo  perfed  as  he  is,  and  therefore  we 
cannot  be  fo  happy  \  but  if  we  would  be  as  happy, 
as  creatures  are  capable  of  being,  we  mud  endea- 
vour to  be  as  like  God  as  it  is  pofTible  for  crea- 
tures to  be. 

We  muft  refemble  him  as  near  as  we  can,  in  thofe 
perfedtions  wherein  he  is  imitable  by  us.  And  thefe 
are,  as  I  may  call  them,  the  moral  perfeftions  of  his 
nature,  which  the  fcripture  ufually  comprehends  un- 
der the  name  of  holinefs ;  his  goodnefs,  and  patience, 
and  mercy,  andjuftice,  and  truth,  and  faithfulnefs; 
and  thcfe,  as  they  are  the  great  glory,  fo  the  chief  fe- 
licity of  the  divine  nature. 

Goodnefs  is  a  perfeflion  of  itfelf,  though  it  were 
without  any  great  degree  of  knowledge  or  power.  A 
poor  man,  and  one  that  is  ignorant  in  comparifon  of 
others,  may  yet  be  a  very  good  man.  But  power 
and  knowledge  feparated  from  goodnefs,  are  not  per- 
fedions,  but  may  be  applied  to  the  worft  and  moft 

mifchievous 


in  the  future  Jf ate.  43^3 

mlfchievous  purpofes ;  as  we  fee  in  the  devil,  who  S  E  R  M. 

•       •  •  CLXXXVI 

hath  both  thefe  qualities  in  a  high  degree. 

If  we  could  fuppofc  an  omnipotent  and  all-know- 
ing being,  that  were  deftitute  of  goodnefs,  he  would 
not  only  be  troublefome  to  others,  but  uneafy  to  him- 
{t\L  Without  goodnefs  there  can  be  no  happiness. 
So  that  thofe  perfedions  which  contribute  mod  to 
the  happinefs  of  the  divine  nature,  are  the  eafiefl:  to 
be  imitated  by  us.  We  may  be  like  Go  d  in  his  ho- 
Jinefs,  that  is,  in  his  goodneis,  and  patience,  and 
mercy,  and  righteoufnefs,  and  truth.  And  thefe 
perfedlions  are  the  very  temper  and  difpofition  of 
happinefs  J  for  they  are  the  nature  of  God,  who  is 
therefore  effentially  happy,  becaufe  he  is  a  being 
conftituted  of  thefe  perfedions.  And  fo  far  as  we 
imitate  God  in  thefe,  we  are  "  partakers  of  a  di- 
*'  vine  nature;  we  dwell  in  God,  and  God  in  us." 
So  our  apoftle  tells  us  in  the  ivth  chapter,  ver.  16. 
*'  G  o  D  is  love ;  and  he  that  dwclleth  in  love,  dvvel- 
*'  leth  in  Go  d,  and  G  o  d  in  him."  Thefe  divine 
qualities  make  us  fit  company  for  our  heavenly  Fa- 
ther, and  capable  of  the  joys  of  heaven,  and  the 
delights  of  that  glorious  place. 

And  the  contrary  temper  and  difpofition  is  the  na- 
ture of  the  devil,  and  the  very  thing  which  makes  it 
impoflible  for  him  to  be  happy.  Malice,  and  envy, 
and  revenge,  are  unquiet  paffions  s  and  in  what  na- 
ture foever  they  are,  they  are  as  vexatious  and  tor- 
mentful  to  itfelf,  as  they  are  troublefome  and  mif- 
chievous  to  others.  Thefe  are  a  hell  within  us,  and 
are  as  natural  caufes  of  mifery,  as  bodily  difeafes  are 
of  pain  and  reftlefnefs ;  and  while  thefe  furies  are  in 
us,  nothing  without  us  can  make  us  happy. 

Vol.  X,  21  M  The 

2. 


43^4  0/  ^^^  happhefs  of  good  men^ 

S  E  R  M.  The  capacity  and  foundation  of  all  felicity  muft  be 
CLxxxvi.  j^.^  -^  ^^  inward  frame  of  our  minds,  in  a  godlike 
temper  and  difpofition.  Till  the  image  of  his  holi- 
ntfs  and  goodnefs,  which  hath  been  defaced  by  fin, 
be  renewed  upon  our  minds,  we  are  utterly  incapable 
of  the  enjoyment  of  the  firit  and  chief  good,  in  which 
all  our  felicity  does  confift. 

And  thus  you  fee  what  a  neceflary  connexion 
there  is  between  our  likencfsand  conformity  to  God, 
and  the  blefled  vifion  and  enjoyment  of  him.  All 
that  now  remains,  is  to  draw  fome  inferences  from 
what  hath  been  difcourfed  upon  this  argument,  and 
fo  I  fhall  conclude. 

I.  This  fhcws  us,  how  impoflible  it  is  to  reconcile 
a  wicked  life  with  the  hopes  of  heaven.  The  terms 
of  our  happinefs  are  firmly  and  immutably  fix'd,  like 
"  the  foundation  of  the  earth,  which  cannot  be 
*'  moved  ;'*  nay  fooner  may  "  heaven  and  earth  pafs 
"  away,"  than  a  wicked  man  enter  into  the  king- 
dom of  heaven.  If  we  continue  in  a  finful  and  im- 
penitent ftate,  we  muft  neceffarily  "  come  fhort  of 
"  the  glory  of  God."  And  therefore  all  thofe  de- 
vices which  men  have  found  out,  to  excufe  themfelves 
from  a  holy  life,  and  yet  to  maintain  hopes  of  get- 
ting to  heaven  at  laft,  are  but  foolifh  arts  of  fecurity, 
and  tricks  to  undo  ourfelves  quietly,  and  without  any 
great  difturbance.  Some  think  to  be  faved  by  an 
external  profefllon  of  religion,  though  it  have  no 
force  and  efficacy  upon  their  lives ;  fome  by  being 
of  the  only  true  church,  wherein  falvation  is  to  be 
had  :  and  yet  if  it  were  true,  that  there  were  any  one 
party  or  community  of  chriftians,  out  of  which  there 
were  no  falvation,  I  am  fure  this  Jikewifc  is  true, 
that  there  is  no  church  wherein  a  wicked  man  can 
be  faved.  Others 


in  the  future  ^ate.  43<^S 

Others  reJy  upon  abfolutions  and  indulgences,  and  SE  R  M. 
hope,  notwithftanding  all  the  unrighteoufnefs  and  un-  '  ^ 
godlinefs  of  their  lives,  to  do  their  bufinefs  at  lad 
that  way.  But  can  any  man  be  fo  foolifh,  as  to 
think  that  any  church  or  pried  can  forgive  a  man 
upon  other  terms,  than  thofe  upon  which  only  God 
hath  declared  he  will  forgive  finncrs  ? 

Others  hope  to  be  faved  by  the  righteoufnefs  of 
Christ,  without  any  of  their  own.  But  what  a 
prefumption  is  this,  to  think  that  any  thing  that 
Christ  hath  done  for  us,  will  avail  us  while  we 
cherifh  our  lulls,  and  live  in  the  contempt  of  his 
laws?  "  let  no  man  deceive  you  j  he  that  doth 
*'  righteoufnefs  is  righteous,  even  as  he  is  righteous.'* 
The  righteoufnefs  of  C  h  r  i  s  t  fliall  never  be  im- 
puted to  any  for  their  juftification,  but  thofe  who 
are  ''  fan(flified  by  the  renewing  of  the  Holy 
«  Ghost.'* 

So  that  nothing  can  be  vainer  than  a  wicked  man's 
hopes  of  heaven.  The  whole  defign  of  the  gofpel 
is,  to  convince  men  that  bleffednefs  belongs  only  to 
the  righteous,  and  that  no  man  that  allows  himfelf 
in  any  wickednefs  and  impiety  of  life,  fhall  have 
any  "  inheritance  in  the  kingdom  of  God  and 
*'  Chris  t." 

II.  The  confideration  of  the  indifpenfible  neceffity 
of  our  likenefs  and  conformity  to  G  o  d  in  holinels 
and  purity,  to  make  us  capable  of  the  happinefs  of 
the  next  life,  calls  loudly  upon  us,  to  endeavour  after 
it  in  this  hfe.  So  it  follows  in  the  words  immedi- 
ately after  the  text,  "  we  fhall  be  like  him,  for  we 
"  fhall  fee  him  as  he  is :  and  every  man  that  hath 
"  this  hope  in  him,  puriheth  himfelf  even  as  he  is 
*'  pure.'*  'Tis  true  indeed,  nothing  but  perfedl  ho- 
21  M  2  linens 


43  o6  Of  the  happtnefs  of  good  men, 

SERM.  linefs  makes  us  capable  of  the  enioyment  of  God, 

CLXXXVI  . 

'and  wc  cannot  be  pcrfedly  holy  in  this  life.  Bat  then 
we  are  to  confider,  that  if  we  do  not  purify  our- 
felves  in  fome  meafare  in  this  world,  if  we  do  not 
begin  this  work  here,  it  will  never  be  perfeded  here- 
after; fuch  difpofitions  as  we  carry  with  us  out  of 
this  world,  ftick  by  us  for  ever.  Indeed,  if  they 
be  good,  the  degree  of  them  fhall  be  perfeded  ;  but 
if  they  be  bad,  they  fhall  never  be  alter'd.  If  ''  the 
"  image  of  G  o  d  be  renewed  upon  us"  in  this  life, 
^'  we  fhall  be  changed  from  glory  to  glory,"  in  the 
other,  '^  by  the  S  p  I  R  I  T  of  the  L  o  r  d."  But  if 
we  be  utterly  unlike  God  when  we  die,  death  will 
make  no  change  in  us  for  the  better  ;  we  fhall  "  go 
"  to  our  place,"  and  '•  inherit  the  portion  of  fm- 
*«  ners/'  We  did  not  endeavour  to  be  like  God, 
and  therefore  we  can  never  be  admitted  to  the  blef- 
fed  fight  and  enjoyment  of  him ,  for  there  is  a  di- 
refl  and  eternal  oppofition  between  the  holy  nature 
of  God,  and  an  impure  creature;  and  till  this  op- 
pofition be  removed,  we  can  have  no  communion 
with  him.  And  'tis  too  late  to  take  away  this  op- 
pofition between  God  and  an  im'pure  foul  in  the 
other  world;  becaufe  our  condition  is  then  con- 
cluded, and  we  fhall  remain  for  ever  fuch  as  we  have 
made  ourfelves,  while  we  were  in  this  world. 

Now  is  the  time,  "  this  is  the  day  of  falvation." 
Now  we  may  repent  and  leave  our  fins,  and  purify 
ourfelves  ;  and  by  purity  make  ourfelves  like  to  God, 
and  by  our  likenefs  to  him  render  our  fouls  capable  of 
being  admitted  to  the  blefTed  fight  of  him,  "  in  whofe 
''  prefence  is  fulnefs  of  joy,  and  at  whofe  right  hand 
^'  are  pleafures  for  evermore." 

So 


in  the  future  Jlafe.  4307 

So  that  we  ought  to  refolve  upon  one  of  thefe  two  SE  R  M. 
things,  either  to  give  over  all  thoughts  of  happinefs^^^^^^^^" 
in  another  world  j  or  to  qualify  ourfelves  for  it,  by 
^'  purifying  ourfelves,  as  Go  d  is  pure  :  "  for  till  we 
are  like  God,  we  are  not  capable  of  enjoying  him. 
While  we  live  "  in  ungodlinefs  and  worldly  lulls,'* 
we  are  as  unlike  God  as  is  polTible  ;  and  there 
are  but  two  ways  imaginable,  whereby  to  bring  a 
conformity  and  likenefs  between  God  and  us,  ei- 
ther by  changing  God  or  our  felves.  Now  the 
nature  of  God  is  iix'd  and  immutable,  he  cannot 
recede  from  his  holy  nature ;  therefore  we  muft  leave 
our  fins.  'Tis  certain  we  cannot  change  God; 
therefore  we  muft  endeavour  to  change  ourfelves. 
Rather  think  of  purifying  thy  corrupt  nature, 
which  may  be  done ;  than  of  making  any  altera- 
tion in  God,  "  with  whom  is  no  variablenefs,  nor 
*'  fhadow  of  turning.'* 

Once  God  hath  condefcended  fb  far,  as  to  take 
our  nature  upon  him,  to  bring  us  to  a  participation 
of  his  own  divine  nature,  and  make  us  capable  of 
happinefs :  but  if  this  will  not  do,  we  muft  not 
expe6l  that  God  will  put  off  his  own  nature  to 
make  us  happy. 


SERMON 


[  43o8  3 

SERMON  CLXXXVII. 

The  wifdom  of  religion  juftified,  in 
the  different  ends  of  good  and  bad 
men. 

P  R  O  V.    xiv.  32. 

i'he  wicked  is  driven  away  in  his  wickednefs  :  hut  the 
righteous  hath  hope  in  his  death. 


SERM.  ^^OLOMON,  all  along  this  book  of  the  Pro- 
^^^^"^^^  ^^  verbs,  doth  recommend  to  us  religion  and  the 
Prcach'd  ^^^  fear  of  God,  by  the  name,  and  under  the 
mfetb.^^^^^^  of  wifdom.  Chap.  i.  7.  "  The  fear  of  the 
*'  Lord  is  the  beginning  of  knowledge.'*  Chap. 
ix,  10.  *^  The  fear  of  the  Lor  d  is  the  beginning 
"  of  wifdom  ;  and  the  knowledge  of  the  holy  is  un- 
"  derifanding.**  Hereby  fignifying  to  us,  that  re- 
ligion is  the  fundamental  principle  of  wifdom,  by 
which  our  whole  liie,  and  all  the  adlions  of  it,  ought 
to  be  conduced  and  govern'd ;  and  that  all  wifdom 
which  doth  not  begin  here,  and  lay  religion  for  a 
foundation,  and  which  doth  not  a^l  upon  fuppo- 
fition  of  the  truth  of  the  principles  of  religion, 
viz.  the  belief  of  a  God,  and  his  providence, 
of  the  immortality  of  our  fouls,  and  the  rewards  and 
punifluTients  of  anodier  life,  is  but  "  wifdom  falfly 
"  fo  called  j"  becaufe  it  is  prepofterous,  and  begins 
at  the  wrong  end,  and  proceeds  upon  a  falfe^  fup- 
pofition,  and  wrong  fcheme  of  things  -,  and  confe- 
quently  our  whole  life,  and  all  the  adtions  and  de- 

figns 


The  wifdom  of  religion  jujiljied,  &c.  43^9 

figns  of  it,  do  run  upon  a  perpetual  njiflake,  and  S  E  R  M. 
falfe  ftatings  of  our  own  cafe ;  and  whatever  we  do 
purfuant  to  this  miftake,  is  fooli(h  in  itfelf,  and  will 
be  fatal  in  the  ilTue  and  confequence  of  it. 

For  he  that  takes  it  for  granted  that  there  is  no 
God,  and  that  the  world  is  not  governed  by  the 
providence  of  any  fuperior  being,  but  by  chance ; 
that  his  foul  dies  with  his  body,  and  that  there  is 
no  life  after  this :  he  that  proceeds  upon  thefe  prin- 
ciples, is  free  from  all  fetters  and  obligations  of  con- 
fcience,  and   hath  no  reafon  to  regard  any  rule  of 
right  and  juftice,    of  virtue  and   goodnefs,  farther 
than  they  conduce  to  his  own  eafe  and  pleafure,  his 
convenience  and  fafety  in  this  world  -,  he  hath  no- 
thing to  do,  but  to  contrive  his  own  prefent  happi- 
nefs,  and   to  live  as  long  as  he  can  ;  and  becaufe  he 
knows  he  mud  die,  to  compofe  himfelf  to  undergo  it 
as  contentedly,  and  to  bear  the  pain  of  it  as  chearfully 
and  patiently,  and  to  adl  this  laft  part  as  decently  as 
he  can,  being  fecured  by  his  own  principles  againft  all 
future  mifery  and  danger,  becaufe  death  makes  an 
utter  end  of  him. 

This  is  a  very  confident  theory,  and  hath  but  one 
fault,  that  it  is  not  true  at  the  bottom,  and  will  fail 
us  when  we  come  to  lay  our  whole  weight  upon 
it.  It  is  juft  as  the  prophet  defcribes  *'  the  flafF 
"  of  the  broken  reed  of  Egypt,  whereon  if  a  man 
*'  lean,  it  will  go  into  his  hand  and  pierce  it.'* 
Such  are  the  principles  of  infidelity,  to  all  that  trufl 
in  them  j  when  they  ^fhould  ftand  us  in  mod  dead, 
and  when  we  come  to  lean  hard  upon  them,  they 
will  not  only  fail  us,  but  go  into  our  very  heart,  and 
pierce  it  with  fharp  pain  and  anguidi.  In  the  days 
cf  our   health  and  prolperity,  the  fpirit  of  a  man 

may 


43 1  o  7he  wijdom  of  religion  juftifiedy 

SERM.  may  bear  up  itlelf  by  its  own  natural  force  and 
CL3/XV11  ^^^^gj.j^  ,  and  falfe  principles  are  like  anticks  in  a 
building,  which  feem  to  crouch  under  the  weight  of 
an  arch,  as  if  they  bore  it  up,  when  in  truth  they 
are  borne  up  by  it.  But  when  thefe  men  fall 
into  any  great  calamity,  or.  death  makes  towards 
them  in  good  earned:,  then  is  the  trial  of  thefe 
principles,  of  what  flrength  they  are,  and  what 
weight  they  will  bear  5  and  we  commonly  fee  that 
they  do  not  only  fail  thofe  who  trufl:  in  them,  but 
they  vanifh  and  difappear  like  dreams  and  mere 
illufions  of  the  imagination,  when  a  man  awakes 
out  of  deep ;  and  the  man  that  was  borne  up  by 
them  before  with  fo  much  confidence,  can  now  feel 
no  fubftance  and  reality  in  them  ;  he  cannot  now  be 
an  atheift  if  he  would  ;  but  God,  and  the  other 
world,  begin  to  be  as  great  realities  to  him,  as  if 
they  were  prefent  to  his  bodily  eye.  And  now  the 
principles  of  infidelity  are  fo  far  from  miniflring 
any  comfort  and  good  hopes  to  him,  that  they  fill 
him  with  horror,  and  anguifh,  and  defpair ;  and  are 
fo  far  from  quieting  his  mind,  that  there  is  nothing 
but  florm  and  temped  there.  "  The  wicked  is 
*'  driven  away  in  his  wickednefs  :  but  the  righteous 
*'  hath  hope  in  his  death.'*  "  The  wicked,"  that 
is,  the  finner,  the  hardned  and  impenitent  finner, 
''  is  driven  awayj'*  which  may  either  fignify  the 
fudden  and  violent  end  many  times  of  bad  men,  they 
are  carried  away  as  it  were  by  a  temped,  anfwerable 
to  that  expreflion,  Prov.  x.  25.  "  As  the  whirlwind 
*'  paifeth,  fo  the  wicked  is  no  more:'*  or  elfe  the 
word  may  fignify  to  be  caft  down  and  dejedled; 
and  then  it  imports  that  trouble  and  defpondency  of 
mind,  that  anguifh  and  defpair,  which  arifeth  from 

the 


in  the  differ  eijf  ends  of  good  and  bad  men,        43  ^  ^ 
the  guilt  of  a  wicked  life.     "  Is  driven  away  in  his  SERM- 

CLXXXVit 

*'  wickednefs;'*  the  word  in  the  original  is,  "  m 
"  his  evil,"  which  may  either  refer  to  the  evil  of 
fin,  or  of  affli6lion  and  calamity,  and  ic  will  come 
much  to  one  in  which  fenfe  we  take  it.  According 
to  the  hrft  fenfe  of  the  word  evil,  the  meaning  v/ili 
be,  that  the  fmner,  when  he  comes  to  die,  is  in  great 
trouble  and  defpondency  of  mind,  becaufe  of  his 
wicked  life  \  hath  no  comfort,  no  good  hopes  con* 
cerning  his  future  ilate,  according  to  that  other  faying 
of  Solomon,  Prov.  xi,  2g.  "  The  expedation  of 
"  the  wicked  is  wrath."  If  we  take  the  word  "  evil " 
in  the  latter  fenfe,  for  the  evil  of  afflidion  and  ca- 
lamity, then  the  meaning  is,  that  bad  men,  when 
they  fall  into  any  great  evil  and  calamity,  more  elpe- 
cially  upon  the  approach  of  death,  (for  that,  as  th^ 
laft  and  greatcft  of  evils,  is  probably  intended,  as 
appears  by  the  oppofition  in  the  next  words,  "  the 
"  righteous  hath  hope  in  his  death.")  I  fay,  that 
bad  men,  when  they  fall  into  any  great  evil  or  cala- 
mity, efpecially  upon  the  approach  of  death,  are  full 
of  trouble  and  difquiet,  by  reafon  of  their  guilt, 
and  deilitute  of  all  comfort  and  hope  in  that  need- 
ful time.  And  this  is  moil  agreeable  to  the  oppo- 
fite  part  of  this  proverb  or  fentence,  "  but  the  righ^ 
"  teous  hath  hope  in  his  death  ;"  that  is,  the  good 
man,  when  arty  evil  and  calamity  overtakes  him, 
though  it  be  the  moft  terrible  of  all,  death  \l{ii\'i^  is 
full  of  peace,  and  comfort,  and  good  hopes  ;  when 
there  is  nothing  but  ftorms  without,  all  is  calm 
within,  he  hath  foniething  which  Hill  fupports  hira 
and  bears  him  up. 

So  that  Solomon,  in  this  fentence  or  proverb,  feems 
to  defign  to  recommend  religion  and  virtue  to  us,  from 

VoL.X.  21  N  5he 


43  12  The  wijdom  of  religion  jujiifiedy 

SERM.  the  confideration  of  the  different  ends  of  good  and 
CLxxxvii  ^^^  ^^^^  ^^  obvious   to  common  obfervation,  and 

generally  fpeaking,  and  for  the  moft  part,  which 
(as  I  have  often  obferved)  is  all  the  truth  that  is 
to  be  expeded  in  moral  and  proverbial  fpeeches; 
that  for  the  moft  part,  the  end  of  good  men  is  full 
of  peace  and  comfort,  and  good  hopes  of  their  future 
condition  \  but  the  end  of  bad  men  quite  contrary, 
full  of  anguifli  and  trouble,  of  horror  and  defpair, 
without  peace  or  comfort,  or  hope  of  any  good  to 
befal  them  afterwards.  The  righteous  man  hath 
great  peace  and  ferenity  in  his  mind  at  that  time; 
is  not  only  contented,  but  glad  to  die ;  does  not  only 
fubmit  and  yield  to  it,  but  defircs  it  as  much  better. 
And  fo  fome  read  the  words,  "  the  righteous  defires 
*'  or  hopes  to  die  :  '*  but  the  wicked  man  and  the 
finner  dreads  the  thoughts  and  approaches  of  death, 
quits  life  with  great  reludancy,  clings  to  it,  and 
hangs  upon  it  as  long  as  he  can,  and  is  not  without 
areat  violence  parted  from  it.  The  good  man  goes 
out  of  the  world  willingly  and  contentedly  :  but  the 
wicked  is  "  driven  away,"  not  without  great  force 
and  conftraint,  with  much  reludancy,  and  in  great 
"trouble  and  perplexity  of  mind,  what  will  become 
of  him  for  ever. 

You  fee  the  meaning  of  the  words,  that  they 
contain  a  great  truth,  and  very  well  worthy  of  our 
moft  attentive  regard  and  confideration;  becaufe, 
if  this  be  generally  and  for  the  moft  part  true,  which 
Solomon  here  afTcrts,  then  this  is  a  mighty  teftimo- 
ny  on  the  behalf  of  piety  and  virtue,  and  plainly 
fhews,  that  the  principles  of  religion  and  virtue  arc 
proof  againft  all  aflaults  to  which  humane  nature  is 
liable  i  and  that  the  principles  of  infidelity  and  vice 

do 


in  the  differ efit  ends  of  good  and  lad  men.        4313 
do  flirink  and  give  back  when  it  comes  to  the  trial.  SER  M. 
And  this,  to  any  wife  and  confiderate  man,  is  ^s  ^^^^^"^^^ 
good  as  a  demonftration,  that  the  religious  man  is 
in  the  right,  and  proceeds  upon  principles  of  found 
and   true  wifdom,    and   "    hath  chofen    the   better 
*'  pare : "  but  that  the  infidel  and  the  wicked  man 
is  in  the  wrong,  and  under  a  fatal  miftake,  which 
he  feldom  difcerns  till  it  be  too  late  to  redify  it. 

Now  in  the  handling  of  this  argument,  I  fliall  do 
thefe  three  things  ; 

Firft,  I  fhall  fhew  that  this  obfervation  of  Solo- 
mon, concerning  the  different  end  of  good  and  bad 
men,  and  the  final  iffuc  and  event  of  a  virtuous  and 
vicious  courfe  of  life,  is  generally  true,  and  that  the 
exceptions  on  either  fide  to  the  contrary  are  but 
few,  and  not  of  force  to  infringe  the  truth  of  the  ob- 
fervation. 

Secondly,  I  fhall  confider  whence  this  difference 
proceeds,  and  I  fhall  endeavour  to  fhew  that  it  is 
founded  in  the  true  nature  and  reafon  of  things.  And 

Thirdly,  That  if  this  be  true,  it  is  a  dcmondration 
on  the  fide  of  religion,  and  does  fully  juftify  the 
wifdom  of  it. 

Firft,  I  fhall  endeavour  to  fliew,  that  this  obfer- 
vation of  Solomon,  concerning  the  different  end  of 
good  and  bad  men,  and  the  final  iffue  and  event  of 
a  virtuous  and  vicious  courfe  of  life,  is  generally  \0Vin6. 
true,  and  that  the  exceptions  on  either  fide  to  the 
contrary  are  but  few  in  comparifon,  and  by  no  means 
of  fufficient  force  to  infringe  the  general  truth  of 
this  obfervation  ;  I  fay,  that  this  obfervation  of  the 
wife  man,  is  generally  and  for  the  moft  part  true, 
which  (as  I  mentioned  before)  is  all  the  truth  that 
is  to  be  expeded,  in  moral  and  proverbial  fentences.. 

21  N  2  And 


43^4  ^^^  wifdom  of  religion  jujiifed^ 

^'  F.^  ^5'  -^^"^  ^^^  ^^^^2  ^  appeal  to  the  common  and  daily  ex- 
perience  of  mankind,  whether  we  do  not  generally 
fee  religious  and  good  men  to  have  great  eafe  and 
comfort,  and  fometimes  great  joy  and  tranlport  in 
their  minds,  from  the  reflexion  upon  an  innocent 
and  ufeful,  an  holy  and  virtuous  coune  of  life.  Da- 
vid v/as  fo  confident  of  this,  that  he  appeals  to  com- 
mon obfervation  and  experience  for  the  trutii  of  it, 
Pfal.  xxxvii.  37.  "  Mark  the  perfed  man,  and  be- 
"  hold  the  upright ;  for  the  end  of  that  man  is 
*^'  peace."  Or  as  this  text  is  rendred  in  our  old 
tranilation,  *'  keep  innocency,  take  heed  to  the 
"  thing  that  is  right;  for  that  fhall  bring  a  man 
'*  peace  at  the  lafl."  And  he  gives  the  reafon  of 
this,  ver,  39.  becaufe  God  (lands  by  them  to  fupport 
them  in  this  needful  time,  with  the  comfortable  hopes 
of  his  falvation,  '^  the  falvation  of  the  righteous  is 
*'  of  the  Lord,  he  is  their  help  in  the  time  of 
*'  trouble."  As  they  have  fmcerely  endeavoured  to 
fcrve  Go  p,  fo  they  have  great  hopes  and  confidence 
of  his  mercy  and  goodnefs  to  them,  that .  he  will 
fi:and  by  them,  and  fupport  them  in  their  greateft 
diftrefs,  and  guide  and  condud  them  to  happinefs 
at  the  Uft  5  and  in  this  confidence  they  can  fay  with 
David,  Pial.  xvi.  <S,  9,  1 1.  "I  have  let  the  Lor  p 
''  always  befoi'-e  me  :  becaufe  he  is  at  my  right 
«'  hand,  I  fhall  not  be  moved.  TiK^efore  my  heart 
*'  is  glad,  and  my  glory  rejoiceth  :  my  flefh  alfo 
"  fiiall  reft  in  hope."  For  "  thou  wilt  fhew  me  the 
"  path  of  life  •,  in  thy  prefence  is  fulnefs  of  joy,  at 
*'  thy  right  hand  there  are  pleafares  for  evermore." 
And  Pfal.  xxxi.  5.  "  Into  thy  hand  I  commit  my 
*^  fpirit,  O  Lord  God  of  truth."  And  Pfal. 
xlviii.  i±.  "  This  God  is  our  God   for  ever  and 


in  the  different  ends  of  good  and  bad  men.        43 1^ 
*^  ever,  he  will  be  our  guide  even  unto  death."  And  SE  R  ]Vf. 
again,  Pfal.  Ixxiii.  23,  24,  25,  z6.    "  Neverthelefs,  ^J;^^^f^ 
^'  I  am  continually  with  thee  :  thou  haft  holden  me 
"  by  my  right  hand.     Thou  fhalt  guide  me  with 
*'  thy  counfel,  and  afterward  receive  me  to  glory. 
"  Whom  have  I  in  heaven  but  thee.?   and  there  is 
*'  none  upon  earth  that  I  defire  befides  thee.     My 
*^  flefh    and   my   heart  faileth  :    but  God    is  the 
''  ftrength  of  my  heart,  and  my  portion  for  ever," 
Thus  a  good  man  not  only  in  the  contemplation  of 
death,  and  upon  the  approach  of  it,  but  even  under 
the  very  pangs  of  it,  is  apt  to  comfort  himfcif  in 
the  divine  mercy  and  goodnefs,  and  to  rejoice  in  the 
hopes  of  the  glory  of  G  o  d. 

But  the  wicked,  on  the  contrary,  when  death  makes 
its  approach  towards  them,  the  guilt  of  their  wicked 
Jives  flies  in  their  faces,  and  difturbs  their  minds, 
and  fills  them  with  horror  and  amazement,  with 
'^  a  fearful  expe6lation  of  judgment,  and  fiery  in- 
"  dignation  to  confume  them."  ''  The  expedlation 
'^  of  the  wicked  is  wrath,"  faith  Solomon,  Prov.  xi, 
23.  ''  what  is  the  hope  of  the  hypocrite,"  that  is, 
of  the  wicked  man,  "  when  God  fhall  take  away 
"  his  foul  .?  "  Job  xxvii.  8.  In  their  life-time  they 
neglected  God  and  religion,  and  perhaps  denied 
him,  or  faid  unto  him  with  thofe  in  the  xxift  chap, 
ver.  14.  "  depart  from  us,  for  we  defire  not  i\\q, 
"  knowledge  of  thy  ways ;  "  and  when  they  come 
to  die,  they  find  that  God  is  "  departed  from 
''  them,"  They  have  not  the  confidence  to  look 
up  to  him,  or  to  expedl  any  mercy  or  favour  from 
him,  being  confcious  to  themfelves,  that  they  have 
"  denied  the  G  o  d  which  is  above,"  or  at  jeaft  neo-- 
le6led  and  defpifed  him  j  and  now  "  the  terrors  of 

*'  the 


43 1 6  The  wifdom  of  religion  jujlijied, 

SERM.  cc  the  almighty  take  hold  of  them,  and  his  arrows 
CLxxxvii ,,  ^.^1^  ^^^  .j^  them,"  and  wound  their  confciences, 
and  they  cannot  pluck  them  out,  or  get  rid  of  them ; 
their  fpirits  are  ready  to  fink  within  them,  and  the 
principles  of  infidelity  which  they  once  relied  upon, 
now  fail  them,  and  inflead  of  miniftring  any  com- 
fort and  confidence  to  them,  they  pierce  them  to  the 
heart,  and  are  the  greateft  ground  of  their  trouble 
and  defpair. 

So  that  here  is  a  very  vifible  and  remarkable  dif- 
ference between  good  and  bad  men  when  they  come 
to  die.  Good  men  have  commonly  a  great  calm 
and  ferenity  in  their  minds,  are  full  of  good  hopes 
of  the  mercy  and  favour  of  G  o  d  to  them,  and  of 
the  fenfc  of  *'  his  loving  kindnefs,  which  is  better 
*'  than  life  it  felf " ;  and  are  willing  to  leave  this 
world,  in  the  comfortable  expeftation  and  afTurance  of 
a  better  condition  after  death  ;  and  not  only  will- 
ing, but  many  times  heartily  glad,  that  they  are  go- 
ing out  of  this  "  vale  of  tears,"  out  of  this  fink  of 
fin  and  forrows,  that  they  arc  quitting  thefe  droop- 
ing manfions,  and  exchanging  thefe  "  earthly  taber- 
"  nacles,  for  a  building  of  Go  d,  a  houfe  not  made 
"  with  hands,  eternal  in  the  heavens :  '*  whereas 
the  wicked  is  full  of  trouble  and  anguidi,  and  his 
mind  in  greater  pain  and  diforder  than  his  body ; 
all  ftorm  and  tempefl:,  "  like  the  troubled  fea,  when 
*'  it  cannot  reft  ;  there  is  no  peace,  faith  my  God, 
"  to  the  wicked."  And  "  how  can  there  be  peace," 
when  his  whoredoms  and  adulteries,  his  repeated  adls 
of  drunkennefs  and  intemperance,  his  profane  oaths 
and  blafphemies,  have  been  fo  many  ?  when  he  is 
confcious  to  himfelf  what  a  life  he  hath  led,  and  is 
thoroughly  awakened  to  a  juft  fenfe  of  the  evil  of  his 


doinj^s  ? 


> 


in  the  different  ends  of  good  and  bad  men,        43  17 
dolno-s?  and  when  death  makes  up  to  him,  how  SERm: 

CT  WYVTT 

does  he  dread  the  fight  and  thoughts  of  it,  and  how 
does  he  hanker  after  life,  as  if  all  his  happinefs  de- 
pended upon  it,  and  ended  with  it  ?  and  at  laft,  Hke 
the  young  man  in  the  gofpel,  "  he  goes  away  for- 
*'  rowful,  becaufe,  perhaps,  he  had  great  poflef- 
«'  lions  "  in  this  world,  and  hath  no  hopes  at  all  ia 
the  other.  '^  This  is  the  portion  of  a  wicked  man 
*'  from  God,  and  the  heritage  appointed  to  him 
''  by  God." 

There  are,  I  confefs,  fome  exceptions  to  the  con- 
trary on  both  fides  j  but  they  are  but  few  in  compa- 
rifon,  and  by  no  means  fufficient  to  infringe  the 
general  truth  of  this  obfervation. 

On  the  other  hand,  fome  good  men  are  very  me- 
lancholy and  difpirited,  when  they  come  to  die,  and 
leave  the  world  full  of  fears  and  jealoufies  concern- 
ing their  future  condition  •  and  this  may  proceed 
from  feveral  caufes.  Perhaps  they  are  naturally  of 
a  dark  and  melancholy  temper,  which  is  ufually 
heightened  and  increafed  by  bodily  weaknefs  and  dif- 
temper  -,  and  in  this  cafe  it  is  no  wonder,  if  the  con- 
fiderations  of  religion  be  not  fufficient  to  fcattcr 
thefe  clouds,  and  to  over-rule  and  corred  the  irrcs-u- 
larities  of  our  bodily  temper  ;  becaufe  the  principles 
and  confiderations  of  religion  do  not  work  naturally 
and  by  way  of  phyfick,  but  morally,  and  by  way 
of  convidlion  and  counfel.  Sometimes  this  fear  and 
deje6tion  of  mind  in  good  men,  proceeds  from  mere 
lownefs  and  faintnefs  of  fpirit,  naturally  caufed  by 
the  load  and  continuance  of  the  diftemper  which 
they  labour  under,  and  by  which  the  mind  is  like- 
wife  in  fome  degree  weakened  and  broken  •,  and 
when  this  happens,  it  is  ufually  very  vifible,  and 

confe-'^v 


43  1 8  The  "ivifdom  of  religion  jujiijiedy 

SERM.  confequently  the  account  of  it  eafy  and  obvious^ 
, -._/  and  fomctimes  perhaps  we  are  charitably  mis- 
taken in  our  good  man,  and  either  he  is  not  a  fin- 
cerely  good  man,  or  not  fo  good  as  we  took  him 
to  be  ;  perhaps  his  Hfc  hath  been  very  unequal,  and 
full  of  great  fiilings :  and  in  either  cafe,  it  is  no 
wonder,  if  the  man  have  not  that  peace  and  com- 
fort, which  is  anfwerable  to  our  good  opinion  of 
him  ;  if  this  man  be  not  fincerely  good,  there  is  no 
real  foundation  of  peace  and  comfort;  for  "  thd 
"  hope  of  the  hypocrite  ihall  perifh  :  whofe  hope 
"  fhall  be  cut  off,  and  whofe  trufl:  fhall  be  as  a  fpi- 
*^  der's  web.  He  fliall  lean  upon  his  houfe,  but  it  fhall 
*'  not  fland  ;  he  fhall  hold  it  fad,  but  it  fliall  not 
''  endure'*  as  one  of  Job's  friends  fpeaks,  Job  viii. 
14,  15.  And  ver.  20.  "  Behold,  God  will  not  cafi: 
*'  away  a  perfed,  or  fincere  man  ;  '*  neither  will 
"  he  help,  or  fupport  the  evil  doers."  Or  tho' 
he  have  been  in  the  main  a  good  man,  yet  perhaps 
with  a  great  mixture  of  imperfe6lion,  and  many 
great  failings,  and  negledls  ;  and  then  it  is  no  won- 
der, if  his  mind  be  not  fo  calm,  and  clear  of  doubts 
and  jcaloufies  concerning  his  condition  :  for  propor- 
tionably  to  the  breaches  and  inequalities  of  our  obe- 
dience, and  our  more  and  greater  failings,  will  our 
peace  and  comfort,  hving  and  dying,  be  naturally 
abated  and  interrupted.  But  thefe  cafes  are  not 
many,  it  is  fuiiicient  that  it  is  generally  othcrwife 
with  good  men,  and  that  their  end  is  peace.  And 
this  is  fo  remarkable,  that  Balaam,  when  he  was 
reckoning  up  the  blcflings  and  privileges  of  the  peo-- 
pie  of  Ifrael,  the  type  of  good  men  in  all  ages,  he 
takes  particular  notice  of  their  happy  end,  as  a  mofl 
fignal   and  invaluable   blefling  -,  which  made   him 

break 


in  the  different  ends  of  good  and  bad  men.        43  1 9 
break  out  into  that  vvifh,  Numb,  xxiii.  10.  *'  Let  SERM. 

CLXXXVil 

*«  me  die  the  death  of  the  righteous,  and  let  my  lail 
*'  end  be  like  his." 

And  on  the  other  hand,  it  cannot  be  denied,  but  that 
fome  very  bad  men,  (as  bad  as  we  can  well  imagine) 
have  pad  out  of  this  world,  not  only  quiet  and  undii^ 
Curbed,  but  with  a  great  deal  of  courage  and  refolution. 
And  this  I  beheve  in  fact  and  experience,  at  lead 
according  to  my  bed  obfervation,  is  the  more  rare 
cafe  of  the  two ;  for  a  notorious  bad  man  to  die  in 
perfed  peace,  than  for  a  good  man  to  die  in  great 
trouble  and  perplexity  of  mind.  But  this,  when  ic 
hapjxns,  may  probably  enough  be  aicribcd  to  one  or 
more  of  thefe  caufes,  either  to  the  miftake  of  the 
by-ftanders,  who  take  filence  for  peace ;  and  becaufe 
the  man  is  of  a  ftrong  refolution,  and  hath  a  good 
command  of  himfelf,  and  does  not  think  fit  to  trou- 
ble others,  in  a  m.atter  in  which  he  thinks  they  can 
give  him  no  comfort  and  relief;  they  interpret  this 
to  be  tranquillity  of  mind  :  becaufe  he  holds. his  peace 
and  fays  nothing,  they  think  he  hath  peace,  and 
that  all  is  quiet  within.  But  I  remember  the  obfer- 
vation of  a  very  wife  hiftorian,  Phil.  Comines,  who 
fays,  that  he  knew  in  his  time  feveral  great  perfons, 
who  in  ordinary  converfation,  and  to  a  fuperficial 
view,  feemed  to  be  very  happy  and  contented,  but 
yet  to  them  who  knew  them  more  intimately,  and  in 
their  private  freedoms  and  recefTes,  were  the  moft 
miferable  and  difcontented  perfons  in  the  world.  This 
I  confefs  is  very  rare,  for  men  to  conceal  a  very  great 
trouble,  and  more  yet  for  a  man  to  diflTemble  when 
dying ;  and  yet  there  is  reafon  to  believe  it  fometimes 
happens. 

Vo  L.  X,  21  O  Some- 

2. 


The  wifdom  of  religion  jiijiifiedy 
Sometimes  the  quiet  death  of  a  very  bad  man, 
proceeds  from  ftupidity,  and  want  of  a  jufl  fenfe  of 
the  danger  of  his  condition,  and  this  from  want  of 
difcipJine  and  inftrudion  in  the  nature  and  principles 
of  religion :  this  temper  looks  like  courage,  becaufe 
it  is  fearlefs  of  danger  ;  but  this  fearlefnefs  is  founded 
in  great  ignorance  and  want  of  apprehenfion ;  where- 
as a  true  courage  difcerns  the  danger,  and  yet  thinks 
it  fit  and  reafonable  to  venture  upon  it.  Now  this 
flupidity  of  dying  men,  who  have  lived  very  ill,  is 
commonly  the  cafe  of  fuch  as  have  been  brought  up 
in  great  ignorance,  and  have  lived  in  great  fenfuali- 
ty,  by  which  means  their  fpirits  are  immcrs'd,  and 
even  ftifled  in  carnality  and  fenfe ;  and  no  wonder,  if 
they  who  live  like  beads,  die  after  the  fame  manner. 
And  thus  our  Saviour  reprefents  the  rich  glutton 
in  the  parable,  as  never  coming  to  himfelf,  and  a 
fenfe  of  his  condition,  till  he  was  awakened  by  the 
flames  of  hell;  Luke  xvi.  22,  23.  "  The  rich  man 
**  alfo  died,  and  was  buried,  and  in  hell  he  lift  up 
"  his  eyes,  being  in  torment."  As  if  he  had  never 
been  awakened  till  then,  his  voluptuous  and  fenfual 
courfe  of  life  rendring  him  infenfible  of  another 
world. 

Or  elfe  this  falfe  peace  may  be  afcribed  to  the  de- 
lufion  of  falfe  principles,  by  virtue  whereof  it  is  of- 
ten feen,  that  men  die  in  a  very  bad  caufe,  not  only 
without  any  regret  and  trouble,  but  with  chearfulnels 
and  fatisfaclion  :  and  this  is  not  to  be  wondred  at, 
becaufe  every  man's  confcience  is  a  kind  of  God  to 
him  •,  and  whether  a  man  be  in  the  right  or  wrong, 
fo  long  as  he  thinks  he  does  well,  "  and  his  heart 
*'  condemns  him  not,"  he  is  apt  ''  to  have  confi- 
''  dence  towards  Go  Di"  but  for  all  that,  it  greatly 

concerns 


in  the  different  ends  of  good  and  had  men.        4321 
concerns  every  man  to  take  great  care  to  inform  his  SERM. 

i-.        .r  -11  1        •  •    1    -         1      •     CLXXXVII 

confcience.  For  it  men  will  not  be  impartial  in  their  ^ 
enquiry  after  truth,  and  be  not  ready  "  to  receive  it 
"  in  the  love  of  it,"  St.  Paul  tells  us,  "  that  for  this 
"  caufe,  God  may  fend  them  ftrong  delufions,  that 
"  they  fhould  believe  a  lye,  and  that  they  might  be 
<«  damned,  becaufe  they  believed  not  the  truth,  but 
«'  had  pleafure  in  unrightcoufnefs,"  2  ThcfT.  ii.  10, 
II,  12.  that  is,  in  falfhood  and  impofturc :  for  fo 
the  word  a^^^t/a,  which  is  here  rendred  unrighteouf- 
nefs,  is  fometimes  ufed  in  the  new  teflament. 

And  this  is  the  lad  caufe  I  fhall  mention,  to  which 
the  falfe  peace  of  wicked  men,  when  they  come  to 
die,  is  to  be  afcribed,  viz.  to  the  laft  judgment  of 
God,  who  permits  great  Tinners  to  be  fo  hardened 
in  an  evil  courfe,  as  neither  living  nor  dying,  to  be 
awakened  to  a  fenfe  of  their  condition  •,  fuch  as  the 
apoftle  fpeaks  of,  i  Tim.  iv.  2.  who  are  faid  to  have 
"  their  confciences  feared,  as  it  were,  with  a  hot 
*^  iron."  This,  it  is  to  be  hoped,  is  but  the  cafe  of  a 
few,  that  are  thus  utterly  forfaken  of  Go  d,  and  left 
to  perilh  in  their  own  hardnefs  and  obftinacy.  This 
is  like  a  gangrene  in  the  body,  which  mortifies  the 
part,  and  leaves  it  without  fenfe,  and  thereby  incapa- 
ble of  recovery.     I  proceed,  in  the 

Second  place,  to  fhew  whence  this  difference  be- 
tween good  and  bad  men,  v/hen  they  come  to  die, 
does  proceed.  And  here  I  fhall  endeavour  to  fhew, 
that  this  difference  is  founded  in  the  true  nature  and 
reafon  of  the  things  themfelves-,  in  the  nature  of  re- 
ligion and  virtue,  and  of  impiety  and  vice;  in  the 
different  ways  and  courfes  of  good  and  bad  men, 
which  do  naturally  tend  to  thefe  different  ends. 

2 1  O  i  And 


4322  7he  mfdom  of  religion  jujlifledy 

SE  R  M.      ^ri(j  tQ  make  out  this  more  clearly  and  diftlnflly, 

CLXXXVIl  J  J  ' 

I  fhall  endeavour  to  manifefl:  thefc  two  things. 

I.  That  a  religious  and  virtuous  life,  is  a  real 
ground  of  peace  and  ferenity  of  mind,  of  comfort 
and  joy,  under  all  the  evils  and  calamities  of  life,  and 
efpecially  at  the  hour  of  death. 

II.  That  impiety  and  wickednefs  is  a  real  founda- 
tion of  guilt  and  fear,  of  horror  and  defpair  in  the 
day  of  adverfity  and  afflidion,  and  more  efpecially  in 
the  approaches  of  death. 

I.  That  a  religious  and  virtuous  life  is  a  real  ground 
of  peace  and  ferenity  of  mind,  of  comfort  and  joy, 
under  all  the  evils  and  calamities  of  life,  and  efpeci- 
ally at  the  hour  of  death. 

Under  the  evils  and  calamities  of  life,  innocency 
is  a  great  flay  and  fupport  to  our  minds  under  fuffer- 
ings,  and  will  bear  up  our  fpirits,  when  nothing  elfe 
can,  efpecially  if  a  man  fuffer  for  a  good  confcience, 
*'  and  for  righteoufnefs  fake;"  becaufe  then,  befide 
the  comfort  of  innocency,  we  are  intitled  in  a  fpecial 
manner  to  the  favour  of  Go d,  and  the  comforts  and 
fjpports  of  his  Ho  LY  S  p  I  R I  t,  and  the  hopes  of  a 
glorious  reward  from  that  God,  for  whofe  fiike  and 
in  whofe  caufe  we  fuffer.  All  trouble  is  tolerable  to 
him  who  hath  no  burden  of  guilt  upon  his  mind,  to 
him  who  is  at  peace  with  his  own  confcience,  and  at 
peace  with  God,  and  is  afTured  of  his  favour  and 
friendfhip,  of  his  providence  and  care,  of  his  appro- 
bation, and  reward;  this  is  a  firm  ground,  not  only  of 
patience,  but  of  joy  to  a  good  man,  in  the  fiddefh 
and  mod  difmal  condition  he  can  fall  into.  ''  Unto 
"  the  upright  (faith  the  pfalmift)  there  arifeth  light 
''  in  darknefs,"  Pfal.  cxii.  4.  And  no  wonder,  be- 
c.iufe  he  that  fears  G  0  D,  and  ferve  hims  faithfully, 

and 


in  the  dtferent  ends  of  good  and  bad  men.        43  23 
and  fuffers  for  him  patiently,  hath  laid  a  fure  founda-  S  E  R  M. 

CLXXXVIl 

tion  of  comfort  to  himfelf,  hath  fown  the  feeds  of;,..-^^-,^ 
contentment  and  peace,  of  joy  and  gladncfs  in  his 
own  mind,  which  will  fpring  up  and  flourifh  moH:, 
when  wc  are  in  the  mod  deftitute  and  afilidled  condi- 
tion. "  Light  is  fown  for  the  righteous,  and  glad- 
"  nefs  for  the  upright  in  heart,"  fays  David,  Pfal. 
xcvii.  II.  "  The  work  of  righteoufnels  fhall  be 
"  peace,  and  the  effedl  of  righteoufnefs,  quietnefs, 
*'  and  aflurance  for  ever,"  faith  the  prophet,  Ifa. 
xxxii.  17. 

And  more  efpecially  at  the  hour  of  death,  then  the 
comfort  of  a  good  man  overflows,  and  "  he  lifts  up 
"  his  head  with  joy,  becaufe  his  redemption  draweth 
*'  nigh:"  then  the  reflexion  upon  a  well-fpent  and 
unfpotted  life,  fills  his  foul  with  abundant  confoJation, 
with  "  joy  unlpcakable  and  full  of  glory;"  for 
God,  and  the  things  of  another  world,  appear  iriore 
real  and  fubftantial  to  him,  as  he  draws  near  to  them, 
and  his  faith  begins  to  be  turned  into  fight  and  frui- 
tion ;  he  now  (lands  upon  the  confines  of  both  worlds, 
and  difcerns  more  clearly  the  vanity  and  emptinefs  of 
that  which  he  is  going  from,  and  the  fubftantial  and 
durable  happinefs  of  that  which  he  is  entring  into. 
Here  is  the  trial  of  our  faith,  and  the  proof  of  reli- 
gion, by  the  real  fruits  and  effefts  of  it,  in  the  peace 
and  comfort  which  it  gives  to  a  good  man,  when  he 
is  leaving  this  world;  fo  that  "  when  he  walks 
"  through  the  valley  of  death,  he  fears  no  ill,"  and 
his  hopes  are  then  mod  lively  and  vigorous,  when  he 
is  ready  to  give  up  the  ghoft: ;  the  voice  of  nature, 
and  of  every  man's  reafon  and  confcience,  as  well  as 
fcripture,  "  fays  to  the  righteous,  it  fhall  be  well  with 
**  him,  for  he  Ihall  eat  the  fruit  of  his  doings ;  but 

*'  wo 


4324.  ^he  wifdom  of  religion  jujlifiedy 

SERM.  «  wo  unto  the  wicked,  it  Hiali   be  111  with  him,  for 

the  reward  of  his  hards  fliall  be  given  him." 
Which  brings  me  to  the 

lid  thing,  namely,  that  impiety  and  wickednefs  is 
a  real  foundation  of  guilt  and  fear,  of  horror  and  de- 
fpair,  in  the  day  of  adverfity  and  afflidlion,  and  efpe- 
cially  in  the  approaches  of  death. 

And  how  can  it  be  othervvife,  when  all  inward 
fupport  and  comfort  fail  him,  and  all  forts  of  evi] 
and  calamity  inward  and  outward,  affault  him,  and 
break  in  upon  him  at  once  ?  when  the  principles  of 
infidelity  fail  him,  and  what  he  had  made  out  fo  fpe- 
ciouOy  to  himfelf,  vanifheth  into  nothing,  "  as  a 
*'  dream  when  one  awakens,  and  as  a  vifion  in  the 
*'  night?"  for  when  any  great  calamity  befals  this 
man,  God,  '*  who  was  not  before  in  all  his  thoughts," 
then  begins  to  appear  terrible  to  him,  and  he  cannot 
banifh  the  thoughts  and  fear  of  him  out  of  his  mind. 
But  how  uncomfortable  is  this,  to  be  convinc'd  there 
is  a  G  o  D,  when  a  man  hath  moft  need  of  him,  and 
can  lead  hope  for  his  favour  and  pity  ? 

But  efpeciaily  at  the  approach  of  death,  what  a  fad 
preparation  for  that  is  an  impious  and  wicked  life  ? 
How  does  his  confcience  then  fly  in  his  face,  and  how 
bitter  is  the  remembrance  of  thofe  fins  which  he 
committed  v/ith  fo  much  pleafure  and  greedinefs  .^ 
What  a  terror  is  the  almighty  to  him,  and  the  appre- 
henfion  of  that  vengeance  that  threatens  him,  and 
that  eternal  mifery  which  is  ready  to  fwallow  him  up? 
And  in  the  midft  of  all  this  anguifh  and  horror,  which 
naturally  fpring  from  an  evil  confcience,  and  the  guilt 
of  a  wicked  life,  he  is  deftitute  of  all  comfort  and 
hope;  "  he  hath  denied  the  God  that  is  above," 
and  now  he  dares  not  look  up  to  him  :  his  whole  life 

hath 


in  the  different  ends  of  good  and  bad  men.        43  25 
hath  been  a  continued  affront  of  the  divine  majefty,  S  E  R  M. 

CLXXXVII 

and  an  infolent  defiance  of  his  juftice  •,  and  what  hopes 
can  he  now  reafonably  have  of  his  mercy  ?  "  of  the 
*'  G  o  D  that  formed  him,  he  hath  been  unmindful,'* 
and  hath  ufed  him  with  all  the  defpite  he  could ;  and 
therefore  he  hath  all  the  reafon  in  the  world  to  con- 
cllide,  that  "  he  that  made  him  will  not  fave  him, 
"  and  he  that  formed  him  will  have  no  mercy  on 
*'  him."  And  this  is  the  natural  confequcnce  of  im- 
piety and  wickednefs,  it  fills  the  foul  of  a  dying  fm- 
ner  with  trouble  and  anguifh,  with  guilt  and  defpair, 
when  he  is  leaving  the  world,  and  puts  him  into  the 
moil  difmal  condition  that  can  be  imagined  on  this 
fide  hell,  and  very  like  to  it^  without  comfort,  and 
without  hope.     I  proceed  to  the 

Third  and  lafl  thing  I  propofed,  viz.  that  if  this 
be  true,  it  is  a  demonftration  on  the  fide  of  religion, 
and  doth  fully  juftify  and  acquit  the  wifdom  of  it, 
and  that  upon  thefc  three  accounts : 

I.  Becaufe  the  principles  of  religion,  and  the  prac- 
tice of  them  in  a  virtuous  life,  when  they  come  to  the 
lall;  and  utmoft  trial,  do  hold  out,  and  are  a  lirm  and 
unfhaken  foundation  of  peace  and  comfort  to  us. 

II.  That  they  miniilcr  comfort  to  us  in  the  mod 
needful  and  defirable  time. 

III.  That  when  men  are  commonly  more  lerious, 
and  fober,  and  impartial,  and  when  their  declarations 
and  words  are  thought  to  be  of  greateft  weight  and 
credit,  they  give  this  tcllimony  to  religion  and  virtue, 
and  againft  impiety  and  vice. 

I.  That  the  principles  of  religion,  and  the  prac- 
tice of  them  in  a  virtuous  life,  when  they  come  to  the 
laft  and  utmoft  trial,  do  hold  out,  and  are  a  firm  and 
unfhaken  foundation  of  peace  and  comfort  to  good 

men. 


4  ;  2  6  The  wifdom  of  religion  jujiijiedy 

SERM.  men,  at  that  time.  The  belief  of  a  God,  andofhispro« 
vidcnce  and  care  of  good  men,  and  that  "  he  is  a  rewar- 
der  of  them  that  "  diligently  feek  him  s"  the  perfuafion 
of  our  own  immortality,  and  of  the  eternal  recompence 
of  another  world ;  "  that  Jesus  Christ  came  into 
*'  the  world  to  fave  fmners,"  and  to  purchafe  eternal 
life  and  happinefs  for  thofe,  who  "  by  patient  con- 
"  tinuance  in  well-doing,  feck  for  glory,  and  honour, 
'*  and  immortality:"  I  fay,  the  belief  of  thefe 
things,  is  commonly  mod  flrong  and  vigorous  in  the 
minds  of  good  men,  when  they  come  to  die  ;  and 
they  have  then  a  more  clear  apprehenfion,  and  firm 
perfuafion  of  the  truth  and  reality  of  thefe  things, 
than  ever  they  had  in  any  time  of  their  lives,  and 
find  more  comfort  from  them,  more  peace  and  joy  in 
the  belief  of  them.  And  this  is  the  great  time  of 
trial,  when  death  prefcnts  itfelf  to  us,  and  the  terrors 
of  it  compafs  us  about,  whether  upon  occafion  of  pcr- 
fecution  or  ficknefs.  Thefe  are  "  the  rains,  and 
**  ftorms,  and  winds,"  which  will  try  upon  what 
foundation  our  peace  and  comfort  is  built ;  and  no- 
thing but  the  principles  of  religion,  fincerely  believed 
and  pradiled,  will  make  us  firm  and  impregnable 
againfl  thefe  afTaults.  So  our  S  a  v  i  o  u  r  afTures  us, 
Matth.  vii.  24,  25.  "  whofoever  heareth  thefe  fayings 
''  of  mine,  and  doth  them,"  that  is,  believes  and  prac- 
tifeth  my  dodlrine,  "  I  will  hken  him  to  a  wife  man, 
*'  which  built  his  houfe  upon  a  rock,  and  the  rain  de- 
*'  fcended,  and  the  floods  came,  and  the  winds  blew, 
*«  and  beat  upon  that  houfe,  and  it  fell  not,  for  it 
*'  was  founded  upon  a  rock." 

And  on  the  contrary,  the  principles  of  infidelity 
and  vice,  are  mofl  apt  to  fhrink  and  give  back  at 
fuch  a  time:  nay,  for  the  moil  part  they  vanifh  and 

difappear. 


/;/  the  different  ends  of  good  and  bad  men,  4327 
difappear,  and  upon  the  apprehenfion  of  death,  anew  SERM, 
light  as  it  were  fprings  up  in  their  minds,  and  things  ^_-,^^.^ 
appear  quite  contrary  to  that  fcheme  which  they  had 
form'd,  and  which  they  had  taken  fo  much  pains  to 
maintain  and  make  probable  to  themfelves ;  and  that 
hypothefis  which  they  had  been  fo  long  a  building, 
appears  now  to  have  no  foundation,  and  falls  at  once, 
and  all  their  hopes  together  with  it.  And  now  the 
infidel  "  believes  and  trembles,"  is  fenfible  of  his 
wicked  life,  and  of  the  vengeance  that  hangs  over 
him,  and  was  never  in  his  life  half  ^b  well  fatisfied  of 
the  principles  of  infidelity,  as  he  is  now  convinc'd  of 
the  contrary,  to  his  infinite  trouble  and  confufion, 
that  there  is  a  God,  and  another  life  after  this,  and 
a  terrible  punifhment  to  the  workers  of  iniquity. 

And  daily  experience  confirms  to  us  the  certainty 
and  truth  of  this  matter,  and  that  there  is  this  diffe- 
rence for  the  mo  ft  part  very  vifible  in  the  temper  and 
carriage  of  good  and  bad  men,  when  they  come 
to  die. 

II.  The  principles  of  religion  and  virtue  do  mini- 
fler  comfort  to  us  in  the  molt  needful  and  defirable 
times  ;  and  on  the  contrary,  the  principles  of  infide- 
lity and  vice  do  not  only  fail  us  in  this  day  of  dif- 
trefs,  but  give  great  trouble  to  us  at  the  moft  un-. 
feafonable  time. 

And  this  makes  a  mighty  difference  between  the 
condition  of  thefe  two  forts  of  perfons  ;  for  when 
would  a  man  defire  to  be  at  peace  and  quiet  in  his 
mind,  but  when  his  body  is  reftlefs,  and  in  pain  ? 
When  would  a  man  wifh  for  "  ftrong  confolation 
*'  and  hope,"  that  "  anchor  of  the  foul,  fure  and 
<«  ftedfaft,"  as  the  apoftle  to  the  Hebrews  calls  it, 
but  in  that  laft  and  terrible  conflidt  of  nature,  with 

Vol.  X.  21  P  "the 


4328  T^e  nvifdom  of  religion  jujlijied^ 

SERM.  «  the  lafl:  of  enemies,'*  which  is  "  death?'*     And 

CLXXXVII 

when  would  a  man  dread  trouble  and  anguifh  of 
mind,  but  at  fuch  a  time,  when  he  is  hardly  able  t® 
fuftain  his  bodily  pains  and  infirmities  ?    If  it  be  true 
of  every  day  of  our  lives,  '*  fufRcient  for  the  day  is 
*'  the  evil   thereof;"    much   more  of   the  day  of 
death :  it  is  enough  furely  to  have   that  one  enemy 
to  encounter,  at  which  nature  ftartles,  and  our  bed 
reafon  can  hardly  furnifh  us  with  force  enough  for 
the  conflidl,  even  when  ''  the  fling  of  death"  is  ta- 
ken away,  I  mean  the  guilt  of  an  evil  confcience : 
but  when  all  evils  aflail  a  man  at  once,  pains  without, 
and  terrors  within,  a  weak  body,  and  "  a  wounded 
"  fpirit,"  an  incurable  difeafe,  and  intolerable  de- 
fpair,  death  ready  to  alTault  us,  and  hell  following  it, 
how  unfeafonable  is  the  conjuncSture  of  fo  many  and 
fo  great  evils  ?  Wife  men  are  wont  to  provide  with 
great  care  againfl  fuch  a  time,  that  they  may  not  be 
opprefTed  with  too  many  troubles  at  once;  and  there- 
fore in  the   time  of  their  health,  they  fettle  their 
worldly  concernments,   and   make  their  wills,  that 
when  ficknefs  or  death  comes,  they  may  have  no  care 
upon  them,  nothing  to  do  but  to  die.     This  is  a 
time,  when  all  the  force  of  our  reafon,  and  all  the 
comfort  and  hope  that  religion  can  give,  will  be  lit- 
tle enough  to  give  us  a  quiet  and  undifturbed  paiTage 
out  of  this  world  into  the  other:   and  we  fhall  be 
very  miferable,  if  the  terrors  and  flings  of  a  guilty 
confcience,  and  the  pangs  of  death,  do  feizc  upon 
us  at  once.     And  therefore  a  wife  man  would  make 
it  the  bufinefs  of  his  whole  life,  to  prevent  this  un- 
happy concurrence  of  evils,  fo  unfupportable  to  hu- 
mane nature ;  and  to  render  death,  which  is  grievous 
ajid  ierrible  enough  of  itfelf,  as  comfortable  and  eafy 


in  the  different  ends  of  good  and  bad  men.         4329 
as  *tis  poiTible.     For  if  there  were  nothing  beyond  SERM. 
this  Jife,  yet  it  were  worth  the  while  to  provide  for, 
a  quiet  death ;  and  if  men  were  fure  to  be  pofTclTed 
of  thefe  paflions  of  hope  and  fear,   of  comfort  and 
defpair,    which   ufually  attend  good  and  bad  men 
when  they  come  to  (Mq^  there  is  no  man    that  cal- 
culates things  wifely,  would,  for  aJI  the  pleafures  of 
fin,  forfeit  the  peace  and  comfort  of  a  righteous  foul, 
going    outi  of  the   world    full    of  the    hopes  of  a 
blefTed  immortality  ;  and  endure  the  anguifh  and  tor- 
ment of  a  guilty  confcience,  and  the  amazing  terrors 
of  a  defpairing  and  dying  fmner.  This  is  a  condition 
fo  fad  and   fearful,  that  a  wife  man  would  avoid  it 
upon  any  terms. 

III.  When  men  are  commonly  more  ferious,  and 
fober,  and  impartia;]',  and  their  declarations  and  words 
are  thought  to  be  of  greatefl:  weight  and  credit, 
they  give  this  teftimony  to  religion  and  virtue,  and 
againft  impiety  and  vice. 

It  is  generally  feen,  when  fnen  come  to  die,  that 
the  manner  of  their  death  is  anfwerable  to  the  courfc 
of  their  life ;  that  the  reflexion  upon  a  holy  and 
virtuous  life,  is  a  great  eafe  and  comfort  to  mens 
minds :  and  on  the  contrary,  the  guilt  of  a  wicked 
life  is  apt  to  fly  in  their  faces,  and  to  difturb  their 
minds,  and  fill  them  with  horror.  And  this  is  a 
critical  time,  when  the  confciences  of  men  are  ufual- 
ly awake,  and  apt  to  pafs  an  impartial  judgment  and 
cenfure  upon  themfelves.  And  for  this,  the  infidel 
may  believe  one  of  his  own  great  authors,  I  mean 
Lucretius,  who  obferves,  that  when  men  are  in  dif- 
trefs  and  the  apprehenfions  of  death  are  upon  them, 
religion  doth  then  fhew  its  force. 

21  P  2  Jcrius 


43  3  o  ^ht  nvifdom  of  religion  jujlifiejy 

S  E  R  M.      Acrius  advertunt  animos  ad  rel'igionem^ 

CI  XXXVlI 

"  The  thoughts  of  it  are  then  more  pungent  and 
"  powerful  upon  their  minds." 

]>lam  ver^  voces  turn  demum  pe£lore  ah  imo 

EJiciuntur,  iff  eripitur  perfona^  manet  res. 

"  Mens  words  then  come  from  the  bottom  of 
*'  their  hearts,  the  mask  is  taken  off,  and  things  then 
'^  appear  to  them  as  indeed  they  are." 

Now,  that  when  men  are  {o  impartial  and  in  good 
earneft,  when  they  (land  upon  the  confines  of  both 
worlds,  and  can  view  them  at  once,  when  they  are 
leaving  this  world,  and  are  now  no  longer  in  danger 
of  being  blinded  or  flattered,  or  tempted  by  it,  and 
are  juft  ready  to  pafs  into  the  other  world,  and  fo 
much  the  more  likely  to  difcern  the  reality  of  it,  as 
they  approach  near  to  it  j  I  fay,  that  in  thefe  cir- 
cumftances,  men  generally  declare  on  the  fide  of 
piety  and  virtue,  and  declaim  moft  vehemently  againft 
their  fins  and  vices ;  that  generally  fpeaking,  and  ac- 
cording to  what  is  commonly  feen  in  experience,  the 
man  who  hath  led  a  religious  and  virtuous  life,  is, 
when  he  conies  to  die,  quiet  and  eafy  to  himfelf,  hath 
no  regret  at  what  he  hath  done,  no  fevere  and  angry 
reflexions  upon  the  ftrid:  courfe  of  a  virtuous  life,  his 
confcience  doth  not  accufe  or  upbraid,  or  terrify 
him,  for  having  lived  "  foberly,  and  righteoufly, 
*'  and  godly  in  chis  world  y  nay,  fo  far  from  this, 
that  if  he  hath  any  trouble,  it  is  not  becaufe  he  hath 
lived  pioufly  and  yirtuoufly,  but  becaufe  he  hath  not 
lived  more  {o^  becaufe  he  hath  come  fhort  of  his 
duty,  and  hath  been  fo  imperfedly  and  inconftantly 
good  :  that  generally  dying  men  repent  of  their  evil 
adions,  and  are  troubled  for  them,  but  no  man  ever 
repented  himfelf  of  ferving  God,  and  doing  good. 

This 


in  the  different  ends  of  good  and  bad  men.        433  r 
This  furelv  is  a  ereat  teftimony  on  the  fide  of  re-  S  E  R  M. 

'  .       .  .  CLXXSVl't 

ligion  and  virtue,  becaufe  it  is  the  teftimony  not  on- 
ly of  the  friends  to  religion,  but  of  thofe  who  have 
been  the  greateft  enemies  to  it,  and  at  a  time  when 
they  are  mod  likely  to  declare  the  inward  fenfe  of 
their  minds,  and  to  fpeak  mod  impartially,  without 
defign  or  difguife.  When  the  ungodly  man  and  the 
finner  comes  to  lie  upon  a  death- bed,  he  hath  then 
other  apprehenfions  of  things  than  he  had,  or  Vv^ould 
own  to  have  in  the  days  of  his  health  and  profperity, 
and  his  foul  is  full  of  fadnefs  and  trouble,  of  per- 
plexity and  anguifli,  of  fear  arid  defpair,  becaufe  of 
the  wicked  and  lewd  life  which  he  hath  led.  But  why 
art  thou  fo  difmay'd,  man?  why  fo  troubled  and 
eaft  down,  fo  relllefs  and  unquiet,  fo  wretched  and 
miferable  in  thine  own  thoughts  ? 

If  thou  haft  done  well  in  renouncing  the  princi- 
ples'of  religion,  and  breaking  loofe   from  all  obli- 
gations of  duty  and  confcience,  in  gratifying  thine 
inclinations  and  lulls,  why  art  thou  now  troubled 
at  it  ?  If  thou  wert  in  the  right  all  the  while,  why 
doft  thou  now  ftand  to  it,  and  juftify  thy  adings, 
and   bear  up   like  a  man  ?    If  the  principles  thou 
wenteft  upon  were  found  and  firm,  why  doft  thou 
not    ftill  take   comfort  and    fupport   from  them  ? 
Why  does  thy  heart  faint,  and  thy  fpirit  fink  with- 
in thee  ?  How  comes  thy  imagination  to  be  fo  dil^ 
turbed  with  fuch  frightful  appearances,  and  to  haunt 
thee  continually  with  fuch  vain  and  groundlefs  ter- 
rors ?  Whence  is  it   that  thofe  who  have  taken  a 
contrary  courfe,  and  lived  a  quite  different  life,  have 
fo  much  the  advantage  of  thee,  in  the  comfort,  and 
peace,  and  tranquillity  of  their  minds  when   they 
f ome  to  die  ? 

But 


4332  ^he  tiiifdom  of  religion  jujlijled^ 

S  E  R  M.      But  if  thou  baft  been  in  the  wrong,  and  doft  now 
CLxxxvit  ^jfrg|-^  rg^i   ^.^yfj.    fQj.  fQ  much  trouble  and   fear, 

why  doit  thou  not  confider  in  time?  why  waft  thou 
not  troubled  fooner,  when  trouble  would  have  dono 
thee  good,  and  a  great  pare  of  the  anguifh  which 
thou  now  feeleft,  and  all  the  mifery  thou  art  fo 
afraid  of,  might  efFedlually  have  been  prevented  ? 

I  think  it  is  faid  by  thofe  who  are  concerned,  to 
take  off  the  force  of  this  terrible  objection  againft 
infidelity  and  a  wicked  life  ;  that  when  men  are  in 
a  dying  condition,  their  fpirits  are  low,  and  their 
underftandings  weak  and  difturbed,  and  their  minds 
thrown  off  the  hinges  ;  and  therefore  it  is  no  wonder 
if  they  want  that  firmaefs  and  refolution  of  fpirit, 
that  confideration  ^nd  courage,  which  they  had  in 
the  time  of  their  health. 

This  is  fpecioufly  faid,  and  with  fome  ihew  and 
appearance  of  reafon  :  but  it  does  by  no  means  an- 
fwer,  and  take  off  the  objedion.  For  if  this  were 
a  true  reafon  at  the  bottom,  why  is  it  not  true  on 
both  fides  ?  why  are  not  both  forts  of  men,  when 
they  are  fick  and  near  to  die,  thofe  who  have  lived 
pioufly  and  virtuoufly,  as  well  as  the  loofe  and 
wicked  livers,  equally  troubled^ why  are  they  not 
difturbed  and  afraid  alike  ?  hath  not  ficknefs  the 
fame  natural  effed:  upon  them,  and  does  it  not  equal- 
ly weaken  and  dilbrder  their  minds  ?  But  we  fee  ge- 
nerally in  experience  a  plain  and  remarkable  diffe- 
rence between  thefe  two  forts  of  men,  when  they 
come  to  die  J  fo  plain,  that  it  is  not  to  be  denied; 
and  fo  remarkable,  that  there  muft  be  fome  confi- 
derable  caufe  of  it ;  and  fo  general  and  conftant, 
that  it  cannot  without  great  folly  and  perverfenefs 
be  imputed  to  chance.     Now  what  can  we  imagine 

ihould 


In  the  different  ends  of  good  and  bad  men,        4333 
{hould  be  the  reafon  of  this  palpable  difference  be-  S  E  R  M. 
tween  good  and  bad  men,  when  they  arc  under  the  ._,r-^^-^ 
apprehenfions  of  death,  but  this,  that  a  pious  and 
virtuous  life  is  a  real  ground  of  peace  and  joy,  of 
comfort  and  confidence  at  that  time ;  and  that  im.- 
piety  and  wickedncfs  are  a  real  foundation  of  guik 
and  fear,  of  horror  and  defpair  in  a   dying  hour :  • 
in  a  word,  that  the  different  ways  and  courfesof  good 
and  bad  men,   do  naturally  lead  to  thefe  different 
ends,  and  produce  thefe  different  effeds  ? 

Either  this  muft  be  granted,  and  then  the  whole 
caufe  of  infidelity  and  vice  is  yielded  and  given  up 
at  once  ;  or  elfe  men  mufl  fly  to  that  which  feems 
the  mod  unreafonable  and  extravagant  paradox  in 
the  world,  and  does  effedlually  give  up  the  caufe 
another  way,  viz.  that  a  falfe  opinion  of  things  and 
a  mere  delufion,  is  more  apt  to  fupport  the  fainting 
fpirits  of  a  dying  man,  and  to  give  him  more  com- 
fort and  hope  in  the  day  of  diflrefs,  than  a  right 
and  well-grounded  pcrfuafion. 

But  this  (as  I  faid  before)  does  effectually  give  up 
the  caufe  another  way  :  for  if  this  be  true,  then  cer- 
tainly they  are  rightefl  that  are  in  the  wrong,  and 
religion,  though  it  were  a  miftake,  ought  to  be  cm- 
braced  and  entertained  by  a  wife  man,  becaufe  of 
this  great  benefit  and  comfort  of  it.  If  this  be  truly 
the  cafe,  then  every  wife  man  muft  fay,  let  me  be 
fo  deceived ;  let  it  be  my  lot  and  portion,  to  Jive 
and  die  in  fo  pleafant,  and  comfortable,  and  happy  an 
error,  as  that  of  religion  is. 

So  that  whether  religion  be  true  or  falfe,  it  muft, 
according  to  this  reafoning,  be  neceffarily  granted 
to  be  the  only  wife  principle,  and  fafe  hypothefis 
for  a  man  to  live  and  die  by.     And  this  very  thing 

that 


4334  ^'^^'  '^^/^^^  ^f  ''^ligionjujlified^ 

S  E  R.M.  that  It  Is  fo,  is  a  ftrong  evidence  of  the  truth  of  reli« 
^^^^;  gion,  and  even  a  demonftration  of  the  real  excel- 
lency of  virtue  ;  becaufe  no  other  fuppofition  but  that 
of  religion,  does  fo  clearly  folve  all  appearances,  and 
fo  fully  and  exadly  anfwer  the  natural  defires,  and 
hopes,  and  fears  of  mankind.  If  the  being  of  G  o  d, 
and  the  obligations  of  religion  and  virtue  be  ad- 
mitted, this  gives  an  eafy  account  of  the  whole  mat- 
ter, and  fhews  us  that  fin  and  vice  are  the  foundation 
of  guilt  and  trouble  \  and  that  religion  and  virtue 
do  naturally  produce  peace  and  comfort :  for  that  is 
to  be  efteemed  and  reckoned  the  natural  effedt  of  any 
thing  which  doth  generally  belong  to  the  whole  kind. 
If  thofe  who  live  religioufly  and  virtuoufly,  have  ge- 
nerally peace  and  comfort  when  they  come  to  die,  and 
thofe  who  live  wickedly  are  comm9nly  full  of  guilt 
and  remorfe,  of  fear  and  perplexity  at  that  time ; 
this  is  reafon  enough  to  believe  that  thefe  are  the 
natural  effedls  of  thofe  caufes :  and  that  men  when 
they  come  to  die,  are,  according  as  they  have  lived, 
afraid  of  the  divine  juftice,  and  of  the  vengeance  of 
another  world,  or  confident  of  God's  goodnefs, 
and  the  rewards  of  another  life,  is  a  ftrong  argu- 
ment of  a  fuperior  being  that  governs  the  world, 
and  will  reward  men  according  to  their  works  ;  be- 
caufe no  fuppofition  but  this  doth  anfwer  the  natu- 
ral hopes  and  fears  of  men.  And  this  likewife  is 
an  argument  of  the  immortality  of  our  fouls,  and 
of  the  rewards  and  punifliments  of  another  life  ;  and 
as  good  a  demonftration  of  the  reality  and  excel- 
lency of  religion  and  virtue,  from  thefe  happy  effecSts 
of  it,  as  the  nature  of  the  thing  is  capable  of 

And  now  to  make  fome  reflexions  upon  what  has 
been  faid  upon  this  argument. 

■  Firft, 


in  the  different  ends  of  good  and  bad  men,  4335 
Firft,  the  confideration  of  the  different  ends  of  S  E  R  M. 
good  and  bad  men,  is  a  mighty  encouragement  to 
piety  and  a  good  life.  Nothing  in  this  world 
fhews  us  fo  remarkable  a  difference  between  the 
righteous  and  the  wicked,  as  a  death-bed.  Then  a 
good  man  mod  fenfibly  enjoys  the  comfort  of  a 
good  life,  and  "  the  peaceable  fruits  of  righteouf- 
"  nefs  •,"  and  the  finner  then  begins  to  reap  the  bit- 
ter fruits  of  ^m.  What  a  difference  is  there  then, 
between  the  comfort  and  trouble,  the  compofure 
and  difturbance,  the  hopes  and  fears  of  thefe  two 
perfons  ?  and  next  to  the  actual  poffcffion  of  bleffed- 
hefs,  the  comfortable  hopes  and  expedlation  of  it 
are  the  greateft  happinefs;  and  next  to  being  plung'd 
into  it,  the  fearful  apprehenfions  of  eternal  mifery 
are  the  greateft  torment.  "  The  wicked  is  driven 
"  away  in  his  wickednefs,"  is  violently  hurried  out 
of  the  world  full  of  guilt  and  trouble.  What  ftorms 
and  tempefts  are  then  raifed  in  his  mind,  from  the 
fear  of  GoD'sjuftice,  and  the  defpairof  his  mercy? 
but  "  the  righteous  hath  hope  in  his  death."  The 
reflexion  upon  a  holy  and  virtuous  life,  and  the  con- 
fcience  of  a  man's  uprightnefs  and  fincerity,  are  a 
fpring  of  joy  and  peace  to  him,  which  refrefheth  his 
mind  with  unfpeakable  comfort  and  pleafure,  under 
the  very  pangs  of  death.  With  what  triumph  and 
exultation  of  fpirit  doth  the  bleffed  apoftle  St.  Paul, 
upon  the  review  of  his  labours  and  fufferings  for 
God  and  his  truth,  fpeak  of  his  dilfolution  ? 
2  Tim.-iv.  6,  7,  8.  "  For  I  am  now  ready  to  be 
*'  offered  up,  and  the  time  of  my  departure  is  at 
*'  hand.  I  have  fought  a  good  fight,  I  have  finifhed 
"  my  courfe,  I  have  kept  the  faith.  Henceforth 
"  there  is  laid  up  for  me  a  crown  of  righteoufnefs, 
VoL.X.  2iQ^  "  which 

3'  .    . 


43  3 6  7^<?  wifdom  of  religion  jujlijied, 

SERAT.'c  which    the    Lord,    the  rig-hteous   iudee,  fliall 

CLXXXVll  JO' 

"  give  me  at  that  day.'*  He  fpeaks  with  fuch  a 
Jively  ienlc  of  it,  as  if  he  had  his  crown  in  his  view, 
and  were  juil:  ready  to  take  hold  of  it.  And  what 
woukl  not  a  man  give,  what  would  he  not  be  con- 
tented to  do  and  fiiffer,  to  be  thus  affedted,  when  he 
comes  to  leave  the  world,  and  to  be  able  to  bear  the 
thoughts  of  his  death  and  diflblution  with  fo  com- 
pofed  and  chearful  a  mind }  and  yet  this  is  the  na- 
tural and  genuine  effedl  of  a  holy  and  ufeful  life. 
And  that  which  the  fame  apoftle  tells  us,  was  the 
ground  of  his  rejoicing  under  fufFerings,  is  likewifc 
the  comfort  and  fupport  of  good  men  at  t'^^i^  time 
of  their  death,  2  Cor.  i.  I2.  "  Our  rejoicing,  faith 
*'  he,  is  this,  the  teftimony  of  our  confcience ;  that 
"  in  fimplicity  and  godly  fmcerity,  we  have  had 
"  our  converfation  in  the  world."  All  the  holy  and 
virtuous  a(5lions  of  our  lives,  are  fo  many  feeds  of 
peace  and  comfort  to  us  at  the  hour  of  our  death, 
which  we  Ihall  more  fenfibly  enjoy,  when  we  come 
to  depart  this  life.  For  then  the  confciences  of  men 
are  apt  to  deal  mod  freely  and  impartially  with 
them  \  and  "  if  our  hearts  do  not  then  condemn 
"  us,  we  may  have  comfort  and  confidence  towards 
*'  God." 

I  believe  there  are  fome  very  pious  and  good  fouls, 
who  have  lived  very  difconfolate  and  full  of  doubtr 
incrs,  and  been  under  a  cloud  the  greateft  part  of 
their  lives,  who  yet  upon  the  approach  of  death, 
andjuft  as  they  were  leaving  the  world,  have  broken 
forth,  as  the  fun  fometimes  doth  jufl:  before  his  kt* 
ting.  I  know  it  is  not  always  thus ;  there  are,  I 
doubt  not,  fome  good  men  who  go  out  of  this  world 
with  little  or  no  comfort ;  and  yet  fo  foon  as  they 

ftep 


'in  the  different  ends  of  good  and  bad  men.        4337 
ftep  into  another  world,  are  cncompafTed  with  "joy  SERM. 
*'  unfpeakable  and  full  of  glory  :  *'  and  though  the^^^^^^ 
comfort  of  fuch  perfons  be  not  fo  early  and  forward, 
yet  it  cannot  choofe  but  to  be  extremely  welcome; 
and  it  muft  needs  put  a  doubting  and  trembling  foul 
into  a  ftrange  kind  of  extafy  and  ravifhment,  to  be 
thus  unexpeftedly  furprifed  with  happinefs. 

Secondly,  fince  this  is  fo  great  and  evident  a  tedi- 
mony  of  the  truth  and  goodnefs  of  religion,  is  it  not 
a  ftrange  thing,  and  to  be  wondered  at,   that  true  re- 
ligion and  virtue  fhould  be  fo  little  pradlifed,  and  im- 
piety and    vice   fhould  fo   generally  prevail  in  the 
world,  againft  fo  many  bars  and  obftacles,  and  againft 
fuch  invincible  objections  to  the  contrary  ?  Not  only 
againft   our  inward  judgment   and   confcience,    but 
againft  the  general  fenfe  and  experience  of  men  in  all 
ages,  the  conftant  declarations  and  teftimonies  of  dy- 
ing men,  both  good  and  bad,  when  they  are  moft  fe- 
rious,  and  their  words  arc  thought  to  be  of  greatefl: 
credit  and  weight ;  againft  the  beft  and  fobereft  rea- 
fon  of  mankind,  and  their  true  intereft  and  happi- 
nefs J  againft  the  health  of  mens  bodies,  and,  which 
is  the  moft  dear  and  valuable  thing  in  the  world,  the 
peace  and  quiet  of  their  minds ;  and  that  not  only  in 
the  time  of  life  and  health,  but  in  the  hour  of  death, 
when  men  ftand  moft  in  need  of  comfort  and  fupport ; 
in  a  word,  againft  the  grain  of  humane  nature,  and 
in  defpite  of  mens  natural  fears  of  divine  vengeance, 
and  to  the  defeating  of  all  our  hopes  of  a  bleffed  im- 
mortality in  another  world,  and  againft  the  inflexible 
nature  and  reafon  of  things,  by  no  art  or  endeavour 
of  man,  by  no  colours  of  wit,  or  fubtilty  of  difcourfe, 
by  no  practice  or  cuftom  to  the  contrary,  by  no  con-- 
fpiracy  and  combination  of  men,  ever  to  be  changed 
21  Qji  or 


433^  ^^^^  ufefulnefi  of  confiderlng 

or  altered  ?  So  that  we  may  fay  with  David,  "  Have 
*'  all  the  workers  of  wickednefs  no  knowledge,"  no 
confideration  of  themfelves,  no  tendernefs  and  regard 
to  their  prefent  and  future  intereft  ?  Nay,  if  there 
were  no  life  after  this,  fetting  afide  the  cafe  of  ex- 
treme fuffering  and  perfecution,  rehgion  and  virtue 
are  certainly  to  be  chofen,  not  only  for  our  content- 
ment in  life,  but  for  our  comfort  in  death;  and  if 
there  be  a  ftate  of  happinefs  or  mifery  remaining  for 
men  after  death,  as  mod  afluredly  there  is,  much 
more  in  order  to  the  attaining  of  that  endlefs  hap- 
pinefs, and  the  avoiding  of  that  eternal  and  intolera- 
ble mifery.  "  O  that  men  were  wife,  that  they  under- 
"  flood  this,  and  would  confider  their  latter  end !  '* 


SERMON  CLXXX VIIL 

The  ufefulnefs  of  confidering  our 
latter  end. 


P  S  A  L.  xc.  12. 

So  teach  us  to  number  our  days^   that  we  may  apply 
our  hearts  unto  wifdom, 

SERM.  nr^H  E  title  of  this  pfalm  tells  us  who  was  the 

CLXXaVJJI  H 

i  author  of  it.  It  is  called  "  a  prayer  of  Mo- 
-*-  *'  fes  the  man  of  God;"  or  as  the  Chal- 
dee  paraphrafe  more  exprefly,  "  The  prayer  which 
««  Mofes,  the  prophet  of  the  Lord,  prayed,  when 
**  the  people  of  the  houfe  of  Ifrael  finned  in  the  wil- 
"  dernefs."  Upon  which  provocation  of  theirs,  Gon 

in 


ciir  latter  end,  4339 

in  great  difpl.eafure  threatned,  and  was  Immutably  re-  S  E  R  M. 
folved  that  they  Ihould  all  perilh  in  the  wildernefs,  ^'^^'^''''"^ 
and  that  none  of  the  men  that  came  out  of  Egypt, 
Caleb  and  Jofhua  only  excepted,  ihould  enter  into 
the  promifed  land,  but  ihould  all  die  in  the  ipace  of 
forty  years. 

Upon  this  occafion,  Mofes  made  this  pfalm  or 
prayer  to  God,  being  a  devout  m.editation  upon  the 
ihortnefs  and  frailty  of  human  life,  which  was  now 
brought  into  a  much  narrower  compafs  than  in  former 
ages.  But  the  cafe  of  that  people  was  different  from 
that  of  the  refl  of  mankind,  being  limited  and  con- 
fined to  forty  years.  They  might  die  fooner  than  that 
time;  but  that  was  the  utmoft  bound  of  their  Jives, 
which  none  were  to  exceed  ;  which  feems  to  be  the 
ground  and  reafon  of  the  petition  which  Mofes  puts 
up  to  God  m  the  text,  "  So  teach  us,"  &c. 

For  I  do  not  think  that  Mofes  does  here  beg  of 
God,  to  reveal  to  every  one  of  them  the  precife  end 
and  term  of  his  life  \  that  might  feem  to  favour  of 
too  much  prefumption  or  curiofity :  but  fince  they 
knew  that  according  to  the  ordinary  courfe  of  nature 
the  life  of  man  was  then  reduced  to  ' '  threefcore  and 
"  ten,  or  fourfcore  years;"  and  fince  God  by  a  pe- 
remptory fentence  had  pronounced,  that,  two  per- 
fons  only  excepted,  all  that  vail  number  which  came 
out  of  Egypt,  and  even  Mofes  himfelf  ihould  die 
within  the  compafs  pf  forty  years ;  it  was  a  very  pious 
and  proper  requeil,  which  Mofes  here  puts  up  for 
himfelf  and  the  reil  of  that  people,  that  God  would 
give  them  wifdom  to  make  a  right  ufe  of  the  notice 
which  they  had  of  their  end,  fince  it  might  happen  at 
any  time,  but  could  not  reach  beyond  forty  years,  rec- 
koning from  the  time  of  their  coming  out  of  Egypt, 

^  To 


43  4©  ^h^  ufefulnefs  of  confidering 

SERM.      To  know  the  determinate  time  of  our  life,  or  to 

CLXXXVlil  .  . 

know  certainly  that  our  life  fhall  not  exceed  fuch  a 
term  fwhich  was  the  cafe  of  the  Ifraelites  in  the 
wilderncfs)  is  a  very  awakening  thing,  and  docs  com- 
monly roufe  inen  more  than  the  general  confidera- 
tion  of  our  own  frailty  and  mortality.  And  yet  to 
a  wife  and  confiderate  man,  it  ought  in  reafon  to  be 
the  fame  :  for  that  which  will  certainly  be,  ought 
to  be  reckoned  upon  and  provided  for  ;  and  if  it 
be  uncertain  when  it  will  be,  whether  at  fome  dif- 
tance,  or  the  next  moment,  we  ought  prefently  to 
take  care  about  it,  and  to  be  always  in  a  readinefs 
for  it,  left  we  fliould  be  furprifed  and  overtaken. 

And  then  this  prayer  is  as  proper  for  us,  as  it  was 
for  Mofes  and  the  Ifraelites,  tho*  we  are  not  juft  un- 
der the  fame  circumftances  that  they  were.  They 
were  under  a  peremptory  fentence  of  death  within 
*'  forty  years,"  and  none  of  them  knew  how  much 
fooner  they  might  be  taken  away :  and  this  is  not 
much  different  from  our  cafe ;  for  we  are  liable  to 
death  at  any  time,  every  day,  every  moment ;  and 
how  few  of  us  in  this  congregation  can  reafonably 
either  hope,  or  expeft  to  have  our  lives  prolonged 
beyond  the  term  of  ''  forty  years  ?  '*  nay,  it  is  very 
probable,  that  not  one  of  us  in  an  hundred  will  hold 
out  fo  long.  And  then  this  prayer  may  be  as  fit 
for  us,  as  it  was  for  Mofes  and  the  Ifraelites,  that 
God  would  "  teach  us  fo  to  number  our  days,'* 
that  is,  to  make  fuch  an  account  of  the  Ihortneis  and 
uncertainty  of  our  lives,  and  fo  to  confider  and  lay 
tb  heart  our  latter  end,  ''  that  we  may  apply  our 
•*  hearts  unto  wifdom  \  '*  that  is,  that  we  may  manage 
and  condudl  this  frail,  and  fhort,  and  uncertain  life,  in 
the  bcft  manner,  and  to  the  wifeft  purpofes. 

And 


our  latter  end.  4341 

And  this  confideration  of  our  latter  end  was  al-  S  E  R  M. 
ways  efteemed  by  the  wifefl  men,  a  principal  part 
a»nd  main  point  of  wifdom.  Socrates,  who  was  by 
the  general  confent  of  wife  men  (a  more  infallible 
oracle,  than  that  of  Apollo)  efteemed  the  wifeft  of 
all  the  philofophers,  gives  us  this  definition  of  philo- 
fophy,  that  "  it  is  the  meditation  or  ftudy  of  death  ;" 
to  intimate  to  us,  that  this  is  true  wifdom,  to  be 
much  in  the  thought  of  our  latter  end,  and  in  a 
conftant  readinefs  and  preparation  for  it.  And  this 
a  greater  than  Socrates  had  long  before  him  obferved 
to  be  a  chief  point  of  wifdom,  I  mean  Mofes  the 
man  of  God,  that  divine  perfon  and  prince  of  the 
ancient  prophets,  not  only  in  this  pfalm,  but  alfo  in 
his  laft  divine  fong,  a  little  before  his  death,  in 
which  he  makes  this  the  fum  of  all  his  wifhes  for 
the  people  of  Ifrael,  that  God  would  endow  them 
with  this  high  point  of  wifdom,  Deut.  xxxii.  29. 
«'  O  that  they  were  wife,  that  they  underftood  this, 
«'  that  they  would  confider  their  latter  end!*' 
This  is  true  wifdom  and  philofophy,  "  to  confider 
"  our  latter  end.'* 

And  this,  by  Go  d's  alTiftance,  fhall  be  the  argu- 
ment which  I  intend  to  handle  from  thefe  words-, 
namely,  to  fhew  what  influence  and  efFed  the  feri- 
ous  confideration  of  our  latter  end,  and  of  the  fhort- 
ncfs  and  uncertainty  of  this  prefent  life,  ought  in 
reafon  to  have  upon  us.  And  of  this  I  iLall  give  you 
an  account  in  thefe  following  particulars  : 

1.  The  meditation  of  our  latter  end  fhould  make 
us  to  take  into  confideration  our  whole  lives,  and 
our  whole  duration,  that  we  may  refolve  and  adt 
accordingly.  And  this  is  a  main  point  of  wifdom, 
10  underftand  our  felves,  and  the  nature  of  our  be. 

ings, 


4342  ^he  ufefulnefi  of  confidering 

SERM.  inffs,  of  what  we  confift,  and  for  what  duration  we 
are  defigii*d  -,  whether  we  contilt  only  of  matter  a 
little  better  fafhioned  and  moulded,  and  made  up 
iDto  a  more  curious  and  complicated  engine,  confid- 
ing of  many  fecret  and  hidden  fprings  and  wheels, 
and  fitted  for  greater  variety  of  motions,  and  for 
more  fine  and  fubtile  operations,  than  the  bodies  of 
thofe  other  creatures  v;hich  we  efteem  below  us :  or 
whether  we  be  endowed  with  a  fpiritual  principle, 
wholly  diftindl  from  matter,  and  capable  not  only 
of  fenfe,  but  of  a6ts  of  reafon,  and  of  the  imprelTi- 
ons  of  religion,  from  the  apprehenfions  of  a  deity 
and  a  fuperior  being  that  is  of  it  felf,  and  made  us 
and  all  other  things.  In  a  word,  whether  we  fhall 
*'  die  like  beads-,"  or  whether  there  be  "  an  im- 
*'  mortal  fpirit  within  us,"  which  hath  no  depen- 
dence upon  matter  and  the  bodily  and  vifible  part 
of  our  feives,  but  is  ''  a  much  better  and  endu- 
"  ring  fubftance,"  which  hath  no  principle  of  cor- 
ruption in  it  felf,  but  fhall  furvive  thefe  perilhing 
bodies,  and  when  they  are  mouldered  into  dull", 
fhall  fubfift  in  a  happy  or  miferable  condition,  ac- 
cording as  we  have  behaved  our  feives  in  this  world. 

For  thefe  are  two  very  different  hypothefes  and 
fchemes  of  things,  and  ought  to  affed  us  very  dif- 
ferently, and  to  inlpire  us  with  different  refoluti- 
ons,  and  to  put  us  upon  a  quite  contrary  method 
and  condudb  of  our  lives. 

For  on  the  one  hand,  if  we  be  well  affured,  that 
we  fliall  be  utterly  extinguifhed  by  death,  "  like 
"  the  beafls  that  peri  ill,"  then  we  have  nothing  to 
care  of  but  of  our  bodies,  becaufe  we  are  nothing 
elfe ;  then  we  need  not  to  extend  our  thoughts,  our 
hopes,  or  fears,  beyond  this  world,  and  this  prefent 

life  5 


our  latter  end,  4343 

life  \  bccaufe  we  have  nothins;  to  do,  but  to  pleafe  S  E  R  M' 

.  .        CV  XXXV Ilia 

our  felves  with  prefent  enjoyments,  and  to  live  fo  with 
other  men,  as  may  make  moft  for  our  temporal 
quiet,  and  fatisfadlion,  and  fecurity. 

But  then  we  are  to  confider  very  well,  whether 
thefe  things  be  certainly  fo,  and  whether  we  may 
rely  upon  it,  and  whether  it  will  bear  all  that  weight 
which  we  lay  upon  it  \  whether  thefe  principles  will 
not  fail  us,  when  we  com.e  moft  to  ftand  in  need  of 
the  comfort  and  fupport  of  them,  and  when  death  is 
in  view,  and  making  up  towards  us,  quite  vanifh  and 
difappear  :  becaufe  it  is  of  infinite  confequence  to  us, 
to  be  well  aflured  of  this,  fince  our  happinefs  or  mi- 
fery  to  all  eternity  depends  upon  it.  And  therefore 
nothing  lefs  than  a  demonftration  of  the  impoiTibi- 
lity  of  the  thing,  of  our  having  immortal  fpirits 
that  ihall  furvive  our  bodies,  and  fubfift  apart  from 
them,  and  be  extremely  miferable  or  happy  in  ano- 
ther world ;  I  fay,  nothing  but  a  demonftration  of 
the  impoffibilicy  of  this,  ought  to  be  fatisfadion  to 
us  in  a  cafe  of  fo  great  danger,  and  upon  which  {a 
much  does  depend. 

For  if  there  be  a  polTibility  on  the  other  fide,  of 
our  having  immortal  fouls,  which  fhaij  Xiv^  for  ever 
in  another  world,  nothing  can  acquit  us  from  th^ 
greateft  imprudence,  if  we  fliould  negled  to  take  care 
of  that  better  and  more  lafting  part  of  our  felves, 
and  to  provide  for  that  duration  which  ftiall  nevef 
have  an  end. 

And  therefore  if  the  fuppofition  of  the  foul's  im- 
mortality be  infinitely  more  probable ,  as  better 
agreeing  with  all  the  notions  which  men  have  of 
God  and  his  providence,  and  with  the  natural  de- 
fires,  and  hopes,  and  fears  of  mankind,  and  as  moft 

Vol.  X.  21  R  fuitabic 

3* 


43 t4  ^^^^  ufefulnefs  of  confidering 

S  E  R  M.  fuitable  to  all  our  capacities  and  expedlations,  and  to 

CLXXXVIII.  .    .  ,  ^ 

s^-v'^w  the  general  opinion  and  conlent  or  wife  men  in  all 
ages  j  then  it  is  infinitely  more  fafe,  and  confequent- 
ly  more  wife,  to  proceed  upon  this  fuppofition,  and 
to  provide  and  adt  accordingly. 

Thus  "  to  number  our  days,'*  that  is,  to  make 
fuch  an  account  of  the  iliortnefs  and  uncertainty  of 
this  life,  as  to  employ  it  mainly  in  the  care  and 
preparation  for  a  better  life,  will  engage  us  effedlu- 
ally  in  the  bufmefs  of  religion.  And  this,  perhaps, 
is  the  meaning  of  this  phrafe  in  the  text,  of  "  ap- 
*'  plying  our  hearts  to  wifdom,"  according  to  that 
of  Job,  Jobxxviii.  2o.  ^'  But  unto  man  he  faid,  be- 
*'  hold  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  that  is  wifdom  ;" 
as  if  he  had  faid,  this  is  the  true  wifdom,  the  great 
excellency  and  perfedion  of  humane  nature  is  reli- 
gion, the  lively  kn^o:  and  firm  belief  of  a  deity,  and  a 
carriage  and  demeanour  fuitable  to  that  belief  j  and 
that  man  is  well  taught,  and  rightly  inftru6led  in 
the  great  bufmefs  and  concernment  of  this  life,  and 
makes  a  wife  reckoning  and  account  of  the  (liortnefs 
and  uncertainty  of  it,  who  applies  himfelf  to  the 
bufmefs  of  religion  :  for  this  is  the  fundamental  prin- 
ciple of  wifdom,  by  which  our  whole  life,  and  all 
the  adlions  of  ir,  ought  to  be  governed  and  con- 
dudled. 

So  that  if  we  have  immortal  fpirits,  which  fhall 
live  and  continue  for  ever ;  we  cannot  in  reafon  but 
take  our  whole  life  and  our  whole  duration  into  con- 
fideration.  And  if  we  do  fo,  we  can  never  juftify  it 
to  our  felves,  to  employ  ail  our  care  and  time  about 
the  word  and  more  ignoble  part  of  our  felves,  and 
to  make  provifion  only  for  the  few  days  of  our  pil- 
grimage here  in  this  world,  without  any  regard  to  that 

eternal 


cur  latter  end.  4345 

eternal  duration,    which  we  fnall  have  in  another  SERM. 
world.  ^^;^^ 

The  ferious  confideration  of  this  cannot  fail  to 
make  us  careful  of  our  fouls,  and  concern'd  for  eter- 
nity ;  and  in  order  to  the  fecuring  the  happincfs  of 
that  (late,  to  mind  us  "  to  work  out  our  falvation  " 
with  great  care  and  dihgence  ;  that  if  it  be  poffib^c, 
v/e  may  avoid  the  mifery,  and  obtain  the  happinefs 
of  another  vv'orld  ;  becaufe  there  is  no  comparifon 
between  the  goods  and  evils  of  this  life,  and  thofe 
of  the  other,  neither  in  refpedl  of  the  degree,  nor 
of  the  duration  of  them.  And  therefore  it  mufl 
needs  be  great  wifdom,  to  forego  the  good  things 
of  this  life,  to  obtain  thofe  of  the  other;  and  to 
bear  the  evils  and  afBidions  of  this  life,  to  efcapc 
thofe  of  the  other.  For  what  man  in  his  wits,  for 
a  temporal  convenience  and  fatisfadlion,  would  for- 
feit an  eternal  benefit  and  advantage  ;  and  to  efcapc 
a  prefent  evil,  which  cannot  lad  long,  would  run 
himfelf  upon  one  infinitely  greater,  and  which  will 
laft  for  ever? 

"  Confider  then,  and  Ihew  your  felves  men."  Can 
there  be  a  greater  overfight  and  mifcarriage  in  the 
condud  of  our  affairs,  than  to  mind  that  lead  which 
concerns  us  mofl:  ?  Is  it  pofTible  for  men  to  run  into 
a  greater  miftake  than  to  think,  that  their  great  bufi- 
nefs  in  this  world,  is  to  mind  the  things  of  this  world  ? 
and  yet  the  greatefb  part  of  mankind  not  only  run 
into  this  miftake  at  their  firft  fetting  out,  but  perfift 
in  it  all  their  days ;  as  if  their  great  and  indeed  their 
only  concernment  were  to  pleafe  themfelves  for  the 
prel'ent,  and  to  provide  for  this  world,  as  if  they 
were  to  live  always  in  it  :  forgetting  all  this  while, 
that  they  have  immortal  fouls,  which  Ihall  furvive 
21  R  ^  their 


434^  ^^'^  «/(/zJf2^  of  confidertng 

S  E  R  M.  their  bodies,  and  after  a  time  be  reunited  to  them, 
to  live  for  ever,  deprived  of  that  happinefs  which 
they  would  take  no  care  to  fecure,  and  undergoing 
that  mifery  and  punifhmcnt,  which  they  would  be 
at  no  pains  to  prevent  whilft  they  were  in  this  world, 
and  the  opportunity  of  fecuring  the  one,  and  avoid- 
ing the  other,  was  in  their  hands. 

II.  The  thoughts  of  our  latter  end  fhould  make 
us  very  ferious  and  compofed  in  our  fpirits.  For  if 
we  have  immortal  fouls  as  well  as  dying  bodies  ;  if 
we  fhall  live  for  ever,  and  if  the  happinefs  of  all 
eternity  depends  upon  the  improvement  of  this  fhort 
time  of  our  lives,  and  our  carriage  and  demeanour 
while  we  are  here  in  this  world  ;  then  it  is  no  trifling 
bufmefs,  it  is  not  a  matter  of  fmall  concernment  to 
us  how  we  live  here,  and  manage  ourfelves  during 
our  abode  in  this  world. 

Whom  do  not  the  lively  thoughts  of  death,  and 
the  near  approach  of  it  make  grave  and  ferious }  and 
many  men,  much  wifer  and  more  confiderate  than 
ever  they  were  in  any  other  time  of  their  lives,  and 
much  truer  judges  of  things.  They  can  then  tell 
how  they  ought  to  have  lived,  what  ufc  they  fhould 
have  made  of  their  time,  and  what  ufe  they  would 
make  of  it,  if  Go  d  would  be  pleafed  to  prolong  it 
to  them. 

The  near  view  of  another  world  is  an  amazing 
thing,  and  apt  to  infpire  men  with  better  thoughts 
and  refolutions  than  ever  they  had  before.  And 
why  Ihould  not  the  clear  profped  of  it  at  a  diflance, 
and  the  alTur'd  belief  of  it,  have  the  fame  efFecl  upon 
us,  to  make  us  ferious,  and  to  mind  in  good  earned, 
"  in  this  our  day,  the  things  which  belong  to  our 
f'  peace,*' and  "  to  wait  all  thedaysofour  appointed 
^'  time,  till  our  change  Ihall  come  ?  And 


$ur  latter  end.  4347 

And  therefore  to  engage  us  to  a  continual  feriouf-  SERM. 
nefs  and  v/archfulnefs,  the  great  judge  of  the  world 
hath  hid  from  us  both  the  time  of  the  general  judg- 
ment, and  of  our  particular  fummons  out  of  this 
world,  that  we  might  never  be  unprovided  for  the 
main  chance^  for  that  which  may  happen  at  any  time, 
and  which  will  concern  us  for  ever. 

III.  The  meditation  of  our  latter  end  Ihould  put 
us  upon  minding  the  great  bufinefs  of  our  lives  with 
all  our  might,  and  make  us  very  vigorous  and  in- 
duftrious  in  it;  I  mean  the  bufmels  of  religion,  and 
the  falvation  of  our  fouls.  And  if  we  fet  up  this, 
as  in  reafon  we  ought,  for  the  g'-earend  and  defign 
of  our  MvQs^  and  the  main  fcope  of  all  our  adlions, 
it  will  make  our  lives  cf  a  piece,  and  every  part  there- 
of agreeable  to  itfelf ;  becaufe  our  mind  will  (land 
continually  bent  one  way,  and  all  our  thoughts,  and 
cares,  and  endeavours,  will  be  united  m  one  great 
end  and  defign. 

And  it  will  oblige  us  to  great  diligence  and  in^ 
duftry,  and  make  us  work  hard,  to  think  how  great 
a  work  we  have  to  do,  and  how  litde  time  to  do  it 
in,  perhaps  much  lefs  than  moft  of  us  do  imagine. 
It  is  not  an  eafy  work  for  a  man  to  become  good, 
and  fit  for  heaven ;  it  requires  time  and  care,  and 
great  watchfulnefs  over  ourfelvcs,  great  itrugghngs, 
and  many  a  conflidt  with  the  evil  inclinations  of  our 
minds,  which,  after  we  have  conquered  them,  will 
often  rally  and  make  head  again  ,  a.  flout  refinance 
of  temptations,  a  ftiff  and  obftinate  refolution  not  to 
yield  to  them,  and  "  a  patient  continuance  in  well- 
''  doing.'*  The  confideration  whereof  fhould  make 
us  very  careful  and  diligent  to  get  "  oil  into  our 
*^  lamps  j"  that  is,  all  thofe  graces  and  virtues,  all 

thofe 


434^  ^^^  ^{pf^^^efs  of  conjidering 

S  E  RM.  thofe  good  diipofitions  which  may  fit  us  for  another 
world,  and  prepare  us  for  eternity ;  it  fhould  make 
us  very  vigorous  and  induflrious  to  do  all  the  good 
we  can,  v/hile  the  opportunity  of  doing  it  is  in  our 
hands,  and  to  make  ourfelves  as  good  as  we  can, 
becaufe  this  is  the  time  and  feafon  of  laying  the 
foundation  of  our  future  happinefs,  and  increafing 
the  degrees  of  it  •,  for  "  as  we  fow,  fo  fliall  we 
*'  reap ;  he  that  fows  fparingly,  fhall  reap  fparingly  % 
*'  and  he  that  fows  plentifully,  fhall  reap  plentifully." 
Every  degree  of  virtue  and  goodnefs  that  we  attain 
to  in  this  world,  will  meet  with  a  fuitable  reward, 
and  a  more  refplendent  degree  of  glory  and  happi- 
nefs in  the  next  life. 

And  we  fhall  have  this  advantage  by  a  great  in- 
duflry  and  diligence  in  "  working  out  our  own  lal- 
•'  vation,"  that  if  we  have  made  religion  the  great 
care  and  bufincfs  of  our  lives,  we  fh.iJl  have  nothing 
to  do  when  we  come  to  die,  but  to  renew  our  repent- 
ance for  the  errors  and  mifcarriages  of  our  lives, 
and  to  beg  Go  d's  pardon  and  forgivenefs  of  them, 
for  the  fake  of  the  meritorious  obedience  and  fufter- 
ings  of  our  blefled  Saviour;  to  comfort  ourfelves 
in  the  goodnefs  and  promifes  of  God,  and  in  the 
glorious  hopes  of  the  happinefs  which  we  are  ready 
to  enter  upon  %  and  in  the  mean  time  to  exercife  faith 
and  patience  for  a  very  litde  while,  till  death  put  an 
end  to  theforrows  and  miferies  of  life. 

IV.  The  meditation  of  our  latter  end  fliould  make 
us  much  in  the  exercife  of  repentance,  and  to  re- 
new it  fre'quendy  ;  becaufe  we  continually  offend 
God,  and  provoke  him  every  day,  if  not  by  fins 
of  commifTion,  yet  of  omiflion  and  negled  in  one 
kind  or  other,  and  by  the  imperfedlion  of  our  beft 

adions 


our  latter  end. 


4349 


adtionsand  fervicesj  if  not  by  prefumptuous  fins  and  SERM.. 

againft  knowledge,  yet  by  manifold   fins  of  igno-  ^^'^'^'^'^'"^' 

ranee  and  infirmity  ;  lb  that  the  bed  of  us   may  fay 

with  David  every  day,  "  who  can  underfland  his  er- 

'*  rors?   cleanfe  thou  me  from  fecret  fins.     If  thou 

''  fiiouldft  be  extreme  to  mark  what  is  done  amils, 

*'  O  Lo  R  D,  who  can  Hand  ?  '* 

Thus  by  exercifing  a  daily,  or  at  leafl  a  very  fre- 
quent repentance, we  may  keep  our  accounts  in  a  good 
meafure  even,  and  not  be  in  a  hurry  and  confufion 
when  we  come  to  die,  neither  knowing  where  to  be- 
gin our  repentance,  nor  how  to  go  through  with 
fo  great  a  work  in  fo  fliort  a  time,  and  in  circum- 
ftances  of  fo  much  weaknefs  and  dillradlion.  There 
are  hardly  any  of  us,  efpecially  of  us  who  are  mini- 
fters,  and  have  frequent  occafion  to  attend  upon 
fick-beds,  but  have  {t^w  feveral  in  thefe  wretched 
circumftances,  not  knowing  what  to  do,  defirous  to 
repent,  but  what  through  v/caknefs  of  body,  and 
horror  and  confufion  of  mind,  not  knowing  how  to 
go  about  it,  lamenting  their  negled  of  it  in  the  time 
of  their  health,  and  defpairing  of  doing  it  now  with 
any  fuccefs  and  acceptance.  Thefe  are  fad  fpedlacles 
indeed,  and  ought  to  be  loud  warnings  to  us  who 
are  in  health,  and  have  the  opportunity  of  repen- 
tance before  us,  to  make  ufe  of  it,  and  to  kx.  about 
this  neceflary  work  out  of  hand,  *'  to  day,  while  it 
*'  is  called  to  day,  left  any  of  us  be  hardened  through 
'*  the  deceitfulnefs  of  fin,"  and  be  at  laft  brought 
into  thole  miferable  fi:raits  which  I  have  been  de- 
fcribing,  and  which  no  man  that  underftands  him- 
felf  would  be  in  for  all  the  world. 

V.The  meditation  of  the  fhortnefs  and  uncertainty 
©f  life  fiiould  make  us  great  husbands  of  our  time, 

as 


435^  ^        ^'^^  ^Af^^^^A  of  cofijidering 

SERM.  as  that  which  next  to  our  immortal  fouls,  and  for 
cLxxwiii.^l^^  fake  of  them,  is  the  moft  precious  and  vahiablc 
thing  in  the  world.  For  as  on  the  one  hand,  no- 
thing will  comfort  us  more  when  we  come  to  die 
and  leave  this  world,  than  the  remembrance  of  a 
wcll-fpent  \\{^y  carefully  employed  in  the  fervice  of 
God,  and  for  the  benefit  and  advantage  of  men  5 
fo  on  the  other  hand,  there  is  nothing  for  which 
our  confciences  wilf  more  bitterly  reproach  us  at  that 
time,  and  fly  in  our  faces  with  greater  fury  and 
rage,  than  for  an  ufelefs  and  unprofitable,  efpecially 
if  it  have  been  likewife  (as  is  too  commonly  fcen) 
a  wicked  and  vicious  life. 

Our  life  is  uncertain,  and  therefore  we  fhould  feize 
the  prefent  time,  and  improve  it  to  the  beft  advan- 
tage, tho'  it  be  but  lliort  in  itfelf,  and  very  fhort  in 
refpedl  of  the  great  and  long  work  which  we  have 
to  do  in  it.  To  prevent  or  cure  the  manifold  dif^ 
tempers  of  our  minds,  and  to  preferve  our  fouls  in 
%  good  flate  of  health,  and  to  keep  them  free  from 
the  diforders  of  our  appetites  and  pafTions,  requires 
a  wife  condud,  and  a  very  careful  management  of 
ourfelves.  Evil  and  inveterate  habits  are  not  ma- 
fler'd  and  mortify 'd  in  an  inftant  ;  nor  the  contrary 
virtues  attained  in  any  meafure  of  perfeftion,  but  by 
long  pradlice  and  flow  degrees.  There  muft  be 
time,  and  patience,  and  perfeverance,  for  the  doing  of 
thefe  things,  and  we  muft  "  give  all  diligence  to 
*'  add  to  our  faith  knowledge,  and  to  our  know- 
*«  ledge  virtue,"  and  one  virtue  to  another,  and  one 
degree  of  virtue  to  another;  and  nothing  without 
this  can  minifter  true  comfort  to  us  in  the  hour  of 
death,  and  make  us  "  to  lift  up  our  heads  with  joy 
"  in  the  day  of  judgment.'* 

The 


cur  latter  end,  435^ 

The  confideration  of  this  fhould  make  us  careful,  SERM. 

'CLXXXVIII. 

not  to  negledl  any  occafion  of  doing  good,  or  of 
making  ourfelves  better  ;  and  reftrain  us  from  allow- 
ing too  much  of  our  time  to  thofe  great  v/afters 
and  devourers  of  it,  diverfions  and  vifits  ;  becaufe 
they  do  not  only  hinder  us  from  better  work  and 
employment,  but  are  apt  infenfibly  to  work  us  off 
from  that  ferious  temper  of  mind,  which  becomes 
thofe  who  do  in  good  earneil  defign  for  another 
world. 

VI.  The  meditation  of  our  latter  end  fhould  make 
us^  always  to  prefer  the  doing  of  our  duty,  and  the 
keeping  of  a  good  confcience,  to  all  temporal  con- 
fiderations  whatfoever,  whether  of  fame  and  the 
good  opiffion  of  men,  or  of  wealth  and  riches,  of 
honour  and  dignity,  of  authority  and  power,  "  choof- 
*'^ing  rather  with  Mofes,  to  fuffer  affli6tions  with 
"  the  people  of  God,  than  to  have  the  temporary 
*'  enjoyments  of  fm." 

^And  as  for  pleafure,  there  is  litde  in  this  world 
that  is  true  and  fincere,  befides  the  pleafui*e  of  doing 
our  duty,  and  of  doing  good ;  I  am  fure  none  that  is 
comparable  to  it.  A  good  confcience  is  "  a  con- 
*'  tinual  feaft,^'  and  he  certainly  pleafeth  himfelf 
befl,  and  is  moft  eafy  in  his  own  mind,  who  is  con- 
icious  to  himfelf,  th^^t  he  endeavours  as  v/ell  as  he  can 
to  do'  what  he  ought. 

Vil.  The  m.editation  of  our  mortality  fhould  teach 
us  the  true  price  and  value  of  all  temporal  enjoy- 
ments, and  m.ake  us  duly  affedled  towards  them,  and 
to  fit  as  loofe  to  them  in  our  affedlions  as  we  can  ;  for 
nothing  furely  can  be  more  apt  to  beget  in  us  a  cold- 
nefs  and  indifferency  towards  the  enjoyments  of  this 
world,  than  the  confideration  of  the  uncertainty  of 

VoL.X.  21  S  all 


4352  ^^^'^  ufifulnefi  of  confidcring 

SERM.  all  thefe  thino;s,  and  of  the  IhortRefs  and  uncertainty 

CLXXXVIII  7! 

or  our  own  Jives. 

Or  if  we  luppolc  that  they  and  we  both  Ihould 
continue  for  fome  number  of  years,  yet  there  will 
be  an  end  of  them  or  us-,  and  nothing  is  to  be 
reckoned  a  lafting  happinefs  that  will  have  an  end,  tho* 
It  fhould  be  long  firft  ;  for  where  there  can  be  either  for- 
row  or  an  end  of  ourjoy,  there  can  be  no  true  felicity. 

Bcfides,  that  the  nature  of  the  things  of  this  world  is 
fuch,  that  th(ry  afford  but  litde  happinefs  to  us  whilft 
we  have  them  ;  we  cannot  do  well  without  them,  and 
yet  we  can  hardly  do  well  with  them.  Moft  of  the  en- 
joyments of  this  world,  as  defirable  as  they  are  to  us,  are 
very  dangerous,  and  are  always  attended  with  fome  in- 
convenience or  other  ;  and  even  when  we  have  all  that 
we  can  wifh  for  in  this  world,  we  are  apt  to  be  ftill 
uneafy,  either  fomething  troubles  us,  or  nothing 
pleafes  us ;  we  are  pained  with  fulnefs,  and  cloyed 
with  the  long  enjoyment  of  the  beft  things  this 
world  can  gi^e  us.  Why  then  fliould  we  let  fuch 
an  high  and  unreafonable  value  upon  thefe  temporary 
enjoyments,  and  be  fo  much  concerned  for  thofe 
things,  of  which  we  have  fo  flippery  a  hold  and  fo 
{lender  an  afilirance,  and  which  afford  us  fo  very 
little  contentment  and  fatisfadlion  when  we  have 
them,  and  yet  give  us  fo  much  grief  and  trouble 
when  we  lofe  them?  confidering  how  foon  we  mufl, 
and  how  fuddenly  we  may  leave  this  world,  and  all 
the  enjoyments  of  1%  we  ought  in  reafon  to  fet  no 
great  price  upon  them. 

VIII.  The  confideration  of  the  fhortnefs  and  un- 
certainty of  our  lives,  fliould  make  us  contented  with 
our  preJent  condition,  and  patient  under  all  the  evils 
i^ad  afi^i(ftions  which   may    befal  us  m  this  world. 

A 


our  latter  end,  AZ^Z 

fs.  little  may  content  us  for  a  little  while,  for  the  fliorc  S  e  R  M, 
time  of  our  abode  here  ;  and  fince  we  do  not  cxped- 
our  reft  and  happinefs  in  this  world,  we  cannot  think 
ourfelves  difippointed,  if  we  do  not  meet  with  it.  If 
our  condition  be  tolerable,  it  is  well,  and  we  have 
rcafon  to  be  contented  with  \\.^  fince  it  is  as  much  as 
this  world  ufually  affords.  If  it  be  very  mean  and 
Ifrait,  it  cannot  lafl:  long;  and  even  that  confidera- 
tion  fliould  filence  our  murmurings,  and  fliould  re- 
drain  and  check  our  difcontent. 

And  it  lliould  make  us  patient  likewife  under  the 
greateft  evils  and  afflictions  of  this  prefent  life,  to 
confider  that  they  will  fhortly  have  an  t\\^  \  either 
they  will  give  off  of  themfelves,  or  they  will  carry 
us  off  and  make  an  end  of  us,  and  all  the  patience 
we  have  exercifed  will  be  rewarded  far  beyond  the 
proportion  of  our  fufferings. 

At  the  worft,  the  afflictions  and  fufferings  of  this 
prefent  time  are  not  like  the  troubles  and  miferies  of 
the  other  world,  they  will  not  laft  always.  The  mod 
grievous  things  that  can  befal  us  here  are  not  like  the 
torments  of  hell,  neither  for  the  degree,  nor  the  du- 
ration of  them,  without  intermiftion  and  without 
end. 

IX.  The  meditation  of  death,  and  of  the  confe- 
quences  of  it,  fhould  make  us  upright  and  fincere  in 
all  our  words  and  anions.  Hypocrify  and  diflimula- 
tion,  as  much  as  they  are  pradifed,  are  no  part  of  true 
wifdom,  no,  not  as  to  this  world  \  they  recoil  terribly 
upon  men,  and  turn  to  their  reproach  and  difadvan- 
tage  fo  foon  as  they  are  difcerned,  and  they  cannot 
be  long  pradifed  without  being  difcover'd.  But  if 
we  regard  the  other  world,  all  difguifes  and  arts  of 
deceit  are  perfed  folly  ^  becaufc  then,  "God  will 
21  S  2  '^  bring 


4354  ^^'^  ufefulnefs  of  confidering 

SERM.  "  bring  every  work  into  judgment,  and  every  fccret^ 
'  "  thing,  whether  it  be  good,  or  whether  it  be  evil,'* 

as  Solomon  affures  us,  Ecclef.  xii.  14.  And  our  blef- 
fed  S  A  V  I  o  u  R  cautions  us  againll  hypocrify,  upon 
this  confideration,  that  there  is  a  day  coming,  v/hen 
all  the  falie  pretences  of  men  Ihall  be  expofcd  and  laid 
open,  and  all  thofe  masks  and  vizors  which  men  wear 
in  this  world  will  fall  off,  and  the  adlions  of  men 
fliall  appear  in  their  true  colours,  Luke  xii.  1,2. 
"  Beware,  fays  our  Saviour  there  firft  of  all, 
"  of  the  leaven  of  the  Fharifees,  which  is  hypocrify  : 
"  for  there  is  nothing  coverM,  that  Hiall  not  be  re- 
"  vealed ;  nor  hid,  that  ihall  not  be  known.'* 

Laflly,  the  meditation  of  our  latter  end  fhould  put 
us  upon  a  careful,  and  continual,  and  particular  prepa- 
ration for  the  time  of  our  death  and  diflblution.  And 
this  is  very  well  worth  our  v/hile^  and  the  fooner  we 
fct  about  it,  the  better:  becaufe,  when  this  work  is  in 
any  good  mcafure  done,  we  have  refcued  ourfelvcs 
from  that  ''  bondage,"  to  which  mod  men  are  all 
their  life  long  "  fubjedt,'*  becaufe  of  the  continual 
«  fear  of  death."  Nothing  abates  the  terror  of  death, 
like  a  due  preparation  for  it.  When  this  is  once  made, 
wc  cannot  be  much  concerned  when  it  comes;  for  to 
a  well-prepared  mind,  fooner  or  later  makes  no  great 
difference :  but  if  we  have  delayed  this  neceflary  work, 
the  longer  wc  have  delayed  it,  the  more  unfit  we  fhall 
be  for  it,  and  the  more  unwilling  to  let  about  it;  and 
if  necefHty  drives  us  to  it  at  lad,  we  fliall  find  that  old 
age  and  ficknefs  are  but  bad  times  to  make  prepara- 
tion for  death  in,  to  begin  our  repentance  and  the 
change  of  a  bad  life.  He  that  prepares  not  for  death, 
before  he  draws  near  to  it,  and  comes  to  lie  upon  a 
fickvbed,  is  hke  him  that  begins  to  ftudy  the  art  of 

navigation. 


our  latter  cfid,  4355 

navigation,  when  he  h^th  prefent  occafion  and  ufe  for  ^SJ^^M. 
the  skill  which  he  hath  not  yet  learned,  when  his  vef-  w-v~^ 
fel  is  driven  among  rocks,  and  is  every  moment  in 
danger  of  being  dalh'd  in  pieces. 

Let  this  then  be  eftablifl-i'd  for  a  firm  principle  and 
rule,  that  the  bed  and  fureft  preparation  for  a  happy 
and'comfortable  death,  is  a  holy  and  good  hfe.     For 
nothing  will  difarm  death  of  its  terrors,  like  the  con- 
fcience  of  our  own  innoccncy,  and  of  a  flncere  deiire 
and  endeavour  to  pleafe  God   in  the  general  courie 
and  tenour  of  our  lives,  and  of  a  fincere  repentance 
for  all  the  errors  and  mifcarriages  of  our  lives.     And 
though  our  life  be  fhort  and  uncertain,  yet  it  is  a  great      . 
deal  that  we  may  do  by  way  of  preparation  for  ano- 
ther world,  if  we  begin  and  fet  out  betimes,  and  be 
good  husbands  of  the  prefent  opportunities.     It  is  a 
great  way  that  we  may  go  in  a  fhort  time,  if  we  be 
always  moving  and  prclTing  forwards. 

But  the  mifchief  is,  many  men  pafs  fifty  or  fixty 

years  in  the  world,  and  when  they  are  juft  going  out 

of  it,  they  bethink  themfelves  and  flep  back  as  it 

were,  to  do  fomething  which  they  had  all  this  while 

forgot,  viz.  the  main  bufinefs  for  which  they  came 

into  the  world,  to  repent  of  their  fms  and  reform  their 

lives,  and  make  their  peace  with  God,  and  m  time 

to  prepare  for  eternity.    This,  which  is  forgotten  and 

deferred  to  the  lafl,  ought  to  have  been  firft  thought 

of,  and  to  have  been  made  the  great  bufinefs  of  their 

whole  lives. 

But  I  proceed  to  give  fome  more  particular  direc- 
tions concerning  our  preparation  for  death  •,  namely, 

I.  By  frequent  meditation  of  it,  which  will  render 
it  more  familiar  to  us,  and  help  us  to  tame  this  mon- 
fter,  and  to  take  ofF  the  dread  of  itj  and  therefore 


43  5^  ^^^  ufefulnefs  of  conjidering 

we  fhould  accuftom  ourfelves  to  the  thoughts  of  it, 
that  we  may  in  fome  meafure  be  reconciled  to  it. 

2.  We  fliould  endeavour  to  mitigate  the  evil  and 
terror  of  death,  by  thinking  of  fomcthing  worfe,  I 
mean  the  evils  and  miferies  of  life.  For  when  we  once 
come  to  look  upon  death  as  a  remedy  of  all  the  evils 
of  life,  we  fhall  then  begin  to  be  reconciled  to  it ; 
and  if  we  be  wife,  fiiajl  be  glad  to  be  out  of  the  noife, 
and  danger,  and  fuffering  of  fo  many  evils  as  we  are 
continually  liable  to  in  this  world ;  and  fhail  thank 
God  heirtily  for  difmifiing  us,  and  giving  us  leave 
to  die,  and  by  death  to  put  an  end  to  this  miferable 
life,  and  to  begin  a  better  and  happier  life,  which 
fhall  never  have  an  end. 

And  we  fhould  likewiie  meditate  much  on  the  glory 
and  happinefs  of  another  world.  For  if  we  be  once 
poflefs'd  v;ith  a  firm  belief  and  perfuafion  of  it,  we 
Ihall  think  the  tmie  long  that  we  are  detained  from  it, 
and  wifh  for  that  which  we  fo  much  feared,  I  mean 
death,  that  it  may  bring  us  to  the  enjoyment  of  that 
which  we  have  much  more  reafbn  to  defire. 

And  indeed  confidering  (as  I  faid  before)  the  many 
evils  and  miferies  which  we  are  liable  to  and  always 
m  danger  of,  while  we  are  in  this  world,  we  have 
caufe  to  thank  God  that  we  were  born  to  die,  and 
that  we  are  not  condemned  to  live  for  ever  in  this 
world.  So  that  whenever  God  fliall  think  fit  to  rc- 
leafe  us,  we  ought  to  efteem  it  a  favour  :  but  if  he 
will  have  us  to  flay  a  little  longer,  we  muft  with  pa- 
tience wait  for  another  opportunity  of  making  our 
efcapc  out  of  an  evil  and  troublefome  world.  But  me- 
thinks  we  fhould  not  much  defire  to  ride  it  out  in  the 
ilorm  any  longer,  when  the  port  is  open,  and  we  may 
fafely  enter  in.     And  then, 

3- By 


our  Utter  end,  4357 

3.  By  way  of  farther  preparation  for  death,  we  SERM. 
fhould  endeavour  to  maintain  always  a  lively  fenfe  of^^'""^^^"' 
it  in  our  minds,  that  we  may  be,  to  all  good  effedls 
and  purpofes,  as  much  under  the  power  of  it  as  if  it 
were  jufb  approaching,  as  if  the  phyfician  or  the  judge 
had  paft  the  fentence  of  death  upon  us.  We  fhoul4 
always  reckon  upon  that  which  m.ay  happen  the  next 
moment ;  and  if  we  do  fo,  we  can  never  be  extreme- 
ly furprifed;  but  "  whenever  our  Lord  comes, 
"  fhall  be  found  watching."  And, 

Laftly,  we  fhould  make  it  our  conftant  prayer  to 
God,  that  he  would  fit  us  for  our  diffolution,  and 
fland  by  us  and  comfort  us  in  that  needful  time,  with- 
out whofe  gracious  fupport  and  affiftance,  both  phyfi- 
cians,  and  even  the  miniftcrs  of  Go  d  themfelves,  are 
but  "  miferable  comforters."  It  fhould  be  our  daily- 
petition  to  Go  D,  that  he  would  enable  us  to  perform 
this  laft  adl  of  our  life  with  decency  and  conffancy  of 
mind,  that  neither  our  difeafe  nor  our  weaknefs  may 
break  the  firmnefs  of  our  fpirits,  or  leave  us  to  be 
amazed  with  fear,  or  betrayed  with  peevifhnefs,  fo  as 
to  render  us  uneafy  to  ourfelves,  or  to  make  our  friends 
willing  to  be  rid  of  us. 

But  more efpecially,  when  God  thinks  fit,  either 
by  the  nature  or  prefent  danger  of  our  diftemper,  to 
give  us  a  nearer  fummons  and  clearer  warning  of  our 
mortality,  we  fhould  take  the  opportunity  to  imprefs 
upon  our  minds  a  deep  and  more  lively  fenfe  of  ano- 
ther world,  that  we  may  quicken  our  pace,  and 
"  work  the  work  of  him  that  fent  us  into  the  work!, 
*'  while  it  is  day  j  becaufe  the  night  is  coming  when 
*'  no  man  can  work." 

Nature  I  know  is  fond  of  life,  and  apt  to  be  ftill 
longing  after  a  longer  continuance  here,  and  to  find 

many 


435^  ^^^  tifefi^lnefs  of  confidering 

S  E  R  M.  many  delays  and  excufes  to  tarry  yet  a  while  longer  ' 
\x\  this  world  ;  and  yet  a  very  long  life,  with  the  ufual 
burdens  and  infirmities  of  ix.^  is  feldom  in  reafon  de- 
firable  j  for  it  is  but  the  fame  thing  over  again,  or 
worfe  ;  fo  many  more  days  and  nights,  fummers  and 
winters,  a  repetition  of  the  fame  pleafures,  but  ftill 
with  lefs  plcafure  and  relifh  \  a  return  of  the  fame  or 
greater  pains  and  troubles,  but  flill  with  \di%  patience 
and  fbrcngth  to  bear  them. 

Let  us  then  be  of  good  courage  in  the  approaches 
of  death,  fince  we  fee  Jand,  and  the  dorm  which  we 
are  in  will  quickly  be  over  ;  and  then  it  will  be  as  if 
it  had  never  been,  or  rather  the  remembrance  of  it 
will  be  a  great  pleafure  to  us. 

Suave  mari  magno^  turhantihus  aqtiora  ventiSy 

E  terra  alterius  magnum  fpeBare  periclum. 

Non  quia  vexari  qiiendam  eft  jucunda  voluptas ; 

Sed  quibus  ipfe  mails  careas  quia  cernere  fuave  eft, 

*'  It  is  a  pleafant  thing  to  ftand  upon  the  fhore, 
*'  when  we  fee  others  in  a  great  ftorm  at  fca.  Not 
*'  that  it  is  delightful  to  fee  others  in  danger  j  but 
*'  when  others  are  in  great  difficulties  and  dangers, 
"  it  is  a  pleafure  to  find  ourfelves  fafe  and  out  of 
*'  danger." 

And  if  it  fliould  pleafe  God  to  exercife  us  with 
great  pains  or  tedious  ficknefs,  we  fliould  make  ufe 
of  all  the  confiderations  which  reafon  and  religion  do 
iurnifh  us  withal,  to  help  to  mitigate  and  deceive  our 
troubles,  and  to  make  that  fiiort  way  a  little  more 
fmooth  and  eafy.  For  the  bed  of  us  have  no  privi- 
lege and  exemption  from  the  common  accidents  of 
humanity,  no  piety  can  certainly  fecure  to  any  of  us 
an  eafy  and  comfortable  death ;  and  therefore  it  is  a 
groundlefs  confidence  for  any  man  to  reckgn  upon  it; 

we 


7he  life  of  ]esus  Christ,  &c.  4359 
we  muft  in  this,  as  in  all  other  things,  refign  up 
our  felves  to  God's  good  pleafure,  and  fubmit  to 
him  the  time  and  manner,  and  all  other  circum- 
ftances  of  our  departure  out  of  this  world  ;  whether 
our  fun  Ihall  fet  in  a  cloud,  or  Ihine  brighceft  and 
look  biggeil  when  it  is  going  down.  But  however 
it.fets,  it  is  the  fun  ilill,  and  the  fountain  of  light, 
and  will  rife  glorioufly.  There  are  always  the  feeds 
of  joy  and  comfort  in  the  confcience  of  a  good  man; 
and  tho'  they  be  hid  and  buried  for  a  while,  they 
will  fpring  forth  one  time  or  other.  "  Light  is 
''  fown  for  the  righteous,  and  gladnefs  for  the  up- 
"  right  in  heart,"  as  David  allures  us,  Pfal.  xcvii. 
II.  I  will  conclude  all  with  the  words  of  the  au- 
thor of  this  pfalm,  Deut.  xxxii.  29.  *'  O  that  they 
«'  were  wife,  that  they  underftood  this,  that  they 
"  would  confider  their  latter  end." 


SERMON  CLXXXIX. 

The  life  oFJesusChrist  confider -d. 


as  our  example, 


I  P  E  T.   ii.  21. 

— Leaving  us  an  example ^  that  ye  Jhould follow  his  fteps. 

THE  apoftle   here   propounds   to  chriftians  s  E  R  M. 
the  example  of  our  Saviour,  as  an  ar-  ^^fl^^ll^ 
gument  to  perfuade  them  to  one  particular  The  firft 
grace  and  virtue,  namely,  patience  under  fufferings  ^^^-"^^  <^^^ 
unjufbly  laid  upon  us,  ver.  19,  20,  zi.  *'  For  this  is 
Vol.  X.  21  T  ''  thank- 

3- 


43&0  The  life  of  ]e$v s  Christ 

SERM.  "  thank- worthy,  ir  a  man  for  confcience  toward 
CLxxxix.  44  QoD  endure  grief,  fuffcring  wrongfully.  For 
*'  what  glory  is  it,  if  when  ye  be  buffetted  for 
*'  your  faults,  ye  Ihall  take  it  patiently  ?  but  if 
*'  when  ye  do  well,  and  fuffer  for  it,  ye  take  it 
*'  patiently  ;  this  is  acceptable  with  God.  For  even 
*'  hereunto  were  ye  called :  becaufe  C  h  r  i  s  t  alfo 
*'  fuffered  for  us,  leaving  us  an  example,  that  yc 
«  fliould  follow  his  fteps." 

But  though  the  example  of  our  Saviour  be 
here  propounded  to  us  upon  a  particular  occafion, 
and  with  a  more  efpecial  regard  to  the  particular  vir- 
tue of  patience  under  unjuft  fufferings,  which  did  Co 
eminently  appear  in  our  blcfied  S  aviour,  the 
mofh  meek  and  patient  endurer  that  ever  was,  of  the 
greateft  and  m,oft  wrongful  fufferings ;  yet  the  apo- 
Itle  does  not  limit  this  great  pattern  of  all  righte- 
oufnefs  to  the  finglc  virtue  of  patience,  but  pro- 
pounds it  to  us,  as  an  example  of  univerfal  holinefs 
and  goodnefs ;  for  fo  he  extends  it  in  the  next  words, 
*'  leaving  us  an  example,  that  ye  fliould  follow  his 
*'  fbcps,  who  did  no  fin,  neither  was  guile  found  in 
"  his  mouth.*' 

In  this  latitude  and  extent  I  fhall  difcourfe  of  it 
at  this  time,  and  that  under  thefe  following  heads ; 

I.  That  his  life  is  a  mod  abfolute  and  perfect 
pattern. 

II.  That  it  is  a  very  eafy  and  familiar  example. 

III.  Very  encouraging  to  the  imitation  of  it. 

IV.  An  univerfal  pattern  fLtted  for  the  imitation 
of  all  forts  of  perfons,  of  what  rank  or  condition 
fcever. 

V.  In  the  nature  of  it  very  powerful  to  engage 
and  oblige  men  to  the  imitation  of  it. 

I.  The 


conjlder^d,  as  our  ey: ample.  4361 

I.  The  life  of  our  blefTed  S  av  i  o  u  r  is  a  mofl  S  E  R  U, 
.abfolute  and  perfect  pattern  of  holinefs  and  goodnefsj  ^Ili^. w 
complete  and  entire  in  all  its  parts,  and  perfed  to 
the  utmoft  degree,  in  the  following  whereof  there  is 
no  danger  of  being  mifguided,  no  fear  of  mifcarri- 
age  :  whereas  all  other  examples  of  mortal  men  are 
fallible  and  uncertain  guides,  which  if  we  follow  too 
clofely,  will  fometime  or  other  miflead  us.  In  the 
lives  of  the  befi;  men  recorded  in  fcripture,  we  may 
difcern  fome  fpot  and  blemifh,  fome  error  and  over, 
fight,  fome  fall  or  flip  ;  fo  that  the  lives  of  the  ho- 
lieft  men  are  no  fure  rule,  no  perfedl  meafure  of  our 
duty,  and  are  therefore  to  be  imitated  with  great 
wifdom  and  warinefs,  left  we  follow  all  their  actions 
inditferently  and  implicitly,  in  confidence  they  are 
good,  becaufe  they  are  theirs,  we  may  fall  into  great 
errors  and  failings  %  and  therefore  in  following  the 
lives  and  examples  of  the  beft  men,  we  muft  have 
an  eye  to  the  rule,  and  by  that  judge  of  the 
example  which  we  propofe  to  imitate  *,  otherwife  we 
may  eafily  be  feduced  by  the  authority  of  a  great 
example. 

But  the  example  of  our  Lord  is  a  living  law 
and  rule,  his  precepts  and  pattern  are  of  equal  per- 
fedion,  and  the  imitation  of  his  life  and  acftions,  \% 
the  very  fame  thing  with  obedience  to  his  laws.  For 
the  life  of  our  blefied  Saviour  here  on  earth,  is 
the  life  of  Go  d  in  the  nature  and  likenefs  of  man  • 
he  was  God  as  well  as  man,  and  the  divine  nature 
is  certainly  the  pattern  of  all  perfedion.  As  he  was 
the  Son  of  God,  he  was  "  the  brightnefs  of  his 
"  Father's  glory,  and  the  exprefs  image  and 
"  charader  of  his  perfon  •,  "  and  as  he  was  the  S  o  i* 
of  man,  though  he  had  natural  frailties  and  infirmf- 

21  T  2  ties. 


43^2  ne  life  of]ESvs  Christ 

S  E  R  M.  ties,  and  was  fubjecl  to  hunger  and  third:,  wearinefs 

v.^^>^^^'  and  pain,  like  other  men  ;  yet  he  had  all  the  moral 
perfedions  belonging  to  humane  nature,  without 
any  of  the  evil  inclinations,  and  finful  frailties  to 
which  it  is  incident ;  and  his  humane  nature  was  af- 
fifted  in  an  extraordinary  manner  by  the  Spirit 
ofGoD,  which  "  was  not  communicated  to  him  by 
*'  meafure,"  but  "  he  was  anointed  with  that  holy 
*^  un6tion  above  his  fellows,"  above  all  the  fons  of 
men,  above  all  the  prophets  and  meffengers  of 
God  that  ever  were  lent  to  mankind  j  "  he  had  no 
"  fin,  neither  was  guile  found  in  his  mouth."  And 
indeed  it  was  requifite,  that  he  that  "  was  manifefted 
"  to  take  away  our  fins,"  and  to  make  expiation 
for  them,  fhould  himfelf  be  ''  without  fin,"  as  the 
apoflle  to  the  Hebrews  reafons,  Heb.  vii.  26.  "  Such 
"  an  high-prieft  became  us,  who  was  holy,  harm- 
*'  lefs,  undefiled,  feparate  from  finncrs : "  and  had 
he  not  been  fo,  he  could  neither  have  been  an  exam- 
ple, nor  an  expiation. 

And  this  is  no  fmall  advantage  to  mankind,  to 
have  fo  excellent  a  pattern  of  the  fame  nature  with 
our  felves  to  imitate,  fo  perfedl  a  copy  to  write  af- 
ter. For  whoever  would  excel  in  any  kind,  miuft 
(as  Quintilian  fays)  optima  qu^eque  exempla  ad  imitan- 
dum  proponere^  "  propofe  to  himfelf  the  highefl  and 
''  mod  perfedl  examples  of  that  kind  for  his  imi- 
*'  tation  ;"  and  the  example  of  our  blefled  S  AVI- 
o  u  r  is  unqueftionably  fuch  a  perfe6t  pattern  of  all 
goodnefsand  virtue,tothepcrfe6tion  whereof  though 
we  can  never  attain,  yet  it  is  a  great  advantage  to 
have  it  always  before  us,  and  in  our  eye,  that  we 
may  corredt  the  errors  and  deformities  of  our  lives, 
by  the  unfpotted  purity,  and  perfect  innocency  of 


confiderdy  as  our  example,  A-^^Z 

his  life,  and  that  we  may  be  always  afpirlng  after  S  E  R  A.f, 
farther  degrees  of  goodnefs  ;  for  furely  we  can  no  ^^^'J^' 
way  better  learn  how  God  would  have  men  to  live 
in  this  world,  than  by   feeing  how   God   himfelf 
lived,    when  he    was  pleafed    to  become  man,   to 
affame  our  nature,  and  dwell  among  us. 

II.  As  the  life  of  our  bleffed  Saviour  is  a 
moil  perfecl,  fo  likewife  it  is  a  familiar  and  eafy  ex- 
ample. The  divine  nature  is  the  great  pattern  of 
perfection  :  but  that  is  too  remote  from  us,  and 
above  our  fight;  "  no  man  hath  feen  God  at  any 
"  time,  nor  can  fee  him  ;  "  and  though  his  perfedli- 
ons  are  reprefented  to  our  minds  in  fome  degree, 
yet  they  are  '4^  fo  glorious  and  dazzling  an  objedt, 
that  we  cannot  bear  to  behold  them  v/ith  that  fted- 
faflnefs,  with  which  we  ought  to  eye  our  pattern  ; 
and  therefore  God  hath  been  pleafed  to  condefcend 
fo  far  to  our  weaknefs,  as  to  give  us  a  vifible  exam- 
ple of  thole  virtues  he  requires  of  us,  in  "  his  own 
"  Son,  appearing  in  the  likenefs  of  fmful  flefh  ;'* 
and  the  Son  of  G  o  d  is  an  example  of  equal  per- 
fedlion  with  God  himfelf,  but  much  more  eafy  and 
familiar,  and  level  to  us,  in  which  we  may  fee  the 
feveral  virtues  of  a  good  life  pradifed  in  fuch  in- 
ftances,  and  upon  fuch  occafions,  as  do  frequen  dy 
happen  in  humane  life. 

Nothing  was  ever  more  fimple  and  open,  more 
obvious,  and  eafy  to  common  imitation,  than  the 
life  of  our  bleffed  S  avi  o  u  r,  in  which  there  was 
nothing  dark  and  myfterious,  abdrufe  and  intricate ;  it 
was  all  perfect  innocency  and  goodnefs,  and  he  car- 
ried on  one  plain,  and  intelligible,  and  uniform  de- 
fjgn,  which  was  to  do  all  the  good  he  poffibly  could 
io  all  iBep  •  this  he  purfued  with  all  his  might, 

with 


4364  The  lifi  of  ]e$us  CuRi^T 

SERM.  with  the  greatcR-  vigour  and  induftry,  with  an  un- 
^^^^^'^^^* daunted  courage  and  refolution,  with  an  unv/earied 
diligence,  with  a  conftant  chearfulnefs  and  ferenity 
of  mind  ;  this  was  ''  his  meat  and  drink,''  his  great 
bufinefs  and  delight,  his  life  and  his  happinefs ;  he  was 
not  fupercihoufly  morofe,  had  no  affefled  fingulari- 
ties,  no  peculiar  auftcrities  in  habit  or  diet,  different 
from  the  common  ufage  of  men;  his  converfation 
was  kind  and  innocent,  free  and  familiar,  open  and 
indifferent  to  all  forts  of  pcrfons ;  for  he  was  a  phy- 
fician,  and  every  body  had  need  of  him,  all  mankind 
were  his  patients.  He  did  not  place  religion  (as 
fome  have  done  fince)  in  retirement  from  the  world, 
and  fhunning  the  converfation  of  men,  and  taking 
great  care  to  do  no  body  good  :  not  in  profound 
myfteries  and  fine  fpeculations,  but  in  the  plain  and 
honeft  pradtice  of  the  folid  and  fubftantial  virtues 
of  a  good  life;  in  meeknefs  and  humility,  in  kind^ 
ncfs  and  charity,  in  contentednefs  in  a  low  and  mean 
condition,  and  a  calm  compofure  of  mind  under 
all  accidents  and  events,  in  patience  under  the  great- 
eft  reproaches  and  fufferings,  and  a  pcrfecl  fubmif- 
fion  to  the  will  of  God  in  all  his  difpenfations,  how 
harlli  and  unpleafant  foevcr. 

Now  there  is  nothing  in  all  this,  but  what  lies  open 
to  evefy  man's  underftanding,  and  is  eafy  to  our 
pradlice  and  imitation,  requiring  nothing  but  an  ho- 
neft mind,  and  due  care  and  diligence  to  do  what 
we  may  eafily  know,  to  follov/  our  guide  in  a  plain 
way,  and  in  all  the  adlions  of  our  lives,  to  tread  in 
thofc  fteps  in  which  the  So  n  of  God,  and  the  beft 
man  that  ever  was,  hath  gone  before  us. 

III.  The  life  of  our  bleffed  S  aV  i  ou  r  is  like- 
wife  an  encouraging  example.     It  cannot  but  give 


great 


confiderd,  as  our  example.  43^5 

great  life  to  all  good  refolutions  and  endeavours,  fo  SERM. 

CLXXXIX* 

fee  all  that  v/hich  God  requires  of  us  performed  by 
one  in  our  nature,  by  a  man  like  ourfelves.  Our  S  avi^ 
OUR  indeed  had  many  advantages  above  us,  being 
G  o  D  as  well  as  man,  and  his  humanity  being  fupport- 
ed  by  the  divine  nature  to  v/hich  it  was  united,  being 
clear  from  all  \.'^^  ill  effects  of  original  fm,  and  from  all 
kind  of  vicious  and  inordinate  inclination :  but  then  it 
is  a  great  encouragement  to  us,  to  confider  thatGo  d 
doth  not  require  at  our  hands  a  perfect  and  unfinning 
obedience,  as  the  condition  of  our  falvation  and  hap- 
pinefs;  but  only  fuch  an  obedience  to  his  laws,  as  is 
fincere,  and  continually  afpiring  after  greater  perfec- 
tion, which  is  very  pofTible  to  us  by  the  grace  of 
Christ,  even  in  this  imperfed:  fl:ate ;  that  God 
confiders  our  weaknefs,  and  how  much  we  Hand  in 
need  of  his  grace  and  afliftance,  and  hath  aflured  us 
that  it  ihall  not  be  wanting  to  us,  if  we  heartily  and 
earneftly  beg  it  of  him  ;  and  that  ftrength  which  we 
may  have  for  asking,  is  as  good  as  if  it  were  our 
own.  If  Christ  vfcre  the  S  o  n  of  G  o  d  ;  fo 
are  we  in  a  lower  degree,  by  grace  and  adoption  ; 
and  "  if  we  be  the  fons  of  God,  the  S  p  i  r  i  t  of 
"God  dv/ells  in  us,"  to  quicken  and  raife  us  to 
newnefs  of  life.  And  he  that  hath  left  us  fuch  an 
example,  on  purpofe  that  we  might  follow  \t^  will 
not  furely  leave  us  deftitute  of  power  to  enable  us 
to  do  fo.  It  is  a  good  argument  to  us,  that  he  will 
enable  us  to  do  that  in  fome  degree  in  our  own  per- 
fons,  which  he  himfelf  did  for  our  example  in  our 
nature. 

An  example  more  fuitable  to  our  weaknefs  might 
feem  to  have  had  more  encouragement  in  it  :  but 
we  are  to  confider  that  the  Son  of  God  aflumcd 

our 


4366  7he  life  ly^jESus  Christ 

S  E  R  AT.  our  nature,  as  compafs'd  with  infirmities,  and  liabk 
clxxaix.  ct  j.^  1^^  tempted  in  alJ  things  as  we  are,  only  with- 
"  out  fin  j  "  ^0  that  his  example  could  not  poP 
fibly  have  come  nearer  to  us  than  it  does,  without 
great  diladvantage  to  us,  without  wanting  that  per- 
tedion  which  is  necefTary  to  a  complete  and  abfolute 
pattern.  In  fhort,  the  Spirit  of  Christ 
dwells  in  us,  and  the  fame  Spirit  which  kept 
and  prcferved  him  from  all  fin,  is  equally  able  to 
mortify  fin  in  us,  and  to  enable  us  to  do  the  will  of 
Go D  in  fuch  manner  as  he  will  accept  our  juftifi- 
cation. 

IV.  It  is  an  univerfal  pattern.  As  the  dodlrine  of 
our  Saviour,  fo  his  example  was  of  an  univerfal 
nature  and  defign,  calculated  for  all  times  and  place?, 
and  as  much  as  w^as  poflible,  abflraded  from  the  cir- 
cumflances  of  a  particular  condition,  that  it  might 
be  the  more  equally  fuited  to  ail  callings  and  condi- 
tions, and  capacities  of  men,  and  fitted  for  general 
diredion  and  imitation  in  all  forts  of  goodnefs  and 
virtue,  either  in  the  general  principle,  or  in  the  par- 
ticular inflances  of  them.  And  for  this  reafon  he 
would  not  engage  himfelf  in  any  particular  calling, 
or  way  of  life,  that  his  pattern  might  more  equally 
and  indifferently  regard  all  mankind. 

He  was  really  a  great  perfon,  the  greateft  that 
ever  was  in  birth  and  dignity,  being  the  only  Son 
of  God,  the  maker  and  heir  of  all  things:  and 
yet  he  fubmitted  to  the  lowed  condition,  to  all  the 
degrees  of  poverty  and  meannefs,  of  contempt  and 
fufferings,  to  teach  men  of  high  degree  to  be  hum- 
ble and  ferviceable  to  the  c;ood  of  others  ;  and  men 
of  low  degree  to  be  contented  and  chearful  in  the 
meaneft  condidon,  and  the  hardefl:  circumftances  that 

die 


c6njider'dy  as  our  example.  43^7 

the  providence  of  G  o  d   ihall   fee  good   to  place  S  E  R  M, 
them  in. 

He  had  the  deepefb  and  mod  comprehenfive  know- 
ledge; "  in  him,"  as  the  apoftle  exprefleth  it,  "  were 
*'  hid  all  the  trcafures  of  wifdom  and  knowledge;'* 
and  yet  he  made  no  vain  fhow  and  oftentation  of  it, 
he  did  not  puzzle  his  hearers  with  abftrufe  fpecula- 
tions  and  fublime  myfteries,  but  in  a  way  of  plain 
and  famihar  initru(5lion  declared  to  his  hearers  thole 
things  which  were  mofl:  ufeful  and  necefTary  for  them 
to  know.  He  confuted  the  do<flors,  and  confounded 
the  wifdom  of  tne  v/ife,  thofe  who  were  conceited  of 
their  own  knowledge  and  skill  in  divine  things  ;  but 
was  always  ready  to  condefcend  to  the  weaknefs  and 
ignorance  of  the  meaneft  capacity  ^  giving  herein  an 
example  to  the  wife  and  learned,  not  to  make  a  fhow 
of  their  knowledge,  but  to  make  the  bed  ufe  of  it  ; 
not  to  lift  up  themfelves  above  others,  but  to  conde- 
fcend and  (toop  to  them  for  their  good. 

He  fometimes  recir'd  from  converfation  and  com- 
pany, that  he  might  be  alone,  and  at  leifure  to  attend 
upon  God,  and  meditate  on  divine  and  heavenly 
things,  without  interruption  and  diftradion  \  but 
moft  frequently  heconvers'd  with  others,  and  mingled 
himfelf  with  all  forts  of  perfons,  that  he  might  give 
all  the  advantage,  and  do  all  the  good  he  could 
to  all  men.  Nay,  he  did  not  decline  the  converla- 
tion  of  the  word  of  men,  and  it  was  really  true 
which  was  objedled  to  him,  that  '^  he  was  a  friend 
*'  of  publicans  and  finners,"  being  fincerely  defirous 
to  do  them  the  greateft  kindnefs  in  the  world,  to 
reform  their  manners,  and  reclaim  them  to  a  better 
courfe ;  fo  that  he  was  a  pattern  both  of  the  con- 
templadve  and  aftive  life,  and  (hews  us  how  to  mix 

VoL.X,  21  U  thefe 

3- 


4368  7he  life  of  ]esvs  Christ 

SERM.  thefe  to  the  greateft  advan'age  ;  and  by  his  own  ex- 
ample teacheth  us  that  wc  cannot  ferve  God  better 
than  by  doing  good  to  men  ;  and  that  he  is  as  well 
pleafed,  when  we  lay  out  ourfelves  for  the  benefit 
of  others  fpiritual  and  temporal,  as  if  we  employed 
all  our  thoughts  and  meditations  wholly  upon  him- 
felf  and  divine  things  -,  that  a  perpetual  retirement 
from  the  world,  and  Ihunning  the  converfation  of 
men,  is  not  the  m>o(l  religious  life,  but  living  among 
men  and  doing  good  to  them. 

More  particularly,  the  life  of  our  blefled  Saviour 
5s  a  pattern  to  us, 

1.  Of  the  greatefl  and  moll  fubftantial  virtues. 

2.  Of  the  moil  rare  and  unufual. 

3.  Of  the  mofl  ufeful  and  beneficial. 
4»  Of  the  mod  hard  and  difficult :  and, 
5.  Of  fuch  virtues  as   are  moft  needful ;  and  for 

the  pradtice  of  which,  there  is  the  greatell  and  mod 
frequent  occafion  in  humane  life. 

I .  It  is  a  pattern  of  the  greateft  and  mod  fubdan- 
tial  virtaeSV'*' 

Of  a  fervent  piety  and  devotion  toward  God. 
We  read,  that  he  often  retired  to  pray,  and  fome- 
times  fpent  whole  nights  in  it :  his  mind  was  con- 
tinually  upon  God,  as  appears  by  his  frequent  eja- 
culations upon  all  occafions,  by  his  communication 
and  difcoarfe,  which  was  always  either  indrucfliveof 
men  in  divine  truths,  or  pcrfuafive  to  a  holy  prac- 
tice J  from  worldly  objedts  and  occurrences,  he  would 
take  occafion  to  raife  fome  fpiritual  meditation,  and 
to  fpeak  of  heavenly  things. 

And  then  his  ready  and  chearful  obedience  to  the 
will  of  G  o  D  in  all  things :  "  in  the  volume  of  the 
**  book  it  is  written  of  me,  I  come  to  do  thy  will, 

'«  O  my 


confider'd,  as  our  example.  4369 

"  O  my  G  0  D."  He  fpeaks  of  it  with  pleafure  ;  and  ^^^1]^^^; 
^'  he  delighted  to  do  it,**  he  declined  the   will  of  ^^^--^j 
God  in  no  inftancc,  how  difEcult  and  difpleafing fo- 
ever  to  flefh  and  blood.      \ 

The  perfed  purity  and  innocency  of  his  life :  he 
«  was  a  lamb  without  fpotand  blemifh,"  i  Pet.  i.  19. 
<^«  He  did  no  fm."  Chap.  ii.  21.  "  Learing  us  herein 
*«  an  example,"  that  though  we  cannot  keep  equal 
pace  with  him,  yet  "  we  fliould  follow  his  fteps.'* 
"  He  was  holy,  harmlefs,  undefiled,  feparate  from. 
"  finners,"  Heb.  vii.  27. 

And  then  his  univerfal  charity,  taking  all  oppor- 
tunities to  do  all  the  good,  temporal  and  fpiritual,  that 
he-  could  to  all  men,  of  which  his  whole  life  is  one 
great  and  continued  inftance:  thefe  are  all  great  and 
fubftantial  virtues. 

I  have  indeed  faid  nothing  of  juilice,  both  becaufc 
there  was  little  occafion  for  it,  he  having  nothing  to 
do  in  thofe  matters  wherein  juftice  is  concerned.  He 
had  no  eilate  of  his  own,  and  he  m.eddled  not  with 
chofe  of  other  mens  :  and  like  wife  becaufe  his  life 
was  all  goodnefs,  which  is  a  virtue  of  a  higher  pitch 
thanjuftice:  he  that  was  fo  good  to  all,  we  need 
not  doubt  of  his  juftice,  if  there  had  been  occafion 
for  it. 

2.  He  was  a  pattern  of  the  mofl  rare  and  unufuai 
virtues. 

Such  was  his  fincerlty ;  ''  guile  was  not  found  in 
*'  his  mouth,''  i  Pet.  ii.  22.  His  converfation  was 
free  and  open,  without  difguife  and  concealment ; 
and  therefore  when  the  high-prieft  asked  him  of  his 
difciples,  and  of  his  dodlrine,  John  xviii.  19.  he 
wonder'd  at  the  queftion  :  "  why  askeft  thou  me? 
**  ask  them  that  heard  me,  1  fpakc  openly  to  the 
21U  2  world. 


437^  "^^^  ^\f^  ^  Jesus  Christ 

SERM.  ««  world,  I  ever  taught  in  the  Tynagogue,  and  in  the 
"  temple,  whither  the  Jews  alwrys  refort,  and  in  fc- 
*'  cret  have  I  faid  nothing  "  And  this  is  no  common 
virtue,  and  therefore  our  Saviour  gave  it  as  a 
fingular  commendation  to  Nithanael,  John  i.  47. 
"  Behold  an  Ifraelite  indeed,  in  whom  there  is  no 
*'  guile.'*  Perfed:  fincerity  is  a  great  foundation  of 
goodnefs;  it  is  foundnefs  at  the  heart,  and,  like  per- 
fed:  health,  feldom  to  befeen;  there  is  hardly  any 
thirg  wherein  men,  otherwife  good  and  virtuous,  do 
oftner  trip  and  falter. 

Another  virtue,  which  is  not  very  ufual,  was  eminent 
in  our  S  A  VI  ou  R,  I  mean  true  humility,  without 
afFeftation  and  fecrct  pride  lurking  under  it.  This 
app(^ared  very  remarkable,  and  very  natural  in  his 
whole  life,  which  was  all  of  it  the  grcatefl  inflance  of 
humility  that  ever  was,  and  therefore  with  great  afTu- 
ranee  he  propounds  himfelf  to  our  imitation  in  this, 
Matth.  xi.  29.  "  Take  my  yoke  upon  you,  and  learn 
<'  of  me:  for  I  am  meek  and  lowly  in  fplrit."  And 
St.  Paul  fets  this  virtue  before  us,  as  being  the  con- 
flant  temper  of  our  Lord,  and  vifible  in  his  whole 
undertaking,  and  in  every  part  of  it  from  firft  to  lafl:, 
from  his  coming  into  the  world  to  his  going  out  of 
it,  Phil  ii.  5,  6,  7,  8.  "  Let  this  mind  be  in  you 
«^  which  was  alfo  in  C  h  r  i  s  t  J  e  s  u  s,  who  being 
*^  in  the  form  of  God,  thought  it  no  robbery  to  be 
•^^  equal  with  God,  but  made  himfelf  of  no  reputa- 
**  tion  (he  emptied  himfelf  of  all  his  majeffy  and 
^*  glory)  and  took  upon  him  the  form  of  a  fervant, 
*'  and  was  made  in  the  likenefs  of  men;  and  being 
<^'  found  in  fafhion  as  a  man,  he  humbled  himfelf, 
^^  and  became  obedient  unto  death,  even  the  death 
**  of  the  crofs."  Htrt  was  humility  indeed,  fiorn  ib 

great 


confiderJy  as  our  example.  437^ 

great  a  height  to  (loop  To  low,  from  the  top  of  glory  ^^^^^^^'^• 
and  majefty,  to  the  loweft  pitch  of  meannefs  and  mi-  " 
fery.  Here's  a  pattern  for  usj  and  how  fhould  it 
fhame  and  confound  the  pride  of  the  fons  of  men,  to 
fee  the  Son  of  Go  d  fo  humble  ?  There  is  no  virtue  I 
am  fure  which  we  have  fo  muchreafon,  and  yet  none 
which  we  have  fo  little  inclination,  to  imitate.  '*  Pride 
"  was  not  made  for  men,"  fays  the  fon  of  Syrach  ; 
it  does  not  become  us,  and  yet  it  is  the  falhion ;  •  we 
know  that  we  have  no  caufe  to  be  proud,  and  yet  we 
know  not  how  to  be  humble.  Let  the  example  of 
our  Lo  R  d's  humility  bring  down  the  haughtinefs  of 
men,  and  when  we  confidcr  how  he  abafed  himfelf, 
let  us  ''  be  vile  in  our  own  eyes,  and  abhor  ourfelves 
"'  in  dufl  and  afhes/' 

And  then  his  contempt  of  the  world,  and  the  en- 
joyments and  pleafures  of  it  to  that  degree,  that  he 
would  have  no  part  and  ihare  in  the  poffefiions  of  it, 
not  fo  much  as  one  of  the  firft  and  almoft  loweft  con- 
veniencies  of  life,  a  fettled  abode  and  habitation  ^  fo 
that,  as  he  himfelf  tells  us,  he  was  in  a  more  deftitute 
condition  than  the  brute  creatures.  "  The  foxes  have 
*'  holes,  and  the  birds  of  the  air  have  nefts ;  but  the 
"  So  N  of  man  hath  not  where  to  lay  his  head.'*  Not 
that  he  defigned  to  oblige  us  to  a  ftrid  imitation  of 
him  in  this  particular;  for  he  might,  and  we  may 
lawfully  poflefs  and  enjoy  thefe  things :  but  to  teach 
us  not  to  over-prize  them,  not  to  feck  them  too  car* 
neftly,  nor  love  them  inordinately.  That  he  defpifed 
them,  fhould  keep  us  from  admiring  them,  and  do- 
ting upon  them ;  that  he  would  not  have  them  in  his 
pofTeffion,  fhould  keep  them  out  of  our  hearts,  and 
make  us  ^^^  loofe  and  indifferent  in  our  affedions  to 
them  i  that  he  valued  doing  good  above  all  the  en- 
joyments 


4372  ^^^  Life  cf  Jesus  Christ 

SERM.  joyments  of  this  world,  fhould  make  us  value  them 
only  jn  order  to  that  end. 

And  then  his  cxcefTive  kindnefs  and  benignity  to 
us,  fuch  as  men  very  rarely  fhew  to  their  bed  friends, 
and  the  bed  men*,  but  fuch  as  no  man  ever  fhevved  to 
his  enemies:    "  peradventure  for  a  good  man  one 
*'  would  even  dare  to  die,"  fays  St.  Paul,  Rom.  v.  7. 
**  but  herein  God  commended  his  love  to  us,  in  that 
*'  whilfl  we  v/ere  finners,  C  h  r  i  s  t  died  for  us.'* 
And  this  pattern  of  love  our  Saviour  propounds 
to  our  imitation,  John  xv.  12,   13.    "  This  is  my 
*'  commandment,  that  ye  love  one  another,  as  I  have 
**  loved  you.     Greater  love  than  this  hath  no  man, 
*'  that  a  man  lay  down  his  life  for  his  friend."     The 
highefl  pitch  of  humane  friendlhip  that  ever  was,  was 
*'  to  die  for  a  friend : "  but  our  Lo  r  d  died  not  for 
his  friends,  but  for  his  enemies,  that  he  might  make 
them  his  friends,  by  gaining  them  to  the  obedience 
of  his  laws :  "  ye  are  my  friends,  if  you  do  whatfo- 
**  ever  I  command  you."  The  fame  pattern  the  apo- 
ftles  of  our   Lord   propound   to  us,    Eph.  v,  2. 
*'  Walk  in  love,  as  C  h  r  i  s  t   alfo  hath  loved  us, 
•^^  and  given  himfelf  for  us."   1  John  iii.  16.  "  Herc- 
"  by  perceive  we  the  love  of  God,  becaule  he  laid 
*"  down  his  lite  for  us;  and   we  alb  ought   to  lay 
'«  down  our  lives  for  the  brethrer.."  Here  is  a  pattern 
of  the  highefl:  and  moil:  unufual  kind  of  love  propo- 
fed  to  our  imitation  ;  not  that  every  man,  by  virtue 
of  this  example,  is  to  lay  down  his  life  for  another, 
becaufe  that  is  not  pradlicable  ;  for  then  by  the  fame 
reafon  that  I  am  obliged  to  lay  down  my  life  for  ano- 
ther, he  would  be  as  much  obliged  to  lay  down  his 
life  for  me;  and  fo  by  my  dying  for  him,  I  ihould 
hinder  him  of  doing  a  duty  to  which  he  was  equally 

obliged. 


conjider'd^  as  our  example.  4S73 

obliged,  and  take  it  out  of  his  hands :  but  the  mean-  SERM. 
ing  of  this  precept  is,  that  as  Christ  died  for  a  ^ijl^^' 
common  good,  fo  we  ought  to  bear  that  common  af- 
fection to  mankind,  and  efpecially  to  our  brethren, 
who  are  endeared  to  us  by  a  nearer  relation,  as  in  imi- 
tation of  the  example  he  hath  given  us,  to  be  ready 
by  our  fingle  life,  if  there  be  occafion,  to  redeem  the 
Jives  of  many  of  our  brethren,  and  to  expofe  ourfelves 
to  fave  them.  This  I  conceive  is  all  that  can  rcafon- 
ably  be  colledted  from  our  obligation  to  imitate  our 
Lo  R  d's  example. 

3.  The  life  of  our  blefifed  Saviour  Is  likcwifc 
a  pattern  of  fuch  virtues,  as  are  mofl  ufeful  and  be- 
neficial to  others. 

In  his  readineis  to  do  good  to  all  perfons  in  all 
kinds  ;  by  inftruding  their  ignorance,  and  fupplying 
their  wants,  fpirltual  and  temporal ;  by  refolving  their 
doubts,  and  comforting  them  in  their  forrows;  by 
healing  their  difcafcs  and  infirmities,  which  he  indeed 
did  in  extraordinary  and  miraculous  ways,  becaule  he 
was  deftitute  of  ordinary  means ;  and  we  are  to  do  X 
by  ordinary  means,  and  fuch  as  are  in  our  power, 
which  when  they  are,  there  is  no  need  of  miracles. 
And  then  in  his  fecking  occafions  and  opportunities 
for  it,  not  content  with  thofe  that  offered  themfclves, 
but  enquiring  after  them  ;  and  in  his  unwearied  dili- 
gence in  this  work ;  for  "  he  went  about  doing 
"  good,*  fpent  whole  days  from  morning  to  night,  for 
the  fervice  and  benefit  of  others;  negleded  himfelf, 
and  the  ordinary  refrefhments  of  nature,  out  of  his 
great  zeal  "  to  work  the  work  of  him  that  fent  him/* 
to  bring  glory  to  God,  and  good  to  men. 

And  in  the  delight  he  took  in  this  employment,  it 
was  "  his  meat  and  drink"  to  be  doing  of  it;  he 

cftecmed 


4'?74  ^^^^  -^y^  ^/'Jesus  Christ 

S  E  R  M.  efteemed  it  his  happinefs,  yea,  a  greater  felicity  to  con- 
■  fer  benefits  upon  others,  than  any  man  firds  in  re- 
ceiving the  greateft  benefit  from  others  :  for  chat  it 
feems  was  a  noted  faying  of  his,  a  kind  of  motto 
with  him,  as  St.  Paul  tcftifies,  Adls  xx.  2§.     "  It  is 
*'  more  bJefled  to  give  than  to  receive.'*     And  in  all 
this,    he  perfifted   in  defpite  of  the  greatcfi:  difcou- 
ragements  from  the  ingratitude  and  malice  of  men, 
who  maligned  him  for  his  kindnefs,  and  put  an  ill 
conllrudion  upon  his  mod   charitable  adions,  and 
were  ready  "  to  (lone  him  for  his  good  works:"  but 
this  did  not  difcourage  him,  and  take  him  off  ^  fo  he 
might  do  good,  he  was  contented  to  hear  and  fuffer  ill. 
And  then  in  his  condtfcenfion  to  others,  and  con- 
fideratioii  of  their  weaknefs,    and  complying  with 
them  in  lawful  and  indifferent  things,   for  their  edifi- 
cation, and  to  gain   them  in  greater  matters;    this 
St.  Paul  tells  us,  was  our  Lo  r  d's  temper,  and   he 
urgeth  chriflians  with  the  example  of  it,  Rom.  xv, 
I,  2,  3.  "  We  then  that  are  ftrong,  ought  to  bear 
*'  the  infirmities  of  the  weak,  and  not  to  pleafc  our 
*'  [elves.     Let  every  one  of  us  pleafe  his  neighbour 
*'  for  his  good  to  edification:  for  even  Christ 
*'  pleafcd  not  himfelf."    Where  we  have  liberty  and 
can  yield,  we  ought  to  abate  of  our  own  humour,  for 
the  good  and  edification  of  others;  and  not  peevifh- 
ly  and  iiifly  to  infift  upon  leffcr  things,  to  the  hin- 
drance of  a  greater  good  ;  "  for  even  Christ 
"  pleafed  not  himfelf."  He  who  had  all  authority  to 
c  mmand,  and  right  to  be  obeyed,  and  who  could 
pot  err  in  any  thing;  yet  he  condelcended  to   the 
weaknefs  and  infirmities  of  others,  and  in  all  indiffe- 
rent things  did  not  conlult  his  own  inclination,  but 
their  intercft  and  edification, 

And 


conjider'd^  as  our  example,  43  75 

And  which  greatly  conduceth  to  the  comfort  and  S  E  R  M, 
benefit  of  all  focieties,  both  civil  and  ecclefiaftical,  he 
gave  us  the  example  of  an  obedient  and  peaceable 
temper,  conforming  himfelf  and  his  a6lions  not  only 
to  divine,  but  humane  laws,  "  giving  to  Csefar  the 
*'  things  which  are  C^far's,  and  to  G  o  d  the  things 
"  which  are  God's;"  infomuch,  that  when  tribute 
was  demanded  of  him,  though  he  was  really  free  from 
any  fuch  obligation,  and  fo  poor,  that  he  was  not 
able  to  pay  ir,  m  which  cafe  even  Csfar  mud  lofe  his 
right;  neverthelefs,  to  avoid  offence,  he  fubmitted  to 
it,  and  chofe  rather  to  work  a  miracle,  than  to  appear 
refradlory  and  difobedient. 

And  in  religious  rites  and  ceremonies,  and  the 
obfervance  of  days  and  times,  he  did  not  only  con- 
form to  all  divine  inftitutions,  but  to  humane  ap- 
pointment and  ufage  in  all  things  that  were  of  an  in- 
nocent and  indifferent  nature;  and  this  without  any 
anxious  fcrupulofity,  and  pcrverfe  difputing  evei-y  inch 
of  his  liberty;  with  great  peaceablenefs  obferving 
thofe  religious  fcftivals,  which  had  no  other  appoint- 
ment but  of  the  civil  authority,  and  were  of  mere  hu- 
mane inftitution;  and  with  great  prudence  fteering  a 
middle  courfc  between  endlefs  fuperftition,  and  fcru- 
pulous  and  petulant  fadlion  ;  giving  all  chriftians  here- 
in a  pattern,  how  to  demean  themfelves  in  like  cafes 
with  great  peaceablenefs  and  obedience,  and  not  to 
do  or  avoid  the  doing  of  any  thing,  out  of  peevifh- 
nefs  and  fingularity  of  humour,  and  a  fpirit  of  con- 
tradidion,  and  not  to  indulge  needlefs  and  endlefs 
fcruples,  efpecially  on  the  wrong  fide,  as  it  is  too  vi- 
fible  many  mens  fcruples  lie  almoll  wholly  about  obe- 
dience to  authority,  and  compliance  with  indifferent 
cuftoms,  but  very  feldom  about  the  danger  of  duo- 
VoL.  X.  21  X  bedience 

3- 


CLXXXIX. 


4376  TJje  Life  o/"Jesus  Christ 

SERM.  bedicnce  and  unpeaceablenefs,  and  rending  In  plecfi 
the  church  of  C  h  r  i  s  t  by  needlefs  reparations,  and 
endlefs  divifions. 

And  our  Lord  did  not  only  give  us  the  example 
of  a  peaceable  and  uniting  fpirit,  but  a  little  before 
his  departure  out  of  the  world,  he  bequeaths  it  to  his 
difciples,  as  his  lail  legacy,  Johnxiv.  27.  *'  Peace  I 
*'  leave  with  you,  my  peace  I  give  unto  you."    And 
to  confirm  it  to  them,  he  makes  it  his  moft  earneft 
and  particular  prayer  to  G  o  d  for  them,  that  God 
would  preferve  this  fpirit  of  peace  and  unity  among 
chriftians  to  the  end  of  the  world,  forefeeing  in  his 
infinite  wiidom,   what  mifchiefs  and  difhonour  the 
contrary  temper  would  bring  to  his   holy  religion, 
John  xvii.  20,  21,  22,  23.  "Neither  pray  I  for  thefc 
"  alone,"  meaning  his  difciples,  "  but  for  them  alfo 
*'  which  fhall  believe  on  me  through  their  word," 
that  is,  for  all  chriftians  to  the  end  of  the  world \* 
"  that   they  all  may  be  one,  as  thou  Father 
*'  art  in  me,  and  1  in  thee,  that  they  alfo  may  be 
*'  one  in  us;  that  the  world  may  believe  that  thou 
"  haft  fent  me.     And  the  glory  which  thou  gaveft 
"  me,  I  have  given  them;  that  they  may  be  one, 
"  even  as  we  are  one.     I  in  them,  and  thou  in  me, 
*'  that  they  may  be  made  perfe6t  in  one,  and  that 
*'  the  world  may  know  that  thou  haft  fent  me."    In- 
timating, that  nothing  is  more  apt  to  bring  in  quc- 
ftion  the  divinity  of  the  chriftian  dodlrine,  than  con- 
tentions and  divifions  among  chriftians,    "  that  the 
"  world  may  know  that  thou  haft  fent  me." 

Let  us  often  think  of  this  pattern,  and  this  prayer 
of  our  Saviour,  and  let  the  confideration  of  it 
quell  thofe  unchriftian  heats  which  are  among  us,  left 
by  our  animofities  and  divifions  about  lefTer  things, 

which. 


eonjider'dy  as  our  example.  4377 

which,  whatever  opinion  men  may  have  of  them,  do 
no  ways  touch  upon  tht  \\^t  and  eflence  of  religion, 
we  firfl:  difhonour,  and  finally  deflroy  from  among 
us  the  bed  religion  in  the  world.  "  And  God 
"  grant  that  we  may  all  know  and  do  in  this  our 
"  day,  the  things  which  belong  to  our  peace,  before  ^ 
"  they  be  hid  from  our  eyes,  for  his  mercy's  fake  in 
"  jEsusCHRisTjto  whom  with  the  Fat  h  e  r, 
*'  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  be  all  power  and  glory 
**  now  and  ever.'* 


SERMON    CXC. 

The  life  of  Jesus  Christ  confider'd, 
as  our  example. 


I  P  E  T.    ii.  21. 

'-'Leaving  us  an  emmple^  that  ye  Jhould  follow  his  fteps. 

I  Have  confidered  our  Sav  i  o u  r's  example,  as  SERM. 
an  univerfal  pattern,  calculated  for  all  perfons,  ^^^^ 
times  and  places ;  and  this  I  illuftrated  in  thefc  The  fe- 

particulars:  condfer- 

r^,        .  r     1  n  mon  on 

1 .  That  It  was   a  pattern  to  us  or  the  greatelt  ti^fg  text. 
and  mod  fubftantial  virtues. 

2.  Of  fuch  as  are  mofl  rare  and  unufual. 

3.  Of  fuch  as  are  moft  ufeful  and  beneficial  to 
others :  I  proceed  to  the  particulars  which  remain  to 
be  fpoken  to. 

4.  Our  Saviour  is  likewife  a  pattern  to  us  of 
fuch  virtues  as  are  moft   hard  and  difHcult  to  be 

21  X  2  pra^ifed. 


4378  5'i&tf  I'tfe  ^/'Jesus  Christ 

SERM.  pra(^ired,  fuch  as  are  mod  againft  the  grain  of  our 
^^^^  corrupt    nature,   and    mofl    contrary   to    flefh  and 
blood. 

Every  virtue  is  then  hard  and  difficult,  when  it 
either  contradidls  the  ftrong  inclinations  of  nature,  or 
meets  with  powerful  temptations  to  the  contrary. 

The  virtues  which  thwart  the  inclinations  of  hu- 
mane nature,  are  comprehended  under  the  general 
name  of  felf-denial,  the  denial  of  ourfelves  in  thofe 
things  which  are  commonly  dcareft  to  men  ;  fuch  are 
our  own  life,  our  pleafure,  our  eafe,  our  reputation  5 
in  all  thde,  our  bleffed  Lord  hath  given  us  the 
greateft  example  of  felf-denial  that  ever  was ;  he 
denied  his  own  life,  and  gave  up  himfelf  wholly  to 
the  will  of  God,  to  do  and  fufFer  whatever  h.e 
thought  fit  to  impgfe  upon  him.  So  he  himfelf  tells 
us,  John  V.  30.  *'  I  feek  not  mine  own  will,  but 
*'  the  will  of  the  Fat  her  which  fent  me:"  and 
John  vi.  30.  "  I  came  down  from  heaven  not  to  do 
"  mine  own  will,  but  the  will  of  him  that  fent  me.'* 
And  when  he  was  in  that  great  agony,  upon  the  ap- 
prehenfion  of  his  approaching  fufferings,  at  which 
nature  did  flart,  and  when  that  "  bitter  cup,  that 
*'  cup  of  aflonifhment,"  was  put  into  his  hand,  tho' 
he  would  have  been  glad  to  have  declined  it,  if  God 
had  thought  fit;  yet  upon  the  whole  matter  he 
fubraitted  to  it,  and  renounced  his  own  will,  the 
flrongeft  inclination  of  nature  that  could  be,  i^a  obe- 
dience to  the  will  of  God,  Mat.  xxvi.  39.  "  He 
*'  fell  on  his  face  and  prayed,  faying,  O  my  Fa- 
*'  T  H  E  R,  if  it  be  poffible,  let  this  cup  pafs  from 
''  me  s  neverthelefs  not  as  I  will,  but  as  thou  wilt:" 
and  ver.  42.  "  He  went  away  again  the  fecond  time, 
^«  andpray'd,  faying,  O  my  Father,  if  this  cup 
•  f'  may 


confiderdy  as  our  example,  4379 

*'  may  not   pafs   from  me,  except  I  drink  it,  thy  SERM, 
"  will  be  done."    Here  was  a  great  confiid  ;  nature    ^^^' 
declined  thofe  dreadful  fufferings,  which  were  com- 
ing upon  him,  and  would  have  flirunk  back  :    but 
he  confider'd  his  duty,  and  made  his  inclination  to 
yield  to  it. 

And  he  did  not  only  deny  his  own  will  in  obedi- 
ence to  the  will  of  God,  for  which  there  is  fo 
great  and  invincible  reafon ;  but  he  denied  it  like- 
wife  in  compliance  and  condefcenfion  to  the  preju- 
dices, and  humours  and  infirmities  of  men,  for 
their  "  edification  and  good."  So  St.  Paul  tells  us, 
and  propounds  our  Lord  herein  to  us  for  a  pattern. 
Rom.  XV.  2,  3. 

He  denied  himfelf  in  the  lawful  pleafures  and  la- 
tisfadlions,  in  the  eafe  and  accomm.odations  of  life : 
he  lived  meanly,  and  fared  hardly ;  ho  pofTefs'd  and 
enjoyed  none  of  the  good  things  of  this  world,  and 
endured  all  the  evils  of  it  ;  he  defpifed  riches,  and 
the  pomp  and  pride  of  life,  and  contented  himfelf 
with  a  poor  and  deftitutc  condition,  ''  having  not 
"  where  to  lay  his  head,"  nor  wherewithal  to  fup- 
port  nature,  and  to  defray  the  common  tribute, 
without  a  miracle.  And  he  did  not  fubmit  to  this 
poor  and  mean  condition  upon  neceffity,  for  '^  he 
^^  was  L  o  R  D  of  all  -y'  he  made  the  world,  and  it 
was  all  his  own  upon  the  higheft  right  and  title : 
but  he  voluntarily  embraced  it,  "  being  rich,  for  our 
*^  fake  he  became  poor,"  that  he  might  wean  us 
from  the  love  of  thefe  things,  and  be  an  effeaual 
example  to  us  of  the  contempt  of  worldly  wealth 
and  greatnefs. 

And  he  denied  himfelf  likewife  in  one  of  the 
^earelt  and  tendereft  things  in  the  world,  to   the 

wifeft 


43S0  The  life  o/s  Jesvs  Christ 

SE  RM.  v/ifeft  and  grcatefl  minds,  I  mean  in  point  of  reputa- 
tion ;  *'  he  made  himfelf  of  no  reputation,"  fays 
"  St.  Paul,  Phil.  ii.  7.  loujrov  Ixsywo-s,  "  he  emptied 
"  himfelf."  To  fubmit  to  contempt,  is  to  empty 
one's  felf  indeed  :  reputation  being  one  of  the  laft 
things  a  generous  mind  would  be  content  to  forego, 
and  that  which  fome  have  held  in  equal  dearnefs  and 
efleem  with  life  itfelf ;  yet  in  this  our  Lord  denied 
himfelf,  and  that  he  might  do  good  to  mankind,  was 
contented  to  be  efteemed  one  of  the  worfl  of  men  5 
and  without  any  kind  of  caule  and  defert  to  under- 
go all  manner  of  obloquy  and  reproach,  to  be  ac- 
counted a  magician  and  impoftor,  "  a  friend  and 
**  companion  of  publicans  and  finners,"  a  feducer  of 
people,  a  feditious  perfon,  and  more  worthy  of  the 
moft  cruel  and  fhameful  death  than  the  greateft  ma- 
lefador.  Thus  was  the  So  n  of  Go d  contented  to 
be  fet  below  the  word  of  men,  to  be  abafed  and 
vilified,  that  he  might  be  a  perfedt  pattern  to  us  of 
this  difficult  virtue  of  felf-denial,  even  in  thofe  things 
which  are  held  in  the  greateft  efteem  among  the  beil 
of  men. 

And  furely  in  no  cafe  is  example  more  neceflary 
than  in  this,  to  animate  and  encourage  us  in  the  dif. 
charge  of  fo  difficult  a  duty,  fo  contrary  to  the  bent 
and  inclination  of  our  nature.  A  bare  precept  of 
felf-denial  in  thefe  things,  and  a  peremptory  com- 
mand to  facrifice  our  own  wills,  our  eafe,  our  pleafure 
and  reputation,  yea  and  life  itfelf  to  the  glory  of 
God, and  the  good  of  men,  would  have  founded  very 
har/h  and  fevere,  had  not  the  pradice  of  all  this 
been  exemplified  in  a  pattern  of  fo  much  advantage : 
one  who  in  all  thefe  refpedts  denied  himfelf  much 
more  than  is  poflible  for  us  to  do,  who  might  have 

infilled 


'  conjtder'dy  as  our  ex  ample  4  4381 

infifted  upon  a  greater  right,  who  abafed  himfelf,  S  E  R  M. 
and  floop'd  from  a  greater  height  and  dignity,  who 
did  not  fubmit  to  a  condition  of  poverty  and  mean- 
nefs  when  it  was  unavoidable,  but  chofe  it ;  who  fub- 
mitted  to  ilifFering,  though  he  never  deferved  it,  and 
who  met  with  all  the  contempt  and  reproach  imagina- 
ble, whilft  he  truly  deferved  the  greateft  efteem  and 
reputation.     Here  is  an  example  that  hath  all  the  ar- 
gument, and  all  the  encouragement  that  can  be  to 
the  imitation  of  it.     Was  he,  who  had  fo  regular  a 
will  and   inclination,   contented  to  have  it  crucified 
and  thwarted  ?  did  he,  who  had  an  unqucftionable 
right  to  all  the  riches  and  enjoyments  of  the  world,  re- 
nounce them  ail,   and  embrace  poverty  ?    did  he, 
to  whofe  deep  wifdom  and  judgment  all  mankind 
ought  to  fubmit,  condefcend  to  the  weaknefs  of  others, 
and  "  not  pleafe  himfelf  ?  "  did  he,  who  never  did 
the  lead  thing  in  his  whole  life  that  might  juftly 
llain  or  blemiih  his   reputation,  patiently  bear  all 
forts  of  contumely  and  reproach  ?  and  ihall  we  think 
much  to  deny   ourfelves  in  any  of  thefe  ?  fuch  an 
example  is  of  greater  force  and  authority   than  any 
precept  or  law.     Well  might  our  Lo  r  d,  thus  going 
before  us,  command  us  to  follow  him,   faying,  '«  if 
"  any  man  will  be  my  difciple,  let  him  deny  him- 
"  felf,  and  take  up  his  crofs  and  follow  me."     If  he 
thus  denied  himfelf,  well  may  we,  who  have  much 
lefs  to  deny,  and  much  more  reafon  and  caufe  to  do 
it ;  for,  as  he  argues,  "  the  difciple  is  not  greater  than 
"  his  mafter,  nor  the  fervant  than  his  lord.*'     He  did 
it  voluntarily  and  of  choice ;  it  is  our  duty :  he   did 
it  for  our  fakes ;  we  do  it  for  our  own  :  we  did  noc 
deferve  it  of  him ;  but  he  hath  merited  it  of  us. 


Our 


4352  'T^^^  ^{/^  of  ]^^^^  Christ 

S  E  RM.      O  ir  L  o  R  D  did  not,  like  the  pharifees,  give  ftrxl 

^^'^'  precepts  toothers,  which  they  themfelves  did  not  fol- 
low. "  They  faid,  and  did  not,  laid  heavy  burdens 
*'  upon  others,  and  grievous  to  be  born,  when  they 
*'  themfelves  would  not  touch  them  with  one  of  fheir 
''  fingers:"  nor  like  the  philofophers,  who  fpake 
fine  and  glorious  things  of  goodnefs  and  virtue,  but 
did  much  like  other  men ;  gave  ftrid  rules  to  others, 
but  lived  loofely  themfelves  \  and  therefore  it  is  no 
wonder  that  their  difcourfcs  had  fo  little  effed  upon 
the  lives  and  manners  of  men,  and  were  fo  unavaila- 
ble to  the  reformation  of  the  world.  Precepts  of 
great  ftridlnefs  and  feverity,  are  like  to  be  obeyed 
very  ilowly  and  fiintly,  unleis  they  be  fweetned  and 
made  eafy  by  the  familiar  pradice  of  thofe  that  give 
them.  In  a  way  that  is  rugged  and  difficult,  full  of 
trouble  and  danger,  it  is  not  enough  to  hid  men  go 
on  ;  but  he  that  bids  them,  mud  go  before  them^ 
and  take  them  by  the  hand,  and  give  them  an  example 
to  follow  his  fteps ;  without  this,  rules  and  precepts 
are  very  dry  things,  and  give  but  faint  and  cold  en- 
couragement. C^far's  example  prevailed  much  more 
upon  his  foldiers,  than  his  word  of  command.  No 
man  ever  difcours'd  better  of  magnanimity  and  great- 
nefs  of  mind,  in  great  dangers  and  calamities,  than 
Tully  does  •,  and  yet  when  it  came  to  the  trial,  no 
man  ever  behaved  himlelf  more  flnntly,  and  fhewed 
greater  dejedlion  of  mind  than  he  did  ;  fo  that  it  is 
hard  to  fay,  whether  his  difcourfes  are  more  apt  to 
raife,  or  his  example  to  damp  a  man's  fpirit.  Seneca 
writes  with  wonderful  wit  and  fmartnefs,  with  great 
finenefs  and  force  of  argument,  about  the  contempt 
of  the  world  and  wealth  •,  but  then  to  confider  how 
he  flowed  in  wealth  himfclf,  and  how  intent  he  was 

to 


cxc. 


conjider'd^  as  our  example,  43^3 

to  heap  up  riches  beyond  meafure,  would  make  a  S  E  R  M. 
man  more  apt  to  defpife  him,  than  the  world.  So 
neceflary  is  it  that  precepts,  efpecially  of  great 
difficulty,  ihould  be  back'd  and  enforc'd  by  exam- 
ple, and  that  fevere  rules  fhould  be  mollified,  and 
made  eafy  by  the  practice  of  thoie  who  prefcribe 
them.  And  this  our  Lord  took  particular  care  to 
do  in  thofe  precepts  of  his,  which  feem  to  offer  the 
greateft  violence  to  the  common  bent  and  inclination 
of  humane  nature. 

And  fo  he  did  hkewife  in  thofe  virtues  which  are 
fo  difficult  upon  the  account  of  temptation  from 
without,  as  well  as  of  inclination  from  within.  Not 
to  infift  upon  his  firm  refiftance  of  all  the  temptati- 
ons to  ambition,  which  made  not  the  leaft  impref^ 
fion  upon  him  ;  the  offer  of  "  the  kingdoms  of  the 
''  world,  and  the  glory  of  them,"  had  no  influence  up- 
on him.  He  was  fometimes  in  great  favour  with  the 
people,  and  mightily  applauded  by  them,  for  ''  fpeak- 
''  ing  as  never  man  fpake,"  and  doing  luch  things, 
as  no  man  ever  did :  but  he  v/as  as  little  moved  by 
their  applaufe,  as  he  was  dejedcd  by  their  reproaches. 
When  the  people  would  have  made  him  king,  to 
qualify  him  the  better,  as  they  thought,  to  be  the 
M  E  s  s  I  A  s,  he  would  not  take  fo  much  notice  of 
the  offer,  as  to  refufe  it,  but  filently  withdrew  him- 
i€\!i^  that  they  knew  not  where  to  find  him. 

But  that  which  I  fhall  particularly  take  notice  of 
under  this  head,  is  his  great  meeknefs,  which  is  a 
very  difficult  virtue  i  if  we  confider  the  peeviffinels 
and  infirmity  of  humane  nature,  and  the  frequent 
temptations  to  paffion  and  anger,  which  occur  in 
humane  life,  and  thefe  very  fudden  and  furprifing ; 
fo  that  there  is  nothing  wherein  wife  men  do  oftner 

Vol.  X.  21  y  betray 

3' 


7 he  life  of  ]esv  s  CuRi  $T 
betray  their  own  weaknefs,  than  in  the  matter  of 
fudden  anger.  Mofes,  the  greateft  of  all  the  pro- 
phets that  had  been,  and  who  it  feems  was  naturally 
of  a  meek  temper,  having  this  teftimony  given  him  by 
the  S  p  I  R  I  T  of  G  o  D,  that  ''  he  was  themeekeft 
*'  man  upon  earth  ;  "  yet  he  mifcarried  in  this  mat- 
ter>  and  not  being  able  to  bear  the  continual  perverfe- 
nefs  of  that  people,  loft  his  temper,  and  fell  into  an 
irregular  pafTion.  But  our  blefTed  Lord,  whofe 
temper  was  perpetually  afTauited  with  the  higheft 
provocations  in  all  kinds,  ftill  maintained  the  even- 
nefs  and  meeknels  of  his  fpirit. 

The  dulnefs  and  flownefs  of  his  difciples,  to  un- 
derftand  and  believe  what  he  had  fo  plainly  taught, 
and  fo  often  inculcated  upon  them,  was  a  great  trial 
of  patience ;  which  yet  provoked  him  no  farther, 
than  to  a  juft  rebuke  of  their  fault.  The  hardeft 
words  he  ever  gave  them,  were,  ''  O  unv/ife  and 
*'  flow  of  heart  to  believe  1  how  long  fhall  I  fufFer 
"  you?"  and  when  he  was  in  the  height  of  his 
forrow  and  trouble,  and  his  difciples  were  fo  un- 
concern'd  for  him,  as  to  fall  afleep,  in  the  fame 
breath  that  he  reproves  their  drowfinefs,  he  makes 
an  excufe  for  it :  ''  can  ye  not  watch  with  me  one 
"  hour  ?  the  fpirit  indeed  is  willing :  but  the  fle/h 
"  is  weak."  This  carriage  from  his  friends  and  fol- 
lowers, when  he  ftood  in  moft  need  of  their  comfort 
and  afllftance,  and  "  his  foul  was  exceeding  forrow- 
"  ful,  even  to  the  death,"  was  a  great  temptation  to 
anc^er,  efpecially  falling  upon  a  fore  and  affl idled 
mind  ;  and  yet  it  was  lb  far  from  provoking  his  an- 
ger, that  it  rather  moved  his  pity  toward  them. 

His  fharp  reproofs  of  the  Scribes  and  Pharifees, 
were  but  a  neceflary  fevcrity,  and  a  juft  expreftlon 

of 


confiderdy  as  our  ei<ample.  43^5 

of  his  indignation  at  the  fulfom  hypocrify  of  fuch  S  E  R  M. 
great  pretenders  to  piety  and  devotion  ;  for  "  he 
^'  knew  their  hearts."  His  whipping  of  the  buy- 
ers and  fellers  out  of  the  temple,  ii\^  only  a6bion 
of  his  \i{t  in  which  there  appears  any  tranfport  of 
anger,  was  no  other  but  a  becoming  zeal  for  the 
honour  .of  God's  houfe,  which  he  faw  fo  notorl- 
ouily  profaned  ;  which  zeal  was  warranted,  after  the 
example  of  Phincas,  by  the  extraordinary  occafioa 
of  lU  In  all  his  other  anions,  he  was  perfecftly 
meek  and  lowly  in  fpirit,  void  of  pride,  one  of 
the  chief  caufes  of  inordinate  anger.  We  cannot 
lay  he  was  never  angry  •  but  whenever  he  was  fo, 
which  was  very  feldom,  "  he  finned  not ;  '*  it  was 
upon  great  and  juft  cccafion,  and  never  to  any  un. 
due  degree. 

And  this  is  the  more  remarkable,  becaufe  he  was 
very  apt  to  receive  the  impreflions  of  other  pafTi- 
ons  \  love  and  pity,  which  eafily  moved  him  to 
kindnefs  and  compaffion.  He  could  not  forbear  to 
weep,  when  he  faw  Lazarus  his  friends  lamenting 
over  his  grave,  though  he  knew  the  caufe  of  their 
forrow  would  foon  be  removed  and  turned  intojoy^ 
by  his  refurredlion  to  life.  Nay,  he  had  not  only 
this  tendernefs  towards  his  friends,  but  even  to  his 
greateft  enemies.  When  he  looked  upon  Jerufalem, 
and  forefaw  the  terrible  revenge  that  God  would 
take  upon  his  enemies  and  murderers,  and  beheld  at 
a  great  diltance  the  dreadful  calamities  that  were 
coming  upon  them,  he  could  not  refrain  from  tears. 
He  allowed  himfelf  in  thefe  innocent  and  humane 
pafTions  \  but  where  there  was  danger  of  tranfgrei- 
fing,  as  there  is  in  no  paffion  more  than  that  o;  an- 
ger, he  was  continually  upon  his  guard,  and  govtrn'd 
%\  Y  %  hiiiifclf 


4386  The  life  f/  Jesu  s  Christ 

SERM.  hlmfelfwith  great  care,  and  never  gave  way  to  it, 
but  upon  evident  and  juft  occafion  s  and  was  never 
tranfported  to  any  undue  degree. 

And  yet  he  lived  and  died  almoft  under  conti- 
nual provocations  to  it;  not  only  from    his  friends 
and  followers,  but  from  all  forts  of  perfons,  provo- 
cations of  the  higheft  nature  ;  if  the  molt  fpiteful  re- 
proaches and  injurious  ufage  and  the  moft  cruel  per- 
fecutions   and   fufferings  from   the    hands    of  thofe 
whom  he  had  by  all  ways  endeavoured   to  oblige  •, 
if  ''  the  contradictions  of  finners,  whom  he  came  to 
**  fave,"  in  a  word,  if  the  greateft  malice  accom- 
panied with  the  highefl:  ingratitude  -,  if  any,  if  all 
of  thefe  be  provocations  of  a  high  nature,  he  was  al- 
moft continually,  living  and  dying,    exercifed  with 
thefe.     And  how    did   he  demean   himielf  in  the 
midft  of  all  thefe  provocations,    with    the  greateft 
meeknefs  and.  mildnefs  imaginable,  anfwering  their 
bittereft  reproaches  and  cruelleft  ufage,  either  with 
calm  reafonings,  or  with  meek  filence ;  that  by  the 
reafonablenefs   and    meeknefs    of  his  anfwers    and 
carriage,  he  might  either  convince  or  mollify  them  ! 
When  his  enemies  charged  him  with  the  profanation 
of  the  fabbath,  he  only  reafons  the  matter  fairly  with 
them,  asking  them  whether  ''  it  was  lawful  to  do 
*'  good,  or  to  do  evil  on  the  fabbath-day  ;"  tell- 
ing them  that  "  the  labbath  was  made  for  man, 
"  and  not   man  for  the  fabbath  \ "  bidding  them 
*'  go  and  learn  what  that  meant,  I  will  have  mercy, 
*'  and  not  facrifice."     When  they  accufed  him  for 
being  a  magician,  and  "  calling  out  devils,  by  the 
"  prince  of  the  devils  -,  "  he  convinceth  them  by  rea- 
fon,  that  this  was  a  malicious  and  groundlels  charge, 
teliing  them,  that  "  a  kingdom  divided  againft  it 

'Melf 


cxc. 


conjider'dy  as  our  example.  43 S/ 

«f  felf  cannot  ftand  ; "  and  that  *"^  if  he  by  Satan  cafl  S  e  R^M. 
^'  out  Satan,  his  kingdom  v/as  divided  againft  it 
^'  felf,  and  mud  fall."  When  they  upbraided  him 
for  "  companying  with  publicans  and  Tinners;  "  he 
juftifies  the  thing  by  telling  them,  that  '^  the  whole 
^'  have  no  need  of  the  phyfician,  but  the  fick  j  '* 
that  "  he  came  not  to  call  the  righteous,  but  finners 
"  to  repentance."  When  they  charged  him  with 
blafphemy,  for  "  faying  to  the  man  fick  of  the  pal- 
"  fy,  thy  fins  be  forgiven  thee  ;  *'  he  only  asks  them 
this  queftion,  "  which  is  eafier  to  fay,  thy  fins  be 
^^  forgiven  thee  ?  or,  take  up  thy  bed  and  walk  ?  '* 
When  they  called  him  by  the  odious  name  of  im- 
poftor  and  feducer  of  the  people,  he  makes  no  iharp 
anfwer,  but  appeals  to  his  miracles,  and  "  the  works 
"  which  he  had  done  among  them,"  as  an  un- 
queftionable  teftimony  that  "  he  came  from  God.'* 
When  "  they  took  up  ftones  to  throw  at  him,"  he 
oppofeth  to  this  hard  ufage  only  foft  gentle  words, 
if  by  that  means  he  might  ftay  their  rage,  John  x, 
32.  "  Many  good  works  have  I  fhewed  you  from 
"  my  Fa  t  h  e  r  ;  for  which  of  thefe  works  do  ye 
«'  flone  me  ? "  thus  upon  all  occafions  he  anfvvers 
their  malice  and  rage,  not  with  boifterous  pafTion, 
but  by  calm  reafon  and  argument ;  and  notwith- 
ftanding  it  had  httle  effed,  he  continues  this  way 
to  the  laft,  and  as  the  malice  of  his  enemies  was  in- 
i^ncible,  fo  was  his  meeknefs.  In  his  Jaft  fufFer- 
ings,  when  he  was  fo  rudely  and  injurioufly  treated 
at  his  trial,  and  one  of  the  high-priefts  officers 
ftruck  him,  in  the  open  face  of  the  court,  he  only 
fays  to  him,  *Mf  I  have  fpoken  evil,  bear  witnels 
*'  of  the  evil :  but  if  well,  why  fmiteft  thou  me  ?  " 
what  could  be  faid  more  meekly  ?  what  more  rea- 

fonably  ? 


4388  7he  life  0/  J  esu  s  Christ 

SERM.  fonibly?  And  when,  in  the  extremity  of  his  fuffer- 
'  ings,  the  high-priefts,  and  the  foldiers,  and  the  peo- 
ple, all  joined  together  to  revile  him,  and  infult  over 
his  mifery,  in  the  mod  barbarous  and  cruel  manner-, 
inftead  of  breaking  out  into  palTion  in  this  anguifh 
of  his  foul,  he  pours  out  his  prayers  to  God  on 
their  behalf,  and  makes  the  mod  charitable  excufe 
and  apology  for  them,  that  their  crime  was  polTibly 
capable  of:  "Father,  forgive  them  *,  for  they 
*'  know  not  what  they  do."  While  he  felt  the  bitter 
effedls  of  their  malice,  he  imputes  it  to  their  igno- 
rance. Here  is  an  example  of  meeknefs  fit  for  the 
Son  of  God  to  give,  and  much  more  fit  for  the 
ions  of  men  to  follow  -,  for  as  the  wife  fon  of  Sy- 
rach  fays  excellendy,  "  pride  was  not  made  for 
"  men,  nor  furious  anger  for  him  that  was  born  of 


*'  a  woman." 


And  having  fuch  an  example  left  us  of  this  great 
virtue,  let  us  do  likewife,  fince  as  Sc.  Peter  tells  us, 
he  fufFered  with  all  this  meeknefs  and  patience,  "  to 
^^  leave  us  an  example,  that  ye  might  follow  his 
*-^  fteps;  who  when  he  was  reviled,  reviled  not  again  ^ 
"  when  he  fufFered,  he  threatned  not;  but  commit- 
**  ted  himfelf  to  him  that  judgeth  righteoufiy." 
When  we  confider  this  example,  can  we  refcnt  fo 
highly  every  petty  injury  and  provocation  ;  and  upon 
every  (lighting  word  proceed  to  a  challenge  and  a 
quarrel,  and  entertain  fierce  and  implacable  thoughts 
of  revenge.^  When  the  Son  of  God  with  fo  much 
meeknefs  "  endured  the  continual  contradidions  of 
^'  finners,"  and  put  up  fuch  outrageous  afironts 
and  indignities  from  his  creatures,  thofe  ungrateful 
wretches  whom  he  had  made,  and  whom  he  came  to 
iave,  and  for  whom  he  offered  to  give  that  very  bloody 

which 


cxc. 


confider'd^  as  our  example.  43^9 

which  they  fo  cruelly  and  malicioufly  filed,  for  the  ex-  SERM. 
piation  of  their  guilt. 

To  all  which  I  /hall  add,  his  readinefs  to  forgive 
injuries,  confidering  the  temptations  he  had  to  wrath 
and  revenge,  from  the  fpiteful  reproaches  and  inju- 
rious calumnies,  and  continual  perfecution  of  his  bit- 
ter and  implacable  enemies  without  a  caufe  5  who  pur- 
fued  him  with  inceflant  rage  and  malice,  and  never 
gave  over  till  they  had  wrought  his  ruin,  and  by  falfe 
accufations,  and  a  mofl  violent  perfecution,  and  fe- 
ditious  tumults  and  clamours,  they  had  forc'd  the 
Roman  governor,  contrary  to  his  inclination,  and 
the  convidions  of  his  own  mind  and  confcience,  and 
againft  all  reafon  and  juftice,  to  pafs  fentence  upon 
him,  when  he  declared  "  he  faw  nothing  in  him 
"  worthy  of  death,"  and  to  condemn  him  to  amoft 
painful  and  ignominious  death.  Nor  did  their  ma- 
lice end  here;  but  they  aggravated  his  fufferings  with 
fcurrilous  taunts  and  reproaches,  and  ail  the  rudenels 
and  indignities  imaginable :  and  yet  all  this  injurious 
and  cruel  ufage,  did  not  provoke  him  to  one  re- 
vengeful thought;  could  not  extort  from  him  fb 
much  as  one  peevilh,  or  misbecoming,  or  threatning 
word.  "  When  he  was  reviled,  he  reviled  not  again ; 
"  when  he  fuffer'd,  he  threatned  not."  But  notwith- 
Itanding  all  this  provocation,  he  was  more  ready  to 
forgive  the  injuries  and  indignities  they  put  upon  him, 
than  they  could  be  to  offer  them,  and  implored  the 
mercy  and  forgivenefs oF  God  for  them,  as  heartily 
and  earneftly  as  they  had  folicited  his  death  and 
dedrudion. 

It  is  eafy  to  give  precepts  of  forgivenefs,  to  bid 
men  "■  love  their  enemies,  blefs  them  that  curfe 
«'  them,  do  good  to  them  that  hate  them^  and  pray 

"  for 


cxc. 


43  90  ^he  life  df  ]  e  svs  Christ 

SERM.  <*  for  them  that  defpitefnlly  ufe  them  and  perfecute 
them,  and  to  forgive  our  brother  that  offends  us, 
*'  not  only  to  ievcn  times  but  to  feventy  times  fcven," 
without  ftint  and  limit :  but  the  practice  of  this  is  ex- 
ceeding difficult  5  for  how  hard  do  we  find  it  to  pafs 
by  a  little  provocation,  and  upon  a  very  fmall  affront 
and  indgnity  offer'd  to  us,  to  fupprefs  the  thought 
and  defire  of  revenge,  and  to  command  our  paffion 
from  breaking  out  in  word  or  deed  ?  but  much  more 
difficult  is  it  perfedtly  to  forgive,  to  love  our  ene- 
mies, to  pray  for  them,  and  to  be  ready  to  do  them 
^good.  Such  a  difHcult  virtue  as  this  had  need  of  all 
forts  of  inducements  to  engage  us  to  the  practice  of 
it.  And  therefore  our  blefTed  Lord  did  not  think 
it  enough  ftridly  to  enjoin  it,  and  to  enforce  it  upon 
us  by  the  mofl  powerful  confiderations,  teaching  us 
in  our  daily  prayers,  to  beg  mercy  and  forgivenefs  of 
God  upon  this  condition,  "  that  we  forgive  others,'* 
and  not  to  hope  for  it  upon  other  terms  -,  telling  us, 
that  as  we  demean  ourfelves  toward  one  another  in  this 
cafe  of  injuries  and  provocations,  fo  God  will  deal 
with  us ',  "  if  ye  forgive  men  their  trefpafTes,  your 
**  heavenly  Father  will  alfo  forgive  you  :  but  if 
"  ye  forgive  not  men  their  trefpafTes,  neither  will  your 
*'  heavenly  Father  forgive  you  your  trefpafTes." 
Nothing  can  be  urged  upon  us  with  greater  force 
than  this  duty  is,  becaufe  upon  our  pra6i:ice  and  per- 
formance of  it,  all  our  hopes  of  mercy  and  forgive- 
nefs from  God  are  fufpended.  But  yet  it  is  difficult 
after  all  this;  and  therefore  to  allure  us  more 
powerfully  to  the  practice  of  it,  our  Lord  hath 
given  us  the  example  of  it  in  the  whole  courfe  of  his 
life ;  in  which  being  continually  afTaulted  with  inju- 
ries and  provocations,  he  had  perpetual  occafion  for 

the 


confiderd^  as  our  example. 

the  pfaftice  of  forgivenefs;  and  that  in  greater  in- 
ilances,  and  upon  occafion  of  greater  injuries,  than 
any  of  us  are  capable  of  receiving.  He  who  could 
never  (land  in  need  of  forgivenefs  from  men,  v/ho 
needed  none  from  God,  who  had  it  always  in  his 
power  to  have  revenged  with  eafe,  and  to  the  utmofl-, 
ail  xkit  provocations  and  affronts  that  were  offered  to 
him;  he  who  had  none  of  thofe  powerful  induce- 
ments to  forgivenefs  which  we  have,  was  thus  ready 
to  forgive  ;  and  did  it  perpetually,  upon  the  greateH, 
upon  innumerable  occafions ;  he  forgave  his  en- 
mies  all  their  ill-will  toward  him,  and  all  their 
vile  and  malicious  ufage  of  him  throughout  his  whole 
life  :  but  mod  remarkably  at  his  death,  when  the  pro- 
vocations were  greatefl:  and  moil  violent,  when  they 
fell  thick  and  in  florms  upon  him,  and  when  they 
were  more  grievous  and  piercing,  in  the  very  agony 
and  anguilh  of  his  fuffering ;  in  thefe  hard  and  pref- 
fmg  circumftances,  he  was  fo  far  from  breathing  out 
threatning  and  revenge  againft  the  authors  of  his 
cruel  fufferings,  that  wdth  his  lad  breath  he  did  mod 
elFeclually  declare  his  free  forgivenefs  of  them,  and 
perfed  charity  towards  them,  by  his  fervent  prayer  to 
God  for  them ;  "Father  forgive  them,  for 
''  they  know  not  what  they  do/' 

5.  And  laftly,  our  S  av  i  o  u  R  is  likewife  a  pattern 
to  us  of  the  mod  needful  virtues,  and  for  the  practice 
whereof  there  is  the  greated  and  mod  frequent  occa- 
fion in  humane  life. 

Several  of  thefe  I  have  already  mentioned  under 
the  former  heads ;  as  fi ncerity  -,  which  hath  an  univer- 
fal  influence  upon  all  our  a6tions,  and  is  a  principal 
ingredient  into  all  the  duties  and  fervices  which  we 
are  to  perform  to   God  and  n^en;    humility  and 

Vol.  X.  21  Z  meeknefs, 

4- 


4392  ^h^  ^^fi  ^/'Jesus  Christ 

S  E  R  M.  meeknefs,  for  the  exercife  whereof  there  is  almoft  con- 
^^^"  .  tinual  occafion  in  all  our  converfation  with  others. 
Thefc  have  been  fpoken  to,  I  ihall  therefore  inftance 
in  fome  others,  which  are  likewife  of  great  and  fre- 
quent ufe  in  humane  life. 

(i.)  The  great  humanity  of  his  carriage  and  de- 
portment, of  which  he  gave  manifold  inftances,  in 
his  free  and  familiar  converfation  with  all  forts  of  peo- 
ple. He  did  not  defpife  the  meaneft.  How  familiarly 
did  he  talk  with  the  woman  of  Samaria?  infomuch 
that  his  difciples  were  offended  at  ir,  and  "  marvel- 
*'  led  that  he  talked  with  her."  He  did  not  decline 
the  converfation  of  the  worflr  of  men,  where  he  had 
any  hope  of  making  them  better  by  it  •,  and  though 
his  "  company ing  with  publicans  and  fmners"  was 
often  objeded  as  matter  of  fcandal  to  him,  yet  he 
would  not  for  that  reafon  negledt  any  opportunity  of 
doing  good.  He  was  affable  to  his  inferiors,  to  the 
meaneft  perfon  that  had  occafion  to  fpeak  with  him ; 
yea  "  he  rebuked  his  difciples,  for  forbidding  the 
*'  little  children  to  come  to  him."  They  would  have 
kept  them  from  him,  becaufe  they  could  not  ima- 
gine to  what  purpofe  they  fhould  be  permitted  to 
come  to  him :  but  though  they  were  not  capable  of 
his  inftru6lions,  yet  they  were  of  his  kindnefs  and 
blelTino-.  "  He  took  them  up  in  his  arms,  and  laid 
*'  his  hands  upon  them,  and  blefled  them-,"  and  he 
propofed  them  to  his  difciples  as  emblems  of  that  in- 
nocency  and  fimplicity,  without  which  no  man  fhall 
enter  into  the  kingdom  ot  God. 

His  humanity  likewife  appeared  in  the  tendernefs 
and  compafTion  of  his  nature,  towards  all  that  were 
in  want  or  mifcry  of  any  kind.  "  He  healed  all  man- 
*'  ner  of  fickneffes  and  difeafes  among  the  people, 

"  and 


confiderdy  as  our  example.  4393 

2«  and  went  about  doing  good."    And  v/hen  his  fol-  S  E  R  M. 
lowers,  by  their  long  attendance  upon  him  in  defert 
and  folitary  places  to  hear  his  do6trine,  were  pinched 
with  hunger,  he  could  not  find  in  his  heart  to  difmifs 
them  without  fome  refrefhment  j  and  having  no  other 
means,  did  it  by  a  miracle.    He  was  very  apt  to  fym- 
pathize  with  the  condition  of  others,  "  to  weep  with 
"  them  that  wept,"  as   he  did  with   the  friends  of 
Lazarus  over  his  grave :  nay,  he  had  a  tendernefs  for 
his  enemies ;  when  he  beheld  Jerulalem,  and  the  lad 
fate  which  hung  over  it  for  their  obllinace  impeni- 
tency,  he  could  not  refrain  from  tears  at  the  thoughts 
of  it. 

Another  inftance  of  his  humanity  was  his  eafinels 
to  be  intreated,  and  readinefs  to  yield  to  the  requeft 
of  thofe  who  defired  his  company,  or  implored  his 
help  and  alTiftance.  And  as  he  was  mod  ready  to  do 
good  to  all,  fo  he  did  not  difdain  to  receive  kindnefs 
from  any ;  complying  chearfully  with  the  defires  of 
thofe  who  invited  him  to  their  houfes,  and  accepting 
kindly  any  well-intended  refpedt.  How  did  he  refent 
the  extraordinary  kindnefs  of  the  devout  woman, 
who  poured  the  box  of  rich  ointment  upon  his  head? 
taking  care  that  the  memory  of  it  fhould  be  tranf- 
mitted  to  all  generations,  and  proclaimed  over  the 
whole  world,  Matth.  xxvi.  13. 

(2.)  Another  very  needful  virtue,  and  for  which 
our  Lord  was  very  eminent,  was  his  negled  and 
difregard  of  the  opinion  of  men,  in  comparifon  of 
his  duty.  As  he  was  not  affedled,  much  lefs  puffM 
up  v/ith  their  applaufe,  (which  is  an  argument  of  a 
vain  and  light  mind)  fo  was  he  as  little  moved  with 
their  cenfures  and  reproaches,  by  which  he  was  nei- 
ther difordered  in  his  paflions,  nor  difcouraged  from 
21  Z  2  well-doing. 


4394  ^^^  Jif^  of  ]esvs  Christ 

S  E  R  M.  well-doino;.  He  took  heed  to  his  duty,  and  made 
'  lure  to  do  the  things  which  pleafed  God,  and  was 
not  very  folicitous  what  menfaid  or  thought  of  him. 
He  obierved  in  the  Pharifees,  how  great  a  tempta- 
tion and  hindrance  to  the  receiving  of  his  dodtrine, 
an  undue  regard  to  the  praife  and  cenfure  of  men 
was:  "  They  loved  the  praife  of  men  more  than  the 
"  praife  of  God,"  as  he  tells  us,  John  xii.  43. 
and  chap.  v.  44.  "  How  can  ye  believe,  which  re- 
f^  ceive  honour  one  of  another,  and  feek  not  the  ho- 
"  nour  which  cometh  from  Go  d  only.^"  Not  that 
we  are  to  flight  and  negled  the  opinion  of  others 
concerning  our  adlions  *,  that  is  pride  and  felf- conceit ; 
and  our  Lord  himfelf  was  not  fo  regardlefs  of  his 
reputation,  as  not  to  take  great  care  to  give  no  jufl 
occafion  of  cenfure,  no  needlefs  handle  to  flander  and 
calumny ;  he  vindicated  himfelf  upon  all  occafions, 
and  was  ready  to  give  a  fair  and  reafonable  account 
of  his  aclions,  to  thofe  who  found  fault  with  them, 
nay,  even  maliciouily  carp'd  at  them ;  he  prudently 
avoided  occafions  of  offence,  and  by  wife  and  cau- 
tious anfwers,  many  times  avoided  the  fnares  that  were 
laid  to  bring  him  under  obloquy  and  reproach  :  but 
in  competition  with  his  plain  duty,  he  neither  re- 
garded the  applaufe  nor  cenfures  of  men ;  he  com- 
plied with  them  in  nothing  that  was  bad,  to  gain 
their  good  opinion  and  efteem  ;  nor  was  he  hinder'd 
and  difcouraged  from  any  thing  that  was  good,  for 
fear  of  being  ill  fpoken  of,  or  of  having  a  bad  inter- 
pretation put  upon  his  good  adlions. 

And  this  is  a  virtue  very  neceflary  to  a  good  man, 
efpecially  in  bad  times,  and  requires  a  good  degree 
of  fortitude  and  firmnefs  of  refolution  to  make  a  man 
mafter  of  it.     And  'tis  not  more  neceflary  than  it 

is 


conjider'd,  as  our  example.  43  9 ^ 

IS  reafonable :  for  it  is  not  in  our  power  whether  S  E  R  M. 
men  fhall  fpeak  well  or  ill  of  us ;  but  it  is  in  our  ^^"' 
power,  whether  we  will  do  well  or  ill.  It  is  many 
times  impoflible  to  plcafe  men,  they  are  fb  divided 
in  their  opinions  about  good  and  evil ;  but  we  may 
make  fure  to  pleafe  God,  and  to  gain  his  praife  and 
approbation,  ''  whofe  judgment  is  always  according 
''  to  truth."  It  is  a  vain  andendlefs  thing  to  live 
up  to  the  humours  and  opinions  of  men,  which  are 
variable  and  uncertain  ;  but  if  we  keep  fleady  to  our 
duty,  we  live  to  the  confciences  of  men,  which  firft 
or  laft  will  come  to  themfelves,  and  come  over  to  us, 
and  approve  of  that  which  is  good.  This  is,  as  Si, 
Paul  fpeaks,  "  to  commend  ourfelves  to  every 
"   man's  confcience  in  the  fight  of  God." 

(3.)  Another  virtue  for  which  there  is  great  occa- 
fion  in  humane  life,  and  for  which  our  Lord  was 
very  remarkable,  was  his  Gontentednefs  in  a  mean 
and  poor  condition,  and  fuch  was  his  condition  to 
the  very  lowed  degree.     He  was  deftitute  of  the  or- 
dinary conveniences  and  neceflary  fupports  of  life ; 
he  lived  generally  upon  the  kindnefs  and  charity  of 
others,  and  when  that  failed,  and  he  wanted  ordina- 
ry fupports,  as  he  often  did,  he  was  maintained   by 
miracle :  and  yet  in  this  mean  and  neceflitous  con- 
dition, he  had  a  conftant  evennefs  and  ferenity  of 
mind ;  he  had  no  anxious   care  and  folicitude  upon 
him,    "  what   he  fhould  eat,  and  what  he  ihould 
*'  drink,  or  wherewithal  he  fhould  be  clothed ;"  he 
never  murmured  at  the  unequal  providence  of  God 
never  utter'd  one  difcontented,  or  envious  word  at 
the  plenty  and  profperity  of  others  ;  he  rather  pitied 
the  misfortune  of  rich  and  great  men,  who  were  ex- 
pofed  to   fo  many  temptations,  that  "  it  was  very 

*'  hard 


43^6  The  life  of  Jbsvs  Christ 

SERM.  "  hard  for  them,"  in  his  opinion,  "  to  befaved  j"  but 
*    he  enjoyed  himfelf,  and  ferved  God,  and  went  about 
doing  good,  and  depended  upon  the  providence  of 
God  for  his  daily  food  ;  and  if  at  any  time  that  was 
wanting,  he   tells  his  difciples,  that  "  he  had  meat 
*'  to  eat  which  they  knew  not  of  j'*  for  "  it  was 
**  his  meat  and  drink  to    do  the  will  of  his  Fa- 
"  THER."     By  ail  that  appears  in  the  hi  (lory  of 
his  life,  (and  we  are  fure  that  it  is  true)  no  man  was 
ever  poorer,  and  yet  no  man    ever   more  contented 
than  he  was ;  which  is  not  only  an  example  of  con- 
tentednefs  to  thofe,  whom  the  providence  of  G  o  d 
hath  placed  in  the  extremity  of  meannefs  and  want, 
but  a  much  flronger  and  more  forcible  argument  of 
contentment  in  every  condition.     For  dilcontent  is 
not  only  the  portion  of  the  poor,  but  of  thofe  who 
have  a  competency,  becaufe  they  have  xiot  plenty  ; 
and  many  times  of  thofe  who  have  plenty  and  abun- 
dance,   becaufe  they   are   wanton  and    foolifli,  and 
know  not  what  they  would  have ;  fo  that  our  S  a- 
VI  OUR,  by  giving  an  example  of  contentment  to 
thofe  of  the  poorelt  and  meanefl:   condition,    hath 
given  it  much  more  to  thofe  who  are  in  better  cir- 
cumftances.     A  narrow  fortune  is  riches  in  compa- 
rifon  of  none ;  a  competency  is  pie.'  ty,   compared 
with  poverty,  and  the  want  of  the  ordinal  y  accommo- 
dations of  life.     If  the  Son  of  G  o  d  fubmitted   to 
the  lowed  and  poorell  condition,  and    bore    it  with 
fo  much  evennefs  and  tranquillity  of  mind  ;  well  may 
wc,  if  God  call  us  to  it.     If  he  that  was  "  heir  of 
**■  all  things,"  was  deftitute  of  all  things,  and  well 
contented  to  be  fo;  fhall   we  murmur  and   repine, 
if  we  be  in  the  fame  circumftances  ?  if  this  example 
be  of  any  force,  (as  it  is  certainly  of  the  greateft) 

fhould 


confider'dy  as   our  example.  4397 

fhould  the  providence  of  God  fee  fit  to  reduce  us  SERM. 

•  •  cxc 

to  the  loweft  condition  of  want,  we  have  no  reafon 

for  difcontent ;  but  if  he  afford  us  a  competency,  we 

have  no  colour  and  pretence  for  it,  unlefs  we  think 

ourfelves  better   than  the  Son  of  God,  and  can 

claim  a  greater  right  to  thepofleffions  and  enjoyments 

of  this  world,  than  he  that  made  it. 

Before  this  example,  we  might  have  thought  that 
poverty  and  meannefs  had  been  afignof  God's 
hatred  and  difpleafure,  or  at  lead  an  argument  of 
lefs  love  and  regard  :  but  now  that  we  fee  him,  whom 
God  loved  infinitely  better  than  any  man  in  the 
world,  to  have  been  one  of  the  poored  men  that 
ever  lived  ;  this  is  a  demonftration,  that  a  man  may 
be  entirely  beloved  of  God,  though  he  be  in  the 
pooreft  and  mod  deftitute  condition ;  for  in  fuch  a 
condition  he  thought  fit  to  place  "'  his  beloved  Son 
*'  in  whom  he  was  well  pleafed."  And  if  poverty 
be  confiftent  with  the  highefl  degree  of  G  o  d's  love 
and  favour,  we  may  bear  it  contentedly  ;  and  if 
there  be  any  reafon  for  contentment  even  in  poverty, 
to  be  difcontented  in  any  condition  that  is  above  it,  is 
Ihameful  and  intolerable.  Of  fuch  force  is  this 
example  of  our  Lord,  to  banifh  difcontent  from 
any  condition  we  are  liable  to  in  this  world.     The 

(4.)  And  laft  virtue  I  fhall  inflance  in,  and  for 
the  exercife  whereof  there  is  very  great  and  frequent 
occafion  in  humane  life,  is  patience  under  fufferings, 
and  fuch  a  perfedl  refignation  of  ourfelves  to  the  will 
of  God,  that  whatever  pleafeth  him  fhould  pleafe 
us,  how  diftafteful  and  grievous  foever  it  be.  And 
of  this  virtue  our  blefled  Saviour  was  the  greateft 
example  that  ever  was ;  his  whole  life,  from  his  birth 
to  his  death,  was  made  up  of  perfecution  and  pati- 

ence^ 


4-^9^  ^^^  ^^fi  ?f  J^^^^  Christ 

SER""^  encc,  and  was  a  continual  exerciie  of  this  virtue.' 
^^  '  T.icre  ha  i  been  great  examples  in  all  ages  of  the 
fuffcrings  and  patience  of  good  men,  which  we  might 
propound  to  ourfclves  with  great  advantage ;  and 
fo  St.  James  exhorts  the  chriftians  to  do,  James  v. 
lo.  "  Take,  my  brethren,  the  prophets,  who  have 
"  fpoken  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  for  an  example 
"  of  fuffering  affliction,  and  of  patience."  Job  ef- 
pecially  was  a  mofl  eminent  example  in  this  kind  : 
"  ye  have  heard,  fays  he,  of  the  patience  of  Job. 
And  all  thefe  examples  are  of  great  ufe,  and  confi- 
derable  arguments  to  this  virtue  s  but  the  pattern  of 
our  Lo  R  d's  fuffcrings  and  patience  is  a  greater  ex- 
ample, and  a  more  powerful  argument  then  all  thefe. 
His  fuffcrings  were  far  greater  than  any  man's  ever 
were  ;  "  never  v/as  any  forrow  like  to  his  forrow, 
"  wherewith  the  Lord  afflidled  him  in  the  day  of 
*'  his  fierce  anger ;"  and  his  patience  was  greater 
than  any  man's  ever  was ;  not  only  becaufe  he  fuf- 
fer'd  more  than  any  one  of  the  fons  of  men  ever  did, 
but  becaui^  he  fuffer'd  without  caufe,  being  perfe6t- 
ly  innocent,  and  free  from  the  leaft  perfonal  fault 
and  guilt.  Well  may  we  "  bear  the  indignation  of 
"the  Lord  patiently,  becaufe  we  have  finned 
*'  againft  him."  Whatever  we  fuffer,  our  confcien. 
ces  tell  us  we  have  deferved  it  all,  and  much  more 
from  the  hand  of  God,  and  "  that  our  punifh- 
*'  ment  is  always  lefs  than  our  iniquities  have  de- 
"  ferved."  Sin  is  at  the  bottom  of  all  our  fufferings, 
and  "  if  we  be  buffeted  for  our  faults,  we  ought  to 
"  take  it  patiently."  Upon  this  confideration,  St. 
Peter  recommends  to  us  the  example  of  our  Lor  d's 
fufferings  and  patience,  as  a  powerful  argument  to 
work  the  fame  temper  and  difpofition  in  us,  i  Pet.  ii. 

20, 


ctjnfider'Jy  as  cur  example.  4399 

so,  21,  22.  "  For  what  glory  is  it,  if  when  yebe  ^"^^^^ 
"  bufFcccd  for  your  faults,  ye  fhall  take  it  patiently  ? 
*'  but  it  when  ye  do  well  and  fufFer  for  it,  ye  take 
*'  it  patiently;  this  is  acceptable  with  God.  For 
*'  hereunto  were  ye  called:  bccaufe  Christ  alfo 
"  fuffered  for  us,  leaving  us  an  example,  that  ye 
*'  fliould  follow  his  fteps,  who  did  no  fin."  Where 
the  apoflle  infinuates  a  two-fold  difFcreiice  between 
our  Lo  R  d's  luffering  for  us,  and  ours  He  fufFered 
for  us :  but  we  upon  our  own  account,  and  for  our 
own  faults.  He  was  perfedly  innocent,  '•'  he  had 
*'  no  fm,"  and  yet  he  fufFered  with  fo  much  patience; 
much  more  ought  we:  for  by  how  much  the  more 
guilt,  fo  much  the  greater  reafon  for  patience  ;  and 
the  more  innocent  the  perfon  is  that  fuffers,  fo  much 
the  more  perfe6l  and  commendable  is  his  patience. 

So  that  the  greatnefs  of  our  Lor  d's  fufFcrings, 
confider'd  together  with  his  perfedl  innocency,  gives 
his  example  a  peculiar  'brce  and  advantage  above 
all  other  examples  whatfoever.  And  therefore  the 
apoflle  to  the  Hebrews,  after  a  great  number  of 
examples  of  the  perfecution  and  patience  of  the  faints 
in  all  ages,  not  content  with  thefe,  he  adds  that  of 
our  L  o  R  D,  as  the  moftperfecfi:  and  powerful  example 
of  all  others,  Heb.xii.  1,2,3.  "  Wherefore  feeing 
''  we  alfo  are  compals'd  about  with  fuch  a  cloud  of 
*'  witnefTes,  let  us  run  with  patience  the  race  that 
*'  is  fet  before  us,  looking  unto  Jesus,  the  author 
*^  and  finifher  of  our  faith,  who  tor  the  joy  that  was 
*'  {ti  before  him,  endured  the  crofs,  defpifing  the 
'^  fhame.  For  confider  him  that  endured  fuch  con- 
«'  tradition  of  finners  againff  himfelf,  lefr  ye  be 
*^  weary  and  faint  in  your  minds.'*  Such  con- 
trad  idtion  of   finners ;    fuch  as    no  man  ever   en. 

Vol.  X.  22  A  .  dureds 

4. 


440O  7he  life  of  Jesu  s  Christ,  &€. 

S£RM.  dured,  and  yet  he  bore  all  this,  not  with  a  ftoical 
and  ftupid  inlenfibilicy,   but  with  a   true  patience. 
For  no  man  had  greater  apprehenfions  of  fuffcring, 
and  a  more  quick  and  tender  fcnfc  of  it,  than  he  had. 
He  had  nor  only  the  more  manly  virtues  of  wifdom, 
and  rcfolution,  and  conflancy,   but  was  clothed  alfo 
with  the  fofter  palTions  of  humane  nature,  meeknefsj 
and  compafTion,  and  grief,  and  a  tender  fenfe  of  pain 
and  fuffering.     "  He  took  our  infirmities,  "*  fays  the 
prophet,  "  and  bore  our  griefs."    And  this  he  ex- 
prefs'd  both  in  his  agony  in  the  garden,  and  in  his 
behaviour  upon  the  crofs;  he  did  not  defpife  pain,  but 
dreaded  it,  and  yet  fubm^itted  to  it;  he  did  not  out- 
brave his  fufferings,  but  bore  them  decently  -,  he  hrrvi 
a  humane  fenfe  of  them,  but  utiderwent  them  with 
a  divine  patience,  refigning  himfelf  ablolutely  to  the 
will  of  G0D5  when  he  faw  them  comi:  g;  and  whf:n 
they  were  upon  him,  cxprcfTing  a  great  fenfe  of  pain, 
without  the  lead  fign  of  impatience.    And  hereby  he 
was  a  pattern  accommodated  to  the  weakefl:  and  ten- 
dered of  mankind  ;  he  did  not  give  us  an  extrava- 
gant example  of  bravery,   and  a  fturdy  refoluiion ; 
but,  which  was  much  fitter  for  us,  of  a  patient  fub- 
milTion  to  the  will  of  God,  under  a  great  fenfe  of 
futfering. 

Before  I  come  to  the  fifth  and  laft  advantage  of 
our  Lord's  example,  it  will  be  requifite  to  clear 
what  hath  been  faid  from  three  or  four  obvious  ob- 
je<flions.  But  this  1  fhall  referve  for  another  difcourfe. 


SERMON 


[  4401  ] 

SERMON  CXCI. 

The  life  of  Jesus  Christ  confider'd, 
as  our  example. 

■  '  '    '  '  — — — — i»*         I      II      I    III'       ^p— — — a, 

I  P  E  T.    ii.  21. 

— Leaving  us  an  example  ^  that  ye  Jhould follow  hisfteps^ 

TH  E  example  of  C  h  r  i  s  t  is  j^n  argument  S  E  R  M, 
never  unleafonabJe ;  and  though  itrbe  fome-    ^^^fV| 
what  foreign  to  the  occafion  of  this  day.  The  third 
yet  it  will  afford  us  fomething  not  improper  to  be  con-^^^'^*^"  ^" 
fider'd  by  us,  concerning  the  blefled  mother  of  our 
Lord.      I   have  handled   this   argument   of   our  March  25, 
Lord's   example  very  largely,  and.  among  other ^^2^* 
things,  have  fliewn  the  manifold  advantages  of  it,  ia, 
thefe  following  rcfpe(5ls : 

L  That  the  example  of  our  Lord  is  a  mod  ab- 
folute  and  per  fed  pattern,  being  the  life  of  Go  D,  ia 
the  nature  and  likenefs  of  man. 

II.  A  moil:  familiar  and  eafy  example,  in  which 
we  fee  the  feveral  virtues  of  a  good  life  pradifed  ih 
fuch  indances,  and  upon  fach  occafions,  as  do  fre- 
quently happen  in  humane  life. 

III.  It  is  an  encouraging  example ;  nothing  being 
more  apt  to  give  life  to  good  rtfolutions  and  endea- 
vours, than  to  fee  all  that  which  God  requires  of  us, 
performed  by  one  in  our  own  nature,  and  a  man  as 
like  ourfelves,  as  it  is  poffible  for  a  perfedb  pattern 
to  be. 

IV.  It  is  likewife  an  univerfal  example,  calculated 
as  equally  as  is  pofTible  for  all  conditions  and  capaci- 

21  A  2  ties 


44-2  The  life  ^/ Jesus  Christ 

SER.M   ties  o^mer,  and  fitted  for  general  direftion  and  imi- 

'"*  ladon  ot  all  Ibrts  O'  virtue  and  t^oodncls -,  fuch  vir- 
tues  4S  are  cne  greatefl  aid  moPT  fjoiliautia!,  the  mod 
rare  and  uiiulua),  the  moit  uicf  jl  aud  beneficial  to 
others,  the  irx'ft  hard  and  difficult  to  be  praCtifed, 
ai'.d  for  the  exercife  whereof,  tnere  is  the  greateft  and 
mod  frequent  occafion  in  humane  life.  There  remains 
now  only  to  be  fpoken  to,  the 

V.  And  lafl  advantage,  which  I  mentioned  of  our 
Lo  R  d's  example,  that  it  is  in  the  natune  of  it,  very 
powerful  to  engage  and  oblige  all  men  to  the  imita- 
tion of  it.  B  it  before  I  enter  upon  this,  I  propofed 
to  clear  what  hath  been  already  faid  concerning  our 
L  o  R  d's  example,  from  three  or  four  obvious  ob- 
jed:ions. 

.  The  firfl:  objedion  is,  that  a  great  part  of  our 
Saviour's  life  confifted  of  miraculous  ad  ions, 
wherein  we  cannot  imitate  him. 

This  is  very  true;  and  for  that  very  reafon,  be- 
caufe  we  cannot  imitate  him  herein,  we  are  not  ob- 
liged to  do  it:  but  we  may  imitate  the  compaffion 
and  charity  which  he  fhevved  in  his  miracles,  by 
fuch  ways  and  in  fuch  effects,  as  are  within  the  com- 
pafs  of  our  power.  We  are  not  ''  anointed,  as  he 
*^  was,  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  with  power, 
««  to  heal  all  manner  of  ficknefs  anddifeafe:"  but 
we  may  "  go  about  doing  good,*'  as  he  did,  fo  far 
as  we  have  ability  and  opportunity ;  we  may  comfort 
thofe  in  their  ficknefs  and  diftrefs,  whom  we  are 
not  able  in  a  miraculous  manner  to  recover  and  re- 
lieve j  and  in  d,\{ti:ks  that  are  curable,  we  may  help 
the  poorer  at  the  expence  of  our  charity,  and  do 
that  by  (lower  and  ordinary  means,  which  our  S  a- 
y  1 0  u  R  did  by  a  word  in  an  inllant.  , , 

Secondly^ 


confiderdy  as  our  example.  44-03 

Secondly,    againft  the   univerfality  of   our   Sa-  SERM. 
V  I  o  u  r's  example,  it  is  objeded,  that  he  hath  given       ^^^' 
us  no  pattern  of  fome  conditions  and  relations  of  life, 
for  which  there  feems  to  have  been  as  great  need  and 
reafon,  as  for  any  other. 

To  this  I  anfwer,  that  though  his  fingle  ftate  of 
life  did  hinder  him  from  being  [ormally  an  example 
as  to  fome  of  the  moft  common  relations,  as  of  a  fa- 
ther, and  a  husband  -,  yet  he  was  virtually  fo  in  the 
principle  and  pradlice  of  univerfal  charity,  which 
principle,  if  it  be  truly  rooted  in  us,  will  fufficient- 
jy  guide  and  dired  us  in  the  duties  of  particular-  re- 
lations. 

And  whereas  it  Is  further  objtded,  that  he  hath 
left  us  no  example  of  that,  which  by  many  is  efteem- 
ed  the  only  religious  flate  of  life,  viz.  perfed  retire- 
ment  from  the  world,  for  the  more  devout  ferving 
of  God,  and  freeing  us  from  the  temptations  of  the 
world,  fuch  as  is  that  of  monks  and  hermits ;  this 
perhaps  may  feem  to  fome  a  great  overfight  and  omif. 
fion :  but  our  Lord  in  great  wifdom  thought  fit  to 
give  a  pattern  of  a  quite  different  fort  of  life,  which 
was,  not  to  fly  the  converfation  of  men,  and  to  live 
in  a  monafrery  or  a  wildernefs;  but  to  do  good 
among  men,  to  live  in  the  world  with  great  freedom, 
and  with  great  innocency.  He  did  indeed  fometimes 
retire  himfelf,  for  the  more  free  and  private  exerciic 
of  devotion  ;  as  we  ought  to  do :  but  he  pafs'd  his 
life  chiefly  in  the  converfation  of  men,  that  they 
might  have  all  the  benefit  that  was  poflTible,  of  his 
inftrudlion  and  example.  We  read  that  "  he  was 
"  carried  into  the  wildernefs  to  be  tempted  ;  "  but 
not  that  he  lived  there,  to  avoid  temptation.  He  hath 
given  us  an  example  of  denying  the  world,  without 

leaving 


4404  ^^^^  Life  of  ]  E$v  s  Christ 

SERM.  leaving  it;  and  of  renouncing  not  only  the  pomp 
and  vanity,  but  even  the  lawful  enjoyments  and  con- 
veniencies  of  life,  when  it  may  ferve  to  any  good 
end,  cither  of  glory  to  God,  or  of  advantage  to 
men  ;  teaching  us  hereby,  that  charity  is  a  duty,  no 
iefs  necelTary  than  devotion;  that  we  cannot  fervc 
Gop  better,  than  by  endeavouring  the  good  and 
happincfs  of  men.  So  that  if  our  Sav  i  o  u  r's  ex- 
ample be  of  authority  with  us,  that  will  foon  decide 
which  is  the  mod  perfed  fcate  of  life,  to  go  out  of 
the  world,  or  to  live  innocently  and  ufefully  in  it. 
And  fince  neither  our  S  a  v  i  o  u  r,  nor  his  apoftles, 
have  recommended  it  to  us,  by  their  example,  nor  by 
one  word  of  precept  or  counfel  tending  that  way,  it 
feems  very  plain,  that  they  did  not  efleem  monkery 
the  mod  perfecl,  much  Jefs  the  only  religious  ftate 
of  life.  There  could  not  have  been  fo  deep  a  Ci- 
lence  throughout  the  new  teflament  opncerning  fo 
important  a  piece  of  rdigion,  as  the  church  of 
Rome  would  bear  us  in  hand  this  is :  for  to  be  pro- 
fcfs'd  of  fomc  monaftical  order  they  call  "  entering 
^'  into  religion,"  and  they  fpeak  of  it,  as  the  mod 
dired  and  ready  way  to  heaven  ;  and  not  only  fo,  but 
they  give  fair  encouragement  to  believe,  that  to  die, 
or  be  buried  in  a  monk's  habit,  will  go  a  great  way, 
(they  arc  loth  to  tell  us  how  far)  in  the  carrying  of  a 
bad  man  towards  heaven,  or  at  lead  to  the  abatement 
of  his  pain  in  purgatory. 

Thirdly,  it  is  objected,  that  fome  particulars  of 
our  S  A  V  I  o  u  r's  carriage  towards  rulers  and  magi- 
(trates  feem  liable  to  exception,  and  not  proper  for 
our  imitation ;  as  his  bold  and  free  reproofs  of  the 
Scribes  and  Pharifees,  many  of  whom  were  chief 
rulers,  and  of  grcatefl:  authority  among  them  ;  and 

•his 


confiderd^  as  our  example,  440C 

his  mefiage  to  Herod,  "  go  and   tell    that  fox.''  S  E  R  M, 
This  opprobrious  and  reproachful  treatment  of  ma-    ^^S^ 
giflrates,  feems  diredly  conti-ary-  to  an  exprefs  law  of 
God,  Exod.  xxii  2S.    "  Thou  fhalt  not  revile  the 
"  gods,  or  judges,  nor  fpcak  evil  of  lY.t  ruler  of  thy 
«  people." 

Bat  to  this  the  anfvver  is  plain,  that  our  Lord 
ufed  this  freedom  by  the  virtue  and  privilege  of  his 
prophetical  ofiice,  and  of  his  immediate  commifTion 
from  God;  it  being  the  ofEce  of  prophets,  and  a 
part  of  their  commiiTion,  to  reprove  kings  and  ru- 
lers with  all  freedom  and  phinnefs,  becaule  they 
were  really  f.iperior  to  them  in  tht  execution  of  thac 
office.  In  all  pofitive  l^ws  of  refped  to  fuperiors, 
there  is  an  exception  of  the  divine  com  million  ;  be- 
caufe  in  that  cafe,  the  prophet  fpeaks  in  the  name, 
and  by  the  authority  of  one  infinitely  greater  than 
the  greatefl  upon  earth  ;  as  in  the  Lo  r  d's  name, 
and  by  his  commifTion,  any  man  may  check  inferior 
magiftrates,  and  that  in  fuch  a  manner  as  would  be 
rudencfs  and  infolence  for  any  other  not  {6  war- 
ranted, to  do  it.  And  of  this  there  are  manifold 
exampfes  in  the  prophets  of  the  old  teftament ;  and 
what  the  tenour  or  their  commillion  was,  we  may 
fee  in  that  given  to  the  prophet  Jeremiah,  chap.  i.  ver. 
10.  '^  Behold,  I  have  fet  thee  over  the  nations,  and 
"  over  the  kingdoms,  to  root  out,  and  to  pull  up, 
"  and  to  dellroy,  and  to  throw  down,  to  build  and 
*'  to  plant,"  (that  is,  to  denounce  judgment  and  cala- 
mities, or  peace  and  profperity  to  them^  and  ver. 
17,  18.  "  Thou  therefore  gird  up  thy  loins,  and 
"  arife,  and  fpeak  unto  them  all  that  I  command 
*'  thee  -,  be  not  difmayed  at  their  faces,  left  I  con- 
^^  found  thee  before  them.    For  behold  I  have  made 

«^  thee 


4/.o6  7he  life  of  ]esv  $  Christ 

SF  R  M.  *'  thee  this  day  a  defenced  city,  and  an  iron  pillaf, 
^^  •  "  and  brafen  walls  againft  the  whole  land,  againft 
"  the  kings  of  Judah,  againft  the  princes  thereof, 
"  againft  the  priefts  thereof,  and  againft  the  people 
"  of  Uie  land/'  This  commiiTion  fet  him  above 
then:i  all  in  the  difcharge  of  his  office  :  and  therefore 
wiidt  our  Lo  R  D  did  in  this  kind,  by  virtue  of  an 
excraoidinary  commiflion,  and  the  privilege  of  a 
prophet  immediately  fent  by  God,  is  not  to  be 
drawn  into  example  in  ordinary  cafes  •,  for  we  may 
do  that  by  fpecial  commiflion  rom  God,  which  the 
ordinary  rales  of  daty  and  re  pe(fl  to  princes  and  go- 
vern'-TS,  will  by  no  means  allow  to  be  done. 

Tne  fourth  and  laft  objedtion  is,  that  our  bleffed 
S  AV  I  ou  R  does  not  feem  to  bear  himlelf  with  that 
duty  and  refpe6t  towards  his  mother,  which  that  re- 
laiion  feemi  to  require.  And  to  fpeak  according  to 
the  firli:  appeara^  ce  of  things,  this  feems  to  be,  of 
ail  other,  the  moft  exceptionable  part  of  his  life,  and 
to  require  fome  particular  and  extraordinary  reafon, 
not  to  obvious  at  fird  fight,  for  the  vindication  of  it. 

There  are,  to  my  belt  remembrance  and  obferva- 
tion,  but  five  paiTagcs,  in  the  hiftory  of  our  S  avi- 
ou  r's  life,  coi.cerning  his  carriage  towards  his  mo- 
ther, and  his  difcourfe  with  her,  and  of  her  i  in  all 
which  he  feems  rather  to  treat  her  with  fome  appea- 
rance of  negleft,  than  wiuh  any  great  Ihew  of  reve- 
rence and  rclpedt.  Not  that  we  are  to  imagine, 
but  that  he  did  pay  her  an  entire  duty ;  for  we 
know  that  '^  he  fulfilled  all  righteoufnels : "  but  for 
realons  beft  known  to  his  infinite  wifdom,  he  thought 
fit  very  much  to  conceal  it  in  his  publick  behaviour, 
and  to  have  as  little  notice  taken  of  it  in  the  hiftory 
ot  his  hte. 

And 


confiderd,  as  our  example,  44*^7 

And  the  firft  pafTage  is  Luke  ii.  48.  when  his  SERM. 
parents  having  loft  him,  at  laft  "  found  him  in  the  ^^^  * 
"  temple  difputing  among  the  dodlors ; '*  and  his 
mother  reproved  him,  "  Ton,  why  haft  thou  thus 
"  dealt  with  us  ?  behold,  thy  father  and  I  have 
"  fought  thee  forrowing'"  He  gives  them  this  fhort 
and  obfcure  anfwer,  which  they  knew  not  what  to 
make  of,  '*  how  is  it  that  ye  fought  me  ?  wift  ye  not 
"  that  I  muft  be  about  my  Fat  h  e  r's  bufinefs?  *' 
This  happen'd  when  he  was  but  "  twelve  years 
"  old."  And  that  we  may  not  think,  that  during 
his  minority,  he  did  ordinarily  afTume  this  behaviour 
towards  his  parents,  but  only  upon  this  firft  eflay 
of  his  publick  appearance,  the  evangelift  purpofely 
adds,  ver.  51.  that  "  he  went  down  with  his  parents 
''  to  Nazareth,  and  was  fubjett  to  them.'* 

The  fecond  pafTage  is  John  ii.  4.  when  his  mother 
defiring  him  to  work  a  miracle,  at  his  firft  appea- 
rance -and  entrance  upon  his  publick  miniftry,  he 
takes  occafion  to  declare  to  her,  that  he  was  dii^ 
charged  from  her  condud  and  government,  and  this 
in  terms  to  all  appearance  of  no  great  refpedl  : 
*'  woman,  what  have  I  to  do  with  thee?  mine 
'^  hour  is  not  yet  come."  Greg.  NyfTen  reads  both 
fentences  with  an  interrogation  ;  "  what  have  I  to 
"  do  with  thee  ?  is  not  mine  hour  now  come  V*  As 
if  he  had  faid,  "  why  doft  thou  interpofe  in  fhefe 
"  matters.^  is  not  the  time  come,  that  I  am  to 
«'  enter  upon  my  office  ;  and  in  the  difcharge  of  it, 
*'  to  be  diredled  by  God,  and  none  elfe?" 

The  third  pafTage  is  Matth.  xii.  47.  when  he  was 
told  that  "  his  mother  and  his  brethren  ftood  with- 
*'  out,  defiring  to  fpeak  with  him  :  who  is  my 
*'  mother,"  fays  he,  *'  and  who  are  my  brethren  ? " 

Vol.  X,  22  B  And 

4' 


44^8  The  life  ^Jesus  Christ 

SER  M.  And  pointing  to  his  difciples,  "  behold  my  mother, 
"  and  my  brethren  ;  for  whofoever  fhall  do  the  will 
**  of  my  Father  which  is  in  heaven,  the  fame 
''  is  my  brother,  and  filler,  and  mother."  Here  is 
but  little  appearance  of  regard  •,  for  we  do  not  find, 
that  he  left  the  bufinefs  he  was  about,  to  fpeak  with 
her  when  fhe  defired  it.  Nor  it  fecms  did  fhe  un- 
derftand  her  power  fo  well  as  the  church  of  Rome 
hath  done  fince,  when  (as  is  to  be  feen  in  fome 
of  their  mafs- books)  they  addrefs  to  her  in  thefe 
terms,  jure '  matris  impera  redemptori ;  "  by  the  au- 
**  thority  of  a  mother,  command  the  redeemer.'* 

The  fourth  pafTage  is  not  much  different  from 
the  former,  Luke  xi.  zy.  When  "  a  certain  woman 
*'  faid  to  him;  blelTcd  is  the  womb  that  bare  thee, 
"  and  the  paps  which  thou  haft  fuck'd  ;  he  faid, 
*'  yea,  rather  bleffcd  are  they  that  hear  the  word  of 
"God  and  keep  it."  He  does  not  deny  what  was 
faid  in  honour  of  her  ;  but  turns  his  difcourfe  ano- 
ther way  :  and  forefeeing  the  danger  of  a  fuperiliti- 
ous  veneration  of  her,  he  feems  to  bring  her  down 
to  the  fame  level  with  all  fincere  chriftians  j  teaching 
us,  that  no  external  privilege  or  relation,  how  glo- 
rious foever,  no  not  that  of  being  the  mother  of  the 
Son  of  G  0  d,  wzr,  fo  valuable,  as  doing  the  will 
of  God.  .  "  Yea,  rather  blefled  are  they  that  hear 
**  the  word  of  God,  and  keep  it." 

The  laft  pafTage  is  at  the  time  of  his  death,  John 
xix.  25,  26,  27.  "  Now  there  ftood  by  the  crofs  of 
*'  J  E  s  u  s  his  mother  :  when  Jesus  therefore  faw 
*'  his  mother,  and  the  difciple  (landing  by,  whom 
*'  he  loved,  he  faith  unto  his  mother,  woman,  be- 
-«'  hold  thy  fon  :  then  faith  he  to  the  difciple, 
"  behold  thy  mother.     And  from  that  hour   that 

"  difciple 


confiderdy  as  our  example.  44^9 

**  difciple  took  her  unto  his'own  home.'*     Here  in-  SE  R  M. 
deed  he  fhewed  his  great  kindnefs  and  concernment 
for  her,  in  committing  her  to  the  care  of  his  bell 
beloved  friend  ;  but   yet  without  any  extraordinary 
demonftration  of  refpefl  in  the  manner  of  it. 

Thefe  are  all  the  paflages  I  know  in  the  gofpel, 
which  concern  our  Lord's  carriage  towards  his 
mother,  which,  upon  the  whole  matter,  is  fo  ftrange, 
that  we  cannot  imagine  but  there  muft  be  fome  fpe- 
cial   and  extraordinary   reafon   for  it :  and  wc  who 
have  lived  to  fee  and  know  what  hath  happened  in 
the  chriflian  world,  are  now  able  to  give  a  better 
account  of   this  great  caution  and    refervedncfs   in 
his  behaviour  towards  her ;  namely,  that  out  of  his 
infinite  wifdom  and  forefight,  he  fo  demeaned  him- 
felf  toward  her,  that  he  might  lay  no  temptation  be- 
fore men,  nor  give  the  lead  occafion  to  the  idoliz- 
ing of  her.     Hs   always  called  her    "  woman  ;  '* 
and  by  the  privilege  of  his  divinity  and  high  office, 
hardly  feems  to  pay  her  the  refped  due  to  a  mo- 
ther, that  he  might  reftrain  all  chriftians  from  wor- 
fhipping  her  as  a  deity  ;  or  if  they  did,  that  they 
might  have  no   colour  or  excufe  for  it,  from  any 
thing-  he  faid  or  did.     This  is  fo  probable  an  ac- 
count of  that  which  might  otherwife  feem  fo  unac- 
countable, that  I  perfuade  my  k\f^  that  all  unpre- 
judiced perfons  will  readily  afTent  to  it.     And  which 
is  farther  remarkable  in  this  matter,  the  apoflles  of 
our  Lord  in  all  their  writings  ufe  the  fame  re- 
fervednefs ;  and  no  doubt,  by  the  direction  of  the 
fame  Spirit,  concerning  the  blefled  mother  of 
our  Lord.     For,    throughout  the  hiftory  of  the 
adts,  and  all  the  epiftles  of  the  apoflles,  there   is 
but  once  mention  made  of  her,  and  that  only  by 

2i  B  z  the 


441^  ^'^^  ^if^  d/ Jesus  Christ 

SERM.  the  by,  A6ls  i.  14.  where  it  is  faid,  that  "  the  dif- 
cxcr.        .  .  . 

\^  ^-^j  "  ciples  all  continued  with  one  accord  in  prayer  and 

"  fupplication,  with  the  women,  and  Mary  the  mo- 
"  ther  of  J  E  s  u  s.'^  So  far  are  they  from  propofing 
her  foranobjed  of  our  worlliip,  that  they  only  once 
make  mention  of  her,  and  that  joining  with  others 
in  prayer  and  fupplication  to  God,  without  any 
ipecial  remark  concerning  her  ;  much  lefs  do  they 
fpeak  of  any  devotion  paid  to  her. 

And  furely  if  this  •■'  bleflTed  among  women,  themo- 
"  ther  of  our  Lor  d,'*  (for  I  keep  to  the  titles 
which  the  fcripture  gives  her)  have  any  ^cn^t  of  what 
we  do  here  below,  fhe  cannot  but  look  down  with 
the  greateft  difdain  upon  that  facrilegious  and  ido- 
latrous vvorfhip  which  is  paid  to  her,  to  the  high  dif- 
honour  of  the  great  God  and  our  Saviour,  and 
the  infinite  fcandal  of  his  religion.  How  can  fhe, 
without  indignation,  behold  how  they  play  the  fool 
in  the  church  of  Rome  about  her;  what  an  idol 
they  make  of  her  image  i  and  with  what  fottifhnefs 
they  give  divine  honour  to  it  ^  how  they  place  her 
in  their  idolatrous  pidures  in  equal  rank  with  the 
^  bielTed  trinity,  and  turn  the  falutation  of  the  angel, 
Ave  Maria,  "  hail  Mary,  full  of  grace,*'  into  a  kind 
of  prayer  ;  and  in  their  bead-roll  of  devotion  repeat 
it  ten  times,  for  once  that  they  fay  the  Lord's 
prayer,  as  of  greater  virtue  and  efficacy  ?  and  indeed 
they  almoft  juille  out  the  devoti' n  due  to  almighty 
God,  and  our  bleJTed  S  av  1  ou  r,  by  their  cndlefs 
idolatry  to  her. 

So  that  the  greater  part  of  their  religion,  both  pub- 
lick  and  private,  is  made  up  of  that  which  was  no 
part  at  all  of  the  religion  of  tiie  apollles  and  primitive 
chriflians  5  nay,  which  plainly  contradicts  it :  for  that 

exprcfly 


€onJider*d,  as  our  .ei>c ample.  4411 

exprefly  teaches  us,  that  there  is  but  one  objed  of  S  E  R  M, 
our  prayers,  and  one  mediator  by  whom  we  are  to  ^^^^• 
make  our  addrefles  to  God.  "  There  is  one 
"  God;  and  one  mediator  between  God  and 
"  man,  the  man  Christ  Jesu  s,"  fays  St.  Paul, 
when  he  gives  a  (landing  rule  concerning  prayer  in 
the  chriftian  church.  And  yet  notwithftanding  all 
the  care  that  our  blefTed  Saviour  and  his 
apoftles  could  take,  to  prevent  the  grofs  idolatry 
of  the  blefTed  mother  of  our  Lord,  how  blindly 
and  wilfully  have  the  church  of  Rome  run  into  it  ? 
and  in  defpite  of  the  cleared  evidence  and  conviction, 
do  obftinately  and  impudently  perfift  in  it,  and 
juftify  themfelves  in  fo  abominable  a  pradlice.  I 
come  now  to  the 

V.  And  laft  advantage  of  our  Lo  r  d's  example, 
that  it  is  in  the  nature  of  it  very  powerful,  to  en- 
gage and  oblige  all  men  to  the  imitation  of  it. 

it  is  almoft  equally  calculated  for  perfons  of  all  ca- 
pacides  and  conditions,  for  the  wife  and  the  weak, 
for  thofe  of  high  and  low  degree  ;  for  all  men  are 
alike  concerned  to  be  happy.  And  the  imitation  of 
this  example,  is  the  moft  ready  and  diredl  way  to  it, 
the  moft  effedual  means  we  can  ufe  to  compafs  this 
great  and  univerfal  end ;  nay,  it  is  not  only  the 
means,  but  the  end,  the  beft  and  moft  eflential  part 
of  it.  To  be  like  our  Lord,  is  to  be  as  good  as 
it  is  pofTible  for  men  to  be  -,  and  goodnefs  is  the  high- 
eft  perfedion  that  any  being  is  capable  of;  and  the 
perfedlion  of  every  being  is  its  happinefs. 

There    is  a   kind  of  contagion  in    all  examples; 
men  are   very  apt   to  do   what  they   fee  (Others  do, 
though  it  ^be  very  bad :  every  day's  experience   fur- 
niiheth  us   with  many  and  fad  inftances  of  the  in- 
fluence 


CXCI. 


4412  ^he  life  ^  Jesus  Christ 

SERM.  fluence  of  bad  examples;  but  there  are  peculiar 
charms  in  that  which  is  good  and  excellent.  A  per- 
fc(5l  pattern  of  goodnels  docs  flrongly  allure  and  in- 
vite to  the  imitation  of  it,  and  a  great  example  of 
virtue,  to  a  well-difpofed  mind  is  a  mighty  tempta- 
tion, and  apt  to  infpirit  us  with  good  refolutions,  to 
endeavour  after  that  in  ourfelves,  which  we  fo  much 
efteem  and  admire  in  others.  And  fuch  is  the  ex- 
ample of  our  Lord,  perfedl  as  is  polTible,  and  yet 
obvious  to  ^^common  imitation,  and  as  much  fitted 
for  the  general  diredion  of  mankind,  in  all  forts  of 
virtue  and  goodnefs,  as  any  one  fingle  example  can 
be  imagined  to  be. 

The  virtues  of  his  life  are  pure,  without  any 
mixture  of  infirmity  and  imperfedion.  He  had 
humility  without  meannefs  of  fpirit ;  innocency  with- 
out weaknefs ;  wifdom  without  cunning ;  and  con- 
ftancy  and  refolution  in  that  which  was  good,  with- 
out ftiffnefs  of  conceit,  and  peremptorinefs  of  hu- 
mour :  in  a  word,  his  virtues  were  fhining  without 
vanity,  heroical  without  any  thing  of  tranfport, 
and  very  extraordinary  without  being  in  the  leaft  ex- 


travagant. 


His  life  was  even  and  of  one  tenour,  quiet,  and 
■without  noife  and  tumult,  always  employed  about 
the  fame  work,  in  doing  the  things  which  pleafed 
God,  and  were  of  greateft  benefit  and  advantage 
to  men.  Who  would  not  write  after  fuch  a  copy  ^ 
fo  perfcd,  and  yet  fo  familiar,  and  fit  for  our  imita- 
tion ?  who  would  not  be  ambitious  to  live  the  life 
which  God  lived,  when  he  was  pleafed  to  become 
man  and  dwell  among  us  ? 

We  are  ambitious  to  imitate  thofe  whom  weefleem, 
and  are  apt  to  have  their  example  in  great  dearnefs 

and 


ionjider'd^  as  our  example.  44^3 

and  regard,  from  whom  we  have  received  great  SERM. 
kindnefs  and  mighty  benefits.  This  pattern,  which  ^^^^• 
our  religion  propofcth  to  us,  is  the  example  of  one 
whom  we  ought  to  reverence,  and  whom  we  have 
reafon  to  Jove  above  any  perfon  in  the  world ;  'tis 
the  example  of  our  Lord  and  maftcr,  of  our  fo- 
vercign  and  our  Saviour,  of  the  founder  of  our 
religion,  and  of  "  the  author  and  finiiher  of  our  faith ;" 
it  is  an  example  that  carries  authority  with  it,  and 
commands  our  imitation,  "  You  call  me  Lord 
*'  and  mafter,"  fays  he  himfelf,  recommending  to 
us  the  example  of  his  own  humility,  John  xiii.  13, 
14.  "  You  call  me  Lor  D  and  mafter,  and  ye  fay 
*'  well ;  for  fo  I  am.  If  I  then  your  Lord  and 
*'  mafter  have  wafhed  your  feet,  ye  ought  alfo  to 
*'  wafh  one  another's  i&tt^^^  that  is,  itoop  to  the 
loweft  and  meaneft  office  to  ferve  one  another ;  "  for 
"  I  have  given  you  an  example,  that  ye  fhould  do 
*'  as  I  have  done  to  you.'* 

Yet  farther,  'tis  the  example  of  our  bcft  friend 
and  greateft  benefadlor,  of  him  who  laid  down  his 
life  for  us,  and  fealed  his  love  to  us  with  his  own 
blood;  and  while  we  were  bitter  enemies  to  him, 
did  and  fuffer'd  more  for  us,  than  any  man  ever  did 
for  his  deareft  friend.  How  powerfully  muft  fuch  a 
pattern  recommend  goodnefs,  and  kindnefs,  and  com- 
pafTion  to  us,  who  have  had  fo  much  comfort  and  ad- 
vantage from  them  ?  had  not  the  S  o  n  of  God 
commiferatcd  our  cafe,  and  pitied  and  relieved  us  in 
our  low  and  wretched  condition,  we  had  been  ex- 
tremely and  for  ever  miferable,  beyond  all  imagina- 
tion, and  paft  all  remedy.  All  the  kindnefs  and 
compafTion,  all  the  mercy  and  forgivenefs  he  would 
kave  us  prac^ife  towards  one  another,  he  himfelf  ^rik. 

exercifed 


The  life  of  Jesus  Christ 

exercifed  upon  us ;  and  furely  we  have  a  much 
greater  obligation  upon  us  to  the  pradlice  of  thefe 
virtues,  than  he  had.  For  he  did  all  this  for  our  fakes  ; 
we  do  it  for  our  own.  We  have  a  natural  obligation, 
both  in  point  of  duty  and  intereft  :  his  was  volun- 
tary, and  what  he  took  upon  himfelf,  that  he  might 
at  once  be  a  Saviour  and  an  example  to  us. 
He  that  commands  us  to  do  good  to  others,  was  our 
great  benefadlor  -,  he  that  requires  us  to  forgive  our 
enemies,  ihed  his  own  blood  for  the  forgivenefs  o^ 
our  fins ;  while  we  were  enemies  to  him,  laid  down 
his  life  for  us,  making  himfelf  the  example  of  that 
goodnefs,  which  he  recommends  us  to  fhew  to  others. 

Are  any  of  us  reduced  to  poverty  and  want  ?  ht 
us  think  of  him,  who  "  being  Lo  r  d  of  all,  had 
*'  not  where  to  lay  his  head  ;  who  being  rich,  for  our 
*'  fakes  became  a  beggar,  that  we  through  his  po- 
*'  verty  might  be  made  rich."  Are  we  perfecuted 
for  righteoufnels  fake,  and  exercifed  with  fufferings 
and  reproaches  ?  "  Let  us  run  vv'ith  patience  the  race 
*'  which  is  fet  before  us,  looking  unto  Jesus,  the 
**  author  and  finifher  of  our  faith ;  who  for  the  joy 
*'  that  was  fet  before  him,  endured  the  crofs,  de- 
*'  fpifing  the  fhame." 

When  we  are  ready  to  be  difcouraged  in  well-do- 
ing, by  the  oppofition  w^  meet  withal  from  the  in- 
gratitude of  men,  and  the  malicious  interpretation  of 
our  good  adions,  perverting  the  beft  things,  done 
with  the  beft  mind  and  to  the  beft  ends,  to  fome  ill 
purpofe  and  defign,  "  confider  him  who  endured 
*'  fuch  contradidlion  of  finners  againft  himfelf,  left 
*'  you  be  weary  and  faint  in  your  minds." 

Can  we  be  proud ;  when  the  S  o  n  of  Go  d  "  hum- 
*'  bled  himfelf  and  became  of  no  reputation  j  emptied 

him- 


confjerd,  as  our  example.  44  ^S 

^*  himfelf"  of  ali  his  glory,  and  was  contented  SERM. 
^'  to  be  defpifed  and  rcjeded  of  men  ?"  fhall  we  be 
covetous,  and  third  after  the  things  of  this  world  *, 
when  we  confider  how  the  S  o  n  of  G  o  d  defpifed 
them,  and  trampled  upon  them  ?  fhall  we  contemn 
and  defpife  the  poor  ;  nay,  can  we  choofe  but  efteem 
them  for  his  fake,  whom  they  refemble,  and  whofe 
]ow  and  indigent  condition  in  the  world  hath  made 
poverty,  not  only  tolerable,  but  glorious?  can  we  be 
peevifh  and  troward,  and  apt  to  fly  out  into  paluon 
upon  every  little  occafion ;  when  we  confider  the  meek- 
nefs  of  the  S  o  n  of  Go d,  and  with  what  ferenity  and 
evennefs  of  m^ind  he  demeaned  himfelf,  under  great  and 
continual  provocations  ?  fhall  we  be  difcon tented  in 
any  condition  ;  when  we  confider  how  contented  the 
So  N  of  God  was  in  the  meanefl:  and  mofl  deflitute 
condition  \  how  he  welcomed  all  e-^ents,  and  was  fo 
perfedly  refigned  to  the  will  of  his  heavenly  Fa- 
T  H  E  R,  that  whatfoever  pleafed  God, pleafed  him ? 
Ihall  we  be  io  ready  to  feparate  from  the  communion 
of  the  church  of  God,  upon  pretence  of  fomething 
that  we  think  amifs,  or  lefs  pure  and  perfe^fl ;  (which 
will  always  be  in  this  world)  when  the  Son  of  G  o  d 
lived  and  died  in  the  communion  of  a  church  guilty 
of  great  corruptions  both  in  dodrine  and  practice, 
fuch  as  can  with  no  colour  be  objedled  to  ours  ? 

Shall  we  refent  injuries,  flanders  and  calumnies  fb 
heinoufly,  as  to  be  cut  of  all  patience  ;  when  we  con- 
fider with  what  meeknefs  of  temper,  and  how  little 
difturbance  of  mind  the  Son  of  God  bore  ali 
thefe  ?  how  "  he  gave  his  back  to  the  fmiteiT^ 
"  and  his  cheeks  to  them  that  plucked  off  the  hair., 
*'  and  Withheld  not  his  face  from  fhame  and  fpir, 
*'  ting  ?  how  he  was  led  as  a  lamb  to  the  flaughter, 

VoL.X.  2e  C  *^  and 

4. 


44i6  The  life  of  ]e^vs  Christ,  &c. 

SE  RM.  «c  ^^^  ^5  fi^e  fheep  before  the  fhearer  is  dumb,  fo  he 
cxcr 

''  opened  not  his  mouth  \  being  reviled,  he  reviled 

"  not  again,  when  he  fufFered,  he  threaten'd  not  • 
*'  but  committed  himfelf  to  him  that  judgeth  righ- 
"  teoudy  ?  "  fuch  vile  and  barbarous  ufage  the  Son 
of  God  met  withal;  and  yet  under  all  this,  he 
*'  pofiefs'd  his  foul  in  patience  :  "  and  do  we  exped  to 
be  better  treated  than  he  was  ?  was  goodnels  itfelf 
contented  to  be  traduced,  and  evil  Ipoken  of,  per- 
fect innocence  to  be  flander'd  and  perfecuted  :  and 
fhall  we  who  arc  Tinners,  great  Tinners,  think  our 
felvcs  worthy  to  efcape  theTc  things,  and  too  good 
to  have  that  done  to  us,  which  was  done  to  one  in- 
finitely better  than  we  are?  it  is  our  Lord's  own 
argument,  and  there  is  great  weight  and  reaTon  in 
it ;  ''  if  the  world  hate  you,  ye  know,  that  it  hated 
''  me,  before  it  hated  you.  Remember  the  word 
'^  that  I  Taid  unto  you,  the  Tervant  is  not  greater  than 
"  the  Lo  R  D.  If  they  have  perfecuted  me,  they 
*'  will  alfo  perfecute  you ;  it  is  enough  for  the  dif- 
*'  ciple,  that  he  be  as  his  maftcr,  and  the  fervant  as 
*'  his  Lord:  if  they  have  called  the  mafter  of  the 
'<  houfe  Beelzebub,  how  much  more  fhall  they  call 
"  them  of  the  houlhold  ?  ** 

Can  we  entertain  thoughts  of  revenge,  when  we 
have  fuch  a  pattern  of  forgiving  before  us,  who  poured 
out  his  blood  for  the  expiation  of  the  guilt  of  them 
that  fhed  it,  and  fpent  his  laft  breath  in  fervent  and 
charitable  prayers  for  his  betrayers  and  murderers  ? 
"  Lord,  endow  us  with  the  like  temper:  but  do 
''  not  try  us  with  the  like  fufferings  ?  " 

Thus  by  fetting  the  example  of  our  Lord  before 
us,  and  keeping  this  pattern  always  in  our  eye,  we 
may  continually  corrcdl  all  our  own  errors  and  defedls, 

all 


7hefufferwgs  ^Christ  can/ider'd,  &c.  4417 
all  the  diftempers  of  our  minds,  and  the  faults  and 
irregularities  of  our  lives  ;  we  may  argue  ourfelves 
into  all  kind  of  virtue  and  goodnefs,  and  from  fuch 
an  example  be  ftrongly  excited,  and  fweetly  led  to  the 
pradice  of  it. 

Let  us  not  be  difcouraged  by  the  confideration  of 
our  own  weaknefs,  for  he  who  hath  given  us  fuch  an 
example  of  virtue,  is  feady  likewife  to  give  us  his 
Ho  LY  S  p  I  R  I  T,  to  afllft  and  enable  us  to  conform 
ourfelves  to  this  pattern  of  our  Lord  and  mailefj 
and  to  follow  the  bleflcd  fteps  of  his  holy  life. 

"  Now  the  God  of  peace,"  &c. 


SERMON    CXCII.  , 

The  fufFerings  of  Christ  confider'd, 
as  a  proper  means  of  our  falvation. 


I  C  O  R.  i.  23,  24. 

But  we  preach  Christ  crucifiedy  unto  the  Jews  a 

fttimbling-hlocky  and  unto  the  Greeks  foolijhnefs  •,   hut 

unto  them  which  are  called^  both  Jews  and  Greeks ^ 

Christ  the  power  of  God,  and  the  wifdom  cf 

Go  D. 


1 


"^HE  fufferings  of  the  Son   of  God  for  SERM, 
the  fins  of  men,  as  they  are  a  fubjed  never  ^^^^^ 
improper   to  be  infifted  on,    fo  are   they  *  Preached 
more  efpecially  feafonable  at  this  time,  *  which  the  p"j.:^°°^' 
chriftian  church  hath  for  fo  many  ages  kt  apart  for 

11  Q  z  the 


4  u  8  7he  fufferlngs  ^  C  h  r  s  i  t  confiderd, 

S  E  R  M.  the  folemn  commemoration  of  them,  in  order  to 
our  more  due  preparation  for  the  receiving  the  facra- 
ment  at  Eafter ;  which  next  after  the  LoRD's-day 
(which  was  let  apart  by  the  apoftles  for  a  weekly 
commemoration  of  our  S  av  i  o  u  r's  refurreclion)  is 
the  firil  and  mod  folemn  feftival  that  is  taken  notice 
of  in  ecclefiaftical  antiquity,  to  be  generally  obferved 
by  chriftians ;  at  which  time  all  chriflians  that  were 
admitted  to  thofe  iiicred  myfteries,  did  receive  the 
holy  facrament ;  and  for  this  rcafon,  I  have  pitched 
upon  this  iubjecl  at  this  time. 

Among  all  the  prejudices  that  were  raifed  againfl 
the  chriftian  religion,  when  it  firft  appeared  in  the 
world,  this  was  the  greatefl  of  all  other,  that  th^ 
firft  author  of  this  dodrine  Ihould  come  to  fo  mi- 
lerable  and  fhameful  an  end,  as  to  die  upon  the 
crofs;  that  "  Son  of  God  fhould  be  delivered  in- 
"  to  the  hands  of  men,"  to  be  fo  cruelly  and  igno- 
minioufly  handled.  This  both  Jews  and  Greeks 
laid  hold  on,  as  the  moft  popular  objedlion  againfl 
chriftianity,  and  matter  of  juil"  reproach  to  that  reli-- 
gion,  which  pretended  to  |be  brought  from  heaven 
by  the  Son  of  God  :  for  though  he  call'd  himlcjf 
the  Son  of  God,  yet  he  died  Jike  a  man^  and 
not  on]y  fo,  but  fufFer'd  as  a  malefa6]:or. 

Eat,  notwithftanding  the  odium  of  this  objedion, 
the  apoftles  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour,  who 
were  fent  by  him  to  publifh  his  dodrine  to  the 
world,  did  not  in  the  Icaft  endeavour  to  hide  and 
diflembie  the  matter  ;  but  did  openly,  and  without 
difguifc,  declare  to  the  world,  that  he  in  whom  they 
behcved,  and  endeavoured  to  perfuade  others  to  be- 
lieve, was,  for  "  fpeaking  the  truth,  which  he  had 
^'  heard  from  God,    arraigned  at  Jerufalem,  and 

"  there 


CXCII. 


a^  a  proper  means  of  our  fahafion,  44^9 

^'  there  by  wicked  hands  crucified  and  (lain."     And  SERM. 
though  they  knew  that  this  feemed  very  foolifli  and 
abfurd,  borh  to  Jews  and  Gentiles,  whom  they  de- 
figned  to  convert  to  chriftianity,  and  did  extremely 
prejudice  them  againft  it;  yet  neverthelefs  they  per- 
fifled  in  the  courfe  they  had  begun,  leaving  God  to 
do  his  own  work,  in  his  ov/n  way ;  and  they  found 
the  fucccfs  of  it.  For  though  it  was  a  very  plain  flc  r/ 
which  they  told  the  world,  and  appeared  even  ndi-  . 
culous  to  thofc  who  thousrht  themfelves  i\\t  wifefl  and    > ,  . . 
ableft  judges  of  thefe  matters  j  yet  being  the  truth  of 
God,  it  had  a  mighty  efficacy  upon  the  minds  of 
men,  notwithftanding  all  the  prejudice  that  was  raifrd   '  ^:S'^*^ 
againfl:  it.    "  ItpleafedGoD   by  the  foolifhnefs  of       •, 
^'  preaching,  to  fave  them  that  believe  ;*'  by  this 
dodlrine,  which  feemed  fo  abfurd  to  human  reafoii, 
to  gain  many  to  the  belief  and  entertainment  of  it. 

Indeed  it  was  not  fuited  to  the  genius  either  of  the 
Jev/s  or  Gentiles  i  for  they,  according  to  tlieir  dafe- 
rent  ways  of  inflitution,  expedled  quite  another  thing. 
Ver.  2  2.  "  The  Jews  require  a  fign,  and  the  Greeks 
"  feek  after  wifdom."  "  The  Jews  require  a  ii^:; ," 
they  expedled  the  apoftles  fhould  have  given  fome  ex. 
traordinary  teftimony  from  heaven,  fuch  as  was  E  as 
his  calling  for  fire  down  from  heaven,  to  cor.iume 
thofe  that  oppofed  and  refifted  them.  Such  things 
as  thefe  they  read  of  the  prophets  in  their  law,  and 
they  expecled  the  Meffias  would  do  the  fame,  and 
greater  things.  And  though  in  truth  he  did  ib, 
wrought  more  and  greater  miracles  than  Mo.es  and 
all  the  prophets  had  done  before  him,  yet  thcircuno- 
iny  was  not  fatisfied  j  and  notwiihitauding  i[\^  great 
works  which  he  did  amoii^  them,  they  v/cre  conti- 
nually importuning  him  for  a  fign;  MatLh.  xii.  38^ 

"  Then 


44  2  o  ^hefufferings  of  Cn  ri$t  con  fide r^  J ^ 

S  E  R  M.   <«  Then  certain  of  the  Scribes  and  Pharifees  anfwered, 
CXCII  *'-'-•> 

"  faying,  mailer,  we  would  fee  a  fign  from  thee.'' 
This  feems  a  ftrange  and  unreafonable  demand,  con- 
fidering  the  many  and  great  works  he  had  done 
among  them,  which  were  fo  generally  known.  So 
that  in  all  probability,  it  was  fome  particular  and  pecu- 
liar kind  of  miracle  which  they  defired,  as  appears 
from  Matth.  xvi.  i.  "  The  Pharifees  alfo  with  the 
"  Sadducees  came,  and  tempting,  defired  him,  that 
"  he  would  fhew  them  a  fign  from  heaven."  He  had 
wrought  many  miracles  on  earth,  in  healing  the  fick, 
and  opening  the  eyes  of  the  blind,  and  the  ears  of 
the  deaf,  in  cleanfing  the  lepers,  and  making  the 
lame  to  walk  \  but  thefe  they  looked  upon  as  an  in- 
ferior fort  of  miracles,  here  was  all  this  while  no  ex- 
traordinary thing  immediately  "  from  heaven,"  if 
they  could  once  fee  "  that,"  they  would  be  fatisfied. 
But  when  no  fuch  thing  was  done,  and  at  lall  God 
permitted  him  to  die  upon  the  crois,  as  an  impoftor 
and  feditious  perfon  •,  and  it  appeared  plainly  that  he, 
who  pretended  to  free  others  from  difeafes,  could 
not  fave  himfelf  from  death :  this  confirmed  them  in 
their  unbelief,  and  upon  good  realbn  as  they  thought. 
And  that  this  was  a  fign  which  they  particularly  ex- 
pelled, and  thought  they  had  caufe  fo  to  do,  appears 
by  their  upbraiding  of  him  with  the  war:t  of  it  in 
the  time  of  his  fuffering,  Matth.  xxvii.  39.  "  And 
"  they  that  paffed  by  reviled  him,  wagging  their 
*'  heads,  and  faying,  thou  tliat  deftroyeft  the  temple, 
"  and  buildefl  it  up  in  three  days,  fave  thy  felf ;  if 
*'  thou  be  the  Son  of  God,  come  down  from 
''  the  crofs."  And  it  was  not  only  the  malice  and  ig- 
norance of  the  common  people  that  objedled  this  to 

him;  but  even  the  priefts,  and  fcribes,  and  elders, 

infilled 


as  a  proper  means  of  our  f ah  at  ion.  44-21 

infifted  upon  the  fame  thing;  ver.  4r,  42,  43.  <«Like-SERM. 
"  wife  alfo  the  chief  prieO:s  mocking  him,  with  the 
*'  fcribes  and  elders,  faid,  he  faved  others,  himfelf 
<«  he  cannot  fave:  if  he  be  the  king  of  lirael,  let 
*'  him  now  come  down  from  the  crofs,  and  we  will 
"  believe  him.  He  trufted  in  God;  let  him  deli- 
"  ver  him  nov/,  if  he  will  have  him:  for  he  faid,  I 
"  am  the  Son  of  God."  By  this  paffage  you  fee 
what  it  was  the  Jews  expe6ted ;  that  if  our  Sa- 
viour had  been  ''  the  Son  of  G  o  d,"  he  fhould 
have  "  faved  himfelf;"  when  they  went  about  to 
crucify  him,  that  God  fhould  have  refcued  him  out 
of  their  hands,  and  given  fome  extraordinary  tcfti- 
mony  from  heaven  to  his  innocency  ;  and  for  this 
realbn,  the  preaching  of  "  Christ  crucified'* 
was  very  offenfive  to  them  :  '^  the  Jews  require  a 
"  fign ;  but  we  preach  Christ  crucified." 

Such  was  the  temper  and  difpofition  of  the  Jews: 
but  now  the  Gentiles,  according  to  their  way  of  in- 
ftitution,  expected  that  the  apoflles  fhould  have  dif- 
courfcd  to  them  upon  philofophical  principles,  and 
have  demonftrated  things  to  them  in  their  way.  "  The 
*'  Greeks  feek  after  wifdom;"  they  were  great 
fearchers  after  wifdom  and  knowledge,  and  they  va- 
lued nothing  but  what  had  the  appearance  of  it,  and 
what  was  delivered  with  great  fharpnefs  of  wit  and 
reafoning,  and  fet  off  with  art  and  eloquence.  Had 
the  apoftles  pretended  to  fome  new  theory  of  natural 
or  moral  philofophy,  and  difcourfed  to  them  about 
the  firfl  principles  of  all  things,  about  the  chief 
good,  or  about  the  nature  of  the  foul,  they  would 
have  heard  him  with  great  patience  and  delight.  No- 
thing but  deep  and  fubtile  fpeculations,  about  thefe 
kind  of  arguments,  did  relifh  with  them  and  pleafe 

their 


44^2  ^hefuffering^  of  Christ  confiJerJ, 

1 E  R  M.  their  palates.  But  the  hiftory  of  our  S  a  v  i  o  u  r, 
his  life  and  death,  and  refurredion,  and  the  plain 
precepts  of  his  dodlrine,  v/ere  dry  and  infipid  things 
to  them,  and  were  fo  far  from  having  a  Ihew  of  wiC- 
dom  and  philofophy,  that  they  appeared  foolirh  and 
ridiculous  to  them. 

But  the  defign  of  G  o  d  in  the  chrillian  religion, 
being  not  to  pleafe  the  humour,  and  gratify  the  cu- 
riofity  of  men  ;  but  really  to  do  them  good,  and  to 
reform  the  manners  of  mankind,  he  ufed  quite  ano- 
ther method  ;  which  how  offenfive  foever  it  might  be 
to  thofe  who  thought  themfelves  wife,  yet  it  was  re- 
ally the  wifefl  and  moft  powerful  means  to  that  end  : 
{o  the  apoftle  tells  us  here  in  the  text;  "  but  we 
*«  preach  Christ  crucified,  to  the  Jews  a  ftumb- 
''  ling- block,  and  to  the  Greeks  foohfhnefs:  but 
"  unto  them  that  are  called,"  that  is,  to  thofe  whole 
minds  are  duly  prepared  to  confider  things  imparti- 
ally, and  to  receive  the  truth,  "  the  power  of 
"  God,  and  the  wifdom  of  God;"  a  moft  wife 
and  powerful  means  to  reform  the  world,  an  eminent 
inftance  of  the  divine  power  and  wifdom. 

In  thefe  words  we  have  thefe  two  things  confider- 
able  : 

Firft,  the  exception  which  the  world  took  at  the 
dodlrine  of  the  gofpel,  upon  account  of  our  S  a  - 
V I  o  u  r's  fufferings :  "  Christ  crucified  was  to 
*'  the  Jews  a  ftumbling-block,  and  to  the  Greeks 
"  foohlhnefs." 

Secondly,  that  notwithftanding  the  feeming  un- 
reafonablenefs  and  abfurdity  of  it,  it  was  a  moft  wife 
and  cfi^eclual  contrivance  for  the  end  to  which  it  was 
defigned  and  appointed  :  "  But  unto  them  which 
*'  are  called,  both  Jews  and  Greeks,  Christ  the 

"  power 

\ 


as  a  proper  means  of  our  fahation.  44^3 

/^«  power  of  God,  and  the  wifdom  of  God  "  I 
fhall  fpeak  fomething  to  each  ot  thde,  as  britilyand 
plainly  as  I  can.     I  begin  with  the 

Firfl  the  exception  which  the  world  took  at  the 
dodtrine  of  the  golpcl,  upon  account  of  our  S  a- 
V I  o  u  r's  fufterings.  The  world  were  generally  of- 
fended at  it,  but  not  all  upon  the  fame  account ;  the 
Jews  took  one  kind  of  exception  againft  it,  and  the 
Heathen  another.  "  We  preach  Christ  cruci-^ 
*'  fied,  unto  the  Jews  a  ftumbling- block,  and  unto 
*'  the  Greeks  foolilhnefs."  They  were  borh  ottended 
at  the  fame  thing,  the  low  and  fufFering  condition  of 
our  Saviour  ;  but  not  upon  the  fame  reafon. 
The  Jews  thought,  that  this  mean  appearance  and 
condition  of  our  Saviour,  was  unfuitable  to  the 
power  of  God  ;  and  the  Heathen,  that  it  was  not 
agreeable  to  the  wifdom  of  men. 

The  Jews  from  the  tradition  of  their  fathers,  to 
which  (juft  as  the  church  of  Rome  does  now-a-days) 
they  paid  a  greater  reverence,  than  to  the  written 
word  of  G  o  D,  were  poITefs'd  with  a  (trong  perfuafion, 
that  the  Mellias  whom  they  expedcd,  and  was  fore- 
told by  the  prophets,  was  to  be  a  great  temporal 
prince,  to  appear  in  great  fplendor  and  glory,  to  be 
a  mighty  conqueror,  and  not  only  to  free  them  from 
the  Roman  yoke,  which  they  were  then  under ;  but 
to  fubdue  all  nations  to  them,  and  fo  bring  them  un* 
der  their  dominion  and  government.  And  this  did 
fo  generally  prevail  among  them,  that  even  the  difci* 
pies  of  our  Saviour  were  as  ftrongly  pofTefs'd 
with  this  conceit,  as  any  of  the  reft ;  infomuch  that 
the  mother  of  James  and  John  made  it  her  folemn 
requeft  to  our  Saviou  r,  that  ''  her  two  fons 
*'  might  fit,  one  on  his  right  iiand  and  the  other  on 

Vol.  X.  '      22  D  *'his 


4424  The ftifferings  cf  Cuji^isr  confder'd, 

SERM.  cc  }^is  jgfj.   in  his  kinsdom."  And  though  he  had  told 
CXCII  '  o  tj 

his  difciples  juft  before,  that  "  he  muft  go  up  to  Je- 

"  rufalcm,  and  fufitir  many  things  of  the  fcribc-s  and 
"  pharifces,  and  be  betrayed  and  put  todeatn-, " 
yet  the  other  conceit  of  his  temporal  dominion  and 
greatncfs  did  fo  pofTefs  their  minds,  that  they  could 
"  not  underftand  this  faying,  and  it  was  hid  from  thenr 
'*  that  they  perceived  it  not,"  as  St.  Luke  tells  us> 
Luke  ix.  45.  Nay,  even  after  his  death  and  refur- 
redlion,  when  he  appeared  to  them,  this  ftill  lluck 
in  their  minds,  as  appears  by  that  queftion  which  they 
ask'd  him  immediately  belore  his  alcenfion,  Alls  i.  6. 
*'  When  they  were  come  together,  they  ask'd  of 
*^  him,  Lord,  wilt  thou  at  this  time  rellore  again 
«  the  kingdom  to  Ifrael  ?"  They  took  it  for  granted, 
the  MefTias  would  do  it  one  time  or  other,  and  they 
enquire  of  him,  whether  that  were  the  time. 

So  that  the  Jews  being  fo  firmly  fix'd  in  this  con- 
ceit of  the  temporal  reign  of  the  MefTias,  nothing 
could  be  a  greacer  ftun^- jiing-block  to  them,  than  the 
mean  and  fuftc-ring  co.iditio.i,  in  which  our  S  a- 
V  I  o  u  R  appeared.  The  mtannefs  of  his  birth  and 
life  was  a  great  objedion  againfl:  him;  but  when 
they  faw  him  put  to  death  fo  ignominioufly,  and  that 
he  did  not  then  fhew  his  glory  and  power,  to  favc 
himfelf  from  that  cruel  and  fhamefui  death,  they  could 
rather  believe  any  thing  than  that  this  v/as  the  Mcf- 
fias  foretold,  and  whom  they  had  Ilo  long  expeded. 
They  made  full  account  that  the  MefTias,  whenever 
he  came,  would  live  in  great  fplcndor  and  g'ory,  and 
do  great  things  tor  the  advantage  and  honour  ol  their 
nation  ;  the  leall:  they  expeded  from  him,  was  their 
deliverance  from  the  Roman  yoke,  and  tne  efta- 
blilMngof  the  throne  of  David  for  ever;   or  if  his 

beginning 


as  a  proper  means  of  our  f ah  at  ion.  44^5 

beginning  had  been  obfcure,  that  he  would  at  lafl  SERM. 
break  forth  in  great  luftre  and  majefty;  or,  if  they 
could  have  fuppofed  that  the  Meffias  fhould  be  per- 
fec'Jted,  and  condemned,  and  nailed  to  the  crofs, 
yet  they  doubted  not  but  then  God  v/ould  have 
given  tedimony  to  him  by  fome  fign  from  heaven, 
and  have  refcued  him  from  the  crofs  in  a  miracu- 
lous manner  :  but  feeing  nothing  of  all  this,  nothing 
but  poverty  and  meannefs,  reproach  and  fuiTering  at- 
tending him,  they  concluded,  whatever  miracles  he 
pretended  to,  this  could  not  be  the  So  n  of  God, 
the  true  Meffias. 

On  the  other  fide,  the  heathen  philofophers,  who 
were  not  polTcls'd  with  thefe  conceits  about  the 
Meffias,  they  were  offended  at  the  unreafonablenefs 
and  folly,  as  they  thought,  of  the  apoflle's  do(ftrine, 
who  went  about  to  perfuac^e  the  world,  that  a  man 
who  had  lately  fuffered  and  was  crucified  at  Jerufa- 
lem,  was  a  great  prophet  come  mto  the  world  \  nay, 
the  Son  of  God,  in  whom  all  men  ought  to  be- 
lieve, and  by  whom  they  ought  to  hope  for  life  and 
falvation :  as  if  it  were  reafonable  to  think,  that 
God  would  have  expofed  the  moft  innocent  and  vir- 
tuous perfon  that  ever  was,  to  fo  great  reproach  and 
futferings,  that  the  Son  of  God  fhould  die,  and 
that  life  and  immortality  were  to  be  hoped  for  from 
him,  who  was  crucified  and  put  to  death.  This  they 
looked  upon  as  a  ftory  fo  ill  framed,  that  to  all  wife 
and  fagacious  men,  it  deflroy'd  its  own  credit  and 
belief.  For  though  they  faid  he  was  ri fen  again  from 
the  dead,  yet  before  that  could  be  entertained  by  men 
of  philofophical  minds,  there  were  many  deep  points 
to  be  determined,  as  concerning  the  nature  of  the 
foul,  and  whether  it  can  fubfift  feparately  from  the 
22  D  2  body^. 


44^6  The fuf^Ttngs  of  CnRisr  confid'^rd, 

SERM  body,  ami  whether  a  body  once  dead  can  be  reftored 
i__^ J  to  life  again,  and  re-united  to  the  foul  ? 

And  as  for  his  dodlrine,  which  the  apoftles  pre- 
tended to  deliver,  it  was  a  plain,  and  rude  thing, 
without  art  or  eloquence,  nothing  of  deep  fpecula- 
tion,  or  ftrid  demonflration  in  it:  in  fhort,  fo  far 
from  being  worthy  of  *'  a  teacher  come  from  G  o  D," 
that  it  was  below  the  pitch  of  an  ordinary  philofo- 
pher.  The'e  and  fuch  Jike  things  were,  in  all  pro- 
bjt»iity,  the  exceptions  which  the  heathen  philofo- 
phers  took  at  the  apoftles  preaching,  concerning  our 
^  Sav  I  o  u  k's  death,  and  his  dodlnne  -,  and  they  had 
fome  colour  in  them. 

Bat  upon  impartial  examination,  it  will  appear, 
that  notwichftanding  thefe  exceptions,  the  fufferings 
of  our  Saviour,  confidered  with  all  the  circum- 
flances  that  belong  to  them,  were  a  very  wife  and 
effedual  iiiechod  made  ufe  of  by  almighty  God,  for 
the  reforming  and  faving  the  world.  WhiCh  brings 
me  10  the 

Second  thing  I  propounded  to  fpeak  to  from  thefc 
words,  namely  to  vindicate  the  wildom  of  this  defign 
and  contrivance  of  almighty  God,  tor  the  lalvation 
of  mankind  by  the  futferings  of  his  Son,  from  the 
feeming  ablurdity  and  unreafonablenef.  of  it.  "  But 
*  untoihem  ihat  are  called,  both  Jews  and  Greeks, 
*'  Christ  the  power  ot  God,  and  the  wifdom 
«'  of  God."     And, 

Firlt,  the  Jews  had  no  fufficient  ground,  to  be  fo 
much  offended  at  the  fufferings  of  the  M  e  s  s  i  a  s. 
For, 

I.  They  had  no  reafon  to  expetfl  that  the  M  e  s- 
5 1  a  s  fhould  be  a  great  temporal  prince,  if  they  had 
Attended  to  the  predidions  of  their  prophets  concerning 

him, 


US  a  proper  means  of  our  [ah  at  ion.  44"  f 

him,  which  ought  to  have  been  their  rule  :  for  they  ^  Ek  M* 
affirm  no  fuch  thing  of  him.  All  that  they  fay  of 
him,  plainly  refers  to  a  fpiritual  kingdom,  that  he 
fhould  "  rule  in  righteoufnefs,"  that  he  fhould  *  preach 
"  the  gofpel  to  the  poor,  and  open  the  eyes  oi  the 
"  blind,  and  undop  the  ears  of  the  deaf,  and  make 
«  the  lame  walk  ;'*  that  he  fhould  **  finifh  tranf- 
*'  grefTion,  and  make  an  end  of  fin,  and  make  in- 
"  terceflion  for  iniquity,  and  bring  in  everlafting 
"  righteoufnefs."  So  that  if  they  had  not  entertained 
a  very  groundlcfs  and  carnal  conceit  concerning  him, 
they  could  not  fb  widely  have  miftaken  the  ancient 
prophefies  of  him,  which  ought  to  have  guided  them 
in  thefe  matters,  and  which  they  might  have  {ttn  all 
plainly  fulfilled  in  the  perfon  of  our  Saviour. 

n.  The  predidions  concerning  him  do  mod  ex» 
prefly  foretel  his  death  and  fufi^erings,  and  that  with 
very  particular  circum (lances :  David  in  the  xxiid 
Plalm  :  Ilaiah  quite  throughout  his  liiid  chapter.  And 
Daniel  does  particularly  point  nut  the  time  when  he 
fliould  be  cut  off.  So  that  they  had  all  the  reafon  ia 
the  world  to  exped  that  the  Messias,  when 
he  came,  fhould  be  "  defpifed  and  rejedled  of  men, 
"  a  man  of  forrow  and  acquainted  with  grief,'*  that 
he  fhould  be  "  fcourged  and  buffeted,  opprefTed  and 
**  afBided,"  and  at  lall  "  cut  off  out  of  the  land 
*'  of  the  living  '*  Nay,  if  it  had  been  otherwife, 
they  had  had  no  reafon  to  have  owned  him  tor  the 
true  Messias. 

III.  As  for  figns  to  evidence  him  to  be  the  Son 
of  God  *,  though  God  did  not  gratify  their  curiofi- 
ty  as  to  the  nature  and  manner  of  them,  yet  he  gave 
the  greateft  teftimonies  that  ever  were  given  to  any 
prophet,  and  abundantly  enough  to  fatisfy  any  rca- 

fonablc 


44^8  7he fuferings  o/Cyirist  confiderd^ 

5  E  R  ivr.  fonable  man,  t.iac  he  was  "  a  teacher  come  from  God." 
Incieed  his  miracles  v. ere  not  generally  fo  prodigious 
a  .d  amazing:  but  they  were  many  and  publick,  they 
wtre  uletul  and  beneticial  to  mankind  ;  and  for  that 
realon,  more  likely  to  come  from  God.     He  did 
not  call  for  fire  from  heaven  to  deftroy  his  enemies  ; 
but  he  gave  fight  to  the  blind,  and  hearing   to  the 
deaf,  and  health  to  thofc  that  were  fick  of  the  moft 
da:igerous  and  inveterate  difeafes,  and  (which  was  al- 
ways reckoned  among  the  greateft  and  moft  undoubt- 
ed kind  of  miracles)  life   to  the  dead.     And  when 
he  himfelf  was  put  to  death  by  the  malice  of  the 
Jews,  though  he  did  not  "  come  down  from   the 
**  crofs,"  and    was   not  refcued  from  his  fufFerings 
by  an  immediate  hand  from  heaven,    to   triumph 
over  the  malice  and  cruelty  which  they  were  exercif- 
ing  upon  him,  (which  was  the  miracle  they  required 
to  be  fl:o  vr )  yet  G  o  D  was  not  wanting  to  give  tefti- 
mony  to  him  in  a  moft  remarkable  manner,  by  pro- 
digies which  immediately  tollow'd  his  death  •,  in  the 
flrange  darknefs  which  came  upon  the  land  ;  in  the 
terrible  earthquake  Vv^hich  rent  the  veil  of  the  temple, 
and  tore  the  rocks  afunder;  in  the  opening  of  the 
graves,  and    the  rifing  of  the  dead  ;  and   laftly,  in 
his  own  miraculous  refurredtion,  the  third   day  after 
he  was  crucified :  fo  that  here  was  no  fign  wanting  in 
heaven  above,  or  in  the  earth  beneath,  to  convince 
their  obftinacy  and  unbelief,  unlefs  it  were  that  very 
fign  which  they  demanded.     God  did  enough  to  fa- 
tisfy  every  man's  reafon  \  and  he  is  not  wont  togra- 
tify   the  hutnour  and  curioficy   of  men.     If  men  be 
fo  unreafonable   as  to  exped  this  from  him,  God 
lets  fuch  men  continue  in  their  wilful  blindnefs  and 
infidelity. 

Secondly, 


as  a  proper  tneans  of  our  falvation.  44^9 

Secondly,  neither  had  the  heathen  philofophers  S  E  R  M- 
reafon,  upon  account  of  the  (lory  of  our  S  a  v  i  o  u  k's 
futFerings,  to  look  upon  the  gofpel  as  foabfurd  and  un- 
reabndblc  a  thing-,  as  v\/ill,  1  hope,  evidenily  ap- 
pear, if  you  will  be  pleafcd  to  confider  with  me  thefe 
following  parncalars: 

I.  That  there  is  nothing  more  inculcated  in  the 
writings  of  the  wiieft  and  muli  lamous  i  the  hea- 
then phiioibphcrs  than  this,  that  worldly  greatness  and 
profperity  is  not  to  be  adnnr'd,  but  deipis'd  by  a 
truly  wife  man.  Anfrotle  in  his  t.thicks,  makes  it 
the  propcrry  of  a  magnanimous  and  great  fpirit, 
''  not  to  admire  greatnels  and  power,  and  vidory, 
*'  and  richeb."  So  liiat  according  to  their  own  prin- 
ciples, our  Saviour  was  not  to  be  defpifed  upon 
account  of  his  meannefs  and  fufFcrings.  He  might 
be  a  great  propher,  and  come  from  God,  though 
he  erijoy'd  nothiiig  of  worldly  greatnefs  and  pro- 
fperity. 

II.  They  tell  us  likewife,  that  men  may  be  very 
virtuous  and  good,  and  dearly  beloved  of  G  o  d,  and 
yet  be  liabl.;  to  great  miferies   and  fufFcrings.     And 
to  this  purpofe  I  could  bring  you  almoft  innumerable 
teftimonies  out  of  the   books  of  the  philofophers. 
Max.  Tyrius  the  platonift,  fpeakingof  UlyfTes,  fays, 
that  "  the  gods  forced  him  to  wanJer,  and  beg,  and 
*'  wear  rags,  and  fuffered  him  to  be  reproach  d  and 
*'  revil'd,  for  the  love  and  friend ihip  that  they  bare 
''  to  him."     Epidletus,  a  poor  flave,  but  inferior  to 
none  of  all  the  philofophers,  for  true  virtue  and  wif-^ 
dom,  ''  thanks   the  gods  for  his  mean  condition," 
and  fays,  "  he  did  not  believe  himfelf  to   be  one  jot 
*'  the   lefs  belov*d   by  them,  for  that  reafon  %  and 
"  that  he  was  not  caft  into  a  ftate  of  poverty  and 

«'  contempt^ 


4430  ^hefufferings  of  Christ  cotifiderd, 

SERM."  contempt,  becaufe  the  gods  hated  him,  but  that 
''  he  might  be  fit  to  be  a  witnels  to  others/' 

III.  They  teJl  us  Jikewife,  that  a  flace  of  afflidlion 
and  lufFering  is  fo  flir  from  rendring  a  man  unfit  to 
reform  the  world,  and  to  be  an  example  of  virtue, 
that  none  fo  fit  as  thofe  that  are  in  fuch  circumftances. 
Arrian,  in  his  differ  cations  of  Epicfletus,  defcribing 
*'  a  man  fit  to  reform  the  world,"  whom  he  calls, 
*'  the  apoflle  and  mefTenger,  the  minifter  and 
*'  preacher  of  God  to  mankind,'*  gives  this  charac- 
ter of  him  :  "  he  muft,  fays  he,  be  without  houfeand 
*'  harbour,  and  deflitute  of  all  worldly  accommoda- 
*'  tions  j"  (juft  as  it  is  laid  of-  our  S  av  i  o  u  r,"  that 
"  the  So  N  ot-  man  had  not  where  to  lay  his  head;") 
*'  he  mufl  be  armed  with  fuch  a  patience  by  the 
*'  greacelt  fufferings,  as  if  he  were  a  flone  and  de- 
*'  void  of  fenfe ;  he  mufl  be  a  fpedtacle  of  mifery 
•'  and  contempt  to  the  world."  And  to  mention 
no  more,  Plato  in  the  fecond  book  of  his  common- 
wealth, when  he  would  reprefent  a  righteous  man, 
giving  the  moft  unqueflionable  teftimony  to  the 
world  of  his  virtue,  "  let  him,  fays  he,  be  fiript  of 
"  all  things  in  this  world,  except  his  righteoufnefsj 
*'  let  him  be  poor  and  difeafed,  and  accounted  a 
*'  wicked  and  unjuft  man  ;  let  him  be  whipp'd,  and 
"  tormented,  and  crucified  as  a  malefaclor ;  and  yet 
*'  all  this  while  retain  his  integrity;"  which  does 
fo  exadlly  agree  with  our  S  a  v  i  o  u  r's  condition,  that 
had  he  not  wrote  before  his  time,  one  would  have 
thought  he  had  alluded  to  it. 

IV.  As  it  feems  very  convenient,  (I  am  not  fo 
bold  as  to  fay  it  was  neceflfary,  and  that  God  had  no 
other  way  to  bring  about  the  falvation  of  men  ;  for 
wiut  are  we,  that  we  ihould  prefcribe  to  Go  d,  and 

,'■  Hi.       f« 

,  ,  i 


as  a  proper  means  of  our  fahation,  443  i 

ki  bounds  to  infinite  wiidom?)  I  fay,  as  ic  feem^  SERTvI 
very  reafonable,  that,  in  order  to  our  lalvation,  the  ^  ^^ 
Son  of  God,  who  was  to  be  the  author  ot  it, 
Ihould  become  man,  both  that  he  might  be  an  ex- 
ample of  hoHnefs,  and  an  expiation  for  fm  j  and 
that-iie  fnould  be  born  after  the  manner  of  other 
men,  to  fatisFy  us,  that  he  was  really  of  the  fame 
nature  with  us,  that  fo  he  might  converfe  more  fa- 
miharly  with  us,  and  might  be  a  more  eafy,  and 
encouraging,  and  imirable  example  of  all  holinefs 
and  virtue;  fo  hkewife  was  it  convenient  that  he 
Ihould  be  fubjed:  to  the  miferies  and  fuiferings  of 
our  nature,  that  through  the  feveral  dates  and  con-  . 
ditions  of  humanity,  he  might  have  an  experimen- 
tal knowledge  of  the  fufferings  that  humane  nature  is 
liable  to  ;  and  from  his  own  fenfe  of  our  infirmities 
might  be  a  *'  more  merciful  and  compafTionate  high- 
«'  pricft."  And  this  the  apoftle  exprcHy  takes  no- 
tice of,  Heb.  V.  that  it  was  convenient  that  "  our 
"  high-priefl:  fhould  be  taken  from  among  men,'* 
that  he  might  learn  to  be  companionate,  by  knovvr- 
ing  experimentally  what  it  was  to  be  tempted  and . 
afRicled;  the  knowledge  of  experience  being  the 
ftrongefl  motive  and  incitement  to  pity  ♦,  and  con- 
fequently  to  give  us  the  greater  affurance  of  his  ten- 
der afFedion  to  us. 

It  was  of  great  ufe,  that  he  fhould  live  in  fo  mean 
and  afRi6led  a  condition,  to  confound  the  pride, 
and  vanity,  and  fantaftry  of  the  world,  and  to  con- 
vince men  of  thefc  two  great  truths,  that  God  may 
love  thofe  whom  he  afflidfs,  and  that  men  may  be 
innocent,  and  virtuous,  and  contented,  in  the  midfl: 
of  poverty,  and  reproach,  and  fuffering.  Had  our 
blefTed   Saviour   been  a  great   worldly    prince. 

Vol.  X.  22  E  his 

4. 


4432  Thefufferings  c/Chrjzt  cofiJiJer'dy 

^CXCa*  ^^^  i"^^^"cc  and  example  might  polTibly  have  made 
more  hypocrites  and  fervile  converts,  but  it  would 
not  have  tended  one  whit  to  make  men  more  in- 
.wardly  good  and  virtuous.  .  The  great  arguments 
that  mull  do  this,  mud  be  fetched  not  from  the 
pomp  and  profperity  of  this  world,  but  from  the 
happinefs  and  mifery  of  the  other.  Befidcs,  had  our 
S  AV  10  u  R  appeared  in  any  great  power  and  fplen- 
dor,  the  chriftian  rehgion  could  not  have  fo  clearly 
been  acquitted  from  the  fufpicion  of  a  worldly  inte- 
reft  and  defign. 

And  then  the  fcripture  afTigns  very  plain  and  ex- 
cellent reafons  of  his  fufFering  of  death,  that  he 
might  "  make  expiation  for  the  fms  of  the  whole 
*'  world,"  that  he  might  "  take  away  fin  by  the  fa- 
'  *'  crifice  of  himfelf,"  and  put  an  end  to  that  trou- 
blefome  and  unreafonable  way  of  worfhip  by  facri- 
fice,  which  was  in  ufe  both  among  Jews  and  Hea- 
thens, and  that  by  "  conquering  death,  and  him 
"  that  had  the  power  of  it,  he  might  deliver  thole, 
<'  who,  through  fear  of  death,  were  all  their  life- 
''  time  fubjedl  to  bondage"  as  the  apoflle  fpeaks, 
Heb.  ii.  14.  For  though  the  death  of  Chris  t, 
barely  confider'd  in  it  felf,  be  far  from  an  encourage- 
.  ment  to  us  to  hope  for  immortality;  yet  the 
;  death  ofCH  rist,  confidered  together  with  his  re- 
furreclion  from  the  dead,  and  his  afcenfion  into  hea- 
ven, is  the  clearefc,  and  mod  fenfible,  and  moll  po- 
pular demonftration  that  ever  was  in  the  world,  of 
another  life  after  this,  and  a  blcfied  immortality. 
So  that  confidering  our  Saviour  rofe  from  the 
dead,  it  is  far  from  being  ridiculous,  to  rely  upon 
one  that  died,  for  our  hopes  of  immortality. 

V,  As 


as  a  proper  means  of  oii?^  falvation,  4433 

V.  As  for  the  plainnefs  of  our  S  av  i  o  u  r's  doc-  S  E  R  M. 
trine  and  of  the  inftruments  whereby  it  was  propa^^^  ^^^,.,^  ,V 
gated,  this  is  fo  far   being  an  objedtion  againft  ir, 
that  it  is  the  great  commendation  of  it.     It  contains 
a  plain   narrative  of  our  Sav  lou  r's  life  and  mi- 
r^Jes,  and  death,   and    refiirreclion,   and  afcenfioii 
into  heaven,  and  a  few  plain  precepts  of  Hfe^   but 
the  mod  excellent  and  reafonabJe,  and  the  freefl  from 
all  vanity  and  folly,  that  are  to  be  met  with  in  any 
book  in  the  world.     And  can  any  thing  be  more 
worthy  of  God,  or  more  \\)/^t\'^  to  proceed  from 
him,  than  fo  plain   and  ufcful  a  do{ftrine  as   this  ? 
Lawgivers  do  not  u!e  to  jdeliver  their  laws  in  elo-'- 
quent   language,    to    kx.  them  off  with  flourifh  of       '^-- 
fpeech,  and   to  perfuade  men  to  a  liking  of  them 
by  fabtile  and  artificial  infinuations  ;  but  plainly,  and  ^ 
in  ii^v^  words,  to  declare  their  will  and  pleafure. 

And  for  the  inftruments  God  was  pleafed  to 
make  ufe  of  for  the  publifhing  of  this  dodirine,  we 
grant  they  were  generally  rude  and  unlearned  men, 
and  our  religion  hath  no  reafon  to  be  afhamed  of  it  \ 
for  this  was  very  agreeable  to  the  fimplicity  of  the 
whole  ^t{\^i\^  that  all  things  fhould  be  managed  in 
the  plained  manner;  that  chriftianity  might  be  in- 
troduced in  fuch  a  way,  as  there  might  be  no  pof. 
fible  fufpicion  of  a  humane  contrivance,  or  worldly 
derig;n  in  it.  ' 

The  religion  it  {t\^  was  fimple  and  plain,  there 
v/ere  no  worldly  inducements  to  the  embracing  of 
it,  but  all  imaginable  difcouragements  upon  that  ac- 
count; the  inftruments  of  propagating  it  were  iim- 
ple  and  plain  men,  unaftifted  by  learning  or  arc,  by 
fecular  power  and  authority  ;  which  is  {o  far  from 
being  a  difparagement  to  our  religion,  i\\\t  it  is  a 
2^  E  2  great 


4431-  ^^^  fufferings  of  Christ  confikrd, 

S  E  R  M.  great  reputation  to  it,  and  a  plain    evidence  of  its 
^^"'^     divine  original,    that  it  was   from  God,  and  was 
countenanced   and   carried    on    by   him,  ''  not  by 
*'  mighr,  nor  by  power,  but  by  the  S  P  i  R  i  t  of  the 
*'  LoR  D." 

A:  d  in  truth,  confidering  the  nature  of  this  doc- 
trine, which  confided  either  of  plain  matter  of  fad, 
orof  eafy  and  familiar  precepts  and  rules  for  a  good 
life,  the  apoflles  were  as  fit  for  propagating  ot  it, 
as  any  fort  of  perlons  in  the  world  :  for  it  did  not 
require  depth  of  underdanding,  or  fliarpnefs  of  wit 
to  comprehend  it,  and  declare  it  to  others  -,  but 
honedy  and  integrity  of  mind,  zeal  and  induilry  to 
promote  it  *,  in  which  qualities  the  apoflles  excelled 
the  philofophers  and  beft  learned  perfons  in  the 
world :  and  provided  an  inflrument  be  fufHcient  and 
competent  for  its  end,  it  matters  not  how  plain  and 
unpc)hn:i'd  it  be  *,  for  inftruments  are  not  intended 
for  ornaments,  but  for  ufe.  Now  the  apoilles  of  our 
Saviour,  though  they  were  illiterate  and  unbred, 
were  as  competent  witnefTes  of  matter  of  fadl,  as  any 
other  perfons :  for  there  is  no  wit  or  learning  re- 
quired, to  relate  what  a  man  hath  {ttn  and  heard. 
Nay,  the  more  Ample  and  plain,  the  lels  eloquent 
and  artificial  any  relation  is,  the  more  likely  it  is  to 
be  true,  and  to  gain  belief. 

Thus  you  fee,  that  notwithflanding  the  fceming 
unreafonablenefs  and  abfurdity  of  the  doctrine  of  the 
aofpel,  it  is  a  moft  wife  and  effcClual  contrivance 
for  the  reforming  and  faving  of  mankind.  *'  But 
''  unto  them  that  are  called,  both  Jews  and  Qitn- 
''  tiles,  ChtnIst  the  power  of  God,  and  the 
^^  v/ifdom  of  God." 


T-h? 


as  a  proper  means  of  our  falvafton.  443  ^ 

The  proper  inference  from  all  this  is,  to  ftir  us  S  E  R  M. 
up  to  a  thankful  acknowledgement  and  admiration  ,„..^^^^ 
of  the  wifdom  and  goodnefs  of  God,  in  the  lalva- 
.tion  of  men  by  Jesus  Christ.  We  are  mofl 
apt  to  admire  that  wifdom  which  finds  out  fuch 
means  to  an  end,  as  humane  wifdom  would  have 
been  leaft  apt  to  devife,  and  hit  upon  ^  and  yet  the 
more  we  confider  them,  the  more  we  mud  approve 
their  iitnefs.  Such  is  the  defign  of  the  recovery  and 
redemption  of  mankind,  by  the  death  and  fuffer-  " 
ings  of  the  So  N  of  G  o  d.  However  it  may  appear 
to  rafh  and  inconfiderate  men,  who  judge  fuperfici- 
ally,  and  according  to  the  uppermoft  appearances  of 
things,  to  be  a  very  unlikely  and  improbable  de- 
fign ',  yet  upon  a  thorough  and  impartial  examina- 
tion of  things,  we  fhall  find,  that  Go  d's  way  is  the 
wifeft,  and  that  in  the  management  of  this  defign, 
he  hath  outdone  the  utmoft  prudence  and  wifdom  of 
men,  and  hath  ordered  things  to  infinitely  more  ad- 
vantage, than  they  would  have  been,  in  any  of  thole 
methods  which  the  fhort  and  imperfed  wifdom  of 
carnal  men  would  have  been  moft  apt  to  pitch  up- 
on. Ignorant  and  conceited,  and  prejudiced  men, 
may  cenfure  it  for  folly,  but  the  angels,  more  in- 
telligent and  difcerning  creatures  than  we  are,  and 
of  a  deeper  reach,  do  look  upon  it  with  wonder  and 
aftonifhment.  So  the  apoftle  tells  us,  i  Pet.  i. 
12.  where  fpeaking  of  the  gofpel,  he  calls  it  a  thino- 
**  which  the  angels  defire  to  look  into."  An  allu- 
fion  to  the  cherubims,  who  looked  earneffly  upon 
the  mercy-feat  which  was  over  the  ark,  as  if  they 
would  pry  into  it. 

And  then  let  us  acknowledge  the  infiriite  goodnefs 
of  God,  in  faving  us  by  the  death  and  fufFcrings  of 

his 


443 6       "the  fufferings  <?/^C  H  r  i  s  T  confide r"d,  &c. 

SERM.his  SoM,  us  vile  and  miferabJe  Tinners.  Had  wc 
-^?^^jt)cen  the  mod  innocent  and  righteous,  and  the  dear- 
eft  friends  to  him  in  the  world,  what  could  he  have 
done  more?  how  could  he  polTibiy  have  teftified 
greater  love  to  us,  than  ''  to  give  his  Son  to  die 
'«  for  us  ?  "  Here  is  goodnefs  without  bounds,  love 
without  parallel  and  example;  for  "  greater  love 
*'  than  this  hath  no  man,  that  a  man  fhould  lay 
"  down  his  life  for  his  friend."  This  is  the  highefl 
pitch  that  humane  affection  ever  attained  to,  to  die 
for  one's  friend  :  "  but  herein  hath  God  commended 
*'  his  love  to  us,  that  while  we  were  enemies,  he 
*«  gave  his  Son  to  die  for  us." 

This  is  that  which  we  arc  to  commemorate  at  this 
feafon,  and  by  the  commemoration  thereof,  to  pre- 
pare ourfelvcs  for  the  receiving  of  the  blefied  facra- 
ment  of  his  body  and  blood,  which  was  broken  and 
flicd  for  us  The  confideration  whereof,  as  it  fliould 
excite  us  to  a  hearty  Ibrrow  and  repentance  for  fin, 
fo  iliould  it  alfo  inflame  us  with  love  to  C  h  r  i  s  t, 
who  by  fuffering  fuch  things  for  usj  hath  laid  upon 
us  an  eternal  obligation  of  love  and  obedience  to  him. 
The  remembrance  of  whofe  death  fhould  not  only  put 
us  into  a  prefent  fit  and  palTion  of  grief  and  love,  but 
Ihould  be  the  ground  of  lafting  affedions  and  refolu- 
tions ',  the  thoughts  oF  what  he  hath  done  and  fuf- 
fered  for  us,  fhould  make  us  ambitious  to  do  or  fuf-r 
fer  any  thing  for  him.  What  fliould  not  we  be  wil- 
ling to  part  with  for  him,  who  did  not  think  his  own 
life,  and  his  glory  dear  to  him  for  our  fakes  ?  did 
he  die  for  us?  and  fliall  we  think  much  to  live  to 
him  ?  did  he  become  miferable  for  our  fakes  ?  and 
fhall  we  think  much  to  become  holy  and  happy  for 
his  fake  and  for  our  own  ? 

Such 


ne  evidence  of,  &c.  4437 

Such  affections  and  holy  refolutions  the  confidcra- 
tion  of  our  S  Av  I  o  u  r's  death  and  fufFerings  fhould 
be  apt  to  excite  in  us.  What  grief,  what  love, 
what  thankfulnefs  fliould  the  remembrance  of  his  dy- 
ing love  work  in  us !  when  we  confider  ferioufiy  the 
many  and  mighty  blcffings  and  benefits  which  flow 
to  us  out  of  his  v/ounds,  and  are  taking  "  the  cup 
''  of  falvation  "  into  our  hands,,  how  fhould  "  our 
«  fouls  and  all  that  is  within  us,  blcfs  his  holy  name, 
"  who  pardoneth  all  our  iniquities,  and  healetR^>all^ 
'*=  our  difeafes  ;  who  redeemeth  our  life  from  deftruc- 
"  tion,  and  crowneth  us  with  loving-kindnefs  and 
"  tender  mercy.  To  him,  therefore,  our  gracious 
''  and  good  God,  let  us  give  all  thanks,  adoration, 
"  and  praife.     Amen." 


SERMON    CXCIII. 

The    evidence    of   our    S  a  v  i  o  u  r's 
refurreclion. 


ACTS    i.    3. 

To  whom  alfo  he  Jhewed  himfelf  alive  after  his  pqffion^ 
by  many  infallible  ;prooft,  being  feen  of  them  forty 
days,  and  fpeaking  of  the  things  pertaining  to  the 
kingdom  of  Go n. 


1 


■^HESE    words   comprehend  in  fhort  the  SERM. 
whole  evidence  of  our  S  av  i  o  u  r's   refur-  p^  ^^^ 


redion,   which  may  be   referr'd   to   theie 

four  heads  ; 

Fird, 


A43S  ^he  evidence  of 

S  E  R  M.  Firft,  his  appearance  to  them  after  his  death  and 
CXCIII.  pafTion.  ''  To  whom  alfo  he  fhcwed  himfclf  alive  af- 
"  ter  his  paiTion.'*  '^  To  whom  ;*'  that  is,  to  the 
apoftles,  whom  Sc.  Luke  had  mentioned  jufl  before. 
"  After  he  had  given  commandment  to  the  apoftles, 
*'  whom  he  had  chofen ;  to  whom  a  Ho,  '  6cc. 

Secondly,  the  proof  of  the  reality  of  his  appear- 
ance. "  To  whom  alfo  he  (hewed  himfclf  alive  after 
*'  his  palTion,  by  many  infallible  proofs/*  c/j  wcWcHs 
*'  TS/./jiyip/cis-,  idque  compluribus  argument  is  y  faith  Eraf- 
mus,  "  and  that  by  many  certain  and  undoubted 
*'  proofs,  or  arguments." 

Thirdly,  the  duration  and  continuance  of  his  ap- 
pearance to  them.  "  Being  ktn  of  them  forty 
*'  days." 

Fourthly,  the  fubject  matter  of  his  difcourfe  with 
them.  *'  And  fpeaking  of  the  things  pertaining 
*'  to  the  kingdom  of  God."  Each  of/thefe  af- 
fords us  a  confiderable  evidence  of  C  h  r  i  s  t's  re- 
fur  re£tion. 

Firft,  his  appearance  to  them  after  his  death  and 
paflion.  "  To  whom  alio  he  fhewed  himlelf  alive  af- 
''  ter  his  pafTion."  In.  which  words,  there  are  three 
things  very  confiderable,  and  which  give  great  evi- 
dence to  our  S  A  V I  o  u  r's  refurredlion. 

I.  His  appearance  to  his  apoftlcs. 

II.  That  he  was  really  alive,  and  his  body  vitally 
united  to  his  foul. 

III.  And  this  after  he  was  really  dead,  "  after  his 
*'  paffion-,"  that  is,  after  he  was  crucified,  dead,  and 
buried,  he  was  raifed  to  life  again.  I  Ihall  fpeak 
briefly  of  thefe. 

I.  His  appearance  to  his  apoftles.  "  To  whom  al- 
**  fo  he  ihewed  himfelf  alive."  The  apotUes  arc  here 

only 


our  S  A  V  I  o  u  a'i  refiirre5iion,  443  9 

only  mentioned,  becaufe  this  is  here  fpoken  of,  in  or-  S  E  R  M, 
der  to  their  defignation  and  appointment  to  be  the  ,  _  _  I 
witneiTes  of  C  h  r  ist's  refurrection  to  the  world,  as 
the  great  confirmation  of  that  dodrine  which  they 
were  to  pubhfh  :  but  becaufe  I  am  confided ng  his  ap- 
pearance after  his  refurredion,  as  an  evidence  of  the 
truth  of  ir,  1  fhaJi  therefore  take  in  his  appearance 
to  others  alfo  of  his  difciples  and  followers,  and  con- 
fider  Jikewifc,  why  he  only  appeared  to  his  own  fol- 
lowers, and  not  alfo  to  the  unbelieving  Jews,  who 
had  put  him  to  death,  for  the  full  convidion  of  his 
enemies  and  murderers,  and  the  converfion  of  that 
whole  nation,  to  whom  he  was  primarily  lent. 

In  confidering  his  feveral  appearances,  not  only  to 
his  apoftles,  but  to  his  other  difciples  and  followers, 
that  I  may  give  the  fhortefl  and  fulleft  view  of  them, 
I  fhall  take  them  as  they  are  briefly  fumm'd  up  by 
St.  Paul,  I  Cor.  xv.  4,  &c.  where  giving  an  ac- 
count of  the  fum  of  his  dodlrine  among  the  Corin- 
thians, he  tells  us,  that  the  foundation  of  all  his 
preaching  was  the  death  and  refurreclion  of  C  h  r  i  s  t. 
"  I  delivered  unto  you  firft  of  all,  that  which 
"  1  alfo  received,  how  that  Ch  rist  died  for  our 
*'  fms  according  to  the  fcriptures,  and  that  he  was 
*'  buried,  and  that  he  rofe  again  the  third  day  ac- 
"  cording  to  the  fcriptures."  And  then  follows  the 
particular  evidence  of  his  refurredion,  ver.  5.  "  and 
"  that  he  was  feen  of  Cephas."  St.  Paul  here  takes 
no  notice  of  his  firft  appearance  to  the  devout  wO' 
men,  who  brought  fpices  and  ointments  to  the  fe- 
pulchre,  "  Mary  Magdalene,  and  Joanna,  and  Mary 
"  the  mother  of  James,  and  other  women,"  as  we 
find  Luke  xxiv.  10.  The  reafon  of  which  feems  to 
be  this,  becaufe  his  firft  appearance  was  in  confidera-r 

Vol.  X.  22  F  ^  tioa 

4. 


4440  ^he  evidence  of 

S  E  R  M.  tlon  of  their  piety  and  afFedlion  to  him,  and  of  the 
^^iiL  weaknefs  of  their  fex,  their  faith  being  liable  to  be 
firft  ftaggered  ;  and  they  were  only  to  relate  it  to  the 
apoltles,  and  to  be  honoured  with  carrying  the  firft 
news  of  it,  not  to  be  witnefTes  of  it  to  the  world ; 
fo  that  this  appearance  was  only  for  the  private  con- 
firmation of  their  faith,  and  therefore  not  particular- 
ly taken  notice  of  by  St.  Paul  among  the  publick  evi- 
dences of  C  H  R-  I  s  t's  refurrcclion. 

*'  He  was  feen  of  Cephas.'*  This  is  mention'd 
Luke  xxiv.  34.  "  The  Lord  is  rifen  indeed,  and 
"  hath  appeared  to  Simon.** 

St.  Paul  goes  on  ;  "  and  then  of  the  twelve.'*  The 
college  of  the  apoflles,  becaufe  their  number  was 
twelve  by  our  Sav  i  o  u  r's  inititution,  are  moft  fre- 
quently called  '*  the  twelve,**  though  at  fome  meet- 
ings fome  one  of  them  might  perhaps  be  abfent ; 
'tis  true  there  was  a  fhort  interruption  by  the  mifcar- 
riage  of  Judas,  from  the  time  of  our  S  a  v  i  o  u  r's 
apprehenfion  to  his  afcenfion,  and  then  they  arc 
called  "  the  eleven,"  as  before  and  after  they  arc 
called  *' the  twelve  i'*  yea  at  this  firfl:  appearance 
of  our  Saviour  to  thcm,^whcn  they  were  but 
**  ten,"  Thomas  being  abfent,  they  are  called  "  the 
"  eleven,'*  Mark.  xvi.  14.  "  He  appeared  to  the 
*'  eleven,  as  they  fat  at  meat^"  becaufe  they  were 
then  but  *'  eleven"  in  all.  And  indeed  in  this  text 
of  St.  Paul,  both  the  vulgar  tranflation,  which  cer- 
tainly follows  a  very  ancient  copy,  and  St.  Ambrofe 
there  inftead  of  "  twelve,'*  render  it  "  eleven  j** 
fo  that  St.  Paul  probably  means  our  S  a  v  i  o  u  r's 
firft  appearance  to  them,  mentioned  by  St.  Mark, 
where  they  are  alfo  called  "  the  eleven,"  though 
Thomas  was  abfent ;  which  is  the  reafon  why  St.  Paul 

fays 


our  Saviour 'i  refurre6lton.  444 1 

fays  afterwards  at    the    7th  verfe,    that   "  he  was  SERM. 
"  feen  of  all  the  apoftles,"  that  is,  Thomas  alfo  be- 
ing prefent,  as  I  fhall  fhew  by  and  by. 

"  After  that,  he  was  feen  by  above  five  hundred 
*'  brethren  at  once."  This  was  the  moll  folcmn  ap- 
pearance of  all,  mentioned  Matth.  xxviii.  10.  and 
John  xxi.  I ,  where  our  Saviour  appointed  a  ge- 
neral meeting  of  all  his  difciples  and  followers.  "  Go 
"  tell  my  brethren  that  they  go  into  Galilee,  and 
"  there  they  (hall  fee  me."  Ver.  1 6.  "  They  went  into 
*'  Galilee,  into  a  mountain,  where  Jesus  had  ap- 
*'  pointed  them."  This  mountain,  according  to  the 
ancient  tradition,  was  mount  Thabor. 

There  is  one  confiderable  difficulty  concerning  the 
greatnefs  of  this  number  of  "  five  hundred; "  name. 
Jy,  that  after  our  Saviour's  afcenfion,  we  find. 
Ads  i.  15.  that  after  their  return  from  mount  Oli- 
vet, (from  whence  our  Saviour  afcended)  to 
Jerufalem,  the  whole  number  of  their  meeting  was 
but  "  an  hundred  and  twenty,"  for  fo  it  is  cxprefly 
faid,  "  the  number  of  the  names  together,  were 
*'  about  an  hundred  and  twenty;'*  that  is,  of  the 
perfons  there  met.  Now  we  cannot  reafonably  fup- 
pofe,  that  any  of  thofe  "  ^w^  hundred,"  who  had 
feen  him  after  his  refurredlion,  were  fallen  off  from 
them. 

For  the  clear  folution  of  this,  it  is  to  be  confider'd, 
that  the  great  meeting  of  "  five  hundred"  was  in 
Galilee,  where  our  Saviour's  refidence  chiefly 
had  been,  and  where  he  had  preached  mofl  condant- 
ly,  and  by  confequence  he  had  probably  there  the 
greateil  number  of  followers,  which  was  the  reafon 
why  he  chofe  to  appear  there,  and  appointed  that 
place  for  the  general  meeting.  After  which,  the 
2i  F  i  apoftles 


444^  ^^^  m^^;7r<?  of 

SERM.  apoHles  who  went  thither  by  our  Lor  d's  appoint- 
ment, together  with  others  who  accompanied  them 
from  Jerulalcm,  returned  back :  but  his  followers 
who  lived  in  Galilee  remained  there ;  fo  that  there 
might  very  well  be  *'  five  hundred''  at  the  meeting 
in  Gahlee,  and  but  *'  an  hundred  and  twenty'*  at  Je- 
rulakm. 

St.  Paul  goes  on,  ver.  7.  "  After  that  he  was  feei 
"  of   James."    This  particular  appearance  of  our 
Lord  to  St.  James,  the  brother  of  our  Lord,  is 
no  where  mentioned  in  the  evangelifts.    St.  Paul  pro- 
bably had  it  from  the  common  tradition  mentioned 
by  St.  Jerom,  out  of  the  hebrew  gofpel  of  the  Na- 
zarenes,  m   which   are  feveral  pafiliges  omitted  by 
St.  Matthew,  and  this  for  one;    "  that  our  Lord, 
"  immediately  after  he  had  rifen,  went  and  appeared 
"  to  James  ;  for  James  had  vowed  that  hour  that  he 
''  drank  of  the  cup  of  the  Lord,  (viz.  in  the  fa- 
*'  cramcnt)  he  would  not  eat  bread,  till  he  faw  him. 
**  rifen  from  the  dead.     The  Lord,  when  he  ap- 
*^  peared  to  him,  faid,  bring  hither  bread  and  a  ta- 
*'  ble,  and  he  took  the  bread  and  blefled,  and  brake 
"  it,  and  gave  it  to  James  the  juft,  and  faid  to  him, 
'^  my  brother,  eat  thy  bread ;  for  the  Son  of  man 
"  is  rifen  from  among  them  that  fleep."  To  this  tra- 
dition St.  Paul   probably  alludes ;  but  then   sTrfHra, 
which  we  tranflate  "  afterwards  or  then,"  ought  to 
be  render'd,  as  it  elfe where  is,  prater ea^  "  befides, 
•'  moreover  he  appeared  to  James,'*  without  denot- 
ing the  order  of  the  time ;  for  according  to  this  tra- 
dition, it  was  prefently  after  his  refurrection,  before 
he  had  appeared  to  the  other  apoflles. 

It  follows,  "  then  he  was  feen  of  all  the  apoflles  ;'* 
ihat  is,  by  Thomas,  as  well  as  the  reft.    And  thi^ 

was 


our  S  A  V I  o  u  R'i  rcfurreBion.  4443 

was  his  fecond  appearance  to  the  apoftjes  together;  SERM. 
of  which  St.  Luke  gives  us  an  account,  Luke  xxiv.  5. 
and  St.  John,  chap.  xx.  19. 

*^  And  laft  of  all,  he  was,  fays  St.  Paul,  feen  of 
*^  me  alfo,  as  an  abortive,  or  one  born  out  of  due 
''  time."  This  he  fpeaks  of  the  appearance  of  our 
Lord  to  him,  in  his  way  to  Damafcus,  whereby 
he  was  in  a  very  pov/erful  and  extraordinary  manner 
on  a  fudden  converted  to  chriftianity. 

Thus  I  have  given  you  an  account  of  the  feveral 
appearances  of  our  Saviour,  not  only  to  the  apo- 
Itles,  but  to  others,  and  have  endeavoured  to  ex- 
plain the  chief  difficulties  relating  to  them;  ft> 
that  here  is  a  very  plentiful  tellimony  of  our  S  a- 
viou  r's  appearance  after  his  refurredtion.  I  pro- 
ceed to  the 

lid  Thing  here  obfervable,  that  our  L  o  r  d  was 
really  alive  when  he  thus  appeared,  and  his  body  vi- 
tally united  to  his  foul.  "  To  whom  alfo  he  ihewed 
"  himfelf  alive."  To  which  purpofe  there  is  a  re- 
markable paiTage  in  Ignatius,  in  his  epiflle  to  the 
church  of  Smyrna,  out  of  the  fame  hebrew  naza- 
rene  gofpel,  *'  that  Ch  rist  faid  to  Peter  after  his 
"  refurredtion,  behold,  touch  me,  and  fee  that  1  am 
''  not  a  Ipirit  that  have  afTumed  a  body.'^  For  that 
was  one  great  objedion,  that  his  body  was  not  a  real 
body  united  to  his  foul,  but  a  thin  airy  body,  fucli 
as  are  aflfumed  by  fpedlres  and  apparitions.  But  the 
farther  evidence  of  this,  I  refer  to  the  fecond  general 
head,  concerning  the  proofs  of  the  reality  of  his  ap- 
pearance.    I  proceed  to  the 

Illd  Thing  I  obferved,  viz.  that  he  appeared  alive 
after  he  had  been  really  dead.  "  To  whom  alfo  he 
\\  fhewed  himfelf  alive,  after  his  pafTion,"  fays  the 

texts 


4444  ^^^  evidence  of 

lERM.  text  J  that  is,  after  he  was  crucified,  and  dead,  and 
buried,  he  was  railed  and  reftored  to  life  again.  And 
this  hkewife  is  neoeflciry,  to  evidence  the  truth  and 
reaUty  of  his  refurrecftion,  that  he  was  really  dead. 
That  this  was  fo,  we  cannot  doubt,  whether  we 
confider  the  malice  of  the  Jews,  who  would  take 
care  he  fhould  be  dead  before  he  was  taken  from 
the  crofs ;  or  the  manner  of  his  death,  his  heart  be- 
ing pierced  by  the  fpear,  which  was  evident  from 
the  water  and  blood  which  came  out  of  his  fide, 
which  fhcwed  that  his  heart  was  mortally  wounded  ; 
or  the  time  of  his  being  in  the  grave,  which  was  part 
of  three  days. 

And  now  if  he  was  really  dead,  his  reftitution  to 
life,  which  we  call  his  refurreftion,  muft  be  miracu- 
lous ;  it  being  beyond  any  natural  power,  that  we 
know  of,  to  effect  it. 

As  for  that  malicious  tradition  of  the  Jews,  that 
he  was  ftolen  out  of  his  grave  by  his  dilciples,  while 
the  watch  was  afleep,  and  given  out  to  be  rifcn  from 
the  dead ;  befides  the  undeniable  proofs  of  his  refur- 
re6lion,  which  I  fhall  produce  by  and  by,  the  evi- 
dence which  thefe  fuborn'd  witnefTes  gave  of  his  dif- 
ciples  ftealing  away  his  body,  deftroys  \ik\^',  for 
they  faid,  '*  his  difciples  came  by  night,  and  ftole 
*'  him  away,  while  we  flepti"  which  amounts  to  no 
more,  but  that  when  they  awaked  his  body  was  fome 
•way  or  other  conveyed  or  gone  out  of  the  grave; 
which  is  confident  with  his  refurredion.  But  furely 
none  will  think  fit  to  give  credit  to  what  they  teftify 
was  done  while  they  were  afleep.  They  are  very  wil- 
ling to  believe  a  thing,  who  will  admit  of  fuch  a  de- 
pofition. 

Thus 


our  SaviourV  refurrediiofj,  444 C 

Thus  much  concerning  our  S  a  v  i  o  u  r*s  appear-  s  E  R  M, 
ance  to  his  difciples  and  followers,  after  his  refurrec- ,  CXCIIL 
don.     I  fhall  briefly  confider,  in  the 

Second  place,  why  he  only  appeared  to  his  own 
followers,  and  not  alio  to  the  unbelieving  Jews,  who 
had  put  him  to  death,  for  the  full  conviction  of  his 
enemies  and  murderers,  and  the  converfion  of  that 
whole  nation  to  whom  he  was  primarily  fent. 

Of  this  matter,  fo  far  as  is  fit  for  us  to  enquire  into 
the  reafon  of  the  divine  dilpenfations,  this  probable 
account  may  be  given  ; 

I.  It  was  only  of  abfblute  neceflity,  that  thofe 
who  were  to  be  the  fir  ft  publi  fliers  of  the  gofpel,  and 
the  witnelTes  of  his  refurredlion  to  the  world,  fhould 
have  the  utmoft  evidence  and  fatisfadion  concernino- 
the  reality  of  it :  others  might  y^ry  foon  credit  it 
upon  the  teftimony  of  fo  many  witnelTcs,  who  alio 
gave  evidence  to  the  truth  of  their  teftimony,  by  the 
miracles  which  they  wrought;  and  of  their  own  fin- 
cerity,  by  dying  for  this  teftimony.  And  thus 
St.  Peter  takes  notice  of  the  reafon  why  our  Lord 
after  his  refurredlion,  did  not  appear  to  all  the  peo- 
ple, but  only  to  M^d:  witnefTes ;  becaufe  his  appear- 
ance was  necefTary  only  to  thofe,  who  were  defigned 
and  appointed  to  be  the  witnefTes  of  it.  If  more 
had  been  neceftary,  he  muft  by  the  fame  reafon  have 
appeared  to  all  the  world,  as  well  as  to  the  Jews : 
Ads  X.  40,  41.  "  Him  God  raifed  up  the  third 
*'  day,  and  Ihewed  him  openly;  not  to  all  the  peo- 
*'  pie,  but  to  witnefTes  chofen  before  of  God,  even 
«'  unto  us,  who  did  eat  and  drink  with  him,  after  he 
"  rofe  from  the  dead;  and  he  commanded  us  to 
*'  preach  unto  the  people,  and  to  teftify,"  &c. 

2.  The 


4446  T>^^  evidence  of 

SERM.       2.    The  unbelieving  Jews,    efpecially   the   chief 
'  priells  and  rulers,  upon   whole  authority  the  people 
depended,  were  very  unworthy,  to  whom  God  Ihould 
afford  fo  extraordinary  a  way  of  convidlion,  who  had 
already  defpifed  and  rejedled  fo  great  evidence  as  was 
offered  to  them  *  and  not   only  fo,  but  malicioufly 
imputed  the  plained  miracles  that  ever  were  wrought 
amongft  them,   to  the  power  and  operation  of  the 
devil.     Now  if  any  thing  can  render  men  incapable 
of  the  favour  of  farther  means  of  convidlion,  fuch 
a  malicious  refinance   of  the  evidence  which   our 
S  A  V  I  o  u  r's  miracles  daily  wrought  among  them, 
carried   along  with  them,    wQuld   probably  do   it  -^ 
efpecially  if  we  confider,  that  the  grcateft  of  all  the 
miracles  which  he  wrought  in  his  life-time   (I  mean, 
the  raifing  of  Lazarus  from  the  dead,  after  he  had 
been  dead   four  days)  was  fo  far  from   convincing 
them,  though  they  could  not  deny  the  thing,  that 
from  thence  their  malice  took  occafion  to  refolveto 
put  him  to  death ;  John  xi.  47.    "  Then  gathered 
"  the  chief  priefts  and  pharifees  a  council,  and  faid, 
*'  what  do  we?  for  this  man  doth  many  miracles: 
*'  if  we  let  him  alone,  all  men  will  believe  on  him." 
And  ver.  ^^.  "  Therefore  from  that  day  they  took 
"  counfel  together  to   put  him   to   death."    Now 
was  it  rcafonable  that  he  Ihould  appear  to  them  for 
their  conviction,  after  he  was  rifen  from  the  dead, 
who  malicioufly  confpired  to  compafs  his  death,  for 
this  very  caufe,  becaufe  they  knew  that  he  had  raifed 
one  from  the  dead  ? 

3.  This  would  have  been  inconfiftent  with  that  juft 
punifliment,  which  God  had  determined  to  bring 
upon  the  Jewifli  nation  for  their  obftinate  infidelity, 
and  malicious  rejeiftion,  and  cruel  ufage  of  the  S  o  n 

of 


6ur  S  AV I  o  u  rV  refur region.  44-47 

of  God.     After  fitting  means  ufed  for  the  convic-  SERM- 

CXCIII3 
tion  of  men,  it  is  juft  with  G  o  d  to  let  men  remain 

in  their  own  obftinate  infidelity,  and  to  punifh  them 
for  it.  And  it  is  not  to  be  expedled,  that  God 
Ihoiild  ufe  violent  and  irreliflible  means,  to  bring " 
fuch  perfons  to  repentance,  and  to  prevent  their  ruin. 
He  pides  the  weaknefs  and  infirmities  of  honeft 
minds,  and  condefccnds  to  give  them  fuch  evidence 
as  it  is  reafonable  to  demand,  as  he  did  to  his 
difcipJes :  but  he  hath  not  thought  fit  to  provide  fo 
extraordinary  a  remedy  for  wilful  and  obftinate  in- 
fidelity ;  which  was  the  cafe  of  the  Scribes  and 
Pharifees. 

Secondly,  we  will  confider  the  proofs  of  the  reality 
oF  our  S  A  v  I  0  u  r's  appearance  after  his  rcfurredion: 
"  to  whom  alio  he  fhewed  himfelf  alive  after  his 
*'  pafTion,  by  many  infallible  proofs,  cu  ttoXXcT?  rs/.- 
*'  ij^^>ojo's^  by  many  certain  and  undoubted  proofs  or 
"  arguments  i"  for  fo  the  words  properly  fignify,  as 
Quintilian  from  Ariflotle  tells  us  s  Tsx/jtyf^a,  fays  he, 
arc  ifidubitata  &  necejfaria  figna^  "  undoubted  and 
"  neceiTary  figns  of  a  thing  j"  as  the  adions  of  fpeak- 
ing,  walking,  eating  and  drinking,  are  the  rsx/jtyj^'a, 
*'  undoubted  figns'*  of  life. 

And  thefe  r^x/jt/f^a,  or  ^'undoubted  proofs*'  of 
our  S Av  I  o  u  r's  reibrredion,  may  be  referred  to  thefe 
two  heads,  the  natural,  and  the  fupernatural  and 
miraculous  evidences  of  the  thing. 

I.  The  natural  evidence  of  the  thing  to  their 
fenfes-,  to  their  eyes,  thequickeft  and  fureft  of  fenfes, 
men  being  lead  apt  to  be  deceived  in  thofe  things, 
qiice  fmt  ocul'is  commijfa  fidelihus^  **  which  are  com- 
''  mitted  to  fuch  faithful  witnefTes,  as  our  own  eyes." 
He  was  feen  of  all  his  difciples,  not  once,  but  feve- 

VoL.X.  22  G  ral 

5' 


44  4^  ^'^^  ^'u/V^/^c^  of 

S  E  R  M.  ral  times ;  not  by  a  tranficnt  view  and  glance,  but  in 
CXCIII  .  .  . 

'  a  way  ofthe  mod  familiar  converfation  :  he  difcourfed 

with  them,  and  did  eat  and  drink  with  them,  and  with 

the  fame  circumftances  that  he  ufed  in  his  Jife-time, 

he  gave  thanks,  and  brake  bread  with  them  :  he  fuf- 

fer'd   his  body    to  be  touched  by  them,  that  they 

might  be  convinced  that  it  was  a  real  body,  confifting 

of  flefh  and  bones,  Luke  xxiv.  ^g.  "  Handle  me,  and 

"  fee  j  for  a  fpirit  hath  not  fiefli  and  bones,  as  ye 

"  fee  me  have." 

And  to  convince  them  beyond  all  doubt  and  fcru- 
ple,  that  the  very  fame  body  was  raifed  in  which  he 
had  fuffer'd,  he  gives  them  leave  to  handle  the  wounds 
of  his  hands  and  feet,  Luke  xxiv.  39.  "  Behold  my 
''  hands  and  my  fcety  that  it  is  I  myfelf."  John 
XX.  19.  "  He  ihewed  them  his  hands  and  his  fide." 
And  to  Thomas,  who  was  more  unbelieving  than 
the  reft,  he  fays  in  the  prefencc  of  them  all,  ver.  27. 
"  Reach  hither  thy  finger,  and  behold  my  hands ; 
*'  and  reach  hither  thy  hand,  and  thruft  it  into  my 
•'  fide;  and  be  not  faithlels,  but  believing.'*  But 
bcfides  this  natural  fenfible  evidence,  he  gave  them 
likewife, 

2.  A  fupcrnatural  and  miraculous  evidence.  St, 
John  mentions  two  or  three  inftances  :  his  coming 
upon  the  fuddcn  on  them,  and  "  ftanding  in  the 
*'  midft  of  them,  when  the  doors  were  fhut."  Not 
that  he  pafs'd  through  the  door  with  his  body,  whieh 
is  not  a  miracle,  but  a  plain  impoflibility,  and 
therefore  juft  as  fit  to  countenance  tranfubftantiation,  as 
one  impoffibility  is  to  prove  another  :  but  that  he  did 
miraculoufly  open  the  door,  and  come  upon  them 
fo  quickly,  as  was  undifcernable  to  them  ;  which  eve- 
ry nun  will   grant,    not  only  to  be  pollible,    but 

cafy 


our  S  AV  1  o  u  r's  refur region,  4449 

eafy  to  the  divine  power.     Bat  this  v/ay  of  our  S  A-  ^|^ JJ* 

VI  ou  r's  conveying  himfelf  into  the  midft  of  his 

diiciples,  though  ic  be  alfo  miraculous,  yet  the  church 

of  Rome  will  by  no  means  allow  it  j  it  is  too  plain, 

and  eafy  to  be  reconciled  with  the  nature  and  pofTibi- 

lity  of  things;  they  iovc  at  their  hearts   "  a  lying 

«'  wonder,*'  a  foppifh  miracle. 

And  this  miracle  was  repeated  twice;  firft  when 
Thomas  was  abfent,  John  xx.  19.  and  when  he  was 
prefent,  the  fame  was  done  again,  ver.  26. 

And  then  the  miraculous  draught  of  fifhes,  by 
which  alfo  he  had  made  himfelf  knov/n  to  them  ia 
his  life-time. 

And  then  Peter's  calling  himfelf  into  the  fca, 
when  he  knew  it  was  he,  in  confidence  of  that  divine 
power,  which  in  the  like  kind  he  had  experience  of 
before. 

Thefe  miracles  ^x.,  John  mentions,  but  he  tells  us, 
chap.  XX.  30.  that  "  many  other  miracles  J  e  s  u  s 
''  did  in  the  prefence  of  his  difciplcs,  which  are  not, 
"  fet  down  in  that  book,"     The 

Third  thing  in  the  text  is  the  duration  and  con- 
tinuance of  his  appearing  to  them,  "  being  feen  of 
"  them  forty  days."  And  this  is  of  great  moment 
to  confirm  the  reahty  of  the  fthing  :  a  man  may  for 
once  be  impofed  upon  by  an  iJlufion  of  fancy,  in  a 
thing  which  he  vehemendy  defires  and  expeds,  and 
v/hich  runs  ilrongly  in  his  mind  :  but  where  there  is 
time  to  examine  things,  and  compare  all  circumftances 
together,  and  to  look  narrowly  into  them,  and  to 
try  them  by  feveral  fenfes,  and  at  feveral  times  for  fo 
long  a  fpace,  it  is  morally,  nay  almoft  naturally  im- 
pofTible,  that  any  one  man  in  his  fenfes,  much  more  fo 
many  hundreds  of  perfons,  fhould  \s\  f^ich  circum- 
22  G  2  dances 


445^  ^^  ^"^i^^^ce  of 

S  E  RM.  {lances  be  srofly  deluded  in  a  plain  fenfiblc  matter  of 

Fourthly,  and  laftly,  here  is  the  fubjeil  matter  of 
our  S  AV  I  o  u  R*s  difcourfe  with  his  dilciples,  *^  con- 
*'  cerning  things  which  pertain  to  the  kingdom  of 
"God  j"  or  as  it  is  in  the  verfe  before,  "  after  he 
*'  had  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  (which  was  not 
*'  given  him  by  meafure,  as  the  evangehft  tells  us 
"  ehewhere)  given  commandment  to  his  apoflles, 
*'  whom  he  had  chofen  : "  that  is,  after  he  had 
given  the  full  orders  and  inftruftions  concerning  the 
doftrine  which  they  were  to  publifh,  and  all  other 
things  pertaining  to  that  fpiritual  kingdom,  which  he 
was  fetting  up  in  the  world  :  by  the  agreement  of  all 
which,  with  what  he  had  faid  to  them  in  his  life-time, 
they  were  more  and  more  confirmed,  that  it  was  the 
very  fame  perfon  whom  they  had  converfed  wi^h  be- 
fore, for  above  three  years  together.  And  yet  in 
this  difcourfe  concerning  his  kingdom,  he  rei'erved 
Tome  things  to  be  afterward  revealed  to  them  by 
the  Holy  Ghost,  according  as  he  had  promifed, 
*'  that  when  the  S  p  i  r  i  t  of  truth  was  come,  he 
*'  ihould  teach  them  all  things,"  particularly  concern- 
ing  the  fpiritual  nature  of  his  kingdom,  which  they 
did  not  yet  fully  underfland,  as  appears  by  that 
queftion  which  they  put  to  him,  ver.  6.  "  Lor  d, 
*'  wilt  thou  at  this  time  reitore  the  kingdom  unto 
"  Ifrael  ?  "  They  flill  dreamed  of  a  temporal  king- 
dom in  which  our  Saviour  would  appear  in 
great  pomp  and  fplendor,  to  fubdue  the  world  to 
them. 

From  all  this  difcourfe  which  I  have  made,  you 
fee  what  evidence  i\\Q  apo^les,  who  were  to  be  the 
ferfl  pubi'i/hersof  the  gofpel,  and  witnefTesof  Ch  rist's 

refur- 


our  S  Av  I  o  u  rV  refurreElion,  445 1 

rcfurredlion,  had  of  the  truth  and  reahty  of  It;  fo  SERM. 
plentiful,  and  clear  and  convincing,  as  nothing  more, 
could  either  be  defired  or  expelled.     And  we  have  a 
credible  relation  of  thefe  things  brought  down  to  us, 
abundantly  fufficient    to   fatisfy  thofe  who  are  free 
from  the  bias  of  pafTion  or  intereft,  or  the  prejudice 
and  prepofTeflion  of  a  contrary    religion,  in  which 
they  have  been  educated  and  brought  up  •,  and  fuffi- 
cient to  gain  fome  few  ingenuous  and  teachable  pcrfons 
here  and  there,  who  do  more  impartially  confider 
things  j  and  though   they  have  been  educated  in  a 
contrary  religion,  yet  have  prefer ved  in  themfelves  a 
greater  freedom   of  judgment  than  education  does 
ufually  leave  in  the  minds  of  men. 

But  yet  this  credible  relation  of  adlions  and  mira- 
cles done  long  ago,  how  true  foever  in  itfelf,  does 
not  carry  fo  prefent,  and  fenfible,  and  ftrong  a  con- 
vidion  with  it,  as  to  be  able  to  bear  down  in  the  com- 
mon people,  the  violent  prejudice  of  education  in 
a  contrary  religion,  and  confequently  is  not  likely  to 
do  any  great  matter  of  itfelf  toward  the  converfion 
of  infidel  nations. 

And  therefore  the  divine  wifdom,  which  does  no- 
thing that  is  fuperfluous  and  unnecefTary,  thought  fit 
not  only  to  fend  the  apoftles  armed  with  this  evidence, 
which  had  abundantly  convinced  them,  to  teftify  the 
refurredion  of  C  h  r  i  s  t  to  the  world,  but  alfo  to 
give  an  immediate  teftimony  to  them,  by  enabling 
them  to  work  prefent  miracles  upon  the  fpot,  for  the 
confirmation  of  their  teftimony.  And  this  divine 
power  which  went  along  with  them,  was  a  fenfible 
teftimony  and  convi6lion  both  of  the  knowing  and 
tgnorant  part  of  mankind,  that  they  were  teachers 
and  witneflfes  fent  by  G  0  d  ,  and  therefore  our  L  o  r  d 

com- 


4452  ^1-^^  er/idence  of 

SERM.  commands  them,  "  not  to  depart  from  Jerufalem, 
v.....^^,^  "  till  they  had  received  power  from  on  high,"  to 
qualify  them  to  be  witneflcs  oFC  i-i  r  r  s  t's  relurrcfVior), 
not  only  in  "  Jerufalem,  and  Judea,  and  Saffiaria," 
but  to  the  utmoft  parts  of  the  earth. 
y   And    this  I  ftiil  believe   to  be  the  cafe  of  thofe 
3    ^    .'vmany  nations  of  the  world,  that  are  yet  under  the 
^     il    <  /  'violent,  and  ahnoft  invincible  prejudice  of   education 
^    ^7^:^"    "in  another   religion.     That  which   may  reafonably 
fatisfy  us  who  are  brought  up  in  the  chriftian  religion, 
is  not  hkely  to  be  efFedcual  enough  to  convince  them  ; 
and  therefore,  I   think  it  ftill  very  credible,  that  if 
perfons  of  fincere  minds  did  go 'to  preach  the  pure 
chriflian  religion,   free  from  thofe  errors  and  fuper- 
\  ftitions  which  have  crept  into  it,  to  infidel  nations, 
that  God  would  ftill  enable   fuch  perfons  to  work 
miracles,  without  which  there  would  be  little  or  no 
probability  of  fucceis.     For  as  the  wifdom  of  God 
is  not  wont  to  do  that  which  is  fuperfluous,  lb  neither 
to  be  wanting  in  that  v/hich  is  neceffiiry  ;  and  though 
u^.iy        the  morality  of  the  chriliian  religionN  be  admirable, 
^  ^  ,        and  very  apt   to   recommend   itfclf  to  the  reafon  of 
mankind,  yet  the  doctrine  of  the  death  of  the  S  o  jt 
of  God  would  be  fuch  a  ftumbling-block  as  would 
be  hard  for  them   to  get  over  ;  and  the  relation  of 
ancient   miracles  would  not  eafily  be  admitted,  by 
thofe  who  arc  utterly  ftrangers  to  our  hiftories  of  for- 
mer times  ;  and  confequently  not  io  fit  to  judge  of 
what  credit  and  value  they  are. 

It  is  not  good  to  be  confident  where  we  arc  not 
certain ;  but  this  1  pioufly  believe,  that  God  would 
extraordinarily  countenance  fuch  an  attempt  by  all 
fitting  afTillance,  as  he  did  the  firft  publication  of  the 
gofpel ;  becaufe  the  reafon  and  neceffity  is  plainly 

the 


cur  S  Av  I  o  u  r'5  refurreElion,  4453 

the  fame  in  this  cafe,  as  it  was  at  firft.  For  if  Go  d  S  E  RM- 
did  not  think  the  apoftles  naked  teftimony,  unlefs  it  ^.^-^ 
were  armed  with  miracles,  fufficient  for  the  convic- 
tion of  the  world,  concerning  the  rcfurreclion  of 
Christ,  of  which  themfclves  had  been  eye-wit- 
neffes,  much  lefs  can  we  exped  to  gain  credit,  who 
only  carry  the  relation  of  thefe  ancient  matters  of 
fad:,  attefted  by  hiftories  to  which  they  are  wholly 
ilrangers. 

And  I  do  (Irongly  hope,  that  there  ftill  remains  a 
great  harveft  among  the  Gentiles,  yet  to   be   gain'd 
to  chriftianity  before  the  end  of  the  world  ;  and  that 
the  providence  of  God  will,  in  his  own  appointed 
time,  make  a  farther  ftep  in   the  converfion  of  the 
infidel  nations ;  and  that  more  of  the  kin  gdoms  of 
the  earth  fhall    become  the  kingdoms  of  the  L  o  r  d, 
and  of  his  C  H  R  I  s  T  ;  and  yet  that  before  the  end 
of  all  things,  the  light  of  the  gofpel  ihall  be  dif- 
play'd  in  a  glorious  manner,  not  only  in  thofe  vaft 
empires  of  Tartary,  and  China,  and  Japan,  and  In- 
doftan,  and  other  great  kingdoms  of  the  eafl,  but 
in  the  large  and  dark  regions  of  the  new  difcover'd 
world  •,  for  that  folemn  promife  which  God   made 
to  his  Son,  Pfal.  ii.  8.  "  Ask  of  me,  and  I  will 
*'  give  thee  the  heathen  for  thine  inheritance,  and 
*'  the  utmoil  parts  of  the  earth  for  thy  pofTeflion,'* 
Teems  to  be  very  far  from  being  yet  fully  accom* 
plifh'd  5  and  fince  this  is  like  to  be  the  work  of  fomc 
ages,  the  time  perhaps  is  not  far  off,  when  itihall  be- 
gin:  and  diough  I  fee  no  fufRcient  grounds  from 
fcripture  to  believe  the  perfonal  reign  of  C  h  r  i  s  t 
upon  earth  for  a  thoufand  years  ;  yet  it  feems  to  be 
not  improbable,  that  fome  time  before  the  end  of  the 
world,  the  glorious  kingdom  of  Ch  r  i  s  t,  I  mean 

the 


4454  ^^^  evidence  of 

ryrm  ^^^  prcvalcncy  of  the  pure  chriftian  religion,  fliould 
'  be  of  as  long   continuance,  as  the  reign   of  Maho- 
met and  antichrift  have  been,  both  which  have  now 
laded  about  a  thouland  years. 

For  it  is  clear,  that  "the  fulnefsof  the  Gentiles'* 
js  not  yet  "  come  in,"  becaufe  the  Jews  dill  continue 
difpers'd  over  the  world,  which  is  the  mark  our 
Saviour  hath  given  of  the  call  and  reftitution 
of  the  Jews,  Luke  xxi.  24.  **  They  iliall  fall  by 
*'  the  edge  of  the  fword,  and  fliall  be  led  away  cap- 
"  tive  into  all  nations ;  and  Jerufalem  fhall  be  troden 
"  down  of  the  Gentiles,  until  the  time  of  the  Gen- 
*'  tiles  be  fulfilled  : "  and  thus  St.  Paul  explains  to  us 
this  predidlion  of  our  Saviour,  Rom.  xi.  25. 
*'  I  would  not,  brethren,  that  you  fhould  be  igno- 
*'  rant  of  this  myftery,  that  blindnefs  in  part  is 
"  happened  unto  Ifrael,  until  the  fulnefs  of  the  Gen- 
"  tiles  be  come  in.** 

So  that  this  we  have  reafon  to  expe(5l,  and  this 
let  us  pray  for,  ''  that  the  knowledge  of  the 
*'  Lord  may  fill  the  earth,  as  the  waters  cover  the 
*'  fea  ;  that  his  ways  may  be  known  upon  earth, 
*'  and  his  faving  health  among  all  nations  j"  and 
with  St.  Paul,  "  let  our  hearty  defire  and  prayer  for 
"  Ifrael  be,  that  they  may  be  faved  ;  that  there  may 
**  come  out  of  Sion  a  deliverer,  and  he  may  turn 
*'  away  unrighteoufnefs  from  Jacob  j"  efpecially  fince 
St.  Paul  hath  given  us  reafon  to  hope,  that  this 
would  be  of  fo  great  benefit  and  advantage  to  the 
gentile  world,  Rom.  xi.  12.  "  If  the  fall  of  the  Jews 
"  be  the  riches  of  the  world,  and  the  diminution  of 
*'  them,  the  riches  of  the  Gentiles ;  how  much  more 
"  their  fulnefs?*'  and  ver.  15.  "  for  if  the  cafting 
"  away  of  them  be  the  reconciling  of  the  world ; 

"  what 


I'h^  pofflbilify  of  the  refurreBion^  &c.  445  $ 

*'  what  Ihall  the  receiving  of  them  be,  but  life 
"  from  the  dead?"  intimating,  that  as  the  rejedion 
of  the  Jews  was  the  occafion  of  pubhlhing  the  gofpeJ, 
that  "  dodrine  of  i-econciHation,"  to  the  world,  as 
the  fame  apoftle  doth  elfewhere  call  it  j  fo  the  re- 
ceiving fhcm  to  favour  again,  fhould  be  "  life 
"  from  the  dead,"  that  is,  a  kind  of  refurrediion  to 
the  remainder  of  the  gentile  world,  who  had  fo 
long  '^  Iain  in  darknefs,  and  the  fhadow  of  death.'* 
Which  "  the.  God  of  peace,  who  brought  again 
"  from  the  dead  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
"  the  great  (hepherd  of  the  fheep,  through  the 
"  blood  of  the  everlafting  covenant,"  grant  in  his 
due  time  may  be  accomphlh'd ;  that  thofe  "  other 
"  fhcep  which  are  not  yet  of  this  fold,  may  hear  his 
''  voice,  and  be  brought  in,  that  there  may  be  one 
''  fold,  and  one  ihepherd ;  and  all  the  ends  of  the 
"  earth  may  fee  the  ialvation  of  our  God." 


SERMON   CXCIV. 

The  poffibility  of  the  refurredion  afferted 
and  proved. 


ACTS  xxvi.  8. 

Why  Jhould  it  he  thought  a  thin^  incredible  with  you^ 
that  God  Jhould  raife  the  dead? 

TH  E  refurredion  of  the  dead  is  one  of  the  S  F  R  M. 
great  articles  of  the  chriftian  faith ;  and   yet   ^^^^ 
fo  it  hath  happened,  that  this  great  article  of  our  Preached 


445^  ^he  pojjtbility  of  the  refurreBion 

cx^TV^"  ^^^^S^°"  ^^^^  ^^^"  made  one  of  the  chief  objefl:ions 
againft  it.  There  is  nothing  that  chriftianity  hath 
been  more  upbraided  withal,  both  by  the  heathens 
of  old,  and  by  the  infidels  of  later  times,  than  the 
impoflibility  of  this  article.  So  that  it  is  a  matter 
of  great  confideration  and  confequence,  to  vindicate 
our  religion  in  this  particular.  For  if  the  thing  be 
evidently  impoflible,  then  it  is  highly  unreafonable  to 
propofe  it  to  the  belief  of  mankind. 

1  know  that  fome  more  devout  than  wife,  and 
who,  it  is  to  be  hoped,  mean  better  than  they  un- 
derfland,  make  nothing  of  impofTibilities  in  matters 
of  faith,  and  would  fain  perfuade  us,  that  the  more 
impoflible  any  thing  is,  for  that  very  reafon  it  is  the 
fitter  to  be  believed  •,  and  that  it  is  an  argument  of  a 
poor  and  low  faith,  to  belicvfc  only  things  that  are 
poflible  J  but  a  generous  and  heroical  faith  will  fwal- 
low  contradidtions,  with  as  much  eafe  as  reafon  af- 
fents  to  the  plained  and  moft  evident  propofitions. 
Tertullian,  in  the  heat  of  his  zeal  and  eloquence, 
upon  this  point  of  the  death  and  refurredion  of 
Christ,  lets  fall  a  very  odd  paflage,  and  which 
muft  have  many  grains  of  allowance  to  make  it  to- 
lerable :  p'crfus  credihile  eft^  (faith  he)  q^uia  ineptum 
eji ',  certum  eft  quia  impojfibik  :  "  it  is  therefore  very 
*'  credible,  becaufe  it  is  foolilh;  and  certain,  becaufe 
"  it  is  impoflible:"  and  this  (fays  he)  is  neceffarium 
dedecus  Jidei^  that  is,  "  it  is  neceflary  the  chriflian  faith 
"  fhould  be  thus  difgrac'd,  by  the  belief  of  impofll- 
"  bilities  and  contradidions.*'  I  fuppofe  he  means, 
that  this  article  of  the  refurredion  was  not  in  itfeif 
the  lefs  credible,  becaufe  the  heathen  philofophers 
caviird  at  it,  as  a  thing  impoflible  and  contradidlious, 
and  endeavoured  to  difgrace  the  chriftian  religion 

upon 


ajferted  and  pronyed.  44 ^y 

upon  that  account.  For  had  he  meant  otherwife,  ^^^^^^  • 
that  the  thing  was  therefore  credible,  becaufe  it  was 
really  and  in  itfelf  foolifh  and  impollible  :  this  had 
been  to  recommend  the  chriftian  religion,  from  the 
ablurdity  of  the  things  to  be  believed ;  which  would 
be  a  ftrange  commendation  of  any  religion  to  the  fo- 
ber  and  reafonable  part  of  mankind. 

I  know  not  what  fome  men  may  find  in  them- 
fclves;  but  I  mud  freely  acknowledge,  that  I  could 
never  yet  attain  to  that  bold  and  hardy  degree  of  fliith, 
as  to  believe  any  thing  for  this  reafon,  becaufe  it  was 
impoITible :  for  this  would  be  to  believe  a  thing  to 
be,  becaufe  I  am  fure  it  cannot  be.  So  that  I  am 
very  far  from  being  of  his  mind,  that  wanted  not 
only  more  difficulties,  but  even  impofTibilities  in  the 
chriftian  religion,  to  exercife  his  faith  upon. 

'Tis  true  indeed,  Abraham,  when  he  was  offering 
up  his  fon  Ifaac,  is  faid  "  againfl:  hope  to  have  be- 
"  lieved  in  hope : "  but  he  did  not  believe  againfl  a 
plain  impofTibility ;  for  the  apoflle  to  the  Hebrews 
exprefly  tells  us,  that  "  he  reafoned  that  God  was 
"  able  to  raife  him  from  the  dead."  But  had  he  be- 
lieved this  impOiTible,  he  could  not  have  reconciled 
the  command  of  God,  with  his  promife;  the  com- 
mand "  to  facrifice  Ifaac,"  with  the  promife  which 
he  had  made  before,  that  "  in  his  feed  (which  was 
"  Ifaac)  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  fliould  be  blef- 
"  fed."  So  that  though  God  was  pleafed  to  try  his 
faith  with  a  great  difficulty,  yet  with  no  impofTibility. 

I  premife  all  this,  to  fatisfy  men  how  necefTary  it 
is  to  vindicate  the  chriftian  religion  from  this  objec- 
tion, of  the  impofTibility  of  any  of  its  articles.  And 
whatever  Tertullian  might  fay  in  a  rhetorical  rant,  it 
is  very  plain  that  the  ancient  fathers  did  not  think  the 
22  H  2,  refurreftion 


44  5 S  '  7y^^  pojibiliiy  of  the  refurreBion 

ex  civ '  ^^^^^^^^^^^  ^o  t;e  a  thing  impoflible ;  for  then  they 
would  never  have  attempted,  as  they  very  frequently 
do,  to  have  anfwered  the  objedbions  of  the  heathens 
againft  it,  from  the  pretended  impofTibility  of  it. 

To  be  fure  St.  Paul  did  not  think  the  refurredlion 
of  tiic  dead  a  thing  impoffible,  for  then  he  would 
never  have  ask'd  that  quell  ion,  "  why  fliould  it  be 
''  thought  a  thing  iiKTedible  with  you,  that  God 
"  ftould  raife  the  dead  ?  '  nothi.ig  being  fo  likely 
to  be  chought  incredible,  and  upon  fo  good  rcafon,  as 
that  which  is  impofiible. 

Leaving  therefore  to  the  church  of  Rome  that  fool- 
hardmels  of  faith,  to  believe  things  to  be  true,  which 
at  the  fame  time  their  reafon  plainly  tells  them  are 
impoflible,  I  (hall  at  this  time  endeavour  to  afl'c^rt 
and  vindicate  this  article  of  the  refurreflion,  from 
the  pretended  impoflibihty  of  it.  And  I  hope,  by 
G  o  d's  afliftance,  to  make  the  pofilbility  of  the  thing 
fo  plain,  as  to  leave  no  confiderable  fcruple  about  it, 
in  any  free  and  unprejudiced  mind.  And  this  I  fhall 
do  from  thefe  words  of  St.  Paul,  which  are  part  of 
the  defence  which  he  made  for  himfelf  before  Feftus 
and  Agrippa  •,  the  fubfliance  whereof  is  this,  that  he 
had  lived  a  blamelefs  and  innoffenfive  life  among  the 
Jews,  in  whofe  religion  he  had  been  bred  up;  that 
he  was  of  the  ftridefl  fed  of  that  religion,  a  Phari- 
fee,  which  in  oppoficion  to  the  Sadducees,  maintained 
the  refurreiSlion  of  the  dead,  and  a  future  (late  of 
rewards  and  puniQiments  in  another  life  ;  and  that 
for  the  hope  of  this  he  was  calPd  in  queflion,  and 
accufed  by  the  Jews,  vcr.  6,  j.  "  And  now  I  (land 
"  here,  and  am  judged,  for  the  hope  of  the  promife 
*'  made  unto  the  fathers;  unto  which  promife,  our 
*'  twelve   tribes,    inftantly    fcrving   God  day  and 

"  night. 


ajferted  and  proved.  4459 

''  nighty  hope  to  come  ;  for  which  hope  fake,  king  SER  M. 
"  Agrippa,  I  amaccufed  ofthejews."  That  is,  he  ^^C^^- 
was  accufed  for  preaching  that  Jesus  was  rifen 
fronm  the  dead,  which  is  a  particular  inftance  of  the 
general  dodtrine  of  the  refurredlion,  which  was  en- 
tertained by  the  greateft  part  of  the  Jews,  and 
which  to  the  natural  reafon  of  mankind,  (however 
the  heathen  in  oppofition  to  the  chriftian  religion 
were  prejudiced  againft  it)  hath  nothing  in  it  that  is 
incredible.  And  for  this  he  appeals  to  his  judges, 
Fedus  and  Agrippa,  "  why  fhould  it  be  thought  a 
"  thing  incredible  with  you,  that  God  Ihould  raife 
*'  the  dead  ? '' 

Which  words  being  a  quedion  without  an  an- 
fwer,  imply  in  them  thefe  two  propofitions. 

Firfl,  that  it  was  thought  by  fome  a  thing  incre- 
dible, that  the  dead  fhould  be  raifed.  This  is  fup- 
pofed  in  the  queftion,  as  the  foundation  of  it  :  for 
he  who  asks  why  a  thing  is  fo,  fuppofeth  it  to  be  fb. 

Secondly,  that  this  apprehenfion,  that  it  is  a  thing 
incredible,  that  God  fhould  raife  the  dead,  is  very 
unreafonable.  For  the  queftion  being  left  unanfwered, 
implies  its  own  anfwer,  and  is  to  be  refolved  into 
this  afErmative,  that  there  is  no  reafon  why  they  or 
any  man  t\^Q  fliould  think  it  a  thing  incredible  that 
God  fhould  raife  the  dead, 

I  fhall  fpeak  to  thefe  two  propofitions,  as  briefly 
as  I  can  ;  and  then  fhew,  what  influence  this  dodlrine 
of  the  refurredlion  ought  to  have  upon  our  lives. 

Firfl,  that  it  was  thought  by  fome  a  thing  incre- 
dible, that  God  fhould  raife  the  dead.  This  St.Paul 
had  reafon  to  fuppofe,  having  from  his  own  experi- 
ence found  men  fo  averfe  from  the  entertaining  of 
this  dodlrine.     When  he  preached  to  the  philofo- 

phers 


4460  The  poffibility  of  the  refurreBion 

S  E  R  M.  phers  at  Athens,  and  declared  to  them  the  refurrec- 
tion  of  one  Jesus  from  the  dead,  they  were  amazed 
at  this  new  doftrine,  and  knew  not  what  he  meant 
by  it,  Acts  xvii.  18.  ''  They  faid,  he  feemeth  to 
*'  be  a  fetter  forth  of  (Irange  gods,  becaufe  he  preach- 
**  ed  unto  them  Jesus  and  the  refurred^tion.'* 
He  had  difcourfed  to  them  of  the  refurre6lion  of  one 
Jesus  from  the  dead  ^  but  this  bufinels  of  the  re- 
furredion,  was  a  thing  fo  remote  from  their  appre- 
henfions,  that  they  had  no  manner  of  co:  ccption  of 
it;  but  underflcod  him  qu-te  in  another  fenfe,  as  if 
he  had  declared  to  them  iwo  new  deities,  Jesus 
and  Anaftafis  ;  as  if  he  had  brought  a  new  god  and 
a  new  goddefs  among  them,  ''  Jesus  and  the  re- 
*'  furredlion."  And  when  he  difcourfed  to  them 
again  more  fully  of  this  matter,  it  is  laid,  ver.  J2. 
that  "  when  they  heard  of  the  refurrci^lion  of  the 
*'  dead,  they  m^ocked."  And  at  the  24th  verfe  of 
this  26th  chapter,  when  he  fpake  of  the  refurrtdion, 
Feftus  told  him,  he  would  hear  him  no  farther,  and 
that  he  looked  upon  him  as  a  man  ''  befide  him- 
*'  felf,  whom  much  learning  had  made  mad." 
Feftus  looked  upon  this  bufinefs  of  the  reiurre6tion, 
as  the  wild  fpeculation  of  a  crazy  head.  And  indeed 
the  heathens  generally,  even  thofe  who  believed  the 
immortality  of  the  foul,  and  another  ftate  after  this 
life,  looked  upon  the  refurredlion  of  the  body  as  a 
thing  impoflible.  Pliny,  I  remember,  reckons  it 
among  thofe  things  which  are  impoflible,  and  which 
God  himfelf  cannot  do;  revocare  defun^os^  "  to 
]«'  call  back  the  dead  to  life:"  and  in  the  primi- 
tive times,  the  heathen  philofophers  very  much  de- 
rided the  chriftians,  upon  account  of  this  flrange 
do(5lrine  of  the  refurredion,   looking  always  upon 

this 


ajferted  and  proved.  446  r 

this  article  of  their  faith,  as  a  ridiculous  and  impofli-  S  E  R  M. 
ble  aflertion.  ,C^CIV. 

So  eafy  is  it  for  prejudice  to  blind  the  minds  of 
men,  and  to  reprefent  every  thing  to  them,  which 
hath  a  great  appearance  of  difficulty  in  it,  as  impol^ 
fibJe.  But  I  fhall  endeavour  to  fhew,  that  if  the 
matter  be  thoroughly  examined,  there  is  no  ground 
for  any  fuch  apprehenfion.  I  proceed  therefore 
to  the 

Second  propofition,  namely,  that  this  apprehenfi- 
on, that  it  is  an  incredible  thing  that  God  fhould' 
raife  the  dead,  is  very  unreafonable:  "  why  fhould 
*'  it  be  thought  a  thing  incredible  with  you,  that 
*'  God  fhould  raife  the  dead?"  That  is,  there  is 
no  fufficient  reafon,  why  any  man  fhould  look  upon 
the  refurredion  of  the  dead,  as  a  thing  impoffible  to 
the  power  of  God  *,  the  only  reafon  why  they  thought 
it  incredible,  being  becaufe  they  judged  it  impolTi- 
ble  :  fo  that  nothing  can  be  vainer,  than  for  men  to 
pretend  to  believe  the  refarredlion  •,  and  yet  at  the 
fame  time  to  grant  it  to  be  a  thing  in  reafon  im- 
poffible, becaufe  no  man  can  believe  that  which  he 
thinks  to  be  incredible  5  and  the  impofTibility  of  a 
thing  is  the  befl  reafon  any  man  can  have  to  think 
a  thing  incredible.  So  that  the  meaning  of  St.  Paul's 
queflion  is,  "  why  fhould  it  be  thought  a  thing  im- 
"  poffible,  that  God  fhould  raife  the  dead  ?  " 

To  come  then  to  the  budnefs  :  I  fhall  endeavour 
to  fhew,  that  there  is  no  fufficient  reafon,  why  men 
Hiould  look  upon  the  refurredlion  of  the  dead,  as  a 
thing  impoffible  to  God.  "  Why  fliould  it  be 
"  thought  a  thing  incredible  (that  is  impoffible)  with 
"  you,  that  God  fhould  raife  the  dead?"  which 
queflion  implies  in  it  thefe  three  things  ; 

I.  That 


44^2  The  pGjfibility  of  the  refUrreElion 

cxcf V*      ^'  '^^^^  ^^  ^^  above  the  power  of  nature,  to  raifc 
, 1,  the  dead. 

II.  B'jt  it  is  not  above  the  power  of  God,  to 
raife  the  dead.   And, 

III.  That  God  fhould  be  able  to  do  this,  is  by 
no  means  incredible  to  natural  rcafon. 

I.  This  queftion  implies,  that  it  is  above  the  power 
of  nature,  to  raife  the  dead  ;  and  therefore  the  apo- 
ple  puts  the  queftion  very  cautioufly,  "  why  Ihould 
*'  it  be  thought  incredible,  that  God  Ihould  raife 
*'  the  dead  }  "  by  which  he  feems  to  grant,  that  it 
is  impoffible  to  any  natural  power,  to  raife  the  dead  ; 
which  is  granted  on  all  hands. 

II.  But  this  queftion  does  plainly  imply,  that  it 
is  not  above  the  power  of  Go  d,  to  do  this.  Though 
the  raifing  of  the  dead  to  life,  be  a  thing  above  the 
power  of  nature,  yet  why  fhould  it  be  thought  in- 
credible that  God,  who  is  the   author  of  nature, 
fhould  be  able  to  do  this }  and  indeed  the  apoftle's 
putting  the  queftion  in  this  manner,  takes  away  the 
main  ground  of  this  objedion  againft  the  refurredi- 
on,  from  the  impoflibihty  of  the  thing.     For  the 
main  reafon,  why  it  was  looked  upon  as  impoflible, 
was,  becaufe  it  was  contrary  to  the  courfe  of  nature, 
that  there  fhould  be  any  return  from  a  perfed  pri- 
vation to  a  habit,  and   that  a  body  perfectly  dead 
Ihould  be  reftored  to  life  again  :  but  for  all  this,  no 
man   that  believes  a  God,  who   made  the  world, 
and  this  natural  frame  of  things,   but  muft  think  it 
very  reafonable  to  believe,  that  he  can  do  things  far 
above  the  power  of  any  thing  that  he  hath  made. 

III.  This  queftion  implies  that  it  is  not  a  thing 
incredible  to  natural  realon,  that  God  fhould  b1 
able  to  raife  the  dead.  I  do  not  fay,  that  by  natural 

light 


^Jerted  and  proved.  4463 

light  we  can  difcover  that  God  will  raife  the  dead  ;  ^^f:^' 
for  that  depending  merely  upon  the  will  of  God,, —  ,^.^^ 
can  no  therwife  be  certainly  known  than  by  divine 
revelation :  but  that  God  can  do  this,  is  not  at  all 
incredible  to  natural  reaibn.  And  this  is  fufficiently 
implied  in  the  quellion  which  Sc.  Paul  asks,  in  which 
he  appeals  to  Feftus  and  Agrippa,  neither  of  them 
chriltians,  ^'  why  fhould  it  be  thought  a  thing  in- 
"  credible  with  you,  that  God  fhould  raife  the 
*'  dead  ? ''  And  why  fliould  he  appeal  to  them 
concerning  the  credibility  of  this  matter,  if  it  be  a 
thing  incredible  to  natural  reafon  ? 

Tnat  it  is  not,  I  fliall  firft  endeavour  to  prove, 
and  then  to  anfwer  the  chief  objeclions  againft  the 
poflibility  of  it. 

And  ]  prove  it  thus :  it  is  not  incredible  to  na- 
tural reafon,  that  God  made  the  world,  and  all  the 
creatures  in  it;  that  mankind  is  "  his  offspring  ;'» 
and  that  *'  he  gives  us  life  and  breath,  and  all  things.'* 
This  was  acknowledged  and  firmly  believed  by  many 
of  the  heathens.  And  indeed,  whoever  believes  that 
the  being  of  God  may  be  known  by  natural  light, 
mufl  grant,  that  it  may  be  known  by  the  natural  lighc 
of  reafon,  that  God  made  the  world  \  becaufe  one 
of  the  chief  arguments  for  the  being  of  God,  is 
taken  from  thole  vifible  effeds  ofwifdom,  and  power, 
and  goodnefs,  which  we  fee  in  the  frame  of  the 
world.  Now  he  that  can  do  the  greater,  can  un- 
doubtedly do  the  lefs;  he  that  made  all  things  of 
nothing,  can  much  more  raife  a  body  out  of  the 
dulf  •,  he  who  at  firll:  gave  life  to  fo  many  inanimate 
beings,  can  eafily  reflore  that  which  is  dead  to  life 
again.  It  is  an  excellent  faying  of  one  of  the  Jewifh 
Rabbles:  ''  that  he  who  made  that  which  was  not. 

Vol.  X.  22  I  to 

5- 


44^4  5^^^  poffibility  of  the  re  furred  Ion 

S  E  R  M.  <c  to  be,  can  certainly  make  that  which  once  was,  to 
"  be  again.'*  This  hath  the  fwce  of  a  demonft ra- 
tion ;  for  no  man  that  believes  that  God  hath  done 
the  one,  can  make  any  doubt,  but  that  he  can  if  he 
pleafe  do  the  other. 

This  feems  to  be  fb  very  clear,  that  they  mud  be 
ftrong  objedlions  indeed,  that  can  render  it  in- 
credible. 

There  are  but  two  that  I  know  of,  that  are  of 
any  confideration,  and  I  fliall  not  be  afraid  to  repre- 
fent  them  to  you  with  their  utmofl  advantage ;  and 
they  are  thefe  : 

Firflr,  againft  the  refurredlion  in  general  :  it  is  prer 
tended  impoflible,  after  the  bodies  of  men  are  re- 
folved  into  duft,  to  recoiled:  all  the  difpcrfed  parts, 
and  bring  them  together,  to  be  united  into  one 
body. 

The  fecond  is  levell'd  againft  the  refurredlion  in 
fome  particular  inftances,  and  pretends  it  to  be  im- 
poflible in  fome  cafes  only,  viz.  when  that  which  was 
the  matter  of  one  man's  body,  does  afterwards  be- 
come the  mater  of  another  man's  body  ;  in  which 
cafe,  fay  they,  it  is  impoflible  that  both  thefe  fliould, 
at  the  refurredion,  each  have  their  own  body. 

The  difliculty  of  both  thefe  objedions,  is  per- 
fe6lly  avoided  by  thofe  who  hold,  that  it  is  not 
neceflary  that  our  bodies  at  the  refurredion  fhould 
confift  of  the  very  fame  parts  of  matter  that  they 
did  before  j  there  being  no  fuch  great  difference 
between  one  parcel  of  dufl:  and  another  -,  neither 
in  refped:  of  the  power  of  God,  which  can  as 
cafily  command  "  this'*  parcel  of  dufl:,  as  "  that'* 
to  become  a  living  body,  and  being  united  to  a 
jiving  foul  to  rife  up  and  walk  :  fo  that  the  miracle 

of 


afferted  and  proved.  44^5 

of  the  refurredion  will  be  all  one  in  the  main,  S  E  R  iVf. 
whether  our  bodies  be  made  of  the  very  fame  matter 
they  were  before,  or  not.  Nor  will  there  be  any  dif- 
ference as  to  us ;  for  whatever  matter  our  bodies  be 
made  of,  when  they  are  once  re-united  to  our  fouls, 
they  will  be  then  as  much  our  own,  as  if  they  had 
been  made  of  the  very  fame  matter  of  which  they  con- 
fided before.  Befides  that,  the  change  which  the  re- 
furredlion  will  make  in  our  bodies,  will  be  fo  great, 
that  we  could  not  know  them  to  be  the  fame,  though 
they  were  fo. 

Now  upon  this  fuppofition,  which  feems  philofo- 
phical  enough,'  the  force  of  both  thefe  objedions  is 
wholly  declined.  But  there  is  no  need  to  fly  to  this 
refuge  ;  and  therefore  I  will  take  this  article  of  the 
refurredion  in  the  ftr idled  fenfe  for  the  raifing  of  a 
body  to  life,  confiding  of  the  fame  individual  mat- 
ter that  it  did  before  ;  and  in  this  fenfe,  I  think  it 
hath  generally  been  received  by  chridians,  not  with- 
out ground  from  fcripture.  I  will  only  mention 
one  text,  which  feems  very  drongly  to  imply  it.  Rev, 
XX.  13.  "  And  the  fea  gave  up  the  dead  which  were 
"  in  it ;  and  death  and  the  grave  delivered  up  the 
*'  dead  which  were  in  them  ;  and  they  were  judged 
"  every  man  according  to  his  works."  Now  why 
fhould  the  "  fea"  and  "  .the  grave"  be  faid  "  to 
"  deliver  up  their  dead,"  if  there  were  not  a  refur- 
re6tion  of  the  fame  body ;  but  any  dud  formed  into 
a  living  body,  and  united  to  the  foul,  would  ferve  the 
turn  }  WyiQ  will  therefore  take  it  for  granted,  that  the 
very  fame  body  Ihall  be  raifed,  and  I  doubt  not  even 
in  this  fenfe,  to  vindicate  the  podibility  of  the  refurrec- 
tion  from  both  thefe  objedions. 

22  I  2  Firfty 


44^6  ^he  pojfxbility  of  the  refurreBion 

TYpr^'      Firfl:,  againft  the   refurredlion   in  general  of  the 
j  Hime  body ;  it  is  pretended  impofTible,  after  the  bo- 
dies of  men  are  moulder'd  into  the  daft,  and  by  in- 
finite accidents  have  been  fcatter'd  up  and  down  the 
world,  and  have  undergone  a  thoufand  changes,  to 
recoiled  and  rally  together  the  very  fame  parts  of 
which  they  confuted  before.    This  the  heathens  ufed 
f  to  objedl  to  the  primitive  chriilians  ;  for  which  rea- 
t  fon  they    alio  ufcd  to  burn  the  bodies  of  martyrs, 
^nd  to  fcacter  their  afhes  in  the  air,  to  be  blown 
about  by  the  wind,  in  derifion  of  their  hopes  of  a 
refurredion. 

1  know  not  how  (Irong  malice  might  make  this 
objedion  to  appear  ;  bjc  furely  in  reafon  it  is  very 
weak  :  for  it  wholly  depends  upon  a  grofs  miftake 
of  the  nature  of  G  o  d  and  his  providence,  as  if  it 
did  not  extend  to  the  fmalJelt*  things  i  as  if  God 
did  not  know  all  things  that  he  haih  made,  and  had 
them  not  always  in  his  view,  and  perfectly  under  his 
command ;  and  as  if  it  were  a  trouble  and  burden  to 
infinite  knowledge  and  power,  to  underftand  and 
order  the  lead  things:  whereas  infinite  knowledge 
and  power  can  know  and  manage  all  things,  with  as 
much  cafe,  as  we  can  underftand  and  order  any  one 
thing. 

So  that  this  objedion  is  grounded  upon  a  low  and 
falfe  apprehenfion  of  the  divine  nature,  and  is 
only  fit  for  Epicurus  his  herd,  who  fancied  to 
themfelves  a  fort  of  flothful  and  unthinkins;  deities 
whofe  happinefs  confided  in  their  lazinefs,  and  a  pri- 
vilege to  do  nothing.     I  proceed  therefore  to  the 

Second  objedion,  which  is  more  clofe  and  pref- 
fmg ;  and  this  is  Jevell'd  againft  the  refurredion 
ivi   feme  particular  inftances.     I  will  mention  but 

''  two,^*' 


ajferted  and  proved,  4467 

*«  two,"  by  which  all  the  reft  may  be  meafur'd  and  S  E  R  M. 
anfwered.  "^     ' 

One  is,  of  thofe  who  are  drowned  in  the  fea,  and 
their  bodies  eaten  up  by  filhes,  and  turned  into  their 
nourifhment ;  and  thofe  fifhes  perhaps  eaten  after- 
wards by  men,  and  converted  into  the  fubftancc  of 
their  bodies. 

The  other  is  of  the  Canibals*,  fome  of  whom,  as 
credible  relations  tell  us,  have  lived  wholly,  or  chief- 
ly of  the  flefh  of  men ;  and  confequently  the  whole, 
or  the  greatefl  part  of  the  fubflance  of  their  bodies  is 
made  of  the  bodies  of  other  men.  In  thefe  and  the 
like  cafes,  wherein  one  man's  body  is  fuppofcd  to  be 
turned  into  the  fubftance  of  another  man's  body, 
how  fhould  both  thefe  at  the  refurredlion,  each  reco- 
ver his  own  body?  So  that  this  objection  is  like  that 
of  the  Sadducees  to  our  Saviour,  concerning  a 
woman  that  had  feven  husbands,  they  ask  "  whole 
^'  wife  of  the  kvtn  fhall  Ihe  be  at  the  refurredlion  ? '* 
So  here,  when  feveral  have  had  the  fame  body,  whole 
Ihall  it  be  at  the  refurredlion  ?  and  how  fhall  they  be 
fupplied  that  have  it  not? 

This  is  the  objedlion  5  and  in  order  to  the  anfwer- 
ing  of  it,  I  ihall  premife  thefe  two  things  : 

I.  That  the  body  of  man  is  not  a  conftant  and  per- 
manent thing,  always  continuing  in  the  fame  ftate, 
and  confiding  of  the  fame  matter :  but  a  fuccelTive 
thing,  which  is  continually  fpending,  and  continually 
renewing  itfelf,  every  day  lofmg  fomcthing  of  the 
matter  which  it  had  before,  and  gaining  new;  fo 
that  moil  men  have  new  bodies,  oftner  than  they 
have  new  clothes ;  only  with  this  difference,  that  we 
change  our  clothes  commonly  at  once,  but  our  bodies 
by  degrees. 


4468  The  pojibility  of  the  refurreElion 

SERM.      And  this  is  undeniably  certain  from  experience, 
v..^.,^^^  For  fo  much  as  our  bodies  grow,  fb  much  new  mat- 
ter is  added  to  them,  over  and  befides  the  repairing 
^  of  what  is  continually  fpentj   and  after  a   man  be 

come  to  his  full  growth,  fo  much  of  his  food,  as 
''f^  every  day  turns  into  nourifhmenr,  fo  much  of  his 

ycflcrday's  body  is  ufually  wafted,  and  carried  off  by 
infenfible  perfpiration,  that  is,  breathed  out  at  the 
pores  of  his  body  \  which  according  to  the  ftatick 
"^y^i  experiment  of  Sanftorius  a  learned  phyfician,  who 
.■>^  •'./•t.^^M>  for  feveral  years  together   weighed  himfelf  exa6kly 
' ' '  '  P^ "(  every  day,  is  (as  I  remember)  according  to  the  pro- 
j  c.-t^e  portion  of  five  to  eight,  of  all  that  a  man  eats  and 
drinks.     Now  according  to  this  proportion,  every 
man  muft  change  his  body  feveral  times  in  a  year. 

'Tis  true  indeed,  the  more  folid  parts  of  the  body, 
as  the  bones,  do  not  change  fo  often  as  the  fluid  and 
flefhy  •,  but  that  they  alfo  do  change,  is  certain,  be- 
caufe  they  grow,  and  v/hatever  grows  is  nourifh'd 
and  fpends,  becaufe  otherwife  it  would  not  need  to  be 
repaired. 

II.  The  body  which  a  man  hath  at  any  time  of 
his  hfe,  is  as  much  his  own  body,  as  that  which  he 
hath  at  his  death ;  fo  that  if  the  very  matter  of  his 
body,  which  a  man  had  any  time  of  his  life,  be 
..raifed,  it  is  as  much  his  own  and  the  fame  body,  as 
'^  that  which  he  had  at  his  death,  and  commonly  much 
more  perfe6l  j  becaufe  they  who  die  of  lingering  fick- 
nefs,  or  old  age,  are  ufually  mere  skeletons  when 
they  die ;  fo  that  there  is  no  reafon  to  fuppofe,  that 
the  very  matter  of  which  our  bodies  confiit  at  the 
time  of  our  death,  fliall  be  that  which  ihall  be^raifcd  ; 
that  being  commonly  the  worft,  and  moll  imperfed: 
body  of  all  the  reft. 

Thefc 


offer  ted  and  proved,  4469 

Thefe  two  things  being  premifed,  the  anfwer  to  SERM. 
this  objedlion  cannot  be  difEcult.  For  as  to  the  more,  ^^^^^- 
folid  and  firm  parts  of  the  body,  as  the  skull  and 
bones,  'tis  not  I  think  pretended  that  the  Canibals 
eat  them ;  and  if  they  did,  fo  much  of  the  matter, 
even  of  thefe  folid  parts,  waftes  away  in  a  few  years, 
as  being  colle<fted  together  would  fupply  them  many 
times  over.  And  as  for  the  flefhy  and  fluid  parrs, 
thefe  are  fo  very  often  changed  and  renewed,  that 
we  can  allow  the  Canibals  to  eat  them  all  up,  and  to 
turn  them  all  into  nourifliment,  and  yet  no  man 
need  contend  for  want  of  a  body  of  his  own  at  the 
refurredlion,  viz.  any  of  thofe  bodies  which  he  had 
ten  or  twenty  years  before;  which  are  every  whit 
as  good,  and  as  much  his  own,  as  that  which  was 
eaten. 

You  will  pardon  me,  I  hope,  that  I  have  dwelt  fo  long 
upon  fo  contentious  an  argument,  when  you  confider 
how  neceflary  what  I  have  faid  is  to  the  vindicating 
of  fo  great  an  article  of  our  religion  ;  and  efpecially 
in  this  evil  age  of  unbelief,  when  greater  matters  than 
this  are  called  in  queftion. 

Having  thus  Ihewn  that  the  refurredlion  is  not  a 
thing  incredible  to  natural  reafon,  I  lliould  now  pro- 
ceed to  iliew  the  certainty  of  it  from  divine  revela- 
tion. For  as  reafon  tells  us,  it  is  not  impofTible  ;  {q 
the  word  of  God  hath  afTur'd  us,  that  it  is  certain. 
The  texts  of  fcripture  are  fo  many  and  clear  to  this 
purpofc,  and  fo  well  known  to  all  chriftians,  that  I 
will  produce  none.  I  fhall  only  tell  you,  that  as  ic 
is  exprcfly  revealed  in  the  gofpel,  fo  our  bkifed 
Saviour,  for  the  confirmation  of  our  faith,  and 
the  comfort  and  encouragement  of  our  hope,  hath 
given  us  the  experiment  of  it  in  his  own  refurredion, 

which 


447^  ^'^^  poffihllity  of  the  refurre5lion 

SERM.  y^:\xic\\  is  "  the  earneft  and  firfl-fruits  of  ours."     So 
CXCI^ 

^,  S'.  Pmi  lells  us,  that  "  C  H  R  i  s  t  is  rifen  from  the 

*'  cc.id,  and  btrcome  the  firit-fruits  of  them  that 
**  fkpc."  And  that  Christ  did  really  rife  from 
the  dead,  we  have  as  good  evidence,  as  for  any  an- 
cient matter  of  fad  which  we  do  mod  firmly  be- 
lieve ;  and  more  and  greater  evidence  than  this,  the 
thmg  is  not  capable  of;  and  becaufe  it  is  not,  no  rea- 
fonable  man  ought  to  require  it. 

Now  what  remains,  but  to  conclude  this  difcourfe 
■with  thofe  pradlical  inferences  which  our  apoftle 
makes  from  this  dodlrine  of  the  refurrcdion ;  and  I 
fhall  mention  thefe  two : 

The  firft  for  our  fupport  and  comfort  under  the  in- 
firmities and  miferies  of  this  mortal  life. 

The  fecond  for  the  encouragement  of  obedience 
and  a  good  life. 

I.  For  our  comfort  and  fupport  under  the  infirmi- 
ties and  miferies  of  this  mortal  ftate.  The  confidera- 
tion  of  the  glorious  change  of  our  bodies  at  the  re- 
furredion  of  the  jufl:,  cannot  but  be  a  great  comfort 
to  us,  under  all  bodily  pain  and  fufferings. 

One  of  the  greateft  burdens  of  humane  nature,  Is 
the  frailty  and  infirmity  of  our  bodies,  the  neceflities 
they  are  frequently  prefs'd  withal,  the  manifold  dif- 
eafes  they  are  liable  to,  and  the  dangers  and  terrors  of 
death,  to  which  they  are  continually  fubjed:  and  en- 
flav'd.  But  the  time  is  coming,  if  we  be  careful  to 
prepare  ourfclves  for  it,  when  we  fhall  be  clothed 
with  other  kind  of  bodies,  free  from  all  thefe  miferies 
and  inconveniencies  which  flefh  and  blood  is  fubjedl 
to.  For  "  thefe  vile  bodies  fhall  be  changed,  and 
«'  fafhioned  like  to  the  glorious  body  of  the  Son  of 
♦*  God."    When  our  bodies  fhall  be  raifed  to  a 

new 


ajferted  and  proved,  447 1 

new  life,  they  fliall  become  incorruptible  ;  "  for  this  S  E  R  M. 
*'  corruptible  mufl  put  on  incorruption,  and  this  ^^^^^'^• 
''  mortal  mu(t  put  on  immortality  ;  and  then  fhall 
''  come  to  pafs  xh^  laying  that  is  written,  death  is 
*'  fwallowcd  up  in  vidlory."  When  this  laft  enemy 
is  conquered,  there  fhall  be  no  "  flelhly  lufts,'*  nor 
brutilh  paffions,  "  to  hght  againft  the  foul-,  no  law 
"  in  our  members,  to  war  againft  the  law  of  our 
*'  minds;"  no  difeafe  to  torment  us,  no  danger  of 
death  to  amaze  and  terrify  us.  Then  all  the  palTions 
and  appetites  of  our  outward  man  fhall  be  fubjed  to 
the  reafon  of  our  minds,  and  our  bodies  fliall  par- 
take of  the  immortality  of  our  Ibuls.  \x.  is  but  a, 
very  little  while,  that  our  fpirits  Hiall  be  crufli'd,  and 
clogg'd  with  thefe  heavy  and  fluggifh  bodies  :  at  the 
refurredion  they  fhall  be  refined  from  all  dregs  of 
corruption,  and  become  fpiritual,  and  incorruptible, 
and  glorious,  and  every  way  fuited  to  the  activity  and 
perfedion  of  a  glorified  foul,  and  "  the  fpirits  of  juil 
_*'  men  made  perfeft." 

II.  For  the  encouragement  of  obedience  and  a 
good  life.  Let  the  belief  of  this  great  article  of  our 
faith  have  the  fame  influence  upon  us,  which 
St.  Paul  tells  us  it  had  upon  him,  Acffs  xxiv.  15,  \6, 
«  I  have  hope  towards  God,  that  there  fhall  be 
*'  a  refurredion  of  the  dead,  both  of  the  juft  and 
«  unjuft  j  and  herein  do  1  exercile  myfelf,  always  to 
"  have  a  confcience  void  of  ofi'ence,  towards  God 
"  and  towards  men."  The  firm  belief  of  a  refurrec- 
tion  to  another  life  Iliould  make  every  one  of  us  very 
careful  how  we  demean  ourfcive.s  in  tliis  life,  and  alraid 
to  do  any  thing,  or  to  negied  any  thing,  that  may 
defeat  our  hopes  of  a  blefTed  immortality,  and  expofc 

Vol.  X.  22  K  us 

5- 


447^  ^he  pojjibility  of  the  refurreBiony  &c. 

S  E  R  M.  us  to  the  extreme  and  endlefs  mifery  of  body  and 
CXCn^  ^^^^  .^  another  life. 

Particularly,  it  fliould  be  an  argument  to  us,  "  to 
*'  o-lorify  Go  D  in  our  bodies,  and  in  our  fpirits  ;  '* 
and  to  ufe  the  members  of  the  one,  and  the  facul- 
ties of  the  other,  as  ''  inftruments  of  righteoufnefs, 
*'  unto  holinefs."  We  (hould  reverence  our  felves, 
and  take  heed,  not  only  how  we  defile  our  fouls  by 
finful  palfions,  but  how  we  diflionour  our  bodies  by 
lenfual  and  brudlh  lufts'-,  finceGoD  hath  defigned 
fo  great  an  honour  and  happinefs  for  both  at  the 
refurredion. 

So  often  as  we  think  of  a  blefifed  refurrc6i:ion  to 
eternal  life,  and  the  happy  confequences  of  it ;  the 
thoughts  of  fo  glorious  a  reward  Ihould  make  us  di- 
ligent and  unwearied  in  the  ferviccof  fo  good  a 
mafler,  and  fo  great  a  prince,  who  can  and  will  pre- 
fer us  to  infinitely  greater  honours,  than  any  that  are 
to  be  had  in  this  world.  This  inference  the  apoftle 
makes  from  the  doctrine  of  the  refurredion,  i  Cor. 
XV.  58.  '^  Therefore,  my  beloved  brethren,  be  yc 
'«  fledfaft  and  unmoveable,  always  abounding  in  the 
*'  work  of  the  Lord*,  forafmuch  as  ye  know 
<^  that  your  labour  fhall  not  be  in  vain  in  the  Lord.'* 

Nay  we  may  begin  this  blefifed  (late  while  we  are 
upon  earth,  by  "  fettling  our  hearts  and  afFedions 
"  upon  the  things  that  are  above,  and  having  our 
*'  convcrfations  in  heaven,  from  whence  ahb  we  look 

*'    for  a  S  AVIOU  R,the  Lo  R  D  J  E  SU  S  Ch  R  I  ST  ; 

"  who  lliall  change  our  vile  bodies,  that  they  may 
*'  be  fafhioned  like  unto  his  glorious  body,  accord- 
*'  ing  to  the  working  whereby  he  is  able  to  fubdue 


<^'  all  things  to  himfelf/ 


Now 


The  refurrediion  of  our  Saviour  confiderd^  &c.  4473 
'«  Now  the  God  of  peace,  who  brought  again 
*'  from  the  dead  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
*'  the  great  (hepherd  of  the  fheep,  through  the  blood 
"  of  the  everlafling  covenant,  make  us  perfedl  in 
"  every  good  work  to  do  his  v/ill,  working  in  us 
*'  always  that  which  is  pleafing  in  his  fight,  through 
"  JesusChrist-,  to  whom  be  glory  for  ever." 
Amen. 


SERMON    CXCV. 

The  refurrc^Slioii  of  our  Saviour  con- 
fider'd,  as  an  argument  for  fceking 
things  above. 


COL.  iii.  I,  2. 
If  ye  then  he  rifen  with  Christ,  feek  thofe  things 
which  are  above  ^  where  Christ  fttteth  at  the 
right  hand  of  God,   Set  your  affeEiions  on  things 
above  \  not  on  things  on  the  earth, 

THE  apoftle  in  this  epiftle  (as  his  manner  SERM.- 
is  in  all  the  reft)  having  laid  the  dodlrine  ^^^^!S 
of  the  gofpel  for  a  foundation,  and  endea- 
voured to  redify  fome  errors,  both  in  do6t:rine  and 
pra6i:ice,  which  the  chriftians  at  Colofs  were  feduced 
into,  by  the  guile  and  arts  of  falfe  teachers  and  apo- 
ftles,  as  particularly  "  the  worfhip  of  angels,**  and 
out  of  a  pretence  of  ''  humility,"  addrefling  them- 
felvcs  to  God  by  their  mediation,  which  is  the  par- 
22,  K  a  ticular 


4474  ^^^  refurreBion  of  cur  Saviour  conftder'd^ 
^  E  R  \/r.  ticalar  fcope  and  defign  of  this  epiftle  :  the  apodle, 
^^^^^^^  I  fay,  having  in  the  former  part  of  it,  endeavoured 
to  fet  them  right  in  this  matter,  and  to  efta- 
blifli  their  minds,  in  the  faith  and  doclrine  of 
C  H  R  1  s  T ;  in  the  latter  part  of  it,  exhorts  them 
to  a  converfation  anfwerable  to  the  dodlrine  of 
Christ,  to  a  holy  and  heavenly  life  ;  at  the  be- 
ginning of  this  third  chapter  :  ''  if  ye  then  be  rifen 
''  with  Christ,  feek  i{\t  things  which  are  above, 
*^  wiiere  Christ    fitteth   at    the  right    hand    of 

''  God.     Set  your  affections  on  things  above i  not 
''  on  things  on  the  earth." 

Tnis   inicrence  is  drawn  from    what  he  had  faid 
at  a    good   diftancc  before,    namely,    at  the    iitli 
verfe  of  tne  former  chapter,  ''  being  buried  with 
"  him   m  bapcifm,  wherein  alfo  ye  -are  rifen   with 
"  him,  througn  the  faith  of  the  operation  of  God, 
*'  who  hath  raifed  him  from  the  ciead."     "  Being 
*'  buried  with  him  in  baprifm."     For  the  full  un- 
derftanding   of  this  expreffion,    we   mufl  have  re- 
courfe  to  that  parallel  text,  Rom.  vi.  3,  4,  5.  which 
will    explain    to   us   the    meaning   of  this   phrafe. 
"  Know  ye  not,  that  fo  many  of  us  as  were  bap- 
''  tized  into  Jesus  Christ,  were  baptized  into 
*'  his  death  ?  therefore  we  are  buried  with  him  by 
*'  baptifm   into  death,  that  like  as  Christ  was 
<«  raifed    up  from   the   dead  by   the   glory  of  the 
"  Fat  HE  R,  even  fo  v/e  alfo  fhould  walk  in   new- 
*'  iiefs  of  life.     For  if  we  have  been  planted  toge- 
'^  ther  in  the  likenefs  of  his   death,  wc  fliall  be  alfo 
"  in  tiie  likenefs  of  his  refurredion."     Where  we 
feci  that  ''  to  be  baptized  into  the  death  and  refur- 
*'  redion  of  C  h  r  i  s  t,"  is  to  be  baptized  into  the 
firoilitude  and  likenefs  of  them  \    and    the  rcf^^m- 

blancG 


as  an  argument  for  fe  eking  things  above,  4475 
blance  is  this ;  that  as  Christ  being;  dead  was  S  E  R  M, 
buried  in  the  grave,  and  after  ibme  flay  in  ir,  that 
is,  for  three  days,  he  was  raifed  again  out  of  it,  by 
the  glorious  power  of  God,  to  a  new  and  heavenly 
life,  being  not  long  after  taken  up  into  heaven  to  live 
at  the  right  hand  of  G  o  d  ;  fo  chriftians,  when  they 
were  baptized,  were  immers'd  into  the  water  three 
times,  their  bodies  being  covered  all  over  with  it ; 
which  is  therefore caird 5  our  being  "buried  with  him 
"  by  baptifm  into  death  ; "  and  after  fome  fhort 
flay  under  water,  were  "  raifed  "  or  taken  up  again 
out  of  it,  as  if  they  had  been  "  recovered  to  a  new 
"  hfe;"  by  all  which  was  fpiritually  fignified,  our 
dying  to  fin,  and  being  raifed  to  a  divine  and  hea- 
venly life,  ^'  through  the  faith  of  the  operation  of 
''  God-,"  that  is,  by  that  divine  and  fupernatural 
power,  which  raifed  up  Christ  from  the  dead. 
So  that  chndians  from  thenceforth  were  ''  to  reckon 
*'  themfelvcs  dead  unto  fin,  but  alive  unto  God, 
*^  through  Jesus  Christ,"  as  the  apoftle 
fpeaks,  Rom.  vi.   ii. 

Now  upon  this  ground,  that  we  are  "  buried 
'^  with  Christ  in  baptifm,  and  rifen  with  him 
"  to  a  new  and  heavenly  life,"  the  apoflle  founds 
the  exhortation  in  the  text,  "  if  ye  then  be  rifen 
"  with  Christ,  feek  the  things  which  are  above, 
"  where  Christ  fitteth  at  the  right  hand  of 
"God.  Set  your  affedlions  on  things  above  j  not 
"  on  things  on  the  earth."  So  that  the  words  are 
an  earneft  exhortation  to  a  divine  life,  and  a  fpiri- 
tual  and  heavenly  converfation.  In  which  there  are 
tv70  things  to  be  confidered  : 

Firfl,  the  duty  we  are  exhorted  to,  which  is  hea» 
venly-mindedncfs.     "   Seek   the   things  which    are 


"  abovc/^ 


447^         ^^^  rcT^rr^^/^;^  of  our  Saviour  confider'd^ 
SERM.  «'  above,"  and  '*  fet  your  afFedions  on  things  above." 

Secondly,  the  arguments  by  which  the  apoftle 
urgeth  and  prdlcdi  this  exhortation.  "  \{  ye  be 
"  rilen  with  Ch  rist,  feek  the  things  which  are 
''  above  i*'  and  '-'•  feek  the  things  which  are  above, 
*^  where  Christ  fitteth  at  the  right  hand  of 
"  God."     So  that  my  work  will  be, 

Firft,  to  fhew  the  nature  of  the  duty,  to  which 
we  are  exhorted.     And, 

Secondly,  the  force  of  the  arguments,  which  are 
ufed  to  perfuade  us  to  it. 

Firft,  for  the  nature  of  the  duty  to  which  we  are 
exhorted  ;  and  it  is  exprelVd  both  affirmadvely  and 
negatively. 

1.  Affirmatively;  and  the  apofde  ufeth  two  fe- 
veral  exprelfions.  "  Seek  the  things  which  arc 
''  above  j"  and,"  fet  your  aiTedions  on  things  above.'' 

2.  Negatively  \  "  and  not  on  things  on  the  earth." 
And  this  feems  to  be  added,  not  only  to  explain 
and  afcertain  the  pbjed,  and  to  add  vehemence  and 
earpeftnefs  to  the  exhortation  \  but  likewife  to  {tx. 
off  the  excellency  of  the  object,  by  way  of  oppofi- 
tion  and  comparifon.  "  On  the  things  that  arc 
"  above ;  and  not  upon  thofe  *'  pitiful  and  inferior 
**  things,  which  are  upon  the  earth.'*  And  like- 
wife  to  fhew  the  inconfillency  of  thefe,  and  the  im- 
poffibility  of  feeking  and  fctting  our  affedions  upon 
both  in  an  intenfe  degree.  For  that  would  be  to 
have  two  chief  ends,  "  to  love  God  and  mam- 
"  mon  -,  to  ferve  two  mafters,"  which  our  S  av  i  - 
OUR  hath  told  us  is  impoiTible.  But  this  I  fhall 
ufe  afterwards,  as  an  argument  to  enforce  the  ex- 
hortation. 


To 


as  an  argument  for  feeling  things  above.         4477 
To  explain  the  nature  of  this  duty,  I  fhall  confi-  S  E  R'M, 
der  the  ad,  and  the  objca.  ^^^^ 

I.  For  the  ad,  here  arc  two  words  ufed  to  exprcfs  it, 
Zr^reirz  and  (p^gveiVs,  "  feek  and  fet  your  afFedions  •,  " 
and  in  theie  two  words,  thefe  four  things  feem  to 
be  comprehended  ;  an  ad  of  our  underflandino-s 
about  thefe  things ;  the  ardency  of  our  affedions ; 
and  the  adivity  of  our  endeavours  in  i\\Q  purfuit  of 
them ;  and  a  clear  preference  of  the  things  which 
are  above,  to  the  things  of  the  e^rth,  when  they 
come  in  competition.  For  thefe  two  words  do 
comprehend,  not  only  the  power  of  our  underfland- 
ings,  and  v/ills,  and  affedions,  and  an  earnell:  atten- 
tion and  application  of  mind  to  thefe  thino-s ;  but 
the  adivity  of  our  endeavours  about  them, 

1.  Here  is  implied  an  ad  of  our  under  (land  in  c^s, 
that  we  fhould  mind  and  think  upon  thefe  thincrs 
that  we  Ihould  often  confider  them,  and  meditate 
upon  them  -,  that  heaven  fhould  be  much  in  our 
thoughts,  and  the  glory  and  excellency  of  that 
Itate,  which  we  hope  to  attain  to,  and  by  what  ways 
and  means  we  may  come  to  be  made  partakers  of 
that  bleffed  inheritance. 

2.  It  implies  hkewife  an  ad  of  our  affedions; 
that  we  heartily  love  and  defire  the  things  that  are 
above,  with  that  ardency  and  vehemency  of  affedion, 
which  is  proportionable  to  the  worth  and  excellency 
of  them.  And  both  thefe  are  included  in  the  w^ord 
(ppovetTf,  which  is  fometimes  tranflated  "  to  mind,'* 
fometimes  "  to  fet  our  affedions  upon  a  thing." 

3.  Adivity    and    induftry  in  the  profecution  of 
thefe  things,  if  by  any  means  we  may  attain  them. 
And  this  is  implied  in  the  word  ^yirars,  "  feek  the 
*'  things  which  are  above."     When  we  know  there 

are 


447^  ^^^  f^/i/rr^<^/^;?  of  our  Saviour  confider'd,  ' 
SERM.  are  fuch  treafures  in  heaven,  fo  great  a  reward  laid 
,,^21^  up  for  good  men,  "  joys  lb  unfpeakable  and  full  of 
"  alory,"  and  when  our  under  (landings  have  dwelt 
fo  long  upon  thefe  things,  as  to  v;ork  upon  our  af- 
fections, thcfe,  like  To  many  fprings  of  motion,  will 
fet  our  endeavours  on  work,  for  the  obtaining  of 
what  we  lb  much  love  and  defire,  and  will  make 
us  inquifitive,  with  the  young  man  in  the  gofpel, 
«'  what  good  thing  we  Ihalt  do,  that  we  may  inhe- 
<«  rit  eternal  life  j  '*  by  what  means  we  may  bed  fe- 
cure  our  dtle  to  heaven  and  happinefs ;  and  very 
induftrious  to  acquire  thofe  qualities  and  difpoliti- 
ons,  which  will  fit  us  for  heaven,  and  the  bleffed 
fio-ht  and  enjoyment  of  God-,  nay,  by  which  we 
may  begin  this  happy  ftate  here,  by  our  converllxtion 
in  heaven,  whilft  we  are  fojourning  here  below,  as 
«  pilgrims  and  ftrangers  in  the  earth." 

4.  It  implies  a  clear  preference  of  the  things  above, 
to  the  things  of  the  earth,  when  they  come  in  com- 
petition. And  in  this  fenfe  the  word  (ppcvtty  is  ob- 
ferved  to  be  ufed  in  good  authors,  for  taking  part 
with  and  adhering  to  one  fide,  when  two  parties 
or  interefts  come  in  competition.  And  indeed  this 
phrafe  and  form  of  fpeech,  when  the  thing  is  ex- 
prefs'd  affirmatively  and  negatively,  is  very  often 
ufed  by  way  of  comparifon,  when  two  things  come 
in  compedtion.  "  Lay  not  up  for  your  felves 
♦t  treafures  upon  earth  :  but  lay  up  for  your  felves 
«'  treafures  in  heaven.  Labour  not  for  the  meat  that 
*'  perifheth  -,  but  for  that  which  endureth  to  eter- 
cc  nal  life."  So  here ;  "  fet  your  affedions  on 
*'  things  above,  not  on  things  on  the  earth." 
When  neaven  and  earth  come  in  competidon,  the 
happinefs  of  the  next  life,  and  the  enjoyments  of 

this. 


as  an  argument  for  feektng  things  above.         4479 

this,  the  intereft  of  your  fouls,  and  of  your  bodies,  ^p^p^* 
*'  the  things  which  are  not  feen,  and  are  eternal,** 
and  "  the  things  which  are  feen,  and  are  but  tern- 
*'  poraV*  a  holy,  and  heavenly,  and  virtuous  Hfe, 
and  a  fenfual  and  finful  courfe,  "  choofe  the  better 
*'  part,"  (tick  to  that  which  is  the  true  and  lading 
intereft  ;  prefer  heaven  before  earth,  and  the  care  of 
your  fouls,  to  that  of  your  bodies,  things  eternal,  to 
things  temporal,  and  a  holy  and  virtuous  life  which 
leads  to  heaven,  to  thofe  finful  and  vicious  pra6bices, 
which  will  fink  men  into  perdition.  For  that  this 
alio  the  apoftle  means  by  "  things  on  the  earth,'* 
finful  lufts  and  pradices,  feems  very  probable,  from 
what  follovv/s  at  ver.  5.  "  Mortify  therefore  your 
''  members  which  are  upon  the  earth.'* 

11.  Let  usconfider  the  objed  of  this  ad,  what  it 
is  that  we  are  to  feek  and  {tx.  our  affedlions  upon ;  and 
that  is  "  the  things  which  are  above." 

1.  The  glorious  God  and  Fat  her  of  all,  and 
his  blelfed  and  eternal  Son  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  and  the  Holy  Spirit  of  Go  d  ; 
thefe  are  the  great  objedls  of  our  contemplation  and 
adoration.  And  then  the  holy  angels,  and  "  the 
*'  fpirits  of  juft  men  made  perfedl,"  who  are  examples 
to  us,  of  doing  the  will  of  God  here  on  earth,  as  ic 
is  done  by  them  in  heaven. 

2.  The  blelfed  ftate  and  condition  which  we  afpire 
after  in  the  next  life,  with  all  the  joys  and  glories  of 
it,  "  fuch  as  eye  hath  not  feen,  nor  ear  heard,  nei- 
'^  ther  haveentred  into  the  heart  of  man." 

3.  The  difpofitions  to  be  acquired,  and  the  adlions 
and  duties  to  be  performed  by  us,  as  neceffary  quali- 
fications and  means  for  the  obtaining  of  this  happi- 
nefs,  and  bringing  us  to  the  poffeiTion  of  it ;  all  thefe 

Vol.  X.  22  L  are 

5' 


4480       ne  refurreSilon  of  our  Sa^oiotir  conftderd^ 

S  ERM.  arc  comprehended  in  the  latitude  of  the  objedl,  "  the 
*'  things  which  are  above." 

And  "  tofeek,"  and  "  mind,"  and  '«  fet  our 
"  afFeiflions*'  upon  thefe,  is  to  do  thofe  things, 
which  the  confideration  of  each  of  thefe  refpedlively 
calls  for;  fo  to  meditate  on  God,  and  mind  him, 
as  to  fear,  and  love,  and  ferve  him ;  to  feek  his 
glory  as  our  laft  end,  and  the  enjoyment  of  him 
as  our  chief  good;  to  feek  his  favour  above  all 
things,  and  to  fue  to  him,  as  the  fountain  of  a]] 
grace,  and  "  the  giver  of  every  good  and  perfed: 
*'  gift,"  and  of  all  bleflings  temporal,  fpiritual,  and 
eternal,  by  the  powerful  interceffion  of  his  Son, 
the  great  and  only  mediator  between  God  and  man, 
to  be  obtained  for  us,  and  to  be  wrought  in  us,  by 
the  powerful  virtue  and  operation  of  the  Holy 
Spirit.  So  to  mind  the  angels  and  blefled  faints 
above,  as  to  alpirc  after  their  fociety,  by  imitating 
their  virtues,  and  "  being  followers  of  thofe,  who 
*'  through  faith  and  patience  have  inherited  the  pro- 
*'  mifes."  So  to  meditate  on  our  future  bleflednefs, 
as  to  raife  our  hearts  and  afFe6tions  above  this  worldj, 
and  cfFedually  to  engage  us  to  fit  ourfelves  for  that 
blefled  flate  and  condition,  that  we  may  be  "  meet 
•'  to  be  made  partakers  of  that  glorious  inheritance." 
And  laftly,  fo  to  mind  all  the  duties  and  means  ne- 
ceflary  and  conducing  to  our  falvation,  as  effedually 
to  perform  them  ;  to  order  our  lives  and  all  the 
adions  of  them,  with  a  regard  to  eternity ;  in  a 
word,  to  omit  and  ncgled  nothing  that  may  further 
and  promote  the  great  defign  of  our  eternal  falvation, 
and  to  do  nothing  that  may  contradid  or  hinder  it. 
This  is  "  to  feek  and  fet  our  afFedions  upon  the 
"  things  that  are  above."    And  thus  I  have  done 

wich 


as  an  argument  for  feektng  things  above*        4481 
with  the  firft  thing  I  propounded,  the  nature  of  the  S  E  R  M. 
duty  which  we  are  exhorted  to.     I  proceed  to  the         CXCV. 

Second  thing  I  propounded,  which  was  to  con- 
fider  the  force  of  the  arguments,  which  arc  ufed  to 
perfuiide  us  to  it.  Here  are  three  arguments  in  the 
text  to  this  purpofe ;  two  of  them  arc  cxprefs,  and 
t\\z  third  of  them  implied. 

I.  "  If  ye  be  rifen  with  Christ,  feek  the  things 
*'  which  are  above.'* 

II.  "  Seek  the  things  which  are  above,  where 
"  Christ  fitteth  at  the  right  hand  of  God." 

III.  The  tranfcendent  and  incomparable  excellency 
of  the  things  above,  in  comparifon  of  earthly  things. 
This  is  intimated  in  the  oppofition,  "  fet  your  affcc- 
"  tions  on  the  things  which  are  above ;  and  not 
*'  on  things  on  the  earth."  I  fhall  briefly  fhew  the 
force  of  each  of  thefe  arguments. 

I.  ^'  If  ye  then  be  rifen  with  Ch  r  i  st,  feek  the 
*'  things  which  arc  above.'*  That  is,  if  yc  believe 
his  rcfurredion,  if  ye  will  be  conformed  to  him  ia 
it,  if  ye  be  made  partakers  of  the  power  and  vir- 
tue of  it. 

1.  If  yc  believe  the  refurredion  of  Ch  rist. 
The  refurredlion  of  our  Lo  r  d  J  e  s  u  s  C  h  R  i  s  t, 
was  the  great  feal  of  his  miniftry,  and  confirmation 
of  his  dodrine  ;  and  one  great  branch  of  his  do£trinc 
was  heavenly-mindenefs,  that  we  fhould  *'  lay  up  for 
"  ourfelves  treafures  in  heaven,"  becaufe  '^  where 
"  our  treafure  is,  there  will  our  hearts  be  alfo»'* 
that  we  fhould  "  firft  feek  the  kingdom  of  Go  Da 
"  and  the  righteoufncfs  thereof." 

2.  If  we  will  bear  a  conformity  and  refemblance 
to  him  in  his  refurredion.  He  is  our  great  pattern. 
and  example,  which  the  gofpei  propounds  to  us  5 

2a  L  2  and 


44^ 2t        ^he  reJurreBion  of  our  Saviour  confjerd^ 
SERM.  and  that  wc  may  have  the  nearer  conformity  to  him, 
the  apofth  doth  not  only  propofe  the  virtues  of  his 
life  to  our  imitation,  but  where  we  cannot  literally 
imitate  hin,  the  apoftle  urgeth  fpiritual  conformity  ; 
that  thole   things  which  he  did  and  fuffered  in  his 
body,  we  Ihould  do  and  fuffer  fpiritually  j  as  Ch  R  i  s  t 
*'  died  for  fin,"  fo  we  fhould  ''  die  to  fin  j"  as  he 
literally  *'  rofe  again  from  the  dead,"  fo  in  confor- 
mity to  him,  we  fhould   be  fpiritually    "  raifcd  to 
''  newnefs  of  life.'*    As  he  "  afcended  into  heaven," 
fo  we  fhould  '*  afcend  thither  alfo  in  our  hearts  and 
*^  afFedlions/*     Col.  ii.  12.  "  Buried   with   him  in 
*'  baptifm,  wherein   alfo  ye   are    rifen    with    him, 
*'  through  the  faith  of  the  operation  of  God,  who 
*'  hath  raifed  him  from  the  dead."  Rom.  vi.  4,  5. 
*^  Therefore  we  are  buried  with  him  by  baptifm  into 
•'  death,  that  like  as  C  n  r  i  s  t  was  raifed  from  the 
^^  dead  by  the  glory  of  the  Fat  h  e  r,  even  fo  we 
"  alfo  fhould  walk  in  newnefs  of  life.     For  if  we 
**  have  been  planted  together  in  the  likenefs  of  his 
*'  death,  we  fhallbe  alfo  in  the  likenefs  of  his  refur- 
*'  redion."   To  be  raifed  from  the  dead,  is  in  order 
to  a  new  life.     So  the  apoftle  tells  us,  ver.    9,   10, 
II."  Knowing  that  Christ  being  raifed    from 
*'  the  dead,  dieth  no  more,  death  hath  no  more  do- 
*'  minion  over  him.     For  in   that  he  died,  he  died 
*'  unto  fin  once:  but  in  that  he  liveth,  he  liveth  unto 
*'  God.     Likewife  reckon  ye  alfo  yourielves  to  be 
"  dead  indeed  unto  fin :  but  alive  unto  God,  through 
**  Jesus  Christ  our  Lor  d."     As  the  refur- 
redlion  of  Christ   was  in  order  to  a  better  and 
happier   life,  to   his  afcenfion  into  heaven,  and   his 
jiving  with  God:  fo  in  conformity  to  Christ, 
our  fpiritual  refurreclion  fhould  be  in  order  to  a  hea. 

venly 


as  an  argument  for  feeking  things  above.         44^3 

v€nlv  and  divine  life.     And  what  is  the  meaning  of  S  E  RM, 

•    •  cxcv 

all  this  ?  but  that  men  are  apt  to  imitate  thofe  whom 

they  love,  and  do  affedb  to  refemble  them  as  much 
as  they  can.  And  therefore  to  endear  our  duty  to 
us,  the  mortification  of  our  lulls,  and  a  holy  life, 
the  apoftle  tells  us,  that  hereby  we  bear  a  confor- 
mity to  Christ,  the  great  objedt  of  our  love 
and  imitation. 

3.  If  ye  be  made  partakers  of  the  power  and  vir- 
tue of  his  refurredlion.  The  refurrcdion  of  C  h  r  i  s  t 
is  not  only  a  pattern,  but  hath  a  power  and  efficacy 
in  it,  to  raifc  us  to  a  fpiritual  and  heavenly  life. 
When  Christ  rofe,  he  did  not  rife  alone,  but 
many  of  the  bodies  of  the  faints  who  were  dead  role 
with  him,  to  fignify  to  us  the  power  of  his  refurrec- 
tion.  It  communicated  a  virtue  to  thofe  who  had 
an  interefl  in  the  merits  of  his  death  and  fufferings, 
whereby  they  are  enabled  to  live  a  new  and  heaven- 
ly life.  John  xi.  25.  "  I  am  the  refurredion  and 
*^  the  life;  he  that  believeth  in  me,  though  he  were 
"  dead,  yet  fhall  he  live."  Eph.  i.  19.  "  And 
"  what  is  the  exceeding  greatnefs  of  his  power  to 
"  us- ward,  who  believe,  according  to  the  working 
*'  of  his  mighty  power,  which  he  wrought  in 
''  Christ,  when  he  raifed  him  from  the  dead.** 
Phil.  iii.  10,  II.  "  That  I  may  know  him,  and  the 
"  power  of  his  refurredion,  and  the  fellowfhip  of 
"  his  fufferings,  being  made  conformable  unto  his 
*'  death  ;  if  by  any  means  I  may  attain  the  refur- 
*'  redion  from  the  dead."  Col.  ii.  13.  "  And  you 
"  being  dead  in  your  fins,  and  the  uncircumcifion 
^'  of  your  flefh,  hath  he  quickcn'd  together  with 
*'  him."  Now  this  power  is  derived  to  us  by  "  be- 
^  lieving  on  him,  who  raifed  up  J  e  s  u  s  from  the 

5 


dead," 


cxcv. 


44S4       7he  refurreElion  of  onr  Saviour  confiderd^ 

S^E^RM-  "  ^^^^'"  ^^^^  "  ^e  is  alfo  able  to  raiTe  ns,  who 
''  are  dead  in  trefpalTes  and  fins,  to  a  divine  and 
"  heavenly  life."     The 

lid  argument  is  contained  in  thefe  words,  *'  feck 
*'  the  things  which  are  above,  where  Christ 
*'  fitteth  at  the  right  hand  of  God."  Which  words 
do  declare  to  us  the  exaltation  of  C  k  r  i  s  t's  humane 
nature,  and  his  being  advanced  to  be  the  king  and 
governor  of  his  church,  having  all  power  and  judg- 
ment committed  to  him.  Luke  xxiv.  26.  Chris  t's 
afcenfion,  and  his  fitting  at  the  right  hand  of  God, 
is  called,  "  his  entring  into  his  glory.  Ought  he 
*'  not  to  have  fufi^cr'd  thefe  things,  and  then  to  en- 
*'  ter  into  his  glory?"  that  is,  to  be  inverted  with 
all  power  and  authority  for  the  good  of  the  church. 
But  mod  particularly  the  apoftle  defcribes  this, 
Eph.  i.  20,  21,  22.  "  And  fet  him  ^t  his  own  right 
"  hand  in  heavenly  places,  far  above  all  principali- 
*'  ties,  and  powers,  and  might,  and  dominion,  and 
*'  every  name  that  is  named,  not  only  in  this  world, 
"  but  that  which  is  to  come ;  and  hath  put  all  things 
*'  under  his  ^tiit.^  and  given  him  to  be  head  over  all 
*'  things  to  the  church." 

And  now  the  force  of  this  argument  is  from  the 
relation  that  is  between  the  head  and  the  members, 
between  C  h  r  i  s  t  and  chrifiians.  The  members 
have  an  affection  for  the  head,  which  makes  them 
afpire  heavenwards ;  and  the  head  hath  an  influence 
upon  the  members.  "  If  I  be  hfted  up  from  the 
"  earth,"  fays  our  Lord,  "  I  will  draw  all  men 
*'  unto  me."  This  is  fpoken  of  his  crucifixion,  "fig- 
*'  nifying  what  death  he  fhould  die,"  as  the  text  tells 
us,  John  xii.  32,  33.  But  it  is  proportionably  true 
of  his  afcenfion,  and  fitting  at  the  right  hand  of 

GoDi 


as  an  argument  for  feeling  things  above.        44.85' 
God  j  for  there  is  a  power  and  virtue  in  the  refur-  SERM. 
redion  of  C  h  r  i  s  t,  and  in  his  afcenfion  into  h^a-,  ^^^^^•, 
ven,  as  well  as  in  his  death,  to  draw  all  men  to  him. 
The  gift  of  G  o  d's  Ho  LY  S  p  I  R I  T  is  the  fruit  of 
his  afcenfion  and  exaltation  "  at  the  right  hand  of 
"  his  majcfty  on  high : "  and  'tis  by  the  powerful 
operation  of  the  Spirit  of  God  upon  our  hearts, 
that  we  are  raifed  to  newnefs  of  life,  and  our  affec- 
tions fix'd  upon  heavenly  things.     We  are  naturally 
bowed  down  to  the  earth,  and  inclined  to  the  things 
of  this  world,    airv^  in  terris  anima,   G*  ccsleftium 
inanes:  but  our  glorified  Saviour  fitting  at  the 
right  hand  of  God,  by  the  power  of  his  S  p  i  R i  t, 
draws  our  affedions  to  him.     The 

Hid  and  iafl  argument,   which  is  but  implied  ia 
the  text,  is  the  tranfcendent  and  incomparable  excel- 
lency  of  heavenly  things,  above  things  on  the  earth, 
which  the  apoftle  intimates  by  the  oppofition,   ««  kt 
*'  your  affedions  on  things  above;  not  on  things  on 
*'  the  earth."  Earthly  things  are  perifhing  and  tran- 
fitory,  grofs  and  unfatisfadory,  and  cannot  be  the 
felicity  of  an  immortal  foul,  being  neither  fuited  to 
the  fpiritual  nature,  nor  to  the  immortal  duration  of 
our  fouls ;  they  can  neither  fatisfy  us  while  we  live, 
nor  prcferve  us  from  death,  nor  comfort  us  in  it, 
nor  accompany  us  into  the  other  world,  nor  contri- 
bute any  thing  to  our  happinefs  there ;  and  if  they 
can  do  nothing   towards  our  happinefs,  why  fhould 
we  fet  our  hearts  upon  them .?    They  that  feek  for 
happinefs  in  earthly  things,  are  like  the  women  fit- 
ting over  our  S  a  v  i  o  u  r's  fepulchre,  with  their 
faces  bowed  down  to  the  earth  ;  they  "  feek  the  iiv* 
"  ing  among  the  dead;"  our   happineis  "  is  not 
"  here,  *tis  rifen,'*  'tis  above.  Let  our  hearts  afcend 

thither. 


cxcv. 


4486       ^he  refurredlion  of  our  Saviour  confide)' d^ 
S  E  R  M   thither,    where  our  happinefs   and   our   treafure  \s. 
Why  fhould  we  beftow  our  affe6lions  upon  thefe  low 
and  mean  things,  when  there  are  incomparably  better 
objedls  to  fix  them  upon? 

The  inference  from  all  this  fhall  be  to  engage 
and  perfuade  us  by  all  thefe  arguments  and  confidera- 
tions,  "  to  feck  and  mind  the  things  which  are 
*'  above,  where  Christ  fitteth  at  the  right  hand 
"  of  G  o  D  -,  and  to  have  our  converfatlon  there, 
*'  where  our  Saviou  r  is,  and  from  whence  alfo 
"  we  look  for  him  again,  to  change  thefe  vile  bo- 
*'  dies,  that  they  may  be  made  like  unto  his  glorious 
"  body,  according  to  the  working  of  that  mighty 
*'  power,  whereby  he  is  able  to  fubduc  all  things  to 
*'  himfelf."  Let  all  our  aftions  have  relation  to  ano- 
ther world,  and  our  converfation  declare,  that  v*^e 
are  "  mindful  of  another  country,  that  is  a  heaven- 
*'  ly."  Is  C  H  R  I  s  T  our  head  rifen  and  afcendcd  in- 
to heaven  ?  let  us  in  our  hearts  and  affections  follow 
him  thither,  and  patiently  wait  till  he  receive  our 
fouls,  and  raife  our  bodies,  and  take  us  wholly 
to  himfelf,  that  we  may  be  "  for  ever  with  the 
*'  Lord." 

The  refurreftion  of  C  h  r  i  s  T  is  a  demonflration 
of  a  future  (late  after  this  life,  and  a  pledge  of  a 
bleifed  immortality  in  another  world.  For  our 
Lord,  by  his  refurre6cIon  from  the  dead,  hath 
conquered  death,  and  "  abolifli'd  it,  and  brought 
"  life  and  immortality  to  light."  He  is  "  the  firfl- 
"  fruits  of  them  that  ficpt,"  and  his  refurredion  is 
an  earned  and  aflurance  of  ours  •,  and  from  thence 
the  apofile  makes  this  inference,  "  therefore,  my  be- 
**  loved  brethren,  be  ye  ftedfail  and  unmoveable,  al- 
•'  ways  abounding  in  ths  work  of  the  Lord;  for- 

*'  afmuch 


as  an  argument  for  feeking  things  above.         4487 
**  afimich  as  ye  know,  that  your  labour  fhall  not  be  S  E  R  M. 

"  in  vain  in  the  Lord."     The  belief  of  a  future.  ^ L 

Hate  after  this  life,  fhould  put  us  upon  the  moft  ear- 
ned and  vigorous  endeavours  to  fecure  this  happy 
condition  to  ourfelves  ;  "  if  by  any  means,"  as  the 
apoftle  exprefleth  it,  "  we  may  attain  the  refurre6tion 
"  of  the  dead."  It  Ihould  raife  us  above  the  world 
and  the  lulls  of  it,  above  all  the  terrors  and  tempta- 
tions of  it. 

As  on  the  one  hand,  the  feHous  thoughts  of  our 
mortality  lliould  check  our  eager  purfuit  of  this 
world  j  fo  on  the  other  hand,  the  belief  of  a  Xi^t  to 
Gome  fhould  quicken  our  endeavours  for  the  obtain- 
ing of  it :  feeing  we  hope  for  fo  happy  a  (late,  we 
fhould  prepare  ourfelves  for  it  by  purity,  and  holinefs 
of  heart  and  life,  by  perfeverance,  and  a  "  patient 
"  continuance  in  well-doing.  What  manner  of  per- 
*'  fons  ought  v/e  to  be,  in  all  holy  converfation  and 
*'  godlinefs,"  who  have  fuch  hopes  and  expedations  ? 
*'  Every  man  that  hath  this  hope  in  him,  purifieth 
*'  himfelf  even  as  he  is  pure."  Now  that  ''  Yiio,  and 
"  immortality  are  brought  to  light  by  the  gofpel,'* 
what  greater,  what  other  defign  can  any  man  pro- 
pofe  to  himfelf,  than  to  be  happy  for  ever  ?  For  fuch 
a  prize,  who  would  not  flrive,  and  run,  and  take 
any  pains.?  Who  would  not  deny  himfelf,  "  the 
"  pleafures  of  fin,  which  are  but  for  a  fealbn,"  refift 
temptations,  and  confiicl:  with  difficulties,  and  "glory 
"  in  tribulations"  and  fuflferings,  and  be  condahtand 
''  faithful  to  the  death,  in  hope  of  that  eternal  life, 
"  which  God  that  cannot  lye  hath  promised  .?" 

In  our  puriuit  of  the  things  of  this  world,  weufu- 
ally  prevent  enjoyment,  by  expedation ;  we  antici- 
pate ouf  own  happinefs,  and  eat  out  the  heart  and 

VoL.X,  ^    22  M  fweeciiels 

5'  '  , 


44^3  7he  refurre5tion  of  our  Saviour  confider'd^ 
SERM.  fweetnefs  of  worldly  pleafures,  by  delightful  .fore- 
thoughts of  them  -,  io  that  when  v/c  come  to  pofTefs 
them,  they  do  not  anfwer  the  expedlation,  nor  fatisfy 
the  defires  which  were  raifed  about  them,  and  they 
vanilh  into  nothing :  but  the  things  which  are  above, 
are  fo  great,  fo  folid,  fo  durable,  fo  glorious,  that 
we  cannot  raife  our  thoughts  to  an  equal  height  with 
them  \  we  cannot  enlarge  our  defires  beyond  a  pofTi- 
bility  of  fatisfaftion.  Our  hearts  arc  greater  than  the 
world;  but  God  is  greater  than  our  hearts  \  and  the 
happinefs  which  he  hath  laid  up  for  us,  is  like  him- 
felf,  incomprehenfibly  great  and  glorious.  Let  the 
thoughts  of  this  raife  us  above  this  world,  and  infpire 
us  with  greater  thoughts  and  defigns,  than  the  care 
and  concernments  of  this  prefent  life. 

We  all  profefs  moft  firmly  to  believe,  that  after  a 
few  days  we  fhall  leave  this  world,  and  all  the  en- 
joyments of  it,  and  go  to  the  place  from  whence  we 
fhall  not  return-,  that  we  fhall  enter  upon  an  un- 
changeable flate  of  happinefs  or  mifery,  according  as 
wc  have  demean'd  ourfelves  in  this  prefent  life;  that 
great  care  and  diligence  is  neceffary  "  to  work  out 
''  our  own  falvation-,"  that  there  muft  be  a  great 
preparation  of  ourfelves,  by  unfpotted  purity  of  heart 
and  life,  to  make  ourfelves  "  me^t  for  an  inheri- 
"  tance  with  them  that  are  fandbified  ;"  that  we  muft 
*'  labour,  and  ftrive,  and  run,  and  fight,  and  give 
*'  all  diligence  to  make  our  calling  and  eledion 
*'  fure;"  that  we  had  need  "  to  watch  and  pray  al- 
"  ways,  that  we  may  be  accounted  worthy  to  elcape 
"  the  judgment  of  the  great  day,  and  to  fland  be- 
«'  fore  the  Son  of  man."  Such  thoughts  as  thefe 
ihould  continually  poffefs  our  fouls,  and  heaven  fhould 
be  always  in  our  eye,  as  if,  with  St.  Stephen,   "  we 

*'  faw 


The  circumjlances  and  benefits^  &c.  44S9 

^^  faw  the  heavens  open'd,  and  Jesus  Handing  at 
*'  the  right  hand  of  Go  d,"  to  fee  how  we  behave 
ourfelves  here  below;  and  when  "  we  have  fought 
''  a  good  fight,  and  finifh*d  our  courfe,  and  kept 
"  the  faith,  to  receive  us  to  himfelf,  that  where  he 
"  is,  there  we  may  be  alfo." 

"  To  whom,  with  the  Father,  and  the 
«*  Holy  Ghost,  be  ail  honour  and  ^lory  now 
<'  and  for  evermore.     Amen." 


SERMON  CXCVI. 

The  circumftances  and  benefits  of  our 
S  A  V  I  o  u  r's  afcenfion. 


ACTS    i.  9,  10,  II. 

^nd  when  he  hadfpoken  thefe  things^  while  they  beheld^ 
he  was  taken  up^  and  a  cloud  received  him  out  of 
their  fight.  And  while  they  looked  ft  edfajily  toward 
heaven,  as  he  went  upy  behold^  two  men  flood  by  them 
in  white  apparel,  which  alfo  faid,  ye  men  of  Galilee, 
why  Jiand  ye  gazing  up  into  heaven  ?  this  fame 
Jesus  vMch  is  taken  up  from  you  into  heaven,  fhall 
fo.come  in  like  manner^  as  ye  have  feen  him  go  into 
heaven. 

THERE  are  two  occafions  of  this  day  *  ac- 
cidentally met  together,  which  bear  fome 
refemblance  to  one  another;  the  afcenfion ^^^'^^^^''^ 
of  our  bleffed  Saviour  into  heaven,  and  his  cxal-  being  af-* 
tation  in  his  kingdom,  being  "  crowned  with  glory  ^^"^lon- 
22  M  2  *'  and  ^^'' 


SERM. 
CXCVI. 


44-9^  ^^^  circumfiances  and  benefit i 

SERM.  ««  and  honour,  and  fet  on  the  right  hand  of  the  ma- 
CXCVf 

"  jefty  on  high :"  and  the  reftoration  of  our  fove- 

reign  to  his  jufl  rights,  and  royal   flate  and  dignity 

here  upon  earth,  by  a  miraculous  providence  of  G  o  d, 

and  as  it  were  by  a  kind  of  refurredion  from  the  dead. 

The  firfl:  of  thefe  being  of  a  more  fpiritual  and 
excellent  nature,  fhall  be  the  fubjedl  of  my  prefent 
difcourfe,  not  forgetting  the  other  in  the  application 
of  it. 

The  grea^  foundation  of  our  religion  is  the  hiftory 
of  our  Saviour,  of  his  incarnarion  and  miracles, 
and  life,  of  his  refurre^lion  from  the  dead,  and  af- 
cenfion  into  heaven,  and  intercefTion  for  us  at  the 
right  hand  of  God  ;  and  the  dodrines  and  articles 
concerning  thefe,  make  up  the  main  body  of  the 
chriftian  faith  •,  and  therefore,  nothing  can  be  more 
ufefal,  than  the  explication  of  thefe,  and  a  ferious 
confideration  and  meditation  upon  them. 

In  thefe  words  you  have  an  account  of  our  S  avi- 
ou  r's  afcenfion  into  heaven;  concerning  which  wc 
v/ill  confider  thefe  three  things. 

Firfl,  the  circumftances  foregoing  his  afccnfion. 

Secondly,  the  circiimftances  of  his  afcenfion. 

Thirdly,  the  confequent  benefits  and  advantages 
of  it. 

Firfl,  the  circunfl:ances  foregoing  his  afcenfion, 
*'  and  when  he  had  fpoken  thefe  things,  he  was  taken 
''  up.'*  This  refers  to  the  difcourfe  which  our  S  a- 
VI  OUR  had  with  his  apoflles,  immediately  before 
he  was  taken  up  from  them  into  heaven,  of  which 
we  have  an  account  m  the  verfes  before  the  text^ 
ver.  4.  Being  affembled  with  them,  and  jufl  ready 
to  take  his  leave  of  them,  he  commands  them  "  that 
'^*  they  fliould  not  depart  from  Jerufalem^  but  w^it 

''  for 


ofourSAviov  E'i  afcenjion.  44.5 1 

"  for  the  promife  of  the  Fat  her,  which  they  SERM. 
«'  had  heard  of  him  :  "  that  is,  they  fhould  not  dif-  CXCVL 
perfe  themfelves,  *till  the  Holy  Ghost,  which 
he  had  promifed  to  fend  from  his  Fat  h  e  R,  was 
come  upon  them,  in  thofe  miraculous  gifts  and 
powers,  whereby  they  Ihould  be  quahfied  for  the 
preaching  of  the  gofpel  to  the  world. 

And  when  our  Saviou  R  had  given  them  this 
charge,  they  put  a  queflion  to  him,  concerning  a  thing 
which,  notwithdanding  he  had  fo  plainly  declared  to 
them,  that  "  his  kingdom  was  not  of  this  world,'* 
did  Hill  run  in  their  minds  about  the  temporal  reign 
of  the  M  E  s  s  I  A  s,  and  a  glorious  kingdom  by  him 
to  be  fet  up  among  the  Jews ;  ver.  6.  ''  They  asked 
"  of  him,  faying.  Lord,  wilt  thou  at  this  time 
*'  reftore  the  kingdom  untolfrael?"  To  this  our 
Saviour  gives  them  no  dired  anfwer,  neither 
that  he  would,  nor  that  he  would  not  do  what  they 
expecfted ;  but  gently  reprehends  their  curiofity ; 
ver.  7.  "  It  is  not  for  you  to  know  the  times  and 
^'  feaibns,  which  the  Fat  h  e  r  hath  put  into  his 
"  own  power.''  And  inilead  of  fatisfying  them  in 
things  that  did  not  concern  them,  he  difcourfeth  to 
them  about  thofe  things  which  did  concern  them ; 
namely,  how  they  fhould  be  qualified  and  fent  forth 
to  preach  the  gofpel  to  the  world,  ver.  8.  "  But 
"  ye  Ihall  receive  power,  after  that  the  Holy 
"  G  H  osT  is  come  upon  you,  and  ye  fhall  be  wit- 
*'  nefTes  unto  me,  both  in  Jerufalem,  and  in  all 
*'  Judea,  and  in  Samaria,  and  unto  the  utmoft  parts 
"  of  the  earth.  And  when  he  had  fpoken  thcfe 
"  things,  he  was  taken  up."  Thefe  are  the  circum- 
fiances  preceeding  his  afcenfion. 

Secondly, 


449^  ^^  circumjiances  and  benefits 

SERM.      Secondly,  we  will  confider  the  circumftanccs  of  his 
'lafcenfion,  and  they  are  thefc  four. 

I.  That  our  S  A  V I  o  u  R  was  taken  up,  while  he 
was  bleffing  his  difciples,  Luke  xxiv.  51.  ''  And  it 
*'  came  to  pafs,  while  he  blefTed  them,  he  was  parted 
*'  from  them,  and  carried  up  into  heaven  " 

"  II.  That  he  was  taken  up  in  the  view  of  his 
difciples,  and  while  their  eyes  were  attentively  fix'd 
upon  him  :  "  while  they  beheld,  he  was  taken  up," 
ver.  9.  And  ver.  lo.  it  is  faid,  '*  they  looked 
"  ftcdfaftly  towards  heaven,  as  he  went  up.'' 

III.  That  he  was  taken  up  in  a  cloud  :  ''  and  a 
^'  cloud  received  him  out  of  their  fight." 

IV.  The  place  whither  he  went, , ver.  11.  ^'  The 
"  fame  Jesus  which  is  taken  up  from  you  into 
*'  heaven ,"  which  is  elfewhere  more  particularly  ex- 
prefs'd,  by  declaring  the  dignity  to  which  he  was 

^exalted  in  heaven,  "  being   fet  down  on   the    right 

^Hnd  of  God,  and  having  all  power  in  heaven 

^^^lifer^  earth  committed  to  him."     Thefe  are  the 

ief  circumftances  of  his  afcenfion,    which  I  Ihall 

fpeak  briefly  to. 

I.  That  our  blefTed  Saviour  was  taken  up, 
while  he  was  blefling  his  difciples.  This  St.  Luke 
does  not  mention  here  in  the  hiflory  of  the  A6ls, 
having  mentioned  it  before  in  his  gofpel,  to  which 
he  refers  us;  Luke  xxiv.  50,  51.  fpeaking  of  our 
Saviour  and  his  apoftles ;  "  and  he  led  them  out 
*'  as  far  as  Bethany,  and  lift  up  his  hands,  and  blef- 
*^  fed  them."  Lifting  up  of  the  hands  was  a  cere- 
mony ufed  among  the  Jews,  in  blefTmg  the  people. 
Levit.  ix.  22.  it  is  faid  there,  that  "  Aaron  lift  up 
''  his  hands  towards  the  people,  and  blefTed  them." 
So  our  S  Av  I  0  u  R   here  in  imitation  of  the  ufual 

ceremonies 


of  our  S  Av  I  o  u  R'i  afcenJion\  4493 

ceremonies  amonff  the  Jews :  "  and  it  came  to  S  E  r  m^ 
"  pafs,  while  he  blcfled  them,  he  was  parted  from 
*'  them,  and  carried  up  into  heaven."  I'he  firft 
tidings  of  our  S  av  i  o  u  r's  birth  were  attended 
with  praifes  to  Go  d,  and  blefTmgs  to  men ;  "  glory 
"  to  God  en  'high,  peace  on  earth,  and  good- 
*'  will  towards  men.  "  And  when  xhe  died,  he 
breathed  out  his  foul  in  blefllngs  to  his  enemies; 
in  the  height  of  his  flifrerings  he  was  full  of  hearty 
prayers,  c^nd  good  wilhes  for  thofe  who  were  the 
caufe  of  them:  "  Father,  forgive  them,  for 
•"  they  know  not  what  they  do."  And  after  his 
refurredlion  from  the  dead,  juft  as  he  left  the 
world,  he  was  taken  out  of  it,  and  tranflated  into 
heaven,  with  a  blefling  in  his  mouth  :  "  while 
*'  he  blelTed  them,  he  was  parted  from  them,  and 
"  carried  up  into  heaven."  And  indeed  his  whole 
life,  all  that  he  did,  and  all  that  he  fufFered, 
his  coming  into  the  world,  and  his  going  outft^j^ 
it,  was  all  a  blefling  to  mankind.  "  GoD.fer^ 
^'  him  to  blefs  us,  in  turning  us  away  every  one  j 
"  from  his  iniquity."  He  was  always  wifhing  well 
to  us,  and  doing  well  for  us  j  ' '  he  went  about  do- 
"  ing  good." 

A  blefled  pattern  to  us,  "  leaving  us  an  example, 
*'  that  we  iliould  follow  his  freps : "  a  lovely  and 
defirable  example  j  in  im^itation  whereof,  we  fhould 
endeavour  that  our  whole  life  may  be  a  blelTing  and 
benefit  to  mankind  j  and  that  when  we  leave  the 
world,  we  may  be  found  fo  doing  as  our  Lord  did, 
doing  the  work  of  heaven  while  we  are  going  thither. 

II.  He  was  taken  up  in  the  view  of  his  difciples, 
and  while  their  eyes  were  attentively  fix'd  upon  him : 
^^  while  they  beheld,    he  was  taken  up,"    vcr.  9, 

And 


CXCVI. 


44.94  T^he  ctrcumjlances  and  ben^Jits 

SERM.  And  vcr.  io.  it  is  faid,  '*  they  looked  ftcdfaftly  to- 
"  ward  heaven,  as  he  went  up."  After  the  apofdcs 
were  fully  conviiic'U,  by  feveral  appearances  of  our 
Saviour  to  them,  and  familiar  converfation  with 
them,  that  he  was  indeed  rifen  from  the  dead  ;  that 
they  might  be  fully  fatisfied  that  "  he  came  from 
*'  God,  and  went  to  him,"  he  was  in  their  fight, 
while  he  was  fpeaking  to  them,  taken  up  into  hea- 
ven. And  this  is  no  fnaall  confirmation  of  the  truth 
of  our  religion,  that  our  Saviour  did  not  only 
work  the  great.fl  miracles  while  he  was  aiive,  and 
after  death  rofe  again,  and  converfed  among  men ; 
but  was  vifibly  taken  up  into  heaven.  So  that  if  all 
things  be  duly  confidered,  never  did  any  man  give 
fo  many  evidences  of  his  being  fent  from  God,  as 
our  blefied  Saviour  did.  He  delivered  the  truth 
of  G  o  D  with  a  divine  authority ;  and  did  the  works 
of  G  o  D  with  all  imaginable  evidence  of  a  divine 
power;  and  with  a  divine  patience  fubmitted  to  the 
will  of  God,  enduring  the  greatefl:  fufFerings;  and 
by  the  mighty  power  of  G  o  d  was  raifed  from  the 
dead;  and  in  a  vifible  manner,  by  the  fame  divine 
power,  taken  up  into  heaven. 

III.  He  was  taken  up  in  a  cloud  :  "  he  was  taken 
«'  up,  and  a  cloud  received  him  out  of  their  fight." 
Which  circumftance,  though  it  do  not  feem  very 
material ;  yet  does  it  fitly  rcprefent  to  us  the  diffe- 
rence between  the  two  difpenfations  of  the  law,  and 
of  the  gofpel.  Elias  was  carried  up  "  by  a  whirl- 
*'  wind"  into  heaven,  in  "  a  fiery  chariot  with 
"  horfes  of  fire:"  but  our  Saviour  *'  in  a 
"  cloud;"  to  fignify  to  us  the  coolnefs  and  calm- 
nefs  of  the  golpel-difpenfation,  in  com  pari  Ton  of 
that  of  the  law ;  which  difference  our  Saviour 

bad 


of  our  S  A  V I  o  u  r'j  afcenfion,  4495 

had  before  obferved  to  his difciples,  upon  a  remarka-  SERM. 
ble  occafion,  Luke  ix.  54,  ^^,  When  they  would 
have  "  called  for  fire  from  heaven "  to  have  con- 
fumed  the  Samaritans  for  fefufmg  to  entertain  our 
Saviour,  as  Elias  had  done  in  a  hke  cafe,  our 
Saviour  feverely  reproves  that  fierce  fpirit  of 
theirs,  as  by  no  means  fuitable  to  the  gofpel :  "  ye 
"  know  not  what  manner  of  fpirit  ye  are  of:  for 
^'  the  Son  of  man  came  not  to  deftroy  mens  lives,' 
*'  but  to  fave  them."  And  jufl  anfwerable  to  the  dif- 
ference between  the  fpirit  of  Elias  and  our  Sa- 
viour, was  the  different  manner  of  their  tranfla- 
tion  into  heaven;  the  one  gently  received  up  "  in  a 
^'  cloud;'*  the  other  violently  taken  up  "  by  a 
''  whirlwind,"  carried  in  "  a  chariot  of  fire  drawn 
'*  by  horfes  of  fire." 

And  there  is  hkewife  another  difference  not  altoge- 
ther unworthy  of  "our  obfervation.  The  blefTmg 
which  Elijah  left  to  Elifha  at  his  parting  from  him, 
and  the  promife  of  his  fpirit  to  be  imparted  to  him, 
is  conceived  in  very  doubtful  words,  2  Kings  ii.  9, 
"  Elijah  faid  to  Elifha,  ask  what  I  fhall  do  for  thee, 
*'  before  I  be  taken  away  from  thee.  And  Eliiha 
"  faid,  let  a  double  portion  of  thy  fpirit  be  upon 
"  me.  And  he  faid,  thou  haft  asked  a  hard  thing  ; 
"  neverthelefs,  if  thou  fee  me  when  I  am  taken 
"  from  thee,  ft  fhall  be  fo  unto  thee;  but  if  thou  fee 
"  me  not,  it  fhall  not  be  {qP  This  was  very  doubt- 
ful, fuitable  to  the  obfcurity  of  the  law:  but  our 
Saviour,  when  he  parted  from  his  difciples, 
makes  a  plain  and  abfolute  promife  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  to  them  anfwerable  to  the  clearnefs  and 
grace  of  the  gofpel :  "  ye  fhall  be  baptized  with  tho, 
"  Holy  Ghost  not  many  days  hence."    So 

Vol.  X.  22  N  wifely 

J' 


449^  The  circumjiances  and  befiejlts 

SERM.  wifely  did  God  order  all  circumftances  concerning 

CXCVI 

'   our  Saviour,  that  every  thing  belonging  to  him, 

every  adlion  that  he  did,  and  every  circumftance  of  it 
might  have  fome  important  fignification. 

IV.  The  lad  circumftance  of  our  S  a  v  i  o  u  r's 
afcenfion,  is  the  place  where  he  went,  ver.  ii. 
''  This  fame  Jesus  which  is  taken  up  from  you 
*'  into  heaven."  And  this  is  elfewhere  more  particu- 
larly exprefs'd,  by  declaring  the  dignity  to  which  he 
was  exalted  in  heaven  *,  "  being  fet  down  on  the  right 
*•  hand  of  G  o  d,  and  having  all  power  in  heaven  and 
"  earth  committed  to  him."  Markxvi.  19.  "  He 
«'  was  received  up  into  heaven,  and  fat  on  the  right 
«'  hand  of  God:'*  which  phrafe  fignifies  our  S  a- 
V I  o  u  r's  being  advanced  in  his  humane  nature,  to 
an  honour  and  dignity  next  to  that  of  the  divine  ma- 
jefty  *,  the  right  hand  being  efteemed  the  place  of 
greateft  honour.  This  exaltation  of  Ch  rist,  the 
apoftle  tells  us,  was  conferred  upon  him  as  a  reward 
of  his  great  humiliation  and  fufferings  j  Heb.  xii.  2. 
*'  Who  for  the  joy  that  was  fet  before  him  endured 
««  the  crofs,  and  defpifed  the  fhame,  and  is  fet  down 
«'  on  the  right  hand  of  the  throne  of  God."  And 
by  virtue  of  this  exaltation,  the  apoftle  proves  him 
to  be  exalted  iu  his  humane  nature  above  the  angels, 
Heb.  i.  3,  4.  "  When  he  had  by  himfelf  purged 
*^  our  fins,  he  fat  down  at  the  right  hand  of  the 
*'  majefty  on  high,  being  made  fo  much  better  than 
"  the  angels,  as  he  hath  by  inheritance  obtained  a 
*«  more  excellerjt  name  than  they  •,"  that  is,  being 
advanced  to  a  higher  dignity;  for  name  among  the 
Hebrews  fignifies  dignity  and  honour.  So  the  apoftle 
ufeth  the  word  name,  Phil.  ii.  9,  10,  1 1.  "  Where- 
««  fore  God  alfo  hath  highly  exalted  him,  and  given 

*'  him 


of  our  SAviouR*i  afcenjion.  4497 

<«  him  a  name  which  is  above  ever-  name,  that  at  S  E  R  M* 
*'  the  name  of  Jesus  every  knee  fhall  bow,  of  * 
*^  things  in  heaven  and  things  in  earth,  and  things 
"  under  the  earth ;  and  that  every  tongue  fhould 
*'  confefs  that  Jesus  Christ  is  Lo  r  d,  to  the 
"  glory  of  God  the  Father."  So  Jikewife, 
Eph.  i.  20,  21.  "  Whom  he  raifed  from  the  dead, 
*^  and  fee  at  his  own  right  hand  in  heavenly  places, 
^'  far  above  all  principalities,  and  powers,  and  might, 
"  and  dominion,  and  every  name  that  is  named,  not 
*^'  only  in  this  world,  but  in  that  which  is  to  come." 
And  now,  wherein  this  dignity  doth  confiil,  the  fame 
apoftle  tells  us  in  the  next  words  ^  "  that  he  hath  put 
"  all  things  under  his  ^t^\.^  and  given  him  to  be  head 
*'  over  all  things  to  the  church;"  which  is  the  fame 
with  what  our  Saviour  told  his  apoftles  before 
bis  afcenfion,  *'  all  power  is  given  me  in  heaven 
*'  and  in  earth;"  that  is,  God  hath  committed  the 
government  of  the  world  into  his  hands,  for  the  be- 
nefit and  advantage  of  his  church  here  in  this  world, 
and  for  the  difpenfing  of  rewards  and  punifhments  to 
good  and  bad  men  in  the  next  life. 

And  though  the  apoftles  did  only  fee  him  taken 
up,  and  received  in  a  cloud  out  of  their  fight,  and 
were  not  witneiTes  of  his  advancement  and  ex- 
altation at  the  right  hand  of  God;  yet  they 
had,  and  we  have,  fufficient,  aflurance  of  it,  both  by 
what  our  S  a  v  i  o  u  r  declared  before  his  afcenfion, 
and  by  the  efFe6ls  which  followed  after.  Before  he 
afcended,  he  told  them  whither  he  was  going,  and 
what  power  and  dignity  would  be  conferred  upon 
him,  that  "  all  power  in  heaven  and  earth  was  com- 
*'  mitted  to  him  ;"  and  that  as  an  evidence  of  this 
exaltation  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  and  the  power 
22  N  2  there 


449^  ^'^^  r/r^«;;^^^«^^x  and  benefits 

S  E  R  M.  there  conferr'd  upon  him,  he  would  in  a  few  days 
CXCVI.  ^^^^  down  the  Holy  Ghost  upon  them  in  a 
fenfiblc  manner,  and  in  great  and  fenfible  efFedls, 
enabhng  them  to  fpeak  with  tongues,  and  to  work 
all  forts  of  miracles.  After  this  he  was  in  their  fight 
taken  up  from  them,  and  carried  towards  heaven ; 
and  ten  days  after,  the  Holy  Ghost,  according 
to  his  promife,  came  down  upon  them  in  miraculous 
powers  and  gifts.  So  that  here  was  abundant  evi- 
dence to  them  of  his  exaltation  in  heaven,  they 
having  feen  him  taken  up  and  carried  thitherwards, 
and  after  this  finding  the  wonderful  efFeds  of  his 
being  there,  and  of  the  power  which  was  conferred 
upon  him. 

The  third  and  Jaft  thing  to  be  fpoken  to,  is  the 
confequent  benefits  of  our  S  a  v  i  o  u  r's  afcenfion 
and  exaltation ;  and  they  are  chiefly  thefe  three  :  the 
fending  of  the  Ho  l  y  Ghost;  his  powerful  inter- 
cefTion  for  us  at  the  right  hand  of  God;  and  the 
confirmation  of  our  faith,  as  to  the  truth  of  his  doc- 
trine in  general,  and  particularly  as  to  his  coming  to 
judgment. 

I.  The  fending  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  mira- 
culous powers  and  gifts  upon  the  apoftles,  to  qualify 
them  for  the  fpeedy  and  effedual  propagation  of  the 
gofpel,  and  to  give  credit  to  them  in  the  preaching 
of  it.  By  the  gift  of  tongues,  they  are  enabled  to 
preach  the  gofpel  to  all  nadons ;  and  by  the  other 
miraculous  powers,  God  bare  witnefs  to  the  tefti- 
mony  vvhich  they  gave  of  our  Sav  i  o  u  r's  dodtrine 
and  re  fa  rrecflion.  And  this  was  a  great  benefit ;  for 
to  this  we  owe  the  great  blefling  of  the  gofpel,  and 
the  fpreading  of  the  chriftian  religion  through  the 
world;    and    this    was   properly    the    fruit  of  our 

Sav  10  u  r's 


of  our  S  Av  I  o  u  R'i  a/cenjion.  4499 

S  AVI  OUR 's  afcenfion  into  heaven,  and  his  exalta-  SERM. 

cxcvr 
tion  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  and  of  that  royal 

power  and  majefty  which  he  was  invefted  withal. 
God  in  his  wife  difpenfation  of  things  having  fo  or- 
dered, that  this  dignity  and  power  fhould  be  the  re- 
ward of  our  S  A  V I  o  u  r's  obedience  and  fufferings ; 
which  may  ferve  to  explain  to  us  that  paifage,  John 
vii.  39.  "  This  ipake  he  of  the  Spirit,  which 
'^  they  that  believe  on  him  fhould  receive  :  for  the 
''Holy  Ghost  was  not  yet  given,  becaufe 
^'  Jesus  was  not  yet  glorified."  The  giving  of 
thefe  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  was  purpofely 
referved  by  God,  to  be  an  inflance  of  that  power 
and  glory,  wherewith  our  Saviour  was  to  be 
invefted  upon  his  afcenfion  into  heaven,  and  exalta- 
tion at  the  right  hand  of  God.-,  and  therefore  our 
Saviour  tells  his  difciples,  that  they  ought  not' 
to  be  troubled  at  his  departure,  becaufe,  till  he  had 
left  them,  the  Holy  Ghost  would  not  come, 
John  xvi.  17.  "  I  tell  you  the  truth,  it  is  expedient 
'*  for  you  that  I  go  away  :  for  if  I  go  not  away, 
*'  the  comforter  will  not  come  unto  you." 

11.  Another  mighty  benefit  of  our  Saviour's 
afcenfion  and  exaltation,  is  his  powerful  interceffion 
for  us  at  the  right  hand  of  God.  And  this  is  a 
mighty  advantage  and  comfort,  to  have  a  perpetual 
patron  and  advocate  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  to 
plead  our  caufe,  to  folicit  our  concernments,  and  re- 
prefent  our  wants,  and  to  offer  up  our  prayers  and 
requeds  to  God,  in  the  virtue  of  his  meritorious  fa- 
crilice  j  to  have  fo  good  a  friend  in  the  court  of  hea- 
ven, in  fuch  power  and  favour  with  the  great  king 
of  the  world.  This  under  the  law  was  fhadowed 
iby  the  high-prieft's  going  into  the  holy  of  holies, 

once 


'4500  ^he  circumjiances  and  benefits 

SERM.  once  every  year  alone,  carrying  blood  with  him,  to 
'  '  offer  for  the  fins  of  the  people  ;  anfwerably  to  which, 
our  Saviour  is  once  for  all  cnrer'd  into  the  hea- 
vens, to  intercede  with  God  for  us,  by  the  reprc- 
fentation  of  that  facrifice  which  he  oPfer'd  for  our 
fins,  and  of  that  blood  which  was  fhed  for  us.  So 
the  apoftle  tells  us,  Heb.  ix.  2.4.  "  That  C  h  r  i  s  i" 
•'  is  not  enter'd  into  the  holy  places  made  with 
*'  hands,  which  are  the  figures  of  the  true  ;  but  into 
•'  heaven  it  felf,  to  appear  in  the  prefence  of  God 
*'  for  as."  And  this  is  a  mighty  comfort  to  us  un- 
der the  guilt  of  our  fins,  that  "  we  have  an  advo- 
*'  cate  with  the  Fa  T  H  E  R,  Jesus  Christ  the 
**  righteous,  who  is  a  propitiation  for  our  fins,  and 
«  for  the  fins  of  the  whole  world."  This  is  a  great 
comfort  under  all  trials  and  temptations,  that  "  wc 
«'  have  not  an  high-priert  that  cannot  be  touched 
*'  with  a  feme  of  our  infirmities ;  but  was  in  all 
*'  points  tempted  like  as  we  are.^'  He  that  is  our 
mediator  and  interceffor,  knows  by  experience  the 
infirmities  of  our  nature,  and  hath  learned  by  his 
own  fufferings  to  companionate  ours. 

And  this  is  a  mighty  encouragement  to  our  pray-  ^ 
crs,  and  gives  us  confidence  and  hopes  of  good  fuc- 
cefs  in  our  addrefles  to  God,  that  are  offered 
by  fo  powerful  and  prevalent  a  hand.  So  the  apo- 
ftle reafons, Heb.  iv.  14,  16.  "Seeing  then  we  have 
*'  a  great  high-prieft  that  is  paflcd  into  the  hea- 
*'  vens,  Jesus  the  Son  of  God  ;  let  us  come 
«*  boldly  to  the  throne  of  grace,  that  we  may  ob- 
*«  tain  mercy,  and  find  grace  to  help  in  time  of 
«'  need." 

In  a  word,  this  may  animate  us  againft  all  the 
enemies  of  our  falvation,  becaufe  he  that  hath  all 

power 


t)f  our  S  A V  I  o  u  r'j  afcenfion.  4^0 1 

power  in  heaven  and  earth  is  concerned  for  us,  and  s  E  R  M. 
is  continually  foliciting  our  caufe  with  God,  Heb.  ^^^21l 
vii.  25.  "  Wherefore  he  is  able  to  fave  them  to  the 
"  utmofl:,  who  come  unto  G  o  d  by  him,  feeing  he 
''  ever  liveth  to  make  intercefTion  for  us/* 

III.  The  afcenfion  of -^ur  S  av  i  o  u  r  into  hea- 
ven, is  a  mighty  confirm.ation  of  our  faith,  both  as 
to  the  truth  of  his  do6lrine  in  general,  and  parti- 
cularly as  to  his  coming  again  at  the  end  of  the 
world,  to  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead,  to  reward 
the  righteous,  and  to  punifh  the  fmners  and  un- 
godly. 

1.  As  to  the  truth  of  his  dodlrine  in  genera!.  If 
after  all  the  miracles  of  his  life,  and  his  refurreclion 
from  the  dead,  any  man  can  doubt  whether  he 
came  from  God,  and  was  fent  by  him  to  teach  the 
world  ;  yet  this,  methinks,  is  evidence  beyond  all 
exception,  that  God  took  him  to  himfelf,  that  he 
was  vifibly  taken  up  into  heaven  ;  and  though  the 
witnefles  of  his  afcenfion  did  not  fee  him  in  heaven, 
yet  the  fending  of  the  Ho  ly  Ghost,  according 
to  his  promife,  was  an  abundant  evidence  that  he 
was  received  up  into  glory.  Upon  this  account  it 
is  that  our  Saviour  fays,  that  the  comino-  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  fhould  "  convince  the  world 
"  of  fin,  for  not  believing  in  him,"  becaufe  the 
fending  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  was  an  evidence 
that  he  was  in  glory  ;  and  his  being  taken  up  into 
glory,  was  a  demonftration  that  he  was  a  true  pro- 
phet, and  fent  from  God,  and  confequently  that 
they  were  guilty  of  a  great  fin,  who  did  not  believe 
in  him.     And, 

2.  This  likewife  is  a  great  confirmation  of  our 
faith,  as  to  our  S  aviou  k's  coming  again  at  the 

end 


a:'c2  ^^^  circiimjiances  and  benefits 

SERM.  end  of  the  world,  to  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead. 
CXCVI.  3|.^  Peter  tells  us,  Acls  x  42.  that  our  S  av  i  o  u  r 
after  his  refurredion  did  particularly  give  in  charge 
to  his  apodles,  *'  to  teftify  to  the  people  j  that  it 
"  was  he  that  was  ordained    of  God,  to  be  the 
"  judge   of    quick  and  dead.'*     And  what    argu- 
ment more  proper  to  perfuade  them  of  this,  than 
to  fee  him  vifibly  taken  up  into  heaven  ;  and  at  the 
tery  time  of  his  afcenfion,  to  be  admonifh'd  by  an- 
gels, that  this  fame  perfon  v/hom  they  faw  carried 
up  into  heaven,    Hiould  in  the  fame  viable  manner 
come  down  from  heaven  again  at  the  end  of  the 
world  ?  So  the  text  tells  us,  that  "  while  the  apoflles 
"  looked  ftedfaftly  toward  heaven,  as  he  went  up, 
*'  behold,  two  men  flood  by  them  in  white  appa- 
*'  rel,'*  that  is,  two  angels  in  the    appearance  of 
men,  "  which  faid,  ye  men  of  Galilee,  why  Hand 
*'  ye  gazing  up   into  heaven  ?  this  fame  Jesus 
*'  which  is  taken  up  from  you  into  heaven,  ihall 
*'  fo  come  in  like  manner,  as  ye  have  feen  him  ga 
*'  into  heaven  i "  that  is,  in  a  vifible  manner,  and 
in  a  cloud.     For  as  "  he  was  received  up  in  a  cloud 
*'  out  of  ^their  fight,"  fo  at  his  return  to  judge  the 
world,  men  Ihall  "  fee  the  S  on  of  man  coming  in 
"  the  clouds  of  heaven,"  Matt.  xxiv.  30.    And  this 
is  a  great  confirmation  of  our  faith  of  a  future  judg- 
ment ;  that  our  S  av  i  o  u  R,  immediately  after  his 
refurredion,  declared  himfelf  to  be  "  appointed  by 
•'  God  judge  of  quick  and  dead;*'  and  when  he 
was  afcended,  the  angels  declared  that  "  he  fhould 
"  come  again  in  like  manner  as  they  had  feen  him 
*'  taken  up."     So  that  they  who  believe  his  afcen- 
fion, cannot  doubt  of  his  return  to  judgment ;  no- 
thing being  more  credible,  than  the  faying  of  one 

whom 


of  out'  S  A  V  I  o  u  r'x  afcenfion.  45^3 

whom  God  raifed  from  the  dead,  and  vifibly  took  S  E  R  M^ 
tohimfelf.  CXCVI^. 

And  now  to  make  fome  reflexion  upon  what  hatii 
been  delivered.  The  confideration  of  our  Savi- 
our's afcenfion  into  heaven,  and  exaltation  at  the 
right  hand  of  Go  d,  is  very  comfortable  to  all  true 
chriflians,   in  thefe  two  refpefls. 

I.  In  refpecl  oFour  condition  in  this  world. 

11  In  refped  of  the  happinefs  of  the  next  world. 

I.  In  refped:  of  our  condition  in  this  world.  The 
church  of  Christ,  and  every  particular  member 
of  \x.^  every  true  chriftian,  is  expofed  to  a  great  many 
troubles  and  dangers  in  this  world  :  but  it  is  matter 
of  great  comfort  to  us,  in  the  confideration  of  all 
evils  we  are  liable  to,  that  we  are  under  his  patro- 
nage and  protection,  who  hath  '^  all  power  given 
'•  him  in  heaven  and  earth."  He  who  is  "  the 
*'  head  and  defender  of  the  church,  is  fet  down  on 
*'  the  right  hand  of  the  majefty  of  God,  exalted 
*'  far  above  principalities,  and  powers,  and  might,^ 
^'  and  dominion,  and  every  name  that  is  named  in 
^^  this  world,  and  that  which  is  to  come  ;"  fo  that 
the  true  church  of  Christ  need  not  fear  either 
the  powers  of  this  world,  or  the  malice  of  devils, 
becaufe  we  have  a  fure  friend,  who  is  greater 
than  all  thefe,  whom  God  hath  made  his  vicege- 
rent, and  hath  "  put  all  things  under  his  ^^qi^^  and 
hath  given  the  g6vernment  of  the  woi"ld,  and  of  all 
creatures,  into  his  hands,  for  the  good  and  benefit  of 
his  church  ;  who  is  able  to  protect  his  church,  and 
every  true  member  of  it,  againft:  all  the  injuries  of 
earth,  and  the  malice  of  hell  \  and  if  he  permit  us 
at  any  time  to  fall  into  fufferings,  he  is  able  to 
fupport  us  under  them,   and  to  reward  us  for  tnem : 

Vol.  X.  22  O  and 

5- 


4504  ^f^^  clrcumflances  and  benefits 

SERM.  and  "  if  he  be  for  us,  who  ean  be  againfl  us?'* 
CXCVI.  1^^  ^1^^^  jt  ^1^^^  y^^  rather  that  is  rifen  again,  who  is 

"  even  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  and  maketh  in- 
"  terceflion  for  us."  Rom.  xiv.  9.  "  For  this  end, 
*'  Christ  both  died,  and  rofe,  and  revived,  that 
*'  he  might  be  Lord  both  of  the  dead  and  hv- 
*'  ing-, "  and  now  tiiat  he  is  in  heaven  and  clothed 
with  majefty  and  glory,  he  is  not  lefs  concerned  for 
us,  than  when  he  converfed  with  us  upon  earth, 
and  fuffer'd  and  died  for  us :  for  he  is  there  in  our 
nature,  that  nature  in  v/hich  he  fufFercd  more  than 
any  of  us  can  do ;  and  therefore  v/e  may  with  confi- 
dence make  our  applications  to  him  in  all  our  di- 
Itrefles  and  difficulties,  becaufe  he  is  nearly  allied  to 
us,  "  bone  of  our  bone,  and  flefh  of  our  flefh,"  and 
was  once  "  tempted  like  ourfelves,"  and  from  the 
experience  of  his  own  trials  and  fufFerings,  ftill  retains 
a  quick  fcnfe  of  the  frailties  and  infirmities  of  morta- 
lity. This  confidcration  the  apoftle  to  the  Hebrews 
rnakes  ufe  of,  to  fupport  chriflians  under  all  their  per- 
fecutions  sfor  the  profellion  of  chriftianity,  Heb.  iv. 
14,  15.  "  Seeing  then  we  have  a  great  high- pried, 
'*  that  is  pafiled  into  the  heavens,  Jesus  the  S  o  n  of 
*'  God;  let  us  hold  fall  our  profefiion.  For  we  have 
"  not  an  high-pried  that  cannot  be  touched  with  the 
"  feeling  of  our  infirmities;  but  was  in  all  points 
.''  tempted  hkeas  weare,  yet  without  fin." 

II.  The  confidcration  of  Ch>rist's  afcenfion 
and  exaltation  is  likewifc  matter  of  comfort  to  us, 
in  refped  of  the  happinefs  which  we  hope  for  in 
the  next  world.  No  religion  that  ever  was  in  the 
world  hath  given  men  fo  fenfible  a  demonftration  of 
a  future  life,  and  a  blefled  immortality  in  another 
world,  as  the  chriftian  religion  hath  done,  by  the  re- 

furredion 


gJ  our  S  A  V I  o  u  r'j  afienfion.  4505 

forreaion  of  our  blefled  Saviour  from  the  dead,  ^^^g^; 
and  his  vifible  afcenfion  into  heaven.  This  is  a  fen-  ^ 
fible  argument,  and  levelled  to  the  capacities  of  all 
mankind.  The  reafonings  of  the  philofophers  con- 
cernino-  the  immortality  of  mens  fouls,  and  a  future 
Hate  after  this  life,  befides  the  uncertainty  of  them, 
have  alfo  this  difadvantage,  that  they  are  only  calcu- 
lated for  the  more  refined  and  fpeculative  part  of 
mankind  :  but  every  man  is  capable  of  the  force  of 
this  argument,  that  he  who  declared  to  the  world 
another  life  after  this,  and  the-^happy  condition  of 
good  men  m  another  world,  was  himfelf  raifed  from 
the  dead,  and  vifibly  taken  up  into  heaven.  And 
now  it  is  no  difficult  matter  for  us  to  believe  that 
God  will  raife  us,  and  advance  us  to  glory  and  hap- 
pinefs,  when  we  confider  what  an  earned  he  hath 
given  us  of  this,  by  "  the  working  of  that  mighty 
"  power  which  he  wrought  in  Ch  ri  st,  when  he 
«'  raifed  him  from  the  dead,  and  fet  him  at  his  own 
"  right  hand  in  heavenly  places." 

If  then  we  believe  that  ''  Ch  rist  is  afcended 
"  into  heaven,  and  fits  at  the  right  hand  of  God,'* 
let  this  raife  our  minds  above  the  vain  dehghts  and 
perilling  enjoyments  of  this  world,  to  the  confidera- 
tion  of  thofe  better  and  more  glorious  things  that 
are  above  •,  let  us  often  afcend  thither  in  our  thoughts, 
whither  "  our  Saviour  is  gone  before  us,  to 
''  prepare  a  place  for  us;"  and  from  whence  he  hath 
promifed  "  to  come  again"  at  the  end  of  the  world 
"  to  receive  us  to  himfelf,  that  where  he  is,  there  wc 
<^'  may  be  alfo." 

But  then  we  muft  endeavour  to  live  as  he  did  ;  if 
we  hope  to  go  to  him,  when  we  die.  "  Every  man 
^'  that  hath  this  hope  in  him,  purifies  himfelf,  even 

22.  0  2  "as 


Qi 


4506  7be  circumjhnces  and  benefits 

S  E  R  M.  ««  as  he  is  pure."  Let  us  then  "  have  our  converfa- 
'    "  tion  in  heaven,  from  whence  alfo  we  look  for  a 
Saviour,    the  Lord    Jesus    Christ; 
who  fliall  change  our  vile  body,  that  it   may  be 
fafhioned  like  unto  his  glorious  body,  according  to 
"  the  working  of  that  mighty  power,  whereby  he  is 
"  able  to  fubdue  all  things  to  himfelf.'* 

To  conclude  ;  let  us  heartily  thank  God  for  the 
whole  dirpenlation  of  our  falvation,  by  the  incarna- 
tion and  docStrine,  by  the  holy  life  and  meritorious 
death  of  our  blefled  Saviour,  and  by  that  de- 
monftration  of  ''  God's  mighty  power  and  good- 
*'  nefs,  which  he  wrought  in  Christ,  when  he 
*'  raifed  him  from  the  dead,  and  fet  him  at  his  own 
''  right  hand  in  heavenly  places,  far  above  all  prin- 
*'  cipalities,  and  powers,  and  might,  and  dominion^ 
*'  and  every  name  that  is  named,  not  only  in  this 
"  world,  but  alfo  in  that  which  is  to  come  -,  having 
<^  put  all  things  under  his  feet,  and  given  him  to 
*'  be  the  head  over  all  things  to  the  church,  which  is 
^'  his  body." 

The  confideration  whereof  is  (as  you  have  heard) 
a  mighty  confolation  to  us,  under  all  the  troubles  and 
dangers  to  which  the  church  of  C  h  r  i  s  t  is  expo- 
fed  in  this  world.  He  who  hath  "  all  power  com- 
"  mitted  to  him"  by  God,  and  is  made  ''  head 
''  over  all  things  for  the  benefit  and  advantage  of 
^'  the  church,"  we  may  be  fure,  will  have  a  particu- 
lar care  of  it,  and  tender  it  as  "  his  own  body  :" 
and  as  he  is  able,  he  is  ready  upon  all  occafions  to 
proteft  and  defend  his  own  religion,  and  the  true 
profelTors  of  it,  againft  all  the  fury  and  mahce  of 
men  and  devils,  fo  that  "  the  gates  of  hell,"  the 
ftrongcft  combinations  and  deepeft  confpiracies  of  all 

ihe 


of  our  Sa V 1  o  u  R*i  afcenfion,  4-5^7 

the  powers  ofdarknefs,  "  fliall  not  finally  prevail  SERM- 
^*  againft  it."  Here  is  the  foundation  of  our  hopes  ,^^  ^^ 
and  confidence,  that  our  redeemer  is  ftrong,  and  that 
God  hath  given  him  a  kingdom  and  power,  that  is 
paramount  and  fuperior  to  all  earthly  kingdoms  and 
powers  ;  and  though  they  fhould  confpire  together, 
and  be  of  one  mind,  unite  all  their  force,  and  "  give 
*^  their  power  and  ftrength  unto  the  beaft,  to  make 
"  war  with  the  lamb  and  his  company,"  that  is,  the 
true  church  and  faithful  fervants  of  C  h  r  i  s  t  ^  yet 
"  the  lamb  fhall  overcome  them,  becaufe  he  is  lord 
"  of  lords,  and  king  of  kings." 

And  let  us  likewife  blefs  God  for  the  wonderful 
reftoration  of  his  majefty  to  the  government  of  thefe 
kingdoms,  who  under  Christ  is  the  great  defen- 
der of  our  faif:h  and  religion ;  and  let  us  pay  that 
duty  and  obedience,  which  becom.es  us,  to  a  prince 
whom  God  hath  fo  miraculoufly  preferved  and  re- 
flored ',  and  pour  out  our  mod  fervent  prayers  to 
God,  that  he  would  long  preferve  him,  and  protedl 
his  perfon  from  all  dangers,  who  is  the  great  fecurity 
of  our  religion,  *  and  the  life  of  all  our  hopes,  and  ^  ^'*''^  '*''^'*'* 
as  truly  as  any  prince  ever  was  to  any  people,  the,  '^^'^*^' "^ 
light  of  our  eyes,  and  the  breath  of  our  noftrils;!-^^'^"*^'^' 


and  that  God  would  make  him  "  wife  as  an  angel  ^  «  / 
"  of  God,  to  go  in  and  out  before  this  great  peo- ^^^^^^^J^ 
"  pie-,"  and  grant  to  him,  and  all  the  people  of^i^u^,j.t^ 
this  land,  "  to  know  in  this  our  day  the  things  that  ;,,„>.'  -  ^np 
*'  belong  to  our  peace,  before  they  be  hid  from  our .  ^a^rlu^MU 
^'  eyes."  ;  vcto-^i  .^, . 

*    Preached   towards  the  conclufion  of  the  reign  of  king 
Charles  II. 

SERMON 


C  4508  3 
SERMON   CXCVII. 

Of  the  gii:t  of  tongues  conferr'd  on 
the  apoftles. 

ACTS   ii.  I,  2,  3,  4. 

And  "johen  the  day  of  pentecofl  was  fully  come^  they 
luere  all  with  one  accord  in  one  place.  And  fuddenly 
there  came  a  found  from  heaven.,  as  of  a  mighty  rufh- 
ing  wind  J  and  it  filled  all  the  houfe  where  they  were 
fitting.  And  there  appeared  unto  them  cloven  tongues^ 
like  as  of  fire.,  and  it  fat  upon  each  of  them.  And 
they  were  all  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  and 
began  to  fpeak  with  other  tongues^  as  /i?^  S  p  i  r  i  t 
gave  them  utterance, 

S  E  R  M.  ^"^  N  E  of  the  chief  defigns  of  the  difpenfation 
CXCVII.  ■  JP  of  G  o  D  towards  the  Jews,  and  of  the  giv- 
^^^^  Vw^  ing  Qf  ti^e  ].^^  X.0  them  by  Mofes,  was  to  be 
a  type  of  the  chriflian  church,  and  of  the  difpenfa- 
tion of  the  gofpel  by  the  S  o  n  of  G  o  d  ;  and  there- 
fore no  wonder,  if  there  be  a  great  correfpondence 
between  them,  and  that  the  divine  providence  fhould 
fo  order  the  event  of  things,  that  the  feafons  of  dif- 
penfing  the  great  evangehcal  blefTings,  fliould  hap- 
pen at  the  fame  times,  when  the  great  blefTings  of  the 
law,  which  were  the  types  of  them,  were  difpenfed 
and  commemorated.  Thus  our  S  a  v  i  o  u  r,  who 
was  "  the  lamb  of  Go  d,"  was  (lain  and  offer'd  up 
at  the  fame  time  that  the  paflbver  was  kept,  and  the 
pafchal  lamb  was  flain  and  offer'd  up  among  the 
Jews  5   and  the  redemption  of  the  world  from  the 

llavery 


Of  the  gift  of  tongues^  ^c.  4509 

fiavery  of  fin  and  fatan,  is  celebrated  by  chriftians,  SERM, 
at  the  very  fame  feafon  of  the  year,  when  the  de-,^"^^^^^' 
liverance  of  the  Ifraelites  from  the  Egyptian  flavery 
was  comemorated  by  them :  and  as  at  the  time  of 
pentecoft    (which    was    fifty   days  after)   the  Jews 
were  appointed  to  rejoice  before  the  Lor  d,  and  to 
offer  their  firft-fruits  by  way  of  grateful  acknow- 
ledgment to  God  for  the  fruits  of  the  earth,  then 
newly  gathered  in  *,  fo  did  G  o  d  likewife  at  the  fame 
time  impart  the  firfl- fruits  of  the  H  o  ly  S  p  i  r  i  t  to 
the  apoftles,  who  were  to  be  the  firfl  and  chief  la-^ 
bourers  in  that  fpiritual  harvefl,  to  which  they  were 
appointed   by   "  the  Lord   of  the  harveft :"  and 
which  is  yet  more  remarkable,  at  the  fame  feafon  that 
the  law  v/as  delivered  to  the  Jews  from  mount  Sinai, 
and  the  firfl  covenant  eflablilh'd,  namely,  at  the  time 
of  pentecofl,  as  is  commonly  fuppofed  by  the  Jewifh 
dodors,  and  as  may  probably  be  colle6ted  from  the 
text,  Exod.  xix.  I.  I  fay,  at  that  very  time,  the  gos- 
pel, which  contains  the  terms  of  the  new  covenant, 
began  to  be  publifli'd  from  mount  Sion,  in  as  wonder- 
ful, though  not  fo  terrible  a  manner,  as  the  law  was 
given  from  mount  Sinai.     And  thus  it  was  foretold 
by  the  ancient  prophets,  Ifaiah  ii.  3.  and  Micah  iv.  2. 
that  "  out  of  Sion  fhould  go  forth  the  law,  and  the 
''  word  of  the  Lor  D  from  Jerufalem.'* 

I  fhall  briefly  explain  the  words,  and  as  I  pais  along 
make  fome  fhort  obfervations  upon  them,  and  then 
fix  upon  that  which  is  mainly  intended  in  them,  viz. 
this  firfl  and  mofl  miraculous  gift  of  the  Holy 
Ghost-,  which  was  conferred  upon  the  apoflles 
when  they  were  aifembled  together  at  Jerufalem  upon 
the  day  of  *  pentecofl. 

f  Preach' d  en  Whitfunday, 

«  When 


CXCv  11 


4510  Of  the  gift  of  tongues 

SERM.  «=  When  the  day  of  pentecoft  was  fully  come,** 
that  is,  when  the  lifty  days  after  eafter  were  fulfilled, 
upon  the  fiftieth  day,  Vhich  was  called  "  the  day  of 
'•  pentecod,  they  were  ail  with  one  accord  In  one 
"  place."  "  They  were  all,"  that  is,  all  the  twelve 
apoflles  •,  for  upon  them  it  was  that  the  gifc  of  tongues 
was  bellowed  \  becaufe  they  were  appointed  to  be  the 
chief  publifhers  of  the  gofpel,  having  been  eye-wit- 
nefles  of  our  S  av  i  o  u  r's  miracles,  and  particularly 
of  his  refurredion  from  the  dead.  There  is  no  men- 
tion of  any  other  in  this  chapter,  but  only  of  the 
twelve  apoftles ;  ver.  14/  we  find  "  Peter  and  the 
"  eleven  "  fpoken  of-,  and  ver.  o^"].  it  is  faid  that 
'^  the  multitude,  who  were  adonifhed  at  this  miracle, 
"  fpake  to  Peter  and  the  reft  of  the  apoftles." 

*'  They  were  all  with  one  accord  in  one  place.*' 
Unity  is  an  excellent  qualification  and  difpofition  for 
the  H  o  L  Y  S  p  I  R  I  T  of  G  o  D  and  his  gifts ;  for 
which  reafon,  the  peace  and  good  agreement  ofchri- 
flians  is  called  by  St.  Paul,  "  the  unity  of  the  fpi- 
*'  rit,  in  the  bond  of  peace."  When  the  apoftles 
were  "  of  one  heart,  and  one  mind,"  then  the  Ho- 
ly Spirit  of  God  came  down  upon  them  in 
this  wonderful  manner. 

Ver.  2.  "  And  fuddenly  there  came  a  found  from 
"  heaven,  as  of  a  rufhing  mighty  wind."  As  they 
were  together  "  waiting  for  the  promife  of  the 
*'  Fat  H  E  R,"  all  on  the  fudden  there  came  a  found, 
as  of  a  ftrong  guft  of  wind.  This  was  a  fit  emblem 
of  the  divine  Spirit-,  for  to  this  our  Sa v  i  o  u  r 
had  compared  it,  in  his  difcourfe  with  Nicodemus, 
John  iii.  8.  "  The  wind  bloweth  where  it  lifteth, 
«  and  thou  heareft  the  found  thereof  j  but  c-anft 
*'  not    tell    whence   ic    comcth,   nor    whither    it 

"  goeth  J 


conferred  on  the  apojlle^,  45^^ 

'^  goeth  :  fo  is  every  one  that  is  born  of  the  S  p  ^^pJk^,^' 


"    RIT.'* 


"  As  of  arufhing  mighty  wind/'  To  fignify  to 
us,  that  the  publication  of  the  gofpel  was  attended 
with  the  fame  divine  prefence  and  power,  that  the 
giving  of  the  Jaw  was ;  but  not  with  the  fame  cir- 
cumftances  of  terror,  v/hich  xkit  apoftle  to  the  He- 
brews defcribes,  when  he  fets  forth  to  us  the  difference 
between  mount  Sinai  and  mount  Sion,  that  is,  be- 
tween the  two  difpenfations  of  '*  the  Jaw  and  the  gof^ 
''  pej."  Heb.  xii.  i8,  19.  fpeaking  of  mount  Sinai, 
from  which  the  Jaw  was  given,  ''  ye  are  not  come, 
''  fays  he,  unto  the  mount,  that  might  be  touched, 
"  and  that  burned  with  hre,  nor  unto  bhcknefs,  and 
''  darknefs,  and  tempeil,  and  the  found  of  a  trum-. 
"  pec,  and  the  voice  of  words  \'  that  is,  that  ter- 
rible voice  of  G  o  D,  wherein  the  ten  words  of  the  law 
were  delivered  ;  "  which  voice  then  fhook  the  earth,'* 
as  the  apollle  tells  us,  ver.  26.  "A  voice  fo  terrible, 
*'  that  they  who  heard  it,  earneflly  begged,  that 
"  they  might  hear  it  no  more/*  Thefe  were  all 
circumftances  of  great  horror :  but  at  the  coming 
down  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  here  v/as  no  trum- 
pet nor  terrifying  voice,  no  thunder,  nor  darknefs, 
nor  tempefl,  only  i\i^  found  as  it  were  of  a  firong 
guft  of  wind,  as  a  fenfible  fignification  of  a  divine 
prefence  and  power. 

"  And  it  filJed  all  the  houfe  where  they  were  fit- 
"  ting/'  '*  The  whole  houfe,"  to  reprefent  the 
world,  which  was  to  be  filled  with  the  found  of  the 
gofpel,  according  to  that  of  the  pfalmift  cited  by 
Si,  Paul,  Rom.  x.  \  8.  where  fpeaking  of  the  gene- 
ral publication  of  the  gofpel,  "  their  lound,  fays  he, 

VoL.X.  22  P  ''went 

6. 


V    45^^  0/  the  gift  of  tongues 

S  SERM.  <c  went  out  into  all  the  earth,  and  their  words  un to 


,  ^llh  "  the  end  of  the  world. 


i  ^  '^  "  It  filled  all  the  houfe.'*  This  is  that,  which, 
^C^"*  ^^.^'  ;  ver.  5.  of  this  chapter,  our  Saviour  calls  "  bap- 
^  .p5  "'■  ■;^<*  tizing  the  apodles  with  the  Holy  Ghost,'* 
■  *  ^\  fo  that  they  who  fat  in  the  houfe  were  as  it  were  im- 
"^  "^i-Yi niers'd  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  they  who  were 
^  t  I  i"^  baptized  with  water,  w^ere  overv/helmed  and  covered 
-*  "^  ,^  I'ij  all  over  with  water,  which  is  the  proper    notion  of 

'•)"^to  I'it  baptifm. 

4  "^  i.|i      Ver,  3.  "  And  there  appeared  unto  them  cloven 
I  4  ^  .il  "  tongues,  as  it  wereof  fire,  and  £it  upon  each  of 

5  t'-^^v,;    «  them."     "  Cloven  tongues,"  to  fignify  the  diver- 
^•i"i"-'  fity  and  diflribution  of  them^  this    gift  being  im- 

*^  i^i     parted  to  every  one  of  the  apoftles  :  for  it  is  faid, 
^•^  it  I  ^  that  thefe  tongues  "  fat  upon  each  of  them." 

*'  Cloven  tongues  as  it  were  of  fire,"  to  fignify 

the  penetrating  virtue  and  efiicacy  of  their  preaching. 

-' ''       ,  i  And  this  is  that  which  John  the  baptift  calls  "  bap- 

^^r^i6t'e<I  ^^  ^.^.^^  ^.^j^  ^T^g  pj  Q  L  Y  G  H  o  s  T,  and  v/ith  fire," 

'  ^JiJ  meaning  the  defcent  of  the  H  o  l  y  Ghost    upon 

,^  ^he  apoftles,  in  the  form  of  fiery  tongues ;  divided, 

\^^,L^  .    tofignify  the  diverfity  of  them.     At  firfl  men  were 

^^^       all  of  one  language  ;  and  the  confufion  and  divifion 

of  tonc^ues,  v/as  a  curfe  and  punifhment  upon  them, 

and  the  caufe  of  their  difperfion  through  the  world  ; 

but  now,  God   by  the  ^ift  of  feveral  tongues  de- 

fitrned  to  gather  mankind  together,  and  to  unite  them 

in  one  religion. 

"And  it  fat  upon  each  of  them."  Thcfe  "  cloven 
«'  fiery  tongues  fat  upon  each  of  the  apoftles,"  that 
is,  remain'd  vifibly  upon  them  for  fome  time  ;  to 
fignify  the  permanency  of  this  gift  of  tongues.  Ic 
was  not  like  feveral  of  the  other  miraculous  gifts, 

v/hich 


conferrd  on  the  apoflles.  45^3 

which  did  not  condantly  refide  upon  them ;  for  they  S^^^^^- 
had  them  not  at  all  times,  nor  when  they  pleafed,^'' 
but  as  G  o  D  was  pleafed  to  difpenfe  and  communicate 
them  :  but  this  gift  of  tongues  was  conftant,  becaufe 
they  had  continual  ufe  of  it ;  and  it  was  common  to 
all  the  apoftles,  becaufe  they  were  to  be  the  publiflicrs 
of  the  gofpej,  and  the  witnefTes  of  our  Lo  r  d's  re- 
furredlion,  which  was  the  great  miracle  whereby  the 
gofpel  was  to  be  confirmed. 

Ver.  4.  ''And  they  were  all  filled  with  the  Holy 
'*  Ghost,  and  began  to  fpeak  with  other  tongues, 
''  as  the  S  p  I  R  I  T  gave  them  utterance.'*  "  And 
"  began  to  fpeak  with  other  tongues:"  the  vulgar 
tranflation  renders  it,  variis  Unguis^  ''  with  divers 
*'  tongues;"  that  is,  they  fpake  feveral  languages 
befides  their  own  mother  tongue,  or  as  it  is  exprefs'd 
in  our  S  a  v  i  o  u  r's  promife  to  the  apoftles,  Mark 
xvi.  17.  "  With  new  tpngues."  ^'  Thefe  figns," 
fays  our  Lord  before  his  afcenfion,  *^  fliall  follow 
"  them  that  believe ;"  "  they  fhall  fpeak  v/ith  new 
'^  tongues  i"  that  is,  they  fhould  all  on  the  fudderx 
fpeak  languages  which  they  had  never  le^rn'd,-  nor 
had  any  knowledge  of  before. 

I  know  not  who  was  the  firft.  author  of  that  con- 
ceit, that  the  miracle  was  not  in  the  fpeakers,  but  in 
the  hearers  ;  that  is,  the  apoftles  fpake  in  their  own 
mother  tongue,  (the  Syriac)  and  the  hearers  of  fe- 
veral nations  heard  them  every  one  in  their  own 
language ;  which  indeed  muft  be  acknowledged  to 
be  as  great  a  miracle,,  or  greater,  than  if  the  apoftles 
had  fpoken  fo  many  diff^erent  languages :  but  this 
feems  to  be  a  very  groundlefs,  and  unreaionable  con^ 
ceit,  and  very  contrary  to  this  relation  of  this  mira- 
culous giftj  and  to  all  the  circumftances  of  it*  For 
22  P  2  th^ 


4514  Of  the  gift  of  tongim 

)ERM.  the  text  cxprelly  fays,  that "  they  fpake  with  other 
"  tongues,"  that  is,  in  languages  different  from  their 
mother  tongue,  in  which   they  fpake  before,  other- 
wife    they  could   r '  *:  be  caLed  "  other,    or    new 
"  tongues.*'  And  i  L'rr.  xii.  2^,  the  apoftle,  among 
the  feveral  gifts  which  God  had  bellowed  upon  the 
church,  mentions  '*  divcrfity  of  tongues,'*  which  had 
not  been  true,  if  the  apoflles  had  all  fpoken  in  one 
language.     And  ver.  30.  he  makes  a  difference  be- 
tween the  ^ift  of  fpeaking  feveral  languages,  and  in- ' 
terprecing  things  fpoken  in  divers  tongues.     ''   Do 
*'  all,  fays  he,  fpeak  with  tongues  ?  do  all  interpret  ?  " 
But  if  what  the  apoftles  had  fpoken  in  one  language, 
had   been  heard   by  thofe  of  feveral  nations  in  their 
own  language,  there  had  been  no  need  of  interpre- 
tation.    And  chap.  xiv.  ver.  2.  "  He  that  fpeaketh 
*'  in  an  unknown  tongue,  fpeaketh  not  unto  men,  but 
^'  unto  God;  for  no  man   heareth  him ;"  that  is, 
no   man  underftandeth    what   he  faith,  God  only 
knows  it  ;  whereas  if  they  heard  every  one  in  their 
own  language,  they   all  underdood  what  was  faid. 
And  ver.  13.  "  Wherefore  let  him  that  fpeaketh  in 
*'  an  unknown  tongue,  pray  that  he  may  interpret.'* 
But  what  need  of  that,  if  every  one  heard  what  was 
fpoken  in  his  own  tongue  ^  And  ver.  16.  the  apoftle 
fays,  that  "  he  that  was  unlearned,  could  not  fay 
*'  amen  at  giving  of  thanks  in  an  unknown  tongue  ; 
"  becaufe  he  underfiood  not  what  was  fliid."     And 
ver.  27.  ^'  If  any  man  fpeak  in  an  unknown  tongue, 
^'  let  it  be  by   two,    or  at    moil    by   three,    and 
^'  that  by  courfe,  and  let  one  interpret."    All  which 
plainly  contradicts  that  foolifh  conceit,  that  the  mira- 
cle of  the  gift  of  tongues  was  not  in  the  fpeakers,  but 
ihc  hearers. 

That 


conferred  on  the  apofiles.  45^5 

That  which  feems  to  have  given  occafion  to  this  SERM. 
error,  was,  that  they  could  not  underfland  how  any 
man  fhould  at  the  fame  time  fpeak  divers  languages : 
but  there  is  no  ground  at  all  to  fuppofe  fo-,  becaufe  it 
is  not  faid,  that  any  of  the  apoftles  did  at  the  fame 
time  fpeak  feveral  languages,  (which  is  impollible)  but 
that  the  apoftles  fpake  feveral  languages,  fo  that  the 
feveral  nations  then  prefent  heard  fome  or  other  of 
the  apoftles  fpeaking  in  their  own  language.  So 
that  to  trouble  ourfelves  no  farther  about  this  idle 
conceit,  the  miracle  was  not,  that  every  one  of  the 
apoftles  did  fpeak  feveral  languages  at  the  fame  time ; 
but  that  they. all  fpake  on  a  fudden  languages  which 
they  had  never  learn'd  before  ;  fo  that  the  people  of 
Icvcral  nations,  that  were  then  prefent,  did  then  hear 
fome  or  other  of  the  apoftles  fpeaking  to  them  in 
their  own  language. 

Having  thus  explained  the  feveral  exprcfllons  and 
pafiages  in  the  text, 

I  come  now  to  fpeak  to  the  main  argument  con- 
tained in  them,  viz.  this  miraculous  gift  which  was 
conferred  on  the  apoftles,  of  fpeaking  all  on  the  fud- 
den the  languages  of  all  nations,  with  whom  they 
had  occ4fion  to  converfe,  though  they  had  never 
learn*d  them  before. 

And  in  the  handling  of  this  argument,  thefe  fol- 
lowing particulars  will  be  fit  to  be  conftdered,  and 
enquired  into  by  us. 

Firft,  the  ftrangencls  of  this  gift  or  miracle. 

Secondly,  the  clear  evidence  of  this  miracle,  that 
it  was  real,  and  that  there  was  no  manner  of  im- 
pofture  or  deceit  in  it,  nor  could  there  be  any  fufpi- 
cion  of  it, 

Thirdly, 


4  J 1 6  Of  the  gift  of  tongues 

SERM.       Thirdly,  the  wonderful  efFed  of  it  immediately^ 
'  and  upon  the  fpot,  upon  the  very  day,  and  in  the 
place  where  it  was  firft  wrought. 

Fourthly,  the  great  neceffity  and  ufefulnefs  of  it. 

Fifthly,  the  reafon  why  it  was  the  firft  of  all  the 
miraculous  gifts,  and  fo  vifibly  conferr'd  upon  the 
apoftles,  before  any  of  the  reft. 

Sixthly  and  laftly,  I  fhall  enquire,  whether  there  be 
any  neccfilty  now,  and  confequently  any  probabili- 
ty of  the  renewing  of  this  miracle,  in  order  to  the 
converfion  of  the  infidel  world,  and  thofe  many  and 
great  nations  in  the  remoter  parts  of  the  world,  which 
do  ftiil  continue  ftrangers  and  enemies  to  the  chriftian 
religion. 

Firft,  the  ftrangenefs  of  this  gift  or  miracle.  It 
was  of  that  nature,  that  the  like  was  never  known  in 
the  world,  neither  before  nor  fince  the  firft  ages  of 
chriftianity,  upon  any  occafion  whatfoever ;  nor  can 
we  we^l  imagine  any  other  fort  of  miracle  that 
could  probably  affed  men  more,  and  ftrike  them 
with  greater  wonder  and  admiration,  and  have  been  a 
more  fenfible  demonftration  of  a  divine  power  and 
prelence  accompanying  the  apoftles,  than  to  fee  and 
hear  them  all  on  the  fudden  perfedly  to  fpeak  fo  many 
languages,  which  they  had  never  learned  before. 

Efpecially  if  all  the  circumftances  of  the  thing 
be  duly  weighed  and  confider'd  ;  that  they  who  pre- 
tended to  be  endowed  with  this  gift, were  not  ftrangers 
newly  arrived  and  come  to  Jerulalem,  who  before 
they  came  thither  might  pofiibly  by  great  ftudy  and 
pains  have  attained  to  the  knowledge  and  skill  of  fe- 
veral  languages,  (each  of  them  fuppofe  two  languages 
apiece)  and  have  craftily  combined  together  lo  im- 
pofe  upon  the  world,  by  the  pretence  and  oftentation 

of 


conferrd  oft  the  apofiks.  45^7 

of  fuch  a  miracle :  but  thefe  perfons  were  known  to  SERM- 
all  that  dwek  in  Jerufalem,  and  had  for  a  long  time 
been  taken  notice  of,  as  the  difciples  and  followers  of 
Jesus,  who  was  lately  crucified  among  them  •,  their 
education  was  known,  and  the  meannefs  of  their  con- 
dition, that  they  were  fimple  and  ilhterate  perfons, 
wlio  never  had  the  advantage  or  opportanity  of  at- 
taining to  this  skill  in  an  ordinary  way ;  and  therefore 
it  muft  be  concluded  to  have  been  an  extraordinary 
and  fupernatural  gift. 

Befides,  that  this  miracle  was  very  publickly  wrought, 
and  the  noife  of  it  in  a  few  hours  drew  together  the 
flrangers  of  feveral  nations,  who  being  become  pro- 
felytes  of  the  Jewifh  religion,  dwelt  at  Jerufalem ; 
thefe  all  coming  together,  upon  the  noife  and  fame  of 
this  miracle,  found  it  to  be  true,  and  as  appears  from 
the  hiftory,  were  fo  well  fatisfied  of  the  reality  of  it, 
that  a  very  great  number,  upon  the  occafion  of  \i^ 
and  upon  that  very  day,  became  profelytes  to  the 
chriftian  religion,  and  joined  themfelves  to  the  apo- 
fties  and  their  followers,  (who  were  then  but  few  in 
number)  and  were  prefendy  admitted  into  the  chri- 
ftia'n  church  by  baptifm,  the  ufual  cerem.ony  of  ad- 
mitting profelytes  among  the  Jews.  This  was  a  pre- 
fent  and  great  effed,  and  is  a  great  evidence  and  con- 
firmation of  the  truth  and  reality  of  the  thing:  but 
this  I  fhall  have  occafion  to  fpeak  more  fully  to,  when. 
I  come  to  the  fifth  particular  which  I  propofed. 

I  add  farther,  that  our  Saviour  feem.s  to  have 
reckoned  this  as  one  of  the  greateil  of  miracles,  and 
therefore  to  have  referved  it,  for  an  inHance  and  de- 
monftration  of  the  glorious  power  which  he  was  m~ 
veiled  withal,  after  his  afcenfion  into  heaven*,  as  may 
very  probably  be  colleded  from  that  declaration  and 

proinife 


451 8  Of  the  gift  of  tongues 

S  E  R  M.  promife  which  he  made  to  his  apoftles,  a  little  before 
his  departure  from  them,  John  xiv.  12.  "  Verily, 
"  verily,  I  fay  unto  you,  he  that  believeth  on  me, 
"  the  works  that  I  do  fhali  he  do  alfo,  and  greater 
''  works  than  thefe  fhall  he  do,  becaufe  T  go  unto 
"  my  Fa  the  r/*  that  is,  in  order  to  the:  fending 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  "  to  endow  them  with  power 
*'  from  on  high,"  to  qualify  them  for  the  publifhing 
of  the  gofpel,  which  they  were  forbidden  to  enrer 
upon  till  this  promife  was  made  good  to  them.  But 
what  were  thefe  "  greater  works,"  which  he  here 
promifeth  to  enable  them  to  do,  after  he  was  "  gone 
"  to  his  F  A  T  H  E  R  ?'*  for  he  exprefly  promifeth,  that 
they  fhould  not  only  do  "  the  works  which  he  had 
"  done,  but  greater  works  than  thofe : "  and  what 
could  thefe  be?  Our  S  a  v  i  ou  R  had  wrought  many 
and  great  miracles  almoft  in  all  kinds  ■  imaginable ; 
he  had  caft  out  devils,  and  healed  all  forts  of  infirmi- 
ties and  difeafes ;  he  had  changed  nature,  by  turning 
water  into  wine,  and  had  (lopp'd  the  courfe  of  it,  by 
(lining  the  winds  and  the  fea  by  his  word ;  and  he 
had  raifed  the  dead ;  and  now  what  work  could  that 
be  which  was  "  greater  "  than  any  of  thefe  ?  Even 
that  which  I  am  fpeaking  of,  the  miraculous  power 
of  fpeaking  all  languages,  without  learning  them  *,  a 
thing  never  heard  of  in  the  world  before.  And  this 
was  the  firfl:  fenfible  effedt  of  the  coming  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  upon  them,  the  iirft  miraculous 
power  with  which  he  endowed  his  apoftles,  after  he 
was  afcended  into  heaven,  and  gone  to  his  Fa- 
ther •,  an  evident  teftimony  of  the  glory  and  power 
which  he  was  inverted  withal,  after  he  was  taken  up 
into  heaven,  and  fat  down  at  the  right  hand  of  God, 
to  fignify  both   the  honour  and   power  which   was 

conferred 


conferrd  on  the  apojiks,  45^9 

conferred  upon  him,  in  that  he  enabled  his  apoftles,  S  E  R  M. 
when  he  was  abfent  from  them,  to  do  that,  which 
whilfl  he  was  prefent  with  them,  he  had  never  enabled 
them  to  do,  nor  ever  did  himfelf ;  all  which  tends  to 
advance  this  miracle,  and  to  Ihew  the  greatneis  and 
flrangenefs  of  it  above  any  other.  And  unlefs  we  fix 
it  upon  this  miracle,  it  will  be  hard,  if  not  impolTible, 
to  give  a  good  account  of  the  accomplifhing  of  that 
foiemn  promife  of  our  Saviour  to  his  difciples, 
after  he  fliould  be  gone  to  his  Father,  that  is, 
after  his  afcenfion  into  heaven  s  "  verily,  verily,  I  fay 
**  unto  you,  he  that  believcth  on  me,  the  works  that 
*'  I  do  fhall  he  do  alio,  and  greater  works  than  thefe 
''  fhall  he  do,  becaufc  I  go  unto  my  Fath  e  r.'* 
Now  what  miraculous  work  can  be  inilanced  in,  that 
v/as  done  by  the  apoflles,  and  was  "  greater "  than 
any  our  Saviour  did,  when  he  was  upon  earth, 
but  this'  only  of  fpeaking  all  languages  on  the  fudden, 
v/ithout  ever  having  learned  them  ?  which  confidera- 
tion  alone  does  confirm  me  paft  all  doubt,  that  our 
Saviour  in  this  promife  meant  the  miraculous  gift 
of  tongues,  which  was  the  firft  gift  that  was  confer- 
red upon  them,  after  he  was  afcended  into  heaven, 
and  gone  to  his  Fa  t  H  e  R.     I  proceed. 

Secondly,  to  confider  the  clear  evidence  of  this  mi- 
racle, that  it  was  real,  and  that  there  could  be  no  fuf- 
picion  of  any  manner  of  impofture  and  deceit  in  it. 

It  was  publickly  wrought  before  many  witneflcs, 
and  thofe  the  moft  competent  of  all  other,  becaufe 
they  were  highly  prejudiced  againft  the  apoftles,  and 
great  enemies  to  them,  as  being  the  difciples  of  him 
whom  they  had  fo  lately  crucified  as  an  impoflor. 
They  gave  clear  proof  of  this  miraculous  power  in 
the  prefence  of  great  multitudes  of  feveral  nations. 

Vol.  Xo  22  Q^  who 

6, 


452 o  Of  the  gift  df  tongues 

SERM.  who  heard  them  every  one  fpeaklns  to  them  in  their 

CXCV II  J  r  Q 

■  own  language  :  and  befides  the  prefent  demonflration 
of  this  miraculous  gift,  to  thofe  of  feveral  nations 
that  dwelt  at  Jerufalem,  they  gave  evidence  of  it  in 
all  places  and  nations  whither  they  went  preaching 
the  gofpel  \  fo  that  this  miracle  accompanied  and  con- 
tinued with  them,  till  the  gofpel  was  made  known  to 
a  great  part  of  the  then  known  world,  and  lafted 
for  a  whole  age,  and  till  there  was  no  farther  need 
and  ufe  of  it. 

But  it  may  be  faid,  that  though  this  was  fuffici- 
ently  evident  to  them  that  dwelt  at  Jcrufalem,  who 
knew  the  apoflles,  and  the  circumftances  of  their 
education ;  yet  it  was  not  fo  credible  to  others,  who 
lived  remote  from  Jerufalem,  and  neither  knew 
the  apoftles,  nor  the  manner  of  their  education,  nor 
were  witnefles  of  the  miraculous  rife  and  beginning  of 
this  gift  of  tongues.  Thefe  could  only  hear  them  \ 
fpeak  in  their  language ;  but  whether  their  know- 
ledge of  this  language  had  been  acquired  by  ftudy,  or 
was  fupernatural  and  infufed,  for  this  they  had  only 
common  fame,  and  the  apoftles  own  word,  which 
may  feem  to  have  been  but  a  flender  evidence  for  a 
thing  fo  ftrange.  And  fo  it  mud  be  acknowledged 
to  be,  if  the  apoftles  affirmation,  that  this  gift  was 
fupernaturally  conferred  upon  them,  had  not  been 
otherwife  countenanced  and  fupported  ;  as  it  was  in  a 
very  extraordinary  and  remarkable  manner,  by  their 
being^endowed  with  a  power  to  work  other  miracles 
of  all  kinds,  which  they  did  every  where,  and  very 
frequendy  upon  all  occafions.  And  this  was  fufficicnt  1 
to  give  credit  to  what  they  affirmed,  concerning  this 
fupernatural  gift  of  tongues :  for  when  they  faw  them 
work  other  miracles  of  all  forts,  they  had  no  reafon 

tc 


cbnfe'rrd  on  the  apojiles,  452 r 

to  doubt  of  the  truth  and  reality  of  this  miraculous  SERM. 

CXCVIT 
gift  of  tongues,  which  was  abundantly  confirmed  by 

the  other  miraculous  powers  with  which  they  were 
endowed.  So  that  the  gofpel,  wherever  it  came,  car- 
ried its  own  evidence  along  with  it,  and  was  con- 
firmed by  the  very  manner  of  its  conveyance  and  de- 
livery j  and  well  might  men  entertain  it  as  a  divine 
dodrine,  when  the  very  manner  and  means,  whereby 
it  was  conveyed  to  the  world,  was  fo  ftrange  and  aflo- 
nifhing  a  miracle,  as  was  never  wrought  in  tht  world 
before,  upon  any  occafion  whatfoever.  And  this  will 
yet  be  farther  evident,  if  we  confider  in  the 

Third  place,  the  wonderful  effed  which  this  mira- 
cle immediately  had  upon  the  fpot,  and  on  the  very 
day  when  it  firft  appeared. 

It  had  fo  glaring  an  evidence,  and  carried  fuch 
convidion  in  it,  that  the  doctrine  which  they  who 
were  endowed  with  miraculous  gifts  did  preach,  was 
immediately  received  and  entertained  by  a  very  great 
number  of  the  hearers ;  who,  upon  the  convicftion  of 
this  great  miracle,  became  profelytes  to  this  new  re- 
ligion, and  were  folemnly  admitted  to  the  profeffion 
of  it  by  baptifm  j  as  we  read,  ver.  41.  of  this  chap- 
ter; where,-  after  St.  Peter  had  made  an  end  of  his 
fermon  to  the  people  upon  this  occafion,  it  is  faid, 
"  then  they  that  gladly  received  his  word  were  bap- 
«'  tized  ;  and  the  fame  day  there  were  added  unto 
''  them  about  three  thoufand  fouls."  Here  was  a 
mighty  eifed  "three  thoufand"  converted  at  one 
fermon,  being  convinced  by  the  evidence  of  this  mi- 
racle. And  it  was  a  very  immediate  efFe6t ;  for  it  is 
faid,  that  "  the  fame  day  three  thoufand  were  added 
*'  to  the  church."  Here  was  an  efFecl  proportionable 
to  the  greatnefs  and  ftrangenefs  of  its  caufe>  a  mighty 
22  Q^i  vidlory 


4522  Of  the  gift  of  tongues 

S  E  R  M.  vi(5lory  gained  over  the  prejudices  of  men,  and  the 
^  ^^  *  powers  of  darknefs,  by  the  light  and  conviftion  of 
this  miracle,  which  our  Saviour  feems  to  have 
kept  in  refervc  for  this  great  occafion,  when  his  gof- 
pel  and  religion  was  to  be  firft  publifh'd,  and  to  make 
its  folemn  entrance  into  the  world.  Here  was  a  large 
portion  of  firft- fruits,  and  a  great  earneftof  that  fpi- 
ritual  harveft,  which  the  apoftles  had  began  to  reap ; 
of  which  the  firft- fruits  among  the  Jews  were  a  type: 
for  their  harveft  alfo  was  at  this  very  feafon  of  the 
year ;  as  I  noted  before; 

Fourthly,  we  will  confider  the  great  ufefulnefs  of 
this  miraculous  gift,  for  the  more  eafy  and  fpecdy 
conveyance  of  the  dodlrine  of  chriftianity,  and  the 
diffufing  and  fpreading  the  knowledge  of  it  in  the 
world  5  and  this,  if  we  confider  it,  not  as  a  miracle, 
but  only  as  a  means  fo  very  convenient  to  this  pur- 
pofe,  that  by  the  advantage  of  it,  the  gofpel  made 
a  greater  progrels  in  the  fpace  of  a  few  years,  than 
in  humane  probability  could  have  been  made  without 
it  in  many  ages ;  and  it  was  fpread  farther  in  thirty 
years,  than  could  in  reafon  have  been  expeded  in  fif-  ^ 
teen  hundred,  by  natural  and  ordinary  micans.  "  So 
*'  mightily  grew  the  word  of  God,  and  prevailed  j'* 
being  carried  on  in  fo  powerful  and  fupernatural  a 
manner. 

Fifthly,  we  will  confider,  why  this  was  the  firft 
miraculous  gift,  conferred  upon  the  apoftles  more  vi- 
fibly,  and  before  any  of  the  reft.  The  other  mira- 
culous powers  were  only  vifible  in  their  efi^edls;  but 
this  was  vifible,  not  only  in  the  efteds  of  it,  but  like- 
wife  in  the  caufe  and  the  manner  of  its  being  con- 
ferr'd  :  "  for  the  Holy  Spirit  rcfted upon  them, 
'^  in  the  form  of  fiery  cloven  tongues  i"  to  {x^m^'j 

not 


conferred  on  the  apofiles,  452 1 

not  only  the  divcrfity  of  languages  which  they  fhould  S  e  r  M. 
be  enabled  to  fpeak,,  but  the  quick  and  piercing  effi-  ^^^^ 
cacy  of  their  fpeech.  The  reaibn  of  all  which  feems 
to  be,  becaufe  this  was  the  greateft  of  all  miracles, 
and  therefore  fit  to  be  firll :  for,  as  I  fhevved  before, 
this,  in  the  judgment  of  our  Saviour  (who 
beft  underftood  the  different  degrees  of  miracles) 
was  greater  than  any  of  thofe  which  he  himfelf 
in  his  iife^time  had  wrought ;  and  likewife,  becaufe 
this  miracle  was  of  greater  ufe  than  any  of  the  reft, 
and  more  neceifary  to  the  effedual  difcharge  of  their 
apoftolical  ofiice,  and  to  the  cafy  fjccefs,  and  more 
fpeedy  effe6l  of  it.  For  by  this  miraculous  gift  more 
efpecially,  the  apoilles  were,  as  it  were,  confecrated 
to  their  office,  and  made  capable  to  difcharge  it 
with  eafe  and  effed: ;  their  office  being  :o  publifh 
the  dodrine  of  the  gofpel  to  the  world,  and  to  be 
witnefTes  of  our  S  aviou  r's  refurredion  from  t)\^ 
dead,  which  was  to  be  the  great  confirmation  of  his 
dodrine  \  neither  of  which  they  could,  with  any  pro- 
bability of  effed  and  fuccefs,  have  done  without 
this  miraculous  gift :  for  what  flow  progrefs  mufl 
they  have  made,  and  how  \\xx\t  couki  they  have  ad- 
vanced in  this  work,  had  they  either  done  all  by 
interpreters,  or  been  put  lo  have  learned  the  lan- 
guages of  che  feveral  nations,  to  which  x!aty  had  been 
to  preach,  before  they  could  have  publiih'd  this 
doftrine  among  them  ? 

The  Jews,  who  were  very  zealous-  of  their  reli- 
gion, (which  was  iikewife  from  God,  and  was  at- 
.  teded  by  miracles^  upon  occafion  of  ieveral  calami- 
ties which  befel  them,  and  carried  them  into  capti- 
vity, were  difperfed  in  feveral  nations  5  and  yet  how 
flowly,  for  want  of  this  gift,  did  they  gain  prole- 

lyte^ 


1 


4524  ^f  i^^  S^fi  ^f  tongues 

S  E  re  vl.  ]ytes  to  their  religion  ?  and  how  h-^  did  they  con» 
^  ^*  vert  to  it  in  the  fpace  of  four  or  five  hundred  years  ? 
by  which  we  may  judge  how  little  chriftianity 
would  have  gained  upon  the  world,  had  it  not  been 
countenanced  and  afTifted  from  heaven  in  this  mira- 
culous manner.     I  come  now  to  the 

Sixth  and  laft  thing  which  I  propofed  to  enquire 
into  i  namely,  whether  there  be  any  necelTity  now, 
and  confequently  probability  of  the  renewing  of  this 
miracle,  in  order  to  the  converfion  of  infidels,  and 
the  gaining  over  of  thofe  many  and  great  nations  in 
the  remoter  parts  of  the  world,  who  are  flill  itrangcrs 
and  enemies  to  the  chriftian  religion. 

That  which  would  induce  a  man  to  hope  well  in 
this  cafe,  is,  that  without  fome  fuch  miraculous  gift, 
there  is  little  or  no  probability  of  the  converfion  of 
infidel  nations  \  unlefs  God  fhould  be  pleafed,  by 
fome  unexpedlcd  means,  to  bring  over  to  chriftia- 
nity fome  powerful  prince  of  great  reputation  for 
his  wifdom  and  virtue ;  who  by  the  influence  of  his 
examfJe,  and  by  his  favour  and  countenance,  might 
give  advantages  to  the  planting  of  it  among  his 
Ibbjeds.  And  yet  confidering  the  inveterate  and 
violent  prejudices  of  men  againft  a  new  religion,  fuch 
an  attempt  would,  in  all  humane  probability,  be  more 
likely  to  end  in  the  ruin  of  the  prince,  and  the  over- 
turning of  his  government,  than  in  the  eftablifhment 
of  a  new  religion.  Of  which  kind  there  have  been 
feveral  inftances  very  remarkable  in  Japan  and  ^^chi- 
opia,  and  perhaps  in  places  and  times  nearer  to  us, 
and  within  our  own  memory. 

But  if  any  fuch  thing    fhould   be  attempted  by 
private  perfons,  the  undertaking   would   meet  with 
fuch  infuperable  obftacles,  not  only  from  the  preju- 
dices 


conferred  on  the  apoflles.  45^5 

dices  and  interefls  of  men,  but  from  the  great  diffi-  SERM, 
culty  of  gaining  languages  fo  different  from  our  own,  ^^^^^-.^^ 
that  it  muft  in  all  likeUhood  have  a  very  flow  progrels, 
and  at  laft  fall  to  the  ground,  for  want  of  proper 
and  effedlual  means  to  carry  it  on.  For  though  the 
morality  of  the  chriftian  religion  be  admirable,  and 
very  apt  to  recommend  it  felf  to  the  unbiafs'd  and 
impartial  reafon  of  mankind  (if  any  fuch  thing  were 
any  where  to  be  found  ;)  yet  *  the  death  of  the  So  rf  *  ^^^  ^^.^- 
of  God  is  fuch  a  ftumbling-block,  as  is  very  hard oTthiT vol 
for  humane  reafon  to  get  over.  Of  which  thejefuits^""^^- 
in  China  were  fo  fenfible,  that,  according  to  their 
ufual  fincerity,  they  thought  beft  to  conceal  that 
mofl  eflential  part  of  the  chriftian  dodlrine,  which 
relates  to  the  death  and  fufferings  of  our  Saviour. 
So  I  am  furc  St.  Paul  took  it  to  be,  when  he  tells  the 
Corinthians,  that  "  he  determined  to  know  no- 
"  thing  among  them,  fave  JesusChrist,  and 
*'  him  crucified."  This  it  feems  he  looked  upon  as 
the  moil  material  and  valuable  part  of  the  chriftian 
religion,  and  of  greateft  confequence  to  be  known 
by  us.  But  the  jefuits  it  feems  thought  otherwile, 
and  therefore  concealed  it  from  their  converts.  For 
which  mod  fhameful  and  unchriftian  pradice,  feve- 
ral  of  them  were  very  lately  under  profecution  at 
Rome. 

Befides  all  this,  +  the  matters  of  fadl  upon  which  +  See  the 
the  truth  of  chriftianity  does  neceflarily  depend,  as  couife  ' 
the  birth,  and  life,  and  miracles,  and  death,  and 
refurredion  of  our  bleffed  Saviour,  and  his  vifi- 
ble  afcenfion  into  heaven  :  I  fay,  thefe  matters  of 
fad,  though  we  have  a  moil  credible  hiflory  and 
relation  of  them  brought  down  to  us,  do  not  carry 
fo  ftrong  and  fenfible  a  conviction  in  them,  to  thofe 

who       \ 


.4526  Of  the  gift  of  tongues 

S  E  R  M.  who  never  heard  of  them  before,  as  to  be  able  to  con- 
^^^  qucr  and  bear  down  a  violent  prejudice:  nor  is  it 
in  reafon  to  be  expedled,  that  thefe  things  (houid 
eafily  be  admitted  by  thofe,  who  are  utter  ftrangers 
to  our  hiftory  of  former  times,  and  confequently  not 
fit  to  judge  of  what  value  they  arc. 

I  fpeak  not  this  to  difcourage  any  from  ufing 
their  bed  endeavours  to  propagate  our  religion 
among  infidels,  where  the  providence  of  God  opens 
a  doorjand  gives  any  opportunity  for  it.  Among  the 
,  many  bad  things  that  have  been  done  in  the  church 
of  Rome^  there  is  one  thing  very  much  to  their 
honour,  that  they  have  been  at  very  great  charge 
and  pains  m.  their  miffions  for  the  converfion  of  in- 
fidel nations,  efpecially  in  the  eaflcrn  parts  of  the 
world,  to  that  which  they  account  the  true  chriftian 
rehgion.  And  if  the  matter  had  been  as  honeftiy 
managed,  as  I  hope  it  was  pioufly  intended,  and 
their  charity  and  zeal  had  been  equally  warm  for  the 
converfion  of  the  northern  infidels,  where  there  is 
nothing  to  be  met  with  but  froft  and  cold,  as  it 
hath  been  for  the  converfion  of  thofe  parts  of  the 
world,  where  gold  and  fpices  abound,  it  had  deferved 
great  praife,  notwithflanding  their  mifrakes  in  reli- 
gion, and  the  great  mixture  of  errors  and  corruptions 
in  it. 

And  it  is  no  fmali  reproach  to  the  proteftant  reli- 
'  gion,  that  there  hath  not  appeared  an  equal  zeal 
among  us  for  this  purpofe  ;  and  that  to  our  unwea- 
ried endeavours  to  promote  the  intereft  of  trade  in 
foreign  parts,  there  hath  not  been  joined  a  like  zeal 
and  induftry  for  the  propagating  of  the  chriftian  re- 
ligion ;  which  might  furely  be  attempted,  with  more 
than  ordinary  advantage,  in  thofe  places  where  we 
have  fo'  free  a  commerce. ,  It 


conferrd  on  the  apofdes.  45^7 

It  is  not  good  for  men  to  be  confident^  where  S  e  r  M^ 
they  are  not  certain;  but  *  it  feems  to  me  not  im-^^^^^^- 
pofTible,  if  iho.  converfion  of  infidels  to  chriflianity  *  See  the 
were  fincerely  and  vigoroufiy  attem.pted  by  men  of^'^''^-^^^^^ 
honed  minds,  who  would  make  it  their  bu finefs  to  ^  ^^"^  ^' 
in(lrLi(fl  thofe  who  are  Grangers  to  our  religion  in  the' 
pure  doclrine  of   chriflianity^  free  from  all  humane 
mixtures  and  corruptions:    it  feems  to  me  in  this 
cafe,  not  at  all  improbable,  that  God  would  extraor- 
dinarily countenance  fuch  an  attempt,  by  all  fitting 
afTiftance,  as  he  did  the  firft  publication  of  the  gofpel  i 
for  as  the  wifdom  of  G  o  d  is  not  wont  to  do  that 
which  is  fuperfluous,  fo  neither  is  it  wanting  in  that 
which  is  necefTary.     And  from  what  hath  been  faid 
upon  this  argument,  the  necefTity  feems  to  be  much 
the  fame  that  it  was  at  firfl. 

I  would  not  be  millaken  in  what  I  have  faid  abouc ' 
this  matter  5  I  do  not  deliver  it  as  pofitive,  but  only 
as  probable  divinity,  no  wife  contrary  to  fcripture, 
and  very  agreeable  to  reafon. 

Thus  much  may  fuffice  to  have  fpoken  concerning 
this  miraculous  gift  of  tongues,  conferred  upon  the 
apoftles  at  the  time  of  pentecoil. 


'Vv^J^-* 


:x-w»C  i 


'^^    ^fc-t*.,^^     UrCuf    d-^-lfr'  ■  -i-    ^^^t-**.*-   ^^KA/'i- 


(U^ 


Vol.  X.  32  R  SERMON 

6. 


[4528] 

SERMON  CXCVIII. 

Of  the  coming  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
as  an  advocate  for  Christ. 


JOHN  xvi.  7,  8. 

Neverthelefsy  I  tell  you  the  truth  ;  //  is  expedient  for 
you  that  I  go  away.  For  if  I  go  not  away^  the  ccm^ 
forter  will  not  come  unto  you  ;  but  if  I  depart^  I  will 
fend  him  unto  you.  And  when  he  is  come,  he  will 
reprove  the  world  of  Jin,  and  of  righteoufnefs,  and  of 
judgment, 

SERM;  r  I  "^HESE  words  are  part  of  our  Savi- 
CXCVIII  a  ouR*s  lad  fermon,  which  he  made  to  his 
^"^  -*•       difciples  a  little  before  he  Mt  the  world : 

and  this  fermon  is  only  recorded  by  this  evangehfl, 
who  hath  fet  it  down  at  large  in  the  14th,  15th,  and 
1 6th  chapters  of  his  golpel.  The  main  fcope  of  it 
is,  lirft  to  perfuade  them  to  the  obedience  and  prac- 
tice of  that  holy  dodlrine,  which  he  had  delivered 
to  them  while  he  was  with  them  ;  and  then,  becaufe 
their  hearts  (were  full  of  forrow  at  the  thoughts  of 
his  departure  from  them,  knowing  that  for  his  fake 
they  Ihould  be  ill  treated  by  the  world,  he  arms 
them  againft  thefe  difcouragements ;  he  promifeth, 
not  long  after  his  departure  from  them,  to  fend 
down  his  Holy  Spirit  upon  them  in  miracu- 
lous powers  and  gifts,  as  a  teftimony  to  the  world 
of  the  truth  of  his  doctrine,  and  a  clear  convidion 
that  he  came  from  Go  d  ;  ver.  26.  of  the  xvth  chapter. 

*'  But 


Of  the  coming  of  the  Yioi.Y  Ghost,  G?r.  4529 
''  But  when  the  comforter  (or  rather  the  advocate)  SERM. 
"  is  come,  whom  I  will  fend  unto  you  from  the 
"  Fat  H  E  R,  even  the  S  p  i  R  i  t  of  truth,  which 
''  proceeds  from  the  Father,  he  fhall  tcftify 
*'  of  me.  And  ye  alfo  fhall  bear  witnefs,  becaufe 
''  ye  have  been  with  me  from  the  beginning." 
The  teflimony  which  the  Holy  S  p  i  r i  r^'ihouiu 
give  to  them,  fhould  give  credit  and  flrength  to  their 
teflimony. 

And  this  confideration  he  makes  ufe  of  to  com- 
fort them  under  the  fad  thoughts  of  his  departure, 
becaufe  his  abfence  would  be  abundantly  recompenfcd 
to  them,  by  the  coming  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
which  could  not  be  till  he  had  left  the  world  :  be- 
caufe this  comforter,  or  advocate,  was  to  be  fent  in 
his  name,  to  come  upon  his  account,  and  in  his 
Head,  to  fupply  his  abfence.  So  that  though  they 
were  greatly  troubled  at  the  thoughts  of  his  departure, 
there  was  no  caufe  for  it,  when  all  things  were  con- 
fidered  ;  for  in  truth,  it  was  for  their  advantage,  that 
he  fhould  depart  from  them,  ver.  the  6tk  of  this  chap- 
ter :  "  but  becaufe  I  have  faid  thefe  things  unto  you, 
"  forrow  hath  filled  your  heart.  Neverthelefs,  I  tell 
''  you  the  truth  ;  it  is  expedient  for  you  that  I  go 
"  away  :  for  if  I  go  not  away,  the  comforter  will 
"  not  come  unto  you  \  but  if  I  depart,  I  will  fend 
'^  him  unto  you.  And  when  he  is  come,  he  will  re- 
''  prove  the  world  of  fin,  and  of  righteoufnefs,  and 
*'  of  judgment.'* 

From  which  v/ords,  I  fhall  confider  thefe  two 
things. 

Firfl,  the  necefTity  of  C  h  r  i  s  t's  leaving  the 
world,  in  order  to  the  coming  of  the  Holy 
Ghost:  "  if  I  go  not  away,  the  comforter  v/iil 

22  R  2  "^  not 


453 o        ^f  ^^^  coming  of  the  Holy  G  h  o s t^ 
JEjlM   "  not  come  unto  you;  but  if  I  depart,  I  will  fend 
^«  him  unto  you." 

Secondly,  the  happy  confequence  and  effect  of  the 
comins:  of  the  Ho  ly  Ghost  :  ''  and  when  he 
*'  IS  come,  he  fhall  reprove  the  woi^ld  of  fin,  and  of 
^'  righteoufnefs,  and  of  judgment.'*  1  fhall  as  briefly 
as  I  can  explain  both  thefe. 

Firil,  the  necefllty  of  C  h  r  i  s  t's  leaving  the 
world,  in  order  to  the  coming  of  the  Holy  G  h  o  s  t  : 
"  neverthelefs,  I  tell  you  the  truth  ;  it  is  exJ)edientfor 
''  you  that  I  go  away  :  for  if  I  go  not  away,  the 
*'  comforter  will  not  come  unto  you  *,  but  if  I  de- 
*^  part,  I  will  fend  him  unto  you."  That  it  is  the 
Holy  Ghost  which  is  here  fpoken  of,  and  that 
as  a  perfon  a!nd  nota^a  quality,  or  power,  or  virtue,  is 
plain  from  our  S  av  i  o  u  r's  difcourfe  all  along  this 
fermon,  in  which  he  is  fpoken  of  under  the  notion 
of  a  perfon,  and  that  in  as  plain  and  exprefs  terms  as 
Christ  himfelf  is.  As  the  Father  "  fent 
''  Chris t,"  fo  he  is  faid  "  to  fend  the  Holy 
*'  G  H  o  s  t  >"  as  C  H  R  I  s  T  is  faid  "  to  depart,"  fo 
the  Holy  Ghost  is  faid  "  to  come-,'*  as 
Christ  is  called  "  an  advocate,"  fo  the  H  o  l  y 
Ghost  is  faid  to  be" another  advocate ;"  C h  r  i  s  t 
our  advocate  to  plead  our  caufe  with  God,  he 
Chris  t's  advocate^  to  plead  his  caufe  v/ith  the 
v/orld,  chap.  xiv.  i6,  17.  "  And  1  will  pray  the 
''  Fat  H  E  R,  and  he  fhall  give  you  another  com- 
"  forter,  that  he  may  abide  v/ith  you  for  ever." 
And  who  is  that .?  "  even  the  Spirit  of  truth." 
And  chap.  xv.  26.  '^  But  when  the  comforter  is  come, 
"  whom  i  will  fend  unto  you  from  the  Fat  H  e  r, 
^'  even  the  Sp  i  r  i  t  of  truth."  And  in  the  verfe 
immediately   after  the  text,  "  hov/beit,    when  he, 

"  the 


as  an  advocate  for  Christ.  453 1 

s«  the  S  p  I  R I  T  of  truth,  is  come/'     Bat  exprefly,  S  E  r  M. 
"  chap,  xiv.26.  he  is  called ''the  Ho  lyG  HOST  :^^^^^^^ 
".  but  the  comforter,  which  is  the  Ho  ly  G  h  os  t, 
^'  whom  the  Fat  h  e  r  will  fend  in  my  name,  he 
''  Ihall  teach  you  all  things.'* 

All  the  difficulty  is  concerning  the  word  ^c^y.Xyircr, 

which  our  tranflation  renders  ''  the  comforter."  'Tis 

true  indeed,  that   the  verb  ^^^y.c'Xei-j  is  of  a   very 

large  and  unhmited  fignification  ;  it  fometimes  figni- 

fies  "  to' comfort,"    very  frequendy  ''  to  preach, 

"  teach,  and  exhort,"  and  fometimes  "  to  plead  as 

"  an  advocate   the  caufe  of  another.'^     And   this 

feems  to  be  the  proper  notion  of  the  word  ^^>tXy]1or, 

in  this  place,  "  the  advocate  or  patron  of  a  caufe,-' 

one  that  pleads  for  the  party  accufed.     And  in  this 

fenfe,  and  no  other,  C  h  A  i  s  t  is  called  our  rS^yXv]" 

T5g-,  or  "  advocate  with  the  Fat  h  e  r,"  i  John  ii.  i, 

^'  If  any  man  fin,  we  have  an   advocate  with  the 

"  Fa  t  H  E  R,  Jesus  Christ   the  righteous.*' 

And  as  C  H  R  I  s  t  is  "  our  advocate  with  the  Fa- 

"the  r"  in  heaven ;  fo  the  S  p  i  r  i  t  is  C  h  r  i  s  t's 

advocate  here  on  earth,  and  pleads  his  caufe  with 

the  world.     And  it  is    very  obfervable,  that   this 

very    word   ^'    paraclete, "    though    it    be  not  an 

hebrew,    but    a    greek    word,    is  frequently   ufed 

both   by  the  chaldee  paraphraft,  and  other  jewifh 

writers,  in  this  fenfe  of  an  advocate.     And  that  this 

notion  of  the  word  agrees  bed  with  this  place,  I  fhall 

clearly  fhew,  when  I  come  to  the  fecond  head  of 

my  difcourfe ;  namely,  to  fhev/  the  happy  confequence 

and  effecl  of  the  coming  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 

viz.  the  convincing  of  the  world  how  injurioudy  they 

had  dealt  with  Christ,  and  the  clear  vindication 

of  his  innocency,  which  is  the  proper  office  and  work 

of  an  advocate.  Having 


453  2  Of  the  coming  of  the  H  o  l,y  G  h  o  s  r, 

S  E  R  M       Having  thus  fix'd  the  notion  of  the  word  f^-vXti" 
"^  To^  in  this  place,  we  will  now  enquire  what  neceffity 

or  expediency  there  was,  that  Christ  fhould  Jeave 
the  world,  in  order  to  the  comino-  of  the  Holy 
Ghost:  "  it  is  expedient  for  you  that  I  go  away  : 
*'  for  if  I  go  not  away,  the  advocate  will  not  come 
'''  unto  youi  but  if  I  depart,  I  will  fend  him  unto 
"  you." 

And  of  this  I  fhall  give  an  account  in  thefe  two 
particulars  : 

I.  From  the  method  of  the  divine  difpenfadon,  in 
the  redemption  and  falvation  of  man  by  Jesus 
Ch  rist. 

II.  From  the  rational  fuitablenefs,  and  congruity 
of  this  difpenfation. 

I.  FiOm  the  method  of  the  divine  difpenfation,  in 
the  redemption  and  filvation  of  man  by  Jesus 
Christ.  Thus  the  fcripture  tells  us,  that  Go  d  in 
his  infinite  v/ifdom  had  defign'd  and  order'd  things, 
that  the  S  o  N  of  God  iliould  come  into  the  world, 
and  live  in  a  mean  and  abje<5l  condition  ;  that  he 
fhould  be  "defpifed  and  rejedted  of  men,"  perfecuted 
and  put  to  death ;  and  that  as  a  reward  of  all  this 
fubmiflion  and  fuffering,  he  fhould  be  raifed  again 
from  the  dead,  taken  up  into  heaven,  and  placed  "  on 
*'  the  right  hand  of  the  majefty  on  high  ;"  and  that 
in  the  triumph  of  his  afcenfion,  he  fliould  "  lead 
"  captive"  death  and  hell,  and  all  the  powers  of  dark- 
nefs;  and  beijig  enter'd  into  the  highcil  heavens,  and 
*'  fet  on  the  right  hand  of  God,"  as  an  a6l  of 
power  and  royalty,  he  fnould  fend  down  his  Holy 
S  p  I  R  I  t  in  miraculous  gifts  upon  men,  for  the  con- 
vidlion  of  the  world,  that  the  dodrine  which  he  com- 
manded his  apoftles  to  publifh  to  all  nations  was  from 

God. 


C5  an  advocate  fcr  Christ.  4533 

God.  And  therefore  the  apoftle  St.  Paul  tells  us  SERM- 
exprefly  that  the  communication  of  thefe  gifts  of*the 
Spirit  was  the  proper  efFeft  and  confequent  of  our 
L  o  R  d's  exaltation,  and  one  of  the  firlt  ads  of  royalty 
which  heexercifed,  after  he  waspofTefs'd  of  his  glorious 
kingdom,  Eph.  iv.  7,  8.  where  fpeakingof  the  vari- 
ous gifts  of  the  S  P  I  R  I  T,"  unto  every  one  of  us,  faith 
"  he,  is  given  grace,  according  to  the  meafure  of  the 
"  gift  of  Ch  R  1ST."  For  which  he  cites  the  pre- 
diction of  David,  Pfal.  Ixviii.  18.  "  Wherefore  he 
*'  faith,  when  heafcended  up  on  high,  he  led  capti- 
"  vity  captive,  and  gave  gifts  unto  men."  And  "  he 
''  gave  fome  apoftles  and  fome  prophets,  and  fome 
"  evangelifts,  and  fome  padors  and  teachers.'*  So 
that  we  plainly  fee,  that  this  was  the  difpenfation  of 
God,  and  the  method  which  his  wifdom  had  pitched 
upon,  that  our  Lor  d  fhould  firil  leave  the  world, 
and  be  taken  up  into  glory,  and  then  fend  down  the 
Ho  LY  G  H  OS  T,  in  the  plentiful  effufions  of  mira- 
culous gifts.  So  this  evangelift  exprefly  tells  us  in 
another  place,  which  gives  great  light  to  this  iqxU 
John  vii.  ^<^.  "  But  this,  (fays  he)  fpake  he  of  the 
*'  Spirit,  which  they  that  believe  on  him  fhould 
*«  receive :  for  the  H  o  l  y  G  h  o  s  t  was  not  yet  given, 
"  becaufe  Jesus  was  not  yet  glorified.''"  Implying, 
that  according  to  the  divine  difpofal,  it  was  oi-dered 
firft,  that  Christ  fhould  be  glorified,  and  being 
invefled  in  his  kingdom  and  glory,  that  then  he 
fhould  do  ads  of  grace,  and  like  a  king  at  his  coro- 
nation, fcatter  and  difpenfe  his  gifts  among  men,  by 
fending  down  his  Holy  Spirit  among  them. 
And  accordingly  we  find  St.  Peter,  Ads  ii.  after  that 
the  H  o  L Y  Ghost  came  down  upon  them,  giving 
this  account  of  it  5  ver,  32,  '^^,  "  This  Jesus  hath 

'-'  God 


4534  Of  the  coming  of  thelAoLY  Ghost, 
SKRM.  c«  God  railed  up,  whereof  we  all  are  witnefles  ° 
C--  ^^^m^  "  therefore  being  by  the  right  hand  of  G  o  d  exalted, 
*^  and  having  received  of  the  Fat  he  r  the  pro- 
"  mife  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  he  hath  fhcd  forth 
"  that  which  ye  now  fee  and  hear ;"  meaning  the 
gift  of  tongues ;  fo  that  lie  refolves  it  into  the  dif- 
penfation  of  God,  who  had  thus  defigned  and  or- 
dered things.     And  therefore  in  the 

Second  place,  I  fhall  fhew,  that  this  difpenfation 
is  very  congruous  and  fuitable  to  the  divine  wifdom. 
For  as  it  was  convenient,  that  the  Son  of  G  o  d 
ihould  aflume  our  nature,  and  come  into  the  world, 
and  dwell  among  us,  that  he  might  reform  mankind, 
by  the  purity  of  his  dodrine,  and  the  pattern  of  his 
holy  life  ;  and  likewife  that  he  Ihould  fuffer  death, 
for  the  expiation  of  fin,  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  might 
not  only  advance  the  mercy,  but  aflert  and  vindicate 
the  holinefs  of  Go  d,  and  teftify  his  great  hatred  and 
difpleafure  againft  fin  :  fo  likewife  after  he  had  thus 
abafed  himfelf  to  the  lowed  degree  of  meannefs  and 
fuffering,  it  was  very  fuitable  to  the  divine  goodnels, 
to  reward  fuch  great  fufferings  with  great  glory,  by 
raifing  him  from  the  dead,  and  taking  him  up  into 
heaven  5  but  it  was  not  fit,  when  he  had  left  the 
world,  that  the  great  work  for  which  he  came  into 
it,  fhould  be  given  over,  and  come  to  nothing,  for 
want  of  eifedual  profecution,  without  any  fruit  and 
effed:  of  fo  much  fweat  and  blood.  And  therefore, 
though  "  it  hadi  pleafed  the  Lord  to  bruife  him, 
*'  and  put  him  to  grief,"  as  the  prophet  cxpreffeth 
it,  yet  the  divine  wifdom  had  fo  order'd  things,  that 
after  "  he  had  made  his  foul  an  offering  for  fin,  he  v 
*^  fhould  fee  his  feed,  and  prolong  his  days,  and  the 
*'  pleafure  of  the   Lord   IhoulcJ  profper  in   his 

*' hands;'* 


as  an  advocate  for  Christ.  4  ^3  c 

*«  hands;'*  that  "  he  ihould  fee  fome  fruit  of  the  S  E  R  M. 
«'  travel  of  his  foul,  and  be  fatisfied,"  as  the  prophet  ^^^^^^^ 
foretels,  Ifaiah  iiii.  10.  So  that  as  it  was  expedient, 
that  he  fhould  ^\q.  and  depart  this  \\{t ;  fo  it  was 
alfo  requifite  afterwards,  that  he  who  had  begun  this 
great  and  good  work,  of  the  redemption  and  ialvation 
of  man,  Ihould  take  care  to  have  it  if  ill  profecuted  and 
carried  on:  and  accordinglyjwhen  he  was  afcended in- 
to heaven, he  ftill  promotes  the  fame  def]gn,/?fr  vicari- 
am  vim  Spiritus  San^i^  as  TertuJlian  calls  it^  '•  by  fead- 
''  ing  the  H  o  L  Y  G  H  0  s  T,as  his  deputy,"  for  the  ma- 
naging of  this  work,  and  the  propagating  and  eftablilh- 
ing  of  that  rehgion  which  he  had  planted  in  the  world. 

God  forefaw  that  the  greatefl  part  of  the  jewilh 
Hution  would  rcjed  Christ  and  his  doclrine,  and 
that  they  would  put  him  to  death,  as  a  deceiver  and 
impoftor  j  and  becaufe  it  was  expedient,  that  there 
ihould  be  fuch  an  expiatory  facrifice  for  fin,  and  that 
**  one  man  (hould  die  for  all  men,"  God  was  wil- 
ling to  permit  his  S  o  n  to  be  thus  difhonourably  and 
unjuftly  treated,  and  "  by  wicked  hands  to  be  cruci- 
"  fied  and  flain  s"  becaufe  he  knew  very  well,  how 
to  make  the  malice  of  men  fubfervient  to  his  own 
gracious  purpofe  and  defign  ;  but  yet  he  was  not  wil- 
ling, that  fo  much  innocency  and  goodnefs  fhould  al- 
ways lie  under  this  reproach  ;  from  which  if  he  had 
not  been  vindicated,  the  defign  of  the  gofpel  had  hlkn 
to  the  ground,  and  prefently  come  to  nothing  :  and 
therefore,  as  a  reward  of  his  obedience  and  fub- 
miffion  to  the  will  of  Go  d,  in  thefe  dreadful  fuffer- 
ings,  in  this  cruel  and  difhonourable  ufage,  God 
furnifn'd  him  with  this  means  of  vindicating  himfdf 
and  his  dodlrine ;  he  gave  him  power  to  fend  his 
Ho  LY  S  p  I R I  T  into  the  world,  who  fliould  djllrl- 

VoL,  X.  22  S  bur« 


453^         Of  ^^^  coming  of  the  Holy  G h o  s  t, 
S  E  R  M.  bute  miraculous  ^ifts  among  his  apoftles  and  followerSj 

<_XCVI1I  .  . 

._^^,-.^_f  that  fo  both  he  and  his  dodlrine  might  be  effedtually 

vindicated  to  the  world,  and  a  way  made  for  the  more 

fpeedy  fpreading  and  propagating  of  it. 

So  that  we  plainly  fee,  that  the  wifdom  of  G  o  d 
had  fo  ordered  this  whole  difpenfation,  that  every  part 
of  it,  the  birth,  the  life,  and  death,  and  refurredlion, 
and  afcenfion  of  our  Lord,  and  the  fending  of  the 
PloLY  Ghost,  are  all  fubfervient  to  one  another, 
and  to  the  whole  defign,  viz.  the  reformation  and 
faivation  of  mankind. 

I  have  done  with  the  firft  thing  I  propounded,  the 
neceflity  of  C  h  r  i  s  t's  leaving  the  world,  in  order 
to  the  coming  of  the  Ho l  v  G h  ost.  I  Ihall  now 
proceed  to  the 

Second  thing  I  propofed,  the  happy  confequence 
and  effeds  of  the  coming  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
*^  When  he  is  come,  he  will  reprove  the  world  of 
*'  fii],  and  of  righteoufnefs,  and  of  judgment.'* 
There  is  a  great  difficulty  in  thefe  words,  and  there- 
fore I  ihall  endeavour,  as  well  as  I  can,  to  explain 
them,  and  then  draw  fome  ufeful  inferences  from  the 
main  doftrine  contained  in  them. 

For  the  explicadon  of  them.  **  And  when  he,'* 
that  is,  the  Ho  LY  G  H  o  s  T,  "the  advocate**  men- 
tioned before,  "  (hall  come,**  that  is,  when  the  pro- 
mife  of  the  F  A  T  H  E  R  concerning  the  coming  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  upon  the  apoftles  fliall  be  ac- 
compliih*d,  "  he  fliall  reprove  the  world ;  '*  the  word 
is  £>Jy|o,  which  I  think  may  much  more  properly 
be  render'd  convince,  •'  he  Ihall  convince  the  world." 
And  fo  it  is  ufed  by  this  evangelift,  John  viii.  46. 
''  Which  of  you,  fays  our  Saviour,  convinceth 
"  me  of  fin  ? "  The  very  phrafe  ufed  in  the  text, 

"  he 


as  an  advocate  for  Christ.  4537 

'^^  he  (hall  convince  the  world  of  fin."  And  the  fame  ^E^RM. 
word  is  alfo  ufed  in  the  fame  fenfe  by  St.  Paul, 
Tit.  i.  9.  lX€y;^e(v  avIfXlycvrar,  "  to  convince  gain- 
"  fayers."  And  this  certainly  is  much  more  agreea- 
ble to  the  fcope  of  this  place.  For  though  "  to  re- 
**  prove  the  world  of  fin,"  be  a  current  exprelTioip ; 
yet  "  to  reprove  the  world  of  righteoufnels,  and  of 
"  judgment,"  are  very  hard  phrafes,  and  I  doubt, 
not  intelligible;  but  to  convince  an  adverfary,  or  to 
fatisfy  a  court,  of  the  fallhood  of  the  acci^fation  and 
charge  brought  againft  the  party  accufed,  that  is,  to 
vindicate  and  juflify  him  in  his  caufe,  this  is  the  pro- 
per ad:  of  an  advocate. 

So  that  the  great  end  of  the  coming  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  v/ho  is  here  called  the  advocate,  is  "  to 
^'  convince  the  world.-  He  fhall  convince  the  world," 
that  is,  both  Jews  and  Gentiles,  who  joined  in  their 
enmity  againfl:  Christ,  and  agreed  to  put  him  to 
death.  In  thefe  three  points,  ''  concerning  fin,  and 
"righteoufnefSjandjudgmeat."Theexpreffionisfliort, 
and  fomewhat  obfcure,  and  feems  (as  Grotius  and  other 
learned  men  have  not  improbably  thought)  to  allude 
to  the  three  forts  of  caufes  and  adlions  among  the  Jews. 

In  the  fird,  to  publick  adtions  concerning  criminal 
matters,  among  which  was  the  cafe  of  believing  or 
rejecting  prophets.  "  He  fhall  convince  the  world  of 
*'  fin,  becaufe  they  believed  not  in  me;"  that  is,  he 
fhall  convince  the  world  that  I  was  a  true  prophet  fent- 
from  God,  and  no  impoftor  \  and  confequendy,  that 
they  were  guilty  of  a  great  contempt  of  God,  and 
a  horrible  murder,  in  putting  me  to  death. 

In  the  lecond,  there  feems  to  be  an  allufion  to  that 
fort  of  private  adlions,   which  referr'd  to  the  vin- 
dicating of  innocency  from  falfe  tellimony  and  .  •. 
22  S  2  C!5u:;ion, 


453^         0/  the  coming  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
SERM.  cufation,  which  are  called   by  the  name  of  righteouf- 
nefs.  "  He  fliall  convince  the  world  of  rightcoufncfs/' 

In  the  third,  to  that  fort  of  anions,  which  referr'd 
to  the  vindication  and  punilhmentof  injuries,  by 'way 
of  retaliation  upon  him  that  did  the  injury^  and  which 
are  called  x^cr^r,  or  judgments.  ''  He  ihall  convince 
"  the  world  of  judgment,  becaufe  the  prince  of  this 
*'  world  is  judged.'* 

But  to  explain  thefe  things  more  particularly. 

I.  *'  He  lliall  convince  the  v/orld  of  fin,  becaufe 
*'  they  believe  not  on  me  ;"  that  is,  of  the  great  fin 
they  were  guilty  of,  in  rejedling  this  great  prophet, 
and  condemning  him  as  a  feducer  and  impoftor.  And 
of  this  they  would  remarkably  be  convinced,  when  they 
fliould  fee  the  predi£tions  of  C  h  r  i  s  t  fulfiil'd,  par- 
ticularly that  of  fending  the  Holy  Ghost,  and 
of  that  terrible  vengeance  which  fhould  afterwards  be 
executed  on  the  jewifh  nation,  for  rejeding  the  Son 
of  God.     The  firft  of  thefe  we  find  eminently  ful- 
filled upon  the  coming  of  the  Holy    Ghost 
upon  the  apoftles  on  the  day  of  pentccoil,  A6ls  ii. 
For  when  the  apoftles  by  a  fudden  infpiration   fpake 
with  other  tongues,  the  Jews,  and  profelytes,  who 
faw  and  heard  them,  were  very  much  amazed  at   it, 
ver.  7.  and  from  this  miraculous  power  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  fo  vifible  upon  them,  St.  Peter  takes  occa- 
fion  to  convince  the  Jews,  of  their  great  fin  in  rejed- 
ing  the  melTias,  and  putting  him  to  death,  ver.  32, 
33.  ''  This  Jesus,  faith  he,  hath  God  raifed  up, 
"  whereof  we  all  are  witnefiTcs :  wherefore  being  by 
"  the  right  hand  of  God  exalted,  and  having  re- 
^*  ccived   of  the   F-a  t  h  e  r    the  promife  of  the 
^"  Holy  Ghost,  he  hath  flied  forth  this,  which 
-*  ye  now  fee  and  hear,"  From  whence  he  concludes^ 

ver. 


as  an  advocate  for  Christ.  4539 

ver.  56.  "  Therefore  let  all  the  houfe  of  Ifrael  know  S  E  R  M. 
*'  alTuredJy,  that  God  hath  made  that  fame  Jesus, 
"  whom  ye  have  crucified,  both  Lord  and 
"  Christ."  That  is,  by  this  you  may  be  con- 
vinced, that  he  whom  you  crucified,  as  a  falfe  prophet, 
was  the  true  meflias.  Upon  this  we  find,  ver.  '^y. 
that  *^  when  the  Jews  heard  this,  they  were  pricked 
"  at  their  hearts,  and  faid  unto  Peter,  and  the  reft 
"  of  the  apoftles.  men  and  brethren,  what  fhall  we 
*'  do  to  be  faved?'*  Thus  you  fee  the  firft  cfi^ecft 
which  our  Sav  10  u  R  foretold  of  the  coming  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  fulfilled  in  a  moft  eminent  man- 
ner *,  for  upon  this  fermon,  three  thoufand  of  the  Jews 
being  "  convinced  of  their  great  fin,  in  not  believing 
''  on  him,  were  baptized  in  his  name." 

II.  "  He  fhail  convince  the  world  of  righteouf- 
*'  nefsj"  that  is,  of  the  innocency  of  that  holy  and 
juft  pcrfon,  whom  they  had  condemned  as  a  male- 
faftor.  "  Of  righteoufnefs,  becaufe  I  go  to  thepA- 
*'  T  H  E  R ; "  that  is,  this  fhall  be  an  evidence  to  the 
world  of  my  innocency  of  thofe  crimes,  with  which 
I  was  charged  5  that  1  am  taken  up  into  heaven,  and 
feated  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  where  I  fliall  re- 
main for  ever,  out  of  the  reach  of  their  malice  and 
injury.  "  Becaufe  I  go  to  the  Father,  and  ye 
*'  fee  me  no  more-,"  that  is,  I  fhall  be  there,  where 
their  malice  cannot  reach  me.  For  fo  he  tells  the  Pha- 
rifees,  when  they  came  to  apprehend  him,  John  vii, 
335  34*  "  Yet  a  litde  while  am  I  with  you,  and  then 
"  I  go  unto  him  that  fent  me :  ye  fhall  feek  me, 
"  and  fhall  not  find  mej  and  where  I  am,  thither 
"  ye  cannot  come.''* 

And  this  vindication  of  his  innocency,  was  begun  by 
the  miracles  which  immediately  followed  his  death, 

upo» 


454^        ^f  ^^^  coming  of  tbe  Holy  Gko  st^ 
SERM.  upon  which  "  the  centurion  glorified  God,  faying, 
CXCVIII  ^,  j,^j.^ainiy  this  was  the  Son  of  God,''  as  St.  Matthew 
hath   it  5  or,  as  St.  Luke,    "  this  was  a  righteous 
man,"  Luke  xxiii.  47.    And  not  only  the  centurion, 
but  all  the  people,   ver.  48.'''  And  all  the   people 
*'  that  came  together  to  that  fight,  beholding  the 
*'  things  which  were  done,  fmote  their  breads,  and 
*'  returned."  But  the  great  vindication  of  his  inno- 
cency  was  his  refurreclion,  which  delivered  him  from 
that  unjuft  fentence  of  death   which  was  pad  upon 
him,  by  raifing  him  up  to  life  again.     And  this  is 
particularly  afcribed  to  the  Holy  Ghost,  Rom.i.  4. 
*'  And  was  mightily  demonflrated  to  be  the  Son 
*'  of  God,   by  the  Spirit  of  holjnefs,  in  his 
**  refurredion  from  the  dead."  Efpecially  if  we  con- 
fider,  that  he  was  afterwards  taken  up  vifibly  into 
heaven,  and  there   in  veiled   with   royal   power  and 
dignity  •,  of  which  h,,e  gave  plentiful  evidence,  in  the 
miraculous   gifts  of  the  Holy   Ghost,  poured 
forth  upon  the  apodles :    which  was  a  (landing  dcr 
monllration  to  the  world  of  his  innocency  andrighte- 
oufnefs,  fince  God  had  taken  him  up  to  himfclf,  and 
"  fet  him  at  his  ov;n  right  hand,  and  committed  all 
**  power  to  him  in  heaven  and  earth." 

III.  "  Fie  fhall  convince  the  world  of  judgment, 
*'  becaufe  the  prince  of  this  world  is  judged."  He 
that  ufurped  the  authority  of  Go  d  in  the  world,  and 
by  his  inflruments  had  procured  Christ  to  be  con- 
demned as  a  counterfeit  king,  is  himfelf  dethroned 
and  condemned ;  "  the  prince  of  this  world  is  judged." 
He  that  thought  to  have  deftroyed  the  S  o  n  of  G  o  d, 
by  putting  him  to  death,  is  by  this  very  means  de- 
ftroyed  himfelf  So  the  apoftle  tells  us,  Heb.  ii.  14. 
that  "  Christ  through  his  death,"   that  is,  upon 

occafion 


r.s  an  advocate  for  Christ,  454  i 

occafion  of  his  death,  and  his  refurredion  from  the  S  E  R  M, 
dead  confequent  upon  it,  "  hath  deftroyed  him  that  ^i^lffj 
"  had  the  power  of  death,  that  is,  the  devil.*' 

But  mod  remarkably  was  "  the  prince  of  this 
"  world  judged  and  call  out,"  when  after  he  had  fo 
long  ufurped  the  name  and  worihip  of  God  in  the 
world,  he  was  by  that  mighty  power  of  the  Spi- 
rit of  God,  which  accompanied  the  preaching 
of  the  gofpel,  thrown  out  of  his  kingdom;  and 
wherever  the  doftrine  of  Christ  came,  the  ido- 
latry of  the  world  was  not  able  to  fland  before  it, 
but  fell  down,  like  ''  Dagon  before  the  ark."  And 
that  this  is  the  meaning  of  judgment  here,  is  plain 
from  the  fame  evangelifl-,  chap.  xii.  31,  32.  "  NoV^^ 
**  is  the  judgment  of  this  world ;  now  fhall  the 
"  prince  of  this  world  be  caft  out.  And  if  I  be  lifted 
"  up  from  the  earth,  I  will  draw  all  men  unto  me.'* 
Where  our  Saviour  explains  the  "  judgment  of 
'*  this  world,"  by  the  "  carting  out  Satan'*  out  of 
that  power  and  authority  v/hich  he  had  ufurped  in  the 
heathen  world  by  his  idolatrous  worfhip  :  and  there- 
fore our  Saviour  foretels,  that  "  when  he  was 
'-  lifted  up  from  the  earth,"  that  is,  after  he  was  cru- 
cified, and  raiftd  from  the  dead,  and  taken  up  into 
heaven,  "  he  would  draw  all  men  to  him  i"  that  is, 
his  religion  fhould  prevail  wonderfully  in  the  world, 
and  be  entertained  in  all  nations.  And  this  was  mod 
remarkably  accomplifhed,  by  the  wonderful  progrels 
of  the  gofpel,  and  fpeedy  downfal  of  idolatry  m  the 
world,  "  not  by  might,  nor  by  power,  but  by  the 
*'  S  p  I  R  I  T  of  the  Lo  R  D."  The  acknowledgment 
of  Porphyry,  that  bitter  enemy  of  chriilianity,  as  it 
is  reported  to  us  by  Eulcbius,  is  very  remarkable, 
"  that  fince  one  Jesus  began  to  be  worfliipped, 

*'  they 


454^         ^f  ^^^  commg  of  de  H  o  l  y  G  k  o  s  Ty 
SERM.  «  tlicy  found  no  publick  benefit  from  their  sodsi 

CXCVIII  o        » 

"  their  miracles,  and  their  oracles  ceafed."  This  our 
Saviour  forefaw,  and  foretold,  when  he  appoint- 
ed and  fent  forth  the  feventy  difciplcs  to  preach  the 
gofpel,  Luke  x.  i8.  *'  I  beheld  Satan  hke  lightning 
*'  to  fall  from  heaven,"  to  express  to  us  the  fudden 
demolifhing  of  his  kingdom,  and  the  quick  and 
fpeedy  overthrow  of  idolatry  in  the  world.  And  thus 
I  have  explained,  as  briefly  as  I  could,  this  difficult 
pafTage,  concerning  the  Holy  G  host's  "  con- 
'*  vincing  the  world  of  fin,  of  righteoufnefs,  and 
*'  of  judgment." 

I  fhall  only  draw  two  or  three  inferences  from  what 
hath  been  delivered,  and  fo  conclude. 

I.  We  have  great  reafon  to  adore  the  wifdom  and 
goodnefs  of  God,  in  the difpenfation  of  the  gofpel; 
that  by  the  fending  down  of  his  Holy  Spirit, 
to  endow  the  firfl:  publifhers  of  his  heavenly  doclrine, 
with  fuch  miraculous  powers  and  gifts,  he  hath  given 
fjch  abundant  tcftimony  to  the  truth  of  our  religion, 
and  fuch  firm  grounds  for  our  faith  to  rely  upon. 
Had  God  left  the  chriftian  religion  to  have  been 
propagated  only  by  its  own  rational  force  upon  the 
minds  of  men,  what  a  flow  progrefs  would  it  in  all 
probability  have  made  ?    How  little  belief  would  the 
apoflles  naked  teftimony  of  our  Lo  r  d's  refurrecflion 
from  the  dead,  without  any  other  demonltration  or 
proof,  have  gained  while  they  were  alive,  much  lefs 
after  their  death  ?    How  unable  would  their  do6lrine, 
deRitute  of  divine  teftimony,  as  well  as  of  all  hu- 
mane advantages,  have  been  to  have  contefted  with  the 
lufts  and  interefts  of  men,  the  wit  of  the  philofophers, 
and  the  powers  of  the  princes  of  this  world,  which 
all  fee  themfelves  againft  it  ?  How  could  it,  with  any 

hope 


m  an  advocate  for  Christ.  4543 

hope  of  fuccefs,  have  encounter'd  the  malice  of  men  SE  RM. 

.  CXCVIII 

and  devils,  which  was  fo  adtive  and  bufy,  by  all  poA 

fible  violence,  and  by  all  imaginable  arts  to  root  ic 
out  of  x.\\^  world  ?  Had  the  apoftles  of  our  Lord 
only  gone  forth,  in  the  ftrength  of  their  own  intereft 
and  eloquence,  (which  in  poor  and  unlearned  men 
muft  needs  be  very  fmali)  how  little  could  they  have 
contributed  to  the  carrying  on  fo  great  and  difficult 
a  work  ?  Nay,  had  they  not  been  fupported,  and  born 
up  in  their  fpirits  by  a  mighty  ftrength  above  their 
own,  had  not  their  commiffion  been  fealed  by  the  mi- 
raculous power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  v/hich  upon 
all  occafions  ihew'd  forth  itfelf  in  them,  to  the  won- 
der and  aftonifhment  of  men,  and  was  a  teltimoriy 
from  heaven  to  them,  that  they  were  the  ambafladors 
of  God  to  men,  fpecially  empower'd  and  commit 
fioned  by  him  for  that  work,  they  could  not  but 
have  been  difcouraged  by  the  oppofition  and  difficul- 
ties they  met  withal,  and  they  might  with  Mofes  have 
declined  the  fervice,  and  defired  God  to  fend  his 
mefTage  by  others,  that  were  fitter  and  better  qua- 
lified to  deliver  it ;  and  after  fome  vain,  and  unfuc- 
cefsful  attempts,  to  propagate  the  belief  of  their 
doclrine,  they  would  have  given  it  over,  and  been 
afhamed  of  their  rafti  undertaking.  So  St.  Paul  in- 
timates, that  had  not  the  mighty  power  of  God  ac- 
companied their  preaching,  and  made  it  effe£bual  to 
the  converfion  and  falvation  of  men,  they  would  have 
been  tempted  to  have  been  "  ailiamed  of  the  gofpel 
"  of  Christ." 

But  then  we  muft  remember,  that  it  is  the  doflrine' 
of  Christ  which  is  thus  confirmed,  and  not  the 
dodtrines  and  traditions  of  men.     For  had  the  con- 
cealment of  the  dodrine  of  Christ,  and  the  ferv- 

VoL.  X,  22  T  ir^S 

6, 


4544-  ^f  ^^^  coming  of  the  H  o  l  v  Ghost, 
S  E  R  M.  ing  of  Go  D  in  an  unknown  tongue,  been  any  part  of 
the  apoftlcs  dodrine,  the  gift  of  tongues  had  not  been 
a  confirmation  of  this  dodrine,  but  a  con  trad  i6\:  ion 
to  it;  had  they  preach'd  tranfubftantiation,  and  the 
renouncing  of  our  fenfes,  in  order  to  the  belief  of  it, 
miracles  could  have  given  no  credit  to  it:  for  that 
which  depends  upon  the  certainty  of  fenfe  (as  mira- 
cles do)  cannot  be  a  competent  argument,  to  prove 
that  which  is  contrary  to  fenfe ;  for  that  which  makes 
me  fure  of  the  miracle  which  fliould  prove  this  doc- 
trine, does  at  the  fame  time  make  me  equally  fure  that 

^  this  dodlrine  is  not  true.  If  there  were  no  other  evi- 
dence, that  tranfubftantiation  is  no  part  of  the  chri- 
ilian  do6lrine,  this  to  a  wife  man  would  be  fufficient, 

._that  what  proves  the  one,  overthrows  the  other;  and 
that  miracles,  which  are  certainly  the  beft,  and  high- 
eft  external  proof  of  chriftianity,  arc  the  worft  proof 
in  the  world  of  tranfubftantiation,  unlefs  a  man  can 
rerwunce  his  fenfes,  at  the  fame  time  that  he  relies 
upon  them;  for  a  man  cannot  believe  a  miracle, 
without  relying  upon  his  fenfes,  nor  tranfubftantia- 
tion, without  renouncing  them  :  and  never  were  any 
two  things  fo  ill  coupled  together,  as  the  dodlrine  of 
chriftianity,  and  that  of  tranfubftantiation,  becaufe 
they  draw  feveral  ways,  and  are  ready  to  ftrangle  one 

'  another.  The  main  evidence  and  confirmation  of 
the  chriftian  dodlrine,  which  is  miracles,  is  refolved 
into  the  certainty  and  teftimony  of  our  fenfes ;  but 
this  evidence  is  clear  and  point  blank  againft  tranfub- 
ftantiation. 

II.  The  confideration  of  what  hath  been  faid,  con- 
vinceth  men  of  the  great  fm  of  infidelity,  and  the 
unreafonablenefs  of  it,  after  fo  clear  convidlion  and 
deraonftration  as  God  hath  given  to  the  world  of 

the 


as  an  advocate  for  Christ.  4545 

the  truth  of  chriftianity.  That  the  gofpel  was  plant-  >^  E  R  M. 
ed  and  propagated  in  the  world  in  fo  wonderful  a 
manner,  and  prevailed,  Tiotwithftanding  all  the  op- 
pofition  chat  was  made  againft  it:  the  remarkable  and 
terrible  deflruftion  of  Jerufalcm,  according  to  our 
S  A  V  I  o  u  r's  prediction  :  the  feveral  attempts  of  re- 
building the  ten^ple,  particularly  by  Julian  the  apo- 
ftate,  in  defpite  of  chriftianity,  and  to  confute  our 
S  A  V  I  o  u  r's  predidion,  fo  remarkably  fruftrateJ, 
and  refifted  from  heaven,  by  fire  flaming  out  of  the 
foundation,  and  confuming  the  workmen,  fo  that 
they  were  forced  to  defift  \  and  this  recorded  by  a 
heathen  hiftorian,  Ammianus  Marcellinus :  the  dif- 
perfion  of  the  jewilh  nation,  and  their  continuing 
for  fb  many  ages  feparate  and  diftindl  from  all  other 
people,  for  a  ftanding  accomplifhment  of  our  Sa- 
viour's prophefy,  and  a  teflimony  to  all  ages  of 
the  truth  of  chriftianity.  Thefe,  with  many  more 
arguments  I  might  mention,  are  a  clear  evidence  to 
any  one  that  does  not  abfolutely  wink  and  fhut  Iris 
eyes  againft  the  light,  that  the  doflrine  of  chriftianity 
came  from  Go  d. 

III.  They  who  believe  the  golpel,  are  inexcufable 
if  they  do  not  obey  it,  and  live  according  to  it.  This 
is  the  great  end  of  all  the  miracles  which  God  hath 
wrought  for  the  confirmation  of  chriftianity  ;  that  by 
the  belief  of  the  gofpel,  men  might  be  brought  "  to 
"  the  obedience  of  faith,'*  and  live  conformably  to 
the  precepts  of  that  holy  religion,  which  the  Son  of 
God,  by  fo  many  miracles,  hath  planted  and  pre- 
ferved  in  the  world.  The  infidelity  of  men  will  be  a 
heavy  charge  upon  them,  at  the  judgment  of  the 
great  day,  and  God  will  condemn  them  for  it :  but 
we  that  profefs  to  believe  the  gofpel,  and  live  con=. 
22  T  2  trary 


4546  Of  the  coming  of  the\\o\.Y  Ghost,  G?r. 
S  E  R  M.  trary  to  it,  fhall  not  only  be  condemned  by  the  iude- 
ment  of  God,  bat  by  the  lentence  of  our  own  con- 
fciences.  Our  profefTion  to  believe  the  gofpel,  will 
be  an  aggravation  of  our  difobedience  to  it,  and  every 
article  of  our  creed  will  be  a  fore  charge  againft  us ; 
and  that  faith,  which  was  ordained  to  juftify  us,  will 
be  our  great  condemnation  at  the  great  day. 

Therefore,  as  xh^  apoftle  to  the  Hebrews  argues, 
'<  we  ought  to  give  the  more  earned  heed  to  the 
''  things  which  we  have  heard,  lefb  at  any  time  we 
"  fall  away,"  either  by  infideUty  or  impiety  of  life  ; 
"  for  if  the  word  fpoken  by  angels  was  ftedfaft,"  that 
is,  if  difobedience  to  the  law  of  Mofes  was  fo  fevere- 
ly  puniOied,  "  and  every  tranfgrefTion  and  difobe- 
'^  dience  received  a  juft  recompence  of  reward  :  how 
*^  fhall  we  efcape,  if  we  negled  fo  great  falvation, 
"  which  was  at  firfl:  fpoken  by  the  Lord,  and  was 
"  confirmed  afterwards  by  them  that  heard  him.^ 
"God  alfo  bearing  them  witnefs,  both  with  figns 
^*  and  wonders,  and  with  divers  miracles,  and  gifts 
"  of  the  H  o  L  Y  G  H  OS  T  ?  For,  if  we  fin  wilfully, 
*'  after  we  have  received  the  knowledge  of  the  truth, 
*'  there  remains  no  more  facrifice  for  fin,  but  a  cer- 
^'  tain  fearful  looking  for  of  judgment,  and  fiery  in- 
"  dignation,  which  fhall  devour  the  adverfaries.  He 
*'  that  defpifed  Mofes,  died  without  mercy,  under 
''  two  or  three  witnefTes,  Oi  how  much  forer  pu- 
"  nifhment  fhall  we  be  thought  worthy,  if  we  tread 
*"  under  foot  the  Son  of  Go  d  ;  and  count  the  blood 
"  of  the  covenant,  whereby  we  are  fandlified,  an  un- 
-^^  holy  thing,  and  offer  defpite  to  the  Spirit  of 
*'  Grace!  It  is  a  fearful  thing,  to  fall  into  the  hands 
^'  of  the  living  God.  But,  beloved,  I  hope  better 
''  things  of  you,   j^nd  things  that  accompany  fali^a- 

^'  tion. 


Of  the  coming  of  the  Ho  ly  Guosr^  &c.      4547 
*'  tion,  though  I  thus  fpeak,  and  that  you  are  not 
"  of  the  number  of  thofe,  who  draw  back  untoper- 
"  dition,  but  of  them  that  believe  to  the  faving  of 
"  your  fouls.'* 


SERMON  CXCIX. 

Of  the  coming  of  the  Holy  Ghost^ 
as  a  guide  to  the  apofkles. 

JOHN    xvi.    12,  13. 

/  have  yet  many  things  to  fay  unto  you^  hut  you  cannot 
hear  them  now.     Howheit  when  he^  /i?^  S  p  i  r  i  t 

of  truths  is  come^  he  will  guide  you  into  alt  truth. 


O 


UR  Saviour  having  before  declared  to  s  E  R  M. 
his    difciples   the  great   expediency   of  his  ^^^^^• 


leaving  the  world,  in  order  to  the  coming  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,  ver.  7.  he  tells  them  in  the 
next  place,  what  the  office  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
Ihould  be.  In  reference  to  Ch  rist,  he  lliould  be 
an  advocate  :  and  in  reference  to  them,  he  fhould  be 
a  guide  or  teacher. 

I.  In  reference  to  Christ,  he  fliould  be  *'  an 
**  advocate"  to  plead  the  caufe  of  Christ  and 
of  his  dodlrine,  and  to  vindicate  them  to  the  world, 
ver.  8,  9,  10,  II.  ^«  And  when  he  is  come  he  will 
'^  convince  the  world  of  fin,  and  of  righteoufnels, 
"  and  of  judgment :  of  fin,  becaufe  they  believe  not 
"  in  me :  of  righteoufnefs,  becaufe  I  go  to  my  Fa- 
^'  THE  R,  and  ye  fee  rne  no  more :  of  judgment, 

''  becaufe 


454^  Qf^'^^  coming  of  the  Koly  Ghost, 

;ERM.  «'  becaale  the  prince  of  this  world  is  judged."  AH 
which  I  have  formerly  handled  and  explained  at 
large. 

2 .  In  regard  to  the apoflles  ;  the  Holy  Ghost 
is  promis'd  to  be  '^  a  guide  and  teacher,"  to  reveal 
to  them,  and  to  inftrucl  them  in  fomc  truths  which 
our  Saviour,  vvhihl  he  v/as  with  them,  had  not  fo 
fully  acquainted  them  withal,  becaufe  of  their  prefent 
incapacity  and  unfitnefs  at  that  time  to  receive  them. 
*'  I  have  many  things  to  fay  unto  you,  but  you  can- 
"  not  bear  them  now.  Howbeit  when  he,  the 
*'  S  p  I  R I T  of  truth,  is  come,  he  will  guide  you  into 
"  all  truth.'* 

In  the  handling  of  thefe  words,  I  fhall  do  thefe  two 
things. 

Firll,  I  fhall  endeavour  to  explain  the  meaning  of 
them. 

Secondly,!  fhall  draw  fome  inferences  from  them. 

Firft,  I  fhall  begin  with  the  explication  of  them  5 
in  order  whereunto  it  will  be  requifite  to  enquire  into 
thefe  two  things. 

I.  What  thofe  things  probably  were,  which  our 
Saviour  did  not  reveal  and  declare  to  his  difciples, 
becauie  they  could  not  then  bear  them. 

II.  What  is  the  meaning  of  this  promife,  "  that 
''  the  S  p  I  R  I  T  of  truth  fhall  guide  them  into  all 
"  truth." 

I.  What  thofe  things  probably  were,  which  our 
S  Av  I  o  u  R  did  not  reveal  and  declare  to  his  difciples, 
becaufe  they  could  not  then  bear  them.  Our  S  a- 
v  I  o  u  R  does  not  exprefs  particularly  what  thofe 
things  were,  nor  can  it  be  expected  he  fhould  have 
done  fo  ^  for  then  he  had  declared  them  to  them, 
which  he  tells  us  he   would  not  db :  but  the  text 

gives 


as  a  guide  to  the  apojiles.  4549 

gives  us  two  marks  to  diredt  our  inquiry  concerning  SERM. 
them,  cxcix. 

1 .  That  they  were  fuch  things  as  the  difciples  at  that 
time  were  incapable  of.  *^  I  have  many  things  yet 
"  to  fay  unto  you,  but  ye  cannot  bear  them  now." 
So  that  it  feems  they  were  fuch  truths,  as  the  dif- 
ciples were  prejudiced  againft  upon  fome  account  or 
other  ;  mod  probably  by  reafon  of  their  education 
in  the  jewilh  religion,  and  fome  principles  which 
they  had  imbib'd  from  the  teachers  and  interpreters 
of  their  law. 

2.  They  were  fuch  truths  as,  after  the  Holy 
Ghost  did  defcend  upon  them,  they  fhould  be  in- 
truded in.  So  that  if  we  can  find  out  what  thofe 
truths  were,  which  the  difciples  were  fully  intruded 
in  after  the  coming  of  the  H o ly  Ghost,  which 
either  were  not  at  all,  or  not  fo  clearly  revealed  to 
them  before,  becaufe  of  their  prejudice  againll:  them  ; 
we  may  then  certainly  conclude,  that  thefe  were  the 
things  which  our  Savio  u  r  here  fpeaks  of,  when  he 
fays,  "  I  have  many  thing  to  fay  unto  you,  but  you 
"  cannot  bear  them  nov//* 

And  upon  enquiry  into  this  matter  by  thefe  two 
marks,  it  will  appear  that  they  were  principally  thefe 
three. 

I .  That  our  Saviour  did  not  defign  the  fetting 
up  of  any  temporal  kingdom  in  this  world  ;  but  that 
his  kingdom  and  government  was  to  be  fpiritual,  not 
managed  by  any  external  force  or  compulfion,  or  by 
laws,  the  violation  whereof  he  would  vindicate  by 
the  temporal  fword ;  but  by  laws,  the  fandion  and 
penalty  whereof  fhould  take  hold  of  the  minds  and 
fpiritsof  men,  and  relate  unto  another  world. 

And 


455*^  O/'Z-S^  coming  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
SERM.  And  this  was  a  truth  which  the  difciples  were  m- 
'capable  of,  whilft  our  Saviour  was  here  upon 
earth ;  againft  which  they  were  fo  prejudiced  by 
the  general  tradition  which  the  Jews  had  en- 
tertained, that  the  Messias  was  to  be  a  great 
temporal  prince,  and  to  fubdue  ail  nations  to  them, 
that  they  were  in  a  continual  expedation,  when  he 
would  lay  afide  his  mean  condition,  and  appear  in 
that  glory  and  majefty  which  they  expedled  d  when 
like  the  fun  he  would  break  through  all  thofe  clouds 
wherewith  he  was  mufHed  and  obfcur'd,  and  fhine 
forth  in  his  full  ftrength  and  glory.  For  it  appears 
very  plain,  that  they  had  an  hankering  expedation 
after  fome  fuch  thing,  and  that  after  he  had  fo  plain- 
ly declared  to  them  his  death  and  fufFerings.  For  the 
text  tells  us,  that  "  they  could  not  underftand  thefe 
"  things,  but  they  were  hid  from  them  j"  that  is, 
they  were  fo  poflefs'd  with  the  conceit  of  his  tempo- 
ral kingdom,  that  they  could  not  imagine  that  any 
fuch  thing  could  befal  him.  And  to  fhew  how  deep- 
ly this  conceit  was  rooted  in  them,  immediately  after 
Christ  had  told  them  fo  plainly  of  his  fufFerings, 
James  and  John  put  up  a  petition  to  him,  that  one 
of  them  might  fit  on  his  right  hand,  and  the  other 
on  his  left  in  his  kingdom.  This  opinion  of  his  tem- 
poral kingdom  did  lo  run  in  their  minds,  that  they 
could  not  undcrftand  any  thing  that  feemed  to  con- 
tradid  it. 

And  though  our  S  av  i  o  u  R  had  fo  exprefly  de- 
clared, but  a  little  before  his  death,  that  ''  his  king- 
*'  dom  was  not  of  this  world,"  and  therefore  he 
fhould  make  no  refiftance  to  the  violence  that  was 
offered  to  him,  yea,  though  the  difciples  faw  him  put 
to  death ;  yet  they  did  not  lay  afide  his  opinion,  but 

{till 


m  a  guide  to  the  apojlles.  455^ 

ilill  expecfted  that  he    would  rife  asrain,    and  then  SERM; 

•  •  •  o        '  PYCTV 

bsgin  his  kingdom  in  this  world.     For  fo  we  find  , .-^-^ 

the  two  difciples  difcourfing  together,  as  they  were 
going  to  Emmaus,  Luke  xxiv.  21.  '^  We  trufled^ 
''  fay  they  one  to  another,  that  it  had  been  ^e  which 
"  ihould  have  redeemed  Ifrael,"  And  after  his  re- 
furredlion,  this  was  that  which  lay  uppermofl  in  their 
minds,  and  which  their  thoughts  were  ftill  upon,  as 
appears  by  that  queflion  which  they  put  to  him  juft 
before  his  afcenfion,  as  St.  Luke  tells  us,  Adls  i.  6. 
'^  When  therefore  they  were  come  together,  they 
'^  asked  of  him,  faying,  wilt  thou  at  this  time  reftore 
*'  the  kingdom  to  Ifrael  ?  " 

No  wonder  then,  if  being  poflefs'd  with  fo  ftrong 
a  prejudice  about  this  matter,  our  Saviour  did 
r^r  drive  to  convince  them  of  it,  whilft  he  was  upon 
earth  ;  becaufe  they  could  not  then  have  born  it:  but 
we  find  that  after  the  coming  of  the  Ho  ly  Ghos  t, 
they  were  fully  inftru6led  in  it,  and  quitted  the  con- 
ceit which  they  formerly  entertained,  and  were^  fan's- 
fied  that  he  was  afcended  into  heaven,  and  "  fet  at 
*'  the  right  hand  of  the  majefty  ofGoD,"  and  that 
from  thence  he  had  fent  his  S  p  i  r  i  t  to  inftru6land 
govern  his  church,  and  that  this  was  the  kingdom 
of  the  M  E  s  s  I A  s. 

They  were  fo  pofTefs'd  before  with  another  appre- 
henfion,  that  they  would  almofl  have  rejeded  him, 
had  they  underftood  that  the  M  e  s  s  i  as  was  to  have  no 
other  kingdom  than  this :  but  after  that  glorious  confir- 
mation was  given  to  him,  by  his  refurredlion  from  the 
dead,  and  vifible  afcenfion  into  heaven,  and  the  de- 
fcent  of  the  Ho  ly  Gh  os  t  in  fuch  wonderful  and 
miraculous  gifts,  then  at  lad  they  were  capable  of  un- 

VoL.X.  22  U  derftanding 

6, 


4552  0/*  the  coming  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 

S  E  R  M.  derftandine   and  receiving  this  truth,   which  could 
CXCIX  . 

not  fink  into  their  hearts  before. 

2.  Another  truth  which  our  Saviour  here  pro- 
bably intended,  was  the  abrogating  the  jewifh  dif- 
penfation.  And  this  hkewife  they  mud  needs  be  ex- 
tremely prejudiced  againfl: ;  becaufe  their  law  was 
given  by  God,  and  looked  upon  by  them,  not  as 
temporary,  but  a  perpetual  inftitution.  And  this  truth 
we  find  that  the  apoftles  were  afterwards  inftruded  in, 
when  the  Holy  Ghost  was  come  upon  them. 
And  therefore  in  the  coundl  at  Jerufalem,  the  apoftles 
released  the  Gentiles  from  the  obfervance  of  Mofes 
his  law,  as  a  thing  which  they  were  perfedly  inftrudlcd 
in  by  the  Ho  ly  Gh  o  s  t.  Acls  xv.  28.  "  It  hath 
*'  feemed  good  to  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  to 
*'  us,"  &c. 

3.  Another  truth  which  our  Saviour  proba- 
bly here  intended,  was,  that  the  lalvation  of  the 
M  E  s  s  I  A  s  belonged  to  the  Gentiles,  as  well  as  to 
the  Jews.  The  Jews  had  a  ftrong  conceit  of  their 
own  privileges,  and  look'd  upon  all  the  world,  be- 
fides  themfeives,  as  a  company  of  reprobates,  that 
had  no  fhare  or  intereft  in  the  promife  of  God,  or 
in  thofe  great  bleflings,  which  their  Messi.\s  was 
to  bring  to  the  world.  And  we  find  that  the  difciples 
had  fo  deeply  imbib'd  this  prejudice  in  their  educa- 
tion, that  they  wonder'd  at  our  S  av  i  o  u  r,  when 
they  found  him  talking  with  the  famaritan  woman. 
And  though  before  his  afcenfion  he  had  given  them 
an  exprefs  command  "  to  go  and  teach  all  nations," 
yet  it  feems  'twas  a  good  while  before  they  under- 
ftood  this  command  in  the  latitude  in  which  our  S  a- 
V  I  o  u  R  intended  it.  For  'tis  plain  from  the  hifiory 
of  the  A6ls,  that  till  Peter  was  fent  to  Cornelius,  and 

better 


as  a  guide  to  the  apojlks.  4555 

better  inftrudled   in  this   matter   by  a  vifion  from  SERM. 

CXCIX 
heaven,  they  had  not  at  all  preach'd  the  gofpel  to 

the  Gentiles,  being  perfuaded  that  it  was  unlawful  to 
do  it  •,  bat  by  the  command  of  our  S  x\v  i  o  u  r 
"  to  go  and  teach  all  nations,"  they  underftood  that 
they  were  to  preach  to  the  Jews  diiperfcd  in  all  na- 
tions. Bat  after  this  vifion  to  Peter,  and  whea 
they  faw  that  the  Holy  Ghost  fell  upon  the 
Gentiles,  in  the  fame  manner  that  it  had  done  upon 
them,  then  and  not  before  they  were  inftrufted  in 
this  truth. 

That  thefe  are  all,  or  ibme  of  the  principal  of 
thofe  truths  which  our  S  av  i  o  u  R  here  means,  when 
he  fays,  that  he  had  yet  many  things  to  fay  unto 
his  dilciples,  which  they  could  not  then  bear,  does 
I  hope  fufficiendy  appear ;  becaufe  they  were  fucli 
truths,  as  the  difcipies  were  moft  vehemently  preju- 
diced againft,  and  which  afterwards  they  were  fully 
inftrudled  in  by  the  defcent  of  the  H  o  l  v  Ghost, 
and  not  before. 

II.  I  fhall  enquire  what  is  the  meaning  of  this 
promife  in  the  text,  that  "the  S  p  i  r  i  t  of  truth 
"  will  guide  them  into  all  truth." 

That  thefe  words  are  not  to  be  underllood  in  the 
greateft  latitude  which  they  are  capable  of,  I  think 
any  one  will  grant.  For  certainly  no  man  ever  fup- 
pofed,  that  our  Saviour  here  promis'd  that  his  ' 
Spirit  fhould  lead  his  difcipies  into  the  know- 
ledge of  all  natural  truths,  and  indrudt  them  in  all 
the  depths  of  philofophy,  and  in  the  myfteries  of 
all  arts  and  fciences.  Plain  it  is  then,  that  fome  Xu 
mitation  mull  be  put  upon  this  general  and  uni* 
verfal  promife  of  "  leading  them  into  all  truth." 
All  the  difficulty  is,  how   far  it   is  to    be  limited, 

22  U  s  and 


4554  Of  the  comhig  of  thelA^-LY  Ghost, 

5ERM.  and  what  bounds  are  to  be  fet  to   this  general  pro- 
^^^^^'^-  mife? 

Now  in  all  reafon  it  ought  to  be  limited  by  the 
context  5  and  if  we  go  that  way,  which  is  the  only 
reafonable  way  of  limiting  general  words,  then  the 
plain  meaning  of  this  promife  wil]  be  this  •,  that  be- 
caufe  cur  S  a  v  i  o  u  r  had  forborn  to  reveal  feveral 
truths  to  his  difciples,  which  they  were  not  then  ca- 
pable of,  he  would  fupply  this  difficulty  afterwards  by 
his  Ho  LY  Spirit,  who  after  that  he  was  riicn 
from  the  dead,  and  afcended  into  heaven,  fliould 
defcend  upon  them,  and  inftrufl  them  fully  in  thofe 
truths,  which  he,  in  condefcenfion  to  their  prejudice 
and  incapacity,  had  in  his  life-time  forborn  to  do  ; 
that  is,  he  would  take  a  fitter  feafon  to  inflru£b  them 
fully  by  his  S  p  I  R  I  T,  in  all  thofe  truths,  which, 
whilft  he  was  upon  earth,  they  were  not  fo  capable  of 
receiving.  "  I  have  yet  many  things- to  fay  unto 
*'  you  j"  that  is,  befides  what  I  have  already  de- 
clared to  you,  there  are  feveral  other  things,  which 
ye  are  not  now  fo  capable  of  receiving,  which  the 
Holy  Ghost,  whom  I  will  fend  in  my  name, 
fliall  take  a  more  convenient  time  to  infcrudl  you  in. 

And  our  Saviour-  fpeaks  much  to  the  fame 
purpofe,  John  xiv.  if,  26.  "  Thefe  things  have  I 
««  fpoken  unto  you,  being  yet  prefent  with  you  :  but 
*'  the  comforter,  v/hich  is  the  Holy  Ghost, 
*'  whom  the  Fathe  r  will  fend  in  my  name,  he 
*'  will  teach  you  all  things;  "  that  is,  he  fliall  make 
up  and  ^  n\y  what  is  wanting,  and  inftrud  you  in 
thofe  thing,  '^hich  ye  arc  n6t  now  fo  capable  of  re- 
ceiving. 

I  fhall  now,  in  the  fecond  place,  make  fome  Infe- 
rences from  the  words  thus  explained.     As, 

Fira, 


as  a  guide  to  the  apojlles.  4-555 

Fird,  that  it  is  not  neceflary  at  all  times  to  preach  S  E  R  M. 
all  truths,  which  are  of  importance  to  be  *  known.  ^^^^ 
For  thefe  were  great  truths  which  our  Saviour 
forbore  for  fome  time  to  reveal  to  his  difciples,  and 
were  of  great  importance  to  the  planting  and  propa- 
gating of  the  gofpel ;  and  yet  he  thought  it  better 
at  prefent  to  forbear  the  preiling  of  them,  than 
by  an  unfeafonable  declaration  of  them  to  do  no 
good,  but  only  ftir  up  prejudice  againfl  himfelf,  and 
thdfe  other  neceflary  truths  which  he  had  intruded 
them  in. 

Secondly,  that  there  ought  to  be  due  regard  to 
what  the  people  can  bear ;  and  where  men  are  pof- 
fefs'd  v^ith  a  violent  prejudice  againil  fome  truths, 
we  ought,  in  imitation  of  our  Saviou  r's  exam- 
ple, patiently  to  expedl  and  endeavour  the  removal 
of  that  prejudice;  and  firft  to  apply  all  fitting  means 
for  the  conquering  and  fubduing  it,  before  we 
expofe  truth  to  be  rejedted  by  thofe  who  have  taken 
up  a  violent  prejudice  againfl  it.  And  this  rule  holds 
univerfally,  where  we  have  to  deal  v/ith  perfons 
who  are  tradable  and  willing  to  learn,  but  do  at  pre- 
fent lie  under  fome  prejudice  of  education,  or  fome 
falfe  principles  which  they  entertained  unawares, 
which  by  time  and  patience,  and  a  gradual  progrefs 
of  truth,  m.ay  be  removed,  but  are  not  to  be  con- 
quer'd  and  born  down  at  once.  There  are  fome  * 
prejudices  which  cannot  be  pluck'd  out  of  the  minds 
of  men  at  once,  but  yet  may  be  fo  loofened  by  de- 
grees, that  they  will  fall  off  of  themfelves  -,  as  there 
are  many  knots  unty'd  with  patience  and  leifure,  which 
by  a  violent  pulling  are  fix'd  fo  much  the  fafter. 

*   Utile  eft   ut  taceatar  aliquod  veram,    propter  incapaces, 
Aug  perfcver.  1.  ii.  c.  i6. 

And 


455^         Of  the  coming  ?/*//5<?HolyGhostj 

CXCIX '  '^""^  ^'^'^  ^^^^^^  ^^  ^"*^  ^^^  apoftles  took,  in  imi- 
•  tation  of  our  Saviou  R,  i  Cor.  iii.  2.  «  I  have 
"  fed  you,"  faith  St.  Paul  there,  "  with  miJk,  and 
"  not  with  meat ;  for  hitherto  ye  were  not  able  to 
"  bear  it."  He  was  contented  to  inflil  truth  into 
them  by  degrees,  and  as  they  were  capable  of  it. 
The  minds  of  moil  men  are  ftrait  and  narrow,  and 
cannot  receive  that  at  once,  which  may  be  inftili'd 
by  degrees  ;  like  narrow-mouth'd  vefleJs,  into  which 
liquor  may  be  poured  by  degrees ;  but  if  we  drive 
to  put  It  in  fader  than  they  can  receive  it,  it  runs 
by,  and  is  lod. 

But  where  men  are  not  of  a  teachable  difpofition, 
but  the  prejudice  againd  truth  is  wilful  and  afFeded, 
there  we  are  bound  to  propofe  great  and  important 
truths  to  men ,  notwithdanding  their  prejudice 
againd  them,  and  to  urge  upon  them  thofe  things 
which  are  neceflary  and  fit  for  them  to  know, 
«  whether  they  will  hear,  or  whether  they  v/ill  for- 
*'  bear."  And  if  in  that  cafe  they  will  refid  truth 
fairly  and  with  full  evidence  propofed  to  them,  they 
do  it  at  their  peril.  God  is  not  obliged  to  do  more, 
than  to  offer  men  fufficient  means  of  convidion  ; 
and  if  they  will  be  obdinate  and  pertinacious,  God 
is  not  bound  in  that  cafe  to  provide  any  farther 
remedy. 

III.  Another  inference,  and  which  I  principally 
intended  from  this  text,  is  this,  that  from  the  expli- 
cation which  I  have  given  of  this  promife  of  our 
Saviou  r's,  of  fending  his  Spirit  to  lead  his 
difciples  into  all  truth,  it  very  plainly  appears,  that 
there  is  no  ground  or  colour  of  ground  from  this 
text,  for  the  pretended  infallibility  of  the  romifli 
church  :  and  yet  this  is  one  of  thole    texts,  which 

their 


as  a  guide  to  the  apojlles.  4557 

their  great  maders  of  controverfy  do  urge  us  withal,  l?-^,^* 
for  the  proof  of  their  infalHbility ;  a  fign  that  they  ^^,r>^^ 
are  much  at  a  lofs  for  good  arguments  to  prove 
it  by,  otherwife  they  would  never  fummon  a  text  lb 
very  remote  from  their  purpofe.  And  how  far  this 
text  is  from  proving  their  church  to  be  infallible, 
will  very  clearly  appear,  if  we  confider  thefe  five 
things. 

1.  That  the  plain  and  obvious  fenfe  of  this  pro- 
mife  (as  I  have  already  fhewn)  is  this ;  that  becaufe 
there  were  fome  truths  fit  for  the  apoftles  to  know, 
which  they  were  not  at  that  time  capable  of  receiv- 
ing, whilft  our  S  Av  I  ou  r  was  upon  earth,  there- 
fore after  his  afcenfion,  he  would  fend  his  Holy 
Spirit  to  inftrud  them  in  thofe  things,  and  to 
guide  them  into  all  thofe  truths,  which  it  was  not 
then  feafonable  to  acquaint  them  withal.  Now  by 
what  art  can  any  man  infer  from  hence,  that  our 
S  AV  I  o  u  R  would  give  the  infallible  afTi  (lance  of  his 
Holy  Spirit  to  the  church  of  Rome,  to  the 
end  of  the  world  ? 

2.  Let  it  alfo  be  confider'd,  that  this  promife  was 
made  perfonally  to  the  apoftles,  and  therefore  ought 
not  to  be  extended  beyond  them,  unlefs  it  evidently 
appear,  that  it  ought  to  be  fo  extended  ;  unlefs  it  evi- 
dently appear,  either  from  the  tenour  of  the  pro- 
mife, or  from  fome  other  reafon,  that  it  was  the  in- 
tention of  the  promifer,  that  this  Ihould  equally  ex- 
tend to  others  as  well  as  to  them.  'Tis  true,  that 
this  promife  was  made  to  the  apoflles,  not  merely 
for  their  own  fakes,  but  for  the  benefit  of  the  church  ; 
for  G  o  D  thereby  promifeth,  that  his  S  p  i  R  i  t  fhould 
reveal  thofe  truths  to  them,  that  they  might  declare 
them  to  the  church ;  but  it  does  not  from  hence 

follow. 


455^  0/  the  coming  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 

S  E  R  M.  follow,  that  any  other  perfons,  in  fucceeding  ages 
^  '  of  the  church,  fhould  have  the  fame  immediate  af- 
fiftance  of  the  Holy  Ghost  which  the  apoftles 
had  ;  becaufe,  being  once  revealed  to  the  church, 
there  was  no  need  of  a  new  revelation  of  thofe  truths 
in  every  age. 

3.  There  is  nothing  in  the  tenour  of  this  promifc, 
nor  any  other  reafon,  from  whence  it  may  appear, 
that  this  promife  ought  to  be  extended  any  farther, 
than  to  the  perfons  to  whom  it  was  made  •  becaufe 
this  promife  was  made  with  a  pecuhar  refpe6fc  to  the 
apoftles,  and  their  employment,  and  for  reafon s  pro- 
per to  the  firft  ftate  of  the  church  5  and  not  common 
to  all  ages ;  therefore  it  cannot  with  reafon  be  ex- 
tended to  all  after-ages  of  the  church. 

Let  it  be  granted  then,  that  this  promife  taken 
together  with  other  promifcs  of  our  Saviour 
made  to  the  apoftles,  does  fignify  an  infallible  af. 
fiftance  to  them,  fo  as  to  fecure  them  from  error,  in 
the  delivery  of  the  do6lrine  of  Chr  i  s  t  ;  yet  why 
fhould  any  church  afterwards,  much  lefs  the  church 
of  Rome  apart  from  all  others,  pretend  to  be  heir- 
general  to  the  apoftles  in  this  infalhble  affiftancc  ? 
The  apoftles  gave  fufficient  evidence  of  their  infallibi- 
lity, by  the  miracles  which  they  wrought:  and  Jet 
the  pope  and  general  councils  give  this  teftimony  of 
their  infallibility,  and  v;e  are  ready  to  acknowledge 
it.  There  was  reafon  why  this  affiliance  fhould  be 
afforded  to  the  apoftles  in  the  firft  preaching  of  the 
gofpel ;  but  after  it  was  planted,  and  the  dodrine  of 
chriftianity  confign'd  to  writing,  there  was  no  need 
of  fuch  an  infallible  afliftance  afterwards. 

But  they  of  the  church  of  Rome  tell  us,  that  this 
infallible  alfiftance  was  ncceftliry  afterwards  for  the 

perpetuity 


as  a  guide  to  the  apo files.  A-5S9 

perpetuity  of  the  church,  and  for  the  government  of  S  E  R  M, 
it,  and  for  the  decifion  of  controverfies  amongll  chri-  ^^^^ 
aims.     To  this  1  anfvver  two  things  : 

Firil,  if  this  ififalhlle  affil^.ince  be  necefTary  to 
thefc  -  ends,  then  it  is  alfo  neceHary,  that  it  Ibould 
have  been  declared,  what  that  church  or  fociety  is, 
which  was  to  be  fo  infallible  5  dfc  how  would  men 
know,  whither  to  have  recourfe.for  the  government 
of  the  church,  and  the  decifion  of  controverfies  in 
matters  of  difHculty  ?  as  good  the  chriilian  church  be 
without  infallibility,  as  that  no  man  Ihould  know 
where  it  is.  ^ 

And  will  any  man  have  the  confidence  to  fay, 
that  God  hath  any  where  in  fcriptu  re  declared,  that 
the  church  of  Rome  hath  this  infallibility  annex'd  to 
her  ?  hath  the  fcripture  any  where  told  us,  that  the 
church  of  Rome   is   the  catholick   church,  that  is, 
that  a  particular  church  is  the  church  univerfal  ?   if 
we  fliould  fuppofe  the  univerfal  church  to  be  infalli- 
ble in  matters  of  faith  and  pradlice,  is  it  any  where 
fa  id  in  the  bible,  that  the  pope,  or  a  general  coun- 
cil, or  both  together  are  infallible  ?  are  we  any  where 
there  direded  to  have  recourfe  to  Rome,  and  the 
bilhop  of  that  city,  either  with  or  without  a  general 
council,  for  the  determination  of  controverfies  in  re- 
ligion ?  and  yet  if  infallibility  be  neceflary  for  th^ 
ends  mentioned,  then  certainly  'tis  as  neceflary,  that 
we  fhould  have  been  plainly  direded  where  to  find 
it,  that  we  may  make  ufe  of  it  upon  occafion.    What 
man  living  can  perfuade  himfelf,  th;it  the  belief  of 
the  infallibihty  of  the  Romifh  church,  that  is,  of  the 
pope,  or  of  the  pope  and  council,  fhould  be  io  fun- 
damental an  article  of  faith  as  they  would  make  it ; 
and    vet  that    neither  Christ    nor  his   apollles 
Vol.  X.  22  X  iliould 


CXCIX. 


4560  Of  the  coming  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 

SERM.  Hiould  fay  one  word  about  it?  How  comes  it  to  pafs, 
that  when  there  were  fo  many  fchlfms  and  diflenfions 
in  the  primitive  church,  St.  Paul  Ihould  never  fo  much 
as  once  mention  this  effedual  remedy  of  all  thofe  evils 
to  fend  them  to  St.  Peter,  who  was  the  only  infallible 
judge  of  controverfies  ?  If  C  h  r  i  s  t  had  appointed 
this  way,  then  certainly  St.  Paul  could  not  have  been 
ignorant  of  it.  Befides  that  it  would  have  been  an 
excellent  diredtion  to  the  church  in  after- ages,  what 
to  have  done  in  the  like  cafes ;  if  our  Saviour  or 
any  of  his  apoflles  would  have  given  us  the  lead  fig- 
nification,  that  the  heir  of  infallibility  had  been  fix'd 
at  Rome,  and  that  thither  we  were  to  have  recourfc 
for  the  deciding  of  all  differences  in  religion. 

Efpecially  it  muft  needs  feem  very  wonderful,  that 
St.  Paul  in  his  epiftle  to  the  Roman  church,  fhould 
not  acquaint  them  what  a  fingular  privilege  that 
church  had  above  all  other  churches,  that  it  was  the 
feat  of  infallibility,  and  that  the  bifhop  of  that 
church  was  the  great  judge  of  controverfies,  and  that 
there  could  no  difference  arife  among  them,  about  any 
matter  of  faith,  but  they  might  fpeedily  have  it  de- 
cided from  that  chair.  Nay,  on  the  contrary,  there 
are  fhrewd  intimations  given,  that  the  church  of 
Rome  herfeif  fhould  apoftatize  from  the  faith,  and 
that  her  haughtincfs  would  be  her  ruin.  Rom.  xi.  20, 
21.  where  fpeakingof  the  Jews,  that  were  *'  broken 
*'  off  by  their  unbelief,"  he  gives  this  caution  to  the 
church  of  Rome;  "  well:  becaufe  of  unbelief  they 
"  were  broken  off,  and  thou  ftandefl  by  faith.  Be 
"  not  high-minded,  but  fear.  For  if  God  fpared 
*'  not  the  natural  branches;  take  heed  left  he  alfb 
*'  fpare  not  thee.  Be  not  high-minded,  but  fear." 
What  needed  they  to  fear,  who  had  the  privilege  of 

infallibility  ? 


as  a  guide  to  the  apojiles.  45^* 

infallibility  ?  their  faith  muft  needs  be  unfliaken.  But  SE  RM. 
St.  Paul  feems  to  think  that  church  to  be  in  as  much  ^_^  jl 
danger  of  falling  from  the  faith,  as  any  other.  From 
whence  we  may  certainly  conclude,  that  he  knew  no- 
thing of  its  infallibility.  Nay  he  feems  to  have  fore- 
feen  their  arrogant  pretence  to  ir,  and  that  that  very 
thing  would  be  the  occafion  of  their  falling,  when 
he  gives  them  that  caution,  '^  be  not  high-minded, 
"  but  fear."  For  what  greater  inflance  could  there  pof- 
fibly  be  of  a  proud  and  high  mind,  than  to  alTume  to 
themfelves  to  be  infallible  ?  But, 

Secondly,  the  ends  mentioned  may  be  fufficiently 
attained  without  infallibility.  As  for  the  perpetuity 
of  the  church,  that  may  continue  to  the  end  of  the 
v/orld,  by  virtue  of  the  infallibility  of  Ch  R  i  st's 
promife,  though  there  be  no  infallibility  either  in  tloe 
church  of  Rome,  or  any  where  el/e.  •  For  fetting 
afide  C  H  R  I  s  t's  promife,  the  church  may  fail ;  and 
his  promife  fignifies  only  that  it  fhall  not  fail,  not 
that  it  cannot.  All  that  can  be  inferred  from  the  pro- 
mife of  Ch  RiST,  concerning  the  perpetuity  of  the 
church,  is  only  the  certainty  of  the  event,  but  not  the 
infallibility  of  the  caufe;  not  that  the  church  fhall  be 
infallible,  but  only  that  it  fhall  not  fail. 

In  like  manner  for  the  government  of  the  church, 
and  decifion  of  controverfies,  there  is  no  need  of  in'  ■ 
fallibility  •,  becaufe  the  church  may  be  governed  well 
enough,  as  other  focieties  are,  without  an  infallibility  : 
and  all  controverfies  that  are  necefTary  to  be  decided, 
may  be  decided  by  the  infallible  rule  of  faith,  "  the 
''  holy  fcriptures,*'  which  are  plain  m  all  things  ne- 
cefTary ;  and  there  is  no  necefTity,  that  controverfies 
about  matters  not  necefTary  fhould  be  decided. 

2.2.    X    2  To 


\ 


CXCIX. 


4562  Of  the  coming  of  theHo  ly  Gnosr,  fee. 
SERNT.  To  conclude  this  point;  if  the  pope  and  a  genera! 
council  be  the  feat  of  infallibility,  (which  is  the  moil 
general  opinion  in  the  church  of  Rome)  then  how 
was  thechriftian  church  govern'd,  and  contioverfies 
decided,  before  the  council  of  Nice,  which  was  the 
firfr  general  council  •,  that  is,  for  three  hundred  years  ? 
And  if  the  church  did  well  enough  for  three  hundred 
ycais  without  an  infallible  judge,  this  is  a  dennonftra- 
tion  that  there  is  no  abfolute  need  of  it. 

4.  This  promife  here  in  the  text  fignifies  a  revela- 
tion of  fome  new  truths  to  the  apoflles,  which  they 
were  not  inRrudled  in  before,  and  therefore  cannot 
belong  to  any  church  in  after-ages.  For  the  church 
of  Rome  herfelf  does  not  pretend  to  any  revelation 
of  objedts  of  faith  not  known  before,  and  therefore 
can  challenge  nothing  by  virtue  of  this  promife. 

5.  Suppofe  infallible  afTiftance  were  here  promifed 
to  the  church  in  all  ages,  and  that  the  church  of 
Rome  were  the  catholick  church,  and  that  the  pope 
and  a  council  were  the  Roman  church,  and  ccnfe- 
quently  the  catholick,  I  fay,  fuppofe  all  this  granted  i 
yet  the  church  of  Rome,  according  to  her  princi- 
ples, can  never  be  certain  that  this,  is  the  meaning  of 
this  promife.  For  they  profefs  to  receive  both  tlie 
fcripture  and  the  interpretation  of  it  from  the  church, 
and  confequentiy  to  believe  this  text  to  be  fcripture, 
and  this  to  be  the  meaning  of  this  text,  becaufe  their 
church  which  is  infallible  tdls  them  i'o :  and  if  lb, 
then  they  do  not  believe  their  church  to  be  infallible, 
becaufe  this  t.xt  fays  fo  ;  but  they  believe  this  to  be 
the  meaning  of  this  text,  becaufe  their  church  is  in- 
fallible and  tells  them  lb.  So  that  of  necefllty  they 
muft  firll  believe  their  church  to  be  infallible,  before 
they  can  prove  it  from  this  or  any  other  text ;  and 

confequentiy. 


Of  the  ordinary  influence^  &c.  45^3 

confequently,  they  muft  either  prove  things  in  a  cir- 
cle, or  elfe  take  the  meaning  of  this  text  of  the  infal- 
libiHty  of  their  church  for  granted,  without  any 
proof.  And  thus  much  may  fuffice  to  have  fpoken 
to  this  text. 


SERMON    CC. 

Of  the  ordinary  influence  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  on  the  minds  of  chriftians* 


JOHN  vii.  39. 

But  this  fpake  he  of  the  Spirit,  which  they  that  be- 
lieve on  him  Jhould  receive.  For  the  Holy 
Ghost  was  not  yet  given^  becaufe  that  Jesus 
was  not  yet  glorified, 

OU  R  blefifed  Saviour  (who  ufed  from  all  s  E  R  M. 
forts  of  objefls  and  occurrences  to  difcourfe     ^^  ^ 
of  heavenly  and  fpiritual  things)  being  pre-  The  firft 
fent  at  the  feaft  of  tabernacles,  in  which  it  was  the  Sermon  on 
cuftom  of  the  Jews,  from  the  fountain  Siloam,  to  ^  ^^  ^^^^' 
fetch  water  with  great  pomp  and  ceremony,  and  to 
bring  it  into  the  temple  with  found  of  trumpet,  and 
to  offer  it,  finging  thofe  words  of  the  prophet  Ifaiah, 
"  they  fhall  draw  waters  with  joy  out  of  the  wells  of 
''  falvation :"  1  fay,  our  Saviour  being  prefent 
iat  this  feaft,  takes  occafion  from  thefe  waters,  which 
they  brought  into  the  temple  with  fo  much  joy,  to 
proclaim  thofe  fpiritual    benefits    which    chriftians 
ihould  be  made  partakers  of  by  the  Ho ly  Ghost, 

and 


4564  Of  the  ordinary  influertce  of  the 

S  E  R  M.  and  which  are  in  fcripture  reprefcntcd  by  "  waters 
"  flowing  from  a  living  fountain.  In  the  lad  day, 
<'  the  great  day  of  the  feafl,  Jesus  flood  and  cried, 
*'  faying,  if  any  man  third,  let  him  come  unto  me 
"  and  drink.  He  that  beheveth  on  me,  as  the  fcrip- 
"  ture  faith,"  that  is,  according  to  the  tenour  of  fe- 
veral  pafluiges  in  the  prophets,  "  out  of  his  belly  fhall 
*'  flow  rivers  of  living  watery"  and  then  the  evan- 
gelifl"  adds,  by  way  of  farther  explication  of  our  S  a- 
V I  o  u  r's  meaning,  "  but  tKis  he  fpake  of  the  S  x^  i- 
"  R I T,  which  they  that  believe  on  him  fhould  re- 
**  ceive.  For  the  Holy  Ghost  was  not  yet 
**  given,  becaufe  Jesus  was  not  yet  glorified." 
In  which  words  we  have  thefe  three  things  con- 
fiderable. 

Firft,  the  gift  itfelf;  which  is  here  called  "  the 
<=^  Spirit,  or  the  Holy  G  h  os  t." 

Secondly,  the  pcrfons  upon  whom  this  gift  was  to 
be  conferr'd ;  and  thofe  are  believers,  fuch  as  fhould 
believe  and  embrace  the  gofpel.     "  This  he  fpake  of 
«'•  the  S  p  I  R  I  T,  which  they  that  believe  on  him 
"  fhould  receive." 

Thirdly,  the  particular  time  and  fcafon  of  the  firfl: 
conferring  of  this  gift:  and  this  was  not  to  be  till  after 
our  Saviour's  afcenfion  into  heaven,  and  being 
receiv'd  up  into  glory,  implied  in  thofe  words,  "  the 
*'  Holy  Ghost  was  not  yet  given,  becaufe  J  e- 
"  s  u  s  was  not  yet  glorified."  I  Ihall  as  briefly  as  I 
can  explain  thefe  three  tfhings. 

Firlt,  the  gift  itfelf,  which  is  here  called  "  the 
"  Spirit,  or  the  H  o  l  y  Ghost,"  By  which  we 
are  to  underdand  a  fpecial  power  and  prefence  of  the 
Hol  y  Ghost  with  believers,  the  immediate  ope- 
ration and  affiitance  of  the  Divine  Spirit  com- 
municatee! 


lloL^  CuoBT  on  the  mijids  of  chrifiiansl      4  c6 ^ 

municated  and  Imparted  to  them  \  and  this  compre-  S  E  R  M. 
hcnds  in  it  thefe  two  things.  ,  ^^ 

I.  Thofe  extraordinary  and  miraculous  gifts  which 
were  bellowed  upon  the  apoftles  and  primitive  chri- 
ftians,  in  order  to  the  planting  and  propagating  of 
the  chriftian  rdlgion  in  the  world,  and  for  the  ufe  and 
benefit  of  the  church,  while  it  was  under  perftcution, 
and  deftitute  of  all  fecular  countenance  and  aiTiliance, 
and  of  thofe  ordinary  humane  advantages  which  are 
fufficient  to  preferve  and  maintain  a  religion,  after  it 
IS  once  firmly  fettled,  and  generally  entertained.  And 
thefe  gifts  were  in  a  very  remarkable  manner,  and 
fach  as  no  religion  that  ever  was  in  the  world  can  pre- 
tend to  the  like,  conferred  upon  the  firft  preachers  of 
the  chriftian  doflrine,  and  planters  of  it  in  the  world ; 
and  they  were  in  a  high  degree  neceffary  to  give  cre- 
dit and  countenance  to  this  religion  at  its  firft  appear- 
ance, and  to  awaken  the  drowfy  world  to  an  attentive 
confideration  of  it,  to  conquer  the  prejudices  of  men 
again  ft  a  new  religion,  and  to  fupport  and  bear  up 
the  teachers  and  publifhers  of  this  do6lrine,  againft 
that  violent  oppofition  and  perfecution  which  would 
certainly  be  raifed  againft  it,  and  likewife  to  fupply 
the  want  of  fecular  power  and  authority  to  give  coun- 
tenance and  afliftance  to  it. 

For  thefe  and  fuch  like  ends  and  reafons,  God  was 
pleafed  at  that  time  not  only  to  endue  the  apoftlesand 
firft  preachers  of  chriftianity  with  all  forts  of  miracu- 
lous powers,  but  even  the  generality  of  chriftians  with 
feveral  extraordinary  gifts ;  and  alfo  to  accompany 
the  outward  preaching  of  the  gofpel  with  a  very  ex- 
traordinary influence  of  G  o  d's  Spirit  upon  the 
minds  of  men ;  to  make  way  for  iht  entertainment 
of  it,  by  opening  their  underftandings,  and  enlight- 


4566  Of  the  ordinary  influence  of  the 

ning  their  minds  to  difcern  fpiritual  things,  by  fub- 
duing  their  prejudices,    and  conquering  their  Jufts 
and   the  vicious  and  perverfe   inclinations  of  their 
wills    to   the   obedience  of  faith,    by  raifing  their 
mmds  above  the   worid,  above  aH    the  allurements 
and  enjoyments  of  it,  and  above  all  the  threatnines 
and  terrors  of  it,  and  giving  men  courage  and  refo- 
lution  to  embrace  this  profeffion,  and  with  conftancy 
to  adhere  to  it,  notwithftanding  all  the  dangers  and 
lufterings  which  attend  it. 

_  I  fhall  not  now  treat  of  thefc  miraculous  gifts  par- 
*  See  Vol  'j?  ^  ^'  ''^'""S  had  frequent  occafion  heretofore  *  to 
7v^?;?-        °"'',    ^'  '""■§'  °^  '''^  "'''"'■^'  ^«d  federal  kinds,  and 

,';fthh-    T  "*"'  '"'^  '"'^^  °f  '^''^-     I  ^-"  on'y  ob- 

Vol  Sem,/^'"^e  to  you,  that  this  power  of  miracles,  and  this 
CXC VII.  extraordinary  influence  of  the  S  p  ,  r  r  t  of  G  o  d  up! 
on  the  minds  of  men,  was  not  intended  always  to 
continue  in  the  church,  but  only  fo  long  as  there 
Ihould  be  need  and  occafion  for  it,  that  is,  'till  the 
clixift^n  religion  was  fully  propagated  and  planted, 
and  the  fury  of  perfecution  abated,  and  till  chriftia- 
nity  had  the  favour  and  countenance  of  the  civil  an- 
thority,  and  the  prejudice  of  education  on  its  Ude 
For  when  by  this  means  it  came  to  ftand  upon  equal 
terms  of  advantage  with  other  religions,  God    then 
withdrew  his  extraordinary  affiftance,  and  left  it  to  be 
maintained  and  fupported  by  more  humane  and  or- 
dinary  ways,  and  in  a  great  meafure  by  its  own  ra- 
tional force  and  power  upon  the  minds  of  men. 

II.  The  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost  doth  likewife 
fignify  and  comprehend  in  it  a  more  ordinary  and 
gentle  influence  of  God's  S  pir,t  upon  the  minds 
of  men,  tp  all  holy  and  good  purpofes :  by  which  I 
mean,  an  immediate  operation  and  affiftance  of  the 

Holy 


Ho  LY  Ghost  on  the  minds  of  chrijiians.      4567 
Holy  "GiiosT  afForded  to  men,  to  relieve  the  weak-  SER  ?^, 
nefs  and  impotence  of  humane  nature,  to  help  and ,_     ^J^ 
ilrengthen  us  to  the  performance  of  what  the  gofpel 
requires  of  us.     And  this  I  fhall  have  occafion  to  ex- 
plain more  particularly,  when  I  have  gone  over  the 
other  parts  of  the  text. 

Secondly,  you  have  here  the  qualification  of  the 
perfons  who  were  to  be  made  partakers  of  this  gifr, 
and  that  is  "  believing"  and  embracing  the  gorpel. 
"  This  he  fpake  of  the  Spirit,  which  they  that 
"  believe  on  him  fhould  receive." 

The  extraordinary  and  miraculous  gifts  of  the 
S  PiRiT  were  not  conferred  on  any,  but  thofe  who 
embraced  the  faith  of  Christ,  and  made  profef^ 
fion  of  the  chriilian  religion.  Not  that  all  chriftians 
were  endowed  with  thofe  extraordinary  gifts,  much 
lefs  all  in  an  equal  degree.  But  they  were  diftributed, 
as  St.  Paul  tells  us,  in  fuch  manner  and  meafureas  the 
wifdom  of  Go  D  thought  fit,  and  as  was  moft  for  the 
ufe  and  edification  of  tlie  church.  But  all  were  par- 
takers of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  refped  of  his  more 
ordinary  influence  and  afliftance,  and  this  gift  all 
chriftians  receiv'd  upon  their  embracing  and  ovvning 
the  chriflian  religion.  Thus  Adls  v.  gz.  "  The 
*'  Holy  Ghost  is  faid  to  be  given  by  God  to 
"  them  that  obey  him."  And  Gal.  iii.  14.  we  are 
.  faid  "  to  receive  the  promife  of  the  Spirit  through 
faith.'*  And  Ephef.  i.  13.  "  In  whom  alfo  after  that 
*'  ye  believed,  ye  were  fealed  with  that  Holy 
"  Spirit  of  promife." 

And  becaufe  this  profeflion  of  faith  was  made  in 
baptifm,  whereby  men  are  folemnly  initiated  into  i\xz 
chriftian  rehgion,  hence  it  is,  that  this  gift  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  is  in  fcripture  promifed,  and  faid  to 

Vol.  X.  22  Y  b^ 

6. 


4  s 68  Of  the  ordinary  influence  of  the 

SERM.be  conferred  in  baptifm,  Afts  ii.  38.  ''  Then  Peter 
^^-  "  faid  unto  them,  repent  and  be  baptized  every  one 
''  of  you  in  the  name  of  J  e  s  u  s  C  h  r  i  s  t,  for  the 
*'  rcmifTion  of  fins,  and  ye  fhall  receive  the  gift  of 
"  the  H  o  L  Y  Ghost."  And  Heb.  vi.  4.  the  apo- 
ftle  fpeaking  of  thofe  who  had  folemnly  taken  upon 
them  the  profclTion  of  chriflianicy,  thus  defcribes 
them,  "  thofe  who  were  once  enlightned,'/  that  is, 
*'  baptized  -,"  (for  fo  baptifm  is  frequently  by  the  an- 
cients call'd  illumination)  "  thofe  who  were  once  bap_ 
*'  tized,  and  have  tafted  of  the  heavenly  gift,  and 
*'  were  made  partakers  of  the  Ho  ly  Ghost  j '' 
implying  that  this  heavenly  gift  of  God's  Holy 
Spirit,  was  conferr'd  upon  chriftians  in  their  bap- 
tifm ;  and  hence  it  is,  that  "  baptizing  with  water 
"  and  the  Holy  Ghost'*  were  frequently  put  to- 
gether, water  being  the  outward  fymbol,  and  the 
Holy  Ghost  the  inward  grace,  conferred  in  bap- 
tifm. So  likewife  the  apoftle  joins  together,  "  the 
*'  laver  of  regeneration,  and  the  renewing  of  the^  -. 
''  Holy  Ghost,"  Tit.  iii.  5. 

All  which  confider'd,  I  cannot  imagine  why  fo 
great  a  fcruple  fhould  be  made  of  thofe  exprefTions 
which  our  church  ufeth  in  the  office  of  baptifm  of 
children ;  "  being  regenerated  and  born  again  by 
"  baptifm,  and  being  thereby  made  the  children  of 
*'  God,  and  heirs  of  eternal  life."  That  is,  by  en- 
tring  into  this  covenant,  they  are  put  into  a  ftate  and 
capacity  of  all  the  bleflings  of  the  gofpel,  if  they  do 
not  negledl  the  condition  which  that  covenant  requires 
on  their  parr.  For  all  this  is  in  truth  no  other  but 
what  the  fcripture  fays  of  baptifm,  and  afcribes  to  it, 
when  it  calls  it,  ''  the  laver  of  regeneration,"  when 
it  declares  the  S  p  i  rit  to  be  conferred  in  baptifm. 


Holy  Ghost  on  the  mmds  ofchrifliam.  4569 
and  when  it  fays,  that  ''  as  many  as  are  led  by  the  3ERM. 
*'  S  p  I  R  I  T  of  G  o  D,  are  the  Tons  of  Go  d,  and  that 
"  the  fons  of  God,  are  heirs  of  eternal  life."  So 
that  I  cannot  fee  that  our  church,  in  her  higheft  ex- 
preffions  concerning  the  benefits  and  effedls  of  baptifm, 
fays  any  thing  but  what  is  very  agreeable,  both  to 
the  exprefTions  and  fenfe  of  fcripture.  And  thus  no: 
only  the  ancient  fathers  fpake  of  this  matter,  but  fo 
likewife  do  all  the  liturgies  of  the  reformed  churches, 
in  the  offices  and  forms  appointed  by  them  for  the 
adminiftration  of  baptifm  ;  fo  that  it  feems  a  very 
affected  fingularity  to  take  exceptions  at  fuch  expref- 
fions  as  have  conflandy  been,  and  ftill  are  generally 
ufed  in  all  chriflian  churches.     Tiie 

Third  thing  confiderable  in  the  text  is,  the  parti- 
cular time  and  feafon  of  the  conferring  of  this  gift 
of  the  H  o  LY  Ghost;  and  that  was  after  our  S  a- 
V I  o  u  r's  afcenfion  into  heaven,  and  being  received 
up  into  glory,  implied  in  thofe  words,  "  the  Holy 
*'  G  H  o  a  T  was  not  yet  given,  becaufe  Jesus 
"  was  not  yet  glorified  i"  fignifying  to  us,  that  this 
efFufion  of  the  S  p  i  r  i  t  was  not  to  be  till  after  our 
S  A  v  I  o  u  r's  afcenfion  into  heaven. 

But  was  not  the  Holy  Ghost  given  to  the 
prophets  of  old  ?  and  were  not  good  men  in  former 
ages  of  the  world  under  the  ordinary  influence  and 
afTiflance.  of  the  divine  grace  and  Spirit?  why  is 
it  then  faid  that  "  the  Holy  Ghost  was  not  yet 
*'  given  ?  '* 

The  anfwer  to  this  is  eafy,  that  our  Saviour 
here  fpeaks  of  that  general  and  plentiful  efFufion  of 
the  Holy  G  host  which  was  promifed  to  **  the 
*'  latter  days,*'  that  is,  to  the  "  gofpel  age  ;"  the 
like  to  which,  both  for  the  univerfal  communication 
i$^  y  2  of 


Of  the  ordinary  infuence  of  the 
of  this  gift,  and  for  the  extraordinary  degree  and 
meafure  of  its  participation,  had  never  been  in  the 
world  before  ;  and  of  this  it  is,  that  the  evangeUfh 
fpeaks,  when  he  dares  the  time  of  it,  from  after  our 
S  Av  I  o  u  r's  afcenfion  into  heaven.  Now  why  the 
difpenfation  of  this  gift  of  the  Ho  ly  Ghost  was 
particularly  Hmited  to  this  time,  though  it  is  not  ne-  • 
ceffary  we  fhould  know  the  reafons  of  it,  yet  there  are 
three  obvious  ones,which  may  give  us  full  fatisfadion 
in  this  matter. 

1.  Becaufe  it  was  not  fo  necefiary  before  in  our 
S  A V I  o  u  r's  life-time.  For  during;  his  continuance 
in  the  world,  and  converfation  with  his  difciples,  his 
prefence  fupplied  all  other  defedls  \  but  when  he  left 
them,  they  were,  as  he  calls  them,  "  orphans,'* 
deftitute  of  help,  comfort,  and  protedion  ;  and  there- 
fore it  was  requifite,  that  upon  his  departure  from 
them,  this  comforter  and  advocate  fhould  "  come  to 
*'  abide  and  continue  with  them  for  ever."  But  this 
does  not  feem  to  reach  fully  the  reaibn  afTigned  in 
the  text,  why  "  the  Spirit  was  not  yet  given, 
''  becaufe  Jesus  was  not  yet  glorified."  Therefore, 

2.  It  feems  very  convenient,  not  only  that  our 
Saviour  fhould  be  vifibly  taken  up  into  heaven, 
but  that  after  he  was  afcended  thither,  he  fhould  give 
fome  remarkable  teftimony  to  the  world,  of  the 
power  and  dignity  to  which  he  was  there  advanced  ; 
and  that  as  a  king  he  fhould  give  fome  evidence  of 
his  authority  and  majefty,  at  his  folemn  inauguration 
into  his  kingdom,  by  difpenfing  plendfully  fpiritual 
gifts,  as  the  princes  of  this  world  are  wont  at  fuch 
a  time  to  fcatter  temporal  favours  and  benefits.  And 
this  the  fcripture  takes  notice  of,  as  an  evidence  and 
teftimony  of  his  royal  dignity,  and  glorious  exalta- 
tion 


Holy  Ghost  on  the  mifids  ofchrifiians.  4571 
don  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  Adls  v.  31,  32.  SERM. 
"  Him  hath  God  exalted  (fpeaking  of  our  bleflfed 
*'  Lord)  with  his  own  right  hand,  to  be  a  prince 
*'  and  a  Sav  i  o  u  r,  to  give  repentance  unto  Ifrael, 
"  and  forgivenefs  of  fins.  And  we  are  his  witnefles 
*'  of  thefe  things ;  and  fo  alfo  is  the  H  o  l  y  G  pi  o  s  t, 
*'  whom  God  hath  given  to  them  that  obey  him." 
Where  you  fee  that  "  the  gift  of  the  Holy 
"  G  H  o  s  t"  is  mention'd  as  a  teftimony  of  our  S  a- 
y  I  o  u  r's  being  "^^  exalted  as  a  prince  at  the  right 
"  hand  of  God."  But  more  exprefly  St.  Paul, 
Eph.  iv.  8.  applies  to  our  Saviour  thefe  words 
of  the  pfalmifl,  "  wherefore  he  faith,  when  he  af- 
"  cended  up  on  high,  he  led  captivity  captive, 
^^  and  gave  gifts  unto  men." 

3.  After  our  Saviour's  afcenfion,  there  was 
the  greateft  occafion  that  ever  was  for  the  beftowing 
of  this  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  confidering 
what  kind  of  perfons  they  were,  that  were  appointed 
to  publifh  the  gofpel  to  the  world  5  and  that  this 
great  work  being  to  be  carried  on  by  inftruments  in 
all  appearance  fo  weak,  and  mean,  and  contemptible, 
there  v/as  an  abfolute  neceffity  of  an  extraordinary 
teftimony  to  be  given  from  heaven  to  the  divinity 
of  this  new  dodrine,  and  of  a  divine  power  and  pre- 
fence  going  along  with  it,  to  encourage  and  fupport 
thofe  weak  inftruments  in  carrying  on  of  this  work, 
againft  the  mighty  oppofition  and  perfccution  it  was 
likely  to  meet  withal,  and  againft  fuch  difficulties  and 
obftacles  as  were  plainly  infuperable  by  any  humane 
power  and  means.  For  as  there  never  was  a  work  of 
greater  confequence  and  difficulty  than  this  under- 
taking J  fo  could  this  divine  power  and  alTiftance 
never  have  appeared  and  manifefted  itfelf,  upon  a 

fitter 


457^  O/*  the  ordinary  influence  of  the 

S  E RM.  fitter  and  more  worthy  occafion.  Sine?. our  S  a  v  i- 
^^^  ^  OUR,  according  to  the  wife  counfel  of  Go  d,  intend- 
ed, that  after  his  afcenfion  into  heaven,  his  gofpel 
fhould  be  publifhed  to  the  world,  it  was  highly  re- 
quifite  that  the  minds  of  men  fhould  be  prepared  for 
it,  and  way  made  for  the  more  ready  entertainment 
and  eafy  pafiage  of  it,  by  fomc  fignal  teftimony  of 
the  divine  prefence  attending  the  firft  publifhers  of 
it,  and  by  circumflances,  though  not  fo  full  of  terror 
and  amazempnt,  as  thofe  who-'did  accompany  the 
giving  of  the  Jaw,  yet  really  of  greater  force  and  ef- 
ficacy, and  more  apt  to  convince  the  world  of  the 
truth  of  this  dodrine,  and  to  infinuate  it  more  ef- 
fedualJy  into  the  hearts  and  confciencei  of  men. 

And  now  that  I  have  given  you  a  brief  account  of 
the  three  particulars,  which  from  this  text  offer 
themfelves  to  our  conflderation,  I  fhalJ  return  back 
to  that  which  I  intended  more  efpecially  80  infill 
upon,  and  that  is,  the  more  ordinary  influence  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  of  God  upon  the  minds  of  thofe 
who  believe  and  embrace  the  chriftian  do6lrine  •,  and 
this  I  lliall  endeavour  to  explain  to  you  under  thefe 
four  heads. 

Firft,  I  fhall  open  to  you  the  nature  of  it. 
Secondly,  the  necefiity  of  it,  to  enable  us  to  per- 
form the  condition  of  the  gofpel -covenant. 
Thirdly,  the  bleffed  effeds  of  it. 
Fourthly,  the  extent  of  it,  as  to  perfons  and  times. 
Firft,  I  fhall  endeavour  to  open  to  you  the  nature 
of  this  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  underftanding 
by  it  the  ordinary  influence  of  the  Ho  ly  Spirit 
of  God  upon  the  hearts  and  minds  of  believers.  And 
I  doubt  not  but  that  the  fcripture  means  by  it  an  im- 
mediate influence  and  operation  of  the  Holy  S  p  i- 

RI  T 


Holy  Ghost  on  the  minds  of  chrijiians.  4573 
RiT  of  G(H)  upon  the  minds  of  men,  an  inv/ard  SERM, 
power,  ftrength  and  affiflance  communicated  to  chri- 
ftians,  to  all  the  purpofes  of  holinefs  and  obedience, 
enabling  them  to  be  fuch  "  manner  of  perfons  in  all 
"  holy  converfation  and  godlinefs  *'  as  the  gofpei  re- 
quires :  and  not  only  that  this  ftrength  and  affiftance 
is  offered  and  afforded  to  us,  "  to  work  in  us,  both 
''  to  will  and  to  do  "  all  that  is  neceffary  to  falvation, 
if  we  put  no  obftacle  thereto,  and  do  not  refift  the 
Spirit  of  God,  and  the  bleffed  motions  of  it  i 
but  likewife  that  this  power  does  continually  dwell  and 
refide  in  all  true  chriftians,  if  we  do  not  grieve  the 
Spirit  of  God,  and  provoke  him  to  withdraw 
himfelf  from  us. 

And  this  is  fufEciently  declared  in  feveral  places  of 

the  new  teftament,  where  we  are  faid  to  be  "  affifted 

''  by  a  divine  power,  and  ftrengthenM  with  all  might 

"  by  the  S  p  I  R  I  t  in  the  inner  man  \  to  walk  in  the 

"  S  p'l  R  I  T,  to  be  led  by  the  S  p  i  r  i  t,  and  by  the 

^'  S  p  I  R  I  t  to  mortify  the  deeds  of  the  liefh  5"  and 

likewife  in  thofe  texts,  wherein  "  the  Spirit  of 

"  G  o  D  is  faid[to  work  mightily  in  them  that  believe, 

"  to  dwell    in  them,  to  fanc^lify  and  renew  them," 

with  many   fuch  like  exprefTions,  frequently    to   be 

met   with  in  the  writings   of  the  apoitles.     By  all 

which,  unlefs  we  offer  notorious  violence  to  the  plain 

and  obvious  fenfe  of  them,  we  muft  neceffarily  un- 

derftand  fomething  more  than  the  confirmation  which 

was  given  to  the  chriftian  dodlrine,  by  the  miracles 

that  were  wrought    by   the  power    of  the  Holy 

Q  H  o  s  t  j  which  dodlrine  being  thus  confirmed,  does 

by  way  of  rational  convidlion  work  upon  the  minds 

of  men,  and  change  their  wills,  without  any  internal 

operation  and  immediate  afllftance  of  the  Holy 

Ghost. 


Of  the  ordinary  influence  of  the 
Ghost.  Such  a  remote  influence  of  the  S  p  i  r  i  T 
of  Go  D  upon  men  as  this  is,  does  by  no  means  feem 
to  anfwer  the  fulnefs  of  thofe  phrafes  and  exprefTions, 
which  the  fcripture  fo  frequently  ufeth  concerning  it ; 
and  if  any  man  do  but  ferioufly  weigh  and  confider 
them,  nothing  lefs  than  an  immediate  influence  of 
the  S  p  I  R  I  T  of  G  o  D  upon  our  hearts,  and  a  real 
ftrength  and  power  thereby  communicated  to  us,  can 
be  imagined  to  fatisfy  the  proper  fenfe  and  meaning 
of  the  fevera!  exprefilons  which  I  have  mentioned. 

And  that  the  fcripture,  by  the  promife  of  the 
Spirit,  and  the  various  exprefilons  concerning 
it,  does  mean  this  ordinary  aSTiflance  common  to 
all  chrifliians  in  all  times,  and  only  the  extraordinary 
and  miraculous  gifts  of  the  H o  ly  G  h  os  t,  which 
were  peculiar  to  the  firfl:  ages  of  chrifl:ianity,  feems 
to  me  to  be  very  plain  ;  becaufe  the  fcripture  makes 
the  gift  of  the  S  p  i  r  i  t  to  be  common  to  all  be- 
lievers, and  to  be  given  to  all  that  are  baptized^  and 
this  in  all  ages  of  the  church  ;  as  appears  from  thofe 
words  of  St.  Peter,  Adts  ii.  38,  39.  "  Then  Peter 
"  faid  unto  them,  repent  and  be  baptized  every 
*'  one  of  you  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ, 
*'  for  the  remiflion  of  fins,  and  ye  fhall  receive  the 
"  gift  of  the  H  OL  Y  Ghost.  For  the  promife  is 
"  unto  you,  and  to  your  children,  and  to  all  that 
*^  are  afar  off^,  even  as  many  as  the  Lord  our 
"God  fhall  call."  This  promife  is  ''  the  promife 
*'  of  theH'oLY  Ghost,"  which  he  fiiys  is  made 
to  them  and  their  pofl:erity,  that  in  all  fucceeding 
ages  fhould  be  gained  to  the  faith  of  Christ. 
So  that  this  "  promife  of  the  Holy  Ghost," 
which  St.  Peter  fpeaks  of,  and  declares  to  be  con- 
ferred in  baptifm,  does  not  refpedl  only  the  firit  ages 

of 


Jjo  LY  Ghost  07t  the  minds  of  chrijlians,       4S7S 
of  chridianity,    but  all  fucceeding  generations;  and  ^^{^.^* 
therefore  cannot  be  underwood  of  the  power  of  mi- 
racles, bccaufe  that  is  long  fince  ceafed  in  the  chrifti.iii 
church. 

And  this  appears  yet  more  evidently,  in  that  the 
fcripture  makes  the  want  of  the  S  p  i  R  i  T  a  fign 
that  a  man  is  no  true  and  fincere  chriflian  :  "  if 
'^  any  man  have  not  the  S  p  i  R  i  T  of  C  H  r  i  s  t, 
*'  he  is  nons  of  his ; "  a.id  on  the  contrary,  makes 
our  having  the  Spirit  of  God,  a  mark  of  a 
child  of  G  o  D  ;  ''as  many  as  are  led  by  the  S  p  i- 
**  R  I  T  of  G  o  D  are  the  fons  of  God:"  but  oui:' 
Saviour  hath  aflured  us,  that  men  may  have  the 
miraculous  gifts  of  the  Spirit  of  God^  "  may 
"  prophefy  in  C  H  r  ji  s  t's  name,  and  cafl:  out  devils 
"  in  his  name,  and  in  his  name  do  many  wondrous 
*'  works,"  and  yet  be  "  workers  of  iniquity,  and  fhut 
"  out  of  the  kingdom  of  God.''  And  on  the  other 
hand,  jpnen  may  not  have  thefe  miraculous  gifts,  and 
yet  be  "  the  children  of  God."  But  this  will  yeC 
more  fully  appear,  if  we  confider  in  the 

Second  place,  the  great  neccfiity  of  fcch  an  im<^ 
mediate  influence  and  afliftance  of  the  Spirit  of 
God,  to  enable  chriftians  to  perform  the  condition 
of  the  covenant  of  the  gofpel.  The  great  corruption 
and  degeneracy  of  humane  nature,  and  the  im potency 
and  weaknefs  confequent  thereupon,  is  not  only  mat-^ 
ter  of  divine  revelation,  but  hath  always  been  the 
general  apprehenfion  and  acknowledgement,  and  the 
fad  complaint  of  the  wifeft  part  of  mankind;  and 
indeed,  every  man  may  feel  it  in  himfelf,  and  obferve 
it  in  others.  No-a^  for  our  relief  and  recovery  out  of 
this  miferable  and  degenerate  Rate,  G  o  d  was  pleafed 
in  great  pity  and  commiferation  to  mankind^  to  fend 

VoL.X.  22  Z  ^is 

7* 


457^  0/"  the  ordinan  inpunce  of  the 

SERM.  his  Son  into  the  world,  to  reveal  his  will-  and  our 
cc 

duty  a-new  to  us,  for  our  diredion  in  the  way  to  life 

and  happincfs ;  and  by  the  facrifice  of  himfelf  to 
make  a  perfedl  expiation  of  fin  *,  and  to  proclaim 
forgivenefs  of  fins  to  us,  for  the  encouragement  of 
our  repentance,  and  return  to  our  duty  •,  and,  in  a 
word,  to  offer  new  terms  of  life  and  happinefs  to  us, 
upon  the  conditions  of  faith,  and  repentance,  and 
new  obedience. 

But  after  all  this  is  done  for  us,  wc  arc  flill  with- 
out ftrength,  our  nature  being  depraved,  and  funk 
into  that  impotency  and  weaknefs,  that  without  the 
powerful  afliltance  of  divine  grace,  v/e  are  utterly  un- 
able to  perform  thofe  mofl:  equal  and  reafonable  con- 
ditions which  the  gofpcl  requirCi  of  us,  being,  as  the 
fcripturc  exprcfTcth  it,  ''  dead  in  trefpaffds  and  fins, 
*'  and  eflranged  from  the  life  of  God,  through  the 
"  darknefs  that  is  in  us,  and  the  blindnefs  of  our 
''  hearts;'*  being  enQaved  to  vicious  habits,  and 
having  '*  a  carnal  mind,  which  is  enmity  to  God,'* 
and  renders  us  incapable  to  receive  or  rclifh  divine 
and  fpiritual  things.  So  that  notwithfianding  all  that 
our  bkfi^ed  Saviour  hath  done  and  fuffer'd  for  us, 
and  all  the  merciful  overtures  of  pardon  and  happi- 
nefs, which  the  gofpel  makes  to  us,  all  this  will 
fignify  nothing  to  our  bcncat  and  advantage,  unlels 
our  impotency  be  relieved,  and  new  life  and  firength 
be  conveyed  to  us,  to  awaken  and  excite  us  to  that 
which  is  good,  to  enable  us  to  mortify  and  fubdue 
our  evil  and  corrupt  inclinations,  to  break  off  our  vi- 
cious habits,  and  to  walk  in  the  ways  of  Go  d's  com- 
mandments. For  "  v.'e  arc  not  fufficient  of  ourfelves, 
"  as  of  ourfelvcsj"  for  any  of  the'c  thing';;  *'  but 
"  our  fufficiency  is  of  God."  "  Without  Christ 

*'  wc 


HolyGhost  upon  the  minds  ofchrljiiam,  J^^yy 
«'  we  can  do  nothing*,"  and  it  is  only  "  through  SERM. 
"  him  ftrengthening  of  us,  that  we  are  able  to  do 
*'  all  thofe  things "  which  are  neceUary  to  be  done 
by  us,  in  order  to  the  obtaining  of  that  happinefs 
and  faivation  which  the  gofpel  hath  promifcd,  and 
our  Saviour  hath  purchafed  for  us.  And  there- 
fore our  merciful  Redeemer,  that  he  might  not 
leave"  his  work  imperfed,  hath  fent  his  blefifcd  Spi- 
rit into  our  hearts,  "  to  enlighten  the  eyes  of  our 
**  minds,"  and  to  open  and  difpofe  our  underfland- 
ings  for  the  receiving  of  divine  and  fpiritual  truths  ; 
to  conquer  likewife  the  perverfenefs  and  ilubbornncfs 
of  our  wills,  and  to  fet  us  at  liberty  from  the  fiave- 
ry  of  our  luRs  •,  (for  "  where  the  Spi  rit  of  God 
*'  is,  as  St.  Paul  tells  us,  there  is  liberty,*';  "  to 
*'  renew  our  natures,  and  to  purify  our  hearts,  to 
*^  mortify  our  corrupt  affedions,  and  to  afiift  us  to 
**  every  good  word  and  work-,"  to  flrengthen  us 
againll  temptations,  to  ilipport  us  under  fufferings 
and  pcrfecutions,  and  in  a  word,  "  to  keep  us  by  this 
"  mighty  pov.'er  of  God,"  and  gracious  alTiltar.ce 
of  his  Holy  Sp  I  RIT,  "  through  faith  unro  fal- 
**  vation." 

So  that  whofoever  (hall  but  duly  weigh  and  con- 
fider  his  own  darknefs  and  ignorance,  the  flrange  and 
unreafonable  prejudices  of  a  corrupt  mind  againll  di- 
vine truth,  and  againft  the  pradice  of  holinefs  and 
virtue,  the  ftrong  bias  of  mens  natural  inclinations 
to  that  which  is  evil,  the  mighty  force  and  power  of 
evil  and  inveterate  habits  within  us,  and  the  ftrength 
and  violence  of  manifold  temptations  without  us,  to- 
gether with  the  great  difficulties  and  difcouragements 
of  piety  and  virtue,  efpecially  when  they  are  attended 
with  grievous  fufferings,  and  fiery  trials,  for  righteouf- 

22  Z  2  nefs 


457^  0/  the  ordinary  tfifuence  of  the 

8ERM.  nefs  fake-,  I  fay,  he  that  confiders  all  this,  will  eafily 
difcern,  and  readily  acknowledge,  how  great  a  necef- 
fity  there  is  of  the  grace  and  afTiflance  of  God's 
Holy  S  p  i  r  i  t,  to  all  the  purpofes  of  a  firm  faith, 
and  a  fincere  repentence,  and  a  conftant  and  univerfal 
obedience  to  the  holy  laws  and  precepts  ol  the  gofpel, 
to  refcue  us  from  the  power  and  dominion  of  fin,  to 
raife  us  to  a  new  life,  to  engage  us  in  an  holy  courfe, 
and  to  fortify  our  refoluiions  againrt:  fin,  and  to  enable 
us  to  perfevere,  and  patiently  continue  in  doing  and 
fuffering  the  will  of  God. 

*Tis  this  gracious  influence,  and  continual  aHillance 
of  God's  Holy  Spirit  refiding  and  dwelling 
in  us,  which  fccures  all  the  other  blelTings  and  be- 
nthtsof  the  gofpel  to  us,  and  conduds  us  fately  through 
^11  the  temptations  of  this  world,  and  the  difficulties 
ofachriftian  courfe,  to  "  the  end  of  our  faith,  the 
*'  eternal  falvation  of  our  fouls."  For  which  reafon, 
the  Spirit  of  God  dwelling  in  good  men,  and 
evidencing  itfclf  by  its  genuine  fruits  and  eifeds,  the 
graces  and  virtues  of  a  good  life,  is  faid  to  be  "  the 
^'  pledge  4nd  earneft  of  our  future  inheritance,"  and 
of  a  bleffed  refurredion  to  eternal  life,  and  "  to  feal 
"  us  up  to  Ihe  day  of  redemption,"  Rom.  viii.  1 1. 
"  But  if  the  S  p  I  R  I  T  of  him  that  raifed  up  J  e  s  u  s 
*'  from  the  dead  dwell  in  you  -,  he  that  raifed  up 
^'  Christ  from  the  dead,  ihall  alfo  quicken  your 
^'  mortal  bodies,  by  his  S  p  i  r  i  t  that  dwelleth  in 
*'  you."  For  the  fimc  reafon  the  apoflle  makes  the 
Spirit  of  Go  d,  by  v;hich  chriftians  are  governed 
and  Jed,  to  be  the  mark  of  their  "  adoption,"  and 
being  "  the  children  of  God,  and  heirs   of  eternal 

life."  ,Ver.  14.  ''  For  as  many  as  are  led  by  the 
^'  5l*i-^i'3'  of  God,  are  the  fonsof  Go  d."  And 

:'':  '"'  ven 


Holy  G h  ost  on  the  minds  ofchrijlians.       4579 

ver.  1 6,  17.  "  The  Spirit  it  felf  beareth  witnefs 
*'  with  our  fpirit,  that  we  are  the  children  of  God. 
'*  And  if  children,  then  heirs,  heirs  of  God,  and 
^'  joint  heirs  with  Christ"  And  ellcwhere  the 
apoftle  ufeth  it  for  an  argument,  why  we  fhould  be 
careful  not  to  refift,  or  quench  the  motions  of  Go  d's 
bleflcd  Spirit;  becaufe  by  this  rtiark  "  we  are 
*'  fealed  "  to  eternal  life.  ''  And  quench  not  the 
^^  H  o  LY  Spirit  of  G  o  d,  whereby  ye  are  fealed 
"  unto  the  day  of  redemption."  I  fhould  now  have 
proceeded  in  the 

Third  place,  to  fhew  the  blefied  effeds  of  the  in- 
fluence of  the  H  o  LY  Spirit  dwelling  and  refid- 
ino;  in  us :  but  that,  tog;ether  with  the  extent  of 
this  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  to  perfons  and 
times,   I  fhall  refer  to  another  opportunity. 


SERMON    CCI. 

Of  the  ordinary  influence  of  the  Holy 
Gh  0ST5  on  ^^^  minds  of  chriftians. 


JOHN  vii,  29- 
But  this /pake  he  of  the  Spirit,  which  they  that 
believe  on    him  fhould  receive.     For  the  Holy 
Ghost   was   not  yet  given,  becaufe  thai  Jesus 

was  not  yet  glorified.  S  E  R  M. 

CCI. 

IN  my  former  difcourfe  from  thefe  words,  I  ob-  hjpT*^ 
ferv'd  that  the  gift  of  "  the  S  p  i  r  i  t,  or  thccond  fer- 
Holy  Ghost,"  comprehends  under  it  two  "?o"  ^^ 
1  •  '  r  n"  a  this  text. 

things.  Firlt, 


45  So  Of  the  ordinary  influence  of  the 

SERM.  Firfl:,  thofe  extraordinary  and  miraculous  gifts, 
^^\j  which  were  bellowed  upon  the  apoftles  and  primitive 
chriftians,  in  order  to  the  planting  and  propagating 
of  the  chriftian  religion  in  the  world  ;  together  with 
that  extraordinary  influence  of  God*s  Spirit 
upon  the  minds  of  believers,  which  accompa.nied  the 
firfl:  preaching  of  the  gofpel. 

Secondly,  the  more  ordinary  and  gentle  influence 
of  the  Spirit  of  God,  upon  the  minds  of  all 
thofe  who  believe  and  embrace  the  gofpel. 

The  latter  of  thefe  I  propofed  to  fpeak  to  more 
particularly  and  fully,  and  that  under  thefe  four 
heads  r 

Firft,  to  open  the  nature  of  this  influence. 

Secondly,  to  fliew  the  necefl"ity  of  it,  to  enable  us 
to  perform  the  condition  of  the  gofpel  covenant. 

Thirdly,  to  confider  the  bleflcd  effeds  of  it. 

Fourthly,  to  confider  the  extent  of  it,  as  toperfons 
and  times. 

The  two  firft  of  thefe  I  have  fpoken  to,  and  now 
proceed  to  what  remains,    viz. 

Thirdly,  to  confider  the  bleflfed  eflx?<fls  of  this 
gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  'And  they  are  many 
and  great. 

1  fhall  enumerate  them  as  briefly  as  I  can,  not  in- 
tending to  infill  long  upon  them.  And  in  general, 
all  the  good  that  is  in  us,  and  proceeds  from  us,  all 
good  thoughts  and  inclinations,  all  good  purpofes 
and  rcfolutions,  all  good  works  and  actions  are  \n 
fcripture  every  where  afcribed  to  the  dictates  and 
motions,  to  the  influence  and  afliftance  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  of  God.  It  is  "  he  that  works  in  us, 
^'  both  to  will  and  to  do  of  his  own  mere  good- 
'^  nefs?"  All  our  flrength  and  fuificiency  is  from 

him. 


Holy  Ghost  on  tbe  minds  ofchripans.       458 1 
him.     To  his  blcfied  infpirations  and  aids  we  owe  S  E  R  M. 
all  good  inclinations,  our  beginning,  and  our  progrefs,     ^^]^ 
and  our  perfeverance  in  virtue  and  goodnefs.     And 
though  the  S  p  I  R I T  be  faid  to  be  given  to  them 
that  do  already  believe,  that  is,  fo  as  to  dwell  and 
rcfide,  to  take  up  his  conftant  habitation  and  abode 
only  in  thofc  who  have  already  fincerely  embraced 
the  chriftian  faith  ;  yet  this  doth  not  exclude  a  pre- 
venting  influence  and  operation  of  God's  Holy 
Spirit  upon  the   minds  of  thofe  to  whom  the 
gofpel  is  offered,  difpofmg  them  to  embrace  and  en- 
tertain it,  and  by  this  means  working  faith  m  them. 
And  in  this  fenfe  it  is,  that  faith  m  fcripture  is  faid 
to  be  '•  the  gift  of  Go  d,"  becaufe  it  is  firfl  wrought    • 
in  them  by  the  influence  and  operatbn  of  that  bleflTed 
Spirit,  which  is  promifed  to  dwell  and  refide  in 
them  after  they  have  believed,    and  fincerely  em- 
braced the  chrifl:ian  religion. 

More  particularly  thefe  blefl'ed  fruits  and  effcdls 
are  comlantly  in  fcripture  attributed  to  the  Holt 
Spirit  of  Go  d. 

1.  Our  fandlification.  We  are  faid  ^'  to  be  re- 
"  newed  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  by  the 
Spirit  to  mortify  the  deeds  of  the  flefh."  That 
great  change  which  is  wrought  in  man,  v/hich  m 
fcripture  is  called  by  the  feveral  names  of  "  regene- 
'*  ration,  and  a  new  birth,  of  the  new  creature,  and 
"  the  new  man,"  is  confl:antly  afcrib'd  to  the  Spi- 
rit of  Go  D  as  the  author  of  it. 

2.  The  condudl  of  our  whole  chridian  courfe,  and 
all  the  adlions  of  it,  and  our  conftarxy  and  perfeve- 
rance in  it,  arc  likewife  afcribed  to  the  fame  b!efl!ed 
caufe.  We  are  faid  **  to  be  led  by  the  S  pi  r  i  t, 
•'  and  to  walk  in  th§  S  p  1  r  i  t  j "  that  is,  to  be 


guided 


CCl. 


4  5  S  2  Of  the  ordinary  injluence  of  the 

SER  M.  guided  and  afTifted  in  all  that  we  do,  by  this  blefled 
principle,  which  does  as  it  were  ad:  and  animate  all 
good  men  ;  and  we  are  faid  "  to  be  kept  by  the  mighty 
"  power  of  God,"  that  is,  by  the  powerful  ope- 
ration of  G  o  d's  H  o  L Y  S  p  I  R  I  T,  "  through  faith 
*'  unto  falvation." 

3.  All  particular  graces  and  virtues  are  likewifc 
faid  to  be  "  the  fruit  of  the  S  p  i  r  i  t,"  Gal.  v.  11^ 
*'  The  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  love,  joy,  peace, 
*'  long  fuffering,  gentlenefs,  goodnefs,  faith,  (or  ra- 
''  ther  fidelity)  meeknefs,  temperance."  And  Ephef. 
V.  9.  "  The  fruit  of  the  S  p  i  r  i  t  is  in  all  goodnefsj 
"  and  rigntcoufnefs,  and  truth, ''  And  charity, 
which  is  the  fum  almoft  of  all  other  graces  and  vir- 
tues, IS  fiiJ  to  be  planted  and  wrought  in  us  by  the 
Spirit,  i  Pet.  i.  22.  '^  Seeing  ye  have  purified 
*'  your  fouls  in  obeying  the  truth,  through  the  S  p  i- 
*'  R  I  T,  unto  charity,  or  unfeigned  love  of  the  bre- 
«  thren  " 

4.  By  the  fame  Spirit  we  are  faid  to  be  made 
partakers  of  that  great  and  glorious  privilege  of 
*'  adoption,'*  and  are  advanced  to  that  high  ho- 
nour and  dignity  of  being  ^'  called  the  ions  of 
*'  God,"  Rom.  viii.  14.  '^  As  many  as  are  led  by 
*'  the  Spirit  of  God,  are  the  fons  of  God,'* 
and  confequently  heirs  of  a  bleficd  refurredion  to 
eternal  life.  For  fo  the  apoftle  reafons,  ver.  16,  17. 
"  The  Spirit  it  felf  beareth  witnefs  with  our 
*'  fpirit,**  that  is,  is  a  teflimony  withi^i  us,  "  that  we 
*«  are  the  children  of  God.  And  if  children,  then 
«'  heirs,  heirs  of  God,  ar.d  joint  heirs  with  Christ  j 
«'  if  fo  be  that  fufl^cr  with  him,  that  we  may  be  Jlo 
<^  glorified  together."  So  that  the  Holy  Spi- 
rit of  God,  which  is  confcrr'd  upon  all  fincerc 

chnftians. 


H  o  LY  G  H  o  ST  c;?  the  minds  of  chrifiians.      4583 

chrlftians,  and  does  refide  in  them,  is  a  "  mark  or  SERM. 

ccr 
"  feal  of  their  being  the  children  of  God,"  and  a, 

"  pledge  or  earned  of  the  blefled  inheritance"  of 
eternal  life,  as  the  Icripture  very  plainly  and  fre- 
quently declares,  2  Cor.  i.  2.1,  ^^.  "  Now  he  which 
"  eftablifheth  us  with  you  in  Christ,  and  hath 
''  anointed  us,  is  God  ;  who  hath  alfo  fealed  us,"  or 
fet  his  fignature  or  mark  upon  us ;  and  what  this  is, 
he  explains  in  the  next  words ;  "  and  hath  given  us 
"  the  earned  or  pledge  of  the  Spirit  in  our 
''  hearts."  Ephef.  i.  13,  14.  "  In  whom  alfo  after 
"  that  ye  believed,  ye  were  fealed  with  that -Holy 
"  S  p  I  R  I  T  of  promife  \ '  which  is  the  earned  of  our 
*'  inheritance,  until  the  redemption  of  the  purcha- 
''  fed  polTeflion."  And  chap.  iv.  30.  "  And  grieve 
"  not  the  H  o  LY  Spirit  of  G  0  d,  whereby 
"  ye  are  fealed  unto  the  day  of  redemption*" 

5.  By  this  Spirit  we  have  free  accels  to  G  o  d 
in  prayer,  in  confidence  that  we  diall  have  our  pe- 
titions granted,  Ephef.  ii.  18.  "  For  through  him," 
that  is  through  Jesus  Christ,  ''we  both  have 
*'  an  accefs  by  one  Spirit  unto  the  Fat  h  er." 
By  the  fame  Spirit  likewife  we  are  adifted  in 
our  prayers  to  God,  and  directed  what  to  ask  of 
him.  So  St.  Paul  tells  us,  Rom.  viii.  2.6.  that 
"  we  do  not  know  what  to  pray  for  as  we  ought ; 
"  but  the  S  P I  R I  T  helpeth  our  infirmities,  and  in- 
"  tercedcth  for  us-,"  that  is,  fuggeds  to  us  fuch 
petitions  and  requeds  as  are  fit  for  us  to  put  up  to 
God. 

6.  By  the  fame  Spirit  "  joy  and  peace  in  be- 
"  lieving,"  and  from  the  tedim^ony  of  a  good  con- 
fcience,  "  great  confolation  and  good  hope  through 
*'  grace,"  are  frequently  indill'd  into  us,  and  ''  died 

Vol.  X.  23  A  "  abroad 


45^4  Of  the  ordinary  injluence  of  the 

SERM.  <c  abroad  in  our  hearts."  Hence  are  thofe  expreil 
fions  fo  frequent  in  fcripture,  of  ^^  the  confolations 
"  of  the  S  p  I  R  I  T,  of  peace  and  joy  in  the  Holy 
"  G  H  o  s  T,"  which,  as  it  is  the  natural  fruit  of  righ- 
teoufnefs,  fo  it  is  hkewife  produced  and  increafed  in 
us,  by  the  fecret  operation  and  influence  of  God's 
Holy  Spirit. 

7.  And  laflly,  by  the  fame  Spirit  chriftians 
are  fupported  and  born  up,  chearcd  and  comforted 
in  all  their  troubles  and  afflidions,  and  that  in  a  very 
extraordinary  and  fupernatural  manner,  when  they 
fall  under  great  tribulations  and  fufferings  for  righ- 
teoufnefs  fake.  And  this  influence  and  afllftance  of 
the  divine  Spirit,  was  very  vifible  and  remark- 
able among  the  primitive  chriftians,  who  were  fo 
terribly  expofed  to  the  mofl  fierce  and  cruel  perfe- 
cutions ;  and  may  proportionably  be  expeded  in  all 
cafes  of  extraordinary  fuffering  for  the  tcftimony  of 
Go  d's  truth. 

And  though  this  influence  and  aflifl:ance,  tliis 
condu6b  and  guidance  of  the  divine  Spirit,  be 
commonly  very  gentle  and  fecret,  and  do  ufually 
work  upon  us  in  fo  imperceptible  a  manner,  that  it 
is  very  hard,  if  not  impoffible,  particularlyto  diftin- 
guifli  between  the  motions  of  G  o  d*s  S  p  i  r  i  t,  and 
thofe  of  our  own  minds,  between  the  immediate 
fuggeftions  of  the  H  o  l  y  Ghost,  and  the  dictates 
of  our  own  reafon ;  yet  we  are  in  general  fuffici- 
endy  aflured  of  it,  partly  from  the  eflTedts  themfelves, 
but  principally  from  the  exprefs  promife  and  decla- 
rations from  fcripture,  that  chriflians  are  aded  by  a 
fupernatural  principle,  and  fecretly  afllfted  by  the 
influence  of  a  fpirit  above  our  own  :  and  there- 
fore we  have  reafonj    as    the   Icripture   confl:antIy 

does. 


Holy  Ghost  on  the  minds  of  chrijVans.       4585 

does,  to  afcribe  all  the  good  that  is  in  us,  or  that  S  E  R  M. 

CCI. 


is  done  by  us,  to  this  gracious  affiilance  and  pov/er- 


fill  influence  of  the  Ho  ly  S  p  i  r  i  t  of  Go  d  up- 
on our  minds,  and  thankfu -ly  to  acknowledge  that 
"  in  us,  that  is,  in  our  flefli,'*  in  our  carnal  minds 
confidered  as  deilitute  cf  the  Spirit  of  God, 
''  there  dwells  nothing  thi^c  is  good ;  and  that  "  by 
*'  the  grace  of  G  o  d  we  are  what  we  are,"  and 
are  enabled  to  do  all  the  good  we  do,  "  through 
''  Christ  ilrengthning  of  us  by  his  Spirit 
"  in  the  inner  man."     I  proceed  to  the 

Fourth  and  laft  thing  I  propofed  to  confider,  viz. 
the  extent  of  this  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit  of 
God,  as  to  perfons  and  times.  And  in  fhort,  this 
gift  is  beftowed  upon  every  particular  chriftian,  every 
fincere  believer ,  for  ''  v/e  receive  the  promife  of 
"  the  Spirit  by  faith:"  and,  "  if  any  man, 
*'  fays  the  apoftle,  Rom.  viii.  9.  have  not  the  Sp  i- 
^'  rit  of  Christ,  he  is  none  of  his;"  that 
is,  he  does  not  belong  to  him,  he  is  no  true  chri- 
ftian. And  I  Cor.  iii.  16.  *'  Know  yet  not,"  fays 
the  fame  apoftle,  fpeaking  of  all  chriftians  in  ge- 
neral, "  know  ye  not  that  ye  are  the  temple  of 
^'  GoDj^andthat  the  Spirit  of  God  dwelleth 
"  in  you  V 

And  that  this  gift  extends  to  all  perfons,  in  all 
times  and  ages  of  the  church,  to  all  that  fincerely 
embrace  the  chriftian  profeftion,  and  are  admitted 
into  i  t  by^baptifm,  is  plain  from  that  difcourfe  of 
St.  Peter,  which  I  had  occafion  to  mention  before. 
Ads  ii.  38.  ''  Repent  and  be  baptized  every  one  6f 
''  you,  in  the  name  of  J  e  s  u  s  C  h  r  i  s  t,  for  the 
''  remiftion  of  fins,  and  ye  fhall  receive  the  gift  of 
"  the  Ho  LY  G  H  0  s  T."     And  that  this  was  not  a 

23  A  a.  favour 


Of  the  ordinary  influence  of  the 
favour  and  privilege  peculiar  to  the  firft  ages  of  chri- 
ftianity,  but  common  to  all  fucceeding  times,  is  evi- 
dent from  what  follows,  ver.  39.  "  but  the  promife,'* 
that  is,  the  great  promife  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
"  is  unto  you,  and  to  your  children,  and  to  all  that 
"  are  afar  off,  even  as  many  as  the  Lord  our  God 
"  fhall  call."  That  is,  this  promife  of  the  S  p  i  r  i  t 
extends  to  all  thofe  who  fliall  hereafter  embrace  the 
chriftian  profeflion. 

And  in  this  fenfe,  our  Saviour  makes  good  that 
promife  which  he  made  to  the  apoftles,  "  to  be  with 
<*  them  always  in  the  work  of  making  difciples,  and 
«'  baptizing  them  ,to  the  end  of  the  v/orld  ;"  that  is, 
he  would  accompany  the  labours  of  the  paftors  and 
teachers  of  his  church  in  all  ages,  with  fuch  a  pre- 
fence  and  influence  of  his  Spirit  upon  thofe  that 
were  taught  and  baptized,  as  fhould  be  fuitable  to 
the  occafions  and  neceiTuics  of  the  church,  both  the 
paftors  and  the  members  of  it,  "  unto  the  end  of  the 
*'  world."  In  a  word,  this  gift  of  God's  Holy 
Spirit  is  bellowed  upon  all  thofe  who  by  bap- 
tifm  are  admitted  into  C  h  r  i  s  t's  religion,  and  if  it 
be  cherifh'd  and  complied  with,  and  the  blefied  mo- 
tions of  it  be  not  refiflcd  and  quenched  by  us,  it 
will  abide  and  continue  with  us,  and  produce  thofe 
bleffed  fruits  and  efFcds  which  I  have  before  men- 
tioned. 

Having  thus  cxplain'd  the  feveral  particulars  con- 
tain'd  in  the  text,  all  that  now  remains,  is  to  make 
fome  ufeful  inferences  from  the  whole  \  and  they 
fhall  be  thefc  following,  and  I  fhall  be  very  brief  in 
them. 

I.  What  an  encouragement  is  here  to  our  duty, 
that  we  have  fuch  a  mighty  aid  and  afTiftance  pro- 
mi  fed 


H  o  L  Y  G  H  o  s  T  on  the  nmids  of  chrijliam,      4587 
mifed  and  afforded  to  us  in  the  gofpei  ?     So  that  the  S  E  R  M, 
apoftle  doth  with  great  reafon  exhort,  2  Cor.  vii.  i.  ,   ^^^' 
'^  Having  therefore  thefe  promifes,  dearly  beloved, 
<*  let  us  cleanfe  ourfelves  from  all  filthinefs  of  the  flefli 
*'  and  fpirit,  perfedling  holinefs  in  the  fear  of  G  o  d.'* 
And  we  arc  utterly  inexcufable,  if  we  do  not  make 
ufe  of  that  grace  which  is  promifed,  and  ready  to  be 
afforded  to  us  to  this  end  *,  it  is  our  own  fault  if  fm 
ftill  "  have  dominion  over  us,  and  reign  in  our  mor- 
"  tal  bodies,  that  we  fhould  obey  itin  the  luftsof  it.'' 

II.  What  great  caufe  have  we  thankfully  to  ac- 
knowledge the  wonderful  goodnefs  of  God  to  us,  in 
beftowing  fuch  an  invaluable  gift  upon  us,  as  this  of 
the  H  o  LY  S  p  I R I T,  by  whofe  grace  and  alTiftance 
alone  we  are  made  partakers  of  all  the  other  blefling? 
and  benefits  of  the  gofpei  ?  Had  we  been  ftill  left 
without  flrength,  that  great  falvation  which  Christ 
hath  purchafed  for  us,  and  which  the  gofpei  offers, 
would  have  fignified  nothing  to  us,  for  want  of  power 
to  have  performed  the  conditions  which  the  gofpei  re- 
quires of , all  that  hope  for  eternal  hfe  and  falvation. 

III.  Let  us  always  be  ready  to  comply  with  the 
motions  and  fuggeftions  of  the  bleffed  Spirit,  and 
fincerely  make  ufe  of  thofe  aids  and  affiftances  which 
he  is  always  ready  to  afford  to  us ;  and  ht  us  take  great 
heed,  that  we  do  not  by  any  difobedience  of  ours  to 
his  bleffed  motions,  or  by  any  wilful  prefumptuous 
fins,  "  refifl,  and  quench,  and  grieve  this  Holy 
*'  Spirit  of  God,  whereby  we  are  fealed  unto 
*'  the  day  of  redemption.'* 

If  the  S  p  I R I T  of  God  vouchfafe  to  dwell  in  us, 

and  to  make  his  abode  in  our  finful  fouls  and  bodies ; 

*  \tt  us  do  nothing  that  is  unworthy  of  io  divine  and 

heavenly  a  gueft;  let  his  prefence  with  us  fill  our 

hearts 


^  p8§  Of  the  ordinary  influence  of  the 

SERM.  hearts  with  a  continual  awe  and  reverence  of  him, 
^^^*  and  engage  us  e(fe61:ually  "  to  cleanfe  ourfelves  from 
«^-  all  filthinefs  of  the  flefh  and  fpirit-,  "  let  nothing  be 
a6led  by  us,  or  proceed  from  us,  which  may  defile 
this  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  "  Ye  are  the 
*«  temple  of  the  living  God,"  fays  St.  Paul,  i  Cor. 
vi.  i6.  And  in  the  fird  of  the  Corinthians,  iii.  i5, 
in.  "  Know  ye  not  that  ye  are  the  temple  of  God, 
«'  and  that  the  Spirit  of  God  dwelleth  in  you  ? 
"  If  any  man  ddiit  the  temple  of  God,  him  fhall 
«*  God  deftroy:  for  the  temple  of  God  is  holyj 
*'  which  temple  ye  are."  More  particularly  the  apo- 
ftle  ufeth  it  as  an  argument  to  flee  from  fornication, 
becaufe  our  bodies  alfo  are  "  the  temples  of  the 
^*  Holy  Ghost,"  i  Cor.  vi.  i8,  19.  "  Flee  forni- 
*'  cation :  for  every  fin  that  a  man  doth,"  that  is, 
other  fins  which  men  commit,  "  arc  without  the  bo- 
*'  dy  •,  but  he  that  commitrcth  fornication,  finneth 
*'  ao-ainil  his  own  body  •,"  that  is,  pollutes  and  de- 
files it.  And  then  it  follows,  "  what,  know  ye  not 
'^  that  your  body  is  the  temple  of  the  Holy 
*'  Ghost  which  is  in  you,  which  yc  have  of  God, 
"  and  ye  are  not  your  own  ?  For  ye  are  bought  with 
"  a  price:  therefore  glorify  Go  d  in  your  body,  and 
*'  in  your  fpirit,  which  are  God's." 

IV.  Let  OS  earneltly  beg  of  G  o  d  his  Holy 
Spirit,  and  continually  depend  upon  him  for  his 
grace  and  affiftance,  in  an  humble  fenfe  of  our  own 
impotency  and  weaknefs,  of  the  frailty  and  treachery 
of  our  own  fpirits,  of  the  ficklenefs  and  inconftancy 
of  our  beft  purpofes  and  refolutions,  always  remem- 
bring  that  faying  of  our  S  a  vi  o  u  r's,  John  xv.  5. 
"  Without  me  ye  can  do  nothing."  And  that  of 
St.  Paul,  Ephef.  ii.  8.   "  For  by  grace  are  ye  faved 

"  through 


Holy  Ghost  on  the  minds  of  chrtfJans,  4589 
*^'  through  faith:  and  that  not  of  yourfelves :  it  is  the  SERM. 
<^'  gift  of  God."  And  that  of  St.  Peter,  i  Pet.  i.  5. . 
fpeaking  in  general  of  all  true  chriftians,  *'  who,  fays 
'^  he,  are  kept  by  the  power  of  Go  d  through  faith 
"  unto  falvation."  This  ^'  power  of  God  is  the 
*^  Spirit  which  they  that  believe  receive,"  and  by 
the  bleffcd  guidance  and  influence  whereof  they  are 
"'  kept  unto  falvation." 

V.  This  fhews  us  what  an  advantage  we  have  by 
the  chriflian  religion,  which  makes  us  partakers  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,  whereby  is  afforded  to  us  all^ 
neceflary  direction  and  aflifcance,  and  comfort  in  our 
chriftian  courfe.  Our  Saviour,  tells  his  difciples, 
that  the  prefence  and  influence  of  this  comforter  and 
advocate,  whom  "  he  would  fend  to  abide  with  them 
"  for  ever,"  would  be  more  to  them,  than  even  his 
own  perfonal  prelence  among  them,  which  furely  we 
ihouid  look  upon  as  an  unfpeakable  privilege  and 
happinefs  %  and  yet  the  inv/ard  prefence  of  the  divine 
Spirit  is  more  for  our  fecurity  and  comfort,  than 
the  beft  teacher  and  example;  becaufe  it  is  inward, 
and  conveys  a  real  ftrength  to  us ;  and  it  is  univerfal, 
difiiifing  itfelf  at  once  into  the  hearts  ajid  minds  of 
all  good  men,  and  is  always  prefent  to  them,  which 
Christ's  perfonal  and 'vi Able  prefence  was  nor, 
nor  could  be  *,  fo  that  to  ail  purpofes  of  direction  and 
afliftance,  of  fecurity  and  comfort,  we  are  in  a  bet- 
ter condition  under  the  continual  influence  and  con- 
duel  of  Go  d's  FI  o  L  Y  Spirit,  than  they  who  had 
the  advantage  and  happinefs  of  converfing  perfonally 
with  our  Saviour  here  upon  earth.  And  there- 
fore he  tells  his  difciples,  that  it  was  really  for  their 
beneflt  and  advantage,  that  he  fnould  leave  the  world, 
to  make  way  for  the  coming  of  this  comforter  and 

advocate. 


459^  O/"  Z/!;^  ordinary  influence  of  the 

SERM.  advocate,  John  xvi.  7.  "  Neverthelefs  I  tell  you  the 
^^^'  '*  truth  ;  k  is  expedient  for  you  that  I  go  away.  Fo^ 
•  if  I  go  not  away,  the  comforter  will  not  come  un- 
"  to  you  :  but  if  I  depart,  I  will  fend  him  unto  you." 
So  that  they  were  gainers  by  their  lols,  and  his  depar- 
ture from  them  upon  thefe  terms  was  really  to  their 
advantage. 

VI.  This  fhews  the  great  fault  of  the  contempt 
and  negledl  of  the  facrament  of  baptifm,  which  was 
inftituted  by  our  Saviour  as  the  folemn  rite  and 
ceremony  of  admitting  perfons  into  the  chriftian  re- 
ligion, and  the  means  of  making  us  partakers  of  this 
gift  of  the  Spirit,  and  of  all  the  bleflfed  fruits 
and  effects  of  it;  fo  that  this  facrament  cannot  be 
neglected  or  flighted,  without  great  affront  to  the 
chriftian  religion,  and  contempt  of  one  of  the  great- 
eft  blelTings  promifed  in  the  gofpel.  They  that  were 
admitted  to  the  folemn  profeflion  of  chriftianity  by 
baptifm,  were  "  made  partakers  of  the  Holy 
*^'  Ghost-,"  and  this  not  only  in  the  apoftles 
times,  but  in  all  after- ages  5  for  this  ''  promife  of  the 
*'  Holy  Ghost  was  to  them  and  thqir  children, 
"  and  to  all  that  were  afar  off,  even  to  as  many  as 
*'  the  Lord  their  God  fliould  call  y "  that  is,  to  all 
that  fhould  embrace  the  chriftian  religion,  and  make 
a  folemn  profefTion  of  it  in  baptifm,  in  all  fucceeding 
ages  to  the  end  of  the  world. 

VII.  What  hath  been  difcourfed  upon  this  argu- 
ment, difcovers  the  vanity  of  many  mens  pretenfions 
to  the  S  p  I  R  I  T.  Some  pretend  to  infallibility,  all 
pretence  whereto  is  vain,  without  miracles  to  juftify 
and  make  good  this  pretence-,  and  yet  upon  this  pre- 
fumption  of  infallibility,  without  any  proof  of  it,  but 
only  that  it  is  convenient  for  them  to  have  it,  which 

will 


Holy  Gu  osT  on  the  minds  of  chrljlians,  4 J9 1 
will  as  well  prove  all  others  to  be  infallible,  becaufe  S  E  R  M. 
it  is  every  whit  as  convenient  for  them  :  I  fay,  upon 
this  prefumption  and  pretence,  they  aflume  to  them- 
felves  to  didate  to  all  the  world,  what  they  fhall  be- 
lieve, and  to  cenfure  and  condemn  all  thofe  who  will 
not  fubmin  to  their  dictates,  as  miferably  miliaken, 
and  out  of  the  way  of  faivation  j  whereas  the  infalli- 
bility of  the  apofties  was  a  fupernatural  gift,  not  evi- 
dent of  itfelf,  but  evidenced  to  the  world  by  the  mi- 
racles which  were  wrought,  to  confirm  the  truth  of 
their  teftimony  and  doclrinc  j  and  without  this  evi- 
dence of  infallibility,  110  man's,  no  church's  pretences 
to  it  ought  to  be  regarded,  but  ought  to  be  look'd 
upon  as  fanatical  enthufiafm ;  befides,  the  prodigious 
uncharitablenefs  of  this  fpirit,  is  as  directly  contrary  as 
can  be  to  the  firfl  and  chief  "  fruit  of  the  Spirit'* 
mentioned  by  the  apoftle,  which  is  love  or  charity. 

Others  pretend  to  be  guided  by  the  S  p  i  r it  in  all 
their  adlions,  and  to  be  governed  in  an  extraordinary 
manner  by  pardcular  impulfes  and  imprelTions  from 
the  Spirit  of  God*,  which  they  likewife  pretend 
they  can  certainly  difcern  from  the  motions  of  their 
own  minds  and  imaginations.  But  as  they  can  give 
no  reafon  for  this,  io  we  have  ^Qtn  many  times  in  ex- 
perience, that  men  have  been  led  into  unlawful  and 
wicked  practices,  and  have  done  weak  and  unreafon- 
able  and  ridiculous  things,  and  then  have  blafphe- 
moufly  charged  them  upon  the  S  p  i  rit  of  Go  d  ;  a 
prefumption  of  a  high  nature,  and  which  hath  fome 
refcmblance  to  the  fin  againft  the  Holy  Ghost, 
and  feems  to  be  of  near  affinity  with  it.  For  as  the 
unpardonable  fin  againft  the  Holy  Ghost  con- 
fifted  in  refilling  the  evidence  of  our  S  a  v  i  o  u  r's 
miracles,  and  pcrverfly  and  malicioufiy  imputing  the 

Vo  L.  X.  23  B  operations 

7- 


459^  O/*  the  ordinary  infuence  of  the 

S  E  R  M.  operations  of  the  Spirit  of  G  o  d  to  the  powef 
and  efficacy  of  the  devil ;  fo  on  the  other  hand,  to 
pretend  the  S  p  i  r  i  t  of  God  and  his  motions  for 
the  works  of  the  devil,  and  any  thing  that  is  wicked; 
and  to  afcribe  thefe  things,  which  are  more  likely  to 
proceed  from  the  inftigation  of  that  evil  fpirit,  to  the 
impulfe  of  the  H  o  L  Y  S  p  I  R  I T  of  G  o  D,  is  a  high 
blafphemy  of  the  HoL  Y  Gh  GST. 

Others  pretend,  that  the  S  p  i  r  i  t  doth  immedi- 
ately didate  to  them  their  prayers,  which  many  times 
are  very  confufed  and  unbefeeming,  and  too  plainly 
the  ifiue  of  a  heated  imagination;  whereas."  Go  d  is 
*'  not  the  God  of  confufion,  but  of  order,"  And 
what  is  merely  the  efFe6t  of  an  acquired  habit,  or  na- 
tural fluency  and  facility  of  exprefllon  and  warm  af- 
fections, they  confidendy  afcribe  to  the  Spirit  of 
God;  whereas  the  S  p  i  r  i  t  of  God  is  more  fre- 
quently and  certainly  in  "  the  ftill  voice,  than  in  the 
*'  high  wind  and  fire,"  the  boifterous  pafiions,  and 
fiery  zeal  of  men.  And  certainly  he  that  takes  care 
to  put  up  wife  and  decent  petitions  to  G  o  d,  and  con- 
fiders  carefully  what  to  beg  of  him,  and  asks  it  in  a 
becoming  manner,  with  faith  and  true  fervency  of 
affeclion,  though  in  a  form,  hath  much  more  reafon 
to  conclude  that  he  prays  in  and  by  the  S  p  i  r  i  t  of 
God,  than  he  that  hath  the  greateft  freedom  of  ex- 
tempore effufions. 

And  after  all,  there  is  a  much  better  and  clearer 
demonftration,  that  a  man  hath  the  Spirit  of 
God,  than  any  of  thefe  pretences,  and  that  is  from 
the  undoubted  "  fruits  of  the  Spirit,'*  in  the 
graces  and  virtues  of  a  good  life,  which  are  vifible 
and  manifeft  in  the  temper  and  converfation  of  a 
good  man;  and  without  thef©^  all  pretences  to  the 

Spirit 


H  o  L  Y  G  H  o  s  T  on  the  minds  gJ chrifiians.      4593 
Spirit  of  G  o  d,  are  but  fancy  and  vain  delu-  S  E  R  M. 
fions ;  fuch  men  "  deceive  themfelves,  and  the  truth 
*'  is  not  in  them." 

VIII.  and  laftJy,  from  hence  it  appears  how  happy- 
it  is  for  us,  that  we  are  not  left  in  our  own  hands, 
and  to  our  own  weaknefs  and  impotency,  and  *'  to 
«'  work  out  our  own  falvation,"  but  that  we  are  un- 
der the  continual  condudl,  and  powerful  protedion  of 
fuch  a  guardian,  and  that  the  Holy  Spirit  is 
always  ready  to  be  afforded  to  us,  to  all  the  purpofes 
of  guidance  and  afliftance,,  of  comfort  and  fupport, 
of  fandification  and  obedience,  of  patient  continuance 
and  perfeverance  in  well-doing.  "  Let  us  therefore,  as 
^^  the  apoftle  exhorts,  work  out  our  falvation  with 
**  fear  and  trembling,  becaule  it  is  God  that  worketh 
*'  in  us,  both  to  will  and  to  do."  We  are  not  left  to 
ourfelves  to  carry  on  this  great  work,  for  then  it 
would  certainly  mifcarry;  but  God  works  in  us,  both 
the  will  and  inclination  to  that  which  is  good,  and 
gives  us  the  power  to  do  it :  he  does  not  force  our 
v/ills,  but  incline  them  by  the  gentle  fuggeftions  and 
motions  of  his  blefled  S  p  i  r  i  t  ;  with  which,  if  we 
comply,  we  are  happy;  if  we  refift  them,  and  rebel 
againft  them,  "  we  receive  the  grace  of  God  in 
''  vain,'*  and  ''  our  ruin  and  deftruftion  is  of 
"  ourfelves." 

But  can  we  then  do  nothing?  no,  not  without  the 
preventing  and  affifting  grace  of  God  •,.  but  that  be- 
ing afforded  to  us,  we  may  comply  with  the  motions 
of  Go  d's  bleffed  Spirit-,  we  may  co-operate  and 
concur  with  his  affiftance.  God  affifts,  but  we  do; 
he  fan6tifies  and  renews  us  by  the  H  o  l  y  Ghost, 
and  yet  we  purify  and  cleanle  ourfelves. 

2^  B  z  BJt 


4594  ^f  ^^^  ordinary  infuence  of  the 

SERM.  BQt  is  not  this  injurious  to  the  grace  of  God,  if 
we  do  any  thing  at  all,  and  the  grace  of  G  o  d  do  not 
do  all  in  us  and  for  us  ?  I  anfwer, 

1.  it  is  a  great  grace  of  God,  to  help  our  weak- 
nefs,  and  to  relieve  our  impotency,  and  to  ilrengthen 
and  enable  us  to  do  what  we  cannot  do  of  ourTelves. 
We  owe  our  Hilvation  to  the  grace  of  God,  to  the 
influence  and  aaiflance  of  his  H  o  l  y  S  p  i  r  i  t,  if 
fo  be  that  without  it  we  fnould  Itill  remain  ''  dead  in 
"  trefpafles  and  fins/'  and  fhould  never  be  able  to 
emerge  and  recover  out  of  that  corrupt  and  mifera- 
ble  date. 

2.  Grace  does  not  deftroy  nature,  nor  divine  af- 
fillance  take  away  our  liberty,  but  frees  us  from  our 
bondage  %  and,  as  David  exprefleth  it,  '^  enlargeth 
♦^  our  hearts  to  run  the  ways  of  Go  d*s  command- 
*'  ments;"  for  if  God  do  all,  and  we  nothing,  all 
exhortations  and  perfuafions  would  be  in  vain. 

But  then  it  feems  that  v/e  may  "  receive  the  grace 
*'  of  Go  D  in  vain,  and  refifl  the  Ho  lv  G  h  o  s  tj" 
and  our  complying  with  it,  or  not  refilling  of  it,  is 
our  own  a6i: ;  which  is  to  make  men  their  own  Sa- 
viour, and  to  give  the  calling  and  determining 
vote  to  humane  liberty.     I  anfwer, 

1.  The  fcripture  expreily  fays,  that  men  may  "  re- 
*'  ceive  the  grace  of  G  o  d  in  vain,  and  rejed  the 
"  counfel  of  God  againft  themfelves*,'*  and  that  if 
we  rebel  againft,  and  difobey  the  motions  of  Go  d's 
Spirit,  he  will  depart  from  us,  and  we  forfeit  his 
^fTiftance. 

2.  All  this  is,  d^yo^  Koyc^^  mere  cavilj  as  will  ap- 
pear to  any  one,  by  this  plain  inftance.  A  rebel  is 
convi6le'd,  and  liable  to  the  fentence  and  condemna- 
ucn  of  the  law  j  he  fues  for  a  pardon,  and  obtains  and 

accepts 


Ho  L  y  G  H  o  s  T  on  the  minds  of  chrijiiam,  4595 
accepts  it :  will  any  man  now  fay,  that  becaufe  he  S  E  R  M. 
asks  and  accepts  it  from  the  king,  and  the  king  does 
not  take  his  hand  and  open  it,  and  violently  thruft  the 
pardon  into  it,  that  this  man  faves  himfelf,  and  takes 
away  the  glory  of  the  king's  grace  and  mercy,  and 
that  he  owes  his  life  to  himfelf,  and  not  to  the  king's 
bounty  and  goodnefs  ?  A  man  would  be  tliought  very 
fenfelefs,  that  fhould  fo  afcribe  this  man's  deliverance 
from  death  to  any  a6l  of  his  own,  as  not  to  think  it 
wholly  owing  to  the  king's  grace  and  favour.  I  think 
the  cafe  is  the  very  fame,  concerning  mens  complying 
with  that  grace  which  God  affords  them  for  their 
^'  repentance  unto  life."  I  would  fain  know  of  thefe 
fubtle  objedors,  whether  Moles,  when  he  fays,  Deut. 
XXX.  19.  "I  have  kt  before  you  life  and  death,  blef- 
*'  fing  and  curfing ;  therefore  choofe  life ;  '*  does  nor, 
in  fo  faying,  plainly  fuppofe,  that  men  may  choofe 
Mo.  or  refufe  it  ?  and  if  {q^  whether  he  intended  to 
make  men  their  own  faviour  ? 

But  this  objedlion  is  prefs'd  yet  a  litdc  farther;  that 
if  this  be  {Oy  then  Judas  had  as  much  caufe  to  thank 
G  o  D  as  Peter  had.  And  who  ever  denied,  or  can 
deny,  that  a  rebel  who  refufeth  a  pardon  offer'd  to 
him  by  his  prince,  hath  the  fame  real  obligation  of 
gradtude  to  his  prince,  with  him  that  accepts  it  ?  The 
prince  offers  the  fame  favour  to  both,  and  the  obliga- 
tion is  equal  \  and  though  he  that  accepts  it  doth  not 
fave  himfelf,  yet  he  that  refufeth  it  deftroys  himfelf. 
And  at  the  judgment  of  the  great  day,  all  impenitent 
finners  under  the  gofpel,  fhall  be  forc'd  to  acknow- 
ledge the  grace  of  G  o  d  to  them,  in  affording  the 
opportunity  of  falvation,  and  fhall  only  blame  and 
condemn  themfelves  for  negledling  that  happy  op- 
portunity.    But  if  an  irrefiftible  degree  of  grace  be 

neceffary 


459^  ^te fruits  of  the  Svi^Kir^ 

neceflary  to  every  man's  /alvation,  it  is  plain,  that 
impenitent  finners  never  had  the  opportunity  of  fal- 
vation,  and  confequently  cannot  condemn  themlelves 
for  the  neglcd-  of  it. 

I  have  been  the  longer  upon  this,  that  I  might 
root  out  of  the  minds  of  rnen  an  inveterate  falfe  per- 
fuafion,  concerning  the  manner  of  the  operation  of 
Go  d's  grace  in  the  converfion  of  finners.  And  thus 
much  may  fuffice  to  have  been  fpoken  concerning  the 
operation  of  G  o  d's  Spirit  upon  men,  in  order  to 
their  converfion  and  making  of  them  good  :  but  after 
men  are  converted,  and  do  fincerely  "  repent  and 
"'•  believe  the  gofpel,"  they  have  the  Spirit  of 
Go  D  in  another  manner  ;  he  "  dwells  and  refides  in 
"  believers,"  as  a  conftant  and  fetded  principle  of 
holinefs  and  obedience,  as  I  have  already  fhewn. 


SERMON    CCIL- 

The  fruits  of  the  Spirit,   the   fame 
with  moral  virtues. 


E  P  H  E  S.    v.  9. 

For  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit/^  in  all  goodnefs^  mid 
S  E  R  M.  right eoufnefs^  and  truth, 

*Prcach'd^  Have  formerly,  upon  occafion  of  this  feftival 
on  Whit-  I  folemnity  %  difcours'd  on  divers  forts  of  ar- 
^\ll7/  guments  relating  to  the  Holy    Spirit   of 

t  See  God.  As  concerning  the  f  miraculous  powers  and 
cxc^ii.      S^^^^  of  the  Holy    Ghost   conferred   upon  the 

apoftles 


the  fame  "with  moral  virtues.  4597 

spoflles  in  a  vifible  manner,  when  they  were  afiem-  SERM. 
bled  together  upon  this  day  of  pentecoft,  to  qualify  ^-.^^-w 
and  enable  them  for   the  more  fpeedy  and  effedual 
planting  and  propagating  of  the  chriftian  religion  in 
the  world,  which  is  the  argument  more  peculiarly 
proper  to  this  day. 

I  have  Hkewife  ||  difcourfed  to  you  concerning  die  i|  Seeferm. 
fandifying  power  and  virtue  of  the  HolySpirit^^"  ^^^'^^^' 
ofGoD,which  is  common  to  all  chriflians,  and  to  all 
ages  of  the  chriftian  church  :  as  alfo  concerning  the 
blelTed  fruit  and  effed  of  Go  d's  Holy  Spirit 
conferred  upon  chriftians  in  baptifm,  and  which  does 
continually  dwell  and  refide  in  all  thofe  who  do  fin- 
cerely  perform,  and  make  good  their  baptifmal  vow, 
to  afTift  and  enable  them  to  all  the  purpofes  of  holinels 
and  obedience,  and  to  work  and  increafe  in  us  all 
thofe  graces  and  virtues  which  are  here  in  the  text, 
faid  to  be  the  fruit  of  theHo  ly  S  p  i  ri  t  ofGoD, 
''  For  the  fruit  of  the  S  p  i  R  i  t  is  in  all  goodnefs,  and 
"  righteoufn  efs,  and  truth.''  The  connexion  of  which 
words,  with  the  apoftles  foregoing  difcourfe,  is  briefly 
this.  At  the  17th  verfe  of  the  former  chapter,  the 
apoftle  gives  a  folemn  charge  to  the  chriftians  at 
Ephefus,  who  were  newly  converted  from  heathenifm 
to  chriftian ity,  to  be  careful  that  their  converfation 
be  anfwerable  to  that  holy  religion  which  they  now 
made  profefTion  of,  and  that  as  they  had  quitted  the 
religion  and  rites  of  paganifm,  fo  like  wife  that  they 
would  abandon  the  vices  and  evil  practices  of  it  \  that 
the  world  might  fee  that  they  had  made  as  great  a 
change  in  their  minds  and  manners,  as  in  their  religion. 
*'  This  I  fay  therefore,  and  teftify  in  the  Lord, 
*'  that  ye  henceforth  walk  not  as  other  gentiles  walk, 
"  in  the  vanity  of  their  mind,  having  the  underftand- 


(( 


ing 


459^  ^hefruit'^  of  the  S  p  i  r  i  t, 

SERM.  fic  ing  darkenVi,  belnoj  alienated  from  the  life  of 
''  God,  through  the  ignorance  that  is  in  them,  be- 
"  caufe  of  the  blindncfs  of  their  heart :  who  having 
*'  loft  the  fenfe  of  good  and  evil,  have  given  them- 
*'  felves  over  to  all  filthinefs  and  brutifh  lufts."  And 
then  at  the  20th  verfe  he  tells  them,  that  the  chriftian 
religion  requires  another  fort  of  converfation  :  *'  but 
''ye  have  not  fo  learned  Christ:  if  fo  be  that  ye 
*'  have  heard  him,  and  have  been  taught  by  him,  as 
"  the  truth  is  in  J  e  s  u  s :  that  ye  put  off,  concern* 
"  ing  the  former  converfation,  the  old  man,  which 
"  is  corrupt  according  to  the  deceitful  lufls  \  and  be 
*'  renewed  in  the  fpirit  of  your  mind  :  and  that  ye 
*'  put  on  the  new  man,  which  after  G  o  d  is  created 
''  in  righteoufnefs  and  true  holinefs;  or,  the  holi- 
*'  ncfs  of  truth.'* 

And  then  he  cautions  them  againfl  feveral  forts  of 
vices  which  they  had  formerly  lived  in,  and  recom- 
mends the  contrary  virtues  to  their  pradice ;  and  as  an 
argument  thereto,  he  puts  them  again  in  mind  of  the 
change  which  they  had  made  at  the  8  th  verfe  of  this 
chapter,  "  for  ye  were  fometimes  darknefs,  but  now 
'^  are  ye  light  in  the  Lor  d.'*  The  condition  they 
were  in  whilfl  they  were  heathens,  he  qA\%  "  dark- 
*'  nefs  i"  by  which  metaphor  he  reprefents  that  dif- 
mal  flate  of  ignorance  and  wickednefs  in  which  they 
formerly  were  ;  "  but  now  are  ye  light  in  theLoRo  :'* 
being  admitted  into  the  chriftian  religion  by  baptifm, 
they  were  enlighten'd  by  the  Spirit  of  God. 
For  fo  the  apoftle  to  the  Hebrews  defcribes  baptifm 
by"  illumination,  and  being  made  partakers  of  the 
"  Holy  Ghost,"  Heb.  vi.  4."  They  that  were 
"  once  enlighten'd,  and  have  tafted  of  the  heavenly 

gift  i"  which  he  explains  in  the  next  words,  by 

being 


4C 


the  fame  with  moral  virtues.  4599 

beincr  "  made  partakers  of  the  Holy  Ghost,"  SERM. 

•  ecu 

becaufe  that  is  conferr'd  in  baptifm. 

"  Bat  now  are  ye  light  in  the  L  o  r  d  ;  walk  there- 
*'  fore  as  children  of  the  light;"  that  is,  do  nothing 
unbecoming  that  (late,  into  which  by  the  folemn  pro- 
felTion  of  chriflianity  in  baptifm  ye  are  enter'd  ;  or 
as  it  fellows  a  little  after  the  text,  '«  have  no  fellow- 
"  fhip  with  the  unfruitful  works  of  darknefs ;  walk 
*'  as  children  of  the  light,"  as  becomes  thofe  who 
"  are  enlighten'd  and  fandlified  by  the  Ho  ly  S  pi- 
"  RiT  of  God,"  whereof  ye  were  "  made  par- 
"  takers  in  baptifm  :  for  the  fruit  of  the  S  pi  r  i  t 
"  is  in  all  goodncfs,  and  righteoufnefs,  and  truth." 

"  For  the  the  fruit  of  the  S  p  i  r  i  t."  Some  co- 
pies have  it,  6  '^  Kapirog  i^  (poorer,  "  for  the  fruit 
*'  of  light,"  that  is  of  the  illumination  of  the  H  o  l  y 
Ghost,  which  chriftians  are  made  partakers  of  in 
baptifm,  "  is  in  all  goodnefs,  and  righteoufnefs,  and 
"  truth,"  which  will  make  no  difference  in  the  fenfe. 

I  fhall  briefly  explain  the  importance  of  thefe  three 
words ;  ''  goodnefs,  and  righteoufnefs,  and  truth  ;'* 
and  then  proceed  to  make  fome  obfervations  from 
the  text. 

I.  "  Goodnefs."  And  what  that  is,  the  apoftle 
takes  it  for  granted  that  every  body  knows  5  he  does 
not  go  about  to  define  or  explain  it,  but  appeals  to 
every  man's  mind  and  confcience,  to  tdl  him  what 
it  is.  It  is  not  any  thing  that  is  difputed  and  contro- 
verted among  men,  which  fome  call  good,  and  others 
evil ;  but  that  which  mankind  is  agreed  in,  and  which 
is  univerfally  approved  by  the  light  of  nature,  by 
heathens,  as  well  as  chriftians ;  it  is  that  which  is 
fubftantially  good,  and  that  which  is  unqueftionably 
fo.     h  is  not  a  zeal  for  indifferent  things,  about  the 

Vol.  X.  23  C  ritual 

7- 


^^oo  ^ke fruits  of  the  S? iKi  t, 

SERM.  ritual   and  ceremonial  part  of  relis^ion,  the  external 
ecu  •  •  ^      ' 

^^  _^  circumftances  of  it,  much  nicety,  and  fcrupuloufnefs 

about  things  of  no  moment  and  confideration,  fuch  as 
was  the  Phariiees  *'  tithing  of  mint,  anife,  and  cum- 
•'  min  •,"  difputes  about  "  meats  and  drinks,  and  the 
*'  obfervation  of  days,"  and  the  like  j  but  a  purfuit 
of  *'  the  weightier  things  of  the  law,"  a  care  of 
the  great  duties  of  religion,  and  thofe  things  where- 
in *'  the  kingdom  of  G  o  d  confifts  •,"  the  pradice  of 
the  great  virtues  of  converfation,  which  are  apt  to 
recommend  us  to  the  general  approbation  of  men, 
to  gain  their  good- will,  and  to  take  ofFexafperations, 
and  to  calm  and  Tweeten  the  fpirits  and  tempers 
of  men  towards  us.  And  they  mufl  likewife  be  things 
unqueftionably  good,  and  againfl:  which  there  is  no 
exception,  fuch  as  will  juftify  and  bear  themfelves  out 
in  the  general  opinion  of  mankind. 

I  know  very  well  that  '*  goodnefs,*'  in  the  ftrift 
notion  of  it,  does  fignify  a  ready  inclination  of  mind 
to  benefit  and  help  others  all  that  we  can,  as  we  have 
opportunity.  And  this  is  the  particular  virtue  of 
alms-giving,  or  as  we  commonly  call  it,  charity  5 
which  is  fo  often  recommended  to  us  under  the 
notion  of  "  doing  good."  Gal.  vi.  10.  "  As  we 
''  have  therefore  opportunity,  let  us  do  good  unto 
*«  all  men."  And  i  Tim.  vi.  17,  18. "  Charge  them 
"  that  are  rich  in  this  world,  that  they  be  not  high- 
'*  minded,  nor  truft  in  uncertain  riches,  but  in  the 
'<  living  God,  who  giveth  us  richly  all  things  to  en- 
"  joy  ;  that  they  do  good,  that  they  be  rich  in 
*'  good  works,  ready  to  diftributc,  willing  to  com- 
*'  municate." 

But  there  is  a  larger  notion  of  "  goodnefs "  more 
frequently  ufed  in  the  new  teftament,  v/hich  compre- 
hends 


the  fame  with  moral  virtues.  460 1 

hends  and  takes  in  all  thofe  virtues  of  converfation,  ^^^/^'^' 
which  are  univerfally  and  by  the  light  of  nature  owned 
to  be  fuch,  and  the  pracStice  whereof  is  apt  to  recom. 
mend  us  to  the  Jove  and  efteem  of  all  men  ;  as  on 
the  contrary,  the  negle£t  of  them  is  apt  to  bring  rcligi* 
OB  under  a  great  fcandal  and  cenfure  :  fuch  are  obedi- 
ence to  our  fuperiors  and  governors,  and  a  confcious 
care  to  difcharge  all  thofe  duties  which  the  feveral  re- 
lations wherein  we  (land  to  others,  do  call  for  from  us. 

Obedience  to  governors  is  recommended  to  us 
under  the  notion  of  "  goodnefs,  or  weil-doing." 
I  Pet.  ii.  13,  14,  15.  "  Submit  yourfelves  to  every 
''  ordinance  of  man  for  the  Lo  r  d's  fake,  whether 
"  it  be  to  the  king  as  fupreme,  or  unto  governors, 
'^  as  unto  them  that  are  fent  by  him,  for  the  punilh- 
"  ment  of  evil-doers,  and  for  the  praife  of  them 
"  that  do  well.  For  fo  is  the  will  of  God,  that 
"  with  well-doing  ye  may  put  to  filence  the  ignorance 
"  of  foolifh  men.**  So  likewife  praying  for  thofe 
that  are  in  authority,  i  Tim.  i.  i,  2,  3.  "I  exhort 
"  therefore,  that  fird  of  all  fupplications,  prayers,  in- 
"  tercelTions,  and  giving  of  thanks  be  made  for  all 
"  men  -,  for  kings,  and  for  all  that  are  in  authori- 
"  ty,  that  we  may  lead  a  quiet  and  peaceable  life  in 
*'  all  godlinefs  and  honelly.  For  this  is  good  and 
*'  acceptable  in  the  fight  of  God  our  Saviour." 

In  like 'manner,  a  confcientious  difcharge  of  the 
duties  which  other  relations  require  is  recommended 
to  us  under  the  notion  of  ''  goodnefs,"  and  that  which 
is  a  fpecial  grace  and  ornament  to  religion,  i  Tim.  v. 
4.  "  Let  them  learn  firft  to  (hew  piety  at  home,  and 
*'  to  requite  their  parents,  for  that  is  good  and  ac- 
**  ceptable  before  God."  And  Tk.  ii.  9,  10.  the 
apoftle  exhorts  fervants  to  be  "  obedient  to  their 
23  C  2  *'  mailers  j" 


4602  The  fruits  of  the  Sv  ivlit^ 

^CClf '  "  n^aftersj"  that  by  this  inftanceofgoodnefs,as  well 
as  others,  they  may  bring  credit  and  reputation  to 
religion ;  "  exhort  fervants  to  be  obedient  unto  their 
^'  ownmaflers,andto  pleafe  them  well  in  all  things: 
^'  notanfvvering  again  ;  not  purloining  ;  but  fhewing 
"  all  good  fidelity,  that  they  may  adorn  the  dodlrine 
*'  of  G  o  D  our  S  A  V  I  0  u  R  in  all  things." 

More  particularly,  the  feveral  virtues  of  converfa- 
tion  are  frequently  inftanced  in,  as  branches  of  good- 
nefs,  as  unity,  peaceablenefs,  courtefy,  compalTion, 
and  good  will  towards  all  men.  Thepradice  of  thefe 
things  the  apoftle  calls  "  the  following  of  that  which 
"  is  good,"  Rom.xii.  9,  10.  &c.  «  Let  love  be 
"  without  diffimulation :  abhor  that  which  is  evil, 
^'  cleave  to  that  which  is  good.  Be  kindly  affedioned 
*'  one  towards  another.  Blefs  them  which  perfecute 
*'  you  :  blefs,  and  curfe  not.  Rejoice  with  them  that 
*'  do  rejoice,  and  weep  with  them  that  weep.  Be 
"  of  the  fame  mind  one  towards  another.  Mind  not 
''  high  things,  but  condefcend  to  men  of  low  ellate. 
"  Be  not  wife  in  your  own  conceits.  Recompenfe 
"  to  no  man  evil  for  evil.  Provide  things  honeft 
"  in  the  fight  of  all  men.  If  it  be  poiTible,  as  much 
"  as  lieth  in  you,  live  peaceably  with  all  men.  Dear- 
^'  ly  beloved,  avenge  not  yourfelves,  but  rather  give 
*«  place  unto  wrath.  Be  not  overcome  of  evil  ;  but 
*'  overcome  evil  with  good."  So  likewife  the  apo- 
ftle,  I  ThefT.  v.  15.  inftancech  in  abltaining  from  re- 
venge, as  an  eminent  piece  of  goodnefs.  "  See  that 
"  none  render  evil  for  evil  unto  any  man  :  but  ever 
*^  follow  that  which  is  good,  both  among  yourfelves, 
^*  and  to  all  men."  And  St.  Peter  alfo  gives  much 
the  fame  inftancesof  goodnefs  that  St.  Paul  hath  done, 
1  Pet.  iii.  8,  9,  &c.  "  Finally,  be  ye  all  of  one  mind, 

"  having 


the  fame  with  moral  virtues  4^^3 

^*  having  compalTion  one  of  another  ;  love  as  bre-  SER]V[. 
*'  thren  ;  be  pitiful,  be  courteous ;  not  rendering  .^^-^  r. 
*'  evil  for  evil,  or  railing  for  railing,  but  contrari- 
*'  wife  bleffing  ;  knowing  that  ye  are  thereunto 
*'  called,  that  ye  iLould  inherit  a  bleffing.  For 
^'  he  that  will  love  life,  and  fee  good  days,  let  him 
"  refrain  his  tongue  from  evil,  and  his  lips  that  they 
"  fpeak  no  guile  :  let  him  efchew  evil,  and  do  good  ; 
"  let  him  feek  peace,  and  enfue  it.  And  who  is  he 
"that  will  harm  you,  if  ye  be  followers  of  that 
"  which  is  good  ?  "  that  is,  if  ye  pradlife  goodnefs 
in  the  inftances  I  have  mentioned. 

You  fee  then  what  *'  goodnefs "  is,  by  the  in- 
ftances  which  the  fcripture  gives  of  it ;  obedience  to 
our  fuperiors  and  governors,  and  a  confcientious 
care  of  the  duties  of  our  feveral  relations,  fincere 
love  and  charity,  compafTion,  humility,  peace  and 
unity,  abftaining  from  wrath  and  revenge,  and  ren- 
dering good  for  evil ;  thefe  are  unqueftionable  in- 
ftances  of  goodnefs,  and  pafs  for  current  among  all 
mankind,  are  on  all  hands  agreed  to  be  good,  and 
have  an  univerfal  approbation  among  all  parties  and 
profefTions,  how  wide  foever  their  differences  maybe 
in  other  matters. 

Thefe  are  the  things  which  are  in  fcripture  more 
peculiarly  called  good,  becaufe  they  are  (o  in  them- 
felves  and  in  their  own  nature  ;  and  not  merely  be- 
caufe they  are  commanded,  as  the  rites  and  cere- 
monies of  the  jewifll  religion  were,  which  are  there- 
fore called  by  Go  D  himfelf,  in  the  prophet,  "  fta- 
"  tutes  that  were  not  good,"  Ezek.  xx.  25.  "  Where- 
"  fore  I  gave  them  ftatutes  that  were  not  good,'* 
that  is,  I  gave  them  laws  concerning  feveral  things, 
which  had   no  intrinfical  goodnefs  in  them.     But 

moral 


4604  ^he  fruits  of  the  Sv  i  Kir  ^ 

SERM.  moral  duties,  becaufe  of  the  efTential  and  eternal 
'  goodnefs  of  them,  are  eminently  called  *'  good  •,  " 
as  in  that  known  pafTage  of  the  prophet,  Micah  vi. 
8.  '^  He  hath  fhewed  thee,  O  man,  what  is  good ; 
*'  and  what  doth  the  Lord  require  of  thee,  but 
"  to  do  juftly,  and  to  love  mercy,  and  to  walk 
^'  humbly  with  thy  God  ?" 

The  other  two  fruits  of  the  Spirit  which  are 
added  in  the  text,  '*  righteoufnefs  and  truth," 
which  refpedl  like  wife  our  converfation  with  men, 
more  efpecially  in  the  way  of  commerce,  or  rather 
parts  or  branches  of  ''  goodnefs,"  than  really  diftindl 
from  it ;  but  they  are  two  confiderable  virtues,  and 
therefore  the  apoftle  thought  fit  to  inftance  particu- 
larly in  them,  after  he  had  mentioned  "  goodnefs,** 
which  is  indeed  the  general  name  that  comprehends 
all  virtues  in  it. 

''  The  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  righteoufnefs," 
which  fignifies  juftice  in  our  dealings  and  adlions  with 
otliers  j  "  and  truth,"  which  is  juftice  in  our  words  j 
for  he  that  fpeaks  as  he  thinks,  and  performs  and 
makes  good  what  he  promifeth,  is  faid  to  be  juft  to 
his  word.  And  all  thefe,  "  goodnefs,  and  riglite- 
*'  oufnefs,  and  truth,"  and  whatever  particular  vir- 
tues are  comprehended  under  them,  though  they  be 
truly  and  properly  "  moral  virtues,"  yet  are  faid  to 
be  fruits  of  the  S  p  i  r  i  t." 

From  the  words  thus  explained,  I  iliall  make  thefe 
four  obfervations,  which  1  fhall  fpeak  as   briefly  to 

as  I  can. 

Firft,  that  ''  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit'*  are  plain 
and  fenfible  cffeds,  appearing  in  the  difpofitions  and 
Kves  of  men. 

Secondly, 


the  fame  with  moral  virtues.  4^  or 

Secondly,  that  thefe  *'  fruits  of  the  Spirit,"  SERM. 
here  mentioned,  are  of  an  eternal  and  immutable  na-    ^'^l^ 
ture,  and  of  perpetual  and  indilpenfable  obligation. 

'  Thirdly,  that  moral  virtues  are  "  the  graces  and 
*'  fruits  of  the  S p  i r  it." 

Fourthly,  that  therefore  they  are  by  no  means  to 
be  flighted,  as  low  and  mean  attainments  in  religi- 
on ;  but  are  to  be  looked  upon  and  eftecmed  as  a 
main  and  fubftantial  part  of  chriftianity. 

Fird,  that  "  the  fruits  of  the  S  P  i  R  i  t,'*  are  real 
and  fcnfible  effedls,  appearing  in  the  difpofitions  and 
lives  of  men.  The  apoftle  here  (peaks  of  what  i% 
vifible  in  the  lives  and  converfations  of  men;  for 
he  exhorts  chriflians  to  '*  walk  as  children  of  the 
*'  light  y  "  now  "  walking  "  is  a  metaphor,  which 
fignifies  the  outward  converfation  and  adlions  of 
men.  *'  Walk  as  children  of  the  light.  For  the 
*'  fruit  of  the  S  P  I  R  I  T  is  in  all  goodnefs,  and 
*'  righteoufnefs,  and  truth;"  that  is,  if  a  man  be 
endued  with  the  Spirit,  it  will  difcover  it  felf 
by  thefe  vifible  fruits  and  efFedls.  What  the  apoftle 
fays  of  "  the  works  of  the  flefh,"  Galat.  v.  i^. 
*'  The  works  of  the  flefli  are  manifeft, "  plainly  to 
be  feen  in  the  lives  and  converfations  of  men,  is 
equally  true  of  "  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit,'*  that 
*'  they  alfo  are  vifible  and  manifeft  ; "  ki  that  by 
thefe,  men  may  make  a  judgment  of  their  condition, 
whether  they  be  true  chriftians,  and  "  the  S  p  i  r  i  t 
*'  of  God  dwell  in  them,"  or  not,  viz.  by  the 
temper  and  difpofition  of  our  minds,  manifeftly  ap- 
pearing in  our  lives  and  adlions,  by  the  practice  of 
thofe  real  virtues  which  are  the  proper  and  genuine 
fruits  of  the  HolySpirit  of  God.  For  reli- 
gion is  not  an  invifible  thing,  confiding  in  mere  be- 
lief. 


4606  The  fruits  of  the  Spirit, 

SERM.lieF,  in  height  of  fpeculation,  and  niceties  of  op'ni- 
^^^^-    on,  or  in   abftrufenefs  of  myftery.     The  fcripture 
does  not  place  it  in  things   remote  from  the  fight 
and  obfervation  of  men  ;  but  in  real  and  vifible  ef- 
feft^,  fuch   as    may  be  plainly  difcerned,  and  even 
felt  in   the  converfation  of  men  •,  not  in  abftradted 
notions,  bat   in  fubftantial  virtues  5  and  in  a  fenfible 
power  and  efficacy  upon  the   lives  of  men,  in  all  the 
inftances  of  piety  and  virtue,  of  holy  and  excellent 
adtions.     This  our  S  av  i  o  u  R  requires  of  his  difci- 
ples,  that  the  virtue  and  hpiinefs  of  their  lives  fliould 
be  fo  vifible  and  confpicuous,  that  all  men  may  be- 
hold it,  and  give  teftimony  to  it,  and  glorify  God 
upon   that  account ;  Mat.  v.  16.  ''  Let  your  light 
i"^  fo  fhine  before  men,  that  they  may  fee  your  good 
*'  works,  and  glorify  your  Father  which  is  in 
"  heaven."     Not  that  men  fhould  make  any  often- 
tation  of  religion,  as  the  Pharifees  did  of  their  devo- 
tion and  alms,  which  our  S  a  v  i  o  u  r  cenfures  very 
feverely  :  but  there  is  a  great  difference  between  an 
affedled  and  vain-glorious  fhew  of  piety  and  virtue, 
and  the  real  and  fubftantial  effeds  of  them  in  a  good 
life,  which  as  they  cannot,  fo  they  ought  not  to  be 
hid  •,  nay,  on  the  contrary^  men  ought,  as  St.  James 
exhorts,  James  iii.   13.  to  ''  fhew  out  of  a  good 
*'  converfation,  their  works  with  meeknefs  of  wif^ 
''  dom,"  that  is,  in  a  wife  manner,  not  with  pride 
and  oflentation,  but  with    meeknefs  and    humility, 
the  o-reat  ornament  of  all  chriftian  graces  and  virtues. 
I  proceed  to  the 

Second  obfervation,  namely,  that  the  "  fruits  of 
«'  the  Spirit,**  here  mentioned,  "  goodncfs,  and 
'^  righteoufnefs,  and  truth,"  are  of  an  eternal  mid 
iramutable  nature,  and  of  perpetual  and  indifpen fable 

obligation. 


the  fame  with  moral  virtues,  4607 

obligation.  The  notions  of  good  and  evil,  of  jufl:  S  E  R  M. 
and  unjuft,  of  truth  and  fidelity,  and  of  falfhood  ^^^^' 
and  perfidioufhels  in  our  words  and  adlions,  I  fay 
thefe  notions  are  born  with  us,  and  imprinted  in 
our  natures,  are  fo  fix'd  and  dctermin'd  in  the  very 
frame  of  our  minds  and  underftandings,  that  as  they 
need  not  be  explain'd,  fo  they  can  never  be  chang'd 
and  altered.  The  difference  of  good  and  evil  is 
naturally  known,  and  the  notions  of  "  righteoufnefs, 
"  and  goodnefs,  and  truth,"  are  fix'd  antecedently 
to  any  divine  revelation,  which  fuppofeth  the  nature 
of  them  to  be  known,  and  therefore  doth  not  go 
about  to  define  and  explain  them  to  us  j  and  fuppo- 
feth likewife  the  obligation  of  them,  being  branches 
of  the  law  of  nature,  and  efTential  parts  of  that  re- 
ligion which  is  "  born  with  us,  and  written  upon 
"  our  hearts,^  and  makes  us  "  a  law  to  our  felves." 
And  therefore  the  chriflian  religion  doth  only  de- 
clare thefe  duties  more  plainly,  and  prefs  them  more 
earneftly  upon  us,  and  enforce  t\\Q  obligation  of 
them  by  more  powerful  arguments  and  confiderati- 
ons,  grounded  upon  clearer  difcoveries  of  the  grace 
and  mercy  of  G  o  d  to  mankind,  and  of  the  re- 
wards and  puniiliments  of  another  world  :  but  thefe 
duties  are  in  their  nature  ftill  the  fame,  and  the  chri- 
ftian  religion  is  fo  far  from  releafing  us  from  the 
obligation  of  them,  that  it  hath  very  much  heigh- 
tened it,  and  bound  them  the  fafter  upon  us.  I  pafs 
on  to  the 

Third  obfervation  from  thefe  words,  namely,  that 
"  moral  virtues  are  the  graces  and  fruits  of  the 
"  Spirit."  For  the  three  particulars  here  men- 
tioned by  the  apoftle  are  no  other,  but  the  chief 
heads  and  inftanccs  of  moral  duties,    *^  goodnefs. 

Vol.  X.  z^  D  "  and 

7- 


4608  ^he  fruits  of  ibe  S?iRiTy 

SERM.  cc  and  righteoufners,  and  truth.'*  What  are  thefe  but 
moral  virtues  ?  and  yet  it  is  certain,  that  they  are  alfo 
chriftian  graces,  becaufe  they  are  here  exprefly  faid  to 
be  "  the  fruits  of  the  S  p  i  R  i  t." 

And  they  are  called  moral  virtues,  becaufe  they  arc 
fuch  duties  as  are  not  enjoined  by  any  pofitive  law, 
(which  is  not  obligatory  from  the  nature  and  reafoii 
of  the  thing  commanded,  but  merely  from  the  com- 
mand ; )  but  are  of  natural  and  eternal  obligation,  and 
fuch  as  we  had  been  bound  to  the  obfervance  of  them, 
from  the  immutable  goodnefs  and  reafon  of  them, 
though  God  had  never  made  any  external  revelation 
of  his  will  concerning  them.  Though  it  cannot  be 
denied,  but  that  by  the  means  of  external  revelation, 
we  have  a  more  clear  and  certain  knowledge  of  them, 
and  more  powerful  motives  to  the  practice  of  them. 
So  that  grace  and  virtue  are  but  two  names  that  fignify 
the  fame  thing.  Virtue  fignifies  the  abfolute  nature 
and  goodnefs  of  thefe  things :  grace  denotes  the  caufe 
and  principle  by  which  thefe  virtues  are  wrought  and 
produced,  and  are  preferved  and  increafed  in  us,  name- 
ly, by  the  free  gift  of  G  o  d's  H  o  l  y  Spi  rit  to  us ; 
for  which  reafon,  thefe  graces  and  virtues  of  "  good- 
*'  nefs,  and  righteoufnefs,  and  truth,"  which  are  here 
mentioned  in  the  text,  are  faid  to  be  "  the  fruits  of 
*'  the  Spi  RIT.*'     I  come  now  to  the 

Fourth  and  laft  obfervation  from  the  ttxt,  namely, 
that  fince  thefe  very  things  which  are  called  moral 
virtues,  are  in  their  nature  the  very  fame  with  "  the 
*'  graces  and  fruits  of  the  S  p  i  r  i  t,"  therefore  they 
are  by  no  means  to  be  flighted,  as  low  and  mean  at- 
tainments in  religion,  but  to  be  looked  upon  and 
eileemed  as  a  main  and  fubftantial  part  of  chriftianity. 
They  are  called  "  the  fruits  of  the  S  p  i  R  i  t  >"  that 

is 


the  fame  t)ith  moral  "oirfues,  4609 

is  the  natural  and  genuine  eftefi:  of  that  divine  power  S  E  R  M. 
and  influence  upon  the  hearts  and  lives  of  men,  which 
accompanies  the  chriftian  religion ;  or  the  happy  ef- 
feds  of  the  chriftian  religion  wrought  in  men,  by  the 
immediate  operation  and  afTiilance  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  of  God,  which  is  conferred  upon  all  chri- 
ftians  in  their  baptifm,  and  does  continually  dwell  and 
refide  in  them,  if  by  wilful  fins  they  do  not  grieve 
him,  and  drive  him  away,  and  provoke  him  to  with- 
draw himfelf  from  them. 

I  do  not  fay  that  thefe  virtues  are  all  religion,  and 
all  that  is  neceilary  to  make  a  man  a  complete  chri- 
ftian, and  good  man.    For  there  m.uft  be  knowledge 
to  direcl  us  in  our  duty ;  there  muft  be  faith  or  a 
hearty  afTent  to  the  revelation  of  the  gofpel,  (efpecial- 
]y  concerning  the  forgivenels  of  our  fins,  and  of  our 
juftification  and  acceptance  with  God,  for  the  fake 
of  the  m.eritorious  fufferings  of  our  bleiTed  Saviour,) 
to  be  the  root  and  principle  of  all  religious  adions  % 
there  muft  be  piety  and  devotion  towards  Go  d,  and 
the  conftant  pradice  and  exercife  of  religious  duties 
in  publick  and  private,  fuch  as  prayer,  hearing  and 
reading  the  word  of  Go  d,  frequent  and  reverent  re- 
ceiving of  the  holy  facran^ent,  which  arc  the  beft  and 
moft  efFedlual  means  in  the  world  to  make  men  good, 
becaufe  they  are  appointed  by  God,  and  attended 
with  his  blefting  to  that  end;  I  fay,  there  muft  be  ail 
thefe,  becaufe  they  are  the  principles  and  means  of 
religion,  which  are  always  fuppoied  as  neceftary  to 
that  which  is  the  end.  Now  the  great  end  of  reh'gion, 
that  which  chriftianity  mainly  defigns  to  work  and 
perfed  in  us,  are  thofe  graces  and  virtues  which  are 
called  "  the  fruits  of  the  Sp  irit  ;"  fuch  as  thofe 
mentioned  in  the  text,  "  goodnels,  and  righteoufnefs, 
^ '  and  truth.'^  2302^  And 


46 1 o  T'he  fruits  of  the  S  p  i  r  i  t, 

S  E  R  M.      And  this  will  be  evident  to  any  one  that  will  atten- 
ecu      .  • 

tively  confider  what  the  fcripture  fays  of  them ;  and 

more  efpecially  how  our  Saviour  and  his  apoftles 
do  every  where  recommend  them  to  our  confidera- 
ticn  and  pra6lice,  Micah  vi.  8.  "  He  hath  ihewed 
*'  thee,  O  man,  what  is  good  ,  and  what  doth  the 
"  Lord  require  of  thee,  but  to  dojuftly,  and  to 
*'  love  mercy,  and  to  walk  humbly  with  thy  God  ? " 
It  is  to  thefc  qualities  and  difpofitions  of  goodnefs^  and 
righteoufnefs,  and  the  like  virtues,  that  our  Sa- 
viour promifcs  blcflednefs.  Thefe  St.  Peter  calls 
*'  a  divine  or  god-like  nature,"  2  Pet.  i.  4,  5.  fpeak- 
ing  of  the  knowledge  of  the  gofpel,  ''  Whereby, 
*'  fays  he,  are  given  to  us  exceeding  great  and  pre- 
"  cious  promifes,  that  by  thcfe  ye  might  be  partakers 
*'  of  the  divine  nature  j"  and  thereupon  he  exhorts 
that  chriftians  fhould  "  give  all  diligence  to  make 
^^  their  calling  and  eleflion  fure,''  by  adding  to  the 
faith  of  the  gofpel,  the  feveral  graces  and  virtues  of 
a  good  life;  thefe  being  that  "  divine  nature"  which 
the  gofpel  defigns  to  make  us  "  partakers  of." 

To  fpeak  a  little  more  particularly  of  the  three  vir- 
tues here  mentioned,  "  goodnefs,  righteoufnefs,  and 
*^  truth."  Thefe  are  every  where  frequendy  comrhen- 
ded  and  enjoined  in  the  new  teftament.  "  Goodnefs,'* 
whether  we  confider  it  as  it  imports  charity  in  gene- 
ral, and  our  love  of  one  another,  our  Saviour 
ip.akes  it  the  great  badge  and  mark  of  a  chriflian. 
"  Hereby,  fays  he,  fhall  all  men  know  that  ye  arc 
"  my  difciples,  if  ye  love  one  another."  St.  Paul 
calls  it  "  the  fulfilling  of  the  law,  and  the  end  of  the 
"  commandment,  teXc?  r7s  -jra^yyiKia^,  the  great 
*'  end  and  defign  of  the  gofpel,  is  charity."  St.  John 
rifeth  yet  higher,  and  fpeaks  of  it  as  the  very  nature 

and 


the  fame  with  moral  virtues.  46 1 1 

arid  cflence  of  God  himfelf,  and  that  by  which  we  SERM. 
are  as  it  were  united  to  him.  "  God  is  love,  and  he  .  _  ^' 
*'  that  dwelleth  in  love,  dwelleth  in  God,  and  God 
"  in  him."  Or  whether  we  confider  goodnefs  under 
the  notion  of  compaflion  and  beneficence,  a  readinefs 
to  pity  and  reheve  and  benefit  others  according  to 
our  ability  and  opportunities.  This  the  fcripture  ce- 
lebrates as  a  thing  highly  acceptable  to  G  o  d.  Heb. 
xiii.  16.  "  But  to  do  good,  and  to  communicate,  for« 
^''  get  not:  for  with  fuch  facrifices  God  is  well 
"  pleafed."  And  St.  James  inftanceth  it  as  one  of 
the  mod  fignal  teftimonies  or  true  piety,  James  i.  27. 
"  Pure  religion,  and  undefiled  before  God  and  the 
"  F  A  T  H  E  R  is  this,  to  vifit  the  fatherlels  and  wi- 
*^  dovvs  in  their  afflidlion."  And  chap.  iii.  17.  he 
makes  it  a  mark  and  character  of  the  divine  and  hea- 
venly wifdom ;  "  the  wifdom  which  is  from  above,  is 
*'  full  of  mercy  and  good  works." 

And  then  for  "  righteoufnefs,"  of  which  truth  and 
fidelity  in  our  intercourfe  with  men  is  a  confiderable 
part,  St.  Paul  inftanceth  it  in,  in  the  firft  place,  as  a 
principal  thing  wherein  the  kingdom  of  G  o  d  doth 
confift,  Rom.  xiv.  17.  "  The  kingdom  of  God  doth 
*'  not  confift  in  meats  and  drinks,"  that  is,  the  power 
and  efficacy  of  the  chriftian  religion,  or  the  golpel, 
(which  is  frequendy  in  the  new  teftament  called  "  t\\Q 
"  kingdom  of  Go  d/'J  doth  not  confift  in  zeal  about 
indifferent  things :  but  in  the  fubftannal  virtues  of  a 
good  life,  "  in  righteoufnefs  and  peace." 

You  fee  by  all  this,  at  what  a  rate  the  fcripture 
magnifies  thele  virtues,  as  the  great  things  of  reli- 
gion, the  end  of  the  goipel,  and  that  wherein  our 
chriftianity  does  mainly  confift.  The  confideration 
whereof  would  make  a  man  ftand  amazed,  to  think 

how 


46 1 2  "The  fruits  of  the  S^  IKIT, 

SERM.  how  thefe  virtues  fliould  ever  fall  into  fo  much  con- 
■  tempt  among  thofe  who  call  themfelves  chriftians,  and 
do  every  day  read  the  bible ;  and  come  to  be  account- 
ed but  low  and  pitiful  things,  in  comparifon  of  I 
know  not  what  fancies  and  conceits,  wherein  fome  are 
pleafed  to  place  religion.  For  what  can  the  beft  reli- 
gion that  ever  was  in  the  world  (which  chriftianity 
certainly  is)  be  better  placed  in,  than  in  thefe  and  the 
like  virtues ;  all  which  are  fo  excellent  in  their  nature 
and  ufe,  and  have  fo  direct  a  tendency  both  to  the 
happinefs  of  particular  perfons  fingly  confider'd,  and 
of  humane  fociety,  and  feveral  of  them,  efpecially 
thofe  inftanced  in,  in  the  text,  ^'goodnefs,  and  righte- 
"  oufnefs,  and  truth,"  are  the  very  nature  and  per- 
fefiion  of  Go  D  himfelf  ? 

And  what  more  worthy  to  be  '^  the  fruits  of  the 
"  Holy  Spirit  of  Gooj^andtheetfedlsof  adivine 
pov/er  and  influence  v/orking  upon  the  minds  of  men, 
chan  fuch  qualities  and  difpofitions  as  render  us  fo  like 
to  Go  D,  and  do  fo  nearly  refemble  the  higheft  excel- 
lencies and  perfedions  of  the  divine  nature  ?  And 
therefore  our  Saviour  ufeth  this  as  an  argument 
to  perfuade  us  to  be  good,  and  merciful,  and  patient; 
becaufe  thefe  qualities  are  fo  near  a  refemblance  and 
imitation  of  the  divine  perfedlion,  the  nearefl  that 
creatures  are  capable  of.  Matth.  v.  48.  ''  Be  ye  there- 
''  fore  perfed,  even  as  your  F  a  t  h  e  r  which  is  in 
"  heaven  is  perfe6t." 

And  thus  I  have  difpatch'd  the  four  obfervations 
from  the  text  j  that  "  the  fruits  of  the  S  p  i  r  i  t"  are 
plain  and  fenfible  eife(5ls,  appearing  in  the  difpofitions 
and  lives  of  men  -,  that  they  are  of  an  eternal  and  im- 
mutable nature,  and  of  perpetual  and  indifpenfablc 
obligation ;  and  though  they  be  moral  virtues,  yet 

they 


(he  fame  with  moral  virtues.  46 1 3' 

they  are  likewife  "  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit;"  and  S  E  R  M. 
are  by  no  means  to  be  flighted  and  undervalued,  as 
low  and  mean  attainments  in  religion. 

All  that  now  remains,  is  to  make  feme  inferences 
from  what  has  been  difcours'd  on  this  text. 

And  i^  this  clifcourfe  be  true,  then  the  want  of  thele 
%^irtues  mention'd  in  the  text,  and  the  reigning  of  the 
contrary  vices  m  us,  is  a  clear  and  undeniable  evi- 
dence, notwithftanding  all  our  fair  profelTions  and 
pretences,  that  we  are  not  true  chriftians.  For  i^  we 
do  not  bring  forth  '^  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit," 
we  have  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ;  and  then 
St.  Paul  hath  determined  our  cafe,  that  "  if  any 
"^^  man  have  not  the  S  p  i  R  i  t  of  C  h  r  i  s  t  he  is 
"  none  of  his."  If  thefe  chriftian  graces  and  virtues 
mentioned  in  the  ttxt^  "  goodnefs,  and  righteoufnefs, 
"  and  truth,"  do  not  fhine  forth  in  our  lives  and 
converfations,  it  is  plain,  according  to  the  apoftie's 
reafoning  in  this  and  other  texts,  that  v/e  are  noc 
'^  children  of  the  light,"  becaule  we  do  not  "  walk 
"  as  children  of  the  light,"  as  thofe  that  are  enligh- 
ten'd  by  the  S  p  I  R I  T  of  God  ;  for  "  the  fruit  of  the 
''  Spi  Ri  T,  or  the  fruit  of  light,"  as  fome  copies 
have  it,  "  is  m  all  goodnefs,  and  righteoufnefs,  and 
^'  truth."  And  if  thefe  fruits  be  not  found  in  us,  'tis 
a  plain  evidence  that  we  do  not  "  walk  in  the  S  p  i- 
"  R  IT,"  that  we  are  not  "  led  and  guided  by  the 
"  S  p  I  R I T  of  G  o  D  ; "  for  "  the  fruits  of  the  Spi- 
''  RiT,  as  well  as  the  works  of  the  flefli  are  mani- 
''  feft,"  fufficiently  plain  and  vifible  in  the  converfa- 
tions of  men;  and  according  as  we  "  fulfil  the  lufls 
"  of  the  one,  or  bring  forth  the  fruits  of  the;  other,'* 
we  may  certainly  judge  whether  we  have  the  Spirit 
of  C  H  R I  s  T  or  not,  that  is,  whether  we  be  true 

chriflians. 


46 1 4  The  fridis  of  the  S  p  i  r  j  t, 

SERM.  chriflians,  or  do  only  ufurp  a  name,  and  take  a  title 
*  to  ourfelves,  which  does  not  of  right  belong  to  us. 
We  need  not  to  trouble  and  puzzle  ourfelves  with  a 
great  many,  doubtful  andobfcure  marks,  to  find  out  by 
them  what'  our  ftate  and  condition  is,  and  whether  we 
be  the  children  of  God  or  not.;  if  we  have  a  mind  to 
know  it,  we  may  foon  bring  the  matter  to  an  ifllie,  by 
lool^ing  into  our  own  hearts  and  lives,  whether  "  the 
^'  fruits  of  the  S  p  i  r  i  t  be  there,  in  all  goodnefs^ 
«'  and  righteoufncfs,  and  truth,"  and  in  all  thofe  vir- 
tues which  are  elfewhere  mentioned  as  "  fruits  of  the 
*'  Spirit."  Thefe  are  plain  and  fenfible  things,  and 
if  thefe  virtues  be  in  us,  they  cannot  be  hid  from  our 
felves  or  others,  but  will  fhine  forth  in  our  lives  and 
converfations,  in  all  our  words  and  actions.  Goodnels 
is  foon  feen,  it  hath  a  native  beauty  and  brightnefs  in 
it,  which  draws  the  eyes  of  men  towards  it  \  and  it 
difcovers  itfelf  by  its  efFeds,  which  are  perceiv'd  and 
felt  in  thofe  upon  whom  it  is  exercifed.  Rightcouf- 
nefs  and  truth,  are  likewife  very  fenfible  to  ourfelves 
and  others;  and  fo  are  the  contrary  difpofuions  and 
pradices.  No  man  does  an  unjuft  thing,  but  his  con- 
fcience  tells  him  he  does  fo;  no  man  fpeaks  contrary 
to  truth,  or  breaks  his  word  and  promife,  but  he  is 
guilty  to  himfelf  of  fo  doing.  And  thus  I  might  in- 
ftance  in  all  other  virtues  and  vices.  If  we  will  but 
look  into  ourfelves,  and  obferve  our  own  a6tions,  we 
may  eafily  difcern,  v/hcther  we  be  malicious  and  en- 
vious, cruel  and  hard-hearted,  cenforious  and  uncha- 
ritable; or  good,  and  kind,  and  merciful,  and  ready 
to  forgive  ;  whether  we  make  confcicnce  of  our  word 
or  not ;  and  whether  we  do  to  others,  as  we  would 
have  them  do  to  us.  Nothing  is  more  eafy  to  be 
known  than  it  is,  which  of  thefe  qualities  does  poffefs 

and 


the  fame  with  moral  virtues. 

and  rule  our  hearts,  and  govern  and  bear  fway  in  our 
lives.  And  if  we  can  know  this,  we  know  whether 
we  have  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit  or  not;  ''  for  the 
"  fruit  of  the  S  p  I R I T  is  in  all  goodnefs,  and  righte- 
"  oufnefsj  and  truth.'*  And  by  thefe  "  fruits  of  the 
"  S  PiRiT,'*  or  the  want  of  them,  (which  are  both 
very  difcernable)  we  may  know  what  ouf  (late  and 
condition  is,  whether  we  have  the  S  pirit  of  God, 
and  be  true  and  fincere  chriftians.  A  great  many  men 
tire  themfelves  in  an  endlefs  enquiry,  concerning  the 
good  eilate  of  their  fouls  towards  God;  whether 
they  be  the  children  of  G  o  d,  and  whether  they  have 
the  Sp  I  RiT  of  God  or  not,  and  are  trying  themfelves 
£lll  their  lives,  by  obfcure  and  uncertain  marks,  which 
will  never  bring  the  matter  to  any  clear  iffue,  buC 
leave  them  ftill  in  the  dark  and  in  ddubt,  concerning 
their  own  fmcerity,  and  the  integrity  of  their  hearts 
towards  God.  And  how  can  it  be  otherwife,  fince 
they  have  been  fo  often  told  by  unskilful  men,  thaC 
they  cannot  know  their  own  hearts,  and  confequently 
can  never  be  affured  of  their  own  integrity  and  fince- 
rity  ?  This,  I  rhull  confefs^  is  but  an  ill  fign  of  fin- 
cerity,  when  we  find  it  fo  hard  a  matter  to  difcern  it 
in  ourfelves.  Job  found  it  clearly  in  himfelf,  and  was 
very  confidently  aflfured  of  it.  Job  xxvii.  s^  6.  ••'  Till 
"  I  die,  fays  he,  I  will  not  remove  my  integrity  from 
*'  me.  My  righteoufnefs  I  hold  fad,  and  will  not  let 
^'  it  go."  But  if  a  man  cannot  know  his  own  heart, 
and  whether  he  have  integrity  or  not  -,  how  fhall  he 
know  either  when  he  parts  with  it,  or  when  he  holds 
it  faft  ^  the  aportle  in  the  text  gives  us  a  fure  mark 
whereby  we  may  know  when  we  have  the  Spirit 
of  God,  by  the  fenfible  fruits  and  effeds  of  it. 
Vol.  X.  23  E  I  will 

7. 


4616  The  fruits  of  the  S?  I  RiTy  Sec. 

$  E  R  M.  I  will  conclude  all  with  the  apoftle's  exhortation^ 
,^_^  •_^Phil.  iv.  8.  *'  Finally,  brethren,  whatfoever  things 
"  are  true,  whatfoever  things  are  honeft,  whatfoever 
*'  things  are  juft,  whatfoever  things  are  pure,  what- 
*'  foever  things  are  lovely,  whatfoever  things  are  of 
"  good  report;  if  there  be  any  virtue,  and  if  there 
*'  be  any  praife,  think  on  thefe  things."  Think  of 
them  and  regard  them  as  principal  parts  of  your  duty, 
and  particular  inftances  of  that  un^erfal  goodnefs 
which  chriftianityteacheth  and  requires,  as  the  proper 
and  genuine  effects  of  that  ''  frace  of  Go  d  which 
"  hath  appeared  to  all  men,  and  brings  falvation,'* 
that  is,  of  the  gofpel.  And  if  the  dodlrine  of  the  gof- 
pel  do  not  produce  thefe  bleflTed  fruits  and  effeds  in 
the  hearts  and  lives  of  thofe  who  profefs  the  chriftian 
religion ;  then,  as  the  apoflle  to  the  Hebrews  reafons, 
"  How  fhall  we  efcape  if  we  neglefl:  fo  great  falva- 
"  tion,  which  was  at  firfl  fpoken  by  the  Lo  r  d,  and 
"  afterwards  confirmed  by  them  that  heard  him  ; 
**  God  alfo  bearing  them  witnefs,  both  with  figns, 
"  and  wonders,  and  divers  miracles,  and  gifts  of 
"  the  Holy  Ghost,  according  to  his  own 
'^  will?" 


SERMON 


[  46i7  ] 

SERMON    CCIII. 

The  neceffity  of  fupernatural  grace,  in 
order  to  a  chriftiaii  life. 

J  O  H  N  XV.  5. 

— —  For  without  me  ye  can  do  nothing. 

IN  the  beginning  of  this  chapter,  our  Saviour  SERM. 
compares  his  my  (Ileal  body,  that  is  his  church,  '^^'^^I^- 
to  a  vine,  which  his  F  a  t  h  E  R,  whom  he  com- 
pares to  a  husbandman,  hath  planted.  "  I  am  the  true 
"  vine,,  and  my  Fa  t  h  E  r  is  the  husbandman."  To 
reprefent  to  us  the  union  that  is  betwixt  C  h  r  i  s  t 
and  all  true  chriftians,  and  the  influence  of  grace  and 
fpiricual  life,  which  all  that  arc  united  to  him  do  de- 
rive and  receive  from  him,  he  fets  it  forth  to  us  by 
the  refemblance  of  a  vine  and  branches.  As  there  is  a 
natural  vital  union  between  the  vine  and  the  branches, 
fo  there  is  a  fpi ritual  vital  union  between  Christ 
and  true  chriftians ;  and  this  union  is  the  caufe  of  our 
fruitfulnefs  in  the  works  of  obedience  and  a  good  life. 
There  are  fome  indeed  that  feem  to  be  grafted  into 
Christ  by  an  outward  profelTion  of  chriftianity, 
who  yet  derive  no  influence  from  him,  fo  as  to  bring 
forth  fruit,  becaufe  they  are  not  vitally  united  to  him ; 
thefe  the  husbandman  will  lop  off,  and  take  away  as 
unprofitable  and  dead  branches,  ver.  2.  "  Every 
''  branch  in  me  that  beareth  not  fruit,  he  taketh  awayj" 
that  is,  they  who  only  make  an  outward  profefllon  of 
faith  in  Christ,  but  do  not  bring  forth  the  fruits  of 
obedience  and  a  good  life,  fhall  finally  be  fcparated 
2.3  E  i  from 


CCIII. 


46 1 8  ^he  necejjiiy  of  fupernatiiral  grace^ 

SERM.  from  him:  *'  and  every  branch  that  beareth  fruit  he 
"  purgeth  it,  that  it  n>jy  bring  forth  more  fruit.** 
And  becaufe  all  our  fruitfulnefs  depends  upon  our  union 
with  C  H  R  I  s  T,  as  the  fruitfulnefs  of  the  branches  de- 
pends upon  their  union  with  the  vine,  therefore  he  bids 
us  be  careful,  that  this  union  be  prefcrved  and  conti- 
nued, vcr.  4.  "  Abide  in  me,  and  I  in  you."  We  are 
planted  into  Christ  by  faith,  and  the  belief  of  his 
dodtrine;  and  we  abide  in  him  by  a  firm  purpofe  and 
refolution  of  obedience.  So  they  are  faid  to  abide  and 
continue  in  Chris  t's  word,  who  obey  and  pradlifc 
his  doftrine,  John  viii.  3  r .  "  Then  faid  Jesus  to 
*'  thofe  Jews  which  believed  on  him,  if  ye  continue  in 
^'  my  word,  then  are  ye  my  difciples  indeed."  So 
St.  James  explains  it,  Jam.  i.  25.  ''  But  whofo  looketh 
<<  into  the  perfe6b  Jaw  of  liberty,"  that  is,  the  chri- 
ftian  doctrine,  "  and  continueth  therein  j "  how  is  that  .^ 
*'  he  being  not  a  forgetful  hearer,  but  a  doer  of  the 
"  work,  this  man  fhall  be  bleflfed  in  his  deed.'*  And 
I  John  iii.  6.  "  Whofoever  abideth  in  him,  finneth  not. 
"  Abide  in  me,  and  I  in  you."  C  h  r  i  s  t  is  faid 
to  abide  ia  us,  by  the  continual  aids  and  influences  of 
his  grace  and  Holy  Spirit  ;  and  if  we  abide  in  him, 
by  the  refolution  of  obedience,  his  grace  and  afliftance 
will  be  continually  derived  to  us,  to  bring  this  good 
refolution  to  effedl,  and  to  enable  us  to  bring  forth 
fruit.  "  For  as  the  branch  cannot  bear  fruit  of  itfelf, 
*'  except  it  abide  in  the  vine,  no  more  can  ye,  except 
*'  ye  abide  in  me.  I  am  the  vine,  ye  arc  the  branches; 
*'  he  that  abideth  in  me,  and  I  in  him,  the  fame 
**  bringeth  forth  much  fruit :  for  without  me,  ye  can 
*'  do  nothing,  x-^^^  ^'-^^j  ^^^  ^^  me,"  being  fepa- 
rated  from  me,  "  ye  can  do  nothing." 

There  are  two  things  to  be  explained  in  the  words, 

an4 


in  order  to  a  chrijlian  life,  4619 

and  then  I  fhall  come  to  the  afTertion  or  propofitlon  ^^^' 
contained  in  them.  \^ 

Firft,  what  is  here  meant  by  being  "  without 
«'  Christ,  or  out  of  him." 

Secondly,  in  what  fenfc,  and  with  what  limitations 
we  are  to  underftand  that  expreffion,  "  we  can  do 
*«  nothing." 

Firft,  what   i»  here   meant   by   being  ''  without 
«'  Christ,  or   out  of  him."    "  Out   of  me  ye 
*'  cm   do  nothing-,"  that  is,  unlefs  we  be  united  to 
him,  and  by  virtue  of  that  union  derive  from  him 
the  fupernatural  aids  and  influences  of  his  grace,  "  we 
*'  can  do  nothing."    'Tis  true  indeed,  that  without 
God  we  can  do  nothing;    we  cannot  think,  or 
fpeak,  or  do   any  natural  adlion,  without  the  com- 
mon alTiftance  and  concurrence  of  his  providence  ; 
for   "  in  him  we  live,   and  move,  and  have  our 
"  beino-.*'    Bat  this  affiftance  is   natural  and    ordi- 
nary, and  commonly  afforded  to  every  man  in  the 
world :  but  the  grace  and  affiftance  of  C  h  r  i  s  t  fig- 
nifies  fomething  extraordinary  and  fupernatural,  that 
which  divines  mean  by  fupernatural  grace,  in  oppo- 
fition  to  the  ordinary  concurrence  of  divine  provi- 
dence to  all  the  a6lions  of  men. 

Secondly,  in  what  fenfe,  and  with  what  limitations 
we  are  to  underftand  that  expreflion, ''  we  can  dono- 
«  thincy :  without  me  ye  can  do  nothing."  And  this 
is  neceflary  to  be  limited  to  fuch  effedls  as  our  S  a  v  i- 
o  u  R  was  fpeaking  of,  viz.  the  proper  adls  of  a  chri- 
ilian  life,  obedience  to  the  laws  and  precepts  of  the 
o-ofpel,  which  our  S  a  v  i  o  u  r  here,  in  purfuance  of 
the  allegory,  calls  ^'  bearing  fruit,  and  bringing  forth 
«  much  fruit."  For  if  it  be  not  thus  limited,  but  extend- 
ed to  all  kinds  of  anions,  natural  or  civil,  it  is  not  true 

that 


4620  7ke  7iece/Jtty  t)f  fupernatural  gracCy 

3  E  R  M.  that  we  cannot  do  thefe  witliout  fupernatural  affiflance* 
and  the  grace  of  Ch  r  i  st.  For  thefe  we  may  do  by 
the  common  and  natural  afTiftance  and  concurrence  of 
Go  Dj  equally  afFordcd  to  men  \  nay,  more  than  this, 
we  may  by  this  common  afliftance  do  thofe  adions, 
which  tend  to  make  us  fpiritually  good,  and  are  the 
means  appointed  by  G  o  d  for  that  purpofe.  We  may 
go  to  church,  we  may  read  and  hear  G  od's  word, 
and  upon  the  hearing  of  it  may  relied:  upon  theadions 
of  our  lives,  and  may  be  convinced  of  our  fin  and 
danger,  and  upon  this  convidion,  may  beg  God's 
mercy  and  grace  to  reform  and  grow  better.  But 
then  we  cannot  effed  this  without  fupernatural  grace 
and  afTiftance.  So  that  this  afiertion  here  in  the  i^yii^ 
is  to  be  limited  to  the  purpofes  of  regeneration,  and 
fandification,  and  perfevcrance  in  holi:  Is  ^  that  a  man 
cannot  make  himfelf  good,, he  cannoc  cOxivert  and 
change  himfelf,  nor  by  his  own  (trength  continue  and 
hold  out  in  a  good  courfe ,  we  can  do  nothing  of  this, 
without  the  grace  and  affiftance  of  C  h  r  i  s  t. 

So  that  the  plain  defign  of  this  propofition  here  in 
the  text,  is  toaflert  thenecelTity  of  fupernatural  grace, 
to  make  men  good,  and  to  make  them  perfcvere  in  a 
courfe  of  holinefs  and  obedience.  In  fpeaking  to  this 
argument,  I  Ihall, 

Firft,  Ihew  what  it  is  we  mean  by  the  fupernatural 
grace  and  aiTiftance  of  Christ. 

Secondly,  that  to  this  thefcripture  doth  conftandy 
attribute  our  regeneration,  and  fandification,  and  per- 
feverance  in  holinefs. 

Thirdly,  that  there  is  great  reafon  to  aflert  the  ne- 
ceflity  of  Go  d's  fupernatural  grace  and  afliftance  to 
thefe  purpofes. 

Fourthly,  that  this  fupernatural  grace  and  afliflance 

does 


in  order  to  a  chrijlian  life.  4621 

does  not  exclude,   but  fuppofe   the  concurrence  of  SERM. 
our  own  endeavours.  .  Jl  1 

Fifthly,  that  this  grace  and  afTiftance  is  derived  to 
us  from  our  union  with  Christ. 

Firft,  what  we  mean  by  the  fupernacural  grace  and 
aiTiftance  of  C  h  R  i  s  t.  Whatever  natural  power  we 
have  to  do  any  thing,  is  from  God,  and  an  efred  of 
hisgoodnefs;  but  God  confidering  the  lapfed  and 
decayed  condition  of  mankind,  fent  his  Son  into  the 
world,  to  recover  us  out  of  that  finfui  and  miferable 
condition  into  which  we  are  fallen,  to  reveal  eternal 
life  to  us,  and  the  way  to  it,  and  to  purchafe  happinefs 
for  us,  and  to  offer  it  to  us  upon  certain  terms  and 
conditions  to  be  performed  by  us :  but  we  being  weak 
and  without  ftrength,  (laves  to  fin,  and  under  the  power 
of  evil  habits,  and  unable  to  free  ourfelves  from  this 
bondage  by  any  natural  power  left  in  us,  our  bleffed 
Sav  I  o  u  r,  in  great  pity  and  tendernefs  to  mankind, 
hath  in  his  gofpel  offered,  and  is  ready  to  afford  to  us 
an  extraordinary  affiftance  of  his  grace  and  Ho  ly 
Spirit,  to  fupply  the  defeats  of  our  natural  power 
and  ftrength.  And  this  fupernatural  grace  of  Christ 
is  that  alone,  which  can  enable  us  to  perform  what  he 
requires  of  us.     And  this,  according  to  the  feveral 
ufes  and  occafions  of  it,  is  by  divines  called  by  feveral 
names.     As  it  puts  good  morions  into  us,  and  excites 
and  ftirs  us  up  to  that  which  is  good,  'tis  called  pre- 
venting grace ;  becaufe  it  prevents  any  motion  or  de- 
fire  on  our  parts :  as  it  affifts  and  ftrengthens  us  in 
the  doing  of  any  thing  that  is  good,  it  is  called  af- 
fifting  grace :  as  it  keeps  us  conftant  in  a  good  courfe, 
it  is  called  perfevering  grace  :  and  may  have  feveral 
other  denominations,  in  feveral  other  refpedls :  for  it 
is  fuited  to  all  our  occafions  and  neceffities. 

1  Secondly^ 


4  6  ^.  2  The  necejjify  of  fupernatural  grace\ 

SERM.     Secondly,  to  this   grace  and  afUftance  of  God, 

^^-^  '^  die  fcriptare  doth  conftantly  attribute  our  regeneration, 
and  fanctitication,  and  perfeverance  in  holincfs.  We 
are  faid  to  be  "  born  again  of  the  S  p  i  R  i  t,"  to  be 
*'  fan6tified  by  the  renewing  of  the  H  o  l  y  G  h  o  s  t," 
to  be  "  led  by  the  Spirit  of  Go  d,  and  through  the 
*'  Spirit  to  mortify  the  deeds  of  the  flefh  ;  to  do 
''  all  things  through  Christ  ftrengthening  us, 
"  and  to  be  kept  by  the  power  of  God  through 
*'  faith  unto  falvation/*  All  which,  and  many  more 
texts  that  I  might  inftance  in,  do  plainly  exprefs  to 
us  the  fupernatural  afilftance  of  Christ,  whereby 
we  become  good,  and  are  enabled  to  do  any  thing 
that  is  good,  and  preferved  and  continued  in  a  good 
Gourfe.  As  the  fcripture  doth  every  where  attribute 
fin  to  our  own  corrupt  hearts,  and  to  the  temptation 
and  inftigation  of  the  devil ;  fo  docs  it  conftandy 
afcribe  all  the  good  that  we  do  to  the  grace  of 
Christ,  or,  which  is  all  one,  to  the  bleflfed  mo- 
tions and  affiftances  of  God's  Holy  Spirit. 
For  "  the  S  p  I  r  I T  of  G  o  D  is  called  the  S  p  i  r  i  t 
"  of  C  H  R  I  s  T,  yea  C  H  r  I  s  t,"  Rom.  viii.  9,  10. 
*'  But  ye  are  not  in  the  flefh,  but  in  the  S  p  i  r  i  t,  if 
*'•  fo  be  that  the  Sp  i  r  i  t  of  Go d  dwell  in  you. 
"  Now  if  any  man  have  not  the  Spirit  of 
*'  Christ,  he  is  none  of  his.  And  if  C  h  r  i  s  t 
**  be  in  you,  the  body  is  dead  becaufe  of  fin."  By 
which  it  is  evident,  that  "  the  Spirit  of  God, 
*'  and  the  S  p  I  R  I  T  of  C  H  R  I  s  T,  and  Chris  t," 
do  in  this  text  fignify  one  and  the  fame  thing. 

Thirdly,  there  is  great  reafon  to  aflert  thenecefTi-' 
ty  of  this  grace  and  afliftance  to  thefe  purpofes,  whe- 
ther we  confider  the  corruption  and  impotency  of  hu- 
mane nature,  the  ftrange  ppwer  of  evil  habits  and 

cuftomSj 


in  order  to  a  chrijlian  life,  4623 

Cuftoms,  the  ficklenefs  and  inconftancy  of  humane  S  ERM. 
refolution,  or  tiie  malice  and  activity  of  the  devil  to  ^  ^^^^fl 
feduce  and  tempt  us  to  fin. 

I.  If  we  confider  the  corruption  and  impotency  of 
humane  nature.  This  the  Jight  of  nature  cannot  out 
acknowledge.  The  philofophers  and  wife  men  among 
the  heathens,  were  fenfible  of  a  great  depravation  in 
our  fouls,  and  degeneracy  from  the  divine  life  ;  and 
therefore  they  prefcribed  feveral  ways  and  methods 
for  the  purifying  of  our  fouls,  and  theraifing  of  thein 
to  that  purity  and  perfedion,  to  which  they  fuppofed 
they  were  defigned  :  but  they  were  wholly  ignorant 
from  whence  this  depravation  camej  and  therefore 
many  of  them  fuppofed  a  pre-exiilence  of  fouls;  tliat 
is,  that  our  fouls,  which  now  inhabit  thefe  bodies, 
had  lived  in  a  former  ftate,  and  for  fome  faults  they 
had  committed  in  that  flate,  were  by  the  juftice  of 
God  fentenced  to  be  imprifoned  in  thefe  bodies,  as 
a  punilhment  for  their  former  fins.  They  could  not 
imagine  that  our  fouls  came  impure  out  of  God's 
hands ;  and  to  avoid  that  inconvenience,  they  ima- 
gined a  former  flate  wherein  they  had  finned.  And 
this  was  the  beft  account  they  could  give  of  the  ge- 
neral depravation  of  mankind. 

But  the  fcripture  hath  given  us  a  more  certain  ac- 
count of  this  ;  that  "  by  one  man  fin  entered  into 
"  the  world,  and  death  by  fin."  This  is  the  true 
fource  and  original  of  the  univcrfal  degeneracy  of 
mankind,  and  of  rhc  weaknefs  and  impotency  of 
humane  nature.  The  fall  of  our  firil  parents  hath 
•derived  corruption  and  weaknefs  upon  the  whole  race 
and  pofterity  of  Adam  \  for  "  whatfoever  is  born  of 
"  the  flelh,  is  flefh." 

So  that  confidering  our  natural  impotency,  there  is 

Vol.  X.  23  F  great 

7- 


'4624  ^he  necejfity  of  fupernatural  grace^ 

S  K  L  M  great  need  of  a  fupernatural  and  extraordinary  pov/er 

^^^'  ,and  afTiftancej  to  recover  us  from  this  degeneracy,  and 
'^  to  renew  U3  after  the  image  of  him  who  created  us, 
*'  in  righteoufaefs  and  true  holinefs."  And  therefore 
when  the  fcripture  fpeaks  of  the  redemption  of 
C  H  R  1  s  T,  it  reprefents  our  condition,  not  only  as  mi- 
ferable,  but  helplefs;  Rom.  v.  6,  '^  For  v/hen  we  were 
"  yet  without  ftrength,  in  due  time  Christ  died 
*'  for  the  ungodly."  When  mankind  was  under  an 
utter  impotency  of  recovering  itfelf  out  of  that  ftate 
of  fin  and  mifery  into  which  it  v/as  plunged,  *'  in  the 
"  fulnefs  of  time,"  that  is,  when  God  thought  it 
mod  convenient,  "  he  fent  his  Son  into  the  world, 
*'  to  die  for  finners ;"  and  "  by  that  Spirit  which 
*'  raifed  him  from  the  dead,'*  to  enable  us  to  mordfy 
our  lufls,  and  "  to  rife  to  newncfs  of  life." 

2.  The  neceflity  of  this  grace  and  afTiftance  will  far- 
ther appear,  if  wc  confider  the  ft  range  power  of  evil 
habits  and  cuftoms.  The  other  is  a  natural,  and  this 
a  contra6ted  impotency,  whereby  men  make  thcm- 
fclves  much  weaker  than  they  were  by  nature.  The 
habits  of  fin  being  added  to  our  natural  impotency,  are 
like  fo  many  difeafes  fuperinduced  upon  a  conftitution 
naturally  weak,  which  do  all  help  to  increafe  the  man's 
infirmity.  Evil  habits  in  fcripture  are  compared  to 
bonds  and  fetters,  which  do  as  cfFedlually  hinder  a  man 
from  motion,  and  putting  forth  himfelf  to  aflion,  as  if 
he  were  quite  lame,  hand  and  foot.  Habit  and  cuflom 
is  a  kind  of  fecond  nature;  and  fo  far  as  any  thing  is 
natural,  fo  far  it  is  necelTary,  and  we  cannot  do  other- 
wife.  By  pafling  from  one  degree  of  fin  to  another, 
men  become  fix'd  and  harden'd  in  their  wickednefs, 
and  do  infenfibly  bring  themfelves  into  that  ftate,  out 
of  which  they  are  utterly  unable  to  recover  themfelves. 

When 


in  order  to  a  chrijlian  life,  4625 

When  men  have  been  long  accuftomed  to  evil,  and  S  E  R  M- 
are  once  grown  old  in  vice,  it  is  as  hard  to  reform  and 
rectify  them,  as  to  recover  a  body  bowed  down  with 
age,  to  its  firft  flraightncfs.  When  men  have  continued 
long  in  a  finful  courfe,  they  arc  almoft  under  a  fatal 
nccelTity  of  being  wicked,  and  under  all  imaginable 
difadvantages  of  contributing  any  thing  to  their  own 
recovery.  The  fcripture  reprefcnts  the  condition  of 
fuch  perfons  to  us,  by  fuch  things  as  are  naturally  im- 
polTible.  '^  Can  the  Ethiopian  change  his  skin,  or  the 
''  leopard  his  ipots  ?  then  may  ye  aifo  do  good,  that 
*'  are  accuftomed  to  do  eviL"  Now  this  confideration 
added  to  the  former,  to  the  impotency  of  nature,  the 
ftrength  of  evil  habits,  is  ftill  a  farther  evidence  of  the 
neceflity  of  fupernatural  grace  and  afllftance  for  our 
recovery.  For  the  greater  our  impotency  is,  fo  much 
more  need  is  there  of  an  extraordinary  power  and  aC- 
fiftance,  to  enable  us  to  do  our  duty. 

3,  This  will  yet  farther  appear,  if  we  confider  the 
inconftancy  and  ficklenefs  of  humane  refolution.  Sup- 
pofe  that  upon  hearing  the  terrible  threatnings  of 
God's  word  againft  fin,  or  upon  the  natural  checks 
and  convidions  of  confcience  for  having  done  wicked- 
ly, a  finner  ihould  of  himfelf  (as  there  is  reafon  enough 
for  it)  entertain  a  purpofe  and  refolution  of  breaking 
off  his  finful  courfe  j  yet  how  unable  would  this  refo- 
lution be  to  withftand  the  powerful  aflaults  of  temp- 
tation, and  the  violent  returns  of  his  own  inclinations 
to  his  former  lufts?  this  almoft  every  man  finds  by 
his  own  frequent  and  fad  experience,  how  inconftant 
his  mind  is  to  his  own  purpofes,  and  how  unfaithful 
and  treacherous  to  his  moft  folemn  and  fevere  refolu- 
tions  \  how  falfe  we  are  to  ourfelves,  and  to  rhe 
vov/s  and  promifes  we  have  made  to  Gor>,  and  our 

23  F  2  own 


4626  7he  mceffity  of  fiipernatural  grace ^ 

S  E  R  M.  own  fouls,  when  the  occafions  and  temptations  oF  fm 
prefent  thcmfelves  to  us.  So  that  our  need  of  G  o  d's 
grace  is  in  no  cafe  more  plain  and  evident,  than  to 
keep  us  fiedfafl:  to  our  refolution  of  forlaking  our  fins, 
and  amending  our  Jives  \  and  without  this,  we  find  how 
uncertain  and  ineffc(ftual  all  our  good  purpofes  are, 
*'  like  the  morning  cloud,  and  as  the  early  dew  which 
"  paffeth  away.'-  So  that  we  muft  fay  with  die  pro- 
phet Jeremy,  chap.  x.  23.  ^'  O  Lor  d,  I  know  that 
"  the  way  of  man  is  not  in  himfelf ;  it  is  not  in  man 
"  that  walketh,  to  diredl  hisfteps.** 

4.  Befides  all  thefe  difadvantages  from  ourfelves, 
from  the  mipotency  of  our  natures,  and  the  ftrength 
ot  oar  lufts,  and  the  inconftancy  of  our  refolutions, 
we  have  likewife  a  powerful  enemy  without,  the  devil, 
who  is  very  malicious  and  a<5tive  to  promote  our  ruin, 
by  keeping  us  in  this  flavery.  He  is  the  great  enemy 
of  our  fouls,  and  his  malice  will  not  fuffer  him  to  neg- 
led:  any  opportunity  of  doing  us  mifchief.     He  ob- 
ferves  and  watcheth  our  tempers  and  difpofitions,  and 
accordingly  plants  his  temptations  and  plays  them  upon 
uSjwhere  we  are  weakcil,  and  they  may  do  the  greateft 
execution.     So  that  we  are  not  only  weak  within,  but 
flrongly  affaulted  without;  "  we  wreftlenot  only  widi 
*  •  flefh  and  blood  ;  but  with  principalities,  and  powers, 
^'  and  fpiritualwickedneffes."  All  the  powers  of  dark- 
nefs  are  Combined  againfl:  us,  to  work  our  deftrudlion  \ 
and  therefore  we  have  need  of  an  extraordinary  ftrength 
and  afllftance  to  enable  us  to  contend  with  fuch  power- 
ful advcriaries,  upon  fo  many  difadvantages.   And  our 
comfort  is,  that  God  offers  his  grace  to  us,  and  "  that 
'*  is  fufRcient  for  us.  Greater  is  he  that  is  in  us,  than 
'''  he  that  is  in  the  world."  TheS  p  i  r  i  t  that  dwells 
in  good  men,  and  is  ready  to  affift  them  to  all  good 

purpofesc. 


in  order  to  a  chrijlian  life.  4627 

purpofes,  is  ftronger  than  that  evil  fpirit  which  is  in  ^^^^R  M. 
the  world,  and  "  goes  about  like  a  roaring  lion,  feek- 
■^'  ing  whom  he  may  devour." 

Fourthly,  this  fupernatural  grace  and  affiftance 
does  not  exclude,  but  fuppofe  the  concurrence  of  our 
endeavours.  The  grace  of  G  o  d  does  not  do  all, 
without  any  concurrence  on  our  part.  It  ftrengthens 
and  afTifts  us ;  but  does  not  produce  the  whole  efFed, 
without  any  a6livity  or  endeavour  of  ours.  When 
our  Saviour  fays,  "  without  me  ye  can  do  nothing,'* 
he  does  imply,  that  by  the  afllftance  of  grace, 
we  may  perform  all  the  duties  of  the  chriftian  life, 
we  may  "  bear  fruit,  and  bring  forth  much  fruit." 
And  to  keep  to  the  metaphor  in  the  text,  the  branches 
of  a  vine  are  not  merely  palTive,  but  contribute  their 
part  to  the  produ6tion  of  fruit,  though  they  derive 
continual  fupplies  of  fap  and  virtue  from  the  vine. 
When  the  apoltle  fays,  "  I  can  do  all  things  through 
^'  Christ  ftrengthenir^  me,'^  he  does  not  think 
it  a  difparagement  to  the  grace  of  C  h  r  i  s  t,  to  fay 
''  he  could  do  all  things"  by  the  alTiftance  of  it.  He 
acknowledgeth  his  own  impotency  and  weakneis,  and 
glories  in  the  ftrength  and  affiftance  of  Christ. 
But  an  acknowledgment  of  impotency  does  not  ex- 
clude endeavour  j  for  impotency  does  not  fignify  an 
utter  want  of  power,  but  the  weaknefs  and  infufficien- 
cy  of  it,  that  it  is  difproportioned  to  the  work  and 
duty  required.  So  that  though  "  we  are  not  fufficient 
"  of  ourfelves'*  for  any  thing  that  is  good  ;  yet  being 
affifted  by  God,  we  may  co-operate  with  him  to 
the  killing  of  fin,  to ''  the  cleanfing  of  ourfelves  from 
*'  all  filthinefs  of  flelhj  and  fpirit,  and  to  the  perfedl- 
^'  ing  of  holinefs  in  the  fear  of  God."  As  the  apo- 
illes  were  ^^  workers  together  with  G  0  d,-*  in  the 


CCIJI. 


4  5  2  S  7he  necejjlty  of  fuper natural  grace, 

SERM.  falvation  of  others,  2  Cor.  vi.  ii.  "  We  then,  a 
"  workers  together  with  GoD,befeech  you,  that  yc 
"  receive  not  the  grace  of  G  o  d  in  vain  ;"  I  fay,  as 
they  were  ^'workers  together  with  God,'*  in  the  fal- 
vation  of  others,  fo  may  we  be  faid  to  be,  '^  in  work- 
*'  ino-  out  our  own  falvation  ;'*  nay,  we  arc  command- 
ed to  be  fo,  Philip,  ii.  i2,  tj.  ''  Work  out  your  own 
*••  falvation  with  fear  and  trembling:  for  it  is  God 
"  that  worketh  in  you  both  to  will  and  to  do.*'  So 
that  G  o  d's  preventing  and  aflifting  grace,  his  "  work- 
*'  ing  in  us  both  to  will  and  to  do,"  is  fo  far  from 
excluding  our  endeavours,  that  it  is  ufed  by  theapoftlc 
as  a  ftrong  reafon  and  argument  to  the  contrary, 
"  w^ork  out  your  own  falvation  :  for  it  is  God  that 
^'  worketh  in  you  both  to  will  and  to  do,  of  his 
"  own  good  pleafure."  And  if  this  were  not  fo,  all 
the  exhortations  of  fcripture  were  to  no  purpofe,  "  our 
*'  preaching  were  vain,"  and  your  hearing  vain  :  for 
nothing  can  be  vainer,  than  to  perfuadc  men  to  do 
their  duty,  if  this  be  true  that  God  does  all,  and 
we  do  nothing. 

Fifthly  and  laftly,  this  grace  and  affiftance  is  derived 
to  us  from  our  union  with  Christ.  So  foon  as  we 
believe  in  him,  and  heartily  embrace  his  dodlrine,  wc 
are  united  to  him  \  and  if  we  continue  in  this  faith, 
"  we  abide  in  him,  and  he  in  usj"  and  by  virtue  of 
this  union,  the  influences  of  his  grace,  the  aids  and 
afTiftances  of  his  S  p  i  r  i  t  are  derived  to  us,  to  all 
the  purpofes  of  holinels  and  obedience,  to  enable  us 
*'  to  do  the  will  of  God,"  and  "  patiently  con- 
"  tinue  in  well-doing,"  and  "  to  prefcrve  us  to  his 
«'  heavenly  kingdom." 

There  is  no  other  myftery  in  this  union,  than  that 
which  I  have  plainly  told  you,  that  it  is  efFeilcd  by 

cur 


in  order  to  a  chrtjlian  life.  4629 

cur  becoming  the  difciples  of  Christ,  and  fin-  S  E  R  M- 
cerely  embracing  his  doctrine  •,  that  it  is  continued  by  ^^^^  ' 
our  bringing  forth  the  fruits  of  holinefs  and  obedience. 
By  this  we  become  "  branches  of  that  true  vine ;"  and 
being  fo,  derive  fap  and  virtue  from  him,  the  vita! 
influences  of  his  grace  and  Ho  ly  Sp  i  r  i t,  to  afTifl: 
us  in  our  duty,  and  to  make  us  to  be  ",  fruitful  in 
*'  every  good  work,"  and  "  to  abound  in  all  the  fruits 
*'  of  righteoufncfs,  which  arebyjEsusCHRisT 
"  to  the  praife  and  the  glory  of  Go  d."- 

But  v/hen  I  fay  this  grace  and  affiftance  is  derived 
to  us  from  our  union,  I  do  not  intend  to  exclude  the 
neceflity  of  G  o  d's  grace  and  HolySpirit  to 
the  converfion  of  a  finQcr,  and  his  firft  planting  into 
Christ:  but  v/hen  v/e  fay  that  chriftians  derive  the 
influences  of  grace  and  alTiftance  from  their  union  with 
Christ,  this  fuppofeth  them  to  be  chriftians  al- 
ready, and  planted  into  Christ,  and  that  this  like- 
wife  is  the  work  of  G  o  d's  grace.  For  if  we  cannot 
bring  forth  fruit,  without  the  aid  and  affiftance  of  his 
grace,  much  lels  without  that  could  we  be  planted 
into  him,  and  united  with  him. 

I  fhall  conclude  my  difcourfeupon  this  fubjed,  with 
three  or  four  inferences  from  v/hat  hath  been  delivered  . 

I.  If  the  grace  of  G  o  d  be  fo  necefiary  to  all  the  ends 
of  holinefs  and  obedience,  and  to  our  perfeverance  in 
a  good  courfe,  then  there  is  great  reafonwhy  welhould 
continually  depend  upon  God,  and  every  day  earneft- 
ly  pray  to  him  for  the  aids  and  afiiftances  of  his  grace, 
and  the  influence  of  his  H  o  l  y  S  p  i  r  i  t,  to  guide^ 
and  dire6V^  and  ftrengthen  us  in  all  goodnefs,  and  *'  to 
"  keep  us  by  his  mighty  power  through  faith  unto 
'*  falvation."  For  though  God  have  promifed  his 
alTiftancc  to  us,  and  is  always  ready  to  afford  it  j  yet 

we 


4630  "The  ma£ity  of  fupeniatural  grace, 

S  E  R  M.  we  are  to  remember,  that  it  is  a  free  diTpenfation  of 
^^^^^[.  his  grace  and  goodnefs,  "  he  works  in  us  both  to 
"  Will  and  to  do,  of  his  own  good  pleafure."  And 
the  promife  of  this  grace  is  not  fo  abfolute,  but  that 
he  expects  we  (hould  earneftly  fue  and  beg  to  him  for 
it.  He  hath  not  promifed  his  "  H  o  ly  S  p  i  r  i  t," 
but  ''  to  them  that  ask  him,"  and  that  with  great 
earneftnefs  and  importunity  \  we  muft  "  ask,  and 
*'  feek,  and  knock."  Even  where  he  promifeth 
''  to  give  us  a  new  heart  and  a  new  S  p  i  r  i  t  ;"  yet 
he  fays,  that  "  for  all  thefe  things  he  will  be  fought  to 
*'  by  the  houfe  of  Ifrael."  And  though  fometimes 
*'  he  be  found  of  them  that  feek  him  not,"  and  do 
frequently  prevent  us  with  his  grace,  and  the  mo- 
tions of  his  bleffed  Spirit;  yet  we  have  no  rea< 
fon  to  expect  it  without  our  feeking  of  it. 

II.  We  fhould  thankfully  acknowledge  and  af- 
cribe  all  the  good  that  is  in  us,  and  all  that  we  do, 
to  the  grace  and  aflitlance  of  God,  exciting  and 
Itrengthening  us  to  every  good  work,  without  which 
"  we  can  do  nothing  ; "  and  fay,  with  David,  "  not 
*'  unto  us,  not  unto  us,  O  Lord;  but  to  thy 
"  name  be  the  praife."  And  with  ^t.  Paul,  *'  yet 
*'  not  I  -,  but  the  grace  of  Goo  which  was  with 
*'  me.*'  As  the  children  of  Ifrael  were  brought  out 
of  Egypt,  and  condudted  to  the  polTefTion  of  the 
good  land  (which  is  a  type  of  heaven)  by  the  pre- 
fence  and  power  of  G  o  d  going  along  with  them, 
*'  not  by  their  own  fword  and  bow,  but  by  a  mighty 
*'  hand,  and  an  cutftretched  arm :  "  fo  if  ever 
we  be  refcued  from  the  bondage  of  fin,  and  quick- 
ned  to  newnefs  of  life,  if  ever  we  be  faved,  and  come 
to  heaven,  we  muft  be  alTifted  and  conduced,  and 
♦'  kept  by  the  mighty  power  of  God;  "  for  *'  by 

*'  gracG 


in  order  to  a  chrifiian  life.  463 1 

*^  grace  we  are  faved,  and  that  not  of  our  felves,  for  SE  R  M. 
^'  icis  the  gift  of  God.'*  CCIII. 

III.  Let  us  take  heed  that  we  '^  refill  not  the 
*'  Spirit  of  God,  and  receive  not  this  grace 
''  of  God  in  vain."  And  this  we  do,  whenever 
we  refift  the  motions  of  Go  d's  bleiTcd  Spirit, 
and  do  not  make  ufe  of  that  grace  and  alTjitance 
which  God  offers  to  us,  by  being  ^'  workers  toge- 
"  ther  with  God,"  and  co-operating  with  his 
grace  by  our  own  fincere  endeavours.  G o d's  Spi- 
rit doth  frequently  put  good  motions  into  us,  and 
is  ready  to  further  them,  I'i  we  comply  with  them, 
and  to  enable  us  to  bring  them  to  effed :  but  men 
may,  and  many  times  do,  "  refift  the  Holy 
^'  Ghost",  and  quench  the  motions  of  that  blef. 
fed  S  p  I  R  I  T  of  grace  ;  and  then  G  o  d  juftly  leaves 
us,  and  withdraws  his  afliflancc,  and  takes  away  his 
Holy  Spirit  from  us.  But  if  we  comply  with 
them,  his  grace  and  help  is  ready  to  carry  us  ftill 
farther,  and  to  alTiil  us  more  and  more,  that  we  may 
"  go  from  firength  to  llrength,  till  we  come  to 
^^  appear  before  him  in  Sion." 

IV.  The  confideration  of  our  own  impotency,  is 
no  excufe  to  our  floth  and  negligence,  if  fo  be  the 
grace  of  Go  d  be  ready  to  alTift  us.  For  if  that  be 
offer'd  to  us,  and  always  at  hand  to  help  us,  where 
men  have  not  provoked  G  o  d  to  withdraw  it  ^  then 
it  is  our  own  fault,  if  we  do  not  do  our  duty,  and  if 
we  fall  fhort  of  eternal  happinefs.  For  we  are  really 
able  to  do  all  that  which  Go  d's  grace  and  afliflance 
is  ready  to  enable  us  to  do.  St.  Paul  reckons  upon 
the  firength  of  C  h  r  i  s  t  as  in  fome  fenfe  his  power. 
*^  I  am  able  to  do  all  things  through  Christ 
*'  ftrengthening  me." 

Vol.  X.  23  G  V.  and 

7- 


4632  Of  the  form ^  and 

V.  and  laftly,  the  confideration  of  our  own  imp{> 
tency  is  nojufb  ground  of  difcouragement  to  our  en- 
deavours, confidering  the  promife  of  divine  grace 
and  afliftance.  Now  that  God  is  enter'd  into  a 
new  covenant  of  grace  with  us,  and  offers  us  eternal 
life  upon  the  conditions  of  faith  and  repentance  and 
fincere  obedience,  the  greater  our  weaknefs  is,  the 
more  reafon  we  have  to  expert  his  grace  and  afTiftance  i 
becaufe  we  know  that  he  deals  fincerely  with  us,  and 
intends  to  bring  us  to  that  happinefs  which  he  offers 
to  us  •,  and  therefore  we  are  aflured  that  he  does  not 
command  us  impofTibilities,  and  feeing  we  are  weak 
and  infufficient  of  our  felves  to  do  what  he  requires 
of  us,  that  he  is  ready  to  afford  us  his  grace  to  ena- 
ble us  to  do  if. 


SERMON  CCIV. 

Of  the  form,  and  the  power  of  godhnefs* 

2  T  I  M.  iii.  5. 
Having  a  form  ofgodlinefs^  hut  denying  the  power  thereof, 

^ccw'  ^   I  "^  ^  ^  apoftle    in   thefe  words   diftinguiflies 

\^^^y^       I        two  things  in  religion,  which  do  not,  but 

iThe  firft       -■-       ought,  always  to  go  together,  viz.  the  fhew 

ithirtcxt°"^"^  P^^^^^^^  ^^  ^^^^S^°"'  and  the  hfe  and  power  of 
it.  He  condemns  neither,  but  blames  the  feparating 
of  them.  The  latter  indeed  cannot  be  without  the 
firft ;  for  where-ever  religion  really  is,  there  will  be 
fome  appearance  of  it :  but  the  former  may  be,  and 

often 


the  power  of  godlinefs.  4^33 

often  Is,  without  the  latter.  Men  may  make  a  grcat^  E  RM. 
fhew  of  religion,  and  yet  be  very  deftitute  of  the  .^^^^^^^O 
power  of  it.  And  fuch  were  thofe  perlbns  the  apoflle 
defcribes  here  in  the  text;  they  wxre  guilty  of  the 
grcatcft  faults  and  vices  m  their  lives,  but  thought 
to  cloke  all  thefe  by  an  outward  fhew  and  appearance 
of  godlinefs.  "  Having  a  form  of  godlinefs,  but 
"  denying  the  power  thereof." 

The  word  ^ucoir^cotrfs-,  which  is  here  tranflated  Ibrm, 
fignifies  the  fhew  or  image  of  a  thing,  which  is  dead 
and  inefFedlual  :  in  oppofition  to  the  reality  and  life, 
which  is  quick  and  powerful.  And,  I  think,  this 
word  is  but  once  more  ufed  in  the  new  teftament,  and 
much  in  the  fame  fenfe,  viz.  for  an  empty  and  in- 
effedlual  knowledge  of  religion  without  the  practice 
of  it.  Rom.  ii.  17,  20,  21.  The  apoftle  there  fpeaks 
of  fome  pharifaical  Jews,  who  gloried  in  their  know- 
ledge of  the  law,  but  violated  it  in  their  pradice, 
"  behold,  thou  art  called  a  Jew,  and  refteft  in  the 
*'  law,  and  haft  the  form  of  knowledge,  and  of  the 
"  truth  in  the  law.  Thou  therefore  that  teacheft  ano- 
*^  ther,  teacheft  thou  not  thy  {^Vi}  thou  thatpreach- 
«'  eft,  a  man  ihould  not  fteal,  doft  thou  ftcal?" 
So  that  ''  a  form  of  godlinefs "  fignifies  an  empty 
Ihew  and  profeiTion  of  religion  without  the  real  ef- 
feds  of  it. 

And  they  who  are  deftitute  of  thefe,  are  faid  "  to 
*'  deny  the  power  of  religion."  It  is  ufual  in  leve* 
ral  languages  to  draw  metaphors  from  words  to  adbi' 
ons ',  and  men  are  faid  to  contradid:  or  deny  any  thing, 
when  they  do  contrary  to  what  they  pretend ;  and  fo 
this  phrafe  iselfewhere  ufed.  Tit.  i.  10.  "  They  pro- 
''  fefs  to  know  God,  but  in  their  works  they  deny 
\^  him."  I  Tim.  v.  8.  "Jf  any  man  provide  not  for 

Z3  G  2  "  hia 


4634  Of  the  form y  and 

S  E  R  M.  «  his  own,  efpecially  for  thofe  of  his  own  houfe,  he 
cciv  ^ 


"  hath  denied  the  faith  "  The  apofble  does  not  mean 


that  fuch  an  one  denies  the  faith  by  exprefs  declara'* 
tion  in  words,  but  by  adtions  fo  contradidtory  to  the 
chriftian  faitti,  as  an  infidel  would  hardly  do.  "  He 
*'  hath  denied  the  faith,  and  is  worfe  than  an  infidel.'* 

In  the  handling  of  thefc  words,  I  ihall  do  thefe 
four  things. 

Firft,  ihevv  wherein  "  a  form  of  godlinefs  "  confifts. 

Secondly,  wherein  the  "  power  of  it  lies  ?  '* 

Thirdly,  give  fome  marks  and  chara6lers  where- 
by we  may  know  when  thefe  are  feparated,  when 
"  the  form  of  godlinefs  "  is  deftitute  of  "  the  power.'^ 

Fourthly,  fhew  that  a  mere  "  form  of  godlinefs  '* 
without  "^  the  power  of  it,'*  is  infignificant  to  all 
the  great  ends  and  purpofes  of  religion. 

Firft,  to  fhew  wherein  '^  a  form  of  godlinefs'* 
doth  confifb.  In  general  it  confifts  in  an  external 
fliew  and  profefTion  of  religion,  or  of  any  eminent 
part  of  it,  or  of  that  which  is  reputed  to  be  fo; 
and  a  form  of  religion  is  more  or  lefs  complete,  ac- 
cording to  the  extent  of  it.  Some  pitch  upon  one 
part  of  religion,  and  fet  themfelves  chiefly  to  make 
a  Ihew  of  that  ;  others  take  in  more  parts  of  it,  and 
endeavour  to  exprefs  and  counterfeit  them  \  fo  that 
the  forms  of  religion  are  various  and  different,  and 
not  to  be  reduced  to  any  fix'd  and  conflant  ftandard  ; 
but  they  commonly  appear  in  fome  one  or  more  of 
thefe  fliapes  : 

I.  An  external  devotion. 

II.  An  orthodox  profeffion  of  the  chriflian  faith. 

III.  Enthufiafm  and  pretence  to  infpiration. 

IV.  A  great  external  fliew  of  mortification. 

V.  An  imperfedl  repentance  and  partial  reforma- 
tion. VI.  The 


the  power  of  godlinefs,  4^35 

VI  o  The  appearance  and  often tation  of  feme  par-  S  E  R  M. 
ticular  grace  and  virtue. 

VII.  A  great  zeal  for  fome  party,  or  opinions,  or 
circumftances  of  religion. 

VIII.  Sillinefs  and  freakiflinefs,  and  either  a  pre- 
tended or  real  ignorance  In  the  common  affairs  and 
concernments  of  humane  life. 

IX.  Much  nolfe  and  talk  about  religion. 
Thefe  are  the  feveral  forms  of  religion  which  men 

are  wont  to  afiume.  Not  that  thefe  do  always  go  fing- 
Jy ;  but  fometimes  men  put  on  one,  fometimes  more 
of  them,  as  may  beft  ferve  their  feveral  turns  and  in- 
tercfts.  Nor  would  I  be  underftood  to  condemn  all 
thefe ;  for  feveral  of  thefe  particulars  which  I  have 
mention'd  are  good  in  themfelves,  and  neceflary  parts 
of  religion;  but  being  deftitute  of  other  things 
wherein  the  life  of  religion  doth  confift,  they  are  but 
^'  a  form  of  godlinefs." 

I.  External  devotion.  This  is  the  moft  common 
form  of  religion,  and  eafieft  to  be  alTum'd,  and  there- 
fore it  is  that  ib  many  take  it  up.  And  this  is  good  in 
itfelf,  and  a  neceflary  part  of  religion :  but  if  there 
be  no  more  than  this,  it  is  a  mere  image  and  pidlure 
of  religion,  abominable  to  God,  and  fulfbm  and 
odious  to  decerning  men. 

Now  this  external  devotion  fhews  itfelf  more  efpe- 
cially  thefe  two  ways. 

1 .  In  a  frequent  and  diligent  ufe  of  the  means  and 
inftruments  of  religion, 

2,  In  a  curious  and  nice  regard  to  the  modes  and 
circumftances  of  performing  thefe. 

I.  In  a  frequent  and  diligent  ufe  of  the  means  and 
inftruments  of  religion,  fuch  as  prayer,  reading,  and 
hearing  the  word  of  G  o  D,  and  receiving  of  the  bleC- 

fed 


4636  Of  the  form,  and 

.ERM.  fed  facrament.  Thefe  are  not  i\\t  Jife  of  religion,  the 
■  great  end  and  defign  of  it,  but  the  means  and  inftru- 
ments  which  God  hath  appointed  for  the  begetting 
and  increafing  of  holinefs  and  virtue  in  us.  Many  ex- 
ercife  thcmfelves  in  thefe  with  great  conftancy  and  de- 
votion, pray  to  God,  and  read  the  bible  frequently, 
go  to  church  duly,  and  hear  G  o  d's  word  attentively, 
and  receive  the  facran^ent  reverently,  and  behave 
themfelves  devoutly  in  all  parts  of  publick  worfhip; 
and  yet  all  this  may  be  but  a  mere  form,  and  certain- 
ly is  no  more,  where  the  great  end  of  all  this  is  neg- 
ledled,  and  men  do  not  fincerely  endeavour  to  do 
what  G  o  d's  word  direds  them  to,  and  what  they 
daily  pray  to  G  o  d  to  enable  them  to  do. 

For  all  thefe  means  are  in  order  to  fome  farther 
efte6t  and  defign.  We  read  and  hear  the  word  of 
GoD,  that  we  may  know  his  will,  and  that  we  may 
do  it;  that  by  the  precepts  and  counfels  of  the  holy 
fcriptures  we  may  learn  and  under ftand  our  duty ;  and 
by  the  motives  and  arguments  which  are  there  ofFer'd 
to  us,  we  may  effeftually  be  perfuaded  to  the  practice 
of  it.  We  pray  to  G  o  d,  not  only  for  the  forgive- 
nefs  of  our  fins,  but  for  his  grace  and  afiidance,  to 
enable  us  to  mortify  and  fubdue  them,  and  to  proceed 
in  all  virtue  and  godlinefs  of  living.  We  receive  the 
facrament,  to  inflame  our  love  to  God  and  our  blef- 
fed  S  A  v  I  o  u  R,  to  excite  in  us  a  greater  hatred  of  fin, 
and  to  confirm  us  in  the  purpofe  and  refolution  of 
well-doing.  Thefe  are  the  great  ends  for  which  God 
hath  appointed  all  thefe  helps  and  means,  and  if  thefe 
ends  be  not  obtain'd,  in  vain  do  we  worfliip  God,  all 
our  religion  is  but  mere  fhew  and  pageantry.  We  are 
but  like  the  people  God  himfelf  defcribes,  Ifa. xxix. 
13,  "  This  people  draw  near  me  with  their  mouth, 

'«  and 


the  power  of  godlinefs.  4637 

"  and  with  their  lips  do  they  honour  me,  but  have  re-  S  E  R  M. 
"  moved  their  heart  far  from  me."  And  like  thofe,,^^^!^^!; 
Ezek.  xxxiii.  30,  31,  32.  who  "  fpake  one  to  ano- 
*'  ther,  every  one  to  his  brother,  faying,  come,  I  pray 
'*  you,  and  hear  what  is  the  word  that  cometh  forth 
"  from  the  Lo  R  D.  And  they  come  unto  thee  as  the 
"  people  cometh,  and  they  fit  before  thee  as  my  peo- 
"  pie,  and  they  hear  thy  words,  but  they  will  not  do 
''  them  :  for  with  their  mouth  they  fhew  much  love, 
'*  but  their  heart  goeth  after  their  covetoufnefs.  And 
''  lo,  thou  art  unto  them  as  a  very  lovely  fong  of  one 
*'  that  hath  a  pleafant  voice,  and  can  play  well  on  an 
"  inflrument:  for  they  hear  thy  words,  but  they  do 
"  them  not/'  This  is  not  to  worfhip  God,  but 
impudendy  to  affront  him;  and  if  we  take  this  for 
religion,  we  put  the  grofleft  cheat  imaginable  upon 
ourfelves.  Hear  how  God  challenges  the  people  of 
Ifrael  upon  this  account,  Jer.  vii.  2,3,4,  ^^-  "  Hear 
*'  the  word  of  the  Lor  d,  all  ye  of  Judah,  that  en- 
''  ter  in  at  thefe  gates  to  worfhip  the  L  o  r  d.  Thus 
"  faith  the  Lord  of  hofts,  the  God  of  Ifrael j 
''  amend  your  ways  and  your  doings,  and  I  will  caufe 
''  you  to'dwell  in  this  place."  This  is  the  great  end  of 
all  religious  worfhip  and  devotion,  the  reformation  of 
our  lives  and  adlions ;  and  if  it  have  not  this  effect,  it  is 
a  cheat.  "  Trull  ye  not  in  lying  words,  faying,  the 
*'  temple  of  the  Lo  R  d,  the  temple  of  the  Lor  d, 
«'  the  temple  of  the  Lo  r  d  are  thefe.  For  if  ye  tho- 
"  roughly  amend  your  ways,  and  your  doings ;  if  ye 
"  thoroughly  execute  judgment  between  a  man  and 
"  his  neighbour ;  if  ye  opprefs  not  the  ftranger,  the 
*'  fatherlefs,  and  the  widow,  and  fhed  not  innocent 
*'  blood  in  this  place,  neither  walk  after  other  gods  to 
^'  your  hurt :  then  will  I  caufe  you  to  dwell  in  this 


*'  placcj 


^638  Of  the  form y  and 

SERM.  "  place,  in  the  Jand  that  I  gave  to  your  fathers  fof 
^^l^  ''  ever  and  ever.  Behold,  ye  trull  in  lying  words  that 
"  cannot  profit.  Will  ye  fteal,  murder,  and  commit 
"  adultery,  and  fwear  falfly,  and  burn  incenfe  unto 
*'  Baal,  and  walk  after  other  gods,  whom  ye  know 
'^  not:  and  come  and  (land  before  me  in  this  houfe, 
''  which  is  called  by  my  name,  and  fay,  we  are  deli- 
*'  vered  to  do  all  thefc  abominations.^ "  What  greater 
impudence  can  there  be,  than  to  worfhip  God  de- 
voutly, and  to  live  wickedly  .^  this  is  to  declare  that 
we  mock  God  under  a  pretence  of  ferving  him ;  or 
elfe  that  we  believe,  that  God  whom  we  worfhip  al- 
lows thefe  abominations,  and  is  pleas'd  with  them. 

2o  Others  make  this  form  of  external  devotion  yet 
more  complete,  by  a  curious  and  nice  regard  to  the 
modes  and  circumftances  of  performing  the  duties  of 
religion.  They  are  very  punctual  and  exad:  in  all 
their  carriage  and  geftures,  as  if  they  minded  nothing 
elfe  but  the  outward  part  of  religion. 

Not  but  that  great  humility  and  reverence  does  very 
well  become  men  in  their  addrefles  to  God  -,  but  then 
we  muft  be  fure  that  this  external  reverence  be  a  figni- 
fication  of  the  inward  and  real  devotion  of  our  minds. 
For  if  it  be  feparated  from  this,  it  is  not  devotion, 
but  fuperftition ;  it  is  not  "  to  worfhip  Go  d  in  fpirit 
*'  and  in  truth,"  but  in  bodily  fhew  and  appearance 
only  •,  not  to  honour  the  divine  majefty,  but  to  fawn 
upon  him  and  flatter  him.  And  where  men  are  very 
intent  upon  thefe  things,  and  endeavour  to  outitrip 
other  people  in  voluntary  expreflions  of  outward  devo- 
tion, it  too  often  happens  that  fuch  perfons  are  defti- 
tute  of  the  fubflance  and  reality  of  religion.  They  are 
like  the  formal  complimenting  fort  of  people  in  civil 
converfation,  who  commonly  have  very  little  in  them, 

and 


the  power  of  godlinefs.  4^39 

and  notwithftanding  all  their  fmooth  outfide  and  ap-  ^^^^^^ 
pearance,  they  have  neither  that  folidity  nor  fincerity 
which  is  in  many  a  plain  ordinary  man. 

II.  An  orthodox  profeflion  of  the  chriftian  faith. 
This  is  another  form  of  reh'gion,  which  the  more 
knowing  and  inquifitive  fort  of  men  are  apt  to  take 
up  and  reft  in.  And  this  is  that  which  in  the  jewifh 
religion  the  apoftle  calls  "  a  form  of  knowledge^ 
"  and  of  the  truth  in  the  law." 

And  this  is  good  as  far  as  it  goes.  But  then  it  muft 
not  reft  only  in  the  brain,  but  defcend  from  thence 
upon  the  heart  and  life:  othervvife  a  man  may  have 
this  "  form  of  godlineis,"  and  yet  be  "  a  denier  of 
*"'  the  power  of  it.*'  St.  Paul  puts  this  very  cafe,  that 
a  man  may  have  the  theory  and  knowledge  of  religion, 
and  yet  if  it  do  not  produce  t\\t  fruits  of  a  good  life, 
it  is  nothing  worth,  i  Cor  xiii.  z,  "  Though  I  have 
"  the  gift  of  prophefy,  and  underfland  all  myfteries, 
*'  and  all  knowledge;  and  though  I  have  all  faith,  fo 
*'  that  I  could  remove  mountains,  and  have  no  cha- 
"  rity,  I  am  nothing."  And  the  reafon  is  plain,  be- 
caufe  the  knowledge  of  religion  is  only  in  order  to  the 
pradlice  of  it  \  and  an  article  or  propofition  of  faith 
is  an  idle  thing,  if  it  do  not  produce  fuch  adions  as 
the  belief  of  fuch  a  propofition  doth  require. 

There  are  many  peribns  in  the  world  very  felici- 
tous about  an  orthodox  belief,  and  mightily  concerned 
to  know  what  the  fcriptures,  but  efpecially  what  the 
councils  and  fathers,  have  declared  in  fuch  a  matter ; 
and  they  are  nice  and  fcrupulous  in  thefe  things,  even 
to  the  utmoft  pundlilios,  and  will  with  a  moft  un- 
chriftian  pafllon  contend  for  the  chriftian  faith  :  and 
yet  perhaps  all  this  while  they  can  allow  themfelves  in 
plain  fins,  and  in  the  pradice  of  fuch  things  as  are 

VoL.X.  23  H  ij) 

8. 


4640  Of  the  jorm^  and 

S  E  R  M.  in  fcripture  as  clearly  forbidden  to  be  done,  as  any 
'*  thing  is  there  commanded  to  be  believed.  Whereas  re- 
ligion docs  not  confifl:  fo  much  in  nicety  and  fubtilty 
of  belief,  as  in  integrity  and  innocency  of  life;  and 
the  trued  and  mod  orthodox  perfuafion  in  matters  of 
religion,  is  but  a  mere  form  and  image,  if  it  be  not 
accompanied  with  an  anfwcrable  pradlice  •,  yea  like 
the  image  prefented  to  Nebuchadnezzar  in  his  dream, 
*'  whofe  head  was  of  fine  gold,  but  the  legs  and  feet 
"  were  iron  and  clay." 

Not  but  that  a  right  belief  is  of  great  concernment 
in  religion  j  but  then  this  belief  mufl  be  profecuted  in- 
to the  proper  and  genuine  confequences  of  it  upon  our 
lives:  if  it  be  not,  it  is  unhappy  for  men  that  they 
believe  fo  well,  when  they  live  fo  ill.  The  devils  have 
a  right  faith,  St.  James  tells  us,  "  they  believe  and 
*'  tremble."  And  indeed  none  have  fo  much  reafon  to 
tremble,  as  thofe  who  believe  the  principles  of  reli- 
gion, and  yet  are  confcious  to  themfelvcs  that  they 
live  contrary  to  them ;  becaufe  of  all  perfons  in  the 
world  they  are  the  mod  inexcufable. 

III.  Another  form  of  religion  which  many  take 
upon  them  is  enthufiafm,  and  pretence  to  infpiration. 
And  this  is  a  very  glorious  form,  which  is  apt  to  dazzle 
and  amufe  the  ignorant,  becaufe  they  know  not  what 
to  make  of  it.  It  feems  to  be  fomething  ftrange  and 
extraordinary,  and  yet  'tis  nothing  but  what  every 
man  that  has  confidence  enough  may  pretend  to. 

There  is  no  chridian  doubts  but  that  the  Spirit 
of  God  hath  heretofore  infpir'd  men  in  an  extraor- 
dinary manner,  and  that  he  may  do  fo  again  when  he 
pleafcs.  But  fince  the  great  and  danding  revelation  of 
the  gofpel,  we  have  reafon  not  to  be  radi  in  giving 
heed  to  fuch  pretences.  If  thofe  who  pretend  to  in- 
fpiration 


the  power  of  gcdiinefs.  4^4^ 

fplratlon  declare  nothing  but  what  is  reveal'd  in  the  S  E^R  M, 
gofpel  already,  their  infpiration  is  needlefs ;  if  they 
declare  any  thing  coxitrary  thereto,  we  are  fufficicntly 
cautioned  againft  them ;  if  any  thing  befides  the  re- 
velatioii  of  the  gofpel,  but  not  contrary  to  it,  then  we 
are  to  exped  what  evidence  they  bring  for  their  in- 
fpiration.     For  Go  d  does  not  infpire  men  for  their  | 
own  fikes,  but  for  the  fkke  of  others ;  and  another  j 
man's  infpiration  is  nothing  to  me,  unlefs  he  can  fatis-  ^ 
fy  me  that  he  is  infpir'd.     For  either  I  muft  believe  ; 
every  one  that  pretends  to  infpiration,  or  thofe  only 
that  can  make  good  their  pretence.     Not  every  one, 
for  then  1  yield  up  myfelf  to  the  mercy  of  every  con- 
fident man,  to  lead  me  into  what  delufions  hepleafes. 
If  1  believe  only  thofe  who  are  able  to  make  good  this 
pretence,  then  am  1  in  no  great  danger  •,  for  nothing 
kfs  than  a  miracle  can  give  me  reafonable  afluranceof 
another  man's  infpiration;  and  I  think  few  or  none 
of  our  modern  enthufiads  have  fo  much  as  pretended 
to  miracles.  So  that  this  form  of  religion  is  calculated 
only  to  impofe  upon  the  ignorant,  but  fignifies  Utile 
among  the  fleady  and  confiderate  fort  of  people. 

Nay  if  this  pretence  were  real,  yet  it  may  be  no 

more  than  a  form  of  religion.     For  the  apoftle  fup- 

poC's  that  men  may  have  the  gift  of  prophefy,  and  yet 

want  charity,  without  which  they  are  nothing.    And 

our  S  A  v  I  o  u  R  tells  us,  that  many  fhall  plead  at  the 

day  of  judgment,  "  have  we  not  prophehed  in  thy 

''  name,  and  in  thy  name  caft  out  devils,  and  in  thy 

"  name  done  many  wonderful  works?  "  and  yet  thefe 

very  perfons  for  ail  this  may  be  "  workers  of  i  uquity," 

and  fuch  as  our  Lord  will  bid  «  to  depart  from  Inm.^' 

IV.  A  great  external  (hew  of  mortificanoP. 

This  th^Pharifces  of  old  did  much  applaud  them- 

23  H  2  ^^i^^^ 


4642  Of  the  form,  and 

vSERM   felvesin,  they  "  fafted  twice  a  week."     And  this  is 
CCIV        . 

ftill  a  great  part  of  the  religion  of  many  in  the  romifh 

church  ;  they  impofe  ftrid  penalties  and  corporal  fe- 

verities  upon  themfclves ;  abflain  from  feveral  forts  of 

meats  and  drinks,  watch  and  afflid  their  bodies  with 

feveral  forts  of  rigours :  whereas  one  fevere  refolution 

of  a  good  life  well  profecuted,  is  a  thoufand  times 

better  than  all  this. 

For  experience  fhews  us,  that  men  may  be  very 
fevere  to  their  bodies,  and  yet  favourable  to  their  lufts. 
The  Pharifees  indeed  "  faded  often^"  but  they  were 
ravenous  in  another  kind,  "  they  devoured  widows 
''  houfes."  It  is  pofTible  that  men  may  kill  themfclves 
by  corporal  aufterities,  and  yet  never  mortify  one  lull ; 
they  may  fubmit  to  a  thoufand  penances,  and  yet  never 
truly  repent  of  one  fm  ;  they  may  turn  pilgrims,  and 
go  as  far  as  Jcrufalem  to  vifit  our  S  av  i  ou  r's  fe- 
pulchre,  and  yet  never  "  know  the  power  of  his  death.'* 

Fading  may  be  a  good  inftrument  of  religion,  if 
it  be  difcrcetly  ufed  5  and  as  it  may  be  ufed,  there  may 
be  no  religion  in  it.  But  as  for  thofe  other  kind  of 
fevTrities  they  are  abfurd  and  fuperftitious,  and  taken 
up  upon  a  great  miftake  of  the  nature  of  God  ; 
as  if  he  were  never  well  pleas'd,  but  when  we  do 
fomething  very  difpleafingto  ourfelves ;  as  if  he  were 
extremely  delighted  in. the  mifery  and  torment  of  his 
creatures;  and  to  be  cruel  and  unmerciful  to  ourfelves, 
were  the  only  way  to  move  his  compaflion  towards  us. 

Thefe  are  barbarous  and  heatheniih  conceits  of 
God-,  and  the  abfurd  pradlices  grounded  upon  them 
are  no  where  recommended  to  us  in  fcripture,  nor 
have  any  example  there,  but  only  in  Baal's  priefts, 
who  lanced  and  cut  themfclves,  believing  that  to  be 
^  good  way  to  incline  their  gods  to  hear  them.  Thefe 


thf  power  of  godlinefs,     '  4643 

are  voluntary  fuperftitions,  which  God  hath  required  S  E  R  M, 
at  no  man's  hands.  And  no  wife  man  can  doubt,  but  (^lili 
that  he  that  really  mortifies  his  lufts,  and  fubdues  his 
paflions,  may  be  a  good  man,  though  he  never  whipt 
himfelf  in  all  his  Jife  ;  and  that  he  that  Jives  foberJy, 
and  righteoudy,  and  godly,  may  juftly  be  accounted 
religious,  without  turning  vagrant,  and  rambling  idly 
up  and  down  the  world.  Thefe  are  fuch  forms  of  re- 
ligion as  can  have  no  efteem  and  reputation,  but  in 
a  very  fuperftitious  church  and  age. 

V.  An  imperfed  repentance,  and  partial  refor- 
mation. 

By  an  imperfedl  repentance,  I  mean  a  trouble  and 
forrow  for  fin,  without  the  forfaking  of  it,  and  the 
amendment  of  our  lives  j  or  when,  if  men  do  reform 
in  fome  things  they  continue  in  the  love  and  pradlice 
of  other  fins.  This  is  not  true  repentance';  for  he  that 
hath  truly  repented,  is  heartily  troubled  for  all  his 
off^ences  againft  Go  d, and  refoMd  not  to  commit  the 
like  again  ;  but  he  that  retains  any  lufl,  and  allows 
himfelf  in  the  pradlice  of  it,  is  not  troubled  that  he 
hath  offended  God,  but  hath  left  his  fins  for  fome 
other  reafon.  For  whatever  arguments  and  confide- 
rations  relpeding  God  will  move  a  man  to  quit  any 
one  lufl,  ought  upon  the  fame  account  to  prevail  with 
him  to  abandon  all.  So  that  whatever  trouble  and 
forrow  a  man  may  pretend  for  his  fins,  there  is  no 
furer  fign  qf  an  infincere  repentance,  than  if  after 
this  he  continue  in  the  habitual  practice  of  any 
knowH  fin. 

VI.  The  appearance  and  oflentation  of  fome  par- 
ticular grace  and  virtue. 

A  man  may  be  mov'd  by  the  inclination  of  his  na- 
ture, or  upon  fome  intereft  and  defign,  to  the  practice 

0f 


4644  P/  ^^'^  firnty  and 

SERM,  of  Tome  particular  virtue.  Some  are  tender  andcom- 
paffionate  in  their  nature,  and  that  excites  them  to 
chanty  \  others  of  quiet  and  eafy  difpofitions,  and  that 
makes  them  patient,  and  meek,  and  peaceable  5  others 
alTumc  one  or  more  virtuous  qualities  out  of  vain-glory, 
or  to  ferve  fome  other  intereft.  The  Pharilees  were 
much  in  giving  ahiis,  becaufe  this  is  a  piece  of  reli- 
gion univerfally  applauded  and  well  fpoken  of  ^  and 
therefore  though  they  omitted  many  other  neceflliry 
parts  of  religion,  yet  they  were  fo  cunning  that  they 
would  not  be  defective  in  this  ;  not  out  of  regard  to 
God,  but  themfelves  and  their  own  reputation.  For, 
as  our  Saviour  obferves,  they  did  their  alms  with 
fuch  circumfiances  of  vain-glory  as  quite  blafttd  the 
glory  of  them.  "  They  cau^'d  a  trumpet  to  be  found- 
"  ed  before  them  in  the  fynagogues  and  in  the  ilreetSj 
•'  that  they  might  be  {ten  of  men,"  and  have  glory 
of  them. 

Now  though  the  exercife  of  every  grace  and  virtue 
be  materially  a  fubilantial  part  of  religion,  yet  the 
pradice  of  one  virtue  with  the  negle6l  of  others,  is 
a  fhrewd  gr^nnd  of  fufpicion  that  it  is  not  virtue 
but  defign,  that  it  is  not  religion  but  intereft  which 
prompts  men  to  it/  For  if  it  were  religion,  and  done 
with  regard  to  God,  the  very  fame  reafon  would 
oblige  them  to  all  other  parts  of  their  duty  as  well  as 
that. 

VII.  A  great  zeal  for  fome  particular  party,  or 
opinions,  or  circumllances  of  religion. 

This  form  is  frequently  afTumed,  becaufe  men  find 
the  greateft  (belter  and  protection  under  it.  He  that 
declares  zealoufly  for  a  party  or  opinion,  and  is  fierce 
and  eager  againft  thofe  that  oppofe  it,  feldom  fails  to 
gain  the  reputation  of  a  religious  and  godly  man  j 

becaufe 


the  power  of  godlinefs.  4645 

becaufe  he  hath  the  vote  oF  the  whole  party,  and  a  SERM 
great  number  to  cry  him  up.     And  if  he  be  guilty 
of  any  mifcarriage,  unlefs  it  be  very  grofs  and  vifible, 
he  fhall  never  wane  thofe  that  will  apologize  for  him, 
and  be  ready  to  vindicate  him  at  ail  turns.     Either 
they  will  not  believe  what  is  reported  of  him,  but  im- 
pute it  to  malice  -,  or  they  will  extenuate  it,  and  afcribe 
it  to  humane  infirmity  :  but  ftill  they  cannot  but  think 
he  is  a  religious  man,  becaufe  he  is  fo  zealous  for  that 
which  they  efleem  to  be  fo  confiderable  a  part  of  reli- 
gion. Nay  fuch  is  the  horrible  partiality  and  injuftice  of 
parties,  that  a  very  bad  man  that  appears  zealous  for 
their  way,  fhall  eafily  gain  the  efteem  of  a  holy  and 
religious  man,  though  he  have  many  vifible  and  no- 
torious faults  ;  though  he  be  pafilonate  and  ill-natur*d, 
cenforious  and   uncharitable,    cruel   and  oppreflivc, 
fordid  and  covetous  j  when  another  who  quietly  and 
without  any  noife  and  buille  minds  the    fubfiantial 
parts  of  religion,  and  is  truly  devoted  towards  God, 
jufl  and  peaceable,  and  charitable  towards  men  ;  meek 
and  humble,  and  patient,  kind  and  friendly  even  to 
thofe  that  differ  from  him,  fhall  hardly  efcape  being 
cenfur'd  for  a  lukewarm,  formal,  moral  man,  deilitute 
of  the  grace  of  Go  d  and  of"  ih^  power  of  godlinefs." 
So    likewife   zeal    for  or   againd  indifferent  cir- 
cumftances  of  religion,   is  another  *'  form  of  god-- 
«'  linefs"  which  many  appear  in.    And  commonly 
fuch  perfons,  the  more  deititute  they  are  of  true  piety 
and  virtue,  the  greater   ftir  they  keep  about  thefe 
things,  that  they  may  feem  to  be  fomething  in  reli- 
gion ;  juft  like  thofe,  who  being  confcious  to  them- 
felves  that  they  are  defedive  in  true  and  ufeful  learn- 
ing, that  they    may   not   feem  to  be  fo,  are  always 
troublefome  with  the  Ihreds  and  ends  of  it. 

Now 


4646  Of  the  form^  and 

SERM.  Now  the  indifferent  circumftances  of  religion  arc 
c^  ^^  things  which  no  man  ought  to  have  the  face  to  trouble 
himfelf  about,  that  neglcdls  the  weighty  and  fubftan- 
tial  duties  of  it.  No  man  that  hath  "  a  beam  in  his 
"  own  eye,"  ought  to  beconcern'd  for  *'  the  mote 
"  that  is  in  hi.s  brother's  eye."  Indeed  he  that  is  care- 
ful of  the  main  parts  of  religion,  may  and  ought  to 
be  concerned  for  the  other  in  their  due  place,  fo  far  as 
the  order  and  decency  of  Go  d's  worfnip,  and  obe- 
dience to  authority,  and  the  peace  of  chriftians  is  con- 
cern'd  in  them.  But  to  place  all  religion  m  a  zeal  for 
or  againfl  thefe  things,  is  one  of  the  thinneft  and 
Ilighteil  forms  of  religion. 

VIII.  Sillinefs  and  freakifhnefs,  and  cither  a  pre- 
tended or  real  ignorance  in  the  common  afrairs  and 
concernments  of  humane  life. 

This  may  feem  at  firfl  hearing  to  be  a  very  odd 
form  of  religion,  and  indeed  fo  it  is;  yet  in  feveral 
religions,  men  have  appear'd  in  it  with  great  applaufe 
and  acceptance.  Among  the  Turks  idiots  and  mad- 
men are  mightily  reverenced,  it  being  always  taken 
for  granted  that  they  are  infpir'd.  And  among  the 
papifts,  the  mod  eminent  of  their  faints,  if  their  le- 
gends do  not  belye  them,  efpecially  St.  Francis,  and 
St.  Dominick,  are  magnify'd  fcarcely  for  any  other 
reafon,  but  for  faying  and  doing  the  moll  filly  and 
ridiculous  things.  What  can  be  imagined  more  foolifh 
and  fancaflical  than  St.  Francis's  Gripping  himfelF  of 
his  clothes  and  running  about  naked  }  than  his  frequent 
preaching  to  the  birds,  and  beads,  and  fifhcs.?  was 
ever  any  thing  more  naufeouOy  ridiculous,  than  his 
picking  up  the  lice  which  were  beaten  off  his  clothes, 
and  putting  them  in  his  bofom.?  which  is  magnified 
in  him  as  a  profound  piece  of  humility  3  as  if  nafti- 

nefs 


the  power  of  godlinefs.  4^47 

iiefs  were  a  chriftian  grace.  Thefe  and  many  more  fuch  S  E  R  M. 

freaks  which  are  related  in  his  \ik  as  inflances  of  his  ,^^ -^ 

great  fandity,  ferve  to  no  other  purpofe,  but  to  render 
religion  ridiculous  to  any  man  of  common  fenfe.  As  if 
to  be  "  a  Ipintual  man,  and  a  mere  natural,"  were  all 
one,  and  as  if  this  were  a  good  confequence,  that  a 
man  cannot  choofe  but  be  very  knowing  in  religion, 
becaufe  he  is  very  filly  in  all  other  things  >  and  mufl: 
needs  have  abundance  of  grace,  becaufe  he  hath  no  wit. 
It  is  pity  it  fhould  be  (o^  but  I  am  afraid  it  is  too  true 
that  the  greatefl  mifchiefs  that  have  been  done  to  the 
world,  have  been  done  by  filiy  well-meaning  men. 

Laftly,  great  noife  and  talk  about  religion. 

This  is  as  empty  a  form  as  any  of  the  reft,  and  yec 
this  does  ftrangely  pleafe  and  fatisfy  a  great  many  If 
a  man  do  but  mix  fomething  of  religion  with  all  his 
difcourfes,  and  be  often  fpeaking  of  G  o  d  and  heavenly 
things,  this  pafleth  for  a  more  than  ordinary  charader 
of  a  religious  man.  And  many  deceive  themfelves  with 
it,  they  havetalk'd  of  religion  fo  long,  till  they  believe 
they  have  it. 

Not  but  that  this  is  a  good  thing,  provided  it  be 
order'd  with  difcretion  and  humility,  and  be  not 
forc'd  and  affeded,  impertinent  and  troublefome. 
But  then  we  muft  have  a  great  care  that  other  things 
be  anfwerable.  Our  lives  muft  juftify  our  godly  talk, 
and  our  adlions  muft  give  weight  to  our  words ;  for 
nothing  is  more  odious,  than  a  religious  and  good 
difcourfe  from  the  mouth  of  a  bad  man.  This  made 
our  Saviour  fo  full  of  indignation  againft  the 
Scribes  and  Pharifees,  they  were  not  what  they  ap- 
peared to  be  in  their  difcourfe  and  outward  garb. 
*'  They  faid  and  did  not,"  therefore  he  compares 
them  to  "  whited  walls  and  painted  fepulchres, 
VoL.X,  ?3 1  thag 


4648  Of  ^^^  /^^^^j  ^'^^ 
S  E  R  M. "  that  were  beautiful  indeed  without,  but  within  were 
^  "  full  of  all  uncleannefs  and  rottennefs.'* 

'Tis  true  indeed,  that  "  out  of  the  abundance  of 
**  the  heart  the  mouth  fpeaketh-,'*  if  religion  be 
within,  it  will  appear  in  mens  words  as  well  as  adtions; 
this  is  a  fire  that  will  break  out:  but  the  bed  men  are 
very  modeft,  and  make  little  noife,  do  nothing  out  of 
oftentation  and  to  be  taken  notice  of,  and  had  ra- 
ther "  refrain  from  good  words,"  than  to  make  an 
unfeafonable  fliew  of  religion. 

Speech  is  intended  to  fignify  the  inward  fenfe  of 
mens  minds,  but  it  does  not  always  do  fo ;  men  may 
be  full  of  religious  talk,  when  there  is  nothing  of  re- 
ligion in  their  hearts,  nothing  anfwcrable  in  their 
lives ;  men  may  fpcak  like  angels,  and  yet  do  like  devils. 

Therefore  let  no  man  deceive  himfelf,  or  think  to 
deceive  others  with  this  appearance  of  religion :  for  let 
men  talk  never  fo  pioufly,  every  confiderate  man 
knows  that  there  is  more  of  true  religion  in  one  good 
adion,  than  in  a  thoufand  good  words. 

And  thus  I  have  done  with  the  firfl  thing,  viz, 
wherein  a  form  of  religion  doth  confift. 

Secondly,  wherein  "  the  power  of  godlinefs"  doth 
confift.  And  becaufe  it  is  very  material  to  be  rightly 
informed  in  this,  I  will  reduce  the  fevcral  particulars 
to  thefe  four  general  heads. 

I.  A  due  fenfe  of  G  o  d,  and  fuitable  afFedlions  to- 
wards him. 

II.  A  fincere  and  diligent  ufe  of  the  means  and  in- 
ftruments  of  religion. 

III.  A  firm  and  fleady  refolution  of  well-doing. 

IV.  As  the  proper  and  genuine  effed  of  all  thefe, 
the  pradice  of  a  good  life,  in  the  feveral  parts  and  in- 
fiances  of  it. 

I,  A 


the  power  of  godltnefi.  '464  9 

I.  A  due  fenfe  of  God,  and  fuitable  afFedions  to-  SERm, 
wards  him.     This  is  the  principle  and  fountain  of  all 
religion,  from  whence  all  anions  of  piety  and  good- 
nefsdo  fpring. 

Under  this  I  comprehend  a  lively  fenfe  of  God's 
being  ;  which  the  apoftle  tells  us  is  fundamentally  ne- 
ceflciry  to  all  religion,"  he  that  cometh  to  Go  d  muft 
*'  believe  that  he  is.'*  This  is  the  great  fpring  of  all 
religious  motions,  and  of  our  dependence  upon  him, 
the  lively  ienfe  whereof  will  make  us  humble  and 
thankful,  and  teach  us  "  to  acknowledge  him  in  all 
^'  our  ways,"  and  to  refer  all  our  concernments  to 
him;  and  of  our  fubjedion  to  him,  which  will  make 
us  obedient  to  his  laws,  and  fubmifllve  to  his  pleafure; 
nothing  being  more  reafonable  than  that  he  that  gave 
us  our  lives  iTiould  have  the  entire  government  and 
difpofal  of  them  \  than  that  he  that  made  us  what 
we  are,  fhould  command  us  what  we  fhould  do.  la 
fhort,  this  comprehends  faith  in  Go  d,  or  a  readinefs 
to  alTent  to  what  he  reveals,  with  the  fear  and  the  love 
of  Go  D,  which  are  the  great  principles  of  religion, 

II.  A  fincere  and  diligent  ufe  of  the  means  and  in- 
ftruments  of  religion,  fuch  as  prayer,  reading,  and 
hearing  the  word  of  God,  and  receiving  the  facra- 
mcnts.  Thefe  are  the  means  which  God  hath  ap- 
pointed for  the  improving  of  us  in  holinefs  and 
goodnefs  -,  and  v/e  fmccrely  ufe  thcfe  means,  when  we 
really  aim  at  this  end  ;  when  we  pray,  and  read,  and 
hear,  and  meditate  on  G  o  d's  word,  and  receive  the 
facraments,  that  we  may  truly  become  better,  more 
holy  and  virtuous  in  all  manner  of  converfation ;  and 
do  not  reft  in  the  ufe  of  thefe  means,  as  if  a  man  were 
a  religious  and  good  man,  becaufe  he  prays  often,  and 
every  day  reads  the  bible,  and  goes  to  all  the  fermons 

23  I  2  he 


465©  Of  the  form^  and 

'/?J^.^"  ^^  ^^f^  ^^^^^  of,  and  takes  all  occafions  to  receive  the 
lacrament.  The  life  of  religion  does  not  confift  in  the 
bare  ufc  of  thefe,  but  in  the  real  efficacy  of  them 
upon  our  lives.  It  is  a  very  good  caution  which  St. 
John  gives  us,  "  be  not  deceived,  he  that  doth  righ- 
*'  teoufnefs  is  righteous,  even  as  he  is  righteous," 
I  John  iii,  6.  Men  are  apt  to  impofe  upon  themfelves, 
as  if  they  could  be  righteous,  and  approve"  themfelves 
to  God,  upon  fome  other  terms,  whereas  only  '^  they 
''  that  fear  God,  and  work  righteoufnels,  are  ac- 
*'  cepted  with  hmi." 

I  do  not  fpeak  this  to  undervalue  the  exercifes  of 
religion,  but  to  inform  men  of  the  true  nature  and  de- 
fign  of  them.  Be  as  diligent  as  thou  wilt  in  the  exer- 
cifes of  piety  and  devotion,  but  be  fincere  in  the  ufe 
of  thofe  means  •,  do  not  fatisfy  thy  felf  in  the  perfor- 
mance of  thofe  dudes,  unlefs  thou  find  the  effed  of  them 
upon  thy  heart  and  life,  always  remembring  that* 
*'  not  the  hearers  of  the  word,  but  the  doers  of  it 
*'  are  blefied  ;"  that  "  the  prayer,  and  all  the  facri- 
*'  fices  of  the  wicked  are  an  abomination  to  the 
"  Lord." 

III.  A  firm  and  fteady  refolution  of  well-doing. 
This  is  the  refult  of  a  true  and  fincere  repentance,  and 
the  great  principle  of  a  new  life;  and  if  it  be  firm 
and  fteadfaft,  it  will  derive  its  influence  into  all  our 
aflions ;  but  if  it  be  wavering  and  inconfident,  it  is 
only  the  occafion  of  a  religious  mood  and  fit,  but  not 
the  principle  of  a  religious  fiate.  Therefore  it  con- 
cerns us  to  flrengthen  this  principle,  and  to  be  true  to 
it,  when  we  have  once  taken  it  up ;  for  whoever 
we  quit  it,  we  break  loofe  from  God  and  religion 
at  once,  and  caft  our  felves  back  into  a  much  morcv 
dangerous  flate  dian  we  were  in  before. 

Ther- 


the  power  of  godlinefs,  4651 

There  is  no  doubt,  but  that  the  devli  and  our  S  E  R  M,  *! 
own  corrupt  hearts  will  make  many  aflaults  upon 
fuch  a  refolution,  and  raifc  all  their  batteries  againft 
'\x^  becaufe  it  is  our  main  fort,  and  the  great  fecurity 
of  our  fouls,  and  fo  long  as  we  maintain  that,  we 
are  fafe  %  and  therefore  it  had  need  be  a  mighty 
refolution  that  is  able  to  ftand  out  againft  fuch  op» 
pofition. 

Bat  what  are  we  that  we  lliould  take  up  fuch  a 
refolution,  and  what  is  our  ftrength  ?  We  are  weak 
and  "  unfledfaft  as  water,   reeds   fhaken  with  the 
*'  wind  5  we  are  not  fufficient  of  our  felves,  as  of 
"  our  MvQs^  for  any  thing  that  is  good  ;  the  way  of 
"  man  is  not  in  himfelf,  nor  is  it  in  man  that  walks 
^'  to   dire6b  his   fteps :  "     but   we   have  a  greater 
ftrength  than   our  own    to  rely  upon,  and   greater 
than  that  of  any  adverfe  power  that  can  fet  it  felf 
againft  us ;  we  have  G  o  d  on  our  fide,  and  the  af. 
fiftance  of  his  grace  to  back  and  fortify  thefe  holy 
refolutions ;  fo  that  we  have  no  reafon  to  defpair  of 
fuccefs  and  victory,  if  we   be  not   wanting   to  our 
felves;    for  "   God's   grace   is   fufficient  for  us; 
*'  greater  is  he  that  is  in  us,  than  he  that  is  in  the 
*'  world.  " 

IV.  And  laftly,  which  is  the  proper  and  genuine 
effed  of  all  thefe,  the  pradice  of  a  holy  and  virtuous 
life  in  all  the  parts  and  inftances  of  it.  And  unlefs 
this  effed  be  produced,  we  want  the  fureft  evidence 
of  the  former  :  for  it  is  not  credible,  that  that  man 
hatha  due  fenfe  of  God,  and  pious  afFed ions  to- 
wards him,  or  does  fincerely  exercife  himfelf  in  t\\Q 
duties  of  religion,  or  is  firmly  rcfolved  in  well-doing, 
who  does  not  /hew  forth  efFedls  of  all  this  in  a  good 
■  converfation.  Thus  St.  James  reafons,  chap.  iii.  i }. 

«'  Who 


'4652  Of  the  form,  and 

SERM.  "Who  is  a  wife  man,    and   endued   with   know- 
CCIV.    u  ledge  aniongll   you?"  that  is,  inftruded  in  the 
chriflian  knowledge,  in  the  heavenly  wifdom ;  "  let 
*'  him  ihew  forth  out   of  a  good  converfation  his 
«  works." 

So  that  herein  the  power  of  godlinefs  doth  vifibly 
appear,  in  the  courfe  of  a  good  lifej  and  'tis  the 
very  dcfign     of  the  apoftle  in  this  chapter  to  de- 
clare this  to  us,   as  will  appear  to  any  one  that  con- 
fiders  the  defcription  here  given    of  thofe  perfons, 
who  under  a  Ihew  of  religion   "  denied  the  power 
*'  of  it  5  *'    they  v/ere  fuch  as  notwichftanding  all 
their   pretences  to  godlinefs,  allowed  themfelves  in 
feveral  vices,  and  lufts,  and  paffions,  and  were  de- 
llitute  of  the. virtues  of  a  good  life,  they  were  felfifh, 
and  covetous,  and  vain-glorious,    and  proud,   evil- 
fpeakers,  difobedient  to  parents,  unthankful  to  their 
benefidors,  filthy  and  impure,  treacherous,  heady, 
conceited,  fenfual  and  voluptuous ;  fo  that  whatever 
appearance  of  godlinefs  they  made,    they  v/ere  al- 
moll:  as  bad  as  could  be  imaginc:d  ;  there  is   hardly 
a  fuller  catalogue  of  fins  to  be  met  with  in  the  bible  : 
befides  that  ail  thefe  vices  are  fuch  as  are  plain  and 
evident  in  the  lives  of  men. 

So  that  upon  the  whole  matter,  it  is  very  clear 
wherein  the  apoftle  mainly  places  the  power  of  god- 
linefs, namely,  in  the  real  effeds  of  religion,  fuch  as 
are  the  mortifying  our  lufts,  and  fubduing  of  our  paC- 
fions,  the  government  of  our  tongues,  and  the  feve- 
ral virtues  of  a  good  life. 

I.  In  the  mortifying  of  our  lufts,  the  lufts  of  in- 
temperance and  uncleannefs,  covetoufnefs,  and  am- 
bition. He  that  is  a  flave  to  any  of  thefe,  his  reli- 
gion is  but  a  form,  how  glorious  a  ihew  foever  it 

may 


the  power  of  godIi?2e/s,  4655 

may  make.     **  Flefhly  lufts  war  againft  the  foul,'*  serM. 
and  will  finally  ruin  it.     Covetoufnefs  and  pride  are  ^^^^• 
enmity  to  Go  d.    "God  refifts  the  proud  afar  off, 
•'  and  the  covetous  man  the  Lo  r  d  abhors.'* 

2.  In  the  fubduing  of  our  palTions,  wrath,  hatred, 
malice,  envy  and  revenge.  They  are  the  very  nature 
and  properties  of  the  devil,  and  difpofitions  as  con- 
trary to  God,  as  light  is  to  darknefs ;  therefore 
whoever  allows  himfelf  in  thefe,  whatever  pretences 
he  makes  to  religion,  is  really  a  bad  man.  This 
St,  John  tells  us  is  a  plain  cafe,  i  John  iii.  10. 
"  Whofoever  doth  not  righteoufnels,  is  not  of  G  o  d, 
*'  neither  he  that  loveth  not  his  brother."  James  iii. 
13,  14.  ''  But  if  ye  have  bitter  envying  and  ftrife  in 
''  your  hearts,  glory  not,  and  lyt  not  againft  the 
*'  truth,"  that  is,  do  not  pretend  to  be  religious  5 
*«  this  wifdom  defcendeth  not  from  above,  but  is 
*'  earthly,  fenfual,  devilifh." 

3.  In  the  government  of  our  tongues.  This  is  a 
great  effedl  of  religion,  to  "  keep  our  tongues  from 
*'  fpeaking  evil,'*  from  backbiting,  and  flandering, 
and  cenfuring,  and  reviling,  from  profane  fwearing 
and  curfmg,  lewd  and  filthy  talking.  "When  mens 
tongues  run  out  into  thefe  diforders,  it  is  a  fign 
that  they  are  not  under  the  government  of  religion, 
and  that  the  fear  of  G  o  d  hath  not  feized  upon  their 
hearts  ;  for  "  out  of  the  abundance  of  the  heart 
*«  the  mouth  fpeaketh. "  So  St.  James  tells  us, 
chap.  i.  26.  ''  If  any  man  among  you  leem  to  be 
*'  religious,  and  bridleth  not  his  tongue,  but  de- 
'*  ceiveth  his  own  heart  %  this  man's  religion  is 
*'  vain.'*  And  on  the  contrary,  it  is  a  good  fign 
that  religion  hath  fome  power  over  men,  when  it 
rcftrains  them  in  this  kind.    So  the  fame  apoftle 

tells 


46'54  Of  the  form,  &c. 

SERiVlteJIs  us,  chap.    iii.  2.    '«  If  any  man  offend  not  m 
*  I ''  word,  the  fame  is  a  perfed:  man.'* 

4.  In  thefeveral  virtues  of  a  good  life,  in  oppo- 
fition  to  tnelb  and  alJ  other  vices ;  fuch  as  are  truth 
and  juirice,  humihty  and  meeknefs,  patience  and 
contentednefs  with  our  condition,  peaceablenefs  and 
charity  to  thofe  that  are  in  want  and  necellity,  a 
readinefs  to  forgive  our  enemies,  and  an  univerfal  love 
and  kindnefs  to  all  men.  I  have  not  time  to  recom- 
mend thefe  particularly  to  you,  the  fcripture  does  it 
frequently  and  fully,  telling  us  that  thefe  are  "  the 
**^  will  of  God,"  and  "  the  divine  nature,  the  new 
"  creature,  pure  religion  and  undefiled,  the  wifdom 
"  that  is  from  above,  the  fruits  of  the  S  p  i  r  i  t," 
the  proper  and  genuine  effedls  of  true  piety,  the  fen- 
fible  and  fubftantial  evidences  of  our  love  to  Go  d 
the  things  wherein  ^'  the  kingdom  of  God  confifts,'* 
and  that  "  he  that  in  thefe  things  ferveth  Christ, 
"  is  accepted  of  Go  d  and  approved  of  men  j"  but 
he  that  negledls  tht{t,  whatever  "  form  of  godlinefs" 
he  puts  on,  is  '«  a  denier  of  the  power  of  it."  "  la 
''  this  the  children  of  God  are  manifell,  and  the 
"  children  of  tht  devil,  he  that  doth  not  righteouf- 
*'  ncfs,  is  not  of  Go  d. 

Thus  I  have  done  with  the  fecond  thing  I  pro- 
pounded  to  fpeak  to,  namely,  wherein  "  the  power 
*'  of  godlinefs  '*  confifts.  There  are  two  other  par- 
ticulars remaining,  which  I  ihd]\  referve  to  a  farther 
opportunity. 


5  E  R  M  O  JS 


[  4655  ] 

SERMON    CCV. 

Of  the  form,  and  the  power  of  godlinefs. 


i 


2  T  I  M.     iii.  5. 
Having  a  form  of  godlinefs^  but  denying  the  power  thereof, 

THE  third    thing  propounded,   was  togivesERM. 
fome  rmrkp,   whereby  we  may  know  when  ^^CCj/^ 
thefe  are  feparated,  when  there  is  a  form  of    he  le- 
reliffion  without  the  power  of  ir.  condfer- 

I  need  not  infift  long  upon  this,  becaule  this  will  in  ^his  cext. 
a  good  meafure  appear  by  the  account  I  have  given  of 
thefe  two  feverally,  of  the  form  of  religion,  and  of 
the  power  of  it  5  for  he  that  confiders  wherein  each 
cf  thefe  confuts,  will  eafily  judge  when  they  are  fe- 
parated. But  yet,  that  we  may  be  fure  not  to  miftake 
in  a  matter  of  fo  great  concernment,  I  will  inftance 
in  two  or  three  grofs  and  palpable  characters  of  this, 
and  they  are  fo  comprehenfive  as  to  contain  mod  of 
the  reft. 

I.  He  hath  only  "  a  form  of  godlinefs,'*  who  minds 
merely  the  external  part  of  religion,  without  any  in- 
ward fenfe  of  it. 

II.  He  that  ufeth  only  the  means  of  religion,  with- 
out regard  to  the  end  and  effect  of  it. 

III.  He  that  is  grofly  and  knowingly  defedive  in 
the  pradice  of  any  part  of  \t. 

I.  He  hath  only  ''  a  form  of  godlinefs,"  who 
minds  merely  the  external  part  of  religion,  without 
ally  inward  fenfe  of  it.  He  that  worfhips  and  ferves 
God  outwardly,  but  hath  no  inward  reverence 
and  efteem  for  him,  who  cares  not,  fo  the  work  be 

VoL.X.  23  K  done, 

8, 


4656  Of  the  form,  and 

S  E  R  M.  done,  and  the  duty  performed  with  what  heart  and 
afFedion  he  does  it.  This  is  a  mere  carcafe  of  rehgion, 
which  is  fo  far  from  being  pleafmg  to  God,  that 
it  is  intolerably  offenfive  to  him  ;  for  though  it  be 
outwardly  an  honour  done  to  God,  yet  really  and  in 
truth  it  is  a  contempt  of  him. 

And  yet  it  is  to  be  fear'd,  that  this  is  a  religion 
which  many  in  the  world  choofe  and  content  them- 
felves  with.  They  can  ferve  Go  d  an  hour  together, 
and  mention  his  name  an  hundred  times,  without  ever 
thinking  of  him,  or  being  afFe6led  with  the  buunefs 
they  are  about :  nay,  which  is  worfe,  this  is  a  reli- 
gion which  a  great  part  of  the  world  ufe,  and  can- 

I  not  help  it  \  I  mean  all  thofe  who  ferve  G  o  d  in  an 
unknown  tongue.     For  how  is  it  polTible  their  minds 

\  and  hearts  can  be  concerned  in  a  lervice  they  da 
not  underftand  ?  they  may  poflibly  have  a  devout 
mind  in  general  ^  but  they  cannot  exercife  any  a6ls 
of  devotion  in  the  particular  fervice  they  are  engaged 
in.  The  befl  of  men  are  apt  enough  to  let  their 
thoughts  fwerve,  and  go  aftray  from  God  when  they 
are  worfhipping  of  him,  though  they  underftand  the 
fervice  they  are  about;  but  when  they  do  not  underftand, 
it  is  impofTible  their  minds  and  thoughts  fhould  go 
along  with  it,  and  be  concerned  in  what  is  done. 
This  is  properly,  and  in  the  (Irid  fenfe  of  the  word, 
/jLop(pwcnf  Iucrsi3«ar,  ''  an  image  of  religion  and  de- 
"  votion,  without  any  life  or  fenfe."  And  if  to 
have  our  bodies  put  in  a  devout  poflure,  to  move  our 
hands,  and  lips,  and  eyes,  without  underftanding  the 
fervice  we  offer  to  God,  may  be  accounted  wor- 

I  fliipping  of  him,  this  is  a  fervice  that  may  be  per- 

j formed  by   puppets  as  well  as  men.     "  God  is  a 

*'  Spirit  ;    j^nd    they    that    woriliip    him ,    muft 

worfhip 


fhepo'wer  of  godlwefs.  4^57 

"  worihip  him  in  fpirit  and  in  truth."     "  In  fpirit  SERVl. 

.  .  ccv. 

*'  and  in  truth,'*  in  oppofition  to  a  mere  bodily  fer-, 

vice,  and  external  fhew  of  devotion.     God  who  is 

a   Spirit,    mud    be    worfhipp'd    with    our    fpirits. 

He  expeds  from  reafonable  creatures  a  rcafonable  fer- 

vice,  and  that  fervice  only   is  reafonable,  which   is 

didated  by    cur  underilandings,   and   accompanied 

vvith  cur  hearts  and  afreclions :  and  to  worfliip  him 

otherwife,  is  to  orTer  a  ficriiice  without  a  heart,  it  is 

"  to  offer  the  lame  and  the  blind  in  ficrifice,"  which 

would  be  an  affront  to  our  governor,  much  more  to 

the  great  king  of  the  world.     Whatever  we  do  in 

the  fervice  of  God,  we  mud  "  do  it  heartily  as  to 

"  theLoR.D,"  becaufeheis  "  the  fearcher  of  hearts, 

"  and  all  things  are   open  and  naked  to  the  eyes  of 

*'  him  with  whom  we  have  to  do." 

II.  Hehath  only  «'a  form  of  godlinefs,"  that  ufeth 

only   the  means  of  religion,  without  regard  to  the 

^nd  and  effed:  of  them.    A  man  may  exercife  his  un- 

derflanding  in   the  fervice   of  God,  and  his  heart 

may  be  touched,  and  his  affedlions  moved  in  prayer, 

and  at  the  hearing  of  God's  word,  and  the  receiving 

of  the  facrament,  and  yet  this  may  be  but  a  form  of 

religion,  if  it  go  no  farther.  If  we  do  not  forfake  thofe 

fins  we  confefs  to  God,  and  daily  beg  the  pardon  of; 

if  we  do  not  truly  and  heartily  endeavour  that  we  may 

live  godly,  and  righteous,  and  fober  lives,  as  well  as  pray 

that  we  may  do  fo  ;  if  the  counfels  and  diredions  of 

God's  word  have  not  an  influence  upon  our  lives  5 

if  we  be  not  awed  by  the  threatnings  of  it  to  leave 

our  fms,  and  encouraged  by  the  promifes  of  it  "  to 

''  cleanfe   ourfelves  from  all   filthinefs  of  flefli  and 

"  fpirit,  and  to  perfect  holinefs  in  the  fear  of  G  o  d  ;'» 

.we  ufc  the  means  of  religion  to  no  purpofe,  and  we 

?3  K  2  difcredi^ 


4658  Of  the  form,  and 

SERM.  difcrcdit  the  inftitutiojis  of  .God,  becaufe  wc  maker 
no  proficiency  under  them.  We  are  jufl:  like  the 
difciples  of  thofe  formal  profefibrs  of  religion,  whom 
the  apoflie  defcribes  after  the  text,  who  are  "  ever 
*'  learning,  but  never  able  to  come  to  the  knowledge 
*'  of  the  truth."  It  feems  they  ufed  the  means  of  in- 
flrudion,  and  continued  to  ufe  them,  "  they  were 
*•  ever  learning  ;*'  but  all  this  while  they  were  un- 
der the  dominion  of  fin,  and  the  power  of  their 
lufts;  "  they  v/ere  laden  with  fins,  and  led  away 
^'  with  divers  lufts,**  and  fo  they  never  attained  to 
that  which  the  apoftle  calls  "  the  knowledge  of  the 
"  truth,''  that  is,  fuch  a  knowledge  of  the  do6lrine 
of  Christ,  as  is  accompanied  with  a  fuitable 
pradice,  according  to  that  of  our  Saviour,  John 
viii.  31.  "  If  ye  continue  in  my  word,"  that  is,  if 
ye  pradife  my  doubrine,  "  then  are  ye  my  difciples 
*'  indeed,  and  ye  fiiall  know  the  truth,  and  the  truth 
*'  fhall  make  you  free."  Then  men  come  to"  the 
"  knowledge  of  the  truth,"  when  *'  it  frees  them  '• 
from  the  flavery  of  fin.  If  our  knowledge  have  not 
this  effe^b,  it  fignifies  nothing,  and  does  not  deferve 
the  name  of  knowledge,  becaufe  "  we  know  no- 
'*  thing  in  religion  as  we  ought  to  know."  i  John  ii. 
2,  3.  fpeaking  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ, 
*'  hereby  do  wc  know  that  we  know  him,  if  we 
"  keep  his  commandments.  He  that  faith  he  knows 
*'  him,  and  keepeth  not  his  commandmentSj  is  a 
^'  liar,  and  the  truth  is  not  in  him." 

III.  He  hath  only  a  form  of  rehgion,  who  is  grofly 
and  knowingly  defecftive  in  the  pradice  of  any  part 
of  it.  And  this  fort  of  perfons  are  thofe,  whorrl  the 
apoftle  particularly  intended  here  in  the  text.  For 
jltich  were  they  y/hom  he  defcribes  by  this-  charadler, 

that 


the  power  of  godlinefs.  4659 

diat  "  they  had  a  form  of  godlinefs,  but  denied  the  SERM. 
''  power  of  it.*'     Under  the  garb  of  rehgion  which 
they  had  put  on,  they  were  grofly  faulty  in  their  lives 
and  pradiice,  and  mainly  defedlive  in  many  of  the  ef- 
fential  duties   of  chriftianity ;  they  were  felfifh  and 
covetous,  vain-glorious  and  difpifers  of  others,  calum- 
niators and  flanderers,  undutiful  to  their  fuperiors,  and 
unthankful  to  thofe  that  had  obliged  them,  fierce  and 
ill-natured,  treacherous  and  falfe  to  their  word,  perfe- 
ciitors  of  thofe  that  were  good,  filthy  and  fenfual ;  not 
that  every  one  of  them  had  all  theie  vices,  they  are  io 
many  and  grofs,  that  no  cloke  of  religion  could  have 
cover'd  them  \  but  theapoftle  means  that  among  thofe 
that  made  an  empty  profefiion  of  religion,  thcfe  vices 
.were  vifible,  fome  of  them  in  one,  and  fome  in  anO' 
then  And  the  living  in  any  one  of  thefe,  or  any  other 
of  the  like  nature,  is  inconfiflent  with  chriftianity.  The 
power  of  religion  appears  chiefly  in  the  fubduing  of 
thefe  lufts,  and  in  the  exercife  and  pradlce  of  thofe  graces 
and  virtues  which  are  contrary  to  thefe.   Here  the  very 
heart  and  life  of  religion  lies,  and  thefe  are  the  veins  in 
which  it  runs  5  and  if  there  be  a  failure  in  any  of  thefe 
main  virtues  of  a  chriftian  hSt^  it  is  a  plain  cafe,  that  we 
are  deftitute  of  the  power  of  religion,  and  do  only 
make  a  vain  and  empty  fhewof  it.  St.  James  inftanceth, 
as  one  would  think,  in  none  of  the  groffeft  and  mofl 
confiderable  of  thele,   the  government  of  our  tongue, 
and  yet  he  peremptorily  determines,  that  the  want  of 
this  virtue  is  enough  to  deftroy  all  a  man's  other  pre- 
tences to  religion,  chap  i.  26.  "  if  any  man  among  you 
^ «  feem  to  be  religious,  and  bridleth  not  his  tongue,  but 
"  deceives  his  own  heart ;  this  man's  religion  is  vain." 
So  that  by  the  pradlice  ornegled:  of  thefe  main  vir- 
tues of  a  good  life,  ^wtvy  man  may  examine  and  judge 

himfelf. 


4660  Of  the  form,  and ' 

S  E  R  M.  himfelf.  This  is  the  rule  which  our  Saviour  gives 
to  try  the  religion  of  men  by,  Matth.  vii.  16,  17, 
"  Ye  ihall  know  thenn  by  their  fruits.  Do  men  gather 
*'  grapes  of  thorns,  or  figs  of  thiftles  ?  Even  fo  every 
*'  good  tree  bringeth  forth  good  fruit;  but  a  corrupt 
*'  tree  bringeth  forth  evil  fruit.  A  good. tree  cannot 
*'  bring  forth  evil  fruit ;  neither  can  a  corrupt  tree 
*'  bring  forth  gooJ  fruit.  Wherefore  by  their  fruits 
*'  ye  fhall  know  them."  Tlie  force  of  which  r&afon- 
ing  is  this,  that  every  tree  bringeth  forth  fruit  ac- 
cordi  g  to  its  nature,  and  by  the  kind  and  quality  of 
the  fruit  you  may  certainly  know  what  the  tree  is.  So 
by  the  good  or  bad  a6lions  of  mens  lives,  you  may 
know  by  what  principle  they  are  govern'd,  whether 
the  fear  of  God,  or  the  love  of  fin  bear  fway  in  them ; 
the  courfe  of  their  lives  will  difcover  the  bent  and 
inclination  of  their  minds,  whatever  fhew  and  pro- 
feffion  they  may  make  to  the  contrary.  "  By  their 
"  fruits  ye  fhali  know  them.  Not  every  one  that 
'•  faith  unto  me,  Lo  r  d,  Lor  d,"  (there  is  fome 
profefTionof  religion)  "  fhall  enter  into  the  kingdom 
*'  of  heaven:  but  he  that  doth  the  will  of  my  Fa- 
"  T  H  E  R  which  is  in  heaven  j"  (there  is  the  power 
of  it.) 

I  would  by  no  means  encourage  men  to  be  over 
cenforious  toward  others,  there  is  too  much  of  that 
fpirit  already  in  the  world ;  but  it  is  not  amifs  that 
men  fhould  be  ftricl  and  fcvere  toward  themfelves. 
And  would  to  Go  d  men  would  bring  themfelves  to 
this  ted,  and  examine  the  truth  and  fincerity  of  their 
religion,  not  by  the  leaves  of  an  outward  profeirion*  ^ 
but  by  the  fruits  it  produceth  in  their  lives.  Every 
man  that  will  but  take  the  pains  to  look  into  himfelf, 
and  to   obferve  his  own  anions,  may  by  comparing 

the 


the  pO'wer  of  godlinefs,  4661 

the  temper  of  his  mind,  and  the  general  courfe  oF  his  SE  RM. 
life  and  practice,  with  the  rules  and  precepts  of  reli- 
gion, eafily  difccrn  what  power  and  efficacy  religion 
hath  on  him.     A  man  may  as  certainly  know  him- 
f<?lf,  and  make  as  fure  a  judgment  of  his  ftate  and 
condition  toward  God  in  this  way,  as  "  a  tree  is  known 
*'  by  its  fruit."  Therefore  let  us  not  flatter  ourfelves: 
for  if  we  indulge  any  lull,  or  irregular  paffion  in  our 
fouls,  and  do  not  endeavour  to  n:iortify  and  fjbdue  it  5 
if  we  allow  ourfelves  in  any  vicious  pra6tice  in  our 
lives  i  we  do  but  deceive  ourfelves  with  an  opinion  of 
our  godlinefs,  and  v/hatcver  fhew  and  appearance  we 
may  mske  of  religion,  we  arc  certainly  deftitute  of 
the  power  of  it.     True  religion  and  godiincfs  is  an 
uniform  principle,  which  inclines  a  man  to  all  holi- 
nels  and  goodnefs,  and  does  bias  him  againft  all  known 
fm  and  wickednefs.     All  the  motives  and  arguments 
of  religion,  and  all  confiderations  of  piety  are  levelFd 
againft  all  fm,  and  tend  to  engage  men  to  univerfal 
holinefs  of  life.    Bonum  conftat  ex  integris  caufiSy  fed 
malum  ex  quolihet  defe5tu  :  the  })rad:ice  of  any  one  vice 
is  enough  to  render  a  man  a  bad  man  ;  but  there  mud 
be  the   concurrence  of  all  the  parts  of  religion  and 
virtue,  to  make  a  man  good. 

I  proceed  to  the  fourth  thing!  propounded,  which 
was  to  (hew,  that  "  a  form  of  godlinefs,"  without 
*'  the  power  of  it,"  is  infignificarit  to  all  the  great 
ends  and  purpofes  of  religion.  The  great  ends  that 
men  can  reafonably  propound  to  themielves  in  being^ 
religious,  are  thefe  three. 

I.  The  pleafmg  of  God. 

II.  The  peace  and  tranquillity  of  our  own  minds. 

III.  The  faving  of  our  fouls.  Now  a  form  of  god- 
iincfs, without  the  power  of  it,  is  unavailable  to  all 
thefe  purpofes.  i-  To 


4662  of  the  form,  and 

S E  R  M.      J.  To  the  pleafing  of  G  o  d.     External  devcti'or?, 
and  cxercifing  ourfclves  in  the  means  and  inftrumenrs 
of  religion,  and  the  profeffion  of  a  right   belief,  or 
any  other  form  of  religion  whatfoever,  do  not  recom- 
mend any  man  to  the  divine  favour  and  acceptance, 
without  the  real  effeds  of  reh'gion  \n  a  good  \\\z  :  nay, 
fo  far  is  it  from  this,  that  all  forms  of  religion,  defbi- 
tute  of  the  life  and  power  of  it,  are  extremely  odious 
and  offenfive  to  him.     Devotion  in  prayer  without  a 
holy  life,  is  but  a  rude  and  troubiefome  noife  in  the 
ears  of  the  almighty.  "  The  prayer  of  the  wicked^'* 
is  fo  far  from  being  accepted,  that  it  is  ^'  an  abomina- 
^'  tion  to  him."    He  does  not  love  to  be  invoked  by 
unhallowed  mouths,  and  to  be  praifed  by  the  workers 
of  iniquity.    Flattery  is  hateful  to  a  wife  man,  much 
more  to  the  infinitely  wife  God.     He  cannot  endure 
that  men  fhoald  lift  up  eyes  to  him  "  that  are  full  of 
"  adultery,  and  hands  fili'd  with  violence  and  oppref- 
*'  fion,  and  tread  his  courts  with  kct  ready  to  Hied 
"  blood."  It  is  an  affront  to  God  to  be  worfhipped 
by  evil-doers,  and  to  fee  men  diligent  in  reading  his 
word,  and  attending  to  his  law,  who  break  it  every 
day.  "  Unto  the  wicked  God  faith,  what  haft  thou 
*'  to  do  to  declare  my  ftatutes,  or  that  thou  fhouldft 
"  take  my  covenant  in  thy  mouth,  feeing  thou  hateft 
«  to  be  reformed,  and  cafteft  my  words  behind  thy 
«  back.?"   What  God  fays  of  the  facrifices  of  the 
Jews,  offered  to  him  by  *'  a  finful  people,  laden  with 
«  iniquity,''  may  be  applied  to  the  worfliip  of  chri- 
ftians  who  Jive  wicked  and  abominable  lives,  Ifa.  i. 
II,  12,  &c.    "  To  what  purpofe  is  the  multitude  of 
"  your  facrifices  unto  me,  faith  the  Lo  r  d.?    I  am 
«  full  of  the  burnt-offerings  of  rams,  and  the  fat  of 
"  fed  beafts,  and  I  delight  not  in  the  blood  of  bulls. 


the  power  of  godlinefs,  4663 

«*  or  of  Iambs,  or  of  he-goats.  When  ye  come  to  ap-  S  E RM, 
*^  pear  before  me,  who  hath  required   this  at  your, 
**  hands,  to  tread  my  courts  ?  bring  no  more  vain  ob- 
*'  Jations  Incenfe  is  an  abomination  unto  me  :  the  new 
"  moons,  and  fabbaths,  and  the  calling  of  afTcmblies, 
"  I  cannot  away  with  •,   it  is  iniquity,  even  the  folemn 
"  meetings.     Your  new  moons,  and  your  appointed 
"  feafls  my  foul  hatcth,  they  are  a  trouble  unto  me,  I 
*'  am  weary  to  bear  them.  And  when  you  fpread  forth 
''  your  hands,  I  will  hide  mine  eyes  from  you  :  yea, 
*'  when  you   make  many  prayers,  I  will  not  hear. 
**  Wafh  you,  make  you  clean,  put  away  the  evil  of 
^'  your  doings  from  before  mine  t^f^^  ceafe  to  do  evil, 
"  learn  to  do  well.'*  This  is  that  which  God  expedts 
from  us,  the  amendment  and  reformation  of  our  lives, 
and  without  this  all  our  religious  addrefles  to  him  are 
naufeous  and  abominable.     God  does  hardly  any 
where  in  fcripture  exprefs  fo  great  a  deteftation  of  the 
greateft  fins,  as  he  does  of  the  devotion  of  wicked 
men.  I  will  but  bring  one  text  more  to  this  purpofe^ 
Ifa.  Ixvi.  3.  ''  He  that  killeth  an  ox,  is  as  \^  he  flew 
*'  a  man :  he  that  facrificeth  a  lamb,  as  if  he  cut  off 
"  a  dog's  neck  r  he  that  ofFereth  an  obligation,  as  if 
^'  he  offered  fwines  blood  ;  he  that  burneth  incenfe,  as 
*'  if  he  bleffed  an  idol."     What  is  the  reafon  of  all 
thefc  fevere  exprefTions }  becaufe  they  were  "  the  facri- 
*'  fices  of  the  wicked,  of  thofe  who  had  chofen  their 
*^  own  ways,  and  whofe  foul  delighted  in  their  abo- 
*'  minationsj"   they  worfhipp'd  God  according  to 
his  will,  but  lived  according  to  their  own,  and  there- 
fore they  were  to  him  no  better  than  an  aiTembly  of 
murderers,  and  a  church  of  idolatrous  worfhippers : 
for  this  is  falfe  worlhip,  to  offer  facrifices  to  God,  and 
to  devote  ourfelves  to  the  fervice  of  our  iufts. 

Vol.  X,  23  L  II.  Another 

8, 


4664  Of  the  form ^  and 

SERM.  II,  Another  end  of  religion  is  the  peace  and  tran- 
*  quillity  of  our  own  minds.  And  this  is  not  to  be  attain- 
ed upon  true  and  lading  grounds,  by  any  form  of  re- 
ligion without  the  power  of  it.  Men  may  delude 
themfelvcs  with  fome  falfe  peace,  and  make  a  hard 
fhift  to  ftop  the  loud  and  vehement  clamours  of  their 
confcience  j  but  the  guilt  of  any  vicious  courfe  of  life 
will  frequently  recoil  upon  them,  to  difturb  and  inter- 
rupt their  peace,  and  to  put  out  their  falfe  joy ;  their 
confciences  will  ever  and  anon  give  them  many  fecret 
girds  and  lafhes.  For  no  man  can  knowingly  live  in 
the  practice  of  any  fin,  but  he  mud  be  guilty  to  him- 
felfj  and  whoever  is  guilty,  hath  received  a  fecret 
fting  into  his  heart,  which  is  never  to  be  taken  out 
but  by  repentance,  and  a  thorough  reformation.  God 
hath  faid  it,  and  I  doubt  not  but  every  finner  finds  it 
true,  "  there  is  no  peace  to  the  wicked."  Efpecially 
when  fuch  a  man  is  feizcd  upon  by  ficknefs,  and  ap- 
proaches in  his  thoughts  near  to  eternity,  then  his 
drowfy  confcience  awakes  like  a  hon  out  of  fleep,  full 
of  rage  and  fiercenefs,  and  all  his  falfe  peace  and  com- 
fort vanifheth.  "  For  what  is  the  hope  of  the  hypo- 
''  crite,  when  God  comes  to  take  away  his  foul  ?" 
It  is,  as  Job  elegantly  exprefles  it,  "  like  the  fpider's 
*'  web,*'  artificially  wrought,  but  miferably  weak,  it 
can  endure  no  ftrefs,  upon  the  leafl  touch  it  breaks 
and  vanilheth. 

And  this  is  no  fmall  difadvantagc  which  a  man  that 
hath  only  the  form  of  religion  lies  under,  that  in  t^^d: 
be  lofeth  all  the  pleafure  and  fatisfadlion  of  religion ; 
or  if  he  fancy  any  hope  or  comfort  to  himfelf,  it  is 
built  upon  a  falfe  foundation,  which  when  it  is  tried 
will  endure  no  fliock.  This  is  the  comparifon  our 
Sav  I  o  u  r  ufeth  \n  this  very  cafe,  Matth.  vii.  26,  27. 


the  power  of  godlinefs.  4665 

^^  Every  one  that  heareth  thefe  fayings  of  mine,  and  S  E  R  M. 
•*  doth  them  not  (here  is  a  form  of  godlinefs  without, 
*'  the  power  of  it)  fhall  be  likened  to  a  foohfh  man, 
*'  which  built  his  houfe  upon  the  fand;  and  the  rain 
*'  defcended,  and  the  floods  came,  and  the  winds 
*'  blew,  and  beat  upon  that  houfe,  and  it  fell,  and 
''  great  was  the  fall  of  it."  But  real  and  fubftantial 
religion  is  like  "  a  houfe  built  upon  a  rock,**  which  no 
temped  can  overthrow.  "  Righteoufnefs,  faith  Solo- 
*'  mon,  Prov.  x.  25.  is  an  everlafting  foundation;'* 
it  is  a  continual  fpring  of  joy  and  peace.  There  is  a 
certain  unfpeakable  contentment  and  delight  arifing 
from  a  good  confcience,  and  from  the  fincere  difcharge 
of  our  duty,  which  a  hypocrite  is  a  (tranger  to,  and 
is  never  admitted  to  the  tade  of.  Now  what  an  un- 
comfortable thing  is  this,  for  a  man  to  take  the  pains 
to  feem  to  be  religious,  and  yet  to  lofe  the  real  plca- 
fure  of  religion! 

III.  The  great  end  of  all,  of  being  religious,  is  the 
faving  of  our  fouls.  And  this  end  a  mere  form  of  re- 
ligion will  certainly  mifs  of.  No  external  garb  of  re- 
ligion will  gain  a  man  admiflion  into  heaven  •,  there  h 
no  getting  in  there  in  mafquerade,  no  prayers  will 
then  avail,  though  never  fo  fervent  and  importunate. 
*'  Many  Ihall  fay  in  that  day,  Lord,  Lord, 
''  open  unto  us  -,  and  yet  he  will  bid  them  depart  from 
''  him."  Though  we  had  heard  Christ  himfelf 
preach,  and  had  received  the  blefifcd  facrament  with 
him,  yet  this  will  not  avail.  So  our  S  a  v  i  o  u  r  tells 
us,  Luke  xiii.  26.  "  Then  fliall  they  begm  to  fay,  we 
''  have  eaten  and  drunken  in  thy  prefence,  and  thou 
*'  haft  taught  in  our  ftreets ;  and  yet  he  will  fay  unto 
^^  them,  I  know  not  whence  you  are."  'Tis  not  a 
pretence  tw  infpiration,  no,  though  it  were  juftified  by 
9.%  h  z  piraculous 


ccv. 


4666  Of  the  form^  and 

SERM.  miraculous  gifts,  that  will  then  fland  us  in  {lead.r 
''  Many  fhall  fay  in  that  day,  Lord,  Lord,  have 
*'  we  not  prophefied  in  thy  name,  and  in  thy  name 
*'  have  caft  out  devils,  and  in  thy  name  have  done 
"  many  wondrous  works  ?  "  and  yet  thefe  (hall  be  re- 
jedled.  Why,  what  Hiould  be  the  reafon  of  all  this  fe- 
verity  ?  our  Saviour  gives  us  a  plain  account 
of  it;  becaufe  they  were  "  workers  of  iniquity.'* 
Under  all  thefe  feveral  masks  of  religion,  they  were 
wicked  in  their  lives. 

'Tis  not  an  orthodox  faith,  and  the  belief  of  all  the 
articles  of  chrillianity,  that  will  faveaman,  without 
the  works  of  a  good  life.  Jam.  ii.  14.  "What  doth 
*'  it  profit  a  man,  my  brethren,  though  a  man  fay 
*'  that  he  hath  faiih,  and  hath  nor  works  ?  can  faith 
^^  fave  him  ?  Thou  believell  there  is  one  God;  thou 
«^  doft  well;  the  devils  believe"  this  too,  but  they  are 
not  fo  vain  as  to  hope  to  be  faved  by  this  faith  ;  no, 
they  know  the  contrary,  and  that  makes  them  fear 
and  tremble.  "  Know  then,  O  vain  man,  that  faith 
*'  without  works  is  dead."  Thou  believeil:  ''  in  one 
***  LordJesusChrist,  that  came  down  from 
"  heaven  to  fave  us,  that  was  conceived  by  the  Holy 
''  Gh  osT,  born  of  the  virgin  Mary,  and  became 
««  man,  that  he  might  bring  us  to  God;  that  fuf- 
'^  fered  and  died  for  our  fins,  and  rofe  again  for  our 
*'  juftification,  and  is  afcended  into  heaven,  and  fit- 
v«  tcth  at  the  right  hand  of  God  the  Father  al- 
'*  mighty,  and  from  thence  he  fliaJI  come  again  at  the 
*«  end  of  the  world,  to  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead  ;'* 
thou  doft  well  to  believe  this:  but  if  thou  do  not  live 
accordingly,  what  will  become  of  thee,  when  the 
Son  of  God  fliall  come  to  judge  the  world  ?  Then 
^hc  great  enquiry  will  be,  how  we  have  lived  ?  what 

good 


the  power  of  godlinefs.  4667 

good  we  have  done  ?  So  our  Saviour  reprelents  S  E  R  Mo 
the  proceedings  of  that  great  day.  "  I  was  hungry,  ^^^'• 
''  and  ye  gave  me  no  meat;  I  was  thirfty,  and  ye  "^ 
*'  gave  me  no  drink  \  naked,  and  ye  cloth.ed  me  not ; 
"  Tick  and  in  prifon,  and  ye  vifited  me  not: "  there- 
fore "  depart  ye  curfed  into  everlafting  fire."  So  that 
it  feems  here  the  bufinefs  will  flick,  upon  the  good  and 
bad  anions  of  mens  Jives,  and  accordingly  fentence 
fhall  be  pronounced  upon  them.  For  "  God  will  rcn- 
*'  der  to  every  man  according  to  his  works;  to  them 
*'  that  by  patient  continuance  in  well-doing  feck  for 
"  glory,  and  honour,  and  immortality;  eternal  life: 
*'  but  to  thofe  that  obey  not  the  truth,  but  obey  un- 
"  righteoufnefs ;  indignation  and  wrath,  tribulation 
*'  and  anguifh  upon  every  foul  of  man  that  doth  evil, 
•"^  of  the  Jew  firll,  and  alfo  of  the  Gentile:  but  glory 
"  <}nd  honour,  and  peace  to  every  man  that  worketh 
"  good,  to  the  Jew  fird,  and  alfo  to  the  Gentile: " 
for  "  not  the  hearers  of  the  Jaw  are  jufl  before  God, 
"  but  the  doers  of  the  law  fhall  be  juftilied."  Still 
you  fee  that  *tis  "  to  the  patient  continuance  in  weJI- 
*'  doing,  to  the  obeying  of  the  truth,  to  the  workino^ 
"  of  righteoufnels,'*  that  eternal  life  is  promifed; 
*^'  and  the  wrath  of  God  is  threatened  to  them  that 
*'  obey  unrighteoufnefs,  to  every  foul  of  man  that 
"  doth  evil.  To  the  Jew  firfl,'*  why  fo .?  becaufe  he 
had  great  advantage  of  coming  to  the  knowledge  of 
the  truth,  which  is  fo  much  the  greater  aggravation 
of  his  wicked  life,  and  makes  his  fentence  fo  much 
the  heavier. 

Indeed  it  fhall  be  to  men  at  the  day  of  judgment 
likewile  according  to  their  faith,  in  a  certain  fenfe» 
that  is,  according  to  the  do6lrine  of  the  gofpel  which 
fhey  profefs  to  believe,  according  to  what  our  S  a- 

viou  R 


^668  Of  the  form,  Sec. 

SERM.  viouR  and   his  apollles  have  taught,    that  ^^  thai 

^^^'  , "  workers  of  iniquity  (hall  depart  from  him  ;  that 
'«  without  holinefs  no  man  fhall  fee  the  Lords" 
and  *'  if  we  live  after  the  flefli  we  fhall  die-,'*  that 
«'  no  whoremonger,  nor  adulterer^  nor  covetous, 
*'  nor  unrighteous  perfon,  fhall  have  any  inheritance 
*'  in  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  of  Ch  r  ist." 
This  we  profefs  to  believe,  and  according  to  thefe 
declarations  God  will  proceed  with  men  at  the 
great  day.  And  he  that  believes  this,  and  yet  goes 
on  in  an  innpiecy  and  wickednefs  of  life,  though  his 
faith  will  not  juftify  him,  yet  God  will  juflify  his 
faith,  and  make  it  good,  when  ''  he  fhall  judge  the 
•'  world  in  righteoufnefs." 

Thus  you  fee  plainly,,  that  "  a  form  of  godlinels 
*'  without  the  power,"  is  infignificant  to  all  the 
great  ends  and  purpofes  of  religion ;  nay,  he  that 
takes  up  in  a  form,  does  not  only  Jofe  the  advan- 
tages of  religion  ^  but  he  hath  two  great  difadvan- 
tages  by  it. 

I.  He  hath  the  trouble  of  making  a  fhew  of  reli- 
gion, without  the  real  benefit  of  it. 

II.  He  incurs  a  heavier  fentence  upon  this  very 
account. 

But  thefe  with  the  application  I  ihall  refer  to  the 

next  opportunity. 


SERMON 


I 


[  4669  ] 
SERMON  CCVr. 

Of  the  form,  and  the  power  of  godlinefs, 

z  T  I  M.  iii.  5. 
Having  a  form  ofgodlinefs^  but  denying  the  power  thereof. 

Come  now  to  fhew,  that  he  that  takes  upon  him  SERM. 
a    form  of  rehgion,  without  the  power  of  it,    CCVL 
doth  not   only  lofe  all  the  confidcrable  advan-  -pi^^u-a 

cages  of  religion,  but  he  hath  two  great  difadvan- Sermon  co 

tages  by  it. 

I.  He  hath  the  trouble  of  making  a  fhew  and  ap- 
pearance of  religion,  without  the  real  benefit  of  it. 

II.  He  incurs  a  heavier  fentence  upon  this  account, 
that  he  hath  a  form  of  religion,  and  yet  is  defticute 
of  the  power  of  it. 

I.  He  hath  the  trouble  of  making  a  fliew  and  ap- 
pearance of  religion,  without  the  real  benefits  of  it. 
And  'tis  no  fmall  trouble  to  perlbnate  and  a(5t  a  part 
v/ell,  it  requires  great  art  and  attention,  great  guard 
and  caution.  That  which  men  are  prompted  to  by  an 
inward  principle,  is  natural  and  eafy,  it  is  done  with 
pleafure  and  delight;  but  whatever  is  artificial  and 
counterfeit,  is  ftiff  and  forc'd.  Nemo  ficlain  perfonam 
diu  fujiinere  potejiy  ''  no  man  can  difTembJe  always,'* 
one  time  or  other  he  will  be  furprifed  and  forget  him- 
felf  and  let  his  mask  fall.  A  form  of  religion  is  a  dry 
unpleafant  thing,  and  a  continual  burden  to  him  that 
aflumes  it,  and  the  more  outwardly  (trift  and  holy  he 
is,  he  is  the  more  inwardly  guilty  •,  his  confcience  never 
ftings  and  galls  him  more,  than  when  he  is  playing 

the 


4670  Of  th's  fortUy  and 

S  E  R  M.  the  hypocrite  with  God  and  men  :  whereas  a  truly 
CCVi.  .  .  ^      . 

good  man,  when  he  employs  himfelf  in  afts  of  reli- 
gion, or  juftice,  or  charity,  he  doth  it  naturally^  and 
hath  a  mighty  fatisfadion  of  mind  in  the  doing  of 
ix.^  and  if  he  were  permitted  to  make  his  own  choice, 
he  would  not  do  otherwife  \  but  a  hypocrite  puts  a 
force  upon  himfelf  all  the  while,  and  adls  againft 
his  nature  and  inclinations,  every  thing  he  does  in 
religion  goes  againft  the  grain,  and  becaufe  it  is 
unnatural  mud  be  uneafy ;  his  outward  converfation 
and  demeanour  is  {tt^  and  in  a  frame,  he  does  not 
move  as  he  would,  but  as  he  muft,  and  the  fecret 
propenfions  of  his  nature  are  under  a  continual  re- 
ftraint. 

He  hath  indeed  one  advantage  by  his  artificial 
garb,  that  he  can  more  fecurely  over-reach  and  de- 
fraud others  by  his  fhew  of  godlinefs,  while  men 
are  not  aware  of  his  difTimulation.  But  this  com- 
monly does  not  Jaft  long,  and  only  fcrves  a  man  for 
a  few  turns ;  and  when  'tis  difcover'd,  the  man  is 
lofl",  and  no  body  will  truft  him.  But  fuppofe  he 
could  {^v^  himfelf  of  religion  this  way  for  fome 
confiderable  time,  where  is  the  advantage  ?  it  amounts 
to  no  more  than  this,  that  the  man  hath  the  oppor- 
tunity of  being  a  greater  finner,  of  making  himfelf 
more  miferable,  and  "  treafuring  up  to  himfelf  more 
*'  wrath  againft  the  day  of  wrath.'*  So  that  he 
pays  dear  for  all  this  in  the  end  and  ilTue,  as  w^Yi 
as  in  the  way.  He  fpcnds  many  a  tedious  hour  m 
the  fervice  of  God,  and  the  exercife  of  religion; 
more  it  may  be  than  many  do,  who  lave  their  fouls, 
and  get  to  heaven.  For  as  to  the  external  part  of 
religion,  a  hypocrite  muft  do  all  that  which  a  truly 
religious  man  docs  ;  he  muft  frequent  the  church, 

and 


the  power  of  godlinefs.  ^()ji 

and  make  as  much  fliew  of  devotion  as  the  beft;SERM, 

CCVI 
nay,  it  may  be  he  prays  more,    and    falls  oftner,  ^^^^.^ 

and   IS  more  bufy,  and  keeps  a  greater  flir  in  i\\q 

outward  part  of  religion,  than  the  fincere  chriftian  ; 

for  being  confcious  to  himfelf  of  bis  own  hollownels 

and  infincerity  in  religion,  he  thinks  himfelf  obliged 

outwardly  to  over-ad:  it  in  unfeafonable  and  fuper- 

ilitious  obfervances,  and  in  all  other  arts  of  affecfted  ' 

devotion  ;  and  when  he  goes  abroad  into  the  world, 

he  is  forced  to  lay  great  reliraints  upon  himfelf,  and 

to  be  continually  gathering  his  cloke  about  him,  as 

being  afraid  led  any  body  fhould  fpy  what  is  under 

it.     So  much  more  troublefome  it  is  for  any  man 

to  feem  to  be  rehgious,   than  to  be  fo  indeed. 

II.  K  mere  form  of  vtYigioxi  does  upon  fome  ac- 
counts bring  a  man  under  a  heavier  fentence,  than 
if  he  were  openly  profane  and  irreligious.  He  that 
makes  a  fhev/  of  religion,  flatters  God,  but  all  the 
while  ads  and  defigns  againft  him  :  v/hereas  the 
profane  man  deals  plainly,  and  though  he  be  a  mon- 
ftrous  and  unnatural  rebel,  yet  he  is  a  fiiir  and 
open  enemy  ;  and  the  kifTes  of  a  falfe  friend  are 
more  hateful  than  the  wounds  of  an  open  enemy. 
Upon  this  account  it  is  that  our  Saviour  denoun- 
ceth  fo  many  fevere  woes  againil  the  Scribes  and 
Pharifees,  becaufe  they  were  wicked  under  a  fhevy  of 
religion.  "  Wo  unto  you  Scribes  and  Phrrifees,  hy- 
"^  pocrites  :  "  and  when  he  would  fet  forth  t;he  fe ve- 
rity of  the  Lord  againft  the  evil  fervanr.  Match. 
xxiv.  51.  he  exprefleth  it  thus,  "  he  fhall  cut  him 
"  afunder,  and  appoint  him  his  portion  with  the 
"  hypocrites  •,  there  fhall  be  weeping  and  gnaihing 
<«  of  teeth."     As  if  the  punifhment  of  hypocrites. 

Vol..  X,  23  M  were 

8. 


4672  Of  ^^^  form^  and 

S  E  R  M.  were  the  rule  and  ftandard  of  the  fevered  putiifli- 
CCVI.  ^ttnt,     "  He  fhall  appoint  him  his  portion   with 
^^'^  the  hypocrites." 

I  will  not  deny  but  that  a  profane  man  is  a  worfe 
example  to  the  world,  and  may  do  more  mifchief 
upon  that  account :  but  the  hypocrite  is  more  mif- 
chievous  to  himfelf,  and  of  the  two  more  odious  to 
G0D5  and  fometimes  does  more  prejudice  to  reli- 
gion by  undermining  it,  than  the  ocher  does  by  all 
his  open  alTaults  and  batteries.  God  cannot  endure 
to  be  affronted  :  but  he  hates  to  be  mocked.  So  that 
upon  this  account,  it  is  like  to  go  harder  with  the 
formal  profeffors  of  religion,  than  with  the  open 
contemners  of  it. 

And. thus  I  have  done  with  the  four  things  I  pro- 
pounded to  fpeak  to  from  thefe  words ;  wherein  "  a. 
«'  form  of  godlinefs  ^'  does  confift  \  wherein  "  the 
*'  power  of  it'*  lies  y  by  what  marks  and  charac- 
ters we  may  know  when  thefe  are  feparated ;  and 
that  "  a  form  of  religion  '*  without  ''  the  power  of 
«^  it,"  is  infignificant  to  all  the  great  ends  and  pur- 
pofes  of  religion  j  and  not  only  h^  but  it  is  greatly 
to  mens  difadvantage  to  affume  "  a  form  of  godli- 
<*  nefs,"  if  they  be  deilitute  of"  the  power  of  it." 

All  that  now  remains,  is  to  draw  fome  inferences 
from  this  difcourfe  by  way  of  application  ;  and  they 
fhall  be  thefe  three. 

Firft,  to  take  heed  of  miftaking  ^'  the  form  of 
^^  religion,  for  the  power  of  it." 

Secondly,  to  take  heed  of  being  captivated  and  fe- 
duced  by  thofe  who  have  only  *'  a  form  of  godlinefs.'* 
Thirdly,  to  perfuade  men  to  mind  the  life,  and 
power,  and  fubllance  of  religion. 

Firft,  to  take  heed  of  miftaking  "   the  form  of 

"  religion. 


cs 


the  power  of  godllnefs,  4673 

religion,  for  the  power  of  it."  The  papifts  have  S  E  R  M. 
almoft  confined  the  words  religion  and  reli- 
crious  to  cloifters  and  monks;  and  they  make 
a  religious  life  to  confiil  in  mafles  and  ave-maries, 
and  pater-nod ers,  in  the  obfervation  of  canonical 
hours,  and  the  diftindlions  of  meats  and  habits,  in 
coarfe  clothes,  and  a  difiembled  poverty,  and  feveral 
bodily  rigours  and  feverities.  As  if  to  make  a  m.an 
a  religious  and  good  man,  it  were  necefiary  that  he 
Ihould  be  dreit  fantaftically,  and  in  a  great  many  in- 
different things  be  different  from  other  men.  Nay, 
io  far  doth  this  fuperftition  prevail,  that  a  great  many 
think  that  they  fhould  hardly  get  to  heaven  without 
lij  or  that  it  will  be  very  miUch  for  their  advan- 
tage, if  tl^y  be  buried  in  the  habit  of  a  religious 
man  :  as  if  to  be  put  in  a  monk's  coul,  would  give 
a  man  the  flart  of  other  people  at  the  refurredion. 
But  what  reafon  is  there  that  the  name  and  title  of 
religion  fhould  be  appropriated  to  thele  uiages  ?  does 
the  fcripture  any  where  conftitute  religion  in  thefe 
things,  or  confine  it  to  them  ?  are  not  thefe  volun- 
tary things,  which  God  ties  no  man  to  ?  whence 
then  come  they  to  fwallow  up  the  name  of  religion, 
and  to  engrofs  it  to  themfelves,  as  if  they  were  the 
very  life  and  foul  of  chriftianity ,  when  the  great 
author  of  our  religion  Jesus  Christ,  and  his 
blefTed  apoftles,  never  fpake  one  word  of  them  ? 
what  an  abufe  of  language  is  this,  to  confine  the 
name  of  religion  to  that  which  h  not  fo  much  as 
any  part  of  it ! 

But  the  church  of  Rome  is  not  alone  guilty  of 

this ;  among  our  felves  it  is  very  ordinary  to  miflake 

*'  the  form  of  godlinefs  for  the  power,"  though  the 

niillake  is  not  fo  grols,  as  in  thofe  particulars  I  have 

23  M  2  mentioned. 


4^74  Of  the  form,  and 

^CCvf'  "^^"^^°^^^-  ^^^  ^^^y  are  there,  who  talk  as  if 
''  the  power  of  gidiinefs"  confifted  in  nothing  elfe 
but  a  daily  task  oi'  devotion,  in  frequent  hearing  of 
fermons,  and  a  ftridl  obfervation  of  the  Lord's- 
day.  Thefe  are  very  good  things ;  but  they  are  but 
"  a  form  of  godlinefs,"  and  may  be,  and  often  are 
without  "  the  power  of  it,"  they  are  but  the 
means  and  inftruments  of  religion,  but  not  the  great 
end  and  dcfign  of  it  j  that  confills  in  the  renewing 
of  our  natures,  and  the  reformation  of  our  lives; 
"  in  righteoufnefs  and  true  holincfs,  in  mortifying 
"  the  fleih  with  the  affedions  and  lufts  of  it,"  fuch 
as  are  "  adultery,  fornication,  hatred,  variance, 
''  wrath,  fedition,  envying,  murder,  drunkennefs : 
"  for  they  v/hich  do  fuch  things,  cannot^  inherit  the 
*^  kingdom  of  God  ;"  and  in  "  the  fruits  of  the 
''  S  p  I  R  I  T,"'  fuch  as  are  ''  love,  joy,  peace,  long- 
*'  fuffering,  gentlenefs,  goodnefs,  fidelity,  meeknefs, 
"  temperance,"  as  the  apoRle  reckons  them  up^ 
Gal.  v.  21.  Thefe  are  real  and  fenfible  effedls  of 
religion  ;  and  the  means  of  religion,  if  they  be  fin- 
cerely  ufed,  do  all  tend  to  the  begetting  and  increaf- 
ino-  of  thefe  in  us :  lb  that  it  is  a  grofs  miRake  to 
talk  of  "  the  power  of  religion''  without  thefe. 
"Wiioever  is  deftitute  of  thefe,  whatever  attainments 
in  religion  he  may  pretend  to,  is  got  no  farther  than 
"  a  form  of  godlinefs,"  he  is  not  yet  under  the 
power  of  it.     This  is  the  firft. 

Secondly,  let  us  be  cautioned  againft  being  capti- 
vated and  feduced  by  thofe,  who  have  only  "  a  form 
<'  of  godlinefs."  This  is  the  apoftle's  exhortation 
here  in  the  text,  ''  from  fuch  turn  away  :  for  of  this 
"  fort  arc  tlicy  which  creep  into  houfes,  and  lead 
"  captive  filly   women"     To  the  ilime  purpofe  i? 

our 


the  power  of  godlinefs.  A^75 

our  S  A V I  o  u  r's  caution,  Matth.  vii.  i  ^,  1 6.  "  Be-  S  E  R  M, 
^'  ware  of  falfe  prophets,  which  come  to  you  in 
"  flieeps  clothing,  but  inwardly  they  are  ravening 
*'  wolves."  And  that  we  may  know  how  to  avoid 
them,  our  S  av  i  o  u  r  bids  us  to  obferve  their  lives, 
"  ye  ihall  know  them  by  their  fruits."  He  does 
not  bid  us  examine  their  opinions,  and  try  their 
pretences  to  infpiration  ;  that  is  a  thing  many  times 
above  the  capacity  of  the  ordinary  fort  of  men  ;  but 
their  li  /es  and  anions  are  open  to  every  man's  view ; 
and  though  it  is  poflible  men  may  counterfeit  even 
in  this,  yet  they  feldom  do  it  fo  exadlly,  as  not  to 
betray  themfelves  fome  time  or  other  :  however  this 
of  all  other  is  t\\Q  eafieil  and  fureil  rule  ;  "  by  their 
'^  fruits  ye  lliall  know  them." 

Therefore  if  any  man  pretend  to  any  new  difco- 
veries  in  religion,  beyond  what  is  plainly  revealed  in 
fcripture,  though  he  appear  in  never  fo  fandimonious 
a  garb,  be  not  moved  with  this  :  for  ''  the  power 
"  of  religion  "  does  not  confift  in  any  thing  now  to 
be  difcover'd  ;  but  in  thofe  things  which  are  clearly 
contained  in  the  word  of  G  o  d,  in  the  precepts  and 
diredlions,  and  in  the  motives  and  arguments  to  a 
good  life ;  and  whoever  hves  according  to  thcfe,  is 
in  the  bed  way  to  heaven  that  any  man  can  put 
himfelf  into  ;  and  he  need  not  trouble  himfelf  about 
thofe  new  lights  and  opinions,  which  in  every  age 
appear  like  comets,  and  glare  a-while,  and  draw  peo- 
ple to  gaze  upon  them,  and  then  vaniili.  And  none 
are  fo  much  to  be  fufpedled  of  "  a  form  of  religion" 
as  thofe  who  make  frequent  changes  in  it,  and  wan- 
der from  one  party  and  opinion  to  another.  An 
outward  form  and  fliape  is  eafiiy  changed;  it  is  that 
which  a  man  fhifcs  and  puts  off  at  pleafure. 

Thirdly, 


^676  Of  the  form^  and 

S  E  R  m:.       Thirdly,  to  perfuade  men  to  mind  the  power,  and 
^y^  life,  and  lubftance  of  religion.     It  was  the  commen- 
dation of  Socraces,  the  beft  of  philofophers,   that  he 
did  philofophiam  de  ccelo  deducere^  "  bring  down  phi- 
*='  lofophy  from  heaven  to  earth,"    that    is,    from 
contem.plation  to  pradice,  and  from  being  an  arc  of 
talking  and  difputing  to  be  an  art  of  living.     This 
I  defire  may  be  the  aim  of  all  my  difcourfes,  to  in- 
ftru6t  men  in  religion  in  order  to  the  pra6lice  of  it, 
£0  teach  men  "to  know  God,  in   St.  John's  fenfe, 
I  John  ii.  3.  "  Hereby  we  know  that  we  know  him, 
^^  if  we   keep   his   commandm.ents."     This  is  the 
oreat  end  and  fcope,  to  which  all  difcourfes  of  reli- 
gion ought  to  be  leveird.      It  was  a  good  faying  of 
pacuvius^  ego   odi   homines  ignavd  operd^  i^  philofo- 
phos  fententid^  ''  I  hate  men  that  are  unadive  in  their 
*'  lives,  and  philofophers  in  their  opinions  *'     Chri- 
{lianity  is  the  bed  philofophy,  and  the  mod  perfedc 
inftitation  of  life  that  ever  the  world  was  acquainted' 
withal  j  and  therefore  it  is  much  more  odious  to  fee 
men  chriftians  in  their  profefTion,  and  faulty  and  vi- 
cious  in  their  lives ,  becaufe  the  very  defign  of  the 
chriftian  religion,  is  to  give  men  a  perfed  and  plain 
law  and  rule  of  life,  and  to  enforce  this  law  by  the 
moft  powerful  and  prevailing  arguments.     So  that 
as  Tully  fays   concerning  the  philofopher  who  lived 
but  a  bad  life,  that  he  was  utterly  inexcufable,  quodi?z 
CO  cnjiis  magifter  ejje  vuU  labitur,  arte?n  vit^e  pyofejjus^ 
delinquit  in  vita  •,  "  becaufe  he  faiPd   in  that  wherein 
*'  he  pretended  to  be  a  m.afler,  and  while  he  pro- 
*'  fefled  to  have  an   art  of  living  better  than  other 
**  men,  he  offended  and  mifcarried    in   his  life :  " 
all  defeds  m  the  pradice,  and  in  the  virtues    of  a 
good  life,  may  with  much  more  rcafon  and  juftice  be 

upbraided 


the  pO'^MT  of  godlinefs.  4677 

tspbraided  to  chriftians,  to  thofe  "  who  have  learned  s  E  R  M. 
''  Christ,  who  have  heard  him,  and  been  taught  ,^^^^^ 
*'  by  him,  as  the  truth  is  in  J  e  s  u  s  i"  to  thofe  who 
are  blefs'd  with  the  clearefl  and  moil  perfecfl  revelation 
which  ever  God  made  to  the  world,  the  holieft  and 
mofl  rcafonable  religion,  which  furnifheth  us  with  the 
beft  counfels  and  diredions,  the  mofl  prevalent  mo- 
tives and  arguments,  and  the  greateft  helps  and  advan- 
tages to  a  good  life  ;  a  religion  plain  and  fimple,  that 
hath  lefs  of  outward  form  and  pomp,  and  more  of 
fubflance  a^d  reality,  than  any  religion  that  ever 
was  known  in  the  v/orld. 

What  a  fad  thing  is  it^  that  a  religion  h  wholly 
fitted  and  calculated  to  the  defign  and  purpofe  of  a 
good  life,  arm'd  with  fuch  powerful  confiderations 
to  engage  men  thereto,  Ihould  yet  have  fbJittle  force 
and  power  upon  the  lives  of  men,  as  we  fee  it  ge« 
nerally  to  have !  as  if  "  the  grace  of  G  o  d  had  never 
*'  appeared  to  men,  to  teach  them  to  deny  ungodli- 
"  nefs  and  worldly  lufts,  and  to  live  foberly,  and  rio-h^ 
*'  teoufly,  and  godly  m  this  prefent  world," 

There  was  hardly  ever  any  age,  wherein  the  form 
of  religion  did  more  abound,  and  there  were  greater ' 
variety  in  them ;  and  it  is  to  be  feared  that  there  was 
never  lefs  of  the  power  and  efficacy  of  it. 

I  will  inftance  in  two  great  defedls  in  the  lives  and 
pradlice  of  chriftians,  which  are  vifible  to  every  one,^ 
but  are  fad  indications  how  litde  the  power  of  religion, 
prevails  among  men  ;  I  mean  the  want  of  common 
honefty  and  integrity  among  men,  and  the  want  of 
peace  and  love  -,  the  firft  of  which  is,  the  great  virtue 
of  civil  converfation,  and  the  other  the  great  bond 
both  of  civil  and  ecclefiaftical  focieties.  Thefe  are  two 
great  duties  of  religion  frequently  mentioned,  and 

ilriaiy 


j^6yS  Of  the  form^  and 

SERM.  ftridtly  charged  upon  the  confciences  of  men  In  fcrip- 
'  ture :  and  yet  how  rare  is  the  pradlice  of  them  in  the 
Jives  of  chriftians  ?  thefe  are  two  main  defeds  in  tc- 
ligion,  and  a  plain  demonftration  of  "  a  form  of  reli- 
**  gion,  without  the  power  of  it.*' 

I.  The  want  of  common  honefly  and  integrity 
among  men.  So  indeed  it  ufed  to  be  called,  common 
honefty  j  but  it  grows  fo  rare  now,  that  it  is  like  to 
lofe  that  name.  "  Righteoufnefs,  truth  and  faithfulnefs 
'*  are  almoft  failed  from  among  the  children  of  men;" 
all  ranks  of  men  have  corrupted  themfelves  in  this 
kind  j  this  is  grown  almofl:  an  univerfal  depravation, 
there  is  hardly  any  trade  or  profelTion  which  hath  not 
fomethincy  of  knavery  and  falfhood  woven  into  the 
very  myftery  of  it,  and  is  become  almoft  a  nec-eiTary 
part  of  it.  Where  is  the  generous  honefty  and  up- 
ric^htnefs  which  did  heretofore  pofTefs  the  fpirits  of 
men,  and  which  is  an  infeparable  companion  of  true 
courac^e  ?  but  we  are  now  pafTing  apace  into  foreign 
manners  and  vices,  and  any  form  of  religion  will 
ferve,  when  juftice  and  integrity  are  gone. 

II.  The  want  of  peace  and  love.  How  full  of 
fadtions  and  divifions  are  we?  and  thefe  managed 
with  all  imaginable  heat  and  animofity  one  to- 
ward another  -,  as  if  the  badge  of  chriftianity  were 
chano-ed,  and  our  Saviour  had  faid,  "  hereby 
"  fhall  ail  men  know  that  ye  are  my  difciples,  if  ye 
*'  hate  one  another." 

All  the  differences  among  chriftians,  of  what  de- 
nomination foever,  are  fadly  to  be  lamented ;  but  I 
almoft  defpairas  to  the  difference  between  us  and  the 
church  of  Rome,  becaufe  the  reconciliation  is  impof-  , 
fible,  unlefs  they  renounce  their  principles.  They  can- 
not come  over  to  us,  becaufe  they  think  they  are  in- 

faUible '. 


the  power  of  godlinefs,  4^79 

fallible;  and  we  cannot  pais  over  to  them,  becaufe  SERM. 
we  know  they  are  deceived  ;  fo  that  there  is  '^  a  great 
*'  gulf  between  us  and  them."  We  mud  not  only  re- 
nounce the  fcriptures,  but  our  reafon  and  our  lenfes, 
to  be  of  their  mind.  We  cannot  communicate  with 
them  in  the  facrament,  becaufe  they  have  taken  away 
one  half  of  it,  which  is  as  plainly  inftituted  and  com- 
mandcd,  as  the  other  part  which  is  Itiz.  We  cannot 
worfhip  the  virgin  Mary,  and  the  faints,  much  lefs 
their  images,  becaufe  it  is  written,  *'  thou  flialt  wor- 
"  (hip  the  Lord  thy  God,  and  him  only  fhalc 
"  thou  ferve.  Thou  ihalt  not  make  to  thyfeif  any 
''  graven  image,  nor  the  likenefs  of  any  thing  that  is 
"  in  heaven  above,  or  in  the  earth  beneath,  or  in  the 
''  water  under  the  earth  ;  thou  fhalt  not  bow  down 
''  to  them,  nor  worfhip  them  ;  for  I  the  Lord  thy 
*'  God  am  a  jealous  God."  In  fhort,  feveral  of 
their  articles  of  faith  are  fuch,  as  no  credulity  can  fv/al- 
low  ;  and  feveral  parts  of  their  worfhip  are  fuch,  as 
no  piety  can  join  with. 

Bat  this  we  bewail,  that  thofe  who  agree  in  the  faine 
effentials  of  faith  and  worfhip,  fhould  be  fo  forward 
to  divide  and  feparate  from  one  another,  merely  upon 
forms  of  government,  and  circumftances  of  worfhip. 
What  can  juftify  the  breach  of  communion  and  peace 
upon  fuch  terms  ?  either  church  government  is  of  di- 
vine right,  or  it  is  not.  If  it  be,  why  do  not  men 
fubmit  to  the  form  which  is  eftablifh'd  by  authority  ? 
if  it  be  not,  what  kind  of  government  can  contend 
for  that  right,  with  any  equality  of  advantage,  againfl 
that  which  cannot  be  deniecf  to  have  almofl  univer- 
fally  obtained  in  moft  ages  and  parts  of  the  chrifliaa 
world  ? 

VoL.X,  23  N  A* 

8, 


CCVI. 


4680  Of  the  form^  and 

S  E  R  M.  As  for  the  circumftances  of  worfhip  there  is  fcarce 
any  man  hath  the  face  to  contend,  that  any  of  thole 
ufed  In  our  church  are  clearly  condemned  by  the  word 
of  Go  d;  and  what  elfe  can  make  them  unlawful  ? 
One  of  the  chief  caufes  of  feparation,  is  a  form  of 
prayer  \  the  lawfulnefs  of  which  our  Saviour  hath 
abundantly  juftilied,  and  I  do  not  think  was  ever 
queftioned  by  any  writer  in  the  chriftian  church,  for 
near  upon  fixteen  hundred  years ;  and  is  it  worth 
while  to  break  the  peace  of  the  church,  and  violate 
one  of  the  greateft  precepts  of  chriftianity,  upon  little 
and  flight  pretences  of  unlawfulnefs,  and  doubtful  rea- 
fons  of  convenience  and  expedience  *,  and  about  fuch 
things  as  are  no  more  reafonable  grounds  of  quarrels 
among  chriftians,  than  the  differences  of  mens  fhature 
and  faces  would  be  ajuft  ground  for  mankind  to 
make  war  upon  one  another  ? 

Where  is  the  power  of  religion,  when  the  peace 
and  unity  of  chriftians  is  violated  upon  thefe  terms  ? 
It  is  a  fign  that  the  life  and  fubitance  of  religion  is 
little  regarded  by  us,  when  men  can  afford  to  employ 
fo  much  zeal  about  thefe  things. 

And  that  men  may  be  effedually  perfuaded  to  mind 
the  fubflance  of  religion  more,  let  me  defire  them 
to  imprint  thefe  three  confiderations  upon  their  minds. 

I.  That  the  parts  of  religion  are  fubordinate  to  one 
another,  and  arc  to  be  minded  each  in  their  due  place. 
The  means  of  religion  are  lefs  worth  than  the  end, 
and  therefore  deferve  our  regard  chiefly  in  order  to 
that.  The  circum fiances  of  religion  are  lefs  confide- 
rable,  than  the  means  and  inftruments  of  it,  and 
therefore  are  to  be  fubordinated  to  them.  Faith  is  in 
order  to  the  pradlice  of  a  good  life,  and  fignifies  no- 
thing, unlefs    it  produces  that.     So   that  the   ilTue 

and 


the  power  of  godiinefs,  46 Si 

and  upOiot  of  all,  is  a  holy  and  virtuous  life,  *^  to  SERM. 
^'  deny  ungodlinefs  and  worldly  lufts,  and  to  live 
*'  foberly,  and  righteoufly,  and  godly  in  this  prefent 
*^'  world;  to  love  God  and  our  neighbour;'*  to 
deal  juftly,  and  to  be  kind,  and  peaceable,  and  chari- 
table towards  all  men. 

II.  Confider  that  religion  confifts  in  an  entire  and 
univerfal  obedience  to  the  will  of  God,  in  '^  a  re- 
*'  fpedl  to  all  his  commandments,"  and  "  hating  eve, 
*'  ry  evil  way."  Here  ''  the  power  of  godlinels" 
confifts  in  being  "  holy  in  all  manner  of  conver/a- 
"  tion." 

III.  Confider  that  religion  chiefly  refpeds  God, 
and  another  world.  A  form  of  religion,  if  it  were 
artificially  contrived,  might  pofTibly  ferve  to  cheat 
men,  and  be  ufeful  enough  to  all  the  interefts  and  ad- 
vantages of  this  world  :  but  we  are  to  do  all  things 
in  referencje  to  G  o  d,  who  cannot  be  iiPipofed  upon 
with  fhews  and  pretences ;  and  with  regard  to  another 
world,  where  no  form  of  ^eligion  will  be  current 
without 'Vdie  power  of  i:."  Yea,  and  in  referenc* 
tD  this  world,  if  there  be  any  advantage  in  feeming 
religious,  certainly  the  bed  way  "  to  feem  to  be  fo, 
*^  is  to  be  fo  indeed." 


23  N  2  SERMON 


C  4682  ] 
SERMON    CCVIL 

Of  the  necellity  of  good  yvorks. 

fc  '  III 

T  I  T.  iii.  8. 

*ij^his  is  a  faithful  faying^  and  thefe  thi?igs  I  will  that 
thou  affirm  confiantly^  that  they  which  have  believed 
in  God,  might  be  careful  to  maintain  good  works, 
1'hefe  things  are  good  and  profitable  unto  men. 


1 


SERM.  nr^HIS  epiftle  of  St.  Paul  to  Titus,  whom  he 
had    made    bifliop  of  Crete,  contains  di- 


The  firil       -*•       reclions  how  he  ought  to  demean  himfclf  in 
fermon  c 
this  text. 


fermon  en  ^l^^j.  g^eat  charge. 


1.  By  appointing  in  every  city  bifhops  or  elders, 
to  teach  and  govern  thofe  that  were  ah'eady,  or  fliould 
afterwards  by  their  means  be  converted  to  the  faith 
of  Christ  \  and  to  be  very  careful  to  make  choice 
of  worthy  and  fit  perfons  into  this  high  office  \  men 
of  found  do6trine,  and  unblameable  lives,  chap.  i. 
from  ver.  5.   to  the  end. 

2.  By  his  own  dodlrine  and  converfation  among 
them.  And  this  is  the  fubjed  of  the  two  following 
chapters,  in  which  he  gives  him  a  ftridl  charge,  to  be 
very  careful  both  of  his  dodrine  and  his  \\{^,  Of 
his  docflrine,  that  it  be  according  to  the  foundnefs 
and  purity  of  the  gofpel  ;  not  fuch  corrupt  and  adul- 
terate llufF  as  the  falfe  apoflles  and  teachers  were 
wont  to  vend  among  them,  chap.  ii.  i.  "  But 
^'  fpeak  thou  the  things  which  become  found  doc- 
*'  trine;  "  which  he  elfewhere  calls  "  the  dodlrineof 
^''  truth  which  is  according  to  godlinefs/'  fuch  a 

doctrine 


Of  the  necejjity  of  good  ns)orh,  4683 

doSrlne  as  tends  to  reform  the  lives  of  men,  to  make  S  E  R  M. 

CP  VTI 

them  better,  and  more  like  to  God.     And  then  he . '^ 

fhould  be  careful  likewife,  that  his  life  and  converfa- 
tion  be  exemplary  in  all  virtue  and  goodnefs ;  without 
which  the  bell  words  will  be  of  little  weight,  and  the 
wifeft  dodrines  and  counfels  of  fmall  efficacy  and  force 
to  perfuade  others  to  the  pradlice  of  them,  ver.  7.  "  In 
*'  all  things  fhewing  thyfelf  a  pattern  of  good  works." 
When  found  dodlrine  is  feconded  by  the  good  life  of 
the  teacher,  it  mud  have  great  authority  and  force  of 
perfuafion,  ver.  15.  "  Thefe  things  fpeak,  and  exhort, 
"  and  rebuke  with  all  authority  •,  let  no  man  defpife 
"  thee,"  If  the  minifter  of  God  do  butfb  preach  and 
fo  live,  this  will  give  him  authority,  and  fet  him  above 
contempt ;  hi  men  defpife  fuch  an  one  if  they  can. 

More  particularly,  as  he  would  have  him  intlrudl 
men  in  general  in  all  the  virmes  of  a  good  life;  fo 
more  efpecially,  the  feveral  ages  and  conditions  of 
men  in  the  duties  and  virtues  refpeftively  belonging 
to  them ;  to  young  and  old,  men  and  women. 

And  becaufe  great  fcandal  had  been  brought  upon 
the  chriflian  religion,  by  the  undutiful  carriage  of  fer- 
vants  and  fubjeds  towards  their  mailers  and  magi- 
ftrates,  upon  a  falfe  notion  of  chriftian  liberty,  ad- 
vanced and  propagated  by  the  falfe  apoftles  and  gno- 
Hick  libertines,  he  gives  Titus  in  particular,  charge 
to  put  chriftians  in  mind  of  their  duty  in  this  particu- 
lar, and  to  inculcate  it  earneftly  upon  them,  that  the 
chriflian  religion  might  not  be  flandered  upon  this  ac- 
count, chap.  ii.  ver.*  9,  10.  "  Exhort  fervants  to  be 
*'  obedient  to  their  mailers,  &c,  that  they  may  adorn 
"  the  dodlrine  of  God  our  Saviour  in  all  things.'* 
Chap.  iii.  r.  "  Put  them  in  mind  to  be  fubjedl  to  prin- 
^'  cipalities  and  powers,  and  to  be  ready  to  every 

"  good 


4684  Of  the  necejjity  of  good  works. 

SERM.  «c  o;ood  work:"  that  is.  in  fliort,   to  endeavour  to 
CCVII  .  . 

be  good  in  all  relations,  and  in  all  forts  and  kinds  of 

goodnels. 

And  then,  ver.  8.  he  lays  great  flrefs  and  weight 
upon  this  matter,  that  chriflians  fhould  conftantly  and 
upon  all  occafions  be  taught  the  great  necefiity  of  the 
virtucsof  a  good  life.  "  This  is  a  faithful  faying,"  &c. 
By  which  folemn  and  vehement  kind  of  exprellion, 
the  apoflle  feems  to  infinuate,  that  the  falfe  apoftles 
did  exalt  the  virtue  of  faith,  to  the  prejudice  and  neg- 
]e6t  of  a  good  life  ;  as  if  by  a  mere  fpeculative  belief 
and  profeflion  of  the  chriftian  religion  men  were  dif- 
charged  and  releafed  from  the  practice  of  all  virtue 
and  goodnefs.  And  this  is  very  probable,  becaufe  we 
find  thefc  kind  of  licentious  dodrines  very  frequently 
reflected  on,  and  reproved  by  the  apofiles  in  their 
epiftles,  and  efpecially  by  St.  Paul.  The  falfe  apoftles 
made  the  chriflian  religion  a  matter  of  mere  fpecula- 
tion  and  difpute,  but  laid  no  weight  upon  the  virtues 
of  a  good  \\^t.  And  therefore  St.  Paul,  after  he  had 
charged  Titus  to  inculcate  upon  chriflians  the  necefllty 
of  good  works,  immediately  adds,  "  but  avoid  foolifh 
*'  quertions,  and  genealogies,  and  contentions,  and 
*'  drivings  about  the  law ;  for  they  are  unprofitable 
-'  and  vaiili"  intimating  that  the  falfe  apoltles,  in*- 
(lead  of  prefiing  the  neceffiLy  of  a  good  life,  did 
amufe  people  widi  thefe  idle  LOC'ons  and  difputcs. 

But  to  return  to  my  text.  "  This  is  a  faithful  fay- 
*'  ing.'*  This  kind  of  preface  the  apofile  ufeth  feve- 
ral  times,  but  always  when  he  i^  fpeaking  of  fome- 
thing  that  is  of  great  weight  and  concernment  to  us, 
^nd  which  deferves  our  ferious  attention  and  regard; 
as  m  I  Tim.  i.  15.  "  This  is  a  faithful  faying,  and 
*'  worthy  of  all  acceptation,  that  JesusChrist 

*'  came 


Of  the  necejjtty  of  good  worh,  4685 

*^  came  into  the  world  to  fave  fmners."  i  Tim.  iv.  8.  S  E  R  M, 
"  Godlinefs  is  profitable  unto  all  things  ;  having  the  ^^Y^^'. 
"  promife  of  the  life  that  now  is,  and  of  that  which 
"  is  to  come.  This  is  a  faithful  faying.'*  And  2  Tim. 
ii.  II,  12.  "  This  is  a  faithful  faying;  if  we  be  dead 
'^  with  him,  we  fhall  alfo  live  with  him  -,  if  we  fuiier, 
*'  we  fhall  alfo  reign  with  him  :  if  we  deny  him,  he 
''  alfo  will  deny  us."  And  fo  likewife  here  in  the 
text,  "  this  is  a  faithful  faying,  that  they  which  have 
"  believed  in  God,  fhould  be  careful  to  maintain 
''  good  works."  By  which  you  fee,  that  it  is  not  a 
form  which  the  apoflle  ufeth  of  courfe,  and  applies 
to  any  thing,  but  only  to  things  of  more  than  ordi- 
nary confideration  and  regard,  fuch  as  are  of  the  ef- 
fence  of  chriftianity,  and  fundamental  to  the  belief 
and  pra6lice  of  it. 

*'  This  is  a  faithful  faying,"  -un'^k  Xoyo^^  "  a  ere- 
**  dible  faying,'*  that  which  every  man  that  truly 
undcrftands  the  nature  and  defign  of  religion  will 
readily  afTent  to. 

"  And  this  I  will  that  thou  affirm  conflantly.**  He 
chargeth  him  to  preach  this  upon  all  occafions,  led 
the  dodlrine  of  juftification  by  faith  and  by  grace, 
without  any  works  of  righteoufneis  proceeding,  lliould 
be  turned  into  licentioufnefs,  as  it  had  been  by  fome, 
and  men  fhould  falfiy  conclude,  that  becaufe  works  of 
righteoufnefs  were  not  necelTary  before  juflificationj 
and  to  bring  men  into  that  (late,  they  were  not  ne- 
celTary  neither  afterwards  to  our  continuance  in  tha£ 
ftatc. 

The  apoflle  indeed  did  teach  that  "  God  did  juftify 
"  the  ungodly,"  by  the  grace  of  the  gofpel,  and  faith 
in  C  H  R I  s  T,  that  is,  that  thofe  who  did  fincerely  be- 
lieve and  embrace  the  gofpel,  though  they  had  been 

never 


CCVII. 


4686  Of  the  necejjity  of  good  worh. 

SERM.  never  fo  great  Tinners  before,  werejuftified  upon  thai 
faith,  that  is,  all  their  former  fins  were  forgiven,  and 
they  were  received  into  the  favour  of  God.  But 
though  works  of  righteoufnefs  were  not  necefTary  be- 
fore their  juftificacion,  yet  they  are  necefTary  after- 
wards, becaufe  the  faith  of  the  goTpel,  and  the  cm- 
bracing  of  chriftianity,  doth  imply  a  ftipulation  and 
engagement  on  our  part,  to  live  according  to  the  laws 
and  rules  of  the  gofpel,  which  do  itridtly  enjoin  all 
kind  of  virtue  and  goodnefs.  The  covenant  of  bap- 
tifm,  by  which  we  are  enter'd  into  chriftianity,  doth 
contain  on  our  part  not  only  a  profeflion  of  faith  in 
Christ,  but  a  folemn  promife  "  to  deny  ungodli- 
"  nefs  and  worldly  lufts,  and  to  live  foberly,  and  righ- 
*'  teouHy,  and  godly  in  this  prefent  world."  So  that  k 
is  the  greateil:  miftake  in  the  world  to  think,  that  be- 
caufe we  are  juftified  by  faith  and  the  profeflion  of 
chriftianity  without  works  of  righteoufnefs,  therefore 
we  are  under  no  obligation  to  a  good  life:  for  faith  in 
C  H  RisT,  and  the  fincere  profeflion  of  the  bhrifl:ian 
religion  doth  imply  a  good  life,  and  an  engagement 
to  the  pradlice  of  all  virtue  and  goodnefs,  which  if  we 
do  not  perform  and  make  good,  we  fail  in  our  part  of 
the  covenant,  and  thereby  forfeit  all  the  blefllngs  and 
benefits  promifed  therein  on  Go  d's  part. 

Therefore  it  is  obfervable,  that  the  apofl:le,  after 
he  had  fpoken  of  our  juftification  by  grace  without 
works  of  righteoufnefs,  gives  this  charge  to  Titus,  to 
prefs  the  necefllty  of  good  works  upon  thofe  who  did 
believe  and  embrace  the  profeflion  of  the  gofpel,  as  it 
were  on  purpofe  to  prevent  all  miftake  and  abufe  of 
the  doftrine  of  juftification  by  faith,  and  the  free  grape 
and  mercy  ofGoDinjEsusCnRisT,  ver.  5,  6, 7. 
**  Not  by  works  of  righteoufnefs  which  we  have  dom\ 

'*  but 


Of  the  necejjity  of  good  works.  4687 

"^^  but  according  to  his  mercy  he  faved  us,  by  the  SERM, 
''  Wafhing  of  regeneration,  and  the  renewing  of  the 
*'  Holy  Ghost  5  which  he  fhed  on  us  abundantly 
''  through   Jesus   Christ  our    Saviour,'^ 
that  is,  by  our  folemn  profefTion  of  chriftianity  at  our 
baptifm  ;  "  that  being  juftified  by  his  grace,  wc  fliould 
*'  be  made  heirs,  according  to  the  hope  of  eternal  life."" 
And  then  he  adds,  ver.  8.  "  This  is  a  faithful  faying, 
"  and  thefe  things  I  will  that  thou  affirm  conflantly, 
''  that  they  which  have  believed  in  God,  might  be 
*'  careful  to  maintain  good  works , "  that  is,  that  they 
who  are  thus  juflified  by  the  faith  of  the  gofptj,  fhould 
be  fo  far  from  thinking  themfelves  hereby  excufed  from 
good  works,  that  they  fhould  upon  this  account  be 
more  careful   to  maintain  and   praclile  them,    be- 
caufe  by  the  very  profelTion  of  the  chriftian  faith  and  re- 
ligion they  have  folemn ly  engaged  themfelves  fo  to  do. 
"  That  they  which  believe  in  Godj"  that  is,  who 
have  taken  upon  them  the  profeffion  of  chriftianity  in 
their  baptifm.  For  it  is  not  improbable,  that  the  apo^ 
file  having  fpoken  of  baptifm  jult  before,  may  by  this 
phrafeof  "  believing  in  God,"  refer  to  thatprofef- 
fion  of  faith  made  in  baptifm,  which  began  with  thefc 
words,  "  I  believe  in  G  o  d  ; "  and  then,  "  they  which 
*'  have  believed  in  God,"  are  thofe  who  in  baptifm 
have  made  a  folemn  profeffion  of  chriftianity :  as  if 
he  had  faid,  '^  thefe  things  I  will  that  thou  affirm  con- 
*'  ftantly,  that  all  that  profefs  themfelves   chriftians 
*'  be  careful  to  maintain  good  works."   Or  if  by  the 
phrafe  of  "  believing  in  God,"  we  will  underftand 
an  affent  to  all  divine  revelations,   more  efpecialiy 
that  of  the  gofpel,  and  the  chriftian  religion,  the  moft: 
perfed:  that  ever  Go  d* made  of  his  will  to  mankind, 
the  matter  will  come  much  to  the  fame  iflue. 

Vol.  X»  23  O  *' Be 


4638  Of  the  necejity  of  good  works. 

$  E  R  M.  <«  Be  careful  to  maintain  good  works."  This  phraft 
feems  in  the  latter  end  of  thif  epiftle,  to  be  ufed  in  a 
very  reftrained  fenfe  y  for  labouring  in  an  honed  cal- 
ling, ver.  14.  '*  Let  ours  alfo  learn  to  maintain  good 
''  works  for  neceflary  ufes,  that  they  be  not  unfruit- 
*'  ful."  In  the  margin  of  your  bibles  you  will  find  it 
render'd,  to  profefs  honeft  trades,  "  let  ours  alfo  leara 
*'  to  profefs  honeft  trades  for  neceflary  ufes,"  that  is, 
for  the  fupply  of  their  neceffities :  but  in  the  text  it 
feems  more  agreeable  to  the  fcope  of  the  apoftlc's  dif- 
courfc  to  underftand  the  phrafe  of  "  maintaining  good 
*'  works,"  for  the  pra6Lice  of  all  chriflian  virtues,  ef- 
pecially  thofe  which  are  more  ufeful  and  beneficial  to 
humane  fociety ;  among  which,  diligence  and  indu- 
flry  in  an  honeft  calling  is  none  of  the  leaft  confider- 
able,  becaufe  it  follows,  "  thefe  things  are  good  and 
*'  profitable  unto  men."  And  indeed  thefe  are  pro- 
perly works  of  goodnefs,  which  redound  to  the  pub- 
lick  benefit  and  advantage. 

But  good  works  may  well  be  taken  in  a  larger 
fenfe  for  all  forts  of  virtuous  adlions.  And  fo  it  is  cer- 
tainly ufed  feveral  times  in  this  epiftle,  chap.  i.  16. 
**  Unto  ever  V  good  work  reprobate,"  fpeaking  of  all 
profligate  perfons  who  were  loft  to  all  virtue  and  good- 
nefs. Chap.  ii.  7.  "  In  all  things  fhewing  thyfelf  a  pat- 
*'  tern  of  good  works,"  that  is,  an  example  of  all 
kind  of  virtue.  And  chap.  iii.  i.  "  Put  them  in 
^*  mind  to  be  fubjed  to  principalities  and  powers,  to 
"  obey  magi  ft  rates,  and  to  be  ready  to  every  good 
*'  work;"  that  is,  to  the  pradiceof  all  goodneis,  of 
whatfoever  is  honeft  and  virtuous  in  itfelf,  amiable 
and  commendable  in  the  fight  of  others,  ufeful  and 
beneficial  to  any. 

Having  thus  explained  the  words,  I  come  now  to  con* 
fider  the  two  points  contained  in  them.  Firft, 


Of  the  necejjity  of  good  words.  4689 

Firfl:^  the  certain  truth  and  credibility  of  this  faying  ^^^^j^' 
or  propofition,  that  they  which  have  believed  in  God^ 
ought  to  be  careful  to  maintain  good  works.   "  This 
*'  is  a  faithful  faying,"  that   is,  a  moil  evident  and 
credible  truth.  Ar.d, 

Secondly,  the  great  fitnefs  and  necefllty  of  inculcat- 
ing this  upon  all  chrillians,  that  the  chriftian  reli- 
gion doth  indifpenfably  require  the  virtues  of  a  good 
life.  "  Thefe  things  I  will  that  thou  affirm  confiant- 
"  \y^  &c.'*  I  begin  with  the 

Firft  of  thefe  points,  viz.  the  certain  truth  and  evi- 
dent credibility  of  this  faying  or  propofition,  that 
''they  which  have  believed  in  Go  d,  fhould  be  careful 
"  to  maintain  good  works.  This  is  a  faithful  faying, 
*'  -un^of  Xo/or,  a  faying  worthy  of  credit,  a  moft  certain 
*'  and  credible  truth."  And  it  v;ii]  appear  to  be  fo,  whe- 
ther we  confider  the  great  end  and  defign  of  religion 
in  general,  or  of  the  chriftian  religion  in  particular. 

I.  If  we  confider  the  great  end  and  defign  of  reli- 
gion in  general,  which  is  to  make  us  happy,  by  pof- 
leiTing  our  minds  with  the  belief  of  a  Go  d,  and 
thofe  other  principles  which  have  a  necellary  con- 
nexion with  that  belief;  and  by  obliging  us  to  the 
obedience  and  pradlice  of  his  laws. 

I .  By  polTeffing  our  minds  with  the  belief  of  a  God, 
and  of  thofe  other  principles  which  have  a  neceflary 
connexion  with  it.  Such  are  the  belief  of  the  divine  per- 
fedions,  of  the  infinite  goodnefs,  and  wifdom,  and 
power,  and  truth,  and  juflice,  and  purity  of  the  divine 
nature  -,  a  firm  perfuafion  of  his  providence,  that  he  go- 
verns and  adminifters  the  affairs  of  the  world,  and  takes 
notice  of  the  adions  of  men,  and  will  call  them  to 
an  account  for  them-,  of  the  immortality  of  our  fouls, 
and  their  endlefs  duration  after  death,  and  confequently 

23  O  2,  of 


4690  Of  the  necejjity  of  good  ivorks. 

S  E  RM.  of  the  eternal  rewards  and  punifhments  of  another  life. 
Thefe  are  the  great  principles  of  natural  religion, which 
mankind  are  in  fome  meafure  pofleft  with,  and  per- 
fuaded  of,  without  any  external  revelation  from  God; 
and  thefe  are  necelTary  and  fundamental  to  religion, 
as  the  apoftle  to  the  Hebrews  declares,  Heb.  xi.  6. 
"  Without  faith  it  is  impoffible  to  pleafe  Go  d  ;"  that 
is,  there  can  be  no  fuch  thing  as  the  pradice  of  reli- 
gion, without  tht  belief  of  the  principles  of  it ;  and 
what  thefe  are  he  tells  us  in  the  next  words  :  ''he  that 
'^^  cometh  to  God  mud:  beHeve  that  he  is,  and  that  he 
"  is  a  rewarder  of  them  that  diligently  feek  him." 

But  then  we  mud  not  reft  here,  in  the  belief  of  a 
God  and  the  principles  of  religion  ;  for  this  faith  is 
not  required  of  us  for  itfcif,  but  in  order  to  fome  far- 
ther end,  which  if  it  be  not  attained  by  us,  the  mere 
belief  of  the  principles  of  religion  is  to  no  purpofe,  nei- 
ther acceptable  to  Go  d,  nor  ufeful  and  beneficial  to 
ourfelves.  God  would  not  have  imprinted  the  notion 
of  himfelf  upon  our  nature,  he  would  not  have  difco- 
ver-ed  himfelf  to  us,  nor  have  required  of  us  the  be- 
lief of  his  being  and  providence,  merely  that  wc 
might  know  there  is  fuch  a  being  as  G  o  d  in  the 
world,  who  made  us  and  governs  us  5  but  that  this  be- 
lief might  have  its  proper  influence  upon  us,  to  oblige 
us  to  the  obedience  of  his  laws,  which  are  the  proper 
caufes  and  means  of  our  happinefs.  It  will  not  avail 
us  at  all,  nor  is  it  in  the  leaft  acceptable  to  God, 
ior  men  "  to  profefs  that  they  know  him,"  when  in 
''  works  they  deny  him,  being  abominable  and  dif- 
"  obedient,  and  to  every  good  work  reprobate,"  as 
the  apoftle  defcribes  fome,  chap.  i.  16.  And  therefore, 
2.  The  great  end  and  defign  of  religion  is,  that  our 
minds  being  pofTefl  and  prepared  by  the  principles  of 

reiigfon. 


Of  the  necejfity  of  good  works.  469 1 

religion,  the  belief  of  thefe  fhould  have  its  proper  In-  S  E  R  M. 
.  •  CCVII 

fluence  upon  us,  which  is  effedually  to  oblige  us  to 

the  obedience  and  pradice  of  Go  d's  laws.  Now  the 
laws  which  God  hath  given  us  to  live  by,  as  they 
are  the  rule  and  meafurc  of  our  duty,  by  the  perfor- 
mance whereof  only  we  can  hope  to  gain  the  favour  of 
Go  D,  fo  they  are  the  proper  diredions  and  means  in 
order  to  our  happinefs  j  they  teach  us  both  the  condi- 
tions of  our  happinels,  and  the  proper  qualification 
and  difpofition  for  it. 

Obedience  to  the  laws  of  Go  d  is  the  condition  of 
our  happinefs,  both  temporal  and  eternal,  both  in  this 
world  and  the  other.  The  promifes  which  God  hath 
made  of  temporal  felicity  and  blellings,  are  upon  con- 
dition of  our  obedience  to  his  laws  ;  it  is  "  godlinels 
"  only  that  hath  the  promife  of  this  life,  as  well  as  of 
"  the  other,"  i  Tim.  iv.  8.  A  truth  fo  certain  and  evi- 
dent, that  the  apoflle  thought  fit  to  add  that  folemn  feal 
to  it,  which  he  prefaceth  to  the  faying  in  the  text,"  this 
*'  is  a  faithful  faying."  And  though  God  bepleafed, 
out  of  his  exceflive  goodnefs  to  bellow  many  tempo- 
ral bleflings  and  favours  upon  very  bad  men,  that  by 
this  "  goodnefs  of  his  he  might  lead  them  to  repen- 
^*  tance  ;'*"  yet  God  never  made  any  promife  of  tem- 
poral bleflings  to  wicked  men  ;  but  on  the  contrary, 
hath  threatned  them  with  great  temporal  evils  and 
calamities  5  but  all  the  promifes  even  of  temporal 
good  things,  are  made  to  the  obeying  of  G  o  d's  laws; 
"  to  them  that  keep  his  covenant,  and  remember  his 
"  commandments  to  do  them." 

And  this  is  not  only  the  condition  upon  which  the 
promifes  of  temporal  bleflings  are  fufpended,  but  ge- 
nerally, and  for  the  moll  part,  the  natural  caufc  and 
means  of  thofe  bleflings  5  for  there  is  no  moral  duty 

enjoined 


469  2  Of  the  necejfity  of  good  works, 

SE  RM.  enjoined  by  Go  d,  no  virtue  the  praiflice  whereof  he 
CCVli.  j-eqijjj-es  irom  us,  which  does  not  naturally  tend  to  our 
temporal  felicity  in  this  world ;  as  temperance  and 
chaftity  to  that  invaluable  blcfling  of  health,  and  to 
the  prefervation  of  our  eftate,  which  is  wafted  by  lewd 
and  riotous  living  •,  humility  and  meeknefs  to  our  quiet 
and  lafcty  ;  jullice  and  integrity  to  our  reputation  and 
honour,  one  of  the  chief  inllruments  of  temporal  pro- 
fperity  and  fuccefs.  Kindnefs  and  charity,  and  a  readi- 
nefs  "  to  do  good  to  all  men  as  v/e  have  opportunity,'* 
are  in  their  nature  apt  to  recommend  us  exceedingly 
to  the  love  and  efteem  of  all  men,  and  to  their  favour- 
able regard  and  aflidance,  when  we  ftand  in  need  of  it.- 
And  lb  1  might  inflance  in  all  other  virtues,  the  fincers 
pradice  whereof,  though  it  be  not  in  all  cafes  certain  and 
infallible,  yet  it  is  the  beft  and  wifeft  courfe  that  any 
man  can  take,  to  attain  the  greateft  happinefs  which 
this  world  can  afford,  and  to  avoid  the  greatefl  miferies 
and  calamities  of  it:  as  on  the  contrary,  there  is  no 
vice,  no  wicked  practice,  but  is  naturally  productive 
of  fome  great  temporal  mifchief  and  inconvenience. 

And  then  the  pradtice  of  virtue  and  goodnefs,  as  it 
is  the  abfclute  and  indifpcnfable  condition  of  our  future 
happinefs  in  another  world,  fo  is  it  the  neceffary  and 
only  proper  qualification  for  it,  and  the  certain  and 
infallible  means  of  attaining  it. 

Ic  is  an  abfolute  and  indifpcnfable  condition  of  at- 
taining it; and  without  this  it  is  in  vain  to  hope  for  it. 
As  God  will  certainly  punifh  the  tranfgrelTors  of  his 
laws  •,  fo  nothing  but  obedience  to  them  can  pretend 
to  his  rewards.  This  God  hath  moft  exprefiy  declared, 
that  ''  without  purity  and  holinefs  no  man  fhall  fee 
''  him  i"  that  "  Christ  is  the  author  of  eternal 
•'  falvation  only  to  them  that  obey  him."     And  if 

God 


Of  the  necejjity  of  good  works.  4693 

God  had  not  declared  this  in  his  word,  the  confide-  S  E  R  M, 
ration  of  God's  effential  hohnefs  and  juftice  would  ^^ 
fufficiently  affure  us  of  it. 

But  befides  this,  in  the  very  nature  and  reafon  of 
the  thing,  holinefs  and  goodnefs  is  the  neceflary  and 
only    proper  qualification   for  happinefs.     Without 
the  bleiTed  fight  and  enjoyment  of  G  o  d  we  cannot 
be  happy,  and  holinefs  and  goodnefs  can  only  qualify 
us  for  this.  For  happinefs  is  a  flate  v/hich  refalts  from 
a  temper  and  difpofuion  of  mind  fuited  to  it ;  and  where 
this  is  wanting,  the  man  is  no  more  capable  of  happi- 
nefs, than  he  that  is  fick  is  of  eafe.    Virtue  and  good- 
nefs are  fo  efTential  to  happinefs,  that  where  thefe  arc 
not,  there  is  no  capacity  of   it.     Thefe  make  us  like 
to  GoDjwho  is  the  fountain  and  pattern  of  all  happinefs ; 
and  if  we  be  not  like  to  G  o  d,  we  can  have  no  enjoy- 
ment of  him.     And  a  wicked  man,  if  he  could  (leal 
into  heaven,  into  the  fight  and  prefence  of  God, 
would  from  the  temper  and  difpofuion  of  his  own 
mind,  {o  unfuitable  to  that  holy  place  and  company, 
be  extremely  miferable,  even  in  the  manfions  of  the 
blefTed.     Such  a  temper  of  mind,  fuch  a  polluted  and 
guilty  confcience,  as  a  finner  carries  with  him  cut  of 
this  world,  will  accompany  him,  and  remain  with  him 
in  the  other  ;  and  guilt  is  always  reillefs  and  full  of  tor- 
ment, and  though  Go  d  fhould  not  punifh  it  with  any 
pofitive  infiidlion  of  pain,would  of  its  own  nature  make 
a  man  for  ever  miferable.  So  that  it  is  a  vain  dream  and 
imagination,  that  any  man  without  the  pradice  of  ho- 
linefs in  and  virtue  in  this  life,  can  be  happy  in  the  other. 
A  fmcere  and  thorough  repentance  of  all  our  fins  will 
indeed  clear  our  confciences  of  guilt,  and  by  the  mercy 
.of  God  make  us  capable  of  happinefs:   but  it  does 
this  by  changing  our  minds,  and  reconciling  them  to 

holinefs 


4694  Of  the  necejjity  of  good  luorh, 

S  E  R  M.  holinefs  and  goodncfs,  in  firm  purpofe  and  refolutlon  of 
a  new  life ;  and  by  changing  our  Jives  and  adlions  too, 
if  there  be  opportunity  for  it;  but  till  this  change  be 
wrought,  either  in  firm  purpofe,  or  in  real  efFecfc,  it  is 
impoflible  we  fhould  be  happy.  And  though  I  will 
not  deny  but  this  may  be  done  by  a  deep  repentance, 
and  fuch  as  Go  d  it^^  would  prove  lincere,  in  the  laft 
a6t  of  our  lives :  yet  it  is  extreme  madnefs  to  run  fuch 
a  hazard,  becaufe  we  may  be  cut  off  from  the  oppor- 
tunity of  it;  or  if  G  o  D  fhould  afford  us  time  and  grace 
to  that  purpofe,  it  is  the  hardefl  thing  in  the  world  to 
have  any  comfortable  and  well-grounded  alTurance  of 
the  fincerity  of  it.  So  that  very  litde  hopes  of  heaven 
and  happinefs  can  be  given  upon  any  other  terms,  than 
the  general  and  conftant  courfe  of  a  holy  and  virtuous 
life ;  and  leaftofalltothofe  v/ho  have  all  their  life  long 
refblved  to  venture  their  everlafting  happinefs,  upon 
the  infinite  uncertainties  of  a  death-bed  repentance  at 
the  laft.     But, 

II.  The  truth  of  this  propofitlon,  that  "  they  which 
**  have  believed  in  Go  d,  fhould  be  careful  to  maintain 
*'  good  works,**  or  that  faith  and  the  virtues  of  a  good 
life  ought  to  go  together:  I  fay,  the  truth  of  this  will 
yet  be  more  evident,  if  we  confider  the  great  end  and 
defign  of  the  chriftian  religion  in  particular,  which 
was  to  reform  the  world,  to  purify  the  hearts  and  lives 
of  men  from  corrupt  affedlions  and  wicked  pradlices,  to 
teach  men  to  excel  in  all  kinds  of  virtue  and  goodnefs. 

And  this  is  every  where  in  the  new  teftament  moft 
cxprefly  declared.  The  great  promife  of  bleflednefs  is 
made  to  the  virtues  of  meeknefs,  and  patience,  and 
peaceablenefs,  and  purity,  and  righteoufnefs,  as  our  S  a- 
V  I  o  u  R  exprefly  teacheth  in  that  excellent  fermon  of 
his  upon  the  mount,  which  is  the  fummary  of  the  chri-^ 

flian 


Of  the  necejjity  of  good  'worh.  4695 

ftian  religion.  Ephcf.  iv.  1 7, 1 8,  6cc."  This  I  fay  there-  S  E  R  M- 
*'  fore,  and  teftify  in  the  Lo  r  d,  that  ye  henceforth,"  v— -v— J 
that  is,  now  that  yehaveembracedchriflianity,"  walk 
*'  not  as  other  Gentiles  walk,   in  the  vanity  of  their 
''  mini,  having  theunderftandingdarkned,  being  alie- 
''  nated  from  the  life  of  God  through  the  ignorance 
*'  that  is  in  them,   becaufe  of  the  blindnefs  of  their 
"  heart:    who  being  pafl:  feeling,   have  given  them- 
*'  felves  over  unto  iafcivioufnefs,  to  work  all  uncleannefs 
*^  v/ith  greedinefs.  Bur  ye  have  not  fo  learned  Ch  r  ist  : 
"  if  fo  be  that  ye  have  heard  him,  and  have  been  taught 
*'  by  him,  as  the  truth  is  in  J  e  s  us  :  that  ye  put  ori^ 
"  concerning  the  former  converfation,   the  old  man, 
*'  which  is  corrupt  according  to  the  deceitful  lufts  : 
*'  and  be  renewed  in  the  fpirit  of  your  mind ;  and  that 
*'  ye  put  on  the  new  man,which  after  Go  d  is  created  in 
"  righteoufnefs  and  true  holinefs.  Wherefore  putting 
"  away  lying,  fpeak  every  man  truth  with  his  neigh- 
"  bour :  for  we  are  m.embers  one  of  another.  Be  ye  angry 
•'  and  fin  not,  let  not  the  fun  go  down  upon  your  wrath: 
"  neither  give  place  to  the  devil.  Let  him  that  dole,  fteal 
''  no  more ;   but  rather  let  him  labour,  working  with 
''  his  hands  the  thing  which  is  good,  that  he  may  have 
*'  to  give  to  him  that  needeth.    Let  no  corrupt  com- 
"  munication  proceed  put  of  your  mouth,   but  that 
"which  is  good  to  the  ufe  of  edifying,   that  it  may 
"  miniftcr  grace  unto  the  hearers.  And  grieve  not  the 
*^  Holy  Spirit  of  God,  whereby  ye  are  lealed 
*'  unto  the  day  of  redemption.    Let  all  bitternels,  and 
"  wrath,  and  anger,  and  clamour,  and  evil  fpeaking  be 
*'  put  away  from  you,  with  all  malice :  and  be  ye  kind 
*'  one  to  another,  &c.'*    So  that  you  fee,   that  unlefs 
there  be  an  univerfal  reformation  of  heart  and  life,  we 
have  not"fo  learned  Christ  as  the  truth  is  injEsus:'* 
Vo  L.  X  23  P  we 


4696  0/  the  necejjity  of  good  works, 

SERM.  we  do  not  rightly  undcrftand  the   gofpel,  and  the 
^^^^^-  tendency    of    the  chriftian    rehgion.     Gal.  v.    22, 
23,  24.  "  But  the  fruits   of  the    Sp  i  r  i  t,"  of 
that   Spirit    which    the   chriftian    rehgion  en- 
dows men  withal,  "  is  love,  joy,  peace,  long-fuffer- 
''  ing,  gentlenefs,  goodnefs,  fidelity,  meeknefs,  tem- 
"  perance  -,  and  they  that  are  C  h  r  i  s  t's,  have  cru- 
"  cified  the  fiefh  with  the  affedlions  and  lufts  ;"  that 
is,  they  that  profefs  themfelvcs  chriftians,  are  obliged 
to  endeavour  after  all  thefe  virtues,  and  to  put  off  the 
contrary  lufts  and  vices.  Phil.  iv.  8. "  Finally,  brethren, 
"  whatfoever  things  are  true,  whatfoever  things  are 
"  honeft,  whatfoever  things  are  juft,  whatfoever  things 
*'  arc  pure,  whatfoever  things  are  lovely,   whatfoever 
*«  things  are  of  good  report  -,  if  there  be  any  virtue, 
"  and  if  there  be  any  praife,  think  on  thefe  things.'* 
St.  James  likewife  declares  to  the  fame  purpofe  the 
genuine  efFed  of  chriftianity,   which  he  calls  ''  the 
*'  knowledge  and  wifdom  which   is  from  above.'* 
James  iii.  13,  I4,i5>  ^7-  "Who  is  a  wife  man,  and 
*'  endowed  with  knowledge  amongft  you.?  lethimfliew 
'«  out  of  a  good  convcrfation  his  works  with  meekncfs 
''  and  wifdom.  But  if  ye  have  bitter  envying  andftrife 
*'  in  your  hearts,  glory  not,   and  lye  not  againft  the 
"  truth.     This  wifdom  defcendcth  not  from  above  ; 
«'  but  is  earthly,  fenfual,  devilifh."  And  "  the  wifdom 
"  that  is  from  above,  is  firftpure,  then  peaceable,  gen- 
**  tie,  and  eafy  to  be  intreated,  full  of  mercy  and  good 
''  fruits,  without  partiality,  and  without  hypocrify." 
To  which  I  will  add  but  one  text  more,  which  is  the 
fum  and  comprehenfion  of  all  the  reft,  and  it  is  chap, 
ii.  of  this  epiftle  to  Titus,  ver.  11.   "  The  grace  of 
"  God,"  fo  he  calls  the  dodrine  of  the  gofpel,"  the 
*'  grace  of  Go  d  which  brings  falvation  unto  all  men, 

"  hath 


Gf  the  necejjiiy  of  good  works.  4697 

^^  hath  appeared,  teaching  us  that  denying  ungodlinefs  ^^^j^; 
"  and  worldly  lufts,  we  (hould  live  roberly,and  righte-, 
"  oufly  and  godly  in  this  prefent  world." 

\  might  proceed  particularly  to  fhew,  that  the  whole 
difpenfation  and  doctrine  of  the  gofpel,  and  all  the  parts 
of  them,  are  calculated  to  raife  and  exalt  humane  nature 
to  the  higheft  pitch  and  perfedlion  of  virtueand goodnefs^ 
and  efFcdually  to  reform  the  fpirits  and  lives  of  men. 

The  difpenfation  of  the  gofpel,  or  the  chriftian  re- 
ligion, confifts  in  G  o  d's  merciful  condefcenfion  to  fend 
his  own  and  only  So  n  in  our  nature,  to  live  among 
us,  aqd  to  die  for  us.  The  do6trine  of  the  gofpel  confifts 
in  the  things  to  be  believed  5  the  duties  to  be  prac- 
tifed  by  us ;  and  the  arguments  and  encouragem.ents  to 
the  practice  of  thofe  duties.  Now  I  fhall  briefly  fhew, 
that  the  defign  of  every  part,  both  of  the  difpenfation 
and  dodrineof  the  gofpel,  is  to  reform  the  minds  and 
manners  of  men,  and  to  engage  them  to  the  pradice 
of  all  virtue  and  goodnefs.  And, 

1.  For  the  difpenfation  of  the  gofpel,  by  which  I 
mean  the  gracious  method  which  the  wifdom  of  Go  d 
hath  pitched  upon  for  the  falvation  and  recovery  of 
mankind,  by  fending  his  only  begotten  Son  into  the 
world  in  our  nature,  co  live  among  us,  and  to  die  for 
us.  So  that  the  principal  parts  of  this  difpenfation 
are  thefe  three  : 

J.  His  incarnation,  or  appearing  in  our  nature, 

2.  His  life. 

3.  His  death  and  fufferings  for  us.  And  I  fhall  fhew, 
tliat  the  great  defign  of  all  this  was  to  reform  man- 
kind, and  make  them  better. 

1.  For  his  incarnation.  The  great  defign  of  his  com- 
ing into  the  world,  and  appearing  in  our  nature,  was 
this  \  and  this  was  the  reafon  of  the  narne  Jesus, 
23  P  2  given 


4698  Of  the  necejfity  of  good  works. 

ccvn  '  ^'^^^"  ^'^  ^^  ''^'  ^^^^^'  ^5  ^h^  ^"gel  tel^s  us,  Matth.  1. 
2 1 . "  His  name  fhaJI  be  called  J  e  s  u  s,  for  he  fhall  fave 
"  his  people  from  their  fins."  Matth.  ix.  13.  He  him- 
felf  tells  us,  that "  hecame  to  call  finners  to  repentance  i'' 
that  is,  to  reclaim  them  to  a  better  and  more  virtuous 
courfeof  life;  and  chap,  xviii.  11.  "The  Son  of  man 
^*  is  come  to  fave  that  which  was  loft,"  that  is,  to  re- 
cover mankind  from  a  (late  of  fin  and  mifery,  to  a  ftate 
of  holinefs  and  happinefs.  And  St.  Peter,  exhorting  the 
Jews  to  repentance,  ufeth  this  argument,  that  for  this 
very  end  God  fent  him  among  them,  Adls  iii.  26, 
''  Unto  you  firft  God  fent  him  to  blefs  you,  in 
"  turning  away  every  one  of  you  from  his  iniquity." 
Heb.  ix.  26.  "  But  now  once  in  the  end  of  the 
*'  world  he  hath  appeared  to  abolifh  fin,"  that  is,  to 
deflroy  both  the  guilt  and  power  of  fin.  i  John  iii.  5. 
^'  Ye  know  that  he  was  manifefled  to  take  away  our 
"  fins."  And  ver.  8.  "  For  this  purpofethe  Son  of 
''God  was  manifefled,  to  deftroy  the  works  of  the 
'•  devil." 

2.  This  likewife  was  the  great  defign  of  his  life, 
of  his  dwelling  and  converfing  with  us  fo  long,  to 
teach  us  by  his  dodlrine  in  all  holinefs  and  virtue, 
and  to  give  us  the  perfedl  pattern  and  example  of  it 
in  his  life.  For  his  doctrine,  I  have  fpoke  of  that  by 
itfelf:  but  bt:fides  that,  one  principal  end  of  his 
living  amongft  us,  was,  that  in  the  courfe'of  his  life, 
and  ail  the  adlions  of  it,  he  might  give  us  a  perfed:  and 
familiar  example  of  all  holinels  and  virtue,  and  there- 
fore we  are  commanded  to  take  him  for  our  great 
pattern.  "  Learn  of  me,  faith  he,  for  I  am  meek 
*'  and  lowly  of  fpiric,"  Matth.  xi.  29.  John  xiii.  15, 
after  that  great  inllance  of  his  humility,  in  wadiing 
bis  difciples  feet,  he  adds,  "  for  I  have  given  you  aa 

*'  example^ 


Of  the  necejjtty  of  good  works.  4699 

**  example,  that  ye  fhould  do    as  I  have  done  to  SERM. 
«         >r  CCVII. 

you. 

3.  This  alfo  was  the  great  defign  of  his  death  and 
fufFerings.  So  the  apoftles  every  where  teach  :  Gal.  i.  4. 
fpeaking  of  C  h  r  i  s  t,  "who  gave  himfelf  for  our 
"  fins,  that  he  might  deliver  us  from  this  prefent 
"  evil  world,"  that  is,  that  he  might  refcue  us  from 
the  vicious  cuftoms  and  pradices  of  the  world,  i  Pet.  i. 
18.  "  Forafmuch  as  ye  know,  that  ye  were  not  re- 
"  deemed  with  corruptible  things,  as  filver  and  gold, 
"  from  your  vain  converfation ;  but  with  the  preci- 
"  ous  blood  of  C  H  R  I  s  T,  as  of  a  lamb  without  ble- 
•"  mifli  and  without  fpot."  The  death  and  fuffer- 
ings  of  C  H  R  I  s  T  did  not  only  make  expiation  for 
our  fins,  but  are  propofed  to  us  as  a  pattern  of  mor- 
tification to  fin,  and  refurredion  to  a  new  life,  and  a 
moft  powerful  argument  thereto.  Rom.  vi.  i,  2,  3, 
&c.  And  2  Cor,  v.  14,  15.  fpeaking  of  the  love  of 
Christ  in  laying  down  his  life  for  us,  "  for  the 
"love  of  Christ,  faith  he,  conftraineth  us,  be- 
"  caufe  we  thus  judge ,  that  if  one  died  for  all ,  then 
"  were  all  dead :  and  that  he  died  for  all,  that  they 
"  which  live,  fhould  not  henceforth  live  unto  them- 
"  felves,  but  unto  him  which  died  for  them."  From 
whence  he  infers,  ver.  17.  "  Therefore  if  any  man 
*'  be  in  Christ,  he  is  a  new  creature:  old  things  are 
"  pafs'd  away  ;  behold,  all  things  are  become  new.'* 
And  ver.  21.  ''  For  he  hath  made  him  to  be  fin  for 
«'  us,  who  knew  no  fin,  that  we  might  be  made  the 
"  righteoufnefs  of  God  in  him;"  that  is,  he  hath 
made  him  who  was  without  fin,  a  facrifice  for  our 
fins ;  which  ihould  be  a  fiirong  motive  and  argument 
to.  us,  to  endeavour  after  "  the  righteoufnefs  of  God," 

II.  As  the  whole  difpenfation  of  the  gofpel  tends 

to 


470C)  Of  the  necejjity  of  good  works. 

E  R  M.  to  this  end,  fo  more  particularly  does  the  docbrlnc 
of  the  gofpel,  and  every  part  of  it.  Now  the  whole 
doctrine   of  the  gofpel    may   be   refer'd    to   thefe 

three  heads : 

1.  The  things  to  be  believed  by  us. 

2.  The  duties  to  be  pradtifed.     And, 

3.  The  arguments  and  encouragements  to  the  prac- 
tice of  thefe  duties.  And  all  thefe  have  a  moll  di- 
re6t  and  proper  tendency  to  reiorm  mankind,  and 
effcdtually  to  engage  us  to  the  pradice  of  holinefs 
and  virtue. 

I.  The  matters  of  faith  propofed  in  the  gofpel, 
have  a  diredt  tendency  to  a  good  life,  and  immediate 
influence  upon  it.     All  the  articles  of  our  creed,  and 
whatever  the  chriftian  religion  propofeth  to  our  be- 
lief concerning  God  the  Fa  t  h  e  r,  the  creator  and 
governor  of   all    things;    and    concerning    Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord  and*  Saviour  ;  and  con- 
cerning  the  Ho  LY  Spirit  ol  grace  ;  the  catho- 
lick  church  •,  the  communion  of  faints  •,  the  refur- 
redion  of  the  dead,  and  everlafting  lite  after  death  : 
all  and  each  of  thefe  are  fo  many  arguments  and 
reafons,  motives  and  encouragements  to  a  good  life. 
In  general,  "  our  hearts  are  laid  to  be  purified  by 
"  faith,'*   Adls  xv.  9.    i  Tim.  i.  5.   Faith  is  there 
reckoned  among  the  principal  fources  and  fountains 
of  a  good  life :  "  the  end  of  the  commandment,  (the 
*^'  word  is  xapayy£>j'ar)  the  end  of  the  gofpel  decla- 
"  ration    is    charity,   out    of  a  pure  heart,    and  a 
"  good  confcience,  and  of  faith  unfeigned."  So  that 
a  fincere  faith  is  the  great  principle  of  charity,  which 
is  "  the  fulfilling  of  the  law,"  and  comprehends  in 
it  the  duties  of  both  tables.  And  here  I  might  parti- 
cularly fhew,  what  influence  the  feveral  articles  of  the 
<  chriftian 


Of  the  necejjity  of  good  works.  4701 

ehriftlan  faith  have  upon  the  pradice  of  holinefs  and  S  E  R  M. 
virtue  in  our  lives  j  but  this  would  be  too  laro;e  a  t^^j 
field  of  difcourfe  ;  and   the  thing  is  very  plain  and 
obvious  to  every  man's  confideration  ;  and  therefore 
I  fhall  content  my  felf  with  what  I  have  faid  in  o-cne- 
ral  concerning  the  influence  of  faith  upon  a  good  life. 
2.  The  duties  enjoined  by  the  chrifiian  religion  do 
likewife  tend  more  immediately  to  the  fame  end  and 
defign ;  I  mean  the  laws  and  precepts  of  the  gofpel, 
which  are  nothing  elfe  but  fo  many  rules  of  a  good 
life,  and  in  the  main  fubftance  of  them  are  the  laws  of 
nature  cleared  and  perfected.  For  ''  Christ  came 
"  not  to  deftroy  the  law,"  which  was  in  force  be- 
fore ;  but  to  explain  and   clear  it,  where,  throuc^h 
the  corruption  and  degeneracy  of  mankind,  it  was 
grown  obfcure  and  doubtful,  and  to  perfedl  it  by  fu- 
peradding  fome  rules  and  precepts  of  greater  goodneis 
and  perfeflion,  than  feem  to  have  been  enjoined  by 
it  \  as  to  abftain  from  all  kind  of  revenge,  to  love 
our  enemies,  and  not  only  to  be  ready  to   foro-ive 
them  the  greateft  injuries  they  have  done  us,  but  to 
do  them  the  greateft  good,  and  even  to  be  perfcdlly 
reconciled  to  them  after  the  higheft  provocations 
v/hcnever  they  are  in  a  meet  capacity  and  difpofition 
for  it.     So  that  the  precepts  of  the  chriftian  religion 
are  a  plain  and  perfedl  rule  of  all  virtue  and  good- 
nefs,  and  the  beft  and  moft  abfolute  fyftem  of  moral 
philofophy  that  ever  was  in  the  world,  contain  in  o-  all 
the  rules  of  virtue  and  a  good  life,  which  are  fcat- 
tered  and  difperfed  in  the  writings  of  the  philofophers, 
and  the  wife  men  of  all  ages,   and  deliverino-  them 
to  us  with  greater  clearnefs  and  certainty,  in  a  more 
fimple  and  unaffecled  manner,  with  greater  authori- 
ty, force  and  efficacy  upon  their  minds,  than  any  phi- 

lolbpher 


4702  Of  the  necejjity  of  good  works. 

SERM.  lofopherand  lawgiver  ever  did;  teaching  us  how  to 
CCVII.  ^Qj.f}^}p  Go  D  in  the  bed  manner,  and  mod  fuitable 
to  his  nature  and  perfedlions;  how  to  demeanour 
felves  towards  others  with  all  meeknefs  and  humility, 
juftice  and  integrity,  kindnefs  and  charity  •,  and  how 
to  govern  our  felves  and  our  own  unruly  appetites 
and  paffions,  and  bring  them  within  the  bounds  of 
reafon,  much  better  than  any  law  or  inilitution  that 
ever  was  in  the  world  ;  and  all  thefe  duties  and  vir- 
tues ftridly  commanded  and  enjoined  in  the  name 
and  authority  of  G  o  d,  by  one  evidently  impowered 
and  commiflioned  by  him,  and  fent  from  heaven  on 
purpofe  to  in(lru6t  us  in  the  nature  and  practice  of 
them.  So  that  the  do(5lrine  of  the  gofpel,  in  refpedt 
of  the  laws  and  precepts  of  it,  is  a  plain  and  perfe6l 
rule  of  a  good  life.     And  then, 

5  The  chriftian  religion  contains  the  moft  power- 
ful arguments  and  encouragements  to  this  purpofe  ; 
and  thefe  are  the  threatnings  and  promifes  of  the  gofpel. 
(i.)  The  terrible  threatnings  of  eternal  mifery  and 
punifhments  to  all  the  workers  of  iniquity,  and  wilful 
and  impenitent  tranfgreflbrs  of  thefe  laws.  And  this 
is  an  argument  which  taketh  the  fafteft  and  fureft 
hold  upon  humane  nature,  and  will  many  times  move 
and  affecl,  when  no  other  confiderations  will  work 
upon  us.  Many  men  that  could  not  be  wrought  up- 
on by  the  love  of  God  and  goodnefs,  nor  by  the 
hopes  of  everlafting  happinels,  have  been  affrighted 
and  reclaimed  from  an  evil  courfe  by  the  fear  of  hell 
and  damnation,  and  the  awe  of  a  judgment  to  come. 
To  think  of  lying  under  the  terrible  wrath  and  dif- 
pleafure  of  almighty  God  to  eternal  ages,  of  being 
extremely  and  for  ever  miferable  without  intermilTioa 
and  without  end,  muft  needs  be  a  very  difmal  con- 

fideration 


Of  the  neceffity  of  good  works.  ■  4703 

■»- 
flderatlon  to  any  man  that  can  think  and  confider  :  ^  E  R  M. 

*'  for  who  knows  the  power  of  God's  anger,  who 
*'  can  dwell  with  everJafting  burnings  ?  "  and  yet  to 
this  horrible  danger,  to  this  intolerable  mifery,  do  all 
the  workers  of  iniquity,  every  one  that  lives  in  the 
wilful  contempt  and  difobedience  of  the  laws  of  the 
gofpel,  expole  themfelves;  and  this  as  exprefly  re- 
vealed and  declared  to  us,  as  it  is  polTible  for  words 
to  declare  any  thing.  Matth.  xiii.  40,  41,  42.  "  So 
*'  fhall  it  be  in  the  end  of  the  world.     The  Son  of 
"  man  fhall  fend  forth  his  angels,  and  they  fhall  ga- 
"  ther  out  of  his  kingdom  all  things  that  offend, 
•^^  and  them  which  do  iniquity,  and  Ihall  caft  them 
''  into  a  furnace  of  fire ;  there  fliall  be  wailing  and 
"  gnafhing  of  teeth."     Matth.  xxv.  41.    there  you 
have  the  very  fentence  recorded,  which  fhall  be  pro- 
nounced upon  finners  at  the  great  day  -,    "  then  fhall 
^'  the  king  fay  to  them  on  his  left  hand,'*  that  is,  to 
the  wicked,  ''  depart  ye  curfed  into  everlafling  fire, 
*'  prepared  for  the  devil  and   his  angels."      And 
ver.  46.    *'  Thefe  fhall  go  into  everlafting  punilh- 
*'  ment."     And  this  is  that  which  St.  Paul  tells  us, 
renders  the  dodrine  of  the  gofpel  io  powerful  for 
the  converfion  and  falvation  of  finners,  Rom.  i.  16. 
*'  I  am  not  afhamed  of  the  gofpel  of  Christ, 
^'  becaufe  it  is  the  power  of  God   to  falvation,  to 
*'  every  one  that  believetti."    And  ver.  18.    "  For 
"  the  wrath  of  God  is  revealed  from  heaven,  againlj 
*'  all  ungodhnefs  and  unrighteoufnefs  of  men.'*  And 
chap.  ii.  8,  9.    "  To  them  that  obey  not  the  truth, 
<^'  bat  obey  unrighteoufnels,  indignation  and  wrath, 
*'  triDulacion  and  anguifh,  upon  every  foul  of  man 
"  t.jiit  doch  evil."  Ephef.  v.  6.    "  Let  no  man  de- 
^'  cel^e  you  with  vain  words,  for  becaufe  of  thefe 
Vol,  X.  23  0^  *^£hin-s,'»' 


4-7^4  /  ^f  ^^^  neceffity  of  good  works. 

SERM.  «  things,"  viz.  ti>e  fins  he  had   mentioned  before, 
ccvir 

"  Cometh  the  wrath  of  God  upon  the  children  of 

"  difobedience."    2  ThefT.  i.  7,  8,  9.    "  When  the 

"  Lord  Jesus,"    fpeaking  of  the  judgment  of 

the.great  day,  "  fhall  be  revealed  from  heaven  with 

"  his  mighty  angels,   in  flaming  fire,  taking  ven- 

*'  geance  on  them  that  know  not  God,  and  that 

*'  obey  not  the  gofpel  of  our  Lo  rdJesus 

*'  Christ,  who  fhall  be  punifhed  with  everlafl- 

*'  ing  deftruflion  from  the  prefence  of  the  Lor  o, 

"  and  from  the  glory  of  his  power."     So  that  the 

gofpel  gives  all  imaginable  difcouragement  to  the 

tranfgrefTicn  and  difobcdience  of  God's  laws,    by 

denunciation  of  tKe  greatefl:  dread  and  terror  that 

can  be  prefented  to  humane  nature,  enough  to  make 

any  fenfible  and  confiderate  man  willing  to  do  or 

forbear  any  thing,  to  efcape  fo  horrible  danger,  *'  to 

*'  cut  off  a  foot  or  hand,  or  to  pluck  out  an  eye," 

not  only  to  reftrain  nature  in  any  thing,  but  even  to 

offer  violence  to  it,  "  rather  than  to  be  caft  into 

''  hell-fire,  where  the  worm  dies  not,  and  the  fire  is 

*'  not  quenched,"  as  our  Saviour  expreffeth  it, 

Mark.  ix.  48.     This  is  the  firlt  argument  from  the 

threatnings.     The 

(2.)  Is  from  the  promifes  of  the  gofpel,  which  are 

full  encouragement  to  obedience ;  and  there  are  three 

great  promifes  made  in  the  gofpel  to  repentance,  and 

the  obedience  of  G  o  d's  laws. 

1.  The  promife  of  pardon  and  forgivenefs, 

2.  Of  grace  and  aflillance. 

3.  Of  eternal  life  and  happinefs.  And  thefc  certain- 
ly contain  all  the  encouragement  we  can  defire  \  that 
God  will  pardon  what  is  paft,  aflift  us  in  well-doing 
for  the  future,  and  reward  our  perfeverancc  in  it  to 

the 


Of  the  necejfity  of  good  imorh.  4705 

£he  end  with  eternal  life-,  and  all  this  is  exprefly  pro-  SERM. 
mifed  to  us  in  the  gofpel.  QQMYl.^ 

1.  The  pardon  and  forgivenefs  of  fins  paft.  Ads 
2^^ii-  3S,  39.  "  Be  it  known  unto  you  therefore,  men 
^'  and  brethren,  that  through  this  man  is  preached  un- 
"  to  you  the  forgivenefs  of  fins :  and  by  him  all  that 
*'  believe  are  juftified  from  all  thing?,  from  which  ye 
**  could  not  be  jutlified  by  the  law  of  Mofes,"  And 
this  is  a  great  encouragement  to  amendment,  to  be 
fully  indemnified  from  all  paft  fins  and  traafgrefi-ons ; 
and  this  promife  is  made  to  believing,  which  includes 
in  it  repentance  and  a  better  courfe. 

2.  The  promife  of  grace  and  afllftance  to  enable  us 
to  all  the  purpoles  of  holinefs  and  obedience.  And 
this  our  S  Av  I  o  u  R  hath  moft  exprefiy  and  empha- 
tically promifed  to  all  that  are  fincerely  refolved  to 
makeufeof  it;  and  that  upon  the  eafieft  condition 
that  can  be,  if  we  do  but  earnefiiy  pray  to  Go  d  for 
it,  telling  us  that  we  may  with  the  fame  confidence  and 
afi"urance  of  fuccefs,  (nay  with  much  greater)  ask  this 
of  God,  as  we  can  any  thing  that  is  good,  of  the 
kindeft  father  upon  earth,  Luke  xi«  9,  And  furely 
here  is  a  mighty  encouragement  to  well-doing,  to  be 
aflured  that  G  o  d  is  moft  ready  to  afford  his  grace  and 
afliftance  to  us  to  this  purpofe,  if  we  heartily  beg  it  of 
him.  So  that  neither  the  confideration  of  our  own 
weaknefs,  nor  of  the  power  of  our  fpiritual  enemies, 
can  be  any  difcouragement  or  juft  excufe  to  us  from 
doing  our  duty,  fince  God  offers  us  fo  freely  all  the 
ftrength  that  we  need,  and  to  endow  us  with  an  inward 
principle  of  well-doing,  more  powerful  and  efi^edual 
to  all  the  purpofes  of  holinefs  and  virtue,  than  any  op- 
pofition  that  can  be  raifed  againft  it.  So  St.  John  afiures 
us,  that  we  have  Go  d  on  our  fide,  and  the  powerful 

23  0^2  afliftance 


47^6  0/  ii^^  necejlify  of  good  works. 

S  K  R  M.  afTiftance  of  his  Holy  Sp  i  r  i  t,  and  therefore  are  furc 

CCVII.  Qf  ^j^c|.Qj.y  jj^  thisconfli6l;  I  John  iv.  4.  "  Ye  are  of 
"God,  little  children,  and  have  overcome;  becaufc 
*'  greater  is  he  that  is  in  you,  than  he  that  is  in  the 
"  world  .'*  If  the  S  p  I R I T  of  G  o  D  be  more  powerful 
than  the  devil,  we  are  of  the  ftronger  fide  ;  and  we 
have  no  juft  caufe  to  complain  of  our  inability  and 
•weaknefs  to  do  the  will  of  God,  fince  that  ftrength 
and  afiiftance,  which  we  may  have  for  asking,  is  to  al 
effeds  and  purpofes  of  our  own  power.  And  therefore 
St.  Paul  made  no  fcruple  to  call  it  fo,  and  to  fay,  he 
was  able  to  do  all  things,  "  I  am  able  to  do  all  things 
*'  through  Christ  which  ftrengtheneth  me." 

3.  The  prom'ife  of  eternal  life  :  and  this  is  the  great 
promife  of  the  gofpel,  and  the  crown  of  all  the  reft. 
I  John  ii.  25.  "  This  is  the  promife  that  he  hath 
"  promifed  us,  even  eternal  life."  And  this  is  a  re- 
ward fo  great  and  glorious,  and  fo  infinitely  beyond 
the  portion  of  our  fervicc  and  obedience,  that  no- 
thing can  be  more  encouraging.  What  fhould  not 
men  do  "  in  hopes  of  eternal  life,  which  God  that 
*' cannot  lye,  hath  promifed  to  us?'*  The  expedation 
of  fuch  a  reward,  fo  well  aflured  to  us,  is  fufficient  to 
encourage  us  to  do  our  utmoft,  and  to  flrain  all  our 
powers  for  the  fecuring  and  attaining  of  it,  which  we 
cannot  do  without  holinefs  and  obedience  of  life  ;  for 
*'  without  holinefs  no  man  fhall  fee  the  Lor  d." 
So  that  all  the  promifes  of  the  gofpel  are  to  encou- 
rage and  ftrengthen  us  in  well-doing,  "  to  make  us 
"  partakers  of  the  divine  nature,*'  that  we  fliould 
«'  cleanfe  ourfelves  from  all  filthinefs,  and  perfed  ho- 
«'  linefs  in  the  fear  of  God." 

Thus  you  fee  that  the  whole  difpenfation  of  the 
gofpel,  and  the  dodrincsof  it,  and  every  part  of  them, 

are 


Of  the  necejjity  of  good  ^works',  47^7 

are  all  calculated  to  reform  the  minds  and  manners  of  S  E  R  M. 
men.  This  is  the  great  defign  of  the  chriftian  reli-  ^ 
gion,  and  all  the  parts  and  powers  of  it,  to  clear  and 
confirm  and  perfed  the  natural  law,  to  reinforce  the 
obligation  of  moral  duties  by  feverer  threatnings,  and 
greater  promifes,  and  to  offer  men  more  powerful 
grace  and  afliftance  to  the  pradlice  of  all  goodnefs 
and  virtue ;  and  they  do  not  underfland  the  chriftian 
religion,  who  imagine  any  other  end  and  defign  of 
it.  There  is  nothing  that  our  Saviour  and  his 
apoflles  do  every  where  more  vehemently  declare,  than 
that  hearing  and  believing  the  doflrine  of  Christ 
fignifies  nothing,  without  the  real  virtues  of  a  good 
life.  ^'  Know,  O  vain  man,  that  faith  without  works 
"  is  dead,"  faith  St.  James.  For  men  to  think  that 
the  mere  belief  of  the  gofpel,  without  the  fruits  and 
effeds  of  a  good  life,  will  fave  them,  is  a  very  fond 
and  vain  imagination.  And  thus  much  may  fufficc 
to  have  fpoken  concerning  the  firft  point. 


A  Table 


A  Table  of  the  Texts  of  each 
Sermon. 

SERMON    CLXXXIII. 

MARK  xiii.  32,  33.  But  of  that  day  and  that 
hour  kmweth  710  man^  no  not  the  angels  which 
are  in  heaven^  neiiher  the  Son,  hut  //&<?  F  a  t  h  s  r  . 
^akeye  heed^  watch  and  fray  \  for  ye  know  not  when 
the  time  is,  page  4225 

SERMON     CLXXXIV. 
I  T  H  E  S  S.  iv.  14.  For  if  we  believe  that  Jesus 
died^  and  rofe  again  ;  even  fo  them  alfo  which  fleep 
/«  J ES  u  s,  will  God  bring  with  him,        p.  4252 

SERMON    CLXXXV,     CLXXXVI. 
I  J  O  H  N  111.  2.  //  doih  no-  ye:  afpear  what  we fljall 
be  •,  but  we  know^  that  when  he  Jhall  appear^  wefroall 
he  like  him  *,  for  we  fhall  fee  him  as  he  is. 

p.4277,4292 

SERMON     CLXXXVII. 
P  R  O  V.  xiv.  32.  'The  wicked  is  driven  away  in  his 
wickednefs  :  hut  the  righteous  hath  hope  in  his  death. 

p.  4308 
SERMON    CLXXXVIII. 
P  S  A  L.  xc.  12.  So  teach  us  to  number  our  days.^  that 
we  may  apply  our  hearts  unto  wifdom.        p.  4338 

SERMON    CLXXXIX,  CXC,  CXCI. 
I  PET.  ii.  21.    — Leaving  us  an  example.,  that  ye 
fhould  follow  his  fteps.  p.  4359,  4377,  4401 

SERMON    CXCII. 

I  C  O  R.  i.  23,  24.  But  we  preach  Christ  cruel- 
fied^  unto  the  Jews  a  ftmnbling-block^  and  unto  the 
Greeks  focV.jhnefs  ;  hut  unto  them  which  411  e  called^ 
both  Jews  and  Greeks.,  Christ  the  power  of 
God    and  the  wifdo-m  of  God.  p.  441 7 

SERMON     CXCIII. 

ACTS  i.  3.  'To  whom  alfo  he  fljewed  himfelf  dive 
after  his  paffion^  by  many  infallible  proofs^  being  feen 


A  Table  of  the  Texts. 

€f  them  forty  days^  and  [peaking  of  the  things  per- 
taining to  the  kingdom  of  God.  p.  4437 
SERMON     CXCIV. 

ACTS  xxvi.  8.  Why  fJoould  it  be  thought  a  thing  in- 
credible with  you  ^  that  God  fhould  raife  the  dead? 

p.  4455 
SERMON     CXCV. 

COL.  iii.  I,  2.  If  ye  then  be  rifen  with  Christ, 

feek  thofe  things  which  are  above ^  where  Christ 

Jitteth  at  the  right  hand  of  Go  v.    Set  your  aff^ufions 

on  things  above^  not  on  things  on  the  earth,    p.  4473 

SERMON     CXCVI. 

ACTS  i.  9,  10,  II.  And  when  he  had fpoken  thefe 
things^  while  they  beheld^  he  was  taken  up^  and  a 
cloud  received  him  out  of  their  fight.  And  while 
they  looked  ftedfajlly  toward  heaven^  as  he  went  iip^ 
behold ,^  two  men  flood  by  them  in  zvhite  apparel^  which 
alfo  faid^  ye  men  of  Galilee^  why  ft  and  ye  gazing  up 
into  heaven  ?  this  fame  Jesus  which  is  taken  up  from 
you  into  heaven^  fhall  fo  come  in  like  manner  as  ye 
have  feen  him  go  into  heaven,  p.  4489 

SERMON  CXCVII. 
ACTS  ii.  1, 2,  3,  4.  And  when  the  day  of  pentecoft 
was  fully  come^  they  were  all  with  one  accord  in  one 
place,  Andfuddcnly  there  came  a  found  from  heaven^ 
as  of  a  mighty  rufroing  wind^  and  it  filled  all  the  houfe 
where  they  were  fitting.  And  there  appeared  unto 
them  cloven  tongues^  like  as  of  fire  ^  and  it  fat  upon 
each  of  them.  And  they  were  all  filled  with  the  Holy 
Ghost,  and  began  to  fpeak  with  other  tongues^ 
as  the  Spirit  gave  them  utterance,  p.  4508 

SERMON  CXCVIII. 
JOHN  xvi.  7,  8.  Neverthelefs,  I  tell  you  the 
truth  *,  it  is  expediejit  for  you  that  I  go  away  :  for  if 
I  go  not  away^  the  comforter  will  not  come  unto  you  ; 
but  if  I  depart^  I  will  fend  him  unto  you.  And  when 
he  is  come^  he  will  reprove  the  world  of  fin,  and  of 
right  ecufnefsy  and  of  judgment,  p.  4528 

SERMON 


A  Table  of  the  Texts. 

SERMON     CXCIX. 

JOHN  xvi.  12,   13.  /  have  yet  many  things  to  fay 

unto  you^  but  you  cannot  bear  them  now :  howheit 
when  he^  /i?^  S  p  i  R  i  t  of  truths  is  come^  he  will 
guide  you  into  all  truth.  p.  4547 

SERMON     CC,  CCr. 
JOHN  vii.  '^(^.     But  this  fpake  he  of  the  S  P  i  R  i  t, 

which  they  that  believe  on  him  fhould  receive.  For 
the^  -If b-xV  GfJoS"'^  '^as .not  yet  given,  becaufe 
that  Jesus  was  not  yet  gtorij^d.    .  p.  4563, 4579 

SERMON    CCiL      ; 
E  P  H  E  S.  V.  9 .  For  the  fruit  of  the  Si>i  RiTft  is- in  all 

goodnefs^  and  right eoufnefs .  and  truth,       p.  .4596 
SERMON    CCIII. 
JOHN  XV.  5.  —  For  without  me  ye  can  do  nothing, 

.      p.  4617 

SERMON    CCIV,  CCV,  CCVI. 

2  T  I  M.  iii.  5.  Having  a  form  of  godlmefs^  hut  de^ 
vying  the  power  thereof  p.  4lij2,  46.'; -.  a66^ 

SERMON  CCV|ie 
TIT.  iii.  8.  This  is  a  faithful  faying,  mid' the fe 
things  I  will  that  thou  affirm  conflantly,  that  they 
which  have  believed  in  God,  might  be  careful  to- 
maintain  good  works,  fhefe  things  are  good  and  pro- 
fitable to  men,  p  46820 


The  End  of  the  Tentli  Volume, 


